26 TH EDITION

Williams

OBSTETRICS

CUNNINGHAM
LEVENO
DASHE
HOFFMAN
SPONG

CASEY

Me
Graw
Hill

NOTICE
Medicine is an ever-changing science. As new research and clinical
experience broaden our knowledge, changes in treatment and drug therapy
are required. The authors and the publisher of this work have checked
with sources believed to be reliable in their efforts to provide information
that is complete and generally in accord with the standards accepted at the
time of publication. However, in view of the possibility of human error or
changes in medical sciences, neither the authors nor the publisher nor any
other party who has been involved in the preparation or publication of this
work warrants that the information contained herein is in every respect
accurate or complete, and they disclaim all responsibility for any errors
or omissions or for the results obtained from use of the information
contained in this work. Readers are encouraged to confirm the information
contained herein with other sources. For example and in particular,
readers are advised to check the product information sheet included in the
package of each drug they plan to administer to be certain that the
information contained in this work is accurate and that changes have not
been made in the recommended dose or in the contraindications for
administration. This recommendation is of particular importance in
connection with new or infrequently used drugs.

Williams

OBSTETRICS
26TH EDITION
F. Gary Cunningham
Kenneth J. Leveno
Jodi S. Dashe
Barbara L Hoffman
Catherine Y, Spong
Brian M. Casey

Grow
Hill
New York *C ! icng4> San Fran<iseo Lisbon London Madrid Mexico City
Milan New Ddhi San Juan Seoul Singapore Sydney Tbronro

^

Copyright © 2022 by McGraw Hill. All rights reserved. Except as permitted
under the United States Copyright Act of 1976, no part of this publication
may be reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, or stored in a
database or retrieval system, without the prior written permission of the
publisher.
ISBN: 978-1-26-046274-6
MHID:
1-26-046274-9
The material in this eBook also appears in the print version of this title:
ISBN: 978-1-26-046273-9, MHID: 1-26-046273-0.
eBook conversion by codeMantra
Version 1.0
All trademarks are trademarks of their respective owners. Rather than put a
trademark symbol after every occurrence of a trademarked name, we use
names in an editorial fashion only, and to the benefit of the trademark owner,
with no intention of infringement of the trademark. Where such designations
appear in this book, they have been printed with initial caps.
McGraw-Hill Education eBooks are available at special quantity discounts
to use as premiums and sales promotions or for use in corporate training
programs. To contact a representative, please visit the Contact Us page at
www.mhprofessional.com.
TERMS OF USE
This is a copyrighted work and McGraw-Hill Education and its licensors
reserve all rights in and to the work. Use of this work is subject to these
terms. Except as permitted under the Copyright Act of 1976 and the right to
store and retrieve one copy of the work, you may not decompile,
disassemble, reverse engineer, reproduce, modify, create derivative works
based upon, transmit, distribute, disseminate, sell, publish or sublicense the
work or any part of it without McGraw-Hill Education’s prior consent. You
may use the work for your own noncommercial and personal use; any other

use of the work is strictly prohibited. Your right to use the work may be
terminated if you fail to comply with these terms.
THE WORK IS PROVIDED “AS IS.” McGRAW-HILL EDUCATION AND
ITS LICENSORS MAKE NO GUARANTEES OR WARRANTIES AS TO
THE ACCURACY, ADEQUACY OR COMPLETENESS OF OR RESULTS
TO BE OBTAINED FROM USING THE WORK, INCLUDING ANY
INFORMATION THAT CAN BE ACCESSED THROUGH THE WORK
VIA HYPERLINK OR OTHERWISE, AND EXPRESSLY DISCLAIM ANY
WARRANTY, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED
TO IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS
FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. McGraw-Hill Education and its licensors
do not warrant or guarantee that the functions contained in the work will meet
your requirements or that its operation will be uninterrupted or error free.
Neither McGraw-Hill Education nor its licensors shall be liable to you or
anyone else for any inaccuracy, error or omission, regardless of cause, in the
work or for any damages resulting therefrom. McGraw-Hill Education has no
responsibility for the content of any information accessed through the work.
Under no circumstances shall McGraw-Hill Education and/or its licensors
be liable for any indirect, incidental, special, punitive, consequential or
similar damages that result from the use of or inability to use the work, even
if any of them has been advised of the possibility of such damages. This
limitation of liability shall apply to any claim or cause whatsoever whether
such claim or cause arises in contract, tort or otherwise.

EDITORS
F. Gary Cunningham, MD
Professor, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
Parkland Health and Hospital System
Dallas, Texas
Kenneth J. Leveno, MD
Professor, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
Parkland Health and Hospital System
Dallas, Texas
Jodi S. Dashe, MD
Professor, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
Medical Director of Prenatal Diagnosis
Parkland Health and Hospital System
Dallas, Texas
Barbara L. Hoffman, MD
Distinguished Professor in Obstetrics and Gynecology, in Honor of F. Gary
Cunningham, M.D.
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
Parkland Health and Hospital System
Dallas, Texas
Catherine Y. Spong, MD
Paul C. MacDonald Distinguished Chair in Obstetrics and Gynecology
Professor and Chair, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology

Chief, Division of Maternal-Fetal Medicine
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
Parkland Health and Hospital System
Dallas, Texas
Brian M. Casey, MD
Professor, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology
Vice Chair, Obstetrics
Director, Division of Maternal-Fetal Medicine
University of Alabama at Birmingham

DR. F. GARY CUNNINGHAM

Editor of Williams Obstetrics
18th through 26th Editions
In the early 1970s, as I was finishing my residency at Charity Hospital of
New Orleans, the 14th edition of Williams Obstetrics was published. The
residents in our program were totally enamored with the textbook because it
was a clinical manual derived from the editors’ personal experiences and
from contemporary, evidence-based literature.
During my last year, my chairman, Dr. Abe Mickal, invited me to attend a
national meeting where I first met four obstetricians who would have an
immeasurable impact on my life—Drs. Jack Pritchard, Paul MacDonald,
Norman Gant, and Peggy Whalley. Following that, I was invited to Dallas to
spend time at the University of Texas Southwestern and Parkland Hospital.
As I followed Dr. Pritchard through Labor & Delivery and his clinical
research laboratory, I became hooked on “Parkland Obstetrics” and later that
year began a fellowship that was the nascent subspecialty of Maternal–Fetal
Medicine. It also began a lifelong friendship with Jack Pritchard that I will
always treasure.
Beginning with the 15th edition of Williams Obstetrics, the authoreditors were Drs. Pritchard, MacDonald, and Gant. After publication of the
17th edition, these mentors asked me to assume the senior editor role. I was
immediately struck by the awesome responsibility of shepherding the book
that many people called “the bible of obstetrics.”

Over the years, and now as we publish this 26th edition, I reflect on the
evolution of obstetrics, and hence the complexity of sustaining a textbook
designed to cover the breadth of obstetrics. As essential fields such as
sonography, genetics, and fetal medicine were developed, we enlisted the
help of extremely talented leaders in their respective fields to ensure that the
book adequately presented these innovations. As for my role in this and other
editions, I can only promise the readers that the quality of the book has been
foremost in my mind and led me to spend literally tens of thousands of hours
to help prepare the past nine editions. To this end, the editors have always
strived to put the best product forward because of the tremendous
responsibility that we shoulder regarding the care of women and their unborn
children. The textbook has been one of the great passions in my life, and I
will miss the challenge.

DEDICATION

KENNETH LEVENO, MD
1941–2020
Dr. Kenneth Leveno was a vocal and stalwart defender of evidence-based
obstetrics. Sadly, he passed away in May 2020. Ken joined the Department
of Obstetrics & Gynecology at the University of Texas Southwestern after
completing a Maternal–Fetal Medicine fellowship in 1978. In 1984, he was
appointed Chief of Obstetrics at Parkland Memorial Hospital—a role in
which he served for the next 20 years. During that time and afterwards, he
worked tirelessly to achieve a level of excellence in obstetrical care for
indigent women of Dallas County. His inspiring leadership and innovations
raised the quality of care at the community obstetrics clinics, the high-risk
prenatal clinics at Parkland, and the inpatient units, which include the
Obstetrical Triage Unit, Labor & Delivery, postpartum wards, and the HighRisk Pregnancy Unit. Early on, he also designed a computerized database to
measure quality indicators and provide an underpinning for clinical research.
Indeed, his contributions to these programs were reverently referred to by us
as Parkland Obstetrics.
Ken Leveno’s leadership extended well beyond the hospital that he
loved. He was a leader in American obstetrics by his defining of clinical
research. Through his hundreds of peer-reviewed publications, his clinical

opinions, and his willingness to engage in national debates, he helped shape
obstetrical practices worldwide. In 1993, Ken began serving as an editor for
Williams Obstetrics—a task that he regarded as a privilege and a
responsibility. He co-authored the 19th through the current 26th editions. Last
and importantly, he mentored the careers of many Maternal–Fetal Medicine
fellows and young faculty who have gone on to achieve national reputations
in the care of women. Ken will be greatly missed.
The Editors

ASSOCIATE EDITORS
Mala S. Mahendroo, PhD
Professor, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology and Green Center for
Reproductive Biological Sciences
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
Dallas, Texas
David B. Nelson, MD
Dedman Family Scholar in Clinical Care
Associate Professor, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
Chief of Obstetrics
Parkland Health and Hospital System
Dallas, Texas
Shivani Patel, MD
Associate Professor, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
Assistant Quality Officer, Health Systems Affairs
Medical Director of Obstetrics, William P. Clements Jr. University Hospital
Parkland Health and Hospital System
Dallas, Texas
Diane M. Twickler, MD, FACR
Dr. Fred Bonte Professorship in Radiology
Professor, Department of Radiology and of Obstetrics and Gynecology
Vice Chairman at Large for Radiology
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
Medical Director of Obstetrics and Gynecology Ultrasonography
Parkland Health and Hospital System

Dallas, Texas

CONTRIBUTING AUTHORS
Emily H. Adhikari, MD
Assistant Professor, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
Medical Director of Perinatal Infectious Diseases
Parkland Hospital and Hospital System
Dallas, Texas
Donald D. McIntire, PhD
Biostatistician
Professor, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
Dallas, Texas
Wilmer Moreno, MD
Assistant Professor, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
Parkland Health and Hospital System
Dallas, Texas
David M. Owen, MD, PhD
Assistant Professor, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
Parkland Health and Hospital System
Dallas, Texas
Weike Tao, MD
Professor, Department of Anesthesiology and Pain Management
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
Parkland Health and Hospital System

Dallas, Texas
C. Edward Wells, MD
Professor, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
Parkland Health and Hospital System
Dallas, Texas
Myra H. Wyckoff, MD
Professor, Department of Pediatrics
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
Director, Newborn Resuscitation Services
Parkland Health and Hospital System
Dallas, Texas

CONTENTS
Preface
Acknowledgments

SECTION 1
OVERVIEW
1. Overview of Obstetrics

SECTION 2
MATERNAL ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
2. Maternal Anatomy
3. Congenital Genitourinary Abnormalities
4. Maternal Physiology

SECTION 3
PLACENTATION, EMBRYOGENESIS, AND FETAL
DEVELOPMENT
5. Implantation and Placental Development
6. Placental Abnormalities
7. Embryogenesis and Fetal Development

SECTION 4
PRECONCEPTIONAL AND PRENATAL CARE
8. Teratology, Teratogens, and Fetotoxic Agents
9. Preconceptional Counseling
10. Prenatal Care

SECTION 5
FIRST- AND SECOND-TRIMESTER PREGNANCY LOSS
11. First- and Second-Trimester Pregnancy Loss
12. Ectopic Pregnancy
13. Gestational Trophoblastic Disease

SECTION 6
THE FETAL PATIENT
14. Obstetrical Imaging
15. Normal and Abnormal Fetal Anatomy
16. Genetics
17. Prenatal Diagnosis
18. Fetal Disorders
19. Fetal Therapy
20. Antepartum Fetal Assessment

SECTION 7

LABOR
21. Physiology of Labor
22. Normal Labor
23. Abnormal Labor
24. Intrapartum Assessment
25. Obstetrical Analgesia and Anesthesia
26. Induction and Augmentation of Labor

SECTION 8
DELIVERY
27. Vaginal Delivery
28. Singleton Breech Delivery
29. Operative Vaginal Delivery
30. Cesarean Delivery and Peripartum Hysterectomy
31. Prior Cesarean Delivery

SECTION 9
THE NEWBORN
32. The Newborn
33. Complications of the Term Newborn
34. The Preterm Newborn
35. Stillbirth

SECTION 10

THE PUERPERIUM
36. The Puerperium
37. Puerperal Infection
38. Contraception
39. Sterilization

SECTION 11
OBSTETRICAL COMPLICATIONS
40. Preeclampsia Syndrome
41. Clinical Management of the Preeclampsia Syndrome
42. Causes of Obstetrical Hemorrhage
43. Hemorrhagic Placental Disorders
44. Management of Obstetrical Hemorrhage
45. Preterm Birth
46. Postterm Pregnancy
47. Fetal-Growth Disorders
48. Multifetal Pregnancy

SECTION 12
MEDICAL AND SURGICAL COMPLICATIONS
49. General Considerations and Maternal Evaluation
50. Critical Care and Trauma
51. Obesity
52. Cardiovascular Disorders

53. Chronic Hypertension
54. Pulmonary Disorders
55. Thromboembolic Disorders
56. Renal and Urinary Tract Disorders
57. Gastrointestinal Disorders
58. Hepatic, Biliary, and Pancreatic Disorders
59. Hematological Disorders
60. Diabetes Mellitus
61. Endocrine Disorders
62. Connective Tissue Disorders
63. Neurological Disorders
64. Psychiatric Disorders
65. Dermatological Disorders
66. Neoplastic Disorders
67. Infectious Diseases
68. Sexually Transmitted Infections

APPENDIX
Serum and Blood Constituents
Maternal Echocardiographic Measurements
Sonographic Measurements of the Embryo and Fetus
Index

PREFACE
Over its 26 editions, Williams Obstetrics has aimed to serve practicing
obstetricians and midwives in the bedside care of their patients. With its
detailed explanations of disease pathophysiology and treatment fundamentals,
it provides a bedrock text for residents who are training in Obstetrics or in
Family Medicine specialties. Fellows in Maternal–Fetal Medicine will
benefit from its additional discussions of complicated pathology and
management. Last, Williams Obstetrics can aid specialists who act as
consultants for gravidas with non-pregnancy-related disorders. Specifically,
each chapter in Section 12 focuses on a specific organ system, the normal
physiological changes and frequent disorders of that system in pregnancy, and
suitable treatment options.
For this 26th edition, we continue to present the detailed staples of basic
obstetrics such as maternal anatomy and physiology, preconceptional and
prenatal care, labor, delivery, and the puerperium. These accompany detailed
discussions of obstetrical complications exemplified by preterm labor,
hemorrhage, hypertension, and many more. To emphasize the “M” in
Maternal–Fetal Medicine, we continue to instruct on the many medical and
surgical disorders that can complicate pregnancy. And, our second patient—
the fetus—has accrued especial attention with an entire section devoted to
diagnosis and treatment of fetal disorders. For all of these, we once again
emphasize the science-based practice of clinical obstetrics. Expert clinical
pearls add depth to these discussions and are written for busy practitioners—
those “in the trenches.” To integrate all our content, the reader of one chapter
may be referred to a different chapter that contains complementary content.
This offers a more global understanding of a given topic.
To accomplish our teaching goals, the text has been updated with more
than 3000 new literature citations through 2021. Many of the nearly 900
figures are new, and these graphs, sonograms, magnetic resonance images,
photographs, photomicrographs, and data graphs are all in vivid color. Much
of the original artwork was rendered by our own medical illustrators.

As before, we continue to incorporate contemporaneous guidelines from
professional and academic organizations such as the American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, the Society for Maternal–Fetal Medicine,
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the National Institutes of
Health, and other authoritative sources. Many of these data are distilled into
nearly 100 tables, in which information has been arranged in an easy readand-use format. In addition, several diagnostic and management algorithms
are available to quickly guide practitioners. Although we strive to cite
numerous sources and provide multiple evidence-based options for such
management schemes, we also include our own clinical experiences drawn
from the large obstetrical service at Parkland Hospital. We are convinced
that these are disciplined examples of evidence-based obstetrics but quickly
acknowledge that they do not constitute the sole method of management.
F. Gary Cunningham
Kenneth J. Leveno
Jodi S. Dashe
Barbara L. Hoffman
Catherine Y. Spong
Brian M. Casey

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
In the creation and production of this textbook, we were fortunate to have the
assistance and support of countless talented professionals both within and
outside the Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology. To begin, we
acknowledge that an undertaking of this magnitude would not be possible
without the unwavering support provided by our recent Chairman Dr. Steven
Bloom and Vice-Chairman Dr. Barry Schwarz, whose financial and
academic endorsement has been essential. Dr. Bloom has served as an editor
for the 22nd through 25th editions but now has assumed the important role of
Associate Dean of Clinical Sciences at the University of Texas Southwestern
Medical Center.
In constructing such an expansive academic compilation, the expertise of
many colleagues was needed to add vital, evidence-based content. It was
indeed fortuitous for us to have access to a trove of collaborators from our
medical center. From our own Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Dr.
Shivani Patel was essential to the production of our book and is an
invaluable addition to our team. We benefitted from her obstetrical expertise,
writing talent, and ability to translate difficult concepts into teaching pearls.
Faculty with specific expertise included Dr. Claudia Werner, who lent
valuable insight into the management of cervical dysplasia. Our nationally
known pelvic anatomist, Dr. Marlene Corton, prepared graphic masterpieces
for the anatomy chapter with artist Lew Calver. We also are grateful to the
numerous faculty and residents who added seminal clinical photographs to
our text.
In addition to these contributors, we relied heavily on our colleagues in
the Division of Maternal–Fetal Medicine. These professionals, in addition to
providing expert consultation, graciously assisted us by covering clinical
duties when writing and editing were especially time consuming. These
include Drs. Scott Roberts, Oscar Andujo, Vanessa Rogers, Charles Brown,
Julie Lo, Robyn Horsager, Patricia Santiago-Muñoz, Mark Peters, Elaine
Duryea, Jamie Morgan, Morris Bryant, Shena Dillon, Anne Ambia, Robert

Martin, Robert Stewart, Stephan Shivvers, Ashley Zink, Sarah Happe, and
Christina Herrera.
We also emphasize that production of Williams Obstetrics would not be
feasible without the help of our Maternal–Fetal Medicine fellows and our
residents in Obstetrics and Gynecology. Their insatiable curiosity serves to
energize us to find new and effective ways to convey age-old truths, new
data, and cutting-edge concepts. Their logical and critical questions lead us
to weaknesses in the text, and thereby always help us to improve our work. In
addition, we sincerely thank them for their vigilance in capturing photographs
of spectacular examples of both obstetrical pathology and normal findings.
This edition is heavily populated with seminal examples of sonographic
findings. We are grateful for the efforts of Mary Gibbs, RDMS; Rafael Levy,
RDMS; Michael Davidson, RDMS; and the many talented sonographers at
Parkland Hospital.
Thanks to generous funding from the McGraw-Hill Companies, this 26th
edition now contains more than 200 color illustrations. Most of these were
crafted by several skilled medical illustrators who include Ms. Marie Sena,
Ms. Erin Frederickson, and Ms. SangEun Cha. All of these talented artists
trained here at UT Southwestern under the instruction of Mr. Lewis Calver.
Additional artistic support came from Mr. Joseph Varghese, Ms. Shreya
Tiwari, Dr. Sudhi Singh, and Mr. Manoj Kumar Choudhry. Their work at
Thomson Digital provided the full-color graphs and line art used to enhance
this edition. Their team tirelessly coordinated efforts between author and
artist and graciously accommodated our numerous changes and tweaks.
Production of the 5000-page manuscript would not have been possible
without a dedicated team. Once again, we are deeply indebted to Ms. Dawn
Wilson and Ms. Melinda Epstein for their untiring efforts with manuscript
production. Ms. Regina Williams also provided excellent, cheerful,
conscientious manuscript assistance. Mr. Charles Richards offered
knowledgeable and responsive information technology support. For these and
many more that go unnamed, we could not have done our job without their
expertise.
It again has been a privilege to work with the dedicated professionals
from McGraw-Hill Education. We have had the pleasure to work with
Executive Editor Mr. Jason Malley in production of our textbook and are
grateful for his support of Williams Obstetrics. Senior Project Development
Editor Ms. Christie Naglieri has again brought her considerable knowledge

to this edition of our book. Her dedication to creating the best textbook
supported our efforts, and we appreciate her productive, gracious style. We
thank Ms. Leah Carton, who provided professional, timely, and ever-sunny
aid. Mr. Richard Ruzycka served as production supervisor for this edition of
the textbook, and our book benefits from his years of experience.
Our text took its final shape under the watchful care of our compositors at
Aptara, Inc. We thank Ms. Indu Jawwad for her talents in graciously and
masterfully coordinating and overseeing composition. Her dedicated
attention to detail and organization were vital to completion of our project.
She has created many editions with us, and we consider her an essential team
member. At Aptara, Mr. Mahender Singh carried out the crucial task of
quality control. He also assisted, along with Mr. Rajesh Chander, Mr.
Kamlesh Bhatt, and Mr. Anil Varghese, in creating beautiful chapter layouts
to highlight our content aesthetically and informatively. This edition’s
chapters were also posted and available online for use prior to print
publication. We thank Mr. Braj Bhushan and Mr. Ashish Kumar Sharma for
preparing this content so brilliantly. Special thanks go to Mr. Greg Feldman.
As copyeditor, Greg added precision and clarity to our efforts. His
endurance and pleasant professionalism through many challenging chapters
has made our text better.
Last, we acknowledge our significant debt to the women who have
entrusted themselves and their unborn children to us for obstetrical care. The
clinical expertise and many images provided in this text would not have been
possible without their collaborative spirit to help us advance obstetrical
knowledge. We also offer enthusiastic and heartfelt appreciation to our
families and friends. Without their patience, generosity, love, and
encouragement, this task would have been impossible.
F. Gary Cunningham
Kenneth J. Leveno
Jodi S. Dashe
Barbara L. Hoffman
Catherine Y. Spong
Brian M. Casey

SECTION 1

OVERVIEW

CHAPTER 1

Overview of Obstetrics

VITAL STATISTICS
PREGNANCY RATES IN THE UNITED STATES
OBSTETRICAL CARE MEASURES
TIMELY TOPICS IN OBSTETRICS
REFERENCES
The science and clinical practice of obstetrics focuses on human
reproduction. The specialty promotes the health and well-being of the
pregnant woman and her fetus through quality perinatal care. Such care
entails recognition and treatment of complications, supervision of labor and
delivery, initial care of the newborn, and management of the puerperium.
Postpartum care promotes health and provides family planning options.
Evidence-based medicine dominates the modern practice of obstetrics.
As described by Williams in this textbook’s first edition, we too strive to
present the scientific evidence for current obstetrical care. Still, high-quality
data do not support most recommendations (Brock, 2021). Thus, much of our
practice stems from expert-based opinions and historical experiences
(Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, 2021). To help bridge knowledge
gaps, we also rely on authoritative sources such as the American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists and the Society for Maternal-Fetal
Medicine, as well as agencies such as the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC) and National Institutes of Health (NIH).

VITAL STATISTICS
The importance of obstetrics is demonstrated by the use of maternal and
neonatal outcomes as an index of health and life quality among nations.
Intuitively, indices showing poor obstetrical and perinatal outcomes could be
assumed to reflect medical care deficiencies for the entire population.
The National Vital Statistics System of the United States collects
statistics on births and deaths, including fetal deaths. Legal authority for
collection resides individually with the 50 states; two regions—the District
of Columbia and New York City; and five territories—American Samoa,
Guam, the Northern Mariana Islands, Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands.
The standard birth certificate includes information on medical and lifestyle
risks, labor and delivery factors, and newborn characteristics. Importantly,
the current death certificate contains a pregnancy checkbox (Hoyert, 2020).

■ Definitions
Standard definitions are encouraged by the World Health Organization as
well as the American Academy of Pediatrics and the American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019a). Uniformity allows data
comparison between states or regions and between countries. Still, not all
definitions are uniformly applied. For example, uniformity is incomplete
among states regarding birthweight and gestational age criteria for reporting
fetal deaths (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020a).
Not all states follow this recommendation. Specifically, 28 states stipulate
that losses beginning at 20 weeks’ gestation should be recorded as fetal
deaths; eight states report all products of conception as fetal deaths; and still
others use a minimum birthweight of 350 g, 400 g, or 500 g to define fetal
death. To further the confusion, the National Vital Statistics Reports tabulates
fetal deaths from pregnancies that are 20 weeks’ gestation or older (Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention, 2020a). This is problematic because the
50th percentile for fetal weight at 20 weeks approximates 325 to 350 g—
considerably less than the 500-g definition. In fact, a birthweight of 500 g
corresponds closely with the 50th percentile for 22 weeks’ gestation.
Definitions recommended by the National Center for Health Statistics and
the CDC are as follows:

Perinatal period. The interval between the birth of a neonate born after 20
weeks’ gestation and the 28 completed days after that birth. When
perinatal rates are based on birthweight, rather than gestational age,
recommendations define the perinatal period as commencing at the birth
of a 500-g neonate.
Birth. The complete expulsion or extraction from the mother of a fetus after
20 weeks’ gestation. As described above, in the absence of accurate
dating criteria, fetuses weighing <500 g are usually not considered births
but rather are termed abortuses for purposes of vital statistics.
Birthweight. Neonatal weight determined immediately after delivery or as
soon thereafter as feasible. It should be expressed to the nearest gram.
Birth rate. The number of live births per 1000 population.
Fertility rate. The number of live births per 1000 females aged 15 through 44
years.
Live birth. The term used to record a birth whenever the newborn at or
sometime after birth breathes spontaneously or shows any other sign of
life such as a heartbeat or definite spontaneous movement of voluntary
muscles. Heartbeats are distinguished from transient cardiac contractions,
and respirations are differentiated from fleeting respiratory efforts or
gasps.
Stillbirth or fetal death. The absence of signs of life at birth.
Early neonatal death. Death of a liveborn neonate during the first 7 days after
birth.
Late neonatal death. Death after 7 days but before 29 days.
Stillbirth rate or fetal death rate. The number of stillborn neonates per 1000
neonates born, including live births and stillbirths.
Neonatal mortality rate. The number of neonatal deaths per 1000 live births.
Perinatal mortality rate. The number of stillbirths plus neonatal deaths per
1000 total births.
Infant death. All deaths of liveborn infants from birth through 12 months of
age.
Infant mortality rate. The number of infant deaths per 1000 live births.
Low birthweight. A newborn whose weight is <2500 g.
Very low birthweight. A newborn whose weight is <1500 g.
Extremely low birthweight. A newborn whose weight is <1000 g.

Term neonate. A neonate born any time after 37 completed weeks’ gestation
and up until 42 completed weeks’ gestation (260 to 294 days). The
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists and Society for
Maternal-Fetal Medicine encourage specific gestational age designations
(2019a). Early term refers to neonates born at 37 completed weeks up to
386/7 weeks. Full term denotes those born at 39 completed weeks up to
406/7 weeks. Last, late term describes neonates born at 41 completed
weeks up to 416/7 weeks.
Preterm neonate. A neonate born before 37 completed weeks (the 259th day).
A neonate born before 34 completed weeks is early preterm, whereas a
neonate born between 34 and 36 completed weeks is late preterm.
Postterm neonate. A neonate born any time after completion of the 42nd
week, beginning with day 295.
Abortus. A fetus or embryo removed or expelled from the uterus in the first
half of gestation—20 weeks or less, or in the absence of accurate dating
criteria, born weighing <500 g.
Induced termination of pregnancy. The purposeful interruption of an
intrauterine pregnancy that has the intention other than to produce a
liveborn neonate and that does not result in a live birth. This definition
excludes retention of products of conception following fetal death.
Direct maternal death. The death of the mother that results from obstetrical
complications of pregnancy, labor, or the puerperium and from
interventions, omissions, incorrect treatment, or a chain of events resulting
from any of these factors. An example is maternal death from
exsanguination after uterine rupture.
Indirect maternal death. A maternal death that is not directly due to an
obstetrical cause. Death results from previously existing disease or a
disease developing during pregnancy, labor, or the puerperium that was
aggravated by maternal physiological adaptation to pregnancy. An
example is maternal death from complications of mitral valve stenosis.
Late maternal death. Death of a woman from direct or indirect obstetrical
causes more than 42 days but less than 1 year after the pregnancy’s end.
Nonmaternal death. Death of the mother that results from accidental or
incidental causes not related to pregnancy. An example is death from an
automobile accident or concurrent malignancy.

Pregnancy-associated death. The death of a woman, from any cause, while
pregnant or within 1 calendar year of termination of pregnancy, regardless
of the duration and the site of pregnancy.
Pregnancy-related death. A pregnancy-associated death that results from: (1)
complications of pregnancy itself, (2) the chain of events initiated by
pregnancy that led to death, or (3) aggravation of an unrelated condition
by the physiological or pharmacological effects of pregnancy and that
subsequently caused death.
Maternal mortality ratio. The number of maternal deaths that result from the
reproductive process per 100,000 live births. Used more commonly, but
less accurately, are the terms maternal mortality rate or maternal death
rate. The term ratio is more accurate because it includes in the numerator
the number of deaths regardless of pregnancy outcome—for example, live
births, stillbirths, and ectopic pregnancies—whereas the denominator
includes the number of live births.

PREGNANCY RATES IN THE UNITED STATES
According to the CDC, the fertility rate of women aged 15 to 44 years in the
United States in 2019 was 58 live births per 1000 women. This rate began
slowly trending downward in 1990 and has now dropped below that for
replacement births to sustain the population level. This indicates a
population decline. The birth rate decreased for all major ethnic and racial
groups, for adolescents and unmarried women, and for those aged 20 to 24
years. For women older than 30 years, the birth rate rose slightly. Almost
half of newborns in 2019 in the United States were minorities: Hispanic—25
percent; African-American—15 percent; and Asian—4 percent (Martin,
2021).
The total number of pregnancies and their outcomes in 2019 are shown in
Table 1-1. According to the Guttmacher Institute (2019b), 45 percent of
births in the United States are unintended at the time of conception. But, the
overall proportion of unintended births has declined since 2008. Unmarried
women, black women, and women with less education or income are more
likely to have an unplanned pregnancy.
TABLE 1-1. Total Pregnancies and Outcomes in the United States in 2019

OBSTETRICAL CARE MEASURES
Several indices are used to assess obstetrical and perinatal outcomes as
measures of medical care quality. As noted, the perinatal mortality rate
includes the number of stillbirths and neonatal deaths per 1000 total births. In
2016, this rate was 6 deaths per 1000 births (Fig. 1-1). This rate has been
unchanged for several years (Gregory, 2018). Rates of fetal death at 28
weeks’ gestational age or more have declined since 1990, whereas rates for
those between 20 and 27 weeks are static.

FIGURE 1-1 Perinatal, late-fetal, and early-neonatal mortality rates per 1000 births in the United
States in 2016. (Data from Gregory, 2018).

Of infant deaths, the rate approximated 6 deaths per 1000 live births in
2018 compared with nearly 7 in 2001 (Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, 2020b). The four leading causes—congenital malformations,
preterm birth, low birthweight, and maternal pregnancy complications—
accounted for almost half of all infant deaths. Neonates born at the lowest
gestational ages and birthweights add substantively to these mortality rates.
For example, 17 percent of all infant deaths in 2018 were in those born
preterm and with a low birthweight (Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, 2020d). Of particular interest are neonates with birthweights
<500 g, for whom neonatal intensive care can now be offered (Chap. 45, p.
785).
Of maternal deaths, rates dropped precipitously in the United States
during the 20th century. Pregnancy-related deaths are so uncommon as to be

measured per 100,000 births. The CDC maintains data on pregnancy-related
maternal deaths in its Pregnancy Mortality Surveillance System (PMSS). Its
latest report described 3410 pregnancy-related deaths between 2011 and
2015 (Petersen, 2019b). Approximately 5 percent were early-pregnancy
maternal deaths due to ectopic gestation or abortive outcomes. The deadly
obstetrical triad of hemorrhage, preeclampsia, and infection accounted for a
third of all deaths (Fig. 1-2). Thromboembolism, cardiomyopathy, and other
cardiovascular disease together accounted for another third. Other significant
contributors were amnionic fluid embolism (5.5 percent) and
cerebrovascular accidents (8.2 percent). Anesthesia-related deaths were at
an all time low—only 0.4 percent. Similar causes were reported for selected
cohorts by MacDorman and associates (2017).

FIGURE 1-2 Some causes of and their contributions to pregnancy-related maternal deaths in the
United States from 2014–2017. (Data from Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2020c).

The pregnancy-related maternal mortality ratio was 17 deaths per
100,000 live births in 2017 (Fig. 1-3). The cause of this rise during the last
30 years may simply be that more women are dying, however, other factors
explain this increase (Joseph, 2017). First, the number of pregnant women
with severe chronic health conditions, which place women at higher risk, is
greater (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2020c). Second, the
increased proportion of births to women older than 40 years contributes to
higher mortality rates (Petersen, 2019b). Another is an artificial elevation
caused by the International Statistical Classification of Diseases, 10th

Revision (ICD-10), implemented in 1999. Additionally, improved reporting
of maternal mortality contributes to the rise (MacDorman, 2016, 2017). Last,
implementation of the pregnancy checkbox on the death certificate was
associated with an increased identification of maternal deaths (Rossen,
2020). Thus, after accounting for the checkbox, predicted maternal mortality
rates did not change significantly from 1999 through 2017.

FIGURE 1-3 Trends in pregnancy-related maternal mortality in the United States from 1999–2017.
(Data from Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2020c).

Another consideration is the obvious disparity of higher mortality rates
among black, Hispanic, and white women as shown in Figure 1-4. Racial
disparities stem from health-care availability, access, or use (Petersen,
2019a). The maternal mortality rate is also disparately high in rural
compared with metropolitan areas (Maron, 2017).

FIGURE 1-4 Pregnancy-related mortality ratio by race/ethnicity in the United States from 2014–2017.
(Data from Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2020c).

Importantly, many maternal deaths are considered preventable. In one
report, up to a third of pregnancy-related deaths in white women and up to
half of those in black women were deemed preventable (Berg, 2005). One
evaluation of an insured cohort reported that 28 percent of 98 maternal
deaths were preventable (Clark, 2008). Thus, further efforts are imperative
for obstetrics and described on page 6.

■ Severe Maternal Morbidity
This is defined as unintended events of labor and delivery resulting in
serious short- or long-term consequences to a woman. Indicators serve as
one measure to guide prevention (Table 1-2). The American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists and the Society for Maternal-Fetal
Medicine (2016) have provided lists of suggested screening topics for this
purpose.
TABLE 1-2. Severe Maternal Morbidity Indicators

To study severe maternal morbidity (SMM), the CDC analyzed more than
50 million maternity records from 1998 to 2009 (Callaghan, 2012). They
reported that 129 per 10,000 women had at least one indicator for SMM
(Table 1-2). Thus, for every maternal death, approximately 200 women
experience severe morbidity. As shown in Figure 1-5, SMM rates have
increased during the past 15 years, and this trend is attributed to better
documentation and a rise the blood transfusion rate. These numbers are

greatest in smaller hospitals with <1000 deliveries annually (Hehir, 2017).
Last, as with mortality rates, there are serious racial and ethnic disparities
for SMM, and black women are disproportionately affected (Creanga, 2014).

FIGURE 1-5 Rates of severe maternal morbidity (SMM) per 10,000 delivery hospitalizations. Women
who received blood transfusions account for the greatest fraction of SMM. (Data from Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention, 2021).

■ Near Misses
Lowering medical error rates serves to diminish risks for maternal death and
SMM. The terms near misses or close calls were introduced and defined as
unplanned events caused by error that do not result in patient injury but have
this potential (Institute for Safe Medication Practices, 2009). These are more
common than injury events, but for obvious reasons, they are more difficult to
identify and quantify. Systems designed to encourage reporting have been
installed in various institutions and allow focused safety efforts (Clark,
2012; King, 2012; Shields, 2017). The World Health Organization (WHO)
also implemented such a system. It has been validated in Brazil and
accurately correlates with maternal death rates (Souza, 2012). A similar
system in Britain is the UK Obstetric Surveillance System—UKOSS (Knight,

2005, 2008). In the United States, one is the National Partnership for
Maternal Safety (D’Alton, 2016; Main, 2015).

TIMELY TOPICS IN OBSTETRICS
Various topics have been in the forefront since the 25th edition of this
textbook. Here, we discuss several of these.

■ COVID-19 Pandemic
In early 2020, the severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS)-CoV-2 virus
spread rapidly around the globe, creating the greatest public health crisis
since the influenza pandemic of 1918 (Chap. 67, p. 1187). As of early 2021,
the disease caused by this virus and commonly known as COVID-19 is
estimated to have infected more than 181 million people and caused nearly 4
million deaths (World Health Organization, 2021). Expectedly, the healthcare
and political landscapes in the United States changed dramatically because
of the pandemic.
Following the January 2020 declaration of a Global Health Emergency
by the WHO, citywide lockdowns, state-mandated shelter-in-place orders,
and public mask mandates were all implemented to help control early viral
spread. Healthcare systems scrambled to acquire COVID-19 tests and
personal protective equipment for staff. Wards dedicated solely to COVID19 care opened in hospitals throughout the nation to handle substantial patient
volume. Despite these measures, more than 500,000 individuals—including
more than 3000 healthcare workers—died in the United States in 2020 from
the infection.
Maternity wards were not spared, and traditional models of prenatal care
were transformed. Namely, virtual care and drive-through prenatal care
models aimed to reduce exposure risk to patients and staff (Holcomb, 2020;
Turrentine, 2020). Asymptomatic or mild infections were common in
pregnancy (Adhikari, 2020). Still, the effects of COVID-19 on pregnancy are
not completely understood, and the effect of pregnancy on disease course is
controversial. Management of severe COVID-19 infection in pregnancy
requires interdisciplinary care and an understanding of pregnancy physiology
and viral pathophysiology.

Preventive measures—including mRNA vaccines—have been shown to
be safe and highly effective in disease prevention. However, this critical
information was delayed following exclusion of pregnant individuals from
initial clinical trials (Adhikari, 2021; Polack, 2020). In a report describing
over 800,000 pregnancies, Chinn and colleagues (2021) found that 2.2
percent (18,715) of these women had COVID-19. When compared with
women without such infections, these women had significantly increased
adverse outcomes to include preterm birth, ICU admissions, intubations and
mechanical ventilation, and maternal deaths. In 2021 the FDA approved
COVID-19 vaccines for pregnant women.
Knowledge gained during the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic will undoubtedly
shape healthcare moving forward (Cook, 2021). Indeed, a combined inperson plus audio-only virtual prenatal care model may most effectively
provide services to vulnerable patients who lack internet access (Duryea,
2021).

■ Maternal Mortality—a Call to Arms
Almost 700 women in the United States die each year from pregnancy or its
complications, and many deaths are deemed preventable. As a result,
obstetricians and other stakeholders have united to address these tragedies
(Chescheir, 2015). Because maternal deaths are inextricably linked to SMM
indicators (see Table 1-2), several programs have been designed by national
organization to avoid these events. Noted earlier, the Pregnancy Mortality
Surveillance System (PMSS) collects national pregnancy-related death data
to guide prevention efforts. Another, the Alliance for Innovation on Maternal
Health (AIM) program, creates patient safety bundles, which describe
evidence-based best practices for various obstetrical settings. The Joint
Commission recommends that birthing centers establish protocols and
implement simulation efforts (Barbieri, 2015). Moreover, national working
groups target specific risks, such as thromboembolism (D’Alton, 2016).
In addition to pregnancy, the puerperium is a vulnerable period as well.
One specific national effort is to establish dedicated 1-year postpartum
follow-up to ensure ongoing care. Important targets are medical disorders
such as hypertension, diabetes, other cardiovascular diseases, and their
consequences. To emphasize puerperal care, the concept of a “fourth
trimester” has been introduced (Chap. 36, p. 634). Moreover, legislation—

the MOMMA’s Act—aims to expand Medicaid postpartum coverage from 60
days to 12 months (Bailey, 2021). As stated by Surgeon General Jerome
Adams, “We must act now; our nation and our mothers deserve better.”
(Frieden, 2020).

■ Opioid Use Disorder
During 1999 to 2014, the national prevalence of opioid use disorder in
pregnant women rose 333 percent from 1.5 to 6.5 cases per 1000 deliveries
(Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2018). In addition to the
complexities of maternal addiction, opioid use has led to an unprecedented
increase in the incidence of the neonatal opioid withdrawal syndrome
(Chap. 33, p. 605). To combat the associated adverse effects on women and
their pregnancies, the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
(2019b) has stressed an active role by obstetricians. The College
recommends universal screening by questionnaire, as well as care given to
affected women by a multidisciplinary team. Therapeutic use of opioids is
curtailed as best possible. Treatment of opioid use disorder with methadone
or buprenorphine is challenging and discussed in Chapter 64 (p. 1150).
Despite efforts, a significant decline in the prevalence of these disorders in
gravidas is not in sight.

■ Advances in Prenatal Genetics
Several technologies help detect fetal genetic abnormalities. Since the last
edition, noninvasive prenatal screening that uses cell-free DNA (cfDNA) has
become commonplace in prenatal care (Zhang, 2019). Another promising
technique is chromosomal microarray analysis (CMA) performed on samples
of chorionic villi or amnionic fluid. These tests provide sophisticated
information about gains and losses of DNA segments as small as 50 to 100
kilobases. However, although the yield with CMA is superior to that with
fetal karyotyping, most birth defects occur in the setting of normal CMA and
karyotype results.
As knowledge of the human genome has expanded, the role of specific
DNA sequence abnormalities has gained attention. As an example, evaluation
of fetal skeletal dysplasia may include panels of tests in which nextgeneration sequencing is used to identify mutations in specific genes. Whole

exome sequencing (WES) analyzes all coding regions of DNA, which
together account for 1.5 percent of the genome. In pregnancies with structural
fetal abnormalities, and in which CMA and karyotype results are normal,
WES has identified clinically significant abnormalities in approximately 10
percent of fetuses (Lord, 2019; Petrovski, 2019). In one series of fetuses with
unexplained nonimmune hydrops, WES detected diagnostic genetic variants
in nearly 30 percent (Sparks, 2020).
Although promising, WES technology at this time is not recommended for
routine use in prenatal diagnosis (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2020b). Limitations include high rates of genetic variants of
uncertain significance, long turnaround times, and high costs. Comprehensive
counseling is needed because WES may detect or suspect a finding that is
unrelated but medically actionable. Genomic tests are reviewed in Chapter
16 (p. 324), and elements of counseling are discussed in Chapter 17 (p. 334).

■ Placenta Accreta Spectrum
Since our last edition, the cesarean delivery rate has been static and
approximates 32 percent. However, rates of pregnancies complicated by
placenta accreta spectrum (PAS) have grown substantially. An incidence as
high as 1 case in 300 deliveries has been cited (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2018). Sequelae of these dangerous
syndromes are discussed in Chapter 43 (p. 765). To address these risks,
specialized accreta surgical teams at tertiary care centers and greater
antepartum transfer to these centers are both on the rise. As one prevention,
national efforts have worked to avoid the primary cesarean delivery.
However, despite these efforts, PAS will likely continue as a significant risk
for SMM.

■ Progestogens to Prevent Preterm Birth
Progesterone derivatives to forestall preterm birth have been studied for
decades. One—intramuscular 17-alpha-hydroxyprogesterone caproate (17OHPC)—was approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
under the accelerated approval process and contingent on demonstration of
efficacy in a second trial. The drug is marketed as Makena, and subsequent,

observational studies, described in Chapter 45 (p. 795), have led to
questions of its efficacy (Nelson, 2021).
In 2019, results of the confirmatory trial of Makena efficacy—the
PROLONG trial—failed to show its benefits compared with placebo for
prevention of birth before 35 weeks (Blackwell, 2020). Later in 2019, an
FDA Advisory Committee voted 9 to 7 to withdraw interim accelerated
approval. Analyses by the committee included cross-study comparisons and
subgroup analyses that did not show 17-OHPC benefits (Fig. 45-6, p. 796).
In late 2020, the FDA Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER)
recommended drug withdrawal from the market.
Subsequently, obstetricians became polarized regarding “off label” use
of the drug because it appears safe (Chang, 2020; Greene, 2020; Sibai,
2020). Despite findings from the PROLONG trial and the FDA’s CDER, both
the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2021) and the
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine (2020) continued to endorse 17-OHPC
use. This, however, is with the proviso that “uncertainty regarding benefit”
be shared with the patient during decision-making. Last, the EPPPIC Group
(2021) performed a metaanalysis of randomized trials evaluating
progestogens for preterm birth prevention. Although not statistically
significant, they concluded progestogens, which include 17-OHPC, reduced
births at less than 34 weeks. The FDA’s CDER (2021) continues to
recommend withdrawal of 17-OHPC from the market. At this time, however,
thousands of women continue to receive 17-OHPC despite its questionable
efficacy.

REFERENCES
Adhikari EH, Moreno W, Zofkie AC, et al: Pregnancy outcomes among women with and without severe
acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 infection. JAMA Netw Open 3(11):e2029256, 2020
Adhikari EH, Spong CY: COVID-19 vaccination in pregnant and lactating women. JAMA 325(1):1039,
2021
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine: Severe
maternal morbidity: screening and review. Obstetric Care Consensus No. 5, September 2016
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine: Placenta
accreta spectrum. Obstetric Care Consensus No. 7, December 2018
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Definition of term pregnancy. Committee Opinion
No. 579, November 2013, Reaffirmed 2019a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Opioid use and opioid use disorder in pregnancy.
Committee Opinion No. 711, August 2017, Reaffirmed 2019b

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Management of stillbirth. Obstetric Consensus
Conference No. 10, February 2020a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Microarrays and next-generation sequencing
technology: the use of advanced genetic diagnostic tools in obstetrics and gynecology. Committee
Opinion No. 682, December 2016, Reaffirmed 2020b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Prediction and prevention of spontaneous
preterm birth. Practice Bulletin No. 234, August 2021
Bailey SR: Our black maternal health crisis is an American tragedy. AMA April 15, 2021
Barbieri RL: Reducing maternal mortality in the United States—let’s get organized! OBG Manag
27(9):8, 2015
Berg CJ, Harper MA, Atkinson SM, et al: Preventability of pregnancy-related deaths. Results of a
state-wide review. Obstet Gynecol 106:1228, 2005
Blackwell SC, Gyamfi-Bannerman C, Biggio JR Jr, et al: 17-OHPC to prevent recurrent preterm birth in
singleton gestation (PROLONG Study): a multicenter, international, randomized double-blind trial.
Am J Perinatol 37(2):127, 2020
Brock CO, Blackwell SC, Chauhan SP, et al: Assessment of evidence underlying guidelines by the
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine. Am J Obstet Gynecol 224:223.e1, 2021
Callaghan WM, Creanga AA, Kuklina EV: Severe maternal morbidity among delivery and postpartum
hospitalizations in the United States. Obstet Gynecol 120(5):1029, 2012
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Opioid use disorder documented at delivery hospitalization
—United States, 1999–2014. MMWR 67(31):845, 2018
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Fetal deaths. 2020a. Available at:
https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/nvss/fetal_death.htm. Accessed June 24, 2021
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Infant mortality. 2020b. Available at:
https://www.cdc.gov/reproductivehealth/maternalinfanthealth/infantmortality.htm. Accessed June 29,
2021
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Pregnancy mortality surveillance system. 2020c. Available
at: https://www.cdc.gov/reproductivehealth/maternal-mortality/pregnancy-mortality-surveillancesystem.htm. Accessed July 1, 2021
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Preterm birth. 2020d. Available at:
https://www.cdc.gov/reproductivehealth/maternalinfanthealth/pretermbirth.htm. Accessed June 29,
2021
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Severe maternal morbidity in the United States. 2021.
Available at:
https://www.cdc.gov/reproductivehealth/maternalinfanthealth/severematernalmorbidity.html.
Accessed July 1, 2021
Chang CY, Nguyen CP, Wesley B, et al: Withdrawing approval of Makena—a proposal from the FDA
Center for Drug Evaluation and Research. N Engl J Med 383(24):e131, 2020
Chescheir NC: Enough already! Obstet Gynecol 125(1):2, 2015
Chinn J, Sedighim S, Kirby K, et al: Characteristics and outcomes of women with COVID-19 giving
birth at UKS academic centers during the COVID-19 pandemic. JAMA Netw Open 4(8):e2120456,
2021
Clark SL, Belfort MA, Dildy GA, et al: Maternal death in the 21st century: causes, prevention, and
relationship to cesarean delivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 199(1):36.e1, 2008
Clark SL, Meyers JA, Frye DR, et al: A systematic approach to the identification and classification of
near-miss events on labor and delivery in a large, national health care system. Am J Obstet Gynecol

207(5):441, 2012
Cook DJ, Altman RB, Westman J, et al: Can the COVID-19 natural experiment teach us about care
value and system preferences? NEJM Catalyst May 5, 2021
Creanga AA, Bateman BT, Kuklina EV, et al: Racial and ethnic disparities in severe maternal morbidity:
a multistate analysis, 2008–2010. Am J Obstet Gynecol 210(5):435.e1, 2014
D’Alton ME, Friedman AM, Smiley RM, et al: National partnership for maternal safety: consensus
bundle on venous thromboembolism. Obstet Gynecol 128:688–98, 2016
Duryea EL, Adhikari EH, Ambia A, et al: Comparison between in-person and audio-only prenatal visits
and perinatal outcomes. JAMA Network Open 5(4):e215854, 2021
EPPPIC Group: Evaluating Progestogens for Preventing Preterm birth International Collaborative
(EPPPIC): metaanalysis of individual participant data from randomised controlled trials. Lancet
397(10280):1183, 2021
Frieden J: HHS, Surgeon General launches campaign to reduce maternal deaths. Med Page Today
December 3, 2020
Greene MF, Klebanoff MA, Harrington D: Preterm birth and 17OHP–why the FDA should not
withdraw approval. N Engl J Med 383(24):e130, 2020
Gregory EC, Drake P, Martin JA: Lack of change in perinatal mortality in the United States, 2014–2016.
NCHS Data Brief No. 316, August, 2018
Guttmacher Institute: Fact Sheet: induced abortion in the United States. 2019a. Available at:
www.guttmacher.org/fact-sheet/induced-abortion-unitedstates. Accessed June 25, 2021
Guttmacher Institute: Fact sheet: unintended pregnancy in the United States. 2019b. Available at:
https://www.guttmacher.org/fact-sheet/unintended-pregnancy-united-states. Accessed June 25, 2021
Hehir MP, Ananth CV, Wright JD, et al: Severe maternal morbidity and comorbid risk in hospitals
performing <1000 deliveries per year. Am J Obstet Gynecol 216(2):179.e1, 2017
Holcomb D, Faucher MA, Bouzid J, et al: Patient perspectives on audio-only virtual prenatal visits
amidst the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) pandemic. Obstet
Gynecol 136(2):317, 2020
Hoyert DL, Uddin SF, Miniño AM: Evaluation of the pregnancy status checkbox on the identification of
maternal deaths. National Vital Statistics Reports 69(1):1, 2020
Institute for Safe Medication Practices: ISMP survey helps define near miss and close call. 2009.
Available at: https://www.ismp.org/resources/ismp-survey-helps-define-near-miss-and-close-call.
Accessed June 29, 2021
Joseph KS, Lisonkova S, Muraca GM, et al: Factors underlying the temporal increase in maternal
mortality in the United States. 129(1):91, 2017
King JC: Maternal mortality in the United States—why is it important and what are we doing about it?
Semin Perinatol 36(1):14, 2012
Knight M, Kurinczuk JJ, Tuffnell D, et al: The UK obstetric surveillance system for rare disorders of
pregnancy. BJOG 112:263, 2005
Knight M, UKOSS: Antenatal pulmonary embolism: risk factors, management and outcomes. BJOG
115:453, 2008
Lord J, McMullan DJ, Eberhardt RY: Prenatal exome sequencing analysis in fetal structural
abnormalities detected by ultrasonography (PAGE): a cohort study. Lancet 393(10073):747, 2019
MacDorman MF, Declercq E, Cabral H, et al: Recent increases in the U.S. maternal mortality rate:
disentangling trends from measurement issues. Obstet Gynecol 128(3):447, 2016
MacDorman MF, Declercq E, Thoma ME: Trends in maternal mortality by sociodemographic
characteristics and cause of death in 27 states and the District of Columbia. Obstet Gynecol

129(5):811, 2017
Main EK, Cape V, Abreo A, et al: Reduction of severe maternal morbidity from hemorrhage using a
state perinatal quality collaborative. Am J Obstet Gynecol 216(3):298.e1, 2017
Main EK, Goffman D, Scavone BM, et al: National partnership for maternal safety: consensus bundle
on obstetric hemorrhage. Obstet Gynecol 126(1):155, 2015
Maron DF: Maternal health care is disappearing in rural America. Scientific American, February 15,
2017
Martin JA, Hamilton BE, Osterman MJ, et al: Births: final data for 2019. National Vital Statistics Report
70(2):1, 2021
Meis PJ, Klebanoff M, Thom E, et al: Prevention of recurrent preterm delivery by 17 alphahydroxyprogesterone caproate. N Engl J Med 348(24):2379, 2003
Nelson DB, McIntire DD, Leveno KJ: A chronicle of the 17OHP-C story to prevent recurrent preterm
birth. Am J Obstet Gynecol 224(2):175, 2021
Petersen EE, Davis NL, Goodman D, et al: Racial/ethnic disparities in pregnancy-related deaths—
United States, 2007–2016. MMWR 68(35):762, 2019a
Petersen EE, Davis NL, Goodman D, et al: Vital signs: pregnancy-related deaths, United States, 2011–
2015, and strategies for prevention, 13 states, 2013–2017. MMWR 68(18):423, 2019b
Petrovski S, Aggarwal V, Giordano JL, et al: Whole-exome sequencing in the evaluation of fetal
structural anomalies: a prospective cohort study. Lancet 393(101793):758, 2019
Polack FP, Thomas SJ, Kitchin N, et al: Safety and efficacy of the BNT162b2 mRNA Covid-19
vaccine. N Engl J Med 383(27):2603, 2020
Rossen LM, Womack LS, Hoyert DL, et al: The impact of the pregnancy checkbox and
misclassification on maternal mortality trends in the United States, 1999–2017. Vital Health Stat
3(44):1, 2020
Shields LE, Wiesner S, Klein C, et al: Early standardized treatment of critical blood pressure elevations
is associated with a reduction in eclampsia and severe maternal morbidity. Am J Obstet Gynecol
216(4):415.e1, 2017
Sibai B, Saade G, Das A: Re-examining the Meis Trial for evidence of false-positive results. Obstet
Gynecol 136 (3):622, 2020
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine: SMFM statement use of 17-alpha hydroxyprogesterone caproate
or prevention of recurrent preterm birth. Am J Obstet Gynecol 223(1):B16, 2020
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine: Special statement: grading of recommendations assessment,
development, and evaluations (GRADE) update. Am J Obstet Gynecol 224(4):B24, 2021
Souza JP, Cecatti JG, Haddad SM, et al: The WHO maternal near-miss approach and the maternal
severity index model (MSI): tools for assessing the management of severe maternal morbidity. PLoS
One 7(8):e44129, 2012
Sparks TN, Lianoglou BR, Adami RR, et al: Exome sequencing for prenatal diagnosis in nonimmune
hydrops fetalis. N Engl J Med 383(18):1746, 2020
Turrentine M, Ramirez M, Monga M, et al: Rapid development of a drive-through prenatal care model in
response to the coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) pandemic. Obstet Gynecol 136(1):29, 2020
United States Food and Drug Administration: CDER statement: Makena (hydroxyprogesterone caproate
injection) information. 2021. Available at: https://www.fda.gov/drugs/postmarket-drug-safetyinformation-patients-and-providers/makena-hydroxyprogesterone-caproate-injection-information.
Accessed July 1, 2021
World Health Organization: WHO coronavirus (COVID-19) dashboard. 2021. Available at:
https://covid19.who.int. Accessed June 30, 2021

Zhang J, Jianli L, Saucier JB, et al: Non-invasive prenatal sequencing for multiple mendelian monogenic
disorders using circulating cell-free fetal DNA. Nat Med 25(3):439, 2019

SECTION 2

MATERNAL ANATOMY AND
PHYSIOLOGY

CHAPTER 2

Maternal Anatomy

ANTERIOR ABDOMINAL WALL
PERINEUM
INTERNAL GENERATIVE ORGANS
LOWER URINARY TRACT
PELVIC SKELETAL ANATOMY
REFERENCES

ANTERIOR ABDOMINAL WALL
■ Skin, Subcutaneous Layer, and Fascia
The anterior abdominal wall confines abdominal viscera, stretches to
accommodate the expanding uterus, and provides surgical access to the
internal reproductive organs. Thus, a comprehensive knowledge of its
layered structure is required to surgically enter the peritoneal cavity.
Langer lines describe the orientation of dermal fibers within the skin. In
the anterior abdominal wall, they lie transversely. As a result, vertical skin
incisions sustain greater lateral tension and in general develop wider scars.
In contrast, low transverse incisions, such as the Pfannenstiel, follow Langer
lines and lead to superior cosmetic results.
The subcutaneous layer can be separated into a superficial,
predominantly fatty layer—Camper fascia—and a deeper membranous layer

—Scarpa fascia. Camper fascia continues onto the perineum to provide fatty
substance to the mons pubis and labia majora and then to blend with the fat of
the ischioanal fossa. Scarpa fascia continues inferiorly onto the perineum as
Colles fascia, (p. 18).
Beneath the subcutaneous layer, the anterior abdominal wall muscles are
the midline rectus abdominis and pyramidalis muscles as well as the
external oblique, internal oblique, and transversus abdominis muscles,
which extend across the entire wall (Fig. 2-1). The fibrous aponeuroses of
these three latter muscles form the primary fascia of the anterior abdominal
wall. These fuse in the midline at the linea alba, which normally
sonographically measures ≤15 mm wide below the umbilicus in nongravid
women (Beer, 2009; Mota, 2018). An abnormally wide separation may
reflect diastasis recti or ventral hernia.

FIGURE 2-1 Anterior abdominal wall anatomy. (Modified with permission from Corton MM: Anatomy.
In Hoffman BL, Schorge JO, Halvorson LM, et al (eds): Williams Gynecology, 4th ed. New York, NY:

McGraw Hill; 2020.)

These three aponeuroses also invest the rectus abdominis muscle as the
rectus sheath. The construction of this sheath varies above and below a
boundary, termed the arcuate line (see Fig. 2-1). Cephalad to this border, the
aponeuroses invest the rectus abdominis bellies on both dorsal and ventral
surfaces. Caudal to this line, all aponeuroses lie ventral or superficial to the
rectus abdominis muscle, and only the thin transversalis fascia and
peritoneum lie deep to the rectus (Loukas, 2008). This transition of rectus
sheath composition can be seen best in the upper third of a midline vertical
abdominal incision.
The paired small triangular pyramidalis muscles originate from the pubic
crest and insert into the linea alba. These muscles lie atop the rectus
abdominis muscle but beneath the anterior rectus sheath.
The umbilicus is covered by peritoneum, transversalis fascia, and skin
and contains the umbilical ring. The ring is a defect in the linea alba through
which the fetal umbilical vessels previously passed. The round ligament of
the liver and the median umbilical and medial umbilical ligaments variably
attach to the ring.

■ Transversalis Fascia and Peritoneum
Transversalis fascia is the thin fibrous tissue layer between the inner surface
of the transversus abdominis muscle and the preperitoneal fat. Inferiorly, the
transversalis fascia blends with the periosteum of the pubic bones.
The peritoneum contains a single layer of epithelial cells and a
supporting connective tissue. The visceral peritoneum densely wraps around
the abdominopelvic viscera, whereas the parietal peritoneum lines the inner
surface of the abdominal walls. In the anterior abdominal wall, five
elevations of parietal peritoneum converge toward the umbilicus and are
known as umbilical ligaments.
The single median umbilical ligament is formed by the urachus, a
fibrous fetal remnant that extends from the bladder apex to the umbilicus.
Clinically, this ligament may be seen at laparotomy during peritoneal incision
as a white, midline, fibrous cord. The paired medial umbilical ligaments are
formed by the obliterated fetal umbilical arteries. The paired lateral

umbilical ligaments contain the patent inferior epigastric vessels (see Fig. 21).

■ Blood Supply and Lymphatics
The superficial epigastric, superficial circumflex iliac, and superficial
external pudendal arteries arise from the femoral artery just below the
inguinal ligament within the femoral triangle (see Fig. 2-1). These vessels
supply the skin and subcutaneous layers of the anterior abdominal wall and
mons pubis. The superficial epigastric vessels are surgically important and
course diagonally from their origin toward the umbilicus. With a low
transverse skin incision, these vessels can usually be identified at a depth
halfway between the skin and the anterior rectus sheath. They lie above the
Scarpa fascia and several centimeters from the midline. Ideally, these vessels
are identified and surgically occluded. Lymphatics run cephalad–caudad on
the lower abdomen (Tourani, 2015). Most channels lie in the dermis, and a
smaller density is found between the Camper and Scarpa fascias (Friedman,
2015).
More deeply, the bilateral inferior epigastric artery and vein are
respective branches of the external iliac vessels and supply anterior
abdominal wall muscles, nerves, and fascia. Of surgical relevance, the
inferior epigastric vessels initially course lateral to and then posterior to the
rectus abdominis muscles, which they supply. A deep system of lymphatics
follows these arteries (Tourani, 2015).
Clinically, when a Maylard incision is used for cesarean delivery, the
inferior epigastric vessels may be lacerated during muscle transection.
Preventively, identification and surgical occlusion are preferable. These
vessels rarely may rupture spontaneously or traumatically during pregnancy
to create a rectus sheath hematoma (Eckhoff, 2016; Gibbs, 2016).
On each side of the lower anterior abdominal wall, the Hesselbach
triangle is the region bounded laterally by the inferior epigastric vessels,
inferiorly by the inguinal ligament, and medially by the lateral border of the
rectus abdominis muscle. Hernias that protrude through the abdominal wall
in the boundaries of the Hesselbach triangle are termed direct inguinal
hernias. In contrast, indirect inguinal hernias bulge through the deep inguinal
ring, which lies lateral to this triangle, and enter the inguinal canal. Here,
contents may exit out the superficial inguinal ring.

■ Innervation
The entire anterior abdominal wall is innervated by intercostal nerves (T7–
11), the subcostal nerve (T12), and the iliohypogastric and the ilioinguinal
nerves (L1). The intercostal and subcostal nerves are anterior rami of the
thoracic spinal nerves and run along the lateral and then anterior abdominal
wall between the transversus abdominis and internal oblique muscles (Fig.
2-2). This space, termed the transversus abdominis plane, can be used for
postcesarean analgesia blockade (Chap. 25, p. 480)(Ng, 2018).

FIGURE 2-2 Intercostal and subcostal nerves are the anterior rami of spinal nerves. In this figure, an
intercostal nerve extends ventrally between the transversus abdominis and internal oblique muscles.
During this path, the nerve gives rise to lateral and anterior cutaneous branches, which innervate the
anterior abdominal wall. As shown by the inserted needle, the transversus abdominis plane (TAP) block
takes advantage of this anatomy. (Modified with permission from Hawkins JL: Anesthesia for the
pregnant woman. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al: Cunningham and Gilstraps’s
Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2017.)

Near the rectus abdominis lateral borders, anterior branches of the
intercostal and subcostal nerves travel superficially to pierce the posterior
sheath, rectus muscle, and then anterior sheath to reach the skin. Thus, these
nerve branches may be severed during a Pfannenstiel incision creation during

the step in which the overlying anterior rectus sheath is separated from the
rectus abdominis muscle (Chap. 30, p. 552).
The iliohypogastric and ilioinguinal nerves originate from the anterior
ramus of the first lumbar spinal nerve. They emerge lateral to the psoas
major muscle and travel across the quadratus lumborum in the
retroperitoneum and toward the iliac crest. Near this crest, both nerves
pierce the transversus abdominis muscle and course ventromedially. At a site
2 to 3 cm medial to the anterior superior iliac spine, the nerves then pierce
the internal oblique muscle and course superficial to it toward the midline
(Whiteside, 2003). The iliohypogastric nerve perforates the external oblique
aponeurosis near the lateral rectus border to provide sensation to the
suprapubic skin (see Fig. 2-1). The ilioinguinal nerve in its course medially
travels through the inguinal canal and exits through the superficial inguinal
ring, which forms by splitting of external abdominal oblique aponeurosis
fibers. This nerve supplies the skin of the mons pubis, upper labia majora,
and medial upper thighs.
The ilioinguinal and iliohypogastric nerves can be severed during a low
transverse incision or entrapped during closure, especially if incisions
extend beyond the lateral borders of the rectus abdominis muscle (Rahn,
2010). These nerves carry sensory information only, and injury leads to loss
of sensation within the areas supplied. Rarely, chronic pain may develop
(Verhagen, 2018).
The T10 dermatome approximates the level of the umbilicus. Analgesia to
this level is suitable for labor and vaginal birth. Regional analgesia for
cesarean delivery or for puerperal sterilization ideally extends to T4.

PERINEUM
This diamond-shaped area has boundaries that mirror those of the bony
pelvic outlet (p. 28). These are the pubic symphysis anteriorly, ischiopubic
rami and ischial tuberosities anterolaterally, sacrotuberous ligaments
posterolaterally, and coccyx posteriorly. An arbitrary line joining the ischial
tuberosities divides the perineum into an anterior triangle, also called the
urogenital triangle, and a posterior triangle, termed the anal triangle (Fig. 23).

FIGURE 2-3 Vulvar structures and subcutaneous layer of urogenital triangle. Inset: Vestibule
boundaries and openings onto the vestibule. (Modified with permission from Corton MM: Anatomy. In
Hoffman BL, Schorge JO, Halvorson LM, et al (eds): Williams Gynecology, 4th ed. New York, NY:
McGraw Hill; 2020.)

■ Vulva
Mons Pubis, Labia, and Clitoris
The vulva includes all structures visible externally in the urogenital triangle.
These are the mons pubis, labia majora, labia minora, clitoris, hymen,
vestibule, urethral opening, greater vestibular (Bartholin) glands, minor
vestibular glands, and paraurethral glands (see Fig. 2-3). The vulva receives
innervations and vascular support from the pudendal nerve (p. 22).
The mons pubis is a fat-filled cushion overlying the symphysis pubis.
After puberty, the mons pubis skin is covered by hair that forms the triangular
escutcheon, whose base aligns with the upper margin of the symphysis pubis.
In men and some hirsute women, the escutcheon extends farther onto the
anterior abdominal wall toward the umbilicus and thus is diamond shaped.

Labia majora usually are 7 to 8 cm long, 2 to 3 cm wide, and 1 to 1.5 cm
thick. They are continuous directly with the mons pubis superiorly, and the
round ligaments terminate at their upper borders. Hair covers the labia
majora, and apocrine, eccrine, and sebaceous glands are abundant. Beneath
the skin, a dense connective tissue layer is nearly void of muscular elements
but is rich in elastic fibers and fat. This fat mass provides bulk to the labia
majora and is supplied with a rich venous plexus. During pregnancy, this
plexus may develop varicosities from pressure created by the growing
uterus.
Each labium minus is a thin tissue fold that lies medial to each labium
majus. The labia minora begin at the fourchette and extend superiorly, where
each divides into two lamellae. From each side, the lower lamellae fuse to
form the frenulum of the clitoris, and the upper lamellae merge to form the
prepuce (see Fig. 2-3). The labia minora dimensions vary greatly among
reproductive-aged women (Cao, 2015; Lykkebo, 2017). In one large study,
the mean length was 4 cm (range 0.5 to 10 cm) and mean lateral span was 1.5
(range 0.1 to 6 cm) (Kreklau, 2018).
Structurally, the labia minora are composed of connective tissue with
many small vessels, elastin fibers, but very little smooth muscle. Nerve
fibers are numerous (Ginger, 2011a; Schober, 2015). The epithelia of the
labia minora differ by location. Thinly keratinized stratified squamous
epithelium covers the outer surface of each labium. On their inner surface,
the lateral portion is covered by this same epithelium up to a demarcating
line, termed the Hart line. Medial to this line, each labium is covered by
squamous epithelium that is nonkeratinized. Labia minora lack hair follicles,
eccrine glands, and apocrine glands but have many sebaceous glands
(Wilkinson, 2011).
The clitoris is the principal female erogenous organ (Fig. 2-4). It is
located beneath the prepuce, above the frenulum and urethra, and projects
downward toward the vaginal opening. The clitoris rarely exceeds 2 cm in
length and is composed of a glans, a corpus or body, and two crura. The
glans is usually less than 0.5 cm in diameter and is covered by stratified
squamous epithelium. Nerve bundles are prominent and correspond to the
paired dorsal nerves of the clitoris (Jackson, 2019). The clitoral body
contains two corpora cavernosa. Extending from the clitoral body, each
corpus cavernosum diverges laterally to form a long, narrow crus. Each crus
lies along the inferior surface of its respective ischiopubic ramus and deep to

the ischiocavernosus muscle. The clitoral blood supply stems from branches
of the internal pudendal artery. Specifically, the deep artery of the clitoris
supplies the clitoral body, whereas the dorsal artery of the clitoris supplies
the glans and prepuce.

FIGURE 2-4 Clitoris and associated vulvar structures in superficial space of urogenital triangle. Inset:
cross section through proximal body of clitoris. PM = perineal membrane; PS = pubic symphysis.
(Modified with permission from Corton MM: Anatomy. In Hoffman BL, Schorge JO, Halvorson LM, et
al (eds): Williams Gynecology, 4th ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2020.)

Vestibule
In adult women, the vestibule is an almond-shaped area that is enclosed by
the Hart line laterally, the hymen medially, the clitoral frenulum anteriorly,
and the fourchette posteriorly (see Fig. 2-3). The vestibule is usually
perforated by six openings: the urethra, the vagina, two greater vestibular
(Bartholin) gland ducts, and ducts of the two largest paraurethral glands—the
Skene glands. The posterior portion of the vestibule between the fourchette
and the vaginal opening is called the vestibular fossa (Hill, 2021). It is
usually observed only in nulliparas.
The bilateral Bartholin glands are 0.5 to 1 cm in diameter. On their
respective side, each lies inferior to the vestibular bulb (bulb of vestibule)

and deep to the inferior end of the bulbospongiosus muscle (former
bulbocavernosus muscle). A duct extends medially from each gland,
measures 1.5 to 2 cm long, and opens distal to the hymeneal ring. One duct
opens at 5 and the other at 7 o’clock on the vestibule. Following trauma or
infection, either duct may swell and obstruct to form a cyst or, if infected, an
abscess. In contrast, the minor vestibular glands are shallow glands lined by
simple mucin-secreting epithelium and open along the Hart line.
The paraurethral glands are a collective arborization of glands whose
numerous small ducts open into the urethra and predominantly along its entire
inferior aspect (Costa, 2016; Huffman, 1948). The two largest are called
Skene glands, and their ducts typically lie distally and near the urethral
meatus. Clinically, inflammation and duct obstruction of any of the
paraurethral glands can lead to urethral diverticulum formation (Chap 56, p.
1007). The urethral opening or meatus is in the midline of the vestibule, 1 to
1.5 cm below the pubic arch, and a short distance above the vaginal opening.

■ Vagina and Hymen
In adult women, the hymen is a thin membrane that surrounds all or much of
the vaginal opening in an annular or crescent form. Mainly elastic fibers,
collagen, and fine vessels compose the hymen. Nerve fibers are few and
localize to its base. Both outer and inner hymeneal surfaces are covered by
nonkeratinized stratified squamous epithelium (Mahran, 1964). The aperture
of the intact hymen ranges in diameter from pinpoint to one that admits one or
even two fingertips. As a rule, the hymen is torn at several sites during first
coitus. However, identical tears may form by other penetration, for example,
by tampons used during menstruation. The torn edges soon reepithelialize.
Proximal to the hymen, the vagina is a muscular tube that extends to the
uterus and is interposed lengthwise between the bladder and the rectum (Fig.
2-5). Total vaginal length is 9 to 10 cm (Collins, 2017; Patnam, 2019).
Anteriorly, the vagina is separated from the bladder and urethra by
connective tissue—the vesicovaginal septum. Posteriorly, between the lower
portion of the vagina and the rectum, similar tissues together form the
rectovaginal septum. The upper fourth of the vagina is separated from the
rectum by the rectouterine pouch, also called the cul-de-sac or pouch of
Douglas (Balgobin, 2020).

FIGURE 2-5 Vagina and surrounding anatomy. (Modified with permission from Corton MM: Anatomy.
In Hoffman BL, Schorge JO, Halvorson LM, et al (eds): Williams Gynecology, 4th ed. New York, NY:
McGraw Hill; 2020.)

Normally, the anterior and posterior walls of the vaginal lumen lie in
contact. The vaginal apex is subdivided by the cervix into anterior, posterior,
and two lateral fornices. Clinically, the internal pelvic organs usually can be
palpated through the thin walls of these fornices.
The vaginal lining is composed of nonkeratinized stratified squamous
epithelium and underlying lamina propria. In premenopausal women, this
lining is thrown into numerous thin transverse ridges, known as rugae. Deep
to this, a muscular layer contains smooth muscle, collagen, and elastin.
Beneath this, an adventitial layer consists of collagen and elastin
(Maldonado, 2020; Mazloomdoost, 2017). No true fascia separates the
vagina from the bladder or from the rectum.
The vagina lacks glands. Instead, it is lubricated by a transudate that
originates from the vaginal subepithelial capillary plexus and crosses the
permeable epithelium (Kim, 2011). Due to increased vascularity during
pregnancy, vaginal secretions are notably increased. At times, this may be

confused with amnionic fluid leakage, and clinical differentiation of these
two is described in Chapter 22 (p. 426).
After birth-related epithelial trauma and healing, fragments of stratified
epithelium occasionally are embedded beneath the vaginal surface. Similar
to its native tissue, this buried epithelium continues to shed degenerated
cells. As a result, epidermal inclusion cysts, which are filled with debris,
may commonly form.
The vagina has an abundant vascular supply. The proximal portion is
supplied by the cervical branch of the uterine artery and by the vaginal artery.
The latter may variably arise from the uterine or inferior vesical artery or
directly from the internal iliac artery. The middle rectal artery contributes
supply to the posterior vaginal wall, whereas the distal walls receive
contributions from the internal pudendal artery. At each level, vessels
supplying each side of the vagina course medially across the anterior or
posterior vaginal wall and form midline anastomoses.
An extensive venous plexus also surrounds the vagina and follows the
course of the arteries. Lymphatics from the lower third, along with those of
the vulva, drain primarily into the inguinal lymph nodes. Those from the
remainder drain into the pelvic lymph nodes.

■ Perineal Body
This fibromuscular pyramidal mass lies in the midline at the junction
between the urogenital and anal triangles (Figs. 2-3 and 2-5) (Oh, 1973;
Soga, 2007). Clinically, it measures 3.5 to 5 cm in nulliparas from the
posterior midline hymen to the mid-anal opening, which are standard pelvic
organ prolapse-quantification (POP-Q) landmarks (Komorowski, 2014;
Reimers, 2016). It lengthens slightly during pregnancy, and during secondstage labor, one study showed that it stretches >65 percent (Meriwether,
2016). It serves as the junction for several structures and provides significant
perineal support (Shafik, 2007). Superficially, the bulbospongiosus,
superficial transverse perineal, and external anal sphincter muscles converge
on the perineal body. More deeply, the perineal membrane, portions of the
pubococcygeus muscle, and internal anal sphincter contribute (Larson, 2010).
The perineal body is incised during episiotomy incision and is torn with
second-, third-, and fourth-degree lacerations. Data conflict as to whether a

shorter perineal body length predisposes to higher-order lacerations
(Deering, 2004; Dua, 2009; Hokenstad, 2015; Meriwether, 2016).

■ Urogenital Triangle
Superficial Space
The urogenital triangle is bounded by the pubic rami superiorly, the ischial
tuberosities laterally, and the superficial transverse perineal muscles
posteriorly (Fig. 2-6). It is divided into superficial and deep spaces by the
perineal membrane. This membranous partition is a dense fibrous sheet that
was previously known as the inferior fascia of the urogenital diaphragm. The
perineal membrane attaches laterally to the ischiopubic rami, medially to the
distal third of the urethra and vagina, posteriorly to the perineal body, and
anteriorly to the arcuate ligament of the pubis (Stein, 2008). It lies at the
depth of the hymeneal ring.

FIGURE 2-6 Superficial space of the urogenital triangle and anal triangle. Structures on the left side of
the image can be seen after removal of Colles fascia. Those on the right side are noted after removal of
the superficial muscles of the urogenital triangle. (Modified with permission from Corton MM: Anatomy.
In Hoffman BL, Schorge JO, Halvorson LM, et al (eds): Williams Gynecology, 4th ed. New York, NY:
McGraw Hill; 2020.)

The superficial space has the perineal membrane as its deep wall and the
Colles fascia as its superficial one. As noted earlier, the Colles fascia is the
continuation of the Scarpa fascia onto the perineum. On the perineum, the
Colles fascia securely attaches laterally to the pubic rami and fascia lata of
the thigh, inferiorly to the superficial transverse perineal muscle and inferior
border of the perineal membrane, and medially to the urethra, clitoris, and
vagina. As such, the superficial space of the urogenital triangle is a relatively
closed compartment.
This superficial space contains several important structures, which
include the Bartholin glands, vestibular bulbs, clitoral body and crura,
branches of the pudendal vessels and nerve, and the ischiocavernosus,
bulbospongiosus, and superficial transverse perineal muscles. Of this
muscular trio, the ischiocavernosus muscles each attach on their respective
side to the medial aspect of the ischial tuberosity inferiorly and the
ischiopubic ramus laterally. Anteriorly, each attaches to a clitoral crus and
may help maintain clitoral erection by compressing the crus to obstruct
venous drainage. Each bulbospongiosus muscle overlies a vestibular bulb
and Bartholin gland. Anteriorly, they attach to the body of the clitoris and
posteriorly, to the perineal body. Some more-recent anatomical studies
instead describe that the bulbospongiosus muscles blend medially with the
external anal sphincter (Baramee, 2020; Plochocki, 2016). The muscles
constrict the vaginal lumen and aid release of Bartholin gland secretions.
They also may contribute to clitoral erection by compressing the deep dorsal
vein of the clitoris. The bulbospongiosus and ischiocavernosus muscles also
pull the clitoris downward. Last, the superficial transverse perineal muscles
are narrow strips that attach to the ischial tuberosities laterally and the
perineal body medially.
Each vestibular bulb, also called bulb of vestibule, is an almond-shaped
aggregation of veins that lie beneath the bulbospongiosus muscle on either
side of the vestibule (Jeppson, 2018). They measure 5 cm long and 2 cm
wide (Jackson, 2019). The bulbs terminate inferiorly at approximately the
middle of the vaginal opening and extend upward toward the clitoris. Their
anterior extensions merge in the midline, below the clitoral body. During
childbirth, veins in the vestibular bulb may be lacerated or may rupture to
create a hematoma enclosed within the superficial space of the urogenital
triangle.

Deep Space
This space lies above or deep to the perineal membrane and below the
inferior investing fascia of the levator ani muscle. It contains portions of
urethra and vagina, certain portions of internal pudendal artery branches, and
muscles of the striated urogenital sphincter complex (Fig. 2-7).

FIGURE 2-7 Deep space of urogenital triangle. Structures on the right side of the image can be seen
after removal of the perineal membrane. Also shown are structures that attach to the perineal body:
bulbospongiosus, superficial transverse perineal, external anal sphincter, and puboperinealis muscles as
well as perineal membrane. (Modified with permission from Corton MM: Anatomy. In Hoffman BL,
Schorge JO, Halvorson LM, et al (eds): Williams Gynecology, 4th ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill;
2020.)

Urethra. The female urethra measures 3 to 4 cm and originates within the
bladder trigone (p. 27) (Hamner, 2018; Rahn, 2007). The distal two thirds of
the urethra are fused with the anterior vaginal wall. The epithelial lining of
the urethra is transitional epithelium at the urethrovesical junction. It then
changes to a pseudostratified columnar along its proximal length but is a
nonkeratinized stratified squamous epithelium distally (Carlile, 1987).
The walls of the urethra consist of two layers of smooth muscle, an inner
longitudinal and an outer circular. This is in turn surrounded by a circular
layer of skeletal muscle referred to as the sphincter urethrae (see Fig. 2-7).

Approximately at the junction of the middle and lower third of the urethra
and within the deep perineal space, two straplike skeletal muscles called the
sphincter urethrovaginalis and the compressor urethrae are found. Together
with the sphincter urethrae, these constitute the external urethral sphincter
(EUS), also called the striated urogenital sphincter complex (Mistry, 2020).
The EUS supplies constant tonus and provides emergency reflex contraction
to sustain continence.
Distal to the level of the perineal membrane, the walls of the urethra
consist of fibrous tissue, serving to direct the urine stream. Here, the urethra
has a prominent submucosal layer that is lined by hormonally sensitive
stratified squamous epithelium. Within the submucosal layer on the dorsal
(vaginal) surface of the urethra lie most paraurethral glands (p. 16).
The urethra receives its blood supply from branches of the inferior
vesical, vaginal, or internal pudendal arteries. The pudendal nerve provides
somatic innervation to the EUS. The urethra’s smooth muscle receives
sympathetic and parasympathetic innervation from the inferior hypogastric
plexus (p. 26) (Colleselli, 1998).

■ Pelvic Diaphragm
The pelvic diaphragm spans the pelvic outlet and lies deep to the urogenital
and anal triangles (p. 17). This broad muscular floor provides substantial
support to the pelvic viscera and is composed of the coccygeus and levator
ani muscles (see Fig. 2-7). The levator ani muscle, in turn, contains the
pubococcygeus, puborectalis, and iliococcygeus muscles. The
pubococcygeus muscle is also termed the pubovisceral muscle and is
subdivided based on points of insertion and function. These include the
pubovaginalis, puboperinealis, and puboanalis muscles, which insert into the
vagina, perineal body, and anus, respectively (Kearney, 2004).
Vaginal birth can damage the levator ani muscle or its innervation
(DeLancey, 2003; Weidner, 2006). Evidence suggests that levator ani trauma
may predispose women to later pelvic organ prolapse (Berger, 2018; Dietz,
2008). Current research efforts aim to minimize these injuries.

■ Anal Triangle

This triangle contains the anal canal, anal sphincter complex, and ischioanal
fossae. The sphincter complex consists of the internal anal sphincter, external
anal sphincter, and puborectalis muscle. The anal triangle also contains
branches of the pudendal nerve and internal pudendal vessels.

Anal Canal
This is the distal continuation of the rectum. Canal mucosa is a columnar
epithelium proximally. However, at the pectinate line, also termed dentate
line, simple stratified squamous epithelium begins and continues to the anal
verge (Fig. 2-8). The anal verge is defined as the transition point at which a
keratin layer and skin adnexa join the squamous epithelium. Two definitions
describe anal canal boundaries. The surgical anal canal begins at the levator
ani muscle, ends at the anal verge, and measures 4 cm. The anatomical anal
canal lies between the pectineal line and anal verge and is 2 cm long
(Nivatvongs, 1981).

FIGURE 2-8 Anal canal and ischioanal fossa. (Modified with permission from Corton MM: Anatomy.
In Hoffman BL, Schorge JO, Halvorson LM, et al (eds): Williams Gynecology, 4th ed. New York, NY:
McGraw Hill; 2020.)

The anal canal has several tissue layers. Inner layers include the anal
mucosa, the internal anal sphincter, and an intersphincteric space that

contains continuation of the rectum’s longitudinal smooth muscle layer. An
outer layer contains the external anal sphincter caudally and the puborectalis
muscle cephalad.
Within the anal canal, three highly vascularized submucosal
arteriovenous plexuses, termed anal cushions, aid complete closure of the
canal and fecal continence when apposed. Increasing uterine size, excessive
straining, and hard stool create raised pressure that ultimately leads to
degeneration and subsequent laxity of the cushion’s supportive connective
tissue base. These cushions then protrude into and downward through the
anal canal. This leads to venous engorgement within the cushions—now
termed hemorrhoids. Venous stasis results in inflammation, erosion of the
cushion’s epithelium, and bleeding.
External hemorrhoids are those that arise distal to the pectinate line. They
are covered by stratified squamous epithelium and receive sensory
innervation from the inferior rectal nerve. Accordingly, pain and a palpable
mass are typical complaints. Following resolution, a hemorrhoidal tag may
remain and is composed of redundant anal skin and fibrotic tissue. In
contrast, internal hemorrhoids are those that form above the pectinate line
and are covered by insensitive anorectal mucosa. These may prolapse or
bleed but rarely become painful unless they undergo thrombosis or necrosis.

Anal Sphincter Complex
Two sphincters surround the anal canal to provide fecal continence—the
external and internal anal sphincters. Both lie near the vagina and may be
torn during vaginal delivery. The internal anal sphincter (IAS) is a distal
continuation of the rectal circular smooth muscle layer. It receives
predominantly parasympathetic fibers, which pass through the pelvic
splanchnic nerves. Along its length, this sphincter is supplied by the superior,
middle, and inferior rectal arteries. The IAS contributes the bulk of anal
canal resting pressure for fecal continence and relaxes prior to defecation.
The IAS measures 3 to 4 cm in length, and at its distal margin, it overlaps the
external sphincter for 1 to 2 cm (DeLancey, 1997). The distal site at which
this overlap ends, called the intersphincteric groove, is palpable on digital
examination. It is 2 to 3 mm thick (Rociu, 2000).
In contrast, the external anal sphincter (EAS) is a striated muscle ring that
anteriorly attaches to the perineal body and posteriorly connects to the

coccyx via the anococcygeal ligament. The EAS measures 1.5 to 2.5 cm deep
and 6 to 15 mm thick (Fenner, 1998; Stewart, 2018). The EAS is considered
to have one or more subdivisions, although the precise composition is
disputed (Lee, 2018). Often, a surrounding fibrous capsule is described, but
this most likely is perineal body rather than a true EAS sheath (Maldonado,
2020).
The EAS maintains a constant resting contraction to aid continence,
provides additional squeeze pressure when continence is threatened, yet
relaxes for defecation. The EAS receives blood supply from the inferior
rectal artery, which is a branch of the internal pudendal artery. Somatic motor
innervation derives from the inferior rectal branch of the pudendal nerve
supply. Clinically, the IAS and EAS may be involved in third- and fourthdegree lacerations during vaginal delivery, and reunion of these rings is
integral to defect repair (Chap. 27, p. 511).

Ischioanal Fossae
These two fat-filled wedge-shaped spaces are found on either side of the
anal canal and constitute the bulk of the anal triangle (Figs. 2-8 and 2-9).
Formerly known also as ischiorectal fossae, each fossa has skin as its
superficial base, whereas its deep border is formed by the levator ani
muscle. Other borders include: laterally, the obturator internus muscle and
ischial tuberosity; medially, the anal sphincter complex and levator ani
muscle; posteriorly, the gluteus maximus muscle and sacrotuberous ligament;
and anteriorly, the inferior border of the urogenital triangle.

FIGURE 2-9 Branches of pudendal nerve and artery. (Modified with permission from Corton MM:
Anatomy. In Hoffman BL, Schorge JO, Halvorson LM, et al (eds): Williams Gynecology, 4th ed. New
York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2020.)

The fat found within each fossa provides support to surrounding organs
yet allows rectal distention during defecation and vaginal stretching during
delivery. Clinically, injury to vessels in the anal triangle can lead to
hematoma formation in the ischioanal fossa. Moreover, the two fossae
communicate posteriorly through the deep postanal space. This connection
lies between the pelvic floor muscles and anococcygeal ligament (Llauger,
1998). As a result, episiotomy infection or hematoma may extend from one
fossa into the other.

■ Pudendal Nerve
This is formed from the anterior rami of S2–4 spinal nerves. It courses
between the piriformis and coccygeus muscles and exits through the greater
sciatic foramen at a location posterior to the sacrospinous ligament and just
medial to the ischial spine (Maldonado, 2015). Thus, when injecting local

anesthetic for a pudendal nerve block, the ischial spine serves as an
identifiable landmark (Chap. 25, p. 471). The pudendal nerve then runs
beneath the sacrospinous ligament and above the sacrotuberous ligament as it
reenters the lesser sciatic foramen to course across the obturator internus
muscle. Atop this muscle, the nerve lies within the pudendal canal, also
known as the Alcock canal. This space is formed by splitting of the obturator
internus investing fascia (Shafik, 1999). In general, the pudendal nerve is
relatively fixed as it courses behind the sacrospinous ligament and within the
pudendal canal. Accordingly, it may be at risk of stretch injury during
downward displacement of the pelvic floor during childbirth (Lien, 2005).
The pudendal nerve leaves this canal to enter the perineum and divides
into three terminal branches (see Fig. 2-9). The first of these, the dorsal
nerve of the clitoris, runs between the ischiocavernosus muscle and perineal
membrane to supply the clitoral glans (Ginger, 2011b). Second, the perineal
nerve runs superficial to the perineal membrane (Montoya, 2011). It divides
into posterior labial branches and muscular branches, which serve the labial
skin and the urogenital triangle muscles, respectively. Last, the inferior rectal
branch runs through the ischioanal fossa to supply the external anal sphincter,
the anal mucosa, and the perianal skin (Mahakkanukrauh, 2005).
The major blood supply to the perineum is from the internal pudendal
artery, and its branches mirror the divisions of the pudendal nerve. Relevant
to pudendal nerve blockade, the internal pudendal artery is the closest
vascular structure, within 5 to 8 mm. It runs deep to the spine in most cases
as it exits the greater sciatic foramen (Dueñas-Garcia, 2017; Roshanravan,
2007).

INTERNAL GENERATIVE ORGANS
■ Uterus
The nonpregnant uterus lies in the pelvic cavity between the bladder
anteriorly and the rectum posteriorly. Anterior and posterior uterine walls
are lined by serosa, that is, visceral peritoneum (Fig. 2-10). This peritoneum
continues from the posterior wall to create the rectouterine space (see Fig. 25). It continues anteriorly to create the vesicouterine pouch. Clinically,
during cesarean delivery, the peritoneum of the vesicouterine pouch is
sharply incised, and the vesicocervical space is entered. This space is a

well-defined loose connective tissue layer between the cervix and bladder
(Balgobin, 2020). Dissection caudally within this space lifts the bladder
safely off the cervix and lower uterine segment for hysterotomy and delivery
(Chap. 30, p. 553).

FIGURE 2-10 Uterus, adnexa, and associated anatomy. (Modified with permission from Corton MM:
Anatomy. In Hoffman BL, Schorge JO, Halvorson LM, et al (eds): Williams Gynecology, 4th ed. New
York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2020.)

The uterus is pear shaped and consists of two major but unequal parts.
The upper, larger portion is the body or corpus, whereas the lower smaller
cervix projects into the vagina. The isthmus is the union site of these two. It
is of special obstetrical significance because it forms the lower uterine
segment during pregnancy. At each superolateral margin of the body is a
uterine cornu, from which a fallopian tube emerges. This area also contains
the origins of the round and uteroovarian ligaments. Between the points of
fallopian tube insertion is the convex upper uterine segment termed the
fundus.

The bulk of the uterine body, but not the cervix, is muscle. The inner
surfaces of the uterine walls lie almost in contact, and the intervening cavity
forms a mere slit. The nulligravid uterus measures 6 to 8 cm in length
compared with 9 to 10 cm in multiparas. The uterus averages 60 g and
typically weighs more in parous women (Langlois, 1970; Sheikhazadi,
2010).
Pregnancy stimulates remarkable uterine growth due to muscle fiber
hypertrophy. The uterine fundus, a previously flattened convexity between
tubal insertions, now becomes dome shaped. Moreover, the round ligaments
appear to insert at the junction of the middle and upper thirds of the organ.
The fallopian tubes elongate, but the ovaries grossly appear unchanged.

Cervix
This portion of the uterus is cylindrical and has small apertures at each end
—the internal os and external os. The endocervical canal runs through the
cervix and connects these ora. The cervix is divided into upper and lower
portions by the vagina’s attachment to its outer surface. The upper portion—
the portio supravaginalis—begins at the internal os, which corresponds to
the level of the vesicouterine peritoneum (see Figs. 2-5 and 2-10). The lower
cervical portion protrudes into the vagina as the portio vaginalis.
Before childbirth, the external cervical os is a small, regular, oval
opening. After labor, especially vaginal childbirth, the orifice is converted
into a transverse slit that is divided such that there are the so-called anterior
and posterior cervical lips. If torn deeply during labor or delivery, the cervix
may heal in such a manner that it appears irregular, nodular, or stellate (Fig.
36-1, p. 635).
The cervical surface that radially surrounds the external os is called the
ectocervix and is lined predominantly by nonkeratinized stratified squamous
epithelium. In contrast, the endocervical canal is covered by a single layer of
mucin-secreting columnar epithelium, which creates deep cleftlike infoldings
or “glands.” Commonly during pregnancy, the endocervical epithelium moves
out and onto the ectocervix in a physiological process termed eversion
(Chap. 4, p. 53).
The cervical stroma is composed mainly of collagen, elastin, and
proteoglycans, but very little smooth muscle. As described in Chapter 21 (p.
406), changes in the amount, composition, and orientation of these

components lead to cervical ripening prior to labor. In early pregnancy,
increased vascularity within the cervix stroma beneath the epithelium creates
an ectocervical blue tint that is characteristic of the Chadwick sign. Cervical
edema leads to softening—the Goodell sign, whereas isthmic softening is the
Hegar sign.

Myometrium and Endometrium
Most of the uterus is composed of myometrium, which contains smooth
muscle bundles united by connective tissue with many elastic fibers.
Interlacing myometrial fibers surround myometrial vessels and contract to
compress these. This anatomy allows hemostasis at the placental site during
third-stage labor.
The uterine cavity is lined with endometrium, which is composed of an
overlying epithelium, invaginating glands, and a supportive, vascular stroma.
Throughout the menstrual cycle, the endometrium varies greatly (Chap. 5, p.
83). It is divided into a functionalis layer, which is sloughed with menses,
and a basalis layer, which serves to regenerate the functionalis layer
following each menses. During pregnancy, the endometrium undergoes
dramatic hormonally driven alterations and is termed decidua.

Ligaments
Several ligaments extend from the uterine surface toward the pelvic
sidewalls and include the round, broad, cardinal, and uterosacral ligaments
(see Fig. 2-10). Despite their appellation, the round and broad ligaments
provide no substantial uterine support, which contrasts with the cardinal and
uterosacral ligaments.
The round ligament originates somewhat below and anterior to the origin
of the fallopian tubes. Clinically, this orientation can aid tube identification
during puerperal sterilization (Chap. 39, p. 682). Each round ligament
extends laterally and down into the inguinal canal, through which it passes, to
terminate in the upper portion of the ipsilateral labium majus. The artery to
the round ligament, formerly the Sampson artery, is a small branch of the
uterine artery and runs within the ligament. In nonpregnant women, the round
ligament varies from 3 to 5 mm in diameter and is composed of smooth
muscle bundles separated by fibrous tissue septa (Mahran, 1965). During
pregnancy, these ligaments hypertrophy and increase appreciably in both

length and diameter. Rare, round ligament varicosities can mimic an inguinal
hernia, and color Doppler interrogation of the mass aids diagnosis
(Yonggang, 2017).
The broad ligaments are two winglike structures that extend from the
lateral uterine margins to the pelvic sidewalls. Each broad ligament consists
of a double-layer drape of peritoneum. The anterior and posterior layers of
this drape are termed the anterior and posterior leaves, respectively. In
forming the broad ligament, this peritoneum folds over structures extending
from each cornu. Peritoneum that folds over the fallopian tube is termed the
mesosalpinx, that around the round ligament is the mesoteres, and that over
the ovarian ligament is the mesovarium. Peritoneum that extends beneath the
fimbriated end of the uterine tube toward the pelvic wall forms
infundibulopelvic ligament, which is also the suspensory ligament of the
ovary. This contains nerves and the ovarian vessels, and during pregnancy,
these vessels, especially the venous plexuses, are dramatically enlarged.
Specifically, the diameter of the ovarian vascular pedicle increases from 0.9
cm to reach 2.6 cm at term (Hodgkinson, 1953).
The cardinal ligament—formerly the transverse cervical ligament or the
Mackenrodt ligament—anchors medially to the uterus and upper vagina. The
cardinal ligament is the thick base of the broad ligament. As such, during
cesarean hysterectomy, sturdy clamps and suture are required for its
transection and ligation.
Each uterosacral ligament originates with a posterolateral attachment to
the supravaginal portion of the cervix and inserts into the fascia over the
sacrum, with some variations (Ramanah, 2012; Umek, 2004). These
ligaments are composed of connective tissue, small neurovascular bundles,
and some smooth muscle. Covered by peritoneum, these ligaments form the
lateral boundaries of the rectouterine space.
The term parametrium describes the connective tissues adjacent and
lateral to the uterus within the broad ligament. Paracervical tissues are those
adjacent to the cervix, whereas paracolpium is tissue lateral to the vaginal
walls.

■ Pelvic Blood Supply
During pregnancy, uterine vasculature, which is supplied principally from the
uterine and ovarian arteries, markedly hypertrophies (see Fig. 2-10). The

uterine artery is a main branch of the internal iliac artery (prior hypogastric
artery) and enters the base of the broad ligament. From its origin, the uterine
artery courses medially to the lateral side of the uterus. Approximately 2 cm
lateral to the cervix, the uterine artery crosses over the ureter. This proximity
is important surgically, as the ureter may be injured or ligated during
hysterectomy when the uterine vessels are clamped and ligated.
Once the uterine artery reaches the cervix, it divides. The smaller
cervicovaginal artery supplies blood to the lower cervix and upper vagina.
Instead, the main uterine artery branch turns abruptly upward and travels
cephalad along the lateral margin of the uterus. Along this path, the uterine
artery gives rise to the arcuate arteries. Indicated by the name, each branch
arches across either the anterior or posterior uterine wall and courses within
the myometrium just beneath the serosal surface. Arcuate vessels from each
side anastomose at the uterine midline. From the arcuate arteries, radial
arteries originate at right angles and travel inward through the myometrium.
Upon entering the endometrium/decidua, they branch to become either basal
arteries or spiral arteries. The coiled spiral arteries supply the functionalis
layer. The basal arteries, also called the straight arteries, extend only into the
basalis layer.
As the uterine artery courses cephalad, it gives rise to the artery of the
round ligament. At the each cornu, the uterine artery divides into three
terminal branches. First, the tubal branch makes its way through the
mesosalpinx and supplies part of the fallopian tube; whereas the fundal
branch penetrates the uppermost uterus. Third, the ovarian branch of the
uterine artery forms an anastomosis with the terminal branch of the ovarian
artery.
The ovarian artery is a direct branch of the aorta and enters the broad
ligament through the infundibulopelvic ligament. At the ovarian hilum, it
divides into smaller branches that enter the ovary. As the ovarian artery runs
along the hilum, it also sends several branches through the mesosalpinx to
supply the fallopian tubes. Its main stem, however, traverses the entire length
of the broad ligament toward the uterine cornu. Here, it forms an anastomosis
with the ovarian branch of the uterine artery. This dual uterine blood supply
creates a vascular reserve to prevent uterine ischemia if ligation of the
uterine or internal iliac artery is performed to control postpartum
hemorrhage.

Uterine veins accompany their respective arteries. As such, the arcuate
veins unite to form the uterine vein, which empties into the internal iliac vein
and then the common iliac vein. Some of the blood from the upper uterus, the
ovary, and the upper part of the broad ligament is collected by several veins.
These terminate in the ovarian vein. From here, the right ovarian vein
empties into the vena cava. The left ovarian vein empties into the left renal
vein.
Blood supply to the pelvis is predominantly provided by branches of the
internal iliac artery (Fig. 2-11). These branches are organized into anterior
and posterior divisions, and subsequent branches are highly variable
between individuals. The anterior division provides blood supply to the
pelvic organs and perineum and includes the inferior gluteal, internal
pudendal, middle rectal, vaginal, uterine, and obturator arteries, as well as
the umbilical artery and its continuation as the superior vesical artery. The
posterior division branches extend to the buttock and thigh and include the
superior gluteal, lateral sacral, and iliolumbar arteries. For this reason,
during internal iliac artery ligation, many advocate ligation distal to the
posterior division to avoid compromise to the areas supplied by this division
(Bleich, 2007).

FIGURE 2-11 Pelvic arteries. (Modified with permission from Corton MM: Anatomy. In Hoffman BL,
Schorge JO, Halvorson LM, et al (eds): Williams Gynecology, 4th ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill;
2020.)

■ Pelvic Lymphatics
The lymphatic vessels from the uterine corpus generally empty into two
nodal groups. Those from the cervix and lower uterine segment travel to the
pelvic lymph nodes, which then drain into the paraaortic nodes. Vessels from
the fundus, after joining lymphatics from the adnexa, directly terminate in the
paraaortic lymph nodes. Vaginal lymphatic channels have extensive
anastomoses. As a result, any node in the pelvis, groin, or anorectal area may
drain any part of the vagina. Lymphatics of the vulva and distal vagina
typically empty into the superficial inguinal nodal group. From here, lymph
travels through the deep femoral lymphatics to the pelvic nodal groups.

■ Pelvic Innervation
As a brief review, the peripheral nervous system is divided into a somatic
division, which innervates skeletal muscle, and an autonomic division, which
innervates smooth muscle, cardiac muscle, and glands. Pelvic visceral
innervation is predominantly autonomic, which is further divided into
sympathetic and parasympathetic components.
Sympathetic innervation to pelvic viscera begins with the superior
hypogastric plexus, also termed the presacral nerve (Fig. 2-12). This plexus
is formed by sympathetic fibers arising from spinal levels T10 through L2. At
the level of the sacral promontory, the superior hypogastric plexus divides
into a right and a left hypogastric nerve, which run downward along their
respective pelvic sidewalls (Ripperda, 2017).

FIGURE 2-12 Pelvic innervation. (Modified with permission from Corton MM: Anatomy. In Hoffman
BL, Schorge JO, Halvorson LM, et al (eds): Williams Gynecology, 4th ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill;

2020.)

In contrast, parasympathetic innervation to the pelvic organs derives from
spinal levels S2 through S4. Anterior rami of the spinal nerves for those
levels combine on each side to form the pelvic splanchnic nerves, also
termed nervi erigentes.
Blending of the two hypogastric nerves (sympathetic) and the two pelvic
splanchnic nerves (parasympathetic) gives rise to the inferior hypogastric
plexus, also termed the pelvic plexus. From here, fibers of this plexus extend
to the bladder, uterus, upper vagina, and rectum (Ripperda, 2017; Spackman,
2007). Extensions of the inferior hypogastric plexus also reach the perineum
to innervate the clitoris and vestibular bulbs (Montoya, 2011).
For the uterus, most of its afferent sensory fibers ascend through the
inferior hypogastric plexus and enter the spinal cord via T10 through T12 and
L1 spinal nerves. These transmit the painful stimuli of contractions to the
central nervous system. For the cervix and upper part of the birth canal,
sensory nerves pass through the pelvic splanchnic nerves to the second, third,
and fourth sacral nerves. Last, those from the lower portion of the birth canal
pass primarily through the pudendal nerve. Anesthetic blocks used during
delivery target these levels of innervation.

■ Ovaries
Along the pelvic sidewall, each ovary usually rests in the ovarian fossa,
which is a slight depression between the external and internal iliac vessels.
During childbearing years, ovaries variably measure 2.5 to 5 cm in length,
1.5 to 3 cm in width, and 0.6 to 1.5 cm in thickness.
The ovarian ligament, also called the uteroovarian ligament, originates
from the posterolateral uterine cornu and extends to the uterine pole of the
ovary (see Fig. 2-10). Measuring a few centimeters long and 3 to 4 mm in
diameter, this ligament is made up of muscle and connective tissue and is
covered by peritoneum—the mesovarium. Blood supply reaches the ovary
through the mesovarium to enter the ovarian hilum.
The ovary consists of an outer cortex and inner medulla. In young women,
the cortex is smooth, white, and lined by a single layer of cuboidal
epithelium. This epithelium is supported by an inner connective tissue
condensation, the tunica albuginea. Beneath this, the ovarian cortex contains

oocytes and developing follicles. The medulla is composed of loose
connective tissue, numerous arteries and veins, and a small amount of smooth
muscle.
The ovaries are supplied with both sympathetic and parasympathetic
nerves. The sympathetic nerves are derived primarily from the ovarian
plexus that accompanies the ovarian vessels and originates in the renal
plexus. Others derive from the plexus that surrounds the ovarian branch of the
uterine artery. Parasympathetic input is from the vagus nerve. Sensory
afferents follow the ovarian artery and enter at T10 spinal cord level.

■ Fallopian Tubes
Each of these serpentine tubes extend laterally 8 to 14 cm from their
respective uterine cornu. Along their length, they contain an interstitial
portion, isthmus, ampulla, and infundibulum (Fig. 2-13). Most proximal, the
interstitial portion is embodied within the uterine muscular wall. Next, the
narrow 2- to 3-mm wide isthmus widens gradually into the 5- to 8-mm wide
ampulla. Last, the infundibulum is the funnel-shaped fimbriated distal
extremity of the tube, which opens into the abdominal cavity. These latter
three extrauterine portions are covered by the mesosalpinx, which is a
superior extension of the broad ligament and described next.

FIGURE 2-13 The fallopian tube of an adult woman with cross-sectioned illustrations of the gross
structure in several portions: (A) isthmus, (B) ampulla, and (C) infundibulum. Below these are
photographs of corresponding histological sections. (Reproduced with permission from Dr. Kelley S.
Carrick.)

In cross section, the uterine tube contains a mesosalpinx, myosalpinx, and
endosalpinx. The outer of these, the mesosalpinx, is a single-cell mesothelial
layer functioning as visceral peritoneum. In the myosalpinx, smooth muscle is
arranged in an inner circular and an outer longitudinal layer. The tubal

musculature undergoes rhythmic contractions constantly, the rate of which
varies with cyclical ovarian hormonal changes.
The endosalpinx (tubal mucosa) is a single layer of columnar epithelium
made up of ciliated, secretory, and intercalary cells resting on a sparse
lamina propria. Clinically, its close proximity to the underlying myosalpinx
contributes to easy invasion by ectopic trophoblast. The tubal mucosa is
arranged in longitudinal folds that become progressively more complex
toward the fimbria. In the ampulla, the lumen is occupied almost completely
by the arborescent mucosa. The current produced by the tubal cilia flows
toward the uterine cavity. Tubal peristalsis created by cilia and muscular
layer contraction aids ovum transport (Croxatto, 2002).
The tubes are supplied richly with elastic tissue, blood vessels, and
lymphatics. Their sympathetic innervation is extensive, in contrast to their
parasympathetic innervation. This nerve supply derives partly from the
ovarian plexus and partly from the inferior hypogastric plexus. Sensory
afferent fibers ascend to T10 spinal cord levels.

LOWER URINARY TRACT
■ Bladder
Anteriorly, the bladder rests against the inner surface of the pubic bones and
then, as it fills, also against the anterior abdominal wall. Posteriorly, it rests
against the vagina and cervix. The bladder is divided into a dome and a base
approximately at the level of the ureteral orifices. The dome is thin walled
and distensible, whereas the base is thicker and undergoes less distention
during filling. The vesical trigone lies in the bladder base and contains both
ureteral orifices and the internal urinary meatus. The urethral lumen begins at
this meatus and then courses through the bladder base for less than 1 cm. This
region where the urethral lumen traverses the bladder base is the bladder
neck.
The bladder wall consists of coarse bundles of smooth muscle known as
the detrusor muscle, which extends into the proximal part of the urethra. A
submucosal layer intervenes between this detrusor muscle and the mucosa.
The bladder mucosa consists of transitional epithelium and underlying lamina
propria.

The blood supply to the bladder arises from the superior vesical arteries,
which are branches of the patent portion of the umbilical artery and supply
the dome (see Fig. 2-11). The inferior vesical arteries supply the base and
variably arise from either the umbilical, uterine, or vaginal artery (de
Treigny, 2017). The nerve supply to the bladder arises from the inferior
hypogastric plexus (see Fig. 2-12).

■ Ureter
As the ureter enters the pelvis, it crosses over the bifurcation of the common
iliac artery and passes just medial to the ovarian vessels (see Fig. 2-10). As
the ureter descends into the pelvis, it lies medial to the internal iliac
branches and anterolateral to the uterosacral ligaments. The ureter then
traverses through the cardinal ligament approximately 1 to 2 cm lateral to the
cervix. Near the level of the uterine isthmus, it courses below the uterine
artery and travels anteromedially toward the bladder base. In this path, it
runs close to the upper third of the anterior vaginal wall (Jackson, 2019;
Rahn, 2007). Finally, the ureter enters the bladder and travels obliquely for
approximately 1.5 cm before opening at the ureteral orifices.
The pelvic ureter receives blood supply from the vessels it passes: the
common iliac, internal iliac, uterine, and superior vesical vessels. The
ureter’s course runs medial to these vessels, and thus its blood supply
reaches the ureter from lateral sources. This is important during ureteral
isolation. Vascular anastomoses on the connective tissue sheath enveloping
the ureter form a longitudinal network of vessels.

PELVIC SKELETAL ANATOMY
■ Pelvic Bones and Joints
The pelvis is composed of four bones—the sacrum, coccyx, and two
innominate bones. Each innominate bone is formed by the fusion of three
bones—the ilium, ischium, and pubis (Fig. 2-14). Both innominate bones are
joined to the sacrum at the sacroiliac joint. Anteriorly, they are joined at the
symphysis pubis. This consists of fibrocartilage and the superior and inferior
pubic ligaments. The latter ligament is frequently designated the arcuate
ligament of the pubis.

FIGURE 2-14 The innominate bone is composed of the pubis (brown), ischium (red), and ilium (blue).
Of the three anteroposterior diameters of the pelvic inlet, only the diagonal conjugate can be measured
clinically. The important obstetrical conjugate is derived by subtracting 1.5 cm from the diagonal
conjugate.

These pelvic joints have a limited degree of mobility but can relax
remarkably during pregnancy. For example, at term, the sacroiliac joint can
glide upward. This is greatest in dorsal lithotomy position and may increase
the diameter of the outlet by 1.5 to 2.0 cm for delivery (Borell, 1957).
Sacroiliac joint mobility also likely aids the McRoberts maneuver to release
an obstructed shoulder in cases of shoulder dystocia (Chap. 27, p. 502).
These changes may also contribute to the success of the modified squatting
position to hasten second-stage labor (Gardosi, 1989). Squatting may
increase the interspinous diameter and the pelvic outlet diameter (Russell,
1969, 1982).

■ Planes and Diameters of the Pelvis
The pelvis is conceptually divided into false and true components. The false
pelvis lies above the linea terminalis, and the true pelvis is below this
boundary (Fig. 2-15). The false pelvis is bounded posteriorly by the lumbar
vertebra and laterally by the iliac fossa. In front, the boundary is formed by
the lower portion of the anterior abdominal wall.

FIGURE 2-15 Axial view of a normal female pelvis. The clinically important obstetrical conjugate and
transverse diameter of the pelvic inlet are illustrated. The interspinous diameter of the midpelvis also is
marked.

The true pelvis is described by four imaginary planes:
1. The plane of the pelvic inlet—the superior strait.
2. The plane of the pelvic outlet—the inferior strait.
3. The plane of the midpelvis—the least pelvic dimensions.
4. The plane of greatest pelvic dimension—of no obstetrical significance.

Pelvic Inlet

The pelvic inlet is bounded posteriorly by the promontory, laterally by the
linea terminalis, and anteriorly by the horizontal pubic rami and the
symphysis pubis. During labor, fetal head engagement is defined by the fetal
head’s biparietal diameter passing through this plane.
Four diameters of the pelvic inlet are usually described: anteroposterior,
transverse, and two oblique diameters. Of these, distinct anteroposterior
diameters have been described using specific landmarks. Most cephalad, the
anteroposterior diameter, termed the true conjugate, extends from the
uppermost margin of the symphysis pubis to the sacral promontory (see Fig.
2-14). The clinically important obstetrical conjugate is the shortest, and thus
the most limiting, distance between the sacral promontory and the symphysis
pubis. Normally, this measures 10 cm or more, but unfortunately, it cannot be
measured directly with examining fingers. Thus, the obstetrical conjugate is
estimated indirectly by subtracting 1.5 to 2 cm from the diagonal conjugate.
To measure the diagonal conjugate, a hand with the palm oriented laterally
extends its index finger to the promontory. The distance from the fingertip to
the point at which the lowest margin of the symphysis strikes the same
finger’s base is the diagonal conjugate.
The transverse diameter is constructed at right angles to the obstetrical
conjugate and represents the greatest distance between the linea terminalis on
either side (see Fig. 2-15). It usually intersects the obstetrical conjugate at a
point approximately 5 cm in front of the promontory and measures
approximately 13 cm.

Midpelvis and Pelvic Outlet
The midpelvis is measured at the level of the ischial spines, also called the
midplane or plane of least pelvic dimensions (see Fig. 2-15). During labor,
the degree of fetal head descent into the true pelvis may be described by
station, and the midpelvis and ischial spines serve to mark zero station. The
interspinous diameter is 10 cm or slightly greater and is usually the smallest
overall pelvic diameter. The anteroposterior diameter through the level of the
ischial spines normally measures at least 11.5 cm.
The pelvic outlet consists of two approximately triangular areas whose
boundaries mirror those of the perineum described earlier (p. 14). They have
a common base, which is a line drawn between the two ischial tuberosities.
The apex of the posterior triangle is the tip of the sacrum, and the lateral

boundaries are the sacrotuberous ligaments and the ischial tuberosities. The
anterior triangle is formed by the descending inferior rami of the pubic
bones. These rami unite at an angle of 90 to 100 degrees to form a rounded
arch under which the fetal head must pass. Unless there is significant pelvic
bony disease, the pelvic outlet seldom obstructs vaginal delivery.

■ Pelvic Shapes
The Caldwell–Moloy (1933, 1934) anatomical classification of the pelvis is
based on shape, and its concepts aid an understanding of labor mechanisms.
Specifically, the greatest transverse diameter of the inlet and its division into
anterior and posterior segments are used to classify the pelvis as gynecoid,
anthropoid, android, or platypelloid. The posterior segment determines the
type of pelvis, whereas the anterior segment determines the tendency. These
are both determined because many pelves are not pure but are mixed types.
For example, a gynecoid pelvis with an android tendency means that the
posterior pelvis is gynecoid and the anterior pelvis is android shaped.
From viewing the four basic types in Figure 2-16, the configuration of the
gynecoid pelvis would intuitively seem suited for delivery of most fetuses.
Indeed, Caldwell (1939) reported that the gynecoid pelvis was found in
almost half of women.

FIGURE 2-16 The four parent pelvic types of the Caldwell–Moloy classification are shown by
anatomic and schematic drawings. In each, the blue line passes through the widest transverse diameter
and divides the pelvic inlets into posterior (P) and anterior (A) segments. Mixed types are formed by
combining anterior and posterior inlet segments from different parent types.

REFERENCES

Balgobin S, Jeppson PC, Wheeler T 2nd, et al: Standardized terminology of apical structures in the
female pelvis based on a structured medical literature review. Am J Obstet Gynecol 222(3):204,
2020
Baramee P, Muro S, Suriyut J, et al: Three muscle slings of the pelvic floor in women: an anatomic
study. Anat Sci Int 95(1):47, 2020
Beer GM, Schuster A, Seifert B, et al: The normal width of the linea alba in nulliparous women. Clin
Anat 22(6):706, 2009
Berger MB, Kolenic GE, Fenner DE, et al: Structural, functional, and symptomatic differences between
women with rectocele versus cystocele and normal support. Am J Obstet Gynecol 218(5):510, 2018
Bleich AT, Rahn DD, Wieslander CK, et al: Posterior division of the internal iliac artery: anatomic
variations and clinical applications. Am J Obstet Gynecol 197:658.e1, 2007
Borell U, Fernstrom I: Movements at the sacroiliac joints and their importance to changes in pelvic
dimensions during parturition. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 36:42, 1957
Caldwell WE, Moloy HC: Anatomical variations in the female pelvis and their effect in labor with a
suggested classification. Am J Obstet Gynecol 26:479, 1933
Caldwell WE, Moloy HC, D’Esopo DA: Further studies on the pelvic architecture. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 28:482, 1934
Caldwell WE, Moloy HC, Swenson PC: The use of the roentgen ray in obstetrics, 1. Roentgen
pelvimetry and cephalometry; technique of pelvis roentgenography. AJR 41:305, 1939
Cao Y, Li Q, Zhou C, et al: Measurements of female genital appearance in Chinese adults seeking
genital cosmetic surgery: a preliminary report from a gynecological center. Int Urogynecol J
26(5):729, 2015
Carlile A, Davies I, Faragher E, et al: The epithelium in the female urethra: a quantitative study. J Urol
138(4):775, 1987
Colleselli K, Stenzl A, Eder R, et al: The female urethral sphincter: a morphological and topographical
study. J Urol 160(1):49, 1998
Collins AF, Doyle PJ, Vilasagar S, et al: Utility of anterior vaginal wall length measurement in vaginal
reconstructive surgery. Int Urogynecol J 28(8):1197, 2017
Corton MM: Anatomy. In Hoffman BL, Schorge JO, Halvorson LM, et al (eds): Williams Gynecology,
4th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2020
Costa TC, Cury PM, Custódio AM: Features of the female prostate according to age: an autopsy study.
J Bras Patol Med 52(4):246, 2016
Croxatto HB: Physiology of gamete and embryo transport through the fallopian tube. Reprod Biomed
Online 4(2):160, 2002
de Treigny OM, Roumiguie M, Deudon R, et al: Anatomical study of the inferior vesical artery: is it
specific to the male sex? Surg Radiol Anat 39(9):961, 2017
Deering SH, Carlson N, Stitely M, et al: Perineal body length and lacerations at delivery. J Reprod Med
49(4):306, 2004
DeLancey JO, Kearney R, Chou Q, et al: The appearance of levator ani muscle abnormalities in
magnetic resonance images after vaginal delivery. Obstet Gynecol 101:46, 2003
DeLancey JO, Toglia MR, Perucchini D: Internal and external anal sphincter anatomy as it relates to
midline obstetric lacerations. Obstet Gynecol 90:924, 1997
Dietz HP, Simpson JM: Levator trauma is associated with pelvic organ prolapse. BJOG 115(8):979, 2008
Dua A, Whitworth M, Dugdale A, et al: Perineal length: norms in gravid women in the first stage of
labour. Int Urogynecol J Pelvic Floor Dysfunct 20(11):1361, 2009

Dueñas-Garcia OF, Kim Y, Leung K, et al: Vascular anatomical relationships of the retropubic space
and the sacrospinous ligament, using three-dimensional imaging. Int Urogynecol J 28(8):1177, 2017
Eckhoff K, Wedel T, Both M, et al: Spontaneous rectus sheath hematoma in pregnancy and a
systematic anatomical workup of rectus sheath hematoma: a case report. J Med Case Rep
10(1):292, 2016
Fenner DE, Kriegshauser JS, Lee HH, et al: Anatomic and physiologic measurements of the internal
and external anal sphincters in normal females. Obstet Gynecol 91(3):369, 1998
Friedman T, Coon D, Kanbour-Shakir A, et al: Defining the lymphatic system of the anterior abdominal
wall: an anatomical study. Plast Reconstr Surg 135(4):1027, 2015
Gardosi J, Hutson N, Lynch CB: Randomised, controlled trial of squatting in the second stage of labour.
Lancet 2:74, 1989
Gibbs J, Bridges F, Trivedi K, et al: Spontaneous rectus sheath hematoma in pregnancy complicated by
the development of transfusion related acute lung injury: a case report and review of the literature.
AJP Rep 6(3):e325, 2016
Ginger VA, Cold CJ, Yang CC: Structure and innervation of the labia minora: more than minor skin
folds. Female Pelvic Med Reconstr Surg 17(4):180, 2011a
Ginger VA, Cold CJ, Yang CC: Surgical anatomy of the dorsal nerve of the clitoris. Neurourol Urodyn
30(3):412, 2011b
Hamner JJ, Carrick KS, Ramirez DM, et al: Gross and histologic relationships of the retropubic urethra
to lateral pelvic sidewall and anterior vaginal wall in female cadavers: clinical applications to
retropubic surgery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 219(6):597, 2018
Hawkins JL: Anesthesia for the pregnant woman. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al:
Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2017
Hill AJ, Balgobin S, Mishra K, et al: Recommended standardized anatomic terminology of the posterior
female pelvis and vulva based on a structured medical literature review. Am J Obstet Gynecol
225(2):169.e1, 2021
Hodgkinson CP: Physiology of the ovarian veins during pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 1(1):26, 1953
Hokenstad ED, El-Nashar SA, Weaver A, et al: Perineal body and genital hiatus in the third trimester
and risk of perineal Laceration. Female Pelvic Med Reconstr Surg 21(6):359, 2015
Huffman JW: The detailed anatomy of the paraurethral ducts in the adult human female. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 55(1):86, 1948
Jackson LA, Hare AM, Carrick KS, et al: Anatomy, histology, and nerve density of clitoris and
associated structures: clinical applications to vulvar surgery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 221(5):519, 2019
Jeppson PC, Balgobin S, Washington BB, et al: Recommended standardized terminology of the anterior
female pelvis based on a structured medical literature review. Am J Obstet Gynecol 219(1):26, 2018
Kearney R, Sawhney R, DeLancey JO: Levator ani muscle anatomy evaluated by origin-insertion pairs.
Obstet Gynecol 104:168, 2004
Kim SO, Oh KJ, Lee HS, et al: Expression of aquaporin water channels in the vagina in premenopausal
women. J Sex Med 8(7):1925, 2011
Komorowski LK, Leeman LM, Fullilove AM, et al: Does a large infant head or a short perineal body
increase the risk of obstetrical perineal trauma? Birth 41(2):147, 2014
Kreklau A, Vâz I, Oehme F, et al: Measurements of a ‘normal vulva’ in women aged 15–84: a crosssectional prospective single-centre study. BJOG 125(13):1656, 2018
Langlois PL: The size of the normal uterus. J Reprod Med 4:220, 1970
Larson KA, Yousuf A, Lewicky-Gaupp C, et al: Perineal body anatomy in living women: 3-dimensional
analysis using thin-slice magnetic resonance imaging. Am J Obstet Gynecol 203(5):494.e15, 2010

Lee JM, Kim NK: Essential anatomy of the anorectum for colorectal surgeons focused on the gross
anatomy and histologic findings. Ann Coloproctol 34(2):59, 2018
Lien KC, Morgan DM, Delancey JO, et al: Pudendal nerve stretch during vaginal birth: a 3D computer
simulation. Am J Obstet Gynecol 192(5):1669, 2005
Llauger J, Palmer J, Pérez C, et al: The normal and pathologic ischiorectal fossa at CT and MR
imaging. Radiographics 18(1):61, 1998
Loukas M, Myers C, Shah R, et al: Arcuate line of the rectus sheath: clinical approach. Anat Sci Int
83(3):140, 2008
Lykkebo AW, Drue HC, Lam JU, et al: The size of labia minora and perception of genital appearance: a
cross-sectional study. J Low Genit Tract Dis 21(3):198, 2017
Mahakkanukrauh P, Surin P, Vaidhayakarn P: Anatomical study of the pudendal nerve adjacent to the
sacrospinous ligament. Clin Anat 18:200, 2005
Mahran M: The microscopic anatomy of the round ligament. J Obstet Gynaecol Br Commonw 72:614,
1965
Mahran M, Saleh AM: The microscopic anatomy of the hymen. Anat Rec 149:313, 1964
Maldonado PA, Carrick KS, Montoya TI, et al: Posterior vaginal compartment anatomy: implications for
surgical repair. Female Pelvic Med Reconstr Surg 26(12):751, 2020
Maldonado PA, Chin K, Garcia AA, et al: Anatomic variations of pudendal nerve within pelvis and
pudendal canal: clinical applications. Am J Obstet Gynecol 213(5):727, 2015
Mazloomdoost D, Westermann LB, Mutema G, et al: Histologic anatomy of the anterior vagina and
urethra. Female Pelvic Med Reconstr Surg 23(5):329, 2017
Meriwether KV, Rogers RG, Dunivan GC, et al: Perineal body stretch during labor does not predict
perineal laceration, postpartum incontinence, or postpartum sexual function: a cohort study. Int
Urogynecol J 27(8):1193, 2016
Mistry MA, Klarskov N, DeLancey JO, et al: A structured review on the female urethral anatomy and
innervation with an emphasis on the role of the urethral longitudinal smooth muscle. Int Urogynecol J
31(1):63, 2020
Montoya TI, Calver L, Carrick KS, et al: Anatomic relationships of the pudendal nerve branches. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 205(5):504.e1, 2011
Mota P, Pascoal AG, Carita AI, et al: Normal width of the inter-recti distance in pregnant and
postpartum primiparous women. Musculoskelet Sci Pract 35:34, 2018
Ng SC, Habib AS, Sodha S, et al: High-dose versus low-dose local anaesthetic for transversus
abdominis plane block post-Caesarean delivery analgesia: a meta-analysis. Br J Anaesth 120(2):252,
2018
Nivatvongs S, Stern HS, Fryd DS: The length of the anal canal. Dis Colon Rectum 24(8):600, 1981
Oh C, Kark AE: Anatomy of the perineal body. Dis Colon Rectum 16(6):444, 1973
Patnam R, Edenfield A, Swift S: Defining normal apical vaginal support: a relook at the POSST study.
Int Urogynecol J 30(1):47, 2019
Plochocki JH, Rodriguez-Sosa JR, Adrian B, et al: A functional and clinical reinterpretation of human
perineal neuromuscular anatomy: application to sexual function and continence. Clin Anat
29(8):1053, 2016
Rahn DD, Bleich AT, Wai CY, et al: Anatomic relationships of the distal third of the pelvic ureter,
trigone, and urethra in unembalmed female cadavers. Am J Obstet Gynecol 197(6):668.e1, 2007
Rahn DD, Phelan JN, Roshanravan SM, et al: Anterior abdominal wall nerve and vessel anatomy:
clinical implications for gynecologic surgery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 202(3):234.e1, 2010

Ramanah R, Berger MB, Parratte BM, et al: Anatomy and histology of apical support: a literature
review concerning cardinal and uterosacral ligaments. Int Urogynecol J 23(11):1483, 2012
Reimers C, Staer-Jensen J, Siafarikas F, et al: Change in pelvic organ support during pregnancy and the
first year postpartum: a longitudinal study. BJOG 123(5):821, 2016
Ripperda CM, Jackson LA, Phelan JN, et al: Anatomic relationships of the pelvic autonomic nervous
system in female cadavers: clinical applications to pelvic surgery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 216(4):388,
2017
Rociu E, Stoker J, Eijkemans MJ, et al: Normal anal sphincter anatomy and age- and sex-related
variations at high-spatial-resolution endoanal MR imaging. Radiology 217(2):395, 2000
Roshanravan SM, Wieslander CK, Schaffer JI, et al: Neurovascular anatomy of the sacrospinous
ligament region in female cadavers: implications in sacrospinous ligament fixation. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 197(6):660.e1, 2007
Russell JG: Moulding of the pelvic outlet. J Obstet Gynaecol Br Commonw 76:817, 1969
Russell JG: The rationale of primitive delivery positions. BJOG 89:712, 1982
Schober J, Aardsma N, Mayoglou L, et al: Terminal innervation of female genitalia, cutaneous sensory
receptors of the epithelium of the labia minora. Clin Anat 28(3):392, 2015
Shafik A, Doss SH: Pudendal canal: surgical anatomy and clinical implications. Am Surg 65:176, 1999
Shafik A, Sibai OE, Shafik AA, et al: A novel concept for the surgical anatomy of the perineal body. Dis
Colon Rectum 50(12):2120, 2007
Sheikhazadi A, Sadr SS, Ghadyani MH, et al: Study of the normal internal organ weights in Tehran’s
population. J Forensic Leg Med 17(2):78, 2010
Soga H, Nagata I, Murakami G, et al: A histotopographic study of the perineal body in elderly women:
the surgical applicability of novel histological findings. Int Urogynecol J Pelvic Floor Dysfunct
18(12):1423, 2007
Spackman R, Wrigley B, Roberts A, et al: The inferior hypogastric plexus: a different view. J Obstet
Gynaecol 27(2):130, 2007
Stein TA, DeLancey JO: Structure of the perineal membrane in females: gross and microscopic
anatomy. Obstet Gynecol 111(3):686, 2008
Stewart AM, Cook MS, Dyer KY, et al: Structure-function relationship of the human external anal
sphincter. Int Urogynecol J 29(5):673, 2018
Tourani SS, Taylor GI, Ashton MW: Scarpa fascia preservation in abdominoplasty: does it preserve the
lymphatics? Plast Reconstr Surg 136(2):258, 2015
Umek WH, Morgan DM, Ashton-Miller JA, et al: Quantitative analysis of uterosacral ligament origin
and insertion points by magnetic resonance imaging. Obstet Gynecol 103:447, 2004
Verhagen T, Loos MJ, Mulders LG, et al: A step up therapeutic regimen for chronic post-Pfannenstiel
pain syndrome. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 231:248, 2018
Weidner AC, Jamison MG, Branham V, et al: Neuropathic injury to the levator ani occurs in 1 in 4
primiparous women. Am J Obstet Gynecol 195:1851, 2006
Whiteside JL, Barber MD, Walters MD, et al: Anatomy of ilioinguinal and iliohypogastric nerves in
relation to trocar placement and low transverse incisions. Am J Obstet Gynecol 189:1574, 2003
Wilkinson EJ, Massoll NA: Benign diseases of the vulva. In Kurman RJ, Ellenson LH, Ronnett BM
(eds): Blaustein’s Pathology of the Female Genital Tract, 6th ed. New York, Springer, 2011, p 3
Yonggang H, Jing Y, Ping W, et al: Forty-one cases of round ligament varicosities that are easily
misdiagnosed as inguinal hernias. Hernia 21(6):901, 2017

CHAPTER 3

Congenital Genitourinary Abnormalities

GENITOURINARY TRACT DEVELOPMENT
SEXUAL DIFFERENTIATION
DISORDERS OF SEX DEVELOPMENT
BLADDER AND PERINEAL ABNORMALITIES
MÜLLERIAN ABNORMALITIES
UTERINE FLEXION
REFERENCES
In females, the external genitalia, gonads, and müllerian ducts each derive
from different primordia and in close association with the urinary tract and
hindgut. Abnormal embryogenesis can lead to reproductive organs that
predispose to infertility, subfertility, miscarriage, or preterm delivery.

GENITOURINARY TRACT DEVELOPMENT
■ Urinary System
Between the 3rd and 5th gestational weeks, an elevation of intermediate
mesoderm on each side of the fetus begins to develop into the urogenital
tract. This urogenital ridge divides into the genital ridge, destined to
become the gonads, and into the nephrogenic ridge (Fig. 3-1). Each

nephrogenic ridge produces a mesonephros (mesonephric kidney). Recall
that evolution of the renal system passes sequentially from the mesonephric
stage to reach the permanent metanephric system (de Bakker, 2019;
Upadhyay, 2014). Each nephrogenic ridge also gives rise to a mesonephric
duct, also termed wolffian duct, and to a paramesonephric duct, also called
müllerian duct.

FIGURE 3-1 A. Cross-section of an embryo at 4 to 6 weeks. B. Primordial germ cells migrate
(arrows) from the yolk sac to the area of germinal epithelium, within the genital ridge. C. Development
of gonad. Also, migration of sympathetic cells from the spinal ganglia to a region above the developing
kidney.

The early urinary tract develops from the mesonephric ducts (Fig. 3-2A).
Between the 4th and 5th weeks, each mesonephric duct gives rise to a
ureteric bud, which grows cephalad (Fig. 3-2B). As each bud lengthens, it
induces differentiation of the metanephros, which will become the final
kidney (Fig. 3-2C) (Davidson, 2019). The metanephros ascends to its final
position by the 9th week because of disproportionate growth of the embryo’s
caudal region (Jain, 2018). Each ureteric bud also gives rise to an elongation
that becomes the metanephric duct or future ureter.

FIGURE 3-2 Embryonic development of the female genitourinary tract (A–F). (Reproduced with
permission from Shatzkes DR, Haller JO, Velcek FT: Imaging of uterovaginal anomalies in the pediatric
patient, Urol Radiol 1991;13(1):58–66.)

The cloaca begins as a common opening for the embryonic urinary,
genital, and alimentary tracts (Gupta, 2014). By the 7th week, it is divided by
the urorectal septum to create the hindgut and the urogenital sinus (Fig. 3-2D)
(Valentini, 2016). The urogenital sinus is considered in three parts: (1) the
cephalad or vesicle portion, which forms the urinary bladder; (2) the middle
or pelvic portion, which creates the female urethra; and (3) the caudal or
phallic part, which gives rise to the distal vagina and to the greater vestibular
(Bartholin) and paraurethral glands.
Near the end of the first trimester, each mesonephros degenerates, and
without testosterone, the mesonephric ducts regress as well. The
ureterovesical junction forms from incorporation of the metanephric ducts
into the bladder at the trigone. Abnormalities of this process lead to
obstruction and vesicoureteral reflux (Liaw, 2018).

■ Genital Tract
The fallopian tubes, uterus, and upper vagina derive from the müllerian ducts
(see Fig. 3-2B). Linear spatial development of these organs along the duct
length is guided by several genes and notably by Hox genes (Du, 2004;
Jacquinet, 2016). These ducts extend downward and then turn medially to
meet and fuse together in the midline. The uterus is formed by this union of
the two müllerian ducts at approximately the 10th week (Fig. 3-2E) (Spencer,
2012). Fusion to create the uterus begins in the middle and then extends both
caudally and cephalad. With cellular proliferation at the upper portion, a
thick wedge of tissue creates the characteristic piriform uterine shape. At the
same time, dissolution of cells at the lower pole forms the first uterine cavity
(Fig. 3-2F). As the upper wedge-shaped septum is slowly reabsorbed, the
final uterine cavity is usually formed by the 20th week (Toaff, 1984). If the
two müllerian ducts fail to fuse, two separate uterine horns remain. In
contrast, resorption failure of the common tissue between them results in
various degrees of persistent uterine septum.
As the distal end of the fused müllerian ducts contacts the urogenital
sinus, this induces endodermal outgrowths from the sinus, which are termed
the sinovaginal bulbs. These bulbs proliferate and fuse to form the vaginal
plate, which later resorbs to form the vaginal lumen. Vaginal canalization is
generally completed by the 20th week (Crosby, 1962). However, the lumen
remains separated from the urogenital sinus by the hymeneal membrane. This
membrane further degenerates to leave only the hymeneal ring.
The close association of the mesonephric (wolffian) and
paramesonephric (müllerian) ducts explains the potential to see simultaneous
abnormalities in their end organs. Nearly half of females with uterovaginal
malformations have associated urinary tract defects, and this association is
explored later (p. 40) (Kenney, 1984; Semmens, 1962). With müllerian
anomalies, ovaries are functionally normal but have a higher incidence of
anatomical maldescent into the pelvis (Allen, 2012).
As discussed, the mesonephric ducts usually degenerate in the female.
However, persistent remnants may become clinically apparent. Mesonephric,
that is wolffian, vestiges can persist as Gartner duct cysts. These are
typically located in the proximal anterolateral vaginal wall but may be found
at other sites along the vaginal length. Most cysts are asymptomatic and
benign and usually do not require surgical excision or drainage.

Intraabdominal wolffian remnants in the female include a few blind
tubules in the mesovarium—the epoöphoron—and similar ones adjacent to
the uterus—paroöphoron (see Fig. 3-2F) (Moore, 2020). The epoöphoron or
paroöphoron may develop into clinically identifiable benign cysts in the
adult.

■ Gonads
Because of separate gonadal and müllerian derivation, women with
müllerian defects typically have functionally normal ovaries. At
approximately 4 weeks, gonads form from the genital ridge, also known as
the gonadal ridge. This ridge forms from the coelomic epithelium covering
the medioventral surface of the mesonephros (Smith, 2014). Recall that
coelomic epithelium arises from mesoderm and invests the body cavity’s
inner surface (Ariza, 2016). Next, strands of these epithelial cells extend into
the underlying mesenchyme as the primary sex cords.
Another gonadal component is the primordial germ cell, the future
oogonia. By the 6th week, primordial germ cells have migrated from the yolk
sac along the dorsal mesentery to enter the genital ridge mesenchyme (see
Fig. 3-1) (Fujimoto, 1977; Hen, 2019). The primordial germ cells are then
incorporated into the primary sex cords.
In the 7th week, the sexes can be distinguished. Testes are recognized
during microscopic sectioning by their well-defined radiating testis cords,
which derived from the primary sex cords. These cords develop into the
seminiferous tubules and rete testis. The rete testis connects with small tubes
arising off the mesonephric duct. These small tubes become the efferent ducts
that drain into the epididymis and then into the vas deferens, which are main
mesonephric duct derivatives. After the 8th week, gonads begin to differ
grossly as well (Shen, 2018).
In the female embryo, the primary sex cords give rise to the medullary
cords, which persist only for a short time. The coelomic epithelium again
proliferates into the underlying mesenchyme, and these strands are the
cortical cords. By the 16th week, the cortical cords begin to form isolated
cell clusters called primordial follicles. These follicles contain the oogonia,
which derive from primordial germ cells, and a single surrounding layer of
follicular cells, derived from the cortical cords. Follicular cells are
supporting nutrient cells.

By 8 months, the ovary has become a long, narrow, lobulated structure
that is attached to the body wall by the mesovarium. The coelomic epithelium
has been separated by a band of connective tissue—the tunica albuginea—
from the cortex. At this stage, the cortex contains follicles and is well
defined from the inner medulla, which is composed of abundant blood
vessels, lymphatic vessels, and nerve fibers.

■ External Genitalia
Early development of the external genitalia is similar in both sexes. By 6
weeks’ gestation, three external protuberances have developed surrounding
the cloacal membrane. These are the left and right cloacal folds, which meet
ventrally to form the genital tubercle (Fig. 3-3A). With division of the
cloacal membrane into anal and urogenital membranes in the early 7th week,
the cloacal folds become the anal and urethral folds, respectively. Lateral to
the urethral folds, genital swellings arise, and these become the labioscrotal
folds. Between the urethral folds, the urogenital sinus extends onto the
surface of the enlarging genital tubercle to form the urethral groove. Late in
week 7, the urogenital membrane ruptures, exposing the cavity of the
urogenital sinus to amnionic fluid.

FIGURE 3-3 Development of the external genitalia. A. Indifferent stage. B. Virilization of external
genitalia. C. Feminization.

The genital tubercle elongates to form the phallus in males and the
clitoris in females. Still, it is not possible to visually differentiate between
male and female external genitalia until week 12. In the male fetus,
dihydrotestosterone (DHT) forms locally by the 5-α reduction of
testosterone. DHT prompts the anogenital distance to lengthen, the phallus to
enlarge, and the labioscrotal folds to fuse and form the scrotum (see Fig. 33B).

In the female fetus, without DHT, the anogenital distance does not
lengthen, and the labioscrotal and urethral folds do not fuse (see Fig. 3-3C).
The genital tubercle bends caudally to become the clitoris, and the urogenital
sinus forms the vestibule of the vagina. The labioscrotal folds create the
labia majora, whereas the urethral folds persist as the labia minora. Female
external genitals are differentiated by 11 weeks, whereas male external
genital differentiation is complete by 14 weeks.
To differentiate phenotypic gender early, first-trimester sonography relies
on the angle of the genital tubercle off a horizontal line drawn parallel to the
lumbosacral skin surface (Fig. 3-4) (Efrat, 2006). Specifically, male gender
is assigned if the angle is >30°, and female gender if the angle is <10°.

FIGURE 3-4 First-trimester transvaginal sonogram shows a male fetus, whose phallus lies at an angle
that is ≥30 degrees above the horizontal. The horizontal line aligns with the fetal lumbosacral skin.
(Reproduced with permission from Dr. Ashley Zink.)

SEXUAL DIFFERENTIATION
Defining gender incorporates genetic gender, gonadal gender, and phenotypic
gender. Genetic gender—XX or XY—is established at fertilization.

However, for the first 6 weeks, male and female embryos are
morphologically indistinguishable.
Gonadal gender is heralded by the differentiation of the primordial
gonad into a testis or an ovary. If a Y chromosome is present, the gonad
begins developing into a testis. Testis development is directed by the sexdetermining region (SRY) gene, located on the short arm of the Y
chromosome (Sinclair, 1990). In addition, testis development requires other
autosomal genes that include SOX9, WT1, DAX1, WNT4, and NR5A1(SF1)
(Grinspon, 2019). Identified mutations in these and others are linked to
disorders of sex development, described next.
The importance of the SRY gene is demonstrated in several paradoxical
conditions. For example, 46,XX phenotypic males can result from
translocation of the Y chromosome fragment containing SRY to the X
chromosome during meiosis of male germ cells (Yue, 2019). Similarly,
46,XY individ-uals can appear phenotypically female if they carry a mutation
in the SRY gene (Helszer, 2013).
Last, phenotypic gender begins at 8 weeks’ gestation. Before this,
urogenital tract development in both sexes is homologous. Thereafter,
differentiation of the internal and external genitalia to the male phenotype is
dependent on testicular function and response. In its absence, female
differentiation ensues irrespective of genetic gender (Table 3-1) (She, 2017).
TABLE 3-1. Embryonic Urogenital Structures and Their Adult Homologues

In males, the Sertoli cells of the fetal testis secrete a protein called
antimüllerian hormone (AMH), also named müllerian-inhibiting substance
(MIS). It acts locally as a paracrine factor to cause müllerian duct regression
(Grinspon, 2020; Mäkelä, 2019). Thus, it prevents development of the uterus,
fallopian tube, and upper vagina. Sertoli cells secrete AMH before
differentiation of Leydig cells, which synthesize testosterone. AMH is
secreted as early as 7 weeks, and müllerian duct regression is completed by
9 to 10 weeks. Because AMH acts locally near its site of formation, if a
testis were absent on one side, the müllerian duct on that side would persist,
and the uterine horn and fallopian tube would develop on that side.
Through stimulation initially by human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG),
and later by fetal pituitary luteinizing hormone (LH), Leydig cells secrete
testosterone. This hormone acts directly on the wolffian duct to promote
development of the vas deferens, epididymis, and seminal vesicles.
Testosterone also enters fetal blood and acts on the external genitalia. In
these tissues, testosterone is converted to 5α-DHT to cause virilization of the
external genitalia. Leydig cells also produce insulin-like factor 3, which
prompts embryonic testes to descend by acting on the gubernaculum (Ivell,
2009).

DISORDERS OF SEX DEVELOPMENT
■ Definitions
Abnormal sex development may involve the gonads, internal duct system, or
external genitalia. Current classification of disorders of sex development
(DSDs) include: (1) sex chromosome DSDs, (2) 46,XY DSDs, and (3)
46,XX DSDs (Table 3-2) (Hughes, 2006). Rates vary depending on included
entities and approximate 1 case in every 5000 births (Lee, 2016).
TABLE 3-2. Disorders of Sex Development (DSD) Classification

Other terms describe abnormal phenotypic findings. First, some DSDs
have abnormal, underdeveloped gonads, that is, gonadal dysgenesis. With
this, a poorly formed testis is called a dysgenetic testis. A poorly formed
ovary is a streak gonad. Underdeveloped gonads ultimately fail, which
creates low sex steroid hormone levels but elevated follicle-stimulating
hormone (FSH) and LH levels.
A second term, ambiguous genitalia, describes genitalia that do not
appear clearly male or female. Abnormalities can include hypospadias,
undescended testes, micropenis or enlarged clitoris, labial fusion, and labial
mass.
Last, ovotesticular defines a rare state characterized by ovarian and
testicular tissue in the same individual. It was formerly termed true
hermaphroditism. In these cases, different gonad types can be paired. Pair
combinations may include a normal testis, a normal ovary, a streak gonad, a
dysgenetic testis, or an ovotestis. In the last, both ovarian and testicular
elements are combined within the same gonad.
With ovotesticular cases, the internal ductal system structure depends on
the type of ipsilateral gonad and its function. Specifically, the amount of
AMH and testosterone determines the degree to which the internal ductal
system is retained or reabsorbed (p. 35). With inadequate AMH, müllerian
duct derivatives persist. With inadequate testosterone, external genitalia are
usually ambiguous and undermasculinized. Ovotesticular development may
be found in all three of the DSD categories, and each of these sections
describes examples (see Table 3-2).

■ Germ Cell Cancer
This cancer can develop in dysgenetic gonads of patients bearing all or part
of the Y chromosome. On the Y chromosome, the gene for testis-specific
protein Y (TSPY) is one putative cancer-predisposing gene. Other risks
include disturbed gonadal development, delayed germ cell maturation, and
presence of a gonadoblastoma (Cools, 2014). The last is a benign tumor that
contains germ cells and immature granulosa cells (Roth, 2018).
Germ cell cancer (GCC) risk varies among DSD types, but for some,
gonadectomy may be recommended by a multispecialty DSD team (Lee,
2016). Early surgery benefits those with higher GCC risk and those in whom
gonadal hormones may run counter to preferred pubertal development for the

individual’s chosen gender identity. Later surgery may benefit those with low
GCC risk and in whom gonadal hormones would advance desired pubertal
development (van der Zwan, 2015).
In addition to dysgenetic gonads, undescended testes also have higher
GCC rates (Kolon, 2014). Instead of gonadectomy, orchiopexy, which
translocates and fixes a testis into the scrotum, may be protective (Radmayr,
2016; Walsh, 2007).

■ Sex Chromosome DSD
Cases in this first DSD category typically arise from an abnormal number of
sex chromosomes, that is, sex chromosome aneuploidy (SCA). The
population rate approximates 1 case per 2500 births (Howard-Bath, 2018).
Discussed fully in Chapter 17 (p. 333), prenatal screening methods allow
detection of aneuploidies, including SCAs (Norton, 2016). Sonographically,
a thick nuchal translucency or the presence of cystic hygromas is associated
with an increased SCA risk (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2020; Reiss, 2017). Cell-free DNA present in the maternal
blood is another common aneuploidy screening tool (Fig. 16-14, p. 328)
(Huang, 2018; Vogel, 2019). Its selection solely for gender identification and
without a medical indication is not recommended by the American College of
Medical Genetics and Genomics (Gregg, 2016). Still, with cell-free DNA
use for other indications, antenatal detection of SCAs will likely rise.
Interpretation and management of findings is discussed in Chapter 17 (p.
335). Advantageously, early recognition of sex chromosome DSD offers an
opportunity for patient education. Decisions to end or continue pregnancies
are best guided by clinical geneticists. For continued pregnancies, prenatal
diagnosis allows early postnatal interventions (Gravholt, 2017).

Turner Syndrome
This develops from de novo loss or severe structural abnormality of one X
chromosome in a phenotypic female. Most affected fetuses are spontaneously
aborted. However, 1 in 2000 female live births are affected (Lin, 2019). In
survivors with Turner syndrome, phenotype varies but nearly all affected
patients have short stature. Associated problems can include hypertension;
cardiac abnormalities, especially aortic coarctation, bicuspid aortic valve,

and QT-interval prolongation; and renal, skeletal, and otolaryngological
anomalies. A webbed posterior neck results from cystic hygromas.
Metabolic concerns are diabetes mellitus (DM), autoimmune thyroiditis,
celiac disease, and elevated liver enzymes (Gravholt, 2019). Two streak
ovaries are typically found, and this syndrome is the most common form of
gonadal dysgenesis that leads to primary ovarian insufficiency (POI). POI is
the depletion or dysfunction of ovarian follicles that leads to failing sex
hormone production. The uterus and vagina are normal and respond to
prescribed hormones (Matthews, 2017).
Despite eventual POI, women with Turner syndrome may conceive with
assisted reproductive technologies (ART) and rarely spontaneously (Hovatta,
1999; Oktay, 2016). In gravidas with Turner syndrome, cardiac morbidity
stems from aortic dissection, aortic valve stenosis, and hypertension. For this
reason, maternal–fetal medicine preconceptional counseling and cardiologist
evaluation is essential. For aortic dissection, risk rises as the aortic diameter
increases. The ascending aortic size index (ASI), which is the aortic
diameter divided by body surface area, better reflects risk because it
accounts for short stature. Conception should be avoided with an ASI >2.5
cm/m2 or with an ASI of 2.0 to 2.5 cm/m2 plus comorbid aortic dissection
risk factors. These include bicuspid aortic valve, transverse aortic arch
elongation, aortic coarctation, and hypertension (Gravholt, 2017; Silberbach,
2018). The American Society for Reproductive Medicine (2012)
recommends against pregnancy with an ASI >2 cm. Even without identified
risk, aortic dissection can develop in pregnancy (Carlson, 2007).
If conception is planned, preconceptional evaluation includes
echocardiography, combined computed tomography plus cardiac magnetic
resonance (CMR) imaging of the heart/aorta, 24-hour ambulatory blood
pressure monitoring, exercise testing to reveal exercise-induced
hypertension, and electrocardiogram (Gravholt, 2017). Cardiac disorders
may require surveillance with serial echocardiograms.
This syndrome carries higher fetal rates of miscarriage, preterm birth,
and small-for-gestational age. Preeclampsia, gestational diabetes, and
cholestasis of pregnancy are other maternal risks (Dotters-Katz, 2016a;
Grewal, 2021). Thus, baseline serum tests ideally assess renal, liver, and
thyroid function and screen for DM (Bouet, 2016). These complications and
cephalopelvic disproportion account for cesarean delivery rates of 40 to 80

percent in gravidas with Turner syndrome (Cadoret, 2018; Campens, 2021;
Dotters-Katz, 2016a).

Klinefelter Syndrome
This syndrome has an estimated prevalence of 1 case per 650 newborn males
fetuses (Bojesen, 2003; Radicioni, 2010). With chromosome complement of
47,XXY, these individuals tend to be tall, undervirilized males with
gynecomastia and two small, firm testes. They have greatly reduced fertility
from hypogonadism due to gradual testicular failure. These men are at
increased risk for mediastinal germ cell tumors, osteoporosis,
hypothyroidism, DM, breast cancer, cardiovascular abnormalities, and
neurobehavioral disorders (Groth, 2013).
Affected fetuses may show a thick NT during first-trimester sonography
(Gruchy, 2011). Antepartum risks include preterm birth, cesarean delivery,
small-for-gestational-age fetus, and neonatal death (Dotters-Katz, 2016b).

47,XXX and 47,XYY Karyotypes
These rare karyotypes are found in 1 in 10,000 newborn females and 2 in
10,000 newborn males, respectively (Berglund, 2019). Sonographically,
fetuses with either karyotype may show a thick NT and fetal-growth
restriction (Gruchy, 2016). Phenotypic range is wide, but both may be taller,
show subtle facial and skeletal dysmorphisms, and display neurobehavioral
problems such as autism spectrum and attention-deficit/hyperactivity
disorders (Bardsley, 2013; Urbanus, 2020; Widby 2016). Hormone levels
and fertility are unaffected in most, although POI and semen abnormalities
may be seen, respectively.

Sex Chromosomal Ovotesticular DSD
In the sex chromosome DSD group, ovotesticular DSD may arise from a
46,XX/46,XY karyotype. Here, an ovary, testis, or ovotestis may be paired.
For others, ovotesticular DSD arises from a chromosomal mosaic such as
45,X/46,XY. With this karyotype, mixed gonadal dysgenesis shows a streak
gonad on one side and either a dysgenetic testis or normal testis on the other.
For this reason, phenotypic gender varies widely.

■ 46,XY DSD
Insufficient androgen exposure of a fetus destined to be a male leads to
46,XY DSD—formerly called male pseudohermaphroditism. Testes are often
present, and the uterus is generally absent due to the normal action of AMH.
These individuals are usually sterile from abnormal spermatogenesis and a
small phallus that is inadequate for coitus. Described next, the etiology of
46,XY DSD may stem from abnormal testis development or from abnormal
androgen production or action (see Table 3-2). Rarely, 46,XY DSD may be
part of another metabolic syndrome that alters structural development, such
as Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome (Neri, 1999).

46,XY Gonadal Dysgenesis
This spectrum of abnormal gonad underdevelopment includes complete,
partial, or mixed 46,XY gonadal dysgenesis. These are defined by karyotype
and by the amount of abnormal testicular tissue. Because of the potential for
GCC, gonadectomy is often recommended (p. 36).
Of these, complete gonadal dysgenesis results from a mutation in the
SRY gene or in other genes with testis-determining effects (Hutson, 2014).
Swyer syndrome reflects SRY defects, whereas Frasier and Denys-Drash
syndromes have WT1 mutations. With both mutations, underdeveloped
dysgenetic gonads fail to produce androgens or AMH, which results a normal
prepubertal female phenotype and a normal müllerian system.
Partial gonadal dysgenesis defines those with gonad development
intermediate between normal and dysgenetic testes. Depending on
percentages, wolffian and müllerian structures and genital ambiguity are
variably expressed.
Mixed gonadal dysgenesis is one type of ovotesticular DSD. As
discussed in the last section, one gonad is streak, and the other is a normal
testis or a dysgenetic testis. The phenotype is wide ranging.
Last, testicular regression can follow initial testis development
(McElreavey, 2020). The phenotypic spectrum is broad and depends on the
timing of testis failure.

Abnormal Androgen Production or Action

Some cases of 46,XY DSD stem from abnormalities in: (1) testosterone
biosynthesis, (2) LH-receptor function, (3) AMH function, or (4) androgenreceptor action. First, the sex-steroid biosynthesis pathway can suffer
enzymatic defects that block testosterone production. Depending on blockade
timing and degree, undervirilized males or phenotypic females may result. In
contrast to these central enzymatic defects, peripheral defects can be
causative. Namely, abnormal action of 5α-reductase type 2 enzyme impairs
conversion of testosterone to DHT and blunts virilization.
Second, hCG/LH receptor abnormalities within the testes can lead to
Leydig cell hypoplasia and decreased testosterone production. In contrast,
disorders of AMH and AMH receptors result in persistent müllerian duct
syndrome (PMDS). These patients appear as males but have a persistent
uterus and fallopian tubes due to failed AMH action.
Last, the androgen receptor may be defective and result in androgeninsensitivity syndrome (AIS). Resistance to androgens may be incomplete
and result in varying degrees of virilization and genital ambiguity. Milder
forms may lead to poorly virilized men with severe male-factor infertility.
Those with complete androgen-insensitivity syndrome (CAIS) are
phenotypically normal females. Girls often present at puberty with primary
amenorrhea. External genitalia appear normal; pubic and axillary hair are
scant or absent; the vagina is markedly shortened; and the uterus and
fallopian tubes are absent. However, these individuals develop breasts
during puberty due to conversion of androgen to estrogen. Testes may be
palpable in the labia or groin or may lie intraabdominally. Traditionally,
testes are removed. However, women with AIS have a low risk of GCC, and
retention until after puberty allows hormone-mediated breast and bone mass
development. Despite hormone replacement after ultimate gonadectomy,
many individuals describe hormone-related mood imbalance. New cancersurveillance protocols may allow gonad retention (Cools, 2017; Weidler,
2019).

■ 46,XX DSD
This DSD group may stem from abnormal ovarian development or from
excess androgen exposure.

Abnormal Ovarian Development

Disorders of ovarian development in those with a 46,XX complement
include: (1) gonadal dysgenesis, (2) testicular DSD, and (3) ovotesticular
DSD.
With 46,XX gonadal dysgenesis, similar to Turner syndrome, streak
gonads develop. These lead to hypogonadism, prepubertal normal female
genitalia, and normal müllerian structures. However, other Turner stigmata
are absent.
With 46,XX testicular DSD, several genetic mutations lead to testis-like
formation. Most commonly, defects stem from SRY translocation onto one
paternal X chromosome. Less often, other genes with testis-determining
effects are activated. Regardless, AMH prompts müllerian system
regression, and androgens promote wolffian system development and
external genitalia masculinization. Spermatogenesis, however, is absent
because needed genes on the long arm of the Y chromosome are lacking.
These persons are not usually diagnosed until puberty or during infertility
evaluation.
With 46,XX ovotesticular DSD, individuals possess a unilateral
ovotestis with a contralateral ovary or testis, or bilateral ovotestes. An
overexpression of SOX genes, which are testis promoting, or deficient
ovarian promoting genes are implicated (Grinspon, 2019). Phenotypic
findings depend on the degree of androgen exposure.

Androgen Excess
Discordance between female gonadal sex and phenotypically masculine
external genitalia may also result from excessive fetal androgen exposure.
The prior term was female pseudohermaphroditism. In affected individuals,
the ovaries and female internal ductal structures such as the uterus, cervix,
and upper vagina develop. Thus, patients are potentially fertile. The external
genitalia, however, are variably virilized depending on the amount and
timing of androgen exposure. The embryonic clitoris, labioscrotal folds, and
urogenital sinus are commonly affected by elevated androgen levels.
Virilization may range from modest clitoromegaly to posterior labial fusion
and a phallus with a penile urethra. Degrees of virilization can be described
by the Prader score, which ranges from 0 for a normal-appearing female to 5
for a normal, virilized male. The external genitalia score is another and

similarly ranges from 0 to 12, respectively (Ahmed, 2000; van der Straaten,
2020).
Fetal, placental, or maternal sources can provide the excessive androgen
levels. Maternally derived androgen excess may come from virilizing
ovarian tumors such as luteoma and Sertoli-Leydig cell tumor or from
virilizing adrenal tumors. Fortunately, these neoplasms infrequently cause
fetal effects because of the placental syncytiotrophoblast’s tremendous ability
to convert C19 steroids—androstenedione and testosterone—into estradiol
via the enzyme aromatase (Chap. 5, p. 101). As another source, drugs such as
testosterone, danazol, and other androgen derivatives may virilize.
Of fetal sources, exposure can arise from fetal congenital adrenal
hyperplasia (CAH). This stems from a fetal enzyme deficiency in the
steroidogenic pathway and leads to androgen accumulation. Most cases have
a 21-hydroxylase deficiency. Rarely, others involve deficient 3βhydroxysteroid dehydrogenase, 17α-hydroxylase, cholesterol side-chain
cleavage enzyme, P450 oxidoreductase, or 11β-hydroxylase (El-Maouche,
2017; Narasimhan, 2019). CAH is a frequent cause of virilization, and its
approximate incidence in the United States is 1 case in 18,000 live births
(Chan, 2013; Pearce, 2016).
With CAH, phenotypes depend on the enzyme defect’s location in the
steroidogenic pathway and its severity (Miller, 2011). Classically, deficient
enzymes block corticosteroid production, which feeds back to raise
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) levels. This prompts increased levels
of precursors, which detour into pathways that generate androgens. With
severe deficiency, affected newborns also have blocked aldosterone
production that leads to life-threatening salt wasting. This is typified by
hyponatremia, hyperkalemia, metabolic acidosis, and hypovolemia (Bizzarri,
2016). Other mutations may prompt fetal virilization alone (Auchus, 2015).
The mildest abnormalities present later and are described as
“nonclassic,” “late-onset,” or “adult-onset” CAH. In these patients, adrenal
axis activation at puberty increases steroidogenesis and unmasks mild
enzymatic deficiency. Excess androgen provides negative feedback to
gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) receptors in the hypothalamus.
These patients often have hirsutism, acne, and anovulation. Thus, late-onset
CAH may mimic polycystic ovarian syndrome (McCann-Crosby, 2014).

In some instances, CAH can be diagnosed antenatally. Early maternal
dexamethasone therapy can dampen androgen excess to minimize virilization
(Chap. 19, p. 369). Cell-free DNA can identify fetal gonadal gender. If Ychromosome cell-free DNA is identified, androgens will not harm the male
fetus and maternal dexamethasone treatment can be stopped (TardyGuidollet, 2014).
Of rare placental sources, placental aromatase deficiency from a fetal
CYP19 gene mutation causes accumulation of placental androgen and
underproduction of placental estrogens (Chap. 5, p. 102) (Jones, 2007).
Consequently, both the mother and the 46,XX fetus are virilized.

■ Gender Assignment
Delivery of a newborn with a DSD is a potential medical emergency and can
also create possible long-lasting psychosexual and social ramifications for
the individual and family. Ideally, once the affected neonate is stable, parents
are encouraged to hold the child. The newborn is referred to as “your baby,”
and suggested terms include “phallus,” “gonads,” “folds,” and “urogenital
sinus” to reference underdeveloped structures. An obstetrician explains that
the genitalia are incompletely formed and emphasizes the situation’s
seriousness and need for rapid consultation and laboratory testing.
Because similar or identical phenotypes may have several etiologies,
identification of a specific DSD may require several diagnostic tools
(McCann-Crosby, 2015). Relevant historical questions seek prior obstetrical
outcomes, medication inventory, consanguinity, germane antenatal testing and
sonography results, and family history of genetic or structural anomalies.
Signs of maternal hyperandrogenism are sought. Neonatal physical
examination evaluates: (1) ability to palpate gonads in the labioscrotal or
inguinal regions, (2) ability to palpate uterus during rectal examination, (3)
phallus size, (4) other syndromic features, and (5) genitalia pigmentation,
which derives from increased melanocyte-stimulating hormone levels that
can accompany ACTH secretion. The newborn metabolic condition is
assessed, and hyperkalemia, hyponatremia, and hypoglycemia may indicate
CAH. Other neonatal tests include genetic studies, hormone measurements,
imaging, and in some cases endoscopic, laparoscopic, and gonadal biopsy.
Sonography or magnetic resonance (MR) imaging can help identify

müllerian/wolffian structures, gonad location, and associated malformations
such as renal anomalies.

BLADDER AND PERINEAL ABNORMALITIES
During embryo formation, a bilaminar cloacal membrane lies at the caudal
end of the germinal disc and forms the infraumbilical abdominal wall.
Normally, an ingrowth of mesoderm between the ectodermal and endodermal
layers leads to formation of the lower abdominal musculature and pelvic
bones. Without this reinforcement, the cloacal membrane may prematurely
rupture. Depending on the infraumbilical defect’s extent, cloacal exstrophy,
bladder exstrophy, or epispadias may result, and all are rare.
Cloacal exstrophy, also known as the omphalocele, bladder exstrophy,
imperforate anus, spina bifida (OEIS) complex, affects approximately 1 in
300,000 live births (Keppler-Noreuil, 2007; Woo, 2010). With bladder
exstrophy, the bladder lies outside the abdomen, is open, drains directly into
amnionic fluid, and thus does not fill. Sonography in the first trimester may
show a thin-walled, lower-abdominal cystic structure and a thick NT
(Mallmann, 2014; Tonni, 2011). During second-trimester scans, findings are
a midline, infraumbilical, anterior-abdominal-wall defect, failure to see the
bladder, and associated OEIS defects (Ben-Neriah, 2007). Prenatal
karyotyping is recommended. Delivery route is usually dictated by the
associated spina bifida defect. Postnatal repair is complex, and individuals
may struggle with urinary and fecal incontinence and the challenges of
neonatal gender assignment (Woo, 2010).
With bladder exstrophy, associated findings often include abnormal
external genitalia and a widened symphysis pubis. At the same time,
however, the uterus, fallopian tubes, and ovaries are typically normal except
for occasional müllerian duct fusion defects. Although often not identified in
affected fetuses, sonographic indicators are inability to see the bladder, solid
mass between the umbilical arteries, low umbilical insertion into the
abdomen, divergent pubic rami, normal amnionic fluid volume, and in males,
a small penis with anteriorly displaced scrotum (Mallmann, 2019). The
differential diagnosis includes bladder exstrophy or agenesis, bilateral
ectopic ureters, patent urachus, cloacal exstrophy, and simple
nonvisualization of the bladder. MR imaging may be a helpful adjunct
(Goldman, 2013). Fetal karyotyping is considered if genitalia are ambiguous.

For an affected fetus, the prenatal course is typically routine, and cesarean
delivery is reserved for obstetrical indications.
For a gravida with bladder exstrophy herself, pregnancy is associated
with greater risk for antepartum pyelonephritis, urinary retention, ureteral
obstruction, pelvic organ prolapse, miscarriage, preterm birth, and breech
presentation. The American Urological Association has published
management guidelines for pregnancy (Eswara, 2016). Due to the extensive
adhesions from prior repair and altered anatomy typically encountered, some
recommend planned early cesarean delivery at a tertiary center (Deans,
2012; Greenwell, 2003). Dy and coworkers (2015) described using
paramedian abdominal wall and vertical uterine incisions.
Epispadias without bladder exstrophy is rare and develops in
association with other anomalies such as a widened, patulous urethra; absent
or bifid clitoris; nonfused labial folds; and flattened mons pubis. Vertebral
abnormalities and pubic symphysis diathesis are also common.
Clitoral anomalies are rare. One is clitoral duplication or bifid clitoris,
which usually develops in association with bladder exstrophy or epispadias.
With female phallic urethra, the urethra opens at the clitoral tip. Last,
clitoromegaly noted at birth suggests fetal exposure to excessive androgens
(p. 38). Without a DSD, idiopathic congenital clitoromegaly in females born
extremely premature is rare but well-recognized, and observation is
recommended (Williams, 2013).
As noted, the hymen marks the embryological boundary between
structures derived from the müllerian and urogenital sinus. Hymeneal
anomalies include imperforate, microperforate, cribriform (sievelike),
navicular (boat-shaped), and septate hymens. They result from failure of the
inferior end of the vaginal plate—the hymeneal membrane—to canalize.
Rarely, with an imperforate hymen, secretions may markedly accumulate in
the fetal uterus and vagina, that is, hydrometrocolpos (HMC). Most cases of
HMC are asymptomatic and resolve postnatally as mucus is reabsorbed and
estrogen levels decline. Rarely, perinatal urinary tract obstruction results
from mass effect and is relieved with cruciate incision of the hymen
(Grimstad, 2019).
Fetal HMC sonographically appears as a cystic mass behind the bladder.
The differential diagnosis includes reproductive tract outlet obstruction of
the hymen, vagina, or cervix; ureterocele; megacystis; ovarian, urachal, or
mesenteric cyst; anterior meningocele; bowel or bladder duplications; and

urogenital sinus or cloacal dysgenesis. Rare associated syndromes are
McKusick-Kaufman, Ellis-van Creveld, or Bardet-Biedl syndromes (Garcia
Rodriguez, 2018).

MÜLLERIAN ABNORMALITIES
Four principal abnormalities arise from defective müllerian duct
embryological steps: (1) agenesis of both ducts, either focally or along the
entire duct length; (2) unilateral maturation of one müllerian duct with
incomplete or absent development of the opposite side; (3) absent or faulty
midline fusion of the ducts; or (4) defective canalization. Various
classifications have been proposed, and Table 3-3 shows the one from the
American Fertility Society (1988). This classification system is the most
widely used, although several others have been created (Grimbizis, 2013,
2016; Ludwin, 2018b).
TABLE 3-3. Classification of Müllerian Anomalies

A müllerian anomaly is suspected if a vaginal septum, blind-ending
vagina, or duplicated cervix is found. Amenorrhea may be an initial
complaint for those with agenesis of a müllerian component. In those with
outlet obstruction but functioning endometrium, pelvic pain may arise from
occult blood that accumulates and distends the vagina, uterus, or fallopian
tubes (Kapczuk, 2018; Patel, 2016). Endometriosis and its associated

dysmenorrhea, dyspareunia, and chronic pain are also frequent with outlet
obstruction (Matalliotakis, 2017).

■ Comorbid Renal Anomalies
Renal anomalies most frequently accompany unicornuate uterus, uterine
didelphys, and anomalies with an ipsilateral obstructive vaginal septum.
Less often, partial bicornuate, and partial septate uteri are associated
(Heinonen, 2018). When müllerian anomalies are identified, the urinary
system can be evaluated with sonography, MR imaging, or intravenous
pyelography (Hall-Craggs, 2013). The last two are advantageous because
ureteral anatomy can be affected too. An absent unilateral kidney is the most
common finding. On the other hand, if renal agenesis is found first,
reproductive-tract imaging in early puberty may help identify müllerian
anomalies early (Friedman, 2018).

■ Müllerian Agenesis (Class I)
Class I segmental defects are caused by müllerian hypoplasia or agenesis as
shown in Figure 3-5 (American Fertility Society, 1988). These
developmental defects can affect the vagina, cervix, uterus, or fallopian tubes
and may be isolated or may coexist with other müllerian anomalies.

Study Newer classification

FIGURE 3-5 Classification of müllerian anomalies. DES = diethylstilbestrol.

■ Vaginal Abnormalities
Of these, vaginal agenesis is the most profound and may be isolated or
associated with other müllerian anomalies. One example is the MayerRokitansky-Küster-Hauser (MRKH) syndrome, in which upper vaginal
agenesis is typically associated with uterine hypoplasia or agenesis. Less
often, this syndrome also displays additional abnormalities and is known by
the acronym MURCS (müllerian duct aplasia, renal aplasia, and
cervicothoracic somite dysplasia) (Rall, 2015).
The obstetrical significance of vaginal anomalies depends greatly on the
degree of obstruction. Complete vaginal agenesis, unless corrected

surgically, precludes pregnancy by vaginal intercourse. With MRKH
syndrome, a functional vagina can be created, but uterine agenesis proscribes
childbearing. In these women, however, ova can be retrieved for in vitro
fertilization (IVF) and carriage by a surrogate mother (Reichman, 2010).
Uterine transplantation is experimental but holds promise for these women
(Johannesson, 2021; Jones, 2019).
Of other vaginal anomalies, congenital septa may form longitudinally or
transversely, and each can arise from a fusion or resorption defect. A
longitudinal septum divides the vagina into right and left portions. It may be
complete and extend the entire vaginal length. A partial septum usually forms
high in the vagina but may develop at lower levels. These septa are often
associated with other müllerian anomalies (Haddad, 1997).
During examination, the provider can usually guide a speculum up along
one side of the septum. Similarly, in labor, a complete longitudinal vaginal
septum usually does not cause dystocia because the fetus can descend through
one vaginal side, which dilates sufficiently. An incomplete distal longitudinal
septum, however, may interfere with descent, and antepartum resection is
preferred (Hoffman, 2020). Rarely, a woman with an incomplete distal
longitudinal septum instead presents in labor. During second-stage labor, this
septum usually becomes attenuated by pressure from the fetal head. After
ensuring adequate analgesia, the attachment of the septum to the posterior
vaginal wall is isolated between two clamps, transected, and ligated.
Following placenta delivery, the superior attachment is similarly isolated
between clamps and transected, while carefully avoiding urethral injury.
A transverse septum poses an obstruction of variable thickness. It may
develop at any depth within the vagina, but most lie in the lower third
(Williams, 2014). Septa may or may not be perforate, and thus obstruction or
infertility is possible.
In labor, perforate strictures may be mistaken for the upper limit of the
vaginal vault, and the septal opening is misidentified as an undilated cervix
(Kumar, 2014). If encountered during labor, and after the cervix has dilated
completely, the head impinges on the septum and causes it to bulge
downward. If the septum does not spontaneously yield, slightly stretching its
opening usually leads to further dilation. Occasionally cruciate incisions that
avoid the urethra and rectum are required to permit delivery (Blanton, 2003;
Levin, 1963). For a thick transverse septum, cesarean delivery may be
necessary.

■ Cervical Abnormalities
Developmental abnormalities of the cervix include partial or complete
agenesis, duplication, or a longitudinal dividing septum. Complete agenesis
is incompatible with pregnancy. IVF with gestational surrogacy or with
transmyometrial embryo transfer are options (Al-Jaroudi, 2011; Xu, 2009).
Instead, surgical correction by uterovaginal anastomosis successfully
relieves outlet obstruction, but subsequent pregnancy and live birth rates are
low (Mikos, 2020). Significant complications including deaths have
accompanied such corrective surgery. Some experts recommend
hysterectomy for complete cervical agenesis and reserve reconstruction
attempts for carefully selected patients with cervical dysgenesis (Roberts,
2011; Rock, 2010).

■ Uterine Abnormalities
From a large variety, a few of the more common congenital uterine
malformations are shown in Table 3-3. Assessing an accurate population
prevalence is difficult because the best diagnostic techniques are invasive.
The prevalence found with imaging ranges from 0.4 to 10 percent, and rates
in women with recurrent miscarriage are significantly higher (Byrne, 2000;
Dreisler, 2014; Saravelos, 2008). In a general population, the most frequent
finding is arcuate uterus, followed in descending order by septate,
bicornuate, didelphic, and unicornuate classes (Chan, 2011b).
As a group, these anomalies pose greater risk for miscarriage,
malpresentation, preterm birth, and poor fetal growth (Chan, 2011a; Hua,
2011; Reichman, 2009). Vaginal delivery is the preferred delivery route
when feasible. The cervix of the pregnancy-containing uterus or horn will
typically dilate sufficiently. Similarly, any proximal longitudinal septum will
stretch to permit fetal descent.
Müllerian uterine anomalies may be discovered first during pelvic
examination, cesarean delivery, tubal sterilization, or infertility evaluation.
Depending on clinical presentation, sonography, hysterosalpingography
(HSG), MR imaging, laparoscopy, and hysteroscopy may also be diagnostic.
Each has limitations and thus may be combined to completely define
anatomy.

If a müllerian anomaly is suspected, two-dimensional transvaginal
sonography (2-D TVS) is initially performed in most clinical settings. For
this indication, the pooled accuracy for 2-D TVS is 90 to 92 percent
(Pellerito, 1992). Three-dimensional (3-D) TVS is more accurate than 2-D
TVS because it provides uterine images from virtually any angle. The
diagnostic accuracy of 3-D TVS approaches 97 percent (Vaz, 2017). Thus,
coronal images can be constructed, and these are essential in evaluating both
internal and external uterine contours. Both 2-D and 3-D TVS are suitable for
use in pregnancy (Fig. 3-6).

FIGURE 3-6 A. Sagittal transvaginal sonogram shows a gestational sac surrounded by myometrium.
The gestational sac is not contiguous with the endocervical canal or with the main horn’s endometrium.

B. Here, two Pean clamps are placed across the vascular tissue bridge that separates the rudimentary
horn (above) from the main uterine horn (below). (Reproduced with permission from Dr. Elaine L.
Duryea.)

Several studies reported good concordance between 3-D TVS and MR
imaging of müllerian uterine anomalies (Deutch, 2008; Graupera, 2015). MR
imaging is often preferred for complex anatomy, especially cases for which
corrective surgery is planned. MR imaging provides clear delineation of both
the internal and external uterine anatomy and has a reported accuracy of up to
100 percent for müllerian anomaly evaluation (Bermejo, 2010; Pellerito,
1992). Moreover, secondary diagnoses such as renal or skeletal anomalies
can be concurrently evaluated. MR imaging without contrast is safe in
pregnancy.
Saline infusion sonography (SIS) is a technique that instills fluid into the
uterine cavity to distend and define cavity shape. It improves delineation of
internal uterine morphology. However, SIS is contraindicated in pregnancy. It
requires a patent endometrial cavity.
In women undergoing fertility evaluation, HSG is usually selected for
uterine cavity and tubal patency assessment. It is contraindicated during
pregnancy. HSG poorly defines the external uterine contour and can delineate
only patent cavities. Described next, remember that some unicornuate
rudimentary horns lack a cavity. Also, outlet obstructions will preclude dye
filling. For infertility, hysteroscopy and/or laparoscopy plus chromotubation
may help confirm or treat uterine cavity or tubal pathologies. These also
screen for endometriosis, which often coexists with both infertility and
müllerian anomalies (American Society for Reproductive Medicine, 2015).
In pregnancy, laparoscopy is rarely used to diagnose müllerian defects, and
hysteroscopy is contraindicated.

Unicornuate Uterus (Class II)
General population estimates cite an incidence of 1 case in 4000 women
(Reichman, 2009). In class II-D forms, only one uterine horn is present (see
Fig. 3-5). Instead, an underdeveloped rudimentary horn may be present. The
rudiment may or may not communicate with the dominant horn and may or
may not contain an endometrium-lined cavity. With noncommunicating types,
the rudiment may lie near the uterus or may lie anywhere along the
embryological migration path of the paramesonephros. This starts at the back
and sweeps forward along the broad ligament.

This anomaly may be detected during fertility evaluation by HSG, but
false-negative examinations stem from noncavitary or noncommunicating
horns failing to fill with dye. If this anomaly is suspected, 3-D TVS raises
diagnostic accuracy, but again MR imaging may be preferred to define
endometrium (Fukunaga, 2017). Importantly, 40 percent of affected women
will have renal anomalies (Fedele, 1996).
Main Horn. Pregnancies developing in the main horn carry significant
obstetrical risks. These include first- and second-trimester miscarriage,
malpresentation, fetal-growth restriction, fetal demise, prematurely ruptured
membranes, and preterm delivery (Chan, 2011a; Hua, 2011; Reichman,
2009). These risks theoretically stem from abnormal uterine blood flow,
cervical insufficiency, and diminished cavity size and muscle mass
(Donderwinkel, 1992). The main unicornuate horn is indeed smaller than
normal uterine lengths of 7- to 8-cm (Hawkins, 2013). One small study of
140 nulligravidas found a median uterine length of 5 cm (Li, 2019). Those
with lengths from the internal os to fundus <4.5 cm prior to pregnancy had
higher preterm labor rates during subsequent pregnancy compared with
longer hemiuteri. Thus, a heightened awareness of potential complications is
prudent. However, specific surveillance for poor fetal growth or preterm
labor is mainly guided by prior pregnancy outcomes.
Rudimentary Horn. Ectopic pregnancy, correctly termed a cornual
pregnancy, can develop within a remnant (Arleo, 2014). This risk includes
noncommunicating cavitary rudiments, for which transperitoneal sperm
migration permits ovum fertilization and pregnancy (Nahum, 2004). Although
less common than other unicornuate pregnancy complications, rupture can
create life-threatening hemorrhage. Convergence of uterine and ovarian
branches near the pregnancy and the commonly associated placenta accreta
spectrum (PAS) explain this risk.
In a report of 70 such pregnancies, Rolen and associates (1966) found
that most rudimentary uterine horn pregnancies ruptured prior to 20 weeks’
gestation. Nahum (2002) reviewed the literature from 1900 to 1999 and
identified 588 rudimentary horn pregnancies. Half had uterine rupture, and 80
percent did so before the third trimester. Of the total 588, the neonatal
survival rate was only 6 percent.

First-trimester sonography allows an earlier diagnosis and rudiment
excision before rupture. The main horn shows an empty endometrium
continuous with the cervical canal, and the interstitial portion of a fallopian
tube is seen only on one side. The rudimentary horn pregnancy displays: (1)
no continuity between the cervical canal and gestational sac, (2) myometrium
surrounding the gestation, (3) PAS-associated hypervascularity surrounding
the gestational sac, and (4) a vascular pedicle connecting the main horn and
the sac’s surrounding myometrium (Mavrelos, 2007; Tsafrir, 2005). If
necessary, 3-D TVS is an appropriate adjunct (Tolani, 2018). As seen in
Figure 3-6, the connecting pedicle can be broad and vascular.
Treatment is surgical and removes the rudimentary horn and in situ
pregnancy. The ipsilateral fallopian tube is also excised to avert future
ectopic pregnancies (Dove, 2017; Worley, 2008). Steps include sequential
division of the uteroovarian ligament, mesosalpinx, round ligament, and
pedicle to the main horn. Ideally, the ovary is spared, but large pregnancies
with a short uteroovarian ligament may prompt adnexectomy. Surgical route
is dictated by pregnancy size and laparoscopic capabilities.
In nonpregnant women, most unicornuate uteri are asymptomatic. Those
with a noncommunicating cavitary rudiment may present with outlet
obstruction symptoms at puberty. In this instance, comorbid endometriosis
can club fimbria and obstruct tubal egress of blood. In all cases, prophylactic
excision of a cavitary rudiment is recommended to avoid pregnancy in an
inadequately sized horn (Fedele, 2005; Rackow, 2007; Schneiderman, 2018).
Data regarding subsequent pregnancy after excision are scarce. In one series
of eight women, all had a preterm cesarean delivery (Pados, 2014).

Uterine Didelphys (Class III)
This anomaly arises from incomplete fusion that results in two entirely
separate hemiuteri, two cervices, and usually two vaginas or a longitudinal
vaginal septum (see Fig. 3-5). Uterine didelphys may be isolated or part of a
rare triad with an obstructed hemivagina and ipsilateral renal agenesis
(OHVIRA), also known as Herlyn-Werner-Wunderlich syndrome (Tong,
2014). Rarely diagnosed antenatally, it is considered in a fetus with renal
agenesis and a cystic pelvic mass, which reflects hydrometrocolpos (p. 40)
(Tuna, 2019). Fetal MR imaging aids diagnosis.

Uterine didelphys is suspected on pelvic examination by identification of
a longitudinal vaginal septum and two cervices. During HSG for fertility
evaluation, contrast shows two separate endocervical canals. These open
into separate noncommunicating fusiform endometrial cavities that each ends
with a solitary fallopian tube. In women without fertility issues, 2- or 3-D
TVS is a logical initial imaging tool, and separate divergent uterine horns
with a large intervening fundal cleft are seen. Endometrial cavities and two
cervices are uniformly separate. MR imaging can clarify cases lacking
classic findings.
Adverse obstetrical outcomes associated with uterine didelphys are
similar to but less frequent than those seen with unicornuate uterus. Increased
risks include miscarriage, preterm birth, and malpresentation (Chan, 2011a;
Hua, 2011).
Metroplasty for either uterine didelphys or bicornuate uterus involves
resection of intervening myometrium and fundal recombination (Alborzi,
2015). These rarely performed surgeries are chosen for highly selected
patients with otherwise unexplained recurrent miscarriage at later gestational
ages. After metroplasty, scheduled delivery prior to labor is prudent to avoid
uterine rupture (Ayhan, 1992).

Bicornuate Uterus (Class IV)
This fusion anomaly results in two hemiuteri. As shown in Figure 3-5, the
central myometrium runs either partially or completely to the cervix. A
complete bicornuate uterus may extend to the internal cervical os and have a
single cervix (bicornuate unicollis) or reach the external os (bicornuate
bicollis). As with uterine didelphys, a coexistent longitudinal vaginal septum
is common.
Radiological discrimination of a bicornuate uterus from a septate uterus
can be challenging, and defining criteria vary. This distinction, however, is
important because septate uterus can be treated with hysteroscopic septal
resection. HSG or 2-D TVS may initially suggest an anomaly, but further
distinction is provided by 3-D TVS or MR imaging. With these, the
intercornual angle, fundal contour, and a straight line drawn between the
imaged tubal ostia serve as defining thresholds (Fig. 3-7).

FIGURE 3-7 Three-dimensional transvaginal sonography (3-D TVS) images of müllerian uterine
anomalies in the coronal plane. Below each are corresponding diagrammatic uteri and differing
organizational definitions. A. Bicornuate uterus. This 3-D TVS rendered image demonstrates a concave
external fundal contour that dips to a point near or below the interostial line (green line). (Reproduced
with permission from Dr. Elysia Moschos.) B. Septate uterus. This sonogram depicts the narrow angle
between the two small endometrial cavities, which is characteristic of a septate) uterus. The external
contour here is flat but may show minor fundal indentation. C. Arcuate uterus. This image illustrates the
normal external uterine contour and obtuse angle of the endometrial cleft that is characteristic of an
arcuate uterus. Organizations vary among their use of the terms intercornual, interostial, or interstitial
line. ASRM = American Society for Reproductive Medicine; ESHRE/ESGE = European Society of
Human Reproduction and Embryology/European Society for Gynaecological Endoscopy. (Data from
American Society for Reproductive Medicine, 2016, Bermejo, 2010, Grimbizis, 2013, 2016.)

Bicornuate uterus carries increased risks for miscarriage, preterm birth,
and malpresentation (Chan, 2011a; Mastrolia, 2017). As discussed in the

prior section, rare surgical correction by metroplasty is reserved for highly
selected cases.

Septate Uterus (Class V)
With this anomaly, a resorption defect leads to a persistent complete or
partial longitudinal uterine septum (see Fig. 3-5). In the rare Robert uterus,
an asymmetric longitudinal septum creates a sequestered noncommunicating
hemicavity that acts similar to a rudimentary horn (Ludwin, 2018a).
Many septate uteri are identified during evaluation of infertility or
recurrent pregnancy loss. Although an abnormality may be identified with
HSG or 2-D TVS, typically 3-D TVS or MR imaging is required to
differentiate septate and bicornuate uteri. Experts still debate diagnostic
criteria (see Fig. 3-7).
Septate anomalies can be associated with increased risks for adverse
pregnancy outcomes that include miscarriage, preterm delivery, and
malpresentation (Chan, 2011a; Ghi, 2012). In those with recurrent pregnancy
loss, hysteroscopic septal resection may improve birth rates (American
Society for Reproductive Medicine, 2016; Corroenne, 2018; Valle, 2013).
During a subsequent labor, those with prior septal resection, especially if
complicated by uterine perforation, carry a small risk for uterine rupture
(Homer, 2000; Sentilhes, 2005).

Arcuate Uterus (Class VI)
This malformation is a mild deviation from the normally developed uterus
(see Fig. 3-7). Most consider this anomaly benign, but some have found
excessive second-trimester losses, preterm labor, and malpresentation (Chan,
2011a; Mucowski, 2010; Prior, 2018; Woelfer, 2001).

Cesarean Delivery
As noted in the above sections, cesarean delivery rates are increased with
müllerian uterine anomalies. Data regarding subsequent trial of labor after
cesarean (TOLAC) are few and show evidence both for and against its
success and safety (Erez, 2007; Ravasia, 1999). Failed TOLAC attempts or
the risk of rupture may stem from smaller than normal cavity size, abnormal
propagation of myometrial action potentials, and a weaker cesarean scar due
to congenitally altered vascular anatomy (Altwerger, 2015). Other factors

that support or disfavor TOLAC are similar to those for women with normalshaped uteri and are outlined in Chapter 31.
In those without prior cesarean delivery, external cephalic version (ECV)
is reasonable to avoid primary cesarean delivery for malpresentation. A
smaller uterine cavity or an obstructing midline partition may limit fetal
turning. These are added to the traditional list of factors that should be
reviewed when assessing a potential ECV candidate (Chap. 28, p. 528).
At times, a müllerian anomaly may not be diagnosed until cesarean
delivery, and additional information should be methodically sought. Prior to
hysterotomy closure, the cavity is manually explored to define the length of
any cavity partition. If a rudimentary horn is found, the main cavity is also
digitally explored for a communication. However, this may be missed due to
its narrow caliber.
After closure, the fundus is examined. The external contour is delineated
to differentiate bicornuate from didelphys types. If only one adnexum is
found, a unicornuate uterus is suspected. In this case, if an obvious rudiment
is not attached to the main horn, the surgeon should trace the embryological
migratory path of the paramesonephric duct starting at the patient’s back and
sweeping forward. If found, the rudiment may be removed or at minimum its
accompanying fallopian tube should be ligated to prevent later ectopic
pregnancy.
With any müllerian anomaly, both renal fossae are examined
intraoperatively to confirm kidneys. Postoperative radiologic assessment of
the urinary collecting anatomy is reasonable.

Treatment with Cerclage
Uterine anomalies are one risk for cervical insufficiency (Althuisius, 2001;
Berghella, 1999; Mastrolia, 2018). Some women with uterine anomalies and
repetitive pregnancy loss after the first trimester may benefit from cervical
cerclage (Golan, 1992; Yassaee, 2011). Others with partial cervical atresia
or hypoplasia also may benefit (Ludmir, 1991; Song, 2015). For women with
a uterine anomaly, candidacy for cervical length sonographic screening or for
cerclage placement is determined by the same criteria used for women
without a uterine defect (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2021; Society for Maternal–Fetal Medicine, 2016). These
topics are discussed in Chapters 45 (p. 794) and 11 (p. 205), respectively.

■ Diethylstilbestrol-related Abnormalities (Class VII)
In the 1960s, a synthetic nonsteroidal estrogen—diethylstilbestrol (DES)—
was used to treat threatened abortion, preterm labor, preeclampsia, and
diabetes. It was remarkably ineffective. Moreover, women exposed as
fetuses carry increased risks for vaginal clear cell adenocarcinoma, cervical
intraepithelial neoplasia, and vaginal adenosis (Hatch, 2001; Herbst, 1971;
Robboy, 1984). Women exposed in utero can also show a cervix or vagina
with a transverse septum, circumferential ridge, or cervical collar. Uteri are
potentially smaller or have a T-shaped cavity (see Fig. 3-5) (Kaufman,
1984). Women exposed as fetuses are now postreproductive, but they did
suffer risks for infertility and adverse pregnancy outcome (Kaufman, 2000;
Palmer, 2001).

■ Fallopian Tube Abnormalities
The fallopian tubes develop from the unpaired distal ends of the müllerian
ducts. Congenital anomalies include accessory ostia, complete or segmental
tubal agenesis, and several embryonic cystic remnants. The most common is
a small, benign cyst attached by a pedicle to the distal end of the fallopian
tube—the hydatid of Morgagni. In other cases, benign paratubal cysts may be
of mesonephric or mesothelial origin. Last, in utero exposure to DES is
associated with various tubal abnormalities (DeCherney, 1981).

UTERINE FLEXION
Moderate flexion of the pregnant uterus is typically inconsequential, but
exaggerated flexion may pose unique complications. Anteflexion describes
forward angling of the uterine fundus in the sagittal plane relative to the
cervix. In extreme cases, the fundus later in pregnancy falls forward to lie
below the lower margin of the symphysis. Abdominal wall laxity is
contributory. This uterine position can prevent proper transmission of labor
contractions but is usually corrected by repositioning and application of an
abdominal binder.
Retroflexion describes uterine fundal angling posteriorly in the sagittal
plane. A growing retroflexed uterus fundus will occasionally become
trapped in the hollow of the sacrum (Fig. 3-8). Symptoms include pelvic

pressure or pain plus voiding dysfunction or retention. During bimanual
pelvic examination, the cervix will be anterior and behind the symphysis
pubis, whereas the uterus is wedged in the deep pelvis. Sonography or MR
imaging can aid diagnosis (Gardner, 2013; Grossenburg, 2011).

FIGURE 3-8 A. With uterine incarceration, the uterus is wedged between the sacral promontory and
symphysis pubis. Resulting pressure against the urethra and rectum can cause urinary retention and
constipation, respectively (Reproduced with permission from Corton MM: Anatomy. In Yeomans ER,
Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al (eds): Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New
York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2017.) B. Sagittal transvaginal sonogram shows a first-trimester fetus and
incarcerated uterine fundus. The marked retroflexion brings the fundus to lie beneath the cervix.
(Reproduced with permission from Dr. Angela Seasley.)

With continued uterine growth, the incarcerated uterus can spontaneously
resolve over 1 to 2 weeks. A knee-chest position assumed by the patient
several times daily may assist resolution (Hooker, 2009). An indwelling
urinary catheter or intermittent self-catheterization resolves retention.
Persistent cases require manual repositioning. For this, after bladder
catheterization, the uterus can usually be pushed out of the pelvis when the
woman is placed in a knee-chest position. Often, this is best accomplished by
digital pressure applied through the rectum or vagina. Intravenous sedation or
spinal analgesia aids comfort and allows sufficient dislodging forces (Hire,
2019). Afterward, insertion of a soft, space-filling pessary for a few weeks
usually prevents recurrence (Gibbons, 1969).
For rare resistant cases, advancing a colonoscope or colonoscopic
insufflation can dislodge the fundus (Newell, 2014; Seubert, 1999). Upward
round ligament traction during laparoscopy also has been described (Lettieri,
1994).
Rarely, sacculation may form as an extensive lower uterine segment
dilation due to persistent uterine entrapment. Clinically, the elongated vagina
extends above the level of the deeply descended fetal head. The Foley
catheter is frequently palpated above the level of the umbilicus! In these
extreme cases, sonography and MR imaging help define anatomy (Gottschalk,
2008; Lee, 2008). To avoid uterine rupture, cesarean delivery is necessary
when sacculation is marked. Spearing (1978) recommended extending the
abdominal incision above the umbilicus and delivering the entire uterus from
the abdomen before hysterotomy. Correct anatomical relationships are

ideally restored to help prevent inadvertent incisions into and through the
vagina and bladder (Fig. 3-9). (Singh, 2007; Uma, 2002).

FIGURE 3-9 With anterior sacculation, note the markedly attenuated anterior uterine wall and atypical
location of the true uterine fundus.

Uterine torsion is another rare acquired anomaly. During pregnancy, the
uterus commonly rotates gently to the maternal right. Rotation exceeding 180
degrees creates torsion, and most cases stem from uterine leiomyomas,
müllerian anomalies, fetal malpresentation, pelvic adhesions, or laxity of the
abdominal wall or uterine ligaments. In one review of 212 cases, associated
symptoms were obstructed labor, intestinal or urinary complaints, abdominal
pain, uterine hypertonus, vaginal bleeding, or hypotension (Jensen, 1992).
In some women, torsion can be confirmed preoperatively with MR
imaging, which shows a twisted vagina that appears X-shaped rather than its
normal H-shape (Nicholson, 1995). Flipped placenta location and abnormal
umbilical Doppler findings have been described sonographically (Rood,

2014). However, uterine torsion is usually found at the time of cesarean
delivery, and the severely rotated uterus should be repositioned anatomically
before hysterotomy. In some cases, an inability to reposition or a failure to
recognize the torsion may lead to a posterior hysterotomy incision (Albayrak,
2011; Karavani, 2017). Rotation of 90 degrees risks uterine vessel laceration
(Berger, 2020).

REFERENCES
Ahmed SF, Khwaja O, Hughes IA: The role of a clinical score in the assessment of ambiguous genitalia.
BJU Int 85(1):120, 2000
Albayrak M, Benian A, Ozdemir I, et al: Deliberate posterior low transverse incision at cesarean section
of a gravid uterus in 180 degrees of torsion: a case report. J Reprod Med 56(3–4):181, 2011
Alborzi S, Asefjah H, Amini M, et al: Laparoscopic metroplasty in bicornuate and didelphic uteri:
feasibility and outcome. Arch Gynecol Obstet 291(5):1167, 2015
Al-Jaroudi D, Saleh A, Al-Obaid S, et al: Pregnancy with cervical dysgenesis. Fertil Steril 96(6):1355,
2011
Allen JW, Cardall S, Kittijarukhajorn M, et al: Incidence of ovarian maldescent in women with mullerian
duct anomalies: evaluation by MRI. AJR Am J Roentgenol 198(4):W381, 2012
Althuisius SM, Dekker GA, Hummel P, et al: Final results of the cervical incompetence prevention
randomized cerclage trial (CIPRACT): therapeutic cerclage with bed rest versus bed rest alone.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 185(5):1106, 2001
Altwerger G, Pritchard AM, Black JD, et al: Uterine didelphys and vaginal birth after cesarean delivery.
Obstet Gynecol 125(1):157, 2015
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Screening for Fetal Chromosomal abnormalities.
Practice Bulletin No 226, October 2020
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Prediction and prevention of preterm birth.
Practice Bulletin No 234, August 2021
American Fertility Society: The American Fertility Society classifications of adnexal adhesions, distal
tubal occlusion, tubal occlusion secondary to tubal ligation, tubal pregnancies, Müllerian anomalies
and intrauterine adhesions. Fertil Steril 49:944, 1988
American Society for Reproductive Medicine: Diagnostic evaluation of the infertile female: a committee
opinion. Fertil Steril 103(6):e44, 2015
American Society for Reproductive Medicine: Uterine septum: a guideline. Fertil Steril 106(3):530, 2016
American Society for Reproductive Medicine: Increased maternal cardiovascular mortality associated
with pregnancy in women with Turner syndrome. Fertil Steril 97(2):282, 2012
Ariza L, Carmona R, Cañete A, et al: Coelomic epithelium-derived cells in visceral morphogenesis. Dev
Dyn 245(3):307, 2016
Arleo EK, DeFilippis EM: Cornual, interstitial, and angular pregnancies: clarifying the terms and a
review of the literature. Clin Imaging 38(6):763, 2014
Auchus RJ: Management considerations for the adult with congenital adrenal hyperplasia. Mol Cell
Endocrinol 408:190, 2015

Ayhan A, Yücel I, Tuncer ZS, et al: Reproductive performance after conventional metroplasty: an
evaluation of 102 cases. Fertil Steril 57(6):1194, 1992
Bardsley MZ, Kowal K, Levy C, et al: 47,XYY syndrome: clinical phenotype and timing of
ascertainment. J Pediatr 163(4):1085, 2013
Ben-Neriah Z, Withers S, Thomas M, et al: OEIS complex: prenatal ultrasound and autopsy findings.
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 29(2):170, 2007
Berger A, Ritter M, Fessler S: Uterine torsion in pregnancy. Arch Gynecol Obstet 302(4):791, 2020
Berghella V, Daly SF, Tolosa JE, et al: Prediction of preterm delivery with transvaginal ultrasonography
of the cervix in patients with high-risk pregnancies: does cerclage prevent prematurity? Am J Obstet
Gynecol 181(4):809, 1999
Berglund A, Viuff MH, Skakkebæk A, et al: Changes in the cohort composition of turner syndrome and
severe non-diagnosis of Klinefelter, 47,XXX and 47,XYY syndrome: a nationwide cohort study.
Orphanet J Rare Dis 14(1):16, 2019
Bermejo C, Martinez Ten P, et al: Three-dimensional ultrasound in the diagnosis of müllerian duct
anomalies and concordance with magnetic resonance imaging. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 35:593,
2010
Bizzarri C, Pedicelli S, Cappa M, et al: Water balance and ‘salt wasting’ in the first year of life: The role
of aldosterone-signaling defects. Horm Res Paediatr 86(3):143, 2016
Blanton EN, Rouse DJ: Trial of labor in women with transverse vaginal septa. Obstet Gynecol 101:1110,
2003
Bojesen A, Juul S, Gravholt CH: Prenatal and postnatal prevalence of Klinefelter syndrome: a national
registry study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 88(2):622, 2003
Bouet PE, Godbout A, El Hachem H, et al: Fertility and pregnancy in turner syndrome. J Obstet
Gynaecol Can 38(8):712, 2016
Byrne J, Nussbaum-Blask A, Taylor WS, et al: Prevalence of Müllerian duct anomalies detected at
ultrasound. Am J Med Genet 94(1):9, 2000
Cadoret F, Parinaud J, Bettiol C, et al: Pregnancy outcome in Turner syndrome: a French multi-center
study after the 2009 guidelines. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 229:20, 2018
Campens L, Baris L, Scott NS, et al: Pregnancy outcome in thoracic aortic disease data from the
Registry Of Pregnancy And Cardiac disease. Heart January 19, 2021 [Epub ahead of print]
Carlson M, Silberbach M.: Dissection of the aorta in Turner syndrome: two cases and review of 85
cases in the literature. J Med Genet 44:745, 2007
Chan CL, McFann K, Taylor L, et al: Congenital adrenal hyperplasia and the second newborn screen. J
Pediatr 163(1):109, 2013
Chan YY, Jayaprakasan K, Tan A, et al: Reproductive outcomes in women with congenital uterine
anomalies: a systematic review. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 38(4):371, 2011a
Chan YY, Jayaprakasan K, Zamora J, et al: The prevalence of congenital uterine anomalies in
unselected and high-risk populations: a systematic review. Hum Reprod Update 17(6):761, 2011b
Cools M: Germ cell cancer risk in DSD patients. Ann Endocrinol (Paris) 75(2):67, 2014
Cools M, Looijenga L: Update on the pathophysiology and risk factors for the development of malignant
testicular germ cell tumors in complete androgen insensitivity syndrome. Sex Dev 11(4):175, 2017
Corroenne R, Legendre G, May-Panloup P, et al: Surgical treatment of septate uterus in cases of
primary infertility and before assisted reproductive technologies. J Gynecol Obstet Hum Reprod
47(9):413, 2018
Corton MM: Anatomy. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al (eds): Cunningham and
Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2017, p 47

Crosby WM, Hill EC: Embryology of the mullerian duct system. Review of present-day theory. Obstet
Gynecol 20:507, 1962
Davidson AJ, Lewis P, Przepiorski A, et al: Turning mesoderm into kidney. Semin Cell Dev Biol 91:86,
2019
de Bakker BS, van den Hoff MJ, Vize PD, et al: The pronephros; a fresh perspective. Integr Comp Biol
59(1):29, 2019
Deans R, Banks F, Liao LM, et al: Reproductive outcomes in women with classic bladder exstrophy: an
observational cross-sectional study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 206(6):496.e1, 2012
DeCherney AH, Cholst I, Naftolin F: Structure and function of the fallopian tubes following exposure to
diethylstilbestrol (DES) during gestation. Fertil Steril 36(6):741, 1981
Deutch TD, Abuhamad AZ: The role of 3-dimensional ultrasonography and magnetic resonance imaging
in the diagnosis of müllerian duct anomalies: a review of the literature. J Ultrasound Med 27(3):413,
2008
Donderwinkel PF, Dörr JP, Willemsen WN: The unicornuate uterus: clinical implications. Eur J Obstet
Gynecol Reprod Biol 47(2):135, 1992
Dotters-Katz SK, Humphrey WM, Senz KL, et al: The effects of Turner syndrome, 45,X on obstetric
and neonatal outcomes: a retrospective cohort evaluation. Am J Perinatol 33(12):1152, 2016a
Dotters-Katz SK, Humphrey WM, Senz KL, et al: The impact of prenatally diagnosed Klinefelter
syndrome on obstetric and neonatal outcomes. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 203:173, 2016b
Dove CK, Harvey SM, Spalluto LB: Sonographic findings of early pregnancy in the rudimentary horn of
a unicornuate uterus: a two case report. Clin Imaging 47:25, 2017
Dreisler E, Stampe Sørensen S: Müllerian duct anomalies diagnosed by saline contrast
sonohysterography: prevalence in a general population. Fertil Steril 102(2):525, 2014
Du H, Taylor HS. Molecular regulation of mullerian development by Hoxgenes. Ann N Y Acad Sci
1034:152, 2004
Efrat Z, Perri T, Ramati E, et al: Fetal gender assignment by first-trimester ultrasound. Ultrasound
Obstet Gynecol 27(6):619, 2006
El-Maouche D, Arlt W, Merke DP: Congenital adrenal hyperplasia. Lancet 390(10108):2194, 2017
Erez O, Dukler D, Novack L, et al: Trial of labor and vaginal birth after cesarean section in patients with
uterine Müllerian anomalies: a population-based study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 196(6):537, 2007
Eswara JR, Kielb S, Koyle MA, et al: The recommendations of the 2015 American Urological
Association Working Group on Genitourinary Congenitalism. Urology 88:1, 2016
Fedele L, Bianchi S, Agnoli B, et al: Urinary tract anomalies associated with unicornuate uterus. J Urol
155:847, 1996
Fedele L, Bianchi S, Zanconato G, et al: Laparoscopic removal of the cavitated noncommunicating
rudimentary uterine horn: surgical aspects in 10 cases. Fertil Steril 83(2):432, 2005
Friedman MA, Aguilar L, Heyward Q, et al: Screening for mullerian anomalies in patients with unilateral
renal agenesis: leveraging early detection to prevent complications. J Pediatr Urol 14(2):144, 2018
Fujimoto T, Miyayama Y, Fuyuta M: The origin, migration and fine morphology of human primordial
germ cells. Anat Rec 188(3):315, 1977
Fukunaga T, Fujii S, Inoue C, et al: The spectrum of imaging appearances of müllerian duct anomalies:
focus on MR imaging. Jpn J Radiol 35(12):697, 2017
Garcia Rodriguez R, Pérez González J, Garcia Delgado R, et al: Fetal hydrometrocolpos and congenital
imperforate hymen: prenatal and postnatal imaging features. J Clin Ultrasound 46(8):549, 2018
Gardner CS, Jaffe TA, Hertzberg BS, et al: The incarcerated uterus: a review of MRI and ultrasound
imaging appearances. AJR Am J Roentgenol 201(1):223, 2013

Ghi T, De Musso F, Maroni E, et al: The pregnancy outcome in women with incidental diagnosis of
septate uterus at first trimester scan. Hum Reprod 27(9):267, 2012
Gibbons JM Jr, Paley WB: The incarcerated gravid uterus. Obstet Gynecol 33(6):842, 1969
Golan A, Langer R, Neuman M, et al: Obstetric outcome in women with congenital uterine
malformations. J Reprod Med 37:233, 1992
Goldman S, Szejnfeld PO, Rondon A, et al: Prenatal diagnosis of bladder exstrophy by fetal MRI. J
Pediatr Urol 9(1):3, 2013
Gottschalk EM, Siedentopf JP, Schoenborn I, et al: Prenatal sonographic and MRI findings in a
pregnancy complicated by uterine sacculation: case report and review of the literature. Ultrasound
Obstet Gynecol 32(4):582, 2008
Graupera B, Pascual MA, Hereter L, et al: Accuracy of three-dimensional ultrasound compared with
magnetic resonance imaging in diagnosis of müllerian duct anomalies using ESHRE-ESGE
consensus on the classification of congenital anomalies of the female genital tract. Ultrasound
Obstet Gynecol 46(5):616, 2015
Gravholt CH, Andersen NH, Conway GS, et al: Clinical practice guidelines for the care of girls and
women with Turner syndrome: proceedings from the 2016 Cincinnati International Turner Syndrome
Meeting. Eur J Endocrinol 177(3):G1, 2017
Gravholt CH, Viuff MH, Brun S, et al: Turner syndrome: mechanisms and management. Nat Rev
Endocrinol 15(10):601, 2019
Greenwell TJ, Venn SN, Creighton SM, et al: Pregnancy after lower urinary tract reconstruction for
congenital abnormalities. BJU Int 92:773, 2003
Gregg AR, Skotko BG, Benkendorf JL, et al: Noninvasive prenatal screening for fetal aneuploidy, 2016
update: a position statement of the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics. Genet
Med 18(10):1056, 2016
Grewal J, Valente AM, Egbe AC, et al: Cardiovascular outcomes of pregnancy in Turner syndrome.
Heart 107(1):61, 2021
Grimbizis GF, Di Spiezio Sardo A, Saravelos SH, et al: The Thessaloniki ESHRE/ESGE consensus on
diagnosis of female genital anomalies. Hum Reprod 31(1):2, 2016
Grimbizis GF, Gordts S, Di Spiezio Sardo A, et al: The ESHRE/ESGE consensus on the classification of
female genital tract congenital anomalies. Hum Reprod 28(8):2032, 2013
Grimstad F, Strickland J, Dowlut-McElroy T: Management and prevention of postoperative
complications in a neonate with a symptomatic imperforate hymen. J Pediatr Adolesc Gynecol
32(4):429, 2019
Grinspon RP, Bergadá I, Rey RA: Male hypogonadism and disorders of sex development. Front
Endocrinol (Lausanne) 11:211, 2020
Grinspon RP, Rey RA: Molecular characterization of XX maleness. Int J Mol Sci 20(23):6089, 2019
Grossenburg NJ, Delaney AA, Berg TG: Treatment of a late second-trimester incarcerated uterus using
ultrasound-guided manual reduction. Obstet Gynecol 118(2 Pt 2):436, 2011
Groth KA, Skakkebæk A, Høst C, et al: Clinical review: Klinefelter syndrome—a clinical update. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab 98(1):20, 2013
Gruchy N, Blondeel E, Le Meur N, et al: Pregnancy outcomes in prenatally diagnosed 47,XXX and
47,XYY syndromes: a 30-year French, retrospective, multicentre study. Prenat Diagn 36(6):523,
2016
Gruchy N, Vialard F, Decamp M, et al: Pregnancy outcomes in 188 French cases of prenatally
diagnosed Klinefelter syndrome. Hum Reprod 26(9):2570, 2011

Gupta A, Bischoff A, Peña A, et al: The great divide: septation and malformation of the cloaca, and its
implications for surgeons. Pediatr Surg Int 30(11):1089, 2014
Haddad B, Louis-Sylvestre C, Poitout P, et al: Longitudinal vaginal septum: a retrospective study of 202
cases. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 74(2):197, 1997
Hall-Craggs MA, Kirkham A, Creighton SM: Renal and urological abnormalities occurring with
müllerian anomalies. J Pediatr Urol 9(1):27, 2013
Hatch EE, Herbst AL, Hoover RN, et al: Incidence of squamous neoplasia of the cervix and vagina in
women exposed prenatally to diethylstilbestrol (United States). Cancer Causes Control 12:837, 2001
Hawkins LK, Correia KF, Srouji SS, et al: Uterine length and fertility outcomes: a cohort study in the
IVF population. Hum Reprod 28(11):3000, 2013
Heinonen PK: Renal tract malformations associated with müllerian duct anomalies. Clin Obstet Gynecol
Reprod Med 4(1):1, 2018
Helszer Z, Dmochowska A, Szemraj J, et al: A novel mutation (c. 341A>G) in the SRY gene in a 46,XY
female patient with gonadal dysgenesis. Gene 526(2):467, 2013
Hen G, Sela-Donenfeld D: “A narrow bridge home”: the dorsal mesentery in primordial germ cell
migration. Semin Cell Dev Biol 92:97, 2019
Herbst AL, Ulfelder H, Poskanzer DC: Adenocarcinoma of the vagina. Association of maternal
stilbestrol therapy with tumor appearance in young women. N Engl J Med 284(15):878, 1971
Hire MG, Reynolds KE, Farrer JR: Spontaneous resolution of gravid uterine incarceration with spinal
anesthesia: a case report. A Pract 13(11):433, 2019
Hoffman BL, Hamid CA, Corton MM: Surgeries for benign gynecologic disorders. In Hoffman BL,
Schorge JO, Halvorson LM, et al: Williams Gynecology, 4th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education,
2020, p 993
Homer HA, Li TC, Cooke ID: The septate uterus: a review of management and reproductive outcome.
Fertil Steril 73(1):1, 2000
Hooker AB, Bolte AC, Exalto N, et al: Recurrent incarceration of the gravid uterus. J Matern Fetal
Neonatal Med 22(5):462, 2009
Hovatta O: Pregnancies in women with Turner’s syndrome. Ann Med 31(2):106, 1999
Howard-Bath A, Poulton A, Halliday J, et al: Population-based trends in the prenatal diagnosis of sex
chromosome aneuploidy before and after non-invasive prenatal testing. Prenat Diagn 38(13):1062,
2018
Hua M, Odibo AO, Longman RE, et al: Congenital uterine anomalies and adverse pregnancy outcomes.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 205(6):558.e1, 2011
Huang LY, Pan M, Han J, et al: What would be missed in the first trimester if nuchal translucency
measurement is replaced by cell free DNA foetal aneuploidy screening? J Obstet Gynaecol
38(4):498, 2018
Hughes IA, Houk C, Ahmed SF, et al: Consensus statement on management of intersex disorders. J
Pediatr Urol 2:148, 2006
Hutson JM, Grover SR, O’Connell M, et al: Malformation syndromes associated with disorders of sex
development. Nat Rev Endocrinol 10(8):476, 2014
Ivell R, Anand-Ivell R: Biology of insulin-like factor 3 in human reproduction. Hum Reprod Update
15(4):463, 2009
Jacquinet A, Millar D, Lehman A: Etiologies of uterine malformations. Am J Med Genet A 170(8):2141,
2016
Jain S, Chen F, Jain S, et al: Developmental pathology of congenital kidney and urinary tract anomalies.
Clin Kidney J 12(3):382, 2018

Jensen JG: Uterine torsion in pregnancy. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 71:260, 1992
Johannesson L, Testa G, Putman JM, et al: Twelve live births after uterus transplantation in the Dallas
UtErus Transplant Study. Obstet Gynecol 137(2):241, 2021
Jones BP, Saso S, Bracewell-Milnes T, et al: Human uterine transplantation: a review of outcomes from
the first 45 cases. BJOG 126(11):1310, 2019
Jones ME, Boon WC, McInnes K, et al: Recognizing rare disorders: aromatase deficiency. Nat Clin
Pract Endocrinol Metab 3(5):414, 2007
Kapczuk K, Friebe Z, Iwaniec K, et al: Obstructive müllerian anomalies in menstruating adolescent girls:
a report of 22 cases. J Pediatr Adolesc Gynecol 31(3):252, 2018
Karavani G, Picard R, Elami-Suzin M, et al: Complete uterine torsion diagnosed during an elective
caesarean section following failed external cephalic version: a case report. J Obstet Gynaecol
37(5):673, 2017
Kaufman RH, Adam E, Hatch EE, et al: Continued follow-up of pregnancy outcomes in
diethylstilbestrol-exposed offspring. Obstet Gynecol 96(4):483, 2000
Kaufman RH, Noller K, Adam E, et al: Upper genital tract abnormalities and pregnancy outcome in
diethylstilbestrol exposed progeny. Am J Obstet Gynecol 148: 973, 1984
Kenney PJ, Spirt BA, Leeson MD: Genitourinary anomalies: radiologic-anatomic correlations.
Radiographics 4(2):233, 1984
Keppler-Noreuil K, Gorton S, Foo F, et al: Prenatal ascertainment of OEIS complex/cloacal exstrophy—
15 new cases and literature review. Am J Med Genet A 143A(18):2122, 2007
Kolon TF, Herndon CD, Baker LA, et al: Evaluation and treatment of cryptorchidism: AUA guideline. J
Urol 192(2):337, 2014
Kumar N, Tayade S: Successful pregnancy outcome in an untreated case of concomitant transverse
complete vaginal septum with unicornuate uterus. J Hum Reprod Sci 7(4):27, 2014
Lee PA, Nordenström A, Houk CP, et al: Global disorders of sex development update since 2006:
perceptions, approach and care. Horm Res Paediatr 85(3):158, 2016
Lee SW, Kim MY, Yang JH, et al: Sonographic findings of uterine sacculation during pregnancy.
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 32(4):595, 2008
Lettieri L, Rodis JF, McLean DA, et al: Incarceration of the gravid uterus. Obstet Gynecol Surv 49:642,
1994
Levin N, Layzequilla N: Transverse vaginal septum—a rare cause of dystocia of labor. Report of a
case. Obstet Gynecol 22:237, 1963
Li XQ, Qian HJ, Zhang XY, et al: Analysis of the reproductive outcomes and the size of the unicornuate
uterus measured by magnetic resonance imaging and their relationship. Arch Gynecol Obstet
299(5):1321, 2019
Liaw A, Cunha GR, Shen J, et al: Development of the human bladder and ureterovesical junction.
Differentiation 103:66, 2018
Lin AE, Prakash SK, Andersen NH, et al: Recognition and management of adults with Turner
syndrome: from the transition of adolescence through the senior years. Am J Med Genet A
179(10):1987, 2019
Ludmir J, Jackson GM, Samuels P: Transvaginal cerclage under ultrasound guidance in cases of severe
cervical hypoplasia. Obstet Gynecol 78:1067, 1991
Ludwin A, Ludwin I, Bhagavath B, et al: Pre-, intra-, and postoperative management of Robert’s uterus.
Fertil Steril 110(4):778, 2018a
Ludwin A, Martins WP, Nastri CO, et al: Congenital uterine malformation by experts (CUME): better
criteria for distinguishing between normal/arcuate and septate uterus? Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol

51(1):101, 2018b
Mäkelä JA, Koskenniemi JJ, Virtanen HE, et al: Testis development. Endocr Rev 40(4):857, 2019
Mallmann MR, Mack-Detlefsen B, Reutter H, et al: Isolated bladder exstrophy in prenatal diagnosis.
Arch Gynecol Obstet 300(2):355, 2019
Mallmann MR, Reutter H, Geipel A, et al: Early prenatal diagnosis of the OEIS complex with different
appearance in early compared with late pregnancy before spontaneous rupture of the cloacal
membrane. Prenat Diagn 34(8):803, 2014
Mastrolia SA, Baumfeld Y, Hershkovitz R, et al: Bicornuate uterus is an independent risk factor for
cervical os insufficiency: a retrospective population based cohort study. J Matern Fetal Neonatal
Med 30(22):2705, 2017
Mastrolia SA, Baumfeld Y, Hershkovitz R, et al: Independent association between uterine malformations
and cervical insufficiency: a retrospective population-based cohort study. Arch Gynecol Obstet
297(4):919, 2018
Matalliotakis M, Goulielmos GN, Matalliotaki C, et al: Endometriosis in adolescent and young girls:
report on a series of 55 cases. J Pediatr Adolesc Gynecol 30(5):568, 2017
Matthews D, Bath L, Högler W, et al: Hormone supplementation for pubertal induction in girls. Arch Dis
Child 102(10):975, 2017
Mavrelos D, Sawyer E, Helmy S, et al: Ultrasound diagnosis of ectopic pregnancy in the noncommunicating horn of a unicornuate uterus (cornual pregnancy). Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol
30(5):765, 2007
McCann-Crosby B, Chen MJ, et al: Non-classical congenital adrenal hyperplasia: targets of treatment
and transition. Pediatr Endocrinol Rev 12(2):224, 2014
McCann-Crosby B, Sutton VR: Disorders of sexual development. Clin Perinatol 42(2):395, 2015
McElreavey K, Jorgensen A, Eozenou C, et al: Pathogenic variants in the DEAH-box RNA helicase
DHX37 are a frequent cause of 46,XY gonadal dysgenesis and 46,XY testicular regression
syndrome. Genet Med 22(1):150, 2020
Mikos T, Gordts S, Grimbizis GF: Current knowledge about the management of congenital cervical
malformations: a literature review. Fertil Steril 113(4):723, 2020
Miller WL, Auchus RJ: The molecular biology, biochemistry, and physiology of human steroidogenesis
and its disorders. Endocr Rev 32(1):81, 2011
Moore KL, Persaud TV, Torchia MG: Urogenital system. In The Developing Human, 11th ed.
Philadelphia, Saunders, 2020, p 246
Mucowski SJ, Herndon CN, Rosen MP: The arcuate uterine anomaly: a critical appraisal of its
diagnostic and clinical relevance. Obstet Gynecol Surv 65(7):449, 2010
Nahum G, Stanislaw H, McMahon C: Preventing ectopic pregnancies: how often does transperitoneal
transmigration of sperm occur in effecting human pregnancy? BJOG 111:706, 2004
Nahum GG: Rudimentary uterine horn pregnancy: the 20th-century worldwide experience of 588 cases.
J Reprod Med 47:151, 2002
Narasimhan ML, Khattab A, Narasimhan ML, et al: Genetics of congenital adrenal hyperplasia and
genotype-phenotype correlation. Fertil Steril 111(1):24, 2019
Neri G, Opitz J: Syndromal (and nonsyndromal) forms of male pseudohermaphroditism. Am J Med
Genet 89(4):201, 1999
Newell SD, Crofts JF, Grant SR: The incarcerated gravid uterus: complications and lessons learned.
Obstet Gynecol 123(2 Pt 2 Suppl 2):423, 2014
Nicholson WK, Coulson CC, McCoy MC, et al: Pelvic magnetic resonance imaging in the evaluation of
uterine torsion. Obstet Gynecol 85(5 Pt 2):888, 1995

Norton ME, Baer RJ, Wapner RJ, et al: Cell-free DNA vs sequential screening for the detection of fetal
chromosomal abnormalities. Am J Obstet Gynecol 214(6):727, 2016
Oktay K, Bedoschi G, Berkowitz K, et al: Fertility preservation in women with turner syndrome: a
comprehensive review and practical guidelines. J Pediatr Adolesc Gynecol 29(5):409, 2016
Pados G, Tsolakidis D, Athanatos D, et al: Reproductive and obstetric outcome after laparoscopic
excision of functional, non-communicating broadly attached rudimentary horn: a case series. Eur J
Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 182:33, 2014
Palmer JR, Hatch EE, Rao RS, et al: Infertility among women exposed prenatally to diethylstilbestrol.
Am J Epidemiol 154:316, 2001
Patel V, Gomez-Lobo V: Obstructive anomalies of the gynecologic tract. Curr Opin Obstet Gynecol
28(5):339, 2016
Pearce M, DeMartino L, McMahon R, et al: Newborn screening for congenital adrenal hyperplasia in
New York State. Mol Genet Metab Rep 7:1, 2016
Pellerito JS, McCarthy SM, Doyle MB, et al: Diagnosis of uterine anomalies: relative accuracy of MR
imaging, endovaginal sonography, and hysterosalpingography. Radiology 183:795, 1992
Prior M, Richardson A, Asif S, et al: Outcome of assisted reproduction in women with congenital
uterine anomalies: a prospective observational study. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 51(1):110, 2018
Rackow BW, Arici A: Reproductive performance of women with müllerian anomalies. Curr Opin
Obstet Gynecol 19(3):229, 2007
Radicioni AF, Ferlin A, Balercia G, et al: Consensus statement on diagnosis and clinical management of
Klinefelter syndrome. J Endocrinol Invest 2010
Radmayr C, Dogan HS, Hoebeke P, et al: Management of undescended testes: European Association of
Urology/European Society for Paediatric Urology Guidelines. J Pediatr Urol 12(6):335, 2016
Rall K, Eisenbeis S, Henninger V: Typical and atypical associated findings in a group of 346 patients
with Mayer-Rokitansky-Kuester-Hauser syndrome. J Pediatr Adolesc Gynecol 28(5):362, 2015
Ravasia DJ, Brain PH, Pollard JK: Incidence of uterine rupture among women with müllerian duct
anomalies who attempt vaginal birth after cesarean delivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 181(4):877, 1999
Reichman DE, Laufer MR: Mayer-Rokitansky-Küster-Hauser syndrome: fertility counseling and
treatment. Fertil Steril 94(5):1941, 2010
Reichman D, Laufer MR, Robinson BK: Pregnancy outcomes in unicornuate uteri: a review. Fertil Steril
91(5): 1886, 2009
Reiss RE, Discenza M, Foster J, et al: Sex chromosome aneuploidy detection by noninvasive prenatal
testing: helpful or hazardous? Prenat Diagn 37(5):515, 2017
Robboy SJ, Young RH, Welch WR, et al: Atypical vaginal adenosis and cervical ectropion. Association
with clear cell adenocarcinoma in diethylstilbestrol-exposed offspring. Cancer 54(5):869, 1984
Roberts CP, Rock JA: Surgical methods in the treatment of congenital anomalies of the uterine cervix.
Curr Opin Obstet Gynecol 23(4):251, 2011
Rock JA, Roberts CP, Jones HW Jr: Congenital anomalies of the uterine cervix: lessons from 30 cases
managed clinically by a common protocol. Fertil Steril 94(5):1858, 2010
Rolen AC, Choquette AJ, Semmens JP: Rudimentary uterine horn: obstetric and gynecologic
implications. Obstet Gynecol 27:806, 1966
Rood K, Markham KB: Torsion of a term gravid uterus: a possible cause of intrauterine growth
restriction and abnormal umbilical artery Doppler findings. J Ultrasound Med 33(10):1873, 2014
Roth LM, Cheng L: Classical gonadoblastoma: its relationship to the ‘dissecting’ variant and
undifferentiated gonadal tissue. Histopathology 72(4):545, 2018

Saravelos SH, Cocksedge KA, Li TC: Prevalence and diagnosis of congenital uterine anomalies in
women with reproductive failure: a critical appraisal. Hum Reprod Update 14(5):415, 2008
Schneiderman M, Tulandi T: The importance to exclude the existence of a rudimentary uterine horn in
women with unicornuate uterus. J Obstet Gynaecol Can 40(2):143, 2018
Semmes JP: Congenital anomalies of female genital tract. Functional classification based on review of
56 personal cases and 500 reported cases. Obstet Gynecol 19:328, 1962
Sentilhes L, Sergent F, Roman H, et al: Late complications of operative hysteroscopy: predicting patients
at risk of uterine rupture during subsequent pregnancy. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol
120(2):134, 2005
Seubert DE, Puder KS, Goldmeier P, et al: Colonoscopic release of the incarcerated gravid uterus.
Obstet Gynecol 94:792, 1999
Shatzkes DR, Haller JO, Velcek FT: Imaging of uterovaginal anomalies in the pediatric patient. Urol
Radiol 13(1):58, 1991
She ZY, Yang WX: Sry and SoxE genes: How they participate in mammalian sex determination and
gonadal development? Semin Cell Dev Biol 63:13, 2017
Shen J, Cunha GR, Sinclair A, et al: Macroscopic whole-mounts of the developing human fetal
urogenital-genital tract: Indifferent stage to male and female differentiation. Differentiation 103:5,
2018
Silberbach M, Roos-Hesselink JW, Andersen NH, et al: Cardiovascular health in Turner syndrome: a
scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Circ Genom Precis Med 11(10):e000048,
2018
Sinclair AH, Berta P, Palmer MS, et al: A gene from the human sex-determining region encodes a
protein with homology to a conserved DNA-binding motif. Nature 346(6281):240, 1990
Singh MN, Payappagoudar J, Lo J: Incarcerated retroverted uterus in the third trimester complicated by
postpartum pulmonary embolism. Obstet Gynecol 109:498, 2007
Smith P, Wilhelm D, Rodgers RJ: Development of mammalian ovary. J Endocrinol 221(3):R145, 2014
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, McIntosh J, Feltovich H, et al: The role of routine cervical length
screening in selected high- and low-risk women for preterm birth prevention. Am J Obstet Gynecol
215(3):B2, 2016
Song JE, Lee KY, Son GH: Prediction of outcome for transabdominal cerclage in women with cervical
insufficiency. Biomed Res Int 2015;2015:985764
Spearing GJ: Uterine sacculation. Obstet Gynecol 51:11S, 1978
Spencer TE, Dunlap KA, Filant J. Comparative developmental biology of the uterus: insights into
mechanisms and developmental disruption. Mol Cell Endocrinol 354(1-2):34, 2012
Tardy-Guidollet V, Menassa R, Costa JM, et al: New management strategy of pregnancies at risk of
congenital adrenal hyperplasia using fetal sex determination in maternal serum: French cohort of 258
cases (2002-2011). J Clin Endocrinol Metab 99(4):1180, 2014
Toaff ME, Lev-Toaff AS, Toaff R: Communicating uteri: review and classification with introduction of
two previously unreported types. Fertil Steril 41(5):661, 1984
Tolani AD, Kadambari Deenadayal A, et al: Timely identification of pregnancy in noncommunicating
horn of unicornuate uterus by three-dimensional transvaginal ultrasonography. J Clin Imaging Sci
8:39, 2018
Tong J, Zhu L, Chen N, et al: Endometriosis in association with Herlyn-Werner-Wunderlich syndrome.
Fertil Steril 102(3):790, 2014
Tonni G, Grisolia G, Bonasoni M, et al: Prenatal diagnosis of OEIS (omphalocele, bladder exstrophy,
imperforate anus, clubfeet) variant associated with increased nuchal translucency and OEIS

complex with ambiguous genitalia associated with corrected transposition of the great arteries: case
series and review of the literature. Arch Gynecol Obstet 284(2):261, 2011
Tsafrir A, Rojansky N, Sela HY, et al: Rudimentary horn pregnancy: first-trimester prerupture
sonographic diagnosis and confirmation by magnetic resonance imaging. J Ultrasound Med
24(2):219, 2005
Tuna T, Estevão-Costa J, Ramalho C, et al: Herlyn-Werner-Wunderlich Syndrome: report of a prenatally
recognised case and review of the literature. Urology 125:205, 2019
Uma R, Oláh KS: Transvaginal caesarean hysterectomy: an unusual complication of a fibroid gravid
uterus. BJOG 109(10):1192, 2002
Upadhyay KK, Silverstein DM: Renal development: a complex process dependent on inductive
interaction. Curr Pediatr Rev 10(2):107, 2014
Urbanus E, Swaab H, Tartaglia N, et al: The behavioral profile of children aged 1–5 years with sex
chromosome trisomy (47,XXX, 47,XXY, 47,XYY). Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet
184(2):444, 2020
Valentini AL, Giuliani M, Gui B, et al: Persistent urogenital sinus: diagnostic imaging for clinical
management. What does the radiologist need to know? Am J Perinatol 33(5):425, 2016
Valle RF, Ekpo GE: Hysteroscopic metroplasty for the septate uterus: review and meta-analysis. J
Minim Invasive Gynecol 20(1):22, 2013
Van der Straaten S, Springer A, Zecic A, et al: The external genitalia score (EGS): a European
multicenter validation study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 105(3):dgz142, 2020
Van der Zwan YG, Biermann K, Wolffenbuttel KP, et al: Gonadal maldevelopment as risk factor for
germ cell cancer: towards a clinical decision model. Eur Urol 67(4):692, 2015
Vaz SA, Dotters-Katz SK, Kuller JA: Diagnosis and management of congenital uterine anomalies in
pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol Surv 72(3):194, 2017
Vogel I, Tabor A, Ekelund C, et al: Population-Based screening for trisomies and atypical chromosomal
abnormalities: improving efficacy using the combined first trimester screening algorithm as well as
individual risk parameters. Fetal Diagn Ther 45(6):424, 2019
Walsh TJ, Dall’Era MA, Croughan MS, et al: Prepubertal orchiopexy for cryptorchidism may be
associated with lower risk of testicular cancer. J Urol 178(4 Pt 1):1440, 2007
Weidler EM, Linnaus ME, Baratz AB, et al: A management protocol for gonad preservation in patients
with androgen insensitivity syndrome. J Pediatr Adolesc Gynecol 32(6):605, 2019
Williams CE, Nakhal RS, Achermann JC, et al: Persistent unexplained congenital clitoromegaly in
females born extremely prematurely. J Pediatr Urol 9(6 Pt A):962, 2013
Williams CE, Nakhal RS, Hall-Craggs MA, et al: Transverse vaginal septae: management and long-term
outcomes. BJOG 121(13):1653, 2014
Woelfer B, Salim R, Banerjee S, et al: Reproductive outcomes in women with congenital uterine
anomalies detected by three-dimensional ultrasound screening. Obstet Gynecol 98:1099, 2001
Woo LL, Thomas JC, Brock JW: Cloacal exstrophy: a comprehensive review of an uncommon problem.
J Pediatr Urol 6(2):102, 2010
Worley KC, Hnat MD, Cunningham FG: Advanced extrauterine pregnancy: diagnostic and therapeutic
challenges. Am J Obstet Gynecol 198:287.e1, 2008
Xu C, Xu J, Gao H, et al: Triplet pregnancy and successful twin delivery in a patient with congenital
cervical atresia who underwent transmyometrial embryo transfer and multifetal pregnancy
reduction. Fertil Steril 91(5):1958, 2009
Yassaee F, Mostafaee L: The role of cervical cerclage in pregnancy outcome in women with uterine
anomaly. J Reprod Infertil 12(4):277, 2011

Yue F, Zhang H, Xi Q, et al: Molecular cytogenetic analysis and genetic counseling: a case report of
eight 46,XX males and a literature review. Mol Cytogenet 12:44, 2019

CHAPTER 4

Maternal Physiology

REPRODUCTIVE TRACT
BREASTS
SKIN
METABOLIC CHANGES
HEMATOLOGICAL CHANGES
CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM
RESPIRATORY TRACT
URINARY SYSTEM
GASTROINTESTINAL TRACT
ENDOCRINE SYSTEM
MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM
CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM
REFERENCES
The anatomical, physiological, and biochemical adaptations of pregnancy are
profound. Many gestational changes begin soon after fertilization and
continue throughout pregnancy. Equally astounding is the almost complete
return to the prepregnancy state after delivery and lactation. Most pregnancyrelated changes are prompted by stimuli provided by the fetus and placenta.

Virtually every organ system undergoes alterations, and these can
appreciably modify criteria for disease diagnosis and treatment. Thus, an
understanding of pregnancy adaptations is essential to avoid
misinterpretation. Moreover, some normal physiological changes can unmask
or worsen preexisting disease.

REPRODUCTIVE TRACT
■ Uterus
In the nonpregnant woman, the uterus weighs approximately 70 g and is
almost solid, except for a cavity of 10 mL or less. During pregnancy, the
uterus is transformed into a thin-walled muscular organ of sufficient capacity
to accommodate the fetus, placenta, and amnionic fluid. The total volume of
the contents at term averages 5 L but may be 20 L or more! Thus, by the end
of pregnancy, the uterus has achieved a capacity that is 500 to 1000 times
greater than the nonpregnant state. The corresponding increase in uterine
weight is such that, by term, the organ weighs nearly 1100 g.
Uterine hypertrophy early in pregnancy is probably stimulated by the
action of estrogen and perhaps progesterone. Thus, similar uterine changes
can be observed with ectopic pregnancy. But after approximately 12 weeks’
gestation, uterine growth is related predominantly to pressure exerted by the
expanding products of conception.
Within the uterus, enlargement is most marked in the fundus. The extent of
uterine hypertrophy is also influenced by the position of the placenta.
Namely, the myometrium surrounding the placental site grows more rapidly
than does the rest.
During pregnancy, uterine enlargement involves stretching and marked
hypertrophy of muscle cells, whereas the production of new myocytes is
limited. Fibrous tissue also accumulates, particularly in the external muscle
layer, together with a considerable rise in elastic tissue content. The walls of
the corpus considerably thicken and strengthen during the first few months of
pregnancy but then gradually thin. By term, the myometrium is only 1 to 2 cm
thick, and the fetus usually can be palpated through the soft, readily
indentable uterine walls.
The uterine musculature during pregnancy is arranged in three strata. The
first is an outer hoodlike layer, which arches over the fundus and extends into

the various ligaments. The middle layer is a dense network of muscle fibers
perforated in all directions by blood vessels. Last is an internal layer, with
sphincter-like fibers around the fallopian tube orifices and internal cervical
os. Most of the uterine wall is formed by the middle layer. Here, each
myocyte has a double curve so that the interlacing of any two cells forms a
figure eight. This crucial arrangement permits myocytes to contract after
delivery and constrict penetrating blood vessels to halt bleeding.

Uterine Shape and Position
For the first few weeks, the uterus maintains its original piriform or pear
shape. But, as pregnancy advances, the corpus and fundus become globular
and almost spherical by 12 weeks’ gestation. Subsequently, the organ grows
more rapidly in length than in width and becomes ovoid. By the end of 12
weeks, the enlarged uterus extends out of the pelvis. With growth, it contacts
the anterior abdominal wall, displaces the intestines laterally and superiorly,
and ultimately reaches almost to the liver. As it ascends, the uterus usually
rotates to the right, and this dextrorotation likely is caused by the
rectosigmoid on the left side of the pelvis. As the uterus rises, tension is
exerted on the broad and round ligaments.
With the pregnant woman standing, the longitudinal axis of the uterus
corresponds to an extension of the pelvic inlet axis. The abdominal wall
supports the uterus and maintains this axis, unless the wall is lax. When the
pregnant woman lies supine, the uterus falls back to rest on the vertebral
column and the adjacent great vessels.

Uterine Contractility
Beginning in early pregnancy, the uterus contracts irregularly, and these may
be perceived as mild cramps. During the second trimester, these contractions
can be detected by bimanual examination. In 1872, J. Braxton Hicks first
brought attention to these contractions, which now bear his name. These
appear unpredictably and sporadically. Their intensity varies between 5 and
25 mm Hg (Alvarez, 1950). Until near term, these Braxton Hicks
contractions are infrequent, but their number rises during the last week or
two. At this time, the uterus may contract as often as every 10 to 20 minutes
and with some degree of rhythmicity. Correspondingly, uterine electrical
activity is low and uncoordinated early in gestation but becomes

progressively more intense and synchronized by term (Rabotti, 2015). This
synchrony develops twice as fast in multiparas compared with nulliparas
(Govindan, 2015). Late in pregnancy, these contractions may cause some
discomfort and account for so-called false labor (Chap 21, p. 401).

Uteroplacental Blood Flow
The delivery of most substances essential for fetal and placental growth,
metabolism, and waste removal requires the placental intervillous space to
be adequately perfused (Chap. 5, p. 86). Placental perfusion depends on total
uterine blood flow, but simultaneous measurement of uterine, ovarian, and
collateral vessels is not yet possible, even using magnetic resonance (MR)
angiography (Pates, 2010). For this measurement, early results using fourdimensional flow MR imaging in the primate are promising (MacDonald,
2019).
Doppler ultrasound interrogation of the uterine arteries shows a
progressive increase in uteroplacental blood flow during pregnancy. Flow
rates rise from approximately 450 mL/min in the midtrimester to nearly 500
to 750 mL/min at 36 weeks’ gestation (Flo, 2014; Wilson, 2007). These
measures are similar to flow estimates ascertained indirectly using clearance
rates of androstenedione and xenon-133 (Edman, 1981; Kauppila, 1980).
These values also mirror older ones—500 to 750 mL/min—obtained with
invasive methods (Assali, 1953; Metcalfe, 1955). Logically, such massively
increased uteroplacental blood flow requires adaptation of the uterine veins
as well. The resulting increased venous caliber and distensibility can result
in uterine vein varices that rarely may rupture (Lim, 2014).
As noted first from animal studies, uterine contractions, either
spontaneous or induced, lower uterine blood flow proportionally to
contraction intensity (Assali, 1968). A tetanic contraction yields a
precipitous fall in uterine blood flow. In humans, three-dimensional power
Doppler angiography has also demonstrated reduced uterine blood flow
during contractions (Jones, 2009). Using a similar technique, resistance to
blood flow in both maternal and fetal vessels was found to be greater during
the second stage of labor compared with the first (Baron, 2015). Given that
baseline uterine blood flow is diminished in pregnancies complicated by
fetal-growth restriction, these fetuses often tolerate spontaneous labor less
effectively (Simeone, 2017).

Uteroplacental Blood Flow Regulation
The vessels that supply the uterine corpus widen and elongate yet preserve
their contractile function (Mandala, 2012). As an exception, the spiral
arteries, which directly supply the placenta, vasodilate but completely lose
contractility. This presumably stems from endovascular trophoblast invasion,
which destroys the intramural muscular elements (Chap. 5, p. 92). This
vasodilation allows maternal–placental blood flow to progressively rise
during gestation. Given that blood flow increases proportionally to the fourth
power of the radius of the vessel, small widening of a vessel diameter results
in tremendous augmentation of flow. In one study, the uterine artery diameter
grew from only 3.3 mm to 3.7 mm between 22 and 29 weeks’ gestation, but
mean blood flow velocity increased 50 percent, from 29 to 43 cm/sec (Flo,
2010).
The downstream fall in vascular resistance is another key factor that
accelerates flow and shear stress in upstream vessels. In turn, shear stress
leads to circumferential vessel growth. Nitric oxide—a potent vasodilator—
appears to play a central role in regulating this process and is discussed later
(p. 65). Endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) and nitric oxide production
are augmented by endothelial shear stress and several hormones and growth
factors (Osol, 2019; Zhang, 2017). Factors include estrogen, progesterone,
activin, placental growth factor (PlGF), and vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF), which is a promoter of angiogenesis. As an important aside,
VEGF and PlGF signaling is attenuated in response to excess placental
secretion of their soluble receptor—soluble FMS-like tyrosine kinase 1
(sFlt-1). An elevated maternal sFlt-1 level inactivates and lowers circulating
PlGF and VEGF concentrations and is important in preeclampsia
pathogenesis (Chap. 40, p. 694).
Normal pregnancy is also characterized by vascular refractoriness to the
pressor effects of infused angiotensin II, and this raises uteroplacental blood
flow (Rosenfeld, 2012). Other factors that augment uteroplacental blood
flow include relaxin and certain adipocytokines (Vodstrcil, 2012). Chemerin
is an adipocytokine secreted by several tissues, including the placenta
(Kasher-Meron, 2014). Its concentration rises as gestation advances and
serves to increase human umbilical eNOS activity (Wang, 2015). Another
adipocytokine—visfatin—raises VEGF secretion and VEGF receptor 2
expression in epithelial cells derived from the placental amnion (Astern,

2013). Other adipocytokines include leptin, resistin, and adiponectin, which
all enhance umbilical vein endothelial cell proliferation (Połeć, 2014).
Last, certain microRNA species mediate vascular remodeling and uterine
blood flow early in placentation (Santa, 2015). In particular, members of the
miR-17–92 cluster and miR-34 are important in spiral artery remodeling and
invasion. Micro-RNA dysfunction has been reported in preeclampsia, fetalgrowth restriction, and gestational diabetes.

■ Cervix
As early as 1 month after conception, the cervix begins to soften and gain
bluish tones. These changes result from increased vascularity and edema of
the entire cervix, from alterations in the collagen network, and from
hypertrophy and hyperplasia of the cervical glands (Peralta, 2015). Although
the cervix contains a small amount of smooth muscle, its major component is
connective tissue. Rearrangement of this collagen-rich tissue aids the cervix
in retention of the pregnancy until term, in dilation to aid delivery, and in
postpartum repair and reconstitution to permit a subsequent successful
pregnancy (Myers, 2015). As detailed in Chapter 21 (p. 405), cervical
ripening involves connective tissue remodeling that lowers collagen and
proteoglycan concentrations and raises water content compared with the
nonpregnant cervix.
Cervical glands undergo marked proliferation, and by the end of
pregnancy, they occupy up to one half of the entire cervical mass. This
normal pregnancy-induced change prompts an extension, or eversion, of the
proliferating columnar endocervical glands onto the ectocervical portio (Fig.
4-1). This tissue appears red and velvety and bleeds even with minor trauma,
such as with Pap smear testing.

FIGURE 4-1 Cervical eversion of pregnancy as viewed through a colposcope. The eversion represents
columnar epithelium on the portio of the cervix. (Reproduced with permission from Dr. Claudia Werner.)

The endocervical mucosal cells produce copious amounts of tenacious
mucus that obstructs the cervical canal soon after conception (Bastholm,
2017). This mucus is rich in immunoglobulins and cytokines and may act as
an immunological barrier to protect the uterine contents against infection
(Hansen, 2014). At labor onset, if not before, this mucus plug is expelled,
resulting in a bloody show. Moreover, the cervical mucus consistency
changes during pregnancy. Specifically, in most pregnant women, as a result
of progesterone, when cervical mucus is spread and dried on a glass slide, it
shows poor crystallization, termed beading. In some gravidas, as a result of
amnionic fluid leakage, an arborization of ice-like crystals, called ferning, is
seen microscopically.
Histologically, basal cells near the squamocolumnar junction can be
prominent in size, shape, and staining quality in pregnancy. These changes
are considered to be estrogen induced. In addition, pregnancy is associated
with both endocervical gland hyperplasia and hypersecretory appearance—
the Arias-Stella reaction. This cytologic change can make differentiating

these from truly atypical glandular cells during Pap test evaluation
particularly difficult (Rosai, 2015).

■ Ovaries
Ovulation ceases during pregnancy, and maturation of new follicles is
suspended. The single corpus luteum functions maximally during the first 6 to
7 weeks of pregnancy—4 to 5 weeks postovulation. Thereafter, it contributes
relatively little to progesterone production. As discussed in Chapter 66 (p.
1170), surgical removal of the corpus luteum before 7 weeks’ gestation
prompts a rapid fall in maternal serum progesterone levels and spontaneous
abortion (Csapo, 1973). In these cases, exogenous progesterone is necessary
for pregnancy maintenance until placental function is sufficient. After 7
weeks, however, corpus luteum excision ordinarily does not cause abortion.
An extrauterine decidual reaction on and just beneath the ovarian surface
is common in pregnancy and is usually observed at cesarean delivery. These
appear as slightly elevated clear or red blisters or patches that bleed easily
and may, on first glance, resemble freshly torn adhesions. Similar decidual
reactions are seen on the uterine serosa and other pelvic, or even extrapelvic,
abdominal organs (Bloom, 2010). These areas arise from subcoelomic
mesenchyme or endometriotic lesions that have been stimulated by
progesterone. They histologically appear similar to progestin-stimulated
intrauterine endometrial stroma (Kim, 2015).
The enormous caliber of the ovarian veins viewed at cesarean delivery is
startling. Hodgkinson (1953) found that the diameter of the ovarian vascular
pedicle increased during pregnancy from 0.9 cm to approximately 2.6 cm at
term. Again, recall that flow in a tubular structure increases exponentially as
the diameter enlarges.

Relaxin
This protein hormone is secreted by the corpus luteum, the decidua, and the
placenta in a pattern similar to that of human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG)
(Chap. 5, p. 97). Relaxin is also expressed in brain, heart, and kidney. It is
mentioned here because its secretion by the corpus luteum appears to aid
many maternal physiological adaptations, such as remodeling of
reproductive-tract connective tissue to accommodate labor (Vrachnis, 2015).

Relaxin also appears important in initiating augmented renal hemodynamics,
lowering serum osmolality, and increasing arterial compliance, which are all
associated with normal pregnancy (Conrad, 2015). Despite its name, serum
relaxin levels do not contribute to greater peripheral joint laxity or pelvic
girdle pain during pregnancy (Aldabe, 2012; Marnach, 2003).

Theca-Lutein Cysts
These benign ovarian lesions reflect exaggerated physiological follicle
stimulation, which is termed hyperreactio luteinalis. The resulting bilateral
cystic ovaries are variably enlarged. The reaction is usually linked to
markedly elevated serum hCG levels. Logically, theca-lutein cysts are found
frequently with gestational trophoblastic disease (Fig. 13-3, p. 238). They
may also develop with the placentomegaly that can accompany diabetes, antiD alloimmunization, and multifetal gestation. Hyperreactio luteinalis is
associated with preeclampsia and hyperthyroidism, which may contribute to
elevated risks for fetal-growth restriction and preterm birth (Lynn, 2013;
Malinowski, 2015). These cysts are also encountered in women with
otherwise uncomplicated pregnancies. In these cases, an exaggerated
response of the ovaries to normal levels of circulating hCG is suspected
(Sarmento Gonçalves, 2015).
Although usually asymptomatic, hemorrhage into the cysts can cause
acute abdominal pain (Amoah, 2011). Maternal virilization may be seen in
up to 30 percent of women, however, virilization of the fetus has only rarely
been reported. Maternal findings that include temporal balding, hirsutism,
and clitoromegaly are associated with massively elevated levels of
androstenedione and testosterone. The diagnosis typically is based on
sonographic findings of bilateral enlarged ovaries containing multiple cysts
in the appropriate clinical settings. The condition is self-limited and resolves
following delivery. Its management was reviewed by Malinowski (2015) and
discussed further in Chapter 66 (p. 1171).

■ Fallopian Tubes
The fallopian tube musculature, that is, the myosalpinx, undergoes little
hypertrophy during pregnancy. The epithelium of the endosalpinx somewhat
flattens. Decidual cells may develop in the stroma of the endosalpinx, but a
continuous decidual membrane is not formed. Rarely, a fallopian tube may

twist during uterine enlargement, but this torsion is more common with
comorbid paratubal or ovarian cysts (Lee, 2015; Macedo, 2017).

■ Vagina and Perineum
During pregnancy, greater vascularity and hyperemia develop in the skin and
muscles of the perineum and vulva, and the underlying abundant connective
tissue softens. This augmented vascularity prominently affects the vagina and
cervix and results in the violet color characteristic of the Chadwick sign.
Within the vagina, the considerably elevated volume of cervical
secretions during pregnancy forms a somewhat thick, white discharge. The
pH is acidic and varies from 3.5 to 6. This pH results from increased
production of lactic acid by Lactobacillus acidophilus during metabolism of
glycogen energy stores in the vaginal epithelium. Pregnancy is associated
with an elevated risk of vulvovaginal candidiasis, particularly during the
second and third trimesters. Higher infection rates may stem from
immunological and hormonal changes and from greater vaginal glycogen
stores (Aguin, 2015).
The vaginal walls undergo striking changes in preparation for the
distention that accompanies labor and delivery. These include considerable
epithelial thickening, connective tissue loosening, and hypertrophy of smooth
muscle cells.

Pelvic Organ Prolapse
Pelvic Organ Prolapse Quantification (POP-Q) scores and sonographic
studies show that vaginal support changes across pregnancy. In particular,
vaginal lengthening, posterior vaginal wall and hiatal relaxation, increased
levator hiatal area, and greater first-trimester vaginal elastase activity are all
associated with uncomplicated spontaneous vaginal delivery (Oliphant,
2014). The larger hiatal area persists in women who deliver vaginally
compared with women delivering by prelabor or early-labor cesarean
delivery. However, all women show greater hiatal distensibility after
delivery, which is potentially a factor in later pelvic floor dysfunction
(Blomqvist, 2018; Friedman, 2019).
In women with existing apical vaginal prolapse, the cervix, and
occasionally a portion of the uterine body, can protrude variably from the

vulva during early pregnancy. With further growth, the uterus usually rises
above the pelvis and can draw the cervix up with it. If the uterus persists in
its prolapsed position, symptoms of incarceration may develop at 10 to 14
weeks’ gestation (Chap. 3, p. 46). As a preventive measure, the uterus can be
replaced early in pregnancy and held in position with a space-filling pessary.
Attenuation of anterior vaginal wall support can lead to prolapse of the
bladder, that is, cystocele. Associated urinary stasis can predispose to
infection. Pregnancy may also worsen coexistent stress urinary incontinence
(SUI), likely because urethral closing pressures do not rise sufficiently to
compensate for altered bladder neck support. Urinary incontinence affects
nearly 20 percent of women during the first trimester and nearly 40 percent
during the third trimester. Most cases stem from SUI rather than urgency
urinary incontinence (Abdullah, 2016; Franco, 2014). In primigravidas,
maternal age greater than 30 years, obesity, smoking, constipation, and
gestational diabetes mellitus are all risk factors associated with incontinence
during pregnancy (Sangsawang, 2014).
Attenuation of posterior vaginal wall support can lead to rectocele, and a
large defect may fill with feces. Splinting, in which a finger is inserted into
the vagina, can bolster posterior wall support to aid evacuation.
Occasionally, digital rectal disimpaction is needed. Uncommonly during
labor, fetal descent is blocked by a cystocele or rectocele. Emptying by
catheterization or enema and compressing the bulge with vaginal fingers will
resolve the impasse. Rarely, a large enterocele may bulge into the vagina to
block descent. Similarly, the hernia sac and its abdominal contents are gently
reduced.

BREASTS
In early pregnancy, women often experience breast tenderness and
paresthesias. After the second month, the breasts grow in size, and delicate
veins are visible just beneath the skin. The nipples become considerably
larger, more deeply pigmented, and more erectile. After the first few months,
a thick, yellowish fluid—colostrum—can often be expressed from the
nipples by gentle massage. During the same months, the areolae become
broader and more deeply pigmented. Scattered through each areola are
several small elevations, the glands of Montgomery, which are hypertrophic
sebaceous glands. If breasts gain extensive size, skin striae similar to those

observed in the abdomen may develop. Rarely, breasts can become
pathologically enlarged—referred to as gigantomastia—which may require
consideration of postpartum bromocriptine and later surgical reduction
(Rezai, 2015; Türkan, 2016).
For most, prepregnancy breast size and ultimate volume of breast milk do
not correlate. Multiple factors influence milk production and are discussed in
Chapter 36 (p. 640).

SKIN
Skin changes are common, and Fernandes and Amaral (2015) described
dermatological changes in more than 900 pregnant women. They found at
least one physiological cutaneous change in 89 percent of the women
examined. Dermatological pathologies during pregnancy are found in Chapter
65.

■ Abdominal Wall
Beginning after midpregnancy, reddish, slightly depressed streaks commonly
develop in the skin. These are called striae gravidarum or stretch marks. In
multiparas, glistening, silvery lines that represent the cicatrices of previous
striae frequently coexist. In one study of 800 primiparas, 70 percent
developed striae gravidarum on their abdomen; 33 percent on their breasts;
and 41 percent on their hips and thighs (Picard, 2015). The strongest
associated risk factors included younger maternal age, family history, and
prepregnancy weight and weight gain during pregnancy. The etiology of
striae gravidarum is unknown, but aloe vera gel and almond oil decrease
itching and may help to prevent progression (Hajhashemi, 2018).
Occasionally, the muscles of the abdominal walls do not withstand the
tension of the expanding pregnancy. As a result, rectus muscles separate in
the midline, creating diastasis recti of varying extent. If severe, a
considerable portion of the anterior uterine wall is covered by only a layer
of skin, attenuated fascia, and peritoneum to form a ventral hernia.

■ Hyperpigmentation

This develops in up to 90 percent of women and is usually more accentuated
in those with darker complexion (Bieber, 2017). Of specific sites, the
pigmented skin line in the midline of the anterior abdominal wall—the linea
alba—takes on dark brown-black pigmentation to form the linea nigra.
Occasionally, irregular brownish patches of varying size appear on the face
and neck, giving rise to chloasma or melasma gravidarum—the mask of
pregnancy. Pigmentation of the areolae and genital skin also may be
accentuated. After delivery, these pigmentary changes usually disappear or at
least regress considerably. Oral contraceptives may cause similar alterations
(Handel, 2014).
The etiology of these pigmentary changes is incompletely understood,
however, hormonal and genetic factors are implicated. Levels of melanocytestimulating hormone, a polypeptide similar to corticotropin, are elevated
remarkably throughout pregnancy, and estrogen and progesterone also are
reported to have melanocyte-stimulating effects.

■ Vascular Changes
Angiomas, called vascular spiders, are particularly common on the face,
neck, upper chest, and arms. These are minute, red skin papules with radicles
branching out from a central lesion. The condition is often designated as
nevus, angioma, or telangiectasis. Palmar erythema is encountered during
pregnancy. Both conditions lack clinical significance and disappear in most
gravidas shortly after pregnancy. They are likely the consequence of
hyperestrogenemia. In addition to these discrete lesions, increased cutaneous
blood flow in pregnancy serves to dissipate excess heat generated by
augmented metabolism.

■ Hair Changes
Throughout life, the human hair follicle undergoes a pattern of cyclic activity
that includes periods of hair growth (anagen phase), apoptosis-driven
involution (catagen phase), and a resting period (telogen phase). Based on a
study of 116 healthy pregnant women, the anagen phase lengthens during
pregnancy and the telogen rate increases postpartum (Gizlenti, 2014). Neither
is exaggerated in most gravidas, but excessive hair loss in the puerperium is
termed telogen effluvium (Stoehr, 2019).

METABOLIC CHANGES
In response to the greater demands of the rapidly growing fetus and placenta,
the pregnant woman undergoes numerous metabolic changes. By the third
trimester, maternal basal metabolic rate rises by 20 percent compared with
that of the nonpregnant state (Berggren, 2015). This rate grows by an
additional 10 percent in women with a twin gestation (Shinagawa, 2005).
This is stratified as 85, 285, and 475 kcal/d during the first, second, and third
trimesters, respectively (Table 4-1) (World Health Organization, 2004). Of
note, Abeysekera and coworkers (2016) reported that women accrue fat mass
during pregnancy despite the increased total energy expenditure and without
significant change in energy intake. This suggests more efficient energy
storage.
TABLE 4-1. Additional Energy Demands During Normal Pregnancya

Most of the normal weight gain in pregnancy is attributable to the uterus
and its contents, the breasts, and expanded blood and extravascular
extracellular fluid volumes. A smaller fraction results from metabolic
alterations that promote accumulation of cellular water, fat, and protein,
which are so-called maternal reserves. The average weight gain during
pregnancy approximates 12.5 kg or 27.5 lb, and this value has remained

consistent across studies and over time (Hytten, 1991; Jebeile, 2016). Weight
gain is detailed in Table 4-2 and in Chapter 10 (p. 183) (Hytten, 1991).
TABLE 4-2. Weight Gain Based on Pregnancy-Related Components

■ Water Metabolism
In pregnancy, greater water retention is normal and mediated in part by a
drop in plasma osmolality of 10 mOsm/kg. As shown in Figure 4-2, this
decline develops in early pregnancy and is induced by a reset of osmotic
thresholds for thirst and vasopressin secretion (Lindheimer, 2001). Relaxin
and other hormones are thought to play a role (Conrad, 2013).

FIGURE 4-2 Mean values (black line) ± standard deviations (blue lines) for plasma osmolality
(P osm) measured at weekly intervals in nine women from preconception to 16 weeks. LMP = last
menstrual period; MP = menstrual period. (Redrawn from Davison JM, Dunlop W. Renal
hemodynamics and tubular function normal human pregnancy, Kidney Int 1980 Aug;18(2):152–161.)

Maternal serum osmolality is significantly lower than umbilical arterial
osmolality to favor water transport to the fetus (Moen, 2018). At term, the
water content of the fetus, placenta, and amnionic fluid approximates 3.5 L.
Another 3.0 L accumulates from expanded maternal blood volume and from
uterus and breast growth. Thus, the minimum amount of extra water that the
average woman accrues during normal pregnancy approximates 6.5 L. This
corresponds to almost 15 lb.
Demonstrable pitting edema of the ankles and legs is seen in most
gravidas, especially at the day’s end. This fluid accumulation may amount to
a liter or so. It results from greater venous pressure below the level of the

uterus as a consequence of partial vena cava occlusion. A decline in
interstitial colloid osmotic pressure induced by normal pregnancy also
favors edema late in pregnancy (Øian, 1985).
Longitudinal studies of body composition show a progressive
accumulation of total body water and fat mass during pregnancy. These two
components as well as initial maternal weight and weight gained during
pregnancy are highly associated with neonatal birthweight (Lederman, 1999).
As discussed in Chapter 51 (p. 905), “overnourished” women are more
likely to deliver oversized neonates, even when glucose tolerant.

■ Protein Metabolism
The products of conception, the uterus, and maternal blood are relatively rich
in protein rather than fat or carbohydrate. At term, the normally grown fetus
and placenta together weigh about 4 kg and contain approximately 500 g of
protein, or about half of the total pregnancy increase. The remaining 500 g is
added to the uterus as contractile protein, to the breasts primarily in the
glands, and to maternal blood as hemoglobin and plasma proteins.
Amino acid concentrations are higher in the fetal than in the maternal
compartment and generally result from facilitated transport across the
placenta (Panitchob, 2015). This greater concentration is largely regulated by
the placenta through an incompletely understood process (Chap. 7, p. 136). In
particular, placental transport is variable for individuals and for different
amino acids. For example, tyrosine is a conditionally essential amino acid in
the preterm neonate but not in the fetus (Van den Akker, 2011). The placenta
concentrates amino acids into the fetal circulation and is also involved in
protein synthesis, oxidation, and transamination of some nonessential amino
acids (Galan, 2009).
Maternal protein intake does not appear to be a critical determinant for
birthweight among well-nourished women (Chong, 2015). Still, recent data
suggest that current recommendations for protein intake may be too low.
These guidelines are extrapolated from nonpregnant adults and may
underestimate actual needs. Stephens and colleagues (2015) prospectively
analyzed maternal protein intake and metabolism. They estimated average
requirements of 1.22 g/kg/d of protein for early pregnancy and 1.52 g/kg/d
for late pregnancy. These levels are higher than the current recommendation
of 0.88 g/kg/d. Dietary protein intake is discussed in Chapter 10 (p. 185).

■ Carbohydrate Metabolism
Normal pregnancy is characterized by mild fasting hypoglycemia,
postprandial hyperglycemia, and hyperinsulinemia (Fig. 4-3) (Phelps, 1981).
This elevated basal level of plasma insulin in normal pregnancy is
associated with several unique responses to glucose ingestion. Specifically,
after an oral glucose meal, gravidas demonstrate prolonged hyperglycemia
and hyperinsulinemia and a greater suppression of glucagon. This cannot be
explained by an increased metabolism of insulin because its half-life during
pregnancy is not changed appreciably (Lind, 1977). Instead, this response
reflects a pregnancy-induced state of peripheral insulin resistance, which
ensures a sustained postprandial supply of glucose to the fetus. Indeed,
insulin sensitivity in late normal pregnancy is 30 to 70 percent lower than
that of nonpregnant women (Lowe, 2014).

FIGURE 4-3 Diurnal changes in plasma glucose and insulin in normal late pregnancy.

The mechanisms responsible for this reduced insulin sensitivity include
numerous endocrine and inflammatory factors (Angueira, 2015). In
particular, pregnancy-related hormones such as progesterone, placentally
derived growth hormone, prolactin, and cortisol; cytokines such as tumor
necrosis factor; and hormones derived from central adiposity, particularly
leptin and its interplay with prolactin, all have a role in the insulin resistance
of pregnancy. Even so, insulin resistance is not the only factor to elevate
postprandial glucose values. Hepatic gluconeogenesis is augmented during
both diabetic and nondiabetic pregnancies, particularly in the third trimester
(Angueira, 2015).

When fasting overnight, the pregnant woman changes from a postprandial
state characterized by elevated and sustained glucose levels to a fasting state
characterized by lower levels of plasma glucose and some amino acids.
Instead, plasma concentrations of free fatty acids, triglycerides, and
cholesterol are higher in the fasting state. This pregnancy-induced switch in
fuels from glucose to lipids has been called accelerated starvation.
Certainly, when fasting is prolonged in the pregnant woman, these alterations
are exaggerated and ketonemia rapidly appears.

■ Fat Metabolism
The concentrations of lipids, lipoproteins, and apolipoproteins in plasma
rise appreciably during pregnancy (Appendix, p. 1231). Increased insulin
resistance and estrogen stimulation during pregnancy are responsible for
maternal hyperlipidemia. Augmented lipid synthesis and food intake
contribute to maternal fat accumulation during the first two trimesters.
Overweight women who have excessive gestational weight gain accrue fat
mass (Berggren, 2016). In the third trimester, however, fat storage declines
or ceases. This is a consequence of enhanced lipolytic activity, and
decreased lipoprotein lipase activity reduces circulating triglyceride uptake
into adipose tissue. This transition to a catabolic state favors maternal use of
lipids as an energy source and spares glucose and amino acids for the fetus.
Maternal hyperlipidemia is one of the most consistent and striking
changes of lipid metabolism during late pregnancy. Triacylglycerol and
cholesterol levels in very-low-density lipoproteins (VLDLs), low-density
lipoproteins (LDLs), and high-density lipoproteins (HDLs) are increased
during the third trimester compared with those in nonpregnant women (Table
4-3). After delivery, the concentrations of these lipids, lipoproteins, and
apolipoproteins decline. Breastfeeding drops maternal triglyceride levels but
increases those of HDL cholesterol (HDL-C). The effects on total cholesterol
and LDL cholesterol levels are unclear (Gunderson, 2014).
TABLE 4-3. Plasma Concentrations of Lipids

Hyperlipidemia is theoretically a concern because it is associated with
endothelial dysfunction. That said, endothelium-dependent vasodilation
responses actually improve across pregnancy (Saarelainen, 2006). This is
partly because increased HDL-C concentrations likely inhibit LDL oxidation
and thus protect the endothelium. These findings suggest that the increased
cardiovascular disease risk in multiparas may be related to factors other than
maternal hypercholesterolemia.

■ Leptin
This peptide hormone is primarily secreted by adipose tissue in nonpregnant
humans. It plays a key role in body fat and energy expenditure regulation and
in reproduction. For example, leptin is important for implantation, cell
proliferation, and angiogenesis (Vazquez, 2015). Leptin deficiency is
associated with anovulation and infertility, whereas certain leptin mutations
cause extreme obesity (Tsai, 2015).
Among normal-weight gravidas, serum leptin levels rise and peak during
the second trimester and plateau until term in concentrations two to four
times higher than those in nonpregnant women. Among obese women, leptin
levels correlate with adiposity (Tsai, 2015). In all cases, leptin levels fall
after delivery, reflecting the significant amounts produced by the placenta
(Vazquez, 2015).
Leptin participates in regulating energy metabolism during pregnancy.
Despite the rise in leptin concentrations during pregnancy, reduced leptin

sensitivity to food intake during pregnancy has been described (Chehab,
2014). This “leptin resistance” may serve to promote energy storage during
pregnancy and for later lactation.
Higher leptin levels during pregnancy may be disadvantageous under
certain situations, such as maternal obesity. Leptin functions as a
proinflammatory cytokine in white adipose tissue, which may dysregulate the
inflammatory cascade and lead to placental dysfunction in obese women
(Vazquez, 2015). In addition, abnormally elevated leptin levels have been
associated with preeclampsia, gestational diabetes, and fetal distress
(Rabiepoor, 2019; Taylor, 2015).
Fetal leptin is important for the development of several organs that
include the pancreas, kidney, heart, and brain. Fetal levels correlate with
maternal body mass index and birthweight (Özdemir, 2020). Lower levels
are linked to fetal-growth restriction (Briffa, 2015).

■ Other Adipocytokines
Dozens of hormones with metabolic and/or inflammatory functions are
produced by adipose tissue. Adiponectin is a peptide produced primarily in
maternal fat but not in the placenta (Haghiac, 2014). It may play a role in
early pregnancy to assure a source of glycogen for fetal energy (Duval,
2018). Adiponectin levels inversely correlate with adiposity, and it acts as a
potent insulin sensitizer. Despite reduced adiponectin levels in women with
gestational diabetes, directed assays are not useful for predicting diabetes
development (Hauguel-de Mouzon, 2013).
Ghrelin is a peptide secreted mainly by the stomach in response to
hunger. It cooperates with other neuroendocrine factors, such as leptin, in
energy homeostasis. Ghrelin is also expressed in the placenta and likely has
a role in fetal growth and cell proliferation (González-Domínguez, 2016).
Visfatin is a peptide that was first identified as a growth factor for B
lymphocytes but is mainly produced within adipose tissue. Mumtaz and
associates (2015) propose that elevated levels of visfatin and leptin impair
uterine contractility. Such findings may provide a physiological basis for the
observation that maternal obesity raises the risk for dysfunctional labor.

■ Electrolyte and Mineral Metabolism

During normal pregnancy, nearly 1000 mEq of sodium and 300 mEq of
potassium are retained (Lindheimer, 1987). The glomerular filtration rate of
sodium and potassium is increased, but the excretion of these electrolytes is
unchanged during pregnancy as a result of enhanced tubular resorption
(Brown, 1988). Although total accumulations of sodium and potassium are
elevated, their serum concentrations are diminished slightly (Appendix, p.
1229). Several mechanisms may explain these lower levels (Odutayo, 2012).
In the case of potassium, it possibly involves the expanded plasma volume of
pregnancy. With respect to sodium, osmoregulation is altered, and the
threshold for arginine vasopressin release is lowered. This promotes free
water retention and diminished sodium levels.
Total serum calcium levels, which include both ionized and nonionized
calcium, decrease during pregnancy. This reduction follows lowered plasma
albumin concentrations and in turn a consequent decline in the amount of
circulating protein-bound nonionized calcium. Serum ionized calcium levels,
however, remain unchanged (Olausson, 2012).
The developing fetus imposes a significant demand on maternal calcium
homeostasis. For example, the fetal skeleton accrues approximately 30 g of
calcium by term, 80 percent of which is deposited during the third trimester.
This demand is largely met by a doubling of maternal intestinal calcium
absorption mediated partly by 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3, the serum levels of
which also are doubled. These higher levels of vitamin D are possibly
stimulated by a twofold rise in parathyroid hormone (PTH)-related peptide
levels produced by several tissues including the placenta (Olausson, 2012).
To help compensate, dietary intake of sufficient calcium is necessary to
prevent excess depletion from the mother. A list of all recommended daily
allowances is found in Table 10-5 (p. 184). This is especially important for
pregnant adolescents, in whom bones are still developing (Cullers, 2019).
Unfortunately, a lack of robust data prevents drawing firm conclusions
regarding the utility of calcium and vitamin D supplements during pregnancy
(Bi, 2018; Hofmeyr, 2018).
Serum magnesium levels also decline during pregnancy. Compared with
nonpregnant women, both total and ionized magnesium concentrations are
significantly lower during normal pregnancy (Rylander, 2014).
Serum phosphate levels lie within the nonpregnant range (Larsson,
2008). Although calcitonin is an important regulator of serum calcium and

phosphate, the importance of calcitonin as it relates to pregnancy is poorly
understood (Olausson, 2012).
Iodine requirements increase during normal pregnancy for several
reasons (Moleti, 2014). First, maternal thyroxine (T4) production rises to
maintain maternal euthyroidism and to transfer thyroid hormone to the fetus
prior to fetal thyroid functioning. Second, fetal thyroid hormone production
increases during the second half of pregnancy. This contributes to greater
maternal iodine requirements because iodine readily crosses the placenta.
Third, the primary route of iodine excretion is the kidney. Beginning in early
pregnancy, the iodine glomerular filtration rate increases by 30 to 50 percent.
In sum, because of greater thyroid hormone production, fetal iodine
requirements, and augmented renal clearance, dietary iodine needs are higher
during normal gestation (Velasco, 2018).
Although the placenta has the ability to store iodine, whether this organ
functions to protect the fetus from inadequate maternal dietary iodine is
currently unknown. Iodine deficiency is discussed later in this chapter (p. 72)
and in Chapter 61 (p. 1097). Extremely low or high maternal iodine intake
may affect childhood neurodevelopment (Zhou, 2019). At the extreme,
maternal supplements containing excessive iodine have been associated with
congenital hypothyroidism. This stems from autoregulation in the thyroid
gland—known as the Wolff-Chaikoff effect—to curb T4 production in
response to iodine overconsumption.
The serum levels of many of these minerals are listed in the Appendix (p.
1229). With respect to most other minerals, pregnancy induces little change
in their metabolism other than their retention in amounts equivalent to those
needed for growth. An important exception is the considerably greater
requirement for iron, which is discussed subsequently (Georgieff, 2021).

HEMATOLOGICAL CHANGES
■ Blood Volume
The well-known hypervolemia associated with normal pregnancy averages
40 to 45 percent above the nonpregnant blood volume after 32 to 34 weeks’
gestation (Pritchard, 1965; Zeeman, 2009). In some, accumulated volume
rises only modestly, whereas in others blood volume nearly doubles. A fetus
is not essential, as augmented blood volume develops in some with

hydatidiform mole. The stimulus is not known, but it likely is related to renin
and prorenin with its effects on sodium and water retention (Fu, 2018).
Simultaneously, vascular plasticity accommodates the larger blood volume
(Osol, 2019).
Pregnancy-induced hypervolemia serves several functions. First, it meets
the metabolic demands of the enlarged uterus and its greatly hypertrophied
vascular system. It also provides abundant nutrients and elements to support
the rapidly growing placenta and fetus. The expanded intravascular volume
protects the mother, and in turn the fetus, against the deleterious effects of
impaired venous return in the supine and erect positions. Last, it safeguards
the mother against the adverse effects of parturition-associated blood loss.
Maternal blood volume begins to accrue during the first trimester. By 12
menstrual weeks, plasma volume expands by approximately 15 percent
compared with that prior to pregnancy (Bernstein, 2001). Maternal blood
volume grows most rapidly during the midtrimester, rises at a much slower
rate during the third trimester, and reaches a plateau during the last several
weeks of pregnancy (Fig. 4-4) (Thomsen, 1994). Blood volume accrues even
more dramatically in twin gestations.

FIGURE 4-4 Blood volume expansion during pregnancy in twins (n = 10) and singletons (n = 40). Data
shown as medians.

During blood volume expansion, plasma volume and erythrocyte mass
increase. Although more plasma than erythrocytes is usually added to the
maternal circulation, the increase in erythrocyte volume is considerable and
averages 450 mL (Pritchard, 1960). Moderate erythroid hyperplasia
develops in the bone marrow, and the reticulocyte count is elevated slightly
during normal pregnancy. These changes are almost certainly related to the
rise in maternal plasma erythropoietin levels (Appendix, p. 1227).
Because of great plasma augmentation, both hemoglobin concentration
and hematocrit decline slightly during pregnancy. As a result, whole blood
viscosity decreases (Huisman, 1987). Hemoglobin concentration at term
averages 12.5 g/dL, and in approximately 5 percent of women it is below
11.0 g/dL. Thus, a concentration <11.0 g/dL, especially late in pregnancy, is
considered abnormal and usually due to iron-deficiency anemia rather than
pregnancy hypervolemia (Chap. 59, p. 1049).

■ Iron Metabolism
The total iron content of normal adult women ranges from 2.0 to 2.5 g, or
approximately half that found normally in men. Most of this is incorporated
in hemoglobin or myoglobin, and thus iron stores of normal young women
approximate only 300 mg (Pritchard, 1964). Although the lower iron levels
in women may be partly due to menstrual blood loss, other factors have a
role. One is hepcidin—a peptide hormone that functions as a homeostatic
regulator of systemic iron metabolism (Fisher, 2017). As shown in Figure 45, hepcidin levels drop early in pregnancy (Hedengran, 2016a,b). Lower
hepcidin levels are associated with greater absorption of iron via ferroportin
in enterocytes (Camaschella, 2015). Lower hepcidin levels also augment
iron transport into the fetus via ferroportin in syncytiotrophoblast. Hepcidin
levels rise with inflammation, but drop with iron deficiency and increased
amount of several hormones, including testosterone, estrogen, vitamin D, and
possibly prolactin (Liu, 2016).

FIGURE 4-5 Hepcidin levels during pregnancy. Blue data points are median values and crossbars are
the 25th and 75th percentiles. D is delivery and D + 1 and D + 2 are postpartum days 1 and 2.

Of the approximate 1000 mg of iron required for normal pregnancy, about
300 mg is actively transferred to the fetus and placenta, and another 200 mg
is lost through various normal excretion routes, primarily the gastrointestinal
tract. These are obligatory losses and accrue even when the mother is iron
deficient. The average increase in the total circulating erythrocyte volume—
about 450 mL—requires another 500 mg. Recall that each 1 mL of
erythrocytes contains 1.1 mg of iron.
As shown in Figure 4-6, most iron is used during the latter half of
pregnancy (Koenig, 2014). Thus, the iron requirement becomes large after
midpregnancy and averages 6 to 7 mg/d (Pritchard, 1970). In most women,
this amount is usually not available from iron stores or diet. If the nonanemic
pregnant woman is not given supplemental iron, serum iron and ferritin
concentrations decline after midpregnancy. Moreover, the optimal rise in
maternal erythrocyte volume will not develop, and the hemoglobin
concentration and hematocrit will fall appreciably as plasma volume rises.
At the same time, fetal red cell production is not impaired because the
placenta transfers iron even if the mother has marked iron-deficiency anemia.
In severe cases, we have documented maternal hemoglobin values of 3 g/dL,
and at the same time, fetuses had hemoglobin concentrations of 16 g/dL. The
mechanisms of placental iron transport and regulation are complex (Koenig,
2014; McArdle, 2014).

FIGURE 4-6 Estimated daily iron requirements during pregnancy in a 55-kg woman.

With normal vaginal delivery, at least 500 to 600 mL of blood is
typically lost, and thus not all the maternal iron added in the form of
hemoglobin is spent. The excess hemoglobin iron postpartum becomes stored
iron.

■ Immunological Functions
Pregnancy is associated with suppression of various humoral and cellmediated immunological functions (Chap. 5, p. 93). This permits
accommodation of the “foreign” semiallogeneic fetal graft that contains
antigens of both maternal and paternal origin (Redman, 2015). The tolerance
that exists at the maternal-fetal interface remains a great unsolved medical
mystery. This tolerance is complex and involves certain immune system
adaptations and crosstalk among the maternal microbiome, uterine decidua,
and trophoblast. In particular, areas of the uterus that were previously
considered sterile are colonized with bacteria. In most cases, these microbes
are believed to be commensal and play a tolerizing and protective role.
Indeed, commensal organisms may inhibit the proliferation of certain
pathogens. Several reviewers have described these relationships (Mor,
2015; Racicot, 2014; Sisti, 2016).

One immune adaptation that promotes tolerance and protection at the
maternal-fetal interface involves the expression of special major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules on the trophoblast. Another
immune adaptation that promotes tolerance stems from important changes in
CD4 T lymphocyte subpopulations in pregnancy. Specifically, immunity
mediated by T-helper (Th) 1 cells shifts to Th2-mediated immunity. An
important antiinflammatory component of pregnancy involves suppression of
Th1 and T-cytotoxic (Tc) 1 cells, which lower secretion of interleukin 2 (IL2), interferon α, and tumor necrosis factor (TNF).
In cervical mucus, peak levels of immunoglobulins A and G (IgA and
IgG) are significantly higher during pregnancy, and the immunoglobulin-rich
cervical mucus plug creates a barrier to ascending infection (Hansen, 2014;
Wang, 2014). Similarly, IgG is transferred to the developing fetus in the third
trimester as a form of passive immunity, ostensibly in anticipation of birth.
Immunoglobulins secreted into breast milk during lactation augment neonatal
defenses against infection (Chap. 36, p. 640).

■ Leukocytes and Lymphocytes
Normal leukocyte counts during pregnancy can be higher than nonpregnant
values, and upper values approach 15,000/μL (Appendix, p. 1227). During
labor and the early puerperium, values may markedly rise to attain levels
≥25,000/μL (Gat, 2019). The cause is unknown, but the same response
occurs during and after strenuous exercise. The leukocytosis possibly
represents the reappearance of leukocytes previously shunted out of active
circulation.
The distribution of lymphocyte cell types also is altered during
pregnancy. Specifically, B lymphocytes numbers are unchanged, but the
absolute numbers of T lymphocytes rise and create a relative increase.
Concurrently, the ratio of CD4 to CD8 T lymphocytes does not change
(Kühnert, 1998).

■ Inflammatory Markers
Many tests performed to diagnose inflammation cannot be used reliably
during pregnancy. For example, leukocyte alkaline phosphatase levels—
used to evaluate myeloproliferative disorders—are elevated beginning early

in pregnancy. The concentration of C-reactive protein, an acute-phase serum
reactant, rises rapidly in response to tissue trauma or inflammation. Median
C-reactive protein levels in pregnancy and labor are higher than for
nonpregnant women (Anderson, 2013). Of nonlaboring gravidas, 95 percent
had levels measuring ≤1.5 mg/dL, and gestational age did not affect serum
levels.
Another marker of inflammation, the erythrocyte sedimentation rate
(ESR), is increased in normal pregnancy because of elevated plasma globulin
and fibrinogen concentrations. Complement factors C3 and C4 levels also
significantly rise during the second and third trimesters (Richani, 2005).
Concentrations of procalcitonin, a normal precursor of calcitonin, are low to
undetectable in midpregnancy but increase at the end of the third trimester
and through the first few postpartum days (Bilinski, 2018). Procalcitonin
levels rise with severe bacterial infections but remain low in viral infections
and nonspecific inflammatory disease. However, measured levels poorly
predict development of overt or subclinical chorioamnionitis after premature
rupture of membranes (Thornburg, 2016; Tujula, 2018).

■ Coagulation and Fibrinolysis
During normal pregnancy, both coagulation and fibrinolysis are augmented
but remain balanced to maintain hemostasis (Kenny, 2015). Evidence of
activation includes increased concentrations of all clotting factors except
factors XI and XIII (Table 4-4) (Cunningham, 2015).
TABLE 4-4. Coagulation Factor Normal Values Across Pregnancy

Of procoagulants, the level and rate of thrombin generation throughout
gestation progressively increase (McLean, 2012). In normal nonpregnant
women, plasma fibrinogen (factor I) averages 300 mg/dL and ranges from
200 to 400 mg/dL. During normal pregnancy, the fibrinogen concentration
rises approximately 50 percent. In late pregnancy, it averages 450 mg/dL,
with a range from 300 to 600 mg/dL. As discussed, this contributes greatly to
the striking elevation in the erythrocyte sedimentation rate. Also, levels of
factor XIII—fibrin stabilizing factor—significantly drop as normal
pregnancy advances (Sharief, 2014). Few studies describe
thromboelastographic changes in normal pregnancy (Murray, 2018).
The end product of the coagulation cascade is fibrin formation, and the
main function of the fibrinolytic system is to remove excess fibrin. Tissue
plasminogen activator (tPA) converts plasminogen into plasmin, which is the
enzyme that promotes fibrinolysis. It yields fibrin-degradation products such
as D-dimers, and levels of these are increased in pregnancy (Hedengran,
2016b). Although somewhat conflicting, most evidence suggests that
fibrinolytic activity is reduced in normal pregnancy (Kenny, 2015). As
reviewed by Cunningham and Nelson (2015), these changes favor fibrin
formation. Although this is countered by increased levels of plasminogen, the
net result is that pregnancy is a procoagulant state. Amnionic fluid is a potent
activation of coagulation (Oda, 2018). Such changes serve to ensure
hemostatic control during pregnancy, particularly during delivery when a
certain amount of blood loss is expected.

■ Regulatory Proteins
Several proteins are natural inhibitors of coagulation, including proteins C
and S and antithrombin. Inherited or acquired deficiencies of these and other
natural regulatory proteins—collectively referred to as thrombophilias—
account for many thromboembolic episodes during pregnancy. They are
discussed in Chapter 55 (p. 976).
Activated protein C, along with the cofactors protein S and factor V,
functions as an anticoagulant by neutralizing the procoagulants factor Va and
factor VIIIa. During pregnancy, resistance to activated protein C grows
progressively and is related to a concomitant drop in free protein S levels
and greater factor VIII concentrations. Between the first and third trimesters,
activated protein C levels decline from 2.4 to 1.9 U/mL, and free protein S

concentrations diminish from 0.4 to 0.16 U/mL (Cunningham, 2015; Walker,
1997). Antithrombin levels drop by 13 percent between midpregnancy and
term and fall 30 percent from this baseline until 12 hours after delivery. By
72 hours after delivery, there is a return to baseline (James, 2014).

■ Platelets
In a study of more than 7000 women, and as shown in Figure 4-7, the average
platelet count declined across pregnancy and returned to normal nonpregnant
values by 4 to 12 weeks postpartum (Reese, 2018). The platelet counts were
lower for twin pregnancies. Lower platelet concentrations are partially due
to hemodilution. In addition, platelet consumption is likely augmented and
creates a greater proportion of younger and therefore larger platelets (Han,
2014). Further, clinically insignificant levels of several markers of platelet
activation rise with gestational age but drop postpartum (Blomqvist, 2018).
Because of splenic enlargement, an element of “hypersplenism,” may
sequester and prematurely destroy platelets (Kenny, 2015).

FIGURE 4-7 Platelet counts in singleton and twin pregnancies determined during 1st, 2nd, and 3rd
trimester, at delivery, and then at 4–12 weeks postpartum. NP = nonpregnant. Values are means and
95% confidence intervals.

■ Spleen
By the end of normal pregnancy, the spleen enlarges up to 50 percent
compared with that in the first trimester (Maymon, 2007). Moreover, Gayer
and coworkers (2012) found that splenic size was 68-percent greater

compared with that of nonpregnant controls. The cause of this splenomegaly
is unknown, but it might follow the increased blood volume and/or the
hemodynamic changes of pregnancy.

CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM
Changes in cardiac function become apparent during the first 8 weeks of
pregnancy (Hibbard, 2015). Cardiac output is increased as early as the fifth
week and reflects a reduced systemic vascular resistance and an increased
heart rate. Compared with prepregnancy measurements, brachial systolic
blood pressure, diastolic blood pressure, and central systolic blood pressure
are all significantly lower 6 to 7 weeks from the last menstrual period
(Mahendru, 2012). The resting pulse rate rises approximately 10 beats/min
during pregnancy. Nelson and associates (2015) found that for both normal
and overweight women, heart rate rose significantly between 12 and 16
weeks’ and between 32 and 36 weeks’ gestation. Between weeks 10 and 20,
plasma volume expansion begins, and preload rises. This augmented preload
results in a significantly larger left atrial volume and ejection fraction (Cong,
2015).
Ventricular performance during pregnancy is influenced by both the
decline in systemic vascular resistance and changes in pulsatile arterial flow.
Multiple factors contribute to this overall altered hemodynamic function,
which allows the physiological demands of the fetus to be met while
maintaining maternal cardiovascular integrity (Hibbard, 2015). These
changes in stroke volume during the last half of pregnancy and the effects of
maternal posture are summarized in Figure 4-8 (Nelson, 2015). Bijl and
colleagues (2019) offer a detailed review of methods to measure cardiac
function in gravidas.

FIGURE 4-8 Left ventricular stroke volume across pregnancy compared with 12-week postpartum
(nonpregnant) values for normal-weight women in the supine and lateral positions.

■ Heart
As the diaphragm becomes progressively elevated, the heart is displaced to
the left and upward and is rotated on its long axis. As a result, the apex is
moved somewhat laterally from its usual position and produces a larger
cardiac silhouette in chest radiographs. Furthermore, gravidas normally have
some degree of benign pericardial effusion, which may enlarge the cardiac
silhouette (Enein, 1987). These factors make it difficult to precisely identify
moderate degrees of cardiomegaly by simple radiographic studies.
Normal pregnancy induces some characteristic electrocardiographic
(ECG) changes, and the most common is slight left-axis deviation due to the
altered heart position. Q waves in leads II, III, and avF and flat or inverted T
waves in leads III and V1–V3 also may be seen (Sunitha, 2014).
During pregnancy, many of the normal cardiac sounds are modified.
These include: (1) an exaggerated splitting of the first heart sound and
increased loudness of both components, (2) no definite changes in the aortic
and pulmonary elements of the second sound, and (3) a loud, easily heard
third sound (Cutforth, 1966). In most gravidas, a systolic murmur is
intensified during inspiration in some or with expiration in others. Less often,
a soft diastolic murmur can be noted transiently, and continuous murmurs
arising from the breast vasculature may be heard (Fig. 52-1, p. 917).

Structurally, the expanding plasma volume seen during normal pregnancy
is reflected by enlarging cardiac end-systolic and end-diastolic dimensions.
Concurrently, however, septal thickness or ejection fraction does not change.
This is because these dimensional changes are accompanied by substantive
ventricular remodeling, which is characterized by left-ventricular mass
expansion of 30 to 35 percent near term. In the nonpregnant state, the heart is
capable of remodeling in response to stimuli such as hypertension and
exercise. Such cardiac plasticity likely is a continuum that encompasses
physiological growth as with exercise, and pathological hypertrophy as with
hypertension (Hill, 2008; Osol, 2019).
Stewart and colleagues (2016) used cardiac MR imaging to
prospectively evaluate cardiac remodeling during pregnancy. Compared with
the first trimester, left ventricular mass significantly grew beginning at 26 to
30 weeks’ gestation, and this continued until delivery (Fig. 4-9) (Stewart,
2016). This remodeling is concentric and proportional to maternal size for
both normal and overweight women and resolved within 3 months of
delivery. Certainly for clinical purposes, ventricular function during
pregnancy is normal, as estimated by the Braunwald ventricular function
graph (Fig. 4-10) (Clark, 1989). For the given filling pressures, cardiac
output is appropriate and thus cardiac function during pregnancy is
eudynamic. Of the metabolic changes that occur in the heart during pregnancy,
the efficiency of cardiac work—which is the product of cardiac output ×
mean arterial pressure—is estimated to rise by approximately 25 percent.
The associated increase in oxygen consumption is primarily accomplished
via increased coronary blood flow rather than increased extraction (Liu,
2014).

FIGURE 4-9 Left ventricular mass of normal-weight and overweight women across pregnancy
compared with 12-week postpartum (nonpregnant) values.

FIGURE 4-10 Relationship between left ventricular stroke work index (LVSWI), cardiac output, and
pulmonary capillary wedge pressure (PCWP) in 10 normal pregnant women in the third trimester.

■ Cardiac Output
When measured in the lateral recumbent position at rest, cardiac output
increases significantly beginning in early pregnancy. It continues to rise and
remains elevated during the remainder. In a supine woman, a large uterus
consistently compresses veins and diminishes venous return from the lower
body. It may also compress the aorta. In response, cardiac filling is limited,
and cardiac output lessened. Specifically, cardiac MR imaging shows that a
woman rolling from her back onto her left side raises her cardiac output at 26
to 30 weeks’ gestation by approximately 20 percent and at 32 to 34 weeks by
10 percent (see Fig. 4-7). Consistent with this, Simpson and James (2005)
found that fetal oxygen saturation is approximately 10 percent higher if a
laboring woman lies in a lateral recumbent position compared with supine.
Upon standing, cardiac output falls to the same degree as in the nonpregnant
woman (Easterling, 1988).
In multifetal pregnancies, compared with singletons, maternal cardiac
output is augmented further by almost another 20 percent. Ghi and coworkers
(2015) used transthoracic echocardiography to show that first-trimester
cardiac output with twins (mean 5.5 L/min) was more than 20 percent greater
than postpartum values. Cardiac output values in the second (6.3 L/min) and
third (6.3 L/min) trimesters rose an additional 15 percent compared with
first-trimester output. Due to augmented preload, left atrial and left
ventricular end-diastolic diameters also grow with twins (Orabona, 2021).
The augmented heart rate and inotropic contractility imply that
cardiovascular reserve is reduced in multifetal gestations (Orabona, 2019).
During first-stage labor, cardiac output rises moderately. During the
second stage, with vigorous expulsive efforts, it is appreciably greater. The
pregnancy-induced increase is lost after delivery, at times dependent on
blood loss.

■ Hemodynamic Function in Late Pregnancy
Clark and associates (1989) conducted invasive studies to measure
hemodynamic function late in pregnancy (Table 4-5). Right heart

catheterization was performed in 10 healthy nulliparas at 35 to 38 weeks’
gestation, and again at 11 to 13 weeks postpartum. Late pregnancy was
associated with the expected increases in heart rate, stroke volume, and
cardiac output. Systemic vascular and pulmonary vascular resistance both
dropped significantly, as did colloid osmotic pressure. Pulmonary capillary
wedge pressure and central venous pressure did not change appreciably.
Thus, although cardiac output rises, left ventricular function as measured by
stroke work index remains similar to the nonpregnant normal range (see Fig.
4-10). Put another way, normal pregnancy is not a continuous “high-output”
state (Herrera, 2018).
TABLE 4-5. Central Hemodynamic Changes in 10 Normal Nulliparous
Women Near Term and Postpartum

■ Circulation and Blood Pressure
Arterial pressure usually declines to a nadir at 24 to 26 weeks’ gestation and
rises thereafter. Diastolic pressure decreases more than systolic. Changes in
posture affect arterial blood pressure (Fig. 4-11) (Wilson, 1980). Brachial
artery pressure when sitting is lower than that when in the lateral recumbent
supine position (Bamber, 2003). Additionally, systolic blood pressure is
lower in the lateral positions compared with either the flexed sitting or

supine positions (Armstrong, 2011). In approximately 10 percent of women,
supine compression of the great vessels by the uterus causes significant
arterial hypotension, sometimes referred to as the supine hypotensive
syndrome. Also when supine, uterine arterial pressure—and thus uterine
blood flow—is significantly lower than that in the brachial artery. Evidence
to support whether this directly affects fetal heart rate patterns in
uncomplicated low-risk pregnancies is conflicting (Armstrong, 2011;
Ibrahim, 2015). Similar changes can also be seen with hemorrhage or with
spinal analgesia.

FIGURE 4-11 Sequential changes (± SEM) in blood pressure throughout pregnancy in 69 women in
supine (blue lines) and left lateral recumbent positions (red lines). PP = postpartum.

Studies have assessed vascular compliance before pregnancy, during
pregnancy, and postpartum (Morris, 2015; Osman, 2017). Compared with
healthy nonpregnant controls, significant declines in mean arterial pressure
and arterial stiffness were observed between prepregnant and postpartum
time periods. These findings suggest that pregnancy confers a favorable
effect on maternal cardiovascular remodeling.

The venous system is a high-flow, low-resistance circulation during
pregnancy (Gyselaers, 2018). While antecubital venous pressure remains
unchanged, in the supine position, femoral venous pressure rises steadily,
from approximately 8 mm Hg early in pregnancy to 24 mm Hg at term.
Venous blood flow in the legs is retarded except when the lateral recumbent
position is assumed. This tendency toward blood stagnation in the lower
extremities during later pregnancy is attributable to occlusion of the pelvic
veins and inferior vena cava by the enlarged uterus. The elevated venous
pressure returns to normal when the pregnant woman lies on her side and
immediately after delivery. These alterations contribute to the dependent
edema frequently experienced and to development of hemorrhoids and
varicose veins in the legs and vulva. These changes also predispose to deepvein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism.

■ Renin, Angiotensin II, and Plasma Volume
The renin-angiotensin-aldosterone axis is intimately involved in blood
pressure control via sodium and water balance. All components of this
system show increased levels in normal pregnancy. Renin is produced by
both the maternal kidney and the placenta, and greater amounts of renin
substrate (angiotensinogen) are produced by both maternal and fetal liver.
Elevated angiotensinogen levels result, in part, from augmented estrogen
production during normal pregnancy and are important in first-trimester
blood pressure maintenance (West, 2016).
Gant and associates (1973) reported that nulliparas who remained
normotensive became and stayed refractory to the pressor effects of infused
angiotensin II. Conversely, those who ultimately became hypertensive
developed, but then lost, this refractoriness. The diminished vascular
responsiveness to angiotensin II may be progesterone related. Placental
growth factor (PlGF) also blunts this response (Espinoza, 2019). Normally,
pregnant women lose their acquired vascular refractoriness to angiotensin II
within 15 to 30 minutes after the placenta is delivered. Large amounts of
intramuscular progesterone given during late labor delay this diminishing
responsiveness.

■ Cardiac Natriuretic Peptides

At least two species of these—atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) and brain
natriuretic peptide (BNP)—are secreted by cardiomyocytes in response to
chamber-wall stretching. These peptides regulate blood volume by
provoking natriuresis, diuresis, and vascular smooth-muscle relaxation. In
nonpregnant and pregnant patients, levels of BNP and of amino-terminal pro–
brain natriuretic peptide (Nt pro-BNP), as well as newer analytes such as
suppressor of tumorigenicity 2 (ST2), may be useful in screening for
depressed left ventricular systolic function and determining chronic heart
failure prognosis (Cunningham, 2019; Ker, 2018).
During normal pregnancy, plasma ANP and BNP levels are maintained in
the nonpregnant range despite greater plasma volume (Yurteri-Kaplan, 2012).
In one study, median BNP levels were stable across pregnancy with values
<20 pg/mL (Resnik, 2005). BNP levels are elevated in severe preeclampsia,
and this may be caused by cardiac strain from increased afterload. It would
appear that ANP-induced physiological adaptations participate in
extracellular fluid volume expansion and in the elevated plasma aldosterone
concentrations characteristic of normal pregnancy.

■ Prostaglandins
Elevated prostaglandin production during pregnancy is thought to have a
central role in control of vascular tone, blood pressure, and sodium balance.
Renal medullary prostaglandin E2 synthesis is markedly elevated during late
pregnancy and is presumed to be natriuretic. Levels of prostacyclin (PGI2),
the principal prostaglandin of endothelium, also rise during late pregnancy.
PGI2 regulates blood pressure and platelet function. It helps maintain
vasodilation during pregnancy, and its deficiency is associated with
pathological vasoconstriction (Shah, 2015). The ratio of PGI2 to
thromboxane in maternal urine and blood may be important indicators of
preeclampsia pathogenesis.

■ Endothelin
Pregnancy generates several endothelins, which are vasoconstricting
peptides. Endothelin-1 is a potent vasoconstrictor produced in endothelial
and vascular smooth muscle cells and regulates local vasomotor tone

(Lankhorst, 2016). Its production is stimulated by angiotensin II, arginine
vasopressin, and thrombin. Endothelins, in turn, stimulate secretion of ANP,
aldosterone, and catecholamines. Vascular sensitivity to endothelin 1 is not
altered during normal pregnancy. Pathologically elevated levels may play a
role in preeclampsia (Saleh, 2016).

■ Nitric Oxide
This potent vasodilator is released by endothelial cells and may modify
vascular resistance during pregnancy. As discussed earlier (p. 52), nitric
oxide is an important mediator of placental vascular tone and development
(West, 2016). Abnormal nitric oxide synthesis has been linked to
preeclampsia (Laskowska, 2015; Vignini, 2016).

RESPIRATORY TRACT
Of anatomical changes, the diaphragm rises approximately 4 cm during
pregnancy (Fig. 4-12). The subcostal angle widens appreciably as the
transverse diameter of the thoracic cage lengthens approximately 2 cm. The
thoracic circumference increases about 6 cm, but not sufficiently to prevent
reduced residual lung volumes created by the elevated diaphragm. Even so,
diaphragmatic excursion is greater in pregnancy. Dyspnea is common
(Rudder, 2021).

FIGURE 4-12 Chest wall measurements in nonpregnant (left) and pregnant women (right). The
subcostal angle increases, as does the anteroposterior and transverse diameters of the chest wall and
chest wall circumference. These changes compensate for the 4-cm elevation of the diaphragm so that
total lung capacity is not significantly reduced. (Redrawn from Hegewald MJ, Crapo RO. Respiratory
physiology in pregnancy, Clin Chest Med 2011 Mar;32(1):1–13.)

■ Pulmonary Function
Of physiological lung changes, functional residual capacity (FRC)
decreases by approximately 20 to 30 percent or 400 to 700 mL during

pregnancy (Fig. 4-13). This capacity is composed of expiratory reserve
volume—which drops 15 to 20 percent or 200 to 300 mL—and residual
volume—which decreases 20 to 25 percent or 200 to 400 mL. FRC and
residual volume decline progressively across pregnancy due to diaphragm
elevation. Significant reductions are observed by the sixth month.
Inspiratory capacity, the maximum volume that can be inhaled from FRC,
rises by 5 to 10 percent or 200 to 350 mL during pregnancy. Total lung
capacity—the combination of FRC and inspiratory capacity—is unchanged
or declines by <5 percent at term (Hegewald, 2011).

FIGURE 4-13 Changes in lung volumes with pregnancy. The most significant changes are reduction in
functional residual capacity (FRC) and its subcomponents, expiratory reserve volume (ERV) and
residual volume (RV), as well as increases in inspiratory capacity (IC) and tidal volume (VT).
(Reproduced with permission from Hegewald MJ, Crapo RO. Respiratory physiology in pregnancy, Clin
Chest Med 2011 Mar;32(1):1–13.)

The respiratory rate is essentially unchanged, but tidal volume and
resting minute ventilation increase significantly as pregnancy advances.
Kolarzyk and coworkers (2005) reported significantly greater mean tidal
volumes—0.66 to 0.8 L/min—and resting minute ventilations—10.7 to 14.1
L/min—compared with those of nonpregnant women. The elevated minute
ventilation is caused by several factors. These include enhanced respiratory
drive primarily due to the stimulatory action of progesterone, low expiratory
reserve volume, and compensated respiratory alkalosis (Heenan, 2003).
Also, decreased plasma osmolality can result in less respiratory depression
(Moen, 2014).

Regarding pulmonary function, peak expiratory flow rates rise
progressively as gestation advances (Grindheim, 2012). Lung compliance is
unaffected by pregnancy. Airway conductance is increased and total
pulmonary resistance reduced, possibly as a result of progesterone. The
maximum breathing capacity and forced or timed vital capacity are not
altered appreciably. It is unclear whether the critical closing volume—the
lung volume at which airways in the dependent parts of the lung begin to
close during expiration—is higher in pregnancy (Hegewald, 2011).
Pulmonary function with a singleton pregnancy does not significantly differ
from that with twins (Siddiqui, 2014). Importantly, the greater oxygen
requirements and perhaps the increased critical closing volume imposed by
pregnancy make respiratory diseases more serious.
Demir and colleagues (2015) studied nasal physiology in 85 pregnant
women. Although the minimal cross-sectional area decreased between the
first and third trimesters, subjective reports of nasal congestion or total nasal
resistance did not significantly differ among trimesters or compared with
nonpregnant controls.

■ Oxygen Delivery
The amount of oxygen delivered into the lungs by the increased tidal volume
clearly exceeds oxygen requirements imposed by pregnancy. Moreover, the
total hemoglobin mass and, in turn, total oxygen-carrying capacity rise
appreciably during normal pregnancy, as does cardiac output. Consequently,
the maternal arteriovenous oxygen difference is diminished. Oxygen
consumption grows approximately 20 percent during pregnancy, and it is
approximately 10 percent higher in multifetal gestations (Ajjimaporn, 2014).
During labor, oxygen consumption increases 40 to 60 percent (Bobrowski,
2010).

■ Acid–Base Equilibrium
A greater awareness of a desire to breathe is common even early in
pregnancy (Milne, 1978). This may be interpreted as dyspnea, which may
suggest pulmonary or cardiac abnormalities when none exist. This
physiological dyspnea, which should not interfere with normal physical
activity, is thought to result from greater tidal volume that lowers the partial

pressure of carbon dioxide (CO2) in blood (PaCO2) slightly and
paradoxically causes dyspnea. The increased respiratory effort during
pregnancy, and in turn the reduction in the PaCO2, is likely induced in large
part by progesterone and to a lesser degree by estrogen. Progesterone acts
centrally. Here, it lowers the threshold and raises the sensitivity of the
chemoreflex response to carbon dioxide (Jensen, 2005).
To compensate for the resulting respiratory alkalosis, plasma bicarbonate
levels normally drop from 26 to 22 mmol/L. Although blood pH is increased
only minimally, it does shift the oxygen dissociation curve to the left. This
shift increases the affinity of maternal hemoglobin for oxygen—the Bohr
effect—thereby lowering the oxygen-releasing capacity of maternal blood.
This is offset because the slight pH rise also stimulates an increase in 2,3diphosphoglycerate in maternal erythrocytes. This shifts the curve back to the
right (Tsai, 1982). Thus, reduced PaCO2 from maternal hyperventilation aids
CO2 (waste) transfer from the fetus to the mother while also aiding oxygen
release to the fetus.

URINARY SYSTEM
■ Kidney
The urinary system undergoes several remarkable changes in pregnancy
(Table 4-6) (Lindheimer, 2000). Kidney size grows approximately 1.0 cm
(Cietak, 1985). Both the glomerular filtration rate (GFR) and renal plasma
flow increase early in pregnancy. The GFR rises as much as 25 percent by
the second week after conception and 50 percent by the beginning of the
second trimester (Fig. 4-14) (Lopes van Balen, 2019). This hyperfiltration
results from two principal factors. First, hypervolemia-induced hemodilution
lowers the protein concentration and oncotic pressure of plasma entering the
glomerular microcirculation. Second, renal plasma flow rises by
approximately 80 percent before the end of the first trimester (Conrad, 2015;
Lopes van Balen, 2019). Elevated GFR persists until term, even though renal
plasma flow declines during late pregnancy. Primarily as a consequence of
this elevated GFR, approximately 60 percent of nulliparas during the third
trimester experience urinary frequency, and 80 percent experience nocturia
(Frederice, 2013).

TABLE 4-6. Renal Changes in Normal Pregnancy

FIGURE 4-14 Glomerular filtration rate across pregnancy as measured by inulin clearance. The solid
line is the 50th percentile and the dashed lines are the 5th and 95th percentiles.

During the puerperium, a marked GFR persists during the first postpartum
day, principally from the reduced glomerular capillary oncotic pressure. The
gestational hypervolemia and hemodilution, still evident on the first
postpartum day, resolves by the second week postpartum.
Studies suggest that relaxin, discussed earlier (p. 54), may mediate both
increased GFR and renal blood flow during pregnancy (Conrad, 2015).
Relaxin boosts renal nitric oxide production, which leads to renal
vasodilation and lowered renal afferent and efferent arteriolar resistance.
This augments renal blood flow and GFR (Bramham, 2016). Relaxin may
also increase vascular gelatinase activity during pregnancy, which leads to
renal vasodilation, glomerular hyperfiltration, and reduced myogenic
reactivity of small renal arteries (Odutayo, 2012).
As with blood pressure, maternal posture may considerably influence
several aspects of renal function. Late in pregnancy, the sodium excretion
rate in the supine position averages less than half that in the lateral recumbent
position. The effects of posture on GFR and renal plasma flow vary.
One unusual feature of the pregnancy-induced changes in renal excretion
is the remarkably higher amounts of some nutrients lost in the urine. Amino
acids and water-soluble vitamins are excreted in much greater amounts
(Shibata, 2013).

■ Renal Function Tests
The mean nonpregnancy serum creatinine level of 0.7 mg/dL declines during
normal pregnancy to 0.5 mg/dL. Values ≥0.9 mg/dL suggest underlying
renal disease and prompt further evaluation. Creatinine clearance in
pregnancy averages 30 percent higher than the 100 to 115 mL/min in
nonpregnant women. This is a useful test to estimate renal function, provided
that complete urine collection is made during an accurately timed period. If
this is not done precisely, results are misleading (Lindheimer, 2010). During
the day, pregnant women tend to accumulate water as dependent edema.
When recumbent at night, they mobilize this fluid with diuresis. This reversal
of the usual nonpregnant diurnal pattern of urinary flow causes nocturia, and
urine is more dilute than in nonpregnant women. Failure of a pregnant woman
to excrete concentrated urine after withholding fluids for approximately 18
hours does not necessarily signify renal damage. In fact, the kidneys in these

circumstances function perfectly normally by excreting mobilized
extracellular fluid of relatively low osmolality.

■ Urinalysis
Glucosuria during pregnancy may not be abnormal. The appreciably
increased GFR, together with impaired tubular reabsorptive capacity for
filtered glucose, accounts for most cases of glucosuria. Chesley (1963)
calculated that approximately one sixth of gravidas will spill glucose in the
urine. As discussed in Chapter 56 (p. 994), although the sensitivity is low,
glucosuria may be an indicator of gestational diabetes mellitus. For women
with glucosuria, no guidelines in the United States direct practice, but in the
United Kingdom, early oral glucose testing is considered for those with an
isolated 2+ or repetitive 1+ urine dipstick readings (National Institute for
Health And Clinical Excellence, 2015).
Hematuria most often suggests urinary tract disease or infection.
Evaluation of this finding is outlined in Chapter 56 (p. 995). Hematuria is
common after difficult labor and delivery because of trauma to the bladder
and urethra.
Proteinuria is typically defined in nonpregnant subjects as a protein
excretion rate of more than 150 mg/d. Because of the aforementioned
hyperfiltration and possible reduction of tubular reabsorption, proteinuria
during pregnancy is usually considered significant once a protein excretion
threshold of at least 300 mg/d is reached (Odutayo, 2012). Higby and
coworkers (1994) measured protein excretion in 270 normal women
throughout pregnancy (Fig. 4-15). Mean 24-hour excretion for all three
trimesters was 115 mg, and the upper 95-percent confidence limit was 260
mg/d without significant differences by trimester. They showed that albumin
excretion is minimal and ranges from 5 to 30 mg/d. Proteinuria increases
with gestational age, which corresponds with the peak in GFR (Benzing,
2021).

FIGURE 4-15 Scatter plot of women showing 24-hour urinary total protein excretion by gestational
age. Mean and 95-percent confidence limits are outlined. (Modified with permission from Higby K,
Suiter CR, Phelps JY, et al: Normal values of urinary albumin and total protein excretion during
pregnancy, Am J Obstet Gynecol 1994 Oct;171(4):984–989.)

Measuring Urine Protein
The three most commonly employed approaches for assessing proteinuria are
the qualitative classic dipstick, the quantitative 24-hour collection, and the
albumin/creatinine or protein/creatinine ratio of a single voided urine
specimen. The pitfalls of each approach have been reviewed (Bramham,
2016; Conrad, 2015).
With dipstick assessment, the principal problem is its failure to account
for renal concentration or dilution of urine. For example, with polyuria and
extremely dilute urine, a negative or trace dipstick could actually be
associated with excessive protein excretion.
The 24-hour urine collection is affected by urinary tract dilation,
discussed in the next section. The dilated tract may lead to errors related
both to retention—hundreds of milliliters of urine remaining in the dilated
tract—and to timing—the remaining urine may have formed hours before the
collection. To minimize these pitfalls, the patient is first hydrated and
positioned in lateral recumbency—the definitive nonobstructive posture—for
45 to 60 minutes. After this, she is asked to void, and this specimen is

discarded. Immediately following this void, her 24-hour collection begins.
During the final hour of collection, the patient is again placed in the lateral
recumbent position. But, at the end of this hour, the final collected urine is
incorporated into the total collected volume (Lindheimer, 2010).
Last, the protein:creatinine ratio is a promising approach because data
can be obtained quickly and collection errors are avoided.
Disadvantageously, the amount of protein per unit of creatinine excreted
during a 24-hour period is not constant, and the thresholds to define abnormal
vary. Nomograms for urinary microalbumin and creatinine ratios during
uncomplicated pregnancies have been developed. The ratio is unreliable
postpartum (Aziz, 2018).

■ Ureters
After the uterus completely rises out of the pelvis, it rests on the ureters. This
laterally displaces and compresses them at the pelvic brim. Above this level,
elevated intraureteral tonus results, and ureteral dilation (hydroureter) and
hydronephrosis is impressive. It is greater on the right side as shown in
Figure 4-16 (Wadasinghe, 2016). It is right sided in 86 percent of women.
This unequal dilation may result from cushioning provided to the left ureter
by the sigmoid colon and perhaps from greater right ureteral compression
exerted by the dextrorotated uterus. The right ovarian vein complex, which is
remarkably dilated during pregnancy, lies obliquely over the right ureter and
may also contribute to ureteral compression and proximal dilation.

FIGURE 4-16 Hydronephrosis. Plain film from the 15-minute image of an intravenous pyelogram
(IVP). Moderate hydronephrosis on the right (arrows) and mild hydronephrosis on the left
(arrowheads) are both normal for this 35-week gestation.

Progesterone likely has some additional effect. Van Wagenen and Jenkins
(1939) described continued ureteral dilation after removal of the monkey
fetus but with the placenta left in situ. The relatively abrupt onset of dilation
in women at midpregnancy, however, seems more consistent with ureteral
compression.
Ureteral elongation accompanies distention, and the ureter is frequently
thrown into curves of varying size, and smaller curves may be sharply

angulated. These so-called kinks are poorly named, because the term
connotes obstruction. They are usually single or double curves that, when
viewed in a radiograph taken in the same plane as the curve, may appear as
acute angulations. Another exposure at right angles nearly always identifies
them to be gentle curves. Despite these anatomical changes, complication
rates associated with ureteroscopy in pregnant and nonpregnant patients do
not differ significantly (Semins, 2014).

■ Bladder
The bladder shows few significant anatomical changes before 12 weeks’
gestation. Subsequently, however, increased uterine size, the hyperemia that
affects all pelvic organs, and hyperplasia of bladder muscle and connective
tissues together elevate the trigone and thicken its intraureteric margin.
Continuation of this process to term produces marked deepening and
widening of the trigone. The bladder mucosa is unchanged other than an
increase in the size and tortuosity of its blood vessels.
Bladder pressure in primigravidas rises from 8 cm H2O early in
pregnancy to 20 cm H2O at term (Iosif, 1980). To compensate for reduced
bladder capacity, absolute and functional urethral lengths increase by 6.7 and
4.8 mm, respectively. Concurrently, maximal intraurethral pressure rises
from 70 to 93 cm H2O, and thus continence is maintained. Still, at least half
of women experience some degree of urinary incontinence by the third
trimester (Abeysekera, 2016). Indeed, this is always considered in the
differential diagnosis of ruptured membranes. Near term—particularly in
nulliparas, in whom the presenting part often engages before labor—the
entire base of the bladder is pushed ventral and cephalad. This converts the
normally convex surface into a concavity. As a result, diagnostic and
therapeutic procedures are more difficult. Moreover, pressure from the
presenting part impairs blood and lymph drainage from the bladder base,
often rendering the area edematous, easily traumatized, and possibly more
susceptible to infection.

GASTROINTESTINAL TRACT

As pregnancy progresses, the stomach and intestines are displaced cephalad
by the enlarging uterus. Consequently, the physical findings in certain
diseases are altered. The appendix, for instance, is usually displaced upward
and somewhat laterally. At times, it may reach the right flank.
Pyrosis (heartburn) is common during pregnancy and is most likely
caused by reflux of acidic secretions into the lower esophagus. Although the
altered stomach position probably contributes to its frequency, lower
esophageal sphincter tone also is diminished. In addition, intraesophageal
pressures are lower and intragastric pressures higher in pregnant women.
Concurrently, esophageal peristalsis has lower wave speed and lower
amplitude (Ulmsten, 1978).
Gastric emptying time is essentially unchanged across pregnancy in
gravidas compared with nonpregnant women. In fasting women at term,
gastric volume is not different than that in nonpregnant controls (Van de Putte,
2019). At term, during labor, and especially after administration of
analgesics, however, gastric emptying time may be appreciably prolonged
(Barboni, 2016). As a result, one danger of general anesthesia for delivery is
regurgitation and aspiration of either food-laden or highly acidic gastric
contents.
Some reports describe maternal gut microbiome changes during
pregnancy (Smid, 2018). Currently, however, the vaginal and gut microbiome
profiles and their influence on pregnancy are unclear (Taddei, 2018).
Hemorrhoids are common during pregnancy (Shin, 2015). They are
caused in large measure by constipation and elevated pressure in rectal veins
below the level of the enlarged uterus.

■ Liver
Liver size does not enlarge during human pregnancy. Hepatic arterial and
portal venous blood flow, however, rise substantively (Clapp, 2000). Liver
stiffness increases from the second to third trimester and returns to baseline
postpartum (Ammon, 2018).
Some laboratory test results of hepatic function are altered in normal
pregnancy (Appendix, p. 1229). Total alkaline phosphatase activity almost
doubles, but much of the rise is attributable to heat-stable placental alkaline
phosphatase isozymes. Serum aspartate transaminase (AST), alanine

transaminase (ALT), γ-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT), and bilirubin levels
are slightly lower compared with nonpregnant values (Cattozzo, 2013).
The serum albumin concentration declines during pregnancy. By late
pregnancy, albumin levels may be near 3.0 g/dL compared with
approximately 4.3 g/dL in nonpregnant women (Mendenhall, 1970). Total
body albumin levels rise, however, because of pregnancy-associated
expansion of plasma volume. Serum globulin levels also are slightly higher.
Leucine aminopeptidase is a proteolytic liver enzyme whose serum
levels may be elevated with liver disease. Its activity is markedly higher in
pregnant women. The rise, however, results from a pregnancy-specific
enzyme(s) with distinct substrate specificities (Song, 1968). Pregnancyinduced aminopeptidase has oxytocinase and vasopressinase activity that
occasionally causes transient diabetes insipidus (Chap. 61, p. 1104).

■ Gallbladder
During normal pregnancy, gallbladder volume expands by approximately 50
percent, contractility declines, and both lead to greater residual volume
(Braverman, 1980). Progesterone potentially impairs gallbladder contraction
by inhibiting cholecystokinin-mediated smooth muscle stimulation, which is
the primary regulator of gallbladder contraction. Impaired emptying,
subsequent stasis, and the greater cholesterol saturation of bile in pregnancy
contribute to the increased prevalence of cholesterol gallstones in
multiparas. In one study, approximately 8 percent of women had gallbladder
sludge or stones (Ko, 2014).
The pregnancy effects on maternal serum bile acid concentrations are
still incompletely characterized. This is despite the long-acknowledged
propensity for pregnancy to cause intrahepatic cholestasis from retained bile
salts. Cholestasis of pregnancy is described in Chapter 58 (p. 1032).

ENDOCRINE SYSTEM
■ Pituitary Gland
During normal pregnancy, the pituitary gland enlarges by approximately 135
percent (Woodmansee, 2019). This expansion may sufficiently compress the
optic chiasma to reduce visual fields. Impaired vision from this is rare and

usually due to macroadenomas (Lee, 2014). Pituitary enlargement is
primarily caused by estrogen-stimulated hypertrophy and hyperplasia of the
lactotrophs (Feldt-Rasmussen, 2011). As discussed subsequently, maternal
serum prolactin levels parallel this growth. Gonadotroph number decline,
and corticotroph and thyrotroph populations remain constant. Somatotroph
function is generally suppressed due to negative feedback by the placental
production of growth hormone.
Peak pituitary size may reach 12 mm in MR images in the first days
postpartum. The gland involutes rapidly and reaches normal size by 6 months
postpartum (Woodmansee, 2019). The incidence of pituitary prolactinomas is
not increased during pregnancy. When these tumors are large before
pregnancy, such as with macroadenomas that by definition measure ≥10 mm,
then growth during pregnancy is more likely (Chap. 61, p. 1103).
The maternal pituitary gland is not essential for pregnancy maintenance.
Many women have undergone hypophysectomy, completed pregnancy
successfully, and entered spontaneous labor while receiving compensatory
glucocorticoids, thyroid hormone, and vasopressin.
Of pituitary gland hormones, growth hormone during the first trimester is
secreted predominantly from the maternal pituitary gland, and concentrations
in serum and amnionic fluid lie within the nonpregnant range. As early as 6
weeks’ gestation, growth hormone secreted from the placenta becomes
detectable, and by approximately 20 weeks, the placenta is the principal
source of growth hormone secretion (Woodmansee, 2019). During this time,
maternal serum values rise slowly from approximately 3.5 ng/mL at 10
weeks to plateau at about 14 ng/mL after 28 weeks’ gestation. Growth
hormone in amnionic fluid peaks at 14 to 15 weeks’ gestation and slowly
declines thereafter to reach baseline values after 36 weeks.
Placental growth hormone—which differs from pituitary growth hormone
by 13 amino acid residues—is secreted by syncytiotrophoblast (Newbern,
2011). Its regulation and physiological effects are incompletely understood,
but it influences fetal growth via upregulation of insulin-like growth factor 1
(IGF-1). That said, fetal growth still progresses in the complete absence of
this hormone. Although not absolutely essential, the hormone may act in
concert with placental lactogen to regulate fetal growth (Newbern, 2011).
Prolactin levels rise markedly in maternal plasma during normal
pregnancy. Concentrations are usually tenfold greater at term—approximately
150 ng/mL—compared with those of nonpregnant women. Paradoxically,

plasma levels drop after delivery even in women who are breastfeeding.
During early lactation, pulsatile bursts of prolactin secretion are a response
to suckling.
The principal function of maternal prolactin is to ensure lactation. Early
in pregnancy, prolactin acts to initiate DNA synthesis and mitosis of
glandular epithelial cells and presecretory alveolar cells of the breast.
Prolactin also augments the number of estrogen and prolactin receptors in
these cells. Last, prolactin promotes mammary alveolar cell RNA synthesis,
galactopoiesis, and production of casein, lactalbumin, lactose, and lipids
(Andersen, 1982). A woman with isolated prolactin deficiency failed to
lactate after two pregnancies (Kauppila, 1987). This establishes prolactin as
a requisite for lactation but not for pregnancy.
Grattan (2015) has reviewed the numerous physiological roles of
prolactin to aid maternal adaptations to pregnancy. The prolactin receptor in
the maternal pancreas indicates that prolactin may function to mediate
pancreatic adaptations to pregnancy (Nteeba, 2019). A possible role is
proposed for a prolactin fragment in the genesis of peripartum
cardiomyopathy (Chap. 52, p. 933) (Cunningham, 2019; Koenig, 2018).
Prolactin is present in amnionic fluid in high concentrations. Levels of up
to 10,000 ng/mL are found at 20 to 26 weeks’ gestation. Thereafter, levels
decline and reach a nadir after 34 weeks. Uterine decidua is the synthesis
site of amnionic fluid prolactin. The exact function of this hormone is
unknown, but water transfer from the fetus into the maternal compartment to
prevent fetal dehydration is one suggestion.
Oxytocin and antidiuretic hormone are hormones secreted from the
posterior pituitary gland. The roles of oxytocin in parturition and lactation
are discussed in Chapters 21 (p. 413) and 36 (p. 640), respectively. Brown
and colleagues (2013) have reviewed the complex mechanisms that promote
quiescence of oxytocin systems during pregnancy. Levels of antidiuretic
hormone, also called vasopressin, do not change during pregnancy. As
discussed earlier (p. 56), osmolality is slightly higher in maternal compared
with fetal blood, and the gradient favors water transport to the fetus (Moen,
2018).

■ Thyroid Gland

The maternal and fetal thyroid glands are intricately interrelated. On the
maternal side, thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) is secreted by the
hypothalamus and stimulates thyrotrope cells of the anterior pituitary to
release thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), also called thyrotropin. TRH
levels do not rise during normal pregnancy. However, TRH does cross the
placenta and may serve to stimulate the fetal pituitary to secrete TSH.
Serum TSH and hCG levels vary with gestational age (Fig. 4-17)
(Burrow, 1994). As discussed in Chapter 5 (p. 96), the α-subunits of the two
glycoproteins are identical, whereas the β-subunits, although similar, differ
in their amino acid sequence. As a result of this structural similarity, hCG has
intrinsic thyrotropic activity, and thus, high serum hCG levels cause thyroid
stimulation. Indeed, TSH levels in the first trimester decline in more than 80
percent of pregnant women, however, they still remain in the normal range
for nonpregnant women.

FIGURE 4-17 Relative changes in maternal and fetal thyroid function across pregnancy. Maternal
changes include a marked and early increase in hepatic production of thyroxine-binding globulin (TBG)
and placental production of human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG). Elevated TBG increases serum
thyroxine (T4) concentrations. hCG has thyrotropin-like activity and stimulates maternal free T4
secretion. This transient hCG-induced increase in serum T4 levels inhibits maternal secretion of
thyrotropin. Except for minimally increased free T4 levels when hCG peaks, these levels are essentially
unchanged. Fetal levels of all serum thyroid analytes increase incrementally across pregnancy. Fetal
triiodothyronine (T3) does not increase until late pregnancy.

The thyroid gland boosts production of thyroid hormones by 40 to 100
percent to meet maternal and fetal needs (Korevaar, 2017). To accomplish
this, the thyroid gland undergoes moderate enlargement during pregnancy
caused by glandular hyperplasia and greater vascularity. Mean thyroid
volume expands from 12 mL in the first trimester to 15 mL at term (Glinoer,
1990). That said, normal pregnancy does not typically cause significant
thyromegaly, and thus any goiter warrants evaluation.
Early in the first trimester, levels of the principal carrier protein—
thyroid-binding globulin (TBG)—rise. They reach their zenith at about 20
weeks’ gestation. Concentrations stabilize at approximately double baseline
values for the remainder of pregnancy (see Fig. 4-17). The greater TBG
concentrations result from both higher hepatic synthesis rates—due to
estrogen stimulation—and lower metabolism rates due to increased TBG

sialylation and glycosylation. These elevated TBG levels increase total
serum T4 and triiodothyronine (T3) concentrations, but do not affect the
physiologically important serum free T4 and free T3 levels. Specifically, total
serum T4 levels rise sharply beginning between 6 and 9 weeks’ gestation and
reach a plateau at 18 weeks. Serum free T4 levels rise only slightly and peak
along with hCG levels, and then they return to normal.
Interestingly, T4 and T3 secretion is not similar for all pregnant women.
Approximately a third of women experience relative hypothyroxinemia,
preferential T3 secretion, and higher, albeit normal, serum TSH levels
(Korevaar, 2017). Thus, thyroidal adjustments during normal pregnancy may
vary considerably.
The fetus relies on maternal T4, which crosses the placenta in small
quantities to maintain normal fetal thyroid function (Chap. 61, p. 1089).
Recall that the fetal thyroid does not begin to concentrate iodine until 10 to
12 weeks’ gestation. The synthesis and secretion of thyroid hormone by fetal
pituitary TSH ensues at approximately 20 weeks. At birth, approximately 30
percent of the T4 in umbilical cord blood is of maternal origin (Leung, 2012).

Thyroid Function Tests
As detailed in Chapter 61 (p. 1095), a substantial proportion of otherwise
normal pregnancies are found to have subclinical hypothyroidism or isolated
hypothyroxinemia. The effects of thyroxine replacement in these women is
currently controversial (Korevaar, 2017). Normal suppression of TSH during
pregnancy may lead to a misdiagnosis of subclinical hyperthyroidism. Of
greater concern is the potential failure to identify women with early
hypothyroidism because of suppressed TSH concentrations. To mitigate the
likelihood of such misdiagnoses, Dashe and coworkers (2005), and others,
have developed gestational-age-specific TSH normal curves for both
singleton and twin pregnancies (Fig. 4-18).

FIGURE 4-18 Gestational age-specific thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) nomogram derived from
13,599 singleton pregnancies. The nonpregnant reference values of 4.0 and 0.4 mU/L are represented
as solid black lines. Upper shaded area represents the 28 percent of singleton pregnancies with TSH
values above the 97.5th percentile threshold that would not have been identified as abnormal based on
the assay reference value of 4.0 mU/L. Lower shaded area represents singleton pregnancies that would
have been (falsely) identified as having TSH suppression based on the assay reference value of 0.4
mU/L.

These complex alterations of thyroid regulation do not appear to alter
maternal thyroid status as measured by metabolic studies. Although basal
metabolic rate rises progressively by as much as 25 percent during normal
pregnancy, most of this greater oxygen consumption can be attributed to fetal
metabolic activity. If fetal body surface area is considered along with that of
the mother, the predicted and observed basal metabolic rates are similar to
those in nonpregnant women.

Iodine Status
As discussed earlier (p. 59), iodine requirements increase during normal
pregnancy (Chap. 61, p. 1097). In women with low or marginal intake,
deficiency may manifest as low T4 and higher TSH levels. Importantly, more
than one third of the world population lives in areas where iodine intake is
marginal. Even in modernized countries, iodine deficiency is commonplace
(Snart, 2019). For the fetus, early exposure to thyroid hormone is essential
for the nervous system. Yet, despite public health programs to supplement

iodine, severe deficiency that results in cretinism affects more than 2 million
people globally (Syed, 2015).

■ Parathyroid Glands
During pregnancy, levels of calcitriol, which is the bioactive form of vitamin
D, increase twofold and enhance intestinal calcium absorption (Khan, 2019).
In an earlier longitudinal investigation of 20 women, all markers of bone
turnover rose during normal pregnancy and failed to reach baseline levels by
12 months postpartum (More, 2003). Investigators concluded that the calcium
needed for fetal growth and lactation may be drawn at least in part from the
maternal skeleton. The factors affecting bone turnover create a net yield that
favors fetal skeletal formation at the expense of the mother. As a result,
pregnancy is a vulnerable period for osteoporosis (Sanz-Salvador, 2015).
Parathyroid hormone (PTH) release is stimulated by acute or chronic
declines in plasma calcium or acute drops in magnesium levels. Conversely,
greater calcium and magnesium levels suppress PTH levels. The action of
this hormone on bone resorption, intestinal absorption, and kidney
reabsorption is to raise extracellular fluid calcium concentrations and lower
phosphate levels.
As discussed earlier (p. 59), fetal skeleton mineralization requires
approximately 30 g of calcium, primarily during the third trimester. Although
this amounts to only 3 percent of the total calcium held within the maternal
skeleton, calcium demands still challenge the mother (Degennaro, 2021).
Augmented maternal calcium absorption provides the additional calcium.
During pregnancy, the amount of calcium absorbed rises gradually and
reaches approximately 400 mg/d in the third trimester. Greater calcium
absorption appears to be mediated by elevated maternal 1,25dihydroxyvitamin D concentrations. This occurs despite decreased PTH
levels during early pregnancy, which is the normal stimulus for active
vitamin D production within the kidney. Indeed, PTH plasma levels decline
during the first trimester and then rise progressively throughout the remainder
of pregnancy (Pitkin, 1979).
The increased production of active vitamin D is likely due to placental
production of either PTH or a PTH-related protein (PTH-rP). Outside
pregnancy and lactation, PTH-rP is usually detectable only in serum of
women with hypercalcemia due to malignancy. During pregnancy, however,

PTH-rP concentrations rise significantly. This protein is synthesized in both
fetal tissues and maternal breasts.
Calcitonin is secreted by C cells that are located predominantly in the
perifollicular areas of the thyroid gland. Calcitonin opposes actions of PTH
and vitamin D and protects the maternal skeleton during times of calcium
stress. As discussed, pregnancy and lactation cause profound maternal
calcium stress. Indeed, fetal calcitonin levels are at least twofold higher than
maternal levels (Ohata, 2016). Although maternal calcitonin levels fall
during pregnancy, they generally rise postpartum.
Calcium and magnesium promote the biosynthesis and secretion of
calcitonin. Various gastric hormones—gastrin, pentagastrin, glucagon, and
pancreozymin—and food ingestion also promote calcitonin plasma levels.

■ Adrenal Glands
Cortisol
In normal pregnancy, unlike their fetal counterparts, the maternal adrenal
glands undergo little, if any, morphological change. The serum concentration
of circulating cortisol rises, but much of it is bound by transcortin, the
cortisol-binding globulin. The adrenal secretion rate of this principal
glucocorticoid is not elevated, and it is probably lower than in the
nonpregnant state. The metabolic clearance rate of cortisol, however, is
diminished during pregnancy because its half-life is nearly doubled
compared with that for nonpregnant women (Migeon, 1957). Administration
of estrogen, including most oral contraceptives, causes changes in serum
cortisol levels and transcortin similar to those of pregnancy (Jung, 2011).
During early pregnancy, the levels of circulating adrenocorticotropic
hormone (ACTH ), also known as corticotropin, are dramatically reduced.
As pregnancy progresses, ACTH and free cortisol levels rise equally and
strikingly (Fig. 4-19) (Carr, 1981). This apparent paradox is not understood
completely. Some suggest that greater free cortisol levels in pregnancy result
from a “resetting” of the maternal feedback mechanism to higher thresholds
(Nolten, 1981). This might result from tissue refractoriness to cortisol.
Others assert that these incongruities stem from an antagonistic action of
progesterone on mineralocorticoids (Keller-Wood, 2001). Thus, in response
to elevated progesterone levels during pregnancy, an elevated free cortisol is

needed to maintain homeostasis. Other theories include possible roles for
higher free cortisol in preparation for the stress of pregnancy, delivery, and
lactation.

FIGURE 4-19 Serial increases in serum cortisol (blue line) and adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)
(red line) across normal pregnancy.

Aldosterone
As early as 15 weeks’ gestation, the maternal adrenal glands secrete
considerably higher amounts of aldosterone, the principal mineralocorticoid.
By the third trimester, approximately 1 mg/d is released. If sodium intake is
restricted, aldosterone secretion is even further elevated. Concurrently,
levels of renin and angiotensin II substrate normally rise, especially during
the latter half of pregnancy. This scenario promotes greater plasma levels of
angiotensin II, which acts on the zona glomerulosa of the maternal adrenal
glands and accounts for the markedly elevated aldosterone secretion. Some

suggest the increased aldosterone secretion during normal pregnancy affords
protection against the natriuretic effect of progesterone and atrial natriuretic
peptide. Gennari-Moser and colleagues (2011) provide evidence that
aldosterone and cortisol may modulate trophoblast growth and placental size.

Deoxycorticosterone
Maternal plasma levels of this potent mineralocorticosteroid progressively
increase during pregnancy. Indeed, plasma levels of deoxycorticosterone rise
to near 1500 pg/mL by term, a more than 15-fold increase (Parker, 1980).
This marked elevation does not derive from adrenal secretion but instead
represents augmented kidney production resulting from estrogen stimulation.
The levels of deoxycorticosterone and its sulfate in fetal blood are
appreciably higher than those in maternal blood, which suggests transfer of
fetal deoxycorticosterone into the maternal compartment.

Androgens
In balance, androgenic activity rises during pregnancy, and both maternal
plasma levels of androstenedione and testosterone are increased. This
finding is not totally explained by alterations in their metabolic clearance.
Both androgens are converted to estradiol in the placenta, which increases
their clearance rates. Conversely, greater plasma sex hormone–binding
globulin levels in gravidas retard testosterone clearance. Thus, the
production rates of maternal testosterone and androstenedione during human
pregnancy are increased. The source of this higher C19-steroid production is
unknown, but it likely originates in the ovary. Interestingly, little or no
testosterone in maternal plasma enters the fetal circulation as testosterone.
Even when massive testosterone levels are found in the circulation of
pregnant women, as with androgen-secreting tumors, testosterone
concentrations in umbilical cord blood are likely to be undetectable. This
results from the near complete trophoblastic conversion of testosterone to
17β-estradiol.
Maternal serum and urine levels of dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate are
lower during normal pregnancy. This stems from a greater metabolic
clearance through extensive maternal hepatic 16α-hydroxylation and
placental conversion to estrogen (Chap. 5, p. 101).

MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM
Progressive lordosis is characteristic of pregnancy. Compensating for the
anterior position of the enlarging uterus, lordosis shifts the center of gravity
dorsally and over the lower extremities. The sacroiliac, sacrococcygeal, and
pubic joints have greater mobility during pregnancy. However, as discussed
earlier, increased joint laxity and associated discomfort during pregnancy do
not correlate with increased maternal serum levels of estradiol,
progesterone, or relaxin. Most relaxation takes place in the first half of
pregnancy. It may contribute to maternal posture alterations and in turn create
lower back discomfort. As discussed in Chapter 36 (p. 644), although some
symphyseal separation likely accompanies many deliveries, those greater
than 1 cm may cause significant pain (Shnaekel, 2015).
Aching, numbness, and weakness also occasionally are experienced in
the upper extremities. This may result from the marked lordosis and
associated anterior neck flexion and shoulder girdle slumping. These can
produce traction on the ulnar and median nerves. The latter may give rise to
symptoms mistaken for the carpal tunnel syndrome (Chap. 63, p. 1137).
Joint strengthening begins immediately following delivery and is usually
complete within 3 to 5 months. Pelvic dimensions measured by MR imaging
up to 3 months postpartum are not significantly different from prepregnancy
values (Huerta-Enochian, 2006).

CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM
Changes to the central nervous system during pregnancy are relatively few
and mostly subtle. Zeeman and coworkers (2003) used MR imaging to
measure cerebral blood flow across pregnancy. They found that mean blood
flow in the middle and posterior cerebral arteries declined progressively
from 147 and 56 mL/min when nonpregnant to 118 and 44 mL/min late in
pregnancy, respectively. Others have found similar middle cerebral artery
blood flow changes with ultrasound (Batur Caglayan, 2019). Mechanisms
and significance of the decline are unknown. It appears that pregnancy does
not affect cerebrovascular autoregulation (Cipolla, 2015).

■ Memory

Women often report problems with attention, concentration, and memory
throughout pregnancy and the early puerperium. Systematic studies of
memory in pregnancy, however, are limited and often anecdotal. In a
metaanalysis, Davies and coworkers (2018) reported pregnancy-related
memory decline was worst in the third trimester. This decline was not
attributable to depression, anxiety, sleep deprivation, or other physical
changes associated with pregnancy. It was transient and quickly resolved
following delivery. In follow up studies, preeclampsia and eclampsia were
found to lead to both short- and long-term cognitive disability (Aukes, 2007;
Dayan, 2018).

■ Eyes
Intraocular pressure declines during pregnancy and is attributed partly to
greater vitreous outflow. Corneal sensitivity is decreased, and the greatest
changes are late in gestation. Most pregnant women demonstrate a
measurable but slight increase in corneal thickness, thought to be due to
edema. Consequently, they may have difficulty with previously comfortable
contact lenses. Brownish-red opacities on the posterior surface of the cornea
—Krukenberg spindles—are observed with a higher than expected
frequency during pregnancy. Hormonal effects similar to those observed for
skin lesions are believed to cause this increased pigmentation. Other than
transient loss of accommodation reported during both pregnancy and
lactation, visual function is unaffected by pregnancy. These changes during
pregnancy and pathological eye aberrations were reviewed by Gilbert and
colleagues (2019).

■ Sleep
Beginning as early as 12 weeks’ gestation and extending through the first 2
months postpartum, women have difficulty with falling asleep, frequent
awakenings, fewer hours of night sleep, and reduced sleep efficiency. These
symptoms are part of the spectrum of sleep-disordered breathing, the most
severe of which is obstructive sleep apnea (Ayyar, 2018; Dominguez, 2018).
The greatest disruption of sleep is encountered postpartum and may
contribute to postpartum blues or to frank depression and suicidal ideation
(Palagini, 2019).

REFERENCES
Abdullah B, Ayub SH, Mohd Zahid AZ, et al: Urinary incontinence in primigravida: the neglected
pregnancy predicament. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 198:110, 2016
Abeysekera MV, Morris JA, Davis GK, et al: Alterations in energy homeostasis to favour adipose tissue
gain: a longitudinal study in healthy pregnant women. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol 56:42, 2016
Aguin TJ, Sobel JD: Vulvovaginal candidiasis in pregnancy. Curr Infect Dis Rep 17:462, 2015
Ajjimaporn A, Somprasit C, Chaunchaiyakul R: A cross-sectional study of resting cardio-respiratory and
metabolic changes in pregnant women. J Phys Ther Sci 26:779, 2014
Aldabe D, Ribeiro DC, Milosavljevic S, et al: Pregnancy-related pelvic girdle pain and its relationship
with relaxin levels during pregnancy: a systematic review. Eur Spine J 21:1769, 2012
Alvarez H, Caldeyro-Barcia R: Contractility of the human uterus recorded by new methods. Surg
Gynecol Obstet 91:1, 1950
Amoah C, Yassin A, Cockayne E, et al: Hyperreactio luteinalis in pregnancy. Fertil Steril 95(7):2429.e1,
2011
Ammon FJ, Kohlhaas A, Elshaarawy O, et al: Liver stiffness reversibly increases during pregnancy and
independently predicts preeclampsia. World J Gastroenterol 24(38):4393, 2018
Andersen JR: Prolactin in amniotic fluid and maternal serum during uncomplicated human pregnancy.
Dan Med Bull 29:266, 1982
Anderson BL, Mendez-Figueroa H, Dahlke J, et al: Pregnancy-induced changes in immune protection of
the genital tract: defining normal. Am J Obstet Gynecol 208(4):321.e1, 2013
Angueira AR, Ludvik AE, Reddy TE, et al: New insights into gestational glucose metabolism: lessons
learned from 21st century approaches. Diabetes 64:327, 2015
Armstrong S, Fernando R, Columb M, et al: Cardiac index in term pregnant women in the sitting, lateral,
and supine positions: an observational, crossover study. Anesth Analg 113:318, 2011
Assali NS, Dilts PV, Pentl AA, et al: Physiology of the placenta. In Assali NS (ed): Biology of
Gestation, Vol I. The Maternal Organism. New York, Academic Press, 1968
Assali NS, Douglas RA, Baird WW: Measurement of uterine blood flow and uterine metabolism. IV.
Results in normal pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 66(2):248, 1953
Astern JM, Collier AC, Kendal-Wright CE: Pre-B cell colony enhancing factor
(PBEF/NAMPT/Visfatin) and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) cooperate to increase the
permeability of the human placental amnion. Placenta 34:42, 2013
Aukes AM, Wessel I, Dubois AM, et al: Self-reported cognitive functioning in formerly eclamptic
women. Am J Obstet Gynecol 197:365.e1, 2007
Ayyar L, Shaib F, Guntupalli K: Sleep-disordered breathing in pregnancy. Sleep Med Clin 13(3):349,
2018
Aziz MM, Kulkarni A, Shah L, et al: Physiologic proteinuria in labor and postpartum: the results of the
postpartum proteinuria trial (PoPPy). Pregnancy Hypertens 13:22, 2018
Bamber JH, Dresner M: Aortocaval compression in pregnancy: the effect of changing the degree and
direction of lateral tilt on maternal cardiac output. Anesth Analg 97:256, 2003
Barboni E, Mancinelli P, Bitossi U, et al: Ultrasound evaluation of the stomach and gastric emptying in
pregnant women at term: a case-control study. Minerva Anestesiol 82(5):543, 2016
Baron J, Shwarzman, Sheiner E, et al: Blood flow Doppler velocimetry measured during active labor.
Arch Gynecol Obstet 291:837, 2015

Bastholm SK, Samson MH, Becher N, et al: Trefoil factor peptide 3 is positively correlated with the
viscoelastic properties of the cervical mucus plug. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 96(1):47, 2017
Batur Caglayan HZ, Nazliel B, Cinar M, et al: Assessment of maternal cerebral blood flow velocity by
transcranial Doppler ultrasound before delivery and in the early postpartum period. J Matern Fetal
Neonatal Med 32(4):584, 2019
Benzing T, Salant D: Insights into glomerular filtration and albuminuria. N Engl J Med 384:1437, 2021
Berggren EK, Groh-Wargo S, Presley L, et al: Maternal fat, but not lean, mass is increased among
overweight/obese women with excess gestational weight gain. Am J Obstet Gynecol 214(6):745.e1,
2016
Berggren EK, Presley L, Amini SB, et al: Are the metabolic changes of pregnancy reversible in the first
year postpartum? Diabetologia 58:1561, 2015
Bernstein IM, Ziegler W, Badger GJ: Plasma volume expansion in early pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol
97:669, 2001
Bi WG, Nuyt AM, Weiler H, et al: Association between vitamin D supplementation during pregnancy
and offspring growth, morbidity, and mortality: a systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA
Pediatr 172(7):635, 2018
Bieber AK, Martires KJ, Stein JA, et al: Pigmentation and pregnancy: knowing what is normal. Obstet
Gynecol 129(1):168, 2017
Bijl RC, Valensise H, Novelli GP, et al: Methods and considerations concerning cardiac output
measurement in pregnant women: recommendations of the International Working Group on Maternal
Hemodynamics. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 54(1):35, 2019
Bilinski RT, Williams SF, Apuzzio JJ: Procalcitonin in amniotic fluid at the time of genetic amniocentesis
and preterm delivery. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 31(20):2705, 2018
Blomqvist JL, Muñoz A, Carroll M, et al: Association of delivery mode with pelvic floor disorders after
childbirth. JAMA 320(23):2438, 2018
Bloom SL, Uppot R, Roberts DJ: Case 32–2010: a pregnant woman with abdominal pain and fluid in the
peritoneal cavity. N Engl J Med 363(17):1657, 2010
Bobrowski RA: Pulmonary physiology in pregnancy. Clin Obstet Gynecol 53(2):286, 2010
Bramham K, Hladunewich MA, Jim B, et al: Pregnancy and kidney disease. NephSAP Nephrology
Self-Assessment Program 15(2):115, 2016
Braverman DZ, Johnson ML, Kern F Jr: Effects of pregnancy and contraceptive steroids on gallbladder
function. N Engl J Med 302:362, 1980
Briffa JF, McAinch AJ, Romano T, et al: Leptin in pregnancy and development: a contributor to
adulthood disease? Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 308:E335, 2015
Brown CH, Bains JS, Ludwig M, et al: Physiological regulation of magnocellular neurosecretory cell
activity: integration of intrinsic, local and afferent mechanisms. J Neuroendocrinol 25:678, 2013
Brown MA, Gallery EDM, Ross MR, et al: Sodium excretion in normal and hypertensive pregnancy: a
prospective study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 159:297, 1988
Burrow GN, Fisher DA, Larsen PR: Maternal and fetal thyroid function. N Engl J Med 331:1072, 1994
Camaschella C: Iron deficiency anemia. N Engl J Med 372:1832, 2015
Carr BR, Parker CR Jr, Madden JD, et al: Maternal plasma adrenocorticotropin and cortisol
relationships throughout human pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 139:416, 1981
Cattozzo G, Calonaci A, Albeni C, et al: Reference values for alanine aminotransferase, α-amylase,
aspartate aminotransferase, γ-glutamyltransferase and lactate dehydrogenase measured according
to the IFCC standardization during uncomplicated pregnancy. Clin Chem Lab Med 51:e239, 2013

Chehab FF: 20 years of leptin: leptin and reproduction: past milestones, present undertakings, and future
endeavors. J Endocrinol 223:T37, 2014
Chesley LC: Renal function during pregnancy. In Carey HM (ed): Modern Trends in Human
Reproductive Physiology. London, Butterworth, 1963
Chong MF, Chia AR, Colega M, et al: Maternal protein intake during pregnancy is not associated with
offspring birth weight in a multiethnic Asian population. J Nutr 145:1303, 2015
Cietak KA, Newton JR: Serial quantitative maternal nephrosonography in pregnancy. Br J Radiol
58:405, 1985
Cipolla MJ, Zeeman GG, Cunningham FG: Cerebrovascular (patho)physiology in
preeclampsia/eclampsia. In Taylor RN, Roberts JM, Cunningham FG (eds): Chesley’s Hypertensive
Disorders in Pregnancy, 4th ed. Amsterdam, Academic Press, 2015
Clapp JF III, Stepanchak W, Tomaselli J, et al: Portal vein blood flow—effects of pregnancy, gravity,
and exercise. Am J Obstet Gynecol 183:167, 2000
Clark SL, Cotton DB, Lee W, et al: Central hemodynamic assessment of normal term pregnancy. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 161:1439, 1989
Cong J, Yang X, Zhang N, et al: Quantitative analysis of left atrial volume and function during
normotensive and preeclamptic pregnancy: a real-time three-dimensional echocardiography study.
Int J Cardiovasc Imaging 31:805, 2015
Conrad KP, Baker VL: Corpus luteal contribution to maternal pregnancy physiology and outcomes in
assisted reproductive technologies. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol 304(2):R69, 2013
Conrad KP, Gaber LW, Lindheimer MD: The kidney in normal pregnancy and preeclampsia. In Taylor
RN, Roberts JM, Cunningham FG (eds): Chesley’s Hypertensive Disorders in Pregnancy, 4th ed.
Amsterdam, Academic Press, 2015
Csapo AI, Pulkkinen MO, Wiest WG: Effects of luteectomy and progesterone replacement therapy in
early pregnant patients. Am J Obstet Gynecol 115(6):759, 1973
Cullers A, King JC, Van Loan M, et al: Effect of prenatal calcium supplementation on bone during
pregnancy and 1 y postpartum. Am J Clin Nurt 109(1):197, 2019
Cunningham FG, Byrne JJ, Nelson DB: Peripartum cardiomyopathy. Obstet Gynecol 133(1):167, 2019
Cunningham FG, Nelson DB: Disseminated intravascular coagulation syndromes in obstetrics. Obstet
Gynecol 126:999, 2015
Cutforth R, MacDonald CB: Heart sounds and murmurs in pregnancy. Am Heart J 71:741, 1966
Dashe JS, Casey BM, Wells CE, et al: Thyroid-stimulating hormone in singleton and twin pregnancy:
importance of gestational age-specific reference ranges. Obstet Gynecol 106:753, 2005
Davies SJ, Lum JA, Skouteris H, et al: Cognitive impairment during pregnancy: a meta-analysis. Med J
Aust 208(1):35, 2018
Davison JM, Dunlop W: Renal hemodynamics and tubular function in normal human pregnancy. Kidney
Int 18:152, 1980
Dayan N, Kaur A, Elharram M, et al: Impact of preeclampsia on long-term cognitive function.
Hypertension 72(6):1374, 2018
Degennaro VA, Brandt ML, Cagnielli G, et al: First assessment of bone mineral density in healthy
pregnant women by means of Radiofrequency Echographic Multi Spectrometry (REMS)
technology. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 263:44, 2021
Demir UL, Demir BC, Oztosun E, et al: The effects of pregnancy on nasal physiology. Int Forum
Allergy Rhinol 5:162, 2015
Dominguez JE, Street L, Louis J: Management of obstructive sleep apnea in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol
Clin North Am 45(2):233, 2018

Duval F, Dos Santos E, Maury B, et al: Adiponectin regulates metabolism at the human fetal-maternal
interface. J Mol Endocrinol 61(3):139, 2018
Easterling TR, Schmucker BC, Benedetti TJ: The hemodynamic effects of orthostatic stress during
pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 72:550, 1988
Edman CD, Toofanian A, MacDonald PC, et al: Placental clearance rate of maternal plasma
androstenedione through placental estradiol formation: an indirect method of assessing uteroplacental
blood flow. Am J Obstet Gynecol 141:1029, 1981
Enein M, Zina AA, Kassem M, et al: Echocardiography of the pericardium in pregnancy. Obstet
Gynecol 69:851, 1987
Espinoza J, Betancourt A, Belfort MA, et al: Placental growth factor blunts uterine artery responses to
angiotensin II. BJOG 126(8):1058, 2019
Feldt-Rasmussen U, Mathiesen ER: Endocrine disorders in pregnancy: physiological and hormonal
aspects of pregnancy. Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab 25(6):875, 2011
Fernandes LB, Amaral WN: Clinical study of skin changes in low and high risk pregnant women. An
Bras Dermatol 90:822, 2015
Fisher AL, Nemeth E: Iron homeostasis during pregnancy. Am J Clin Nutr 106(Suppl6):1567S, 2017
Flo K, Widnes C, Vårtun Å, et al: Blood flow to the scarred gravid uterus at 22–24 weeks of gestation.
BJOG 121:210, 2014
Flo K, Wilsgaard T, Vårtun Å, et al: A longitudinal study of the relationship between maternal cardiac
output measured by impedance cardiography and uterine artery blood flow in the second half of
pregnancy. BJOG 117:837, 2010
Franco EM, Pares D, Colome NL, et al: Urinary incontinence during pregnancy: is there a difference
between first and third trimester? Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 182:86, 2014
Frederice CP, Amaral E, Ferreira Nde O: Urinary symptoms and pelvic floor muscle function during the
third trimester of pregnancy in nulliparous women. J Obstet Gynaecol Res 39:188, 2013
Friedman T, Eslick GD, Dietz HP: Delivery mode and the risk of levator muscle avulsion: a metaanalysis. Int Urogynecol 30(6):901, 2019
Fu Z, Hu J, Zhou L, et al: (Pro)Renin receptor contributes to pregnancy-induced sodium-water retention
in rats via activation of intrarenal RAAS and α-ENaC. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol 316(3):F530,
2019
Galan HL, Marconi AM, Paolini CL, et al: The transplacental transport of essential amino acids in
uncomplicated human pregnancies. Am J Obstet Gynecol 200(1):91.e1, 2009
Gant NF, Daley GL, Chand S, et al: A study of angiotensin II pressor response throughout primigravid
pregnancy. J Clin Invest 52:2682, 1973
Gat R, Hadar E, Orbach-Zinger S, et al: Distribution of extreme vital signs and complete blood count
values of healthy parturients: a retrospective database analysis and review of the literature. Anesth
Analg 129(6):1595, 2019
Gayer G, Ben Ely A, Maymon R, et al: Enlargement of the spleen as an incidental finding on CT in postpartum females with fever. Br J Radiol 85 (1014):753, 2012
Gennari-Moser C, Khankin EV, Schüller S, et al: Regulation of placental growth by aldosterone and
cortisol. Endocrinology 152(1):263, 2011
Georgieff MK: Iron deficiency in pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 146:516, 2021
Ghi T, Degli Esposti D, Montaguti E, et al: Maternal cardiac evaluation during uncomplicated twin
pregnancy with emphasis on the diastolic function. Am J Obstet Gynecol 213:376.e1, 2015
Gilbert AL, Prasad S, Mallery RM: Neuro-ophthalmic disorders in pregnancy. Neurol Clin 37(1):85,
2019

Gizlenti S, Ekmekci TR: The changes in the hair cycle during gestation and the post-partum period. J
Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol 28:878, 2014
Glinoer D, de Nayer P, Bourdoux P, et al: Regulation of maternal thyroid during pregnancy. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab 71:276, 1990
González-Domínguez MI, Lazo-de-la-Vega-Monroy ML, Zaina S, et al: Association of cord blood desacyl ghrelin with birth weight, and placental GHS-R1 receptor expression in SGA, AGA, and LGA
newborns. Endocrine 53:182, 2016
Govindan RB, Siegel E, Mckelvey S, et al: Tracking the changes in synchrony of the electrophysiological
activity as the uterus approaches labor using magnetomyographic technique. Reprod Sci 22:595,
2015
Grattan DR: The hypothalamo-prolactin axis. J Endocrinol 226:7101, 2015
Grindheim G, Toska K, Estensen ME, et al: Changes in pulmonary function during pregnancy: a
longitudinal cohort study. BJOG 119(1):94, 2012
Gunderson EP: Impact of breastfeeding on maternal metabolism: implications for women with
gestational diabetes. Curr Diab Rep 14:460, 2014
Gyselaers W, Spaanderman M, International Working Group on Maternal Hemodynamics: Assessment
of venous hemodynamics and volume homeostasis during pregnancy: recommendations of the
International Working Group on Maternal Hemodynamics. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 52(2):174,
2018
Hajhashemi M, Rafieian M, Rouhi Boroujeni HA, et al: The effect of aloe vera gel and sweet almond oil
on striae gravidarum in nulliparous women. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 31(13):1703, 2018
Haghiac M, Basu S, Presley L, et al: Patterns of adiponectin expression in term pregnancy: impact of
obesity. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 99:3427, 2014
Han L, Liu X, Li H, et al: Blood coagulation parameters and platelet indices: changes in normal and
preeclamptic pregnancies and predictive values for preeclampsia. PLoS One 9:e114488, 2014
Handel AC, Lima PB, Tonolli VM, et al: Risk factors for facial melasma in women: a case-control
study. Br J Dermatol 171:588, 2014
Hansen LK, Becher N, Bastholm S, et al: The cervical mucus plug inhibits, but does not block, the
passage of ascending bacteria from the vagina during pregnancy. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand
93:102, 2014
Hauguel-de Mouzon S, Catalano P: Adiponectin: are measurements clinically useful in pregnancy?
Diabetes Care 36:1434, 2013
Hedengran KK, Andersen MR, Stender S, et al: Large D-Dimer fluctuation in normal pregnancy: a
longitudinal cohort study of 4,117 samples from 714 healthy Danish women. Obstet Gynecol Int
2016:3561675, 2016b
Hedengran KK, Nelson D, Andersen MR, et al: Hepcidin levels are low during pregnancy and increase
around delivery in women without iron deficiency—a prospective cohort study. J Matern Fetal
Neonatal Med 29:1506, 2016a
Heenan AP, Wolfe LA: Plasma osmolality and the strong ion difference predict respiratory adaptations
in pregnant and nonpregnant women. Can J Physiol Pharmacol 81:839, 2003
Hegewald MJ, Crapo RO: Respiratory physiology in pregnancy. Clin Chest Med 32(1):1, 2011
Herrera S, Kuhlmann-Capek MJ, Rogan SC, et al: Stroke volume recruitability during the third trimester
of pregnancy. Am J Perinatal 35(8):737, 2018
Hibbard JU, Shroff SG, Cunningham FG: Cardiovascular alterations in normal and preeclamptic
pregnancies. In Taylor RN, Roberts JM, Cunningham FG (eds): Chesley’s Hypertensive Disorders
in Pregnancy, 4th ed. Amsterdam, Academic Press, 2015

Higby K, Suiter CR, Phelps JY, et al: Normal values of urinary albumin and total protein excretion during
pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 171:984, 1994
Hill JA, Olson EN: Cardiac plasticity. N Engl J Med 358:1370, 2008
Hodgkinson CP: Physiology of the ovarian veins in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 1:26, 1953
Hofmeyr GJ, Lawrie TA, Atallah ÁN, et al: Calcium supplementation during pregnancy for preventing
hypertensive disorders and related problems. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 10:CD001059, 2018
Huerta-Enochian GS, Katz VL, Fox LK, et al: Magnetic resonance–based serial pelvimetry: do maternal
pelvic dimensions change during pregnancy? Am J Obstet Gynecol 194:1689, 2006
Huisman A, Aarnoudse JG, Heuvelmans JH, et al: Whole blood viscosity during normal pregnancy.
BJOG 94:1143, 1987
Hytten FE: Weight gain in pregnancy. In Hytten FE, Chamberlain G (eds): Clinical Physiology in
Obstetrics, 2nd ed. Oxford, Blackwell, 1991, p 173
Ibrahim S, Jarefors E, Nel DG, et al: Effect of maternal position and uterine activity on periodic
maternal heart rate changes before elective cesarean section at term. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand
94:1359, 2015
Iosif S, Ingemarsson I, Ulmsten U: Urodynamic studies in normal pregnancy and in puerperium. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 137:696, 1980
James AH, Rhee E, Thames B, et al: Characterization of antithrombin levels in pregnancy. Thromb Res
134:648, 2014
Jebeile H, Mijatovic J, Louie JC, et al: A systematic review and meta-analysis of energy intake and
weight gain in pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 214:465, 2016
Jensen D, Wolfe LA, Slatkovska L, et al: Effects of human pregnancy on the ventilatory chemoreflex
response to carbon dioxide. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol 288:R1369, 2005
Jones NW, Raine-Fenning NJ, Jayaprakasan K, et al: Changes in myometrial “perfusion” during normal
labor as visualized by three-dimensional power Doppler angiography. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol
33:307, 2009
Jung C, Ho JT, Torpy DJ, et al: A longitudinal study of plasma and urinary cortisol in pregnancy and
postpartum. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 96(5):1533, 2011
Kasher-Meron M, Mazaki-Tovi S, Barhod E, et al: Chemerin concentrations in maternal and fetal
compartments: implications for metabolic adaptations to normal human pregnancy. J Perinat Med
42:371, 2014
Kauppila A, Chatelain P, Kirkinen P, et al: Isolated prolactin deficiency in a woman with puerperal
alactogenesis. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 64:309, 1987
Kauppila A, Koskinen M, Puolakka J, et al: Decreased intervillous and unchanged myometrial blood
flow in supine recumbency. Obstet Gynecol 55:203, 1980
Keller-Wood M, Wood CE: Pregnancy alters cortisol feedback inhibition of stimulated ACTH: studies in
adrenalectomized ewes. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol 280:R1790, 2001
Kenny L, McCrae K, Cunningham FG: Platelets, coagulation, and the liver. In Taylor RN, Roberts JM,
Cunningham FG (eds): Chesley’s Hypertensive Disorders in Pregnancy, 4th ed. Amsterdam,
Academic Press, 2015
Ker JA, Soma-Pillay P: NT-proBNP: When is it useful in obstetric medicine. Obstet Gynecol 1(1):3,
2018
Khan AA, Clarke B, Rejnmark L, et al: MANAGEMENT OF ENDOCRINE DISEASE:
Hypoparathyroidism in pregnancy: review and evidence-based recommendations for management.
Eur J Endocrinol 180(2):R37, 2019

Kim HS, Yoon G, Kim BG, et al: Decidualization of intranodal endometriosis in a postmenopausal
woman. Int J Clin Exp Pathol 8:1025, 2015
Ko CW, Napolitano PG, Lee SP, et al: Physical activity, maternal metabolic measures, and the incidence
of gallbladder sludge or stones during pregnancy: a randomized trial. Am J Perinatol 31:39, 2014
Koenig MD, Tussing-Humphreys L, Day J, et al: Hepcidin and iron homeostasis during pregnancy.
Nutrients 6:3062, 2014
Koenig T, Bauersachs J, Hilfiker-Kleiner D: Bromocriptine for the treatment of peripartum
cardiomyopathy. Card Fail Rev 4(1):46, 2018
Kolarzyk E, Szot WM, Lyszczarz J: Lung function and breathing regulation parameters during
pregnancy. Arch Gynecol Obstet 272:53, 2005
Korevaar TIM, Medici M, Visser TH, et al: Thyroid disease in pregnancy: new insights in diagnosis and
clinical management. Nat Rev Endocrinol 13(10):610, 2017
Kühnert M, Strohmeier R, Stegmüller M: Changes in lymphocyte subsets during normal pregnancy. Eur
J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 76:147, 1998
Lankhorst S, Jan Danser AH, van den Meiracker AH: Endothelin-1 and antiangiogenesis. Am J Physiol
Regul Integr Comp Physiol 310:R230, 2016
Larsson A, Palm M, Hansson LO, et al: Reference values for clinical chemistry tests during normal
pregnancy. BJOG 115:874, 2008
Laskowska M, Laskowska K, Oleszczuk J: The relation of maternal serum eNOS, NOSTRIN and
ADMA levels with aetiopathogenesis of preeclampsia and/or intrauterine fetal growth restriction. J
Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 28:26, 2015
Lederman SA, Paxton A, Heymsfield SB, et al: Maternal body fat and water during pregnancy: do they
raise infant birth weight? Am J Obstet Gynecol 180:235, 1999
Lee DH, Park YK: Isolated fallopian tube torsion during pregnancy: a case report. Clin Exp Obstet
Gynecol 42:681, 2015
Lee HR, Song JE, Lee KY: Developed diplopia and ptosis due to a nonfunctioning pituitary
macroadenoma during pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol Sci 57:66, 2014
Leung AM: Thyroid function in pregnancy. J Trace Elem Med Biol 26(2–3):137, 2012
Lim PS, Ng SP, Shafiee MN, et al: Spontaneous rupture of uterine varicose veins: a rare cause for
obstetric shock. J Obstet Gynaecol Res 40:1791, 2014
Lind T, Bell S, Gilmore E, et al: Insulin disappearance rate in pregnant and non-pregnant women, and in
non-pregnant women given GHRIH. Eur J Clin Invest 7:47, 1977
Lindheimer MD, Davison JM, Katz AI: The kidney and hypertension in pregnancy: twenty exciting
years. Semin Nephrol 21:173, 2001
Lindheimer MD, Grünfeld JP, Davison JM: Renal disorders. In Barran WM, Lindheimer MD (eds):
Medical Disorders During Pregnancy, 3rd ed. St. Louis, Mosby, 2000, p 39
Lindheimer MD, Kanter D: Interpreting abnormal proteinuria in pregnancy: the need for a more
pathophysiological approach. Obstet Gynecol 115(2 Pt 1):365, 2010
Lindheimer MD, Richardson DA, Ehrlich EN, et al: Potassium homeostasis in pregnancy. J Reprod Med
32:517, 1987
Liu J, Sun B, Yin H, et al: Hepcidin: a promising therapeutic target for iron disorders: a systematic
review. Medicine (Baltimore) 95:e3150, 2016
Liu LX, Arany Z: Maternal cardiac metabolism in pregnancy. Cardiovasc Res 101:545, 2014
Lopes van Balen VA, van Gansewinkel TAG, de Haas S, et al: Kidney function during pregnancy: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 54(3):297, 2019

Lowe WL, Karban J: Genetics, genomics and metabolomics: new insights into maternal metabolism
during pregnancy. Diabet Med 31:254, 2014
Lynn KN, Steinkeler JA, Wilkins-Haug LE, et al: Hyperreactio luteinalis (enlarged ovaries) during the
second and third trimesters of pregnancy: common clinical associations. J Ultrasound Med 32:1285,
2013
Macdonald JA, Corrado PA, Jguyen SM, et al: Uteroplacental and fetal 4D flow MRI in the pregnant
rhesus macaque. J Magn Reson Imaging 49(2):534, 2019
Macedo M, Kim B, Khoury R, et al: A rare case of right lower quadrant abdominal pain. Am J Emerg
Med 35(4):668.e1, 2017
Mahendru AA, Everett TR, Wilkinson IB, et al: Maternal cardiovascular changes from pre-pregnancy to
very early pregnancy. J Hypertens 30(11):2168, 2012
Malinowski AK, Sen J, Sermer M: Hyperreactio luteinalis: maternal and fetal effects. J Obstet
Gynaecol Can 37:715, 2015
Mandala M, Osol G: Physiological remodeling of the maternal uterine circulation during pregnancy.
Basic Clin Pharmacol Toxicol 110:12, 2012
Marnach ML, Ramin KD, Ramsey PS, et al: Characterization of the relationship between joint laxity
and maternal hormones in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 101:331, 2003
Maymon R, Zimerman AL, Strauss S, et al: Maternal spleen size throughout normal pregnancy. Semin
Ultrasound CT MRI 28:64, 2007
McArdle HJ, Gambling L, Kennedy C: Iron deficiency during pregnancy: the consequences for
placental function and fetal outcome. Proc Nutr Soc 73:9, 2014
McLean KC, Bernstein IM, Brummel-Ziedins KE: Tissue factor-dependent thrombin generation across
pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 207(2):135.e1, 2012
Mendenhall HW: Serum protein concentrations in pregnancy. 1. Concentrations in maternal serum. Am
J Obstet Gynecol 106:388, 1970
Metcalfe J, Romney SL, Ramsey LH, et al: Estimation of uterine blood flow in normal human pregnancy
at term. J Clin Invest 34(11):1632, 1955
Migeon CJ, Bertrand J, Wall PE: Physiological disposition of 4– 14C cortisol during late pregnancy. J Clin
Invest 36:1350, 1957
Milne JA, Howie AD, Pack AI: Dyspnoea during normal pregnancy. BJOG 85:260, 1978
Moen V, Brudin L, Rundgren M, et al: Osmolality and respiratory regulation in humans: respiratory
compensation for hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis is absent after infusion of hypertonic saline in
healthy volunteers. Anesth Analg 119:956, 2014
Moen V, Brudin L, Tjernberg I, et al: Feto-maternal osmotic balance at term. A prospective
observational study. J Perinat Med 46(2):183, 2018
Moleti M, Trimarchi F, Vermiglio F: Thyroid physiology in pregnancy. Endocr Pract 20:589, 2014
Mor G, Kwon JY: Trophoblast-microbiome interaction: a new paradigm on immune regulation. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 213:S131, 2015
More C, Bhattoa HP, Bettembuk P, et al: The effects of pregnancy and lactation on hormonal status and
biochemical markers of bone turnover. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 106:209, 2003
Morris EA, Hale SA, Badger GJ, et al: Pregnancy induces persistent changes in vascular compliance in
primiparous women. Am J Obstet Gynecol 212:633.e1, 2015
Mumtaz S, AlSaif S, Wray S, et al: Inhibitory effect of visfatin and leptin on human and rat myometrial
contractility. Life Sci 125:57, 2015

Murray EKI, Murphy MSQ, Smith GN, et al: Thromboelastographic analysis of haemostasis in
preeclamptic and normotensive pregnant women. Blood Coagul Fibrinolysis 29(6):567, 2018
Myers KM, Feltovich H, Mazza E, et al: The mechanical role of the cervix in pregnancy. J Biomech
48:1511, 2015
National Institute for Health And Clinical Excellence: Diabetes in pregnancy management from
preconception to the postnatal period. 2015. Available at:
www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng3/resources/diabetes-in-pregnancy-management-from-preconceptionto-the-postnatal-period-51038446021. Accessed November 25, 2020
Nelson DB, Stewart RD, Matulevicius SA, et al: The effects of maternal position and habitus on
maternal cardiovascular parameters as measured by cardiac magnetic resonance. Am J Perinatol
32:1318, 2015
Newbern D, Freemark M: Placental hormones and the control of maternal metabolism and fetal growth.
Curr Opin Endocrinol Diabetes Obes 18:409, 2011
Nolten WE, Rueckert PA: Elevated free cortisol index in pregnancy: possible regulatory mechanisms.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 139:492, 1981
Nteeba J, Kubota K, Wang W, et al: Pancreatic prolactin receptor signaling regulates maternal glucose
homeostasis. J Endocrinol February 1, 2019 [Epub ahead of print]
Oda T, Tamura N, Shen Y, et al: Amniotic fluid as a potent activator of blood coagulation and platelet
aggregation: study with rotational thromboelastometry. Thromb Res 172:142, 2018
Odutayo A, Hladunewich M: Obstetric nephrology: renal hemodynamic and metabolic physiology in
normal pregnancy. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 7:2073, 2012
Ohata Y, Ozono K, Michigami T: Current concepts in perinatal mineral metabolism. Clin Pediatr
Endocrinol 25:9, 2016
Øian P, Maltau JM, Noddeland H, et al: Oedema-preventing mechanisms in subcutaneous tissue of
normal pregnant women. BJOG 92:1113, 1985
Olausson H, Goldberg GR, Laskey MA: Calcium economy in human pregnancy and lactation. Nutr Res
Rev 25:40, 2012
Oliphant SS, Nygaard IE, Zong W, et al: Maternal adaptations in preparation for parturition predict
uncomplicated spontaneous delivery outcome. Am J Obstet Gynecol 211:630.e1, 2014
Orabona R, Prefumo F, Zandardini C, et al: Maternal functional hemodynamics in uncomplicated twin
pregnancies: a longitudinal study using impedance cardiography. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand
98(2):188, 2019
Orabona R, Sciatti E, Vizzardi, E, et al: Maternal hemodynamics, arterial stiffness and elastic aortic
properties in twin pregnancy. Physiol Med 41:125, 2021
Osman MW, Nath M, Khalik A, et al: Longitudinal study to assess changes in arterial stiffness and
cardiac output parameters among low-risk pregnant women. Pregnancy Hypertens 10:256, 2017
Osol G, Ko NL, Mandalá M: Plasticity of the maternal vasculature during pregnancy. Annu Rev Physiol
81:89, 2019
Özdemir ZC, Akşit MA: The association of ghrelin, leptin, and insulin in umbilical cord blood with fetal
anthropometric measurements and glucose levels at birth. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 33(9):1486,
2020
Palagini L, Cipollone G, Masci I, et al: Stress-related sleep reactivity is associated with insomnia,
psychopathology and suicidality in pregnant women: preliminary results. Sleep Med 56:145, 2019
Panitchob N, Widdows KL, Crocker IP, et al: Computational modeling of amino acid exchange and
facilitated transport in placental membrane vesicles. J Theor Biol 365:352, 2015

Parker CR Jr, Everett RB, Whalley PJ, et al: Hormone production during pregnancy in the primigravid
patients. II. Plasma levels of deoxycorticosterone throughout pregnancy of normal women and
women who developed pregnancy-induced hypertension. Am J Obstet Gynecol 138:626, 1980
Pates JA, Hatab MR, McIntire DD, et al: Determining uterine blood flow in pregnancy with magnetic
resonance imaging. Magn Reson Imaging 28(4):507, 2010
Peralta L, Rus G, Bochud N, et al: Mechanical assessment of cervical remodeling in pregnancy: insight
from a synthetic model. J Biomech 48:1557, 2015
Phelps RL, Metzger BE, Freinkel N: Carbohydrate metabolism in pregnancy, 17. Diurnal profiles of
plasma glucose, insulin, free fatty acids, triglycerides, cholesterol, and individual amino acids in late
normal pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 140:730, 1981
Picard D, Sellier S, Houivet E, et al: Incidence and risk factors for striae gravidarum. J Am Acad
Dermatol 273:699, 2015
Pitkin RM, Reynolds WA, Williams GA, et al: Calcium metabolism in normal pregnancy: a longitudinal
study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 133:781, 1979
Połeć A, Fedorcsák P, Eskild A, et al: The interplay of human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) with basic
fibroblast growth factor and adipokines on angiogenesis in vitro. Placenta 35:249, 2014
Pritchard JA: Changes in the blood volume during pregnancy and delivery. Anesthesiology 26:393, 1965
Pritchard JA, Adams RH: Erythrocyte production and destruction during pregnancy. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 79:750, 1960
Pritchard JA, Mason RA: Iron stores of normal adults and their replenishment with oral iron therapy.
JAMA 190:897, 1964
Pritchard JA, Scott DE: Iron demands during pregnancy. In Iron Deficiency-Pathogenesis: Clinical
Aspects and Therapy. London, Academic Press, 1970, p 173
Rabiepoor S, Abedi M, Saboory E, et al: Stress during pregnancy affected neonatal outcomes and
changed cortisol and leptin both in mothers and newborns. J Neonatal Perinatal Med 12(2):209, 2019
Rabotti C, Mischi M: Propagation of electrical activity in uterine muscle during pregnancy: a review.
Acta Physiol 213:406, 2015
Racicot K, Kwon JY, Aldo P, et al: Understanding the complexity of the immune system during
pregnancy. Am J Reprod Immunol 72:107, 2014
Redman CW, Sargent IL, Taylor RN: Immunology of normal pregnancy and preeclampsia. In Taylor
RN, Roberts JM, Cunningham FG (eds): Chesley’s Hypertensive Disorders in Pregnancy, 4th ed.
Amsterdam, Academic Press, 2015
Reese JA, Peck JD, Deschamps DR, et al: Platelet counts during pregnancy. N Engl J Med 379(1):32,
2018
Resnik JL, Hong C, Resnik R, et al: Evaluation of B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) levels in normal and
preeclamptic women. Am J Obstet Gynecol 193:450, 2005
Rezai S, Nakagawa JT, Tedesco J, et al: Gestational gigantomastia complicating pregnancy: a case
report and review of the literature. Case Rep Obstet Gynecol 2015:892369, 2015
Richani K, Soto E, Romero R, et al: Normal pregnancy is characterized by systemic activation of the
complement system. J Matern Fetal Neonat Med 17:239, 2005
Rosai J, Young RH: Javier Arias-Stella and his famous reaction. Int J Gynecol Pathol 34:314, 2015
Rosenfeld CR, DeSpain K, Word RA, et al: Differential sensitivity to angiotensin II and norepinephrine
in human uterine arteries. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 97(1):138, 2012
Rudder M, Russo M, Ventetuolo CE: Breathing for two. N Engl J Med 384:61, 2021
Rylander R: Magnesium in pregnancy blood pressure and pre-eclampsia—a review. Pregnancy
Hypertens 4:146, 2014

Saarelainen H, Laitinen T, Raitakari OT, et al: Pregnancy-related hyperlipidemia and endothelial function
in healthy women. Circ J 70:768, 2006
Saleh L, Verdonk K, Visser W, et al: The emerging role of endothelin-1 in the pathogenesis of preeclampsia. Ther Adv Cardiovasc Dis 10(5):282, 2016
Sangsawang B: Risk factors for the development of stress urinary incontinence during pregnancy in
primigravidae: a review of the literature. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 178:27, 2014
Santa LM, Teshima LY, Forero JV, et al: AngiomiRs: potential biomarkers of pregnancy’s vascular
pathologies. J Pregnancy 2015:320386, 2015
Sanz-Salvador L, García-Pérez MÁ, Tarín JJ, et al: Bone metabolic changes during pregnancy: a period
of vulnerability to osteoporosis and fracture. Eur J Endocrinol 172:R53, 2015
Sarmento Gonçalves I, Malafaia S, Belchior H, et al: Hyperreactio luteinalis encountered during
caesarean delivery of an uncomplicated spontaneous singleton pregnancy. BMJ Case Rep
2015:bcr2015211349, 2015
Semins MJ, Matlaga BR: Kidney stones during pregnancy. Nat Rev Urol 11:163, 2014
Shah DA, Khalil RA: Bioactive factors in uteroplacental and systemic circulation link placental ischemia
to generalized vascular dysfunction in hypertensive pregnancy and preeclampsia. Biochem
Pharmacol 95:211, 2015
Sharief LT, Lawrie AS, Mackie IJ, et al: Changes in factor XIII level during pregnancy. Hemophilia
20:e144, 2014
Shibata K, Fukuwatari T, Sasaki S, et al: Urinary excretion levels of water-soluble vitamins in pregnant
and lactating women in Japan. J Nutr Sci Vitaminol 59:178, 2013
Shin GH, Toto EL, Schey R: Pregnancy and postpartum bowel changes: constipation and fecal
incontinence. Am J Gastroenterol 110:521, 2015
Shinagawa S, Suzuki S, Chihara H, et al: Maternal basal metabolic rate in twin pregnancy. Gynecol
Obstet Invest 60:145, 2005
Shnaekel KL, Magann EF, Ahmadi S: Pubic symphysis rupture and separation during pregnancy. Obstet
Gynecol Surv 70:713, 2015
Siddiqui AH, Tauheed N, Ahmad A, et al: Pulmonary function in advanced uncomplicated singleton and
twin pregnancy. J Bras Pneumol 40:244, 2014
Simeone S, Marchi L, Canarutto R, et al: Doppler velocimetry and adverse outcome in labor induction
for late IUGR. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 30(3):323, 2017
Simpson KR, James DC: Efficacy of intrauterine resuscitation techniques in improving fetal oxygen
status during labor. Obstet Gynecol 105:1362, 2005
Sisti G, Kanninen TT, Witkin SS: Maternal immunity and pregnancy outcome: focus on preconception
and autophagy. Genes Immun 17:1, 2016
Smid MC, Ricks NM, Panzer A, et al: Maternal gut microbiome biodiversity in pregnancy. Am J
Perinatol 35(1):24, 2018
Snart CJP, Keeble C, Taylor E, et al: Maternal iodine status and associations with birth outcomes in
three major cities in the United Kingdom. Nutrients 11(2):441, 2019
Song CS, Kappas A: The influence of estrogens, progestins and pregnancy on the liver. Vitam Horm
26:147, 1968
Stephens TV, Payne M, Ball RO, et al: Protein requirements of healthy pregnant women during early
and late gestation are higher than current recommendations. J Nutr 145:73, 2015
Stewart RD, Nelson DB, Matulevicius SA, et al: Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging to assess the
impact of maternal habitus on cardiac remodeling during pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol
214:640.e1, 2016

Stoehr JR, Choi JN, Colavincenzo M, et al: Off-label use of topical minoxidil in alopecia: a review. Am J
Clin Dermatol 20(2):237, 2019
Sunitha M, Chandrasekharappa S, Brid SV: Electrocardiographic QRS axis, Q wave and T-wave
changes in 2nd and 3rd trimester of normal pregnancy. J Clin Diagn Res 8:BC17, 2014
Syed S: Iodine and the “near” eradication of cretinism. Pediatrics 135:594, 2015
Taddei CR, Cortez RV, Mattar R, et al: Microbiome in normal and pathological pregnancies: a literature
overview. Am J Reprod Immunol 80(2):e12993, 2018
Taylor BD, Ness RB, Olsen J, et al: Serum leptin measured in early pregnancy is higher in women with
preeclampsia compared with normotensive pregnant women. Hypertension 65:594, 2015
Thomsen JK, Fogh-Andersen N, Jaszczak P, et al: Atrial natriuretic peptide, blood volume, aldosterone,
and sodium excretion during twin pregnancy. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 73(1):14, 1994
Thornburg LL, Queenan R, Brandt-Griffith B, et al: Procalcitonin for prediction of chorioamnionitis in
preterm premature rupture of membranes. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 29:2056, 2016
Tsai CH, de Leeuw NK: Changes in 2,3-diphosphoglycerate during pregnancy and puerperium in normal
women and in β-thalassemia heterozygous women. Am J Obstet Gynecol 142:520, 1982
Tsai PJ, Davis J, Bryant-Greenwood G: Systemic and placental leptin and its receptors in pregnancies
associated with obesity. Reprod Sci 22:189, 2015
Türkan H, Gökgöz MS, Taşdelen I, et al: Gestational gigantomastia. J Breast Health 12(2):86, 2016
Tujula B, Kokki H, Räsänen J, et al: Procalcitonin; a feasible biomarker for severe bacterial infections in
Obstetrics and Gynecology? Acta Obstet Gynecol Scan 97(5):505, 2018
Ulmsten U, Sundström G: Esophageal manometry in pregnant and nonpregnant women. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 132:260, 1978
Van de Putte P, Vernieuwe L, Perlas A: Term pregnant patients have similar gastric volume to nonpregnant females: a single-centre cohort study. Br J Anaesth 122(1):79, 2019
Van den Akker CH, Schierbeek H, et al: Amino acid metabolism in the human fetus at term: leucine,
valine, and methionine kinetics. Pediatr Res 70:566, 2011
Van Wagenen G, Jenkins RH: An experimental examination of factors causing ureteral dilatation of
pregnancy. J Urol 42:1010, 1939
Vazquez MJ, Ruiz-Romero A, Tena-Sempere M: Roles of leptin in reproduction, pregnancy and
polycystic ovary syndrome: consensus knowledge and recent developments. Metabolism 64:79, 2015
Velasco I, Bath SC, Rayman MP: Iodine as essential nutrient during the first 1000 days of like. Nutrients
10(3):pii.E290, 2018
Vignini A, Cecati M, Nanetti L, et al: Placental expression of endothelial and inducible nitric oxide
synthase and NO metabolism in gestational hypertension: a case-control study. J Matern Fetal
Neonatal Med 29:576, 2016
Vodstrcil LA, Tare M, Novak J, et al: Relaxin mediates uterine artery compliance during pregnancy and
increases uterine blood flow. FASEB J 26(10):4035, 2012
Vrachnis N, Grigoriadis C, Siristatidis C, et al: The Janus face of maternal serum relaxin: a facilitator of
birth, might it also induce preterm birth? J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 28:218, 2015
Wadasinghe SU, Metcalf L, Metcalf P, et al: Maternal physiologic renal pelvis dilatation in pregnancy:
sonographic reference data. J Ultrasound Med 35(12):2659, 2016
Walker MC, Garner PR, Keely EJ, et al: Changes in activated protein C resistance during normal
pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 177:162, 1997
Wang L, Yang T, Ding Y, et al: Chemerin plays a protective role by regulating human umbilical vein
endothelial cell-induced nitric oxide signaling in preeclampsia. Endocrine 48:299, 2015

Wang YY, Kannan A, Nunn KL, et al: IgG in cervicovaginal mucus traps HSV and prevents vaginal
herpes infections. Mucosal Immunol 7:1036, 2014
West CA, Sasser JM, Baylis C: The enigma of continual plasma volume expansion in pregnancy: critical
role of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol 311(6):F1125, 2016
Wilson M, Morganti AA, Zervoudakis I, et al: Blood pressure, the renin-aldosterone system and sex
steroids throughout normal pregnancy. Am J Med 68:97, 1980
Wilson MJ, Lopez M, Vargas M, et al: Greater uterine artery blood flow during pregnancy in
multigenerational (Andean) than shorter-term (European) high-altitude residents. Am J Physiol
Regul Integr Comp Physiol 293:R1313, 2007
Woodmansee WW: Pituitary disorders in pregnancy. Neurol Clin 37(1):63, 2019
World Health Organization: Human energy requirements. Food and nutrition technical report series 1.
Rome, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2004, p 53
Yurteri-Kaplan L, Saber S, Zamudio S: Brain natriuretic peptide in term pregnancy. Reprod Sci
19(5):520, 2012
Zeeman GG, Cunningham FG, Pritchard JA: The magnitude of hemoconcentration with eclampsia.
Hypertens Pregnancy 28(2):127, 2009
Zeeman GG, Hatab M, Twickler DM: Maternal cerebral blood flow changes in pregnancies. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 189:968, 2003
Zhang HH, Chen JC, Sheibani L, et al: Pregnancy augments VEGF-stimulated in vitro angiogenesis and
vasodilator (NO and H2S) production in human uterine artery endothelial cells. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab 102(7):2382, 2017
Zhou SJ Condo D, Ryan P, et al: Association between maternal iodine intake in pregnancy and childhood
neurodevelopment at age 18 months. Am J Epidemiol 88(2):332, 2019

SECTION 3

PLACENTATION,
EMBRYOGENESIS, AND FETAL
DEVELOPMENT

CHAPTER 5

Implantation and Placental Development

OVARIAN–ENDOMETRIAL CYCLE
DECIDUA
IMPLANTATION AND EARLY TROPHOBLAST FORMATION
PLACENTA AND CHORION
AMNION
UMBILICAL CORD
PLACENTAL HORMONES
FETAL ADRENAL GLAND–PLACENTAL INTERACTIONS
REFERENCES
All obstetricians should understand the basic biological steps required for
women to achieve pregnancy. Moreover, abnormalities affecting these steps
can lead to infertility or pregnancy loss. The biological and molecular
changes involved in human zygote implantation and subsequent fetal and
placental development are intricate. In the past 50 years, researchers have
delineated many of these molecular and physiological events. Yet, much
work remains in the continual challenge to improve clinical outcomes.

OVARIAN-ENDOMETRIAL CYCLE

In most women, cyclical ovulation continues during the almost 40 years
between menarche and menopause. Thus, without contraception,
approximately 400 opportunities for pregnancy exist, and these are tightly
regulated by complex interactions of the hypothalamic-pituitary-ovarian axis.
Concurrently, endometrium undergoes faithfully reproduced cyclical changes
to prepare for pregnancy (Fig. 5-1). Essential contributors in this process
include gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH), the gonadotropin
hormones follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH),
and the ovarian sex steroid hormones estrogen and progesterone. For a
detailed description of menstrual cycle physiology, the reader is referred to
Chapter 16 in Williams Gynecology, 4th edition (Halvorson, 2020).

FIGURE 5-1 Gonadotropin control of the ovarian and endometrial cycles. The ovarian-endometrial
cycle is structured as a 28-day cycle. The follicular phase (days 1 to 14) is characterized by rising
estrogen levels, endometrial thickening, and selection of the dominant “ovulatory” follicle. During the
luteal phase (days 14 to 21), the corpus luteum (CL) produces estrogen and progesterone, which
prepare the endometrium for implantation. If implantation occurs, the developing blastocyst begins to
produce human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) and rescues the corpus luteum, thus maintaining
progesterone production. FSH = follicle-stimulating hormone; LH = luteinizing hormone.

■ Ovulation
This defining event separates the follicular and luteal phases of the menstrual
cycle. Following ovulation, the corpus luteum develops from the remains of

the graafian follicle in a process referred to as luteinization. The basement
membrane separating the granulosa-lutein and theca-lutein cells breaks
down, and by day 2 postovulation, blood vessels and capillaries invade the
granulosa cell layer. During luteinization, these cells undergo hypertrophy
and increase their capacity to synthesize hormones. LH is the primary
luteotropic factor responsible for corpus luteum maintenance (Vande Wiele,
1970).
The hormone secretion pattern of the corpus luteum differs from that of
the follicle. First, the greater capacity of granulosa-lutein cells to produce
progesterone results from enhanced access to blood-borne, low-density
lipoprotein (LDL)-derived cholesterol, which is a steroidogenic precursor
(Carr, 1981). Ovarian progesterone production peaks at 25 to 50 mg/d during
the midluteal phase. With pregnancy, the corpus luteum continues
progesterone production in response to placental human chorionic
gonadotropin (hCG). LH and hCG both act via the same LH-hCG receptor.
The human corpus luteum is a transient endocrine organ. In the absence of
pregnancy, it rapidly undergoes apoptosis 9 to 11 days after ovulation
(Vaskivuo, 2002). The dramatic drop in circulating estradiol and
progesterone levels initiate molecular events that lead to menstruation.
Between days 22 and 25 after ovulation, the secretory-phase
endometrium undergoes striking changes associated with predecidual
transformation of the upper two thirds of the functionalis layer. The glands
exhibit extensive coiling, and luminal secretions become visible. Changes
within the endometrium can also mark the window of implantation seen on
days 20 to 24. Epithelial surface cells show fewer microvilli and cilia, but
luminal protrusions appear on the apical cell surface (Nikas, 2003). These
pinopodes help prepare for blastocyst implantation. They also coincide with
changes in the surface glycocalyx that allow acceptance of a blastocyst
(Aplin, 2003).
Another highlight of the secretory phase is the continuing growth and
development of the spiral arteries. These vessels arise from the radial
arteries, which are myometrial branches of the arcuate and, ultimately,
uterine vessels. The morphological and functional properties of the spiral
arteries are unique and essential to blood flow changes seen during
menstruation or implantation. During endometrial growth, spiral arteries
lengthen at a rate appreciably greater than the rate of endometrial tissue
thickening. This growth discordance obliges even greater coiling. Spiral

artery development reflects a marked induction of angiogenesis, reflected by
widespread vessel sprouting and extension.
At this juncture with hormonal withdrawal, menstruation follows. With
blastocyst implantation, however, the endometrium is converted to the
decidua.

DECIDUA
This is a specialized, highly modified endometrium of pregnancy. It is
essential for hemochorial placentation, that is, one in which maternal blood
contacts trophoblast. This relationship requires trophoblast invasion, and
considerable research has focused on the interaction between decidual cells
and invading trophoblasts. Decidualization transforms proliferating
endometrial stromal cells into specialized secretory cells. This process
depends on estrogen, progesterone, androgens, and factors secreted by the
implanting blastocyst (Gibson, 2016). The decidua produces factors that
regulate endometrial receptivity and that modulate immune and vascular cell
functions within the maternal–fetal microenvironment. The special
immunomodulatory relationship between the decidua and invading
trophoblasts is largely mediated by decidual natural killer (NK) cells and
ensures success of the pregnancy semiallograft.

■ Decidual Structure
The decidua is classified into three parts based on anatomical location.
Decidua directly beneath the implanted blastocyst is modified by trophoblast
invasion and becomes the decidua basalis. The decidua capsularis overlies
the enlarging blastocyst and initially separates the conceptus from the rest of
the uterine cavity (Fig. 5-2). This portion is most prominent during the
second month of pregnancy and consists of stromal decidual cells covered by
a single layer of flattened epithelial cells. The other side of the capsularis
contacts the avascular, extraembryonic fetal membrane—the chorion laeve.
The remainder of the uterus is lined by decidua parietalis. During early
pregnancy, a space lies between the decidua capsularis and parietalis
because the gestational sac does not fill the entire uterine cavity. The
gestational sac is the extraembryonic coelom and also called the chorionic
cavity. By 14 to 16 weeks’ gestation, the expanding sac has enlarged to

completely fill the uterine cavity. The resulting apposition of the decidua
capsularis and parietalis creates the decidua vera, and the uterine cavity is
functionally obliterated.

FIGURE 5-2 Three portions of the decidua—the basalis, capsularis, and parietalis—are illustrated.

In early pregnancy, the decidua begins to thicken, eventually attaining a
depth of 5 to 10 mm. With magnification, furrows and numerous small
openings, representing the mouths of uterine glands, can be detected. Later in
pregnancy, the decidua becomes thinner, presumably because of pressure
exerted by the expanding uterine contents.
The decidua parietalis and basalis are composed of three layers. There is
a surface or compact zone—zona compacta; a middle portion or spongy zone
—zona spongiosa—that has remnants of glands and numerous small blood
vessels; and a basal zone—zona basalis. The zona compacta and spongiosa
together form the zona functionalis. The basal zone remains after delivery
and gives rise to new endometrium.
The decidual reaction is completed only with blastocyst implantation.
Predecidual changes, however, commence first during the midluteal phase in
endometrial stromal cells adjacent to the spiral arteries and arterioles.

Thereafter, these alterations spread in waves throughout the uterine
endometrium. The endometrial stromal cells enlarge to form polygonal or
round decidual cells. The nuclei become vesicular, and the cytoplasm
becomes clear, slightly basophilic, and surrounded by a translucent
membrane.
As the embryo–fetus grows, the blood supply to the decidua capsularis is
lost. However, spiral arteries persist to supply the decidua parietalis. These
arteries retain smooth muscle and endothelium and thereby remain
responsive to vasoactive agents.
In contrast, the spiral arteries that supply the decidua basalis and
ultimately the placental intervillous space are altered remarkably.
Trophoblastic cells invade the spiral arterioles and arteries and replace their
endothelial cells. The vessel wall smooth muscle is destroyed, and the
resulting uteroplacental vessels become unresponsive to vasoactive agents.
Defective trophoblastic invasion of spiral arteries is thought to be one
underlying cause of preeclampsia (Chap. 40, p. 692). Conversely, the fetal
chorionic vessels, which transport blood between the placenta and the fetus,
contain smooth muscle and thus do respond to vasoactive agents.

■ Decidual Histology
Early in pregnancy, the decidual zona spongiosa consists of large distended
glands, often exhibiting marked hyperplasia and separated by minimal
stroma. At first, the glands are lined by typical cylindrical uterine epithelium
with abundant secretory activity that contributes to blastocyst nourishment.
With advanced pregnancy, the glandular elements largely disappear, and the
spongy zone of the decidua basalis consists mainly of arteries and widely
dilated veins.
The decidua basalis contributes to formation of the placental basal plate
(Fig. 5-3). As such, it is invaded by many interstitial trophoblasts. The
Nitabuch layer is a zone of fibrinoid degeneration in which invading
trophoblasts meet the decidua basalis. If the decidua is defective, as in
placenta accreta, the Nitabuch layer is usually absent (Chap. 43, p. 759).
Normally, there is also a more superficial, but inconsistent, deposition of
fibrin—Rohr stria—at the bottom of the intervillous space and surrounding
the anchoring villi. Decidual necrosis is a common phenomenon in the first
and probably second trimesters (McCombs, 1964). Thus, necrotic decidua

obtained through curettage after spontaneous abortion should not necessarily
be interpreted as either a cause or an effect of the pregnancy loss.

FIGURE 5-3 Section through a junction of chorion, villi, and decidua basalis in early first-trimester
pregnancy. (Reproduced with permission from Dr. Kurt Benirschke.)

Both decidual layers contain numerous cell groups whose composition
varies with gestational stage (Loke, 1995). The primary cellular components
are the true decidual cells, which differentiated from the endometrial stromal
cells, and numerous maternal bone marrow-derived cells. Of the latter,
lymphocytes with unique properties accumulate at the maternal–fetal
interface and are essential to evoke immune tolerance between mother and

fetus. These include regulatory T cells, decidual macrophages, and decidual
NK cells. Collectively, these cells not only provide immunotolerance but
also play an important role in trophoblast invasion and vasculogenesis
(PrabhuDas, 2015).

■ Decidual Prolactin
The decidua produces prolactin, which is present in enormous amounts in
amnionic fluid (Golander, 1978; Riddick, 1979). Decidual prolactin is a
product of the same gene that encodes for anterior pituitary prolactin, but the
exact physiological role of decidual prolactin is unknown. Signaling by
prolactin can lead to the production of proangiogenic factors. Prolactin can
also be cleaved by proteases to form vasoinhibins (Nakajima, 2015; Triebel,
2015). These compounds have antiangiogenic properties and may contribute
to peripartum cardiomyopathy, whose pathogenesis and treatment are
discussed in Chapter 52 (p. 933).
Decidual prolactin preferentially enters amnionic fluid and may reach
extraordinarily high levels of 10,000 ng/mL at 20 to 24 weeks’ gestation
(Tyson, 1972). In contrast, maternal serum levels are relatively low at 150 to
200 ng/mL. As discussed in Chapter 4 (p. 57), prolactin inhibits maternal
insulin action and results in increased glucose levels for fetal growth.

IMPLANTATION AND EARLY TROPHOBLAST
FORMATION
■ Fertilization
With ovulation, the ovary releases the secondary oocyte and surrounding
cells of the cumulus–oocyte complex. The oocyte complex is quickly
engulfed by the fallopian tube infundibulum. Directional movement of cilia
and tubal peristalsis moves the ovum within the tubal lumen. Fertilization
takes place in the lumen within a few hours, and no more than a day after
ovulation. Because of this narrow window, spermatozoa must be present in
the fallopian tube at the time of oocyte arrival. Almost all pregnancies result
when intercourse occurs during the 2 days preceding or on the day of
ovulation.

Fertilization is highly complex. Molecular mechanisms allow
spermatozoa to pass between cumulus cells; through the zona pellucida,
which is a thick glycoprotein layer surrounding the oocyte cell membrane;
and into the oocyte cytoplasm. Fusion of the two nuclei and intermingling of
maternal and paternal chromosomes creates the zygote.
Early human development is described by days or weeks
postfertilization, that is, postconceptional (Chap. 7, p. 121). By contrast, in
most chapters of this book, clinical pregnancy dating is calculated from the
first day of the last menstrual period (LMP). Thus, 1 week postfertilization
corresponds to approximately 3 weeks from the LMP in women with regular
28-day cycles. This convention is clinically important for dating pregnancies
conceived by in vitro fertilization (IVF), in which the gestational age is 14
days greater than the day of fertilization. As an example, 8 weeks’ gestation
refers to 8 completed weeks following the LMP but corresponds to 6 weeks
postfertilization.
After fertilization, the zygote—a diploid cell with 46 chromosomes—
undergoes cleavage, and zygote cells produced by this division are
blastomeres (Fig. 5-4). In the two-cell zygote, the blastomeres and polar
body continue to be surrounded by the zona pellucida. The zygote undergoes
slow cleavage for 3 days while still in the fallopian tube. As the blastomeres
continue to divide, a solid mulberry-like ball of cells—the morula—is
produced. The morula enters the uterine cavity approximately 3 days after
fertilization. Gradual accumulation of fluid between the morula cells leads to
formation of the early blastocyst.

FIGURE 5-4 Zygote cleavage and blastocyst formation. The morula period begins at the 12- to 16-cell
stage and ends when the blastocyst forms, which occurs when there are 50 to 60 blastomeres present.
The polar bodies, shown in the 2-cell stage, are small nonfunctional cells that degenerate.

Blastocyst
As early as 4 to 5 days after fertilization, the 58-cell blastocyst differentiates
into five embryo-producing cells—the inner cell mass (see Fig. 5-4). The
remaining 53 outer cells, called the trophectoderm, are destined to form
trophoblasts (Hertig, 1962).
In the 107-cell blastocyst, the eight formative, embryo-producing cells
are surrounded by 99 trophoblastic cells. The blastocyst is released from the
zona pellucida secondary to secretion of specific proteases from the
secretory-phase endometrial glands (O’Sullivan, 2002). Release from the
zona pellucida allows blastocyst-produced cytokines and hormones to
directly influence endometrial receptivity (Lindhard, 2002). The blastocyst
secretes interleukin-1α (IL-1α) and IL-1β, which are cytokines that likely

directly influence the endometrium. Embryos also secrete hCG, which may
influence endometrial receptivity (Licht, 2001; Lobo, 2001).
The receptive endometrium is thought to respond by producing leukemia
inhibitory factor (LIF), follistatin, and colony-stimulating factor-1 (CSF-1).
LIF and follistatin activate signaling pathways that collectively inhibit
proliferation and promote differentiation of the endometrial epithelia and
stroma to enable uterine receptivity (Rosario, 2016b). At the maternal–fetal
interface, CSF-1 has proposed immunomodulatory and proangiogenic actions
that are required for implantation (Rahmati, 2015).

■ Implantation
The blastocyst implants into the uterine wall 6 or 7 days after fertilization.
This process can be divided into three phases: (1) apposition—initial
contact of the blastocyst to the uterine wall; (2) adhesion—increased
physical contact between the blastocyst and decidua; and (3) invasion—
penetration and invasion of syncytiotrophoblast and cytotrophoblasts into the
decidua, inner third of the myometrium, and uterine vasculature. Successful
implantation requires a receptive endometrium appropriately primed with
estrogen and progesterone by the corpus luteum. Such uterine receptivity is
limited to days 20 to 24 of the endometrial cycle. Adherence is mediated by
cell-surface receptors at the implantation site that interact with blastocyst
receptors (Carson, 2002; Lessey, 2002). If the blastocyst approaches the
endometrium after cycle day 24, the potential for adhesion declines because
antiadhesive glycoprotein synthesis prevents receptor interactions (Navot,
1991). A mismatch between uterine receptivity and timing of embryo transfer
can lead to repeated implantation failure in some IVF patients. This has
stimulated efforts to define receptivity by gene expression profiles to
improve clinical outcomes (Ruiz-Alonso, 2013).
At the time of its interaction with the endometrium, the blastocyst is
composed of 100 to 250 cells. The blastocyst trophectoderm loosely adheres
to the decidua by apposition. This appears to be closely regulated by
paracrine interactions between these two tissues and most commonly occurs
on the upper posterior uterine wall.
Successful endometrial blastocyst adhesion involves modified
expression of cellular adhesion molecules (CAMs). The integrins—one of
four families of CAMs—are cell-surface receptors that mediate cell

adhesion to extracellular matrix proteins (Lessey, 2002). Endometrial
integrins are hormonally regulated, and a specific set of integrins is
expressed at implantation (Lessey, 1995). Recognition-site blockade of the
integrins needed for binding will prevent blastocyst attachment (Kaneko,
2013).

■ Trophoblast Development
The fetus depends on the placenta for pulmonary, hepatic, and renal
functions. These are accomplished through the anatomical relationship of the
placenta and its uterine interface. In overview, maternal blood flows from
uteroplacental vessels into the placental intervillous space and bathes the
syncytiotrophoblast, which surround villi. Here, gases, nutrients, and other
substances are exchanged with fetal capillary blood within the core of each
placental villus. Thus, fetal and maternal blood do not normally mix in this
hemochorial placenta.
Human placental formation begins with the trophectoderm, which gives
rise to a trophoblast cell layer encircling the blastocyst. Trophoblast exhibits
the most variable structure, function, and developmental pattern of all
placental components. Its invasiveness promotes implantation, its nutritional
role for the conceptus is reflected in their name, and its endocrine function is
essential to maternal physiological adaptations and to pregnancy
maintenance.
By the eighth day postfertilization, after initial implantation, the
trophoblast has differentiated into an outer multinucleated syncytium—the
primitive syncytiotrophoblast, and an inner layer of primitive mononuclear
cells—cytotrophoblasts. The latter are solely germinal cells for the
syncytium. As cytotrophoblasts differentiate, they express an endogenous
envelope protein called syncytin, which aids their cell fusion with the
expanding outer layer of syncytiotrophoblast. Each cytotrophoblast has a
well-demarcated cell border, a single nucleus, and ability to undergo DNA
synthesis and mitosis (Arnholdt, 1991). These are lacking in the
syncytiotrophoblast, which provides transport functions of the placenta. It is
so named because instead of individual cells, it has an amorphous cytoplasm
without cell borders, nuclei that are multiple and diverse in size and shape,
and a continuous syncytial lining.

Following implantation, trophoblasts differentiate along two main
pathways that give rise to either villous or extravillous trophoblasts. As
shown in Figure 5-5, both have distinct functions (Loke, 1995). Villous
trophoblasts generate chorionic villi, which primarily transport oxygen,
nutrients, and other compounds between the fetus and mother. Extravillous
trophoblasts migrate into the decidua and myometrium (Fig. 5-6). They also
penetrate maternal vasculature and thus directly contact various maternal cell
types (Pijnenborg, 1994). Extravillous trophoblasts are further classified as
interstitial trophoblasts and endovascular trophoblasts. The interstitial
trophoblasts invade the decidua and eventually penetrate the myometrium to
form placental-bed giant cells. These trophoblasts also surround spiral
arteries. The endovascular trophoblasts penetrate the spiral artery lumens
(Pijnenborg, 1983).

FIGURE 5-5 Endovascular and interstitial extravillous trophoblasts are found outside the villus.
Endovascular trophoblasts invade and transform spiral arteries during pregnancy to create lowresistance blood flow that is characteristic of the placenta. Interstitial trophoblasts invade the decidua
and surround spiral arteries.

FIGURE 5-6 Photomicrograph of extravillous trophoblast invasion of the decidua basalis.

Recently, single-cell RNA sequencing technology has enabled inference
of trophoblast differentiation lineages (Liu, 2018; Tsang, 2017). This has
also yielded insights into the communication between trophoblasts and
maternal decidual and immune cell populations (Vento-Tormo, 2018).
Furthermore, human trophoblast stem cells, long hypothesized to exist, have
been isolated from early gestations (Okae, 2018). Culture of these cells will
likely aid greater understanding of early trophoblast differentiation and
invasion (Haider, 2018; Turco, 2018).

■ Early Invasion
After gentle erosion between epithelial cells of the surface endometrium,
invading trophoblasts burrow deeper. At 9 days of development, the
blastocyst wall facing the uterine lumen is a single layer of flattened cells.
By the 10th day, the blastocyst becomes totally encased within the
endometrium (Fig. 5-7). The blastocyst wall opposite the uterine lumen is
thicker and comprises two zones—the trophoblasts and the embryo-forming
inner cell mass. As early as 7.5 days postfertilization, the inner cell mass or

embryonic disc differentiates into a thick plate of primitive ectoderm and an
underlying layer of endoderm. Some small cells appear between the
embryonic disc and the trophoblasts and enclose a space that will become
the amnionic cavity.

FIGURE 5-7 Drawing of sections through implanted blastocysts. A. At 10 days. B. At 12 days after
fertilization. This stage is characterized by the intercommunication of the lacunae filled with maternal
blood. Note in (B) that large cavities have appeared in the extraembryonic mesoderm, forming the
beginning of the extraembryonic coelom. Also, extraembryonic endodermal cells have begun to form on
the inside of the primitive yolk sac. (Redrawn from Moore KL, Persaud, TV, Torchia, MG (eds): The
Developing Human. Clinically Oriented Embryology, 9th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 2013.)

Extraembryonic mesenchyme first appears as groups of isolated cells
within the blastocyst cavity, and later this mesoderm completely lines the
cavity. Within this mesoderm, spaces form and then fuse to form the chorionic
cavity, that is, the extraembryonic coelom. The chorion is composed of
trophoblasts and mesenchyme. Some mesenchymal cells eventually will
condense to form the body stalk. This stalk joins the embryo to the nutrient
chorion and later develops into the umbilical cord. The body stalk can be
recognized at an early stage at the caudal end of the embryonic disc (Fig. 7-3,
p. 123).
As the embryo enlarges, more maternal decidua basalis is invaded by
syncytiotrophoblast. Beginning approximately 12 days after conception, the
syncytiotrophoblast is permeated by a system of intercommunicating channels
called trophoblastic lacunae. After invasion of superficial decidual
capillary walls, lacunae become filled with maternal blood. At the same

time, the decidual reaction, characterized by decidual stromal cell
enlargement and glycogen storage, intensifies (p. 84).

■ Chorionic Villi
With deeper invasion into the decidua, solid primary villi arise from buds of
cytotrophoblasts that protrude into the primitive syncytium before 12 days
postfertilization. Primary villi are composed of a cytotrophoblast core
covered by syncytiotrophoblast. As the lacunae merge, a complicated
labyrinth is formed that is partitioned by these solid cytotrophoblastic
columns. The trophoblast-lined channels form the intervillous space, and the
solid cellular columns form the primary villous stalks.
Beginning on the 12th day after fertilization, mesenchymal cords derived
from extraembryonic mesoderm invade the solid trophoblast columns. These
then form secondary villi. Once angiogenesis begins in the mesenchymal
cords, tertiary villi are created. Although maternal venous sinuses are
tapped early in implantation, maternal arterial blood does not enter the
intervillous space until around day 15. By the 17th day, however, fetal blood
vessels are functional, and a placental circulation is established. The fetal–
placental circulation is completed when the blood vessels of the embryo are
connected with chorionic vessels. In some villi, angiogenesis fails from lack
of circulation. The most striking exaggeration of this is seen with
hydatidiform mole (Fig. 13-1, p. 236).
Villi are covered by an outer layer of syncytiotrophoblast and an inner
layer of cytotrophoblasts. Proliferation of cytotrophoblast at the villous tips
produces the trophoblastic cell columns that form anchoring villi. They are
not invaded by fetal mesenchyme, and they are anchored to the decidua at the
basal plate, which is the maternal side of the intervillous space. The
chorionic plate forms the roof of the intervillous space. It consists of the two
layers of trophoblasts, which line the intervillous space, and fibrous
mesoderm on the opposite side. The final chorionic plate is formed by 8 to
10 weeks as the amnionic and primary chorionic plate mesenchyme fuse
together. This formation is accomplished by expansion of the amnionic sac.
Early electron microscopic studies demonstrate prominent microvilli on
the syncytial surface (Fig. 5-8) (Wislocki, 1955). Associated pinocytotic
vacuoles and vesicles are involved in both absorptive and secretory
placental functions. Microvilli increase trophoblast surface area in direct

contact with maternal blood, the defining characteristic of a hemochorial
placenta.

FIGURE 5-8 Electron micrograph of term human placenta villus. A villus capillary filled with fetal red
blood cells (asterisks) is seen in close proximity to the microvilli border. (Reproduced with permission
from Boyd JD, Hamilton WJ: The Human Placenta. Cambridge, Heffer, 1970.)

PLACENTA AND CHORION
■ Chorion Development
In early pregnancy, the villi are distributed over the entire periphery of the
chorionic membrane (Fig. 5-9). As the blastocyst with its surrounding
trophoblasts grows and expands into the decidua, one pole faces the
endometrial cavity. The opposite pole will form the placenta. Here,
chorionic villi in contact with the decidua basalis proliferate to form the
chorion frondosum—or leafy chorion. As growth of embryonic and
extraembryonic tissues continues, the blood supply to the chorion facing the
endometrial cavity is restricted. Because of this, villi in contact with the
decidua capsularis cease to grow and then degenerate. This portion of the

chorion becomes the avascular fetal membrane that abuts the decidua
parietalis and is called the chorion laeve—or smooth chorion. This smooth
chorion is composed of cytotrophoblasts and fetal mesodermal mesenchyme.
A paracrine system between the decidua and chorion also links mother and
fetus. This is an extraordinarily important arrangement for maternal–fetal
communication and for maternal immunological acceptance of the conceptus
(Guzeloglu-Kayisli, 2009).

FIGURE 5-9 Complete abortion specimens. A. Initially, the entire chorionic sac is covered with villi,
and the embryo within is not visible B. Stretch and pressure from further growth prompt partial

regression of the villi. The remaining villi form the future placenta, whereas the smooth portion is the
chorion.

Until near the end of the third month, the chorion laeve is separated from
the amnion by the exocoelomic cavity. Thereafter, they are in intimate contact
to form the avascular amniochorion. These two structures are important sites
of molecular transfer and metabolic activity. Moreover, they constitute an
important paracrine arm of the fetal–maternal communication system.

■ Regulators of Trophoblast Invasion
Implantation and endometrial decidualization activate a unique population of
maternal immune cells that play critical functions in trophoblast invasion,
angiogenesis, spiral artery remodeling, and maternal tolerance to fetal
alloantigens. Decidual natural killer cells (dNK) make up 70 percent of
decidual leukocytes in the first trimester and directly contact trophoblasts. In
contrast to NK cells in peripheral blood, dNK cells lack cytotoxic functions.
They produce specific cytokines and angiogenic factors to regulate
trophoblast invasion and spiral artery remodeling (Hanna, 2006). dNK cells
promote phagocytosis of cell debris (Faas, 2017). These and other unique
properties distinguish dNK cells from circulating NK cells and from NK
cells in the endometrium before pregnancy (Fu, 2013; Winger, 2013). dNK
cells express both IL-8 and interferon-inducible protein 10, which bind to
receptors on invasive trophoblastic cells to promote their decidual invasion
toward the spiral arteries. dNK cells also produce proangiogenic factors,
including VEGF and placental growth factor (PlGF), which both promote
vascular growth in the decidua.
Trophoblasts also secrete specific chemokines that attract the dNK cells
to the maternal–fetal interface. Thus, both cell types simultaneously attract
each other. Decidual macrophages account for approximately 20 percent of
leukocytes in the first trimester and elicit an M2-immunomodulatory
phenotype (Williams, 2009). Recall that while M1 macrophages are
proinflammatory, M2 macrophages counter proinflammatory responses and
promote tissue repair.
Concurrently, T cell subsets aid tolerance toward the allogenic fetus.
Regulatory T cells (Tregs) are essential for promoting immune tolerance.
Other T cell subsets are present, such as Th1, Th2, and Th17, although their
functions are tightly regulated (Ruocco, 2014).

Endometrial Invasion
Extravillous trophoblasts of the first-trimester placenta are highly invasive.
This process occurs under low-oxygen conditions, and regulatory factors that
are induced under hypoxic conditions are contributory (Soares, 2012).
Invasive trophoblasts secrete numerous proteolytic enzymes that digest
extracellular matrix and activate proteinases already present in the decidua.
Trophoblasts produce urokinase-type plasminogen activator, which converts
plasminogen into the broadly acting serine protease, plasmin. This in turn
both degrades matrix proteins and activates MMPs. One member of the MMP
family, MMP-9, appears to be critical. The timing and extent of trophoblast
invasion is regulated by a balanced interplay between pro- and anti-invasive
factors.
Low estradiol levels in the first trimester are critical for trophoblast
invasion and spiral artery remodeling. Animal studies suggest that the rise in
second-trimester estradiol levels suppresses and limits vessel remodeling by
reducing trophoblast expression of VEGF and specific integrin receptors
(Bonagura, 2012). Namely, extravillous trophoblasts express integrin
receptors that recognize the extracellular matrix proteins collagen IV,
laminin, and fibronectin. Binding of these matrix proteins and integrin
receptors initiates signals to promote trophoblast cell migration and
differentiation. However, as pregnancy advances, rising estradiol levels
downregulate VEGF and integrin receptor expression. This represses and
controls the extent of uterine vessel transformation.

■ Spiral Artery Invasion
One of the most remarkable features of human placental development is the
extensive modification of maternal vasculature by trophoblasts, which are
fetal in origin. These events occur in the first half of pregnancy and are
essential to uteroplacental blood flow. They are also integral to conditions
such as preeclampsia, fetal-growth restriction, and preterm birth. Spiral
artery modifications are carried out by two populations of extravillous
trophoblasts—endovascular trophoblasts, which penetrate the spiral-artery
lumen, and interstitial trophoblasts, which surround the arteries (see Fig. 55).

Interstitial trophoblasts constitute a major portion of the placental bed.
They penetrate the decidua and adjacent myometrium and aggregate around
spiral arteries, where they may aid endovascular trophoblast invasion.
Endovascular trophoblasts first enter the spiral artery lumens and
initially form cellular plugs. They then promote apoptosis of the native
endothelium and replace the vessel lumen with cells of fetal origin. Fibrinoid
material replaces smooth muscle and connective tissue of the vessel media.
This decreases resistance of blood flow into the intervillous space. Invading
endovascular trophoblasts can extend several centimeters along the vessel
lumen, and they must migrate against arterial flow. Of note, invasion by
trophoblasts involves only the decidual spiral arteries and not decidual
veins.
Uteroplacental vessel development proceeds in two waves or stages
(Ramsey, 1980). First, before 12 weeks’ postfertilization, spiral arteries are
invaded and modified up to the border between the decidua and myometrium.
The second wave, between 12 and 16 weeks, involves some invasion of the
intramyometrial segments of spiral arteries. Remodeling converts narrowlumen, muscular spiral arteries into dilated, low-resistance uteroplacental
vessels. Molecular mechanisms of these crucial events and their significance
for preeclampsia and fetal-growth restriction have been reviewed (Pereira
de Sousa, 2017; Xie, 2016).
Although early placenta development occurs in a low-oxygen-tension
environment (2 to 3 percent O2), this vascular remodeling increases blood
flow and oxygenation such that the oxygen concentration more than doubles
around the end of the first trimester (Chang, 2018).

■ Villus Branching
Although certain villi of the chorion frondosum extend from the chorionic
plate to the decidua to serve as anchoring villi, most villi arborize and end
freely within the intervillous space. As gestation proceeds, the short, thick,
early stem villi branch to form progressively finer subdivisions and greater
numbers of increasingly smaller villi (Fig. 5-10). This increasing villous
surface area correlates with gestational age and aids fetal growth. In cases of
restricted blood flow, more highly branched villi than expected for
gestational age is a compensatory mechanism.

FIGURE 5-10 Illustration (A, B), histology (C, D), and electron microscopy (E, F) of early (top panel)
and late (bottom panel) human placenta villi. Limited branching of villi is seen in the early placenta. With
maturation, increasing villous arborization is seen, and villous capillaries lie closer to the surface of each
villus. (Electron micrographs reproduced with permission from King BF, Menton DN: Scanning electron
microscopy of human placental villi from early and late in gestation. Am J Obstet Gynecol 122:824,
1975.)

Each truncal or main stem villus and its ramifications constitutes a
placental lobule or cotyledon. Each lobule has a single chorionic artery and
vein, such that lobules constitute the functional units of placental architecture.

■ Placental Growth and Maturation
In the first trimester, placental growth is more rapid than that of the fetus.
However, by 17 weeks’ gestation, placental and fetal weights are nearly
equal. By term, placental weight approximates one sixth of fetal weight.
The mature placenta and its variant forms are discussed in detail in
Chapter 6 (p. 108). Briefly, viewed from the maternal surface, which
attaches to the uterine wall, the number of slightly elevated convex areas,
called lobes, varies from 10 to 38. Lobes are incompletely separated by
grooves of variable depth. These tissue grooves form in response to
placental septa, which rise up as projections of decidua. The total number of
placental lobes remains the same throughout gestation, and individual lobes

continue to grow—although less actively in late pregnancy (Crawford,
1959). Although grossly visible lobes are commonly referred to as
cotyledons, this is inaccurate. Correctly used, lobules or cotyledons are the
functional units supplied by each main stem villus.
As villi continue to branch and the terminal ramifications become more
numerous and smaller, the volume of cytotrophoblasts decline. This layer
attenuates, and by 16 weeks’ gestation, the apparent continuity of the
cytotrophoblasts is lost. As the syncytium also thins, the fetal vessels become
more prominent within the villus and lie closer to the intervillous space (see
Fig. 5-8). At term, villi may be focally reduced to a thin layer of syncytium
covering minimal villous connective tissue in which thin-walled fetal
capillaries abut the trophoblast and dominate the villi.
The villous stroma also exhibits changes as gestation progresses. In early
pregnancy, the branching connective-tissue cells are separated by an
abundant loose intercellular matrix. Later, the villous stroma becomes
denser, and the cells are more spindly and closely packed. Another stromal
change involves infiltration of Hofbauer cells, which are fetal macrophages.
These are round with vesicular, often eccentric nuclei and with very granular
or vacuolated cytoplasm. They grow in number and maturational state
throughout pregnancy and appear to be important mediators of protection at
the maternal–fetal interface (Johnson, 2012). These macrophages are
phagocytic, have an immunosuppressive phenotype, produce various
cytokines, and provide paracrine regulation of trophoblastic functions
(Cervar, 1999; Reyes, 2017).
Some architectural changes, if substantive, can lower placental exchange
efficiency. These include thickening of the basal lamina of trophoblast or
capillaries, obliteration of certain fetal vessels, greater villous stroma, and
fibrin deposition on the villous surface (Chap. 6, p. 109).

■ Placental Circulation
The gross anatomy of the placenta reflects the intimate approximation of the
fetal capillary bed to maternal blood. The fetal surface is covered by the
transparent amnion, beneath which chorionic vessels course. A section
through the placenta includes amnion, chorion, chorionic villi and
intervillous space, decidual (basal) plate, and myometrium (Figs. 5-11 and
5-12).

FIGURE 5-11 Uterus showing a normal placenta and its membranes in situ.

FIGURE 5-12 Photomicrograph of implantation site with partial section of an early embryo. Anchoring
villi are seen with extravillous trophoblasts invading the decidua basalis. CNS = central nervous system.
(Reproduced with permission from Dr. Kurt Benirschke.)

Fetal Circulation
Deoxygenated venous-like fetal blood flows to the placenta through the two
umbilical arteries. As the cord joins the placenta, these umbilical vessels
branch repeatedly beneath the amnion as they run across the chorionic plate.
Branching continues within the villi to ultimately form capillary networks in
the terminal villous branches. Blood with significantly higher oxygen content
returns from the placenta via a single umbilical vein to the fetus.
The branches of the umbilical vessels that traverse along the chorionic
plate are called placental surface vessels or chorionic vessels. They respond
to vasoactive substances, but anatomically, morphologically, histologically,
and functionally, they are unique. Chorionic arteries always cross over
chorionic veins. Vessels are most readily recognized by this anatomical
relationship, but they are difficult to distinguish by histological criteria.

Truncal arteries are perforating branches of the surface arteries and pass
through the chorionic plate. Each truncal artery supplies one main stem villus
and thus one cotyledon. As the artery penetrates the chorionic plate, its wall
loses smooth muscle, and its caliber increases. The loss of muscle continues
as the truncal arteries and veins branch into their smaller rami.
Before 10 weeks’ gestation, end-diastolic flow is not detected within the
umbilical artery at the end of the fetal cardiac cycle (Fisk, 1988; Loquet,
1988). After 10 weeks, however, end-diastolic flow appears and is
maintained throughout normal pregnancy. Clinically, these flow patterns are
studied with Doppler sonography to assess fetal well-being (Chap. 4, p.
262).

Maternal Circulation
Mechanisms of placental blood flow must allow blood to leave maternal
circulation; flow into an amorphous space lined by syncytiotrophoblast; and
return through maternal veins without producing arteriovenous-like shunts
that would prevent adequate exchange between maternal blood and fetal
villi. For this, maternal blood enters through the basal plate and is driven
high up toward the chorionic plate by arterial pressure before laterally
dispersing (Fig. 5-13). After bathing the external microvillous surface,
maternal blood drains back through venous orifices in the basal plate and
enters uterine veins. Thus, maternal blood traverses the placenta randomly
without preformed channels. Trophoblast invasion of the spiral arteries
creates low-resistance vessels that can accommodate massive increase in
uterine perfusion during gestation. Generally, spiral arteries are
perpendicular to, but veins are parallel to, the uterine wall. This arrangement
aids closure of veins during a uterine contraction and prevents the exit of
maternal blood from the intervillous space. The number of arterial openings
into the intervillous space is gradually reduced by cytotrophoblastic invasion
to approximately 120 entry sites at term (Brosens, 1963). These discharge
blood in spurts to bath the adjacent villi (Borell, 1958). After the 30th week,
a prominent venous plexus lies between the decidua basalis and myometrium
and helps develop the cleavage plane needed for placental separation after
delivery.

FIGURE 5-13 Schematic drawing of a section through a full-term placenta. Maternal blood flows into
the intervillous spaces in funnel-shaped spurts, and umbilical arteries carry deoxygenated fetal blood to
the placenta. Exchanges between the maternal and fetal systems occur as maternal blood flows around
the villi. The umbilical vein carries oxygenated blood back to the fetus. Inflowing arterial blood pushes
maternal venous blood into the endometrial veins, which are scattered over the entire surface of the
decidua basalis. Placental lobes are separated from each other by placental (decidual) septa.

Both inflow and outflow are curtailed during uterine contractions. Bleker
and associates (1975) used serial sonography during normal labor and found
that placental length, thickness, and surface area grew during contractions.
They attributed this to distention of the intervillous space by impairment of
venous outflow compared with arterial inflow. During contractions,
therefore, a somewhat larger volume of blood is available for exchange even
though the rate of flow is decreased. Similarly, Doppler velocimetry has
shown that diastolic flow velocity in spiral arteries is diminished during
uterine contractions. Thus, principal factors regulating intervillous space
blood flow are arterial blood pressure, intrauterine pressure, uterine
contraction pattern, and factors that act specifically on arterial walls.

■ Breaks in the Placental “Barrier”

The placenta does not maintain absolute integrity of the fetal and maternal
circulations, and cells traffic between mother and fetus in both directions.
This situation is best exemplified clinically by erythrocyte D-antigen
alloimmunization (Chap. 18, p. 353). Fetal cell transfer is small in most
cases, although rarely the fetus exsanguinates into the maternal circulation.
Fetal cells can also engraft in the mother during pregnancy and still be
detected decades later. Fetal lymphocytes, mesenchymal stem cells, and
endothelial colony-forming cells all reside in maternal blood, bone marrow,
or uterine vasculature (Huu, 2006; Piper, 2007; Sipos, 2013). This frequent
phenomenon, termed microchimerism, is implicated in the disparate female:
male ratio of autoimmune disorders (Greer, 2011; Stevens, 2006). As
discussed in Chapter 62 (p. 1109), fetal cell engraftment has been associated
with the pathogenesis of lymphocytic thyroiditis, scleroderma, and systemic
lupus erythematosus.

■ Maternal–Fetal Interface
This maternal–fetal interface is an active hub of immunological interactions
that allows implantation, appropriate placental development, and
immunotolerance of the fetus. At the same time, a functional immune system
must be maintained to protect the mother.

Immunogenicity of the Trophoblasts
Trophoblastic cells are the only fetus-derived cells in direct contact with
maternal tissues and blood. Fetal syncytiotrophoblast synthesizes and
secretes numerous factors that regulate the immune responses of maternal
cells both at the implantation site and systemically.
Human leukocyte antigens (HLAs) are the human analogue of the major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) (Hunt, 1992). There are 17 HLA class I
genes and include three classic genes, HLA-A, -B, and -C, that encode the
major class I (class Ia) transplantation antigens. Three other class I genes,
designated HLA-E, -F, and -G, encode class Ib HLA antigens. MHC class I
and II antigens are absent from villous trophoblasts, which appear to be
immunologically inert at all gestational stages (Weetman, 1999). Invasive
extravillous trophoblasts do express MHC class I molecules but avoid
rejection by the maternal immune system.

Moffett-King (2002) reasoned that normal implantation depends on
controlled trophoblastic invasion of maternal decidua and spiral arteries.
Such invasion must proceed far enough to provide for normal fetal growth
and development but avoid the pathogenic invasion seen in placenta accreta
spectrum disorders (Chap. 43, p. 759). She suggests that dNK cells
combined with extravillous trophoblasts’ unique expression of three specific
HLA class I genes act in concert to permit and subsequently limit trophoblast
invasion.
Extravillous trophoblasts express the class Ia antigen HLA-C and
nonclassic class Ib molecules HLA-E and HLA-G. HLA-G antigen is
expressed only in humans and is restricted to extravillous trophoblasts in
contact with maternal tissues. Expressed in both membrane-bound and
soluble isoforms detectable in maternal circulation, HLA-G is thought to
protect extravillous trophoblasts from immune rejection by modulating the
function of both decidual and circulating NK populations (Apps, 2011;
Rajagopalan, 2012). The importance of this molecule is highlighted by the
observation that IVF embryos fail to implant if they do not express a soluble
HLA-G isoform (Fuzzi, 2002). Thus, HLA-G may act through multiple
mechanisms to aid tolerance of the maternal–fetal antigen mismatch
(LeBouteiller, 1999). Abnormal HLA-G expression in extravillous
trophoblasts from women with preeclampsia suggests immune dysregulation
as one etiology (Goldman-Wohl, 2000).

Decidual Immune Cells
Of leukocytes, NK cells predominate in midluteal phase endometrium and in
first-trimester decidua, but numbers decline by term (Johnson, 1999). In firsttrimester decidua, dNK cells lie close to extravillous trophoblasts and
purportedly regulate invasion. Their infiltration is increased by progesterone
and by stromal cell production of IL-15 and decidual prolactin (Dunn, 2002;
Gubbay, 2002). Although dNK cells have the capacity for cytotoxicity, they
are not cytotoxic toward fetal trophoblasts. Their cytotoxic potential is
prevented by molecular cues from decidual macrophages. As noted, specific
HLA molecule expression protects against dNK cells’ damaging actions.
Decidual macrophages are another decidual immune cell type and are
distinct from proinflammatory M1 or antiinflammatory M2 macrophages.
These cells regulate adaptive T cell responses; control dNK differentiation,

activation, and cytotoxicity; and produce antiinflammatory cytokines such as
IL-10.
Dendritic cells are antigen-presenting cells that educate maternal T cells.
They affect development of a receptive endometrium for implantation.
Maternal T cells, as part of the adaptive immune response, increase in
number and function after encounter with a specific antigen. These cells
subsequently retain the ability to respond rapidly in a subsequent encounter
with the same antigen. In contrast, Tregs are immunosuppressive, and during
pregnancy systemic maternal populations expand. Specific Treg cell
populations persist and protect against aberrant immune responses.

AMNION
At term, the amnion is a tough and tenacious but pliable membrane. This
innermost avascular fetal membrane is contiguous with amnionic fluid and
provides almost all of the tensile strength of the fetal membranes. Its
resilience to rupture is vital to successful pregnancy outcomes. Indeed,
preterm rupture of fetal membranes is a major cause of preterm delivery
(Chap. 45, p. 787).
Bourne (1962) described five separate amnion layers. Here, progression
of discussed layers moves from amnionic fluid to the chorion. The innermost
layer, which is bathed by amnionic fluid, is a single-layer cuboidal
epithelium (Fig. 5-14). This epithelium attaches firmly to a distinct basement
membrane. Next, an acellular compact layer composed primarily of
interstitial collagens is followed by the fibroblast-like mesenchymal cell
layer. The outermost layer is the relatively acellular zona spongiosa, which
is contiguous with the chorion laeve. The amnion also contains a few fetal
macrophages, which predominate in the outer two layers. The amnion lacks
smooth muscle cells, nerves, lymphatics, and importantly, blood vessels.

FIGURE 5-14 Photomicrograph of fetal membranes. From left to right: AE = amnion epithelium; AM
= amnion mesenchyme; S = zona spongiosa; CM = chorionic mesenchyme; TR = trophoblast; D =
decidua. (Reproduced with permission from Dr. Judith R. Head.)

■ Amnion Development
Early during implantation, a space develops between the embryonic cell
mass and adjacent trophoblastic cells (see Fig. 5-7). Small cells that line this
inner surface of trophoblasts are precursors of amnionic epithelium, and the
amnion is first identifiable on the 7th or 8th day of embryo development. It is
initially a minute vesicle, which then develops into a small sac that covers
the dorsal embryo surface. As the amnion enlarges, it gradually engulfs the
growing embryo, which prolapses into its cavity (Benirschke, 2012).
Distention of the amnionic sac eventually brings it into contact with the
interior surface of the chorion laeve. Apposition of the chorion laeve and
amnion near the end of the first trimester obliterates the extraembryonic
coelom. The amnion and chorion laeve, although slightly adhered, are never
intimately connected and can be separated easily. Placental amnion covers
the placental surface and thereby is in contact with the chorionic vessels.
Umbilical amnion covers the umbilical cord. As discussed in Chapter 48 (p.

842), with monochorionic-diamnionic placentas, no tissue intervenes
between the fused amnions. With dichorionic-diamnionic twin placentas,
amnions are separated by fused chorion laeves.
Amnionic fluid fills the amnionic sac. As pregnancy progresses, this
normally clear fluid increases in volume until approximately 34 weeks’
gestation. After this, the volume declines. At term, it averages 1000 mL,
although this may vary widely in normal and especially abnormal conditions.
Amnionic fluid origin, composition, circulation, and function of are
discussed further in Chapter 14 (p. 256).

■ Amnion Cell Histogenesis
Amnionic epithelium derives from fetal ectoderm of the embryonic disc and
not from trophoblasts. This is an important consideration both
embryologically and functionally. For example, HLA class I gene expression
in amnion is more akin to that in embryonic cells than to that in trophoblasts.
The fibroblast-like mesenchymal cell layer likely originates from
embryonic mesoderm. Early in human embryogenesis, the amnionic
mesenchymal cells lie immediately adjacent to the basal surface of the
amnion epithelium. At this time, the amnion has two-cell layers and
approximately equal numbers of epithelial and mesenchymal cells.
Simultaneously with growth and development, interstitial collagens are
deposited between these two cell layers. This marks formation of the amnion
compact layer, which separates the two early layers.
Amnionic epithelium early in pregnancy replicates at a rate appreciably
faster than mesenchymal cells. Thus, as the amnionic sac expands, its
epithelial cells form a continuous, uninterrupted layer. Instead, mesenchymal
cells become more sparsely distributed. Connected by a lattice network of
extracellular matrix, they appear as long, slender fibrils.

Amnion Epithelial Cells
The apical surface of the amnionic epithelium is replete with highly
developed microvilli. This structure reflects its function as a major site of
transfer between amnionic fluid and amnion layers. This epithelium is
metabolically active, and its cells synthesize tissue inhibitor of MMP-1,
prostaglandin E2 (PGE2), and fetal fibronectin (fFN) (Rowe, 1997). Although

epithelia produce fFN, studies suggest that fFN acts in the underlying
mesenchymal cells. Here, fFN promotes synthesis of MMPs that break down
strength-bearing collagens. It also enhances prostaglandin synthesis to
prompt uterine contractions (Mogami, 2013). This pathway is upregulated
with premature rupture of membranes induced by thrombin or infectioninduced release of fFN (Chigusa, 2016; Mogami, 2014).
Epithelial cells may respond to signals derived from the fetus or the
mother, and they are responsive to various endocrine or paracrine
modulators. Examples include oxytocin and vasopressin, both of which
increase PGE2 production in vitro (Moore, 1988). These cells may also
produce cytokines such as IL-8 during labor initiation (Elliott, 2001).
Amnionic epithelium also synthesizes vasoactive peptides, which
function in both maternal and fetal tissues in diverse physiological processes.
These peptides include endothelin and parathyroid hormone-related protein
(Economos, 1992; Germain, 1992). Others are brain natriuretic peptide
(BNP) and corticotropin-releasing hormone, which are peptides that invoke
smooth-muscle relaxation (Riley, 1991; Warren, 1995). BNP production is
positively regulated by mechanical stretch in fetal membranes and is
proposed to function in uterine quiescence. Epidermal growth factor, a
negative regulator of BNP, is upregulated in the membranes at term and leads
to a decline in BNP-regulated uterine quiescence (Carvajal, 2013).

Amnion Mesenchymal Cells
These cells are responsible for other major functions. Mesenchymal cells
synthesize the interstitial collagens that compose the amnionic compact layer
—the major source of its tensile strength (Casey, 1996). At term, the
generation of cortisol by 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase may contribute
to membrane rupture by reducing collagen abundance (Mi, 2017).
Mesenchymal cells also synthesize cytokines that include IL-6, IL-8, and
MCP-1. Cytokine synthesis rises in response to bacterial toxins and IL-1.
This ability of amnion mesenchymal cells to synthesize chemokines is an
important consideration in interpreting studies of labor-associated
accumulation of inflammatory mediators in amnionic fluid (Garcia-Velasco,
1999). Last, mesenchymal cells may be a greater source of PGE2 than
epithelial cells, especially in the case of premature membrane rupture
(Mogami, 2013; Whittle, 2000).

■ Tensile Strength
During tests of tensile strength, the decidua and then the chorion laeve give
way long before the amnion ruptures. Indeed, the membranes are elastic and
can expand to twice normal size during pregnancy (Benirschke, 2012). The
amnion tensile strength resides almost exclusively in the compact layer,
which is composed of cross-linked interstitial collagens I and III, and lesser
amounts of collagens V and VI.
Amnion tensile strength is regulated in part by fibrillar collagen
assembly. This process is influenced by the interaction between fibrils and
proteoglycans such as decorin and biglycan (Chap. 21, p. 405). Reduction of
these proteoglycans is reported to perturb fetal membrane function (Horgan,
2014; Wu, 2014). Fetal membranes overlying the cervix have a regional shift
in gene expression and lymphocyte activation that set in motion an
inflammatory cascade (Marcellin, 2017). This change may contribute to
tissue remodeling and loss of tensile strength in the amnion (Moore, 2009).

■ Metabolic Functions
The amnion is metabolically active, is involved in solute and water transport
for amnionic fluid homeostasis, and produces an impressive array of
bioactive compounds. The amnion is responsive both acutely and chronically
to mechanical stretch, which alters amnionic gene expression (Carvajal,
2013; Nemeth, 2000). This in turn may trigger both autocrine and paracrine
responses that include production of MMPs, IL-8, and collagenase (BryantGreenwood, 1998; Mogami, 2013). Such factors may modulate changes in
membrane properties during labor.

UMBILICAL CORD
The yolk sac and the umbilical vesicle into which it develops are prominent
early in pregnancy. Initially, the embryo is a flattened disc interposed
between amnion and yolk sac (see Fig. 5-7). The embryonic dorsal surface,
in association with the elongation of its neural tube, grows faster than the
ventral surface. As a result, the embryo bulges into the amnionic sac, and the
embryo body incorporates the adjacent yolk sac to form the gut. The body
stalk connects the caudal embryo to the chorion. The fetal allantois forms as

a diverticulum from the caudal wall of the yolk sac and projects into the base
of the body stalk.
As pregnancy advances, the yolk sac becomes smaller and its pedicle
relatively longer. By the middle of the third month, the expanding amnion
fuses with the chorion laeve to obliterate the extraembryonic coelom. In its
expansion, the amnion covers the bulging placental disc and the lateral
surface of the body stalk. The latter is then called the umbilical cord or
funis. A more detailed description of this cord and potential abnormalities is
found in Chapter 6 (p. 113).
The cord at term normally has two arteries and one vein. The right
umbilical vein usually disappears early during fetal development, leaving
only the original left vein. The umbilical cord extends from the fetal
umbilicus to the fetal surface of the placenta, that is, the chorionic plate. As
discussed in detail in Chapter 7 (p. 126), blood flows from the umbilical
vein toward the fetus. Blood then takes a path of least resistance via two
routes within the fetus. One is the ductus venosus, which empties directly into
the inferior vena cava. The other route consists of numerous smaller openings
into the hepatic circulation. Blood from the liver flows into the hepatic vein
and then the inferior vena cava. Resistance in the ductus venosus is
controlled by a sphincter situated at the origin of the ductus at the umbilical
recess and is innervated by a vagus nerve branch.
Blood exits the fetus via the two umbilical arteries. These are anterior
branches of the internal iliac artery and become obliterated after birth to
form the medial umbilical ligaments.

PLACENTAL HORMONES
The production of steroid and protein hormones by human trophoblasts is
greater in amount and diversity than that of any single endocrine tissue in all
of mammalian physiology. Table 5-1 is a compendium of average production
rates for various steroid hormones in nonpregnant and in near-term pregnant
women. It demonstrates the remarkable increase in steroid hormone
production during pregnancy. The human placenta also synthesizes an
enormous amount of protein and peptide hormones, summarized in Table 5-2.
The successful physiological adaptations of pregnant women to this unique
endocrine milieu is discussed throughout Chapter 4.

TABLE 5-1. Steroid Production Rates in Nonpregnant and Near-Term
Pregnant Women

TABLE 5-2. Protein Hormones Produced by the Human Placenta

■ Human Chorionic Gonadotropin
Biosynthesis
Chorionic gonadotropin is a glycoprotein with biological activity similar to
that of LH, and both act via the LH-hCG receptor. hCG varies in molecular
weight from 36,000 to 40,000 Da and is highly glycosylated with the most
carbohydrate content of any human hormone—30 percent. This glycosylation
protects the molecule from catabolism and results in a 36-hour plasma halflife for intact hCG compared with 2 hours for LH. The hCG molecule is
composed of two dissimilar subunits, α and β. These are noncovalently
linked but held together by electrostatic and hydrophobic forces. Isolated
subunits are unable to bind the LH-hCG receptor and thus lack biological
activity.

The hCG hormone is structurally related to three other glycoprotein
hormones—LH, FSH, and thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH). All four
glycoproteins share a common α-subunit. However, each of their β-subunits
is characterized by a distinct (although related) amino acid sequence.
Synthesis of the α- and β-chains of hCG is regulated separately from gene
loci on different chromosomes. A single gene on chromosome 6 encodes the
α-subunit. Chromosome 19 encodes the β-hCG–β-LH family of subunits with
six genes for β-hCG and one for β-LH (Miller-Lindholm, 1997). Both
subunits are synthesized as larger precursors and then cleaved by
endopeptidases to their mature form. Intact hCG is assembled and released
by secretory granule exocytosis (Morrish, 1987). Modifications during
synthesis and subsequent enzymatic degradation give rise to multiple forms
of hCG in maternal plasma and urine that vary enormously in bioactivity and
immunoreactivity.
Before 5 weeks, hCG is expressed both in the syncytiotrophoblast and
cytotrophoblasts (Maruo, 1992). Later in the first trimester, hCG is produced
almost solely in the syncytiotrophoblast, peaks around 9 weeks’ gestation,
and then declines to a plateau for the remainder of gestation (Beck, 1986;
Kurman, 1984). Dynamic changes in hCG concentration in the first trimester
highlight the importance of accurate gestational age estimation when
interpreting aneuploidy screening strategies that include hCG.
Circulating levels of free β-subunit are low to undetectable throughout
pregnancy, and their concentration is the limiting factor for secretion of
complete hCG molecules. Levels of the α-subunit rise gradually and roughly
correspond to placental mass, until they plateau at approximately 36 weeks’
gestation (Cole, 1997).

Concentrations in Serum and Urine
The combined hCG molecule is detectable in plasma of pregnant women 7 to
9 days after the midcycle LH surge preceding ovulation. Thus, hCG likely
enters maternal blood at the time of blastocyst implantation. Plasma levels
rise rapidly, doubling approximately every 2 days in the first trimester (Fig.
5-15). Appreciable fluctuations in levels for a given patient are observed on
the same day.

FIGURE 5-15 Distinct profiles for the concentrations of human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG), human
placental lactogen (hPL), and corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) in serum of women throughout
normal pregnancy.

Intact hCG circulates as multiple, highly related isoforms that have
variable cross-reactivity between commercial assays. This emphasizes the
need to use the same assay type when measuring serial hCG levels for
clinical indications such as evaluating pregnancy of unknown location or
medical management of ectopic pregnancy. Peak maternal plasma levels
reach approximately 50,000 to 100,000 mIU/mL between the 60th and 80th
days after menses. Plasma levels then decline, and a nadir is reached by
approximately 16 weeks’ gestation. Plasma levels remain at this lower level
for the rest of pregnancy.
Although maternal urine, like plasma, contains various hCG degradation
products, the principal urinary form is the terminal product of hCG
degradation, namely, the β-core fragment. Concentrations of this fragment
follow the same general pattern as that in maternal plasma, peaking at
approximately 10 weeks’ gestation. Importantly, the β-subunit antibody used
in most pregnancy tests reacts with both intact hCG (the major form in the
plasma) and with fragments of hCG (the major form found in urine).

hCG Regulation

Placental GnRH is likely involved in the regulation of hCG formation. Both
GnRH and its receptor are expressed by cytotrophoblasts and
syncytiotrophoblast (Wolfahrt, 1998). GnRH administration elevates
circulating hCG levels, and cultured trophoblasts respond to GnRH treatment
with increased hCG secretion (Iwashita, 1993; Siler-Khodr, 1981). Pituitary
GnRH production is regulated by inhibin and activin. Likewise, in cultured
placental cells, activin stimulates and inhibin inhibits GnRH and hCG
production (Petraglia, 1989; Steele, 1993).
hCG is cleared by the kidney (about 30 percent), and the remainder is
likely cleared by liver metabolism (Wehmann, 1980). Thus, levels can be
markedly altered in gravidas with chronic renal disease.

Biological Functions
Noted earlier, hCG maintains corpus luteum function—that is, continued
progesterone production. Both hCG subunits are required for binding to the
LH-hCG receptor in the corpus luteum. However, maximum plasma hCG
concentrations are attained well after hCG-stimulated corpus luteum
secretion of progesterone has ceased. Specifically, luteal progesterone
synthesis begins to decline at approximately 6 weeks’ gestation despite
continued and increasing hCG production. Therefore, this incompletely
explains the physiological function of hCG in pregnancy. LH-hCG receptors
are present in various other tissues, and roles are discussed subsequently.
In pregnancies with male fetuses, hCG stimulates fetal testicular
testosterone secretion. This reaches a maximum when hCG levels peak.
Thus, at a critical time in male sexual differentiation, hCG enters fetal
plasma from the syncytiotrophoblast. In the fetus, it acts as an LH surrogate to
stimulate Leydig cell replication and testosterone synthesis to promote male
sexual differentiation (Chap. 3, p. 35). Before approximately 110 days, the
fetal anterior pituitary lacks vascularization from the hypothalamus and
produces minimal LH secretion. Thereafter, as hCG levels fall, pituitary LH
maintains modest testicular stimulation.
The maternal thyroid gland also is stimulated by large quantities of hCG.
In women with gestational trophoblastic disease, biochemical and clinical
evidence of hyperthyroidism sometimes develops (Chap. 13, p. 238). Some
forms of hCG bind to TSH receptors on thyrocytes (Hershman, 1999). The
thyroid-stimulatory activity in plasma of first-trimester pregnant women

varies appreciably from sample to sample. Modifications of hCG
oligosaccharides likely are important in the capacity of hCG to stimulate
thyroid function. Acidic isoforms stimulate thyroid activity, and some more
basic isoforms stimulate iodine uptake (Kraiem, 1994; Tsuruta, 1995). Last,
the LH-hCG receptor is also expressed by thyrocytes, which suggests that
hCG stimulates thyroid activity via the LH-hCG receptor as well (Tomer,
1992).
LH-hCG receptors are found in myometrium and in uterine vascular
tissue. It has been hypothesized that hCG may promote uterine vascular
vasodilation and myometrial smooth muscle relaxation (Kurtzman, 2001).
hCG also modulates maternal immune cell functions in the decidua during
early stages of placentation (Schumacher, 2019; Silasi, 2020).

Abnormally High or Low Levels
Several clinical circumstances display substantively higher maternal plasma
hCG levels. Some examples include multifetal pregnancy, erythroblastosis
fetalis associated with fetal hemolytic anemia, and gestational trophoblastic
disease. Relatively higher hCG levels may be found in women carrying a
fetus with Down syndrome, and this has been incorporated into screening
strategies (Table 17-4, p. 336). Various malignant tumors also produce hCG,
sometimes in large amounts—especially trophoblastic neoplasms (Chap. 13,
p. 241).
Relatively lower hCG plasma levels are found in women with failing
early pregnancies and ectopic pregnancy (Chap. 12, p. 222). hCG is
produced in very small amounts in normal tissues of men and nonpregnant
women, perhaps primarily in the anterior pituitary gland. Nonetheless, the
detection of hCG in blood or urine almost always indicates pregnancy (Chap.
10, p. 176).

■ Human Placental Lactogen
Biosynthesis
This single, nonglycosylated polypeptide chain shares a 96-percent aminoacid-sequence homology with human growth hormone (hGH) and a 67percent homology with human prolactin (hPRL). Because of these

similarities, it was called chorionic growth hormone or human placental
lactogen. Currently, the latter term is used by most.
Five genes in the growth hormone–placental lactogen gene cluster are
linked and located on chromosome 17: GH1, GH2, CSHL1, CSH1, and
CSH2. Human placental lactogen (hPL) is encoded by the last two genes. hPL
is concentrated in syncytiotrophoblast, but similar to hCG, hPL is
demonstrated in cytotrophoblasts before 6 weeks (Grumbach, 1964; Maruo,
1992). Within 5 to 10 days after conception, hPL is demonstrable in the
placenta and can be detected in maternal serum as early as 3 weeks. Levels
of mRNA for hPL in syncytiotrophoblast remain relatively constant
throughout pregnancy. This finding supports the idea that the hPL secretion
rate is proportional to placental mass. Levels rise steadily until 34 to 36
weeks’ gestation. The hPL production rate near term—approximately 1 g/d—
is by far the greatest of any known hormone in humans. It is rapidly cleared
and has a half-life between 10 and 30 minutes (Walker, 1991). In late
pregnancy, maternal serum concentrations reach levels of 5 to 15 μg/mL (see
Fig. 5-15).
Very little hPL is detected in fetal blood, and amnionic fluid levels are
somewhat lower than that in maternal plasma. Thus, although hPL may have a
direct effect on fetal tissues, such as modulating fetal vasculature formation,
its primary role is to act on maternal physiology to ensure adequate nutrient
delivery to the placenta (Corbacho, 2002).

Metabolic Actions
hPL has putative actions in several important maternal metabolic processes.
First, hPL promotes lipolysis to raise circulating free fatty acid levels. This
provides an energy source for maternal metabolism and fetal nutrition. In
vitro studies suggest that hPL inhibits secretion by term syncytiotrophoblast
of leptin (Coya, 2005). Prolonged maternal starvation in the first half of
pregnancy leads to higher hPL plasma concentrations.
Second, hPL aids maternal adaptation to fetal energy requirements (Hill,
2018). For example, increased maternal insulin resistance ensures nutrient
flow to the fetus. It also favors protein synthesis and provides a readily
available amino acid source to the fetus. To counterbalance the greater
insulin resistance and prevent maternal hyperglycemia, maternal insulin
levels rise. Both hPL and prolactin signal through the prolactin receptor to

increase maternal beta cell proliferation, which augments insulin secretion
(Georgia, 2010). In animals, prolactin and hPL upregulate serotonin
synthesis, which increases beta cell proliferation (Kim, 2010). Short-term
changes in plasma glucose or insulin, however, have relatively little effect on
plasma hPL levels. In vitro studies of syncytiotrophoblast suggest that hPL
synthesis is stimulated by insulin and insulin-like growth factor-1 and
inhibited by PGE2 and PGF2α (Bhaumick, 1987; Genbacev, 1977).

■ Other Placental Protein Hormones
The placenta has a remarkable capacity to synthesize numerous peptide
hormones, including some that are analogous or related to hypothalamic and
pituitary hormones. In contrast to their counterparts, some of these placental
peptide/protein hormones are not subject to feedback inhibition.

Hypothalamic-Like Releasing Hormones
The known hypothalamic-releasing or -inhibiting hormones include GnRH,
corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH), thyrotropin-releasing hormone
(TRH), growth hormone–releasing hormone (GHRH), and somatostatin. For
each of these, the human placenta produces an analogous hormone (Petraglia,
1992; Siler-Khodr, 1988).
GnRH in the placenta shows its highest expression in the first trimester
(Siler-Khodr, 1978, 1988). Interestingly, it is found in cytotrophoblasts but
not syncytiotrophoblast. Placenta-derived GnRH functions to regulate
trophoblast hCG production and extravillous trophoblast invasion via
regulation of MMP-2 and MMP-9 (Peng, 2016). Placenta-derived GnRH is
also the likely source of elevated maternal GnRH levels in pregnancy (SilerKhodr, 1984).
CRH is a member of a larger family of CRH-related peptides that
includes CRH and urocortins (Dautzenberg, 2002). Maternal serum CRH
levels rise from 5 to 10 pmol/L in the nonpregnant woman to approximately
100 pmol/L in the early third trimester and then to almost 500 pmol/L
abruptly during the last 5 to 6 weeks (see Fig. 5-15). After labor begins,
maternal plasma CRH levels rise even further (Petraglia, 1989, 1990).
Urocortin, involved in the stress response, is also produced by the placenta

and secreted into the maternal circulation, but at much lower levels than that
seen for CRH (Florio, 2002).
The function of CRH synthesized in the placenta, membranes, and
decidua has been somewhat defined. For example, trophoblast,
amniochorion, and decidua express both CRH-R1 and CRH-R2 receptors
and several variant receptors (Florio, 2000). Both CRH and urocortin
enhance trophoblast secretion of adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), and
this suggests an autocrine–paracrine role (Petraglia, 1999). Large amounts of
trophoblast CRH enter maternal blood.
CRH receptors are also present in many tissues outside the placenta.
Proposed biological roles include induction of smooth-muscle relaxation in
vascular and myometrial tissue and immunosuppression. The physiological
reverse, however, induction of myometrial contractions, has been proposed
for the rising CRH levels seen near term. Some hypothesize that CRH may be
involved with parturition initiation (Wadhwa, 1998).
Glucocorticoids act in the hypothalamus to inhibit CRH release. But, in
the trophoblast, glucocorticoids stimulate CRH gene expression (Jones,
1989a; Robinson, 1988). Thus, a novel positive feedback loop in the
placenta may allow placental CRH to stimulate placental ACTH and thereby
prompt fetal and maternal adrenal glucocorticoid production, with
subsequent stimulation of placental CRH expression (Nicholson, 2001;
Riley, 1991).
GHRH is expressed in placenta, but its function is unclear (Berry, 1992).
GHRH may play an autocrine role in trophoblast survival via the GHRH
receptor (Liu, 2016). Ghrelin is another regulator of hGH secretion and is
produced by placental tissue (Horvath, 2001). Trophoblast ghrelin
expression peaks at midpregnancy and is a paracrine regulator of
differentiation or is a potential regulator of human growth hormone variant
production, described next (Fuglsang, 2005; Gualillo, 2001).

Pituitary-Like Hormones
A human growth hormone variant (hGH-V) that is not expressed in the
pituitary is expressed in the placenta. The gene encoding hGH-V is located in
the hGH–hPL gene cluster on chromosome 17. Sometimes referred to as
placental growth hormone, hGH-V is a 191-amino-acid protein that differs in
15 amino acid positions from the sequence for hGH. Although hGH-V retains

growth-promoting and antilipogenic functions that are similar to those of
hGH, it has reduced diabetogenic and lactogenic functions relative to hGH
(Vickers, 2009). Placental hGH-V presumably is synthesized in the
syncytiotrophoblast. It is believed that hGH-V is present in maternal plasma
by 21 to 26 weeks’ gestation, rises in concentration until approximately 36
weeks, and remains relatively constant thereafter. hGH-V levels in maternal
plasma and those of insulin-like growth factor 1 positively correlate.
Moreover, hGH-V secretion by trophoblast in vitro is inhibited by glucose in
a dose-dependent manner (Patel, 1995). Overexpression of hGH-V in mice
causes severe insulin resistance, making it a likely candidate to mediate
insulin resistance of pregnancy (Liao, 2016).
Pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC) is a polypeptide produced in the pituitary
and other tissues including the placenta. It is proteolytically cleaved into
numerous active hormones including ACTH, β-lipotropic hormone,
melanocyte-stimulating hormone (α-, β-, and γ-MSH), and β–endorphin
(Harno, 2018). These hormones play a role in maintaining energy balance.
As discussed, placental CRH stimulates synthesis and release of placental
ACTH, demonstrating the autocrine and paracrine functions of the placenta in
addition to its systemic endocrine activity.

Relaxin
The peptide is expressed in human corpus luteum, decidua, and placenta
(Bogic, 1995). Two of the three relaxin genes—H2 and H3—are transcribed
in the corpus luteum (Bathgate, 2002; Hudson, 1983, 1984). Decidua,
placenta, and membranes express H1 and H2 (Hansell, 1991). Relaxin is
synthesized as a single, 105-amino-acid preprorelaxin molecule that is
cleaved to A and B molecules. Relaxin is structurally similar to insulin and
insulin-like growth factor.
The rise in maternal circulating relaxin levels in early pregnancy is
attributed to corpus luteum secretion, and levels parallel those of hCG.
Relaxin, along with rising progesterone levels, may act on myometrium to
promote relaxation and the quiescence of early pregnancy (Chap. 21, p. 404).
In addition, the production of relaxin and relaxin-like factors within the
placenta and fetal membranes may play an autocrine-paracrine role in
postpartum regulation of extracellular matrix remodeling (Qin, 1997a,b). One
important relaxin function is enhancement of the maternal glomerular
filtration rate that is apparent early in gestation (Chap. 4, p. 68).

Parathyroid Hormone-Related Protein
Levels of this peptide are elevated within maternal but not fetal circulation
(Bertelloni, 1994; Saxe, 1997). Parathyroid hormone-related protein (PTHrP) synthesis is found in several normal adult tissues, especially in
reproductive organs that include myometrium, endometrium, corpus luteum,
and lactating mammary tissue. PTH-rP is not produced in the parathyroid
glands of normal adults. Although yet undefined, placenta-derived PTH-rP
may regulate genes involved in transfer of calcium and other solutes. It also
contributes to mineral homeostasis in fetal bone, amnionic fluid, and the fetal
circulation (Simmonds, 2010).

Leptin
This hormone is normally secreted by adipocytes, but cytotrophoblasts and
syncytiotrophoblast also synthesize leptin (Henson, 2002). Relative
contributions of leptin from maternal adipose tissue versus placenta are
currently undefined. Leptin functions as an antiobesity hormone that
decreases food intake through its hypothalamic receptor. It also regulates
bone growth and immune function (Cock, 2003; La Cava, 2004). Placental
leptin promotes placental cell proliferation, protein synthesis, and activation
of immune tolerance and antiapoptotic responses (Rosario, 2016a; Schanton,
2018). Maternal serum levels are significantly higher than those in
nonpregnant women. Fetal leptin levels correlate positively with birthweight
and likely function in fetal development and growth. Studies suggest that
reductions in leptin availability contribute to adverse fetal metabolic
programing in intrauterine growth-restricted offspring (Nusken, 2016, PerezPerez, 2018).

Neuropeptide Y
This 36-amino-acid peptide is widely distributed in brain. It also is found in
sympathetic neurons innervating the cardiovascular, respiratory,
gastrointestinal, and genitourinary systems. Neuropeptide Y has been
isolated from the placenta and localized in cytotrophoblasts (Petraglia,
1989). Trophoblasts possess neuropeptide Y receptors, and treatment of
these with neuropeptide Y causes CRH release (Robidoux, 2000).

Transforming Growth Factor Beta Superfamily

This family of cytokines regulates various cellular functions that include
placental development, trophoblast differentiation, and invasion into the
decidua (Adu-Gyamafi, 2020). This process is finely tuned, and extreme
invasion results in placenta accreta spectrum disorders, whereas shallow
implantation can lead to early pregnancy loss or preeclampsia. Members of
the family include transforming growth factor beta (TGF-β), activin, inhibin,
nodal, bone morphogenic proteins (BMPs), antimüllerian hormone, and
growth differentiation factors (GDFs).
These cytokines bind to a suite of receptors composed of a type 1 subunit
and a type 2 receptor subunit to ultimately direct gene expression. This
combinatorial diversity leads to divergent functions in the placenta and
decidua. Activin A promotes syncytialization, extravillous trophoblast
formation, and invasion. BMP2 enhances invasion, and BMP4 may direct
embryonic stem cells toward a trophoblast lineage (Zhang 2018, Xu 2002).
Inhibin A promotes syncytialization but inhibits invasion (Debiève, 2000;
Jones, 2006). Nodal inhibits proliferation, extravillous trophoblast
formation, and invasion. The complete role this superfamily in normal and
abnormal placental development is yet to be fully defined.

■ Placental Progesterone Production
After 6 to 7 weeks’ gestation, little progesterone is produced in the ovary
(Diczfalusy, 1961). Surgical removal of the corpus luteum or even bilateral
oophorectomy during the 7th to 10th week does not decrease excretion rates
of urinary pregnanediol, the principal urinary metabolite of progesterone.
Before this time, however, corpus luteum removal will lead to spontaneous
abortion unless an exogenous progestin is given, and Chapter 66 (p. 1170)
lists suitable dosing. After approximately 8 weeks, the placenta assumes
progesterone secretion, and maternal serum levels throughout pregnancy
gradually rise (Fig. 5-16). By term, these levels are 10 to 5000 times of those
in nonpregnant women, depending on the ovarian cycle stage.

FIGURE 5-16 Plasma levels of progesterone, estradiol, estrone, estetrol, and estriol in women during
the course of gestation. (Modified and redrawn with permission from Mesiano S: The endocrinology of
human pregnancy and fetoplacental neuroendocrine development. In Strauss JF, Barbieri RL (eds) Yen
and Jaffe’s Reproductive Endocrinology: Physiology, Pathophysiology, and Clinical Management, 6th ed.
Philadephia, PA: Saunders; 2009.)

The daily production rate of progesterone in late, normal, singleton
pregnancies approximates 250 mg. In multifetal pregnancies, the daily
production rate may exceed 600 mg. Progesterone is synthesized from
cholesterol in a two-step enzymatic reaction. First, cholesterol is converted
to pregnenolone within the mitochondria in a reaction catalyzed by
cytochrome P450 cholesterol side-chain cleavage enzyme. Pregnenolone

leaves the mitochondria and is converted to progesterone in the endoplasmic
reticulum by 3β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase. Progesterone is released
immediately by diffusion.
Although the placenta produces a prodigious amount of progesterone, the
syncytiotrophoblast has a limited capacity for cholesterol biosynthesis. The
rate-limiting enzyme in its biosynthesis is 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl
coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) reductase. Because of this, the placenta must rely
on an exogenous source, that is, maternal cholesterol, for progesterone
formation. The trophoblast preferentially uses LDL cholesterol for
progesterone biosynthesis (Simpson, 1979, 1980). This mechanism differs
from placental production of estrogens, which relies principally on fetal
adrenal precursors.
Although fetal well-being and placental estrogen production show a
relationship, this is not the case for placental progesterone. Thus, placental
endocrine function, including progesterone biosynthesis and formation of
protein hormones such as hCG, may persist for weeks after fetal demise.
The metabolic clearance rate of progesterone in pregnant women is
similar to that found in men and nonpregnant women. One metabolite is 5αdihydroprogesterone (5α-DHP), and levels disproportionately rise due to
synthesis in syncytiotrophoblast from both placenta-produced progesterone
and fetus-derived precursor (Dombroski, 1997). Thus, the concentration ratio
of 5α-DHP to progesterone is elevated in pregnancy, although the
mechanisms for this are incompletely defined. Progesterone also is converted
to the potent mineralocorticoid deoxycorticosterone in pregnant women and
in the fetus. The concentration of deoxycorticosterone is strikingly higher in
both maternal and fetal compartments (see Table 5-1). The extraadrenal
formation of deoxycorticosterone from circulating progesterone accounts for
most of its production in pregnancy (Casey, 1982a,b).

■ Placental Estrogen Production
During the first 2 to 4 weeks or pregnancy, rising hCG levels maintain
production of estradiol in the corpus luteum. Ovarian production of both
progesterone and estrogens drops significantly by the 7th week of pregnancy.
At this time, there is a luteal–placental transition. Subsequently, more than
half of estrogen entering maternal circulation is produced in the placenta, and
it produces a continually increasing magnitude of estrogen (MacDonald,

1965a; Siiteri, 1963, 1966). Near term, normal human pregnancy is a
hyperestrogenic state, and syncytiotrophoblast is producing estrogen in
amounts equivalent to that produced in one day by the ovaries of no fewer
than 1000 ovulatory women. This hyperestrogenic state terminates abruptly
after delivery of the placenta.

Biosynthesis
In human trophoblast, neither cholesterol nor in turn progesterone can serve
as precursor for estrogen biosynthesis. This is because steroid 17αhydroxylase/17,20-lyase (CYP17A1) is not expressed in the human placenta.
This essential enzyme converts 17-OH progesterone (a C21 steroid) to
androstenedione, which is a C19 steroid and an estrogen precursor.
Consequently, conversion of C21 steroids to C19 steroids is not possible.
However, dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) and its sulfate (DHEA-S)
are also C19 steroids and are produced by maternal and fetal adrenal glands.
These two steroids can serve as estrogen precursors in the placenta (Fig. 517). Ryan (1959a) found that the placenta had an exceptionally high capacity
to convert appropriate C19 steroids to estrone and estradiol. The conversion
of DHEA-S to estradiol requires placental expression of four key enzymes
that are located principally in syncytiotrophoblast (Bonenfant, 2000; Salido,
1990). First, the placenta expresses high levels of steroid sulfatase (STS),
which converts the conjugated DHEA-S to DHEA. DHEA is then acted upon
by 3β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 (3βHSD) to produce
androstenedione. Cytochrome P450 aromatase (CYP19) then converts
androstenedione to estrone, which is then converted to estradiol by 17βhydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 (17βHSD1).

FIGURE 5-17 Schematic presentation of estrogen biosynthesis in the human placenta.
Dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (DHEA-S) is secreted in prodigious amounts by the fetal adrenal
glands, and a portion is converted to 16α-hydroxydehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (16OH-DHEA-S) in
the fetal liver. DHEA-S and 16OH-DHEA-S are converted in the placenta to the estrogens 17βestradiol (E2) and estriol (E3). These estrogens then enter the maternal circulation. Near term, half of
E2 is derived from fetal adrenal DHEA-S and half from maternal DHEA-S. On the other hand, 90
percent of E3 in the placenta arises from fetal 16OH-DHEA-S and only 10 percent from all other
sources. 3βHSD1 = 3β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1; 17βHSD1 = 17β-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase type 1; CYP17 = steroid 17α-hydroxylase/17,20-lyase; LDL = low-density lipoprotein;
SCC = cholesterol side-chain cleavage enzyme; StAR = steroidogenic acute regulatory protein.

DHEA-S is the major precursor of estrogens in pregnancy (Baulieu,
1963; Siiteri, 1963). However, maternal adrenal glands do not produce
sufficient amounts of DHEA-S to account for more than a fraction of total
placental estrogen biosynthesis. The fetal adrenal glands are quantitatively
the most important source of placental estrogen precursors in human
pregnancy. Thus, estrogen production during pregnancy reflects the unique
interactions among fetal adrenal glands, fetal liver, placenta, and maternal
adrenal glands.

Directional Secretion
Of estradiol and estriol formed in syncytiotrophoblast, >90 percent enters
maternal plasma (Gurpide, 1966). Of placental progesterone production, ≥85

percent enters maternal plasma, and little maternal progesterone crosses the
placenta to the fetus (Gurpide, 1972).
This directional secretion stems from the architecture of
hemochorioendothelial placentation. Steroids produced in the
syncytiotrophoblast are secreted directly into maternal blood. To reach the
fetus, they must first traverse the cytotrophoblast layer and then enter the
stroma of the villous core and then fetal capillaries. From either of these
spaces, steroids can reenter the syncytium. The net result of this hemochorial
arrangement is that entry of steroids into the maternal circulation is
substantially greater than that into fetal blood.

FETAL ADRENAL GLAND–PLACENTAL
INTERACTIONS
As noted, the fetal adrenal gland is a vital source of steroid precursors for
placental estrogen synthesis. This fetal gland is remarkable both
morphologically and functionally. At term, its mass exceeds that in adults
(Chap. 7, p. 134). More than 85 percent of the fetal gland is composed of a
unique fetal zone, which has a great capacity for steroid biosynthesis. Its
daily steroid production near term is 100 to 200 mg/d, which exceeds the
adult steroid secretion of 30 to 40 mg/d. The unique fetal zone subsequently
regresses in the first year of life.
In addition to responding to ACTH from the fetal brain, fetal adrenal
gland growth is influenced by factors secreted by the placenta. This is
exemplified by the continued adrenal gland growth throughout gestation and
by its rapid involution immediately after birth and placenta delivery.

■ Placental Estriol Synthesis
Estradiol is the primary placental estrogen product at term. In addition,
significant levels of estriol and estetrol are found in the maternal circulation,
particularly late in gestation (see Fig. 5-16). These hydroxylated forms of
estrogen derive from the placenta using substrates formed by the combined
efforts of the fetal adrenal gland and fetal liver enzymes (see Fig. 5-17). For
this, high levels of hepatic 16α-hydroxylase act on adrenal-derived steroids
(MacDonald, 1965b; Ryan, 1959b). Thus, the disproportionate rise in estriol

formation during pregnancy is accounted for by placental synthesis from
plasma-borne 16-OH-DHEA-S. Near term, the fetus produces 90 percent of
placental estriol and estetrol precursors in normal human pregnancy. Thus, in
the past, levels of these steroids were used as an indicator of fetal wellbeing.

■ Fetal Adrenal Steroid Precursor
Cholesterol is the precursor for fetal adrenal steroidogenesis. Here, the
steroid biosynthesis rate is so great that its steroidogenesis alone is
equivalent to a fourth of the total daily LDL cholesterol turnover in adults.
Fetal adrenal glands synthesize cholesterol from acetate, and all enzymes
involved in this biosynthesis are elevated compared with those of the adult
adrenal gland (Rainey, 2001). Thus, the de novo cholesterol synthesis rate by
fetal adrenal tissue is extremely high. Even so, it is insufficient to account for
the steroids produced by fetal adrenal glands. Therefore, cholesterol must be
assimilated from the fetal circulation and mainly from LDL produced in the
fetal liver (Carr, 1980, 1984; Simpson, 1979).

■ Fetal Conditions Affecting Estrogen Production
Several fetal disorders alter the availability of substrate for placental steroid
synthesis and thus highlight the interdependence of fetal development and
placental function. Fetal demise is followed by a striking reduction in
maternal urinary estrogen levels. Similarly, after ligation of the umbilical
cord with the fetus and placenta left in situ, placental estrogen production
declines markedly (Cassmer, 1959). However, as previously discussed,
placental progesterone production is maintained. These observations indicate
that an important source of precursors for placental estrogen—but not for
progesterone—biosynthesis derive from the fetus.
Anencephalic fetuses have markedly atrophic adrenal glands due to
absent hypothalamic and pituitary structures that would otherwise release
ACTH for adrenal stimulation. In the absence of the adrenal cortical fetal
zone development, placental formation of estrogen is severely limited
because of diminished availability of C19 steroid precursors. Indeed, urinary
estrogen levels in women pregnant with an anencephalic fetus approximate
only 10 percent of those found in normal pregnancy (Frandsen, 1961). With

an anencephalic fetus, almost all estrogens produced arise from placental use
of maternal plasma DHEA-S.
Fetal adrenal cortical hypoplasia occurs in perhaps 1 in 12,500 births
(McCabe, 2001). Estrogen production in these pregnancies is also limited,
which suggests the absence of C19 precursors.
Fetal–placental sulfatase deficiency is associated with very low
estrogen levels in otherwise normal pregnancies (France, 1969). Namely,
sulfatase deficiency precludes the hydrolysis of C19 steroid sulfates, the first
enzymatic step in the placental use of these circulating prehormones for
estrogen biosynthesis. This deficiency is an X-linked disorder, and thus all
affected fetuses are male. Its estimated frequency is 1 case in 2000 to 5000
births and is associated with delayed labor onset. It also is associated with
development of ichthyosis in affected males later in life (Bradshaw, 1986).
Fetal–placental aromatase deficiency is a rare autosomal recessive
disorder in which individuals cannot synthesize endogenous estrogens
(Grumbach, 2011; Simpson, 2000). Fetal adrenal DHEA-S is converted in
the placenta to androstenedione, but in cases of placental aromatase
deficiency, androstenedione cannot be converted to estradiol. Rather,
androgen metabolites of DHEA produced in the placenta, including
androstenedione and some testosterone, are secreted into the maternal or
fetal circulation, or both. This can virilize the mother and the female fetus
(Belgorosky, 2009; Harada, 1992).
Trisomy 21—Down syndrome—screening searches for abnormal levels
of hCG, alpha-fetoprotein, and other analytes (Chap. 17, p. 338). Of these,
serum unconjugated estriol levels can be low in women with Down
syndrome fetuses (Benn, 2002). This likely stems from inadequate formation
of C19 steroids in the adrenal glands of these trisomic fetuses.
Fetal erythroblastosis in some cases of severe fetal D-antigen
alloimmunization can lead to elevated maternal plasma estrogen levels. A
suspected cause is the greater placental mass from hypertrophy, which can be
seen with such fetal hemolytic anemia (Chap. 18, p. 360).
Complete hydatidiform mole and gestational trophoblastic neoplasias
lack a fetus and also a fetal adrenal source of C19 steroid precursors for
trophoblast estrogen biosynthesis. Placental estrogen formation is
consequently limited to the use of C19 steroids from the maternal plasma, and
thus estradiol is principally produced (MacDonald, 1964, 1966).

■ Maternal Conditions Affecting Estrogen Production
Maternal conditions can likewise affect placental estrogen production.
Glucocorticoid treatment can inhibit ACTH secretion from the maternal and
fetal pituitary glands. This diminishes maternal and fetal adrenal secretion of
the placental estrogen precursor DHEA-S and leads to a striking reduction in
placental estrogen formation.
With Addison disease, pregnant women show lower estrogen levels,
principally estrone and estradiol levels (Baulieu, 1956). However, the fetal
adrenal gland contribution to estriol synthesis, particularly in later
pregnancy, is quantitatively much more important than that of the maternal
adrenal gland.
Maternal androgen-producing tumors can present the placenta with
elevated androgen levels. Fortunately, placenta is extraordinarily efficient in
the aromatization of C19 steroids. For example, virtually all androstenedione
entering the intervillous space is taken up by syncytiotrophoblast and
converted to estradiol (Edman, 1981). None of the C19 steroid enters the
fetus, and a female fetus is rarely virilized by a maternal androgen-secreting
tumor. Indeed, virilized female fetuses of women with an androgenproducing tumor may be cases in which a nonaromatizable C19 steroid
androgen is produced by the tumor—for example, 5α-dihydrotestosterone.
Alternatively, tumor-derived testosterone could be produced very early in
pregnancy in amounts that exceed the placental aromatase capacity at that
time.

REFERENCES
Adu-Gyamfi EA, Ding YB, Wang YX: Regulation of placentation by the transforming growth factor
beta superfamily. Biol Reprod 102(1):18, 2020
Apps R, Sharkey A, Gardner L, et al: Ex vivo functional responses to HLA-G differ between blood and
decidual NK cells. Mol Hum Reprod 17(9):577, 2011
Arnholdt H, Meisel F, Fandrey K, et al: Proliferation of villous trophoblast of the human placenta in
normal and abnormal pregnancies. Virchows Arch B Cell Pathol Incl Mol Pathol 60:365, 1991
Bathgate RA, Samuel CS, Burazin TC, et al: Human relaxin gene 3 (H3) and the equivalent mouse
relaxin (M3) gene. Novel members of the relaxin peptide family. J Biol Chem 277:1148, 2002
Baulieu EE, Bricaire H, Jayle MF: Lack of secretion of 17-hydroxycorticosteroids in a pregnant woman
with Addison’s disease. J Clin Endocrinol 16:690, 1956
Baulieu EE, Dray F: Conversion of 3H-dehydroepiandrosterone (3Beta-hydroxy-delta5-androsten-17one) sulfate to 3H-estrogens in normal pregnant women. J Clin Endocrinol 23:1298, 1963

Beck T, Schweikhart G, Stolz E: Immunohistochemical location of HPL, SP1 and beta-HCG in normal
placentas of varying gestational age. Arch Gynecol 239:63, 1986
Belgorosky A, Guercio G, Pepe C, et al: Genetic and clinical spectrum of aromatase deficiency in
infancy, childhood and adolescence. Horm Res 72(6):321, 2009
Benirschke K, Burton GJ, Baergen RN: Pathology of the Human Placenta, 6th ed. Heidelberg, Springer,
2012
Benn PA: Advances in prenatal screening for Down syndrome: I. General principles and second
trimester testing. Clin Chim Acta 323:1, 2002
Berry SA, Srivastava CH, Rubin LR, et al: Growth hormone-releasing hormone-like messenger
ribonucleic acid and immunoreactive peptide are present in human testis and placenta. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab 75:281, 1992
Bertelloni S, Baroncelli GI, Pelletti A, et al: Parathyroid hormone-related protein in healthy pregnant
women. Calcif Tissue Int 54:195, 1994
Bhaumick B, Dawson EP, Bala RM: The effects of insulin-like growth factor-I and insulin on placental
lactogen production by human term placental explants. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 144:674,
1987
Bleker O, Kloostermans G, Mieras D, et al: Intervillous space during uterine contractions in human
subjects: an ultrasonic study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 123:697, 1975
Bogic LV, Mandel M, Bryant-Greenwood GD: Relaxin gene expression in human reproductive tissues
by in situ hybridization. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 80:130, 1995
Bonagura TW, Babischkin JS, Aberdeen GC, et al: Prematurely elevating estradiol in early baboon
pregnancy suppresses uterine artery remodeling and expression of extravillous placental vascular
endothelial growth factor and a1b1 integrins. Endocrinology 153(6):2897, 2012
Bonenfant M, Provost PR, Drolet R, et al: Localization of type 1 17beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase
mRNA and protein in syncytiotrophoblasts and invasive cytotrophoblasts in the human term villi. J
Endocrinol 165:217, 2000
Borell U, Fernstrom I, Westman A: An arteriographic study of the placental circulation. Geburtshilfe
Frauenheilkd 18:1, 1958
Bourne GL: The Human Amnion and Chorion. Chicago, Year Book, 1962
Boyd JD, Hamilton WJ: The Human Placenta. Cambridge, England, Heffer, 1970
Bradshaw KD, Carr BR: Placental sulfatase deficiency: maternal and fetal expression of steroid
sulfatase deficiency and X-linked ichthyosis. Obstet Gynecol Surv 41:401, 1986
Brosens I, Dixon H: The anatomy of the maternal side of the placenta. Eur J Endocrinol 73:357, 1963
Bryant-Greenwood GD: The extracellular matrix of the human fetal membranes: structure and function.
Placenta 19:1, 1998
Carr BR, Porter JC, MacDonald PC, et al: Metabolism of low density lipoprotein by human fetal adrenal
tissue. Endocrinology 107:1034, 1980
Carr BR, Sadler RK, Rochelle DB, et al: Plasma lipoprotein regulation of progesterone biosynthesis by
human corpus luteum tissue in organ culture. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 52:875, 1981
Carr BR, Simpson ER: Cholesterol synthesis by human fetal hepatocytes: effect of lipoproteins. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 150:551, 1984
Carson DD: The glycobiology of implantation. Front Biosci 7:d1535, 2002
Carvajal JA, Delpiano AM, Cuello MA, et al: Mechanical stretch increases brain natriuretic peptide
production and secretion in the human fetal membranes. Reprod Sci 20(5):597, 2013
Casey ML, MacDonald PC: Extraadrenal formation of a mineralocorticosteroid: deoxycorticosterone
and deoxycorticosterone sulfate biosynthesis and metabolism. Endocr Rev 3:396, 1982a

Casey ML, MacDonald PC: Metabolism of deoxycorticosterone and deoxycorticosterone sulfate in men
and women. J Clin Invest 70:312, 1982b
Casey ML, MacDonald PC: The endothelin-parathyroid hormone-related protein vasoactive peptide
system in human endometrium: modulation by transforming growth factor-beta. Hum Reprod
11(Suppl 2):62, 1996
Cassmer O: Hormone production of the isolated human placenta. Studies on the role of the foetus in the
endocrine functions of the placenta. Acta Endocrinol Suppl 32(Suppl 45):1, 1959
Cervar M, Blaschitz A, Dohr G, et al: Paracrine regulation of distinct trophoblast functions in vitro by
placental macrophages. Cell Tissue Res 295:297, 1999
Chang CW, Wakeland AK, Parast MM: Trophoblast lineage specification, differentiation and their
regulation by oxygen tension. J Endocrinol 236(1):R43, 2018
Chigusa Y, Kishore AH, Mogami H, et al: Nrf2 activation inhibits effects of thrombin in human amnion
cells and thrombin-induced preterm birth in mice. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 101(6):2612, 2016
Cock TA, Auwerx J: Leptin: cutting the fat off the bone. Lancet 362:1572, 2003
Cole LA: Immunoassay of human chorionic gonadotropin, its free subunits, and metabolites. Clin Chem
43:2233, 1997
Corbacho AM, Martinez DL, Clapp C: Roles of prolactin and related members of the prolactin/growth
hormone/placental lactogen family in angiogenesis. J Endocrinol 173:219, 2002
Coya R, Martul P, Algorta J, et al: Progesterone and human placental lactogen inhibit leptin secretion on
cultured trophoblast cells from human placentas at term. Gynecol Endocrinol 21:27, 2005
Crawford J: A study of human placental growth with observations on the placenta in erythroblastosis
foetalis. BJOG 66:855, 1959
Dautzenberg FM, Hauger RL: The CRF peptide family and their receptors: yet more partners
discovered. Trends Pharmacol Sci 23:71, 2002
Debiève F, Pampfer S, Thomas K: Inhibin and activin production and subunit expression in human
placental cells cultured in vitro. Mol Human Reprod 6(8):743, 2000
Diczfalusy E, Troen P: Endocrine functions of the human placenta. Vitam Horm 19:229, 1961
Dombroski RA, Casey ML, MacDonald PC: 5-Alpha-dihydroprogesterone formation in human placenta
from 5alpha-pregnan-3beta/alpha-ol-20-ones and 5-pregnan-3beta-yl-20-one sulfate. J Steroid
Biochem Mol Biol 63:155, 1997
Dunn CL, Critchley HO, Kelly RW: IL-15 regulation in human endometrial stromal cells. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab 87:1898, 2002
Economos K, MacDonald PC, Casey ML: Endothelin-1 gene expression and protein biosynthesis in
human endometrium: potential modulator of endometrial blood flow. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 74:14,
1992
Edman CD, Toofanian A, MacDonald PC, et al: Placental clearance rate of maternal plasma
androstenedione through placental estradiol formation: an indirect method of assessing uteroplacental
blood flow. Am J Obstet Gynecol 141:1029, 1981
Elliott CL, Allport VC, Loudon JA, et al: Nuclear factor-kappa B is essential for up-regulation of
interleukin-8 expression in human amnion and cervical epithelial cells. Mol Hum Reprod 7:787, 2001
Faas MM, de Vos P: Uterine NK cells and macrophages in pregnancy. Placenta 56:44, 2017
Fisk NM, MacLachlan N, Ellis C, et al: Absent end-diastolic flow in first trimester umbilical artery.
Lancet 2:1256, 1988
Florio P, Franchini A, Reis FM, et al: Human placenta, chorion, amnion and decidua express different
variants of corticotropin-releasing factor receptor messenger RNA. Placenta 21:32, 2000

Florio P, Mezzesimi A, Turchetti V, et al: High levels of human chromogranin A in umbilical cord plasma
and amniotic fluid at parturition. J Soc Gynecol Investig 9:32, 2002
France JT, Liggins GC: Placental sulfatase deficiency. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 29:138, 1969
Frandsen VA, Stakemann G: The site of production of oestrogenic hormones in human pregnancy:
hormone excretion in pregnancy with anencephalic foetus. Acta Endocrinol 38:383, 1961
Fu B, Li X, Sun R, et al: Natural killer cells promote immune tolerance by regulating inflammatory TH17
cells at the human maternal-fetal interface. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 110(3):E231, 2013
Fuglsang J, Skjaerbaek C, Espelund U, et al: Ghrelin and its relationship to growth hormones during
normal pregnancy. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) 62(5):554, 2005
Fuzzi B, Rizzo R, Criscuoli L, et al: HLA-G expression in early embryos is a fundamental prerequisite
for the obtainment of pregnancy. Eur J Immunol 32:311, 2002
Garcia-Velasco JA, Arici A: Chemokines and human reproduction. Fertil Steril 71:983, 1999
Genbacev O, Ratkovic M, Kraincanic M, et al: Effect of prostaglandin PGE2alpha on the synthesis of
placental proteins and human placental lactogen (HPL). Prostaglandins 13:723, 1977
Georgia S, Bhushan A: Pregnancy hormones boost beta cells via serotonin. Nat Med 16(7):756, 2010
Germain A, Attaroglu H, MacDonald PC, et al: Parathyroid hormone-related protein mRNA in
avascular human amnion. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 75:1173, 1992
Gibson DA, Simitsidelis I, Cousins FL, et al: Intracrine androgens enhance decidualization and modulate
expression of human endometrial receptivity genes. Sci Rep 286, 2016
Golander A, Hurley T, Barrett J, et al: Prolactin synthesis by human chorion-decidual tissue: a possible
source of prolactin in the amniotic fluid. Science 202:311, 1978
Goldman-Wohl DS, Ariel I, Greenfield C, et al: HLA-G expression in extravillous trophoblasts is an
intrinsic property of cell differentiation: a lesson learned from ectopic pregnancies. Mol Hum Reprod
6:535, 2000
Greer LG, Casey BM, Halvorson LM, et al: Antithyroid antibodies and parity: further evidence for
microchimerism in autoimmune thyroid disease. Am J Obstet Gynecol 205(5):471.e1, 2011
Grumbach MM: Aromatase deficiency and its consequences. Adv Exp Med Biol 707:19, 2011
Grumbach MM, Kaplan SL: On placental origin and purification of chorionic growth hormone prolactin
and its immunoassay in pregnancy. Trans N Y Acad Sci 27:167, 1964
Gualillo O, Caminos J, Blanco M, et al: Ghrelin, a novel placental-derived hormone. Endocrinology
142:788, 2001
Gubbay O, Critchley HO, Bowen JM, et al: Prolactin induces ERK phosphorylation in epithelial and
CD56(+) natural killer cells of the human endometrium. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 87:2329, 2002
Gurpide E, Schwers J, Welch MT, et al: Fetal and maternal metabolism of estradiol during pregnancy. J
Clin Endocrinol Metab 26:1355, 1966
Gurpide E, Tseng J, Escarcena L, et al: Fetomaternal production and transfer of progesterone and
uridine in sheep. Am J Obstet Gynecol 113:21, 1972
Guzeloglu-Kayisli O, Kayisli UA, Taylor HS: The role of growth factors and cytokines during
implantation: endocrine and paracrine interactions. Semin Reprod Med 27(1):62, 2009
Haider S, Meinhardt G, Saleh L, et al: Self-renewing trophoblast organoids recapitulate the
developmental program of the early human placenta Stem Cell Reports 11(2):537, 2018
Halvorson LM: Reproductive endocrinology. In Hoffman BL, Schorge JO, Halvorson LM, et al:
Williams Gynecology, 4th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2020
Hanna J, Goldman-Wohl D, Hamani Y, et al: Decidual NK cells regulate key developmental processes
at the human fetal-maternal interface. Nat Med 12:1065, 2006

Hansell DJ, Bryant-Greenwood GD, Greenwood FC: Expression of the human relaxin H1 gene in the
decidua, trophoblast, and prostate. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 72:899, 1991
Harada N, Ogawa H, Shozu M, et al: Biochemical and molecular genetic analyses on placental
aromatase (P-450AROM) deficiency. J Biol Chem 267:4781, 1992
Harno E, Ramamoorthy TG, Coll AP, et al: POMC: the physiological power of hormone processing.
Physiol Rev 98(4):2381, 2018
Henson MC, Castracane VD: Leptin: roles and regulation in primate pregnancy. Semin Reprod Med
20:113, 2002
Hershman JM: Human chorionic gonadotropin and the thyroid: Hyperemesis gravidarum and
trophoblastic tumors. Thyroid 9:653, 1999
Hertig AT: The placenta: some new knowledge about an old organ. Obstet Gynecol 20:859, 1962
Hill DJ: Placental control of metabolic adaptations in the mother for an optimal pregnancy outcome.
What goes wrong in gestational diabetes? Placenta 69:162, 2018
Horgan CE, Roumimper H, Tucker R, et al: Altered decorin and Smad expression in human fetal
membranes in PPROM. Biol Reprod 91(5):105, 2014
Horvath TL, Diano S, Sotonyi P, et al: Minireview: ghrelin and the regulation of energy balance—a
hypothalamic perspective. Endocrinology 142:4163, 2001
Hudson P, Haley J, John M, et al: Structure of a genomic clone encoding biologically active human
relaxin. Nature 301:628, 1983
Hudson P, John M, Crawford R, et al: Relaxin gene expression in human ovaries and the predicted
structure of a human preprorelaxin by analysis of cDNA clones. EMBO J 3:2333, 1984
Hunt JS, Orr HT: HLA and maternal-fetal recognition. FASEB J 6:2344, 1992
Huu SN, Dubernard G, Aractingi S, et al: Feto-maternal cell trafficking: a transfer of pregnancy
associated progenitor cells. Stem Cell Rev 2:111, 2006
Iwashita M, Kudo Y, Shinozaki Y, et al: Gonadotropin-releasing hormone increases serum human
chorionic gonadotropin in pregnant women. Endocr J 40:539, 1993
Johnson EL, Chakraborty R: Placental Hofbauer cells limit HIV-1 replication and potentially offset
mother to child transmission (MTCT) by induction of immunoregulatory cytokines. Retrovirology
9:101, 2012
Johnson PM, Christmas SE, Vince GS: Immunological aspects of implantation and implantation failure.
Hum Reprod 14(suppl 2):26, 1999
Jones RL, Stoikos C, Findlay JK, et al: TGF-β superfamily expression and actions in the endometrium
and placenta. Reproduction 132:217, 2006
Jones SA, Brooks AN, Challis JR: Steroids modulate corticotropin-releasing hormone production in
human fetal membranes and placenta. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 68:825, 1989a
Kaneko Y, Murphy CR, Day ML: Extracellular matrix proteins secreted from both the endometrium and
the embryo are required for attachment: a study using a co-culture model of rat blastocysts and
Ishikawa cells. J Morphol 2741(1):63, 2013
Kim H, Toyofuku Y, Lynn FC; et al: Serotonin regulates pancreatic beta cell mass during pregnancy.
Nat Med 16(7):804, 2010
King BF, Menton DN: Scanning electron microscopy of human placental villi from early and late in
gestation. Am J Obstet Gynecol 122:824, 1975
Kraiem Z, Sadeh O, Blithe DL, et al: Human chorionic gonadotropin stimulates thyroid hormone
secretion, iodide uptake, organification, and adenosine 3′,5′-monophosphate formation in cultured
human thyrocytes. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 79:595, 1994

Kurman RJ, Young RH, Norris HJ, et al: Immunocytochemical localization of placental lactogen and
chorionic gonadotropin in the normal placenta and trophoblastic tumors, with emphasis on
intermediate trophoblast and the placental site trophoblastic tumor. Int J Gynecol Pathol 3:101, 1984
Kurtzman JT, Wilson H, Rao CV: A proposed role for hCG in clinical obstetrics. Semin Reprod Med
19:63, 2001
La Cava A, Alviggi C, Matarese G: Unraveling the multiple roles of leptin in inflammation and
autoimmunity. J Mol Med 82:4, 2004
LeBouteiller P, Solier C, Proll J, et al: Placental HLA-G protein expression in vivo: where and what for?
Hum Reprod Update 5:223, 1999
Lessey BA, Castelbaum AJ: Integrins and implantation in the human. Rev Endocr Metab Disord 3:107,
2002
Lessey BA, Castelbaum AJ, Sawin SW, et al: Integrins as markers of uterine receptivity in women with
primary unexplained infertility. Fertil Steril 63:535, 1995
Liao S, Vickers MH, Taylor RS, et al: Human placental growth hormone is increased in maternal serum
at 20 weeks of gestation in pregnancies with large-for-gestation-age babies. Growth Factors 34(5–
6):203, 2016
Licht P, Russu V, Wildt L: On the role of human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) in the embryoendometrial microenvironment: implications for differentiation and implantation. Semin Reprod Med
19:37, 2001
Lindhard A, Bentin-Ley U, Ravn V, et al: Biochemical evaluation of endometrial function at the time of
implantation. Fertil Steril 78:221, 2002
Liu AX, Zhang D, Zhu YM, et al: Impact of axis of GHRH and GHRH receptor on cell viability and
apoptosis of the placental choriocarcinoma cell line. Curr Mol Med 16(3):299, 2016
Liu Y, Fan X, Wang R, et al: Single-cell RNA-seq reveals the diversity of trophoblast subtypes and
patterns of differentiation in the human placenta. Cell Res 28(8):819, 2018
Lobo SC, Srisuparp S, Peng X, et al: Uterine receptivity in the baboon: modulation by chorionic
gonadotropin. Semin Reprod Med 19:69, 2001
Loke YM, King A: Human Implantation. Cell Biology and Immunology. Cambridge, Cambridge
University Press, 1995
Loquet P, Broughton-Pipkin F, Symonds E, et al: Blood velocity waveforms and placental vascular
formation. Lancet 2:1252, 1988
MacDonald PC: Placental steroidogenesis. In Wynn RM (ed): Fetal Homeostasis, Vol. I. New York,
New York Academy of Sciences, 1965a
MacDonald PC, Siiteri PK: Origin of estrogen in women pregnant with an anencephalic fetus. J Clin
Invest 44:465, 1965b
MacDonald PC, Siiteri PK: Study of estrogen production in women with hydatidiform mole. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab 24:685, 1964
MacDonald PC, Siiteri PK: The in vivo mechanisms of origin of estrogen in subjects with trophoblastic
tumors. Steroids 8:589, 1966
Marcellin L, Schmitz T, Messaoudene M, et al: Immune modifications in fetal membranes overlying the
cervix precede parturition in humans. J Immunol 198(3):1345, 2017
Maruo T, Ladines-Llave CA, Matsuo H, et al: A novel change in cytologic localization of human
chorionic gonadotropin and human placental lactogen in first-trimester placenta in the course of
gestation. Am J Obstet Gynecol 167:217, 1992
McCabe ER: Adrenal hypoplasias and aplasias. In Scriver CR, Beaudet AL, Sly WE, et al (eds): The
Metabolic and Molecular Bases of Inherited Disease. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2001

McCombs H, Craig M: Decidual necrosis in normal pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 24:436, 1964
McGregor WG, Kuhn RW, Jaffe RB: Biologically active chorionic gonadotropin: synthesis by the human
fetus. Science 220:306, 1983
Mesiano S: The endocrinology of human pregnancy and fetoplacental neuroendocrine development. In
Strauss JF, Barbieri RL (eds): Yen and Jaffe’s Reproductive Endocrinology: Physiology,
Pathophysiology, and Clinical Management, 6th ed. Philadelphia, Saunders, 2009
Mi Y, Wang W, Zhang C, et al: Autophagic degradation of collagen 1A1 by cortisol in human amnion
fibroblasts. Endocrinology 158(4):1005, 2017
Miller-Lindholm AK, LaBenz CJ, Ramey J, et al: Human chorionic gonadotropin-beta gene expression
in first trimester placenta. Endocrinology 138:5459, 1997
Moffett-King A: Natural killer cells and pregnancy. Nat Rev Immunol 2:656, 2002
Mogami H, Keller PW, Shi H, et al: Effect of thrombin on human amnion mesenchymal cells, mouse
fetal membranes, and preterm birth. J Biol Chem 289(19):13295, 2014
Mogami H, Kishore AH, Shi H, et al: Fetal fibronectin signaling induces matrix metalloproteases and
cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) in amnion cells and preterm birth in mice. J Biol Chem 288(3):1953,
2013
Moore JJ, Dubyak GR, Moore RM, et al: Oxytocin activates the inositol-phospholipid-protein kinase-C
system and stimulates prostaglandin production in human amnion cells. Endocrinology 123:1771,
1988
Moore KL, Persaud TV, Torchia MG (eds): The Developing Human. Clinically Oriented Embryology,
9th ed. Philadelphia, Saunders, 2013
Moore RM, Redline RW, Kumar D, et al: Differential expression of fibulin family proteins in the paracervical weak zone and other areas of human fetal membranes. Placenta 30(4):335, 2009
Morrish DW, Marusyk H, Siy O: Demonstration of specific secretory granules for human chorionic
gonadotropin in placenta. J Histochem Cytochem 35:93, 1987
Nakajima R, Ishida M, Kamiya CA, et al: Elevated vasoinhibin derived from prolactin and cathepsin D
activities in sera of patients with preeclampsia. Hypertens Res 38(12):899, 2015
Navot D, Bergh P: Preparation of the human endometrium for implantation. Ann N Y Acad Sci
622:212, 1991
Nemeth E, Tashima LS, Yu Z, et al: Fetal membrane distention: I. Differentially expressed genes
regulated by acute distention in amniotic epithelial (WISH) cells. Am J Obstet Gynecol 182:50, 2000
Nicholson RC, King BR: Regulation of CRH gene expression in the placenta. Front Horm Res 27:246,
2001
Nusken E, Wohlfarth M, Lippach G, et al: Reduced perinatal leptin availability may contribute to adverse
metabolic programming in a rat model of uteroplacental insufficiency. Endocrinology 157(5):1813,
2016
O’Sullivan CM, Liu SY, Karpinka JB, et al: Embryonic hatching enzyme strypsin/ISP1 is expressed with
ISP2 in endometrial glands during implantation. Mol Reprod Dev 62:328, 2002
Okae H, Toh H, Sato T, et al: Derivation of human trophoblast stem cells. Cell Stem Cell 4;22(1):50,
2018
Patel N, Alsat E, Igout A, et al: Glucose inhibits human placental GH secretion, in vitro. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab 80:1743, 1995
Peng B, Zhu H, Klausen C, et al: GnRH regulates trophoblast invasion via RUNX2-mediated MMP2/9
expression. Mol Hum Reprod 22(2):119, 2016
Pereira de Sousa FL, Chaiwangyen W, Morales-Prieto DM, et al: Involvement of STAT1 in proliferation
and invasiveness of trophoblastic cells. Reprod Biol 17(3):218, 2017

Pérez-Pérez A, Toro A, Vilariño-García T, et al: Leptin action in normal and pathological pregnancies. J
Cell Mol Med 22(2):716, 2018
Petraglia F, Florio P, Benedetto C, et al: Urocortin stimulates placental adrenocorticotropin and
prostaglandin release and myometrial contractility in vitro. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 84:1420, 1999
Petraglia F, Giardino L, Coukos G, et al: Corticotropin-releasing factor and parturition: plasma and
amniotic fluid levels and placental binding sites. Obstet Gynecol 75:784, 1990
Petraglia F, Vaughan J, Vale W: Inhibin and activin modulate the release of gonadotropin-releasing
hormone, human chorionic gonadotropin, and progesterone from cultured human placental cells.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 86:5114, 1989
Petraglia F, Woodruff TK, Botticelli G, et al: Gonadotropin-releasing hormone, inhibin, and activin in
human placenta: evidence for a common cellular localization. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 74:1184, 1992
Pijnenborg R: Trophoblast invasion. Reprod Med Rev 3:53, 1994
Pijnenborg R, Bland JM, Robertson WB, et al: Uteroplacental arterial changes related to interstitial
trophoblast migration in early human pregnancy. Placenta 4:397, 1983
Piper KP, McLarnon A, Arrazi J, et al: Functional HY-specific CD8+ T cells are found in a high
proportion of women following pregnancy with a male fetus. Biol Reprod 76:96, 2007
PrabhuDas M, Bonney E, Caron K, et al: Immune mechanisms at the maternal-fetal interface:
perspective and challenges. Nat Immunol 16(4):328, 2015
Qin X, Chua PK, Ohira RH, et al: An autocrine/paracrine role of human decidual relaxin. II.
Stromelysin-1 (MMP-3) and tissue inhibitor of matrix metalloproteinase-1 (TIMP-1). Biol Reprod
56:812, 1997a
Qin X, Garibay-Tupas J, Chua PK, et al: An autocrine/paracrine role of human decidual relaxin. I.
Interstitial collagenase (matrix metalloproteinase-1) and tissue plasminogen activator. Biol Reprod
56:800, 1997b
Rahmati M, Petitbarat M, Dubanchet S, et al: Colony stimulating factors 1, 2, 3 and early pregnancy
steps: from bench to bedside. J Reprod Immunol 109:1, 2015
Rainey WE, Carr BR, Wang ZN, et al: Gene profiling of human fetal and adult adrenals. J Endocrinol
171:209, 2001
Rajagopalan S, Long EO: Cellular senescence induced by CD158d reprograms natural killer cells to
promote vascular remodeling. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 109(50):20596, 2012
Ramsey EM, Donner MW: Placental Vasculature and Circulation. Philadelphia, Saunders, 1980
Reyes L, Wolfe B, Golos T: Hofbauer cells: placental macrophages of fetal origin. Results Probl Cell
Differ 62:45, 2017
Riddick DH, Luciano AA, Kusmik WF, et al: Evidence for a nonpituitary source of amniotic fluid
prolactin. Fertil Steril 31:35, 1979
Riley S, Walton J, Herlick J, et al: The localization and distribution of corticotropin-releasing hormone in
the human placenta and fetal membranes throughout gestation. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 72:1001,
1991
Robidoux J, Simoneau L, St Pierre S, et al: Characterization of neuropeptide Y-mediated corticotropinreleasing factor synthesis and release from human placental trophoblasts. Endocrinology 141:2795,
2000
Robinson BG, Emanuel RL, Frim DM, et al: Glucocorticoid stimulates expression of corticotropinreleasing hormone gene in human placenta. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 85:5244, 1988
Rosario FJ, Powell TL, Jansson T: Activation of placental insulin and mTOR signaling in a mouse model
of maternal obesity associated with fetal overgrowth. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol
310(1):R87, 2016a

Rosario GX, Stewart CL: The multifaceted actions of leukaemia inhibitory factor in mediating uterine
receptivity and embryo implantation. Am J Reprod Immunol 75(3):246, 2016b
Rowe T, King L, MacDonald PC, et al: Tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-1 and tissue inhibitor of
metalloproteinase-2 expression in human amnion mesenchymal and epithelial cells. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 176:915, 1997
Ruiz-Alonso M, Blesa D, Díaz-Gimeno P, et al: The endometrial receptivity array for diagnosis and
personalized embryo transfer as a treatment for patients with repeated implantation failure. Fertil
Steril 100(3):818, 2013
Ruocco MG, Chaouat G, Florez L, et al: Regulatory T-cells in pregnancy: historical perspective, state of
the art, and burning questions. Front Immunol 5:389, 2014
Ryan KJ: Biological aromatization of steroids. J Biol Chem 234:268, 1959a
Ryan KJ: Metabolism of C-16-oxygenated steroids by human placenta: the formation of estriol. J Biol
Chem 234:2006, 1959b
Salido EC, Yen PH, Barajas L, et al: Steroid sulfatase expression in human placenta:
immunocytochemistry and in situ hybridization study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 70:1564, 1990
Saxe A, Dean S, Gibson G, et al: Parathyroid hormone and parathyroid hormone-related peptide in
venous umbilical cord blood of healthy neonates. J Perinat Med 25:288, 1997
Schanton M, Maymó JL, Pérez-Pérez A, et al: Involvement of leptin in the molecular physiology of the
placenta. Reproduction 155(1):R1, 2018
Schumacher A, Zenclussen AC: Human chorionic gonadotropin-mediated immune responses that
facilitate embryo implantation and placentation. Front Immunol 10:2896, 2019
Siiteri PK, MacDonald PC: Placental estrogen biosynthesis during human pregnancy. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab 26:751, 1966
Siiteri PK, MacDonald PC: The utilization of circulating dehydroisoandrosterone sulfate for estrogen
synthesis during human pregnancy. Steroids 2:713, 1963
Silasi M, You Y, Simpson S, et al: Human chorionic gonadotropin modulates CXCL10 expression through
histone methylation in human decidua. Sci Rep 10(1):5785, 2020
Siler-Khodr TM: Chorionic peptides. In McNellis D, Challis JRG, MacDonald PC, et al (eds): The
Onset of Labor: Cellular and Integrative Mechanisms. Ithaca, Perinatology Press, 1988
Siler-Khodr TM, Khodr GS: Content of luteinizing hormone-releasing factor in the human placenta. Am
J Obstet Gynecol 130:216, 1978
Siler-Khodr TM, Khodr GS, Valenzuela G: Immunoreactive gonadotropin-releasing hormone level in
maternal circulation throughout pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 150:376, 1984
Simmonds CS, Karsenty G, Karaplis AD, et al: Parathyroid hormone regulates fetal-placental mineral
homeostasis. J Bone Miner Res 25(3):594, 2010
Simpson ER: Genetic mutations resulting in loss of aromatase activity in humans and mice. J Soc
Gynecol Investig 7:S18, 2000
Simpson ER, Burkhart MF: Acyl CoA:cholesterol acyl transferase activity in human placental
microsomes: inhibition by progesterone. Arch Biochem Biophys 200:79, 1980
Simpson ER, Carr BR, Parker CR Jr, et al: The role of serum lipoproteins in steroidogenesis by the
human fetal adrenal cortex. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 49:146, 1979
Sipos Pl, Rens W, Schlecht H, et al: Uterine vasculature remodeling in human pregnancy involves
functional macrochimerism by endothelial colony forming cells of fetal origin. Stem Cells 31:1363,
2013
Soares MJ, Chakraborty D, Renaud SJ, et al: Regulatory pathways controlling the endovascular invasive
trophoblast cell linear. J Reprod Dev 58(3):283, 2012

Steele GL, Currie WD, Yuen BH, et al: Acute stimulation of human chorionic gonadotropin secretion by
recombinant human activin-A in first trimester human trophoblast. Endocrinology 133:297, 1993
Stevens AM: Microchimeric cells in systemic lupus erythematosus: targets or innocent bystanders?
Lupus 15:820, 2006
Tomer Y, Huber GK, Davies TF: Human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) interacts directly with
recombinant human TSH receptors. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 74:1477, 1992
Triebel J, Bertsch T, Bollheimer C, et al: Principles of the prolactin/vasoinhibin axis. Am J Physiol Regul
Integr Comp Physiol 309(10):R1193, 2015
Trombly DJ, Woodruff TK, Mayo KE: Roles for transforming growth factor beta superfamily proteins in
early folliculogenesis. Semin Reprod Med 27(1):14, 2009
Tsang JCH, Vong JSL, Ji L, et al Integrative single-cell and cell-free plasma RNA transcriptomics
elucidates placental cellular dynamics. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 114(37):E7786, 2017
Tsuruta E, Tada H, Tamaki H, et al: Pathogenic role of asialo human chorionic gonadotropin in
gestational thyrotoxicosis. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 80:350, 1995
Turco MY, Gardner L, Kay RG, et al: Trophoblast organoids as a model for maternal-fetal interactions
during human placentation. Nature 564(7735):263, 2018
Tyson JE, Hwang P, Guyda H, et al: Studies of prolactin secretion in human pregnancy. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 113:14, 1972
Vande Wiele RL, Bogumil J, Dyrenfurth I, et al: Mechanisms regulating the menstrual cycle in women.
Recent Prog Horm Res 26:63, 1970
Vaskivuo TE, Ottander U, Oduwole O, et al: Role of apoptosis, apoptosis-related factors and 17 betahydroxysteroid dehydrogenases in human corpus luteum regression. Mol Cell Endocrinol 194(1–
2):191, 2002
Vento-Tormo R, Efremova M, Botting RA, et al: Single-cell reconstruction of the early maternal-fetal
interface in humans. Nature 563(7731):347, 2018
Vickers MH, Gilmour S, Gertler A, et al: 20-kDa placental hGH-V has diminished diabetogenic and
lactogenic activities compared with 22-kDa hGH-N while retaining antilipogenic activity. Am J
Physiol Endocrinol Metab 297(3):E629, 2009
Wadhwa PD, Porto M, Garite TJ, et al: Maternal corticotropin-releasing hormone levels in the early
third trimester predict length of gestation in human pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 179:1079, 1998
Walker WH, Fitzpatrick SL, Barrera-Saldana HA, et al: The human placental lactogen genes: structure,
function, evolution and transcriptional regulation. Endocr Rev 12:316, 1991
Warren W, Silverman A: Cellular localization of corticotrophin releasing hormone in the human placenta,
fetal membranes and decidua. Placenta 16:147, 1995
Weetman AP: The immunology of pregnancy. Thyroid 9:643, 1999
Wehmann RE, Nisula BC: Renal clearance rates of the subunits of human chorionic gonadotropin in
man. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 50:674, 1980
Whittle WL, Gibb W, Challis JR: The characterization of human amnion epithelial and mesenchymal
cells: the cellular expression, activity and glucocorticoid regulation of prostaglandin output. Placenta
21:394, 2000
Williams PJ, Searle RF, Robson SC, et al: Decidual leucocyte populations in early to late gestation
normal human pregnancy. J Reprod Immunol 82(1):24, 2009
Winger EE, Reed JL: The multiple faces of the decidual natural killer cell. Am J Reprod Immunol 70:1,
2013
Wislocki GB, Dempsey EW: Electron microscopy of the human placenta. Anat Rec 123:133, 1955

Wolfahrt S, Kleine B, Rossmanith WG: Detection of gonadotrophin releasing hormone and its receptor
mRNA in human placental trophoblasts using in situ reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction.
Mol Hum Reprod 4:999, 1998
Wu Z, Horgan CE, Carr O, et al: Biglycan and decorin differentially regulate signaling in the fetal
membranes. Matrix Biol 34:266, 2014
Xie L, Sadovsky Y: The function of miR-519d in cell migration, invasion, and proliferation suggests a
role in early placentation. Placenta 48:34, 2016
Xu RH, Chen X, Li DS, et al: BMP4 initiates human embryonic stem cell differentiation to trophoblast.
Nat Biotechnol 20(12): 1261, 2002
Yan C, Wang P, DeMayo J, et al: Synergistic roles of bone morphogenetic Protein 15 and growth
differentiation Factor 9 in ovarian function. Mol Endocrinol 15:854, 2001
Zhang B, He L, Liu Y, et al: Prostaglandin E(2) is required for BMP4-induced mesoderm differentiation
of human embryonic stem cells. Stem Cell Reports 10(3):905, 2018

CHAPTER 6

Placental Abnormalities

NORMAL PLACENTA
SHAPE AND SIZE VARIANTS
EXTRACHORIAL PLACENTATION
CIRCULATORY DISTURBANCES
PLACENTAL CALCIFICATION
PLACENTAL TUMORS
AMNIOCHORION
UMBILICAL CORD
REFERENCES
During pregnancy, the placenta provides the indispensable interface between
mother and fetus (Chap. 5, p. 86). However, in part due to inaccessibility
throughout gestation, the placenta’s anatomy, physiology, and molecular
structure still remain some of the most understudied and intriguing topics in
obstetrics. Furthermore, the parallels between placental formation and
cancer afford opportunities to understand tumor biology and pathogenesis
(Costanzo, 2018; Guttmacher, 2014).
Visual placental inspection by the obstetrician is recommended, but
routine pathological examination is not mandatory. Indeed, specific
conditions that merit submission for detailed inspection are still debated. For

example, the College of American Pathologists recommends placental
examination for an extensive list of indications, however many providers are
not aware (Langston, 1997; Odibo, 2016). Moreover, data are insufficient to
support all of these. At minimum, the placenta and cord should be inspected
in the delivery room. The decision to request pathological examination
should be based on clinical and placental findings (Table 6-1) (Redline,
2008; Roberts, 2008).
TABLE 6-1. Some Indications for Placental Pathological Examinationa

NORMAL PLACENTA
At term, the typical placenta weighs 470 g, is round to oval with a 22-cm
diameter, and has a central thickness of 2.5 cm (Benirschke, 2012). It is
composed of a placental disc, extraplacental membranes, and three-vessel
umbilical cord. The disc surface that lies against the uterine wall is the basal
plate, which is divided by clefts into portions—termed cotyledons. The fetal
surface is the chorionic plate. Here, the umbilical cord inserts, typically in
the center. Large fetal vessels that originate from the cord vessels then spread
and branch across the chorionic plate before entering stem villi of the
placenta parenchyma. In tracing these, fetal arteries almost invariably cross
over veins. The chorionic plate and its vessels are covered by thin amnion,
which can be easily peeled away from a postdelivery specimen.
During prenatal sonographic examinations, multiple societies, including
the American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine (2018), recommend
identifying and recording placental location and its relationship to the
internal cervical os. As seen sonographically, the normal placenta is
homogenous and 2 to 4 cm thick, lies against the myometrium, and indents
into the amnionic sac. The retroplacental space is a hypoechoic area that
separates the myometrium from the basal plate and measures less than 1 to 2
cm. The umbilical cord is also imaged, its fetal and placental insertion sites
examined, and its vessels counted.

Many placental lesions can be identified grossly or sonographically, but
other abnormalities require histopathological examination for clarification. A
detailed description of these is beyond the scope of this chapter, and
interested readers are referred to textbooks by Benirschke (2012), Fox
(2007), and Faye-Petersen (2006) and their colleagues. Moreover, the
placenta accreta spectrum, placenta previa, and gestational trophoblastic
disease are presented in detail in Chapters 41 and 20, respectively.

SHAPE AND SIZE VARIANTS
Of variants, placentas may infrequently form as separate, nearly equally
sized discs. This bilobate placenta may also be called bipartite placenta or
placenta duplex. In these, the cord inserts between the two placental lobes—
either into a connecting chorionic bridge or into intervening membranes. A
placenta containing three or more equivalently sized lobes is rare and termed
multilobate. Unlike this equal distribution, one or more disparately smaller
accessory lobes—succenturiate lobes—may develop in the membranes at a
distance from the main placenta (Fig. 6-1). These lobes have vessels that
course through the membranes. Of clinical importance, if these vessels
overlie the cervix to create a vasa previa, dangerous fetal hemorrhage can
follow vessel laceration (p. 115). An accessory lobe can also be retained in
the uterus after delivery to cause postpartum uterine atony and hemorrhage or
later endometritis.

FIGURE 6-1 Succenturiate lobe. A. Vessels extend from the main placental disc to supply the small
round succenturiate lobe located to the left. (Reproduced with permission from Dr. Rachel Gardner.) B.

Sonographic imaging with color Doppler shows the main placental disc implanted posteriorly (asterisk).
The succenturiate lobe is located on the anterior uterine wall across the amnionic cavity. Vessels are
identified as the long red and blue crossing tubular structures that travel within the membranes to
connect these two portions of placenta.

Rarely, the placental surface area varies from the norm. With placenta
membranacea, villi cover all or nearly all the uterine cavity. This may
occasionally give rise to serious hemorrhage because of associated placenta
previa or accreta (Pereira, 2013). A ring-shaped placenta may be a variant
of placenta membranacea. This placenta is annular, and a partial or complete
ring of placental tissue is present. These abnormalities appear to be
associated with a greater likelihood of antepartum and postpartum bleeding
and fetal-growth restriction (Faye-Petersen, 2006; Steemers, 1995). With
placenta fenestrata, the central portion of a placental disc is missing. In
some cases, there is an actual hole in the placenta. More often, only villous
tissue is missing, and the chorionic plate remains intact.
During pregnancy, the normal placenta increases its thickness at a rate
that approximates 1 mm per week. Although not measured as a component of
routine sonographic evaluation, this thickness typically does not exceed 40
mm (Hoddick, 1985). Placentomegaly defines those thicker than 40 mm and
commonly results from striking villous enlargement. Underlying maternal
etiologies are diabetes mellitus or severe anemia, whereas fetal sources
include hydrops, anemia, syphilis, toxoplasmosis, or infection caused by
parvovirus or cytomegalovirus. In these conditions, the placenta is
homogeneously thickened. In other cases placentas are thick but
inhomogeneous. Partial mole is a classic example. The thickened placenta
contains edematous villi, which appear as multiple, small, anechoic
placental cysts (Chap. 13, p. 239). Cystic vesicles also are seen with
placental mesenchymal dysplasia. In this rare condition, vesicles
correspond to enlarged stem villi. However, unlike molar pregnancy,
trophoblast proliferation is not excessive, and chromosomal complements
are diploid (Woo, 2011).
Rather than villous enlargement, inhomogeneous placentomegaly often
may result from collections of blood or fibrin, which impart heterogeneity to
the placenta. Examples of this are discussed later and include massive
perivillous fibrin deposition, intervillous or subchorionic thromboses, and
large retroplacental hematomas (p. 110).

EXTRACHORIAL PLACENTATION
The chorionic plate normally extends to the periphery of the placental disc
and has a diameter similar to that of the basal plate. With extrachorial
placentation, however, the chorionic plate fails to extend to this periphery
and leads to a chorionic plate that is smaller than the basal plate (Fig. 6-2).
Circummarginate and circumvallate placentas are the two types. In a
circummarginate placenta, fibrin and old hemorrhage lie between the
placental disc and the overlying sheer amniochorion. In contrast, with a
circumvallate placenta, the chorionic plate periphery is a thickened, opaque,
gray-white circular ridge composed of a double fold of chorion and amnion.

FIGURE 6-2 A. In this illustration, circummarginate (left) and circumvallate (right) varieties of
extrachorial placentation are shown. A circummarginate placenta is covered by a single layer of
amniochorion. B. This transabdominal grayscale sonographic image shows a circumvallate placenta.
The double fold of amnion and chorion creates a broad, opaque white ring and ridge on the fetal
surface.

Sonographically, the circumvallate fold can be seen as a thick, linear
band of echoes extending from one placental edge to the other. On cross
section, however, it appears as two “shelves,” with each lying above an
opposing placental margin (see Fig. 6-2). This anatomy can help differentiate
this shelf from other bands (Table 6-2).
TABLE 6-2. Sonographic Bands During Pregnancy

In small observational studies of circumvallate placenta diagnosed
postpartum, it was associated with increased risk for antepartum bleeding,
abruption, fetal demise, and preterm birth (Suzuki, 2008; Taniguchi, 2014). In
a prospective sonographic investigation of 17 cases, however, Shen and
associates (2007a) found most circumvallate placentas to be transient.
Persistent cases were benign. In general, most otherwise uncomplicated
pregnancies with either type of extrachorial placentation have normal
outcomes, and no increased surveillance is usually required.

CIRCULATORY DISTURBANCES
Functionally, placental perfusion disorders can be grouped into: (1) those in
which maternal blood flow to or within the intervillous space is disrupted,
and (2) those with disturbed fetal blood flow through the villi. These lesions
are frequently identified in the normal, mature placenta. Although they can
limit maximal placental blood flow, functional reserve within the placental
prevents harm in most cases. Indeed, some estimate that up to 30 percent of
placental villi can be lost without untoward fetal effects (Fox, 2007). If
extensive, however, these lesions can profoundly limit fetal growth.
Lesions that disrupt perfusion are frequently seen grossly or
sonographically, whereas smaller lesions are seen only histologically. With

sonography, many of these, such as subchorionic fibrin deposition,
perivillous fibrin deposition, and intervillous thrombosis, appear as focal
sonolucencies within the placenta. Greater magnetic resonance (MR) imaging
use in pregnancy has permitted detection and further characterization of these
lesions (Bockoven, 2020; Capuani, 2017). Importantly, in the absence of
maternal or fetal complications, small isolated placental sonolucencies are
considered incidental findings.

■ Maternal Blood Flow Disruption
Subchorionic Fibrin Deposition
These collections are caused by slowing of maternal blood flow within the
intervillous space. In the upper portion of this space near the chorionic plate,
blood stasis is prominent and leads to subsequent fibrin deposition. In
viewing the placental fetal surface, subchorionic lesions are seen as white or
yellow, firm, round, elevated plaques just beneath the chorionic plate.

Perivillous Fibrin Deposition
Stasis of maternal blood flow around an individual villus also results in
fibrin deposition and can lead to diminished villous oxygenation and
necrosis of syncytiotrophoblast (Fig. 6-3). These small yellow-white
placental nodules are grossly visible within the parenchyma of a sectioned
placenta. Within limits, these reflect normal placental aging. Deposition that
affects >25 percent of villi is associated with fetal-growth restriction and
adverse neonatal outcomes (Devisme, 2017; Spinillo, 2019).

FIGURE 6-3 Potential sites of maternally and fetally related placental circulatory disturbances.

Maternal Floor Infarction. This extreme variant of perivillous fibrin
deposition is a dense fibrinoid layer within the placental basal plate and is
erroneously termed an infarction. Maternal floor infarction has a thick,
yellow or white, firm corrugated surface that impedes normal maternal blood
flow into the intervillous space. In specific cases that extend up and beyond
the basal plate to entrap villi and obliterate the intervillous space, the term
massive perivillous fibrin deposition is used. The etiopathogenesis is
unclear, but maternal auto- or alloimmunity appears contributory (FayePeterson, 2018; Romero, 2013). Antiphospholipid antibody syndrome and
angiogenic factors involved with preeclampsia also have been implicated
(Sebire, 2002; Whitten, 2013).
These lesions are not reliably imaged with prenatal sonography, but they
may create a thicker basal plate. Affected pregnancies are associated with
miscarriage, fetal-growth restriction, preterm delivery, and stillbirth
(Andres, 1990; Mandsager, 1994). Importantly, these adverse outcomes can
recur in subsequent pregnancies.

Intervillous Thrombus
This is a collection of coagulated maternal blood normally found in the
intervillous space mixed with fetal blood from a break in a villus. Grossly,
these round or oval collections vary in size up to several centimeters. They
appear red if recent or white-yellow if older, and they develop at any

placental depth. Intervillous thrombi are common and typically not
associated with adverse fetal sequelae. These reflect potential
communication between maternal and fetal circulations, and thus large
lesions are one cause of elevated maternal serum alpha-fetoprotein (MSAFP)
levels (Table 17-5, p. 338). (Salafia, 1988).

Infarction
Chorionic villi themselves receive oxygen solely from maternal circulation
and specifically from blood supplied into the intervillous space. Any
uteroplacental disease that diminishes or obstructs this supply can result in
infarction of an individual villus. These are common lesions in mature
placentas and are benign in limited numbers. If numerous, however, placental
insufficiency can develop. When they are thick, centrally located, and
randomly distributed, they may be associated with preeclampsia or lupus
anticoagulant.

Hematoma
The maternal–placental–fetal unit can develop several hematoma types. As
depicted in Figure 6-3, these include: (1) retroplacental hematoma—formed
between the placenta and its adjacent decidua; (2) marginal hematoma—
formed between the chorion and decidua at the placental periphery—known
clinically as subchorionic hemorrhage; (3) subamnionic hematoma—
derived of fetal vessel origin and found beneath the amnion but above the
chorionic plate, and (4) subchorial thrombus along the roof of the
intervillous space and beneath the chorionic plate. With this last type,
massive subchorionic hematomas are also known as Breus moles.
Sonographically, hematomas evolve with time and appear hyperechoic to
isoechoic in the first week after hemorrhage, hypoechoic at 1 to 2 weeks, and
finally, anechoic after 2 weeks. Most subchorionic hematomas visible
sonographically are fairly small and of no clinical consequence (Naert,
2019). However, extensive retroplacental, marginal, and subchorial
collections are associated with higher rates of miscarriage, stillbirth,
placental abruption, and preterm delivery (Tuuli, 2011). In essence, placental
abruption is a large, clinically significant retroplacental hematoma.

■ Fetal Blood Flow Disruption

Fetal Vascular Malperfusion
Placental lesions that arise from fetal circulatory disturbances are also
depicted in Figure 6-3. Normally, deoxygenated fetal blood flows from the
two umbilical arteries into arteries within the chorionic plate. These surface
arteries divide and send branches out across the placental surface. These
eventually supply individual stem villi. Remember that fetal blood is
oxygenated within each villus by passive diffusion of oxygen from maternal
blood contained within the intervillous space. Thus, with fetal vessel
thrombosis, portions of the villus distal to the obstruction become
nonfunctional. Normally, thrombi in limited numbers are found in mature
placentas. If many villi are affected, which can be seen with preeclampsia,
the fetus may suffer growth restriction, stillbirth, or nonreassuring fetal heart
rate patterns (Chisholm, 2015; Lepais, 2014; Saleemuddin, 2010).

Villous Vascular Lesions
Villous capillaries show a spectrum of histological lesions. Chorangiosis
describes an increased number of capillaries within terminal villi. Its
definition requires ≥10 capillaries to be present in ≥10 villi in ≥10 fields
viewed through a 10× lens (Altshuler, 1984). Clinically, long-standing
hypoperfusion or hypoxia is thought to be causative (Stanek, 2016). Focal
chorangiosis is increased capillary vascularity in a significant portion of the
placenta but not diffusely. In one small study, lower Apgar scores and fetal
vascular malperfusion were associated outcomes (Sung, 2019). Prenatal
detection of chorangiosis has been reported (Inubashiri, 2017).
Chorangiomatosis describes increased capillary number in stem villi, but
terminal villi are spared. This finding has been linked with fetal-growth
restriction and anomalies (Bagby, 2011). Despite these associations, the
clinical significance of both vascular conditions remains unclear.
Chorioangiomas are described subsequently.

Subamnionic Hematoma
As noted earlier, these hematomas lie between the chorionic plate and
amnion. They most often are acute iatrogenic events of no clinical
consequence during third-stage labor when cord traction ruptures a vessel
near the cord insertion.

Large, chronic antepartum lesions may cause fetomaternal hemorrhage or
fetal-growth restriction (Deans, 1998). They also may be confused with other
placental masses such as chorioangioma. In most cases, color Doppler
interrogation will show absent internal blood flow within a hematoma and
permit differentiation (Sepulveda, 2000).

PLACENTAL CALCIFICATION
Calcium salts can be deposited throughout the placenta but are most common
on the basal plate. Calcification accrues with advancing gestation, and
greater degrees are associated with smoking and higher maternal serum
calcium levels (Bedir Findik, 2015). These hyperechoic deposits can easily
be seen sonographically, and a grading scale from 0 to 3 reflects increasing
calcification with increasing numerical grade (Grannum, 1979). Following
this scheme, a grade 0 placenta is homogeneous, lacks calcification, and
displays a smooth, flat chorionic plate. A grade 1 placenta has scattered
echogenicities and subtle chorionic plate undulations. Grade 2 shows
echogenic stippling at the basal plate. Large, echogenic comma shapes
originate from an indented chorionic plate, but their curve falls short of the
basal plate. Last, a grade 3 placenta has echogenic indentations extending
from the chorionic plate to the basal plate, which create discrete components
that resemble cotyledons. Basal plate densities also increase.
This grading scale poorly predicts neonatal outcome near term
(McKenna, 2005; Mirza, 2018). However, data from two small studies link
grade 3 placenta prior to 32 weeks with stillbirth and some other adverse
pregnancy outcomes (Chen, 2011, 2015; Mirza, 2018).

PLACENTAL TUMORS
■ Chorioangioma
These benign tumors have components similar to the blood vessels and
stroma of the chorionic villus. Also called chorangiomas, these placental
tumors have an incidence that approximates 1 percent (Guschmann, 2003). In
some cases, fetal-to-maternal hemorrhage across tumor capillaries leads to
elevated levels of MSAFP. This typically prompts sonographic evaluation to
exclude a neural-tube defect, which also shows high MSAFP levels.

Sonographically, chorangiomas appear as a well-circumscribed, rounded,
predominantly hypoechoic lesion lying near the chorionic plate and
protruding into the amnionic cavity (Fig. 6-4). Documenting increased blood
flow by color Doppler helps to distinguish these lesions from other placental
masses such as hematoma, partial hydatidiform mole, teratoma, metastases,
and leiomyoma (Prapas, 2000). Although rare, chorangiocarcinoma tumors
mirror chorioangiomas clinically (Huang, 2015).

FIGURE 6-4 Placental chorioangioma. A. Color Doppler imaging displays blood flow through a large
chorioangioma with its border outlined by white arrows. B. Grossly, the chorioangioma is a round, wellcircumcised mass protruding from the fetal surface.

Small chorioangiomas are usually asymptomatic. Large tumors, typically
those measuring >4 cm, can create significant arteriovenous shunting within
the placenta to cause high-output heart failure, hydrops, and fetal death (Al
Wattar, 2014). Compression or shearing of fetal erythrocytes within tumor
vessels can lead to hemolysis and microangiopathic anemia (Bauer, 1978).
Hydramnios, preterm delivery, and fetal-growth restriction are other
sequelae (Dong, 2020). Large tumor size and fetal hydrops are the primary
determinants and signal a potential adverse perinatal outcome (Buca, 2020).
Grayscale and color Doppler interrogation of the placenta and amnionic
fluid volume are used to identify these tumors. Diagnostic tools that can
affirm associated fetomaternal hemorrhage include MSAFP level and
Kleihauer-Betke stain (Chap. 18, p. 358). With fetal concern,
echocardiography assesses cardiac function, whereas middle cerebral artery
interrogation is used to identify fetal anemia.
Several fetal therapies interfere with the vascular supply to the tumor and
reverse fetal heart failure. At specialized perinatal centers, endoscopic laser
ablation of feeder vessels to the tumor is most frequently used and is
associated with favorable fetal outcomes (Hosseinzadeh, 2015). Discussed
in Chapter 16, fetal transfusion can treat serious anemia, amnioreduction can
temporize hydramnios, and digoxin therapy can assist fetal heart failure.

■ Metastatic Tumors
Maternal malignant tumors rarely metastasize to the placenta. Of those that
do, melanomas, leukemias and lymphomas, and breast cancer are the most
common (Al-Adnani, 2007). Tumor cells usually are confined within the
intervillous space. As a result, metastasis to the fetus is uncommon but is
most often seen with melanoma (Alexander, 2003).
Similarly, cases in which fetal malignancy metastasizes to the placenta
are rare (Reif, 2014). These are predominantly fetal neuroectodermal tumors,
and only one case in the literature describes transplantation of tumor to the
maternal uterus (Nath, 1995).

AMNIOCHORION
■ Chorioamnionitis
Normal genital-tract flora can colonize and infect the membranes, umbilical
cord, and eventually the fetus. Bacteria most commonly ascend after
prolonged membrane rupture and during labor to cause infection. Organisms
initially infect the chorion and adjacent decidua in the area overlying the
internal os. Subsequently, progression leads to full-thickness involvement of
the membranes—chorioamnionitis. Organisms often then spread along the
chorioamnionic surface to colonize and replicate in amnionic fluid.
Inflammation of the chorionic plate and of the umbilical cord—funisitis—
may follow (Kim, 2015; Redline, 2012).
Most commonly, chorioamnionitis is microscopic or occult and caused
by a wide variety of microorganisms. This is frequently cited as a possible
explanation for many otherwise unexplained cases of ruptured membranes,
preterm labor, or both (Chap. 45, p. 789). In some cases, gross infection is
characterized by visible membrane clouding and is sometimes accompanied
by a foul odor that depends on bacterial species.

■ Other Membrane Abnormalities
Amnion nodosum is a condition characterized by numerous small, light-tan
nodules affixed to the amnion that overlies the chorionic plate. These may be

scraped off the fetal surface and contain deposits of fetal squames and fibrin
that reflect prolonged and severe oligohydramnios (Adeniran, 2007).
Two notable bands can be formed by the fetal membranes. First,
amnionic band sequence is an anatomical disruption sequence in which
amnion bands tether, constrict, or amputate fetal parts. Bands may form
spontaneously or follow fetal surgery procedures (see Table 6-2) (Lafitte,
2017). Amnionic bands commonly cause limb-reduction defects, facial
clefts, or encephalocele (Barzilay, 2015; Guzmán-Huerta, 2013). Umbilical
cord compromise is another sequela (Barros, 2014). Severe defects of the
spine or ventral wall that accompany amnionic bands suggest a limb-body
wall complex, described in Chapter 15 (p. 297).
Sonography often first identifies the sequelae of this sequence rather than
the bands themselves. As with any fetal anomaly, targeted sonography is
indicated. Identification of a limb-reduction defect, an encephalocele in an
atypical location, or an extremity with edema or positional deformity should
prompt careful evaluation for amnionic bands.
Management depends on the degree of anatomic deformity (Society of
Maternal–Fetal Medicine, 2019). Fetoscopic laser interruption of the band
may be suitable in highly selected antepartum cases (Gueneuc, 2019;
Javadian, 2013).
Second, an amnionic sheet in contrast is formed by normal amniochorion
draped over a preexisting uterine synechia. Generally, these sheets pose little
fetal risk, although slightly higher rates of preterm membrane rupture and
placental abruption have been described (Nelson, 2010; Tuuli, 2012).

UMBILICAL CORD
■ Length
Most umbilical cords at delivery measure 40 to 70 cm long, and very few
measure <30 cm or >100 cm. Cord length is influenced positively by both
maternal parity and body mass index (Linde, 2018). In retrospective studies,
short cords have been linked with congenital malformations and intrapartum
distress (Krakowiak, 2004; Linde, 2018; Yamamoto, 2016). Excessively long
cords are linked with cord entanglement or prolapse and with fetal anomalies
(Olaya-C, 2015; Rayburn, 1981).

Because antenatal determination of cord length is technically limited,
cord diameter has been evaluated as a predictive marker for fetal outcomes.
Some have linked lean cords with poor fetal growth and large-diameter
cords with macrosomia (Proctor, 2013). However, the clinical utility of this
parameter is still unclear (Cromi, 2007; Raio, 2003).

■ Coiling
Cord coiling characteristics are not currently part of standard sonographic
evaluation. Usually the umbilical vessels spiral through the cord in a
sinistral, that is, left-twisting direction (Fletcher, 1993; Lacro, 1987). The
number of complete coils per centimeter of cord length is termed the
umbilical coiling index—UCI (Strong, 1994). A normal, antepartum,
sonographically derived UCI is 0.4, and this contrasts with a normal,
postpartum, physically measured value of 0.2 (Sebire, 2007). UCIs <10th
percentile are considered hypocoiled, and those >90th percentile are
hypercoiled.
Clinically, the significance of coiling extremes is controversial. Some
studies evaluating large, unselected cohorts find no associations between
UCI values and poor neonatal outcome (Jessop, 2014; Pathak, 2010). In
others, extremes are linked with various adverse outcomes but most
consistently with intrapartum fetal heart rate abnormalities, preterm labor, or
fetal-growth restriction (Chitra, 2012; de Laat, 2006; Pergialiotis, 2019).

■ Vessel Number
Counting cord vessel number is a standard component of anatomical
evaluation during fetal sonographic examination and immediately after
delivery (Fig. 6-5). Embryos initially have two umbilical veins. In the first
trimester, the right vein typically atrophies to leave one large vein to
accompany the two, thick-walled umbilical arteries. Four-vessel cords are
rare and often associated with congenital anomalies (Puvabanditsin, 2011). If
it is an isolated finding, however, prognosis can be good (Avnet, 2011).

FIGURE 6-5 Two umbilical arteries are typically documented sonographically in the second trimester.
They encircle the fetal bladder (asterisk) as extensions of the superior vesical arteries. A. In this color
Doppler sonographic image, a single umbilical artery, shown in red, runs along the bladder wall before
joining the umbilical vein (blue) in the cord. Remember with color Doppler that color signifies only blood
flow direction relative to the transducer. B. A cross section of a floating cord segment shows the two
vessels of the cord. The smaller circle is the single umbilical artery and the larger circle, the umbilical
vein.

The most common aberration is that of a single umbilical artery (SUA).
Its cited incidence is 0.63 percent in liveborn neonates, 1.92 percent in
perinatal deaths, and 3 percent in twins (Heifetz, 1984). Fetuses with major
malformations frequently have an SUA. Thus, its identification often prompts
consideration for targeted sonography and possibly fetal echocardiography.
The most frequent anomalies are cardiovascular and genitourinary (Hua,
2010; Murphy-Kaulbeck, 2010). In an anomalous fetus, an SUA greatly
increases the aneuploidy risk, and amniocentesis is recommended for
karyotype assessment (Dagklis, 2010).
If targeted sonography finds otherwise normal anatomy, an isolated SUA
in an otherwise low-risk pregnancy does not significantly raise the fetal
aneuploidy risk. However, as an isolated finding, it has been associated with
fetal-growth restriction and perinatal death in some but not all studies
(Chetty-John, 2010; Ebbing, 2019; Voskamp, 2013). Thus, clinical
monitoring of growth is reasonable, but the value of sonographic surveillance
is unclear.
In contrast, a fused umbilical artery with a shared lumen is rare. It arises
from failure of the two arteries to split during embryological development.
The common lumen may extend through the entire cord, but, if partial, it is
typically found near the placental insertion site (Yamada, 2005). In one

report, these malformations were associated with a higher incidence of
marginal or velamentous cord insertion but not of congenital fetal anomalies
(Fujikura, 2003).
Found in most placentas, the Hyrtl anastomosis is a connection between
the two umbilical arteries, and it lies near the cord’s insertion into the
placenta. This anastomosis acts physiologically to equalize pressures
between the arteries (Gordon, 2007). The resulting redistribution of pressure
gradients and blood flow improves placental perfusion, especially during
uterine contractions or during compression of one umbilical artery. Fetuses
with an SUA lack this safety valve (Raio, 1999, 2001).

■ Remnants and Cysts
Several structures are housed in the umbilical cord during fetal development,
and their remnants may be seen when the mature cord is inspected
transversely. Indeed, in grossly sectioned cords, remnants of the allantoic
duct, vitelline duct, and embryonic vessels are found in 25 to 50 percent
(Grottling, 2019; Jauniaux, 1989). These are not associated with congenital
malformations or perinatal complications.
Cysts occasionally are found along the course of the cord. They are
designated according to their origin. True cysts are epithelium-lined
remnants of the allantoic or vitelline ducts and tend to be located closer to
the fetal insertion site. In contrast, the more common pseudocysts form from
local degeneration of Wharton jelly and occur anywhere along the cord. Both
have a similar sonographic appearance. Single umbilical cord cysts
identified in the first trimester tend to resolve completely, however, multiple
cysts may portend miscarriage or aneuploidy (Ghezzi, 2003; Hannaford,
2013). Cysts persisting beyond this time are associated with a risk for
structural defects and chromosomal anomalies (Bonilla, 2010; Zangen,
2010).

■ Insertion
The cord normally inserts centrally into the placental disc, but eccentric,
marginal, or velamentous insertions are variants. Of these, eccentric
insertions in general pose no identifiable fetal risk. Marginal insertion is a
common variant—sometimes referred to as a battledore placenta—in which

the cord anchors at the placental margin. In one population-based study, the
rate was 6 percent in singleton gestations and 11 percent in twins (Ebbing,
2013). This common insertion variant rarely causes problems, but it and
velamentous insertion occasionally result in the cord being pulled off during
delivery of the placenta (Ebbing, 2015; Luo, 2013). In monochorionic twins,
marginal insertion may be associated with weight discordance (Kent, 2011).
With velamentous insertion, the umbilical vessels characteristically
travel within the membranes before reaching the placental margin (Fig. 6-6).
The incidence of velamentous insertion approximates 1 percent but is 6
percent with twins (Ebbing, 2013). It is more commonly seen with placenta
previa (Papinniemi, 2007; Räisänen, 2012). Antenatal diagnosis is possible
sonographically, and cord vessels are seen traveling along the uterine wall
before entering the placental disc. Clinically, vessels are vulnerable to
compression, which may lead to fetal hypoperfusion and acidemia. Higher
associated rates of low Apgar scores, stillbirth, preterm delivery, and small
for gestational age have been noted (de Los Reyes, 2018; Ebbing, 2017;
Esakoff, 2015; Vahanian, 2015). Accordingly, monitoring of fetal growth is
reasonable either clinically or sonographically (Vintzileos, 2015).

FIGURE 6-6 Velamentous cord insertion. A. The umbilical cord inserts into the membranes (arrow).
From here, the cord vessels branch and are supported only by membrane until they reach the placental
disc. B. When viewed sonographically and using color Doppler, the cord vessels appear to lie against
the myometrium as they travel to insert into the margin of the placental disc (P).

Last, with the rare furcate insertion, umbilical vessels lose their
protective Wharton jelly shortly before they insert. As a result, they are
covered only by an amnion sheath and prone to compression, twisting, and
thrombosis.

Vasa Previa
With this condition, vessels travel within the membranes and overlie the
cervical os. There, they can be torn with cervical dilation or membrane
rupture, and laceration can lead to rapid fetal exsanguination. Over the
cervix, vessels can also be compressed by a presenting fetal part (Matsuzaki,
2019). Vasa previa may be more common than previously estimated, and
rates are 1 case in 338 to 365 pregnancies (Hasegawa, 2012; Klahr, 2019).
Vasa previa is classified as type 1, in which vessels are part of a
velamentous cord insertion, and type 2, in which involved vessels span
between portions of a bilobate or a succenturiate placenta (Catanzarite,
2001). Two other risks are conception with in vitro fertilization and secondtrimester placenta previa, with or without later migration (Baulies, 2007;
Schachter, 2003).
Compared with intrapartum diagnosis, antepartum diagnosis greatly
improves the perinatal survival rate, which ranges from 97 to 100 percent
(Oyelese, 2004; Swank, 2016; Zhang, 2021). Thus, vasa previa is ideally
identified early, although this is not always possible. Effective screening for
vasa previa begins during scheduled midtrimester sonographic examination.
In suspicious cases, transvaginal sonography is added and shows cord
vessels inserting into the membranes and vessels running above the cervical
internal os (Fig. 6-7). Routine color Doppler interrogation of the placental
cord insertion site, particularly in cases of placenta previa or low-lying
placenta, may aid its detection. With this, the vessel waveform reflects the
fetal heart rate. In one systematic review, the median prenatal detection rate
was 93 percent (Ruiter, 2015).

FIGURE 6-7 Vasa previa. A. Using color Doppler, an umbilical vessel (red linear structure) is seen
overlying the internal os and cervical canal (arrows). At the bottom, the Doppler waveform seen with

this vasa previa has the typical appearance of an umbilical artery. B. The amniotomy site (held open by
hemostat), which was created at the time of cesarean hysterotomy, illustrates how fetal vessels may be
lacerated and why fetal delivery should be prompt (Reproduced with permission from Dr. Julie Lo.)

Once vasa previa is identified, subsequent imaging is reasonable because
up to 39 percent of cases ultimately resolve (Erfani, 2019; Klahr, 2019). Bed
rest apparently has no added advantage. Antenatal corticosteroids can be
provided as indicated or given prophylactically at 28 to 32 weeks’ gestation
to cover possible urgent preterm delivery. Antenatal hospitalization may be
considered at 30 to 34 weeks to permit surveillance and expedited delivery
for labor, bleeding, or rupture of membranes. Data supporting this are
limited, and admission may best serve women with risk factors that portend
early delivery (Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, 2015). A few cases of
antepartum fetoscopic surgery with vessel laser ablation are described
(Hosseinzadeh, 2015; Johnston, 2014). However, current practice is early
scheduled cesarean delivery. The American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2021) recommends cesarean delivery at 34 to 36 weeks’
gestation.
At delivery, the fetus is expeditiously delivered after the hysterotomy
incision in case a vessel is lacerated during uterine entry. Delayed cord
clamping is not encouraged.
In all pregnancies, otherwise unexplained vaginal bleeding either
antepartum or intrapartum should prompt consideration of vasa previa and a
lacerated fetal vessel. In many cases, bleeding is rapidly fatal, and neonatal
salvage is not possible. With less hemorrhage, however, it may be possible
to distinguish fetal versus maternal bleeding. Various tests can be used, and
each relies on the increased resistance of fetal hemoglobin to denaturing by
alkaline or acid reagents (Odunsi, 1996).

■ Knots, Strictures, and Loops
Various mechanical abnormalities in the cord can impede blood flow and
sometimes cause fetal harm. Of these, true knots are found in approximately
1 percent of births. These form from fetal movement, and associated risks
include hydramnios and diabetes mellitus (Hershkovitz, 2001; Räisänen,
2013). Knots are especially common and dangerous in monoamnionic twins,
which are discussed in Chapter 48 (p. 845). In singleton fetuses, the stillbirth

risk is increased four- to tenfold compared with those without knots (Airas,
2002; Sørnes, 2000).
Knots can be found incidentally during antepartum sonography, and a
“hanging noose” sign is suggestive (Ramon y Cajal, 2006). Threedimensional and color Doppler aid diagnostic accuracy (Hasbun, 2007).
With these knots, optimal fetal surveillance is unclear but may include
umbilical artery Doppler velocimetry, nonstress testing, or subjective fetal
movement monitoring (Rodriguez, 2012). Allowing vaginal delivery is
suitable, and intrapartum fetal heart rate tracings do not differ from
unaffected pregnancies (Carter, 2018). In these cases, cesarean delivery rates
are not increased and cord blood acid-base values are usually normal (Airas,
2002; Maher, 1996).
In contrast, false knots form from focal redundancy and folding of an
umbilical cord vessel rather than knotting. These lack clinical significance.
A cord stricture is a focal narrowing of the diameter that usually
develops near the fetal cord insertion site (Peng, 2006). Pathological features
typically include absent Wharton jelly at the narrowed segment and
obliteration of cord vessels (Sun, 1995). In most instances, the fetus is
stillborn (French, 2005). Even less common is a cord stricture caused by an
amnionic band.
Cord loops are frequently encountered and are caused by coiling around
various fetal parts during movement. A cord around the neck—a nuchal cord
—is common, and vaginal delivery is suitable. One loop is reported in 20 to
34 percent of deliveries; two loops in 2.5 to 5 percent; and three loops in 0.2
to 0.5 percent (Kan, 1957; Sørnes, 1995; Spellacy, 1966). During labor, up to
20 percent of fetuses with a nuchal cord have moderate to severe variable
heart rate decelerations, and these are associated with a lower umbilical
artery pH (Hankins, 1987). Decelerations are not relieved by amnioinfusion
(Spong, 1996). Cords wrapped around the body can have similar effects
(Kobayashi, 2015). Despite their frequency, nuchal cords are not associated
with greater rates of adverse perinatal outcome (Henry, 2013; Masad, 2019).
Last, in a funic presentation, the umbilical cord is the presenting part.
These are uncommon and most often are associated with fetal
malpresentation (Kinugasa, 2007). A funic presentation in some cases is
identified with placental sonography and color flow Doppler (Ezra, 2003).
Overt or occult cord prolapse can complicate labor. Thus, once identified at
term, cesarean delivery is typically recommended.

■ Vascular
Cord hematomas are rare and generally follow rupture of an umbilical
vessel, usually the vein, and hemorrhage into the Wharton jelly. Hematomas
have been associated with abnormal cord length, umbilical vessel aneurysm,
trauma, entanglement, umbilical vessel venipuncture, and funisitis
(Gualandri, 2008). Most are identified postpartum, but hematomas are
recognized sonographically as hypoechoic masses that lack blood flow
(Chou, 2003). Sequelae include stillbirth or intrapartum abnormal fetal heart
rate pattern (Abraham, 2015; Barbati, 2009; Sepulveda, 2005; Towers,
2009). However, case reports have described normal outcomes (SanchexCodez, 2018).
Umbilical cord vessel thromboses are rare in utero events and seldom
diagnosed antepartum. Approximately 70 percent are venous, 20 percent are
venous and arterial, and 10 percent are arterial thromboses (Heifetz, 1988).
These all have high associated rates of stillbirth, fetal-growth restriction, and
intrapartum fetal distress (Minakami, 2001; Sato, 2006; Shilling, 2014). If
these are identified antepartum as hypoechoic masses without blood flow,
data from case reports support consideration of prompt delivery of viableaged fetuses (Kanenishi, 2013).
An umbilical vein varix can complicate either the intraamnionic or fetal
intraabdominal portion of the umbilical vein. Sonographically and
complemented by color Doppler, rare intraamnionic varices show cystic
dilation of the umbilical vein that is contiguous with a normal-caliber
portion. Of complications, an intraamnionic varix may compress an adjacent
umbilical artery or can rupture or thrombose. A systematic review of 250
cases found that approximately one fifth is associated with other anomalies.
Isolated cases had reassuring outcomes but typically required antenatal
surveillance (di Pasquo, 2018).
The rare umbilical artery aneurysm is caused by congenital thinning of
the vessel wall with diminished support from Wharton jelly. Indeed, most
form at or near the cord’s placental insertion site, where this support is
absent. These are associated with SUA, trisomy 18, amnionic fluid volume
extremes, fetal-growth restriction, and stillbirth (Hill, 2010; Vyas, 2016). At
least theoretically, these aneurysms could cause fetal compromise and death
by compression of the umbilical vein. With aneurysms measuring >5 cm, the
blood reservoir within the aneurysm may pose a risk for high-output heart

failure (Matsuki, 2017). These aneurysms may appear sonographically as a
cyst with a hyperechoic rim. Within the aneurysm, color flow and spectral
Doppler interrogation demonstrate either low-velocity or turbulent
nonpulsatile flow (Olog, 2011; Shen, 2007b). Although not codified,
management may include fetal karyotyping, antenatal fetal surveillance, and
early delivery to prevent stillbirth (Doehrman, 2014). Some recommend
delivery by cesarean to avoid aneurysm rupture.

REFERENCES
Abraham A, Rathore S, Gupta M, et al: Umbilical cord haematoma causing still birth—a case report. J
Clin Diagn Res 9(12):QD01, 2015
Adeniran AJ, Stanek J: Amnion nodosum revisited: clinicopathologic and placental correlations. Arch
Pathol Lab Med 131:1829, 2007
Airas U, Heinonen S: Clinical significance of true umbilical knots: a population-based analysis. Am J
Perinatol 19:127, 2002
AIUM-ACR-ACOG-SMFM-SRU Practice parameter for the performance of standard diagnostic
obstetric ultrasound examinations. J Ultrasound Med 37(11):e13, 2018
Al-Adnani M, Kiho L, Scheimberg I: Maternal pancreatic carcinoma metastatic to the placenta: a case
report and literature review. Pediatr Dev Pathol 10:61, 2007
Alexander A, Samlowski WE, Grossman D, et al: Metastatic melanoma in pregnancy: risk of
transplacental metastases in the infant. J Clin Oncol 21:2179, 2003
Altshuler G: Chorangiosis: an important placental sign of neonatal morbidity and mortality. Arch Pathol
Lab Med 108(1):71, 1984
Al Wattar BH, Hillman SC, Marton T, et al: Placenta chorioangioma: a rare case and systematic review
of literature. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 27(10):1055, 2014
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Medically indicated late-preterm and early-term
deliveries. Committee Opinion No. 831, June 2021
Andres RL, Kuyper W, Resnik R, et al: The association of maternal floor infarction of the placenta with
adverse perinatal outcome. Am J Obstet Gynecol 163:935, 1990
Avnet H, Shen O, Mazaki E, et al: Four-vessel umbilical cord. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 38:604, 2011
Bagby C, Redline RW: Multifocal chorangiomatosis. Pediatr Dev Pathol 14(1):38, 2011
Barbati A, Cacace MG, Fratini D, et al: Umbilical cord haematoma with altered fetal heart rate. J
Obstet Gynaecol 29(2):150, 2009
Barros M, Gorgal G, Machado AP, et al: Revisiting amniotic band sequence: a wide spectrum of
manifestations. Fetal Diagn Ther 35(1):51, 2014
Barzilay E, Harel Y, Haas J, et al: Prenatal diagnosis of amniotic band syndrome—risk factors and
ultrasonic signs. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 28(3):281, 2015
Bauer CR, Fojaco RM, Bancalari E, et al: Microangiopathic hemolytic anemia and thrombocytopenia in
a neonate associated with a large placental chorioangioma. Pediatrics 62(4):574, 1978
Baulies S, Maiz N, Muñoz A, et al: Prenatal ultrasound diagnosis of vasa praevia and analysis of risk
factors. Prenat Diagn 27:595, 2007

Bedir Findik R, Ersoy AO, Fidanci V, et al: Vitamin D deficiency and placental calcification in low-risk
obstetric population: are they related? J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 29(19):3189, 2015
Benirschke K, Burton GJ, Baergen R: Pathology of the Human Placenta, 6th ed. New York, Springer,
2012, p 908
Bockoven C, Gastfield RD, Victor T, et al: Correlation of placental magnetic resonance imaging with
histopathologic diagnosis: detection of aberrations in structure and water diffusivity. Pediatr Dev
Pathol 23(4):260, 2020
Bonilla F Jr, Raga F, Villalaiz E, et al: Umbilical cord cysts: evaluation with different 3-dimensional
sonographic modes. J Ultrasound Med 29(2):281, 2010
Buca D, Iacovlla C, Khlil A, et al: Perinatal outcome of pregnancies complicated by placental
chorioangioma: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 55(4):441, 2020
Capuani S, Guerreri M, Antonelli A, et al: Diffusion and perfusion quantified by magnetic resonance
imaging are markers of human placenta development in normal pregnancy. Placenta 58:33, 2017
Carter EB, Chu CS, Thompson Z, et al: True knot at the time of delivery: electronic fetal monitoring
characteristics and neonatal outcomes. J Perinatol 38(12):1620, 2018
Catanzarite V, Maida C, Thomas W, et al: Prenatal sonographic diagnosis of vasa previa: ultrasound
findings and obstetric outcome in ten cases. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 18:109, 2001
Chen KH, Chen LR, Lee YH: Exploring the relationship between preterm placental calcification and
adverse maternal and fetal outcome. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 37(3):328, 2011
Chen KH, Seow KM, Chen LR: The role of preterm placental calcification on assessing risks of
stillbirth. Placenta 36(9):1039, 2015
Chetty-John S, Zhang J, Chen Z, et al: Long-term physical and neurologic development in newborn
infants with isolated single umbilical artery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 203(4):368.e1, 2010
Chisholm KM, Heerema-McKenney A: Fetal thrombotic vasculopathy: significance in live born children
using proposed society for pediatric pathology diagnostic criteria. Am J Surg Pathol 39(2):274, 2015
Chitra T, Sushanth YS, Raghavan S: Umbilical coiling index as a marker of perinatal outcome: an
analytical study. Obstet Gynecol Int 2012:213689, 2012
Chou SY, Chen YR, Wu CF, et al: Spontaneous umbilical cord hematoma diagnosed antenatally with
ultrasonography. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 82(11):1056, 2003
Costanzo V, Bardelli A, Siena S, et al: Exploring the links between cancer and placenta development.
Open Biol 8(6): 180081, 2018
Cromi A, Ghezzi F, Di Naro E, et al: Large cross-sectional area of the umbilical cord as a predictor of
fetal macrosomia. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 30:804, 2007
Dagklis T, Defigueiredo D, Staboulidou I, et al: Isolated single umbilical artery and fetal karyotype.
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 36(3):291, 2010
Dashe JS, Hoffman BL: Placental abnormalities. D’Alton (ed): Ultrasonography in Obstetrics and
Gynecology, 6th ed. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2017
Deans A, Jauniaux E: Prenatal diagnosis and outcome of subamniotic hematomas. Ultrasound Obstet
Gynecol 11:319, 1998
de Laat MW, Franx A, Bots ML, et al: Umbilical coiling index in normal and complicated pregnancies.
Obstet Gynecol 107:1049, 2006
de Los Reyes S, Henderson J, Eke AC. A systematic review and meta-analysis of velamentous cord
insertion among singleton pregnancies and the risk of preterm delivery. Int J Gynaecol Obstet
142(1):9, 2018

Devisme L, Chauvière C, Franquet-Ansart H, et al: Perinatal outcome of placental massive perivillous
fibrin deposition: a case-control study. Prenat Diagn 37(4):323, 2017
di Pasquo E, Kuleva M, O’Gorman N, et al: Fetal intra-abdominal umbilical vein varix: retrospective
cohort study and systematic review and meta-analysis. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 51(5):580, 2018
Doehrman P, Derksen BJ, Perlow JH, et al: Umbilical artery aneurysm: a case report, literature review,
and management recommendations. Obstet Gynecol Surv 69(3):159, 2014
Dong T, Sher D, Luo Q: Pregnancy complications and adverse outcomes in placental chorioangioma: a
retrospective cohort analysis. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 33(13):2269, 2020
Ebbing C, Johnsen SL, Albrechtsen S, et al: Velamentous or marginal cord insertion and the risk of
spontaneous preterm birth, prelabor rupture of the membranes, and anomalous cord length, a
population-based study. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 96(1):78, 2017
Ebbing C, Kiserud T, Johnsen SL, et al: Prevalence, risk factors and outcomes of velamentous and
marginal cord insertions: a population-based study of 634,741 pregnancies. PLoS One 8(7):e70380,
2013
Ebbing C, Kessler J, Moster D, et al: Isolated single umbilical artery and the risk of adverse perinatal
outcome and third stage of labor complications: a population-based study. Acta Obstet Gynecol
Scand 99(3):374, 2020
Ebbing C, Kiserud T, Johnsen SL, et al: Third stage of labor risks in velamentous and marginal cord
insertion: a population-based study. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 94(8):878, 2015
Erfani H, Haeri S, Shainker SA, et al: Vasa previa: a multicenter retrospective cohort study. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 221(6):644.e1, 2019
Esakoff TF, Cheng YW, Snowden JM, et al: Velamentous cord insertion: is it associated with adverse
perinatal outcomes? J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 28(4):409, 2015
Ezra Y, Strasberg SR, Farine D: Does cord presentation on ultrasound predict cord prolapse? Gynecol
Obstet Invest 56:6, 2003
Faye-Petersen O, Sauder A, Estrella Y, et al: Dichorionic twins discordant for massive perivillous
fibrinoid deposition: report of a case and review of the literature. Int J Surg Pathol 26(1):41, 2018
Faye-Petersen OM, Heller DS, Joshi VV: Handbook of Placental Pathology, 2nd ed. London, Taylor &
Francis, 2006, pp 27, 83
Fletcher S: Chirality in the umbilical cord. BJOG 100(3):234, 1993
Fox H, Sebire NJ: Pathology of the Placenta, 3rd ed. Philadelphia, Saunders, 2007, pp 99, 133, 484
French AE, Gregg VH, Newberry Y, et al: Umbilical cord stricture: a cause of recurrent fetal death.
Obstet Gynecol 105:1235, 2005
Fujikura T: Fused umbilical arteries near placental cord insertion. Am J Obstet Gynecol 188:765, 2003
Ghezzi F, Raio L, Di Naro E, et al: Single and multiple umbilical cord cysts in early gestation: two
different entities. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 21:213, 2003
Gordon Z, Eytan O, Jaffa AJ, et al: Hemodynamic analysis of Hyrtl anastomosis in human placenta. Am
J Physiol Regul Integra Comp Physiol 292:R977, 2007
Grannum PA, Berkowitz RL, Hobbins JC: The ultrasonic changes in the maturing placenta and their
relation to fetal pulmonic maturity. Am J Obstet Gynecol 133:915, 1979
Grottling E, Gisselsson D: Changes in the prevalence of embryologic remnants in umbilical cord with
gestational age. Pediatr Dev Pathol 22(4):288, 2019
Gualandri G, Rivasi F, Santunione AL, et al: Spontaneous umbilical cord hematoma: an unusual cause of
fetal mortality: a report of 3 cases and review of the literature. Am J Forensic Med Pathol
29(2):185, 2008

Gueneuc A, Chalouhi GE, Borali D, et al: Fetoscopic release of amniotic bands causing limb constriction:
case series and review of the literature. Fetal Diagn Ther 46(4):246, 2019
Guschmann M, Henrich W, Entezami M, et al: Chorioangioma—new insights into a well-known
problem. I. Results of a clinical and morphological study of 136 cases. J Perinat Med 31:163, 2003
Guttmacher AE, Maddox YT, Spong CY: The Human Placenta Project: placental structure,
development, and function in real time. Placenta 35(5):303, 2014
Guzmán-Huerta ME, Muro-Barragán SA, Acevedo-Gallegos S, et al: Amniotic band sequence: prenatal
diagnosis, phenotype descriptions, and a proposal of a new classification based on morphologic
findings. Rev Invest Clin 65(4):300, 2013
Hankins GD, Snyder RR, Hauth JC, et al: Nuchal cords and neonatal outcome. Obstet Gynecol 70:687,
1987
Hannaford K, Reeves S, Wegner E: Umbilical cord cysts in the first trimester: are they associated with
pregnancy complications? J Ultrasound Med 32(5):801, 2013
Hasbun J, Alcalde JL, Sepulveda W: Three-dimensional power Doppler sonography in the prenatal
diagnosis of a true knot of the umbilical cord: value and limitations. J Ultrasound Med 26(9):1215,
2007
Hasegawa J, Nakamura M, Ichizuka K, et al: Vasa previa is not infrequent. J Matern Fetal Neonatal
Med 25(12):2795, 2012
Heifetz SA: Single umbilical artery: a statistical analysis of 237 autopsy cases and a review of the
literature. Perspect Pediatr Pathol 8:345, 1984
Heifetz SA: Thrombosis of the umbilical cord: analysis of 52 cases and literature review. Pediatr Pathol
8:37, 1988
Henry E, Andres RL, Christensen RD: Neonatal outcomes following a tight nuchal cord. J Perinatol
33(3):231, 2013
Hershkovitz R, Silberstein T, Sheiner E, et al: Risk factors associated with true knots of the umbilical
cord. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 98(1):36, 2001
Hill AJ, Strong TH Jr, Elliott JP, et al: Umbilical artery aneurysm. Obstet Gynecol 116(Suppl 2):559, 2010
Hoddick WK, Mahony BS, Callen PW, et al: Placental thickness. J Ultrasound Med 4(9):479, 1985
Hosseinzadeh P, Shamshirsaz AA, Cass DL, et al: Fetoscopic laser ablation of vasa previa for a fetus
with a giant cervical lymphatic malformation. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 46(4):507, 2015
Hua M, Odibo AO, Macones GA, et al: Single umbilical artery and its associated findings. Obstet
Gynecol 115(5):930, 2010
Huang B, Zhang YP, Yuan DF, et al: Chorangiocarcinoma: a case report and clinical review. Int J Clin
Exp Med 8(9):16798, 2015
Inubashiri E, Watanabe Y, Akutagawa N, et al: Preliminary experience using three-dimensional HD liverendered images for antenatal diagnosis in placental chorangiosis. Taiwan J Obstet Gynecol
56(1):106, 2017
Jauniaux E, De Munter C, Vanesse M, et al: Embryonic remnants of the umbilical cord: morphologic and
clinical aspects. Hum Pathol 20(5):458, 1989
Javadian P, Shamshirsaz AA, Haeri S, et al: Perinatal outcome after fetoscopic release of amniotic
bands: a single-center experience and review of the literature. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 42(4):449,
2013
Jessop FA, Lees CC, Pathak S, et al: Umbilical cord coiling: clinical outcomes in an unselected
population and systematic review. Virchows Arch 464(1):105, 2014
Johnston R, Shrivastava VK, Chmait RH: Term vaginal delivery following fetoscopic laser
photocoagulation of type II vasa previa. Fetal Diagn Ther 35(1):62, 2014

Kan PS, Eastman NJ: Coiling of the umbilical cord around the foetal neck. BJOG 64:227, 1957
Kanenishi K, Nitta E, Mashima M, et al: HDlive imaging of intra-amniotic umbilical vein varix with
thrombosis. Placenta 34(11):1110, 2013
Kent EM, Breathnach FM, Gillan JE, et al: Placental cord insertion and birthweight discordance in twin
pregnancies: results of the national prospective ESPRiT Study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 205(4):376.e1,
2011
Kim CJ, Romero R, Chaemsaithong P, et al: Acute chorioamnionitis and funisitis: definition, pathologic
features, and clinical significance. Am J Obstet Gynecol 213(4 Suppl):S29, 2015
Kinugasa M, Sato T, Tamura M, et al: Antepartum detection of cord presentation by transvaginal
ultrasonography for term breech presentation: potential prediction and prevention of cord prolapse. J
Obstet Gynaecol Res 33(5):612, 2007
Klahr R, Fox NS, Zafman K, et al: Frequency of spontaneous resolution of vasa previa with advancing
gestational age. Am J Obstet Gynecol 221(6):646.e1, 2019
Kobayashi N, Aoki S, Oba MS, et al: Effect of umbilical cord entanglement and position on pregnancy
outcomes. Obstet Gynecol Int 2015:342065, 2015
Krakowiak P, Smith EN, de Bruyn G, et al: Risk factors and outcomes associated with a short umbilical
cord. Obstet Gynecol 103:119, 2004
Lacro RV, Jones KL, Benirschke K: The umbilical cord twist: origin, direction, and relevance. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 157(4 Pt 1):833, 1987
Lafitte AS, Verspyck E, Jeanne Pasquier C, et al: Pseudoamniotic band syndrome after fetoscopic laser
ablation of placental anastomoses for twin-twin transfusion syndrome: two case reports and
systematic review. J Ultrasound Med 36(11):2373, 2017
Langston C, Kaplan C, Macpherson T, et al: Practice guideline for examination of the placenta. Arch
Pathol Lab Med 121:449, 1997
Lepais L, Gaillot-Durand L, Boutitie F, et al: Fetal thrombotic vasculopathy is associated with
thromboembolic events and adverse perinatal outcome but not with neurologic complications: a
retrospective cohort study of 54 cases with a 3-year follow-up of children. Placenta 35(8):611, 2014
Linde LE, Rasmussen S, Kessler J, et al: Extreme umbilical cord lengths, cord knot and entanglement:
risk factors and risk of adverse outcomes, a population-based study. PLoS One 13(3):e0194814,
2018
Luo G, Redline RW: Peripheral insertion of umbilical cord. Pediatr Dev Pathol 16(6):399, 2013
Maher JT, Conti JA: A comparison of umbilical cord blood gas values between newborns with and
without true knots. Obstet Gynecol 88:863, 1996
Mandsager NT, Bendon R, Mostello D, et al: Maternal floor infarction of the placenta: prenatal
diagnosis and clinical significance. Obstet Gynecol 83:750, 1994
Masad R, Gutvirtz G, Wainstock T, et al: The effect of nuchal cord on perinatal mortality and long-term
offspring morbidity. J Perinatol 40(3):439, 2020
Matsuzaki S, Kimura T: Vasa previa. N Engl J Med 380(3):274, 2019
Minakami H, Akahori A, Sakurai S, et al: Umbilical vein thrombosis as a possible cause of perinatal
morbidity or mortality: report of two cases. J Obstet Gynaecol Res 27(2):97, 2001
Mirza FG, Ghulmiyyah LM, Tamim H, et al: To ignore or not to ignore placental calcifications on
prenatal ultrasound: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 31(6):797,
2018
Murphy-Kaulbeck L, Dodds L, Joseph KS, et al: Single umbilical artery risk factors and pregnancy
outcomes. Obstet Gynecol 116(4):843, 2010

Nath ME, Kanbour A, Hu J, et al: Transplantation of congenital primitive neuroectodermal tumor of
fetus to the uterus of mother: application of biotin-labeled chromosome-specific probes. Int J
Gynecol Cancer 5(6):459, 1995
Naert MN, Muniz Rodriguez A, Khadraoui H, et al: Association between first-trimester subchorionic
hematomas and adverse pregnancy outcomes after 20 weeks of gestation in singleton pregnancies.
Obstet Gynecol 134(4):863, 2019
Nelson LD, Grobman WA: Obstetric morbidity associated with amniotic sheets. Ultrasound Obstet
Gynecol 36(3):324, 2010
Odibo I, Gehlot A, Ounpraseuth ST, et al: Pathologic examination of the placenta and its clinical utility: a
survey of obstetrics and gynecology providers. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 29(2):197, 2016
Odunsi K, Bullough CH, Henzel J, et al: Evaluation of chemical tests for fetal bleeding from vasa previa.
Int J Gynaecol Obstet 55(3):207, 1996
Olaya-C M, Bernal JE: Clinical associations to abnormal umbilical cord length in Latin American
newborns. J Neonatal Perinatal Med 8(3):251, 2015
Olog A, Thomas JT, Petersen S, et al: Large umbilical artery aneurysm with a live healthy baby
delivered at 31 weeks. Fetal Diagn Ther 29(4):331, 2011
Oyelese Y, Catanzarite V, Prefumo F, et al: Vasa previa: the impact of prenatal diagnosis on outcomes.
Obstet Gynecol 103:937, 2004
Papinniemi M, Keski-Nisula L, Heinonen S: Placental ratio and risk of velamentous umbilical cord
insertion are increased in women with placenta previa. Am J Perinatol 24:353, 2007
Pathak S, Hook E, Hackett G, et al: Cord coiling, umbilical cord insertion and placental shape in an
unselected cohort delivering at term: relationship with common obstetric outcomes. Placenta
31(11):963, 2010
Peng HQ, Levitin-Smith M, Rochelson B, et al: Umbilical cord stricture and over coiling are common
causes of fetal demise. Pediatr Dev Pathol 9:14, 2006
Pereira N, Yao R, Guilfoil DS, et al: Placenta membranacea with placenta accreta: radiologic diagnosis
and clinical implications. Prenat Diagn 33(13):1293, 2013
Pergialiotis V, Kotrogianni P, Koutaki D, et al: Umbilical cord coiling index for the prediction of adverse
pregnancy outcomes: a meta-analysis and sequential analysis. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 27:1,
2019
Prapas N, Liang RI, Hunter D, et al: Color Doppler imaging of placental masses: differential diagnosis
and fetal outcome. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 16:559, 2000
Proctor LK, Fitzgerald B, Whittle WL, et al: Umbilical cord diameter percentile curves and their
correlation to birth weight and placental pathology. Placenta 34(1):62, 2013
Puvabanditsin S, Garrow E, Bhatt M, et al: Four-vessel umbilical cord associated with multiple
congenital anomalies: a case report and literature review. Fetal Pediatr Pathol 30(2):98, 2011
Raio L, Ghezzi F, Di Naro E, et al: In-utero characterization of the blood flow in the Hyrtl anastomosis.
Placenta 22:597, 2001
Raio L, Ghezzi F, Di Naro E, et al: Prenatal assessment of the Hyrtl anastomosis and evaluation of its
function: case report. Hum Reprod 14:1890, 1999
Raio L, Ghezzi F, Di Naro E, et al: Umbilical cord morphologic characteristics and umbilical artery
Doppler parameters in intrauterine growth-restricted fetuses. J Ultrasound Med 22:1341, 2003
Räisänen S, Georgiadis L, Harju M, et al: Risk factors and adverse pregnancy outcomes among births
affected by velamentous umbilical cord insertion: a retrospective population-based register study.
Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 165(2):231, 2012

Räisänen S, Georgiadis L, Harju M, et al: True umbilical cord knot and obstetric outcome. Int J
Gynaecol Obstet 122(1):18, 2013
Ramon y, Cajal CL, Martinez RO: Four-dimensional ultrasonography of a true knot of the umbilical cord.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 195:896, 2006
Rayburn WF, Beynen A, Brinkman DL: Umbilical cord length and intrapartum complications. Obstet
Gynecol 57(4):450, 1981
Rebarber A, Dolin C, Fox NS, et al: Natural history of vasa previa across gestation using a screening
protocol. J Ultrasound Med 33(1):141, 2014
Redline RW: Inflammatory response in acute chorioamnionitis. Semin Fetal Neonatal Med 17(1):20,
2012
Redline RW: Placental pathology: a systematic approach with clinical correlations. Placenta 29(Suppl
A):S86, 2008
Reif P, Hofer N, Kolovetsiou-Kreiner V, et al: Metastasis of an undifferentiated fetal soft tissue
sarcoma to the maternal compartment of the placenta: maternal aspects, pathology findings and
review of the literature on fetal malignancies with placenta metastases. Histopathology 65(6):933,
2014
Roberts DJ: Placental pathology, a survival guide. Arch Pathol Lab Med 132(4):641, 2008
Rodriguez N, Angarita AM, Casasbuenas A, et al: Three-dimensional high-definition flow imaging in
prenatal diagnosis of a true umbilical cord knot. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 39(2):245, 2012
Romero R, Whitten A, Korzeniewski SJ, et al: Maternal floor infarction/massive perivillous fibrin
deposition: a manifestation of maternal antifetal rejection? Am J Reprod Immunol 70(4):285, 2013
Ruiter L, Kok N, Limpens J, et al: Systematic review of accuracy of ultrasound in the diagnosis of vasa
previa. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 45(5):516, 2015
Salafia CM, Silberman L, Herrera NE, et al: Placental pathology at term associated with elevated
midtrimester maternal serum alpha-fetoprotein concentration. Am J Obstet Gynecol 158(5):1064,
1988
Saleemuddin A, Tantbirojn P, Sirois K, et al: Obstetric and perinatal complications in placentas with fetal
thrombotic vasculopathy. Pediatr Dev Pathol 13(6):459, 2010
Sánchez-Códez MI, Lubián-Gutiérrez M, Méndez-Abad P: Umbilical cord hematoma. Fetal Pediatr
Pathol 38(4):359, 2019
Sato Y, Benirschke K: Umbilical arterial thrombosis with vascular wall necrosis: clinicopathologic
findings of 11 cases. Placenta 27:715, 2006
Schachter M, Tovbin Y, Arieli S, et al: In vitro fertilization is a risk factor for vasa previa. Fertil Steril
78(3):642, 2003
Sebire NJ: Pathophysiological significance of abnormal umbilical cord coiling index. Ultrasound Obstet
Gynecol 30(6):804, 2007
Sebire NJ, Backos M, Goldin RD, et al: Placental massive perivillous fibrin deposition associated with
antiphospholipid antibody syndrome. BJOG 109:570, 2002
Sepulveda W, Aviles G, Carstens E, et al: Prenatal diagnosis of solid placental masses: the value of color
flow imaging. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 16:554, 2000
Sepulveda W, Wong AE, Gonzalez R, et al: Fetal death due to umbilical cord hematoma: a rare
complication of umbilical cord cyst. J Matern-Fetal Neonatal Med 18(6):387, 2005
Shen O, Golomb E, Lavie O, et al: Placental shelf—a common, typically transient and benign finding on
early second-trimester sonography. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 29:192, 2007a
Shen O, Reinus C, Baranov A, et al: Prenatal diagnosis of umbilical artery aneurysm: a potentially lethal
anomaly. J Ultrasound Med 26(2):251, 2007b

Shilling C, Walsh C, Downey P, et al: Umbilical artery thrombosis is a rare but clinically important
finding: a series of 7 cases with clinical outcomes. Pediatr Dev Pathol 17(2):89, 2014
Society for Maternal-Fetal (SMFM) Publications Committee, Sinkey RG, Odibo AO, et al: Diagnosis
and management of vasa previa. Am J Obstet Gynecol 213(5):615, 2015
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Gandhi M, Rac MW, et al: Amniotic band sequence. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 221(6):B5, 2019
Sørnes T: Umbilical cord encirclements and fetal growth restriction. Obstet Gynecol 86:725, 1995
Sørnes T: Umbilical cord knots. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 79:157, 2000
Spellacy WN, Gravem H, Fisch RO: The umbilical cord complications of true knots, nuchal coils and
cords around the body. Report from the collaborative study of cerebral palsy. Am J Obstet Gynecol
94:1136, 1966
Spinillo A, Gardella B, Muscettola G, et al: The impact of placental massive perivillous fibrin deposition
on neonatal outcome in pregnancies complicated by fetal growth restriction. Placenta 87:46, 2019
Spong CY, McKindsey F, Ross MG: Amniotic fluid index predicts the relief of variable decelerations
after amnioinfusion bolus. Am J Obstet Gynecol 175(4 Pt 1):1066, 1996
Stanek J: Chorangiosis of chorionic villi: what does it really mean? Arch Pathol Lab Med 140(6):58,
2016
Steemers NY, De Rop C, Van Assche A: Zonary placenta. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 51(3):251, 1995
Strong TH Jr, Jarles DL, Vega JS, et al: The umbilical coiling index. Am J Obstet Gynecol 170(1 Pt
1):29, 1994
Sun Y, Arbuckle S, Hocking G, et al: Umbilical cord stricture and intrauterine fetal death. Pediatr Pathol
Lab Med 15:723, 1995
Sung DK, Baergen RN: Focal chorangiosis: does it have clinical and pathologic significance? Pediatr
Dev Pathol 22(5):406, 2019
Suzuki S: Clinical significance of pregnancies with circumvallate placenta. J Obstet Gynaecol Res
34(1):51, 2008
Swank ML, Garite TJ, Maurel K, et al: Vasa previa: diagnosis and management. Obstetrix Collaborative
Research Network. Am J Obstet Gynecol 215(2):223.e1, 2016
Taniguchi H, Aoki S, Sakamaki K, et al: Circumvallate placenta: associated clinical manifestations and
complications—a retrospective study. Obstet Gynecol Int 2014:986230, 2014
Towers CV, Juratsch CE, Garite TJ: The fetal heart monitor tracing in pregnancies complicated by a
spontaneous umbilical cord haematoma. J Perinatol 29:517, 2009
Tuuli MG, Norman SM, Odibo AO, et al: Perinatal outcomes in women with subchorionic hematoma: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Obstet Gynecol 117(5):1205, 2011
Tuuli MG, Shanks A, Bernhard L, et al: Uterine synechiae and pregnancy complications. Obstet
Gynecol 119(4):810, 2012
Vahanian SA, Lavery JA, Ananth CV, et al: Placental implantation abnormalities and risk of preterm
delivery: a systematic review and metaanalysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 213(4 Suppl):S78, 2015
Vintzileos AM, Ananth CV, Smulian JC: Using ultrasound in the clinical management of placental
implantation abnormalities. Am J Obstet Gynecol 213(4 Suppl):S70, 2015
Voskamp BJ, Fleurke-Rozema H, Oude-Rengerink K, et al: Relationship of isolated single umbilical
artery to fetal growth, aneuploidy and perinatal mortality: systematic review and meta-analysis.
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 42(6):622, 2013
Vyas NM, Manjeera L, Rai S, et al: Prenatal diagnosis of umbilical artery aneurysm with good fetal
outcome and review of literature. J Clin Diagn Res 10(1):QD01, 2016

Whitten AE, Romero R, Korzeniewski SJ, et al: Evidence of an imbalance of angiogenic/antiangiogenic
factors in massive perivillous fibrin deposition (maternal floor infarction): a placental lesion
associated with recurrent miscarriage and fetal death. Am J Obstet Gynecol 208(4):310.e1, 2013
Woo GW, Rocha FG, Gaspar-Oishi M, et al: Placental mesenchymal dysplasia. Am J Obstet Gynecol
205(6):e3, 2011
Yamada S, Hamanishi J, Tanada S, et al: Embryogenesis of fused umbilical arteries in human embryos.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 193:1709, 2005
Yamamoto Y, Aoki S, Oba MS, et al: Relationship between short umbilical cord length and adverse
pregnancy outcomes. Fetal Pediatr Pathol 35(2):81, 2016
Zangen R, Boldes R, Yaffe H, et al: Umbilical cord cysts in the second and third trimesters: significance
and prenatal approach. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 36(3):296, 2010
Zhang W, Geris S, Al-Emara N, et al: Perinatal outcome of pregnancies with prenatal diagnosis of vasa
previa: systematic review and meta-analysis. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 57(5):710, 2021

CHAPTER 7

Embryogenesis and Fetal Development

GESTATIONAL AGE
EMBRYONIC DEVELOPMENT
FETAL DEVELOPMENT AND PHYSIOLOGY
ENERGY AND NUTRITION
PLACENTAL ROLE IN EMBRYOFETAL DEVELOPMENT
REFERENCES
Contemporary obstetrics incorporates physiology and pathophysiology of the
fetus, and its development and environment. As a result, the fetus is
considered a patient and is given the same meticulous care provided for the
mother. Section 6 is dedicated to the fetal patient, however, virtually every
aspect of obstetrics can affect the developing fetus.

GESTATIONAL AGE
Several terms define pregnancy duration and thus fetal age (Fig. 7-1).
Gestational age or menstrual age is the time elapsed since the first day of
the last menstrual period (LMP), a time that actually precedes conception.
This starting time, which is usually approximately 2 weeks before ovulation
and fertilization and nearly 3 weeks before blastocyst implantation, has
traditionally been used. Embryologists describe embryofetal development in

ovulation age, or the time in days or weeks from ovulation. Another term is
postconceptional age, which is nearly identical to ovulation age.

FIGURE 7-1 Terminology used to describe pregnancy duration.

Until recently, clinicians customarily calculated menstrual age, and with
this, term pregnancy averages 280 days or 40 weeks between the first day of
the LMP and birth. This corresponds to 9 and 1/3 calendar months. However,
menstrual cycle length variability among women renders many of these
calculations inaccurate. This realization, combined with the frequent use of
first-trimester sonography, has led to more accurate gestational age
determination (Duryea, 2015). Much of this change stems from the accuracy
of early sonographic measurement. As a result, the American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, the American Institute of Ultrasound in
Medicine, and the Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine (2019) together
recommend the following:
1. First-trimester sonography is the most accurate method to establish or
reaffirm gestational age.
2. In conceptions achieved with in vitro fertilization (IVF), the embryo age
and egg transfer date are used.
3. If available, the gestational ages calculated from the LMP and from firsttrimester sonography are compared, and the estimated date of confinement
(EDC) is recorded and discussed with the patient.
4. The best obstetrical estimate of gestational age at delivery is recorded on
the birth certificate.

The embryofetal crown-rump length in the first trimester is accurate ± 5
to 7 days. Thus, if sonographic gestational age differs by more than 5 days
prior to 9 weeks’ gestation, or by more than 7 days later in the first trimester,
the EDC is changed. These and discrepant values in the second and third
trimester are discussed further in Chapter 14 (p. 248).

■ Naegele Rule
An EDC based on the LMP can be quickly estimated as follows: add 7 days
to the first day of the LMP and subtract 3 months. For example, if the first day
of the LMP was October 5, the due date is 10–05 minus 3 (months) plus 7
(days) = 7–12, or July 12 of the following year. This calculation has been
termed the Naegele rule. The period of gestation can also be divided into
three units of approximately 14 weeks each. These three trimesters are
important obstetrical milestones.
In addition to estimating the EDC with either Naegele rule or “pregnancy
wheels,” calculator tools in the electronic medical record and smartphone
applications can provide a calculated EDC and gestational age. For example,
the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020) has
developed a calculator application that incorporates sonographic criteria and
the LMP or embryo transfer date (Chap. 14, p. 248).

EMBRYONIC DEVELOPMENT
The complexity of embryofetal development is immense. Figure 7-2 shows a
developmental sequence of various organ systems. New information
regarding organ development continues to accrue. For example, imaging
techniques help to unravel the contributions of gene regulation and tissue
interaction to eventual three-dimensional organ morphology (Anderson,
2016). Others have described the sequence of gene activation that underlies
cardiac development (p. 126).

FIGURE 7-2 Embryofetal development according to gestational age determined by the first day of the
last menses. Times are approximate.

■ Zygote and Blastocyst Development
During the first 2 weeks after ovulation and then fertilization, the zygote—or
preembryo—progresses to the blastocyst stage. The blastocyst implants 6 or
7 days following fertilization. The 58-cell blastocyst differentiates into five
cells—the inner cell mass, which develops into the embryo. The remaining
53 cells form placental trophoblast. Details of implantation and early
development of the blastocyst and placenta are described in Chapter 5 (p.
86).

■ Embryonic Period
The conceptus is termed an embryo at the beginning of the third week after
ovulation and fertilization. Primitive chorionic villi form, and this coincides
with the expected day of menses. The embryonic period, during which time
organogenesis takes place, lasts 6 weeks. It begins the third week from the

LMP and continues through the eighth week. The embryonic disc is well
defined, and most pregnancy tests that measure human chorionic
gonadotropin (hCG) become positive by this time. As shown in Figure 7-3,
the body stalk is now differentiated. There are villous cores in which
angioblastic chorionic mesoderm can be distinguished and a true intervillous
space that contains maternal blood.

FIGURE 7-3 Early human embryos. Ovulation ages: A. 19 days (presomite). B. 21 days (7 somites).
C. 22 days (17 somites). (After drawings and models in the Carnegie Institute.)

During the third week, fetal blood vessels in the chorionic villi appear. In
the fourth week, a cardiovascular system has formed (Fig. 7-4) (Moore,
2008). Thereby, a true circulation is established both within the embryo and
between the embryo and the chorionic villi. Partitioning of the primitive
heart begins. Also in the fourth week, the neural plate forms, and it
subsequently folds to form the neural tube. By the end of the fifth menstrual
week, the chorionic sac measures approximately 1 cm in diameter. The
embryo is 3 mm long and can be measured sonographically. Arm and leg
buds have developed, and the amnion is beginning to ensheathe the body
stalk, which thereafter becomes the umbilical cord. At the end of the sixth
week, the embryo is approximately 9 mm long, and the neural tube has closed
(Fig. 7-5). Cardiac motion is almost always discernable sonographically
(Fig. 7-6).

FIGURE 7-4 Three- to four-week-old embryos. A, B. Dorsal views of embryos during 22 to 23 days
of development showing 8 and 12 somites, respectively. C–E. Lateral views of embryos during 24 to 28
days, showing 16, 27, and 33 somites, respectively.

FIGURE 7-5 Embryo photographs. A. Dorsal view of an embryo at 24 to 26 days and corresponding
to Figure 7-4C. B. Lateral view of an embryo at 28 days and corresponding to Figure 7-4D. C. Lateral
view of embryofetus at 56 days, which marks the end of the embryonic period and the beginning of the

fetal period. The liver is within the white, halo circle. (From Werth B, Tsiaras A: From Conception to
Birth: A Life Unfolds. New York, Doubleday, 2002.)

FIGURE 7-6 A. This image of an 8-week, 3-day embryo depicts measurement of the crown-rump
length, which is 1.93 cm at this gestational age. B. Despite the early gestational age, M-mode imaging
readily demonstrates embryonic cardiac activity. The heart rate in this image is 161 beats per minute.

The cranial end of the neural tube closes by 38 days from the LMP, and
the caudal end closes by 40 days. Thus, the neural tube has closed by the end
of the sixth week. And by the end of the eighth week, the crown-rump length
approximates 22 mm. Fingers and toes are present, and the arms bend at the
elbows. The upper lip is complete, and the external ears form definitive
elevations on either side of the head. Three-dimensional images and videos
of human embryos from the Multi-Dimensional Human Embryo project can
be seen at: embryo.soad.umich.edu/.

FETAL DEVELOPMENT AND PHYSIOLOGY
■ Fetal Period Epochs
The transition from embryonic to fetal periods occurs at 7 weeks after
fertilization, corresponding to 9 weeks after the LMP. At this time, the fetus
approximates 24 mm in length, most organ systems have developed, and the
fetus enters a period of growth and maturation. These phases are outlined in
Figure 7-2.

12 Gestational Weeks

The uterus usually is just palpable above the symphysis pubis. Fetal growth
is rapid, and the fetal crown-rump length is 5 to 6 cm (Fig. 7-7). Centers of
ossification have appeared in most fetal bones, and the fingers and toes have
become differentiated. Skin and nails develop, and scattered rudiments of
hair appear. The external genitalia are beginning to show definitive signs of
male or female gender. The fetus begins to make spontaneous movements.

FIGURE 7-7 This image of a 12-week, 2-day embryo depicts measurement of the crown-rump length.
The fetal profile, cranium, and a hand and foot also are visible in this image.

16 Gestational Weeks
Fetal growth slows at this time. The crown-rump length is 12 cm, and the
fetal weight approximates 150 g. Clinically, the sonographic crown-rump
length is not measured beyond 13 weeks, which corresponds to
approximately 8.4 cm. Instead, biparietal diameter, head circumference,
abdominal circumference, and femur length are measured. Fetal weight in the
second and third trimesters is estimated from a combination of these
measurements (Chap. 14, p. 248).
Eye movements begin at 16 to 18 weeks, coinciding with midbrain
maturation. By 18 weeks in the female fetus, the uterus is formed and vaginal

canalization begins. By 20 weeks in the male, testicles start to descend.

20 Gestational Weeks
This is the midpoint of pregnancy as estimated from the LMP. The fetus now
weighs somewhat more than 300 g, and weight increases substantially in a
linear manner. From this point onward, the fetus moves approximately every
minute and is active 10 to 30 percent of the day (DiPietro, 2005). Brown fat
forms, and the fetal skin becomes less transparent. Downy lanugo covers its
entire body, and some scalp hair can be seen. Cochlear function develops
between 22 and 25 weeks, and this maturation continues for 6 months after
delivery.

24 Gestational Weeks
The fetus now weighs almost 700 g. The skin is characteristically wrinkled,
and fat deposition begins. The head is still comparatively large, and
eyebrows and eyelashes are usually recognizable. By 24 weeks, the
secretory type II pneumocytes have initiated surfactant secretion (Chap. 32,
p. 587). The canalicular period of lung development, during which the
bronchi and bronchioles enlarge and alveolar ducts develop, is nearly
completed. Despite this, a fetus born at this time will attempt to breathe, but
many will die because the terminal sacs, required for gas exchange, have not
yet formed. Although dependent on racial and ethnic factors, and as
discussed in Chapter 45 (p. 785), the overall survival rate at 24 weeks
barely exceeds 50 percent (Janevic, 2018). By 26 weeks, the eyes open.
Nociceptors are present over all the body, and the neural pain system is
developed (Kadic, 2012). The fetal liver and spleen are important early sites
for hemopoiesis (Fanni, 2018).

28 Gestational Weeks
The crown-rump length approximates 25 cm, and the fetus weighs about 1100
g. The thin skin is red and covered with vernix caseosa. The pupillary
membrane has just disappeared from the eyes. Isolated eye blinking peaks at
28 weeks. The bone marrow now becomes the major site of hemopoiesis.
The otherwise normal neonate born at this age has a 90-percent chance of
survival without physical or neurological impairment.

32 and 36 Gestational Weeks
At 32 weeks, the fetus has attained a crown-rump length approximating 28
cm and a weight of about 1800 g. The skin surface is still red and wrinkled.
In contrast, by 36 weeks, the fetal crown-rump length averages about 32 cm,
and the weight approximates 2800 g (Duryea, 2014). Because of
subcutaneous fat deposition, the body is more rotund, and the previous
wrinkled facies are now fuller. Normal fetuses have a nearly 100-percent
survival rate.

40 Gestational Weeks
This is considered term, and the fetus is fully developed. The average
crown-rump length measures about 36 cm, and the average weight
approximates 3500 g.

■ Central Nervous System Development
Brain Development
The cranial end of the neural tube closes by 38 days from the last menstrual
period, and the caudal end closes by 40 days. Hence, folic acid
supplementation to prevent neural-tube defects must be in place before this
point to be efficacious (Chap. 9, p. 168). The walls of the neural tube form
the brain and spinal cord. The lumen becomes the ventricular system of the
brain and the central canal of the spinal cord. During the sixth week, the
cranial end of the neural tube forms three primary vesicles. In the seventh
week, five secondary vesicles develop: the telencephalon—future cerebral
hemispheres; diencephalon—thalami; mesencephalon—midbrain;
metencephalon—pons and cerebellum; and myelencephalon—medulla. This
is, in part, controlled by Hox genes, and defects result in abnormal signaling
that leads to neuropathic anomalies (Arendt, 2018). Meanwhile, flexures
develop and fold the brain into its typical configuration. The end of the
embryonic period signifies completion of primary and secondary
neutralization.
At 3 to 4 months’ gestation, neuronal proliferation peaks. As expected,
disorders in this cerebral development phase profoundly worsen function
(Ortega, 2017; Volpe, 2018). One example is Zika virus infection (Rothan,
2019). Neuronal migration occurs almost simultaneously and peaks at 3 to 5

months. This process is characterized by movement of millions of neuronal
cells from their ventricular and subventricular zones to areas of the brain in
which they reside for life (Fig. 7-8). Upregulation of gene expression for
neuronal migration has been described (Di Donato, 2017). Noninvasive
methods to study fetal neurodevelopment also have been reported (Goetzl,
2016; Wang, 2015).

FIGURE 7-8 Neuronal proliferation and migration are complete at 20 to 24 weeks. During the second
half of gestation, organizational events proceed with gyral formation and proliferation, differentiation,
and migration of cellular elements. Approximate gestational ages are shown. A. 20 weeks. B. 35
weeks. C. 40 weeks.

As gestation progresses, the fetal brain appearance steadily changes.
Thus, it is possible to identify fetal age from its external appearance (Volpe,
2018). Neuronal proliferation and migration proceed along with gyral growth
and maturation (see Fig. 7-8). Sequential maturation studies using magnetic
resonance (MR) imaging have characterized the developing fetal brain
(Dubois, 2014; Meng, 2012; Wang, 2015).

Myelination of the ventral roots of the cerebrospinal nerves and
brainstem begins at approximately 6 months, but most myelination progresses
after birth. This lack of myelin and incomplete skull ossification permit fetal
brain structure to be seen sonographically throughout gestation.

Spinal Cord
Whereas the superior two thirds of the neural tube give rise to the brain, the
inferior third forms the spinal cord. In the embryo, the spinal cord extends
along the entire vertebral column length, but after that it lags behind vertebral
growth. Ossification of the entire sacrum is visible sonographically by
approximately 21 weeks (Chap. 15, p. 276). By 24 weeks, the spinal cord
extends to S1, at birth to L3, and in the adult to L1. Spinal cord myelination
begins at midgestation and continues through the first year of life. Synaptic
function is sufficiently developed by the eighth week to demonstrate flexion
of the neck and trunk. During the third trimester, integration of nervous and
muscular function proceeds rapidly (Molina, 2017).

■ Cardiovascular System
The embryology of the heart is highly complex. At its earliest stages of
formation, the fetal heart undergoes molecular programming, and more than a
hundred genes and molecular factors are integral to its morphogenesis
(Kathiriya, 2015; Moore, 2020). These molecular factors include the
hypoxia-inducible factor—HIF and homeobox (HOX)—family.
To summarize its embryology, the straight cardiac tube is formed by the
23rd day during an intricate morphogenetic sequence, during which each
segment arises at a unique time. Between 4 and 7 weeks the heart undergoes
extensive growth and morphological modification, leading to the formation of
a partially septated four-chambered heart with a set of primitive valves
(Sylva, 2014). The valves develop, and the aortic arch forms by
vasculogenesis. Chapter 8 of Hurst’s The Heart has a full description
(Torres, 2017). Late in fetal life, coronary angiogenesis vascularizes the
myocardium (Lu, 2021).

Fetal Circulation

This unique circulation is substantially different from that of the adult and
functions until birth, when it changes dramatically. For example, fetal blood
is oxygenated by the placenta and does not need to enter the pulmonary
vasculature. Thus, most of the right ventricular output bypasses the lungs. In
addition, the fetal heart chambers work in parallel, not in series. This
effectively supplies the brain and heart, compared with the rest of the body,
with more highly oxygenated blood from the dominant right ventricle.
Oxygen and nutrient materials required for fetal growth and maturation
are delivered from the placenta by the single umbilical vein (Fig. 7-9). The
vein then divides into the ductus venosus and the portal sinus. The ductus
venosus is the major branch of the umbilical vein and traverses the liver to
enter the inferior vena cava directly. Because it does not supply oxygen to the
intervening tissues, it carries well-oxygenated blood directly to the heart. In
contrast, the portal sinus carries blood to the hepatic veins primarily on the
left side of the liver, and oxygen is extracted. The relatively deoxygenated
blood from the liver then flows back into the inferior vena cava, which also
receives more deoxygenated blood returning from the lower body. Blood
flowing to the fetal heart from the inferior vena cava, therefore, consists of an
admixture of arterial-like blood that passes directly through the ductus
venosus and less well-oxygenated blood that returns from most of the veins
below the level of the diaphragm. The oxygen content of blood delivered to
the heart from the inferior vena cava is thus lower than that leaving the
placenta.

FIGURE 7-9 The intricate nature of the fetal circulation is evident. The degree of blood oxygenation in
various vessels differs appreciably from that in the postnatal state. aa = arteries; LA = left atrium; LV =
left ventricle; RA = right atrium; RV = right ventricle; v = vein.

Because the ventricles of the fetal heart work in parallel, this allows the
right ventricle to account for two thirds of the total cardiac output. Welloxygenated blood enters the left ventricle, which supplies the heart and brain,
and less oxygenated blood enters the right ventricle, which supplies the rest
of the body. Congenital cardiac defects may contribute to dysregulated brain
development or placenta dysfunction (Fantasia, 2018; Lauridsen, 2017).
These two separate circulations are maintained by right-atrium anatomy,
which effectively directs entering blood to either the left atrium or the right

ventricle, depending on its oxygen content. This separation of blood
according to its oxygen content is aided by the pattern of blood flow in the
inferior vena cava. The well-oxygenated blood tends to course along the
dorsomedial aspect of the inferior vena cava and the less oxygenated blood
flows along the lateral vessel wall. This aids their shunting into opposite
sides of the heart. Once this blood enters the right atrium, the configuration of
the upper interatrial septum—the crista dividens—preferentially shunts the
well-oxygenated blood from the medial side of the inferior vena cava through
the foramen ovale into the left heart. Here, it is directed to the heart and brain
(Dawes, 1962). After these tissues extract needed oxygen, the resulting less
oxygenated blood returns to the right atrium through the superior vena cava.
Blood flow velocity in the superior vena cava rises from 20 weeks until term
(Stefopoulou, 2021).
The less oxygenated blood coursing along the lateral wall of the inferior
vena cava enters the right atrium and is deflected through the tricuspid valve
to the right ventricle. The superior vena cava courses inferiorly and
anteriorly as it enters the right atrium, ensuring that less well-oxygenated
blood returning from the brain and upper body also will be shunted directly
to the right ventricle. Similarly, the ostium of the coronary sinus lies just
superior to the tricuspid valve so that less oxygenated blood from the heart
also returns to the right ventricle. As a result of this blood flow pattern,
blood in the right ventricle is 15 to 20 percent less saturated with oxygen
than blood in the left ventricle.
Almost 90 percent of blood exiting the right ventricle is shunted through
the ductus arteriosus to the descending aorta. High pulmonary vascular
resistance and comparatively lower resistance in the ductus arteriosus and
the umbilical–placental vasculature ensure that only about 8 percent of right
ventricular output goes to the lungs (Fineman, 2014). Thus, one third of the
blood passing through the ductus arteriosus is delivered to the body. The
remaining right ventricular output returns to the placenta through the two
hypogastric arteries. These two arteries course from the level of the bladder
along the abdominal wall to the umbilical ring and into the cord as the
umbilical arteries. In the placenta, this blood picks up oxygen and other
nutrients and is recirculated to the umbilical vein.

Circulatory Changes at Birth

After birth, the umbilical vessels, ductus arteriosus, foramen ovale, and
ductus venosus normally constrict or collapse. With the functional closure of
the ductus arteriosus and the expansion of the lungs, blood leaving the right
ventricle preferentially enters the pulmonary vasculature to become
oxygenated before it returns to the left heart (Hillman, 2012). Virtually
instantaneously, the ventricles, which had worked in parallel in fetal life,
now effectively work in series. The more distal portions of the hypogastric
arteries undergo atrophy and obliteration within 3 to 4 days after birth. These
become the umbilical ligaments, whereas the intraabdominal remnants of the
umbilical vein form the ligamentum teres. The ductus venosus constricts by
10 to 96 hours after birth and is anatomically closed by 2 to 3 weeks. This
ultimately forms the ligamentum venosum (Fineman, 2014).

Fetoplacental Blood Volume
Although precise measurements of human fetoplacental blood volume are
lacking, Usher and associates (1963) reported values in term normal
newborns to average 78 mL/kg when immediate cord clamping was
conducted. Gruenwald (1967) found that the fetal blood volume contained in
the placenta after prompt cord clamping averaged 45 mL/kg of fetal weight.
Thus, fetoplacental blood volume at term is approximately 125 mL/kg of fetal
weight. This is important when assessing the magnitude of fetomaternal
hemorrhage, which is discussed in Chapter 18 (p. 358).

■ Hemopoiesis
Embryo hemopoiesis begins in the yolk sac and endothelium, followed by the
liver, and then spleen and bone marrow (Canu, 2021). Transitions are
intricate and involve several genes and protein complexes (Shao, 2018).
Both myeloid and erythroid cells are continually produced by progenitors
that derive from hemopoietic stem cells (Fanni, 2018; Heinig, 2015). The
first erythrocytes released into the fetal circulation are nucleated and
macrocytic. The mean cell volume is at least 180 fL in the embryo and
decreases to 105 to 115 fL at term. Normal adult volume ranges from 80 to
95 fL. The erythrocytes of aneuploid fetuses generally do not undergo this
maturation and maintain high mean cell volumes, which average 130 fL
(Sipes, 1991). As fetal development progresses, more and more circulating
erythrocytes are smaller and nonnucleated. With fetal growth, both the blood

volume in the common fetoplacental circulation and hemoglobin
concentration increase. As shown in Table 7-1, fetal hemoglobin
concentrations rise across pregnancy. For clinical purposes, the Society for
Maternal-Fetal Medicine (2015) recommends a cutoff fetal hematocrit value
of 30 percent to define anemia.
TABLE 7-1. Fetal Hemoglobin Concentrations Across Pregnancy

Because of their large size, fetal erythrocytes have a short life span,
which progressively lengthens to approximately 90 days at term (Pearson,
1966). As a consequence, red blood cell concentrations rise. Reticulocytes
are initially present at high levels but decrease to 4 to 5 percent of the total at
term. Fetal erythrocytes differ structurally and metabolically from those in
the adult (Baron, 2012). They are more deformable, which serves to offset
their higher volume and viscosity. They also contain several enzymes with
appreciably different activities.

Erythropoiesis is controlled primarily by fetal erythropoietin because
maternal erythropoietin does not cross the placenta. Fetal hormone
production is influenced by testosterone, estrogen, prostaglandins, thyroid
hormone, lipoproteins, and importantly, by fetal hypoxia (Teramo, 2018).
Serum erythropoietin levels rise with fetal maturity. The fetal liver is an
important source until renal production begins near term. The erythropoietin
concentration in amnionic fluid correlates closely with that in umbilical
venous blood obtained by cordocentesis. After birth, erythropoietin normally
may not be detectable for up to 3 months.
In contrast, platelet production reaches stable levels by midpregnancy,
although there is some variation across gestation (Fig. 7-10). The fetal and
neonatal platelet count is subject to various agents, which are discussed in
Chapter 18 (p. 359).

FIGURE 7-10 Platelet counts by gestational age obtained the first day of life. Mean values and 5th and
95th percentiles are shown. (Data from Christensen RD, Henry E, Antonio DV: Thrombocytosis and
thrombocytopenia in the NICU: incidence, mechanisms and treatments, J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med
25 Suppl 4:15, 2012.)

Fetal Hemoglobin

This tetrameric protein is composed of two copies of two different peptide
chains, which determine the type of hemoglobin produced (Fig. 7-11).
Normal adult hemoglobin A1 is made of α and β chains. During embryonic
and fetal life, various α and β chain precursors are produced. This results in
the serial production of several different embryonic hemoglobins. At least 17
genetic loci potentially regulate erythropoiesis (Tumburu, 2017). Genes for
β-type chains are on chromosome 11, and those for α-type chains on
chromosome 16. Each of these genes is turned on and then off during fetal
life, until α and β genes, which direct the production of adult hemoglobin A1,
are permanently activated.

FIGURE 7-11 Hemoglobin types transition throughout pregnancy. Alpha (α) and zeta (ζ) globin chains
are interchangeable. The beta (β) globin chain can be replaced by epsilon (ε), gamma (γ), or delta ( δ)
globin chains. In embryonic life (stage I), ζ and ε globin chain production is gradually replaced by α and
γ globin chain production. Hemoglobin F is the main type in fetal life (stage II). After birth (stage III),
HbA1 predominates.

The timing of production of each of these early hemoglobins corresponds
to the site of hemoglobin production. Fetal blood is first produced in the yolk
sac, where hemoglobins Gower 1, Gower 2, and Portland are made.
Erythropoiesis then moves to the liver, where fetal hemoglobin F is

produced. When hemopoiesis finally moves to the bone marrow, adult-type
hemoglobin A1 appears in fetal red blood cells and is present in
progressively greater amounts as the fetus matures (Lessard, 2018).
The final adult version of the α chain is produced exclusively by 6
weeks. After this, there are no functional alternative versions, and the gene
for the zeta (ζ) globin chain is down-regulated. If the gene coding the α
globin chain undergoes mutation, no alternate α-type chain can be substituted
to form functional hemoglobin. In contrast, at least two versions of the β
chain—δ and γ—remain in production throughout fetal life and beyond. With
a mutation in the gene coding the β globin chain, these two other versions of
the β chain often continue to be produced, resulting in either hemoglobin A2
(α2δ2) or hemoglobin F (α2γ2), which substitute for the abnormal or missing
hemoglobin A1.
Genes are turned off by methylation of their control region, which is
discussed in Chapter 13 (p. 322). In some situations, methylation does not
occur. For example, in newborns of diabetic women, hemoglobin F may
persist due to hypomethylation of the γ gene (Perrine, 1988). With sickle-cell
anemia, the γ gene remains unmethylated, and large quantities of fetal
hemoglobin continue to be produced. As discussed in Chapter 59 (p. 1053),
elevated hemoglobin F levels are associated with fewer sickle-cell disease
symptoms, and pharmacological modification of these levels by hemoglobin
F–inducing drugs is one treatment approach (Pasricha, 2018).
Hemoglobins A and F function differently. At any given oxygen tension
and at identical pH, fetal erythrocytes that contain mostly hemoglobin F bind
more oxygen than do those that contain nearly all hemoglobin A (Fig. 50-2, p.
886). This is because hemoglobin A binds 2,3-diphosphoglycerate (2,3DPG) more avidly than does hemoglobin F. Remember that 2,3-DPG is an
intraerythrocyte phosphate, and hemoglobin has a reciprocal affinity for 2,3DPG and oxygen (Benesch, 1968). Thus, hemoglobin A’s greater 2,3-DPG
binding lowers its oxygen affinity compared with hemoglobin F. Moreover,
during pregnancy, maternal 2,3-DPG levels are greater, and because fetal
erythrocytes have lower concentrations of 2,3-DPG, fetal cells have
increased oxygen affinity.
The amount of hemoglobin F in fetal erythrocytes begins to decrease in
the last weeks of pregnancy. At term, approximately three fourths of total
hemoglobin levels are hemoglobin F. During the first 6 to 12 months of life,

the hemoglobin F proportion continues to decline and eventually reaches the
low levels found in adult erythrocytes (Pasricha, 2018).

Coagulation Factors
With the exception of fibrinogen, other hemostatic proteins do not exist in
embryonic forms. The fetus starts producing normal, adult-type procoagulant,
fibrinolytic, and anticoagulant proteins by 12 weeks. Because they do not
cross the placenta, their concentrations at birth are markedly below the
levels that develop within a few weeks of life (Corrigan, 1992). In normal
neonates, the levels of factors II, VII, IX, X, and XI, and of protein S, protein
C, antithrombin, and plasminogen, all approximate 50 percent of adult levels.
In contrast, levels of factors V, VIII, XIII, and fibrinogen are closer to adult
values (Saracco, 2009). Maternal vitamin K deficiency has been associated
with fetal cerebral hemorrhage (Goto, 2018). Without prophylactic treatment,
the levels of vitamin K–dependent coagulation factors usually drop even
further during the first few days after birth. This decline is amplified in
breastfed infants and may lead to newborn hemorrhage (Chap. 33, p. 606).
Schott (2018) and Konstantinidi (2019) and their colleagues have provided
thromboelastographic parameters for both healthy and sick term newborns.
Fetal fibrinogen, which appears as early as 5 weeks, has the same amino
acid composition as adult fibrinogen but different properties (Klagsbrun,
1988). It forms a less compressible clot, and the fibrin monomer has a lower
degree of aggregation (Heimark, 1988). Although plasma fibrinogen levels at
birth are less than those in nonpregnant adults, the protein is functionally
more active than adult fibrinogen (Ignjatovic, 2011). Neonates have higher
cord plasma levels and fibronectin-fibrinogen complexes compared with
maternal levels (Lis-Kuberka, 2018).
Levels of functional fetal factor XIII (fibrin stabilizing factor) are
significantly reduced compared with those in adults (Henriksson, 1974).
Nielsen (1969) described low levels of plasminogen and elevated
fibrinolytic activity in cord plasma compared with that of maternal plasma.
Platelet counts in cord blood are in the normal range for nonpregnant adults.
Despite this relative reduction in procoagulants, the fetus appears to be
protected from hemorrhage, and fetal bleeding is rare. Even after invasive
fetal procedures such as cordocentesis, excessive bleeding is uncommon.
Ney and coworkers (1989) have shown that amnionic fluid thromboplastins

and a factor(s) in Wharton jelly combine to aid coagulation at the umbilical
cord puncture site.
Various thrombophilias may cause thromboses and pregnancy
complications in adults (Chap. 55, p. 976). If the fetus inherits one of these
mutations, thrombosis and infarction can develop in the placenta or fetal
organs. This is usually seen with homozygous inheritance. One example is
homozygous protein C mutation, which causes purpura fulminans.

Plasma Proteins
Liver enzymes and other plasma proteins are produced by the fetus, and these
levels do not correlate with maternal levels (Weiner, 1992). Concentrations
of plasma proteins, which include albumin, lactic dehydrogenase, aspartate
and alanine aminotransferases, and γ-glutamyl transpeptidase, all rise.
Conversely, prealbumin levels decline with gestational age (Fryer, 1993). At
birth, mean total plasma protein and albumin concentrations in fetal blood
are similar to maternal levels. This is important because albumin binds
unconjugated bilirubin to prevent kernicterus in the newborn (Chap. 33, p.
606).

■ Respiratory System
Lung maturation and biochemical indices of functional fetal lung maturity are
important predictors of early neonatal outcome. Morphological or functional
immaturity at birth leads to the development of the respiratory distress
syndrome (Chap. 34, p. 615). A sufficient amount of surface-active materials
—collectively referred to as surfactant—in the amnionic fluid is evidence
of fetal lung maturity (Warburton, 2017). As Liggins (1994) emphasized,
however, the structural and morphological maturation of fetal lung also is
extraordinarily important to proper lung function.

Anatomical Maturation
Like the branching of a tree, lung development proceeds along an established
timetable. As with other organ systems, gene activation and deactivation
control these functions (Miller, 2019). The lung primordium is an outgrowth
from foregut endoderm at approximately 20 days’ gestation. The lung bud
arises at 25 days and within this framework, four essential lung development

stages are described by Moore (2020). First, the pseudoglandular stage
entails growth of the intrasegmental bronchial tree between the 5th and 17th
weeks. The microvasculature begins to develop, and the lung looks
microscopically like a gland. Second, during the canalicular stage, from 16
to 25 weeks, the bronchial cartilage plates extend peripherally. Each terminal
bronchiole gives rise to several respiratory bronchioles, and each of these in
turn divides into multiple saccular ducts. Third, the terminal sac stage
begins after 25 weeks. During this stage, primordial alveoli give rise to
primitive pulmonary alveoli, that is, the terminal sacs. Simultaneously, an
extracellular matrix develops from proximal to distal lung segments until
term. The fourth alveolar stage begins during the late fetal period and
continues well into childhood. An extensive capillary network is built, the
lymphatic system forms, and type II pneumocytes begin to produce surfactant.
At birth, only approximately 15 percent of the adult number of alveoli is
present. Thus, the lung continues to grow and add more alveoli for up to 8
years.
Various insults can upset this process, and their timing determines the
sequelae. During the embryonic phase, abnormalities in lung development
include esophageal and tracheal atresia, tracheoesophageal fistula, and
pulmonary agenesis. Another example is fetal renal agenesis in which
amnionic fluid is absent at the beginning of lung growth, and major defects
occur in all four developmental stages. Similarly, the fetus with membrane
rupture and subsequent oligohydramnios before 20 weeks usually exhibits
nearly normal bronchial branching and cartilage development but has
immature alveoli. In contrast, membrane rupture after 24 weeks may have
minimal long-term effect on pulmonary structure. Last, vitamin D is thought to
be important for several aspects of lung development (Hart, 2015; Ustun,
2020).

Pulmonary Surfactant
After the first breath, the terminal sacs must remain expanded despite the
pressure imparted by the tissue-to-air interface, and surfactant keeps them
from collapsing. Surfactant is formed in type II pneumocytes that line the
alveoli. These cells are characterized by multivesicular bodies that produce
the lamellar bodies in which surfactant is assembled. During late fetal life, at
a time when the alveolus is characterized by a water-to-tissue interface, the
intact lamellar bodies are secreted from the lung and swept into the amnionic

fluid during respiratory-like movements that are termed fetal breathing. At
birth, with the first breath, an air-to-tissue interface is established in the lung
alveolus. Surfactant uncoils from the lamellar bodies and spreads to line the
alveolus to prevent alveolar collapse during expiration. Thus, the fetal lungs’
capacity to produce surfactant establishes lung maturity.
Surfactant Composition. Gluck (1972) and Hallman (1976) and their
coworkers approximated that 90 percent of surfactant dry weight is lipid,
specifically glycerophospholipids. Proteins account for the other 10 percent.
Nearly 80 percent of the glycerophospholipids are phosphatidylcholines
(lecithins). The principal active component that constitutes half of surfactant
is a specific lecithin, which is dipalmitoyl phosphatidylcholine (DPPC or
PC). Phosphatidylglycerol (PG) accounts for another 8 to 15 percent. Its
precise role is unclear because newborns without PG usually do well. The
other major constituent is phosphatidylinositol (PI).
Surfactant Synthesis. Biosynthesis takes place in the type II pneumocytes. The
apoproteins are produced in the endoplasmic reticulum, and the
glycerophospholipids are synthesized by cooperative interactions of several
cellular organelles. Phospholipid is the primary surface tension–lowering
component of surfactant, whereas the apoproteins aid the forming and
reforming of a surface film.
The major apoprotein is surfactant A (SP-A), which is a glycoprotein
with a molecular weight of 28,000 to 35,000 Da. It is synthesized in the type
II cells, and its content in amnionic fluid increases with gestational age and
fetal lung maturity. SP-A gene expression is demonstrable by 29 weeks
(Mendelson, 2005). Specifically, SP-A1 and SP-A2 are two separate genes
on chromosome 10, and their regulation is distinctive and different
(McCormick, 1994).
Corticosteroids and Fetal Lung Maturation. Since Liggins (1969) observed
accelerated lung maturation in lamb fetuses given glucocorticosteroid prior
to preterm delivery, many suggested that fetal cortisol stimulates lung
maturation and surfactant synthesis. It is unlikely, however, that
corticosteroids are the only stimulus for augmented surfactant formation. But,
when these are administered at certain critical times, they may improve
preterm fetal lung maturation. Antenatal betamethasone and dexamethasone

for lung maturation and neonatal replacement surfactant therapy are discussed
in Chapter 34 (p. 617).

Breathing
Fetal respiratory muscles develop early, and chest wall movements are
detected sonographically as early as 11 weeks (Koos, 2014). Breathing is
essential for normal lung growth and development. From the beginning of the
fourth month, the fetus engages in respiratory movement sufficiently intense to
move amnionic fluid in and out of the respiratory tract. Some extrauterine
events have effects on fetal breathing, for example, maternal exercise
stimulates it (Sussman, 2016).

■ Digestive System
After its embryogenic formation from the yolk sac as the primordial gut, the
digestive system forms the intestines and various appendages. The foregut
gives rise to the pharynx, lower respiratory system, esophagus, stomach,
proximal duodenum, liver, pancreas, and biliary tree. The midgut gives rise
to the distal duodenum, jejunum, ileum, cecum, appendix, and the right colon.
The hindgut develops into the left colon, rectum, and the superior portion of
the anal canal that empties into the cloaca (Kruepunga, 2018). Numerous
malformations develop in these structures from improper rotation, fixation,
and partitioning. A common example is one of the several types of intestinal
atresias (Moore, 2020; Stoll, 2017).
Swallowing begins at 10 to 12 weeks, coincident with the ability of the
small intestine to undergo peristalsis and to actively transport glucose
(Koldovsky, 1965). As a correlate, neonates born preterm may have
swallowing difficulties because of immature gut motility (Singendonk, 2014).
Much of the water in swallowed fluid is absorbed, and unabsorbed matter is
propelled to the lower colon. Gitlin (1974) demonstrated that late in
pregnancy, approximately 800 mg of soluble protein is ingested daily by the
fetus. The stimulus for swallowing is unclear, but the fetal neural analogue of
thirst, gastric emptying, and change in the amnionic fluid composition are
potential factors (Boyle, 1992). The fetal taste buds may play a role because
saccharin injected into amnionic fluid increases swallowing, whereas
injection of a noxious chemical inhibits it (Liley, 1972).

Fetal swallowing appears to have little effect on amnionic fluid volume
early in pregnancy because the volume swallowed is small compared with
the total. However, term fetuses swallow between 200 and 760 mL per day
—an amount comparable to that of the term neonate (Pritchard, 1966). Thus
at term, amnionic fluid volume regulation can be substantially altered by fetal
swallowing. For example, as discussed in Chapter 14 (p. 256), if
swallowing is inhibited, hydramnios is common.
Hydrochloric acid and some digestive enzymes are present in the
stomach and small intestine in minimal amounts in the early fetus. Intrinsic
factor is detectable by 11 weeks, and pepsinogen by 16 weeks. The preterm
neonate, depending on its gestational age, may have transient deficiencies of
these enzymes. The small intestinal histological appearance is normal
(Meier, 2018).
Stomach emptying appears to be stimulated primarily by volume. A
dilated stomach suggests obstruction (McCormick, 2021). Movement of
amnionic fluid through the gastrointestinal system may enhance growth and
development of the alimentary canal. That said, other regulatory factors
likely are involved. For example, anencephalic fetuses, in which swallowing
is limited, often have normal amnionic fluid volume and normal-appearing
gastrointestinal tract.

Meconium
Fetal bowel contents consist of various products of secretion, such as
glycerophospholipids from the lung, desquamated fetal cells, lanugo, scalp
hair, and vernix. It also contains undigested debris from swallowed amnionic
fluid. The dark greenish-black color forms from bile pigments, especially
biliverdin. Meconium can pass from normal bowel peristalsis in the mature
fetus or from vagal stimulation. It can also pass when hypoxia stimulates
arginine vasopressin (AVP) release from the fetal pituitary gland. AVP
stimulates colonic smooth muscle to contract, resulting in intraamnionic
defecation (Rosenfeld, 1985). Meconium is toxic to the respiratory system,
and its inhalation can result in meconium aspiration syndrome.

Liver
The hepatic diverticulum is an outgrowth of the endodermal lining of the
foregut. Epithelial liver cords and primordial cells differentiate into hepatic

parenchyma. By 9 weeks, the liver accounts for 10 percent of fetal weight
(Moore, 2020). Serum liver enzyme levels increase with gestational age. As
noted, in early gestation, fetal hepatic hemopoiesis is a key source of blood
and immune cells (p. 125) (Popescu, 2019).
The fetal liver has a gestational-age-related capacity to conjugate
bilirubin, which forms from hemoglobin breakdown (Morioka, 2015).
Because of hepatic immaturity, the preterm newborn is at particular risk for
unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia (Chap. 33, p. 606). And because the life
span of normal fetal macrocytic erythrocytes is shorter than that of the adult,
relatively more unconjugated bilirubin is produced. Of this unconjugated
form, only a small fraction is conjugated by the fetal liver, and this is
excreted into the intestine and ultimately oxidized to biliverdin. Instead, most
of the unconjugated bilirubin is excreted into the amnionic fluid after 12
weeks and transferred across the placenta (Bashore, 1969). Importantly,
placental bilirubin transfer is bidirectional. Thus, a woman with severe
hemolysis has excess unconjugated bilirubin that readily passes to the fetus
and then into the amnionic fluid. Conversely, conjugated bilirubin is not
exchanged to any significant degree between mother and fetus.
Most fetal cholesterol derives from hepatic synthesis, which satisfies the
large demand for low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol by the fetal
adrenal glands. However, an estimated 20 to 50 percent of fetal cholesterol
originates from the mother, is transferred through the placenta, and released
to circulating fetal apolipoproteins (Baardman, 2012; Pecks, 2014). Fetuses
with growth restriction have lower cholesterol levels due to diminished fetal
synthesis rather than diminished maternal supply (Pecks, 2019).
Hepatic glycogen is present in low concentration during the second
trimester, but near term, levels rise rapidly and markedly to reach
concentrations that are two- to threefold higher than those in the adult liver.
After birth, glycogen content falls precipitously.

Pancreas
This gland arises from dorsal and ventral pancreatic buds from the endoderm
of the foregut (Moore, 2020). Gene regulation of its development has been
reviewed (Jennings, 2015). Insulin-containing granules can be identified by 9
to 10 weeks, and insulin is detectable in fetal plasma at 12 weeks (Adam,

1969). Between 19 and 36 weeks, Kivilevitch and associates (2017) were
able to visualize the pancreas sonographically in 60 percent of fetuses.
The fetal pancreas responds to hyperglycemia by secreting insulin
(Obenshain, 1970). Islets of Langerhans are enlarged in fetuses of mothers
with metabolic abnormalities (Avagliano, 2019). These fetuses likely can be
identified by sonographic pancreatic hyperechogenicity (Akkaya, 2018).
Glucagon has been identified in the fetal pancreas at 8 weeks. Although
hypoglycemia does not cause an increase in fetal glucagon levels, similar
stimuli do so by 12 hours after birth (Chez, 1975).
Most pancreatic enzymes are present by 16 weeks. Trypsin,
chymotrypsin, phospholipase A, and lipase are found in the 14-week fetus,
and their concentrations increase with gestational age (Werlin, 1992).
Amylase has been identified in amnionic fluid at 14 weeks (Davis, 1986).
The exocrine function of the fetal pancreas is limited. Physiologically
important secretion occurs only after stimulation by a secretagogue such as
acetylcholine, which is released locally after vagal stimulation (Werlin,
1992). Cholecystokinin normally is released only after protein ingestion and
thus ordinarily is not found in the fetus.

■ Urinary System
Renal development involves interaction between pluripotential stem cells,
undifferentiated mesenchymal cells, and epithelial components (Fanos,
2015). Two primitive urinary systems—the pronephros and the mesonephros
—precede development of the metanephros, which forms the final kidney.
The pronephros involutes by 2 weeks, and the mesonephros produces urine at
5 weeks and degenerates by 11 to 12 weeks. Failure of these two structures
either to form or to regress may result in anomalous urinary system
development. Between 9 and 12 weeks, the ureteric bud and the nephrogenic
blastema interact to produce the metanephros. Glomeruli develop and
filtration begins by week 9 (Moore, 2020). The kidney and ureter develop
from intermediate mesoderm. The bladder and urethra develop from the
urogenital sinus. The bladder also develops in part from the allantois.
Urogenital embryology is a focus of Chapter 3.
By week 14, the loop of Henle is functional and reabsorption occurs
(Smith, 1992). New nephrons continue to be formed until 36 weeks
(Lindström, 2018). In preterm neonates, their formation continues after birth.

Although the fetal kidneys produce urine, their ability to concentrate and
modify the pH is limited even in the mature fetus. Fetal urine is hypotonic
with respect to fetal plasma and has low electrolyte concentrations.
Renal vascular resistance is high, and the filtration fraction is low
compared with adult values (Smith, 1992). Fetal renal blood flow and thus
urine production are controlled or influenced by the renin-angiotensin
system, the sympathetic nervous system, prostaglandins, kallikrein, and atrial
natriuretic peptide. The glomerular filtration rate increases with gestational
age from less than 0.1 mL/min at 12 weeks to 0.3 mL/min at 20 weeks. In
later gestation, the rate remains constant when corrected for fetal weight
(Smith, 1992). Hemorrhage or hypoxia generally decreases renal blood flow,
glomerular filtration rate, and urine output.
Urine usually is found in the bladder even in small fetuses. The fetal
kidneys start producing urine at 12 weeks. By 18 weeks, they are producing 7
to 14 mL/d, and at term, this increases to 650 mL/d (Wladimiroff, 1974).
Maternally administered furosemide augments fetal urine formation, whereas
uteroplacental insufficiency, fetal-growth restriction, and other fetal
disorders can lower it. Obstruction of the urethra, bladder, ureters, or renal
pelves can damage renal parenchyma and distort fetal anatomy (Müller
Brochut, 2014). Pathological correlates and prenatal therapy of urinary tract
obstruction are discussed in Chapter 19 (p. 376).
Kidneys are not essential for survival in utero but influence control of
amnionic fluid composition and volume. Thus, abnormalities that cause
chronic fetal anuria are usually accompanied by oligohydramnios and
pulmonary hypoplasia (Cotton, 2017).

■ Endocrine Gland Development
The fetal endocrine system is functional for some time before the central
nervous system reaches maturity (Mulchahey, 1987).

Pituitary Gland
The anterior pituitary gland develops from oral ectoderm—the Rathke pouch
—whereas the posterior pituitary gland derives from neuroectoderm.
Embryonic development involves a complex and highly spatiotemporally

regulated network of signaling molecules and transcription factors
(Bancalari, 2012; Montenegro, 2019).
Anterior and Intermediate Lobes. The adenohypophysis, or anterior pituitary,
differentiates into five cell types that secrete six protein hormones. Of these
types, lactotropes produce prolactin (PRL), somatotropes produce growth
hormone (GH), corticotropes produce adrenocorticotropic hormone
(ACTH), thyrotropes produce thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), and
gonadotropes produce luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating
hormone (FSH).
ACTH is first detected in the fetal pituitary gland at 7 weeks, and GH and
LH have been identified by 13 weeks. By the end of the 17th week, the fetal
pituitary gland synthesizes and stores all pituitary hormones. Moreover, the
fetal pituitary is responsive to tropic hormones and is capable of secreting
these early in gestation (Grumbach, 1974). The fetal pituitary secretes βendorphin, and cord blood levels of β-endorphin and β-lipotropin rise with
fetal arterial partial pressure of carbon dioxide (Paco2) (Browning, 1983).
The intermediate lobe in the fetal pituitary gland is well developed. The
cells of this structure begin to disappear before term and are absent from the
adult pituitary.
Neurohypophysis. The posterior pituitary gland or neurohypophysis is well
developed by 10 to 12 weeks, and oxytocin and arginine vasopressin are
demonstrable. Both hormones probably function in the fetus to conserve
water by actions directed largely at the lung and placenta rather than kidney.
Vasopressin levels in umbilical cord plasma are strikingly higher than
maternal levels (Chard, 1971).

Thyroid Gland
The thyroid primordium arises from the endoderm of the primordial pharynx
(Moore, 2020). The thyroid migrates to its final position, and the obliterated
thyroglossal duct connects to the foramen cecum of the tongue.
The pituitary–thyroid system is functional by the end of the first trimester.
By 10 to 12 weeks, the thyroid gland is able to synthesize hormones, and
thyrotropin, thyroxine, and thyroid-binding globulin (TBG) have been
detected in fetal serum as early as 11 weeks (Bernal, 2007). Thyroid
follicles have formed and colloid is present. The placenta actively

concentrates iodine on the fetal side, and by 12 weeks and throughout
pregnancy, the fetal thyroid concentrates iodine more avidly than does the
maternal thyroid. Thus, maternal administration of either radioiodine or
appreciable amounts of ordinary iodine is hazardous after this time (Chap.
66, p. 1174). Normal fetal levels of free thyroxine (T4), free triiodothyronine
(T3), and TBG rise steadily throughout gestation (Ballabio, 1989). Compared
with adult levels, by 36 weeks, fetal serum concentrations of TSH are higher,
total and free T3 concentrations are lower, and T4 is similar. This suggests
that the fetal pituitary may not become sensitive to feedback until late
pregnancy.
Fetal thyroid hormone plays a role in the normal development of virtually
all fetal tissues, especially the brain (Andersen, 2018; Jansen, 2019).
Congenital hypothyroidism is a heterogenous disorder for which several
candidate genes have been identified (Moore, 2020). With hypothyroidism, it
was previously believed that normal fetal growth and development provided
evidence that T4 was not essential for fetal growth. It is now known,
however, that growth proceeds normally because small quantities of maternal
T4 prevent antenatal cretinism in fetuses with thyroid agenesis (Forhead,
2014; Vulsma, 1989). As discussed in Chapter 61 (p. 1098), the fetus with
congenital hypothyroidism typically does not develop stigmata of cretinism
until after birth (Abduljabbar, 2012). Because administration of thyroid
hormone will prevent this, by state law, all newborns are tested for high
serum levels of TSH (Chap. 32, p. 594).
The placenta prevents substantial passage of maternal thyroid hormones
to the fetus by rapidly deiodinating maternal T4 and T3 to form reverse T3, a
relatively inactive thyroid hormone. Several antithyroid antibodies cross the
placenta when present in high concentrations (Pelag, 2002). Those include
the long-acting thyroid stimulators (LATS), LATS-protector (LATS-P), and
thyroid-stimulating immunoglobulin (TSI). Congenital hyperthyroidism
develops when maternal thyroid-stimulating antibody crosses the placenta to
stimulate the fetal gland to secrete thyroxine (Donnelley, 2015). These
fetuses develop large goiters as shown in Figure 61-3 (p. 1092). They also
display tachycardia, hepatosplenomegaly, hematological abnormalities,
craniosynostosis, and growth restriction. As children, they have perceptual
motor difficulties, hyperactivity, and reduced growth (Johns, 2018).

Immediately after birth, thyroid function and metabolism undergo major
change. Cooling to room temperature evokes a sudden and marked increase
in TSH secretion. This in turn causes a progressive increase in serum T4
levels that are maximal 24 to 36 hours after birth. There are nearly
simultaneous elevations of serum T3 levels.

Adrenal Glands
These glands develop from two separate tissues. The medulla derives from
neural crest ectoderm, whereas the fetal and adult cortex arise from
intermediate mesoderm. The gland grows rapidly through cell proliferation
and angiogenesis, cellular migration, hypertrophy, and apoptosis (Ishimoto,
2011). Expression of the Kiss1R gene, alone or in concert with corticotropinreleasing hormone, stimulates fetal adrenal growth (Katugampola, 2017).
Fetal glands are enormous in relation to body size and are 10 to 20 times
larger than adult glands (Karsli, 2019; Moore, 2020). The bulk is made up of
the inner or fetal zone of the adrenal cortex and involutes rapidly after birth.
This zone is scant to absent in rare instances in which the fetal pituitary gland
is congenitally absent. The function of the fetal adrenal glands is discussed in
Chapter 5 (p. 102).

■ Immunological System
Infections in utero have provided an opportunity to examine mechanisms of
the fetal immune response (Chap. 67, p. 1182). Evidence of immunological
competence has been reported as early as 13 weeks (Stabile, 1988). In cord
blood at or near term, the average level for most components approximates
half that of the adult values.
B cells differentiate from pluripotent hemopoietic stem cells that migrate
to the liver (Berthault, 2017; Melchers, 2015). Despite this, in the absence of
a direct antigenic stimulus such as infection, fetal plasma immunoglobulins
consist almost totally of transferred maternal immunoglobulin G (IgG). Thus,
antibodies in the newborn most often reflect maternal immunological
experiences (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019).
The interaction between maternal and fetal T cells is described in Chapter 5
(p. 93).

Immunoglobulin G
Maternal IgG transport correlates with placental Fc receptor expression
(Lozano, 2018). Fetal transport begins at approximately 16 weeks and
increases thereafter. Because the bulk of IgG is acquired during the last 4
weeks, preterm neonates are poorly endowed with protective maternal
antibodies. Newborns begin to slowly produce IgG, and adult values are not
attained until age 3 years. In certain situations, the transfer of IgG antibodies
from mother to fetus can be harmful rather than protective. The classic
example is hemolytic disease of the fetus and newborn resulting from Rhantigen alloimmunization (Chap. 18, p. 353).

Immunoglobulins M and A
In the adult, production of immunoglobulin M (IgM) in response to an
antigenic stimulus is superseded in a week or so predominantly by IgG
production. Similarly, very little IgM is produced by normal fetuses not
exposed to infection, but with infection, the IgM response predominates and
remains so for weeks to months in the newborn. And, because IgM is not
transported from the mother, any IgM in the fetus or newborn is that which it
produced. Thus, specific IgM levels in umbilical cord blood may be elevated
in those with congenital infection. According to the American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019), elevated IgM levels are usually
found in newborns with congenital infection such as rubella, cytomegalovirus
infection, or toxoplasmosis. In infants, adult levels of IgM are normally
attained by age 9 months.
Immunoglobulin A (IgA) ingested in colostrum provides mucosal
protection against enteric infections. There is only a small amount of fetal
secretory IgA found in amnionic fluid (Quan, 1999).

Lymphocytes and Monocytes
The immune system develops early, and B lymphocytes are derived from
primordial stem cells and appear in fetal liver by 9 weeks and in blood and
spleen by 12 weeks (Moore, 2020). T lymphocytes begin to leave the thymus
at approximately 14 weeks. Despite this, the newborn responds poorly to
immunization, and especially poorly to bacterial capsular polysaccharides.
This immature response may stem from a deficient response of newborn B
cells to polyclonal activators or from a lack of T cells that proliferate in

response to specific stimuli (Hayward, 1983). In the newborn, monocytes are
able to process and present antigen when tested with maternal antigenspecific T cells. DNA methylation patterns are developmentally regulated
during monocyte-macrophage differentiation and contribute to the
antiinflammatory phenotype in macrophages (Kim, 2012).

■ Musculoskeletal System
The origin of most muscles and bones is mesodermal. MYOD is a member of
the family of myogenic regulatory factors that activates transcription of
muscle-specific genes (Moore, 2020). The limb buds appear by the fourth
week. Most skeletal muscle derives from myogenic precursor cells in the
somites. The skeleton arises from condensed mesenchyme—embryonic
connective tissue—which eventually forms hyaline cartilage models of the
bones. Osteoclasts arise from erythro-myeloid progenitors (Jacome-Galarza,
2019). By the end of the embryonic period, ossification centers have
developed, and bones harden by endochondral ossification.

ENERGY AND NUTRITION
Because of the small amount of yolk in the human ovum, growth of the
embryofetus is dependent on maternal nutrients during the first 2 months.
During the first few days after implantation, blastocyst nutrition comes from
the interstitial fluid of the endometrium and the surrounding maternal tissue.
Maternal adaptations to store and transfer nutrients to the fetus are
discussed in Chapter 4 and summarized here. Three major maternal storage
depots are the liver, muscle, and adipose tissue. These maternal depots and
the storage hormone insulin are intimately involved in the metabolism of the
nutrients absorbed from the gut. Maternal insulin secretion is sustained by
increased serum levels of glucose and amino acids. The net effect is maternal
storage of glucose as glycogen primarily in liver and muscle, retention of
some amino acids as protein, and storage of the excess as fat (Abeysekera,
2016). Storage of maternal fat peaks in the second trimester and then declines
as fetal energy demands rise in the third trimester (Pipe, 1979). Interestingly,
the placenta appears to act as a nutrient sensor, altering transport based on
the maternal supply and environmental stimuli (Jansson, 2006b, Wesolowski,
2017).

During times of fasting, glucose is released from glycogen, but maternal
glycogen stores cannot provide an adequate amount of glucose to meet
requirements for maternal energy and fetal growth. Augmentation is provided
by cleavage of triacylglycerols, stored in adipose tissue, which results in
free fatty acids and activation of lipolysis.

■ Glucose and Fetal Growth
Although dependent on the mother for nutrition, the fetus also actively
participates in providing its own nutrition. At midpregnancy, fetal serum
glucose concentration is independent of maternal levels and may exceed
them. Glucose is the major nutrient for fetal growth and energy. Logically,
mechanisms exist to minimize maternal glucose use so that the limited
maternal supply is available to the fetus. As one example, human placental
lactogen (hPL) is a hormone normally abundant in the mother but not the fetus
and has an insulin antagonist effect. It blocks the peripheral uptake and use of
glucose, while instead promoting mobilization and use of free fatty acids by
maternal tissues (Chap. 5, p. 98). This hormone is also diabetogenic as
discussed in Chapter 60 (p. 1068). Last, intrinsic epigenetic changes play a
role (Hansen, 2017). For example, nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD)
is associated with fetal macrosomia (Lee, 2019).

Glucose Transport
The transfer of D-glucose across cell membranes is accomplished by a
carrier-mediated, stereospecific, nonconcentrating process of facilitated
diffusion. There are 14 glucose transport proteins (GLUTs) encoded by the
SLC2A gene family and characterized by tissue-specific distribution (Joshi,
2021). Several of these are expressed by trophoblast (Stanirowski, 2017).
GLUT-1, GLUT-3, and GLUT-4 primarily aid glucose uptake by the placenta
and are located in the plasma membrane of the syncytiotrophoblast microvilli
(Acosta, 2015; James-Allan, 2019). DNA methylation regulates expression
of placental GLUT genes, with epigenetic modification across gestation
(Novakovic, 2013). Methylation increases as pregnancy advances and is
induced by almost all growth factors.
In addition to its transport role, the placenta uses glucose for its
metabolic functions. Fetal and placental glucose consumption are inversely

related. Thus, placental glucose use is a key modulator of maternal-fetal
transfer (Michelsen, 2019).
Lactate is a product of glucose metabolism and transported across the
placenta also by facilitated diffusion. By way of cotransport with hydrogen
ions, lactate is probably transported as lactic acid.

Fetal Macrosomia
The precise biomolecular events in the pathophysiology of fetal macrosomia
are not defined. Nonetheless, fetal hyperinsulinemia is clearly one driving
force (Luo, 2012). As discussed with fetal-growth disorders in Chapter 47
(p. 824), insulin-like growth factor and leptin and other adipokines are
important regulators of placental development and function (Gao, 2012).
Maternal obesity begets fetal macrosomia. In addition, theories suggest that
maternal obesity affects fetal cardiomyocyte growth that may result in fetal
cardiomyopathy or even congenital heart disease (Roberts, 2015).

■ Leptin
This polypeptide hormone was originally identified as a product of
adipocytes and a regulator of energy homeostasis by curbing appetite. It also
contributes to angiogenesis, hemopoiesis, osteogenesis, pulmonary
maturation, and neuroendocrine, immune, and reproductive functions (Briffa,
2015). Leptin is produced by the mother, fetus, and placenta. It is expressed
in syncytiotrophoblast and fetal vascular endothelial cells. Of placental
production, 5 percent enters the fetal circulation, whereas 95 percent is
transferred to the mother (Hauguel-de Mouzon, 2006).
Leptin concentrations peak in amnionic fluid at midpregnancy (ScottFinley, 2015). Fetal serum leptin levels begin increasing at approximately 34
weeks and are correlated with fetal weight. This hormone is involved in the
development and maturation of the heart, brain, kidneys, and pancreas, and
its levels are decreased with fetal-growth restriction (Briffa, 2015; Yalinbas,
2019). Abnormal levels are associated with fetal-growth disorders,
gestational diabetes, and preeclampsia, but not maternal obesity (Allbrand,
2018; Gurugubelli, 2018). Postpartum, leptin levels decline in both the
newborn and mother. Perinatal leptin is associated with the development of
metabolic syndromes later in life (Briffa, 2015).

■ Free Fatty Acids and Triglycerides
The term newborn has a large proportion of fat, which averages 15 percent
of body weight (Kimura, 1991). Thus, late in pregnancy, a substantial part of
the substrate transferred to the human fetus is stored as fat. Although maternal
obesity raises placental fatty acid uptake and fetal fat deposition, it does not
appear to affect fetal organ growth (Dubé, 2012). Neutral fat in the form of
triglycerides does not cross the placenta, but glycerol does. Despite this,
evidence supports that abnormal maternal concentrations of triglycerides—
both low and high levels—are associated with major congenital anomalies
(Nederlof, 2015).
There is preferential placental-fetal transfer of long-chain
polyunsaturated fatty acids (Fonseca, 2018). Lipoprotein lipase is present on
the maternal but not on the fetal side of the placenta. This arrangement favors
hydrolysis of triacylglycerols in the maternal intervillous space yet preserves
these neutral lipids in fetal blood. Fatty acids transferred to the fetus can be
converted to triglycerides in the fetal liver.
The placental uptake and use of LDL is an alternative mechanism for fetal
assimilation of essential fatty acids and amino acids (Chap. 5, p. 100). LDL
binds to specific receptors in the coated-pit regions of the
syncytiotrophoblast microvilli. The large LDL particle, measuring about
250,000 Da, is taken up by a process of receptor-mediated endocytosis. The
apoprotein and cholesterol esters of LDL are hydrolyzed by lysosomal
enzymes in the syncytium to yield: (1) cholesterol for progesterone synthesis;
(2) free amino acids, including essential amino acids; and (3) essential fatty
acids, primarily linoleic acid. Interestingly, maternal cholesterol is
obligatory for steroid hormone synthesis, but increasing levels are associated
with fetal aortic atherogenesis (de Nigris, 2018).

■ Amino Acids
The placenta concentrates many amino acids in the syncytiotrophoblast,
which are then transferred to the fetal side by diffusion. In cordocentesis
blood samples, the amino acid concentration in umbilical cord plasma is
greater than in maternal venous or arterial plasma. DNA methylation serves
to regulate transporter gene expression (Simner, 2017). Transport system
activity is influenced by gestational age and environmental factors. These

include heat stress, hypoxia, under- and overnutrition, and hormones such as
glucocorticoids, growth hormone, and leptin (Briffa, 2015). Trophoblastic
mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) regulates placental
amino acid transporters and modulates transfer across the placenta (Jansson,
2012). In vivo studies suggest an upregulation of transport for certain amino
acids and a greater delivery rate of these to the fetuses of women with
gestational diabetes associated with fetal overgrowth (Jansson, 2006a).

■ Proteins
Placental transfer of larger proteins is limited, but there are exceptions. As
discussed, IgG crosses the placenta in large amounts via endocytosis and
trophoblast Fc receptors. IgG transfer depends on maternal levels of total
IgG, gestational age, placental integrity, IgG subclass, and antigenic potential
(Palmeira, 2012). Conversely, the larger immunoglobulins—IgA and IgM—
of maternal origin are effectively excluded from the fetus.

■ Ions and Trace Metals
Calcium and phosphorus are actively transported from mother to fetus.
Calcium is transferred for fetal skeletal mineralization (Olausson, 2012). A
calcium-binding protein is produced in placenta. Parathyroid hormone–
related protein (PTH-rP), as the name implies, acts as a surrogate PTH in
many systems (Chap. 5, p. 99). PTH is not found in fetal plasma, but PTH-rP
is present, suggesting that PTH-rP is the fetal parathormone (Martin, 2016).
The expression of PTH-rP in cytotrophoblasts is modulated by the
extracellular concentration of Ca2+ (Hellman, 1992). It seems possible that
PTH-rP synthesized in decidua, placenta, and other fetal tissues is important
in fetal Ca2+ transfer and homeostasis.
Another example is the unidirectional transfer of iron. Typically,
maternal plasma iron concentration is much lower than that in her fetus. Even
with severe maternal iron-deficiency anemia, the fetal hemoglobin mass is
normal.
Iodine transport is clearly attributable to a carrier-mediated, energyrequiring active process. And, as discussed in Chapter 61 (p. 1097), the
placenta concentrates iodine (Velasco, 2018). The concentrations of zinc in

the fetal plasma also are greater than those in maternal plasma. Conversely,
copper levels in fetal plasma are less than those in maternal plasma. This
fact is of particular interest because important copper-requiring enzymes are
necessary for fetal development.

Placental Sequestration of Heavy Metals
The heavy metal–binding protein metallothionein-1 is expressed in human
syncytiotrophoblast. This protein binds and sequesters a host of heavy
metals, including zinc, copper, lead, and cadmium. Despite this, fetal
exposure is variable (Caserta, 2013). For example, lead enters the fetal
environment at a level 90 percent of maternal concentrations. In contrast,
placental transfer of cadmium is limited (Kopp, 2012). The most common
source of environmental cadmium is cigarette smoke.
Metallothionein also binds and sequesters copper in placental tissue.
This accounts for the low copper levels in cord blood (Iyengar, 2001). It is
possible that cadmium provokes metallothionein synthesis in the amnion.
This may cause copper sequestration, a pseudocopper deficiency, and in turn,
diminished amnion tensile strength.

■ Vitamins
The concentration of vitamin A (retinol) is greater in fetal than in maternal
plasma and is bound to retinol-binding protein and to prealbumin. Retinolbinding protein is transferred from the maternal compartment across the
syncytiotrophoblast. The transport of vitamin C—ascorbic acid—from
mother to fetus is accomplished by an energy-dependent, carrier-mediated
process. As a result, the concentration of ascorbic acid is two to four times
higher in fetal plasma than in maternal plasma (Morriss, 1994). Levels of
principal vitamin D metabolites, including 1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol,
are greater in maternal plasma than in fetal plasma. The 1β-hydroxylation of
25-hydroxyvitamin D3 is known to take place in placenta and in decidua.

PLACENTAL ROLE IN EMBRYOFETAL
DEVELOPMENT

The placenta is the organ of transfer between mother and fetus. Within this
bidirectional maternal-fetal interface, maternal oxygen and nutrients transfer
to the fetus, whereas CO2 and metabolic wastes are directed back to the
mother. Fetal blood, which is contained in the fetal capillaries of the
chorionic villi, has no direct contact with maternal blood, which remains in
the intervillous space. Instead, bidirectional transfer depends on processes
that allow or aid the transport through the syncytiotrophoblast that lines
chorionic villi (Michelsen, 2017).
With this system, breaks in the chorionic villi permit escape of
fetal/placental cells and other blood-borne material into the maternal
circulation. This leakage is the mechanism by which some D-negative
women become sensitized by the erythrocytes of their D-positive fetus
(Chap. 18, p. 353). The escape of fetal cells can also lead to fetal
microchimerism from entrance of allogeneic fetal cells, including
trophoblast, into maternal blood and other organs (Rijnink, 2015). Volumes
are estimated to range from 1 to 6 cells/mL at midpregnancy. Some fetal cells
become “immortal” in that they persist in the maternal circulation and organs
following pregnancy. As discussed in Chapter 61 (p. 1109), the clinical
corollary is that some maternal autoimmune diseases such as Hashimoto
thyroiditis may be provoked by such microchimerism.
Last, cell-free DNA (cfDNA) is released from syncytiotrophoblast
during normal physiological cell turnover. After 10 weeks, 10 to 15 percent
of all cfDNA in maternal plasma is trophoblastic DNA (Norton, 2015;
Shaffer, 2018). This phenomenon underlies one maternal-serum screening
method for fetal aneuploidy, which is discussed in Chapters 16 and 17 (pp.
327 and 335).

■ The Intervillous Space
Maternal blood within the intervillous space is the primary source of
maternal–fetal transfer. Blood from the maternal spiral arteries directly
bathes the trophoblast layer that surrounds the villi. Substances transferred
from mother to fetus first enter the intervillous space and are then transported
to the syncytiotrophoblast. As such, the chorionic villi and intervillous space
function together as the fetal lung, gastrointestinal tract, and kidney.
Circulation within the intervillous space is described in Chapter 5 (p.
92). Intervillous and uteroplacental blood flow increases throughout

pregnancy, and at term, the residual volume of the intervillous space
approximates 140 mL. Moreover, uteroplacental blood flow near term ranges
from 700 to 900 mL/min, and most of this blood apparently goes to the
intervillous space (Pates, 2010).

■ Placental Transfer
In the terminal villi, substances that pass from maternal to fetal blood must
first traverse the syncytiotrophoblast, the attenuated cytotrophoblast layer, the
thinned villous stroma, and finally, the fetal capillary wall. Although this
histological barrier separates maternal and fetal circulations, it is not a
simple physical barrier. First, throughout pregnancy, syncytiotrophoblast
actively or passively permits, facilitates, and adjusts the amount and rate of
substance transfer to the fetus. As discussed in Chapter 5 (p. 92), the
maternal-facing syncytiotrophoblast surface is characterized by a complex
microvillus structure. The fetal-facing basal cell membrane is the site of
transfer to the intravillous space. Finally, the villous capillaries are an
additional site for transport from the intravillous space into fetal blood, or
vice versa. In determining the effectiveness of the human placenta as an organ
of transfer, several variables are important and shown in Table 7-2.
Epigenetic placental changes brought about by methylation of genes engaged
in nutrient transfer also play a role (Kerr, 2018).
TABLE 7-2. Variables of Maternal-Fetal Substance Transfer

Mechanisms of Transfer
Most substances with a molecular mass <500 Da pass readily through
placental tissue by simple diffusion. These include oxygen, CO2, water, most
electrolytes, and anesthetic gases (Carter, 2009). Some low-molecularweight compounds undergo transfer facilitated by syncytiotrophoblast. These
are usually those that have low concentrations in maternal plasma but are
essential for normal fetal development.
Insulin, steroid hormones, and thyroid hormones cross the placenta, but
very slowly. The hormones synthesized in situ in the syncytiotrophoblast
enter both the maternal and fetal circulations, but not equally (Chap. 5, p.
86). Examples are hCG and hPL concentrations, which are much lower in
fetal plasma than in maternal plasma. High-molecular-weight substances
usually do not traverse the placenta, but there are important exceptions. As
discussed, one is IgG—molecular weight 160,000 Da—which is transferred
by way of a specific trophoblast receptor–mediated mechanism (Stach,
2014).
Although simple diffusion is an important method of placental transfer,
the trophoblast and chorionic villus unit demonstrate enormous selectivity in
transfer. As discussed, important in this regard is DNA methylation of
transporter genes (Kerr, 2018; Simner, 2017). The net results are different
metabolite concentrations on the two sides of the villus.

Transfer of Oxygen and Carbon Dioxide
Placental oxygen transfer is blood flow limited. Using estimated
uteroplacental blood flow, Longo (1991) calculated oxygen delivery to be
approximately 8 mL O2/min/kg of fetal weight. Because of the continuous
passage of oxygen from maternal blood in the intervillous space to the fetus,
its oxygen saturation resembles that in maternal capillaries. The average
oxygen saturation of intervillous blood is estimated to be 65 to 75 percent,
with a partial pressure (Pao2) of 30 to 35 mm Hg. The oxygen saturation of
umbilical vein blood is similar but has a somewhat lower oxygen partial
pressure (Ramsay, 1996). As noted earlier, fetal hemoglobin has a higher
oxygen affinity than adult hemoglobin.
The placenta is highly permeable to CO2, which traverses the chorionic
villus by diffusion more rapidly than oxygen. Near term, the partial pressure
of carbon dioxide (Paco2) in the umbilical arteries averages 50 mm Hg,
which is approximately 5 mm Hg higher than in the maternal intervillous
blood. Fetal blood has less affinity for CO2 than does maternal blood,
thereby favoring CO2 transfer from fetus to mother. Also, mild maternal
hyperventilation results in a fall in Paco2 levels, favoring a transfer of CO2
from the fetal compartment to maternal blood.

REFERENCES
Abduljabbar MS, Afifi AM: Congenital hypothyroidism. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab 25(102)13, 2012
Abeysekera MV, Morris JA, Davis GK, et al: Alterations in energy homeostasis to favour adipose tissue
gain: a longitudinal study in healthy pregnant women. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol 56(1):42, 2016
Acosta O, Ramirez VI, Lager S, et al: Increased glucose and placental GLUT-1 in large infants of
obese nondiabetic mothers. Am J Obstet Gynecol 212(2):227.e1, 2015
Adam PA, Teramo K, Raiha N, et al: Human fetal insulin metabolism early in gestation: response to
acute elevation of the fetal glucose concentration and placental transfer of human insulin-I-131.
Diabetes 18:409, 1969
Akkaya H, Büke B, Uysal G: Fetal pancreatic hyperechogenicity may be an early ultrasonographic sign
of gestational diabetes mellitus. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 20:1, 2018
Allbrand M, Åman J, Lodefalk M: Placental ghrelin and leptin expression and cord blood ghrelin,
adiponectin, leptin, and C-peptide levels in severe maternal obesity. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med
31(21):2839, 2018
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Cytomegalovirus, parvovirus B19, varicella
zoster, and toxoplasmosis in pregnancy. Practice Bulletin No. 151, June 2015, Reaffirmed 2019

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: ACOG app. 2020. Available at:
https://www.acog.org/membership/member-benefits/acog-app. Accessed April 5, 2020
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, American
Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine: Methods for estimating the due date. Committee Opinion No.
700, May 2017, Reaffirmed 2019
Andersen SL, Andersen S, Liew Z, et al: Maternal thyroid function in early pregnancy and
neuropsychological performance of the child at 5 years of age. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 103(2):660,
2018
Anderson RH, Brown NA, Mohun TJ: Insights regarding the normal and abnormal formation of the
atrial and ventricular septal structures. Clin Anat 29(3):290, 2016
Arendt D: Hox genes and body segmentation. Science 361(6409):1310, 2018
Avagliano L, Mascherpa M, Massa V, et al: Fetal pancreatic Langerhans islets size in pregnancies with
metabolic disorders. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 32(21):3589, 2019
Baardman ME, Erwich JJ, Berger RM, et al: The origin of fetal sterols in second-trimester amniotic
fluid: endogenous synthesis or maternal-fetal transport? Am J Obs Gynecol 207:202 e19, 2012
Ballabio M, Nicolini U, Jowett T, et al: Maturation of thyroid function in normal human foetuses. Clin
Endocrinol 31:565, 1989
Bancalari RE, Gregory LC, McCabe MJ, et al: Pituitary gland development: an update. Endocr Dev
23:1, 2012
Baron MH, Isern J, Fraser ST: The embryonic origins of erythropoiesis in mammals. Blood
119(21):4828, 2012
Bashore RA, Smith F, Schenker S: Placental transfer and disposition of bilirubin in the pregnant monkey.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 103:950, 1969
Benesch R, Benesch RE, Enoki Y: The interaction of hemoglobin and its subunits with 2,3diphosphoglycerate. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 61(3):1102, 1968
Bernal J: Thyroid hormone receptors in brain development and function. Nat Clin Pract Endocrinol
Metab 3:249, 2007
Berthault C, Ramond C, Burlen-Defranoux O, et al: Asynchronous lineage priming determines
commitment to T cell and B cell linages in fetal liver. Nat Immunol 18(10):1139, 2017
Boyle JT: Motility of the upper gastrointestinal tract in the fetus and neonate. In Polin RA, Fox WW
(eds): Fetal and Neonatal Physiology. Philadelphia, Saunders, 1992, p 1028
Briffa JF, McAinch AG, Romano T, et al: Leptin in pregnancy and development: a contributor to
adulthood disease? Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 308:E335, 2015
Browning AJF, Butt WR, Lynch SS, et al: Maternal plasma concentrations of β-lipotropin, β-endorphin
and α:lipotropin throughout pregnancy. BJOG 90:1147, 1983
Canu G, Ruhrberg C: First blood: the endothelial origins of hematopoietic progenitors. Angiogenesis
24(2):199, 2021
Carter AM: Evolution of factors affecting placental oxygen transfer. Placenta 30(Suppl A):19, 2009
Caserta D, Graziano A, Lo Monte G, et al: Heavy metals and placental fetal-maternal barrier: a minireview on the major concerns. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci 17(16):198, 2013
Chard T, Hudson CN, Edwards CR, et al: Release of oxytocin and vasopressin by the human foetus
during labour. Nature 234:352, 1971
Chez RA, Mintz DH, Reynolds WA, et al: Maternal-fetal plasma glucose relationships in late monkey
pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 121:938, 1975
Christensen RD, Henry E, Antonio DV: Thrombocytosis and thrombocytopenia in the NICU: incidence,
mechanisms and treatments. J Matern Fetal Neonat Med 25(54):15, 2012

Corrigan JJ Jr: Normal hemostasis in the fetus and newborn: Coagulation. In Polin RA, Fox WW (eds):
Fetal and Neonatal Physiology. Philadelphia, Saunders, 1992, p 1368
Cotton CM: Pulmonary hypoplasia. Semin Fetal Neonatal Med 22(4):250, 2017
Davis MM, Hodes ME, Munsick RA, et al: Pancreatic amylase expression in human pancreatic
development. Hybridoma 5:137, 1986
Dawes GS: The umbilical circulation. Am J Obstet Gynecol 84:1634, 1962
de Nigris F, Cacciator F, Mancini FP, et al: Epigenetic hallmarks of fetal early atherosclerotic lesions in
humans. JAMA Cardiol 3(12):1184, 2018
Di Donato N, Chiari S, Mirzaa GM, et al: Lissencephaly: expanded imaging and clinical classification.
Am J Med Genet A 173(6):1473, 2017
DiPietro JA: Neurobehavioral assessment before birth. MRDD Res Rev 11:4, 2005
Donnelley MA, Wood C, Casey B, et al: Early severe fetal Graves disease in a mother after thyroid
ablation and thyroidectomy. Obstet Gynecol 125(5):1059, 2015
Dubé E, Gravel A, Martin C, et al: Modulation of fatty acid transport and metabolism by maternal
obesity in the human full-term placenta. Biol Reprod 87(1):14, 2012
Dubois J, Dehaene-Lambertz G, Kulilova S, et al: The early development of brain white matter: a
review of imaging studies in fetuses, newborns and infants. Neuroscience 12:276, 2014
Duryea EL, Hawkins JS, McIntire DD, et al: A revised birth weight reference for the United States.
Obstet Gynecol 124(1):16, 2014
Duryea EL, McIntire DD, Leveno KJ: The rate of preterm birth in the United States is affected by the
method of gestational age assignment. Am J Obstet Gynecol 213:331.e1, 2015
Fanni D, Angotzi F, Lai C, et al: Four stages of hepatic hematopoiesis in human embryos and fetuses. J
Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 31(6):701, 2018
Fanos V, Loddo C, Puddu M, et al: From ureteric bud to the first glomeruli: genes, mediators, kidney
alterations. Int Urol Nephrol 47(1):109, 2015
Fantasia I, Kasapoglu D, Kasapoglu T, et al: Fetal major cardiac defects and placental dysfunction at
11–13 weeks’ gestation. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 51(2):194, 2018
Fineman JR, Clyman R: Fetal cardiovascular physiology. In Resnik R, Creasy RK, Iams JD, et al (eds):
Creasy and Resnik’s Maternal-Fetal Medicine: Principles and Practice, 7th ed. Philadelphia,
Saunders, 2014, p 147
Fonseca FCPD, Mucci DB, Assumpcão RP, et al: Differential long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids
status and placental transport in adolescent pregnancies. Nutrients 10(2):220, 2018
Forhead AJ, Fowden AL: Thyroid hormones in fetal growth and prepartum maturation. J Endocrinol
221(3):R87, 2014
Fryer AA, Jones P, Strange R, et al: Plasma protein levels in normal human fetuses: 13–41 weeks’
gestation. BJOG 100:850, 1993
Gao L, Lv C, Xu C, et al: Differential regulation of glucose transporters mediated by CRH receptor type
1 and type 2 in human placental trophoblasts. Endocrinology 153:1464, 2012
Gitlin D: Protein transport across the placenta and protein turnover between amnionic fluid, maternal
and fetal circulation. In Moghissi KS, Hafez ESE (eds): The Placenta. Springfield, Thomas, 1974
Gluck L, Kulovich MV, Eidelman AI, et al: Biochemical development of surface activity in mammalian
lung. 4. Pulmonary lecithin synthesis in the human fetus and newborn and etiology of the respiratory
distress syndrome. Pediatr Res 6:81, 1972
Goetzl L, Darbinian N, Goetzl EJ: Novel window on early human neurodevelopment via fetal exosomes
in maternal blood. Ann Clin Transl Neurol 3(5): 381, 2016

Goto T, Karita H, Takasu M, et al: A rare case of fetal extensive intracranial hemorrhage and wholecerebral hypoplasia due to latent maternal vitamin K deficiency. J Neonatal Perinatal Med 11(2):191,
2018
Gruenwald P: Growth of the human foetus. In McLaren A (ed): Advances in Reproductive Physiology.
New York, Academic Press, 1967
Grumbach MM, Kaplan SL: Fetal pituitary hormones and the maturation of central nervous system
regulation of anterior pituitary function. In Gluck L (ed): Modern Perinatal Medicine. Chicago, Year
Book, 1974
Gurugubelli Krishna R, Vishnu Bhat B: Molecular mechanisms of intrauterine growth restriction. J
Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 31(19):2634, 2018
Hallman M, Kulovich MV, Kirkpatrick E, et al: Phosphatidylinositol and phosphatidylglycerol in amniotic
fluid: indices of lung maturity. Am J Obstet Gynecol 125:613, 1976
Hansen NS, Strasko KS, Hjort L, et al: Fetal Hyperglycemia changes human preadipocyte function in
adult life. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 102(4):1141, 2017
Hart PH, Lucas RM, Walsh JP, et al: Vitamin D in fetal development: findings from a birth cohort study.
Pediatrics 135(1):e167, 2015
Hauguel-de Mouzon S, Lepercq J, Catalano P: The known and unknown of leptin in pregnancy. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 193(6):1537, 2006
Hayward AR: The human fetus and newborn: development of the immune response. Birth Defects Orig
Artic Ser 19:289, 1983
Heimark R, Schwartz S: Cellular organization of blood vessels in development and disease. In Ryan U
(ed): Endothelial Cells, Vol II. Boca Raton, CRC Press, 1988, p 103
Heinig K, Sage F, Robin C, et al: Development and trafficking function of haematopoietic stem cells and
myeloid cells during fetal ontogeny. Cardiovasc Res 107(3):352, 2015
Hellman P, Ridefelt P, Juhlin C, et al: Parathyroid-like regulation of parathyroid hormone related protein
release and cytoplasmic calcium in cytotrophoblast cells of human placenta. Arch Biochem Biophys
293:174, 1992
Henriksson P, Hedner V, Nilsson IM, et al: Fibrin-stabilization factor XIII in the fetus and the newborn
infant. Pediatr Res 8:789, 1974
Hillman NH, Kallapur SG, Jobe AH: Physiology of transition from intrauterine to extrauterine life. Clin
Perinatol 39(4):769, 2012
Ignjatovic V, Ilhan A, Monagle P: Evidence for age-related differences in human fibrinogen. Blood
Coagul Fibrinolysis 22(2):110, 2011
Ishimoto H, Jaffe RB: Development and function of the human fetal adrenal cortex: a key component in
the feto-placental unit. Endocr Rev 32(3):317, 2011
Iyengar GV, Rapp A: Human placenta as a “dual” biomarker for monitoring fetal and maternal
environment with special reference to potentially toxic trace elements. Part 3: Toxic trace elements
in placenta and placenta as a biomarker for these elements. Sci Total Environ 280:221, 2001
Jacome-Galarza CE, Percin GI, Muller JT, et al: Developmental origin, functional maintenance and
genetic rescue of osteoclasts. Nature 568(7753):541, 2019
James-Allan LB, Arbet J, Teal SB, et al: Insulin stimulates GLUT4 trafficking to the syncytiotrophoblast
basal plasma membrane in the human placenta. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 104(9):4225, 2019
Janevic T, Zeitlin J, Auger N, et al: Association of race/ethnicity with very preterm neonatal morbidities.
JAMA Pediatr 172(11):1061, 2018
Jansen TA, Korevaar TI, Mulder TA, et al: Maternal thyroid function during pregnancy and child brain
morphology: a time window-specific analysis of a prospective cohort. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol

7(8):629, 2019
Jansson T, Aye IL, Goberdhan DC: The emerging role of mTORC1 signaling in placental nutrientsensing. Placenta 33(Suppl 2):e23, 2012
Jansson T, Cetin I, Powell TL, et al: Placental transport and metabolism in fetal overgrowth—a
workshop report. Placenta 27:109, 2006a
Jansson T, Powell TL: Human placental transport in altered fetal growth: does the placenta function as a
nutrient sensor? A review. Placenta 27:S91, 2006b
Jennings RE, Berry AA, Strutt JP, et al: Human pancreas development 142(18):3126, 2015
Johns LE, Ferguson KK, Cantonwine DE, et al: Subclinical changes in maternal thyroid function
parameters in pregnancy and fetal growth. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 103(4):1349, 2018
Joshi NP, Mane AR, Sahay AS, et al: Role of placental glucose transporters in determining fetal growth.
Reprod Sci August 2, 2021 [Epub ahead of print]
Kadic AS, Predojevic M: Fetal neurophysiology according to gestational age. Semin Fetal Neonatal Med
17(5):256, 2012
Karsli T, Strickland D, Livingston J, et al: Assessment of neonatal adrenal size using high resolution 2D
ultrasound and its correlation with birth demographics and clinical outcomes. J Matern Fetal
Neonatal Med 32(3):377, 2019
Kathiriya IS, Nora EP, Bruneau BG: Investigating the transcriptional control of cardiovascular
development. Circ Res 116(4):700, 2015
Katugampola H, King PJ, Chatterjee S, et al: Kisspeptin is a novel regulator of human fetal
adrenocortical development and function: a finding with important implications for the human
fetoplacental unit. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 102(9):3349, 2017
Kerr B, Leiva A, Farías M, et al: Foetoplacental epigenetic changes associated with maternal metabolic
dysfunction. Placenta 69:146, 2018
Kim ST, Romero R, Tarca AL: Methylome of fetal and maternal monocytes and macrophages at the
feto-maternal interface. Am J Reprod Immunol 68(1):8, 2012
Kimura RE: Lipid metabolism in the fetal-placental unit. In Cowett RM (ed): Principles of PerinatalNeonatal Metabolism. New York, Springer, 1991, p 291
Kivilevitch Z, Achiron R, Perlman S, et al: The normal fetal pancreas. J Ultrasound Med 36(10):1997,
2017
Klagsbrun M: Angiogenesis factors. In Ryan U (ed): Endothelial Cells, Vol II. Boca Raton, CRC Press,
1988, p 37
Koldovsky O, Heringova A, Jirsova U, et al: Transport of glucose against a concentration gradient in
everted sacs of jejunum and ileum of human fetuses. Gastroenterology 48:185, 1965
Konstantinidi A, Sokou R, Parastatidou S, et al: Clinical application of
thromboelastography/thromboelastometry (TEG/TEM) in the neonatal population: a narrative review.
Semin Thromb Hemost 45(5):449, 2019
Koos BJ, Rajaee A: Fetal breathing movements and changes at birth. Adv Exp Med Biol 814:89, 2014
Kopp RS, Kumbartski M, Harth V, et al: Partition of metals in the maternal/fetal unit and leadassociated decreases of fetal iron and manganese: an observational biomonitoring approach. Arch
Toxicol 86(10):1571, 2012
Kruepunga N, Hikspoors JP, Mekonen HK, et al: The development of the cloaca in the human embryo.
J Anat 233(6):724, 2018
Lauridsen MH, Uldbjerg N, Henriksen TB, et al: Cerebral oxygenation measurements by magnetic
resonance imaging in fetuses with and without heart defects. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging
10(11):e006459, 2017

Lee SM, Kim BJ, Koo JN, et al: Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease is a risk factor for large-forgestational-age birthweight. PLoS One 14(8): e0221400, 2019
Lessard S, Beaudoin M, Orkin SH, et al: 14q32 and let-7 microRNAs regulate transcriptional networks
in fetal and adult human erythroblasts. Hum Mol Genet 27(8):141, 2018
Liggins GC: Fetal lung maturation. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol 34:247, 1994
Liggins GC: Premature delivery of fetal lambs infused with glucocorticoids. J Endocrinol 45:515, 1969
Liley AW: Disorders of amniotic fluid. In Assali NS (ed): Pathophysiology of Gestation. New York,
Academic Press, 1972
Lindström NO, McMahon JA, Guo J, et al: Conserved and divergent features of human and mouse
kidney organogenesis. J Am Soc Nephrol 29(3):785, 2018
Lis-Kuberka J, Berghausen-Mazur M, Katnik-Prastowska I, et al: Delivery-associated presence of
supramolecular fibronectin-fibrin complexes in puerperal and cord plasma. J Neonatal Perinatal Med
11(2):191, 2018
Longo LD: Respiration in the fetal-placental unit. In Cowett RM (ed): Principles of Perinatal-Neonatal
Metabolism. New York, Springer, 1991, p 304
Lozano NA, Lozano A, Marini V, et al: Expression of FcRn receptor in placental tissue and its
relationship with IgG levels in term and preterm newborns. Am J Reprod Immunol 80(3):e12972,
2018
Lu P, Wang Y, Liu Y, et al: Perinatal angiogenesis from preexisting coronary vessels via DLL4NOTCH1 signalling. Nat Cell Biol 23(9):967, 2021
Luo ZC, Nuyt AM, Delvin E, et al: Maternal and fetal IGF-I and IGF-II levels, fetal growth, and
gestational diabetes. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 97(5):1720, 2012
Mari G, Deter RL, Carpenter RL, et al: Noninvasive diagnosis by Doppler ultrasonography of fetal
anemia due to maternal red-cell alloimmunization. Collaborative Group for Doppler Assessment of
the Blood Velocity in Anemic Fetuses (Level II-I). N Engl J Med 342:9, 2000
Martin TJ: Parathyroid hormone-related protein, its regulation of cartilage and bone development, and
role in treating bone diseases. Physiol Rev 96(3):831, 2016
McCormick BM, Blakemore K, Johnson CT, et al: Outcomes of both complex and isolated cases of
infants with large stomach on fetal ultrasound. Am J Obstet Gynecol MFM 3(1):100272, 2021
McCormick SM, Mendelson CR: Human SP-A1 and SP-A2 genes are differentially regulated during
development and by cAMP and glucocorticoids. Am J Physiol 266:367, 1994
Meier CF, Camargo SM, Hunziker S, et al: Intestinal IMINO transporter SIT1 is not expressed in
human newborns. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Physiol 315(5):G887, 2018
Melchers F: Checkpoints that control B cell development. J Clin Invest 125(6):2203, 2015
Mendelson CR, Condon JC: New insights into the molecular endocrinology of parturition. J Steroid
Biochem Mol Biol 93:113, 2005
Meng H, Zhang Z, Geng H, et al: Development of the subcortical brain structures in the second
trimester: assessment with 7.0-T MRI. Neuroradiology 54(10):1153, 2012
Michelsen TM, Holme AM, Henriksen T: Transplacental nutrient transfer in the human in vivo
determined by 4 vessel sampling. Placenta 59 Suppl 1: S26, 2017
Michelsen TM, Holme AM, Holm MB, et al: Uteroplacental glucose uptake and fetal glucose
consumption: a quantitative study in human pregnancies. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 104(3):873, 2019
Miller AJ, Dye BR, Ferrer-Torres D, et al: Generation of lung organoids from human pluripotent stem
cells in vitro. Nat Protoc 41(2):518, 2019
Molina A, Pituello F: Playing with the cell cycle to build the spinal cord. Dev Biol 432(1):14, 2017

Montenegro YH, de Queiroga Nascimento D, de Assis TO, et al: The epigenetics of the hypothalamicpituitary-adrenal axis in fetal development. Ann Hum Genet 83(4):195, 2019
Moore KL, Persaud TV: The Developing Human: Clinically Oriented Embryology, 8th ed. Elsevier,
Philadelphia, 2008
Moore KL, Persaud TV, Torchia MG: The Developing Human: Clinically Oriented Embryology, 11th ed.
Elsevier, Philadelphia, 2020
Morioka I, Iwatani S, Koda T, et al: Disorders of bilirubin binding to albumin and bilirubin-induced
neurologic dysfunction. Semin Fetal Neonatal Med 20(1):31, 2015
Morriss FH Jr, Boyd RD, Manhendren D: Placental transport. In Knobil E, Neill J (eds): The Physiology
of Reproduction, Vol II. New York, Raven, 1994, p 813
Mulchahey JJ, DiBlasio AM, Martin MC, et al: Hormone production and peptide regulation of the
human fetal pituitary gland. Endocr Rev 8:406, 1987
Müller Brochut AC, Thomann D, Kluwe W, et al: Fetal megacystis: experience of a single tertiary
center in Switzerland over 20 years. Fetal Diagn Ther 36(3):215, 2014
Nederlof M, de Walle HE, van Poppel MN, et al: Deviant early pregnancy maternal triglyceride levels
and increased risk of congenital anomalies: a prospective community-based cohort study. BJOG
122:1176, 2015
Ney JA, Fee SC, Dooley SL, et al: Factors influencing hemostasis after umbilical vein puncture in vitro.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 160:424, 1989
Nielsen NC: Coagulation and fibrinolysin in normal women immediately postpartum and in newborn
infants. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 48:371, 1969
Norton ME, Jacobsson B, Swamy GK, et al: Cell-free DNA analysis for noninvasive examination of
trisomy. N Engl J Med 372(17):1589, 2015
Novakovic B, Gordon L, Robinson WP, et al: Glucose as a fetal nutrient: dynamic regulation of several
glucose transporter genes by DNA methylation in the human placenta across gestation. J Nutr
Biochem 24(1):282, 2013
Obenshain SS, Adam PAJ, King KC, et al: Human fetal insulin response to sustained maternal
hyperglycemia. N Engl J Med 283:566, 1970
Olausson H, Goldberg GR, Laskey A, et al: Calcium economy in human pregnancy and lactation. Nutr
Res Rev 25(1):40, 2012
Ortega JA, Sirois CL, Memi F, et al: Oxygen levels regulate the development of human cortical radial
glia cells. Cereb Cortex 27(7):3736, 2017
Palmeira P, Quinello C, Silveira-Lessa AL, et al: IgG placental transfer in health and pathological
pregnancies. Clin Dev Immunol 2012:985646, 2012
Pasricha SR, Drakesmith H: Hemoglobinopathies in the fetal position. N Engl J Med 379(17):1675, 2018
Pates JA, Hatab MR, McIntire DD, et al: Determining uterine blood flow in pregnancy with magnetic
resonance imaging. Magn Reson Imaging 28(4):507, 2010
Pearson HA: Recent advances in hematology. J Pediatr 69:466, 1966
Pecks U, Bornemann V, Klein A, et al: Estimating fetal cholesterol synthesis rates by cord blood
analysis in intrauterine growth restriction and normally grown fetuses. Lipids Health Dis 18(1):185,
2019.
Pecks U, Mohaupt MG, Hütten MC, et al: Cholesterol acceptor capacity is preserved by different
mechanisms in preterm and term fetuses. Biochim Biophys Acta 1841:251, 2014
Pelag D, Cada S, Peleg A, et al: The relationship between maternal serum thyroid-stimulating
immunoglobulin and fetal and neonatal thyrotoxicosis. Obstet Gynecol 99:1040, 2002

Perrine SP, Greene MF, Cohen RA, et al: A physiological delay in human fetal hemoglobin switching is
associated with specific globin DNA hypomethylation. FEBS Lett 228:139, 1988
Pipe NGJ, Smith T, Halliday D, et al: Changes in fat, fat-free mass and body water in human normal
pregnancy. BJOG 86:929, 1979
Popescu DM, Botting RA, Stephenson E, et al: Decoding human fetal liver haematopoiesis. Nature
574(7778):365, 2019
Pritchard JA: Fetal swallowing and amniotic fluid volume. Obstet Gynecol 28:606, 1966
Quan CP, Forestier F, Bouvet JP: Immunoglobulins of the human amniotic fluid. Am J Reprod Immunol
42:219, 1999
Ramsay MM, James DK, Steer PJ, et al (eds): Normal Values in Pregnancy. London, Elsevier, 1996, p
106
Reddy UM, Abuhamad AZ, Levine D, et al: Fetal imaging: executive summary of a joint Eunice
Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, Society for MaternalFetal Medicine, American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine, American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists, American College of Radiology, Society for Pediatric Radiology, and Society of
Radiologists in Ultrasound Fetal Imaging workshop. Obstet Gynecol 123(5):1070, 2014
Rijnink EC, Penning ME, Wolterbeek R, et al: Tissue microchimerism is increased during pregnancy: a
human autopsy study. Mol Hum Reprod 21(11):857, 2015
Roberts VH, Frias AE, Grove KL: Impact of maternal obesity on fetal programming of cardiovascular
disease. Physiology 30:224, 2015
Rosenfeld CR, Porter JC: Arginine vasopressin in the developing fetus. In Albrecht ED, Pepe GJ (eds):
Research in Perinatal Medicine, Vol 4. Perinatal Endocrinology. Ithaca, Perinatology Press, 1985, p
91
Rothan HA, Fang S, Mahesh M, et al: Zika virus and the metabolism of neuronal cells. Mol Neurobiol
56(4):2551, 2019
Saracco P, Parodi E, Fabris C, et al: Management and investigation of neonatal thromboembolic events:
genetic and acquired risk factors. Thromb Res 123(6):805, 2009
Schott NJ, Emery SP, Garbee C, et al: Thromboelastograpohy in term neonates. J Matern Fetal
Neonatal Med 31(19):2599, 2018
Scott-Finley M, Woo JG, Habli M, et al: Standardization of amniotic fluid leptin levels and utility in
maternal overweight and fetal undergrowth. J Perinatol 35(8):547, 2015
Shaffer BL, Norton ME: Cell-free DNA screening for aneuploidy and microdeletion syndromes. Obstet
Gynecol Clin North Am 45(1):13, 2018
Shao L, Chang J, Feng W, et al: The Wave2 scaffold Hem-1 is required for transition of fetal liver
hematopoiesis to bone marrow. Nat Commun 9(1):2377, 2018
Simner C, Novakovic B, Killycrop KA, et al: DNA methylation of amino transporter genes in the human
placenta. Placenta 60:64, 2017
Singendonk MM, Rommel N, Omari TI, et al: Upper gastrointestinal motility: prenatal development and
problems in infancy. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol 11(9):545, 2014
Sipes SL, Weiner CP, Wenstrom KD, et al: The association between fetal karyotype and mean
corpuscular volume. Am J Obstet Gynecol 165:1371, 1991
Smith FG, Nakamura KT, Segar JL, et al: In Polin RA, Fox WW (eds): Fetal and Neonatal Physiology,
Vol 2, Chap 114. Philadelphia, Saunders, 1992, p 1187
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Mari G, Norton ME, et al: Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine
(SMFM) Clinical Guidelines #8: the fetus at risk for anemia—diagnosis and management. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 212(6):697, 2015

Stabile I, Nicolaides KH, Bach A, et al: Complement factors in fetal and maternal blood and amniotic
fluid during the second trimester of normal pregnancy. BJOG 95:281, 1988
Stach SC, Brizot Mde L, Liao AW, et al: Transplacental total IgG transfer in twin pregnancies. Am J
Reprod Immunol 72(6):555, 2014
Stanirowski PJ, Szukiewicz D, Pyzlak M, et al: Impact of pre-gestational and gestational diabetes
mellitus on the expression of glucose transporter GLIT-1, GLIT-4 and GLUT-9 in human term
placenta. Endocrine 55(3):799, 2017
Stefopoulou M, Herling L, Johnson J, et al: Reference ranges of fetal superior vena cava blood flow
velocities and pulsatility index in the second half of pregnancy: a longitudinal study. BMC Pregnancy
Childbirth 21(1):158, 2021
Stoll C, Alembik Y, Dott B, et al: Associated anomalies in cases with esophageal atresia. Am J Med
Genet A 173(8):2139, 2017
Sussman D, Lye SJ, Wells GD: Impact of maternal physical activity on fetal breathing and body
movement—a review. Early Hum Dev 94:53, 2016
Sylva M, van den Hoff MJ, Moorman AF: Development of the human heart. Am J Med Genet A
164A(6):1347, 2014
Teramo KA, Klemetti MM, Widness JA: Robust increases in erythropoietin production by the hypoxic
fetus is a response to protect the brain and other vital organs. Pediatr Res 84(6):807, 2018
Torres M, Martin-Puig S: Molecular and cellular development of the heart. Fuster V, Harrington RA,
Narula J, et al (eds): Hurst’s The Heart, 14th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2017, p 161
Tumburu L, Thein SL: Genetic control of erythropoiesis. Curr Opin Hematol 24(3):173, 2017
Usher R, Shephard M, Lind J: The blood volume of the newborn infant and placental transfusion. Acta
Paediatr 52:497, 1963
Ustun N, Eyerci N, Karadag N, et al: Association of vitamin D receptor gene Fokl and Taql
polymorphisms and risk of RDS. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 33(21):3640, 2020
Velasco I, Bath SC, Rayman MP: Iodine as essential nutrient during the first 1000 days of life. Nutrients
10(3):290, 2018
Volpe JJ, Inder TE, Darras BT, et al (eds): Volpe’s Neurology of the Newborn, 6th ed. New York,
Elsevier, 2018
Vulsma T, Gons MH, De Vijlder JJ: Maternal-fetal transfer of thyroxine in congenital hypothyroidism
due to a total organification defect or thyroid agenesis. N Engl J Med 321:13, 1989
Wang R, Dai G, Takahashi E: High resolution MRI reveals detailed layer structures in early human fetal
stages: in vitro study with histologic correlation. Front Neuroanat 9:150, 2015
Warburton D: Overview of lung development in the newborn human. Neonatology 111(4):398, 2017
Weiner CP, Sipes SL, Wenstrom K: The effect of fetal age upon normal fetal laboratory values and
venous pressure. Obstet Gynecol 79:713, 1992
Werlin SL: Exocrine pancreas. In Polin RA, Fox WW (eds): Fetal and Neonatal Physiology.
Philadelphia, Saunders, 1992, p 1047
Werth B, Tsiaras A: From Conception to Birth: A Life Unfolds. New York, Doubleday, 2002
Wesolowski SR, Kasmi KC, Jonscher KR, et al: Development origins of NAFLD: a womb with a clue.
Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol 14(2):81, 2017
Wladimiroff JW, Campbell S: Fetal urine-production rates in normal and complicated pregnancy. Lancet
1:151, 1974
Yalinbas EE, Binay C, Simsek E, et al: The role of umbilical cord blood concentration of IGF-I, IGR-II,
leptin, adiponectin, ghrelin, resistin, and visfatin in fetal growth. Am J Perinatol 36(6):600, 2019

SECTION 4

PRECONCEPTIONAL AND
PRENATAL CARE

CHAPTER 8

Teratology, Teratogens, and Fetotoxic
Agents

TERATOLOGY
CRITERIA FOR DETERMINING TERATOGENICITY
STUDIES IN PREGNANT WOMEN
COUNSELING FOR MEDICATION EXPOSURE
LABELING REQUIREMENTS
TERATOGENIC AND FETOTOXIC AGENTS
DRUGS OF ABUSE
REFERENCES
Birth defects are common. Of all newborns, 2 to 3 percent have a major
congenital abnormality detectable at birth (Cragan, 2009; Dolk, 2010). Some
medications undoubtedly pose significant risk to the developing embryo or
fetus (Table 8-1). However, 80 percent of birth defects do not have an
obvious etiology, and of those with an identified cause, nearly 95 percent of
cases have chromosomal or genetic origins (Feldkamp, 2017). The U.S.
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) (2018) estimates that <1 percent of all
birth defects are caused by medications (Fig. 8-1).
TABLE 8-1. Selected Teratogenic and Fetotoxic Agents

FIGURE 8-1 Etiology of birth defects. Known and unknown causes of 5504 birth defects from a
population-based review of 270,878 births.

That said, significant concern surrounds medication use in pregnancy.
This is because many pregnant women are prescribed medications and
because safety data are often lacking. Investigators from the National Birth
Defects Prevention Study found that women take an average of two to three
medications per pregnancy and that 70 percent use medication in the first
trimester (Mitchell, 2011). A population-based review from Canada found
that 65 percent of women fill ≥1 prescription during pregnancy (Leong,
2019). Between 2010 and 2019, the FDA approved 290 new drugs, and only
11 percent had human data related to pregnancy (Byrne, 2020).

TERATOLOGY
The study of birth defects and their etiology is termed teratology, derived
from the Greek teratos, meaning monster. A teratogen may be broadly
defined as any agent that acts during embryonic or fetal development to

produce a permanent alteration of form or function. Thus, a teratogen may be
a medication or other chemical substance, a physical or environmental factor
such as heat or radiation, a maternal metabolite as in diabetes or
phenylketonuria, or an infection such as cytomegalovirus.
Strictly defined, a teratogen causes structural abnormalities. A hadegen
—after the god Hades—is an agent that interferes with normal maturation and
function of an organ. A trophogen is an agent that alters growth. Substances
in the latter two groups typically affect development in the fetal period or
postnatally and are thus fetotoxins rather than teratogens.

■ Criteria for Determining Teratogenicity
The guidelines shown in Table 8-2 were proposed by Shepard (1994) as a
framework for discussion and have proved useful for nearly 30 years.
Although each individual criterion is not required to establish teratogenicity,
the following tenets should be considered (Shepard, 2002a):
TABLE 8-2. Criteria for Determining Teratogenicity

• The abnormality has been completely characterized. This is preferably
done by a geneticist or dysmorphologist because different genetic and
environmental factors may produce similar defects. It is easiest to prove
causation when a rare exposure produces a rare anomaly, when at least
three cases with the same exposure have been identified, and when the
defect is severe.
• The agent must cross the placenta. Although almost all drugs cross the
placenta, transport must be of sufficient quantity to directly influence
embryonic or fetal development or to alter maternal or placental
metabolism to exert an indirect effect. Placental transfer depends on

maternal metabolism; on specific characteristics of the drug, such as protein
binding and storage, molecular size, electrical charge, and lipid solubility;
and on placental metabolism, such as by the cytochrome P450 enzyme
system. In early pregnancy, the placenta also has a relatively thick
membrane that slows diffusion.
• Exposure must occur during a critical developmental period.
○ The preimplantation period is the 2 weeks between fertilization and
implantation and is known as the “all or none” period. As the zygote
undergoes cleavage, an insult damaging a large number of cells typically
causes embryonic death. However, if only a few cells are injured,
compensation may be possible and allow normal development.
○ The embryonic period extends from the second through the eighth week
postconception. It encompasses organogenesis and is thus the most
crucial period with regard to structural malformations. Critical
developmental periods for each organ system are illustrated in Figure 7-2
(p. 122).
○ The fetal period, which is beyond 8 weeks postconception, is
characterized by continued maturation and functional development.
During this time, certain organs remain vulnerable.
• A biologically plausible association is supportive. Because birth defects
and medication exposures are both common, they may be temporally but not
causally related.
• Epidemiological findings must be consistent. Because initial evaluation of
teratogen exposure is often retrospective, it may be hampered by recall
bias, inadequate reporting, and incomplete assessment of the exposed
population. Potential confounding factors include varying dosages,
concomitant drug therapy, and comorbid maternal disease(s). Familial and
environmental variables also can influence development of birth defects.
Thus, an important criterion for teratogenicity is that two or more highquality epidemiological studies report similar findings. Last, a relative risk
of 3.0 or greater is generally considered necessary to support the
hypothesis, whereas a lesser risk is interpreted with caution (Khoury,
1992).
• The suspected teratogen causes a defect in animal studies. This criterion is
not obligatory, and for litigation purposes, establishment of a causal

relationship between an exposure and an outcome in humans requires
human data (Teratology Society Public Affairs Committee, 2005).
Failure to employ these tenets and criteria has contributed to erroneous
conclusions regarding the safety of some widely used drugs. The poster child
for this is the medicolegal fiasco surrounding Bendectin. This antiemetic was
a combination of doxylamine and pyridoxine, with or without dicyclomine.
More than 30 million women used this drug worldwide, and it was safe and
effective for nausea and vomiting in early pregnancy. The 3-percent
congenital anomaly rate among exposed fetuses was not different from the
background rate (McKeigue, 1994). Despite considerable evidence that this
combination of an antihistamine and a B-vitamin is not teratogenic, Bendectin
was the target of numerous lawsuits, and the financial burden of defending
these forced its withdrawal from the marketplace in 1983. Consequently,
hospitalization rates for hyperemesis doubled (Koren, 1998). Ironically, the
combination of doxylamine and pyridoxine was subsequently remarketed
under the brand name Diclegis and was approved by the FDA in 2013.

■ Studies in Pregnant Women
The study of medication safety—or teratogenicity—in pregnant women is
fraught with complications. First, animal studies are necessary but
insufficient. For example, thalidomide was considered harmless in several
animal species but resulted in phocomelia in thousands of children born
across Europe in the late 1950s and early 1960s. Second, medications are
rarely approved by the FDA for a pregnancy-related indication. Despite the
Common Rule’s removal of pregnant women as a vulnerable population,
pregnant women are routinely excluded from research (Health and Human
Services, 2017; Spong, 2018). Last, drug concentration and thus embryo-fetal
exposure are affected by pregnancy physiology. This includes changes in
volume of distribution, cardiac output, gastrointestinal absorption, hepatic
metabolism, and renal clearance. In the absence of research trials, counseling
is based on case reports or series, case-control studies, cohort studies, and
pregnancy registry data.

Case Reports and Series

Many major teratogens were first described by clinicians who observed a
rare defect occurring after a rare exposure. This has been termed the “astute
clinician model” (Carey, 2009). Congenital rubella syndrome was identified
in this way by Gregg (1941), an Australian ophthalmologist whose
observations challenged the view that the uterine environment was
impervious to noxious agents. Other teratogens identified through case series
include thalidomide and alcohol (Jones, 1973; Lenz, 1962). Shepard (2002a)
recommended that establishment of teratogenicity in this way requires proven
exposure at a critical time in development and at least three such cases.
Unfortunately, teratogens are less likely to be identified if the exposure is
uncommon, if the defects are relatively nonspecific, or if abnormalities
develop in only a small proportion of exposed fetuses. A major limitation of
case series is their lack of a control group.

Case-control Studies
These studies begin with groups of affected infants (cases) and unaffected
controls and are structured to allow retrospective assessment of prenatal
exposure to particular substances. Case-control studies are an efficient way
to study rare outcomes (Alwan, 2015). These permit investigators to evaluate
associations and generate useful hypotheses. However, case-control studies
have inherent potential for recall bias. Namely, parents of an affected infant
are often more likely to recall exposure than those whose child is not ill.
Confounding by indication is another concern, that is, the indication for the
medication may be the cause of the birth defect. And importantly, birth defect
registries have statistical power to detect small differences that may not be
clinically meaningful. Grimes and Schulz (2012) have cautioned that unless
odds ratios in case-control studies are above three- to fourfold, the observed
associations may not be correct.
The National Birth Defects Prevention Study. Funded by Congress and
coordinated by the National Center on Birth Defects and Developmental
Disabilities, the National Birth Defects Prevention Study (NBDPS) took
place between 1997 and 2013 across ten states with active birth defects
surveillance programs. It is an excellent example of a population-based casecontrol study. The study involved approximately 32,000 cases and nearly
12,000 controls. Live births, stillbirths, and terminated pregnancies were
included. Clinical geneticists reviewed each potential case, and standardized

telephone interviews were conducted with women whose pregnancies were
affected or unaffected to obtain information regarding medication exposure
and risk factors (Mitchell, 2011; Reefhuis, 2015).
The NBDPS identified novel—although often small—associations
between individual birth defects and several classes of medications. These
include antibiotics, antidepressants, antiemetics, antihypertensives, asthma
medications, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), and opioids
(Ailes, 2016; Broussard, 2011; Fisher, 2018; Hernandez, 2012; Lin, 2012;
Munsie, 2011). Pregestational diabetes was significantly associated with 46
of 50 different abnormalities studied (Tinker, 2020). The NBDPS also found
associations between birth defects and exposures such as secondhand smoke,
pesticides, and nitrogen oxide, which is a marker of traffic-related air
pollution (Hoyt, 2016; Rocheleau, 2015; Stingone, 2017).
The NBDPS had several key limitations related to study design. First,
interviews were conducted 6 weeks to 2 years following delivery, which
raised the likelihood of recall bias. For example, 25 percent of women could
not remember which antibiotic they had taken (Ailes, 2016). Additionally,
only two thirds of women agreed to participate, and there were differences in
ethnicity and socioeconomic status between cases and controls. These factors
may have contributed to selection bias (Reefhuis, 2015). Further, medical
records were not reviewed to verify dosage, and this precluded assessment
of dose-response relationships. Last, a major limitation was that because the
NBDPS included only a small number of cases of each birth defect and
analyzed them for many different maternal exposures, it was not possible to
adjust for multiple comparisons. As a result, some of the observed
associations were likely due to chance (Alwan, 2015). As one example, the
study of antibiotics and birth defects included 43 comparisons and identified
four significant associations, but chance alone predicted that two
associations would be identified (Ailes, 2016).
Importantly, the NBDPS was able to identify statistically significant odds
ratios for which the absolute risk was quite low. Such findings have the
potential to complicate counseling and prenatal management. In many
instances, the risk identified by the NBDPS was as low as 1 case per 1000
exposed pregnancies.

Cohort Studies

These studies begin with cohorts of pregnant women who are exposed or
unexposed to a particular medication. The percentage of infants or children
affected with birth defects is examined in each cohort. Because individual
birth defects are rare, cohort studies require a very large sample size.
Medicaid datasets and private insurance claims databases are commonly
used for cohort studies of teratogenicity in the United States (Ehrenstein,
2010). Inability to adjust for confounding variables—such as the indication
for which the medication was needed—is an important limitation of this
study design.

Pregnancy Registries
Potentially harmful agents may be monitored by clinicians who prospectively
enroll exposed pregnancies in a registry. The FDA (2021) maintains an
active webpage of Pregnancy Exposure Registries. As of 2021, this included
registries for 115 individual medications and for medication groups used to
treat asthma, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, autoimmune diseases,
cancer, diabetes, epilepsy, hepatitis B and C, human immunodeficiency virus
infection, hypercholesterolemia, inborn errors of metabolism, inflammatory
bowel disease, multiple sclerosis, narcolepsy, psychiatric illness, and
transplant rejection. Similar to case series, exposure registries are hampered
by lack of a control group. The prevalence of an abnormality identified
through a registry requires knowledge of the baseline prevalence of that
anomaly in the population. Investigators typically use a birth defect registry
to assess population prevalence. One example is the Metropolitan Atlanta
Congenital Defects Program, which is an active surveillance program
established in 1967 for fetuses and infants with birth defects.

COUNSELING FOR MEDICATION EXPOSURE
Questions regarding medication and illicit drug use should be part of routine
preconceptional and prenatal care. Misinformation is common. Individuals
tend to underestimate the background risk for birth defects in the general
population and exaggerate potential risks associated with medication
exposure. In one population-based study of more than 270,000 births from
Utah that included 5500 fetuses and infants with major birth defects, only 4
cases were attributed to medication exposure (see Fig. 8-1) (Feldkamp,

2017). And yet, Koren and colleagues (1989) reported that a fourth of
women exposed to nonteratogenic drugs thought they had a 25-percent risk
for fetal anomalies. Misinformation may be amplified by inaccurate reports
in the lay press. Knowledgeable counseling may allay anxiety considerably
and may even avert pregnancy termination.
Several sources are available to assist providers with accurate and
updated risk information. With recent changes to the FDA labeling
requirements, discussed next, the manufacturer’s prescribing information has
become increasingly helpful. We recommend using this content for initial
counseling. Published research studies can be identified using PubMed, a
free database tool from the National Center for Biomedical Information.
Additionally, online databases such as Reprotox, TERIS, and Shepard’s
Online Catalog of Teratogenic Agents offer detailed reviews of medication
risks. Lactmed, a database from the National Library of Medicine,
specifically deals with medication use by breastfeeding women. Its entries
on specific medications describe levels in breast milk and potential effects
on the infant.
Ultimately, it is the responsibility of the clinician to interpret risk
information. Medication dosage and route, timing of exposure during
pregnancy, other medications used, and underlying medical condition(s) are
considered in this analysis. Last, the risk from lack of treatment also is
weighed.

■ Labeling Requirements
In 1979, the FDA developed a letter classification system (A, B, C, D, X) to
provide therapeutic guidance for prescribing medications in pregnancy.
These letter categories were intended to simplify risk-benefit data using
summary statements regarding available evidence from human or animal
studies of embryonic–fetal risk. Unfortunately, information regarding
medication risk was often incomplete and led to an overreliance on the
category definition.
To address these deficiencies, new FDA (2014, 2020b) labeling
requirements were created and went into effect in 2015. The label provides a
framework to aid prescribing decisions by more clearly communicating risks
and benefits. Information about each medication now incorporates a detailed
summary of risks, clinical considerations, and available data (Table 8-3).

Registry information is included when available. For each medication, a
lactation subsection is provided, and a section addressing potential risks in
females and males of reproductive potential is presented. In addition to risks
associated with specific medications, the label is required to include the
background risk of major birth defects and miscarriage in the general
population. Because of the level of detail in the new labels, the information
can be indispensable for counseling.
TABLE 8-3. Food and Drug Administration Pregnancy Labeling
Requirements

■ Presenting Risk Information
Counseling should cover not only the embryonic and fetal risks from drug
exposure, but also the risks and/or genetic implications of the condition for
which the drug is administered. Risks associated with not treating the
condition also are described. Even the manner in which information is
presented affects perception. For example, women given negative

information—such as a 2-percent chance of a malformed newborn—are more
likely to perceive an exaggerated risk than women given positive information
—such as a 98-percent chance of an unaffected infant (Jasper, 2001). Instead
of citing a higher odds ratio, it may be helpful to provide the absolute risk
for a particular defect or the attributable risk, which is the difference
between prevalence in exposed and unexposed individuals (Conover, 2011).
The association between oral corticosteroid medications and cleft lip sounds
far more concerning when presented as a tripling or 200-percent increase in
risk than when described as an increase from 1 to 3 cases per 1000 or as a
99.7-percent likelihood of no cleft development following exposure.
With a few notable exceptions, most commonly prescribed drugs and
medications can be used with relative safety during pregnancy. Many drugs
discussed in this chapter are low-risk teratogens, which are medications that
produce defects in fewer than 10 per 1000 maternal exposures (Shepard,
2002a). Because risks conferred by low-risk teratogens are so close to the
population background rate of fetal anomalies, they may not be a major factor
in deciding whether to discontinue treatment for an important condition
(Shepard, 2002b). All women have an approximate 3-percent chance of
having a fetus or newborn with a major anomaly. Although exposure to a
confirmed teratogen may elevate this risk, the magnitude of the increase is
usually only 1 or 2 percent or at most, doubled or tripled. The concept of risk
versus benefit is often central to counseling. Some untreated diseases pose a
more serious threat to both mother and fetus than medication exposure risks.

TERATOGENIC AND FETOTOXIC AGENTS
Considering the thousands of compounds available, relatively few
medications and other substances are considered to be major human
teratogens or to have significant fetotoxicity. The most common examples are
listed in Table 8-1. With few exceptions, in every clinical situation
potentially requiring therapy with a known teratogen, alternative drugs can be
given with relative safety. Realizing limitations in available evidence,
pregnant women should be advised to take any medication only when it is
clearly needed. Detailed sonography is generally indicated if the fetus has
been exposed to any major teratogen during the embryonic period.

■ Alcohol
Ethanol is a potent and prevalent teratogen. It is considered the leading cause
of preventable developmental disabilities worldwide (Hoyme, 2016). In the
United States, alcohol use is reported by 10 percent of pregnant women
(England, 2020). Nearly 10 percent of such women admit to binge drinking in
the first trimester, and 1 percent report binge drinking in the second and third
trimesters.
The fetal effects of alcohol abuse have been recognized since the 1800s.
Lemoine (1968) and Jones (1973) and their coworkers are credited with
describing the spectrum of alcohol-related fetal defects known as fetal
alcohol syndrome. Criteria are shown in Table 8-4 (Hoyme, 2016). For
every child with the syndrome, many more are born with neurobehavioral
deficits from alcohol exposure. Fetal alcohol spectrum disorder (FASD) is
an umbrella term that includes five conditions attributed to prenatal alcohol
damage: (1) fetal alcohol syndrome, (2) partial fetal alcohol syndrome, (3)
alcohol-related birth defects, (4) alcohol-related neurodevelopmental
disorder, and (5) neurobehavioral disorder associated with prenatal alcohol
exposure (Williams, 2015). The prevalence of FASD exceeds 1 percent in 76
countries, and 1 in 13 women who consume alcohol in pregnancy has a child
with FASD (Lange, 2017). The birth prevalence of fetal alcohol syndrome is
estimated to be as high as 1 percent in the United States (Centers for Disease
Control, 2015; Guerri, 2009). Further, studies of school-aged children have
identified FASD in 2 to 5 percent (May, 2009, 2014).
TABLE 8-4. Criteria for Prenatal Alcohol Exposure, Fetal Alcohol
Syndrome, and Alcohol-Related Birth Defects

Criteria

Fetal alcohol syndrome has specific criteria (see Table 8-4). These include
central nervous system (CNS) abnormalities, pre- or postnatal growth
impairment, and a characteristic pattern of minor facial abnormalities (Fig.
8-2). Similar criteria have been established for the other conditions that
make up FASD (Hoyme, 2016). Prenatal alcohol exposure criteria also are
available to assist with assessment.

FIGURE 8-2 Fetal alcohol syndrome. A. At 2½ years. B. At 12 years. Note persistence of short
palpebral fissures, epicanthal folds, flat midface, hypoplastic philtrum, and thin upper vermilion border.
(Reproduced with permission from Streissguth AP, Clarren, SK, Jones KL. Natural history of fetal
alcohol syndrome: a 10-year follow-up of eleven patients, Lancet. 1985 Jul 13;2(8446):85–91.)

Alcohol-related birth defects include cardiac and renal anomalies,
orthopedic problems, and abnormalities of the eyes and ears (see Table 8-4).
An association has further been reported between periconceptional alcohol
use and omphalocele and gastroschisis (Richardson, 2011). There are no
established sonographic criteria for prenatal diagnosis of fetal alcohol
syndrome. At Parkland Hospital, we reserve detailed sonography for
pregnancies that have met the exposure criteria listed in Table 8-4. Thirdtrimester assessment of fetal growth also should be considered.
Fetal vulnerability to alcohol is modified by genetic and environmental
factors, nutritional status, coexisting maternal disease, and maternal age

(Abel, 1995). Binge drinking, however, is believed to pose particularly high
risk for alcohol-related birth defects and has also been linked to a greater
risk for stillbirth (Centers for Disease Control, 2015; Strandberg-Larsen,
2008). The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), and the American Academy of
Pediatrics have stressed that no amount of alcohol can be considered safe in
pregnancy (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020a;
Williams, 2015).

■ Antiepileptic Medications
Traditionally, women with epilepsy requiring treatment with medication
were informed that their risk for fetal malformations was increased. More
recent data suggest that the risk may not be as great as once thought,
particularly for newer agents. The most frequently reported anomalies are
orofacial clefts, cardiac malformations, and neural-tube defects.
Of agents in current use, valproic acid confers the highest risk (Vajda,
2016). The North American Antiepileptic Drug (NAAED) Pregnancy
Registry reported that major malformations developed in 9 percent of fetuses
with first-trimester valproate exposure. This included a 4-percent risk for
neural-tube defects (Hernandez-Diaz, 2012). School-aged children with
prior in utero exposure to valproic acid have poorer cognitive development
—including significantly lower intelligence quotient (IQ) scores—than
children exposed to other antiepileptic drugs (Bromley, 2014; Meador,
2009).
Regarding other specific anticonvulsants, one metaanalysis identified
increased malformation rates among exposed children compared with rates
among children born to women with untreated epilepsy. Rates were twofold
higher among children exposed to carbamazepine or phenytoin, threefold
higher among those exposed to phenobarbital, and fourfold higher among
those exposed to topiramate as monotherapy (Weston, 2016). The risk for
fetal malformations is approximately doubled if multiple agents are required
(Vajda, 2016). Several older anticonvulsants may produce a constellation of
findings similar to the fetal hydantoin syndrome. The syndrome is
characterized by distinctive features such as hypertelorism, low nasal bridge,
and midface hypoplasia; hypoplasia of the distal phalanges and nails; growth
impairment; and intellectual disability.

Importantly, evidence to date suggests that these risks do not appear to
hold for the newer agents levetiracetam and lamotrigine (Mølgaard-Nielsen,
2011; Weston, 2016). A review of 208 pregnancies with first-trimester
lamotrigine exposure from the Israeli Teratology Information Service found
no increase in the rate of major malformations and no case of oral cleft
(Diav-Citrin, 2017). Similarly, the International Lamotrigine Pregnancy
Registry followed more than 1500 pregnancies with first trimester exposure
and observed no effect on the rate of major malformations (Cunnington,
2011). The Motherisk Program reviewed eight studies of levetiracetam and
concluded that monotherapy was associated with a 2-percent major
malformation rate, no different from that for the general population
(Chaudhry, 2014). More recently, a review of 465 pregnancies reported to
the Levetiracetam Pregnancy Registry found no evidence of teratogenicity
(Scheuerle, 2019).
Providers are encouraged to enroll pregnant women treated with
antiepileptic medication in the NAAED Pregnancy Registry. Management of
epilepsy in pregnancy is discussed in Chapter 63 (p. 1128).

■ Angiotensin-converting Enzyme Inhibitors and Receptor
Blocking Drugs
These medications may result in angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE)inhibitor fetopathy. Normal renal development depends on the fetal reninangiotensin system. ACE-inhibitor medication may cause fetal hypotension
and renal hypoperfusion, with subsequent ischemia and anuria (Guron, 2000;
Pryde, 1993). Reduced perfusion can result in fetal-growth restriction and
calvarium maldevelopment, and oligohydramnios may lead to pulmonary
hypoplasia and limb contractures (Barr, 1991). Because angiotensin-receptor
blockers have a similar mechanism of action, concerns regarding fetotoxicity
have been generalized to include this entire medication class. A recent
review of nearly 200 pregnancies from teratology information services found
a 30-percent fetopathy risk with angiotensin-receptor blockers compared
with a 3-percent risk with ACE-inhibitor exposure beyond 20 weeks’
gestation (Weber-Schoendorfer, 2020).
Concerns about ACE-inhibitor embryotoxicity have largely been
disproven. In 2006, a review of 29,000 infants from the Tennessee Medicaid
database identified a two- to threefold greater risk for neonatal cardiac and

CNS abnormalities among the 209 that had prenatal ACE-inhibitor exposure
(Cooper, 2006). Subsequent larger studies have not corroborated these
observations. In a retrospective cohort study of more than 460,000
pregnancies, risks for birth defects were not higher with ACE inhibitors than
with other antihypertensive medications (Li, 2011). Similarly, a review of
1.3 million pregnancies from the Medicaid Analytic eXtract found no
increased risk for any malformation with ACE-inhibitor exposure after
adjusting for confounding factors such as diabetes (Bateman, 2017). Thus,
women with inadvertent first-trimester exposure to these medications may be
reassured. Importantly, given the many therapeutic options for treating
hypertension during pregnancy, discussed in Chapter 53 (p. 949), ACE
inhibitors and angiotensin receptor-blocking drugs should be avoided in
pregnancy.

■ Antifungal Medications
From this class of drugs, fluconazole has been associated with a pattern of
congenital malformations resembling the autosomal recessive Antley-Bixler
syndrome. Abnormalities include oral clefts, abnormal facies, and cardiac,
skull, long-bone, and joint abnormalities. Such findings have been reported
only with chronic, first-trimester, high-dose treatment at doses of 400 to 800
mg daily.
Regarding low-dose treatment of vulvovaginal candidiasis, the Motherisk
Program conducted a systematic review of pregnancies with first-trimester
oral fluconazole exposure of 150 or 300 mg in total (Alsaad, 2015). The
overall risk for birth defects was not greater, although a small increase in
rates of cardiac malformations could not be excluded. A population-based
cohort study from Denmark identified a threefold greater risk for tetralogy of
Fallot following exposure to low-dose fluconazole (Mølgaard-Nielsen,
2013). The birth prevalence of tetralogy of Fallot rose from 3 to 10 cases per
10,000. Notably, investigators did not identify increased risks for 14 other
birth defects previously associated with exposure to high-dose azole
antifungal agents (Mølgaard-Nielsen, 2013). A subsequent review of more
than 37,000 pregnancies with first-trimester fluconazole exposure did not
identify an association with cardiac abnormalities (Zhu, 2020). Based on
reported risks, we do not perform detailed sonography or fetal
echocardiography following low-dose fluconazole exposure.

■ Antiinflammatory Agents
Nonsteroidal Antiinflammatory Drugs
This drug class includes both aspirin and traditional NSAIDs such as
ibuprofen and indomethacin. They exert their effects by inhibiting
prostaglandin synthesis. In a report from the NBDPS, at least 20 percent of
pregnant women recall first-trimester NSAID use, particularly ibuprofen and
aspirin, and such exposure is not a major risk factor for birth defects
(Hernandez, 2012).
When taken in late pregnancy, however, indomethacin may cause
constriction of the fetal ductus arteriosus and subsequent pulmonary
hypertension. Fetal ductal constriction is more likely with third trimester use
that exceeds 72 hours. The drug also may decrease fetal urine production and
amnionic fluid volume (Rasanen, 1995; van der Heijden, 1994; Walker,
1994). In one systematic review, indomethacin tocolysis was associated with
a 1.5-fold risk for bronchopulmonary dysplasia, intraventricular hemorrhage,
and necrotizing enterocolitis (Hammers, 2015a,b).
Based on a review of 35 cases of oligohydramnios or neonatal kidney
problems reported to the FDA Adverse Event Reporting System database,
the FDA recommends that pregnant women ≥20 weeks’ gestation avoid
NSAID use (Food and Drug Administration, 2020a). If NSAIDs are needed
for more than 48 hours, ultrasound evaluation of amnionic fluid should be
considered. Oligohydramnios usually resolves within 6 days of discontinuing
NSAIDs, but there are cases in which infants have died of renal failure.
With aspirin, a low dosage of 100 mg daily or less does not confer a
greater risk for constriction of the ductus arteriosus or for adverse infant
outcomes (Grab, 2000). As with other NSAIDs, however, high-dose aspirin
use should be avoided, particularly in the third trimester.

Leflunomide
This is a pyrimidine-synthesis inhibitor used to treat rheumatoid arthritis.
Leflunomide is considered contraindicated in pregnancy. In rats and rabbits,
leflunomide results in hydrocephalus, eye anomalies, skeletal anomalies, and
embryo death when given at or below human-equivalent doses (SanofiAventis, 2016). The active metabolite, teriflunomide, is detectable in plasma
for up to 2 years following discontinuation of the medication. Women who

become pregnant while taking leflunomide, and even those of childbearing
potential who have discontinued it, are recommended to undergo an
accelerated drug elimination procedure with either cholestyramine or
activated charcoal (Sanofi-Aventis, 2016).
Reassuringly, studies of exposed human pregnancies have not confirmed
these teratogenic effects (Berard, 2018; Chambers, 2010). In a cohort of 60
women with first-trimester leflunomide exposure who completed
cholestyramine washout, the rate of birth defects was not increased
(Chambers, 2010). A recent review of more than 500 exposed pregnancies
found that the rate of major birth defects was 3 percent, similar to the general
population (Henson, 2020). The rate of spontaneous abortion also was not
increased.

■ Antimicrobial and Antiviral Drugs
Medications used to treat infections are among those most frequently
administered during pregnancy. Over the years, experience has accrued
regarding their general safety. With few exceptions, commonly used
antimicrobial agents are without embryo-fetal safety concerns.

Nitrofurantoin
From NBDPS results, first-trimester nitrofurantoin exposure is linked to a
twofold risk for cleft lip (Ailes, 2016). Considering that the birth prevalence
of clefts approximates 1 case per 1000, the likelihood that a nitrofurantoinexposed fetus would not have a cleft would thus be 998 per 1000. For other
birth defects, initial associations with this antibiotic did not persist in the
final NBDPS cohort (Ailes, 2016).
In one systematic review of nitrofurantoin exposure in pregnancy, results
of cohort and case-control studies differed (Goldberg, 2015). Five cohort
studies included 9275 exposed pregnancies and nearly 1.5 million unexposed
pregnancies, and the review found no higher risk for any malformation.
However, among three case-control studies that had nearly 40,000 cases
matched with 130,000 controls, the rate of hypoplastic left heart syndrome
was threefold greater (Goldberg, 2015). For context, this increase in risk
would result in a birth prevalence of fewer than 1 case per 1000 exposed
infants. Nitrofurantoin is considered contraindicated in pregnant women with

known or suspected glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency
because of risk for hemolytic anemia and other hematologic abnormalities. In
the absence of G6PD deficiency, the There are no concerns with second- or
third-trimester nitrofurantoin use, and first-trimester use is appropriate if no
suitable alternatives are available.

Sulfonamides
These drugs are often combined with trimethoprim and used to treat
infections during pregnancy. One indication is treatment of methicillinresistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) infection. The NBDPS, which
included 107 pregnancies with periconceptional trimethoprimsulfamethoxazole exposure and birth defects, identified a fivefold greater
risk to have offspring with esophageal atresia or diaphragmatic hernia
(Ailes, 2016). Similar to findings with nitrofurantoin exposure, this degree of
increase would confer a risk of approximately 1 case per 1000 exposed
infants for these selected birth defects. However, these findings have not
been corroborated by other reports. One review from the Medication
Exposure in Pregnancy Risk Evaluation Program included more than 7500
infants with first-trimester exposure to trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
(Hansen, 2016). Compared with either unexposed infants or those exposed to
penicillins or cephalosporins, no higher risk for any congenital abnormality
was identified. Given this reassuring data, we consider sulfonamides
appropriate for first-trimester use if suitable alternatives are lacking.
Sulfonamides are considered contraindicated in pregnant women with
known or suspected G6PD deficiency because of risk for hemolytic anemia
and other hematologic abnormalities. Additionally, sulfonamides displace
bilirubin from protein-binding sites. Thus, if given near the time of preterm
delivery, these agents theoretically might worsen neonatal
hyperbilirubinemia. However, a population-based review of more than
800,000 births from Denmark found no association between exposure to
sulfamethoxazole in late pregnancy and neonatal jaundice (Klarskov, 2013).

Tetracyclines
These drugs are not commonly used in pregnant women. They have been
associated with yellowish-brown discoloration of the deciduous teeth when
used after 25 weeks’ gestation. The risk for subsequent dental caries is not

increased (Billings, 2004; Kutscher, 1966). Doxycycline has a reduced
ability to chelate calcium orthophosphate compared with other tetracyclines
and is preferred if needed. A systematic review of doxycycline-exposed
pregnancies identified no higher rates of either birth defects or staining of
deciduous teeth (Cross, 2016).

Ribavirin
This antiviral nucleoside analogue is a component of therapy for hepatitis C
infection, discussed in Chapter 58 (p. 1038). Ribavirin causes birth defects
in multiple animal species at doses significantly lower than those
recommended for human use. Reported malformations include skull, palate,
eye, skeleton, and gastrointestinal abnormalities. The drug has a half-life of
12 days and persists in extravascular compartments following therapy
discontinuation. Treated women must use two forms of contraception and
have monthly pregnancy tests while on therapy and for 6 months following
drug discontinuation (Merck, 2020). Ribavirin use is also contraindicated in
men whose partners are pregnant.

■ Antineoplastic Agents
Cancer management in pregnancy includes many chemotherapeutic agents
generally considered to be at least potentially toxic to the embryo, fetus, or
both. For the many novel polyclonal antibody therapies designated as
antineoplastics, there is little information concerning safety. The National
Toxicology Program (2013) conducted a review of 300 pregnancies with
first-trimester exposure and identified major malformations in 14 percent.
Treatment of cancer in pregnancy is discussed in Chapter 66 (p. 1163). Risks
associated with selected agents for which experience in pregnancy has
accrued are considered next.

Cyclophosphamide
This alkylating agent inflicts a chemical insult on developing fetal tissues and
leads to cell death and heritable DNA alterations in surviving cells.
Pregnancy loss rates are greater, and reported fetal abnormalities include
skeletal anomalies, limb defects, cleft palate, and eye abnormalities (Enns,
1999; Kirshon, 1988). The risk for a major abnormality is estimated to be 18

percent (National Toxicology Program, 2013). Surviving infants may have
growth abnormalities and developmental delays. Environmental exposure
among health-care workers is associated with a higher risk for spontaneous
abortion.

Methotrexate
This folic-acid antagonist is a potent teratogen. It is used for cancer
chemotherapy, immunosuppression of autoimmune diseases and psoriasis,
nonsurgical treatment of ectopic pregnancy, and medical abortion. It acts
similarly to aminopterin, which is no longer used clinically, and can cause
defects known collectively as the fetal methotrexate-aminopterin syndrome.
Associated craniofacial abnormalities include craniosynostosis with a
“clover-leaf” skull, wide nasal bridge, low-set ears, and micrognathia (Del
Campo, 1999). Exposure has also been linked to central nervous system
abnormalities, cardiac defects, and limb anomalies (Cumberland
Pharmaceuticals, 2020). Intellectual impairment has been described. The
embryo is thought to be most vulnerable at 8 to 10 weeks postconception and
at dosages of at least 10 mg/week. However, this is not universally accepted
(Feldkamp, 1993). Because of its distribution, methotrexate can remain in the
body for prolonged periods. Thus, preconceptional exposure is not without
risk.
The standard 50-mg/m2 dose given to treat ectopic pregnancy or to
induce abortion exceeds the 10-mg/week threshold dose. Reports describe
cardiac anomalies, particularly conotruncal defects, in intrauterine
pregnancies inadvertently treated with methotrexate for suspected ectopic
pregnancy (Dawson, 2014; Hyoun, 2012).

Tamoxifen
This nonsteroidal selective estrogen-receptor modulator (SERM) is used as
an adjuvant to treat breast cancer. In animal studies, tamoxifen has been
associated with malformations similar to those caused by diethylstilbestrol
(DES) exposure in rodents, including vaginal adenosis. One review of 167
pregnancies reported a fetal abnormality in 13 percent but emphasized that
evidence was limited (Schuurman, 2019). Abnormalities have included
ambiguous genitalia and craniofacial anomalies.

Trastuzumab
This is a recombinant monoclonal antibody directed to the human epidermal
growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) protein. Used to treat breast and gastric
cancers that express HER2 protein, this drug has not been associated with
fetal malformations. However, postmarketing surveillance identified cases of
oligohydramnios sequence resulting in pulmonary hypoplasia, renal failure,
skeletal abnormalities, and neonatal death (Genentech, 2020). Surveillance
for these complications is recommended for exposed pregnancies and for
those treated at any time in the 7 months prior to conception. A trastuzumab
pregnancy exposure registry and a pregnancy pharmacovigilance program
have been established to monitor pregnancy outcomes. These warnings also
apply to those treated with ado-trastuzumab emtansine.

■ Endothelin-receptor Antagonists
Bosentan, ambrisentan, and macitentan are three endothelin-receptor
antagonists used to treat pulmonary arterial hypertension (Chap. 52, p. 930).
The endothelin-receptor signaling pathway is important for neural-crest
development. Mice deficient in endothelin receptors develop neural-crest
cell defects that include craniofacial and cardiac outflow tract abnormalities
(de Raaf, 2015). Each of these three agents has been found to cause similar
birth defects in multiple animal species (Janssen, 2019a,b). No human data
are available. Endothelin-receptor antagonists may be obtained only through
restricted access programs, each of which has stringent requirements that
include contraception and monthly pregnancy testing (Gilead, 2019; Janssen,
2019a,b).

■ Immunosuppressant Medications
Selected autoimmune diseases and their treatment are reviewed in Chapter
62 (p. 1109).

Corticosteroids
Glucocorticoids and mineralocorticoids have antiinflammatory and
immunosuppressive actions. They are used to treat serious disorders such as
asthma and autoimmune disease. Corticosteroids have been associated with

orofacial clefts in animal studies, but the absolute risk is small. In a
metaanalysis of case-control studies by the Motherisk Program, systemic
corticosteroid exposure was associated with a threefold rate increase,
conferring an absolute risk of 3 clefts per 1000 exposed fetuses (ParkWyllie, 2000). A 10-year prospective cohort study by the same group,
however, did not identify an increased overall risk for major malformations.
Based on these findings, corticosteroids are not considered to represent a
major teratogenic risk.
Potential risks associated with prednisone or methylprednisolone are
considered to be lower than those with other corticosteroids. Prednisolone,
the active metabolite of prednisone, is itself metabolized and rendered
inactive by the placental enzyme 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase 2
(Murphy, 2007). Thus, it is thought to reach the fetus less effectively.

Mycophenolate Mofetil
This inosine monophosphate dehydrogenase inhibitor, and a related agent,
mycophenolic acid, are immunosuppressants. They are used to prevent
rejection in organ-transplant recipients and to treat autoimmune disease
(Chap. 62, p. 1112). Mycophenolate is a potent teratogen. From the National
Transplantation Pregnancy Registry, of pregnancies in which mycophenolate
was not discontinued until after the first trimester, birth defects complicated
30 percent, and another 30 percent spontaneously aborted (King, 2017). One
prospective review by the European Network of Teratology Information
Services similarly identified a spontaneous loss rate of nearly 30 percent in
exposed pregnancies. More than 20 percent of liveborn infants had major
anomalies (Hoeltzenbein, 2012).
Many affected infants have a pattern of defects termed mycophenolate
embryopathy. This includes microtia, auditory canal atresia, clefts,
coloboma and other eye anomalies, short fingers with hypoplastic nails, and
cardiac defects (Anderka, 2009; Merlob, 2009). A Risk Evaluation and
Mitigation Strategy (REMS) has been developed for mycophenolate
prescribers who treat women with reproductive potential. REMS are safety
strategies mandated by the FDA to help manage known risks associated with
a medicine yet still allow patients to have access to the benefits of a given
drug.

■ Lead
Lead crosses the placenta via passive diffusion. Prenatal lead exposure is
associated with fetal-growth impairment and with childhood
neurodevelopmental delays. According to the CDC (2010), no level of lead
exposure is considered safe in pregnancy. Although routine testing is not
recommended, risk factors should be assessed in all pregnancies (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019a). Care and testing for atrisk pregnancies is discussed in Chapter 10 (p. 188).

■ Mercury
The developing nervous system is particularly susceptible to mercury. In the
1950s and early 1960s, children born near Minamata Bay, Japan were found
to have congenital Minamata disease—severe neurological abnormalities
from methylmercury exposure in utero (Yorifuji, 2020). Prenatal exposure
causes disturbances in neuronal cell division and migration. This leads to a
range of defects from microcephaly to intellectual disability, choreo-athetoid
movement abnormalities, motor delays, and behavioral abnormalities
(Grandjean, 2011).
The principal concern for prenatal mercury exposure is the consumption
of certain species of large fish and seafood (Chap. 10, p. 188).
Methylmercury cannot be eliminated by cooking. It crosses the placenta and
can accumulate in the fetus. The FDA (2019) advises that pregnant women
and breastfeeding mothers avoid consumption of king mackerel, marlin,
orange roughy, shark, swordfish, tilefish, and bigeye tuna.

■ Psychiatric Medications
Treatment of psychiatric illness in pregnancy, including a discussion of the
risks and benefits of various psychiatric medications, is described in Chapter
64 (p. 1142).

Antipsychotic Medications
No antipsychotic medications are considered teratogenic. Exposed neonates
can manifest abnormal extrapyramidal muscle movements and withdrawal
symptoms that include agitation, abnormally enhanced or diminished muscle

tone, tremor, agitation, somnolence, respiratory abnormalities, and feeding
difficulty. Such findings are nonspecific and transient. An FDA (2017) alert
cited all medications in this class. Included are older medications like
haloperidol and chlorpromazine and newer medications such as aripiprazole,
olanzapine, quetiapine, and risperidone.

Lithium
This medication has been associated with Ebstein anomaly, a rare cardiac
abnormality that otherwise complicates only 1 per 20,000 births. Ebstein
anomaly is characterized by apical displacement of the tricuspid valve, often
resulting in severe tricuspid regurgitation and marked right atrial
enlargement. A report from the Lithium Baby Registry initially suggested that
the risk for Ebstein anomaly was as high as 3 percent. However, subsequent
series have identified an attributable risk for Ebstein anomaly and cooccurring right-sided cardiac anomalies of only 1 to 4 cases per 1000
exposed pregnancies (Patorno, 2017; Yacobi, 2008). The NBDPS found that
just 1 of 135 cases of Ebstein anomaly occurred in the setting of lithium
exposure (Downing, 2019).
Neonatal lithium toxicity stems from exposure near delivery. The
manufacturer recommends that if possible, the dosage should be decreased or
drug discontinued 2 to 3 days prior to delivery to reduce this risk (WestWard, 2020). Findings may persist for up to 2 weeks and may include
cardiac arrhythmias, hypoglycemia, nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, and a
“floppy infant syndrome” (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2019f). The latter may include hypotonia, respiratory distress
or apnea, bradycardia, cyanosis, and feeding difficulties (West-Ward, 2020).

Selective Serotonin- and Norepinephrine-reuptake Inhibitors
These medications have been studied more than almost any other, apart from
Bendectin (p. 146). As a class, they are not considered major teratogens
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019f). The one
exception is paroxetine, which has been associated with a slightly higher risk
for cardiac anomalies, particularly atrial and ventricular septal defects.
Metaanalyses have identified a pooled odds ratio of just 1.3 for paroxetine
and cardiac abnormalities (Berard, 2016; Wurst, 2010). However, a review
of nearly 1 million pregnancies from the nationwide Medicaid Analytic

eXtract identified no significant association between paroxetine use in the
first trimester and fetal cardiac abnormalities (Huybrechts, 2014). The
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019f) recommends
that women planning pregnancy avoid paroxetine. Fetal echocardiography
should be considered for those with first-trimester paroxetine exposure.
Neonatal effects have been associated with prenatal exposure to
selective serotonin-reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) and selective
norepinephrine-reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs). Approximately 25 percent of
neonates exposed to SSRIs in late pregnancy manifest one or more
nonspecific findings considered to represent poor neonatal adaptation
(Costei, 2002; Jordan, 2008). Collectively termed the neonatal behavioral
syndrome, findings can include jitteriness, irritability, hyper- or hypotonia,
feeding abnormalities, vomiting, hypoglycemia, thermoregulatory instability,
and respiratory abnormalities. Fortunately, these neonatal behaviors are
typically mild and self-limited and last approximately 2 days. Jordan and
coworkers (2008) reported that affected newborns were not more likely to
require a higher level of care, to experience respiratory abnormalities, or to
have prolonged hospitalization. Rarely, neonates exposed to SSRIs in late
pregnancy have demonstrated more severe adaptation abnormalities (Ornoy,
2017).
Another concern with late-pregnancy exposure is the possible association
of SSRI medications with persistent pulmonary hypertension of the
newborn (PPHN). The baseline incidence approximates 2 cases per 1000
term newborns. PPHN is characterized by elevated pulmonary vascular
resistance with right-to-left shunting and resultant hypoxemia. Two
population-based cohort studies—together involving more than 5 million
pregnancies—identified an attributable risk of only 1 to 2 cases per 1000
births (Huybrechts, 2015; Kieler, 2012). Moreover, cases of PPHN
associated with SSRI medication have not been severe (Ornoy, 2017).

■ Retinoids
Vitamin A derivatives are among the most potent human teratogens. By
inhibiting neural-crest cell migration during embryogenesis, they create a
pattern of cranial neural-crest defects—termed retinoic acid embryopathy—
that involve the CNS, face, heart, and thymus (Fig. 8-3). Specific anomalies
may include ventriculomegaly, maldevelopment of the facial bones or

cranium, microtia or anotia, micrognathia, cleft palate, conotruncal heart
defects, and thymic aplasia or hypoplasia.

FIGURE 8-3 Retinoic acid embryopathy. A. Bilateral microtia or anotia with stenosis of external ear
canal. B. Flat, depressed nasal bridge and ocular hypertelorism. (Reproduced with permission from
permission from Dr. Edward Lammer.)

Acitretin
This retinoid is used to treat severe psoriasis. It was introduced to replace
etretinate, a lipophilic retinoid with such a long half-life (120 days) that birth
defects resulted more than 2 years after therapy was discontinued. Although
acitretin has a short half-life, it is metabolized to etretinate, and thus remains
in the body for prolonged periods (Stiefel Laboratories, 2017). To obviate
exposure, the manufacturer of acitretin has developed a pregnancy risk
management program. Called “Do Your P.A.R.T”—pregnancy prevention
actively required during and after treatment, this program promotes a delay
of conception for at least 3 years following therapy discontinuation.

Bexarotene
This retinoid is used to treat refractory cutaneous T-cell lymphoma. When
given to rats in doses comparable to those for human therapy, fetuses
developed eye and ear abnormalities, cleft palate, and incomplete
ossification. For a woman to receive bexarotene, the manufacturer requires

two forms of contraception that are initiated 1 month before therapy and
continued for 1 month after it is discontinued. This is coupled with monthly
pregnancy testing during treatment (Bausch Health, 2020). Males who have
partners who could become pregnant are advised to use condoms during
sexual intercourse while taking bexarotene and for 1 month after
discontinuing therapy.

Isotretinoin
13-cis-Retinoic acid is a vitamin A isomer that stimulates epithelial cell
differentiation. It is primarily used to treat recalcitrant nodular acne. Firsttrimester exposure is associated with a high rate of pregnancy loss, and up to
a third of infants have malformations (Lammer, 1985). The iPLEDGE
program is an FDA-mandated REMS for isotretinoin and is found at
www.ipledgeprogram.com. This web-based, restricted-distribution program
requires participation for all patients, physicians, and pharmacies to help
eliminate embryo–fetal exposure. Other countries have instituted similar
programs, however, inadvertent exposure remains a global concern (AutretLeca, 2010; Crijns, 2011).

Topical Retinoids
These compounds, initially used to treat acne, have become so popular for
sun-damage treatment that they are called cosmeceuticals (Panchaud, 2012).
The most commonly used topical agents are tretinoin, isotretinoin, and
adapalene. Systemic absorption is low, and this argues against plausible
teratogenicity.
Isolated case reports have described malformations following topical
tretinoin, and it is unknown whether this is due to variability in absorption or
perhaps potential individual susceptibility (Kaplan, 2015). A prospective
study by the European Network of Teratology Information Services found no
higher rates of birth defects or spontaneous losses, and no case of retinoid
embryopathy (Panchaud, 2012). A systematic review of 635 pregnancies
exposed to topical retinoids identified no higher risk for congenital
malformations, spontaneous abortion, stillbirth, low birthweight, or preterm
delivery (Kaplan, 2015). Notably, the manufacturer of tazarotene cautions
that application over a sufficient body surface area could be comparable to

oral treatment. Accordingly, its use in pregnancy is not recommended
(Allergan, 2019).

Vitamin A
There are two natural forms of vitamin A. First, provitamin A carotenoids,
which include beta-carotene, alpha-carotene, and beta-cryptoxanthin, are
precursors found in fruits and vegetables. The body converts carotenoids into
vitamin A. They have never been shown to cause birth defects (Oakley,
1995).
Second, preformed vitamin A, also called retinol, has been associated
with cranial neural-crest defects when more than 10,000 IU per day is
consumed in the first trimester (Rothman, 1995). Preformed vitamin A is
present in liver, fish oils, milk, eggs, and in vitamin pills and dietary
supplements. It seems reasonable to avoid doses of preformed preparations
that exceed the recommended 3000 IU daily allowance (American Academy
of Pediatrics, 2017).

■ Sex Hormones
Selected functions and effects of male and female hormones on the
developing fetus are reviewed in Chapter 3 (p. 31). Androgen exposure may
cause varying degrees of virilization in female fetuses and may result in
ambiguous genitalia (Fig. 3-3, p. 34).

■ Thalidomide and Analogues
Possibly the most notorious human teratogen, thalidomide causes
malformations in 20 percent of fetuses exposed between 34 and 50 days
menstrual age. The characteristic malformation is phocomelia—an absence
or underdevelopment of one or more long bones. As a result, hands or feet
may attach to the trunk, occasionally by a small rudimentary bone. Cardiac
defects, gastrointestinal abnormalities, external ear and eye malformations,
and other limb-reduction defects also are common following thalidomide
exposure. The manufacturer reports that up to 40 percent of affected
newborns do not survive the neonatal period (Celgene, 2021).

Thalidomide was marketed outside the United States from 1956 to 1960,
before its teratogenicity was appreciated. The ensuing disaster, with
thousands of affected children, was instructive of several important
teratological principles. First, the placenta is not an effective barrier to the
transfer of toxic substances from mother to embryo (Dally, 1998). Second,
different species manifest considerable variability in their susceptibility to
drugs and chemicals. Namely, thalidomide produced no defects in multiple
rodent species and was assumed to be safe for humans. Last, timing of
exposure may be closely related to the type of defect (Vargesson, 2015). For
example, upper-limb amelia may develop with thalidomide exposure during
days 24 to 30 postconception, upper-limb phocomelia with exposure during
days 24 to 33, and lower-limb phocomelia with exposure during days 27 to
33.
Thalidomide was first approved in the United States in 1999 and
currently is used to treat erythema leprosum nodosum and multiple myeloma
(Celgene, 2021). The FDA has mandated a web-based, restricteddistribution program for thalidomide, called THALOMID REMS, which is
required before patients, physicians, and pharmacies can access the
medication.
Lenalidomide and pomalidomide are analogues of thalidomide. Both
cross the placenta in animal species. Lenalidomide is used to treat some
types of myelodysplastic syndrome and multiple myeloma. It has been found
to cause thalidomide-like limb abnormalities in monkeys (Celgene, 2019).
Pomalidomide is used to treat refractory multiple myeloma and acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS)-related Kaposi sarcoma. It is
teratogenic in rats and rabbits (Celgene, 2020). Restricted-distribution
programs similar to those used for thalidomide have been developed for
these analogues.

■ Thyroid Medications
Methimazole
This thionamide drug is used to treat hyperthyroidism. Methimazole has been
associated with a 2-fold increased risk for aplasia cutis congenita, as well as
choanal atresia and esophageal atresia (Yoshihara, 2012). This constellation
of findings has been termed methimazole embryopathy. Aplasia cutis is a

rare abnormality characterized by a full-thickness skin defect, usually the
scalp, occasionally with a defect of underlying bone. In a study of more than
1000 methimazole-treated pregnancies, Yoshihara and colleagues (2015)
identified the embryopathy in 1 to 2 percent. Treatment of hyperthyroidism in
pregnancy is reviewed in Chapter 61.

Radioiodine
Radioactive iodine-131 is used for treatment of thyroid cancer and
thyrotoxicosis and for diagnostic thyroid scanning. It is also a component of
iodine-131 tositumomab therapy, which is employed to treat a type of nonHodgkin lymphoma. Radioiodine is contraindicated during pregnancy
because it readily crosses the placenta and is concentrated in the fetal thyroid
gland by 12 weeks’ gestation. It may cause severe or irreversible fetal and
neonatal hypothyroidism, which can lead to decreased mental capacity and
delayed skeletal maturation. Pregnancy testing should be performed before
administration of radioiodine-131, and it is recommended that pregnancy be
avoided for 6 to 12 months following treatment (Haugen, 2016). A review of
more than 3000 pregnancies in which women delayed conception for at least
6 months after receiving radioactive iodine treatment identified no increase
in pregnancy losses or congenital malformations (Kim, 2020). Concerns for
the breastfeeding mother stem from breast exposure to the radioisotope.

■ Warfarin
This anticoagulant is a vitamin K antagonist with a long half-life. Because of
its low molecular weight, it readily crosses the placenta and may cause
embryotoxic and fetotoxic effects. It is considered contraindicated in
pregnancy with one important exception. As discussed in Chapter 52 (p.
922), warfarin is used to treat women with mechanical heart valves who are
at high risk for thromboembolism (Bristol-Myers Squibb, 2019).
Warfarin embryopathy is characterized by stippled epiphyses and nasal
hypoplasia (Fig. 8-4). In one review of 63 cases attributed to warfarin
exposure, 80 percent displayed characteristic findings, which include
depressed nasal bridge with nasal hypoplasia and choanal atresia, along with
stippled epiphyses of the femur, humerus, calcanei, and distal phalanges (Van
Driel, 2002). The embryopathy may result from exposure between 6 and 9
weeks’ gestation (Hall, 1980). Prevalence following exposure during this

critical period is estimated to be 6 percent. One metaanalysis of cases in
which the warfarin dosage was ≤5 mg/d identified embryopathy in 1 percent
of exposed fetuses. This suggests that risk may be dose dependent (Hassouna,
2014).

FIGURE 8-4 Warfarin embryopathy or fetal warfarin syndrome: nasal hypoplasia and depressed nasal
bridge seen in a fetal sonographic image (A) and in the same newborn (B).

If used beyond the first trimester, warfarin may lead to hemorrhage into
fetal structures, which can cause abnormal growth and deformation from
scarring (Warkany, 1976). Nearly 50 percent of reported embryopathy cases
also have CNS anomalies (van Driel, 2002). Abnormalities can include
agenesis of the corpus callosum; cerebellar vermian agenesis, which is the
Dandy-Walker malformation; microphthalmia; and optic atrophy. Affected
infants are also at risk for blindness, deafness, and developmental delays.

■ Tobacco
Cigarette smoking is the leading preventable cause of perinatal mortality. At
least 7 percent of women report smoking cigarettes during pregnancy (Drake,
2018). Cigarette smoke contains a complex mixture of nicotine, cotinine,
cyanide, thiocyanate, carbon monoxide, cadmium, lead, and various

hydrocarbons (Stillerman, 2008). In addition to being fetotoxic, many of
these substances have vasoactive effects or reduce oxygen levels.
Although tobacco is not considered a major human teratogen, selected
birth defects have been reported to occur with greater frequency following
exposure. Cigarette smoking and exposure to second-hand smoke have been
associated with up to a 1.5-fold risk for orofacial clefts (Kummet, 2016;
Sabbagh, 2015). This equates to an attributable risk of approximately 1 case
per 2000 births. It is plausible that the vasoactive properties of tobacco
smoke could produce congenital defects related to vascular disturbances. For
example, the prevalence of Poland sequence, which is caused by an
interruption in the vascular supply to one side of the fetal chest and
ipsilateral arm, has been reported to occur two times more commonly among
cigarette smokers (Martinez-Frias, 1999). The NBDPS similarly found an
association between active or passive cigarette smoking and limb reduction
defects, and an overall increase in risk of 25 percent (Caspers, 2013). A
small increased risk for fetal cardiac anomalies also has been reported and
may be dose related (Alverson, 2011; Malik, 2008; Sullivan, 2015).
The most prevalent obstetrical complication from smoking is a dosedependent reduction in fetal growth. Newborns of mothers who smoke weigh
on average 200 g less than newborns of nonsmokers (D’Souza, 1981).
Smoking doubles the risk of low birthweight and raises the risk of fetalgrowth restriction two- to threefold (Werler, 1997). As such, cigarette
smoking accounts for 15 percent of low-birthweight neonates (Dietz, 2010).
Even secondhand smoke increases the risk for low birthweight. Other
adverse pregnancy outcomes associated with cigarette smoking include
preterm birth, prelabor rupture of membranes, placenta previa, and placenta
abruption (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020b).
Approximately one third of cases of sudden infant death syndrome have been
attributed to cigarette smoking (Anderson, 2019; Dietz, 2010). Risks of
childhood asthma and obesity also are increased.
When inquiring about tobacco use, providers should include alternative
nicotine delivery products. All forms of nicotine cross the placenta. None is
considered safe in pregnancy. Vaping or e-cigarette products heat an “eliquid” containing nicotine—and often additional contaminants—along with
a flavoring agent. Nicotine is associated with adverse effects on fetal brain
and lung development (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2020b; Spindel, 2016). In adults, vaping has been linked to

serious lung injury known as EVALI—e-cigarette or vaping-associated lung
injury (Krishnasamy, 2020). Animal studies of hookah use, in which tobacco
smoke is filtered through a water bowl, demonstrate lower birthweight and
increased markers of cardiac stress (Khabour, 2016).
Smoking cessation should be strongly encouraged. Counseling includes
avoidance of secondhand smoke and all nicotine-replacement products, such
as patches, gum, and lozenges. A hotline is available from the Centers of
Disease Control and Prevention and can be accessed by calling 1-800-QUITNOW. The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force has recommended that
behavioral interventions be offered at the initial visit and continued
throughout pregnancy (Siu, 2015).

■ Herbal Medicinal Products
In large survey studies from North America and Europe, 30 to 60 percent of
women report using herbal remedies during pregnancy (Kennedy, 2016;
Pallivalapila, 2015). These products are not regulated by the FDA, and there
is a paucity of controlled studies assessing their safety and efficacy. The
identity, quantity, and purity of each ingredient are usually unknown. Authors
of a recent systematic review that included more than 1 million pregnancies
concluded that in the absence of more safety data, the use of herbal medicinal
products in pregnancy should be discouraged (Munoz Balbontin, 2019).
Selected herbal remedies and their reported adverse effects are shown in
Table 8-5.
TABLE 8-5. Pharmacological Actions and Adverse Effects of Some Herbal
Medicines

■ Drugs of Abuse
Substance abuse is not uncommon in pregnancy. Assessment of outcomes
attributable to illicit drug use is often confounded by factors such as poor
maternal health, malnutrition, and infectious disease. Polysubstance abuse
further complicates assessment of outcomes associated with any one drug.
Moreover, illegal substances may contain toxic contaminants such as lead,
cyanide, herbicides, and pesticides. Impurities added as diluents may
independently have serious adverse perinatal effects. As noted on page 149,
alcohol is a significant teratogen. Because it is legally obtained and
ubiquitous, its use confounds the study of illicit drug teratogenicity. Similarly,
tobacco use confounds the effect of drugs on fetal growth.

Cocaine
With this CNS stimulant, most adverse outcomes result from its
vasoconstrictive and hypertensive effects. Serious potential maternal
complications are cerebrovascular hemorrhage, myocardial damage, and
placental abruption. Studies of congenital abnormalities and cocaine
exposure have yielded conflicting results, but associations with cleft palate,
cardiovascular abnormalities, and urinary tract anomalies have been
reported (Chasnoff, 1988; Lipshultz, 1991; van Gelder, 2009). Cocaine use is
also associated with fetal-growth restriction and preterm delivery. Children
exposed as fetuses have risks for behavioral abnormalities and cognitive
impairments (Bada, 2011; Gouin, 2011).

Marijuana
This is the recreational drug most commonly used in pregnancy (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019b). Based on data from the
National Survey on Drug Use and Health, nearly 4 percent of pregnant
women reported using marijuana in 2014 (Brown, 2017). Among women
diagnosed with nausea and vomiting of pregnancy, the prevalence of
marijuana use increased from 7 to 11 percent from 2009 to 2016 (YoungWolff, 2019). Of concern is that the increase in prevalence is related to
perceived safety and efficacy. In a study of 400 cannabis dispensaries, nearly
70 percent advised a caller posing as a pregnant woman with nausea at 8
weeks’ gestation to use marijuana (Dickson, 2018). However, no data
support efficacy of marijuana for nausea and vomiting of pregnancy, and
there are indeed safety concerns (Metz, 2018).
Cannabinoids are not considered to be major teratogens, but they cross
the placenta, and endogenous cannabinoids play key roles in brain
development. In animals, cannabinoids are involved in neuronal
proliferation, migration, and differentiation (Campolongo, 2011). Adverse
developmental outcomes reported in exposed children include decreased
attention span and lower scores on tests of visual problem solving and
visual-motor coordination (Fried, 2003; Willford 2010).
Pregnancy outcome data are somewhat limited by the confounding risks
of concomitant tobacco use. In one metaanalysis of nearly 8000 exposed
pregnancies, only those with concomitant tobacco use had increased rates of
preterm birth and low-birthweight neonates (Conner, 2016). The American

College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019b) has stated that the
effects of marijuana may be as serious as those of cigarette smoking or
alcohol consumption. Because of neurodevelopmental concerns, women who
are pregnant or contemplating pregnancy should avoid marijuana use.

Methamphetamine
This sympathomimetic amine is derived from dextroamphetamine. It
enhances dopamine release and blocks its reuptake. Methamphetamine is
prescribed to treat attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and narcolepsy.
Abuse has been rising in the United States since the late 1980s (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019c). Methamphetamine is not
considered teratogenic. However, use in pregnancy is consistently associated
with small-for-gestational age newborns, and children are at risk for
developmental delays and behavioral abnormalities (Derauf, 2012; Eze,
2016; Gabrhelik, 2021; O’Connor, 2020). Behavioral abnormalities have
been described in both infants and school-aged children (Eze, 2016).
Hypertensive complications, placental abruption, preterm birth, and stillbirth
are other associated adverse outcomes (Gorman, 2014).

Opioids
The dramatic rise in narcotic use among nonpregnant and pregnant
individuals has been aptly termed an epidemic. Opioids are not major
teratogens. However, the NBDPS did identify a slightly greater risk for spina
bifida, gastroschisis, and cardiac abnormalities with periconceptional opioid
exposure (Broussard, 2011). The American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2019d) stresses that this potential, small increase in birth
defects with maintenance therapy should be weighed against the risks
associated with uncontrolled opioid abuse. Heroin addiction is associated
with adverse pregnancy outcomes from the effects of repeated narcotic
withdrawal on the fetus and placenta. These include preterm birth, placental
abruption, fetal-growth restriction, and fetal death.
Neonatal narcotic withdrawal, called the neonatal abstinence syndrome,
may manifest in 40 to 90 percent of exposed newborns (Blinick, 1973;
Creanga, 2012; Dashe, 2002; Zelson, 1973). As discussed in Chapter 33 (p.
605), CNS irritability may progress to seizures if untreated and may be
accompanied by tachypnea, apneic episodes, poor feeding, and failure to

thrive. At-risk neonates are closely monitored using a scoring system, and
those severely affected are treated with opioids (Finnegan, 1975). The
proportion of exposed newborns developing neonatal abstinence syndrome
has risen significantly in recent years (Creanga, 2012; Lind, 2015).
The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019d)
recommends that pregnant women with opioid-use disorder be maintained on
opioid-agonist therapy to reduce the risks associated with illicit opioid
abuse and associated behaviors. Treatment includes either buprenorphine,
which may be given in an office-based setting by a licensed buprenorphine
prescriber, or methadone, usually through a licensed outpatient opioid
treatment program. A multidisciplinary treatment program is recommended to
reduce the likelihood of additional opioid abuse while on maintenance
therapy. Withdrawal from methadone during pregnancy is discouraged
because of high relapse rates (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2019d). At Parkland Hospital, pregnant opioid users who
decline maintenance therapy are offered inpatient hospitalization for
controlled methadone taper. The goal is to reduce the likelihood of neonatal
abstinence syndrome (Dashe, 2002; Stewart, 2013).

Miscellaneous Drugs
Phencyclidine (PCP) or angel dust is not associated with congenital
anomalies. More than half of exposed newborns, however, experience
withdrawal symptoms characterized by tremors, jitteriness, and irritability.
Toluene is a common solvent used in paints and glue. Occupational exposure
is reported to have significant fetal risks (Wilkins-Haug, 1997). When
abused by women in early pregnancy, it is associated with toluene
embryopathy, which is phenotypically similar to fetal alcohol syndrome.
Abnormalities include pre- and postnatal growth deficiency, microcephaly,
midface hypoplasia, short palpebral fissures, and wide nasal bridge
(Pearson, 1994). Up to 40 percent of exposed children have developmental
delays (Arnold, 1994).

REFERENCES
Abel EL, Hannigan JH: Maternal risk factors in fetal alcohol syndrome: provocative and permissive
influences. Neurotoxicol Teratol 17(4):445, 1995

Ailes EC, Gilboa SM, Gill SK, et al: Association between antibiotic use among pregnant women and
urinary tract infections in the first trimester and birth defects, National Birth Defects Prevention
Study 1997 to 2011. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol 106(11):940, 2016
Allergan Pharmaceuticals: Avage (Tazarotene) prescribing information. 2019. Available at:
https://media.allergan.com/actavis/actavis/media/allergan-pdf-documents/productprescribing/AVAGE-Cream_pi.pdf. Accessed March 20, 2021
Alsaad AM, Kaplan YC, Koren G: Exposure to fluconazole and risk of congenital malformations in the
offspring: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Reprod Toxicol 52:78, 2015
Alverson CJ, Strickland MJ, Gilboa SM, et al: Maternal smoking and congenital heart defects in the
Baltimore-Washington Infant Study. Pediatrics 127(3):e647, 2011
Alwan S, Chambers CD: Findings from the National Birth Defects Prevention Study: interpretation and
translation for the clinician. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol 103(8):721, 2015
American Academy of Pediatrics, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Guidelines for
Perinatal Care, 8th ed. Elk Grove Village, AAP, 2017
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Lead screening during pregnancy and lactation.
Committee Opinion No. 533, August 2012, Reaffirmed 2019a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Marijuana use during pregnancy and lactation.
Committee Opinion No. 722, October 2017, Reaffirmed 2019b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Methamphetamine abuse in women of
reproductive age. Committee Opinion No. 479, March 2011, Reaffirmed 2019c
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Opioid use and opioid use disorder in pregnancy.
Committee Opinion No. 711, August 2017, Reaffirmed 2019d
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Use of psychiatric medications during pregnancy
and lactation. Practice Bulletin No. 92, April 2008, Reaffirmed 2019f
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Prepregnancy counseling. Committee Opinion
No. 762, December 2018, Reaffirmed 2020a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Tobacco and nicotine cessation during
pregnancy. Committee Opinion No. 807, April 2020b
Anderka MT, Lin AE, Abuelo DN, et al: Reviewing the evidence for mycophenolate mofetil as a new
teratogen: case report and review of the literature. Am J Med Genet A 149A(6):1241, 2009
Anderson TM, Lavista Ferres JM, Ren SY, et al: Maternal smoking before and during pregnancy and
the risk of sudden unexpected infant death. Pediatrics 143(4):e20183325, 2019
Ang-Lee MK, Moss J, Yuan CS: Herbal medicines and perioperative care. JAMA 286(2):208, 2001
Arnold GL, Kirby RS, Langendoerfer S, et al: Toluene embryopathy: clinical delineation and
developmental follow-up. Pediatrics 93(2):216, 1994
Autret-Leca E, Kreft-Jais C, Elefant E, et al: Isotretinoin exposure during pregnancy: assessment of
spontaneous reports in France. Drug Saf 33(8):659, 2010
Bada HS, Bann CM, Bauer CR, et al: Preadolescent behavior problems after prenatal cocaine
exposure: relationship between teacher and caretaker ratings (Maternal Lifestyle Study).
Neurotoxicol Teratol 33(1):78, 2011
Barr M, Cohen MM: ACE inhibitor fetopathy and hypocalvaria: the kidney-skull connection. Teratology
44(5):485, 1991
Bateman BT, Patorno E, Desai RJ, et al: Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors and the risk of
congenital malformations. Obstet Gynecol 129(1):174, 2017
Bausch Health: Bexarotene (Targretin) prescribing information. 2020. Available at:
https://bauschhealth.com/Portals/25/Pdf/PI/TargretinCapsules-PI.pdf. Accessed March 20, 2021

Berard A, Iessa N, Chaabane S, et al: The risk of major cardiac malformations associated with
paroxetine use during the first trimester of pregnancy: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Br J
Clin Pharmacol 81(4):589, 2016
Berard A, Zhao JP, Shui I, et al: Leflunomide use during pregnancy and the risk of adverse pregnancy
outcomes. Ann Rheum Dis 77(4):500, 2018
Billings RJ, Berkowitz RJ, Watson G: Teeth. Pediatrics 113(4Suppl):1120, 2004
Blinick G, Jerez E, Wallach RC: Methadone maintenance, pregnancy, and progeny. JAMA 225(5):477,
1973
Bristol-Myers Squibb Pharmaceuticals: Coumadin (Warfarin) prescribing information. 2019. Available
at: https://packageinserts.bms.com/pi/pi_coumadin.pdf. Accessed March 20, 2021
Bromley R, Weston J, Adab N, et al: Treatment for epilepsy in pregnancy: neurodevelopmental
outcomes in the child. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 10:CD010236, 2014
Broussard CS, Rasmussen SA, Reefhuis J, et al: Maternal treatment with opioid analgesics and risk for
birth defects. Am J Obstet Gynecol 204(4):314.e1, 2011
Brown QL, Sarvet AL, Shmulewitz D, et al: Trends in marijuana use among pregnant and nonpregnant
reproductive-aged women, 2002–2014. JAMA 317(2):207, 2017
Byrne JJ, Saucedo AM, Spong CY: Evaluation of drug labels following the 2015 Pregnancy and
Lactation Labeling Rule. JAMA Netw Open 3(8):e2015094, 2020
Campolongo P, Trezza V, Ratano P, et al: Developmental consequences of perinatal cannabis exposure:
behavioral and neuroendocrine effects in adult rodents. Psychopharmacology (Berl) 214(1):5, 2011
Carey JC, Martinez L, Balken E, et al: Determination of human teratogenicity by the astute clinician
method: review of illustrative agents and a proposal of guidelines. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol
Teratol 85(1):63, 2009
Caspers KM, Romitti RA, Lin S, et al: Maternal periconceptional exposure to cigarette smoking and
congenital limb deficiencies. Pediatr Perinat Epidemiol 27(6):509, 2013
Celgene Corporation: Pomalyst (pomalidomide) prescribing information. 2020. Available at:
https://packageinserts.bms.com/pi/pi_pomalyst.pdf. Accessed March 20, 2021
Celgene Corporation: Revlimid (lenalidomide) prescribing information. 2019. Available at:
https://packageinserts.bms.com/pi/pi_revlimid.pdf Accessed March 20, 2021
Celgene Corporation: Thalomid (thalidomide) prescribing information. 2021. Available at:
https://packageinserts.bms.com/pi/pi_thalomid.pdf Accessed March 20, 2021.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Alcohol use and binge drinking among women of
childbearing age—United States, 2011–2013. MMWR 64(37):1042, 2015
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Guidelines for the identification and management of lead
exposure in pregnant and lactating women. 2010. Available at:
https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/lead/publications/leadandpregnancy2010.pdf. Accessed March 20, 2021
Chambers CD, Johnson DL, Robinson LK, et al: Birth outcomes in women who have taken leflunomide
during pregnancy. Arthritis Rheum 62(5):1494, 2010
Chasnoff IJ, Chisum GM, Kaplan WE: Maternal cocaine use and genitourinary tract malformations.
Teratology 37(3):201, 1988
Chaudhry SA, Jong G, Koren G: The fetal safety of levetiracetam: a systematic review. Reprod Toxicol
46(1):40, 2014
Conner SN, Bedell V, Lipsey K, et al: Maternal marijuana use and adverse neonatal outcomes. Obstet
Gynecol 128(4):713, 2016
Conover EA, Polifka JE: The art and science of teratogen risk communication. Am J Med Genet C
Semin Med Genet 157(3):227, 2011

Cooper WO, Hernandez-Diaz S, Arbogast PG, et al: Major congenital malformation after first-trimester
exposure to ACE inhibitors. N Engl J Med 354(23):2443, 2006
Costei AM, Kozer E, Ho T, et al: Perinatal outcome following third trimester exposure to paroxetine.
Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 156(11):1129, 2002
Cragan JD, Giboa SM: Including prenatal diagnoses in birth defects monitoring: experience of the
Metropolitan Atlanta Congenital Birth Defects Program. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol
85(1)20, 2009
Creanga AA, Sabel JC, Ko JY, et al: Maternal drug use and its effect on neonates: a population-based
study in Washington state. Obstet Gynecol 119(5):924, 2012
Crijns HJ, Straus SM, Gispen-de Wied C, et al: Compliance with pregnancy prevention programmes of
isotretinoin in Europe: a systematic review. Br J Dermatol 164(2):238, 2011
Cross R, Ling C, Day NP, et al: Revisiting doxycycline in pregnancy and early childhood—time to
rebuild its reputation? Expert Opinion Drug Saf 15(3):367, 2016
Cumberland Pharmaceuticals: RediTrex (methotrexate) prescribing information. 2020. Available at:
https://reditrex.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/10/Reditrex-revised-PI_AUG2020-cleanJW.pdf.
Accessed March 20, 2021
Cunnington MC, Weil JG, Messenheimer JA, et al: Final results from 18 years of the International
Lamotrigine Pregnancy Registry. Neurology 76(21):1817, 2011
Dally A: Thalidomide: was the tragedy preventable? Lancet 351:1197, 1998
Dashe JS, Sheffield JS, Olscher DA, et al: Relationship between maternal methadone dosage and
neonatal withdrawal. Obstet Gynecol 100(6):1244, 2002
Dawson AL, Riehle-Colarusso T, Reefhuis J, et al: Maternal exposure to methotrexate and birth
defects: a population-based study. Am J Med Genet 164A(9):2212, 2014
Derauf C, LaGasse LL, Smith LM, et al: Prenatal methamphetamine exposure and inhibitory control
among young school-age children. J Pediatr 161:452, 2012
De Raaf MA, Beekhuijzen M, Guignabert C, et al: Endothelin-1 receptor antagonists in fetal
development and pulmonary arterial hypertension. Reprod Toxicol 56:45, 2015
Del Campo M, Kosaki K, Bennett FC, et al: Developmental delay in fetal aminopterin/methotrexate
syndrome. Teratology 60(1):10, 1999
Diav-Citrin O, Shechtman S, Zvi N, et al: Is it safe to use lamotrigine during pregnancy? A prospective
comparative observational study. Birth Defects Res 109(15):1196, 2017
Dickson B, Mansfield C, Guiahi M, et al: Recommendations from cannabis dispensaries about firsttrimester cannabis use. Obstet Gynecol 131(6):1031, 2018
Dietz PM, England LJ, Shapiro-Mendoza CK, et al: Infant morbidity and mortality attributable to
prenatal smoking in the U.S. Am J Prev Med 39(1):45, 2010
Dolk H, Loane M, Garne E: The prevalence of congenital anomalies in Europe. Adv Exp Med Biol
686:349, 2010
Downing KF, Riehle-Colarusso T, Gilboa SM, et al: Potential risk factors for Ebstein anomaly, National
Birth Defects Prevention Study, 1997–2011. Cardiol Young 29(6):819, 2019
Drake P, Driscoll AK, Mathews TJ: Cigarette smoking during pregnancy: United States, 2016. NCHS
Data Brief (305):1, 2018
D’Souza SW, Black P, Richards B: Smoking in pregnancy: associations with skinfold thickness, maternal
weight gain, and fetal size at birth. BMJ 282(6227):1661, 1981
Ehrenstein V, Sorensen HT, Bakketeig LS, et al: Medical databases in studies of drug teratogenicity:
methodological issues. Clin Epidemiol 2(1):37, 2010

England LJ, Bennett C, Denny CH, et al: Alcohol use and co-use of other substances among pregnant
females aged 12–44 years—United States, 2015–2018. MMWR 69(31):1009, 2020
Enns GM, Roeder E, Chan RT, et al: Apparent cyclophosphamide (Cytoxan) embryopathy: a distinct
phenotype? Am J Med Genet 86(3):237, 1999
Eze N, Smith LM, LaGasse LL, et al: School-aged outcomes following prenatal methamphetamine
exposure: 7.5-year follow-up from the infant development, environment, and lifestyle study. J Pediatr
170:34.e1, 2016
Facchinetti F, Pedrielli G, Benoni G, et al: Herbal supplements in pregnancy: unexpected results from a
multicentre study. Hum Reprod 27(11):3161, 2012
Feldkamp M, Carey JC: Clinical teratology counseling and consultation case report: low dose
methotrexate exposure in the early weeks of pregnancy. Teratology 47(6):533, 1993
Feldkamp ML, Carey JC, Byrne JL, et al: Etiology and clinical presentation of birth defects: population
based study. BMJ 357:j2249, 2017
Finnegan LP, Connaughton JF, Kron RE et al: Neonatal abstinence syndrome: assessment and
management. Addict Dis 2(1–2):141, 1975
Fisher SC, van Zutphen AR, Werler MM, et al: Maternal antihypertensive medication use and selected
birth defects in the National Birth Defects Prevention Study. Birth Defects Res 110(19):1433, 2018
Food and Drug Administration: Content and format of labeling for human prescription drug and
biological products; requirements for pregnancy and lactation labeling. Final rule. Fed Regist
79(233):72036, 2014
Food and Drug Administration: Evaluating the risks of drug exposure in human pregnancies. 2018.
Available at: https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fda-guidancedocuments/evaluating-risks-drug-exposure-human-pregnancies. Accessed March 20, 2021
Food and Drug Administration: FDA drug safety communication: antipsychotic drug labels updated on
use during pregnancy and risk of abnormal muscle movements and withdrawal symptoms in
newborns. 2017. Available at: https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm243903.htm. Accessed
March 20, 2021
Food and Drug Administration: FDA drug safety communication: FDA recommends avoiding use of
NSAIDs in pregnancy at 20 weeks or later because they can result in low amniotic fluid. 2020a.
Available at: www.fda.gov/drugs/drug-safety-and-availability/fda-recommends-avoiding-use-nsaidspregnancy-20-weeks-or-later-because-they-can-result-low-amniotic. Accessed March 20, 2021
Food and Drug Administration: List of pregnancy exposure registries. 2021. Available at:
https://www.fda.gov/science-research/womens-health-research/list-pregnancy-exposure-registries.
Accessed March 20, 2021
Food and Drug Administration: Pregnancy, lactation, and reproductive potential: labeling for human
prescription drug and biological products—content and format guidance for industry. Draft
Guidance, Revision 1. Rockville, Maryland, 2020b. Available at:
https://www.fda.gov/media/90160/download. Accessed March 20, 2021
Food and Drug Administration: Questions & answers from the FDA/EPA advice about eating fish for
women who are or might become pregnant, breastfeeding mothers, and young children. 2019.
Available at: https://www.fda.gov/food/consumers/questions-answers-fdaepa-advice-about-eatingfish-women-who-are-or-might-become-pregnant. Accessed March 20, 2021
Fried PA, Watkinson B, Gray R: Differential effects on cognitive functioning in 13- to 16-year-olds
prenatally exposed to cigarettes and marihuana. Neurotoxicol Teratol 25:427, 2003
Gabrhelik R, Skurtveit S, Nechanska B, et al: Prenatal methamphetamine exposure and adverse
neonatal outcomes: a nationwide cohort study. Eur Addict Res 27(2):97, 2021

Genentech: Herceptin (trastuzumab) prescribing information. 2020. Available at:
https://www.gene.com/download/pdf/herceptin_prescribing.pdf. Accessed March 20, 2021
Gilead Sciences: Letairis (ambrisentan) prescribing information. 2019. Available at:
https://www.gilead.com/∼/media/Files/pdfs/medicines/cardiovascular/letairis/letairis_pi.pdf.
Accessed March 20, 2021
Goldberg O, Moretti M, Levy A, et al: Exposure to nitrofurantoin during early pregnancy and congenital
malformations: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Obstet Gynaecol Can 37(2):150, 2015
Gorman MC, Orme KS, Nguyen NT, et al: Outcomes in pregnancies complicated by methamphetamine
use. Am J Obstet Gynecol 211(4):429.e1, 2014
Gouin K, Murphy K, Shah PS, et al: Effects of cocaine use during pregnancy on low birthweight and
preterm birth: systematic review and meta-analyses. Am J Obstet Gynecol 204(4):340.e1, 2011
Grab D, Paulus WE, Erdmann M, et al: Effects of low-dose aspirin on uterine and fetal blood flow
during pregnancy: results of a randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind trial. Ultrasound Obstet
Gynecol 15(1):19, 2000
Grandjean P, Herz KT: Methylmercury and brain development: imprecision and underestimation of
developmental neurotoxicity in humans. Mt Sinai J Med 78(1):107, 2011
Gregg NM: Congenital cataract following German measles in the mother. Trans Ophthalmol Soc 3:35,
1941
Grimes DA, Schulz KF: False alarms and pseudo-epidemics: the limitations of observational
epidemiology. Obstet Gynecol 120(4):920, 2012
Guerri C, Bazinet A, Riley EP: Foetal alcohol spectrum disorders and alterations in brain and behaviour.
Alcohol 44(2):108, 2009
Guron G, Friberg P: An intact renin-angiotensin system is a prerequisite for normal renal development. J
Hypertension 18(2):123, 2000
Hall HG, McKenna LG, Griffiths DL: Complementary and alternative medicine for induction of labor.
Women Birth 25(3):142, 2012
Hall JG, Pauli RM, Wilson K: Maternal and fetal sequelae of anticoagulation during pregnancy. Am J
Med 68(1):122, 1980
Hammers AL, Sanchez-Ramos L, Kaunitz AM: Antenatal exposure to indomethacin increases the risk
of severe intraventricular hemorrhage, necrotizing enterocolitis, and periventricular leukomalacia: a
systematic review with metaanalysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 212(4):505.e1, 2015a
Hammers AL, Sanchez-Ramos L, Kaunitz AM: Indomethacin as a tocolytic harmful to preterm infant.
Author reply. Am J Obstet Gynecol 213(6):879, 2015b
Hansen C, Andrade SE, Freiman H, et al: Trimethoprim-sulfonamide use during the first trimester of
pregnancy and the risk of congenital anomalies. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf 25(2):170, 2016
Hassouna A, Allam H: Limited dose warfarin throughout pregnancy in patients with mechanical heart
valve prosthesis: a meta-analysis. Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg 18(6):797, 2014
Haugen BR, Alexander EK, Bible KC, et al. 2015 American Thyroid Association management
guidelines for adult patients with thyroid nodules and differentiated thyroid cancer: the American
Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force on thyroid nodules and differentiated thyroid cancer.
Thyroid 26(1):1, 2016
Health and Human Services: Federal policy for the protection of human subjects. Fed Regist 82(2):7149,
2017
Henson LJ, Afsar S, Davenport L, et al: Pregnancy outcomes in patients treated with leflunomide, the
parent compound of the multiple sclerosis drug teriflunomide. Reprod Toxicol 95:45, 2020

Hernandez RK, Werler MM, Romitti P, et al: Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug use among women and
the risk of birth defects. Am J Obstet Gynecol 206(3):228.e1, 2012
Hernandez-Diaz S, Smith CR, Shen A, et al: Comparative safety of antiepileptic drugs during pregnancy.
Neurology 78(21):1692, 2012
Hoeltzenbein M, Elefant E, Vial T, et al: Teratogenicity of mycophenolate confirmed in a prospective
study of the European Network of Teratology Information Services. Am J Med Genet A
158A(3):588, 2012
Hoyme HE, Kalberg WO, Elliott AJ, et al: Updated clinical guidelines for diagnosing fetal alcohol
spectrum disorders. Pediatrics 138(2):e20154256, 2016
Hoyt AT, Canfield MA, Romitti PA, et al: Associations between maternal periconceptional exposure to
secondhand tobacco smoke and major birth defects. Am J Obstet Gynecol 215(5):613, 2016
Huybrechts KF, Bateman BT, Palmsten K, et al: Antidepressant use late in pregnancy and risk of
persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn. JAMA 313(21):2142, 2015
Huybrechts KF, Palmsten K, Avorn J, et al: Antidepressant use in pregnancy and the risk of cardiac
defects. N Engl J Med 360(25):2397, 2014
Hyoun SC, Obican SG, Scialli AR: Teratogen update: methotrexate. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol
Teratol 94(4):187, 2012
Janssen Pharmaceutica: Opsumit (macitentan) prescribing information. 2019a. Available at:
https://www.janssenlabels.com/package-insert/product-monograph/prescribinginformation/OPSUMIT-pi.pdf. Accessed March 20, 2021
Janssen Pharmaceutica: Tracleer (bosentan) prescribing information. 2019b. Available at:
https://www.tracleer.com/assets/PDFs/Tracleer_Full_Prescribing_Information.pdf. Accessed
March 20, 2021
Jasper JD, Goel R, Einarson A, et al: Effects of framing on teratogenic risk perception in pregnant
women. Lancet 358(9289):1237, 2001
Jones KL, Smith DW, Ulleland CN, et al: Pattern of malformation in offspring of chronic alcoholic
mothers. Lancet 1(7815):1267, 1973
Jordan AE, Jackson GL, Deardorff D, et al: Serotonin reuptake inhibitor use in pregnancy and the
neonatal behavioral syndrome. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 21(10):745, 2008
Kaplan YC, Ozsarfati J, Etwel F, et al: Pregnancy outcomes following first-trimester exposure to topical
retinoids: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Br J Dermatol 173(5):1117, 2015
Kennedy DA, Lupattelli A, Koren G, et al: Safety classification of herbal medicines used in pregnancy
in a multinational study. BMC Complement Altern Med 16(1):102, 2016
Khabour OF, Alzoubi KH, Al-Sheyab N, et al: Investigating the effects of exposure to waterpipe smoke
on pregnancy outcomes using an animal model. Nicotine Tob Res 18:585, 2016
Khoury MJ, James LM, Flanders WD, et al: Interpretation of recurring weak association obtained from
epidemiologic studies of suspected human teratogens. Teratology 46(1):69, 1992
Kieler H, Artama M, Engeland A, et al: Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors during pregnancy and
risk of persistent pulmonary hypertension in the newborn: population based cohort study from the
five Nordic countries. BMJ 344:d8012, 2012
Kim HO, Lee K, Lee SM, et al: Association between pregnancy outcomes and radioactive iodine
treatment after thyroidectomy among women with thyroid cancer. JAMA Intern Med 180(1):54,
2020
King RW, Baca MJ, Armenti VT, et al: Pregnancy outcomes related to mycophenolate exposure in
female kidney transplant recipients. Am J Transplant 17(1):151, 2017

Kirshon B, Wasserstrum N, Willis R, et al: Teratogenic effects of first trimester cyclophosphamide
therapy. Obstet Gynecol 72(3Pt2):462, 1988
Klarskov P, Andersen JT, Jimenez-Solem E, et al: Short-acting sulfonamides near term and neonatal
jaundice. Obstet Gynecol 122(1):105, 2013
Koren G, Bologa M, Long D, et al: Perception of teratogenic risk by pregnant women exposed to drugs
and chemicals during the first trimester. Am J Obstet Gynecol 160(5Pt1):1190, 1989
Koren G, Pastuszak A, Ito S: Drugs in pregnancy. N Engl J Med 338(16):1128, 1998
Krishnasamy VP, Hallowell BD, Ko JY, et al: Update: characteristics of a nationwide outbreak of ecigarette, or vaping, product use–associated lung injury—United States, August 2019–January 2020.
MMWR 69(3):90, 2020
Kummet CM, Moreno LM, Wilcox AJ, et al. Passive smoke exposure as a risk factor for oral clefts–a
large international population-based study. Am J Epidemiol 183(9):834, 2016
Kutscher AH, Zegarelli EV, Tovell HM, et al: Discoloration of deciduous teeth induced by administration
of tetracycline antepartum. Am J Obstet Gynecol 96(2):291, 1966
Lammer EJ, Chen DT, Hoar RM, et al: Retinoic acid embryopathy. N Engl J Med 313(14):837, 1985
Lange S, Probst C, Gmel G, et al: Global prevalence of fetal alcohol spectrum disorder among children
and youth: a systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA Pediatr 171(10):948, 2017
Lemoine P, Harouusseau H, Borteyru JP, et al: Les enfants de parents alcooliques: anomalies observées,
a propos de 127 cas. Ouest Med 21:476, 1968
Lenz W, Knapp K: Thalidomide embryopathy. Arch Environ Health 5:100, 1962
Leong C, Chateau D, Dahl M, et al: Prescription medication use during pregnancies that resulted in
births and abortions (2001-2013): a retrospective population-based study in a Canadian population.
PLoS One 14(3):e0211319, 2019
Li DK, Yang C, Andrade S, et al: Maternal exposure to angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors in the
first trimester and risk of malformations in offspring: a retrospective cohort study. BMJ 343:d5931,
2011
Lin S, Munsie JP, Herdt-Losavio ML, et al: Maternal asthma medication use and the risk of selected
birth defects. Pediatrics 129(2):317, 2012
Lind JN, Petersen EE, Lederer PA, et al: Infant and maternal characteristics in neonatal abstinence
syndrome—selected hospitals in Florida, 2010–2011. MMWR 64(8):213, 2015
Lipshultz SE, Frassica JJ, Orav EJ: Cardiovascular abnormalities in infants prenatally exposed to
cocaine. J Pediatr 118(1):44, 1991
Malik S, Cleves MA, Honein MA, et al: Maternal smoking and congenital heart defects. Pediatrics
121(4):e810, 2008
Martinez-Frias ML, Czeizel AE, Rodriguez-Pinilla E, et al: Smoking during pregnancy and Poland
sequence: results of a population-based registry and a case-control registry. Teratology 59(1):35,
1999
May PA, Baete A, Russo J, et al: Prevalence and characteristics of fetal alcohol spectrum disorders.
Pediatrics 134(5):855, 2014
May PA, Gossage JP, Kalberg WO, et al: Prevalence and epidemiologic characteristics of FASD from
various research methods with an emphasis on recent in-school studies. Dev Disabil Res Rev
15(3):176, 2009
McKeigue PM, Lamm SH, Linn S, et al: Bendectin and birth defects: I. A meta-analysis of the
epidemiologic studies. Teratology 50(1):27, 1994
Meador KJ, Baker GA, Browning N, et al: Cognitive function at 3 years of age after fetal exposure to
antiepileptic drugs. N Engl J Med 360(16):1597, 2009

Merck: Rebetol (ribavirin) prescribing information. 2020. Available at:
https://www.merck.com/product/usa/pi_circulars/r/rebetol/rebetol_pi.pdf. Accessed March 20, 2021
Merlob P, Stahl B, Klinger G: Tetrada of the possible mycophenolate mofetil embryopathy: a review.
Reprod Toxicol 28(1):105, 2009
Metz TD, Borgelt LM: Marijuana use in pregnancy and while breastfeeding. Obstet Gynecol
132(5):1198, 2018
Mitchell AA, Gilboa SM, Werler MM, et al: Medication use during pregnancy, with particular focus on
prescription drugs: 1976–2008. Am J Obstet Gynecol 205(1):51.e1, 2011
Mølgaard-Nielsen D, Hviid A: Newer-generation antiepileptic drugs and the risk of major birth defects.
JAMA 305(19):1996, 2011
Mølgaard-Nielsen D, Pasternak B, Hviid A: Use of oral fluconazole during pregnancy and the risk of
birth defects. N Engl J Med 369(9):830, 2013
Munoz Balbontin Y, Stewart D, Shetty A, et al: Herbal medicinal product use during pregnancy and the
postnatal period: a systematic review. Obstet Gynecol 133(5):920, 2019
Munsie JW, Lin S, Browne ML, et al: Maternal bronchodilator use and the risk of oral clefts. Hum
Reprod 26(11):3147, 2011
Murphy VE, Fittock RJ, Zarzycki PK, et al: Metabolism of synthetic steroids by the human placenta.
Placenta 28(1):39, 2007
National Toxicology Program: NTP monograph: developmental effects and pregnancy outcomes
associated with cancer chemotherapy use during pregnancy. NTP Monog 2:1, 2013
Nordeng H, Bayne K, Havnen GC, et al: Use of herbal drugs during pregnancy among 600 Norwegian
women in relation to concurrent use of conventional drugs and pregnancy outcome. Complement
Ther Clin Pract 17(3):147, 2011
Oakley GP, Erickson JD: Vitamin A and birth defects. N Engl J Med 333(21):1414, 1995
O’Connor A, Seeber C, Harris E, et al: Developmental outcomes following prenatal exposure to
methamphetamine: a western Australian perspective. J Paediatr Child Health 56(3):372, 2020
Ornoy A, Koren G: Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors during pregnancy: do we have now more
definite answers related to prenatal exposure? Birth Defects Res 109(12):898, 2017
Pallivalapila AR, Stewart D, Shetty A, et al: Use of complementary and alternative medicines during the
third trimester. Obstet Gynecol 125(1):204, 2015
Panchaud A, Csajka C, Merlob P, et al: Pregnancy outcome following exposure to topical retinoids: a
multicenter prospective study. J Clin Pharmacol 52(12):1844, 2012
Park-Wyllie L, Mazzota P, Pastuszak A, et al: Birth defects after maternal exposure to corticosteroids:
prospective cohort study and meta-analysis of epidemiological studies. Teratology 62(6):385, 2000
Patorno E, Huybrechts KF, Bateman BT, et al: Lithium use in pregnancy and the risk of cardiac
malformations. N Engl J Med 376(23):2245, 2017
Pearson MA, Hoyme HE, Seaver LH, et al: Toluene embryopathy: delineation of the phenotype and
comparison with fetal alcohol syndrome. Pediatrics 93(2):211, 1994
Pryde PG, Sedman AB, Nugent CE, et al: Angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor fetopathy. J Am Soc
Nephrol 3(9):1575, 1993
Rasanen J, Jouppila P: Fetal cardiac function and ductus arteriosus during indomethacin and sulindac
therapy for threatened preterm labor: a randomized study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 173(1):20, 1995
Reefhuis J, Gilboa SM, Anderka M, et al: The National Birth Defects Prevention Study: a review of the
methods. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol 103(8):656, 2015
Richardson S, Browne ML, Rasmussen SA, et al: Associations between periconceptional alcohol
consumption and craniosynostosis, omphalocele, and gastroschisis. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol

Teratol 91(7):623, 2011
Rocheleau CM, Bertke SJ, Lawson CC, et al: Maternal occupational pesticide exposure and risk of
congenital heart defects in the National Birth Defects Prevention Study. Birth Defects Res A Clin
Mol Teratol 103(10):823, 2015
Rothman KJ, Moore LL, Singer MR, et al: Teratogenicity of high vitamin A intake. N Engl J Med
333(21):1369, 1995
Sabbagh HJ, Hassan MH, Innes NP, et al: Passive smoking in the etiology of non-syndromic orofacial
clefts: a systematic review and meta-analysis. PLOS One 10(3):e0116963, 2015
Sadler TW (ed): Langman’s Medical Embryology, 6th ed. Baltimore, Williams & Wilkins, 1990, p 130
Sanofi-Aventis: Arava (leflunomide) prescribing information. 2016. Available at:
https://products.sanofi.us/arava/arava.html. Accessed March 20, 2021
Scheuerle AE, Holmes LB, Albano JD, et al: Levetiracetam Pregnancy Registry: final results and a
review of the impact of registry methodology and definitions on the prevalence of major congenital
malformations. Birth Defects Res 111(13):872, 2019
Schuurman TN, Witteveen PO, van der Wall E, et al: Tamoxifen and pregnancy: an absolute
contraindication? Breast Can 175(1):17, 2019
Shepard TH: Annual commentary on human teratogens. Teratology 66(6):275, 2002a
Shepard TH: Letters: “proof” of human teratogenicity. Teratology 50(2):97, 1994
Shepard TH, Brent RL, Friedman JM, et al: Update on new developments in the study of human
teratogens. Teratology 65(4):153, 2002b
Siu AL: Behavioral and pharmacotherapy interventions for tobacco smoking cessation in adults,
including pregnant women: U.S. Preventive Services Task Force Recommendation Statement. U.S.
Preventive Services Task Force. Ann Intern Med 163:622, 2015
Spindel ER, McEvoy CT: The role of nicotine in the effects of maternal smoking during pregnancy on
lung development and childhood respiratory disease. Implications for dangers of e-cigarettes. Am J
Respir Crit Care Med 193(5):486, 2016
Spong CY, Bianchi DW: Improving public health requires inclusion of underrepresented populations in
research. JAMA 319(4):337, 2018
Stewart RD, Nelson DB, Adhikari EH, et al: The obstetrical and neonatal impact of maternal opioid
detoxification in pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 209(3):267, 2013
Stiefel Laboratories: Soriatane (acitretin) prescribing information. 2017. Available at:
https://gskpro.com/content/dam/global/hcpportal/en_US/Prescribing_Information/Soriatane/pdf/SOR
IATANE-PI-MG.PDF. Accessed March 20, 2021
Stillerman KP, Mattison DR, Giudice LC, et al: Environmental exposures and adverse pregnancy
outcomes: a review of the science. Reprod Sci 15(7):631, 2008
Stingone JA, Luben TJ, Carmichael SL, et al: Maternal exposure to nitrogen dioxide, intake of methyl
nutrients and congenital heart defects in offspring. Am J Epidemiol 186(6):719, 2017
Strandberg TE, Andersson S, Jarvenpaa AL, et al: Preterm birth and licorice consumption during
pregnancy. Am J Epidemiol 156(9):803, 2002
Strandberg-Larsen K, Nielsen NR, Grønbaek M, et al: Binge drinking in pregnancy and risk of fetal
death. Obstet Gynecol 111(3):602, 2008
Streissguth AP, Clarren SK, Jones KL: Natural history of fetal alcohol syndrome: a 10-year follow-up of
eleven patients. Lancet 2:85, 1985
Sullivan PM, Dervan LA, Reiger S, et al: Risk of congenital heart defects in the offspring of smoking
mothers: a population-based study. J Pediatr 166(4):978, 2015

Teratology Society Public Affairs Committee: Causation in teratology-related litigation. Birth Def Res A
Clin Mol Teratol 73(6):421, 2005
Tinker SC, Gilboa SM, Moore CA, et al: Specific birth defects in pregnancies of women with diabetes:
National Birth Defects Prevention Study, 1997–2011. Am J Obstet Gynecol 222(2):176, 2020
Vajda FJ, O’Brien TJ, Lander CM, et al: Antiepileptic drug combinations not involving valproate and the
risk of fetal malformations. Epilepsia 57(7):1048, 2016
van der Heijden BJ, Carlus C, Narcy F, et al: Persistent anuria, neonatal death, and renal microcystic
lesions after prenatal exposure to indomethacin. Am J Obstet Gynecol 171(3):617, 1994
Van Driel D, Wesseling J, Sauer PJ, et al: Teratogen update: fetal effects after in utero exposure to
coumarins overview of cases, follow-up findings, and pathogenesis. Teratology 66(3):127, 2002
Van Gelder MM, Reefhuis J, Caton AR, et al: Maternal periconceptional illicit drug use and the risk of
congenital malformations. Epidemiology 20:60, 2009
Vargesson N: Thalidomide-induced teratogenesis: history and mechanisms. Birth Defects Res C
Embryo Today 105(2):140, 2015
Walker MP, Moore TR, Brace RA: Indomethacin and arginine vasopressin interaction in the fetal
kidney. A mechanism of oliguria. Am J Obstet Gynecol 171(5):1234, 1994
Warkany J: Warfarin embryopathy. Teratology 14(2):205, 1976
Weber-Schoendorfer C, Kayser A, Tissen-Diabate T, et al: Fetotoxic risk of AT1 blockers exceeds that
of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors: an observational study. J Hypertens 38(1):133, 2020
Werler MM: Teratogen update: smoking and reproductive outcomes. Teratology 55(6):382, 1997
Weston J, Bromley R, Jackson CF, et al: Monotherapy treatment of epilepsy in pregnancy: congenital
malformation outcomes in the child. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 11:CD010224, 2016
West-Ward Pharmaceuticals: Lithium prescribing information. 2020. Available at:
dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=7dc9c6d2-6d9a-49e4-a8ab-437b0ed5f84e.
Accessed March 20, 2021
Wiesner J, Knoss W: Herbal medicinal products in pregnancy—which data are available? Reprod
Toxicol 72:142, 2017
Wilkins-Haug L: Teratogen update: toluene. Teratology 55(2):145, 1997
Willford JA, Chandler LS, Goldschmidt L, et al: Effects of prenatal tobacco, alcohol and marijuana
exposure on processing speed, visual-motor coordination, and inter-hemispheric transfer.
Neurotoxicol Teratol 32:580, 2010
Williams JF, Smith VC, American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on Substance Abuse: Fetal alcohol
spectrum disorders. Pediatrics 136(5):e1395, 2015
Wurst KE, Poole C, Ephross SA, et al: First trimester paroxetine use and the prevalence of congenital,
specifically cardiac defects: a meta-analysis of epidemiological studies. Birth Defect Res A Clin Mol
Teratol 88(3):159, 2010
Yacobi S, Ornoy A: Is lithium a real teratogen? What can we conclude from the prospective versus
retrospective studies? A review. Isr J Psychiatry Relat Sci 45(2):95, 2008
Yorifuji T: Lessons from an early-stage epidemiological study of Minimata disease. J Epidemiol 30(1):12,
2020
Yoshihara A, Noh JY, Watanabe N, et al: Substituting potassium iodide for methimazole as the treatment
for Graves’ disease during the first trimester may reduce the incidence of congenital anomalies: a
retrospective study at a single medical institution in Japan. Thyroid 25(10):1155, 2015
Yoshihara A, Noh J, Yamaguchi T, et al: Treatment of Graves’ disease with antithyroid drugs in the first
trimester of pregnancy and the prevalence of congenital malformation. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
97:2396, 2012

Young-Wolff KC, Sarovar V, Tucker LY et al: Trends in marijuana use among pregnant women with and
without nausea and vomiting in pregnancy, 2009–2016. Drug Alcohol Depend 196(1): 66, 2019
Zelson C, Lee SJ, Casalino M: Neonatal narcotic addiction: comparative effects of maternal intake of
heroin and methadone. N Engl J Med 289(23):1216, 1973
Zhu Y, Bateman BT, Gray KJ, et al: Oral fluconazole use in the first trimester and risk of congenital
malformations: population based cohort study. BMJ 369:m1494, 2020

CHAPTER 9

Preconceptional Counseling

COUNSELING SESSION
MEDICAL HISTORY
GENETIC DISEASES
REPRODUCTIVE HISTORY
PARENTAL AGE
SOCIAL HISTORY
SCREENING TESTS
REFERENCES
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) defines
preconceptional health to encompass the overall health of nonpregnant
women during their reproductive years (Robbins, 2018). The American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019b) and the Society for
Maternal–Fetal Medicine (2014, 2021) attest to the importance of
preconceptional care and promote the following objectives to advance it:
1. Improve knowledge, attitudes, and behaviors of men and women related to
preconceptional health
2. Assure that all childbearing-aged women receive preconceptional care
services—including evidence-based risk screening, health promotion, and
interventions—that will enable them to enter pregnancy in optimal health

3. Implement interconceptional interventions to prevent or minimize recurrent
adverse outcomes
4. Reduce the racial and socioeconomical disparities in adverse pregnancy
outcomes
Table 9-1 lists the prevalence of many conditions often amenable to
preconceptional intervention (Robbins, 2018). These are frequently
encountered by generalist obstetrician–gynecologists, who can help optimize
health entering pregnancy (Arluck, 2018). For example, by the time most
women realize they are pregnant—usually 1 to 2 weeks after the first missed
period—the embryo has already begun to form. Thus, many preventive steps
—such as folic acid to avoid neural-tube defects—will be ineffective if
initiated at this time. Moreover, 45 percent of all pregnancies in the United
States are unplanned, and often these are at greatest risk (Finer, 2016). Last,
a disproportionate number of indigent women receive less preconceptional
care compared with their more affluent counterparts (Easter, 2017).
TABLE 9-1. Preconceptional Health Indicators—United States, 2013–2015

Few randomized trials evaluate preconceptional care efficacy, in part
because withholding such counseling would be unethical. Also, pregnancy

outcomes are dependent on the interaction of various maternal, fetal, and
environmental factors. Thus, ascribing a salutary outcome to a specific
intervention is difficult (Temel, 2014; Tieu, 2017). However, prospective
observational and case-control studies have demonstrated the successes of
preconceptional counseling (Yamamoto, 2018). Therefore, routine pregnancy
intention screening should be done (Manze, 2020).

COUNSELING SESSION
Obstetricians–gynecologists, internists, family practitioners, and
pediatricians have the best opportunity to provide preventive counseling
during periodic health maintenance examinations. The occasion of a negative
pregnancy test is also an excellent time for education (Skogsdal, 2018). Jack
and colleagues (1995) administered a comprehensive preconceptional risk
survey to 136 such women, and almost 95 percent reported at least one
problem that could affect a future pregnancy (see Table 9-1). Providers
should be knowledgeable regarding relevant medical diseases, prior surgery,
reproductive disorders, or genetic conditions and be able to interpret data
and recommendations provided by other specialists (Simpson, 2014).
Women presenting specifically for preconceptional evaluation are
advised that information collection may be time consuming, depending on the
number and complexity of factors. The intake evaluation includes a thorough
review of the medical, obstetrical, social, and family histories. Useful
information is more likely to be obtained by asking specific questions
regarding each of these histories and the health of each family member than
by asking general, open-ended questions. Some important information can be
obtained by questionnaires that address these topics. Answers are reviewed
with the couple to ensure appropriate follow-up, including obtaining relevant
medical records.

■ The Fourth Trimester
Another optimal time to begin preconceptional counseling is during the
“fourth trimester.” This was emphasized by the Presidential Task Force on
Redefining the Postpartum Visit (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2018e). Designed to optimize postpartum care and provide
contraceptive counseling, it also sets the stage for any subsequent pregnancy

and for the woman’s long-term health. To assist the provider, the American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019b) has joined the Society
of Maternal–Fetal Medicine to provide an Obstetric Care Consensus guide
that emphasizes the interpregnancy period.

MEDICAL HISTORY
With specific medical conditions, general points include the pregnancy’s
effect on the condition and the disorder’s influence on the fetus and
pregnancy course. Some chronic conditions that may worsen pregnancy
outcomes include treated or active cancer, prior peripartum cardiomyopathy,
antiphospholipid antibodies, systemic lupus erythematosus, and congenital
heart disease (Amant, 2015; Cunningham, 2019; Davis, 2021; Foeller, 2018;
Gibbins, 2018; Hopkins, 2018). Importantly, psychological health also is
considered (Barker, 2020; Lassi, 2014). Detailed preconceptional
information regarding a few exemplary conditions is found in the next
sections and in the other topic-specific chapters of this text.

■ Diabetes Mellitus
Because maternal and fetal pathology associated with hyperglycemia is well
known, diabetes is the prototype of a condition for which preconceptional
counseling is beneficial. Diabetes-associated risks to both mother and fetus
are discussed in detail in Chapter 60 (p. 1068). If a patient maintains glucose
levels close to normal, many of these complications can be avoided before
conception. Another important aspect of counseling pertains to the frequent
use of teratogenic angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors in this population
(Podymow, 2015).
The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2018f) has
concluded that preconceptional counseling for women with pregestational
diabetes is beneficial and cost-effective and should be encouraged. The
American Diabetes Association (2004) has promulgated consensus
recommendations for preconceptional care for women with diabetes. These
guidelines advise an inventory of disease duration and related complications
and clinical and laboratory examination for end-organ damage. Perhaps most
essential, they encourage a preconceptional hemoglobin A1c level goal

below 7 percent. In addition to assessing diabetic control, hemoglobin A1c
measurement can also forecast the risks for gestational diabetes and for
major anomalies (Fig. 9-1) (Hinkle, 2018; Martin, 2020).

FIGURE 9-1 Relationship between first-trimester glycosylated hemoglobin values and risk for major
congenital malformations in 320 women with insulin-dependent diabetes.

Although no randomized trials attest to the success of preconceptional
counseling in women with diabetes, cohort studies do demonstrate its
effectiveness (Tieu, 2017). In a prospective study of 5075 affected women,
preconceptional counseling improved hemoglobin A1c levels, folic acid
compliance, and “optimal” pregnancy preparation (Yamamoto, 2018).
Diabetic women who undergo preconceptional counseling also have
improved glycemic control before pregnancy and in the first trimester and
experience lower rates of adverse outcomes—defined as a perinatal death or
major congenital anomaly (Tripathi, 2010). Despite such benefits, in one
study of approximately 300 diabetic women in a managed-care plan, only
approximately half received preconceptional counseling (Kim, 2005).

■ Epilepsy
Compared with unaffected women, those with a seizure disorder carry an
augmented risk of neonates with structural anomalies. Some early reports
indicated that epilepsy conferred an elevated a priori risk for congenital

malformations that was independent of anticonvulsant treatment effects. More
recent studies have largely failed to confirm this, but it is difficult to refute
entirely because women who are controlled without medication generally
have less severe disease (Cassina, 2013; Vajda, 2015). Polytherapy is
associated with a higher malformation risk compared with monotherapy
(Bromley, 2017). Last, in women using antiseizure medications, the risks for
miscarriage and stillbirth in do not appear elevated (Aghajanian, 2015; Bech,
2014).
Ideally, medications are adjusted preconceptionally to minimize seizure
frequency. From one national registry, the seizure risk during pregnancy was
50 to 70 percent lower in women without a seizure in the year preceding
pregnancy compared with a group experiencing seizures in this preceding
year (Vajda, 2008). No further advantages accrued if the seizure-free period
exceeded a year.
Treatment goals attempt to control seizure frequency with monotherapy
and with medications considered less teratogenic (Aguglia, 2009; Tomson,
2009). Discussed in Chapter 63 (p. 1129) and shown in Table 9-2, some onedrug regimens are more teratogenic than others. In particular, valproic acid is
avoided if possible, as it has consistently been associated with a greater risk
for major congenital malformations than other antiepileptic drugs (Jentink,
2010; Vajda, 2015). Information concerning the teratogenicity of newer
antiepileptics is limited (Knight, 2021).
TABLE 9-2. First-Trimester Antiepileptic Monotherapy and the Associated
Major Malformation Risk

The American Academy of Neurology recommends consideration of
antiseizure medication discontinuation before pregnancy in suitable
candidates (Jeha, 2005). These include women who satisfy the following
criteria: (1) have been seizure-free for 2 to 5 years, (2) display a single
seizure type, (3) have a normal neurological examination and normal
intelligence, and (4) show electroencephalogram results that have normalized
with treatment.
Women with seizures should be advised to take a daily 4-mg oral folic
acid supplement. Even so, the value of folate to reduce fetal malformation
rates in pregnant women taking anticonvulsant therapy is not entirely clear. In
one case-control study, the congenital abnormality risk was reduced by
maternal folate supplementation in fetuses exposed to carbamazepine,
phenobarbital, phenytoin, and primidone (Kjær, 2008). Conversely, Morrow
and coworkers (2009) compared fetal outcomes of women who received
preconceptional folic acid with those who did not receive it until later in

pregnancy or not at all. In this study, a paradoxical increase in the number of
major congenital malformations was observed in the group who received
preconceptional folate. These investigators concluded that folate metabolism
may be only a part of the mechanism by which malformations are induced in
women taking these medications.

■ Immunizations
Preconceptional counseling includes assessment of immunity against common
pathogens. Also, depending on health status, travel plans, and time of year,
other immunizations may be indicated as discussed in Chapter 10 (p. 189).
Several immunization resources are listed in Table 9-3. Vaccines that contain
toxoids such as tetanus are suitable before or during gestation. Also, those
containing killed bacteria or viruses—such as influenza, pneumococcus,
hepatitis B, meningococcus, and rabies vaccines—are not associated with
adverse fetal outcomes and are not contraindicated preconceptionally or
during pregnancy. Conversely, live-virus vaccines are not recommended
during pregnancy. Examples are vaccines against varicella-zoster, measles,
mumps, rubella, polio, chickenpox, and yellow fever. Moreover, 1 month or
longer should ideally pass between vaccination and conception attempts.
That said, inadvertent administration of measles, mumps, rubella (MMR) or
varicella vaccines during pregnancy should not generally be considered
indications for pregnancy termination. Most reports indicate that the fetal risk
is only theoretical. Immunization to smallpox, anthrax, and other bioterrorism
diseases is discussed if clinically appropriate (Chap. 67, p. 1200).
TABLE 9-3. Immunization Resources

With some infections, vaccines are unavailable. One recent example is
the Zika virus (Brasil, 2016). For this virus, during the 2016 epidemic, the
CDC issued travel advisories for pregnant women (Petersen, 2016; SchulerFaccini, 2016).

GENETIC DISEASES

The CDC (2016) estimates that 3 percent of neonates born each year in the
United States will have at least one birth defect. Importantly, such defects are
the leading cause of infant mortality and account for 20 percent of deaths.
Ethics preclude randomized trials of preconceptional counseling for genetic
risk (Hussein, 2018). Instead, the benefits of preconceptional counseling
usually are measured by comparing the incidence of new cases before and
after initiation of such a program. Specific congenital conditions that clearly
benefit from patient education include neural-tube defects, phenylketonuria,
thalassemias, and other genetic diseases more common in individuals of
Eastern European Jewish descent (King, 2018). Other missed opportunities
for genetic consultation were found for women with a personal or family
history of birth defects, intellectual disability or autism, and a prior positive
genetic carrier screening test (McClatchey, 2018).

■ Family History
Pedigree construction using the symbols shown in Figure 9-2 is the most
thorough method for obtaining a family history as a part of genetic screening.
The health and reproductive status of each “blood relative” are individually
reviewed for medical illnesses, mental retardation, birth defects, infertility,
and pregnancy loss. Certain racial, ethnic, or religious backgrounds may
indicate elevated risk for specific recessive disorders.

FIGURE 9-2 Symbols used for pedigree construction.

Although most women can provide information regarding their history,
their understanding may be limited. Pregnant women may fail to communicate
a birth defect in the family or may report it incorrectly. Thus, any disclosed
defect or genetic disease is ideally confirmed by reviewing pertinent medical
records or by contacting affected relatives for additional information.

■ Neural-Tube Defects
The incidence of neural-tube defects (NTDs) is 0.9 per 1000 live births, and
they are second only to cardiac anomalies as the most frequent structural fetal
malformation. Some of these malformations are associated with specific
mutations. One example is the 677C → T substitution in the gene that
encodes methylene tetrahydrofolate reductase. For this and similar gene
defects, one seminal trial showed that preconceptional folic acid therapy
significantly reduced the risk for a recurrent NTD by 72 percent (Medical
Research Council Vitamin Study Research Group, 1991). More importantly,
because more than 90 percent of neonates with NTDs are born to women at
low risk, Czeizel and Dudas (1992) showed that universal supplementation
reduced the a priori risk of a first NTD.
Because of these findings, all women who may become pregnant are
recommended to take daily 400 to 800 μg of folic acid orally before
conception and through the first trimester (U.S. Preventive Services Task
Force, 2019). Folate fortification of cereal grains has been mandatory in the
United States since 1998, and this practice has lowered neural-tube defect
rates (Williams, 2015). Despite the demonstrated benefits of folate
supplementation, only half of women take folic acid supplementation
periconceptionally (de Jong-van den Berg, 2005; Goldberg, 2006).

■ Phenylketonuria
More than 600 mutations have been identified in the phenylalanine
hydroxylase gene. The inherited defect in phenylalanine metabolism
exemplifies diseases in which the fetus may not be at risk to inherit the
disorder but may be damaged by maternal disease. Specifically, mothers with
phenylketonuria (PKU) who eat an unrestricted diet have abnormally high
blood phenylalanine levels. This amino acid readily crosses the placenta and
can damage developing fetal organs, especially neural and cardiac tissues.
With appropriate preconceptional counseling and adherence to a
phenylalanine-restricted diet before pregnancy, the incidence of fetal
malformations is dramatically reduced (Camp, 2014; Vockley, 2014).
Therefore, the phenylalanine concentration is ideally brought into normal
range 3 months before conception and then maintained there throughout
pregnancy (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020a).

The target phenylalanine blood concentration is 120 to 360 µmol/L (Camp,
2014).

■ Thalassemias
These disorders of globin-chain synthesis are the most common single-gene
disorders worldwide (Forget, 2013; Vichinsky, 2013). As many as 200
million people carry a gene for one of these hemoglobinopathies, and
hundreds of mutations are known to cause thalassemia syndromes (Chap. 59,
p. 1053). In endemic areas such as Mediterranean and Southeast Asian
countries, counseling and other prevention strategies have reduced the
incidence of new cases by up to 80 percent (Cao, 2013).
The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2018a)
recommends that individuals of high-risk ancestry be offered carrier
screening to allow them informed decision-making regarding reproduction
and prenatal diagnosis. One method of early prenatal diagnosis for some
thalassemia syndromes is preimplantation genetic testing (PGT), which is
coupled with assisted reproductive technology (Chap. 17, p. 348).

■ Individuals of Eastern European Jewish Descent
Most individuals of Jewish ancestry in North America are descended from
Ashkenazi Jewish communities and are at greater risk for having offspring
with one of several autosomal recessive disorders. These include Tay-Sachs
disease, Gaucher disease, cystic fibrosis, Canavan disease, familial
dysautonomia, mucolipidosis IV, Niemann-Pick disease type A, Fanconi
anemia group C, and Bloom syndrome. The American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2017a; 2019a) recommends
preconceptional counseling and screening for these disorders in this
population. Carrier frequency and features of these conditions are discussed
in greater detail in Chapter 17 (p. 343).

REPRODUCTIVE HISTORY
During preconceptional screening, information is sought regarding infertility;
abnormal pregnancy outcomes that may include miscarriage, ectopic

pregnancy, molar pregnancy, and recurrent pregnancy loss; and obstetrical
complications such as cesarean delivery, preeclampsia, placental abruption,
and preterm delivery (Stubblefield, 2008).
As discussed in Chapter 35 (p. 626), details involving a prior stillbirth
are especially important. For example, Korteweg and associates (2008)
identified chromosomal abnormalities in 13 percent of stillborns who
underwent karyotyping. And, Reddy and colleagues (2012) confirmed that
chromosomal microarray analysis (CMA) yields better detection of genetic
abnormalities than does standard karyotyping. This primarily stems from
CMA’s ability to assess nonviable tissue (Chap. 16, p. 325). Identification of
a genetic abnormality in a stillborn can help to determine recurrence risk.

PARENTAL AGE
■ Maternal Age
Women at both ends of the reproductive-age spectrum have unique outcomes
to consider. First, according to the CDC, 3.4 percent of births in the United
States in 2010 were in women aged 15 to 19 years (Martin, 2012). An
international study reported a rate of 11.9 percent for this age group globally
(Althabe, 2015). These adolescents are at higher risk for anemia, preterm
delivery, and preeclampsia compared with women aged 20 to 35 years (Usta,
2008). The incidence of sexually transmitted diseases—common in
adolescents—is even higher during pregnancy (Niccolai, 2003).
Unfortunately, because most of their pregnancies are unplanned, adolescents
rarely seek preconceptional counseling.
Conceptions after age 35 currently constitute approximately 15 percent of
pregnancies in the United States (Martin, 2012). By contrast, these women
are more likely to request preconceptional counseling. Motivations may stem
from a desire to optimize outcomes at their age or with infertility treatment or
both. Some studies—including data from Parkland Hospital presented in
Figure 9-3–indicate that risks for obstetrical complications and for perinatal
morbidity and mortality rise after age 35 (Waldenström, 2015). The older
woman who has a chronic illness or who is in poor physical condition
usually has readily apparent risks. For the physically fit woman without
medical problems, however, the risks are lower.

FIGURE 9-3 Incidence of selected pregnancy complications in relation to maternal age among 295,667
women delivered at Parkland Hospital.

Overall, the maternal mortality rate is higher in women aged 35 and older
(Chap. 1, p. 5). Creanga and coworkers (2017) analyzed pregnancy-related
deaths in the United States for 2011 through 2013. Although women older
than 35 years contributed less than 15 percent of all live births, they
constituted 31 percent of maternal deaths. For the fetus, maternal age-related
risks primarily originate from (1) indicated preterm delivery for maternal
complications such as hypertension and diabetes, (2) spontaneous preterm
birth, (3) fetal-growth disorders related to chronic maternal disease or
multifetal gestation, (4) fetal aneuploidy, and (5) pregnancies resulting from
assisted reproductive technology.

Assisted Reproductive Technologies
Recall that older women have subfertility problems. And, although the
incidence of dizygotic twinning rises with maternal age, the more important
cause of multifetal gestation in older women follows the use of assisted
reproductive technology (ART) and ovulation induction. Indeed, according to

the CDC, 30 to 40 percent of all multifetal gestations in the United States in
2012 were conceived with the use of ART (Sunderan, 2015). Morbidity and
mortality with multifetal pregnancies stem from preterm delivery and
placentation complications, such as placenta previa and abruption (Qin,
2016).
With ART, transmission of infectious agents is a risk. For women without
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection who plan conception with
their HIV-affected partners, the CDC has published prevention strategies
(Kawwass, 2017). Also, Zika virus infection acquisition through in vitro
fertilization (IVF) has been described (Washington Cross, 2017). Last, some
data links ART to higher major congenital malformation rates. In a registry of
308,974 births, 8.3 percent of neonates conceived by ART had major birth
defects, and intracytoplasmic injection was also associated with an elevated
risk for malformations (Davies, 2012).

■ Paternal Age
Advanced paternal age has doubled in the United States over the past
generation. It is associated with a higher risk of preterm birth and new
autosomal-dominant mutations (Chap. 16, p. 320) (Khandwala, 2018). One
example is the possible link between increasing paternal age and complex
neuropsychiatric conditions (Malaspina, 2015). Parental history and
experiences can also exert effects on progeny through epigenomic
information not contained in the DNA sequence. Variations in sperm and
oocyte cytosine methylation and noncoding RNAs are examples (Cedars,
2015; Lane, 2014).

SOCIAL HISTORY
■ Recreational Drugs and Smoking
Fetal risks associated with alcohol, marijuana, cocaine, amphetamines, and
heroin are discussed in Chapters 8 (p. 148) and 64 (p. 1150). The first step
in preventing drug-related fetal risk is an honest assessment of use by the
patient (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2017c).
Toward this end, questioning should be nonjudgmental.

Several validated tools screen for at-risk drinking. One is the wellstudied TACE questions (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2019d). These four questions investigate having a tolerance
to alcohol, being annoyed by comments about their drinking, attempting to
cut down, and drinking early in the morning—the eye opener.
Of more than 1000 postpartum patients in one Canadian study, a high
percentage reported alcohol use concurrent with conception attempts (Tough,
2006). Specifically, nearly half of those planning for pregnancy consumed a
mean of 2.2 drinks daily during early gestation and before they recognized
their pregnancy. This frequency and pattern clearly underscore the
opportunity for preconceptional counseling.
In 2014 to 2015, 17 percent of reproductive-age women in the United
States smoked cigarettes according to the CDC (Robbins, 2018). Smoking in
pregnancy is consistently associated with numerous adverse perinatal
outcomes (Chap. 8, p. 156). These risks are largely mitigated by cessation
before pregnancy, highlighting the importance of screening for tobacco use
prior to and during pregnancy (Chap. 10, p. 179).

■ Environmental Exposures
Only a few environmental agents have been shown to cause adverse
pregnancy outcomes (McCue, 2019; Windham, 2008). For example, contact
with some chemicals may impart significant maternal and fetal risks.
Discussed in Chapter 8 (p. 153), excess exposure to methyl mercury or lead
is associated with neurodevelopmental disorders. For lead, the American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2018b) endorses guidelines that
recommend blood lead testing only if a lead-exposure risk factor is
identified. If the levels are >5 µg/dL, counseling is completed, and the lead
source is sought and removed. Blood lead levels >45 µg/dL are consistent
with lead poisoning, and women in this group may be candidates for
chelation therapy (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2019).
In contrast, everyday exposures to electromagnetic fields are not linked
to adverse fetal outcomes (Robert, 1999). Examples include energy emanated
by high-voltage power lines, electric blankets, microwave ovens, and
cellular phones.

■ Diet
Pica is the craving for and consuming of ice, laundry starch, clay, dirt, or
other nonfood items. It should be discouraged due to its inherent replacement
of healthful food with nutritionally empty products (Chap. 10, p. 191). In
some cases, it may represent an unusual physiological response to iron
deficiency (Epler, 2017). Many vegetarian diets are protein deficient but can
be corrected by increasing egg and cheese consumption. Anorexia and
bulimia raise maternal risks of nutritional deficiencies, electrolyte
disturbances, cardiac arrhythmias, and gastrointestinal pathology (American
Psychiatric Association, 2013). Discussed in Chapter 64 (p. 1149),
pregnancy-related complications with these eating disorders include greater
risks of low birthweight, smaller head circumference, microcephaly, and
small-for-gestational-age newborns.
Obesity is linked with several maternal complications. Discussed in
Chapter 51 (p. 905), these include hypertension, preeclampsia, gestational
diabetes, labor abnormalities, cesarean delivery, and operative
complications (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists,
2018d). Obesity also appears to be associated with a range of structural fetal
anomalies (Stothard, 2009).

■ Exercise
Conditioned pregnant women usually can continue to exercise throughout
gestation (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020b).
Discussed in Chapter 10, covering prenatal care (p. 187), no data suggest
that exercise is harmful during pregnancy. However, as pregnancy
progresses, balance problems and joint relaxation may predispose to
orthopedic injury. During exercise, gravidas should avoid exhaustion,
overheating, dehydration, and prolonged supine position.

■ Intimate-Partner Violence
Pregnancy can exacerbate interpersonal problems and is a time of elevated
risk from an abusive partner. According to the American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2012), approximately 324,000 pregnant
women are abused each year. Intimate-partner violence (IPV) is associated

with greater risk for several pregnancy-related complications that include
hypertension, vaginal bleeding, hyperemesis, preterm delivery, and lowbirthweight neonates (Chap. 50, p. 891) (Silverman, 2006). Because IPV can
escalate during pregnancy, even to the point of homicide, the preconceptional
period provides an ideal time for screening and intervention (Cheng, 2010).
In support, the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019c)
provides recommendations and resources for screening both pregnant and
nonpregnant women for IPV.

■ Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender, and Queer
Individuals
Preconceptional care has traditionally been based on the assumption of
heterosexuality and has often excluded lesbian women (Bushe, 2017). The
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2018c) endorses
quality health care for all women regardless of sexual orientation. Indeed, in
a study by Carpinello and colleagues (2016), three fourths of lesbian couples
planned for one partner to conceive. Paradoxically, adolescent bisexual and
lesbian women are at greater risk for undesired pregnancies (Charlton, 2018;
Hodson, 2017). Of special risks in this group, lesbian and bisexual women
have higher incidences of obesity, tobacco and alcohol use, depression,
diabetes, and low parity compared with heterosexual women (Mravcak,
2006; O’Hanlan, 2007). In some of these groups, knowledge of surrogacy
laws is imperative (Tsai, 2020).

SCREENING TESTS
Highlighted in Table 9-4, women with certain chronic medical diseases
ideally would be evaluated before conception. With several of these,
optimizing maternal condition will improve pregnancy outcomes.
TABLE 9-4. Selected Preconceptional Counseling Topics

REFERENCES
Aghajanian P, Gupta M: Helping your epileptic patient. Contemp OB/GYN 60:10, 2015
Aguglia U, Barboni G, Battino D, et al: Italian consensus conference on epilepsy and pregnancy, labor
and puerperium. Epilepsia 50:7, 2009
Althabe F, Moore JL, Gibbons L, et al: Adverse maternal and perinatal outcomes in adolescent
pregnancies: the Global Network’s Maternal Newborn Health Registry Study. Reprod Health 12
Suppl:S8, 2015
Amant F, Vandenbroucke T, Verheecke M, et al: Pediatric outcome after maternal cancer diagnosed
during pregnancy. N Engl J Med 373(19):1824, 2015

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Carrier screening for genetic conditions.
Committee Opinion No. 691, March 2017a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Marijuana use during pregnancy and lactation.
Committee Opinion No. 722, July 2015, Reaffirmed 2017c
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Hemoglobinopathies in pregnancy. Practice
Bulletin No. 78, January 2007, Reaffirmed 2018a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Lead screening during pregnancy and lactation.
Committee Opinion No. 533, August 2012, Reaffirmed 2018b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Marriage and family building equality for lesbian,
gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, intersex, asexual, and gender nonconforming individual. Committee
Opinion No. 749, July 2018c
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Optimizing postpartum care. Committee Opinion
No. 736, May 2018e
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologist: Pregestational diabetes mellitus. Practice Bulletin
No. 201, November 2018f
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Carrier screening in the age of genomic
medicine. Committee Opinion No. 690, March 2017, Reaffirmed 2019a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Interpregnancy care. Obstetric Care Consensus
Number 8, January 2019b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Intimate partner violence. Committee Opinion
No. 518, February 2012, Reaffirmed 2019c
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: At-risk drinking and alcohol dependence:
obstetric and gynecologic implications. Committee Opinion No. 496, August 2011, Reaffirmed 2019d
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Management of women with phenylalanine
hydroxylase deficiency. Committee Opinion No. 802, March 2020a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Physical activity and exercise during pregnancy
and the postpartum period. Committee Opinion No. 804, March 2020b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Obesity in pregnancy. Practice Bulletin No. 230,
May 2021
American Diabetes Association: Preconception care of women with diabetes. Diabetes Care. 27 Suppl
1:S76, 2004
American Psychiatric Association: Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th ed.
Arlington, American Psychiatric Association, 2013
Arluck JC, Mayhew AC: Preconception care for the general Ob/Gyn. Clin Obstet Gynecol 61(1):62,
2018
Barker LC, Dennis CL, Hussain-Shamsy N, et al: Decision-making about antidepressant medication use
in pregnancy: a comparison between women making the decision in the preconception period versus
in pregnancy. BMC Psychiatry 20(1):54, 2020
Bech BH, Kjaersgaard MI, Pedersen HS, et al: Use of antiepileptic drugs during pregnancy and risk of
spontaneous abortion and stillbirth: population based cohort study. BMJ 349:g5159, 2014
Bennett RL, French KS, Resta RG, et al: Standardized human pedigree nomenclature: update and
assessment of the recommendations of the National Society of Genetic Counselors. J Genet Counsel
17(5):424, 2008
Brasil P, Pereira JP, Gabaglia CR, et al: Zika virus infection in pregnant women in Rio de Janeiro—
preliminary report. N Engl J Med 375(24):2321, 2016

Bromley RL, Weston J, Marson AG: Maternal use of antiepileptic agents during pregnancy and major
congenital malformations in children. JAMA 318(17):1700, 2017
Bushe S, Romero IL: Lesbian pregnancy: care and considerations. Semin Reprod Med 35(5):420, 2017
Camp KM, Paris MA, Acosta PB, et al: Phenylketonuria scientific review conference: state of the
science and future research needs. Mol Genet Metab 112(2):87, 2014
Cao A, Kan YW: The prevention of thalassemia. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 3(2):a011775, 2013
Carpinello OJ, Jacob MC, Nulsen J, et al: Utilization of fertility treatment and reproductive choices by
lesbian couples. Fertil Steril 106(7):1709, 2016
Cassina M, Dilaghi A, Di Gianantonio E, et al: Pregnancy outcome in women exposed to antiepileptic
drugs: teratogenic role of maternal epilepsy and its pharmacologic treatment. Reprod Toxicol 39:50,
2013
Cedars MI: Introduction: childhood implications of parental aging. Fertil Steril 103(6):1379, 2015
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Recommended actions based on blood lead level. 2019.
Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/lead/advisory/acclpp/actions-blls.htm. Accessed January 30,
2020
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: COVID-19 vaccines while pregnant or breastfeeding.
2021. Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019ncov/vaccines/recommendations/pregnancy.html. Accessed October 8, 2021
Charlton BM, Roberts AL, Rosario M, et al: Teen pregnancy risk factors among young women of
diverse sexual orientations. Pediatrics 141(4):pii:e20172278, 2018
Cheng D, Horon IL: Intimate-partner homicide among pregnant and postpartum women. Obstet
Gynecol 115(6):1181, 2010
Creanga AA, Berg CJ, Syverson C, et al: Pregnancy-related mortality in the United States, 2011–2013.
Obstet Gynecol 130:366, 2017
Cunningham FG, Byrne JJ, Nelson DB: Peripartum cardiomyopathy. Obstet Gynecol 133(1):167, 2019
Czeizel AE, Dudas I: Prevention of the first occurrence of neural-tube defects by periconceptional
vitamin supplementation. N Engl J Med 327:1832, 1992
Davies MJ, Moore VM, Willson KJ, et al: Reproductive technologies and the risk of birth defects. N
Engl J Med 366(19):1803, 2012
Davis MB, Arendt K, Bello NA, et al: Team-based care of women with cardiovascular disease from
pre-conception through pregnancy and postpartum: JACC Focus Seminar 1/5. J Am Coll Cardiol
77(14):1763, 2021
de Jong-van den Berg LT, Hernandez-Diaz S, Werler MM, et al: Trends and predictors of folic acid
awareness and periconceptional use in pregnant women. Am J Obstet Gynecol 192:121, 2005
Easter SR, Rosenthal EW, Morton-Eggleston E, et al: Disparities in care for publicly insured women
with pregestational diabetes. Obstet Gynecol 130(5):946, 2017
Epler KE, Pierce A, Rappaport VJ: Pica in pregnancy: an unusual presentation. Obstet Gynecol
130(6):1377, 2017
Finer LB, Zolna MR: Declines in unintended pregnancy in the United States, 2008–2011. N Engl J Med
374(9):843, 2016
Foeller ME, Foeller TM, Druzin M: Maternal congenital heart disease in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol Clin
North Am 45(2):267, 2018
Forget BG, Bunn HF: Classification of the disorders of hemoglobin. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med
3(2):a011684, 2013
Gibbins KJ, Mumford SL, Sjaarda LA, et al: Preconception antiphospholipid antibodies and risk of
subsequent early pregnancy loss. Lupus 27(9):1437, 2018

Goldberg BB, Alvarado S, Chavez C, et al: Prevalence of periconceptional folic acid use and perceived
barriers to the postgestation continuance of supplemental folic acid: survey results from a Teratogen
Information Service. Birth Defects Res Part A Clin Mol Teratol 76:193, 2006
Hernández-Díaz S, Smith CR, Shen A, et al: Comparative safety of antiepileptic drugs during pregnancy.
Neurology 78:1692, 2012
Hinkle SN, Tsai MY, Rawal S, et al: HbA1c measured in the first trimester of pregnancy and the
association with gestational diabetes. Sci Rep 8(1):12249, 2018
Hodson K, Meads C, Bewley S: Lesbian and bisexual women’s likelihood of becoming pregnant: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. BJOG 124(3):393, 2017
Hopkins MK, Golstein SA, Ward CC, et al: Evaluation and management of maternal congenital heart
disease: a review. Obstet Gynecol 73(2):16, 2018
Hussein N, Weng SF, Kai J, et al: Preconception risk assessment for thalassaemia, sickle cell disease,
cystic fibrosis and Tay-Sachs disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 3:CD010849, 2018
Jack BW, Atrash H, Coonrod DV, et al: The clinical content of preconception care: an overview and
preparation of this supplement. Am J Obstet Gynecol 199(6 Suppl 2):S266, 2008
Jack BW, Campanile C, McQuade W, et al: The negative pregnancy test. An opportunity for
preconception care. Arch Fam Med 4:340, 1995
Jeha LE, Morris HH: Optimizing outcomes in pregnant women with epilepsy. Cleve Clin J Med 72:928,
2005
Jentink J, Loane MA, Dolk H, et al: Valproic acid monotherapy in pregnancy and major congenital
malformations. N Engl J Med 362(23):2185, 2010
Kawwass JF, Smith DK, Kissin DM, et al: Strategies for preventing HIV infection among HIVuninfected women attempting conception with HIV-infected men—United States. MMWR
66(21):554, 2017
Khandwala YS, Baker VL, Shaw GM, et al: Associations of paternal age with perinatal outcomes
between 2007 and 2016 in the United States: population based cohort study. BMJ 363:k4372, 2018
Kim C, Ferrara A, McEwen LN, et al: Preconception care in managed care: the translating research
into action for diabetes study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 192:227, 2005
King JR, Klugman S: Ethnicity-based carrier screening. Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am 45(1):83, 2018
Kitzmiller JL, Gavin LA, Gin GD, et al: Preconception care of diabetics. JAMA 265:731, 1991
Kjær D, Horvath-Puhó E, Christensen J, et al: Antiepileptic drug use, folic acid supplementation, and
congenital abnormalities: a population-based case-control study. 115(1):98, 2008
Knight R, Wittkowski A, Bromley RL: Neurodevelopmental outcomes in children exposed to newer
antiseizure medications: a systematic review. Epilepsia 62:1765, 2021
Korteweg FJ, Bouman K, Erwich JJ, et al: Cytogenetic analysis after evaluation of 750 fetal deaths:
proposal for diagnostic workup. Obstet Gynecol 111(4):865, 2008
Lane M, Robker RL, Robertson SA: Parenting from before conception. Science 345(6198):756, 2014
Lassi ZS, Imam AM, Dean SV, et al: Preconception care: screening and management of chronic
disease and promoting psychological health. Reprod Health 26:11, 2014
Malaspina D, Gilman C, Kranz TM: Paternal age and mental health of offspring. Fertil Steril
103(6):1392, 2015
Manze MG, Calixte C, Romero DR, et al: Physician perspectives on routine pregnancy intention
screening and counseling in primary care. Contraception 101(2):91, 2020
Martin JA, Hamilton BE, Ventura SJ, et al: Births: final data for 2010. Natl Vital Stat Rep 61(1):1, 2012

Martin R, Duryea E, Ambia A, et al: Congenital malformation risk according to hemoglobin A1c values
in a contemproary cohort with pregestational diabetes. Abst. No, 957 Am J Obstet Gynecol
222:s594, 2020
McClatchey T, Lay E, Strassberg M, et al: Missed opportunities: unidentified genetic risk factors in
prenatal care. Prenat Diagn 38(1):75, 2018
McCue K, DeNicola N: Environmental exposures in reproductive health. Obstet Gynecol Clin North
Am 46(3):455 2019
Medical Research Council Vitamin Study Research Group: Prevention of neural tube defects: results of
the Medical Research Council vitamin study. Lancet 338:131, 1991
Morrow JI, Hunt SJ, Russell AJ, et al: Folic acid use and major congenital malformations in offspring of
women with epilepsy: a prospective study from the UK Epilepsy and Pregnancy Register. J Neurol
Neurosurg Psychiatry 80(5):506, 2009
Mravcak SA: Primary care for lesbians and bisexual women. Am Fam Physician 74(2):279, 2006
Niccolai LM, Ethier KA, Kershaw TS, et al: Pregnant adolescents at risk: sexual behaviors and sexually
transmitted disease prevalence. Am J Obstet Gynecol 188:63, 2003
O’Hanlan KA, Isler CM: Health care of lesbian and bisexual women. In: Meyeer IH, Northridge ME
(eds): The Health of Sexual Minorities: Public Health Perspectives on Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and
Transgender Populations. New York, Springer, 2007, p 506
Petersen EE, Staples JE, Meaney-Delman D, et al: Interim guidelines for pregnant women during a Zika
virus outbreak—United States, 2016. MMWR 65(2):30, 2016
Podymow T, Joseph G: Preconception and pregnancy management of women with diabetic nephropathy
on angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors. Clin Nephrol 83(2):73, 2015
Polen KD, Gilboa SM, Hills S, et al: Update: interim guidance for preconception counseling and
prevention of sexual transmission of Zika virus for men with possible Zika virus exposure—United
States, August 2018. MMWR 67(31):868, 2018
Qin J, Liu X, Sheng X, et al: Assisted reproductive technology and the risk of pregnancy-related
complications and adverse pregnancy outcomes in singleton pregnancies: a meta-analysis of cohort
studies. Fertil Steril 105(1):73, 2016
Reddy UM, Page GP, Saade GR, et al: Karyotype versus microarray testing for genetic abnormalities
after stillbirth. N Engl J Med 367(23):2185, 2012
Robbins C, Boulet SL, Morgan, et al: Disparities in preconception health indicators—behavioral risk
factor surveillance system, 2013–2015, and pregnancy risk assessment monitoring system, 2013–
2014. MMWR 67(1):1, 2018
Robert E: Intrauterine effects of electromagnetic fields (low frequency, mid-frequency RF, and
microwave): review of epidemiologic studies. Teratology 59:292, 1999
Schuler-Faccini L, Ribeiro EM, Feitosa IM, et al: Possible association between Zika virus infection and
microcephaly—Brazil, 2015. MMWR 65(3):59, 2016
Silverman JG, Decker MR, Reed E, et al: Intimate partner violence victimization prior to and during
pregnancy among women residing in 26 U.S. States: associations with maternal and neonatal health.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 195:140, 2006
Simpson LL: Preconception considerations. Semin Perinatol 38(5):236, 2014
Skogsdal YRE, Karlsson JÅ, Cao Y, et al: Contraceptive use and reproductive intentions among women
requesting contraceptive counseling. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 97(11):1349, 2018
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Kaimal A, Norton ME: Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine
consult series #55: counseling women at increased risk of maternal morbidity and mortality. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 224(4):B16, 2021

Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine (SMFM), Sciscione A, Berghella V, et al: Society for MaternalFetal Medicine (SMFM) special report: the maternal-fetal medicine subspecialists’ role within a
health care system. Am J Obstet Gynecol 211(6):607, 2014
Stothard KJ, Tennant PW, Bell R, et al: Maternal overweight and obesity and the risk of congenital
anomalies: a systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA 301:636, 2009
Stubblefield PG, Coonrod DV, Reddy UM, et al: The clinical content of preconception care: reproductive
history. Am J Obstet Gynecol 199(6 Suppl 2):S373, 2008
Sunderan S, Kissin DM, Crawford SB, et al: Assisted reproduction technology surveillance—United
States, 2012. MMWR 64:1, 2015
Temel S, Van Voorst SF, Jack BW, et al: Evidence-based preconceptional lifestyle interventions.
Epidemiol Rev 36:19, 2014
Tieu J, Middleton P, Crowther CA, et al: Preconception care for diabetic women for improving maternal
and infant health. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 8:CD0077776, 2017
Tomson T, Battino D: Pregnancy and epilepsy: what should we tell our patients? J Neurol 256(6):856,
2009
Tough S, Tofflemire K, Clarke M, et al: Do women change their drinking behaviors while trying to
conceive? An opportunity for preconception counseling. Clin Med Res 4:97, 2006
Tripathi A, Rankin J, Aarvold J, et al: Preconception counseling in women with diabetes: a populationbased study in the North of England. Diabetes Care 33(3):586, 2010
Tsai S, Shaia K, Woodward JT, et al: Surrogacy laws in the United States: what obstetriciangynecologists need to know. Obstet Gynecol 135(3):717, 2020
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force: Final update summary: folic acid to prevent neural tube defects.
2019. Available at:
www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/Page/Document/UpdateSummaryFinal/folic-acid-toprevent-neural-tube-defects-preventive-medication. Accessed October 10, 2019
Usta IM, Zoorob D, Abu-Musa A, et al: Obstetric outcome of teenage pregnancies compared with adult
pregnancies. Acta Obstet Gynecol 87:178, 2008
Vajda FJ, Hitchcock A, Graham J, et al: Seizure control in antiepileptic drug-treated pregnancy. Epilepsia
49:172, 2008
Vajda FJ, O’Brien TJ, Graham J, et al: The outcomes of pregnancy in women with untreated epilepsy.
Seizure 24:77, 2015
Veroniki AA, Cogo E, Rios P, et al: Comparative safety of anti-epileptic drugs during pregnancy: a
systematic review and network meta-analysis of congenital malformations and prenatal outcomes.
BMC Med 15(1):95, 2017
Vichinsky EP: Clinical manifestations of α-thalassemia. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 3(5):a011742,
2013
Vockley J, Andersson HC, Antshel KM, et al: Phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency: diagnosis and
management guideline. Genet Med 16(2):188, 2014
Waldenström U, Cnattingius S, Norman M, et al: Advanced maternal age and stillbirth risk in nulliparous
and parous women. Obstet Gynecol 126(2):355, 2015
Washington Cross CI, Segars JH: Preconception assisted reproductive technology counseling in the age
of Zika. Fertil Steril 107(6):1296, 2017
Williams J, Mai CT, Mulinare J, et al: Updated estimates of neural tube defects prevention by mandatory
folic acid fortification—United States, 1995–2011. MMWR 64(1):1, 2015
Windham G, Fenster L: Environmental contaminants and pregnancy outcomes. Fertil Steril 89:e111, 2008

Yamamoto JM, Hughes DJF, Evans ML, et al: Community-based pre-pregnancy care programme
improves pregnancy preparation in women with pregestational diabetes. Diabetologia 61(7):1528,
2018

CHAPTER 10

Prenatal Care

PRENATAL CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
DIAGNOSIS OF PREGNANCY
INITIAL PRENATAL EVALUATION
SUBSEQUENT PRENATAL VISITS
NUTRITIONAL COUNSELING
COMMON CONCERNS
REFERENCES
The American Academy of Pediatrics and the American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2017) define prenatal care as “A
comprehensive antepartum program involves a coordinated approach to
medical care, continuous risk assessment, and psychosocial support that
optimally begins before pregnancy and extends throughout the postpartum and
interpregnancy period.” As promulgated by John Ballantyne, such care has
been a bedrock to improve pregnancy outcomes for more than 100 years
(Reiss, 2000).

PRENATAL CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
Almost a century after its introduction, prenatal care has become one of the
most frequently used health services in the United States. According to the

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), only 1.6 percent of
women who gave birth in 2016 received no prenatal care (Osterman, 2018).
African-American and Hispanic women have high rates of inadequate or no
prenatal care that reach 10 and 7.7 percent, respectively. This figure is
greater for adolescents, particularly those younger than 15 years, compared
with older age groups. These data highlight areas of potential improvement
by the health-care system.

■ Prenatal Care Effectiveness
Care designed during the early 1900s focused on lowering the extremely high
maternal mortality rate. Prenatal care undoubtedly contributed to the dramatic
decline in maternal deaths from 690 per 100,000 births in 1920 to 50 per
100,000 by 1955 (Loudon, 1992). Data from 1998 to 2005 from the
Pregnancy Mortality Surveillance System identified a fivefold increased risk
for maternal death in women who received no prenatal care (Berg, 2010).
Goldenberg and McClure (2018) have emphasized the importance of
prenatal care to reduce stillbirth rates as well. In a study of almost 29 million
births, the risk for preterm birth, stillbirth, early and late neonatal death, and
infant death rose linearly with decreasing prenatal care utilization (Partridge,
2012). Similarly, from Parkland Hospital, Leveno and associates (2009)
found that a significant decline in preterm births correlated closely with any
use of prenatal care by medically indigent women. And in women with
diabetes, adherence to prenatal care resulted in lower rates of neonatal
admissions to the intensive care unit (Sperling, 2018a).
Group prenatal care is acceptable and effective (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2018g). Ickovics and coworkers (2016)
compared this with individual prenatal care. Group care provided traditional
pregnancy surveillance in a group setting with special focus on support,
education, and active health-care participation. Women enrolled in group
care had significantly better pregnancy outcomes. Carter and colleagues
(2017) cited similar results. Childbirth education classes are also reported to
result in better pregnancy outcomes (Afshar, 2017). Pregnancy in adolescents
carries special risk, and guidelines have been developed that focus on this
age group (Fleming, 2015).

DIAGNOSIS OF PREGNANCY
Pregnancy is usually identified when a woman presents with symptoms and
possibly a positive home urine pregnancy test result. Typically, these women
receive confirmatory testing of urine or blood for human chorionic
gonadotropin (hCG). Further, presumptive signs or diagnostic findings of
pregnancy may be found during the clinical examination. Sonography is often
used, especially if miscarriage or ectopic pregnancy is a concern.

■ Symptoms and Signs
Amenorrhea in a healthy reproductive-aged woman who previously has
experienced spontaneous, cyclical, predictable menses is highly suggestive
of pregnancy. Menstrual cycles vary appreciably in length among women and
even in the same woman (Chap. 5, p. 83). Thus, amenorrhea is not a reliable
pregnancy indicator until 10 or more days have passed after expected
menses. Occasionally, uterine bleeding that mimics menstruation is noted
after conception. During the first month of pregnancy, these episodes are
likely the consequence of blastocyst implantation. Still, first-trimester
bleeding should prompt evaluation for an abnormal pregnancy.
Of other symptoms, maternal perception of fetal movement depends on
factors such as parity and habitus. In general, after a first successful
pregnancy, a woman may first perceive fetal movements between 16 and 18
weeks’ gestation. A primigravida may not appreciate fetal movements until
approximately 2 weeks later. At about 20 weeks, depending on maternal
habitus, an examiner can begin to detect fetal movements. Of pregnancy
signs, changes in the lower reproductive tract, uterus, and breasts develop
early.

■ Pregnancy Tests
Detection of hCG in maternal blood and urine is the basis for endocrine
assays of pregnancy. Syncytiotrophoblast produces hCG in amounts that
increase exponentially during the first trimester. hCG and luteinizing hormone
(LH) share the same receptor in tissues. Thus, a main function of hCG is to
prevent involution of the corpus luteum, which is the principal site of
progesterone formation during the first 6 weeks of pregnancy.

With a sensitive test, the hormone can be detected in maternal serum or
urine by 8 to 9 days after ovulation. The doubling time of serum hCG
concentration is 1.4 to 2.0 days. As shown in Figure 10-1, serum levels range
widely and increase from the day of implantation. Lower levels of hCG rise
more rapidly than higher levels (Barnhart, 2016). Peak hCG levels are
reached at 60 to 70 days. Thereafter, the concentration declines slowly to a
plateau at approximately 16 weeks’ gestation.

FIGURE 10-1 Mean concentration (95% CI) of human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) in serum of
women throughout normal pregnancy.

Measurement of hCG
This hormone is a glycoprotein with high carbohydrate content. The general
structure of hCG is a heterodimer composed of two dissimilar subunits,
designated α and β, which are noncovalently linked. The α-subunit is
identical to those of LH, follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), and thyroidstimulating hormone (TSH), but the β-subunit is structurally distinct. Thus,
antibodies were developed with high specificity for the hCG β-subunit. This
specificity allows its detection, and numerous commercial immunoassays are
available for measuring serum and urine hCG levels. Each immunoassay
detects a slightly different mixture of hCG variants, its free subunits, or its
metabolites—however, all are appropriate for pregnancy testing (Braunstein,
2014). Depending on the assay used, the sensitivity for the laboratory
detection limit of hCG in serum is 1.0 mIU/mL or even lower.

False-positive hCG test results are rare. A few women have circulating
serum factors that may bind erroneously with the test antibody directed to
hCG in a given assay. The most common factors are heterophilic antibodies.
These are produced by an individual and bind to the animal-derived test
antibodies used in a given immunoassay. Thus, women who have worked
closely with animals are more likely to develop these antibodies, and
alternative laboratory techniques are available (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2017a). Elevated hCG levels may also
reflect molar pregnancy and its associated neoplasms (Chap. 13, p. 238).
Other rare causes of positive assays without pregnancy are (1) exogenous
hCG injection used for weight loss, (2) renal failure with impaired hCG
clearance, (3) physiological pituitary hCG, and (4) hCG-producing tumors
that most commonly originate from gastrointestinal sites, ovary, bladder, or
lung (McCash, 2017).

Home Pregnancy Tests
More than 60 different types of over-the-counter pregnancy test kits are
available in the United States (Grenache, 2015). Unfortunately, many of these
are not as accurate as advertised (Johnson, 2015). For example, Cole and
associates (2011) found that a detection limit of 12.5 mIU/mL would be
required to diagnose 95 percent of pregnancies at the time of missed menses.
However, they reported that only one brand had this degree of sensitivity.
Two other brands gave false-positive or invalid results. In fact, with an hCG
concentration of 100 mIU/mL, clearly positive results were displayed by
only 44 percent of brands. Accordingly, only approximately 15 percent of
pregnancies could be diagnosed at the time of the missed menses. Some
manufacturers of even newer home urine assays claim >99-percent accuracy
for tests done on the day of—and some up to 4 days before—the expected
day of menses. Again, careful analysis suggests that these assays are often not
as sensitive as advertised.

■ Sonographic Recognition of Pregnancy
Transvaginal sonography is commonly used to accurately establish
gestational age and confirm pregnancy location. A gestational sac is the first
sonographic evidence of pregnancy, and it may be seen with transvaginal
sonography by 4 to 5 weeks’ gestation. It should not be confused with a

pseudogestational sac. The latter, or pseudosac, is a fluid collection within
the endometrial cavity, which can occur in the setting of ectopic pregnancy
(Fig. 12-3, p. 223). Further evaluation may be warranted if this is the only
sonographic finding, particularly in a woman with pain or bleeding. A
normal gestational sac implants eccentrically in the endometrium, whereas a
pseudosac is seen in the midline of the endometrial cavity. Other potential
indicators of early intrauterine pregnancy are an anechoic center surrounded
by a single echogenic rim—the intradecidual sign—or two concentric
echogenic rings surrounding the gestational sac—the double decidual sign
(Fig. 10-2). If sonography yields equivocal findings, the term pregnancy of
unknown location (PUL) is applied (Bobdiwala, 2019). In these cases,
serial serum hCG levels and transvaginal sonography can help differentiate a
normal intrauterine pregnancy from an extrauterine pregnancy or an early
miscarriage (Chap. 12, p. 222).

FIGURE 10-2 Transvaginal sonogram of a first-trimester intrauterine pregnancy. The double decidual
sign is noted surrounding the gestational sac and is defined by the decidua parietalis (white asterisk)
and the decidua capsularis (yellow asterisk). The arrow notes the yolk sac, and the crown-rump length
of the embryo is marked with measuring calipers. (Reproduced with permission from Dr. Elysia
Moschos.)

If the yolk sac—a brightly echogenic ring with an anechoic center—is
seen within the gestational sac, an intrauterine location for the pregnancy is
confirmed. The yolk sac can normally be seen by the middle of the fifth
week. As shown in Figure 10-2, after 6 weeks, an embryo is seen as a linear
structure immediately adjacent to the yolk sac. Cardiac motion is typically
noted at this point.

INITIAL PRENATAL EVALUATION
Prenatal care is ideally initiated early. Major goals are to (1) define the
health status of the mother and fetus, (2) estimate the gestational age, and (3)
initiate a plan for continued obstetrical care. Typical components of the
initial visit are summarized in Table 10-1. Subsequent care may range from
relatively infrequent routine visits to prompt hospitalization because of
serious maternal or fetal disease.
TABLE 10-1. Typical Components of Routine Prenatal Care

■ Prenatal Record
Use of a standardized record within a perinatal health-care system greatly
aids antepartum and intrapartum management. Standardizing documentation
allows communication and care continuity between providers and enables
objective measures of care quality to be evaluated over time and across
different clinical settings (Gregory, 2006). A prototype is provided by the
American Academy of Pediatrics and the American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists (2017) in their Guidelines for Perinatal Care, 8th
edition.

Definitions
Several definitions are pertinent to establishment of an accurate prenatal
record.
1. Nulligravida—a woman who currently is not pregnant and has never been
pregnant.
2. Gravida—a woman who currently is pregnant or has been in the past,
irrespective of the pregnancy outcome. With the establishment of the first
pregnancy, she becomes a primigravida, and with successive pregnancies,
a multigravida.
3. Nullipara—a woman who has never completed a pregnancy beyond 20
weeks’ gestation. She may not have been pregnant or may have had a
spontaneous or elective abortion(s) or an ectopic pregnancy.
4. Primipara—a woman who has been delivered only once of a fetus or
fetuses born alive or dead with an estimated gestation duration of 20 or
more weeks. In the past, a 500-g birthweight threshold was used to define
parity. This threshold is now controversial. Namely, many states still use
this weight to differentiate a stillborn fetus from an abortus, but the
survival of neonates with birthweights <500 g is no longer uncommon
(Chap. 1, p. 2).
5. Multipara—a woman who has completed two or more pregnancies with
gestational ages at least 20 weeks. Parity is determined by the number of
pregnancies reaching 20 weeks. It is not increased to a higher number if
multiples are delivered in a given pregnancy. Moreover, stillbirth does not
lower this number.

In some locales, the obstetrical history is summarized by a series of
digits connected by dashes. These refer to the number of term newborns,
preterm neonates, abortuses younger than 20 weeks, and children currently
alive. For example, a woman who is para 2–1–0–3 has had two term
deliveries, one preterm delivery, no abortuses, and has three living
children. Because these are nonconventional, it is helpful to specify the
outcome of any pregnancy that did not end normally.

Normal Pregnancy Duration
The normal duration of pregnancy calculated from the first day of the last
normal menstrual period is very close to 280 days or 40 weeks. A quick
estimate of a pregnancy due date based on menstrual data can be made as
follows: add 7 days to the first day of the last period and subtract 3 months.
For example, if the first day of the last menses was October 5, the due date is
10-05 minus 3 (months) plus 7 (days) = 7–12 or July 12 of the following
year. This calculation is the Naegele rule. However, menstrual cycle length
varies among women and renders many of these calculations inaccurate.
This, combined with the frequent use of first-trimester sonography, has
changed the method of determining an accurate gestational age.
The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2017e), the
American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine, and the Society for MaternalFetal Medicine have emphasized that first-trimester ultrasound is the most
accurate method to establish or reaffirm gestational age. For pregnancies
conceived by assisted reproductive technologies, embryo age or transfer date
is used to assign gestational age. If available, the gestational ages calculated
from the last menstrual period and from first-trimester ultrasound are
compared, and this estimated date of delivery is recorded. Reconciling any
discordance between these two values is discussed in Chapter 14 (p. 248).

Trimesters
It has become customary to divide pregnancy into three equal epochs or
trimesters of approximately 3 calendar months. More recently a “fourth
trimester” has been recognized to emphasize the need for comprehensive
postpartum care (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists,
2018i). This is discussed in Chapter 36 (p. 634). Historically, the first
trimester extends through completion of 14 weeks, the second through 28

weeks, and the third through 42 weeks. The fourth is the 12 weeks after
delivery. Thus, prenatally, there are three periods of 14 weeks each. Certain
major obstetrical problems tend to cluster in each of these three time periods.
For example, most spontaneous abortions take place during the first trimester,
whereas most women with hypertensive disorders due to pregnancy are
diagnosed during the third trimester.
In modern obstetrics, the clinical use of trimesters to describe a specific
pregnancy is imprecise. For example, it is inappropriate in cases of uterine
hemorrhage to categorize the problem temporally as “third-trimester
bleeding.” Appropriate management for the mother and her fetus will vary
remarkably depending on whether bleeding begins early or late in the third
trimester (Chap. 42, p. 733). Because precise knowledge of fetal age is
imperative for obstetrical management, the clinically appropriate unit is
weeks of gestation completed. Clinicians designate gestational age using
completed weeks and days. For example, 334/7 weeks or 33 + 4 describes
pregnancy duration of 33 completed weeks and 4 days.

Previous and Current Health Status
As elsewhere in medicine, history-taking begins with queries concerning
medical or surgical disorders. Detailed information regarding previous
pregnancies is essential, as many obstetrical complications tend to recur in
subsequent pregnancies. The menstrual and contraceptive histories also are
important. As noted earlier, gestational age may be less accurate for those
with irregular menses. Moreover, some methods of birth control favor
ectopic implantation following method failure (Chap. 38, p. 665).
Psychosocial Screening. The American Academy of Pediatrics and the
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2017) define
psychosocial issues as nonbiomedical factors that affect mental and physical
well-being. Women should be screened regardless of social status, education
level, race, or ethnicity. Such screening should seek barriers to care,
communication obstacles, nutritional status, unstable housing, desire for
pregnancy, safety concerns that include intimate-partner violence,
depression, stress, and use of substances such as tobacco, alcohol, and illicit
drugs. This screening is performed on a regular basis, at least once per
trimester, to identify important issues and reduce adverse pregnancy
outcomes. Coker and colleagues (2012) compared pregnancy outcomes in

women before and after implementation of a universal psychosocial
screening program and found that screened women were less likely to have
preterm or low-birthweight newborns, as well as other adverse outcomes.
Specific screens for depression are presented in Chapter 64 (p. 1143).
Cigarette Smoking. These data are included on the birth certificate, and the
number of pregnant women who smoke continues to decline. From 2000 to
2010, the prevalences were 12 to 13 percent (Tong, 2013). By 2016, the
incidence was 7.2 percent according to the National Center for Health
Statistics (Drake, 2018). Concurrent with the decline in cigarette use, there
has been an increase in electronic cigarettes/vaping with a reported
prevalence of 0.6 to 15 percent (Whittington, 2018). In a survey of more than
3000 mothers in Oklahoma and Texas, 7 percent reported using electronic
vapor products prior to conception and in the postpartum period. Of these
women, according to the CDC, 1.4 percent used them during the last 3 months
of pregnancy (Kapaya, 2019).
According to the American Society for Reproductive Medicine (2018),
smoking is associated with subfertility. Higher rates of miscarriage,
stillbirth, low birthweight, and preterm delivery also are linked to smoking
during pregnancy (Dahlin, 2016; Luke, 2018; Tong, 2013). Compared with
nonsmokers, risks of placenta previa, placental abruption, and premature
membrane rupture are increased twofold. Potential teratogenic effects are
reviewed in Chapter 8 (p. 156). Thus, the U.S. Preventive Services Task
Force recommends that clinicians offer counseling and effective intervention
options to pregnant smokers at the first and subsequent prenatal visits (Siu,
2015). Although benefits are greatest if smoking ceases early in pregnancy or
preferably preconceptionally, quitting at any stage of pregnancy can improve
perinatal outcomes (Soneji, 2019).
Compared with simple counseling to quit, person-to-person psychosocial
interventions are significantly more successful in achieving smoking
abstinence in pregnancy (Fiore, 2008). One example is a brief counseling
session covering the “5As” of smoking cessation (Table 10-2). This
approach can be accomplished in 15 minutes or less and is effective when
initiated by health-care providers (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2020b).
TABLE 10-2. Five A’s of Smoking Cessation

Behavioral interventions and nicotine replacement products are
successful in reducing smoking rates (Patnode, 2015). However, nicotine
replacement has not been sufficiently evaluated to determine its effectiveness
and safety in pregnancy. Trials evaluating such therapy have yielded
conflicting evidence (Coleman, 2015; Spindel, 2016). Two randomized trials
also produced inconclusive results. In the Smoking and Nicotine in
Pregnancy (SNAP) trial, Cooper and associates (2014) reported that a
temporary cessation of smoking may have been associated with improved
infant development. In the Study of Nicotine Patch in Pregnancy (SNIPP)
trial, no differences in smoking cessation rates or birthweights were found
(Berlin, 2014). Similar preliminary results were reported for sustainedrelease bupropion (Nanovskaya, 2017). Olson and colleagues (2019)
reported that financial incentives were helpful to encourage smoking
cessation.
Because of limited available evidence to support pharmacotherapy for
smoking cessation in pregnancy, the American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2020b) recommends that if nicotine replacement therapy is
used, it should be done with close supervision and after careful
consideration of the risks of smoking versus nicotine replacement.
Alcohol. Ethyl alcohol or ethanol is a potent teratogen that causes the fetal
alcohol spectrum disorders. Fetal alcohol syndrome, the most severe form
of these disorders, is characterized by growth restriction, facial
abnormalities, and central nervous system dysfunction. The estimated
prevalence of these disorders is 11 to 50 per 1000 (May, 2018).
As discussed in Chapter 8 (p. 150), women who are pregnant or
considering pregnancy should abstain from drinking any alcoholic beverages
(Sarman, 2018). The CDC analyzed data from the Behavioral Risk Factor
Surveillance System from 2015 to 2017 and estimated that 12 percent of
pregnant women used alcohol (Denny, 2019). The American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2021a) in collaboration with the CDC has

developed the Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorders (FASD) Prevention
Program, which provides resources for providers and is available at
www.acog.org/alcohol.
Illicit Drugs. An estimated 10 percent of fetuses are exposed to one or more
illicit drugs. Agents may include heroin and other opiates, cocaine,
amphetamines, barbiturates, and marijuana (American Academy of
Pediatrics, 2017). As discussed in Chapter 8 (p. 157), chronic use of large
quantities is harmful to the fetus (Metz, 2015). Well-documented sequelae
include fetal-growth restriction, low birthweight, and drug withdrawal soon
after birth. Adverse effects of marijuana are less convincing. Women who
use such drugs frequently do not seek prenatal care, which in itself is
associated with risks for preterm and low-birthweight neonates (Eriksen,
2016).
For women who abuse heroin, methadone maintenance can be initiated
within a registered methadone treatment program to reduce complications of
illicit opioid use and narcotic withdrawal, to encourage prenatal care, and to
avoid drug culture risks (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2017g). Available programs can be found through the
treatment locator of the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services
Administration at www.samhsa.gov. Methadone dosages usually are initiated
at 10 to 30 mg orally daily and titrated as needed. In some women, careful
methadone taper may be an appropriate option (Stewart, 2013).
Buprenorphine alone or in combination with naloxone also may be offered
and managed by physicians with specific credentialing. These therapeutic
options are considered in greater detail in Chapter 64 (p. 1150).
Intimate-Partner Violence. This term refers to a pattern of assault and
coercive behavior that may include physical injury, psychological abuse,
sexual assault, progressive isolation, stalking, deprivation, intimidation, and
reproductive coercion (Miller, 2019). Such violence is recognized as a
major public health problem. Unfortunately, most abused women continue to
be victimized during pregnancy. With the possible exception of
preeclampsia, intimate-partner violence (IPV) is more prevalent than any
major medical condition detectable through routine prenatal screening
(American Academy of Pediatrics, 2017). The estimated prevalence during
pregnancy lies between 4 and 8 percent. IPV is associated with an increased

risk of several adverse perinatal outcomes that include preterm delivery,
fetal-growth restriction, and perinatal death (Chap. 50, p. 891).
The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019c) has
provided methods for IPV screening and recommends their use at the first
prenatal visit, again at least once per trimester, and again at the postpartum
visit. Such screening should be done privately and away from family
members and friends. Patient self-administered or computerized screenings
appear to be as effective for disclosure as clinician-directed interviews
(Ahmad, 2009; Chen, 2007). Physicians should be familiar with state laws
that may require reporting of IPV. Coordination with social services can be
invaluable in these cases. The National Domestic Violence Hotline (1–800–
799-SAFE [7233]) is a nonprofit telephone referral service that provides
individualized information regarding city-specific shelter locations,
counseling resources, and legal advocacy.

■ Clinical Evaluation
Thorough, general physical and pelvic examinations should be completed at
the initial prenatal encounter. The cervix is visualized using a speculum
lubricated with warm water or water-based lubricant gel. Bluish-red passive
hyperemia of the cervix is characteristic, but not diagnostic, of pregnancy.
Dilated, occluded cervical glands bulging beneath the ectocervical mucosa—
nabothian cysts—may be prominent. The cervix is not normally dilated
except at the external os. To identify cytological abnormalities, a Pap test is
performed according to current guidelines noted in Chapter 66 (p. 1164).
Specimens for identification of Chlamydia trachomatis and Neisseria
gonorrhoeae are obtained when indicated (p. 181).
Bimanual examination is completed by palpation. Special attention is
given to the consistency, length, and dilation of the cervix; to uterine and
adnexal size; to the bony pelvic architecture; and to any vaginal or perineal
anomalies. Often, later in pregnancy, fetal presentation also can be
determined. Lesions of the cervix, vagina, or vulva are further evaluated as
needed by colposcopy, biopsy, or culture. The perianal region is inspected,
and digital rectal examination is performed as required for complaints of
rectal pain, bleeding, or mass.

Gestational Age Assessment

Precise knowledge of gestational age is essential for prenatal care, because
several pregnancy complications may develop and optimal treatment will
depend on fetal age. Menstrual history is best confirmed by first-trimester
sonography (Chap. 14, p. 248). That said, gestational age can also be
estimated with considerable precision by a carefully performed clinical
uterine size examination that is coupled with last menstrual period dating.
Uterine size similar to a small orange roughly correlates with a 6-week
gestation; a large orange, with an 8-week pregnancy; and a grapefruit, with
one at 12 weeks (Margulies, 2001).

■ Laboratory Tests
Recommended routine tests at the first prenatal encounter are listed in Table
10-1. Initial blood tests include a complete blood count, a determination of
blood type and Rh status, and an antibody screen. The Institute of Medicine
recommends universal human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) testing as a
routine part of prenatal care. This testing is explained to the patient, who may
decline. The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2018j)
continues to support this practice. If a woman declines, this is recorded in the
prenatal record. All pregnant women are screened also for hepatitis B virus
infection, syphilis, and immunity to rubella at the initial visit.
Based on their prospective investigation of 1000 women, Murray and
coworkers (2002) concluded that in the absence of hypertension, routine
urinalysis beyond the first prenatal visit was unnecessary. A urine culture is
recommended by most, because treating bacteriuria significantly reduces the
likelihood of developing symptomatic urinary tract infections in pregnancy
(Chap. 56, p. 996).

Cervical Infections
C trachomatis is isolated from the cervix in 2 to 13 percent of pregnant
women. The American Academy of Pediatrics and the American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2017) recommend that all women be
screened for chlamydia during the first prenatal visit, with additional thirdtrimester testing for those at increased risk. Risk factors include unmarried
status, recent change in sexual partner or multiple concurrent partners, age
younger than 25 years, inner-city residence, history or presence of other
sexually transmitted diseases, and little or no prenatal care. For those testing

positive, treatment described in Chapter 68 (p. 1212) is followed by a
second testing—a test of cure—3 to 4 weeks after treatment completion.
N gonorrhoeae typically causes cervicitis or urethritis in pregnancy.
Infrequently, it may also cause septic arthritis (Bleich, 2012). Risk factors
for gonorrhea are similar to those for chlamydial infection. The American
Academy of Pediatrics and the American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2017) recommend that pregnant women with risk factors or
those living in an area of high N gonorrhoeae prevalence be screened at the
initial prenatal visit and again in the third trimester. Treatment is given for
gonorrhea and simultaneously for possible coexisting chlamydial infection
(Chap. 68, p. 1211). Test of cure is recommended following treatment.

■ Pregnancy Risk Assessment
Many factors can adversely affect maternal and fetal well-being. Some are
evident at conception, but many become apparent during the course of
pregnancy. The designation of “high-risk pregnancy” is overly vague for an
individual woman and is best avoided if a more specific diagnosis can be
assigned. Some common risk factors for which consultation is recommended
by the American Academy of Pediatrics and the American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2017) are shown in Table 10-3. Some
conditions may require the involvement of a maternal-fetal medicine
specialist, geneticist, neonatologist, anesthesiologist, cardiologist, or other
specialist.
TABLE 10-3. Conditions for Which Maternal-Fetal Medicine Consultation
May Be Beneficial

SUBSEQUENT PRENATAL VISITS
These are traditionally scheduled at 4-week intervals until 28 weeks, then
every 2 weeks until 36 weeks, and weekly thereafter. Women with
complicated pregnancies—for example, with twins or diabetes—often
require return visits at 1- to 2-week intervals (Power, 2013). In 1986, the
Department of Health and Human Services convened an expert panel to
review the content of prenatal care. This report was subsequently
reevaluated and revised in 2005 (Gregory, 2006). The panel recommended,
among other things, early and continuing risk assessment that is patient
specific. It also endorsed flexibility in clinical visit spacing; health
promotion and education, including preconceptional care; medical and
psychosocial interventions; standardized documentation; and expanded
prenatal care objectives that include family health up to 1 year after birth.
The World Health Organization conducted a multicenter randomized trial
with almost 25,000 women that compared routine prenatal care with an

experimental model designed to minimize visits (Villar, 2001). In the new
model, women were seen once in the first trimester and screened for certain
risks. Those without anticipated complications—80 percent of those
screened—were seen again at 26, 32, and 38 weeks. Compared with routine
prenatal care, which required a median of eight visits, the new model
required a median of only five. No disadvantages were attributed to the
regimen with fewer visits, and these findings are consistent with other
randomized trials.

■ Prenatal Surveillance
At each return visit, the well-being of mother and fetus are assessed (see
Table 10-1). Fetal heart rate, growth, and activity are evaluated. Maternal
blood pressure and weight and their extent of change are assessed. Symptoms
such as abdominal pain, nausea and vomiting, bleeding, vaginal fluid
leakage, headache, altered vision, and dysuria are sought. After 20 weeks’
gestation, uterine examination measures size from the symphysis to the fundus
with a traditional tape measure. In late pregnancy, vaginal examination often
provides valuable information. This may include confirmation of the
presenting part and its station, clinical estimation of pelvic capacity and
configuration, fetal ballottement as a reflection of sufficient amnionic fluid
volume, and cervical consistency, effacement, and dilation (Chap. 22, p.
426).

Fundal Height
Between 20 and 34 weeks’ gestation, the height of the uterine fundus
measured in centimeters correlates closely with gestational age in weeks.
This measurement is used to monitor fetal growth and amnionic fluid volume.
It is measured along the abdominal wall from the top of the symphysis pubis
to the top of the fundus. Importantly, the bladder must be emptied before
fundal measurement. Obesity or the presence of uterine masses such as
leiomyomas also may limit fundal height measurement accuracy. Moreover,
using fundal height alone, fetal-growth restriction may be undiagnosed in up
to a third of cases (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists,
2021b; Haragan, 2015).

Fetal Heart Sounds
Instruments incorporating Doppler ultrasound are usually used to easily
detect fetal heart action, and in the absence of maternal obesity, heart sounds
are almost always detectable by 10 weeks with such instruments (Chap. 24,
p. 447). The fetal heart rate ranges from 110 to 160 beats per minute and is
typically heard as a double sound. Using a standard nonamplified
stethoscope, the fetal heart is audible by 20 weeks in 80 percent of women,
and by 22 weeks, heart sounds are expected to be heard in all (Herbert,
1987). Because the fetus moves freely in amnionic fluid, the site on the
maternal abdomen where fetal heart sounds can be heard best will vary.
Additionally, with ultrasonic auscultation, one may hear the funic souffle,
which is a sharp, whistling sound that is synchronous with the fetal pulse. It
is caused by the rush of blood through the umbilical arteries and may not be
heard consistently. In contrast, the uterine souffle is a soft, blowing sound
that is synchronous with the maternal pulse. It is produced by the passage of
blood through the dilated uterine vessels and is heard most distinctly near the
lower portion of the uterus.

Sonography
Ultrasound imaging provides invaluable information regarding fetal anatomy,
growth, and well-being. As such, it is recommended that all pregnant women
be offered at least one prenatal sonographic examination (American College
of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2018l). Continuing trends suggest that the
number of these examinations performed per pregnancy is increasing. Data
from commercial insurance plans indicate that even low-risk pregnancies
receive an average of 4 to 5 ultrasound examinations (O’Keeffe, 2013).
Sonography should be performed only for valid medical indications.
Additionally, needed information is obtained using the lowest possible
ultrasound exposure settings, which is the as low as reasonably achievable
(ALARA) principle (American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine, 2016).

■ Subsequent Laboratory Tests
If initial results were normal, most tests need not be repeated. Hematocrit or
hemoglobin determination, along with serology for syphilis if it is prevalent
in the population, is repeated at 28 to 32 weeks (Hollier, 2003; Kiss, 2004).

For women at increased risk for HIV acquisition during pregnancy, repeat
testing is recommended in the third trimester, preferably before 36 weeks
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2018j). Similarly,
women who engage in behaviors that place them at high risk for hepatitis B
virus infection are retested at the time of delivery. Women who are D (Rh)
negative and are unsensitized should have an antibody screening test repeated
at 28 to 29 weeks. Anti-D immunoglobulin is given if they remain
unsensitized (Chap. 18, p. 354).

Group B Streptococcal Infection
The CDC (2010b) recommends that vaginal and rectal group B streptococcal
(GBS) cultures be obtained in all women between 35 and 37 weeks’
gestation, and the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
(2020f) endorses this recommendation. Intrapartum antimicrobial
prophylaxis is provided to those whose culture results are positive. Women
with GBS bacteriuria, preterm labor, or a previous infant with invasive
disease are given empirical intrapartum prophylaxis. Trials are in progress
to test an investigational vaccine (Madhi, 2016). These infections are
described further in Chapter 67 (p. 1194).

Gestational Diabetes
All pregnant women are screened for gestational diabetes mellitus, whether
by history, clinical factors, or routine laboratory testing. Although laboratory
testing between 24 and 28 weeks’ gestation is the most sensitive approach,
there may be women at low risk who are less likely to benefit from testing
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019d). Gestational
diabetes is discussed in Chapter 60 (p. 1079).

Genetic Screening
Serum screening for fetal aneuploidy is routinely offered to all pregnant
women—in the first trimester at 10 to 14 weeks, in the second trimester at 15
to 20 weeks, or as cell-free DNA screening at any point after 10 weeks
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020d).
Additionally, the College recommends that both cystic fibrosis carrier
screening and screening for spinal muscular atrophy should be offered to all
women considering pregnancy or who are currently pregnant, provided that

carrier or disease status is not already known (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologist, 2017b).
Historically, carrier screening for selected genetic abnormalities was
offered only to women at increased risk based on ethnic or racial
background. One example is screening for Tay-Sachs disease in those of
Ashkenazi Jewish descent. However, given our increasingly diverse,
multiethnic society, previous assumptions about carrier risk may no longer
apply. Although ethnicity-specific carrier screening remains an option,
providers should also consider panethnic and expanded carrier screening
strategies (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2017c).
These are discussed further in Chapter 17 (p. 342). All genetic screening is
optional, and ideally, genetic carrier screening and counseling should be
performed before pregnancy.

Neural-Tube Defects
Traditionally, screening for neural-tube defects has been performed as part of
second-trimester aneuploidy screening. An elevation of maternal serum
alpha-fetoprotein (MSAFP) levels then prompted additional evaluation with
ultrasound and/or amniocentesis. With the advent of other screening
modalities for aneuploidy, second-trimester MSAFP testing is less frequently
obtained. For example, the expansion of second-trimester fetal anatomical
surveillance has been used to screen and identify neural-tube defects
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2017f).

NUTRITIONAL COUNSELING
■ Weight Gain Recommendations
In 2009, the Institute of Medicine and National Research Council revised
guidelines for weight gain in pregnancy and continued to stratify suggested
weight gain ranges based on prepregnancy body mass index (BMI) (Table
10-4). The same recommendations apply to women in all age, race, and
ethnic groups. The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
(2018n) endorses these measures.

TABLE 10-4. Recommendations for Total and Rate of Weight Gain During
Pregnancy

When the initial Institute of Medicine guidelines were formulated,
concern focused on low-birthweight newborns. However, current emphasis
is directed to the obesity epidemic. The specific and relatively narrow range
of recommended weight gains for obese women emphasizes the renewed
interest in lower weight gains during pregnancy. Obesity is associated with
significantly greater risks for gestational hypertension, preeclampsia,
gestational diabetes, macrosomia, cesarean delivery, and other complications
(Chap. 51, p. 905). The risk appears proportionate to prenatal weight gain. In
a Maternal-Fetal Medicine Units Network cohort of more than 29,000
pregnant women, 51 percent had weight gain above and 21 percent below the
guidelines (Kominiarek, 2018). Those with excessive weight gain had higher
rates of hypertension and cesarean delivery. This risk is even greater in
chronically hypertensive women (Ornaghi, 2018).

Conversely, among 100,000 women with normal prepregnancy BMI,
DeVader and colleagues (2007) found that those who gained <25 lb during
pregnancy had a lower risk for preeclampsia, failed induction, cephalopelvic
disproportion, cesarean delivery, and large-for-gestational age neonates.
This cohort, however, had an increased risk for small-for-gestational age
newborns.

■ Severe Undernutrition
Meaningful studies of nutrition in human pregnancy are exceedingly difficult
to design because experimental dietary deficiency is not ethical. In those
instances in which severe nutritional deficiencies have been induced as a
consequence of social, economic, or political disaster, coincidental events
have often created many variables, the effects of which are not amenable to
quantification. Some past experiences suggest, however, that in otherwise
healthy women, a state of near starvation is required to establish clear
differences in pregnancy outcome. These are discussed in Chapter 47 (p.
827).

■ Weight Retention After Pregnancy
Not all the weight gained during pregnancy is lost during and immediately
after delivery. Schauberger and coworkers (1992) studied prenatal and
postpartum weights in 795 women. Their average weight gain was 28.6 lb or
12.9 kg. As shown in Figure 10-3, most maternal weight loss was at delivery
—approximately 12 lb or 5.4 kg—and in the ensuing 2 weeks—
approximately 9 lb or 4 kg. An additional 5.5 lb or 2.5 kg was lost between 2
weeks and 6 months postpartum. Thus, average retained pregnancy weight
was 2.1 lb or 1 kg. Excessive weight gain is manifest by accrual of fat and
may be partially retained as long-term fat (Berggren, 2016; Widen, 2015).
Overall, the more weight that was gained during pregnancy, the more that
was lost postpartum. And breastfeeding duration is inversely related to
weight retention (Jiang, 2018).

FIGURE 10-3 Cumulative weight loss from last antepartum visit to 6 months postpartum. On average,
1 kg will be retained after pregnancy. *Significantly different from 2-week weight loss; **Significantly
different from 6-week weight loss. (Redrawn with permission from Schauberger CW, Rooney BL,
Brimer LM: Factors that influence weight loss in the puerperium. Obstet Gynecol 79:424, 1992.)

■ Dietary Reference Intakes—Recommended Allowances
Periodically, the Institute of Medicine (2006, 2011) publishes recommended
dietary allowances, including those for pregnant or lactating women. Some of
its latest recommendations are summarized in Table 10-5. Certain prenatal
vitamin–mineral supplements may lead to intakes well in excess of the
recommended allowances. Moreover, the use of excessive supplements,
which often are self-prescribed, has led to concern regarding nutrient
toxicities during pregnancy. Those with potentially toxic effects include
iron, zinc, selenium, and vitamins A, B6, C, and D.
TABLE 10-5. Recommended Daily Dietary Allowances for Pregnant and
Lactating Women

■ Calories

As shown in Figure 10-4, pregnancy requires an additional 80,000 kcal,
mostly during the last 20 weeks. To meet this demand, a caloric increase of
100 to 300 kcal/d is recommended during pregnancy (American Academy of
Pediatrics and American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2017).
This greater intake, however, should not be divided equally during the course
of pregnancy. The Institute of Medicine (2006) recommends adding 0, 340,
and 452 kcal/d to the estimated nonpregnant energy requirements in the first,
second, and third trimesters, respectively. The addition of 1000 kcal/d or
more results in fat accrual (Jebeile, 2015).

FIGURE 10-4 Cumulative kilocalories required for pregnancy. (Redrawn with permission from
Chamberlain G, Broughton-Pipkin F [eds]: Clinical Physiology in Obstetrics, 3rd ed. Oxford, Blackwell
Science, 1998.)

Whenever caloric intake is inadequate, protein is metabolized rather than
being spared for its vital role in fetal growth and development. Total
physiological requirements during pregnancy are not necessarily the sum of
ordinary nonpregnant requirements plus those specific to pregnancy. For
example, the additional energy required during pregnancy may be
compensated in whole or in part by reduced physical activity (Hytten, 1991).

■ Protein

Protein requirements rise to meet the demands for growth and remodeling of
the fetus, placenta, uterus, and breasts, and for the expanded maternal blood
volume (Chap. 4, p. 51). During the second half of pregnancy, approximately
1000 g of protein are deposited, amounting to 5 to 6 g/d (Hytten, 1971). To
accomplish this, protein intake that approximates 1 g/kg/d is recommended
(see Table 10-5). Data suggest this should be doubled in late gestation
(Stephens, 2015). Most amino-acid levels in maternal plasma fall markedly,
including ornithine, glycine, taurine, and proline (Hytten, 1991). Exceptions
during pregnancy are glutamic acid and alanine, the concentrations of which
rise.
Preferably, most protein is supplied from animal sources, such as meat,
milk, eggs, cheese, poultry, and fish. These furnish amino acids in optimal
combinations. Milk and dairy products are considered nearly ideal sources
of nutrients, especially protein and calcium, for pregnant or lactating women.
Ingestion of specific fish and potential methylmercury toxicity are discussed
later (p. 188).

■ Minerals
The intakes recommended by the Institute of Medicine (2006) for various
minerals are listed in Table 10-5. With the exception of iron and iodine,
practically all diets that supply sufficient calories for appropriate weight
gain will contain enough minerals to prevent deficiency.
Iron requirements substantively rise during pregnancy, and reasons for
this are discussed in Chapter 4 (p. 60). Of the approximately 300 mg of iron
transferred to the fetus and placenta and the 500 mg incorporated into the
expanding maternal hemoglobin mass, nearly all is used after midpregnancy.
During that time, iron requirements imposed by pregnancy and maternal
excretion total approximately 7 mg/d (Pritchard, 1970). Few women have
sufficient iron stores or dietary intake to supply this amount. Thus, the
American Academy of Pediatrics and the American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists (2017) endorse the recommendation by the National
Academy of Sciences that at least 27 mg of elemental iron be supplemented
daily to pregnant women. This amount is contained in most prenatal vitamins.
As little as 30 mg of elemental iron, supplied as ferrous gluconate,
sulfate, or fumarate, and taken daily throughout the latter half of pregnancy,
provides sufficient iron to meet pregnancy requirements and protect

preexisting iron stores (Scott, 1970). This amount will also provide for iron
requirements of lactation. Notably, in iron preparations, the number of
milligrams of compound is followed by the milligrams of elemental iron,
which is enclosed by parentheses. The pregnant woman may benefit from 60
to 100 mg of elemental iron per day if she is obese, has a multifetal gestation,
begins supplementation late in pregnancy, takes iron irregularly, or has a
depressed hemoglobin level. The woman who is overtly anemic from iron
deficiency responds well to oral supplementation with iron salts. In
response, serum ferritin levels rise more than the hemoglobin concentration
(Daru, 2016).
Iodine also is needed, and the recommended iodine allowance is 220
µg/d (see Table 10-5). The use of iodized salt and bread products is
recommended during pregnancy to offset the increased fetal requirements and
maternal renal losses of iodine. Despite this, iodine intake has declined
substantially in the past 15 years, and in some areas it is probably inadequate
(Caldwell, 2013; Chittimoju, 2019). Severe maternal iodine deficiency
predisposes offspring to endemic cretinism, which is characterized by
multiple severe neurological defects. In parts of China and Africa, where this
condition is common, iodide supplementation very early in pregnancy
prevents some cretinism cases (Cao, 1994). To obviate this, most prenatal
supplements now contain various quantities of iodine (Patel, 2019).
Calcium is retained by the pregnant woman during gestation and
approximates 30 g. Most of this is deposited in the fetus late in pregnancy
(Pitkin, 1985). This amount of calcium represents only approximately 2.5
percent of total maternal calcium, most of which is in bone and can readily
be mobilized for fetal growth. As another potential use, routine calcium
supplementation to prevent preeclampsia is ineffective (Chap. 40, p. 704).
Zinc deficiency if severe may lead to poor appetite, suboptimal growth,
and impaired wound healing. During pregnancy, the recommended daily
intake approximates 12 mg. But, the safe level of zinc supplementation for
pregnant women is not clearly established. Vegetarians have lower zinc
intakes (Foster, 2015). The bulk of studies support zinc supplementation only
in zinc-deficient women in poor-resource countries (Nossier, 2015; Ota,
2015).
Magnesium deficiency as a consequence of pregnancy has not been
recognized. Undoubtedly, during prolonged illness with no magnesium intake,
the plasma level might become critically low, as it would in the absence of

pregnancy. We have observed this deficiency during pregnancies in some
with previous intestinal bypass surgery. Instead, as a preventive agent, Sibai
and colleagues (1989) randomly assigned 400 normotensive primigravidas to
receive 365-mg elemental magnesium supplementation or placebo tablets
from 13 to 24 weeks’ gestation. Supplementation did not improve any
measures of pregnancy outcome.
Trace metals include copper, selenium, chromium, and manganese, which
all have important roles in certain enzyme functions. In general, most are
provided by an average diet. Selenium deficiency is manifested by a
frequently fatal cardiomyopathy in young children and reproductive-aged
women. Conversely, selenium toxicity resulting from oversupplementation
also has been observed. Selenium supplementation is not needed in
American women.
Potassium concentrations in maternal plasma decline by approximately
0.5 mEq/L by midpregnancy (Brown, 1986). Potassium deficiency develops
in the same circumstances as in nonpregnant individuals. One common
example in pregnant women is hyperemesis gravidarum.
Fluoride metabolism is not altered appreciably during pregnancy
(Maheshwari, 1983). Horowitz and Heifetz (1967) concluded that no
additional offspring benefits accrued from maternal ingestion of fluoridated
water if the newborn ingested such water from birth. Sa Roriz Fonteles and
associates (2005) studied microdrill biopsies of deciduous teeth and
concluded that antenatal fluoride provided no additional fluoride uptake
compared with postnatal fluoride alone. Finally, supplemental fluoride
ingested by lactating women does not raise the fluoride concentration in
breast milk (Ekstrand, 1981).

■ Vitamins
The increased requirements for most vitamins during pregnancy shown in
Table 10-5 usually are supplied by any general diet that provides adequate
calories and protein. The exception is folic acid during times of unusual
requirements, such as pregnancy complicated by protracted vomiting,
hemolytic anemia, or multiple fetuses. That said, in impoverished countries,
routine multivitamin supplementation reduced the incidence of lowbirthweight and growth-restricted fetuses but did not alter preterm delivery
or perinatal mortality rates (Fawzi, 2007).

Folic acid supplementation in early pregnancy can lower neural-tube
defect risks (Chap. 15, p. 276). For example, the CDC (2004) estimated that
the number of affected pregnancies had decreased from 4000 per year to
approximately 3000 per year after mandatory fortification of cereal products
with folic acid in 1998. Perhaps more than half of all neural-tube defects can
be prevented with daily intake of 400 µg of folic acid throughout the
periconceptional period (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
2019a). Evidence also suggests that folate insufficiency has a global effect on
brain development (Ars, 2016). Putting 140 µg of folic acid into each 100 g
of grain products may increase the folic acid intake of the average American
woman of childbearing age by 100 µg/d. Because nutritional sources alone
are insufficient, however, folic acid supplementation is still recommended.
A woman with a prior child with a neural-tube defect can reduce the 2to 5-percent recurrence risk by more than 70 percent with a daily 4-mg folic
acid supplement taken during the month before conception and during the first
trimester. As emphasized by the American Academy of Pediatrics and the
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2017), this dose
should be consumed as a separate supplement and not as multivitamin tablets.
This practice avoids excessive intake of fat-soluble vitamins.
Vitamin A, although essential, has been associated with congenital
malformations when taken during pregnancy in high doses (>10,000 IU/d).
These malformations are similar to those produced by the vitamin A
derivative isotretinoin (Accutane), which is a potent teratogen (Chap. 8, p.
155). Beta-carotene, the precursor of vitamin A found in fruits and
vegetables, does not produce vitamin A toxicity. Most prenatal vitamins
contain vitamin A in doses considerably below the teratogenic threshold.
Dietary intake of vitamin A in the United States appears to be adequate, and
additional supplementation is not routinely recommended. In contrast,
vitamin A deficiency is an endemic nutritional problem in the developing
world (McCauley, 2015). Vitamin A deficiency, whether overt or
subclinical, is associated with night blindness and with an increased risk of
maternal anemia and spontaneous preterm birth (West, 2003).
Vitamin B12 plasma levels drop in normal pregnancy, mostly as a result
of reduced plasma levels of their carrier proteins—transcobalamins.
Vitamin B12 occurs naturally only in foods of animal origin, and strict
vegetarians may give birth to neonates whose B12 stores are low. Likewise,

because breast milk of a vegetarian mother contains little vitamin B12, the
deficiency may become profound in the breastfed infant (Higginbottom,
1978). Excessive ingestion of vitamin C also can lead to a functional
deficiency of vitamin B12. Although its role is still controversial, vitamin B12
deficiency may be an independent factor associated with neural-tube defects
(Molloy, 2018).
Vitamin B6, which is pyridoxine, does not require supplementation in
most gravidas (Salam, 2015). For women at high risk for inadequate
nutrition, a daily 2-mg supplement is recommended. As discussed on page
191, vitamin B6, when combined with the antihistamine doxylamine, is
helpful in many cases of nausea and vomiting of pregnancy.
Vitamin C allowances during pregnancy are 80 to 85 mg/d—
approximately 20 percent more than when nonpregnant (see Table 10-5). A
reasonable diet should readily provide this amount, and supplementation is
unnecessary (Rumbold, 2015). Maternal plasma levels decline during
pregnancy, whereas cord blood levels are higher. This is a phenomenon
observed with most water-soluble vitamins.
Vitamin D is a fat-soluble vitamin. After being metabolized to its active
form, it boosts the efficiency of intestinal calcium absorption and promotes
bone mineralization and growth. Unlike most vitamins that are obtained
exclusively from dietary intake, vitamin D is also synthesized endogenously
with exposure to sunlight. Vitamin D deficiency is common during pregnancy.
This is especially true in high-risk groups such as women with limited sun
exposure, vegetarians, and ethnic minorities—particularly those with darker
skin (Bodnar, 2007). Maternal deficiency can cause disordered skeletal
homeostasis, congenital rickets, and fractures in the newborn (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2017j). However, vitamin D
supplementation in women with asthma may decrease the likelihood of
childhood asthma in their offspring (Litonjua, 2016). The Food and Nutrition
Board of the Institute of Medicine (2011) established that an adequate intake
of vitamin D during pregnancy and lactation was 15 µg/d (600 IU/d). In
women suspected of having vitamin D deficiency, serum levels of 25hydroxyvitamin D can be obtained. Even then, the optimal levels in
pregnancy have not been established (De-Regil, 2016).

■ Pragmatic Nutritional Surveillance
Although researchers continue to study the ideal nutritional regimen for the
pregnant woman and her fetus, basic tenets for the clinician include:
1. Advise the pregnant woman to eat food types she wants in reasonable
amounts and salted to taste.
2. Ensure that food is amply available for socioeconomically deprived
women.
3. Monitor weight gain and align goals with the Institute of Medicine
recommendations.
4. Explore food intake by dietary recall periodically to discover the
occasional nutritionally errant diet.
5. Give tablets of simple iron salts that provide at least 30 mg of elemental
iron daily. Give folate supplementation before and in the early weeks of
pregnancy. Provide iodine supplementation in areas of known dietary
insufficiency.
6. Recheck the hematocrit or hemoglobin concentration at 28 to 32 weeks’
gestation to detect significant anemia.

COMMON CONCERNS
■ Employment
More than half of the children in the United States are born to working
mothers. Several federal laws have been passed to protect pregnant workers.
These prohibit employers from excluding women from job categories on the
basis that they are or might become pregnant. The Family and Medical Leave
Act of 1993 requires that covered employers must grant up to 12 work weeks
of unpaid leave to an employee for the birth and care of a newborn child.
In the absence of complications, most women can continue to work until
labor onset (American Academy of Pediatrics and American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2017). Some types of work, however, may
increase pregnancy complication risks. According to the American College
of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2018b), risks of preterm birth are
slightly to modestly increased with standing or walking at work >3 hours
daily, lifting and carrying >5 kg, or physically exerting oneself at work. In a

prospective study of more than 900 healthy nulliparas, women who worked
had a fivefold higher risk of preeclampsia (Higgins, 2002). Thus, any
occupation that subjects the gravida to severe physical strain should be
avoided. Ideally, no work or play is continued to the extent that undue fatigue
develops. Adequate periods of rest should be provided.

■ Exercise
In general, pregnant women do not need to limit exercise, provided they do
not become excessively fatigued or risk injury (Davenport, 2016). Clapp and
associates (2000) reported that both placental size and birthweight were
significantly greater in women who exercised. Duncombe and coworkers
(2006) reported similar findings in 148 women. In contrast, Magann and
colleagues (2002) prospectively analyzed exercise behavior in 750 healthy
women and found that working women who exercised had smaller neonates
and more dysfunctional labors.
The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020a)
advises a thorough clinical evaluation before recommending an exercise
program. In the absence of contraindications listed in Table 10-6, pregnant
women are encouraged to engage in regular, moderate-intensity physical
activity for at least 150 minutes each week. Such activity has been shown to
not adversely alter uterine artery Doppler studies (Szymanski, 2018). Each
activity should be reviewed individually for its potential risk. Examples of
safe activities are walking, running, swimming, stationary cycling, and lowimpact aerobics. However, they should refrain from activities with a high
risk of falling or abdominal trauma. Similarly, scuba diving is avoided
because the fetus is at increased risk for decompression sickness (Reid,
2018).
TABLE 10-6. Some Contraindications to Exercise During Pregnancy

In the setting of certain pregnancy complications, it is wise to abstain
from exercise and even limit physical activity. Some women with pregnancyassociated hypertensive disorders, preterm labor, placenta previa, or severe
cardiac or pulmonary disease may accrue advantages from being sedentary.
Also, those with multiple or suspected growth-restricted fetuses may be
served by greater rest.

■ Seafood Consumption
Fish are an excellent source of protein, are low in saturated fats, and contain
omega-3 fatty acids. It is recommended that pregnant women ingest 8 to 12
ounces of fish weekly, but no more than 6 ounces of albacore or “white” tuna
(U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 2019). Because nearly all fish and
shellfish contain trace amounts of mercury, pregnant and lactating women are
advised to avoid specific types of fish with potentially high methylmercury
levels. These include shark, swordfish, king mackerel, and tile fish. If the
mercury content of locally caught fish is unknown, overall fish consumption
should be limited to 6 ounces per week. Finally, to help avert listeriosis,
eating raw or undercooked fish is avoided (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2017j).

■ Lead Screening
Maternal lead exposure is associated with several adverse maternal and fetal
outcomes across a range of maternal blood lead levels (Taylor, 2015). These
include gestational hypertension, miscarriage, low birthweight, and
neurodevelopmental impairments in exposed pregnancies. The levels at
which these risks rise remains unclear. However, recognizing that such
exposure remains a significant health issue for reproductive-aged women, the
CDC (2010a) provides guidance for screening and managing exposed
pregnant and lactating women. These guidelines, which have been endorsed
by the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2018f),
recommend blood lead testing only if a risk factor is identified. If the levels
are >5 µg/dL, the lead source is sought and removed. Subsequent blood
levels are obtained. Blood lead levels >45 µg/dL are consistent with lead
poisoning, and women in this group may be candidates for chelation therapy.
Affected pregnancies are best managed in consultation with lead poisoning

treatment experts. National and state resources are available at the CDC
website: www.cdc.gov/nceh/lead/.

■ Automobile and Air Travel
Pregnant women are encouraged to wear properly positioned three-point
restraints as protection against automobile accident injury (Chap. 50, p. 892).
The lap portion of the restraining belt is placed under the abdomen and
across her upper thighs. The belt should be comfortably snug. The shoulder
belt also is firmly positioned between the breasts. Airbags should not be
disabled for the pregnant woman.
In general, air travel in a properly pressurized aircraft has no harmful
effect on pregnancy. Thus, in the absence of obstetrical or medical
complications, the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
(2018a) has concluded that pregnant women can safely fly up to 36 weeks’
gestation. It is recommended that they observe the same precautions for air
travel as the general population. Seatbelts are used while seated. Support
stockings, periodic lower extremity movement, and at least hourly
ambulation help lower the venous thromboembolism threat. Significant risks
with travel, especially international travel, are infectious disease acquisition
and development of complications remote from adequate health-care
resources.

■ Coitus
In healthy pregnant women, sexual intercourse usually is not harmful.
Whenever miscarriage, placenta previa, or preterm labor threatens, however,
coitus is avoided. Nearly 10,000 women enrolled in a prospective
investigation by the Vaginal Infection and Prematurity Study Group were
interviewed regarding sexual activity (Read, 1993). They reported a
decreased frequency of coitus with advancing gestation. By 36 weeks, 72
percent had intercourse less than once weekly. The decline is attributed to
lower desire and fear of harming the pregnancy (Staruch, 2016).
Intercourse specifically late in pregnancy is not harmful. Sayle and
colleagues (2001) reported no increased—and actually a decreased—risk of
delivery within 2 weeks of intercourse. Tan and associates (2007) studied
women scheduled for nonurgent labor induction and found that spontaneous

labor ensued at equal rates in groups either participating in or abstaining
from intercourse.
Oral-vaginal intercourse is occasionally hazardous. Aronson and Nelson
(1967) described a fatal air embolism late in pregnancy as a result of air
blown into the vagina during cunnilingus. Other near-fatal cases have been
described (Bernhardt, 1988).

■ Dental Care
Examination of the teeth is included in the prenatal examination, and good
dental hygiene is encouraged. Indeed, periodontal disease is linked to
preterm labor. Unfortunately, although its treatment improves dental health, it
does not prevent preterm birth (Daalderop, 2018). Dental caries are not
aggravated by pregnancy. Importantly, pregnancy is not a contraindication to
dental treatment including dental radiographs (American Academy of
Pediatrics and American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2017).

■ Immunization
Current recommendations for immunization during pregnancy are summarized
in Table 10-7. Well-publicized concerns regarding a causal link between
childhood exposure to the thimerosal preservative in some vaccines and
neuropsychological disorders have led some parents to vaccine prohibition.
Although controversy continues, these associations have been proven
groundless. Thus, many vaccines may be used in pregnancy (Munoz, 2019).
The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020c) stresses
the importance of integrating an effective vaccine strategy into the care of
both obstetrical and gynecological patients. The College further emphasizes
that information on the safety of vaccines given during pregnancy is subject to
change, and recommendations can be found on the CDC website at
www.cdc.gov/vaccines.
TABLE 10-7. Recommendations for Immunization During Pregnancy and
Postpartum

Influenza and tetanus–diphtheria–acellular pertussis (Tdap) vaccinations
are recommended routinely for all pregnant women (Munoz, 2019; Sperling,
2018b). Others are recommended for specific indications (see Table 10-7).
Women who are susceptible to rubella should receive measles, mumps, and
rubella (MMR) vaccination postpartum. This vaccine is contraindicated
during pregnancy.

■ Caffeine
Whether adverse pregnancy outcomes are related to caffeine consumption is
somewhat controversial. As summarized from Chapter 11 (p. 200), heavy
intake of coffee each day—approximately five cups or 500 mg of caffeine—
slightly raises the miscarriage risk. Studies of “moderate” intake—less than
200 mg daily—did not find a higher risk.
It is unclear if caffeine consumption is associated with preterm birth or
impaired fetal growth. Clausson and coworkers (2002) found no association
between caffeine consumption <500 mg/d and low birthweight, fetal-growth
restriction, or preterm delivery. Bech and associates (2007) randomly
assigned more than 1200 pregnant women who drank at least three cups of
coffee per day to caffeinated versus decaffeinated coffee. They found no
difference in birthweight or gestational age at delivery between groups. The
CARE Study Group (2008), however, evaluated 2635 low-risk pregnancies
and reported a 1.4-fold risk for fetal-growth restriction among those whose
daily caffeine consumption was >200 mg/d compared with those who
consumed <100 mg/d. The American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2018g) concludes that moderate consumption of caffeine—
less than 200 mg/d—does not appear to be associated with miscarriage or
preterm birth, but that the relationship between caffeine consumption and
fetal-growth restriction remains unsettled.

■ Nausea and Heartburn
Nausea and vomiting are common complaints during the first half of
pregnancy. These vary in severity and usually commence between the first
and second missed menstrual period and continue until 14 to 16 weeks’
gestation. Although nausea and vomiting tend to be worse in the morning—
thus termed morning sickness—both symptoms frequently continue

throughout the day. Lacroix and associates (2000) found that nausea and
vomiting were reported by three fourths of pregnant women and lasted an
average of 35 days. Half had relief by 14 weeks’ gestation, and 90 percent
by 22 weeks’ gestation. In 80 percent of these women, nausea lasted all day.
Treatment of pregnancy-associated nausea and vomiting seldom provides
complete relief, but symptoms can be minimized. Eating small meals at
frequent intervals is valuable. One systematic literature search reported that
the herbal remedy ginger was likely effective (Borrelli, 2005). Mild
symptoms usually respond to vitamin B6 given with doxylamine, but some
women require phenothiazine or H1-receptor blocking antiemetics (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2018h). In some with
hyperemesis gravidarum, vomiting is so severe that dehydration, electrolyte
and acid-base disturbances, and starvation ketosis become serious problems
(Chap. 57, p. 1014).
Heartburn is another common complaint of gravidas and is caused by
gastric content reflux into the lower esophagus. The greater frequency of
regurgitation during pregnancy most likely results from upward displacement
and compression of the stomach by the uterus, combined with relaxation of
the lower esophageal sphincter. Avoiding bending over or lying flat can be
preventive. In most pregnant women, symptoms are mild and relieved by a
regimen of more frequent but smaller meals. Antacids may provide
considerable relief (Phupong, 2015). Specifically, aluminum hydroxide,
magnesium trisilicate, or magnesium hydroxide are given alone or in
combination. Management of heartburn or nausea that does not respond to
simple measures is discussed in Chapter 57 (p. 1017).

■ Pica and Ptyalism
The craving for strange foods is termed pica. Worldwide, its prevalence
among pregnant women is estimated to be 30 percent (Fawcett, 2016). At
times, nonfoods such as ice (pagophagia), starch (amylophagia), or clay
(geophagia) may predominate. This desire is considered by some to be
triggered by severe iron deficiency (Epler, 2017). Although such cravings
usually abate after deficiency correction, not all pregnant women with pica
are iron deficient. Indeed, if strange “foods” dominate the diet, iron
deficiency will be aggravated or will develop eventually. Patel and

colleagues (2004) prospectively completed a dietary inventory on more than
3000 women during the second trimester. The prevalence of pica was 4
percent. The most common nonfood items ingested were starch in 64 percent,
dirt in 14 percent, sourdough in 9 percent, and ice in 5 percent.
Women during pregnancy are occasionally distressed by profuse
salivation—ptyalism. Although usually unexplained, ptyalism sometimes
appears to follow salivary gland stimulation by the ingestion of starch. It
commonly occurs with hyperemesis gravidarum (Bronshtein, 2018).

■ Headache or Backache
Headaches are common in pregnancy. At least 5 percent of pregnancies are
estimated to be complicated by new-onset or new-type headache (Spierings,
2016). Acetaminophen is suitable for treatment of most, and an in-depth
discussion is found in Chapter 63 (p. 1127).
Low back pain to some extent is reported by nearly 70 percent of
gravidas (Liddle, 2015). Minor degrees follow excessive strain or
significant bending, lifting, or walking. It can be reduced by squatting rather
than bending when reaching down, by using a back-support pillow when
sitting, and by avoiding high-heeled shoes. Back pain complaints increase
with progressing gestation and are more prevalent in obese women and those
with a history of low back pain. In some cases, troublesome pain may persist
for years after the pregnancy (Norén, 2002).
Severe back pain should not be attributed simply to pregnancy until a
thorough orthopedic examination has been conducted. Severe pain has other
uncommon causes that include pregnancy-associated osteoporosis, disc
disease, vertebral osteoarthritis, or septic arthritis (Smith, 2008). More
commonly, muscular spasm and tenderness are classified clinically as acute
strain or fibrositis. Although evidence-based clinical research directing care
in pregnancy is limited, low back pain usually responds well to analgesics,
heat, and rest. Acetaminophen may be used as needed. Nonsteroidal
antiinflammatory drugs also may be beneficial but are used only in short
courses to avoid fetal effects (Chap. 8, p. 151). Muscle relaxants that include
cyclobenzaprine or baclofen may be added when needed. Once acute pain is
improved, stabilizing and strengthening exercises provided by physical
therapy help improve spine and hip stability, which is essential for the

increased load of pregnancy. For some, a support belt that stabilizes the
sacroiliac joint may be helpful (Gutke, 2015).

■ Varicosities and Hemorrhoids
Venous leg varicosities have a congenital predisposition and accrue with
advancing age. They can be aggravated by factors that raise lower-extremity
venous pressures, such as an enlarging uterus. Femoral venous pressures in
the supine gravida rise from 8 mm Hg in early pregnancy to 24 mm Hg at
term. Thus, leg varicosities typically worsen as pregnancy advances,
especially with prolonged standing. Symptoms vary from cosmetic blemishes
and mild discomfort at the end of the day to severe discomfort that requires
prolonged rest with feet elevation. Treatment is generally limited to periodic
rest with leg elevation, elastic stockings, or both. Surgical correction during
pregnancy generally is not advised, although rarely the symptoms may be so
severe that injection, ligation, or even stripping of the veins is necessary.
Superficial varicosities are a risk factor for deep-vein thrombosis and
pulmonary embolism (Chap. 55, p. 980).
Vulvar varicosities frequently coexist with leg varicosities, but they may
appear without other venous pathology. Uncommonly, they become massive
and almost incapacitating (Pratilas, 2018). If these large varicosities rupture,
either spontaneously or at the time of delivery, blood loss can be severe.
Treatment is with specially fitted pantyhose that will also minimize lower
extremity varicosities. With particularly bothersome vulvar varicosities, a
foam rubber pad suspended across the vulva by a belt can be used to exert
pressure on the dilated veins.
Hemorrhoids are rectal vein varicosities and may first appear during
pregnancy as pelvic venous pressures rise. Commonly, they are recurrences
of previously encountered hemorrhoids. Up to 40 percent of pregnant women
develop these (Poskus, 2014). Pain and swelling usually are relieved by
topically applied anesthetics, warm soaks, and stool-softening agents. With
thrombosis of an external hemorrhoid, pain can be considerable. This may be
relieved by incision and removal of the clot following injection of a local
anesthetic.

■ Sleeping and Fatigue

Beginning early in pregnancy, many women experience fatigue and need
greater amounts of sleep. The soporific effect of progesterone contributes but
may be compounded in the first trimester by nausea and vomiting. In the latter
stages, general discomforts, urinary frequency, and dyspnea can be additive.
Sleep-disordered breathing may be associated with significant morbidities
such as hypertensive disorders of pregnancy, stillbirth, and preterm delivery
(Brown, 2018; Dominguez, 2018). Moreover, sleep efficiency appears to
progressively diminish as pregnancy advances. Wilson and associates (2011)
performed overnight polysomnography and observed that women in the third
trimester had poorer sleep efficiency, more awakenings, and less of both
stage 4 (deep) and rapid-eye-movement sleep. Women in the first trimester
also were affected, but to a lesser extent. Daytime naps and mild sedatives at
bedtime such as diphenhydramine (Benadryl) can be helpful.

■ Cord Blood Banking
Cord blood contains hemopoietic stem cells that can be used to treat more
than 70 types of diseases. These include immunological and genetic diseases
and some forms of cancer. Of the two cord blood bank types, public banks
promote allogeneic donation, for use by a related or unrelated recipient,
similar to blood product donation. Private banks store stem cells for future
autologous use and charge fees for initial processing and annual storage.
The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020e) has
concluded that if a woman requests data on umbilical cord banking,
information regarding advantages and disadvantages of public versus private
banking should be explained. Some states have passed laws that require
physicians to inform patients about cord blood banking options. Importantly,
few transplants have been performed by using cord blood stored in the
absence of a known indication in the recipient (Screnci, 2016). The
likelihood that cord blood would be used for the child or family member of
the donor couple is considered remote. Instead, it is recommended that
directed donation be considered when an immediate family member carries
the diagnosis of a specific condition known to be treatable by hemopoietic
transplantation.

REFERENCES

Afshar Y, Wang E, Mei J, et al: Childbirth education class and birth plans are associated with a vaginal
delivery. Birth 44(1):29, 2017
Ahmad F, Hogg-Johnson S, Stewart D, et al: Computer-assisted screening for intimate partner violence
and control. Ann Intern Med 151(2):94, 2009
American Academy of Pediatrics, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Guidelines for
Perinatal Care, 8th ed. Elk Grove Village, AAP, 2017
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Avoiding inappropriate clinical decisions based on
false-positive human chorionic gonadotropin test results. Committee Opinion No. 278, November
2002, Reaffirmed 2017a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Carrier screening for genetic conditions.
Committee Opinion No. 691, March 2017b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Carrier screening in the age of genomic
medicine. Committee Opinion No. 690, March 2017c
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Method for estimating the due date. Committee
Opinion No. 700, May 2017e
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Neural tube defects. Practice Bulletin No. 187,
December 2017f
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Opioid use and opioid use disorder in pregnancy.
Committee Opinion No. 711, August 2017g
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Update on seafood consumption during
pregnancy. ACOG Practice Advisory, 2017j
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Vitamin D: screening and supplementation during
pregnancy. Committee Opinion No. 495, July 2011, Reaffirmed 2017k
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Air travel during pregnancy. Committee Opinion
No. 746, August 2018a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Employment considerations during pregnancy and
the postpartum period. Committee Opinion No. 733, April 2018b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Group prenatal care. Committee Opinion No.
731, March 2018d
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Lead screening during pregnancy and lactation.
Committee Opinion No. 533, August 2012, Reaffirmed 2018f
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Moderate caffeine consumption during
pregnancy. Committee Opinion No. 462, August 2010, Reaffirmed 2018g
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Nausea and vomiting of pregnancy. Practice
Bulletin No. 189, January 2018h
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Optimizing postpartum care. Committee Opinion
No. 736, May 2018i
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Prenatal and perinatal human immunodeficiency
virus testing. Committee Opinion No. 752, September 2018j
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Ultrasound in pregnancy. Practice Bulletin No.
175, December 2016, Reaffirmed 2018l
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Weight gain during pregnancy. Committee
Opinion No. 548, January 2013, Reaffirmed 2018n
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Intimate partner violence. Committee Opinion
No. 518, February 2012, Reaffirmed 2019c

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Gestational diabetes mellitus. Practice Bulletin.
No. 190, Feburary 2018, Reaffirmed 2019d
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Physical activity and exercise during pregnancy
and the postpartum period. Committee Opinion No. 804, March 2020a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Smoking cessation during pregnancy. Committee
Opinion No. 807, April 2020b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Immunization implementation strategies for
Obstetrician-Gynecologists. Committee Opinion No. 772, February 2019, Reaffirmed 2020c
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Screening for fetal chromosomal abnormalities.
Practice Bulletin No. 226, August 2020d
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Umbilical cord blood banking. Committee Opinion
No. 771, February 2019, Reaffirmed 2020e
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Prevention of group B streptococcal early-onset
disease in newborns. Committee Opinion No. 797, January 2020f
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologist: Fetal alcohol spectrum disorders (FASD)
prevention program. 2021a. Available at: www.acog.org/programs/fasd. Accessed October 5, 2021
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Fetal growth restriction. Practice Bulletin No.
227, January 2021b
American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine: Recommended maximum scanning times for displayed
thermal index (TI) values. 2016. Available at: www.aium.org/officialStatements/65. Accessed
October 8, 2019
American Society for Reproductive Medicine: Smoking and infertility: a committee opinion. Fertil Steril
110(4):611, 2018
Aronson ME, Nelson PK: Fatal air embolism in pregnancy resulting from an unusual sex act. Obstet
Gynecol 30:127, 1967
Ars CL, Nijs IM, Marroun HE, et al: Prenatal folate, homocysteine and vitamin B12 levels and child
brain volumes, cognitive development and psychological functioning: the Generation R Study. Br J
Nutr 22:1, 2016
Barnhart KT, Guo W, Cary MS, et al: Differences in serum human chorionic gonadotropin rise in early
pregnancy by race and value at presentation. Obstet Gynecol 128(3):504, 2016
Bech BH, Obel C, Henriksen TB, et al: Effect of reducing caffeine intake on birth weight and length of
gestation: randomized controlled trial. BMJ 335:409, 2007
Berg CJ, Callaghan WM, Syverson C, et al: Pregnancy-related mortality in the United States, 1998 to
2005. Obstet Gynecol 116(6):1302, 2010
Berggren EK, Groh-Wargo S, Presley L, et al: Maternal fat, but not lean, mass is increased among
overweight/obese women with excess gestational weight gain. Am J Obstet Gynecol 214(6):745.e1,
2016
Berlin I, Grangé G, Jacob N, et al: Nicotine patches in pregnant smokers: randomized, placebo
controlled, multicentre trial of efficacy. BMJ 348:g1622, 2014
Bernhardt TL, Goldmann RW, Thombs PA, et al: Hyperbaric oxygen treatment of cerebral air embolism
from orogenital sex during pregnancy. Crit Care Med 16:729, 1988
Bleich AT, Sheffield JS, Wendel GD Jr, et al: Disseminated gonococcal infection in women. Obstet
Gynecol 119(3):597, 2012
Bobdiwala S, Saso S, Verbakel JY, et al: Diagnostic protocols for the management of pregnancy of
unknown location: a systematic review and meta-analysis. BJOG 126(2): 190, 2019

Bodnar LM, Simhan HN, Powers RW, et al: High prevalence of vitamin D insufficiency in black and
white pregnant women residing in the northern United States and their neonates. J Nutr 137(2):447,
2007
Borrelli F, Capasso R, Aviello G, et al: Effectiveness and safety of ginger in the treatment of pregnancyinduced nausea and vomiting. Obstet Gynecol 105:849, 2005
Braunstein GD: The long gestation of the modern home pregnancy test. Clin Chem 60(1):18, 2014
Bronshtein M, Gover A, Beloosesky R, et al: Characteristics and outcomes of ptyalism gravidarum. Isr
Med Assoc J 20(9):573, 2018
Brown MA, Sinosich MJ, Saunders DM, et al: Potassium regulation and progesterone-aldosterone
interrelationships in human pregnancy: a prospective study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 155:349, 1986
Brown NT, Turner JM, Kumar S: The intrapartum and perinatal risks of sleep-disordered breathing in
pregnancy: a systematic review and metaanalysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 219(2):147, 2018
Cao XY, Jiang XM, Dou ZH, et al: Timing of vulnerability of the brain to iodine deficiency in endemic
cretinism. N Engl J Med 331:1739, 1994
CARE Study Group: Maternal caffeine intake during pregnancy and risk of fetal growth restriction: a
large prospective observational study. BMJ 337:a2332, 2008
Carter EB, Barbier K, Sarabia R, et al: Group versus traditional prenatal care in low-risk women
delivering at term: a retrospective cohort study. J Perinatol 37(7):769, 2017
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Spina bifida and anencephaly before and after folic acid
mandate—United States, 1995–1996 and 1999–2000. MMWR 53(17):362, 2004
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Guidelines for the identification and management of lead
exposure in pregnant and lactating women. 2010a. Available at:
www.cdc.gov/nceh/lead/publications/leadandpregnancy2010.pdf. Accessed October 8, 2019
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Prevention of perinatal group B streptococcal disease:
revised guidelines from CDC, 2010b. MMWR 59(10):1, 2010b
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: General recommendations on immunization—
recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR 60(2):1,
2011
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Folic acid: birth defects COUNT. 2019a. Available at:
www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/birthdefectscount/basics.html. Accessed October 8, 2019
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Weight gain during pregnancy. 2019b. Available at:
www.cdc.gov/reproductivehealth/maternalinfanthealth/pregnancy-weight-gain.htm. Accessed
October 8, 2019
Chamberlain G, Broughton-Pipkin F (eds): Clinical Physiology in Obstetrics, 3rd ed. Oxford, Blackwell
Science, 1998
Chen PH, Rovi S, Washington J, et al: Randomized comparison of 3 methods to screen for domestic
violence in family practice. Ann Fam Med 5(5):430, 2007
Chittimoju SB, Pearce EN: Iodine deficiency and supplementation in pregnancy. Clin Obstet Gynecol
62(2):330, 2019
Caldwell KL, Pan Y, Mortensen ME, et al: Iodine status in pregnant women in the National Children’s
Study and in U.S. women (15-44 years), National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey 2005–
2010. Thyroid 23(8):927, 2013
Clapp JF III, Kim H, Burciu B, et al: Beginning regular exercise in early pregnancy: effect on
fetoplacental growth. Am J Obstet Gynecol 183:1484, 2000
Clausson B, Granath F, Ekbom A, et al: Effect of caffeine exposure during pregnancy on birth weight
and gestational age. Am J Epidemiol 155:429, 2002

Coker AL, Garcia LS, Williams CM, et al: Universal psychosocial screening and adverse pregnancy
outcomes in an academic obstetric clinic. Obstet Gynecol 119(6):1180, 2012
Cole LA: The utility of six over-the-counter (home) pregnancy tests. Clin Chem Lab Med 49(8): 1317,
2011
Coleman T, Chamberlain C, Davey MA, et al: Pharmacological interventions for promoting smoking
cessation during pregnancy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 12:CD010078, 2015
Cooper S, Taggar J, Lewis S, et al: Effect of nicotine patches in pregnancy on infant and maternal
outcomes at 2 years: follow-up from the randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled SNAP trial.
Lancet Respir Med 2(9):728, 2014
Daalderop LA, Wieland BV, Tomsin K, et al: Periodontal disease and pregnancy outcomes: overview of
systematic reviews. JDR Clin Trans Res 3(1):10, 2018
Dahlin S, Gunnerbeck A, Wikström AK, et al: Maternal tobacco use and extremely premature birth–a
population-based cohort study. BJOG 123(12):1938, 2016
Daru K, Cooper NA, Khan KS: Systematic review of randomized trials of the effect of iron
supplementation on iron stores and oxygen carrying capacity in pregnancy. Acta Obstet Gynecol
Scand 95(3):270, 2016
Davenport MH, Skow RJ, Steinback CD: Maternal responses to aerobic exercise in pregnancy. Clin
Obstet Gynecol 59(3):541, 2016
Denny CH, Acero CS, Naimi TS, et al: Consumption of alcohol beverages and binge drinking among
pregnant women aged 18–44 years—United States, 2015–2017. MMWR 68(16):365, 2019
De-Regil LM, Palacios C, Lombardo LK, et al: Vitamin D supplementation for women during
pregnancy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 1:CD008873, 2016
DeVader SR, Neeley HL, Myles TD, et al: Evaluation of gestational weight gain guidelines for women
with normal prepregnancy body mass index. Obstet Gynecol 110:745, 2007
Dominguez JE, Street L, Louis J: Management of obstructive sleep apnea in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol
Clin North Am 45(2):233, 2018
Drake P, Driscoll AK, Mathews TJ: Cigarette Smoking During Pregnancy: United States, 2016. NCHS
Data Brief 305:1, 2018
Duncombe D, Skouteris H, Wertheim EH, et al: Vigorous exercise and birth outcomes in a sample of
recreational exercisers: a prospective study across pregnancy. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol 46:288,
2006
Ekstrand J, Boreus LO, de Chateau P: No evidence of transfer of fluoride from plasma to breast milk.
BMJ (Clin Res Ed) 283:761, 1981
Epler KE, Pierce A, Rappaport VJ: Pica in pregnancy: an unusual presentation. Obstet Gynecol
130(6):1377, 2017
Eriksen JL, Pilliod RA, Caughey AB: Impact of late initiation of prenatal care on pregnancy outcomes
among women who use drugs. Abstract No. 732. Am J Obstet Gynecol 214:S384, 2016
Fawcett EJ, Fawcett JM, Mazmanian D: A meta-analysis of the worldwide prevalence of pica during
pregnancy and the postpartum period. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 133(3):277, 2016
Fawzi WW, Msamanga GI, Urassa W, et al: Vitamins and perinatal outcomes among HIV-negative
women in Tanzania. N Engl J Med 356:14, 2007
Fiore MC, Jaen CR, Baker TB, et al: Treating tobacco use and dependence: 2008 update. 2008.
Available at: www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK63952/. Accessed October 15, 2019
Fleming N, O’Driscoll T, Becker G, et al: Adolescent pregnancy guidelines. J Obstet Gynaecol Can
37(8):740, 2015

Foster M, Herulah UN, Prasad A, et al: Zinc status of vegetarians during pregnancy: a systematic
review of observational studies and meta-analysis of zinc intake. Nutrients 7(6):4512, 2015
Goldenberg RL, McClure EM: Importance of prenatal care in reducing stillbirth. BJOG 125(2):148, 2018
Gregory KD, Johnson CT, Johnson TR, et al: The content of prenatal care. Women’s Health Issues
16:198, 2006
Grenache DG: Variable accuracy of home pregnancy tests: truth in advertising? Clin Chem Lab Med
53(3):339, 2015
Grohskopf LA, Alyanak E, Broder KR, et al: Prevention and control of seasonal influenza with
vaccines: recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices—United States,
2019–20 influenza season. MMWR 68(3):1, 2019
Gutke A, Betten C, Degerskär K, et al: Treatments for pregnancy-related lumbopelvic pain: a
systematic review of physiotherapy modalities. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 94(11):1156, 2015
Haragan AF, Hulsey TC, Hawk AF, et al: Diagnostic accuracy of fundal height and handheld
ultrasound-measured abdominal circumference to screen for fetal growth abnormalities. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 212(6):820.e1, 2015
Herbert WN, Bruninghaus HM, Barefoot AB, et al: Clinical aspects of fetal heart auscultation. Obstet
Gynecol 69:574, 1987
Higginbottom MC, Sweetman L, Nyhan WL: A syndrome of methylmalonic aciduria, homocystinuria,
megaloblastic anemia and neurologic abnormalities in a vitamin B12-deficient breast-fed infant of a
strict vegetarian. N Engl J Med 299:317, 1978
Higgins JR, Walshe JJ, Conroy RM, et al: The relation between maternal work, ambulatory blood
pressure, and pregnancy hypertension. J Epidemiol Community Health 56:389, 2002
Hollier LM, Hill J, Sheffield JS, et al: State laws regarding prenatal syphilis screening in the United
States. Am J Obstet Gynecol 189:1178, 2003
Horowitz HS, Heifetz SB: Effects of prenatal exposure to fluoridation on dental caries. Public Health
Rep 82:297, 1967
Hytten FE, Chamberlain G (eds): Clinical Physiology in Obstetrics, 2nd ed. Oxford, Blackwell, 1991
Hytten FE, Leitch I: The Physiology of Human Pregnancy, 2nd ed. Oxford, Blackwell, 1971
Ickovics JR, Earnshaw V, Lewis JB, et al: Cluster randomized controlled trial of group prenatal care:
perinatal outcomes among adolescents in New York City health centers. Am J Public Health
106(2):359, 2016
Institute of Medicine: Dietary Reference Intakes: The Essential Guide to Nutrient Requirements.
Washington, The National Academies Press, 2006
Institute of Medicine: DRI Dietary Reference Intakes for Calcium and Vitamin D. Washington, The
National Academies Press, 2011
Institute of Medicine and National Research Council: Weight Gain During Pregnancy: Reexamining the
Guidelines. Washington, The National Academic Press, 2009
Jebeile H, Mijatovic J, Louie JC, et al: A systematic review and meta-analysis of energy intake and
weight gain in pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 214(4):465, 2015
Jiang M, Gao H, Vinyes-Pares G, et al: Association between breastfeeding duration and postpartum
weight retention of lactating mothers: A meta-analysis of cohort studies. Clin Nutr 37(4):1224, 2018
Johnson S, Cushion M, Bond S, et al: Comparison of analytical sensitivity and women’s interpretation of
home pregnancy tests. Clin Chem Lab Med 53(3):391, 2015
Kapaya M, D’Angelo DV, Tong VT, et al: Use of electronic vapor products before, during, and after
pregnancy among women with a recent live birth–Oklahoma and Texas, 2015. MMWR 68(8):189,
2019

Kim DK, Bridges CB, Harriman KH, et al: Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices
recommended immunization schedule for adults aged 19 years or older—United States, 2016.
MMWR 65(4):88, 2016
Kim DK, Hunter P: Advisory committee on immunization practices recommended immunization
schedule for adults aged 19 years or older—United States, 2019. MMWR 68(5):115, 2019
Kiss H, Widham A, Geusau A, et al: Universal antenatal screening for syphilis: is it still justified
economically? A 10-year retrospective analysis. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 112:24, 2004
Kominiarek MA, Saade G, Mele L, et al: Association between gestational weight gain and perinatal
outcomes. Obstet Gynecol 132(4):875, 2018
Lacroix R, Eason E, Melzack R: Nausea and vomiting during pregnancy: a prospective study of its
frequency, intensity, and patterns of change. Am J Obstet Gynecol 182:931, 2000
Leveno KJ, McIntire DD, Bloom SL, et al: Decreased preterm births in an inner-city public hospital.
Obstet Gynecol 113(3):578, 2009
Liddle SD, Pennick V: Interventions for preventing and treating low-back and pelvic pain during
pregnancy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 9:CD001139, 2015
Litonjua AA, Carey VJ, Laranjo N, et al: Effect of prenatal supplementation with vitamin D on asthma
or recurrent wheezing in offspring by age 3 years: the VDAART randomized clinical trial. JAMA
315(4):362, 2016
Loudon I: Death in Childbirth. New York, Oxford University Press, 1992
Luke S, Kirby RS: Timing of maternal tobacco exposure, hypertension, and risk of singleton small-forgestational age infants. Am J Perinatol 35(3):215, 2018
Madhi SA, Cutland CL, Jose L, et al: Safety and immunogenicity of an investigational maternal trivalent
group B streptococcus vaccine in healthy women and their infants: a randomised phase 1b/2 trial.
Lancet Infect Dis 16(8):923, 2016
Magann EF, Evans SF, Weitz B, et al: Antepartum, intrapartum, and neonatal significance of exercise on
healthy low-risk pregnant working women. Obstet Gynecol 99:466, 2002
Maheshwari UR, King JC, Leybin L, et al: Fluoride balances during early and late pregnancy. J Occup
Med 25:587, 1983
Margulies R, Miller L: Fruit size as a model for teaching first trimester uterine sizing in bimanual
examination. Obstet Gynecol 98(2):341, 2001
May PA, Chambers CD, Kalberg WO, et al: Prevalence of fetal alcohol spectrum disorders in 4 US
communities. JAMA 319(5):474, 2018
McCash SI, Goldfrank DJ, Pessin MS, et al: Reducing false-positive pregnancy test results in patients
with cancer. Obstet Gynecol 130(4):825, 2017
McCauley ME, van den Broek N, Dou L, et al: Vitamin A supplementation during pregnancy for
maternal and newborn outcomes. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 10:CD008666, 2015
Metz TD, Stickrath EH: Marijuana use in pregnancy and lactation: a review of the evidence. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 213(6):761, 2015
Miller E, McCaw B: Intimate partner violence. N Engl J Med 380(9):850, 2019
Molloy AM: Should vitamin B12 status be considered in assessing risk of neural tube defects. Ann N Y
Acad Sci 1414(1):109, 2018
Munoz FM, Jamieson DJ: Maternal immunization. Obstet Gynecol 133(4):739, 2019
Murray N, Homer CS, Davis GK, et al: The clinical utility of routine urinalysis in pregnancy: a
prospective study. Med J Aust 177:477, 2002

Nanovskaya TN, Oncken C, Fokina VM, et al: Bupropion sustained release for pregnant smokers: a
randomized, placebo-controlled trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol 216(4):2017
Norén L, Östgaard S, Johansson G, et al: Lumbar back and posterior pelvic pain during pregnancy: a 3year follow-up. Eur Spine J 11:267, 2002
Nossier SA, Naeim NE, El-Sayed NA, et al: The effect of zinc supplementation on pregnancy
outcomes: a double-blind, randomized controlled trial, Egypt. Br J Nutr 114(2):274, 2015
O’Keeffe DF, Abuhamad A: Obstetric ultrasound utilization in the United States: data from various
health plans. Semin Perinatol 37(5):292, 2013
Olson AL, Boardman MB, Johnson DJ: Smoke-free moms: financial rewards for smoking cessation by
low-income rural pregnant women. Am J Prev Med 56(6):852, 2019
Ornaghi S, Algeri P, Todyrenchuk L, et al: Impact of excessive pre-pregnancy body mass index and
abnormal gestational weight gain on pregnancy outcomes in women with chronic hypertension.
Pregnancy Hypertens 12:90, 2018
Osterman MJ, Martin JA: Timing and adequacy of prenatal care in the United States, 2016. Natl Vital
Stat Rep 67(3):1, 2018
Ota E, Mori R, Middleton P, et al: Zinc supplementation for improving pregnancy and infant outcome.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2:CD000230, 2015
Partridge S, Balayla J, Holcroft CA, et al: Inadequate prenatal care utilization and risks of infant
mortality and poor birth outcome: a retrospective analysis of 28,729,765 U.S. deliveries over 8 years.
Am J Perinatol 29(10):787, 2012
Patel A, Lee SY, Stagnaro-Green A, et al: Iodine content of the best-selling United States adult and
prenatal multivitamin preparations. Thyroid 29(1):124, 2019
Patel MV, Nuthalapaty FS, Ramsey PS, et al: Pica: a neglected risk factor for preterm birth. Obstet
Gynecol 103:68S, 2004
Patnode CD, Henderson JT, Thompson JH, et al: Behavioral counseling and pharmacotherapy
interventions for tobacco cessation in adults, including pregnant women: a review of reviews for the
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Ann Intern Med 163(8):608, 2015
Phupong V, Hanprasertpong T: Interventions for heartburn in pregnancy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
9:CD011379, 2015
Pitkin RM: Calcium metabolism in pregnancy and the perinatal period: a review. Am J Obstet Gynecol
151:99, 1985
Poskus T, Buzinskiene D, Drasutiene G, et al: Haemorrhoids and anal fissures during pregnancy and
after childbirth: a prospective cohort study. BJOG 121(13):1666, 2014
Power ML, Wilson EK, Hogan SO, et al: Patterns of preconception, prenatal and postnatal care for
diabetic women by obstetrician-gynecologists. J Reprod Med 58(1-2):7, 2013
Pratilas GC, Dinas K: Severe vulvovaginal varicosities in pregnancy. N Engl J Med 378(22):2123, 2018
Pritchard JA, Scott DE: Iron demands during pregnancy. In Hallberg L, Harwerth HG, Vannotti A (eds):
Iron Deficiency: Pathogenesis, Clinical Aspects, Therapy. New York, Academic Press, 1970
Read JS, Klebanoff MA: Sexual intercourse during pregnancy and preterm delivery: effects of vaginal
microorganisms. Am J Obstet Gynecol 168:514, 1993
Reid RL, Lorenzo M: SCUBA diving in pregnancy. J Obstet Gynaecol Can 40(11):1490, 2018
Reiss HE: History, John William Ballantyne 1861–1923. J Obstet Gynecol 20(4):343, 2000
Rumbold A, Ota E, Nagata C, et al: Vitamin C supplementation in pregnancy. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev 9:CD004072, 2015
Sa Roriz Fonteles C, Zero DT, Moss ME, et al: Fluoride concentrations in enamel and dentin of primary
teeth after pre- and postnatal fluoride exposure. Caries Res 39:505, 2005

Salam RA, Zuberi NF, Bhutta ZA: Pyridoxine (vitamin B6) supplementation during pregnancy or labour
for maternal and neonatal outcomes. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 6:CD000179, 2015
Sarman I: Review shows that early foetal alcohol exposure may cause adverse effects even when the
mother consumes low levels. Acta Paediatr 107(6):938, 2018
Sayle AE, Savitz DA, Thorp JM Jr, et al: Sexual activity during late pregnancy and risk of preterm
delivery. Obstet Gynecol 97:283, 2001
Schauberger CW, Rooney BL, Brimer LM: Factors that influence weight loss in the puerperium. Obstet
Gynecol 79:424, 1992
Scott DE, Pritchard JA, Satin AS, et al: Iron deficiency during pregnancy. In Hallberg L, Harwerth HG,
Vannotti A (eds): Iron Deficiency: Pathogenesis, Clinical Aspects, Therapy. New York, Academic
Press, 1970
Screnci M, Murgi E, Valle V, et al: Sibling cord blood donor program for hematopoietic cell
transplantation: the 20-year experience in the Rome Cord Blood Bank. Blood Cells Mol Dis 57:71,
2016
Sibai BM, Villar MA, Bray E: Magnesium supplementation during pregnancy: a double-blind randomized
controlled clinical trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol 161:115, 1989
Siu AL, U.S. Preventive Services Task Force: Behavioral and pharmacotherapy interventions for
tobacco smoking cessation in adults, including pregnant women: U.S. Preventive Services Task
Force Recommendation Statement. Ann Intern Med 163(8):622, 2015
Smith MW, Marcus PS, Wurtz LD: Orthopedic issues in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol Surv 63:103, 2008
Soneji S, Beltrán-Sánchez H: Association of maternal cigarette smoking and smoking cessation with
preterm birth. JAMA Netw Open 2(4):e192514, 2019
Sperling JD, Maggio L, Has P, et al: Prenatal care adherence and neonatal intensive care unit admission
or stillbirth among women with gestational and preexisting diabetes mellitus. Am J Perinatol
35(2):103, 2018a
Sperling RS, Riley LE, Immunization and Emerging Infections Expert Work Group: Influenza
vaccination, pregnancy safety, and risk of early pregnancy loss. Obstet Gynecol 131(5):799, 2018b
Spierings EL, Sabin TD: De novo headache during pregnancy and puerperium. Neurologist 21(1):1, 2016
Spindel ER, McEvoy CT: The role of nicotine in the effects of maternal smoking during pregnancy on
lung development and childhood respiratory disease: implications for dangers of E-cigarettes. Am J
Respir Crit Care Med 193(5):486, 2016
Staruch M, Kucharcyzk A, Zawadzka K, et al: Sexual activity during pregnancy. Neuro Endocrinol Lett
37(1):53, 2016
Stephens TV, Payne M, Ball Ro, et al: Protein requirements of healthy pregnancy women during early
and late gestation are higher than current recommendations. J Nutr 145(1):73, 2015
Stewart RD, Nelson DB, Adhikari EH, et al: The obstetrical and neonatal impact of maternal opioid
detoxification in pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 209:267.e1, 2013
Szymanski LM, Kogutt BK: Uterine artery Doppler velocimetry during individually prescribed exercise
in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 132(4):1026, 2018
Tan PC, Yow CM, Omar SZ: Effect of coital activity on onset of labor in women scheduled for labor
induction. Obstet Gynecol 110:820, 2007
Taylor CM, Golding J, Emond AM: Adverse effects of maternal lead levels on birth outcomes in the
ALSPAC study: a prospective birth cohort study. BJOG 122(3):322, 2015
Tong VT, Dietz PM, Morrow B, et al: Trends in smoking before, during, and after pregnancy—
pregnancy risk assessment monitoring system, United States, 40 sites, 2000–2010. MMWR 62(6):1,
2013

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency: 2019 EPA-FDA advice about eating fish. 2019. Available at:
www.fda.gov/food/consumers/advice-about-eating-fish. Accessed October 8, 2019
Villar J, Báaqeel H, Piaggio G, et al: WHO antenatal care randomised trial for the evaluation of a new
model of routine antenatal care. Lancet 357:1551, 2001
West KP: Vitamin A deficiency disorders in children and women. Food Nutr Bull 24:S78, 2003
Whittington JR, Simmons PM, Phillips AM, et al: The use of electronic cigarettes in pregnancy: a review
of the literature. Obstet Gynecol Surv 73(9):544, 2018
Widen EM, Whyatt RM, Hoepner LA, et al: Excessive gestational weight gain is associated with longterm body fat and weight retention at 7 y postpartum in African American and Dominican mothers
with underweight, normal, and overweight prepregnancy BMI. Am J Clin Nutr 102(6):1460, 2015
Wilson DL, Barnes M, Ellett L, et al: Decreased sleep efficiency, increased wake after sleep onset and
increased cortical arousals in late pregnancy. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol 51(1):38, 2011

SECTION 5

FIRST- AND SECONDTRIMESTER PREGNANCY LOSS

CHAPTER 11

First- and Second-Trimester Pregnancy
Loss

NOMENCLATURE
FIRST-TRIMESTER SPONTANEOUS ABORTION
SPONTANEOUS ABORTION CLINICAL CLASSIFICATION
RECURRENT MISCARRIAGE
SECOND-TRIMESTER ABORTION
CERVICAL INSUFFICIENCY
INDUCED ABORTION
FIRST-TRIMESTER METHODS
SECOND-TRIMESTER METHODS
POSTABORTAL CONTRACEPTION
REFERENCES
Miscarriage is a common event in pregnancy. Most early losses stem from
genetic abnormalities, and thus the opportunity for prevention is small.
Women with later miscarriage or with recurrent miscarriage more likely have
a chronic etiology that may be modified. In contrast to these spontaneous
losses, pregnancy termination may be elected. For both induced abortion and
miscarriage, management options include surgery or medication, and

providers should have an understanding of these methods and their potential
complications.

NOMENCLATURE
Abortion is defined as the spontaneous or induced termination of pregnancy
before fetal viability. Many prefer miscarriage for spontaneous loss.
Induced abortion describes termination with surgery or medication of a live
fetus that has not reached viability.
Definitions of an abortus vary among organizations. The National Center
for Health Statistics and the World Health Organization define abortion as
loss or termination of a pregnancy with a fetus aged younger than 20 weeks’
gestation or weighing <500 g. These criteria, however, are somewhat
contradictory because the mean birthweight of a 20-week fetus approximates
330 g, whereas 500 g is the mean for 22 weeks (Hadlock, 1991). Further
confusion may derive from criteria that are set by state laws and define
abortion even more widely.
Incongruity also exists for the term early pregnancy loss itself. The
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019b) defines this
as a nonviable, intrauterine pregnancy (IUP) within the first 126/7 weeks of
gestation that consists of either an empty gestational sac or one containing an
embryo or fetus without fetal heart activity. Recurrent pregnancy loss is
variably defined but is meant to identify women with repetitive miscarriage
(p. 203).
Other definitions help distinguish intrauterine from ectopic gestations.
The term pregnancy of unknown location (PUL) describes a pregnancy
identified by human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) level testing but without a
confirmed sonographic location. In this context, five categories are proposed
for early pregnancies: definite ectopic pregnancy, probable ectopic
pregnancy, PUL, probable IUP, and definite IUP (Barnhart, 2011). Diagnostic
and management options for ectopic gestation are described in Chapter 12.
Last, spontaneous abortion includes subcategories of threatened,
incomplete, complete, missed, and inevitable abortions. These are discussed
in the next sections. Septic abortion is used to further classify any of these
that are complicated by infection.

FIRST-TRIMESTER SPONTANEOUS ABORTION
■ Pathogenesis
More than 80 percent of spontaneous abortions occur within the first 12
weeks of gestation. With first-trimester losses, demise of the embryo or fetus
nearly always precedes spontaneous expulsion. Death is usually
accompanied by hemorrhage into the decidua basalis. This is followed by
adjacent tissue necrosis that stimulates uterine contractions and expulsion.
An intact gestational sac is usually filled with fluid. Anembryonic
miscarriage or preembryonic loss describes the group with no identifiable
embryo. The term blighted ovum is less preferred. An embryonic
miscarriage or embryonic loss displays an embryo without cardiac activity
during ultrasound evaluation (Kolte, 2015; Pinar, 2018).
In second-trimester losses, the fetus usually does not die before
expulsion. Thus, other sources for abortion are sought and described on page
213.

■ Incidence
Rates for miscarriage vary according to the study population. In pregnancies
aged 5 to 20 weeks’ gestation, the incidence ranges from 10 to 20 percent
and is higher in earlier weeks (Ammon Avalos, 2012). To evaluate rates
starting at conception, researchers have tested daily urinary samples for βhCG in women trying to conceive and found that approximately 20 percent of
pregnancies failed very early (Wang, 2003). These biochemical pregnancy
losses are clinically silent and are identified only by dropping β-hCG levels
(Kolte, 2015).
Certain factors influence the clinically apparent miscarriage rate and are
described next. It is unknown if these same factors also affect biochemical
pregnancy loss.

■ Fetal Factors
Of all miscarriages, approximately half are euploid abortions, that is,
carrying a normal chromosomal complement. The other half of all
miscarriages has a chromosomal abnormality. This percentage appears to

persist even from evaluations with newer cytogenetic techniques (Sahoo,
2017). However, outside of research, routine use of chromosomal microarray
testing of first-trimester fetal tissues is not endorsed by the American College
of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020d). The American Society for
Reproductive Medicine (2012) recognize its value only if cytogenetic
analysis alters future care of a patient.
Both abortion and chromosomal anomaly rates decline with advancing
gestational age (Eiben, 1990). Of chromosomally abnormal embryos, 75
percent aborts by 8 weeks’ gestation. The rate of abortion with euploid
fetuses peaks at approximately 13 weeks (Kajii, 1980).
Of chromosomal abnormalities, 95 percent are caused by maternal
gametogenesis errors, and 5 percent by paternal errors (Jacobs, 1980). Thus,
the aneuploid abortion incidence rises dramatically after maternal age
exceeds 35 years (Eiben, 1990). Indeed, maternal age is a primary factor
underlying the spontaneous loss of aneuploid fetuses (Nybo Andersen, 2000).
To a lesser degree, increasing paternal age is also associated with a greater
abortion risk (Nguyen, 2019). Not yet well studied, chromosomal
abnormalities in spermatozoa likely play a role (Pohl, 2021).
Most common abnormalities are trisomy, found in 50 to 60 percent;
monosomy X, in 9 to 13 percent; and triploidy, in 11 to 12 percent (Jenderny,
2014; Sahoo, 2017). Trisomies typically result from isolated nondisjunction,
and rates rise with maternal age (Boué, 1975). Trisomies of chromosomes
13, 16, 18, 21, and 22 are most common. Less often, a trisomy forms from a
balanced structural chromosomal rearrangements. These may originate from
either parent and are found in 2 to 4 percent of couples with recurrent
pregnancy loss (p. 204).
Monosomy X (45,X) is the single most frequent specific chromosomal
abnormality. This is Turner syndrome, which usually results in miscarriage,
but liveborn females are described in Chapter 3 (p. 36). Conversely,
autosomal monosomy is rare and incompatible with life.
Triploidy is an additional haploid set of chromosomes, and cells thus
contain a total of 69 chromosomes. The extra haploid set can be either
maternally or paternally derived. Maternally derived digynic triploidy
typically results from a meiosis error and fertilization of a diploid ovum by a
normal haploid sperm. Paternally derived diandric triploidy usually forms
from the fertilization of a normal haploid ovum by two haploid spermatozoa
and leads to partial molar pregnancy (Chap. 13, p. 237). Triploid fetuses

frequently spontaneously abort early, and the few carried longer are all
grossly deformed.

■ Maternal Factors
Medical Disorders
In chromosomally normal pregnancy losses, maternal contributions can play
a role. For example, a prominent miscarriage risk is associated with poorly
controlled diabetes mellitus, obesity, thyroid disease, and systemic lupus
erythematosus. In these, inflammatory mediators may be an underlying theme
to pregnancy loss (Kalagiri, 2016; Sjaarda, 2017). In chapters on these
disorders, the miscarriage rate and attempts to lower it are discussed. In
contrast, thrombophilias are no longer linked to miscarriage (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020b).
For women undergoing cancer treatment, direct therapeutic radiation can
cause miscarriage. Suggested safe parameters are found in Chapter 49 (p.
872). Similarly, the effects of chemotherapy on miscarriage rates are not well
defined. Particularly worrisome are women with an ongoing pregnancy after
early exposure to the teratogen methotrexate, described in Chapter 8 (p. 152).
Cancer survivors previously treated with abdominopelvic radiotherapy and
now subsequently pregnant may carry a greater risk for miscarriage (Chap.
66, p. 1164).

Surgical Procedures
The miscarriage risk associated with surgery is not well studied. But, as
discussed in Chapter 49 (p. 867), uncomplicated surgical procedures
performed during early pregnancy are unlikely to raise this risk (Mazze,
1989).
If indicated, ovarian tumors can generally be resected without inciting
miscarriage. An exception involves early removal of the corpus luteum or the
entire ovary in which it resides. If performed before 10 weeks’ gestation,
supplemental progesterone should be given and is described in Chapter 66
(p. 1170).
Trauma seldom causes first-trimester miscarriage, and although Parkland
Hospital is a busy trauma center, this is an infrequent association. Major

trauma—especially abdominal—can cause fetal loss but is more likely as
pregnancy advances (Chap. 50, p. 891).

Nutrition
Sole deficiency of one nutrient or moderate deficiency of all does not appear
to raise miscarriage risks. Even in extreme cases—for example, hyperemesis
gravidarum—abortion is rare. Dietary quality may play a small role, and
some data suggest miscarriage risk may decline in women who eat a diet rich
in fruits, vegetables, whole grains, and fish (Gaskins, 2015). Unlike obesity,
underweight is not associated with a greater miscarriage risk (Balsells,
2016).
With caffeine, reports link heavy intake of approximately five cups of
coffee per day—about 500 mg of caffeine—with a slightly greater abortion
risk (Cnattingius, 2000; Klebanoff, 1999). Values vary depending on brewing
style, but an 8-ounce cup of coffee contains 80 to 100 mg of caffeine. Black
or green tea has half this dose (Food and Drug Administration, 2018).
Currently, the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020e)
concludes consumption of <200 mg/d likely is not a major miscarriage risk
and that any associated risk with higher intake is unsettled. Metaanalyses
support an increasing dose-related risk (Chen, 2016; Li, 2015).

Behavioral Factors
Approximately 7 percent of pregnant women acknowledge cigarette smoking
(Kondracki, 2019). One metaanalysis found a slight dose-related relationship
between current smoking and early pregnancy loss (Pineles, 2014). The
serious later risks of persistent smoking on pregnancy outcomes are
discussed in Chapter 8 (p. 156).
Alcohol consumption carries miscarriage risk mainly in those with
chronic or heavy use (Feodor Nilsson, 2014). The potent teratogenic effects
in these instances are also discussed in Chapter 8 (p. 149).

Environmental Factors
Despite the many infections acquired in pregnancy, these uncommonly cause
early miscarriage. The important maternofetal consequences of specific
infections in later pregnancy are discussed in Chapters 67 and 68.

Environmental toxins suggested to have a possible link to miscarriage
include bisphenol A, phthalates, polychlorinated biphenyls, and
dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT) (Krieg, 2016). Even fewer studies
implicate occupational exposures. Data suggest a slight increased
miscarriage risk in health-care workers exposed to radiation or
antineoplastic drugs (Anderson, 2020). The National Institute for
Occupational Safety and Health publishes guidelines on potentially
hazardous drugs (Connor, 2016). Evidence implicating occupational
anesthetic gases in miscarriage is not robust (Oliveira, 2021). Still, gas
scavenging systems and workplace exposure limits are recommended
(McGlothin, 2014).

■ Spontaneous Abortion Clinical Classification
Threatened Abortion
This is defined as bleeding through a closed cervical os in the first 20 weeks
of pregnancy and with a live embryo or fetus. It may portend abortion, or it
may be associated with conceptus implantation. Other bleeding sources to
exclude are ectopic pregnancy, cervical infection, and dysplastic or
neoplastic cervical lesions.
Almost one fourth of women develop bleeding during early gestation that
is attributed to threatened abortion (Everett, 1997). Bleeding or spotting may
persist for days or weeks. It may be accompanied by suprapubic discomfort,
mild cramps, pelvic pressure, or persistent low backache. Of symptoms,
bleeding is by far the most predictive factor for subsequent pregnancy loss.
Vaginal bleeding or abdominal pain in early pregnancy should prompt
hematocrit and blood type assessment. One primary goal is to exclude
ectopic pregnancy, and strategic use of β-hCG levels and transvaginal
sonography (TVS) is outlined in Chapter 12 (p. 222). A second goal is to
determine IUP viability. With an IUP, the gestational sac—an anechoic fluid
collection that represents the exocoelomic cavity—may be seen by 4.5 weeks
(Fig. 10-2, p. 177). At this time, β-hCG levels generally measure 1500 to
2000 mIU/mL (Barnhart, 1994; Timor-Tritsch, 1988). Connolly and
colleagues (2013), however, noted that a threshold as high as 3500 mIU/mL
may be needed to identify the gestational sac in some cases that ultimately
yield a viable singleton IUP.

One caveat during TVS is that a gestational sac may appear similar to a
pseudogestational sac, which is an anechoic intrauterine fluid collection
(Fig. 12-3, p. 223). This pseudosac may be blood derived from a bleeding
ectopic pregnancy and is easier to exclude once a yolk sac is seen. Typically,
the yolk sac is visible by 5.5 weeks and with a mean gestational-sac
diameter of 10 mm. Thus, the diagnosis of an IUP should be made cautiously
if the yolk sac is not yet seen (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2020h). Fetal cardiac activity can typically be detected at 6
to 6.5 weeks.
A subchorionic hematoma may also be seen sonographically with
threatened miscarriage (Fig. 11-1). In general, this collection does not
portend a greater miscarriage risk (Naert, 2019).

FIGURE 11-1 In this transvaginal sonogram sagittal view of the uterus, a subchorionic hematoma is
seen as a very hypoechoic collection (arrow). It lies adjacent to the round anechoic gestational sac that
contains a nearly 7-week embryo (calipers). (Reproduced with permission from Jason McWhirt,
ARDMS.)

Once threatened abortion is diagnosed, observation is the norm.
Acetaminophen-based analgesia will help relieve cramping discomfort. The
randomized Progesterone in Spontaneous Miscarriage (PRISM) trial found

no advantage to progesterone supplementation to lower miscarriage rates in
women with first-trimester bleeding (Coomarasamy, 2019). Bed rest does
not improve outcomes and may cause harms such a deep-vein thrombosis
(McCall, 2013). We do counsel against intercourse until bleeding subsides.
In unusual cases, bleeding with threatened abortion can lead acute severe
anemia or hypovolemia. Pregnancy evacuation is generally indicated. Less
often, transfusion and further observation is elected.
Even if miscarriage does not follow threatened abortion, later rates of
preterm birth and placental abruption are slightly increased (Saraswat,
2010). Weiss and coworkers (2004) noted greater risks for later adverse
outcomes if early bleeding was heavy rather than light. Despite these
associations, we typically do not add sonography or other surveillance later
in pregnancy solely for a first-trimester diagnosis of threatened abortion.

Incomplete Abortion
During miscarriage, the cervix opens and placental separation causes
bleeding. Before 10 weeks’ gestation, the fetus and the placenta are
frequently expelled together, but later, they often deliver separately. Thus,
tissue may remain entirely within the uterus or partially extrude through the
cervix. Products lying loosely within the cervical canal can be easily
extracted or teased out with ring forceps. For uterine infection or for
hemodynamically unstable women with heavy bleeding, prompt surgical
evacuation is performed.
For less urgent cases, three management options are curettage, expectant
management, or misoprostol (Cytotec), which is prostaglandin E1 (PGE1)
(Kim, 2017). With all three, treatment complications such as infection and
need for transfusion are infrequent. However, misoprostol and expectant care
can be associated with unpredictable bleeding. Thus, some women will still
require unscheduled curettage, which studies have used as a failure endpoint.
Expectant management of spontaneous incomplete abortion has failure rates
that approximate 25 percent in randomized trials (Nielsen, 1999; Trinder,
2006). Medication therapy carries failure rates of 5 to 30 percent (Shochet,
2012; Trinder, 2006). Many of the studies assessing treatment have used an
800-μg vaginal, a 400-μg sublingual, or a 600-μg oral misoprostol dose.
Last, curettage usually results in a quick resolution that is 95- to 100-percent

successful. However, it is invasive, carries surgical risks, and is not
necessary for all women (p. 211).

Complete Abortion
At times, the entire pregnancy is expelled. With completion, bleeding ebbs,
and the internal cervical os subsequently closes over the next hour or so.
Patients are encouraged to bring in passed tissue, and a gestation should be
documented within blood clots or within a decidual cast (Fig. 11-2). The
latter is the thickened endometrium, in the shape of the uterine cavity, that
may slough with miscarriage.

FIGURE 11-2 A. Decidual cast from a complete abortion. B. Opening the cast reveals a clear
translucent gestational sac, which confirms the diagnosis.

If a gestational sac is not identified within the expelled tissue, TVS helps
differentiate a complete abortion from a threatened abortion or ectopic
pregnancy. Findings of complete abortion include a thin endometrium without
a gestational sac. However, this does not guarantee a recent IUP. One study
evaluated 152 women with heavy bleeding and an empty uterus with
endometrial thickness <15 mm. Six percent were subsequently found to have
an ectopic pregnancy (Condous, 2005). Thus, a complete abortion cannot be

surely diagnosed unless: (1) true products of conception are seen grossly or
(2) sonography documents first an IUP and then later an empty cavity. In
unclear settings, serial serum β-hCG levels aid clarification. With complete
abortion, these levels drop quickly (Table 11-1).
TABLE 11-1. Percentage Decline of Initial Serum β-hCG Levels Following
Complete Spontaneous Abortion

Missed Abortion
This describes dead products of conception that have been retained for days
or weeks within a uterus with a closed cervical os. Diagnosis is imperative
prior to intervention and avoids interruption of a potentially live IUP. Again,
TVS and β-hCG levels are primary tools. With the latter, levels that plateau
or drop are typical.

With TVS, a 1- to 2-mm embryo adjacent to the yolk sac can be seen at 5
to 6 weeks’ gestation. As listed in Table 11-2, absence of an embryo in a sac
with a mean sac diameter (MSD) ≥25 mm signifies pregnancy loss. The
MSD is calculated by summing the length, width, and height of a gestational
sac and dividing the sum by three. Fetal cardiac activity can typically be
detected at 6 to 6.5 weeks, with a crown-rump length (CRL) of 1 to 5 mm,
and an MSD of 13 to 18 mm (Goldstein, 1992; Levi, 1990). A CRL threshold
≥7 mm plus absent cardiac activity also is used to diagnose nonviability
(Doubilet, 2013). For cases in which a gestational sac has no embryo or yolk
sac, additional time and repeat TVS are recommended. M-mode should be
used to document cardiac activity and measure the rate (Brown, 2018).
Pulsed Doppler is not used routinely and is reserved for specific diagnostic
purposes because of theoretical temperature elevation in exposed fetal
tissues (Chap. 14, p. 247).
TABLE 11-2. Guidelines for Early Pregnancy Loss Diagnosis

Less robust sonographic markers may portend pregnancy failure. A yolk
sac diameter >7 mm in pregnancies <10 weeks’ gestation is one (Rodgers,
2015). The fetal heart rate in the first trimester rises from 110 to 130 beats
per minute (bpm) at 6 weeks’ gestation to 160 to 170 bpm at 8 weeks
(Achiron, 1991; Rauch, 2009). A slower heart rate is unfavorable, especially
one <85 bpm (DeVilbiss, 2020). Even with cardiac activity, fetuses with a
small MSD may presage embryonic loss. A difference <5 mm between the
MSD and CRL values raises concern (Bromley, 1991). Last, an irregular
gestational sac contour may portend loss (Nyberg, 1986).
With embryonic or fetal death confirmed, expectant observation, surgery,
or medication is an option. Nonsurgical options balance less invasiveness
against heavier associated bleeding, longer completion times, and lower
success rates. Of options, expectant care underperforms medication or
surgery, and failure rates range from 15 to 50 percent (Luise, 2002; Trinder,

2006; Zhang, 2005). Also, weeks may pass between pregnancy failure
diagnosis and actual spontaneous miscarriage.
As a medication option, misoprostol can be given, and a single 800-μg
dose vaginally is a common standard. It may be repeated once in 1 to 2 days,
and one large trial reported that 22 percent of women required a second dose
(Zhang, 2005). Overall, failure rates range from 15 to 40 percent (Petersen,
2013; Trinder, 2006). Success rates are improved by a 200-mg oral dose of
mifepristone (Mifeprex) given 24 hours prior to misoprostol (Schreiber,
2018). In the United States, access to this antiprogestin is limited by the Food
and Drug Administration (FDA) to providers participating in the
manufacturer’s Risk Evaluation and Mitigation Strategy (REMS) (Danco
Laboratories, 2021). Contraindications mirror those listed in the section
describing induced abortion (p. 212).

Inevitable Abortion of a Previable Fetus
Either rupture of placental membranes or marked ballooning of membranes
into the vagina may lead to inevitable abortion. The latter is discussed in the
cervical insufficiency section (p. 205).
Preterm prelabor rupture of membranes (PPROM) at a previable
gestational age complicates 0.5 percent of pregnancies (Hunter, 2012).
Instead, periviable birth is defined as delivery between 200/7 and 256/7
weeks and is discussed in Chapter 45 (p. 785). Clinically with PPROM,
abundant vaginal fluid that pools during sterile speculum examination
confirms the diagnosis. Patient coughing or Valsalva maneuver may
accentuate this. Other diagnostic steps can include pH testing, microscopic
examination, and sonographic assessment of amnionic fluid volume, and
these are outlined in Chapter 22 (p. 426).
Rupture may be spontaneous, and risks are prior PPROM, prior secondtrimester delivery, and tobacco use (Kilpatrick, 2006). Iatrogenic fluid
leakage can follow amniocentesis or fetal surgery. In some second-trimester
cases, fluid may have collected previously between the amnion and chorion
and reflects only chorion leakage.
Spontaneous rupture in the first trimester is nearly always followed by
either uterine contractions or infection, and termination is typical. With
second-trimester spontaneous PPROM at a previable age, 40 to 50 percent of
women will deliver within the first week, and 70 to 80 percent will do so

after 2 to 5 weeks (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists,
2020f). Average latency is 2 weeks (Hunter, 2012; Kibel, 2016). Significant
maternal complications attend previable PPROM and include uterine
infection, sepsis, placental abruption, postpartum hemorrhage, and retained
placenta (Dotters-Katz, 2017b; Waters, 2009). In one study, 56 percent of
women suffered one or more of these complications (van der Marel, 2016).
With significant bleeding or fever, the uterus should be evacuated. Surgical
evacuation or medication options for this vary by gestational age and surgeon
skill. Methods mirror those for second-trimester elective abortion, described
later (p. 213).
For cases in which previable delivery is inevitable or elected, neonatal
consultation aids decision-making and helps form expectations for the family.
For fetuses with a life-limiting condition, such as extreme prematurity,
perinatal palliative care is a strategy that emphasizes comfort (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019c). Care team members can
include obstetric and neonatal professionals, chaplaincy, and mental health
specialists.
In cases without bleeding or fever, expectant management is an option in
the well-counseled patient. Many will choose termination due to the earlierdescribed maternal risks and tenuous neonatal outcomes. Early fetal mortality
stems from pulmonary hypoplasia, severe intraventricular hemorrhage, and
sepsis. Of those managed expectantly with PPROM at <20 weeks, the
percentage of infants who are discharged home ranges from 12 to 23 percent
(Hunter, 2012; Sim, 2020; van der Martel, 2016). Common neonatal
morbidities are respiratory distress syndrome, bronchopulmonary hypoplasia
or dysplasia, necrotizing enterocolitis, and sepsis. Overall, prognosis is
improved if previable PPROM occurs at a later gestation, latency is longer,
and oligohydramnios is absent. With the last, poor lung development and
fetal skeletal deformations can result from scant amnionic fluid.
If expectant care is elected, initial hospital evaluation, diminished
physical activity, and observation for fever or labor are reasonable. After 24
hours, if there is no bleeding, cramping, or fever, a woman may resume
ambulation and is discharged home. She is instructed to watch for fever,
contractions, or bleeding. Antibiotics are considered and given for 7 days to
extend latency (Dotters-Katz, 2017a). However, lung-maturing
corticosteroids, magnesium sulfate neuroprophylaxis, group B streptococcus
antibiotic prophylaxis, cesarean delivery, and tocolytics are not

recommended before 22 weeks’ gestation (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019d). Once a viable age is reached,
readmission until delivery is our practice. PPROM care at viable gestational
ages is described in Chapter 45 (p. 799).
In procedure-related PPROM, iatrogenic leaks are typically higher in the
uterus and tend to self-seal. For leaks from amniocentesis, management is
typically conservative, and brief bedrest yields high pregnancy continuation
rates. For rupture after fetal surgery, investigational treatments can address
surgical leaks (Chmait, 2017). One is an occlusive plug—termed an
amniopatch—that forms following intraamnionic instillation of autologous
platelets and cryoprecipitate. Another is amnioinfusion to counter the effects
of oligohydramnios but is not robustly supported by current data (Roberts,
2014; van Kempen, 2019).
In subsequent pregnancies, the risk for recurrent preterm birth is great in
women with prior previable PPROM. In one cohort study, 46 percent
delivered their next pregnancy before 37 weeks, and 17 percent delivered
before reaching 24 weeks (Monson, 2016).

Septic Abortion
With spontaneous or induced abortion, organisms may invade myometrial
tissues and extend to cause parametritis, peritonitis, and septicemia. This
may complicate both medication and surgical methods. Classic clinical
findings include fever, lower abdominal pain, uterine tenderness, and foul
vaginal discharge. Vaginal bleeding and sonographic evidence of retained
uterine tissue are others. Urinary tract infection should be excluded by
urinalysis, and a complete blood count assesses leukocytosis.
Most bacteria causing septic abortion are part of the normal vaginal
flora. Thus, vaginal culture is not informative, however, we obtain blood
cultures for those with sepsis. Particularly worrisome are severe necrotizing
infections and toxic shock syndrome (TSS) caused by group A streptococcus
—S pyogenes (Daif, 2009). Maternal deaths from Clostridium perfringens
or C sordellii also have been described. With TSS, women show severe
endothelial injury, capillary leakage, hemoconcentration, hypotension,
tachycardia, and marked leukocytosis but may not be febrile initially.
With septic abortion, management includes prompt administration of
broad-spectrum antibiotics as discussed in Chapter 37 (p. 651). If products

are retained, suction evacuation is performed. Most women respond to this
treatment within 1 to 2 days and are discharged when afebrile. Additional
oral antibiotics are likely unnecessary (Savaris, 2011). In a very few women,
severe sepsis syndrome develops, and intensive supportive care is essential.
Although rare, widespread peritonitis despite curettage and clinical decline
in the patient should raise concerns. Imaging that shows intraabdominal free
air or air within the uterine wall typically prompts laparotomy (Eschenbach,
2015). If the uterus is necrotic, hysterectomy is indicated.

Anti-D Immunoglobulin
With spontaneous or induced abortion, 2 percent of D-negative women will
become alloimmunized if not provided passive isoimmunization. With
surgical dilation and curettage, this rate may reach 5 percent. The American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019e) recommends a 300-μg
intramuscular dose of anti-Rho (D) immunoglobulin for all gestational ages.
Doses can also be graduated. Namely, a 50-μg or 120-ug dose is given for
pregnancies ≤12 weeks and a 300-μg one for those ≥13 weeks. This is
administered immediately following surgical evacuation. For medication
abortion or expectant management, the injection is given within 72 hours of
pregnancy failure diagnosis.
With threatened abortion, immunoglobulin prophylaxis is controversial
because of sparse evidence-based data (Hannafin, 2006). It is reasonable to
administer anti-D immunoglobulin for a threatened abortion, and this is our
practice.

RECURRENT MISCARRIAGE
Affecting approximately 1 percent of fertile couples, recurrent pregnancy
loss (RPL) is classically defined as three or more consecutive pregnancy
losses at <20 weeks’ gestation or with a fetal weight <500 g. However, data
show the risk for a subsequent loss to be similar whether a woman has two
or three prior miscarriages (Bhattacharya, 2010). The American Society for
Reproductive Medicine (2020) now defines RPL as two or more failed
pregnancies confirmed by sonographic or histopathological examination.
Primary RPL refers to multiple losses in a woman who has never delivered
a liveborn, and secondary RPL refers to multiple pregnancy losses in a

patient with a prior live birth. Remarkably, chances for a successful
pregnancy are >50 percent even after five miscarriages (Table 11-3)
(Brigham, 1999). RPL evaluation addresses its major causes, described next.
TABLE 11-3. Predicted Success Rate of Subsequent Pregnancy According
to Age and Number of Previous Miscarriages

■ Etiology
Widely accepted causes of RPL include some parental chromosomal
abnormalities, antiphospholipid antibody syndrome, specific
endocrinopathies, and certain structural uterine abnormalities. Thus, current
RPL evaluation includes karyotyping of both parents; measuring
antiphospholipid antibody levels; assessing HbA1c, thyroid-stimulating
hormone (TSH), and prolactin levels; and performing saline-infusion
sonography (SIS) or hysterosalpingography (American Society for
Reproductive Medicine, 2012).
The timing of recurrent loss can offer clues, and in some women, each
miscarriage may occur near the same gestational age (Heuser, 2010).
Approximately 50 percent of women have idiopathic RPL (Habayeb, 2004).

■ Parental Chromosomal Abnormalities
In first-trimester RPL, the incidence of genetic abnormalities is significantly
lower than in sporadic miscarriage (Stephenson, 2002). A notable exception

is a parent that carries a reciprocal translocation or Robertsonian
translocation (Fan, 2016). Their genesis and reproductive sequelae are
discussed in Chapter 16 (p. 316). These account for only 2 to 4 percent of
RPL cases, but karyotyping of both parents is a recognized part of RPL
evaluation.
After thorough genetic counseling, couples with an abnormal karyotype
can be offered in vitro fertilization (IVF) followed by preimplantation
genetic testing (PGT) or offered donor gametes (Chap. 17, p. 348). However,
birth rates with IVF plus PGT are not superior to expectant management for
this cause of RPL (Murugappan, 2016). Importantly, in couples with RPL
who are chromosomally normal, PGT is not recommended solely for the
indication of RPL.

■ Anatomical Factors
Several genital tract abnormalities have been implicated in RPL, but direct
linkage is not robust. According to Devi Wold and associates (2006), 15
percent of women with ≥3 consecutive miscarriages will have a congenital
or acquired uterine anomaly. Thus, SIS and hysteroscopy are primary
evaluation tools.
Uterine leiomyomas are common, and some may cause miscarriage,
especially if located near the placental implantation site. However, data
suggesting a significant link to RPL are not convincing and poor quality
(Saravelos, 2011). The American Society for Reproductive Medicine (2017)
notes that hysteroscopic excision of large submucosal leiomyomas in women
with RPL can be considered.
Uterine synechiae, often called Asherman syndrome, result from broad
destruction of endometrium and subsequent scarring, which can follow
uterine curettage or hysteroscopic surgeries. With SIS, multiple hypoechoic
bridging bands are seen to span the endometrial cavity, which is filled with
anechoic saline. Treatment is hysteroscopic adhesiolysis, but success rates
are lower with more severe initial disease.
Uterine polyps have been found more frequently in women with RPL, but
causality is unclear. These are seen during hysteroscopy or SIS as a mass
lesion extending from the uterine wall into the endometrial cavity.
Application of color Doppler during SIS classically reveals a single feeder
vessel reaching the mass. Hysteroscopic polypectomy can be considered.

For all these acquired lesions, correction can be considered for those
with significant uterine cavity distortion. However, evidence supporting
improved birth rates is not robust (American Society for Reproductive
Medicine, 2012). Moreover, reproductive benefits are balanced against
intrauterine adhesions that may form after any intracavitary surgery.
Congenital uterine anomalies often originate from abnormal müllerian
duct formation. Depending on their anatomy, some may raise risks for
miscarriage or preterm delivery. Of these, septate uterus is most closely
linked with miscarriage. Hysteroscopic resection has been associated with
improved live birth rates in some but not all studies (Rikken, 2017). It can be
considered for RPL (American Society for Reproductive Medicine, 2016).
Chapter 3 (p. 42) contains a fuller discussion of uterine abnormalities and
their other obstetrical effects.

■ Immunological Factors
Miscarriages are more common in women with systemic lupus erythematosus
(SLE) (Clowse, 2008). Many of these women and also some without SLE
carry antiphospholipid antibodies. These are a family of autoantibodies that
bind to phospholipid-binding plasma proteins and are associated with RPL
(Alijotas-Reig 2019). As shown in Table 11-4, the antiphospholipid
antibody syndrome (APS) is defined by these antibodies in combination with
various forms of reproductive loss or vascular thrombosis (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019a). Chapter 62 (p. 1114)
describes pregnancy loss with APS and treatment.
TABLE 11-4. Clinical and Laboratory Criteria for Diagnosis of
Antiphospholipid Antibody Syndromea

■ Endocrine Factors
Of recurrent miscarriages, 8 to 12 percent are caused by endocrine factors
(Arredondo, 2006). First, the well-known abortifacient action of
uncontrolled diabetes mellitus is detailed in Chapter 60 (p. 1070). Optimal
periconceptional glycemic control will mitigate many of these losses.
Overt hypothyroidism and severe iodine deficiency also raise
miscarriage rates (Chap. 61, p. 1094). Correction with supplementation
reverses these actions. Subclinical hypothyroidism, however, does not
appear to increase miscarriage rates (Dong, 2020). Antithyroid antibodies
are a common associate of subclinical hypothyroidism or overt
hypothyroidism. A recent metaanalysis found positive associations between
these antibodies and a greater risk for sporadic and recurrent miscarriages
(Xie, 2020). However, levothyroxine supplementation in this group does not
improve subsequent pregnancy outcomes (Sun, 2020). For evaluation of RPL,
measuring levels of serum TSH, but not antithyroid antibodies, is reasonable.
Other endocrinopathies are inconclusively implicated. One is
progesterone deficiency caused by a luteal-phase defect. Progesterone
supplementation, compared with placebo, did not improve the live birth rate
in those with RPL in one large trial (Coomarasamy, 2015). Limited data
implicate hyperprolactinemia (Hirahara, 1998). Obesity, polycystic ovarian
syndrome, and insulin resistance are also linked to RPL (Cavalcante, 2019;

Craig, 2002; Mayrhofer, 2020). However, the interplay between these makes
assigning individual causality difficult.

SECOND-TRIMESTER ABORTION
■ Etiology
The timespan that defines a midtrimester fetal loss extends from the end of
the first trimester until the fetus weighs <500 g or gestational age reaches 20
weeks. The spontaneous loss rate in the second trimester is much lower than
in the first.
Unlike earlier miscarriages that frequently stem from chromosomal
aneuploidies, causes of these later fetal losses are more diverse (Table 115). Their ultimate presentations may be miscarriage, PPROM, or fetal demise
prior to labor (Morris, 2016). Some second-trimester abortions are induced
because of fetal abnormalities or patient choice.
TABLE 11-5. Some Causes of Midtrimester Spontaneous Pregnancy Losses

Second-trimester losses are subclassified similarly to first-trimester ones
(p. 200). Management is similar in many regards to that used for secondtrimester induced abortion, described on page 214. One exception is cervical
cerclage, which may be employed for cervical insufficiency.

■ Cervical Insufficiency

Previously called incompetent cervix, this is characterized classically by
painless cervical dilation in the second trimester. It can be followed by
prolapse and ballooning of the amnionic membranes into the vagina, and
ultimately, expulsion of an immature fetus. This sequence often repeats in
future pregnancies.
Of causes, prior cervical trauma is implicated. One cohort study of more
than 15,000 women with prior cervical conization found a fourfold risk of
pregnancy loss before 24 weeks’ gestation (Albrechtsen, 2008). However, in
women solely with prior conization but no prior preterm birth, outcomes are
not improved by prophylactic cerclage (Zeisler, 1997). In other instances,
abnormal cervical development, including that from diethylstilbestrol (DES),
may play a role (Hoover, 2011). Marfan and Ehlers-Danlos syndromes also
carry increased risk of cervical insufficiency (Meijboom, 2006; Spiegel,
2020).

Surgical Indications
For women with an unequivocal history of second-trimester painless
delivery, prophylactic cerclage placement is an option and reinforces a weak
cervix by an encircling suture. However, some women have a history and
clinical findings that make it difficult to verify—classic cervical
insufficiency. In one randomized trial of almost 1300 women, cerclage was
found to be beneficial—13 versus 17 percent—to prolong pregnancy past 33
weeks (MacNaughton, 1993).
The physical finding of early dilation of the internal cervical os and
visible membranes is another indicator of insufficiency. In one systematic
review, cerclages that were placed based on such examination findings
provided superior perinatal outcomes compared with expectant management
(Ehsanipoor, 2015).
Last, some use TVS to determine cerclage need. In those with any prior
spontaneous preterm birth, the Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine (2016)
recommends transvaginal cervical length screening. The American College
of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2021) also recommends this screening.
Surveillance extends between 16 and 24 weeks’ gestation, and examinations,
described in Chapter 14 (p. 254), are performed every 1 to 4 weeks. In those
without prior preterm birth or in those with multifetal gestation, cervical
length is not specifically measured. The cervix should be viewed during the

sonographic anatomical anatomy examination at 18 to 22 weeks’ gestation.
Chapter 45 (p. 794) discusses recommendations for cerclage placement
based on cervical length to prevent preterm birth.

■ Presurgical Preparation
Contraindications to cerclage include bleeding, contractions, or ruptured
membranes, any of which substantially raise the likelihood of labor and
failure. Prophylactic elective cerclage before dilation is preferable, and
timing between 12 and 14 weeks’ gestation allows early intervention. Still, it
avoids surgery in the first trimester, which is when most predestined
spontaneous losses occur, and screening for aneuploidy and malformation is
completed. Cervical neoplasia screening in suitable candidates and
gonorrhea and chlamydial infection testing are done. Obvious cervical
infection is treated.
At times, the cervix instead is found to be dilated, effaced, or both, and
an emergency cerclage is performed. Notably, in more-advanced pregnancy,
the risk of stimulating preterm labor or of rupturing membranes with the
surgery is greater. At Parkland Hospital, cerclage procedures are not done
after 23 to 24 weeks’ gestation. Others, however, describe placement later
than this (Caruso, 2000; Terkildsen, 2003).
When outcomes of cerclage are evaluated, women with similar clinical
presentations are ideally compared. In a study of elective cerclage by Owen
and associates (2009), approximately a third of women delivered before 35
weeks, and complications were few. By contrast, in a 10-year review of 75
women undergoing emergency cerclage, only half were delivered after 36
weeks (Chasen, 1998). Importantly, only 44 percent of those with bulging
membranes at the time of cerclage reached 28 weeks. Terkildsen and
associates (2003) had similar experiences. Our experiences at Parkland
Hospital are that emergency cerclage has a high failure rate, and women are
counseled accordingly.
If the clinical indication for cerclage is questionable, a woman may
instead be observed. Most undergo cervical examinations weekly or every 2
weeks to assess effacement and dilation. Unfortunately, rapid effacement and
dilation can develop despite such precautions (Witter, 1984).

Vaginal Cerclage

Of the two vaginal cerclage operations, most use the simpler procedure
developed by McDonald (1963) (Fig. 11-3). The more complicated
operation is a modification of the procedure described by Shirodkar (1955)
(Fig. 11-4). When either technique is performed electively, women with a
classic history of cervical insufficiency have good outcomes (Caspi, 1990;
Kuhn, 1977). For either vaginal or abdominal cerclage, evidence is
insufficient to recommend perioperative antibiotic prophylaxis (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologist, 2020a). Few data are available
and do not support prophylactic tocolysis (Smith, 2015).

FIGURE 11-3 McDonald cerclage procedure for incompetent cervix. A. Start of the cerclage
procedure with a no. 2 monofilament suture being placed in the body of the cervix very near the level of
the internal os. B. Continuation of suture placement in the body of the cervix so as to encircle the os. C.
Encirclement completed. D. The suture is tightened around the cervical canal sufficiently to reduce the
diameter of the canal to 5 to 10 mm, and then the suture is tied. The effect of the suture placement on
the cervical canal is apparent. A second suture placed somewhat higher may be of value if the first is
not in close proximity to the internal os.

FIGURE 11-4 Modified Shirodkar cerclage for incompetent cervix. A. A transverse incision is made in
the mucosa overlying the anterior cervix, and the bladder is pushed cephalad. B. A 5-mm Mersilene
tape on a swaged-on or Mayo needle is passed anterior to posterior. C. The tape is then directed
posterior to anterior on the other side of the cervix. Allis clamps are placed so as to bunch the cervical
tissue. This diminishes the distance that the needle must travel submucosally and aids tape placement.
D. The tape is snugly tied anteriorly, after ensuring that all slack has been taken up. The cervical
mucosa is then closed with continuous stitches of chromic suture.

Regional analgesia is suitable and preferred. After this, the woman is
placed in standard lithotomy position. The vagina and perineum are cleaned
for surgery, and the bladder is drained. Some operators do not use potentially
irritating antiseptic solution if amnionic membranes are exposed and instead

use warm saline (Pelosi, 1990). Although steps are described here, a
thorough and illustrated review of technique is provided by Hawkins (2017).
For suturing, options include a no. 1 or 2 nylon or polypropylene
monofilament suture or 5-mm Mersilene tape. During placement, the suture is
placed as cephalad along the cervical length as possible, is anchored into the
dense cervical stroma, yet avoids the bladder. Two tandem cerclage suture
rings are not more effective than one (Giraldo-Isaza, 2013).
Emergency cerclage placement with a thinned dilated cervix is more
difficult, and tissue tearing and membrane puncture are risks. Gentle
replacement of the prolapsed amnionic sac back into the uterus can aid
suturing. Options include steep Trendelenburg or filling the bladder with 600
mL of saline through a Foley catheter in the bladder. However, these steps
may carry the cervix cephalad and away from the operating field. Instead,
membranes can be pushed inward by a wide, moist sponge stick. A Foley
catheter can instead be inserted through the cervix, and inflation of the 30-mL
balloon can deflect the amnionic sac inward. The balloon is gradually
deflated as the cerclage suture is tightened around the catheter tubing, which
is then removed. With any of these, simultaneous gentle outward traction
created by ring forceps placed on the cervical edges may be helpful.
For uncomplicated pregnancies without labor, the cerclage is usually
snipped and removed at 37 weeks’ gestation. This balances the risk of
preterm birth against that of cervical laceration from a cerclage in place with
labor contractions. Transvaginally placed cerclages are typically removed
even with cesarean delivery to avoid rare long-term foreign-body
complications (Hawkins, 2014). With scheduled cesarean delivery, the
cerclage may be removed at 37 weeks or deferred until the time of regional
analgesia and delivery. Again, the risk of labor ensuing before delivery must
be considered. During extraction, particularly with a Shirodkar cerclage or a
cerclage using Mersilene tape, analgesia aids patient comfort and adequate
visualization.

Transabdominal Cerclage
At times, suture at the uterine isthmus is placed abdominally. Performed less
often than transvaginal methods, selected indications include prior
transvaginal cerclage failure or severe cervical anatomical defects. The
cerclage is left until childbearing completion, and thus cesarean delivery is

required. With the cerclage in place, conception rates still approximate 75
percent (Moawad, 2018). If needed for a fetal loss, dilation and evacuation
can be performed with the suture in place (Dethier, 2020).
With the procedure, after abdomen entry, sharp dissection in the
vesicocervical space allows the bladder to be pushed caudally. At the level
of the internal os, a window is made in free space medial to the uterine
vessels. This avoids vessel compression by the tightened cerclage. The
nearby ureter is identified and avoided. One end of the ligating suture is
passed into the right window, and the other is threaded into the left. Per
surgeon preference, the knot is tied either in the front or back. The
vesicouterine peritoneum is closed with absorbable suture in a running
fashion.
In the MAVRIC trial, 111 women with a prior failed vaginal cerclage
were randomly assigned to transabdominal, McDonald, or Shirodkar
methods. Almost half of the transabdominal ones were placed prior to
conception. The preterm birth rate before 32 weeks was 8 percent in the
transabdominal group and 38 percent in each of the transvaginal cerclage
groups (Shennan, 2020).
Of morbidity, rates of bleeding, adjacent organ injury, uterine perforation,
and infection can be greater with transabdominal compared with transvaginal
methods. Transabdominal cerclage performs suitably whether laparotomy or
laparoscopy is used to place the sutures (Moawad, 2018).

Complications
With cerclage in general, PPROM, preterm labor, hemorrhage, or infection is
a potential risk. All are uncommon with prophylactic cerclage. In the trial by
MacNaughton and associates (1993), membrane rupture complicated only 1
of more than 600 procedures done before 19 weeks. In our view, clinical
infection mandates immediate removal of the suture with labor induced or
augmented. Similarly, with imminent abortion or delivery, the suture should
be removed to avoid cervical laceration.
Following cerclage, sonographic surveillance does not improve
outcomes (Dijkstra, 2000). Evidence does not support a subsequent
reinforcing cerclage procedure (Baxter, 2005). Membrane rupture during
suture placement or within the first 48 hours after surgery is considered by
some to be an indication for cerclage removal to avoid serious fetal or

maternal infection (Kuhn, 1977). In those with later PPROM but without
infection or labor, options include observation alone or cerclage removal
and observation. In these cases, data are contradictory regarding prolonged
gestational latency and infection rates with retention or removal (Jenkins,
2000; Pergialiotis, 2015). In the absence of infection or labor, we allow
cerclage retention with close clinical surveillance.

INDUCED ABORTION
■ Definitions
The term induced abortion is defined as termination of pregnancy with
medication or surgery before fetal viability. The abortion ratio is the number
of abortions per 1000 live births, and abortion rate is the number per 1000
women aged 15 to 44 years. For 2018, approximately 620,000 elective
abortions were reported (Kortsmit, 2020). Of these, 78 percent were
pregnancies aged ≤9 weeks’ gestation, and 92 percent of abortions were
completed before ≤13 weeks. The abortion ratio was 189 per 1000 live
births, and the abortion rate was 11.3.
Therapeutic abortion refers to pregnancy termination for medical
reasons, and suitable maternal or fetal indications are described in
respective chapters. In cases of rape or incest, many consider termination.
The most frequent therapeutic indication currently is to prevent birth of a
fetus with a significant anatomical, metabolic, or mental deformity.
The term elective abortion or voluntary abortion describes the
interruption of pregnancy before viability at the request of the woman, but not
for medical reasons. Most abortions done today are elective.

■ Legal Influence
The legality of elective abortion was established by the United States
Supreme Court in the case of Roe v. Wade. The Court defined the extent to
which states might regulate abortion and ruled that first-trimester procedures
must be left to the medical judgment of the physician. After this, the state
could regulate abortion procedures in ways reasonably related to maternal
health. Last, subsequent to viability, the state could promote its interest in the

potential of human life and regulate abortion, except for preservation of the
mother’s health.
Other legislation followed. The 1976 Hyde Amendment forbids use of
federal funds to provide abortion services except in cases of rape, incest, or
life-threatening circumstances. The Supreme Court in 1992 reviewed
Planned Parenthood v. Casey and upheld the fundamental right to abortion,
but established that regulations are constitutional as long as they do not
impose an “undue burden” on the woman. Subsequently, many states
introduced counseling requirements, waiting periods, parental consent for
minors, facility requirements, and funding restrictions. Such limits are often
called targeted regulation of abortion providers (TRAP) laws. One major
choice-limiting decision was the 2007 Supreme Court decision that reviewed
Gonzales v. Carhart and upheld the 2003 Partial-Birth Abortion Ban Act. In
2016, some TRAP laws were dialed back by the Supreme Court ruling in the
case of Whole Woman’s Health v. Hellerstedt. With this, the justices noted
that abortion laws must confer health safety benefits that outweigh burdens on
access.

■ Provider Availability
Major women’s health organizations support the legal right of women to
obtain an abortion (Espey, 2019). The Accreditation Council for Graduate
Medical Education mandates that obstetrics and gynecology residency
education must include access to experience with induced abortion. The
Kenneth J. Ryan Residency Training Program was established in 1999 to
work with residency programs to improve abortion and contraceptive
training. Moreover, postresidency training in these techniques is available in
formal 2-year Family Planning fellowships. Other residency programs have a
less-codified abortion curriculum. Instead, residents learn technical aspects
through their management of miscarriage and pregnancy interruption for
medical indications.
The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019g)
respects the need and responsibility of health-care providers to determine
their individual positions on induced abortion. It also advocates for
counseling and timely referral if providers have individual beliefs that
preclude pregnancy termination. Knowledgeable and compassionate

counseling objectively describes and provides information to the woman to
permit informed decision-making.

FIRST-TRIMESTER METHODS
Abortions can be completed with either medication or surgery. In the absence
of serious maternal disorders, abortion procedures do not require
hospitalization (Guiahi, 2012). However, outpatient facilities should be able
to provide emergency resuscitation and immediate transfer to a hospital
(Levy, 2019).

■ Surgical Abortion
Preoperative Preparation
Surgical evacuation is performed transvaginally through an appropriately
dilated cervix. For this, preoperative cervical ripening is typically
associated with easier intraoperative cervical dilation, less pain, a
technically easier procedure, and shorter operative times (Kapp, 2010;
Webber, 2015). On balance, this preparation adds a surgical delay and
potential side effects. Thus, cervical priming in the first trimester may be
reserved for those with anticipated challenges to dilation. Examples are
those with cervical stenosis or adolescents, who overall may experience
higher associated pain (Allen, 2016). Surgical steps presented here apply to
both induced abortion and miscarriage.
For ripening, hygroscopic dilators, also called osmotic dilators, are
devices that draw water from surrounding tissues and expand gradually to
dilate the endocervical canal. One type is derived from various species of
Laminaria algae that are harvested from the ocean floor (Fig. 11-5). These
come in different diameters, which allow the number and diameters of
inserted devices, also called tents, to be customized to a given cervix.
Another device is Dilapan-S, which is composed of an acrylic-based gel.
Each type expands to an ultimate diameter three to four times that of its dry
state.

FIGURE 11-5 Hygroscopic dilators. With each type, the dry unit (left) expands exponentially when
exposed to water (right) as in the endocervical canal. A. Laminaria. B. Dilapan-S.

With hygroscopic dilators, shallow insertion yields insufficient dilation
or tent expulsion. Overly deep placement risks dislodgement into the uterine
cavity. Once tents are inserted, several gauze sponges placed at the external
os help prevent spontaneous tent expulsion. Patients can ambulate, void, or
stool without limitation. The numbers of sponges and dilators inserted are
carefully counted and recorded in the chart.
Schneider and coworkers (1991) described 21 cases in which women
who had a hygroscopic dilator placed changed their minds. Of 17 women
who chose to continue their pregnancy, 14 delivered at term, two delivered
preterm, and one miscarried 2 weeks later. None suffered infection-related
morbidity, including three untreated women with cervical cultures positive
for Chlamydia trachomatis.
Instead, misoprostol is often used for cervical ripening. The typical dose
is 400 μg administered sublingually, buccally, or placed into the posterior
vaginal fornix at least 3 to 4 hours prior to surgery. Oral ingestion is less
effective (Allen, 2016). Another option is a 200-mg oral mifepristone dose
given 24 to 48 hours before surgery (Ashok, 2000). However, misoprostol is
typically favored, because of mifepristone’s greater delay to the procedure,
cost, and limited access within the FDA’s REMS program (p. 202).
Of options, hygroscopic dilators provide equal or slightly greater
dilation than misoprostol. Other surgical parameters do not vary significantly
(Bartz, 2013; MacIsaac, 1999). On balance, the ripening time required for
hygroscopic dilators extends the total procedure time and can be
uncomfortable, whereas misoprostol can cause fever, bleeding, and
gastrointestinal side effects.
If not done as part of early prenatal care, hemoglobin level and Rh status
are assessed prior to abortion. Screening for gonorrhea, for syphilis, and for
human immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis B, and chlamydial infections also is
completed. Obvious cervical infections are treated and resolved before
elective procedures. To prevent postabortal infection after a first- or secondtrimester surgical evacuation, a 200-mg oral prophylactic dose of
doxycycline is given 1 hour before. For those electing local anesthesia,
evidence also supports adding an oral or intramuscular dose of a
nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug 30 to 60 minutes prior to surgery (Allen,
2018). Prophylaxis specifically for infective endocarditis prevention in those
with valvular heart disease is not required in the absence of active infection
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020g,i). No

recommendations specifically address venous thromboembolism prophylaxis
for suction curettage in low-risk gravidas. At our hospital, we encourage
early ambulation.

Vacuum Aspiration
Also called suction curettage or suction dilation and curettage, vacuum
aspiration is a transcervical approach, in which the cervix is first dilated and
tissue is then evacuated. For this, a rigid cannula is attached either to an
electric-powered vacuum source or to a handheld 60-mL syringe for its
vacuum source. These are electric vacuum aspiration (EVA) or manual
vacuum aspiration (MVA), respectively. Sharp dilation and curettage (D &
C) in which contents are mechanically scraped out solely by a sharp curette
is currently not recommended for pregnancy evacuation due to greater blood
loss, pain, and procedural time (National Abortion Federation, 2020; World
Health Organization, 2012). Importantly, this practice is distinguished from
brief final sharp curettage following initial aspiration.
To begin, the surgeon performs a bimanual examination to confirm uterine
size and orientation. A speculum is inserted, and the cervix is swabbed with
povidone-iodine or equivalent solution. The anterior cervical lip is grasped
with a toothed tenaculum. The cervix, vagina, and uterus are richly supplied
by nerves of the Frankenhäuser plexus, which lies within connective tissue
lateral to the uterosacral and cardinal ligaments. Thus, vacuum aspiration at
minimum requires intravenously or orally administered sedatives or
analgesics, and some add a paracervical or intracervical block (Allen, 2009;
Renner, 2012). For a pudendal block, 5 mL of 1- or 2-percent lidocaine is
injected into the uterosacral ligaments at their insertion into the uterus at 4
and 8 o’clock. Instead, an intracervical block with 5-mL aliquots of 1percent lidocaine injected at 12, 3, 6, and 9 o’clock was reported to be
equally effective (Mankowski, 2009). General or regional anesthesia may
instead be elected.
First, a Sims uterine sound is passed into the uterus to measure the depth
and inclination of the cavity. This provides parameters for subsequent
instrument insertion. If required, the cervix is further dilated with Hegar,
Hank, or Pratt dilators until a suction cannula can be inserted. As a rough
rule, the degree of required cervical dilation in millimeters approximates
gestational age. Hegar sizes reflect their diameter in millimeters. Pratt and

Hank dilators are sized in French units, which can be converted to
millimeters by dividing the French value by three.
With dilation, the fourth and fifth fingers of the introducing hand should
rest on the perineum and buttocks as the instrument is guided through the
internal os (Fig. 11-6). This technique minimizes forceful insertion and helps
prevent uterine perforation.

FIGURE 11-6 Dilation of cervix with a Hegar dilator. Note that the fourth and fifth fingers rest against
the perineum and buttocks, lateral to the vagina. This maneuver is an important safety measure because
if the cervix relaxes abruptly, these fingers prevent a sudden and uncontrolled thrust of the dilator, a
common cause of uterine perforation.

Following dilation, for most first-trimester aspiration procedures, an 8to 12-mm Karman cannula is appropriate. Small cannulas carry the risks of a
longer surgery and of missed intrauterine tissue. Large cannulas risk cervical
injury and more discomfort. For evacuation, the cannula is slowly moved
toward the fundus until resistance is met. Suction is then activated. The
cannula is gradually pulled back toward the os and is simultaneously slowly

turned circumferentially to cover the entire uterine cavity surface (Fig. 11-7).
This is repeated until no more tissue is aspirated. A gentle sharp curettage
can follow to remove any remaining tissue fragments (Fig. 11-8). Strong and
consistent evidence supports the high efficacy, safety, and patient
acceptability for both MVA and EVA (Lichtenberg, 2013).

FIGURE 11-7 A suction curette has been placed through the cervix into the uterus. The figure shows
the rotary motion used to aspirate the contents. (Figures 11-7 and 11-8: Reproduced with permission
from Hoffman BL, Hamid CA, Corton MM: Surgeries for benign gynecologic disorders. In Hoffman
BL, Schorge JO, Halvorson LM, et al (eds): Williams Gynecology, 4th ed. New York, McGraw Hill
Education, 2020.)

FIGURE 11-8 A sharp curette is advanced into the uterine cavity while the instrument is held with the
thumb and forefinger as shown in Figure 11-6. Upon reaching the fundus, the curette is placed flush
against the uterine wall. Firm pressure against the wall as the instrument is dragged out will scrape
away adhered tissue fragments. With movement of the curette, only the strength of these two fingers
should be used to help avoid perforation.

For abortion done at ≤6 weeks’ gestation, a distinct drawback is that the
pregnancy may be small and missed by the curette. To identify placenta, the
aspirated contents are rinsed in a strainer to remove blood, and then placed
in a clear plastic container with saline and examined with back lighting
(MacIsaac, 2000). Placental tissue macroscopically appears feathery. A
magnifying lens, colposcope, or microscope can augment viewing. With
gestations <6 weeks, the failed abortion rate approximates 2 percent (Paul,
2002). Thus, if products are not clearly identified, serial serum β-hCG levels
can be informative (Dean, 2015).

Abortion Complications

Legally induced abortion in the United States has a low associated mortality
rate, and from 2013 to 2017, the rate was 0.4 deaths in 100,000 procedures
(Kortsmit, 2020). Early abortions are safer. The mortality rate was 0.3
deaths in 100,000 procedures performed ≤8 weeks’ gestation but rose to 2.5
at 14 to 17 weeks and to 6.7 at ≥18 weeks (Zane, 2015). Notably, maternal
mortality rates are 14-fold greater for pregnancies that are continued
(Raymond, 2012).
Uterine perforation and lower-genital-tract laceration are uncommon but
potentially serious, and rates also rise with gestational age. In one systematic
review of first-trimester abortion, the uterine perforation and laceration rates
were each ≤1 percent (White, 2015). Perforation is usually recognized when
the instrument passes without resistance deep into the pelvis. Risk factors
include operator inexperience, prior cervical surgery or anomaly,
adolescence, multiparity, and advanced gestational age (Allen, 2016;
Grimes, 1984). If the uterine perforation is small and fundal, as when
produced by a uterine sound or narrow dilator, observation for vital sign
changes or uterine bleeding is usually sufficient.
If a suction cannula or sharp curette passes into the peritoneal cavity,
considerable intraabdominal damage can ensue. Laparotomy or laparoscopy
to thoroughly examine the abdominal contents is often the safest course. After
potential injuries are resolved, intraoperatively, curettage can be completed
under the direct guidance provided by laparoscopy or laparotomy (Owen,
2017).
Following curettage, uterine synechiae may form, and the risk of
synechiae increases with procedure number. Most cases are mild and of
unclear reproductive significance (Hooker, 2014). However, of Asherman
syndrome cases, one series found that two thirds were linked to firsttrimester curettage (Schenker, 1982).
Other first-trimester abortion complications are germane to both surgical
and medication abortion techniques. First, hemorrhage with abortion is
variably defined. One supported by the Society for Family Planning is
bleeding that prompts a clinical response or bleeding in excess of 500 mL
(Kerns, 2013). For first-trimester surgical abortions, hemorrhage
complicates ≤1 percent (White, 2015). Atony, abnormal placentation, and
coagulopathy are frequent sources, whereas surgical trauma is a rare cause.
With medication abortion, bleeding is more common. In one study of more
than 42,000 Finnish women undergoing pregnancy termination with

pregnancies less 63 days, hemorrhage complicated 15 percent of medication
abortion but only 2 percent of surgical cases (Niinimäki, 2009).
Infection is another risk. One review found a cumulative rate of 0.5
percent in those given prophylaxis compared with 2.6 percent in those given
placebo (Achilles, 2011). In another review, the postoperative infection rate
was <0.3 percent for either surgical or medication abortion (Upadhyay,
2015).
Incomplete abortion may require reevacuation. For medication abortion,
this neared 5 percent in one systematic review (Raymond, 2013).
Reaspiration rates following surgical abortion are typically <2 percent
(Ireland, 2015; Niinimaki, 2009).
In sum, surgical abortion offers higher efficacy rates (96 to 100 percent)
than medication abortion (83 to 98 percent) in the first trimester. Medication
abortion also carries a greater cumulative risk of complications, although
differences are small (Lichtenberg, 2013). These are balanced against the
greater privacy of medication abortion and the more invasive steps of
curettage.

■ Medication Abortion
Agents Used
For many women, outpatient medication abortion is an acceptable option for
pregnancies with a menstrual age ≤70 days. Although suitable at later
gestational ages, successful evacuation rates are lower.
Among abortions performed at ≤9 weeks’ gestation, 39 percent were
completed with medication in the United States in 2018 (Kortsmit, 2020).
One regimen provides mifepristone plus misoprostol, but another provides
misoprostol alone. Of actions, mifepristone augments uterine contractility by
reversing progesterone-induced myometrial quiescence. Misoprostol directly
stimulates the myometrium. Both also ripen the cervix (Mahajan, 1997; Tang,
2007).
Contraindications have evolved from exclusion criteria that were used in
clinical trials. Cautions include suspected ectopic pregnancy; in-situ
intrauterine device; severe anemia, coagulopathy, or anticoagulant use; longterm systemic corticosteroid therapy; chronic adrenal failure; inherited
porphyria; or allergy to agents used (American College of Obstetricians and

Gynecologists, 2020c). Of note, misoprostol is suitable for early pregnancy
failure in those with prior uterine surgery (Chen, 2008).
Misoprostol is a teratogen that is associated with transverse limb
reduction or with the Mobius sequence, which is manifest by cranial nerve
palsy. Thus, a commitment to abortion completion is essential once this
drug is given (Vauzelle, 2013). With mifepristone, for women who choose to
continue their pregnancies after exposure, the ongoing pregnancy rate ranges
from 10 to 46 percent (Grossman, 2015). The associated major malformation
rate was 5 percent in one series of 46 exposed pregnancies (Bernard, 2013).

Administration
Several dosing schemes are effective (Table 11-6). Because of its greater
efficacy, mifepristone plus misoprostol combinations are favored. For
gestations ≤70 days, the most widely accepted regimen is mifepristone, 200
mg given orally on day 0. This is followed in 24 to 48 hours by an 800-μg
misoprostol dose that is administered vaginally, buccally, or sublingually
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020c). Oral
ingestion has lower efficacy rates. If desired, mifepristone and misoprostol
may be self-administered at home (Gambir, 2020). Associated infection rates
approximate 0.3 percent, and antibiotic prophylaxis is not currently
recommended (Achilles, 2011).
TABLE 11-6. Various Regimens for Medical Termination of Pregnancy

Symptoms following misoprostol are common within 3 hours and include
vomiting, diarrhea, fever, and chills. Bleeding and cramping with medication
abortion typically is significantly worse than that with menses. Thus, oral
analgesics are provided. If bleeding soaks two or more pads in an hour for at
least 2 hours, the woman is instructed to contact her provider.
Reappointment is 1 to 2 weeks following drug administration, and
bimanual pelvic examination is recommended. Abortion completion may be
assessed with β-hCG levels. Expected rates of decline at 1 week can be
extrapolated from Table 11-1 and can guide care. However, specific β-hCG
values lack suitable sensitivity (Rørbye, 2004). Moreover, routine
postabortal sonographic examination is typically unnecessary (Clark, 2010).
If done, it performs comparably to β-hCG level assessment (Dayananda,
2013). If sonography is done due to concern for failed abortion or for
bleeding, unnecessary surgery can be avoided if scans are interpreted
appropriately. If no gestational sac is seen and no heavy bleeding is noted,
intervention is unnecessary. This is true even when, as is common, the uterus
contains sonographically evident debris (Reeves, 2008).

SECOND-TRIMESTER METHODS

In the second trimester, fetal anomaly or death, maternal health
complications, inevitable abortion, or desired termination may be indications
for uterine evacuation. As in the first trimester, medication or surgery is an
option. In the second trimester, dilation and evacuation (D & E) rather than
suction D & C is needed because of larger fetal size and bones.
Of options, D & E is a common means in the United States. Of all
induced abortions in 2018, nearly 8 percent were performed by D & E at
gestational ages >13 weeks (Kortsmit, 2020). Many of the surgical and
medication steps for second-trimester abortion mirror those in the first
trimester, and differences are emphasized here.

■ Dilation and Evacuation
Preparation
With D & E, wide mechanical cervical dilation is needed for evacuation of
fetal parts. The degree needed rises with fetal gestational age, and
inadequate dilation risks cervical trauma, uterine perforation, or tissue
retention (Peterson, 1983). Thus, presurgical cervical preparation is advised,
and main options include hygroscopic dilators or misoprostol (p. 209).
With laminaria, overnight preparation offers optimal cervical dilation
(Fox, 2014). Uncommonly, laminaria may fail to adequately dilate the cervix,
and serial insertions over several days with an increasing number of tents is
an option. Dilapan-S also is suitable. It may be preferable for same-day
procedures, as this device achieves its maximal effect in 4 to 6 hours
(Newmann, 2014). Supplementing laminaria with mifepristone can aid
procedures for gestations >19 weeks (Diedrich, 2020; Goldberg, 2015). In
contrast, misoprostol supplementation to hygroscopic dilators failed to add
benefits in one metaanalysis (Cahill, 2020).
If a patient changes abortion plans after hygroscopic dilator removal,
preterm delivery and PPROM rates are substantial. In one series of 12 such
cases, 50 percent ended with miscarriage or perinatal death (Mark, 2019).
Misoprostol alone can be used for cervical preparation. The typical dose
is 400 μg given vaginally or buccally 3 to 4 hours prior to D & E.
Randomized trial results vary regarding the ability of misoprostol to achieve
results equal to that with hydroscopic dilators (Bartz, 2013; Goldberg, 2005;
Sagiv, 2015). In women with one prior hysterotomy, the risk of uterine

rupture was not elevated by misoprostol cervical ripening in one review but
rose to 2.5 percent in those with ≥2 cesarean deliveries (Andrikopoulou,
2016).
With mifepristone alone for cervical ripening, fewer studies provide
data. In one, mifepristone alone provided less dilation than hydroscopic
dilators (Borgatta, 2012). In another trial, mifepristone given 48 hours before
misoprostol created greater cervical dilation compared with misoprostol
alone (Carbonell, 2007).
In sum, hygroscopic dilators soften and dilate the cervix before D & E.
Sequential insertions or layering agents may be most helpful for later
gestations or for an inadequate response to initial hygroscopic dilators alone.
Yet, layering adds cost and potential side effects.
With elective abortion, some choose to induce fetal demise prior to D &
E to avert a live birth. For this, an intracardiac potassium chloride or
lidocaine injection or an intraamnionic or intrafetal digoxin injection is used
prior to cervical ripening (Tufa, 2020).

Technique
During D & E, sonography can be used as an adjunct in all cases or
selectively in more challenging ones. Perioperative antibiotic prophylaxis
mirrors that for first-trimester procedures (p. 209). To reduce postprocedure
bleeding, dilute vasopressin can be injected intracervically or as part of a
paracervical block (Kerns, 2013; Schulz, 1985). Once adequate cervical
dilation is achieved, the initial surgical step drains amnionic fluid with an
11- to 16-mm suction cannula or with amniotomy. This reduces the risk of
amnionic fluid embolism and brings the fetus into the lower uterine segment
for removal (Owen, 2017; Prager, 2009).
For pregnancies >16 weeks’ gestation, the fetus is extracted, often in
parts, using Sopher forceps or other destructive instruments. With complete
removal of the fetus, a large-bore vacuum curette is used to remove the
placenta.
Major complications are infrequent with D & E, and rates range from 1
to 2 percent in large series (Lederle, 2015; Peterson, 1983). These include
uterine perforation, cervical laceration, uterine bleeding, and postabortal
infection. Prior cesarean delivery is not a contraindication for D & E and

may be preferred over prostaglandins for those with multiple prior
hysterotomies (Ben-Ami, 2009).

Other Surgical Considerations
Placenta previa or the placenta accreta syndrome (PAS) can raise D & E
risks. Once diagnosed, PAS typically prompts hysterectomy (Matsuzaki,
2015). For placenta previa, D & E is preferred to quickly evacuate the
placenta, but the ability to transfuse blood products and perform possible
hysterectomy must be available (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2019f; Perriera, 2017). Medication abortion may be elected,
but the risk for transfusion is greater than with D & E (Nakayama, 2007).
Data are conflicting regarding the value of predelivery uterine artery
embolization to lessen bleeding risks (Wang, 2019).
In some cases of failed second-trimester medication abortion,
hysterotomy may be considered. In other cases, if comorbid uterine pathology
is significant, such as numerous large myomas, hysterectomy may provide
ideal treatment. Some women with second-trimester pregnancies desire
sterilization following evacuation. Because the contracted uterine fundus will
lie lower, any laparotomy incision must be placed to allow fallopian tube
access.

■ Medication Abortion
Principal among noninvasive methods is a mifepristone plus misoprostol
regimen or misoprostol alone (see Table 11-6). Of these two options, the
combined regimen yields a shorter termination duration (Kapp, 2007; Ngoc,
2011). Hygroscopic dilators may speed the time to delivery with this
combined regimen (Mazouni, 2009; Vincienne, 2018). In selecting
misoprostol routes, oral administration leads to a longer time to delivery
compared with vaginal or sublingual routes (Dickinson, 2014). Prophylactic
antibiotics are not typically given, and infection surveillance during labor is
instead applied (Achilles, 2011).
Another induction agent, PGE2, shows similar efficacy and side effects
compared with misoprostol (Jain, 1994; Jansen, 2008). Simultaneous
administration of an antiemetic such as metoclopramide (Reglan), an
antipyretic such as acetaminophen, and an antidiarrheal such as

diphenoxylate/atropine (Lomotil) will help prevent or treat symptoms.
Dinoprostone (Prostin) is an available PGE2 in the United States. However,
its greater cost and poor pharmacologic stability at room temperature may
make it less attractive than misoprostol.
During medication abortion, the uterine rupture rate is 0.4 percent with
misoprostol and one prior low transverse cesarean delivery (Berghella,
2009). Both misoprostol and PGE2 appear to pose similar risk (le Roux,
2001; Reichman, 2007). Few data guide their use for medication abortion in
those with ≥2 prior cesarean deliveries.
Of other agents, high-dose intravenous oxytocin in saline will result in
second-trimester abortion in 80 to 90 percent of cases (see Table 11-6).
However, by comparison, misoprostol leads to higher successful induction
rates and faster delivery times (Alavi, 2013).
Rarely used in the United States, ethacridine lactate is an organic
antiseptic that activates myometrial mast cells to release prostaglandins
(Olund, 1980). The solution is instilled either intraamnionically or
extraovularly, that is, into the potential space between the uterine wall and
amnion. Compared with misoprostol, it is associated with longer times to
delivery and lower success rates (Hou, 2011).

■ Fetal and Placental Evaluation
For second-trimester pregnancies being terminated for maternal health or
fetal indications, either D & E or medication abortion is suitable. Thus,
patient input and clinical indication both guide selection. Perinatal palliative
care can be instituted (p. 203) (Marc-Aurele, 2020).
Evaluation of a stillborn fetus is described in Chapter 35 (p. 626). One
component is autopsy, which can also be valuable for second-trimester
terminations due to anomalies (Hauerberg, 2012; Man, 2016). Fragmented D
& E specimens may provide less information than intact fetuses (Lal, 2014).

ELECTIVE ABORTION CONSEQUENCES
Data relating abortion to overall maternal health and to subsequent pregnancy
outcome are limited. Rates of infertility or ectopic pregnancy are not
increased (Burkman, 1988; Frank, 1993). Exceptions may stem from

postabortal infections, especially those caused by C trachomatis. Of
subsequent adverse pregnancy outcomes, several studies note an approximate
1.5-fold greater incidence of preterm delivery following surgical evacuation
(Lemmers, 2016; Saccone, 2016). This risk accrues with the number of
terminations (Klemetti, 2012). Subsequent pregnancy outcomes are similar if
a prior induced abortion was completed with medication or by surgery
(Männistö, 2013; Virk, 2007).

POSTABORTAL CONTRACEPTION
After early abortion, woman may ovulate after 8 days, but the average is 3
weeks (Lahteenmaki, 1978; Stoddard, 2011). Unless another pregnancy is
imminently desired, contraception, either hormonal or nonhormonal, can be
started immediately after abortion (Curtis, 2016). In candidates, defined in
Chapter 38 (p. 667), an intrauterine device can be inserted immediately after
surgery or medication abortion is completed (Bednarek, 2011; Korjamo,
2017).
For women who desire another pregnancy, conception need not be
delayed. From studies, groups conceiving within 3 months of a first-trimester
loss had lower subsequent miscarriage rates compared with groups with
later conceptions (Schliep, 2016).

REFERENCES
Achilles SL, Reeves MF, Society of Family Planning: Prevention of infection after induced abortion:
release date October 2010: SFP guideline 20102. Contraception 83(4):295, 2011
Achiron R, Tadmor O, Mashiach S: Heart rate as a predictor of first-trimester spontaneous abortion
after ultrasound-proven viability. Obstet Gynecol 78(3 Pt 1):330, 1991
Alavi A, Rajaei M, Amirian M, et al: Misoprostol versus high dose oxytocin and laminaria in termination
of pregnancy in second-trimester pregnancies. Electron Physician 5(4):713, 2013
Albrechtsen S, Rasmussen S, Thoresen S, et al: Pregnancy outcome in women before and after cervical
conization: population based cohort study. BMJ 18:337, 2008
Alijotas-Reig J, Esteve-Valverde E, Ferrer-Oliveras R, et al: The European Registry on Obstetric
Antiphospholipid Syndrome (EUROAPS): A survey of 1000 consecutive cases. Autoimmun Rev
18(4):406, 2019
Allen RH, Fitzmaurice G, Lifford KL, et al: Oral compared with intravenous sedation for first-trimester
surgical abortion: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol 113(2 Pt 1):276, 2009
Allen RH, Goldberg AB: Cervical dilation before first-trimester surgical abortion (<14 weeks’
gestation). Contraception 93(4):277, 2016

Allen RH, Singh R.: Society of Family Planning clinical guidelines pain control in surgical abortion part 1
—local anesthesia and minimal sedation. Contraception 97(6):471, 2018
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Antiphospholipid syndrome. Practice Bulletin No.
132, December 2012, Reaffirmed 2019a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Early pregnancy loss. Practice Bulletin No. 200,
August 2018, Reaffirmed 2019b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Perinatal palliative care. Committee Opinion No.
786, August 2019c
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Periviable birth. Obstetric Care Consensus No. 6,
October 2017, Reaffirmed 2019d
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Prevention of Rh D alloimmunization. Practice
Bulletin No. 181, August 2017, Reaffirmed 2019e
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Second-trimester abortion. Practice Bulletin No.
135, June 2013, Reaffirmed 2019f
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: The limits of conscientious refusal in reproductive
medicine. Committee Opinion No. 385, November 2007, Reaffirmed 2019g
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Cerclage for management of cervical
insufficiency. Practice Bulletin No. 142, February 2014, Reaffirmed 2020a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Inherited thrombophilias in pregnancy. Practice
Bulletin No. 197, June 2018, Reaffirmed 2020b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Medication abortion up to 70 days of gestation.
Practice Bulletin No. 225, August 2020c
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Microarray and next generation sequencing
technology: the use of advanced genetic diagnostic tools in obstetrics and gynecology. Committee
Opinion No. 682, December 2016, Reaffirmed 2020d
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Moderate caffeine consumption during
pregnancy. Committee Opinion No. 462, August 2010, Reaffirmed 2020e
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Prelabor rupture of membranes. Practice Bulletin
No. 217, March 2020f
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Prevention of infection after gynecologic
procedures. Practice Bulletin No. 195, June 2018, Reaffirmed 2020g
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Ultrasound in pregnancy. Practice Bulletin No.
175, December 2016, Reaffirmed 2020h
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Use of prophylactic antibiotics in labor and
delivery. Practice Bulletin No. 199, August 2018, Reaffirmed 2020i
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Prediction and prevention of preterm birth.
Practice Bulletin No. 234, September 2021
American Society for Reproductive Medicine: Definitions of infertility and recurrent pregnancy loss.
Fertil Steril 113(3):533, 2020
American Society for Reproductive Medicine: Evaluation and treatment of recurrent pregnancy loss: a
committee opinion. Fertil Steril 98:1103, 2012
American Society for Reproductive Medicine: Removal of myomas in asymptomatic patients to improve
fertility and/or reduce miscarriage rate: a guideline. Fertil Steril 108(3):416, 2017
American Society for Reproductive Medicine: Uterine septum: a guideline. Fertil Steril 106(3):530, 2016
Ammon Avalos L, Galindo C, Li DK: A systematic review to calculate background miscarriage rates
using life Table analysis. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol 94(6):417, 2012

Anderson M, Goldman RH: Occupational reproductive hazards for female surgeons in the operating
room: a review. JAMA Surg 155(3):243, 2020
Andrikopoulou M, Lavery JA, Ananth CV, et al: Cervical ripening agents in the second trimester of
pregnancy in women with a scarred uterus: a systematic review and metaanalysis of observational
studies. Am J Obstet Gynecol 215(2):177, 2016
Arredondo F, Noble LS: Endocrinology of recurrent pregnancy loss. Semin Reprod Med 1:33, 2006
Ashok PW, Flett GM, Templeton A: Mifepristone versus vaginally administered misoprostol for cervical
priming before first-trimester termination of pregnancy: a randomized, controlled study. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 183(4):998, 2000
Balsells M, García-Patterson A, Corcoy R: Systematic review and meta-analysis on the association of
prepregnancy underweight and miscarriage. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 207:73, 2016
Barnhart K, Mennuti MT, Benjamin I, et al: Prompt diagnosis of ectopic pregnancy in an emergency
department setting. Obstet Gynecol 84(6):1010, 1994
Barnhart K, Sammel MD, Chung K, et al: Decline of serum human chorionic gonadotropin and
spontaneous complete abortion: defining the normal curve. Obstet Gynecol 104:975, 2004
Barnhart K, van Mello NM, Bourne T, et al: Pregnancy of unknown location: a consensus statement of
nomenclature, definitions, and outcome. Fertil Steril 95(3):857, 2011
Bartz D, Maurer R, Allen RH, et al: Buccal misoprostol compared with synthetic osmotic cervical
dilator before surgical abortion: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol 122(1):57, 2013
Baxter JK, Airoldi J, Berghella V.: Short cervical length after history-indicated cerclage: is a reinforcing
cerclage beneficial? Am J Obstet Gynecol 193(3 Pt 2):1204, 2005
Bednarek PH, Creinin MD, Reeves MF, et al: Immediate versus delayed IUD insertion after uterine
aspiration. N Engl J Med 364(21):2208, 2011
Ben-Ami I, Schneider D, Svirsky R, et al: Safety of late second-trimester pregnancy termination by
laminaria dilatation and evacuation in patients with previous multiple cesarean sections. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 201(2):154.e1, 2009
Berghella V, Airoldi J, O’Neill AM, et al: Misoprostol for second trimester pregnancy termination in
women with prior caesarean: a systematic review. BJOG 116(9):1151, 2009
Bernard N, Elefant E, Carlier P, et al: Continuation of pregnancy after first-trimester exposure to
mifepristone: an observational prospective study. BJOG 120(5):568, 2013
Bhattacharya S, Townend J, Bhattacharya S: Recurrent miscarriage: are three miscarriages one too
many? Analysis of a Scottish population-based database of 151,021 pregnancies. Eur J Obstet
Gynecol Reprod Biol 150:24, 2010
Borgatta L, Roncari D, Sonalkar S, et al: Mifepristone vs. osmotic dilator insertion for cervical
preparation prior to surgical abortion at 14–16 weeks: a randomized trial. Contraception 86(5):567,
2012
Boué J, Bou A, Lazar P: Retrospective and prospective epidemiological studies of 1500 karyotyped
spontaneous human abortions. Teratology 12(1):11, 1975
Branch DW, Gibson M, Silver RM: Recurrent miscarriage. N Engl J Med 363:18, 2010
Brigham SA, Conlon C, Farquhason RG: A longitudinal study of pregnancy outcome following idiopathic
recurrent miscarriage. Hum Reprod 14(11):2868, 1999
Bromley B, Harlow BL, Laboda LA, et al: Small sac size in the first trimester: a predictor of poor fetal
outcome. Radiology 178(2):375, 1991
Brown DL, Packard A, Maturen KE, et al: ACR Appropriateness Criteria first trimester vaginal
bleeding. J Am Coll Radiol 15(5S):S69, 2018

Burkman RT, Mason KJ, Gold EB: Ectopic pregnancy and prior induced abortion. Contraception
37(1):21, 1988
Cahill EP, Henkel A, Shaw JG, et al: Misoprostol as an adjunct to overnight osmotic dilators prior to
second trimester dilation and evacuation: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Contraception
101(2):74, 2020
Carbonell JL, Gallego FG, Llorente MP, et al: Vaginal vs. sublingual misoprostol with mifepristone for
cervical priming in second-trimester abortion by dilation and evacuation: a randomized clinical trial.
Contraception 75(3):230, 2007
Caruso A, Trivellini C, De Carolis S, et al: Emergency cerclage in the presence of protruding
membranes: is pregnancy outcome predictable? Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 79:265, 2000
Caspi E, Schneider DF, Mor Z, et al: Cervical internal os cerclage: description of a new technique and
comparison with Shirodkar operation. Am J Perinatol 7:347, 1990
Cavalcante MB, Sarno M, Peixoto AB, et al: Obesity and recurrent miscarriage: a systematic review
and meta-analysis. J Obstet Gynaecol Res 45(1):30, 2019
Chasen ST, Silverman NS: Mid-trimester emergent cerclage: a ten year single institution review. J
Perinatol 18:338, 1998
Chen BA, Reeves MF, Creinin MD, et al: Misoprostol for treatment of early pregnancy failure in
women with previous uterine surgery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 198:626.e1, 2008
Chen LW, Wu Y, Neelakantan N, et al: Maternal caffeine intake during pregnancy and risk of
pregnancy loss: a categorical and dose-response meta-analysis of prospective studies. Public Health
Nutr 19(7):1233, 2016
Chmait RH, Kontopoulos EV, Chon AH, et al: Amniopatch treatment of iatrogenic preterm premature
rupture of membranes (iPPROM) after fetoscopic laser surgery for twin-twin transfusion syndrome.
J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 30(11):1349, 2017
Chung K, Sammel M, Zhou L, et al: Defining the curve when initial levels of human chorionic
gonadotropin in patients with spontaneous abortions are low. Fertil Steril 85(2): 508, 2006
Clark W, Bracken H, Tanenhaus J, et al: Alternatives to a routine follow-up visit for early medical
abortion. Obstet Gynecol 115(2 Pt 1):264, 2010
Clowse ME, Jamison M, Myers E, et al: A national study of the complications of lupus in pregnancy.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 199:127.e1, 2008
Cnattingius S, Signorello LB, Anneren G, et al: Caffeine intake and the risk of first-trimester
spontaneous abortion. N Engl J Med 343:1839, 2000
Condous G, Okaro E, Khalid A, et al: Do we need to follow up complete miscarriages with serum
human chorionic gonadotrophin levels? BJOG 112:827, 2005
Connolly A, Ryan DH, Stuebe AM, et al: Reevaluation of discriminatory and threshold levels for serum
β-hCG in early pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 121(1):65, 2013
Connor TH, MacKenzie BA, DeBord DG, et al: NIOSH list of antineoplastic and other hazardous drugs
in healthcare settings, 2016. National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, Publication No.
2016–161, 2016
Coomarasamy A, Devall AJ, Cheed V, et al: A randomized trial of progesterone in women with bleeding
in early pregnancy. N Engl J Med 380(19):1815, 2019
Coomarasamy A, Williams H, Truchanowicz E, et al: A randomized trial of progesterone in women with
recurrent miscarriages. N Engl J Med 373(22):2141, 2015
Craig LB, Ke RW, Kutteh WH, et al: Increased prevalence of insulin resistance in women with a history
of recurrent pregnancy loss. Fertil Steril 78(3):487, 2002

Curtis KM, Tepper NK, Jatlaoui TC, et al: U.S. medical eligibility criteria for contraceptive use, 2016.
MMWR 65(3):1, 2016
Daif JL, Levie M, Chudnoff S, et al: Group A streptococcus causing necrotizing fasciitis and toxic shock
syndrome after medical termination of pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 113(2 Pt 2):504, 2009
Danco Laboratories: Mifeprex. 2021. Available at: https://www.earlyoptionpill.com/for-healthprofessionals/prescribing-mifeprex/. Accessed March 1, 2021
Dayananda I, Maurer R, Fortin J, et al: Medical abortion follow-up with serum human chorionic
gonadotropin compared with ultrasonography: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol
121(3):607, 2013
Dean G, Colarossi L, Porsch L, et al: Manual compared with electric vacuum aspiration for abortion at
less than 6 weeks of gestation: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol 125(5):1121, 2015
Dethier D, Lassey SC, Pilliod R, et al: Uterine evacuation in the setting of transabdominal cerclage.
Contraception 101(3):174, 2020
Devi Wold AS, Pham N, Arici A: Anatomic factors in recurrent pregnancy loss. Semin Reprod Med
1:25, 2006
DeVilbiss EA, Mumford SL, Sjaarda LA, et al: Prediction of pregnancy loss by early first trimester
ultrasound characteristics. Am J Obstet Gynecol 223(2):242.e1, 2020
Dickinson JE, Jennings BG, Doherty DA: Mifepristone and oral, vaginal, or sublingual misoprostol for
second-trimester abortion: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol 123(6):1162, 2014
Diedrich JT, Drey EA, Newmann SJ.: Society of Family Planning clinical recommendations: Cervical
preparation for dilation and evacuation at 20–24 weeks’ gestation. Contraception 101(5):286, 2020
Dijkstra K, Funai EF, O’Neill L, et al: Change in cervical length after cerclage as a predictor of preterm
delivery. Obstet Gynecol 96(3):346, 2000
Dong AC, Morgan J, Kane M, et al: Subclinical hypothyroidism and thyroid autoimmunity in recurrent
pregnancy loss: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Fertil Steril 113(3):587, 2020
Dotters-Katz SK, Myrick O, Smid M, et al: Use of prophylactic antibiotics in women with previable
prelabor rupture of membranes. J Neonatal Perinatal Med 10(4):431, 2017a
Dotters-Katz SK, Panzer A, Grace MR, et al: Maternal morbidity after previable prelabor rupture of
membranes. Obstet Gynecol 129(1):101, 2017b
Doubilet PM, Benson CB, Bourne T, et al: Diagnostic criteria for nonviable pregnancy early in the first
trimester. N Engl J Med 369:1443, 2013
Ehsanipoor RM, Seligman NS, Saccone G, et al: Physical examination-indicated cerclage: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. Obstet Gynecol 126(1):125, 2015
Eiben B, Bartels I, Bahr-Prosch S, et al: Cytogenetic analysis of 750 spontaneous abortions with the
direct-preparation method of chorionic villi and its implications for studying genetic causes of
pregnancy wastage. Am J Hum Genet 47:656, 1990
Eschenbach DA: Treating spontaneous and induced septic abortions. Obstet Gynecol 125(5):1042, 2015
Espey E, Dennis A, Landy U: The importance of access to comprehensive reproductive health care,
including abortion: a statement from women’s health professional organizations. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 220(1):67, 2019
Everett C: Incidence and outcome of bleeding before the 20th week of pregnancy: prospective study
from general practice. BMJ 315(7099):32, 1997
Fan HT, Zhang M, Zhan P, et al: Structural chromosomal abnormalities in couples in cases of recurrent
spontaneous abortions in Jilin Province, China. Genet Mol Res 15(1):1, 2016
Feodor Nilsson S, Andersen PK, Strandberg-Larsen K, et al: Risk factors for miscarriage from a
prevention perspective: a nationwide follow-up study. BJOG 121:1375, 2014

Food and Drug Administration: Spilling the beans: how much caffeine is too much? 2018. Available at:
https://www.fda.gov/consumers/consumer-updates/spilling-beans-how-much-caffeine-too-much.
Accessed February 25, 2021
Fox MC, Krajewski CM: Cervical preparation for second-trimester surgical abortion prior to 20 weeks’
gestation: SFP Guideline #2013–4. Contraception 89(2):75, 2014
Gambir K, Garnsey C, Necastro KA, et al: Effectiveness, safety and acceptability of medical abortion at
home versus in the clinic: a systematic review and meta-analysis in response to COVID-19. BMJ
Glob Health 5(12):e003934, 2020
Gaskins AJ, Toth TL, Chavarro JE: Prepregnancy nutrition and early pregnancy outcomes. Curr Nutr
Rep 4(3):265, 2015
Giraldo-Isaza MA, Fried GP, Hegarty SE, et al: Comparison of 2 stitches vs 1 stitch for transvaginal
cervical cerclage for preterm birth prevention. Am J Obstet Gynecol 208:209.e1, 2013
Goldberg AB, Drey EA, Whitaker AK: Misoprostol compared with laminaria before early secondtrimester surgical abortion: a randomized trial. Obstet Gynecol 106:234, 2005
Goldberg AB, Fortin JA, Drey EA, et al: Cervical preparation before dilation and evacuation using
adjunctive misoprostol or mifepristone compared with overnight osmotic dilators alone: a randomized
controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol 126(3):599, 2015
Goldstein SR: Significance of cardiac activity on endovaginal ultrasound in very early embryos. Obstet
Gynecol 80(4):670, 1992
Grimes DA, Schulz KF, Cates WJ Jr: Prevention of uterine perforation during curettage abortion.
JAMA 251(16):2108, 1984
Grossman D, White K, Harris L, et al: Continuing pregnancy after mifepristone and “reversal” of firsttrimester medical abortion: a systematic review. Contraception 92(3):206, 2015
Guiahi M, Davis A, Society of Family Planning: First-trimester abortion in women with medical
conditions: release date October 2012 SFP guideline #20122. Contraception 86(6):622, 2012
Habayeb OM, Konje JC. The one-stop recurrent miscarriage clinic: an evaluation of its effectiveness
and outcome. Hum Reprod 19(12):2952, 2004
Hadlock FP, Harrist RB, Martinez-Poyer J: In utero analysis of fetal growth: a sonographic weight
standard. Radiology 181(1):129, 1991
Hannafin B, Lovecchio F, Blackburn P: Do Rh-negative women with first trimester spontaneous
abortions need Rh immune globulin? Am J Obstet Gynecol 24:487, 2006
Hauerberg L, Skibsted L, Graem N, et al: Correlation between prenatal diagnosis by ultrasound and fetal
autopsy findings in second-trimester abortions. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 91(3):386, 2012
Hawkins E, Nimaroff M: Vaginal erosion of an abdominal cerclage 7 years after laparoscopic
placement. Obstet Gynecol 123(2 Pt 2 Suppl 2):420, 2014
Hawkins JS: Lower genital tract procedures. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al:
Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, McGraw Hill Education, 2017
Heuser C, Dalton J, Macpherson C, et al: Idiopathic recurrent pregnancy loss recurs at similar
gestational ages. Am J Obstet Gynecol 203(4):343.e1, 2010
Hirahara F, Andoh N, Sawai K, et al: Hyperprolactinemic recurrent miscarriage and results of
randomized bromocriptine treatment trials. Fertil Steril 70(2):246, 1998
Hoffman BL, Hamid CA, Corton MM: Surgeries for benign gynecologic disorders. In Hoffman BL,
Schorge JO, Halvorson LM, et al (eds): Williams Gynecology, 4th ed. New York, McGraw Hill
Education, 2020
Hooker AB, Lemmers M, Thurkow AL, et al: Systematic review and meta-analysis of intrauterine
adhesions after miscarriage: prevalence, risk factors and long-term reproductive outcome. Hum

Reprod Update 20(2):262, 2014
Hoover RN, Hyer M, Pheiffer RM, et al: Adverse health outcomes in women exposed in utero to
diethylstilbestrol. N Engl J Med 365(14):1304, 2011
Hou SP, Fang AH, Chen QF, et al: Termination of second-trimester pregnancy by mifepristone
combined with misoprostol versus intra-amniotic injection of ethacridine lactate (Rivanol®): a
systematic review of Chinese trials. Contraception 84(3):214, 2011
Hunter TJ, Byrnes MJ, Nathan E, et al: Factors influencing survival in previable preterm premature
rupture of membranes. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 25(9):1755, 2012
Ireland LD, Gatter M, Chen AY: Medical compared with surgical abortion for effective pregnancy
termination in the first trimester. Obstet Gynecol 126(1):22, 2015
Jacobs PA, Hassold TJ: The origin of chromosomal abnormalities in spontaneous abortion. In Porter IH,
Hook EB (eds): Human Embryonic and Fetal Death. New York, Academic Press, 1980, p 289
Jain JK, Mishell DR: Comparison of intravaginal misoprostol with prostaglandin-E2 for termination of
2nd-trimester pregnancy. N Engl J Med 331:290, 1994
Jansen NE, Pasker-De Jong PC, Zondervan HA: Mifepristone and misoprostol versus Dilapan and
sulprostone for second trimester termination of pregnancy. J Matern Fetal Neonatal 21(11):847, 2008
Jenderny J: Chromosome aberrations in a large series of spontaneous miscarriages in the German
population and review of the literature. Mol Cytogenet 7:38, 2014
Jenkins TM, Berghella V, Shlossman PA, et al: Timing of cerclage removal after preterm premature
rupture of membranes: maternal and neonatal outcomes. Am J Obstet Gynecol 183(4):847, 2000
Kajii T, Ferrier A, Niikawa N, et al: Anatomic and chromosomal anomalies in 639 spontaneous
abortions. Hum Genet 55:87, 1980
Kalagiri RR, Carder T, Choudhury S, et al: Inflammation in complicated pregnancy and its outcome. Am
J Perinatol 33(14):1337, 2016
Kapp N, Borgatta L, Stubblefield PG, et al: Mifepristone in midtrimester medical abortion: a randomized
controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol 110:1304, 2007
Kapp N, Lohr PA, Ngo TD, et al: Cervical preparation for first trimester surgical abortion. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 2:CD007207, 2010
Kerns J, Steinauer J: Management of postabortion hemorrhage: release date November 2012 SFP
Guideline #20131. Contraception 87(3):331, 2013
Kibel M, Asztalos E, Barrett J, et al: Outcomes of pregnancies complicated by preterm premature
rupture of membranes between 20 and 24 weeks of gestation. Obstet Gynecol 128(2):313, 2016
Kilpatrick SJ, Patil R, Connell J, et al: Risk factors for previable premature rupture of membranes or
advanced cervical dilation: a case control study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 194(4):1168, 2006
Kim C, Barnard S, Neilson JP, et al: Medical treatments for incomplete miscarriage. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 1:CD007223, 2017
Klebanoff MA, Levine RJ, DerSimonian R, et al: Maternal serum paraxanthine, a caffeine metabolite,
and the risk of spontaneous abortion. N Engl J Med 341:1639, 1999
Klemetti R, Gissler M, Niinimäki M, et al: Birth outcomes after induced abortion: a nationwide registerbased study of first births in Finland. Hum Reprod 27(11):3315, 2012
Kolte AM, Bernardi LA, Christiansen OB, et al: Terminology for pregnancy loss prior to viability: a
consensus statement from the ESHRE early pregnancy special interest group. Hum Reprod
30(3):495, 2015
Kondracki AJ: Prevalence and patterns of cigarette smoking before and during early and late pregnancy
according to maternal characteristics: the first national data based on the 2003 birth certificate
revision, United States, 2016. Reprod Health 16(1):142, 2019

Korjamo R, Mentula M, Heikinheimo O: Immediate versus delayed initiation of the levonorgestrelreleasing intrauterine system following medical termination of pregnancy—1 year continuation rates:
a randomised controlled trial. BJOG 124(13):1957, 2017
Kortsmit K, Jatlaoui TC, Mandel MG, et al: Abortion surveillance—United States, 2018. MMWR
69(7):1, 2020
Krieg SA, Shahine LK, Lathi RB: Environmental exposure to endocrine-disrupting chemicals and
miscarriage. Fertil Steril 106(4):941, 2016
Kuhn RPJ, Pepperell RJ: Cervical ligation: a review of 242 pregnancies. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol
17:79, 1977
Lahteenmaki P, Luukkainen T: Return of ovarian function after abortion. Clin Endocrinol 2:123, 1978
Lal AK, Kominiarek MA, Sprawka NM: Induction of labor compared to dilation and evacuation for
postmortem analysis. Prenat Diagn 34(6):547, 2014
le Roux PA, Pahal GS, Hoffman L, et al: Second trimester termination of pregnancy for fetal anomaly
or death: comparing mifepristone/misoprostol to gemeprost. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol
95(1):52, 2001
Lederle L, Steinauer JE, Montgomery A, et al: Obesity as a risk factor for complications after secondtrimester abortion by dilation and evacuation. Obstet Gynecol 126(3):585, 2015
Lemmers M, Verschoor MA, Hooker AB, et al: Dilatation and curettage increases the risk of
subsequent preterm birth: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Hum Reprod 31(1):34, 2016
Levi CS, Lyons EA, Zheng XH, et al: Endovaginal US: demonstration of cardiac activity in embryos of
less than 5.0 mm in crown-rump length. Radiology 176(1):71, 1990
Levy BS, Ness DL, Weinberger SE: Consensus guidelines for facilities performing outpatient
procedures: evidence over ideology. Obstet Gynecol 133(2):255, 2019
Li J, Zhao H, Song JM, et al: A meta-analysis of risk of pregnancy loss and caffeine and coffee
consumption during pregnancy. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 130(2):116, 2015
Lichtenberg ES, Paul M, Society of Family Planning: Surgical abortion prior to 7 weeks of gestation.
Contraception 88(1):7, 2013
Luise C, Jermy K, May C, et al: Outcome of expectant management of spontaneous first trimester
miscarriage: observational study. BMJ 324:873, 2002
MacIsaac L, Darney P: Early surgical abortion: an alternative to and backup for medical abortion. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 183:S76, 2000
MacIsaac L, Grossman D, Balistreri E, et al: A randomized controlled trial of laminaria, oral misoprostol,
and vaginal misoprostol before abortion. Obstet Gynecol 93(5 Pt 1):766, 1999
MacNaughton MC, Chalmers IG, Dubowitz V, et al: Final report of the Medical Research Council/Royal
College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists Multicentre Randomized Trial of Cervical Cerclage.
BJOG 100:516, 1993
Mahajan DK, London SN: Mifepristone (RU486): a review. Fertil Steril 68(6):967, 1997
Man J, Hutchinson JC, Heazell AE, et al: Stillbirth and intrauterine fetal death: role of routine
histopathological placental findings to determine cause of death. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol
48(5):579, 2016
Mankowski JL, Kingston J, Moran T, et al: Paracervical compared with intracervical lidocaine for
suction curettage: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol 113:1052, 2009
Männistö J, Mentula M, Bloigu A, et al: Medical versus surgical termination of pregnancy in primigravid
women—is the next delivery differently at risk? A population-based register study. BJOG
120(3):331, 2013

Marc-Aurele KL: Decisions parents make when faced with potentially life-limiting fetal diagnoses and
the importance of perinatal palliative care. Front Pediatr 8:574556, 2020
Mark K, Merchant RM, Hu K: Pregnancy outcomes after removal of osmotic dilators in patients who
presented for second-trimester abortion. Contraception 99(5):285, 2019
Matsuzaki S, Matsuzaki S, Ueda Y, et al: A case report and literature review of midtrimester termination
of pregnancy complicated by placenta previa and placenta accreta. AJP Rep 5(1):e6, 2015
Mayrhofer D, Hager M, Walch K, et al: The prevalence and impact of polycystic ovary syndrome in
recurrent miscarriage: a retrospective cohort study and meta-analysis. J Clin Med 9(9):2700, 2020
Mazouni C, Vejux N, Menard JP, et al: Cervical preparation with laminaria tents improves induction-todelivery interval in second- and third-trimester medical termination of pregnancy. Contraception
80(1):101, 2009
Mazze RI, Källén B: Reproductive outcome after anesthesia and operation during pregnancy: a registry
study of 5405 cases. Am J Obstet Gynecol 161:1178, 1989
McCall CA, Grimes DA, Lyerly AD. “Therapeutic” bed rest in pregnancy: unethical and unsupported
by data. Obstet Gynecol 121(6):1305, 2013
McDonald IA: Incompetent cervix as a cause of recurrent abortion. J Obstet Gynaecol Br Commonw
70:105, 1963
McGlothlin JD, Moenning JE, Cole SS: Evaluation and control of waste anesthetic gases in the
postanesthesia care unit. J Perianesth Nurs 29(4):298, 2014
Meijboom LJ, Drenthen W, Pieper PG, et al: Obstetric complications in Marfan syndrome. Int J Cardiol
110(1):53, 2006
Miyakis S, Lockshin MD, Atsumi T, et al: International consensus statement on an update of the
classification criteria for definite antiphospholipid syndrome (APS). J Thromb Haemost 4(2):295,
2006
Moawad GN, Tyan P, Bracke T, et al: Systematic review of transabdominal cerclage placed via
laparoscopy for the prevention of preterm birth. J Minim Invasive Gynecol 25(2):277, 2018
Monson MA, Gibbons KJ, Esplin MS, et al: Pregnancy outcomes in women with a history of previable,
preterm prelabor rupture of membranes. Obstet Gynecol 128(5):976, 2016
Morris A, Meaney S, Spillane N, et al: The postnatal morbidity associated with second-trimester
miscarriage. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 29(17):2786, 2016
Murugappan G, Shahine LK, Perfetto CO, et al: Intent to treat analysis of in vitro fertilization and
preimplantation genetic screening versus expectant management in patients with recurrent
pregnancy loss. Hum Reprod 31(8):1668, 2016
Naert MN, Khadraoui H, Muniz Rodriguez A, et al: Association between first-trimester subchorionic
hematomas and pregnancy loss in singleton pregnancies. Obstet Gynecol 134(2):276, 2019
Nakayama D, Masuzaki H, Miura K, et al: Effect of placenta previa on blood loss in second-trimester
abortion by labor induction using gemeprost. Contraception 75(3):238, 2007
National Abortion Federation: 2020 Clinical Policy Guidelines for Abortion Care. Washington, NAF,
2020
Newmann SJ, Sokoloff A, Tharyil M, et al: Same-day synthetic osmotic dilators compared with
overnight laminaria before abortion at 14–18 weeks of gestation: a randomized controlled trial.
Obstet Gynecol 123:271, 2014
Ngoc NT, Shochet T, Raghavan S, et al: Mifepristone and misoprostol compared with misoprostol alone
for second-trimester abortion. Obstet Gynecol 118(3):601, 2011
Nguyen BT, Chang EJ, Bendikson KA: Advanced paternal age and the risk of spontaneous abortion: an
analysis of the combined 2011–2013 and 2013–2015 National Survey of Family Growth. Am J

Obstet Gynecol 221(5):476.e1, 2019
Nielsen S, Hahlin M, Platz-Christensen J: Randomised trial comparing expectant with medical
management for first trimester miscarriages. BJOG 106(8):804, 1999
Niinimäki M, Pouta A, Bloigu A, et al: Immediate complications after medical compared with surgical
termination of pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 114:795, 2009
Nyberg DA, Laing FC, Filly RA. Threatened abortion: sonographic distinction of normal and abnormal
gestation sacs. Radiology 158(2):397, 1986
Nybo Andersen AM, Wohlfahrt J, Christens P, et al: Maternal age and fetal loss: population based
register linkage study. BMJ 320(7251):1708, 2000
Oliveira LA, El Dib RP, Figueiredo DB, et al: Spontaneous abortion in women occupationally exposed to
inhalational anesthetics: a critical systematic review. Environ Sci Pollut Res Int 28(9):10436, 2021
Olund A, Kindahl H, Oliw E, et al: Prostaglandins and thromboxanes in amniotic fluid during rivanolinduced abortion and labour. Prostaglandins 19(5):791, 1980
Owen J, Hankins G, Iams J, et al: Multicenter randomized trial of cerclage for preterm birth prevention
in high-risk women with shortened midtrimester cervical length. Am J Obstet Gynecol 201(4):375,
2009
Paul ME, Mitchell CM, Rogers AJ, et al: Early surgical abortion: efficacy and safety. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 187:407, 2002
Pelosi MA: A new technique for reduction of prolapsed fetal membranes for emergency cervical
cerclage. Obstet Gynecol 75(1):143, 1990
Pergialiotis V, Gkioka E, Bakoyiannis I, et al: Retention of cervical cerclage after preterm premature
rupture of the membranes: a critical appraisal. Arch Gynecol Obstet 291(4):745, 2015
Perriera LK, Arslan AA, Masch R: Placenta praevia and the risk of adverse outcomes during second
trimester abortion: a retrospective cohort study. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol 57(1):99, 2017
Petersen SG, Perkins A, Gibbons K, et al: Can we use a lower intravaginal dose of misoprostol in the
medical management of miscarriage? A randomised controlled study. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol
53(1):64, 2013
Peterson WF, Berry FN, Grace MR, et al: Second-trimester abortion by dilatation and evacuation: an
analysis of 11,747 cases. Obstet Gynecol 62(2):185, 1983
Pinar MH, Gibbins K, He M, et al: Early pregnancy losses: review of nomenclature, histopathology, and
possible etiologies. Fetal Pediatr Pathol 37(3):191, 2018
Pineles BL, Park E, Samet JM: Systematic review and meta-analysis of miscarriage and maternal
exposure to tobacco smoke during pregnancy. Am J Epidemiol 179(7):807, 2014
Pohl E, Gromoll J, Wistuba J, et al: Healthy ageing and spermatogenesis. Reproduction 161(4):R89, 2021
Prager SW, Oyer DJ: Second-trimester surgical abortion. Clin Obstet Gynecol 52(2):179, 2009
Rauch ER, Schattman GL, Christos PJ, et al: Embryonic heart rate as a predictor of first-trimester
pregnancy loss in infertility patients after in vitro fertilization. Fertil Steril 91(6):2451, 2009
Raymond E, Grimes D: The comparative safety of legal induced abortion and childbirth in the United
States. Obstet Gynecol 119(2, Part 1):215, 2012
Raymond EG, Harrison MS, Weaver MA: Efficacy of misoprostol alone for first-trimester medical
abortion: a systematic review. Obstet Gynecol 133(1):137, 2019
Raymond EG, Shannon C, Weaver MA, et al: First-trimester medical abortion with mifepristone 200 mg
and misoprostol: a systematic review. Contraception 87:26, 2013
Reeves MF, Lohr PA, Harwood BJ, et al: Ultrasonographic endometrial thickness after medical and
surgical management of early pregnancy failure. Obstet Gynecol 111(1):106, 2008

Reichman O, Cohen M, Beller U: Prostaglandin E2 mid-trimester evacuation of the uterus for women
with a previous cesarean section. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 96(1):32, 2007
Renner RM, Nichols MD, Jensen JT, et al: Paracervical block for pain control in first-trimester surgical
abortion. Obstet Gynecol 119:1030, 2012
Rikken JF, Kowalik CR, Emanuel MH, et al: Septum resection for women of reproductive age with a
septate uterus. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 1:CD008576, 2017
Roberts D, Vause S, Martin W, et al: Amnioinfusion in very early preterm prelabor rupture of
membranes (AMIPROM): pregnancy, neonatal and maternal outcomes in a randomized controlled
pilot study. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 43(5):490, 2014
Rodgers SK, Chang C, DeBardeleben JT, et al: Normal and abnormal US findings in early first-trimester
pregnancy: review of the society of radiologists in ultrasound 2012 consensus panel
recommendations. Radiographics 35(7):2135, 2015
Rørbye C, Nørgaard M, Nilas L.: Prediction of late failure after medical abortion from serial beta-hCG
measurements and ultrasonography. Hum Reprod 19(1):85, 2004
Saccone G, Perriera L, Berghella V: Prior uterine evacuation of pregnancy as independent risk factor
for preterm birth: a systematic review and metaanalysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 214(5):572, 2016
Sagiv R, Mizrachi Y, Glickman H, et al: Laminaria vs. vaginal misoprostol for cervical preparation
before second-trimester surgical abortion: a randomized clinical trial. Contraception 91(5):406, 2015
Sahoo T, Dzidic N, Strecker MN, et al: Comprehensive genetic analysis of pregnancy loss by
chromosomal microarrays: outcomes, benefits, and challenges. Genet Med 19(1):83, 2017
Saraswat L, Bhattacharya S, Maheshwari A, et al: Maternal and perinatal outcome in women with
threatened miscarriage in the first trimester: a systematic review. BJOG 117:245, 2010
Saravelos SH, Yan J, Rehmani H, et al: The prevalence and impact of fibroids and their treatment on the
outcome of pregnancy in women with recurrent miscarriage. Hum Reprod 26:3274, 2011
Savaris RF, Silva de Moraes G, Cristovam RA, et al: Are antibiotics necessary after 48 hours of
improvement in infected/septic abortions? A randomized controlled trial followed by a cohort study.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 204:301.e1, 2011
Schenker JG, Margalioth EJ: Intrauterine adhesions: an updated appraisal. Fertil Steril 37(5):593, 1982
Schliep KC, Mitchell EM, Mumford SL, et al: trying to conceive after an early pregnancy loss: an
assessment on how long couples should wait. Obstet Gynecol 127(2):204, 2016
Schneider D, Golan A, Langer R, et al: Outcome of continued pregnancies after first and second
trimester cervical dilatation by laminaria tents. Obstet Gynecol 78:1121, 1991
Schreiber CA, Creinin MD, Atrio J, et al: Mifepristone pretreatment for the medical management of
early pregnancy loss. N Engl J Med 378(23):2161, 2018
Schulz KF, Grimes DA, Christensen DD: Vasopressin reduces blood loss from second-trimester
dilatation and evacuation abortion. Lancet 2:353, 1985
Shennan A, Chandiramani M, Bennett P, et al: MAVRIC: a multicenter randomized controlled trial of
transabdominal vs transvaginal cervical cerclage. Am J Obstet Gynecol 222(3):261.e1, 2020
Shirodkar VN: A new method of operative treatment for habitual abortions in the second trimester of
pregnancy. Antiseptic 52:299, 1955
Shochet T, Diop A, Gaye A, et al: Sublingual misoprostol versus standard surgical care for treatment of
incomplete abortion in five sub-Saharan African countries. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth 12:127, 2012
Sim WH, Ng H, Sheehan P: Maternal and neonatal outcomes following expectant management of
preterm prelabor rupture of membranes before viability. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 33(4):533,
2020

Sjaarda LA, Radin RG, Silver RM, et al: Preconception low-dose aspirin restores diminished pregnancy
and live birth rates in women with low-grade inflammation: a secondary analysis of a randomized
trial. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 102(5):1495, 2017
Smith J, DeFranco EA. Tocolytics used as adjunctive therapy at the time of cerclage placement: a
systematic review. J Perinatol 35(8):561, 2015
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, McIntosh J, Feltovich H, et al: The role of routine cervical length
screening in selected high- and low-risk women for preterm birth prevention. Am J Obstet Gynecol
215(3):B2, 2016
Spiegel E, Nicholls-Dempsey L, Czuzoj-Shulman N, et al: Pregnancy outcomes in women with EhlersDanlos Syndrome. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med July 13, 2020 [Epub ahead of print]
Stephenson MD, Awartani KA, Robinson WP: Cytogenetic analysis of miscarriages from couples with
recurrent miscarriage: a case-control study. Hum Reprod 17(2):446, 2002
Stoddard A, Eisenberg DL: Controversies in family planning: timing of ovulation after abortion and the
conundrum of postabortion intrauterine device insertion. Contraception 84(2):119, 2011
Sun X, Hou N, Wang H, et al: A meta-analysis of pregnancy outcomes with levothyroxine treatment in
euthyroid women with thyroid autoimmunity. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 105(4):dgz217, 2020
Tang OS, Gemzell-Danielsson K, Ho PC: Misoprostol: pharmacokinetic profiles, effects on the uterus
and side-effects. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 99 Suppl 2:S160, 2007
Terkildsen MFC, Parilla BV, Kumar P, et al: Factors associated with success of emergent secondtrimester cerclage. Obstet Gynecol 101:565, 2003
Timor-Tritsch IE, Farine D, Rosen MG: A close look at early embryonic development with the highfrequency transvaginal transducer. Am J Obstet Gynecol 159(3):676, 1988
Trinder J, Brocklehurst P, Porter R, et al: Management of miscarriage: expectant, medical, or surgical?
Results of randomized controlled trial (miscarriage treatment (MIST) trial). BMJ 332(7552):1235,
2006
Tufa TH, Prager S, Lavelanet AF, et al: Drugs used to induce fetal demise prior to abortion: a
systematic review. Contracept X 2:100046, 2020
Upadhyay UD, Desai S, Zlidar V, et al: Incidence of emergency department visits and complications
after abortion. Obstet Gynecol 125(1):175, 2015
van der Marel I, de Jonge R, Duvekot J, et al: Maternal and neonatal outcomes of preterm premature
rupture of membranes before viability. Klin Padiatr 228(2):69, 2016
van Kempen LE, van Teeffelen AS, de Ruigh AA, et al: Amnioinfusion compared with no intervention
in women with second-trimester rupture of membranes: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet
Gynecol 133(1):129, 2019
Vauzelle C, Beghin D, Cournot MP, et al: Birth defects after exposure to misoprostol in the first
trimester of pregnancy: prospective follow-up study. Reprod Toxicol 36:98, 2013
Vincienne M, Anselem O, Cordier AG, et al: Comparison of the induction-to-delivery interval in
terminations of pregnancy with or without Dilapan-S. Fetal Diagn Ther 43(1):61, 2018
Virk J, Zhang J, Olsen J: Medical abortion and the risk of subsequent adverse pregnancy outcomes. N
Engl J Med 357:648, 2007
Wang X, Chen C, Wang L, et al: Conception, early pregnancy loss, and time to clinical pregnancy: a
population-based prospective study. Fertil Steril 79(3):577, 2003
Wang Y, Hu C, Pan N, et al: Prophylactic uterine artery embolization in second-trimester pregnancy
termination with complete placenta previa. J Int Med Res 47(1):345, 2019
Waters TP, Mercer BM: The management of preterm premature rupture of the membranes near the
limit of fetal viability. Am J Obstet Gynecol 201(3):230, 2009

Webber K, Grivell RM: Cervical ripening before first trimester surgical evacuation for non-viable
pregnancy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 11:CD009954, 2015
Weiss JL, Malone FD, Vidaver J, et al: Threatened abortion: a risk factor for poor pregnancy outcome, a
population-based screening study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 190(3):745, 2004
White K, Carroll E, Grossman D: Complications from first-trimester aspiration abortion: a systematic
review of the literature. Contraception 92(5):422, 2015
Whitehouse K, Brant A, Fonhus MS, et al: Medical regimens for abortion at 12 weeks and above: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Contracept X 2:100037, 2020
Witter FR: Negative sonographic findings followed by rapid cervical dilatation due to cervical
incompetence. Obstet Gynecol 64:136, 1984
World Health Organization: Medical management of abortion. Geneva, WHO, 2018
World Health Organization: Safe Abortion: Technical and Policy Guidance for Health Systems, 2nd ed.
Geneva, WHO, 2012
Xie J, Jiang L, Sadhukhan A, et al: Effect of antithyroid antibodies on women with recurrent
miscarriage: A meta-analysis. Am J Reprod Immunol. 83(6):e13238, 2020
Zane S, Creanga AA, Berg CJ, et al: Abortion-related mortality in the United States: 1998–2010. Obstet
Gynecol 126(2):258, 2015
Zeisler H, Joura EA, Bancher-Todesca D, et al: Prophylactic cerclage in pregnancy. Effect in women
with a history of conization. J Reprod Med 42(7):390, 1997
Zhang J, Gilles JM, Barnhart K, et al: A comparison of medical management with misoprostol and
surgical management for early pregnancy failure. N Engl J Med 353:761, 2005

CHAPTER 12

Ectopic Pregnancy

TUBAL PREGNANCY
TUBAL PREGNANCY DIAGNOSIS
MEDICAL MANAGEMENT
SURGICAL MANAGEMENT
INTERSTITIAL PREGNANCY
CESAREAN SCAR PREGNANCY
CERVICAL PREGNANCY
ABDOMINAL PREGNANCY
OVARIAN PREGNANCY
HETEROTOPIC PREGNANCY
REFERENCES
Following fertilization and fallopian tube transit, the blastocyst normally
implants in the endometrial lining of the uterine cavity. Implantation
elsewhere is considered ectopic. In the United States, numbers from an
insurance database and from Medicaid claims showed ectopic pregnancy
rates of 1.54 percent and 1.38 percent, respectively, in 2013 (Tao, 2017).
Ectopic implantation accounts for 3 percent of all pregnancy-related deaths
(Creanga, 2017). Fortunately, beta-human chorionic gonadotropin (β-hCG)

assays and transvaginal sonography (TVS) aid earlier diagnosis, maternal
survival, and fertility conservation.

TUBAL PREGNANCY
■ Classification
Of ectopic pregnancies, nearly 95 percent implant in the fallopian tube’s
various segments (Fig. 2-13, p. 26). The ampulla (70 percent) is the most
frequent site (Fig. 12-1). The rate for isthmic implantation is 12 percent;
fimbrial, 11 percent; and interstitial, 2 percent (Bouyer, 2002). Nontubal
ectopic pregnancies compose the remaining 5 percent and implant in the
ovary, peritoneal cavity, cervix, or prior cesarean scar. Occasionally, a
multifetal pregnancy contains one conceptus with normal uterine implantation
and the other implanted ectopically. This is termed a heterotopic pregnancy
(p. 231).

FIGURE 12-1 Ampullary tubal pregnancy (arrow) seen during laparoscopy. (Reproduced with
permission from Dr. Lisa Chao.)

For all ectopic pregnancy sites, management is influenced by pregnancy
viability, gestational age, maternal health, desires for the index pregnancy
and for future fertility, physician skill, and available resources. Regardless
of location, D-negative women with an ectopic pregnancy are given anti-D
immunoglobulin. In first-trimester pregnancies, a single intramuscular 50- or
120-μg dose is appropriate. Later gestations are given 300 μg (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019b).

■ Risks
Abnormal fallopian tube anatomy underlies most cases of tubal ectopic
pregnancy. Surgeries for a prior tubal pregnancy, for fertility restoration, or
for sterilization confer the highest risk. After one prior ectopic pregnancy, the
chance of another nears 10 percent (de Bennetot, 2012). Previous tubal
infection, which can distort normal tubal anatomy, is another risk.
Specifically, one episode of salpingitis can be followed by a subsequent
ectopic pregnancy in up to 9 percent of women (Westrom, 1992). Peritubal
adhesions that form from salpingitis, appendicitis, or endometriosis also
raise chances.
Infertility and the use of assisted reproductive technologies (ART) to
overcome it are linked to increased ectopic pregnancy rates (Li, 2015;
Perkins, 2015). Newer techniques aim to lower this rate with ART (Londra,
2015; Zhang, 2017). Smoking is another known association, although the
underlying mechanism is unclear (Hyland, 2015). Last, with any form of
contraception, the absolute number of ectopic pregnancies declines because
pregnancy is effectively prevented. However, some methods more efficiently
prevent intracavity implantation and with their failure, ectopic implantation
is favored. These methods are tubal sterilization, intrauterine devices
(IUDs), and progestin-only contraceptives.

■ Pathogenesis and Potential Outcomes
With tubal pregnancy, because the fallopian tube lacks a submucosal layer,
the fertilized ovum promptly burrows through the epithelium. The zygote
comes to lie near or within the muscularis, which is invaded by rapidly
proliferating trophoblast. Potential outcomes from this include tubal rupture,
tubal abortion, or pregnancy failure with resolution.

With rupture, the invading and expanding conceptus can tear the fallopian
tube. Tubal ectopic pregnancies usually rupture spontaneously but may
occasionally burst following coitus or bimanual examination. Hemorrhage
usually persists and can become life threatening.
Tubal abortion describes the pregnancy’s passage out the fallopian
tube’s distal end. Subsequently, hemorrhage may cease, and symptoms
eventually disappear. However, bleeding instead can progress to induce
symptoms as long as products remain in the tube. Blood slowly issues from
the tubal fimbria into the peritoneal cavity and pools in the rectouterine culde-sac. If the fimbriated extremity is occluded, the fallopian tube may
gradually distend with blood to form a hematosalpinx. Rarely, an aborted
fetus will secondarily implant on a peritoneal surface and become an
abdominal pregnancy (p. 231).
Last, spontaneous failure reflects ectopic pregnancy death and
subsequent reabsorption. These are now more regularly identified by current
sensitive β-hCG assays and surveillance.
Distinctions between acute ectopic pregnancy, just described, and
chronic ectopic pregnancy also can be drawn. Acute ectopic pregnancies are
more common, produce a high serum β-hCG level, and grow rapidly, leading
to a timely diagnosis. These carry a greater risk of rupture (Barnhart, 2003c).
With chronic ectopic pregnancy, abnormal trophoblasts die early, and thus
serum β-hCG levels are negative or are low and static. Chronic ectopic
pregnancies typically rupture late, if at all, but commonly form a persistent
complex pelvic mass. This sonographic finding, rather than patient
symptoms, often is the reason that prompts diagnostic surgery (Tempfer,
2019).

■ Clinical Manifestations
Sources of abdominal pain during pregnancy are extensive. Uterine
conditions include miscarriage, infection, degenerating or enlarging
leiomyomas, or round-ligament pain. Adnexal pain may reflect ectopic
pregnancy or ovarian masses that are hemorrhagic, ruptured, or torsed.
Appendicitis, renal stone, cystitis, and gastroenteritis are some
nongynecological reasons for lower abdominal pain in early pregnancy.
Thus, an initial urine β-hCG assay, urinalysis, and measure of hemoglobin or
hematocrit are routine. A complete blood count (CBC) to assess the white

blood cell count may be preferred if serious infection is a possible
diagnosis. A positive urine pregnancy test result should prompt a serum βhCG assay for those with pain or bleeding.
Before rupture, symptoms and signs of ectopic pregnancy are often subtle
or absent. The classic triad is amenorrhea that is followed by pain and
vaginal bleeding. With tubal rupture, lower abdominal and pelvic pain is
usually severe and frequently described as sharp, stabbing, or tearing. Some
degree of vaginal spotting or bleeding is reported by most women with tubal
pregnancy. Although profuse vaginal bleeding suggests an incomplete
abortion, such bleeding occasionally is seen with tubal gestations. Moreover,
tubal pregnancy can lead to significant intraabdominal hemorrhage. Neck or
shoulder pain, especially on inspiration, develops in women with
diaphragmatic irritation from a sizable hemoperitoneum. Vertigo and syncope
may reflect hemorrhage-related hypovolemia.
Of physical findings, abdominal palpation elicits tenderness. Bimanual
pelvic examination may reveal a mass and tenderness, but this examination
should be limited and gentle to avoid iatrogenic rupture. The uterus itself can
be slightly enlarged due to hormonal stimulation. Responses to moderate
bleeding include no change in vital signs, a slight rise in blood pressure, or a
vasovagal response with bradycardia and hypotension. Blood pressure will
fall and pulse will rise only if bleeding continues and hypovolemia becomes
significant.
Of laboratory findings, hemoglobin or hematocrit readings may at first
show only a slight reduction, even after substantive hemorrhage. Thus, after
acute hemorrhage, a trending decline in hemoglobin or hematocrit levels over
several hours is a more valuable index of blood loss than is the initial level.
In approximately half of women with a ruptured ectopic pregnancy, varying
degrees of leukocytosis may reach 30,000/μL.
Decidua is endometrium that is hormonally prepared for pregnancy. The
degree to which the endometrium is converted with ectopic pregnancy varies.
Thus, in addition to bleeding, women with ectopic tubal pregnancy may pass
a decidual cast. This is the entire sloughed endometrium that takes the form
of the endometrial cavity (Fig. 12-2). Importantly, decidual sloughing may
also occur with miscarriage. Thus, tissue is carefully examined by the
provider and then submitted to evaluate for histological evidence of a
conceptus. If no clear gestational sac is seen by inspection or if no villi are

identified histologically, the possibility of ectopic pregnancy must still be
considered.

FIGURE 12-2 This 7-cm decidual cast was passed by a patient with a tubal ectopic pregnancy. The
cast mirrors the shape of the endometrial cavity, and each arrow marks the portion of decidua that lined
the cornua.

TUBAL PREGNANCY DIAGNOSIS
For ectopic pregnancy, physical findings, serum β-hCG level measurement,
TVS, and at times diagnostic surgery are tools for diagnosis. Women with
evidence of tubal rupture undergo prompt surgery. For all other
hemodynamically stable women without a clearly identified pregnancy,
diagnostic strategies use these tools to identify ectopic pregnancy.
Strategies involve trade-offs. Those that maximize ectopic pregnancy
detection may terminate a normal intrauterine pregnancy (IUP). Conversely,
those that reduce the potential interruption of a normal IUP can delay ectopic
pregnancy diagnosis. Patient desires for the index pregnancy are sought and
influence these trade-offs.

■ Beta-Human Chorionic Gonadotropin
Rapid and accurate determination of pregnancy is a fundamental step. hCG is
a glycoprotein produced by placental trophoblast and can be detected in
serum in early pregnancy. Current pregnancy tests are immunoassays that
seek the beta subunit of hCG. Lower limits of detection are 20 to 25 mIU/mL
for urine and ≤5 mIU/mL for serum (Greene, 2015). Different assays can
have results that vary by 5 to 10 percent. Thus, serial values are more
reliable when performed by the same laboratory (Desai, 2014).
For women with a positive pregnancy test result plus bleeding or pain, an
initial TVS is typically performed to locate the gestation. The initial β-hCG
level sets expectations for anticipated TVS finding. With values above a
discriminatory threshold, a normal IUP is expected to be seen within the
uterus. Some institutions set their discriminatory threshold at ≥1500 mIU/mL,
whereas others use ≥2000 mIU/mL. Connolly and associates (2013)
suggested an even higher threshold. They noted that with live IUPs, a
gestational sac was seen 99 percent of the time in those with a discriminatory
level >3510 mIU/mL.

■ Transvaginal Sonography
Pregnancy of Unknown Location
If a yolk sac, embryo, or fetus is found within the uterus or within the adnexa,
a diagnosis is made. However, if no evidence of an IUP is seen with TVS,
the diagnosis is a pregnancy of unknown location (PUL). Most PULs reflect:
(1) a failing IUP, (2) recent completed abortion, (3) early IUP, or (4) ectopic
pregnancy.
Without clear evidence for ectopic pregnancy, serial β-hCG level
assessment is reasonable, and a second level is obtained 48 hours after the
first. This practice averts unnecessary methotrexate therapy and avoids
harming an early, normal IUP.
With early, normal IUPs, Barnhart and coworkers (2004b) reported a 53percent minimum rise over 48 hours. Seeber and colleagues (2006) found an
even more conservative minimal 35-percent rise in normal IUPs. With
multifetal gestation, this same anticipated rate of rise is expected (Chung,
2006).

With a PUL ultimately diagnosed as a failed IUP, a pattern of β-hCG
level decline also can be anticipated, and levels drop rapidly (Table 11-1, p.
202) (Barnhart, 2004a). Sometimes, PULs fail before their location is
identified. With failing PULs, Butts and coworkers (2013) found rates of
decline that ranged from 35 to 50 percent at 48 hours and 66 to 87 percent at
7 days for starting hCG values between 250 and 5000 mIU/mL.
Despite these benchmarks, a third of women with an ectopic pregnancy
can also have a 53-percent rise at 48 hours (Silva, 2006). Overall,
approximately half of ectopic pregnancies show declining β-hCG levels,
whereas the other half have rising levels. Importantly, despite a declining βhCG level, a resolving ectopic pregnancy may rupture. Rupture at low values
likely reflects partial disruption of the vascular connection between
trophoblast and maternal vessels. Here, although β-hCG is produced, it is
unable to enter circulation and be detected.
After the initial two β-hCG tests during PUL assessment, additional
levels are drawn every 2 to 7 days. In general, testing is typically more
frequent if symptoms or β-hCG level trends reflect a higher ectopic
pregnancy risk (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists,
2019c). TVS also may be repeated. This serial assessment to reach a
diagnosis is balanced against the rupture risk if the pregnancy is indeed
ectopic. Dilation and curettage (D & C) is an option (Barnhart, 2021). It may
give a faster diagnosis but may interrupt a normal IUP. Before curettage, a
second TVS examination may be indicated and may display new informative
findings.
As noted, ectopic pregnancies can rupture even at low β-hCG levels.
Thus, serum β-hCG values are usually followed until they lie below the
negative-result threshold for the given assay.

Endometrial Findings
In a woman in whom ectopic pregnancy is suspected, TVS is performed to
look for findings indicative of an IUP or ectopic pregnancy. During
endometrial cavity evaluation, an intrauterine gestational sac is usually
visible between 4½ and 5 weeks. The yolk sac appears between 5 and 6
weeks, and a fetal pole with cardiac activity is first detected at 5½ to 6
weeks (Fig. 14-1, p. 248). With transabdominal sonography, these structures
are visualized slightly later.

In contrast, with ectopic pregnancy, a trilaminar endometrial pattern is
characteristic (Fig. 12-3). Its specificity is 94 percent, but with a sensitivity
of only 38 percent (Hammoud, 2005). In addition, Moschos and Twickler
(2008) determined in women with a PUL at presentation that no normal IUPs
had an endometrial stripe thickness <8 mm.

FIGURE 12-3 Transvaginal sonography of a pseudogestational sac within the endometrial cavity. Its
central location is characteristic of these anechoic fluid collections. The endometrium is marked by
calipers, and distal to this fluid, the endometrial thickness has a trilaminar pattern. This pattern is
common with ectopic pregnancy. (Reproduced with permission from Jason McWhirt, ARDMS.)

Anechoic fluid collections, which might normally suggest an early
intrauterine gestational sac, may also be seen with ectopic pregnancy. These
include pseudogestational sac and decidual cyst. First, a pseudosac is a fluid
collection between the endometrial layers and conforms to the cavity shape
(see Fig. 12-3). If a pseudosac is noted, the risk of ectopic pregnancy is
increased (Hill, 1990). Second, a decidual cyst is identified as an anechoic
area lying within the endometrium but remote from the canal and often at the
endometrial–myometrial border. This may represent early decidual
breakdown that precedes cast formation (Ackerman, 1993b).

These two findings contrast with the intradecidual sign seen with IUPs.
With this sign, the early gestational sac is an anechoic sac eccentrically
located within one of the endometrial stripe layers (Dashefsky, 1988). The
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020) advises
caution in diagnosing an IUP if a definite yolk sac or embryo is not seen.

Adnexal Findings
The sonographic diagnosis of ectopic pregnancy rests on seeing an adnexal
mass separate from the ovary (Fig. 12-4). If an extrauterine yolk sac, embryo,
or fetus is identified, ectopic pregnancy is clearly confirmed. In other cases,
a hyperechoic halo or tubal ring surrounding an anechoic gestational sac is
seen. Alternatively, hemorrhage within the ectopic pregnancy can form a
solid, complex adnexal mass. Overall, 60 percent of ectopic pregnancies are
a complex mass; 20 percent are a hyperechoic ring; and 13 percent have an
obvious gestational sac with a yolk sac or embryo (Condous, 2005).
Importantly, not all adnexal masses represent an ectopic pregnancy. In this
case, integration of sonographic findings with other clinical information is
necessary.

FIGURE 12-4 Various transvaginal sonographic findings with ectopic tubal pregnancies. For
sonographic diagnosis, an ectopic mass should be seen in the adnexa separate from the ovary and may
be seen as: (A) a yolk sac (shown here) and/or fetal pole with or without cardiac activity within an

extrauterine sac, (B) an empty extrauterine sac with a hyperechoic ring, or (C) an inhomogeneous
adnexal mass. In this last image, color Doppler shows a classic “ring of fire,” which reflects increased
vascularity typical of ectopic pregnancies. LT OV = left ovary; SAG LT AD = sagittal left adnexal; UT
= uterus.

Placental blood flow within the periphery of the complex adnexal mass
—the ring of fire—can be seen with application of color Doppler. A corpus
luteum cyst often displays a similar vascular pattern, and differentiation can
be challenging.

Hemoperitoneum
In affected women, blood in the peritoneal cavity is most often identified
using TVS (Fig. 12-5). A small amount of peritoneal fluid is physiologically
normal. However, with hemoperitoneum, anechoic or hypoechoic fluid
initially collects in the dependent retrouterine cul-de-sac. It then additionally
surrounds the uterus as blood fills the pelvis. With significant intraabdominal
hemorrhage, blood will track up the pericolic gutters to fill Morison pouch
near the liver. Free fluid in this pouch typically is not seen until accumulated
volumes reach 400 to 600 mL (Branney, 1995; Rodgerson, 2001).
Diagnostically, peritoneal fluid in conjunction with an adnexal mass and a
positive pregnancy test result are highly predictive of ectopic pregnancy
(Nyberg, 1991). Ascites from cancer is a notable mimic.

FIGURE 12-5 Hemoperitoneum. A. This transvaginal sagittal view of the pelvis shows anechoic fluid
initially pooling in the retrouterine cul-de-sac (**). Large accumulations will also extend into the anterior
cul-de-sac (*). B. In this right upper quadrant sonogram, anechoic fluid is seen in Morison pouch
(arrowhead). C = cervix; F = fundus; K = kidney; L = liver. (Reproduced with permission from Dr.
Devin Macias.)

If sonography is unavailable, culdocentesis is a simple technique and
was used commonly in the past. The cervix is pulled outward and upward
toward the symphysis with a tenaculum, and a long, 18-gauge needle is
inserted through the posterior vaginal fornix into the retrouterine cul-de-sac.
If present, fluid can be aspirated. However, no fluid is interpreted only as
unsatisfactory entry into the cul-de-sac. Bloody fluid or fluid with old clot
fragments suggests hemoperitoneum. If the blood sample clots, it may reflect
an adjacent blood vessel puncture or brisk bleeding from ectopic pregnancy
rupture.

■ Serum Progesterone
Although not our practice, this hormone is used by some to aid ectopic
pregnancy diagnosis when serum β-hCG levels and TVS findings are
inconclusive (Stovall, 1992). A single value is sufficient. From studies, a
serum progesterone level <6 ng/mL (<20 nmol/L) has a pooled specificity of
98 percent to predict a nonviable pregnancy in women with a PUL
(Verhaegen, 2012). A value >25 ng/mL suggests a live IUP and excludes
ectopic pregnancy with 97-percent sensitivity (Carson, 1993). With most
ectopic pregnancies, progesterone levels range between 10 and 25 ng/mL
and thus have limited diagnostic utility (American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists, 2019c). Serum progesterone levels can be used to
buttress a clinical impression, but again they cannot reliably identify location
(Guha, 2014).

■ Endometrial Sampling
Several endometrial changes accompany ectopic pregnancy, and all lack
coexistent chorionic villi. Decidual reaction is found in 42 percent of
samples, secretory endometrium in 22 percent, and proliferative
endometrium in 12 percent (Lopez, 1994). Some recommend that lack of
chorionic villi be confirmed by D & C before methotrexate treatment is
given. Chung and associates (2011) found that the presumptive diagnosis of
ectopic pregnancy is inaccurate in 27 percent of cases without histological
exclusion of a spontaneous pregnancy loss. Nevertheless, the risks of D & C
are weighed against the limited maternal risks of methotrexate.

Endometrial biopsy with a Pipelle catheter or endometrial aspiration was
studied as an alternative to surgical curettage and found inferior (Barnhart,
2003b; Insogna, 2017). Instead, frozen section of curettage fragments to
identify products of conception is accurate in 95 percent of cases (Li, 2014).

■ Laparoscopy
Direct visualization of the fallopian tubes and pelvis by laparoscopy offers a
reliable diagnosis in most cases of suspected ectopic pregnancy. This also
permits a ready transition to definitive operative therapy, which is discussed
subsequently.

MEDICAL MANAGEMENT
■ Regimen Options
For most ectopic pregnancies, medical therapy is preferred, if feasible, to
avoid surgical risks. Disqualifying criteria are a ruptured fallopian tube and
drug contraindications. Other considerations include reasonably close access
to emergency care and a commitment to surveillance laboratory testing.
Medical therapy traditionally involves the antimetabolite methotrexate
(MTX). This drug is a folic acid antagonist. It tightly binds to dihydrofolate
reductase, blocking the reduction of dihydrofolate to tetrahydrofolate, which
is the active form of folic acid. As a result, de novo purine and pyrimidine
production is halted, which then arrests DNA, RNA, and protein synthesis.
Thus, MTX is highly effective against rapidly proliferating trophoblast.
However, gastrointestinal mucosa, bone marrow, and respiratory epithelium
also can be harmed.
To help select suitable candidates, laboratory tests are obtained. First,
MTX is renally cleared, and significant renal dysfunction, reflected by an
elevated serum creatinine level, precludes its use. Second, MTX can be
hepato- and myelotoxic, and CBC and liver function tests (LFTs) help
establish a baseline. Last, blood type and Rh status are determined. All
except blood typing are considered surveillance laboratory tests and are
repeated prior to additional MTX doses.
With administration, women are counseled to avoid several aggravating
agents until treatment is completed. These are: (1) folic acid-containing

supplements, which can competitively reduce MTX binding to dihydrofolate
reductase; (2) nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs, which reduce renal blood
flow and delay drug excretion; (3) alcohol, which can predispose to
concurrent hepatic enzyme elevation; (4) sunlight, which can provoke MTXrelated dermatitis; and (5) sexual activity, which can rupture the ectopic
pregnancy (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019c).
MTX is a potent teratogen, and MTX embryopathy is notable for
craniofacial and skeletal abnormalities and fetal-growth restriction
(Nurmohamed, 2011). MTX is excreted into breast milk and may accumulate
in neonatal tissues and interfere with neonatal cellular metabolism
(American Academy of Pediatrics, 2001; Briggs, 2017). Based on all these
findings, a list of contraindications and pretherapy laboratory testing is found
in Table 12-1.
TABLE 12-1. Medical Treatment Protocols for Ectopic Pregnancy

For ease and efficacy, intramuscular MTX administration is used most
often for ectopic pregnancy treatment, and single-dose and multidose MTX
protocols are available. With single-dose therapy, the dose is 50 mg/m2 body
surface area (BSA), and BSA can be derived using various Internet-based
BSA calculators. At our institution, patients are observed for 30 minutes
following MTX injection to exclude an adverse reaction.
With the multidose regimen, leucovorin is added to blunt MTX toxicity.
Leucovorin is folinic acid and has folic acid activity. Thus, it allows some

purine and pyrimidine synthesis to buffer side effects.
Comparing these two protocols, trade-offs are recognized. Single-dose
therapy offers simplicity, less expense, and less intensive posttherapy
monitoring. However, some but not all studies report a higher success rate
for the multidose regimen (Barnhart, 2003a; Lipscomb, 2005; Tabatabaii,
2012). Overall, ectopic tubal pregnancy resolution rates approximate 90
percent with MTX use. At our institution, we use single-dose MTX.

■ Patient Selection
The best candidate for medical therapy is the woman who is asymptomatic,
motivated, and compliant. With medical therapy, some classic predictors of
success include a low initial serum β-hCG level, small ectopic pregnancy
size, and absent fetal cardiac activity. Of these, initial serum β-hCG level is
the best prognostic indicator with single-dose MTX. Reported failure rates
are 1.5 percent if the initial serum β-hCG concentration is <1000 mIU/mL;
5.6 percent at 1000 to 2000 mIU/mL; 3.8 percent at 2000 to 5000 mIU/mL;
and 14.3 percent for levels between 5000 and 10,000 mIU/mL (Menon,
2007).
Many early trials also used large size as an exclusion criterion.
Lipscomb and colleagues (1998) reported a 93-percent success rate with
single-dose MTX when the ectopic mass was ≤3.5 cm. This compared with
success rates between 87 and 90 percent when the mass was >3.5 cm. These
authors also found ectopic pregnancies measuring ≤4 cm and lacking cardiac
activity to be suitable candidates. Failure rates rise if cardiac activity is
seen, with an 87-percent success rate in such cases.

■ Side Effects
These regimens are associated with minimal laboratory changes and
symptoms, but rarely toxicity may be severe. Kooi and Kock (1992)
reviewed 16 studies and reported that adverse effects were resolved by 3 to
4 days after MTX was discontinued. The most frequent were liver
involvement—12 percent; stomatitis—6 percent; and gastroenteritis—1
percent. One woman had bone marrow depression. More commonly, 65 to 75
percent of women given MTX will have increasing pain beginning several
days after therapy. Thought to reflect separation of the ectopic pregnancy

from the tubal wall, this pain generally is mild and relieved by analgesics. In
a series of 258 women treated with MTX by Lipscomb and colleagues
(1999), 20 percent had pain that merited evaluation in a clinic or emergency
department to exclude tubal rupture.
Long term, MTX treatment does not diminish ovarian reserve
(Ohannessian, 2014). However, after successful MTX therapy, pregnancy is
ideally delayed for at least 3 months, because this drug may persist in human
tissues for months after a single dose (Hackmon, 2011). Although data are
very limited, conception before this waiting period appears reassuring. In
one study, 45 women who conceived <6 months after MTX had similar
pregnancy outcomes compared with 80 women who conceived >6 months
after MTX (Svirsky, 2009).

■ Surveillance
As shown in Table 12-1, monitoring single-dose therapy calls for serum βhCG determinations at days 4 and 7 following initial MTX injection on day
1. After single-dose MTX, mean serum β-hCG levels may rise or fall during
the first 4 days and then should gradually decline. If the level fails to drop by
≥15 percent between days 4 and 7, a second MTX dose is recommended.
This is necessary in 20 percent of women treated with single-dose therapy
(Cohen, 2014). In such cases, a CBC, creatinine level, and LFTs are
rechecked. If these surveillance tests are normal, a second equivalent dose is
administered. The date of this second injection will become the new day 1,
and the protocol is restarted.
Multidose therapy provides MTX (1 mg/kg) treatment with leucovorin
(0.1 mg/kg) therapy on alternating days. After this first pair of injections, a
serum β-hCG concentration is obtained. Values between days 1 and 3 are
anticipated to drop by ≥15 percent. If not and if surveillance tests are normal,
an additional MTX/leucovorin pair is given. A serum β-hCG level is
repeated 2 days later. Up to four doses may be given if required (Stovall,
1991).
With either dosing regimen, once a decline ≥15 percent is achieved,
weekly serum β-hCG level testing then begins until values are undetectable.
Lipscomb and colleagues (1998) used single-dose MTX to successfully treat
287 women and reported that the average time to resolution—defined as a

serum β-hCG level <15 mIU/mL—was 34 days. The longest time was 109
days.

SURGICAL MANAGEMENT
■ Options
Before surgery, future fertility desires are discussed. In women desiring
sterilization, the unaffected tube can be ligated or removed. This is done
concurrently with salpingectomy for the ectopic-containing tube.
Laparoscopy is the preferred surgical approach for ectopic pregnancy
unless a woman is hemodynamically unstable. This is supported first by
comparable subsequent uterine pregnancy rates and tubal patency rates in
those undergoing salpingostomy completed either by laparoscopy or by
laparotomy (Hajenius, 2007). Second, laparoscopy has lower infection,
adhesion, and thromboembolism risks and faster recovery times than
laparotomy. Moreover, as experience has accrued, cases previously managed
by laparotomy—for example, those with hemoperitoneum—can safely be
managed laparoscopically by those with suitable expertise. However, the
lowered venous return and cardiac output associated with pneumoperitoneum
must be factored into the selection of minimally invasive surgery for a
hypovolemic woman.
Two procedures—salpingostomy or salpingectomy—are options. In the
past, some favored salpingostomy to preserve future fertility. However, two
randomized trials compared laparoscopic outcomes between the two
procedures in women with a normal contralateral fallopian tube. The
European Surgery in Ectopic Pregnancy (ESEP) study randomized 231
women to salpingectomy and 215 to salpingostomy. After surgery, the
subsequent cumulative rates of ongoing pregnancy by natural conception did
not differ significantly between groups—56 versus 61 percent, respectively
(Mol, 2014). Again, in the DEMETER trial, the subsequent 2-year rate for
achieving an IUP did not differ between groups—64 versus 70 percent,
respectively (Fernandez, 2013). However, for women with an abnormalappearing contralateral tube, salpingostomy of the ectopic-containing tube
may be preferred if feasible to help preserve fertility.
Of the two procedures, salpingectomy may be used for both ruptured and
unruptured ectopic pregnancies. With one laparoscopic technique, the

affected fallopian tube is lifted and held with atraumatic grasping forceps.
One of several suitable bipolar grasping devices is placed across the
fallopian tube at the uterotubal junction. Once desiccated, the tube is cut from
its uterine attachment. The bipolar device is then advanced across the
mesosalpinx to free the entire tube.
Salpingostomy is typically used to remove a small unruptured pregnancy.
A 10- to 15-mm linear incision is made on the antimesenteric border of the
fallopian tube and over the pregnancy. The products usually will extrude
from the incision. These can be carefully extracted or can be flushed out
using high-pressure irrigation that more thoroughly removes the trophoblastic
tissue. Small bleeding sites are controlled with needlepoint electrosurgical
coagulation, and the incision is left unsutured to heal by secondary intention
(Tulandi, 1991). With either procedure and after specimen removal, the
pelvis and abdomen are irrigated and suctioned free of blood and tissue
debris to remove all trophoblastic tissue.

■ Persistent Trophoblast
After trophoblast removal during surgery, β-hCG levels usually fall quickly.
Persistent trophoblast is rare following salpingectomy but complicates 5 to
15 percent of salpingostomy cases (Pouly, 1986; Seifer, 1993). Incomplete
trophoblast removal can be identified by stable or rising β-hCG levels
(Hajenius, 1995). Monitoring approaches are not codified. Weekly measures
are reasonable following salpingostomy (Mol, 2008). Following
uncomplicated salpingectomy, we do not repeat β-hCG levels in women
without pain or symptoms of hemoperitoneum.
With stable or increasing β-hCG levels, additional surgical or medical
therapy is necessary. In those without evidence for tubal rupture, standard
therapy for persistent trophoblast is single-dose MTX, 50 mg/m2 × BSA.
Tubal rupture and bleeding require a second surgery.

■ Medical versus Surgical Therapy
Of options, multidose MTX treatment and laparoscopic salpingostomy have
been compared in one randomized trial of 100 patients. The authors found no
differences for rates of tubal preservation, primary treatment success, and
subsequent fertility (Dias Pereira, 1999; Hajenius, 1997).

For single-dose MTX, its efficacy compared with laparoscopic
salpingostomy shows conflicting results. In one randomized trial, single-dose
MTX was less successful in pregnancy resolution, whereas in the other,
single-dose MTX was equally effective (Saraj, 1998; Sowter, 2001). Krag
Moeller and associates (2009) reported during a median surveillance period
of 8.6 years that ectopic-resolution success rates and cumulative spontaneous
IUP rates were not significantly different between those managed by
laparoscopic salpingostomy and those treated with single-dose MTX.
Salpingectomy effectively removes the entire conceptus and yields high
resolution rates. It thus outperforms MTX in this regard. Yet, when future
fertility and ectopic pregnancy recurrence rates are analyzed, both
salpingectomy and MTX therapy show comparable results (de Bennetot,
2012; Irani, 2017). In another study, surgery, MTX, or expectant management
all yielded statistically similar subsequent spontaneous IUP rates (Demirdag,
2017).
In sum, medical or surgical management offer similar outcomes in women
who are hemodynamically stable, have serum β-hCG concentrations <5000
mIU/mL, and have a small pregnancy with no cardiac activity. Despite lower
success rates with medical therapy for women with larger tubal size, higher
serum β-hCG levels, and fetal cardiac activity, medical management can be
offered to the motivated woman who understands the risks of emergency
surgery in the event of treatment failure.

■ Expectant Management
In select asymptomatic women, observation of a very early tubal pregnancy
that is associated with stable or falling serum β-hCG levels is reasonable. A
commitment to surveillance visits and relative proximity to emergency care
are other safeguards. Importantly, this differs from expectant management of a
PUL during its evaluation.
Predictive factors for success include a low initial serum β-hCG
concentration, a significant drop in levels over 48 hours, and a sonographic
inhomogeneous mass rather than a tubal halo or other gestational structures.
For example, initial values <175 mIU/mL predict spontaneous resolution in
88 to 96 percent of attempts (Elson, 2004; Kirk, 2011). Initial values <1000
mIU/mL have success rates ranging from 71 to 92 percent (Jurkovic, 2017;
Mavrelos, 2013; Silva, 2015).

With expectant management, subsequent rates of tubal patency and
intrauterine pregnancy are comparable with surgery (Helmy, 2007). That
said, compared with the established safety of medical or surgical therapy, the
prolonged surveillance and risks of tubal rupture support the practice of
expectant therapy only in appropriately selected and counseled women.

INTERSTITIAL PREGNANCY
■ Diagnosis
An interstitial pregnancy is one that implants within the tubal segment that
lies within the muscular uterine wall (Fig. 12-6). Incorrectly, they may be
called cornual pregnancies, but this term describes a conception that
develops in the rudimentary horn of a uterus with a müllerian anomaly. Risk
factors are similar to others discussed for tubal ectopic pregnancy, although
previous ipsilateral salpingectomy is a specific one for interstitial pregnancy
(Lau, 1999). Undiagnosed interstitial pregnancies usually rupture following 8
to 16 weeks of amenorrhea, which is later than for more distal tubal
pregnancies. The myometrium covering the interstitial fallopian tube segment
permits greater distention before rupture. Because of the proximity of these
pregnancies to the uterine and ovarian arteries, hemorrhage can be severe
and associated with mortality rates as high as 2.5 percent (Tulandi, 2004).

FIGURE 12-6 Interstitial ectopic pregnancy. A. This parasagittal view using transvaginal sonography
shows an empty uterine cavity and a mass that is cephalad and lateral to the uterine fundus (calipers).
B. Intraoperative photograph during laparotomy and before cornual resection of the same ectopic
pregnancy. In this frontal view, the bulging right-sided interstitial ectopic pregnancy is lateral to the round

ligament insertion and medial to the isthmic portion of the fallopian tube. (Reproduced with permission
from Drs. David Rogers and Elaine Duryea.)

In many cases, these pregnancies are identified early, but diagnosis can
still be challenging. These pregnancies sonographically can appear similar to
an eccentrically implanted IUP, especially in a uterus with a müllerian
anomaly. Criteria that may aid differentiation include: an empty uterus, a
gestational sac seen separate from the endometrium and >1 cm away from the
most lateral edge of the uterine cavity, and a thin, <5-mm myometrial mantle
surrounding the sac (Timor-Tritsch, 1992). Moreover, an echogenic line,
known as the interstitial line sign, extending from the gestational sac to the
endometrial cavity most likely represents the interstitial portion of the
fallopian tube and is highly sensitive and specific (Ackerman, 1993a). In
unclear cases, three-dimensional (3-D) sonography, magnetic resonance
(MR) imaging, or diagnostic laparoscopy can help clarify anatomy.
Laparoscopically, a myometrial protuberance is seen to lie lateral to the
round ligament and coexists with normal distal tubes and ovaries.

■ Management
Surgically, either cornual resection or cornuostomy may be performed via
laparotomy or laparoscopy, depending on patient hemodynamic stability and
surgeon expertise. With either approach, intraoperative intramyometrial
vasopressin injection may limit surgical blood loss. Cornual resection
removes the gestational sac and surrounding cornual myometrium by means
of a wedge excision (Fig. 12-7). Alternatively, cornuostomy involves
incision of the cornual myometrium and suction or instrument extraction of
the pregnancy. Both instances require layered myometrial closure. β-hCG
levels are monitored postoperatively to exclude remnant trophoblast.

FIGURE 12-7 During cornual resection, the pregnancy, surrounding myometrium, and ipsilateral
fallopian tube are excised en bloc. The incision is angled inward as it is deepened. This creates a wedge
shape into the myometrium, which is then closed in layers with delayed-absorbable suture. The serosa is
closed with subcuticular style suturing. (Reproduced with permission from Hoffman BL, Hamid CA,
Corton MM: Surgeries for benign gynecologic conditions. In Hoffman BL, Schorge JO, Halvorson LM,
et al: Williams Gynecology, 4th ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2020.)

With early diagnosis, medical management may be considered. However,
consensus regarding MTX regimens is lacking because of small study
numbers. Jermy and coworkers (2004) reported a 94-percent success with
systemic MTX using a dose of 50 mg/m2 × BSA. Others employ a traditional
multidose MTX regimen (Hiersch, 2014). Direct MTX injection into the
gestational sac also offers comparable success (Framarino-dei-Malatesta,
2014). Last, a uterine artery MTX infusion followed by uterine artery
embolization (UAE) is termed chemoembolization by some. This combined
with systemic MTX has shown promise (Krissi, 2014).
The risk of uterine rupture with subsequent pregnancies following either
medical or surgical management is undefined. Thus, elective cesarean
delivery after 370/7 weeks’ gestation, which is timed similarly to those with

prior at-risk myomectomy, is reasonable (American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists, 2021).
Distinct from interstitial pregnancy, the term angular pregnancy is used
by some to describe eccentric implantation near one cornu but within the
endometrial cavity. In one prospective case series of 42 such pregnancies, 80
percent progressed to a viable age, and abnormal placentation or uterine
rupture did not develop (Bollig, 2020). These eccentrically implanted early
IUPs are managed as normal pregnancies at our institution.

CESAREAN SCAR PREGNANCY
■ Diagnosis
This term describes implantation within the myometrium of a prior cesarean
delivery scar. Its incidence approximates 1 case in 2000 normal pregnancies
and has increased along with the cesarean delivery rate (Rotas, 2006).
Women with symptomatic cesarean scar pregnancy (CSP) usually present
early, and pain and bleeding are common. Still, up to 40 percent of women
are asymptomatic, and the diagnosis is made during routine sonographic
examination (Rotas, 2006). Sonographic criteria are described in Figure 128 (Timor-Tritsch, 2012). Further, CSP implantation can be divided into
endogenic and exogenic patterns. Endogenic CSPs implant on the scar and
expand toward the uterine cavity, whereas exogenic ones implant deeply
within the scar niche and grow toward the bladder or abdominal cavity. In
one small study of CSPs that continued to viability, endogenic CSPs yielded
variable obstetric outcomes, whereas all exogenic CSPs underwent
hysterectomy with placenta accreta spectrum (PAS) at delivery (Kaelin
Agten, 2017).

FIGURE 12-8 Transvaginal sonogram of a uterus with a cesarean scar pregnancy in a sagittal plane.
Diagnostic criteria include: (1) an empty uterine cavity (E) and empty endocervical canal, (2) placenta
or gestational sac (asterisk) embedded in the hysterotomy scar niche, (3) a thin myometrial mantle
between the gestational sac and bladder (B), and (4) a prominent vascular pattern at the scar. C =
cervix; Ut = anterior uterine wall.

Sonographically, differentiating between an IUP implanted at the
cervicoisthmic junction and a CSP can be difficult. Investigators in one study
marked the midpoint of the uterine length (cervix to fundus) in sagittal views.
If the center of the gestational sac lay distal to this midpoint, a CSP was
diagnosed (Timor-Tritsch, 2016). A spontaneous expelling abortus is another
mimic. Color Doppler will show the intense placental vascularity around a
CSP, whereas as the aborting sac is avascular. Moreover, gentle pressure
applied to the cervix by the vaginal probe will fail to move an implanted
gestation—a negative sliding sign. Instead, an aborted sac will slide against
the endocervical canal (Jurkovic, 2003). TVS is the typical first-line imaging
tool, but MR imaging is useful for inconclusive cases.

■ Management

Insights into the pathogenesis of CSPs are expanding management options.
Namely, growing evidence suggests that some of these pregnancies will not
behave as a typical ectopic pregnancy, and rupture rates are lower. CSPs are
thought by some to be a precursor of PAS (Timor-Tritsch, 2014). As such, a
significant percentage of affected pregnancies will progress to a viable-aged
neonate, albeit with the complications associated with PAS (Calì, 2018;
Timor-Tritsch, 2015b).
Patients may prefer to avoid rupture and PAS risks and seek pregnancy
termination. From one literature review, the most successful operations
include: (1) laparoscopic uterine isthmic resection; (2) transvaginal isthmic
resection through an anterior colpotomy, created similarly to anterior entry
during vaginal hysterectomy; (3) UAE, followed by D & C with or without
hysteroscopy; and (4) hysteroscopic resection (Birch Petersen, 2016; Wang,
2014). The Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine (SMFM) (2020) considers
sonography-guided vacuum aspiration alone, but not sharp curettage, to be
suitable. In some instances, hysterectomy is required or may be elected in
those not desiring future fertility.
Medical management is an option for those hoping to avoid surgery.
However, compared with surgery, pregnancy resolution rates are more
varied and lengthier. In one review, local MTX injection into the gestational
sac alone provided a success rate of 60 percent, and systemic plus local
MTX raised the rate to nearly 80 percent (Maheux-Lacroix, 2017). The
SMFM (2020) recommends against systemic MTX alone.
With local MTX, doses of 1 mg/kg or 50-mg doses have been described.
Prior to local MTX, fetal death can be induced in more advanced gestations
by potassium chloride (KCL) injection into the sac (Grechukhina, 2018). One
option is 1 mL of 2 mEq/mL KCL. Also, if associated bleeding complicates
medical management, a Foley balloon catheter can be placed and expanded
(Timor-Tritsch, 2015a). Recently, a novel double-balloon catheter, in which
the balloons lie in tandem, has been used with MTX to resolve CSPs
(Monteagudo, 2019). The cephalad balloon is filled within the endometrial
cavity to prevent device expulsion. The lower balloon is tightly inflated to
interrupt the CSP via mechanical pressure and tamponades potential
bleeding.
Following conservative treatment, subsequent pregnancies have good
outcomes, but PAS and recurrent CSP are risks (Gao, 2016; Wang, 2015). In
one series of 30 CSPs, five subsequent pregnancies developed normally,

whereas four were recurrent CSPs (Grechukhina, 2018). Uterine
arteriovenous malformations are a potential long-term complication (TimorTritsch, 2015b).
CSPs have also been expectantly managed. The Society for Maternal–
Fetal Medicine (2020) recommends against this practice. Exceptions may be
early CSPs with evidence of pregnancy failure. One review of 69 patients
continuing their gestation found that uterine rupture or dehiscence
complicated 10 percent of all cases (Calì, 2018). During the first or second
trimester, hysterectomy was performed in 15 percent. For the 40 patients
progressing to the third trimester, 17 had placenta percreta, 23 patients
underwent hysterectomy, and two patients had uterine rupture or dehiscence.
For all trimesters, 60 percent of cases ultimately underwent hysterectomy.
More reassuringly, in early pregnancies without cardiac activity, 70 percent
had uncomplicated miscarriage, whereas 30 percent required surgical or
medical intervention. Of these early demises, none required hysterectomy.
Women accepting expectant care are ideally well counseled on these
potential obstetric complications. If not prompted by earlier complications,
repeat cesarean delivery is recommended at 340/7 and 356/7 weeks’ gestation,
and this timing recognizes the PAS and uterine rupture risks associated with
CSP. Betamethasone to hasten lung maturity is recommended prior to
delivery (Society for Maternal–Fetal Medicine, 2020).

CERVICAL PREGNANCY
■ Diagnosis
This rare ectopic pregnancy is defined first by cervical glands noted
histologically opposite the placental attachment site. Second, all or part of
the placenta lies at a level below the entrance of the uterine vessels or below
the peritoneal reflection on the anterior uterus. Trophoblast invades the
endocervix, and the pregnancy develops in the fibrous cervical wall. Risk
factors include ART and prior uterine curettage (Ginsburg, 1994).
Painless vaginal bleeding is reported by 90 percent of women with a
cervical pregnancy, and it can be severe (Ushakov, 1997). As pregnancy
progresses, a distended, thin-walled cervix with a partially dilated external
os may be evident. Above the cervical mass, a slightly enlarged uterine

fundus is felt. Typical sonographic findings are shown and described in
Figure 12-9. In some cases, MR imaging and 3-D TVS can aid diagnosis.

FIGURE 12-9 Cervical pregnancy. Transvaginal sonographic findings may include: (1) an hourglass
uterine shape and ballooned cervix; (2) gestational tissue at the level of the cervix (arrow); (3) absent
intrauterine gestational tissue; and (4) a portion of the endocervical canal seen interposed between the
gestation and the endometrial canal. (Reproduced with permission from Dr. Angela Seasely.)

At times, cervical ectopic pregnancy can mimic a miscarriage in transit
through the cervix. Similar to CSPs and described in that section, color
Doppler will show the intense vascularity of cervical implantation, and
gentle pressure applied to the cervix by the vaginal probe will fail to move
an implanted gestation—a negative sliding sign.

■ Management
Cervical pregnancy may be treated medically or surgically. In many centers,
including ours, MTX is first-line therapy in hemodynamically stable women.
Of options, single- or multidose systemic MTX and dosing found in Table
12-1 are suitable (Murji, 2015). Alternatively, 50 mg of MTX can be
injected directly into the gestational sac (Jeng, 2007; Yamaguchi, 2017).

Others describe chemoembolization with MTX and UAE, as described for
interstitial pregnancy (p. 228).
With MTX regimens, resolution and uterine preservation are achieved for
gestations <12 weeks in 91 percent of cases (Kung, 1997). To select
appropriate candidates, Hung and colleagues (1996) noted higher risks of
systemic MTX treatment failure in those with a gestational age >9 weeks, βhCG levels >10,000 mIU/mL, crown-rump length >10 mm, and fetal cardiac
activity. For this reason, feticidal KCL can be injected into the fetus or
gestational sac (Verma, 2009). Notably, during posttherapy surveillance,
sonographic resolution lags far behind serum β-hCG level regression (Song,
2009).
Although conservative management is feasible for many women with
cervical pregnancies, suction evacuation or hysterectomy may be selected.
Moreover, hysterectomy may be required with bleeding uncontrolled by
conservative methods (Fowler, 2021). During hysterectomy, because of the
close proximity of the ureters to the ballooned cervix, urinary tract injury
rates are a concern.
If suction evacuation of the cervix is planned, intraoperative bleeding
may be lessened by preoperative UAE, by intracervical vasopressin
injection, or by a cerclage placed at the internal cervical os to compress
feeding vessels (Chen, 2015; Fylstra, 2014; Wang, 2011). Cervical branches
of the uterine artery can effectively be ligated with vaginal placement of
hemostatic cervical sutures on the lateral aspects of the cervix at 3 and 9
o’clock (Bianchi, 2011).
As an adjunct to medical or surgical therapy, UAE has been described
either as a response to bleeding or as a preprocedural prevention (Hirakawa,
2009; Zakaria, 2011). Also, in the event of hemorrhage, a 26F Foley catheter
with a 30-mL balloon can be placed intracervically and inflated to effect
hemostasis by vessel tamponade and to monitor bloody drainage. The
balloon remains inflated for 24 to 48 hours and is gradually decompressed
over a few days (Ushakov, 1997).

ABDOMINAL PREGNANCY
■ Diagnosis

These rare ectopic pregnancies are defined as an implantation in the
peritoneal cavity exclusive of tubal, ovarian, or intraligamentous
implantations. Most are thought to follow early tubal rupture or tubal
abortion with reimplantation.
Clinically, symptoms may be absent or vague. Laboratory tests are
typically uninformative, although maternal serum alpha-fetoprotein levels can
be elevated. With later gestations, abnormal fetal positions may be palpated,
or the cervix is displaced (Zeck, 2007). Sonographically, clues are a fetus or
placenta seen eccentrically positioned within the pelvis or separate from the
uterus; lack of myometrium between the fetus and the maternal anterior
abdominal wall or bladder; or bowel loops surrounding the gestational sac
(Allibone, 1981; Chukus, 2015). Oligohydramnios is common but
nonspecific. Often needed, MR imaging can aid diagnosis and provide
placental information.

■ Management
Abdominal pregnancy treatment depends on the gestational age at diagnosis.
Conservative expectant management carries a maternal risk for sudden,
dangerous hemorrhage. Moreover, Stevens (1993) reported fetal
malformations and deformations in 20 percent. Thus, we believe that
termination generally is indicated once the diagnosis is made. Certainly,
before 24 weeks’ gestation, conservative treatment rarely is justified.
Despite this, some describe waiting until fetal viability with close
surveillance (Harirah, 2016).
Principal surgical objectives are delivery of the fetus and careful
assessment of placental implantation without provoking hemorrhage.
Unnecessary exploration is avoided because the anatomy is commonly
distorted and surrounding areas are extremely vascular. Importantly,
placental removal may precipitate torrential hemorrhage because the normal
hemostatic mechanism of myometrial contraction to constrict hypertrophied
blood vessels is lacking. If it is obvious that the placenta can be safely
removed or if the implantation site is already bleeding, then removal begins
immediately. Blood vessels supplying the placenta are ideally ligated first.
For early gestations, locally injected dilute vasopressin also can be
employed.

Some advocate leaving the placenta in place as the lesser of two evils. It
decreases the chance of immediate life-threatening hemorrhage, but at the
expense of long-term sequelae. Placental embolization may play a role prior
to or following fetal extraction (Frischhertz, 2019; Marcelin, 2018). If left in
the abdominal cavity, the placenta can form abscesses, adhesions, intestinal
or ureteral obstruction, and wound dehiscence (Bergstrom, 1998; Martin,
1988). In many of these cases, surgical removal becomes inevitable. If the
placenta is left, its involution can be monitored using serum β-hCG levels
and color Doppler sonography or MR imaging (France, 1980; Martin, 1990).
Placental function usually declines rapidly. The placenta is eventually
resorbed, but this can take months or years with advanced gestations
(Valenzano, 2003).
If the placenta is left, postoperative MTX is often given to hasten
involution. Accelerated placental destruction with accumulation of necrotic
tissue follows (Deng, 2017). Infection with abscess formation can be a
complication (Rahman, 1982). Similar to persistent trophoblastic tissue,
early gestations may benefit most (Ansong, 2019).

OVARIAN PREGNANCY
Ectopic implantation of the fertilized egg in the ovary is rare and is
diagnosed if four clinical criteria are met. These were outlined by
Spiegelberg (1878): (1) the ipsilateral tube is intact and distinct from the
ovary; (2) the ectopic pregnancy occupies the ovary; (3) the ectopic
pregnancy is connected by the uteroovarian ligament to the uterus; and (4)
ovarian tissue can be demonstrated histologically amid the placental tissue.
Risk factors are similar to those for tubal pregnancies, but ART or IUD
failure are prominent (Zhu, 2014). Presenting complaints and findings mirror
those for tubal ectopic pregnancy. Although the ovary can accommodate the
expanding pregnancy more easily than the fallopian tube, rupture at an early
stage is the usual consequence (Melcer, 2016).
Sonographically, an internal anechoic area is surrounded by a wide
echogenic ring, which in turn is surrounded by ovarian cortex (Comstock,
2005). In one review of 49 cases, the diagnosis was not be made until
surgery, and many cases were presumed to be a tubal ectopic pregnancy
(Choi, 2011). Moreover, at surgery, an early, unrecognized ovarian

pregnancy may instead be considered and managed as a hemorrhagic corpus
luteum.
Evidence-based management accrues mainly from case reports (Hassan,
2012). Classically, management for ovarian pregnancies has been surgical.
Selection of laparoscopy or laparotomy are influenced by gestational age,
hemoperitoneum, and hemodynamic status. Small lesions can be managed by
ovarian wedge resection or cystectomy, whereas larger lesions require
oophorectomy (Elwell, 2015; Melcer, 2015). With conservative surgery, βhCG levels should be monitored to exclude remnant trophoblast.

HETEROTOPIC PREGNANCY
This pairing of an IUP and an ectopically located pregnancy is rare, and the
most common dyad is an IUP and an ampullary tubal pregnancy. The natural
incidence of these heterotopic pregnancies approximates 1 case per 30,000
pregnancies (Reece, 1983). However, with ART, their incidence is higher
and is 9 cases in 10,000 pregnancies (Perkins, 2015). Initial clinical
symptoms usually reflect those from the ectopic. Because an IUP is seen
sonographically and the ectopic pregnancy may not be visualized, rates of
rupture are higher in heterotopic pregnancy (Dendas, 2017).
In patients wishing to preserve the IUP, management initially is dictated
by bleeding. In those with hemorrhage, treatment of the ectopic pregnancy is
surgical. Depending on the ectopic location, resection or suction aspiration is
the most common method (Wu, 2018). Of note, adjunctive UAE and
vasopressin and their effects on uterine blood flow are less desirable for the
ongoing IUP. With a rare comorbid ovarian ectopic pregnancy, early excision
of the corpus luteum merits progesterone supplementation (Chap. 66, p.
1170).
In those without significant bleeding, medical steps to disrupt the ectopic
pregnancy typically involve gestational-sac injection of KCl or of
hyperosmolar glucose. This may be followed by later aspiration evacuation
of the ectopic gestation. Because of toxicity to the IUP, MTX is avoided.
With ongoing pregnancy, adverse neonatal outcome rates are not
appreciably elevated (Clayton, 2007). However, initial sonographic
surveillance of fetal growth seems reasonable. Route of ultimate delivery is

influenced mainly by myometrial integrity following ectopic treatment
(Dendas, 2017; OuYang, 2014).

REFERENCES
Ackerman TE, Levi CS, Dashefsky SM, et al: Interstitial line: sonographic finding in interstitial (cornual)
ectopic pregnancy. Radiology 189(1):83, 1993a
Ackerman TE, Levi CS, Lyons EA, et al: Decidual cyst: endovaginal sonographic sign of ectopic
pregnancy. Radiology 189(3):727, 1993b
Allibone GW, Fagan CJ, Porter SC: The sonographic features of intra-abdominal pregnancy. J Clin
Ultrasound 9(7):383, 1981
American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on Drugs: Transfer of drugs and other chemicals into
human milk. Pediatrics 108(3):776, 2001
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Prevention of Rh D alloimmunization. Practice
Bulletin No. 181, August 2017, Reaffirmed 2019b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Tubal ectopic pregnancy. Practice Bulletin No.
193, March 2018, Reaffirmed 2019c
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Ultrasonography in pregnancy. Practice Bulletin
No. 175, December 2016, Reaffirmed 2020
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Medically indicated late-preterm and early-term
deliveries. Committee Opinion No. 831, June 2021
American Society for Reproductive Medicine: Medical treatment of ectopic pregnancy: a committee
opinion. Fertil Steril 100(3):638, 2013
Ansong E, Illahi GS, Shen L, et al: Analyzing the clinical significance of postoperative methotrexate in
the management of early abdominal pregnancy: analysis of 10 cases. Ginekol Pol 90(8):438, 2019
Barnhart KT, Gosman G, Ashby R, et al: The medical management of ectopic pregnancy: a metaanalysis comparing “single dose” and “multidose” regimens. Obstet Gynecol 101:778, 2003a
Barnhart KT, Gracia CR, Reindl B, et al: Usefulness of Pipelle endometrial biopsy in the diagnosis of
women at risk for ectopic pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 188:906, 2003b
Barnhart KT, Hansen KR, Stephenson MD, et al: Effect of an active vs expectant management
strategy on successful resolution of pregnancy among patients with a persisting pregnancy of
unknown location: The ACT or NOT randomized clinical trial. JAMA 326(5):390, 2021
Barnhart KT, Rinaudo P, Hummel A, et al: Acute and chronic presentation of ectopic pregnancy may be
two clinical entities. Fertil Steril 80:1345, 2003c
Barnhart KT, Sammel MD, Chung K, et al: Decline of serum hCG and spontaneous complete abortion:
defining the normal curve. Obstet Gynecol 104:975, 2004a
Barnhart KT, Sammel MD, Rinaudo PF, et al: Symptomatic patients with an early viable intrauterine
pregnancy: hCG curves redefined. Obstet Gynecol 104:50, 2004b
Bergstrom R, Mueller G, Yankowitz J: A case illustrating the continued dilemmas in treating abdominal
pregnancy and a potential explanation for the high rate of postsurgical febrile morbidity. Gynecol
Obstet Invest 46:268, 1998
Bianchi P, Salvatori MM, Torcia F, et al: Cervical pregnancy. Fertil Steril 95(6):2123.e3, 2011
Birch Petersen K, Hoffmann E, Rifbjerg Larsen C, et al: Cesarean scar pregnancy: a systematic review
of treatment studies. Fertil Steril 105(4):958, 2016

Bollig KJ, Schust DJ: Refining angular pregnancy diagnosis in the first trimester: a case series of
expectant management. Obstet Gynecol 135(1):175, 2020
Bouyer J, Coste J, Fernandez H, et al: Sites of ectopic pregnancy: a 10 year population-based study of
1800 cases. Hum Reprod 17(12):3224, 2002
Branney SW, Wolfe RE, Moore EE, et al: Quantitative sensitivity of ultrasound in detecting free
intraperitoneal fluid. J Trauma 40(6):1052, 1995
Briggs GG, Freeman RK, Towers CV, et al: Drugs in Pregnancy and Lactation, 11th edition.
Philadelphia, Wolters Kluwer, 2017
Butts SF, Guo W, Cary MS, et al: Predicting the decline in human chorionic gonadotropin in a resolving
pregnancy of unknown location. Obstet Gynecol 122(2 Pt 1):33, 2013
Calì G, Timor-Tritsch IE, Palacios-Jaraquemada J, et al: Outcome of cesarean scar pregnancy managed
expectantly: systematic review and meta-analysis. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 51(2):169, 2018
Carson SA, Buster JE: Ectopic pregnancy. N Engl J Med 329(16):1174, 1993
Chen H, Yang S, Fu J, et al: Outcomes of bilateral uterine artery chemoembolization in combination with
surgical evacuation or systemic methotrexate for cervical pregnancy. J Minim Invasive Gynecol
22(6):1029, 2015
Choi HJ, Im KS, Jung HJ, et al: Clinical analysis of ovarian pregnancy: a report of 49 cases. Eur J
Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 158(1):87, 2011
Chukus A, Tirada N, Restrepo R, et al: Uncommon implantation sites of ectopic pregnancy: thinking
beyond the complex adnexal mass. Radiographics 35(3):946, 2015
Chung K, Chandavarkar U, Opper N, et al: Reevaluating the role of dilation and curettage in the
diagnosis of pregnancy of unknown location. Fertil Steril 96(3):659, 2011
Chung K, Sammel MD, Coutifaris C, et al: Defining the rise of serum HCG in viable pregnancies
achieved through use of IVF. Hum Reprod 21(3):823, 2006
Clayton HB, Schieve LA, Peterson HB, et al: Ectopic pregnancy risk with assisted reproductive
technology procedures. Obstet Gynecol 107(3):595, 2006
Cohen A, Bibi G, Almog B, et al: Second-dose methotrexate in ectopic pregnancies: the role of beta
human chorionic gonadotropin. Fertil Steril 102(6):1646, 2014
Comstock C, Huston K, Lee W: The ultra-sonographic appearance of ovarian ectopic pregnancies.
Obstet Gynecol 105:42, 2005
Condous G, Okaro E, Khalid A, et al: The accuracy of transvaginal ultrasonography for the diagnosis of
ectopic pregnancy prior to surgery. Hum Reprod 20(5):1404, 2005
Connolly A, Ryan DH, Stuebe AM, et al: Reevaluation of discriminatory and threshold levels for serum
β-hCG in early pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 121(1):65, 2013
Creanga AA, Syverson C, Seed K, et al: Pregnancy-related mortality in the United States, 2011–2013.
Obstet Gynecol 130(2):366, 2017
Dashefsky SM, Lyons EA, Levi CS, et al: Suspected ectopic pregnancy: endovaginal and transvesical
US. Radiology 169:181, 1988
de Bennetot M, Rabischong B, Aublet-Cuvelier B, et al: Fertility after tubal ectopic pregnancy: results of
a population-based study. Fertil Steril 98(5):1271, 2012
Demirdag E, Guler I, Abay S, et al: The impact of expectant management, systemic methotrexate and
surgery on subsequent pregnancy outcomes in tubal ectopic pregnancy. Ir J Med Sci 186(2):387,
2017
Dendas W, Schobbens JC, Mestdagh G, et al: Management and outcome of heterotopic interstitial
pregnancy: case report and review of literature. Ultrasound 25(3):134, 2017

Deng MX, Zou Y: Evaluating a magnetic resonance imaging of the third-trimester abdominal pregnancy:
what the radiologist needs to know. Medicine (Baltimore) 96(48):e8986, 2017
Desai D, Lu J, Wyness SP, et al: Human chorionic gonadotropin discriminatory zone in ectopic
pregnancy: does assay harmonization matter? Fertil Steril 101(6):1671, 2014
Dias Pereira G, Hajenius PJ, Mol BW, et al: Fertility outcome after systemic methotrexate and
laparoscopic salpingostomy for tubal pregnancy. Lancet 353(9154):724, 1999
Elwell KE, Sailors JL, Denson PK, et al: Unruptured second-trimester ovarian pregnancy. J Obstet
Gynaecol Res 41(9):1483, 2015
Elson J, Tailor A, Banerjee S, et al: Expectant management of tubal ectopic pregnancy: prediction of
successful outcome using decision tree analysis. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 23:552, 2004
Fernandez H, Capmas P, Lucot JP, et al: Fertility after ectopic pregnancy: the DEMETER randomized
trial. Hum Reprod 28(5):1247, 2013
Fowler ML, Wang D, Chia V, et al: Management of cervical ectopic pregnancies: a scoping review.
Obstet Gynecol 138(1):33, 2021
Framarino-dei-Malatesta M, Piccioni MG, Derme M, et al: Transabdominal ultrasound-guided injection
of methotrexate in the treatment of ectopic interstitial pregnancies. J Clin Ultrasound 42(9):522, 2014
France JT, Jackson P: Maternal plasma and urinary hormone levels during and after a successful
abdominal pregnancy. BJOG 87:356, 1980
Frischhertz S, Eubanks-Bradley J, Gilbert P: Endovascular therapy for abdominal pregnancy. Ochsner J
19(2):74, 2019
Fylstra DL: Cervical pregnancy: 13 cases treated with suction curettage and balloon tamponade. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 210(6):581.e1, 2014
Gao L, Huang Z, Zhang X, et al: Reproductive outcomes following cesarean scar pregnancy—a case
series and review of the literature. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 200:102, 2016
Ginsburg ES, Frates MC, Rein MS, et al: Early diagnosis and treatment of cervical pregnancy in an in
vitro fertilization program. Fertil Steril 61:966, 1994
Greene DN, Grenache DG, Education Committee of the Academy of Clinical Laboratory Physicians
and Scientist: Pathology consultation on human chorionic gonadotropin testing for pregnancy
assessment. Am J Clin Pathol 144(6):830, 2015
Grechukhina O, Deshmukh U, Fan L, et al: Cesarean scar pregnancy, incidence, and recurrence: fiveyear experience at a single tertiary care referral center. Obstet Gynecol 132(5):1285, 2018
Guha S, Ayim F, Ludlow J, et al: Triaging pregnancies of unknown location: the performance of
protocols based on single serum progesterone or repeated serum hCG levels. Hum Reprod
29(5):938, 2014
Hackmon R, Sakaguchi S, Koren G: Effect of methotrexate treatment of ectopic pregnancy on
subsequent pregnancy. Can Fam Physician 57(1):37, 2011
Hajenius PJ, Engelsbel S, Mol BW, et al: Randomized trial of systemic methotrexate versus laparoscopic
salpingostomy in tubal pregnancy. Lancet 350:774, 1997
Hajenius PJ, Mol BWJ, Ankum WM, et al: Clearance curves of serum human chorionic gonadotropin
for the diagnosis of persistent trophoblast. Hum Reprod 10:683, 1995
Hajenius PJ, Mol F, Mol BW, et al: Intervention for tubal ectopic pregnancy. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev 1:CD000324, 2007
Hammoud AO, Hammoud I, Bujold E, et al: The role of sonographic endometrial patterns and
endometrial thickness in the differential diagnosis of ectopic pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol
192:1370, 2005

Harirah HM, Smith JM, Dixon CL, et al: Conservative management and planned surgery for periviable
advanced extrauterine abdominal pregnancy with favorable outcome: report of two cases. AJP Rep
6(3):e301, 2016
Hassan S, Arora R, Bhatia K: Primary ovarian pregnancy: case report and review of literature. BMJ
Case Rep Nov 21, 2012
Helmy S, Sawyer E, Ofili-Yebovi D, et al: Fertility outcomes following expectant management of tubal
ectopic pregnancy. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 30(7):988, 2007
Hiersch L, Krissi H, Ashwal E, et al: Effectiveness of medical treatment with methotrexate for
interstitial pregnancy. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol 54(6):576, 2014
Hill LM, Kislak S, Martin JG: Transvaginal sonographic detection of the pseudogestational sac
associated with ectopic pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 75(6):986, 1990
Hirakawa M, Tajima T, Yoshimitsu K, et al: Uterine artery embolization along with the administration of
methotrexate for cervical ectopic pregnancy: technical and clinical outcomes. AJR Am J Roentgenol
192(6):1601, 2009
Hoffman BL, Hamid CA, Corton MM: Surgeries for benign gynecologic conditions. In Hoffman BL,
Schorge JO, Halvorson LM, et al (eds): Williams Gynecology, 4th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill
Education, 2020
Hung TH, Jeng CJ, Yang YC, et al: Treatment of cervical pregnancy with methotrexate. Int J Gynaecol
Obstet 53:243, 1996
Hyland A, Piazza KM, Hovey KM, et al: Associations of lifetime active and passive smoking with
spontaneous abortion, stillbirth and tubal ectopic pregnancy: a cross-sectional analysis of historical
data from the Women’s Health Initiative. Tob Control 24(4):328, 2015
Insogna IG, Farland LV, Missmer SA, et al: Outpatient endometrial aspiration: an alternative to
methotrexate for pregnancy of unknown location. Am J Obstet Gynecol 217(2):185.e1, 2017
Irani M, Robles A, Gunnala V, et al: Unilateral salpingectomy and methotrexate are associated with a
similar recurrence rate of ectopic pregnancy in patients undergoing in vitro fertilization. J Minim
Invasive Gynecol 24(5):777, 2017
Jeng CJ, Ko ML, Shen J: Transvaginal ultrasound-guided treatment of cervical pregnancy. Obstet
Gynecol 109:1076, 2007
Jermy K, Thomas J, Doo A, et al: The conservative management of interstitial pregnancy. BJOG
111:1283, 2004
Jurkovic D, Hillaby K, Woelfer B, et al: First-trimester diagnosis and management of pregnancies
implanted into the lower uterine segment cesarean section scar. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol
21(3):220, 2003
Jurkovic D, Memtsa M, Sawyer E, et al: Single-dose systemic methotrexate vs expectant management
for treatment of tubal ectopic pregnancy: a placebo-controlled randomized trial. Ultrasound Obstet
Gynecol 49(2):171, 2017
Kaelin Agten A, Cali G, Monteagudo A, et al: The clinical outcome of cesarean scar pregnancies
implanted “on the scar” versus “in the niche.” Am J Obstet Gynecol 216(5):510.e1, 2017
Kirk E, Van Calster B, Condous G, et al: Ectopic pregnancy: using the hCG ratio to select women for
expectant or medical management. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 90(3):264, 2011
Kooi S, Kock HC: A review of the literature on nonsurgical treatment in tubal pregnancy. Obstet
Gynecol Surv 47:739, 1992
Krag Moeller LB, Moeller C, Thomsen SG, et al: Success and spontaneous pregnancy rates following
systemic methotrexate versus laparoscopic surgery for tubal pregnancies: a randomized trial. Acta
Obstet Gynecol Scand 88(12):1331, 2009

Krissi H, Hiersch L, Stolovitch N, et al: Outcome, complications and future fertility in women treated
with uterine artery embolization and methotrexate for non-tubal ectopic pregnancy. Eur J Obstet
Gynecol Reprod Biol 182:172, 2014
Kung FT, Chang SY, Tsai YC, et al: Subsequent reproduction and obstetric outcome after methotrexate
treatment of cervical pregnancy: a review of original literature and international collaborative followup. Hum Reprod 12:591, 1997
Lau S, Tulandi T: Conservative medical and surgical management of interstitial ectopic pregnancy. Fertil
Steril 72:207, 1999
Li Y, Yang Y, He QZ, et al: Frozen section of uterine curetting in excluding the possibility of ectopic
pregnancy—a clinicopathologic study of 715 cases. Clin Exp Obstet Gynecol 41(4):419, 2014
Li C, Zhao WH, Zhu Q, et al: Risk factors for ectopic pregnancy: a multi-center case-control study.
BMC Pregnancy Childbirth 15:187, 2015
Lipscomb GH, Bran D, McCord ML, et al: Analysis of three hundred fifteen ectopic pregnancies
treated with single-dose methotrexate. Am J Obstet Gynecol 178:1354, 1998
Lipscomb GH, Givens VM, Meyer NL, et al: Comparison of multidose and single-dose methotrexate
protocols for the treatment of ectopic pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 192:1844, 2005
Lipscomb GH, Puckett KJ, Bran D, et al: Management of separation pain after single-dose
methotrexate therapy for ectopic pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 93:590, 1999
Londra L, Moreau C, Strobino D, et al: Ectopic pregnancy after in vitro fertilization: differences
between fresh and frozen-thawed cycles. Fertil Steril 104(1):110, 2015
Lopez HB, Micheelsen U, Berendtsen H, et al: Ectopic pregnancy and its associated endometrial
changes. Gynecol Obstet Invest 38(2):104, 1994
Maheux-Lacroix S, Li F, Bujold E, et al: Cesarean scar pregnancies: a systematic review of treatment
options. J Minim Invasive Gynecol 24(6):915, 2017
Marcelin C, Kouchner P, Bintner M, et al: Placenta embolization of advanced abdominal pregnancy.
Diagn Interv Imaging 99(4):265, 2018
Martin JN Jr, McCaul JF IV: Emergent management of abdominal pregnancy. Clin Obstet Gynecol
33:438, 1990
Martin JN Jr, Sessums JK, Martin RW, et al: Abdominal pregnancy: current concepts of management.
Obstet Gynecol 71:549, 1988
Mavrelos D, Nicks H, Jamil A, et al: Efficacy and safety of a clinical protocol for expectant
management of selected women diagnosed with a tubal ectopic pregnancy. Ultrasound Obstet
Gynecol 42(1):102, 2013
Melcer Y, Maymon R, Vaknin Z, et al: Primary ovarian ectopic pregnancy: still a medical challenge. J
Reprod Med 61(1-2):58, 2016
Melcer Y, Smorgick N, Vaknin Z, et al: Primary ovarian pregnancy: 43 years experience in a single
institute and still a medical challenge. Isr Med Assoc J 17(11):687, 2015
Menon S, Colins J, Barnhart KT: Establishing a human chorionic gonadotropin cutoff to guide
methotrexate treatment of ectopic pregnancy: a systematic review. Fertil Steril 87(3):481, 2007
Mol F, Strandell A, Jurkovic D, et al: The ESEP study: salpingostomy versus salpingectomy for tubal
ectopic pregnancy; the impact on future fertility: a randomized controlled trial. BMC Womens
Health 8:11, 2008
Mol F, van Mello NM, Strandell A, et al: Salpingotomy versus salpingectomy in women with tubal
pregnancy (ESEP study): an open-label, multicentre, randomized controlled trial. Lancet
383(9927):1483, 2014

Monteagudo A, Calì G, Rebarber A, et al: Minimally invasive treatment of cesarean scar and cervical
pregnancies using a cervical ripening double balloon catheter: expanding the clinical series. J
Ultrasound Med 38(3):785, 2019
Moschos E, Twickler DM: Endometrial thickness predicts intrauterine pregnancy in patients with
pregnancy of unknown location. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 32(7):929, 2008
Murji A, Garbedian K, Thomas J, et al: Conservative management of cervical ectopic pregnancy. J
Obstet Gynaecol Can 37(11):1016, 2015
Nurmohamed L, Moretti ME, Schechter T, et al: Outcome following high-dose methotrexate in
pregnancies misdiagnosed as ectopic. Am J Obstet Gynecol 205(6):533.e1, 2011
Nyberg DA, Hughes MP, Mack LA, et al: Extrauterine findings of ectopic pregnancy of transvaginal
US: importance of echogenic fluid. Radiology 178:823, 1991
Ohannessian A, Loundou A, Courbière B, et al: Ovarian responsiveness in women receiving fertility
treatment after methotrexate for ectopic pregnancy: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Hum
Reprod 29(9):1949, 2014
OuYang Z, Yin Q, Xu Y, et al: Heterotopic cesarean scar pregnancy: diagnosis, treatment, and
prognosis. J Ultrasound Med 33(9):1533, 2014
Perkins KM, Boulet SL, Kissin DM, et al: Risk of ectopic pregnancy associated with assisted
reproductive technology in the United States, 2001–2011. Obstet Gynecol 125(1):7, 2015
Pouly JL, Mahnes H, Mage G, et al: Conservative laparoscopic treatment of 321 ectopic pregnancies.
Fertil Steril 46:1093, 1986
Rahman MS, Al-Suleiman SA, Rahman J, et al: Advanced abdominal pregnancy—observations in 10
cases. Obstet Gynecol 59:366, 1982
Reece EA, Petrie RH, Sirmans MF, et al: Combined intrauterine and extra uterine gestations: a review.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 146(3):32, 1983
Rodgerson JD, Heegaard WG, Plummer D, et al: Emergency department right upper quadrant
ultrasound is associated with a reduced time to diagnosis and treatment of ruptured ectopic
pregnancies. Acad Emerg Med 8(4):331, 2001
Rotas MA, Haberman S, Levgur M: Cesarean scar ectopic pregnancies. Obstet Gynecol 107:1373,
2006
Saraj AJ, Wilcox JG, Najmabadi S, et al: Resolution of hormonal markers of ectopic gestation: a
randomized trial comparing single-dose intramuscular methotrexate with salpingostomy. Obstet
Gynecol 92:989, 1998
Seeber BE, Sammel MD, Guo W, et al: Application of redefined human chorionic gonadotropin curves
for the diagnosis of women at risk for ectopic pregnancy. Fertil Steril 86(2):454, 2006
Seifer DB, Gutmann JN, Grant WD, et al: Comparison of persistent ectopic pregnancy after
laparoscopic salpingostomy versus salpingostomy at laparotomy for ectopic pregnancy. Obstet
Gynecol 81(3):378, 1993
Silva C, Sammel MD, Zhou L, et al: Human chorionic gonadotropin profile for women with ectopic
pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 107:605, 2006
Silva PM, Araujo Júnior E, Cecchino GN, et al: Effectiveness of expectant management versus
methotrexate in tubal ectopic pregnancy: a double-blind randomized trial. Arch Gynecol Obstet
291(4):939, 2015
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Miller R, Timor-Tritsch IE, et al: Cesarean scar pregnancy.
Consult Series No. 49, Am J Obstet Gynecol 222(5):B2, 2020
Song MJ, Moon MH, Kim JA, et al: Serial transvaginal sonographic findings of cervical ectopic
pregnancy treated with high-dose methotrexate. J Ultrasound Med 28:55, 2009

Sowter MC, Farquhar CM, Petrie KJ, et al: A randomized trial comparing single dose systemic
methotrexate and laparoscopic surgery for the treatment of unruptured tubal pregnancy. BJOG
108(2):192, 2001
Spiegelberg O: Zur Casuistic der Ovarialschwangerschaft. Arch Gynaekol 13:73, 1878
Stevens CA: Malformations and deformations in abdominal pregnancy. Am J Med Genet 47:1189, 1993
Stovall TG, Ling FW, Carson SA, et al: Serum progesterone and uterine curettage in differential
diagnosis of ectopic pregnancy. Fertil Steril 57:456, 1992
Stovall TG, Ling FW, Gray LA, et al: Methotrexate treatment of unruptured ectopic pregnancy: a report
of 100 cases. Obstet Gynecol 77(5):749, 1991
Svirsky R, Rozovski U, Vaknin Z, et al: The safety of conception occurring shortly after methotrexate
treatment of an ectopic pregnancy. Reprod Toxicol 27(1):85, 2009
Tao G, Patel C, Hoover KW: Updated estimates of ectopic pregnancy among commercially and
Medicaid-insured women in the United States, 2002–2013. South Med J 110(1):18, 2017
Tabatabaii Bafghi A, Zaretezerjani F, Sekhavat L, et al: Fertility outcome after treatment of unruptured
ectopic pregnancy with two different methotrexate protocols. Int J Fertil Steril 6:189, 2012
Tempfer CB, Dogan A, Tischoff I, et al: Chronic ectopic pregnancy: case report and systematic review
of the literature. Arch Gynecol Obstet 300(3):651, 2019
Timor-Tritsch IE, Cali G, Monteagudo A, et al: Foley balloon catheter to prevent or manage bleeding
during treatment for cervical and cesarean scar pregnancy. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 46(1):118,
2015a
Timor-Tritsch IE, Khatib N, Monteagudo A, et al: Cesarean scar pregnancies: experience of 60 cases. J
Ultrasound Med 34(4):601, 2015b
Timor-Tritsch IE, Monteagudo A, Cali G, et al: Cesarean scar pregnancy is a precursor of morbidly
adherent placenta. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 44(3):346, 2014
Timor-Tritsch IE, Monteagudo A, Cali G, et al: Easy sonographic differential diagnosis between
intrauterine pregnancy and cesarean delivery scar pregnancy in the early first trimester. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 215(2):225.e1, 2016
Timor-Tritsch IE, Monteagudo A, Matera C, et al: Sonographic evolution of cornual pregnancies treated
without surgery. Obstet Gynecol 79(6):1044, 1992
Timor-Tritsch IE, Monteagudo A, Santos R, et al: The diagnosis, treatment, and follow-up of cesarean
scar pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 207(1):44.e1, 2012
Tulandi T, A1-Jaroudi D: Interstitial pregnancy: results generated from the Society of Reproductive
Surgeons. Obstet Gynecol 103:47, 2004
Tulandi T, Guralnick M: Treatment of tubal ectopic pregnancy by salpingotomy with or without tubal
suturing and salpingectomy. Fertil Steril 55:53, 1991
Ushakov FB, Elchalal U, Aceman PJ, et al: Cervical pregnancy: past and future. Obstet Gynecol Surv
52:45, 1997
Valenzano M, Nicoletti L, Odicino F, et al: Five-year follow-up of placental involution after abdominal
pregnancy. J Clin Ultrasound 31(1):39, 2003
Verhaegen J, Gallos ID, van Mello NM, et al: Accuracy of single progesterone test to predict early
pregnancy outcome in women with pain or bleeding: meta-analysis of cohort studies. BMJ
345:e6077, 2012
Verma U, Goharkhay N: Conservative management of cervical ectopic pregnancy. Fertil Steril
91(3):671, 2009
Wang G, Liu X, Bi F, et al: Evaluation of the efficacy of laparoscopic resection for the management of
exogenous cesarean scar pregnancy. Fertil Steril 101(5):1501, 2014

Wang Q, Peng HL, He L, et al: Reproductive outcomes after previous cesarean scar pregnancy: Follow
up of 189 women. Taiwan J Obstet Gynecol 54(5):551, 2015
Wang Y, Xu B, Dai S, et al: An efficient conservative treatment modality for cervical pregnancy:
angiographic uterine artery embolization followed by immediate curettage. Am J Obstet Gynecol
204(1):31.e1, 2011
Westrom L, Joesoef R, Reynolds G, et al: Pelvic inflammatory disease and fertility: a cohort study of
1,844 women with laparoscopically verified disease and 657 control women with normal
laparoscopic results. Sex Transm Dis 19(4):185, 1992
Wu Z, Zhang X, Xu P, et al: Clinical analysis of 50 patients with heterotopic pregnancy after ovulation
induction or embryo transfer. Eur J Med Res 23(1):17, 2018
Yamaguchi M, Honda R, Erdenebaatar C, et al: Treatment of cervical pregnancy with ultrasound-guided
local methotrexate injection. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 50(6):781, 2017
Zakaria MA, Abdallah ME, Shavell VI, et al: Conservative management of cervical ectopic pregnancy:
utility of uterine artery embolization. Fertil Steril 95(3):872, 2011
Zeck W, Kelters I, Winter R, et al: Lessons learned from four advanced abdominal pregnancies at an
East African Health Center. J Perinat Med 35(4):278, 2007
Zhang X, Ma C, Wu Z, et al: Frozen-thawed embryo transfer cycles have a lower incidence of ectopic
pregnancy compared with fresh embryo transfer cycles. Reprod Sci 25(9):1431, 2018
Zhu Q, Li C, Zhao WH, et al: Risk factors and clinical features of ovarian pregnancy: a case-control
study. BMJ Open 4(12):e006447, 2014

CHAPTER 13

Gestational Trophoblastic Disease

HYDATIDIFORM MOLE—MOLAR PREGNANCY
PATHOGENESIS
DIAGNOSIS
MANAGEMENT
GESTATIONAL TROPHOBLASTIC NEOPLASIA
DIAGNOSIS, STAGING, AND PROGNOSTIC SCORING
TREATMENT
SUBSEQUENT PREGNANCY
REFERENCES
Gestational trophoblastic disease (GTD) is the term used to encompass a
group of tumors typified by abnormal trophoblast proliferation. Trophoblast
produces human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG). Thus, the measurement of
this peptide hormone in serum is essential for GTD diagnosis, management,
and surveillance. GTD histologically is divided into hydatidiform moles,
which are characterized by the presence of villi, and nonmolar trophoblastic
malignant neoplasms, which lack villi.
Hydatidiform moles are excessively edematous immature placentas
(Benirschke, 2012). These include the benign complete hydatidiform mole
and partial hydatidiform mole (Table 13-1). The third member is the

malignant invasive mole (Hui, 2014b). Invasive mole is deemed malignant
because of its marked penetration into and destruction of the myometrium and
its ability to metastasize.
TABLE 13-1. Modified WHO Classification of GTD

Nonmolar trophoblastic neoplasms include choriocarcinoma, placental
site trophoblastic tumor, and epithelioid trophoblastic tumor (Hui, 2014a).
These three are differentiated by the trophoblast type that they contain.
Under the GTD umbrella term, the malignant forms of GTD are termed
gestational trophoblastic neoplasia (GTN). These include invasive mole,
choriocarcinoma, placental site trophoblastic tumor, and epithelioid
trophoblastic tumor. These malignancies develop weeks or years following
any type of pregnancy, but more frequently follow hydatidiform mole.
Each GTN malignancy type is histologically distinct and varies in its
propensity to invade and metastasize. However, these diagnoses are
infrequently identified from an actual histological specimen. Instead,
measurement of serum hCG levels and clinical findings are more often used
to diagnose and treat this malignancy. Accordingly, GTN is often managed as
a single composite clinical entity. With chemotherapy, most tumors currently
are highly curable.

HYDATIDIFORM MOLE
Classic histological findings of molar pregnancy include trophoblast
proliferation and villi with stromal edema (Fig. 13-1). The degree of
histological changes, karyotype and immunostaining differences, and the
absence or presence of embryonic elements are used to classify them as
either complete or partial hydatidiform moles (Table 13-2). These two also
vary in their associated risks for developing medical comorbidities and
postevacuation GTN. Of the two, GTN more frequently follows complete
hydatidiform mole.

FIGURE 13-1 Complete hydatidiform mole. A. Gross specimen with characteristic vesicles of variable
size. (Photograph contributed by Dr. Sasha Andrews. Reproduced with permission from Patel S,
Roberts S, Rogers V, et al [eds]: Williams Obstetrics Study Guide, 25th ed. New York, NY: McGraw
Hill; 2019.) B. Low-magnification photomicrograph shows generalized edema and cistern formation
(black asterisks) within avascular villi. Haphazard trophoblastic hyperplasia is marked by a yellow
asterisk on the right. (Reproduced with permission from Dr. Erika Fong.)

TABLE 13-2. Features of Partial and Complete Hydatidiform Moles

Grossly, complete moles have abnormal chorionic villi that appear as a
mass of clear vesicles. These vary in size and often hang in clusters from thin
pedicles. In contrast, partial molar pregnancies have focal and less advanced
hydatidiform changes and contain some fetal tissue. Both forms of moles
usually fill the uterine cavity, but they rarely may be ectopic (Sebire, 2005;
Yamada, 2016).

■ Epidemiology and Risk Factors
Ethnic predisposition is seen with hydatidiform mole, and prevalences are
higher in Asians, Hispanics, and American Indians (Choi, 2015; Drake,
2006). The incidence in the United States and Europe has been relatively
constant at 1 per 1000 deliveries (Eysbouts, 2016; Melamed, 2016).
The strongest risk factors are age and a prior hydatidiform mole. Women
at both extremes of reproductive age are most vulnerable (Savage, 2013;
Sebire, 2002a). With a prior complete mole, the risk of another mole is 0.9
percent, and with a previous partial mole, the rate is 0.3 percent. After two

prior complete moles, approximately 20 percent of women have a third mole
(Eagles, 2015).

■ Pathogenesis
Molar pregnancies typically arise from chromosomally abnormal
fertilizations. Complete moles most often have a diploid chromosomal
composition. These usually are 46,XX and result from androgenesis,
meaning both sets of chromosomes are paternal. The chromosomes of the
ovum are either absent or inactivated. As shown in Figure 13-2A, an ovum is
fertilized by a haploid sperm, which then duplicates its own chromosomes
after meiosis. Less commonly, the chromosomal pattern may be 46,XY or
46,XX and due to fertilization by two sperm, that is, dispermic fertilization
or dispermy (Lawler, 1991; Ohama, 1981).

FIGURE 13-2 Typical pathogenesis of complete and partial moles. A. A 46,XX complete mole may be
formed if a 23,X-bearing haploid sperm penetrates a 23,X-containing haploid egg whose genes have
been “inactivated.” Paternal chromosomes then duplicate to create a 46,XX diploid complement solely
of paternal origin. B. A partial mole may be formed if two sperm—either 23,X- or 23,Y-bearing—both
fertilize (dispermy) a 23,X-containing haploid egg whose genes have not been inactivated. The resulting
fertilized egg is triploid with two chromosome sets being donated by the father (diandry).

Partial moles have a triploid karyotype, which is 69,XXX, 69,XXY, or
much less commonly, 69,XYY. These are each composed of two paternal
haploid sets of chromosomes contributed by dispermy and one maternal
haploid set (see Fig. 13-2B). Less frequently, a similar haploid egg may be
fertilized by an unreduced diploid 46,XY sperm. These triploid zygotes
result in some embryonic development, however, it ultimately is a lethal fetal
condition (Joergensen, 2014; Lakovschek, 2011). Fetuses that reach
advanced ages have severe growth restriction, multiple congenital
anomalies, or both.

Twin Pregnancy
Rarely, in some twin pregnancies, one chromosomally normal fetus is paired
with a complete diploid molar pregnancy. Importantly, these cases must be
distinguished from a single partial molar pregnancy with its associated
abnormal fetus. Other potential diagnoses include placental mesenchymal
dysplasia, subchorionic hematoma, or chorioangioma (Chap. 6, p. 112)
(Cavoretto, 2020). To help distinguish among these, chorionic villus
sampling, amniocentesis, or fetal cord blood sampling coupled with fetal
karyotyping aid confirmation (Lee, 2010).
Several unique pregnancy problems complicate such twin pregnancies.
Thyrotoxicosis is common, but the most worrisome are preeclampsia or
hemorrhage. These frequently necessitate preterm delivery. Thus, many
women may choose to terminate the gestation, if diagnosed early. In those
with continuing pregnancy, survival of the normal fetus varies and depends
on associated comorbidity from the molar component. Wee and Jauniaux
(2005) reviewed outcomes in 174 women, of whom 82 chose termination. Of
the remaining 92 pregnancies, 42 percent either miscarried or had a perinatal
death; approximately 60 percent delivered preterm; and 40 percent delivered
at term.
Another concern for those continuing their pregnancy is the risk for
developing subsequent GTN. Most evidence indicates no significant

difference between women who continue or terminate their pregnancy (Lin,
2017; Sebire 2002b).

■ Clinical Findings
Molar pregnancy is diagnosed sooner than in the past because prenatal care
is sought much earlier and sonography is virtually universal. For example, in
194 women with a complete mole, evacuation was completed at a median
gestational age of 9 weeks and at 12 weeks for 172 patients with a partial
mole (Sun, 2015). As a result, most molar pregnancies are treated before
complications ensue.
Typically, 1 to 2 months of amenorrhea precede the diagnosis. As
gestation advances, symptoms tend to be more pronounced with complete
compared with partial moles (Niemann, 2007). Untreated molar pregnancies
will almost always cause uterine bleeding that varies from spotting to
profuse hemorrhage. Bleeding may presage spontaneous molar abortion, but
more often, it follows an intermittent course for weeks to months.
In more advanced moles with considerable concealed uterine
hemorrhage, moderate iron-deficiency anemia develops. Nausea and
vomiting also may be significant. Of physical findings, many women have
uterine growth exceeding that expected, and the enlarged uterus is
comparatively softer. Fetal heart motion is absent with complete moles. The
ovaries can be fuller and cystic from multiple theca-lutein cysts (Fig. 13-3).
These are more common with a complete mole and likely result from ovarian
overstimulation by excessive hCG levels. Remember that hCG and
luteinizing hormone share the same receptor, and both can stimulate the theca
layer that surrounds follicles. Because theca-lutein cysts regress following
pregnancy evacuation and subsequent hCG level decline, expectant
management is preferred. Occasionally, a larger cyst may undergo torsion,
infarction, and hemorrhage. However, oophorectomy is not performed unless
extensive infarction persists after untwisting.

FIGURE 13-3 Sonogram of an ovary with multiple theca-lutein cysts in a woman with a complete
hydatidiform mole.

The thyrotropin-like effects of hCG frequently cause serum free thyroxine
(fT4) levels to be elevated and thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) levels to
be decreased (Chap. 61, p. 1089). Despite this, clinically apparent
thyrotoxicosis is unusual and in our experience can be mimicked by bleeding
and sepsis from infected products. Moreover, the serum free T4 levels
rapidly normalize after uterine evacuation. Despite this, cases of presumed
“thyroid storm” have been reported (Kofinas, 2015).
Severe preeclampsia and eclampsia are relatively common with
advanced molar pregnancies. However, these are seldom seen today because
of early diagnosis and evacuation. An exception is the case of a normal fetus
coexisting with a complete mole, described earlier. In continuing twin
gestations, severe preeclampsia frequently mandates preterm delivery.

■ Diagnosis
Serum β-HCG Measurements

Most women initially have irregular bleeding that almost always prompts
pregnancy testing and sonography. Less often, women will spontaneously
pass molar tissue.
With a complete molar pregnancy, serum β-hCG levels are commonly
elevated above those expected for gestational age. With more advanced
moles, values in the millions are not unusual. Importantly, these high values
can lead to erroneous false-negative urine pregnancy test results. Termed a
hook effect, excessive β-hCG hormone levels oversaturate the assay’s
targeting antibody and create a false-negative reading (Cormano, 2016). In
these cases, serum β-hCG determinations with or without sample dilution
will yield a positive result. With a partial mole, β-hCG levels may also be
significantly elevated, but more commonly concentrations are in ranges
expected for gestational age.

Sonography
Although this is the mainstay of trophoblastic disease diagnosis, not all cases
are confirmed initially. In a large series of more than 1000 patients with
molar pregnancy, sonography’s sensitivity was 44 percent, and its specificity
was 74 percent (Fowler, 2006). With grayscale sonography, a complete mole
appears as an echogenic uterine mass filling the endometrial cavity and is
surrounded by normal myometrium. The mass is composed of numerous
anechoic cystic spaces of different sizes and shapes, but without a fetus or
amnionic sac. The appearance is often described as a “snowstorm” (Fig. 134). Application of color Doppler displays marked surrounding myometrial
vascularity. However, absent internal flow reflects the avascular villi of
complete moles.

FIGURE 13-4 Sonograms of hydatidiform moles. A. Transverse view of a uterus with a complete
hydatidiform mole. The characteristic “snowstorm” appearance reflects an echogenic uterine mass,
marked by calipers, that has numerous anechoic cystic spaces. Notably, a fetus or amnionic sac is
absent. B. In this sagittal image of a partial hydatidiform mole, the fetal head (arrow) lies adjacent to an
enlarged, multicystic placenta.

A partial mole has features that include a thick, multicystic placenta plus
a fetus or fetal tissue. Thin septa can be found within the gestational sac
(Savage, 2017). Affected fetuses usually die in the first trimester. Those
advancing further often show growth restriction, oligohydramnios, and limb
or CNS defects (Cavoretto, 2020).
In early pregnancy, however, these sonographic characteristics are seen
in fewer than half of hydatidiform moles. At earlier gestations, a complete
mole may appear as a polypoid hyperechoic mass that lacks internal cysts
and is surrounded by anechoic fluid (Jauniaux, 2018).
The most common mimics are incomplete or missed abortion. In these
cases, histological evaluation, described next, ultimately is diagnostic.
Occasionally, molar pregnancy may be confused for a multifetal pregnancy or
a uterine leiomyoma with cystic degeneration.

Pathology
Because of the risk for subsequent GTN following molar pregnancy,
postevacuation surveillance is indicated. Thus, moles must be distinguished
from other pregnancy types that are not molar but that have hydropic
placental degeneration. Most often, these are hydropic abortuses formed by
the traditional union of one haploid egg and one haploid sperm but are
pregnancies that have failed. Their placentas display hydropic degeneration,
in which villi are edematous and swollen, and thus mimic some villous
features of hydatidiform moles. These mimics do not require postevacuation
surveillance. Some distinguishing histological characteristics are shown in
Table 13-2.
In pregnancies before 10 weeks, classic molar histological changes may
not be apparent. Villi may not be enlarged, and molar stroma may not yet be
edematous and avascular. Histopathologic evaluation can be enhanced by
immunohistochemical staining for p57 expression and by molecular
genotyping (Banet, 2014). p57KIP2 is a nuclear protein whose gene is
paternally imprinted and maternally expressed. This means that the gene
product is produced only in tissues containing a maternal allele. Because

complete moles contain only paternal genes, the p57KIP2 protein is absent in
complete moles, and tissues do not pick up this stain (Merchant, 2005). In
contrast, this nuclear protein is strongly expressed in normal placentas, in
spontaneous pregnancy losses with hydropic degeneration, and in partial
hydatidiform moles (Castrillon, 2001). Accordingly, immunostaining for
p57KIP2 is an effective means to isolate complete mole from the diagnostic
list. For distinction of a partial mole from a nonmolar hydropic abortus, both
of which express p57KIP2, molecular genotyping can be used (Ronnett,
2018). Molecular genotyping determines the parental source of alleles.
Thereby, it can distinguish among a diploid diandric genome (complete
mole), a triploid diandric-monogynic genome (partial mole), or biparental
diploidy (nonmolar abortus) (Xing, 2021).

■ Management
Maternal deaths from molar pregnancies are rare because of early diagnosis,
timely evacuation, and vigilant postevacuation surveillance for GTN (Sun,
2016). Preoperative evaluation strives to identify potential complications,
such as preeclampsia, hyperthyroidism, anemia, electrolyte depletions from
hyperemesis, and metastatic disease (Table 13-3). Most recommend chest
radiography, whereas computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance
(MR) imaging are not routinely done unless a chest radiograph shows lung
lesions or unless other extrauterine disease is suspected.
TABLE 13-3. Some Considerations for Management of Hydatidiform Mole

Molar Pregnancy Termination
Regardless of uterine size, molar evacuation by suction curettage usually is
the preferred treatment. Preoperative cervical dilation with an osmotic
dilator is recommended if the cervix is minimally dilated. Intraoperative
bleeding can be greater with molar pregnancy than with a comparably sized
uterus containing nonmolar products. Thus with large moles, adequate
anesthesia, sufficient intravenous access, and blood-banking support is
imperative.
A step by step description of dilation and curettage is found in Chapter
11 (p. 213). For molar evacuation, the cervix is mechanically dilated to
preferably allow insertion of a large Karman suction cannula. Depending on
uterine size, a 10- to 14-mm diameter is typical. As evacuation is begun,
oxytocin is infused to limit bleeding. Intraoperative sonography is often
recommended to help ensure complete uterine cavity emptying and minimize

perforation risk. When the myometrium has contracted, a thorough but gentle
curettage with a sharp large-loop Sims curette may be performed. If bleeding
continues despite uterine evacuation and oxytocin infusion, other uterotonic
agents are given (see Table 13-3). Uncommonly, pelvic arterial
embolization, uterine packing, or hysterectomy may be necessary (Chap. 44,
p. 779) (Tse, 2007).
Some volume of trophoblast is deported into the pelvic venous system
during molar evacuation (Hankins, 1987). With large moles, the amount of
tissue may be sufficient to produce clinically apparent respiratory
insufficiency, pulmonary edema, or even embolism (Delmis, 2000). In our
earlier experiences with substantial moles, these and their chest radiographic
manifestations clear rapidly without specific treatment.
Following curettage, anti-D immunoglobulin (Rhogam) is given to Rh Dnegative women because fetal tissues with a partial mole may include red
cells with D-antigen (Chap. 18, p. 356). Those with suspected complete
mole are similarly treated because a definitive diagnosis of complete versus
partial mole may not be confirmed until histological evaluation of the
evacuated products.
Following evacuation, the long-term prognosis for women with a
hydatidiform mole is not improved with prophylactic chemotherapy.
Moreover, chemotherapy toxicity can be significant, and thus it is not
recommended routinely (Gueye, 2014; Wang, 2017).
Methods other than suction curettage can be considered for select cases.
Hysterectomy with ovarian preservation may be preferable for women who
have finished childbearing and who carry complete moles with high-risk
features. Of women aged 40 to 49 years, up to 50 percent will subsequently
develop GTN, and hysterectomy markedly reduces this likelihood (Elias,
2012; Zhao, 2019). During hysterectomy, theca-lutein cysts do not require
removal, and they spontaneously regress following molar termination. Last,
labor induction or hysterotomy is seldom used for molar evacuation in the
United States. Both will likely increase blood loss and theoretically may
raise the incidence of persistent trophoblastic disease (Tidy, 2000).

Postevacuation Surveillance
Close biochemical surveillance for persistent gestational neoplasia follows
each hydatidiform mole evacuation. Serial measurement of serum β-hCG

levels aim to detect persistent or renewed trophoblastic proliferation. As a
glycoprotein, hCG shows structural heterogeneity and exists in different
isoforms. Thus, for surveillance, an hCG assay that can detect all forms of
hCG should be used (Harvey, 2010; Ngan, 2018). These are different from
those used for routine pregnancy testing (de Medeiros, 2009). The initial βhCG level is obtained within 48 hours after evacuation. This serves as the
baseline, which is compared with β-hCG quantification done thereafter every
1 to 2 weeks. Levels are followed until they become undetectable.
The median time for such resolution is 6 weeks for partial moles and 7
weeks for complete moles. Of patients, 95 percent have normal β-hCG levels
by 14 weeks postevacuation and 99 percent by 25 weeks (Eysbouts, 2017a).
Once β-hCG is undetectable, this is confirmed with monthly determinations
for another 6 months (Lurain, 2010; Sebire, 2007).
Concurrently, reliable contraception is imperative to avoid confusion
caused by rising β-hCG levels from a new pregnancy. Most recommend
combination hormonal contraception, injectable depot medroxyprogesterone
acetate, or progestin implant. The latter two are particularly useful if poor
patient compliance is anticipated. Intrauterine devices are not used until βhCG levels are undetectable because of the risk of uterine perforation if an
invasive mole is present. After these 6 months, monitoring is discontinued
and pregnancy allowed. Although not recommended, if a woman conceives
during surveillance, live-birth and congenital anomalies rates appear to
mirror general population rates (Tuncer, 1999b).
During β-hCG levels surveillance, increasing or persistently plateaued
levels mandate evaluation for GTN. If the woman has not become pregnant,
these levels signify trophoblast proliferation that is most likely malignant.
Several factors predispose a patient to GTN following molar evacuation.
Complete moles have a 15 to 20 percent incidence of malignant sequelae,
compared with 1 to 5 percent following partial moles. Surprisingly, with
much earlier recognition and evacuation of molar pregnancies, the risk for
GTN has not dropped (Sun, 2015). Other GTN risk factors are older
maternal age, preevacuation β-hCG levels >100,000 mIU/mL, uterine size
that is large-for-gestational age, theca-lutein cysts >6 cm, and a slow decline
in β-hCG levels (Berkowitz, 2009; Kang, 2012; Wolfberg, 2005).

GESTATIONAL TROPHOBLASTIC NEOPLASIA

This group includes invasive mole, choriocarcinoma, placental site
trophoblastic tumor, and epithelioid trophoblastic tumor. These tumors
almost always develop with or after some form of recognized pregnancy.
Half follow hydatidiform mole, a fourth follow miscarriage or tubal
pregnancy, and another fourth develop after a preterm or term pregnancy
(Goldstein, 2012). These four tumor types are histologically distinct but are
usually diagnosed solely by persistently elevated serum β-hCG levels
because tissue is infrequently available for study. Criteria to diagnose
postmolar GTN are shown in Table 13-4.
TABLE 13-4. Criteria for Diagnosis of Gestational Trophoblastic
Neoplasia

■ Diagnosis, Staging, and Prognostic Scoring
Clinically, these placental tumors are characterized by their aggressive
invasion into the myometrium and propensity to metastasize. The most
common finding with GTN is irregular bleeding associated with uterine
subinvolution. The bleeding may be continuous or intermittent and sometimes
may be sudden and massive. Myometrial perforation from trophoblastic
growth can cause intraperitoneal hemorrhage. In some women, lower genital
tract metastases are evident. In others, only distant metastases, with no trace
of uterine tumor, are found.
Consideration for the possibility of GTN is the most important factor in
its recognition. Unusually persistent bleeding after any type of pregnancy
should prompt serum β-hCG level measurement. Uterine size is assessed, and
careful examination seeks lower genital tract metastases, which usually are
bluish vascular masses (Cagayan, 2010). Tissue biopsy of such masses is
unnecessary and may cause significant bleeding.
Once the diagnosis is verified, a baseline serum β-hCG level and
hemogram are obtained. A search for local disease and metastases includes
tests of liver and renal function, transvaginal sonography, chest CT or
radiography, and brain and abdominopelvic CT scan or MR imaging. Less

often, positron-emission tomographic (PET) scanning and cerebrospinal fluid
β-hCG level determination are used to identify metastases (Lurain, 2011).
If no extrauterine disease is found, a second curettage or hysterectomy
may be considered. After either, β-hCG levels are then measured every 2
weeks until three consecutively lie in undetectable range. Levels are
subsequently repeated monthly for 6 months. In contrast, if β-hCG levels
persist after curettage or hysterectomy or if initial extrauterine disease is
found, patients undergo staging and chemotherapy is instituted (Koh, 2018;
Osborne, 2016).
GTN is staged clinically using the system of the International Federation
of Gynecology and Obstetrics (FIGO) (2009). This includes a modification
of the World Health Organization (WHO) (1983) prognostic index score,
with which scores of 0 to 4 are given for each of the categories shown in
Table 13-5. Women with WHO scores of 0 to 6 are considered to have lowrisk disease, whereas those with scores ≥7 are considered in the high-risk
group.
TABLE 13-5. International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics
(FIGO) Staging and Diagnostic Scoring System for Gestational
Trophoblastic Neoplasia

■ Histological Classification

Clinical staging is assigned without regard to histological findings, even if
available. Still, distinct histological types are recognized.

Invasive Mole
These are a common trophoblastic neoplasm, and almost all invasive moles
arise from partial or complete moles. Previously known as chorioadenoma
destruens, invasive mole is characterized by extensive tissue invasion by
trophoblast and whole villi. Trophoblastic cells penetrate deep into the
myometrium and sometimes involve the peritoneum, adjacent parametrium,
or vaginal vault. Although locally aggressive, invasive moles are less prone
to metastasize.

Gestational Choriocarcinoma
This is the most common trophoblastic neoplasm to follow a term pregnancy
or a miscarriage, and only a fourth of cases follow a molar gestation (Soper,
2021). Choriocarcinoma is composed of cells reminiscent of early
cytotrophoblast and syncytiotrophoblast, however, it contains no villi. This
rapidly growing tumor invades both myometrium and blood vessels to create
hemorrhage and necrosis. Myometrial tumor may spread outward and
become visible on the uterine surface as dark, irregular nodules. Metastases
often develop early and are generally blood-borne. The most common sites
are the lungs and vagina, but tumor may travel to the vulva, kidneys, liver,
brain, ovaries, and bowel. With choriocarcinomas, ovarian theca-lutein cysts
commonly coexist.

Placental Site Trophoblastic Tumor
This uncommon tumor arises from intermediate trophoblasts at the placental
site. These tumors have associated serum β-hCG levels that may be only
modestly elevated (Gadducci, 2019). However, they produce variant forms
of hCG, and identifying a high proportion of free β-hCG favors this diagnosis
(Horowitz, 2017). Treatment of placental site trophoblastic tumor by
hysterectomy is preferred because these locally invasive tumors are usually
resistant to chemotherapy. For higher-risk stage I and for later stages,
adjuvant multidrug chemotherapy also is given (Koh, 2018; Schmid, 2009).

Epithelioid Trophoblastic Tumor

This rare tumor develops from chorionic-type intermediate trophoblast.
The uterus is mainly involved, and bleeding but low hCG levels are typical
findings (Gadducci, 2019). Primary treatment is hysterectomy because this
tumor is relatively resistant to chemotherapy. Metastatic disease is common,
and combination chemotherapy is employed (Frijstein, 2019; Koh, 2018).

■ Treatment
Women with GTN are best managed by oncologists, and some evidence
supports treatment in centers specializing in GTN (Kohorn, 2014).
Chemotherapy alone is usually the primary treatment. In some GTN cases
without extrauterine disease, a second uterine evacuation may be an adjuvant
therapeutic option to avoid or minimize chemotherapy (Hemida, 2019; Koh,
2018; Pezeshki, 2004). In other cases, suction curettage may infrequently be
needed to resolve bleeding or remove a substantial amount of retained molar
tissue. In specific cases, hysterectomy may be primary or adjuvant treatment
(Bolze, 2018; Eysbouts, 2017b).
Single-agent chemotherapy protocols are usually sufficient for
nonmetastatic or low-risk metastatic neoplasia (Lawrie, 2016; Koh, 2018).
In their review of 108 women with low-risk disease, Abrão and colleagues
(2008) reported that monotherapy protocols with either methotrexate or
actinomycin D were equally effective compared with a regimen containing
both. In general, methotrexate is less toxic than actinomycin D (Chan, 2006;
Seckl, 2010). Regimens are repeated until serum β-hCG levels are
undetectable.
Combination chemotherapy is given for high-risk disease, and reported
cure rates approximate 90 percent (Lurain, 2011). Several regimens are
successful. One is EMA-CO, which includes etoposide, methotrexate,
actinomycin D, cyclophosphamide, and vincristine (Oncovin). In selected
cases, adjuvant surgical and radiotherapy also may be employed (Hanna,
2010). Despite chemotherapy successes in general, frequent causes of death
include hemorrhage from metastatic sites, respiratory failure, sepsis, and
multiorgan failure due to widespread chemoresistant disease (Lybol, 2012;
Neubauer, 2015).
With either low- or high-risk disease, once serum β-hCG levels are
undetectable, serosurveillance is continued for 1 year. During this time,
effective contraception is crucial to avoid teratogenic effects of

chemotherapy to the fetus and to mitigate confusion from rising β-hCG levels
caused by superimposed pregnancy.
A few women during surveillance, despite no evidence of metastases,
will be found to have very low β-hCG levels that plateau. This phenomenon
is called quiescent hCG and presumably stems from dormant trophoblast.
Close observation without therapy is recommended, but 20 percent will
eventually have recurrent active and progressive GTN (Ngu, 2014).

SUBSEQUENT PREGNANCY
Women with prior hydatidiform mole generally do not have impaired
fertility, and their pregnancy outcomes are usually normal (Joneborg, 2014;
Matsui, 2001; Sebire, 2003). One concern is the 1-percent risk for
developing trophoblastic disease in a subsequent pregnancy (p. 237).
Sonographic evaluation is recommended in early pregnancy, and
subsequently as needed.
Women with GTN who have successfully completed chemotherapy are
advised to delay pregnancy for 1 year. Most relapses develop within this
time period (Tranoulis, 2019). Also, methotrexate may persist in human
tissues for months (Hackmon, 2011). Despite this, women who become
pregnant within 1 year postchemotherapy for GTN can be reassured of a
likely favorable outcome (Woolas, 1998). Risk of miscarriage or GTN
relapse is not increased compared with women conceiving after the
suggested 1-year surveillance (Williams, 2014). However, these gravidas
are advised that the diagnosis of a tumor relapse may be delayed during
pregnancy (Blagden, 2002; Tuncer, 1999a).
In general, fertility and pregnancy outcomes following GTN treatment are
typically normal, and congenital anomaly rates are not increased (Berkowitz,
2000; Tse, 2012). One exception is a higher stillbirth rate of 1.5 percent
compared with a background rate of 0.8 percent (Vargas, 2014).
For those with prior hydatidiform mole or GTN treatment, the placenta or
products of conception in a subsequent pregnancy are sent for pathological
evaluation at delivery. A serum β-hCG level also is measured 6 weeks
postpartum (Lurain, 2010; Royal College of Obstetricians and
Gynaecologists, 2010). This assay may be less valuable for those solely with
a prior mole compared with those previously treated for GTN (Earp, 2019).

REFERENCES
Abrão RA, de Andrade JM, Tiezzi DG, et al: Treatment for low-risk gestational trophoblastic disease:
comparison of single-agent methotrexate, dactinomycin and combination regimens. Gynecol Oncol
108:149, 2008
Banet N, DeScipio C, Murphy KM, et al: Characteristics of hydatidiform moles: analysis of a
prospective series with p57 immunohistochemistry and molecular genotyping. Mod Pathol 27(2):238,
2014
Benirschke K, Burton GJ, Baergen RN (eds): Molar pregnancies. In Pathology of the Human Placenta,
6th ed. New York, Springer, 2012, p 687
Berkowitz RS, Goldstein DP: Current management of gestational trophoblastic diseases. Gynecol Oncol
112(3):654, 2009
Berkowitz RS, Tuncer ZS, Bernstein MR: Management of gestational trophoblastic diseases: subsequent
pregnancy experience. Semin Oncol 27(6):678, 2000
Blagden SP, Foskett MA, Fisher RA, et al: The effect of early pregnancy following chemotherapy on
disease relapse and foetal outcome in women treated for gestational trophoblastic tumours. Br J
Cancer 86(1):26, 2002
Bolze PA, Mathe M, Hajri T, et al: First-line hysterectomy for women with low-risk non-metastatic
gestational trophoblastic neoplasia no longer wishing to conceive. Gynecol Oncol 150(2):282, 2018
Cagayan MS: Vaginal metastases complicating gestational trophoblastic neoplasia. J Reprod Med 55(5–
6):229, 2010
Castrillon DH, Sun D, Weremowicz S, et al: Discrimination of complete hydatidiform mole from its
mimics by immunohistochemistry of the paternally imprinted gene product p57KIP2. Am J Surg
Pathol 25(10):1225, 2001
Cavoretto P, Cioffi R, Mangili G, et al: A pictorial ultrasound essay of gestational trophoblastic disease. J
Ultrasound Med 39(3):597, 2020
Chan KK, Huang Y, Tam KF, et al: Single-dose methotrexate regimen in the treatment of low-risk
gestational trophoblastic neoplasia. Am J Obstet Gynecol 195:1282, 2006
Choi MC, Lee C, Smith HO, et al: Epidemiology. In Hancock BW, Seckl MJ, Berkowitz RS (eds):
Gestational trophoblastic disease, 4th ed. London, International Society for the Study of
Trophoblastic Disease, 2015, p 57
Cormano J, Mackay G, Holschneider C: Gestational trophoblastic disease diagnosis delayed by the hook
effect. Obstet Gynecol 126(4):811, 2015
de Medeiros SF, Norman RJ: Human chorionic gonadotrophin protein core and sugar branches
heterogeneity: basic and clinical insights. Hum Reprod Update 15(1):69, 2009
Delmis J, Pfeifer D, Ivanisecvic M, et al: Sudden death from trophoblastic embolism in pregnancy. Eur J
Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 92:225, 2000
Drake RD, Rao GG, McIntire DD, et al: Gestational trophoblastic disease among Hispanic women: a
21-year hospital-based study. Gynecol Oncol 103:81, 2006
Eagles N, Sebire NJ, Short D, et al: Risk of recurrent molar pregnancies following complete and partial
hydatidiform moles. Hum Reprod 30(9):2055, 2015
Earp KE, Hancock BW, Short D, et al: Do we need post-pregnancy screening with human chorionic
gonadotrophin after previous hydatidiform mole to identify patients with recurrent gestational
trophoblastic disease? Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 234:117, 2019
Elias KM, Shoni M, Bernstein M, et al: Complete hydatidiform mole in women aged 40 to 49 years. J
Reprod Med 57(5-6):254, 2012

Eysbouts Y, Brouwer R, Ottevanger P, et al: Serum human chorionic gonadotropin normogram for the
detection of gestational trophoblastic neoplasia. Int J Gynecol Cancer 27(5):1035, 2017a
Eysbouts YK, Bulten J, Ottevanger PB, et al: Trends in incidence for gestational trophoblastic disease
over the last 20 years in a population-based study. Gynecol Oncol 140(1):70, 2016
Eysbouts YK, Massuger LF, IntHout J, et al: The added value of hysterectomy in the management of
gestational trophoblastic neoplasia. Gynecol Oncol 145(3):536, 2017b
FIGO Committee on Gynecologic Oncology: Current FIGO staging for cancer of the vagina, fallopian
tube, ovary, and gestational trophoblastic neoplasia. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 105:3, 2009
Fowler DJ, Lindsay I, Seckl MJ, et al: Routine pre-evacuation ultrasound diagnosis of hydatidiform mole:
experience of more than 1000 cases from a regional referral center. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol
27(1):56, 2006
Frijstein MM, Lok CA, van Trommel NE, et al: Management and prognostic factors of epithelioid
trophoblastic tumors: results from the International Society for the Study of Trophoblastic Diseases
database. Gynecol Oncol 152(2):361, 2019
Gadducci A, Carinelli S, Guerrieri ME, et al: Placental site trophoblastic tumor and epithelioid
trophoblastic tumor: clinical and pathological features, prognostic variables and treatment strategy.
Gynecol Oncol 153(3):684, 2019
Goldstein DP, Berkowitz RS: Current management of gestational trophoblastic neoplasia. Hematol
Oncol Clin North Am 26(1):111, 2012
Gueye M, Kane-Gueye SM, Ndiaye-Gueye MD, et al: Gestational trophoblastic neoplasia after
achieving a nondetectable serum human chorionic gonadotrophin level. BJOG 121(11):1415, 2014
Hackmon R, Sakaguchi S, Koren G: Effect of methotrexate treatment of ectopic pregnancy on
subsequent pregnancy. Can Fam Physician 57(1):37, 2011
Hankins GD, Wendel GD, Snyder RR, et al: Trophoblastic embolization during molar evacuation: central
hemodynamic observations. Obstet Gynecol 63:368, 1987
Hanna RK, Soper JT: The role of surgery and radiation therapy in the management of gestational
trophoblastic disease. Oncologist 15(6):593, 2010
Harvey RA, Mitchell HD, Stenman UH, et al: Differences in total human chorionic gonadotropin
immunoassay analytical specificity and ability to measure human chorionic gonadotropin in
gestational trophoblastic disease and germ cell tumors. J Reprod Med 55(7-8):28, 2010
Hemida R, Vos EL, El-Deek B, et al: Second uterine curettage and the number of chemotherapy
courses in postmolar gestational trophoblastic neoplasia: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet
Gynecol 133(5):1024, 2019
Horowitz NS, Goldstein DP, Berkowitz RS: Placental site trophoblastic tumors and epithelioid
trophoblastic tumors: biology, natural history, and treatment modalities. Gynecol Oncol 144(1):208,
2017
Hui P, Baergen R, Cheung AN, et al: Gestational trophoblastic neoplasia. In Kurman RJ, Carcangiu LM,
Herrington CS, et al (eds): WHO Classification of Tumours of Female Reproductive Organs. Lyon,
International Agency for Research on Cancer, 2014a, p 155
Hui P, Baergen R, Cheung AN, et al: Molar pregnancies. In Kurman RJ, Carcangiu LM, Herrington CS,
et al (eds): WHO Classification of Tumours of Female Reproductive Organs. Lyon, International
Agency for Research on Cancer, 2014b, p 163
Jauniaux E, Memtsa M, Johns J, et al: New insights in the pathophysiology of complete hydatidiform
mole. Placenta 62:28, 2018
Joergensen MW, Niemann I, Rasmussen AA, et al: Triploid pregnancies: genetic and clinical features of
158 cases. Am J Obstet Gynecol 211(4):370.e1, 2014

Joneborg U, Eloranta S, Johansson AL, et al: Hydatidiform mole and subsequent pregnancy outcome: a
population-based cohort study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 211(6):681.e1, 2014
Kang WD, Choi HS, Kim SM: Prediction of persistent gestational trophoblastic neoplasia: the role of
hCG level and ratio in 2 weeks after evacuation of complete mole. Gynecol Oncol 124(2):250, 2012
Kofinas JD, Kruczek A, Sample J, et al: Thyroid storm-induced multi-organ failure in the setting of
gestational trophoblastic disease. J Emerg Med 48(1):35, 2015
Koh WJ, Abu-Rustum NR, Besn S, et al: Gestational trophoblastic neoplasia, version 1.2019. Plymouth
Meeting, National Comprehensive Cancer Network, 2018
Kohorn EI: Worldwide survey of the results of treating gestational trophoblastic disease. J Reprod Med
59(3-4):145, 2014
Lakovschek IC, Streubel B, Ulm B: Natural outcome of trisomy 13, trisomy 18, and triploidy after
prenatal diagnosis. Am J Med Genet A 155A(11):262, 2011
Lawler SD, Fisher RA, Dent J: A prospective genetic study of complete and partial hydatidiform moles.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 164:1270, 1991
Lawrie TA, Alazzam M, Tidy J, et al: First-line chemotherapy in low-risk gestational trophoblastic
neoplasia. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 6:CD007102, 2016
Lee SW, Kim MY, Chung JH, et al: Clinical findings of multiple pregnancy with a complete hydatidiform
mole and coexisting fetus. J Ultrasound Med 29(2):271, 2010
Lin LH, Maestá I, Braga A, et al: Multiple pregnancies with complete mole and coexisting normal fetus
in North and South America: a retrospective multicenter cohort and literature review. Gynecol Oncol
145(1):88, 2017
Lurain JR: Gestational trophoblastic disease I: epidemiology, pathology, clinical presentation and
diagnosis of gestational trophoblastic disease, and management of hydatidiform mole. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 203(6):531, 2010
Lurain JR: Gestational trophoblastic disease II: classification and management of gestational
trophoblastic neoplasia. Am J Obstet Gynecol 204(1):11, 2011
Lybol C, Centen DW, Thomas CM, et al: Fatal cases of gestational trophoblastic neoplasia over four
decades in the Netherlands: a retrospective cohort study. BJOG 119(12):1465, 2012
Matsui H, Iitsuka Y, Suzuka K, et al: Subsequent pregnancy outcome in patients with spontaneous
resolution of HCG after evacuation of hydatidiform mole: comparison between complete and partial
mole. Hum Reprod 16(6):1274, 2011
Melamed A, Gockley AA, Joseph NT, et al: Effect of race/ethnicity on risk of complete and partial
molar pregnancy after adjustment for age. Gynecol Oncol 143(1):73, 2016
Merchant SH, Amin MB, Viswanatha DS, et al: p57KIP2 immunohistochemistry in early molar
pregnancies: emphasis on its complementary role in the differential diagnosis of hydropic abortuses.
Hum Pathol 36:180, 2005
Neubauer NL, Strohl AE, Schink JC, et al: Fatal gestational trophoblastic neoplasia: an analysis of
treatment failures at the Brewer Trophoblastic Disease Center from 1979–2012 compared to 1962–
1978. Gynecol Oncol 138(2):339, 2015
Ngan HY, Seckl MJ, Berkowitz RS, et al: Update on the diagnosis and management of gestational
trophoblastic disease. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 143(Suppl 2):79, 2018
Ngu SF, Chan KK: Management of chemoresistant and quiescent gestational trophoblastic disease. Curr
Obstet Gynecol Rep 3:84, 2014
Niemann I, Petersen LK, Hansen ES, et al: Differences in current clinical features of diploid and triploid
hydatidiform mole. BJOG 114:1273, 2007

Ohama K, Kajii T, Okamoto E, et al: Dispermic origin of XY hydatidiform moles. Nature 292(5823):551,
1981
Osborne RJ, Filiaci VL, Schink JC, et al: Second curettage for low-risk nonmetastatic gestation-al
trophoblastic neoplasia. Obstet Gynecol 128(3):535, 2016
Patel S, Roberts S, Rogers V, et al (eds): Williams Obstetrics Study Guide, 25th Edition. New York,
McGraw-Hill Education, 2019, p 138
Pezeshki M, Hancock BW, Silcocks P: The role of repeat uterine evacuation in the management of
persistent gestational trophoblastic disease. Gynecol Oncol 95(3):423, 2004
Ronnett BM: Hydatidiform moles: ancillary techniques to refine diagnosis. Arch Pathol Lab Med
142(12):1485, 2018
Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists: The management of gestational trophoblastic
disease. Green-top Guideline No. 38, 2010
Savage JL, Maturen KE, Mowers EL, et al: Sonographic diagnosis of partial versus complete molar
pregnancy: a reappraisal. J Clin Ultrasound 45(2):72, 2017
Savage PM, Sita-Lumsden A, Dickson S, et al: The relationship of maternal age to molar pregnancy
incidence, risks for chemotherapy and subsequent pregnancy outcome. J Obstet Gynaecol 33(4):406,
2013
Schmid P, Nagai Y, Agarwal R: Prognostic markers and long-term outcome of placental-site
trophoblastic tumours: a retrospective observational study. Lancet 374(9683):48, 2009
Sebire NJ, Fisher RA, Foskett M, et al: Risk of recurrent hydatidiform mole and subsequent pregnancy
outcome following complete or partial hydatidiform molar pregnancy. BJOG 110(1):22, 2003
Sebire NJ, Foskett M, Fisher RA, et al: Risk of partial and complete hydatidiform molar pregnancy in
relation to maternal age. BJOG 109:99, 2002a
Sebire NJ, Foskett M, Paradinas FJ, et al: Outcome of twin pregnancies with complete hydatidiform
mole and healthy co-twin. Lancet 359:2165, 2002b
Sebire NJ, Foskett M, Short D, et al: Shortened duration of human chorionic gonadotrophin surveillance
following complete or partial hydatidiform mole: evidence for revised protocol of a UK regional
trophoblastic disease unit. BJOG 114(6):760, 2007
Sebire NJ, Lindsay I, Fisher RA: Overdiagnosis of complete and partial hydatidiform mole in tubal
ectopic pregnancies. Int J Gynecol Pathol 24(3):260, 2005
Seckl MJ, Sebire NJ, Berkowitz RS: Gestational trophoblastic disease. Lancet 376(9742):717, 2010
Soper JT: Gestational trophoblastic disease: current evaluation and management. Obstet Gynecol
137(2):355, 2021
Sun SY, Goldstein DP, Bernstein MR, et al: Maternal near miss according to World Health Organization
classification among women with a hydatidiform mole: experience at the New England Trophoblastic
Disease Center, 1994–2013. J Reprod Med 61(5–6):210, 2016
Sun SY, Melamed A, Goldstein DP, et al: Changing presentation of complete hydatidiform mole at the
New England Trophoblastic Disease Center over the past three decades: does early diagnosis alter
risk for gestational trophoblastic neoplasia? Gynecol Oncol 138(1):46, 2015
Tidy JA, Gillespie AM, Bright N, et al: Gestational trophoblastic disease: a study of mode of evacuation
and subsequent need for treatment with chemotherapy. Gynecol Oncol 78:309, 2000
Tranoulis A, Georgiou D, Sayasneh A, et al: Gestational trophoblastic neoplasia: a meta-analysis
evaluating reproductive and obstetrical outcomes after administration of chemotherapy. Int J
Gynecol Cancer 29(6):1021, 2019
Tse KY, Chan KK, Tam KF: 20-year experience of managing profuse bleeding in gestational
trophoblastic disease. J Reprod Med 52(5):397, 2007

Tse KY, Ngan HY: Gestational trophoblastic disease. Best Pract Res Clin Obstet Gynaecol 26(3):357,
2012
Tuncer ZS, Bernstein MR, Goldstein DP, et al: Outcome of pregnancies occurring before completion of
human chorionic gonadotropin follow-up in patients with persistent gestational trophoblastic tumor.
Gynecol Oncol 73(3):345, 1999a
Tuncer ZS, Bernstein MR, Goldstein DP, et al: Outcome of pregnancies occurring within 1 year of
hydatidiform mole. Obstet Gynecol 94(4):588, 1999b
Vargas R, Barroilhet LM, Esselen K, et al: Subsequent pregnancy outcomes after complete and partial
molar pregnancy, recurrent molar pregnancy, and gestational trophoblastic neoplasia: an update from
the New England Trophoblastic Disease Center. J Reprod Med 59(5-6):188, 2014
Wang Q, Fu J, Hu L, et al: Prophylactic chemotherapy for hydatidiform mole to prevent gestational
trophoblastic neoplasia. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 9:CD007289, 2017
Wee L, Jauniaux E: Prenatal diagnosis and management of twin pregnancies complicated by a coexisting molar pregnancy. Prenat Diagn 25(9):772, 2005
Williams J, Short D, Dayal L, et al: Effect of early pregnancy following chemotherapy on disease
relapse and fetal outcome in women treated for gestational trophoblastic neoplasia. J Reprod Med
59(5-6):248, 2014
Wolfberg AJ, Berkowitz RS, Goldstein DP: Postevacuation hCG levels and risk of gestational
trophoblastic neoplasia in women with complete molar pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 106(3):548, 2005
Woolas RP, Bower M, Newlands ES, et al: Influence of chemotherapy for gestational trophoblastic
disease on subsequent pregnancy outcome. BJOG 105:1032, 1998
World Health Organization Scientific Group: Gestational trophoblastic disease. WHO Tech Rep Ser
692:1, 1983
Yamada Y, Ohira S, Yamazaki T, et al: Ectopic molar pregnancy: diagnostic efficacy of magnetic
resonance imaging and review of the literature. Case Rep Obstet Gynecol 2016:7618631, 2016
Xing D, Adams E, Huang J, et al: Refined diagnosis of hydatidiform moles with p57
immunohistochemistry and molecular genotyping: updated analysis of a prospective series of 2217
cases. Mod Pathol 34(5):961, 2021
Zhao P, Lu Y, Huang W, et al: Total hysterectomy versus uterine evacuation for preventing post-molar
gestational trophoblastic neoplasia in patients who are at least 40 years old: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. BMC Cancer 19(1):13, 2019

SECTION 6

THE FETAL PATIENT

CHAPTER 14

Obstetrical Imaging

TECHNOLOGY AND SAFETY
GESTATIONAL AGE ASSESSMENT
FIRST-TRIMESTER ULTRASOUND
SECOND- AND THIRD-TRIMESTER ULTRASOUND
PLACENTA AND CERVIX
HYDRAMNIOS
OLIGOHYDRAMNIOS
DOPPLER
MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING
REFERENCES
Obstetrical ultrasound is fundamental to prenatal care. It is used to confirm
gestational age and viability; to detect and characterize abnormalities of the
fetus, amnionic fluid, and placenta; and to assist with diagnostic and
therapeutic procedures.
Ultrasound practice continues to evolve. The number of components
included in the second-trimester standard and detailed fetal anatomical
surveys has expanded. With improved image resolution, fetal abnormalities
are increasingly identified in the late first trimester. This has prompted the
requirement for a limited anatomical survey during the standard first-

trimester examination and has led to the development of a new detailed firsttrimester examination. Detailed placental evaluation is a new specialized
examination to aid detection and characterization of placenta accreta
spectrum.
Across the United States, pregnant women receive ultrasound
examinations in various practice settings staffed by obstetrician–
gynecologists, maternal–fetal medicine specialists, and radiologists. Ideally,
examinations are performed by registered diagnostic medical sonographers
or physicians with certification in their area(s) of practice and in units
accredited by the American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine (AIUM) or
American College of Radiology. Components of accreditation include
evidence of physician training, sonographer credentialing, continuing
medical education, and protocols and procedures to ensure proper and safe
ultrasound practice. One important component is independent review of
submitted images.
To standardize ultrasound education for residents in obstetrics and
gynecology and fellows in maternal-fetal medicine, the American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, the Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine,
and the AIUM have developed consensus documents (Abuhamad, 2018;
Benacerraf, 2018). A focus of training—and of ultrasound practice—is
standardization of an ultrasound curriculum and provision of competency
assessment tools for image acquisition.

TECHNOLOGY AND SAFETY
The image on the ultrasound screen is produced by sound waves that are
reflected back from fluid and tissue interfaces of the fetus, amnionic fluid,
and placenta. Ultrasound transducers contain groups of piezoelectric crystals
that convert electrical energy into sound waves and convert returning sound
waves back into electrical energy. The sound waves are emitted in
synchronized pulses. As these pulses pass through tissue layers, dense tissue
such as bone produces high-velocity reflected waves. With routine grayscale imaging, which is also known as brightness-mode (B-mode), these
reflected waves are displayed as bright echoes on the screen. Conversely,
fluid generates few reflected waves and appears dark. Digital images
generated at 50 to more than 100 frames per second undergo postprocessing
that yields the appearance of real-time imaging.

Ultrasound refers to sound waves traveling at a frequency above 20,000
hertz (Hz [cycles per second]). Transducers use wide-bandwidth technology
to perform within a range of frequencies. Higher-frequency transducers yield
better image resolution, whereas lower frequencies penetrate tissue more
effectively. In early pregnancy, a 5- to 12-megahertz (MHz) transvaginal
transducer usually provides excellent resolution, because the early fetus lies
close to the transducer. In the first and second trimesters, a 4- to 6-MHz
transabdominal transducer is similarly sufficiently close to the fetus to yield
precise images. By the third trimester, however, a lower-frequency 2- to 5MHz transducer may be needed for tissue penetration—particularly in obese
patients—and this can lead to compromised image resolution.

■ Embryo and Fetal Safety
Sonography should be performed only for a valid medical indication and use
the lowest possible exposure setting to gain necessary information. This is
the ALARA principle—as low as reasonably achievable. Examinations are
performed only by those trained to recognize fetal abnormalities and artifacts
that may mimic pathology and with techniques to avoid ultrasound exposure
beyond what is considered safe for the fetus (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020; American Institute of Ultrasound in
Medicine, 2018a). No causal relationship has been demonstrated between
diagnostic ultrasound and any recognized adverse effect in human pregnancy.
The International Society of Ultrasound in Obstetrics and Gynecology (2016)
further concludes that there is no scientifically proven association between
ultrasound exposure in the first or second trimesters and autism spectrum
disorder or its severity.
All ultrasound machines are required to display two indices: the thermal
index and the mechanical index. The thermal index measures the relative
probability that the examination may raise the temperature enough to induce
injury. However, fetal damage resulting from commercially available
ultrasound equipment in routine practice is extremely unlikely. The potential
for temperature elevation is higher with longer examination time and is
greater near bone than in soft tissue. Theoretical risks are higher during
organogenesis than later in gestation. The thermal index for soft tissue, Tis,
should be used before 10 weeks’ gestation, and that for bone, Tib, at or
beyond 10 weeks (American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine, 2018a).

The thermal index is higher with pulsed Doppler applications than with
routine B-mode scanning. In the first trimester, if pulsed Doppler is clinically
indicated, the thermal index should be ≤0.7, and the exposure time should be
as brief as possible (American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine, 2020b).
This is an important consideration when pulsed Doppler is applied to assist
with identification or characterization of suspected abnormalities at 11 to 14
weeks’ gestation. To document the embryonic or fetal heart rate, motionmode (M-mode) scanning is used instead of pulsed Doppler imaging.
The mechanical index is a measure of the likelihood of adverse effects
related to rarefactional pressure, such as cavitation, which is relevant only in
tissues that contain air. Microbubble ultrasound contrast agents are not used
in pregnancy for this reason. In mammalian tissues that do not contain gas
bodies, no adverse effects have been reported over the range of
diagnostically relevant exposures. Fetuses cannot contain gas bodies and thus
are not considered at risk.
The use of ultrasound for any nonmedical purpose, such as “keepsake
fetal imaging,” is considered contrary to responsible medical practice and
is not condoned by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) (2019), the
American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine (2020b), or the American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020b). However, images or
video clips from medically indicated ultrasound examinations may be shared
with patients.

■ Operator Safety
The reported prevalence of work-related musculoskeletal discomfort or
injury among sonographers approximates 70 percent (Janga, 2012; Roll,
2012). The most common injuries are capsulitis and tendonitis of the
shoulder, epicondylitis of the elbow, carpal and cubital tunnel syndrome, and
neck or back strain (Murphey, 2018). The main risk factors for injury during
transabdominal ultrasound examinations are awkward posture, sustained
static forces, and various pinch grips used to maneuver the transducer
(Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2006). Excessive flexion,
extension, or abduction while scanning places stress on joints and muscles.
Task repetition without adequate recovery time may compound risks.
Maternal habitus can be contributory because more force is often needed
when imaging obese patients.

The following guidelines may help avert injury:
1. Position the patient close to you on the examination table. As a result, your
elbow is close to your body, shoulder abduction is <30 degrees, and your
thumb is facing up.
2. Adjust the table or chair height so that your forearm is parallel to the floor.
3. Use a chair with back support, if seated. Avoid leaning toward the patient
or monitor. Support your feet, and keep ankles in neutral position.
4. Face the monitor squarely and position it so that it is viewed at a neutral
angle from the horizon, such as 15 degrees downward.
5. Avoid reaching, bending, or twisting while scanning.
6. Take frequent breaks to help prevent muscle strain. Stretching and
strengthening exercises can be helpful.

GESTATIONAL AGE ASSESSMENT
Gestational age is based on two things: the certainty of the woman’s last
menstrual period (LMP) date and measurements of the embryo or fetus at the
initial ultrasound examination. Gestational sac measurement is not suitable
for gestational age assignment. If the LMP is certain, the estimated due date
(EDD) is based on LMP unless the date–measurement discrepancy exceeds
thresholds listed in Table 14-1 (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2019b,c). If the discrepancy exceeds these thresholds, or if
the LMP is uncertain or unknown, ultrasound measurements establish the
EDD.
TABLE 14-1. Assessment of Gestational Age

Ultrasound measurement of the crown-rump length (CRL) is the most
accurate method to establish or confirm gestational age (Appendix, p. 1234).
Transvaginal imaging yields higher resolution images. The CRL is measured
in the midsagittal plane with the embryo or fetus in a neutral, nonflexed
position. This allows its length to be measured in a straight line (Fig. 14-1).
The mean of three discrete measurements is used. Before 14 weeks’
gestation, the CRL is accurate to within 5 to 7 days (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019c).

FIGURE 14-1 A. The measured crown-rump length is approximately 7 mm in this 6-week embryo. B.
M-mode demonstrates embryonic cardiac activity and a heart rate of 124 beats per minute.

Starting at 140/7 weeks’ gestation, the biparietal diameter, head
circumference, abdominal circumference, and femur length should be
measured. Equipment software formulas calculate estimated gestational age
and fetal weight from these four biometric parameters. The accuracy of the
fetal weight estimate is assumed to be within 15 percent of the actual weight
(American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine, 2018a). Measurement criteria
are discussed in Chapter 15 (p. 272).
Before 22 weeks, gestational age assessment using these four biometric
parameters is accurate to within 7 to 10 days (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019c). Various nomograms are available
for other structural measurements, including the transverse cerebellar
diameter, orbital distances, thoracic circumference, and length of the ear,
kidney, long bones, and feet. These may be used to address specific questions
regarding organ system abnormalities or syndromes (Appendix, pp. 1238–
1241).
If the initial ultrasound examination is performed at or beyond 22 weeks’
gestation, the pregnancy is suboptimally dated (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019b). In such cases, subsequent
ultrasound evaluation in 3 to 4 weeks may be considered. This is especially
true if the ultrasound measurements are smaller than expected for gestational
age based on LMP and thus poor fetal growth is a possibility.
Fertilization is presumed to occur 2 weeks after a confident LMP.
Therefore, for pregnancies achieved with in vitro fertilization and fresh
transfer, 266 days are added to the egg-retrieval/fertilization date to calculate

the EDD. Similarly, if using a day-3 frozen embryo, adding 263 days
accounts for the days of embryo culture. For pregnancies conceived with
intrauterine insemination, LMP is used.

FIRST-TRIMESTER ULTRASOUND
The three types of first-trimester examinations include standard ultrasound;
nuchal translucency evaluation—between 11 and 14 weeks’ gestation; and
detailed first-trimester anatomy evaluation between 12 and 14 weeks’
gestation.
Indications for the standard first-trimester examination are listed in Table
14-2 (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020;
American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine, 2018a). Early pregnancy can
be evaluated with transabdominal or transvaginal sonography, or both. The
components listed in Table 14-3 should be assessed (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020; American Institute of Ultrasound in
Medicine, 2018a). The first trimester is the ideal time to evaluate the uterus,
adnexa, and cul-de-sac. Ultrasound interrogation at this time can reliably
diagnose anembryonic gestation, embryonic demise, ectopic pregnancy, and
gestational trophoblastic disease. In a multifetal gestation, determination of
chorionicity is most accurate in the first trimester (Chap. 48, p. 841).
Gestational sac implantation in a prior cesarean scar is increasingly detected
in the first trimester as well.
TABLE 14-2. Indications for First-Trimester Ultrasound Examination

TABLE 14-3. Components of Standard Ultrasound Examination by
Trimester

An intrauterine gestational sac may be consistently visualized with
transvaginal sonography by 5 weeks’ gestation, and an embryo with cardiac
activity by 6 weeks. The embryo should be visible transvaginally once the
mean sac diameter has reached 25 mm—otherwise the gestation is
anembryonic. Whenever an embryo or fetus is identified, it should be
measured, and cardiac motion should be documented with either video clip
or M-mode scanning (see Fig. 14-1B). Cardiac motion may be visible with
transvaginal imaging when the length of the embryo is 2 mm and should be
visible at 7 mm in a live embryo (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2020). If an embryo measures <7 mm and has no visible
cardiac activity, subsequent examination is recommended in 1 week
(American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine, 2018a). At Parkland
Hospital, first-trimester demise is diagnosed with transvaginal ultrasound if
the embryo has reached 10 mm and lacks cardiac motion, taking measurement
error into consideration. Criteria to diagnose first-trimester demise are found
in Table 11-2 (p. 202).
A recent addition to the standard first-trimester examination is an
assessment of selected anatomical components when fetal size permits.
These include the calvarium, umbilical cord insertion into the ventral wall,
and presence of extremities (American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine,
2018a).

■ Nuchal Translucency
This represents the maximum thickness of the subcutaneous translucent area
between the skin and soft tissue overlying the fetal spine at the back of the
neck. The nuchal translucency (NT) is measured in the sagittal plane between
11 and 14 weeks’ gestation using precise criteria (Table 14-4) (American
Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine, 2018a; International Society of
Ultrasound in Obstetrics and Gynecology, 2016). When the NT measurement
is increased, the risk for fetal aneuploidy and various structural anomalies—
in particular heart defects—is significantly elevated. It is a component of
first-trimester aneuploidy screening, which is discussed in Chapter 17 (p.
337). The aneuploidy risk calculation depends on the crown-rump length.
However, an NT measurement ≥3 mm is associated with increased risk for
fetal structural or genetic abnormalities and is an indication for a detailed
fetal anatomical survey.

TABLE 14-4. Guidelines for Nuchal Translucency (NT) Measurement

■ Detailed First-Trimester Ultrasound Examination
Assessment for fetal abnormalities in an at-risk pregnancy may include a
detailed survey of fetal anatomy at 12 to 14 weeks’ gestation. Such
examinations are a recent addition and limited to specialized centers with
advanced imaging skills, although use may be expected to expand. Despite
improvements in imaging technology, it is not realistic to expect that all
major abnormalities detectable in the second trimester may be visualized
in the first trimester. Abnormalities may change in appearance as the fetus
develops, and new findings may become evident. If an abnormality is
identified in the first trimester, detailed second-trimester sonography will be
important to further characterize the findings or identify associated
abnormalities. In an at-risk pregnancy, a normal first-trimester examination
does not obviate the recommendation for a detailed second-trimester fetal
anatomical survey.
In a systematic review of more than 118,000 pregnancies undergoing fetal
NT assessment, 46 percent of major abnormalities were detected in low-risk

or unselected pregnancies (Karim, 2017). In high-risk pregnancies, anomaly
detection exceeded 60 percent. Detection rates are high for fetal anencephaly,
alobar holoprosencephaly, and ventral wall defects. However, in one series
of 40,000 pregnancies with fetal anatomical evaluation at the time of NT
assessment, only a third of major cardiac anomalies were identified. No
cases of microcephaly, agenesis of the corpus callosum, cerebellar
abnormalities, congenital pulmonary airway malformations, or bowel
obstruction were detected (Syngelaki, 2011). Some of these abnormalities
had not yet developed by the end of the first trimester, and this is an
important caveat for counseling.

SECOND- AND THIRD-TRIMESTER ULTRASOUND
Ultrasound should be routinely offered to all pregnant women between 18
and 22 weeks’ gestation (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2020). Recognizing that the gestational age at which an
abnormality is identified may affect pregnancy management options,
providers often opt to perform the examination before 20 weeks. Indications
for second- and third-trimester sonograms are listed in Table 14-5
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020; American
Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine, 2018a). Based on data from large
insurance providers, pregnant women typically receive at least 4 to 5
sonograms per pregnancy (O’Keeffe, 2013). Examinations are classified as
standard, specialized, or limited. Specialized examination types include the
detailed fetal anatomy examination, detailed evaluation for placenta accreta
spectrum (p. 253), fetal echocardiography, Doppler velocimetry (p. 262),
and the biophysical profile (Chap. 20, p. 389).
TABLE 14-5. Indications for Standard Second- and Third-trimester
Ultrasound Examinations

■ Standard Second- and Third-Trimester Ultrasound
Examinations
The standard examination includes evaluation of fetal number and
presentation, cardiac activity, fetal biometry, amnionic fluid volume,
placental location, cervical length, and a survey of fetal anatomy (see Table
14-3). Anatomical components are listed in Table 15-1 (p. 273). With twins
or other multiples, documentation should also include the number of chorions
and amnions, comparison of fetal sizes, estimation of amnionic fluid volume
within each sac, and fetal phenotypic gender.

The American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine (2018a) revised its
prior 2013 standard ultrasound practice parameter to include the following
updates:
1. Components added to the standard fetal anatomical survey are presence of
the hands and feet, and when feasible, the three-vessel view and threevessel trachea views of the heart (Fig. 15-37, p. 290).
2. If the relationship between placenta and cervix cannot be assessed
transabdominally, transvaginal evaluation should be performed.
Transperineal evaluation remains an option but in our experience is rarely
used.
3. If the cervix appears abnormal or is not adequately visualized
transabdominally, transvaginal (or transperineal) examination is
recommended. If cervical length assessment is requested, measurement
should be based on a transvaginal image.
4. In the setting of velamentous cord insertion, color and pulsed Doppler
ultrasound should be used to evaluate for vasa previa (Figs. 6-6 and 6-7,
p. 115).

■ Detailed Second- and Third-Trimester Ultrasound
Examinations
The detailed fetal anatomy examination is also known as a targeted or
76811 examination. It is performed when the risk for a fetal structural or
genetic abnormality is elevated because of history, screening test result, or
abnormal finding during standard examination (Table 14-6) (American
Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine, 2019). The detailed ultrasound
examination is intended to be indication-driven and is not repeated without
an extenuating circumstance, such as a new risk factor (American Institute of
Ultrasound in Medicine, 2019). Physicians who perform or interpret these
ultrasound examinations should have gained expertise in fetal imaging
through both training and ongoing experience (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020).
TABLE 14-6. American Institute for Ultrasound in Medicine Indications for
Detailed Second- and Third-trimester Ultrasound Examinations

Components of the detailed examination are intended to be determined on
a case-by-case basis. Table 15-1 (p. 273) lists nearly 70 anatomical
components that may be included. When practices apply for adjunct
accreditation in performance of the detailed fetal anatomic survey, the
American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine specifies 50 components that
must be included when submitting normal cases for review. At Parkland
Hospital, we attempt to image these components in all detailed anatomic
surveys. When performing a given detailed examination, one challenge is
determining which components are needed for a given indication, as these
have not been codified. The most prevalent risk factors and thus indications
for detailed ultrasound examinations are maternal obesity and maternal age

≥35 years. In a systematic review of more than 16,000 pregnancies affected
by anomalies, obesity conferred modestly increased odds of a neural-tube
defect (1.9), ventriculomegaly (1.7), cardiovascular anomaly (1.3), cleft
lip/palate (1.2), anorectal atresia (1.5), and limb reduction defect (1.7)
(Stothard, 2009). Subsequently, Biggio and colleagues (2010) reported that
obesity was associated with a higher anomaly prevalence only in the setting
of diabetes. Maternal age ≥35 years is considered another indication for
detailed sonographic examination. However, the fetal anomaly risk may be
related to the associated increase in aneuploidy. Goetzinger and colleagues
(2017) found that the anomaly rate among euploid fetuses born to older
mothers was not increased.

■ Fetal Echocardiography
This specialized examination of fetal cardiac structure and function is
designed to identify and characterize abnormalities. Echocardiography
indications include suspected fetal cardiac structural or functional
abnormality; heart rate abnormality or arrhythmia; extracardiac anomaly or
hydrops; chromosomal abnormality; nuchal translucency ≥3.5 mm; in vitro
fertilization; monochorionic twin gestation; first-degree relative to the fetus
with a congenital cardiac defect; first- or second-degree relative to the fetus
with a Mendelian syndrome and childhood cardiac manifestation; prior fetus
with heart block in the setting of maternal anti-Ro or La antibodies; retinoid
exposure; and metabolic risk factor such as pregestational diabetes or
phenylketonuria (American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine, 2020a).
Selected cardiac anomalies are reviewed in Chap. 15 (p. 291).

■ Limited Ultrasound Examination
A limited second- or third-trimester examination is performed to address a
specific clinical question. Evaluation of fetal number, presentation, and
cardiac activity; amnionic fluid volume; and placental location with respect
to the internal os are common indications (American Institute of Ultrasound
in Medicine, 2018b). The examination may include fetal biometry but not a
complete anatomical survey. In the absence of an emergency, a limited
examination is performed only if a standard ultrasound survey has already

been completed. Otherwise, provided that the gestational age is at least 18
weeks, a standard ultrasound examination is recommended.

■ Fetal Anomaly Detection
With current advances in imaging technology, approximately 60 percent of
major fetal abnormalities may be detected during standard ultrasound
examinations (Byrne, 2020; Rydberg, 2017). For detailed ultrasound surveys
performed in pregnancies at increased risk for anomalies, detection rates
may exceed 90 percent (Dashe, 2009; Levi, 1998). The sensitivity of the
examination varies according to factors such as gestational age, maternal
habitus, fetal position, equipment features, examination type, operator skill,
and the specific abnormality. For example, maternal obesity lowers the
anomaly detection rate by 20 percent (Dashe, 2009).
Detection rates vary considerably according to the abnormality. In the
EUROCAT network of 28 population-based registries, 40 percent of major
fetal abnormalities are detected prenatally (EUROCAT, 2019). Detection
rates of selected abnormalities are as follows: anencephaly, 98 percent;
spina bifida, 89 percent; hydrocephaly, 82 percent; cleft lip/palate, 70
percent; hypoplastic left heart, 88 percent; transposition of the great vessels,
69 percent; diaphragmatic hernia, 73 percent; gastroschisis, 92 percent;
omphalocele, 90 percent; bilateral renal agenesis, 94 percent; posterior
urethral valves, 80 percent; limb reduction defects, 60 percent; and clubfoot,
60 percent. In contrast, anomalies with poor sonographic detection rates in
the second trimester include microcephaly, choanal atresia, cleft palate,
Hirschsprung disease, anal atresia, and congenital skin disorders. Although
clinicians tend to focus on abnormalities amenable to sonographic detection,
those that are undetectable can be no less devastating to families. Every
sonographic examination should include a frank discussion of examination
limitations.

■ Three-Dimensional Ultrasound Examination
Over the past three decades, three-dimensional (3-D) ultrasound has gone
from a novelty to a feature of all modern equipment. After a region of interest
is identified, a volume is acquired using a 3-D transducer. This volume can
be rendered to display axial, sagittal, coronal, or oblique images. Sequential

slices may be generated, similar to computed tomographic (CT) images.
Unlike two-dimensional (2-D) scanning, which appears to be happening in
real time on the screen, 3-D imaging is static and obtained by processing a
volume of stored images. With four-dimensional ultrasound, rapid
reconstruction of the rendered images conveys the impression that the
scanning is in real time.
For selected anomalies, such as those of the face and skeleton, for
tumors, and for some cases of neural-tube defects, 3-D sonography can add
useful information (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists,
2020; Goncalves, 2005). That said, comparisons of 3-D and conventional 2D sonography for the diagnosis of most congenital anomalies have not
demonstrated better overall detection rates (Goncalves, 2006; Reddy, 2008).
The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020b) has
concluded that proof of a clinical advantage of 3-D ultrasound for prenatal
diagnosis is generally lacking.

PLACENTA AND CERVIX
The standard examination includes evaluation of the anatomical relationship
between the placenta and the internal cervical os, the umbilical cord
insertion into the placenta, and cervical length assessment. (American
Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine, 2018a). Evaluation for placenta accreta
spectrum is a detailed examination type (see Table 14-6).

■ Placenta Previa and Low-lying Placenta
The location of the placenta with respect to the cervix may be accurately
assessed by approximately 16 weeks’ gestation. If transabdominal
visualization is limited, transvaginal ultrasound is recommended. Placenta
previa is diagnosed if the placenta overlies the internal cervical os to any
degree or reaches its margin (Fig. 14-2A). If the inferior placental edge is
within 2 cm of the internal os but does not reach the cervix, the diagnosis is
low-lying placenta (see Fig. 14-2B). Whenever placenta previa or low-lying
placenta are diagnosed, a follow-up ultrasound examination is recommended
at approximately 32 weeks’ gestation, with transvaginal evaluation if needed
to verify the relationship between the placenta and cervix. If findings persist,

a 36-week ultrasound examination also is recommended. Management of
these placenta types are discussed in Chapter 43 (p. 757).

FIGURE 14-2 A. Placenta previa. In this transvaginal image, the inferior edge (arrow) of the posterior
placenta (P) overlies the internal cervical os (arrowhead). H = head. B. Low-lying placenta. The
inferior placental edge (arrow) is within 2 cm of the internal cervical os (arrowhead) in this
transvaginal image. The bladder (B) is seen anterior to the cervix.

The umbilical cord insertion into the placenta should be interrogated.
Marginal cord insertion, also known as battledore placenta, is diagnosed if
the umbilical cord inserts into the edge of the placenta or within 2 cm of the
placental margin. If the umbilical cord does not insert into the placenta—but
rather into the membranes—the diagnosis is velamentous cord insertion
(Fig. 6-6, p. 115). With the latter, the umbilical arteries and vein traverse the
membranes along the uterine wall unprotected by Wharton jelly before
entering the placental margin. If umbilical vessels course within the portion
of membrane overlying the cervix or within 2 cm of the cervix, the diagnosis
is vasa previa (Fig. 6-7, p. 116). Vasa previa may also occur if there are two
or more placental lobes—as with a succenturiate lobe—and the
interconnecting vessels traverse the intervening membranes over or in
proximity to the internal cervical os. Transvaginal ultrasound with color
Doppler highlights the vessels, and pulsed-wave Doppler of the spanning
arterial vessel demonstrates a fetal heart rate, which confirms the diagnosis.
A subsequent detailed ultrasound examination is recommended at 32 weeks’
gestation (Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, 2015b). Chapter 6 (p. 114)
contains content on management of these entities.

■ Placenta Accreta Spectrum
Placenta accreta, increta, and percreta comprise the placenta accreta
spectrum (PAS). They are characterized by abnormal placental invasion onto,
into, or through the myometrium, respectively (Chap. 43, p. 759). Evaluation
includes transabdominal and transvaginal imaging, with and without color or
power Doppler and with the patient’s bladder partially filled. In one
metaanalysis that included more than 3200 pregnancies, the sensitivity of
ultrasound to identify placenta accreta, increta, and percreta was 91, 93, and
89 percent, respectively. Corresponding specificities were 97, 98, and 99
percent, respectively (Pagani, 2018). Five ultrasound criteria assist with
detection and characterization of PAS (Fig. 14-3):

FIGURE 14-3 These third-trimester sonograms demonstrate findings that characterize placenta
accreta spectrum. A. Transabdominal color mapping depicts bridging vessels between the bladder and
the uterine serosa (arrowheads) and shows large intraplacental lacunae (arrow). B. Transvaginal
transverse image showing a large bulge (suggesting placenta percreta) along the bladder-uterine serosal
interface (arrowheads) and multiple large, irregular lacunae (arrows). C. Disruption of the bladderserosal interface. The echogenic interface between bladder and serosa appears irregular (arrowheads).
The smallest myometrial thickness measures <1 mm, and bridging vessels are highlighted by color
Doppler. Large lacunae also are shown (arrows).

1. Placental lacunae, which are vascular spaces that may contain prominent
color Doppler flow

2. Attenuation or thinning of the retroplacental myometrium, such that the
smallest myometrial thickness measurement is <1 mm. This is also
referred to as loss of the retroplacental clear space
3. Disruption of the bladder-uterine serosal interface, which appears as an
irregular, echogenic boundary between the bladder and uterine serosa with
gray-scale imaging
4. Bridging vessels, which are demonstrated with color Doppler to course
from the placenta to the bladder-serosal interface
5. A placental “bulge” that pushes outward and distorts the contour of the
uterus or other organs. In some cases of placenta percreta, a focal
exophytic mass also is seen.
The accuracy of these criteria varies in published series and is affected
by the number and predictive value of given findings and by associated risk
factors such as placenta previa and number of prior cesarean deliveries
(Jauniaux, 2016; Rac, 2015). Serial evaluation may be helpful, particularly
in the third trimester. With concurrent placenta previa and history of cesarean
delivery, any of these ultrasound findings prompts a detailed ultrasound
evaluation. The role of magnetic resonance (MR) imaging as an adjunct in
pregnancies with suspected PAS is reviewed later (p. 268).

■ Cesarean Scar Pregnancy
Placental implantation within a prior hysterotomy scar—termed cesarean
scar pregnancy (CSP)—is often a precursor to second- or third-trimester
PAS (Happe, 2020; Rac, 2016; Timor-Trisch, 2014). Sonographically, the
gestational sac lies low and anteriorly in the uterus. CSPs may appear to rest
on the prior scar or may fill the niche, which is a myometrial pocket defect in
the thinned hysterotomy scar (Kaelin Agten, 2017). Placental sonolucencies,
a precursor to PAS lacunae, may be seen. The retroplacental myometrium
may be attenuated to a degree that the distance from the anterior trophoblastic
border to the uterine serosa measures <3 mm (D’Antonio, 2018; Moschos,
2014; Happe, 2020). Color Doppler may demonstrate prominent vascularity
in the region of the prior hysterotomy scar (Fig. 14-4). In some cases, the
gestational sac may bulge toward the bladder. CSP evaluation and
management are discussed in Chapter 12 (p. 229).

FIGURE 14-4 Cesarean scar pregnancy, transvaginal images. A. The trophoblast appears to fill the
scar “niche” (arrows). B. Outward bulging of the gestational sac toward the bladder (arrowheads). C.
Placental sonolucencies (arrows). D. Attenuation of the retroplacental myometrium. The distance from
the anterior trophoblastic border to the uterine serosa is <1 mm (arrows). Color Doppler demonstrates
vascularity in the region of the prior hysterotomy scar.

■ Cervical Length
Although the cervix may be imaged transabdominally (Fig. 14-5A),
visualization is often limited by maternal habitus, cervical position, or
shadowing by the fetal presenting part. In addition, the maternal bladder or
pressure from the transducer may artificially elongate the cervix’s
appearance. As a result, values from transabdominal or transvaginal
measurement of the cervix can differ significantly.

FIGURE 14-5 A. Transabdominal image of the cervix depicting the internal os and external os. B.
Transvaginal imaging provides a more accurate evaluation of the cervix and should be used for medical
decision-making. In this image, arrowheads mark the endocervical canal. (Reproduced with permission
from Dr. Emily Adhikari.)

If the cervix appears short or is inadequately visualized during
transabdominal evaluation, transvaginal assessment should be considered
(American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine, 2018a). Clinical decisionmaking should use only cervical length measurements obtained transvaginally
(Fig. 14-5B). Measurement should be performed at or beyond 16 weeks’
gestation. A short cervix is associated with an elevated risk for preterm
birth, particularly in those with prior preterm birth. Risk rises proportionally
with the degree of cervical shortening (Chap. 45, p. 793).
To measure the cervix transvaginally, the imaging criteria shown in Table
14-7 are followed. The endocervical canal should be visible in its entirety,
and images ideally are obtained over several minutes to capture dynamic
change. Funneling is a protrusion of amnionic membranes into a portion of
the endocervical canal that has dilated (Fig. 14-6). Funneling is not an
independent predictor of preterm birth but is associated with cervical
shortening. Transvaginal assessment is recommended if a funnel is suspected
transabdominally. The cervical length is measured distal to the funnel,
because the funnel’s base becomes the functional internal os. If the cervix is
dilated, as with cervical insufficiency, the membranes may prolapse through
the endocervical canal and into the vagina to produce an hourglass
appearance. Sludge represents an aggregate of particulate matter (debris)
within the amnionic sac and close to the internal os. In pregnancies at risk for
preterm birth, sludge further raises the risk.

TABLE 14-7. Criteria for Transvaginal Evaluation of the Cervix

FIGURE 14-6 Transvaginal image depicting a foreshortened cervix with funneling. Funneling is a
protrusion of amnionic membranes into a portion of the endocervical canal that has dilated. The distal
protruding edge of the funnel becomes the functional internal os (left arrow). Thus, the measured
cervical length, which lies between the arrows, should not include the funnel. (Reproduced with
permission from Dr. Emily Adhikari.)

AMNIONIC FLUID
■ Physiology
Amnionic fluid serves several roles. Fetal breathing is essential for normal
lung growth, and fetal swallowing permits gastrointestinal (GI) tract
development. The fluid also creates a physical space for fetal movement,
which is necessary for neuromusculoskeletal maturation. Amnionic fluid
further guards against umbilical cord compression and protects the fetus from
trauma. It also has bacteriostatic properties.
Early in pregnancy, amnionic fluid is similar in composition to
extracellular fluid. Amnionic fluid arises as a transudate of plasma either
from the fetus through its nonkeratinized skin or from the mother across the
uterine decidua and placenta surface (Beall, 2007). Specifically, early
transfer of water and other small molecules occurs via three mechanisms:
across the amnion—transmembranous flow; across fetal vessels on the
placental surface—intramembranous flow; and across fetal skin—
transcutaneous flow. Fetal urine production does not become a major
component of amnionic fluid until the second trimester, which explains why
fetuses with lethal renal abnormalities may not manifest severe amnionic
volume declines until after 18 weeks’ gestation. Water transport across the
fetal skin continues until keratinization occurs at 22 to 25 weeks. In the
second half of pregnancy, fetal urination is the primary source of amnionic
fluid. In late gestation, the fetal respiratory tract also produces approximately
350 mL of lung fluid per day. Fetal swallowing is the primary mechanism for
amnionic fluid resorption and averages 500 to 1000 mL per day (Mann,
1996). By term, the entire amnionic fluid volume is recirculated on a daily
basis (Table 14-8). However, impaired swallowing, secondary to either a
central nervous system (CNS) abnormality or GI tract obstruction, can result
in impressive amnionic fluid volume expansion.
TABLE 14-8. Amnionic Fluid Volume Regulation in Late Pregnancy

The osmolality of amnionic fluid is similar to that of fetal urine and
hypotonic to that of maternal and fetal plasma. Specifically, the osmolality of
maternal and fetal plasma approximates 280 mOsm/mL, whereas that of
amnionic fluid is about 260 mOsm/L. The hypotonicity of amnionic fluid
accounts for up to 400 mL per day of intramembranous fluid transfer across
and into fetal vessels on the placental surface (Mann, 1996). Maternal
dehydration can lead to higher maternal osmolality, which favors fluid
transfer from the fetus to mother and then from the amnionic fluid
compartment into the fetus (Moore, 2010).
Amnionic fluid volume expands from approximately 30 mL at 10 weeks’
gestation to 200 mL by 16 weeks and reaches 800 mL by the mid-third
trimester (Brace, 1989; Magann, 1997). Using dye dilution, Magann and
associates (1997) reported that the average amnionic fluid volume was
approximately 400 mL between 22 and 30 weeks’ gestation, then rose to 800
mL until 40 weeks, and subsequently declined by 8 percent per week. There
was a wide normal range, particularly in the third trimester. Abnormally
decreased fluid volume is termed oligohydramnios, whereas abnormally
increased fluid volume is termed hydramnios or polyhydramnios.

■ Semi-quantitative Assessment
Evaluation of amnionic fluid volume is a component of every second- or
third-trimester ultrasound examination. Volume is measured semiquantitatively using the single deepest pocket of fluid or the amnionic fluid
index (AFI). Both measurements are reproducible and, in the setting of a
fluid abnormality, can be followed serially over time to assess trends and aid

communication among providers. For this reason, subjective assessment
alone is not recommended.
The single deepest pocket of fluid is measured in a sagittal plane with the
ultrasound transducer held perpendicular to the floor and parallel to the long
axis of the woman. A pocket should be at least 1 cm wide to be considered
adequate, and the measurement should not include fetal parts or loops of
umbilical cord. Color Doppler is generally used to verify that umbilical cord
is not within the measurement. The measurement is considered normal if it is
>2 cm and <8 cm. Values below and above this range indicating
oligohydramnios and hydramnios, respectively. These thresholds correspond
to the 3rd and 97th percentiles (Chamberlain, 1984). When evaluating twins
and other multifetal gestations, a single deepest pocket is assessed in each
gestational sac, using the same normal range (Hernandez, 2012; Society for
Maternal-Fetal Medicine, 2013). The fetal biophysical profile similarly uses
a single deepest vertical pocket threshold of >2 cm to indicate normal
amnionic fluid volume (Chap. 20, p. 389).
To measure the AFI, the uterus is divided into four equal quadrants—the
right and left upper and lower quadrants, respectively. The AFI is the sum of
the single deepest pocket from each quadrant. In a study of 1400
measurements obtained from the INTERGROWTH-21st trial, the mean intraand interobserver variability of AFI measurements were each below 1 cm
(Sande, 2015). Two standard deviations from the mean, however, reached 5
and 7 cm, respectively. As useful rule of thumb, the AFI is generally three
times higher than the single deepest pocket of fluid.
The AFI is considered normal if >5 cm and <24 or 25 cm. Using an AFI
nomogram based on cross-sectional evaluation of nearly 800 uncomplicated
pregnancies, the mean AFI ranged between 12 and 15 cm from 16 weeks
until 40 weeks’ gestation (Moore, 1990). Other investigators have published
nomograms with similar mean values (Fig. 14-7) (Hinh, 2005; Machado,
2007).

FIGURE 14-7 Amnionic fluid index (AFI) according to gestational age–specific and threshold values.
The blue curves represent the 2.5th, 50th, and 97.5th AFI percentile values, based on the nomogram by
Moore (1990). Red and tan curves represent 50th percentile values for AFI from Machado (2007) and
from Hinh and Ladinsky (2005), respectively. The light blue and yellow shaded bars indicate threshold
values used to define hydramnios and oligohydramnios, respectively.

■ Hydramnios
Abnormally increased amnionic fluid volume complicates 1 to 2 percent of
singleton pregnancies (Dashe, 2002; Khan, 2017; Pri-Paz, 2012).
Hydramnios may be categorized as mild if the AFI is 25 to 29.9 cm;
moderate, if 30 to 34.9 cm; and severe, if ≥35 cm (Luo, 2017; Odibo, 2016).
Using a single deepest pocket of amnionic fluid, as is done in multifetal
gestations, mild hydramnios is defined as 8 to 9.9 cm, moderate as 10 to 11.9
cm, and severe hydramnios as ≥12 cm (Fig. 14-8). Mild hydramnios accounts
for approximately two thirds of cases and is frequently idiopathic and
benign. By comparison, severe hydramnios is far more likely to have an
underlying etiology and to have consequences for the pregnancy.

FIGURE 14-8 Severe hydramnios. This pocket of amnionic fluid measured >15 cm, and the amnionic
fluid index measured nearly 50 cm.

Underlying causes of hydramnios include fetal structural abnormalities or
genetic syndromes in approximately 15 percent and diabetes in 15 to 20
percent (Table 14-9). Selected anomalies and the likely mechanism by which
they cause hydramnios are shown in Table 14-10. Congenital infection, red
blood cell alloimmunization, and placental chorioangioma are less frequent
etiologies. Hydramnios may also complicate syphilis and cytomegalovirus,
toxoplasmosis, and parvovirus infections (Chaps. 67 and 68, pp. 1183 and
1206). Hydramnios is often seen with hydrops fetalis (Chap. 18, p. 360).
The underlying pathophysiology in such cases is frequently related to a highcardiac-output state, and severe fetal anemia a classic example. A detailed
ultrasound examination is indicated whenever hydramnios is identified. If a
fetal abnormality is identified at that time, the aneuploidy risk is significantly
elevated.
TABLE 14-9. Hydramnios: Prevalence and Associated Etiologies—Values
in Percent

TABLE 14-10. Selected Anomalies and Mechanism for Hydramnios

The degree of hydramnios positively correlates with the likelihood of an
anomalous fetus. At Parkland Hospital, the prevalence of an anomalous
neonate approximated 8 percent with mild hydramnios, 12 percent with
moderate hydramnios, and more than 30 percent with severe hydramnios
(Dashe, 2002). Even if no abnormality was detected during targeted

sonographic evaluation, the likelihood of a major anomaly identified at birth
was 1 to 2 percent if hydramnios was mild or moderate and 10 percent if
hydramnios was severe. The overall reported risk that an underlying anomaly
will be discovered after delivery ranges from 9 percent in the neonatal
period to 28 percent among infants followed to 1 year of age (Abele, 2012;
Dorleijn, 2009).
The amnionic fluid glucose concentration is higher in diabetic women
than in those without diabetes, and the AFI may correlate positively with the
amnionic fluid glucose concentration (Dashe, 2000; Spellacy, 1973; Weiss,
1985). Such findings support the hypothesis that maternal hyperglycemia
causes fetal hyperglycemia, which leads to fetal osmotic diuresis into the
amnionic fluid compartment. Repeat screening for gestational diabetes in
pregnancies with hydramnios does not appear to be beneficial if the secondtrimester glucose tolerance test result was normal (Frank Wolf, 2017).
Hydramnios is more frequently noted in multifetal gestations than in
singleton ones. In a review of nearly 2000 twin gestations, Hernandez and
coworkers (2012) identified hydramnios in 18 percent of both
monochorionic and dichorionic pregnancies. In monochorionic gestations,
hydramnios in one sac and oligohydramnios in the other are diagnostic
criteria for twin-twin transfusion syndrome (TTTS) (Chap. 48, p. 848).
Isolated hydramnios solely in one sac also may precede this syndrome’s
development (Chon, 2014). In the absence of a fetal abnormality or TTTS,
complication risks are not generally higher (Hernandez, 2012).
Idiopathic hydramnios is a diagnosis of exclusion. It accounts for up to
70 percent of all hydramnios cases, is mild in approximately 80 percent of
idiopathic cases, and subsequently resolves in more than one third (Odibo,
2016; Wiegand, 2016).

Management
Severe hydramnios occasionally results in early preterm labor or maternal
respiratory compromise. In such cases, large-volume amniocentesis—termed
amnioreduction—may be needed. The technique is similar to that for genetic
amniocentesis but is generally done with an 18- or 20-gauge needle. Fluid is
collected in either a vacuum container bottle or a larger syringe (Chap. 17, p.
344). Approximately 1000 to 2000 mL of fluid is slowly withdrawn over 20
to 30 minutes, depending on the severity of hydramnios and gestational age.

The goal is to restore amnionic fluid volume to the upper normal range.
Subsequent amnioreduction procedures may be required as often as weekly
or semiweekly.
In a review of 138 singleton pregnancies requiring amnioreduction for
hydramnios, a fetal GI malformation was identified in 20 percent, a
chromosomal abnormality or genetic condition in almost 30 percent, and a
neurological abnormality in 8 percent (Dickinson, 2014). In only 20 percent
of cases was the hydramnios idiopathic. The initial amnioreduction
procedure was performed at 31 weeks’ gestation, and the median gestational
age at delivery was 36 weeks.

Outcomes
Hydramnios can be associated with preterm birth, placental abruption,
uterine dysfunction during labor, and postpartum hemorrhage. When an
underlying cause is identified, the severity of hydramnios positively
correlates with risk for preterm delivery, small-for-gestational age newborn,
and perinatal mortality (Pri-Paz, 2012). However, idiopathic hydramnios is
generally not associated with preterm birth (Magann, 2010; Many, 1995;
Panting-Kemp, 1999). Placental abruption may result from rapid
decompression of an overdistended uterus following rupture of membranes
or therapeutic amnioreduction, occasionally days or weeks later. Uterine
dysfunction from overdistention may lead to postpartum atony and associated
postpartum hemorrhage.
With idiopathic hydramnios, birthweight exceeds 4000 g in nearly 25
percent of cases, and the likelihood is greater if the hydramnios is moderate
or severe (Luo, 2017; Odibo, 2016; Wiegand, 2016). A rationale for this
association is that larger fetuses have higher urine output, by virtue of their
increased volume of distribution, and fetal urine is the largest contributor to
amnionic fluid volume. Cesarean delivery rates are also higher in
pregnancies with idiopathic hydramnios, and reported rates range from 35 to
55 percent (Dorleijn, 2009; Khan, 2017; Odibo, 2016).
An unresolved question is whether hydramnios alone raises the risk for
perinatal mortality (Khan, 2017; Pilliod, 2015; Wiegand, 2016). Using birth
certificate data from California, Pilliod and colleagues (2015) reported that
at 37 weeks’ gestation, the stillbirth risk was sevenfold higher in pregnancies

with hydramnios. Risks appear to be compounded when fetal-growth
restriction is comorbid with hydramnios (Erez, 2005).

■ Oligohydramnios
Abnormally decreased amnionic fluid volume complicates 1 to 2 percent of
pregnancies (Casey, 2000; Petrozella, 2011). Oligohydramnios is diagnosed
if the AFI measures <5 cm or the single deepest pocket is <2 cm (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020). An AFI threshold of 5
cm is below the 2.5th percentile throughout the second and third trimesters
(see Fig. 14-7). Importantly, use of AFI rather than single deepest pocket will
identify more pregnancies as having oligohydramnios but without evidence of
improved pregnancy outcomes (Kehl, 2016; Nabhan, 2010). When evaluating
multifetal pregnancies for TTTS, a single deepest pocket <2 cm is used to
define oligohydramnios (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2021c). When no measurable pocket of amnionic fluid is
identified, the term anhydramnios is used.
By 18 weeks’ gestation, the fetal kidneys are the main contributor to
amnionic fluid volume. Selected renal abnormalities that lead to absent fetal
urine production include bilateral renal agenesis, bilateral multicystic
dysplastic kidney, unilateral renal agenesis with contralateral multicystic
dysplastic kidney, and the infantile form of autosomal recessive polycystic
kidney disease. Lower urinary abnormalities may also cause
oligohydramnios because of fetal bladder outlet obstruction (Figs. 15-58
through 15-61, p. 300). Complex fetal genitourinary abnormalities such as
persistent cloaca and sirenomelia similarly may result in a lack of amnionic
fluid. With oligohydramnios before the mid-second trimester, particularly
before 20 to 22 weeks, pulmonary hypoplasia is a significant concern. The
prognosis is extremely poor unless fetal therapy is an option (Chap. 19, p.
377).
Oligohydramnios is also associated with exposure to drugs that block the
renin-angiotensin system. These include angiotensin-converting enzyme
(ACE) inhibitors, angiotensin-receptor blockers, and nonsteroidal
antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). When taken in the second or third
trimester, ACE inhibitors and angiotensin-receptor blockers may result in
fetal hypotension, renal hypoperfusion, and renal ischemia, leading to
subsequent anuric renal failure (Bullo, 2012; Guron, 2000). Fetal skull bone

hypoplasia and limb contractures also have been described (Schaefer, 2003).
Additionally, NSAIDs can be associated with fetal ductus arteriosus
constriction and impaired fetal urine production (Chap. 8, p. 151).
Oligohydramnios in the late second trimester or in the third trimester is
often associated with uteroplacental insufficiency. A placental abnormality
or a maternal complication such as preeclampsia or vascular disease are
examples. Initially, ruptured membranes should be excluded. Then,
particularly in the second trimester, a detailed ultrasound examination should
be performed to search for fetal and placental abnormalities. If a placental
hematoma or chronic abruption is sufficiently severe to result in
oligohydramnios—the chronic abruption-oligohydramnios sequence (CAOS)
—then it commonly also causes growth restriction (Chap. 43, p. 750).

Management
Oligohydramnios detected before 36 weeks’ gestation in the presence of
normal fetal anatomy and growth is generally managed expectantly and
coupled with fetal surveillance (Chap. 20, p. 392). For late-preterm and
early-term pregnancies, risks of fetal compromise outweigh potential
complications of preterm delivery. The American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists (2021b) recommends delivery between 360/7 and 376/7
weeks. In a review of 16 trials of pregnancies with apparent isolated
oligohydramnios, oral or intravenous hydration was associated with a
significantly improved AFI. However, it was unclear whether this translated
into better pregnancy outcomes (Gizzo, 2015).

Outcomes
In a review of pregnancies with oligohydramnios at Parkland Hospital,
Petrozella and associates (2011) found that an AFI <5 cm identified between
24 and 34 weeks’ gestation was associated with increased risks for perinatal
morbidity and mortality (Table 14-11). Similarly, a metaanalysis comprising
more than 10,000 pregnancies found that oligohydramnios conferred a
twofold risk for cesarean delivery due to nonreassuring fetal status and a
fivefold risk for an Apgar score <7 at 5 minutes compared with pregnancies
with a normal AFI (Chauhan, 1999).

TABLE 14-11. Pregnancy Outcomes in Women Diagnosed with
Oligohydramnios between 24 and 34 Weeks’ Gestation at Parkland Hospital

As discussed, if oligohydramnios is defined as an AFI <5 cm rather than
a single deepest pocket <2 cm, more pregnancies will be classified as such.
Kehl and coworkers (2016) performed a prospective trial with more than
1000 term pregnancies in which women with an AFI <5 cm or a single
deepest pocket <2 cm were randomly assigned to labor induction or
expectant care. Significantly more pregnancies were diagnosed with
oligohydramnios using the AFI criterion—10 percent compared with just 2
percent—when single deepest pocket was used. This led to a higher rate of
labor induction in the AFI group but not to a difference in neonatal outcomes.

Borderline Oligohydramnios
This diagnosis is somewhat controversial. Also called borderline AFI. It
usually refers to an AFI between 5 and 8 cm (Magann, 2011; Petrozella,
2011). During the mid-third trimester, an AFI value of 8 cm is below the 5th
percentile on the Moore nomogram (see Fig. 14-7). Petrozella (2011) found
that pregnancies between 24 and 34 weeks’ gestation with an AFI between 5

and 8 cm were not more likely than those with an AFI >8 cm to have
maternal hypertensive complications or an increased risk for stillbirth and
neonatal death. Wood and colleagues (2014) reported a higher rate of fetalgrowth restriction in pregnancies with borderline AFI but not an increase in
rates of preterm delivery or need for neonatal intensive care. In a study of
late-preterm pregnancies that were otherwise uncomplicated, borderline AFI
conferred no increased risk for preterm delivery, nonreassuring fetal heart
rate tracing, low Apgar score, or neonatal respiratory compromise (Sahin,
2018). Evidence is insufficient to support fetal surveillance or delivery in
this setting (Magann, 2011).

DOPPLER
When sound waves strike a moving target, the frequency of the waves
reflected back is shifted in proportion to the velocity and direction of that
moving target—a phenomenon known as the Doppler shift. Because
magnitude and direction of the frequency shift depend on the motion of a
moving target, Doppler can help evaluate flow within blood vessels.
An important component of the Doppler equation is the angle of
insonation, abbreviated as theta (θ) (Fig. 14-9). This is the angle between the
sound waves from the transducer and flow within the vessel. Measurement
error becomes large when θ is not close to zero, in other words, when blood
flow is not coming directly toward or away from the transducer. For this
reason, ratios are often used to compare different waveform components and
allow cosine θ to cancel out of the equation. Figure 14-10 is a schematic of
the Doppler waveform and describes the three ratios commonly used. The
simplest is the systolic-diastolic ratio (S/D ratio), which compares the
maximal (or peak) systolic flow with end-diastolic flow to evaluate
downstream impedance to flow. Currently, two types of Doppler modalities
are available for clinical use.

FIGURE 14-9 Doppler equation. Ultrasound emanating from the transducer with initial frequency f o
strikes blood moving at velocity v. Reflected frequency f d is dependent on angle θ between beam of
sound and vessel.

FIGURE 14-10 Doppler systolic–diastolic waveform indices of blood flow velocity. S represents the
peak systolic flow or velocity, and D indicates the end-diastolic flow or velocity. The mean, which is the
time-average mean velocity, is calculated from computer-digitized waveforms.

Continuous-wave Doppler equipment contains two types of crystals, one
to transmit high-frequency sound waves and another to continuously capture
signals. In M-mode imaging, continuous-wave Doppler is used to evaluate
motion through time, however, it cannot image individual vessels.
Pulsed-wave Doppler uses only one crystal, which transmits the signal
and then waits until the returning signal is received before transmitting
another one. It allows precise visualization and color-flow mapping of the
vessel of interest. By convention, blood flowing toward the transducer is
displayed in red and that flowing away from the transducer appears in blue.

■ Umbilical Artery
The umbilical artery differs from other vessels in that it normally has
forward flow throughout the entire cardiac cycle. With advancing gestation,
the amount of flow during diastole increases because of decreasing placental
impedance. The S/D ratio approximates ≤4.0 after 20 weeks’ gestation, <3.0
after 30 weeks’, and close to 2.0 at term. More end-diastolic flow is
observed at the placental cord insertion than at the fetal ventral wall, a
reflection of downstream impedance to flow. Thus, abnormalities such as
absent or reversed end-diastolic flow will appear first at the cord insertion
site into the fetus. The International Society of Ultrasound in Obstetrics and
Gynecology recommends that umbilical artery Doppler measurements be
made in a free loop of cord (Bhide, 2013). However, assessment close to the
ventral wall insertion may optimize measurement reproducibility in cases in
which flow is diminished (Berkley, 2012).
The waveform is considered abnormal if the S/D ratio is >95th
percentile for gestational age. Threshold values are listed in the Appendix
(p. 1242). In extreme cases of growth restriction, end-diastolic flow can
become absent or even reversed (Fig. 47, p. 830). Such reversal of enddiastolic flow has been associated with greater than 70-percent obliteration
of the small muscular arteries in placental tertiary stem villi (Kingdom,
1997; Morrow, 1989).
Umbilical artery Doppler has been rigorously investigated to test of fetal
well-being. As described in Chapter 47 (p. 830), this tool aids management

of fetal-growth restriction and is associated with improved outcome in these
cases (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019a). It is
not recommended for other indications. Similarly, its use as a screening tool
for growth-restriction is not advised (Berkley, 2012). Abnormal umbilical
artery Doppler findings should prompt a detailed fetal evaluation, if not
already done, because abnormal measurements are often associated with
major fetal anomalies and aneuploidy (Wenstrom, 1991).

■ Ductus Arteriosus
Doppler evaluation of the ductus arteriosus is used primarily to monitor
fetuses exposed to indomethacin and other NSAIDs. Indomethacin may cause
ductal constriction or closure, particularly when used in the third trimester
(Huhta, 1987). The resulting increased pulmonary flow can cause reactive
hypertrophy of the pulmonary arterioles and eventual development of fetal
pulmonary hypertension. In a review of 12 randomized trials involving more
than 200 exposed pregnancies, Koren and coworkers (2006) reported that
NSAIDs raised the odds of ductal constriction 15-fold. The risk is typically
limited to drug use greater than 72 hours’ duration. Monitoring for ductal
constriction should be considered in such cases, so that the NSAID can be
discontinued if ductal constriction is identified. Fortunately, effects are often
reversible after NSAID discontinuation.

■ Uterine Artery
Uterine blood flow is estimated to rise from 50 mL/min early in gestation to
500 to 750 mL/min by term. The uterine artery Doppler waveform is
characterized by high diastolic flow velocities and turbulent flow. Greater
resistance to flow and development of a diastolic notch are associated with
later development of gestational hypertension, preeclampsia, and fetalgrowth restriction. Zeeman and associates (2003) also found that women
with chronic hypertension who had elevated uterine artery impedance at 16
to 20 weeks’ gestation were at greater risk to develop superimposed
preeclampsia. However, the technique, best testing interval, and defining
criteria for this indication have not been standardized. As the predictive
value of uterine artery Doppler testing is considered to be low, its use for
screening for hypertensive complications of pregnancy or for fetal-growth

restriction is not recommended in either high-risk or low-risk pregnancies
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019a, 2020b).

■ Middle Cerebral Artery
Doppler velocimetry of the middle cerebral artery (MCA) has become the
primary method of detecting fetal anemia and is central to surveillance of
alloimmunized pregnancies. Anatomically, the path of the MCA is such that
flow often approaches the transducer “head-on,” which allows accurate
determination of flow velocity (Fig. 14-11). The MCA is imaged in an axial
view of the head at the base of the skull and ideally within 2 mm of the
internal carotid artery origin. Velocity measurement is optimal when the
insonating angle θ is close to zero, and no more than 30 degrees of angle
correction should be used. In general, other fetal vessels are not suitable for
velocity assessment, because a larger insonating angle is needed and confers
significant measurement error.

FIGURE 14-11 Middle cerebral artery (MCA) Doppler. A. Color Doppler of the circle of Willis
demonstrates the correct location to sample the MCA. B. The waveform shows a peak systolic velocity
exceeding 70 cm/sec in a 32-week fetus with severe fetal anemia secondary to Rh alloimmunization.

With fetal anemia, the peak systolic velocity is enhanced due to greater
cardiac output and decreased blood viscosity (Segata, 2004). This permits
the reliable, noninvasive detection of fetal anemia in cases of blood-group
alloimmunization. Mari and colleagues (2000) demonstrated that an MCA
peak systolic velocity threshold of 1.50 multiple of the median (MoM) could
reliably identify fetuses with moderate or severe anemia. As discussed in

Chapter 18 (p. 355), MCA peak systolic velocity has replaced invasive
testing with amniocentesis as the preferred test for fetal anemia detection
(Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, 2015a).
MCA Doppler has also been studied as an adjunct in evaluation of fetalgrowth restriction (Chap. 47, p. 830). Fetal hypoxemia is associated with
increased blood flow to the brain, heart, and adrenal glands, which leads to
greater end-diastolic flow in the MCA. This phenomenon, called “brainsparing,” is actually a misnomer, as it does not protect the fetus but rather is
associated with perinatal morbidity and mortality (Bahado-Singh, 1999;
Cruz-Martinez, 2011). To evaluate redistribution of blood flow, investigators
have studied a ratio of the MCA pulsatility index (PI) to the umbilical artery
PI–termed the cerebroplacental ratio. Like the S/D ratio, the PI estimates
downstream impedance to flow (Fig. 14-10). In the PORTO (Prospective
Observational Trial to Optimize Paediatric Health in IUGR) study of
ultrasound-dated pregnancies with estimated fetal weights <10th percentile,
fetuses with a cerebroplacental PI ratio <1 had an 11-fold greater risk for
adverse perinatal outcomes (Flood, 2014). Such findings can further our
understanding of fetal pathophysiology. However, the utility of MCA
Doppler to aid the timing of delivery is uncertain, and it has not been adopted
as standard practice in the management of growth restriction (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2021a; Martins, 2020).

■ Ductus Venosus
The fetal ductus venosus shunts oxygenated blood from the intrahepatic
portion of the umbilical vein directly to the inferior vena cava, thus
bypassing the liver (Fig. 7-9, p. 127). The ductus venosus is imaged as it
branches from the umbilical vein at approximately the level of the
diaphragm. The waveform is biphasic and normally has forward flow
throughout the entire cardiac cycle (Fig. 14-12). The first peak reflects
ventricular systole, and the second is ventricular diastolic filling. These are
followed by a nadir during atrial contraction—termed the a-wave.

FIGURE 14-12 Venous Doppler abnormalities. A. Reversal of a-wave flow in the ductus venosus.
Arrows depict a-waves below the baseline. This finding may be identified with cardiac dysfunction in
the setting of severe fetal-growth restriction. B. Pulsatile flow in the umbilical vein. The undulating
umbilical venous waveform below the baseline indicates tricuspid regurgitation. Above the baseline is

the umbilical artery waveform, in which there is no visible end-diastolic flow. Because the venous
waveform is below the baseline in this image, it is not possible to determine whether the umbilical artery
end-diastolic flow is reversed.

It is believed that Doppler findings in preterm fetuses with growth
restriction show a progression in which umbilical artery Doppler
abnormalities are followed by ones in the MCA and then in the ductus
venosus. With severe fetal-growth restriction, cardiac dysfunction may lead
to flow in the a-wave that is decreased, absent, and eventually reversed and
to pulsatile flow in the umbilical vein (see Fig. 14-12). However, ductus
venosus Doppler assessment has not improved perinatal outcomes, and
neither the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2021a)
nor the Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine (Martins, 2020) recommend its
use in the routine management of fetal growth-restriction.

MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING
MR imaging is based on the excitation of hydrogen ions in the body by
pulsing radiofrequencies with high field-strength magnets (1.5 to 3 Tesla).
High-resolution fetal imaging is now possible, in part due to faster
acquisition times of less than one second per slice. The relaxing hydrogen
ions can be manipulated through various pulse sequences to produce different
representations on images. The classic example is simple fluid, such as
amnionic fluid or urine in the bladder, which appears bright on T2-weighted
and dark on T1-weighted image acquisitions.
Image resolution with MR is often superior to that with sonography
because MR is less hindered by bony interfaces, maternal obesity,
oligohydramnios, or an engaged fetal head. Thus, it can complement
sonography in evaluating suspected fetal abnormalities. Examples include
complex abnormalities of the fetal thorax and of the central nervous, GI,
genitourinary, and musculoskeletal systems. MR imaging is also used to
evaluate maternal pelvic masses and placental invasion. This modality,
however, is not portable, is time-consuming, and is generally limited to
referral centers with expertise in fetal imaging.
To guide clinical use, the American College of Radiology and Society for
Pediatric Radiology (2020b) have developed a practice guideline for fetal
MR imaging. This document acknowledges the primacy of sonography as the
preferred screening modality. Moreover, it recommends that fetal MR

imaging be used for problem solving to contribute to prenatal diagnosis,
counseling, treatment, and delivery planning. At Parkland Hospital, MR
imaging is performed in 15 percent of pregnancies with major fetal
abnormalities (Herrera, 2020). Specific indications are listed in Table 14-12
and are discussed subsequently (American College of Radiology, 2020b).
TABLE 14-12. Fetal Conditions for Which Magnetic Resonance Imaging
May Be Indicateda

■ Safety
MR imaging is not associated with known adverse fetal effects if performed
without administration of contrast media (Ray, 2016). It uses no ionizing
radiation, and human and tissue studies support its safety (Clements, 2000;
Reeves, 2010; Vadeyar, 2000; Wiskirchen, 1999). The strength of the
magnetic field is measured in tesla (T). Both 1.5T and 3T fetal MR imaging
can be done safely and successfully, assuming expertise of the imagers with
the physical principles of MR (Prayer, 2017). All clinical examinations must
adhere to the specific absorption rate, which is regulated by the FDA, and the
ALARA principle should be followed. Specifically, the amount of heat
generated in the MR is reflected in the specific absorption rate and must be
monitored.
The Society for Pediatric Radiology recommends 3T MR imaging
because of its improved signal-to-noise ratio, which results in better
resolution (Barth, 2017). We prefer 1.5T for diagnostic imaging given its
better field homogeneity. We reserve 3T for functional imaging, which
requires higher field strength.
Gadolinium-based MR contrast agents are gadolinium (Gd3+) chelates.
These contrast agents enter the fetal circulation and are excreted via fetal
urination into amnionic fluid. Here, they may remain for an indeterminate
period before being ingested and reabsorbed. The longer time the
gadolinium-chelate molecule remains in a protected space such as the
amnionic sac, the greater the potential for dissociation of the toxic Gd3+ ion.
In a population-based review from Ontario, children exposed to gadoliniumenhanced MR imaging in utero were at slightly increased risk for a broad set
of rheumatological, inflammatory, or infiltrative skin conditions (Ray, 2016).
In adults with renal disease, this contrast agent is associated with
development of nephrogenic systemic fibrosis, a potentially severe
complication. MR imaging with gadolinium is not recommended in
pregnancy without a life-threatening indication.

■ Technique
Before MR imaging, all women complete a written safety questionnaire that
includes information about metallic implants, pacemakers, or other metal- or
iron-containing devices. High-level magnetization may cause dangerous

movement in these devices, causing adjacent tissue damage and malfunction.
(American College of Radiology, 2020a). Iron supplementation may cause
image artifact in the colon but does not usually affect the resolution of fetal
images. In more than 4500 MR procedures performed at Parkland Hospital in
pregnancy during the past 18 years, <1 percent of our patients suffered
maternal anxiety secondary to claustrophobia. To reduce anxiety in this small
group, a single oral dose of diazepam, 5 to 10 mg, or lorazepam, 1 to 2 mg,
may be given.
To begin an MR examination, women are placed in a supine or left
lateral decubitus position. A torso coil is used in most circumstances to send
and receive the radiofrequency pulses, but a body coil can be used alone to
accommodate large maternal habitus. A series of three-plane localizers, or
scout views, are obtained relative to the maternal coronal, sagittal, and axial
planes. The gravid uterus is imaged in the maternal axial plane (7-mm slices,
0 gap) with a T2-weighted fast acquisition. Typically, these may be a singleshot fast spin echo sequence (SSFSE), half-Fourier acquisition single-shot
turbo spin echo (HASTE), or rapid acquisition with relaxation enhancement
(RARE), depending on the machine. Next, a fast T1-weighted acquisition
such as spoiled gradient echo (SPGR) is performed (7-mm thickness, 0 gap).
These large-field-of-view acquisitions through the maternal abdomen and
pelvis are particularly good for identifying fetal and maternal anatomy.
Orthogonal images of targeted fetal or maternal structures are then
obtained. In these cases, 3- to 5-mm slice thickness, 0 gap T2-weighted
acquisitions are performed in the coronal, sagittal, and axial planes.
Depending on the anatomy and underlying suspected abnormality, T1weighted images can be performed to evaluate for subacute hemorrhage, fat,
or location of normal structures that appear bright on these sequences, such
as liver and meconium in the colon (Brugger, 2006; Zaretsky, 2003b).
Short T1 inversion recovery (STIR) and frequency-selective fat-saturated
T2-weighted images may help differentiation in cases in which the water
content of the abnormality is similar to that of the normal structure. An
example is a thoracic mass compared with normal lung. Diffusion-weighted
imaging may be employed to evaluate for restricted diffusion, which can be
seen in ischemia, cellular tumors, or clotted blood (Brugger, 2006; Zaretsky,
2003b).

■ Fetal Anatomy Evaluation
A fetal anatomical survey is generally completed during the MR examination,
regardless of the fetal indication. Nearly 95 percent of anatomical
components recommended by the International Society of Ultrasound in
Obstetrics and Gynecology were visible at 30 weeks’ gestation (Millischer,
2013). The aorta and pulmonary artery were the most difficult to evaluate.
Zaretsky and coworkers (2003a) similarly found that with the exclusion of
cardiac structures, fetal anatomical evaluation was possible in 99 percent of
cases.

■ Central Nervous System
For intracranial anomalies, fast T2-weighted images produce excellent tissue
contrast. Cerebrospinal fluid–containing structures appear bright, which
allows exquisite detail of the posterior fossa, midline structures, and
cerebral cortex. T1-weighted images are used to identify hemorrhage. CNS
biometry obtained with MR imaging is comparable with that obtained using
sonography, and nomograms are available for the corpus callosum and
cerebellar vermis (Harreld, 2011; Katorza, 2016; Twickler, 2002; Xi, 2016).
MR imaging may provide valuable added information when cerebral
abnormalities are identified or suspected sonographically (Benacerraf, 2007;
Li, 2012). Additional information is more likely to be gained when the
examination is performed beyond 24 weeks’ gestation. In studies, MR
imaging has identified additional CNS findings or led to a changed diagnosis
in nearly 50 percent of cases and affected prognosis or management in 20
percent (Griffiths, 2017, Twickler, 2003).
MR imaging accurately portrays cerebral gyration and sulcation patterns
(Fig. 14-13) (Levine, 1999). It may assist with identifying agenesis or
dysgenesis of the corpus callosum and characterizing migrational
abnormalities (Benacerraf, 2007; Li, 2012; Twickler, 2003). In cases of
septo-optic dysplasia, MR imaging may confirm absence of the septum
pellucidum and display hypoplastic optic tracts (Fig. 14-14). When fetal
intracranial hemorrhage (ICH) is suspected, MR imaging can help to
characterize the extent of bleeding and to estimate when bleeding occurred.
Risk factors for fetal ICH include atypical-appearing ventriculomegaly,
concern for neonatal alloimmune thrombocytopenia, and severe TTTS or

demise of one monochorionic twin (Hu, 2006). With congenital fetal
infections, MR imaging can delineate the variable degrees of neural
parenchymal abnormality and subsequent maldevelopment (Soares de
Oliveira-Szejnfeld, 2016).

FIGURE 14-13 Axial images of the fetal brain demonstrate the normal gyration and sulcation
progression during fetal development. A. 23 weeks’ gestation. B. 33 weeks’ gestation. These images
were obtained using a Half Fourier Acquisition Single Shot Turbo Spin Echo (HASTE) sequence
because it is relatively motion insensitive.

FIGURE 14-14 Septo-optic dysplasia. A. Axial. B. Coronal. Images at 30 weeks’ gestation confirm
absence of the cavum septum pellucidum (arrowheads) in both. There is also associated mild

ventriculomegaly (arrow).

■ Thorax
MR imaging can delineate the location and size of space-occupying thoracic
lesions and quantify the volume of lung tissue. If needed, it can characterize
blood flow to a thoracic mass to differentiate cystic adenomatoid
malformation from pulmonary sequestration (Chap. 15, p. 287). With
congenital diaphragmatic hernia, MR imaging can help verify and quantify
the abdominal organs within the thorax (Debus, 2013; Lee, 2011; MehollinRay, 2012). This includes the volume of herniated liver and of compressed
lung tissue (Fig. 14-15). MR imaging can also measure lung volumes in
pregnancies with prolonged oligohydramnios secondary to renal
abnormalities or ruptured membranes (Messerschmidt, 2011; Zaretsky,
2005).

FIGURE 14-15 A. Coronal image of normal lungs on a balanced sequence at 29 weeks’ gestation.
The liver (L) and stomach (S) lie below the diaphragm. B. Left-sided congenital diaphragmatic hernia
(CDH) (dotted ellipse) seen on balanced sequence at 33 weeks. C. The T1-weighted sequence
confirms the subdiaphragmatic position of the liver and better delineates the small bowel (arrow) and
meconium-containing colon (arrowhead) that have herniated into the chest. D. Another image of a leftsided CDH at 22 weeks demonstrates no normal lung, the heart (H) displaced into the right chest, and
an elevated liver (dotted ellipse).

■ Abdomen

Meconium accumulation within the GI tract gives a predictable pattern and
has high signal intensity on T1-weighted sequences. Thus, MR imaging is a
complementary tool in diagnosing GI abnormalities and complex cloacal
malformations (Furey, 2016). With cystic abdominal abnormalities,
differences in signal characteristics may also help distinguish between
meconium in the fetal colon and urine in the bladder (Farhataziz, 2005).
Peritoneal calcifications related to meconium peritonitis are more readily
apparent sonographically, whereas pseudocysts and resultant abnormalities
of meconium migration are better delineated with MR imaging.

■ Adjunct to Fetal Therapy
Prior to fetal surgery, MR imaging is often used. In cases of
myelomeningocele, it precisely displays brain and spine anatomy. For
sacrococcygeal teratomas, if fetal surgery is considered, MR imaging may
identify tumor extension into the fetal pelvis (Avni, 2002; Neubert, 2004;
Perrone, 2018). When a fetal neck mass is identified with ultrasound, MR
imaging may help delineate a lesion’s extent and its mass effect on the oral
cavity and trachea. This can help identify cases that are at risk for adverse
outcome and that may benefit from an ex utero intrapartum treatment (EXIT)
procedure (Lazar, 2012; Ogamo, 2005; Ng, 2019). MR imaging can also
calculate a jaw index when an EXIT procedure may be needed for severe
micrognathia (Kooiman, 2018; Morris, 2009). At some centers, before laser
ablation of placental anastomoses for TTTS, MR imaging is performed to
identify fetal ICH or periventricular leukomalacia (Hu, 2006; Kline-Fath,
2007). Fetal therapy is discussed in Chapter 19 (p. 367).

■ Placenta
Despite improvements in ultrasound detection of PAS, particularly when the
placenta is anterior, characterization of the extent of invasion remains a
challenge. MR findings concerning for invasion are depicted in Figure 14-16.
They include dark intraplacental bands on T2-weighted images, a focal
bulge, placental heterogeneity, involvement of the bladder-uterine serosal
interface, and fibrin deposition (Clark, 2020; Leyendecker, 2012). When
used to complement ultrasound, MR imaging’s sensitivity to detect invasion
is high. Clark and associates (2020) reported that MR imaging findings

positively correlated with need for cesarean hysterectomy and with
histological and surgical impressions of invasion. Clinical risk factors and
ultrasound findings (p. 253) should be incorporated when interpreting MR
placental images (Chap. 43, p. 759).

FIGURE 14-16 A. Sagittal T2-weighted image of the placenta demonstrates placenta accreta
spectrum (PAS), in this case placenta percreta. There are intraplacental, dark, linear bands (arrows), a
large bulge along the bladder-serosal interface (arrowheads), and a central area of marked
inhomogeneity (asterisk). B. A coronal image from the same study demonstrates the bulge with right
lateral extension (arrowheads) and multiple, dark, linear bands (arrows). C. A sagittal, balanced,
steady state free precession (SSFE) image shows a bulge, retroplacental vessels, and irregularity of the
bladder-serosal interface (arrowheads). These contrast with the large maternal varices (arrows). F =
fetus.

Two emerging technologies also are being employed to investigate
placental insufficiency and PAS. Arterial spin labelling is a technique for
functional assessment of perfusion and excites maternal red blood cells to
serve as endogenous contrast agents (Zun, 2018). Second, radiomics textural
analysis characterizes placental morphology in vivo. MR textural features
may help select pregnancies requiring cesarean hysterectomy (Do, 2020).

REFERENCES

Abele H, Starz S, Hoopmann M, et al: Idiopathic polyhydramnios and postnatal abnormalities. Fetal
Diagn Ther 32(4):251, 2012
Abuhamad A, Minton KK, Benson CB, et al: Obstetric and gynecologic ultrasound curriculum and
competency assessment in residency training programs: consensus report. Am J Obstet Gynecol
218(1):29, 2018
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Management of suboptimally dated pregnancies.
Committee Opinion No. 688, March 2017, Reaffirmed 2019b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Methods for estimating the due date. Committee
Opinion No. 700, May 2017, Reaffirmed 2019c
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Ultrasound in pregnancy. Practice Bulletin No.
175, December 2016, Reaffirmed 2020
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Fetal growth restriction. Practice Bulletin No.
227, February 2021a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Society of Maternal–Fetal Medicine: Medically
indicated late-preterm and early-term deliveries. Committee Opinion No. 831, July 2021b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Multifetal gestations: twin, triplet, and higherorder multifetal pregnancies. Practice Bulletin No. 231, June 2021c
American College of Radiology: ACR manual on MR safety. 2020a. Available at:
https://www.acr.org/-/media/ACR/Files/Radiology-Safety/MR-Safety/Manual-on-MR-Safety.pdf.
Accessed September 15, 2021
American College of Radiology, Society for Pediatric Radiology: ACR-SPR practice parameter for the
safe and optimal performance of fetal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Resolution No. 45,
2020b. Available at: https://www.acr.org/-/media/ACR/Files/Practice-Parameters/mr-fetal.pdf.
Accessed September 15, 2021
American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine: AIUM-ACR-ACOG-SMFM-SRU practice parameter
for the performance of standard diagnostic obstetric ultrasound examinations. J Ultrasound Med
37(11):e13, 2018a
American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine: AIUM practice parameter for the performance of
detailed second- and third-trimester diagnostic obstetric ultrasound examinations. J Ultrasound Med
38(12):3093, 2019
American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine: AIUM practice parameter for the performance of fetal
echocardiography. J Ultrasound Med 39(1):E5, 2020a
American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine: AIUM practice parameter for the performance of limited
obstetric ultrasound examinations by advanced clinical providers. J Ultrasound Med 37:1587, 2018b
American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine: Prudent use and safety of diagnostic ultrasound in
pregnancy. 2020. Available at: https://www.aium.org/officialStatements/79. Accessed October 13,
2020b
Avni FE, Guibaus L, Robert Y, et al: MR imaging of fetal sacrococcygeal teratoma: diagnosis and
assessment. AJR Am J Roentgenol 178(1):179, 2002
Bahado-Singh RO, Kovanci E, Jeffres A, et al: The Doppler cerebroplacental ratio and perinatal
outcome in intrauterine growth restriction. Am J Obstet Gynecol 180(3):750, 1999
Barth R, Victoria T, Kline-Fath B, et al: ISUOG Guidelines for fetal MRI: a response to 3-T fetal
imaging and limited fetal exams. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 50(6):804, 2017
Beall MH, van den Wijngaard JP, van Gemert MJ, et al: Amniotic fluid water dynamics. Placenta 28(89):816, 2007

Benacerraf BR, Minton KK, Benson CB, et al: Proceedings: Beyond Ultrasound First Forum on
improving the quality of ultrasound imaging in obstetrics and gynecology. Am J Obstet Gynecol
218(1):19, 2018
Benacerraf BR, Shipp TD, Bromley B, et al: What does magnetic resonance imaging add to the prenatal
sonographic diagnosis of ventriculomegaly? J Ultrasound Med 26:1513, 2007
Bhide A, Acharya G, Bilardo CM, et al: ISUOG Practice Guidelines: use of Doppler ultrasonography in
obstetrics. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 41(2):233, 2013
Biggio JR, Chapman V, Neely C, et al: Fetal anomalies in obese women: the contribution of diabetes.
Obstet Gynecol 115 (201):290, 2010
Brace RA, Wolf EJ: Normal amniotic fluid volume changes throughout pregnancy. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 161(2):382, 1989
Brugger PC, Stuhr F, Lindner C, et al: Methods of fetal MR: beyond T2-weighted imaging. Euro J
Radiol 57(2):172, 2006
Bullo M, Tschumi S, Bucher BS: Pregnancy outcome following exposure to angiotensin-converting
enzyme inhibitors or angiotensin receptor antagonists: a systematic review. Hypertension 60:444,
2012
Byrne JJ, Morgan JL, Twickler DM, et al: Utility of follow-up standard sonography for fetal anomaly
detection. Am J Obstet Gynecol 222:615.e1, 2020
Casey BM, McIntire DD, Bloom SL, et al: Pregnancy outcomes after antepartum diagnosis of
oligohydramnios at or beyond 34 weeks’ gestation. Am J Obstet Gynecol 182:909, 2000
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Workplace solutions. Preventing work-related
musculoskeletal disorders in sonography. DHHS (NIOSH) Publication No. 2006–148, 2006
Chamberlain PF, Manning FA, Morrison I, et al: Ultrasound evaluation of amniotic fluid. The relationship
of marginal and decreased amniotic fluid volumes to perinatal outcome. Am J Obstet Gynecol
150:245, 1984
Chauhan SP, Sanderson M, Hendrix NW, et al: Perinatal outcome and amniotic fluid index in the
antepartum and intrapartum periods: a meta-analysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 181:1473, 1999
Chon AH, Korst LM, Llanes A, et al: Midtrimester isolated polyhydramnios in monochorionic diamniotic
multiple gestations. Am J Obstet Gynecol 211(3):303.e1, 2014
Clark HR, Ng Tw, Khan A, et al: Placenta accreta spectrum: correlation of MRI parameters with
pathologic and surgical outcomes in high-risk pregnancies. AJR Am J Roentgenol 214:1417, 2020
Clements H, Duncan KR, Fielding K, et al: Infants exposed to MRI in utero have a normal paediatric
assessment at 9 months of age. Br J Radiol 73(866):190, 2000
Cruz-Martinez R, Figueras F, Hernandez-Andrade E, et al: Fetal brain Doppler to predict cesarean
delivery for nonreassuring fetal status in term small-for-gestational-age fetuses. Obstet Gynecol
117:618, 2011
D’Antonio F, Timor-Tritsch IE, Palacios-Jaraquemada J, et al: First-trimester detection of abnormally
invasive placenta in high-risk women: systematic review and meta-analysis. Ultrasound Obstet
Gynecol 51(2):176, 2018
Dashe JS, McIntire DD, Ramus RM, et al: Hydramnios: anomaly prevalence and sonographic detection.
Obstet Gynecol 100(1):134, 2002
Dashe JS, McIntire DD, Twickler DM: Effect of maternal obesity on the ultrasound detection of
anomalous fetuses. Obstet Gynecol 113(5):1001, 2009
Dashe JS, Nathan L, McIntire DD, et al: Correlation between amniotic fluid glucose concentration and
amniotic fluid volume in pregnancy complicated by diabetes. Am J Obstet Gynecol 182(4):901, 2000

Debus A, Hagelstein C, Kilian A, et al: Fetal lung volume in congenital diaphragmatic hernia: association
of prenatal MR imaging findings with postnatal chronic lung disease. Radiology 266(3):887, 2013
Do QN, Lewis MA, Xi Y, et al: MRI of the placenta accreta spectrum (PAS) disorder: radiomics
analysis correlates with surgical and pathological outcome. J Magn Reson Imaging 51(3):936, 2020
Dorleijn DM, Cohen-Overbeek TE, Groenendaal F, et al: Idiopathic polyhydramnios and postnatal
findings. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 22(4):315, 2009
Einerson BD, Comstock J, Silver RM, et al: Placenta accreta spectrum disorder: uterine dehiscence, not
placental invasion. Obstet Gynecol 135(5):1104, 2020
Erez O, Shoham-Vardi I, Sheiner E, et al: Hydramnios and small for gestational age are independent risk
factors for neonatal mortality and maternal morbidity. Arch Gynecol Obstet 271(4):296, 2005
EUROCAT: Prenatal detection rates charts and tables. 2019. Available at: eu-rdplatform.jrc.ec.europa.eu/eurocat/eurocat-data/prenatal-screening-and-diagnosis_en. Accessed
September 15, 2021
Farhataziz N, Engels JE, Ramus RM, et al: Fetal MRI of urine and meconium by gestational age for the
diagnosis of genitourinary and gastrointestinal abnormalities. AJR Am J Roentgenol 184:1891, 2005
Flood K, Unterscheider J, Daly S, et al: The role of brain sparing in the prediction of adverse outcomes
in intrauterine growth restriction: results of the multicenter PORTO Study. Am J Obstet Gynecol
211:288.e1, 2014
Food and Drug Administration: Avoid fetal “keepsake” images, heartbeat monitors. 2014. Available at
https://www.fda.gov/consumers/consumer-updates/avoid-fetal-keepsake-images-heartbeat-monitors.
Accessed May 12, 2020
Frank Wolf M, Peleg D, Stahl-Rosenzweig T, et al: Isolated polyhydramnios in the third trimester: is a
gestational diabetes evaluation of value? Gynecol Endocrinol 33(11):849, 2017
Furey EA, Bailey AA, Twickler DM: Fetal MR imaging of gastrointestinal abnormalities. Radiographics
36(3):904, 2016
Gizzo S, Noventa M, Vitagliano A, et al: An update on maternal hydration strategies for amniotic fluid
improvement in isolated oligohydramnios and normohydramnios: evidence from a systematic review
of literature and meta-analysis. PLoS One 10(12):e0144334, 2015
Goetzinger KR, Shanks AL, Odibo AO, et al: Advanced maternal age and the risk of major congenital
anomalies. Am J Perinatol 34(3):217, 2017
Griffiths PD, Bradburn M, Campbell MJ, et al: Use of MRI in the diagnosis of fetal brain abnormalities
in utero (MERIDIAN): a multicenter, prospective cohort study. Lancet 389(10068):538, 2017
Guron G, Friberg P: An intact renin-angiotensin system is a prerequisite for normal renal development. J
Hypertens 18(2):123, 2000
Happe SK, Rac MW, Moschos E, et al: Prospective first trimester ultrasound of low implantation and
placenta accreta spectrum. J Ulrasound 39(10):1907, 2020
Harreld JH, Bhore R, Chason DP, et al: Corpus callosum length by gestational age as evaluated by fetal
MR imaging. Am J Neuroradiol 32(3):490, 2011
Hernandez JS, Twickler DM, McIntire DM, et al: Hydramnios in twin gestations. Obstet Gynecol
120(4):759, 2012
Herrera CL, Byrne JJ, Clark HR, et al: Utilization of fetal magnetic resonance imaging after
sonographic identification of major structural anomalies. J Ultrasound Med 39(10):2053, 2020
Hinh ND, Ladinsky JL: Amniotic fluid index measurements in normal pregnancy after 28 gestational
weeks. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 91:132, 2005
Hu LS, Caire J, Twickler DM: MR findings of complicated multifetal gestations. Obstet Gynecol 36(1):
76, 2006

Huhta JC, Moise KJ, Fisher DJ, et al: Detection and quantitation of construction of the fetal ductus
arteriosus by Doppler echocardiography. Circulation 75:406, 1987
Iams JD, Grobman WA, Lozitska A, et al: Adherence to criteria for transvaginal ultrasound imaging and
measurement of cervical length. Am J Obstet Gynecol 209(4):365, 2013
International Society of Ultrasound in Obstetrics and Gynecology: ISUOG statement on ultrasound
exposure in the first trimester and autism spectrum disorders. 2016. Available at:
https://www.isuog.org/resource/isuog-statement-on-ultrasound-exposure-in-the-first-trimester-andautism-spectrum-disorders-pdf.html. Accessed September 15, 2021
Janga D, Akinfenwa O: Work-related repetitive strain injuries amongst practitioners of obstetric and
gynecologic ultrasound worldwide. Arch Gynecol Obstet 286(2):353, 2012
Jauniaux E, Collins SL, Jurkovic D, et al: Accreta placentation: a systematic review of prenatal
ultrasound imaging and grading of villous invasiveness. Am J Obstet Gynecol 215(6):712, 2016
Kaelin Agten A, Cali G, Monteagudo A, et al: The clinical outcome of cesarean scar pregnancies
implanted “on the scar” versus “in the niche.” Am J Obstet Gynecol 216(5):510, 2017
Karim JN, Roberts NW, Salomon LJ, et al: Systematic review of first trimester ultrasound screening in
detecting fetal structural anomalies and factors affecting screening performance. Ultrasound Obstet
Gynecol 50(4):429, 2017
Katorza E, Bertucci E, Perlman S, et al: Development of the fetal vermis: new biometry reference data
and comparison of 3 diagnostic modalities-3D ultrasound, 2D ultrasound, and MR imaging. Am J
Neuroradiol 37(7):1359, 2016
Kehl S, Schelkle A, Thomas A, et al: Single deepest vertical pocket or amniotic fluid index as evaluation
test for predicting adverse pregnancy outcome (SAFE trial): a multicenter open-label, randomized
controlled trial. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 47:674, 2016
Khan S, Donnelly J: Outcome of pregnancy in women diagnosed with idiopathic polyhydramnios. Aust
N Z J Obstet Gynaecol 57(1):57, 2017
Kingdom JC, Burrell SJ, Kaufmann P: Pathology and clinical implications of abnormal umbilical artery
Doppler waveforms. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 9:271, 1997
Kline-Fath BM, Calvo-Garcia MA, O’Hara SM, et al: Twin-twin transfusion syndrome: cerebral
ischemia is not the only fetal MR imaging finding. Pediatr Radiol 37(1):47, 2007
Kooiman, Calabrese CE, Didier R, et al: Micrognathia and oropharyngeal space in patients with Robin
sequence: prenatal MRI measurements. J Oral Maxillofac Surg 76(2):408, 2018
Koren G, Florescu A, Costei AM, et al: Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs during third trimester and
the risk of premature closure of the ductus arteriosus: a meta-analysis. Ann Pharmacother
40(5):824, 2006
Lazar DA, Cassady CI, Olutoye OO, et al: Tracheoesophageal displacement index on predictors of
airway obstruction for fetuses with neck masses. J Pediatr Surg 47:46, 2012
Lee TC, Lim FY, Keswani SG, et al: Late gestation fetal magnetic resonance imaging-derived total lung
volume predicts postnatal survival and need for extracorporeal membrane oxygenation support in
isolated congenital diaphragmatic hernia. J Pediatr Surg 46(6):1165, 2011
Levi S: Routine ultrasound screening of congenital anomalies. An overview of the European experience.
Ann N Y Acad Sci 847:86, 1998
Levine D, Barnes PD: Cortical maturation in normal and abnormal fetuses as assessed with prenatal
MR imaging. Radiology 210:751, 1999
Leyendecker JR, DuBose M, Hosseinzadeh K, et al: MRI of pregnancy-related issues: abnormal
placentation. AJR Am J Roentgenol 198(2):311, 2012

Li Y, Estroff JA, Khwaja O, et al: Callosal dysgenesis in fetuses with ventriculomegaly: levels of
agreement between imaging modalities and postnatal outcome. Ultra Obstet Gynecol 40(5): 522,
2012
Luo QQ, Zou L, Gao H, et al: Idiopathic polyhydramnios at term and pregnancy outcomes: a multicenter
observational study. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 30(14):1755, 2017
Machado MR, Cecatti JG, Krupa F, et al: Curve of amniotic fluid index measurements in low risk
pregnancy. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 86:37, 2007
Magann EF, Bass JD, Chauhan SP, et al: Amniotic fluid volume in normal singleton pregnancies. Obstet
Gynecol 90(4):524, 1997
Magann EF, Chauhan CP, Hitt WC, et al: Borderline or marginal amniotic fluid index and peripartum
outcomes: a review of the literature. J Ultrasound Med 30(4):523, 2011
Magann EF, Doherty D, Lutegendorf MA, et al: Peripartum outcomes of high-risk pregnancies
complicated by oligo- and polyhydramnios: a prospective longitudinal study. J Obstet Gynaecol Res
36(2):268, 2010
Mann SE, Nijland MJ, Ross MG: Mathematic modeling of human amniotic fluid dynamics. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 175(4):937, 1996
Many A, Hill LM, Lazebnik N, et al: The association between polyhydramnios and preterm delivery.
Obstet Gynecol 86(3):389, 1995
Mari G, Deter RL, Carpenter RL, et al: Noninvasive diagnosis by Doppler ultrasonography of fetal
anemia due to maternal red-cell alloimmunization. Collaborative group for Doppler assessment of the
blood velocity in anemic fetuses. N Engl J Med 342:9, 2000
Martins JG, Biggio JR, Abuhamad A: Consult series #52: diagnosis and management of fetal growth
restriction. Am J Obstet Gynecol 223(4):B2, 2020
Mehollin-Ray AR, Cassady CI, Cass DL, et al: Fetal MR imaging of congenital diaphragmatic hernia.
Radiographics 32(4):1067, 2012
Messerschmidt A, Pataraia A, Helber H, et al: Fetal MRI for prediction of neonatal mortality following
preterm premature rupture of the fetal membranes. Pediatr Radiol 41:1416, 2011
Millischer AE, Sonigo P, Ville Y, et al: Standardized anatomical examination of the fetus at MRI. A
feasibility study. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 42(5):553, 2013
Modena AB, Fieni S: Amniotic fluid dynamics. Acta Bio Medica Ateneo Parmanese 75(Suppl 1):11,
2004
Moore TR: Amniotic fluid dynamics reflect fetal and maternal health and disease. Obstet Gynecol
116(3):759, 2010
Moore TR, Cayle JE: The amniotic fluid index in normal human pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol
162(5):1168, 1990
Morris LM, Lim FY, Elluru RG, et al: Severe micrognathia: indications for EXIT-to-Airway. Fetal Diagn
Ther 26(30):162, 2009
Morrow RJ, Abramson SL, Bull SB, et al: Effect of placental embolization of the umbilical artery
velocity waveform in fetal sheep. Am J Obstet Gynecol 151:1055, 1989
Moschos E, Wells CE, Twickler DM: Biometric sonographic findings of abnormally adherent
trophoblastic implantations on cesarean delivery scars. J Ultrasound Med 33:475, 2014
Murphey S, Society of Diagnostic Medical Sonography: White paper series: work related
musculoskeletal disorders in sonography. Society of Diagnostic Medical Sonography, Plano, Texas,
2018
Nabhan AF, Abdelmoula YA: Amniotic fluid index versus single deepest vertical pocket as a screening
test for preventing adverse pregnancy outcome. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 3:CD006953, 2008

Neubert S, Trautmann K, Tanner B, et al: Sonographic prognostic factors in prenatal diagnosis of SCT.
Fetal Diagn Ther 19(4): 319, 2004
Ng TW, Xi Y, Schindel D, et al: Fetal head and neck masses: MRI prediction of significant morbidity.
AJR Am J Roentgenol 212(1):215, 2019
Odibo IN, Newville TM, Ounpraseuth ST, et al: Idiopathic polyhydramnios: persistence across gestation
and impact on pregnancy outcomes. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 199:175, 2016
Ogamo M, Sugiyama T, Maeda T, et al: The ex utero intrapartum treatment (EXIT) procedure in giant
fetal neck masses. Fetal Diagn Ther 20(3):214, 2005
O’Keeffe DF, Abuhamad A: Obstetric ultrasound utilization in the United States: data from various
health plans. Semin Perinatol 37(5):29, 2013
Pagani G, Cali G, Acharya G, et al: Diagnostic accuracy of ultrasound in detecting the severity of
abnormally invasive placentation: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Acta Obstet Gynecol
Scand 97(1):25, 2018
Panting-Kemp A, Nguyen T, Chang E, et al: Idiopathic polyhydramnios and perinatal outcome. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 181(5):1079, 1999
Perrone EE, Jarboe MD, Maher CO, et al: Early delivery of sacrococcygeal teratoma with intraspinal
extension. Fetal Diagn Ther 43(1):72, 2018
Petrozella LN, Dashe JS, McIntire DD, et al: Clinical significance of borderline amniotic fluid index and
oligohydramnios in preterm pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 117(2 pt 1):338, 2011
Pilliod RA, Page JM, Burwick RM, et al: The risk of fetal death in nonanomalous pregnancies affected
by polyhydramnios. Am J Obstet Gynecol 213:410.e.1, 2015
Prayer D, Malinger G, Twickler D, et al: In reply: ISUOG Guidelines for fetal MRI: a response to 3-T
fetal imaging and limited fetal exams. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 50(6):805, 2017
Pri-Paz S, Khalek N, Fuchs KM, et al: Maximal amniotic fluid index as a prognostic factor in
pregnancies complicated by polyhydramnios. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 39(6):648, 2012
Rac MW, Dashe JS, Wells CE, et al: Ultrasound predictors of placental invasion: the Placenta Accreta
Index. Am J Obstet Gynecol 212(3):343, 2015
Rac MW, Moschos E, Wells CE, et al: Sonographic findings of morbidly adherent placenta in the first
trimester. J Ultrasound Med 35(2):263, 2016
Ray JG, Vermeulen MJ, Bharatha A, et al: Association between MRI exposure during pregnancy and
fetal and childhood outcomes. JAMA 316(9):952, 2016
Reeves MJ, Brandreth M, Whitby EH, et al: Neonatal cochlear function: measurement after exposure to
acoustic noise during in utero MR imaging. Radiology 257(3):802, 2010
Roll SC, Evans KD, Hutmire CD, et al: An analysis of occupational factors related to shoulder
discomfort in diagnostic medical sonographers and vascular technologists. Work 42(3):355, 2012
Rydberg C, Tunon K: Detection of fetal abnormalities by second-trimester ultrasound screening in a
non-selected population. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 96(2):176, 2017
Sahin E, Madendag Y, Tayyar AT, et al: Perinatal outcomes in uncomplicated late preterm pregnancies
with borderline oligohydramnios. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 31(23):3085, 2018
Sande JA, Ioannou C, Sarris I, et al: Reproducibility of measuring amniotic fluid index and single deepest
vertical pool throughout gestation. Prenat Diagn 35(5):434, 2015
Schaefer C: Angiotensin II-receptor-antagonists: further evidence of fetotoxicity but not teratogenicity.
Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol 67(8):591, 2003
Segata M, Mari G: Fetal anemia: new technologies. Curr Opin Obstet Gynecol 16:153, 2004
Soares de Oliveira-Szejnfeld P, Levine D, Melo AS, et al: Congenital brain abnormalities and Zika virus:
what the radiologist can expect to see prenatally and postnatally. Radiology 281:203, 2016

Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Mari G, Norton ME, et al: SMFM Clinical Guideline No. 8: The
fetus at risk for anemia—diagnosis and management. Am J Obstet Gynecol 212(6):697, 2015a
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Simpson LL: Twin-twin transfusion syndrome. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 208(1):3, 2013
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Sinkey RG, Odibo AO, et al: SMFM Clinical Consult Series No.
37: Diagnosis and management of vasa previa. Am J Obstet Gynecol 213(5):615, 2015b
Spellacy WN, Buhi WC, Bradley B, et al: Maternal, fetal, amniotic fluid levels of glucose, insulin, and
growth hormone. Obstet Gynecol 41:323, 1973
Stothard KJ, Tennant PW, Bell R, et al: Maternal overweight and obesity: A systematic review and
meta-analysis. JAMA 301(6):636, 2009
Syngelaki A, Chelemen T, Dagklis T, et al: Challenges in the diagnosis of fetal non-chromosomal
abnormalities at 11–13 weeks. Prenat Diagn 31:90, 2011
Timor-Tritsch IE, Monteagudo A, Cali G, et al: Cesarean scar pregnancy and early placenta accreta
share a common histology. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 43(4):383, 2014
Twickler DM, Magee KP, Caire J, et al: Second-opinion magnetic resonance imaging for suspected fetal
central nervous system abnormalities. Am J Obstet Gynecol 188:492, 2003
Twickler DM, Reichel T, McIntire DD, et al: Fetal central nervous system ventricle and cisterna magna
measurements by magnetic resonance imaging. Am J Obstet Gynecol 187:927, 2002
Vadeyar SH, Moore RJ, Strachan BK, et al: Effect of fetal magnetic resonance imaging on fetal heart
rate patterns. Am J Obstet Gynecol 182:666, 2000
Weiss PA, Hofmann H, Winter R, et al: Amniotic fluid glucose values in normal and abnormal
pregnancies. Obstet Gynecol 65:333, 1985
Wenstrom KD, Weiner CP, Williamson RA: Diverse maternal and fetal pathology associated with absent
diastolic flow in the umbilical artery of high-risk fetuses. Obstet Gynecol 77:374, 1991
Wiegand SL, Beamon CJ, Chescheir NC, et al: Idiopathic polyhydramnios: severity and perinatal
morbidity. Am J Perinatol 33(7):658, 2016
Wiskirchen J, Groenewaeller EF, Kehlbach R, et al: Long-term effects of repetitive exposure to a static
magnetic field 1.5 T on proliferation of human fetal lung fibroblasts. Magn Reson Med 41:464, 1999
Wood SL, Newton JM, Wang L, et al: Borderline amniotic fluid index and its relation to fetal intolerance
of labor: a 2-center retrospective cohort study. J Ultrasound Med 33(4):705, 2014
Xi Y, Brown E, Bailey A, et al: MR imaging of the fetal cerebellar vermis: Biometric predictors of
adverse neurologic outcome. J Magn Reson Imaging 44(5):1284, 2016
Zaretsky M, Ramus R, McIntire D, et al: MRI calculation of lung volumes to predict outcome in fetuses
with genitourinary abnormalities. AJR Am J Roentgenol 185:1328, 2005
Zaretsky MV, McIntire DD, Twickler DM: Feasibility of the fetal anatomic and maternal pelvic survey
by magnetic resonance imaging at term. Am J Obstet Gynecol 189:997, 2003a
Zaretsky MV, Twickler DM: Magnetic imaging in obstetrics. Clin Obstet Gynecol 46:868, 2003b
Zeeman GG, McIntire DD, Twickler DM: Maternal and fetal artery Doppler findings in women with
chronic hypertension who subsequently develop superimposed pre-eclampsia. J Matern Fetal
Neonatal Med 14:318, 2003
Zun Z, Limperopoulos C: Placental perfusion imaging using velocity-selective arterial spin labeling.
Magn Reson Med 80(3):1036, 2018

CHAPTER 15

Normal and Abnormal Fetal Anatomy

BIOMETRY
BRAIN AND SPINE
HEAD, FACE, AND NECK
THORAX
HEART
GASTROINTESTINAL OBSTRUCTION
VENTRAL WALL DEFECTS
KIDNEYS AND GENITOURINARY TRACT
SKELETON
REFERENCES
The ability to detect and characterize abnormalities before birth is one of the
marvels of modern obstetrics. Sonography can image the fetus with
remarkable precision. Components of the standard anatomic survey are listed
in Table 15-1. These have been termed essential elements by the American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020) and minimal elements by
the American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine (2018). Ideally, residency
training in Obstetrics and Gynecology includes education in acquisition and
interpretation of these views. Resources provided by national societies assist
with this endeavor (Abuhamad, 2018).

TABLE 15-1. Components of Standard and Detailed Anatomic Surveys

A detailed fetal anatomic survey is a specialized examination that may
include more than 60 components, each determined on a case-by-case basis.
It is the primary method of evaluating at-risk pregnancies and characterizing

fetal abnormalities, thereby aiding consultation and delivery planning.
Indications are shown in Table 14-6 and discussed further in Chapter 14 (p.
251). At Parkland hospital, the detailed survey includes, at minimum, an
attempt to visualize all components required by the American Institute of
Ultrasound in Medicine for normal detailed case submission (see Table 151).
This chapter presents the standard and detailed anatomic surveys and
some of the many fetal abnormalities that may be detected when visualization
is optimal. When imaging or measuring any fetal structure, care should be
taken to place the focal zone at the appropriate level and to magnify the
image appropriately (Abuhamad, 2018). Whenever a fetal abnormality is
identified, a detailed anatomic survey is recommended. With rare exception,
amniocentesis with chromosomal microarray analysis also is offered. If a
cardiac abnormality is identified, fetal echocardiography is indicated.
Additional indications for these specialized examinations and for fetal
magnetic resonance (MR) imaging are reviewed in Chapter 14.

BIOMETRY
In the first trimester, crown-rump length (CRL) measurement is used to
establish or confirm gestational age (Appendix, p. 1234). The earlier that
sonography is performed, the more accurate this estimation. Gestational age
assessment is reviewed in Chapter 14 (p. 248). The fetus is imaged in the
midsagittal plane in a neutral, nonflexed position so that its length can be
measured in a straight line (Fig. 15-1). The average of three measurements is
used. First-trimester nuchal translucency measurement is reviewed in
Chapter 14 (p. 249).

FIGURE 15-1 The crown-rump length measures 61 mm in this 12-week, 4-day fetus.

In the second and third trimesters, the biparietal diameter, head
circumference, abdominal circumference, and femur length are measured to
confirm gestational age, if not already established in the first trimester, and to
estimate fetal weight. Ultrasound equipment and report packages calculate
these estimates using standardized nomograms (Hadlock, 1991). If an
abnormality involving one of the parameters is suspected, consideration is
given to excluding it from the gestational age calculation. Fetal weight
nomograms are available that do not include the head measurements or the
femur measurement (Hadlock, 1984; Shepard, 1982).
The biparietal diameter and head circumference are measured in the
transthalamic view. This is a transverse image that includes the midline falx
cerebri, cavum septum pellucidum, thalami, and insula (Fig. 15-2A). The
cerebral hemispheres should appear symmetric, and the cerebellum should
not be visible. The biparietal diameter is measured perpendicular to the falx
cerebri, from the outer edge of the skull in the near field to the inner edge of
the skull in the far field. The head circumference is measured by placing an
ellipse around the outer edge of the skull. The head circumference may also

be calculated by averaging the biparietal diameter and the occipito-frontal
diameter and multiplying by π.

FIGURE 15-2 Normal biometry. A. Transthalamic view depicts measurement of the biparietal
diameter (BPD) and head circumference (HC). Landmarks include the cavum septum pellucidum
(CSP), thalami (T), and insula (I). B. Abdominal circumference view (AC) shows measurement and
landmarks, which include the stomach (S) and the confluence of the umbilical vein (U) and the left
portal vein. C. Femur length measurement (FL).

The abdominal circumference is measured in a transverse image that
includes the stomach and the J-shaped confluence of the umbilical vein with
the portal sinus. An ellipse is placed just outside the fetal skin edge (Fig. 152B). The image should appear as round as possible and ideally contain no
more than 1 rib on either side. The spine should be visible in cross-section at
the 3 o’clock or 9 o’clock position, whereas the kidneys should not be
visible, as they are lower in the abdomen. Abdominal circumference is the
biometric parameter most affected by fetal growth. An abdominal
circumference below the 10th percentile may be used to diagnose fetalgrowth restriction (Chap. 47, p. 825).
The femur length is measured with the ultrasound beam perpendicular to
the long axis of the shaft. Calipers are placed at each end of the calcified

diaphysis (Fig. 15-2C). Throughout the second and third trimesters, the femur
length to abdominal circumference ratio is normally 20 to 24 percent. If this
ratio is below 18 percent, a skeletal dysplasia should be considered,
particularly if other long-bone measurements are lagging (p. 302). As
discussed in Chapter 17 (p. 340), a mildly foreshortened femur length
measurement is also a minor marker for Down syndrome (Herrera, 2020b).
Various nomograms exist for other fetal structures, including the
transverse cerebellar diameter, ocular distances, nasal bone, ear length, jaw
index, thoracic circumference, and lengths of the liver, kidneys, long bones,
and feet. They may be used to address specific questions regarding organ
system abnormalities, congenital infection, or genetic syndromes (Appendix,
pp. 1238–1241).

BRAIN AND SPINE
Standard sonographic evaluation of the fetal brain includes three transverse
(axial) views. As noted, the transthalamic view should contain the midline
falx cerebri, cavum septum pellucidum (CSP), thalami, and insula (see Fig.
15-2A). The CSP is the space between the two laminae that separate the
frontal horns of the lateral ventricles. It should be visible between
approximately 17 and 37 weeks’ gestation, but after this, fusion of the septi
pellucidi may obliterate the cavum. Inability to visualize a normal CSP may
indicate a midline brain abnormality (Fig. 15-3). For example, the frontal
horns are widely spaced apart in agenesis of the corpus callosum (ACC),
whereas in cases of septo-optic dysplasia (de Morsier syndrome) and lobar
holoprosencephaly, the frontal horns communicate. Discussed in Chapter 16
(p. 312), an abnormally wide CSP may also be found with trisomy 18.

FIGURE 15-3 Absence of the cavum septum pellucidum, with coronal (A) and transverse (B) images
showing communication between the frontal horns (FH) of the lateral ventricles. This may be isolated
but can occur in the setting of septo-optic dysplasia or lobar holoprosencephaly. C = choroid plexus; F =
falx cerebri.

The transventricular view lies superior to the transthalamic view and, as
the name implies, includes the lateral ventricles. The ventricles are measured
at their atrium, which is the confluence of the temporal and occipital horns
(Fig. 15-4). The measurement is normally 5 to 9 mm throughout the second
and third trimesters. Cerebrospinal fluid is produced within the ventricles by
the choroid plexus. Choroid plexus cysts are present in 0.5 to 2 percent of
uncomplicated pregnancies and approximately 30 to 50 percent of
pregnancies with trisomy 18 (Fig. 16-5, p. 312) (Reddy, 2014). A detailed
ultrasound examination is generally offered when found. In the absence of an
associated ultrasound abnormality, or unless an aneuploidy screening test
indicates increased risk for trisomy 18, a choroid plexus cyst is considered a
normal variant.

FIGURE 15-4 Transventricular view. A. Transverse image of the lateral ventricles, which contain the
choroid plexus (C). B. The ventricles are measured at the atria (A), the confluence of the temporal and
occipital horns. The measurement is normally 5–9 mm. Vp = lateral ventricle. (Reproduced with
permission from Rosa Robles, RDMS.)

For the transcerebellar view, the transducer is angled back through the
posterior fossa (Fig. 15-5). Structures visible in this image include the
midline falx cerebri, cavum septum pellucidum, thalami, cerebellum, and
cisterna magna. The cerebellum and cisterna magna are measured, and
between 15 and 20 weeks’ gestation, the nuchal skinfold thickness also is
measured. From 15 until 22 weeks, the cerebellar diameter in millimeters is
roughly equivalent to the gestational age in weeks (Chavez, 2003).
Cerebellar hypoplasia has been associated with various central nervous
system (CNS) and non-CNS abnormalities (Howley, 2018). The cisterna
magna should measure between 2 and 10 mm throughout the second trimester
and may reach 12 mm in the latter part of the third trimester. It becomes
effaced when the Chiari II malformation is present (p. 277). If the cisterna
magna is enlarged, the differential diagnosis includes absence of all or part
of the vermis (p. 279), a cyst such as an arachnoid cyst within the posterior
fossa, or mega-cisterna magna, which is a diagnosis of exclusion and has an
excellent prognosis. An increased nuchal skinfold measurement is associated
with increased risk for Down syndrome, other genetic syndromes, and
structural abnormalities (Chap. 17, p. 341).

FIGURE 15-5 Transcerebellar view. A. Transverse image of the posterior fossa showing
measurement of the cerebellum (Cereb), cisterna magna (CM), and nuchal skinfold thickness (NF). B.
Third-trimester image depicting the cerebellar hemispheres (CH) and cerebellar vermis (V). The fourth
ventricle (4) is anterior to the vermis. CSP = cavum septum pellucidum; I = insula; P = cerebral
peduncles.

Imaging of the spine includes evaluation of the cervical, thoracic, lumbar,
and sacral regions (Fig. 15-6). Representative images are often obtained in
the sagittal or coronal plane. However, imaging of each spinal segment in the
transverse plane is more sensitive for anomaly detection. Transverse images
demonstrate three ossification centers. The anterior ossification center is the
vertebral body, and the posterior paired ossification centers represent the
junction of vertebral laminae and pedicles. Ossification of the spine
proceeds in a cranial-caudal fashion. The ossification of the upper sacrum
(S1-S2) is not generally visible before 16 weeks’ gestation, and ossification
of the entire sacrum may not be visible until 21 weeks (De Biasio, 2003).
Thus, detection of some spinal abnormalities can be challenging in the early
second trimester.

FIGURE 15-6 Normal fetal spine. This sagittal image depicts the cervical (C), thoracic (T), lumbar (L),
and sacral spine (S). Arrows denote the parallel rows of paired posterior ossification centers, which
represent the junction of vertebral lamina and pedicles.

■ Neural-tube Defects
These defects include anencephaly, myelomeningocele (spina bifida),
cephalocele, and rare spinal dysraphisms. Normally, the neural tube closes
by the embryonic age of 26 to 28 days (Chap. 7, p. 124). The birth
prevalence of neural-tube defects approximates 0.9 in 1000 in the United
States and most of Europe and 1.3 in 1000 in the United Kingdom (Cragan,
2009; Dolk, 2010). Many neural-tube defects can be prevented with folic
acid supplementation. When isolated, neural-tube defect inheritance is
multifactorial, and the recurrence risk without periconceptional folic acid
supplementation is 3 to 5 percent (Chap. 16, p. 324).
Screening for neural-tube defects may be performed with either
ultrasound alone or ultrasound in addition to maternal serum alphafetoprotein (MSAFP) level measurement (American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists, 2019a). Between 15 and 20 weeks’ gestation, an upper
MSAFP threshold of 2.5 multiples of the median (MoM) is anticipated to

detect 95 percent with fetal anencephaly and 80 percent with
myelomeningocele. However, detection with standard sonography is at least
comparable to that with MSAFP (Dashe, 2006; Norem 2005). A detailed
ultrasound examination is the preferred diagnostic test and may identify other
abnormalities or conditions that also elevate MSAFP levels (Table 17-5, p.
338).
Anencephaly is an absence of the cranium and telencephalon above the
level of the skull base and orbits (Fig. 15-7). Acrania is absence of the
cranium with protrusion of disorganized brain tissue, and herniation of the
latter tissue is exencephaly. Importantly, brain tissue visible in the late first
trimester is often not seen when ultrasound is performed in the second or
third trimester. Thus, anencephaly is the final stage of exencephaly. It is often
diagnosed in the late first trimester, and with adequate visualization, virtually
all cases may be diagnosed in the second trimester.

FIGURE 15-7 Anencephaly/acrania. A. This transabdominal image at 11 weeks’ gestation depicts
relatively subtle absence of the cranium. B. A transvaginal image at 11 weeks demonstrates more
clearly the protrusion of a disorganized mass of brain tissue. C. By 14 weeks, this tissue resembles a
“shower cap.” CRL = crown–rump length.

Sonographically, the cranial contour may appear abnormal in the first
trimester and may resemble a “shower cap” in the late first or early second
trimester. The face often appears triangular, and sagittal images demonstrate
lack of an ossified cranium. Hydramnios from impaired fetal swallowing is
common in the third trimester. Anencephaly is uniformly lethal. If the
pregnancy is continued, perinatal palliative care consultation should be
considered (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019b).
Cephalocele is the herniation of meninges through a cranial defect,
typically located in the midline occipital region (Fig. 15-8). When brain
tissue herniates through the skull defect, the anomaly is termed an

encephalocele. Herniation of the cerebellum and other posterior fossa
structures constitutes a Chiari III malformation. Microcephaly is common
by the third trimester. Associated intracranial abnormalities are frequently
visible, and survivors have a high incidence of neurological deficits and
intellectual disability. Cephalocele is an important feature of the autosomal
recessive Meckel-Gruber syndrome, which includes cystic renal dysplasia
and polydactyly. A cephalocele not located in the occipital midline raises
suspicion for amnionic-band sequence (Chap. 6, p. 113).

FIGURE 15-8 Encephalocele. This transverse image depicts a large defect in the occipital region of
the cranium (arrows) through which meninges and brain tissue have herniated.

Spina bifida is characterized by defects in the vertebrae, typically the
dorsal arches, and subsequent exposure of the meninges and nerve roots. The
prevalence approximates 1 in 2000 births (Cragan, 2009; Dolk, 2010).
Herniation of a meningeal sac and neural elements is a myelomeningocele
(Fig. 15-9A). Less commonly, only an empty meningeal sac herniates, which
is a meningocele. Transverse images are helpful to demonstrate separation
or splaying of the lateral processes and characterize the level of the defect.
Most cases are open spina bifida, which means that the defect includes skin

and soft tissues. Closed defects are skin-covered and more challenging to
detect prenatally.

FIGURE 15-9 Myelomeningocele. A. Sagittal image of a lumbosacral myelomeningocele. Arrowheads
indicate nerve roots within the anechoic herniated sac. The overlying skin abruptly stops at the defect
(arrow). B. Transthalamic image demonstrating flattening of the frontal bones (arrows)—the lemon
sign. C. Transcerebellar image depicting the banana sign, an anterior curvature of the cerebellum
(arrows) and effacement of the cisterna magna.

Detection of spina bifida is aided by two characteristic cranial findings
(Nicolaides, 1986). Flatting or scalloping of the frontal bones is termed the
“lemon sign,” and anterior curvature of the cerebellum with effacement of
the cisterna magna is the “banana sign” (Fig. 15-9B,C). These findings are
manifestations of the Arnold-Chiari or Chiari II malformation. This develops
when downward displacement of the spinal cord pulls a portion of the
cerebellum through the foramen magnum and into the upper cervical canal.
The biparietal diameter measurement often lags behind the other biometric
parameters. Ventriculomegaly is common after mid-gestation, and 80 to 90
percent of infants with myelomeningocele require ventriculoperitoneal shunt
placement (Adzick 2011, Chao, 2010). Affected children require
multidisciplinary care to address problems related to the defect such as
deficits in swallowing, bladder and bowel function, and ambulation. Fetal
myelomeningocele surgery is discussed in Chapter 19 (p. 372).

■ Ventriculomegaly
Distention of the lateral ventricles is considered a nonspecific marker of
abnormal brain development (Pilu, 2018). Mild ventriculomegaly is
diagnosed when the atrial width measures 10 to 12 mm; moderate
ventriculomegaly, when the measurement is 13 to 15 mm; and severe

ventriculomegaly when >15 mm (Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine,
2018). Representative images are depicted in Figure 15-10. The choroid
plexus may appear dangling in severe cases.

FIGURE 15-10 Ventriculomegaly. A. Mild ventriculomegaly. The atria measured 11 mm. No
associated abnormality or underlying etiology was identified. B. Severe ventriculomegaly. In this fetus
with aqueductal stenosis, the atria measured 45 mm. Arrow denotes the dangling choroid plexus.

Ventriculomegaly may occur secondary to a variety of central nervous
system abnormalities and is associated with numerous genetic and infectious
etiologies. Initial evaluation includes a detailed examination of fetal
anatomy, amniocentesis for chromosomal microarray analysis, and testing for
congenital infections such as cytomegalovirus and toxoplasmosis (Chap. 16,
p. 326). Genetic syndromes resulting in ventriculomegaly include L1 Xlinked aqueductal stenosis, Joubert syndrome, Walker Warburg syndrome,
hydrolethalus syndrome, and lissencephaly syndromes (Kousi, 2016).
Ventriculomegaly does not typically result in significant skull enlargement.
Two exceptions—when macrocrania often occurs—are aqueductal stenosis
and the asymmetric ventriculomegaly interhemispheric cyst callosal
dysgenesis (AVID) syndrome (Oh, 2019). Fetal MR imaging should be
considered to assess for associated abnormalities that may not be detectable
sonographically (Herrera, 2020a; Katz, 2018) (Chap. 14, p. 263).
Prognosis is determined by etiology, severity, and progression. In a
systematic review of nearly 1500 mild to moderate cases, 1 to 2 percent
were associated with congenital infection; 5 percent, with aneuploidy; and

12 percent, with neurological abnormality (Devaseelan, 2010). With
chromosomal microarray analysis, genetic abnormalities may be identified in
10 to 15 percent (Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, 2018). The larger the
atria, the greater the likelihood of an underlying CNS abnormality and
subsequent abnormal outcome (Gaglioti, 2009; Joó, 2008). If
ventriculomegaly is isolated and remains mild, development is normal in at
least 90 percent, and if moderate, development is normal in at least 75
percent (Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, 2018). Progression
significantly raises the likelihood of abnormal neurological development.

■ Agenesis of the Corpus Callosum
The corpus callosum is a major fiber bundle that connects reciprocal regions
of the cerebral hemispheres. It is best viewed in the midsagittal plane, and
color Doppler may demonstrate the pericallosal artery (Fig. 15-11).
Agenesis of the corpus callosum has characteristic sonographic findings. The
frontal horns are widely separated, and the occipital horns are rounded—
which is called colpocephaly. Together these findings give the lateral
ventricles a teardrop shape (Fig. 15-12). A normal cavum septum pellucidum
is not visible because of frontal horn displacement. In the midline, bundles of
Probst represent fiber tracts that no longer cross in the midline.
Ventriculomegaly is not uncommon, and without the corpus callosum
bordering the third ventricle superiorly, the third ventricle may be elevated
and mildly enlarged.

FIGURE 15-11 Normal corpus callosum. A. Arrows point to the corpus callosum in this midsagittal
image. B. Power Doppler image of the pericallosal artery (arrowheads).

FIGURE 15-12 Agenesis of the corpus callosum. A. This transverse image demonstrates a teardropshaped ventricle. The frontal horns (F) are widely separated, no cavum septum pellucidum is visible, and
bundles of Probst (P) line the midline. B. There is mild ventriculomegaly, no cavum septum pellucidum is
visible (arrow), and the third ventricle (3V) is elevated and enlarged. A = atria.

In population-based series, agenesis of the corpus callosum occurs in 1
in 4000 to 5000 pregnancies (Ballardini, 2018; Stoll, 2019; Szabo, 2011). It
is associated with other anomalies, aneuploidy, and more than 200 genetic
syndromes. Thus, chromosomal microarray analysis should be offered, and
genetic counseling can be challenging. In a review of apparently isolated
cases, fetal MR imaging identified additional brain abnormalities in more
than 20 percent of cases (Sotiriadis, 2012). If MR imaging does not identify
associated abnormalities, normal developmental outcome in 67 to 75 percent
of cases and severe disability in about 10 percent has been reported (des
Portes, 2018; Sotiriadis, 2012).

■ Holoprosencephaly
During early normal brain development, the prosencephalon or forebrain
divides as it becomes the telencephalon and diencephalon. With
holoprosencephaly, the prosencephalon fails to divide completely into two
separate cerebral hemispheres and underlying paired diencephalic structures.
The most severe form, alobar holoprosencephaly, is characterized by a

single monoventricle that surrounds fused thalami (Fig. 15-13). In semilobar
holoprosencephaly, hemispheres partially separate. Lobar
holoprosencephaly refers to a variable degree of fusion of frontal structures
and is more challenging to detect with prenatal ultrasound. The lobar form is
among possible diagnoses when a normal cavum septum pellucidum cannot
be visualized. Last, the middle interhemispheric variant of
holoprosencephaly is characterized by communication between the
midportion of the bodies of the lateral ventricles with separation of the
frontal horns, such that the choroid plexus may prolapse from one lateral
ventricle into the other. Differentiation into two cerebral hemispheres is
induced by prechordal mesenchyme, which is also responsible for
differentiation of the midline face. Craniofacial anomalies associated with
holoprosencephaly are reviewed later (p. 283).

FIGURE 15-13 Alobar holoprosencephaly. The thalami (Th) are fused and encircled by a
monoventricle (V) with a covering mantle (M) of cortex. The midline falx is absent. (Reproduced with
permission from Rafael Levy, RDMS.)

The birth prevalence of holoprosencephaly is only 1 in 10,000. However,
the abnormality has been identified in nearly 1 in 250 early abortuses, which
attests to extremely high in-utero lethality (Orioli, 2010; Yamada, 2004). The

alobar form accounts for 40 to 75 percent of cases, and 30 to 40 percent have
a numerical chromosomal abnormality, particularly trisomy 13 (Orioli, 2010;
Solomon, 2010). Conversely, of trisomy 13 cases, two thirds are found to
have holoprosencephaly.

■ Dandy-Walker Malformation
This posterior fossa abnormality is characterized by agenesis of the
cerebellar vermis, posterior fossa enlargement, and elevation of the
tentorium cerebelli. The cerebellar hemispheres are visibly separated, and
fluid in the cisterna magna communicates with the fourth ventricle through the
cerebellar vermis defect (Fig. 15-14). The birth prevalence approximates 1
in 12,000 (Long, 2006). Associated anomalies and aneuploidy are common.
These include ventriculomegaly in 30 to 40 percent, other anomalies in
approximately 50 percent, and aneuploidy in 40 percent (Ecker, 2000; Long,
2006). Dandy-Walker malformation is also associated with numerous genetic
and sporadic syndromes, congenital viral infections, and teratogen exposure,
all of which greatly affect the prognosis. Thus, the initial evaluation mirrors
that for ventriculomegaly (p. 278).

FIGURE 15-14 Dandy-Walker malformation. A. The cerebellar hemispheres (CH) are widely
separated by a fluid collection that connects the 4th ventricle (4V) to the enlarged cisterna magna (CM).
B. Sagittal image depicts elevation of the tentorium (arrows).

Inferior vermian agenesis is a term used when only the inferior portion
of the vermis is absent. Even with partial and relatively subtle vermian

agenesis, the prevalence of associated anomalies and aneuploidy is still high,
and the prognosis is often poor (Ecker, 2000; Long, 2006).

■ Schizencephaly and Porencephaly
Schizencephaly is a rare brain abnormality characterized by clefts in one or
both cerebral hemispheres, typically involving the perisylvian fissure. The
cleft is lined by heterotopic gray matter and communicates with the ventricle,
extending through the cortex to the pial surface (Fig. 15-15). Schizencephaly
is believed to be an abnormality of neuronal migration, which explains its
typically delayed recognition until after midpregnancy (Howe, 2012). It is
associated with absence of the cavum septum pellucidum, resulting in frontal
horn communication. Ventriculomegaly is a common finding.

FIGURE 15-15 Schizencephaly. This transverse image shows a large cleft extending from the right
lateral ventricle through the cortex. Because the borders of the cleft are separate, the defect is termed
open-lipped. (Reproduced with permission from Michael Davidson, RDMS.)

In contrast, porencephaly is a cystic space within the brain that is lined
by white matter and may or may not communicate with the ventricular system.

It is generally considered to be a destructive lesion. Porencephaly may
develop following intracranial hemorrhage in the setting of neonatal
alloimmune thrombocytopenia or in an individual with a COL4A-1 mutation
—a genetic condition which causes familial porencephaly. In a
monochorionic twin gestation, acute hypotension following death of a cotwin also may create porencephaly. Fetal MR imaging should be considered
when either of these CNS anomalies is identified.

■ Microcephaly
This condition indicates that the size of the head is profoundly smaller than
expected. The Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine (2016) recommends that
fetal microcephaly be defined as a head circumference at least 3 standard
deviations (SD) below the mean for gestational age (Appendix, p. 1237).
However, many fetuses with measurements in this range have normal head
size at birth, and therefore the diagnosis of pathologic microcephaly is not
considered certain until the head circumference reaches 5 SD below the
mean (Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, 2016). The forehead is often
upsloping. Microcephaly is associated with a wide range of underlying
abnormalities, genetic syndromes, and congenital infections such as
toxoplasmosis, rubella, and cytomegalovirus, herpes, or Zika infection
(Chap. 67, p. 1183). Findings that suggest infection include parenchymal and
periventricular echogenic foci, ventriculomegaly, and cerebellar hypoplasia.
Amniocentesis should be offered, and fetal MR imaging should be
considered. The Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine (2016) recommends
performing a detailed ultrasound examination of the fetal brain if the head
circumference measures more than 2 SD below the mean. Another ultrasound
evaluation follows in 3 or 4 weeks, with the understanding that it may be
difficult to distinguish constitutionally small head size from pathologic
findings.

■ Sacrococcygeal Teratoma
This germ cell tumor is one of the most common tumors in neonates, with a
birth prevalence of approximately 1 in 28,000 (Derikx, 2006; Swamy, 2008).
It is thought to arise from the totipotent cells along the Hensen node, anterior
to the coccyx. Sacrococcygeal teratoma (SCT) classification includes four

types (Altman, 1974). Type 1 is predominantly external with a minimal
presacral component; type 2 is predominantly external but with a significant
intrapelvic component; type 3 is predominantly internal and has abdominal
extension; and type 4 is entirely internal with no external component. The
tumor histological type may be mature, immature, or malignant.
Sonographically, SCT is a solid and/or cystic mass that arises from the
anterior sacrum and usually extends inferiorly and externally as it grows
(Fig. 15-16). Solid components often vary in echogenicity, appear
disorganized, and may enlarge rapidly with advancing gestation. Fetal MR
imaging should be considered because internal pelvic components may be
challenging to visualize. Large, solid tumors frequently result in hydrops due
to high-output cardiac failure, either as a consequence of tumor vascularity or
secondary to bleeding within the tumor and resultant anemia. Hydramnios is
common. Fetuses with tumors >5 cm often require cesarean delivery, and
classical hysterotomy may be needed (Gucciardo, 2011). Fetal therapy for
SCT is discussed in Chapter 19 (p. 373).

FIGURE 15-16 Sacrococcygeal teratoma. This tumor enlarged from 3 cm in diameter at 19 weeks’
gestation (A) to 9 cm in diameter during a 5-week period (B). Arrows depict the external borders of the
mass.

■ Caudal Regression Sequence
This rare anomaly is characterized by absence of the sacral spine and often
portions of the lumbar spine. It is approximately 25 times more prevalent in
pregnancies complicated by diabetes (Garne, 2012). Caudal regression is
associated with genitourinary malformations and syndromes such as the

VACTERL association (vertebral defects, anal atresia, cardiac defects,
tracheo-esophageal fistula, renal anomalies, and limb abnormalities)
(Vilanova-Sanchez, 2018). Sonographic findings include a spine that appears
abnormally short, lacks normal lumbosacral curvature, and terminates
abruptly above the level of the iliac wings (Fig. 15-17). Because the sacrum
does not lie between the iliac wings, they are abnormally close together and
may appear shield-like. The lower extremities lack normal soft tissue
development and may be abnormally positioned.

FIGURE 15-17 Caudal regression sequence. A. The spine is markedly foreshortened. The arrow
shows where it terminates. B. The spine ends abruptly above the level of the iliac wings (I). C. Without
a vertebral body between the iliac wings (I), they assume a shield shape.

■ Sirenomelia
This rare anomaly may be confused with caudal regression sequence but is
quite different. Formerly termed mermaid syndrome, it is characterized by a
single lower extremity in the midline and bilateral renal agenesis. The
extremity may contain one or two sets of bones and feet (Fig. 15-18). The
bladder, anus, and genitalia are absent. What may appear to be a single
umbilical artery in these cases is instead a remnant of the vitelline artery.
After 18 weeks’ gestation, when the kidneys become the primary source of
amnionic fluid production, resultant anhydramnios may complicate the
diagnosis. Cases of surviving infants have a variant of sirenomelia in which
there is some functioning renal tissue and urinary output (Pinette, 2005).

FIGURE 15-18 Sirenomelia. A. This single lower extremity contained two femur bones (F), two lower
leg bones (LL), and a fused foot with toes pointing outward (*). B. Arrows show the soft tissue outline
of the lower extremity. Amnionic fluid is visible only because the gestational age is 17 weeks’ gestation.
By 18 weeks, absence of kidneys and bladder resulted in anhydramnios. (Reproduced with permission
from Melissa Salvie, RDMS.)

■ Hemivertebrae
These spinal segmentation-fusion defects are characterized by abnormal
development of half of the vertebral body. Affected vertebrae are triangular
and may be separate or fused to adjacent vertebral bodies. This leads to
abnormal curvature of the spine such as scoliosis (Fig. 15-19). Prenatally
diagnosed cases typically involve the thoraco–lumbar spine. Associated
abnormalities are common, particularly skeletal, renal, and cardiac defects
(Basude, 2015; Yulia, 2020). Hemivertebrae are also a component of several
syndromes, including the VACTERL association.

FIGURE 15-19 Hemivertebrae result in abnormal spinal curvature in these coronal images.
(Reproduced with permission from Rose Muli, RDMS.)

HEAD, FACE, AND NECK
Craniofacial anatomy on the detailed anatomic survey may include cranial
integrity and shape of the skull (Fig. 15-2A); images of the orbits, nose, and
lips; views of the maxilla, mandible, hard palate, and tongue; images of the
ears; and evaluation of the neck (Fig. 15-20). Of these structures, only the
upper lip is a component of the standard examination. At Parkland Hospital,
we include an image of the sagittal profile as part of our standard
examination to help detect micrognathia prenatally.

FIGURE 15-20 Normal craniofacial and neck anatomy. A. Transverse images of orbits (O) and nose
(N). The small circle within each orbit is the lens. The distance between the orbits roughly approximates
the width of each orbit. B. Sagittal view of the face, depicting the nasal bone (NB), lips (L), maxilla
(Max), and mandible (Man). C. Transverse image of the alveolar ridge. D. Coronal view of the nose,
upper lip, and lower lip. E. Sagittal image of the neck. F. Image of the ear. (Reproduced with permission
from Devi Nanandhan, RDMS.)

When imaging the neck, particularly in the third trimester, identifying a
nuchal cord is not uncommon (Fig. 15-21). This finding is not associated
with adverse outcome, and we do not alter fetal surveillance if a nuchal cord
is detected.

FIGURE 15-21 Nuchal cord incidentally noted with color Doppler in a transverse image of the fetal
neck at 34 weeks’ gestation.

■ Dolichocephaly and Brachycephaly
The cephalic index reflects the skull shape. It is measured by dividing the
biparietal diameter by the occipitofrontal diameter. The cephalic index is
normally 70 to 86 percent. It is smaller if the head shape is flattened—
dolichocephaly, and larger if the shape is rounded—brachycephaly. In such
cases, the head circumference measurement more reliably estimates
gestational age than does the biparietal diameter (Fig. 15-22). These head
shape variants may be normal or can be secondary to fetal position or
oligohydramnios. Dolichocephaly can occur with neural-tube defects, and
brachycephaly may be seen in fetuses with Down syndrome. A strawberryshaped skull describes a pattern of angulation typical of trisomy 18 (Fig. 165, p. 312). With any abnormal skull shape, craniosynostosis is a
consideration.

FIGURE 15-22 Transthalamic images demonstrating dolichocephaly (A) and brachycephaly (B). The
biparietal diameter (BPD) and head circumference (HC) are measured in each image.

■ Abnormalities of Orbits and Nose
Subjectively, the distance in between the orbits is similar to the diameter of
each orbit (see Fig. 15-20). The lens is often visible. Nomograms are
available for the ocular diameter and for the interorbital and binocular
distances (Appendix, p. 1240). Hypertelorism (Fig. 15-23) is a common
finding in trisomy 18. Hypotelorism, with or without microphthalmia, may be
found in the setting of holoprosencephaly. In its extreme form only a single
orbit is visible—cyclopia. Other comorbid anomalies with
holoprosencephaly include a single nostril—cebocephaly, or absence of the
entire nose (arhinia) with proboscis (Fig. 15-24).

FIGURE 15-23 Abnormalities of the orbits. A. Hypertelorism in a fetus with trisomy 18. B.
Hypotelorism in a fetus with trisomy 13 and alobar holoprosencephaly. C. Microphthalmia. This fetus

also had trisomy 13. Arrows point to the eyes.

FIGURE 15-24 Nasal abnormalities associated with holoprosencephaly. A. Sagittal profile depicting a
proboscis (arrow) protruding from the forehead. B. Coronal image demonstrating the proboscis along
with hypotelorism and absence of the nose. C. Coronal image demonstrating a single nostril
(cebocephaly). D. Photograph of a newborn with cebocephaly.

Nasal bone hypoplasia or sonographic absence is an aneuploidy marker
that confers increased risk for fetal Down syndrome (Fig. 15-25). It is not a
structural abnormality. Nasal bone measurement is part of the detailed
ultrasound examination and is measured only between 15 and 22 weeks’
gestation. The measurement is considered foreshortened if less than 2.5 mm
or if more than 2 SD below the mean for gestational age (Chap. 17, p. 341).

Hypoplasia of the nose is a different condition that can occur following
warfarin exposure (Fig. 8-4, p. 156).

FIGURE 15-25 Nasal bone (and its absence). A. Sagittal image of the profile showing measurement
of a normal nasal bone at 19 weeks. B. Fetus with trisomy 21, also at 19 weeks, with no visible nasal
bone. (Reproduced with permission from Jason McWhirt, RDMS.)

■ Facial Clefts
These are grouped into three main types. The first type, cleft lip and palate,
always involves the lip, may also involve the hard palate, can be unilateral
or bilateral, and has a birth prevalence that approximates 1 in 1000 (Cragan,
2009; Dolk, 2010). If isolated, the inheritance is multifactorial—with a
recurrence risk of 3 to 5 percent for one prior affected child. If a cleft is
visible in the upper lip, a transverse image at the level of the alveolar ridge
may demonstrate that the defect also involves the primary palate (Fig. 1526).

FIGURE 15-26 Cleft lip/palate. A. This fetus has a prominent unilateral (left-sided) cleft lip. B.
Transverse view of the palate in the same fetus demonstrates a defect in the alveolar ridge (arrow).
The tongue (T) is also visible.

In one review of low-risk pregnancies, cleft lip was identified
sonographically in only about half of cases (Maarse, 2010). Approximately
40 percent of those detected prenatally are associated with other anomalies
or syndromes, and aneuploidy is common (Maarse, 2011; Offerdal, 2008).
The rate of associated anomalies is highest for bilateral defects that involve
the palate. In the Utah Birth Defect Network, aneuploidy was identified in 1
percent with cleft lip alone, 5 percent with unilateral cleft lip and palate, and
13 percent with bilateral cleft lip and palate (Walker, 2001).
The second type of cleft is isolated cleft palate. It begins at the uvula,
may involve the soft palate, and occasionally involves the hard palate—but
does not involve the lip. The birth prevalence approximates 1 in 2000 (Dolk,
2010). Identification of an isolated cleft palate has been described using
detailed sonography, and particularly with three-dimensional imaging, but
detection is not feasible in all cases (Ramos, 2010; Wilhelm, 2010). Isolated
cleft palate is not expected to be visualized during a standard ultrasound
examination (Maarse, 2011; Offerdal, 2008).
A third type of cleft is median cleft lip, which may be found in fetuses
with holoprosencephaly, typically when hypotelorism is also present.
Additionally, a median cleft may be associated with hypertelorism and
frontonasal dysplasia, formerly called the median cleft face syndrome.

■ Micrognathia
The fetal profile can help identify cases of micrognathia—hypoplasia of the
mandible, and retrognathia, which is recession of the mandible in relation to
the maxilla (Fig. 15-27). To quantify micrognathia risk, a transverse image of
the mandible can be used to calculate the jaw index, which is the anteriorposterior diameter of the mandible expressed as a percentage of the
biparietal diameter (Paladini, 1999). Fetuses with micrognathia and
retrognathia frequently have a posterior cleft palate and glossoptosis
(recessed tongue)—a constellation of findings known as the Pierre Robin
sequence. Micrognathia is also a feature of Treacher Collins syndrome, oralfacial-digital syndromes, trisomies 18 and 13, triploidy, and the 22 q11.2
deletion. Micrognathia may result in hydramnios and can cause airway
obstruction at birth. Use of the ex-utero intrapartum treatment (EXIT)
procedure for severe micrognathia is discussed in Chapter 19 (p. 379).

FIGURE 15-27 Micrognathia. A. Sagittal image of a fetus with severe micrognathia. B. 3-dimensional
ultrasound rendering depicts the recessed chin and downslanting palpebral fissures. C. A transverse
image of the mandible was used to calculate a jaw index for this fetus.

Micrognathia should not be confused with agnathia–otocephaly, a rare
anomaly in which no mandible develops and the ears may fuse in the midline
(Fig. 15-28). The latter confers an extremely poor prognosis and has been
diagnosed as early as the late first trimester (Rodriguez, 2019).

FIGURE 15-28 Agnathia-otocephaly, ultrasound (A) and postdelivery (B) images. With this rare, lethal
anomaly the mandible fails to develop, and the ears are inferiorly displaced and may be fused in the
midline.

■ Epignathus
This rare teratoma arises from the oral cavity or pharynx. It may grow
outward or both outward and into the brain, the latter conferring an extremely
poor prognosis (Fig. 15-29). If brain involvement is absent, an EXIT
procedure, reviewed in Chapter 19 (p. 379), can help secure the airway at
delivery (Chung, 2012).

FIGURE 15-29 Epignathus, ultrasound (A) and postdelivery (B) images. This teratoma arises from the
oral cavity or pharynx and may grow outward from the mouth or both outward and into the brain, as in
this fetus (arrowhead). Arrows depict the external extent of the mass. (Reproduced with permission
from Halima Abdirahman, RDMS.)

■ Cystic Hygroma
This venolymphatic malformation is characterized by fluid-filled sacs that
extend from the posterior neck (Fig. 15-30). Cystic hygromas may be
diagnosed in the first trimester and vary widely in size. Impaired lymphatic
drainage from the head into the jugular vein leads to an accumulation of fluid
in jugular lymphatic sacs. The birth prevalence of cystic hygromas
approximates 1 in 5000. However, reflecting the high in-utero lethality of the
condition, the first-trimester incidence exceeds 1 in 300 (Malone, 2005).

FIGURE 15-30 Cystic hygromas. A. This 9-week fetus with a cystic hygroma (arrow) was later
found to have Noonan syndrome. B. Massive multiseptated hygromas (arrowheads) in the setting of
hydrops fetalis at 15 weeks’ gestation.

Up to 70 percent of cystic hygromas are associated with aneuploidy.
When cystic hygromas are diagnosed in the first trimester, trisomy 21 is the
most common aneuploidy, followed by 45,X and trisomy 18 (Kharrat, 2006;
Malone, 2005). First-trimester fetuses with cystic hygromas are five times
more likely to be aneuploid than fetuses with a thickened nuchal translucency.
When cystic hygromas are diagnosed in the second trimester, approximately
75 percent of aneuploid cases are 45,X—Turner syndrome (Johnson, 1993;
Shulman, 1992).
Even in the absence of aneuploidy, cystic hygromas confer a significantly
greater risk for other abnormalities, particularly flow-related cardiac
defects. These include hypoplastic left heart and coarctation of the aorta (p.
292). Cystic hygromas may also be part of a genetic syndrome such as
Noonan syndrome, an autosomal dominant disorder that shares several
features with 45,X. Noonan syndrome is characterized by short stature,
lymphedema, high-arched palate, and often pulmonary valve stenosis.
Large cystic hygromas are usually associated with hydrops fetalis, rarely
resolve, and carry a poor prognosis. Small hygromas may undergo
spontaneous resolution, and provided that fetal karyotype and
echocardiography results are normal, the prognosis may be good. The
likelihood of a nonanomalous liveborn neonate with normal karyotype
following identification of first-trimester hygroma approximates 1 in 6
(Kharrat, 2006; Malone, 2005).

THORAX
Thoracic anatomy imaged in the detailed anatomic survey may include the
lungs, ribs, and diaphragm. The lungs should appear homogeneous and
symmetric, each occupying approximately one third of the area in the fourchamber view of the heart (Fig. 15-31). The thoracic circumference is
measured at the skin line in a transverse plane at the level of the fourchamber view. If pulmonary hypoplasia is suspected secondary to a small
thorax, such as with a severe skeletal dysplasia, comparison with a reference
table may be helpful (Appendix, p. 1238). Representative images of the

diaphragm are usually obtained in the parasagittal or coronal plane. The
diaphragm appears as a hypoechoic line between the lungs and liver.
Thoracic abnormalities may appear sonographically as cystic or solid spaceoccupying lesions or as an effusion outlining the heart or lung(s). Fetal
therapy for thoracic abnormalities is discussed in Chapter 19 (p. 376).

FIGURE 15-31 Normal thoracic anatomy. A. The lungs each occupy one third of the area in the fourchamber view of the heart. B. The diaphragm (arrow) appears as a hypoechoic line in between the
lung and liver in this parasagittal view. LA = left atrium; LV = left ventricle; RA = right atrium; RV =
right ventricle.

■ Diaphragmatic Hernia
This is a defect in the diaphragm through which abdominal organs herniate
into the thorax. It is left-sided in approximately 75 percent of cases, rightsided in 20 percent, and bilateral in 5 percent (Gallot, 2007). The prevalence
of congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH) is 1 in 3000 to 5000 births
(Cragan, 2009; Dolk, 2010). Associated anomalies and aneuploidy are found
in 40 percent of cases (Gallot, 2007; Stege, 2003). In population-based
series, an associated abnormality reduces the overall survival rate of
neonates with CDH from approximately 50 percent to about 20 percent
(Colvin, 2005; Gallot, 2007). Without other abnormalities, the major causes
of neonatal mortality are pulmonary hypoplasia and pulmonary hypertension.
Left-sided CDH typically causes dextroposition of the heart to the right
side of the thorax, such that the cardiac axis points toward the midline (Fig.

15-32). Accompanying findings include the stomach bubble or bowel
peristalsis in the chest and a wedge-shaped mass—the liver—located
anteriorly in the left hemithorax. Liver herniation complicates at least 50
percent of cases and is associated with a 30-percent reduction in the survival
rate (Mullassery, 2010). With large lesions, impaired swallowing and
mediastinal shift may result in hydramnios and hydrops, respectively.

FIGURE 15-32 Congenital diaphragmatic hernia. In this transverse view of the thorax, the heart is
shifted to the right side of the chest by a left-sided diaphragmatic hernia containing stomach (S), liver
(L), and bowel (B).

An effort to reduce neonatal mortality rates and need for extracorporeal
membrane oxygenation (ECMO) has focused on prognostic indicators such as
the sonographic lung-to-head ratio, described in Chapter 19 (p. 375). MR
imaging parameters include measurements of lung volume and degree of liver
herniation (Dutemeyer, 2020; Oluyomi-Obi, 2017; Worley, 2009).

■ Congenital Cystic Adenomatoid Malformation
This abnormality represents a hamartomatous overgrowth of terminal
bronchioles that communicates with the tracheobronchial tree. It is also

called congenital pulmonary airway malformation (CPAM), based on an
understanding that not all histopathological types are cystic or adenomatoid
(Azizkhan, 2008; Stocker, 1977 2002). The estimated prevalence is 1 in
6000 to 8000 births, and this rate is rising because of improved sonographic
detection of milder cases (Burge, 2010; Duncombe, 2002; Lau, 2017).
With ultrasound, a congenital cystic adenomatoid malformation (CCAM)
is as a well-circumscribed mass that may appear solid and echogenic or may
have one or multiple variably sized cysts (Fig. 15-33). It usually involves
one lobe, receives its blood supply from the pulmonary artery, and has
pulmonary venous drainage. Lesions with cysts ≥5 mm are generally termed
macrocystic, and lesions that appear solid or have cysts <5 mm are
microcystic (Adzick, 1985).

FIGURE 15-33 Congenital cystic adenomatoid malformation (CCAM). A. This left-sided microcystic
CCAM is an echogenic mass that fills the left hemithorax and causes mediastinal shift, which displaces
the heart (arrows) to the right side of the chest. B. This left-sided macrocystic CCAM contains a cyst
as large as the heart and also displaces the heart to the right. C. This right-sided CCAM contains
multiple cysts of varying size (*) and displaces the heart farther to the left side of the chest (arrows).

In a review of 645 CCAM cases, the neonatal survival rate exceeded 95
percent, and 30 percent of cases demonstrated apparent prenatal resolution.
The other 5 percent of cases—typically very large lesions with associated
mediastinal shift—were complicated by hydrops and had poor prognosis
(Cavoretto, 2008). Microcystic CCAMs usually become less conspicuous
with advancing gestation, because in addition to occupying less of the thorax,
their echogenicity more closely resembles surrounding lung tissue. However,
a subset of CCAMs may demonstrate rapid growth between 18 and 26
weeks’ gestation. Corticosteroid therapy has been used for large microcystic
lesions to forestall growth and potentially ameliorate hydrops (Curran, 2010;
Peranteau, 2016). If a large dominant cyst is present, thoracoamnionic shunt

placement may lead to hydrops resolution. Fetal therapy for CCAM is
discussed in Chapter 19 (p. 370).

■ Pulmonary Sequestration
Also called a bronchopulmonary sequestration, this abnormality is an
accessory lung bud “sequestered” from the tracheobronchial tree. It is
nonfunctioning lung tissue. Most cases diagnosed prenatally are extralobar,
which means they are enveloped in their own pleura. Overall, however, most
sequestrations present in adulthood and are intralobar—within the pleura of
another lobe. Extralobar pulmonary sequestration is considered significantly
less common than CCAM, and no precise prevalence has been reported.
Lesions have a left-sided predominance and most often involve the left lower
lobe. Associated anomalies have been reported in approximately 10 percent
of cases (Yildirim, 2008).
Sonographically, pulmonary sequestration presents as a homogeneous,
echogenic thoracic mass (Fig. 15-34A). Thus, it may resemble a microcystic
CCAM. However, the blood supply is from the systemic circulation—from
the aorta—rather than the pulmonary artery (Fig. 15-34B). Approximately 10
to 20 percent are located below the diaphragm. A small percentage of fetuses
with pulmonary sequestration develop a large ipsilateral pleural effusion,
and without treatment, this may result in pulmonary hypoplasia or hydrops
(Fig. 15-34C). Treatment with thoracoamnionic shunting is discussed in
Chapter 19 (p. 376). Hydrops may also result from mediastinal shift or highoutput cardiac failure due to the left-to-right shunt imposed by the mass. In
the absence of a pleural effusion, the reported survival rate exceeds 95
percent, and 40 percent of cases demonstrate apparent prenatal resolution
(Cavoretto, 2008).

FIGURE 15-34 Pulmonary sequestration. A. Transverse image of the thorax depicts a left lower lobe
pulmonary sequestration (PS) in this 25-week fetus. B. Sagittal image showing that blood supply to the
mass is from a branch of the abdominal aorta, which confirms the diagnosis. C. Over the next 3 weeks,
a large ipsilateral pleural effusion develops (asterisk), resulting in mediastinal shift and dextroposition of
the heart to the far-right thorax. D. After placement of a double-pigtail shunt through the chest wall,
which drains the effusion into the amnionic fluid, the lung significantly reexpanded. Arrows point to coils
of the pigtail shunt. (Reproduced with permission from Dr. Elaine Duryea.)

■ Congenital High Airway Obstruction Sequence
This rare anomaly usually results from laryngeal or tracheal atresia. The
normal egress of lung fluid is obstructed, and the tracheobronchial tree and
lungs become massively distended. Sonographically, the lungs are brightly
echogenic, the bronchi are dilated, the diaphragm is flattened or everted, and
the heart is compressed (Fig. 15-35). Impaired venous return leads to
development of ascites, typically followed by hydrops. In one review of 118
cases, associated anomalies were identified in more than 50 percent

(Sanford, 2012). Congenital high airway obstruction sequence (CHAOS) is a
feature of the autosomal recessive Fraser syndrome and has been associated
with the 22q11.2 deletion syndrome. In some cases, the obstructed airway
spontaneously perforates, which potentially confers a better prognosis. The
EXIT procedure has significantly improved outcome in selected cases.

FIGURE 15-35 Congenital high airway obstruction sequence (CHAOS). The lungs (L) appear brightly
echogenic, and the bronchi (arrow) are dilated with fluid. Flattening and eversion of the diaphragm is
common, as is ascites (asterisks).

HEART
Cardiac malformations are the most common class of congenital anomalies.
Their overall prevalence is 8 cases in 1000 births (Cragan, 2009). Almost
90 percent of cardiac defects are multifactorial or polygenic in origin,
another 1 to 2 percent result from a single-gene disorder or gene-deletion
syndrome, and 1 to 2 percent may occur from exposure to a teratogen such as
maternal diabetes or isotretinoin. Based on data from population-based
registries, approximately 1 in 8 liveborn and stillborn neonates with a
congenital heart defect has a chromosomal abnormality (Dolk, 2010;

Hartman, 2011). Trisomy 21 accounts for most of these cases, followed by
trisomy 18, 22q11.2 deletion, trisomy 13, and monosomy X (Hartman, 2011).
Approximately 50 to 70 percent of aneuploid fetuses with cardiac anomalies
are also found to have noncardiac abnormalities.
Traditionally, congenital cardiac anomalies have been more challenging
to detect than anomalies of other organ systems. Recent series suggest that
standard ultrasound may identify 50 to 60 percent of those with major
cardiac anomalies before 22 weeks’ gestation (Byrne, 2020; Sun, 2018).
Prenatal detection may improve neonatal survival, particularly for ductaldependent lesions, that is, those requiring prostaglandin infusion after birth
to keep the ductus arteriosus open (Franklin, 2002; Mahle, 2001; Tworetzky,
2001).

■ Standard Cardiac Examination
Standard cardiac assessment includes a four-chamber view, evaluation of
rate and rhythm, evaluation of the left and right ventricular outflow tracts, and
when feasible, documentation of the 3-vessel view and 3-vessel trachea
view (Figs. 15-36 and 15-37). It is hoped that examination of the cardiac
outflow tracts and 3-vessel views will improve detection of outflow tract
abnormalities that may have a normal-appearing four-chamber view, such as
tetralogy of Fallot and transposition of the great arteries. Centers with
expertise have reported at least 90 percent detection of such anomalies with
incorporation of these views (Brandt, 2015; Palatnik, 2016).

FIGURE 15-36 Diagram showing measurement of cardiac axis from the four-chamber view. LA =
left atrium; LV = left ventricle; RA = right atrium; RV = right ventricle.

FIGURE 15-37 Standard and detailed examination cardiac views. A. Four-chamber view. B. Left
ventricular outflow tract view. Arrow depicts mitral valve becoming the posterior wall of the aorta. The
arrow with asterisk marks the interventricular septum becoming the anterior aortic wall. C. Right
ventricular outflow tract view. D. Three-vessel view. E. Three-vessel trachea view F. High short-axis
view (outflow tracts). G. Aortic arch view. H. Ductal arch view. I. Superior and inferior vena cavae
views. AA = aortic arch; Ao = aorta; DA = ductal arch; IVC = inferior vena cava; LA = left atrium;
LV = left ventricle; PA = pulmonary artery; RA = right atrium; RV = right ventricle; SVC = superior
vena cava; T = trachea.

The four-chamber view is a transverse image of the fetal thorax at a level
immediately above the diaphragm. It allows evaluation of cardiac size,
position in the thorax, cardiac axis, atria and ventricles, foramen ovale, atrial
septum primum, interventricular septum, and atrioventricular valves (Fig. 1537A). The left ventricle is apex-forming, and two pulmonary veins are often

visible entering the left atrium. The atria and ventricles should be similar in
size, and the apex of the heart should form a 45-degree angle with the left
anterior chest wall (see Fig. 15-36). Abnormalities of cardiac axis are
encountered in more than one third of fetuses with structural cardiac
anomalies (Shipp, 1995; Crane, 1997; Sinkovskaya, 2015).
The left ventricular outflow tract view demonstrates that the ascending
aorta arises entirely from the left ventricle. The interventricular septum is
shown to be in continuity with the anterior wall of the aorta, and the mitral
valve in continuity with the posterior wall of the aorta (Fig. 15-37B).
Ventricular septal defects and outflow tract abnormalities are often visible in
this view.
The right ventricular outflow tract view shows the right ventricle giving
rise to the main pulmonary artery, which subsequently branches into the right
and left pulmonary arteries. (Fig. 15-37C,F). Together, the left and right
outflow tract views demonstrate the normal perpendicular orientation of the
aorta and pulmonary artery and the comparable size of these great arteries.
The 3-vessel view (3VV) is a transverse image obtained just above the
base of the heart. The three vessels line up in a row: an oblique view of the
pulmonary artery, which should appear long and cylindrical; a crosssectional image of the ascending aorta; and a cross-sectional image of the
superior vena cava (SVC) (Fig. 15-37D). The pulmonary artery and aorta
should be similar in diameter. The 3-vessel trachea view (3VTV) also is a
transverse image but is obtained further cephalad. It includes the pulmonary
artery giving rise to the ductus arteriosus as it makes a V-shape with the
aortic arch, along with the SVC and the trachea (Fig. 15-37E). The 3VTV can
be helpful for identifying aortic arch abnormalities, particularly ductaldependent lesions.

■ Specialized Cardiac Examination
The detailed ultrasound examination includes the five cardiac components of
the standard examination plus the superior and inferior vena cavae and the
aortic and ductal arch views (Fig. 15-37G–I). The examination also involves
evaluation of the interventricular septum and cardiac situs, documentation of
which may be facilitated with video clips.
Fetal echocardiography is a more extensive examination of cardiac
structure and function designed to characterize abnormalities. In addition to

grayscale imaging views, echocardiography includes evaluation of cardiac
rate and rhythm, color Doppler ultrasound, pulsed-wave Doppler ultrasound,
cardiac biometry, and if clinically relevant, cardiac function assessment
(American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine, 2020b). These components
are beyond the scope of this text. Echocardiography indications are
discussed in Chapter 14 (p. 252). Selected cardiac anomalies are reviewed
next.

Ventricular Septal Defect
This is the most common congenital cardiac anomaly. It is found in
approximately 1 in 300 births (Bjornard, 2013; Cragan, 2009; Dolk, 2010).
A defect may be appreciated in the perimembranous or muscular portion of
the interventricular septum in the four-chamber view, and imaging of the left
ventricular outflow tract may show discontinuity of the interventricular
septum as it becomes the wall of the aorta (Fig. 15-38). Color Doppler may
demonstrate flow across the defect. Genetic abnormalities are diagnosed
with chromosomal microarray analysis in approximately 1 percent of
isolated cases but found in at least 15 percent if other structural
abnormalities also are present (Maya, 2020). More than a third of prenatally
diagnosed ventricular septal defects close in utero, and another third close in
the first year of life (Cho, 2017; Paladini, 2002; Svirsky, 2019).

FIGURE 15-39 Endocardial cushion defect. A. During ventricular systole, the lateral leaflets of the
mitral and tricuspid valves come together in the midline. But the atrioventricular valve plane is abnormal,
a common atrium (A) is observed, and there is a visible defect (arrow) in the interventricular septum. B.

During diastolic filling, opening of the atrioventricular valves more clearly demonstrates the absence of
their medial leaflets.

Endocardial Cushion Defect
This is also called an atrioventricular (AV) septal defect or AV canal
defect. It has a birth prevalence of approximately 1 in 2500 and is associated
with trisomy 21 in more than half of cases (Christensen, 2013; Cragan, 2009;
Dolk, 2010). The endocardial cushions are the crux of the heart, and defects
jointly involve the atrial septum primum, interventricular septum, and medial
leaflets of the mitral and tricuspid valves (Fig. 15-39). The majority of
defects are balanced–with ventricles comparable in size. Some are
unbalanced however, with one side of the heart significantly smaller than the
other. The endocardial cushion defect is considered partial if there is
absence of the atrial septum primum and a more subtle AV valve plane
abnormality, with no ventricular septal defect.

FIGURE 15-38 Ventricular septal defect. A. In this four-chamber view, a defect (arrow) is noted in
the perimembranous portion of the interventricular septum. B. The left ventricular outflow tract view
demonstrates a break in continuity (arrow) between the interventricular septum and the anterior wall of
the aorta.

Endocardial cushion defects are a common finding in heterotaxy, also
known as cardiosplenic or isomerism syndromes. Heterotaxy implies that

thoraco-abdominal organs normally on one side of the body are on an
incorrect side, on both sides, or absent, as in polysplenia or asplenia.
Complex cardiac abnormalities are a common feature, particularly
endocardial cushion defects. In a review of 632 pregnancies with fetal
heterotaxy, an endocardial cushion defect was present in 60 percent (Buca,
2018). These endocardial cushion defects are a particularly at-risk group
because of their association with third-degree heart block, which confers a
poor prognosis.

Hypoplastic Left Heart Syndrome
This anomaly is found in approximately 1 in 4000 births (Bjornard, 2013;
Cragan, 2009; Dolk, 2010;). During second-trimester ultrasound examination,
the left ventricle may be so small that a chamber is difficult to appreciate
(Fig. 15-40). Alternately, the left ventricle may be normal in size or dilated
but have severely decreased contractility and an echogenic inner wall due to
endocardial fibroelastosis. There may be no visible left ventricular inflow
or outflow, and reversal of flow may be documented in the aortic arch in the
3-vessel trachea view. As gestation advances, the left ventricle and aorta
become progressively smaller. Prenatal detection is nearly 90 percent in
population-based registries.

FIGURE 15-40 Hypoplastic left heart syndrome. A. In this four-chamber view, the left ventricle
appears “filled in” and echogenic, due to endocardial fibroelastosis. B. Color Doppler depicts only flow
from the right atrium into the right ventricle, and no left ventricular filling is visible. C. Color Doppler
shows reversal of flow in the aortic arch (arrow), which is perfused retrograde via the ductus
arteriosus. LA = left atrium; LV = left ventricle; RA = right atrium; RV = right ventricle.

Hypoplastic left heart syndrome is a ductal-dependent lesion for which
neonatal administration of prostaglandin therapy is essential. Postnatal
treatment consists of a three-staged palliative repair—single ventricle

palliation, or cardiac transplantation. Rates of survival to adulthood may
reach 70 percent (Feinstein, 2012). However, morbidity is high, and
developmental delays are common (Lloyd, 2017; Paladini, 2017; Wilson,
2018). Fetal therapy for this condition is discussed in Chapter 19 (p. 378).

Coarctation of the Aorta
Coarctation refers to narrowing of the aortic arch. The birth prevalence
approximates 1 in 2500 (Bjornard, 2013). Usually, the narrowing is focal
and found just distal to the origin of the left subclavian artery at the aortic
isthmus. Alternatively, a long segment of the aorta may be affected.
Coarctation may be isolated or associated with other cardiac anomalies, such
as hypoplastic left heart syndrome, unbalanced endocardial cushion defect,
or double-outlet right ventricle. The most common sonographic finding is
disproportion in ventricular size, with the left ventricle smaller than the right.
However, only one third with this finding have coarctation (Ghi, 2018; van
Nisselrooij, 2018). Other findings include narrowing of the aortic arch in the
3-vessel trachea view or narrowing of the isthmus in the aortic arch view–
which may be challenging to image. Coarctation is associated with Turner
syndrome (45,X), with the 22q11.2 deletion, and with autosomal trisomies.

Ebstein Anomaly
This rare anomaly is characterized by apical displacement of the tricuspid
valve, such that the septal and posterior valve leaflets of the tricuspid valve
attach closer to the cardiac apex (Fig. 15-41). The birth prevalence is
approximately 1 in 20,000 (Boyle, 2017). Fetuses with Ebstein anomaly
develop varying degrees of tricuspid regurgitation. In severe cases, right
atrium becomes markedly dilated, and the fetus may develop cardiomegaly
and hydrops. For many years, there was concern that lithium exposure
predisposed to Ebstein anomaly. However, as discussed in Chapter 8 (p.
154), the absolute attributable risk is likely well below 1 percent.

FIGURE 15-41 Ebstein anomaly. A. In this four-chamber view, the tricuspid valve’s septal leaflet
attaches closer to the cardiac apex (arrowhead) than the corresponding mitral valve leaflet (arrow). B.
The color Doppler blue jet reflects tricuspid regurgitation. LA = left atrium; LV = left ventricle; RA =
right atrium; RV = right ventricle.

Tetralogy of Fallot
This anomaly occurs in approximately 1 in 3000 births (Cragan, 2009; Dolk,
2010; Nelson, 2016). It includes a ventricular septal defect; an overriding
aorta; a pulmonary valve or pulmonary artery abnormality, and right
ventricular hypertrophy (Fig. 15-42). The last does not usually manifest
before birth. Due to the location of the ventricular septal defect, the fourchamber view may appear normal.

FIGURE 15-42 Tetralogy of Fallot. A. Left ventricular outflow tract view shows a ventricular septal
defect with an overriding aorta. The arrow points to the aortic valve. B. Right ventricular outflow tract
view demonstrating severe pulmonary artery stenosis. The arrow points to the pulmonary valve. C. In

this fetus with tetralogy of Fallot with absent pulmonary valve, the pulmonary artery shows marked
enlargement. Ao = aorta; LV = left ventricle; PA = pulmonary artery; RV = right ventricle.

The pulmonary artery abnormality is pulmonary stenosis in 60 percent of
cases, pulmonary atresia in slightly more than 25 percent, and absent
pulmonary valve in 10 to 15 percent (Zhao, 2016). Absence of the pulmonary
valve leads to marked enlargement of the pulmonary artery and poses a risk
for hydrops. The enlarged pulmonary artery can also compress the trachea
and cause tracheomalacia.
Chromosomal abnormalities are identified in approximately one third of
fetuses with tetralogy of Fallot. Of these, 22q11.2 deletions compose 15 to
20 percent, and autosomal trisomies constitute 10 percent (Zhao, 2016).

D-Transposition of the Great Arteries
This anomaly is characterized by outflow tracts that arise in parallel from the
ventricles. The right ventricle gives rise to the aorta, and the left ventricle to
the pulmonary artery (Fig. 15-43). Thus, there is ventriculo-arterial
discordance. The birth prevalence approximates 1 in 4000 (Bjornard, 2013).
The four-chamber view is often normal. Prenatal detection approximates 40
percent but is thought to improve with visualization of the outflow tracts
(Ravi, 2018). Additionally, the 3-vessel views may demonstrate only two
vessels, because the pulmonary artery is underneath the aorta.

FIGURE 15-43 D-transposition of the great arteries. A. Transverse image with color Doppler
depicting the outflow tracts arising in parallel. B. View of the left ventricle giving rise to the pulmonary
artery, which subsequently branches (arrows). C. Sagittal image of the aorta arising anteriorly from the
right ventricle and parallel to the pulmonary artery, which arises posteriorly. Ao = aorta; LV = left
ventricle; PA = pulmonary artery; RV = right ventricle.

D-transposition contrasts with L- or corrected transposition of the great
arteries, in which there is atrio-ventricular discordance in addition to
ventricular-arterial discordance. L-transposition is strongly associated with
other cardiac anomalies and is much less likely to be diagnosed prenatally as
an isolated finding.

Double-outlet Right Ventricle
With this anomaly, the majority of blood flow to both the pulmonary artery
and the aorta comes from the right ventricle. Double-outlet right ventricle
(DORV) is always associated with a ventricular septal defect. DORV has a
spectrum of presentation. It is categorized according to the location of the
ventricular septal defect and the relative proportion of blood flow from the
right ventricle to the outflow tracts. The outflow tracts are often malposed,
arising in parallel. The birth prevalence approximates 1 in 20,000 (Bjornard,
2013).

Truncus Arteriosus
This rare anomaly is characterized by a single, large outflow tract exiting the
heart—a common arterial trunk—rather than a separate aorta and pulmonary
artery. A prominent ventricular septal defect is usually identified, with an
enlarged overriding outflow tract that gives rise to pulmonary arteries as
well as head and neck vessels (Fig. 15-44). The differential diagnosis
includes tetralogy of Fallot with pulmonary atresia. The birth prevalence of
truncus arteriosus approximates 1 in 16,000 (Bjornard, 2013). In 1949,
Collett and Edwards categorized four types of truncus arteriosus according to
the origin of the pulmonary arteries. Characterization of anatomic variants
can often only be made postnatally.

FIGURE 15-44 Truncus arteriosus. Grayscale (A) and color Doppler (B) images depict a single, large
outflow tract. The common arterial trunk (CAT) overlies a ventricular septal defect (arrowhead) and
gives rise to the head and neck vessels and pulmonary arteries. LV = left ventricle; RV = right ventricle.
(Reproduced with permission from Paul Mallamaci, RDMS.)

Cardiac Rhabdomyoma
This is the most common cardiac tumor. Approximately 50 percent of cases
are associated with tuberous sclerosis, an autosomal dominant disease with
multiorgan system manifestations. Tuberous sclerosis is caused by mutations
in the hamartin (TSC1) and tuberin (TSC2) genes.
Sonographically, cardiac rhabdomyomas are well-circumscribed
echogenic masses, usually within the ventricles or outflow tracts (Fig. 1545). They may be single or multiple, may grow in size during gestation, and
may occasionally lead to inflow or outflow obstruction. In cases without
obstruction or large tumor size, the prognosis is relatively good from a
cardiac standpoint, because the tumors tend to regress after the neonatal
period. Because extracardiac findings of tuberous sclerosis may not be
apparent with prenatal sonography, MR imaging may be considered to
evaluate fetal CNS anatomy (p. 266).

FIGURE 15-45 Rhabdomyoma. In this four-chamber view of the heart, a large, echogenic, wellcircumscribed mass (R) fills the right ventricle and abuts the tricuspid valve (arrow). Despite its size,
the mass did not obstruct flow, and the neonate did well.

■ M-Mode
Motion-mode or M-mode imaging is a linear display of cardiac cycle events,
with time on the x-axis and motion on the y-axis. It is often used to measure
embryonic or fetal heart rate (Fig. 14-1, p. 248). If an abnormality of heart
rate or rhythm is identified, M-mode imaging permits separate evaluation of
atrial and ventricular waveforms. Thus, it is particularly useful for
characterizing arrhythmias and their response to treatment (Chap. 19, p. 367).
M-mode can also be used to assess ventricular function and atrial and
ventricular outputs.

Premature Atrial Contractions
Also called atrial extrasystoles, these are the most common fetal arrhythmia
and a frequent finding. They represent cardiac conduction system immaturity
and often resolve with advancing gestation or in the neonatal period.
Premature atrial contractions (PACs) may be conducted and thus sound like
extra beats. However, they are more commonly blocked, and with handheld
Doppler they sound like dropped beats. As shown in Figure 15-46, the

dropped beat may be demonstrated with M-mode evaluation as a
compensatory pause that follows the premature contraction.

FIGURE 15-46 M-mode. This image demonstrates normal concordance between atrial (A) and
ventricular (V) contractions. Movement of the tricuspid valve (T) is also shown. The blue arrow denotes
a premature atrial contraction followed by a compensatory pause.

PACs are not associated with major structural cardiac abnormalities.
Older case reports describe an association with maternal caffeine
consumption and with hydralazine (Lodeiro, 1989; Oei, 1989). In
approximately 2 percent of cases, affected fetuses are later identified to have
supraventricular tachycardia (SVT), which is an arrhythmia that requires
urgent treatment (Copel, 2000). Accordingly, pregnancies with fetal PACs
are often followed with fetal heart rate assessment as often as every 1 to 2
weeks until the ectopy resolves. Treatment of fetal SVT and other
arrhythmias is discussed in Chapter 19 (p. 368).

ABDOMEN
Abdominal anatomy visible in the second and third trimester includes the
stomach, liver, gallbladder, spleen, adrenal glands, kidneys, renal arteries,
small and large bowel, and ventral wall. The stomach is nearly always
identified after 14 weeks’ gestation. Nonvisualization of the stomach may be
secondary to impaired swallowing in the setting of oligohydramnios or to
underlying causes such as esophageal atresia, a craniofacial anomaly, or a
CNS or musculoskeletal abnormality. Fetuses with hydrops can also have
impaired swallowing.
Both the liver and spleen may be viewed in a transverse image obtained
at the level of the stomach and intrahepatic portion of the umbilical vein—the
plane at which the abdominal circumference is measured (see Fig. 15-2B).
Hepatosplenomegaly may occur with congenital infection or with hydrops.
By convention, the liver is measured in the sagittal or coronal plane, from the
top of the right hemidiaphragm to the inferior tip of the right lobe (Fig. 1547). The spleen is posterior to the stomach in the transverse plane. The
gallbladder may be imaged just inferior to the level at which the abdominal
circumference is measured. It lies to the right of the intrahepatic portion of
the umbilical vein and has a conical or teardrop shape (see Fig. 15-47B).

FIGURE 15-47 Abdominal organs. A. The liver is measured from the top of the right hemidiaphragm
to the inferior tip of the right lobe in this coronal image. B. Transverse image of the abdomen just
inferior to the level at which the abdominal circumference is measured, depicting the gallbladder (G),
stomach (S), spleen (Sp), liver (L), and right adrenal gland (A).

The appearance of fetal bowel changes with maturation. Increased bowel
echogenicity may indicate a small amount of swallowed intraamnionic blood,
especially if the maternal serum alpha-fetoprotein level is elevated. The
bowel appears as bright as bone in approximately 0.5 percent of secondtrimester fetuses. In such cases, the risk for fetal trisomy 21 is increased (Fig.
17-3, p. 340). Echogenic bowel is also associated with fetal
cytomegalovirus infection and with cystic fibrosis, in which echogenicity
represents inspissated meconium.

■ Gastrointestinal Obstruction
Bowel atresia is characterized by obstruction and proximal bowel dilation.
In general, the more proximal the obstruction, the more likely it is to lead to
hydramnios. The degree of hydramnios from proximal small-bowel
obstruction can be sufficiently severe to result in maternal respiratory
compromise or preterm labor and may necessitate amnioreduction (Chap. 14,
p. 258).

Esophageal Atresia
The birth prevalence of this anomaly approximates 1 in 4000 (Cragan, 2009;
Pedersen, 2012). It may be suspected when there is no visible stomach
bubble or when the stomach is contracted. However, because esophageal
atresia is associated with a tracheoesophageal fistula in up to 90 percent of
cases, fluid is often able to enter the stomach. More than 50 percent of those
with esophageal atresia have other abnormalities or underlying genetic
syndromes. Multiple malformations are present in 30 percent of cases, and
aneuploidy such as trisomy 18 or 21, in 10 percent. Approximately 10
percent of cases of esophageal atresia is found as part of the VACTERL
association (Pedersen, 2012).

Duodenal Atresia
This anomaly occurs in approximately 1 in 10,000 births (Best, 2012; Dolk,
2010). It is characterized by the sonographic double-bubble sign, which
develops from distention of the stomach and the first part of the duodenum
(Fig. 15-48). This finding may not be obvious before 24 weeks’ gestation.
Demonstrating continuity between the stomach and proximal duodenum

confirms that the second “bubble” is the proximal duodenum. Approximately
30 percent of affected fetuses have an associated chromosomal abnormality
or genetic syndrome, particularly trisomy 21. Of cases without a genetic
abnormality, a third have associated anomalies, most commonly cardiac
defects and other gastrointestinal abnormalities (Best, 2012).

FIGURE 15-48 Duodenal atresia. Transverse image of the double-bubble sign, which represents
distension of the stomach (S) and the first part of the duodenum (D). Continuity between these
structures confirms that the second cystic structure is the duodenum.

Jejunoileal Atresia
This condition may present with dilated small-bowel loops that fill the
abdomen or with meconium peritonitis from bowel perforation (Fig. 15-49).
Associated gastrointestinal abnormalities are identified postnatally in 25
percent of cases, with malrotation in 10 to 15 percent (Stollman, 2009).
Cystic fibrosis also is identified in approximately 10 percent.

FIGURE 15-49 Jejunoileal atresia with meconium peritonitis. A. Sagittal image of the fetal abdomen at
26 weeks’ gestation with severe ascites following bowel perforation. Arrows point to the bowel, which
is considerably more echogenic than the liver. B. Transverse image at 30 weeks demonstrates resolution
of ascites. The abdomen is now filled with dilated loops of small bowel. Focal bright echoes (arrows)
represent extraluminal meconium. A = ascites; L = liver.

In general, jejunal atresia is more strongly associated with bowel
dilation and hyperperistalsis, and ileal atresia, with perforation. Bowel
dilatation in jejunal atresia typically does not present until after 24 weeks’
gestation and may be accompanied by hydramnios. Perforation is frequently
associated with ascites, and bright echoes may be visible outside the bowel
lumen, outlining the peritoneal cavity. Over time, the ascites resolves, and the
extravasated meconium may form a pseudocyst. Fetal MR imaging can assist
with identifying the level of the defect (Chap. 14, p. 267).

Anal Atresia
Also known as imperforate anus, this condition is less readily diagnosed by
sonography. Hydramnios is not a typical feature, and the bowel may not be
significantly dilated. A transverse view through the pelvis may show an
enlarged rectum as an anechoic structure between the bladder and the
sacrum. Anal atresia is a feature of the VACTERL association.

■ Ventral Wall Defects

The integrity of the abdominal wall is assessed at the level of the cord
insertion during the standard examination (Fig. 15-50). Ventral wall defects
include gastroschisis, omphalocele, and body stalk anomaly.

FIGURE 15-50 Normal ventral wall. Transverse view of the abdomen demonstrating normal umbilical
cord insertion and integrity of the anterior abdominal wall.

Gastroschisis
This is a full-thickness abdominal wall defect located to the right of the
umbilical cord insertion. Bowel herniates through the defect into the
amnionic cavity. Gastroschisis may be diagnosed as early as the late first
trimester (Fig. 15-51). The prevalence is approximately 1 in 2000 births
(Jones, 2016; Nelson, 2015). Gastroschisis is the one major anomaly more
common in fetuses of younger mothers, and the average maternal age is 20
years (Santiago-Muñoz, 2007). Coexisting bowel abnormalities such as
jejunal atresia are found in approximately 15 percent of cases (Overcash,
2014). Gastroschisis is not associated with aneuploidy, and the survival rate
is 90 to 95 percent (Nelson, 2015; Raitio, 2020).

FIGURE 15-51 Gastroschisis. Transverse views of the lower abdomen at 13 weeks’ gestation (A) and
18 weeks (B) depict multiple small bowel loops (B) that have herniated into the amnionic cavity through
a defect to the right of the cord insertion (arrow).

Fetal-growth restriction complicates gastroschisis in 15 to 40 percent of
cases (Overcash, 2014; Santiago-Muñoz, 2007). Growth restriction does not
appear to confer increased mortality (Nelson, 2015; Overcash, 2014).
However, earlier gestational age at delivery does pose a risk for adverse
outcome, and planned delivery at 36 to 37 weeks’ gestation has not been
found to benefit the neonate (Al-Kaff, 2016; South, 2013).

Omphalocele
The birth prevalence of this anomaly approximates 1 in 3000 to 5000
(Canfield, 2006; Dolk, 2010). It develops when the lateral ectomesodermal
folds fail to meet in the midline. Abdominal organs herniate into the base of
the umbilical cord, covered only by a two-layered sac of amnion and
peritoneum (Fig. 15-52). More than half of cases are associated with other
major anomalies or aneuploidy. Aneuploidy is particularly common with
smaller defects (De Veciana, 1994). Omphalocele is also a component of
several syndromes, including Beckwith–Wiedemann, cloacal exstrophy, and
pentalogy of Cantrell. Neonatal survival approximates 90 percent for
isolated cases and 80 percent in those with other structural abnormalities
(Raitio, 2021; Springett, 2014). Isolated defects containing liver are
typically delivered via cesarean to decrease the risk for fetal trauma and
bleeding.

FIGURE 15-52 Omphalocele. Transverse view of the abdomen showing a large, round, membranecovered ventral wall defect containing exteriorized liver.

Body Stalk Anomaly
Also known as limb-body-wall complex or cyllosoma, this rare, lethal
anomaly is characterized by abnormal body wall formation. Typically, no
abdominal wall is visible, and the abdominal organs extrude into the
extraamnionic coelom (Fig. 15-53). The body and placenta are closely
approximated or fused, and the umbilical cord is extremely short. Acuteangle scoliosis is another feature, and amnionic bands are often identified.

FIGURE 15-53 Body-stalk anomaly. A. This 15-week fetus has no visible abdominal wall. The thorax
is disproportionately small compared with the head, and the small lower torso is deviated to the side.
Arrows point to the large mass of extruded abdominal organs. B. Acute-angle scoliosis. Arrows depict
the abnormal curvature of the spine. (Reproduced with permission from Deirdre Snelson, RDMS.)

■ Kidneys and Genitourinary Tract
The fetal kidneys are visible adjacent to the spine, frequently in the first
trimester and routinely by 18 weeks’ gestation (Fig. 15-54). The length of the
kidney approximates 20 mm at 20 weeks and grows about 1.1 mm each week
thereafter (Chitty, 2003).

FIGURE 15-54 Normal fetal kidneys and bladder. A. The kidneys are visible adjacent to the spine in
this 29-week fetus. A small amount of urine is often visible within the renal pelvis (arrow). B. Normal
fetal bladder, outlined by the two superior vesical arteries as they become the umbilical arteries.

The fetal bladder is also readily seen in the second trimester as a round,
anechoic structure in the anterior midline of the pelvis. With application of
Doppler, the bladder is outlined by the two superior vesical arteries as they
become the umbilical arteries of the umbilical cord (Chap. 6, p. 114). The
fetal ureters and urethra are not visible sonographically unless abnormally
dilated.
After 18 weeks’ gestation, the kidneys are the major source of amnionic
fluid (Chap. 14, p. 256). Normal amnionic fluid volume in the second half of
pregnancy suggests urinary tract patency and at least one functioning kidney.
External genitalia are a component of the detailed examination and are
part of the standard examination in multifetal gestations and when medically
indicated (American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine, 2019).
Identification may aid counseling in pregnancies at risk for an X-linked
genetic condition. Examples of normal and ambiguous genitalia are shown in
Figure 15-55. Disorders of sexual development are discussed in Chapter 3
(p. 35).

FIGURE 15-55 Normal and ambiguous genitalia. A. Female labia. B. Male penis and scrotum. C.
Ambiguous genitalia with a phallus and bifid scrotum. D. With this condition, color Doppler can assist
locating the urethral meatus, which is pinpointed here by the urine stream (blue).

Renal Pelvis Dilatation
Present in 1 to 5 percent of fetuses, this finding is also called urinary tract
dilatation or hydronephrosis. In 40 to 90 percent of cases, and particularly
when mild, renal pelvis dilatation is transient or physiological and does not
represent an underlying abnormality (Ismaili, 2003; Nguyen, 2010). In

approximately one third of cases, a urinary tract abnormality is confirmed in
the neonatal period. Of these, ureteropelvic junction (UPJ) obstruction and
vesicoureteral reflux (VUR) are the most frequent.
The fetal renal pelvis diameter is measured anterior-to-posterior in a
transverse plane. Calipers are placed on the inner border of the fluid
collection (Fig. 15-56). Although various thresholds have been defined, the
pelvis is typically considered dilated if it exceeds 4 mm in the second
trimester or 7 mm at approximately 32 weeks’ gestation (Nguyen, 2014;
Reddy, 2014). The second-trimester threshold is used to identify pregnancies
that warrant subsequent third-trimester evaluation.

FIGURE 15-56 Renal pelvis dilatation. A. The anterior-posterior diameter of the renal pelves
measured 7 mm in the transverse plane in this 34-week fetus. B. Sagittal image at 32 weeks depicts
renal pelvis dilatation with rounded calyces (arrow) in the setting of ureteropelvic junction obstruction.

The Society for Fetal Urology categorized renal pelvis dilatation based
on a metaanalysis of more than 100,000 screened pregnancies (Table 15-2)
(Lee, 2006; Nguyen, 2010). Provided that the finding is isolated, the degree
of dilation correlates with the likelihood of an underlying abnormality.
Associated calyceal dilation, cortical thinning, or dilation elsewhere along
the urinary tract confer increased risk (Nguyen, 2014). Mild pyelectasis in
the second trimester is a minor aneuploidy marker associated with a slightly
increased risk for trisomy 21, particularly when other findings or risk factors
are also present (Fig. 17-3, p. 340).

TABLE 15-2. Risk for Postnatal Urinary Abnormality According to Degree
of Renal Pelvis Dilation

Ureteropelvic Junction Obstruction. This condition is the most common
abnormality associated with renal pelvis dilatation. The birth prevalence is 1
in 1000 to 2000, and males are affected three times more often than females
(Williams, 2007; Woodward, 2002). Obstruction is generally functional
rather than anatomical, and it is bilateral in up to a fourth of cases. The
likelihood of UPJ obstruction ranges from 5 percent with mild renal pelvis
dilatation to more than 50 percent with severe dilatation (Lee, 2006).
Duplicated Renal Collecting System. In this anatomical anomaly, the upper
and lower poles of the kidney—called moieties—are each drained by a
separate ureter (Fig. 15-57). Duplication is found in approximately 1 in 4000
pregnancies, is more common in females, and is bilateral in 15 to 20 percent
of cases (James, 1998; Vergani, 1998; Whitten, 2001). Sonographically, an
intervening tissue band separates two distinct renal pelves. Hydronephrosis
or ureteral dilation may develop due to abnormal implantation of one or both
ureters within the bladder—a relationship that reflects the anatomical
Weigert-Meyer rule. The upper pole ureter tends to develop obstruction from
a ureterocele within the bladder, whereas the lower pole ureter has a
shortened intravesical segment that predisposes to VUR (see Fig. 15-57).
Thus, both moieties may become dilated from different etiologies, and both
are at risk for loss of function.

FIGURE 15-57 Duplicated renal collecting system. A. Renal pelvis dilatation is visible in both the
upper (U) and lower (L) pole moieties, which are separated by an intervening band of renal tissue
(arrowhead). B. A ureterocele (arrowhead) is visible within the bladder. Color Doppler depicts the
superior vesical arteries.

Renal Agenesis
The estimated prevalence of bilateral renal agenesis is 1 in 8000 births,
whereas that of unilateral renal agenesis is 1 in 1000 births (Cragan, 2009;
Dolk, 2010; Sheih, 1989; Wiesel, 2005). With an absent kidney, color
Doppler imaging of the descending aorta demonstrates absence of the
ipsilateral renal artery (Fig. 15-58). In addition, the ipsilateral adrenal gland
typically enlarges to fill the renal fossa, termed the lying down adrenal sign
(Hoffman, 1992).

FIGURE 15-58 Renal agenesis. A. Coronal image of a fetus with bilateral renal agenesis in which
color Doppler of the abdominal aorta is used to demonstrate absence of the renal arteries. B. In this
fetus with unilateral renal agenesis, arrowheads point to the adrenal gland (arrowheads) filling the renal
fossa, which is the “lying-down” adrenal sign.

If renal agenesis is bilateral, no urine is produced, and the resulting
anhydramnios leads to pulmonary hypoplasia, limb contractures, and
distinctive facies. When this combination results from renal agenesis, it is
called Potter syndrome, after Dr. Edith Potter, who described it in 1946.
When these abnormalities result from severely decreased amnionic fluid
volume from another etiology, such as bilateral multicystic dysplastic kidney
or autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease, it is called Potter
sequence. The prognosis for these abnormalities is extremely poor.

Multicystic Dysplastic Kidney
This severe form of renal dysplasia results in a nonfunctioning kidney. The
nephrons and collecting ducts form abnormally, such that primitive ducts are
surrounded by fibromuscular tissue, and the ureter is atretic (Hains, 2009).
Sonographically, the kidney contains numerous, variably sized, smoothwalled cysts that do not communicate with the renal pelvis and are
surrounded by echogenic cortex (Fig. 15-59).

FIGURE 15-59 Multicystic dysplastic kidneys. Coronal view of the fetal abdomen demonstrates
enlarged kidneys that are filled with cysts of varying size and contain no visible renal pelvis or normalappearing renal tissue.

Unilateral multicystic dysplastic kidney (MCDK) has a prevalence of 1
in 4000 births. Contralateral renal abnormalities are present in 30 to 40
percent—most frequently VUR or UPJ obstruction (Schreuder, 2009).
Nonrenal anomalies have been reported in 25 percent of cases. Cystic
dysplasia may occur as a component of many genetic syndromes (Lazebnik,
1999; Schreuder, 2009). If MCDK is isolated and unilateral, the prognosis is
generally good. Bilateral MCDK is found in approximately 1 in 12,000
births. It is associated with severely decreased amnionic fluid volume
starting early in gestation. This leads to Potter sequence and a poor
prognosis.

Polycystic Kidney Disease
Of the hereditary polycystic diseases, only the infantile form of autosomal
recessive polycystic kidney disease (ARPKD) may be reliably diagnosed
prenatally. ARPKD is a chronic, progressive disease of the kidneys and liver
that results in cystic dilation of the renal collecting ducts and in congenital

hepatic fibrosis (Turkbey, 2009). The carrier frequency of a disease-causing
mutation in the PKHD1 gene approximates 1 in 70, and the birth prevalence
is 1 in 20,000 (Zerres, 1998). The phenotypes of ARPKD range from lethal
pulmonary hypoplasia at birth to a presentation in late childhood or even
adulthood with predominantly hepatic manifestations. Sonographically,
ARPKD displays abnormally large kidneys that may fill or even distend the
fetal abdomen and have a solid, ground-glass texture (Fig. 15-60). Severe
oligohydramnios confers a poor prognosis.

FIGURE 15-60 Autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease (ARPKD). Transverse (A) and
coronal (B) images of a 29-week fetus with marked renal enlargement. The kidneys measure 7 cm in
length and have a ground-glass appearance. There is anhydramnios.

Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD), which is far
more common, usually does not manifest until adulthood (Chap. 56, p. 1001).
Even so, some fetuses with ADPKD have mild renal enlargement and
enhanced renal echogenicity in the setting of normal amnionic fluid volume.
The differential diagnosis for these findings includes several genetic
syndromes, aneuploidy, or normal variant.

Bladder Outlet Obstruction
Distal obstruction of the urinary tract is more frequent in male fetuses, and
the most common etiology is posterior urethral valves. It may be diagnosed
as early as the first trimester in some cases (Fig. 15-61). The bladder is
markedly dilated, with accompanying dilation of the proximal urethra, which

is termed the “keyhole” sign. Oligohydramnios, particularly before
midpregnancy, portends pulmonary hypoplasia and poor prognosis. The
kidneys may initially manifest severe hydroureteronephrosis but later
develop cystic renal dysplasia or become small and echogenic. Outcome may
be poor even with normal amnionic fluid volume. Associated anomalies
occur in 40 percent of cases, and aneuploidy has been reported in 5 to 8
percent (Hayden, 1988; Hobbins, 1984; Mann, 2010). Evaluation and
potential fetal therapy for bladder outlet obstruction is discussed in Chapter
19 (p. 376).

FIGURE 15-61 Bladder outlet obstruction. A. The bladder (B) is so large that it fills the abdomen in
this 13-week fetus. B. By 18 weeks, the kidneys (K) have become brightly echogenic. C. The bladder
is markedly dilated and thick-walled, with dilation of the proximal urethra, termed the “keyhole” sign
(arrow).

SKELETON
The standard examination includes demonstrating the presence of the arms,
legs, hands, and feet (American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine, 2018).
The detailed examination includes, in addition, the number and position of
the digits—fingers and toes (Fig. 15-62).

FIGURE 15-62 Normal extremities. A. Footprint with toes identified. B. Normal ankle position. C.
Hand with fingers identified. D. Normal hand and forearm position.

The Nosology and Classification of Genetic Skeletal Disorders includes
461 skeletal anomalies in 42 groups, characterized according to their
molecular phenotype, clinical features, or radiographic findings (Mortier,
2019). More than 90 percent of skeletal disorders now have a known genetic
basis, with pathogenic variants identified in more than 400 genes. The two
types of skeletal dysplasias are osteochondrodysplasias—the generalized
abnormal development of bone and/or cartilage, and dysostoses—which are
abnormalities of individual bones. In addition to these malformations,

skeletal abnormalities include deformations, as with some cases of clubfoot,
and disruptions such as limb-reduction defects.

■ Skeletal Dysplasias
The prevalence of skeletal dysplasias approximates 3 in 10,000 births. Two
groups account for more than half of all cases: the fibroblast growth factor 3
(FGFR3) chondrodysplasia group and the osteogenesis imperfecta and
decreased bone density group. Each occurs in 0.8 in 10,000 births
(Stevenson, 2012).
Evaluation of a pregnancy with suspected skeletal dysplasia includes a
survey of every long bone, as well as the hands and feet, skull size and
shape, clavicles, scapulae, thorax, and spine. Reference tables are used to
determine which long bones are affected and ascertain the degree of
shortening (Appendix, p. 1239). Involvement of all long bones is termed
micromelia, whereas predominant involvement of only the proximal,
intermediate, or distal long bone segments is termed rhizomelia, mesomelia,
and acromelia, respectively. The degree of ossification should be noted, as
should presence of bowing or fractures.
Although precise characterization may elude prenatal diagnosis, it is
frequently possible to determine whether a skeletal dysplasia is lethal. Lethal
dysplasias show profound long bone shortening, often with measurements far
below the 5th percentile, and display femur length-to-abdominal
circumference ratios <16 percent (Nelson, 2014; Rahemtullah, 1997; Ramus,
1998). Other sonographic abnormalities are generally evident. Pulmonary
hypoplasia is suggested by a thoracic circumference <80 percent of the
abdominal circumference value, a thoracic circumference <2.5th percentile,
and a cardiac circumference >50 percent of the thoracic circumference value
(Appendix, p. 1238). Affected pregnancies may also develop hydramnios
and/or hydrops.
The FGFR3 chondrodysplasias include achondroplasia,
hypochondroplasia, and thanatophoric dysplasia. Achondroplasia is the
most common nonlethal skeletal dysplasia. An impressive 98 percent of
cases are due to a specific point mutation in the FGFR3 gene. Inheritance is
autosomal dominant, and 80 percent of cases result from a new mutation.
Achondroplasia is characterized by long bone shortening that is
predominantly rhizomelic, an enlarged head with frontal bossing, depressed

nasal bridge, exaggerated lumbar lordosis, and a trident configuration of the
hands. Intelligence is usually normal. The femur and humerus measurements
may not fall below the 5th percentile until the early third trimester. In
homozygotes, who represent 25 percent of the offspring of heterozygous
parents, the condition is characterized by greater long bone shortening and is
lethal.
The other major class of FGFR3 dysplasias, thanatophoric dysplasia, is
the most common lethal skeletal disorder. It is characterized by severe
micromelia, and affected fetuses—particularly those with type II—may
develop a characteristic cloverleaf skull deformity (Kleeblattschädel) due to
craniosynostosis. Genetic testing is confirmatory.
Osteogenesis imperfecta represents a group of skeletal dysplasias
typified by hypomineralization. There are multiple types, and more than 90
percent of cases are characterized by a mutation in the COL1A1 or COL1A2
gene. Type II, also called the perinatal form, is lethal. The skull displays a
profound lack of ossification, and gentle pressure on the maternal abdomen
from the ultrasound transducer results in visible skull deformation (Fig. 1563). Other features include multiple in-utero fractures and ribs that appear
“beaded.” Inheritance is autosomal dominant, such that all cases result from
either new mutations or gonadal mosaicism. Another skeletal dysplasia that
creates severe hypomineralization is hypophosphatasia, which has an
autosomal recessive inheritance.

FIGURE 15-63 Post-axial polydactyly. A. In this image of the hand, the arrow points to a rudimentary
digit adjacent to the little finger. B. Foot with 6 toes in a fetus with trisomy 13. The arrow points to the
extra digit.

■ Polydactyly
The most common skeletal abnormality is polydactyly, which occurs in
approximately 1 in 1000 births. It is post-axial if on the side of the ulna or
fibula and pre-axial if on the side of the radius or tibia (Fig. 15-64). The
extra digit is often rudimentary, and in the absence of a bony component,
prenatal detection may be limited. Post-axial polydactyly is more common
and is frequently inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion. Polydactyly is
also a feature of syndromes such as Meckel-Gruber and trisomy 13.

FIGURE 15-64 Osteogenesis imperfecta, Type IIa. A. Due to lack of skull ossification, gentle
ultrasound transducer pressure on the maternal abdomen results in visible deformation (flattening) of the
skull in this 24-week fetus. B. When the transducer pressure is removed, the skull shape returns to
normal. C. In the four-chamber view of the heart, in-utero fractures lead to abrupt angulation of the ribs
(arrows). D. The thorax is markedly smaller than the abdomen in this sagittal image.

■ Clubfoot—Talipes Equinovarus
This disorder is notable for a deformed talus and shortened Achilles tendon.
The affected foot is abnormally fixed and positioned with equinus
(downward pointing), varus (inward rotation), and forefoot adduction. Most
cases are considered malformations, with a multifactorial genetic component.

However, an association with environmental factors and with early
amniocentesis suggests that deformation also plays a role (Tredwell, 2001).
Sonographically, the footprint is visible in the same plane as the tibia and
fibula (Fig. 15-65).

FIGURE 15-65 Talipes equinovarus or clubfoot. This condition is diagnosed by visualizing the
“footprint” in the same plane as the tibia and fibula.

The prevalence of clubfoot approximates 1 in 1000 births, and the
male:female ratio is 2:1 (Carey, 2003; Pavone, 2012). Clubfoot is bilateral
in approximately 50 percent of cases. At least 50 percent of affected
individuals have associated abnormalities, such as neural-tube defects,
arthrogryposis, and myotonic dystrophy and other genetic syndromes
(Mammen, 2004; Sharma, 2011). If there are other abnormalities, aneuploidy
is present in 30 percent. In contrast, the aneuploidy rate is <4 percent when
clubfoot appears isolated (Lauson, 2010; Sharma, 2011). Thus, a careful
search for associated abnormalities is warranted, and chromosomal
microarray analysis may be considered.

■ Limb-Reduction Defects

Documentation of the arms and legs is a component of the standard
examination. The absence or hypoplasia of all or part of one or more
extremities is a limb-reduction defect. The birth prevalence is 4 to 8 in
10,000 (Kucik, 2012; Stoll, 2010; Vasluian, 2013). Approximately half of
these are isolated defects, up to one third occur as part of a recognized
syndrome, and individuals in the remaining cases have other coexisting
anomalies (Stoll, 2010; Vasluian, 2013). Upper extremities are affected more
frequently than lower ones. A terminal transverse limb defect lacks part or
all of a distal limb to create a stump (Fig. 15-66). This is more common than
a longitudinal defect, which is complete or partial absence of the long
bone(s) on only one side of a given extremity.

FIGURE 15-66 Transverse limb-reduction defect. A. At 18 weeks’ gestation, only a rudimentary hand
was visible. B. By 24 weeks, the radius and ulna were normal in size and appearance, and small
rudimentary digits were evident.

Absence of an entire extremity is termed amelia. Phocomelia, associated
with thalidomide exposure, is an absence of one or more long bones with the
hands or feet attached to the trunk (Chap. 8, p. 155). Limb-reduction defects
are associated with numerous genetic syndromes, such as Roberts syndrome,
an autosomal recessive condition characterized by tetraphocomelia. A
clubhand deformity, usually from an absent radius, is a component of the
thrombocytopenia-absent radius syndrome and is also associated with
trisomy 18 (Fig. 16-5, p. 312). Limb-reduction defects may occur in the
setting of a disruption such as amnionic-band sequence (Chap. 6, p. 113).

They have also been associated with chorionic villus sampling when
performed before 10 weeks’ gestation (Fig. 17-5, p. 346).

REFERENCES
Abuhamad A, Minton KK, Benson CB, et al: Obstetric and gynecologic ultrasound curriculum and
competency assessment in residency training programs: consensus report. Am J Obstet Gynecol
218(1):29, 2018
Adzick NS, Harrison MR, Glick PL, et al: Fetal cystic adenomatoid malformation: prenatal diagnosis and
natural history. J Pediatr Surg 20:483, 1985
Adzick NS, Thom EA, Spong CY, et al: A randomized trial of prenatal versus postnatal repair of
myelomeningocele. N Engl J Med 364(11):993, 2011
Al-Kaff A, MacDonald SC, Kent N, et al: Delivery planning for pregnancies with gastroschisis: findings
from a prospective national registry. Am J Obstet Gynecol 213(4):557.e1, 2015
Altman RP, Randolph JG, Lilly JR: Sacrococcygeal teratoma: American Academy of Pediatrics Surgical
Section survey—1973. J Pediatr Surg 9:389, 1974
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Neural tube defects. Practice Bulletin No. 187,
December 2017, Reaffirmed 2019a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Perinatal palliative care. Committee Opinion No.
786, August 2019b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Ultrasound in pregnancy. Practice Bulletin No.
175, December 2016, Reaffirmed 2020
American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine: AIUM-ACR-ACOG-SMFM-SRU Practice parameter
for the performance of standard trimester diagnostic obstetric ultrasound examinations. J Ultrasound
Med 37(11):e13, 2018
American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine: AIUM Ultrasound Practice Accreditation. 2020a.
Available at: https://aium.org/accreditation/accreditation.aspx. Accessed August 17, 2020
American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine: Practice parameter for the performance of detailed
second- and third-trimester diagnostic obstetric ultrasound examinations. J Ultrasound Med
38(12):3093, 2019
American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine: Practice parameter for the performance of fetal
echocardiography. J Ultrasound Med 39(1):e5, 2020b
Azizkhan RG, Crombleholme TM: Congenital cystic lung disease: contemporary antenatal and postnatal
management. Pediatric Surg Int 24:643, 2008
Ballardini E, Marino P, Maietti E, et al: Prevalence and associated factors for agenesis of corpus
callosum in Emilia Romagna (1981–2015). Eur J Med Genet 61(9):524, 2018
Basude S, McDermott L, Newell S, et al: Fetal hemivertebra: associations and perinatal outcome.
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 45(4):434, 2015
Best KE, Tennant PWG, Addor M, et al: Epidemiology of small intestinal atresia in Europe: a registerbased study. Arch Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed 97(5):F353, 2012
Bjornard K, Riehle-Colarusso T, Gilboa SM, et al: Patterns in the prevalence of congenital heart defects,
metropolitan Atlanta, 1978 to 2005. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol 97(2):87, 2013
Boyle B, Garne E, Loane M, et al: The changing epidemiology of Ebstein’s anomaly and its relationship
with maternal mental health conditions: a European registry-based study. Cardio Young 27(4):677,

2017
Brandt JS, Wang E, Rychik J, et al: Utility of a single 3-vessel view in the evaluation of the ventricular
outflow tracts. J Ultrasound Med 34(8):1415, 2015
Buca DIP, Khalil A, Rizzo G, et al: Outcome of prenatally diagnosed fetal heterotaxy: systematic review
and meta-analysis. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 51:323, 2018
Burge D, Wheeler R: Increasing incidence of detection of congenital lung lesions. Pediatr Pulmonol
45(1):103, 2010
Byrne JJ, Morgan JL, Twickler DM, et al: Utility of follow-up standard sonography for fetal anomaly
detection. Am J Obstet Gynecol 222(6):615, 2020
Canfield MA, Honein MA, Yuskiv N, et al: National estimates and race/ethnic-specific variation of
selected birth defects in the United States, 1999–2001. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol
76(11):747, 2006
Carey M, Bower C, Mylvaganam A, et al: Talipes equinovarus in Western Australia. Paediatr Perinat
Epidemiol 17:187, 2003
Cavoretto P, Molina F, Poggi S, et al: Prenatal diagnosis and outcome of echogenic fetal lung lesions.
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 32:769, 2008
Chao TT, Dashe JS, Adams RC, et al: Central nervous system findings on fetal magnetic resonance
imaging and outcomes in children with spina bifida. Obstet Gynecol 116(2):323, 2010
Chavez MR, Ananth CV, Smulian JC, et al: Fetal transcerebellar diameter nomogram in singleton
gestations with special emphasis in the third trimester: a comparison with previously published
nomograms. Am J Obstet Gynecol 189(4):1021, 2003
Chitty LS, Altman DG: Charts of fetal size: kidney and renal pelvis measurements. Prenat Diagn 23:891,
2003
Cho YS, Park S E, Hong SK, et al: The natural history of fetal diagnosed isolated ventricular septal
defect. Prenat Diagn 37(9):889, 2017
Christensen N, Andersen H, Garne E, et al: Atrioventricular septal defects among infants in Europe: a
population-based study of prevalence, associated anomalies, and survival. Cardiol Young 23(4):560,
2013
Chung JH, Farinelli CK, Porto M, et al: Fetal epignathus: the case of an early EXIT (ex utero
intrapartum treatment). Obstet Gynecol 119(2):466, 2012
Collett RW, Edwards JE. Persistent truncus arteriosus; a classification according to anatomic types.
Surg Clin North Am 29(4):1245, 1949
Colvin J, Bower C, Dickinson JE, et al: Outcomes of congenital diaphragmatic hernia: a populationbased study in Western Australia. Pediatr 116:e356, 2005
Copel JA, Liang R, Demasio K, et al: The clinical significance of the irregular fetal heart rhythm. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 182:813, 2000
Cragan JD, Gilboa SM: Including prenatal diagnoses in birth defects monitoring: experience of the
Metropolitan Atlanta Congenital Defects Program. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol 85:20,
2009
Crane JM, Ash K, Fink N, et al: Abnormal fetal cardiac axis in the detection of intrathoracic anomalies
and congenital heart disease. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 10(2):90, 1997
Curran PF, Jelin EB, Rand L, et al: Prenatal steroids for microcystic congenital adenomatoid
malformations. J Pediatr Surg 45:145, 2010
Dashe JS, Twickler DM, Santos-Ramos R, et al: Alpha-fetoprotein detection of neural tube defects and
the impact of standard ultrasound. Am J Obstet Gynecol 195(6):1623, 2006

De Biasio P, Ginocchio G, Aicardi G, et al: Ossification timing of sacral vertebrae by ultrasound in the
mid-second trimester of pregnancy. Prenat Diagn 23:1056, 2003
De Veciana M, Major CA, Porto M: Prediction of an abnormal karyotype in fetuses with omphalocele.
Prenat Diagn 14:487, 1994
Derikx JP, De Backer A, Van De Schoot L, et al: Factors associated with recurrence and metastasis in
sacrococcygeal teratoma. Br J Surg 93:1543, 2006
des Portes V, Rolland A, Velazquez-Dominguez J, et al: Outcome of isolated agenesis of the corpus
callosum: a population-based prospective study. Eur J Paediatr Neurol 22(1):82, 2018
Devaseelan P, Cardwell C, Bell B, et al: Prognosis of isolated mild to moderate fetal cerebral
ventriculomegaly: a systematic review. J Perinat Med 38:401, 2010
Dolk H, Loane M, Garne E: The prevalence of congenital anomalies in Europe. Adv Exp Med Biol
686:349, 2010
Duncombe GJ, Dickinson JE, Kikiros CS: Prenatal diagnosis and management of congenital cystic
adenomatoid malformation of the lung. Am J Obstet Gynecol 187(4):950, 2002
Dutemeyer V, Cordier AG, Cannie MM, et al: Prenatal prediction of postnatal survival in fetuses with
congenital diaphragmatic hernia using MRI: lung volume measurement, signal intensity ratio, and
effect of experience. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med March 25, 2020 [Epub ahead of print]
Ecker JL, Shipp TD, Bromley B, et al: The sonographic diagnosis of Dandy-Walker and Dandy-Walker
variant: associated findings and outcomes. Prenat Diagn 20:328, 2000
Feinstein JA, Benson DW, Dubin AM, et al: Hypoplastic left heart syndrome: current considerations and
expectations. J Am Coll Cardiol 59(1 Suppl):S1, 2012
Franklin O, Burch M, Manning N, et al: Prenatal diagnosis of coarctation of the aorta improves survival
and reduces morbidity. Heart 87:67, 2002
Gaglioti P, Oberto M, Todros T: The significance of fetal ventriculomegaly: etiology, short-and long-term
outcomes. Prenat Diagn 29(4):381, 2009
Gallot D, Boda C, Ughetto S, et al: Prenatal detection and outcome of congenital diaphragmatic hernia: a
French registry-based study. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 29:276, 2007
Garne E, Loane M, Dolk H, et al: Spectrum of congenital anomalies in pregnancies with pregestational
diabetes. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol 94(3):134, 2012
Ghi T, Dall’Asta A, Cavalli C, et al: How often an isolated cardiac disproportion predicts a coarctation
of the aorta? Single center experience and systematic review of the literature. J Matern Fetal
Neonatal Med 31(10):1350, 2017
Gucciardo L, Uyttebroek A, de Wever I, et al: Prenatal assessment and management of sacrococcygeal
teratoma. Prenat Diagn 31:678, 2011
Hadlock FP, Harrist RB, Carpenter RJ, et al: Sonographic estimation of fetal weight. Radiology 150:535,
1984
Hadlock FP, Harrist RB, Martinez-Poyer J: In utero analysis of fetal growth: a sonographic weight
standard. Radiology 181(1):129, 1991
Hains DS, Bates CM, Ingraham S, et al: Management and etiology of the unilateral multicystic
dysplastic kidney: a review. Pediatr Nephrol 24:233, 2009
Hartman RJ, Rasmussen SJ, Botto LD, et al: The contribution of chromosomal abnormalities to
congenital heart defects: a population-based study. Pediatr Cardiol 32:1147, 2011
Hayden SA, Russ PD, Pretorius DH, et al: Posterior urethral obstruction. Prenatal sonographic findings
and clinical outcome in fourteen cases. J Ultrasound Med 7:371, 1988
Herrera CL, Byrne JJ, Clark HR, et al: Use of fetal magnetic resonance imaging after sonographic
identification of major structural anomalies. J Ultrasound Med 39(10):2053 2020a

Herrera CL, Hussamy DJ, McIntire DD, et al: Femur length parameters in fetuses with Down
syndrome. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 33(15):2516, 2020b
Hobbins JC, Robero R, Grannum P, et al: Antenatal diagnosis of renal anomalies with ultrasound: I.
Obstructive uropathy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 148:868, 1984
Hoffman CK, Filly RA, Callen PW: The “lying down” adrenal sign: a sonographic indicator of renal
agenesis or ectopia in fetuses and neonates. J Ultrasound Med 11:533, 1992
Howe DT, Rankin J, Draper ES: Schizencephaly prevalence, prenatal diagnosis and clues to etiology: a
register-based study. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 39(1):75, 2012
Howley MM, Keppler-Noreuil KM, Cunniff CM, et al: Descriptive epidemiology of cerebellar
hypoplasia in the National Birth Defects Prevention Study. Birth Defects Res 110(19):1419, 2018
Ismaili K, Hall M, Donner C, et al: Results of systematic screening for minor degrees of fetal renal
pelvis dilatation in an unselected population. Am J Obstet Gynecol 188:242, 2003
James CA, Watson AR, Twining P, et al: Antenatally detected urinary tract abnormalities: changing
incidence and management. Eur J Pediatr 157:508, 1998
Johnson MP, Johnson A, Holzgreve W, et al: First-trimester simple hygroma: cause and outcome. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 168:156, 1993
Jones AM, Isenburg J, Salemi JL, et al: Increasing prevalence of gastroschisis–14 states, 1995–2012.
MMWR 65(2):23, 2016
Joó JG, Tóth Z, Beke A, et al: Etiology, prenatal diagnoses and outcome of ventriculomegaly in 230
cases. Fetal Diagn Ther 24(3):254, 2008
Katz JA, Chock VY, Davis AS, et al: Utility of prenatal MRI in the evaluation and management of fetal
ventriculomegaly. J Perinatol 38(11):1444, 2018
Kharrat R, Yamamoto M, Roume J, et al: Karyotype and outcome of fetuses diagnosed with cystic
hygroma in the first trimester in relation to nuchal translucency thickness. Prenat Diagn 26:369, 2006
Kousi M, Katsanis N: The genetic basis of hydrocephalus. Ann Review Neurosci 39:409, 2016
Kucik JE, Alverson CJ, Gliboa SM, et al: Racial/ethnic variations in the prevalence of selected major
birth defects, Metropolitan Atlanta, 1994–2005. Public Health Reports 127(1):52, 2012
Lau CT, Kan A, Shek N et al: Is congenital pulmonary airway malformation really a rare disease?
Result of a prospective registry with universal antenatal screening program. Pediatr Surg Int
33(1):105, 2017
Lauson S, Alvarez C, Patel MS, et al: Outcome of prenatally diagnosed isolated clubfoot. Ultrasound
Obstet Gynecol 35:708, 2010
Lazebnik N, Many A: The severity of polyhydramnios, estimated fetal weight and preterm delivery are
independent risk factors for the presence of congenital anomalies. Gynecol Obstet Invest 48:28,
1999
Lee RS, Cendron M, Kinnamon DD, et al: Antenatal hydronephrosis as a predictor of postnatal
outcome: a meta-analysis. Pediatrics 118:586, 2006
Lloyd DF, Rutherford MA, Simpson JM, et al: The neurodevelopmental implications of hypoplastic left
heart syndrome in the fetus. Cardiol Young 27(2):217, 2017
Lodeiro JG, Feinstein SJ, Lodeiro SB: Fetal premature atrial contractions associated with hydralazine.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 160(1):105, 1989
Long A, Moran P, Robson S: Outcome of fetal cerebral posterior fossa anomalies. Prenat Diagn 26:707,
2006
Maarse W, Berge SJ, Pistorius L, et al: Diagnostic accuracy of transabdominal ultrasound in detecting
prenatal cleft lip and palate: a systematic review. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 35:495, 2010

Maarse W, Pistorius LR, Van Eeten WK, et al: Prenatal ultrasound screening for orofacial clefts.
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 38:434, 2011
Mahle WT, Clancy RR, McGaurn SP, et al: Impact of prenatal diagnosis on survival and early neurologic
morbidity in neonates with the hypoplastic left heart syndrome. Pediatrics 107:1277, 2001
Malone FD, Ball RH, Nyberg DA, et al: First-trimester septated cystic hygroma: prevalence, natural
history, and pediatric outcome. Obstet Gynecol 106:288, 2005
Mammen L, Benson CB: Outcome of fetuses with clubfeet diagnosed by prenatal sonography. J
Ultrasound Med 23:497, 2004
Mann S, Johnson MP, Wilson RD: Fetal thoracic and bladder shunts. Semin Fetal Neonatal Med 15:28,
2010
Maya I, Singer A, Yonath H, et al: What have we learned from 691 prenatal chromosomal microarrays
for ventricular septal defects? Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 99(6):757, 2020
Mortier GR, Cohn DH, Cormier-Daire V, et al: Nosology and classification of genetic skeletal disorders:
2019 revision. Am J Med Genet A 179(12):2393, 2019
Mullassery D, Ba’ath ME, Jesudason EC, et al: Value of liver herniation in prediction of outcome in fetal
congenital diaphragmatic hernia: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol
35:609, 2010
Nelson DB, Dashe JS, McIntire DD, et al: Fetal skeletal dysplasias: sonographic indices associated with
adverse outcomes. J Ultrasound Med 33(6):1085, 2014
Nelson DB, Martin R, Twickler DM, et al: Sonographic detection and clinical importance of growth
restriction in pregnancies with gastroschisis. J Ultrasound Med 34(12):2217, 2015
Nelson JS, Stebbins RC, Strassle PD, et al: Geographic distribution of live births with tetralogy of Fallot
in North Carolina 2003 to 2012. Birth Defect Res A Clin Mol Teratol 106(11):881, 2016
Nguyen HT, Benson CB, Bromley B, et al: Multidisciplinary consensus on the classification of prenatal
and postnatal urinary tract dilatation (UTD classification system). J Pediatric Urol 10:982, 2014
Nguyen HT, Herndon CDA, Cooper C, et al: The Society for Fetal Urology consensus statement on the
evaluation and management of antenatal hydronephrosis. J Pediatr Urol 6:212, 2010
Nicolaides KH, Campbell S, Gabbe SG: Ultrasound screening for spina bifida: cranial and cerebellar
signs. Lancet 2(8498):72, 1986
Norem CT, Schoen EJ, Walton DL, et al: Routine ultrasonography compared with maternal serum
alpha-fetoprotein for neural tube defect screening. Obstet Gynecol 106:747, 2005
Oei SG, Vosters RP, van der Hagen NL: Fetal arrhythmia caused by excessive intake of caffeine by
pregnant women. BMJ 298:568, 1989
Offerdal K, Jebens N, Swertsen T, et al: Prenatal ultrasound detection of facial cleft: a prospective
study of 49,314 deliveries in a non-selected population in Norway. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol
31:639, 2008
Oh KY, Gibson TH, Pinter JD, et al: Clinical outcomes following prenatal diagnosis of asymmetric
ventriculomegaly, interhemispheric cyst, and callosal dysgenesis (AVID). Prenat Diagn 39(1):26,
2019
Oluyomi-Obi T, Kuret V, Puligandla P, et al: Antenatal predictors of outcome in prenatally diagnosed
congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH). J Pediatr Surg 52(5):881, 2017
Orioli IM, Catilla EE: Epidemiology of holoprosencephaly: prevalence and risk factors. Am J Med Genet
Part C Semin Med Genet 154C:13, 2010
Overcash RT, DeUgarte DA, Stephenson ML, et al: Factors associated with gastroschisis outcomes.
Obstet Gynecol 124(3):551, 2014

Paladini D, Alfirevic Z, Carvalho JS, et al: ISUOG consensus statement on current understanding of the
association of neurodevelopmental delay and congenital heart disease: impact on prenatal
counseling. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 49(2):287, 2017
Paladini D, Morra T, Teodoro A, et al: Objective diagnosis of micrognathia in the fetus: the jaw index.
Obstet Gynecol 93(3):382, 1999
Paladini D, Russo M, Teodoro A, et al: Prenatal diagnosis of congenital heart disease in the Naples area
during the years 1994–1999—the experience of a joint fetal-pediatric cardiology unit. Prenatal Diagn
22(7):545, 2002
Palatnik A, Grobman WA, Cohen LS, et al: Role of the 3-vessel and trachea view in antenatal detection
of tetralogy of Fallot. J Ultrasound Med 35(8):1799, 2016
Pavone V, Bianca S, Grosso G, et al: Congenital talipes equinovarus: an epidemiological study in Sicily.
Acta Orthop 83(3):294, 2012
Pedersen RN, Calzolari E, Husby S, et al: Oesophageal atresia: prevalence, prenatal diagnosis and
associated anomalies in 23 European regions. Arch Dis Child 97:227, 2012
Peranteau WH, Boelig MM, Khalek N, et al: Effect of single and multiple courses of maternal
betamethasone on prenatal congenital lung lesion growth and fetal survival. J Pediatr Surg 51(1):28,
2016
Pilu G: Prenatal diagnosis of cerebrospinal anomalies. In Fleischer AC, Abramowicz JS, Goncalves LF,
et al (eds): Fleischer’s Sonography in Obstetrics and Gynecology: Textbook and Teaching Cases, 8th
ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2018
Pinette MG, Hand M, Hunt RC, et al: Surviving sirenomelia. J Ultrasound Med 24(11):1555, 2005
Rahemtullah A, McGillivray B, Wilson RD: Suspected skeletal dysplasias: femur length to abdominal
circumference ratio can be used in ultrasonographic prediction of fetal outcome. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 177:864, 1997
Raitio A, Lahtinen A, Syvanen J, et al: Gastroschisis in Finland 1993 to 2014-increasing prevalence, high
rates of abortion, and survival: a population-based study. Eur J Pediatr Surg 30(6):536, 2020
Raitio A, Tauriainen A, Syvanen J, et al: Omphalocele in Finland from 1993 to 2014: trends, prevalence,
mortality, and associated malformations-a population-based study. Eur J Pediatr Surg 31(2):172, 2021
Ramos GA, Romine LE, Gindes L, et al: Evaluation of the fetal secondary palate by 3-dimensional
sonography. J Ultrasound Med 29:357, 2010
Ramus RM, Martin LB, Twickler DM: Ultrasonographic prediction of fetal outcome in suspected
skeletal dysplasias with use of the femur length-to-abdominal circumference ratio. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 179(5):1348, 1998
Ravi P, Mills L, Fruitman D, et al: Population trends in prenatal detection of transposition of great
arteries: impact of obstetric screening ultrasound guidelines. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 51(5):659,
2018
Reddy UM, Abuhamad AZ, Levine D, et al: Fetal imaging: executive summary of a joint Eunice
Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, Society for MaternalFetal Medicine, American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine, American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists, American College of Radiology, Society for Pediatric Radiology, and Society of
Radiologists in Ultrasound Fetal Imaging Workshop. Obstet Gynecol 123(5):1070, 2014
Rodriguez N, Casasbuenas A, Andreeva E, et al. First-trimester diagnosis of agnathia-otocephaly
complex: a series of 4 cases and review of the literature. J Ultrasound Med 38(3):805, 2019
Sanford A, Saadai P, Lee H, et al: Congenital high airway obstruction sequence (CHAOS): a new case
and a review of phenotypic features. Am J Med Genet A 158A(12):3126, 2012

Santiago-Muñoz PC, McIntire DD, Barber RG, et al: Outcomes of pregnancies with fetal gastroschisis.
Obstet Gynecol 110:663, 2007
Schreuder MF, Westland R, van Wijk JA: Unilateral multicystic dysplastic kidney: a meta-analysis of
observational studies on the incidence, associated urinary tract malformations and the contralateral
kidney. Nephrol Dial Transplant 24:1810, 2009
Sharma R, Stone S, Alzouebi A, et al: Perinatal outcome of prenatally diagnosed congenital talipes
equinovarus. Prenat Diagn 31:142, 2011
Sheih CP, Liu MB, Hung CS, et al: Renal abnormalities in schoolchildren. Pediatrics 84:1086, 1989
Shepard MJ, Richards VA, Berkowitz RL, et al: An evaluation of two equations for predicting fetal
weight by ultrasound. Am J Obstet Gynecol 142:47, 1982
Shipp TD, Bromley B, Hornberger LK, et al: Levorotation of the fetal cardiac axis: a clue for the
presence of congenital heart disease. Obstet Gynecol 85:97, 1995
Shulman LP, Emerson DS, Felker RE, et al: High frequency of cytogenetic abnormalities in fetuses with
cystic hygroma diagnosed in the first trimester. Obstet Gynecol 80:80, 1992
Sinkovskaya ES, Chaoui R, Karl K, et al: Fetal cardiac axis and congenital heart defects in early
gestation. Obstet Gynecol 125(2)453, 2015
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine. Ultrasound screening for fetal microcephaly following Zika virus
exposure. Am J Obstet Gynecol 214(6):B2, 2016
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Fox NS, Monteagudo A, et al: Mild fetal ventriculomegaly:
diagnosis, evaluation, and management. Am J Obstet Gynecol 219(1):B2, 2018
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Simpson LL: Twin-twin transfusion syndrome. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 208(1):3, 2013
Solomon BD, Rosenbaum KN, Meck JM, et al: Holoprosencephaly due to numeric chromosome
abnormalities. Am J Med Genet Part C Semin Med Genet 154C:146, 2010
Sotiriadis A, Makrydimas G: Neurodevelopment after prenatal diagnosis of isolated agenesis of the
corpus callosum: an integrative review. Am J Obstet Gynecol 206(4):337.e1, 2012
South AP, Stutey KM, Meinzen-Derr J, et al: Metaanalysis of the prevalence of intrauterine fetal death
in gastroschisis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 209(2):114.e.1, 2013
Springett A, Draper ES, Rankin J, et al: Birth prevalence and survival of exomphalos in England and
Wales: 2005 to 2011. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol 100(9):721, 2014
Stege G, Fenton A, Jaffray B: Nihilism in the 1990s: the true mortality of congenital diaphragmatic
hernia. Pediatr 112:532, 2003
Stevenson DA, Carey JC, Byrne JL, et al: Analysis of skeletal dysplasias in the Utah population. Am J
Med Genet 158A:1046, 2012
Stocker JT: Congenital pulmonary airway malformation: a new name and expanded classification of
congenital cystic adenomatoid malformation of the lung. Histopathology 41(Suppl):424, 2002
Stocker JT, Madewell JE, Drake RM: Congenital cystic adenomatoid malformation of the lung:
classification and morphologic spectrum. Hum Pathol 8:155, 1977
Stoll C, Alembik Y, Dott B, et al: Associated malformations in patients with limb reduction deficiencies.
Eur J Med Genet 53(5):286, 2010
Stoll C, Dott B, Roth MP: Associated anomalies in cases with agenesis of the corpus callosum. Am J
Med Genet A 179(10):2101, 2019
Stollman TH, de Blaauw I, Wijnen MH, et al: Decreased mortality but increased morbidity in neonates
with jejunoileal atresia; a study of 114 cases over a 34-year period. J Pediatr Surg 44(1):217, 2009
Sun HY, Proudfoot JA, McCandless RT: Prenatal detection of critical cardiac outflow tract anomalies
remains suboptimal despite revised obstetrical imaging guidelines. Cong Heart Dis 13:748, 2018

Svirsky R, Brabbing-Goldstein D, Rozovkski U, et al: The genetic and clinical outcome of isolated fetal
muscular ventricular septal defect. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 32(17)2837, 2019
Swamy R, Embleton N, Hale J, et al: Sacrococcygeal teratoma over two decades: birth prevalence,
prenatal diagnosis and clinical outcomes. Prenat Diagn 28:1048, 2008
Szabo N, Gergev G, Kobor J, et al: Corpus callosum abnormalities: birth prevalence and clinical
spectrum in Hungary. Pediatr Neurol 44:420, 2011
Turkbey B, Ocak I, Daryanani K, et al: Autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease and congenital
hepatic fibrosis. Pediatr Radiol 39:100, 2009
Tworetzky W, McElhinney DB, Reddy VM, et al: Improved surgical outcome after fetal diagnosis of
hypoplastic left heart syndrome. Circulation 103:1269, 2001
Van Nisselrooij AE, Rozendaal L, Linskens IH, et al: Postnatal outcome of fetal isolated ventricular size
disproportion in the absence of aortic coarctation. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 52(5):593, 2018
Vasluian E, van der Sluis CK, van Essen AJ, et al: Birth prevalence for congenital limb defects in the
northern Netherlands: a 30-year population-based study. BMC Musculoskel Disord 14:323, 2013
Vergani P, Ceruti P, Locatelli A, et al: Accuracy of prenatal ultrasonographic diagnosis of duplex renal
system. J Ultrasound Med 18:463, 1998
Vilanova-Sanchez A, Reck CA, Sebastião YV et al: Can sacral development as a marker for caudal
regression help identify associated urologic anomalies in patients with anorectal malformation? J
Pediatr Surg 53(11)2178, 2018
Walker SJ, Ball RH, Babcook CJ, et al: Prevalence of aneuploidy and additional anatomic abnormalities
in fetuses and neonates with cleft lip with or without cleft palate. A population-based study in Utah.
J Ultrasound Med 20(11):1175, 2001
Whitten SM, Wilcox DT: Duplex systems. Prenat Diagn 21:952, 2001
Wiesel A, Queisser-Luft A, Clementi M, et al: Prenatal detection of congenital renal malformations by
fetal ultrasonographic examination: an analysis of 709,030 births in 12 European countries. Euro J
Med Genet 48:131, 2005
Wilhelm L, Borgers H: The “equals sign”: a novel marker in the diagnosis of fetal isolated soft palate.
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 36:439, 2010
Williams B, Tareen B, Resnick M: Pathophysiology and treatment of ureteropelvic junction obstruction.
Curr Urol Rep 8:111, 2007
Wilson WM, Valente AM, Hickey EJ, et al: Outcomes of patients with hypoplastic left heart syndrome
reaching adulthood after fontan palliation: multicenter study. Circulation. 137(9): 978, 2018
Woodward M, Frank D: Postnatal management of antenatal hydronephrosis. BJU Int 89:149, 2002
Worley KC, Dashe JS, Barber RG, et al: Fetal magnetic resonance imaging in isolated diaphragmatic
hernia: volume of herniated liver and neonatal outcome. Am J Obstet Gynecol 200(3):318.e1, 2009
Yamada S, Uwabe C, Fujii S, et al: Phenotypic variability in human embryonic holoprosencephaly in the
Kyoto collection. Birth Defects Res Part A Clin Mol Teratol 70:495, 2004
Yildirim G, Gungorduk K, Aslan H, et al: Prenatal diagnosis of extralobar pulmonary sequestration. Arch
Gynecol Obstet 278:181, 2008
Yulia A, Pawar S, Chelemen O, et al: Fetal hemivertebra at 11 to 14 weeks’ gestation. J Ultrasound
Med 39(9):1857, 2020
Zerres K, Mucher G, Becker J, et al: Prenatal diagnosis of autosomal recessive polycystic kidney
disease: molecular genetics, clinical experience, and fetal morphology. Am J Med Genet 6:137, 1998
Zhao Y, Abuhamad A, Fleenor J, et al. Prenatal and postnatal survival of fetal tetralogy of Fallot: a
meta-analysis of perinatal outcomes and associated genetic disorders. J Ultrasound Med 35(5):905,
2016

CHAPTER 16

Genetics

GENOMICS IN OBSTETRICS
ABNORMALITIES OF CHROMOSOME NUMBER
ABNORMALITIES OF CHROMOSOME STRUCTURE
MOSAICISM
MODES OF INHERITANCE
CYTOGENETIC ANALYSIS
CHROMOSOMAL MICROARRAY ANALYSIS
WHOLE GENOME AND WHOLE EXOME SEQUENCING
FETAL DNA IN THE MATERNAL CIRCULATION
REFERENCES
Genetics is the study of genes, heredity, and the variation of inherited
characteristics. Medical genetics addresses the etiology and pathogenesis of
human diseases that are at least partially genetic in origin, as well as their
prediction and prevention. Whereas a gene is a specific sequence of
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) on a single chromosome that codes for a
particular protein, a genome is the entirety of all genes that make up an
organism. Genomics is the study of how genes function and interact with one
other. Chromosomal, mendelian, and nonmendelian genetic conditions are
reviewed in this chapter. Prenatal and preimplantation genetic testing and

newborn genetic screening are discussed in Chapters 17 and 32,
respectively.
Genetic disease is common. Two to 3 percent of newborns have a
recognized structural abnormality, another 3 percent are diagnosed with an
abnormality by age 5 years, and yet another 8 to 10 percent are found to have
a functional or developmental abnormality before reaching adulthood.

GENOMICS IN OBSTETRICS
The Human Genome Project was an international research program that
sequenced the 3 billion base pairs and more than 20,000 genes that make up
the human genome. It paved the way for research into gene organization and
function in an effort to understand the molecular basis of disease. More than
99 percent of our DNA is identical. The coding regions of DNA—exons—
constitute only 1.5 percent of the genome. An exome is the entirety of all the
exons that an organism contains. Introns are DNA sequences involved in
coding regulation and make up 24 percent of the genome. Intergenic DNA
composes the remainder.
Our genetic code varies once every 200 to 500 base pairs, usually as a
single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP). Thus, whole genome sequencing and
whole exome sequencing, described later (p. 327), hold tremendous potential
to further elucidate genetic variants in disease.
Toward this goal, genetic and genomic databases are maintained by the
National Center for Biotechnology Information (2021). These are freely
accessible and can be indispensable to providers who offer counseling and
testing for genetic conditions. The GeneReviews database has in-depth
clinical information for more than 800 genetic conditions, including
diagnostic criteria and management considerations. The Genetic Testing
Registry (GTR) database contains information for nearly 80,000 genetic tests
and instructions for specimen collection and transport to individual
laboratories throughout the world (National Center for Biotechnology
Information, 2021). The National Library of Medicine (2021) has also
established a genetic information database, the MedlinePlus Genetics, which
is intended for the lay population. It provides explanations of more than 1300
genetic conditions, a glossary of genetic concepts, and links to more
comprehensive medical resources.

CHROMOSOMAL ABNORMALITIES
Chromosomal abnormalities figure prominently in genetic disease. They
account for >50 percent of first-trimester miscarriages, approximately 20
percent of second-trimester losses, and 6 to 8 percent of stillbirths and earlychildhood deaths (Reddy, 2012; Stevenson, 2004; Wou, 2016). Based on data
from population-based registries, chromosomal abnormalities are identified
in 0.4 percent of recognized pregnancies (Wellesley, 2012). Most of these
are aneuploidies. Trisomy 21 accounts for >50 percent, trisomy 18 for nearly
15 percent, and trisomy 13 for 5 percent of cases (Fig. 16-1). If no
karyotypic abnormality is identified in a fetus with a structural anomaly,
additional testing with chromosomal microarray analysis is anticipated to
detect a chromosomal deletion or duplication—a copy number variant—in
approximately 6.5 percent of cases (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2020c).

FIGURE 16-1 Prevalence and relative proportion of selected chromosomal abnormalities from
EUROCAT (European Surveillance of Congenital Anomalies) population-based registries that included
>10,000 aneuploid live births, fetal deaths, and pregnancy terminations, 2000–2006.

■ Standard Nomenclature
Chromosomal abnormalities are described using the International System for
Human Cytogenomic Nomenclature (McGowan-Jordan, 2020).
Abnormalities fall into two broad categories: abnormal chromosome
number, such as trisomy, and abnormal chromosome structure, such as a
DNA segment deletion or duplication. Each chromosome has a short arm,
termed the “p” or petit arm, and a long arm, known as the “q” arm, selected
because it is the next letter in the alphabet. The two arms are separated by the
centromere.
When reporting a karyotype, the total number of chromosomes is listed
first, corresponding to the number of centromeres. This is followed by the
sex chromosomes, XX or XY, and then by a description of any structural
variation. Specific chromosomal abnormalities are indicated by standard
abbreviations, such as del (deletion), inv (inversion), and t (translocation).
The affected region or bands of the arms are then reported, so that the reader
will know the exact location. Examples are shown in Table 16-1.
TABLE 16-1. Examples of Karyotype Designations Using the 2020
International System for Human Cytogenomic Nomenclature

Nomenclature is similar for fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), a
technique used to rapidly identify a specific chromosome abnormality (p.
325). The abbreviation ish applies when in situ hybridization is performed
on metaphase cells and nuc ish when performed on interphase nuclei. If the
result is normal, ish is followed by the probe’s specific chromosomal region,
such as 22q11.2, and then the name of the probe and the number of signals
visualized—for example, HIRAx2. If a deletion is identified, del is included
before the chromosomal region, and the name of the probe is followed by a
minus sign (HIRA–), as shown in Table 16-1. The 22q11.2 deletion
syndrome is discussed later (p. 315).
For chromosomal microarray analysis (CMA), the designation begins
with the abbreviation arr (p. 348). This is followed by the version of the
genome build to which the nucleotide designations are aligned, such as
GRCh38 for Genome Reference Consortium human build 38. Next, the
number of the chromosome containing the abnormality is listed, followed by

the p or q arm, and then the specific bands in question. CMA reports also
include the affected base pair coordinates and thus convey the exact size and
location for every abnormality identified (see Table 16-1). The information
is reported in the same way whether the alteration is pathogenic or is of
uncertain clinical significance.

■ Abnormalities of Chromosome Number
The most easily recognized chromosomal abnormalities are numerical.
Aneuploidy is the inheritance of either an extra chromosome—resulting in
trisomy, or loss of a chromosome—monosomy. This differs from polyploidy,
which is an abnormal number of whole haploid chromosome sets. For
example, triploidy has 69 chromosomes. The estimated incidence of various
numerical chromosomal abnormalities is shown in Figure 16-1 (Wellesley,
2012).

Autosomal Trisomies
Trisomy usually results from nondisjunction, which is the failure of normal
chromosomal pairing and separation during meiosis. Nondisjunction may
occur if the chromosomes: (1) fail to pair up, (2) pair up properly but
separate prematurely, or (3) fail to separate. Although each chromosome pair
is equally likely to have a segregation error, trisomies other than 21, 18, or
13 rarely result in term pregnancies. Each of these autosomal trisomies has a
spectrum of phenotypic severity. Some fetuses come to attention earlier in a
pregnancy due to multiple major organ abnormalities or hydrops fetalis (p.
328). Others have more subtle findings or are detected only through prenatal
screening tests (Chap. 17, p. 337). Survival data are based on cases with
better prognosis, and this factors into counseling.
The likelihood that a pregnancy will be complicated by an autosomal
trisomy rises steeply with maternal age and particularly after age 35 (Fig.
16-2) (Mai, 2013). From birth until ovulation, oocytes are suspended in
midprophase of meiosis I. If nondisjunction occurs after completion of
meiosis, one gamete will have two copies of the affected chromosome,
which leads to trisomy if fertilized. The other gamete, receiving no copy of
the affected chromosome, is nullisomic and will be monosomic if fertilized.
It is estimated that 10 to 20 percent of oocytes are aneuploid secondary to
meiotic errors compared with 3 to 4 percent of sperm. After a pregnancy

with an autosomal trisomy, the risk for any autosomal trisomy in a future
pregnancy approximates 1 percent until the woman’s age-related risk exceeds
this. Screening and prenatal diagnosis of autosomal trisomies are discussed
in Chapter 17 (p. 333). Parental chromosomal studies are not indicated
unless the abnormality was caused by an unbalanced translocation or other
structural rearrangement (p. 315).

FIGURE 16-2 Prevalence of autosomal trisomies according to maternal age found in population-based
birth defect surveillance programs in the United States, 2006–2010.

Trisomy 21—Down Syndrome. In 1866, J. L. H. Down described a group of
intellectually disabled children with distinctive physical features. Nearly
100 years later, Lejeune (1959) demonstrated that Down syndrome stems
from an autosomal trisomy (Fig. 16-3). Trisomy 21 causes 95 percent of
Down syndrome cases. The nondisjunction event occurs during meiosis I in
approximately 75 percent of cases and in meiosis II in the remainder.
Because chromosome 21 is acrocentric, a robertsonian translocation (p. 315)
may occur, and this accounts for 3 to 4 percent of Down syndrome births. The
remaining 1 to 2 percent are caused by isochromosome 21 or mosaicism for
chromosome 21 (p. 317).

FIGURE 16-3 Male karyotype with trisomy 21 (47,XY,+21), consistent with Down syndrome.
(Reproduced with permission from Dr. Prasad Koduru.)

Down syndrome is the most common nonlethal trisomy. It is identified in
approximately 1 in 450 pregnancies (Loane, 2013). In the United States, fetal
losses and pregnancy terminations yield an estimated prevalence of 1 case
per 740 live births (Mai, 2013; Parker, 2010). The fetal death rate beyond 20
weeks’ gestation approximates 5 percent. Coinciding with the rise in overall
number of pregnancies in women aged 35 years and older, the proportion of
pregnancies with Down syndrome has increased approximately 33 percent
during the past four decades (Loane, 2013; Parker, 2010; Shin, 2009). Most
Down syndrome births at Parkland Hospital now occur in women in this age
group (Hussamy, 2019).
If major anomalies and minor aneuploidy markers are considered, 50 to
75 percent of pregnancies affected by Down syndrome are found to have a
sonographic abnormality (Chap. 17, p. 340) (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020d; Hussamy, 2019). A major structural
malformation is detected in the second trimester in approximately one third
of cases. The most prevalent anomalies in affected children are cardiac and
gastrointestinal. Cardiac abnormalities occur in approximately 50 percent,

particularly endocardial cushion defects and ventricular septal defects (Figs.
15-39A and 15-39B, p. 291) (Bergstrom, 2016; Freeman, 2008; Stoll, 2015).
Gastrointestinal abnormalities are identified in 6 to 12 percent and include
esophageal atresia, duodenal atresia, and Hirschsprung disease (Fig. 15-48,
p. 296) (Bull, 2011; Stoll, 2015).
Other health problems are also common with Down syndrome. These
include hearing loss in 75 percent, optical refractive errors in 50 percent,
cataracts in 15 percent, obstructive sleep apnea in 60 percent, thyroid
disease in 15 percent, transient myeloproliferative disorder in 10 percent of
newborns, early-onset Alzheimer’s disease in 70 percent of adults, and a
higher incidence of leukemia (Bull, 2011; Hartley, 2015). Women with Down
syndrome are fertile, and nearly one third of their offspring will have Down
syndrome. Males with Down syndrome have markedly reduced
spermatogenesis and are almost always sterile. The average intelligence
quotient (IQ) score is 35 to 70. Social skills in affected children are usually
higher than predicted by their IQ scores.
Characteristic features of Down syndrome are shown in Figure 16-4.
Typical findings include brachycephaly; epicanthal folds and up-slanting
palpebral fissures; Brushfield spots, which are whitish spots on the
periphery of the iris; a flat nasal bridge; and hypotonia. Infants often have
loose skin at the nape of the neck, a prominent space or “sandal-gap”
between the first and second toes, short fingers, a single palmar crease, and
clinodactyly of the fifth digit, in which hypoplasia of the middle phalanx
causes inward curvature. Discussed in Chapter 17, some of these findings are
seen during prenatal ultrasound examination.

FIGURE 16-4 Newborn with Down syndrome, karyotype 47,XX,+21 (trisomy 21). A. Characteristic
facial features include epicanthal folds and a flattened nasal bridge. B. The hand has a single palmar

crease (arrow) and hypoplasia of the middle phalanx of the fifth digit (arrowhead). C. The “sandal
gap” between the first and second toes is also known as hallux varus. (Reproduced with permission
from Dr. Aldeboran N. Rodriguez.)

Data suggest that approximately 95 percent of liveborn infants with
Down syndrome survive the first year. The 10-year survival rate is at least
90 percent overall and is 99 percent if major malformations are absent
(Rankin, 2012; Vendola, 2010). Average life expectancy is 55 to 60 years.
Several organizations offer education and support for prospective parents
faced with prenatal diagnosis of Down syndrome. These include the March
of Dimes, National Down Syndrome Congress (www.ndsccenter.org), and
National Down Syndrome Society (www.ndss.org).
Trisomy 18—Edwards Syndrome. The association between this constellation
of abnormalities and an autosomal trisomy was first described by Edwards
(1960). In population-based series of abortuses, stillbirths, and live births,
trisomy 18 approximates 1 per 2000 recognized pregnancies (Goel, 2019;
Loane, 2013; Parker, 2010). High in-utero lethality and termination of many
affected pregnancies explains a live birth prevalence of just 1 per 6600 to
10,000. Unlike Down syndrome and Patau syndrome, which may result from
a robertsonian translocation because they involve acrocentric chromosomes,
Edwards syndrome uncommonly stems from a chromosomal rearrangement.
Virtually every organ can be affected by trisomy 18. Common major
anomalies include heart defects in more than 90 percent, particularly
ventricular septal defects. Cerebellar vermian agenesis, myelomeningocele,
diaphragmatic hernia, omphalocele, imperforate anus, and renal anomalies
such as horseshoe kidney are others (Rosa, 2011; Springett, 2015; Watson,
2008). Sonographic images of these abnormalities are shown in Chapter 15.
Frequent cranial and extremity abnormalities in affected fetuses include a
“strawberry-shaped” cranium, abnormally wide cavum septum pellucidum,
choroid plexus cysts, micrognathia, clenched hands with overlapping digits,
radial aplasia with hyperflexed wrists, and rockerbottom or clubbed feet
(Fig. 16-5) (Abele, 2013). Importantly, choroid plexus cysts only raise the
risk for trisomy 18 in the setting of other risk factors, such as fetal structural
abnormalities or an abnormal aneuploidy screening test result (Reddy, 2014).

FIGURE 16-5 Trisomy 18—Edwards Syndrome. A. This transventricular sonographic view shows
fetal choroid plexus cysts and an angulated “strawberry-shaped” skull. B. Radial clubhand is manifested
as a single forearm bone (radius), with the hands in a fixed, hyperflexed position at right angles to the
forearms. C. This three-dimensional (3-D) sonographic image shows the characteristic hand position of
clenched fist with overlapping digits. D. 3-D sonographic image displays a rockerbottom foot (vertical
talus).

Pregnancies with trisomy 18 that reach the third trimester often develop
fetal-growth restriction, and the mean birthweight is <2500 g (Lin, 2006;
Rosa, 2011). When undiagnosed, trisomy 18 has resulted in emergency
cesarean for “fetal distress” in nearly 50 percent of cases (Schneider, 1981;
Houlihan, 2013). Mode of delivery and management of heart rate
abnormalities should be discussed in advance. Discussed in Chapter 35 (p.
628), perinatal palliative care consultation should be offered (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019).

In the National Birth Defects Prevention Study, median neonatal survival
with trisomy 18 was 8 days, and the 5-year survival rate was 12 percent
(Meyer, 2016). Not unexpectedly, major anomalies lower survival rates.
Data from the Society of Thoracic Surgeons indicate that infants with trisomy
18 who undergo cardiac surgery have mortality rates 3 to 5 times higher than
those without trisomy 18 (Cooper, 2019). Thus, among the minority with
trisomy 18 who survive until birth, the condition is severely life limiting.
Trisomy 13—Patau Syndrome. This constellation of fetal abnormalities and
their association with an autosomal trisomy was first described by Patau and
colleagues (1960). The incidence of trisomy 13 approximates 1 case in 5000
recognized pregnancies, which includes abortuses and stillbirths. Most
affected fetuses are lost or terminated. The live birth prevalence is 1 per
12,000 to 18,000 (Goel, 2019; Loane, 2013; Parker, 2010).
At least 80 percent of pregnancies with Patau syndrome result from
trisomy 13. With rare exception, the remainder are caused by a robertsonian
translocation involving chromosome 13. The most common translocation
involves chromosomes 13 and 14, der(13;14)(q10;q10), which is carried by
approximately 1 in 1300 phenotypically normal individuals. Among
translocation carriers, fewer than 2 percent give birth to a live infant with
Patau syndrome.
Trisomy 13 may be associated with abnormalities of any organ system.
Abnormalities of the brain, heart, kidneys, and extremities are the most
frequent. Holoprosencephaly, usually the alobar type, is present in two thirds
of cases and often is accompanied by severe facial abnormalities (Fig. 1513, p. 279). These may include hypotelorism or cyclopia, microphthalmia,
and nasal abnormalities that range from a single nostril to a proboscis.
Cardiac defects are found in up to 90 percent (Shipp, 2002). Other
abnormalities that suggest trisomy 13 include cephalocele, microcephaly,
omphalocele, cystic renal dysplasia, polydactyly, rockerbottom feet, aplasia
cutis, and cleft lip-palate, which may be median (Lin, 2007; Springett, 2015).
Sonographic images of several of these are shown in Chapter 15. Affected
fetuses often also have bilateral echogenic intracardiac foci. For the fetus or
newborn with a cephalocele, cystic kidneys, and polydactyly, the differential
diagnosis includes trisomy 13 and the autosomal-recessive Meckel–Gruber
syndrome.

Trisomy 13 is life limiting, even more so than trisomy 18 (Domingo,
2019). In the National Birth Defects Prevention Study, median survival of
neonates with trisomy 13 was 5 days, and the 5-year survival rate was below
10 percent (Meyer, 2016). Occasionally children with trisomy 13 have been
candidates for palliative surgical procedures. Most of these have a milder
phenotype that lacks brain, cardiac, gastrointestinal, or genitourinary
abnormalities (Nelson, 2016). Counseling regarding prenatal diagnosis and
management options is similar to that described for trisomy 18.
Unlike other aneuploidies, fetal trisomy 13 confers risk to the pregnant
woman. Continuing pregnancies have at least a 25-percent risk for
hypertensive complications (Dotters-Katz, 2018; Tuohy, 1992). The risk for
preeclampsia with severe features is increased more than tenfold and often
develops prior to 32 weeks’ gestation. Chromosome 13 contains the gene for
soluble fms-like tyrosine kinase-1 (sFlt-1), which is an antiangiogenic
protein associated with preeclampsia (Chap. 40, p. 694). Investigators have
documented overexpression of the sFlt-1 protein by trisomic 13 placentas
and in serum of women with preeclampsia (Bdolah, 2006; Silasi, 2011).
Other Trisomies. Live births are extremely rare with any other autosomal
trisomy. Trisomy 22 has been described in case reports and series (Heinrich,
2013; Kehinde, 2014). Affected fetuses have severe growth restriction,
microcephaly with an abnormal-shaped cranium, midface hypoplasia, and
cardiac and genitourinary abnormalities. Trisomy 16 is the most prevalent
trisomy among first-trimester losses, accounting for 16 percent. Trisomies 21
and 22 are also common among first trimester losses. Trisomy 1 has never
been reported.

Monosomy
Nondisjunction creates an equal number of nullisomic and disomic gametes.
As a rule, missing chromosomal material is more devastating than extra
chromosomal material, and almost all monosomic conceptuses are lost
before implantation. The one exception is monosomy for the X chromosome
(45,X), Turner syndrome, which is discussed subsequently. Unlike autosomal
trisomies, which increase in incidence with maternal age, monosomy and
maternal age lack an association.

Polyploidy

This is defined as more than two complete haploid chromosomal sets.
Polyploidy accounts for approximately 20 percent of spontaneous abortions
but is rarely found later in gestation.
Triploid pregnancies have three haploid sets, 69 chromosomes. If extra
set of chromosomes is paternal, the result is diandric triploidy, and if
maternal, digynic triploidy, relevant because the phenotype reflects the
parent of origin. This is an example of imprinting (p. 322). Diandric or type
I triploidy occurs after fertilization of one egg by two sperm or by one
abnormal diploid sperm. Diandric triploidy produces a partial molar
pregnancy, discussed in Chapter 13 (p. 237). With digynic or type II
triploidy, the extra chromosomal set is maternal, and the egg fails to undergo
the first or second meiotic division before fertilization. Digynic triploid
placentas do not develop molar changes. However, the fetus usually
develops asymmetrical growth restriction. Although diandric triploidy
accounts for the majority of triploid conceptions, the early loss rate is so high
that two thirds of triploid pregnancies identified beyond the first trimester
are digynic ( Jauniaux, 1999).
Triploidy is recognized in 1 per 5000 pregnancies (Zalel, 2016). It is
considered lethal, and fetuses with either the diandric or digynic form
typically have multiple structural anomalies. The brain, heart, kidneys, and
extremities are commonly affected (Massalska, 2017; Zalel, 2016).
Counseling, prenatal diagnosis, and delivery management are similar to those
for trisomies 18 and 13. The recurrence risk for a woman whose triploid
fetus survived past the first trimester is 1 to 1.5 percent, and thus prenatal
diagnosis is offered in future pregnancies.
Tetraploid pregnancies have four haploid sets of chromosomes, resulting
in either 92,XXXX or 92,XXYY. This suggests a postzygotic failure to
complete an early cleavage division. The conceptus invariably succumbs,
and the recurrence risk is minimal.

Sex Chromosome Abnormalities
45,X—Turner Syndrome. First described by Turner (1938), this syndrome
later was found to be caused by monosomy X (Ford, 1959). The birth
prevalence of Turner syndrome is approximately 1 in 2500 girls (Cragan,
2009; Dolk, 2010). The missing X chromosome is paternally derived in 80
percent of cases (Cockwell, 1991; Hassold, 1990).

Turner syndrome is the only monosomy compatible with life, but it is also
the most common aneuploidy in first-trimester losses, accounting for 20
percent. This is explained by its wide range in phenotype. Approximately 98
percent of affected conceptuses are so abnormal that they abort early in the
first trimester. Of the remainder, many manifest large, septated cystic
hygromas in the late first or early second trimester, often in the setting of
edema that progresses to hydrops fetalis. When cystic hygromas are
accompanied by hydrops, the prognosis is extremely poor (Chap. 15, p. 286).
Fewer than 1 percent of pregnancies with Turner syndrome result in a
liveborn neonate. Of these, only half are actually monosomy X—
approximately a fourth have mosaicism for monosomy X, such as
45,X/46,XX or 45,X/46,XY, and another 15 percent have isochromosome X.
It is thought that surviving individuals with 45,X may have had the benefit of
“rescue” by an additional cell line containing 46,XX during critical phases
of development that was subsequently lost (Hook, 2014).
Abnormalities associated with Turner syndrome include left-sided
cardiac defects—such as coarctation of the aorta, hypoplastic left heart
syndrome, or bicuspid aortic valve—in 30 to 50 percent; renal anomalies,
particularly horseshoe kidney; and hypothyroidism. Other features are short
stature, broad chest with widely spaced nipples, congenital lymphedema—
puffiness over the dorsum of hands and feet, and a “webbed” posterior neck
resulting from cystic hygromas. Intelligence scores are generally in the
normal range, but there may be impairments in visual-spatial organization,
nonverbal problem solving, and interpretation of social cues. A consensus
guideline is available that addresses screening and treatment for the range of
health problems affected individuals face (Graveholt, 2017). Growth
hormone is typically administered in childhood to ameliorate short stature.
More than 90 percent have ovarian dysgenesis and require estrogen repletion
at puberty. An exception is mosaicism involving the Y chromosome, as this
confers risk for germ cell neoplasm—regardless of whether the child is
phenotypically male or female. Accordingly, eventual prophylactic bilateral
gonadectomy is indicated (Cools, 2011; Schorge, 2020).
47,XXX. Approximately 1 in 1000 female newborns has an additional X
chromosome—47,XXX (Berglund, 2020). The extra X is maternally derived
in more than 90 percent of cases. The prevalence of 47,XXX is weakly
associated with maternal age, and cell-free DNA screening has resulted in

increased diagnoses. No specific pattern of malformations has been
described, but genitourinary problems and seizure disorders are more
common (Wigby, 2016). Affected infants do not have a characteristic
appearance. When children do come to attention, features may include tall
stature, hypertelorism, epicanthal folds, kyphoscoliosis, clinodactyly, and
hypotonia (Tartaglia, 2010; Wigby, 2016). More than one third are diagnosed
with a learning disability, half have attention deficit disorder, and overall
cognitive scores are in the low-average range. Pubertal development is
unaffected. Primary ovarian insufficiency has been reported. In the absence
of prenatal diagnosis, it is estimated that 47,XXX is ascertained in only 10
percent of affected children (Tartalgia, 2010).
Females with two or more extra X chromosomes—48,XXXX or
49,XXXXX—are likely to have physical abnormalities apparent at birth.
These abnormal X complements are associated with intellectual disability.
For both males and females, the IQ score is lower with each additional X
chromosome.
47,XXY—Klinefelter Syndrome. This is the most common sex chromosome
abnormality. It occurs in approximately 1 in 700 male infants (Radicioni,
2010). The additional X chromosome is maternally or paternally derived
with equal propensity (Jacobs, 1995; Lowe, 2001). There is a weak
association with advanced maternal and paternal age.
Like 47,XXX, newborns with 47,XXY usually appear phenotypically
normal and do not have a higher incidence of anomalies. As children, boys
are typically taller than average and have normal prepubertal development.
However, they have gonadal dysgenesis, do not undergo normal virilization,
and require testosterone supplementation. They may develop gynecomastia.
IQ scores usually lie in the average to low-average range, with increased
rates of delayed language development (Boada, 2009; Girardin, 2011).
Initiation of hormone replacement was previously recommended to begin in
adolescence. However, more recent research suggests that therapy earlier in
childhood results in improved working memory and executive functioning
and a decrease in anxiety disorders (Samango-Sprouse 2019; Tran, 2019).
47,XYY. This aneuploidy occurs in approximately 1 in 1000 male newborns
(Berglund, 2020). As with 47,XXX and XXY individuals, affected boys tend
to be tall. A third have macrocephaly, nearly two thirds demonstrate

hypotonia, and tremors are common (Bardsley, 2013). Rates of major
anomalies are not elevated, although hypertelorism and clinodactyly may be
identified in more than half. Pubertal development is normal, and fertility is
unimpaired. Affected individuals do have increased rates of oral and written
language impairments, attention deficit disorder, developmental delays, and
autism spectrum disorder (Bardsley, 2013; Joseph, 2018).
Males with more than two Y chromosomes—48,XYYY—or with both
additional X and Y chromosomes—48,XXYY or 49,XXXYY—are more
likely to have congenital abnormalities, medical problems, and intellectual
disability (Tartaglia, 2011).

■ Abnormalities of Chromosome Structure
Structural chromosomal abnormalities include deletions, duplications,
translocations, isochromosomes, inversions, ring chromosomes, and
mosaicism (see Table 16-1). Identification of a structural chromosomal
abnormality in offspring raises two primary questions. First, what phenotypic
or later developmental abnormalities are associated with the finding?
Second, is parental karyotype evaluation indicated? In other words, are the
parents at increased risk of carrying this abnormality, and if so, what is their
risk of having future affected offspring?

Deletions and Duplications
A chromosome with a deletion has a stretch of DNA that is missing, whereas
one with a duplication has a region that is included twice. Most deletions and
duplications occur during meiosis and result from malalignment or
mismatching during the pairing of homologous chromosomes. The misaligned
segment may then be deleted, or if the mismatch remains when the two
chromosomes recombine, it may result in a deletion in one chromosome and
duplication in the other (Fig. 16-6). When a deletion or duplication is
identified in a fetus or infant, parental karyotyping should be offered, because
if either parent carries a balanced translocation, the recurrence risk in
subsequent pregnancies is significantly increased. Deletions involving DNA
segments large enough to be seen with standard cytogenetic karyotyping are
identified in approximately 1 in 7000 births. Common deletions may be
referred to by eponyms—for example, del 5p is called cri du chat syndrome.

FIGURE 16-6 A mismatch during pairing of homologous chromosomes may lead to a deletion in one
chromosome and a duplication in the other. Del = deletion; Dupl = duplication.

Microdeletions and Microduplications. When a deletion or duplication is
smaller than 3 to 5 million base pairs, it is too small to be detected with a
standard karyotype analysis. CMA permits identification of these
microdeletions and microduplications (p. 325). When CMA is used, the
region of DNA that is missing or duplicated is termed a genomic copy
number variant. A microdeletion or duplication may involve a stretch of
DNA that contains multiple genes. This causes a contiguous gene syndrome,
which can encompass serious but unrelated phenotypic abnormalities
(Schmickel, 1986). In some cases, a microduplication may involve the exact
DNA region that causes a recognized microdeletion syndrome (Table 16-2).
When a specific microdeletion syndrome is suspected clinically, it is
confirmed using either CMA or FISH.
TABLE 16-2. Selected Microdeletion Syndromes

22q11.2 Microdeletion Syndrome. This syndrome is also known as
DiGeorge syndrome, Shprintzen syndrome, and velocardiofacial syndrome. It
is the most common microdeletion, with a prevalence of 1 case in 3000 to
6000 births. Inheritance is autosomal dominant—offspring of affected
individuals have a 50-percent chance of inheriting the syndrome. However,
more than 90 percent of cases arise from a de-novo mutation. The full
deletion contains 3 million base pairs, encompasses 40 genes, and includes
180 different features (Shprintzen, 2008). This is emblematic of a contiguous
gene syndrome and poses counseling challenges because features can vary
widely, even among family members. With prenatal diagnosis of an affected
fetus, genetic testing is offered to the pregnant patient and her partner.

Approximately 75 percent of affected individuals have an associated
conotruncal cardiac anomaly, such as tetralogy of Fallot, truncus arteriosus,
interrupted aortic arch, or ventricular septal defect (McDonald-McGinn,
2015). Immune deficiency, such as T-cell lymphopenia, also develops in 75
percent. More than 70 percent have velopharyngeal insufficiency or cleft
palate. Characteristic facial features include short palpebral fissures,
bulbous nasal tip, micrognathia, short philtrum, and small or posteriorly
rotated ears. Learning disabilities, autism spectrum disorder, and intellectual
disability also are common. Other manifestations include hypocalcemia,
renal anomalies, esophageal dysmotility, hearing loss, behavioral disorders,
and psychiatric illness, particularly schizophrenia.

Chromosomal Translocations
These are DNA rearrangements in which a DNA segment breaks away from
one chromosome and attaches to another. The rearranged chromosomes are
called derivative (der) chromosomes. The two types are reciprocal and
robertsonian translocations.
Reciprocal Translocations. A double-segment or reciprocal translocation
results when breaks occur in two different chromosomes and the broken
fragments are exchanged. Each affected chromosome receives a fragment of
the other. If no chromosomal material is gained or lost, the translocation is
considered balanced. The prevalence of reciprocal translocations
approximates 1 in 600 births.
The carrier of a balanced translocation will usually have a normal
phenotype. However, repositioning of specific genes within chromosomal
segments may cause major structural or developmental abnormalities in
approximately 6 percent of apparently balanced translocation carriers. Using
CMA technology, up to 20 percent of individuals who appear to have a
balanced translocation are found instead to have missing or redundant DNA
segments (Manning, 2010).
Balanced translocation carriers are at risk to produce unbalanced
gametes, resulting in abnormal offspring. As shown in Figure 16-7, if an
oocyte or sperm contains a translocated chromosome, fertilization results in
an unbalanced translocation—monosomy for part of one affected
chromosome and trisomy for part of the other. In general, translocation
carriers identified after the birth of an abnormal child have a 5- to 30-percent

risk of producing liveborn offspring with an unbalanced translocation.
Carriers identified for other reasons, for example, during an infertility
evaluation, have only a 5-percent risk. This risk is lower because gametes
are so abnormal that conceptions are nonviable.

FIGURE 16-7 A carrier of a balanced translocation may produce offspring who are also carriers of
the balanced rearrangement (B), offspring with unbalanced translocations (C, D), or offspring with
normal chromosomal complements (A).

Robertsonian Translocations. These involve only the acrocentric
chromosomes—13, 14, 15, 21, and 22. Acrocentric chromosomes have
extremely short p arms, and the p arms contain redundant copies of genes
coding for ribosomal RNA. In a robertsonian translocation, the q arms of two
acrocentric chromosomes fuse at one centromere to form a derivative
chromosome, and the other centromere and both p arms are lost. The lost
DNA is present in multiple copies on other acrocentric chromosomes, and
thus the translocation carrier is usually phenotypically normal. Because the
number of centromeres determines the chromosome count, a robertsonian
translocation carrier has only 45 chromosomes.

Balanced robertsonian carriers have reproductive difficulties. During
fertilization, if the derivative chromosome pairs with a normal haploid
chromosome, the resulting offspring will have trisomy. If the fused
chromosomes are homologous, that is, from the same chromosome pair, the
carrier can produce only unbalanced gametes. Each egg or sperm contains
either both copies of the translocated chromosome, which would result in
trisomy if fertilized, or no copy, which would result in monosomy. If the
fused chromosomes are nonhomologous, four of the six possible gametes
would be abnormal.
Robertsonian translocations are found in 1 in 1000 individuals. The risk
to have an abnormal offspring approximates 15 percent if a robertsonian
translocation is carried by the mother and 2 percent if carried by the father.
However, robertsonian translocations are not a major cause of miscarriage
and are identified in fewer than 5 percent of couples evaluated for recurrent
pregnancy loss. If a fetus or child is found to have a translocation trisomy,
both parents should be offered karyotype analysis. If neither parent is a
carrier, the recurrence risk is extremely low. The most common robertsonian
translocation is der(13;14)(q10;q10), which accounts for up to 20 percent of
cases of Patau syndrome (p. 313).

Isochromosomes
When either two p arms or two q arms from the same chromosome fuse
together, an isochromosome results. This may occur if the centromere breaks
transversely instead of longitudinally during meiosis II or mitosis.
Alternately, an isochromosome can result from a meiotic error in a
chromosome with a robertsonian translocation. If the isochromosome is
acrocentric, it is composed of two q arms and will behave like a homologous
robertsonian translocation. Such a carrier is phenotypically normal but can
produce only abnormal, unbalanced gametes. If the isochromosome is
nonacrocentric, it may be composed of either two p arms or two q arms.
Functionally this results in trisomy of the genes on the arms that are present
and monosomy of the genes on the arms that are lost. Thus, the carrier is
usually phenotypically abnormal and produces abnormal gametes. The most
common isochromosome involves the long arm of the X chromosome, i(Xq),
which is the etiology of 15 percent of cases of Turner syndrome.

Chromosomal Inversions
When the same chromosome breaks in two places, the intervening genetic
material may invert before the breaks are repaired. Although no genetic
material is lost or duplicated, an inversion may alter gene function. There are
two types—pericentric and paracentric inversions.
Pericentric Inversion. This results from breaks in both the p and q arms of a
chromosome, such that the inverted material spans the centromere (Fig. 168). A pericentric inversion causes problems in chromosomal alignment
during meiosis and confers significant risk for the carrier to produce
abnormal gametes and abnormal offspring. The observed risk of abnormal
offspring is 5 to 10 percent if ascertainment is made after the birth of an
abnormal child. The risk is only 1 to 3 percent if prompted by another
indication. An important exception is inv(9)(p11q12), a pericentric inversion
on chromosome 9 that is a normal variant and present in approximately 1
percent of the population.

FIGURE 16-8 Pericentric inversion involves the centromere, whereas paracentric inversion does not.
Individuals with pericentric inversions are at risk to have offspring with a duplication/deletion. Those
with paracentric inversions are at increased risk for early pregnancy loss.

Paracentric Inversion. If one arm of a chromosome suffers the two breaks, the
inverted material does not include the centromere, and the inversion is

paracentric (see Fig. 16-8). The carrier makes either normal balanced
gametes or gametes that are so abnormal as to preclude fertilization. Thus,
although infertility may be a problem, the risk of having an abnormal
offspring is extremely low.

Ring Chromosome
If a deletion occurs at each end of the same chromosome, the ends may come
together to form a ring chromosome. The telomere regions at the ends of each
chromosome contain redundant nucleoprotein complexes that stabilize the
chromosome. If only the telomeres are lost, all necessary genetic material is
retained, and the carrier is balanced. If a deletion extends more proximally
than the telomere, the carrier is likely to be phenotypically abnormal. An
example of this is the ring X chromosome, which may result in Turner
syndrome.

■ Mosaicism
A mosaic individual has two or more cytogenetically distinct cell lines that
are derived from a single zygote. Phenotypic expression of mosaicism
depends on several factors, including whether the cytogenetically abnormal
cells involve the fetus, part of the fetus, just the placenta, or some
combination. Mosaicism is found in approximately 0.3 percent of amnionic
fluid cultures (Carey, 2014). When abnormal cells are present in only a
single flask of amnionic fluid, the finding is likely pseudomosaicism, caused
by cell-culture artifact (Bui, 1984; Hsu, 1984). When abnormal cells involve
multiple cultures, however, true mosaicism is more likely. Further testing
verifies a second cell line in 60 to 70 percent of these fetuses (Hsu, 1984;
Worton, 1984).

Confined Placental Mosaicism
Mosaicism involving a gene abnormality is detected in 1 to 2 percent of
chorionic villus sampling specimens. Amniocentesis should be offered. In a
series of more than 1000 pregnancies with mosaicism at chorionic villus
sampling, subsequent amniocentesis identified true fetal mosaicism in 13
percent. Confined placental mosaicism accounted for 85 percent of cases,
and uniparental disomy, discussed later (p. 322), was found in 2 percent

(Malvestiti, 2015). If mosaicism is detected for a chromosome known to
contain imprinted genes—such as chromosomes 6, 7, 11, 14, or 15—testing
for uniparental disomy should be considered, as there may be fetal
consequences (Grati, 2014a).
Although outcomes with confined placental mosaicism are generally
good, risks of fetal-growth restriction and stillbirth are higher (Reddy, 2009).
Fetal-growth restriction may stem from impaired functioning of the aneuploid
placental cells (Baffero, 2012). In a recent series of 5500 pregnancies
undergoing chorionic villus sampling, the preterm birth rate in pregnancies
with confined placental mosaicism was 45 percent, and 50 percent of
affected newborns were small for gestational age (Toutain, 2018). Placental
mosaicism for trisomy 16 confers a particularly poor prognosis, with as few
as 1 in 3 pregnancies resulting in normal outcome (Grau Madsen, 2018).

Gonadal Mosaicism
Also called germline mosaicism, this refers to having one cell line in
gametes and another in somatic cells. A genetic abnormality that is confined
to gamete cells will affect all cells in the offspring. Thus, gonadal mosaicism
can account for apparently de-novo diseases in the offspring of normal
parents. Because spermatogonia and oogonia divide throughout fetal life, and
spermatogonia continue to divide throughout adulthood, a meiotic error can
occur in germ cells that were previously normal. New mutations identified in
an offspring whose father is older than 40 may arise through this mechanism,
as discussed later (p. 319) (Wilkie, 2017). Gonadal mosaicism also explains
the 6-percent recurrence risk after the birth of a child with a disease caused
by a “new” mutation.

MODES OF INHERITANCE
A monogenic or mendelian disorder is caused by a mutation or alteration in
a single locus or gene in one or both members of a gene pair. Types of
mendelian inheritance include autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive, Xlinked, and Y-linked (Table 16-3). Other monogenic inheritance patterns
include mitochondrial inheritance, uniparental disomy, imprinting, and
trinucleotide repeat expansion.

TABLE 16-3. Selected Monogenic (Mendelian) Disorders

■ Relationship between Phenotype and Genotype
When considering inheritance, it is the phenotype that is dominant or
recessive, not the genotype. If a disease is dominant, a normal gene directs
the production of normal protein, but the phenotype will be abnormal
because of protein produced by the abnormal gene. A heterozygous carrier of
a recessive disease may produce detectable levels of an abnormal gene
product but have no features of the condition, because the phenotype is
directed by the product of the normal co-gene. For example, erythrocytes
from carriers of sickle-cell anemia contain approximately 30 percent
hemoglobin S, but because the other 70 percent is hemoglobin A, these cells
do not usually sickle in vivo.

Heterogeneity
Genetic heterogeneity explains how different genetic mechanisms may result
in the same phenotype. Locus heterogeneity indicates that a specific disease
phenotype can be caused by mutations in different genetic loci. It also
explains why some diseases appear to follow more than one type of
inheritance. For example, retinitis pigmentosa may develop following
mutations in at least 35 different genes or loci and may result in autosomal
dominant, autosomal recessive, or X-linked forms. Allelic heterogeneity
describes how different mutations of the same gene may affect presentation of
a particular disease. For example, although only one gene has been
associated with cystic fibrosis—the cystic fibrosis conductance

transmembrane regulator gene—more than 2000 mutations in this gene have
been described and result in variable disease severity (Chaps. 17, p. 342 and
54, p. 968). Phenotypic heterogeneity explains how different disease states
can arise from different mutations in the same gene. As an example, mutations
in the fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 (FGFR3) gene may result in
several different skeletal disorders, including achondroplasia and
thanatophoric dysplasia, both of which are discussed in Chapter 15 (p. 302).

■ Autosomal Dominant Inheritance
If only one copy of a gene pair determines the phenotype, that gene is
considered to be dominant. Carriers have a 50-percent chance of passing on
the affected gene with each conception. A gene with a dominant mutation
generally specifies the phenotype in preference to the normal gene. That said,
not all individuals will necessarily manifest an autosomal dominant
condition the same way. Factors that affect the phenotype of an autosomal
dominant condition include penetrance, expressivity, and presence of
codominant genes.

Penetrance
This characteristic describes whether a dominant gene is expressed. A gene
with recognizable phenotypic expression in all individuals has complete
penetrance. Penetrance is incomplete if some carriers express the gene but
others do not. A gene that is expressed in 80 percent of individuals is 80percent penetrant. Incomplete penetrance explains why some autosomal
dominant diseases may appear to “skip” generations.

Expressivity
Individuals with the same autosomal dominant trait may manifest the
condition differently, even within the same family. Genes with variable
expressivity can produce disease manifestations that range from mild to
severe. Examples include neurofibromatosis, tuberous sclerosis, and adult
polycystic kidney disease.

Codominant Genes

If two different alleles in a gene pair are both expressed in the phenotype,
they are considered to be codominant. Blood type, for example, is
determined by expression of dominant A and B red-cell antigens that can be
expressed simultaneously. Another example of codominance is the group of
genes responsible for hemoglobin production. If one gene directs production
of hemoglobin S and the other directs production of hemoglobin C, that
individual will produce both S and C hemoglobin (Chap. 59, p. 1053).

Advanced Paternal Age
Paternal age older than 40 is associated with increased risk for spontaneous
genetic mutations. Spermatogonia undergo mitotic division every 16 days,
and the many replications raise the risk for single base-pair mutations. As a
result, offspring of older fathers are at risk for new autosomal dominant
disorders and X-linked carrier states. Several in particular have been termed
paternal age effect disorders (Goriely 2012). These include mutations in the
fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 (FGFR2) gene, which may cause
craniosynostosis syndromes such as Apert, Crouzon, and Pfeiffer syndromes;
mutations in the FGFR3 gene, which may result in achondroplasia and
thanatophoric dysplasia; and mutations in the RET proto-oncogene, which
may cause multiple endocrine neoplasia syndromes (Toriello, 2008).
Using whole genome sequencing to study SNPs among offspring of older
fathers, Kong and associates (2012) found an increase of approximately two
mutations for each year of paternal age past 40. The absolute risk for any
specific condition is low, because individual autosomal dominant disorders
are uncommon. Thus, no screening or testing is specifically recommended.

■ Autosomal Recessive Inheritance
Recessive diseases develop only when both gene copies are abnormal.
Unless carriers are screened for a specific disease, they usually are
recognized only after the birth of an affected child or the diagnosis of an
affected family member. If a couple has a child with an autosomal recessive
disease, the recurrence risk is 25 percent for each subsequent pregnancy.
Thus, 1/4 of offspring will be homozygous normal, 2/4 will be heterozygous
carriers, and 1/4 will be homozygous abnormal. In other words, three of four
children will be phenotypically normal, and 2/3 of phenotypically normal
siblings are actually carriers.

A heterozygous carrier of a recessive condition is only at risk to have
affected children if her or his partner is heterozygous or homozygous for the
disease. Genes for rare autosomal recessive conditions have low prevalence
in the general population. Thus, the likelihood that a partner will be a gene
carrier is small, unless there is consanguinity or the partner is a member of
an at-risk group. Carrier screening is discussed in Chapter 17 (p. 342).
Preimplantation genetic testing allows a blastocyst to be genetically
evaluated prior to intrauterine transfer during in vitro fertilization and is
described also in Chapter 17 (p. 348).

Inborn Errors of Metabolism
Most of these autosomal recessive diseases result from absence of a crucial
enzyme, leading to incomplete metabolism of proteins, lipids, or
carbohydrates. The metabolic intermediates that build up are toxic to various
tissues and may result in intellectual disability or other abnormalities.
Phenylketonuria. Also known as phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH)
deficiency, this autosomal recessive disease is caused by mutations in the
PAH gene. PAH metabolizes phenylalanine to tyrosine, and homozygotes have
diminished or absent enzyme activity. This leads to abnormally high levels of
phenylalanine, which results in progressive intellectual impairment, autism,
seizures, motor deficits, and neuropsychological abnormalities (Blau, 2010).
Because phenylalanine competitively inhibits tyrosine hydroxylase, which is
essential for melanin production, affected individuals also have hair, eye,
and skin hypopigmentation. More than 600 PAH gene mutations have been
characterized, and the carrier frequency varies by ethnicity. For those of
Northern European origin, carrier frequency is 1 in 50, such that the disease
affects up to 1 in 10,000 newborns (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2020b). Prompt diagnosis and restriction of dietary
phenylalanine beginning early in infancy are essential to prevent neurological
damage. All states mandate newborn screening for phenylketonuria (PKU).
Phenylalanine restriction alone would result in inadequate protein
consumption, and phenylalanine-free amino acid–based supplementation is
required. Maintenance of phenylalanine concentrations in the range of 2 to 6
mg/dL (120 to 360 μmol/L) is recommended from at least 3 months prior to
pregnancy and continuing throughout pregnancy (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020b).

Unfortunately, phenylalanine is actively transported to the fetus. Women
with PKU whose phenylalanine levels remain above the recommended range
during pregnancy are at risk to have otherwise normal (heterozygous)
offspring who sustain significant in utero damage as a result of being exposed
to toxic phenylalanine concentrations. Hyperphenylalaninemia raises the risk
for miscarriage and for PKU embryopathy, which is characterized by
intellectual disability, microcephaly, seizures, growth impairment, and
cardiac anomalies. Among women on unrestricted diets, the risk to have a
child with intellectual disability exceeds 90 percent, microcephaly develops
in more than 70 percent, and as many as 1 in 6 children have cardiac defects.
The Maternal Phenylketonuria Collaborative Study, which included 572
pregnancies followed more than 18 years, reported that maintenance of serum
phenylalanine levels in the recommended range significantly reduced the
fetal abnormality risk and resulted in normal childhood IQ scores (Koch,
2003; Platt, 2000).
Approximately 25 to 50 percent of individuals with PKU experience a
significant decline in phenylalanine levels when treated with the synthetic
PAH cofactor tetrahydrobiopterin (sapropterin) (Vockley, 2014). Based on
registry data, sapropterin is considered a treatment option for those in whom
phenylalanine levels remain elevated despite dietary therapy (Grange, 2014).
Preconceptional counseling and consultation with providers from
experienced PKU centers is recommended.

Consanguinity
In medical genetics, a union is consanguineous if between second cousins or
closer relatives. Although uncommon in Western countries, the global
estimate of consanguineous parentage approximates 10 percent of the
population (Oniya, 2019). More than 1 billion people are estimated to live in
countries in which 20 to 50 percent of marriages are consanguineous
(Romeo, 2014). First-degree relatives share half of their genes, seconddegree relatives share a fourth, and third-degree relatives—first cousins—
share one eighth. Because of the potential for shared deleterious genes,
consanguinity confers an increased risk to have offspring with otherwise rare
autosomal recessive diseases or multifactorial disorders. In populationbased series, first cousins have twice the risk for offspring with congenital
abnormalities (Sheridan, 2013; Stoltenberg, 1997). Consanguinity is also
associated with a greater rate of stillbirth (Kapurubandara, 2016). Because

CMA performed using a SNP platform may identify consanguinity, it is
important that preprocedural counseling include this possibility.
Incest is defined as a sexual relationship between first-degree relatives
such as parent-child or brother-sister and is universally illegal. Progeny of
such unions carry the highest risk of abnormal outcomes. Older studies
reported that up to 40 percent of offspring were abnormal as a result of
recessive and multifactorial disorders (Baird, 1982; Freire-Maia, 1984).

■ X-Linked and Y-Linked Inheritance
Most X-linked diseases are recessive. Common examples include color
blindness, hemophilia A and B, and Duchenne and Becker muscular
dystrophy. A male with an X-linked recessive gene is usually affected by the
disease it causes, because he lacks a second X chromosome to express the
normal dominant gene. However, a male with an X-linked disease cannot
have affected sons because they do not receive his X chromosome. When a
woman carries a gene causing an X-linked recessive condition, each son has
a 50-percent risk of being affected, and each daughter has a 50-percent
chance of being a carrier.
Women with an X-linked recessive gene are generally unaffected by the
disease it causes. In some cases, however, the random inactivation of one X
chromosome in each cell—termed lyonization—is skewed, and female
carriers may have features of the condition. For example, approximately 10
percent of female carriers of hemophilia A will have factor VIII levels less
than 30 percent of normal, and a similar proportion of female hemophilia B
carriers have factor IX levels less than 30 percent. Levels below these
thresholds confer a greater risk for abnormal bleeding when affected women
give birth (Plug, 2006). Indeed, even with higher levels, carriers are
reported to be at increased risk for bleeding complications (Olsson, 2014).
Female carriers of Duchenne or Becker muscular dystrophy carry an elevated
risk for cardiomyopathy, and periodic evaluation for cardiac dysfunction and
neuromuscular disorders is recommended (American Academy of Pediatrics,
2008).
X-linked dominant disorders mainly affect females, because they tend to
be lethal in males. Two examples are vitamin D–resistant rickets and
incontinentia pigmenti. An important exception is fragile X syndrome,
discussed subsequently.

The prevalence of Y-linked disorders is low. The Y-chromosome carries
genes important for sex determination and various cellular functions related
to spermatogenesis and bone development. Deletion of genes on the long arm
of Y results in severe spermatogenic defects, whereas genes at the tip of the
short arm are critical for chromosomal pairing during meiosis and for
fertility.

■ Mitochondrial Inheritance
Human cells contain hundreds of mitochondria, each with its own genome
and associated replication system. Oocytes have approximately 100,000
mitochondria. Sperm have only about 100, and the latter are destroyed after
fertilization. Each mitochondrion has multiple copies of a 16.5-kb circular
DNA molecule that contains 37 genes. Mitochondrial DNA encodes peptides
required for oxidative phosphorylation and encodes ribosomal and transfer
RNAs.
Mitochondria are inherited exclusively from the mother. Thus, although
males and females both can be affected by a mitochondrial disorder, a male
cannot transmit the condition to his offspring. When a cell replicates,
mitochondrial DNA sorts randomly into each of the resulting cells, a process
termed replicative segregation. As a consequence of replicative segregation,
any mitochondrial mutation will be propagated randomly into the newly
formed cells. Because each cell holds multiple copies of mitochondrial
DNA, the mitochondrion may contain only normal or only abnormal DNA,
termed homoplasmy. Alternatively, it may contain both normal and mutated
DNA, namely heteroplasmy. If a heteroplasmic oocyte is fertilized, the
relative proportion of mutated DNA may affect whether the individual
manifests a given mitochondrial disease. It is not possible to predict the
potential degree of heteroplasmy among offspring, and this poses challenges
for genetic counseling.
There are 33 mitochondrial diseases or conditions with known molecular
bases (Johns Hopkins University, 2020). Examples include myoclonic
epilepsy with ragged red fibers (MERRF), Leber optic atrophy, KearnsSayre syndrome, Leigh syndrome, and several forms of mitochondrial
myopathy and cardiomyopathy.

■ DNA Triplet Repeat Expansion
Mendel’s first law is that genes are passed unchanged from parent to
progeny, and barring new mutations, this is often true. Certain genes,
however, contain a region of DNA trinucleotide repeats that can expand
during parent-to-child transmission. The expansion can occur during male
meiosis, as in Huntington disease, or during female meiosis, as in fragile X
syndrome. Clinically, DNA triplet repeat expansion is manifested by
anticipation—a phenomenon in which a disease may manifest at an earlier
age or become more severe with each successive generation. Examples of
DNA triplet repeat diseases are shown in Table 16-4.
TABLE 16-4. Some Disorders Caused by DNA Triplet Repeat Expansion

Fragile X Syndrome
This is the most common inherited intellectual disability. Fragile X syndrome
affects approximately 1 in 3600 males and 1 in 4000 to 6000 females
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020a). It is caused
by expansion of a repeated trinucleotide DNA segment—cytosine-guanineguanine (CGG)—at chromosome Xq27.3. When the CGG repeat number
reaches a critical size—the full mutation—the fragile X mental retardation 1
(FMR1) gene becomes methylated and inactivated. Inactivation halts
expression of the FMR1 protein, which is abundant in nerve cells and
necessary for normal cognitive development.
Individuals with fragile X syndrome may have speech and language
problems, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, and autism or autistic-like
behaviors. Intellectual disability is generally more severe in males, in whom
average IQ scores are 35 to 45 (Nelson, 1995). The syndrome has

characteristic phenotypic features—a narrow face with large jaw, prominent
ears, connective tissue abnormalities, and macroorchidism in postpubertal
males.
Both the sex of the affected individual and the number of CGG repeats
determine the degree of clinical impairment. Clinically, four groups have
been described (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists,
2020a):
• Full mutation—more than 200 repeats
• Premutation—55 to 200 repeats
• Intermediate—45 to 54 repeats
• Unaffected—fewer than 45 repeats.
Full mutations are expressed in all males and many females. Males with
full mutations typically have significant cognitive and behavioral
abnormalities and phenotypic features. In females, random X chromosome
inactivation results in variable expression, and the disability may be much
less severe. With rare exception, the parent of origin of repeat expansion that
leads to a full mutation is female (Monaghan, 2013).
Counseling for a premutation is more complex. The woman with a fragile
X premutation may have offspring with the full mutation, and the risk ranges
from ≤5 percent with fewer than 70 CGG repeats to >95 percent with 100 to
200 CGG repeats (Nolin, 2003). Expansion is extremely unlikely in a male
premutation carrier, but all of his daughters will carry the premutation.
Among women with no risk factors, approximately 1 in 250 carries a fragile
X premutation, and in those with a family history of intellectual disability, the
risk approximates 1 in 90 (Cronister, 2008).
Fragile X premutation carriers may themselves experience significant
health consequences. Males with a premutation are at risk for the fragile X
tremor ataxia syndrome (FXTAS), which is characterized by memory loss,
executive function deficits, anxiety, and dementia (Monaghan, 2013).
Females are at decreased risk for FXTAS, but they have a 20-percent risk for
fragile X-associated primary ovarian insufficiency (POI).
Carrier screening is recommended for women with a family history of
fragile X syndrome, for those with unexplained intellectual disability,
developmental delay, or autism, and for women with POI (American College
of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020a). Prenatal diagnosis can be

accomplished by amniocentesis or chorionic villus sampling. Either type of
specimen can be used to evaluate the CGG repeat number, but chorionic
villus sampling may not accurately determine FMR1 gene methylation status.

■ Imprinting
Usually, one copy of each gene is inherited from each parent, and both copies
are expressed. Imprinting refers to the situation in which gene expression
varies according to the parent of origin. With maternal imprinting, a gene
inherited from the mother is transcriptionally silent and the gene inherited
from the father is active. Paternal imprinting is the opposite. This
phenomenon explains the phenotypic differences that occur in triploid
pregnancies according to whether the extra chromosomal set is maternal or
paternal (p. 313).
Imprinting affects gene expression by epigenetic control, that is, it
modifies the phenotype without altering the underlying genetic structure or
genotype. Importantly, the effect may be reversed in a subsequent generation,
because a female who inherits an imprinted gene from her father will pass it
in her oocytes with a maternal—rather than paternal—imprint, and vice
versa.
An example of imprinting can be found in two very different diseases
associated with the same region of DNA. Prader-Willi syndrome is
characterized by pronounced hyperphagia with obesity, along with short
stature, small hands and feet, and mild mental retardation. In more than 70
percent of cases, Prader-Willi is caused by microdeletion or disruption of a
DNA segment on the paternal chromosome 15, 15q11.2-q13. The remaining
cases are due to maternal uniparental disomy or due to maternal gene
imprinting with the paternal gene inactivated.
In contrast, individuals with Angelman syndrome have normal stature and
weight but severe intellectual disability, absent speech, seizures, ataxia,
jerky arm movements, and paroxysms of inappropriate laughter. In
approximately 70 percent of cases, Angelman syndrome is caused by
microdeletion for the 15q11.2-q13 DNA segment on the mother’s
chromosome 15. This segment contains a gene that codes for ubiquitin
protein ligase E3A, an important neural protein. Paternal gene imprinting
defects—with maternal genes inactivated—account for 2 to 3 percent, and 2

percent result from paternal uniparental disomy. Table 16-5 lists selected
diseases that can involve imprinting.
TABLE 16-5. Some Disorders That Can Involve Imprinting

■ Uniparental Disomy
This occurs when both members of a chromosome pair are inherited from the
same parent. Uniparental disomy usually has no clinical consequences,
because gene expression is not generally affected by the parent of origin and
because both copies of a chromosome pair are not usually identical.
However, if chromosomes 6, 7, 11, 14, or 15 are involved, offspring are at
increased risk for an abnormality because of parent-of-origin differences in
gene expression, that is, because of imprinting (Shaffer, 2001). Several
genetic mechanisms may cause uniparental disomy, the most common of
which is trisomic rescue, shown in Figure 16-9. After a nondisjunction event
produces a trisomic conceptus, one of the three homologues may be lost,
resulting in uniparental disomy for that chromosome in approximately one
third of cases.

FIGURE 16-9 Mechanism of uniparental disomy arising from trisomic “rescue.” A. In normal meiosis,
one member of each pair of homologous chromosomes is inherited from each parent. B. If
nondisjunction results in a trisomic conceptus, one homologue is sometimes lost. In a third of cases, loss
of one homologue leads to uniparental disomy.

Uniparental isodisomy occurs when an individual receives two identical
copies of one chromosome from the same parent. This mechanism has
explained cases of cystic fibrosis in which only one parent is a carrier but
the fetus inherits two copies of the same gene mutation (Spence, 1988;
Spotila, 1992).

■ Multifactorial Inheritance
Traits or diseases that are determined by the combination of multiple genes
and environmental factors are considered to have multifactorial inheritance
(Table 16-6). Polygenic traits are determined by the combined effects of
more than one gene. Many congenital and acquired conditions and common
traits display multifactorial inheritance. Examples include malformations
such as neural-tube defects, cardiac defects, and facial clefts; diseases such
as diabetes and atherosclerosis; and traits such as head size or height.
Multifactorial abnormalities tend to recur in families, but not according to a
mendelian pattern. If a couple has had 1 child with a multifactorial birth

defect, the risk that another child will be affected is empirically 3 to 5
percent. This risk declines exponentially with successively more distant
family relationships.
TABLE 16-6. Characteristics of Multifactorial Diseases

Multifactorial traits that have a normal distribution in the population are
termed continuously variable. A measurement that is more than two standard
deviations above or below the population mean may be considered
abnormal. Continuously variable traits tend to be less extreme in the
offspring of affected individuals, because of the statistical principle of
regression to the mean.

Threshold Traits
Some multifactorial traits do not appear until a threshold is exceeded.
Genetic and environmental factors that create propensity or liability for the

trait are themselves normally distributed, and only individuals at extremes of
the distribution exceed the threshold and exhibit the trait or defect. The
phenotypic abnormality is thus an all-or-none phenomenon.
Certain threshold traits have a clear male or female predominance. If an
individual of the less affected gender has the characteristic or defect, the risk
is greater in his or her offspring (Fig. 16-10). An example is pyloric stenosis,
which is approximately four times more common in males (Krogh, 2012). A
female with pyloric stenosis has likely inherited more predisposing genetic
factors than are necessary to produce the defect in a male, and the recurrence
risk for her children or siblings is thus higher than the expected 3 to 5
percent. Her brothers and sons would have the highest liability because they
not only will inherit more than the usual number of predisposing genes but
also are the more susceptible gender.

FIGURE 16-10 Schematic example of a threshold trait, such as pyloric stenosis, which has a
predilection for males. Each gender is normally distributed, but at the same threshold, more males than
females will develop the condition.

The recurrence risk for threshold traits is also greater if the defect is
severe. For example, the recurrence risk after the birth of a child with
bilateral cleft lip and palate approximates 8 percent, but it is only about 4
percent following a child with unilateral cleft lip alone.

Cardiac Defects

Structural cardiac anomalies are the most common birth defects, with a birth
prevalence of 8 cases per 1000. The risk of having a child with a cardiac
anomaly approximates 5 to 6 percent if the mother has the defect and 2 to 3
percent if the father is affected (Burn, 1998). Selected left-sided lesions,
including hypoplastic left heart syndrome, coarctation of the aorta, and
bicuspid aortic valve, may have recurrence risks four- to sixfold higher (Lin,
1988; Lupton, 2002; Nora, 1988). Observed recurrence risks for specific
cardiac malformations are listed in Table 52-4 (p. 920).

Neural-tube Defects
Risk for developing a neural-tube defect (NTD) is influenced by family
history, hyperthermia, hyperglycemia, teratogen exposure, obesity, ethnicity,
and fetal gender. More than 50 years ago, Hibbard and Smithells (1965)
postulated that abnormal folate metabolism was responsible for many NTDs.
However, most NTD cases do not occur in the setting of maternal folic acid
deficiency, and it has become clear that the gene-nutrient interactions
underlying folate-responsive NTDs are complex. For a woman with a prior
affected child, the 3- to 5-percent recurrence risk declines by at least 70
percent with 4 mg/d of periconceptional oral folic acid supplementation
(Grosse, 2007; MRC Vitamin Study Research Group, 1991).
Periconceptional folic acid supplementation also appears to ameliorate the
fetal NTD risk in women with pregestational diabetes and in those with
exposure to antiepileptic medications, fever during embryogenesis, and
obesity (Kerr, 2017; Petersen, 2019). Sonographic features of NTDs are
described in Chapter 15 (p. 276), their prevention with folic acid is
discussed in Chapter 9 (p. 168), and fetal therapy for myelomeningocele is
reviewed in Chapter 19 (p. 372).

GENETIC TESTS
All pregnant women should have the option of prenatal aneuploidy screening
and prenatal genetic diagnosis (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2018). Screening for fetal aneuploidy may be either serum
analyte-based or cell-free DNA-based. Prenatal genetic carrier screening
tests for cystic fibrosis and spinal muscular atrophy carrier status also are
routinely offered. Additional carrier screening tests are offered to at-risk

individuals. Expanded genetic carrier screening panels also are available.
The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists considers ethnicspecific, panethnic, and expanded carrier screening acceptable strategies
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020a). These
screening tests are discussed in Chapter 17 (p. 342).
For prenatal genetic diagnosis, the most commonly used tests are
chromosomal microarray analysis (CMA), cytogenetic analysis
(karyotyping), and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). Testing may be
performed on amnionic fluid or chorionic villi. In selected circumstances,
whole genome or whole exome sequencing may be considered, but these are
not recommended for routine use. To diagnose a specific disease whose
genetic basis is known, DNA-based tests are often employed, typically using
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for rapid amplification of DNA sequences.

■ Cytogenetic Analysis
Also known as karyotyping, cytogenetic analysis tests for numerical
chromosomal abnormalities—aneuploidy or polyploidy. It can also identify
balanced or unbalanced structural rearrangements of at least 5 to 10
megabases in size. Karyotyping has diagnostic accuracy exceeding 99
percent.
Any tissue containing dividing cells or cells that can be stimulated to
divide is suitable for cytogenetic analysis. The dividing cells are arrested in
metaphase, and their chromosomes are stained to reveal light and dark bands.
The most commonly used technique is Giemsa staining, which yields the Gbands shown in Figure 16-3. Each chromosome has a unique banding pattern
that permits its identification and detection of deleted, duplicated, or
rearranged segments. The accuracy of cytogenetic analysis rises with the
number of bands produced. Metaphase banding routinely yields 450 to 550
visible bands per haploid chromosome set, whereas prophase banding
generally yields 850 bands.
Only dividing cells can be evaluated, so the growth of cultured cells
affects the rapidity with which results are obtained. Amnionic fluid, which
contains amniocytes, epithelial cells, and gastrointestinal mucosal cells, will
usually yield results in 7 to 10 days (Chap. 17, p. 344). Fetal blood cells may
provide results in 36 to 48 hours but are rarely needed. If fetal skin
fibroblasts are evaluated postmortem, stimulation of cell growth can be more

difficult. Cytogenetic analysis may take 2 to 3 weeks in such cases and has
largely been replaced by CMA (Chap. 35, p. 627).

■ Fluorescence In Situ Hybridization
This technique is most commonly used for rapid identification of a specific
chromosomal abnormality, such as trisomy 21, 18, or 13. Because of its 1- to
2-day turnaround time, FISH is typically selected for cases in which findings
may alter pregnancy management. It may also be used to verify a suspected
deletion syndrome, such as the 22q11.2 microdeletion (p. 315), although
CMA is preferred. The American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2018) recommends that decision-making based on FISH
should incorporate clinical information consistent with the suspected
diagnosis. Supportive data may be an abnormal aneuploidy screening test
result, a sonographic finding, or a confirmatory diagnostic test such as
karyotyping or CMA.
To perform FISH, cells are fixed onto a glass slide, and fluorescentlabeled probes are hybridized to the fixed chromosomes (Fig. 16-11). Each
probe is a DNA sequence that is complementary to a chromosome region or
gene being investigated. If the DNA sequence is present, hybridization is
detected as a bright signal visible by microscopy. The number of signals
indicates the number of chromosomes or genes of that type in the cell. FISH
does not provide information on the entire chromosomal complement but
merely the chromosomal or gene region of interest. Figure 16-12 shows an
example of interphase FISH using α-satellite probes for chromosomes 18, X,
and Y to confirm trisomy 18.

FIGURE 16-11 Steps in fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH).

FIGURE 16-12 Interphase fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) using α-satellite probes for
chromosomes 18, X, and Y. In this case, the three light blue signals, two green signals, and absence of
red signals indicate that this is a female fetus with trisomy 18. (Reproduced with permission from Dr.
Frederick Elder.)

■ Chromosomal Microarray Analysis
This test is 100 times more sensitive than karyotyping and detects
microduplications and microdeletions as small as 50 to 100 kilobases.
Direct CMA, which is performed on uncultured cells, can yield results in 3
to 7 days. If cultured cells are required, results may take 10 to 14 days
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2018).
Microarrays use either a comparative genomic hybridization (CGH)
platform, a SNP platform, or a combination of the two. The CGH microarray
platform compares specimen DNA with a normal control sample. Shown in
Figure 16-13, the CGH chip contains reference DNA fragments of known
sequence—oligonucleotides. Fetal DNA from the amniocentesis or chorionic
villus sampling specimen is labeled with a fluorescent dye and then
hybridized to the DNA on the chip. Normal control DNA is labeled with a
different probe and also hybridized to the same chip. The intensity of the
fluorescent signals from the two samples is compared. With a SNP array, the
chip contains known DNA sequence variants, that is, single-nucleotide
polymorphisms. When fetal DNA is labeled and hybridized to the chip, the
fluorescent signal intensity indicates copy number variation.

FIGURE 16-13 Chromosomal microarray analysis. A. Actual microarray chip size. B. Each chip
contains thousands of cells (squares). C & D. Each cell contains thousands of identical oligonucleotides
on its surface and is unique in its nucleotide content. E. During genetic analysis, a mixture containing
tagged fetal DNA is presented to the chip. Complementary DNA sequences bind. F. If a laser is shined
on the chip, DNA sequences that have bound will glow thus identifying a matching sequence. (Modified
with permission from Doody KJ: Treatment of the infertile couple. In Hoffman BL, Schorge JO,
Schaffer JI, et al (eds): Williams Gynecology, 2nd ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2012.)

Both types of platforms detect aneuploidy, unbalanced translocations, and
microdeletions and microduplications. In addition, SNP arrays are able to
identify triploidy and can detect absence of heterozygosity. The latter can
occur with uniparental disomy, in which both copies of a chromosome are
inherited from one parent. Absence of heterozygosity may also occur with
consanguinity, and counseling prior to performance of an SNP array should
include this possibility (p. 321). Importantly, neither type of array platform
currently detects balanced chromosomal rearrangements. For this reason,
couples with recurrent pregnancy loss should be offered karyotyping as the
first-line test (Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, 2016).
In addition to identifying pathogenic copy number variants, CMA may
detect variants that are unable to be classified as benign or pathologic and

thus are considered to be of uncertain clinical significance. In recent series,
these variants of uncertain significance are identified in approximately 1
percent of prenatal specimens (Brady, 2014; Chong, 2019; Wang, 2018). Not
unexpectedly, variants of uncertain significance may be a source of distress
to families, even with comprehensive pretest counseling.

Clinical Applications
In pregnancies at increased risk for autosomal trisomy based on aneuploidy
screening results, karyotyping or FISH plus karyotyping should be offered,
and CMA should be made available (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2018). Clinicians are increasingly offering CMA in this
setting. If the karyotype is normal, CMA has identified clinically relevant
copy number variants in approximately 6.5 percent of pregnancies with fetal
abnormalities and in 1 to 2 percent of those without obvious fetal
abnormality (Callaway, 2013; Chong, 2019). The American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2018) and the Society for Maternal-Fetal
Medicine (2016) recommend CMA as the first-tier test when fetal structural
abnormalities are identified. If a particular anomaly that strongly suggests a
specific aneuploidy is identified, such as an endocardial cushion defect
(trisomy 21) or alobar holoprosencephaly (trisomy 13), then karyotyping or
FISH may be offered as the initial test. Genetic counseling should include
information regarding the benefits and limitations of both CMA and
karyotyping. Each should be made available to women who elect prenatal
diagnosis (Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, 2016). CMA may identify
instances of autosomal dominant genetic disorders that have not yet
manifested in an affected parent, and it may also identify instances of
nonpaternity.
For stillbirth evaluation, CMA is significantly more likely than standard
karyotyping to provide a genetic diagnosis, in part because it does not
require dividing cells. The Stillbirth Collaborative Research Network found
that when karyotyping was uninformative, approximately 6 percent of cases
had either aneuploidy or a pathogenic copy number variant identified with
CMA (Reddy, 2012). In a recent metaanalysis of more than 900 stillbirths
with normal karyotype, CMA identified pathogenic copy number variants in
6 percent with structural abnormalities and 3 percent with no abnormalities
evident (Martinez-Portilla, 2019). Overall, CMA yielded results 15 percent
more often than karyotyping alone.

■ Whole Genome and Whole Exome Sequencing
Most fetuses with structural abnormalities have a normal karyotype and a
normal CMA result. Whole genome sequencing (WGS) is a technique for
analyzing the entire genome. Whole exome sequencing (WES) analyzes only
the DNA coding regions, which account for approximately 1.5 percent of the
genome. These next-generation sequencing tools are increasingly used
postnatally to evaluate suspected genetic syndromes and intellectual
disability.
Several prospective, multicenter series have evaluated WES for
pregnancies in which fetuses have structural abnormalities, no karyotypic
evidence of aneuploidy, and normal CMA. WES identified genetic
abnormalities in approximately 10 percent of such cases (Lord, 2019;
Petrovski, 2019). Utility was higher in cases with cardiac, skeletal, or
multiorgan system anomalies.
Importantly, WGS and WES have significant limitations in their current
form. These include prohibitively long turnaround times, high costs, and
increased rates of false-positive and false-negative results and variants of
uncertain significance (American College of Medical Genetics, 2012; Atwal,
2014). In addition, because sequencing is generally performed on the fetus
and parents simultaneously, one parent may be identified or suspected to
have an unrelated but medically actionable finding, which further
complicates counseling (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2020c). As a result, the clinical utility of this promising
technology for prenatal cases is currently limited, and it is not recommended
for routine clinical use.

■ Fetal DNA in the Maternal Circulation
Fetal cells are present in maternal blood at a very low concentration, only 2
to 6 cells per milliliter (Bianchi, 2006). Intact fetal cells sometimes persist
in the maternal circulation for decades following delivery. Persistent fetal
cells may engraft in the mother, causing microchimerism (Chap. 62, p. 1109).
This has been implicated in maternal autoimmune diseases such as
scleroderma, systemic lupus erythematosus, and Hashimoto thyroiditis
(Kinder, 2017). From the standpoint of prenatal diagnosis, use of intact fetal
cells from maternal blood is limited by low cell concentration, cell

persistence into successive pregnancies, and difficulties in distinguishing
fetal and maternal cells. Cell-free DNA overcomes these limitations.

Cell-free DNA
Also known as cell-free fetal DNA or noninvasive prenatal screening
(NIPS), this screening test uses DNA fragments derived from maternal cells
and from apoptotic placental trophoblast cells. “Fetal” is thus a misnomer.
Cell-free DNA is reliably detected in maternal blood after 9 to 10 weeks’
gestation (Bianchi, 2018). The proportion of total cell-free DNA that is
placental is called the fetal fraction, and it accounts for approximately 10
percent of the total circulating cell-free DNA in maternal plasma. Unlike
intact fetal cells, cell-free DNA is cleared within minutes from maternal
blood.
Current clinical applications of cell-free DNA are aneuploidy screening
and Rh D genotyping (Fig. 16-14). Commercial laboratories have also
offered two other applications of cell-free DNA: (1) screening for selected
microdeletion and microduplication syndromes and (2) genome-wide
screening for deletions and duplications larger than 7 megabase pairs.
Currently, prospective data on these promising applications are limited, and
neither is recommended for routine screening (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020c).

FIGURE 16-14 Cell-free DNA screening. These DNA fragments are derived from apoptotic
trophoblast cells. Screening for autosomal trisomies and sex chromosomal aneuploidies may be
performed using whole-genome sequencing, chromosome-selective or -targeted sequencing, and
analysis of single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). Real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) also may be used to target specific regions or sequences, a technique used for Rh D genotyping.

Additional applications for cell-free DNA are on the horizon. In research
settings, numerous single-gene disorders have been detected and include
skeletal dysplasias, hemoglobinopathies, cystic fibrosis, congenital adrenal
hyperplasia, hemophilia, muscular dystrophy, myotonic dystrophy, and spinal
muscular atrophy (Camunas-Soler, 2018; Jenkins, 2018; Zhang, 2019).
Aneuploidy Screening. Several different assay platforms are used to screen
for fetal autosomal trisomies and sex chromosomal aneuploidies. These
include massively parallel sequencing, which is a WGS technique;
chromosome-selective or targeted sequencing; and analysis of SNPs
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2018, 2020c). By
simultaneously sequencing millions of chromosome-specific DNA fragments,
investigators can identify whether the proportion or ratio of fragments from
one chromosome is higher than expected. Thus, samples from women with a
Down syndrome fetus will have a larger proportion of DNA sequences from
chromosome 21.
The screening performance of cell-free DNA is excellent. In a
metaanalysis of 35 studies of largely high-risk pregnancies, the pooled
sensitivity to detect Down syndrome was 99.7 percent, and to identify
trisomies 18 and 13, 98 and 99 percent, respectively (Gil, 2017). For each,
the specificity was at least 99.9 percent, such that the cumulative falsepositive rate was below 1 percent. Aneuploidy screening reports commonly
include information about fetal sex, which may be clinically useful if the
fetus is at risk for an X-linked disorder or for congenital adrenal hyperplasia
(Chap. 17, p. 335). In a metaanalysis, the sensitivity of cell-free DNA testing
for fetal sex determination was reported to be 95 percent between 7 and 12
weeks’ gestation and 99 percent after 20 weeks (Devaney, 2011).
Causes of false-positive and false-negative screening results are listed in
Table 16-7. As with any other screening test, diagnostic confirmation should
be performed before irreversible medical intervention. Cell-free DNA
screens do not yield a result in 2 to 4 percent of cases. This may be due to
assay failure, high assay variance, or low fetal fraction (Norton, 2012;

Pergament, 2014; Quezada, 2015). Importantly, such pregnancies carry a
greater risk for fetal aneuploidy. In addition, results may not reflect the fetal
DNA complement but rather may indicate confined placental mosaicism,
early demise of an aneuploid co-twin, maternal mosaicism, or rarely, occult
maternal malignancy (Bianchi, 2015; Curnow, 2015; Grati, 2014b; Wang,
2014). Recommendations for counseling are discussed in Chapter 17 (p.
336).
TABLE 16-7. Selected Etiologies Creating Inaccurate Cell-free DNA
Results

Rh D Genotype Evaluation. Many fetuses of Rh D-negative women are also
Rh D-negative. In a predominantly white population, this prevalence
approaches 40 percent. Fetal Rh D genotype assessment from maternal blood
can eliminate administration of anti-D immune globulin in such cases,

thereby reducing costs and potential risk. When Rh D alloimmunization is
suspected, early identification of an Rh D-negative fetus might avoid
unnecessary middle cerebral artery Doppler assessment or amniocentesis.
Evaluation using cell-free DNA is done using real-time PCR to target several
exons of the RHD gene, typically exons 4, 5, 7, and 10.
Rh D-genotyping is performed routinely with cell-free DNA in Denmark,
Finland, and the Netherlands (Clausen, 2012; de Haas, 2016; Haimila,
2017). In population-based studies of more than 35,000 Rh D-negative
women screened at 24 to 27 weeks’ gestation, the false-negative rate—in
which Rh D-negative status was missed—was only 0.03 percent. The falsepositive rate—in which Rh immune globulin would be given unnecessarily—
was less than 1 percent (de Haas, 2016; Haimila, 2017). Similar results
were reported from the United Kingdom, although the false-negative rate was
higher in the first trimester. Investigators concluded that false-negative
screening results might increase the alloimmunization risk but by less than 1
case per million births (Chitty, 2014). Rh D alloimmunization is discussed in
Chapter 18 (p. 353).

REFERENCES
Abele H, Babiy-Pachomow O, Sonek J, et al: The cavum septum pellucidi in euploid and aneuploidy
fetuses. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 42(2):156, 2013
American Academy of Pediatrics: Clinical report: cardiovascular health supervision for individuals
affected by Duchenne or Becker muscular dystrophy. Pediatrics 116(6):1569, 2005, Reaffirmed
December 2008
American College of Medical Genetics (ACMG) Board of Directors: Points to consider in the clinical
application of genomic sequencing. Genet Med 14(8):759, 2012
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Prenatal diagnostic testing for genetic disorders.
Practice Bulletin No. 162, May 2016, Reaffirmed 2018
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Perinatal palliative care. Committee Opinion No.
786, August 2019
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Carrier screening for genetic conditions.
Committee Opinion No. 691, March 2017, Reaffirmed 2020a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Management of women with phenylalanine
hydroxylase deficiency (phenylketonuria). Committee Opinion No. 802, April 2020b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Microarrays and next-generation sequencing
technology: the use of advanced genetic diagnostic tools in obstetrics and gynecology. Committee
Opinion No. 682, December 2016, Reaffirmed 2020c
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Screening for fetal chromosomal abnormalities.
Practice Bulletin No. 226, October 2020d

Atwal PS, Brennan ML, Cox R, et al: Clinical whole-exome sequencing: are we there yet? Genet Med
16(9):717, 2014
Baffero GM, Somigliana E, Crovetto F, et al: Confined placental mosaicism at chorionic villus sampling:
risk factors and pregnancy outcome. Prenat Diagn 32(11):1102, 2012
Baird PA, McGillivray B: Children of incest. J Pediatr 101(5): 854, 1982
Bardsley MZ, Kowal K, Levy C, et al: 47,XYY syndrome: clinical phenotype and timing of
ascertainment. J Pediatr 163(4):1085, 2013
Bdolah Y, Palomaki GE, Yaron Y, et al: Circulating angiogenic proteins in trisomy 13. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 194(1):239, 2006
Berglund A, Stochholm K, Gravholt CH: The epidemiology of sex chromosome abnormalities. Am J
Med Genet C 184(2):202, 2020
Bergström S, Carr H, Petersson G, et al: Trends in congenital heart defects in infants with Down
syndrome. Pediatrics 138(1):e210160123, 2016
Bianchi DW, Chiu RW: Sequencing of circulating cell-free DNA during pregnancy. N Engl J Med
379(5):464, 2018
Bianchi DW, Chudova D, Sehnert AJ, et al: Noninvasive prenatal testing and incidental detection of
occult malignancies. JAMA 314(2):162, 2015
Bianchi DW, Hanson J: Sharpening the tools: a summary of a National Institutes of Health workshop on
new technologies for detection of fetal cells in maternal blood for early prenatal diagnosis. J Matern
Fetal Neonatal Med 19(4):199, 2006
Blau N, van Spronsen FJ, Levy HL: Phenylketonuria. Lancet 376(9750):1417, 2010
Boada R, Janusz J, Hutaff-Lee C, et al: The cognitive phenotype in Klinefelter syndrome: a review of
the literature including genetic and hormonal factors. Dev Disabil Res Rev 15(4):284, 2009
Brady PD, Delle Chiaie B, Christenhusz G, et al: A prospective study of the clinical utility of prenatal
chromosomal microarray analysis in fetuses with ultrasound abnormalities and an exploration of a
framework for reporting unclassified variants and risk factors. Genet Med 16(6):469, 2014
Bui TH, Iselius L, Lindsten J: European collaborative study on prenatal diagnosis: mosaicism,
pseudomosaicism and single abnormal cells in amniotic fluid cultures. Prenat Diagn 4(7):145, 1984
Bull MJ, American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on Genetics: Health supervision for children with
Down syndrome. Pediatrics 128(2):393, 2011
Burn J, Brennan P, Little J, et al: Recurrence risks in offspring of adults with major heart defects: results
from first cohort of British collaborative study. Lancet 351(9099):311, 1998
Callaway JL, Shaffer LG, Chitty LS, et al: The clinical utility of microarray technologies applied to
prenatal cytogenetics in the presence of a normal conventional karyotype: a review of the literature.
Prenat Diagn 33(12):1119, 2013
Canunas-Soler J, Lee H, Hudgins L, et al: Noninvasive prenatal diagnosis of single-gene disorders by
use of droplet digital PCR. Clin Chem 64(2):336, 2018
Carey L, Scott F, Murphy K, et al: Prenatal diagnosis of chromosomal mosaicism in over 1600 cases
using array comparative genomic hybridization as a first line test. Prenat Diagn 34(5):478, 2014
Chitty LS, Finning K, Wade A: Diagnostic accuracy of routine antenatal determination of fetal RHD
status across gestation: population based cohort study. BMJ 349:g5243, 2014
Chong HP, Hamilton S, Mone F, et al: Prenatal chromosomal microarray testing of fetuses with
ultrasound structural anomalies: a prospective cohort study of over 1000 cases. Prenat Diagn
39(12):1064, 2019
Clausen FB, Christiansen M, Steffensen R, et al: Report of the first nationally implemented clinical
routine screening for fetal RHD in D–pregnant women to ascertain the requirement for antenatal

RHD prophylaxis. Transfusion 52(4):752, 2012
Cockwell A, MacKenzie M, Youings S, et al: A cytogenetic and molecular study of a series of 45,X
fetuses and their parents. J Med Genet 28(3):151, 1991
Cools M, Pleskacova J, Stoop H, et al: Gonadal pathology and tumor risk in relation to clinical
characteristics in patients with 45,X/46,XY mosaicism. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 96(7):E1171, 2011
Cooper DS, Riggs KW, Zafar F, et al: Cardiac surgery in patients with trisomy 13 and 18: an analysis of
the Society of Thoracic Surgeons Congenital Heart Surgery Database. J Am Heart Assoc
8:e012349, 2019
Cragan JD, Gilboa SM: Including prenatal diagnoses in birth defects monitoring: experience of the
Metropolitan Atlanta Congenital Defects Program. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol 85(1):20,
2009
Cronister A, Teicher J, Rohlfs EM, et al: Prevalence and instability of fragile X alleles: implications for
offering fragile X premutation diagnosis. Obstet Gynecol 111(3):596, 2008
Curnow KJ, Wilkins-Haug L, Ryan A, et al: Detection of triploid, molar, and vanishing twin pregnancies
by single-nucleotide polymorphism-based noninvasive prenatal test. Am J Obstet Gynecol
212(1):79.e1, 2015
de Haas M, Thurik FF, van der Ploeg CP, et al: Sensitivity of fetal RHD screening for safe guidance of
targeted anti-D immunoglobulin prophylaxis: a prospective cohort study of a nationwide programme
in the Netherlands. BMJ 355:i5789, 2016
Devaney SA, Palomaki GE, Scott JA, et al: Noninvasive fetal sex determination using cell-free fetal
DNA: a systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA 306(6):627, 2011
Dolk H, Loane M, Garne E: The prevalence of congenital anomalies in Europe. Adv Exp Med Biol
686:349, 2010
Domingo L, Carey JC, Eckhauser A, et al: Mortality and resource use following cardiac interventions in
children with trisomy 13 and trisomy 18 and congenital heart disease. Pediatr Cardiol 40(2):349,
2019
Doody KJ: Treatment of the infertile couple. In Hoffman BL, Schorge JO, Halvorson LM, et al (eds):
Williams Gynecology, 4th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2020
Dotters-Katz SK, Humphrey WM, Senz KL, et al: Trisomy 13 and the risk of gestational hypertensive
disorders: a population-based study. J Mat Fetal Neonatal Med 31(15):1951, 2018
Edwards JH, Harnden DG, Cameron AH, et al: A new trisomic syndrome. Lancet 1(7128):787, 1960
Ford CE, Jones KW, Polani PE, et al: A sex-chromosome anomaly in a case of gonadal dysgenesis
(Turner’s syndrome). Lancet 1(7075):711, 1959
Freeman SB, Bean LH, Allen EG, et al: Ethnicity, sex, and the incidence of congenital heart defects: a
report from the National Down Syndrome Project. Genet Med 10(3):173, 2008
Freire-Maia N: Effects of consanguineous marriages on morbidity and precocious mortality: genetic
counseling. Am J Med Genet 18(3):401, 1984
Gil MM, Accurti V, Santacruz B, et al: Analysis of cell-free DNA in maternal blood in screening for
aneuploidies: updated meta-analysis. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 50:302, 2017
Girardin CM, Vliet GV: Counselling of a couple faced with a prenatal diagnosis of Klinefelter syndrome.
Acta Pediatr 100(6):917, 2011
Goel N, Morris JK, Tucker D, et al: Trisomy 13 and 18-prevalence and mortality-a multi-registry
population based analysis. Am J Med Genet A 179(12):2382, 2019
Goriely A, Wilkie AO: Paternal age effect mutations and selfish spermatogonial selection: causes and
consequences for human diseases. Am J Hum Genet 90(2):175, 2012

Grange DK, Hillman RE, Burton BK, et al: Sapropterin dihydrochloride use in pregnant women with
phenylketonuria: an interim report of the PKU MOMS sub-registry. Mol Genet Metab 112(1):9, 2014
Grati FR: Chromosomal mosaicism in human feto-placental development: implications for prenatal
diagnosis. J Clin Med 3(3):809, 2014a
Grati FR, Malvestiti F, Ferreira JC, et al: Fetoplacental mosaicism: potential implications for falsepositive and false negative non-invasive prenatal screening results. Genet Med 16(8):620, 2014b
Grau Madsen S, Uldbjerg N, Sunde L, et al: Prognosis for pregnancies with trisomy 16 confined to the
placenta: a Danish cohort study. Prenat Diagn 38(13):1103, 2018
Grosse SD, Collins JS: Folic acid supplementation and neural tube defect recurrence prevention. Birth
Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol 79(11):737, 2007
Haimila KI, Sulin K, Kuosmanen M, et al: Targeted antenatal anti-D prophylaxis program for RhDnegative pregnant women–outcome of the first two years of a national program in Finland. Acta
Obstet Gynecol Scand 96(10):1228, 2017
Hartley D, Blumenthal T, Carrillo M, et al: Down syndrome and Alzheimer’s disease: common
pathways, common goals. Alzheimers Dement 11(6):700, 2015
Hassold T, Arnovitz K, Jacobs PA, et al: The parental origin of the missing or additional chromosome in
45,X and 47,XXX females. Birth Defects Orig Artic Ser 26(4):297, 1990
Heinrich T, Nanda I, Rehn M, et al: Live-born trisomy 22: patient report and review. Mol Syndromol
3(6):262, 2012
Hibbard ED, Smithells RW: Folic acid metabolism and human embryopathy. Lancet 1:1254, 1965
Hook EB, Warburton D: Turner syndrome revisited: review of new data supports the hypothesis that all
viable 45,X cases are cryptic mosaics with a rescue cell line, implying an origin by mitotic loss. Hum
Genet 133(4):417, 2014
Houlihan OA, O’Donoghue K: The natural history of pregnancies with a diagnosis of Trisomy 18 or
Trisomy 13; a retrospective case series. BMC Pregnancy and Childbirth 13:209, 2013.
Hussamy DJ, Herrera CL, Twickler DM, et al: Number of risk factors in Down syndrome pregnancies.
Am J Perinatol 36(1):79, 2019
Hsu LY, Perlis TE: United States survey on chromosome mosaicism and pseudomosaicism in prenatal
diagnosis. Prenat Diagn 4(7):97, 1984
Jacobs PA, Hassold TJ: The origin of numerical chromosomal abnormalities. Adv Genet 33:101, 1995
Jauniaux E: Partial moles: from postnatal to prenatal diagnosis. Placenta 20(5–6):379, 1999
Jenkins LA, Deans ZC, Lewis C, et al: Delivering an accredited non-invasive prenatal diagnosis service
for monogenic disorders and recommendations for best practice. Prenat Diagn 38(1):44, 2018
Johns Hopkins University: Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM). 2021. Available at:
http://omim.org/. Accessed October 4, 2021
Joseph L, Farmer C, Chlebowski C, et al: Characterization of autism spectrum disorder and
neurodevelopmental profiles in youth with XYY syndrome. J Neurodev Disord 10(1):30, 2018
Kapurubandara S, Melov S, Shalou E, et al: Consanguinity and associated perinatal outcomes, including
stillbirth. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynecol 56(6):599, 2016
Kehinde FI, Anderson CE, McGowan JE, et al: Co-occurrence of non-mosaic trisomy 22 and inherited
balanced t(4;6)(q33;q23.3) in a liveborn female: case report and review of the literature. Am J Med
Genet Part A 164(12):3187, 2014
Kerr SM, Parker SE, Mitchell AA, et al: Periconceptional maternal fever, folic acid intake, and the risk
for neural tube defects. Ann Epidemiol 27(12):777, 2017
Kinder JM, Stelzer IA, Arch PC, et al: Immunological implications of pregnancy-induced
microchimerism. Nat Rev Immunol 17(8)483, 2017

Koch R, Hanley W, Levy H, et al: The maternal phenylketonuria international study: 1984–2002.
Pediatrics 112(6 Pt 2):1523, 2003
Kong A, Frigge ML, Masson G, et al: Rate of de novo mutations, father’s age, and disease risk. Nature
488(7412):471, 2012
Krogh C, Gortz S, Wohlfahrt J, et al: Pre- and perinatal risk factors for pyloric stenosis and their
influence on the male predominance. Am J Epidemiol 176(1):24, 2012
Lejeune J, Turpin R, Gautier M: Chromosomic diagnosis of mongolism. Arch Fr Pediatr 16:962, 1959
Lin AE, Garver KL: Genetic counseling for congenital heart defects. J Pediatr 113(6):1105, 1988
Lin HY, Chen YJ, Hung HY, et al: Clinical characteristics and survival of trisomy 18 in a medical center
in Taipei, 1988–2004. Am J Med Genet 140(9):945, 2006
Lin HY, Lin SP, Chen YJ, et al: Clinical characteristics and survival of trisomy 13 in a medical center in
Taiwan, 1985–2004. Pediatr Int 49(3):380, 2007
Loane M, Morris JK, Addor M, et al: Twenty-year trends in the prevalence of Down syndrome and
other trisomies in Europe: impact of maternal age and prenatal screening. Eur J Hum Genet
21(1):27, 2013
Lord J, McMullan DJ, Eberhardt RY. Prenatal exome sequencing analysis in fetal structural anomalies
detected by ultrasonography (PAGE): a cohort study. Lancet 393(10173):747, 2019
Lowe X, Eskenazi B, Nelson DO, et al: Frequency of XY sperm increases with age in fathers of boys
with Klinefelter syndrome. Am J Hum Genet 69(5):1046, 2001
Lupton M, Oteng-Ntim E, Ayida G, et al: Cardiac disease in pregnancy. Curr Opin Obstet Gynecol
14(2):137, 2002
Mai CT, Kucik JE, Isenburg J, et al: Selected birth defects data from population-based birth defects
surveillance programs in the United States, 2006 to 2010: featuring trisomy conditions. Birth Defects
Res A Clin Mol Teratol 97(11):709, 2013
Malvestiti F, Agrati C, Grimi B, et al: Interpreting mosaicism in chorionic villi: results of a monocentric
series of 1001 mosaics in chorionic villi with follow-up amniocentesis. Prenat Diagn 35(11):1117,
2015
Manning M, Hudgins L: Professional Practice and Guidelines Committee: array-based technology and
recommendations for utilization in medical genetics practice for detection of chromosomal
abnormalities. Genet Med 12(11):742, 2010
Martinez-Portilla RJ, Pauta M, Hawkins-Villarreal A, et al: Added value of chromosomal microarray
analysis over conventional karyotyping in stillbirth work-up: systematic review and meta-analysis.
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 53(5):590, 2019
Massalska D, Bijok J, Ilnicka A, et al: Triploidy – variability of sonographic phenotypes. Prenat Diagn
37(8):774, 2017
McDonald-McGinn DM, Sullivan KE, Marino B, et al: 22q11.2 deletion syndrome. Nat Rev Dis Primers
1:15071, 2015
McGowan-Jordan J, Hastings RJ, Moore S (eds): ISCN 2020: An International System for Human
Cytogenomic Nomenclature. Basel, Karger, 2020
Meyer RE, Liu G, Gilboa SM, et al: Survival of children with trisomy 13 and trisomy 18: a multi-state
population-based study. Am J Med Genet Part A 170(4):825, 2016
Monaghan KG, Lyon E, Spector EB, et al: ACMG Standards and Guidelines for fragile X testing: a
revision to the disease-specific supplements to the Standards and Guidelines for Clinical Genetics
Laboratories of the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics. Genet Med 15(7):575,
2013

MRC Vitamin Study Research Group: Prevention of neural tube defects: results of the Medical
Research Council Vitamin Study. Lancet 338(8760):131, 1991
National Center for Biotechnology Information: GeneReviews. 2021. Available at:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1116/. Accessed October 4, 2021
National Center for Biotechnology Information: GTR: Genetic Testing Registry. 2021. Available at:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gtr/. Accessed October 4, 2021
National Library of Medicine: MedlinePlus Genetics. 2021. Available at:
https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/. Accessed October 4, 2021
Nelson DL: The fragile X syndromes. Semin Cell Biol 6(1):5, 1995
Nelson KE, Rosella LC, Mahant S, et al: Survival and surgical interventions for children with trisomy 13
and 18. JAMA 316(4):420, 2016
Nolin SL, Brown WT, Glickspan A, et al: Expansion of the fragile X CGG repeat in females with
premutation or intermediate alleles. Am J Hum Genet 72(2):454, 2003
Nora JJ, Nora AH: Updates on counseling the family with a first-degree relative with a congenital heart
defect. Am J Med Genet 29(1):137, 1988
Norton ME, Brar H, Weiss J, et al: Non-Invasive Chromosomal Evaluation (NICE) study: results of a
multicenter prospective cohort study for detection of fetal trisomy 21 and trisomy 18. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 207(2):137.e1, 2012
Nussbaum RL, McInnes RR, Willard HF (eds): Complex inheritance of common multifactorial traits. In
Thompson & Thompson Genetics in Medicine, 8th ed. Philadelphia, Saunders, 2016
Olsson A, Hellgren M, Berntorp E, et al: Clotting factor level is not a good predictor of bleeding in
carriers of haemophilia A and B. Blood Coagul Fibrinolysis 25(5):471, 2014
Oniya O, Neves K, Ahmed B, et al: A review of the reproductive consequences of consanguinity. Eur J
Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 232(1):87, 2019
Parker SE, Mai CT, Canfield MA, et al: Updated national birth prevalence estimates for selected birth
defects in the United States, 2004–2006. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol 88(12):1008, 2010
Patau K, Smith DW, Therman E, et al: Multiple congenital anomaly caused by an extra autosome.
Lancet 1(7128):790, 1960
Pergament E, Cuckle H, Zimmermann B, et al: Single-nucleotide polymorphism-based noninvasive
prenatal screening in a high-risk and low-risk cohort. Obstet Gynecol 124(2pt1):210, 2014
Petersen JM, Parker SE, Benedum CM, et al: Periconceptional folic acid and risk for neural tube
defects among higher risk pregnancies. Birth Defects Res 111(19):1501, 2019
Petrovski S, Aggarwal V, Giordano JL, et al. Whole-exome sequencing in the evaluation of fetal
structural anomalies: a prospective cohort study. Lancet 393(10173):758, 2019
Platt LD, Koch R, Hanley WB, et al: The international study of pregnancy outcome in women with
maternal phenylketonuria: report of a 12-year study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 182(2):326, 2000
Plug I, Mauser-Bunschoten EP, Brocker-Vriends AH, et al: Bleeding in carriers of hemophilia. Blood
108(1):52, 2006
Quezada MS, Gil MM, Francisco C, et al: Screening for trisomies 21, 18, and 13 by cell-free DNA
analysis of maternal blood at 10–11 weeks. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 45(1):36, 2015
Radicioni AF, Ferlin A, Balercia G, et al: Consensus statement on diagnosis and clinical management of
Klinefelter syndrome. J Endocrinol Invest 33(11):839, 2010
Rankin J, Tennant PWG, Bythell M, et al: Predictors of survival in children born with Down syndrome: a
registry-based study. Pediatrics 129(6):e1373, 2012

Reddy UM, Abuhamad AZ, Levine D, et al: Fetal Imaging. Executive summary of a joint Eunice
Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, Society for MaternalFetal Medicine, American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine, American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists, American College of Radiology, Society for Pediatric Radiology, and Society of
Radiologists in Ultrasound Fetal Imaging Workshop. Obstet Gynecol 123(5):1070, 2014
Reddy UM, Goldenberg R, Silver R, et al: Stillbirth classification—developing an international consensus
for research: executive summary of a National Institute of Child Health and Human Development
workshop. Obstet Gynecol 114(4):901, 2009
Reddy UM, Grier PP, Saade GR, et al: Karyotype versus microarray testing for genetic abnormalities
after stillbirth. N Engl J Med 367(23):2185, 2012
Romeo G, Bittles AH: Consanguinity in the contemporary world. Hum Hered 77(1):6, 2014
Rosa RF, Rosa RC, Lorenzen MB, et al: Trisomy 18: experience of a reference hospital from the south
of Brazil. Am J Med Genet A 155A(7):1529, 2011
Samango-Sprouse CA, Lasutschinkow P, Powell S, et al: The incidence of anxiety symptoms in boys
with 47,XXY (Klinefelter syndrome) and the possible impact of timing of diagnosis and hormonal
replacement therapy. Am J Med Genet Part A 179(3):423, 2019
Schmickel RD: Contiguous gene syndromes: a component of recognizable syndromes. J Pediatr
109(2):231, 1986
Schneider AS, Mennuti MT, Zackai EH: High cesarean section rate in trisomy 18 births: a potential
indication for late prenatal diagnosis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 140(4):367, 1981
Schorge JO: Ovarian germ cell and sex cord-stromal tumors. In Hoffman BL, Schorge JO, Halvorson
LM, et al (eds): Williams Gynecology, 4th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2020
Shaffer LG, Agan N, Goldberg JD, et al: American College of Medical Genetics Statement on
diagnostic testing for uniparental disomy. Genet Med 3(3):206, 2001
Sheridan E, Wright J, Small N, et al: Risk factors for congenital anomaly in a multiethnic birth cohort: an
analysis of the Born in Branford study. Lancet 382(9901):1350, 2013
Shin M, Besser LM, Kucik JE, et al: Prevalence of Down syndrome in children and adolescents in 10
regions of the United States. Pediatrics 124(6):1565, 2009
Shipp TD, Benacerraf BR: Second trimester ultrasound screening for chromosomal abnormalities.
Prenat Diagn 22(4):296, 2002
Shprintzen RJ: Velo-cardio-facial syndrome: 30 years of study. Dev Disabil Res Rev 14(1):3, 2008
Silasi M, Rana S, Powe C, et al: Placental expression of angiogenic factors in trisomy 13. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 204(6):546.e1, 2011
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine: The use of chromosomal microarray for prenatal diagnosis.
SMFM Consult Series No. 41. October 2016
Spence JE, Perciaccante RG, Greig FM, et al: Uniparental disomy as a mechanism for human genetic
disease. Am J Hum Genet 42(2):217, 1988
Spotila LD, Sereda L, Prockop DJ: Partial isodisomy for maternal chromosome 7 and short stature in an
individual with a mutation at the COLIA2 locus. Am J Hum Genet 51(6):1396, 1992
Springett A, Wellesley D, Greenlees R, et al: Congenital anomalies associated with trisomy 18 or trisomy
13: a registry-based study in 16 European countries, 2000–2011. Am J Med Genet A 167A(12):3062,
2015
Stevenson DA, Carey JC: Contribution of malformations and genetic disorders to mortality in a
children’s hospital. Am J Med Genet 126A(4):393, 2004
Stoll C, Dott B, Alembik Y, et al: Associated congenital anomalies among cases with Down syndrome.
Eur J Med Genet 58(12):674, 2015

Stoltenberg C, Magnus P, Lie RT, et al: Birth defects and parental consanguinity in Norway. Am J
Epidemiol 145(5):439, 1997
Tartaglia N, Ayari N, Howell S, et al: 48,XXYY, 48,XXXY, and 49,XXXXY syndromes: not just variants
of Klinefelter syndrome. Acta Paediatrica 100(6):851, 2011
Tartaglia NR, Howell S, Sutherland A, et al: A review of trisomy X (47,XXX). Orphanet J Rare Dis 5:8,
2010
Toriello HV, Meck JM, Professional Practice and Guidelines Committee: Statement on guidance for
genetic counseling in advanced paternal age. Genet Med 10(6):457, 2008
Toutain J, Goutte-Gattat D, Horovitz J, et al: Confined placental mosaicism revised: impact on pregnancy
characteristics and outcome. PLoS One 13(4):e0195905, 2018
Tran SL, Samango-Sprouse CA, Sadeghin T, et al: Hormonal replacement therapy and its potential
influence on working memory and competency/adaptive functioning in 47,XXY (Klinefelter
syndrome). Am J Med Genet Part A 179(12):2374, 2019
Tuohy JF, James DK: Pre-eclampsia and trisomy 13. BJOG 99(11):891, 1992
Turner HH: A syndrome of infantilism, congenital webbed neck and cubitus valgus. Endocrinol 23:566,
1938
Vendola C, Canfield M, Daiger SP, et al: Survival of Texas infants born with trisomies 21, 18, and 13.
Am J Med Genet A 152A(2):360, 2010
Vockley J, Andersson HC, Antshel KM, et al: ACMG Practice Guidelines: phenylalanine hydroxylase
deficiency: diagnosis and management guideline. Genet Med 16(2):188, 2014
Wang J, Chen L, Zhou C, et al. Prospective chromosome analysis of 3429 amniocentesis samples in
China using copy number variation sequencing. Am J Obstet Gynecol 219(3):287, 2018
Wang Y, Chen Y, Tian F, et al: Maternal mosaicism is a significant contributor to discordant sex
chromosomal aneuploidies associated with non-invasive prenatal testing. Clin Chem 60(1):251, 2014
Watson WJ, Miller RC, Wax JR, et al: Sonographic findings of trisomy 18 in the second trimester of
pregnancy. J Ultrasound Med 27(7):1033, 2008
Wellesley D, Dolk H, Boyd PA, et al: Rare chromosome abnormalities, prevalence, and prenatal
diagnosis rates from population-based congenital anomaly registers in Europe. Eur J Hum Genet
20(5):521, 2012
Wigby K, D’Epagnier C, Howell S, et al: Expanding the phenotype of triple X syndrome: a comparison
of prenatal versus postnatal diagnosis. Am J Med Genet Part A 170(11):2870, 2016
Wilkie AOM, Goriely A: Gonadal mosaicism and non-invasive prenatal diagnosis for reassurance in
sporadic paternal age effect (PAE) disorders. Prenat Diagn 23(9):946, 2017
Worton RG, Stern R: A Canadian collaborative study of mosaicism in amniotic fluid cell cultures. Prenat
Diagn 4(7):131, 1984
Wou K, Hyun Y, Chitayat D, et al: Analysis of tissue from products of conception and perinatal losses
using QF-PCR and microarray: a three-year retrospective study resulting in an efficient protocol.
Eur J Med Genet 59(8):417, 2016
Zalel Y, Shapiro I, Weissmann-Brenner A, et al: Prenatal sonographic features of triploidy at 12–16
weeks. Prenat Diagn 36(7)650, 2016
Zhang J, Li J, Saucier JB, et al. Non-invasive prenatal sequencing for multiple Mendelian monogenic
disorders using circulating cell-free DNA. Nat Med 2019;25(3):439

CHAPTER 17

Prenatal Diagnosis

HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE
CELL-FREE DNA SCREENING
ANALYTE-BASED ANEUPLOIDY SCREENING
ULTRASOUND SCREENING
CARRIER SCREENING FOR GENETIC DISORDERS
AMNIOCENTESIS
CHORIONIC VILLUS SAMPLING
PREIMPLANTATION GENETIC TESTS
REFERENCES
Prenatal diagnosis is the science of identifying congenital abnormalities and
genetic conditions in the fetus. It encompasses the diagnosis of structural
malformations with specialized ultrasound, screening tests for aneuploidy,
carrier screening for genetic diseases, and diagnostic tests performed on
chorionic villi and amnionic fluid.
Based on population-based registry data including births, fetal deaths,
and pregnancy terminations, 4 per 1000 pregnancies have a chromosomal
abnormality (Wellesley, 2012). If chromosomal microarray analysis (CMA)
is performed on chorionic villi or amnionic fluid, an additional 4 per 1000
are found to have a pathogenic copy number variant, such as a microdeletion

or microduplication (Srebniak, 2017). It is important for all pregnant women
to be offered both screening and diagnostic tests.
The goal of prenatal diagnosis is to provide accurate information about
short- and long-term prognosis, recurrence risk, and potential therapy.
Nondirective counseling and provision of unbiased knowledge are
paramount. Management of an affected pregnancy that includes diagnostic
testing, discussion of potential fetal therapy options and postnatal care, and
decisions related to expectant management or pregnancy termination are all
incorporated into counseling (Flessel, 2011). Fetal imaging of congenital
anomalies is discussed in Chapter 15, fetal therapy in Chapter 19, and
pregnancy termination in Chapter 11.

HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE
Nearly 50 years ago, Brock (1972, 1973) observed that pregnancies
complicated by neural-tube defects had higher levels of alpha-fetoprotein
(AFP) in maternal serum and amnionic fluid. Widespread serum screening
began in 1977, after a collaborative trial from the United Kingdom
established the association between elevated maternal serum AFP levels
(MSAFP) and fetal open neural-tube defects (Wald, 1977). Screening at 16
to 18 weeks’ gestation detected 90 percent of fetuses with anencephaly and
80 percent of those with open spina bifida, similar to current screening
performance (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019c).
The terms level I and level II ultrasound were coined in this context. In
the California MSAFP Screening Program of the 1980s and early 1990s, the
first step in evaluation of an abnormally elevated MSAFP was a level I
ultrasound examination. This screening examination demonstrated that one
third of pregnancies with MSAFP elevation had incorrect gestational age,
multifetal gestation, or fetal demise as the etiology (Filly, 1993).
Amniocentesis was then offered to the remaining two thirds. If the amnionic
fluid AFP concentration was elevated, a level II ultrasound examination was
performed to detect and characterize a fetal abnormality.
Additionally, an elevated amnionic fluid AFP level prompted a
concurrent assay for amnionic fluid acetylcholinesterase. Because
acetylcholinesterase leaks from the exposed neural tissue into the amnionic
fluid, presence of both analytes was used to confirm the diagnosis. However,

other fetal abnormalities are associated with elevated amnionic fluid AFP
and positive assay results for acetylcholinesterase. These include ventral
wall defects, esophageal atresia, fetal teratoma, cloacal exstrophy, and skin
abnormalities such as epidermolysis bullosa.
Most neural-tube defects are now detected with a standard ultrasound
examination, and the detailed ultrasound examination is the preferred
diagnostic test (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists,
2019c; Dashe, 2006). Level II ultrasound is no longer an appropriate
synonym for detailed ultrasound examination, because the study now includes
a much more comprehensive evaluation of fetal anatomy (Chap. 14, p. 251).
As MSAFP screening was being adopted, the designation “advanced
maternal age” (AMA) became popular. A 1979 National Institutes of Health
Consensus Development Conference recommended advising pregnant women
who were 35 years and older about the possibility of amniocentesis for fetal
karyotyping. The threshold was based on the greater risk for selected fetal
chromosomal abnormalities with increasing maternal age (Table 17-1).
There was also an assumption that the loss rate attributable to amniocentesis
was equivalent to the fetal Down syndrome risk at maternal age 35. This is
no longer the case.
TABLE 17-1. Estimated Risks for Fetal Trisomy 21 and Any Aneuploidy
According to Maternal Age and Timing of Diagnosis

In 1984, Merkatz and colleagues reported that midtrimester MSAFP
levels were lower in pregnancies with trisomies 21 and 18 than in unaffected
pregnancies. Maternal age was incorporated into the calculation, which
enabled assignment of a specific risk (DiMaio, 1987; New England Regional
Genetics Group, 1989). The MSAFP screen detected approximately 25
percent of cases of fetal trisomy 21 when the threshold ratio for a positive
result was set at 1:270—the approximate second-trimester risk at maternal
age 35. This trisomy 21 risk threshold and the associated 5-percent falsepositive rate became standards that remain in use in some laboratories.

ANEUPLOIDY SCREENING
Aneuploidy is the presence of one or more extra chromosomes, usually
resulting in trisomy, or loss of a chromosome—monosomy (Chap. 16, p.
309). Of recognized pregnancies with chromosomal abnormalities, trisomy
21 accounts for approximately half of cases; trisomy 18 accounts for 15
percent; trisomy 13, for 5 percent; and the sex chromosomal abnormalities—
45,X, 47,XXX, 47,XXY, and 47,XYY—for approximately 12 percent.
Screening tests are available for some or all of these aneuploidies.

The risk for fetal trisomy increases with maternal age, particularly after
age 35 (Fig. 16-2, p. 310). The positive predictive value of all aneuploidy
screening tests is higher for women aged 35 years and older. Such women
account for 18 percent of deliveries in the United States (Fig. 17-1). At
Parkland Hospital, the majority of Down syndrome births occur in this age
group (Hussamy, 2019). Other important aneuploidy risk factors include a
numerical chromosomal abnormality or structural chromosomal
rearrangement in the woman or her partner—such as a balanced translocation
—or a prior pregnancy with autosomal trisomy or triploidy.

FIGURE 17-1 Trends in the percentage of births to women aged 35 to 44 years. (Data from the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2015, 2019).

Broadly speaking, there are two types of aneuploidy screening tests,
those that are analyte-based and those that are cell-free DNA-based. Cellfree DNA (cfDNA) screening is more sensitive and specific than analytebased screening, and it has a much higher positive predictive value. One
prospective screening study for trisomy 21 in 15,000 pregnancies found that
the average positive predictive value was 80 percent for cfDNA but only 3
percent for first-trimester screening (Norton, 2015). However, analyte-based
screening has the unusual benefit that an abnormal result may indicate a
genetic abnormality for which screening was not specifically performed (p.
337). The position of the American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2020e) is that no one screening test is superior in all

circumstances. No aneuploidy screening test is diagnostic, and prenatal
diagnosis is strongly recommended before acting upon a result.
There are selected circumstances in which aneuploidy screening is not
recommended. Following diagnosis of a major fetal abnormality, prenatal
diagnosis with amniocentesis or chorionic villus sampling is advised. The
fetal risk cannot be normalized with a negative aneuploidy screening result.
Screening results can be falsely negative, and major abnormalities confer
risk for genetic syndromes not identified through screening tests. Analytebased screening tests are not valid in the setting of an abnormality that affects
the AFP component, such as a neural-tube defect or ventral-wall defect.
Additionally, all aneuploidy screening methods are less accurate in twin
gestations and are invalid in triplet gestations and higher-order multiples.
Aneuploidy screening should be an informed patient choice that
incorporates the patient’s clinical circumstances, values, interests, and goals.
Counseling should be individualized, with the understanding that at least 20
percent of women prefer not to receive aneuploidy screening, even when
financial barriers are removed (Kuppermann, 2014). Elements of counseling
prior to aneuploidy screening are listed in Table 17-2. The screening test(s)
offered and elected may depend on factors such as gestational age, provider
location or practice setting, and the patient’s out-of-pocket costs.
TABLE 17-2. Aneuploidy Screening Counseling Elements

■ Test Characteristics
Validity characteristics convey information about how well an aneuploidy
screening test differentiates affected from unaffected pregnancies. The
sensitivity, also known as the detection rate, is the proportion of fetuses with
a particular aneuploidy who are detected by the screening test. The converse
is the false-negative rate. If a woman elects a first-trimester aneuploidy
screen with a sensitivity of 80 percent for trisomy 21, the false-negative rate
is 20 percent, so the test is anticipated to miss 1 in 5 affected pregnancies.
Specificity is the proportion of unaffected pregnancies with a negative
screening result. The converse of specificity is the false-positive rate, those
without aneuploidy who nonetheless screen positive. Because aneuploidies
are individually uncommon, the screen-positive rate, which is the overall
proportion of tests with a positive result, is usually similar to the falsepositive rate. Aneuploidy screening tests generally have screen-positive
rates no higher than 5 percent.
Sensitivity and specificity do not convey any information regarding
individual risk. The positive predictive value (PPV) is the proportion with a

positive screening result who have an aneuploid fetus. PPV may be viewed
as the test result. It is usually expressed as a 1:X ratio or as a percentage.
Because PPV is directly affected by disease prevalence, it is higher in
women aged 35 years and older than in younger women (Table 17-3).
Negative predictive value is the proportion of those with a negative
screening test result who have unaffected (euploid) fetuses. Because the
prevalence of aneuploidy is low, the negative predictive value of all
aneuploidy screening tests generally exceeds 99 percent (Gil, 2017; Norton,
2015).
TABLE 17-3. Positive Predictive Value of Cell-Free DNA Screening for
Autosomal Trisomies and Sex Chromosome Abnormalities, According to
Maternal Age at Term

■ Cell-free DNA Screening
This screening test identifies DNA fragments derived primarily from
apoptotic trophoblasts, which are placental cells undergoing programmed
cell death. Thus, the term cell-free fetal DNA is a misnomer. Differences
between placental and fetal DNA may cause false-positive and falsenegative results. There are three types of assays: whole-genome sequencing,
chromosome selective or targeted sequencing, and single nucleotide
polymorphism analysis. CfDNA screening can be performed at any time after
9 to 10 weeks’ gestation. When it was first introduced, cfDNA screening was
offered primarily to pregnancies with increased aneuploidy risk, but it has

since become widely available (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2020e).
CfDNA screening is most commonly used to screen for autosomal
trisomies—trisomy 21, trisomy 18, and trisomy 13. It may also be used to
screen for 45,X (Turner syndrome), 47,XXX, 47,XXY, and 47,XYY. A recent
metaanalysis concluded that the number of reported sex aneuploidy cases is
too small for accurate assessment of screening performance (Gil, 2017). The
prognosis for these sex chromosomal aneuploidies differs considerably from
that of the autosomal trisomies (Chap. 16, p. 313). If screening for sex
chromosomal abnormalities is elected, counseling should include this
information.
CfDNA has the highest sensitivity and specificity of any aneuploidy
screening test. In a metaanalysis of 35 studies of largely high-risk
pregnancies, the pooled sensitivity to detect trisomy 21 was 99.7 percent,
and for trisomies 18 and 13, 98 percent and 99 percent, respectively (Gil,
2017). For each of these autosomal trisomies, the specificity is 99.9 percent,
and the combined false-positive rate is less than 0.2 percent. If the screening
platform includes other genetic conditions, each additional condition
increases the overall false-positive rate for the test.
The PPV of a positive cfDNA result is provided in the report or may be
estimated from an online calculator or reference table (see Table 17-3).
Because the risk estimate for each aneuploidy depends on maternal age, such
information may be included as part of pretest counseling. This can help to
avoid the misconception that a positive screen indicates aneuploidy—it does
not.
Because cfDNA screening has a PPV far higher than analyte screening, it
may be offered as a secondary screening test for women who wish to avoid
amniocentesis. Such an approach has important caveats. If cfDNA is used as
a secondary screening test and yields a negative result, the residual risk for a
chromosomal abnormality may be as high as 2 percent (Norton, 2014). And,
if the cfDNA result is positive, the delay in definitive diagnosis may affect
management options.
In addition to the aforementioned aneuploidies, cfDNA screening is
available for other genetic conditions. These include aneuploidies such as
trisomies 16 and 22, specific microdeletion syndromes, and large copy
number changes throughout the genome. Currently, the American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020e) does not recommend cfDNA

screening for these other conditions. Sensitivity and specificity of cfDNA
screening have not been established for them, and screening accuracy has not
been validated clinically.

Limitations of cfDNA Screening
In 2 to 4 percent of pregnancies screened with cfDNA, no result is obtained.
These cases are termed “no-call,” or indeterminate. With a no-call result, the
fetal aneuploidy risk is as high as 4 percent (Norton, 2015). As shown in
Table 17-4, this result is similar to the average risk conferred by a positive
analyte screening test result.
TABLE 17-4. Characteristics of Screening Tests for Trisomy 21 in
Singletons

Low fetal fraction is a common reason for no-call results. The fetal
fraction is the proportion of cfDNA in the maternal circulation that is

placental rather than maternal in origin. The fetal fraction approximates 10
percent in the late first trimester, increasing slightly thereafter (Ashoor, 2013;
Scott, 2018). Low fetal fraction is usually defined as <4 percent of the total,
and it is more prevalent before 10 weeks’ gestation and in the setting of
maternal obesity (Ashoor, 2013; Juul, 2020; Scott, 2018). The no-call rate
may exceed 10 to 20 percent in women whose body mass index is 40 kg/m2
or greater (Juul, 2020). Low fetal fraction is also more common in the setting
of aneuploidy, particularly trisomies 18 and 13 (Norton, 2015; Pergament,
2014). The American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics
recommends that the fetal fraction be included in cfDNA reports because it
assists with interpretation of results (Gregg, 2016). Pretest counseling should
include the possibility of a no-call result and its clinical significance (see
Table 17-2).
If the cfDNA screening test is positive or yields a no-call result,
additional genetic counseling is indicated, and amniocentesis should be
offered. If cfDNA screening is repeated, the risk for repeat screen failure
approximates 40 percent (Dar, 2014; Quezada, 2015; Rolnik, 2018).
Detailed ultrasound examination may be offered, but it is not a substitute for
amniocentesis, and the residual aneuploidy risk following normal detailed
ultrasound examination is unknown.
It is important to remember that cfDNA results may not reflect the fetal
DNA complement. Rather, a positive result may be caused by confined
placental mosaicism or early demise of an aneuploid co-twin. Alternately, it
may indicate maternal aneuploidy, mosaicism, or even occult maternal
malignancy (Bianchi, 2015; Curnow, 2015; Grati, 2014; Wang, 2014). If
ultrasound identifies an empty second gestational sac, cfDNA screening is
not recommended. The patient should be informed of such limitations prior to
screening.

■ Analyte-based Aneuploidy Screening
The three categories of multiple marker-serum analyte screening are firsttrimester screens, second-trimester screens, and combined first- and secondtrimester screens. The serum concentration of each analyte is converted to a
multiple of the median (MoM) of the unaffected population by adjusting for
maternal age, maternal weight, and gestational age. The serum AFP
concentration is further adjusted for maternal race and for presence of

diabetes, which affect calculation of neural-tube defect risk (Greene, 1988;
Huttly, 2004).
The analyte-based screening result is based on a composite likelihood
ratio, and the maternal age-related risk is multiplied by this ratio. Adjustment
normalizes the distribution of analyte levels and permits comparison of
results from different laboratories and populations. Each woman is provided
with a specific risk for trisomy 21 and for trisomy 18—or in the first
trimester, for trisomy 18 or 13 in some cases. Each screening test has a
predetermined value at or above which it is deemed “positive” or abnormal.
For second-trimester tests, this threshold has traditionally been set at the risk
for fetal Down syndrome at a maternal age of 35 years—approximately 1 in
270 in the second trimester. The trisomy 21 risk may be further modified
based on selected ultrasound markers (p. 340).
A benefit of analyte screening is that pregnancies with abnormal results
may have genetic abnormalities other than those for which screening was
performed. For example, in a review of more than 2500 pregnancies with
genetic abnormalities from the California Prenatal Screening Program,
combined first- and second-trimester screening results were abnormal in 93
percent with trisomies 21 and 18 (Norton, 2016). However, results were
also abnormal in 80 percent with trisomy 13, in 80 percent with 45,X, in
nearly 60 percent with other sex chromosomal abnormalities, and in more
than 50 percent with other genetic abnormalities. Alamillo and associates
(2013) similarly identified an abnormal karyotype other than trisomies 21,
18, or 13 in 2 percent of pregnancies with abnormal first-trimester screening
results, accounting for 30 percent of abnormal karyotypes in the series.
Women younger than 35 are at lower risk for the specific autosomal
trisomies for which cfDNA screening is typically performed. Thus, if the
goal is to select a screening test that will identify the highest proportion of
fetuses with any chromosomal abnormality, the yield may be comparable or
even slightly higher with integrated or sequential screening than with current
cfDNA screening (Baer, 2015; Norton, 2014).

First-trimester Aneuploidy Screening
This test includes human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG), pregnancyassociated plasma protein A (PAPP-A), and ultrasound measurement of the
nuchal translucency (NT). It is performed between 11 and 14 weeks’

gestation. Pregnancies with fetal trisomy 21 are characterized by higher
levels of hCG and lower PAPP-A. With trisomy 18 and trisomy 13, levels of
both analytes are lower (Cuckle, 2000; Malone, 2005b).
Nuchal Translucency. This is the maximum thickness of the subcutaneous
translucent area between the skin and soft tissue overlying the fetal spine at
the back of the neck (Fig. 17-2). It is measured in the sagittal plane and is
valid when the crown-rump length (CRL) measurement is between 38 to 45
mm and 84 mm, with the lower limit varying according to the laboratory.
Measurement criteria are listed in Table 14–4 (p. 250). The NT should be
imaged and measured with a high degree of precision for aneuploidy
detection to be accurate. This has led to standardized training, certification,
and ongoing quality review programs.

FIGURE 17-2 Sagittal image of a normal, 12-week fetus shows correct caliper placement (+) for
nuchal translucency measurement. The fetal nasal bone and overlying skin are indicated. The nasal tip
and the 3rd and 4th ventricles (asterisk), which are other landmarks that should be visible in the nasal
bone image, also are shown. (Reproduced with permission from Dr. Michael Zaretsky.)

An increased NT is not a fetal abnormality but rather a marker that
confers increased risk. It is helpful to differentiate from cystic hygroma,

which appears sonographically as a septated hypoechoic space behind the
neck that extends down the back (Fig. 15-30, p. 286). The fetal aneuploidy
risk is five times greater with first-trimester cystic hygroma than with
increased NT (Malone, 2005a). An increased NT measurement is associated
with other genetic syndromes and various birth defects, especially fetal
cardiac abnormalities (Clur 2008; Simpson, 2007). If the NT measurement is
at least 3 mm or reaches the 99th percentile for CRL, a detailed ultrasound
examination should be offered. Similarly, fetal echocardiography may be
considered if the NT measurement is at least 3 mm and is recommended if the
NT measurement is 3.5 mm or greater (American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists, 2020e; American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine,
2019).
As an isolated marker, NT detects only 70 percent of trisomy 21 fetuses,
and for this reason it is not used to screen singleton pregnancies (Alldred,
2017; Malone, 2005b). If cfDNA screening has already been performed, the
NT measurement does not improve fetal aneuploidy detection and is not
recommended for this purpose (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2020e; Reiff, 2016). NT evaluation may be helpful in
multifetal gestations because serum screening is less accurate, may not be
available, and cannot provide information specific to each fetus. The NT
distribution is similar in twins and singletons (Cleary-Goldman, 2005).
Efficacy of First-trimester Screening. Before first-trimester screening
became widely adopted, four large prospective trials were conducted,
together including more than 100,000 pregnancies (Reddy, 2006). When the
screen-positive rate was set at 5 percent, trisomy 21 detection was 84
percent. A recent metaanalysis also reported detection of 87 percent of
trisomy 21 fetuses (Alldred, 2017). First-trimester screening similarly
detects approximately 80 percent of fetuses with trisomy 18 and 50 percent
with trisomy 13 (Norton, 2015).
Maternal age affects the performance of first-trimester aneuploidy
screening. In women younger than age 35 at delivery, fetal trisomy 21
detection ranges from 67 to 75 percent (Malone, 2005b; Wapner, 2003).
Among women older than 35 at delivery, detection is as high as 90 to 95
percent, albeit at a higher false-positive rate of 15 to 22 percent.
In twin pregnancies, serum free β-hCG and PAPP-A levels are
approximately double the singleton values (Vink, 2012). Even with specific

curves, a normal dichorionic co-twin will tend to normalize screening
results. Thus the aneuploidy detection rate is at least 15-percent lower (Bush,
2005).
Analyte abnormalities are termed unexplained if prenatal diagnostic
testing results are normal. There is a significant association between serum
PAPP-A levels below the 5th percentile and preterm birth, growth
restriction, preeclampsia, and fetal demise (Cignini, 2016; Dugoff, 2004;
Jelliffe-Pawlowski, 2015). Similarly, low levels of free β-hCG have been
associated with fetal demise (Goetzl, 2004). The sensitivity and PPVs of
these markers are too low to make them clinically useful as screening tests
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020c).

Second-trimester Aneuploidy Screening
The quadruple marker or “quad” screening test is performed from 15 through
20 or 21 weeks’ gestation depending on the laboratory. Pregnancies with
fetal trisomy 21 are characterized by lower MSAFP, higher hCG, lower
unconjugated estriol, and higher dimeric inhibin levels. In large prospective
trials, trisomy 21 detection was 81 to 83 percent at a 5-percent screenpositive rate (Malone, 2005b; Wald, 1996, 2003). In cases of trisomy 18,
levels of MSAFP, hCG, and unconjugated estriol are all decreased, and
inhibin is not part of the calculation. Trisomy 18 detection is similar to that
for trisomy 21, but the false-positive rate is just 0.5 percent (Benn, 1999). As
with first-trimester screening, aneuploidy detection rates are lower in
younger women and higher in women older than 35 years at delivery. If
second-trimester serum screening is used in twin pregnancies, aneuploidy
detection rates are significantly lower (Vink, 2012).
Quadruple-marker screening offers no benefit over first-trimester
screening from the standpoint of trisomy 21 or trisomy 18 detection. As a
stand-alone test, it is generally used if women do not begin care until the
second trimester or if first-trimester screening and cfDNA screening are not
available. In 2019, women who initiated prenatal care beyond the first
trimester made up more than 20 percent of pregnancies in the United States
(Martin, 2020). As subsequently discussed, combining first- and secondtrimester screening yields greater aneuploidy detection.
Maternal Serum AFP Elevation: Neural-tube Defect Screening. AFP is the
major protein in fetal serum, analogous to albumin in a child or adult.

Defects in fetal integument, such as neural-tube and ventral-wall defects,
permit AFP to leak into the amnionic fluid and result in dramatically
increased maternal serum levels. Accurate gestational age assessment is
imperative because the AFP value rises by approximately 15 percent per
week during the screening window (Knight, 1992).
Using an MSAFP level of 2.5 MoM as the upper limit of normal, the
neural-tube defect detection rate approximates 95 percent for anencephaly
and 80 percent for spina bifida, with a screen-positive rate of 1 to 3 percent
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019c; Palomaki,
2019). The overall PPV approximates just 2 percent. Higher screening
threshold values are used in twin pregnancies, which have twice the AFP
level of singletons (Cuckle, 1990). Importantly, because nearly all cases of
anencephaly and most with spina bifida are detected during the standard
second-trimester ultrasound examination, MSAFP screening is considered
optional (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019c;
Dashe, 2006; Norem, 2005).
If the serum AFP is elevated, a detailed ultrasound examination is
recommended, and characteristic sonographic findings are diagnostic (Chap.
15, p. 276). Other abnormalities and conditions also may result in MSAFP
elevation (Table 17-5). Amniocentesis for measurement of amnionic fluid
AFP and acetylcholinesterase levels can help to diagnose whether a
myelomeningocele is open or closed, which is relevant when considering
fetal surgical repair (Chap. 19, p. 372).
TABLE 17-5. Conditions Associated with MSAFP Level Elevation

Most pregnancies with MSAFP elevation have no fetal abnormality. The
patient should receive counseling about the benefits and limitations of
detailed ultrasound examination for the diagnosis of neural-tube defects and
other potential etiologies. These include other fetal abnormalities, placental
abnormalities, and selected adverse pregnancy outcomes (Table 17-5). The
likelihood of any abnormality or adverse outcome increases in proportion to
the AFP level.

There are similarly significant associations between second-trimester
elevation of either hCG or dimeric inhibin alpha levels and adverse
pregnancy outcomes. The likelihood of adverse outcome is greater if multiple
analytes are elevated (Dugoff, 2005). The sensitivity and positive predictive
values of these markers are considered too low to be useful for screening or
management. No specific program of maternal or fetal surveillance has been
found to favorably affect pregnancy outcomes (Dugoff, 2010).
Low Maternal Serum Estriol Level. A maternal serum estriol level less than
0.25 MoM has been associated with two uncommon but important conditions.
Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome is an autosomal recessive condition resulting
from mutations in the 7-dehydrocholesterol reductase gene. It is
characterized by abnormalities of the central nervous system, heart, kidney,
and extremities; with ambiguous genitalia; and with fetal-growth restriction.
Detailed sonography should be offered if an unconjugated estriol level is
<0.25 MoM (American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine, 2019; Dugoff,
2010). An elevated amnionic fluid 7-dehydrocholesterol level can confirm
the diagnosis.
The second condition is steroid sulfatase deficiency, also known as Xlinked ichthyosis. It is typically an isolated condition, but it may also occur
in the setting of a contiguous gene deletion syndrome (Chap. 16, p. 315). In
such cases, it may be associated with Kallmann syndrome, chondrodysplasia
punctata, and/or mental retardation (Langlois, 2009). If the estriol level is
<0.25 MoM and the fetus appears to be male, chromosomal microarray
analysis or fluorescence in situ hybridization to assess the steroid sulfatase
locus on the X-chromosome may be considered.

Integrated and Sequential Screening
If first-trimester screening is combined with second-trimester screening,
aneuploidy detection is significantly improved. Combined screening test
options require that specimens are obtained at the correct gestational age and
sent to the same laboratory. The first- and second-trimester components
cannot be performed independently, because the false-positive rate would be
higher and providing accurate risk assessment would be problematic.
Three types of screening strategies are available:

1. Integrated screening combines results of first- and second-trimester tests.
This includes a combined measurement of fetal NT and serum analyte
levels at 11 to 14 weeks’ gestation plus quadruple markers at
approximately 15 to 21 weeks. Trisomy 21 detection is 94 to 96 percent
(see Table 17-4).
2. Sequential screening involves informing the patient of the results after
first-trimester screening, with plan to offer prenatal diagnostic testing if the
calculated risk value lies above a specified threshold. There are two
testing strategies in this category:
• With stepwise sequential screening, women whose first-trimester risk is
at or below the threshold receive second-trimester screening. Using data
from the First- and Second-Trimester Evaluation of Risk trial, when the
first-trimester threshold is set at approximately 1:30, and the overall
threshold is set at 1:270, stepwise sequential screening resulted in a 92percent trisomy 21 detection rate (Cuckle, 2008). The false-positive rate
remained 5 percent (see Table 17-4).
• With contingent sequential screening, women are divided into high-,
moderate-, and low-risk groups. Those at highest risk for trisomy 21—
for example, risk >1:30, are counseled and offered diagnostic testing.
Women at moderate risk, between 1:30 and 1:1500, undergo secondtrimester screening, whereas those at lowest risk of <1:1500 receive
negative screening test results and have no further testing (Cuckle, 2008).
Using this strategy, more than 75 percent of those screened are provided
with reassuring results almost immediately. Assuming that women accept
diagnostic testing when informed that the risk is elevated, detection
approaches 91 percent.

■ Ultrasound Screening
Ultrasound can improve aneuploidy screening by providing accurate
gestational age assessment, by detecting multifetal gestations, and by
identifying major structural abnormalities and minor aneuploidy markers.
With rare exception, the aneuploidy risk associated with any major
abnormality is high enough to recommend prenatal diagnosis with
chromosomal microarray analysis. We do not recommend aneuploidy
screening after detection of a major abnormality, because of the many genetic
conditions are not detectable with screening tests. Counseling should include

the association of the abnormality with aneuploidy (Table 17-6). A caveat is
that fetal abnormalities are frequently not isolated, and associated-butundetectable abnormalities may greatly affect prognosis.
TABLE 17-6. Aneuploidy Risk Associated with Selected Major Fetal
Anomalies

Importantly, fetuses with trisomy 21 and other genetic syndromes may not
have obvious ultrasound abnormalities. Just one third of trisomy 21 fetuses
have a major abnormality identified with second-trimester ultrasound
evaluations (Bromley, 2002; Hussamy, 2019; Vintileos, 1995). If major
anomalies and minor aneuploidy markers are considered, 50 to 75 percent of
pregnancies affected by Down syndrome are found to have a sonographic
abnormality. This is not unexpected, because nearly 40 percent of infants
with trisomy 21 do not have major organ system abnormalities identified in
the newborn period (Hussamy, 2019). In contrast, the vast majority of fetuses
with trisomies 18 and 13 and with triploidy do have ultrasound abnormalities
detectable in the second trimester.

Aneuploidy Markers

For more than three decades, investigators have recognized that ultrasound
detection of aneuploidy, particularly trisomy 21, may be improved by minor
markers that are collectively referred to as “soft signs.” Minor markers are
normal variants rather than fetal abnormalities, and in the absence of
aneuploidy or an associated abnormality, they do not significantly affect
prognosis. One or more markers are present in at least 10 percent of
pregnancies (Bromley, 2002; Nyberg, 2003). Examples are listed in Table
17-7 and depicted in Figure 17-3. A minor marker is an indication for a
detailed survey of fetal anatomy to determine if it is isolated (American
Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine, 2019).
TABLE 17-7. First- and Second-Trimester Ultrasound Markers Associated
with Fetal Trisomy 21

FIGURE 17-3 Minor sonographic markers that are associated with increased risk for fetal Down
syndrome. A. Nuchal skinfold thickening (bracket). B. Echogenic intracardiac focus (arrow). C. Mild
renal pelvis dilatation (pyelectasis) (arrows). D. Echogenic bowel (arrow). E. Clinodactyly—hypoplasia
of the 5th finger middle phalanx creates an inward curvature (arrow). F. “Sandal-gap” (arrow).

If an isolated marker is identified and aneuploidy screening has not yet
been performed, it should be offered. A benefit of cfDNA screening is that
isolated aneuploidy markers no longer factor into the aneuploidy risk,
because the negative predictive value of a normal cfDNA test is so high.
Conversely, if a cfDNA result is abnormal, the absence of minor markers is
not considered reassuring.
First-trimester Markers. Detection of first-trimester findings associated with
aneuploidy requires specialized imaging. NT evaluation is discussed earlier
(p. 337). Other first-trimester markers are not routinely used in the United
States but may be available at specialized centers. The Perinatal Quality
Foundation’s Nuchal Translucency Quality Review Program offers an
education program in first-trimester nasal bone assessment. The Fetal
Medicine Foundation also provides online instruction and certification in
first-trimester assessment of nasal bone, ductus venosus flow, and tricuspid
flow.
There are additional benefits of first-trimester ultrasound evaluation in
women who elect aneuploidy screening, including accurate assessment of

gestational age and early detection of multifetal gestation or fetal demise. As
discussed in Chapter 14 (p. 249), standard first-trimester sonography may
identify selected major anomalies associated with aneuploidy, such as cystic
hygroma.
Second-trimester Markers. If analyte-based aneuploidy screening has been
performed, minor markers may be used to modify the risk using likelihood
ratios (Table 17-8). The risk increases with the number of markers
identified. Risk modification should follow a protocol that specifies criteria
for each marker (Reddy, 2014).
TABLE 17-8. Likelihood Ratios and False-Positive Rates for Isolated
Second-Trimester Markers Used in Trisomy 21 Screening Protocols

The nuchal skinfold is imaged in the transcerebellar view of the head
and is measured from the outer edge of the skull to the outer border of the
skin (see Fig. 17-3A). The skinfold is considered thickened if it measures ≥6
mm at 15 to 20 weeks (Benacerraf, 1985). This finding is seen in

approximately 1 per 200 pregnancies and confers more than tenfold risk for
trisomy 21 (Bromley, 2002; Nyberg, 2001; Smith-Bindman, 2001).
An echogenic intracardiac focus is a focal papillary muscle
calcification that is neither a structural nor functional cardiac abnormality
(see Fig. 17-3B). It is present in 4 to 7 percent of normal fetuses. The fetal
trisomy 21 risk is approximately doubled. The finding is more commonly
identified in Asian individuals (Shipp, 2000). Fetuses with trisomy 13 may
have bilateral echogenic foci (Nyberg, 2001).
Mild renal pelvis dilatation is usually transient or physiologic (Chap.
15, p. 298). The renal pelves are measured anterior-to-posterior in a
transverse image of the kidneys, with calipers placed at the inner borders of
the fluid collection (see Fig. 17-3C). A measurement ≥4 mm is found in
about 2 percent of fetuses and approximately doubles the risk for trisomy 21.
The degree of pelvic dilatation beyond 4 mm correlates with the likelihood
of an underlying renal abnormality, and third-trimester sonography is
recommended at approximately 32 weeks.
Echogenic fetal bowel is defined as bowel that is sonographically as
bright as fetal bone (see Fig. 17-3D). It is identified in approximately 0.5
percent of pregnancies and often represents a small amount of swallowed
blood, not infrequently in the setting of MSAFP elevation. The fetal trisomy
21 risk is increased approximately sixfold. Echogenic bowel is also
associated with fetal cytomegalovirus infection and cystic fibrosis—
representing inspissated meconium in the latter. Follow-up ultrasound
evaluation is suggested at 32 weeks’ gestation to evaluate fetal growth
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020e).
For the purpose of Down syndrome screening, the fetal femur and
humerus are considered short if below the 2.5th percentile for gestational
age (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020e). Thirdtrimester ultrasound evaluation is suggested to assess fetal growth. Fetuses
with trisomy 21 and short femur are not more likely to be growth restricted,
however (Herrera, 2019).
The fetal nasal bone is absent in 30 percent of second-trimester fetuses
with trisomy 21 and hypoplastic in more than 50 percent (Moreno-Cid,
2014). Absent nasal bone occurs in approximately 1 in 200 euploid fetuses
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020e; Viora, 2005).
The finding represents delayed ossification rather than true absence. The
nasal bone is measured between 15 and 22 weeks’ gestation. Hypoplasia

may be defined as shorter than 2.5 mm, as >2 standard deviations below the
mean, or based on a ratio to the biparietal diameter (Cicero, 2003). The fetal
profile and nasal bone are components of the detailed fetal anatomic survey,
but they are not assessed as part of the standard examination and thus not
used for routine screening (American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine,
2019).
One or more choroid plexus cysts are seen in 1 to 2 percent of euploid
pregnancies (Fig. 16-5, p. 312). The cyst is a benign, normal variant of no
clinical consequence. If associated with structural abnormalities however,
the trisomy 18 risk is increased (Reddy, 2014).

CARRIER SCREENING FOR GENETIC DISORDERS
The goal of genetic carrier screening is to provide individuals with
meaningful information to guide pregnancy planning according to their
personal values (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists,
2020b). There are three approaches, each of which is an acceptable strategy:
ethnicity-based carrier screening, panethnic screening (performed regardless
of ethnicity), and expanded carrier screening—which is a type of panethnic
screening performed for a large number of conditions. All carrier screening
is optional and should be an informed choice.
Carrier screening is ideally performed prior to conception so that both
partners can have the opportunity to consider the results and pursue options
such as preimplantation genetic testing (p. 348) or donor gametes. If the
screen detects a genetic condition, partner screening should be offered. No
screening test will identify all carriers of a condition. Genetic counseling
should include the residual risk for the condition if the partner’s screen is
negative, as well as prenatal diagnosis options (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020b). Prenatal diagnosis is increasingly
available if disease-causing mutation or mutations are known. The Genetic
Testing Registry of the National Institutes of Health contains detailed
information regarding more than 18,000 genetic conditions and 78,000
genetic tests (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gtr/). In the setting of consanguinity,
additional genetic counseling is indicated.
Ethnicity-based carrier screening is offered for selected autosomal
recessive conditions that are found in greater frequency in specific racial or

ethnic groups. The founder effect occurs when an otherwise rare gene is
found with greater frequency in a certain population and can be traced back
to a single family member or small group of ancestors. It may develop when
generations of individuals procreate only within their own groups because of
religious or ethnic prohibitions or geographical isolation. Because
assignment of a single ethnicity is often difficult, panethnic screening is
increasingly preferred.
Expanded carrier screening has the advantage of screening for many
conditions simultaneously, ranging from a few dozen to more than 1000
(Chokshvilli, 2018). An unfortunate result is that much of the population—
more than 50 percent of those screened–may be identified to be carriers for
at least 1 condition. Some conditions are so rare that information about
detection and residual risk are limited. Counseling regarding phenotypic
expression of different mutations and determination of whether variants have
clinical significance has become increasingly complex. Thus, expanded
carrier screening can cause anxiety for families and may pose challenges to
already-strained genetic counseling resources. The American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020b) has the following guidelines for
conditions included in expanded panels:
1. The carrier frequency should be at least 1:100, which corresponds to a
population prevalence of 1:40,000.
2. The condition should have a well-defined phenotype, lead to a detrimental
effect on quality of life, cause cognitive or physical impairment, or require
surgical or medical intervention.
3. Conditions with adult onset are not recommended for inclusion.
There is a long-held principle that genetic carrier screening for a
particular condition not be repeated in a subsequent pregnancy. The number
of mutations for which testing is available has greatly increased in recent
years, but the additional yield of rescreening is usually low. Consultation
with a provider with genetic expertise should be considered before screening
is repeated (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020a).

■ Cystic Fibrosis

This disorder is caused by a mutation in the cystic fibrosis conductance
transmembrane regulator (CFTR) gene, which is located on the long arm of
chromosome 7 and encodes a chloride-channel protein. Although the most
common CFTR mutation associated with classic cystic fibrosis (CF) is the
ΔF508 mutation, more than 2100 mutations have been identified (Cystic
Fibrosis Mutation Database, 2020). CF may develop from either
homozygosity or compound heterozygosity for mutations in the CFTR gene.
One mutation must be present in each copy of the gene, but they need not be
the same mutation. There is a wide range of clinical disease severity. Median
survival length is 42 years, but approximately 15 percent have milder
disease and can survive for decades longer. Care of the pregnant woman with
CF is discussed in Chapter 54 (p. 968).
For more than two decades, the American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2020a) has recommended that all women who are pregnant or
considering pregnancy be offered CF carrier screening. Such screening
should include, at minimum, a panel of 23 panethnic gene mutations, selected
because they are present in at least 0.1 percent of patients with classic CF.
The CF-mutation carrier frequency approximates 1:25 in Ashkenazi Jews and
those of non-Hispanic white ethnicity, 1:60 in African Americans and those
of Hispanic white ethnicity, and 1:95 Asian Americans. Using the 23mutation panel, the residual carrier risk after a negative test result was
roughly 1:380 for Ashkenazi Jews and 1:170 to 1:200 for other ethnicities
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020a).
More recently however, expanded panels that use gene sequencing have
been reported to improve detection of at-risk couples by 30 percent
compared with the 23-mutation panel (Beauchamp, 2019). The American
College of Medical Genetics now recommends either a targeted approach to
carrier screening, in which the standard mutation panel may be used, or a
more comprehensive approach in which specific variant classifications may
be reported (Deignan, 2020).
CF is included in all newborn screening panels but is not a substitute for
carrier screening because it only identifies affected individuals. If the patient
carries a mutation, her partner should be offered screening. If both parents
are carriers, genetic counseling is indicated, and prenatal diagnostic testing
should be offered.

■ Spinal Muscular Atrophy
This autosomal recessive disorder results in spinal cord motor neuron
degeneration that leads to skeletal muscle atrophy and generalized weakness.
There is currently no effective treatment. The prevalence of spinal muscular
atrophy (SMA) is 1 in 6000 to 10,000 live births. Types I, II, III, and IV are
caused by mutations in the survival motor neuron (SMN1) gene, which is
located on the long arm of chromosome 5 (5q13.2) and encodes the SMN
protein. Types I and II account for 80 percent of cases and are both lethal
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020a). SMA type I,
known as Werdnig-Hoffmann disease, is the most severe. Disease onset is
within the first 6 months, and affected children die of respiratory failure by
age 2 years. Type II generally has onset before age 2 years, and the age at
death can range from 2 years to the third decade of life. Type III also presents
before age 2 years, with disease severity that is milder and more variable.
Type IV does not present until adulthood.
The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020a)
recommends that carrier screening for SMA be offered to all women who are
considering pregnancy or are currently pregnant. Prior to screening, the
potential spectrum of severity, carrier frequency, and detection rate should be
provided. Posttest counseling should include the residual risk after a negative
result, which differs according to ethnicity and also according to the number
of SMN1 copies detected. The SMA carrier frequency approximates 1:35 in
those of non-Hispanic white ethnicity, 1:41 in Ashkenazi Jews, 1:53 in
Asians, 1:66 in African Americans, and 1:117 in those of Hispanic white
ethnicity (Hendrickson, 2009). Carrier detection rates range from 90 to 95
percent for each ethnicity except African Americans, in whom it
approximates 70 percent (MacDonald, 2014).
Although there is usually one copy of the SMN1 gene on each
chromosome, approximately 3 to 4 percent of carriers have no copies of this
gene on one chromosome and two copies on the other. Because such
individuals have two copies in total, they are not detected if a quantitative
polymerase chain reaction test is used. Carrier screening is less sensitive in
African American individuals, because they are more likely to have this
genetic variation. Additionally, some individuals have three copies of the
gene and are at even lower risk. If the patient or her partner has a family

history of SMA, or if carrier screening is positive, genetic counseling is
indicated.

■ Hemoglobinopathies
These include the sickle hemoglobinopathies—sickle cell anemia and sickle
cell hemoglobin C disease, thalassemias, and sickle cell–β-thalassemia.
Their pathophysiology and management are discussed in Chapter 59 (p.
1053). The risk is increased in women who are of African or AfricanAmerican, Mediterranean, Middle Eastern, or Southeast Asian ethnicity. In
such individuals, hemoglobin electrophoresis should be offered prenatally or
prior to conception (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists,
2019a).

Sickle Hemoglobinopathies
Approximately 1 in 12 African Americans has sickle-cell trait, 1 in 40
carries hemoglobin C, and 1 in 40 carries the trait for β-thalassemia.
Hemoglobin S is also more common among individuals of Mediterranean,
Middle Eastern, and Asian Indian descent (Davies, 2000). If a couple is at
risk to have a child with a sickle hemoglobinopathy, genetic counseling
should be offered. Prenatal diagnosis can be performed with either chorionic
villus sampling or amniocentesis.

Thalassemias
These are the most common single-gene disorders worldwide. Thalassemias
are characterized as alpha (α) or beta (β) depending on whether α- or βhemoglobin chains are affected. In general, α-thalassemia is more likely to be
caused by deletions of α-globin chains, whereas β-thalassemia more often
stems from mutations in β-globin chains.
In α-thalassemia, the number of α-globin genes that are deleted may range
from one to all four. If two α-globin genes are deleted, both may be deleted
from the same chromosome—cis configuration (αα/––), or one may be
deleted from each chromosome—trans configuration (α–/α–). The cis
configuration is more prevalent among Southeast Asians, whereas those of
African descent are more likely to inherit the trans configuration. Alphathalassemia trait results in mild anemia. However, if the patient and her

partner both carry cis deletions, offspring are at risk for an absence of αhemoglobin, called Hb Barts disease. This can lead to hydrops and fetal loss
(Chap. 18, p. 360). Hemoglobin electrophoresis cannot detect α-thalassemia
or α-thalassemia trait. Molecular genetic testing should be considered if
there is microcytic anemia in the absence of iron deficiency and if the
hemoglobin electrophoresis is normal, particularly among individuals of
Southeast Asian descent (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2019a).
In β-thalassemia, β-globin genes may cause reduced or absent production
of β-globin chains. If the mutation affects one gene, it results in β-thalassemia
minor. If both copies are affected, the result is either β-thalassemia major—
termed Cooley anemia—or β-thalassemia intermedia. Hemoglobin
electrophoresis demonstrates elevated levels of hemoglobins that do not
contain β-chains, which are hemoglobins F and A2. β-Thalassemia minor
should be considered if an individual of one or more of the aforementioned
ethnicities is found to have microcytic anemia in the absence of iron
deficiency. A hemoglobin A2 level exceeding 3.5 percent confirms the
diagnosis.

■ Recessive Diseases in Ashkenazi Jewish Individuals
Among Jewish individuals of Eastern and Central European (Ashkenazi)
descent, there are three severe diseases for which the carrier frequency and
detection rate are high enough that screening should be offered: Tay-Sachs
disease, Canavan disease, and familial dysautonomia (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists 2020a). The carrier rate approximates 1 in
30 for Tay-Sachs disease, 1 in 40 for Canavan disease, and 1 in 32 for
familial dysautonomia. For each, the detection rate is at least 98 percent. As
for other genetic conditions, screening is ideally performed prior to
conception or during early pregnancy.
There are several other autosomal recessive conditions for which the
College also recommends that screening be considered. These include
Bloom syndrome, familial hyperinsulinism, Fanconi anemia, Gaucher
disease, glycogen storage disease type I (von Gierke disease), Joubert
syndrome, maple syrup urine disease, mucolipidosis type IV, Niemann-Pick
disease, and Usher syndrome. Gaucher disease differs from the other

conditions listed because it has a wide range in phenotype and because
treatment is available in the form of enzyme repletion and substrate reduction
therapy.

Tay-Sachs Disease
This lysosomal-storage disease causes progressive neurodegeneration and
death in early childhood. It is characterized by deficiency of the enzyme
hexosaminidase A, which results in accumulation of GM2 gangliosides in the
central nervous system. Affected individuals have almost complete absence
of the enzyme, whereas carriers are asymptomatic but have less than 55percent hexosaminidase A activity. An international Tay-Sachs carrier
screening campaign was initiated in the 1970s and met with unprecedented
success in the Ashkenazi Jewish population. The incidence of Tay-Sachs
disease subsequently declined more than 90 percent (Kaback, 1993). Other
groups at increased risk for Tay-Sachs disease include those of FrenchCanadian and Cajun descent.
Carrier screening for Tay-Sachs disease is performed with DNA-based
mutation analysis or hexosaminidase activity testing. DNA-based mutation
analysis is the preferred test in Ashkenazi Jewish individuals and other highrisk groups but has a lower detection rate in the general population.
Therefore, hexosaminidase activity testing is recommended for screening in
individuals from lower-risk ethnicities. If a woman is pregnant or taking oral
contraceptives, a hexosaminidase activity test should be performed on
leukocytes to avoid a high false-positive rate (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020a). If both partners are found to be
carriers, prenatal diagnostic testing should be offered. Hexosaminidase
activity may be measured from chorionic villi or amnionic fluid.

PRENATAL AND PREIMPLANTATION DIAGNOSTIC
TESTS
Diagnostic procedures used in prenatal diagnosis include amniocentesis and
chorionic villus sampling (CVS). Fetal blood sampling is rarely performed
solely for genetic diagnosis but may be used in conjunction with intrauterine
transfusion. Preimplantation genetic tests for aneuploidies, structural

chromosomal rearrangements, and monogenic disorders are available for
couples undergoing in vitro fertilization (IVF).
In the setting of a fetal structural abnormality, chromosomal microarray
analysis (CMA) is recommended. CMA is preferred to cytogenetic analysis
(karyotyping) because it can detect clinically significant chromosomal
abnormalities in approximately 6.5 percent of fetuses with normal karyotype
(Callaway, 2013; de Wit, 2014, Wapner, 2012). And, in the absence of a fetal
structural abnormality, CMA has detected additional chromosomal
abnormalities (pathogenic copy number variants) in up to 1 percent of those
with normal karyotype. CMA is therefore made available whenever a
prenatal diagnostic procedure is performed (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2018; Callaway, 2013). Types of CMA
platforms and their benefits and limitations are reviewed in Chapter 16 (p.
326).
Karyotyping identifies aneuploidy and polyploidy. Additionally, it can
identify balanced chromosomal rearrangements that are currently
undetectable with CMA. For example, karyotyping performed when a couple
has experienced recurrent pregnancy loss may reveal that one parent carries
a balanced robertsonian translocation (Chap. 16, p. 315). An additional
indication is the fetus with a structural abnormality that strongly suggests a
particular aneuploidy—such as endocardial cushion defect in trisomy 21 or
holoprosencephaly in trisomy 13.
If rapid identification of a specific chromosomal abnormality, such as
trisomy 21, 18, or 13, is needed, fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH)
may be used in conjunction with CMA or karyotyping. Decision-making
based on FISH should incorporate clinical information consistent with the
suspected diagnosis, such as a screening result or ultrasound finding
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2018).
Because of improvements in aneuploidy screening tests, there has been a
dramatic drop in the number of prenatal diagnostic procedures. Larion and
coworkers (2014) reported a 70-percent decline in CVS and a nearly 50percent drop in amniocentesis procedures since the introduction of cfDNA
screening in 2012. This further amplified the decrease in amniocentesis
procedures that occurred with the advent of first-trimester screening (Warsof,
2015). Unfortunately, fewer than 40 percent of women with a positive
screening result elect prenatal diagnosis (Dar, 2014). If prenatal diagnosis is

elected, however, the percent with an abnormal result has increased
significantly (Awomolo, 2018).

■ Amniocentesis
Because of its established safety and efficacy, amniocentesis is offered to all
pregnant women (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists,
2020e). Amnionic fluid is withdrawn transabdominally under direct
ultrasound guidance. Although typically performed between 15 and 20
weeks’ gestation, amniocentesis may be done at any point later in gestation.
Tests include those for genetic conditions, congenital infections, and
alloimmunization. Fetal lung maturity is no longer routinely assessed, based
on recommendations against using it to assist with delivery timing (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019b).

Technique
Amniocentesis is performed with a 20- or 22-gauge needle using aseptic
technique (Fig. 17-4). A standard spinal needle is 9 cm long. A longer needle
may be required for obese patients. To aid in needle selection, we find it
helpful to measure the distance from skin to amnionic fluid with ultrasound
prior to the procedure. After the patient empties her bladder, the skin is
prepared with an antiseptic such as povidone-iodine. Shellfish allergy is not
a contraindication to the povidone-iodine antiseptic (Westermann-Clark,
2015).

FIGURE 17-4 A. Amniocentesis. B. The amniocentesis needle is seen in the upper right portion of this
sonogram. (Figures 17-4, 17-5, and 17-7 are reproduced with permission from Mastrobattista JM,
Espinoza J: Invasive prenatal diagnostic procedures. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al
(eds): Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2017.)

All aspects of the procedure are performed under direct ultrasound
guidance. A pocket of amnionic fluid close to the midline is selected,
avoiding fetal parts and being cognizant of uterine size and shape. The needle
is inserted perpendicular to the skin, gently puncturing the chorioamnion
rather than pushing or “tenting” it away from the uterine wall. The amnion
usually fuses with the underlying chorion by 16 weeks’ gestation, and the

procedure is generally deferred until after chorioamnion fusion. Discomfort
from the procedure is considered minor and is related more to focal
myometrial contraction than needle discomfort at the skin. Local anesthetic
has not been found to be beneficial (Mujezinovic, 2011).
The amnionic fluid should be clear and colorless or pale yellow. Bloodtinged fluid is more frequent with transplacental passage of the needle and
generally clears with continued aspiration. Needle passage through the
placenta occurs in approximately 60 percent of cases with anterior
placentation and is not associated with pregnancy loss (Bombard, 1995,
Marthin, 1997). Dark brown or greenish fluid may represent a past episode
of intraamnionic bleeding.
The volume of fluid generally needed for commonly performed analyses
is shown in Table 17-9. Because the initial 1 to 2 mL of fluid aspirate may be
contaminated with maternal cells, it is often discarded. Approximately 20 to
30 mL of fluid is then collected for either fetal CMA or karyotyping before
the needle is withdrawn. The uterine puncture site is observed for bleeding,
and fetal cardiac motion is documented following the procedure. If the
patient is Rh D-negative and unsensitized, anti-D immune globulin is
administered after the procedure (Chap. 18, p. 356).
TABLE 17-9. Selected Tests Performed on Amnionic Fluid and Volume of
Fluid Required

Multifetal Pregnancy. When performing the procedure in a dichorionic or
monochorionic diamnionic twin gestation, careful attention is paid to the
location of each sac and the dividing membrane. Until recently, a small
quantity of dilute indigo carmine dye was often injected before removing the
needle from the first sac, with return of clear amnionic fluid anticipated
following needle placement into the second sac. Because of widespread
shortages of indigo carmine dye, experienced providers typically offer
amniocentesis without dye injection. Methylene blue dye is contraindicated
because it has been associated with jejunal atresia and neonatal
methemoglobinemia (van der Pol, 1992).

Complications
Midtrimester losses attributable to amniocentesis have decreased with
improvements in imaging technology. When performed by an experienced
provider, the procedure-related loss rate is estimated to be 0.1 to 0.3
percent, or about 1 per 500 procedures (American College of Obstetricians

and Gynecologists, 2018; Odibo, 2008, Salomon, 2019). The loss rate may
be doubled in women whose body mass index exceeds 40 kg/m2 (Harper,
2012). In twin pregnancies, Cahill and coworkers (2009) reported a loss rate
of 1.8 percent attributable to amniocentesis.
When counseling regarding fetal loss following a procedure, it can be
helpful to explain the difference between overall losses and procedurerelated losses. In a recent metaanalysis that included more than 60,000
amniocentesis procedures and 300,000 control pregnancies, the loss rate in
the absence of a procedure was 0.6 percent, approximately twice the rate of
losses attributable to procedures (Salomon, 2019). The indication for the
procedure is also relevant, because severe fetal abnormalities and hydrops
can significantly increase the loss rate, regardless of a procedure.
Other complications of amniocentesis include amnionic fluid leakage or
transient vaginal spotting in 1 to 2 percent. Leakage of amnionic fluid
generally occurs within 48 hours of the procedure. Leakage of fluid typically
resolves after a few days, and fetal survival exceeds 90 percent (Borgida,
2000). Management recommendations include pelvic rest and avoidance of
strenuous activity. Needle injuries to the fetus are rare. If karyotyping is
performed, amnionic fluid culture is successful in more than 99 percent of
cases, although cells are less likely to grow if the fetus is abnormal (Persutte,
1995).

Early Amniocentesis
Amniocentesis was formerly offered between 11 and 14 weeks’ gestation.
The technique is the same as for traditional amniocentesis, but the procedure
may be more challenging because of lack of membrane fusion to the uterine
wall. Approximately 1 mL is withdrawn for each week of gestation. Early
amniocentesis is associated with significantly higher rates of fetal loss and
other procedure-related complications than other procedures. Complications
include development of talipes equinovarus (clubfoot) and amnionic fluid
leakage (Canadian Early and Mid-Trimester Amniocentesis Trial, 1998;
Philip, 2004). For these reasons, early amniocentesis is not recommended
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2018).

■ Chorionic Villus Sampling

Biopsy of chorionic villi is typically performed between 10 and 13 weeks’
gestation. As with amniocentesis, the specimen is usually sent for CMA or
karyotype analysis. The primary advantage of CVS is that results are
available earlier in pregnancy, permitting more time for decision-making and
safer pregnancy termination, if desired.

Technique
CVS is performed transcervically or transabdominally. Both approaches are
equally safe and effective (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2018). The transcervical approach uses a flexible
polyethylene catheter that contains a blunt-tipped, malleable stylet.
Transabdominal sampling is performed with an 18- or 20-gauge spinal
needle. Both use aseptic technique and are performed under direct
transabdominal ultrasound guidance. The catheter or needle is inserted into
the early placenta—chorion frondosum, and villi are aspirated into a syringe
that contains tissue culture media (Fig. 17-5).

FIGURE 17-5 A. Transcervical chorionic villus sampling. B. Catheter entering the placenta is marked
and labeled.

Relative contraindications include vaginal bleeding or spotting, active
genital tract infection, extreme uterine ante- or retroflexion, or body habitus
precluding adequate visualization. If the patient is Rh D-negative and
unsensitized, anti-D immune globulin is administered after the procedure.

Complications
The overall fetal loss rate following CVS is higher than that with
midtrimester amniocentesis. This is because of losses that would have
occurred between the first and second trimester in the absence of a
procedure. The procedure-related loss rate is comparable to that with
amniocentesis, approximately 0.1 to 0.3 percent (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2018). In fact, a recent metaanalysis
identified no significant losses from CVS when controls with similar risk
profiles were selected (Salomon, 2019). As with amniocentesis, CVS
indication will affect the loss rate. For example, fetuses with increased NT
thickness have a greater likelihood of demise. There is also a learning curve
associated with safe performance of CVS (Silver, 1990; Wijnberger, 2003).
An early problem with CVS was its association with limb-reduction
defects and oromandibular limb hypogenesis, shown in Figure 17-6 (Firth,
1991, 1994; Hsieh, 1995). These were subsequently found to be associated
with procedures performed at 7 weeks’ gestation (Holmes, 1993). When
performed at or after 10 weeks’ gestation, the incidence of limb defects does
not exceed the background population rate of approximately 1 case per 1000
(Evans, 2005; Kuliev, 1996).

FIGURE 17-6 Oromandibular limb hypogenesis is characterized by transverse limb deficiency and
absence or hypoplasia of the tongue or mandible. This is hypothesized to result from vascular disruption
with subsequent loss of tissue. A. Sonogram obtained at 25 weeks’ gestation demonstrates a fetal limb
reduction defect involving the right hand. B. Photograph of the right extremity of the same newborn.
Chorionic villus sampling was not performed in this pregnancy. (Reproduced with permission from Dr.
Jamie Morgan.)

Vaginal spotting is not uncommon following transcervical sampling, but it
is self-limited and not associated with pregnancy loss. The incidence of
infection or leakage of amnionic fluid is less than 0.5 percent (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2018).
A limitation of CVS is that chromosomal mosaicism is identified in up to
2 percent of specimens (Malvestiti, 2015). In most cases, the mosaicism
reflects confined placental mosaicism rather than a true second cell line
within the fetus. This is discussed in Chapter 16 (p. 318). Amniocentesis
should be offered, and if the result is normal, the mosaicism is usually
presumed to be confined to the placenta. Confined placental mosaicism is
associated with fetal-growth restriction (Baffero, 2012; Toutain, 2018).

■ Fetal Blood Sampling
This procedure is also called cordocentesis or percutaneous umbilical blood
sampling (Fig. 17-7). It was initially described for fetal transfusion of red
blood cells in the setting of anemia from alloimmunization, and fetal anemia
assessment remains the most common indication (Chap. 18, p. 356). Other

indications include assessment and treatment of platelet alloimmunization
and for fetal karyotype determination, particularly in cases of mosaicism
identified following amniocentesis or CVS. Improvements in testing using an
amniocentesis specimen have eliminated the need for fetal blood sampling in
most cases (Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, 2013).

FIGURE 17-7 Fetal blood sampling. A. Access to the umbilical vein varies depending on placental
location and cord position. With an anterior placenta, the needle may traverse the placenta. Inset: With
posterior placentation, the needle passes through amnionic fluid before penetrating the umbilical vein.
Alternatively, a free loop of cord may be accessed. B. Sonogram shows an anterior placenta with
transplacental needle passage into the umbilical vein (UV).

Technique
Using aseptic technique, a 22- or 23-gauge spinal needle is introduced into
the umbilical vein under direct ultrasound guidance, and blood is slowly
withdrawn into a heparinized syringe. Precise visualization of the needle is
essential. As with amniocentesis, a longer needle may be required for obese
patients. Fetal blood sampling is often performed near the placental cord
insertion site, where it may be easier to enter the cord if the placenta lies
anteriorly. Alternatively, a free loop of cord may be punctured. Because fetal
blood sampling requires more time than other fetal procedures, a local
anesthetic may be administered. Prophylactic antibiotics are used at some

centers, although no trials support this policy. Arterial puncture is avoided,
because it may result in vasospasm and fetal bradycardia. After the needle is
removed, fetal cardiac motion is documented, and the site is observed for
bleeding.

Complications
The procedure-related fetal loss rate following fetal blood sampling
approximates 1 percent (Tongsong, 2001, Tanvisut, 2020). The actual loss
rate varies according to the procedure indication and the fetal status. Other
complications may include cord vessel bleeding in 20 to 30 percent of cases,
fetal-maternal bleeding in approximately 40 percent of cases in which the
placenta is traversed, and fetal bradycardia in 5 to 10 percent (Boupaijit,
2012; Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, 2013; Tanvisut, 2020). Most
complications are transitory, with complete recovery, but some result in fetal
loss.
In one series of more than 2000 procedures comparing fetal blood
sampling near the placental cord insertion site with puncture of a free loop,
rates of procedure success, pregnancy loss, visible bleeding from the cord,
and fetal bradycardia did not differ. Time to complete the procedure was
significantly shorter if the cord was sampled at the placental insertion site
rather than in a free loop—5 versus 7 minutes. However, sampling at the
insertion site had a higher rate of maternal blood contamination
(Tangshewinsirikul, 2011).

■ Preimplantation Genetic Tests
For couples undergoing IVF, several types of genetic tests may be performed
on oocytes (polar bodies) or embryos prior to uterine transfer. These include
preimplantation genetic testing for aneuploidy, abbreviated PGT-A,
prenatal genetic testing for structural rearrangements (PGT-SR), and
prenatal genetic testing for monogenic disorders (PGT-M). Testing is
typically performed via trophectoderm biopsy at the blastocyst stage but may
be performed on polar bodies of oocytes or via blastomere biopsy of a
cleavage-stage embryo (Fig. 17-8). False-positive and false-negative results
are possible with each type of PGT. Therefore, prenatal diagnosis with CVS
or amniocentesis should be offered (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2020d). Comprehensive genetic counseling is required before

consideration of each of these procedures (ESHRE PGT Consortium Steering
Committee, 2020).

FIGURE 17-8 A. Blastomere biopsy. After a blastomere is selected, it is then drawn into the pipette.
B. Trophectoderm biopsy. (Reproduced with permission from Doody KJ: Treatment of the infertile

couple. Hoffman BL, Schorge JO, Halvorson LM, et al (eds): Williams Gynecology, 4th ed. New York,
NY: McGraw Hill; 2020.)

PGT-A is a type of aneuploidy screening test that evaluates the number of
each chromosome. Although clearly an appealing prospect, available data
are limited, and an optimal testing platform is not yet established.
Importantly, if PGT-A is performed with next-generation sequencing
following trophectoderm biopsy, mosaicism is frequently identified (VeraRodriguez, 2017). Despite an increased risk for poor outcome, many such
cases have resulted in healthy, normal children (Victor, 2019). The American
Society for Reproductive Medicine (2018) has concluded that the utility of
routine performance of PGT-A for all IVF pregnancies has yet to be
determined.
PGT-M may be performed when there is increased risk for a particular
single-gene disorder or a hereditary cancer syndrome (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020d). It is a test for a specific condition
rather than a panel. In selected cases, this technique may also be used
identify a suitable future donor of umbilical cord blood for an affected family
member.
PGT-SR is offered if one of the parents is a carrier of such a
rearrangement, such as a duplication, deletion, translocation, insertion, or
inversion. The test will identify an unbalanced chromosomal rearrangement
but will not detect a balanced carrier. Counseling should therefore include
this limitation.

REFERENCES
Alamillo CM, Krantz D, Evans M, et al: Nearly a third of abnormalities found after first-trimester
screening are different than expected: 10-year experience from a single center. Prenat Diagn
33(3):251, 2013
Alldred SK, Takwoingi Y, Guo B, et al: First trimester ultrasound tests alone or in combination with first
trimester serum tests for Down’s syndrome screening. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
3:CD012600, 2017
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Prenatal diagnostic testing for genetic disorders.
Practice Bulletin No. 162, May 2016, Reaffirmed 2018
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Hemoglobinopathies in pregnancy. Practice
Bulletin No. 78, January 2007, Reaffirmed 2019a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Management of suboptimally dated pregnancies.
Committee Opinion No. 688, March 2017, Reaffirmed 2019b

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Neural tube defects. Practice Bulletin No. 187,
December 2017, Reaffirmed 2019c
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Carrier screening for genetic conditions.
Committee Opinion No. 691, March 2017, Reaffirmed 2020a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Carrier screening in the age of genomic
medicine. Committee Opinion No. 690, March 2017, Reaffirmed 2020b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Gestational hypertension and preeclampsia.
Practice Bulletin No. 222, June 2020c
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Preimplantation genetic testing. Committee
Opinion No. 799, February 2020d
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Screening for fetal chromosomal abnormalities.
Practice Bulletin No. 226, October, 2020e
American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine: AIUM practice parameter for the performance of
detailed second- and third-trimester diagnostic obstetric ultrasound examinations. J Ultrasound Med
38(12):3093, 2019
American Society for Reproductive Medicine: Preimplantation genetic testing: a practice committee
opinion. Fertil Steril 90: S136, 2008
Ashoor G, Syngelaki A, Poon LC, et al: Fetal fraction in maternal plasma cell-free fetal DNA at 11–13
weeks’ gestation: relation to maternal and fetal characteristics. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 41(1):26,
2013
Awomolo A, Palomares K, Herrera Garcia G, et al: Trends in invasive prenatal diagnostic testing at a
single institution. Prenat Diagn 38(10):735, 2018
Baer RJ, Flessel MC, Jelliffe-Pawlowski LL, et al: Detection rates for aneuploidy by first-trimester and
sequential screening. Obstet Gynecol 126(4):753, 2015
Baffero GM, Somigliana E, Crovetto F, et al: Confined placental mosaicism at chorionic villus sampling:
risk factors and pregnancy outcome. Prenat Diagn 32(11):1102, 2012
Beauchamp KA, Johansen Taber KA, Grauman BS, et al: Sequencing as first-line methodology for
cystic fibrosis carrier screening. Genet Med 21(11):2569, 2019
Benn PA, Leo MV, Rodis JF, et al: Maternal serum screening for fetal trisomy 18: a comparison of fixed
cutoff and patient-specific risk protocols. Obstet Gynecol 93 (5 Pt 1):707, 1999
Best KE, Tennant PW, Addor MC, et al: Epidemiology of small intestinal atresia in Europe: a registerbased study. Arch Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed 97(5):F353, 2012
Bianchi DW, Chudova D, Sehnert AJ, et al: Noninvasive prenatal testing and incidental detection of
occult malignancies. JAMA 314(2):162, 2015
Bombard AT, Powers JF, Carter S, et al: Procedure-related fetal losses in transplacental versus
nontransplacental genetic amniocentesis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 172(3):868, 1995
Borgida AF, Mills AA, Feldman DM, et al: Outcome of pregnancies complicated by ruptured
membranes after genetic amniocentesis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 183(4):937, 2000
Boupaijit K, Wanapirak C, Piyamongkol W, et al: Effect of placental penetration during cordocentesis at
mid-pregnancy on fetal outcomes. Prenat Diagn 32(1):83, 2012
Brock DJ, Bolton AE, Monaghan JM: Prenatal diagnosis of anencephaly through maternal serum alphafetoprotein measurement. Lancet 2(7835):923, 1973
Brock DJ, Sutcliffe RG: Alpha-fetoprotein in the antenatal diagnosis of anencephaly and spina bifida.
Lancet 2(7770):197, 1972
Bromley B, Lieberman E, Shipp TD, et al: The genetic sonogram, a method for risk assessment for
Down syndrome in the mid trimester. J Ultrasound Med 21(10):1087, 2002

Bush MC, Malone FD: Down syndrome screening in twins. Clin Perinatol 32(2):373, 2005
Cahill AG, Macones GA, Stamilio DM, et al: Pregnancy loss rate after mid-trimester amniocentesis in
twin pregnancies. Am J Obstet Gynecol 200(3):257.e1, 2009
Callaway JL, Shaffer LG, Chitty LS, et al: The clinical utility of microarray technologies applied to
prenatal cytogenetics in the presence of a normal conventional karyotype: a review of the literature.
Prenat Diagn 33(12):1119, 2013
Canadian Early and Mid-Trimester Amniocentesis Trial (CEMAT) Group: Randomised trial to assess
safety and fetal outcome of early and midtrimester amniocentesis. Lancet 351(9098):242, 1998
Canfield MA, Honein MA, Yuskiv N, et al: National estimates and race/ethnic-specific variation of
selected birth defects in the United States, 1999–2001. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol
76(11):747, 2006
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Natality trends in the United States, 1909–2013. 2015.
Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data-visualization/natality-trends/ Accessed November 2,
2020
Chkoshvilli D, Vears D, Borry P: Expanded carrier screening for monogenic disorders: where are we
now? Prenat Diagn 38(1):59, 2018
Cicero S, Sonek JD, McKenna DS, et al: Nasal bone hypoplasia in trisomy 21 at 15–22 weeks’
gestation. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 21(1):15, 2003
Cignini P, Maggio Savasta L, Gulino FA, et al: Predictive value of pregnancy-associated plasma proteinA (PAPP-A) and free beta-hCG on fetal growth restriction: results of a prospective study. Arch
Gynecol Obstet 293(6):1227, 2016
Cleary-Goldman J, D’Alton ME, Berkowitz RL: Prenatal diagnosis and multiple pregnancy. Semin
Perinatol 29(5):312, 2005
Clur SA, Mathijsssen IB, Pajkrt E, et al: Structural heart defects associated with an increased nuchal
translucency: 9 years experience in a referral centre. Prenat Diagn 28(4):347, 2008
Colvin J, Bower C, Dickinson JE, et al: Outcomes of congenital diaphragmatic hernia: a populationbased study in Western Australia. Pediatrics 116(3):e356, 2005
Cragan JD, Gilboa SM: Including prenatal diagnoses in birth defects monitoring: experience of the
Metropolitan Atlanta Congenital Defects Program. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol 85(1):20,
2009
Cuckle H: Biochemical screening for Down syndrome. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 92(1):97,
2000
Cuckle H, Wald N, Stevenson JD, et al: Maternal serum alpha-fetoprotein screening for open neural
tube defects in twin pregnancies. Prenat Diagn 10(2):71, 1990
Cuckle HS, Malone FD, Wright D, et al: Contingent screening for Down syndrome–results from the
FaSTER trial. Prenat Diagn 28(2):89, 2008
Curnow KJ, Wilkins-Haug L, Ryan A, et al: Detection of triploid, molar, and vanishing twin pregnancies
by single-nucleotide polymorphism-based noninvasive prenatal test. Am J Obstet Gynecol
212(1):79.e1, 2015
Cystic Fibrosis Mutation Database: CFMDB statistics. Available at:
http://www.genet.sickkids.on.ca/StatisticsPage.html. Accessed November 2, 2020
Dar P, Curnow KJ, Gross SJ, et al: Clinical experience and follow-up with large scale single nucleotide
polymorphism-based noninvasive prenatal aneuploidy testing. Am J Obstet Gynecol 211(5):527.e1,
2014
Dashe JS: Aneuploidy screening in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 128(1):181, 2016

Dashe JS, Twickler DM, Santos-Ramos R, et al: Alpha-fetoprotein detection of neural tube defects and
the impact of standard ultrasound. Am J Obstet Gynecol 195(6):1623, 2006
Davies SC, Cronin E, Gill M, et al: Screening for sickle cell disease and thalassemia: a systematic
review with supplementary research. Heath Technol Assess 4(3):1, 2000
Deignan JL, Astbury C, Cutting GR, et al: CFTR variant testing: a technical standard of the American
College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG). Genet Med 22(8):1288, 2020
de Wit MC, Srebniak MI, Govaerts LC, et al: Additional value of prenatal genomic array testing in
fetuses with isolated structural ultrasound abnormalities and a normal karyotype: a systematic
review of the literature. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 43(2):139, 2014
DiMaio MS, Baumgarten A, Greenstein RM, et al: Screening for fetal Down’s syndrome in pregnancy
by measuring maternal serum alpha-fetoprotein levels. N Engl J Med 317(6):342, 1987
Dolk H, Loane M, Garne E: The prevalence of congenital anomalies in Europe. Adv Exp Med Biol
686:349, 2010
Doody KJ: Treatment of the infertile couple. Hoffman BL, Schorge JO, Halvorson LM, et al (eds):
Williams Gynecology, 4th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2020
Dugoff L, Hobbins JC, Malone FD, et al: First-trimester maternal serum PAPP-A and free-beta subunit
human chorionic gonadotropic concentrations and nuchal translucency are associated with obstetric
complications: a population-based screening study (The FaSTER Trial). Am J Obstet Gynecol
191(6):1446, 2004
Dugoff L, Hobbins JC, Malone FD, et al: Quad screen as a predictor of adverse pregnancy outcome.
Obstet Gynecol 106(2):260, 2005
Dugoff L, Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine: First- and second-trimester maternal serum markers for
aneuploidy and adverse pregnancy outcomes. Obstet Gynecol 115(5):1052, 2010
Ecker JL, Shipp TD, Bromley B, et al: The sonographic diagnosis of Dandy-Walker and Dandy-Walker
variant: associated findings and outcomes. Prenat Diagn 20(3):328, 2000
ESHRE PGT Consortium Steering Committee, Carvalho F, Coonen E, et al: ESHRE PGD Consortium
good practice recommendations for the organization of PGT. Hum Reprod Open 2020(3):hoaa021,
2020
Evans MI, Wapner RJ: Invasive prenatal diagnostic procedures. Semin Perinatol 29(4):215, 2005
Filly RA, Callen PW, Goldstein RB: Alpha-fetoprotein screening programs: what every obstetric
sonologist should know. Radiology 188(1):1, 1993
Firth HV, Boyd PA, Chamberlain PF, et al: Analysis of limb reduction defects in babies exposed to
chorionic villus sampling. Lancet 343(8905):1069, 1994
Firth HV, Boyd PA, Chamberlain P, et al: Severe limb abnormalities after chorion villus sampling at 56–
66 days’ gestation. Lancet 337(8744):762, 1991
Flessel MC, Lorey FW: The California Prenatal Screening Program: “options and choices” not
“coercion and eugenics.” Genet Med 13(8):711, 2011
Gallot D, Boda C, Ughetto S, et al: Prenatal detection and outcome of congenital diaphragmatic hernia: a
French registry-based study. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 29(3):276, 2007
Gil MM, Accurti V, Santacruz B, et al: Analysis of cell-free DNA in maternal blood in screening for
aneuploidies: updated meta-analysis. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 50(3):302, 2017
Gil MM, Quezada MS, Revello R, et al: Analysis of cell-free DNA in maternal blood in screening for
fetal aneuploidies: updated meta-analysis. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 45(3):249, 2015
Goetzl L, Krantz D, Simpson JL, et al: Pregnancy-associated plasma protein A, free beta-hCG, nuchal
translucency, and risk of pregnancy loss. Obstet Gynecol 104(1):30, 2004

Grati FR, Malvestiti F, Ferreira JC, et al: Fetoplacental mosaicism: potential implications for falsepositive and false-negative noninvasive prenatal screening results. Genet Med 16(8):620, 2014
Greene MF, Haddow JE, Palomaki GE, et al: Maternal serum alpha-fetoprotein levels in diabetic
pregnancies. Lancet 2(8606):345, 1988
Gregg AR, Skotko BG, Benkendorf JL, et al: Noninvasive prenatal screening for fetal aneuploidy, 2016
update: a position statement of the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics. Genet
Med 18(10):1056, 2016
Harper LM, Cahill AG, Smith K, et al: Effect of maternal obesity on the risk of fetal loss after
amniocentesis and chorionic villus sampling. Obstet Gynecol 119(4):745, 2012
Hendrickson BC, Donohoe C, Akmaev VR, et al: Differences in SMN1 allele frequencies among ethnic
groups within North America. J Med Genet 46(9):641, 2009
Herrera CL, Hussamy DJ, McIntire DD, et al: Femur length parameters in fetuses with Down
syndrome. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 33(15):2516, 2019
Holmes LB: Report of National Institute of Child Health and Human Development Workshop on
Chorionic Villus Sampling and Limb and Other Defects, October 20, 1992. Teratology 48(4):7, 1993
Hook EB, Cross PK, Schreinemachers DM: Chromosomal abnormality rates at amniocentesis and in
live-born infants. JAMA 249(15):2034, 1983
Hsieh FJ, Shyu MK, Sheu BC, et al: Limb defects after chorionic villus sampling. Obstet Gynecol
85(1):84, 1995
Hussamy DJ, Herrera CL, Twickler DM, et al: Number of risk factors in Down syndrome pregnancies.
Am J Perinatol 36(1):79, 2019
Huttly W, Rudnicka A, Wald NJ: Second-trimester prenatal screening markers for Down syndrome in
women with insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. Prenat Diagn 24(10):804, 2004
Jelliffe-Pawlowski LL, Baer R, Blumenfeld YJ, et al: Maternal characteristics and mid-pregnancy
serum biomarkers as risk factors for subtypes of preterm birth. BJOG 122(11):1484, 2015
Juul LA, Hartwig TS, Ambye L, et al: Noninvasive prenatal testing and maternal obesity: A review.
Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 99(6):744, 2020
Kaback M, Lim-Steele J, Dabholkar D, et al: Tay Sachs disease: carrier screening, prenatal diagnosis,
and the molecular era. JAMA 270:2307, 1993
Knight GK, Palomaki GE: Maternal serum alpha-fetoprotein and the detection of open neural tube
defects. In Elias S, Simpson JL (eds): Maternal Serum Screening. New York, Churchill Livingstone,
1992
Kuliev A, Jackson L, Froster U, et al: Chorionic villus sampling safety. Report of World Health
Organization/EURO meeting in association with the Seventh International Conference on Early
Prenatal Diagnosis of Genetic Diseases, Tel Aviv, Israel, May 21, 1994. Am J Obstet Gynecol
174(3):807, 1996
Kuppermann M, Pena S, Bishop JT, et al: Effect of enhanced information, values clarification, and
removal of financial barriers on use of prenatal genetic testing: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA
312(12):1210, 2014
Langlois S, Armstrong L, Gall K, et al: Steroid sulfatase deficiency and contiguous gene deletion
syndrome amongst pregnant patients with low serum unconjugated estriols. Prenat Diagn
29(10):966, 2009
Larion S, Warsof SL, Romary L, et al: Association of combined first-trimester screen and noninvasive
prenatal testing on diagnostic procedures. Obstet Gynecol 123(6):1303, 2014
Long A, Moran P, Robson S: Outcome of fetal cerebral posterior fossa anomalies. Prenat Diagn
26(8):707, 2006

MacDonald WK, Hamilton D, Kuhle S: SMA carrier testing: a meta-analysis of differences in test
performance by ethnic group. Prenat Diagn 34 (12):1219, 2014
Malone FD, Ball RH, Nyberg DA, et al: First-trimester septated cystic hygroma: prevalence, natural
history, and pediatric outcome. Obstet Gynecol 106(2)288, 2005a
Malone FD, Canick JA, Ball RH, et al: First-trimester or second-trimester screening, or both, for
Down’s syndrome. N Engl J Med 353(19):2005b
Malvestiti F, Agrati C, Grimi B, et al: Interpreting mosaicism in chorionic villi: results of a monocentric
series of 1001 mosaics in chorionic villi with follow-up amniocentesis. Prenat Diagn 35(11):1117,
2015
Marthin T, Liedgren S, Hammar M: Transplacental needle passage and other risk-factors associated
with second trimester amniocentesis. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 76(8):728, 1997
Martin JA, Hamilton BE, Osterman MJ, et al: Births: Final data for 2018. National Vital Statistics
Reports 68(13):1, 2019
Martin JA, Hamilton BE, Osterman MJ: Births in the United States, 2019. NCHS Data Brief, No. 387,
October 2020
Mastrobattista JM, Espinoza J: Invasive prenatal diagnostic procedures. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL,
Gilstrap LC III, et al (eds): Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York,
McGraw-Hill Education, 2017
Merkatz IR, Nitowsky HM, Macri JN, et al: An association between low maternal serum α-fetoprotein
and fetal chromosomal abnormalities. Am J Obstet Gynecol 148(7):886, 1984
Moreno-Cid M, Rubio-Lorente A, Rodriguez MJ, et al: Systematic review and meta-analysis of
performance of second-trimester nasal bone assessment in detection of fetuses with Down
syndrome. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 43(3):247, 2014
Mujezinovic F, Alfirevic Z: Analgesia for amniocentesis or chorionic villus sampling. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev 11:CD008580, 2011
New England Regional Genetics Group Perinatal Collaborative Study of Down Syndrome Screening:
Combining maternal serum alpha-fetoprotein measurements and age to screen for Down syndrome
in pregnant women under age 35. Am J Obstet Gynecol 160(3):575, 1989
Norem CT, Schoen EJ, Walton DL, et al: Routine ultrasonography compared with maternal serum
alpha-fetoprotein for neural tube defect screening. Obstet Gynecol 106(4):747, 2005
Norton ME, Baer RJ, Wapnr RJ, et al: Cell-free DNA vs sequential screening for the detection of fetal
chromosomal abnormalities. Am J Obstet Gynecol 214(6):727.e1, 2016
Norton ME, Jacobsson B, Swamy GK, et al: Cell-free DNA analysis for noninvasive examination of
trisomy. N Engl J Med 372(17):1589, 2015
Norton ME, Jelliffe-Pawlowski LL, Currier RJ: Chromosomal abnormalities detected by current
prenatal screening and noninvasive prenatal testing. Obstet Gynecol 124(5):979, 2014
Nyberg DA, Souter VL: Use of genetic sonography for adjusting the risk for fetal Down syndrome.
Semin Perinatol 27(2):130, 2003
Nyberg DA, Souter VL, El-Bastawissi A, et al: Isolated sonographic markers for detection of fetal
Down syndrome in the second trimester of pregnancy. J Ultrasound Med 20(10):1053, 2001
Odibo AO, Gray DL, Dicke JM, et al: Revisiting the fetal loss rate after second-trimester genetic
amniocentesis: a single center’s 16-year experience. Obstet Gynecol 111(3):589, 2008
Orioli IM, Catilla EE: Epidemiology of holoprosencephaly: prevalence and risk factors. Am J Med Genet
Part C Semin Med Genet 154C:13, 2010
Palomaki GE, Bupp C, Gregg AR, et al: Laboratory screening and diagnosis of open neural tube defects,
2019 revision: a technical standard of the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics.

Genet Med 22(3):462, 2020
Pavone V, Chisari E, Vescio A, et al: The etiology of idiopathic congenital talipes equinovarus: a
systematic review. J Orthop Surg Res 13(1):206, 2018
Pedersen RN, Calzolari E, Husby S, et al: Oesophageal atresia: prevalence, prenatal diagnosis, and
associated anomalies in 23 European regions. Arch Dis Child 97(3):227, 2012
Pergament E, Cuckle H, Zimmermann B, et al: Single-nucleotide polymorphism-based noninvasive
prenatal screening in a high-risk and low-risk cohort. Obstet Gynecol 124(2 Pt 1):210, 2014
Perinatal Quality Foundation: NIPT/cell free DNA screening predictive value calculator. 2016. Available
at: http://perinatalquality.org/. Accessed November 18, 2020
Persutte WH, Lenke RR: Failure of amniotic-fluid-cell growth: is it related to fetal aneuploidy? Lancet
345(8942):96, 1995
Philip J, Silver RK, Wilson RD, et al: Late first-trimester invasive prenatal diagnosis: results of an
international randomized trial. Obstet Gynecol 103(6):1164, 2004
Practice Committees of the American Society for Reproductive Medicine, Society for Assisted
Reproductive Technology: The use of preimplantation genetic testing for aneuploidy (PGT-A): a
committee opinion. Fertil Steril 109(3):429, 2018
Quezada MS, Gil MM, Francisco C, et al: Screening for trisomies 21, 18, and 13 by cell-free DNA
analysis of maternal blood at 10–11 weeks. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 45(1):36, 2015
Reddy UM, Abuhamad AZ, Levine D, et al: Fetal imaging: Executive summary of a joint Eunice
Kennedy Shriver National Institute for Child Health and Human Development, Society for MaternalFetal Medicine, American Institute for Ultrasound in Medicine, American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists, American College of Radiology, Society for Pediatric Radiology, and Society of
Radiologists in Ultrasound Fetal Imaging Workshop. Obstet Gynecol 123(5):1070, 2014
Reddy UM, Mennuti MT: Incorporating first-trimester Down syndrome studies into prenatal screening:
executive summary of the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development workshop.
Obstet Gynecol 107(1):167, 2006
Reiff ES, Little SE, Dobson L, et al: What is the role of the 11- to 14-week ultrasound in women with
negative cell-free DNA screening for aneuploidy? Prenat Diagn 36(3):260, 2016
Rolnik DL, Yong Y, Lee TJ, et al: Influence of body mass index on fetal fraction increase with gestation
and cell-free DNA test failure. Obstet Gynecol 132(2):436, 2018
Salomon LJ, Sotiriadis A, Wulff CB, et al: Risk of miscarriage following amniocentesis or chorionic villus
sampling: systemic review of literature and updated meta-analysis. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 54
(4):442, 2019
Scott FP, Menezes M, Palma-Dias R, et al: Factors affecting cell-free DNA fetal fraction and the
consequences for test accuracy. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 31(14):1865, 2018
Sharma R, Stone S, Alzouebi A, et al: Perinatal outcome of prenatally diagnosed congenital talipes
equinovarus. Prenat Diagn 31(2):142, 2011
Shipp TD, Bromley B, Lieberman E, et al: The frequency of the detection of the detection of fetal
echogenic intracardiac foci with respect to maternal race. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 15(6):460,
2000
Silver RK, MacGregor SN, Sholl JS, et al: An evaluation of the chorionic villus sampling learning curve.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 163(3):917, 1990
Simpson LL, Malone FD, Bianchi DW, et al: Nuchal translucency and the risk of congenital heart
disease. Obstet Gynecol 109(2 Pt 1):376, 2007
Smith-Bindman R, Hosmer W, Feldstein VA, et al: Second-trimester ultrasound to detect fetuses with
Down syndrome. A meta-analysis. JAMA 285(8):1044, 2001

Snidjers RJM, Sundberg K, Holzgreve W, et al: Maternal-age and gestation-specific risk for trisomy 21.
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 13(3):167, 1999
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Berry SM, Stone J, et al: Fetal blood sampling. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 209(3):170, 2013
Solomon BD, Rosenbaum KN, Meck JM, et al: Holoprosencephaly due to numeric chromosome
abnormalities. Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet 154C(1):146, 2010
Srebniak MI, Joosten M, Knapen MFCM, et al: Frequency of submicroscopic chromosomal aberrations
in pregnancies without increased risk for structural chromosomal aberrations: systematic review and
meta-analysis. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 51(4):445, 2018
Tangshewinsirikul C, Wanapirak C, Piyamongkol W, et al: Effect of cord puncture site on cordocentesis
at mid-pregnancy on pregnancy outcome. Prenat Diagn 31(9):861, 2011
Tanvisut R, Wanapirak C, Piyamongkol W, et al: Cordocentesis-associated fetal loss and risk factors:
experience of 6650 cases from a single center. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 56(5):664, 2020
Tongsong T, Wanapirak C, Kunavikatikul C, et al: Fetal loss rate associated with cordocentesis at
midgestation. Am J Obstet Gynecol 184(4):719, 2001
Toutain J, Goutte-Gattat D, Horovitz J, et al: Confined placental mosaicism revisited: Impact on
pregnancy characteristics and outcome. PLoS One 13(4):e0195905, 2018
van der Pol JG, Wolf H, Boer K, et al: Jejunal atresia related to the use of methylene blue in genetic
amniocentesis in twins. BJOG 99(2):141, 1992
Vera-Rodriguez M, Rubio C: Assessing the true incidence of mosaicism in preimplantation embryos.
Fertil Steril 107(5):1107, 2017
Victor AR, Tyndall JC, Brake AJ et al: One hundred mosaic embryos transferred prospectively in a
single clinic: exploring when and why they result in healthy pregnancies. Fertil Steril 111(2):280, 2019
Vink J, Wapner R, D’Alton ME: Prenatal diagnosis in twin gestations. Semin Perinatol 36(3):169, 2012
Vintzileos AJ, Egan JF: Adjusting the risk for trisomy 21 on the basis of second-trimester
ultrasonography. Am J Obstet Gynecol 172(3):837, 1995
Viora E, Errante G, Sciarrone A, et al: Fetal nasal bone and trisomy 21 in the second trimester. Prenat
Diagn 25(6):511, 2005
Wald NJ, Cuckle H, Brock JH, et al: Maternal serum-alpha-fetoprotein measurement in antenatal
screening for anencephaly and spina bifida in early pregnancy. Report of UK Collaborative Study on
alpha-fetoprotein in relation to neural-tube defects. Lancet 1(8026):1323, 1977
Wald NJ, Densem JW, George L, et al: Prenatal screening for Down’s syndrome using inhibin-A as a
serum marker. Prenat Diagn 16(2):143, 1996
Wald NJ, Rodeck C, Hackshaw AK, et al: First and second trimester antenatal screening for Down’s
syndrome: the results of the Serum, Urine and Ultrasound Screening Study (SURUSS). Health
Technol Assess 7(11):1, 2003
Walker SJ, Ball RH, Babcook CJ, et al: Prevalence of aneuploidy and additional anatomic abnormalities
in fetuses and neonates with cleft lip with or without cleft palate. A population-based study in Utah.
J Ultrasound Med 20(11):1175, 2001
Wang Y, Chen Y, Tian F, et al: Maternal mosaicism is a significant contributor to discordant sex
chromosomal aneuploidies associated with non-invasive prenatal testing. Clin Chem 60(1):251, 2014
Wapner R, Thom E, Simpson JL, et al: First-trimester screening for trisomies 21 and 18. N Engl J Med
349(15):1471, 2003
Wapner RJ, Martin CL, Levy B, et al: Chromosomal microarray versus karyotyping for prenatal
diagnosis. N Engl J Med 2367(23):2175, 2012

Warsof SL, Larion S, Abuhamad AZ: Overview of the impact of noninvasive prenatal testing on
diagnostic procedures. Prenat Diagn 35(10):972, 2015
Wellesley D, Dolk H, Boyd PA, et al: Rare chromosome abnormalities, prevalence and prenatal
diagnosis rates from population-based congenital anomaly registers in Europe. Eur J Hum Genet
20(5):521, 2012
Westermann-Clark E, Pepper AN, Talreja N, et al: Debunking myths about “allergy” to radiocontrast
media in an academic institution. Postgrad Med 127(3):295, 2015
Wijnberger LD, van der Schouw YT, Christiaens GC: Learning in medicine: chorionic villus sampling.
Prenat Diagn 20(3):241, 2003

CHAPTER 18

Fetal Disorders

FETAL ANEMIA
RED CELL ALLOIMMUNIZATION
FETOMATERNAL HEMORRHAGE
FETAL THROMBOCYTOPENIA
HYDROPS FETALIS
MIRROR SYNDROME
REFERENCES
Fetal disorders may be acquired—such as alloimmunization; may be genetic
—congenital adrenal hyperplasia; or may be sporadic—like many structural
malformations. This chapter reviews fetal anemia and thrombocytopenia and
immune and nonimmune fetal hydrops. Hydrops is perhaps the quintessential
fetal disorder, as it can be a manifestation of severe illness from a wide
variety of etiologies. Fetal structural malformations are reviewed in Chapter
15, genetic abnormalities in Chapters 16 and 17, and conditions amenable to
medical or surgical fetal therapy in Chapter 19. Because congenital
infections arise as a result of maternal infection or colonization, they are
discussed in Chapters 67 and 68.

FETAL ANEMIA

Anemia may result from alloimmunization, infection, genetic disorders, or
fetomaternal hemorrhage. Red cell alloimmunization results from
transplacental passage of maternal antibodies that destroy fetal red cells.
Alloimmunization leads to overproduction of immature fetal and neonatal red
cells—erythroblastosis fetalis—a condition now referred to as hemolytic
disease of the fetus and newborn (HDFN). Congenital infections are also
associated with fetal anemia, particularly parvovirus B19, discussed in
Chapter 67 (p. 1191). In Southeast Asian populations, α0-thalassemia is a
common cause of severe anemia and nonimmune hydrops. Rare genetic
causes of anemia include red cell production disorders—such as DiamondBlackfan anemia and Fanconi anemia; red cell enzymopathies—glucose-6phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency and pyruvate kinase deficiency; red cell
structural abnormalities—hereditary spherocytosis and elliptocytosis;
lysosomal storage diseases—Gaucher disease, Niemann-Pick, and
mucopolysaccharidosis VII; and myeloproliferative disorders—leukemias.
Fetomaternal hemorrhage is discussed on page 357. Fetal anemia is typically
identified through Doppler evaluation of the fetal middle cerebral artery
(MCA) peak systolic velocity (p. 355).
Progressive fetal anemia from any cause leads to heart failure, hydrops
fetalis, and ultimately death. Treatment with intrauterine transfusions can be
lifesaving. Severely anemic fetuses transfused in utero have survival rates
exceeding 90 percent, and even in cases of hydrops fetalis, survival rates
approach 80 percent (Lindenberg, 2013; Mizuuchi, 2021; Zwiers, 2017).

■ Red Cell Alloimmunization
Currently, 36 different blood group systems and 360 erythrocyte antigens are
recognized by the International Society of Blood Transfusion (Storry, 2019).
Blood banks routinely screen for erythrocyte antigens. Some are
immunologically and genetically important, but many are rare and of little
clinical significance. An individual who lacks a specific erythrocyte antigen
may produce antibodies against it when exposed to that antigen. Such
antibodies can prove harmful if an individual receives an incompatible blood
transfusion. During pregnancy, these antibodies may cross the placenta and
lyse fetal red cells that contain the associated antigens, resulting in anemia.
The fetus typically inherits at least one erythrocyte antigen from the father
that is lacking in the mother. The pregnant woman may become sensitized if

enough fetal red cells reach her circulation to elicit an immune response.
Importantly, alloimmunization is uncommon for the following reasons: (1)
low prevalence of incompatible erythrocyte antigens; (2) insufficient
transplacental passage of fetal antigens and maternal antibodies; (3)
maternal-fetal ABO incompatibility, which leads to rapid clearance of fetal
erythrocytes before they elicit an immune response; (4) variable antigenicity;
and (5) variable maternal immune response to the antigen.
The prevalence of red cell alloimmunization in pregnancy approximates
1 percent (Bollason, 2017; Koelewijn, 2008). Most cases of severe fetal
anemia requiring antenatal transfusion are attributable to anti-D, anti-Kell,
anti-c, or anti-E alloimmunization (de Haas, 2015).
Maternal blood type and antibody screen are routinely assessed at the
first prenatal visit. Unbound antibodies in maternal serum are detected with
an indirect Coombs test (Chap. 10, p. 178). If the result is positive, the
specific antibodies are identified; their immunoglobulin subtype is
determined as either immunoglobulin G (IgG) or M (IgM); and the titer is
quantified. Only IgG antibodies are concerning, because IgM antibodies do
not cross the placenta. Selected antibodies and their potential to cause fetal
hemolytic anemia are listed in Table 18-1. The critical titer is the level at
which significant fetal anemia may develop. It may vary according to
antibody and laboratory but is usually between 1:8 and 1:32. If the
laboratory’s critical titer threshold for anti-D antibodies is 1:16, a titer
≥1:16 indicates the possibility of severe hemolytic disease. An important
exception is Kell sensitization, which is discussed on page 354.
TABLE 18-1. Selected Red Cell Antigens and Their Relationship to Fetal
Hemolytic Disease

CDE (Rh) Blood Group Incompatibility
The CDE system includes five erythrocyte antigens: C, c, D, E, and e. There
is no “d” antigen, and D-negativity is defined as the absence of the D antigen.
Although most people are D positive or negative, more than 200 D antigen
variants exist (Daniels, 2013). The CDE group was formerly termed Rh or
rhesus, due to a misconception that red cells from rhesus monkeys expressed
these human antigens. In transfusion medicine, “rhesus” is no longer used
(Sandler, 2017).
CDE antigens are clinically important. D-negative individuals may
become sensitized after a single exposure to as little as 0.1 mL of fetal

erythrocytes (Bowman, 1988). The two responsible genes—RHD and RHCE
—are located on the short arm of chromosome 1 and are inherited together,
independent of other blood group genes. Antigen positivity varies according
to race and ethnicity. Nearly 85 percent of non-Hispanic white Americans
are D-positive, as are approximately 90 percent of Native Americans, 93
percent of African Americans and Hispanic Americans, and 99 percent of
Asian Americans (Garratty, 2004).
The prevalence of D alloimmunization complicating pregnancy ranges
from 0.5 to 0.9 percent (Koelewijn, 2008; Martin, 2005). Without anti-D
immune globulin prophylaxis, a D-negative woman delivered of a Dpositive, ABO-compatible newborn has a 16-percent likelihood of
developing alloimmunization. Two percent will become sensitized by the
time of delivery, 7 percent by 6 months postpartum, and the remaining 7
percent will be “sensibilized”—producing detectable antibodies only in a
subsequent pregnancy (Bowman, 1985). If there is ABO incompatibility, the
D alloimmunization risk decreases to 2 percent because erythrocyte
destruction of incompatible cells limits sensitization (Bowman, 2006). D
sensitization may also occur following first-trimester pregnancy
complications, prenatal diagnostic procedures, and maternal trauma (Table
18-2).
TABLE 18-2. Causes of Fetomaternal Hemorrhage Associated with Red
Cell Antigen Alloimmunizationa

The C, c, E, and e antigens have lower immunogenicity than the D antigen
but can cause hemolytic disease. Sensitization to E, c, and C antigens
complicates approximately 0.3 percent of pregnancies in screening studies
and accounts for about 30 percent of red cell alloimmunization cases
(Howard, 1998; Koelewijn, 2008). Anti-E alloimmunization is the most
common, but the need for fetal or neonatal transfusions is greater with anti-c
alloimmunization than with anti-E or anti-C (de Haas, 2015; Hackney, 2004;
Koelewijn, 2008).
The Grandmother Effect. In virtually all pregnancies, small amounts of
maternal blood enter the fetal circulation. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
has identified maternal D-positive DNA in peripheral blood from preterm
and full-term D-negative newborns (Lazar, 2006). Thus, a D-negative female

fetus exposed to maternal D-positive red cells might develop sensitization,
and later might produce anti-D antibodies before or during pregnancy. This
mechanism is called the grandmother effect because the fetus in the current
pregnancy is jeopardized by maternal antibodies that were initially provoked
by his or her grandmother’s erythrocytes.

Alloimmunization to Minor Antigens
Because routine administration of anti-D immune globulin prevents anti-D
alloimmunization, proportionately more cases of hemolytic disease are
caused by red cell antigens other than D (American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists, 2019a; Koelewijn, 2008). These are also known as minor
antigens. Kell antigens are among the most frequent. Other antigens with
potential to cause severe alloimmunization include Duffy group A—Fya,
MNS, and Kidd—Jka (de Hass, 2015; Moise, 2008). In most cases,
sensitization to a minor antigen results from an incompatible blood
transfusion. However, if an IgG red cell antibody is detected and there is any
doubt as to its significance, the pregnancy should be evaluated for hemolytic
disease.
Only a few blood group antigens pose no fetal risk. Lewis antibodies—
Lea and Leb—are cold agglutinins, as are I antibodies. They are
predominantly IgM and are not expressed on fetal red cells (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019a). Another antibody that
does not cause fetal hemolysis is Duffy group B—Fyb.
Kell Alloimmunization. Approximately 90 percent of non-Hispanic white
Americans and up to 98 percent of African Americans are Kell antigen
negative. Kell type is not routinely determined. Transfusion history is
important, as nearly 90 percent of Kell sensitization cases result from
transfusion with Kell-positive blood.
Kell sensitization may develop more rapidly and may be more severe
than with sensitization to D and other blood group antigens. This is because
Kell antibodies attach to erythrocyte precursors in the fetal bone marrow and
thereby impair the normal hemopoietic response to anemia. With fewer
erythrocytes produced, there is less hemolysis, and thus severe anemia may
not be predicted by the maternal Kell antibody titer.

Slootweg and colleagues (2018) reviewed 93 pregnancies with Kell
alloimmunization in which the fetus was confirmed to be Kell-positive. They
found that a titer of 1:4 had 100 percent sensitivity, 27 percent specificity,
and 60 percent positive predictive value for transfusion requirement in the
fetal or neonatal period. More than 50 percent of Kell antigen–positive
fetuses ultimately needed transfusions. Given the potential for severe anemia,
the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019a) has
recommended that antibody titers not be used to monitor Kell-sensitized
pregnancies.

ABO Blood Group Incompatibility
Incompatibility for the major blood group antigens A and B is the most
common cause of hemolytic disease in newborns, but it does not cause
appreciable hemolysis in the fetus. This is because most anti-A and anti-B
antibodies are IgM types and do not cross the placenta. Also, fetal red cells
have fewer A and B antigenic sites than adult cells and are thus less
immunogenic. Approximately 20 percent of newborns have ABO blood
group incompatibility, although only 5 percent are affected clinically. In such
cases, the resulting anemia is typically mild.
The condition differs from CDE incompatibility in several respects.
First, ABO incompatibility is often seen in firstborn neonates, unlike
sensitization to other blood group antigens. This is because most group O
women have developed anti-A and anti-B isoagglutinins before pregnancy
from exposure to bacteria displaying similar antigens. Additionally, ABO
alloimmunization rarely becomes more severe in successive pregnancies.
Fetal surveillance and early delivery are not indicated in pregnancies with
prior ABO incompatibility. Postnatally however, neonates are evaluated for
hyperbilirubinemia, which may require treatment with phototherapy or
occasionally transfusion (Chap. 33, p. 606).

■ Management of the Alloimmunized Pregnancy
Of fetuses from D-alloimmunized pregnancies, 25 to 30 percent will have
mild to moderate hemolytic anemia, and up to 25 percent have anemia severe
enough to cause hydrops (Tannirandorn, 1990). If alloimmunization is
detected and the titer is below the critical value, the titer is generally
repeated every 4 weeks for the duration of the pregnancy (American College

of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019a). In any pregnancy in which the
antibody titer has reached a critical value, there is no benefit to repeating the
titer. The pregnancy is at risk even if the titer drops, and further evaluation is
required. Similarly, if a prior pregnancy was complicated by
alloimmunization, the pregnancy is considered at risk regardless of titer.

Fetal Risk Assessment
The presence of anti-D antibodies reflects maternal sensitization but does not
indicate whether the fetus is D-positive or D-negative. Up to 40 percent of
D-negative pregnant women carry a D-negative fetus. If a woman is
sensitized from a prior pregnancy, her antibody titer may rise during the
current pregnancy even if the current fetus is D-negative because of an
amnestic response. In a non-Hispanic white couple in which the woman is
D-negative, there is an 85-percent chance that the man is D-positive.
However, there is a 60-percent likelihood that he is heterozygous at the Dlocus, and only half of his children will be at risk for hemolytic disease.
Initial evaluation of alloimmunization begins with determining the
paternal erythrocyte antigen status. Provided that paternity is certain, if the
father is negative for the red cell antigen to which the mother is sensitized,
the pregnancy is not at risk. A prior blood transfusion may be the cause of
alloimmunization to a red cell antigen other than D. In a D-alloimmunized
pregnancy in which the father is D-positive, it is helpful to determine
paternal zygosity for the D antigen using DNA-based analysis. If the father is
heterozygous—or if paternity is not known—the woman should be offered
assessment of fetal genotype. Traditionally, this was done with amniocentesis
and PCR testing of uncultured amniocytes, which has a positive predictive
value of 100 percent and negative predictive value of approximately 97
percent (Van den Veyver, 1996). Fetal testing for other antigens—such as E/e,
C/c, Duffy, Kell, Kidd, and M/N—also is available with this method.
Chorionic villus sampling is not recommended because of greater risk for
fetomaternal hemorrhage and subsequent worsening of alloimmunization
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019a).
Noninvasive fetal D genotyping has been performed using cell-free DNA
(cfDNA) from maternal plasma (Chap. 17, p. 335). The reported sensitivity
exceeds 99 percent, the specificity exceeds 95 percent, and positive or
negative predictive values are similarly very high (Johnson, 2017; Moise,
2016; Pazourkova, 2021). Fetal D genotyping with cfDNA is routinely used

in parts of Europe but is not yet a widely used clinical tool in the United
States (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019a). Two
potential indications for cfDNA use in D-negative pregnant women are: (1)
in the setting of D alloimmunization, testing can identify fetuses who are also
D-negative and do not require anemia surveillance, and (2) in women
without D alloimmunization, anti-D immune globulin might be withheld if the
fetus is D negative. In the case of the latter, the American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019b) does not recommend routine
cfDNA screening in D-negative pregnancies until it has been demonstrated to
be cost-effective.
Management of the alloimmunized pregnancy typically consists of
maternal antibody titer surveillance followed by ultrasound monitoring of the
fetal MCA peak systolic velocity if a critical antibody titer is reached. As
noted earlier (p. 354), pregnancies with Kell alloimmunization often receive
ultrasound surveillance regardless of titer. Fetal blood sampling is generally
performed if the MCA peak systolic velocity exceeds the threshold for
severe anemia, with plan for concurrent intrauterine transfusion as needed.
Spectrophotometric analysis of amnionic fluid bilirubin, also known as the
ΔOD450 test, is no longer recommended (Society for Maternal-Fetal
Medicine, 2015a).
Recent efforts have focused on use of maternal intravenous
immunoglobulin (IVIG) therapy to postpone the initial intrauterine transfusion
to beyond 20 weeks in severely affected pregnancies (Maisonneuve, 2021).
Its mechanism of action is unclear, but IVIG therapy has been reported to
delay need for transfusion by an average of 3 weeks and to lower the risk for
hydrops (Zwiers, 2018).
Middle Cerebral Artery Doppler Velocimetry. Serial measurement of the
peak systolic velocity of the fetal MCA is the recommended test to detect
fetal anemia (Society for Maternal–Fetal Medicine, 2015a). The anemic fetus
shunts blood preferentially to the brain to maintain adequate oxygenation.
The velocity rises because of increased cardiac output and decreased blood
viscosity. Measurement technique is discussed in Chapter 14 (p. 262).
In a landmark study, Mari and coworkers (2000) measured the MCA
peak systolic velocity serially in 111 fetuses at risk for anemia and in 265
normal control fetuses. The threshold value of 1.5 multiples of the median
(MoM) for gestational age correctly identified all fetuses with moderate or

severe anemia. This provided a sensitivity of 100 percent, with a falsepositive rate of 12 percent.
MCA peak systolic velocity is followed serially, and values are plotted
on a curve like the one shown in Figure 18-1. If the velocity is between 1.0
and 1.5 MoM and the slope is rising—such that the value is approaching 1.5
MoM—MCA Doppler surveillance is generally performed at least weekly.
The false-positive rate of MCA peak systolic velocity increases significantly
beyond 34 weeks’ gestation and stems from the normal rise in cardiac output
that develops at this gestational age (Moise, 2008; Zimmerman, 2002). At
Parkland Hospital, MCA peak systolic velocity is not measured beyond 35
weeks, but ultrasound evaluation for hydrops is performed as needed.

FIGURE 18-1 Doppler measurements of the peak systolic velocity in the middle cerebral artery
(MCA) in 165 fetuses at risk for severe anemia. The blue line indicates the median peak systolic
velocity in normal pregnancies, and the red line shows 1.5 multiples of the median. (Reproduced with
permission from Oepkes D, Seaward PG, Vandenbussche et al: Doppler ultrasonography versus
amniocentesis to predict fetal anemia, N Engl J Med. 2006 Jul 13;355(2):156–164.)

Fetal Blood Transfusion
If the MCA peak systolic velocity exceeds 1.5 MoM or if hydrops develops
and anemia is the leading etiology, fetal blood sampling and intrauterine
transfusion should be considered. Fetal transfusion is typically performed
prior to 34 to 35 weeks’ gestation (Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine,
2015a). Later in gestation, the benefits of transfusion may be outweighed by

the risks of delaying delivery. Transfusion is most commonly intravascular.
However, the umbilical vein may be too narrow in the early second trimester
to readily permit needle entry, and severe hemolysis may necessitate
intraperitoneal fetal transfusion. In the setting of hydrops, peritoneal
absorption may be impaired, and some prefer to transfuse into both the fetal
peritoneal cavity and umbilical vein.
Transfusion is generally recommended only if the fetal hematocrit is <30
percent (Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, 2015a). If hydrops has
developed, the hematocrit is usually 15 percent or lower. The red cells
transfused are type O, D-negative, cytomegalovirus-negative, packed to a
hematocrit of approximately 80 percent to prevent volume overload,
irradiated to prevent fetal graft-versus-host reaction, and leukocyte-poor. The
fetal–placental volume allows rapid infusion of a relatively large quantity of
blood. Before transfusion, a paralytic agent such as vecuronium may be given
to the fetus to minimize movement. In a nonhydropic fetus, the target
hematocrit is 40 to 50 percent. The volume transfused may be estimated by
multiplying the estimated fetal weight in grams by 0.02 for each 10-percent
rise in hematocrit needed (Giannina, 1998). In the severely anemic fetus at
18 to 24 weeks’ gestation, a smaller volume is transfused initially, and
another transfusion may be planned for approximately 2 days later.
Subsequent transfusions take place every 2 to 4 weeks, depending on the
hematocrit.
The MCA peak systolic velocity threshold for severe anemia is higher
following an initial transfusion—1.70 MoM rather than 1.50 MoM (Society
for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, 2015a). It is hypothesized that the change in
threshold compensates for the contribution of donor cells in the initial
transfusion, because the donor cells are from adults and have a smaller mean
corpuscular volume. Following transfusion, the fetal hematocrit drops by
approximately 1 percent per day. The initial decline may be more rapid if
hydrops has developed.
Outcomes. The overall survival rate approximates 95 percent (Zwiers, 2017;
Mizuuchi, 2021). Complications include fetal death in 2 percent, need for
emergent cesarean delivery in 1 percent, and infection and preterm rupture of
membranes in 0.3 percent each, respectively. The stillbirth rate exceeds 15
percent if transfusion is required before 20 weeks (Lindenberg, 2013;
Zwiers, 2017). For hydropic fetuses, the neonatal survival rate is about 80

percent (Emiroglu, 2020; Van Kamp, 2001). In one series, 95 percent of
neonates survived if hydrops resolved following intrauterine transfusion
compared with fewer than 40 percent if hydrops persisted (Van Kamp,
2001).
Lindenberg (2012) reviewed long-term outcomes following intrauterine
transfusion in a cohort of more than 450 alloimmunized pregnancies.
Alloimmunization was secondary to anti-D in 80 percent, anti-Kell in 12
percent, and anti-c in 5 percent. Approximately a fourth of affected fetuses
had hydrops, and more than half also required exchange transfusion in the
neonatal period. Among nearly 300 children aged 2 to 17 years who
participated in neurodevelopmental testing, fewer than 5 percent had severe
impairments.

■ Prevention of Anti-D Alloimmunization
Anti-D immune globulin has been used for more than five decades to prevent
D alloimmunization. Unfortunately, 50 percent of women around the world
who would benefit from anti-D immune globulin do not receive it (Pegoraro,
2020). In countries without access, up to 10 percent of D-negative
pregnancies are complicated by hemolytic disease of the fetus and newborn
(Zipursky, 2015). With immunoprophylaxis, however, the alloimmunization
risk may be reduced to <0.2 percent. Despite long-standing and widespread
use, its mechanism of action is not completely understood.
Fetomaternal hemorrhage at delivery accounts for as many as 90 percent
of alloimmunization cases. Routine postpartum administration of anti-D
immune globulin to at-risk pregnancies within 72 hours of delivery lowers
the alloimmunization rate by 90 percent (Bowman, 1985). Additionally,
provision of anti-D immune globulin at 28 weeks’ gestation reduces the
third-trimester alloimmunization rate from approximately 2 percent to 0.1
percent (Bowman, 1988). Whenever there is doubt whether to give anti-D
immune globulin, it should be given. If not needed, it will not cause harm,
but failure to provide it when needed may have severe consequences.
Anti-D immune globulin is derived from human plasma donated by
individuals with high-titer anti-D immunoglobulin D antibodies.
Formulations prepared by cold ethanol fractionation and ultrafiltration must
be administered intramuscularly because they contain plasma proteins that
could result in anaphylaxis if given intravenously. Formulations prepared

using ion exchange chromatography may be administered either
intramuscularly or intravenously, which is relevant when treating significant
fetomaternal hemorrhage. Both preparation methods effectively remove viral
particles, including hepatitis and human immunodeficiency viruses.
Depending on the preparation, the half-life of anti-D immune globulin ranges
from 16 to 24 days, which is why it is given both in the third trimester and
following delivery. The standard intramuscular dose of anti-D immune
globulin—300 μg or 1500 IU—will protect the average-sized mother from a
fetal hemorrhage of up to 30 mL of fetal whole blood or 15 mL of fetal red
cells.
In the United States, anti-D immune globulin is given prophylactically to
all D-negative, unsensitized women at approximately 28 weeks’ gestation,
and a second dose is given after delivery if the newborn is D-positive
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019b). Before the
28-week dose of anti-D immune globulin, repeat antibody screening is
recommended to identify individuals who have become alloimmunized
(American Academy of Pediatrics, 2017). Following delivery, anti-D
immune globulin should be given within 72 hours. Recognizing that 40
percent of neonates born to D-negative women are also D negative,
administration of immune globulin is recommended only after the newborn is
confirmed to be D positive (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2019b). If immune globulin is inadvertently not administered
following delivery, it should be given as soon as the omission is recognized,
because there may be some protection up to 28 days postpartum (Bowman,
2006). Anti-D immune globulin is also administered after pregnancy-related
events that could result in sensitization (see Table 18-2). In the first trimester,
smaller doses of 50 or 120 µg may be suitable, as discussed in Chapters 11
and 12 (p. 203 and 221).
Anti-D immune globulin may produce a weakly positive—1:1 to 1:4—
indirect Coombs titer in the mother. This is harmless and should not be
confused with development of alloimmunization. Additionally, as the body
mass index increases above 27 to 40 kg/m2, serum antibody levels decrease
by 30 to 60 percent and may be less protective (MacKenzie, 2006; Woelfer,
2004). D-negative women who receive other types of blood products—
including platelet transfusions and plasmapheresis—also are at risk of
becoming sensitized, and this can be prevented with anti-D immune globulin.
Rarely, a small amount of antibody crosses the placenta and results in a

weakly positive direct Coombs test in cord and infant blood. Despite this,
passive immunization does not cause significant fetal or neonatal hemolysis.
In 2 to 3 per 1000 pregnancies, the volume of fetomaternal hemorrhage
may exceed 30 mL of whole blood (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2019b). A single dose of anti-D immune globulin would be
insufficient in such situations. If additional anti-D immune globulin is
considered only for women with risk factors such as those shown in Table
18-2, half of those who require additional immune globulin may be missed.
For this reason, all D-negative women should be screened at delivery,
typically with a rosette test, followed by quantitative testing if indicated
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019b).
The rosette test is a qualitative test that identifies whether fetal Dpositive cells are present in the circulation of a D-negative woman. A
sample of maternal blood is mixed with anti-D antibodies that coat any Dpositive fetal cells present in the sample. Indicator red cells bearing the Dantigen are then added, and rosettes form around the fetal cells as the
indicator cells attach to them by the antibodies. Thus, if rosettes are
visualized, there are fetal D-positive cells in that sample. In the setting of D
incompatibility, or any time a large fetomaternal hemorrhage is suspected—
regardless of antigen status, a Kleihauer-Betke test or flow cytometry test are
used. These are discussed on page 358.
The dosage of anti-D immune globulin is calculated from the estimated
volume of the fetal-to-maternal hemorrhage, as described on page 358. One
300-μg dose is given for each 15 mL of fetal red cells or 30 mL of fetal
whole blood to be neutralized. If using an intramuscular preparation of antiD immune globulin, no more than five doses may be given in a 24-hour
period. If using an intravenous preparation, two ampules—totaling 600 μg—
may be given every 8 hours. A positive indirect Coombs test or the presence
of circulating fetal cells on a rosette test demonstrate that the dose was
sufficient.

Serological Weak D Phenotypes
Formerly called Du, these are the most common antigenic D variants in the
United States and Europe (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2019a). Serological weak D phenotypes have been further
refined into two general categories using molecular analysis to complete

RHD genotyping. Molecular weak D phenotypes carry reduced numbers of
intact D antigens on the red cell surface. Partial D types have protein
deletions associated with abnormal D antigens that lack epitopes (Sandler,
2017).
Many individuals who test positive for weak D have weak D phenotypes
1, 2, or 3. These phenotypes may be managed as if D-positive. The
pregnancy is not considered at risk for alloimmunization, and thus anti-D
immune globulin is not needed (Sandler 2015, 2017). In contrast, individuals
with partial D antigens may be at risk for D-sensitization and do require
immune globulin. Molecular RHD genotyping has been suggested for
pregnant women with weak D phenotype, but cost-benefit analysis of this
strategy is presently lacking (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2019b). If molecular genetic testing has not been performed
in those with serologic weak D phenotype, D immunoprophylaxis should be
administered.

FETOMATERNAL HEMORRHAGE
A small amount of fetomaternal bleeding likely occurs in all pregnancies and
may be sufficient to provoke an antigen-antibody reaction in two thirds. As
shown in Figure 18-2, the incidence increases with advancing gestation and
with the volume of fetal blood in the maternal circulation (Choavaratana,
1997). The prevalence of fetomaternal bleeding of at least 30 mL is
estimated to be 3 events per 1000 pregnancies (Wylie, 2010). Fortunately,
frank hemorrhage is rare. In one series of more than 30,000 pregnancies,
fetomaternal hemorrhage ≥150 mL complicated 1 in 2800 births (de
Almeida, 1994).

FIGURE 18-2 Incidence of fetomaternal hemorrhage during pregnancy. The numbers at each data
point represent total volume of fetal blood estimated to have been transferred into the maternal
circulation.

Selected causes of fetomaternal hemorrhage are shown in Table 18-2.
With significant hemorrhage, the most common presenting complaint is
decreased fetal movement (Bellussi, 2017; Wylie, 2010). A sinusoidal fetal
heart rate pattern is infrequently seen but warrants immediate evaluation
(Chap. 24, p. 451). Sonography may demonstrate elevated MCA peak
systolic velocity, and indeed this is reported to be the most accurate
predictor (Bellusi, 2017; Wylie, 2010). Hydrops is an ominous finding. If the
MCA peak systolic velocity is elevated or hydrops is identified, urgent fetal
transfusion or delivery should be considered. In more than 80 percent of
cases, no etiology of the fetomaternal hemorrhage is identified.
One limitation of quantitative tests for fetal cells in the maternal
circulation is that they do not provide information regarding the timing or
chronicity of hemorrhage (Wylie, 2010). Anemia that develops gradually, as
with alloimmunization, is generally better tolerated by the fetus than acute
anemia. Chronic anemia may not produce fetal heart rate abnormalities until
the fetus is moribund. In contrast, significant acute hemorrhage may result in

profound fetal neurological impairment from cerebral hypoperfusion,
ischemia, and infarction. In some cases, fetomaternal hemorrhage is
identified during stillbirth evaluation (Chap. 35, p. 325).

■ Hemorrhage Quantification
Estimating the volume of fetomaternal hemorrhage is needed to calculate the
appropriate dose of anti-D immune globulin if the woman is D-negative, and
it may also influence obstetrical management. The most commonly used
quantitative test for fetal red cells in the maternal circulation is the acid
elution or Kleihauer-Betke (KB) test (Kleihauer, 1957). Fetal erythrocytes
contain hemoglobin F, which is more resistant to acid elution than
hemoglobin A. Following exposure to acid, only fetal hemoglobin remains.
Therefore, after staining, the fetal erythrocytes appear red and adult
erythrocytes appear as “ghosts” (Fig. 18-3). The fetal cells are then counted
and expressed as a percentage of adult cells. The fetal blood volume
involved in the fetomaternal hemorrhage may be calculated using the
following formula:

FIGURE 18-3 Kleihauer-Betke test demonstrating massive fetomaternal hemorrhage. After acidelution treatment, fetal red cells rich in hemoglobin F stain darkly, whereas maternal red cells with only
very small amounts of hemoglobin F stain lightly.

For a pregnant woman of normal size who is normotensive and has
reached full-term, the maternal blood volume (MBV) may be estimated as
5000 mL. Thus, in a woman with a hematocrit of 35 percent and whose fetus
has a hematocrit of 50 percent, the calculation for a KB test demonstrating
staining of 1.7 percent of sample cells is:

The fetal-placental blood volume at term approximates 125 mL/kg. For a
3000-g fetus, that would equate to 375 mL. Thus, this fetus lost
approximately 15 percent (60 ÷ 375 mL) of the fetal-placental volume.
Assuming the hematocrit is 50 percent in a term fetus, this 60 mL of whole
blood represents 30 mL of red cells lost into the maternal circulation. A loss
of this magnitude should be well tolerated hemodynamically but would
require two 300-μg doses of anti-D immune globulin to prevent
alloimmunization. A more precise method to estimate the maternal blood
volume includes a calculation based on the maternal height, weight, and
anticipated physiological maternal blood volume accrual (Table 42-1, p.
732).
The KB test is labor intensive. There are also two scenarios in which the
KB may be inaccurate: (1) maternal hemoglobinopathies in which the fetal
hemoglobin level is elevated, such as β-thalassemia, and (2) at or near term,
because the fetus may already be producing hemoglobin A.
Another method of quantifying fetomaternal hemorrhage is with flow
cytometry, which uses monoclonal antibodies to hemoglobin F or to the D
antigen and then measures the degree of fluorescence (Chambers, 2012;
Welsh, 2016). Flow cytometry is an automated test that can analyze a greater
number of cells than the KB test. It is also unaffected by maternal levels of
fetal hemoglobin and by fetal levels of hemoglobin A. Flow cytometry has
been reported to be more sensitive and accurate than the KB test, however, it
uses specialized technology not routinely available in many hospitals
(Chambers, 2012; Corcoran, 2014; Fernandes, 2007).

FETAL THROMBOCYTOPENIA
■ Alloimmune Thrombocytopenia
This is also referred to as fetal and neonatal alloimmune thrombocytopenia
(FNAIT). Alloimmune thrombocytopenia (AIT) is the most common cause of
severe thrombocytopenia among term newborns, with a frequency of 1 to 2
cases per 1000 births (Kamphuis, 2010; Pacheco, 2013; Risson, 2012).
FNAIT is caused by maternal alloimmunization to paternally inherited fetal
platelet antigens. Maternal antiplatelet antibodies cross the placenta in a
manner similar to red cell alloimmunization (p. 352). Unlike immune
thrombocytopenia, the maternal platelet count is normal with FNAIT. And,
unlike anti-D alloimmunization, severe sequelae may affect the initial at-risk
pregnancy.
Maternal platelet alloimmunization against human platelet antigen-1a
(HPA-1a) accounts for 80 to 90 percent of cases and is associated with the
greatest severity (Bussel, 1997; Knight, 2011; Tiller, 2013). This is followed
in order of frequency by alloimmunization against HPA-5b, HPA-1b, and
HPA-3a. Alloimmunization to other antigens accounts for only 1 percent of
reported cases.
Approximately 85 percent of non-Hispanic white individuals are HPA-1a
positive. Two percent are homozygous for HPA-1b and at risk for
alloimmunization. However, only 10 percent of these women produce
antiplatelet antibodies when carrying an HPA-1a fetus. Approximately a third
of affected fetuses or neonates will develop severe thrombocytopenia, and
10 to 20 percent with severe thrombocytopenia sustain an intracranial
hemorrhage (ICH) (Kamphuis, 2010). As a result, population-based
screening studies have identified one case of FNAIT-associated ICH per
25,000 to 60,000 pregnancies (Kamphuis, 2010; Knight, 2011).
FNAIT has a spectrum of presentation. Neonatal thrombocytopenia may
be an incidental finding, the newborn may manifest petechiae, or the fetus or
neonate may develop devastating ICH. Of 600 pregnancies with FNAIT
identified through a large international registry, fetal or neonatal ICH
complicated just 7 percent of cases (Tiller, 2013). Hemorrhage affected the
first-born child in 60 percent and occurred before 28 weeks’ gestation in
half. A third of affected children died soon after birth, and 50 percent of
survivors had severe neurological disabilities.

Bussel and coworkers (1997) evaluated fetal platelet counts before
therapy in 107 fetuses with FNAIT. Thrombocytopenia severity was
predicted by a prior sibling with perinatal ICH. Fifty percent had an initial
platelet count <20,000/μL. And, among those in whom the initial platelet
count was >80,000/μL, it dropped by at least 10,000/μL per week in the
absence of therapy.

Diagnosis and Management
AIT is typically diagnosed following delivery of a neonate with severe and
unexplained thrombocytopenia to a woman whose platelet count is normal.
Rarely, the diagnosis is ascertained after identifying fetal ICH. The condition
recurs in 70 to 90 percent of subsequent pregnancies, is often severe, and
usually develops earlier with each successive pregnancy. Traditionally, fetal
blood sampling was performed to detect fetal thrombocytopenia and to tailor
therapy. Platelets were transfused if the fetal platelet count was <50,000/μL.
The reported rate of procedure-related complications exceeds 10 percent
(Winkelhorst, 2017). For this reason, most favor empirical treatment with
IVIG instead (Berkowitz, 2006; Pacheco, 2011).
Therapy may be stratified according to whether a prior affected
pregnancy was complicated by perinatal ICH, and if so, at what gestational
age (Table 18-3) (Pacheco, 2011). Pioneering work by Bussel (1996) and
Berkowitz (2006) and their colleagues demonstrated the efficacy of such
treatment. In one series of 50 pregnancies with fetal thrombocytopenia
secondary to FNAIT, IVIG raised the platelet count by approximately
50,000/μL, and no fetus developed ICH (Bussel, 1996). Among pregnancies
at particularly high risk, which was based on a platelet count <20,000/μL or
a sibling with FNAIT-associated ICH, the addition of corticosteroids to IVIG
therapy was associated with a rise in platelet count in 80 percent of cases
(Berkowitz, 2006). However, a systematic review identified no consistent
benefit of corticosteroid treatment compared with IVIG therapy alone
(Winkelhorst, 2017). Thus, corticosteroid therapy is somewhat controversial.
Cesarean delivery is generally recommended at or near term.
TABLE 18-3. Fetal-Neonatal Alloimmune Thrombocytopenia (FNAIT)
Treatment Recommendations

■ Immune Thrombocytopenia
Also known as immune or idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP), this
autoimmune disorder is characterized by antiplatelet IgG antibodies that
attack platelet glycoproteins. The antibodies may cross the placenta and
cause fetal thrombocytopenia. Maternal ITP is discussed in Chapter 59 (p.
1059).
Fetal thrombocytopenia from maternal ITP is usually mild. However,
neonatal platelet levels may fall rapidly after birth and nadir at 48 to 72
hours of life. Neither the maternal platelet count, identification of antiplatelet
antibodies, nor treatment with corticosteroids effectively predicts fetal or
neonatal platelet counts (Hachisuga, 2014). Importantly, fetal platelet counts
are usually adequate to allow vaginal delivery without an increased risk of
ICH. In a review of more than 400 pregnancies with ITP, there was no case
of fetal or neonatal ICH and no infant with any central nervous system
abnormality (Wyszynski, 2016). Fetal blood sampling is not recommended
(Neunert, 2011). Mode of delivery is based on standard obstetrical
indications.

HYDROPS FETALIS
This phrase has its origins in Middle English, Latin, and Greek. The
condition was described by Ballantyne in 1892 as general dropsy, that is,

edema, of the fetus (Kaiser, 1971). Hydrops can be a manifestation of severe
illness from a wide variety of etiologies (Table 18-4) (Bellini, 2015).
TABLE 18-4. Categories and Etiologies of Nonimmune Hydrops Fetalis

Hydrops is diagnosed by identifying two or more fetal effusions—
pleural, pericardial, or ascites—or one effusion plus anasarca (Fig. 18-4).
Sonographically measured skin thickness of >5 mm constitutes edema or
anasarca. Placentomegaly is defined as placental thickness ≥4 cm in the
second trimester or ≥6 cm in the third trimester (Bellini, 2009; Society for
Maternal–Fetal Medicine, 2015b). As hydrops progresses in severity,
anasarca is an invariable feature and is usually accompanied by
placentomegaly and hydramnios.

FIGURE 18-4 Sonographic findings that define hydrops. A. This profile of a 23-week fetus with
nonimmune hydrops secondary to B19 parvovirus infection depicts scalp edema (arrowheads) and
ascites (*). B. This 34-week fetus had hydrops secondary to an arteriovenous malformation in the brain,
known as a vein of Galen aneurysm. In this coronal image, prominent pleural effusions (*) outline the
lungs (L). Fetal ascites is also present (arrows), as is anasarca. C. This axial (transverse) image depicts
a pericardial effusion (arrows) in a 23-week fetus with hydrops from B19 parvovirus infection. The
degree of cardiomegaly is impressive, and the ventricular hypertrophy raises concern for myocarditis,
which can accompany parvovirus infection. D. This axial (transverse) image depicts fetal ascites (*) in
a 15-week fetus with hydrops secondary to large cystic hygromas. Anasarca is also seen (bracket).

If found in association with red cell alloimmunization, hydrops is termed
immune, otherwise, it is nonimmune. Immune and nonimmune hydrops are
postulated to share several physiological abnormalities. The precise
pathogenesis remains unknown but is likely multifactorial. As shown in
Figure 18-5, these include decreased colloid oncotic pressure, increased
hydrostatic or central venous pressure, and enhanced vascular permeability.

FIGURE 18-5 Proposed pathogenesis of immune and nonimmune hydrops fetalis. (Data from Bellini,
2009; Lockwood, 2009.)

■ Immune Hydrops
This condition results from transplacental passage of maternal antibodies that
destroy fetal red cells. The resultant anemia stimulates marrow erythroid
hyperplasia and extramedullary hematopoiesis in the spleen and liver (see
Fig. 18-5). The latter likely causes portal hypertension and impaired hepatic
protein synthesis, which lowers plasma oncotic pressure (Nicolaides, 1985).
Fetal anemia may also raise central venous pressure (Weiner, 1989). Tissue
hypoxia from anemia may increase capillary permeability, such that fluid
collects in the fetal thorax, abdominal cavity, and/or subcutaneous tissue.
The incidence of immune hydrops has decreased dramatically with the
advent of anti-D immune globulin and with use of MCA Doppler to aid

anemia detection. Only severe anemia results in immune hydrops. Mari and
colleagues (2000) reviewed 70 pregnancies with fetal anemia from red cell
alloimmunization and found that all with immune hydrops had hemoglobin
values <5 g/dL. As discussed on page 356, immediate fetal blood transfusion
may be lifesaving.

■ Nonimmune Hydrops
At least 90 percent of cases of hydrops are nonimmune (Bellini, 2012). The
prevalence approximates 1 case per 1500 second-trimester pregnancies
(Heinonen, 2000). The number of specific disorders that can lead to
nonimmune hydrops is extensive. Etiologies and the proportion of births
within each hydrops category from a review of more than 6700 affected
pregnancies are summarized in Table 18-4 (Bellini, 2015).
A cause is identified in approximately 60 percent prenatally and in up to
80 percent postnatally (Bellini, 2009, 2015; Santo, 2011). Of prenatally
diagnosed cases, aneuploidy accounts for approximately 20 percent,
cardiovascular abnormalities for 15 percent, and infections for 14 percent—
the most common of which is parvovirus B19 (Santo, 2011; Sileo, 2020;
Sparks, 2019). In multifetal gestations, twin-twin transfusion syndrome is the
most frequent cause (Yeom, 2015). Fetal deaths and stillbirths are common
with nonimmune hydrops. Overall, only 40 percent of affected pregnancies
result in a liveborn neonate, and of these, the neonatal survival rate is just 50
percent (Nassr, 2018; Yeom, 2015).
Importantly, the etiology of nonimmune hydrops varies according to the
gestational age at diagnosis. In a review of 63 pregnancies undergoing
genetic testing for hydrops in the first trimester, aneuploidy was the cause in
70 percent (Sileo, 2020). Of cases diagnosed from 14 through 24 weeks,
aneuploidy and congenital infection each accounted for 20 percent. When
nonimmune hydrops presents before 24 weeks’ gestation, the most frequent
aneuploidy is 45,X—Turner syndrome, and in such cases, the survival rate is
<5 percent (Sohan, 2001).
Recent advances in genetic testing have improved the understanding of
hydrops cases that were previously considered idiopathic. In a review from
the University of California Fetal-Maternal Consortium, whole exome
sequencing was studied in 127 cases of unexplained nonimmune hydrops in
which traditional genetic testing was uninformative (Sparks, 2020). Nearly

30 percent had a pathogenic genetic variant. The most common etiology was
RASopathies, and many such cases resulted in Noonan syndrome. It is
anticipated that as experience with whole exome sequencing accrues, the
diagnostic yield will continue to increase.
Although the prognosis of nonimmune hydrops is guarded, it depends
heavily on etiology. In a large series from Thailand and Southern China, α0thalassemia is the main cause of nonimmune hydrops. It accounts for 30 to 50
percent of cases and confers an extremely poor prognosis (Liao, 2007;
Ratanasiri, 2009; Suwanrath-Kengpol, 2005). In contrast, treatable etiologies
such as parvovirus infection, chylothorax, and tachyarrhythmias, which each
constituting approximately 10 percent of cases, can result in survival in two
thirds of cases with fetal therapy (Sohan, 2001).

Diagnostic Evaluation
Hydrops is readily detected with prenatal sonography (see Fig. 18-5).
Imaging and laboratory evaluation may identify fetal structural abnormalities,
arrhythmias, anemia, aneuploidy, placental abnormalities, and complications
of monochorionic twinning. Depending on the circumstances, initial
evaluation includes the following:
1. Indirect Coombs test to identify alloimmunization
2. Detailed ultrasound examination of the fetus and placenta that includes:
• A detailed anatomical survey to assess for the structural abnormalities
listed in Table 18-4
• Fetal echocardiography to further evaluate cardiac structure and function
• MCA Doppler peak systolic velocity to assess for fetal anemia
3. Amniocentesis to obtain samples for chromosomal microarray analysis or
karyotyping and for parvovirus B19, cytomegalovirus, and toxoplasmosis
testing, as discussed in Chapter 67
4. Kleihauer-Betke test to detect fetomaternal hemorrhage if anemia is
suspected, depending on findings and test results
5. Consideration of testing for alpha-thalassemia and/or inborn errors of
metabolism.
Whole exome sequencing has significant potential to identify a genetic
etiology if the aforementioned evaluation is not informative (Sparks, 2020).
Counseling should include anticipated turnaround times, costs, and variants

of uncertain significance. It is not recommended for routine use (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020). In addition, because
sequencing is generally performed on the fetus and parents, a parent may be
identified or suspected to have an unrelated but medically actionable finding,
such as a cancer predisposition.
Isolated Effusion or Edema. The initial presentation of hydrops may be as a
single effusion or anasarca. Although neither is diagnostic of hydrops, the
above evaluation should be considered, and frequent surveillance may be
prudent. A pericardial effusion may precede development of hydrops in fetal
parvovirus B19 infection (Chap. 67, p. 1191). Similarly, isolated ascites may
be the initial finding in fetal parvovirus B19 infection or may result from a
gastrointestinal abnormality such as meconium peritonitis. An isolated
pleural effusion may represent a chylothorax, which is amenable to prenatal
diagnosis, and for which fetal therapy may be lifesaving if hydrops develops
(Chap. 19, p. 376). Last, isolated edema, particularly involving the upper
torso or the dorsum of the hands and feet, may be found in Turner or Noonan
syndrome or may represent congenital lymphedema syndrome (Chap. 16, p.
314).

■ Mirror Syndrome
The association between fetal hydrops and the development of maternal
edema, in which the mother mirrors the fetus, is attributed to Ballantyne. He
called the condition triple edema because the fetus, mother, and placenta all
became edematous. Mirror syndrome has been reported to complicate at
least 20 percent of hydrops cases (Chen, 2021). The etiology of the hydrops
is not related to development of mirror syndrome. It has been associated with
hydrops from D alloimmunization, twin-twin transfusion syndrome, placental
chorioangioma, fetal cystic hygroma, Ebstein anomaly, sacrococcygeal
teratoma, chylothorax, bladder outlet obstruction, supraventricular
tachycardia, vein of Galen aneurysm, and various congenital infections
(Braun, 2010).
In a review of more than 50 cases of mirror syndrome, Braun (2010)
found that approximately 90 percent of women had edema, 60 percent had
hypertension, 40 percent had proteinuria, 20 percent had liver enzyme
elevation, and nearly 15 percent had headache and visual disturbances.

Based on these findings, it is reasonable to consider mirror syndrome a form
of severe preeclampsia (Espinoza, 2006; Midgley, 2000). Others, however,
have suggested that it is a separate disease process with hemodilution rather
than hemoconcentration (Carbillon, 1997; Livingston, 2007).
Some reports describe the same imbalance of angiogenic and
antiangiogenic factors that is observed with preeclampsia, and this suggests a
common pathophysiology (Goa, 2013; Hobson, 2020; Llurba, 2012). These
findings, which include elevated concentrations of soluble fms-like tyrosine
kinase 1 (sFlt-1), decreased placental growth factor (PlGF) levels, and
elevation of soluble vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 1 (sVEGFR1) concentrations, are discussed further in Chapter 40 (p. 694).
In most cases with mirror syndrome, prompt delivery is indicated and
followed by resolution of maternal edema and other findings (Braun, 2010).
However, in isolated cases of fetal anemia, supraventricular tachycardia,
hydrothorax, or bladder outlet obstruction, successful fetal treatment has
resulted in resolution of both fetal hydrops and maternal mirror syndrome
(Goa, 2013; Livingston, 2007; Llurba, 2012; Midgley, 2000). Normalization
of the angiogenic imbalance has also been described following fetal
transfusion for parvovirus B19 infection. Fetal therapy for these conditions is
reviewed in Chapter 19. Given the parallels to severe preeclampsia,
delaying delivery to effect fetal therapy should be considered only with
caution. If the maternal condition deteriorates, delivery is recommended.

REFERENCES
American Academy of Pediatrics, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Guidelines for
Perinatal Care. 8th ed. Elk Grove Village, AAP, 2017
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Management of alloimmunization during
pregnancy. Practice Bulletin No. 192, March 2018, Reaffirmed 2019a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Prevention of Rh-D alloimmunization. Practice
Bulletin No. 181, August 2017, Reaffirmed 2019b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Microarrays and next-generation sequencing
technology: the use of advanced genetic diagnostic tools in obstetrics and gynecology. Committee
Opinion No. 682, December 2016, Reaffirmed 2020
Bellini C, Donarini G, Paladini D, et al: Etiology of non-immune hydrops fetalis: an update. Am J Med
Genet 167A:1082, 2015
Bellini C, Hennekam RC: Non-immune hydrops fetalis: a short review of etiology and pathophysiology.
Am J Med Genet 158A(3):597, 2012

Bellini C, Hennekam RC, Fulcheri E, et al: Etiology of nonimmune hydrops fetalis: a systematic review.
Am J Med Genet A 149A(5):844, 2009
Bellussi F, Perolo A, Ghi T, et al: Diagnosis of severe fetomaternal hemorrhage with fetal cerebral
Doppler: case series and systematic review. Fetal Diagn Ther 41(1):1, 2017
Berkowitz RL, Kolb EA, McFarland JG, et al: Parallel randomized trials of risk-based therapy for fetal
alloimmune thrombocytopenia. Obstet Gynecol 107(1):91, 2006
Bollason G, Hjartardottir H, Jonsson T, et al: Red blood cell alloimmunization in pregnancy during the
years 1996–2015 in Iceland: a nation-wide population study. Transfusion 57(11):2578, 2017
Bowman J: Rh-immunoglobulin: Rh prophylaxis. Best Pract Res Clin Haematol 19(1):27, 2006
Bowman JM: Controversies in Rh prophylaxis: who needs Rh immune globulin and when should it be
given? Am J Obstet Gynecol 151:289, 1985
Bowman JM: The prevention of Rh immunization. Transfus Med Rev 2:129, 1988
Braun T, Brauer M, Fuchs I, et al: Mirror syndrome: a systematic review of fetal associated conditions,
maternal presentation, and perinatal outcome. Fetal Diagn Ther 27(4):191, 2010
Bussel JB, Berkowitz RL, Lynch L, et al: Antenatal management of alloimmune thrombocytopenia with
intravenous gamma-globulin: a randomized trial of the addition of low-dose steroid to intravenous
gamma-globulin. Am J Obstet Gynecol 174(5):1414, 1996
Bussel JB, Zabusky MR, Berkowitz RL, et al: Fetal alloimmune thrombocytopenia. N Engl J Med
337:22, 1997
Carbillon L, Oury JF, Guerin JM, et al: Clinical biological features of Ballantyne syndrome and the role
of placental hydrops. Obstet Gynecol Surv 52(5):310, 1997
Chambers E, Davies L, Evans S, et al: Comparison of haemoglobin F detection by the acid elution test,
flow cytometry and high-performance liquid chromatography in maternal blood samples analysed for
fetomaternal haemorrhage. Transfus Med 22(3):199, 2012
Chen R, Liu M, Yan J, et al: Clinical characteristics of mirror syndrome: a retrospective study of 16
cases. J Obstet Gynaecol 41(1):73, 2021
Choavaratana R, Uer-Areewong S, Makanantakocol S: Fetomaternal transfusion in normal pregnancy
and during delivery. J Med Assoc Thai 80:96, 1997
Corcoran D, Murphy D, Donnelly J, et al: The prevalence of maternal F cells in a pregnant population
and potential overestimation of foeto-maternal haemorrhage as a consequence. Blood Transfus
12:570, 2014
Daniels G: Variants of RhD—current testing and clinical consequences. Br J Haematol 161(4):461, 2013
de Almeida V, Bowman JM: Massive fetomaternal hemorrhage: Manitoba experience. Obstet Gynecol
83:323, 1994
de Haas M, Thurik FF, Koelewijn JM et al: Haemolytic disease of the fetus and newborn. Vox Sang
109(2):99, 2015
Emiroğlu N, Yilmaz FH, Keçeci R, et al: Clinical characteristics and neonatal outcomes of liveborn
newborns with hydrops fetalis treated in a tertiary level neonatal intensive care unit. Birth Defects
Res 1:112(6):515, 2020
Fernandes BJ, von Dadelszen P, Fazal I, et al: Flow cytometric assessment of feto-maternal
hemorrhage; a comparison with Betke-Kleihauer. Prenat Diagn 27(7):641, 2007
Garratty G, Glynn SA, McEntire R, et al: ABO and Rh(D) phenotype frequencies of different
racial/ethnic groups in the United States. Transfusion 44(5):703, 2004
Giannina G, Moise KJ Jr, Dorman K: A simple method to estimate the volume for fetal intravascular
transfusion. Fetal Diagn Ther 13:94, 1998

Goa S, Mimura K, Kakigano A, et al: Normalisation of angiogenic imbalance after intra-uterine
transfusion for mirror syndrome caused by parvovirus B19. Fetal Diagn Ther 34(3):176, 2013
Hachisuga K, Hidaka N, Fujita Y, et al: Can we predict neonatal thrombocytopenia in offspring of
women with idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura? Blood 49(4):259, 2014
Hackney DN, Knudtson EJ, Rossi KQ, et al: Management of pregnancies complicated by anti-c
isoimmunization. Obstet Gynecol 103:24, 2004
Heinonen S, Ruynamen M, Kirkinen P: Etiology and outcome of second trimester nonimmunological
fetal hydrops. Scand J Obstet Gynecol 79:15, 2000
Hobson SR, Wallace EM, Chan YF, et al: Mirroring preeclampsia: the molecular basis of Ballantyne
syndrome. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 33(5):768, 2020
Howard H, Martlew V, McFadyen I, et al: Consequences for fetus and neonate of maternal red cell
allo-immunization. Arch Dis Child Fetal Neonat Ed 78:F62, 1998
Johnson JA, MacDonald K, Clarke G, et al: No. 343—Routine non-invasive prenatal prediction of fetal
RHD genotype in Canada: the time is here. J Obstet Gynaecol Can 39(5):366, 2017
Kaiser IH: Ballantyne and triple edema. Am J Obstet Gynecol 110(1):115, 1971
Kamphuis MM, Paridaans N, Porcelijn L, et al: Screening in pregnancy for fetal or neonatal alloimmune
thrombocytopenia: systematic review. BJOG 117(11):1335, 2010
Kleihauer B, Braun H, Betke K: Demonstration of fetal hemoglobin in erythrocytes of a blood smear.
Klin Wochenschr 35(12):637, 1957
Knight M, Pierce M, Allen D, et al: The incidence and outcomes of fetomaternal alloimmune
thrombocytopenia: a UK national study using three data sources. Br J Haematol 152(4):460, 2011
Koelewijn JM, Vrijkotte TG, van der Schoot CE, et al: Effect of screening for red cell antibodies, other
than anti-D, to detect hemolytic disease of the fetus and newborn: a population study in the
Netherlands. Transfusion 48:941, 2008
Lazar L, Harmath AG, Ban Z, et al: Detection of maternal deoxyribonucleic acid in peripheral blood of
premature and mature newborn infants. Prenat Diagn 26(2):168, 2006
Liao C, Wei J, Li Q, et al: Nonimmune hydrops fetalis diagnosed during the second half of pregnancy in
Southern China. Fetal Diagn Ther 22(4):302, 2007
Lindenburg I, van Kamp I, van Zwet E, et al: Increased perinatal loss after intrauterine transfusion for
alloimmune anaemia before 20 weeks of gestation. BJOG 120:847, 2013
Lindenburg IT, Smits-Wintjens VE, van Klink JM, et al: Long-term neurodevelopmental outcome after
intrauterine transfusion for hemolytic disease of the fetus/newborn: the LOTUS study. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 206:141.e1, 2012
Livingston JC, Malik KM, Crombleholme TM, et al: Mirror syndrome: a novel approach to therapy with
fetal peritoneal-amniotic shunt. Obstet Gynecol 110(2 Pt 2):540, 2007
Llurba E, Marsal G, Sanchez O, et al: Angiogenic and antiangiogenic factors before and after resolution
of maternal mirror syndrome. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 40(3):367, 2012
Lockwood CJ, Nadel AS, King ME, et al: A 32-year old pregnant woman with an abnormal fetal
ultrasound study. Case 16–2009. N Engl J Med 360(21):2225, 2009
MacKenzie IZ, Roseman F, Findlay J, et al: The kinetics of routine antenatal prophylactic intramuscular
injections of polyclonal anti-D immunoglobulin. BJOG 113:97, 2006
Maisonneuve E, Dugas A, Friszer S, et al: Effect of intravenous immunoglobulins to postpone the
gestational age of first intrauterine transfusion in very severe red blood cell alloimmunization: a casecontrol study. J Gynecol Obstet Hum Reprod 50(7):102119, 2021
Mari G, Deter RL, Carpenter RL, et al: Noninvasive diagnosis by Doppler ultrasonography of fetal
anemia due to maternal red-cell alloimmunization. N Engl J Med 342:9, 2000

Martin JA, Hamilton BE, Sutton PD, et al: Births: final data for 2003. Natl Vital Stat Rep 54(2):1, 2005
Midgley DY, Hardrug K: The mirror syndrome. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 8:201, 2000
Mizuuchi M, Murotsuki J, Ishii K, et al: Nationwide survey of intrauterine blood transfusion for fetal
anemia in Japan. J Obstet Gynaecol Res 47(6):2076, 2021
Moise KJ: Fetal anemia due to non-Rhesus-D red-cell alloimmunization. Semin Fetal Neonatal Med
13(4):207, 2008
Moise KJ, Gandhi M, Boring NH, et al: Circulating cell-free DNA to determine the fetal RHD status in
all three trimesters of pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 128(6):1340, 2016
Nassr AA, Ness A, Hosseinzadeh P, et al: Outcome and treatment of antenatally diagnosed nonimmune
hydrops fetalis. Fetal Diagn Ther 43(2):123, 2018
Neunert C, Lim W, Crowther M, et al: The American Society of Hematology 2011 evidence-based
practice guideline for immune thrombocytopenia. Blood 117(16):4190, 2011
Nicolaides KH, Warenski JC, Rodeck CH: The relationship of fetal plasma protein concentration and
hemoglobin level to the development of hydrops in rhesus isoimmunization. Am J Obstet Gynecol
152:341, 1985
Oepkes D, Seaward PG, Vandenbussche FP, et al: Doppler ultrasonography versus amniocentesis to
predict fetal anemia. N Engl J Med 355:156, 2006
Pacheco LD, Berkowitz RL, Moise KJ, et al: Fetal and neonatal alloimmune thrombocytopenia. A
management algorithm based on risk stratification. Obstet Gynecol 118(5):1157, 2011
Pazourkova E, Zednikova I, Korabecna M, et al: Optimization of diagnostic strategy for non-invasive
cell-free foetal RHD determination from maternal plasma. Vox Sang March 24, 2021 [Epub ahead
of print]
Pegoraro V, Urbinati D, Visser GHA, et al: Hemolytic disease of the fetus and newborn due to Rh(D)
incompatibility: a preventable disease that still produces significant morbidity and mortality in
children. PLoS One 15(7):e0235807, 2020
Ratanasiri T, Komwilaisak R, Sittivech A, et al: Incidence, causes, and pregnancy outcomes of hydrops
fetalis at Srinagarind Hospital, 1996–2005: a 10-year review. J Med Assoc Thai 92(5):594, 2009
Risson DC, Davies MW, Williams BA: Review of neonatal alloimmune thrombocytopenia. J Pediatr
Child Health 48(9):816, 2012
Sandler SG, Flegel WA, Westhoff CM, et al: It’s time to phase-in RHD genotyping for patients with a
serological weak D phenotype. Transfusion 55(3):680, 2015
Sandler SG, Queenan JT: A guide to terminology for Rh immunoprophylaxis. Obstet Gynecol 130(3):633,
2017
Santo S, Mansour S, Thilaganathan B, et al: Prenatal diagnosis of non-immune hydrops fetalis: what do
we tell the parents? Prenat Diagn 31:186, 2011
Sileo FG, Kulkarni A, Branescu I, et al: Non-immune fetal hydrops: etiology and outcome according to
gestational age at diagnosis. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 56(3):416, 2020
Slootweg YM, Lindenburg IT, Koelewijn JM, et al: Predicting anti-Kell-mediated hemolytic disease of
the fetus and newborn: diagnostic accuracy of laboratory management. Am J Obstet Gynecol
219(4):393.e1, 2018
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Mari G, Norton ME, et al: Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine
(SMFM) Clinical Guideline #8: The fetus at risk for anemia—diagnosis and management. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 212(6):697, 2015a
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Norton ME, Chauhan SP, et al: Society for Maternal-Fetal
Medicine (SMFM) Clinical Guideline #7: Nonimmune hydrops fetalis. Am J Obstet Gynecol
212(2):127, 2015b

Sohan K, Carroll SG, De La Fuente S, et al: Analysis of outcome in hydrops fetalis in relation to
gestational age at diagnosis, cause, and treatment. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 80(8):726, 2001
Sparks TN, Lianoglou BR, Adami RR, et al: Exome sequencing for prenatal diagnosis in nonimmune
hydrops fetalis. N Engl J Med 383(18):1746, 2020
Sparks TN, Thao K, Lianoglou BR, et al: Nonimmune hydrops fetalis: identifying the underlying genetic
etiology. Genet Med 21(6):1339, 2019
Storry JR, Clausen FB, Castilho L, et al: International Society of Blood Transfusion Working Party on
red cell immunogenics and blood group terminology: report of the Dubai, Copenhagen, and Toronto
meetings. Vox Sang 114(1):95, 2019
Suwanrath-Kengpol C, Kor-anantakul O, Suntharasaj T, et al: Etiology and outcome of non-immune
hydrops fetalis in southern Thailand. Gynecol Obstet Invest 59(3):134, 2005
Tannirandorn Y, Rodeck CH: New approaches in the treatment of haemolytic disease of the fetus.
Ballieres Clin Haematol 3(2):289, 1990
Tiller H, Kamphuis MM, Flodmark O, et al: Fetal intracranial hemorrhages caused by fetal and neonatal
alloimmune thrombocytopenia: an observational cohort study of 43 cases from an international
multicentre registry. BMJ 3:e002490, 2013
Van den Veyver IB, Moise KJ: Fetal RhD typing by polymerase chain reaction in pregnancies
complicated by rhesus alloimmunization. Obstet Gynecol 88:1061, 1996
Van Kamp IL, Klumper FJ, Bakkum RS, et al: The severity of immune fetal hydrops is predictive of
fetal outcome after intrauterine treatment. Am J Obstet Gynecol 185:668, 2001
Weiner CP, Pelzer GD, Heilskov J, et al: The effect of intravascular transfusion on umbilical venous
pressure in anemic fetuses with and without hydrops. Am J Obstet Gynecol 161:1498, 1989
Weinstein L: Irregular antibodies causing hemolytic disease of the newborn: a continuing problem. Clin
Obstet Gynecol 25(2):321, 1982
Welsh KJ, Bai Y, Education Committee of the Academy of Clinical Laboratory Physicians and
Scientists: pathology consultation on patients with a large Rh immune globulin dose requirement. Am
J Clin Pathol 145:744, 2016
Winkelhorst D, Murphy MF, Greinacher A, et al: Antenatal management in fetal and neonatal
alloimmune thrombocytopenia: a systematic review. Blood 129(11):1538, 2017
Woelfer B, Schuchter K, Janisiw M, et al: Postdelivery levels of anti-D IgG prophylaxis in mothers
depend on maternal body weight. Transfusion 44:512, 2004
Wylie BJ, D’Alton ME: Fetomaternal hemorrhage. Obstet Gynecol 115(5): 1039, 2010
Wyszynski DF, Carmen WJ, Cantor AB, et al: Pregnancy and birth outcomes among women with
idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura. J Pregnancy 2016:8297407, 2016
Yeom W, Paik ES, An JJ, et al: Clinical characteristics and perinatal outcome of fetal hydrops. Obstet
Gynecol Sci 58(2):90, 2015
Zimmerman R, Carpenter RJ Jr, Durig P, et al: Longitudinal measurement of peak systolic velocity in the
fetal middle cerebral artery for monitoring pregnancies complicated by red cell alloimmunization: a
prospective multicenter trial with intention-to-treat. BJOG 109(7):746, 2002
Zipursky A, Bhutani VK: Impact of Rhesus disease on the global problem of bilirubin-induced neurologic
dysfunction. Semin Fetal Neonatal Med 20(1):2, 2015
Zwiers C, Lindenburg IT, Klumper FJ, et al: Complications of intrauterine intravascular blood
transfusion: lessons learned after 1678 procedures. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 50(2):180, 2017
Zwiers C, van der Bom JG, van Kamp IL, et al: Postponing early intrauterine transfusion with
intravenous immunoglobulin treatment; the PETIT study on severe hemolytic disease of the fetus
and newborn. Am J Obstet Gynecol 219(3):291.e1, 2018

CHAPTER 19

Fetal Therapy

MEDICAL THERAPY
SURGICAL THERAPY
OPEN FETAL SURGERY
FETOSCOPIC SURGERY
PERCUTANEOUS PROCEDURES
EX-UTERO INTRAPARTUM TREATMENT
REFERENCES
Innovative treatments developed during the past three decades have
dramatically altered the course of selected fetal anomalies and conditions.
Over time, fetal interventions have become less invasive, and the number of
fetal centers has expanded. The North American Fetal Therapy Network now
includes 36 medical centers in the United States and Canada. Some of the
fetal abnormalities and conditions amenable to either medical or surgical
treatment are presented here. The management of fetal anemia and
thrombocytopenia is reviewed in Chapter 18, and treatment of some fetal
infections is discussed in Chapters 67 and 68.

MEDICAL THERAPY

Selected medications administered to the pregnant woman are transported
across the placenta in concentrations high enough to treat fetal conditions.
Pregnancy physiology affects drug concentration, and transfer depends on
maternal and placental metabolism (Chap. 8, p. 145).

■ Arrhythmias
Abnormal fetal cardiac rhythms are grouped into three categories:
tachyarrhythmias, heart rates >180 beats per minute (bpm);
bradyarrhythmias, heart rates <110 bpm; and ectopy, typically premature
atrial contractions. If a fetal arrhythmia is suspected, M-mode ultrasound,
described in Chapter 15 (p. 294), is used to measure the atrial and
ventricular rates and to clarify the relationship between atrial and ventricular
beats, thereby diagnosing the type of rhythm disturbance.

Premature Atrial Contractions
If the fetal heart rate is normal but the rhythm is irregular, the most common
etiology is premature atrial contractions (PACs). These atrial ectopic beats
are found in 1 to 2 percent of uncomplicated pregnancies (Hahurij, 2011;
Strasburger, 2010). PACs represent immaturity of the cardiac conduction
system. They typically resolve later in gestation or in the neonatal period.
PACs are usually an isolated finding but may be associated with redundancy
of the foramen ovale flap—formerly termed a foramen ovale aneurysm.
When a PAC is conducted, an extra beat is heard with handheld Doppler.
However, the premature contraction more commonly arrives at the
atrioventricular node during the refractory period. This results in a
compensatory pause, which sounds like a dropped beat. M-mode evaluation
confirms the diagnosis (Fig. 15-46, p. 295).
PACs may occur as frequently as every other beat, which means that the
auscultated fetal heart rate may be as low as 60 to 80 bpm. Known as
blocked atrial bigeminy, this condition is benign and does not require
treatment (Strasburger, 2010). However, monitoring the fetus in labor may be
challenging and necessitate cesarean delivery. M-mode ultrasound will
differentiate atrial bigeminy from other causes of bradycardia, such as thirddegree atrioventricular block.

Up to 2 percent of fetuses with PACs are later found to have
supraventricular tachycardia (Copel, 2000; Srinivasan, 2008). Given the
importance of prompt identification and treatment of supraventricular
tachyarrhythmias, pregnancies with PACs are often monitored with fetal heart
rate assessment every 1 to 2 weeks until the ectopy resolves. At Parkland
Hospital, we find that auscultation with handheld Doppler is sufficient for
surveillance.

Tachyarrhythmias
The two most common tachyarrhythmias are supraventricular tachycardia
(SVT) and atrial flutter. SVT is characterized by an abrupt increase in the
fetal heart rate to 180 to 300 bpm with 1:1 atrioventricular concordance (Fig.
19-1). The typical range is 200 to 240 bpm. SVT may develop secondary to
an ectopic focus or to an accessory atrioventricular pathway leading to a
reentrant tachycardia. Atrial flutter is characterized by a much higher atrial
rate, generally 300 to 500 bpm, with varying degrees of atrioventricular
block. As a result, the ventricular rate in a fetus with atrial flutter may range
from below normal to approximately 250 bpm (Fig. 19-2). In contrast, fetal
sinus tachycardia typically presents with a gradual heart rate rise to a rate
that is only slightly above normal. With this, readily discernible causes may
be maternal fever or hyperthyroidism, or rarely, fetal anemia or infection.

FIGURE 19-1 Supraventricular tachycardia (SVT). This M-mode image at 20 weeks’ gestation
demonstrates an initially normal fetal heartrate of 150 bpm. Midway through the image (arrow), the
fetal heart rate suddenly increases to 240 bpm. With SVT, there is one atrial beat (A) for each
ventricular beat (V).

FIGURE 19-2 Atrial flutter. In this M-mode image at 32 weeks’ gestation, calipers mark the
ventricular rate, which is approximately 220 bpm. There are two atrial beats (A) for each ventricular
beat (V), such that the atrial rate is approximately 440 bpm with 2:1 atrioventricular block.

If a fetal tachyarrhythmia is identified, it is important to determine
whether it is sustained—defined as present for at least 50 percent of the
time. It may be necessary to monitor the fetal heart rate for 12 to 24 hours
upon initial detection, and then periodically to reassess (Srinivasan, 2008).
Unsustained or intermittent tachyarrhythmias may become sustained over
time. Although intermittent tachyarrhythmias do not generally require
treatment, close fetal surveillance is warranted.
Sustained fetal tachyarrhythmias with ventricular rates exceeding 200
bpm impair ventricular filling to a degree that the risks for developing
cardiomyopathy and hydrops are significant. With atrial flutter, lack of
coordinated atrioventricular contractions may further compound this risk.
Maternal administration of antiarrhythmic agents that cross the placenta may
convert the rhythm to normal or may lower the baseline heart rate to forestall
heart failure. Therapy can require dosages at the upper end of the therapeutic
adult range. Therefore, a maternal electrocardiogram is obtained before and
during therapy. Monitoring of the maternal serum level may be necessary,

particularly if the dosage requires titration. If medical therapy is successful,
the medication is generally continued until delivery.
Antiarrhythmic medications most commonly used include digoxin,
flecainide, and sotalol. Their selection depends on the type of
tachyarrhythmia and provider experience with the drug. Traditionally,
digoxin was the initial preferred treatment, but its placental transfer may be
poor in the setting of hydrops. Many centers now use flecainide or sotalol as
first-line therapy (Ekiz, 2018; van der Heijden, 2013). A second agent is
needed in more than 50 percent of cases (Jaeggi, 2011; O’Leary, 2020; Shah,
2012). With treatment, conversion to a normal rhythm or reduction in heart
rate to a normal range occurs in 90 percent, including 80 percent of those
with hydrops (Miyoshi, 2019; Ueda, 2018). SVT is more likely than atrial
flutter to convert to a normal rhythm. The neonatal survival rate exceeds 90
percent (Ekman-Joelsson, 2015; Miyoshi, 2019; O’Leary, 2020; van der
Heijden, 2013).

Bradyarrhythmia
The most common etiology of fetal bradycardia is congenital heart block.
Approximately 50 percent of cases occur in the setting of a structural cardiac
abnormality involving the conduction system. These include heterotaxy, in
particular left-atrial isomerism; endocardial cushion defect; and less
commonly corrected transposition of the great vessels (Srinivasan, 2008).
The prognosis of heart block from a structural cardiac anomaly is extremely
poor, and fetal loss rates exceed 80 percent (Glatz, 2008; Strasburger, 2010).
In a structurally normal heart, 85 percent of atrioventricular block cases
are caused by transplacental passage of maternal anti-SSA/Ro or antiSSB/La antibodies (Buyon, 2009). Many of these women have, or
subsequently develop, systemic lupus erythematosus or other autoimmune
disease (Chap. 62, p. 1113). The risk of third-degree heart block with Ro
antibodies is small—only approximately 2 percent. However, the risk may
reach 20 percent if a prior infant has been affected. Immune-mediated
congenital heart block confers a mortality rate of nearly 20 percent, requires
permanent pacing in two thirds of surviving children, and also poses a risk
for cardiomyopathy (Brito-Zeron, 2015; Izmirly, 2011). If associated with
effusions, bradyarrhythmias, or endocardial fibroelastosis, neonatal status
may progressively worsen after birth.

Research has focused on maternal corticosteroid therapy to potentially
reverse fetal heart block or to forestall it. In the PR Interval and
Dexamethasone (PRIDE) study, a multicenter trial of pregnancies with antiSSA/Ro antibodies, Friedman and colleagues (2008, 2009) performed
weekly fetal echocardiography to assess for development of heart block.
Fetal heart block was treated with maternal oral dexamethasone, 4 mg daily.
Unfortunately, therapy did not prevent progression from second- to thirddegree block, and third-degree atrioventricular block was irreversible. In
rare cases, there was a potential benefit in reversing first-degree
atrioventricular block. However, first-degree block did not generally
progress even without treatment. Similarly, a subsequent review of
pregnancies with isolated second- or third-degree fetal heart block found that
dexamethasone therapy did not affect disease progression, need for
pacemaker in the neonatal period, or overall survival rates (Izmirly, 2016).
Despite considerable enthusiasm for corticosteroid treatment, a systematic
review of more than 700 pregnancies with treated fetal heart block
demonstrated no improvement in fetal or neonatal morbidity or mortality
rates (Michael, 2019). Thus, we do not recommend dexamethasone use for
this indication.
More recent efforts have turned to potential therapy with
hydroxychloroquine (Plaquenil), a mainstay of treatment for systemic lupus
erythematosus (Chap. 62, p. 1112). In a review of more than 250 women with
prior affected children, early treatment with hydroxychloroquine was
associated with a significant decrease in recurrence of congenital heart block
(Izmirly, 2012). A subsequent clinical trial found that treatment with
hydroxychloroquine was associated with a greater than 50-percent reduction
in the rate of fetal heart block (Izmirly, 2020). In each of these series, fewer
than 8 percent of children from pregnancies treated with hydroxychloroquine
experienced heart block. Research in this area is ongoing.
Maternal terbutaline has also been given in small cohorts with either
alloimmune- or heterotaxy-mediated fetal heart block in which the fetal heart
rate is persistently below 56 bpm. The terbutaline dosage is titrated to a
maternal heart rate of 95 to 115 bpm. Fetal heart rate increases of 5 to 10
bpm have been reported, but resolution of hydrops has not been consistently
demonstrated (Cuneo, 2007, 2010).

■ Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia
Several autosomal recessive enzyme deficiencies impair fetal synthesis of
cortisol from cholesterol by the adrenal cortex, leading to congenital adrenal
hyperplasia (CAH). CAH is the most common etiology of androgen excess in
those with 46,XX disorders of sex development (Chap. 3, p. 38). Lack of
cortisol stimulates adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH) secretion by the
anterior pituitary, overproduction of androstenedione and testosterone, and
subsequent virilization of female fetuses. Sequelae may include formation of
labioscrotal folds, persistence of a urogenital sinus, or even creation of a
penile urethra and scrotal sac (Fig. 15-55, p. 299).
More than 90 percent of CAH cases are caused by 21-hydroxylase
deficiency. There are two types: classic and nonclassic. The incidence of
classic CAH approximates 1 in 15,000 births worldwide but is higher in
selected populations. Among Yupik Eskimos, the reported incidence is 1 in
300 births (Nimkarn, 2016). Of those with classic CAH, 75 percent require
postnatal treatment with mineralocorticoids and glucocorticoids to prevent a
salt-wasting adrenal crisis, which is characterized by hyponatremia,
dehydration, hypotension, and even cardiovascular collapse. The remaining
25 percent with classic CAH have the simple virilizing type and also require
glucocorticoid supplementation. Nonclassic CAH may present with
precocious pubarche, hirsutism, or infertility. However, affected individuals
also may be asymptomatic. The prevalence of nonclassic CAH approximates
1 case per 200 Caucasians and Ashkenazi Jews in the United States (HannahShmouni, 2017). As discussed in Chapter 32 (p.594), all states mandate
newborn screening for CAH.
For more than three decades, dexamethasone has been administered to the
pregnant woman to suppress fetal androgen overproduction and either
obviate or ameliorate virilization of female fetuses (David, 1984; New,
2012). Prenatal corticosteroid therapy is successful in most cases if initiated
early and taken consistently. One metaanalysis found that dexamethasone
treatment was associated with reduced virilization. Specifically, the Prader
score, which grades genital masculinization on a scale 1 to 5, improved by
2.3 grades (Fernandez-Balselis, 2010). The alternative is consideration of
postnatal genitoplasty, which may include clitoroplasty, urogenital sinus
surgery, and additional vaginoplasty procedures. In a recent review, 18
percent of children treated with feminizing genitoplasty experienced

postoperative complications, and 12 percent required further surgery
(Baskin, 2020).
The typical preventive regimen is oral dexamethasone given to the
mother at a dosage of 20 μg/kg/d—up to 1.5 mg per day, divided in three
doses. The critical period for external genitalia development is 7 to 12
weeks’ gestation, and treatment to prevent virilization should be initiated by
9 weeks—before it is known whether the fetus is affected. Because this is
an autosomal recessive condition, affected females make up only 1 in 8 atrisk conceptions.
Carrier parents are typically identified after the birth of an affected child.
Molecular genetic testing is clinically available in such cases and initially
uses sequence analysis of the CYP21A2 gene, which encodes the 21hydroxylase enzyme (Nimkarn, 2016). If this is uninformative, gene-targeted
deletion/duplication analysis is performed, and additional testing such as
whole exome sequencing may be considered (Chap. 16, p. 327).
A goal of prenatal diagnosis is to limit dexamethasone exposure in males
and in unaffected females. If both parents are determined to be carriers,
prenatal molecular genetic testing may be performed on chorionic villi—at
10 to 12 weeks’ gestation—or on amniocytes after 15 weeks. Determination
of fetal gender using cell-free DNA (cfDNA) may aid in avoiding
dexamethasone treatment. CfDNA sensitivity to detect Y-chromosome
sequences is at least 95 percent when performed at or beyond 7 weeks
(Devaney, 2011; Hill, 2011). In the research setting, effective cfDNA testing
using hybridization probes flanking the CYP21A2 gene has been reported as
early as 56/7 weeks’ gestation (New, 2014).
Maternal treatment with dexamethasone has become controversial. The
Endocrine Society recommends that treatment be given only in the context of
research protocols (Speiser, 2018). It further recommends that such protocols
incorporate cfDNA screening for the Y-chromosome to avoid treatment of
male fetuses. Of note, if therapy is initiated shortly before 9 weeks’
gestation, the dose of dexamethasone used is not considered to have
significant teratogenic potential because organogenesis of major organs has
already taken place (McCullough, 2010). Ongoing concerns focus on the
potential effects of either excess endogenous androgens or excess exogenous
dexamethasone on the developing brain. Although maternal dexamethasone
has been used for many years to prevent virilization of female fetuses with
CAH, long-term safety data are relatively limited.

■ Congenital Cystic Adenomatoid Malformation
This well-circumscribed lung mass may appear solid and echogenic or may
have one or multiple variably sized cysts (Fig. 15-33, p. 288). Lesions with
one or more cysts ≥5 mm are termed macrocystic, whereas solid lesions and
those with smaller cysts are microcystic (Adzick, 1985). A small subset of
microcystic congenital cystic adenomatoid malformations (CCAMs) may
demonstrate rapid growth, generally between 18 and 26 weeks’ gestation.
The mass may become so large that it causes mediastinal shift, which may
compromise cardiac output and venous return, leading to hydrops (Cavoretto,
2008).
A CCAM-volume ratio (CVR) has been used to quantify size and risk for
hydrops in these severe cases (Crombleholme, 2002). This ratio is an
estimate of the CCAM volume using the formula for a prolate ellipse (length
× width × height × π/6) divided by the head circumference. In a series of 40
pregnancies with microcystic CCAM, the mean CVR was 0.5 at 20 weeks’
gestation, peaked at 1.0 by 26 weeks, and then declined sharply before
delivery (Macardle, 2016). With a CVR exceeding 1.6, the risk for hydrops
is as high as 60 percent. However, if the initial CVR is below 1.6, CCAM
growth resulting in hydrops develops in fewer than 2 percent of cases
(Ehrenberg-Buchner, 2013; Peranteau, 2016).
A CVR threshold of 1.0 also may assist counseling. In a series of 62
pregnancies with fetal lung masses, a maximal CVR >1.0 was associated
with a 75-percent likelihood that the neonate would be symptomatic
(Ehrenberg-Buchner, 2013). However, no fetus with a CVR ≤1.0
subsequently required surgery in the newborn period.
If the CVR exceeds 1.6 or if signs of hydrops develop, corticosteroid
treatment may be beneficial. Regimens include dexamethasone—6.25 mg
every 12 hours for four doses, or betamethasone—12.5 mg intramuscularly
every 24 hours for two doses. A single course of corticosteroids has been
associated with resolution of hydrops in approximately 80 percent of cases,
and 90 percent of treated fetuses survived (Loh, 2012; Peranteau, 2016).
Multiple courses of corticosteroids—generally two—have been advocated
for fetuses with large CCAM lesions and with persistent or worsening
hydrops or ascites despite a single course of medication (Derderian, 2015;
Peranteau, 2016). Therapy for macrocystic CCAM is discussed later.

■ Thyroid Disease
Identification of fetal thyroid disease is rare and is usually prompted by
sonographic detection of a fetal goiter. If a goiter is identified, determination
of fetal hyper- or hypothyroidism is essential, and thyroid hormone levels
should be measured in amnionic fluid or fetal blood. Traditionally, fetal
blood sampling was preferred to amniocentesis for guiding treatment, but
data are limited (Abuhamad, 1995; Ribault, 2009). Performance of these
procedures is discussed in Chapter 17 (p. 347). Goals of therapy are
correction of the physiological abnormality and diminished goiter size. The
goiter may compress the trachea and esophagus, leading to hydramnios from
impaired swallowing. Despite this, case reports attest to lack of airway
compromise and favorable outcomes (Blumenfeld, 2013; Machado, 2019).

Thyrotoxicosis
Maternal Graves disease may result in transplacental passage of
immunoglobulin G (IgG) thyroid-stimulating antibodies. Untreated fetal
thyrotoxicosis can present with goiter, tachycardia, growth restriction,
hydramnios, accelerated bone maturation, and even heart failure and hydrops
(Huel, 2009; Kiefer, 2017; Peleg, 2002; van Dijk, 2018). Fetal blood
sampling may be considered to confirm the diagnosis (Duncombe, 2001;
Srisupundit, 2008). Maternal administration of antithyroid medication may be
needed, even if the woman has had prior surgery or ablation and no longer
has hyperthyroidism. If the pregnant women develops hypothyroidism, she is
treated with supplemental levothyroxine (Hui, 2011).

Hypothyroidism
In a woman receiving medication for Graves disease, transplacental passage
of methimazole or propylthiouracil may cause fetal hypothyroidism (Bliddal,
2011). Other potential causes of fetal hypothyroidism resulting in goiter
include transplacental passage of thyroid peroxidase antibodies, fetal thyroid
dyshormonogenesis, and maternal consumption of iodine supplements
(Agrawal, 2002; Hardley, 2018; Overcash, 2016).
Goitrous hypothyroidism may lead to hydramnios, neck hyperextension,
and delayed bone maturation. Treatment with intraamnionic levothyroxine
should be considered. Optimal dosage and frequency have not been
established but have typically ranged from 150 to 500 μg every 1 to 4 weeks

(Machado, 2019; Nemescu, 2020; Ribault, 2009). If the pregnant woman is
receiving antithyroid medication, it is generally discontinued.

SURGICAL THERAPY
Fetal surgery, also called maternal-fetal surgery, is offered for selected
congenital abnormalities in which the likelihood of deterioration during
gestation is so great that delaying treatment until after delivery would risk
fetal death or substantially greater postnatal morbidity. Fetal surgical
procedures are highly specialized interventions performed at relatively few
centers to treat a small number of fetal conditions. They require extensive
preoperative counseling and multidisciplinary care. Principles for guiding
case selection are listed in Table 19-1. When considering fetal surgery, the
overriding concern is the safety of the mother and fetus. Accomplishing the
fetal goals of the procedure is secondary (Walsh, 2011).
TABLE 19-1. Guiding Principles for Fetal Surgical Procedures

Selected abnormalities amenable to fetal surgical treatment are shown in
Table 19-2. An overview of some of these procedures, their indications, and
complications is provided here to assist with initial patient evaluation and
counseling. Additional content is also found in Cunningham and Gilstrap’s
Operative Obstetrics, 3rd edition.
TABLE 19-2. Selected Fetal and Placental Abnormalities Amenable to InUtero Procedures

■ Open Fetal Surgery
Fetal procedures are considered open if they are accomplished though a
hysterotomy that is not performed for the purpose of delivery. Open
procedures are performed under general endotracheal anesthesia to suppress
uterine contractions and fetal responses. The hysterotomy is made with a
stapling device, and intraoperative ultrasound is used to avoid the placental
edge and to verify fetal position. The stapler seals the edges of the
myometrium and membranes to achieve hemostasis and avoid chorioamnion
separation. Warmed fluid is continuously infused into the uterus thorough a
rapid infusion device to limit cord compression. The fetus is gently
manipulated to facilitate exposure, to permit pulse oximetry monitoring, and
to establish venous access in case fluids or blood are emergently needed.
The surgical procedure is then performed, and the hysterotomy is closed.
Prophylactic antibiotics are generally administered for 24 hours. Tocolysis
typically includes intravenous magnesium sulfate for 24 hours and oral
indomethacin for 48 hours. Cesarean delivery is needed later in gestation and
for all future deliveries.

Risks
Open fetal surgery entails significant maternal and fetal risks. The most
recent data are from studies of fetal myelomeningocele repair, which is the
most commonly performed procedure. Morbidities identified in the
Management of Myelomeningocele Study (MOMS) are shown in Table 19-3
(Adzick, 2011). In a review of 26 open fetal myelomeningocele cases, 15
percent experienced preterm rupture of membranes, and the mean gestational
age at delivery was 35 weeks (Pruthi, 2021). Other potential risks include
maternal sepsis and fetal death during or following the procedure,
particularly if hydrops is present. Wilson and associates (2010) reviewed
subsequent pregnancy outcomes following open fetal surgery and reported
that 14 percent of women experienced uterine rupture and 14 percent had
uterine dehiscence.

TABLE 19-3. Benefits and Risks of Fetal Myelomeningocele Surgery
versus Postnatal Repair

Myelomeningocele Surgery
Fetal myelomeningocele is the first nonlethal birth defect for which in-utero
repair has been offered (Fig. 19-3). Following standard postnatal
myelomeningocele repair, affected children experience varying degrees of
paralysis, bladder and bowel dysfunction, developmental delays, and
brainstem dysfunction from the Arnold-Chiari II malformation (Chap. 15, p.
277). Damage is postulated to result from abnormal embryonic neurulation
followed by exposure of neural elements to amnionic fluid throughout
pregnancy (Adzick, 2010; Meuli, 1995, 1997).

FIGURE 19-3 Fetal myelomeningocele surgery. A. With the edges of both the laparotomy and
hysterotomy incisions retracted, the skin around the defect is incised. Subsequently, the neural placode is
sharply dissected from the arachnoid membrane. B. The dural membrane is reflected to the midline to
cover the neural placode and is reapproximated using suture. In some cases a patch is needed (not
shown). The fetal skin incision is subsequently sutured. Last, hysterotomy and laparotomy are then
closed. (Figures 19-3, 19-4, 19-6, and 19-8: Reproduced with permission from Shamshirsaz AA, Ramin,
SM, Belfort MA: Fetal therapy. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al: Cunningham and
Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, McGraw Hill Education, 2017.)

In the landmark MOMS trial, Adzick and colleagues (2011) randomized
183 pregnancies to prenatal or standard postnatal myelomeningocele repair
at three centers. Criteria for trial participation included: (1) a singleton fetus
at 19.0 to 25.9 weeks’ gestation; (2) an upper myelomeningocele boundary
between T1 and S1 confirmed by magnetic resonance imaging; (3) evidence
of hindbrain herniation; and (4) a normal karyotype and no evidence of a
fetal anomaly unrelated to the myelomeningocele. Women at risk for preterm
birth or placental abruption, those with a contraindication to fetal surgery,
and women with body mass index (BMI) >35 kg/m2 were excluded.
The MOMS trial demonstrated improved early childhood outcomes in the
prenatal surgery cohort (see Table 19-3). Children who had undergone fetal
surgery were twice as likely to walk independently by 30 months. They had
significantly less hindbrain herniation and were only half as likely to undergo
ventriculoperitoneal shunting by age 1 year. A primary outcome was a
composite score that was derived from the Bayley Mental Development
Index and from the difference between the functional and anatomical level of

the lesion at 30 months. This primary outcome was also significantly better in
the prenatal surgery group.
Despite these benefits, most children who received fetal surgery were
not able to ambulate independently, and nearly 30 percent were not able to
ambulate at all. Prenatal surgery did not confer improvements in fetal or
neonatal death rates or in the Bayley Mental Development Index score at age
30 months. Prenatal surgery was also associated with a small risk for
placental abruption and maternal pulmonary edema. Moreover, nearly half
were delivered before 34 weeks, which significantly increased the risk for
respiratory distress syndrome (Adzick, 2011).
It is the position of the American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2017) that nondirective counseling include the option of fetal
surgery for all pregnancies that meet MOMS trial criteria. Study of fetal
myelomeningocele repair in women with BMI up to 40 kg/m2 has
demonstrated outcomes similar to those in women of lower BMI (Hilton,
2019; Moldenhauer, 2020). Otherwise, MOMS trial criteria are strictly
followed. Outcomes of children aged 6 to 10 years who previously
participated in the MOMs trial are now available (Houtrow, 2020). Fetal
surgery conferred a sustained benefit in the likelihood of independent
ambulation. Nearly 30 percent of children were able to ambulate
independently, and approximately 50 percent required ventriculoperitoneal
shunt placement. Overall cognitive function was similar between cohorts
(Houtrow, 2020).

Thoracic Masses
Open fetal surgery is rarely performed for thoracic masses. Most are small,
and these have a good prognosis. Large CCAMs are often treated medically
with a course of corticosteroids (p. 370). A dominant cyst in a CCAM may
be amenable to drainage or shunt placement (p. 376). Similarly, an isolated
pleural effusion surrounding a pulmonary sequestration may be amenable to
drainage or shunt placement.
Fetal surgery is generally reserved for pregnancies prior to 32 weeks’
gestation in which there is a large, solid-appearing or microcystic mass and
hydrops is developing. In carefully selected cases, the survival rate
following open lobectomy approximates 60 percent (Vrecenak, 2013). Use of

the ex-utero intrapartum treatment procedure in the treatment of fetal lung
masses at delivery is discussed later.

Sacrococcygeal Teratoma
The perinatal mortality rate for cases of sacrococcygeal teratoma diagnosed
prenatally is 20 to 40 percent (Hedrick, 2004; Shue, 2013, Simonini, 2021).
Poor prognostic factors include a solid component constituting more than 50
percent of the tumor mass and a tumor volume-to-fetal weight ratio exceeding
12 percent prior to 24 weeks’ gestation (Akinkuotu, 2015). Hydramnios is
common, and hydrops may develop from high-output cardiac failure, either
as a consequence of tumor vascularity or secondary to bleeding within the
tumor and resulting anemia. Fetal loss rates approach 100 percent in such
cases. Mirror syndrome—maternal preeclampsia developing along with
fetal hydrops—may occur in this setting (Chap. 18, p. 364).
Open fetal surgery is considered only if the tumor is completely external
and high cardiac output with early hydrops has developed in the second
trimester (Vrecenak, 2013). However, given the poor prognosis, rapid
growth beyond 27 weeks often prompts early delivery and postnatal
resection rather than open fetal surgery (Baumgarten, 2019).

■ Fetoscopic Surgery
As with open fetal surgeries, these procedures are performed at highly
specialized centers. Fetoscopy is performed with fiberoptic endoscopes that
measure 1 to 2 mm in diameter. Instruments such as lasers fit through a 3- to
5-mm cannula that surrounds the endoscope. Not all fetoscopic procedures
involve placing the instruments through the maternal anterior abdominal wall.
In some cases, laparotomy facilitates optimal placement and maneuvering of
the instruments or positioning of the fetus. Examples of conditions treated by
fetoscopy are listed in Table 19-2.

Twin-Twin Transfusion Syndrome
As discussed in Chapter 48 (p. 849), fetoscopic laser ablation of placental
anastomoses is the preferred management for severe twin-twin transfusion
syndrome (TTTS). It is generally performed between 16 and 26 weeks’

gestation for monochorionic-diamnionic twin pregnancies with stage II to
stage IV TTTS (Quintero, 1999; Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, 2013).
A fetoscope inserted into the sac of the recipient twin is used to image
the vascular equator. The vascular equator separates the placental
cotyledons that supply each twin (Fig. 19-4). Selective laser
photocoagulation involves individually coagulating anastomoses that cross
between the twins (Ville, 1995). Arteriovenous anastomoses along the
placental surface of the equator are visualized with the fetoscope and then
photocoagulated using a 600-μm diameter diode laser or a 400-μm
neodymium:yttrium-aluminum-garnet (Nd:YAG) laser (Fig. 19-5). The
procedure is typically performed under epidural analgesia. At the end,
amnioreduction is performed to decrease the single deepest pocket of
amnionic fluid to below 5 cm, and antibiotics are injected into the amnionic
cavity.

FIGURE 19-4 Selective laser photocoagulation for twin-twin transfusion syndrome. The fetoscope is
inserted into the recipient-twin sac and positioned over the vascular equator, which lies in between the
two placental cord insertion sites. Arteriovenous anastomoses along the placental surface are
individually photocoagulated using the laser. (Reproduced with permission from Shamshirsaz AA,
Ramin, SM, Belfort MA: Fetal therapy. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al:
Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2017.)

FIGURE 19-5 Fetoscopic photograph of laser photocoagulation for twin-twin transfusion syndrome. A.
Vascular anastomoses (arrows) are shown before photocoagulation is performed. B. The ablation sites
appear as blanched yellow-white areas (arrows). (Reproduced with permission from Dr. Timothy M.
Crombleholme.)

Unfortunately, residual anastomoses remain in up to a third of cases and
may lead to TTTS recurrence or to the development of twin anemiapolycythemia sequence (TAPS). The latter is a feto-fetal transfusion
characterized by large differences in hemoglobin concentrations between a
pair of monochorionic twins. With the Solomon technique, immediately after
selective photocoagulation, the laser is used to coagulate the entire vascular
equator from one edge of the placenta to the other (Slaghekke, 2014a).
Placental dye-injection studies confirm a significant reduction in the number
of residual anastomoses following this procedure (Ruano, 2013; Slaghekke,
2014b).
Families should have reasonable expectations of procedural success and
potential complications. Without treatment, the perinatal mortality rate for
severe TTTS is 70 to 100 percent. Following laser therapy, the perinatal
mortality rate approximates 30 to 50 percent, and the risk for long-term
neurological handicap is 5 to 20 percent (Society for Maternal-Fetal
Medicine, 2013). One series reported a double-twin survival rate of nearly
70 percent and survival of at least one twin in more than 90 percent of cases
(Diehl, 2017). Ischemic fetal brain lesions have been identified in 2 percent
of those treated by laser and include cystic periventricular leukomalacia and
grade III or IV interventricular hemorrhage (Stirnemann, 2018). Cerebral
palsy has been reported in 5 percent of surviving children (Schou, 2019).

Procedure-related complications include preterm prelabor ruptured
membranes in up to 25 percent, placental abruption in 8 percent, vascular
laceration in 3 percent, and amnionic band syndrome resulting from laser
laceration of the membranes in 3 percent. Additionally, TAPS complicates 16
percent of pregnancies treated with selective laser photocoagulation and 3
percent treated with the Solomon technique (Habli, 2009; Robyr, 2006;
Slaghekke, 2014b). The majority of laser-treated TTTS pregnancies deliver
before 34 weeks’ gestation (Akkermans, 2015).

Congenital Diaphragmatic Hernia
Early attempts to treat congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH) used open
fetal surgery to reposition the liver into the abdomen. This unfortunately
kinked the umbilical vein and led to fetal demise (Harrison, 1993).
Knowledge that lungs normally produce fluid and that fetuses with upper
airway obstruction develop pulmonary hyperplasia formed the rationale for
tracheal occlusion. The idea was to “plug the lung until it grows” (Hedrick,
1994). Initial efforts focused on occluding the trachea with an external clip
(Harrison, 1993). Subsequently, a detachable silicone or latex balloon was
placed within the trachea endoscopically and inflated with normal saline
(Fig. 19-6). This procedure, fetoscopic tracheal occlusion (FETO), is
offered to selected pregnancies with isolated CDH in which the prognosis is
otherwise poor based on the degree of fetal liver herniation.

FIGURE 19-6 Fetoscopic tracheal occlusion (FETO). The endoscope enters the fetal oropharynx and
advances down the trachea. Inset: The balloon is inflated to occlude the trachea, and then the
endoscope is removed. (Reproduced with permission from Shamshirsaz AA, Ramin, SM, Belfort MA:
Fetal therapy. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al: Cunningham and Gilstrap’s
Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2017.)

FETO uses a 3-mm operating sheath and fetoscopes as small as 1 mm
(Van der Veeken, 2018). The procedure is generally performed between 26
and 30 weeks’ gestation. The balloon is removed after 6 weeks or at
approximately 34 weeks, either through a second fetoscopic procedure or by
ultrasound-guided puncture (Baschat, 2020). Fetal lamb research
demonstrated that without balloon removal, the number of type II
pneumocytes was markedly reduced, but that balloon removal normalized
type II pneumocyte density (Flageole, 1998). Because the procedure is
performed fetoscopically, vaginal delivery is not contraindicated.

In 2003, a randomized trial of the FETO procedure in pregnancies with
isolated CDH, liver herniation, and lung-to-head ratio <1.4 did not identify a
benefit from fetal therapy (Harrison, 2003). Survival rates 90 days after birth
were unexpectedly high—75 percent—in both groups. Therefore, the lung-tohead threshold was lowered and adjusted for gestational age in an effort to
improve prediction. In a metaanalysis of more than 200 pregnancies,
treatment with FETO was associated with a 13-fold improvement in survival
rates (Al-Maary, 2016). FETO has also been associated with improved
survival rates in right-sided CDH (Russo, 2021). Although study outcomes
are promising, this procedure is currently available in the United States only
through a research protocol.
Lung-to-Head Ratio. This imaging index was developed to improve
prediction of survival in fetuses with isolated left-sided CDH diagnosed
before 25 weeks’ gestation (Metkus, 1996). The lung-to-head ratio (LHR) is
a semi-quantitative estimate of the right lung area divided by the head
circumference. Investigators found that the neonatal survival rate was 100
percent if the LHR was >1.35 and that there were no survivors if the LHR
was <0.6 (Metkus, 1996). Nearly three fourths of pregnancies had values
between 0.6 and 1.35, and prediction was difficult in this group because the
overall survival rate approximated 60 percent.
Modifications to the LHR have been developed in an effort to improve
prediction. Jani and colleagues (2007) derived an observed-to-expected
(O/E) LHR nomogram to account for differential growth of the head and
torso across gestation. Lung area has been measured in 3 different ways: (1)
by tracing the lung circumference, (2) by multiplying the longest diameter of
the lung with its longest perpendicular diameter, and (3) by multiplying the
anterior-posterior diameter of the lung at the mid-clavicular line by the
perpendicular diameter at its midpoint (Jani, 2012). The North American
Fetal Therapy Network found that reproducibility of the O/E LHR was
highest when the lung circumference was traced, but that overall interrater
agreement was lower than anticipated (Abbasi, 2019).

Fetoscopic Myelomeningocele Repair
After publication of the MOMS trial findings, research efforts focused on
whether maternal morbidities associated with open fetal myelomeningocele
repair might be mitigated if the procedure were accomplished fetoscopically.

Araujo Junior and associates (2016) conducted a systematic review that
included 456 open cases and 84 fetoscopic surgeries. The endoscopic
procedures were generally performed by inserting instruments through the
maternal abdominal wall and then through the uterine wall, with partial
carbon dioxide insufflation of the uterus. The rate of maternal myometrial
dehiscence or attenuation was only 1 percent following endoscopy compared
with 26 percent following open procedures. However, fetoscopy was
associated with significantly higher rates of preterm delivery before 34
weeks—80 versus 45 percent, and of perinatal mortality—14 versus 5
percent.
More recently, investigators have performed fetoscopic
myelomeningocele repair but used laparotomy and exteriorization of the
uterus (Belfort 2017). The proportion of infants requiring
ventriculoperitoneal shunts before age 1 year—approximately 40 percent—
was similar to that with open fetal surgery in the MOMS trial (Adzick, 2011;
Belfort, 2017). In one series of 34 pregnancies treated with open fetoscopic
myelomeningocele repair, the median gestational age at delivery was 38
weeks, and 50 percent delivered vaginally (Kohn, 2018). Research is
ongoing in this area.

■ Percutaneous Procedures
These procedures are performed using a shunt, angioplasty catheter,
radiofrequency ablation needle, or bipolar cautery. Under ultrasound
guidance, instruments are inserted through the maternal abdominal wall,
uterine wall, and membranes to reach the amnionic cavity and fetus. Risks
may include preterm labor, preterm prelabor ruptured membranes, placental
abruption, maternal infection, and fetal injury or loss.

Thoracic Shunts
These shunts drain fetal pleural fluid into the amnionic cavity (Fig. 19-7). A
large effusion may result in pulmonary hypoplasia or may cause mediastinal
shift that is severe enough to result in hydrops. The most common etiology of
a primary effusion is chylothorax, which is caused by lymphatic obstruction.
Chylothorax is diagnosed if a cell count performed on the pleural fluid
demonstrates that more than 80 percent of the cells are lymphocytes, and
there is no evidence of infection. Pleural effusions may also form secondary

to congenital viral infection or aneuploidy, or they may be associated with a
malformation such as a pulmonary sequestration. Yinon and associates
(2010) reported aneuploidy in approximately 5 percent and associated
anomalies in 10 percent of cases.

FIGURE 19-7 Thoracoamnionic shunt placement. A. A large, right-sided fetal pleural effusion
(asterisks) and ascites were identified at 18 weeks’ gestation. The effusion was drained but rapidly
reaccumulated. The xanthochromic fluid contained 95-percent lymphocytes, consistent with chylothorax.
B. A double-pigtail shunt (arrow) was inserted under ultrasound guidance. Following shunt placement,
the effusion and ascites resolved.

Typically, the effusion is first drained using a 22-gauge needle. The fluid
may be sent for chromosomal microarray analysis, infection studies, and a
cell count. If the effusion recurs, a double-pigtail shunt is placed through the
fetal chest wall using a trocar and cannula. For a right-sided effusion, the
shunt is placed in the lower third of the chest to permit maximum expansion
of the lung. If left-sided, the shunt is placed along the upper axillary line to
allow the heart to return to normal position. The overall survival rate is 70
percent, and that for hydropic fetuses approximates 50 percent (Mann, 2010;
Yinon, 2010). We recommend weekly surveillance following shunt
placement because displacement into the amnionic cavity is common. At time
of delivery, the shunt must be clamped immediately to avoid neonatal
pneumothorax.
A shunt may also be used drain a dominant cyst in a fetus with
macrocystic CCAM (Fig. 15-33, p. 288). Only rarely are such cysts large

enough to confer risk for hydrops or pulmonary hypoplasia. Shunt placement
may improve the survival rate to 90 percent in those without hydrops and to
at least 75 percent if hydrops has developed (Litwinska, 2017).

Urinary Shunts
Vesicoamnionic shunts are offered in selected cases of fetal bladder-outlet
obstruction in which the amnionic fluid volume is severely diminished.
Lower urinary tract obstruction (LUTO) occurs more often in male fetuses. It
is most commonly caused by posterior urethral valves but may be due to
anterior urethral valves, urethral atresia or stenosis, or prune belly
syndrome, which is also called Eagle-Barrett syndrome. Cases in females
may be associated with complex cloacal abnormalities or the megacystismicrocolon syndrome. Ultrasound findings include dilation of the bladder
and proximal urethra, termed the “keyhole” sign, along with bladder wall
thickening (Fig. 15-61, p. 301). Associated oligohydramnios before
midpregnancy leads to pulmonary hypoplasia. Unfortunately, postnatal renal
function may be poor even when amnionic fluid volume is normal.
Evaluation includes a careful search for associated anomalies, which
may occur in 40 percent of cases, and for aneuploidy, which has been
reported in 5 to 8 percent (Hayden, 1988; Hobbins, 1984; Mann, 2010).
Potential candidates for therapy are fetuses without other severe anomalies
or genetic syndromes. Therapy is generally offered only if the fetus is male
because the underlying anomaly tends to be even more severe in females.
Serial bladder drainage—vesicocentesis—performed under ultrasound
guidance at approximately 48-hour intervals is used to evaluate fetal urine
electrolyte and protein content. Fetal urine is normally hypotonic due to
tubular resorption of sodium and chloride, whereas isotonic urine in the
setting of obstruction suggests renal tubular damage. Serial assessment has
been used to guide candidate selection for therapy (Table 19-4).
Chromosomal microarray analysis also may be performed on fetal urine.
TABLE 19-4. Fetal Urinary Analyte Values with Bladder Outlet
Obstruction

Vesicoamnionic shunt placement allows urine to drain from the bladder
into the amnionic cavity (Fig. 19-8). While this may prevent pulmonary
hypoplasia, it does not reliably preserve renal function, particularly if
cortical cysts are visible sonographically (Ruano, 2017). Warmed lactated
Ringer solution is first infused into the amniotic cavity. Amnioinfusion
improves ultrasound visualization, thereby facilitating evaluation of fetal
anatomy and shunt placement. A small trocar and cannula are then inserted
into the fetal bladder. A double-pigtail catheter is used, and the shunt is
placed as caudal as possible within the bladder to avoid dislodgement after
bladder decompression.

FIGURE 19-8 Vesicoamnionic shunt placement. A. After amnioinfusion is performed, a trocar is
inserted into the distended fetal bladder under sonographic guidance. The pigtail catheter is threaded into
the trocar. B. The double-pigtail shunt has been deployed down the trocar, and the trocar has been
removed. The distal end of the shunt is coiled within the fetal bladder, and the proximal end is draining
into the amnionic cavity. (Reproduced with permission from Shamshirsaz AA, Ramin, SM, Belfort MA:
Fetal therapy. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al: Cunningham and Gilstrap’s
Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2017.)

Complications include displacement of the shunt out of the fetal bladder
in up to 40 percent of cases, urinary ascites in approximately 20 percent, and
even development of bowel herniation through the abdominal wall defect—
gastroschisis—in up to 10 percent (Freedman, 2000; Mann, 2010). Preterm
delivery is common, and reported neonatal survival rates range from 50 to 90
percent (Biard, 2005; Walsh, 2011). A third of surviving children have
required dialysis or renal transplantation, and almost half have respiratory
problems (Biard, 2005). In a randomized trial comparing vesicoamnionic
shunt with conservative management in 31 cases, those receiving shunts had
higher survival rates. However, only two children had normal renal function
at age 2 years (Morris, 2013). Similarly, a metaanalysis of LUTO studies
performed between 1990 and 2015 found that vesicoamnionic shunt
conferred perinatal survival benefit but no improvement in renal function or
survival at age 2 years (Nassr, 2017).

Radiofrequency Ablation
With this procedure, high-frequency alternating current is used to coagulate
and desiccate tissue. Radiofrequency ablation (RFA) is the favored modality

for treatment of twin reversed arterial perfusion (TRAP) sequence, also
known as acardiac twin (Chap. 48, p. 850). Without treatment, the mortality
rate for the normal or pump twin in severe TRAP sequence exceeds 50
percent. The procedure is also used for selective termination with other
monochorionic twin complications.
Under ultrasound guidance, a 17- to 19-gauge RFA needle is directed
into the base of the umbilical cord within the abdomen of the acardiac twin,
and a 2-cm area of coagulation is achieved. Color Doppler is used to verify
absent flow into the acardius. The procedure is generally performed at 20
weeks’ gestation. The neonatal survival rate of the normal or pump twin
approximates 85 percent (Cabassa, 2013; Lee, 2013; Wagata, 2016). Risks
are higher for monoamnionic twin pregnancies, in whom the survival rate is
only 67 percent (Sugibayashi, 2016). The most common complications are
preterm prelabor ruptured membranes and preterm birth.
RFA has generally been offered for TRAP sequence when the volume of
the acardiac twin is large. In a series from the North American Fetal Therapy
Network, the median size of the acardius relative to the pump twin was 90
percent (Lee, 2013). Considering procedure-related risks, expectant
management with close fetal surveillance is often considered if the estimated
weight of the acardius is below 50 percent of the estimated weight of the
pump twin (Jelin, 2010).

Intracardiac Catheter Procedures
Selected fetal cardiac lesions may worsen during gestation, further
complicating and even limiting options for postnatal repair. Severe
narrowing of a cardiac outflow tract may result in progressive myocardial
damage in utero, and a goal of fetal intervention is to permit muscle growth
and preserve ventricular function. These innovative procedures include
aortic valvuloplasty for critical aortic stenosis; atrial septoplasty for
hypoplastic left heart syndrome with intact interatrial septum; and pulmonary
valvuloplasty for pulmonary atresia with intact interventricular septum.
Fetal aortic valvuloplasty is the most commonly performed cardiac
procedure, accounting for 75 percent of cases reported by the International
Fetal Cardiac Intervention Registry (Moon-Grady, 2015). It is offered for
selected cases of critical aortic stenosis in which the left ventricle is either
normal sized or dilated. The goal is to prevent progression to hypoplastic left

heart and to permit postnatal biventricular repair. Under sonographic
guidance, an 18-gauge cannula is inserted through uterus and fetal chest wall
and into the left ventricle. Although the procedure is ideally performed
percutaneously—through the maternal abdominal wall—laparotomy may be
needed if the fetal position is unfavorable. The cannula tip is positioned in
front of the stenotic aortic valve, and a 2.5- to 4.5-mm balloon catheter is
guided into the aortic annulus and then inflated. Fetal bradycardia requiring
treatment may complicate a third of cases, and hemopericardium requiring
drainage affects approximately 20 percent (Patel, 2020).
In a review of 108 fetuses treated with aortic valvuloplasty from 15
international centers, 75 percent survived until delivery, and biventricular
repair was achieved in 32 percent (Patel, 2020). Friedman and coworkers
(2018) from Boston Children’s Hospital have reported improved outcomes
with the procedure in recent years. Of 52 aortic valvuloplasty procedures
performed between 2009 and 2015, nearly 90 percent resulted in a live birth,
and more than 50 percent achieved biventricular repair. Guseh and
colleagues (2020) emphasize that most children with biventricular function
still require postnatal cardiac procedures. The risk for neurodevelopmental
impairment in childhood appears similar to cases treated with postnatal
repair (Laraja, 2017; Moon-Grady, 2015).
The subset of fetuses with hypoplastic left heart syndrome who also have
an intact or restrictive interatrial septum have postnatal mortality rates of
nearly 80 percent (Glantz, 2007; Jantzen, 2017). To help improve survival,
fetal atrial septoplasty using a percutaneous balloon catheter has been
offered. Atrial septal stent placement is often attempted at the time of
septoplasty to ensure patency. Of 47 such procedures reported by the
International Fetal Cardiac Intervention Registry, 35 percent of infants
survived to hospital discharge (Jantzen, 2017). However, the 1-year survival
rate was higher in those that had successful fetal cardiac intervention
compared with those that had not undergone intervention.
Fetal pulmonary valvuloplasty has been offered in cases of pulmonary
atresia with intact interventricular septum to prevent development of
hypoplastic right heart syndrome and subsequent single ventricle palliation.
The International Fetal Cardiac Intervention Registry reported that of 58
cases of attempted pulmonary valvuloplasty, the procedure was technically
successful in 70 percent (Hogan, 2020). Those with successful in-utero
procedures were twice as likely to achieve biventricular repair. However,

when procedure-related losses were considered, survival to hospital
discharge was similar to those who had not received fetal intervention,
approximating 75 percent. Long-term benefits of the procedure have yet to be
demonstrated.

■ Ex-Utero Intrapartum Treatment
This procedure allows the fetus to remain perfused by the placenta after
being partially delivered, so that lifesaving treatment can be performed
before completing the delivery. The technique was first developed to obtain
an airway with fetal tumors involving the oropharynx and neck and is still
used for this indication (Catalano, 1992; Kelly, 1990; Langer, 1992;
Shamshirsaz, 2021). An ex-utero intrapartum treatment (EXIT) procedure is
performed by a multidisciplinary team, which may include an obstetrician,
maternal-fetal medicine specialist, pediatric surgeon(s), pediatric
otolaryngologist, pediatric cardiologist, anesthesiologists for the mother and
fetus, neonatologists, and specially trained nursing personnel. Components of
the procedure are shown in Table 19-5 (Moldenhauer, 2013).
TABLE 19-5. Components of the Ex-Utero Intrapartum Treatment (EXIT)
Procedure

Selected indications are listed in Table 19-2. EXIT is the preferred
procedure for intrapartum management of large venolymphatic malformations
of the neck such as the one shown in Figure 19-9. Criteria for EXIT with a
cervical venolymphatic malformation include compression, deviation, or
obstruction of the airway by the mass, and also involvement of the floor of
the mouth (Laje, 2015). However, a review of 112 pregnancies with fetal

cervical venolymphatic malformations found that only about 10 percent met
these criteria. Other indications for EXIT include severe micrognathia and
congenital high airway obstruction sequence (CHAOS), which are
discussed in Chapter 15 (Figs. 15-27 and 15-35, p. 285). Criteria for an
EXIT procedure for micrognathia include a fetal jaw measurement below the
5th percentile along with indirect evidence of obstruction, such as
hydramnios, an absent stomach bubble, or glossoptosis (Morris, 2009b).
Case selection for EXIT procedures is generally based on fetal magnetic
resonance imaging findings.

FIGURE 19-9 Ex-utero intrapartum treatment (EXIT) procedure for a venolymphatic malformation.
A. Upon delivery of the head, placental circulation was maintained, and an airway was established over
the course of 20 minutes by a team of pediatric subspecialists that included a surgeon, anesthesiologist,
and otolaryngologist. B. Following a controlled intubation, the fetus was ready for delivery and transfer
to the neonatal intensive care unit team. (Reproduced with permission from Drs. Stacey Thomas and
Patricia Santiago-Muñoz.)

In some cases, an EXIT procedure has been used as a bridge to other
procedures. For example, resection of large thoracic masses may be
accomplished by fetal thoracotomy performed with intact placental
circulation. In a series of 16 fetuses with CCAM volume ratios >1.6 or
hydrops, all of whom had mediastinal compression, Cass and colleagues
(2013) reported that nine infants undergoing EXIT-to-resection survived. In
contrast, there were no survivors with urgent postnatal surgery alone.
Similarly, Moldenhauer (2013) reported that 20 of 22 newborns treated with
EXIT-to-resection for lung masses survived. The EXIT procedure has also
been used as a bridge to extracorporeal membrane oxygenation—EXIT-toECMO—in pregnancies with severe congenital diaphragmatic hernia.

However, it has not been found to clearly confer survival benefit in such
cases (Morris, 2009a; Shieh, 2017; Stoffan, 2012).
Counseling prior to an EXIT procedure includes procedure-related risks
such as hemorrhage from placental abruption or uterine atony, need for
cesarean delivery in future pregnancies, higher risk for subsequent uterine
rupture or dehiscence, possible need for hysterectomy, and fetal death or
permanent neonatal disability. Compared with cesarean delivery, the EXIT
procedure is associated with greater blood loss, a higher incidence of wound
complications, and a longer operating time (Noah, 2002; Shamshirsaz, 2019).

REFERENCES
Abbasi N, Ryan G, Johnson A, et al: Reproducibility of fetal lung-to-head ratio in left diaphragmatic
hernia across the North American Fetal Therapy Network (NAFTNet). Prenat Diagn 39(2):188,
2019
Abuhamad AZ, Fisher DA, Warsof SL, et al: Antenatal diagnosis and treatment of fetal goitrous
hypothyroidism: case report and review of the literature. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 6:368, 1995
Adzick NS: Fetal myelomeningocele: natural history, pathophysiology, and in utero intervention. Semin
Fetal Neonatal Med 15(1):9, 2010
Adzick NS, Harrison MR, Glick PL, et al: Fetal cystic adenomatoid malformation: prenatal diagnosis and
natural history. J Pediatr Surg 20:483, 1985
Adzick NS, Thom EA, Spong CY, et al: A randomized trial of prenatal versus postnatal repair of
myelomeningocele. N Engl J Med 364(11):993, 2011
Agrawal P, Ogilvy-Stuart A, Lees C: Intrauterine diagnosis and management of congenital goitrous
hypothyroidism. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 19:501, 2002
Akinkuotu AC, Coleman A, Shue E, et al: Predictors of poor prognosis in prenatally diagnosed
sacrococcygeal teratoma: a multiinstitutional review. J Pediatr Surg 50(5):771, 2015
Akkermans J, Peeters SH, Klumper FJ, et al: Twenty-five years of fetoscopic laser coagulation for
twin-twin transfusion syndrome: a systematic review. Fetal Diagn Ther 38(4):241, 2015.
Al-Maary J, Eastwood MP, Russo FM, et al: Fetal tracheal occlusion for severe pulmonary hypoplasia in
isolated congenital diaphragmatic hernia. A systematic review and meta-analysis of survival. Ann
Surg 264(6):929, 2016
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Neural tube defects. Practice Bulletin No. 187,
December 2017, Reaffirmed 2019
Araujo Junior EA, Eggink AJ, van den Dobbelsteen J, et al: Procedure-related complications of open vs
endoscopic fetal surgery for treatment of spina bifida in an era of intrauterine myelomeningocele
repair: systematic review and meta-analysis. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 48(2):151, 2016
Baschat AA, Rosner M, Millard SE, et al: Single-center outcome of fetoscopic tracheal balloon
occlusion for severe congenital diaphragmatic hernia. Obstet Gynecol 135(3):511, 2020
Baskin A, Wisniewski AB, Aston CE, et al: Post-operative complications following feminizing
genitoplasty in moderate to severe atypia: results from a multicenter, observational prospective
cohort study. J Pediatr Urol 16(5):568, 2020

Baumgarten HD, Gebb JS, Khalek N, et al: Preemptive delivery and immediate resection for fetuses
with high-risk sacrococcygeal teratomas. Fetal Diagn Ther 45(3):137, 2019
Belfort MA, Whitehead WE, Shamshirsaz AA, et al: Fetoscopic open neural tube defect repair.
Development and refinement of a two-port carbon dioxide insufflation technique. Obstet Gynecol
129(4):734, 2017
Biard JM, Johnson MP, Carr MC, et al: Long-term outcomes in children treated by prenatal
vesicoamniotic shunting for lower urinary tract obstruction. Obstet Gynecol 106(3):503, 2005
Bliddal S, Rasmussen AK, Sundberg K, et al: Antithyroid drug-induced fetal goitrous hypothyroidism.
Nat Rev Endocrinol 7:396, 2011
Blumenfeld YJ, Davis A, Milan K, et al: Conservatively managed fetal goiter: an alternative to in utero
therapy. Fetal Diagn Ther 34(3):184, 2013
Brito-Zeron P, Izmirly PM, Ramos-Casals M, et al: The clinical spectrum of autoimmune congenital
heart block. Nat Rev Rheumatol 11(5):301, 2015
Buyon JP, Clancy RM, Friedman DM: Autoimmune associated congenital heart block: integration of
clinical and research clues in the management of the maternal/fetal dyad at risk. J Intern Med
265(6):653, 2009
Cabassa P, Fichera A, Prefumo F, et al: The use of radiofrequency in the treatment of twin reversed
arterial perfusion sequence: a case series and review of the literature. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod
Biol 166(2):127, 2013
Cass DL, Olutoye OO, Cassady CI, et al: EXIT-to-resection for fetuses with large lung masses and
persistent mediastinal compression near birth. J Pediatr Surg 48(1):138, 2013
Catalano PJ, Urken ML, Alvarez M, et al: New approach to the management of airway obstruction in
“high risk” neonates. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 118:306, 1992
Cavoretto P, Molina F, Poggi S, et al: Prenatal diagnosis and outcome of echogenic fetal lung lesions.
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 32:769, 2008
Copel JA, Liang RI, Demasio K, et al: The clinical significance of the irregular fetal heart rhythm. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 182:813, 2000
Crombleholme TM, Coleman B, Hedrick H, et al: Cystic adenomatoid volume ratio predicts outcome in
prenatally diagnosed cystic adenomatoid malformation of the lung. J Pediatr Surg 37(3):331, 2002
Cuneo BF, Lee M, Roberson D, et al: A management strategy for fetal immune-mediated
atrioventricular block. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 23(12):1400, 2010
Cuneo BF, Zhao H, Strasburger JF, et al: Atrial and ventricular rate response and patterns of heart rate
acceleration during maternal-fetal terbutaline treatment of fetal complete heart block. Am J Cardiol
100(4):661, 2007
David M, Forest MG: Prenatal treatment of congenital adrenal hyperplasia resulting from 21hydroxylase deficiency. J Pediatr 105(5):799, 1984
Deprest JA, Flake AW, Gratacos E, et al: The making of fetal surgery. Prenat Diagn 30(7):653, 2010
Derderian SC, Coleman AM, Jeanty C, et al: Favorable outcomes in high-risk congenital pulmonary
airway malformations treated with multiple courses of maternal betamethasone. J Pediatr Surg
50(4):515, 2015
Devaney SA, Palomaki GE, Scott JA, et al: Noninvasive fetal sex determination using cell-free fetal
DNA: a systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA 306(6):627, 2011
Dhillon RK, Hillman SC, Pounds R, et al: Comparison of Solomon technique with selective laser ablation
for twin-twin transfusion syndrome: a systematic review. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 46(5):526,
2015

Diehl W, Diemert A, Grasso D, et al: Fetoscopic laser coagulation in 1020 pregnancies with twin-twin
transfusion syndrome demonstrates improvement in double-twin survival rate. Ultrasound Obstet
Gynecol 50():728, 2017
Duncombe GJ, Dickinson JE: Fetal thyrotoxicosis after maternal thyroidectomy. Aust N Z J Obstet
Gynaecol 41(2):224, 2001
Ehrenberg-Buchner S, Stapf AM, Berman DR, et al: Fetal lung lesions: can we start to breathe easier?
Am J Obstet Gynecol 208(2):151.e1, 2013
Ekiz A, Kaya B, Bornaun H, et al: Flecainide as first-line treatment for fetal supraventricular
tachycardia. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 31(4):407, 2018
Ekman-Joelsson BM, Mellander M, Lagnefeldt L, et al: Foetal tachyarrhythmia treatment remains
challenging even if the vast majority of cases have a favourable outcome. Acta Paediatr
104(11):1090, 2015
Fernandez-Balsells MM, Muthusamy K, Smushkin G, et al: Prenatal dexamethasone use for the
prevention of virilization in pregnancies at risk for classical congenital adrenal hyperplasia because
of 21-hydroxylase (CYP21A2) deficiency: a systematic review and meta-analyses. Clin Endocrinol
73(4):436, 2010
Flageole H, Evrard VA, Piedboeuf B, et al: The plug-unplug sequence: an important step to achieve type
II pneumocyte maturation in the fetal lamb model. J Pediatr Surg 33(2):299, 1998
Freedman AL, Johnson MP, Gonzalez R: Fetal therapy for obstructive uropathy: past, present… future?
Pediatr Nephrol 14:167, 2000
Friedman DM, Kim MY, Copel JA, et al: Prospective evaluation of fetuses with autoimmune associated
congenital heart block followed in the PR interval and dexamethasone evaluation (PRIDE) study.
Am J Cardiol 103(8):1102, 2009
Friedman DM, Kim MY, Copel JA: Utility of cardiac monitoring in fetuses at risk for congenital heart
block: the PR Interval and Dexamethasone (PRIDE) Prospective Study. Circulation 117:485, 2008
Friedman KG, Sleeper LA, Freud LR, et al: Improved technical success, postnatal outcome and refined
predictors of outcome for fetal aortic valvuloplasty. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 52(2):212, 2018
Glantz JA, Tabbutt S, Gaynor JW, et al: Hypoplastic left heart syndrome with atrial level restriction in
the era of prenatal diagnosis. Ann Thorac Surg 84:1633, 2007
Glatz AC, Gaynor JW, Rhodes LA, et al: Outcome of high-risk neonates with congenital complete heart
block paced in the first 24 hours after birth. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 136(3):767, 2008
Guseh SH, Friedman KG, Wilkins-Haug LE: Fetal cardiac intervention-perspectives from a single
center. Prenat Diagn 40(4):415, 2020
Habli M, Bombrys A, Lewis D, et al: Incidence of complications in twin-twin transfusion syndrome after
selective fetoscopic laser photocoagulation: a single-center experience. Am J Obstet Gynecol
201(4):417.e1, 2009
Hahurij ND, Blom NA, Lopriore E, et al: Perinatal management and long-term cardiac outcome in fetal
arrhythmia. Early Hum Dev 87:83, 2011
Hannah-Shmouni F, Morissette R, Sinaii N, et al: Revising the prevalence of nonclassic congenital
adrenal hyperplasia in US Ashkenazi Jews and Caucasians. Genet Med 19(11):1276, 2017
Hardley MT, Chon AH, Mestman J, et al: Iodine-induced fetal hypothyroidism: Diagnosis and treatment
with intra-amniotic levothyroxine. Horm Res Paediatr 90(6):419, 2018
Harrison MR, Filly RA, Golbus MS, et al: Fetal treatment. N Engl J Med 307:1651, 1982
Harrison MR, Keller RL, Hawgood SB, et al: A randomized trial of fetal endoscopic tracheal occlusion
for severe fetal congenital diaphragmatic hernia. N Engl J Med 349:1916, 2003

Harrison MR, Sydorak MR, Farrell JA, et al: Fetoscopic temporary tracheal occlusion for congenital
diaphragmatic hernia: prelude to a randomized controlled trial. J Pediatr Surg 38:1012, 1993
Hayden SA, Russ PD, Pretorius DH, et al: Posterior urethral obstruction. Prenatal sonographic findings
and clinical outcome in fourteen cases. J Ultrasound Med 7(7):371, 1988
Hedrick HL, Flake AW, Crombleholme TM, et al: Sacrococcygeal teratoma: prenatal assessment, fetal
intervention, and outcome. J Pediatr Surg 39(3):430, 2004
Hedrick MH, Estes JM, Sullivan KM, et al: Plug the lung until it grows (PLUG): a new method to treat
congenital diaphragmatic hernia in utero. J Pediatr Surg 29(5):612, 1994
Hill M, Finning K, Martin P, et al: Non-invasive prenatal determination of fetal sex: translating research
into clinical practice. Clin Genet 80(1):68, 2011
Hilton SA, Hodges MM, Dewberry LC, et al: MOMS plus: single institution review of outcomes for
extended BMI criteria for open fetal repair of myelomeningocele. Fetal Diagn Ther 46(6):411, 2019
Hobbins JC, Robero R, Grannum P, et al: Antenatal diagnosis of renal anomalies with ultrasound: I.
Obstructive uropathy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 148:868, 1984
Hogan WJ, Grinenco S, Armstrong A, et al: Fetal cardiac intervention for pulmonary atresia with intact
ventricular septum: International Fetal Cardiac Intervention Registry. Fetal Diagn Ther July 7, 2020
[Epub ahead of print]
Houtrow AJ, Thom EA, Fletcher JM, et al: Prenatal repair of myelomeningocele and school-age
functional outcomes. Pediatrics 145(2):e20191544, 2020
Huel C, Guibourdenche J, Vuillard E, et al: Use of ultrasound to distinguish between fetal
hyperthyroidism and hypothyroidism on discovery of a goiter. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 33:412,
2009
Hui L, Bianchi DW: Prenatal pharmacotherapy for fetal anomalies: a 2011 update. Prenat Diagn 31:735,
2011
Izmirly P, Kim M, Friedman DM, et al: Hydroxychloroquine to prevent recurrent congenital heart block
in fetuses of anti-SSA/Ro-positive mothers. J Amer Col Cardiol 76(3):292, 2020
Izmirly PM, Costedoat-Chalumeau N, Pisoni C, et al: Maternal use of hydroxychloroquine is associated
with a reduced risk of recurrent anti-SSA/Ro associated cardiac manifestations of neonatal lupus.
Circulation 126(1):76, 2012
Izmirly PM, Saxena A, Kim MY, et al: Maternal and fetal factors associated with mortality and
morbidity in a multi-racial/ethnic registry of anti-SSA/Ro-associated cardiac neonatal lupus.
Circulation 124(18):1927, 2011
Izmirly PM, Saxena A, Sahl SK, et al: Assessment of fluorinated steroids to avert progression and
mortality in anti-SSA/Ro-associated cardiac injury limited to the fetal conduction system. Ann
Rheum Dis 75(6):1161, 2016
Jaeggi E, Carvalho JS, de Groot E, et al: Comparison of transplacental treatment of fetal
supraventricular tachyarrhythmias with digoxin, flecainide, and sotalol. Results of a nonrandomized
multicenter study. Circulation 124(16):1747, 2011
Jani J, Nicolaides KH, Keller RL, et al: Observed to expected lung area to head circumference ratio in
the prediction of survival in fetuses with isolated diaphragmatic hernia. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol
30(1):67, 2007
Jani JC, Peralta CF, Nicolaides KH: Lung-to-head ratio: a need to unify the technique. Ultrasound
Obstet Gynecol 39(1):2, 2012
Jantzen DW, Moon-Grady AJ, Morris SA, et al: Hypoplastic left heart syndrome with intact or
restrictive atrial septum: a report from the International Fetal Cardiac Intervention Registry.
Circulation 136(14):1346, 2017

Jelin E, Hirose S, Rand L, et al: Perinatal outcome of conservative management versus fetal intervention
for twin reversed arterial perfusion sequence with a small acardiac twin. Fetal Diagn Ther 27:138,
2010
Kelly MF, Berenholz L, Rizzo KA, et al: Approach for oxygenation of the newborn with airway
obstruction due to a cervical mass. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 99(3 pt 1):179, 1990
Kiefer FL, Klebermass-Schrehf K, Steiner M, et al: Fetal/neonatal thyrotoxicosis in a newborn from a
hypothyroid woman with Hashimoto thyroiditis. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 102(1):6, 2017
Kohn JR, Rao V, Sellner AA, et al: Management of labor and delivery after fetoscopic repair of an open
neural tube defect. Obstet Gynecol 131(6):1062, 2018
Laje P, Peranteau WH, Hedrick HL, et al: Ex utero intrapartum treatment (EXIT) in the management of
cervical lymphatic teratoma. J Pediatr Surg 50(2):311, 2015
Langer JC, Tabb T, Thompson P, et al: Management of prenatally diagnosed tracheal obstruction: access
to the airway in utero prior to delivery. Fetal Diagn Ther 7(1):12, 1992
Laraja K, Sadhwani A, Tworetzky W, et al: Neurodevelopmental outcome in children after fetal cardiac
intervention for aortic stenosis with evolving hypoplastic left heart syndrome. J Pediatr 184:130, 2017
Lee H, Bebbington M, Crombleholme TM, et al: The North American Fetal Therapy Network Registry
data on outcomes of radiofrequency ablation for twin-reversed arterial perfusion sequence. Fetal
Diagn Ther 33(4):224, 2013
Litwinska M, Litwinska E, Janiak K, et al: Thoracoamniotic shunts in macrocystic lung lesions: case
series and review of the literature. Fetal Diagn Ther 41(3):179, 2017
Loh K, Jelin E, Hirose S, et al: Microcystic congenital pulmonary airway malformation with hydrops
fetalis: steroids vs open fetal resection. J Pediatr Surg 47(1):36, 2012
Macardle CA, Ehrenberg-Buchner S, Smith EA, et al: Surveillance of fetal lung lesions using the
congenital pulmonary airway malformation volume ratio: natural history and outcomes. Prenat Diagn
36(3):282, 2016
Machado CM, Castro JM, Campos RA, et al: Graves’ disease complicated by fetal goitrous
hypothyroidism treated with intra-amniotic administration of levothyroxine. BMJ Case Rep
12(8):e230457, 2019
Mann S, Johnson MP, Wilson RD: Fetal thoracic and bladder shunts. Semin Fetal Neonatal Med 15:28,
2010
McCullough LB, Chervenak FA, Brent RL, et al: A case study in unethical transgressive bioethics:
“Letter of Concern from Bioethicists” about the prenatal administration of dexamethasone. Am J
Bioeth 10(9):35, 2010
Metkus AP, Filly RA, Stringer MD, et al: Sonographic predictors of survival in fetal diaphragmatic
hernia. J Pediatr Surg 31(1):148, 1996
Meuli M, Meuli-Simmen C, Hutchins GM, et al: In utero surgery rescues neurological function at birth in
sheep with spina bifida. Nat Med 1(4):342, 1995
Meuli M, Meuli-Simmen C, Hutchins GM, et al: The spinal cord lesion in human fetuses with
myelomeningocele: implications for fetal surgery. J Pediatr Surg 32(3):448, 1997
Michael A, Radwan AA, Kamel Ali A, et al: Use of antenatal fluorinated corticosteroids in management
of congenital heart block: systematic review and meta-analysis. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol X
16(4):1000072, 2019
Miyoshi T, Maeno Y, Hamasaki T, et al: Antenatal therapy for fetal supraventricular tachyarrhythmias:
multicenter trial. J Am Coll Cardiol 74(7):874, 2019
Moldenhauer JS: Ex utero intrapartum therapy. Semin Pediatr Surg 22(1):44, 2013

Moldenhauer JS, Soni S, Jatres J, et al: Open fetal surgical outcomes for myelomeningocele closure
stratified by maternal body mass index in a large single-center cohort. Fetal Diagn Ther 47(12):889,
2020
Moon-Grady AJ, Morris SA, Belfort M, et al: International Fetal Cardiac Intervention Registry. A
worldwide collaborative description and preliminary outcomes. J Am Coll Cardiol 66(4):388, 2015
Morris LM, Lim FY, Crombleholme TM: Ex utero intrapartum treatment procedure: a peripartum
management strategy in particularly challenging cases. J Pediatr 154(1):126, 2009a
Morris LM, Lim FY, Elluru RG, et al: Severe micrognathia: indications for EXIT-to-airway. Fetal Diagn
Ther 26:162, 2009b
Morris RK, Malin GL, Quinlan-Jones E, et al: Percutaneous vesicoamniotic shunting versus
conservative management in fetal lower urinary tract obstruction (PLUTO): a randomized trial.
Lancet 382(9903):1496, 2013
Nassr AA, Shazly SA, Abdelmagied AM, et al: Effectiveness of vesicoamniotic shunt in fetuses with
congenital lower urinary tract obstruction: an updated systematic review and meta-analysis.
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 49(6):696, 2017
Nemescu D, Tanasa IA, Stoian DL, et al: Conservative in utero treatment of fetal dyshormonogenetic
goiter with levothyroxine, a systematic literature review. Exp Ther Med 20(3):2434, 2020
New MI, Abraham M, Yuen T, et al: An update on prenatal diagnosis and treatment of congenital
adrenal hyperplasia. Semin Reprod Med 30(5):396, 2012
New MI, Tong YK, Yuen T, et al: Noninvasive prenatal diagnosis of congenital adrenal hyperplasia
using cell-free DNA in maternal plasma. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 99(6):E1022, 2014
Nimkarn S, Gangishetti PK, Yau M, et al: 21-Hydroxylase deficient congenital adrenal hyperplasia. In
Pagon RA, Adam MP, Ardinger HH, et al (eds): GeneReviews. Seattle, University of Washington,
2016
Noah MM, Norton ME, Sandberg P, et al: Short-term maternal outcomes that are associated with the
EXIT procedure, as compared with cesarean delivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 186(4):773, 2002
O’Leary ET, Alexander ME, Bezzerides VJ, et al: Low mortality in fetal supraventricular tachycardia:
outcomes in a 30-year single-institution experience. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol 31(5):1105, 2020
Overcash RT, Marc-Aurele KL, Hull AD, et al: Maternal iodine exposure: a case of fetal goiter and
neonatal hearing loss. Pediatrics 137(4):e1, 2016
Patel ND, Nageotte S, Ing FF, et al: Procedural, pregnancy, and short-term outcomes after fetal aortic
valvuloplasty. Catheter Cardiovasc Inter 96(3):626, 2020
Peleg D, Cada S, Peleg A, et al: The relationship between maternal serum thyroid-stimulating
immunoglobulin and neonatal thyrotoxicosis. Obstet Gynecol 99(6):1040, 2002
Peranteau WH, Boelig MM, Khalek N, et al: Effect of single and multiple courses of maternal
betamethasone on prenatal congenital lung lesion growth and fetal survival. J Pediatr Surg 51(1):28,
2016
Pruthi V, Abbasi N, Ryan G, et al: Fetal surgery for open spina bifida in Canada: initial results. J Obstet
Gynecol Can 43(6):733, 2021
Quintero RA, Morales WJ, Allen MH, et al: Staging of twin-twin transfusion syndrome. J Perinatol
19:550, 1999
Ribault V, Castanet M, Bertrand AM, et al: Experience with intraamniotic thyroxine treatment in
nonimmune fetal goitrous hypothyroidism in 12 cases. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 94:3731, 2009
Robyr R, Lewi L, Salomon LJ, et al: Prevalence and management of late fetal complications following
successful selective laser coagulation of chorionic plate anastomoses in twin-to-twin transfusion
syndrome. Am J Obstet Gynecol 194(3):796, 2006

Ruano R, Dunn T, Braun MC, et al: Lower urinary tract obstruction: fetal intervention based on prenatal
staging. Pediatr Nephrol 32:(10):1871, 2017
Ruano R, Rodo C, Peiro JL, et al: Fetoscopic laser ablation of placental anastomoses in twin-twin
transfusion syndrome using “Solomon technique.” Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 42(4):434, 2013
Russo FM, Cordier AG, Basurto D, et al: Fetoscopic endoluminal tracheal occlusion reverses the natural
history of right-sided congenital diaphragmatic hernia: a European multicenter experience.
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 57(3):378, 2021
Schou KV, Lando AV, Ekelund CK, et al: Long-term neurodevelopmental outcome of monochorionic
twins after laser therapy or umbilical cord occlusion for twin-twin transfusion syndrome. Fetal Diagn
Ther 46(1):20, 2019
Shah A, Moon-Grady A, Bhogal N, et al: Effectiveness of sotalol as first-line therapy for fetal
supraventricular tachyarrhythmias. Am J Cardiol 190(11):1614, 2012
Shamshirsaz AA, Aalipour S, Erfani H, et al: Obstetrics outcomes of ex-utero intrapartum treatment
(EXIT). Prenat Diagn 39(8):643, 2019
Shamshirsaz AA, Aalipour S, Stewart KA, et al: Perinatal characteristics and early childhood follow up
after ex-utero intrapartum treatment for head and neck teratomas by prenatal diagnosis. Prenat
Diagn 41(4):497, 2021
Shamshirsaz AA, Ramin SM, Belfort MA: Fetal therapy. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III,
et al: Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education,
2017
Shieh HF, Wilson JM, Sheils CA, et al: Does the ex utero intrapartum treatment to extracorporeal
membrane oxygenation procedure change morbidity outcomes for high-risk congenital diaphragmatic
hernia survivors? J Pediatr Surg 52(1):22, 2017
Shue E, Bolouri M, Jelin EB, et al: Tumor metrics and morphology predict poor prognosis in prenatally
diagnosed sacrococcygeal teratoma: a 25-year experience at a single institution. J Pediatr Surg
48(6):1225, 2013
Simonini C, Strizek B, Berg C, et al: Fetal teratomas–a retrospective observational single-center study.
Prenat Diagn 41(3):301, 2021
Slaghekke F, Lewi L, Middeldorp JM, et al: Residual anastomoses in twin-twin transfusion syndrome
after laser: the Solomon randomized trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol 211(3):285.e1, 2014a
Slaghekke F, Lopriore E, Lewi L, et al: Fetoscopic laser coagulation of the vascular equator versus
selective coagulation for twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome: an open-label randomized controlled
trial. Lancet 383(9935):2144, 2014b
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Simpson LL: Twin-twin transfusion syndrome. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 208(1):3, 2013
Speiser PW, Arlt W, Auchus RJ, et al: Congenital adrenal hyperplasia due to steroid 21-hydroxylase
deficiency: an Endocrine Society clinical practice guideline. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 103(11):4043,
2018
Srinivasan S, Strasburger J: Overview of fetal arrhythmias. Curr Opin Pediatr 20:522, 2008
Srisupundit K, Sirichotiyakul S, Tongprasent F, et al: Fetal therapy in fetal thyrotoxicosis: a case report.
Fetal Diagn Ther 23(2):114, 2008
Stirnemann J, Chalouhi G, Essaoui M, et al: Fetal brain imaging following laser surgery in twin-to-twin
surgery. BJOG 125(9):1186, 2018
Stoffan AP, Wilson JM, Jennings RW, et al: Does the ex utero intrapartum treatment to extracorporeal
membrane oxygenation procedure change outcomes for high-risk patients with congenital
diaphragmatic hernia? J Pediatr Surg 47(6):1053, 2012

Strasburger JF, Wakai RT: Fetal cardiac arrhythmia detection and in utero therapy. Nat Rev Cardiol
7(5):277, 2010
Sugibayashi R, Ozawa K, Sumie M, et al: Forty cases of twin reversed arterial perfusion sequence
treated with radio frequency ablation using the multistep coagulation method: a single-center
experience. Prenat Diagn 36(5):437, 2016
Ueda K, Maeno Y, Miyoshi T, et al: The impact of intrauterine treatment on fetal tachycardia: a
nationwide survey in Japan. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 31(19):2605, 2018
van der Heijden LB, Oudijk MA, Manten GT, et al: Sotalol as first-line treatment for fetal tachycardia
and neonatal follow-up. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 42(3):285, 2013
Van der Veeken L, Russo FM, de Catte L, et al: Fetoscopic endoluminal tracheal occlusion and
reestablishment of fetal airways for congenital diaphragmatic hernia. Gynecol Surg 15(1):9, 2018
van Dijk, Smits IH, Fliers E, et al: Maternal thyrotropin receptor antibody concentration and the risk of
fetal and neonatal thyrotoxicosis: a systematic review. Thyroid 28(2):257, 2018
Ville Y, Hyett J, Hecher K, et al: Preliminary experience with endoscopic laser surgery for severe twintwin transfusion syndrome. N Engl J Med 332(4):224, 1995
Vrecenak JD, Flake AW: Fetal surgical intervention: progress and perspectives. Pediatr Surg Int
29(5):407, 2013
Wagata M, Muraskoshi T, Ishii K, et al: Radiofrequency ablation with an internally cooled electrode for
twin reversed arterial perfusion sequence. Fetal Diagn Ther 40(2):110, 2016
Walsh WF, Chescheir NC, Gillam-Krakauer M, et al: Maternal-fetal surgical procedures. Technical
Brief No. 5. AHRQ Publication No. 10(11)-EHC059-EF, Rockville, Agency for Healthcare
Research and Quality, 2011
Wilson RD, Lemerand K, Johnson MP, et al: Reproductive outcomes in subsequent pregnancies after a
pregnancy complicated by open maternal-fetal surgery (1996–2007). Am J Obstet Gynecol
203(3):209.e1, 2010
Yinon Y, Grisaru-Granovsky S, Chaddha V, et al: Perinatal outcome following fetal chest shunt insertion
for pleural effusion. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 36:58, 2010

CHAPTER 20

Antepartum Fetal Assessment

FETAL MOVEMENTS
FETAL BREATHING
CONTRACTION STRESS TESTING
NONSTRESS TESTS
BIOPHYSICAL PROFILE
AMNIONIC FLUID VOLUME
DOPPLER VELOCIMETRY
ANTENATAL TESTING SUMMARY
REFERENCES
Techniques employed to evaluate fetal health focus on fetal biophysical
findings that include heart rate, movement, breathing, and amnionic fluid
production. Antepartum fetal surveillance aims to prevent fetal death in
pregnancies with complex maternal and fetal conditions yet avoid
unnecessary interventions (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2021a).
Most fetuses will be healthy, and a normal antepartum test result is highly
reassuring. Fetal death within 1 week of a normal test result is rare. Indeed,
negative predictive values—true negative test results for fetal jeopardy—for
most of the tests described are 99.8 percent or higher. In contrast, estimates

of positive predictive values—true positive test results for fetal jeopardy—
are low and range between 10 and 40 percent. The benefit of fetal
surveillance is primarily based on circumstantial evidence. No definitive
randomized clinical trials have been conducted for obvious ethical reasons
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2021a).

FETAL MOVEMENTS
■ Fetal Behavioral States
Fetal activity commences as early as 7 weeks’ gestation (Sajapala, 2017;
Vindla, 1995). Between 20 and 30 weeks’ gestation, general body
movements become organized, and the fetus starts to show rest-activity
cycles (Sorokin, 1982). These cycles reflect central nervous system
development and maturation. By approximately 36 weeks’ gestation, restactivity cycles give way to behavioral states in most normal fetuses (Peirano,
2003). Four fetal behavioral states are described by Nijhuis and coworkers
(1982):
• State 1F is a quiescent state—quiet sleep—with a narrow oscillatory
bandwidth of the fetal heart rate.
• State 2F includes frequent gross body movements, continuous eye
movements, and wider oscillation of the fetal heart rate. This state is
analogous to rapid eye movement (REM) or active sleep in the neonate.
• State 3F includes continuous eye movements in the absence of body
movements and no heart rate accelerations. This state is rare, and its
existence is disputed (Pillai, 1990a).
• State 4F is one of vigorous body movement with continuous eye movements
and heart rate accelerations. This state corresponds to the awake state in
newborns.
At 28 to 30 weeks’ gestation, fetuses transition to spend most of their
time in states 1F and 2F, namely, in quiet or active sleep (Fig. 20-1) (Peirano
2003; Suwanrath, 2010). For example, at 38 weeks, 75 percent of time is
spent in these two states. These behavioral states have been used to develop
an increasingly sophisticated understanding of fetal behavior. In a study of
fetal urine production, bladder volumes rose during state 1F quiet sleep and

significantly declined during state 2F active sleep due to diminished urine
production and infrequent fetal voiding (Oosterhof, 1993). These phenomena
were thought to represent reduced renal blood flow during active sleep.

FIGURE 20-1 The change in fetal sleep patterns (blue columns) and corresponding number of
accelerations (graph lines). As the third trimester advances, fetuses spend more time in active sleep
and the number of accelerations per hour increases.

■ Determinants of Fetal Activity
One determinant of fetal activity is the just-described sleep-awake cycles,
which are independent of maternal ones. In one study of 16 near-term fetuses,
the mean duration of a complete cycle, which included quiet and active
states, was 60 minutes. The mean duration was 23 minutes for the quiet states
and 40 minutes for the active states (Timor-Tritsch, 1978). Patrick and
associates (1982) measured gross fetal body movements with real-time
sonography for 24-hour periods in 31 normal near-term pregnancies and
found the longest period of inactivity to be 75 minutes.
Amnionic fluid volume is another factor affecting fetal activity. Sherer
and colleagues (1996) assessed the number of fetal movements in relation to
amnionic fluid volume in 465 preterm pregnancies during biophysical profile
testing. Fetal activity declined in those with diminished amnionic volumes,

and the authors suggested that a restricted uterine space might physically
limit fetal movements.
Patient habits and medications alter fetal movement. For example,
maternal smoking decreases fetal activity (Coppens, 2001; Thaler, 1980).
Treatment of substance abuse disorders with methadone and buprenorphine
also reduces fetal movement (Jansson, 2017; Wouldes, 2004). Betamethasone
administration is associated with decreased fetal movement for 24 to 72
hours, and the diurnal pattern is lost (Koenen, 2005; Mulder, 2009). The
effect is less clear with dexamethasone. Maternal acetaminophen ingestion
does not alter fetal movement, but a glucose load does promote activity
(Aladjem, 1979; Nitsche, 2015).

■ Maternal Perception
Sadovsky and coworkers (1979b) classified fetal movements as weak,
strong, and rolling according to maternal perceptions and independent
recordings using piezoelectric sensors. As pregnancy advances, the rate of
weak movements drops, and more vigorous ones rise in frequency. The latter
then subside at term. Presumably, declining amnionic fluid volume and space
account for diminished activity at term. Figure 20-2 shows fetal movements
during the last half of gestation in 127 pregnancies with normal outcomes.
The mean number of weekly movements calculated from 12-hour daily
recording periods rose from approximately 200 at 20 weeks’ gestation to a
maximum of 575 movements at 32 weeks. Weekly fetal movement counts then
declined to an average of 282 at 40 weeks. Another study of nearly 300
gravidas found a similar movement pattern across gestational ages
(Bradford, 2019b). More than 90 percent of these women reported stronger
movements during the evening and nighttime.

FIGURE 20-2 Graph depicts averages of fetal movements counted during 12-hour periods (mean ±
SEM). (Data from Sadovsky, 1979a.)

Women perceive 16 to 45 percent of fetal movements detected by
sonography (Brown, 2016). A higher body mass index does not decrease
maternal perception of fetal movement (Bradford, 2019a; Sasson, 2016). It
remains unclear if nulliparity or anterior placental location affect maternal
impression of fetal activity (Brown, 2016; Sasson, 2016).

■ Clinical Application
Because women may perceive a decline in fetal movement in the days to
weeks preceding stillbirth, maternal perception of fetal movement has been
evaluated as a preventive aid (Heazell, 2008; Stacey, 2011). However, the
optimal fetal-movement protocol remains undefined (Mangesi, 2015). Some
methods rely on quantitative counts, such as 10 movements in 2 hours,
whereas others rely on a mother’s subjective impression. In one study, more
than 68,000 pregnancies were randomly assigned between 28 and 32 weeks’
gestation to an objective or subjective assessment group (Grant, 1989).
Women in the objective arm were instructed to record the time needed to feel
10 movements each day. This required an average of 2.7 hours daily. Women
in the subjective group were informally asked about movements during
prenatal visits. Reports of decreased fetal motion were then evaluated with
tests of fetal well-being. Antepartum death rates for normal singleton fetuses
were similar in the two study groups, and most stillborn fetuses were dead

by the time the mothers reported for medical attention. Rather than
concluding that maternal perceptions were meaningless, the authors
concluded that informal maternal impressions were as valid as formally
recorded fetal movement counts.
Women’s knowledge of these protocols also vary. In one survey of more
than 400 gravidas, 85 percent noted receiving instruction from their provider
regarding normal fetal movement (Pollock, 2019). However, 60 percent
described it as a subjective assessment, and 40 percent reported a
quantitative method. In another study, more than two thirds of women could
not explain fetal movement monitoring techniques (Berndl, 2013).
Although a long-standing pillar of maternal care, fetal movement
surveillance may not be as predictive as thought. Nearly 6 to 7 percent of
pregnancies are complicated by decreased fetal movement, but stillbirth rates
are not increased in these cases (Harrington, 1998; Scala, 2015). In one study
of more than 400,000 pregnancies complicated by decreased fetal movement,
directed patient and staff education coupled with a prescriptive management
plan did not reduce the stillbirth incidence (Norman, 2018). Aside from
stillbirth, some data show that decreased fetal movement may help identify
growth-restricted fetuses before birth (Saastad, 2011; Scala, 2015). In one of
these studies, nearly 1100 pregnancies were assigned to subjective or
objective assessment of fetal activity. The rate of 1-minute Apgar scores ≤3
was significantly reduced (0.4 versus 2.3 percent) when counting was used
(Saastad, 2011).
Thus, although most pregnancies complicated by decreased fetal
movement will result in normal outcomes, maternal perception of reduced
fetal activity warrants further evaluation. No consensus guides a provider’s
response. Care is individualized and influenced by gestational age and
pregnancy comorbidities. In low-risk pregnancies, documenting fetal heart
tones and adequate amnionic fluid volume may be sufficient. For older
fetuses, tests described in the upcoming sections are typically added. Our
practice is a nonstress test and sonographic measurement of amnionic fluid
volume.
Many women report excessive fetal movement in the third trimester. Its
risk, if any, is poorly understood. Stacey and colleagues (2011) reported that
a single episode of vigorous fetal activity is associated with a greater risk
for fetal death. Similarly, others have described maternal perception of a
single episode of excessive of fetal movement in the weeks prior to a

stillbirth diagnosis (Heazell, 2017; Whitehead, 2020). More research is
needed prior to recommending intervention.

FETAL BREATHING
Small inward and outward flow of tracheal fluid, indicating thoracic
movement, was first identified in fetal sheep (Dawes, 1972). These chest
wall movements differ from those following birth in that they are
discontinuous. Another feature of fetal respiration is paradoxical chest wall
movement (Fig. 20-3) ( Johnson, 1988). In the newborn or adult, the opposite
occurs. One interpretation of paradoxical respiratory motion might be
coughing to clear amnionic fluid debris. Although the physiological basis for
the breathing reflex is not completely understood, such exchange of amnionic
fluid appears to be essential for normal lung development (Chap. 7, p. 130).
Dawes (1974) identified two types of respiratory movements. The first are
gasps or sighs, which occurred at a frequency of 1 to 4 per minute. The
second, irregular bursts of breathing, occurred at rates up to 240 cycles per
minute. These latter rapid respiratory movements were associated with rapid
eye movement. Badalian and associates (1993) studied the maturation of
normal fetal breathing using color flow and spectral Doppler analysis of
nasal fluid flow as an index of lung function. They suggested that fetal
respiratory rate declined in conjunction with increasing respiratory volume
at 33 to 36 weeks’ gestation and coincided with lung maturation.

FIGURE 20-3 Paradoxical chest movement with fetal respiration. During inspiration (A), the chest
wall paradoxically collapses and the abdomen protrudes, whereas during expiration (B), the chest wall
expands.

Many investigators have used sonography to determine whether chest
wall movements might reflect fetal health. Several variables in addition to
hypoxia affect these movements. These include maternal hypoglycemia,
sound stimuli, cigarette smoking, amniocentesis, impending preterm labor,
gestational age, fetal heart rate, and labor—during which it is normal for
fetal respiration to cease.

Because fetal breathing movements are episodic, interpretation of fetal
health when respirations are absent may be difficult. Patrick and coworkers
(1980) performed continuous 24-hour observation using sonography to
characterize fetal breathing patterns during the last 10 weeks of pregnancy. A
total of 1224 hours of fetal observation in 51 pregnancies were collected.
Figure 20-4 displays the percentages of time spent breathing near term.
Substantively diminished breathing during the night suggests a diurnal
pattern. In addition, breathing activity is enhanced somewhat following
maternal meals. Total absence of breathing was observed in some of these
normal fetuses for up to 122 minutes, indicating that fetal evaluation to
diagnose absent respiratory motion may require long periods of observation.

FIGURE 20-4 The percentage of time spent breathing by 11 fetuses at 38 to 39 weeks’ gestation.
Fetal breathing activity significantly increases after breakfast. Breathing activity diminished during the
day and reached its minimum between 20:00 and 24:00 hours. The percentage of time spent breathing
rose significantly between 04:00 and 07:00 hours, when mothers were asleep. (Adapted with permission
from Patrick J, Campbell K, Carmichael L, et al: Patterns of human fetal breathing during the last 10
weeks of pregnancy, Obstet Gynecol. 1980 Jul;56(1):24–30.)

The potential for breathing activity to be an important sole marker of fetal
health is unfulfilled because of the multiple factors that affect breathing. Most
clinical applications couple fetal breathing with other biophysical indices.
For example, fetal breathing is one component of the biophysical profile (p.
389).

CONTRACTION STRESS TEST
During a uterine contraction, pressures generated by the myometrium exceed
the collapsing pressure of the vessels coursing through it. This ultimately
lowers blood flow to the placenta’s intervillous space. Brief periods of
impaired oxygen exchange result. If uteroplacental pathology is present,
oxygen exchange to the fetus is further diminished, and late fetal heart rate
decelerations appear (Chap. 24, p. 452). These downward-sloping heartrate waveforms begin with the onset of the uterine contraction waveform or
just beyond its acme. Instead, contractions may produce variable
decelerations as a result of cord compression. This suggests
oligohydramnios, which is often comorbid with placental insufficiency.
Ray and associates (1972) used this concept in 66 complicated
pregnancies and developed the oxytocin challenge test, which was later
called the contraction stress test (CST). A positive test result, that is, an
abnormal result, is uniform repetitive late fetal heart rate decelerations. In
their study, the tests were repeated weekly, and the authors concluded that
negative CST results, that is, normal results, forecasted fetal health.
To perform the test, contractions are induced with either intravenous
oxytocin or nipple stimulation. If at least three spontaneous contractions of
40 seconds or longer are present in a 10-minute span, no uterine stimulation
is necessary (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2021a).
The fetal heart rate and uterine contractions are recorded simultaneously by
external monitors. With oxytocin, a dilute intravenous infusion is used to
establish a satisfactory contraction pattern (Freeman, 1975). At Parkland
Hospital, 20 units of oxytocin are mixed in 1 liter of Ringer solution and
initiated at a rate of 6 mU/min. The rate is increased by 6 mU/min every 40
minutes to achieve the just-discussed contraction pattern.
Nipple stimulation to induce uterine contractions for a CST is usually
successful (Huddleston, 1984). One method involves a woman rubbing one
nipple through her clothing for 2 minutes or until a contraction begins. This
2-minute nipple stimulation ideally will induce a pattern of three contractions
per 10 minutes. If not, after a 5-minute rest interval, she is instructed to retry
nipple stimulation to achieve the desired pattern. If this is unsuccessful,
dilute oxytocin may be used.
CST results are interpreted according to the criteria shown in Table 201. Disadvantageously, the average CST requires 90 minutes to complete.

Compared with oxytocin, nipple stimulation shortens testing time and costs
less. During a CST, some have reported unpredictable uterine
hyperstimulation and fetal distress, whereas others did not find excessive
activity to be harmful (Frager, 1987; Schellpfeffer, 1985). Relative
contraindications to a CST include those conditions that contraindicate
vaginal delivery.
TABLE 20-1. Criteria for Interpretation of the Contraction Stress Test

NONSTRESS TEST
The nonstress test (NST) also is used to assess fetal well-being and employs
the phenomenon of fetal heart rate acceleration in response to fetal movement
(Freeman, 1975; Lee, 1975). During an NST, these accelerations are
correlated with fetal movements perceived by the mother.
Compared with a CST, an NST is easier to perform, and normal results
can be used to further define false-positive CST results. Simplistically, the
NST is primarily a test of fetal condition, and it differs from the CST, which
is considered a test of uteroplacental function. Currently, NST is the most
widely used primary testing method for assessment of fetal well-being. It has
also been incorporated into the biophysical profile, discussed later (p. 389).

■ Fetal Heart Rate Acceleration
Autonomic influences are mediated by sympathetic or parasympathetic
impulses from brainstem centers to normally raise or slow the fetal heart
rate. The NST is based on the hypothesis that the heart rate of a fetus that is
not acidemic as a result of hypoxia or neurological depression will
temporarily accelerate in response to fetal movement (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019; Lee, 1975). Fetal movements during

testing are identified by maternal perception and self-recorded. As hypoxia
develops, fetal heart rate accelerations diminish (Smith, 1988).
Gestational age influences acceleration of the fetal heart rate. Pillai and
James (1990b) studied patterns of fetal heart rate acceleration during normal
pregnancy. The percentage of body movements accompanied by accelerations
and the amplitude of these waveforms both increase with gestational age
(Fig. 20-5).

FIGURE 20-5 Percentage of fetuses with at least one acceleration of 15 bpm sustained for 15 seconds
concurrent with fetal movement. (Redrawn from Pillai M, James D: The development of fetal heart rate
patterns during normal pregnancy, Obstet Gynecol. 1990 Nov;76(5 Pt 1):812–816.)

Accordingly, the National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development Fetal Monitoring Workshop defined acceleration waveforms
based on gestational age (Macones, 2008). In fetuses at or beyond 32 weeks’
gestation, the acceleration acme is ≥15 beats per minute (bpm) above the
baseline rate, and the acceleration lasts ≥15 seconds but <2 minutes. Before
32 weeks, accelerations are defined as having a rise ≥10 bpm above
baseline for ≥10 seconds. In one study of 188 normal fetuses at 25 and 28

weeks’ gestation, only 70 percent demonstrated the required ≥15 bpm during
heart rate accelerations. Accelerations of 10 bpm occurred in 90 percent
(Guinn, 1998). Cousins and associates (2012) compared the Workshop
criteria recommended before 32 weeks with the standard 15 bpm/15 second
criteria in a randomized trial of 143 women. They found no differences in
perinatal outcomes.

■ Reactive (Normal) Nonstress Tests
A normal NST is termed reactive and requires two or more accelerations
within 20 minutes of beginning the test (Fig. 20-6) (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2021a). Accelerations are accepted
irrespective of fetal movement. Before concluding that a test is nonreactive,
a 40-minute or longer tracing should be performed. This threshold accounts
for fetal sleep cycles (Paul, 1995). Miller and coworkers (1996b) reviewed
outcomes in fetuses with NST results that were considered nonreactive
because only one acceleration was recorded. They concluded that one
acceleration was as reliable as two in predicting healthy fetal status. NSTs
are more likely to be reactive and have a shorter testing time in the evening
compared with the morning (Babazadeh, 2005; Petrikovsky, 1996).

FIGURE 20-6 Reactive nonstress test. Notice there are at least two fetal heart rate accelerations
(arrows) of more than 15 beats/min for longer than 15 seconds. The black line reflects fetal heart rate,
whereas the purple line reflects the mother’s.

Loud external sounds have been used to startle the fetus and thereby
provoke heart rate acceleration. A commercially available acoustic
stimulator is positioned on the maternal abdomen, and a stimulus of 1 to 2
seconds is applied (Eller, 1995). This may be repeated up to three times for
up to 3 seconds (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists,

2021a). In a randomized trial of 113 women undergoing NST, vibroacoustic
stimulation lowered the average testing time and incidence of nonreactive
test results (Perez-Delboy, 2002; Turitz, 2012). One case report described a
fetal tachyarrhythmia that was provoked with vibroacoustic stimulation in a
fetus with known premature atrial contractions (Laventhal, 2003).
Although a normal number and amplitude of accelerations seems to
reflect fetal well-being, their absence does not invariably predict fetal
compromise. Indeed, some investigators have reported false-positive rates
≥90 percent (Devoe, 1986). Because healthy fetuses may not move for up to
75 minutes, some have considered that a longer NST duration might increase
the positive predictive value of the NST (Brown, 1981). In this scheme,
either the test became reactive during a period up to 80 minutes or the test
remained nonreactive for 120 minutes, which indicated a very ill fetus.
Therefore, prolonged fetal heart rate monitoring is undertaken if an NST
remains nonreactive after 40 minutes.

■ Nonreactive (Abnormal) Nonstress Tests
Based on the foregoing, a nonreactive NST is not always ominous and can be
seen with a sleeping fetus. An NST result can also revert to normal as the
fetal condition changes. An example is shown in Figure 20-7. Instead, a
reactive NST result can become abnormal if the fetal condition deteriorates.

FIGURE 20-7 Two antepartum fetal heart rate (FHR) tracings in a 28-week pregnant woman with
diabetic ketoacidosis. A. FHR tracing (upper panel) and accompanying contraction tracing (second
panel). Tracing, obtained during maternal and fetal acidemia, shows absence of accelerations,
diminished variability, and late decelerations with weak spontaneous contractions. B. Fetal heart rate
tracing shows return of normal accelerations and variability of the fetal heart rate following correction
of maternal acidemia.

Some abnormal patterns reliably forecast severe fetal jeopardy (Fig. 208). For example, Devoe and colleagues (1985) concluded that >90 percent of
NST results that were nonreactive for 90 minutes or more were associated
with significant perinatal pathology. Specifically, Visser and associates

(1980) described a terminal cardiotocogram, which included: (1) baseline
variability <5 bpm, (2) absent accelerations, and (3) late decelerations with
spontaneous uterine contractions. These mirrored experiences from Parkland
Hospital in which absence of accelerations during an 80-minute recording
period in 27 fetuses was associated consistently with evidence of
uteroplacental pathology (Leveno, 1983). The latter included fetal-growth
restriction in 75 percent, oligohydramnios in 80 percent, fetal acidemia in 40
percent, meconium in 30 percent, and placental infarction in 93 percent.

FIGURE 20-8 Nonreactive nonstress test (left side of tracing) followed by contraction stress test
showing mild, late decelerations (right side of tracing). Cesarean delivery was performed, and the
severely acidemic fetus could not be resuscitated.

■ Interval Between Testing
Set originally and arbitrarily at 7 days, the interval between NSTs varies
based on indication (Paul, 1995). According to the American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2021a), weekly testing is undertaken in the
setting of stable maternal medical conditions such as pregestational diabetes,
chronic hypertension, or lupus. For high-risk conditions such as
preeclampsia remote from term, some perform NSTs daily. Fetal conditions
require individualized periodic testing based on the fetal complication.

Fetal-growth restriction is a common indication for which testing intervals
vary (Fig. 47-6, p. 829).

■ Decelerations During Nonstress Testing
Fetal movements commonly produce heart rate decelerations. In one study of
16 near-term fetuses, one half to two thirds of NST tracings had
decelerations, depending on the vigor of the fetal motion (Timor-Tritsch,
1978). This high incidence of decelerations inevitably makes interpretation
of their significance problematic. Indeed, Meis and coworkers (1986)
reported that variable fetal heart rate decelerations during NSTs were not a
sign of fetal compromise. The American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2021a) has concluded that variable decelerations, if
nonrepetitive and brief—less than 30 seconds—do not indicate fetal
compromise or the need for obstetrical intervention. Repetitive variable
decelerations—at least three in 20 minutes—have been associated with a
greater risk of cesarean delivery for fetal distress. Decelerations lasting ≥1
minute are reported to have an even worse fetal prognosis (Bourgeois, 1984;
Druzin, 1981; Pazos, 1982).
Hoskins and associates (1991) attempted to refine interpretation of tests
that showed variable decelerations by adding sonographic estimation of
amnionic fluid volume. The incidence of cesarean delivery for intrapartum
fetal distress progressively rose concurrently with the decline of amnionic
fluid volume. Variable decelerations during an NST plus oligohydramnios
resulted in a 75-percent cesarean delivery rate. Fetal distress in labor,
however, also frequently developed in those pregnancies with variable
decelerations but with normal amounts of amnionic fluid. Others report
similar results (Grubb, 1992).

■ False-reactive Nonstress Tests
In one review of fetal death within 7 days of a reactive NST, the most
frequent indication for testing was postterm pregnancy (Smith, 1987). The
mean interval between testing and death was 4 days, with a range of 1 to 7
days. The single most common autopsy finding was meconium aspiration,
often associated with some type of umbilical cord abnormality. The authors
concluded that acute asphyxia had provoked fetal gasping. They considered

an NST inadequate to preclude an acute asphyxial event, but viewed
amnionic fluid volume assessment as valuable. Other ascribed frequent
causes of fetal death despite a false-reactive NST included intrauterine
infection, abnormal cord position, fetal malformations, and placental
abruption.

BIOPHYSICAL PROFILE
Assessing five specific fetal biophysical variables more accurately predicts
fetal health (Manning, 1980). These include heart rate acceleration,
breathing, movement, tone, and amnionic fluid volume (Table 20-2). In the
commonly used biophysical profile (BPP), each normal variable is assigned
a score of 2, and abnormal variables are given a score of 0. Thus, the highest
score possible for a normal fetus is 10. Because fetal breathing and
movement are episodic, 30 minutes are allotted to perform a BPP before a
score of 0 is assigned to any component. Figure 20-9 shows color Doppler
evidence of amnionic fluid flowing through the nares with fetal breathing. In
one study, BPP scores were higher if a test was performed in late evening
compared with the morning (Ozkaya, 2012). Narcotics and sedatives can
significantly lower the score (Kopecky, 2000).
TABLE 20-2. Components and Scores for the Biophysical Profile

FIGURE 20-9 A sagittal color Doppler image displays the movement of amnionic fluid through the
nares during fetal breathing.

Using the BPP interpretation and management strategy shown in Table
20-3, Manning and colleagues (1987) evaluated more than 19,000
pregnancies. Greater than 97 percent of the tested pregnancies had normal
results. They reported a false-normal test rate—defined by an antepartum
death of a structurally normal fetus—that approximated 1 per 1000. The most
common identifiable causes of fetal death after a normal BPP score include
fetomaternal hemorrhage, umbilical cord accident, and placental abruption
(Dayal, 1999).
TABLE 20-3. Interpretation of Biophysical Profile Score

Subsequently, Manning and associates (1993) published a remarkable
description of 493 fetuses in which BPP scores were correlated with
umbilical venous blood pH values. This blood was being obtained via
antepartum cordocentesis for other specific fetal indications. Namely,
karyotyping of fetal-growth restricted fetuses constituted 20 percent, and the
remainder had alloimmune hemolytic anemia requiring hemoglobin
measurement. As shown in Figure 20-10, a BPP score of 0 was almost
invariably associated with significant fetal acidemia, whereas a normal
score of 8 or 10 was associated with normal pH. An equivocal test result—a
score of 6—was a poor predictor of an abnormal outcome. A drop in the
BPP score from 2 or 4 down to 0 more accurately predicted an abnormal
fetal outcome. Overall, BPP scores provided poor sensitivity to predict cord
blood pH. Similar studies have concluded the same (Salvesan, 1993; Weiner,
1996). Kaur and colleagues (2008) performed daily BPPs to ascertain the
optimal delivery time in 48 growth-restricted preterm fetuses that weighed
<1000 g. Despite scores of 8 in 27 fetuses and 6 in 13 others, 6 died and 21
were acidemic.

FIGURE 20-10 Mean umbilical vein pH (±2 SD) obtained by cordocentesis in relation to fetal
biophysical profile score category. (Data from Manning, 1993.)

■ Modified Biophysical Profile
BPP performance is labor intensive and requires a trained sonographer. In
response, Clark and coworkers (1989) created an abbreviated BPP, in which
an NST was coupled with amnionic fluid volume assessment. In 2628
singleton pregnancies, the NST was performed twice weekly. Described in
the next section, amnionic fluid volume was measured by the amnionic fluid
index (AFI), and values ≤5 cm were considered abnormal. This abbreviated
BPP required approximately 10 minutes to perform. The authors considered
it a superb antepartum surveillance method because no fetuses died
unexpectedly.
From another study of 17,429 modified BPPs in 2774 women,
investigators concluded that such testing was an excellent fetal surveillance

tool (Nageotte, 1994). Miller and associates (1996a) reported results of
more than 54,000 modified BPPs performed in 15,400 high-risk pregnancies.
They described a false-negative rate of 0.8 per 1000 and a false-positive rate
of 1.5 percent. The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
(2021a) has concluded that the BPP and modified BPP are comparable to
other biophysical fetal surveillance approaches in predicting fetal wellbeing.

AMNIONIC FLUID VOLUME
The importance of amnionic fluid volume estimation is indicated by its
inclusion into virtually all schemes of fetal health assessment (Frøen, 2008).
Physiologically, diminished uteroplacental perfusion may lead to lower fetal
renal blood flow, decreased urine production, and ultimately,
oligohydramnios (Chap. 14, p. 260). Amnionic fluid volume is measured
either by the AFI or by the single deepest vertical pocket (DVP). In one study
of more than 1000 women in which both methods were compared, AFI led to
a higher rate of oligohydramnios diagnoses and induction of labor. Despite
this, perinatal outcomes were not improved (Kehl, 2016). The American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2021a) concludes that DVP
measurement, as opposed to AFI, is associated with fewer unnecessary
interventions but comparable perinatal outcomes (Nabhan, 2008; Reddy,
2014). An AFI ≤5 cm and a DVP ≤2 cm is considered abnormal.

DOPPLER VELOCIMETRY
Blood flow velocity measured by Doppler ultrasound reflects downstream
impedance (Chap. 14, p. 261). This Doppler velocimetry has been used to
interrogate the umbilical artery, middle cerebral artery (MCA), and ductus
venosus. With umbilical artery studies, abnormal waveforms correlated with
placental villous hypovascularity. Specifically, of the small placental arterial
channels, 60 to 70 percent must be obliterated before the umbilical artery
Doppler waveform becomes abnormal. Such extensive placental vascular
pathology has a major effect on fetal circulation. According to Trudinger
(2007), because more than 40 percent of the combined fetal ventricular
output is directed to the placenta, obliteration of placental vascular channel

increases afterload and leads to fetal hypoxemia. This in turn leads to
ventricular dilation and redistribution of MCA blood flow. Ultimately,
pressure rises in the ductus venosus due to afterload in the right side of the
fetal heart (Baschat, 2004). Clinically, abnormal Doppler waveforms in the
ductus venosus are a late finding in the progression of fetal deterioration due
to chronic hypoxemia. To predict placental dysfunction, maternal uterine
artery Doppler velocimetry also has been assessed, with the goal to balance
stillbirth against the risks of preterm delivery (Ghidini, 2007).

■ Umbilical Artery
The umbilical artery systolic-diastolic (S/D) ratio is considered abnormal if
it is above the 95th percentile for gestational age or if diastolic flow is either
absent or reversed (Chap. 14, p. 262). Absent or reversed end-diastolic flow
signifies greater impedance to umbilical artery blood flow (Fig. 47-7, p.
830). It is reported to result from poorly vascularized placental villi and is
seen in extreme cases of fetal-growth restriction (Todros, 1999). The
perinatal mortality rate is increased when absent or reversed end-diastolic
flow is present (Viero, 2004).
Umbilical artery Doppler velocimetry to evaluate fetal health has been
extensively assessed in randomized trials. In one, 1360 women with a high
risk for stillbirth underwent either an NST or Doppler velocimetry, and
abnormal results prompted labor induction. More patients in the Doppler
group required induction, yet the cesarean delivery rate for intrapartum fetal
distress was 4.6 percent. This rate was significantly lower than the 8.7percent cesarean rate for those receiving an NST (Williams, 2003). The
authors believed that Doppler assessment, compared with an NST, identified
a higher proportion of patients with early placental compromise. Identified
early, these fetuses experienced less distress, which yielded a lower
cesarean delivery rate. Similarly, Yoon and coworkers (1992) found that the
BPP and umbilical artery Doppler measurements are comparable indicators
of fetal acidosis. Introduction of Doppler velocimetry as a primary screening
test must balance any advantages against its necessary training and associated
costs.
In addition, umbilical artery Doppler velocimetry does not effectively
predict fetal health in normal pregnancies (Alfirevic, 2015; Page, 2017).
Gonzalez and associates (2007) found that abnormal umbilical artery

Doppler findings in a cohort of growth-restricted fetuses were the best
predictors of perinatal outcomes. The American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2021a) has concluded that umbilical artery Doppler
velocimetry has not proved valuable as a screening test, except in cases of
fetal-growth restriction (Chap. 47, p. 830).

■ Ductus Venosus
Doppler ultrasound can also assess the fetal venous circulation, and as
discussed earlier, an abnormal ductus venosus Doppler waveform indicates
cardiac dysfunction. However, its routine use in surveillance of fetal-growth
restriction is not recommended (Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, 2020).
Ductus venosus Doppler is also used in the staging of twin-twin
transfusion syndrome (Quintero, 1999). Abnormal Doppler indices reflect
myocardial dysfunction and predict a poorer outcome (Banek, 2003).
Additionally, this Doppler method can help monitor fetuses with congenital
heart defects and supraventricular tachycardia (SVT) (Seravalli, 2016).
Namely, SVT can induce a reversible cardiomyopathy that may lead to
hydrops. Ductus venosus Doppler patterns may aid prediction and monitor
improvement following treatment. Thus, ductus venosus Doppler may have a
role in monitoring pregnancies at increased risk for fetal cardiovascular
decline (Baschat, 2010).

■ Middle Cerebral Artery
Doppler velocimetry of the MCA is the primary method of detecting fetal
anemia (Chap. 14, p. 263). With fetal anemia, the peak systolic velocity is
enhanced due to greater cardiac output and decreased blood viscosity.
However, to detect fetal compromise, Doppler velocimetry of the MCA is
not recommended (Morris, 2012). In one randomized study of 665 women
assigned to modified BPP alone or to modified BPP plus MCA and umbilical
artery Doppler velocimetry, pregnancy outcomes did not differ (Ott, 1998).

■ Uterine Artery
Vascular resistance in the uterine circulation normally declines in the first
half of pregnancy. This stems from trophoblast invasion and remodeling of

maternal uterine vessels (Chap. 5, p. 90). Uterine artery Doppler velocimetry
may be most helpful in assessing pregnancies at high risk of uteroplacental
insufficiency (Abramowicz, 2008). Persistence or development of highresistance patterns has been linked to various pregnancy complications
(Sciscione, 2009; Velathur, 2014). In a study of 30,519 unselected British
women, uterine artery velocimetry was assessed at 22 to 24 weeks’ gestation
(Smith, 2007). The risk of fetal death before 32 weeks, when associated with
abruption, preeclampsia, or fetal-growth restriction, was significantly linked
to high-resistance flow. However, technique standards and criteria to define
an abnormal test are lacking. Thus, uterine artery Doppler studies are not
considered standard practice in either low- or high-risk populations (Society
for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, 2020).

ANTENATAL TESTING SUMMARY
Despite a continuous evolution of options, the precision of any given method
is limited. Moreover, the wide range of normal biological fetal variation
makes interpretation of test results challenging. This prompts many clinicians
to use antenatal testing to forecast fetal wellness rather than illness.
Antenatal testing efficacy was reviewed between 1971 and 1985 at Los
Angeles County Hospital (Platt, 1987). Nearly 17,000 women underwent
antepartum testing of various types. Fetal surveillance rose from <1 percent
of pregnancies in the early 1970s to 15 percent in the mid-1980s. These
authors concluded that such testing was clearly beneficial because the fetal
death rate was significantly less in the tested high-risk pregnancies compared
with the rate in those not tested. The study, however, did not consider other
innovations incorporated into practice during those years. Results from
Ghana suggest that NSTs may be beneficial in low-resource countries
(Lawrence, 2016). Namely, in an observational study of 316 pregnancies
complicated by gestational hypertension, women undergoing an NST had a
nonsignificant decreased risk for stillbirth compared with those not tested—
3.6 versus 9.2 percent, respectively. However, the benefits of antenatal fetal
testing have not been sufficiently evaluated in randomized trials.
Another important and unanswered question is whether antepartum fetal
surveillance identifies fetal asphyxia early enough to prevent brain damage.
Manning and associates (1998) studied the incidence of cerebral palsy in
26,290 high-risk pregnancies managed with serial BPP testing. These

outcomes were compared with those of 58,657 low-risk pregnancies in
which antepartum testing was not performed. The rate of cerebral palsy was
1.3 per 1000 in tested pregnancies compared with 4.7 per 1000 in untested
women. Todd and colleagues (1992) attempted to correlate cognitive
development in infants up to age 2 years following abnormal umbilical artery
Doppler velocimetry or NST results. Only abnormal NST results were
associated with marginally poorer cognitive outcomes. These investigators
concluded that by the time fetal compromise is diagnosed with antenatal
testing, fetal damage has already been sustained. Low and coworkers (2003)
reached a similar conclusion.
Indications for antepartum testing include fetal and maternal conditions
that increase the risk for stillbirth (Table 20-4) (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2021b). According to the American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2021a), a normal antepartum
fetal test result is highly reassuring that a stillbirth will not occur within 1
week. This conclusion was reached after an analysis of reports of stillbirth
rates associated with the various antepartum fetal heart rate tests (Table 205).
TABLE 20-4. Indications for Antepartum Testing

TABLE 20-5. Stillbirth Rates within 1 Week of a Normal Antepartum Fetal
Surveillance Test

The most important consideration in deciding when to begin antepartum
testing is the prognosis for neonatal survival. The severity of maternal
disease is another. In general, with most high-risk pregnancies, testing begins
by 32 to 34 weeks’ gestation. Pregnancies with severe complications, such
as fetal-growth restriction, might require testing as early as 26 to 28 weeks.
The frequency for repeating tests is arbitrarily set at 7 days, but more
frequent testing is often done.

REFERENCES
Abramowicz JS, Sheiner E: Ultrasound of the placenta: a systemic approach. Part II: function
assessment (Doppler). Placenta 29(11):921, 2008
Aladjem S, Feria A, Rest J, et al: Effect of maternal glucose load on fetal activity. Am J Obstet Gynecol
134(3):276, 1979
Alfirevic Z, Stampalija T, Medley N: Fetal and umbilical Doppler ultrasound in normal pregnancy.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 4:CD001450, 2015
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Intrapartum fetal heart rate monitoring:
nomenclature, interpretation, and general management principles. Practice Bulletin No. 106, July
2009, Reaffirmed 2019
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Antepartum fetal surveillance. Practice Bulletin
No. 229, May 2021a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Indications for outpatient antenatal fetal
surveillance. Committee Opinion No. 828, May 2021b
Babazadeh R, Abdali K, Lotfalizadeh M, et al: Diurnal nonstress test variations in the human fetus at
risk. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 90(3):189, 2005
Badalian SS, Chao CR, Fox HE, et al: Fetal breathing-related nasal fluid flow velocity in uncomplicated
pregnancies. Am J Obstet Gynecol 169:563, 1993
Banek CS, Hecher K, Hackeloer BJ, et al: Long-term neurodevelopmental outcome after intrauterine
laser treatment for severe twin-twin transfusion syndrome. Am J Obstet Gynecol 188(4):876, 2003
Baschat AA: Ductus venosus doppler for fetal surveillance in high-risk pregnancies. Clin Obstet
Gynecol 53(4)858, 2010
Baschat AA: Opinion and review: Doppler application in the delivery timing in the preterm growthrestricted fetus: another step in the right direction. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 23:118, 2004
Baschat AA, Cosmi E, Bilardo C, et al: Predictors of neonatal outcome in early-onset placental
dysfunction. Obstet Gynecol 109:253, 2007
Berndl AM, O’Connell CM, McLeod NL: Fetal movement monitoring: how are we doing as educators?
J Obstet Gynaecol Can 35(1):22, 2013
Bourgeois FJ, Thiagarajah S, Harbert GM Jr: The significance of fetal heart rate decelerations during
nonstress testing. Am J Obstet Gynecol 150:213, 1984
Bradford B, Cronin R, McKinlay C, et al: Maternally perceived fetal movement patterns: The influence
of body mass index. Early Hum Dev 15:140, 2019a
Bradford BF, Cronin RS, McKinlay CJ, et al: A diurnal fetal movement pattern: Findings from a crosssectional study of maternally perceived fetal movements in the third trimester of pregnancy. PLoS

One 14(6):e0217583, 2019b
Brown R, Higgins LE, Johnstone ED, et al: Maternal perception of fetal movements in late pregnancy is
affected by type and duration of fetal movement. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 29(13):2145, 2016
Brown R, Patrick J: The nonstress test: how long is enough? Am J Obstet Gynecol 141:646, 1981
Clark SL, Sabey P, Jolley K: Nonstress testing with acoustic stimulation and amnionic fluid volume
assessment: 5973 tests without unexpected fetal death. Am J Obstet Gynecol 160:694, 1989
Coppens M, Vindla S, James DK, et al: Computerized analysis of acute and chronic changes in fetal
heart rate variation and fetal activity in association with maternal smoking. Am J Obstet Gynecol
185(2):421, 2001
Cousins LM, Poeltler DM, Faron S, et al: Nonstress testing at ≤32.0 weeks’ gestation: a randomized
trial comparing different assessment criteria. Am J Obstet Gynecol 207(4):311.e1, 2012
Dawes GS: Breathing before birth in animals and man. An essay in medicine. Physiol Med 290:557,
1974
Dawes GS, Fox HE, Leduc BM, et al: Respiratory movements and rapid eye movement sleep in the
foetal lamb. J Physiol 220:119, 1972
Dayal AK, Manning FA, Berck DJ, et al: Fetal death after normal biophysical profile score: an eighteen
year experience. Am J Obstet Gynecol 181:1231, 1999
Devoe LD, Castillo RA, Sherline DM: The nonstress test as a diagnostic test: a critical reappraisal. Am
J Obstet Gynecol 152:1047, 1986
Devoe LD, McKenzie J, Searle NS, et al: Clinical sequelae of the extended nonstress test. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 151:1074, 1985
Druzin ML, Gratacos J, Keegan KA, et al: Antepartum fetal heart rate testing, 7. The significance of
fetal bradycardia. Am J Obstet Gynecol 139:194, 1981
Eller DP, Scardo JA, Dillon AE, et al: Distance from an intrauterine hydrophone as a factor affecting
intrauterine sound pressure levels produced by the vibroacoustic stimulation test. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 173:523, 1995
Frager NB, Miyazaki FS: Intrauterine monitoring of contractions during breast stimulation. Obstet
Gynecol 69:767, 1987
Freeman RK: The use of the oxytocin challenge test for antepartum clinical evaluation of uteroplacental
respiratory function. Am J Obstet Gynecol 121:481, 1975
Frøen JF, Tviet JV, Saastad E, et al: Management of decreased fetal movements. Semin Perinatol
32(4):307, 2008
Ghidini A: Doppler of the ductus venosus in severe preterm fetal growth restriction. A test in search of
a purpose? Obstet Gynecol 109:250, 2007
Gonzalez JM, Stamilio DM, Ural S, et al: Relationship between abnormal fetal testing and adverse
perinatal outcomes in intrauterine growth restriction. Am J Obstet Gynecol 196:e48, 2007
Grant A, Elbourne D, Valentin L, et al: Routine formal fetal movement counting and risk of antepartum
late death in normally formed singletons. Lancet 2:345, 1989
Grubb DK, Paul RH: Amnionic fluid index and prolonged antepartum fetal heart rate decelerations.
Obstet Gynecol 79:558, 1992
Guinn DA, Kimberlin KF, Wigton TR, et al: Fetal heart rate characteristics at 25 to 28 weeks gestation.
Am J Perinatol 15:507, 1998
Harrington K, Thompson O, Jorden L, et al: Obstetric outcomes in women who present with a reduction
in fetal movements in the third trimester of pregnancy. J Perinat Med 26:77, 1998
Heazell AE, Frøen JF: Methods of fetal movement counting and the detection of fetal compromise. J
Obstet Gynaecol 28:147, 2008

Heazell AE, Warland J, Stacey T, et al: Stillbirth is associated with perceived alterations in fetal activity
—findings from an international case control study. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth 17(1):369, 2017
Hoskins IA, Frieden FJ, Young BK: Variable decelerations in reactive nonstress tests with decreased
amnionic fluid index predict fetal compromise. Am J Obstet Gynecol 165:1094, 1991
Huddleston JF, Sutliff JG, Robinson D: Contraction stress test by intermittent nipple stimulation. Obstet
Gynecol 63:669, 1984
Jansson LM, Velez M, McConnell K, et al: Maternal buprenorphine treatment and fetal neurobehavioral
development. Am J Obstet Gynecol 216(5):529.e, 2017
Johnson T, Besigner R, Thomas R: New clues to fetal behavior and well-being. Contemp Ob/Gyn May
1988
Kaur S, Picconi JL, Chadha R, et al: Biophysical profile in the treatment of intrauterine growthrestricted fetuses who weigh <1000 g. Am J Obstet Gynecol 199:264.e1, 2008
Kehl S, Schelkle A, Thomas A, et al: Single deepest vertical pocket or amniotic fluid index as evaluation
test for predicting adverse pregnancy outcome (SAFE trial): a multicenter, open-label, randomized
controlled trial. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 47(6):674, 2016
Koenen SV, Mulder EJ, Wijnberger LD, et al: Transient loss of the diurnal rhythms of fetal movements,
heart rate, and its variation after maternal betamethasone administration. Pediatr Res 57(5 Pt 1):662,
2005
Kopecky EA, Ryan ML, Barrett JF, et al: Fetal response to maternally administered morphine. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 183:424, 2000
Lalor JG, Fawole B, Alfirevic Z, et al: Biophysical profile for fetal assessment in high risk pregnancies.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 1:CD000038, 2008
Laventhal NT, Dildy GA III, Belfort MA: Fetal tachyarrhythmia associated with vibroacoustic
stimulation. Obstet Gynecol 101:116, 2003
Lawrence ER, Quarshie EL, Lewis KF, et al: Introduction of cardiotocograph monitoring improves birth
outcomes in women with preeclampsia in Ghana. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 132(1):103, 2016
Lee CY, DiLoreto PC, O’Lane JM: A study of fetal heart rate acceleration patterns. Obstet Gynecol
45:142, 1975
Leveno KJ, Williams ML, DePalma RT, et al: Perinatal outcome in the absence of antepartum fetal
heart rate acceleration. Obstet Gynecol 61:347, 1983
Liston R, Sawchuck D, Young D: No. 197a-Fetal health surveillance: antepartum consensus guideline. J
Obstet Gynaecol Can 40(4):e251, 2018
Low JA, Killen H, Derrick EJ: Antepartum fetal asphyxia in the preterm pregnancy. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 188:461, 2003
Macones GA, Hankins GD, Spong CY, et al: The 2008 National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development workshop report on electronic fetal monitoring: update on definitions, interpretation,
and research guidelines. Obstet Gynecol 112:661, 2008
Mangesi L, Hofmeyr GJ, Smith V, et al: Fetal movement counting for assessment of fetal wellbeing.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 10:CD004909, 2015
Manning FA, Bondagji N, Harman CR, et al: Fetal assessment based on fetal biophysical profile scoring
VIII: the incidence of cerebral palsy in tested and untested perinates. Am J Obstet Gynecol 178:696,
1998
Manning FA, Morrison I, Harman CR, et al: Fetal assessment based on fetal biophysical profile scoring:
experience in 19,221 referred high-risk pregnancies, 2. An analysis of false-negative fetal deaths.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 157:880, 1987

Manning FA, Platt LD, Sipos L: Antepartum fetal evaluation: development of a fetal biophysical profile.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 136:787, 1980
Manning FA, Snijders R, Harman CR, et al: Fetal biophysical profile score, VI. Correlation with
antepartum umbilical venous fetal pH. Am J Obstet Gynecol 169:755, 1993
Meis PJ, Ureda JR, Swain M, et al: Variable decelerations during nonstress tests are not a sign of fetal
compromise. Am J Obstet Gynecol 154:586, 1986
Miller DA, Rabello YA, Paul RH: The modified biophysical profile: antepartum testing in the 1990s. Am
J Obstet Gynecol 174:812, 1996a
Miller F, Miller D, Paul R, et al: Is one fetal heart rate acceleration during a nonstress test as reliable as
two in predicting fetal status? Am J Obstet Gynecol 174:337, 1996b
Morris RK, Say R, Robson SC, et al: Systematic review and meta-analysis of middle cerebral artery
Doppler to predict perinatal wellbeing. J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 165(2):141, 2012
Mulder EJ, de Heus R, Visser GH: Antenatal corticosteroid therapy: short-term effects on fetal
behaviour and haemodynamics. Semin Fetal Neonatal Med 14(3):151, 2009
Nabhan AF, Abdelmoula YA: Amniotic fluid index versus single deepest vertical pocket as a screening
test for preventing adverse pregnancy outcome. Cochran Database Syst Rev 3:CD006593, 2008
Nageotte MP, Towers CV, Asrat T, et al: Perinatal outcome with the modified biophysical profile. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 170:1672, 1994
Nijhuis JG, Prechtl HF, Martin CB Jr, et al: Are there behavioural states in the human fetus? Early Hum
Dev 6:177, 1982
Nitsche J, Langman LJ, Penn HJ, et al: Effect of acetaminophen on fetal activity. Am J Perinatol
32(13):1277, 2015
Norman JE, Heazell AE, Rodriguez A, et al: Awareness of fetal movements and care package to
reduce fetal mortality (AFFIRM): a stepped wedge, cluster-randomised trial. Lancet
392(10158):1629, 2018
Oosterhof H, vd Stege JG, Lander M, et al: Urine production rate is related to behavioural states in the
near term human fetus. BJOG 100:920, 1993
Ott WJ, Mora G, Arias F, et al: Comparison of the modified biophysical profile to a “new” biophysical
profile incorporating the middle cerebral artery to umbilical artery velocity flow systolic/diastolic
ratio. Am J Obstet Gynecol 178:1346, 1998
Ozkaya E, Baser E, Cinar M, et al: Does diurnal rhythm have an impact on fetal biophysical profile? J
Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 25(4):335, 2012
Page JM, Silver RM: Interventions to prevent stillbirth. Semin Fetal Neonatal Med 22(3):135, 2017
Patrick J, Campbell K, Carmichael L, et al: Patterns of gross fetal body movements over 24-hour
observation intervals during the last 10 weeks of pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 142:363, 1982
Patrick J, Campbell K, Carmichael L, et al: Patterns of human fetal breathing during the last 10 weeks
of pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 56:24, 1980
Paul RH, Miller DA: Nonstress test. Clin Obstet Gynecol 38(1):3, 1995
Pazos R, Vuolo K, Aladjem S, et al: Association of spontaneous fetal heart rate decelerations during
antepartum nonstress testing and intrauterine growth retardation. Am J Obstet Gynecol 144:574,
1982
Peirano P, Algarín C, Uauy R: Sleep-wake states and their regulatory mechanisms throughout early
human development. J Pediatr 143:S70, 2003
Perez-Delboy A, Weiss J, Michels A, et al: A randomized trial of vibroacoustic stimulation for antenatal
fetal testing. Am J Obstet Gynecol 187:S146, 2002

Petrikovsky BM, Kaplan GP: Diurnal non-stress test variations in healthy term fetuses. A call for
evening appointments for fetal testing. Early Hum Dev 44(2):127, 1996
Pillai M, James D: Behavioural states in normal mature human fetuses. Arch Dis Child 65:39, 1990a
Pillai M, James D: The development of fetal heart rate patterns during normal pregnancy. Obstet
Gynecol 76:812, 1990b
Platt LD, Paul RH, Phelan J, et al: Fifteen years of experience with antepartum fetal testing. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 156:1509, 1987
Pollock D, Ziaian T, Pearson E, et al: Breaking through the silence in antenatal care: fetal movement
and stillbirth education. Women Birth 33(1):77, 2020
Quintero RA, Morales WJ, Allen MH, et al: Staging of twin-twin transfusion syndrome. Perinatol 19(8
Pt 1):550, 1999
Ray M, Freeman R, Pine S, et al: Clinical experience with the oxytocin challenge test. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 114:1, 1972
Reddy UM, Abuhamad AZ, Levine D, et al: Fetal imaging: executive summary of a joint Eunice
Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, Society for MaternalFetal Medicine, American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine, American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists, American College of Radiology, Society for Pediatric Radiology, and Society of
Radiologists in Ultrasound Fetal Imaging Workshop. Obstet Gynecol 123(5):1070, 2014
Reddy UM, Filly RA, Copel JA, et al: Prenatal imaging: ultrasonography and magnetic resonance
imaging. Obstet Gynecol 112(1):145, 2008
Saastad E, Winje BA, Stray Penderson B, et al: Fetal movement counting improved identification of fetal
growth restriction and perinatal outcomes—a multi-centre, randomized, controlled trial. PLoS One
6(12):e28482, 2011
Sadovsky E, Evron S, Weinstein D: Daily fetal movement recording in normal pregnancy. Riv Obstet
Ginecol Practica Med Perinatal 59:395, 1979a
Sadovsky E, Laufer N, Allen JW: The incidence of different types of fetal movement during pregnancy.
BJOG 86:10, 1979b
Sadovsky E, Yaffe H: Daily fetal movement recording and fetal prognosis. Obstet Gynecol 41:845, 1973
Sajapala S, AboEllail MA, Kanenshi K, et al: 4D ultrasound study of fetal movement early in the second
trimester of pregnancy. J Perinat Med 45(6):737, 2017
Salvesen DR, Freeman J, Brudenell JM, et al: Prediction of fetal acidemia in pregnancies complicated
by maternal diabetes by biophysical scoring and fetal heart rate monitoring. BJOG 100:227, 1993
Sasson A, Tsur A, Kalter A, et al: Reduced fetal movement: factors affecting maternal perception. J
Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 29(8):1318, 2016
Scala C, Bhide A, Familiari A, et al: Number of episodes of reduced fetal movement at term: association
with adverse perinatal outcome. Am J Obstet Gynecol 213(5):678.e1, 2015
Schellpfeffer MA, Hoyle D, Johnson JW: Antepartum uterine hypercontractility secondary to nipple
stimulation. Obstet Gynecol 65:588, 1985
Sciscione AC, Hayes EJ: Uterine artery Doppler flow studies in obstetric practice. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 201(2):121, 2009
Sciscione AC, Hayes EJ, Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine: Uterine artery Doppler flow studies in
obstetric practice. Am J Obstet Gynecol 201(2):121, 2009
Seravalli V, Miller JL, Block-Abraham D, et al: Ductus venosus Doppler in the assessment of fetal
cardiovascular health: an updated practical approach. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 95(6):635, 2016
Sherer DM, Spong CY, Ghidini A, et al: In preterm fetuses decreased amniotic fluid volume is
associated with decreased fetal movements. Am J Obstet Gynecol 174:344, 1996

Smith CV, Nguyen HN, Kovacs B, et al: Fetal death following antepartum fetal heart rate testing: a
review of 65 cases. Obstet Gynecol 70:18, 1987
Smith GC, Yu CK, Papageorghiou AT, et al: Maternal uterine artery Doppler flow velocimetry and the
risk of stillbirth. Obstet Gynecol 109:144, 2007
Smith JH, Anand KJ, Cotes PM, et al: Antenatal fetal heart rate variation in relation to the respiratory
and metabolic status of the compromised human fetus. BJOG 95:980, 1988
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine (SMFM), Martins JG, Biggio JR, et al: A Society for MaternalFetal Medicine Consult Series #52: Diagnosis and management of fetal growth restriction. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 223(4):B2, 2020
Sorokin Y, Bottoms SF, Dierker CJ, et al: The clustering of fetal heart rate changes and fetal
movements in pregnancies between 20 and 30 weeks gestation. Am J Obstet Gynecol 143:952, 1982
Spinillo A, Montanari L, Bergante C, et al: Prognostic value of umbilical artery Doppler studies in
unselected preterm deliveries. Obstet Gynecol 105:613, 2005
Stacey T, Thompson JM, Mitchell EA, et al: Maternal perception of fetal activity and late stillbirth risk:
findings from the Auckland Stillbirth Study. Birth 38(4):311, 2011
Suwanrath C, Suntharasaj T: Sleep-wake cycles in normal fetuses. Arch Gynecol Obstet 281(3):449,
2010
Thaler I, Goodman JD, Dawes GS: Effects of maternal cigarette smoking on fetal breathing and fetal
movements. Am J Obstet Gynecol 138(3):282, 1980
Timor-Tritsch IE, Dierker LJ, Hertz RH, et al: Studies of antepartum behavioral state in the human fetus
at term. Am J Obstet Gynecol 132:524, 1978
Todd AL, Tridinger BJ, Cole MJ, et al: Antenatal tests of fetal welfare and development at age 2 years.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 167:66, 1992
Todros T, Sciarrone A, Piccoli E, et al: Umbilical Doppler waveforms and placental villous angiogenesis
in pregnancies complicated by fetal growth restriction. Obstet Gynecol 93:499, 1999
Trudinger B: Doppler: more or less? Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 29 (3):243, 2007
Turitz AL, Bastek JA, Sammel MD, et al: Can vibroacoustic stimulation improve the efficiency of a
tertiary care antenatal testing unit? J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 25(12):2645, 2012
Velauthar L, Plana MN, Kalidindi M, et al: First-trimester uterine artery Doppler and adverse pregnancy
outcome: a meta-analysis involving 55,974 women. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 43(5):500, 2014
Viero S, Chaddha V, Alkazaleh F, et al: Prognostic value of placental ultrasound in pregnancies
complicated by absent end-diastolic flow velocity in the umbilical arteries. Placenta 25(8-9):735,
2004
Vindla S, James D: Fetal behavior as a test of fetal well-being. BJOG 102:597, 1995
Visser GH, Redman CW, Huisjes HJ, et al: Nonstressed antepartum heart rate monitoring: implications
of decelerations after spontaneous contractions. Am J Obstet Gynecol 138:429, 1980
Weiner Z, Divon MY, Katz N, et al: Multi-variant analysis of antepartum fetal test in predicting neonatal
outcome of growth retarded fetuses. Am J Obstet Gynecol 174:338, 1996
Whitehead CL, Cohen N, Visser GH, et al: Are increased fetal movements always reassuring? J
Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 33(21):3713, 2020
Williams KP, Farquharson DF, Bebbington M, et al: Screening for fetal well-being in a high-risk pregnant
population comparing the nonstress test with umbilical artery Doppler velocimetry: a randomized
controlled clinical trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol 188:1366, 2003
Wouldes TA, Roberts AB, Pryor JE, et al: The effect of methadone treatment on the quantity and
quality of human fetal movement. Neurotoxicol Teratol 26(1):23, 2004

Yoon BH, Syn HC, Kim SW: The efficacy of Doppler umbilical artery velocimetry in identifying fetal
acidosis. A comparison with fetal biophysical profile. J Ultrasound Med 11(1):1, 1992

SECTION 7

LABOR

CHAPTER 21

Physiology of Labor

MATERNAL AND FETAL COMPARTMENTS
SEX STEROID HORMONE ROLE
PROSTAGLANDINS ROLE
PHASE 1: UTERINE QUIESCENCE AND CERVICAL SOFTENING
PHASE 2: PREPARATION FOR LABOR
PHASE 3: LABOR
UTEROTONINS IN PARTURITION PHASE 3
PHASE 4: THE PUERPERIUM
REFERENCES
Labor is characterized by forceful and painful uterine contractions that effect
cervical dilation and cause the fetus to descend through the birth canal.
However, extensive preparations take place in both the uterus and cervix
long before this. During the first 36 to 38 weeks of normal gestation, the
myometrium is in a preparatory yet unresponsive state. Concurrently, the
cervix begins an early stage of remodeling yet maintains structural integrity.
Following uterine quiescence, a transitional phase begins during which
myometrial unresponsiveness is suspended and the cervix undergoes
ripening, effacement, and loss of structural cohesion.

The physiological processes that regulate parturition and the onset of
labor continue to be defined. Three theories describe labor initiation.
Viewed simplistically, the first is the functional loss of pregnancy
maintenance factors. The second focuses on synthesis of factors that
induce parturition. The third suggests that the mature fetus is the source of
the initial signal for parturition commencement. Research supports a model
that draws from all three themes. Thus, labor onset represents the culmination
of a series of biochemical changes in the uterus and cervix. These result from
endocrine and paracrine signals emanating from both mother and fetus. Their
relative contributions vary between species, and it is these differences that
complicate elucidation of the exact factors that regulate human parturition.
When parturition is abnormal, preterm labor, dystocia, or postterm pregnancy
may result.

MATERNAL AND FETAL COMPARTMENTS
■ Uterus and Cervix
The myometrial layer of the uterus is composed of bundles of smooth muscle
cells surrounded by connective tissue. In contrast to skeletal or cardiac
muscle, the smooth muscle cell is not terminally differentiated and therefore
is readily adaptable to environmental changes. Varied stimuli such as
mechanical stretch, inflammation, and endocrine and paracrine signals
modulate the transition of the smooth muscle cell into phenotypes that
provide cell growth, proliferation, secretion, and contractility.
Additionally, several smooth muscle qualities confer advantages for
uterine contraction efficiency and fetal delivery. First, the degree of smooth
muscle cell shortening with contractions may be one order of magnitude
greater than that attained in striated muscle cells. Second, forces can be
exerted in smooth muscle cells in multiple directions. This differs from the
contraction force generated by skeletal muscle, which is always aligned with
the axis of the muscle fibers. Third, the thick and thin filaments of smooth
muscle are found in long, random bundles throughout the cells. This
plexiform arrangement aids augmented shortening and force-generating
capacity. Last, greater multidirectional force generation in the uterine fundus
compared with that of the lower uterine segment helps optimize expulsive
force vectors.

Lining the thick muscular uterine walls, the endometrium is transformed
by pregnancy hormones and is then termed decidua. Composed of stromal
cells and maternal immune cells, the decidua serves to maintain the
pregnancy via unique immunoregulatory functions that suppress inflammatory
signals during gestation. However, at the end of pregnancy, the decidua
transitions to induce inflammatory signals and withdraw active
immunosuppression, contributing to parturition initiation.
During pregnancy, the cervix has multiple functions that include: (1)
maintaining the epithelial barrier to protect the reproductive tract from
infection, (2) sustaining cervical competence despite greater gravitational
forces as the fetus grows, and (3) orchestrating extracellular matrix (ECM)
changes that allow progressively greater tissue compliance.
In nonpregnant women, the cervix is closed and firm, and its consistency
is similar to nasal cartilage. By the end of pregnancy, the cervix is easily
distensible, and its consistency is similar to the lips of the oral cavity. The
cervix has a high ratio of fibroblasts to smooth muscle cells, and ECM
contributes significantly to overall tissue mass. Vink and colleagues (2016)
showed that the smooth muscle cells in the cervix have a spatial gradient.
Specifically, smooth muscle cells make up approximately 50 percent of
stromal cells at the internal os but only 10 percent at the external os. Also,
three-dimensional sonography and magnetic resonance imaging show
increases in the cross-sectional area of the cervical canal and changes in
ECM structure from early to late pregnancy (House, 2009; Lang, 2010;
Pizzella, 2020). Concurrent with expansion of the stroma, the cervical
epithelia proliferate and exert a pregnancy-specific immunoprotection.

■ Placenta
In addition to providing the exchange of nutrients and waste between mother
and fetus, the placenta is a key source of steroid hormones, growth factors,
and other mediators that maintain pregnancy and potentially aid the transition
to parturition. The fetal membranes—amnion and chorion—and adjacent
decidua serve as a physiologic, immunologic, and metabolic shield to protect
against untimely parturition initiation.
The amnion provides virtually all of the fetal membranes’ tensile strength
to resist membrane tearing and rupture (Chap. 5, p. 94). This avascular tissue
is highly resistant to penetration by leukocytes, microorganisms, and

neoplastic cells (Fig. 21-1). It also constitutes a selective filter to prevent
fetal particulate-bound lung and skin secretions from reaching the maternal
compartment. In this manner, maternal tissues are protected from amnionic
fluid constituents that could prematurely accelerate decidual or myometrial
activation or could promote adverse events such as amnionic fluid embolism.

FIGURE 21-1 The amnion synthesizes prostaglandins, and late in pregnancy, synthesis is augmented
by increased phospholipase A2 and prostaglandin H synthase, type 2 (PGHS-2) activity. The transport
of prostaglandins from the amnion to maternal tissues is limited by expression of the inactivating
enzyme, prostaglandin dehydrogenase (PGDH), in the chorion. During labor, PGDH levels decline, and
amnion-derived prostaglandins can influence membrane rupture and uterine contractility. The role of
decidual activation in parturition is unclear but may involve local progesterone metabolism and higher
prostaglandin receptor concentrations, thus enhancing uterine prostaglandin actions and cytokine
production. (Redrawn from Smith R: Parturition. N Engl J Med. 2007 Jan 18;356(3):271–283.)

The chorion is a primarily protective tissue layer and provides
immunological acceptance. It is also enriched with enzymes that inactivate
uterotonins, which are agents that stimulate contractions. Inactivating
enzymes include prostaglandin dehydrogenase, oxytocinase, and
enkephalinase (Cheung, 1990; Germain, 1994; Mizutani, 2011).

SEX STEROID HORMONE ROLE
In many species, the role of sex steroid hormones is clear— estrogen
promotes and progesterone inhibits the events leading to parturition. The
removal of progesterone, that is, progesterone withdrawal, directly precedes
progression of parturition. In addition, providing progesterone to some
species will delay parturition via a decline in myometrial activity and
continued cervical competency (Challis, 1994). In humans, however, both
estrogen and progesterone are components of a broader molecular system
that maintains uterine quiescence.

Plasma levels of estrogen and progesterone in normal pregnancy are
enormous and in great excess of the affinity constants for their receptors. For
this reason, it is difficult to comprehend how relatively subtle changes in the
ratio of their concentrations could modulate physiological processes during
pregnancy. The evidence, however, for an increased progesterone-toestrogen ratio in the maintenance of pregnancy and a decline in this ratio for
parturition is overwhelming. In all species studied, including humans,
administration of the progesterone-receptor antagonists mifepristone (RU486) or onapristone will promote some or all key features of parturition.
These include cervical ripening, greater cervical distensibility, and
augmented uterine sensitivity to uterotonins (Bygdeman, 1994; Chwalisz,
1994b; Wolf, 1993). The exact role of estrogen in regulation of human uterine
quiescence and cervical competency is less well understood. That said,
estrogen can advance progesterone responsiveness and, at the end of
pregnancy, aid in processes that mediate uterine activation and cervical
ripening.
Both progesterone and estrogen bind to nuclear receptors that regulate
gene transcription. Two nuclear receptors for estrogen are estrogen receptor
α (ERα) and estrogen receptor β (ERβ). Nuclear receptor isoforms of the
progesterone receptor (PR-A and PR-B) are encoded by differing transcripts
from a single gene (Patel, 2015).

PROSTAGLANDINS ROLE
Prostaglandins are lipid molecules with varied hormone-like actions. In
parturition, they play a prominent role in myometrial contractility, relaxation,
and inflammation. Prostaglandins interact with a family of eight different G
protein–coupled receptors (p. 403), several of which are expressed in the
myometrium and the cervix (Konopka, 2015; Myatt, 2004).
The major synthetic pathway involved in prostaglandin biosynthesis is
shown in Figure 21-2. Prostaglandins are produced using plasma membrane–
derived arachidonic acid, which usually is released by the action of
phospholipase A2 or C. The enzymes type 1 and 2 prostaglandin H synthase
(PGHS-1 and -2), also known as cyclooxygenase 1 and 2 (COX-1 and -2),
convert arachidonic acid to prostaglandin H2 (PGH2). These enzymes are the
target of many nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). The tocolytic

actions of specific COX inhibitors, as discussed in Chapter 45 (p. 806),
were considered promising until they were shown to have adverse fetal
effects (Loudon, 2003; Olson, 2007).

FIGURE 21-2 Overview of the prostaglandin biosynthetic pathway. PG = prostaglandin; PGDH =
prostaglandin dehydrogenase; PGE2 = prostaglandin E2; PGF2α = prostaglandin F2α; PGH2 =
prostaglandin H2; PGHS = prostaglandin H synthase; PGI2 = prostaglandin I2; PLA2 = phospholipase
A2; PLC = phospholipase C.

Through prostaglandin isomerases, PGH2 is converted to active
prostaglandins. These include prostaglandins E2 (PGE2), F2α (PGF2α), and I2
(PGI2). Isomerase expression is tissue-specific and thereby controls the
relative production of various prostaglandins. Another important control
point for prostaglandin activity is its metabolism, which most often is through
the action of 15-hydroxyprostaglandin dehydrogenase (PGDH). Expression
of this enzyme is upregulated during pregnancy in the uterus and cervix,
which provides the important ability to rapidly inactivate prostaglandins
(Giannoulias, 2002; Kishore, 2017). Thus, myometrial responses to
prostaglandins stem from a balance between prostaglandin synthesis versus
metabolism, from the relative expression of various prostaglandin receptors,
or from a switch in receptor-signaling pathways (Kandola, 2014; Lyall,
2002; Olson, 2007; Smith, 2001). It is possible that prostanoids contribute to
myometrial relaxation at one stage of pregnancy and to myometrial
contractions after parturition initiation (Myatt, 2004).

In addition to the myometrium, the amnion synthesizes several bioactive
peptides and prostaglandins that cause myometrial relaxation or contraction
(see Fig. 21-1). Late in pregnancy, amnionic prostaglandin biosynthesis of
PGE2 and PGF2α is increased, and phospholipase A2 and PGHS-2 show
greater activity (Peiris, 2020). The amnion is likely the major source for
amnionic fluid prostaglandins, and their role in the activation of cascades
that promote membrane rupture is clear. However, the influence of amnionderived prostaglandins on uterine quiescence and activation is less clear
because their access to maternal tissues is limited by expression of PGDH.

PHASE 1: UTERINE QUIESCENCE AND CERVICAL
SOFTENING
Parturition can be arbitrarily divided into four overlapping phases that
correspond to the major physiological transitions of the myometrium and
cervix during pregnancy (Fig. 21-3) (Casey, 1997; Shynlova, 2020; Vink,
2018). These include: (1) the prelude, (2) the preparation, (3) the process
itself, and (4) the recovery. Importantly, the phases of parturition should not
be confused with the clinical stages of labor. The first, second, and third
stages of labor make up phase 3 of parturition (Fig. 21-4).

FIGURE 21-3 The phases of parturition.

FIGURE 21-4 Labor course divided on the basis of expected evolution of the dilatation and descent
curves into three functional divisions. The preparatory division includes the latent and active phases. The
dilatational division is the phase of maximum slope of dilatation. The pelvic division encompasses both
the deceleration phase and the second stage, which is concurrent with the phase of maximum slope of
fetal descent. (Redrawn from Friedman EA: Labor: Clinical Evaluation and Management, 2nd ed. New
York, Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1978.)

Beginning even before implantation, a remarkably effective period of
myometrial quiescence is imposed. This phase 1 normally constitutes 95
percent of pregnancy and is characterized by uterine smooth muscle
tranquility with maintenance of cervical structural integrity (Fig. 21-5). All
manner of molecular systems—neural, endocrine, paracrine, and autocrine—

are likely called to implement and coordinate a state of relative uterine
unresponsiveness. Moreover, a complementary “fail-safe” system that
protects the uterus against agents that could perturb the tranquility of phase 1
also must be in place.

FIGURE 21-5 The key factors thought to regulate the phases of human parturition. CRH =
corticotropin-releasing hormone; hCG = human chorionic gonadotropin; PAF = platelet-activating factor;
PGDH = prostaglandin dehydrogenase; SPA = surfactant protein A.

During phase 1, the uterus must initiate extensive changes in its size and
vascularity to accommodate fetal growth. Concurrently, myometrial cells
undergo a phenotypic modification to a noncontractile state, and uterine
muscle is rendered unresponsive to natural stimuli. Although this
unresponsiveness continues until near the end of pregnancy, some lowintensity myometrial contractions are felt during the quiescent phase. These
contractions do not normally cause cervical dilation, and they are common
toward the end of pregnancy, especially in multiparas. They are referred to
as Braxton Hicks contractions or false labor (Chap. 4, p. 52).

The quiescence of phase 1 likely stems from: (1) actions of estrogen and
progesterone via intracellular receptors, (2) myometrial-cell plasma
membrane receptor–mediated increases in cyclic adenosine monophosphate
(cAMP), (3) generation of cyclic guanosine monophosphate, and (4) other
systems, including modification of myometrial-cell ion channels.

■ Myometrial Relaxation and Contraction
The balance between myometrial relaxation and contraction is controlled by
steroid- and peptide-hormone transcriptional regulation of key genes and
their protein products (Wray, 2019). Quiescence is achieved in part by: (1)
diminished intracellular crosstalk and reduced intracellular Ca2+ ([Ca2+]i)
levels, (2) ion-channel regulation of cell membrane potential, (3) activation
of the stress–unfolded protein response by the uterine endoplasmic reticulum,
and (4) uterotonin degradation. In contrast, contractility results from: (1)
enhanced interactions between the actin and myosin proteins, (2) heightened
excitability of individual myometrial cells, and (3) promotion of intracellular
crosstalk that allows synchronous contractions to develop.

Actin–Myosin Interactions
Actin and myosin proteins are essential to muscle contraction. For this, actin
must be converted from a globular to a filamentous form. Indeed, a potential
mechanism for maintenance of relaxation is the promotion of actin into a
globular form rather than into fibrils, which are required for contraction.
Moreover, actin must be attached to the cytoskeleton at focal points in the
cell membrane to allow tension to develop.
Actin must partner with myosin, which is composed of multiple light and
heavy chains (Fig. 21-6). This interaction is brought about by enzymatic
phosphorylation of the 20-kDa light chain of myosin (Stull, 1998). This is
catalyzed by the enzyme myosin light-chain kinase, which is activated by
calcium (Ca2+).

FIGURE 21-6 Uterine myocyte relaxation and contraction. A. Uterine relaxation is maintained by
factors that increase myocyte cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) levels. This activates protein
kinase A (PKA) to promote phosphodiesterase activity with dephosphorylation of myosin light-chain
kinase (MLCK). Other processes serve to maintain actin in a globular form and thus to prevent the fibril
formation necessary for contractions. B. Uterine contractions result from reversal of these sequences.
Actin now assumes a fibrillar form, and calcium enters the cell to combine with calmodulin to form
complexes. These complexes activate MLCK to bring about phosphorylation of the myosin light chains.
This generates ATPase activity to cause sliding of myosin over the actin fibrils, which is a uterine
contraction. AC = adenylyl cyclase; Ca2+ = calcium; DAG = diacylglycerol; Gs and Gα = G-receptor
proteins; IP 3 = inositol triphosphate; LC20 = light chain 20; PIP 3 = phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5–
triphosphate; PLC = phospholipase C; R-PKA = inactive protein kinase. (Redrawn from Smith R:
Parturition. N Engl J Med. 2007 Jan 18;356(3):271–283.)

Thus, logically, uterine relaxation ordinarily is promoted by conditions
that lower concentrations of (Ca2+)i. In contrast, agents that prompt
contraction act on myometrial cells to augment (Ca2+)i levels. Or, they allow
an influx of extracellular calcium through ligand- or voltage-regulated
calcium channels (see Fig. 21-6). For example, PGF2α and oxytocin bind
their respective receptors during labor to open ligand-activated calcium
channels. Activation of these receptors also releases calcium from the
sarcoplasmic reticulum. Additionally, greater localization of nonselective

cation channels on the cell membrane promotes Ca2+ entry (Ying, 2015). The
rise in (Ca2+)i levels is often transient. But, contractions can be prolonged by
inhibition of myosin phosphatase, an enzyme that dephosphorylates myosin
(Woodcock, 2004).

Regulation of Membrane Potentials
As just noted, myocyte excitability is regulated in part by changes in the
electrochemical potential gradient across the plasma membrane. Before
labor, myocytes maintain a relatively high interior electronegativity.
Maintenance of a hyperpolarized membrane potential attenuates smooth
muscle cell excitation and is regulated by ion channels.
Numerous ion channels control sodium (Na+) and calcium (Ca2+) influx
and potassium (K+) efflux to collectively regulate membrane potential.
Sodium leak channels (NALCN) are important to normal uterine function
(Reinl, 2018). Another key regulator is the large-conductance voltage- and
Ca2+-activated K+ channel (BKCa) (Pérez, 1993). The BKCa channel is
abundantly expressed in the myometrium and plays dual promoting and
opposing roles to maintain a balance between uterine quiescence and
contractility. Opening the BKCa channel allows potassium to leave the cell to
maintain interior electronegativity, thus preventing voltage-gated Ca2+ influx
and contraction. Inhibition of the BKCa channel augments myometrial
contractility. Regulation of uterine contractility from early to late gestation
may result from temporal changes in expression of the BKCa channel and/or
BKCa interacting partners (Wakle-Prabagaran, 2016).

Myometrial Gap Junctions
Cellular signals that control myometrial contraction and relaxation can be
effectively transferred between cells through intercellular junctional
channels. Communication is established between myocytes by gap junctions,
which aid the passage of electrical or ionic coupling currents as well as
metabolite coupling. The connexin family of proteins form cell-type specific
gap junctions (Solan, 2018). Connexin-43 is expressed in the myometrium,
and concentrations rise near labor onset. Six connexin subunits form a
connexon, and two adjacent connexons establish a conduit between

communicating cells. This permits exchange of small molecules that can be
nutrients, waste, metabolites, second messengers, or ions. Optimal numbers
and types of gap junctions are believed to be important for electrical
myometrial synchrony.
Progesterone promotes uterine quiescence in part by lowering expression
of contraction-associated proteins (CAPs) and maintaining expression of
anticontractile agents such as caspase 3 (Ingles, 2018; Kyathanahalli, 2015).
CAPs include the oxytocin receptor, prostaglandin F receptor, and connexin43. Also, at the end of pregnancy, increased stretch, metabolism of
progesterone by the enzyme 20α-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (20α-HSD),
loss of progesterone-mediated repression of CAP genes, and greater estrogen
dominance raise CAP levels. Integration of diverse regulatory pathways
culminates in released inhibition of connexin-43 and oxytocin receptor levels
to promote greater uterine contractility (Anamthathmakula, 2019; Mendelson,
2019; Peavey, 2021).

G Protein–Coupled Receptors
In addition to ion-channel linked receptors, G protein–coupled receptors
regulate myocyte contractility. These receptors together with appropriate
ligands may act with sex steroid hormones to maintain uterine quiescence
(Price, 2000; Sanborn, 1998). Examples are the luteinizing hormone (LH)
receptor and corticotropin-releasing hormone receptor 1 (CRHR1), both
described in this section (Fig. 21-7). Other G protein–coupled myometrial
receptors, instead, are associated with uterine contractility. G protein–
mediated activation of phospholipase C, which releases arachidonic acid, is
one example. Ligands for the G protein–coupled receptors include numerous
neuropeptides, hormones, and autacoids. Many of these are available to the
myometrium during pregnancy in high concentration via endocrine or
autocrine mechanisms.

FIGURE 21-7 G protein–coupled receptor signal transduction pathways. A. Receptors coupled to
heterotrimeric guanosine-triphosphate (GTP)-binding proteins (G proteins) are integral transmembrane
proteins that transduce extracellular signals to the cell interior. G protein–coupled receptors exhibit a
common structural motif consisting of seven membrane-spanning regions. B. Receptor occupation
promotes interaction between the receptor and the G protein on the interior surface of the membrane.
An exchange of guanosine diphosphate (GDP) for GTP on the G protein α subunit and dissociation of
the α subunit from the βγ heterodimer occurs. Depending on its isoform, the GTP-α subunit complex
mediates intracellular signaling either indirectly by acting on effector molecules such as adenylyl cyclase
(AC) or phospholipase C (PLC), or directly by regulating ion channel or kinase function. cAMP = cyclic
adenosine monophosphate; DAG = diacylglycerol; IP 3 = inositol triphosphate.

LH and human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) hormones share the same
LH-hCG receptor. This G protein–coupled receptor is found in myometrial
smooth muscle and blood vessels, and levels during pregnancy are greater
before labor (Ziecik, 1992). hCG acts to activate adenylyl cyclase by way of
a plasma membrane receptor Gαs-linked system. This lessens contraction
frequency and force and lowers the number of tissue-specific myometrial cell
gap junctions (Ambrus, 1994; Eta, 1994). Thus, high circulating levels of
hCG may be one mechanism of uterine quiescence. β-Adrenergic receptors
mediate Gαs-stimulated myometrial cell relaxation. Agents binding to these
receptors have been used for tocolysis of preterm labor and include ritodrine
and terbutaline (Chap. 45, p. 805). The rate-limiting factor is likely the
number of receptors expressed and the level of adenylyl cyclase expression.
Prostaglandin E2 mediates its diverse cellular effects through four G
protein–coupled receptors. Specifically, prostaglandin E receptors 1 through
4 (EP1-EP4) are expressed in the myometrium during pregnancy and with

labor onset (Astle, 2005; Leonhardt, 2003). EP2 and EP4 act through Gαs to
maintain myometrial cell quiescence but switch to a Gαq/11 calciumactivating pathway during labor (Kandola, 2014). EP1 and EP3 receptors act
through Gαq and Gαi to augment intracellular Ca2+ and contractility.
The peptide hormone relaxin binds to the G protein–coupled receptor
named relaxin family peptide receptor 1 (RXFP1). Binding activates
adenylyl cyclase, which in turn prevents increased intracellular Ca2+, and
thus promotes uterine quiescence (Downing, 1993; Meera, 1995). The H1
relaxin gene is primarily expressed in the decidua, trophoblast, and prostate,
whereas the H2 gene is primarily expressed in the corpus luteum. Relaxin
plasma levels peak at approximately 1 ng/mL between 8 and 12 weeks’
gestation. Thereafter, they decline until term.
Corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) is synthesized in the placenta
and hypothalamus. Discussed on page 408, CRH plasma levels rise
dramatically during the final 6 to 8 weeks of normal pregnancy and are
implicated in mechanisms that control the timing of human parturition (Smith,
2007; Wadhwa, 1998; Wang, 2019). CRH appears to promote myometrial
quiescence during most of pregnancy but then aids contractions with
parturition onset. Studies suggest that these opposing actions are achieved by
differential actions of CRH via its receptor CRHR1. In nonlaboring
myometrium at term, the interaction of CRH with CRHR1 activates the Gsadenylate cyclase-cAMP signaling pathway. This results in inhibition of
inositol triphosphate (IP3) and stabilization of (Ca2+)i levels (You, 2012).
However, in term laboring myometrium, (Ca2+)i concentrations are
augmented by CRH activation of G proteins Gq and Gi and prompts
stimulation of IP3 production and greater contractility.

Cyclic Guanosine Monophosphate
As noted, cAMP is an important mediator of myometrial relaxation.
However, activation of guanylyl cyclase raises intracellular cyclic guanosine
monophosphate (cGMP) levels. This also promotes smooth muscle
relaxation (Word, 1993). Intracellular cGMP levels are increased in the
pregnant myometrium and can be stimulated by atrial natriuretic peptide,
brain natriuretic peptide, and nitric oxide (Guerra, 2019; Telfer, 2001). All
of these factors and their receptors are expressed in the pregnant uterus.

Accelerated Uterotonin Degradation
The activity of enzymes that degrade or inactivate endogenously produced
uterotonins also is strikingly increased in phase 1. Pairs of some degrading
enzymes and their respective targets include PGDH and prostaglandins;
enkephalinase and endothelins; oxytocinase and oxytocin; diamine oxidase
and histamine; catechol O-methyltransferase and catecholamines;
angiotensinases and angiotensin II; and platelet-activating factor (PAF) and
PAF acetylhydrolase. Levels of several of these enzymes decline late in
gestation (Germain, 1994).

■ Decidua
To ensure uterine quiescence, the synthesis in the decidua of prostaglandins,
in particular PGF2α, is markedly suppressed. Suppression of prostaglandin
production here persists throughout most of pregnancy, and suppression
withdrawal is a prerequisite for parturition (Norwitz, 2015).
The mother and fetus come in direct contact at the decidua basalis and
decidua parietalis. At this interface, myeloid and lymphoid immune cells
such as natural killer cells, macrophages, dendritic cells, and T cells undergo
dynamic changes in number and phenotype to achieve a balanced
microenvironment (Ander, 2019; Solano, 2019; van der Zwan, 2020). This is
a critical site for immune tolerance in phase 1 and for decidual activation in
phase 2 of parturition (see Fig. 21-5). In phase 1 of parturition, these cells, in
collaboration with decidual cells, promote an environment of immune
tolerance to protect the fetus. Immune cells with innate and adaptive immune
responses support vascular and tissue remodeling, immune surveillance and
defense, and trophoblast invasion in phase 1 (Fig. 21-8).

FIGURE 21-8 Immune tolerance and activation at the maternal fetal interface. In the antepartum
period, dNK cells are abundant and their maturation is promoted by release of uterine IL-15. These cells
promote decidual remodeling, blastocyst implantation, and EVT invasion. The cytotoxicity of dNK cells
is regulated by the interaction of its KIR receptor with HLA-G on EVTs. Decidual macrophages—
primary antigen-presenting cells—produce the enzyme IDO, which limits T cell activation. Changes in
the intrapartum period are less understood, but the number of dNK cells decline and decidual
macrophages are activated to a proinflammatory phenotype. dNK = decidual natural killer; EVT =
extravillous trophoblasts; HLA = human leukocyte antigen; IL = interleukin; IDO = indoleamine 2,3dioxygenase; KIR = killer-cell immunoglobulin-like receptors.

During phase 2, decidual stromal cells and fetal membranes undergo an
aging process termed cellular senescence. Noninflammatory signals
precipitate senescence, which in turn leads to synthesis of proinflammatory
cytokines, augmented prostaglandin production, and increased protease
expression. These proteins and hormones break down fetal membranes.

■ Cervical Softening
The initial stage of cervical remodeling—termed softening—begins in phase
1 of parturition. It is characterized by greater tissue compliance, yet the
cervix remains firm and unyielding. Hegar (1895) first described palpable
softening of the lower uterine segment at 4 to 6 weeks’ gestation, and this

sign was once used to diagnose pregnancy. Clinically, the maintenance of
cervical anatomical and structural integrity is essential for pregnancy to
continue to term. Preterm cervical dilation, structural insufficiency, or both
may forecast delivery.

■ Cervical Connective Tissue
Cervical softening is an active molecular process that balances tissue
competence against slow, progressive compositional and structural changes
in the extracellular matrix (ECM) to increase compliance (Myers, 2015;
Nallasamy, 2017; Vink, 2018). Constituents of the ECM include type I and III
fibrillar collagens, matricellular proteins, glycosaminoglycans,
proteoglycans, and elastic fibers. Key to matrix changes, collagen, which is
the main structural protein in the cervix, undergoes conformational changes
that alter tissue stiffness and flexibility (Zhang, 2012). Specifically, collagen
processing and the number or type of stable covalent cross-links between
collagen’s triple helices are altered. Beginning in early pregnancy, mature
cross-links between newly synthesized collagen monomers are reduced due
to diminished expression and activity of the cross-link-forming enzymes
(Akins, 2011; Yoshida, 2014). These enzymes are lysyl hydroxylase and lysyl
oxidase. Gradual turnover of collagen during pregnancy replaces mature
cross-linked collagen fibrils with poorly linked fibrils. The result is a
collagen with reduced stiffness. The collagen-binding proteoglycans—
decorin and biglycan—ensure the new, poorly cross-linked collagen is
appropriately assembled and deposited in the ECM. Data from human and
mouse studies support the theory that a balance in the synthesis and
breakdown of collagen, rather than loss of collagen, achieves cervical
remodeling (Fig. 21-9) (Akins, 2011; Myers, 2008; Read, 2007; Yoshida,
2014).

FIGURE 21-9 Mouse studies identify molecular changes in collagen structure and function during
cervical remodeling. These changes are regulated by steroid hormones and result in a gradual loss of
tissue stiffness. During the softening phase, the decline in lysyl oxidase activity in conjunction with high
collagen turnover results in the replacement of strong cross-linked collagen fibers with weakly crosslinked collagen fibers. Second harmonic generation images in the mouse and human cervix show the
corresponding gradual decline in mechanical function of the cervix. (Compiled from Akins, 2010, 2011;
Ozasa, 1981; Read, 2007; Yoshida, 2014; Zhang, 2012.)

Clinical evidence for the importance of matrix changes to cervical
softening is supported by in vivo mechanical evaluation of the cervix (Badir,
2013; Parra-Saavedra, 2011). The prevalence of cervical insufficiency is
also higher in those with inherited defects in the synthesis or assembly of
collagen or elastic fibers (Anum, 2009; Hermanns-Le, 2005; Volozonoka,
2020). Examples are Ehlers-Danlos and Marfan syndromes, discussed in
Chapter 62 (p. 1121). Concurrent with matrix remodeling in the softening
period, genes involved in cervical dilation and parturition are actively
repressed (Kishore, 2012).

PHASE 2: PREPARATION FOR LABOR

To prepare for labor, the myometrial tranquility of phase 1 of parturition must
be suspended. This so-called uterine awakening or activation in phase 2 of
parturition is a progression of uterine changes during the last few weeks of
pregnancy. Importantly, shifting events associated with phase 2 can cause
either preterm or delayed labor.

■ Progesterone Withdrawal
Key factors in uterine activation are depicted in Figure 21-5. In species that
exhibit progesterone withdrawal, parturition progression to labor can be
blocked by administering progesterone to the mother. Whether progesterone
administration in the absence of classic progesterone withdrawal can delay
the timely onset of parturition or prevent preterm labor remains unclear. The
possibility that progesterone may prevent preterm labor has been studied, but
its use in preventing preterm birth continues to be debated (Chap. 45, p.
795).
Classic progesterone withdrawal from decreased secretion does not
occur in human parturition. However, a mechanism for progesterone
inactivation, whereby the myometrium and cervix become refractory to
progesterone’s inhibitory actions, is supported by studies using progesteronereceptor antagonists. Mifepristone is a classic steroid antagonist, acting at
the level of the progesterone receptor. Although less effective in inducing
abortion or labor later in pregnancy, mifepristone appears to have some
effect on cervical ripening and on increasing myometrial sensitivity to
uterotonins (Berkane, 2005; Chwalisz, 1994a).
The diverse mechanisms by which functional progesterone withdrawal or
antagonism is achieved is an active area of research. These include: (1)
changes in the relative expression of the nuclear progesterone-receptor (PR)
isoforms, (2) differential interaction of PR isoforms A and B with enhancers
and inhibitors of gene expression, (3) altered PR activity through changes in
the expression of coactivators or corepressors of receptor function, (4) local
progesterone inactivation by steroid-metabolizing enzymes or synthesis of a
natural antagonist, and (5) microRNA regulation of progesteronemetabolizing enzymes and transcription factors that modulate uterine
quiescence (Chen, 2017; Condon, 2003; Mahendroo, 1999; Mesiano, 2002;
Nadeem, 2016; Peavey, 2021; Renthal, 2010; Williams, 2012). Thus,
multiple pathways exist to create functional progesterone withdrawal.

■ Myometrial Changes
Phase 2 changes in the myometrium prepare it for labor contractions.
Changes result from a shift in the expression of proteins that control uterine
quiescence to an expression of CAPs, described earlier (p. 403)
(Mendelson, 2019; Renthal, 2015; Stanfield, 2019). These CAPs increase
uterine responsiveness to uterotonins.
Another critical change in phase 2 is formation of the lower uterine
segment from the isthmus. With this development, the fetal head often
descends to or even through the pelvic inlet—lightening. The abdomen
commonly undergoes a shape change, sometimes described by women as “the
baby dropped.” It is also likely that the lower segment myometrium is unique
from that in the upper uterine segment, and leads to distinct roles for each
near term and during labor. This is supported by human studies that
demonstrate differential expression of prostaglandin receptors and CAPs
within the upper- and lower-segment myometrial regions (Astle, 2005;
Blanks, 2003; Sparey, 1999). Near term, elevated expression of the HoxA13
gene in the lower myometrial segment compared with the upper segment also
induces CAP expression and regionalized contractility of the lower segment
(Li, 2016).

Oxytocin Receptors
Because of its long-standing application for labor induction, it seemed
logical that oxytocin must play a central role in spontaneous human labor.
Myometrial oxytocin receptor levels do rise during phase 2 of parturition,
and the level of oxytocin receptor mRNA in human myometrium at term is
greater than that found in preterm myometrium (Wathes, 1999). However, it is
unclear whether oxytocin plays a role in the early phases of uterine activation
or whether its sole function is in the expulsive phase of labor. Most studies
of regulation of myometrial oxytocin receptor synthesis have been performed
in rodents. Disruption of the oxytocin receptor gene in the mouse does not
affect parturition. This suggests that, at least in this species, multiple systems
likely ensure that parturition occurs.
Progesterone inhibits and estradiol induces oxytocin receptor expression.
Through interaction with PR-B, progesterone regulates numerous genes in the
oxytocin signaling pathway (Peavey, 2021). Progesterone may also act within
the myometrial cell to enhance oxytocin receptor degradation (Bogacki,

2002). These data indicate that one of the mechanisms whereby progesterone
maintains uterine quiescence is through inhibition of a myometrial oxytocin
signaling pathway.

■ Cervical Ripening
Before contractions begin, the cervix must shift from a state of competence to
one of compliance. This eventually leads to the cervix yielding and dilating
from forceful uterine contractions. Cervical modifications during phase 2
principally involve connective tissue changes—termed cervical ripening.
The transition from the softening to the ripening phase begins weeks or days
before labor. The understanding of this cervical matrix transformation
remains incomplete. However, it is clear that levels of glycosaminoglycans,
which are large linear polysaccharides, are uniquely increased in phase 2.

Glycosaminoglycans and Proteoglycans
Hyaluronan is a high-molecular-weight polysaccharide that functions alone,
but most other glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) complex with proteins to form
proteoglycans. Hyaluronan is a hydrophilic, space-filling molecule, and thus
greater hyaluronan production during cervical ripening is thought to increase
viscoelasticity, hydration, and matrix disorganization. Hyaluronan synthesis
is carried out by hyaluronan synthase isoenzymes, and expression of these
enzymes is elevated in the cervix during ripening (Akgul, 2012; Straach,
2005).

Inflammatory Changes
In phase 2, resident immune cells are localized to the cervical stroma,
although a functional role for them in this phase has not been demonstrated.
For example, studies of gene expression patterns at term both before and
after cervical ripening show little rise in proinflammatory gene expression.
However, once labor is underway, activation of neutrophils, proinflammatory
M1 macrophages, and tissue repair M2 macrophages in the cervix is
augmented. Moreover, proinflammatory and immunosuppressive gene
expression in the cervix increases markedly after delivery (Bollapragada,
2009; Hassan, 2006, 2009). This suggests a role for inflammatory cells in
postpartum cervical remodeling and repair (Mahendroo, 2012).

Induction of Cervical Ripening
No therapies prevent premature cervical ripening. In contrast, treatment to
promote cervical ripening for labor induction includes direct application of
PGE2 and PGF2α (Chap. 26, p. 489). Prostaglandins likely modify ECM
structure to aid ripening, although their role in the normal physiology of
cervical ripening remains unclear.
In some nonhuman species, events that allow cervical ripening are
induced by dropping serum progesterone concentrations. And in humans,
administration of progesterone antagonists causes cervical ripening.

Endocervical Epithelia
In addition to matrix changes during pregnancy, endocervical epithelial cells
proliferate such that endocervical glands account for a significant percentage
of cervical mass. The endocervical canal is lined with mucus-secreting
columnar and stratified squamous epithelia. These cells form both a mucosal
barrier and a tight junctional barrier that protect against microbial invasion
(Akgul, 2014; Blaskewicz, 2011; Timmons, 2007). The mucosal epithelium
recognizes and deters pathogen invasion via expression of toll-like receptors
that identify pathogens and via antimicrobial peptides and protease
inhibitors. These epithelia also express signals to underlying immune cells
when a pathogenic challenge exceeds their protective capacity (Wira, 2005).

■ Fetal Contributions to Parturition
It is intriguing to envision that the mature human fetus provides the signal to
initiate parturition, and evidence for fetal signaling is mounting (Mendelson,
2017). The fetus may give signals through blood-borne agents that act on the
placenta or through secretion into the amnionic fluid.

Uterine Stretch
Fetal growth is an important component of uterine activation in phase 2 of
parturition. With uterine activation, stretch is required for induction of
specific CAPs. Namely, stretch increases expression of connexin-43 and
oxytocin receptors. Levels of gastrin-releasing peptide, a stimulatory agonist
for smooth muscle, also are augmented by stretch in the myometrium
(Tattersall, 2012).

Clinical clues for a role of stretch come from the observation that
multifetal pregnancies carry a much greater risk for preterm labor than
singleton ones. Preterm labor is also more common in pregnancies
complicated by hydramnios. Although the mechanisms causing preterm birth
in these two are debated, a role for uterine stretch must be considered.
Cell signaling systems are influenced by stretch to regulate the
myometrial cell. This process—mechanotransduction—may include
activation of cell-surface receptors or ion channels, transmission of signals
through ECM, or release of autocrine molecules that act directly on
myometrium (Shynlova, 2007; Young, 2011).

Fetal Endocrine Cascades
The ability of the fetus to provide endocrine signals that initiate parturition
has been demonstrated in several species. However, evidence suggests that it
is not regulated in the same manner in humans. That said, the human fetal
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal-placental axis is considered a critical
component of normal parturition. Moreover, premature activation of this axis
is considered to prompt many cases of preterm labor (Challis, 2000, 2001).
Steroid products of the human fetal adrenal gland are believed to have effects
on the placenta and membranes that eventually transform the myometrium
from a quiescent to a contractile state.
A key component in the human may be the unique ability of the placenta
to produce large amounts of CRH that is identical to maternal and fetal
hypothalamic CRH (Grino, 1987; Saijonmaa, 1988) (Fig. 21-10). However,
unlike hypothalamic CRH, which is under glucocorticoid negative feedback,
cortisol instead stimulates placental CRH production. This ability makes it
possible to create a feed-forward endocrine cascade that does not end until
delivery.

FIGURE 21-10 The placental–fetal adrenal endocrine cascade. In late gestation, placental
corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) stimulates fetal adrenal production of dehydroepiandrosterone
sulfate (DHEA-S) and cortisol. The latter stimulates production of placental CRH, which leads to a
feed-forward cascade that enhances adrenal steroid hormone production. ACTH = adrenocorticotropic
hormone.

Maternal plasma CRH levels are low in the first trimester and rise from
midgestation to term. In the last 12 weeks, CRH plasma levels rise
exponentially, peak during labor, and then fall precipitously after delivery
(Frim, 1988; Sasaki, 1987). Amnionic fluid CRH concentrations similarly
increase in late gestation. CRH is the only trophic hormone-releasing factor
to have a specific serum binding protein. During most of pregnancy, CRHbinding protein (CRH-BP) binds most maternal circulating CRH, and this
inactivates it (Lowry, 1993). During later pregnancy, however, CRH-BP
levels in both maternal plasma and amnionic fluid decline, leading to
markedly greater levels of bioavailable CRH (Perkins, 1995; Petraglia,
1997).
In pregnancies in which the fetus can be considered “stressed” from
various complications, concentrations of CRH in fetal plasma, amnionic
fluid, and maternal plasma are greater than those seen in normal gestation
(Berkowitz, 1996; McGrath, 2002). The placenta is the likely source of this
elevated CRH concentration. For example, placental CRH content is fourfold
higher in placentas from women with preeclampsia than in those from normal
pregnancies (Perkins, 1995).

Placental CRH is thought to play several roles in parturition regulation. It
may enhance fetal cortisol production to provide positive feedback so that
the placenta produces more CRH. Late in pregnancy—phase 2 or 3 of
parturition—modification in the CRH receptor favors a switch from cAMP
formation instead to increased myometrial cell calcium levels via protein
kinase C activation (You, 2012). Oxytocin acts to attenuate CRH-stimulated
accumulation of cAMP in myometrial tissue. CRH acts to augment
myometrial contractile force in response to PGF2α (Benedetto, 1994). Last,
CRH stimulates fetal adrenal C19-steroid synthesis, thereby increasing
substrate for placental aromatization.
Some have proposed that the rising CRH level at the end of gestation
reflects a fetal-placental clock (McLean, 1995). CRH concentrations vary
greatly among women, and the rate of rise in maternal CRH levels is a more
accurate predictor of pregnancy outcome than is a single measurement
(Leung, 2001; McGrath, 2002). In this regard, the placenta and fetus, through
endocrinological events, influence parturition timing at the end of normal
gestation.

Fetal Lung Surfactant and Platelet-activating Factor
Surfactant protein A (SP-A) produced by the fetal lung is required for lung
maturation. SP-A is expressed by the human amnion and decidua, is present
in the amnionic fluid, and prompts signaling pathways in human myometrial
cells (Garcia-Verdugo, 2008; Lee, 2010; Snegovskikh, 2011). The exact
mechanisms by which SP-A activates myometrial contractility in women,
however, remain to be clarified. One mode may be its effects on
prostaglandins. Namely, SP-A selectively inhibits PGF2α in the term decidua,
but SP-A levels drop in the amnionic fluid at term (Chaiworapongsa, 2008).
The fetal lung also makes the uterotonic agent platelet-activating factor
(Frenkel, 1996; Toyoshima, 1995). This factor and SP-A play a role in fetal–
maternal signaling for parturition (Gao, 2015).

Fetal Membrane Senescence
Toward the end of pregnancy, fetal membranes undergo cellular senescence
(Menon, 2016). In human and animal fetal membranes, stretch and oxidative
stress induce senescent fetal membrane to manifest a form of sterile
inflammation termed senescent-associated secretory phenotype (SASP). This

in turn propagates inflammatory signals that further weaken the fetal
membrane and activate signals in the decidua and myometrium to initiate
parturition. Thus, as the functional necessity of fetal membranes declines at
term, they are able to promote signals that contribute to parturition initiation.

Fetal Anomalies and Delayed Parturition
Some evidence shows that pregnancies with markedly diminished estrogen
production may be associated with prolonged gestation. These include
women with inherited placental sulfatase deficiency and fetal anencephaly
with adrenal hypoplasia. The broad range of gestational length seen with
these disorders, however, calls into question the exact role of estrogen in
human parturition initiation.
Some brain anomalies of the fetal calf, fetal lamb, and sometimes the
human fetus delay the normal timing of parturition. In particular, the
association between fetal anencephaly and prolonged gestation is well
described (Rea, 1898; Malpas, 1933). Malpas concluded that the prolonged
gestation was attributable to anomalous fetal brain-pituitary-adrenal function.
Indeed, the adrenal glands of the anencephalic fetus are very small and, at
term, may be only 5 to 10 percent as large as those of a normal fetus. This is
caused by developmental failure of the fetal zone that normally accounts for
most of fetal adrenal mass and production of C19-steroid hormones (Chap. 5,
p. 101). Such pregnancies are associated with delayed labor and suggest that
the fetal adrenal glands are important for the timely onset of parturition.
Other fetal abnormalities that prevent or severely reduce the entry of fetal
urine or lung secretions into amnionic fluid do not prolong human pregnancy.
Examples are renal agenesis and pulmonary hypoplasia, respectively. Thus, a
fetal signal through the paracrine arm of the fetal–maternal communication
system does not appear to be mandated for parturition initiation.

PHASE 3: LABOR
This phase is synonymous with active labor, which is customarily divided
into three stages (see Figure 21-4). The first stage begins when spaced
uterine contractions of sufficient frequency, intensity, and duration are
attained to bring about cervical thinning, termed effacement. Several
uterotonins may be important to the success of this stage of active labor (see

Fig. 21-5). These have been shown to stimulate smooth muscle contraction
through G-protein coupling. This labor stage ends when the cervix is fully
dilated—about 10 cm—to allow passage of the term-sized fetus. The first
stage of labor, therefore, is the stage of cervical effacement and dilation.
The second stage begins when cervical dilation is complete and ends with
delivery. Thus, the second stage of labor is the stage of fetal expulsion. Last,
the third stage begins immediately after delivery of the fetus and ends with
the delivery of the placenta. This stage of labor is the stage of placental
separation and expulsion.

■ First Stage: Clinical Onset of Labor
Uterine Labor Contractions
In some women, forceful uterine contractions that effect delivery begin
suddenly. In others, labor initiation is heralded by spontaneous release of a
small amount of blood-tinged mucus from the vagina. This extrusion of the
mucus plug that had previously filled the cervical canal during pregnancy is
referred to as “bloody show.” Its passage indicates that labor is already in
progress or likely will ensue in hours to days.
Unique among physiological muscular contractions, those of uterine
smooth muscle during labor are painful. Suggested causes are: (1) hypoxia of
the contracted myometrium—such as that with angina pectoris; (2)
compression of nerve ganglia in the cervix and lower uterus by contracted
interlocking muscle bundles; (3) cervical stretching during dilation; and (4)
stretching of the peritoneum overlying the fundus.
Of these, compression of nerve ganglia in the cervix and lower uterine
segment by the contracting myometrium is an especially attractive hypothesis.
Paracervical infiltration with local anesthetic usually produces appreciable
pain relief with contractions (Chap. 25, p. 472). Uterine contractions are
involuntary and, for the most part, independent of extrauterine control. Neural
blockade from epidural analgesia does not diminish their frequency or
intensity. In other examples, myometrial contractions in paraplegic women
and in women after bilateral lumbar sympathectomy are normal but painless.
Mechanical stretching of the cervix enhances uterine activity in several
species, including humans. This phenomenon is the Ferguson reflex
(Ferguson, 1941). Its exact mechanism is unclear, and release of oxytocin has

been suggested but not proven. Manipulation of the cervix and “stripping” the
fetal membranes are associated with a rise in blood levels of prostaglandin
F2α metabolites.
The interval between contractions narrows gradually from approximately
10 minutes at the onset of first-stage labor to as little as 1 minute or less in
the second stage. Periods of relaxation between contractions, however, are
essential for fetal welfare. Unremitting contractions compromise
uteroplacental blood flow sufficiently to cause fetal hypoxemia. In activephase labor, the duration of each contraction ranges from 30 to 90 seconds
and averages 1 minute. Contraction intensity varies appreciably during
normal labor. Specifically, amnionic fluid pressures generated by
contractions during spontaneous labor average 40 mm Hg, but vary from 20
to 60 mm Hg (Chap. 24, p. 462).

Distinct Lower and Upper Uterine Segments
During active labor, the anatomical uterine divisions that were initiated in
phase 2 of parturition become increasingly evident (Figs. 21-11 and 21-12).
By abdominal palpation, even before membrane rupture, the two segments
can sometimes be differentiated. The upper segment is firm during
contractions, whereas the lower segment is softer, distended, and more
passive. This mechanism is imperative because if the entire myometrium,
including the lower uterine segment and cervix, were to contract
simultaneously and with equal intensity, the net expulsive force would
markedly decline. Thus, the upper segment contracts, retracts, and expels the
fetus. In response to these contractions, the softened lower uterine segment
and cervix dilate and thereby form a greatly expanded, thinned-out tube
through which the fetus can pass.

FIGURE 21-11 Sequence of development of the segments and rings in the uterus at term and in labor.
Note comparison between the nonpregnant uterus, the uterus at term, and the uterus during labor. The
passive lower uterine segment is derived from the isthmus, and the physiological retraction ring develops
at the junction of the upper and lower uterine segments. The pathological retraction ring develops from
the physiological ring. Anat. I.O. = anatomical internal os; E.O. = external os; Hist. I.O. = histological
internal os; Ph.R.R. = physiological retraction ring.

FIGURE 21-12 The uterus at the time of vaginal delivery. The active upper segment retracts around
the presenting part as the fetus descends through the birth canal. In the passive lower segment, there is
considerably less myometrial tone.

The myometrium of the upper segment does not relax to its original length
after contractions. Instead, it becomes relatively fixed at a shorter length. The
upper active uterine segment contracts down on its diminishing contents, but
myometrial tension remains constant. The net effect is to take up slack, thus
maintaining the advantage gained in expulsion of the fetus. Concurrently, the
uterine musculature is kept in firm contact with the uterine contents. As the
consequence of retraction, each successive contraction commences where its

predecessor left off. Thus, the upper part of the uterine cavity becomes
slightly smaller with each successive contraction. Because of the successive
shortening of the muscular fibers, the upper active segment becomes
progressively thickened throughout first- and second-stage labor (see Fig.
21-11). This process continues and results in a tremendously thickened upper
uterine segment immediately after delivery.
Clinically, it is important to understand that the phenomenon of upper
segment retraction is contingent on a decrease in the volume of its contents.
For this to happen, particularly early in labor when the entire uterus is
virtually a closed sac with only minimal cervical dilation, the musculature of
the lower segment must stretch. This permits a greater portion of the uterine
contents to occupy the lower segment. The upper segment retracts only to the
extent that the lower segment distends and the cervix dilates.
Relaxation of the lower uterine segment mirrors the same gradual
progression of retraction. In the lower segment, successive lengthening of the
fibers with labor is accompanied by thinning, normally to only a few
millimeters in the thinnest part. With lower segment thinning and concomitant
upper segment thickening, a boundary between the two is marked by a ridge
on the inner uterine surface—the physiological retraction ring. When the
thinning of the lower uterine segment is extreme, as in obstructed labor, the
ring is prominent and forms a pathological retraction ring. This abnormal
condition is also known as the Bandl ring, which is discussed further in
Chapter 23 (p. 442).

Changes in Uterine Shape
Each contraction gradually elongates the ovoid uterine shape an estimated 5
to 10 cm and thereby narrows the horizontal diameter. This fetal axis
pressure straightens the fetal vertebral column. It also presses the upper pole
of the fetus firmly against the fundus, whereas the lower pole is thrust farther
downward. With uterine lengthening, the longitudinal muscle fibers are
drawn taut. As a result, the lower segment and cervix are the only parts of the
uterus that are flexible, and these are pulled upward and around the lower
pole of the fetus.

Ancillary Forces

After the cervix is dilated fully, the most important force in fetal expulsion is
produced by maternal intraabdominal pressure. Contraction of the abdominal
muscles simultaneously with forced respiratory efforts with the glottis closed
is referred to as pushing. The force is similar to that with defecation, but the
intensity usually is much greater. The importance of intraabdominal pressure
is shown by the prolonged descent during labor in paraplegic women and in
those with a dense epidural block.

Cervical Changes
As the result of contraction forces, two fundamental changes—effacement
and dilation—occur in the ripened cervix. For an average-sized fetal head to
pass through the cervix, it must completely or fully dilate to a diameter of
approximately 10 cm. The fetus may not descend during cervical effacement.
However, as the cervix dilates, the presenting fetal part typically does
descend somewhat.
Cervical effacement is “obliteration” or “taking up” of the cervix. It is
manifest clinically by shortening of the cervical canal from a length of
approximately 3 cm to a mere circular orifice with almost paper-thin edges.
The muscular fibers at the level of the internal cervical os are pulled
upward, or “taken up,” into the lower uterine segment. The condition of the
external os remains temporarily unchanged (Fig. 21-13). Because of growing
myometrial activity during uterine preparedness for labor, appreciable
effacement of a softened cervix sometimes is accomplished before active
labor begins. Effacement causes expulsion of the mucous plug as the cervical
canal is shortened.

FIGURE 21-13 Schematic showing effacement and dilation. A. Before labor, the primigravid cervix is
long and undilated in contrast to that of the multipara, which has dilation of the internal and external os.
B. As effacement begins, the multiparous cervix shows more dilation and funneling of the internal os
compared with the primigravid cervix. C. As complete effacement is achieved in the primigravid cervix,
dilation is minimal. The reverse is true in the multipara.

Because the lower segment and cervix have less resistance during a
contraction, a centrifugal pull is exerted on the cervix and creates cervical
dilation (Fig. 21-14). As uterine contractions cause pressure on the
membranes, the hydrostatic action of the amnionic sac in turn dilates the
cervical canal like a wedge. The process of cervical effacement and dilation
causes formation of the forebag of amnionic fluid. This is the leading portion
of fluid and amnionic sac located in front of the presenting part. In the

absence of intact membranes, the pressure of the presenting fetal part against
the cervix and lower uterine segment is a similar wedge. Early rupture of the
membranes does not retard cervical dilation so long as the presenting fetal
part is positioned to exert pressure against the cervix and lower segment.

FIGURE 21-14 Hydrostatic action of membranes in effecting cervical effacement and dilation. With
labor progression, note the changing relations of the internal and external os in (A), (B), and (C).
Although not shown in this diagram, with membrane rupture, the presenting part, applied to the cervix
and the forming lower uterine segment, acts similarly.

Referring back to Figure 21-4, recall that cervical dilation is divided into
latent and active phases. The duration of the latent phase is more variable
and sensitive to extraneous factors. For example, sedation may prolong the
latent phase, and myometrial stimulation shortens it. The latent phase
duration has little bearing on the subsequent course of labor, whereas the
characteristics of the active phase are usually predictive of labor outcome.
Normal and abnormal labor curves are fully described in Chapters 22 and
23.

■ Second Stage: Fetal Descent
In many nulliparas, engagement of the head is accomplished before labor
begins. That said, the head may not descend further until late in labor. In the
descent pattern of normal labor, a typical hyperbolic curve is formed when
the station of the fetal head is plotted as a function of labor duration (see Fig.
21-4). Station describes descent of the fetal biparietal diameter in relation to
a line drawn between maternal ischial spines (Chap. 22, p. 427). Active
descent usually takes place after dilation has progressed for some time.
During second-stage labor, the speed of descent is maximal and is maintained
until the presenting part reaches the perineal floor (Friedman, 1978). In
nulliparas, the presenting part typically descends slowly and steadily. In
multiparas, however, descent may be rapid.

■ Pelvic Floor Changes
The birth canal is supported and functionally closed by the pelvic floor
(Chap. 2, p. 19). The most important component of the floor is the levator ani
muscle and the fibromuscular connective tissue that covers its upper and
lower surfaces. The biomechanical properties of these structures and of the
vaginal wall change markedly during parturition. These result from altered
ECM structure or composition (Alperin, 2015; Lowder, 2007; Rahn, 2008).
In the first stage of labor, the membranes, when intact, and the fetal
presenting part serve to dilate the upper vagina. The most marked change
consists of stretching levator ani muscle fibers. This is accompanied by
thinning of the central portion of the perineum, which becomes transformed
from a wedge-shaped, 5-cm-thick tissue mass to a thin, almost transparent
membranous structure less than 1 cm thick. When the perineum is distended
maximally, the anus becomes markedly dilated and presents an opening that
varies from 2 to 3 cm in diameter and through which the anterior wall of the
rectum bulges.

■ Third Stage: Delivery of Placenta and Membranes
This stage begins immediately after fetal delivery and involves separation
and expulsion of the placenta and membranes. Normally, by the time the
newborn is delivered, the uterine cavity is nearly obliterated and is an almost

solid mass of muscle, several centimeters thick, above the thinner lower
segment. The uterine fundus now lies just below the level of the umbilicus.
This sudden diminution in uterine size is inevitably accompanied by a
decrease in the area of the placental implantation site (Fig. 21-15). For the
placenta to accommodate itself to this reduced area, it thickens, but because
of limited placental elasticity, it buckles. The resulting tension pulls the
weakest layer—decidua spongiosa—from that site. Thus, placental
separation follows the disproportion created between the relatively
unchanged placental size and the reduced implantation site size.

FIGURE 21-15 Diminution in size of the placental site after birth of the newborn. A. Spatial relations
before birth. B. Placental spatial relations after birth.

Cleavage of the placenta is aided greatly by the loose structure of the
spongy decidua. As detachment proceeds, a hematoma forms between the
separating placenta and the adjacent decidua, which remains attached to the
myometrium. The hematoma is usually the result rather than the cause of the
separation, because in some cases bleeding is negligible.

The great decline in uterine cavity surface area simultaneously throws the
fetal membranes—the amniochorion and the parietal decidua—into
innumerable folds (Fig. 21-16). Membranes usually remain in situ until
placental separation is nearly completed. These are then peeled off the
uterine wall, partly by further contraction of the myometrium and partly by
traction that is exerted by the separated placenta as it descends during
expulsion.

FIGURE 21-16 Postpartum, membranes are thrown up into folds as the uterine cavity decreases in
size. (Reproduced with permission from Dr. Kelley S. Carrick.)

After the placenta has detached, it can be expelled by increased
abdominal pressure. Completion of the third stage is also accomplished by
alternately compressing and elevating the fundus, while exerting minimal
traction on the umbilical cord. The retroplacental hematoma either follows
the placenta or is found within the inverted sac formed by the membranes. In
this process, known as the Schultze mechanism of placental expulsion, blood
from the placental site pours into the membrane sac and does not escape
externally until after extrusion of the placenta. In the other form of placental
extrusion, known as the Duncan mechanism, the placenta separates first at

the periphery and blood collects between the membranes and the uterine wall
and escapes from the vagina. In this circumstance, the placenta descends
sideways, and its maternal surface appears first.

UTEROTONINS IN PARTURITION PHASE 3
■ Oxytocin
This nanopeptide is synthesized in the magnocellular neurons of the
supraoptic and paraventricular neurons. The prohormone is transported with
its carrier protein, neurophysin, along the axons to the neural lobe of the
posterior pituitary gland in membrane-bound vesicles for storage and later
release. The prohormone is converted enzymatically to oxytocin during
transport (Gainer, 1988; Leake, 1990).
Oxytocin—literally, quick birth—was the first uterotonin to be
implicated in parturition initiation. Support for this role includes: (1)
oxytocin receptor numbers strikingly rising in myometrial and decidual
tissues near the end of gestation; (2) oxytocin acting on decidual tissue to
promote prostaglandin release; and (3) oxytocin synthesis directly in
decidual and extraembryonic fetal tissues and in the placenta (Chibbar, 1993;
Zingg, 1995). Moreover, abundant data support oxytocin’s important role
during second-stage labor and in the puerperium, which is phase 4 of
parturition. Specifically, maternal serum oxytocin levels are elevated: (1)
during second-stage labor, which is the end of phase 3 of parturition; (2) in
the early puerperium; and (3) during breastfeeding (Nissen, 1995).
Immediately after delivery of the fetus and placenta, which completes
parturition phase 3, firm and persistent uterine contractions induced by
oxytocin are essential to prevent postpartum hemorrhage.

■ Prostaglandins
Prostaglandins play a critical role in phase 3 of parturition (MacDonald,
1993). First, levels of prostaglandins—or their metabolites—in amnionic
fluid, maternal plasma, and maternal urine are increased during labor.
Second, receptors for PGE2 and PGF2α are expressed in the uterus and
cervix. Thus, if these tissues are exposed to prostaglandins, they will
respond. Third, treatment of pregnant women with prostaglandins, by any of

several administration routes, causes abortion or labor at all gestational
ages. Moreover, administration of prostaglandin H synthase type 2 inhibitors
to pregnant women will delay spontaneous labor onset and sometimes arrest
preterm labor (Loudon, 2003).
During labor, prostaglandin production within the myometrium and
decidua is an efficient mechanism of activating contractions. For example,
prostaglandin synthesis is high and unchanging in the decidua during phase 2
and 3 of parturition. Moreover, the receptor level for PGF2α is augmented in
the decidua at term, and this increase most likely is the regulatory step in
prostaglandin action in the uterus.
The fetal membranes and placenta also produce prostaglandins. Primarily
PGE2, but also PGF2α, are detected in amnionic fluid at all gestational ages.
As the fetus grows, prostaglandin levels in the amnionic fluid rise gradually.
Their greatest elevation in concentration within amnionic fluid, however, is
demonstrable after labor begins. These higher levels likely result as the
cervix dilates and exposes decidual tissue (Fig. 21-17). These higher levels
in the forebag, compared with those in the upper compartment, are believed
to follow an inflammatory response that signals the events leading to active
labor. Together, the rise in cytokine and prostaglandin concentrations further
degrade the ECM, thus weakening fetal membranes.

FIGURE 21-17 Sagittal view of the exposed forebag and attached decidual fragments after cervical
dilation during labor. (Redrawn from MacDonald PC, Casey ML: Preterm birth. Sci Am 3:42, 1996.)

■ Endothelin 1
The endothelins are a family of 21-amino-acid peptides that powerfully
induce myometrial contraction (Word, 1990). The endothelin A receptor is
preferentially expressed in smooth muscle, and when activated, it effects a
rise in intracellular calcium. Endothelin 1 is produced in myometrium of term
gestations and is able to induce synthesis of other contractile factors such as
prostaglandins and inflammatory mediators (Momohara, 2004; Sutcliffe,
2009). The requirement of endothelin 1 in normal parturition physiology
remains to be established.

■ Angiotensin II
Modulation of uteroplacental blood flow is regulated by angiotensin II, a
potent vasoconstrictor. Although, in pregnancy, circulating levels of
angiotensin II are increased, vascular resistance is reduced and vasodilation
is enhanced. Two angiotensin II receptors are expressed in the uterus—AT1R
and AT2R. In nonpregnant women, the AT1R receptor predominates, but the
AT2R receptor is preferentially expressed in gravidas (Cox, 1993). During
normotensive pregnancy, AT2R-mediated effects on vascular smooth muscle
lead to vasodilation, which contributes to the pregnancy-associated rise in
uterine arterial blood flow. Decreased AT2R expression is associated with
preeclamptic pregnancies (Mishra, 2018; Rosenfeld, 2012) (Chap. 4, p. 65).

PHASE 4: THE PUERPERIUM
Immediately and for about an hour after delivery, the myometrium remains
persistently contracted. This directly compresses large uterine vessels and
allows thrombosis of their lumens to prevent hemorrhage. This is typically
augmented by endogenous and pharmacological uterotonic agents (Chap. 27,
p. 507).
Uterine involution and cervical repair are prompt remodeling processes
that restore these organs to the nonpregnant state. These protect the
reproductive tract from invasion by commensal microorganisms and restore
endometrial responsiveness to normal hormonal cyclicity.
During the early puerperium, lactogenesis and milk let-down begin in
mammary glands (Chap. 36, p. 639). Reinstitution of ovulation signals
preparation for the next pregnancy. Ovulation generally occurs within 4 to 6
weeks after birth. However, it is dependent on the duration of breastfeeding
and lactation-induced, prolactin-mediated anovulation and amenorrhea.

REFERENCES
Akgul Y, Holt R, Mummert M, et al: Dynamic changes in cervical glycosaminoglycan composition
during normal pregnancy and preterm birth. Endocrinology 153(7):3493, 2012
Akgul Y, Word RA, Ensign LM, et al: Hyaluronan in cervical epithelia protects against infectionmediated preterm birth. J Clin Invest 124(12):5481, 2014

Akins ML, Luby-Phelps K, Bank RA, et al: Cervical softening during pregnancy: regulated changes in
collagen cross-linking and composition of matricellular proteins in the mouse. Biol Reprod
84(5):1053, 2011
Akins ML, Luby-Phelps K, Mahendroo M: Second harmonic generation imaging as a potential tool for
staging pregnancy and predicting preterm birth. J Biomed Opt 15(2):026020, 2010
Alperin M, Lawley DM, Esparza MC, et al: Pregnancy-induced adaptations in the intrinsic structure of
rat pelvic floor muscles. Am J Obstet Gynecol 213(2):191 e191, 2015
Ambrus G, Rao CV: Novel regulation of pregnant human myometrial smooth muscle cell gap junctions
by human chorionic gonadotropin. Endocrinology 135(6):2772, 1994
Anamthathmakula P, Kyathanahalli C, Ingles J, et al: Estrogen receptor alpha isoform ERdelta7 in
myometrium modulates uterine quiescence during pregnancy. EBioMedicine 39:520, 2019
Ander S, Diamond MS, Coyne CB: Immune responses at the maternal-fetal interface. Sci Immunol
4(31):eaat6114, 2019
Anum EA, Hill LD, Pandya A, et al: Connective tissue and related disorders and preterm birth: clues to
genes contributing to prematurity. Placenta 30(3):207, 2009
Astle S, Thornton S, Slater DM: Identification and localization of prostaglandin E2 receptors in upper
and lower segment human myometrium during pregnancy. Mol Hum Reprod 11(4):279, 2005
Badir S, Bajka M, Mazza E: A novel procedure for the mechanical characterization of the uterine cervix
during pregnancy. J Mech Behav Biomed Mater 27:143, 2013
Benedetto C, Petraglia F, Marozio L, et al: Corticotropin-releasing hormone increases prostaglandin F2
alpha activity on human myometrium in vitro. Am J Obstet Gynecol 171(1):126, 1994
Berkane N, Verstraete L, Uzan S, et al: Use of mifepristone to ripen the cervix and induce labor in term
pregnancies. Am J Obstet Gynecol 192:114, 2005
Berkowitz GS, Lapinski RH, Lockwood CJ, et al: Corticotropin-releasing factor and its binding protein:
maternal serum levels in term and preterm deliveries. Am J Obstet Gynecol 174(5):1477, 1996
Blanks AM, Vatish M, Allen MJ, et al: Paracrine oxytocin and estradiol demonstrate a spatial increase
in human intrauterine tissues with labor. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 88(7):3392, 2003
Blaskewicz CD, Pudney J, Anderson DJ: Structure and function of intercellular junctions in human
cervical and vaginal mucosal epithelia. Biol Reprod 85(1):97, 2011
Bogacki M, Silvia WJ, Rekawiecki R, et al: Direct inhibitory effect of progesterone on oxytocin-induced
secretion of prostaglandin F(2alpha) from bovine endometrial tissue. Biol Reprod 67(1):184, 2002
Bollapragada S, Youssef R, Jordan F, et al: Term labor is associated with a core inflammatory response
in human fetal membranes, myometrium, and cervix. Am J Obstet Gynecol 200(1):104.e1, 2009
Bygdeman M, Swahn ML, Gemzell-Danielsson K, et al: The use of progesterone antagonists in
combination with prostaglandin for termination of pregnancy. Hum Reprod 9 Suppl 1:121, 1994
Casey ML, MacDonald PC: The endocrinology of human parturition. Ann N Y Acad Sci 828:273, 1997
Chaiworapongsa T, Hong JS, Hull WM, et al: The concentration of surfactant protein-A in amniotic fluid
decreases in spontaneous human parturition at term. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 21(9):652, 2008
Challis JR, Lye SJ: Parturition. In Knobil E, Neill JD (eds): The Physiology of Reproduction, 2nd ed. Vol
II. New York, Raven, 1994
Challis JR, Matthews SG, Gibb W, et al: Endocrine and paracrine regulation of birth at term and
preterm. Endocr Rev 21(5):514, 2000
Challis JR, Smith SK: Fetal endocrine signals and preterm labor. Biol Neonate 79(3–4):163, 2001
Chen CC, Montalbano AP, Hussain I, et al: The transcriptional repressor GATAD2B mediates
progesterone receptor suppression of myometrial contractile gene expression. J Biol Chem
292(30):12560, 2017

Cheung PY, Walton JC, Tai HH, et al: Immunocytochemical distribution and localization of 15hydroxyprostaglandin dehydrogenase in human fetal membranes, decidua, and placenta. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 163:1445, 1990
Chibbar R, Miller FD, Mitchell BF: Synthesis of oxytocin in amnion, chorion, and decidua may influence
the timing of human parturition. J Clin Invest 91(1):185, 1993
Chwalisz K: The use of progesterone antagonists for cervical ripening and as an adjunct to labour and
delivery. Hum Reprod 9 Suppl 1:131, 1994a
Chwalisz K, Garfield RE: Antiprogestins in the induction of labor. Ann N Y Acad Sci 734:387, 1994b
Condon JC, Jeyasuria P, Faust JM, et al: A decline in the levels of progesterone receptor coactivators in
the pregnant uterus at term may antagonize progesterone receptor function and contribute to the
initiation of parturition. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 100(16):9518, 2003
Cox BE, Ipson MA, Shaul PW, et al: Myometrial angiotensin II receptor subtypes change during ovine
pregnancy. J Clin Invest 92(5):2240, 1993
Dodd JM, Jones L, Flenady V, et al: Prenatal administration of progesterone for preventing preterm birth
in women considered to be at risk of preterm birth. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 7:CD004947, 2013
Downing SJ, Hollingsworth M: Action of relaxin on uterine contractions—a review. J Reprod Fertil
99(2):275, 1993
Eta E, Ambrus G, Rao CV: Direct regulation of human myometrial contractions by human chorionic
gonadotropin. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 79(6):1582, 1994
Ferguson JK: A study of the motility of the intact uterus at term. Surg Gynecol Obstet 73, 1941
Frenkel RA, Muguruma K, Johnston JM: The biochemical role of platelet-activating factor in
reproduction. Prog Lipid Res 35(2):155, 1996
Friedman EA: Labor: Clinical Evaluation and Management, 2nd ed. New York, Appleton-CenturyCrofts, 1978
Frim DM, Emanuel RL, Robinson BG, et al: Characterization and gestational regulation of corticotropinreleasing hormone messenger RNA in human placenta. J Clin Invest 82(1):287, 1988
Gainer H, Alstein M, Whitnall MH, et al: The biosynthesis and secretion of oxytocin and vasopressin. In
Knobil E, Neill J (eds): The Physiology of Reproduction, Vol II. New York, Raven, 1988
Garcia-Verdugo I, Tanfin Z, Dallot E, et al: Surfactant protein A signaling pathways in human uterine
smooth muscle cells. Biol Reprod 79(2):348, 2008
Gao L, Rabbitt EH, Condon JC, et al: Steroid receptor coactivators 1 and 2 mediate fetal-to-maternal
signaling that initiates parturition. J Clin Invest 125(7):2808, 2015
Germain AM, Smith J, Casey ML, et al: Human fetal membrane contribution to the prevention of
parturition: uterotonin degradation. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 78(2):463, 1994
Giannoulias D, Patel FA, Holloway AC, et al: Differential changes in 15-hydroxyprostaglandin
dehydrogenase and prostaglandin H synthase (types I and II) in human pregnant myometrium. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab 87(3):1345, 2002
Grino M, Chrousos GP, Margioris AN: The corticotropin releasing hormone gene is expressed in human
placenta. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 148(3):1208, 1987
Guerra DD, Hurt JK: Gasotransmitters in pregnancy: from conception to uterine involution. Biol Reprod
101(1):4, 2019
Hassan SS, Romero R, Haddad R, et al: The transcriptome of the uterine cervix before and after
spontaneous term parturition. Am J Obstet Gynecol 195(3):778, 2006
Hassan SS, Romero R, Tarca AL, et al: The transcriptome of cervical ripening in human pregnancy
before the onset of labor at term: identification of novel molecular functions involved in this process.
J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 33(12):1183, 2009

Hegar A: Diagnose der frühesten Schwangerschaftsperiode. Deutsche Medizinische Wochenschrift
21:565, 1895
Hermanns-Le T, Pierard G, Quatresooz P: Ehlers-Danlos-like dermal abnormalities in women with
recurrent preterm premature rupture of fetal membranes. Am J Dermatopathol 27(5):407, 2005
House M, Bhadelia RA, Myers K, et al: Magnetic resonance imaging of three-dimensional cervical
anatomy in the second and third trimester. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 144 Suppl 1:S65, 2009
Ingles J, Simpson A, Kyathanahalli C et al: Preconditioning the uterine unfolded protein response
maintains non-apoptotic caspase 3-dependent quiescence during pregnancy. Cell Death Dis
9(10):933, 2018
Kandola MK, Sykes L, Lee YS, et al: EP2 receptor activates dual G protein signaling pathways that
mediate contrasting proinflammatory and relaxatory responses in term pregnant human myometrium.
Endocrinology 155(2):605, 2014
Kishore AH, Li XH, Word RA: Hypoxia and PGE(2) regulate MiTF-CX during cervical ripening. Mol
Endocrinol 26(12):2031, 2012
Kishore AH, Liang H, Kanchwala M, et al: Prostaglandin dehydrogenase is a target for successful
induction of cervical ripening. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 114(31):E6427, 2017
Konopka CK, Glanzner WG, Rigo ML, et al: Responsivity to PGE2 labor induction involves concomitant
differential prostaglandin E receptor gene expression in cervix and myometrium. Genet Mol Res
14(3):10877, 2015
Kyathanahalli C, Organ K, Moreci RS, et al: Uterine endoplasmic reticulum stress-unfolded protein
response regulation of gestational length is caspase-3 and 7-dependent. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
112(45):14090, 2015
Lang CT, Iams JD, Tangchitnob E, et al: A method to visualize 3-dimensional anatomic changes in the
cervix during pregnancy: a preliminary observational study. J Ultrasound Med 29(2):255, 2010
Leake RD: Oxytocin in the initiation of labor. In Carsten ME, Miller JD (eds): Uterine Function.
Molecular and Cellular Aspects. New York, Plenum, 1990
Lee DC, Romero R, Kim CJ, et al: Surfactant protein-A as an anti-inflammatory component in the
amnion: implications for human pregnancy. J Immunol 184(11):6479, 2010
Leonhardt A, Glaser A, Wegmann M, et al: Expression of prostanoid receptors in human lower segment
pregnant myometrium. Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids 69(5):307, 2003
Leung TN, Chung TK, Madsen G, et al: Rate of rise in maternal plasma corticotrophin-releasing
hormone and its relation to gestational length. BJOG 108(5):527, 2001
Li H, Yu Y, Shi Y, et al: HoxA13 stimulates myometrial cells to secrete IL-1beta and enhance the
expression of contraction-associated proteins. Endocrinology 157(5):2129, 2016
Loudon JA, Groom KM, Bennett PR: Prostaglandin inhibitors in preterm labour. Best Pract Res Clin
Obstet Gynaecol 17(5):731, 2003
Lowder JL, Debes KM, Moon DK, et al: Biomechanical adaptations of the rat vagina and supportive
tissues in pregnancy to accommodate delivery. Obstet Gynecol 109(1):136, 2007
Lowry PJ: Corticotropin-releasing factor and its binding protein in human plasma. Ciba Found Symp
172:108, 1993
Lyall F, Lye S, Teoh T, et al: Expression of Gsalpha, connexin-43, connexin-26, and EP1, 3, and 4
receptors in myometrium of prelabor singleton versus multiple gestations and the effects of
mechanical stretch and steroids on Gsalpha. J Soc Gynecol Investig 9(5):299, 2002
MacDonald PC, Casey ML: Preterm birth. Sci Am 3:42, 1996
MacDonald PC, Casey ML: The accumulation of prostaglandins (PG) in amniotic fluid is an aftereffect
of labor and not indicative of a role for PGE2 or PGF2 alpha in the initiation of human parturition. J

Clin Endocrinol Metab 76(5):1332, 1993
Mahendroo M: Cervical remodeling in term and preterm birth: insights from an animal model.
Reproduction 143(4):429, 2012
Mahendroo MS, Porter A, Russell DW, et al: The parturition defect in steroid 5alpha-reductase type 1
knockout mice is due to impaired cervical ripening. Mol Endocrinol 13(6):981, 1999
Malpas P: Postmaturity and malformations of the foetus. BJOG 40(6):1046, 1933
McGrath S, McLean M, Smith D, et al: Maternal plasma corticotropin-releasing hormone trajectories
vary depending on the cause of preterm delivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 186(2):257, 2002
McLean M, Bisits A, Davies J, et al: A placental clock controlling the length of human pregnancy. Nat
Med 1(5): 460, 1995
Meera P, Anwer K, Monga M, et al: Relaxin stimulates myometrial calcium-activated potassium channel
activity via protein kinase A. Am J Physiol 269(2 Pt 1):C312, 1995
Mendelson CR, Montalbano AP, Gao L: Fetal-to-maternal signaling in the timing of birth. J Steroid
Biochem Mol Biol 170:19, 2017
Mendelson CR, Gao L, Montalbano AP: Multifactorial regulation of myometrial contractility during
pregnancy and parturition. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne) 10:714, 2019
Menon R, Bonney EA, Condon J, et al: Novel concepts on pregnancy clocks and alarms: redundancy
and synergy in human parturition. Hum Reprod Update 22(5):535, 2016
Mesiano S, Chan EC, Fitter JT, et al: Progesterone withdrawal and estrogen activation in human
parturition are coordinated by progesterone receptor A expression in the myometrium. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab 87(6):2924, 2002
Mishra JS, Gopalakrishnan K, Kumar S: Pregnancy upregulates angiotensin type 2 receptor expression
and increases blood flow in uterine arteries of rats. Biol Reprod 99(5):1091, 2018
Mizutani S, Wright JW, Kobayashi H: Placental leucine aminopeptidase- and aminopeptidase Adeficient mice offer insight concerning the mechanisms underlying preterm labor and preeclampsia.
J Biomed Biotechnol 2011:286947, 2011
Momohara Y, Sakamoto S, Obayashi S, et al: Roles of endogenous nitric oxide synthase inhibitors and
endothelin-1 for regulating myometrial contractions during gestation in the rat. Mol Hum Reprod
10(7):505, 2004
Myatt L, Lye SJ: Expression, localization and function of prostaglandin receptors in myometrium.
Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids 70(2):137, 2004
Myers KM, Feltovich H, Mazza E, et al: The mechanical role of the cervix in pregnancy. J Biomech
48(9):1511, 2015
Myers KM, Paskaleva AP, House M, et al: Mechanical and biochemical properties of human cervical
tissue. Acta Biomater 4(1):104, 2008
Nadeem L, Shynlova O, Matysiak-Zablocki E, et al: Molecular evidence of functional progesterone
withdrawal in human myometrium. Nat Commun 7:11565, 2016
Nallasamy S, Mahendroo M: Distinct roles of cervical epithelia and stroma in pregnancy and parturition.
Semin Reprod Med 35(2):190, 2017
Nissen E, Lilja G, Widstrom AM, et al: Elevation of oxytocin levels early post partum in women. Acta
Obstet Gynecol Scand 74(7):530, 1995
Norwitz ER, Bonney EA, Snegovskikh VV, et al: Molecular regulation of parturition: the role of the
decidual clock. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 5(11):1, 2015
Olson DM, Ammann C: Role of the prostaglandins in labour and prostaglandin receptor inhibitors in the
prevention of preterm labour. Front Biosci 12:1329, 2007

Ozasa H, Tominaga T, Nishimura T, et al: Lysyl oxidase activity in the mouse uterine cervix is
physiologically regulated by estrogen. Endocrinology 109(2):618, 1981
Parra-Saavedra M, Gomez L, Barrero A, et al: Prediction of preterm birth using the cervical
consistency index. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 38(1):44, 2011
Patel B, Elguero S, Thakore S, et al: Role of nuclear progesterone receptor isoforms in uterine
pathophysiology. Hum Reprod Update 21(2):155, 2015
Peavey MC, Wu SP, Li R, et al: Progesterone receptor isoform B regulates the Oxtr-Plcl2-Trpc3
pathway to suppress uterine contractility. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 118(11): e2011643118, 2021
Peiris HN, Romero R, Vaswani K, et al: Prostaglandin and prostamide concentrations in amniotic fluid
of women with spontaneous labor at term with and without clinical chorioamnionitis. Prostaglandins
Leukot Essent Fatty Acids 163:102195, 2020
Pérez GJ, Toro L, Erulkar SD, et al: Characterization of large-conductance, calcium-activated potassium
channels from human myometrium. Am J Obstet Gynecol 168(2):652, 1993
Perkins AV, Wolfe CD, Eben F, et al: Corticotrophin-releasing hormone-binding protein in human fetal
plasma. J Endocrinol 146(3):395, 1995
Petraglia F, Florio P, Simoncini T, et al: Cord plasma corticotropin-releasing factor-binding protein (CRFBP) in term and preterm labour. Placenta 18(2–3):115, 1997
Pizzella S, Helou NE, Chubiz J, et al: Evolving cervical imaging technologies to predict preterm birth.
Semin Immunopathol 42(4):385, 2020
Price SA, Pochun I, Phaneuf S, et al: Adenylyl cyclase isoforms in pregnant and non-pregnant human
myometrium. J Endocrinol 164(1):21, 2000
Rahn DD, Ruff MD, Brown SA, et al: Biomechanical properties of the vaginal wall: effect of
pregnancy, elastic fiber deficiency, and pelvic organ prolapse. Am J Obstet Gynecol 198(5):590
e591, 2008
Rea C: Prolonged gestation, acrania monstrosity and apparent placenta previa in one obstetrical case.
JAMA 30(20):1166, 1898
Read CP, Word RA, Ruscheinsky MA, et al: Cervical remodeling during pregnancy and parturition:
molecular characterization of the softening phase in mice. Reproduction 134(2):327, 2007
Reinl EL, Zhao P, Wu W, et al: Na+-leak channel, non-selective (NALCN) regulates myometrial
excitability and facilitates successful parturition. Cell Physiol Biochem 48(2):503, 2018
Renthal NE, Chen CC, Williams KC, et al: miR-200 family and targets, ZEB1 and ZEB2, modulate
uterine quiescence and contractility during pregnancy and labor. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
107(48):20828, 2010
Renthal NE, Williams KC, Montalbano AP, et al: Molecular regulation of parturition: a myometrial
perspective. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 5(11):1, 2015
Rosenfeld CR, DeSpain K, Word RA, et al: Differential sensitivity to angiotensin II and norepinephrine
in human uterine arteries. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 97(1):138, 2012
Saijonmaa O, Laatikainen T, Wahlstrom T: Corticotrophin-releasing factor in human placenta:
localization, concentration and release in vitro. Placenta 9(4):373, 1988
Sanborn BM, Yue C, Wang W, et al: G protein signalling pathways in myometrium: affecting the balance
between contraction and relaxation. Rev Reprod 3(3):196, 1998
Sasaki A, Shinkawa O, Margioris AN, et al: Immunoreactive corticotropin-releasing hormone in human
plasma during pregnancy, labor, and delivery. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 64(2):224, 1987
Shynlova O, Nadeem L, Zhang J, et al: Myometrial activation: novel concepts underlying labor. Placenta
92:28, 2020

Shynlova O, Williams SJ, Draper H, et al: Uterine stretch regulates temporal and spatial expression of
fibronectin protein and its alpha 5 integrin receptor in myometrium of unilaterally pregnant rats. Biol
Reprod 77(5):880, 2007
Smith GC, Wu WX, Nathanielsz PW: Effects of gestational age and labor on expression of prostanoid
receptor genes in baboon uterus. Biol Reprod 64(4):1131, 2001
Smith R: Parturition. N Engl J Med 356(3):271, 2007
Snegovskikh VV, Bhandari V, Wright JR, et al: Surfactant protein-A (SP-A) selectively inhibits
prostaglandin F2alpha (PGF2alpha) production in term decidua: implications for the onset of labor. J
Clin Endocrinol Metab 96(4):E624, 2011
Solan JL, Lampe PD: Spatio-temporal regulation of connexin43 phosphorylation and gap junction
dynamics. Biochem Biophys Acta Biomembr 1860(1):83, 2018
Solano ME: Decidual immune cells: guardians of human pregnancies. Best Pract Res Clin Obstet
Gynaecol 60:3, 2019
Sparey C, Robson SC, Bailey J, et al: The differential expression of myometrial connexin-43,
cyclooxygenase-1 and 2, and Gs alpha proteins in the upper and lower segments of the human
uterus during pregnancy and labor. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 84(5):1705, 1999
Stanfield Z, Amini P, Wang J, et al: Interplay of transcriptional signaling by progesterone, cyclic AMP,
and inflammation in myometrial cells: implications for the control of human parturition. Mol Hum
Reprod 25(7):408, 2019
Straach KJ, Shelton JM, Richardson JA, et al: Regulation of hyaluronan expression during cervical
ripening. Glycobiology 15(1):55, 2005
Stull JT, Lin PJ, Krueger JK, et al: Myosin light chain kinase: functional domains and structural motifs.
Acta Physiol Scand 164(4):471, 1998
Sutcliffe AM, Clarke DL, Bradbury DA, et al: Transcriptional regulation of monocyte chemotactic
protein-1 release by endothelin-1 in human airway smooth muscle cells involves NF-kappaB and
AP-1. Br J Pharmacol 157(3):436, 2009
Tattersall M, Cordeaux Y, Charnock-Jones DS, et al: Expression of gastrin-releasing peptide is
increased by prolonged stretch of human myometrium, and antagonists of its receptor inhibit
contractility. J Physiol 590(9):2081, 2012
Telfer JF, Itoh H, Thomson AJ, et al: Activity and expression of soluble and particulate guanylate
cyclases in myometrium from nonpregnant and pregnant women: down-regulation of soluble
guanylate cyclase at term. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 86(12):5934, 2001
Timmons BC, Mahendroo M: Processes regulating cervical ripening differ from cervical dilation and
postpartum repair: insights from gene expression studies. Reprod Sci 14(8 Suppl):53, 2007
Toyoshima K, Narahara H, Furukawa M, et al: Platelet-activating factor. Role in fetal lung development
and relationship to normal and premature labor. Clin Perinatol 22(2):263, 1995
van der Zwan A, van Unen V, Beyrend G, et al: Visualizing dynamic changes at the maternal-fetal
interface throughout human pregnancy by mass cytometry. Front Immunol 11:571300, 2020
Vink J, Myers K. Cervical alterations in pregnancy. Best Pract Res Clin Obstet Gynaecol 52:88, 2018
Vink JY, Qin S, Brock CO, et al: A new paradigm for the role of smooth muscle cells in the human
cervix. Am J Obstet Gynecol 215(4):478.e1, 2016
Volozonoka L, Rots D, Kempa I, et al: Genetic landscape of preterm birth due to cervical insufficiency:
comprehensive gene analysis and patient next-generation sequencing data interpretation. PLoS One
15(3):e0230771, 2020
Wadhwa PD, Porto M, Garite TJ, et al: Maternal corticotropin-releasing hormone levels in the early
third trimester predict length of gestation in human pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 179(4):1079,

1998
Wakle-Prabagaran M, Lorca RA, Ma X, et al: BKCa channel regulates calcium oscillations induced by
alpha-2-macroglobulin in human myometrial smooth muscle cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
113(16):E2335, 2016
Wang B, Wang P, Parobchak N, et al: Integrated RNA-seq and ChIP-seq analysis reveals a feedforward loop regulating H3K9ac and key labor drivers in human placenta. Placenta 76:40, 2019
Wathes DC, Borwick SC, Timmons PM, et al: Oxytocin receptor expression in human term and preterm
gestational tissues prior to and following the onset of labour. J Endocrinol 161(1):143, 1999
Williams KC, Renthal NE, Condon JC, et al: MicroRNA-200a serves a key role in the decline of
progesterone receptor function leading to term and preterm labor. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
109(19):7529, 2012
Wira CR, Grant-Tschudy KS, Crane-Godreau MA: Epithelial cells in the female reproductive tract: a
central role as sentinels of immune protection. Am J Reprod Immunol 53(2):65, 2005
Wolf JP, Simon J, Itskovitz J, et al: Progesterone antagonist RU 486 accommodates but does not induce
labour and delivery in primates. Hum Reprod 8:759, 1993
Woodcock NA, Taylor CW, Thornton S: Effect of an oxytocin receptor antagonist and rho kinase
inhibitor on the [Ca++]i sensitivity of human myometrium. Am J Obstet Gynecol 190:222, 2004
Word RA, Kamm KE, Stull JT, et al: Endothelin increases cytoplasmic calcium and myosin
phosphorylation in human myometrium. Am J Obstet Gynecol 162(4):1103, 1990
Word RA, Stull JT, Casey ML, et al: Contractile elements and myosin light chain phosphorylation in
myometrial tissue from nonpregnant and pregnant women. J Clin Invest 92(1):29, 1993
Wray S, Prendergast C: The myometrium: from excitation to contractions and labour. Adv Exp Med Biol
1124:233, 2019
Ying L, Becard M, Lyell D, et al: The transient receptor potential vanilloid 4 channel modulates uterine
tone during pregnancy. Sci Transl Med 7(319):319ra204, 2015
Yoshida K, Jiang H, Kim M, et al: Quantitative evaluation of collagen crosslinks and corresponding
tensile mechanical properties in mouse cervical tissue during normal pregnancy. PLoS One
9(11):e112391, 2014
You X, Gao L, Liu J, et al: CRH activation of different signaling pathways results in differential calcium
signaling in human pregnant myometrium before and during labor. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
97(10):E1851, 2012
Young RC, Goloman G: Mechanotransduction in rat myometrium: coordination of contractions of
electrically and chemically isolated tissues. Reprod Sci 18(1):64, 2011
Zhang Y, Akins ML, Murari K, et al: A compact fiber-optic SHG scanning endomicroscope and its
application to visualize cervical remodeling during pregnancy. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
109(32):12878, 2012
Ziecik AJ, Derecka-Reszka K, Rzucidlo SJ: Extragonadal gonadotropin receptors, their distribution and
function. J Physiol Pharmacol 43(4 Suppl 1):33, 1992
Zingg HH, Rozen F, Chu K, et al: Oxytocin and oxytocin receptor gene expression in the uterus. Recent
Prog Horm Res 50:255, 1995

CHAPTER 22

Normal Labor

FETAL ORIENTATION
MECHANISMS OF LABOR
NORMAL LABOR CHARACTERISTICS
MANAGEMENT OF NORMAL LABOR
MANAGEMENT OF FIRST-STAGE LABOR
MANAGEMENT OF SECOND-STAGE LABOR
LABOR MANAGEMENT PROTOCOLS
REFERENCES
Labor is the process that leads to childbirth. It begins with the onset of
regular uterine contractions and ends with delivery of the newborn and
expulsion of the placenta. Pregnancy and birth are physiological processes.
Thus, labor and delivery should be considered normal for most women.

FETAL ORIENTATION
■ Fetal Lie
Fetal position within the birth canal is critical to labor progress and to the
delivery route. It should be determined in early labor, and sonography can be

implemented for unclear cases. Important relationships include fetal lie,
presentation, attitude, and position.
Of these, fetal lie describes the relationship of the fetal long axis to that
of the mother. In more than 99 percent of labors at term, the fetal lie is
longitudinal. A transverse lie is less frequent. Occasionally, the fetal and
maternal axes may cross at a 45-degree angle to form an oblique lie. This is
unstable and becomes longitudinal or transverse during labor.

■ Fetal Presentation
The presenting part is the portion of the fetal body either within or in closest
proximity to the birth canal. It usually can be felt through the cervix on
vaginal examination. In longitudinal lies, the presenting part is either the fetal
head or the breech, creating cephalic and breech presentations, respectively.
When the fetus lies with the long axis transversely, the shoulder is considered
the presenting part.
Cephalic presentations are subclassified according to the relationship
between the head and body of the fetus (Fig. 22-1). Ordinarily, the head is
flexed sharply so that the chin contacts the thorax. The occipital fontanel is
the presenting part, and this presentation is referred to as a vertex or occiput
presentation. Much less often, the fetal neck may be sharply extended so that
the occiput and back come into contact, and the face is foremost in the birth
canal—face presentation. The fetal head may assume a position between
these extremes. When the neck is only partly flexed, the anterior (large)
fontanel may present—sinciput presentation. When the neck is only partially
extended, the brow may emerge—brow presentation. These latter two are
usually transient. As labor progresses, sinciput and brow presentations
almost always convert into occiput or face presentations by neck flexion or
extension, respectively. If not, dystocia can develop (Chap. 23, p. 441).

FIGURE 22-1 Longitudinal lie, cephalic presentation. Differences in attitude of the fetal body in (A)
occiput, (B) sinciput, (C) brow, and (D) face presentations. Note changes in fetal attitude as the fetal
head becomes less flexed.

The fetus at term usually presents occiput rather than breech. Although the
fetal head at term is slightly larger than the breech, the entire podalic pole of
the fetus—that is, the breech and extremities—is bulkier and more mobile
than the cephalic pole. The cephalic pole is composed of the fetal head only.
Logically, the fetus orients its polarity to make use of the roomier fundus for
its bulkier and more mobile podalic pole. The breech presentation rate drops
with gestational age, but 2 to 3 percent of singletons are breech at delivery
(Bin, 2016; Toijonen, 2020). The three general breech configurations are
frank, complete, and footling presentations. Management of the breech
presenting fetus and of those with transverse lie is found in Chapters 28 and
23, respectively.

■ Fetal Attitude
In the later months of pregnancy, the fetus assumes a characteristic posture
described as attitude or habitus. As a rule, the fetus forms an ovoid mass that
corresponds roughly to the shape of the uterine cavity (see Fig. 22-1A). The
fetus becomes folded upon itself to create a convex back. The head is sharply
flexed, the chin nearly contacts with the chest, the thighs are flexed over the
abdomen, and the legs bend at the knee. In cephalic presentations, the arms

usually lie across the thorax or parallel to the sides. The umbilical cord fills
the space between the extremities. This posture results from fetal growth and
accommodation to the uterine cavity.
Exceptions form as the fetal head becomes progressively more extended
from occiput to face presentations. This results in a progressive change in
fetal attitude from a convex (flexed) to a concave (extended) contour of the
vertebral column. This progression is seen in Figure 22-1, panels B through
D.

■ Fetal Position
Position refers to the relationship of a defined portion of the fetal presenting
part to either the right or left side of the birth canal. The fetal occiput, chin
(mentum), and sacrum are the defined landmarks in occiput, face, and breech
presentations, respectively. Because the defined presenting part may be on
either the mother’s left or right side, possible designations are left and right
occipital (LO and RO), left and right mental (LM and RM), and left and right
sacral (LS and RS). Further, the relationship of the defined landmark to the
anterior (A), transverse (T), or posterior (P) portion of the maternal pelvis is
considered (Fig. 22-2). Thus, in an occiput presentation, the presentation and
position may be abbreviated in clockwise fashion as shown.

FIGURE 22-2 Longitudinal lie, occiput presentation. A. Left occiput anterior (LOA) position. B. Left
occiput posterior (LOP) position. C. Right occiput transverse (ROT) position.

In shoulder presentations, the acromion process of the scapula is the
portion of the fetus arbitrarily chosen for its orientation to the mother’s right
or left side. In addition, the back may be directed anteriorly or posteriorly
and also superiorly or inferiorly. Thus, it is customary to further distinguish
right or left varieties as dorsoanterior and dorsoposterior (Fig. 23-7, p. 442).
Another term used is transverse lie, with back up or back down, which is
clinically important when deciding incision type for cesarean delivery.

■ Diagnosis
To diagnose fetal presentation and position, Leopold maneuvers, vaginal
examination, and sonography are primary tools. First, abdominal examination
can be conducted systematically employing the four maneuvers described by
Leopold in 1894 (Fig. 22-3). The mother lies supine and comfortably
positioned with her abdomen bared. Leopold maneuvers can be performed
throughout the latter months of pregnancy and during and between the
contractions of labor. These may be difficult if not impossible to perform and
interpret if the patient is obese, if amnionic fluid volume is excessive, or if
the placenta is anteriorly implanted.

FIGURE 22-3 Leopold maneuvers (A-D) performed in fetus with a longitudinal lie and left occiput
anterior (LOA) position.

The first maneuver assesses the uterine fundus. It permits identification of
fetal lie and presentation. The breech feels large and nodular, whereas the

head is large, hard, and round.
The second maneuver can help define the presenting part’s position.
Palms are placed on either side of the maternal abdomen, and gentle but deep
pressure is exerted. On one side, a hard, resistant structure is felt—the back.
On the other, numerous small, irregular, mobile parts are felt—the fetal
extremities. These may move in response to palpation. The back indicates the
side on which the occiput lies. In occiput anterior positions, the convex back
is felt. In occiput posterior positions, nodular extremity parts are
appreciated.
The third maneuver aids confirmation of fetal presentation. The thumb
and fingers of one hand grasp the lower portion of the maternal abdomen just
above the symphysis pubis. If the presenting part is not engaged, a movable
mass will be felt, usually the head. The differentiation between head and
breech is made as in the first maneuver.
The fourth maneuver helps determine the degree of descent. The examiner
faces the mother’s feet, and the fingertips of both hands are positioned on
either side of the presenting part. They exert inward pressure and then slide
caudad along the axis of the pelvic inlet. In many instances, when the head
has descended into the pelvis, the anterior shoulder or the space created by
the neck may be differentiated readily from the hard head.
At least in the past, experienced clinicians have accurately identified
fetal malpresentation using Leopold maneuvers with a high sensitivity—88
percent, specificity—94 percent, positive predictive value—74 percent, and
negative predictive value—97 percent (Lydon-Rochelle, 1993). With
experience, it is possible to estimate the size of the fetus with these
maneuvers (Field, 1995). However, and especially with an obese woman,
estimates by palpation and actual birth weights often correlate poorly (Fox,
2009; Preyer, 2019).
Vaginal examination complements Leopold maneuvers. Before labor, the
diagnosis of fetal presentation and position by vaginal examination is
challenging because the presenting part must be palpated through a closed
cervix and lower uterine segment. However, with labor and cervical
dilation, cephalic presentations and their positions are recognized by
palpation of the various fetal sutures and fontanels (Fig. 29-1, p. 534).
Palpation of facial features signals a face presentation, whereas digital
delineation of the fetal sacrum and perineum suggests breech presentation.

With a transverse lie, ribs, scapula, or clavicle may be identified.
Sonography is used to confirm suspected abnormal fetal presentation or lie.
Sonography can also help clarify fetal position. For the occiput
presenting fetus, a transducer is placed transversely on the lower maternal
abdomen and moved toward the symphysis. In a fetus positioned occiput
anterior, its spine is identified anteriorly and followed to its union with its
occiput. The angle between the two is wide and increases as the head flexes
and descends into the maternal pelvis. In occiput posterior positions, fetal
orbits and nasal bridge lie anteriorly (Bellussi, 2017). Compared with
digital interrogation, sonography for fetal head position determination during
second-stage labor is more accurate (Ramphul, 2014; Wiafe, 2016).

MECHANISMS OF LABOR
Positional changes of the presenting part are needed for the fetus to navigate
through the pelvic canal. Called the mechanisms of labor or cardinal
movements of labor, these are engagement, descent, flexion, internal rotation,
extension, external rotation, and expulsion. During labor, these movements
show great temporal overlap. For example, as part of engagement, the head
both flexes and descends (Fig. 22-4). Concurrently, uterine contractions
effect important modifications in fetal attitude, especially after the head has
descended into the pelvis. These changes consist mainly of fetal
straightening, loss of dorsal convexity, and closer application of the
extremities to the body. As a result, the fetal ovoid is transformed into a
cylinder, with the smallest possible cross section typically passing through
the birth canal.

FIGURE 22-4 Cardinal movements of labor and delivery from a left occiput anterior position.

■ Engagement
In an occiput presentation, passage of the biparietal diameter through the
pelvic inlet defines engagement. The fetal head may engage during the last
few weeks of pregnancy or not until after labor commences. In many
multiparas and some nulliparas, the fetal head is freely movable above the
pelvic inlet at labor onset and is often referred to as “floating.” In one study

of 5341 nulliparas, lack of fetal head engagement before labor onset did not
affect vaginal delivery rates in either spontaneous or induced labor (Segel,
2012).
In most cases, the vertex enters the pelvis with the sagittal suture lying in
the transverse pelvic diameter. Left occiput transverse (LOT) position is
slightly more common than right occiput transverse (ROT) position
(Caldwell, 1934). However, the sagittal suture may not lie exactly midway
between the symphysis and the sacral promontory. The sagittal suture
frequently is deflected off the midline, either posteriorly toward the
promontory or anteriorly toward the symphysis (Fig. 22-5). Such lateral
deflection to a more anterior or posterior position in the pelvis is called
asynclitism. If the sagittal suture approaches the sacral promontory, more of
the anterior parietal bone presents itself to the examining fingers, and the
condition is called anterior asynclitism. If, however, the sagittal suture lies
close to the symphysis, more of the posterior parietal bone will present, and
the condition is called posterior asynclitism. With extreme asynclitism, an
ear may be palpable.

FIGURE 22-5 Synclitism and asynclitism.

Moderate degrees of asynclitism are the rule in normal labor. Successive
fetal head shifting from posterior to anterior asynclitism aids descent.
However, if severe, the condition is a common reason for cephalopelvic
disproportion even with an otherwise normal-sized pelvis.

■ Descent
This movement is the first requisite for vaginal birth. In nulliparas,
engagement may take place before labor onset, and further descent may not
follow until second-stage labor. In multiparas, descent usually begins with
engagement. Descent stems from one or more of three forces: (1) direct
myometrial pressure of the fundus upon the breech with contractions, (2)
bearing-down efforts of maternal abdominal muscles, and (3) extension and
straightening of the fetal body.

■ Flexion
As soon as the descending head meets resistance, whether from the cervix,
pelvic walls, or pelvic floor, it normally flexes. With this movement, the chin
draws closer to the fetal thorax, and the appreciably shorter
suboccipitobregmatic diameter replaces the longer occipitofrontal diameter
(Fig. 29-1, p. 534). This is an essential requisite for descent because it
allows the smallest head diameter to progress.

■ Internal Rotation
This movement turns the occiput gradually away from the transverse axis.
Usually the occiput rotates anteriorly toward the symphysis pubis. LOT
positions transition to left occiput anterior (LOA) positions (Fig. 22-6). ROT
positions rotate to right occiput anterior (ROA) positions. Less commonly,
the head may rotate posteriorly toward the hollow of the sacrum to generate
occiput posterior positions. Internal rotation is essential for completion of
labor, except when the fetus is unusually small.

FIGURE 22-6 Mechanisms of labor for the left occiput transverse position, lateral view. A.
Engagement with posterior asynclitism at the pelvic brim. During descent, the sagittal suture is then
deflected toward the sacrum. B.This leads to anterior asynclitism. This corrects during additional
descent C. Internal rotation moves the occiput toward the symphysis. Farther simultaneous descent. D.
Additional descent with extension of the neck.

Calkins (1939) studied more than 5000 women in labor to ascertain the
time of internal rotation. He concluded that in approximately two thirds,
internal rotation is completed by the time the head reaches the pelvic floor; in
about another fourth, internal rotation is completed shortly after the head
reaches the pelvic floor; and in the remaining 5 percent, rotation does not
take place. When the head fails to turn until reaching the pelvic floor, it
typically rotates during the next one or two contractions in multiparas. In
nulliparas, rotation usually occurs during the next three to five contractions.

■ Extension

After internal rotation, the sharply flexed head reaches the vulva and
undergoes extension. If the sharply flexed head, on reaching the pelvic floor,
did not extend but was driven farther downward, it would impinge on the
posterior portion of the perineum and would eventually be forced through the
perineal tissues. When the head presses on the pelvic floor, however, two
forces come into play. The first force, exerted by the uterus, acts more
posteriorly, and the second, supplied by the resistant pelvic floor and the
symphysis, acts more anteriorly. The resultant vector is in the direction of the
vulvar opening, thereby causing head extension. This brings the base of the
occiput into direct contact with the inferior margin of the symphysis pubis
(see Fig. 22-6).
With progressive distention of the perineum and vaginal opening, an
increasingly large portion of the occiput gradually appears. The head is born
as the occiput, anterior fontanel, brow, nose, mouth, and chin pass
successively over the perineal body. Immediately after its delivery, the head
drops so that the chin lies over the maternal anus.

■ External Rotation
The delivered head next undergoes restitution (see Fig. 22-4). If the occiput
was originally directed toward the maternal left, it rotates toward the
mother’s left ischial tuberosity. If it was originally directed toward the right,
the occiput rotates to the right. With restitution, the head reaches a transverse
position. The fetal body aligns its bisacromial diameter, which is the
distance across the shoulders, with the anteroposterior diameter of the pelvic
outlet. Thus, one shoulder is anterior behind the symphysis and the other is
posterior.

■ Expulsion
Almost immediately after external rotation, the anterior shoulder appears
under the symphysis pubis, and the perineum soon becomes distended by the
posterior shoulder. After delivery of the shoulders, the rest of the body
quickly passes. If the anterior shoulder tightly wedges behind the symphysis,
shoulder dystocia is diagnosed and is described in Chapter 27 (p. 501).

■ Occiput Posterior Position
In approximately 20 percent of labors, the fetus enters the pelvis in an
occiput posterior (OP) position (Caldwell, 1934). It appears likely from
radiographic evidence that posterior positions are more often associated
with a narrow forepelvis (Gardberg, 1994a). Effective contractions,
adequate head flexion, and average fetal size together permit most
posteriorly positioned occiputs to rotate anteriorly toward the symphysis
promptly as soon as they reach the pelvic floor. In perhaps 5 to 10 percent of
cases, however, rotation may be incomplete or may not take place at all,
especially if the fetus is large (Gardberg, 1994b). Poor contractions, faulty
head flexion, or epidural analgesia, which diminishes maternal muscular
pushing and relaxes pelvic floor muscles, may predispose to incomplete
rotation. If rotation is incomplete, transverse arrest may result. If no rotation
toward the symphysis proceeds, the occiput may remain in the direct OP
position, a condition known as persistent occiput posterior. Both can lead to
dystocia and cesarean delivery. Risk factors and labor management of a
persistent OP position are found in Chapter 27 (p. 500). Techniques to
manually rotate from OP to OA positions are illustrated in Chapter 29 (p.
540).

■ Fetal Head Shape Changes
In occiput presentations, labor forces alter fetal head shape. In prolonged
labors before complete cervical dilation, the portion of the fetal scalp
immediately over the cervical os becomes edematous. This swelling is
called caput succedaneum. It usually attains a thickness of only a few
millimeters, but in prolonged labors it may be sufficiently extensive to
prevent differentiation of the various sutures and fontanels. More commonly,
the caput is formed when the head is in the lower portion of the birth canal
and frequently only after the resistance of a rigid vaginal outlet is
encountered. Because it develops over the most dependent area of the head,
one may deduce the original fetal head position. In cases of marked
asynclitism and dystocia, the caput succedaneum may form far from the
sagittal midline (Fig. 22-7).

FIGURE 22-7 Fetal head molding and caput succedaneum formation. A. This newborn was delivered
by cesarean for failure to progress and active labor arrest. The obvious caput succedaneum, which
developed far from and to the left of the sagittal midline (arrow), reflects marked asynclitism during
labor. B. This neonate after vaginal birth shows significant caput succedaneum and elongated molding.

Molding refers to changes in the bony fetal head shape as a result of
external compressive forces (see Fig. 22-7B). Possibly related to Braxton
Hicks contractions, some molding develops before labor. Despite these
shape changes, most studies indicate that the parietal bones seldom overlap.
A “locking” mechanism at the coronal and lambdoidal sutures actually
prevents such overlapping (Carlan, 1991).
Molding yields a shortened suboccipitobregmatic diameter. Of greatest
importance in women with contracted pelves or asynclitism, the degree to
which the head can mold may determine the difference between vaginal and
cesarean birth.
Some older literature implicated severe head molding as a cause for
possible cerebral trauma. Because of the many associated factors, for
example, prolonged labor with fetal sepsis and acidosis, it is impossible to
link molding to any alleged fetal or neonatal neurological sequelae. Most
molding resolves within the week following delivery, although persistent
cases have been described (Graham, 2006). Differentiation of molding, caput
succedaneum, and cephalohematoma is discussed in Chapter 33 (p. 608).

NORMAL LABOR CHARACTERISTICS
The greatest impediment to understanding normal labor is recognizing its
start. The strict definition describes uterine contractions that bring about

demonstrable cervical effacement and dilation. Pinpointing when labor
actually begins, however, is challenging because determination is
retrospective. Several methods are used to mark its start. Despite these, a
recent systematic review of labor definitions emphasizes the lack of
consensus regarding definitions of labor onset (Hanley, 2016).
One method defines onset as the clock time when painful contractions
become regular. However, uterine activity that causes discomfort but that
does not represent true labor may develop at any time during pregnancy.
False labor eventually wanes spontaneously, whereas the contractions of true
labor typically progress to an effective, regular pattern.
A second method defines the onset of labor as beginning at the time of
admission to a labor unit. In the United States, admission for labor is
frequently based on the extent of cervical dilation accompanied by painful
contractions. If a woman has intact membranes, a cervical dilation of 3 to 4
cm or greater and frequent painful contractions are reasonably reliable
diagnostic criteria.

■ First Stage of Labor
For labor progression, Friedman (1954) described a characteristic sigmoid
pattern by graphing cervical dilation against time. With Friedman’s concept,
the first stage of labor contains three functional labor divisions, each with its
own physiological characteristics (Fig. 22-8). First, during the preparatory
division, although the cervix dilates little, its connective tissue components
change considerably (Chap. 21, p. 406). Sedation and conduction analgesia
are capable of arresting this labor division. The dilatational division, during
which dilation proceeds at its most rapid rate, is unaffected by sedation.
Last, the pelvic division commences with the deceleration phase of cervical
dilation. The cardinal movements of labor take place principally during this
pelvic division. In actual practice, however, the onset of the pelvic division
is seldom clearly identifiable.

FIGURE 22-8 Labor progress is described by dilatation and descent curves and is partitioned into: (1)
a preparatory division, including latent and acceleration phases; (2) a dilatational division, which contains
the phase of maximum slope; and (3) a pelvic division, which encompasses both the deceleration phase
and second-stage labor as well as the phase of maximum slope of descent.

Two phases of cervical dilation are defined. The latent phase
corresponds to the preparatory division, and the active phase to the
dilational division. Friedman further subdivided the active phase into the
acceleration phase, the phase of maximum slope, and the deceleration
phase (Fig. 22-9).

FIGURE 22-9 Composite of the average dilatation curve for nulliparous labor. The first stage is divided
into a relatively flat latent phase and a rapidly progressive active phase. The active phase contains an
acceleration phase, a phase of maximum slope, and a deceleration phase.

Latent Phase
The onset of latent labor, as defined by Friedman (1972), is the point at
which the mother perceives regular contractions. For most women, this phase
ends once cervical dilation of 4 cm is achieved. This threshold may be
clinically useful, for it defines dilation limits beyond which active labor can
be expected. More recently, the American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists and Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine (2019c) has
redefined active labor to begin at 6 cm. A fuller discussion of these labor
changes is found in Chapter 23 (p. 436).
A prolonged latent phase was defined as one exceeding 20 hours in the
nullipara and 14 hours in the multipara by Friedman and Sachtleben (1963).
These times corresponded to the 95th percentiles. Factors that affected latent
phase duration include excessive sedation or epidural analgesia; unfavorable
cervical condition, that is, thick, uneffaced, or undilated; and false labor. Of
women in latent labor who had been administered heavy sedation, 85 percent

eventually entered active labor. In another 10 percent, uterine contractions
ceased, which suggests false labor. In the remaining 5 percent, an abnormal
latent phase persisted and required oxytocin stimulation. Amniotomy was
discouraged because of the 10-percent incidence of false labor.
Friedman (1972) later reported that latent phase prolongation did not
adversely influence fetal or maternal morbidity or mortality rates. However,
prolongation of the latent phase appears associated with longer active labor
duration and greater likelihood of obstetrical interventions (Ängeby, 2018;
Chelmow, 1993; Tilden, 2020).

Active Phase
The progress of labor in nulliparas has particular significance because these
curves all reveal a rapid change in the slope of cervical dilation rates
between 3 and 5 cm (see Fig. 22-9). Thus, cervical dilation of 3 to 6 cm or
more, in the presence of uterine contractions, can be taken to reliably
represent the threshold for active labor. Similarly, these curves provide
useful guideposts for labor management.
Turning again to Friedman (1955), the mean duration of active-phase
labor in nulliparas was 4.9 hours. But, the standard deviation of 3.4 hours is
large, hence, the active phase was reported to have a statistical maximum of
11.7 hours. Indeed, rates of cervical dilation ranged from a minimum of 1.2
up to 6.8 cm/hr. Friedman (1972) also found that multiparas progress
somewhat faster in active-phase labor, with a minimum normal rate of 1.5
cm/hr. His analysis of active-phase labor concomitantly describes rates of
fetal descent and cervical dilation (see Fig. 22-8). Descent begins in the later
stage of active dilation, commencing at 7 to 8 cm in nulliparas and becoming
most rapid after 8 cm.
Others have reassessed the Friedman labor curves. Zhang and associates
(2010) studied electronic labor records from 62,415 parturients with
spontaneous labor at term and vaginal birth. For primiparas, the median time
to progress from 4 to 5 cm was 1.3 hours, from 5 to 6 cm 0.8 hours, and
thereafter, additional centimeters were gained approximately each 0.5 hours.
They found that normal labor may take >6 hours to progress from 4 to 5 cm
and >3 hours to progress from 5 to 6 cm dilation. Rates for multiparas were
similar to nulliparas from 4 to 6 cm, but then, labor accelerated much faster
in multiparas. Data from this study form the foundation for new guidelines

regarding cesarean delivery indications for labor arrest put forth in the
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists’ Obstetric Care
Consensus (2019c). These are described in Chapter 23 (p. 436).

■ Second Stage of Labor
This stage begins with complete cervical dilation and ends with fetal
delivery. The median duration is approximately 50 minutes for nulliparas and
about 20 minutes for multiparas, but it is highly variable (Kilpatrick, 1989).
In a woman of higher parity with a previously dilated vagina and perineum,
two or three expulsive efforts after full cervical dilation may suffice to
complete delivery. Conversely, in a woman with a contracted pelvis, with a
large fetus, or with impaired expulsive efforts from conduction analgesia or
sedation, the second stage may become abnormally long. Nulliparas with
high starting fetal station may experience a longer second stage (Ashwal,
2021). Greater maternal body mass index does not interfere with secondstage labor (Carlhäll, 2013; Robinson, 2011).

■ Labor Duration
The normal duration of labor may be clouded by the many clinical variables
that affect the conduct of labor in modern obstetrical units. Kilpatrick and
Laros (1989) reported that the mean length of first- and second-stage labors
approximates 9 hours in nulliparas without regional analgesia and that the
95th percentile upper limit was 18.5 hours. Corresponding times for
multiparas were a mean of 6 hours and a 95th percentile maximum of 13.5
hours. These authors defined labor onset as the time when a woman recalled
regular, painful contractions every 3 to 5 minutes that led to cervical change.
Spontaneous labor was analyzed in nearly 25,000 women delivered at
term at Parkland Hospital in the early 1990s. Almost 80 percent of women
were admitted with a cervical dilation of ≤5 cm. Parity—nulliparous versus
multiparous—and cervical dilation at admission were significant
determinants of spontaneous labor length. The median time from admission to
spontaneous delivery for all parturients was 3.5 hours, and 95 percent of all
women delivered within 10.1 hours. These results suggest that normal human
active labor is relatively short.

MANAGEMENT OF NORMAL LABOR
Birthing is a normal physiological process that most women experience
without complications. However, unexpected intrapartum complications can
arise quickly. Thus, every woman and her supporters should feel welcomed
and comfortable, yet safety measures must be in place for the mother and her
newborn if complications suddenly develop. The American Academy of
Pediatrics and the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
(2017) have collaborated in the development of Guidelines for Perinatal
Care. These provide detailed information on the appropriate content of
intrapartum care, including both personnel and facility requirements. Labor
and delivery outside the hospital is elected by some parturients. This option
is discussed in Chapter 27 (p. 504).

■ Emergency Medical Treatment and Labor Act—EMTALA
By law, all Medicare-participating hospitals with emergency services must
provide an appropriate screening examination for any pregnant woman
experiencing contractions and presenting to the emergency department for
evaluation. The definition of an emergency condition makes specific
reference to a pregnant woman who is having contractions. Labor is defined
as “the process of childbirth beginning with the latent phase of labor
continuing through delivery of the placenta. A woman experiencing
contractions is in true labor unless a physician certifies that after a
reasonable time of observation the woman is in false labor.” A woman in
true labor is considered “unstable” for interhospital transfer purposes until
the newborn and placenta are delivered. A stable woman may, however, be
transferred at the direction of the patient or by a physician who certifies that
the benefits of treatment at another facility outweigh the transfer risks.

■ Identification of Labor
Pregnant women are urged to report early in labor rather than to procrastinate
until delivery is imminent. Early admittance is important if during antepartum
care, the woman, her fetus, or both are found to carry risks for intrapartum
complications.

Although the differentiation between false and true labor is difficult at
times, the diagnosis usually can be clarified by cervical dilation and by
contraction frequency and intensity. Pates and associates (2007) studied one
commonly used recommendation given to pregnant women. Namely, in the
absence of ruptured membranes or bleeding, uterine contractions 5 minutes
apart for 1 hour—that is, ≥12 contractions in 1 hour—may signify labor
onset. Among 768 women in this study at Parkland Hospital, active labor
defined as cervical dilation ≥4 cm was diagnosed within 24 hours in three
fourths of women with ≥12 contractions per hour.
In those instances when a diagnosis of labor cannot be established with
certainty, observation for a longer period is reasonable. Women who present
to Parkland Hospital for labor symptoms at ≥240/7 weeks gestation are
routinely evaluated in a labor triage unit, which is contiguous to our labor
and delivery unit. All women in the triage unit are evaluated by nurse
practitioners and certified nurse midwives using written protocols. For those
with uncomplicated pregnancies, women with intact membranes and cervical
dilation <4 cm receive continuous external fetal monitoring for up to 2 hours.
Women diagnosed with labor by either cervical change or persistent uterine
contractions are admitted. After review by a physician, women without
cervical change or with abatement of contractions return home with a
diagnosis of false labor. In a recent study, a total of 3949 women with
uncomplicated pregnancies between 370/7 and 416/7 weeks’ gestation were
diagnosed with false labor. The mean interval from hospital discharge to
when they again presented was 4.9 days (Nelson, 2017). Within this
protocol, hospital discharge with false labor at term was not associated with
higher rates of adverse neonatal outcomes or cesarean delivery. The
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020a) has endorsed
hospital-based obstetrical triage units.
Instead of false labor, labor in the latent phase may be diagnosed. In this
phase, some women may require admission for pain management. However,
for women without antepartum risks and with reassuring maternofetal status,
expectant care during latent labor is reasonable (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019a). Studies support the value of this
approach to potentially lower rates of interventions that include oxytocin,
antibiotics for intrapartum fever, and cesarean delivery (Bailiet, 2005;
Wood, 2016). Instructions on coping and self-care during this time have

value (Hosek, 2014). Moreover, a mutually agreed upon time is set for
reevaluation.

■ Initial Evaluation
For the gravida presenting with symptoms of labor, blood pressure,
temperature, pulse, and respiratory rate are recorded. Fetal heart rate is
evaluated using a portable Doppler device, sonography, or fetoscope. Our
practice uses extended electronic fetal monitoring to assess initial fetal
status. The pregnancy record is promptly reviewed to identify complications.
A vaginal examination is performed unless there is a known placenta previa
or vasa previa. The gloved index and second fingers are introduced into the
vagina while avoiding the anal region.

Ruptured Membranes
During prenatal care, the woman is instructed to be aware of fluid leakage
from the vagina and to report this event promptly. Rupture of the membranes
is significant for three reasons. First, if the presenting part is not fixed in the
pelvis, the umbilical cord can prolapse and be compressed. Second, labor is
likely to begin soon if the pregnancy is at or near term. Third, if delivery is
delayed after membrane rupture, intrauterine and neonatal infection is more
likely as the time interval lengthens (Herbst, 2007).
During sterile speculum examination, ruptured membranes are diagnosed
if amnionic fluid pools in the posterior fornix or clear fluid flows from the
cervical canal. If the diagnosis remains uncertain, one method involves pH
determination of vaginal fluid. The pH of vaginal secretions normally ranges
from 4.5 to 5.5, whereas the pH of amnionic fluid is usually >7.0. The use of
the indicator nitrazine to identify ruptured membranes is a simple and fairly
reliable method. Test papers are impregnated with the dye, and the color of
the reaction between these paper strips and vaginal fluids is interpreted by
comparison with a standard color chart posted on the strip’s container. A pH
above 6.5 is consistent with ruptured membranes. False-positive test results
may stem from blood, semen, or bacterial vaginosis, which raise pH. Scant
fluid can yield a false-negative test result.
Another test to identify amnionic fluid microscopically evaluates vaginal
fluid that is dried on a slide. Arborization or a fern pattern suggests amnionic

rather than cervical fluid. Amnionic fluid crystallizes and ferns due to its
concentrations of sodium chloride, proteins, and carbohydrates.
Of other methods, detection of alpha-fetoprotein in the vaginal vault has
been used to identify amnionic fluid (Yamada, 1998). Rarely required,
identification may also follow injection of 1 to 4 mL of a 5-percent sodium
fluorescein solution into the amnionic sac via abdominal amniocentesis
(Ireland, 2017).
Last, specific amnionic fluid proteins can be sought using point-of-care
assays. These include AmniSure, which binds placental alpha microglobulin1; Actim PROM, with binds insulin growth factor binding protein-1 (IGFBP1); and ROM Plus, which detects IGFBP-1 plus alpha-fetoprotein (Eleje,
2017; Palacio, 2014). False-positive and false-negative results are not
uncommon. The Food and Drug Administration (2018) emphasizes the need
to incorporate clinical findings if these methods are used.

Cervical Assessment
Progress during labor produces specific cervical changes. Cervical dilation
is assessed by sweeping the examining finger from the inner cervical rim on
one side of the opening to the opposite inner rim. The diameter traversed is
estimated in centimeters. Effective labor will dilate the cervix, which is
considered fully dilated when the diameter measures 10 cm. The presenting
part of a term-size newborn usually can pass through a cervix this widely
dilated.
Cervical effacement is the length of the cervical canal compared with
that of an unlabored cervix. When the length of the cervix is reduced by one
half, it is 50-percent effaced. When the cervix becomes as thin as the
adjacent lower uterine segment, it is completely, or 100-percent, effaced.
Cervical position reflects the relationship of the cervical os to the center
point of the presenting part. It is categorized as posterior, midposition, or
anterior. Fetal descent will gradually move the cervix anteriorly. Along with
position, the consistency of the cervix is determined to be soft, firm, or
intermediate between these two. Cervical softening aids dilation and
effacement.
Fetal station describes the presenting fetal part’s leading edge in the
birth canal in relationship to the ischial spines. These spines lie halfway
between the pelvic inlet and the pelvic outlet and lie at the level of the

midpelvis. When the lowermost portion of the presenting fetal part reaches
the spines, it is designated as being at zero (0) station.
In the past, the long axis of the birth canal above and below the ischial
spines was arbitrarily divided into thirds by some and into fifths
(approximately 1 cm) by other groups. In 1989, the American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists adopted the classification of station that
divides the pelvis above and below the spines into fifths. Each fifth
represents 1 cm above or below the spines. Thus, as the presenting fetal part
descends from the inlet toward the ischial spines, the designation is –5, –4, –
3, –2, –1, and then 0 station. Below the spines, as the presenting fetal part
descends, it passes +1, +2, +3, +4, and +5 stations to delivery. Station +5 cm
corresponds to the fetal head being visible at the introitus.
If the leading part of the fetal head is at 0 station or below, most often the
fetal head has engaged—thus, the biparietal plane has passed through the
pelvic inlet. If the head is unusually molded or if caput succedaneum
formation is extensive, or both, engagement might not have taken place
although the scalp is at 0 station.
In addition to charting the progress of labor, these five characteristics—
cervical dilation, effacement, consistency, position, and fetal station—are
assessed when tabulating the Bishop score. This score is commonly used to
predict labor induction outcome and is discussed in Chapter 26 (p. 488).
Taken together, these factors suggest the subjective “favorability” of the
cervix for induction success.

Laboratory Studies
When a woman is admitted in labor, most often the hematocrit or hemoglobin
concentration is rechecked. The hematocrit can be measured easily and
quickly. At Parkland Hospital, blood is collected in a standard collection
tube with anticoagulant. From this, a heparinized capillary tube is filled to
spin in a microhematocrit centrifuge in the labor and delivery unit. This
provides a hematocrit value within 3 minutes. The initial collection tube is
also sent to the hematology laboratory for evaluation if the point-of-care
hematocrit is <30 volume percent. Another labeled tube of blood is allowed
to clot and sent to the blood bank for blood type and antibody screen. Some
states, for example, Texas, require routine testing for syphilis, hepatitis B,
and HIV in all women admitted to labor and delivery units, even if these

were done during prenatal care. In some labor units, a clean-catch voided
specimen is examined in all women for protein and glucose. At Parkland
Hospital, we obtain a urine specimen for protein determination in
hypertensive women only (Chap. 40, p. 689).

■ Management of First-stage Labor
As soon as possible after admittance, the remainder of a general examination
is completed. Whether a pregnancy is normal can best be determined when
all examinations, including record and laboratory review, are completed. A
rational plan for monitoring labor can then be established based on the needs
of the fetus and the mother. Because labor lengths vary markedly among
individuals, precise statements to the patient regarding anticipated labor
duration are unwise.

Intrapartum Fetal Monitoring
This is discussed in detail in Chapter 24. Briefly, the American Academy of
Pediatrics and American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2017)
recommend that during first-stage labor, in the absence of any abnormalities,
the fetal heart rate should be checked immediately after a contraction at least
every 30 minutes and then every 15 minutes during second-stage labor. If
continuous electronic monitoring is used, the tracing is evaluated at least
every 30 minutes during the first stage and at least every 15 minutes during
the second stage. For women with pregnancies at risk, fetal heart auscultation
is performed at least every 15 minutes during first-stage labor and every 5
minutes during the second stage. Continuous electronic monitoring may be
used with evaluation of the tracing every 15 minutes during the first stage of
labor, and every 5 minutes during the second stage.

Maternal Monitoring
Temperature, pulse, and blood pressure are evaluated at least every 4 hours.
If membranes have been ruptured for many hours or if there is a borderline
temperature elevation, the temperature is checked hourly.
Although uterine contractions are usually assessed with electronic
monitoring, they can be quantitatively and qualitatively evaluated manually.
With the palm of the hand resting lightly on the uterus, the time of contraction

onset is determined. Its intensity is gauged from the degree of muscle tone the
uterus achieves. At the acme of effective contractions, the finger or thumb
cannot readily indent the uterus during a “firm” contraction. The time at
which the contraction disappears is noted next. This sequence is repeated to
evaluate the frequency, duration, and intensity of contractions.
During the first stage of labor, the need for subsequent vaginal
examinations to monitor cervical change and presenting part position will
vary considerably. When the membranes rupture, an examination to exclude
cord prolapse is performed expeditiously if the fetal head was not definitely
engaged at the previous examination. The fetal heart rate is also checked
immediately and during the next uterine contraction to help detect occult
umbilical cord compression. At Parkland Hospital, periodic pelvic
examinations are typically performed at 2- to 3-hour intervals for gravidas in
active labor to evaluate labor progress. Evidence implicating the number of
vaginal examinations in infection-related morbidity is conflicting (Cahill,
2012; Soper, 1989).

Maternal Position
In bed, the laboring woman may assume the position she finds most
comfortable, and often this will be lateral recumbency. Lying supine is
typically avoided to avert aortocaval compression and its potential to lower
uterine perfusion (Chap. 4, p. 64). However, the normal laboring woman
need not be confined to bed early in labor. A comfortable chair may be
beneficial psychologically and perhaps physiologically. Others encourage
ambulation.
Proponents of walking report that it shortens labor, lowers rates of
oxytocin augmentation, diminishes the need for analgesia, and decreases the
frequency of operative vaginal delivery (Flynn, 1978; Read, 1981). In their
Cochrane review, Lawrence and associates (2013) reported that labor in
ambulant or upright positions shortened first-stage labor by approximately 1
hour and lowered cesarean delivery and epidural analgesia rates. However,
they cautioned interpretation given variable study quality. Lupe and Gross
(1986) concluded, however, that no conclusive evidence supports assertions
that upright maternal posture or ambulation improves labor. They reported
that women preferred to lie on their side or sit in bed. Few chose to walk,
fewer to squat, and none wanted the knee-chest position. Parturients tended
to assume fetal positions in later labor. Most women enthusiastic about

ambulation returned to bed when active labor began (Carlson, 1986;
Williams, 1980).
Bloom and colleagues (1998) conducted a randomized trial to study the
effects of walking during first-stage labor. In 1067 women with
uncomplicated term pregnancies delivered at Parkland Hospital, these
investigators reported that ambulation did not affect labor duration.
Ambulation did not reduce the need for analgesia nor was it harmful to the
newborn. Because of these observations, we give women without
complications the option to select either recumbency or supervised
ambulation during labor.

Pain Management
In general, the needs and desires for pain relief are directed by the parturient.
Relaxation techniques may have a role for pain relief and patient satisfaction,
although evidence-based data are not robust (Smith, 2018). Discussed in the
last section, ambulation is another option. Some women choose to spend part
of first-stage labor in a large water tub, if available, for pain relief. With this
practice, one Cochrane review found lower rates of regional analgesia use
and no greater adverse neonatal or maternal effects compared with
traditional labor (Cluett, 2018).
Pharmacologic options include epidural analgesia; intermittent
intravenous (IV) or intramuscular (IM) opioids or meperidine (Table 25-2, p.
469), and less often, nitrous oxide. These are discussed in detail in Chapter
25.

Oral Intake
Food and liquids with particulate matter should be withheld during active
labor and delivery. Gastric emptying time is remarkably prolonged once
labor is established and analgesics are administered. As a consequence,
ingested food and most medications remain in the stomach and are poorly
absorbed. They may be vomited and aspirated (Chap. 25, p. 482). However,
oral intake of moderate amounts of clear liquids is reasonable for women
with uncomplicated labor (American Academy of Pediatrics, 2017;
American Society of Anesthesiologists, 2016). Water, clear tea, black coffee,
carbonated beverages, Popsicles, and pulp-free juices are options. In those
with appreciable risks for aspiration or those with significant risks for

cesarean delivery, further restriction may be instituted. For example, for
those with planned cesarean delivery, liquids are halted 2 hours before and
solids are stopped 6 to 8 hours prior to surgery (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019b).

Intravenous Fluids
Although an IV infusion system is often routinely established early in labor,
real need for this in the normal pregnant woman is limited. Access allows
parenteral analgesia or IV fluid infusion prior to regional analgesia. In the
immediate puerperium, a dilute oxytocin solution can be given
prophylactically to prevent uterine atony and at times therapeutically to treat
it. Moreover, with longer labors, the administration of glucose, sodium, and
water to the otherwise fasting woman at the rate of 60 to 120 mL/hr prevents
dehydration and acidosis.
Although not mandatory, IV hydration may shorten labor length, and most
studies of fluid selection use first-stage labor length as a primary outcome.
From these investigations, data support use of fluids containing dextrose
compared with fluid without it (Riegel, 2018; Shrivastava, 2009). For
administration, rates of 125 or 250 mL/hr are suitable (Dawood, 2013;
Ehsanipoor, 2017; Fong, 2017). In our practice, saline with 5-percent
dextrose is infused at a rate of 150 mL/hr.

Rupture of Membranes
If the membranes are intact, temptation is great, even during normal labor, to
perform amniotomy. Benefits are earlier detection of meconium-stained
amnionic fluid and the opportunity to apply an electrode to the fetus or insert
a pressure catheter into the uterine cavity for monitoring. In one metaanalysis
of 15 studies, normal spontaneous labor was not shortened by amniotomy
(Smyth, 2013). Risks include potential uterine infection if performed early
and possible cord prolapse. To help prevent prolapse, the fetal head must be
well applied to the cervix and not dislodged from the pelvis during
amniotomy. The use of amniotomy in the setting of abnormal labor is
discussed in Chapter 23 (p. 434).
With prolonged membrane rupture and unknown group B streptococcal
(GBS) status, antimicrobial administration for prevention of GBS infections
is recommended for intrapartum risk factors (American College of

Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020b). These include rupture of
membranes greater than 18 hours or intrapartum temperature >38.0°C or
>100.4°F (Chap. 67, p. 1194). This practice similarly lowers rates of
chorioamnionitis and endometritis (Saccone, 2015).

Urinary Bladder Function
Distention of the bladder can hinder descent of the fetal presenting part and
lead to subsequent bladder hypotonia and infection. Periodically, the
suprapubic region is palpated to detect distention. If the bladder is readily
seen or palpated above the symphysis, the woman should be encouraged to
void. Those unable to do so on a bedpan may be able to ambulate with
assistance to a toilet. Catheterization is indicated if the bladder is distended
and voiding is not possible. Regional analgesia is a common reason. In these
cases, continuous or intermittent catheterization is suitable, and both have
comparable rates of puerperal urinary tract infection and urinary retention
(Li, 2019). Postpartum retention is discussed in Chapter 36 (p. 643).

■ Management of Second-stage Labor
In later first-stage or early second-stage labor, attempts are made to
determine head position. The fingers are directed posteriorly and then swept
forward over the fetal head toward the maternal symphysis (Fig. 22-10).
During this movement, the fingers necessarily cross the sagittal suture, and its
lie is delineated. Next, the positions of the two fontanels are ascertained. For
this, fingers are passed to the most anterior extension of the sagittal suture,
and the fontanel encountered there is examined and identified. The fingers
then pass along the sagittal suture to the other end of the head until the other
fontanel is felt and differentiated (Fig. 22-11). Last, the station, or extent to
which the presenting part has descended into the pelvis, also can be
established. Using these maneuvers, the various sutures and fontanels are
determined. In unclear cases, sonography can be used as described earlier
(p. 420).

FIGURE 22-10 Locating the sagittal suture by vaginal examination.

FIGURE 22-11 Differentiating the fontanels by vaginal examination.

With full cervical dilation, which signifies the onset of the second stage,
a woman typically begins to bear down. With descent of the presenting part,
she develops the urge to defecate. Uterine contractions and the accompanying
expulsive forces may now last 1 minute and recur at intervals less than 90
seconds. As discussed earlier, the median duration of the second stage is 50
minutes in nulliparas and 20 minutes in multiparas, although this length can

vary. Monitoring intervals of the fetal heart rate were discussed earlier (p.
427), and interpretation of second-stage electronic fetal heart rate patterns is
discussed in Chapter 24 (p. 447).
In most cases, bearing down is reflexive and spontaneous during secondstage labor. In those with neuraxial analgesia, this urge may be blunted. To
improve spontaneous birth rates, delayed pushing for 60 minutes once the
second stage is reached has been suggested to permit passive fetal descent to
increase pushing efficiency and minimize maternal exhaustion. One large
randomized trial compared immediate and delayed pushing in nulliparas at
term with neuraxial analgesia. Routes of delivery were similar. The
immediate group actively pushed longer, a mean difference of 9 minutes, but
had lower rates of chorioamnionitis (Cahill, 2018). A subsequent
metaanalysis noted similar findings (Di Mascio, 2020).
During pushing, a woman may not employ her expulsive forces to good
advantage and coaching is desirable. When the next uterine contraction
begins, she is instructed to exert downward pressure as though she were
straining at stool. A woman is not encouraged to push beyond the completion
of each contraction. Instead, she and her fetus are allowed to rest and
recover. During this period of active pushing, the fetal heart rate auscultated
during the contraction is likely to be slow but should recover to normal range
before the next expulsive effort. Fetal and obstetrical outcomes appear to be
unaffected whether pushing is coached or uncoached during second-stage
labor (Bloom, 2006; Tuuli, 2012).
Several positions during the second stage have been recommended to
augment pushing efforts. The Birth in the Upright Maternal Position with
Epidural in Second Stage (BUMPES) trial compared a lateral recumbent
position and a supported upright one for nulliparas. Upright positions include
standing, sitting out of bed, kneeling, or squatting. The lateral recumbent
position required the head of the bed to have an incline ≤30 degrees. When
compared, the recumbent group had a spontaneous birth rate of 41 percent,
which was significantly higher than the 35-percent spontaneous birth rate
experienced by the upright group. Otherwise, rates of operative vaginal
delivery (OVD), anal sphincter tear, and neonatal outcome measures were
similar (Epidural and Position Trial Collaborative Group, 2017). In a
subsequent Cochrane review of studies that included nulliparas and
multiparas, upright or recumbent position had little or no affect on rates of
“operative birth,” which combined OVD and cesarean delivery (Walker,

2018). In those without epidural analgesia, Gupta and coworkers (2017) in
their Cochrane review compared upright positions with supine or lithotomy
positions during second-stage labor in multiparas and nulliparas. Upright
positions offered a marginally shorter interval to delivery and fewer
episiotomies and OVDs. However, rates of blood loss >500 mL and perhaps
of second-degree lacerations were increased. In sum, no one position is
mandated for labor. Repositioning with the goal of maternal comfort and
optimal fetal trajectory is suitable as long as appropriate maternal and fetal
monitoring can be achieved (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2019a). To help avoid femoral or lumbosacral nerve injury
from lithotomy positions, hips are not overly flexed, abducted, or externally
rotated for extended periods (Chap. 36, p. 644). From early data,
transperineal ultrasound assessment of the fetal head’s angle of progression
relative to the symphysis during the second stage may be a tool to predict
vaginal birth (Nassr, 2021).
As the head descends through the pelvis, the perineum begins to bulge
and the overlying skin becomes stretched. Now the scalp of the fetus may be
visible through the vulvar opening. At this time, the woman and her fetus are
prepared for delivery, which is described in Chapter 27 (p. 498).

LABOR MANAGEMENT PROTOCOLS
An orderly and systematic approach to labor management results in
reproducible beneficial maternal and perinatal outcomes (Althabe, 2008). In
Dublin more than 30 years ago, O’Driscoll and associates (1984) pioneered
the concept that a disciplined, standardized labor management protocol
reduced the number of cesarean deliveries for dystocia. Their overall
cesarean delivery rate was 5 percent in the 1970s and 1980s with such
management. The approach is now referred to as active management of
labor. Two of its components—amniotomy and oxytocin—have been widely
used, especially in English-speaking countries outside the United States. With
this protocol, labor is diagnosed when painful contractions are accompanied
by complete cervical effacement, bloody “show,” or ruptured membranes.
Women with such findings are committed to delivery within 12 hours. Pelvic
examination is performed each hour for the next 3 hours, and thereafter at 2hour intervals. When dilation has not increased by at least 1 cm/hr,
amniotomy is performed. Progress is again assessed at 2 hours, and high-

dose oxytocin infusion, described in Chapter 26 (p. 493), is started unless
dilation of at least 1 cm/hr is attained. Women are constantly attended by
midwives. If membranes rupture before admission, oxytocin is begun for no
progress at the 1-hour mark.
López-Zeno and colleagues (1992) prospectively compared such active
management with their “traditional” approach to labor management at
Northwestern Memorial Hospital in Chicago. They randomly assigned 705
nulliparas with uncomplicated pregnancies in spontaneous labor at term. The
cesarean delivery rate was significantly lower with active versus traditional
management—10.5 versus 14.1 percent, respectively. Subsequent studies did
not show this. Wei and associates (2013) in a Cochrane database review
found a modest reduction in cesarean delivery rates when active management
of labor was compared with standard care. Frigoletto and coworkers (1995)
reported another randomized trial with 1934 nulliparous women at Brigham
and Women’s Hospital in Boston. Although they found that such management
somewhat shortened labor, it did not affect the cesarean delivery rate. These
observations have since been reported by others (Brown, 2008).
At Parkland Hospital, women are admitted if active labor is diagnosed or
if ruptured membranes are confirmed. Labor is defined as cervical dilation
of ≥4 cm in the presence of regular uterine contractions. Management
guidelines direct that a pelvic examination subsequently be performed
approximately every 2 hours. Ineffective labor is suspected when the cervix
does not dilate within approximately 2 hours of admission. Amniotomy is
then performed, and labor progress determined at the next 2-hour evaluation.
In women whose labors do not progress, an intrauterine pressure catheter is
placed to assess uterine function. Hypotonic contractions and no cervical
dilation after an additional 2 to 3 hours result in stimulation of labor using
the high-dose oxytocin regimen described in Chapter 26 (p. 493). The goal is
uterine activity of 200 to 250 Montevideo units for 4 hours before dystocia is
diagnosed.
In cases in which hypotonic contractions are strongly suspected, internal
monitors may be placed with amniotomy and again cervical change and
contraction pattern are assessed in 2 hours. Confirmation of deficient
Montevideo units at that time may prompt oxytocin augmentation for maternal
or fetal indications.
Dilation rates of 1 to 2 cm/hr are accepted as evidence of progress after
satisfactory uterine activity has been established with oxytocin. This can

require up to 8 hours or more before cesarean delivery is performed for
dystocia. The cumulative time required to effect this stepwise management
approach permits many women to establish effective labor. This management
protocol has been evaluated in >20,000 women with uncomplicated
pregnancies. Importantly, these labor interventions and the relatively
infrequent use of cesarean delivery did not jeopardize the fetus-newborn.

REFERENCES
Althabe F, Buekens P, Bergel E, et al: A behavioral intervention to improve obstetrical care. N Engl J
Med 358:1929, 2008
American Academy of Pediatrics, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Guidelines for
Perinatal Care, 8th ed. Elk Grove Village, AAP, 2017
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Obstetric forceps. Committee Opinion No. 71,
August 1989
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Approaches to limit intervention during labor and
birth. Committee Opinion No. 766, February 2019a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Obstetric analgesia and anesthesia. Practice
Bulletin No. 209, March 2019b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Safe prevention of the primary cesarean delivery.
Obstetric Care Consensus No. 1, March 2014, Reaffirmed 2019c
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Hospital-based triage of obstetric patients.
Committee Opinion No. 667, July 2016, Reaffirmed 2020a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Prevention of group B streptococcal early-onset
disease in newborns. Committee Opinion No. 797, February 2020b
American Society of Anesthesiologists: Task Force on Obstetrical Anesthesia: practice guidelines for
obstetrical anesthesia. Anesthesiology 124:270, 2016
Ängeby K, Wilde-Larsson B, Hildingsson I, et al: Prevalence of prolonged latent phase and labor
outcomes: review of birth records in a Swedish population. J Midwifery Womens Health 63(1):33,
2018
Ashwal E, Fan IY, Berger H, et al: The association between fetal head station at the first diagnosis of
the second stage of labor and delivery outcomes. Am J Obstet Gynecol 224(3):306.e1, 2021
Bailit JL, Dierker L, Blanchard MH, et al: Outcomes of women presenting in active versus latent phase
of spontaneous labor. Obstet Gynecol 105:77, 2005
Bellussi F, Ghi T, Youssef A, et al: The use of intrapartum ultrasound to diagnose malpositions and
cephalic malpresentations. Am J Obstet Gynecol 217(6):633, 2017
Bin YS, Roberts CL, Nicholl MC, et al: Contribution of changing risk factors to the trend in breech
presentation at term. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol 56(6):564, 2016
Bloom SL, Casey BM, Schaffer JI, et al: A randomized trial of coached versus uncoached maternal
pushing during the second stage of labor. Am J Obstet Gynecol 194:10, 2006
Bloom SL, McIntire DD, Kelly MA, et al: Lack of effect of walking on labor and delivery. N Engl J
Med 339:76, 1998

Brown HC, Paranjothy S, Dowswell T, et al: Package of care for active management in labour for
reducing caesarean section rates in low-risk women. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 8:CD004907,
2008
Cahill AG, Duffy CR, Odibo AO, et al: Number of cervical examinations and risk of intrapartum
maternal fever. Obstet Gynecol 119(6):1096, 2012
Cahill AG, Srinivas SK, Tita AT, et al: Effect of immediate vs delayed pushing on rates of spontaneous
vaginal delivery among nulliparous women receiving neuraxial analgesia: a randomized clinical trial.
JAMA 320(14):1444, 2018
Caldwell WE, Moloy HC, D’Esopo DA: A roentgenologic study of the mechanism of engagement of
the fetal head. Am J Obstet Gynecol 28:824, 1934
Calkins LA: The etiology of occiput presentations. Am J Obstet Gynecol 37:618, 1939
Carlan SJ, Wyble L, Lense J, et al: Fetal head molding: diagnosis by ultrasound and a review of the
literature. J Perinatol 11:105, 1991
Carlhäll S, Källén K, Blomberg M: Maternal body mass index and duration of labor. Eur J Obstet
Gynecol Reprod Biol 171(1):49, 2013
Carlson JM, Diehl JA, Murray MS, et al: Maternal position during parturition in normal labor. Obstet
Gynecol 68:443, 1986
Chelmow D, Kilpatrick SJ, Laros RK Jr: Maternal and neonatal outcomes after prolonged latent phase.
Obstet Gynecol 81:486, 1993
Cluett ER, Burns E, Cuthbert A: Immersion in water during labour and birth. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev 5:CD000111, 2018
Dawood F, Dowswell T, Quenby S: Intravenous fluids for reducing the duration of labour in low risk
nulliparous women. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 6:CD007715, 2013
Di Mascio D, Saccone G, Bellussi F, et al: Delayed versus immediate pushing in the second stage of
labor in women with neuraxial analgesia: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized
controlled trials. Am J Obstet Gynecol 223(2):189, 2020
Ehsanipoor RM, Saccone G, Seligman NS, et al: Intravenous fluid rate for reduction of cesarean
delivery rate in nulliparous women: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Acta Obstet Gynecol
Scand 96(7):804, 2017
Eleje GU, Ezugwu EC, Eke AC, et al: Comparison of the duo of insulin-like growth factor binding
protein-1/alpha fetoprotein (Amnioquick duo+) and traditional clinical assessment for diagnosing
premature rupture of fetal membranes. J Perinat Med 45(1):105, 2017
Epidural and Position Trial Collaborative Group. Upright versus lying down position in second stage of
labour in nulliparous women with low dose epidural: BUMPES randomised controlled trial. BMJ
359:j4471, 2017
Field NT, Piper JM, Langer O: The effect of maternal obesity on the accuracy of fetal weight
estimation. Obstet Gynecol 86(1):102, 1995
Flynn AM, Kelly J, Hollins G, et al: Ambulation in labour. BMJ 2:591, 1978
Fong A, Serra AE, Caballero D, et al: A randomized, double-blinded, controlled trial of the effects of
fluid rate and/or presence of dextrose in intravenous fluids on the labor course of nulliparas. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 217(2):208.e1, 2017
Food and Drug Administration: Risks associated with use of rupture of membranes tests – letter to
health care providers. 2018. Available at: https://www.fda.gov/medical-devices/letters-health-careproviders/risks-associated-use-rupture-membranes-tests-letter-health-care-providers. Accessed
December 18, 2020

Fox NS, Bhavsar V, Saltzman DH, et al: Influence of maternal body mass index on the clinical
estimation of fetal weight in term pregnancies. Obstet Gynecol 113(3):641, 2009
Friedman E: The graphic analysis of labor. Am J Obstet Gynecol 68:1568, 1954
Friedman EA: An objective approach to the diagnosis and management of abnormal labor. Bull N Y
Acad Med 48:842, 1972
Friedman EA: Primigravid labor: a graphicostatistical analysis. Obstet Gynecol 6:567, 1955
Friedman EA, Sachtleben MR: Amniotomy and the course of labor. Obstet Gynecol 22:755, 1963
Frigoletto FD Jr, Lieberman E, Lang JM, et al: A clinical trial of active management of labor. N Engl J
Med 333:745, 1995
Gardberg M, Tuppurainen M: Anterior placental location predisposes for occiput posterior presentation
near term. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 73:151, 1994a
Gardberg M, Tuppurainen M: Persistent occiput posterior presentation—a clinical problem. Acta Obstet
Gynecol Scand 73:45, 1994b
Graham JM Jr, Kumar A: Diagnosis and management of extensive vertex birth molding. Clin Pediatr
(Phila) 45(7):672, 2006
Gupta JK, Sood A, Hofmeyr GJ, et al: Position in the second stage of labour for women without epidural
anaesthesia. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 5:CD002006, 2017
Hanley GE, Munro S, Greyson D, et al: Diagnosing onset of labor: a systematic review of definitions in
the research literature. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth 16:71, 2016
Herbst A, Källén K: Time between membrane rupture and delivery and septicemia in term neonates.
Obstet Gynecol 110:612, 2007
Hosek C, Faucher MA, Lankford J, et al: Perceptions of care in women sent home in latent labor. MCN
Am J Matern Child Nurs 39(2):115, 2014
Ireland KE, Rodriguez EI, Acosta OM, et al: Intra-amniotic dye alternatives for the diagnosis of preterm
prelabor rupture of membranes. Obstet Gynecol 129(6):1040, 2017
Kilpatrick SJ, Laros RK Jr: Characteristics of normal labor. Obstet Gynecol 74:85, 1989
Lawrence A, Lewis L, Hofmeyr GJ, et al: Maternal positions and mobility during first stage labour.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 10:CD003934, 2013
Leopold J: Conduct of normal births through external examination alone. Arch Gynaekol 45:337, 1894
Li M, Xing X, Yao L, et al: The effect of bladder catheterization on the incidence of urinary tract
infection in laboring women with epidural analgesia: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials.
Int Urogynecol J 30(9):1419, 2019
López-Zeno JA, Peaceman AM, Adashek JA, et al: A controlled trial of a program for the active
management of labor. N Engl J Med 326:450, 1992
Lupe PJ, Gross TL: Maternal upright posture and mobility in labor: a review. Obstet Gynecol 67:727,
1986
Lydon-Rochelle M, Albers L, Gorwoda J, et al: Accuracy of Leopold maneuvers in screening for
malpresentation: a prospective study. Birth 20:132, 1993
Nassr AA, Berghella V, Hessami K, et al: Intrapartum ultrasound measurement of angle of progression
at the onset of the second stage of labor for prediction of spontaneous vaginal delivery in term
singleton pregnancies: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol August 9, 2021
[Epub ahead of print]
Nelson DB, McIntire DD, Leveno KJ: False labor at term in singleton pregnancies: discharge after a
standardized assessment and perinatal outcomes. Obstet Gynecol 130(1):139, 2017
O’Driscoll K, Foley M, MacDonald D: Active management of labor as an alternative to cesarean
section for dystocia. Obstet Gynecol 63:485, 1984

Palacio M, Kühnert M, Berger R, et al: Meta-analysis of studies on biochemical marker tests for the
diagnosis of premature rupture of membranes: comparison of performance indexes. BMC
Pregnancy Childbirth 14:183, 2014
Pates JA, McIntire DD, Leveno KJ: Uterine contractions preceding labor. Obstet Gynecol 110:566,
2007
Preyer O, Husslein H, Concin N, et al: Fetal weight estimation at term—ultrasound versus clinical
examination with Leopold’s manoeuvres: a prospective blinded observational study. BMC Pregnancy
Childbirth 19(1):122, 2019
Ramphul M, Ooi PV, Burke G, et al: Instrumental delivery and ultrasound: a multicentre randomised
controlled trial of ultrasound assessment of the fetal head position versus standard care as an
approach to prevent morbidity at instrumental delivery. BJOG 121(8):1029, 2014
Read JA, Miller FC, Paul RH: Randomized trial of ambulation versus oxytocin for labor enhancement: a
preliminary report. Am J Obstet Gynecol 139(6):669, 1981
Riegel M, Quist-Nelson J, Saccone G, et al: Dextrose intravenous fluid therapy in labor reduces the
length of the first stage of labor. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 228:284, 2018
Robinson BK, Mapp DC, Bloom SL, et al: Increasing maternal body mass index and characteristics of
the second stage of labor. Obstet Gynecol 118:1309, 2011
Saccone G, Berghella V: Antibiotic prophylaxis for term or near-term premature rupture of membranes:
metaanalysis of randomized trials. Am J Obstet Gynecol 212(5):627.e1, 2015
Segel SY, Carreño CA, Weiner MS, et al: Relationship between fetal station and successful vaginal
delivery in nulliparous women. Am J Perinatol 29:723, 2012
Shrivastava VK, Garite TJ, Jenkins SM, et al: A randomized, double-blinded, controlled trial comparing
parenteral normal saline with and without dextrose on the course of labor in nulliparas. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 200(4):379.e1, 2009
Smith CA, Levett KM, Collins CT, et al: Relaxation techniques for pain management in labour.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 3:CD009514, 2018
Smyth RM, Markham C, Dowswell T. Amniotomy for shortening spontaneous labour. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 6:CD006167, 2013
Soper DE, Mayhall CG, Dalton HP: Risk factors for intraamniotic infection: a prospective epidemiologic
study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 161(3):562, 1989
Tilden EL, Phillippi JC, Carlson N, et al: The association between longer durations of the latent phase of
labor and subsequent perinatal processes and outcomes among midwifery patients. Birth 47(4):418,
2020
Toijonen AE, Heinonen ST, Gissler MV, et al: A comparison of risk factors for breech presentation in
preterm and term labor: a nationwide, population-based case-control study. Arch Gynecol Obstet
301(2):393, 2020
Tuuli MG, Frey HA, Odibo AO, et al: Immediate compared with delayed pushing in the second stage of
labor. Obstet Gynecol 120:660, 2012
Walker KF, Kibuka M, Thornton JG, et al: Maternal position in the second stage of labour for women
with epidural anaesthesia. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 11:CD008070, 2018
Wei S, Wo BL, Qi HP, et al: Early amniotomy and early oxytocin for prevention of, or therapy for, delay
in first stage spontaneous labour compared with routine care. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
8:CD006794, 2013
Wiafe YA, Whitehead B, Venables H, et al: The effectiveness of intrapartum ultrasonography in
assessing cervical dilatation, head station and position: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Ultrasound 24(4):222, 2016

Williams RM, Thom MH, Studd JW: A study of the benefits and acceptability of ambulation in
spontaneous labor. BJOG 87:122, 1980
Wood AM, Frey HA, Tuuli MG, et al: Optimal admission cervical dilation in spontaneously laboring
women. Am J Perinatol 33(2):188, 2016
Yamada H, Kishida T, Negishi H, et al: Silent premature rupture of membranes, detected and monitored
serially by an AFP kit. J Obstet Gynaecol Res 24:103, 1998
Zhang J, Landy HJ, Branch DW, et al: Contemporary patterns of spontaneous labor with normal
neonatal outcomes. Obstet Gynecol 116:1281, 2010

CHAPTER 23

Abnormal Labor

DYSTOCIA
ABNORMALITIES OF THE EXPULSIVE FORCES
PREMATURELY RUPTURED MEMBRANES AT TERM
PRECIPITOUS LABOR AND DELIVERY
FETOPELVIC DISPROPORTION
FACE PRESENTATION
BROW PRESENTATION
TRANSVERSE LIE
COMPOUND PRESENTATION
COMPLICATIONS WITH DYSTOCIA
REFERENCES
Labor arrest, abnormal fetal presentation, or fetal jeopardy are indications
for a large percentage of primary cesarean deliveries in the United States
(Boyle, 2013). Lowering dystocia rates offers the potential to decrease rates
of this surgery and associated maternal morbidity.

DYSTOCIA

Dystocia literally means difficult labor and is characterized by abnormally
slow labor progress. Causes are grouped into three distinct categories.
Mechanistically, these simplify into abnormalities of the powers—poor
uterine contractility and maternal expulsive effort; of the passenger—the
fetus; and of the passage—the pelvis and lower reproductive tract.
These three groups act singly or in combination to produce dysfunctional
labor (Table 23-1). For the powers, uterine contractions may be
insufficiently strong or inappropriately coordinated to efface and dilate the
cervix. This is termed uterine dysfunction. Moreover, during second-stage
labor, voluntary maternal pushing may be inadequate. For the passenger, fetal
abnormalities of presentation, position, or anatomy may slow progress. Last,
for the passage, structural changes can contract the maternal bony pelvis. Or,
soft tissue abnormalities of the reproductive tract may block fetal descent.
TABLE 23-1. Some Causes of Dystocia in Term Vertex Singletons

To describe ineffective labors, two commonly used terms are
cephalopelvic disproportion (CPD) and failure to progress. CPD describes
obstructed labor resulting from disparity between the fetal head size and
maternal pelvis. The term CPD originated at a time when the main indication
for cesarean delivery was overt pelvic contracture from rickets (Olah,
1994). Such absolute disproportion is now rare, and most cases result from
malposition of the fetal head within the pelvis (asynclitism). True

disproportion is a tenuous diagnosis because 50 to 75 percent of women
undergoing cesarean delivery for this reason subsequently deliver even
larger newborns vaginally (Lewkowitz, 2015; Place, 2019).
A second phrase, failure to progress in either spontaneous or stimulated
labor, has become an increasingly popular description of ineffectual labor.
This term reflects lack of progressive cervical dilation or halted fetal
descent.

ABNORMALITIES OF THE EXPULSIVE FORCES
■ Types of Uterine Dysfunction
Uterine contractions are needed to dilate the cervix and to expel the fetus. A
contraction is initiated by spontaneous action potentials in the membrane of
smooth muscle cells. Unlike the heart, a single pacemaker or its site remain
unresolved (Young, 2018). Resulting uterine contractions in normal labor
show a rising and falling gradient of myometrial activity (Reynolds, 1951).
Normal spontaneous contractions can exert pressures approximating 60 mm
Hg (Hendricks, 1959). Even so, the lower limit of contraction pressure
required to dilate the cervix is 15 mm Hg (Caldeyro-Barcia, 1950).
In abnormal labor, two physiological types of uterine dysfunction may
develop. In the more common hypotonic uterine dysfunction, basal tone is
normal and uterine contractions have a normal gradient pattern
(synchronous). However, pressure during a contraction is insufficient to
dilate the cervix. In the second type, hypertonic uterine dysfunction or
incoordinate uterine dysfunction, either basal tone is elevated appreciably
or the pressure gradient is distorted.

■ Risk Factors for Uterine Dysfunction
Various factors are implicated in uterine dysfunction. First, neuraxial
analgesia can slow labor and has been associated with longer first and
second stages of labor (Sharma, 2004). With current anesthesia methods,
however, its effect on labor length is blunted (Anim-Somuah, 2018; Myers,
2020). Moreover, cesarean delivery rates are not higher, and supporting
studies are presented in Chapter 25 (p. 477).

Chorioamnionitis is associated with prolonged labor. Uterine infection
may directly contribute to uterine dysfunction or instead may simply be an
associated consequence of prolonged, dysfunctional labor (Mark, 2000;
Satin, 1992). Affected gravidas are monitored for labor progress, and
augmentation of protracted labor is prudent (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019a).
A higher station at the onset of labor is significantly linked with
subsequent dystocia (Friedman, 1965, 1976; Roshanfekr, 1999). Although a
risk factor, most nulliparas without fetal head engagement at diagnosis of
active labor still deliver vaginally. These observations apply especially for
parous women because the head typically descends later in labor.
Dystocia rate rises proportionally with maternal age even after adjusting
for maternal and fetal weight and parity (Timofeev, 2013; Waldenström,
2017). Maternal obesity lengthens the first stages of labor by 30 to 60
minutes in nulliparas, even after adjusting for associated diabetes, fetal
weight, and parity (Carlhäll, 2013; Kominiarek, 2011). Dystocia-associated
cesarean delivery rates are higher in this group (Fyfe, 2011; Kawakita,
2016). Growing evidence suggests a pathologic biological effect of obesity
on normal parturition (Azais, 2017; Carlson, 2015).

■ Labor Disorders
Latent-phase Prolongation
Uterine dysfunction can in turn lead to labor abnormalities (Table 23-2).
First, the latent phase may be prolonged, which is defined as >20 hours in the
nullipara and >14 hours in the multipara (Friedman, 1961, 1963b). In some,
uterine contractions cease, suggesting false labor. In the remainder, an
abnormally long latent phase persists and is often treated with amniotomy
and oxytocin stimulation (Friedman, 1963a). The diagnosis of uterine
dysfunction in the latent phase is difficult and commonly is made
retrospectively. Women who are not yet in active labor often are erroneously
treated for perceived uterine dysfunction.
TABLE 23-2. Abnormal Labor Patterns, Diagnostic Criteria, and Methods
of Treatment

Active-phase Disorders
In active labor, disorders are divided into those with slow progress—a
protraction disorder or those with halted progress—an arrest disorder.
Terms presented in Table 23-2 and their diagnostic criteria describe
abnormal labor. To be diagnosed with either of these, a woman must be in the
active phase of labor.
The criteria and management of abnormal labor have undergone
modification, and the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
and the Society for Maternal–Fetal Medicine (2019b) describe these in their
Obstetric Care Consensus titled Safe Prevention of the Primary Cesarean
Delivery. The Obstetric Care Consensus was a response to the rising
cesarean delivery rate because nearly one third of women who give birth
each year in the United States undergoes this surgery (Martin, 2019). New
recommendations stem from data of normal labor progress in a more
contemporary cohort. The World Health Organization (2018) has also
revised its recommendations on labor progress. These guidelines have
prompted controversy by their significant revision of the preexisting
understanding of abnormal labor.

Active-phase Protraction. Of active-phase disorders, protraction disorders
are less well described. Previously, protraction has been defined as <1
cm/hr cervical dilation for a minimum of 4 hours. These criteria were
adapted from those of Cohen and Friedman (1983) and shown in Table 23-2.
For this disorder, observation for further progress is appropriate treatment.
In monitoring active labor, if hypotonic contractions are strongly suspected,
internal monitors may be placed with amniotomy and again cervical change
and contraction pattern are reassessed. Deficient Montevideo units and poor
active labor progress typically prompts oxytocin augmentation. In accord
with the Consensus Committee (2019b), slow but progressive first-stage
labor should not be an indication for cesarean delivery.
Active-phase Arrest. Handa and Laros (1993) diagnosed active-phase arrest,
defined as no dilation for ≥2 hours, in 5 percent of term nulliparas. This
incidence has not changed since the 1950s (Friedman, 1978). Inadequate
uterine contractions, defined as <180 Montevideo units, calculated as shown
in Figure 23-1, were diagnosed in 80 percent of women with active-phase
arrest. Hauth and coworkers (1986, 1991) reported that when labor is
effectively induced or augmented with oxytocin, 90 percent of women
achieve 200 to 225 Montevideo units, and 40 percent achieve at least 300
Montevideo units. These results suggest that certain minimums of uterine
activity should be achieved before performing cesarean delivery for
dystocia. Oxytocin regimens suitable to augment labor mirror those to induce
labor. These regimens are outlined in detail in Chapter 26 (p. 493).

FIGURE 23-1 Montevideo units are calculated by subtracting the baseline uterine pressure from the
peak contraction pressure for each contraction in a 10-minute window and adding the pressures
generated by each contraction. In the example shown, there were five contractions producing pressure
changes of 52, 50, 47, 44, and 49 mm Hg, respectively. The sum of these five contractions is 242
Montevideo units.

Other criteria should also be met. First, the latent phase should be
completed, and the cervix is dilated ≥4 cm. Also, a uterine contraction
pattern of ≥200 Montevideo units in a 10-minute period has been present for
≥4 hours without cervical change (Rouse, 1999). The Consensus Committee
has extended this further, as described next.
Obstetric Care Consensus Committee. Four recommendations of the
Consensus Committee apply to management of first-stage labor. The first
admonishes against cesarean delivery in the latent phase. Specifically, a
prolonged latent phase should not be the sole indication for cesarean
delivery. This guideline is not new and is traceable to Friedman’s work.
The second directive, too, is conventional practice. It recommends
against cesarean delivery if labor is progressive but slow—a protraction
disorder. This instance is typically managed with observation, assessment of
uterine activity, and stimulation of contractions as needed.
A third instruction addresses the cervical dilation threshold that serves to
herald active labor. Namely, a cervical dilation of 6 cm—not 4 cm—is now
the recommended threshold. Moreover, before this threshold, standards for
active-phase progress should not be applied. Of note, the WHO (2018)

recognizes 5 cm as the active-labor threshold. Other large studies noted
labor acceleration after 5 cm (Ashwal, 2020; Oladapo, 2018).
A fourth stipulation notes that cesarean delivery for active-phase arrest is
best reserved for women with cervical dilation ≥6 cm and ruptured
membranes who fail to progress despite 4 hours of adequate uterine activity
or despite at least 6 hours of oxytocin administration but inadequate
contractions.
Of these, the change of thresholds from 4 to 6 cm has prompted the most
scrutiny. Described in Chapter 22 (p. 424), original labor curves have been
used since first proposed approximately 40 years ago by Friedman (1978).
Instead, Zhang and coworkers (2002) proposed a new labor curve derived
from a more contemporaneous cohort delivered between 1992 and 1996. The
Friedman labor curves reflected women in spontaneous labor with infrequent
use of neuraxial labor analgesia or oxytocin augmentation. In contrast, in the
later cohort, approximately 50 percent of women had neuraxial analgesia or
augmentation. In the later group, the rate of cervical change is slow between
4 and 6 cm but accelerates thereafter. This could reasonably be interpreted as
the active phase beginning at 6 cm. In comparing both labor curves, the
active phase curve in the Zhang cohort flattens beginning at 3 to 4 cm (Fig.
23-2). Namely, the 6-cm rule for active labor derives from a slowing of the
rate or flattening of the slope of cervical change in first-stage labor.

FIGURE 23-2 Cervical dilation curves from Friedman (1955) and Zhang (2002).

These findings by Zhang and coworkers (2002) are consistent with the
labor results obtained in the subsequent Safe Labor Consortium study (Zhang,
2010). However, this study derived its numbers from a retrospective
observational dataset built from abstracted labor and delivery information
from 19 hospitals across the United States. Various statistical methods and
heavy manipulations of these numbers were used (Cohen, 2015b). Moreover,
women were analyzed after excluding all women with cesarean deliveries or
asphyxiated newborns. The Consensus Committee (2019b) was explicit that
“the Consortium on Safe Labor data, rather than the standards proposed by
Friedman, should inform evidence-based labor management.”
Critics of the Consensus Committee recommendations note that the
Consortium on Safe Labor data were derived from clinical settings with a net
cesarean rate of 30 percent. Thus, adherence to the new recommendations
may fail to achieve desired cesarean rate reductions. Also, the study lacked a
focus on neonatal safety, given that all the asphyxiated neonates were
excluded. Supporters note that the study of prolonged first-stage labors by
Cheng and coworkers (2010) found higher rates of cesarean delivery and
chorioamnionitis but not higher rates of neonatal morbidity. However, Harper

and associates (2014) analyzed maternal and neonatal adverse outcomes
related to first-stage labor lengths. In 5030 women, first-stage labor
durations were divided into those <90th percentile or those ≥90th percentile,
with incremental increases thereafter. These authors and those of other large
studies similarly found maternal and neonatal composite morbidity scores
that were higher in cohorts after adoption of Consensus Committee guidelines
compared with groups prior to implementation (Blankenship, 2020;
Rosenbloom, 2017). This concern for adverse fetal and maternal effects
resulting from the new Consensus Committee guidelines was echoed by
Cohen and Friedman (2015a,b).
Another caveat notes that the efficacy of these recommendations to
achieve their primary goal is limited. One retrospective cohort study
compared 3200 women with uncomplicated term pregnancy undergoing
spontaneous or induced labor before guideline changes and 3000 similar
gravidas after these changes. The cesarean delivery rate for first-stage labor
arrest dropped from 1.8 to 0.9 percent in nulliparas during this time
(Thuillier, 2018). Percent changes were not significant in multiparas.
Adverse maternal and neonatal outcomes did not significantly differ between
epoch groups. In another evaluation of outcomes before and after guideline
implementation, cesarean delivery rates were unchanged (Rosenbloom,
2017).
The Consensus Committee suggests that cesarean deliveries for dystocia
are being done before 6 cm cervical dilation. However, evidence suggests
that all of the Committee’s first-stage recommendations are actually already
empirically in use but are concurrent with an overall cesarean delivery rate
>30 percent. For example, Nelson and associates (2020) analyzed data from
nearly 9000 women with primary cesarean deliveries for dystocia at 13
university hospitals between 1999 and 2000. Notably, the median cervical
dilation at the time of cesarean for dystocia was 6 cm. As another example,
primary cesarean delivery rates for dystocia at Parkland Hospital between
1988 and 2017 did not change significantly. Thus, Consensus Committee
guidelines may fail to prevent additional cesareans for dystocia. Logically,
further study is needed.

Second-stage Descent Disorders
As discussed in Chapter 22 (p. 425), fetal descent largely follows complete
dilation. Moreover, the second stage incorporates many of the cardinal

movements necessary for the fetus to negotiate the birth canal. Thus,
disproportion of the fetus and pelvis frequently becomes apparent during
second-stage labor.
Similar to first-stage labor, time boundaries have been supported to limit
second-stage duration to minimize adverse maternal and fetal outcomes. The
second stage in nulliparas has been limited to 2 hours and extended to 3
hours when regional analgesia is used. For multiparas, 1 hour has been the
limit, extended to 2 hours with regional analgesia. Several studies supported
this extension (Cohen, 1977; Menticoglou, 1995a,b; Saunders, 1992).
However, of maternal outcomes, higher rates of chorioamnionitis, anal
sphincter injury, operative vaginal birth, and postpartum hemorrhage accrue
as the second stage lengthens (Allen, 2009; Rouse, 2009).
Newer guidelines have been promoted by the Consensus Committee
(2019b) for second-stage labor. These recommend that a nullipara push for at
least 3 hours and a multipara push for at least 2 hours before second-stage
labor arrest is diagnosed. Importantly, one caveat is that maternal and fetal
status should be reassuring. These authors provide options to these times
before cesarean delivery is performed. Namely, longer durations may be
appropriate as long as progress is documented. Also, a specific maximal
length of time spent in second-stage labor beyond which all women should
undergo operative delivery has not been identified.
Intuitively, the goal to lower cesarean delivery rates is best balanced
with one to ensure neonatal safety. It is problematic that no robust data on
neonatal outcomes support the safety of allowing prolonged second-stage
labor. Data from many evaluations reveal that serious newborn consequences
attend second-stage labors longer than 3 hours (Bleich, 2012; Cahill, 2018;
Nelson, 2020; Rosenbloom, 2017). Other data, when adjusted for labor
variables, show no difference in adverse neonatal complications for these
longer second stages (Cheng, 2004; Le Ray, 2009; Rouse, 2009). Some
investigators have argued that the absolute number of such outcomes is small
and overall outcomes remain good (Grantz, 2018; Grobman, 2016; Laughon,
2014). That said, some of the adverse outcomes are severe. To fully
ascertain specific effect of these guidelines on morbidity rates, randomized
controlled trials are needed.
It is possible that prolonged first-stage labor presages that with the
second stage. Nelson and coworkers (2013) studied the relationships
between the lengths of the first and second stages of labor in 12,523

nulliparas at term delivered at Parkland Hospital. The second stage
significantly lengthened concomitantly with increasing first-stage duration.
The 95th percentile was 15.6 and 2.9 hours for the first and second stages,
respectively. Women with first stages lasting longer than 15.6 hours (>95th
percentile) had a 16-percent rate of second-stage labor lasting 3 hours (95th
percentile). This compared with a 4.5-percent rate of prolonged second
stages in women with first-stage labors lasting <95th percentile.

■ Maternal Pushing Efforts
With full cervical dilation, most women cannot resist the urge to push with
uterine contractions. The combined force created by contractions of the
uterus and abdominal musculature propels the fetus downward. However, at
times, force created by abdominal musculature is compromised sufficiently
to slow or even prevent spontaneous vaginal delivery. Heavy sedation or
regional analgesia may reduce the reflex urge to push and may impair the
ability to contract abdominal muscles sufficiently. Allowing time for these to
abate is reasonable. In other instances, the urge to push is overridden by the
intense pain created by bearing down. Depending on fetal station and
anticipated second stage, options include emotional support and
encouragement, parenteral analgesia, pudendal blockade, or neuraxial
analgesia.

PREMATURELY RUPTURED MEMBRANES AT TERM
Membrane rupture at term without spontaneous uterine contractions
complicates approximately 8 percent of pregnancies. In the past, labor
stimulation was initiated if contractions did not begin after 6 to 12 hours.
Practice-changing research included that of Hannah (1996) and Peleg (1999)
and their associates, who enrolled a total of 5042 pregnancies with ruptured
membranes in a randomized investigation. They measured the effects of
induction versus expectant management and also compared induction using
intravenous oxytocin with that using prostaglandin E2 gel. There were
approximately 1200 pregnancies in each of the four study arms. They
concluded that labor induction with intravenous oxytocin was preferred
management. This was based on significantly fewer intrapartum and

postpartum infections in women whose labor was induced. There were no
significant differences in cesarean delivery rates. Subsequent analysis by
Hannah and coworkers (2000) indicated higher rates of adverse outcomes
when expectant management at home was compared with in-hospital
observation. Mozurkewich and associates (2009) reported lower rates of
chorioamnionitis, metritis, and neonatal intensive care unit admissions for
women with term ruptured membranes whose labors were induced compared
with those managed expectantly. At Parkland Hospital, labor is induced soon
after admission when ruptured membranes are confirmed at term. In those
with hypotonic contractions or with advanced cervical dilation, oxytocin is
selected to lower potential hyperstimulation risk. In those with an
unfavorable cervix, no or few contraction, and no significant fetal heart rate
decelerations, prostaglandin E1 (misoprostol) is chosen to promote cervical
ripening and contractions. The benefit of prophylactic antibiotics in women
with ruptured membranes before labor at term is unclear (Passos, 2012).
However, in those with membranes ruptured longer than 18 hours, antibiotics
are instituted for group B streptococcal infection prophylaxis (Chap. 67, p.
1194).

PRECIPITOUS LABOR AND DELIVERY
Labor can be too slow, but it also can be abnormally rapid. Precipitous
labor and delivery is extremely rapid labor and delivery. It may result from
an abnormally low resistance of the soft parts of the birth canal, from
abnormally strong uterine and abdominal contractions, or rarely from a lack
of pain with contractions to cue advanced labor.
Precipitous labor terminates in expulsion of the fetus in <3 hours. Using
this definition, 25,260 live births—3 percent—were complicated by
precipitous labor in the United States in 2013 (Martin, 2015). Despite this
incidence, little information is published on maternal and perinatal outcomes.
For the mother, complications are few if the cervix is effaced
appreciably and compliant, if the vagina has been stretched previously, and if
the perineum is relaxed. Conversely, vigorous uterine contractions combined
with a long, firm cervix and a noncompliant birth canal may lead to uterine
rupture or extensive lacerations of the cervix, vagina, vulva, or perineum
(Sheiner, 2004). It is in these latter circumstances that amnionic-fluid

embolism most likely develops (Chap. 42, p. 743). Precipitous labor is
frequently followed by uterine atony. In one report of 99 term pregnancies,
short labors were more common in multiparas who typically had contractions
at intervals less than 2 minutes. Precipitous labors have been linked to
cocaine abuse and associated with placental abruption, meconium,
postpartum hemorrhage, and low Apgar scores (Mahon, 1994).
For the neonate, adverse perinatal outcomes from rapid labor may be
increased considerably for several reasons. The uterine contractions, often
with negligible intervals of relaxation, prevent appropriate uterine blood
flow and fetal oxygenation. Related to trauma, resistance of the birth canal
rarely may cause intracranial injury. In one review of 22 cases of Erb or
Duchenne palsy, precipitous second-stage labor was associated in a third of
the cases (Acker, 1988). During unattended birth, the newborn may fall to the
floor and be injured. Last, needed resuscitation may not be immediately
available due to delivery speed.
As treatment, analgesia is unlikely to modify these forceful contractions
significantly. The use of tocolytic agents such as magnesium sulfate or
terbutaline is unproven in these circumstances. A single, intramuscular 250ug terbutaline dose may be reasonable in an attempt to resolve a
nonreassuring fetal heart rate pattern. This is balanced against the risk of
associated uterine atony if delivery is imminent. Certainly, oxytocin
administration should be stopped.

FETOPELVIC DISPROPORTION
■ Pelvic Capacity
Fetopelvic disproportion arises from diminished pelvic capacity or from
abnormal fetal size, structure, presentation, or position. Commonly, both are
present. The pelvic inlet, midpelvis, or pelvic outlet may be contracted
solely or in combination. Any contraction of the pelvic diameters that
diminishes pelvic capacity can create dystocia. Normal pelvic anatomy is
also discussed in Chapter 2 (p. 28).

Contracted Inlet
Before labor, the fetal biparietal diameter averages from 9.5 to 9.8 cm. Thus,
it might prove difficult or even impossible for some fetuses to pass through a

pelvic inlet that has an anteroposterior diameter <10 cm. Mengert (1948) and
Kaltreider (1952), employing x-ray pelvimetry, demonstrated that the
incidence of difficult deliveries rises when either the anteroposterior
diameter of the inlet is <10 cm or the transverse diameter is <12 cm. Either
threshold can be used to consider a pelvis contracted. As expected, when
both diameters are shortened, dystocia rates are much greater than when only
one is diminished.
The anteroposterior diameter of the inlet is also called the obstetrical
conjugate. It is commonly approximated by manually measuring the diagonal
conjugate, which is approximately 1.5 cm greater. To measure the diagonal
conjugate, a hand with the palm oriented laterally extends its index finger to
the promontory. The distance from the fingertip to the point at which the
lowest margin of the symphysis strikes the same finger’s base is the diagonal
conjugate. Inlet contraction usually is defined as a diagonal conjugate <11.5
cm.
A diminutive woman is likely to have a small pelvis, but she is also
likely to have a small neonate. Thoms (1937) studied 362 nulliparas and
found that the mean birthweight of their offspring was significantly lower—
280 g—in women with a small pelvis than in those with a medium or large
pelvis.
Normally, cervical dilation is aided by hydrostatic action of the
unruptured membranes or by direct application of the presenting part against
the cervix after membrane rupture. In contracted pelves, however, because
the head is arrested in the pelvic inlet, the entire force exerted by
contractions acts directly on the portion of membranes that contact the
dilating cervix. Consequently, early spontaneous rupture of the membranes is
more likely.
After membrane rupture, absent pressure by the head against the cervix
and lower uterine segment predisposes to less effective contractions. Hence,
further dilation may proceed very slowly or not at all. Cibils and Hendricks
(1965) reported that the mechanical adaptation of the fetal passenger to the
bony passage plays an important part in determining the efficiency of
contractions. Better adaptation begets more efficient contractions.
A contracted inlet also plays an important part in the production of
abnormal presentations. In nulliparas with normal pelvic capacity, the
presenting part at term commonly descends into the pelvic cavity before
labor onset. If the inlet is contracted considerably or if asynclitism is

marked, descent usually does not take place until after labor onset, if at all.
Cephalic presentations still predominate, but the head floats over the pelvic
inlet or rests more laterally in one of the iliac fossae. Accordingly, very
slight influences may cause the fetus to assume other presentations. In women
with contracted pelves, face and shoulder presentations are encountered
more frequently, and the cord prolapses more often.

Contracted Midpelvis
This finding is more common than inlet contraction. It frequently causes
transverse arrest of the fetal head, which potentially can lead to a difficult
midforceps operation or to cesarean delivery.
The obstetrical plane of the midpelvis extends from the inferior margin of
the symphysis pubis through the ischial spines and touches the sacrum near
the junction of the fourth and fifth vertebrae. A transverse line theoretically
connecting the ischial spines divides the midpelvis into anterior and
posterior portions (Fig. 2-16, p. 29). The former is bounded anteriorly by the
lower border of the symphysis pubis and laterally by the ischiopubic rami.
The posterior portion is bounded dorsally by the sacrum and laterally by the
sacrospinous ligaments, forming the lower limits of the sacrosciatic notch.
Average midpelvis measurements are as follows: transverse, or
interischial spinous, 10.5 cm; anteroposterior, from the lower border of the
symphysis pubis to the junction of S4 and S5, 11.5 cm; and posterior sagittal,
from the midpoint of the interspinous line to the same point on the sacrum, 5
cm. The definition of midpelvic contractions has not been established with
the same precision possible for inlet contractions. Even so, the midpelvis is
likely contracted when the sum of the interspinous and posterior sagittal
diameters of the midpelvis—normally, 10.5 plus 5 cm, or 15.5 cm—falls to
13.5 cm or less. This concept was emphasized by Chen and Huang (1982) in
evaluating possible midpelvic contraction. Midpelvic contraction is
suspected whenever the interspinous diameter is <10 cm. When it measures
<8 cm, the midpelvis is contracted.
Although no precise manual method permits measure of midpelvic
dimensions, a suggestion of contraction sometimes can be inferred if the
spines are prominent, the pelvic sidewalls converge, or the sacrosciatic
notch is narrow. Moreover, Eller and Mengert (1947) noted that the
relationship between the intertuberous and interspinous diameters of the

ischium is sufficiently constant that narrowing of the interspinous diameter
can be anticipated when the intertuberous diameter is narrow. A normal
intertuberous diameter, however, does not always exclude a narrow
interspinous diameter.

Contracted Outlet
This finding usually is defined as an interischial tuberous diameter of 8 cm or
less. The pelvic outlet may be roughly likened to two triangles, with the
interischial tuberous diameter constituting the base of both. The sides of the
anterior triangle are the pubic rami, and its apex is the inferoposterior
surface of the symphysis pubis. The posterior triangle has no bony sides but
is limited at its apex by the tip of the last sacral vertebra—not the tip of the
coccyx. Diminution of the intertuberous diameter with consequent narrowing
of the anterior triangle must inevitably force the fetal head posteriorly.
Floberg and associates (1987) reported that outlet contractions were found in
almost 1 percent of more than 1400 unselected nulliparas with term
pregnancies. A contracted outlet may cause dystocia not so much by itself but
by an often-associated midpelvic contraction. Outlet contraction without
concomitant midplane contraction is rare.
Although the disproportion between the fetal head and the pelvic outlet is
not sufficiently great to give rise to severe dystocia, it may play an important
part in perineal tears. With increased narrowing of the pubic arch, the
occiput cannot emerge directly beneath the symphysis pubis but is forced
farther down upon the ischiopubic rami. The perineum, consequently,
becomes increasingly distended and thus exposed to risk of laceration.

Pelvic Fractures
Vallier (2012) and Riehl (2014) reviewed experiences with pelvic fractures
and pregnancy. Trauma from automobile collisions was the most common
cause. Moreover, they note that fracture pattern, minor malalignment, and
retained hardware are not absolute indications for cesarean delivery. In
determining vaginal delivery candidates, fracture healing requires 8 to 12
weeks and thus recent fracture merits cesarean delivery (Amorosa, 2013).
With a healed fracture, care includes review of pelvic radiographs and
possible pelvimetry later in pregnancy.

■ Radiologic Assessment
Current evaluation of pelvic capacity typically uses only digital interrogation
of the bony pelvis. Of radiological methods, x-ray pelvimetry with cephalic
presentations provides poor predictive value to diagnose CPD (Mengert,
1948; Pattinson, 2017). Similarly, magnetic resonance pelvimetry fails to
provide suitable accuracy in predicting cesarean delivery for dystocia
(Sporri, 2002; Zaretsky, 2005).
Fetal size alone is seldom the reason for failed labor. Indeed, most cases
of CPD arise in fetuses whose weight is well within the range of the general
obstetrical population. Figure 23-3 depicts Parkland Hospital data, in which
two thirds of neonates who required cesarean delivery after failed forceps
delivery weighed <3700 g. Thus, head malposition more likely obstructs
fetal passage through the birth canal. These include asynclitism, occiput
posterior position, and face, brow, or sinciput presentation.

FIGURE 23-3 Birthweight distribution of 362 newborns born by cesarean delivery after a failed
forceps attempt at Parkland Hospital from 1989–1999. Only 12 percent (n = 44) of the newborns
weighed >4000 g (dark bars).

For fetal head size estimation, clinical and radiographical methods to
predict CPD also have proved disappointing. First, Mueller (1885) and
Hillis (1930) described a clinical maneuver in which the fetal head is
grasped through the abdominal wall, and firm pressure is directed downward
along the axis of the inlet. If no disproportion exists, the head readily enters
the pelvis, and vaginal delivery can be predicted. However, a prospective
evaluation of this Mueller-Hillis maneuver found it poorly predicted
subsequent labor dystocia (Thorp, 1993).
Measurements of fetal head diameters using plain radiographical
techniques are hindered by parallax distortions. The biparietal diameter and
head circumference can be measured sonographically, and Thurnau and
colleagues (1991) used the fetal-pelvic index to identify labor
complications. However, the sensitivity of such measurements to predict
CPD is poor (Ferguson, 1998; Korhonen, 2015).

■ Face Presentation
Etiology and Diagnosis
With this presentation, the neck is hyperextended so that the occiput is in
contact with the fetal back, and the chin (mentum) is presenting (Fig. 23-4).
The rate is approximately 0.1 percent of births (Arsène, 2019; Gardberg,
2011).

FIGURE 23-4 Face presentation. The chin is directly posterior. Vaginal delivery is impossible unless
the chin rotates anteriorly.

Causes of face presentations are numerous and include conditions that
favor neck extension or prevent flexion. Preterm fetuses, with their smaller
head dimensions, can engage before conversion to occiput presentation, and
multifetal gestations carry increased risk (Arsène, 2019; Shaffer, 2006). High
parity is another predisposing factor (Fuchs, 1985). In these cases, a
pendulous maternal abdomen permits the fetal back to sag forward, which
promotes extension of the cervical spine. Fetal malformations and
hydramnios are other risk factors for face or brow presentations, and

anencephalic fetuses naturally present by the face (Bashiri, 2008). Last,
extended neck positions develop more frequently when the pelvis is
contracted or the fetus is very large. In a series of 141 face presentations
studied by Hellman and coworkers (1950), the incidence of inlet contraction
was 40 percent. This high incidence of pelvic contraction should be kept in
mind when considering management.
Face presentation is diagnosed by vaginal examination and palpation of
facial features. Notably, a breech may be mistaken for a face presentation.
With careful examination, however, the finger encounters muscular resistance
with the anus, whereas the bony, less-yielding jaws and palate are felt
through the mouth. The finger, upon removal from the anus, may be stained
with meconium. The mouth and malar eminences form a triangular shape,
whereas the ischial tuberosities and anus lie in a straight line. Sonography
can aid unclear cases (Bellussi, 2017). Used rarely, radiographs demonstrate
a hyperextended head with the facial bones at or below the pelvic inlet (Duff,
1981).

Mechanism of Labor
The fetal face may present with the chin (mentum) anteriorly, transversely, or
posteriorly, relative to the maternal symphysis pubis (Chap. 22, p. 418).
Although some mentum posterior presentations persist, most convert
spontaneously to an anterior position, even as late as second-stage labor
(Duff, 1981; Sharshiner, 2015).
With the chin anterior, internal rotation of the face brings the chin under
the symphysis pubis (Fig. 23-5). Only in this way can the neck traverse the
posterior surface of the symphysis pubis. After anterior rotation and descent,
the chin and mouth appear at the vulva, and the undersurface of the chin
presses against the symphysis. Once the chin clears the symphysis, the neck
can flex. The nose, eyes, brow, and occiput then appear in succession over
the anterior margin of the perineum. After birth of the head, the occiput sags
backward toward the anus. Next, the chin rotates externally to the side
toward which it was originally directed, and the shoulders are born as in
cephalic presentations. Fortunately temporary, edema and bruising can
significantly distort the face.

FIGURE 23-5 Face presentation. A. Mechanism of labor for right mentoanterior position. B. Swollen
eyes and lips are common and transient in newborns delivered with face presentation.

Instead, if the chin persists posteriorly, the relatively short neck cannot
span the anterior surface of the sacrum. Moreover, the fetal brow is pressed
against the maternal symphysis pubis. This position precludes the flexion
necessary to negotiate the birth canal. Hence, as noted earlier, vaginal birth
from a mentum posterior position is impossible unless the shoulders enter the
pelvis at the same time, an event that is impossible except for an extremely
small or macerated fetus.

Management
During labor, fetal heart rate monitoring is best done with external devices to
help avoid face or eye injury. Because face presentations among term-size
fetuses are more common with some degree of pelvic inlet contraction,
cesarean delivery rates are substantially higher than with occiput
presentation. If indicated, low or outlet forceps delivery of a mentum anterior
face presentation can be completed (Chap. 29, p. 542). Vacuum extraction
has been associated with eye trauma and is not recommended (De Bernardo,
2017).
As noted, rotation to a mentum anterior position may occur late in labor.
Conversion methods should not be pursued. Namely, attempts to convert a
face presentation manually to an occiput one, to rotate a posterior chin to a
mentum anterior position, or to complete internal podalic version and
extraction are dangerous and not recommended.

■ Brow Presentation
This uncommon presentation is diagnosed when that portion of the fetal head
between the orbital ridge and the anterior fontanel presents at the pelvic
inlet. As shown in Figure 23-6, the fetal head thus occupies a position
midway between full flexion (occiput) and full extension (face). Rates range
from 0.1 to 0.2 percent of births (Gardberg, 2011; Verspyck, 2012).

FIGURE 23-6 Brow posterior presentation.

Risks for persistent brow presentation mirror those for face presentation.
A brow presentation is commonly unstable and converts to a face or an
occiput presentation (Cruikshank, 1973). The presentation may be recognized
by abdominal palpation when both the occiput and chin can be palpated
easily, but vaginal examination is usually necessary. The frontal sutures,
large anterior fontanel, orbital ridges, eyes, and root of the nose are felt
during vaginal examination, but neither the mouth nor the chin is palpable.
Sonographic landmarks have been described (Bellussi, 2017).
Except when the fetal head is small or the pelvis is unusually large,
engagement of the fetal head and subsequent delivery cannot take place as
long as the brow presentation persists. Engagement is impossible until
marked molding shortens the occipitomental diameter or, more commonly,
until the neck either flexes to an occiput presentation or extends to a face
presentation. The considerable molding essential for vaginal delivery of a
persistent brow characteristically deforms the head. The caput succedaneum
is over the forehead, and it may be so extensive that identification of the
brow by palpation is impossible. In these instances, the forehead is
prominent and squared, and the occipitomental diameter is diminished.
Management principles mirror those for a face presentation.

■ Transverse Lie
Etiology and Diagnosis
With this, the fetus’ long axis lies approximately perpendicular to that of the
mother. In a transverse lie, the shoulder is usually positioned over the pelvic
inlet. The head occupies one iliac fossa, and the breech the other. This
creates a shoulder presentation in which the side of the mother on which the
acromion rests determines the designation of the position as right or left
acromial. In addition, the back may be directed anteriorly or posteriorly and
also superiorly or inferiorly. Thus, it is customary to further distinguish right
or left varieties as dorsoanterior and dorsoposterior (Fig. 23-7).

FIGURE 23-7 Transverse lie. Leopold maneuver of a fetus with right acromiodorsoanterior position.

Transverse lie complicates approximately 0.3 percent of births
(Cruikshank, 1973; Gemer, 1994). Some of the more common causes include
abdominal wall relaxation from high parity, preterm fetus, placenta previa,
abnormal uterine anatomy, hydramnios, and contracted maternal pelvis.
A transverse lie is usually recognized easily, often by inspection alone.
The abdomen is unusually wide, whereas the uterine fundus extends to only
slightly above the umbilicus. No fetal pole is detected in the fundus, and the
ballottable head is found on one side and the breech on the other. When the
back is anterior, a hard resistance plane extends across the front of the

abdomen. When it is posterior, irregular nodules that represent fetal small
parts are felt through the mother’s abdominal wall. During vaginal
examination, in the early stages of labor, if the side of the thorax can be
reached, the sequential parallel ribs are felt. With further dilation, the
scapula and the clavicle are distinguished on opposite sides of the thorax.
The position of the axilla indicates the side of the mother toward which the
shoulder is directed.

Mechanism of Labor
Spontaneous delivery of a fully developed newborn is impossible with a
persistent transverse lie. After rupture of the membranes, if labor continues,
the fetal shoulder is forced into the pelvis, and the corresponding arm
frequently prolapses. After some descent, the shoulder is arrested by the
margins of the pelvic inlet. As labor continues, the shoulder is impacted
firmly in the upper part of the pelvis. The uterus then contracts vigorously in
an unsuccessful attempt to overcome the obstacle. With time, a uterine
contraction ring rises increasingly higher and becomes more marked. An
extreme form is the Bandl ring, described in the complication section. With a
neglected transverse lie, the uterus will eventually rupture. Even without this
complication, maternal and fetal morbidity rates with transverse lie are
increased because of the frequent association with placenta previa, umbilical
cord prolapse, and fetal manipulations during cesarean delivery.
If the fetus is small—usually <800 g—and the pelvis is large,
spontaneous delivery is possible despite persistence of the abnormal lie. The
fetus is compressed with the head forced against its abdomen. A portion of
the thoracic wall below the shoulder thus becomes the most dependent part,
appearing at the vulva. The head and thorax then pass through the pelvic
cavity at the same time. The fetus, which is doubled upon itself in a position
sometimes referred to as conduplicato corpore, is expelled.

Management
Active labor in a woman with a transverse lie typically requires cesarean
delivery. With dorsoanterior or back down position, neither the fetal feet nor
head occupies the lower uterine segment. A low transverse uterine incision
may lead to difficult fetal extraction. Thus, a vertical hysterotomy incision is
typically indicated. With dorsoposterior or back up position, one or both feet

can be grasped through a low transverse incision and delivered by breech
extraction (Chap. 28, p. 527).
Before labor or early in labor, with the membranes intact, attempts at
external cephalic version (ECV) are worthwhile. Candidate selection and
ECV technique mirror those for the breech fetus and are described in Chapter
28 (p. 528). ECV success rates are high and exceed those for breech fetuses
(Correia Costa, 2020; Salzer, 2015).

■ Umbilical Cord Prolapse
Prolapse complicates 0.1 to 0.2 percent of births (Behbehani, 2016;
Gibbons, 2014). As noted earlier, umbilical cord prolapse may be more
common with pelvis contraction. Most risks stem from an unengaged
presenting part and include hydramnios, breech presentation, transverse lie,
premature or small fetus with weight <2500 g, preterm rupture of
membranes, and multifetal gestation (Hasegawa, 2016). Funic presentation is
one in which the umbilical cord is the presenting part. Although rare, it is a
potent risk factor for prolapse and merits cesarean delivery prior to labor. Of
maternal factors for cord prolapse, grand multiparity, a distorting leiomyoma,
or müllerian uterine anomaly are less common reasons (Pagan, 2020).
Umbilical cord prolapse is usually diagnosed clinically. The cord loop is
palpated in a position lower in the vaginal canal than the head or beside it.
For most cases, prompt manual elevation of the fetal head relieves cord
compression. Concurrently, expeditious transfer to an operating room and
preparations for cesarean delivery are completed. Rarely, vaginal or
operative vaginal birth is reasonable if it can be completed much more
rapidly than emergent cesarean birth (Royal College of Obstetricians and
Gynaecologists, 2017).

■ Compound Presentation
With this, an extremity prolapses alongside the presenting part, and both
present simultaneously in the pelvis (Fig. 23-8). Goplerud and Eastman
(1953) identified a hand or arm prolapsed alongside the head once in every
700 deliveries. Much less common was prolapse of one or both lower
extremities alongside a cephalic presentation or a hand alongside a breech.
At Parkland Hospital, compound presentations were identified in only 68 of

more than 70,000 singleton fetuses—an incidence of approximately 1 in
1000. Compound presentations form in cases that prevent or delay occlusion
of the pelvic inlet and mirror those for other malpresentations.

FIGURE 23-8 Compound presentation. A. The left hand is lying in front of the vertex. With further
labor, the hand and arm may retract from the birth canal, and the head may then descend normally. B.
Photograph of a small 34-week fetus with a compound presentation that delivered uneventfully with the
hand presenting first. Mild bruising resolved uneventfully. (Reproduced with permission from Dr.
Elizabeth Mosier.)

In most cases, the prolapsed part should be left alone. It typically does
not impede labor and often retracts out of the way with descent of the
presenting part. If it fails to retract and if it appears to prevent descent of the
head, the prolapsed part can be pushed gently upward and the head
simultaneously downward by fundal pressure. In cases with a co-presenting
hand, the fetus may reflexively retract the hand if pinched by the provider.
In general, rates of perinatal mortality and morbidity are increased, but
these mainly stem from effects of associated preterm birth, prolapsed
umbilical cord, and traumatic obstetrical procedures. Tebes and coworkers
(1999) described a rare case of pressure-induced forearm ischemia and later
surgical amputation.

COMPLICATIONS WITH DYSTOCIA
Dystocia, especially if labor is prolonged, is associated with a higher
incidence of several common obstetrical and neonatal complications. Noted
earlier, maternal infection, either intrapartum chorioamnionitis or
postpartum endomyometritis, is more common with desultory and prolonged
labors. Postpartum hemorrhage from atony is increased with prolonged and
augmented labors. Uterine tears at the time of second-stage cesarean
delivery also occur at greater incidence if the fetal head is impacted in the
pelvis.
Uterine rupture is another risk. Abnormal thinning of the lower uterine
segment creates a serious danger during prolonged labor (Delafield, 2018;

Ronel, 2012). As described in Chapter 21 (p. 410), the upper segment of the
uterus contracts, retracts, and expels the fetus. In response, the softened
lower uterine segment and cervix dilate and thereby form a greatly expanded,
thinned-out tube through which the fetus can pass. The boundary between
these segments is the physiological retraction ring. When disproportion is so
pronounced that fetal descent arrests, the lower uterine segment becomes
increasingly stretched, and the normal retraction ring is unusually marked.
Seldom encountered today, the pathological retraction ring of Bandl is
associated with exaggerated thinning of the lower uterine segment. The ring
may be seen clearly as a sharp uterine indentation and signifies impending
lower segment rupture.
Fistula formation may result from dystocia, in which the presenting part
is firmly wedged into the pelvis. Excessive pressure is exerted against
tissues lying between the leading part and the pelvic wall. Because of
impaired circulation, necrosis may result and become evident several days
after delivery as vesicovaginal, vesicocervical, or rectovaginal fistulas
(Letchworth, 2018). Most often, pressure necrosis follows a very prolonged
second stage. These are rare today except in undeveloped medical systems.
Lower-extremity nerve injury in the mother can follow prolonged
second-stage labor. These are discussed in Chapter 36 (p. 644). Fortunately,
deficits are mainly sensory, and most resolve within 6 months of delivery in
most women.
Similar to the mother, the incidence of peripartum fetal sepsis rises with
longer labors. Caput succedaneum and molding develop commonly and may
be impressive (Fig. 22-7, p. 423) (Buchmann, 2008). Mechanical trauma
such as nerve injury, fractures, and cephalohematoma also are more frequent
and are discussed further in Chapter 33 (p. 608).

REFERENCES
Acker DB, Gregory KD, Sachs BP, et al: Risk factors for Erb-Duchenne palsy. Obstet Gynecol 71:389,
1988
Allen VM, Baskett TF, O’Connell CM, et al: Maternal and perinatal outcomes with increasing duration
of the second stage of labor. Obstet Gynecol 113(6):1248, 2009
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Intrapartum management of intraamniotic
infection. Committee Opinion No. 712, August 2017, Reaffirmed 2019a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Society for Maternal–Fetal Medicine: Safe
prevention of the primary cesarean delivery. Obstetric Care Consensus No. 1, March 2014,

Reaffirmed 2019b
Amorosa LF, Amorosa JH, Wellman DS, et al: Management of pelvic injuries in pregnancy. Orthop Clin
North Am 44(3):301, 2013
Anim-Somuah M, Smyth RM, Cyna AM, et al: Epidural versus non-epidural or no analgesia for pain
management in labour. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 5:CD000331, 2018
Arsène E, Langlois C, Clouqueur E, et al: Prognosis for deliveries in face presentation: a case-control
study. Arch Gynecol Obstet 300(4):869, 2019
Ashwal E, Livne MY, Benichou JI, et al: Contemporary patterns of labor in nulliparous and multiparous
women. Am J Obstet Gynecol 222(3):267.e1, 2020
Azaïs H, Leroy A, Ghesquiere L, et al: Effects of adipokines and obesity on uterine contractility.
Cytokine Growth Factor Rev 34:59, 2017
Bashiri A, Burstein E, Bar-David J, et al: Face and brow presentation: independent risk factors. J
Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 21(6):357, 2008
Behbehani S, Patenaude V, Abenhaim HA: Maternal risk factors and outcomes of umbilical cord
prolapse: a population-based study. J Obstet Gynaecol Can 38(1):23, 2016
Bellussi F, Ghi T, Youssef A, et al: The use of intrapartum ultrasound to diagnose malpositions and
cephalic malpresentations. Am J Obstet Gynecol 217(6):633, 2017
Blankenship SA, Raghuraman N, Delhi A, et al: Association of abnormal first stage of labor duration
and maternal and neonatal morbidity. Am J Obstet Gynecol 223(3):445.e1, 2020
Bleich AT, Alexander JM, McIntire DD, et al: An analysis of second-stage labor beyond 3 hours in
nulliparous women. Am J Perinatol 29:717, 2012
Boyle A, Reddy UM, Landy HJ, et al: Primary cesarean delivery in the United States. Obstet Gynecol
122(1):33, 2013
Buchmann EJ, Libhaber E: Sagittal suture overlap in cephalopelvic disproportion: blinded and nonparticipant assessment. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 87(7):731, 2008
Cahill AG, Srinivas SK, Tita AT, et al: Effect of immediate vs delayed pushing on rates of spontaneous
vaginal delivery among nulliparous women receiving neuraxial analgesia: a randomized clinical trial.
JAMA 320(14):1444, 2018
Caldeyro-Barcia R, Alvarez H, Reynolds SR: A better understanding of uterine contractility through
simultaneous recording with an internal and a seven channel external method. Surg Obstet Gynecol
91:641, 1950
Carlhäll S, Källén K, Blomberg M: Maternal body mass index and duration of labor. Eur J Obstet
Gynecol Reprod Biol 171(1):49, 2013
Carlson NS, Hernandez TL, Hurt KJ: Parturition dysfunction in obesity: time to target the pathobiology.
Reprod Biol Endocrinol 13:135, 2015
Chen HY, Huang SC: Evaluation of midpelvic contraction. Int Surg 67:516, 1982
Cheng YW, Hopkins LM, Caughey AB: How long is too long: does a prolonged second stage of labor in
nulliparous women affect maternal and neonatal outcomes? Am J Obstet Gynecol 191(3):933, 2004
Cheng YW, Shaffer BL, Bryant AS, et al: Length of the first stage of labor and associated perinatal
outcomes in nulliparous women. Obstet Gynecol 116(5):1127, 2010
Cibils LA, Hendricks CH: Normal labor in vertex presentation. Am J Obstet Gynecol 91:385, 1965
Cohen W: Influence of the duration of second stage labor on perinatal outcome and puerperal morbidity.
Obstet Gynecol 49:266, 1977
Cohen W, Friedman EA: Management of Labor. Baltimore, University Park Press, 1983
Cohen WR, Friedman EA: Misguided guidelines for managing labor. Am J Obstet Gynecol
212(6):753.e1, 2015a

Cohen WR, Friedman EA: Perils of the new labor management guidelines. Am J Obstet Gynecol
212(4):420, 2015b
Correia Costa S, Raposo MI, Machado AP, et al: External cephalic version: predictors of success and
influence on caesarean rates. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 256:211, 2020
Cruikshank DP, White CA: Obstetric malpresentations: twenty years’ experience. Am J Obstet Gynecol
116:1097, 1973
De Bernardo G, Svelto M, Giordano M, et al: Face presentation in delivery room: what is strategy? BMJ
Case Rep 2017:bcr2016219114, 2017
Delafield R, Pirkle CM, Dumont A: Predictors of uterine rupture in a large sample of women in Senegal
and Mali: cross-sectional analysis of QUARITE trial data. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth 18(1):432,
2018
Duff P: Diagnosis and management of face presentation. Obstet Gynecol 57:105, 1981
Eller WC, Mengert WF: Recognition of mid-pelvic contraction. Am J Obstet Gynecol 53:252, 1947
Ferguson JE, Newberry YG, DeAngelis GA, et al: The fetal-pelvic index has minimal utility in predicting
fetal-pelvic disproportion. Am J Obstet Gynecol 179:1186, 1998
Floberg J, Belfrage P, Ohlsén H: Influence of pelvic outlet capacity on labor. A prospective pelvimetry
study of 1,429 unselected primiparas. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 66:121, 1987
Friedman EA: Labor: Clinical Evaluation and Management, 2nd ed. New York, Appleton-CenturyCrofts, 1978
Friedman EA, Sachtleben MR: Amniotomy and the course of labor. Obstet Gynecol 22:755, 1963a
Friedman EA, Sachtleben MR: Dysfunctional labor. I. Prolonged latent phase in the nullipara. Obstet
Gynecol 17:135, 1961
Friedman EA, Sachtleben MR: Dysfunctional labor. VI. Abnormal progress in the multipara. Obstet
Gynecol 22:478, 1963b
Friedman EA, Sachtleben MR: Station of the fetal presenting part II: Effect on the course of labor. Am
J Obstet Gynecol 93:530, 1965
Friedman EA, Sachtleben MR: Station of the fetal presenting part IV: Arrest of descent in nulliparas.
Obstet Gynecol 47:129, 1976
Fuchs K, Peretz BA, Marcovici R, et al: The grand multipara—is it a problem? Int J Gynaecol Obstet
73:321, 1985
Fyfe EM, Anderson NH, North RA, et al: Risk of first-stage and second-stage cesarean delivery by
maternal body mass index among nulliparous women in labor at term. Obstet Gynecol 117(6):1315,
2011
Gardberg M, Leonova Y, Laakkonen E: Malpresentations—impact on mode of delivery. Acta Obstet
Gynecol Scand 90(5):540, 2011
Gemer O, Segal S: Incidence and contribution of predisposing factors to transverse lie presentation. Int J
Gynaecol Obstet 44(3):219, 1994
Gibbons C, O’Herlihy C, Murphy JF: Umbilical cord prolapse—changing patterns and improved
outcomes: a retrospective cohort study. BJOG 121(13):1705, 2014
Goplerud J, Eastman NJ: Compound presentation: survey of 65 cases. Obstet Gynecol 1:59, 1953
Grantz KL, Sundaram R, Ma L, et al: Reassessing the duration of the second stage of labor in relation to
maternal and neonatal morbidity. Obstet Gynecol 131(2):345, 2018
Grobman WA, Bailit J, Lai Y, et al: Association of the duration of active pushing with obstetric
outcomes. Obstet Gynecol 127(4):667, 2016
Handa VL, Laros RK: Active-phase arrest in labor: predictors of cesarean delivery in a nulliparous
population. Obstet Gynecol 81:758, 1993

Hannah M, Ohlsson A, Farine D, et al: International Term PROM Trial: a RCT of induction of labor for
prelabor rupture of membranes at term. Am J Obstet Gynecol 174:303, 1996
Hannah ME, Hodnett ED, Willan A, et al: Prelabor rupture of the membranes at term: expectant
management at home or in hospital? Obstet Gynecol 96:533, 2000
Harper LM, Caughey AB, Roehl KA, et al: Defining an abnormal first stage of labor based on maternal
and neonatal outcomes. Am J Obstet Gynecol 210(6):536.e1, 2014
Hasegawa J, Ikeda T, Sekizawa A, et al: Obstetric risk factors for umbilical cord prolapse: a nationwide
population-based study in Japan. Arch Gynecol Obstet 294(3):467, 2016
Hauth JC, Hankins GD, Gilstrap LC III: Uterine contraction pressures achieved in parturients with
active phase arrest. Obstet Gynecol 78:344, 1991
Hauth JC, Hankins GD, Gilstrap LC III, et al: Uterine contraction pressures with oxytocin
induction/augmentation. Obstet Gynecol 68:305, 1986
Hellman LM, Epperson JW, Connally F: Face and brow presentation: the experience of the Johns
Hopkins Hospital, 1896 to 1948. Am J Obstet Gynecol 59:831, 1950
Hendricks CH, Quilligan EJ, Tyler AB, et al: Pressure relationships between intervillous space and
amniotic fluid in human term pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 77:1028, 1959
Hillis DS: Diagnosis of contracted pelvis by the impression method. Surg Gynecol Obstet 51:857, 1930
Kaltreider DF: Criteria of midplane contraction. Am J Obstet Gynecol 63:392, 1952
Kawakita T, Reddy UM, Landy HJ, et al: Indications for primary cesarean delivery relative to body
mass index. Am J Obstet Gynecol 215(4):515.e1, 2016
Kominiarek MA, Zhang J, VanVeldhuisen P, et al: Contemporary labor patterns: the impact of maternal
body mass index. Am J Obstet Gynecol 205:244.e1, 2011
Korhonen U, Taipale P, Heinonen S: Fetal pelvic index to predict cephalopelvic disproportion-a
retrospective clinical cohort study. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 94(6):615, 2015
Laughon SK, Berghella V, Reddy UM, et al: Neonatal and maternal outcomes with prolonged second
stage of labor. Obstet Gynecol 124(1):57, 2014
Le Ray C, Audibert F, Goffinet F, et al: When to stop pushing: effects of duration of second-stage
expulsion efforts on maternal and neonatal outcomes in nulliparous women with epidural analgesia.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 201(4):361.e1, 2009
Letchworth P, MacLaren E, Duffy S: Obstetric fistula: a paradigm shift is needed in research and
prevention. BJOG 125(8):925, 2018
Lewkowitz AK, Nakagawa S, Thiet MP, et al: Effect of stage of initial labor dystocia on vaginal birth
after cesarean success. Am J Obstet Gynecol 213(6):861.e1, 2015
Mahon TR, Chazotte C, Cohen WR: Short labor: characteristics and outcome. Obstet Gynecol 84:47,
1994
Mark SP, Croughan-Minihane MS, Kilpatrick SJ: Chorioamnionitis and uterine function. Obstet Gynecol
95(6 Pt 1):909, 2000
Martin JA, Hamilton BE, Osterman MJ, et al: Births: final data for 2013. Natl Vital Stat Rep 64(1):1,
2015
Martin JA, Hamilton BE, Osterman MJ: Births: final data for 2018. Natl Vital Stat Rep 68(13):1, 2019
Mengert WF: Estimation of pelvic capacity. JAMA 138:169, 1948
Menticoglou SM, Manning F, Harman C, et al: Perinatal outcomes in relation to second-stage duration.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 173:906, 1995a
Menticoglou SM, Perlman M, Manning FA: High cervical spinal cord injury in neonates delivered with
forceps: report of 15 cases. Obstet Gynecol 86:589, 1995b

Mozurkewich E, Chilimigras J, Koepke E, et al: Indications for induction of labour: a best-evidence
review. BJOG 116(5):626, 2009
Mueller P: About the prognosis for delivery with a narrow pelvis. Arch Gynaekol 27:311, 1885
Myers ER, Sanders GD, Coeytaux RR, et al: Labor dystocia. Comparative Effectiveness Review No.
226. AHRQ Publication No. 29-EHC007. Rockville, Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality,
2020
Nelson DB, McIntire DD, Leveno KJ: Relationship of the length of the first stage of labor to the length
of the second stage. Obstet Gynecol 122:27, 2013
Nelson DB, McIntire DD, Leveno KJ: Second-stage labor: consensus versus science. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 222(2):144, 2020
Oladapo OT, Diaz V, Bonet M, et al: Cervical dilatation patterns of ‘low-risk’ women with spontaneous
labour and normal perinatal outcomes: a systematic review. BJOG 125(8):944, 2018
Olah KS, Neilson J: Failure to progress in the management of labour. BJOG 101:1, 1994
Pagan M, Eads L, Sward L, et al: Umbilical cord prolapse: a review of the literature. Obstet Gynecol
Surv 75(8):510, 2020
Passos F, Cardose K, Coelho AM, et al: Antibiotic prophylaxis in premature rupture of membranes at
term. Obstet Gynecol 120:1045, 2012
Pattinson RC, Cuthbert A, Vannevel V: Pelvimetry for fetal cephalic presentations at or near term for
deciding on mode of delivery. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 3:CD000161, 2017
Peleg D, Hannah ME, Hodnett ED, et al: Predictors of cesarean delivery after prelabor rupture of
membranes at term. Obstet Gynecol 93:1031, 1999
Place K, Kruit H, Tekay A, et al: Success of trial of labor in women with a history of previous cesarean
section for failed labor induction or labor dystocia: a retrospective cohort study. BMC Pregnancy
Childbirth 19(1):176, 2019
Reynolds SR: Uterine contractility and cervical dilatation. Proc R Soc Med 44(8):695, 1951
Riehl JT: Caesarean section rates following pelvic fracture: a systematic review. Injury 45(10):1516,
2014
Ronel D, Wiznitzer A, Sergienko R, et al: Trends, risk factors and pregnancy outcome in women with
uterine rupture. Arch Gynecol Obstet 285(2):317, 2012
Rosenbloom JI, Stout MJ, Tuuli MG, et al: New labor management guidelines and changes in cesarean
delivery patterns. Am J Obstet Gynecol 217(6):689.e1, 2017
Roshanfekr D, Blakemore KJ, Lee J, et al: Station at onset of active labor in nulliparous patients and
risk of cesarean delivery. Obstet Gynecol 93:329, 1999
Rouse DJ, Owen J, Hauth JC: Active-phase labor arrest: oxytocin augmentation for at least 4 hours.
Obstet Gynecol 93:323, 1999
Rouse DJ, Weiner SJ, Bloom SL, et al: Second-stage labor duration in nulliparous women: relationship to
maternal and perinatal outcomes. Am J Obstet Gynecol 201(4):357.e1, 2009
Royal College of Obstetricians & Gynaecoloists: Umbilical cord prolapse. Green-top Guide No. 50, May
2014, Reaffirmed 2017
Salzer L, Nagar R, Melamed N, et al: Predictors of successful external cephalic version and assessment
of success for vaginal delivery. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 28(1):49, 2015
Satin AJ, Maberry MC, Leveno KJ, et al: Chorioamnionitis: a harbinger of dystocia. Obstet Gynecol
79:913, 1992
Saunders NS, Paterson CM, Wadsworth J: Neonatal and maternal morbidity in relation to the length of
the second stage of labour. BJOG 99(5):381, 1992

Shaffer BL, Cheng YW, Vargas JE, et al: Face presentation: predictors and delivery route. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 194(5):e10, 2006
Sharma SK, McIntire DD, Wiley J, et al: Labor analgesia and cesarean delivery: an individual patient
meta-analysis of nulliparous women. Anesthesiology 100(1):142, 2004
Sharshiner R, Silver RM: Management of fetal malpresentation. Clin Obstet Gynecol 58(2):246, 2015
Sheiner E, Levy A, Mazor M: Precipitate labor: higher rates of maternal complications. Eur J Obstet
Gynecol Reprod Biol 116(1):43, 2004
Spörri S, Thoeny HC, Raio Let al: MR imaging pelvimetry: a useful adjunct in the treatment of women
at risk for dystocia? AJR Am J Roentgenol 179(1):137, 2002
Tebes CC, Mehta P, Calhoun DA, et al: Congenital ischemic forearm necrosis associated with a
compound presentation. J Matern Fetal Med 8:281, 1999
Thom H: The obstetrical significance of pelvic variations: a study of 450 primiparous women. BMJ
2:210, 1937
Thorp JM Jr, Pahel-Short L, Bowes WA Jr: The Mueller-Hillis maneuver: can it be used to predict
dystocia? Obstet Gynecol 82:519, 1993
Thuillier C, Roy S, Peyronnet V, et al: Impact of recommended changes in labor management for
prevention of the primary cesarean delivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 218(3):341.e1, 2018
Thurnau GR, Scates DH, Morgan MA: The fetal-pelvic index: a method of identifying fetal-pelvic
disproportion in women attempting vaginal birth after previous cesarean delivery. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 165:353, 1991
Timofeev J, Reddy UM, Huang CC, et al: Obstetric complications, neonatal morbidity, and indications
for cesarean delivery by maternal age. Obstet Gynecol 122(6):1184, 2013
Vallier HA, Cureton BA, Schubeck D: Pregnancy outcomes after pelvic ring injury. J Orthop Trauma
26(5):302, 2012
Verspyck E, Bisson V, Gromez A, et al: Prophylactic attempt at manual rotation in brow presentation at
full dilatation. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand. 91(11):13, 2012
Waldenström U, Ekéus C: Risk of labor dystocia increases with maternal age irrespective of parity: a
population-based register study. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 96(9):1063, 2017
World Health Organization: WHO recommendations: intrapartum care for a positive childbirth
experience. Geneva, WHO; 2018
Young RC: The uterine pacemaker of labor. Best Pract Res Clin Obstet Gynaecol 52:68, 2018
Zaretsky MV, Alexander JM, McIntire DD, et al: Magnetic resonance imaging pelvimetry and the
prediction of labor dystocia. Obstet Gynecol 106:919, 2005
Zhang J, Landy HJ, Branch DW, et al: Contemporary patterns of spontaneous labor with normal
neonatal outcomes. Obstet Gynecol 116:1281, 2010
Zhang J, Troendle JF, Yancey MK: Reassessing the labor curve in nulliparous women. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 187(4):824, 2002

CHAPTER 24

Intrapartum Assessment

ELECTRONIC FETAL MONITORING
OTHER INTRAPARTUM ASSESSMENT TECHNIQUES
NONREASSURING FETAL STATUS
MECONIUM IN THE AMNIONIC FLUID
CURRENT RECOMMENDATIONS
INTRAPARTUM SURVEILLANCE OF UTERINE ACTIVITY
REFERENCES
Electronic fetal monitoring eclipsed periodic fetoscopic auscultation of the
fetal heartbeat in the late 1960s (Hon, 1958). It was hoped that the continuous
graph-paper portrayal of the fetal heart rate (FHR), termed
cardiotocography, would reflect pathophysiological events affecting the
fetus. Initially, electronic FHR monitoring was used primarily in complicated
pregnancies. Now, more than 85 percent of all live births in the United States
undergo electronic FHR monitoring (Ananth, 2013).

ELECTRONIC FETAL MONITORING
■ Internal (Direct) Electronic Monitoring

Direct FHR measurement is accomplished by attaching a bipolar spiral
electrode directly to the fetus (Fig. 24-1). The wire electrode penetrates the
fetal scalp, and the second pole is a metal wing on the electrode. The P
wave, QRS complex, and T wave of the electrical fetal cardiac signal are
amplified and fed into a cardiotachometer for heart rate calculation. The
peak R-wave voltage is the most reliably detected portion of the fetal
electrocardiogram (ECG). Time (t) in milliseconds between fetal R waves is
fed into a cardiotachometer, and a new FHR is set with the arrival of each
new R wave (Fig. 24-2). The phenomenon of continuous R-to-R wave FHR
computation was known as beat-to-beat variability, and is now called
baseline variability. If present, fetal premature atrial contractions (PACs)
cause the cardiotachometer to rapidly and erratically seek new heart rates
and create the “spiking” shown Figure 24-3.

FIGURE 24-1 With internal electronic fetal monitoring a bipolar electrode is attached to the fetal scalp
for detection of fetal QRS complexes (F). At times, the maternal heart and its electrical complex (M)
also may be detected.

FIGURE 24-2 Fetal electrocardiographic signals from the scalp electrode are used to compute
continuous beat-to-beat heart rate. Time intervals (t1, t2, t3) in milliseconds between successive fetal R
waves are used by a cardiotachometer to compute instantaneous fetal heart rate. In this example, the t2
interval has complexes that are close together, which indicates a slighted higher heart rate. This is
reflected in the vertical rise on the cardiotachometer graph. ECG = electrocardiogram; PAC =
premature atrial contraction.

FIGURE 24-3 Standard fetal monitor tracing of heart rate using a fetal scalp electrode. Spiking of the
fetal rate reflects premature atrial contractions.

Electrical cardiac complexes detected by the fetal electrode include
those generated by the mother. However, the amplitude of the maternal ECG
signal is diminished when recorded through the fetal scalp electrode. Thus,
maternal cardiac signals do not appear on the FHR tracing. However, if the
fetus is dead, maternal R waves can be still detected by the scalp electrode
as the next best signal and are counted by the cardiotachometer (Fig. 24-4).

FIGURE 24-4 Placental abruption. The fetal scalp electrode first detects the dying fetus’ heart rate.
After fetal death, the maternal electrocardiogram complex is detected and recorded.

■ External (Indirect) Electronic Monitoring
Although it avoids membrane rupture, external monitoring does not provide
the precision of internal FHR monitoring (Nunes, 2014). Moreover, in some
women, external monitoring may be difficult. For example, fetuses of obese
women have a greater amount of unmonitored time compared with those of
normal-weight women (Brocato, 2019).
With external monitoring, the FHR is detected through the maternal
abdominal wall using the ultrasound Doppler principle (Chap. 14, p. 261).
The instrument contains a transducer that emits ultrasound and a sensor to
detect a shift in frequency of the reflected sound. The transducer is placed on
the maternal abdomen at a site where fetal heart action is best detected. A
coupling gel must be applied because air conducts ultrasound waves poorly.
The device is held in position by an elastic belt.
Ultrasound Doppler signals are edited electronically before FHR data
appear. Reflected ultrasound signals from moving fetal heart valves are
analyzed through a microprocessor that compares incoming signals with the
most recent previous signal. This process, called autocorrelation, is based
on the premise that the FHR has regularity, whereas “noise” is random and
lacks regularity. Several fetal heart motions must be deemed electronically
acceptable by the microprocessor before the FHR is revealed. Such
electronic editing has greatly improved tracing quality. Many fetal monitors
are capable of interfacing with archival storage systems, which obviates
maintaining actual paper tracings.
Other features of current external monitors include the ability to monitor
twin fetuses, concurrently assess maternal heart rate, display fetal ECG, and
record maternal pulse oximetry values. Wireless, abdominal, dermal-patch,
external array systems may improve the interpretability of intrapartum FHR
tracings in obese women (Lempersz, 2020; Monson, 2020). Wireless
monitors use electrocardiography to accurately measure maternal and fetal
heart rates yet allow patient mobility during labor.

■ Fetal Heart Rate Patterns
The interpretation of FHR patterns can be problematic without definitions
and nomenclature. In one study, three Maternal-Fetal Medicine specialists
independently interpreted FHR tracings. Agreement was poor for the most

ominous tracings and was moderate for less severe patterns (Blackwell,
2011). To help standardize definitions, the National Institute of Child Health
and Human Development (NICHD) convened a working group (Table 24-1)
(Macones, 2008). The resulting definitions are used in this chapter and have
been adopted by the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
(2019a). Interobserver agreement improves when these standardized
definitions are implemented (Epstein, 2013).
TABLE 24-1. Electronic Fetal Monitoring Definitions

Pattern interpretation derives from the FHR that is portrayed on the
monitor or graph paper. Thus, the choice of vertical and horizontal scaling
greatly affects patterns. NICHD Workshop scaling parameters recommend
that each centimeter on the vertical axis represents 30 beats per minute
(bpm). Measurement markers on this axis range from 30 to 240 bpm. Along
the horizontal axis, the chart recorder moves at a speed of 3 cm/min. The
time between each bold vertical line on this axis is 1 minute (see Fig. 24-4).
FHR patterns during labor are dynamic and can interchange rapidly.
Although intrapartum evaluation of fetal heart tracings occur every 5 to 30
minutes, tracing interpretation should reflect a longitudinal assessment
beyond the current 5- to 30-minute segment (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019b; Robinson, 2008; Vintzileos, 2016).
Thus, a full description should include an evaluation of changes or trends
over time (Macones, 2008).

■ Baseline Fetal Heart Activity
This refers to FHR baseline characteristics apart from periodic accelerations
or decelerations. Elements include rate, variability, and distinct FHR
patterns such as sinusoidal or saltatory.

Rate
Beginning at 16 weeks’ gestation, the heart rate drops approximately 1 bpm
each week (Pillai, 1990; Serra 2009). This continues postnatally such that the
average rate is 85 bpm by age 8 years (Tintinalli, 2016). This normal gradual
slowing of the FHR is thought to correspond to maturation of
parasympathetic (vagal) heart control (Renou, 1969).
The baseline FHR is the approximate mean rate during a 10-minute
tracing segment and is rounded to increments of 5 bpm. In any 10-minute
window, the minimum interpretable baseline duration must be at least 2
minutes—otherwise the baseline is considered indeterminate. For an
indeterminate baseline, the previous 10-minute interval is used to determine
the baseline heart rate.
If the baseline FHR is <110 bpm, it is termed bradycardia. If the
baseline rate is >160 bpm, it is called tachycardia. The average FHR is
considered the result of tonic balance between accelerator and decelerator

influences on cardiac pacemaker cells. In this concept, the sympathetic
system is the accelerator influence. The parasympathetic system is the
decelerator factor and mediated by vagal slowing of heart rate (Dawes,
1985). Heart rate also is under the control of arterial chemoreceptors such
that both hypoxia and hypercapnia can modulate rate. Prolonged hypoxia that
is associated with a rising blood lactate level and severe metabolic acidemia
induces an extended drop in heart rate (Thakor, 2009).
Bradycardia. In the third trimester, the normal mean baseline FHR ranges
between 110 and 160 bpm. But, pragmatically, a rate between 100 and 119
bpm, in the absence of other FHR changes, usually is not representative of
fetal compromise. Such mild bradycardias were observed in 2 percent of
monitored pregnancies and averaged approximately 50 minutes in duration
(Young, 1976). These low baseline heart rates have also been attributed to
head compression from occiput posterior or transverse positions,
particularly during second-stage labor.
However, fetal bradycardia may stem from congenital heart block or
from fetal hypoxia due to maternal or fetal causes (Bravo-Valenzuela, 2018;
Lepercq, 2021). For example, Figure 24-4 shows bradycardia in a fetus
dying from placental abruption. Less often, sustained maternal hypothermia
also can cause fetal bradycardia, but these uniquely involved fetuses
apparently are not harmed by several hours of such bradycardia (Spires,
2020).
Tachycardia. This is defined as a baseline FHR >160 bpm. The most
common explanation is maternal fever. In some cases, fetal tachycardia may
precede overt maternal fever (Gilstrap, 1987). Fetal tachycardia caused by
maternal infection typically is not associated with fetal compromise unless it
is associated with fetal sepsis or with significant FHR decelerations.
Other causes of fetal tachycardia include fetal compromise, cardiac
arrhythmias, and maternal administration of parasympathetic inhibiting
(atropine) or sympathomimetic (terbutaline) drugs. Prompt treatment of the
compromising event, such as alleviation of maternal fever or volume
resuscitation, can result in fetal recovery. The key feature to distinguish fetal
compromise in association with tachycardia seems to be concomitant FHR
decelerations (Cahill, 2018).

Baseline Variability
This is an important index of cardiovascular function and reflects a
sympathetic and parasympathetic “push and pull” mediated by the fetal
sinoatrial node. This produces beat-to-beat fluctuations of the baseline FHR
(Kozuma, 1997). Variability describes these changes during 1 minute, which
modify the baseline’s waviness (Fig. 24-5). Interpretation of variability is
subjective and judges this waviness. The NICHD workshop defined baseline
variability as irregular fluctuations in the baseline excluding accelerations
and decelerations (Macones, 2008). They recommended the criteria shown in
Figure 24-5 for quantification of variability. Normal variability shows
oscillations that change 6 to 25 bpm. FHR variability increases with
advancing gestational age (Serra, 2009; Shuffrey, 2019).

FIGURE 24-5 Baseline fetal heart rate variability shown in the following five panels. 1. Undetectable,
absent variability. 2. Minimal variability, ≤5 bpm. 3. Moderate (normal) variability, 6 to 25 bpm. 4.
Marked variability, >25 bpm. 5. Sinusoidal pattern. This differs from variability in that it has a smooth,
sinelike pattern of regular fluctuation and is excluded in the definition of fetal heart rate variability.

Increased Variability. Several physiological and pathological processes
affect variability. Greater variability accompanies fetal breathing and body
movements (Dawes, 1981; Zizzo, 2020). Shuffrey and colleagues (2020)
showed the FHR had enhanced variation in state 4F (active awake state)
compared with 1F (quiet state) and 2F (active state) (Chap. 20, p. 383).
However, in one study of 390 fetuses, greater intrapartum variability was

associated with abnormal fetal arterial cord blood gas measurements but
without increased neonatal morbidity rates (Polnaszek, 2020).
Decreased Variability. Absent variability and minimal variability are
defined as no baseline fluctuation or changes ≤5 bpm. These are shown in
Figure 24-5, panels 1 and 2. Of greatest concern, diminished variability can
be an ominous sign that indicates a seriously compromised fetus. According
to Esplin (2020), metabolic acidemia depresses the fetal brainstem or heart
to create the loss of variability. Thus, diminished variability, when it reflects
fetal compromise, likely reflects acidemia rather than hypoxia. Severe
maternal acidemia also can lower fetal variability, for example, in a mother
with diabetic ketoacidosis.
Reduced baseline FHR variability is the single most reliable sign of fetal
compromise. Moderate variability is associated with a normal umbilical
cord pH in 98 percent of cases (Parer, 2006). Absent or minimal variability
is associated with fetal acidemia, but it predicts an umbilical cord pH <7.15
in only 12 to 31 percent of cases (Parer, 2006; Williams, 2003). In a study of
2200 consecutive deliveries, authors concluded that variability by itself
could not be used as the only indicator of fetal well-being (Samueloff, 1994).
Comorbid fetal tachycardia or FHR decelerations also may help predict fetal
acidemia (Esplin, 2020; Vintzileos, 2016).
Another common cause of diminished variability is administration of
some analgesic drugs during labor (Chap. 25, p. 477). These can depress the
central nervous system and include narcotics, barbiturates, phenothiazines,
tranquilizers, and general anesthetics. As one specific example, variability
regularly diminishes within 5 to 10 minutes following intravenous (IV)
meperidine administration, and the effects may last 60 minutes or longer
(Hill, 2003; Petrie, 1993). IV butorphanol has similar effects (Schucker,
1996). And, chronically administered buprenorphine suppresses FHR and
movement (Jansson, 2017). Corticosteroids also decrease fetal movement
and thereby dampen variability (Noben, 2019).
Magnesium sulfate can diminish variability and is widely used in the
United States for fetal neuroprotection, tocolysis, and seizure prophylaxis in
preeclampsia. In a study of nearly 250 term gestations, its administration led
to decreased variability but without evidence of adverse neonatal effects
(Duffy, 2012). Others echo these findings (Nensi, 2014; Verdurmen, 2017).

In sum, variability is affected by fetal physiology, and its meaning differs
depending on clinical setting. A decrease in variability but without
decelerations is unlikely to reflect fetal hypoxia (Parer, 2006). A persistently
flat FHR baseline—absent variability—within the normal baseline rate range
and without decelerations may reflect a prior fetal insult that has resulted in
neurological damage (Freeman, 2003).

Cardiac Arrhythmia
When fetal cardiac arrhythmias are first suspected using electronic
monitoring, findings can include baseline bradycardia, tachycardia, or most
commonly in our experience, abrupt baseline spiking (see Fig. 24-3). An
arrhythmia can only be documented, practically speaking, when scalp
electrodes are used. Some fetal monitors can be adapted to output the scalp
electrode signals into an ECG recorder. Because only a single lead is
obtained, analysis and interpretation of rhythm and rate disturbances are
severely limited.
In one study, rate and rhythm disturbances in 934 normal pregnancies
were evaluated between 30 and 40 weeks’ gestation. Arrhythmias, episodes
of bradycardia <100 bpm, or tachycardia >180 bpm were encountered in 3
percent (Southall, 1980). Most supraventricular arrhythmias carry little
significance during labor unless fetal heart failure, as evidenced by hydrops,
is coexistent. Many supraventricular arrhythmias disappear in the immediate
neonatal period, although some are associated with structural cardiac defects
(Api, 2008). Intermittent baseline bradycardia is frequently due to congenital
heart block. Conduction defects, most often complete atrioventricular (AV)
block, usually are found in association with maternal connective tissue
diseases (Chap. 62, p. 1113). Antepartum evaluation of the fetus with an
identified arrhythmia and treatment options are discussed in Chapter 19 (p.
368).
Most fetal arrhythmias without comorbid fetal hydrops are
inconsequential during labor, but they may hinder interpretation of FHR
tracings and thereby necessitate cesarean delivery. Sonographic evaluation of
fetal anatomy and echocardiography can be useful. Generally, without
evidence of fetal hydrops, neonatal outcome is not measurably improved by
pregnancy intervention. At Parkland Hospital, intrapartum fetal cardiac
arrhythmias, especially those associated with clear amnionic fluid, are
typically managed conservatively.

Sinusoidal Heart Rate
A sinusoidal baseline is one with a sine wave–like undulating pattern with a
frequency of 3 to 5 cycles per minute for at least 20 minutes. A true
sinusoidal pattern such as that shown in panel 5 of Figure 24-5 can be
observed with fetal intracranial hemorrhage, severe fetal asphyxia, or severe
fetal anemia. The last may stem from alloimmunization, fetomaternal
hemorrhage, twin-twin transfusion syndrome, fetal parvoviral infection, or
vasa previa with bleeding. The pathophysiology of sinusoidal patterns is
unclear, in part due to varying definitions. One group proposed that the
pattern relates to fetal arterial blood pressure and oscillations in the
baroreceptor-chemoreceptor feedback mechanism (Ikeda, 1999). Modanlou
(1982, 2004) proposed adoption of a strict definition for true sinusoidal FHR
that is most likely ominous. This criteria eliminates the influence of maternal
medications.
1. Stable baseline FHR of 120 to 160 bpm with regular oscillations
2. Amplitude of 5 to 15 bpm (rarely greater)
3. 2 to 5 cycles per minute
4. Absent variability and accelerations
5. Oscillation of the sinusoidal waveform above or below a baseline
6. No concurrent drugs such as narcotics
Other investigators classify sinusoidal heart rate patterns into mild—
amplitude 5 to 15 bpm; intermediate—16 to 24 bpm; and major—≥25 bpm.
Increasing amplitude correlates with advancing fetal risk (Murphy, 1991;
Neesham, 1993).
Importantly, insignificant sinusoidal patterns have been reported
following administration of meperidine, morphine, alphaprodine, and
butorphanol (Angel, 1984; Egley, 1991; Epstein, 1982). When due to
narcotics, this pattern has a sine frequency of 6 cycles per minute. A
sinusoidal pattern also has been described with chorioamnionitis, fetal
distress, and umbilical cord occlusion (Murphy, 1991). Investigators have
concluded that intrapartum sinusoidal fetal heart patterns are not generally
associated with fetal compromise (Johnson, 1981; Young, 1980a). Thus,
management is usually dictated by the clinical setting.

Pseudosinusoidal describes intrapartum sine wave–like baseline
variation coupled with periods of acceleration. In one study, this pattern was
seen in 15 percent of monitored labors (Murphy, 1991). Mild
pseudosinusoidal patterns were associated with use of meperidine and
epidural analgesia. Intermediate pseudosinusoidal patterns were linked to
fetal sucking or transient episodes of fetal hypoxia caused by umbilical cord
compression. In another study, 4 percent of fetuses demonstrated sinusoidal
patterns transiently during normal labor (Egley, 1991). These authors noted
patterns lasting for 90 minutes in some cases.

■ Periodic Fetal Heart Rate Changes
These refer to visually apparent deviations from baseline. Acceleration
refers to a rise in FHR above the baseline, and deceleration is a drop below
the baseline rate. For the latter, terms used in the United States are early,
late, or variable and refer to the temporal relationship between the
deceleration and contractions. Waveform shapes also aid pattern recognition
and are described subsequently. The NICHD Workshop (2008) considered
decelerations to be recurrent if they accompanied ≥50 percent of
contractions in any 20-minute period.

Accelerations
These are an abrupt FHR increase above the baseline and are defined by the
onset-to-peak rise within 30 seconds (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2019a). At ≥32 weeks’ gestation, an acceleration is one that
peaks at a point ≥15 bpm above baseline. Its duration is ≥15 seconds but <2
minutes from onset to baseline return (see Table 24-1). Before 32 weeks, a
peak ≥10 bpm and duration lasting 10 seconds to 2 minutes is considered
normal. Prolonged acceleration is one lasting ≥2 minutes but <10 minutes.
Accelerations occur antepartum and intrapartum. Proposed mechanisms
for intrapartum accelerations include fetal movement, stimulation by uterine
contractions, umbilical cord occlusion, fetal scalp stimulation, scalp blood
sampling, and acoustic stimulation. Accelerations are common during labor.
These are virtually always reassuring and almost always confirm that the
fetus is not acidemic at that moment (Berkus, 1999).

Accelerations reflect intact neurohormonal cardiovascular control
mechanisms linked to fetal behavioral states. In one analysis of FHR tracings
in nearly 2000 fetuses, 99.8 percent showed sporadic accelerations during
labor. FHR accelerations during the first or last 30 minutes of labor were a
favorable sign for fetal well-being (Krebs, 1982). Their absence during
labor, however, is not necessarily an unfavorable sign unless coincidental
with other nonreassuring changes. The chance of acidemia in the fetus that
fails to respond to stimulation despite an otherwise nonreassuring pattern
approximates 50 percent (Clark, 1984; Smith, 1986).

Early Deceleration
This physiological response shows a gradual FHR decline and then return to
baseline that mirrors the contraction (Fig. 24-6). Etiologically, head
compression and dural stimulation probably cause vagal nerve activation,
which mediates the FHR deceleration (Paul, 1964). Freeman and associates
(2003) defined early decelerations as those generally seen in active labor
between 4 and 7 cm cervical dilation. In their definition, the degree of
deceleration is generally proportional to the contraction strength and rarely
falls below 100 to 110 bpm or 20 to 30 bpm below baseline. These
decelerations are common during active labor and not associated with
tachycardia, loss of variability, or other FHR changes. Early decelerations
are considered benign and not associated with fetal hypoxia, acidemia, or
low Apgar scores.

FIGURE 24-6 An early fetal heart rate deceleration characteristically shows a gradual decline and
recovery in the heart rate that coincide with the onset and recovery of the contraction. The nadir of the
deceleration is ≥30 seconds after the deceleration onset.

Late Deceleration
This deceleration is a smooth, gradual, symmetrical decline in the FHR that
begins at or after the contraction peak and returns to baseline only after the
contraction has ended. It reaches its nadir within 30 seconds of its onset (Fig.
24-7). Typically, a late deceleration’s depth is <10 to 20 bpm below
baseline. These usually are not accompanied by accelerations.

FIGURE 24-7 A late fetal heart rate deceleration characteristically shows a gradual decline in the
heart rate that starts at or after the contraction’s peak and recovers after the end of the contraction.
The deceleration nadir occurs ≥30 seconds after the deceleration’s onset.

Late decelerations often reflect poor uterine perfusion or placental
dysfunction. In one animal study, uteroplacental perfusion was intentionally
compromised, and the lag between contraction onset and late deceleration
onset was directly related to basal fetal oxygenation (Myers, 1973). The
lower the fetal PO2 before contractions, the shorter the lag to the late
deceleration’s onset. This lag reflects the time necessary for the fetal PO2 to
fall below a critical level necessary to stimulate arterial chemoreceptors,
which mediate the decelerations.
Late decelerations are the first FHR consequence of uteroplacentalinduced hypoxia. Fetal acidemia develops after frequent or prolonged
periods of hypoxia. However, late decelerations alone do not predict fetal
acidemia (Jia, 2021). Instead, late decelerations plus decreased variability,
which itself is an indicator of less activity in the cardioregulatory center of
the medulla, are more predictive of fetal acidemia and neonatal morbidity
(Cahill, 2018; Holzmann, 2015). Cahill and coworkers (2018) calculated the
total area within the below-baseline curves of decelerations. They found that
increasing area was more predictive of fetal acidemia than other FHR
characteristics.

Generally, any process that produces maternal hypotension, excessive
uterine activity, or placental dysfunction can induce late decelerations. The
two most common are hypotension from epidural analgesia and uterine
hyperactivity from oxytocin stimulation. Maternal hypertension, diabetes, and
collagen vascular disorders can cause chronic placental dysfunction.
Placental abruption can acutely produce late decelerations.

Variable Deceleration
This is the most frequent deceleration pattern encountered during labor and is
attributed to umbilical cord occlusion. In a study of more than 7000 tracings,
variable decelerations were identified in 40 percent when labor had
progressed to 5 cm dilation and in 83 percent by the end of first-stage labor
(Melchior, 1985). The slope of FHR change is abrupt and erratic, giving the
waveform its jagged shape (Fig. 24-8). A variable deceleration is defined as
a drop in the FHR that begins with the contraction’s onset and reaches a nadir
in <30 seconds. The deceleration lasts between 15 seconds and 2 minutes,
and its depth is ≥15 bpm in amplitude. The onset of deceleration typically
varies with successive contractions.

FIGURE 24-8 A variable fetal heart rate deceleration characteristically shows an abrupt drop in the
heart rate, and its onset commonly varies with successive contractions. The deceleration depth

measures ≥15 bpm, lasts ≥15 seconds, and has an onset-to-nadir phase <30 seconds. Its total duration is
<2 minutes.

Etiologically, variable deceleration often reflects some degree of
umbilical cord occlusion. In one animal study, Hon (1959) assessed the
effects of umbilical cord compression on FHR. He found lengthening and
deepening of the deceleration curve with longer occlusion times. In another
study, variable decelerations in fetal lambs occurred only after umbilical
blood flow was reduced by at least 50 percent (Itskovitz, 1983).
Two patterns of variable decelerations are shown in Figure 24-9. The
deceleration denoted by “A” is very much like that seen with complete
umbilical cord occlusion in experimental animals. However, deceleration
“B” differs and displays an acceleration before and after the deceleration
component. Lee and coworkers (1975) proposed that this form was caused
by differing degrees of cord occlusion. In this scheme, occlusion of only the
vein reduces fetal blood return and thereby triggers a baroreceptor-mediated
acceleration. With increasing intrauterine pressure and subsequent complete
cord occlusion, fetal systemic hypertension develops due to obstructed
umbilical artery flow. This stimulates a baroreceptor-mediated deceleration.
Presumably, the aftercoming acceleration represents the same events
occurring in reverse (Fig. 24-10) (Lee, 1975). Ball and Parer (1992)
concluded that variable decelerations are mediated vagally and that the vagal
response may be due to chemoreceptor or baroreceptor activity or both.
Partial or complete cord occlusion produces an increase in afterload
(baroreceptor) and a drop in fetal arterial oxygen content (chemoreceptor).
Both result in vagal activity leading to deceleration.

FIGURE 24-9 Variable fetal heart rate decelerations. Deceleration (B) exhibits “shoulders” of
acceleration compared with deceleration (A).

FIGURE 24-10 Schematic representation of the fetal heart rate effects with partial and complete
umbilical cord occlusion. Uterine pressures generated early in a contraction cause cord compression
predominantly of the thin-walled umbilical vein. The resulting decrease in fetal cardiac output leads to an
initial compensatory rise in fetal heart rate. As cord compression intensifies, umbilical arteries are then
also compressed. The resulting rise in fetal systolic blood pressure leads to a vagal-mediated fetal heart
rate deceleration. As the contraction abates and compression is relieved first on the umbilical arteries,
elevated fetal systolic blood pressures drop and the deceleration resolves. A final increase in fetal heart
rate is seen as a result of persistent umbilical vein occlusion. With completion of the uterine contraction
and cord compression, the fetal heart rate returns to baseline. BP = blood pressure.

Thus, variable decelerations represent FHR reflexes that reflect either
blood pressure changes due to interruption of umbilical flow or changes in
oxygenation. It is likely that most fetuses have experienced brief but recurrent

periods of hypoxia due to umbilical cord compression during gestation. The
great dilemma for the obstetrician in managing variable FHR decelerations is
determining when variable decelerations are pathological. According to the
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019a), recurrent
variable decelerations with minimal to moderate variability are
indeterminate, whereas those with absent variability are abnormal.
A saltatory FHR baseline is another pattern linked to umbilical cord
complications during labor (Fig. 24-11) (Hammacher, 1968). The pattern is
rapidly recurring couplets of acceleration and deceleration causing relatively
large oscillations of the FHR baseline. We also observed a relationship
between cord occlusion and the saltatory pattern in postterm pregnancies
(Leveno, 1984). In the absence of other FHR findings, this pattern does not
signal fetal compromise.

FIGURE 24-11 Saltatory baseline fetal heart rate showing rapidly recurring couplets of acceleration
combined with deceleration.

Prolonged Deceleration
This pattern is defined as an isolated deceleration with a depth >15 bpm and
length ≥2 minutes but <10 minutes from onset to return to baseline (Fig. 2412). Prolonged decelerations are difficult to interpret because they are seen
in many different clinical situations. Frequent causes are cervical
examination, uterine hyperactivity, cord entanglement, and maternal supine
hypotension. Epidural, spinal, or paracervical analgesia may induce a
prolonged deceleration (Eberle, 1998). Of women given epidural analgesia
during labor in one analysis at Parkland Hospital, prolonged deceleration

was noted in 1 percent (Hill, 2003). Other causes include placental
abruption, umbilical cord knots or prolapse, maternal hypoperfusion or
hypoxia from any cause, maternal seizures, fetal scalp-electrode application,
impending birth, or maternal Valsalva maneuver.

FIGURE 24-12 Prolonged fetal heart rate deceleration due to uterine hyperactivity. Approximately 3
minutes of the tracing are shown, but the fetal heart rate returned to normal after uterine hypertonus
resolved. Vaginal delivery later ensued.

The placenta can effectively resuscitate the fetus if the original insult
does not recur immediately. Occasionally, such self-limited prolonged
decelerations are followed by loss of variability, baseline tachycardia, and
even a period of late decelerations. These all resolve as the fetus recovers.
Freeman and colleagues (2003) emphasize that the fetus may die during
prolonged decelerations. Thus, management of prolonged decelerations can
be extremely tenuous. Management of isolated prolonged decelerations is

based on bedside clinical judgment, which inevitably will sometimes be
imperfect given the unpredictability of these decelerations.

■ Fetal Heart Rate Patterns During Second-stage Labor
Decelerations are virtually ubiquitous during the second-stage labor. In one
study, only 1.4 percent of more than 7000 deliveries lacked decelerations
during this stage (Melchior, 1985). Both cord and fetal head compressions
are implicated as causes of decelerations and of baseline bradycardia in this
stage. In one series, profound, prolonged FHR deceleration in the 10 minutes
preceding vaginal delivery was associated with intervention and good fetal
outcomes (Boehm, 1975). In a later extension of this series, similarly
prolonged second-stage decelerations were also associated with a stillbirth
and neonatal death (Herbert, 1981). These experiences attest to the
unpredictability of the FHR during second-stage labor.
In the analysis noted earlier by Cahill and associates (2018), an
increasing total deceleration area found in the final 120 minutes prior to
delivery was most predictive of fetal acidemia. A combination of
deceleration area plus a 10-minute period of tachycardia was most
predictive of neonatal morbidity. Others have reported similar findings
(Krebs, 1981; Picquard, 1988). Gull and colleagues (1996) observed that
abrupt FHR decelerations to <100 bpm associated with lost variability for
≥4 minutes predicted fetal acidemia. Thus, second-stage decelerations plus
an abnormal FHR baseline (bradycardia or tachycardia and/or absent
variability) are associated with greater risk for fetal compromise (Fig. 2413).

FIGURE 24-13 Cord-compression fetal heart rate decelerations in second-stage labor associated with
tachycardia and loss of variability. The umbilical cord arterial pH was 6.9.

■ Computerized Interpretation
FHR pattern interpretations are subjective. Thus, the potential for computer
assistance to enhance the precision of identifying abnormal patterns appeared
promising. The INFANT Collaborative Group (2017) studied whether the
addition of computer-based decision-support software for FHR pattern
interpretation lowered the number of poor neonatal outcomes. In this large
trial, women were randomly assigned to computer-assisted interpretation or
to conventional clinical interpretation. Rates of adverse perinatal outcomes
that included intrapartum stillbirth, early neonatal death, and neonatal
encephalopathy were not improved, and a subset showed no difference in
neurological development at 2 years. Cesarean delivery rates were similar in
both groups. In a subsequent analysis of 71 adverse outcomes, computer
interpretation of FHR tracings was deemed completely valid in only 34
percent of cases. Computer analysis missed a significant portion of
decelerations, reduced variability, and tachysystole (Steer, 2019).

OTHER INTRAPARTUM ASSESSMENT TECHNIQUES
■ Fetal Scalp Blood Sampling
According to the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
(2019a), measurements of the pH in capillary scalp blood may help identify
the fetus in serious distress. However, this group also emphasizes that neither
normal nor abnormal scalp pH results accurately predict neonatal outcome.
Although used in other countries, the procedure is not available at most
hospitals in the United States.
With sampling, an illuminated endoscope is inserted through the dilated
cervix after membrane rupture and is pressed firmly against the fetal scalp.
The skin is wiped clean with a cotton swab and coated with a silicone gel,
which allows fetal blood to accumulate as discrete globules. An incision is
made through the fetal scalp to a depth of 2 mm with a special blade on a
long handle. As a drop of blood forms on the surface, it is immediately
collected into a heparinized glass capillary tube. The blood pH is measured
promptly.
The pH of fetal capillary scalp blood is usually lower than that of
umbilical venous blood and approaches that of umbilical arterial blood. In
one algorithm, if the pH is ≥7.25, labor is observed, and if between 7.20 and
7.25, the pH measurement is repeated within 30 minutes (Zalar, 1979). If the
pH is <7.20, another scalp blood sample is collected immediately, and
delivery is performed promptly if the low pH level is confirmed. Otherwise,
labor is allowed to continue, and scalp blood samples are repeated
periodically.
The only benefits reported for scalp blood pH testing are fewer cesarean
deliveries for fetal distress (Young, 1980b). However, Goodwin and
coworkers (1994) showed a decrease in the scalp pH sampling rate from
approximately 1.8 percent in the mid-1980s to 0.03 percent by 1992. This
drop in sampling rate was not associated with a higher cesarean delivery rate
for fetal distress. They concluded that scalp blood pH sampling was
unnecessary.
Kruger and colleagues (1999) have assessed fetal scalp blood lactate
concentration as an adjunct to pH. In one large randomized study, fetuses
received scalp blood pH analysis or scalp blood lactate analysis (WibergItzel, 2008). The authors found either to be equivalent in predicting fetal

acidemia. In a secondary analysis, prediction of low Apgar scores or
admission to the neonatal intensive care unit did not differ between lactate
and pH groups (Stal, 2020). However, cesarean delivery rates were higher in
the lactate group.

■ Scalp Stimulation
Clark and coworkers (1984) have suggested that fetal scalp stimulation is an
alternative to scalp blood sampling. This proposal stemmed from the
observation that FHR acceleration followed pinching the fetal scalp with an
Allis clamp just before obtaining scalp blood and was invariably associated
with a normal pH level. However, failure to provoke acceleration was not
uniformly predictive of fetal acidemia. In another study of 58 cases in which
the FHR accelerated >10 bpm after 15 seconds of digital scalp stroking, 100
percent had a scalp blood pH >7.20 (Elimian, 1997). However, without an
acceleration, only 30 percent had a scalp blood pH >7.20. Authors of a
recent prospective study concluded that scalp stimulation was a reliable
alternative to fetal scalp blood pH determination (Tahir Mahmood, 2018). In
our practice, scalp stimulation is often one element of intrapartum assessment
of the fetus with a category II tracing.

■ Vibroacoustic Stimulation
FHR acceleration in response to vibroacoustic stimulation is another
substitute for fetal scalp blood sampling (Edersheim, 1987). The technique
uses an electronic artificial larynx placed 1 cm from or directly onto the
maternal abdomen (Chap. 20, p. 387). Response to vibroacoustic stimulation
is considered normal if the FHR accelerates within 15 seconds after the
stimulus and with prolonged fetal movements (Sherer, 1994).
Lin and colleagues (2001) prospectively studied vibroacoustic
stimulation in 113 women in labor with either moderate to severe variable or
late FHR decelerations. They concluded that this technique effectively
predicts fetal acidosis in cases with variable decelerations. In the setting of
late decelerations, its prediction of fetal acidosis, however, is limited. Other
authors found vibroacoustic stimulation in second-stage labor did not predict
neonatal outcome or enhance labor management (Anyaegbunam, 1994).

Skupski and coworkers (2002) performed a metaanalysis of reports on
intrapartum fetal stimulation tests. These included fetal scalp puncture for
blood pH testing, fetal scalp pinching, vibroacoustic stimulation, and digital
stroking of the fetal scalp. Results were similar for all four methods. These
authors concluded that intrapartum stimulation tests were useful to exclude
fetal acidemia. They cautioned, however, that these tests are “less than
perfect.”

■ Fetal Pulse Oximetry
Using technology similar to that of adult pulse oximetry, this tool measures
fetal oxyhemoglobin saturation once membranes are ruptured. A unique
padlike sensor is inserted through the cervix and positioned against the fetal
face. Using fetal pulse oximetry, the lower limit for normal fetal oxygen
saturation is generally considered to be 30 percent (Gorenberg, 2003; Stiller,
2002). However, when measured in umbilical arterial blood, fetal oxygen
saturation normally varies greatly.
In one large trial of this technology, women with term fetuses that
developed abnormal FHR patterns were assigned to conventional FHR
monitoring alone or FHR monitoring plus continuous fetal pulse oximetry
(Garite, 2000). The use of fetal pulse oximetry significantly reduced the
cesarean delivery rate for nonreassuring fetal status from 10.2 to 4.5 percent.
No neonatal benefits or adverse effects were associated with fetal pulse
oximetry. Based on these observations, the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) approved marketing of the Nellcor N-400 Fetal
Oxygen Monitoring System. However, three subsequent trials compared fetal
pulse oximetry with standard care. In each, neonatal outcomes were similar
between study arms. In one, the addition of oximetry significantly reduced
cesarean delivery rates for fetal indications (East, 2006). However, two
studies found no difference in cesarean delivery rates between the two study
arms (Bloom, 2006; Klauser, 2005). Because of these findings, in 2005, the
manufacturer discontinued device sales in the United States.

■ Fetal Electrocardiography
As fetal hypoxia worsens, the fetal ECG changes. Namely, the mature fetus
with hypoxemia develops an elevated ST segment and a progressive rise in

the T-wave height that can be expressed as a T:QRS ratio (Fig. 24-14)
(Devoe, 2006). Increasing T:QRS ratios are thought to reflect fetal cardiac
ability to adapt to hypoxia and appear before neurological damage. Further
worsening of hypoxia then leads to progressively negative ST-segment
deflection that creates a biphasic form. It is reasonable to consider that STsegment abnormalities might occur late in the course of fetal compromise.
Indeed, it has been hypothesized that ST-segment changes reflect myocardial
tissue hypoxia.

FIGURE 24-14 A. Generation of T:QRS ratio from a normal ST segment. B. ST-segment elevation in
hypoxic conditions. C. Biphasic ST-segment waveform with progressive fetal hypoxia.

Because of these findings, these parameters have been evaluated as an
adjunct to conventional fetal monitoring. The technique requires internal
FHR monitoring and special equipment to process the fetal ECG. In 2005, the

manufacturer—Neoventa Medical—received FDA approval for their STsegment analysis program named the STAN system.
Several studies have evaluated ST-segment changes with fetal
monitoring. In one randomized trial of 2400 pregnancies, neonatal outcomes
were not improved compared with those in which conventional FHR
monitoring alone was used (Westgate, 1993). However, the cesarean
delivery rate for fetal distress declined in those with ST-segment analysis.
Subsequent studies revealed conflicting data regarding lower rates of
operative delivery, fetal acidemia, and neonatal encephalopathy (AmerWåhlin, 2001; Becker, 2012; Doria, 2007).
In a trial by the NICHD, 5532 women were randomly assigned to an STsegment analysis and 5576 to standard intrapartum management. The primary
outcome was a composite of one or more of seven events associated with
fetal compromise (Belfort, 2015). In the ST-segment analysis group, clinician
actions were directed by predetermined guidelines. These stipulated that
intervention should be withheld, that is, expectant management adopted, for
at least 60 minutes despite the presence of minimal variability; variable
decelerations lasting ≥60 seconds or dropping to a level ≥60 bpm; recurrent
late decelerations; or prolonged decelerations lasting >2 minutes, so long as
no ST-segment abnormality was present. These guidelines did not pertain to
the standard group. Notably, in the ST-segment analysis group, 55 (20
percent) of the 287 cesarean deliveries performed for fetal indications were
done even though trial guidelines indicated that labor could continue. In these
cases, physicians likely perceived the FHR patterns to reflect those formerly
accepted in their usual practice as nonreassuring. These results showed that
STAN system had no effect on neonatal outcome or cesarean delivery rates
(Belfort, 2015). A subsequent systematic review reached similar conclusions
(Neilson, 2015). These results have essentially eliminated use of ST-segment
analysis in the United States, but it is still used in Europe.

NONREASSURING FETAL STATUS
The term fetal distress is too broad and vague to be applied with any
precision to clinical situations (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2019d). Uncertainty regarding the diagnosis based on FHR
pattern interpretation has given rise to descriptions such as reassuring or
nonreassuring. The former suggests confidence in the health of the fetus. In

contrast, a nonreassuring designation suggests inability to remove doubt.
However, these assessments are subjective judgments that are inevitably
imperfect and must be recognized as such. The American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019d) recommends use of these terms
followed by a description of the findings.
The difficulty in assigning a nonreassuring label to FHR patterns stems in
part from the fact that these patterns reflect fetal physiology more so than
pathology. Heart rate control stems from interconnected mechanisms that
depend on blood flow and oxygenation. Moreover, these mechanisms are
influenced by the preexisting state of fetal oxygenation. Chronic placental
insufficiency is one example. Thus, normal labor is a process of repeated
fetal hypoxic events and can infrequently lead to significant acidemia
(Rogers, 1998).

■ Diagnosis
Identification of nonreassuring fetal status based on FHR patterns is
imprecise. One study of interobserver agreement with FHR pattern
interpretation found that consensus varied (Ayres-de-Campos, 1999).
Specifically, experts agreed on 62 percent of normal patterns, 42 percent of
suspicious patterns, and only 25 percent of pathological patterns. In another
study, 17 experts reviewed 50 tracings on two occasions, at least 1 month
apart. Approximately 20 percent changed their own interpretations, and
approximately 25 percent did not agree with the interpretations of their
colleagues (Keith, 1995).
In an attempt to resolve this imprecision, the NICHD recommended a
three-tier system for FHR pattern classification (Table 24-2). The American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019b) has recommended its
use. To assess this tiered system, Jackson and associates (2011) studied
48,444 women in labor and found that category I patterns were observed in
99.5 percent of tracings. Category II patterns were found in 84.1 percent, and
category III patterns were seen in 0.1 percent (54 women). During labor, 84
percent of women had a mix of categories. The American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists and the American Academy of Pediatrics
(2019d) has concluded that a category I or II tracing with a 5-minute Apgar
score >7 or with normal arterial blood acid–base values is not consistent
with an acute hypoxic-ischemic event.

TABLE 24-2. Three-Tier Fetal Heart Rate Interpretation System

Other studies have evaluated this three-tiered system. In one, the
incidence of umbilical cord acidemia (pH ≤7.10) was correlated
retrospectively with FHR characteristics during the 30 minutes preceding
delivery. None of the three categories demonstrated a significant association
with cord blood acidemia (Cahill, 2012). Sholapurkar (2012) has challenged
the validity of the three-tier system because most abnormal FHR patterns fall
into the indeterminate category II. It was suggested that this resulted from
most FHR decelerations being inappropriately classified as variable and
attributed to cord compression.
Parer and King (2010) compared this situation in the United States with
that of other countries in which a consensus on classification and
management has been reached by their professional societies. These authors
note that the NICHD three-tier system is inadequate because category II
contains a vast heterogenous mixture of patterns that prevents development of
a management strategy. Weissbach and associates (2018) found that duration
of category II tracings does not predict perinatal asphyxia, but the individual
components of diminished variability and fetal tachycardia are predictive.
Parer and Ikeda (2007) had previously proposed a color-coded five-tier
system for both FHR interpretation and management. Two subsequent reports
have compared the five- and three-tier systems. In one, the two systems were

similar in FHR interpretations for tracings that were either very normal or
very abnormal (Bannerman, 2011). The other study found that the five-tier
system had better sensitivity than the three-tier one (Coletta, 2012). It is
apparent that despite decades of electronic FHR monitoring, a consensus on
FHR pattern interpretation and diagnosis is still lacking (Parer, 2011).

■ Meconium in the Amnionic Fluid
Obstetricians have long realized that meconium during labor is an inaccurate
predictor of fetal distress or asphyxia. Indeed, although 12 to 22 percent of
labors are complicated by meconium, only a few are linked to neonatal
mortality. In an investigation from Parkland Hospital, meconium was found to
be a “low-risk” obstetrical hazard because the perinatal mortality rate
attributable to meconium was only 1 death per 1000 live births (Nathan,
1994).
Three etiological theories may explain the tenuous association between
meconium passage and neonatal mortality. First, fetuses may pass meconium
in response to hypoxia, and meconium therefore signals fetal compromise
(Walker, 1953). Second, however, in utero passage of meconium may
represent normal gastrointestinal tract maturation under neural control
(Mathews, 1979). A final theory posits that common but transient umbilical
cord entrapment leads to vagal stimulation, increased bowel peristalsis, and
meconium passage (Hon, 1961).
Jovanovic and Nguyen (1989) observed that meconium aspirated into
fetal lungs during gasping caused aspiration syndrome only in asphyxiated
animals. Ramin and associates (1996) studied almost 8000 pregnancies with
meconium-stained amnionic fluid delivered at Parkland Hospital. Meconium
aspiration syndrome was significantly associated with fetal acidemia at birth.
Further analysis of umbilical blood gases suggested that the fetal compromise
associated with meconium aspiration syndrome was an acute event. This is
because most acidemic fetuses had abnormally elevated PCO2 values rather
than a pure metabolic acidemia. Other significant correlates of aspiration
included cesarean delivery, forceps to expedite delivery, intrapartum FHR
abnormalities, depressed Apgar scores, and need for assisted ventilation at
delivery.
Ramin and colleagues (1996) hypothesized that the pathophysiology of
meconium aspiration syndrome includes, but is not limited to, fetal

hypercarbia, which stimulates fetal respiration leading to aspiration of
meconium into the alveoli. Lung parenchymal injury is secondary to
acidemia-induced alveolar cell damage. In this pathophysiological scenario,
meconium in amnionic fluid is a fetal environmental hazard rather than a
marker of preexisting compromise. This proposed pathophysiological
sequence is not all-inclusive, because it does not account for approximately
half of the cases of meconium aspiration syndrome in which the fetus is not
acidemic at birth.
Thus, the high incidence of meconium observed in the amnionic fluid
during labor often represents normal physiological fetal passage of
gastrointestinal contents. Although normal, such meconium becomes an
environmental hazard when fetal acidemia from hypercarbia supervenes.
Importantly, such acidemia occurs acutely, and therefore meconium
aspiration is unpredictable and likely unpreventable.
Growing evidence indicates that many newborns with meconium
aspiration syndrome have suffered chronic hypoxia before birth (Ghidini,
2001). In one study, 60 percent of neonates diagnosed with meconium
aspiration syndrome had umbilical artery blood pH ≥7.20, which implies that
the syndrome was unrelated to the neonatal condition at delivery (Blackwell,
2001). Similarly, comorbid markers of chronic hypoxia, such as elevated
fetal erythropoietin levels and increased nucleated red blood cell counts in
newborns, suggest that chronic hypoxia is involved in many meconium
aspiration syndrome cases (Dollberg, 2001; Jazayeri, 2000).
Previously, routine obstetrical management of a newborn with meconiumstained amnionic fluid included intrapartum suctioning of the oropharynx and
nasopharynx. Current recommendations state that newborns with meconiumstained amnionic fluid, regardless of their vigor, should no longer routinely
receive intrapartum suctioning (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2021; Wyckoff, 2015). Suctioning is reserved for those with
airway obstruction. They also recommend that an appropriately credentialed
team with full resuscitation skills be available (Chap. 32, p. 586).

■ Management Options
Initial management of variant FHR patterns aims to correct any fetal insult, if
possible. Suggestions are listed in Table 24-3. The woman is moved to a
lateral position, and supplemental oxygen is provided by mask. Correcting

maternal hypotension caused by regional analgesia and discontinuing
oxytocin both serve to improve uteroplacental perfusion. Vaginal examination
excludes a prolapsed cord or impending delivery. Simpson and James (2005)
assessed the benefits of three maneuvers in 52 women with fetal oxygen
saturation sensors already in place. They provided IV hydration with 500 to
1000 mL of lactated Ringer solution given over 20 minutes; lateral versus
supine positioning; and administration of supplemental oxygen at 10 L/min
using a nonrebreathing mask. Each of these maneuvers significantly raised
fetal oxygen saturation levels. A randomized trial comparing oxygen via face
mask to room air showed no difference in resolution of recurrent
decelerations (75 percent versus 86 percent), time to resolution of recurrent
decelerations, and total deceleration area (Raghuraman, 2020b).
TABLE 24-3. Some Resuscitative Measures for Category II or Category III
Tracings

Tocolysis
Terbutaline sulfate given to relax the uterus can be a temporizing maneuver in
the management of nonreassuring FHR patterns during labor. A single 250-μg
IV or subcutaneous injection is used to inhibit uterine contractions and
thereby improve fetal oxygenation. One study described 368 pregnancies in
which terbutaline was used to relieve contractions in preparation for
cesarean delivery that was already planned for nonreassuring fetal status
(Cook, 1994). Compared with a group not receiving tocolysis, the treated
group had fewer 5-minute Apgar scores <7. Small IV doses of nitroglycerin
—60 to 180 μg—also have reported benefit (Mercier, 1997). In one
comparator study, both agents resolved tachysystole, but nitroglycerin
lowered mean arterial blood pressures (Pullen, 2007). Two systematic

reviews both noted that data were limited and reached differing views on
tocolysis benefits (Bullens, 2015; Leathersich, 2018). The American College
of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019b) cites that evidence is insufficient
to recommend tocolysis for nonreassuring FHR patterns. We consider
terbutaline during labor stimulation to resolve tachysystole-associated
prolonged decelerations. However, the chance of success is balanced against
terbutaline’s side effects should cesarean delivery be needed for unresolved
bradycardia. Namely, β agonist–related maternal tachycardia exacerbates the
tachycardia associated with surgery itself. We consider maternal
cardiopulmonary disease, poorly controlled hyperthyroidism, and maternal
or fetal tachycardia with loss of variability to be contraindications.

Amnioinfusion
Early studies infused saline through an intrauterine pressure catheter in
laboring women who had either variable or prolonged decelerations
attributed to cord compression (Miyazaki, 1983, 1985). Such therapy
improved the FHR pattern and decreased cesarean delivery rates for fetal
indications. For variable decelerations, other studies also support
amnioinfusion to reduce variable deceleration frequency, improve neonatal
outcome, and lower cesarean delivery rates (Hofmeyr, 2012; Raghuraman,
2020a). The American Academy of Pediatrics and the American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2017) conclude that amnioinfusion is a
reasonable approach to treat repetitive variable decelerations but not late
decelerations. As a prophylactic tool in known cases of oligohydramnios,
evidence does not support amnioinfusion to prevent cord compressionrelated decelerations (Nageotte, 1991; Ogundipe, 1994). Last, attempts to
flush out or dilute thick meconium are not recommended (Fraser, 2005; Xu,
2007).
Despite differing amnioinfusion protocols, most provide a 500- to 800mL bolus of warmed normal saline, which is followed by a continuous
infusion of 3 mL/min (Owen, 1990; Pressman, 1996). Rinehart and
colleagues (2000) administered a 500-mL bolus of normal saline at room
temperature alone or this bolus plus a continuous infusion at 3 mL/min. They
included 65 women with variable decelerations and found neither method to
be superior. Potential amnioinfusion complications are summarized in Table
24-4 from a U.S. survey of fellowship and residency directors (Wenstrom,
1995).

TABLE 24-4. Complications Associated with Amnioinfusion from a Survey
of 186 Obstetrical Units

■ Fetal Heart Rate Patterns and Brain Injury
Studies attempting to correlate FHR patterns with brain injury have primarily
examined infants identified in medicolegal actions. Phelan and Ahn (1994)
reported that among 48 fetuses later found to be neurologically impaired, a
persistent nonreactive FHR tracing was already present at the time of
admission in 70 percent. They concluded that fetal neurological injury
occurred predominantly before arrival to the hospital. When they looked
retrospectively at FHR patterns in 209 brain-injured newborns, they
concluded that there was not a single unique pattern associated with fetal
neurological injury (Ahn, 1996). Others have reported the same conclusion
(Nakao, 2020; Phelan, 2000). In a review of literature published between
1966 and 2006 on the effect of FHR monitoring to prevent perinatal brain
injury, the summary found no benefit (Graham, 2006).
FHR patterns necessary for perinatal brain damage have been studied in
animals. Myers (1972) described the effects of complete and partial asphyxia
in rhesus monkeys (Fig. 24-15). Complete asphyxia was produced by total
occlusion of umbilical blood flow that led to prolonged deceleration. Fetal
arterial pH did not drop to 7.0 until approximately 8 minutes after complete
cessation of oxygenation and umbilical flow. At least 10 minutes of such
prolonged deceleration were required before surviving fetuses demonstrated
brain damage.

FIGURE 24-15 Prolonged deceleration in a rhesus monkey shown with blood pressure and
biochemical changes during total occlusion of umbilical cord blood flow.

The most common FHR pattern during labor—due to umbilical cord
occlusion—requires considerable time to significantly affect the fetus in
experimental animals. Clapp and colleagues (1988) partially occluded the
umbilical cord for 1 minute every 3 minutes in fetal sheep. Rocha and
associates (2004) totally occluded the umbilical cord for 90 seconds every
30 minutes for 3 to 5 hours a day for 4 days without producing necrotic brain
cell injury. Results from such studies suggest that the effects of umbilical
cord entrapment depend on the degree, the duration, and the frequency of
such occlusions.
The contribution of intrapartum events to subsequent neurological
handicaps has been greatly overestimated, as discussed in Chapter 33 (p.
601). For brain damage, the fetus must be exposed to much more than a brief
period of hypoxia. Moreover, the hypoxia must cause profound, just barely
sublethal metabolic acidemia. Because of this, the American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019d) has recommended umbilical cord
blood gases be obtained when cesarean delivery is performed for fetal
compromise or when a low 5-minute Apgar score, severe fetal-growth
restriction, an abnormal FHR tracing, or multifetal gestation is present
(Chap. 32, p. 593).
Until recently, the prognosis for moderately affected newborns with
hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy (HIE) was poor. More recently, studies
show that brain cooling administered to newborns suffering neonatal HIE
could ameliorate the development of subsequent cerebral palsy (Chap. 33, p.
602).

■ Benefits of Electronic Fetal Heart Rate Monitoring
Several false assumptions underlie the expectation of improved perinatal
outcome with electronic FHR monitoring. One is that nonreassuring fetal
status is a slowly developing phenomenon and that electronic monitoring
permits early detection of the compromised fetus. Another presumption is
that all fetal injury develops in the hospital. In reality, most neurologically
damaged fetuses suffer insults before arrival at labor units. The very term
fetal monitor implies that this inanimate technology in some fashion
“monitors.” The assumption is made that if a dead or damaged fetus is
delivered, the tracing strip must provide some clue, because this device was
monitoring fetal condition. These assumptions led to expectations that all
neonatal deaths or injuries were preventable.
By the end of the 1970s, questions regarding the efficacy, safety, and
costs of electronic monitoring were being voiced. Banta and Thacker (2002)
reviewed the benefits, or lack thereof, of electronic FHR monitoring. More
recently, a review of 13 randomized trials involving more than 37,000
women concluded that electronic FHR monitoring was associated with fewer
neonatal seizures but a higher rate of cesarean and operative vaginal
deliveries (Alfirevic, 2017). However, rates of perinatal mortality or
cerebral palsy did not decline. Grimes and Peipert (2010) concluded that
such monitoring has failed as a public health screening program. They noted
that the positive-predictive value of electronic FHR monitoring for fetal
death in labor or cerebral palsy is near zero and reflects that “almost every
positive test result is wrong.”
Epidemiologically, two large studies in the United States reported a
decline in neonatal mortality rates due to electronic FHR monitoring.
However, the highest effect was seen in preterm neonates (Ananth, 2013;
Chen, 2011). Of note, caution must be used in interpreting these studies, as
epidemiological association does not establish causation (Resnik, 2013).
At admission for labor, most women with low-risk pregnancies are
monitored for a short time. In one study, 3752 low-risk women in
spontaneous labor were randomly assigned at admission to either FHR
auscultation or 20 minutes of electronic FHR monitoring (Mires, 2001).
Electronic FHR monitoring did not improve neonatal outcome. Moreover, its
use resulted in a greater number of interventions, including operative
delivery. A similar study echoed these neonatal outcomes (Impey, 2003).

Last, admission FHR monitoring for low-risk pregnancy is associated with a
higher cesarean delivery rate but not improved neonatal outcomes in one
Cochrane review (Devane, 2017).
At Parkland Hospital in July 1982, an investigation began to ascertain
whether all women during labor should undergo electronic monitoring
(Leveno, 1986). In alternating months, universal electronic FHR monitoring
was rotated with selective FHR monitoring, which was the prevailing
practice. During the 3-year investigation, more than 17,000 labors were
managed using universal electronic FHR monitoring, and these outcomes
were compared with a similar-sized cohort of women selectively monitored
electronically. No significant differences were found in any perinatal
outcome. With universal monitoring, a small but significant increase in the
cesarean delivery rate for fetal distress was noted. Thus, greater application
of electronic FHR monitoring at Parkland Hospital did not improve perinatal
results but did slightly raise the frequency of cesarean delivery for fetal
distress. More recently, a Cochrane Database review found that intermittent
auscultation was associated with a higher cesarean delivery rate compared
with continuous monitoring (Martis, 2017).

■ Current Recommendations
Methods most commonly used for intrapartum FHR monitoring include
intermittent auscultation with a fetal stethoscope or a Doppler ultrasound
device, or continuous electronic monitoring of FHR and uterine contractions.
Evidence has not identified the most effective method nor the frequency or
duration of fetal surveillance that ensures optimum results. That said, Table
24-5 summarizes current guidelines from the American Academy of
Pediatrics and American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2017).
Intermittent auscultation or continuous electronic monitoring is considered an
acceptable method of intrapartum surveillance in both low- and high-risk
pregnancies. The recommended interval between checking the heart rate,
however, is longer in the uncomplicated pregnancy. When auscultation is
used, it is recommended that it be performed after a contraction and for 60
seconds. It also is recommended that a 1-to-1 nurse–patient ratio be used if
auscultation is employed. The position taken by the American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019b) acknowledges that available data
do not show a clear benefit to the use of electronic monitoring over

intermittent auscultation. At Parkland Hospital, all high-risk labors are
continuously monitored electronically. In low-risk pregnancies, both
intermittent auscultation and continuous electronic monitoring are used
depending on clinical circumstances, including the woman’s desire to
ambulate.
TABLE 24-5. Guidelines for Methods of Intrapartum Fetal Heart Rate
Monitoring

INTRAPARTUM SURVEILLANCE OF UTERINE
ACTIVITY
Analysis of electronically measured uterine activity permits some
generalities concerning the relationship of certain contraction patterns and
labor outcome. However, uterine muscle efficiency to bring about delivery
varies greatly. Thus, caution should be exercised before diagnosing true
labor or its absence solely from a monitor tracing.
With internal monitoring of contractions, amnionic fluid pressure is
measured between and during contractions. An intrauterine pressure catheter
is placed into the uterus with its distal tip above the presenting part. The

catheter tip contains a pressure sensor and allows calculation of intrauterine
pressure with each contraction (Fig. 24-16). With external monitoring,
uterine contractions can be measured by a displacement transducer in which
the transducer button, or “plunger,” is held against the maternal abdominal
wall. As the uterus contracts, the button moves in proportion to the strength of
the contraction. This movement is converted into a measurable electrical
signal that indicates the relative intensity of the contraction. It has generally
been accepted that internal monitoring provided a more accurate measure of
intensity. That said, in a randomized trial comparing internal versus external
monitoring of uterine contractions in 1456 women, the two methods yielded
equivalent operative delivery rates and neonatal outcomes (Bakker, 2010).

FIGURE 24-16 Placement of an intrauterine pressure catheter to monitor contractions and their
pressures. The catheter, contained within the light blue introducer, is inserted into the uterus and placed
along one side of the fetal head. The catheter is then gently advanced into the uterus, and the introducer
is withdrawn.

■ Patterns of Uterine Activity
Caldeyro-Barcia and Poseiro (1960), from Montevideo, Uruguay, were
pioneers in elucidating the patterns of spontaneous uterine activity throughout

pregnancy. Waves of uterine activity were usually measured using
intraamnionic pressure catheters. But early in their studies, as many as four
simultaneous intramyometrial microballoons also were used to record
uterine pressure. Contraction intensity was defined as the rise in this pressure
above a resting pressure baseline. These investigators also introduced the
concept of Montevideo units to define uterine activity (Chap. 23, p. 435).
With this definition, uterine performance is the product of contraction
intensity in mm Hg multiplied by the number of contractions in a 10-minute
span. For example, three contractions in 10 minutes, each with 50-mm Hg
intensity, would equal 150 Montevideo units.
According to Caldeyro-Barcia and Poseiro (1960), clinical labor usually
commences when uterine activity reaches values between 80 and 120
Montevideo units. This translates into approximately three contractions of 40
mm Hg every 10 minutes. Importantly, no clear-cut division marks labor
onset, which is a gradual and progressive transition.
In first-stage labor, uterine contractions progressively grow in intensity
from approximately 25 mm Hg at labor commencement to 50 mm Hg at its
end. At the same time, the frequency advances from three to five contractions
per 10 minutes, and uterine baseline tone rises from 8 to 12 mm Hg. Uterine
activity is further enhanced during second-stage labor, aided by maternal
pushing. Contraction intensity of 80 to 100 mm Hg is typical, and the uterus
contracts as frequently as five to six times each 10 minutes. Hauth and
coworkers (1986) quantified uterine contraction pressures in 109 women at
term who received oxytocin for labor induction or augmentation. Most of
these women achieved 200 to 225 Montevideo units, and 40 percent had up
to 300 units to effect delivery. The authors suggested that these levels of
uterine activity should be sought before consideration of cesarean delivery
for presumed dystocia (Chap. 23, p. 436).
Interestingly, the duration of uterine contractions—60 to 80 seconds—
does not lengthen appreciably from early active labor through the second
stage (Bakker, 2007; Pontonnier, 1975). Presumably, this duration constancy
serves fetal respiratory gas exchange. During a uterine contraction, as the
intrauterine pressure exceeds that of the intervillous space, respiratory gas
exchange is halted. This leads to functional fetal “breath holding,” which has
a 60- to 80-second limit that remains relatively constant.
Caldeyro-Barcia and Poseiro (1960) also observed empirically that
uterine contractions are clinically palpable only after their intensity exceeds

10 mm Hg. Moreover, until the intensity of contractions reaches 40 mm Hg,
the uterine wall can readily be depressed by the finger. At greater intensities,
the uterine wall then becomes so hard that it resists easy depression. Uterine
contractions usually are not associated with pain until their strength exceeds
15 mm Hg. Presumably, this is the minimum pressure required to distend the
lower uterine segment and cervix.
Hendricks (1968) observed that “the clinician makes great demands upon
the uterus.” The uterus is expected to remain well relaxed during pregnancy,
to contract effectively but intermittently during labor, and then to remain in a
state of almost constant contraction for several hours postpartum. Figure 2417 demonstrates an example of normal uterine activity during labor. Uterine
activity progressively and gradually rises from early through late labor.
Interestingly, uterine contractions after birth are identical to those resulting in
delivery of the newborn. Logically, the uterus that performs poorly before
delivery is also prone to atony and puerperal hemorrhage.

FIGURE 24-17 Intrauterine pressure recorded through a single catheter. A. Prelabor. B. Early labor.
C. Active labor. D. Late labor. E. Spontaneous activity ½ hour postpartum. F. Spontaneous activity 2½

hours postpartum. (Redrawn from Hendricks CH: Uterine contractility changes in the early puerperium.
Clin Obstet Gynecol 1968 Mar;11(1):125–144.)

■ Uterine Contraction Terminology
Terms to describe uterine contractions have been recommended by the
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019b). Normal
uterine activity is defined as five or fewer contractions in 10 minutes,
averaged during a 30-minute span. Tachysystole is more than five
contractions in 10 minutes, averaged over 30 minutes. Tachysystole can be
applied to spontaneous or induced labor. The term hyperstimulation was
abandoned.
Stewart and associates (2012) prospectively studied uterine tachysystole
in 584 women undergoing labor induction with misoprostol at Parkland
Hospital. A higher rate of adverse neonatal outcomes was not associated
with an increasing number of contractions per 10 minutes or per 30 minutes.
Counts of six or more contractions in 10 minutes, however, were
significantly associated with FHR decelerations.

■ Electronic Fetal Monitoring Complications
Electrodes for FHR evaluation and catheters for uterine contraction
measurement are both associated with infrequent but potentially serious
complications. Rarely, an intrauterine pressure catheter may lacerate a fetal
vessel in the placenta during placement. Also with insertion, placental and
possibly uterine perforation can cause hemorrhage, abruption, and spurious
recordings that have resulted in inappropriate management. Severe cord
compression has been described from entanglement with the pressure
catheter. Injury to the fetal scalp or breech by a FHR electrode is rarely
severe. However, face presentations pose risk for eye or mouth trauma.
Both the fetus and the mother may be at greater risk of infection from
internal monitoring (Faro, 1990). Scalp wounds from the electrode may
become infected, but subsequent cranial osteomyelitis is rare (Brook, 2005;
Eggink, 2004; McGregor, 1989). Certain maternal infections that include
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), herpes simplex virus, and hepatitis B
and C virus are relative contraindications to internal FHR monitoring
(American Academy of Pediatrics, 2017).

REFERENCES
Ahn MO, Korst L, Phelan JP: Intrapartum fetal heart rate patterns in 209 brain damaged infants. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 174:492, 1996
Alfirevic Z, Devane D, Gyte GM, et al: Continuous cardiotocography (CTG) as a form of electronic
fetal monitoring (EFM) for fetal assessment during labour. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
2:CD006066, 2017
Amer-Wåhlin I, Hellsten C, Norén H, et al: Cardiotocography only versus cardiotocography plus ST
analysis of fetal electrocardiogram for intrapartum fetal monitoring: a Swedish randomized controlled
trial. Lancet 358:534, 2001
American Academy of Pediatrics, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Guidelines for
Perinatal Care, 8th ed. Elk Grove Village, AAP, 2017
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Intrapartum fetal heart rate monitoring:
nomenclature, interpretation, and general management principles. Practice Bulletin No. 106, July
2009, Reaffirmed 2019a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Management of intrapartum fetal heart rate
tracings. Practice Bulletin No. 116, November 2010, Reaffirmed 2019b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Delivery of a newborn with meconium-stained
amniotic fluid. Committee Opinion No. 689, March 2017, Reaffirmed 2021
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, American Academy of Pediatrics: Neonatal
encephalopathy and neurologic outcome. Washington, ACOG, 2014, Reaffirmed 2019d
Ananth CV, Chauhan SP, Chen HY, et al: Electronic fetal monitoring in the United States. Obstet
Gynecol 121(5):927, 2013
Angel J, Knuppel R, Lake M: Sinusoidal fetal heart rate patterns associated with intravenous
butorphanol administration. Am J Obstet Gynecol 149:465, 1984
Anyaegbunam AM, Ditchik A, Stoessel R, et al: Vibroacoustic stimulation of the fetus entering the
second stage of labor. Obstet Gynecol 83:963, 1994
Api O, Carvalho JS: Fetal dysrhythmias. Best Pract Res Clin Obstet Gynaecol 22(1):31, 2008
Ayres-de-Campos D, Bernardes J, Costa-Pereira A, et al: Inconsistencies in classification by experts of
cardiotocograms and subsequent clinical decision. BJOG 106:1307, 1999
Bakker JJ, Verhoeven CJ, Janssen PF, et al: Outcomes after internal versus external tocodynamometry
for monitoring labor. N Engl J Med 362:306, 2010
Bakker PC, Kurver PH, Duik DJ, et al: Elevated uterine activity increases the risk of fetal acidosis at
birth. Am J Obstet Gynecol 196:313, 2007
Ball RH, Parer JT: The physiologic mechanisms of variable decelerations. Am J Obstet Gynecol
166:1683, 1992
Bannerman CG, Grobman WA, Antoniewicz L: Assessment of the concordance among 2-tier, 3-tier, and
5-tier fetal heart rate classification systems. Am J Obstet Gynecol 205(3):288.e1, 2011
Banta HD, Thacker SB: Electronic fetal monitoring: lessons from a formative case of health technology
assessment. Int J Technol Assess Health Care 18:762, 2002
Becker JH, Bax L, Amer-Wåhlin I, et al: ST analysis of the fetal electrocardiogram in intrapartum fetal
monitoring. Obstet Gynecol 119:145, 2012
Belfort MA, Saade GR, Thom E, et al: A randomized trial of intrapartum fetal ECG ST-segment
analysis. N Engl J Med 373(7):632, 2015

Berkus MD, Langer O, Samueloff A, et al: Electronic fetal monitoring: what’s reassuring? Acta Obstet
Gynecol Scand 78(1):15; 1999
Blackwell SC, Groman WA, Antoniewicz L, et al: Interobserver and intraobserver reliability of the
NICHD 3-tier fetal heart rate interpretation system. Am J Obstet Gynecol 205:378.e1, 2011
Blackwell SC, Moldenhauer J, Hassan SS, et al: Meconium aspiration syndrome in term neonates with
normal acid-base status at delivery: is it different? Am J Obstet Gynecol 184:1422, 2001
Bloom SL, Spong CY, Thom E, et al: Fetal pulse oximetry and cesarean delivery. N Engl J Med 335:21,
2006
Boehm FH: Prolonged end stage fetal heart rate deceleration. Obstet Gynecol 45:579, 1975
Bravo-Valenzuela NJ, Rocha LA, Machado Nardozza LM, et al: Fetal cardiac arrhythmias: current
evidence. Ann Pediatr Cardiol 11(2)148, 2018
Brocato B, Lewis D, Mulekar M, et al: Obesity’s impact on intrapartum electronic fetal monitoring. J
Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 32(1):92, 2019
Brook I: Infected neonatal cephalohematomas caused by anaerobic bacteria. J Perinat Med 33(3):255,
2005
Bullens LM, van Runnard Heimel PJ, van der Hout-van der Jaqt MB, et al: Interventions for intrauterine
resuscitation in suspected fetal distress during term labor: a systematic review. Obstet Gynecol Surv
70(8):524, 2015
Cahill AG, Roehl KA, Odibo AO, et al: Association and prediction of neonatal acidemia. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 207:206.e1, 2012
Cahill AG, Tuuli MG, Stout MJ, et al: A prospective cohort study of fetal heart rate monitoring:
deceleration area is predictive of fetal acidemia. Am J Obstet Gynecol 218(5):523, 2018
Caldeyro-Barcia R, Poseiro JJ: Physiology of the uterine contraction. Clin Obstet Gynecol 3:386, 1960
Chen HY, Chauhan SP, Ananth C: Electronic fetal heart monitoring and its relationship to neonatal and
infant mortality in the United States. Am J Obstet Gynecol 204(6):491.e1, 2011
Clapp JF, Peress NS, Wesley M, et al: Brain damage after intermittent partial cord occlusion in the
chronically instrumented fetal lamb. Am J Obstet Gynecol 159:504, 1988
Clark SL, Gimovsky ML, Miller FC: The scalp stimulation test: a clinical alternative to fetal scalp blood
sampling. Am J Obstet Gynecol 148:274, 1984
Coletta J, Murphy E, Rubeo Z, et al: The 5-tier system of assessing fetal heart rate tracings is superior
to the 3-tier system in identifying fetal acidemia. Am J Obstet Gynecol 206:226.e1, 2012
Cook VD, Spinnato JA: Terbutaline tocolysis prior to cesarean section for fetal distress. J Matern Fetal
Med 3:219, 1994
Dawes GS: The control of fetal heart rate and its variability in counts. In Kunzel W (ed): Fetal Heart
Rate Monitoring. Berlin, Springer, 1985
Dawes GS, Visser GHA, Goodman JDS, et al: Numerical analysis of the human fetal heart rate:
modulation by breathing and movement. Am J Obstet Gynecol 140:535, 1981
Devane D, Lalor JG, Daly S, et al: Cardiotocography versus intermittent auscultation of fetal heart on
admission to labour ward for assessment of fetal wellbeing. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
1:CD005122, 2017
Devoe L: ECG analysis: the next generation in electronic fetal monitoring? Contemporary Ob/Gyn,
September 15, 2006
Dollberg S, Livny S, Mordecheyev N, et al: Nucleated red blood cells in meconium aspiration syndrome.
Obstet Gynecol 97:593, 2001
Doria V, Papageorghiou AT, Gustafsson A, et al: Review of the first 1502 cases of ECG-ST waveform
analysis during labour in a teaching hospital. BJOG 114:1202, 2007

Duffy CR, Odibo AO, Roehl KA, et al: Effect of magnesium sulfate on fetal heart rate patterns in the
second stage of labor. Obstet Gynecol 119(6):1129, 2012
East CE, Brennecke SP, King JF, et al: The effect of intrapartum fetal pulse oximetry, in the presence of
a nonreassuring fetal heart rate pattern, on operative delivery rates: a multicenter, randomized,
controlled trial (the FOREMOST trial). Am J Obstet Gynecol 194:606, 2006
Eberle RL, Norris MC, Eberle AM, et al: The effect of maternal position on fetal heart rate during
epidural or intrathecal labor analgesia. Am J Obstet Gynecol 179:150, 1998
Edersheim TG, Hutson JM, Druzin ML, et al: Fetal heart rate response to vibratory acoustic stimulation
predicts fetal pH in labor. Am J Obstet Gynecol 157:1557, 1987
Eggink BH, Richardson CJ, Rowen JL: Gardnerella vaginalis–infected scalp hematoma associated
with electronic fetal monitoring. Pediatr Infect Dis J 23:276, 2004
Egley CC, Bowes WA, Wagner D: Sinusoidal fetal heart rate pattern during labor. Am J Perinatol 8:197,
1991
Elimian A, Figueroa R, Tejani N: Intrapartum assessment of fetal well-being: a comparison of scalp
stimulation with scalp pH sampling. Obstet Gynecol 89:373, 1997
Epstein A, Twogood S, Lee RH, et al: Interobserver reliability of fetal heart rate pattern interpretation
using NICHD definitions. Am J Perinatol 30(6):463, 2013
Epstein H, Waxman A, Gleicher N, et al: Meperidine induced sinusoidal fetal heart rate pattern and
reversal with naloxone. Obstet Gynecol 59:225, 1982
Esplin SM: Identification of the fetus at risk for metabolic acidemia using continuous fetal heart rate
monitoring. Clin Obstet Gynecol 63(3):616, 2020
Faro S, Martens MG, Hammill HA, et al: Antibiotic prophylaxis: is there a difference? Am J Obstet
Gynecol 162:900, 1990
Fraser WD, Hofmeyr J, Lede R, et al: Amnioinfusion for the prevention of the meconium aspiration
syndrome. N Engl J Med 353:9, 2005
Freeman RK, Garite TH, Nageotte MP: Fetal Heart Rate Monitoring, 3rd ed. Philadelphia, Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins, 2003
Garite TJ, Dildy GA, McNamara H, et al: A multicenter controlled trial of fetal pulse oximetry in the
intrapartum management of nonreassuring fetal heart rate patterns. Am J Obstet Gynecol 183:1049,
2000
Ghidini A, Spong CY: Severe meconium aspiration syndrome is not caused by aspiration of meconium.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 185:931, 2001
Gilstrap LC III, Hauth JC, Hankins GD, et al: Second stage fetal heart rate abnormalities and type of
neonatal acidemia. Obstet Gynecol 70:191, 1987
Goodwin TM, Milner-Masterson L, Paul RH: Elimination of fetal scalp blood sampling on a large clinical
service. Obstet Gynecol 83:971, 1994
Gorenberg DM, Pattillo C, Hendi P, et al: Fetal pulse oximetry: correlation between oxygen desaturation,
duration, and frequency and neonatal outcomes. Am J Obstet Gynecol 189:136, 2003
Graham EM, Petersen SM, Christo DK, et al: Intrapartum electronic fetal heart rate monitoring and the
prevention of perinatal brain injury. Obstet Gynecol 108:656, 2006
Grimes DA, Peipert JF: Electronic fetal monitoring as a public health screening program. Obstet
Gynecol 116:1397, 2010
Gull I, Jaffa AJ, Oren M, et al: Acid accumulation during end-stage bradycardia in term fetuses: how
long is too long? BJOG 103:1096, 1996
Hammacher K, Huter K, Bokelmann J, et al: Foetal heart frequency and perinatal conditions of the
fetus and newborn. Gynaecologia 166:349, 1968

Hauth JC, Hankins GV, Gilstrap LC, et al: Uterine contraction pressures with oxytocin
induction/augmentation. Obstet Gynecol 68:305, 1986
Hendricks CH: Uterine contractility changes in the early puerperium. Clin Obstet Gynecol 11(1):125,
1968
Herbert CM, Boehm FH: Prolonged end-stage fetal heart deceleration: a reanalysis. Obstet Gynecol
57:589, 1981
Hill JB, Alexander JM, Sharma SK, et al: A comparison of the effects of epidural and meperidine
analgesia during labor on fetal heart rate. Obstet Gynecol 102:333, 2003
Hofmeyr GJ, Lawrie TA: Amnioinfusion for potential or suspected umbilical cord compression in labour.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 1:CD000013, 2012
Holzmann M, Wretler S, Cnattingius S, et al: Cardiotocography patterns and risk of intrapartum fetal
acidemia. J Perinat Med 43(4):473, 2015
Hon EH: The electronic evaluation of the fetal heart rate. Am J Obstet Gynecol 75:1215, 1958
Hon EH: The fetal heart rate patterns preceding death in utero. Am J Obstet Gynecol 78:47, 1959
Hon EH, Bradfield AM, Hess OW: The electronic evaluation of the fetal heart rate. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 82:291, 1961
Ikeda T, Murata Y, Quilligan EJ, et al: Two sinusoidal heart rate patterns in fetal lambs undergoing
extracorporeal membrane oxygenation. Am J Obstet Gynecol 180:462, 1999
Impey L, Reynolds M, MacQuillan K, et al: Admission cardiotocography: a randomised controlled trial.
Lancet 361:465, 2003
INFANT Collaborative Group: Computerised interpretation of fetal heart rate during labour (INFANT):
a randomised controlled trial. Lancet 389(10080):1719, 2017
Itskovitz J, LaGamma EF, Rudolph AM: Heart rate and blood pressure response to umbilical cord
compression in fetal lambs with special reference to the mechanisms of variable deceleration. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 147:451, 1983
Jackson M, Holmgren CM, Esplin MS, et al: Frequency of fetal heart rate categories and short-term
neonatal outcome. Obstet Gynecol 118:803, 2011
Jansson LM, Velez M, McConnell K, et al: Maternal buprenorphine treatment and fetal neurobehavioral
development. Am J Obstet Gynecol 216(5):529.e1, 2017
Jazayeri A, Politz L, Tsibris JC, et al: Fetal erythropoietin levels in pregnancies complicated by
meconium passage: does meconium suggest fetal hypoxia? Am J Obstet Gynecol 183:188, 2000
Jia Y, Chen X, Cui H, et al: Physiological CTG interpretation: the significance of baseline fetal heart rate
changes after the onset of decelerations and associated perinatal outcomes. J Matern Fetal
Neonatal Med 34(14):2349, 2021
Johnson TR Jr, Compton AA, Rotmeusch J, et al: Significance of the sinusoidal fetal heart rate pattern.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 139:446, 1981
Jovanovic R, Nguyen HT: Experimental meconium aspiration in guinea pigs. Obstet Gynecol 73:652,
1989
Keith RD, Beckley S, Garibaldi JM, et al: A multicentre comparative study of 17 experts and an
intelligent computer system for managing labour using the cardiotocogram. BJOG 102:688, 1995
Klauser CK, Christensen EE, Chauhan SP, et al: Use of fetal pulse oximetry among high-risk women in
labor: a randomized clinical trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol 192:1810, 2005
Kozuma S, Watanabe T, Bennet L, et al: The effect of carotid sinus denervation on fetal heart rate
variation in normoxia, hypoxia and post-hypoxia in fetal sleep. BJOG 104:460, 1997
Krebs HB, Petres RE, Dunn LJ: Intrapartum fetal heart rate monitoring. 5. Fetal heart rate patterns in
the second stage of labor. Am J Obstet Gynecol 140:435, 1981

Krebs HB, Petres RE, Dunn LJ, et al: Intrapartum fetal heart rate monitoring, 6. Prognostic significance
of accelerations. Am J Obstet Gynecol 142:297, 1982
Kruger K, Hallberg B, Blennow M, et al: Predictive value of fetal scalp blood lactate concentration and
pH as markers of neurologic disability. Am J Obstet Gynecol 181:1072, 1999
Leathersich SJ, Vogel JP, Tran TS, et al: Acute tocolysis for uterine tachysystole or suspected fetal
distress. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 7:CD009770, 2018
Lee CV, DiLaretto PC, Lane JM: A study of fetal heart rate acceleration patterns. Obstet Gynecol
45:142, 1975
Lempersz C, Noben L, van Osta G, et al: Intrapartum non-invasive electrophysiological monitoring: a
prospective observational study. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 99(10):1387, 2020
Lepercq J, Nghiem M, Goffinet F: Fetal heart rate nadir during bradycardia and umbilical artery
acidemia at birth. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 100(5):964, 2021
Leveno KJ, Cunningham FG, Nelson S: Prospective comparison of selective and universal electronic
fetal monitoring in 34,995 pregnancies. N Engl J Med 315:615, 1986
Leveno KJ, Quirk JG, Cunningham FG, et al: Prolonged pregnancy: observations concerning the causes
of fetal distress. Am J Obstet Gynecol 150:465, 1984
Lin CC, Vassallo B, Mittendorf R: Is intrapartum vibroacoustic stimulation an effective predictor of fetal
acidosis? J Perinat Med 29:506, 2001
Macones GA, Hankins GD, Spong CY, et al: The 2008 National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development workshop report on electronic fetal monitoring: update on definitions, interpretation,
and research guidelines. Obstet Gynecol 112(3):661, 2008
Martis R, Emilia O, Nurdiati DS, et al: Intermittent auscultation (IA) of fetal heart rate in labour for fetal
well-being. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2:CD008680, 2017
Mathews TG, Warshaw JB: Relevance of the gestational age distribution of meconium passage in utero.
Pediatrics 64:30, 1979
McGregor JA, McFarren T: Neonatal cranial osteomyelitis: a complication of fetal monitoring. Obstet
Gynecol 73(2):490, 1989
Melchior J, Bernard N: Incidence and pattern of fetal heart rate alterations during labor. In Künzel W
(ed): Fetal Heart Rate Monitoring: Clinical Practice and Pathophysiology. Berlin, Springer, 1985
Mercier FJ, Dounas M, Bouaziz H, et al: Intravenous nitroglycerin to relieve intrapartum fetal distress
related to uterine hyperactivity: a prospective observation study. Anesth Analg 84:1117, 1997
Mires G, Williams F, Howie P: Randomised controlled trial of cardiotocography versus Doppler
auscultation of fetal heart at admission in labour in low risk obstetric population. BMJ 322:1457, 2001
Miyazaki FS, Nevarez F: Saline amnioinfusion for relief of repetitive variable decelerations: a
prospective randomized study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 153:301, 1985
Miyazaki FS, Taylor NA: Saline amnioinfusion for relief of variable or prolonged decelerations. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 146:670, 1983
Modanlou H, Freeman RK: Sinusoidal fetal heart rate pattern: its definition and clinical significance. Am
J Obstet Gynecol 142:1033, 1982
Modanlou H, Murata Y: Sinusoidal heart rate pattern: reappraisal of its definition and clinical
significance. J Obstet Gynaecol Res 30(3):169, 2004
Monson M, Heuser C, Einerson BD, et al: Evaluation of an external fetal electrocardiogram monitoring
system: a randomized controlled trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol 223(2):244, 2020
Murphy KW, Russell V, Collins A, et al: The prevalence, aetiology and clinical significance of pseudosinusoidal fetal heart rate patterns in labour. BJOG 98:1093, 1991

Myers RE: Two patterns of perinatal brain damage and their conditions of occurrence. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 112:246, 1972
Myers RE, Mueller-Heubach E, Adamsons K: Predictability of the state of fetal oxygenation from a
quantitative analysis of the components of late deceleration. Am J Obstet Gynecol 115:1083, 1973
Nageotte MP, Bertucci L, Towers CV, et al: Prophylactic amnioinfusion in pregnancies complicated by
oligohydramnios: a prospective study. Obstet Gynecol 77:677, 1991
Nakao M, Okumara A, Hasegawa J, et al: Fetal heart rate pattern in term or near-term cerebral palsy: a
nationwide cohort study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 223(6):907, 2020
Nathan L, Leveno KJ, Carmody TJ, et al: Meconium: a 1990s perspective on an old obstetric hazard.
Obstet Gynecol 83:328, 1994
Neesham DE, Umstad MP, Cincotta RB, et al: Pseudo-sinusoidal fetal heart rate pattern and fetal
anemia: case report and review. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol 33:386, 1993
Neilson JP: Fetal electrocardiogram (ECG) for fetal monitoring during labour. Cochrane Database
System Rev 5:CD000116, 2015
Nensi A, De Silva DA, von Dadelszen P, et al: Effect of magnesium sulphate on fetal heart rate
parameters: a systematic review. J Obstet Gynaecol Can 36(12):1055, 2014
Noben L, Verdurmen KM, Warmerdam GJ, et al: The fetal electrocardiogram to detect the effects of
betamethasone on fetal heart rate variability. Early Hum Dev 130:57, 2019
Nunes I, Ayres-de-Campos D, Costa-Santos C, et al: Differences between external and internal fetal
heart rate monitoring during the second stage of labor: a prospective observational study. J Perinat
Med 42(4):493, 2014
Ogundipe OA, Spong CY, Ross MG: Prophylactic amnioinfusion for oligohydramnios: a re-evaluation.
Obstet Gynecol 84:544, 1994
Owen J, Henson BV, Hauth JC: A prospective randomized study of saline solution amnioinfusion. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 162:1146, 1990
Parer JT: Personalities, politics and territorial tiffs: a half century of fetal heart rate monitoring. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 204(6):548, 2011
Parer JT, Ikeda T: A framework for standardized management of intrapartum fetal heart rate pattern.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 197:26, 2007
Parer JT, King TL: Fetal heart rate monitoring: the next step? Am J Obstet Gynecol 203(6):520, 2010
Parer JT, King T, Flanders S: Fetal acidemia and electronic fetal heart rate patterns: is there evidence of
an association? J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 19(5):289, 2006
Paul WM, Quilligan EJ, MacLachlan T: Cardiovascular phenomena associated with fetal head
compression. Am J Obstet Gynecol 90:824, 1964
Petrie RH: Dose/response effects of intravenous meperidine in fetal heart rate variability. J Matern
Fetal Med 2:215, 1993
Phelan JP, Ahn MO: Perinatal observations in forty-eight neurologically impaired term infants. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 171:424, 1994
Phelan PJ, Kim KO: Fetal heart rate observations in the brain-damaged infant. Semin Perinatol
24(3):221, 2000
Picquard F, Hsiung R, Mattauer M, et al: The validity of fetal heart rate monitoring during the second
stage of labor. Obstet Gynecol 72:746, 1988
Pillai M, James D: The development of fetal heart rate patterns during normal pregnancy. Obstet
Gynecol 76:812, 1990
Polnaszek B, Lopez JD, Clark R, et al: Marked variability in intrapartum electronic fetal hear rate
patterns: association with neonatal morbidity and abnormal arterial cord gas. J Perinatol 40(1):56,

2020
Pontonnier G, Puech F, Grandjean H, et al: Some physical and biochemical parameters during normal
labour. Fetal and maternal study. Biol Neonate 26:159, 1975
Pressman EK, Blakemore KJ: A prospective randomized trial of two solutions for intrapartum
amnioinfusion: effects on fetal electrolytes, osmolality, and acid-base status. Am J Obstet Gynecol
175:945, 1996
Pullen KM, Riley ET, Waller SA, et al: Randomized comparison of intravenous terbutaline vs
nitroglycerin for acute intrapartum fetal resuscitation. Am J Obstet Gynecol 197(4):414, 2007
Raghuraman N: Response to category II tracings: does anything help? Semin Perinatol 44(2):151217,
2020a
Raghuraman N, Lopez JD, Carter EB, et al: The effect of intrapartum oxygen supplementation on
category II fetal monitoring. Am J Obstet Gynecol 223(6):905, 2020b
Ramin KD, Leveno KJ, Kelly MS, et al: Amnionic fluid meconium: a fetal environmental hazard. Obstet
Gynecol 87:181, 1996
Renou P, Warwick N, Wood C: Autonomic control of fetal heart rate. Am J Obstet Gynecol 105:949,
1969
Resnik R: Electronic fetal monitoring: the debate goes on … and on … and on. Obstet Gynecol
121(5):917, 2013
Rinehart BK, Terrone DA, Barrow JH, et al: Randomized trial of intermittent or continuous
amnioinfusion for variable decelerations. Obstet Gynecol 96:571, 2000
Robinson B: A review of NICHD standardized nomenclature for cardiotocography: the importance of
speaking a common language when describing electronic fetal monitoring. Rev Obstet Gynecol
1(2):56, 2008
Rocha E, Hammond R, Richardson B: Necrotic cell injury in the preterm and near-term ovine fetal brain
after intermittent umbilical cord occlusion. Am J Obstet Gynecol 191:488, 2004
Rogers MS, Mongelli M, Tsang KH, et al: Lipid peroxidation in cord blood at birth: the effect of labour.
BJOG 105:739, 1998
Samueloff A, Langer O, Berkus M, et al: Is fetal heart rate variability a good predictor of fetal
outcome? Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 73:39, 1994
Schucker JL, Sarno AP, Egerman RS, et al: The effect of butorphanol on the fetal heart rate reactivity
during labor. Am J Obstet Gynecol 174:491, 1996
Serra V, Bellver J, Moulden M, et al: Computerized analysis of normal fetal heart rate pattern
throughout gestation. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 34(1):74, 2009
Sherer DM: Blunted fetal response to vibroacoustic stimulation associated with maternal intravenous
magnesium sulfate therapy. Am J Perinatol 11:401, 1994
Sholapurkar SL: The conundrum of vanishing early decelerations in British obstetrics, a step
backwards? Detailed appraisal of British and American classifications of fetal heart rate
decelerations—fallacies of emphasis on waveform and putative aetiology. J Obstet Gynaecol
32(6):505, 2012
Shuffrey LC, Myers MM, Odendaal HJ, et al: Fetal heart rate, heart rate variability, and heart
rate/movement coupling in the Safe Passage Study. J Perinatol 39(5):608, 2019
Simpson KR, James DC: Efficacy of intrauterine resuscitation techniques in improving fetal oxygen
status during labor. Obstet Gynecol 105:1362, 2005
Skupski DW, Rosenberg CR, Eglinton GS: Intrapartum fetal stimulation tests: a meta-analysis. Obstet
Gynecol 99:129, 2002

Smith CV, Nguyen HN, Phelan JP, et al: Intrapartum assessment of fetal well-being: a comparison of
fetal acoustic stimulation with acid–base determinations. Am J Obstet Gynecol 155:726, 1986
Southall DP, Richards J, Hardwick RA, et al: Prospective study of fetal heart rate and rhythm patterns.
Arch Dis Child 55:506, 1980
Spires B, Towers C: Fetal bradycardia in response to maternal hypothermia. Obstet Gynecol
135(6):1454, 2020
Stal I, Wennerholm U, Nordstrom L, et al: Fetal scalp blood sampling during second stage of laboranalyzing lactate or pH? A secondary analysis of a randomized controlled trial. J Matern Fetal
Neonatal Med March 31, 2020 [Epub ahead of print]
Steer P, Kovar I, McKenzie C, et al: Computerised analysis of intrapartum fetal heart rate patterns and
adverse outcomes in the INFANT trial. BJOG 126(11):1354, 2019
Stewart RD, Bleich AT, Lo JY, et al: Defining uterine tachysystole: how much is too much? Am J
Obstet Gynecol 207:290.e1, 2012
Stiller R, von Mering R, König V, et al: How well does reflectance pulse oximetry reflect intrapartum
fetal acidosis? Am J Obstet Gynecol 186:1351, 2002
Tahir Mahmood U, O’Gorman C, Marchocki Z, et al: Fetal scalp stimulation (FSS) versus fetal blood
sampling (FBS) for women with abnormal fetal heart rate monitoring in labor: a prospective cohort
study. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 31(13):1742, 2018
Thakor AS, Giussani DA: Effects of acute acidemia on the fetal cardiovascular defense to acute
hypoxemia. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol 296(1):R90, 2009
Tintinalli JE, Stapczynski JS, Ma OJ, et al: Tintinalli’s Emergency Medicine: A Comprehensive Study
Guide, 8th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2016
Verdurmen KM, Hulsenboom AD, van Laar JO, et al: Effect of tocolytic drugs on fetal heart rate
variability: a systematic review. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 30(20):2387, 2017
Vintzileos AM, Smulian JC: Decelerations, tachycardia, and decreased variability: have we overlooked
the significance of longitudinal fetal heart rate changes for detecting intrapartum fetal hypoxia? Am
J Obstet Gynecol 215(3):261, 2016
Walker J: Foetal anoxia. J Obstet Gynaecol Br Commonw 61:162, 1953
Weissbach T, Heusler I, Ovadia M, et al: The temporal effect of Category II fetal monitoring on
neonatal outcomes Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 229:8, 2018
Wenstrom K, Andrews WW, Maher JE: Amnioinfusion survey: prevalence protocols and complications.
Obstet Gynecol 86:572, 1995
Westgate J, Harris M, Curnow JSH, et al: Plymouth randomized trial of cardiotocogram only versus ST
waveform plus cardiotocogram for intrapartum monitoring in 2400 cases. Am J Obstet Gynecol
169:1151, 1993
Wiberg-Itzel E, Lipponer C, Norman M, et al: Determination of pH or lactate in fetal scalp blood in
management of intrapartum fetal distress: randomised controlled multicenter trial. BMJ 336:1284,
2008
Williams KP, Galerneau F: Intrapartum fetal heart rate patterns in the prediction of neonatal acidemia.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 188(3):820, 2003
Wyckoff MH, Aziz K, Escobedo MB, et al: Part 13: Neonatal resuscitation: 2015 American Heart
Association guidelines update for cardiopulmonary resuscitation and emergency cardiovascular care.
Circulation 132(18 Suppl 2):S543, 2015
Xu H, Hofmeyr J, Roy C, et al: Intrapartum amnioinfusion for meconium-stained amniotic fluid: a
systematic review of randomised controlled trials. BOJG 114(4):383, 2007

Young BK, Katz M, Wilson SJ: Sinusoidal fetal heart rate. I. Clinical significance. Am J Obstet Gynecol
136:587, 1980a
Young BK, Weinstein HM: Moderate fetal bradycardia. Am J Obstet Gynecol 126:271, 1976
Young DC, Gray JH, Luther ER, et al: Fetal scalp blood pH sampling: its value in an active obstetric
unit. Am J Obstet Gynecol 136:276, 1980b
Zalar RW, Quilligan EJ: The influence of scalp sampling on the cesarean section rate for fetal distress.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 135:239, 1979
Zizzo A, Kirkegaard I, Hansen J, et al: Fetal heart rate variability is affected by fetal movements: a
systematic review. Front Physiol 11:578898, 2020

CHAPTER 25

Obstetrical Analgesia and Anesthesia

GENERAL PRINCIPLES
ANALGESIA AND SEDATION DURING LABOR
NERVE BLOCKS
NEURAXIAL ANALGESIA
SPINAL (SUBARACHNOID) BLOCK
EPIDURAL ANALGESIA
GENERAL ANESTHESIA
REFERENCES
Obstetrical anesthesia presents unique challenges. Labor begins without
warning, and anesthesia may be required within minutes of a full meal.
Vomiting with aspiration of gastric contents is a constant threat. The usual
physiological adaptations of pregnancy require special consideration,
especially with disorders such as preeclampsia, placental abruption, or
sepsis.
Obstetrical analgesia and anesthesia have become extraordinarily safe
over the past 40 years (Hawkins, 2011). Anesthetic-related maternal
mortality rates decreased more than 60 percent during this time, and from
2007 to 2017, only 0.4 percent of 6765 maternal deaths were due to
anesthesia complications (Petersen, 2019). Creanga and colleagues (2017)
reported the contribution of anesthetics to pregnancy-associated deaths has

declined markedly in the United States (Fig. 25-1). Approximately two thirds
of deaths associated with general anesthesia were caused by induction
problems or intubation failures during cesarean delivery. Deaths associated
with regional analgesia were caused by spinal or epidural blocks reaching
higher than planned spinal levels—26 percent; respiratory failure—19
percent; and drug reaction—19 percent.

FIGURE 25-1 Contribution of anesthetic complications to pregnancy-associated deaths—United
States, 1987–2013.

Of factors contributing to improved obstetrical anesthesia safety, the
increased use of regional analgesia for labor and delivery is the most
significant. For general anesthesia, the improved case-fatality rate is
especially notable considering that this method is now used for the highestrisk patients and for emergencies with decision-incision intervals <15
minutes (Bloom, 2005). In addition, the incidence of aspiration, hypoxia, or
other respiratory events has declined during the past three decades. This is
likely due to use of difficult-airway algorithms, advanced airway equipment,
and increased in-house anesthesia staffing (Davies, 2017; Lim, 2018).
Despite these encouraging results with general anesthesia, rising
complications with regional analgesia techniques are now reported (Davies,
2017).

GENERAL PRINCIPLES
■ Obstetrical Anesthesia Services

Every obstetrician should be proficient in local and pudendal analgesia for
select circumstances. However, it is preferable for an anesthesiologist or
anesthetist to provide rapid and reliable pain relief to allow the obstetrician
to focus attention on the laboring woman and her fetus.
The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019b) and
the American Society of Anesthesiologists (2016) have reaffirmed prior
directives that a woman’s request for labor pain relief is sufficient indication
for its provision. Identification of any of the risk factors shown in Table 25-1
should prompt consultation and collaboration with anesthesia personnel. The
resulting plan should ideally minimize the need for emergency anesthesia in
this high-risk group.
TABLE 25-1. Maternal Factors That May Prompt Anesthetic Consultation

Goals for optimizing obstetrical anesthesia services have been
established by the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
(2019b) and the American Society of Anesthesiologists (2016). To achieve
these goals, the following is a partial list of requisites:
1. Availability of a licensed practitioner credentialed to administer an
appropriate anesthetic whenever necessary and to maintain support of vital
functions in an obstetrical emergency
2. Availability of anesthesia personnel to permit the start of cesarean
delivery within 30 minutes of the decision to perform the procedure

(decision–incision time)
3. Anesthesia personnel immediately available to support an emergency
cesarean delivery during the active labor of a woman attempting vaginal
birth after prior cesarean (Chap. 31, p. 578)
4. Appointment of a qualified anesthesiologist to be responsible for all
anesthetics administered
5. Availability of a qualified physician with obstetrical privileges to perform
operative vaginal or cesarean delivery during anesthesia administration
6. Availability of equipment, facilities, and support personnel equal to that
provided in a surgical suite
7. Immediate availability of personnel, other than the surgical team, to
assume responsibility for resuscitation of a depressed newborn (Chap. 32,
p. 586).
To meet these goals, 24-hour in-house anesthesia staffing is usually
necessary. Providing such service in smaller facilities is more challenging.
This is underscored by the fact that approximately 40 percent of all hospitals
providing obstetrical care have fewer than 500 deliveries per year
(American Academy of Pediatrics, 2017). Bell and coworkers (2000)
calculated the financial burden that may be incurred to provide 24/7
obstetrical anesthesia coverage. They concluded that such coverage could not
operate profitably at their tertiary referral institution, given the average
indemnity and Medicaid reimbursement for labor epidural analgesia.
Compounding this burden, some third-party payers have denied
reimbursement for epidural analgesia in the absence of a specific medical
indication—an approach repudiated by the American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019b).

■ Principles of Pain Relief
Labor pain caused by uterine contractions and cervical dilation is transmitted
through visceral afferent sympathetic nerves entering the spinal cord from T10
through L1. Later, perineal stretching transmits painful stimuli through the
pudendal nerve and sacral nerves from S2 through S4. Cortical responses to
pain and anxiety are complex and may be influenced by multiple factors.

Labor pain is a highly individual response to variable stimuli that are
uniquely received and interpreted (Hawkins, 2010). These stimuli are
modified by emotional, motivational, cognitive, social, and cultural
circumstances. Specific modifiers are maternal expectations for her
childbirth experience, age, antepartum labor education, and quality of
emotional support. Major causes of dissatisfaction with pain relief are
perceived labor pain and delay in ameliorating the pain (Yurashevich, 2019).
A mother’s physiological responses to labor pain may influence maternal
and fetal well-being and labor progress. First, a higher metabolic rate leads
to more oxygen consumption and the resultant hyperventilation may induce
hypocarbia. Second, the sympathetic nervous system response to pain leads
to elevated circulating catecholamine levels. These in turn raise cardiac
output and vascular resistance, which may raise maternal blood pressure.
Catecholamines also directly can adversely affect uterine activity and
uteroplacental blood flow. Last, pain, stress, and anxiety cause release of
stress hormones such as cortisol and endorphins. Effective analgesia
attenuates or eliminates these responses.

ANALGESIA AND SEDATION DURING LABOR
If uterine contractions cause discomfort, pain relief with a narcotic such as
meperidine, plus an antiemetic tranquilizer such as promethazine, is
appropriate. With a successful program of analgesia and sedation, discomfort
usually is felt at the acme of a uterine contraction, and the mother can rest
quietly between contractions. Appropriate drug selection and administration
from the medications shown in Table 25-2 safely accomplishes these
objectives.
TABLE 25-2. Typical Parenteral Analgesic Agents for Labor Pain

■ Parenteral Agents
Meperidine and Promethazine
Meperidine, 50 to 100 mg, with promethazine, 25 mg, may be administered
intramuscularly (IM) at intervals of 2 to 4 hours. Analgesia is maximal 30 to
45 minutes after an IM injection. An almost immediate effect is achieved by
giving meperidine intravenously (IV) in doses of 25 to 50 mg every 1 to 2
hours. In an earlier study, meperidine was found to be the most common
opioid used worldwide for pain relief in labor (Bricker, 2002). Tsui and
associates (2004) found meperidine to be superior to placebo for pain relief
in the first stage of labor. In a randomized investigation at Parkland Hospital,
IV patient-controlled analgesia (PCA) with meperidine was found to be an
inexpensive and reasonably effective method for labor analgesia (Sharma,
1997). Women received 50-mg meperidine with 25-mg promethazine IV as
an initial bolus. Thereafter, an infusion pump was set to deliver 15 mg of
meperidine every 10 minutes as needed until delivery. Neonatal sedation, as
measured by need for naloxone treatment in the delivery room, was identified
in 3 percent of newborns.
Meperidine readily crosses the placenta, and its depressant effect in the
fetus closely follows peak maternal analgesia. The active metabolite of
meperidine, normeperidine, has a half-life of approximately 72 hours in the
neonate. Therefore, other opioids discussed below are favored for labor
analgesia. (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019b).

Butorphanol

This synthetic opioid-receptor agonist-antagonist narcotic, given in 1- to 2mg IV doses every 4 hours as needed, compares favorably with meperidine
for labor analgesia. Its major side effects are somnolence, dizziness, and
dysphoria. Neonatal respiratory depression is less than with meperidine.
Importantly, the two drugs are not given contiguously because butorphanol
antagonizes the narcotic effects of meperidine. Hatjis and Meis (1986)
described a transient sinusoidal fetal heart rate pattern following butorphanol
administration, but no short-term maternal or neonatal adverse sequelae were
noted (Chap. 24, p. 451).

Fentanyl
This short-acting and potent synthetic opioid may be given in doses of 50 to
100 µg IV every hour. Its main disadvantage is a short duration of action,
which requires frequent dosing or use of a PCA pump. Atkinson and
coworkers (1994) reported that butorphanol provided better initial analgesia
than fentanyl and was associated with fewer requests for additional
medication or for epidural analgesia.

Remifentanil
This ultrashort-acting opioid can be given using a PCA pump (see Table 252). Remifentanil is administered through a dedicated IV cannula to avoid
bolus dosing, which can lead to apnea. Both respiratory monitoring and 1:1
nursing-to-patient ratio help watch for apneic spells, which occur in 25
percent of treated women (Stocki, 2014). In the RemiPCA SAFE Network
Study, moderate maternal hypoxia (SaO2 <94 percent) was documented in a
fourth of women (Melber, 2019). A multicenter randomized study showed
PCA-administered remifentanil halved the proportion of women
subsequently requesting epidural analgesia compared with IM meperidine
(Wilson, 2018).

Parenteral Agent Safety
Parenteral sedation is not without risks. Hawkins and colleagues (1997)
reported that 4 of 129 maternal anesthetic-related deaths were from such
sedation. One was from aspiration, two from inadequate ventilation, and one
from overdosage.

Narcotics used during labor may cause newborn respiratory depression.
Naloxone is a narcotic antagonist capable of reversing respiratory
depression induced by opioid narcotics. It acts by displacing the narcotic
from specific receptors in the central nervous system. After adequate
ventilation has been established, naloxone may be given to a newborn whose
mother received narcotics. Naloxone is contraindicated in a newborn of a
narcotic-addicted mother because withdrawal symptoms may be precipitated
(American Academy of Pediatrics, 2017).

■ Nitrous Oxide
A self-administered mixture of 50-percent nitrous oxide (N2O) and oxygen
may provide satisfactory analgesia during labor (Zafirova, 2018). Some
preparations are premixed in a single cylinder (Entonox), and in others, a
blender mixes the two gases from separate tanks (Nitronox). The gases are
connected to a breathing circuit through a valve that opens only when the
patient inspires. The use of intermittent nitrous oxide did not alter the rate of
epidural analgesia but did improve birth experience satisfaction rates (Bobb,
2016; Lim, 2018). Maternal side effects include nausea, vomiting, dizziness,
and drowsiness. Neonatal Apgar scores or umbilical cord blood gas results
did not differ in women using nitrous oxide compared with those selecting
other pain management methods or no analgesia in labor (Likis, 2014).

NERVE BLOCKS
Various nerve blocks provide pain relief during labor and/or delivery. These
include pudendal, paracervical, and neuraxial blocks such as spinal,
epidural, dural-puncture epidural, and combined spinal-epidural techniques.

■ Anesthetic Agents
Commonly used nerve block anesthetics are summarized in Table 25-3. The
dose of each agent varies widely and is dependent on the particular nerve
block and physical status of the woman. The onset, duration, and quality of
analgesia can be enhanced by increasing the anesthetic agent’s dose,
concentration, and volume or by altering its delivery mode. With their use,

safety tenets include incremental boluses of the agent and carefully
monitoring for early warning signs of adverse effects. Appropriate equipment
and personnel to manage these reactions must be immediately available.
TABLE 25-3. Commonly Used Local Anesthetic Agents in Obstetrics

Local analgesic agents are manufactured in more than one concentration
and ampule size, and this raises the potential for dosing errors. Most often,
serious toxicity follows inadvertent intravenous, subarachnoid, or subdural
injection. Systemic toxicity from local anesthetics typically manifests in the
central nervous and cardiovascular systems. For this reason, before epidural
analgesia is initiated, a mixture of a small amount of local anesthetic drug
and epinephrine is given as a test dose. Epinephrine with its associated
tachycardia is used as a marker to help identify incorrect placement if it
occurs. A sudden significant elevation in the maternal heart rate or blood
pressure within 1 to 2 minutes after administration suggests intravenous
catheter placement. A block extending over wider than expected spinal
levels and/or dense motor blockade indicate inadvertent catheter placement
into the subarachnoid or into the subdural space.

Central Nervous System Toxicity
Early symptoms are those of stimulation, but as serum levels rise,
depression follows. Symptoms may include light-headedness, dizziness,

tinnitus, metallic taste, and numbness of the tongue and mouth. Patients may
also show bizarre behavior, slurred speech, and muscle fasciculation and
excitation. Ultimately, generalized convulsions and loss of consciousness
could result.
For neural and cardiac toxicity treatment, a rapid IV infusion of 20percent intralipids effectively disassociates anesthetic drugs from neural and
myocardial cell membranes. For patients weighing >70 kg, a 100-mL bolus
dose of lipid emulsion is given. Boluses can be repeated once or twice every
5 minutes for persistent cardiac instability. The initial bolus is followed by a
200-mL infusion over 15 minutes (Neal, 2018).
For convulsions, an airway is established, and oxygen delivered. To halt
seizures, lorazepam, 4 mg IV slowly, is administered and may be repeated
once after 10 to 15 minutes. Alternatively, diazepam, 5 to 10 mg IV every 10
to 15 minutes up to a total dose of 30 mg, can be used. Succinylcholine
abolishes the peripheral manifestations of the convulsions and allows
tracheal intubation. Magnesium sulfate, administered according to the
regimen for eclampsia, also controls convulsions (Chap. 41, p. 719).
Abnormal fetal heart rate patterns such as late decelerations or persistent
bradycardia may develop from maternal hypoxia and lactic acidosis. With
arrest of convulsions, oxygen administration, and other supportive measures,
the fetus usually recovers more quickly in utero than following immediate
cesarean delivery. Moreover, the mother is better served if delivery is
delayed until the intensity of hypoxia and metabolic acidosis has diminished.

Cardiovascular Toxicity
These manifestations generally develop later than those from cerebral
toxicity, and they may not develop at all because they are induced by higher
serum drug levels. The exception is bupivacaine, which is associated with
the development of neurotoxicity and cardiotoxicity at virtually identical
levels (Catterall, 2018). Fortunately, bupivacaine is mostly used in dilute
epidural solutions, and use of 0.75-percent solution is limited to a small dose
for spinal analgesia. Similar to neurotoxicity, cardiovascular toxicity is
characterized first by stimulation and then by depression. Accordingly,
hypertension and tachycardia are soon followed by hypotension, cardiac
arrhythmias, and impaired uteroplacental perfusion. As before, 20-percent
intralipids serve as the rescue.

Hypotension is managed initially by turning the woman onto either side to
avoid aortocaval compression. A crystalloid solution is infused rapidly
along with vasopressors. Emergency bedside cesarean delivery is
considered if maternal vital signs have not been restored within 4 minutes of
cardiac arrest, and the goal is delivery within 5 minutes (Chap. 50, p. 897).
However, as with convulsions, the fetus is likely to recover more quickly in
utero once maternal cardiac output is reestablished.

■ Pudendal Block
Pain with vaginal delivery arises from stimuli from the lower genital tract.
These are transmitted primarily through the pudendal nerve, the peripheral
branches of which provide sensory innervation to the perineum, anus, vulva,
and clitoris (Chap. 2, p. 21). The pudendal nerve passes beneath the
posterior surface of the sacrospinous ligament just as the ligament attaches to
the ischial spine. Sensory nerve fibers of the pudendal nerve are derived
from ventral branches of the S2 through S4 nerves.
The pudendal nerve block is a relatively safe, simple method of
analgesia for vaginal delivery (Sultan, 2021). As shown in Figure 25-2, a
tubular introducer is used to sheath and guide a 15-cm, 22-gauge needle into
position near the pudendal nerve. The end of the introducer is placed against
the vaginal mucosa just beneath the tip of the ischial spine. The introducer
allows 1.0 to 1.5 cm of needle to protrude beyond its tip, and the needle is
pushed beyond the introducer tip into the mucosa. A mucosal wheal is made
with 1 mL of 1-percent lidocaine solution or an equivalent dose of another
local anesthetic (see Table 25-3). To guard against intravascular infusion,
aspiration is attempted before this and all subsequent injections. The needle
is then advanced until it touches the sacrospinous ligament, which is
infiltrated with 3 mL of lidocaine. The procedure is repeated on the other
side.

FIGURE 25-2 Local infiltration of the pudendal nerve. Transvaginal technique showing the needle
extended beyond the needle guard and passing through the sacrospinous ligament to reach the pudendal
nerve.

Within 3 to 4 minutes of injection, the successful pudendal block will
allow pinching of the lower vagina and posterior vulva without pain. If
delivery occurs before the pudendal block becomes effective and an
episiotomy is indicated, the fourchette, perineum, and adjacent vagina can be
infiltrated with 5 to 10 mL of 1-percent lidocaine solution directly at the
planned episiotomy site. The pudendal block usually has become effective by
the time of repair.
The maximum recommended total dose of lidocaine is 4.5 mg/kg and not
to exceed 300 mg (see Table 25-3). For a 50-kg woman, this would equal
225 mg (4.5 mg/kg × 50 kg). Thus, if 1-percent lidocaine is used, the
calculated allowed amount would be: 225 mg ÷ 10 mg/mL = 22.5 mL. Of
note, for any drug solution, 1 percent = 10 mg/mL.

Pudendal block usually does not provide adequate analgesia when
delivery requires extensive obstetrical manipulation. Parenteral or neuraxial
anesthesia is usually necessary when complete visualization of the cervix and
upper vagina or manual exploration of the uterine cavity is indicated.
Infrequently, complications may follow this block. As previously
described, intravascular injection of a local anesthetic agent may cause
serious systemic toxicity. Hematoma formation from perforation of a blood
vessel is most likely when there is a coagulopathy (Lee, 2004). The addition
of a corticosteroid injected along with the local anesthetic did not decrease
the incidence of pudendal neuralgia at 3 months (Labat, 2017). Rarely,
severe infection may originate at the injection site. The infection may spread
posteriorly to the hip joint, into the gluteal musculature, or into the retropsoas
space (Svancarek, 1977).

■ Paracervical Block
The cervix, vagina, and uterus are richly supplied by nerves of the
uterovaginal plexus (Fig. 2-12, p. 25). This plexus lies within the connective
tissue lateral to the uterosacral ligaments. Thus, injections are most effective
if placed immediately lateral to the insertion of the uterosacral ligaments into
the uterus (Rogers, 1998). For paracervical blockade, usually 1-percent
lidocaine or 3-percent chloroprocaine, 5 to 10 mL, is injected into the cervix
laterally at 4 and 8 o’clock positions. This block usually provides
satisfactory pain relief during first-stage labor. However, because the
pudendal nerves are not blocked, additional analgesia is required for
delivery. The block may have to be repeated during labor because these
anesthetics are relatively short acting.
Fetal bradycardia is a worrisome complication that develops in
approximately 15 percent of these blocks (Rosen, 2002). Bradycardia
usually develops within 10 minutes and may last up to 30 minutes. Doppler
studies have shown an increase in the pulsatility index of the uterine arteries
following paracervical blockade (Chap. 14, p. 262). These observations
support the hypothesis of drug-induced arterial vasospasm as a cause of fetal
bradycardia (Manninen, 2000). Thus, paracervical block should not be used
in situations of potential fetal compromise. For all of these reasons, we do
not use this block at Parkland Hospital.

NEURAXIAL ANALGESIA
■ Neuraxial Regional Blocks
Epidural, spinal, dural-puncture epidural, or combined spinal-epidural
techniques are the most common methods used for relief of pain during labor
and/or delivery in the United States. Nearly 75 percent of mothers receive
neuraxial anesthesia for pain relief (Butwick, 2018a). Among first births, 68
percent of women who delivered vaginally received neuraxial pain relief
compared with 57 percent of women delivering their second or higher
number child. Antepartum education programs improve the understanding of
labor analgesia and increase its use by 30 percent in Hispanic women who
traditionally choose labor epidural analgesia less often (Togioka, 2019).
Butwick and associates (2018b) showed women are more likely to receive
neuraxial analgesia with higher class of obesity—class I, 72 percent; class II,
73 percent; and class III, 76 percent.
As a brief review, the epidural space lies just outside the dural sac. The
dura mater encases the subarachnoid space, which contains the cauda equina
of the spinal cord and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) (Fig. 25-3). Spinal and
intrathecal anesthesia are synonymous, and agents are injected into the
subarachnoid space.

FIGURE 25-3 Neuraxial analgesia. A. Combined spinal-epidural analgesia. B. Epidural analgesia.

Epidural analgesia via a catheter in the epidural space is typically used
for relief of labor pain, although it can also be used for anesthesia during
operative vaginal and cesarean delivery. Spinal analgesia is typically given
as a single intrathecal injection of a local anesthetic at the time of operative
vaginal or cesarean delivery. Variations of these two basic approaches are
described in the subsequent sections.

■ Spinal (Subarachnoid) Block
Introduction of a local anesthetic into the subarachnoid space to effect
analgesia offers a short procedural time, rapid blockade onset, and high
success rate of inducing analgesia. The subarachnoid space is smaller during
pregnancy likely because of internal vertebral venous plexus engorgement
(see Fig. 25-3A). As a result, compared with nonpregnant women, the same
amount of anesthetic agent in the same volume of solution produces a higherlevel blockade in parturients.

Vaginal Delivery
Spinal analgesia involving only lower spinal levels can be used for
operative vaginal delivery. The level of analgesia should extend to the T10
dermatome, which corresponds to the level of the umbilicus. Blockade to this
level provides excellent relief from the pain of uterine contractions. The
spinal block provides also excellent analgesia to the lower uterine segment,
vagina, and perineum.
Several local anesthetic agents have been used for spinal analgesia (see
Table 25-3). Addition of dextrose to any of these agents creates a hyperbaric
solution, which is heavier and denser than CSF. A sitting position causes a
hyperbaric solution to settle caudally, whereas a lateral position will have a
greater effect on the dependent side. Lidocaine given in a hyperbaric solution
produces excellent analgesia and has the advantage of a rapid onset and
relatively short duration. Isobaric bupivacaine provides satisfactory
analgesia for more than 1 hour. Single-dose spinal analgesia is usually
administered when the cervix is fully dilated, and all other criteria for safe
operative vaginal delivery have been fulfilled (Chap. 29, p. 533).
Preanalgesic IV hydration with 1 L of crystalloid solution will prevent or
minimize hypotension in many cases.

Cesarean Delivery
A level of sensory blockade extending to the T4 dermatome is desired for
cesarean delivery. A dose of 10 to 12 mg of bupivacaine in a hyperbaric
solution is administered. The addition of 20 to 25 µg of fentanyl improves the
quality and prolongs the duration of the spinal block, reduces shivering, and

minimizes referred pain. In addition, 0.1 to 0.2 mg of intrathecal morphine
can be added for pain control postoperatively.
With intrathecal morphine, the risk for respiratory depression should be
considered. The Society of Obstetric Anesthesia and Perinatology
recommends postoperative respiratory monitoring based on dose, patient risk
factors, and perioperative risk factors. A low-dose regimen, defined as >50
µg and ≤150 µg, in women with no risk factors requires respiratory rate and
sedation checks postoperatively for the first 12 hours. In women with
additional risk factors, these safeguards are conducted postoperatively for
the first 24 hours, and additional monitoring with pulse oximetry or
capnography is considered. Last, this monitoring method is also
recommended in all women receiving doses >150 µg (Bauchat, 2019).

Complications
Shown in Table 25-4 are some of the more common complications
associated with neuraxial analgesia.
TABLE 25-4. Complications of Neuraxial Analgesia

Hypotension. This common complication may develop soon after injection of
the local anesthetic agent. It stems from vasodilation caused by sympathetic

blockade and is compounded by obstructed venous return due to uterine
compression of the vena cava. In the supine position, even in the absence of
maternal hypotension, placental blood flow may still be significantly
diminished. Treatment includes uterine displacement by left lateral patient
positioning, rapid IV crystalloid infusion, and IV vasopressors.
One systematic review concluded that vasopressors should be given only
in the setting of hypotension (Fitzgerald, 2020). For treatment, phenylephrine
is now the preferred drug to treat hypotension from neuraxial analgesia. It is
a pure alpha agonist and raises blood pressure solely through
vasoconstriction. Maternal bradycardia develops more frequently with
phenylephrine than with ephedrine or norepinephrine (Sharkey, 2019; Veeser,
2012). Although ephedrine was believed to correct hypotension without
reducing blood flow, phenylephrine is associated with better umbilical cord
blood gases (Ngan Kee, 2017). A metaanalysis of 36 randomized trials also
suggests that both agents have comparable efficacy but that phenylephrine
yields a lower rate of fetal acidosis (Xu, 2018). For administration,
prophylactic infusions of phenylephrine are effective and may require less
physician intervention compared with intermittent boluses (Ngan Kee, 2004).
As another potential agent, norepinephrine may improve cardiac output with
its beta-adrenergic effects but also is associated with a lower cord arterial
pH compared with phenylephrine (Chen, 2021; Mohta, 2019).
High Spinal Blockade. Most often, complete spinal blockade follows
administration of an excessive dose of local anesthetic. However, it can also
develop with inadvertent delivery of a small amount of local anesthetic drugs
into the subdural space. This small potential space lies between the dura
mater and arachnoid mater and outside the subarachnoid space. Because of
its limited capacity, even small volumes will reach higher spinal levels.
Hypotension and apnea develop quickly and must be immediately treated to
prevent cardiac arrest. In the undelivered woman: (1) the uterus is
immediately displaced laterally to minimize aortocaval compression, (2)
effective ventilation is established, preferably with tracheal intubation, and
(3) IV fluids and vasopressors are given to correct hypotension.
Postdural Puncture Headache. Leakage of CSF from the dural puncture site
can lead to postdural puncture headache. Presumably, when the woman sits
or stands, the diminished CSF volume creates traction on pain-sensitive

central nervous system structures. An alternative mechanism is compensatory
cerebral vasodilation in response to CSF loss—the Monro-Kellie hypothesis
(Mokri, 2001).
The incidence of obstetrical postdural puncture headache in women
undergoing spinal analgesia ranges from 0.2 to 1 percent (Maronge, 2012;
Sprigge, 2008). This rate is similar to the overall occurrence of postdural
puncture headaches, which approximates 1 headache per 200 blocks. A study
of 567 postpartum hospital encounters showed that 40 percent of
presentations for headache are due to neuraxial anesthesia, and these visits
most often occur within 7 days of delivery (Rodriguez, 2020).
Procedural preventive steps include using a small-gauge spinal needle
and avoiding multiple punctures. In a prospective, randomized study of five
different spinal needles, Sprotte and Whitacre needles had the lowest risks of
associated postdural puncture headaches (Vallejo 2000). Rates are high with
inadvertent dural puncture during epidural analgesia and approximate 0.2 to
1 percent (Introna, 2012; Maronge, 2018). No strong evidence supports
placing a woman flat on her back or providing vigorous hydration to prevent
headache (Arevalo-Rodriguez, 2016). A prophylactic blood patch performed
within 24 hours of dural puncture does not diminish either the incidence of
postdural puncture headache or the need for a subsequent therapeutic blood
patch (Scavone, 2004).
If a headache develops, administration of caffeine, which is a cerebral
vasoconstrictor, has limited efficacy (Katz, 2017). With severe headache, an
epidural blood patch is most effective and preferred treatment. Autologous
blood is obtained aseptically by venipuncture, and 10 to 20 mL is injected
into the epidural space at or below the site of dural puncture. This site is
selected because the blood will spread more readily in the cephalad
direction. Further CSF leakage is halted by either mass effect or clot
formation. Relief is immediate, and complications are uncommon.
If a headache does not have the pathognomonic postural characteristics or
persists despite treatment with a repeat blood patch, other diagnoses should
be considered. Chisholm and Campbell (2001) described a case of superior
sagittal sinus thrombosis that manifested as a postural headache. Chan and
Paech (2004) reported persistent CSF leak in three women. Smarkusky and
colleagues (2006) described pneumocephalus, which caused immediate
cephalgia. Last, intracranial and intraspinal subarachnoid hematomas have
developed after spinal analgesia (Bi, 2021; Maronge, 2018; Moore, 2019).

Convulsions. Rarely, postdural puncture cephalgia is associated with
temporary blindness and convulsions. Shearer and associates (1995)
described eight such cases in 19,000 regional analgesia procedures done at
Parkland Hospital. It is presumed that these also are caused by hypotension
from CSF leak. Immediate treatment of seizures and epidural blood patch
were usually effective.
Bladder Dysfunction. With neuraxial analgesia, bladder sensation is likely to
be obtunded and bladder emptying impaired for several hours after delivery.
As a consequence, bladder distention is a frequent postpartum complication,
especially if appreciable volumes of IV fluid are given. Millet (2012)
randomized 146 women with neuraxial analgesia to either intermittent or
continuous bladder catheterizations and found that the intermittent method
was associated with significantly greater rates of bacteriuria.
Arachnoiditis and Meningitis. Local anesthetics used for neuraxial blocks are
required to be free of methylparaben or other preservatives. This practice,
coupled with aseptic technique and disposable equipment, has made
meningitis and arachnoiditis rare (Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, 2010; Maronge, 2018).

Contraindications to Spinal Analgesia
Shown in Table 25-5 are absolute contraindications to spinal analgesia.
Obstetrical complications that are associated with maternal hypovolemia and
hypotension—for example, severe hemorrhage—are contraindications to
spinal blockade. The additive deleterious cardiovascular effects of spinal
blockade plus acute blood loss in nonpregnant patients have been
documented (Kennedy, 1968).
TABLE 25-5. Absolute Contraindications to Spinal Analgesia

Severe preeclampsia is another obstetrical complication in which
decreased blood pressure can be encountered when neuraxial analgesia is
used (Wallace, 1995). These effects are mitigated by judicial dosing of
anesthetic solutions. Perhaps related, Ulubaşoğlu and colleagues (2018)
reported that preeclamptic women undergoing general anesthesia required
more antihypertensive medication than those with spinal analgesia.
Disorders of coagulation that result in poor hemostasis also preclude the
use of neuraxial analgesia. Women with a bleeding diathesis such as von
Willebrand disease or hemophilias carry an increased risk for subarachnoid
hematoma formation (Chap. 59, p. 1062). Rare subdural hematomas may
mimic postdural puncture headaches (Lim, 2016). However, neuraxial
analgesia can be safely performed in these patients following factor
replacement and normalization of levels (Choi, 2009; Katz, 2015). As
discussed earlier, these patients should receive consultation with an
anesthesiologist prior to labor.
The use of anticoagulation to prevent or treat venous thromboembolism is
frequently encountered during the peripartum period. No randomized studies
guide the management of anticoagulation at the time of delivery, but
consensus opinion is provided by the Society for Anesthesia and
Perinatology (Leffert, 2018). Briefly, women receiving >10,000 units/d of
unfractionated heparin are individually assessed regarding timing and dose
of last injection. Thromboprophylaxis with low-molecular-weight heparin
(LMWH) should have a 12-hour delay. Therapeutic doses of LMWH merit a
24-hour delay. This is discussed further in Chapter 55 (p. 985). Spinal
analgesia is also contraindicated if there is infection at the needle entry site.
Other maternal conditions may pose relative contraindications to
neuraxial analgesia. Many women with neurological disorders such as Chiari

malformation or pseudotumor cerebri may be candidates for neuraxial
analgesia after consultation with an anesthesiologist and neurologist. Women
with severe aortic stenosis or pulmonary hypertension also have a relative
contraindication to spinal analgesia due to the deleterious effects of
hypotension and diminished preload and afterload (Chap. 52, p. 926).

■ Epidural Analgesia
Relief of labor and childbirth pain, including cesarean delivery, can be
accomplished by injection of a local anesthetic agent into the epidural space
(see Fig. 25-3B). This potential space contains areolar tissue, fat,
lymphatics, and the internal vertebral venous plexus. Entry for obstetrical
analgesia is usually through a lumbar intervertebral space. Although only one
injection may be given, usually an indwelling catheter is placed for
subsequent bolus administration or continuous infusion (Billingham, 2018).
Infusions use a volumetric pump controlled either by the patient or by a
caregiver. Under appropriate physician supervision, labor and delivery
nursing personnel with specific training in the management of epidural
infusions should be able to adjust dosage and also discontinue infusions.

■ Continuous Lumbar Epidural Analgesia
Complete analgesia for the pain of labor and vaginal delivery necessitates a
block from the T10 to the S4 dermatomes. For cesarean delivery, a block
extending from the T4 to the S1 dermatomes is desired. The effective spread
of anesthetic depends upon the catheter tip location and the dose,
concentration, and volume of anesthetic agent used. Individual variations in
anatomy or synechiae or septa in the epidural space may preclude a
completely satisfactory block. Last, the catheter tip may migrate from its
original location during labor.

Technique
One example of the sequential steps and techniques for performance of
epidural analgesia is detailed in Table 25-6. Before injection of the local
anesthetic therapeutic dose, a test dose is given containing small amounts of
lidocaine and epinephrine. The woman is observed for features of toxicity

from intravascular injection and for signs of either subarachnoid or subdural
injection. If these are absent, analgesia is initiated with a full dose of the
anesthetic alone. Analgesia is maintained by a continuous infusion or by
programmed intermittent boluses delivered by infusion pump (Billingham,
2018). The addition of a short-acting, lipid-soluble narcotic—fentanyl or
sufentanil—lowers the required amount of local anesthetic drug needed to
achieve analgesia. This helps preserve motor function (Lyons, 1997). One
popular regimen is 0.0625- to 0.125-percent bupivacaine with 2-µg/mL
fentanyl.
TABLE 25-6. Technique for Labor Epidural Analgesia

As with spinal blockade, close monitoring, including the level of
analgesia, must be performed by trained personnel. Appropriate resuscitation
equipment, drugs, and personnel must be available during administration of
epidural analgesia.

Complications
As shown in Table 25-4, certain problems are inherent to epidural analgesia.

High Spinal Blockade. Dural puncture with inadvertent and unrecognized
either subarachnoid or subdural injection may cause total spinal blockade. In
a study of more than 18,000 women, the incidence of recognized accidental
dural puncture at the time of epidural analgesia was 0.91 percent (Sprigge,
2008). Management of this complication is described earlier (p. 474).
Ineffective Analgesia. Using currently popular continuous or intermittent
epidural infusion regimens, 90 percent of women rate their pain relief as
good to excellent (Sharma, 1997). In a study of almost 2000 parturients, Hess
and associates (2001) found that 12 percent complained of three or more
episodes of pain or pressure. Its efficacy was more likely to decrease with
rising body mass index (Dresner, 2006). Inadequate analgesia may result in
patient dissatisfaction. Catheter replacement should be considered.
Moreover, a poorly functioning epidural catheter cannot be used for
additional dosing of local anesthetic drugs for intrapartum cesarean delivery.
Such conversion of labor epidural analgesia to cesarean delivery anesthesia
has an approximately 20 percent failure rate. This necessitates placement of
a new regional block or general anesthesia (Mankowitz, 2016). In a Maternal
Fetal Medicine Units (MFMU) Network study, 4 percent of women initially
given epidural analgesia required a general anesthetic for cesarean delivery
(Bloom, 2005).
Also at times, perineal analgesia for vaginal delivery is difficult to
obtain, especially when lower volumes of epidural local anesthetic drugs are
used. With this situation, additional doses can be given, or a pudendal block
may be added.
Hypotension. Sympathetic blockade from epidurally injected analgesic
agents may cause peripheral vasodilation with resulting hypotension and
diminished cardiac output. Hypotension is more common—20 percent—in
women with an admission pulse pressure <45 mm Hg compared with 6
percent in those whose pulse pressure is >45 mm Hg (Miller, 2013). Pulse
pressure is calculated by subtracting diastolic from systolic blood pressure
measurements. Obese women also have significantly higher rates of
hypotension (Vricella, 2011). In normal gravidas, hypotension induced by
epidural analgesia usually can be prevented by rapid IV infusion of 500 to
1000 mL of crystalloid solution as described for spinal analgesia.
Maintaining a lateral position also minimizes hypotension. Despite these

precautions, hypotension is the most frequent side effect and is severe enough
to require treatment in a third of women (Sharma, 1997).
Central Nervous Stimulation. Convulsions are an uncommon but serious
complication. Described earlier, the immediate management involves
infusion of 20-percent intralipids and treatment with lorazepam or diazepam
(p. 470).
Fever. Some women develop intrapartum fever following epidural analgesia.
Many studies are limited by the inability to control for other risk factors,
such as labor length, duration of ruptured membranes, and number of vaginal
examinations. With this in mind, the frequency of intrapartum fever
associated with epidural analgesia is 10 to 15 percent above the baseline
rate (Lieberman, 2002).
The two general theories concerning the etiology of maternal
hyperthermia are maternal-fetal infection or dysregulation of body
temperature (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019b).
A study of placental histopathology in women given epidural analgesia
identified intrapartum fever only when there was placental inflammation
(Dashe, 1999). This suggests that fever is due to infection. Sharma (2014)
randomized 400 nulliparas with labor epidural analgesia to receive 2 g
cefoxitin prophylactically versus placebo. It was hypothesized that epiduralrelated fever was due to infection and that prophylactic antimicrobials
should significantly reduce the rate of fever. Approximately equal
proportions—40 percent—of women developed fever ≥38°C during labor.
This result suggests that infection is unlikely to cause the fever associated
with epidural analgesia during labor. Whatever the mechanism, women with
persistent fever are usually treated with antimicrobials for presumed
chorioamnionitis.
The other proposed mechanisms include alteration of the hypothalamic
thermoregulatory set point, impaired peripheral thermoreceptor input to the
central nervous system with selective blockade of warm stimuli, or
imbalance between heat production and heat loss. Del Arroyo and colleagues
(2019) suggested that bupivacaine blocks release of antipyretic interleukins.
Back Pain. An association between epidural analgesia and back pain has
been reported by some. In a prospective cohort study, Butler and Fuller

(1998) reported that back pain after delivery was common with epidural
analgesia, however, persistent pain was infrequent. Based on their systematic
review, Lieberman and O’Donoghue (2002) concluded that available data do
not support an association between epidural analgesia and development of de
novo, long-term backache.
Miscellaneous Complications. A spinal or epidural hematoma is a rare
complication of an epidural catheter (Grant, 2007). These are considered
neurological emergencies, and treatment is usually surgical. Epidural
abscesses are rare, and the most common pathogen is Staphylococcus aureus
(McQuaid, 2018). These may be managed conservatively with IV antibiotics,
but surgical intervention may be necessary. For both conditions, timely
neurosurgical consultation is important. Uncommonly, the plastic epidural
catheter is sheared off (Noblett, 2007). Computed tomography can localize
the retained fragment. For a tip left in the epidural space, surveillance is
reasonable in the absence of symptoms. With neurological changes or with
fragments in the subarachnoid space, neurosurgical consultation is
recommended (Mitra, 2007). Last, an association of epidural analgesia and
autism spectrum disorder seems unlikely (Mikkelsen, 2021).

Effect on Labor
Most studies, including five combined randomized trials from Parkland
Hospital shown in Table 25-7, report that epidural analgesia prolongs labor
and increases the use of oxytocin stimulation (Sharma, 2004). Alexander and
associates (2002) examined the effects of epidural analgesia on the Friedman
(1955) labor curve (Chap. 22, p. 424). There were 459 nulliparas randomly
assigned to receive patient-controlled epidural analgesia or patientcontrolled IV meperidine. Compared with original Friedman criteria,
epidural analgesia prolonged the active phase of labor by 1 hour. In a cohort
study, similar labor durations were observed for both spinal-epidural and
epidural analgesia (Poma, 2019).
TABLE 25-7. Selected Labor Events in 2703 Nulliparous Women
Randomized to Epidural Analgesia or Intravenous Meperidine Analgesia

The effect of labor epidural on the second stage is unclear. Prolongation
of the second stage was particularly true in earlier studies, at a time when
higher concentrations of local anesthetic drugs were used. This association
has been attributed to local-anesthetic-induced motor blockade and resultant
impaired maternal expulsive efforts. Chestnut and associates (1999) reported
that, with epidural analgesia, operative vaginal delivery occurred more
frequently because of prolonged second-stage labor. In a systematic review,
Anim-Somuah and colleagues (2018) reported that epidural analgesia
prolongs the first stage by 32 minutes and the second stage by 15 minutes.
Craig and coworkers (2015) randomly assigned 310 nulliparous women with
labor epidural analgesia to receive 0.125-percent bupivacaine plus fentanyl
or epidural fentanyl alone during second-stage labor. Epidural bupivacaine
analgesia did cause motor blockade during the second stage, however, the
duration of the second stage was not longer. Neither obstetrical nor neonatal

outcomes were different between the two groups. Patient satisfaction was
high with both methods.
Fetal Heart Rate. Hill and associates (2003) examined the effects of epidural
analgesia with 0.25-percent bupivacaine on fetal heart rate patterns.
Compared with IV meperidine, no worrisome effects were identified.
Reduced beat-to-beat variability and fewer accelerations were more
common in fetuses whose mothers received meperidine (Chap. 24, p. 450).
Based on their systematic review, Reynolds and coworkers (2002) reported
that epidural analgesia was associated with improved neonatal acid-base
status compared with meperidine.
Cesarean Delivery Rates. A contentious issue in the past was whether
epidural analgesia increased the risk for cesarean delivery. Early evidence
that it did was from an era when dense motor blockade resulted from high
concentrations of local anesthetic agents. Now however, with the
administration of dilute anesthetic solutions, the risk for cesarean delivery is
not increased.
Several studies conducted at Parkland Hospital were designed to answer
this and related questions. From 1995 to 2002, a total of 2703 nulliparas at
term and in spontaneous labor were enrolled in five trials to evaluate
epidural analgesia techniques compared with IV meperidine. The results
from these are summarized in Table 25-8 and show that epidural analgesia
does not significantly raise cesarean delivery rates (Sharma, 2004). The
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019b) and the
American Society of Anesthesiologists (2016) also conclude that epidural
analgesia is not associated with a greater cesarean delivery rate.
TABLE 25-8. Cesarean Delivery (CD) Rates in Laboring Women
Receiving Epidural Analgesia or Intravenous Meperidine

Timing of Epidural Placement. Earlier studies indicated that epidural
placement in early labor was linked to a higher risk of cesarean delivery
(Lieberman, 1996; Rogers, 1999; Seyb, 1999). These observations prompted
at least five randomized trials, which showed that the timing of epidural
placement has no effect on the risk of cesarean birth, forceps delivery, or
fetal malposition (Chestnut, 1994a,b; Luxman, 1998; Ohel, 2006; Wong,
2005, 2009). Thus, withholding epidural placement until some arbitrary
cervical dilation has been attained serves only to deny women maximal labor
pain relief.

Safety
Among nearly 20,000 women who received epidural analgesia in the MFMU
Network study cited earlier, no anesthesia-related maternal deaths were
reported (Bloom, 2005). Ruppen and colleagues (2006) reviewed data from
27 studies involving 1.4 million pregnant women who received epidural
analgesia. Their calculated adverse-event rates were 1:145,000 for deep
epidural infection, 1:168,000 for epidural hematoma, and 1:240,000 for
persistent neurological injury. More recently, the Society for Obstetric
Anesthesia and Perinatology established the Serious Complication
Repository Project (D’Angelo, 2014). During a 5-year period, more than
228,000 women had neuraxial analgesia. There were no maternal deaths
related to anesthesia, but two each were attributed to cardiac arrest and
myocardial infarction. There were four cases of epidural abscess or

meningitis, 58 high-spinal-level neuraxial blocks (1 in 4000), 27
neurological injuries, and 16 respiratory arrests (1 in 10,000).

Contraindications
As with spinal analgesia, contraindications are listed in Table 25-5.
Thrombocytopenia. Although low platelet counts are intuitively worrisome,
the level at which epidural bleeding might develop is unknown. Epidural
hematomas are rare, and their incidence was estimated to be 0 to 0.6 percent
in women whose platelet count is <70,000/µL (Goodier, 2015; Lee, 2017).
The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019b) and
Society for Obstetric Anesthesia and Perinatalogy (Bauer, 2021) have
concluded that women with a platelet count of ≥70,000/µL may be
candidates for neuraxial analgesia.
Anticoagulation. Women receiving anticoagulation therapy who are given
regional analgesia are at increased risk for spinal cord hematoma and
compression (Chap. 55, p. 985). The American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2019b) has concluded the following:
1. With prophylactic unfractionated heparin (UFH) in a dose of 5000 units
twice daily, regional analgesia is not contraindicated.
2. With an intermediate dose of UFH (7500 to 10,000 units), it is likely low
risk to proceed with neuraxial analgesia at a point more than 12 hours after
the last dose.
3. With a high dose of UFH (>20,000 units), it is likely low risk to use
regional analgesia at a point more than 24 hours after the last dose if the
activate partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) is within normal range or the
anti-Xa level is undetectable.
4. With thromboprophylaxis with LMWH, needle or catheter placement or
removal should be delayed 12 hours or more.
5. With treatment doses of LMWH, placement or removal of a neuraxial
catheter should be delayed for 24 hours.
Severe Preeclampsia-Eclampsia. Concerns with neuraxial analgesia in
women with severe preeclampsia include hypotension as well as
hypertension from pressor agents given to correct hypotension. Additionally,

pulmonary edema may follow infusion of large volumes of crystalloid. These
risks are outweighed by the disadvantages of general anesthesia (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologist, 2020). Of these, tracheal
intubation may be difficult because of upper airway edema. Also, general
anesthesia can lead to severe, sudden hypertension that can cause pulmonary
or cerebral edema or intracranial hemorrhage.
With improved techniques for infusion of dilute local anesthetics into the
epidural space, most have come to favor epidural blockade for labor and
delivery in women with severe preeclampsia. In a study from Parkland
Hospital, Lucas and associates (2001) randomly assigned 738 women with
hypertension to epidural analgesia or patient-controlled IV analgesia during
labor. A standardized protocol for prehydration, incremental epidural
administration, and ephedrine use was employed. They concluded that labor
epidural analgesia was safe in women with hypertensive disorders.
Thrombocytopenia is seen with severe preeclampsia complicated by
hemolysis, elevated liver enzyme levels, low platelet count—HELLP
syndrome (Chap. 40, p. 689). Discussed earlier and in general, it seems safe
to use neuraxial techniques if the platelet count is ≥70,000/µL (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019b, 2020).
Women with severe preeclampsia can have remarkably diminished
intravascular volume compared with normal pregnancy (Zeeman, 2009).
Conversely, total body water volume is increased because of the capillary
leak caused by endothelial cell activation (Chap. 40, p. 693). This imbalance
is manifested as pathological peripheral edema, proteinuria, ascites, and
total lung water. For all of these reasons, aggressive volume replacement
raises the risk for pulmonary edema, especially in the first 72 hours
postpartum (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019b).
In one study, 3.5 percent of women with severe preeclampsia developed
pulmonary edema when preloaded without a protocol limit to the volume
infused (Hogg, 1999).
The risk of pulmonary edema can be reduced or obviated with judicious
prehydration—usually with 500 to 1000 mL of crystalloid solution.
Specifically, in the study by Lucas and colleagues (2001) cited earlier, no
instances of pulmonary edema developed among the women in whom the
infused crystalloid preload volume was limited to 500 mL. Moreover,
vasodilation produced by epidural blockade is less abrupt if the analgesia
level is achieved slowly with dilute solutions of local anesthetic agents.

With vigorous IV crystalloid therapy, cerebral edema also may develop
(Chap. 40, p. 701. Last, most cases of pharyngolaryngeal edema are related
to aggressive volume therapy (Heller, 1983).

■ Epidural Opioid Analgesia
Opioids alone usually will not provide adequate analgesia, and they are often
used as an adjunct to a local anesthetic agent such as bupivacaine (Wang,
2020). This combination lowers the local anesthetic drug concentration
needed to achieve analgesia, which in turn creates a less dense motor
blockade. Other benefits are rapid onset of pain relief and a decrease in
shivering. Common side effects include pruritus and urinary retention.
Nalbuphine, a mixed opioid agonist/antagonist, will abolish these symptoms
without affecting the analgesic action. When neuraxial morphine is given for
postoperative pain, monitoring for respiratory depression is necessary as
discussed earlier (p. 472) (Bauchat, 2019).

■ Combined Spinal–Epidural Techniques
The combination of spinal and epidural techniques (CSE) has risen in
popularity and may provide rapid and effective analgesia for labor and then
for cesarean delivery. An epidural needle is first placed in the epidural
space. A small-gauge spinal needle is then introduced through the epidural
needle into the subarachnoid space—this is called the needle-throughneedle technique (see Fig. 25-3A). A single bolus of an opioid, a local
anesthetic, or sometimes a combination is injected into the subarachnoid
space. A subarachnoid opioid bolus results in the rapid onset of profound
pain relief with virtually no motor blockade (Poma, 2019). The spinal needle
is withdrawn, and an epidural catheter is then placed into the epidural space.
The epidural catheter remains and permits repeated analgesia dosing.
Miro and associates (2008) compared epidural analgesia with CSE
analgesia for labor in 6497 women and found the overall outcomes and
complications to be similar. Poma and coworkers (2019) also found
comparable analgesia results with epidural or CSE techniques. They noted
that subarachnoid sufentanil was associated with lower uterine contractility,
but labor duration was not affected. A greater incidence of fetal heart rate
abnormalities related to uterine hypertonus has been reported with CSE

analgesia (Abrão, 2009; Beamon, 2014). The analgesia failure rate is 11.6
percent for traditional labor epidural and 6.6 percent for CSE (Booth, 2016).
Although CSE provides a faster onset of labor analgesia, the intrathecal
injection of local anesthetic drugs and/or narcotic may cause hypotension and
pruritus.

■ Continuous Spinal Analgesia During Labor
The technique of continuous spinal analgesia for relief of labor pain is
seldom used because of postdural puncture headaches (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019b). With redesigned needles and
catheters, Arkoosh (2008) randomized 429 women to either continuous
spinal or conventional epidural analgesia during labor. Complication rates
between these two neuraxial techniques did not differ.

■ Dural-Puncture Epidural Analgesia
Gaining popularity, this technique is similar to CSE, but initial steps differ.
First, a single dural puncture is made using a 25-gauge spinal needle placed
through the epidural needle shaft (see Fig. 25-3A). No anesthetic is injected,
but the needle can help confirm correct subarachnoid space placement by the
drip of CSF from its distal hub. After removal of the spinal needle, the
epidural catheter is threaded into the epidural space (see Fig. 25-3B). The
dural puncture allows for a small amount of local anesthetic drugs to be
translocated from the epidural space to the subarachnoid space. This aids a
faster onset of pain relief than traditional epidural analgesia. Without the
intrathecal injection, dural-puncture epidural analgesia is associated with
fewer side effects than CSE analgesia and provides better block quality than
an epidural (Chau, 2017). A review of five studies with 581 patients showed
dural puncture epidural technique was associated with a faster onset of
analgesic effects, a reduction in provider-initiated boluses “top-ups,” and
better sacral coverage. The incidence of post-dural puncture headache was
not significantly increased (Heesen, 2019). A study confirmed fewer top-ups
and a greater local anesthetic drug sparing effect evaluating the combined use
of this technique and the intermittent bolus drug delivery mode (Song, 2021).

■ Local Infiltration Analgesia
A local block is occasionally useful to augment an inadequate or “patchy”
regional block that was given emergently. Rarely, local infiltration may be
needed to perform an emergency cesarean delivery to save the life of a fetus
in the absence of anesthesia support. Two methods are described here.
In one technique, the skin is infiltrated along the proposed incision, and
the subcutaneous, muscle, and rectus sheath layers are injected as the
abdomen is opened. Injection of large volumes into the fatty layers, which
are relatively devoid of nerve supply, is avoided to limit the total dose of
local anesthetic needed.
Cooper and coworkers described using 52 mL of 0.5-percent lidocaine
with 1:200,000 epinephrine. This delivered 260 mg of lidocaine. Related to
lidocaine toxicity, higher lidocaine volumes can be used when paired with
epinephrine, because vasoconstriction lowers the intravascular transfer of
anesthetic. The maximum dose is 7 mg/kg. Others have used 1-percent
procaine with or without epinephrine (Larsen, 1971; Ranney, 1975).
A second technique involves a field block of the major branches
supplying the abdominal wall, to include the 10th, 11th, and 12th intercostal
nerves and the ilioinguinal and genitofemoral nerves (Nandagopal, 2001). As
shown in Figure 25-4, the former group of nerves is located at a point
midway between the costal margin and iliac crest in the midaxillary line. The
latter group is found at the level of the external inguinal ring. A total of four
skin punctures, two on each side, are made. First, at the intercostal block
site, the needle is directed medially, and injection is carried down to the
transversalis fascia, avoiding injection of the subcutaneous fat. Five mL of
0.5-percent lidocaine with epinephrine are injected. The needle is redirected
but not removed, and similar dosing is delivered to sites located at a 45degree angle cephalad and caudad. The other side is then injected. Second, at
the ilioinguinal and genitofemoral sites, the injection is started at a spot 2 to
3 cm lateral from the pubic tubercle at a 45-degree angle. Last, the skin
overlying the planned incision is injected.

FIGURE 25-4 Local anesthetic block for cesarean delivery. The first injection site is halfway between
the costal margin and iliac crest in the midaxillary line to block the 10th, 11th, and 12th intercostal
nerves. A second injection at the external inguinal ring blocks branches of the genitofemoral and
ilioinguinal nerves. Although not shown, both sites are infiltrated bilaterally. The final site is along the line
of proposed skin incision.

■ Transversus Abdominis Plane Block
This block may be used for those with suitable training (Young, 2012). It is
usually performed under ultrasound guidance and involves injection of a
local anesthetic into the transversus abdominis plane (TAP) between the

internal oblique and transversus abdominis muscles (Fig. 2-2, p. 14). The
nerves lying in this plane supply the anterior abdominal wall at the T6 to L1
dermatomes. Ng and colleagues (2018) concluded that high- versus low-dose
local anesthetics performed comparably.
Local infiltration or TAP blocks can be used also for postoperative pain
control. The TAP block in one trial was not superior to local wound
infiltration (Tawfik, 2017). Gao and associates (2019) demonstrated that
pain relief with the TAP block was comparable with that from patientcontrolled IV analgesia. Another study found that the TAP block was
equivalent to intrathecal morphine for postoperative pain (Kwikiriza, 2019).
Last, Prabhu and coworkers (2018) reported that a liposomal bupivacaine
incisional block was not superior to placebo.

GENERAL ANESTHESIA
Trained personnel and specialized equipment—including fiberoptic
intubation—are mandatory for the safe use of general anesthesia. A common
cause of death cited is failed intubation. The latter occurs in approximately 1
of every 390 general anesthetics administered to pregnant women (Kinsella,
2015).
This relatively higher mortality rate suggests that neuraxial analgesia is
the preferred method of pain control and should be used unless
contraindicated (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists,
2019b; American Society of Anesthesiologists, 2016). In two reports from
the MFMU Network, 93 percent of more than 54,000 cesarean deliveries
were performed using neuraxial analgesia (Bloom, 2005; Brookfield, 2013).
Racial and ethnic disparities exist, and a higher incidence of general
anesthesia use is seen among non-white women (Butwick, 2014; Lange,
2017). It is often used for emergent cesarean delivery for acute fetal distress
(Metogo, 2021). In contrast, with obstetrical anesthesiologist subspecialists,
the overall likelihood that neuraxial analgesia will be used is higher (Cobb,
2019).

■ Patient Preparation

Before anesthesia induction, several steps should be taken to help minimize
complication risks. First, antacid administration shortly before anesthesia
induction has probably decreased mortality rates from general anesthesia
more than any other single practice. The American Society of
Anesthesiologists Task Force on Obstetrical Anesthesia (2016) recommends
timely administration of a nonparticulate antacid, an H2-receptor antagonist,
or metoclopramide. For many years, we have recommended administration
of 30 mL of Bicitra—sodium citrate with citric acid—a few minutes before
anesthesia induction by either general or major neuraxial block. If more than
1 hour has passed after the first dose was given and anesthesia has not yet
been induced, a second dose is given.
Lateral uterine displacement also is provided as the uterus may compress
the inferior vena cava and aorta when the mother is supine. With uterine
displacement, the duration of general anesthesia has less effect on neonatal
condition than if the woman remains supine (Crawford, 1972).
Last, because functional reserve lung capacity is diminished, and oxygen
consumption is increased, the pregnant woman becomes hypoxemic more
rapidly during periods of apnea than do nonpregnant patients. Obesity
exacerbates this tendency. To minimize hypoxia between the time of muscle
relaxant injection and intubation, nitrogen is replaced by oxygen in the lungs.
This preoxygenation is accomplished by administering 100-percent oxygen
via face mask for 2 to 3 minutes before anesthesia induction. In an
emergency, four vital capacity breaths of 100-percent oxygen via a tight
breathing circuit will provide similar benefit (Norris, 1985). High-flow
nasal oxygen was found to be inferior to administration by face mask
(Shippam, 2019; Tan, 2019).

■ Induction of Anesthesia
Drugs used to induce general anesthesia include propofol, etomidate, and
ketamine. Propofol has the undesirable side effect of hypotension. Etomidate
is associated with fewer hemodynamic changes. Ketamine also may be used
for induction of general anesthesia in hemodynamically unstable women.

■ Intubation

Immediately after a patient is rendered unconscious, a muscle relaxant is
given to aid intubation. Succinylcholine, a rapid-onset and short-acting
agent, is used. Cricoid pressure—the Sellick maneuver—is applied by a
trained assistant to occlude the esophagus from the onset of induction until
intubation is completed. Before the operation begins, proper placement of the
endotracheal tube must be confirmed.
As discussed, and although uncommon, failed intubation is a major cause
of anesthesia-related maternal mortality. A history of prior difficult
intubation and a careful anatomical assessment of the neck and the
maxillofacial, pharyngeal, and laryngeal structures may help predict
intubation complications. Even in cases in which the initial airway
assessment was unremarkable, edema may develop intrapartum and present
considerable challenges. Morbid obesity is a major risk factor for failed or
difficult intubation.
The American Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force on Obstetric
Anesthesia (2016) stresses the importance of appropriate preoperative
preparation. This includes the immediate availability of specialized
equipment such as different-shaped laryngoscopes, laryngeal mask airways,
and video laryngoscopes, as well as equipment for transtracheal ventilation
and awake oral intubation with a fiberoptic bronchoscope.
Following failed intubation, the woman is ventilated by mask and cricoid
pressure is applied to reduce the aspiration risk. Surgery may proceed with
mask ventilation, or the woman may be allowed to awaken. In those cases in
which the woman has been paralyzed and in which ventilation cannot be
reestablished by insertion of an oral airway, by laryngeal mask airway, or by
use of a fiberoptic laryngoscope, then a life-threatening emergency exists
(Eskander, 2019). To restore ventilation, percutaneous or even open
cricothyrotomy is performed, and jet ventilation begun. Failed intubation
drills have been recommended to optimize response to such an emergency.

■ Inhalational Anesthetics
Once the endotracheal tube is secured, a volatile halogenated agent is given
to provide amnesia and analgesia. The most commonly used volatile
anesthetics in the United States include desflurane and sevoflurane. These
gases can also produce uterine relaxation when given in high concentrations.
These are used when relaxation is a requisite, such as for internal podalic

version of the second twin, breech decomposition, ex utero intrapartum
treatment (EXIT) procedures, and replacement of the acutely inverted uterus.

■ Extubation
The endotracheal tube may be safely removed only if the woman is conscious
to a degree that enables her to follow commands and is capable of
maintaining oxygen saturation with spontaneous respiration. Consideration
should be given to emptying the stomach via a nasogastric tube before
extubation. As induction has now become safer, extubation may be relatively
more perilous. Of 15 anesthesia-related deaths of pregnant women from 1985
to 2003 in Michigan, none occurred during induction, whereas five resulted
from hypoventilation or airway obstruction during emergence, extubation, or
recovery (Mhyre, 2007).

■ Fasting
Data are insufficient regarding fasting times for clear liquids and the risk of
pulmonary aspiration during labor. The American Society of
Anesthesiologists Task Force on Obstetrical Anesthesia (2016) and the
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2017) recommend
that modest amounts of clear liquids such as water, clear tea, black coffee,
carbonated beverages, and pulp-free fruit juices be allowed in
uncomplicated laboring women. As discussed in Chapter 30 (p. 550),
enhanced recovery after surgery (ERAS) protocols provide consumption of
these same liquids up to 2 hours before scheduled surgery (Wilson, 2018b).
Obvious solid foods should be avoided. A fasting period of 6 to 8 hours,
depending on the type of food ingested, is recommended for uncomplicated
parturients undergoing elective cesarean delivery or puerperal tubal ligation.
The amount of gastric fluid—2 mL/kg—in nonlaboring women is almost the
same as that in nonpregnant women (Van de Putte, 2019). However,
pregnancy is associated with horizontal shift of the stomach and a reduced
esophageal sphincter tone. Our policy at Parkland Hospital is to allow clear
liquids in low-risk uncomplicated laboring women in whom vaginal delivery
is anticipated.

■ Aspiration
Massive gastric acidic inhalation may cause pulmonary insufficiency from
aspiration pneumonitis (Mandell, 2019). Such pneumonitis has in the past
been the most common cause of anesthetic deaths in obstetrics and therefore
deserves special attention. To minimize this risk, antacids should be given
routinely, intubation should be accompanied by cricoid pressure, and
regional analgesia should be employed when possible.

Pathophysiology
In 1952, Teabeaut demonstrated experimentally that if the pH of aspirated
fluid was below 2.5, severe chemical pneumonitis developed. It was later
demonstrated that the gastric fluid pH of nearly half of women tested
intrapartum was <2.5 (Taylor, 1966). The right mainstem bronchus usually
offers the simplest pathway for aspirated material to reach the lung
parenchyma, and therefore, the right lower lobe is most often involved. In
severe cases, involvement is bilateral and widespread.
The woman who aspirates may develop evidence of respiratory distress
immediately or several hours after aspiration, depending in part on the
material aspirated and the severity of the response. Aspiration of a large
amount of solid material causes obvious signs of airway obstruction. Smaller
particles without acidic liquid may lead to patchy atelectasis and later to
bronchopneumonia.
When highly acidic liquid is inspired, decreased oxygen saturation along
with tachypnea, bronchospasm, rhonchi, rales, atelectasis, cyanosis,
tachycardia, and hypotension are likely to develop. At the injury sites, there
is pulmonary capillary leakage and exudation of protein-rich fluid containing
numerous erythrocytes into the lung interstitium and alveoli. This causes
decreased pulmonary compliance, shunting of blood, and severe hypoxemia.
Suspicion of aspiration demands close monitoring for evidence of
pulmonary damage. Respiratory rate and oxygen saturation as measured by
pulse oximetry are the most sensitive and earliest indicators of injury.
Radiographic changes may not appear immediately and may be variable.
Therefore, chest radiographs alone should not be used to exclude aspiration.

Treatment

Inhaled fluid should be immediately and thoroughly wiped from the mouth
and removed from the pharynx and trachea by suction. Saline lavage may
further disseminate the acid throughout the lung and is not recommended. If
large particulate matter is inspired, bronchoscopy may be indicated to
relieve airway obstruction. Use of corticosteroid therapy or prophylactic
antimicrobial administration are not supported by clinical or experimental
evidence (Mandell, 2019). If infection develops, however, vigorous
treatment is given. Etiological agents have shifted from anaerobic or mixed
infections to bacteria causing community- or hospital-acquired pneumonitis
(Metlay, 2019). These infections are discussed in Chapter 54 (p. 962). If
acute respiratory distress syndrome develops, mechanical ventilation with
positive end-expiratory pressure may prove lifesaving (Chap. 50, p. 885).

REFERENCES
Abrão KC, Francisco RP, Miyadahira S, et al: Elevation of uterine basal tone and fetal heart rate
abnormalities after labor analgesia: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol 113(10):41, 2009
Alexander JM, Sharma SK, McIntire DD, et al: Epidural analgesia lengthens the Friedman active phase
of labor. Obstet Gynecol 100:46, 2002
American Academy of Pediatrics, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Guidelines for
Perinatal Care, 8th ed. Washington, 2017
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Obstetric analgesia and anesthesia. Practice
Bulletin 209, March 2019b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Gestational hyperten-sion and preeclampsia.
Practice Bulletin No. 222, May 2020
American Society of Anesthesiologists: Practice guidelines for obstetric anesthesia. An updated report
by the American Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force on Obstetric Anesthesia and the Society
for Obstetric Anesthesia and Perinatology. Anesthesiology 124(2):270, 2016
Anim-Somuah M, Smyth RMD, Cyna AM, et al: Epidural versus non-epidural or no analgesia for pain
management in labour. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 5:CD000331, 2018
Arevalo-Rodriguez I, Ciapponi A, Roqué i, Figuls M, et al: Posture and fluids for preventing post-dural
puncture headache. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 3:CD009199, 2016
Arkoosh V, Palmer C, Yun E, et al: A randomized, double-masked, multicenter comparison of the safety
of continuous intrathecal labor analgesia using a 28-gauge catheter versus continuous epidural labor
analgesia. Anesthesiology 108(2):286, 2008
Atkinson BD, Truitt LJ, Rayburn WF, et al: Double-blind comparison of intravenous butorphanol (Stadol)
and fentanyl (Sublimaze) for analgesia during labor. Am J Obstet Gynecol 171:993, 1994
Bauchat JR, Weiniger CF, Sultan P, et al: Society for Obstetric Anesthesia and Perinatology Consensus
Statement: Monitoring recommendations for prevention and detection of respiratory depression
associated with administration of neuraxial morphine for cesarean delivery analgesia. Anesth Analg
129(2):458, 2019

Bauer ME, Arendt K, Beilin Y, et al: The Society for Obstetric Anesthesia and Perinatology
interdisciplinary consensus statement on neuraxial procedures in obstetrics patients with
thrombocytopenia. Anesth Analg 132:1531, 2021
Beamon C, Stuebe A, Edwards L, et al: Effect of mode of regional anesthesia on neonatal outcomes in
preeclamptic patients. Am J Obstet Gynecol 210:S173, 2014
Bell ED, Penning DH, Cousineau EF, et al: How much labor is in a labor epidural? Manpower cost and
reimbursement for an obstetric analgesia service in a teaching institution. Anesthesiology 92:851,
2000
Bi Y, Zhou J: Spinal subdural hematoma and subdural anesthesia following combined spinal-epidural
anesthesia: a case report. BMC Anesthesiol 21:130, 2021
Billingham A, Liang S, Edmonds E, et al: Continuous epidural infusion vs programmed intermittent
epidural bolus for labour analgesia: a prospective, controlled, before-and-after cohort study of labour
outcomes. Br J Anesth 121(2):432, 2018
Bloom SL, Spong CY, Weiner SJ, et al: Complications of anesthesia for cesarean delivery. Obstet
Gynecol 106:281, 2005
Bobb LE, Farber MK, McGovern C, et al: Does nitrous oxide labor analgesia influence the pattern of
neuraxial analgesia usage? An impact study at an academic medical center. J Clin Anesth 35:54,
2016
Booth JM, Pan JC, Ross VH, et al: Combined spinal epidural technique for labor analgesia does not
delay recognition of epidural catheter failures: a single-center retrospective cohort survival analysis.
Anesthesiology 125(3):516, 2016
Bricker L, Lavender T: Parenteral opioids for labor pain relief: a systematic review. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 186:S94, 2002
Brookfield K, Osmundson S, Jaqvi M, et al: General anesthesia at cesarean delivery portends worse
maternal and neonatal outcomes. Abstract No. 672. Am J Obstet Gynecol 208(1 Suppl):S28, 2013
Butler R, Fuller J: Back pain following epidural anaesthesia in labour. Can J Anaesth 45:724, 1998
Butwick AJ, Bentley J, Wong CJ, et al: United States state-level variation in the use of neuraxial
analgesia during labor for pregnant women. JAMA Network Open 1(8):e186567, 2018a
Butwick A, Blumenfeld Y, Brookfeld K, et al: Ethnic disparities among patients undergoing general
anesthesia for cesarean delivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 210:S259, 2014
Butwick AJ, Wong CA, Guo N: Maternal body mass index and use of labor neuraxial analgesia: a
population-based retrospective cohort study. Anesthesiology 129 (3):448, 2018b
Catterall WA, Mackie K: Local anesthetics. In Brunton LL, Hilal-Dandan R, Knolmann BC (eds):
Goodman and Gilman’s The Pharmacological Basis of Therapeutics. 13th ed. New York, McGraw
Hill Education, 2018, p 405
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Bacterial meningitis after intrapartum anesthesia—New
York and Ohio, 2008–2009. MMWR 59(3):65, 2010
Chan BO, Paech MJ: Persistent cerebrospinal fluid leak: a complication of the combined spinal-epidural
technique. Anesth Analg 98:828, 2004
Chau A, Bibbo C, Huang CC, et al: Dural puncture epidural technique improves labor analgesia quality
with fewer side effects compared with epidural and combined spinal epidural techniques: a
randomized clinical trial. Anesth Analg 124(2):560, 2017
Chen Y, Zou L, Guo L, et al: Prophylactic norepinephrine infusion for postspinal anesthesia hypotension
in patients undergoing cesarean section: a randomized, controlled, dose-finding trial.
Pharmocotherapy 41:370, 2021

Chestnut DH: Effect on the progress of labor and method of delivery. In Chestnut DH (ed): Obstetric
Anesthesia: Principles and Practice, 2nd ed. St. Louis, Mosby-Year Book, 1999, p 408
Chestnut DH, McGrath JM, Vincent RD Jr, et al: Does early administration of epidural analgesia affect
obstetric outcome in nulliparous women who are in spontaneous labor? Anesthesiology 80:1201,
1994a
Chestnut DH, Vincent RD Jr, McGrather JM, et al: Does early administration of epidural analgesia
affect obstetric outcome in nulliparous women who are receiving intravenous oxytocin?
Anesthesiology 80:1193, 1994b
Chestnut DH, Wong CA, Tsen LC, et al (eds): Chestnut’s Obstetric Anesthesia: Principles and Practice,
6th ed. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020
Chestnut DH: Effect on the progress of labor and method of delivery. In Chestnut DH (ed): Obstetric
Anesthesia: Principles and Practice, 2nd ed. St. Louis: Mosby-Year Book, 1999, p 408
Chisholm ME, Campbell DC: Postpartum postural headache due to superior sagittal sinus thrombosis
mistaken for spontaneous intracranial hypotension. Can J Anaesth 48:302, 2001
Choi S, Brull R: Neuraxial techniques in obstetric and non-obstetric patients with common bleeding
diatheses. Anesth Analg 109(2):648, 2009
Cobb BT, Lane-Fall MB, Month RC, et al: Anesthesiologist specialization and use of general anesthesia
for cesarean delivery. Anesthesiology 130(2):237, 2019
Cooper MG, Feeney EM, Joseph M, et al: Local anaesthetic infiltration for caesarean section. Anaesth
Intensive Care 17(2):198, 1989
Craig MG, Grant EN, Tao W, et al: A randomized trial of bupivacaine plus fentanyl versus only fentanyl
for epidural analgesia during the second stage of labor. Anesthesiology 122(1):172, 2015
Crawford JS: Some maternal complications of epidural analgesia for labour. Anaesthesia 40:1219, 1985
Crawford JS, Burton M, Davies P: Time and lateral tilt at caesarean section. Br J Anaesth 44:477, 1972
Creanga AA, Syverson C, Seed K, et al: Pregnancy-related mortality in the United States, 2011–2013.
Obstet Gynecol 130(2):366, 2017
D’Angelo R, Smiley RM, Riley ET, et al: Serious complications related to obstetric anesthesia: the
serious complication repository project of the Society for Obstetric Anesthesia and Perinatology.
Anesthesiology 120(6):1505, 2014
Darouiche RO: Spinal epidural abscess. N Engl J Med 355:2012, 2006
Dashe JS, Rogers BB, McIntire DD, et al: Epidural analgesia and intrapartum fever: placental findings.
Obstet Gynecol 93:341, 1999
Davies JM, Stephens LS: Obstetric anesthesia liability concerns. Clin Obstet Gynecol 60:431, 2017
Del Arroyo AG, Sanchez J, Patel S, et al: Role of leucocyte caspase-1 activity in epidural-related
maternal fever: a single-centre, observational, mechanistic cohort study. Br J Anaesth 122(1):92,
2019
Dresner M, Brocklesby J, Bamber J: Audit of the influence of body mass index on the performance of
epidural analgesia in labour and the subsequent mode of delivery. BJOG 113:1178, 2006
Eskander A, de Almeida JR, Irish JC: Acute upper airway obstruction. N Engl J Med 381(20):1940,
2019
Fitzgerald JP, Fedoruk KA, Jadin SM, et al: Prevention of hypotension after spinal anaesthesia for
caesarean section: a systematic review and network meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials.
Anaesthesia 75(1):109, 2020
Friedman EA: Primigravid labor: a graphicostatistical analysis. Obstet Gynecol 6:567, 1955
Gao Y, Guo M, Du C, et al: Clinical study of ultrasound-guided transversus abdominis plane block for
analgesia after cesarean section. Medicine (Baltimore) 98(41):e17542, 2019

Goodier CG, Lu JT, Hebber L, et al: Neuraxial anesthesia in parturients with thrombocytopenia: a
multisite retrospective cohort study. Anesth Analg 121(4):988, 2015
Grant GJ: Safely giving regional anesthesia to gravidas with clotting disorders. Contemp OB Gyn August
, 2007
Hatjis CG, Meis PJ: Sinusoidal fetal heart rate pattern associated with butorphanol administration.
Obstet Gynecol 67:377, 1986
Hawkins JL: Epidural analgesia for labor and delivery. N Engl J Med 362:1503, 2010
Hawkins JL, Chang J, Palmer SK, et al: Anesthesia-related maternal mortality in the United States:
1979–2002. Obstet Gynecol 117:69, 2011
Hawkins JL, Koonin LM, Palmer SK, et al: Anesthesia-related deaths during obstetric delivery in the
United States, 1979–1990. Anesthesiology 86:277, 1997
Heesen M, Rijs K, Klimek M, et al: Dural puncture epidural versus conventional epidural block for labor
analgesia: a systematic review of randomized controlled trials. Int J Obstet Anesth 40:24, 2019
Heller PJ, Scheider EP, Marx GF: Pharyngolaryngeal edema as a presenting symptom in preeclampsia.
Obstet Gynecol 62:523, 1983
Hess PE, Pratt SD, Lucas TP, et al: Predictors of breakthrough pain during labor epidural analgesia.
Anesth Analg 93:414, 2001
Hill JB, Alexander JM, Sharma SK, et al: A comparison of the effects of epidural and meperidine
analgesia during labor on fetal heart rate. Obstet Gynecol 102:333, 2003
Hogg B, Hauth JC, Caritis SN, et al: Safety of labor epidural anesthesia for women with severe
hypertensive disease. Am J Obstet Gynecol 181:1096, 1999
Introna RPS, Blair JR, Neeld JB: What is the incidence of inadvertent dural puncture during epidural
anesthesia in obstetrics? Anesthesiology 117(3):686, 2012
Karahan MA, Incebiyik A, Buyukfirat E, et al: Effect of spinal anesthesia on the QT interval in term
and postterm pregnancies scheduled for elective cesarean section: a prospective study. J Matern
Fetal Neonatal Med January 33(18):3147, 2020
Katz D, Beilin Y: Disorders of coagulation in pregnancy. Br J Anaesth 115 Suppl 2:ii75, 2015
Katz D, Beilin Y: Review of the alternatives to epidural blood patch for treatment of postdural puncture
headache in the parturient. Anesth Analg 124(4):1219, 2017
Kennedy WF Jr, Bonica JJ, Akamatsu TJ, et al: Cardiovascular and respiratory effects of subarachnoid
block in the presence of acute blood loss. Anesthesiology 29:29, 1968
Kinsella SM, Winton AL, Mushambi MC, et al: Failed tracheal intubation during obstetric general
anaesthesia: a literature review. Int J Obstet Anesth 24(4):356, 2015
Kwikiriza A, Kiwanuka JK, Firth PG, et al: The analgesic effects of intrathecal morphine in comparison
with ultrasound-guided transversus abdominis plane block after caesarean section: a randomised
controlled trial at a Ugandan regional referral hospital. Anaesthesia 74(2):167, 2019
Labat JJ, Riant T, Lassaux A, et al: Adding corticosteroids to the pudendal nerve block for pudendal
neuralgia: a randomised, double-blind, controlled trial. BJOG 124(2):251, 2017
Lange EMS, Rao S, Toledo P: Racial and ethnic disparities in obstetric anesthesia. Semin Perinatol
41(5):293, 2017
Larsen JV, Barker A, Barker M, et al: A technique combining neurolept-analgesia with local analgesia
for caesarean section. S Afr Med J 45(27):750, 1971
Lee LA, Posner KL, Domino KB, et al: Injuries associated with regional anesthesia in the 1980s and
1990s: a closed claims analysis. Anesthesiology 101:143, 2004
Lee LO, Bateman BT, Kheterpal S, et al: Risk of epidural hematoma after neuraxial techniques in
thrombocytopenic parturients: a report from the multicenter perioperative outcomes group.

Anesthesiology 126(6):1053, 2017
Leffert L, Butwick A, Carvalho B, et al: The Society of Obstetric Anesthesia and Perinatology
consensus statement on the anesthetic management of pregnant and postpartum women receiving
thromboprophylaxis or higher dose anticoagulants. Anesth Analg 126(3):928, 2018
Lieberman E, Lang JM, Cohen A, et al: Association of epidural analgesia with cesarean delivery in
nulliparas. Obstet Gynecol 88:993, 1996
Lieberman E, O’Donoghue C: Unintended effects of epidural analgesia during labor: a systematic
review. Am J Obstet Gynecol 186:531, 2002
Likis FE, Andrews JC, Collins MR, et al: Nitrous oxide for the management of labor pain: a systematic
review. Anesth Analg 118(1):153, 2014
Lim G, Facco FL, Nathan N, et al: A review of the impact of obstetric anesthesia on maternal and
neonatal outcomes. Anesthesiology 129(1):192, 2018
Lim G, Zorn JM, Dong YJ, et al: Subdural hematoma associated with labor epidural analgesia: a case
series. Reg Anesth Pain Med 41(5):628, 2016
Lin Y, Liu SS: Local anesthetics. In Barash P, Cullen B, Stoeling R, et al (eds): Clinical Anesthesia, 8th
ed. Philadelphia, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2017, p 1432
Lucas MJ, Sharma SK, McIntire DD, et al: A randomized trial of labor analgesia in women with
pregnancy-induced hypertension. Am J Obstet Gynecol 185:970, 2001
Luxman D, Wholman I, Groutz A, et al: The effect of early epidural block administration on the
progression and outcome of labor. Int J Obstet Anesth 7:161, 1998
Lyons G, Columb M, Hawthorne L, et al: Extradural pain relief in labour: bupivacaine sparing by
extradural fentanyl is dose dependent. Br J Anaesth 78:493, 1997
Mandell LA, Niederman MS: Aspiration pneumonia. N Engl J Med 380(7):651, 2019
Mankowitz SK, Gonzalez Fiol A, Smiley R: Failure to extend epidural labor analgesia for cesarean
delivery anesthesia: a focused review. Anesth Analg 123(5):1174, 2016
Manninen T, Aantaa R, Salonen M, et al: A comparison of the hemodynamic effects of paracervical
block and epidural anesthesia for labor analgesia. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 44:441, 2000
Maronge L, Bogod D: Complications in obstetric anaesthesia. Anaesthesia 73 (Suppl 1):61, 2018
McQuaid E, Leffert LR, Bateman BT: The role of the anesthesiologist in preventing severe maternal
morbidity and mortality. Clin Obstet Gynecol 61(2):372, 2018
Melber AA, Jelting Y, Huber M, et al: Remifentanil patient-controlled analgesia in labour: a six-year
audit of outcome data of the RemiPCA SAFE Network (2010-2015). Int J Obstet Anesth 39:12,
2019
Metlay JP, Waterer GW, Long AC, et al: Diagnosis and Treatment of Adults with Community-acquired
Pneumonia. An Official Clinical Practice Guideline of the American Thoracic Society and Infectious
Diseases Society of America. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 200(7):e45, 2019
Metogo JAM, Nana TN, Ngongheh BA, et al: General versus regional anaesthesia for caesarean
section indicated for acute foetal distress: a retrospective cohort study. BMC Anesthesiol 21:68,
2021
Mhyre JM, Riesner MN, Polley LS, et al: A series of anesthesia-related maternal deaths in Michigan,
1985–2003. Anesthesiology 106:1096, 2007
Mikkelsen AP, Greiber IK, Scheller NM, et al: Association of labor epidural analgesia with autism
spectrum disorder in children. JAMA 3261170, 2021
Miller NR, Cypher RL, Nielsen PE, et al: Maternal pulse pressure at admission is a risk factor for fetal
heart rate changes after initial dosing of a labor epidural: a retrospective cohort study. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 209(4):382.e1, 2013

Millet L, Shaha S, Bartholomew ML: Rates of bacteriuria in laboring with epidural analgesia: continuous
vs intermittent bladder catheterization. Am J Obstet Gynecol 206:316, 2012
Miro M, Guasch E, Gilsanz F: Comparison of epidural analgesia with combined spinal-epidural for labor:
a retrospective study of 6497 cases. Int J Obstet Anesth 17:15, 2008
Mitra R, Fleischmann K: Management of the sheared epidural catheter: is surgical extraction really
necessary? J Clin Anesth 19(4):310, 2007
Mohta M, Garg A, Chilkoti GT, et al: A randomised controlled trial of phenylephrine and noradrenaline
boluses for treatment of postspinal hypotension during elective caesarean section. Anaesthesia
74(7):850, 2019
Mokri B: The Munro-Kellie hypothesis: application in CSF volume depletion. Neurology 56:1746, 2001
Moore AR, Wieczorek PM, Carvalho JC: Association between post-dural puncture headache after
neuraxial anesthesia in childbirth and intracranial subdural hematoma. JAMA Neurol 77(1):65, 2020
Nandagopal M: Local anesthesia for cesarean section. Tech Reg Anesth Pain Manag 5(1):30, 2001
Neal JM, Barrington MJ, Fettiplace MR, et al: The Third American Society of Regional Anesthesia and
Pain Medicine Practice Advisory on Local Anesthetic Systemic Toxicity: Executive Summary 2017.
Reg Anesth Pain Med 43(2):113, 2018
Ng SC, Habib AS, Sodha S, et al: High-dose versus low-dose local anaesthetic for transversus
abdominis plane block post-cesarean delivery analgesia: a meta-analysis. Br J Anesth 120(2):252,
2018
Ngan Kee WD: The use of vasopressors during spinal anaesthesia for caesarean section. Curr Opin
Anaesthesiol 30(3):319, 2017
Ngan Kee WD, Khaw KS, Ng FF, et al: Prophylactic phenylephrine infusion for preventing hypotension
during spinal anesthesia for cesarean delivery. Anesth Analg 98:815, 2004
Noblett K, McKinney A, Kim R: Sheared epidural catheter during an elective procedure. Obstet
Gynecol 109:566, 2007
Norris MC, Dewan DM: Preoxygenation for cesarean section: a comparison of two techniques.
Anesthesiology 62:827, 1985
Ohel G, Gonen R, Vaida S, et al: Early versus late initiation of epidural analgesia in labor: does it
increase the risk of cesarean section? A randomized trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol 194:600, 2006
Osterman MJ, Martin JA: Epidural and spinal anesthesia use during labor, 2008. Natl Vital Stat Rep
59(5):1, 2011
Petersen EE, Davis NL, Goodman D, et al: Racial/ethnic disparities in pregnancy-related deaths—
United States, 2007–2016. MMWR 68(35):762, 2019
Poma S, Scudeller L, Verga C, et al: Effects of combined spinal-epidural analgesia on first stage of
labor: a cohort study. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 32(21):3559, 2019
Prabhu M, Clapp MA, McQuaid-Hanson E, et al: Liposomal bupivacaine block at the time of cesarean
delivery to decrease postoperative pain: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol 132(1):70,
2018
Ranney B, Stanage WF: Advantages of local anesthesia for cesarean section. Obstet Gynecol
45(2):163, 1975
Reynolds F, Sharma SK, Seed PT: Analgesia in labour and fetal acid-base balance: a meta-analysis
comparing epidural with systemic opioid analgesia. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 109:1344, 2002
Rodriguez AN, Patel S, Macias DA, et al: Timing of emergency postpartum hospital visits in the fourth
trimester. Abstract No. 294, Am J Obstet Gynecol 222:s198, 2020
Rogers R Jr: Basic pelvic neuroanatomy. In Steege J, Metzger D, Levy B (eds): Chronic Pelvic Pain: an
Integrated Approach. Philadelphia, Saunders, 1998, p 31

Rogers R, Gilson G, Kammerer-Doak D: Epidural analgesia and active management of labor: effects on
length of labor and mode of delivery. Obstet Gynecol 93:995, 1999
Rosen MA: Paracervical block for labor analgesia: a brief historic review. Am J Obstet Gynecol
186:S127, 2002
Ruppen W, Derry S, McQuay H, et al: Incidence of epidural hematoma, infection, and neurologic injury
in obstetric patients with epidural analgesia/anesthesia. Anesthesiology 105:394, 2006
Scavone BM, Wong CA, Sullivan JT, et al: Efficacy of a prophylactic epidural blood patch in preventing
post dural puncture headache in parturients after inadvertent dural puncture. Anesthesiology
101:1422, 2004
Seyb ST, Berka RJ, Socol ML, et al: Risk of cesarean delivery with elective induction of labor at term in
nulliparous women. Obstet Gynecol 94:600, 1999
Sharma SK, McIntire DD, Wiley J, et al: Labor analgesia and cesarean delivery. An individual patient
meta-analysis of nulliparous women. Anesthesiology 100:142, 2004
Sharma SK, Rogers BB, Alexander JM, et al: A randomized trial of the effects of antibiotic prophylaxis
on epidural-related fever in labor. Anesth Analg 118(3):604, 2014
Sharma SK, Sidawi JE, Ramin SM, et al: Cesarean delivery: a randomized trial of epidural versus
patient-controlled meperidine analgesia during labor. Anesthesiology 87:487, 1997
Shearer VE, Jhaveri HS, Cunningham FG: Puerperal seizures after post-dural puncture headache.
Obstet Gynecol 85:255, 1995
Shippam W, Preston R, Douglas J, et al: High-flow nasal oxygen vs. standard flow-rate facemask
preoxygenation in pregnant patients: a randomised physiological study. Anaesthesia 74(4):450, 2019
Sharkey AM, Siddiqui N, Downey K, et al: Comparison of intermittent intravenous boluses of
phenylephrine and norepinephrine to prevent and treat spinal-induced hypotension in cesarean
deliveries: randomized controlled trial. Anesth Analg 129(5):1312, 2019
Shmueli A, Salman L, Orbach-Zinger S, et al: The impact of epidural analgesia on the duration of the
second stage of labor. Birth 45(4):377, 2018
Smarkusky L, DeCarvalho H, Bermudez A, et al: Acute onset headache complicating labor epidural
caused by intrapartum pneumocephalus. Obstet Gynecol 108:795, 2006
Song Y, Du W, Zhou S, et al: Effect of dural puncture epidural technique combined with programmed
intermittent epidural bolus on labor analgesia onset and maintenance: a randomized controlled trial.
Anesth Analg 32(4):971, 2021
Sprigge JS, Harper SJ: Accidental dural puncture and post dural puncture headache in obstetric
anaesthesia: presentation and management: a 23-year survey in a district general hospital.
Anaesthesia 63:36, 2008
Stocki D, Matot I, Einav S, et al: A randomized controlled trial of the efficacy and respiratory effects of
patient-controlled intravenous remifentanil analgesia and patient-controlled epidural analgesia in
laboring women. Anesth Analg 118(3):589, 2014
Sultan P, Sultan E, Carvalho B: Regional anaesthesia for labour, operative vaginal delivery and cesarean
delivery: a narrative review. Anaesthesia 76 Suppl 1:136, 2021
Svancarek W, Chirino O, Schaefer G Jr, et al: Retropsoas and subgluteal abscesses following
paracervical and pudendal anesthesia. JAMA 237:892, 1977
Tan PC, Millay OJ, Leeton L, et al: High-flow humidified nasal preoxygenation in pregnant women: a
prospective observational study. Br J Anaesth 122(1):86, 2019
Tawfik MM, Mohamed YM, Elbadrawi RE, et al: Transversus abdominis plane block versus wound
infiltration for analgesia after cesarean delivery: a randomized controlled trial. Anesth Analg
124(4):1291, 2017

Taylor G, Pryse-Davies J: The prophylactic use of antacids in the prevention of the acid pulmonary
aspiration syndrome (Mendelson’s syndrome). Lancet 1:288, 1966
Teabeaut JR II: Aspiration of gastric contents: an experimental study. Am J Pathol 28:51, 1952
Togioka BM, Seligman KM, Werntz MK, et al: Education program regarding labor epidurals increases
utilization by Hispanic Medicaid beneficiaries: a randomized controlled trial. Anesthesiology 131:840,
2019
Tsui MHY, Kee WDN, Ng FF, et al: A double blinded randomized placebo controlled study of
intramuscular pethidine for pain relief in the first stage of labour. BJOG 111:648, 2004
Ulubaşoğlu H, Bakay K, Guven D: Relation with postpartum maternal morbidity of different types of
anesthesia in preeclamptic patients. Hypertens Pregnancy 37(1):25, 2018
Vallejo MC, Mandell GL, Sabo DP, et al: Postdural puncture headache: a randomized comparison of five
spinal needles in obstetric patients. Anesth Analg 91:916, 2000
Van de Putte P, Vernieuwe L, Perias A: Term pregnant patients have similar gastric volume to
nonpregnant females: a single-centre cohort study. Br J Anaesth 122(1):79, 2019
Veeser M, Hofmann T, Roth R, et al: Vasopressors for the management of hypotension after spinal
anesthesia for elective caesarean section. Systematic review and cumulative meta-analysis. Acta
Anaesthesiol Scand 56(7):810, 2012
Vricella LK, Louis JM, Mercer BM, et al: Impact of morbid obesity on epidural anesthesia complications
in labor. Am J Obstet Gynecol 205:307, 2011
Wallace DH, Leveno KJ, Cunningham FG, et al: Randomized comparison of general and regional
anesthesia for cesarean delivery in pregnancies complicated by severe preeclampsia. Obstet
Gynecol 86:193, 1995
Wang Y, Xu M: Comparison of ropivacaine combined with sufentanil for epidural anesthesia and spinalepidural anesthesia in labor analgesia. BMC Anesthesiol 20(1):1, 2020
Wilson MJ, MacArthur C, Hewitt CA, et al: Intravenous remifentanil patient-controlled analgesia versus
intramuscular pethidine for pain relief in labour (RESPITE): an open-label, multicentre, randomized
controlled trial. Lancet 392(10148):662, 2018a
Wilson RD, Caughey AB, Wood SL, et al: Guidelines for Antenatal and Preoperative care in Cesarean
Delivery: Enhanced Recovery After Surgery Society Recommendations (Part 1). Am J Obstet
Gynecol 219(6):523.e1, 2018b
Wong CA, McCarthy RJ, Sullivan JT, et al: Early compared with late neuraxial analgesia in nulliparous
labor induction. Obstet Gynecol 113(5):1066, 2009
Wong CA, Scavone BM, Peaceman AM, et al: The risk of cesarean delivery with neuraxial analgesia
given early versus late in labor. N Engl J Med 352:655, 2005
Xu C, Liu S, Huang Y, et al: Phenylephrine vs ephedrine in cesarean delivery under spinal anesthesia: A
systematic literature review and meta-analysis. Int J Surg 60:48, 2018
Young MJ, Gorlin AW, Modes VE, et al: Clinical implications of the transversus abdominis plane block in
adults. Anesthesiol Res Pract 2012:731645, 2012
Yurashevich M, Carvalho B, Butwick AJ, et al: Determinants of women’s dissatisfaction with
anaesthesia care in labour and delivery. Anaesthesia 74(9):1112, 2019
Zafirova Z, Sheehan C, Hosseinian L: Update on nitrous oxide and its use in anesthesia practice. Best
Pract Res Clin Anaesthesiol 32(2):113, 2018
Zeeman GG, Cunningham FG, Pritchard JA: The magnitude of hemoconcentration with eclampsia.
Hypertens Preg 28(2):127, 2009

CHAPTER 26

Induction and Augmentation of Labor

LABOR INDUCTION
PREINDUCTION CERVICAL RIPENING
PHARMACOLOGICAL AGENTS
MECHANICAL TECHNIQUES
METHODS OF INDUCTION AND AUGMENTATION
PROSTAGLANDIN E1
OXYTOCIN
AMNIOTOMY FOR INDUCTION AND AUGMENTATION
REFERENCES
Today, several pharmacological agents permit labor to be induced or
augmented. Induction implies stimulation of contractions before the
spontaneous onset of labor, with or without ruptured membranes. When the
cervix is closed and uneffaced, labor induction is often preceded by cervical
ripening, a process to soften and open the cervix. This is somewhat of a
misnomer in that cervical ripening, per se, may also be a means of labor
induction. Augmentation refers to enhancement of spontaneous contractions
that are considered inadequate because of failed cervical dilation and poor
fetal descent. This chapter presents indications and methods for labor
induction or augmentation and for cervical ripening.

LABOR INDUCTION
■ Indications
In the United States, the incidence of labor induction rose from 9.5 percent in
1991 to 27 percent in 2019 (Martin, 2019). Induction is indicated when the
benefits to either mother or fetus outweigh those of pregnancy continuation.
The more common indications include membrane rupture without labor,
gestational hypertension, oligohydramnios, nonreassuring fetal status,
postterm pregnancy, and various maternal medical conditions such as chronic
hypertension and diabetes (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2019a).
Methods to induce or augment labor are contraindicated by most
conditions that preclude spontaneous labor or delivery. Maternal
contraindications are an abnormally implanted placenta or a prior uterine
incision type that is associated with a high rupture risk. Uncommon
conditions are active genital herpes infection, contracted or distorted pelvic
anatomy, or cervical cancer. Fetal factors include appreciable macrosomia,
severe hydrocephalus, malpresentation, or nonreassuring fetal status.

■ Risks
Some maternal complications associated with labor induction are
chorioamnionitis, uterine rupture, and postpartum hemorrhage from uterine
atony. Earlier nonrandomized studies suggested a particularly higher risk for
cesarean delivery in nulliparas undergoing labor induction (Luthy, 2004;
Yeast, 1999). More recent ones, however, cite comparable or even lower
rates of cesarean delivery when induced labor is compared with spontaneous
labor (Middleton, 2020; Souter, 2019).
These studies used spontaneous labor as the comparator, which may be
less suitable than using expectant management as the comparator. In the
ARRIVE trial—A Randomized Trial of Induction Versus Expectant
Management-more than 6000 low-risk nulliparas at 39 weeks’ gestation
were randomly assigned to labor induction or expectant management groups
(Table 26-1) (Grobman, 2018; Tita, 2021). Primary outcome, which was the
rate of severe neonatal morbidity or death, did not differ between cohorts.
However, the cesarean delivery rate in the induction arm was significantly

lower than that in the expectantly managed cohort—18.6 versus 22.2 percent,
respectively. Rates of chorioamnionitis, postpartum hemorrhage, and
peripartum infection were not significantly different. In a metaanalysis of six
cohort studies, elective induction at 39 weeks’ gestation had a significantly
lower risk of cesarean delivery and these other morbidities compared with
expectant management (Grobman, 2019).
TABLE 26-1. Selected Maternal and Perinatal Outcomes with Labor
Induction Versus Expectant Management in Low-Risk Nulliparous Women—
the ARRIVE Trial

With induction, the overall associated risk of uterine rupture is low but is
highest with a prior uterine scar (Landon, 2004). The American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019c) recommends against the use of
prostaglandins for preinduction cervical ripening or for labor induction in
women with a prior uterine incision. It recognizes labor induction with

oxytocin as an option but also notes the higher potential rupture rate and
lower VBAC rate. Oxytocin augmentation may be used in those undergoing
TOLAC, although evidence for higher rupture rates are conflicting.
Amniotomy is often selected to augment labor (p. 494). Of other potential
risks, women whose labor is managed with amniotomy have a higher
incidence of chorioamnionitis compared with those in spontaneous labor
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019a).
In some, but not all studies, uterine atony and associated postpartum
hemorrhage are more common in women undergoing induction or
augmentation (Grobman, 2018; Widmer, 2020). And as discussed in Chapter
42 (p. 733), atony with intractable hemorrhage, especially following
cesarean delivery, is a frequent indication for peripartum hysterectomy. In a
study from Parkland Hospital, labor induction was associated with 17
percent of 553 unanticipated peripartum hysterectomies (Hernandez, 2013).

■ Elective Labor Induction
Until recently, the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
(2019a) did not recommend elective labor induction at term for convenience.
Occasional exceptions are risk of rapid labor, psychosocial indications, or
logistics that factor family support availability and distance from the
hospital. Importantly, several studies have shown that elective delivery
before 39 completed weeks’ gestation is associated with significant adverse
neonatal morbidity (Chiossi, 2013; Salemi, 2016; Tita, 2009).
This proscription against elective induction at term was reconsidered
following publication of the previously cited ARRIVE trial. Because of the
results from that trial, the American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2018) and the Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine (2019)
conclude that offering elective induction to low-risk, well-dated nulliparas at
39 weeks’ gestation is reasonable. These women must meet the criteria for
the ARRIVE trial, and it is recommended to combine shared decision-making
with consideration of available resources.

■ Factors Affecting Induction Success
Several factors affect the ability of labor induction to achieve vaginal
delivery. Favorable factors include younger age, multiparity, body mass

index (BMI) <30, favorable cervix, and birthweight <3500 g (Freret, 2021;
Sievert, 2017). In many cases, the uterus is simply poorly prepared for labor.
One example is an “unripe” or “unfavorable” cervix. Indeed, investigators
with the Consortium on Safe Labor reported that elective induction resulted
in vaginal delivery in 97 percent of multiparas and 76 percent of nulliparas.
Induction was more often successful with a “ripe cervix” (Laughon, 2012).
Failure of induction is likely strongly influenced by the induction
duration, especially with an unfavorable cervix (Spong, 2012). In one study,
labor duration to reach the active phase and to complete dilation was
adversely affected by a higher BMI (Kominiarek, 2011). Similar findings
were reported for women with diabetes (Hawkins, 2017). Simon and
Grobman (2005) concluded that a latent phase as long as 18 hours allowed
most women undergoing labor induction to achieve a vaginal delivery
without a significantly increased risk of maternal or neonatal morbidity.
Rouse and associates (2000) recommend a minimum of 12 hours of uterine
stimulation with oxytocin after membrane rupture, whereas Kawakita and
coworkers (2016) recommend up to 15 hours for multiparas.

PREINDUCTION CERVICAL RIPENING
As noted, a soft cervix—described as “ripe” or “favorable”—is important to
successful labor induction. However, some estimates of favorability are
highly subjective (Feltovich, 2017). Still, pharmacological and mechanical
methods can enhance cervical qualities in a process of preinduction cervical
ripening.
Some of the techniques may have benefits compared with oxytocin
induction alone (Table 26-2). Namely, some are able to initiate labor and
may effect delivery when used alone. However, few data support the premise
that any of these methods lower cesarean delivery rates or lessen maternal or
neonatal morbidity compared with women in whom these methods are not
used.
TABLE 26-2. Some Commonly Used Regimens Compared with Oxytocin
Infusion for Preinduction Cervical Ripening and/or Labor Induction

■ Cervical “Favorability”
One quantifiable method to predict labor induction outcomes is the score
described by Bishop (1964) and presented in Table 26-3. As favorability or
Bishop score rises, the rate of induction to effect vaginal delivery also
increases. A Bishop score >8 conveys a high likelihood for a successful
induction, and a score ≤6 is considered unfavorable (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019a).
TABLE 26-3. Bishop Scoring System Used for Assessment of Inducibility

Laughon and coworkers (2011) attempted to simplify the Bishop score by
performing a regression analysis on 5610 nulliparas with term singletons at
38 to 42 weeks’ gestation. Cervical dilation, station, and effacement were
significantly associated with successful vaginal delivery. Thus, a simplified
Bishop score had a similar or improved positive- or negative-predictive
value compared with that of the original Bishop score. Others have reported
similar findings when consistency and position are omitted (Ivars, 2016;
Raghuraman, 2016).
Transvaginal sonographic measurement of cervical length has been
evaluated as a Bishop score alternative (Feltovich, 2017). However, data
from a metaanalysis of 31 trials showed overall low sensitivity and
specificity and limited predictive utility to forecast successful induction
(Verhoeven, 2013).

■ Pharmacological Agents
Prostaglandin analogues make up available options. These can also stimulate
contractions and thereby aid subsequent labor induction or augmentation.
Importantly, in most studies of preinduction cervical ripening, oxytocin
infusion either is initiated with the ripening agent or follows cervical change.

■ Prostaglandin E2
Dinoprostone is a synthetic analogue of prostaglandin E2 (PGE2). It is
commercially available in three forms: a gel, a time-release vaginal insert,
and a 20-mg suppository (see Table 26-2). The gel and time-release vaginal
insert formulations are indicated only for cervical ripening before labor
induction. Importantly, the 20-mg suppository is not indicated for cervical
ripening. It instead is used for pregnancy termination between 12 and 20
weeks’ gestation and for evacuation of the uterus after fetal demise up to 28
weeks.
Local application of the PGE2 gel form—Prepidil—is available in a 2.5mL syringe for an intracervical application of 0.5 mg of dinoprostone. With
the woman supine, the tip of a prefilled syringe is placed intracervically, and
the gel is deposited just below the internal cervical os. After application, the

woman remains reclined for 30 minutes. Doses may be repeated every 6
hours, with a maximum of three doses recommended in 24 hours.
A 10-mg dinoprostone vaginal insert—Cervidil—also is approved for
cervical ripening. This is a thin, flat, rectangular polymeric wafer held
within a small, white, mesh polyester sac (Fig. 26-1). The sac has a long
attached tail to allow easy removal from the vagina. The insert provides
slower release of medication—0.3 mg/hr—than the gel form. Cervidil is
used as a single dose placed transversely in the posterior vaginal fornix.
Lubricant is used sparingly, if at all, because it can coat the device and
hinder dinoprostone release. Following insertion, the woman remains
recumbent for at least 2 hours. The insert is removed after 12 hours or with
labor onset and at least 30 minutes before the administration of oxytocin.
Since the active drug is encased in a mesh sac, one benefit is the ability for
removal if fetal heart rate abnormalities or tachysystole develop.

FIGURE 26-1 Cervidil vaginal insert contains 10 mg of dinoprostone designed to release approximately
0.3 mg/hr during a 10-hour period.

Most metaanalyses of dinoprostone efficacy report a reduced time to
delivery within 24 hours. However, they do not consistently show a

reduction in the cesarean delivery rate. Thomas and colleagues (2014)
provided a Cochrane review of 70 trials that included 11,487 women given
vaginal prostaglandins or either placebo compared with no treatment. They
noted a higher vaginal delivery rate within 24 hours when prostaglandins
were used. They also reported a threefold greater risk of tachysystole
accompanied by fetal heart rate changes, but cesarean delivery rates were not
significantly decreased. Similar results were noted in another Cochrane
review of intracervical dinoprostone gel (Boulvain, 2008). Compared with
placebo or no treatment, a reduced risk of cesarean delivery was found only
in a subgroup of women with an unfavorable cervix and intact membranes.
Last, the Foley catheter versus vaginal PGE2 gel for induction of labor at
term—PROBAAT-P and M trials—were unblinded, randomized trials
comparing these two options (Jozwiak, 2011, 2013, 2014). The cesarean
delivery rate did not differ, a finding consistent with accompanying
metaanalyses.

Side Effects
Uterine tachysystole follows vaginally administered PGE2 in 1 to 5 percent
of women (Hawkins, 2012). Although definitions of abnormal uterine activity
vary among studies, most use the definition recommended by the American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019b). Uterine tachysystole is
defined as >5 contractions in a 10-minute period. It should always be
qualified by the presence or absence of fetal heart rate abnormalities. The
terms uterine hypertonus, hyperstimulation, and hypercontractility are
terms no longer defined, and their use is not recommended.
Because uterine tachysystole associated with fetal compromise may
develop when prostaglandins are used with preexisting spontaneous labor,
such use is not recommended. If tachysystole follows the 10-mg insert, its
removal by pulling on the tail of the surrounding net sac will usually reverse
this effect. Irrigation to remove the gel preparation has not been shown to be
helpful.
The manufacturers recommend caution when these preparations are used
in women with ruptured membranes. This concern is also extended to women
with glaucoma or asthma. However, in a review of 189 women with asthma,
dinoprostone was not associated with asthma worsening or exacerbation
(Towers, 2004). Other contraindications listed by the manufacturers include

prior dinoprostone hypersensitivity, suspicion of fetal compromise or
cephalopelvic disproportion, unexplained vaginal bleeding, six or more
prior term pregnancies, and contraindications to vaginal delivery. Others are
women already receiving oxytocin, those with a contraindication to oxytocin,
or those who may be endangered by prolonged uterine contractions, for
example, those with prior cesarean delivery or uterine surgery.

Administration
PGE2 preparations should be administered only in or near the delivery suite.
Moreover, uterine activity and fetal heart rate should be monitored
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019a). These
guidelines stem from the risk of uterine tachysystole. When contractions
begin, they are usually apparent in the first hour and show peak activity in the
first 4 hours. According to manufacturer guidelines, oxytocin induction that
follows prostaglandin use for cervical ripening should be delayed for 6 to 12
hours following PGE2 gel administration or for at least 30 minutes after
removal of the vaginal insert.

■ Prostaglandin E1
Misoprostol—Cytotec—is a synthetic prostaglandin E1 (PGE1) that is
approved as a 100- or 200-µg tablet for peptic ulcer prevention. These
tablets can be split to administer 25- or 50-µg doses. The drug is absorbed
from both vaginal, oral, and buccal administration. Randomized trials of
labor induction with misoprostol have evaluated various induction regimens
with differing primary outcomes (Table 26-4).
TABLE 26-4. Randomized Trials with 200 or More Subjects Designed to
Compare Misoprostol (PGE1) With or Without Foley Bulb

Misoprostol is widely used “off label” safely for preinduction cervical
ripening (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019a). The
tablets are stable at room temperature, and the drug currently is the preferred
prostaglandin for cervical ripening at Parkland Hospital.

Vaginal Administration
Compared with intracervical or intravaginal PGE2, vaginally administered
misoprostol tablets offer equivalent or superior efficacy for cervical ripening
or labor induction (Hofmeyr, 2010). Compared with oxytocin or with
intravaginal or intracervical dinoprostone, vaginal misoprostol increased the
vaginal delivery rate within 24 hours. Although the uterine tachysystole rate
was higher, this did not affect cesarean delivery rates. Moreover, compared
with dinoprostone, misoprostol lowered the need for oxytocin induction, but
it raised the frequency of meconium-stained amnionic fluid. Higher doses of
misoprostol are associated with a decreased need for oxytocin but with
greater rates of uterine tachysystole, with and without fetal heart rate
changes. The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019a)
recommends a 25-µg vaginal dose. The drug is evenly distributed among
100-µg tablets that are quartered.

Oral Administration
PGE1 tablets are also effective when given orally, but with a faster peak
concentration and decline compared with the vaginal route. One Cochrane
metaanalysis of 76 trials reported that oral misoprostol compared with
placebo significantly increased the rate of vaginal birth within 24 hours,
while decreasing the need for oxytocin and lowering the cesarean delivery
rate (Alfirevic, 2014). Comparisons of oral misoprostol and oxytocin and of
oral misoprostol and dinoprostone also found significantly reduced rates of
cesarean delivery with misoprostol. Similar efficacy was noted between oral
misoprostol and vaginal administration, although oral administration was
associated with significantly higher Apgar scores and less postpartum
hemorrhage. Thorbiörnson and associates (2017) also reported lower rates
of cesarean delivery with oral misoprostol compared with vaginal
dinoprostone.

■ Nitric Oxide Donors
Over the years, agents that stimulate nitric oxide production have been
studied for labor induction. Physiologically, nitric oxide is likely a mediator
of cervical ripening. Cervical nitric oxide metabolite concentrations are
increased at the beginning of uterine contractions.
Both isosorbide mononitrate and glyceryl trinitrate have been studied
but are less effective clinically than prostaglandins for cervical ripening. In
one metaanalysis, the rate of cesarean delivery was not reduced in those
given nitric oxide donors compared with those given placebo, intravaginal or
intracervical prostaglandins, intravaginal misoprostol, or intracervical
catheter (Ghosh, 2016). However, nitric oxide donors were associated with
significantly more headaches, nausea, and vomiting.

■ Mechanical Techniques
These include transcervical placement of a Foley catheter, with or without
extraamnionic saline infusion; hygroscopic cervical dilators; and membrane
stripping. In one metaanalysis, mechanical methods reduced the risk of
uterine tachysystole compared with prostaglandins, although cesarean
delivery rates were unchanged (Jozwiak, 2012). Trials comparing

mechanical techniques and oxytocin found a lower rate of cesarean delivery
with mechanical methods. Trials comparing mechanical options with
dinoprostone found a higher rate of multiparas undelivered at 24 hours with
mechanical methods. In another metaanalysis comparing Foley catheter and
intravaginal dinoprostone inserts, cesarean delivery rates were similar, but
uterine tachysystole was less frequent with catheter use (Jozwiak, 2013).

Transcervical Catheter
Generally, this option is only used with an unfavorable cervix because the
catheter comes out as the cervix opens. It is suitable for women with
membranes that are intact or ruptured. In most cases, a Foley catheter is
placed through the internal cervical os, and downward tension is created by
taping the catheter to the thigh (Mei-Dan, 2014). Extraamnionic saline
infusion (EASI) is one modification. It adds a constant saline infusion through
the catheter into the space between the internal os and placental membranes
(Fig. 26-2). In one study, chorioamnionitis was significantly less frequent
when infusion was added compared with no infusion—6 versus 16 percent
(Karjane, 2006). Similarly, in a metaanalysis, transcervical catheters were
not associated with higher rates of maternal or fetal infection (McMaster,
2015).

FIGURE 26-2 Extraamnionic saline infusion (EASI) through a 26F Foley catheter that is placed
through the cervix. The 30-mL balloon is inflated with saline and pulled snugly against the internal os,
and the catheter is taped to the thigh. Room-temperature normal saline is infused through the catheter
port of the Foley at 30 or 40 mL/hour by intravenous infusion pump.

As discussed earlier, transcervical catheters do not reduce the cesarean
delivery rate compared with prostaglandins. There were several iterations of
the PROBAAT trials—I, P, M, and II—in which cervical ripening with a
Foley catheter was compared with vaginal dinoprostone gel, dinoprostone
vaginal inserts, and vaginal or oral misoprostol (Jozwiak, 2011, 2013, 2014;
Ten Eikelder, 2016). These studies reported similar outcomes between the
mechanical methods and the prostaglandin agents. Also, fewer overall cases
of cardiotocographic changes were seen in the mechanical technique group.
Similar cesarean delivery rates are found in other comparison studies.
Schoen and coworkers (2017) observed that concurrent oxytocin with a
transcervical Foley catheter shortened the median time to delivery compared

with a Foley catheter followed by oxytocin. However, rates of cesarean
delivery were unchanged. Connolly and associates (2016) reported similar
findings for women within intact membranes undergoing labor induction.
Amorosa and colleagues (2017) found no benefit for transcervical catheter
coupled with oxytocin compared with oxytocin alone for women with
ruptured membranes. Other studies of concurrent misoprostol reported
reduced time to delivery without affecting cesarean delivery rates (Carbone,
2013; Levine, 2016). With catheter induction plus misoprostol, one
randomized trial found vaginal misoprostol to be superior to buccal
administration (Gomez, 2021). Last, addition of tension does not appear to
enhance catheter efficacy (Fruhman, 2017). These investigators randomly
assigned 140 women to transcervical Foley catheter placement, with and
without tension, and reported similar vaginal delivery rates.
One large trial at Parkland Hospital evaluated the addition of a Foley
catheter to oral misoprostol. With catheter addition, investigators found no
improvement in the vaginal delivery rate, but the chorioamnionitis rate was
30-percent higher (Adhikari, 2020). The unaltered vaginal delivery rate
persisted in a stratified analysis of nulliparas and multiparas. In this study,
our standard labor induction protocol with misoprostol alone achieved a 77percent vaginal delivery rate.

Hygroscopic Cervical Dilators
Cervical dilation can be accomplished using hygroscopic or osmotic
cervical dilators, which are illustrated in Chapter 11 (p. 209). Briefly, these
include Laminaria japonicum or hygroscopic devices (Dilapan-S). Intuitive
concerns of ascending infection have not been verified, and their use appears
to be safe. Placement generally requires a speculum and positioning of the
woman on an examination table. Studies comparing hygroscopic cervical
dilators and prostaglandins found few benefits (Maier, 2018).

METHODS OF INDUCTION AND AUGMENTATION
Oxytocin has been used for labor induction for more than 70 years
(Theobald, 1948). As discussed, other methods now include prostaglandins,
which are used alone or in combination with oxytocin. Prostaglandins
include misoprostol and dinoprostone. Mechanical methods encompass

membrane stripping, artificial rupture of membranes, extraamnionic saline
infusion, transcervical balloons, and hygroscopic cervical dilators. As
recommended in Guidelines for Perinatal Care, each obstetrical department
should have written protocols that describe administration of these methods
for labor induction and augmentation (American College of Obstetricians,
2017).
Because preinduction cervical ripening frequently prompts labor, studies
to determine induction efficacy for some of these agents have produced
confusing results. The use of prostaglandins for labor augmentation has
generally been considered experimental due to high rates of uterine
tachysystole.

■ Prostaglandin E1
Both vaginal and oral misoprostol are used for either cervical ripening or
labor induction. For labor induction in women at or near term with either
prematurely ruptured membranes or a favorable cervix, 100 µg of oral or 25
µg of vaginal misoprostol has similar efficacy compared with intravenous
oxytocin. From these studies, evidence supports that oral misoprostol may be
superior (Alfirevic, 2014; Hofmeyr, 2010; Lo, 2003). That said, misoprostol
is associated with a greater rate of uterine tachysystole, particularly at higher
doses. Also, induction with PGE1 may prove ineffective and require
subsequent induction or augmentation with oxytocin.
Thus, although there are trade-offs regarding the risks, costs, and ease of
administration of each drug, either is suitable for labor induction. At
Parkland Hospital, we administer an initial oral 100-µg dose, which may be
repeated for inadequate labor after 6 hours. Four hours after the second dose
or in those with tachysystole, an oxytocin infusion is begun, if needed, for
hypotonic labor. One study compared oral misoprostol and a newer
misoprostol vaginal insert that releases drug up to 24 hours. With the insert,
cesarean delivery and adverse neonatal outcome rates were higher, but time
to delivery was shorter (Döbert, 2018). Additional studies found these
adverse outcomes were mitigated if the insert time was limited to 10 hours
(Brandstetter, 2019, 2020).
For labor augmentation, results of a randomized controlled trial showed
oral misoprostol, 75 µg given at 4-hour intervals for a maximum of two

doses, to be safe and effective (Bleich, 2011). Although the uterine
tachysystole rate was higher among women with labor augmented with
misoprostol, the frequency of nonreassuring fetal status or cesarean delivery
did not differ between oxytocin and misoprostol.

■ Oxytocin
As previously emphasized, in many instances, preinduction cervical ripening
and labor induction are simply a continuum. In this regard “ripening” can
also stimulate labor. If not, induction or augmentation may be continued with
solutions of oxytocin given by infusion pump. Its use in augmentation is a key
component in the active management of labor, described in Chapter 22 (p.
430). With oxytocin use, the American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2019a) recommends fetal heart rate and uterine contraction
monitoring. Contractions can be monitored either by palpation or by
electronic means.

Intravenous Oxytocin Administration
A 1-mL vial contains 10 units of oxytocin. A typical infusate consists of 10
or 20 units, which is 10,000 or 20,000 mU, respectively, mixed into 1000 mL
of crystalloid or dextrose solution. This mixture results in an oxytocin
concentration of 10 or 20 mU/mL, respectively, and is administered by
infusion pump. To avoid bolus administration, the infusion should be inserted
into the main intravenous line close to the venipuncture site.
The goal of induction or augmentation is to effect uterine activity
sufficient to produce cervical change and fetal descent, while avoiding
development of a nonreassuring fetal status. According to the American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019a), the latter is a category
III fetal heart rate tracing. In general, oxytocin is discontinued if the number
of contractions persists with a frequency of more than five in a 10-minute
period or more than seven in a 15-minute period or with a persistent
nonreassuring fetal heart rate pattern. Oxytocin discontinuation nearly always
rapidly lowers contraction frequency. When oxytocin is stopped, its
concentration in plasma rapidly falls because the half-life is approximately 3
to 5 minutes.

The uterus contracts within 3 to 5 minutes of beginning an oxytocin
infusion, and a plasma steady state is reached in 40 minutes (Seitchik, 1984).
Response varies greatly and depends on preexisting uterine activity, cervical
status, pregnancy duration, and individual biological differences. CaldeyroBarcia and Poseiro (1960) reported that the uterine response to oxytocin
increases from 20 to 30 weeks’ gestation and rises rapidly at term.
Oxytocin is generally very successful when used to stimulate labor. In
one large Cochrane metaanalysis, oxytocin was compared with expectant
management, and fewer women—8 versus 54 percent—failed to deliver
vaginally within 24 hours with oxytocin (Alfirevic, 2009). This analysis
studied different oxytocin dosing regimens.

Oxytocin Regimens
Several evidence-based regimens for labor stimulation are now
recommended by the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
(2019a). These and others are shown in Table 26-5. Initially, only variations
of low-dose protocols were used in the United States. Subsequently,
O’Driscoll and colleagues (1984) described their Dublin protocol for the
active management of labor that called for oxytocin at a starting dosage of 6
mU/min and advanced in 6-mU/min increments. Subsequent comparative
trials during the 1990s studied high-dose (4 to 6 mU/min) versus
conventional low-dose (0.5 to 1.5 mU/min) regimens, both for labor
induction and for augmentation.
TABLE 26-5. Various Low- and High-Dose Oxytocin Regimens Used for
Labor Induction

From Parkland Hospital, Satin and associates (1992) evaluated an
oxytocin regimen using an initial and incremental dosage of 6 mU/min
compared with one using 1 mU/min. Among 1112 women undergoing
induction, the 6-mU/min regimen resulted in a shorter mean admission-todelivery time, fewer failed inductions, and no cases of neonatal sepsis.
Among 1676 women who had labor augmentation, those who received the 6mU/min regimen had a shorter duration-to-delivery time, fewer forceps
deliveries, fewer cesarean deliveries for dystocia, and lower rates of
intrapartum chorioamnionitis or neonatal sepsis. With this protocol, uterine
tachysystole was managed by oxytocin discontinuation followed by
resumption when indicated and at half the stopping dosage. Thereafter, the
dosage was increased at 3 mU/min when appropriate, instead of the usual 6mU/min increase used for women without tachysystole. No adverse neonatal
effects were observed. More recently, Son and colleagues (2021) confirmed
these findings in a randomized clinical trial.
In 1990 at Parkland Hospital, routine use of the 6-mU/min oxytocin
beginning and incremental dosage was incorporated and continues through
today. In other labor units, a 2-mU/min beginning and incremental oxytocin

regimen is preferred and administered. With either regimen, dosages are
employed for either labor induction or augmentation.

Interval Between Incremental Dosing
Intervals to increase oxytocin doses vary from 15 to 40 minutes (see Table
26-5). Satin and associates (1994) addressed this aspect with a 6-mU/min
regimen providing increases at either 20- or 40-minute intervals. Women
assigned to the 20-minute interval regimen for labor augmentation had a
significantly reduced cesarean delivery rate for dystocia compared with that
for the 40-minute interval regimen—8 versus 12 percent. As perhaps
expected, uterine tachysystole was significantly more frequent with the 20minute escalation regimen.
Other investigators reported even more frequent incremental increases.
Frigoletto (1995) and Xenakis (1995) and their coworkers gave oxytocin at 4
mU/min with increases as needed every 15 minutes. Merrill and Zlatnik
(1999) started with 4.5-mU/min doses and increased this every 30 minutes.
López-Zeno and associates (1992) used 6-mU/min doses and 15-minute
intervals.

Maximal Oxytocin Dosage
The maximal effective dose of oxytocin to achieve adequate contractions in
all women is different. In one study of 1151 consecutive nulliparas, the
likelihood of progression to vaginal delivery decreased at and beyond an
oxytocin dosage of 36 mU/min (Wen, 2001). Still, at a dosage of 72 mU/min,
half of the nulliparas were delivered vaginally. Thus, if contractions are not
adequate—less than 200 Montevideo units—and if the fetal status is
reassuring and labor has arrested, an oxytocin infusion dose greater than 48
mU/min has no apparent risks (Tesemma, 2020).

■ Risks versus Benefits
Unless the uterus is scarred, uterine rupture associated with oxytocin infusion
is rare, even in parous women. Flannelly and associates (1993) reported no
cases of uterine rupture, with or without oxytocin, in 27,829 nulliparas. Eight
instances of overt uterine rupture during labor were noted in 48,718 parous
women. Only one of these was associated with oxytocin use. A population-

based retrospective review from Denmark reported a rupture rate of 3.3 per
100,000 women without prior cesarean, with the highest risk among
multiparas (Thisted, 2015). Our experience from Parkland Hospital is that
oxytocin induction and augmentation are associated with uterine rupture.
During an 8-year period in which there were almost 95,000 births, 15
women suffered a primary uterine rupture, and 14 of these cases were
associated with oxytocin use. In half of these women, prostaglandins were
also given before augmentation with oxytocin.
Oxytocin has amino-acid homology similar to arginine vasopressin
(AVP) and has significant antidiuretic action. When infused at doses of 20
mU/min or more, renal free water clearance drops markedly. If aqueous
fluids are infused in appreciable amounts along with oxytocin, water
intoxication can lead to convulsions, coma, and even death. In general, if
oxytocin is to be administered in high doses for a considerable period of
time, its concentration should be increased rather than raising the flow rate of
a more dilute solution. Consideration also should be given to use of
crystalloids—either normal saline or lactated Ringer solution.

■ Uterine Contraction Pressures
Contraction forces in spontaneously laboring women range from 90 to 390
Montevideo units (Chap. 24, p. 462). Early researchers found that the mean
or median spontaneous uterine contraction pattern between 140 and 150
Montevideo units resulted in progression to vaginal delivery (CaldeyroBarcia, 1950; Seitchik, 1984).
Labor arrest in first-stage labor is described in Chapter 23 (p. 434). In
the management of active-phase arrest, and with no contraindication to
intravenous oxytocin, decisions must be made with knowledge of the safe
upper range of uterine activity. Hauth and colleagues (1986) described an
effective and safe protocol for oxytocin augmentation for active-phase arrest.
With it, more than 90 percent of women achieved an average of at least 200
to 225 Montevideo units. They later reported that nearly all women in whom
active-phase arrest persisted despite oxytocin generated more than 200
Montevideo units (Hauth, 1991). Importantly, despite no labor progression,
no adverse maternal or perinatal effects were noted in those ultimately
requiring cesarean delivery. Data regarding the safety and efficacy of

contraction patterns in women with a prior cesarean delivery, with twins, or
with an overdistended uterus are lacking.

■ Amniotomy for Induction and Augmentation
Elective amniotomy with the intention of accelerating labor is often
performed. For labor induction, artificial rupture of the membranes—
sometimes called surgical induction—can be used and always implies a
commitment to delivery. The main disadvantage of amniotomy used alone for
labor induction is the unpredictable and occasionally long interval until labor
onset. That said, in a randomized trial, Bakos and Bäckström (1987) found
that amniotomy alone or combined with oxytocin was superior to oxytocin
alone. Mercer and colleagues (1995) randomly assigned 209 women
undergoing oxytocin induction to either early amniotomy at 1 to 2 cm or late
amniotomy at 5 cm. Early amniotomy was associated with a 4-hour reduction
in labor duration. With early amniotomy, however, the incidence of
chorioamnionitis was elevated. In a metaanalysis, De Vivo and associates
(2020) reported that early amniotomy did not increase the risk of cesarean
delivery yet reduced the interval from induction to delivery.
For labor augmentation, amniotomy is commonly performed when labor
is abnormally slow. Shown in Table 26-6, amniotomy at approximately 5-cm
dilation accelerated spontaneous labor by 1 to 1½ hours. Importantly, neither
the need for oxytocin stimulation nor the overall cesarean delivery rate was
higher. Although the incidences of mild and moderate cord compression
patterns were increased following amniotomy, cesarean delivery rates for
fetal distress were not greater. Most importantly, there were no adverse
perinatal effects.
TABLE 26-6. Randomized Clinical Trials of Elective Amniotomy in Early
Spontaneous Labor at Term

Rouse and associates (1994) also found that amniotomy with oxytocin
augmentation for arrested active-phase labor shortened the time to delivery
by 44 minutes compared with that of oxytocin alone. Although amniotomy did
not alter the delivery route, one drawback was that it significantly increased
the incidence of chorioamnionitis.
Regardless of the indication, amniotomy is associated with a risk of cord
prolapse. To minimize this risk, disengagement of the fetal head during
amniotomy is avoided. Toward this goal, fundal or suprapubic pressure or
both may be helpful. Some clinicians prefer to rupture membranes during a
contraction. If the vertex is not well applied to the lower uterine segment, a
gradual egress of amnionic fluid can sometimes be accomplished by several
membrane punctures with a 26-gauge needle held with a ring forceps and
with direct visualization using a vaginal speculum. Alternatively, the trumpet
used for pudendal blockade can sheath the needle and manually guide it
through the cervix for amniotomy. In many of these cases, however,
membranes tear and fluid is lost rapidly. Because of the risk of cord
prolapse, or rarely placental abruption, the fetal heart rate is assessed before
and immediately after amniotomy.

■ Membrane Stripping for Labor Induction
Labor induction by membrane “stripping” or “sweeping” is a frequent
practice. Several studies have suggested that membrane stripping is safe and
lowers the incidence of postterm pregnancy without consistently raising the
incidence of ruptured membranes, infection, or bleeding. Randomized trials
are limited and a metaanalysis of two of these reported sweeping to be

ineffective (Hamidi, 2020). Downsides are discomfort and associated
bleeding (Boulvain, 2005).

REFERENCES
Adhikari EH, Nelson DB, McIntire DD, et al: Foley bulb added to an oral misoprostol induction protocol:
a cluster randomized trial. Obstet Gynecol 136(5):953, 2020
Alfirevic Z, Aflaifel N, Weeks A: Oral misoprostol for induction of labour. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
6:CD001338, 2014
Alfirevic Z, Kelly AJ, Dowswell T: Intravenous oxytocin alone for cervical ripening and induction of
labour. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 4:CD003246, 2009
Al-Ibraheemi Z, Brustman L, Bimson BE, et al: Misoprostol with Foley bulb compared with misoprostol
alone for cervical ripening: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol 131(1):23, 2018
American Academy of Pediatrics, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Guidelines for
Perinatal Care, 8th ed. Elk Grove Village, AAP, 2017
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Practice advisory: clinical guidance for
integration of the findings of The ARRIVE Trial: labor induction versus expectant management in
low-risk nulliparous women. 2018. Available at: https://www.acog.org/clinical/clinicalguidance/practice-advisory/articles/2018/08/clinical-guidance-for-integration-of-the-findings-of-thearrive-trial. Accessed November 21, 2020
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Induction of labor. Practice Bulletin No. 107,
August 2009, Reaffirmed 2019a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Intrapartum fetal heart rate monitoring:
nomenclature, interpretation, and general management principles. Practice Bulletin No. 106, July
2009, Reaffirmed 2019b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Vaginal birth after previous cesarean delivery.
Practice Bulletin 205, February 2019c
Amorosa JM, Stone J, Factor SH, et al: A randomized trial of Foley bulb for labor induction in premature
rupture of membranes in nulliparas (FLIP). Am J Obstet Gynecol 217(3):360.e1, 2017
Bakos O, Bäckström T: Induction of labor: a prospective, randomized study into amniotomy and oxytocin
as induction methods in a total unselected population. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 66:537, 1987
Bishop EH: Pelvic scoring for elective induction. Obstet Gynecol 24:266, 1964
Bleich AT, Villano KS, Lo JY, et al: Oral misoprostol for labor augmentation: a randomized controlled
trial. Obstet Gynecol 118(6):1255, 2011
Boulvain M, Kelly A, Irion O: Intracervical prostaglandins for induction of labour. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev 1:CD006971, 2008
Boulvain M, Stan C, Irion O: Membrane sweeping for induction of labour. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
1:CD000451, 2005
Brandstetter A, Döbert M, Schwaerzler P, et al: Safety of misoprostol vaginal insert for labor induction
using standard vs. adjusted retrieval criteria: a comparative cohort study. J Perinat Med. 48(5):488,
2020
Brandstetter A, Döbert M, Schwaerzler P, et al: Standard and adjusted criteria for the use of the
misoprostol vaginal insert for labor induction: a comparative cohort study J Perinat Med 47(7):750,
2019

Caldeyro-Barcia R, Alvarez H, Reynolds SR: A better understanding of uterine contractility through
simultaneous recording with an internal and a seven channel external method. Surg Obstet Gynecol
91:641, 1950
Caldeyro-Barcia R, Poseiro JJ: Physiology of the uterine contraction. Clin Obstet Gynecol 3:386, 1960
Carbone JF, Tuuli MG, Fogertey PJ, et al: Combination of Foley bulb and vaginal misoprostol compared
with vaginal misoprostol alone for cervical ripening and labor induction: a randomized controlled trial.
Obstet Gynecol 121:247, 2013
Chiossi G, Lai Y, Landon MB, et al: Timing of delivery and adverse outcomes in term singleton repeat
cesarean deliveries. Obstet Gynecol 121(3):561, 2013
Connolly KA, Kohari KS, Rekawek P, et al: A randomized trial of Foley balloon induction of labor trial in
nulliparas (FIAT-N). Am J Obstet Gynecol. 215:392.e1, 2016
De Vivo V, Carbone L, Saccone G, et al: Early amniotomy after cervical ripening for induction of labor:
a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Am J Obstet Gynecol
222(4):320, 2020
Döbert M, Brandstetter A, Henrich W, et al: The misoprostol vaginal insert compared with oral
misoprostol for labor induction in term pregnancies: a pair-matched case-control study. J Perinat
Med 46(3):309, 2018
Feltovich H: Cervical evaluation. From ancient medicine to precision medicine. Obstet Gynecol 130:51,
2017
Flannelly GM, Turner MJ, Rassmussen MJ, et al: Rupture of the uterus in Dublin: an update. J Obstet
Gynaecol 13:440, 1993
Fraser W, Marcoux S, Moutquin JM, et al: Effect of early amniotomy on the risk of dystocia in
nulliparous women. N Engl J Med 328:1145, 1993
Freret TS, Woods GT, James KE, et al: Incidence of and risk factors for failed induction of labor using a
contemporary definition. Obstet Gynecol 137(3):497, 2021
Frigoletto FD, Lieberman E, Lang JM, et al: A clinical trial of active management of labor. N Engl J
Med 333:745, 1995
Fruhman G, Gavard JA, Amon E, et al: Tension compared to no tension on a Foley transcervical
catheter for cervical ripening: a randomized controlled trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol 216:67.e1, 2017
Garite TJ, Porto M, Carlson NJ, et al: The influence of elective amniotomy on fetal heart rate patterns
and the course of labor in term patients: a randomized study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 168:1827, 1993
Ghosh A, Lattey KR, Kelly AJ: Nitric oxide donors for cervical ripening and induction of labour.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 12:CD006901, 2016
Gomez HB, Hoffman MK, Caplan R, et al: Buccal vs vaginal misoprostol combined with Foley catheter
for cervical ripening at term (the BEGIN trial): a randomized controlled trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol
224(5):524.e1, 2021
Grobman WA, Caughey AB: Elective induction of labor at 39 weeks compared with expectant
management: a meta-analysis of cohort studies. Am J Obstet Gynecol 221(4):304, 2019
Grobman WA, Rice MM, Reddy UM, et al: Labor induction versus expectant management in low-risk
nulliparous women. N Engl J Med 379(6):513, 2018
Hamidi O, Quist-Nelson J, Xodo S, et al: Membrane sweeping in patients planning a trial of labor after
cesarean: a systematic review and meta-analysis or randomized controlled trials. J Matern Fetal
Neonatal Med 33(18):3103, 2020
Hauth JC, Hankins GD, Gilstrap LC III: Uterine contraction pressures achieved in parturients with
active phase arrest. Obstet Gynecol 78:344, 1991

Hauth JC, Hankins GD, Gilstrap LC III: Uterine contraction pressures with oxytocin
induction/augmentation. Obstet Gynecol 68:305, 1986
Hawkins JS, Stephenson M, Powers B, et al: Diabetes mellitus: an independent predictor of duration of
prostaglandin labor induction. J Perinatol 37:488, 2017
Hawkins JS, Wing DA: Current pharmacotherapy options for labor induction. Expert Opin
Pharmacother 13(14):2005, 2012
Hernandez JS, Wendel GD Jr, Sheffield JS: Trends in emergency peripartum hysterectomy at a single
institution: 1988–2009. Am J Perinatol 30(5):365, 2013
Hofmeyr GJ, Gülmezoglu AM, Pileggi C: Vaginal misoprostol for cervical ripening and induction of
labour. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 10:CD000941, 2010
Ivars J, Garabedian C, Devos P, et al: Simplified Bishop score including parity predicts successful
induction of labor. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 203:309, 2016
Jozwiak M, Bloemenkamp KW, Kelly AJ, et al: Mechanical methods for induction of labour. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 3:CD001233, 2012
Jozwiak M, Oude Rengerink K, Benthem M, et al: Foley catheter versus vaginal prostaglandin E2 gel
for induction of labour at term (PROBAAT trial): an open-label, randomised controlled trial. Lancet
378(9809):2095, 2011
Jozwiak M, Oude Rengerink K, Ten Eikelder ML, et al: Foley catheter or prostaglandin E2 inserts for
induction of labour at term: an open-label randomized controlled trial (PROBAAT-P trial) and
systematic review of literature. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 170(1):137, 2013
Jozwiak M, Ten Eikelder M, Rengerink KO, et al: Foley catheter versus vaginal misoprostol: randomized
controlled trial (PROBAAT-M Study) and systematic review and meta-analysis of literature. Am J
Perinatol 31:145, 2014
Karjane NW, Brock EL, Walsh SW: Induction of labor using a Foley balloon, with and without extraamniotic saline infusion. Obstet Gynecol 107:234, 2006
Kawakita T, Reddy UM, Iqbal SN, et al: Duration of oxytocin and rupture of membranes before
diagnosing a failed induction of labor. Obstet Gynecol 128:373, 2016
Kehl S, Ziegler J, Schleussner E, et al: Sequential use of double-balloon catheter and oral misoprostol
versus oral misoprostol alone for induction of labour at term (CRBplus trial): a multicenter, openlabel randomised controlled trial. BJOG 122(1):129, 2015
Kominiarek MA, Zhang J, Vanveldhuisen P, et al: Contemporary labor patterns: the impact of maternal
body mass index. Am J Obstet Gynecol 205(3):244.e1, 2011
Kruit H, Tihtonen K, Raudaskoski T, et al: Foley catheter or oral misoprostol for induction of labor in
women with term premature rupture of membranes: a randomized multicenter trial. Am J Perinatol
33(9):866, 2016
Landon MB, Hauth JC, Leveno KJ, et al: Maternal and perinatal outcomes associated with a trial of
labor after prior cesarean delivery. N Engl J Med 351(25):2581, 2004
Laughon SK, Branch DW, Beaver J, et al: Changes in labor patterns over 50 years. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 206(5):419.e1, 2012
Laughon SK, Zhang J, Troendle J, et al: Using a simplified Bishop score to predict vaginal delivery.
Obstet Gynecol 117(4):805, 2011
Levine LD, Downes KL, Elovitz MA, et al: Mechanical and pharmacologic methods of labor induction:
a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol 128:1357, 2016
Lo JY, Alexander JM, McIntire DD, et al: Ruptured membranes at term: randomized, double-blind trial
of oral misoprostol for labor induction. Obstet Gynecol 101:685, 2003

López-Zeno JA, Peaceman AM, Adashek JA, et al: A controlled trial of a program for the active
management of labor. N Engl J Med 326:450, 1992
Luthy DA, Malmgren JA, Zingheim RW: Cesarean delivery after elective induction in nulliparous
women: the physician effect. Am J Obstet Gynecol 191:1511, 2004
Maier JT, Metz M, Watermann N, et al: Induction of labor in patients with an unfavorable cervix after a
cesarean using an osmotic dilator versus vaginal prostaglandin. J Perinatal Med 46(3):299, 2018
Martin JA, Hamilton BE, Osterman MJ, et al: Births: final data for 2018. Natl Vital Stat Rep 68(13):1,
2019
McMaster K, Sanchez-Ramos L, Kaunitz AM: Evaluation of a transcervical Foley catheter as a source
of infection: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Obstet Gynecol 126:539, 2015
Mei-Dan E, Walfisch A, Valencia C, et al: Making cervical ripening EASI: a prospective controlled
comparison of single versus double balloon catheters. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 27:1765, 2014
Mercer BM, McNanley T, O’Brien JM, et al: Early versus late amniotomy for labor induction: a
randomized trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol 173:1371, 1995
Merrill DC, Zlatnik FJ: Randomized, double-masked comparison of oxytocin dosage in induction and
augmentation of labor. Obstet Gynecol 94:455, 1999
Middleton P, Shepherd E, Morris J, et al: Induction of labour at or beyond 37 weeks’ gestation. Cochran
Database Syst Rev 7(7): CD004945, 2020
Mundle S, Bracken H, Kedikar V, et al: Foley catheterisation versus oral misoprostol for induction of
labour in hypertensive women in India (INFORM): a multicentre, open-label, randomised controlled
trial. Lancet 390(10095):669, 2017
O’Driscoll K, Foley M, MacDonald D: Active management of labor as an alternative to cesarean
section for dystocia. Obstet Gynecol 63:485, 1984
Raghuraman N, Stout MJ, Young OM: Utility of the simplified Bishop score in spontaneous labor. Am J
Perinatol 33:1176, 2016
Rouse DJ, McCullough C, Wren AL, et al: Active-phase labor arrest: a randomized trial of chorioamnion
management. Obstet Gynecol 83:937, 1994
Rouse DJ, Owen J, Hauth JC: Criteria for failed labor induction: prospective evaluation of a
standardized protocol. Obstet Gynecol 96:671, 2000
Salemi JL, Pathak EB, Salihu HM: Infant outcomes after elective early-term delivery compared with
expectant management. Obstet Gynecol 127:657, 2016
Satin AJ, Leveno KJ, Sherman ML, et al: High-dose oxytocin: 20- versus 40-minute dosage interval.
Obstet Gynecol 83:234, 1994
Satin AJ, Leveno KJ, Sherman ML, et al: High-versus low-dose oxytocin for labor stimulation. Obstet
Gynecol 80:111, 1992
Schoen CN, Grant G, Berghella V, et al: Intracervical Foley catheter with and without oxytocin for labor
induction: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol 129:1046, 2017
Seitchik J, Amico J, Robinson AG, et al: Oxytocin augmentation of dysfunctional labor. IV. Oxytocin
pharmacokinetics. Am J Obstet Gynecol 150:225, 1984
Sievert RA, Kuper SG, Jauk VC: Predictors of vaginal delivery in medically indicated early preterm
induction of labor. Am J Obstet Gynecol 217(3):375.e1, 2017
Simon CE, Grobman WA: When has an induction failed? Obstet Gynecol 105:705, 2005
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine: SMFM statement on elective induction of labor in low-risk
nulliparous women at term: the ARRIVE trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol 221(1):B2, 2019
Son M, Roy A, Stetson BT, et al: High-dose versus, standard-dose oxytocin regimens to augment labor
in nulliparous: a double-blind randomized trial. Abstract No. 6, Presented at the 2020 Society for

Maternal-Fetal Medicine Meeting. January 28–30, 2021
Souter V, Painter I, Sitcov K, et al: Maternal and newborn outcomes with elective induction of labor at
term. Am J Obstet Gynecol 220(3):273.e1, 2019
Spong CY, Berghella V, Wenstrom KD, et al: Preventing the first cesarean delivery. Summary of a Joint
Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, Society for
Maternal-Fetal Medicine, and American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists Workshop.
Obstet Gynecol 120(5):1181, 2012
Ten Eikelder ML, Oude Rengerink K, Jozwiak M, et al: Induction of labor at term with oral misoprostol
versus a Foley catheter (PROBAAT-II): a multicenter randomized controlled non-inferiority trial.
Lancet 387:1619, 2016
Tesemma MG, Sori DA, Gemeda DH: High dose and low dose oxytocin regimens as determinants of
successful labor induction: a multicenter comparative study. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth 20(1):232,
2020
Theobald GW, Graham A, Campbell J, et al: The use of post-pituitary extract in physiological amounts in
obstetrics; a preliminary report. BMJ 2(4567):123, 1948
Thisted DL, Mortensen LH, Krebs L: Uterine rupture without previous caesarean delivery: a populationbased cohort study. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 195:151, 2015
Thomas J, Fairclough A, Kavanagh J, et al: Vaginal prostaglandin (PGE2 and PGF2a) for induction of
labour at term. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 6:CD003101, 2014
Thorbiörnson A, Vladic T, Stjernholm YV: Oral versus vaginal prostaglandin for labor induction. J
Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 30:789, 2017
Tita AT, Doherty L, Grobman WA, et al: Perinatal outcomes of expectant management of full-term, lowrisk, nulliparous patients. Obstet Gynecol 137(2):250, 2021
Tita AT, Landon MB, Spong CY, et al: Timing of elective repeat cesarean delivery at term and neonatal
outcomes. N Engl J Med 360(2):111, 2009
Towers CV, Briggs GG, Rojas JA: The use of prostaglandin E2 in pregnant patients with asthma. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 190(6):1777, 2004
UK Amniotomy Group: A multicentre randomised trial of amniotomy in spontaneous first labour at term.
BJOG 101:307, 1994
Verhoeven CJ, Opmeer BC, Oei SG, et al: Transvaginal sonographic assessment of cervical length and
wedging for predicting outcome of labor induction at term: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 42:500, 2013
Wen T, Beceir A, Xenakis E, et al: Is there a maximum effective dose of Pitocin? Am J Obstet Gynecol
185:S212, 2001
Widmer M, Piaggio G, Hofmeyr GJ, et al: Maternal characteristics and causes associated with
refractory postpartum haemorrhage after vaginal birth: a secondary analysis of the WHO
CHAMPION trial data. BJOG 127(5):628, 2020
Xenakis EM, Langer O, Piper JM, et al: Low-dose versus high-dose oxytocin augmentation of labor—a
randomized trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol 173: 1874, 1995
Yeast JD, Jones A, Poskin M: Induction of labor and the relationship to cesarean delivery: a review of
7001 consecutive inductions. Am J Obstet Gynecol 180:628, 1999
Young DC, Delaney T, Armson BA, et al: Oral misoprostol, low dose vaginal misoprostol, and vaginal
dinoprostone for labor induction: randomized controlled trial. PLoS One 15(1):e0227245, 2020

SECTION 8

DELIVERY

CHAPTER 27

Vaginal Delivery

DELIVERY TECHNIQUE
PERSISTENT OCCIPUT POSTERIOR POSITION
SHOULDER DYSTOCIA
SPECIAL POPULATIONS
THIRD STAGE OF LABOR
LOWER GENITAL TRACT LACERATIONS
LACERATION AND EPISIOTOMY REPAIRS
REFERENCES
The natural culmination of second-stage labor is controlled vaginal delivery
of a healthy neonate with minimal trauma to the mother. Although some
clinical settings favor cesarean delivery, for most fetuses, vaginal birth is
preferred. For the mother, spontaneous vaginal vertex delivery poses the
lowest risk of most maternal comorbidity, and comparisons with cesarean
delivery are found in Chapter 30 (p. 548). Delivery is usually spontaneous,
although some maternal or fetal complications may warrant operative vaginal
delivery, described in Chapter 29 (p. 533). Last, a malpresenting fetus or
multifetal gestation in many cases may be delivered vaginally but requires
special techniques. These are described in Chapters 28 and 48.

DELIVERY TECHNIQUE
■ Preparation
The end of second-stage labor is heralded as the perineum begins to bulge,
and the fetal scalp is seen through the separating labia. Perineal pressure
from the fetal head creates reflexive pushing efforts. At this time, additional
staff to attend the neonate and instruments are readied for delivery. Fetal
heart rate monitoring continues. As one example, a nuchal cord often tightens
with fetal descent and may lead to deepening variable decelerations. If the
bladder is distended, catheterization can provide added pelvic space.
During second-stage labor, pushing positions may vary. But for delivery,
the dorsal lithotomy position is most common and often the most satisfactory.
Leg holders or stirrups are often used to assist. With or without their use,
perineal laceration rates were equal in one randomized study of 214
parturients (Corton, 2012). With positioning, legs are not separated too
widely or placed one higher than the other. Legs are not strapped into the
stirrups. This permits quick flexion of the thighs backward onto the abdomen
should shoulder dystocia develop. Legs may cramp during second-stage
pushing, and cramping can be relieved by creating gentle muscle stretch, by
brief massage, or both.
Preparation for delivery includes vulvar and perineal cleansing. If
desired, sterile drapes are placed to cover the legs and abdomen and expose
only the perineum. Scrubbing, gowning, gloving, and donning protective
mask and eyewear protect both the gravida and accoucheur from infectious
agents.

■ Delivery of the Head
By the end of second-stage labor, the position of the occiput is usually
known. In some cases, however, molding and caput formation may have
precluded early accurate identification. At this time, careful assessment is
again performed as described in Chapter 22 (p. 429). In most cases, position
is occiput anterior (OA) or is rotated slightly oblique. But, in perhaps 5
percent, an occiput posterior (OP) position persists.
With each contraction, the vulvovaginal opening is dilated by the fetal
head to gradually form an ovoid and finally, an almost circular opening. This

encirclement of the largest head diameter by the vulvar ring is termed
crowning. The anus becomes greatly stretched, and the anterior wall of the
rectum is easily seen through it. The perineum thins and may spontaneously
lacerate. Third- and fourth- degree perineal lacerations, which by definition
involve the anal sphincter and perineal body, are collectively termed
obstetric anal sphincter injuries (OASIS). Because of their associated
morbidity (p. 508), one main goal during delivery is OASIS prevention.
To improve perineal elasticity and protect against laceration, some
perform daily antepartum perineal massage starting at 34 to 35 weeks’
gestation. With a lubricant, the woman or her partner inserts one or two
fingers 3 cm into the vagina and applies pressure, first downward for 2
minutes and then laterally to each side of the vaginal entrance for 2 minutes.
In one large randomized study, nulliparas benefited mainly by lower rates of
episiotomy and of first-degree laceration (Labreque, 1999). Third- and
fourth-degree laceration rates are not lowered (Beckmann, 2013). As another
tool, antepartum use of the Epi-No intravaginal pump balloon similarly aims
to stretch the perineum. However, in randomized trials, it did not prevent
episiotomy, perineal trauma, or levator injury (Brito, 2015; Kamisan Atan,
2016). Instead of antepartum use, perineal massage can be performed solely
intrapartum during second-stage labor. In a large randomized study, the rates
of episiotomy, OASIS, and intact perineum were similar to those in a
nonmassage group (Stamp, 2001). In subsequent systematic reviews, this
practice was noted to lower OASIS rates and raise rates of delivery over an
intact perineum (Aasheim, 2017; Aquino, 2020a).
When the head distends the vulva and perineum enough to open the
vaginal introitus to a diameter of 5 cm or more, slow delivery of the head
and control of accelerative forces may minimize lacerations (Laine, 2008).
One of two approaches may be instituted. With the hands-on method, the
thumb and remaining fingers form a V pressed against the perineum to bolster
it. The other hand maintains fetal neck flexion to deliver the smallest head
diameter through the introitus and provides gentle pressure against rapid
forward movement to avoid expulsive delivery. Instead, with the handspoised method, hands touch neither the head or perineum but are applied
only selectively to slow rapid head expulsion. In a large randomized trial
with more than 5000 gravidas, rates of intact perineum or OASIS did not
differ between groups. In the hands-poised cohort, episiotomy rates were
lower (McCandlish, 1998). Subsequent systematic reviews of randomized

trials similarly note lower episiotomy rates with a hands-poised approach.
However, among these analyses, intact perineum or OASIS rates were not
consistently benefitted by this method (Aasheim, 2017; Huang, 2020; PierceWilliams, 2019).
Alternatively, if expulsive efforts are inadequate or an expedited delivery
is needed, the Ritgen maneuver may be employed or an episiotomy cut. With
the maneuver, gloved fingers grasp the fetal chin just behind or in the anus
and exert upward pressure between contractions. As a counter, the other hand
presses against the occiput to control forces against the perineum (Fig. 27-1)
(Cunningham, 2008). Although expeditious, this maneuver does not alter
OASIS rates (Aquino, 2020b).

FIGURE 27-1 Modified Ritgen maneuver. Moderate upward pressure is applied to the fetal chin by the
posterior hand covered with a sterile towel, while the occiput is held against the symphysis.

■ Delivery of the Shoulders
Following delivery of the fetal head, a finger is passed across the fetal neck
to determine whether it is encircled by one or more umbilical cord loops.
The nuchal cord incidence increases with gestational age and is found in
nearly 25 percent of deliveries at term (Larson, 1997). If an umbilical cord
coil is felt, it is slipped over the head if loose enough. If applied too tightly,
the loop is cut between two clamps. Tight nuchal cords complicate
approximately 6 percent of all deliveries but are not associated with worse
neonatal outcomes than those without a cord loop (Henry, 2013).
Following its delivery, the fetal head falls posteriorly, bringing the face
almost into contact with the maternal anus. The occiput promptly turns
toward one of the maternal thighs, and the head assumes a transverse
position. This external rotation indicates that the bisacromial diameter,
which is the distance between the shoulders, has rotated into the
anteroposterior diameter of the pelvis.
Most often, the shoulders appear at the vulva just after external rotation
and are born spontaneously. If delayed, extraction aids controlled delivery.
The sides of the head and neck are grasped with two hands, and if needed,
gentle axial traction may be applied until the anterior shoulder appears under
the pubic arch. Axial traction is aligned with the fetal spine, and lateral
deviation of the neck does not exceed 25 to 45 degrees (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019c). Next, the posterior shoulder is
delivered. During delivery, abrupt or powerful lateral extension of the neck
is avoided to avert brachial plexus injury.
The rest of the body almost always follows the shoulders without
difficulty. With prolonged delay, however, its birth may be hastened by
moderate outward traction on the head and moderate pressure on the uterine
fundus. Hooking the fingers in the axillae is avoided. This can injure upper
extremity nerves and produce a transient or possibly permanent paralysis.
After the newborn, a gush of amnionic fluid that can be blood-tinged but not
grossly bloody usually follows.
Previously, immediate nasopharyngeal bulb suctioning of the newborn
was routine to remove secretions. However, suctioning of the nasopharynx
may lead to neonatal bradycardia (Gungor, 2006). American Heart
Association neonatal resuscitation recommendations eschew most suctioning
immediately following birth—even with meconium present (Chap. 32, p.

589). Moreover, with meconium-stained fluid, routine intubation for tracheal
suction is not recommended for vigorous or for nonvigorous neonates.
Suctioning is reserved for neonates who have obvious obstruction to
spontaneous breathing or who require positive-pressure ventilation
(Wyckoff, 2015). For suctioning, options are bulb syringe or suction catheter
aspiration and may include intubation and suctioning if the airway is
obstructed.

■ Cord Clamping
The umbilical cord is cut between two clamps placed 6 to 8 cm from the
fetal abdomen, and later an umbilical cord clamp is applied 2 to 3 cm from
its insertion into the fetal abdomen.
For vigorous term neonates, umbilical cord clamping is ideally delayed
30 to 60 seconds to transfer blood to the newborn. Resting the newborn
below the level of the uterus allows gravity to aid flow (Yao, 1974). As a
result, higher total body iron stores and lower anemia rates for the neonate
are sustained (Andersson, 2011; McDonald, 2013). This practice may be
particularly valuable in populations in which iron deficiency is prevalent
(World Health Organization, 2014). In general, delayed compared with early
umbilical cord clamping does not worsen Apgar scores or umbilical cord pH
values. For the mother, postpartum hemorrhage rates and puerperal
hemoglobin status do not differ between early and delayed clamping groups
(Andersson, 2013; Gomersall, 2021; Nudelman, 2020).
Of potential harms, a greater hemoglobin concentration raises risks for
hyperbilirubinemia (Chap. 33, p. 606). Data are conflicting but suggest that
neonatal phototherapy rates do not differ (Andersson, 2011; Chen, 2018;
McDonald, 2013). That said, the American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2020e) recommends that protocols should be in place that
identify neonatal jaundice. Other cautions are cases requiring expedited
maternal or fetal resuscitation. Others are those having abnormal placentation
or compromised placental function, such as with abruption or fetal-growth
restriction. Fewer data are available regarding cord “milking,” in which the
operator pushes blood through the cord toward the newborn. This maneuver
appears safe for term newborns and may be advantageous if rapid cord
clamping is clinically indicated (Panburana, 2020).

For the preterm neonate, delayed cord clamping for 30 seconds or longer
has several benefits. From systematic reviews on the topic, these include
decreased rates of blood transfusion and death before hospital discharge
(Fogarty, 2018; Rabe, 2019). However, one large randomized study did not
show an advantage for its primary outcome, which was a composite of death
plus major neonatal morbidity (Tarnow-Mordi, 2017). The American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020e) recommends delayed
cord clamping for vigorous term and preterm neonates not needing immediate
resuscitation at birth.
Cord milking in the preterm neonate may pose potential harm. Although
conflicting, some data suggest higher associated rates of severe
interventricular hemorrhage in those <32 weeks’ gestation (Katheria, 2019,
2020; Kumbhat, 2021). Because of rapid blood volume changes,
organizations currently recommend against the routine use of cord milking for
neonates born <29 weeks’ gestation (Seidler, 2021; Wyckoff, 2015).

■ Occiput Transverse Position
In some cases, pelvic shape leads to a persistent occiput transverse (OT)
position that is not easily overcome during second-stage pushing. A
platypelloid pelvis is flattened anteroposteriorly and an android pelvis is
heart shaped (Fig. 2-16, p. 29). With these, space may be inadequate for
occipital rotation to either an anterior or posterior position.
In the absence of a pelvic architectural abnormality or asynclitism, the
OT position is usually transitory. Thus, unless contractions are hypotonic, the
head usually rotates spontaneously to an OA position. If rotation ceases
because of poor expulsive forces, vaginal delivery can be aided. The easiest
is manual rotation of the occiput either anteriorly to an OA or, less
commonly, posteriorly to an OP position. Kielland forceps also can rotate the
occiput anteriorly. Both manual and forceps rotations are described in
Chapter 29 (p. 540).

■ Persistent Occiput Posterior Position
Approximately 2 to 10 percent of singleton, term, cephalic fetuses deliver in
an OP position (Cheng, 2010). Many fetuses delivering OP are OA in early
labor but malrotate during labor. Predisposing risks include epidural

analgesia, nulliparity, greater fetal weight, and prior delivery with OP
positioning (Cheng, 2006a; Gardberg, 2004; Lieberman, 2005). Of pelvic
shapes, an anthropoid pelvis and narrow subpubic angle can predispose
(Barth, 2015; Ghi, 2016).
Women with a persistent OP position have higher associated rates of
prolonged second-stage labor, cesarean delivery, and operative vaginal
delivery. For women who deliver vaginally, rates of blood loss and of
OASIS are increased (Senécal, 2005).
Newborns delivered from an OP position have higher complication rates
than those born positioned OA. In one study of neonatal outcomes in 2591
women undergoing delivery from a persistent OP position, rates of acidemic
umbilical cord gases, birth trauma, Apgar scores <7, and intensive care
nursery admission, among others, were higher compared with an OA position
(Cheng, 2006b). Others report similar findings (Fitzpatrick, 2001; Ponkey,
2003).
Fetal head position assessment is essential to management (Chap. 22, p.
429). However, digital examination for identification of fetal head position
can be inaccurate, and transabdominal sonography may increase accuracy
(Bellussi, 2017). The transducer is placed transversely just cephalad to the
maternal mons pubis. In the sonogram, fetal orbits and nasal bridge lie
ventrally, whereas the occiput apposes the lower sacrum. Such information
may explain prolonged second-stage labor and identify suitable candidates
for rotation. Of other interventions, varying maternal position either
antepartum or during labor does not appear to lower rates of persistent OP
position (Kariminia, 2004; Le Ray, 2016).
If the bony pelvic outlet is roomy and the perineum is somewhat relaxed
from prior deliveries, rapid spontaneous OP delivery can take place.
Conversely, if the perineum is resistant to stretch, second-stage labor may be
appreciably prolonged. During each maternal push, the head is driven against
the perineum to a greater degree than when the head position is OA. This
leads to greater rates of OASIS (Groutz, 2011). For these reasons, manual
rotation with spontaneous delivery from an OA position has advantages.
Lower rates of cesarean delivery, severe perineal laceration,
chorioamnionitis, and maternal blood loss follow rotation to OA position
(Shaffer, 2011). Alternatively, forceps rotation to an OA position may be
attempted for those with suitable skills. Last, forceps or vacuum device also

can be applied and delivery completed from an OP position. These operative
vaginal techniques are detailed in Chapter 29 (p. 540).
Infrequently, protrusion of fetal scalp through the introitus can be
erroneously encouraging. In these cases, findings reflect marked fetal head
elongation from molding plus substantive scalp edema and not fetal descent.
In some cases, the head may not even be engaged—that is, the biparietal
diameter may not have passed through the pelvic inlet. Labor is
characteristically long and descent of the head is slow. Careful palpation
above the symphysis may disclose the fetal head to be above the pelvic inlet.
Prompt cesarean delivery is appropriate.

SHOULDER DYSTOCIA
Following complete emergence of the fetal head during vaginal delivery, the
remainder of the body may not rapidly follow. The anterior fetal shoulder can
become wedged behind the symphysis pubis and fail to deliver with maternal
pushing and gentle axial traction by the provider. One indicator may be
retraction of the baby’s head against the mother’s perineum—the turtle sign.
Because the umbilical cord is compressed within the birth canal, shoulder
dystocia is an emergency. Several maneuvers may be performed to free the
shoulder. This requires a team approach, and effective communication and
leadership are critical.
Consensus regarding a specific definition of shoulder dystocia is lacking.
Some, including the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
(2019c), diagnose it if maneuvers are required to free the shoulder. Spong
and coworkers (1995) reported that the mean head-to-body delivery time in
normal births was 24 seconds compared with 79 seconds in those with
shoulder dystocia. These investigators proposed that a head-to-body delivery
time >60 seconds be used to define shoulder dystocia. Currently, however,
the diagnosis continues to rely on the clinical perception that the normal
traction needed for fetal shoulder delivery is ineffective.
Because of these differing definitions, the incidence of shoulder dystocia
varies. One review cites a clinically useful average of 1 percent of all
deliveries (Ouzounian, 2016). The incidence has risen in recent decades,
likely due to increasing fetal birthweight (Øverland, 2014). Greater

recognition and documentation also may boost reported incidences (Kim,
2016).

■ Maternal and Neonatal Consequences
In general, shoulder dystocia poses greater risk to the fetus than to the mother.
The main maternal risks are serious perineal tears and postpartum
hemorrhage, usually from uterine atony but also from lacerations (Hehir,
2020; Rahman, 2009). In contrast, significant neuromusculoskeletal injury
and asphyxia are neonatal concerns. These specific injuries are described
fully in Chapter 33 (p. 599). In one review of 1177 shoulder dystocia cases,
brachial plexus injury was diagnosed in 11 percent and clavicular or humeral
fracture in 2 percent (Chauhan, 2014). MacKenzie and associates (2007)
reviewed 514 cases. Of the neonates, 7 percent showed evidence of acidosis
at delivery, and 1.5 percent required cardiac resuscitation or developed
hypoxic ischemic encephalopathy (HIE). In another review of 200 cases,
rates of severe fetal acidosis and HIE were each 0.5 percent if delivery was
completed within 5 minutes. These rates rose to 6 and 24 percent,
respectively, with delivery delays ≥5 minutes (Leung, 2011).

■ Prediction and Prevention
Although several factors are clearly associated with this complication,
shoulder dystocia cannot be accurately predicted or prevented (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019c). Associated
characteristics include fetal macrosomia, maternal obesity, prolonged
second-stage labor, operative vaginal delivery, and a prior shoulder dystocia
(Mehta, 2004; Zhang, 2018).
Of these, increasing birthweight creates a corresponding rise in the
incidence of shoulder dystocia (Øverland, 2012). With fetal macrosomia,
commonly associated maternal characteristics are obesity, postterm
pregnancy, multiparity, and diabetes (Koyanagi, 2013). The combination of
fetal macrosomia and maternal diabetes mellitus escalates the frequency of
shoulder dystocia (Nesbitt, 1998). This predisposition may stem from
anthropomorphic differences between comparable-weight fetuses of
nondiabetic and diabetic mothers. The latter fetal group has larger shoulder
and extremity circumferences and greater shoulder-to-head and chest-to-head

size (Modanlou, 1982). However, translating these specific measurements
into stand-alone sonographic thresholds shows poor predictive sensitivity
(Burkhardt, 2014). Planned cesarean delivery should be considered for the
nondiabetic woman with a fetus whose estimated fetal weight is >5000 g or
for the diabetic woman whose fetus is estimated to weigh >4500 g
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019c).
As prevention, early labor induction has been evaluated. In one study,
approximately 800 women with suspected macrosomic fetuses were
randomly assigned to early induction between 37 and 39 weeks’ gestation or
to expectant care (Boulvain, 2015). Women with insulin-requiring diabetes
were excluded. Dystocia rates were lowered by two thirds in the induction
group, and neither group suffered brachial plexus injury. Other neonatal
outcomes were similar, except for a higher rate of hyperbilirubinemia and
phototherapy in the induction group. A systematic review of four randomized
trials again with the same compared groups showed no differences in rates of
cesarean delivery, shoulder dystocia, or operative vaginal delivery. Fetal
fracture rates were lower in the induction group (Magro-Malosso, 2017).
Notably, when assessing the benefits, the poor accuracy of antepartum fetal
weight prediction should be considered (Malin, 2016). Moreover, potential
benefits of early induction are balanced against potential harms from early
delivery. The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
(2019a,c) recommends against labor induction before 39 weeks for
suspected macrosomia alone.
Of other risks, recurrent shoulder dystocia ranges from 4 to 13 percent in
the three largest series (Al-Hawash, 2019). For many women with prior
shoulder dystocia, labor may still be a reasonable option. The American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019c) recommends that
estimated fetal weight, gestational age, maternal glucose intolerance, and
severity of prior neonatal injury be evaluated. Antepartum, risks and benefits
of cesarean delivery are discussed with any woman with a history of
shoulder dystocia. After discussion and risk assessment, either mode of
delivery is appropriate.

■ Management
Shoulder dystocia cannot be accurately predicted. Thus, the labor and
delivery team, which includes nurses, obstetrical providers, and anesthesia

staff, should be well versed in its management. An emergent call for
assistance should assemble these members.
Because of ongoing cord compression with this dystocia, one goal is to
reduce delivery time. This is balanced against the second goal, which is
avoiding fetal and maternal injury from aggressive manipulations. Adequate
analgesia assists maneuvers. Episiotomy may be needed to provide sufficient
room for essential manipulations but itself does not lower brachial plexus
injury rates (Gurewitsch, 2004; Paris, 2011).
Various techniques can be used to free the anterior shoulder from its
impacted position behind the symphysis pubis. The McRoberts maneuver is
often selected first. With it, legs are lifted from stirrups, hips are sharply
flexed up onto the abdomen, and knees remain flexed. Gherman and
colleagues (2000) analyzed the McRoberts maneuver using x-ray pelvimetry.
The procedure causes straightening of the sacrum relative to the lumbar
vertebrae, rotation of the symphysis pubis toward the maternal head, and a
decrease in the angle of pelvic inclination. This does not increase pelvic
dimensions, but pelvic rotation cephalad tends to free the impacted anterior
shoulder. Gonik and coworkers (1989) tested the McRoberts position
objectively with laboratory models and found that the maneuver reduced the
forces needed to free the fetal shoulder. During McRoberts maneuver, an
assistant can apply downward and laterally directed suprapubic pressure
(Fig. 27-2). This abducts the anterior shoulder to create a shorter
bisacromial diameter. It also rotates the shoulders into the oblique diameter,
which at the pelvic inlet is longer than the anteroposterior diameter. If
unsuccessful, most move next to the posterior shoulder or to rotation
maneuvers.

FIGURE 27-2 The McRoberts maneuver. The maneuver consists of removing the legs from the
stirrups and sharply flexing the thighs up onto the abdomen. Simultaneously, an assistant also provides
suprapubic pressure that is directed down and lateral.

With delivery of the posterior shoulder, the provider inserts a hand into
the posterior pelvis, carefully sweeps the posterior arm of the fetus forward
across its chest, and delivers the arm (Fig. 27-3). If possible, the operator’s
fingers are aligned parallel to the long axis of the fetal humerus to lower
fracture risks. With the arm now outside of the pelvis, the bisacromial
diameter is diminished. Next, the shoulder girdle is rotated into one of the
oblique diameters of the pelvic inlet. These steps resolve the disproportion
to free the anterior shoulder.

FIGURE 27-3 Delivery of the posterior shoulder for relief of shoulder dystocia. A. The operator’s
hand is introduced into the vagina along the fetal posterior humerus. B. The arm is splinted and swept
across the chest, keeping the arm flexed at the elbow. C. The fetal hand is grasped and the arm
extended along the side of the face. The posterior arm is delivered from the vagina.

Of the rotational maneuvers, the method recommended by Rubin (1964)
aims to shorten the bisacromial diameter (Fig. 27-4). A pelvic hand reaches
the most easily accessible fetal shoulder, often the posterior one, which is
then pushed toward the anterior surface of the chest. This maneuver abducts
the posterior shoulder and rotates both shoulders into one of the pelvic inlet’s
oblique diameters. Friction from the vagina also abducts the anterior
shoulder to some degree during this rotation. Again, resolution of the
disproportion can free the anterior shoulder.

FIGURE 27-4 Rubin maneuver. The bisacromial diameter is aligned vertically. The more easily
accessible fetal shoulder (the anterior is shown here) is pushed toward the anterior chest wall of the
fetus (arrow). Most often, this results in abduction of both shoulders, which reduces the bisacromial
diameter and frees the impacted anterior shoulder.

Instead, Woods (1943) reported that by rotating the posterior shoulder
progressively in a corkscrew fashion, the impacted anterior shoulder could
be released. For performance, one hand is pressed against the anterior
surface of the posterior shoulder, and pressure is directed toward the fetal
back. The posterior shoulder is then rotated 180 degrees, and in doing so, it
becomes the anterior-positioned limb. With rotation, this shoulder comes to
lie beneath, not behind, the symphysis and can be delivered.
In a review of these four methods, all had similar neonatal injury rates
(Spain, 2015). Importantly, delivery duration and the number of maneuvers
raises neonatal injury rates.
If the above are initially unsuccessful, they may be repeated, and other
methods may be elected. With an all-fours maneuver, also called the Gaskin
maneuver, the parturient rolls onto her hands and knees. Here, axial traction
against the head and neck attempts to free the posterior shoulder (Bruner,

1998). Challenges with this include immobility from regional analgesia and
time lost in patient repositioning.
In some cases, the posterior arm is inaccessible for delivery. Cluver and
Hofmeyr (2009) described posterior axilla sling traction to deliver the
posterior arm. With this, suction tubing or a stiff urinary catheter is threaded
under the fetal axilla, and both ends are brought together above the shoulder.
This forms a loop beneath the axilla. Catheter traction then sweeps upward
and outward to deliver the shoulder. Data continue to accrue. In a case series
of 119 cases in which this was the first maneuver, the success rate was 96
percent (Ansell, 2019).
For refractory cases despite the above efforts, deliberate fracture of the
anterior clavicle by using the thumb to press it toward and against the
maternal pubic ramus can be attempted to free the shoulder impaction. In
practice, however, deliberate fracture of a large neonate’s clavicle is
difficult. If successful, the fracture will heal rapidly and is usually trivial
compared with brachial nerve injury, asphyxia, or death.
Symphysiotomy involves cutting of the intervening symphyseal cartilage
and much of its ligamentous support to widen the symphysis pubis. In rare
cases, it has been used successfully for shoulder dystocia (Goodwin, 1997).
Using local analgesia, symphysiotomy surgically divides the intervening
symphyseal cartilage and much of its ligamentous support to widen the
symphysis pubis up to 2.5 cm (Basak, 2011). If feasible, a previously
inserted urinary catheter is displaced from the midline with the index finger
of the left hand, which is inside the vagina. Lack of provider training and
potentially serious maternal pelvic or urinary tract injury explain its rare use
in the United States.
The Zavanelli maneuver involves replacement of the fetal head into the
pelvis followed by cesarean delivery (Sandberg, 1985). Terbutaline, 0.25
mg, is given subcutaneously to produce uterine relaxation. The operator first
turns the head to an OA or OP position, flexes it, and slowly elevates it back
into the vagina. Cesarean delivery is then performed. Sandberg (1999)
reviewed 103 reported cases. It was successful in 91 percent of cephalic
cases and in all cases of breech head entrapments. Despite successful
replacement, fetal injuries were common but may have resulted from the
multiple manipulations used before the Zavanelli maneuver (Sandberg,
2007).

Cleidotomy consists of cutting the clavicle with scissors or other sharp
instruments. It is usually done for a dead fetus (Schramm, 1983).
In preparation for shoulder dystocia, clinical simulations aim to improve
performance, documentation, and retention of drill steps. Their use has
translated into improved neonatal outcome in some, but not all, investigations
(Crofts, 2016; Fransen, 2017; Gurewitsch Allen, 2017; Walsh, 2011). At our
institution, these drills involve resident, faculty, nursing, and anesthesia staff.

SPECIAL POPULATIONS
■ Home Birth
In 2017, 1.4 percent of deliveries in the United States were planned home
births. Unplanned home births constituted 0.2 percent (MacDorman, 2019).
Of unplanned home births in a 15-year epoch in Norway, 69 of 6027 or
1.1 percent resulted in fetal or neonatal death. This high rate was attributable
to infection, prematurity, and placental abruption (Gunnarsson, 2017).
Multiparity and distance from the hospital were ascribed risks (Gunnarsson,
2014). In the United States, youth, lack of prenatal care, minority race, and
lower educational attainment are risks (Declercq, 2010).
With planned home birth of a low-risk pregnancy, benefits include fewer
medical interventions that include labor augmentation, episiotomy, operative
vaginal delivery, and cesarean delivery (Bolten, 2016; Cheyney, 2014).
Regarding the safety of planned home birth, data from randomized trials are
lacking, and large observational studies derive from heterogeneous care
systems, whose results may not be generalizable. For example, several
developed countries deliver a large volume of carefully screened women at
home. Gravidas are attended by midwives with substantial training and in a
setting closely integrated with the local health-care system (Comeau, 2018;
de Jonge, 2015). The level of such coordination in the United States is less
uniform.
Overall, neonatal risks of home births in the United States are small but
greater than those of hospital delivery. Midwife-attended home births carry a
neonatal mortality risk of 1.3 per 1000 births. This is a nearly fourfold
greater rate compared with midwife-attended hospital births (Grünebaum,
2020). The most common underlying causes of death are those attributed to
labor and delivery events, to congenital anomalies, and to infection. Of

neonatal injuries, rates of neonatal seizure and serious neurological
dysfunction also are elevated in home-birth groups (Grünebaum, 2013, 2014,
2017; Snowden, 2015). Importantly, substantial risks attend home birth for
those with preeclampsia, with multifetal gestation, with prior cesarean
delivery, or with breech presentation (Caughey, 2019). The American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020b) specifically considers
the last three to be absolute contraindications. Further, the College considers
accredited hospitals and birthing centers to be the safest site for birth but
recognizes the autonomy of the well-counseled patient.

■ Water Birth
As one option for pain relief, some women choose to spend part of first-stage
labor in a large water tub. With this practice, one Cochrane review found
lower rates of regional analgesia use and no greater adverse neonatal or
maternal effects compared with traditional labor (Cluett, 2018).
For second-stage labor, water birth similarly aims to relieve pain, but it
can pose neonatal risks. The rate of cord avulsion during water birth
approximates 3 per 1000 births and stems primary from abruptly bringing the
newborn out of the water (Schafer, 2014). Fresh-water drowning and
pneumonia with sepsis are reported causes of neonatal death (Byard, 2010).
The latter emphasizes the need for rigorous sanitizing protocols. Systematic
reviews comment on the paucity of high-quality data but do not identify
overall greater neonatal or maternal harms or benefits from water birth in
low-risk, term, singleton gestations (Cluett, 2018; Taylor, 2016). Given the
lack of robust data and potential for serious complications, the American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2016) currently recommends
that “birth occur on land, not in water.”

■ Female Genital Mutilation
This practice refers to medically unnecessary vulvar and perineal surgical
modification. In the United States, it is a federal crime to perform
unnecessary genital surgery on a girl younger than 18 years and is condemned
by major health organizations that include the American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019b). Despite this, forms of female

genital mutilation are practiced in countries throughout Africa, the Middle
East, and Asia (UNICEF, 2020).
The World Health Organization (WHO) (2018a) classifies female genital
mutilation (FGM) into four types (Table 27-1). Some long-term risks include
propensity for urogenital infection, chronic vulvar pain, and dyspareunia
(Berg, 2014b). Thus, early in care, new gravidas are asked about these
problems or prior obstetrical complications. The psychiatric consequences
also can be profound, and referral for psychological assessment can be
offered (Low-Beer, 2018).
TABLE 27-1. World Health Organization Classification of Female Genital
Mutilation

With physical examination, a finger or cotton swab assesses elasticity
and caliber of the vaginal opening. Parturients with types I, II, and IV
typically require only routine obstetrical care. Those with type III FGM or
with extensive scarring have higher delivery risks. If an obstruction to
childbirth is recognized, the advantages of surgical release are ideally
discussed early antenatally. Division of midline scar tissue to reopen the
vulva is termed defibulation but also called deinfibulation or anterior
episiotomy (Kalis, 2012).
FGM is associated with some adverse maternal and neonatal
complications. Moreover, vaginal obstruction can delay diagnosis of other
pregnancy conditions. From a prospective study, the WHO (2006) estimated

that FGM raised perinatal morbidity rates by 1 to 2 percent. For mothers
with FGM, rates for prolonged labor, perineal lacerations and episiotomy,
and postpartum hemorrhage were higher than those without prior FGM (Berg,
2014a; Chibber, 2011). Evidence supports that gravidas with type III FGM
who undergo defibulation benefit from lower rates of cesarean delivery and
OASIS (Berg, 2018; Rodriguez, 2016). To prevent obstetrical complications,
the WHO (2016) recommends defibulation, which can be completed
antepartum or intrapartum (Fig. 27-5). In our and other’s experiences,
intrapartum defibulation allows successful vaginal delivery without major
complications (Rouzi, 2012).

FIGURE 27-5 Deinfibulation. Although not shown here, lidocaine is first infiltrated along the planned
incision if regional analgesia is not in place already. To protect underlying structures, two fingers or the
tips of a narrow clamp are insinuated behind the shelf created by fused labia but in front of the urethra

and crowning head. The shelf is then incised in the midline. After delivery, the raw edges are sutured
with rapidly absorbable material to secure hemostasis. (Reproduced with permission from Hawkins JS:
Lower genital tract procedures. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al (eds): Cunningham
and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2017.)

In discussing defibulation, cultural sensitivity is essential, and some
women may be offended by the suggestion that they have been assaulted or
mutilated (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2014).
Preoperative counseling ideally discusses expected anatomic and
physiologic changes. Partial defibulation uncovers the vagina and urethra,
and total defibulation extends the incision to reveal the clitoris, if present.
Women with infibulation often have a slow urine stream, and they perceive
menses and urine to originate from the same opening. Both will change after
scar incision. Affected women may be unfamiliar with normal vaginal
anatomy, which will be visible following surgery. One excellent review is
provided by Abdulcadir and associates (2018). Wound complications such
as hematoma, cellulitis, or incisional dehiscence are rare but are discussed
during counseling. Postoperative dyspareunia is uncommon, and in most
studies, female sexual functioning scores improve (Berg, 2018; Nour, 2006).

■ Prior Pelvic Reconstructive Surgery
These surgeries are performed with increasing frequency in reproductiveaged women, and thus pregnancy following them is not uncommon. Major
concerns are the degradation of repair by pregnancy and by vaginal birth.
After midurethral sling surgery and then a subsequent pregnancy,
continence is preserved for most. Multiple pregnancies, however, may raise
recurrence risk. Evidence does not favor a delivery route, and vaginal
delivery is suitable (Adams-Piper, 2016; Cavkaytar, 2014; Dyrkorn, 2020).
Sacral neuromodulation units are recommended to be turned off because
of unknown pregnancy effects from chronic electrical stimulation. From
small reviews, lowered device efficacy and displaced or broken device
leads can follow both vaginal and cesarean delivery (Mahran, 2017;
Roulette, 2018). Data do not proscribe vaginal birth.
Hysteropexy aims to correct prolapse of the vaginal apex yet preserve the
uterus. Available case series are few and small and do not allow estimates of
recurrence rate or delivery route recommendations (Wieslander, 2020). Most
undergo elective cesarean delivery.

■ Anomalous Fetuses
Rarely, delivery can be obstructed by extreme hydrocephaly, body stalk
anomaly, conjoined twins, or massive fetal abdominal enlargement from a
greatly distended bladder, ascites, or organomegaly. Specifically, with
milder forms of hydrocephaly, if the biparietal diameter is <10 cm or if the
head circumference is <36 cm, vaginal delivery may be permitted (Anteby,
2003).
In rare cases in which neonatal death has occurred or is certain due to
associated anomalies, vaginal delivery may be reasonable, but the head or
abdomen must be reduced in size for delivery. Removal of fluid by
cephalocentesis or paracentesis with sonographic guidance can be performed
intrapartum. As described earlier, cleidotomy can shorten the bisacromial
diameter. For hydrocephalic fetuses that are breech, cephalocentesis can be
accomplished suprapubically when the aftercoming head enters the pelvis.
Currently, these practices are more germane in developing countries.

THIRD STAGE OF LABOR
■ Delivery of the Placenta
Third-stage labor begins immediately after fetal birth and ends with placental
delivery. Goals include delivering an intact placenta and avoiding uterine
inversion or postpartum hemorrhage. The latter two, described in Chapter 42
(p. 731), are intrapartum emergencies.
Immediately after newborn birth, uterine fundal size and consistency are
examined. If the uterus remains firm and bleeding is minimal, watchful
waiting until the placenta separates is the usual practice. Neither massage nor
downward fundal pressure is employed, but the fundus is frequently palpated
to ensure that it does not become atonic and filled with blood from placental
separation. To prevent uterine inversion, umbilical cord traction must not
be used to pull the placenta from the uterus. Signs of separation include a
sudden gush of blood into the vagina, a globular and firmer fundus, outward
movement of the umbilical cord as the placenta descends into the vagina, and
elevation of the uterus into the abdomen. With the last, the placenta, having
separated, passes down into the vagina. Here, its bulk pushes the uterine
body upward.

These signs appear within minutes after newborn delivery, and the
median time ranges from 4 to 12 minutes (Frolova, 2016; Shinar, 2016b).
Once the placenta has detached from the uterine wall, the mother can bear
down, and intraabdominal pressure often expels the placenta into the vagina.
These efforts may fail or may not be possible because of analgesia. After
ensuring that the uterus is contracted firmly, the umbilical cord is kept
slightly taut but is not pulled. Pressure is exerted by a hand wrapped around
the fundus to propel the detached placenta into the vagina (Fig. 27-6).
Concurrently, the heel of the same hand exerts pressure between the
symphysis pubis and the uterine fundus and directs it toward the sacrum. This
aims to prevent inversion. Once the placenta passes through the introitus,
pressure on the uterus is relieved. The placenta is then gently lifted away.
Care is taken to prevent placental membranes from being torn off and left
behind. If the membranes begin to tear, they are grasped with a clamp and
removed by gentle teasing (Fig. 27-7).

FIGURE 27-6 Expression of the detached placenta. Note that the hand is not trying to push the fundus
through the birth canal! As the placenta leaves the uterus and enters the vagina, the uterus is pushed
cephalad by the heel of the hand on the abdomen while the cord is held in position. The mother can aid
in the delivery of the placenta by bearing down. As the placenta reaches the perineum, the cord is lifted,
which in turn lifts the placenta out of the vagina.

FIGURE 27-7 Membranes that were somewhat adhered to the uterine lining are separated by gentle
traction with ring forceps.

■ Management of the Third Stage
Practices within this stage of labor may be broadly considered as either
expectant or active. Expectant management involves waiting for placental
separation signs and allowing the placenta to deliver either spontaneously or
aided by nipple stimulation or gravity (World Health Organization, 2012).
In contrast, active management of third-stage labor includes earlier cord
clamping, controlled cord traction during placental delivery, and immediate
prophylactic administration of a uterotonic agent. The goal of this triad is to
limit postpartum hemorrhage. However, the value of this bundled approach is
questioned (Begley, 2019). For example and as noted previously (p. 500),
delayed cord clamping does not raise postpartum hemorrhage rates, and thus
early clamping is a less important component of this trio. Similarly, cord
traction fails to prevent hemorrhage. Traction does lower manual placenta

removal rates and shortens third-stage labor (Deneux-Tharaux, 2013;
Hofmeyr, 2015). Following placental delivery, we support uterine massage
to prompt uterine firming but recognize that evidence for its benefits to avoid
postpartum hemorrhage is not strong (Saccone, 2018).
Therefore, uterotonic drugs play an essential preemptive role to decrease
postpartum blood loss (Salati, 2019). A single agent is given either before or
after placental expulsion, and timing does not affect rates of postpartum
hemorrhage, placental retention, or third-stage labor length (Soltani, 2010).
Choices for hemorrhage prophylaxis include oxytocin (Pitocin), misoprostol
(Cytotec), and the ergots, namely ergonovine (Ergotrate) and
methylergonovine (Methergine). In addition, a combination agent of oxytocin
plus ergonovine (Syntometrine) is used outside the United States. Also in
other countries, carbetocin (Duratocin), a long-acting oxytocin analogue, is
available and effective for hemorrhage prevention (Kalafat, 2021).
Prescribing information for carbetocin cites its use for cesarean delivery, but
randomized trials reflect similar use for vaginal birth. Of agents, the WHO
(2018) recommends oxytocin for first-line use.

High-dose Oxytocin
Synthetic oxytocin is identical to that produced by the posterior pituitary. Its
action is noted at approximately 1 minute, and it has a mean half-life of 3 to 5
minutes. Recommended storage temperature is ≤25C°, which may pose
problems in some low-resource countries. When given as a bolus, oxytocin
can cause profound hypotension (Svanström, 2008). This hemodynamic
change may be dangerous to women with hemorrhage-related hypovolemia or
with certain cardiac conditions. Thus, oxytocin should be given as a dilute
solution by continuous intravenous infusion or as an intramuscular injection.
Despite the routine use of oxytocin, no standard prophylactic dose has
been established for its use following either vaginal or cesarean delivery.
Water intoxication can result from the antidiuretic action of high-dose
oxytocin if administered in a large volume of electrolyte-free dextrose
solution (Whalley, 1963). Our practice is to add 20 units (2 mL) of oxytocin
per liter of crystalloid solution. This is administered after delivery of the
placenta at a rate of 10 to 20 mL/min—200 to 400 mU/min—for a few
minutes until the uterus remains firmly contracted and bleeding is controlled.
The infusion rate then is reduced to 1 to 2 mL/min until the mother is ready
for transfer to the postpartum unit. The infusion is usually then discontinued.

For women without intravenous access, 10 units of intramuscular oxytocin
are injected.

Other Agents
Ergonovine and methylergonovine have similar activity in myometrium, but
only methylergonovine is currently manufactured in the United States. These
ergot alkaloid agents lower the rates of postpartum hemorrhage and the need
for additional uterotonic drugs. However, blood pressure elevation is a
concerning side effect (Liabsuetrakul, 2018). Methylergonovine is
contraindicated in hypertensive women. If selected, a 200-μg dose of
methylergonovine is given intramuscularly or is slowly injected
intravenously in a period not less than 60 seconds to avoid sudden
hypertension.
Misoprostol is a prostaglandin E1 analogue, which has proved inferior to
oxytocin for postpartum hemorrhage prevention (Tunçalp, 2012). However,
in resource-poor settings that lack oxytocin, misoprostol is suitable for
hemorrhage prophylaxis and is given orally as a single 400- or 600-μg dose
(World Health Organization, 2018c). Side effects include fever and diarrhea.
From systematic reviews, carbetocin and oxytocin show equivalent
efficacy for postpartum hemorrhage prevention after vaginal birth (van der
Nelson, 2021; Widmer, 2018). Carbetocin is more expensive. A heat-stable
form may have benefit in low-resource settings that may have inconsistent
temperatures during supply distribution (Malm, 2018).
Tranexamic acid (TXA) is an antifibrinolytic agent and has been
evaluated to prevent postpartum hemorrhage (Ahmadzia, 2018). In one
metaanalysis, a 1-g intravenous TXA dose following delivery in addition to
oxytocin was reported to lower the hemorrhage rate from 11.4 to 8.7 percent
(Saccone, 2020). In a randomized trial of 3891 women, however, TXA plus
oxytocin did not decrease the postpartum hemorrhage incidence compared
with oxytocin alone (Sentilhes, 2018). Currently, TXA use is not
recommended prophylactically (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2019c). To treat hemorrhage, TXA use is described in
Chapters 42 (p. 736) and 44 (p. 773).

■ Manual Removal of Placenta

In approximately 2 percent of singleton births, the placenta may not deliver
promptly (Cheung, 2011). This may represent: (1) placenta adherens, in
which uterine contractions are insufficient to detach the placenta; (2) lower
uterine segment constriction and a detached but trapped placenta; or (3)
placenta accreta spectrum. Consistent risks for retained placenta include
stillbirth, prior cesarean delivery, prior retention, and preterm delivery
(Belachew, 2014; Coviello, 2015; Endler, 2014). For the last, in one study
with nearly 46,000 deliveries, analysis predicted that 90 percent of placentas
would spontaneously deliver by 180 minutes for gestations at 20 weeks; 21
minutes at 30 weeks; and 14 minutes at 40 weeks (Dombrowski, 1995).
Postpartum hemorrhage can complicate a retained placenta, and bleeding
risk accrues with the length of third-stage labor. In the absence of bleeding,
evidence supports 15 to 20 minutes (Frolova, 2016; Shinar, 2016a; van Ast,
2019). The WHO (2012) cites a 60-minute threshold. Notably, if brisk
bleeding ensues and the placenta cannot be delivered by standard technique,
manual removal of the placenta is indicated (Fig. 27-8). When performed,
some administer a single dose of intravenous antibiotics, however, one
systematic review of observational studies found no benefits (Chibueze,
2015). The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020d)
concluded that data neither support nor refute this practice, but the WHO
(2012) recommends prophylaxis. At our institution, we administer a single
dose of cefazolin to women not already receiving antibiotics and not
penicillin allergic.

FIGURE 27-8 Manual removal of placenta. A. One hand grasps the fundus and the other hand is
inserted into the uterine cavity and the fingers are swept from side to side as they are advanced. B.
When the placenta detaches, it is grasped and removed.

IMMEDIATE POSTPARTUM CARE
The hour immediately following delivery of the placenta is critical. During
this time, lacerations are repaired. Although uterotonic agents are
administered, postpartum hemorrhage as the result of uterine atony is most
likely at this time. Hematomas may expand. Consequently, uterine tone and
the perineum are frequently evaluated. The mother’s blood pressure and
pulse are recorded immediately after delivery and every 15 minutes for the
first 2 hours. Her temperature is recorded every 4 hours during the first 8
hours and then every 8 hours thereafter. Vital signs may be obtained more
frequently in patients at higher risk of postpartum complications (American
Academy of Pediatrics, 2017). The placenta, membranes, and umbilical cord
are examined for completeness and anomalies, as described in Chapter 6 (p.
107).

■ Skin-to-skin Contact
This practice aims to connect the mother and newborn dyad early to promote
breastfeeding (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020a;
Moore, 2016; World Health Organization, 2018b). Ideally, the mother lies in
a semi-reclined position. After the newborn is dried to prevent cooling, its
chest is placed against the mother’s breast with access to her nipple. Its legs
are flexed, and the mother’s arm steadies its body. Covered with warm
blankets and often a cap, the neonate’s head is uncovered, turned to the side,
and placed in a sniffing position. Mouth and nares should remain
unobstructed (Widström, 2019). The dyad is continually monitored for
physiologic stability, somnolence, unobstructed breathing, and safe
positioning to avoid smothering or falls (Feldman-Winter, 2016).

■ Lower Genital Tract Lacerations
These lacerations may involve the cervix, vagina, or perineum. Those of the
cervix and vagina are described in Chapter 42 (p. 739). In general, those of

the perineum follow vaginal delivery, and most are first- and second-degree
lacerations. Lacerations are classified by depth and involved anatomy, and
complete definitions and visual examples are given in Figure 27-9. Of these,
third-degree lacerations involve the anal sphincter and are subcategorized
as:

FIGURE 27-9 1. First-degree perineal laceration: injury to only the vaginal epithelium or perineal skin.
2. Second-degree laceration: injury to perineum that spares the anal sphincter complex but involves the
perineal muscles, which are the bulbospongiosus and superficial transverse perineal muscles. 3a. Thirddegree laceration: <50 percent of the external anal sphincter (EAS) is torn. 3b. Third-degree laceration:
>50 percent of the EAS is torn, but the internal anal sphincter (IAS) remains intact. 3c. Third-degree
laceration: EAS and IAS are torn. 4. Fourth-degree laceration: the perineal body, entire anal sphincter
complex, and anorectal mucosa are lacerated. (Reproduced with permission from Kenton K, Mueller M:
Episiotomy and obstetric anal sphincter lacerations. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al
(eds): Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2017.)

(3a) <50 percent external anal sphincter (EAS) tear;

(3b) >50 percent EAS tear; and
(3c) EAS plus internal anal sphincter (IAS) tears.
Third- and fourth-degree perineal lacerations are considered obstetric
anal sphincter injuries (OASIS), and their combined incidence is 0.1 to 5
percent (Blondel, 2016; Friedman, 2015). Risk factors for these more
complex lacerations include nulliparity, midline episiotomy, persistent OP
position, Asian race, increasing fetal birthweight, and operative vaginal
delivery (Gurol-Urganci, 2013; Landy, 2011).
Morbidity rates rise as laceration severity increases. Compared with
simpler lacerations, OASIS are associated with greater blood loss and
puerperal pain. Wound disruption and infection rates are other risks
(Goldaber, 1993; Lewicky-Gaupp, 2015). Stock and coworkers (2013)
reported that approximately 7 percent of 909 OASIS had complications.
Long term, OASIS are linked with approximately doubled rates of anal
incontinence compared with vaginal delivery without OASIS (Evers, 2012;
Schei, 2019). Fourth-degree lacerations pose greater anal incontinence risk
than third-degree ones (Gommesen, 2020; Jangö, 2018). Evidence
implicating OASIS in subsequent long-term dyspareunia are conflicting
(Mous, 2008; O’Shea, 2018).
To ensure appropriate repair, identification and correct categorization is
essential. Intrapartum endoanal ultrasound has been used to unmask clinically
occult tears (Faltin, 2005). Few data currently support this imaging
intrapartum, and the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
(2020c) does not recommended it.
For women with a prior OASIS, questions may arise as to subsequent
pregnancy. In those without anal incontinence after OASIS repair, the rate of
developing this incontinence is not increased by a subsequent vaginal birth
(Jangö, 2016; Webb, 2017). Thus, a vaginal route is reasonable. However,
women with a prior OASIS do have a higher recurrence rate with a
subsequent delivery compared with multiparas without a prior OASIS
(Edozien, 2014; Elfaghi, 2004). The risk mirrors that of primiparas in the
general population and is low (Basham, 2013; Boggs, 2014). But, in those
who experience a recurrent OASIS, the risk of anal incontinence can be
substantial (Jangö, 2017). Fetal macrosomia and operative vaginal delivery
are factors for OASIS recurrence and can influence counseling in future
pregnancies. Specifically, patients may choose cesarean delivery to avoid

repeat OASIS. This consideration may be most pertinent for those with prior
postpartum anal incontinence, with OASIS complications that required a
second repair, or with psychological trauma (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020c). Planned cesarean delivery is
balanced against its associated operative risks (Chap. 30, p. 548).

■ Episiotomy
In contrast to spontaneous perineal tears, episiotomy is intended incision of
the perineum. Its goal is enlargement of vaginal opening for birth. Textbooks
and organizational guidelines often differ in their description. Kalis and
colleagues (2012) presents one classification, and we agree with the need for
terminology standardization.
Midline and mediolateral episiotomies are the two main types and vary
by the angle of perineal incision. Involved structures mirror those found with
second-degree laceration, and their repairs are analogous. The midline
episiotomy begins at the fourchette, incises the perineal body in the midline,
and ends well before the EAS is reached. The chosen incision length varies
from 2 to 3 cm depending on perineal length, degree of tissue thinning, and
outlet diameter needs for delivery. The mediolateral episiotomy begins at
the midline of the fourchette and is directed to the right or left at an angle 60
degrees off the midline (Fig. 27-10). This angle accounts for stretch
distortion of perineal anatomy during crowning. After delivery and distortion
resolution, it ultimately yields an incision 45-degrees from the midline for
suturing (Kalis, 2011). Used less often, the lateral episiotomy begins at point
1 to 2 cm lateral from the midline of the fourchette. It too is angled toward
either the right or the left ischial tuberosity.

FIGURE 27-10 A mediolateral episiotomy is cut as the baby’s head crowns. Fingers are insinuated
between the perineum and head. The incision begins in the midline and is directed toward the ipsilateral
ischial tuberosity at an angle 60 degrees off the midline. (Reproduced with permission from Kenton K,
Mueller M: Episiotomy and obstetric anal sphincter lacerations. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap
LC III, et al (eds): Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, NY: McGraw
Hill; 2017.)

The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020c)
recommends selective use of episiotomy rather than routine use. Evidence
shows lower rates of severe perineal trauma in women undergoing
spontaneous birth with a restrictive use of episiotomy (Dillon, 2019; Jiang,
2017). One potential indication is fetal jeopardy, and the quickly enlarged
vaginal opening can speed delivery. Others are shoulder dystocia, breech
delivery, fetal macrosomia, operative vaginal delivery, persistent OP
position, and other instances in which failure to perform an episiotomy will
result in significant perineal rupture. Surgical judgment and common sense
should guide selection.

As a result of selective use, episiotomy rates have dropped. Oliphant and
coworkers (2010) analyzed rates between 1979 and 2006 in the United
States and noted a 75-percent decline. In the United States in 2012,
episiotomy was performed in approximately 12 percent of vaginal births
(Friedman, 2015).
Before episiotomy, analgesia is provided by existing labor regional
analgesia, by bilateral pudendal nerve blockade, or by local infiltration of 1percent lidocaine. Some instead advocate 2.5-percent lidocaine-prilocaine
cream (EMLA cream). However, for efficacy, it requires application an hour
before expected delivery, which may be logistically difficult (Abbas, 2020).
If episiotomy is performed unnecessarily early, incisional bleeding may
be considerable before delivery. If it is performed too late, lacerations will
not be prevented. Typically, episiotomy is completed when the head is
visible during a contraction to a diameter of 4 to 5 cm.
Few data directly compare midline and mediolateral types. As noted,
midline episiotomy has a greater likelihood of associated OASIS (Coats,
1980; de Leeuw, 2001). Short-term rates of pain and dyspareunia are similar
or increased with mediolateral episiotomy (Fodstad, 2013, 2014; Sartore,
2004).
Even fewer studies compare lateral episiotomy to either mediolateral or
midline. One randomized trial compared lateral and mediolateral types in
nulliparas. Groups did not differ in pain scores, in sexual quality of life, or in
vaginal or perineal trauma, including OASIS (Karbanova, 2014a,b;
Necesalova, 2016). The authors also reported that mediolateral episiotomies
required less time and suture for the repair. Thus, among the three,
mediolateral episiotomy may be the preferred incision to reduce OASIS
rates.

■ Laceration and Episiotomy Repairs
Typically, perineal repairs are deferred until the placenta has been delivered.
This policy permits undivided attention to the signs of placental separation
and delivery. A further advantage is that repair is not interrupted or disrupted
by placenta delivery. This is especially true if manual placenta removal must
be performed. The major disadvantage is continuing blood loss until the
repair is completed. Direct pressure from an applied gauze sponge will help
to limit this volume.

For suitable repair, an understanding of perineal anatomy is necessary
(Chap. 2, p. 14). Adequate analgesia is imperative. Locally injected
lidocaine can be used solely or as a supplement to bilateral pudendal nerve
blockade. In those with epidural analgesia, additional doses can be given.
Following any repair, needle and sponge counts are reconciled and recorded
in the delivery note (Steelman, 2018).
First-degree lacerations do not always require repair, and sutures are
placed to control bleeding or restore anatomy. Here, few data guide suture
selection. A fine-gauge, absorbable suture such as chromic gut or a delayedabsorbable type such as polyglactin 910 (Vicryl) or poliglecaprone
(Monocryl) are suitable. If a site is hemostatic, skin glue is another option
(Feingenberg, 2014).
Second-degree laceration is shown in Figures 27-11. Midline and
mediolateral episiotomy repairs use similar steps. Namely, these close the
vaginal epithelium and reapproximate the bulbospongiosus and superficial
transverse perineal muscles during restoration of the perineal body.
Compared with placing interrupted sutures, a continuous suturing method
closes the defect faster, and has lower short-term pain scores, but wound
complications and long-term pain rates are comparable and low (Kettle,
2012; Kindberg, 2008; Valenzuela, 2009). Selected less often, blunt needles
are suitable and aim to decrease the incidence of needle-stick injuries
(Mornar, 2008). Commonly used suture materials are chromic catgut or 2–0
Vicryl. Compared with chromic catgut, Vicryl is associated with less shortterm discomfort, but long-term pain rates are comparable (Kettle, 2010).
However, traditional Vicryl occasionally requires removal of residual suture
from the repair site because of pain. This disadvantage may be reduced by
selecting a rapidly absorbed polyglactin 910 suture (Vicryl Rapide)
(Greenberg, 2004; Kettle, 2002). Other delayed absorbable options include
Monocryl or polydioxanone (PDS II). The perineal skin is closed by a
running subcuticular stitch with the same suture type used to close the
perineal defect.

FIGURE 27-11 Midline episiotomy repair. A. An anchor stitch is placed above the wound apex to
begin a running, locking closure with 2–0 suture to close the vaginal epithelium and deeper tissues and
reapproximate the hymeneal ring. B. A transition stitch redirects suturing from the vagina to the
perineum. C. The superficial transverse perineal and bulbospongiosus muscles are reapproximated using
a continuous, nonlocking technique with the same length of suture. This aids restoration of the perineal
body for long-term support. D. The continuous suture is then carried upward as a subcuticular stitch.
The final knot is tied proximal to the hymeneal ring. (Reproduced with permission from Kenton K,
Mueller M: Episiotomy and obstetric anal sphincter lacerations. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap
LC III, et al (eds): Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, NY: McGraw
Hill; 2017.)

For third-degree laceration repair, two methods are available to repair
the EAS. The first is an end-to-end technique, which we prefer, and is

shown in Figure 27-12. Initially, the torn ends of the EAS, which often
retract, are isolated. The EAS and its surrounding connective tissue are
brought to the midline. As a misnomer, this connective tissue is often called a
capsule (Maldonado, 2020). The strength of this closure is derived from the
connective tissue surrounding the sphincter and less so from the striated
muscle. Thus, serial interrupted sutures incorporate sphincter fibers and a
substantial portion of the perisphincter connective tissue to bring EAS ends
together. If the IAS is torn, a running, nonlocking closure is completed with
3-0 or 4-0 suture (see Fig. 27-13B). Few data guide suture selection for
sphincter repair, but delayed-absorbable material can provide sustained
tensile strength during healing (Williams, 2006). This theory is supported by
the study by Jallad and coworkers (2016), which showed a higher perineal
breakdown rate following OASIS repair with chromic catgut.

FIGURE 27-12 In overview, with end-to-end approximation of the external anal sphincter (EAS), a
suture is placed through the EAS muscle, and four to six simple interrupted 2–0 or 3–0 sutures of
polyglactin 910 are placed at the 3, 6, 9, and 12 o’clock positions through the perisphincter connective
tissue. To begin, disrupted ends of the striated EAS muscle and capsule are identified and grasped. The
first suture is placed posteriorly to maintain clear exposure. Another suture is then placed inferiorly at
the 6 o’clock position. The sphincter muscle fibers are next reapposed by a figure-of-eight stitch. Last,
the remainder of the fascia is closed with a stitch placed anterior to the sphincter cylinder and again
with one placed superior to it. (Reproduced with permission from Kenton K, Mueller M: Episiotomy and
obstetric anal sphincter lacerations. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al (eds):
Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2017.)

FIGURE 27-13 A. Suturing of the anorectal mucosa begins above the laceration apex using a
continuous, nonlocking method with fine-gauge absorbable suture such as 3–0 or 4–0 chromic gut or
polyglactin 910. Sutures are placed through the anorectal submucosa approximately 0.5 cm apart down
to the anal verge. B. A second reinforcing layer uses 3–0 delayed-absorbable suture in a continuous,
nonlocking fashion. This incorporates the torn ends of the internal anal sphincter (IAS), which can be
identified as the glistening white fibrous structure lying between the anal canal submucosa and the fibers
of the external anal sphincter. In many cases, the IAS retracts laterally and must be sought and
retrieved for repair. (Reproduced with permission from Kenton K, Mueller M: Episiotomy and obstetric
anal sphincter lacerations. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al (eds): Cunningham and
Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2017.)

With the overlapping technique, the ends of the EAS are brought to the
midline, lie atop one another, and are sutured in this position. This method is
suitable only for type 3c lacerations—those with complete EAS rupture. Two
rows of mattress sutures travel through both overlapping EAS ends to
recreate the anal ring. In comparing the two methods, neither yields superior
long-term anatomical or functional results (Farrell, 2012; Fernando, 2013;
Fitzpatrick, 2000). Also with type 3c lacerations, the IAS is repaired before
the EAS and is described next.

With fourth-degree laceration repairs, both torn edges of the rectal
mucosa are reapproximated first (see Fig. 27-13). Starting at a point 1 cm
proximal to the wound apex, sutures are placed approximately 0.5 cm apart
in the rectal muscularis and do not enter the anorectal lumen. Clinicians often
use 4–0 delayed-absorbable suture or chromic gut for this running suture line.
Some recommend a second reinforcing layer above this (Hale, 2007). The
next layer to cover the anorectal mucosa is formed by reapproximation of the
IAS.
For reduction of infectious morbidity associated with OASIS, a single
dose of antibiotic at the time of repair may be considered (Buppasiri, 2014;
Duggal, 2008; Lewicky-Gaupp, 2015; Stock, 2013). A single dose of a
second-generation cephalosporin is suitable, or clindamycin for penicillinallergic women. With OASIS, postoperatively, stool softeners are prescribed
for a week, and enemas and suppositories are avoided.

■ Perineal Laceration Care
Initially, locally applied ice packs help reduce swelling and allay discomfort
(de Souza Bosco Paiva, 2016). In subsequent days, warm sitz baths aid
comfort and hygiene. Additionally, a small squirt bottle of warm water can
cleanse the site after voiding or stooling. Analgesics containing codeine
provide considerable relief. For lesser degrees of discomfort, nonsteroidal
antiinflammatory drugs can be given.
Because pain may instead signal a large vulvar, paravaginal, or
ischiorectal fossa hematoma or perineal cellulitis, these sites should be
examined carefully if pain is severe or persistent. Management of these
complications is discussed in Chapters 37 and 42 (pp. 657 and 740). In
addition to pain, urinary retention may complicate episiotomy recovery, and
management is described in Chapter 36 (p. 643).
For those with second-degree lacerations or OASIS, intercourse is
usually proscribed until after the first puerperal visit. Compared with women
with intact perineum, those with perineal trauma show higher rates of
delayed intercourse at 3 and 6 months, but not at 1 year (McDonald, 2015;
Rådestad, 2008; Signorello, 2001).

REFERENCES

Aasheim V, Nilsen AB, Reinar L, et al: Perineal techniques during the second stage of labour for
reducing perineal trauma. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 6:CD006672, 2017
Abbas AM, Mohamed AA, Mattar OM, et al: Lidocaine-prilocaine cream versus local infiltration
anesthesia in pain relief during repair of perineal trauma after vaginal delivery: a systematic review
and meta-analysis. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 33(6):1064, 2020
Abdulcadir J, Marras S, Catania L, et al: Defibulation: a visual reference and learning tool. J Sex Med
15:601, 2018
Adams-Piper E, Buono K, Whitcomb E, et al: A large retrospective series of pregnancy and delivery
after midurethral sling for stress urinary incontinence. Female Pelvic Med Reconstr Surg 22(5):307,
2016
Al-Hawash S, Whitehead CL, Farine D: Risk of recurrent shoulder dystocia: are we any closer to
prediction? J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 32(17):2928, 2019
American Academy of Pediatrics, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Guidelines for
Perinatal Care, 8th ed. Elk Grove Village, AAP, 2017
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Guidelines for Women’s Health Care, 4th ed.
Washington, ACOG, 2014
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Immersion in water during labor and delivery.
Committee Opinion No. 679, November 2016
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Avoidance of nonmedically indicated early-term
deliveries and associated neonatal morbidities. Committee Opinion No. 765, January 2019a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Female genital mutilation. Statement of Policy,
2019b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Postpartum hemorrhage. Practice Bulletin No.
183, October 2017, Reaffirmed 2019c
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Shoulder dystocia. Practice Bulletin No. 178,
May 2017, Reaffirmed 2019d
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Optimizing support for breastfeeding as part of
obstetric practice. Committee Opinion No. 756, October 2018, Reaffirmed 2020a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Planned home birth. Committee Opinion No. 697,
April 2017, Reaffirmed 2020b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Prevention and management of obstetric
lacerations at vaginal delivery. Practice Bulletin No. 198, August 2018, Reaffirmed 2020c
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Use of prophylactic antibiotics in labor and
delivery. Practice Bulletin No. 199, August 2018, Reaffirmed 2020d
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Delayed umbilical cord clamping after birth.
Committee Opinion No. 814, November 2020e
Andersson O, Hellström-Westas L, Andersson D, et al: Effect of delayed versus early umbilical cord
clamping on neonatal outcomes and iron status at 4 months: a randomised controlled trial. BMJ
343:d7157, 2011
Andersson O, Hellström-Westas L, Andersson D, et al: Effects of delayed compared with early
umbilical cord clamping on maternal postpartum hemorrhage and cord blood gas sampling: a
randomized trial. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 92(5):567, 2013
Ansell L, Ansell DA, McAra-Couper J, et al: Axillary traction: an effective method of resolving shoulder
dystocia. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol 59(5):627, 2019
Anteby EY, Yagel S: Route of delivery of fetuses with structural anomalies. Eur J Obstet Gynecol
Reprod Biol 106(1):5, 2003

Aquino CI, Guida M, Saccone G, et al: Perineal massage during labor: a systematic review and metaanalysis of randomized controlled trials. Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 33(6):1051, 2020a
Aquino CI, Saccone G, Troisi J, et al: Is Ritgen’s maneuver associated with decreased perineal
lacerations and pain at delivery? J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 33(18):3185, 2020b
Barth WH Jr: Persistent occiput posterior. Obstet Gynecol 125(3):695, 2015
Basak S, Kanungo S, Majhi C: Symphysiotomy: is it obsolete? J Obstet Gynaecol Res 37(7):770, 2011
Basham E, Stock L, Lewicky-Gaupp C, et al: Subsequent pregnancy outcomes after obstetric anal
sphincter injuries (OASIS). Female Pelvic Med Reconstr Surg 19(6):328, 2013
Beckmann MM, Stock OM: Antenatal perineal massage for reducing perineal trauma. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 4:CD005123, 2013
Begley CM, Gyte GM, Devane D, et al: Active versus expectant management for women in the third
stage of labour. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2:CD007412, 2019
Belachew J, Cnattingius S, Mulic-Lutvica A, et al: Risk of retained placenta in women previously
delivered by caesarean section: a population-based cohort study. BJOG 121(2):224, 2014
Bellussi F, Ghi T, Youssef A, et al: The use of intrapartum ultrasound to diagnose malpositions and
cephalic malpresentations. Am J Obstet Gynecol 217(6):633, 2017
Berg RC, Odgaard-Jensen J, Fretheim A, et al: An updated systematic review and meta-analysis of the
obstetric consequences of female genital mutilation/cutting. Obstet Gynecol Int 2014:542859, 2014a
Berg RC, Taraldsen S, Said MA, et al: The effectiveness of surgical interventions for women with
FGM/C: a systematic review. BJOG 125(3):278, 2018
Berg RC, Underland V, Odgaard-Jensen J, et al: Effects of female genital cutting on physical health
outcomes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ Open 4(11):e006316, 2014b
Blondel B, Alexander S, Bjarnadóttir RI, et al: Variations in rates of severe perineal tears and
episiotomies in 20 European countries: a study based on routine national data in Euro-Peristat
Project. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 95(7):746, 2016
Boggs EW, Berger H, Urquia M, et al: Recurrence of obstetric third-degree and fourth-degree anal
sphincter injuries. Obstet Gynecol 124(6):1128, 2014
Bolten N, de Jonge A, Zwagerman E, et al: Effect of planned place of birth on obstetric interventions
and maternal outcomes among low-risk women: a cohort study in the Netherlands. BMC Pregnancy
Childbirth 16(1):329, 2016
Boulvain M, Senat MV, Perrotin F, et al: Induction of labour versus expectant management for largefor-date fetuses: a randomised controlled trial. Lancet 385(9987):2600, 2015
Brito LG, Ferreira CH, Duarte G, et al: Antepartum use of Epi-No birth trainer for preventing perineal
trauma: systematic review. Int Urogynecol J (10):1429, 2015
Bruner JP, Drummond SB, Meenan AL, et al: All-fours maneuver for reducing shoulder dystocia during
labor. J Reprod Med 43(5):439, 1998
Buppasiri P, Lumbiganon P, Thinkhamrop J, et al: Antibiotic prophylaxis for third- and fourth-degree
perineal tear during vaginal birth. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 10:CD005125, 2014
Burkhardt T, Schmidt M, Kurmanavicius J, et al: Evaluation of fetal anthropometric measures to predict
the risk for shoulder dystocia. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 43(1):77, 2014
Byard RW, Zuccollo JM. Forensic issues in cases of water birth fatalities. Am J Forensic Med Pathol
31(3):258, 2010
Caughey AB, Cheyney M: Home and birth center birth in the United States: time for greater
collaboration across models of care. Obstet Gynecol 133(5):1033, 2019
Cavkaytar S, Kokanali M, Ozer I, et al: Effect of pregnancy and delivery on urinary incontinence after
the midurethral sling procedure. Int Urogynecol J 26(5):693, 2014

Chauhan SP, Laye MR, Lutgendorf M, et al: A multicenter assessment of 1,177 cases of shoulder
dystocia: lessons learned. Am J Perinatol 31(5):401, 2014
Chen X, Li X, Chang Y, et al: Effect and safety of timing of cord clamping on neonatal hematocrit
values and clinical outcomes in term infants: a randomized controlled trial. J Perinatol 38(3):251,
2018
Cheng YW, Hubbard A, Caughey AB, et al: The association between persistent fetal occiput posterior
position and perinatal outcomes: an example of propensity score and covariate distance matching.
Am J Epidemiol 171(6):656, 2010
Cheng YW, Shaffer BL, Caughey AB: Associated factors and outcomes of persistent occiput posterior
position: a retrospective cohort study from 1976 to 2001. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 19(9):563,
2006a
Cheng YW, Shaffer BL, Caughey AB: The association between persistent occiput posterior position and
neonatal outcomes. Obstet Gynecol 107(4):837, 2006b
Cheung WM, Hawkes A, Ibish S: The retained placenta: historical and geographical rate variations. J
Obstet Gynaecol 31(1):37, 2011
Cheyney M, Bovbjerg M, Everson C, et al: Outcomes of care for 16,924 planned home births in the
United States: the Midwives Alliance of North America Statistics Project, 2004 to 2009. J
Midwifery Womens Health 59(1):17, 2014
Chibber R, El-Saleh E, El Harmi J: Female circumcision: obstetrical and psychological sequelae
continues unabated in the 21st century. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 24(6):833, 2011
Chibueze EC, Parsons AJ, Ota E, et al: Prophylactic antibiotics for manual removal of retained placenta
during vaginal birth: a systematic review of observational studies and meta-analysis. BMC
Pregnancy Childbirth 15:313, 2015
Cluett ER, Burns E, Cuthbert A: Immersion in water during labour and birth. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev 5:CD000111, 2018
Cluver CA, Hofmeyr GJ: Posterior axilla sling traction: a technique for intractable shoulder dystocia.
Obstet Gynecol 113(2 Pt 2):486, 2009
Coats PM, Chan KK, Wilkins M, et al: A comparison between midline and mediolateral episiotomies.
BJOG 87:408, 1980
Comeau A, Hutton EK, Simioni J, et al: Home birth integration into the health care systems of eleven
international jurisdictions. Birth 45(3):311, 2018
Corton MM, Lankford JC, Ames R, et al: A randomized trial of birthing with and without stirrups. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 207(2):133.e1, 2012
Coviello EM, Grantz KL, Huang CC, et al: Risk factors for retained placenta. Am J Obstet Gynecol
213(6):864.e1, 2015
Crofts JF, Lenguerrand E, Bentham GL, et al: Prevention of brachial plexus injury—12 years of
shoulder dystocia training: an interrupted time-series study. BJOG 123(1):111, 2016
Cunningham FG: The Ritgen maneuver: another sacred cow questioned. Obstet Gynecol 112:210, 2008
Declercq E, Macdorman MF, Menacker F, et al: Characteristics of planned and unplanned home births
in 19 states. Obstet Gynecol 116(1):93, 2010
de Jonge A, Geerts CC, van der Goes BY, et al: Perinatal mortality and morbidity up to 28 days after
birth among 743 070 low-risk planned home and hospital births: a cohort study based on three
merged national perinatal databases. BJOG 122(5):720, 2015
de Leeuw JW, Struijk PC, Vierhout ME, et al: Risk factors for third degree perineal ruptures during
delivery. BJOG 108(4):383, 2001

Deneux-Tharaux C, Sentilhes L, Maillard F, et al: Effect of routine controlled cord traction as part of the
active management of the third stage of labour on postpartum haemorrhage: multicentre randomised
controlled trial (TRACOR). BMJ 346:f1541, 2013
de Souza Bosco Paiva C, Junqueira Vasconcellos de Oliveira SM, Amorim Francisco A, et al: Length of
perineal pain relief after ice pack application: a quasi-experimental study. Women Birth 29(2):117,
2016
Dillon SJ, Nelson DB, Spong CY, et al: Episiotomy evolution of a common obstetric practice at a single
public hospital. Abstract No. 801, Am J Obstet Gynecol 220(1):S523, 2019
Dombrowski MP, Bottoms SF, Saleh AA, et al: Third stage of labor: analysis of duration and clinical
practice. Am J Obstet Gynecol 172:1279, 1995
Duggal N, Mercado C, Daniels K, et al: Antibiotic prophylaxis for prevention of postpartum perineal
wound complications: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol 111(6):1268, 2008
Dyrkorn OA, Staff AC, Kulseng-Hanssen S, et al: Childbirth after mid-urethral sling surgery: effects on
long-term success and complications. Int Urogynecol J 31(3):485, 2020
Edozien LC, Gurol-Urganci I, Cromwell DA, et al: Impact of third- and fourth-degree perineal tears at
first birth on subsequent pregnancy outcomes: a cohort study. BJOG 121(13):1695, 2014
Elfaghi I, Johansson-Ernste B, Rydhstroem H: Rupture of the sphincter ani: the recurrence rate in
second delivery. BJOG 111:1361, 2004
Endler M, Saltvedt S, Cnattingius S, et al: Retained placenta is associated with pre-eclampsia, stillbirth,
giving birth to a small-for-gestational-age infant, and spontaneous preterm birth: a national registerbased study. BJOG 121(12):1462, 2014
Evers EC, Blomquist JL, McDermott KC, et al: Obstetrical anal sphincter laceration and anal
incontinence 5–10 years after childbirth. Am J Obstet Gynecol 207(5):425.e1, 2012
Faltin DL, Boulvain M, Floris LA, et al: Diagnosis of anal sphincter tears to prevent fecal incontinence:
a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol 106:6, 2005
Farrell SA, Flowerdew G, Gilmour D, et al: Overlapping compared with end-to-end repair of complete
third-degree or fourth-degree obstetric tears: three-year follow-up of a randomized controlled trial.
Obstet Gynecol 120(4):803, 2012
Feigenberg T, Maor-Sagie E, Zivi E, et al: Using adhesive glue to repair first degree perineal tears: a
prospective randomized controlled trial. Biomed Res Int 2014:526590, 2014
Feldman-Winter L, Goldsmith JP, Committee on Fetus and Newborn, et al: Safe sleep and skin-to-skin
care in the neonatal period for healthy term newborns. Pediatrics 138(3):e20161889, 2016
Fernando RJ, Sultan AH, Kettle C, et al: Methods of repair for obstetric anal sphincter injury. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 12:CD002866, 2013
Fitzpatrick M, Behan M, O’Connell PR, et al: A randomized clinical trial comparing primary overlap
with approximation repair of third-degree obstetric tears. Am J Obstet Gynecol 183:1220, 2000
Fitzpatrick M, McQuillan K, O’Herlihy C: Influence of persistent occiput posterior position on delivery
outcome. Obstet Gynecol 98(6):1027, 2001
Fodstad K, Laine K, Staff AC: Different episiotomy techniques, postpartum perineal pain, and blood
loss: an observational study. Int Urogynecol J 24(5):865, 2013
Fodstad K, Staff AC, Laine K: Effect of different episiotomy techniques on perineal pain and sexual
activity 3 months after delivery. Int Urogynecol J 25:1629, 2014
Fogarty M, Osborn DA, Askie L, et al: Delayed vs early umbilical cord clamping for preterm infants: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 218(1):1, 2018
Fransen AF, van de Ven J, Schuit E, et al: Simulation-based team training for multi-professional obstetric
care teams to improve patient outcome: a multicentre, cluster randomised controlled trial. BJOG

124(4):641, 2017
Friedman AM, Ananth CV, Prendergast E, et al: Evaluation of third-degree and fourth-degree laceration
rates as quality indicators. Obstet Gynecol 125(4):927, 2015
Frolova AI, Stout MJ, Tuuli MG, et al: Duration of the third stage of labor and risk of postpartum
hemorrhage. Obstet Gynecol 127(5):951, 2016
Gardberg M, Stenwall O, Laakkonen E: Recurrent persistent occipito-posterior position in subsequent
deliveries. BJOG 111(2):170, 2004
Gherman RB, Tramont J, Muffley P, et al: Analysis of McRoberts’ maneuver by x-ray pelvimetry.
Obstet Gynecol 95:43, 2000
Ghi T, Youssef A, Martelli F, et al: Narrow subpubic arch angle is associated with higher risk of
persistent occiput posterior position at delivery. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 48(4):511, 2016
Goldaber KG, Wendel PJ, McIntire DD, et al: Postpartum perineal morbidity after fourth-degree
perineal repair. Am J Obstet Gynecol 168:489, 1993
Gomersall J, Berber S, Middleton P, et al: Umbilical cord management at term and late preterm birth: a
meta-analysis. Pediatrics 147(3):e2020015404, 2021
Gommesen D, Nohr EA, Qvist N, et al: Obstetric perineal ruptures-risk of anal incontinence among
primiparous women 12 months postpartum: a prospective cohort study. Am J Obstet Gynecol
222(2):165.e1, 2020
Gonik B, Allen R, Sorab J: Objective evaluation of the shoulder dystocia phenomenon: effect of
maternal pelvic orientation on force reduction. Obstet Gynecol 74:44, 1989
Goodwin TM, Banks E, Millar LK, et al: Catastrophic shoulder dystocia and emergency symphysiotomy.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 177:463, 1997
Greenberg JA, Lieberman E, Cohen AP, et al: Randomized comparison of chromic versus fastabsorbing polyglactin 910 for postpartum perineal repair. Obstet Gynecol 103(6):1308, 2004
Groutz A, Hasson J, Wengier A, et al: Third- and fourth-degree perineal tears: prevalence and risk
factors in the third millennium. Am J Obstet Gynecol 204(4):347.e1, 2011
Grünebaum A, McCullough LB, Arabin B, et al: Underlying causes of neonatal deaths in term singleton
pregnancies: home births versus hospital births in the United States. J Perinat Med 45(3):349, 2017
Grünebaum A, McCullough LB, Orosz B, et al: Neonatal mortality in the United States is related to
location of birth (hospital versus home) rather than the type of birth attendant. Am J Obstet Gynecol
223(2):254.e1, 2020
Grünebaum A, McCullough LB, Sapra KJ, et al: Apgar score of 0 at 5 minutes and neonatal seizures or
serious neurologic dysfunction in relation to birth setting. Am J Obstet Gynecol 209(4):323.e1, 2013
Grünebaum A, McCullough LB, Sapra KJ, et al: Early and total neonatal mortality in relation to birth
setting in the United States, 2006–2009. Am J Obstet Gynecol 211:390.e1, 2014
Gungor S, Kurt E, Teksoz E, et al: Oronasopharyngeal suction versus no suction in normal and term
infants delivered by elective cesarean section: a prospective randomized controlled trial. Gynecol
Obstet Invest 61(1):9, 2006
Gunnarsson B, Fasting S, Skogvoll E, et al: Why babies die in unplanned out-of-institution births: an
enquiry into perinatal deaths in Norway 1999–2013. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 96(3):326, 2017
Gunnarsson B, Smárason AK, Skogvoll E, et al: Characteristics and outcome of unplanned out-ofinstitution births in Norway from 1999 to 2013: a cross-sectional study. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand
93(10):1003, 2014
Gurewitsch Allen ED, Will SE, Allen RH, et al: Improving shoulder dystocia management and outcomes
with a targeted quality assurance program. Am J Perinatol 34(11):1088, 2017

Gurewitsch ED, Donithan M, Stallings SP, et al: Episiotomy versus fetal manipulation in managing
severe shoulder dystocia: a comparison of outcomes. Am J Obstet Gynecol 191(3):911, 2004
Gurol-Urganci I, Cromwell DA, Edozien LC, et al: Third- and fourth-degree perineal tears among
primiparous women in England between 2000 and 2012: time trends and risk factors. BJOG
120(12):1516, 2013
Hale RW, Ling FW: Episiotomy: procedure and repair techniques. Washington, American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2007
Hawkins JS: Lower genital tract procedures. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al (eds):
Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2017
Hehir MP, Rubeo Z, Flood K et al: Anal sphincter injury in vaginal deliveries complicated by shoulder
dystocia. Int Urogynecol J 29(3):377, 2018
Henry E, Andres RL, Christensen RD: Neonatal outcomes following a tight nuchal cord. J Perinatol
33(3):231, 2013
Hofmeyr GJ, Mshweshwe NT, Gülmezoglu AM: Controlled cord traction for the third stage of labour.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 1:CD008020, 2015
Huang J, Lu H, Zang Y, et al: The effects of hands on and hands off/poised techniques on maternal
outcomes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Midwifery 87:102712, 2020
Jallad K, Steele SE, Barber MD: Breakdown of perineal laceration repair after vaginal delivery: a casecontrol study. Female Pelvic Med Reconstr Surg 22(4):276, 2016
Jangö H, Langhoff-Roos J, Rosthøj S, et al: Long-term anal incontinence after obstetric anal sphincter
injury-does grade of tear matter? Am J Obstet Gynecol 218(2):232.e1, 2018
Jangö H, Langhoff-Roos J, Rosthøj S, et al: Mode of delivery after obstetric anal sphincter injury and
the risk of long-term anal incontinence. Am J Obstet Gynecol 214(6):733.e1, 2016
Jangö H, Langhoff-Roos J, Rosthøj S, et al: Recurrent obstetric anal sphincter injury and the risk of
long-term anal incontinence. Am J Obstet Gynecol 216(6):610.e1, 2017
Jiang H, Qian X, Carroli G, et al: Selective versus routine use of episiotomy for vaginal birth. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 2:CD000081, 2017
Kalafat E, Gokce A, O’Brien P, et al: Efficacy of carbetocin in the prevention of postpartum
hemorrhage: a systematic review and Bayesian meta-analysis of randomized trials. J Matern Fetal
Neonatal Med 34(14):2303, 2021
Kalis V, Laine K, de Leeuw JW, et al: Classification of episiotomy: towards a standardisation of
terminology. BJOG 119(5):522, 2012
Kalis V, Landsmanova J, Bednarova B, et al: Evaluation of the incision angle of mediolateral episiotomy
at 60 degrees. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 112:220, 2011
Kamisan Atan I, Shek KL, Langer S, et al: Does the Epi-No birth trainer prevent vaginal birth-related
pelvic floor trauma? A multicentre prospective randomized controlled trial. BJOG 123(6):995, 2016
Karbanova J, Rusavy Z, Betincova L, et al: Clinical evaluation of early postpartum pain and healing
outcomes after mediolateral versus lateral episiotomy. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 127(2):152, 2014a
Karbanova J, Rusavy Z, Betincova L, et al: Clinical evaluation of peripartum outcomes of mediolateral
versus lateral episiotomy. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 124(1):72, 2014b
Kariminia A, Chamberlain ME, Keogh J, et al: Randomised controlled trial of effect of hands and knees
posturing on incidence of occiput posterior position at birth. BMJ 328(7438):490, 2004
Katheria A, Reister F, Essers J, et al: Association of umbilical cord milking vs delayed umbilical cord
clamping with death or severe intraventricular hemorrhage among preterm infants. JAMA
322(19):1877, 2019

Katheria AC, Szychowski JM, Essers J, et al: Early cardiac and cerebral hemodynamics with umbilical
cord milking compared with delayed cord clamping in infants born preterm. J Pediatr 223:51, 2020
Kenton K, Mueller M: Episiotomy and obstetric anal sphincter lacerations. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman
BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al (eds): Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York,
McGraw-Hill Education, 2017
Kettle C, Dowswell T, Ismail KM: Absorbable suture materials for primary repair of episiotomy and
second degree tears. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 6:CD000006, 2010
Kettle C, Dowswell T, Ismail KM: Continuous and interrupted suturing techniques for repair of
episiotomy or second-degree tears. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 11:CD000947, 2012
Kettle C, Hills RK, Jones P, et al: Continuous versus interrupted perineal repair with standard or rapidly
absorbed sutures after spontaneous vaginal birth: a randomized controlled trial. Lancet 359:2217,
2002
Kim T, Vogel RI, Mackenthun SM, et al: Rigorous simulation training protocol does not improve
maternal and neonatal outcomes from shoulder dystocia. Obstet Gynecol 127 Suppl 1:3S, 2016
Kindberg S, Stehouwer M, Hvidman L, et al: Postpartum perineal repair performed by midwives: a
randomised trial comparing two suture techniques leaving the skin unsutured. BJOG 115(4):472,
2008
Koyanagi A, Zhang J, Dagvadorj A, et al: Macrosomia in 23 developing countries: an analysis of a
multicountry, facility-based, cross-sectional survey. Lancet 381(9865):476, 2013
Kumbhat N, Eggleston B, Davis AS, et al: Placental transfusion and short-term outcomes among
extremely preterm infants. Arch Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed 106(1):62, 2021
Labrecque M, Eason E, Marcoux S, et al: Randomized controlled trial of prevention of perineal trauma
by perineal massage during pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 180(3 Pt 1):593, 1999
Laine K, Pirhonen T, Rolland R, et al: Decreasing the incidence of anal sphincter tears during delivery.
Obstet Gynecol 111:1053, 2008
Landy HJ, Laughon SK, Bailit JL, et al: Characteristics associated with severe perineal and cervical
lacerations during vaginal delivery. Obstet Gynecol 117(3):627, 2011
Larson JD, Rayburn WF, Harlan VL: Nuchal cord entanglements and gestational age. Am J Perinatol
14(9):555, 1997
Le Ray C, Lepleux F, De La Calle A, et al: Lateral asymmetric decubitus position for the rotation of
occipito-posterior positions: multicenter randomized controlled trial EVADELA. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 215(4):511.e1, 2016
Leung TY, Stuart O, Sahota DS: Head-to-body delivery interval and risk of fetal acidosis and hypoxic
ischaemic encephalopathy in shoulder dystocia: a retrospective review. BJOG 118(4):474, 2011
Lewicky-Gaupp C, Leader-Cramer A, Johnson LL, et al: Wound complications after obstetric anal
sphincter injuries. Obstet Gynecol 125(5):1088, 2015
Liabsuetrakul T, Choobun T, Peeyananjarassri K, et al: Prophylactic use of ergot alkaloids in the third
stage of labour. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 6:CD005456, 2018
Lieberman E, Davidson K, Lee-Parritz A, et al: Changes in fetal position during labor and their
association with epidural analgesia. Obstet Gynecol 105(5 Pt 1):974, 2005
Low-Beer NM, Creighton SM, Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists: Female genital
mutilation and its management. Green-top Guideline No. 53, July 2015, Reaffirmed 2018
MacDorman MF, Declercq E: Trends and state variations in out-of-hospital births in the United States,
2004–2017. Birth 46(2):279, 2019
MacKenzie IZ, Shah M, Lean K, et al: Management of shoulder dystocia: trends in incidence and
maternal and neonatal morbidity. Obstet Gynecol 110:1059, 2007

Magro-Malosso ER, Saccone G, Chen M, et al: Induction of labour for suspected macrosomia at term in
non-diabetic women: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. BJOG
124(3):414, 2017
Mahran A, Soriano A, Safwat AS, et al: The effect of sacral neuromodulation on pregnancy: a
systematic review. Int Urogynecol J 28(9):1357, 2017
Maldonado PA, Carrick KS, Montoya TI, et al: Posterior vaginal compartment anatomy: implications for
surgical repair. Female Pelvic Med Reconstr Surg 26(12):751, 2020
Malin GL, Bugg GJ, Takwoingi Y, et al: Antenatal magnetic resonance imaging versus ultrasound for
predicting neonatal macrosomia: a systematic review and meta-analysis. BJOG 123(1):77, 2016
Malm M, Madsen I, Kjellström J: Development and stability of a heat-stable formulation of carbetocin
for the prevention of postpartum haemorrhage for use in low and middle-income countries. J Pept
Sci 24(6):e3082, 2018
McCandlish R, Bowler U, Van Asten H, et al: A randomised controlled trial of care of the perineum
during second stage of normal labour. BJOG 105(12):1262, 1998
McDonald EA, Gartland D, Small R, et al: Dyspareunia and childbirth: a prospective cohort study.
BJOG 122(5):672, 2015
McDonald SJ, Middleton P, Dowswell T, et al: Effect of timing of umbilical cord clamping of term
infants on maternal and neonatal outcomes. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 7:CD004074, 2013
Mehta SH, Bujold E, Blackwell SC, et al: Is abnormal labor associated with shoulder dystocia in
nulliparous women? Am J Obstet Gynecol 190(6):1604, 2004
Modanlou HD, Komatsu G, Dorchester W, et al: Large-for-gestational-age neonates: anthropometric
reasons for shoulder dystocia. Obstet Gynecol 60:417, 1982
Moore ER, Bergman N, Anderson GC, et al: Early skin-to-skin contact for mothers and their healthy
newborn infants. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 11:CD003519, 2016
Mornar SJ, Perlow JH: Blunt suture needle use in laceration and episiotomy repair at vaginal delivery.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 198:e14, 2008
Mous M, Muller SA, de Leeuw JW: Long-term effects of anal sphincter rupture during vaginal delivery:
faecal incontinence and sexual complaints. BJOG 115(2):234, 2008
Necesalova P, Karbanova J, Rusavy Z, et al: Mediolateral versus lateral episiotomy and their effect on
postpartum coital activity and dyspareunia rate 3 and 6 months postpartum. Sex Reprod Healthc
8:25, 2016
Nesbitt TS, Gilbert WM, Herrchen B: Shoulder dystocia and associated risk factors with macrosomic
infants born in California. Am J Obstet Gynecol 179:476, 1998
Nour NM, Michels KB, Bryant AE: Defibulation to treat female genital cutting: effect on symptoms and
sexual function. Obstet Gynecol 108(1):55, 2006
Nudelman MJR, Belogolovsky E, Jegatheesan P, et al: Effect of delayed cord clamping on umbilical
blood gas values in term newborns: a systematic review. Obstet Gynecol 135(3):576, 2020
Oliphant SS, Jones KA, Wang L, et al: Trends over time with commonly performed obstetric and
gynecologic inpatient procedures. Obstet Gynecol 116(4):926, 2010
O’Shea MS, Lewicky-Gaupp C, Gossett DR: Long-term sexual function after obstetric anal sphincter
injuries. Female Pelvic Med Reconstr Surg 24(2):82, 2018
Ouzounian JG: Shoulder dystocia: incidence and risk factors. Clin Obstet Gynecol 59(4):791, 2016
Øverland EA, Vatten LJ, Eskild A: Pregnancy week at delivery and the risk of shoulder dystocia: a
population study of 2,014,956 deliveries. BJOG 121(1):34, 2014
Øverland EA, Vatten LJ, Eskild A: Risk of shoulder dystocia: associations with parity and offspring
birthweight. A population study of 1,914,544 deliveries. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 91(4):483, 2012

Panburana P, Odthon T, Pongmee P, et al: The effect of umbilical cord milking compared with delayed
cord clamping in term neonates: a randomized controlled trial. Int J Womens Health 12:301, 2020
Paris AE, Greenberg JA, Ecker JL, et al: Is an episiotomy necessary with a shoulder dystocia? Am J
Obstet Gynecol 205(3):217.e1, 2011
Pierce-Williams RA, Saccone G, Berghella V: Hands-on versus hands-off techniques for the prevention
of perineal trauma during vaginal delivery: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized
controlled trials. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 3:1, 2019
Ponkey SE, Cohen AP, Heffner LJ, et al: Persistent fetal occiput posterior position: obstetric outcomes.
Obstet Gynecol 101(5 Pt 1):915, 2003
Rabe H, Gyte GM, Díaz-Rossello JL, et al: Effect of timing of umbilical cord clamping and other
strategies to influence placental transfusion at preterm birth on maternal and infant outcomes.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 9:CD003248, 2019
Rådestad I, Olsson A, Nissen E, et al: Tears in the vagina, perineum, sphincter ani, and rectum and first
sexual intercourse after childbirth: a nationwide follow-up. Birth 35:98, 2008
Rahman J, Bhattee G, Rahman MS: Shoulder dystocia in a 16-year experience in a teaching hospital. J
Reprod Med 54(6):378, 2009
Rodriguez MI, Seuc A, Say L, et al: Episiotomy and obstetric outcomes among women living with type 3
female genital mutilation: a secondary analysis. Reprod Health 13(1):131, 2016
Roulette P, Castel-Lacanal E, Sanson S, et al: Sacral neuromodulation and pregnancy: results of a
national survey carried out for the neuro-urology committee of the French Association of Urology
(AFU). Neurourol Urodyn 37(2):792, 2018
Rouzi AA, Al-Sibiani SA, Al-Mansouri NM, et al: Defibulation during vaginal delivery for women with
type III female genital mutilation. Obstet Gynecol 120(1):98, 2012
Rubin A: Management of shoulder dystocia. JAMA 189:835, 1964
Saccone G, Caissutti C, Ciardulli A, et al: Uterine massage as part of active management of the third
stage of labour for preventing postpartum haemorrhage during vaginal delivery: a systematic review
and meta-analysis of randomised trials. BJOG 125(7):778, 2018
Saccone G, Della Corte L, D’Alessandro P, et al: Prophylactic use of tranexamic acid after vaginal
delivery reduces the risk of primary postpartum hemorrhage. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med
33(19):3368, 2020
Salati JA, Leathersich SJ, Williams MJ, et al: Prophylactic oxytocin for the third stage of labour to
prevent postpartum haemorrhage. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 4:CD001808, 2019
Sandberg EC: Shoulder dystocia: associated with versus caused by the Zavanelli maneuver. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 197(1):115, 2007
Sandberg EC: The Zavanelli maneuver: 12 years of recorded experience. Obstet Gynecol 93:312, 1999
Sandberg EC: The Zavanelli maneuver: a potentially revolutionary method for the resolution of shoulder
dystocia. Am J Obstet Gynecol 152:479, 1985
Schafer R: Umbilical cord avulsion in waterbirth. J Midwifery Womens Health 59(1):91, 2014
Schei B, Johannessen HH, Rydning A, et al: Anal incontinence after vaginal delivery or cesarean
section. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 98(1):51, 2019
Schramm M: Impacted shoulders—a personal experience. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol 23:28, 1983
Seidler AL, Gyte GML, Rabe H, et al: Umbilical cord management for newborns <34 weeks’ gestation:
a meta-analysis. Pediatrics 147(3):e20200576, 2021
Senécal J, Xiong X, Fraser WD, et al: Effect of fetal position on second-stage duration and labor
outcome. Obstet Gynecol 105(4):763, 2005

Sentilhes L, Winer N, Azria E, et al: Tranexamic acid for the prevention of blood loss after vaginal
delivery. N Engl J Med 379(8):731, 2018
Shaffer BL, Cheng YW, Vargas JE, et al: Manual rotation to reduce caesarean delivery in persistent
occiput posterior or transverse position. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 24(1):65, 2011
Shinar S, Schwartz A, Maslovitz S, et al: How long is safe? Setting the cutoff for uncomplicated third
stage length: a retrospective case-control study. Birth 43(1):36, 2016a
Shinar S, Shenhav M, Maslovitz S, et al: Distribution of third-stage length and risk factors for its
prolongation. Am J Perinatol 33(10):1023, 2016b
Signorello LB, Harlow BL, Chekos AK, et al: Postpartum sexual functioning and its relationship to
perineal trauma: a retrospective cohort study of primiparous women. Am J Obstet Gynecol 184:881,
2001
Snowden JM, Tilden EL, Snyder J, et al: Planned out-of-hospital birth and birth outcomes. N Engl J Med
373(27):2642, 2015
Soltani H, Hutchon DR, Poulose TA: Timing of prophylactic uterotonics for the third stage of labour
after vaginal birth. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 8:CD006173, 2010
Spain JE, Frey HA, Tuuli MG, et al: Neonatal morbidity associated with shoulder dystocia maneuvers.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 212(3):353.e1, 2015
Spong CY, Beall M, Rodrigues D, et al: An objective definition of shoulder dystocia: prolonged head-tobody delivery intervals and/or the use of ancillary obstetric maneuvers. Obstet Gynecol 86:433, 1995
Stamp G, Kruzins G, Crowther C: Perineal massage in labour and prevention of perineal trauma:
randomised controlled trial. BMJ 322(7297):1277, 2001
Steelman VM, Shaw C, Shine L, et al: Retained surgical sponges: a descriptive study of 319
occurrences and contributing factors from 2012 to 2017. Patient Saf Surg 12:20, 2018
Stock L, Basham E, Gossett DR, et al: Factors associated with wound complications in women with
obstetric anal sphincter injuries (OASIS). Am J Obstet Gynecol 208(4):327.e1, 2013
Svanström MC, Biber B, Hanes M, et al: Signs of myocardial ischaemia after injection of oxytocin: a
randomized double-blind comparison of oxytocin and methylergometrine during caesarean section.
Br J Anaesth 100:683, 2008
Tarnow-Mordi W, Morris J, Kirby A, et al: Delayed versus immediate cord clamping in preterm infants.
N Engl J Med 377(25):2445, 2017
Taylor H, Kleine I, Bewley S, et al: Neonatal outcomes of waterbirth: a systematic review and metaanalysis. Arch Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed 101(4):F357, 2016
Tunçalp Ö, Hofmeyr GJ, Gülmezoglu AM: Prostaglandins for preventing postpartum haemorrhage.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 8:CD000494, 2012
UNICEF: Female genital mutilation country profiles. 2016. Available at
https://data.unicef.org/resources/fgm-country-profiles/. Accessed October 15, 2020
Valenzuela P, Saiz Puente MS, Valero JL, et al: Continuous versus interrupted sutures for repair of
episiotomy or second-degree perineal tears: a randomised controlled trial. BJOG 116(3):436, 2009
van Ast M, Goedhart MM, Luttmer R, et al: The duration of the third stage in relation to postpartum
hemorrhage. Birth 46(4):602, 2019
van der Nelson H, O’Brien S, Burnard S, et al: Intramuscular oxytocin versus Syntometrine versus
carbetocin for prevention of primary postpartum haemorrhage after vaginal birth: a randomised
double-blinded clinical trial of effectiveness, side effects and quality of life. BJOG 128(7):1236, 2021
Walsh JM, Kandamany N, Ni Shuibhne N, et al: Neonatal brachial plexus injury: comparison of
incidence and antecedents between 2 decades. Am J Obstet Gynecol 204(4):324.e1, 2011

Webb SS, Yates D, Manresa M, et al: Impact of subsequent birth and delivery mode for women with
previous OASIS: systematic review and meta-analysis. Int Urogynecol J 28(4):507, 2017
Whalley PJ, Pritchard JA: Oxytocin and water intoxication. JAMA 186:601, 1963
Widmer M, Piaggio G, Nguyen TM, et al: Heat-stable carbetocin versus oxytocin to prevent hemorrhage
after vaginal birth. N Engl J Med 379(8):743, 2018
Widström AM, Brimdyr K, Svensson K, et al: Skin-to-skin contact the first hour after birth, underlying
implications and clinical practice. Acta Paediatr 108(7):1192, 2019
Wieslander CK, Weinstein MM, Handa VL, et al: Pregnancy in women with prior treatments for pelvic
floor disorders. Female Pelvic Med Reconstr Surg 26(5):299, 2020
Williams A, Adams EJ, Tincello DG, et al: How to repair an anal sphincter injury after vaginal delivery:
results of a randomised controlled trial. BJOG 113(2):201, 2006
Woods CE: A principle of physics is applicable to shoulder delivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 45:796, 1943
World Health Organization: Care of Women and Girls Living with Female Genital Mutilation: a Clinical
Handbook. Geneva, WHO, 2018a
World Health Organization: Female genital mutilation and obstetric outcome: WHO collaborative
prospective study in six African countries. Lancet 367:1835, 2006
World Health Organization: Guideline: delayed umbilical cord clamping for improved maternal and infant
health and nutrition outcomes. Geneva, WHO, 2014
World Health Organization: Implementation guidance: protecting, promoting and supporting
breastfeeding in facilities providing maternity and newborn services—the revised Baby-friendly
Hospital Initiative. Geneva, WHO, 2018b
World Health Organization: WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum
haemorrhage. Geneva, WHO, 2012
World Health Organization: WHO recommendations: uterotonics for the prevention of postpartum
haemorrhage. Geneva, WHO, 2018c
Wyckoff MH, Aziz K, Escobedo MB, et al: Part 13: Neonatal resuscitation: 2015 American Heart
Association guidelines update for cardiopulmonary resuscitation and emergency cardiovascular care.
Circulation 132(18 Suppl 2):S543, 2015
Yao AC, Lind J: Placental transfusion. Am J Dis Child 127:128, 1974
Zhang C, Wu Y, Li S, et al: Maternal prepregnancy obesity and the risk of shoulder dystocia: a metaanalysis. BJOG 125(4):407, 2018

CHAPTER 28

Singleton Breech Delivery

CLASSIFICATION
DIAGNOSIS
DELIVERY ROUTE
LABOR AND DELIVERY
PARTIAL BREECH EXTRACTION
TOTAL BREECH EXTRACTION
EXTERNAL CEPHALIC VERSION
REFERENCES

CLASSIFICATION
Near term, the typical fetus spontaneously assumes a cephalic presentation.
However, if the fetal buttocks or legs enter the pelvis before the head, the
presentation is breech. At term, breech presentation persists in 2 to 5 percent
of singleton deliveries (Bin, 2016; Cammu, 2014; Toijonen, 2019). Breech
delivery of a second twin is discussed in Chapter 48 (p. 856).
The categories of frank, complete, and incomplete breech presentations
differ in their varying relations between the lower extremities and buttocks.
With a frank breech, lower extremities are flexed at the hips and extended at
the knees, and thus the feet lie close to the head (Fig. 28-1). With a complete
breech, both hips are flexed, and one or both knees are also flexed (Fig. 28-

2). With an incomplete breech, one or both hips are extended. As a result,
one or both feet or knees lie below the breech, and thus a foot or knee is
lowermost in the birth canal. A footling breech is an incomplete breech with
one or both feet below the breech.

FIGURE 28-1 Frank breech presentation.

FIGURE 28-2 Complete breech presentation.

Of singleton term breech fetuses, the neck may be extremely
hyperextended in perhaps 5 percent, and the term stargazing fetus is used
(Cimmino, 1975). With transverse lie and similar hyperextension of the fetal
neck, the term flying fetus is applied. With these, fetal or uterine anomalies
may be more prevalent and are sought if not previously identified (Phelan,
1983; Shipp, 2000). With hyperextension, vaginal delivery can injure the
cervical spinal cord. Thus, if identified at term, cesarean delivery is
indicated (Westgren, 1981). However, cases of spinal cord injury have been
reported following uneventful cesarean delivery of breech fetuses. Here, the
flexion itself may be implicated (Hernandez-Marti, 1984; Weinstein, 1983).

DIAGNOSIS
■ Risk Factors
Understanding the clinical settings that predispose to breech presentation can
aid early recognition. This fetal lie is more common remote from term, as
earlier in pregnancy each fetal pole has similar bulk (Toijonen, 2019).
Multifetal gestation is another (Chap. 48, p. 856). With singletons, other
factors include extremes of amnionic fluid volume, fetal anomalies, structural
uterine abnormalities, placenta previa, nulliparity, increased maternal age,
female fetal gender, prior breech delivery, and size that is small for
gestational age (Bin, 2016; Cammu, 2014; Noli, 2019; Roberts, 1999). One
study found that following one breech delivery, the recurrence rate for a
second breech presentation was 10 percent, and for a subsequent third breech
it was 28 percent (Ford, 2010).

■ Examination
Leopold maneuvers to ascertain fetal presentation are discussed in Chapter
22 (p. 419). With the first maneuver, the hard, round fetal head occupies the
fundus. The second maneuver identifies the hard, broad back to be on one
side of the abdomen and the knobby small parts on the other. With the third
maneuver, if not engaged, the softer breech is movable above the pelvic inlet.
After engagement, the fourth maneuver shows the breech to be beneath the
symphysis. The accuracy of this palpation varies (Lydon-Rochelle, 1993;
Nassar, 2006). Thus, with unclear presentation, sonographic examination is
indicated.
During cervical examination with a frank breech, no feet are appreciated,
but the fetal ischial tuberosities, sacrum, and anus are usually palpable. After
further fetal descent, the external genitalia also may be distinguished. When
labor is prolonged, the fetal buttocks may become markedly swollen,
rendering digital differentiation of a face and breech difficult. In some cases,
the anus may be mistaken for the mouth and the ischial tuberosities for the
malar eminences. With careful examination, however, the finger encounters
muscular resistance with the anus, whereas the bony, less yielding jaws and
palate are felt through the mouth. The finger, upon removal from the anus,
may be stained with meconium. The mouth and malar eminences form a

triangular shape, whereas the ischial tuberosities and anus lie in a straight
line. With a complete breech, the feet may be felt alongside the buttocks. In
footling presentations, one or both feet are inferior to the buttocks.
The fetal sacrum is palpated to establish position. As with cephalic
presentations, fetal position is designated to reflect the relations of the fetal
sacrum to the maternal pelvis. Thus, with left sacrum anterior (LSA), the
fetus’s back is up and its sacrum occupies the left upper (ventral) quadrant of
the mother’s pelvis. Other positions are right sacrum anterior (RSA), right or
left sacrum posterior (RSP or LSP), and right or left sacrum transverse (RST
or LST).

DELIVERY ROUTE
Multiple factors aid determination of the best delivery route. These include
maternal parity and pelvic dimensions; coexistent pregnancy complications;
provider experience; patient preference; hospital capabilities; and fetal size,
anatomy, and gestational age (Table 28-1).
TABLE 28-1. Factors Favoring Cesarean Delivery of the Breech Fetus

Compared with their term counterparts, preterm breech fetuses have
distinct complications related to their small size and immaturity.
Accordingly, a separate discussion of term and preterm breech fetuses is
presented.

■ Term Breech Fetus
Current obstetrical thinking regarding vaginal delivery of the term breech
fetus was tremendously influenced by results of the Term Breech Trial
(Hannah, 2000). This trial included 1041 women randomly assigned to
planned cesarean and 1042 to planned vaginal delivery. These comparator
groups reflect actual risks, and the planned vaginal delivery group included
those who required intrapartum cesarean delivery. In the planned vaginal
delivery group, 57 percent were actually delivered vaginally. Planned

cesarean delivery was associated with a lower risk of perinatal mortality
compared with planned vaginal delivery—3 per 1000 versus 13 per 1000.
Cesarean delivery was also associated with a lower risk of “serious”
neonatal morbidity—1.4 versus 3.8 percent. Short-term maternal morbidity
was similar between groups.
Critics of the Term Breech Trial emphasize that fewer than 10 percent of
candidates underwent radiological assessment of pelvic capacity. In
addition, most of the outcomes included in the “serious” neonatal morbidity
composite did not actually portend long-term infant disability (Whyte, 2004).
Since that trial, however, additional data favoring cesarean delivery has
come from the World Health Organization (Lumbiganon, 2010). In more than
100,000 deliveries from nine participating Asian countries, planned cesarean
delivery offered improved perinatal outcomes for the term breech fetus
compared with planned vaginal delivery. Other studies also have found
lowered neonatal morbidity and mortality rates with cesarean delivery
(Lyons, 2015; Rietberg, 2005; Vistad, 2015). From one metaanalysis, the
calculated absolute risk of perinatal mortality was 0.3 percent, and risk of
fetal birth trauma or neurological morbidity was 0.7 percent (Berhan, 2016).
In contrast, other studies support vaginal delivery as a suitable option at
term (Hofmeyr, 2015a). The Presentation et Mode d’Accouchement
(PREMODA) study—which translates as presentation and mode of delivery
—showed no differences in corrected neonatal mortality rates and neonatal
outcomes according to delivery mode (Goffinet, 2006). Severe acute
maternal morbidity scores were similar (Korb, 2019). This French
prospective observational study involved more than 8000 women with term
breech singletons. Strict criteria were used to select 2526 of these for
planned vaginal delivery, and 71 percent of that group were delivered
vaginally. Data from the Lille Breech Study Group in France also showed no
excessive morbidity in term breech singletons delivered vaginally provided
that strict fetal biometric and maternal pelvimetry parameters were applied
(Michel, 2011). Other smaller studies support these findings as long as
guidelines are part of the selection process (Alarab, 2004; Giuliani, 2002;
Toivonen, 2012).
Long-term evidence supporting vaginal breech delivery comes from Eide
and associates (2005). These investigators analyzed intelligence testing
scores of more than 8000 men delivered breech, and delivery route did not
affect later intellectual performance. Moreover, a 2-year follow-up from the

Term Breech trial showed similar risks for death and for
neurodevelopmental delay between delivery groups (Whyte, 2004). Other
studies support these findings (Bin, 2017; Macharey, 2018).
Despite evidence for this debate, at least in the United States, rates of
planned vaginal delivery attempts continue to decline (Grunebaum, 2016).
Thus, as predicted, the number of skilled providers able to safely select and
vaginally deliver breech fetuses steadily dwindles (Dotters-Katz, 2020).
Moreover, obvious medicolegal concerns make physician training in such
deliveries difficult. In response, some institutions have developed birth
simulators to improve resident competence in vaginal breech delivery
(Deering, 2006; Maslovitz, 2007).
In selecting suitable term breech vaginal delivery candidates, factors
outlined in Table 28-1 are weighed. Of these, various national organizations
recommend that the estimated term fetal weight lies between >2500 to 2800 g
and <3800 to 4000 g (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists,
2018b; Impey, 2017b; Kotaska, 2019). Fetal-growth restriction and
oligohydramnios are other contraindications, because of their inherent
association with poor neonatal outcome (Chaps. 14 and 47, pp. 260 and
831). Data support this concern for the term breech fetus (Hinnenberg, 2019;
Macharey, 2017a). Of uterine factors, prior hysterotomy carries an inherent
risk for rupture in labor. The PREMODA, Term Breech Trial, and other
studies allowed a trial of labor after cesarean for vaginal breech delivery,
but in each, these constituted a small percentage of participants. Other studies
have considered prior cesarean as a contraindication. Very limited data
suggest a possible link with adverse perinatal outcome (Azria, 2012;
Macharey, 2017a). Moreover, a prior cesarean delivery performed for
arrested labor may suggest a relatively contracted pelvis and a greater labor
risk. In contrast, parity and prior vaginal birth are positive factors and likely
reflect sufficient pelvic capacity. Last, those with spontaneous labor and
normal labor curves have higher successful vaginal birth rates.

■ Preterm Breech Fetus
In contrast to the term breech fetus, no randomized trials guide delivery
selection for the preterm breech fetus. Comparison of the available
observational studies is often hampered by their combining, splitting, or
overlapping of gestational age groups. Other study biases include differing

gestational age thresholds for planned neonatal resuscitation, assigning
mortality causation to delivery rather than immaturity, and tendency to favor
vaginal delivery for fetuses with a poor prognosis. In addition, the effects of
precipitous vaginal delivery and associated incomplete antenatal prophylaxis
with corticosteroids and antibiotics is difficult to evaluate.
Despite these limitations, for preterm breech fetuses as whole, data
support that planned cesarean delivery confers a survival advantage
compared with planned vaginal delivery. Reddy and associates (2012)
reported data from deliveries between 24 and 32 weeks’ gestation. For
breech fetuses within these gestational ages, attempting vaginal delivery
yielded a low success rate, and this group was associated with higher
neonatal mortality rates compared with planned cesarean delivery. From a
metaanalysis incorporating data from more than 3500 parturients, similar
mortality associations were reported (Bergenhenegouwen, 2014). In contrast,
in their smaller cohort with gestational ages of 26 to 34 weeks, Lorthe and
coworkers (2019) found similar rates of survival or of survival at discharge
without severe morbidity.
For less mature subgroups—23 to 28 weeks—the data are more
conflicting as to whether survival rates are improved with planned cesarean
delivery (Bergenhenegouwen, 2015; Grabovac, 2018; Kayem, 2015;
Thomas, 2016; Tucker Edmonds, 2015). In the balance, cesarean delivery is
proposed to avoid fetal injury from vaginal birth that may include anoxia,
trauma, and head entrapment. This is measured against maternal morbidity
from a classical uterine incision, which is often needed in this early preterm
group due to a poorly developed lower uterine segment. This incision
typically poses a risk of greater blood loss, higher infection rate, and
increased risk of uterine rupture in future pregnancies (Patterson, 2002;
Reddy, 2015; Sciscione, 2008). The high-level skills needed for safe vaginal
delivery of the very preterm fetus and the ultimate prognosis of the neonate
are other directing factors. For periviable fetuses, defined by them as 20 to
256/7 weeks, a consensus workshop of perinatal organizations concluded that
“available data do not consistently support routine cesarean delivery to
improve perinatal mortality or neurological outcomes for early preterm
infants” (Raju, 2014). A subsequent joint statement by the American College
of Obstetricians and Gynecologists and the Society for Maternal-Fetal
Medicine (2017) suggested consideration for cesarean delivery for

periviable fetuses beginning at 230/7 weeks, with a recommendation for
cesarean delivery at 250/7 weeks.
For more mature preterm breech fetuses, that is, between 32 and 37
weeks, again limited data guide delivery route selection. Bergenhenegouwen
and coworkers (2015) studied more than 6800 breech deliveries in a
subgroup between 32 and 37 weeks. With planned cesarean delivery or
planned vaginal birth, they found similar perinatal mortality and morbidity
rates.
All these findings shape practice. Thus, individualized decision-making
is needed for the preterm breech fetus for whom resuscitation is planned.
Provider skill, gestational age, parity, labor curve, and facility capability
weigh heavily in this process. For the fetus in which resuscitation is not
planned, vaginal delivery is likely preferable.

■ Delivery Complications
Compared with cephalic-presenting fetuses, higher rates of maternal and
perinatal morbidity can be anticipated with breech presentations. For the
mother, with either cesarean or vaginal delivery, genital tract laceration can
be problematic. With cesarean delivery, added stretching of the lower uterine
segment by forceps or by a poorly molded fetal head can extend hysterotomy
incisions. With vaginal delivery, especially with a thinned lower uterine
segment, delivery of the aftercoming head through an incompletely dilated
cervix or application of forceps may cause vaginal wall or cervical
lacerations, and even uterine rupture. Manipulations may also extend an
episiotomy, create deep perineal tears, require cervical incision, and raise
infection risks. If needed in select cases, inhalant anesthesia sufficient to
induce appreciable uterine relaxation during vaginal delivery may cause
uterine atony and postpartum hemorrhage. Maternal death is rare, but rates
appear higher in those with planned cesarean delivery for breech
presentation—a case-fatality rate of 0.47 maternal deaths per 1000 births
(Schutte, 2007). Other general short-term and long-term risks of cesarean
delivery are listed in Chapter 30 (p. 548).
For the fetus, prematurity and its complications are frequently comorbid
with breech presentation. Rates of congenital anomalies also are greater
(Mostello, 2014). Compared with cephalic presentation, umbilical cord

prolapse is more frequent with breech fetuses and with breech vaginal
delivery (Behbehani, 2016; Critchlow, 1994). Collea (1980) reported that
the incidence of prolapse approximated 0.5 percent with frank breech
presentation, 5 percent with complete breech, and up to 15 percent with
footling presentation.
Rare fetal morbidity includes humeral or clavicular fracture, brachial
plexus injury, and sternocleidomastoid muscle trauma (Chap. 33, p. 609.
These may occur with either route but more frequently complicate vaginal
birth. However, cesarean birth does not appear to afford greater protection
against femur or skull fractures (Ekéus, 2019; Goffinet, 2006; Hannah, 2000).
Rarely, traction may separate scapular, humeral, or femoral epiphyses
(Lamrani, 2011). The spinal cord may be injured or vertebrae fractured,
especially if great force is employed (Vialle, 2007). Last, genitals may be
injured with breech delivery (Saroha, 2015).
Some perinatal outcomes are inherent to the breech position rather than
delivery. For example, development of hip dysplasia is more common in
breech compared with cephalic presentation and is unaffected by delivery
mode (de Hundt, 2012; Hinderaker, 1994).

■ Imaging
As noted, limited sonographic evaluation near term is reasonable to confirm
presentation. Transabdominal sonography of the lower uterine segment in the
sagittal plane shows the presenting fetal part. Prior to this and as part of
prenatal care, sonographic fetal survey will have been performed in most
cases. If not, gross fetal abnormalities, such as hydrocephaly or anencephaly,
can be rapidly ascertained with sonography. This will identify many fetuses
not suitable for vaginal delivery. It will also help to ensure that a cesarean
delivery is not performed under emergency conditions for an anomalous fetus
with no chance of survival.
In many fetuses—especially those that are preterm or growth restricted—
the breech is smaller than the aftercoming head. Moreover, unlike cephalic
presentations, the head of a breech-presenting fetus does not undergo
appreciable molding during labor. Thus, if vaginal delivery is considered,
fetal size, breech type, and degree of neck flexion are evaluated (Fontenot,
1997; Rojansky, 1994). If needed, simple two-view radiography of the
maternal abdomen also can define fetal head inclination. Sonographic

identification of a nuchal arm or nuchal cord loops may warrant cesarean
delivery to avoid neonatal harm (Sherer, 1989).
The accuracy of fetal weight estimation by sonography is not altered by
breech presentation (McNamara, 2012). For planned vaginal delivery at
term, thresholds in Table 28-1 guide care. Moreover, a biparietal diameter
(BPD) >90 to 100 mm is often considered exclusionary for vaginal delivery
(Giuliani, 2002; Roman, 2008).

Pelvimetry
In addition to these requisite fetal parameters, some institutional protocols
recommend pelvimetry to assess the maternal bony pelvis prior to planned
vaginal term breech birth. Others, including our practice at Parkland
Hospital, instead monitor the steady progression of fetal descent and cervical
dilation to reflect adequate pelvic capacity.
For pelvimetry, one-view computed tomography (CT), magnetic
resonance (MR) imaging, or plain film radiography is suitable. Comparative
data among these modalities for pelvimetry are lacking, but CT is favored
due to its accuracy, low radiation dose, and widespread availability
(Thomas, 1998). Although variable, some suggest specific measurements to
permit a planned vaginal delivery: inlet anteroposterior diameter ≥10.5 cm;
inlet transverse diameter ≥12.0 cm; and midpelvic interspinous distance
≥10.0 cm (Azria, 2012; Vendittelli, 2006). Some have recommended
maternal-fetal biometry correlation. Appropriate values include: the sum of
the inlet obstetrical conjugate minus the fetal BPD is ≥15 mm; the inlet
transverse diameter minus the BPD is ≥25 mm; and the midpelvis
interspinous distance minus the BPD is ≥0 mm (Michel, 2011). From small
studies of MR imaging, vaginal delivery success rates approximating 75
percent were noted if the interspinous distance was >11 cm and true
obstetrical conjugate was >12 cm (Hoffmann, 2016; Klemt, 2019).

LABOR AND DELIVERY
■ Labor Management
On arrival to the labor unit, surveillance of fetal heart rate and uterine
contractions begins, and immediate recruitment of necessary staff includes:
(1) a provider skilled in the art of breech extraction, (2) an associate to

assist with the delivery, (3) anesthesia personnel who can ensure adequate
analgesia or anesthesia when needed, and (4) an individual trained in
newborn resuscitation. For the mother, intravenous access is obtained. This
allows, if required, emergency induction of anesthesia or maternal
resuscitation following hemorrhage from lacerations or from uterine atony.
Assessing cervical dilation, membranes status, and presenting part station
is essential for management. If labor is too far advanced, pelvimetry may be
unsafe if fetal expulsion in the radiology department is a possibility. This
alone, however, should not force the decision for cesarean delivery.
Commonly, stepwise labor progression itself is a good indicator of pelvic
adequacy (Biswas, 1993). Sonographic assessment, described earlier, is
completed. Ultimately, the choice of abdominal or vaginal delivery is guided
by factors listed in Table 28-1.
During labor, one-on-one nursing is ideal because of increased cord
prolapse risks, and physicians must be readily available for such
emergencies. Guidelines for monitoring the high-risk fetus are applied (Chap.
24, p. 461). For first-stage labor, most clinicians prefer continuous electronic
monitoring. At minimum, the fetal heart rate is recorded every 15 minutes. A
scalp electrode can be safely affixed to the buttock, but genitalia are avoided.
When membranes rupture, either spontaneously or artificially, the cord
prolapse risk rises appreciably. A small or preterm fetus or a non-frank
breech presentation raises this risk. Therefore, vaginal examination is
performed immediately following rupture, and special attention is directed to
the fetal heart rate for the first 5 to 10 minutes thereafter.
Continuous epidural analgesia is advocated by some. This may increase
the need for labor augmentation and prolong second-stage labor (Chadha,
1992; Confino, 1985). These potential disadvantages are weighed against the
advantages of better pain relief and increased pelvic relaxation should
extensive fetal manipulation be required. Analgesia must be sufficient for
episiotomy, for breech extraction, and for Piper forceps application. Nitrous
oxide plus oxygen inhalation provides further relief from pain. If general
anesthesia is required, it must be induced quickly.
Normal second-stage labor should show progressive fetal descent. An
initial passive second stage allows the breech to advance to the perineum
and is recommended. In the PREMODA study, this stage lasted <30 min for
60 percent of parturients and >60 min for only 20 percent (Goffinet, 2006).

For this passive phase, some recommend cesarean if the breech is not visible
after 1½ to 2 hours (Impey, 2017b; Kotaska, 2019).
Once the breech is visible, active pushing is encouraged. A hands-off
approach in which hands are poised merely to support delivering parts is
preferred to allow spontaneous delivery. In the PREMODA study, this active
phase was <30 min for 95 percent of those with successful vaginal births
(Goffinet, 2006). In their subanalysis of adverse neonatal outcome factors, an
active second stage >20 min increased the risk (Azria, 2012). In the Term
Breech Trial, the lowest risk for maternal and neonatal adverse outcomes
was seen in the group with active second stages lasting <30 min (Su, 2003,
2007). In one small observational study, fetal adverse risks rose if this phase
was >40 minutes (Macharey, 2017b). Canadian guidelines recommend
cesarean if completed or imminent delivery is not accomplished after 60 min
of pushing (Kotaska, 2019).

■ Labor Induction or Augmentation
Induction or augmentation of labor is controversial for term breech
pregnancies. Here again, data are limited and mostly retrospective. With
labor induction, Burgos and coworkers (2017) reported equivalent vaginal
delivery rates compared with spontaneous labor. With induction, however,
they reported higher rates of neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) admission.
But, Marzouk and associates (2011) found perinatal outcomes and cesarean
delivery rates not to differ. Last, others described greater cesarean delivery
rates with induction but similar neonatal outcomes (Macharey, 2016). In a
metaanalysis of studies, the NICU admission rate was 3 percent with labor
induction and was double that of those delivered from spontaneous labor.
The cesarean delivery rate with induction was higher and was 33 percent
(Sun, 2018).
Compared with cephalic presentations, breech labor in general proceeds
more slowly, but steady cervical progress is a positive indicator of adequate
pelvic capacity (Lennox, 1998). Thus, some protocols avoid augmentation
for the breech-presenting fetus, whereas others recommend it only for
hypotonic contractions (Alarab, 2004; Kotaska, 2019). In women with a
viable fetus, at Parkland Hospital, we use amniotomy to promote
contractions but prefer cesarean delivery instead of pharmacological labor
induction or augmentation.

■ Vaginal Delivery Methods
Vaginal breech delivery is accomplished by one of three methods. With
spontaneous breech delivery, the fetus is expelled entirely without any
traction or manipulation other than support of the newborn. With partial
breech extraction, the fetus is delivered spontaneously as far as the
umbilicus, but the remainder of the body is delivered by provider traction
and assisted maneuvers, with or without maternal expulsive efforts. With
total breech extraction, the entire fetal body is extracted by the provider.

■ Spontaneous Breech Delivery
Similar to vertex delivery, spontaneous expulsion of a breech fetus entails
sequential cardinal movements (Chap. 22, p. 421). First, engagement and
descent of the breech usually take place with the bitrochanteric diameter in
one of the oblique pelvic diameters. The anterior hip usually descends more
rapidly than the posterior hip, and when the resistance of the pelvic floor is
met, internal rotation of 45 degrees usually follows, bringing the anterior hip
toward the pubic arch and allowing the bitrochanteric diameter to occupy the
anteroposterior diameter of the pelvic outlet.
After rotation, descent continues until the perineum is distended by the
advancing breech, and the anterior hip appears at the vulva. By lateral
flexion of the fetal body, the posterior hip then is forced over the perineum,
which retracts over the fetal buttocks, thus allowing the fetus to straighten out
when the anterior hip is born. The legs and feet follow the breech and may be
born spontaneously or require aid.
After the birth of the breech, there is slight external rotation, with the
back turning anteriorly as the shoulders are brought into relation with one of
the oblique diameters of the pelvis. The shoulders then descend rapidly and
undergo internal rotation, with the bisacromial diameter occupying the
anteroposterior plane. Immediately following the shoulders, the head, which
is normally sharply flexed on the thorax, enters the pelvis in one of the
oblique diameters and then rotates to bring the posterior portion of the neck
under the symphysis pubis. The head is then born in flexion.
Infrequently, rotation renders the fetal back to lie posteriorly instead of
anteriorly. Such rotation is prevented if possible. Although the head can be
delivered by allowing the chin and face to pass beneath the symphysis, the

slightest traction on the body may cause extension of the head. With this, a
longer diameter of the head must pass through the pelvis.

■ Partial Breech Extraction
With breech delivery, successively larger and less compressible parts are
born. Thus, spontaneous expulsion is the exception, and vaginal delivery
typically requires skilled provider participation for the fetus to navigate the
birth canal. Noteworthy clinical pearls are provided by Yeomans (2017) in
Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd edition.
First, with all breech deliveries, unless the perineum is considerably lax,
an episiotomy is made and is an important adjunct to delivery. As discussed
in Chapter 27 (p. 510), mediolateral episiotomy may be preferred for its
lower associated risk of anal sphincter lacerations. Ideally, the breech is
allowed to deliver spontaneously to the umbilicus. Delivery of the breech
draws the umbilicus and attached cord into the pelvis. Therefore, once the
breech has passed beyond the vaginal introitus, the abdomen, thorax, arms,
and head must be delivered promptly either spontaneously or assisted.
The posterior hip will deliver, usually from the 6 o’clock position, and
often with sufficient pressure to evoke passage of thick meconium. The
anterior hip then delivers, followed by external rotation to a sacrum anterior
position. The mother is encouraged to continue to push as the fetus descends
until the legs are accessible. The legs are sequentially delivered by splinting
the femur with the operator’s fingers positioned parallel to the long axis of
the femur. This helps avoid femoral fracture. Pressure is exerted upward and
laterally to sweep each leg away from the midline (Fig. 28-3).

FIGURE 28-3 To deliver the left leg, two fingers of the provider’s left hand are placed beneath and
parallel to the femur. The thigh is then slightly abducted and pressure from the fingertips in the popliteal
fossa should induce knee flexion and bring the foot within reach. The foot is then grasped to gently
deliver the entire leg outside the vagina. A similar procedure is followed on the right. (Reproduced with
permission from Yeomans ER: Vaginal breech delivery. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III,
et al [eds]: Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill;
2017.)

Following delivery of the legs, the fetal bony pelvis is grasped with both
hands. The fingers should rest on the anterior superior iliac crests and the
thumbs on the sacrum. This minimizes the chance of fetal abdominal softtissue injury (Fig. 28-4). Maternal expulsive efforts are again used in
conjunction with downward traction to affect delivery.

FIGURE 28-4 To deliver the body, thumbs are placed over the sacrum, and each index finger wraps
over the top of the corresponding fetal iliac crest. Gentle downward traction is applied until the scapulas
are clearly visible. (Reproduced with permission from Yeomans ER: Vaginal breech delivery. In
Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al [eds]: Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative
Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2017.)

A cardinal rule in successful breech extraction is to employ steady,
gentle, downward traction until the lower halves of the scapulas are
delivered. Subsequent delivery of the shoulders and arms is not attempted
until one axilla becomes visible. It makes little difference which shoulder is
delivered first, and two methods are suitable for their delivery. In the first
method, with the scapulas visible, the trunk is rotated either clockwise or
counterclockwise to bring the anterior shoulder and arm into view (Fig. 285). During delivery of the arm, fingers and hand are aligned parallel to the
humerus and act as a splint. Perpendicular force risks humeral fracture. The
body of the fetus is then rotated 180 degrees in the reverse direction to bring
the other shoulder and arm into position for delivery.

FIGURE 28-5 A. After delivery of the first arm, 180-degree rotation of the fetal body brings the
sacrum to a right sacrum transverse (RST) position. B. Fingers of the provider’s hand extended over
the right shoulder and parallel to the humerus. These sweep the arm downward across the chest and
out. (Reproduced with permission from Yeomans ER: Vaginal breech delivery. In Yeomans ER,
Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al [eds]: Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New
York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2017.)

The second method is employed if trunk rotation is unsuccessful. With
this maneuver, the posterior shoulder is delivered first. For this, the feet are
grasped in one hand and drawn upward over the inner thigh of the mother
(Fig. 28-6). The operator’s hand enters over the fetal shoulder, fingers are
aligned parallel to the long axis of the fetal humerus, and the fetal arm is
swept upward. The posterior shoulder slides out over the perineal margin
and is usually followed by the arm and hand. Then, by depressing the body of
the fetus, the anterior shoulder emerges beneath the pubic arch, and the arm
and hand usually follow spontaneously. After both shoulders are delivered,
the back of the fetus tends to rotate spontaneously to the symphysis. Delivery
of the head may then be accomplished.

FIGURE 28-6 Infrequently, the posterior arm must be delivered first. For this, the lower half of the
fetal body is raised up and over the maternal groin. The provider’s fingers are inserted under the
posterior shoulder and aligned with the humerus. (Reproduced with permission from Yeomans ER:
Vaginal breech delivery. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al [eds]: Cunningham and
Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2017.)

Nuchal Arm
During delivery, one or both fetal arms occasionally may lie across the back
of the neck and become trapped at the pelvic inlet. With such a nuchal arm,
delivery is more difficult and can be aided by rotating the fetus through a half
circle in such a direction that the friction exerted by the birth canal will draw
the elbow toward the face (Fig. 28-7). With a right nuchal arm, the body
should be rotated counterclockwise, which rotates the fetal back toward the

maternal right. With a left nuchal arm, the rotation is clockwise, which
rotates the fetal back toward the maternal left. If rotation fails to free the
nuchal arm, it may be necessary to push the fetus upward to a roomier part of
the pelvis. If the rotation is still unsuccessful, still in this roomier part of the
pelvic, the nuchal arm can be extracted. For this, the operator’s hand enters
over the fetal shoulder, and fingers are aligned parallel to the long axis of the
fetal humerus. Downward pressure flexes the elbow, and the fetal arm is then
swept forward and down the ventral body surface for delivery. In this event,
fracture of the humerus or clavicle is common.

FIGURE 28-7 Reduction of a right nuchal arm is accomplished by rotating the fetal body 180 degrees
counterclockwise, which directs the fetal back to the maternal right. Friction exerted by the birth canal
will draw the elbow toward the face.

Delivery of the Aftercoming Head
The head of the fetus is normally extracted with one of the three maneuvers.
With any of these, hyperextension of the fetal neck is avoided.

First, with the Mauriceau maneuver, the index and middle finger of one
hand are applied over the maxilla, to flex the head, while the fetal body rests
on the palm of the same hand and forearm (Fig. 28-8). Fetal legs straddle the
forearm. Two fingers of the other hand hook over and grasp the shoulders.
Downward traction is concurrently applied until the suboccipital region
appears under the symphysis. Gentle suprapubic pressure simultaneously
applied by an assistant helps keep the head flexed. The body is slightly
elevated toward the maternal abdomen, and the mouth, nose, brow, and
eventually the occiput emerge successively over the perineum. With this
maneuver, the provider uses both hands simultaneously to exert continuous
downward gentle traction while balancing forces between the fetal neck and
maxilla to avoid neck hyperextension.

FIGURE 28-8 A. Delivery of the aftercoming head using the Mauriceau maneuver. Note that as the
fetal head is being delivered, flexion of the head is maintained by suprapubic pressure provided by an
assistant. B. Pressure on the maxilla is applied simultaneously by the operator as upward and outward
traction is exerted.

Second, specialized forceps can be used to deliver the aftercoming head.
Piper forceps, shown in Figure 28-9, or Laufe-Piper forceps may be applied

electively or when the Mauriceau maneuver cannot be accomplished easily.
The blades of the forceps are not applied to the aftercoming head until it has
been brought into the pelvis by gentle traction, combined with suprapubic
pressure, and is engaged. Suspension of the body of the fetus in a towel
effectively holds the fetus up and helps keep the arms and cord out of the way
as the forceps blades are applied.

FIGURE 28-9 Piper forceps for delivery of the aftercoming head.

Because the forceps blades are directed upward from the level of the
perineum, some choose to apply them from a one-knee kneeling position.
Piper forceps have a downward arch in the shank to accommodate the fetal
body and lack a pelvic curve. This shape permits direct application of the

cephalic curve of the blade along the length of the maternal vagina and fetal
parietal bone. The blade to be placed on the maternal left is held in the
provider’s left hand. The right hand slides between the fetal head and left
maternal vaginal sidewall to guide the blade inward and around the parietal
bone. The opposite blade mirrors this application.
Once in place, the blades are articulated, and the fetal body rests across
the shanks. The head is delivered by pulling gently outward and slightly
raising the handle simultaneously. This rolls the face over the perineum,
while the occiput remains beneath the symphysis until after the brow
delivers. Ideally, the head and body move in unison to minimize neck
extension.
Last, in some cases, the back of the fetus fails to rotate to the symphysis.
The fetus still may be delivered using the modified Prague maneuver. With
this, two fingers of one hand grasp the shoulders of the back-down fetus from
below while the other hand draws the feet up and over the maternal abdomen
(Fig. 28-10).

FIGURE 28-10 Delivery of the aftercoming head using the modified Prague maneuver necessitated by
failure of the fetal trunk to rotate anteriorly.

Head Entrapment
Either an incompletely dilated cervix or cephalopelvic disproportion can
entrap the head. At this point, a true emergency exists because significant
cord compression must be assumed.
First, an incompletely dilated cervix can constrict around the neck,
especially with a small preterm fetus. With gentle traction on the fetal body,
the cervix at times may be manually slipped over the occiput. If unsuccessful,
Dührssen incisions may be needed (Fig. 28-11). General anesthesia with

halogenated agents is another option to aid lower uterine segment relaxation.
As an extreme measure, replacement of the fetus higher into the vagina and
uterus, followed by cesarean delivery, can rescue an entrapped breech fetus.
This Zavanelli maneuver is classically performed to relieve intractable
shoulder dystocia (Sandberg, 1988). However, case reports have also
described its use for an entrapped aftercoming head (Sandberg, 1999; Steyn,
1994).

FIGURE 28-11 Dührssen incision being cut at 2 o’clock, which is followed by a second incision if
needed at 10 o’clock. Infrequently, an additional incision is required at 6 o’clock. The incisions are so
placed as to minimize bleeding from the laterally located cervical branches of the uterine artery. After
delivery, the incisions are repaired as described in Chapter 42 (p. 740).

Second, in cases with cephalopelvic disproportion and arrest of
aftercoming head, the Zavanelli maneuver or symphysiotomy are options

(Sunday-Adeoye, 2004; Wery, 2013). These are described in Chapter 27 (p.
504).

■ Total Breech Extraction
Frank Breech
During complete extraction of a frank breech, moderate traction is exerted by
a finger in each groin and aided by a generous episiotomy. Once the breech is
pulled through the introitus, the steps just described for partial breech
extraction are completed.
Rarely during vaginal delivery, a frank breech will require
decomposition inside the uterine cavity. Attributed to Pinard (1889), this
procedure converts a frank breech into a footling breech. It is accomplished
more readily if the membranes have ruptured only recently. It becomes
extremely difficult if amnionic fluid is scant and the uterus is tightly
contracted around the fetus. Pharmacological relaxation by general
anesthesia or intravenous magnesium sulfate, nitroglycerin, or a betamimetic
agent may be required. To begin, two fingers are carried up along one leg to
externally rotate the hip by pressing on the medial side of the thigh parallel to
the femur. Simultaneously, pressure in the popliteal fossa should prompt
spontaneous knee flexion which brings the corresponding foot into contact
with the back of the provider’s hand. The fetal foot then may be grasped and
brought down. Delivery is then accomplished as for incomplete breech,
described next.

Incomplete or Complete Breech
If rapid labor progress prohibits cesarean delivery, total extraction of an
incomplete or complete breech may be required. A hand is introduced
through the vagina, and both fetal feet are grasped. The ankles are held with
the middle finger lying between them. With gentle traction, the feet are
brought through the introitus (Fig. 28-12). As the legs begin to emerge
through the vulva, downward gentle traction is continued. As the legs
emerge, successively higher portions are grasped. When the breech appears
at the vaginal outlet, gentle traction is applied until the hips are delivered.
The thumbs are then placed over the sacrum and the fingers over the iliac

crests. Breech extraction is then completed, as described for partial breech
extraction.

FIGURE 28-12 Complete breech extraction begins with traction on the feet and ankles.

If only one foot can be grasped, it can be brought down into the vagina
and held with the appropriate hand, right hand for right foot and left hand for
left foot (Yeomans, 2017). With the first foot secure, the opposite hand is
introduced, passed upward along the leg, and guided to locate the other foot.
If the remaining hip is extended, the second foot is usually easily grasped and
brought down. If the hip is flexed and knee extended, a finger is hooked into
that groin, and traction will bring the lower half of the fetus down until the
leg can be reached.
For cesarean delivery, these same total breech extraction maneuvers can
be used. These steps can aid delivery of a frank, complete, or incomplete
breech through the hysterotomy incision.

EXTERNAL CEPHALIC VERSION
With version, fetal presentation is altered by physically substituting one pole
of a longitudinal presentation for the other, or converting an oblique or
transverse lie into a longitudinal presentation. Manipulations performed
through the abdominal wall that yield a cephalic presentation are termed
external cephalic version. Manipulations accomplished inside the uterine
cavity that yield a breech presentation are designated internal podalic
version. This latter procedure is reserved for delivery of a second twin and
described in Chapter 48 (p. 856).

■ Indications
External cephalic version (ECV) reduces the rate of noncephalic presentation
at birth, and its success rate is 50 to 60 percent (Hofmeyr, 2015b; Melo,
2019). For women with a transverse lie, the overall success rate is
significantly higher.
In general, ECV is attempted before labor in a woman who has reached
370/7 weeks’ gestation (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2020; Impey, 2017a). This threshold aims to balance risks of
fetal immaturity and the greater amnionic fluid volume seen in early-term
pregnancies, which aids turning. In support of this, one systematic review
found that ECV done before 370/7 weeks raised ECV success rates but did
not lower the ultimate cesarean delivery rate and increased the risk of latepreterm birth (Hutton, 2015). Before this time, breech presentation also still
has a high likelihood of correcting spontaneously. And, if ECV is performed
too early, time may allow a reversion back to breech (Bogner, 2012). Last, if
attempts at version cause a need for immediate delivery, complications of
iatrogenic early-term delivery generally are not severe.
Absolute contraindications to ECV are few. It is contraindicated if
vaginal delivery is not an option, such as with placenta previa. Relative
contraindications are early labor, oligohydramnios or ruptured membranes,
known nuchal cord, structural uterine abnormalities, fetal-growth restriction,
multifetal gestation, and prior abruption or its risk factors (Rosman, 2013).
Little data guide the decision for ECV for women with a prior cesarean
delivery. In one pooled series of small studies that contained more than 100

attempts, no uterine ruptures were reported (Impey, 2018). At Parkland
Hospital, we do not attempt ECV in these women.
Several factors can improve the chances of an ECV attempt. These are
multiparity, unengaged presenting part, nonanterior placenta, nonobese
patient, and abundant amnionic fluid (Lauterbach, 2021; Kok, 2008, 2009).
To augment the last parameter, neither a preprocedural 2-L intravenous fluid
bolus nor amnioinfusion raised ECV success rates (Burgos, 2014; Diguisto,
2018). Dedicated breech teams may increase these rates (Hickland, 2018;
Thissen, 2019).

■ Complications
Patient counseling includes a discussion regarding small but real risks for
placental abruption, preterm labor, and fetal compromise. Bradycardia is
common during or following ECV, but emergent cesarean rates are ≤0.5
percent. Uterine rupture, fetomaternal hemorrhage, alloimmunization,
amnionic fluid embolism, and maternal or fetal deaths are rare
(Grootscholten, 2008; Rodgers, 2017). Overall, compared with expectant
management, perinatal morbidity and mortality rates are not greater with
ECV (Krueger, 2018; Son, 2018).
Even after successful ECV, several reports suggest that the cesarean
delivery rate does not completely revert to the baseline for vertex
presentations. Specifically, dystocia, malpresentation, and nonreassuring
fetal heart patterns may be more common in these fetuses who have
undergone successful ECV (Chan, 2004; de Hundt, 2014; Vézina, 2004).

■ Technique
ECV should be carried out in an area that has ready access to a facility
equipped to perform emergency cesarean delivery. Because of the risk for
surgical intervention, intravenous access is obtained. Patients also abstain
from eating for 6 hours, but clear liquids can be consumed up to 2 hours
prior. Sonographic examination is performed to confirm nonvertex
presentation, document amnionic fluid volume adequacy, exclude obvious
fetal anomalies if not done previously, and identify placental location and
fetal spine orientation. Preprocedural external monitoring is performed to
document fetal heart rate reactivity. Anti-D immune globulin is given to Rh

D–negative women. Tocolysis and regional analgesia may be elected, and
rationale for these is provided in subsequent sections.
The woman is placed in left lateral tilt to aid uteroplacental perfusion,
and Trendelenburg positioning helps during elevation of the breech. During
the procedure, we prefer to monitor fetal heart motion sonographically. An
abundant abdominal coating of ultrasound gel permits this and also minimizes
painful skin friction (Vallikkannu, 2014).
A forward roll of the fetus usually is attempted first. One or two
providers may participate, and one hand grasps the head. The fetal buttocks
are then elevated from the maternal pelvis and displaced laterally (Fig. 2813). These are then gently guided toward the fundus, while the head is
simultaneously directed toward the pelvis. If the forward roll is
unsuccessful, a backward flip is attempted. ECV attempts are discontinued
for excessive discomfort, for persistently abnormal fetal heart rate, or after
multiple failed attempts. Failure is not always absolute. Ben-Meir and
colleagues (2007) reported a spontaneous version rate of 7 percent among
226 failed versions—2 percent among nulliparas and 13 percent among
multiparas.

FIGURE 28-13 External cephalic version. With an attempted forward roll, clockwise pressure is
exerted against the fetal poles.

If ECV is successful, a nonstress test is repeated until a normal test result
is obtained. A transient abnormal fetal heart rate tracing during or after ECV
complicates 6 to 9 percent of cases. This should prompt a traditional
resuscitative response with intravenous fluids, oxygen, and lateral tilt. Rates
of abnormal tracings prompting immediate cesarean delivery range from only
0.2 to 0.4 percent (Collaris, 2004; Grootscholten, 2008). Once resolved,
Kuppens and coworkers (2017) found that a transient abnormal tracing did
not predict later fetal distress in subsequent labor.

If ECV is completed before 39 weeks’ gestation, awaiting spontaneous
labor and fetal maturity is preferred. In some studies, immediate labor
induction is linked to higher cesarean delivery rates (Burgos, 2015; Kuppens,
2013).

Tocolysis
By relaxing the uterus prior to an ECV attempt, tocolysis raises success rates.
Most data support the use of the betamimetics terbutaline and ritodrine for
this (Cluver, 2015). In one such trial, Fernandez and coworkers (1996)
reported that the success rate with subcutaneous terbutaline—52 percent—
was significantly higher than without—27 percent. Our policy at Parkland
Hospital is to administer 250 μg of terbutaline subcutaneously to most
women before attempted ECV. When maternal tachycardia—a known side
effect of terbutaline—is noted, the attempt is begun. Terbutaline readily
crosses the placenta, and mild elevation of fetal heart rate baseline also is
possible (Ingemarsson, 1981; Roth, 1990). Data are limited and in some
cases are nonsupportive for other agents that include calcium-channel
blockers, such as nifedipine; nitric oxide donors, such as nitroglycerin; the
oxytocin-receptor antagonist atosiban; and another betamimetic salbutamol
(Burgos, 2010; Cluver, 2015; Hilton, 2009; Levin, 2019; Vani, 2009; Wilcox,
2011).

Conduction Analgesia
Epidural analgesia coupled with tocolysis has been reported to raise ECV
success rates compared with tocolysis alone (Goetzinger, 2011; MagroMalosso, 2016). Moreover, rates of complications that include fetal heart
rate aberrations, emergency cesarean delivery, or placental abruption are not
greater with regional analgesia. In trials, spinal and epidural have both
shown success and are reasonable options (Khaw, 2015; Weiniger, 2010).
Although uncommon, risks specific to regional analgesia, such as spinal
headache, are possible. Currently, the superior technique and best drugs to
administer are unclear. In contrast, from limited data, intravenous sedation or
nitrous oxide does not appear to improve ECV success (Burgos, 2016;
Dochez, 2019; Khaw, 2015; Straube, 2021).

■ Moxibustion

This is a traditional Chinese medicine technique that burns a cigarette-shaped
stick of ground Artemisia vulgaris—which is also known as mugwort or in
Japanese as moxa. At the BL 67 acupuncture point, the stick is directly
placed against the skin or indirectly heats an acupuncture needle at the site to
increase fetal movement and promote spontaneous breech version (Ewies,
2002). It is performed usually between 33 and 36 weeks’ gestation to permit
a trial of ECV if not successful. Results from randomized controlled studies
are conflicting (Bue, 2016; Coulon, 2014; Coyle, 2012; Sananes, 2016; Vas,
2013).

REFERENCES
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Mode of term singleton breech delivery.
Committee Opinion No. 745, July 2018b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine: Periviable
birth. Obstetric Care Consensus No. 6, October 2017
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: External cephalic version. Practice Bulletin No.
221, April 2020
Azria E, Le Meaux JP, Khoshnood B, et al: Factors associated with adverse perinatal outcomes for term
breech fetuses with planned vaginal delivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 207(4):285.e1, 2012
Behbehani S, Patenaude V, Abenhaim HA: Maternal risk factors and outcomes of umbilical cord
prolapse: a population-based study. J Obstet Gynaecol Can 38(1):23, 2016
Ben-Meir A, Elram T, Tsafrir A, et al: The incidence of spontaneous version after failed external
cephalic version. Am J Obstet Gynecol 196(2):157, 2007
Bergenhenegouwen L, Vlemmix F, Ensing S, et al: Preterm breech presentation: a comparison of
intended vaginal and intended cesarean delivery. Obstet Gynecol 126(6):1223, 2015
Bergenhenegouwen LA, Meertens LJ, Schaaf J, et al: Vaginal delivery versus caesarean section in
preterm breech delivery: a systematic review. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 172:1, 2014
Berhan Y, Haileamlak A: The risks of planned vaginal breech delivery versus planned caesarean section
for term breech birth: a meta-analysis including observational studies. BJOG 123(1):49, 2016
Bin YS, Ford JB, Nicholl MC, et al: Long-term childhood outcomes of breech presentation by intended
mode of delivery: a population record linkage study. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 96(3):342, 2017
Bin YS, Roberts CL, Nicholl MC, et al: Contribution of changing risk factors to the trend in breech
presentation at term. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol 56(6):564, 2016
Biswas A, Johnstone MJ: Term breech delivery: does x-ray pelvimetry help? Aust N Z J Obstet
Gynaecol 33:150, 1993
Bogner G, Xu F, Simbrunner C, et al: Single-institute experience, management, success rate, and
outcome after external cephalic version at term. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 116(2):134, 2012
Bue L, Lauszus FF: Moxibustion did not have an effect in a randomised clinical trial for version of
breech position. Dan Med J 63(2): A5199, 2016
Burgos J, Arana I, Garitano I, et al: Induction of labor in breech presentation at term: a retrospective
cohort study. J Perinat Med 45(3):299, 2017

Burgos J, Eguiguren N, Quintana E, et al: Atosiban vs. ritodrine as a tocolytic in external cephalic
version at term: a prospective cohort study. J Perinat Med 38(1):23, 2010
Burgos J, Iglesias M, Pijoan JI, et al: Probability of cesarean delivery after successful external cephalic
version. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 131(2):192, 2015
Burgos J, Pijoan JI, Osuna C, et al: Increased pain relief with remifentanil does not improve the success
rate of external cephalic version: a randomized controlled trial. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand
95(5):547, 2016
Burgos J, Quintana E, Cobos P, et al: Effect of maternal intravenous fluid therapy on external cephalic
version at term: a prospective cohort study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 211(6):665.e1, 2014
Cammu H, Dony N, Martens G, et al: Common determinants of breech presentation at birth in
singletons: a population-based study. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 177:106, 2014
Chadha YC, Mahmood TA, Dick MJ, et al: Breech delivery and epidural analgesia. BJOG 99:96, 1992
Chan LY, Tang JL, Tsoi KF, et al: Intrapartum cesarean delivery after successful external cephalic
version: a meta-analysis. Obstet Gynecol 104:155, 2004
Cimmino CV, Southworth LE: Persistent hyperextension of the neck in breech (“star-gazing fetus”) and
in transverse lie (“flying-fetus”): indication for cesarean section. Am J Roentgenol Radium Ther
Nucl Med 125(2):447, 1975
Cluver C, Gyte GM, Sinclair M, et al: Interventions for helping to turn term breech babies to head first
presentation when using external cephalic version. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2:CD000184, 2015
Collaris RJ, Oei SG.: External cephalic version: a safe procedure? A systematic review of versionrelated risks. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 83(6):511, 2004
Collea JV: Current management of breech presentation. Clin Obstet Gynecol 23(2):525, 1980
Confino E, Ismajovich B, Rudick V, et al: Extradural analgesia in the management of singleton breech
delivery. Br J Anaesth 57:892, 1985
Coulon C, Poleszczuk M, Paty-Montaigne MH, et al: Version of breech fetuses by moxibustion with
acupuncture: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol 124(1):32, 2014
Coyle ME, Smith CA, Peat B: Cephalic version by moxibustion for breech presentation. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 5:CD003928, 2012
Critchlow CW, Leet TL, Benedetti TJ, et al: Risk factors and infant outcomes associated with umbilical
cord prolapse: a population-based case-control study among births in Washington State. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 170(2):613, 1994
Deering S, Brown J, Hodor J, et al: Simulation training and resident performance of singleton vaginal
breech delivery. Obstet Gynecol 107(1):86, 2006
de Hundt M, Vlemmix F, Bais JM, et al: Risk factors for developmental dysplasia of the hip: a metaanalysis. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 165(1):8, 2012
Diguisto C, Winer N, Descriaud C, et al: Amnioinfusion for women with a singleton breech presentation
and a previous failed external cephalic version: a randomized controlled trial. J Matern Fetal
Neonatal Med 31(8):993, 2018
Dochez V, Esbelin J, Misbert E, et al: Effectiveness of nitrous oxide in external cephalic version on
success rate: a randomized controlled trial. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 99(3):391, 2020
Dotters-Katz SK, Gray B, Heine RP, et al: Resident education in complex obstetric procedures: are we
adequately preparing tomorrow’s obstetricians? Am J Perinatol 37(11):1155, 2020
Eide MG, Øyen N, Skjaerven R, et al: Breech delivery and intelligence: a population-based study of
8,738 breech infants. Obstet Gynecol 105(1):4, 2005
Ekéus C, Norman M, Åberg K, et al: Vaginal breech delivery at term and neonatal morbidity and
mortality—a population-based cohort study in Sweden. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med. 32(2):265,

2019
Ewies AA, Olah KS: The sharp end of medical practice: the use of acupuncture in obstetrics and
gynecology. BJOG 109(1):1, 2002
Fernandez CO, Bloom S, Wendel G: A prospective, randomized, blinded comparison of terbutaline
versus placebo for singleton, term external cephalic version. Am J Obstet Gynecol 174:326, 1996
Fontenot T, Campbell B, Mitchell-Tutt E, et al: Radiographic evaluation of breech presentation: is it
necessary? Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 10:338, 1997
Ford JB, Roberts CL, Nassar N, et al: Recurrence of breech presentation in consecutive pregnancies.
BJOG 117(7):830, 2010
Giuliani A, Scholl WMJ, Basver A, et al: Mode of delivery and outcome of 699 term singleton breech
deliveries at a single center. Am J Obstet Gynecol 187:1694, 2002
Goetzinger KR, Harper LM, Tuuli MG, et al: Effect of regional anesthesia on the success rate of
external cephalic version: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Obstet Gynecol 118(5):1137, 2011
Goffinet F, Carayol M, Foidart JM, et al: Is planned vaginal delivery for breech presentation at term still
an option? Results of an observational prospective survey in France and Belgium. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 194(4):1002, 2006
Grabovac M, Karim JN, Isayama T, et al: What is the safest mode of birth for extremely preterm
breech singleton infants who are actively resuscitated? A systematic review and meta-analyses.
BJOG 125(6):652, 2018
Grootscholten K, Kok M, Oei SG, et al: External cephalic version-related risks: a meta-analysis. Obstet
Gynecol 112(5):1143, 2008
Grunebaum A: Vaginal breech deliveries in the United States 1999–2013. Obstet Gynecol 127(5,
suppl):69S, 2016
Hannah ME, Hannah WJ, Hewson SA, et al: Planned caesarean section versus planned vaginal birth for
breech presentation at term: a randomised multicentre trial. Lancet 356:1375, 2000
Hernandez-Marti M, Dal Canto MC, Kidd JM: Evidence of spinal cord injury in an infant delivered by
cesarean section. A case report. Childs Brain 11(3):197, 1984
Hickland P, Gargan P, Simpson J, et al: A novel and dedicated multidisciplinary service to manage
breech presentation at term; 3 years of experience in a tertiary care maternity unit. J Matern Fetal
Neonatal Med 31(22):3002, 2018
Hilton J, Allan B, Swaby C, et al: Intravenous nitroglycerin for external cephalic version: a randomized
controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol 114(3):560, 2009
Hinderaker T, Daltveit AK, Irgens LM, et al: The impact of intra-uterine factors on neonatal hip
instability. An analysis of 1,059,479 children in Norway. Acta Orthop Scand 65(3):239, 1994
Hinnenberg P, Toijonen A, Gissler M, et al: Outcome of small for gestational age-fetuses in breech
presentation at term according to mode of delivery: a nationwide, population-based record linkage
study. Arch Gynecol Obstet 299(4):969, 2019
Hoffmann J, Thomassen K, Stumpp P, et al: New MRI criteria for successful vaginal breech delivery in
primiparae. PLoS One 11(8):e0161028, 2016
Hofmeyr GJ, Hannah M, Lawrie TA: Planned caesarean section for term breech delivery. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 7:CD000166, 2015a
Hofmeyr GJ, Kulier R, West HM: External cephalic version for breech presentation at term. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 4:CD000083, 2015b
Hutton EK, Hofmeyr GJ, Dowswell T: External cephalic version for breech presentation before term.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 7:CD000084, 2015

Impey LW, Murphy DJ, Griffiths M, et al: External cephalic version and reducing the incidence of term
breech presentation. BJOG 124: e178, 2017a
Impey LW, Murphy DJ, Griffiths M, et al: Management of breech presentation: green-top guideline No.
20b. BJOG 124(7):e151, 2017b
Impey OR, Greenwood CE, Impey LW: External cephalic version after previous cesarean section: a
cohort study of 100 consecutive attempts. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. 231:210, 2018
Ingemarsson I, Westgren M, Lindberg C, et al: Single injection of terbutaline in term labor: placental
transfer and effects on maternal and fetal carbohydrate metabolism. Am J Obstet Gynecol
139(6):697, 1981
Kayem G, Combaud V, Lorthe E, et al: Mortality and morbidity in early preterm breech singletons:
impact of a policy of planned vaginal delivery. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 192:61, 2015
Khaw KS, Lee SW, Ngan Kee WD, et al: Randomized trial of anaesthetic interventions in external
cephalic version for breech presentation. Br J Anaesth 114(6):944, 2015
Klemt AS, Schulze S, Brüggmann D, et al: MRI-based pelvimetric measurements as predictors for a
successful vaginal breech delivery in the Frankfurt Breech at term cohort (FRABAT). Eur J Obstet
Gynecol Reprod Biol 232:10, 2019
Kok M, Cnossen J, Gravendeel L, et al: Clinical factors to predict the outcome of external cephalic
version: a metaanalysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 199(6):630, 2008
Kok M, Cnossen J, Gravendeel L, et al: Ultrasound factors to predict the outcome of external cephalic
version: a meta-analysis. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 33(1):76, 2009
Korb D, Schmitz T, Alexander S, et al: Association between planned mode of delivery and severe
maternal morbidity in women with breech presentations: a secondary analysis of the PREMODA
prospective general population study. J Gynecol Obstet Hum Reprod 49(2):101662, 2020
Kotaska A, Menticoglou S: No. 384-management of breech presentation at term. J Obstet Gynaecol
Can 41(8):1193, 2019
Krueger S, Simioni J, Griffith LE, et al: Labour outcomes after successful external cephalic version
compared with spontaneous cephalic version. J Obstet Gynaecol Can 40(1):61, 2018
Kuppens SM, Hutton EK, Hasaart TH, et al: Mode of delivery following successful external cephalic
version: comparison with spontaneous cephalic presentations at delivery. J Obstet Gynaecol Can
35(10):883, 2013
Kuppens SM, Smailbegovic I, Houterman S, et al: Fetal heart rate abnormalities during and after
external cephalic version: which fetuses are at risk and how are they delivered? BMC Pregnancy
Childbirth 17(1):363, 2017
Lamrani YA, Maâroufi M, Kamaoui I, et al: Neonatal distal femoral epiphyseal dislocation: an ultrasound
diagnosis. J Med Ultrason 38(4):221, 2011
Lauterbach R, Bachar G, Ben-David C, et al: Association of persistent breech presentation with
external cephalic version success. Obstet Gynecol 137(2):258, 2021
Lennox CE, Kwast BE, Farley TM: Breech labor on the WHO partograph. Int J Gynaecol Obstet
62(2):117, 1998
Levin G, Ezra Y, Weill Y, et al: Nifedipine versus ritodrine during external cephalic version procedure: a
case control study. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 13:1, 2019
Lorthe E, Sentilhes L, Quere M, et al: Planned delivery route of preterm breech singletons, and neonatal
and 2-year outcomes: a population-based cohort study. BJOG 126(1):73, 2019
Lumbiganon P, Laopaiboon M, Gülmezoglu AM, et al: Method of delivery and pregnancy outcomes in
Asia: the WHO global survey on maternal and perinatal health 2007–08. Lancet 375(9713):490,
2010

Lydon-Rochelle M, Albers L, Gorwoda J, et al: Accuracy of Leopold maneuvers in screening for
malpresentation: a prospective study. Birth 20:132, 1993
Lyons J, Pressey T, Bartholomew S, et al: Delivery of breech presentation at term gestation in Canada,
2003–2011. Obstet Gynecol 125(5):1153, 2015
Macharey G, Gissler M, Rahkonen L, et al: Breech presentation at term and associated obstetric risks
factors-a nationwide population based cohort study. Arch Gynecol Obstet 295(4):833, 2017a
Macharey G, Ulander VM, Heinonen S, et al: Induction of labor in breech presentations at term: a
retrospective observational study. Arch Gynecol Obstet 293(3):549, 2016
Macharey G, Ulander VM, Heinonen S, et al: Risk factors and outcomes in “well-selected” vaginal
breech deliveries: a retrospective observational study. J Perinat Med 45(3):291, 2017b
Macharey G, Väisänen-Tommiska M, Gissler M, et al: Neurodevelopmental outcome at the age of 4
years according to the planned mode of delivery in term breech presentation: a nationwide,
population-based record linkage study. J Perinat Med 46(3):323, 2018
Magro-Malosso ER, Saccone G, Di Tommaso M, et al: Neuraxial analgesia to increase the success rate
of external cephalic version: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 215(3):276, 2016
Marzouk P, Arnaud E, Oury JF, et al: Induction of labour and breech presentation: experience of a
French maternity ward. [French]. J Gynecol Obstet Biol Reprod (Paris) 40(7):668, 2011
Maslovitz S, Barkai G, Lessing JB, et al: Recurrent obstetric management mistakes identified by
simulation. Obstet Gynecol 109(6):1295, 2007
McNamara JM, Odibo AO, Macones GA, et al: The effect of breech presentation on the accuracy of
estimated fetal weight. Am J Perinatol 29(5):353, 2012
Melo P, Georgiou EX, Hedditch A, et al: External cephalic version at term: a cohort study of 18 years’
experience. BJOG 126(4):493, 2019
Michel S, Drain A, Closset E, et al: Evaluation of a decision protocol for type of delivery of infants in
breech presentation at term. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 158(2):194, 2011
Mostello D, Chang JJ, Bai F, et al: Breech presentation at delivery: a marker for congenital anomaly? J
Perinatol 34(1):11, 2014
Nassar N, Roberts CL, Cameron CA, et al: Diagnostic accuracy of clinical examination for detection of
non-cephalic presentation in late pregnancy: cross sectional analytic study. BMJ 333:578, 2006
Noli SA, Baini I, Parazzini F, et al: Preterm birth, low gestational age, low birth weight, parity, and other
determinants of breech presentation: Results from a large retrospective population-based study.
Biomed Res Int 2019: 9581439, 2019
Patterson LS, O’Connell CM, Baskett TF: Maternal and perinatal morbidity associated with classic and
inverted T cesarean incisions. Obstet Gynecol 100(4):633, 2002
Phelan JP, Bethel M, DeVore G, et al: Use of ultrasonography in the breech presentation with
hyperextension of the fetal head. J Ultrasound Med 2(8):373, 1983
Pinard A: On version by external maneuvers. In traite du palper abdominal. Paris, Lauwereyns, 1889
Raju TN, Mercer BM, Burchfield DJ, et al: Periviable birth: executive summary of a joint workshop by
the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, Society for
Maternal-Fetal Medicine, American Academy of Pediatrics, and American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists. Obstet Gynecol 123(5):1083, 2014
Reddy UM, Rice MM, Grobman WA, et al: Serious maternal complications after early preterm delivery
(24-33 weeks’ gestation). Am J Obstet Gynecol 213(4):538, 2015
Reddy UM, Zhang J, Sun L, et al: Neonatal mortality by attempted route of delivery in early preterm
birth. Am J Obstet Gynecol 207(2):117.e1, 2012

Rietberg CC, Elferink-Stinkens PM, Visser GH: The effect of the Term Breech Trial on medical
intervention behaviour and neonatal outcome in The Netherlands: an analysis of 35,453 term breech
infants. BJOG 112(2):205, 2005
Roberts CL, Algert CS, Peat B, et al: Small fetal size: a risk factor for breech birth at term. Int J
Gynaecol Obstet 67(1):1, 1999
Rodgers R, Beik N, Nassar N, et al: Complications of external cephalic version: a retrospective analysis
of 1121 patients at a tertiary hospital in Sydney. BJOG 124(5):767, 2017
Rojansky N, Tanos V, Lewin A, et al: Sonographic evaluation of fetal head extension and maternal
pelvis in cases of breech presentation. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 73:607, 1994
Roman H, Carayol M, Watier L, et al: Planned vaginal delivery of fetuses in breech presentation at
term: prenatal determinants predictive of elevated risk of cesarean delivery during labor. Eur J
Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 138(1):14, 2008
Rosman AN, Guijt A, Vlemmix F, et al: Contraindications for external cephalic version in breech position
at term: a systematic review. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 92(2):137, 2013
Roth AC, Milsom I, Forssman L, et al: Effects of intravenous terbutaline on maternal circulation and
fetal heart activity. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 69(3):223, 1990
Sananes N, Roth GE, Aissi GA, et al: Acupuncture version of breech presentation: a randomized shamcontrolled single-blinded trial. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 204:24, 2016
Sandberg EC: The Zavanelli maneuver extended: progression of a revolutionary concept. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 158(6 Pt 1):1347, 1988
Sandberg EC: The Zavanelli maneuver: 12 years of recorded experience. Obstet Gynecol 93:312, 1999
Saroha M, Batra P, Dewan P, et al: Genital injuries in neonates following breech presentation. J
Neonatal Perinatal Med 8(4):421, 2015
Schutte JM, Steegers EA, Santema JG, et al: Maternal deaths after elective cesarean section for breech
presentation in the Netherlands. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 86(2):240, 2007
Sciscione AC, Landon MB, Leveno KJ, et al: Previous preterm cesarean delivery and risk of
subsequent uterine rupture. Obstet Gynecol 111(3):648, 2008
Sherer DM, Menashe M, Palti Z, et al: Radiologic evidence of a nuchal arm in the breech-presenting
fetus at the onset of labor: an indication for abdominal delivery. Am J Perinatol 6(3):353, 1989
Shipp TD, Bromley B, Benacerraf B: The prognostic significance of hyperextension of the fetal head
detected antenatally with ultrasound. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 15(5):391, 2000
Son M, Roy A, Grobman WA, et al: Association between attempted external cephalic version and
perinatal morbidity and mortality. Obstet Gynecol. 132(2):365, 2018
Steyn W, Pieper C: Favorable neonatal outcome after fetal entrapment and partially successful Zavanelli
maneuver in a case of breech presentation. Am J Perinatol 11:348, 1994
Straube LE, Fardelmann KL, Penwarden AA, et al: Nitrous oxide analgesia for external cephalic
version: A randomized controlled trial. J Clin Anesth 68:110073, 2021
Su M, McLeod L, Ross S, et al: Factors associated with adverse perinatal outcome in the term breech
trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol 189(3):740, 2003
Su M, McLeod L, Ross S, et al: Factors associated with maternal morbidity in the term breech trial. J
Obstet Gynaecol Can 29(4):324, 2007
Sun W, Liu F, Liu S, et al: Comparison of outcomes between induction of labor and spontaneous labor
for term breech—a systemic review and meta-analysis. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 222:155,
2018
Sunday-Adeoye IM, Okonta P, Twomey D: Symphysiotomy at the Mater Misericordiae Hospital Afikpo,
Ebonyi State of Nigeria (1982–1999): a review of 1013 cases. J Obstet Gynaecol 24(5):525, 2004

Thissen D, Swinkels P, Dullemond RC, et al: Introduction of a dedicated team increases the success
rate of external cephalic version: a prospective cohort study. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol
236:193, 2019
Thomas PE, Petersen SG, Gibbons K: The influence of mode of birth on neonatal survival and maternal
outcomes at extreme prematurity: a retrospective cohort study. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol
56(1):60, 2016
Thomas SM, Bees NR, Adam EJ: Trends in the use of pelvimetry techniques. Clin Radiol 53(4):293,
1998
Toijonen AE, Heinonen ST, Gissler MV, et al: A comparison of risk factors for breech presentation in
preterm and term labor: a nationwide, population-based case-control study. Arch Gynecol Obstet
301(2):393, 2020
Toivonen E, Palomäki O, Huhtala H, et al: Selective vaginal breech delivery at term—still an option.
Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 91(10):1177, 2012
Tucker Edmonds B, McKenzie F, Macheras M, et al: Morbidity and mortality associated with mode of
delivery for breech periviable deliveries. Am J Obstet Gynecol 213(1):70, 2015
Vallikkannu N, Nadzratulaiman WN, Omar SZ, et al: Talcum powder or aqueous gel to aid external
cephalic version: a randomised controlled trial. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth 14:49, 2014
Vani S, Lau SY, Lim BK, et al: Intravenous salbutamol for external cephalic version. Int J Gynecol
Obstet 104(1):28, 2009
Vas J, Aranda-Regules JM, Modesto M, et al: Using moxibustion in primary healthcare to correct nonvertex presentation: a multicentre randomised controlled trial. Acupunct Med 31(1):31, 2013
Vendittelli F, Pons JC, Lemery D, et al: The term breech presentation: neonatal results and obstetric
practices in France. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 125(2):176, 2006
Vézina Y, Bujold E, Varin J, et al: Cesarean delivery after successful external cephalic version of breech
presentation at term: a comparative study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 190:763, 2004
Vialle R, Piétin-Vialle C, Ilharreborde B, et al: Spinal cord injuries at birth: a multicenter review of nine
cases. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 20(6):435, 2007
Vistad I, Klungsøyr K, Albrechtsen S, et al: Neonatal outcome of singleton term breech deliveries in
Norway from 1991 to 2011. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 94(9):997, 2015
Weiniger CF, Ginosar Y, Elchalal U, et al: Randomized controlled trial of external cephalic version in
term multiparae with or without spinal analgesia. Br J Anaesth 104(5):613, 2010
Weinstein D, Margalioth EJ, Navot D, et al: Neonatal fetal death following cesarean section secondary
to hyperextended head in breech presentation. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 62(6):629, 1983
Wery E, Le Roch A, Subtil D: Zavanelli maneuver performed in a breech presentation. Int J Gynaecol
Obstet 120(2):193, 2013
Westgren M, Grundsell H, Ingemarsson I, et al: Hyperextension of the fetal head in breech presentation.
A study with long-term follow-up. BJOG 88(2):101, 1981
Whyte H, Hannah ME, Saigal S, et al: Outcomes of children at 2 years after planned cesarean birth
versus planned vaginal birth for breech presentation at term: the International Randomized Term
Breech Trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol 191(3):864, 2004
Wilcox CB, Nassar N, Roberts CL: Effectiveness of nifedipine tocolysis to facilitate external cephalic
version: a systematic review. BJOG 118(4):423, 2011
Yeomans ER: Vaginal breech delivery. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al (eds):
Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2017

CHAPTER 29

Operative Vaginal Delivery

INCIDENCE AND INDICATIONS
CLASSIFICATION AND PREREQUISITES
MORBIDITY
FORCEPS DELIVERY
VACUUM-ASSISTED DELIVERY
TRAINING
REFERENCES
Operative vaginal delivery (OVD) is birth accomplished with assistance
from forceps or a vacuum-cup device. Once these are applied to the fetal
head, outward traction generates forces that augment maternal pushing to
deliver the fetus.

INCIDENCE AND INDICATIONS
From national data, forceps or vacuum-assisted vaginal delivery aided 3.1
percent of births in the United States in 2015. This is a decline from 9
percent in 1990 (Martin, 2017). For these procedures, a vacuum is
disproportionately selected, and the vacuum-to-forceps delivery ratio
approximates 4:1 (Yeomans, 2010). Most of these procedures are successful
in effecting vaginal birth. From 2006 United States data, only 0.4 percent of

forceps trials and 0.8 percent of vacuum extraction attempts failed to result in
vaginal birth (Osterman, 2009). In the specific group of nulliparas with term
gestations, higher failure rates of 4.4 and 6.4 percent, respectively, were
found in a study of 25 academic hospitals (Bailit, 2016).
If technically safe, termination of second-stage labor by OVD is
considered for any condition that threatens the mother or fetus and that is
likely to be relieved by delivery. Of maternal indications, the most common
are maternal exhaustion and prolonged second-stage labor. However, a
specific, maximum second-stage length beyond which all women should be
considered for OVD has not been defined (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019). Other maternal reasons are
preexisting or intrapartum conditions that limit effective pushing or warrant
expedited delivery. Severe or acute pulmonary compromise, decompensation
from intrapartum infection, neurological disease, and serious cardiac
disorders are examples. Frequent fetal indications include nonreassuring
fetal heart rate and premature placental separation (Schuit, 2012).

CLASSIFICATION AND PREREQUISITES
Classification of OVD is summarized in Table 29-1. It emphasizes that
station and rotation are the two most important discriminators of risk for both
mother and neonate. Station is measured by the number of centimeters, either
above or below, an anatomical zero station, which is a line drawn between
the ischial spines. Stations range from –5 to 0 to +5. Procedures are
categorized as outlet, low, and midpelvic, and most are low or outlet
deliveries. High forceps, in which instruments are applied above 0 station,
have no place in current obstetrics.
TABLE 29-1. Operative Vaginal Delivery Prerequisites and Classification
According to Station and Rotationa

To aid patient selection, the Society for Maternal–Fetal Medicine (2020)
published a preprocedural checklist and documentation template. Once
station and rotation are determined, the prerequisites listed in Table 29-1 are
assessed. For vacuum extraction, fetuses ideally are not younger than 34
weeks’ gestation because of cranial hemorrhage vulnerability at earlier ages
(Åberg, 2014). Also prior to vacuum use, although infrequently used in the
United States, fetal scalp blood sampling should not have been recently
performed. Of requisites, ascertaining correct head position is essential, and
Figure 29-1 shows fetal skull anatomy. In unclear cases, sonography can help
identify fetal orbits and nasal bridge to aid orientation (Ghi, 2018).

FIGURE 29-1 Fetal head (A–B) at term showing fontanels, sutures, and various dimensions.

Regional analgesia is preferable for low or midpelvic procedures.
Pudendal blockade may prove adequate for outlet deliveries. As a causative
factor, newer epidural methods or placement during early labor do not raise
OVD rates (Anim-Somuahm, 2018; Liu, 2004).
The bladder is emptied to provide additional pelvic space and minimize
bladder trauma. Urinary retention and bladder dysfunction are frequent shortterm effects of OVD (Mulder, 2012; Pifarotti, 2014). Notably, episiotomy
and epidural analgesia, both common associates of OVD, also are risks for
urinary retention. Retention usually resolves after 24 to 48 hours of passive
catheter bladder drainage (Chap. 36, p. 643).

MORBIDITY
■ Maternal Morbidity
OVD carries increased risk of certain morbidities for both mother and fetus.
In general, a higher station and greater degrees of rotation raise procedure
difficulty and the chance of injury. Morbidity is most properly compared with
morbidity from cesarean delivery and not with that from spontaneous birth.
This is the most appropriate comparator because the alternative to indicated
OVD is cesarean delivery.

Lacerations
The very indications that prompt OVD are among those that also increase the
need for episiotomy and the likelihood of lacerations (de Leeuw, 2008). That
said, higher rates of third- and fourth-degree perineal lacerations, vaginal
wall lacerations, and less often cervical tears do complicate OVD compared
with spontaneous birth (Friedman, 2015; Gurol-Urganci, 2013; Landy, 2011).
These rates with OVD are also substantially higher than with cesarean
delivery. Third- and fourth-degree perineal lacerations are grouped as
obstetrical anal sphincter injuries (OASIS). In general, these tears more
frequently attend forceps delivery compared with vacuum extraction, and
especially if an episiotomy is midline (Kudish, 2006; O’Mahony, 2010).
With OVD, indicated episiotomy rather than routine use is
recommended. If required, a mediolateral episiotomy affords greater
protection against OASIS than midline incision (Gurol-Urganci, 2013; Jangö,
2014; van Bavel, 2018). But, short-term rates of pain and dyspareunia are
similar or increased with mediolateral episiotomy (Chap. 27, p. 510). As
another OASIS protection, early forceps disarticulation and removal can
avoid the full perineal distention created by the blades and crowning head.
Moreover, cessation of maternal pushing during disarticulation or as the head
begins to crown allows the clinician sole control of outward forces against
the perineum. Similarly, adding a dedicated assistant to bolster the perineum
can lower OASIS rates, and this is our practice (Wan, 2020). Last, OASIS
are more common with an occiput posterior (OP) position (Damron, 2004).
Thus, manual or forceps rotation to an occiput anterior (OA) position may
lower rates of lower reproductive tract injury (Bradley, 2013).

Infection and Subsequent-pregnancy Morbidity
As detailed in Chapter 30 (p. 548), cesarean delivery carries greater
maternal morbidity compared with spontaneous birth. For OVD, in one study
of more than 1 million births, cesarean delivery, but not OVD, was a risk for
peripartum hysterectomy (Spiliopoulos, 2011). Further, avoiding cesarean
delivery can minimize rates of subsequent pregnancy complications, such as
placenta previa, placenta accreta spectrum, uterine rupture, and adhesionrelated surgical organ injury.
In addition, postpartum wound or uterine infection is more frequent in
women following cesarean compared with OVD (Bailit, 2016; Halscott,

2015). Still, to address peripartum infection, investigators in the ANODE
trial randomly assigned nearly 3500 gravidas undergoing OVD to receive
either placebo or a single intravenous dose of amoxicillin plus clavulanic
acid (Knight, 2019). The puerperal infection rate was 11 percent after
antibiotic prophylaxis compared with 19 percent in those given placebo.
Notably, these infections often coincide with long labors and multiple
cervical examinations, both of which are common with women requiring
OVD. Thus, we believe that provision of antibiotics to those undergoing
OVD without other infection-related risks warrants further study. Indeed, the
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020a) notes that this
prophylaxis is reasonable but recommends against routine antibiotic
prophylaxis for all women undergoing OVD. However, the College (2020b)
does note that a single antibiotic dose with third- and fourth-degree perineal
laceration is reasonable. Several studies support this practice (Duggal, 2008;
Lewicky-Gaupp, 2015; Stock, 2013a).

Pelvic Floor Disorders
This term encompasses urinary incontinence, anal incontinence, and pelvic
organ prolapse (POP). OVD has been implicated as a possible risk for each.
Proposed mechanisms include structural compromise or pelvic floor
denervation secondary to forces exerted during delivery.
For urinary incontinence, parity and specifically vaginal delivery are risk
factors (Gyhagen, 2013; Rortveit, 2003). But, many studies do not support a
higher risk from OVD compared with the risk from vaginal birth alone
(Gartland, 2016; Leijonhufvud, 2011; MacArthur, 2016).
Evidence linking anal incontinence with OVD is conflicting. Some
studies show that OASIS, but not delivery mode, is the main etiological link
(Bols, 2010; Evers, 2012; Nygaard, 1997). In contrast, others directly
associate OVD with anal incontinence (Dolan, 2010; MacArthur, 2013). But,
these studies may not be incongruous—recall that OVD is associated with
increased rates of OASIS. Importantly, several studies and reviews have not
found cesarean delivery to be protective long term against anal incontinence
(Nelson, 2010).
Similarly for POP, evidence linking it to OVD is mixed (Gyhagen, 2013;
Volløyhaug, 2015). First, pelvic floor mechanisms leading to POP are
complex and incompletely defined (Gordon, 2019). Despite this, obstetrical

avulsion of the levator ani muscle from the pelvic sidewall has been
implicated, and OVD, especially forceps delivery, is one risk for this injury
(DeLancey, 2007; Dietz, 2008; Friedman, 2019). Again, the pelvic floor
injury rather OVD itself may be the causative agent, as those with OVD but
no avulsion did not suffer greater POP rates in one recent analysis (Handa,
2019).

■ Perinatal Morbidity
Acute Perinatal Injury
OVD carries higher risk for fetal injury than cesarean delivery or
spontaneous birth. Both OVD methods are implicated, and factors can
include delivery duration and the number of pulls or cup pop-offs (Åberg,
2019; Levin, 2019; Miller, 2020). Injuries are more frequent with vacuum
extraction, and injuries with this device include cephalohematoma, subgaleal
hemorrhage, retinal hemorrhage, neonatal jaundice secondary to these
hemorrhages, clavicular fracture, and scalp lacerations. Cephalohematoma
and subgaleal hemorrhage are both extracranial lesions illustrated in Figure
33-2 (p. 608). Shoulder dystocia has been linked to both methods (Dall’Asta,
2016). Forceps delivery has higher rates of facial nerve injury, brachial
plexus injury, depressed skull fracture, and corneal abrasion (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020a; Demissie, 2004; Dupuis,
2005). With intracranial hemorrhage, some studies have associated vacuum
extraction with higher rates, whereas others show similar rates with either
OVD method (Towner, 1999; Wen, 2001; Werner, 2011).
Compared with cesarean delivery, OVD carries higher risk of
extracranial hematomas, fractures, nerve injuries, retinal hemorrhage, and
head lacerations. However, rates of fetal acidemia or hypoxic
encephalopathy are not higher with OVD compared with second-stage
cesarean delivery (Bailit, 2016; Contag, 2010; Walsh, 2013). Intracranial
hemorrhage rates are similar among newborns delivered by vacuum
extraction, forceps, or cesarean delivery during labor (Towner, 1999). But,
intracranial hemorrhage rates are higher than among those delivered
spontaneously or by cesarean delivery before labor. These authors suggest
that the common risk factor for intracranial hemorrhage is abnormal labor.
Werner and associates (2011), in their evaluation of more than 150,000

singleton deliveries, reported that forceps delivery was associated with
fewer total neurological complications that included seizures,
intraventricular hemorrhage, and subdural hemorrhage compared with
vacuum-assisted birth or any cesarean delivery.
Compared with rotational OVD, second-stage cesarean delivery has
similar maternal and neonatal morbidity rates (Aiken, 2015; Bahl, 2013;
Stock, 2013b). For example, in their large series, Tempest and associates
(2013) found similar morbidity rates among malpositioned fetuses during
second-stage labor that underwent Kielland rotation, rotational vacuum
extraction, or emergency cesarean delivery.
Midforceps by definition are performed from a higher station. The bulk
of data are from older studies, and most show comparable neonatal
morbidity between low and midforceps procedures (Dierker, 1985; Gilstrap,
1984). In a recent report also comparing these two, Ducarme and coworkers
(2015) found comparable neonatal and maternal composite morbidity scores.
Comparing midpelvic OVD and second-stage cesarean delivery, most
studies support neonatal safety (Bashore, 1990; Cibils, 1990; HagadornFreathy, 1991). But, others have found increased rates of trauma and
umbilical cord blood acidemia with midforceps delivery (Robertson, 1990).
More recently, Muraca and associates (2018) compared midpelvic OVD
methods against second-stage cesarean delivery. For the indication of
dystocia, fetal and maternal morbidity composite scores were higher with
OVD. With distress as the indication, the neonatal morbidity score was
greater only with midpelvic vacuum-assisted OVD, whereas the maternal
morbidity score was higher only with midforceps. In another study
comparing both midpelvic OVD methods, maternal morbidity was greater
with forceps, and neonatal morbidity differed only in a higher
cephalohematoma rate with vacuum-assisted delivery (Baerthlein, 1986).

Mechanisms of Acute Injury
The types of fetal injury with OVD can usually be explained by the forces
exerted. In cases of cephalohematoma or subgaleal hemorrhage, suction and
perhaps rotation during vacuum extraction may lead to a primary vessel
shearing. Intracranial hemorrhage may result from skull fracture that lacerates
vessels or from vessel rupture alone due to exerted forces. With facial nerve
palsy, one of the forceps blades compresses the nerve against the facial

bones. To explain brachial plexus injury, Towner and Ciotti (2007) proposed
that as the fetal head descends down the birth canal, the shoulders may stay
above the pelvic inlet. Thus, similar to shoulder dystocia at the symphysis,
this “shoulder dystocia at the pelvic inlet” is overcome by traction forces but
with concomitant stretch on the brachial plexus.

Long-term Infant Morbidity
Evidence regarding long-term neurodevelopmental outcomes in children born
by OVD is reassuring (Seidman, 1991; Wesley, 1992). Moreover, no
association between forceps delivery and later epilepsy was found in a
cohort study of more than 21,000 births (Murphy, 2004). In their review,
O’Callaghan and colleagues (2011) reported no link between cerebral palsy
and OVD. Last, the incidence of neurodevelopmental morbidity was similar
in those undergoing successful forceps delivery, failed forceps with cesarean
delivery, or cesarean delivery without forceps in one study (Bahl, 2007).
Similarly, with midpelvic OVD, long-term neurodevelopment is not harmed
in most analyses (Dierker, 1986; Friedman, 1984; Nilsen, 1984; Wesley,
1993).

Trial of Operative Vaginal Delivery
If an attempt to perform OVD is expected to be difficult, it should be
considered a trial. Moving the woman to an operating room for this attempt,
which could be followed by immediate cesarean delivery if OVD fails, has
merit. If forceps cannot be satisfactorily applied, the procedure is stopped.
Either a trial of vacuum-assisted delivery or cesarean delivery is then
performed. With the former, if the fetus does not descend with traction, the
trial should be abandoned and cesarean delivery performed.
With such caveats, cesarean delivery after an OVD attempt was not
associated with adverse neonatal outcomes if the fetal heart rate was
concurrently reassuring (Alexander, 2009). A similar study evaluated 122
women who had a trial of midpelvic OVD in a setting with full preparations
for cesarean delivery (Lowe, 1987). Investigators found no significant
difference in immediate neonatal or maternal morbidity compared with that
of 42 women delivered for similar indications by cesarean but without such a
trial. Conversely, in 61 women who had “unexpected” vacuum or forceps

failure in which there was no prior preparation for immediate cesarean
delivery, neonatal morbidity was higher.
Some factors associated with OVD failure are persistent OP positions
and birthweight >4000 g (Ben-Haroush, 2007; Verhoeven, 2016). However,
Palatnik and coworkers (2016) found that risk factors poorly predicted
success. In general, to avert morbidity with failed OVD, the American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020a) cautions that these trials
should be attempted only if the clinical assessment suggests a successful
outcome. We also emphasize proper training.
Sequential instrumentation most often involves an attempt at vacuumassisted OVD followed by one with forceps. This sequence likely reflects
the overall higher completion rate with forceps. However, this practice
significantly raises fetal trauma risks (Dupuis, 2005; Gardella, 2001;
Murphy, 2011). The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
(2020a) recommends against the sequential use of instruments unless there is
a “compelling and justifiable reason.”

FORCEPS DELIVERY
■ Design
Forceps refers to the paired instrument, and each member of this pair is
called a branch. Branches are designated left or right according to the side of
the maternal pelvis to which they are applied (Fig. 29-2A). Each branch has
four components: blade, shank, lock, and handle (see Fig. 29-2B). Each
blade has a toe, a heel, and two curves. Of these, the outward cephalic curve
conforms to the round fetal head, whereas the upward pelvic curve
corresponds to the curve of the birth canal. Some blades are solid, meaning
smooth on both surfaces. Others have an opening within or a depression
along the blade surface and are termed fenestrated or pseudofenestrated,
respectively. A true window in the blade reduces the degree of head slippage
within the blades during forceps rotation. Disadvantageously, it can increase
blade thickness and friction against the vaginal wall. With
pseudofenestration, the forceps blade is smooth on the outer maternal side
but indented on the inner fetal surface. The goal is to reduce head slipping yet
improve the ease and safety of application and removal of forceps. In most
situations, however, despite these subtle differences, any are appropriate.

FIGURE 29-2 A. Simpson forceps have fenestrated blades, parallel shanks, and English lock. The
cephalic curve accommodates the fetal head. B. Luikart forceps have pseudofenestrated blades,
overlapping shanks, a sliding lock, and tongue-in-groove handles. The pelvic curve (black curve) is
marked in this example.

The blades are connected to shanks, which may be parallel or
overlapping. Parallel shanks limit compression of blades against the fetal
head and may be helpful with deliveries employing greater forces. These
shanks, however, add width against the introitus. In comparison, overlapping

shanks raise compression forces but distend the perineum less. This may
offer greatest advantage for outlet deliveries.
Locks are found on all forceps and help to connect the right and left
branches and stabilize the instrument. They can be located at the end of the
shank nearest to the handles (English lock), at the ends of the handles (pivot
lock), or along the shank (sliding lock). Although varied in design, handles,
when squeezed, raise compression forces against the fetal head. Thus, forces
to consider include traction and compression.

■ Blade Application and Delivery
Forceps blades grasp the head and are applied according to fetal head
position. If the head is in an OA position, two or more fingers of the right
hand are introduced inside the left posterior portion of the vulva and
advanced into the vagina beside the fetal head. The handle of the left branch
is grasped between the thumb and two fingers of the left hand (Fig. 29-3).
The blade tip is then gently introduced along the posterior left vaginal wall.
It is swept upward and inward between the fetal head and the palmar surface
of the fingers (Fig. 29-4). This blade can be held in position by an assistant.
For application of the right blade, two or more fingers of the left hand are
introduced into the right posterior portion of the vagina to serve as a guide
for the right blade. This blade is held in the right hand and introduced into the
vagina. With each blade, the thumb is positioned behind the heel, and most of
the insertion force comes from this thumb (Fig. 29-5). If the head is
positioned in a left OA (LOA) or right OA (ROA) position, then the lower of
the two blades is typically placed first.

FIGURE 29-3 For OA or LOA positions, the left handle of the forceps is held in the left hand. The
blade is introduced into the left side of the pelvis between the fetal head and the fingers of the
operator’s right hand.

FIGURE 29-4 Insertion arc of the blade. Importantly, the thumb of the right hand, not shown here,
guides the blade during placement.

FIGURE 29-5 In applying the second blade, insertional force is generated mainly by the thumb.
(Reproduced with permission from Yeomans ER: Operative vaginal delivery. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman
BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al (eds): Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York,
NY: McGraw Hill; 2017.)

The blades are constructed so that their cephalic curve is closely adapted
to the sides of the fetal head (Fig. 29-6). The fetal head is perfectly grasped
only when the long axis of the blades corresponds to the occipitomental
diameter (see Fig. 29-1). As a result, most of the blade lies over the lateral
face.

FIGURE 29-6 A. The forceps are symmetrically placed and articulated. B. The vertex is OA.
(Reproduced with permission from Yeomans ER: Operative vaginal delivery. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman
BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al (eds): Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York,
NY: McGraw Hill; 2017.)

Suboptimal blade placement can increase morbidity (Ramphul, 2015).
For OA positions, appropriately applied blades are equidistant from the
sagittal suture, and each blade is equidistant from its adjacent lambdoid
suture. In OP positions, blades are symmetrically placed relative to the
sagittal suture and to each coronal suture. After correct positioning, the
branches can be articulated. If branches do not articulate, the blade’s
relationships to the sutures are reassessed. Applied in this way, forceps
should not slip, and traction may be applied most advantageously. With most
forceps, if one blade is applied over the brow and the other over the occiput,

the instrument cannot be locked, or if locked, the blades will slip off when
traction is applied.
With both branches in place, slow articulation of the handles will also
typically correct mild asynclitism. For greater asynclitism, Luikart forceps
can be placed and once positioned, one handle will extend further than the
other along their long axis. Asynclitism is resolved by pulling and/or pushing
each respective branch within the sliding lock along the instrument’s long
axis until the finger guards align.
Once blades are placed satisfactorily, rotation to OA position is
performed before traction is applied (Fig. 29-7). Next, gentle, intermittent,
downward and outward traction is exerted concurrent with maternal efforts
until the perineum begins to bulge. For most stations, the initial direction of
traction is downward and brings the head beneath the symphysis.

FIGURE 29-7 If LOA, the vertex is rotated from this position to OA (arrow). (Reproduced with
permission from Yeomans ER: Operative vaginal delivery. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC
III, et al (eds): Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill;
2017.)

With head descent, the vector of forces changes continuously and are
gradually directed upward (Fig. 29-8). During the birth of the head,
mechanisms of spontaneous delivery should be simulated as closely as
possible. As a teaching tool for this, a Bill axis traction device can be
attached over the finger guards of most forceps. The instrument has an arrow
and indicator line. When the arrow points directly to the line, traction is
along the path of least resistance.

FIGURE 29-8 With low forceps, the direction of gentle traction for delivery of the head is indicated
(arrows). (Reproduced with permission from Yeomans ER: Operative vaginal delivery. In Yeomans ER,
Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al (eds): Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New
York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2017.)

It is impossible to ascertain the amount of force exerted by forceps for an
individual patient. Thus, traction is ideally intermittent and relieved between
contractions, as in spontaneous labor. Except when urgently indicated,
delivery should be sufficiently slow, deliberate, and gentle to prevent undue
head compression. It is preferable to apply traction only with each uterine
contraction. Maternal pushing will augment these efforts.
With traction, as the occiput distends the vulva, an episiotomy may be
performed if needed. The delivery may be completed in several ways. Some
clinicians keep the forceps in place to control the head. However, this blade
volume adds to vulvar distention and raises risks for laceration or
episiotomy. To prevent this, the forceps may be removed, and delivery is
then completed by maternal pushing (Fig. 29-9). Importantly, if blades are
disarticulated and removed too early, the head may recede and prolong
delivery. Pushing in some cases may be aided by the modified Ritgen

maneuver. We emphasize bolstering of the perineum to control outward
forces.

FIGURE 29-9 Branches are removed in the opposite order from that in which they were originally
placed. The fingers of the right hand, covered by a sterile towel, bolster the perineum. The thumb is
placed directly on the head to prevent sudden egress. (Reproduced with permission from Yeomans ER:
Operative vaginal delivery. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al (eds): Cunningham and
Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2017.)

■ Manual Rotation
In many cases, OT and OP head positions are often imperfectly flexed and
present a wider head diameter. This can slow fetal descent and lengthen
second-stage labor. By manually rotating the fetal occiput into the anterior
pelvis (OA positions), cephalopelvic proportions improve to help hasten
spontaneous birth. This is usually reserved for second-stage labor. Compared
with no attempt, manual rotation is associated with lower rates of cesarean
delivery, OVD, severe perineal laceration, and chorioamnionitis (Blanc,
2021; Shaffer, 2011). If OVD is still required, the new OA position lowers
rates of perineal trauma.
In the simplest cases, digital rotation can correct OT or OP positioning.
With head molding, the sutures override one another to create a bony ridge.
Two fingers hooked against this ridge and forces directed parallel to the
skull can rotate the occiput toward the anterior pelvis. This is done between
contractions, and advancements are then held in place during pushing.
Progressive degrees of rotation are attained with each attempt, and several
may be needed to ultimately rotate the occiput into the anterior pelvis.
Instead, with manual rotation, an open hand is inserted into the vagina.
For ROP position, the right palm cups the fetal head and straddles the sagittal
suture. The operator’s fingers wrap to one side of the fetal face, and the
thumb extends along the other side. Rotation is clockwise to bring the occiput
to an ROA position (Fig. 29-10). With LOP position, rotation is
counterclockwise with the left palm. Three actions are performed
simultaneously between contractions. The fetal head is flexed to provide a
smaller diameter for rotation and subsequent descent within the pelvis. Next,
slight destationing of the fetal head moves the head to a level in the maternal
pelvis with sufficient room to complete the rotation. Importantly, destationing
should not be confused with disengaging the fetal head, which is proscribed.
Third, we and others prefer also to place the other hand externally on the
corresponding side of the maternal abdomen to pull the back of the fetus up
and toward the midline in synchrony with internal head rotation. Barth
(2015) provides an excellent summary of this technique.

FIGURE 29-10 A. Manual rotation using the left hand, palm-up, to rotate from ROP. B. The head is
flexed and destationed during clockwise rotation to reach an OA position. (Reproduced with permission

from Yeomans ER: Operative vaginal delivery. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al
(eds): Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2017.)

Le Ray and associates (2007, 2013) reported a success rate >90 percent
with manual rotation. Complication were uncommon. In their report of 796
rotations, no cords prolapsed. Two women sustained cervical lacerations,
which required simple vaginal repair. Notably, this study allowed rotations
at advanced cervical dilation prior to second-stage labor, which may have
enhanced cervical injury risk. In 71 percent, fetal heart rate (FHR) was
normal during rotation, but severe FHR abnormalities were noted in 10
percent. However, the need for cesarean delivery after successful manual
rotation was not associated with FHR abnormalities. Failure to rotate the
head does not mandate cesarean delivery, and options are described next.

■ Persistent Occiput Posterior Positions
In cases with persistent OP positioning, the head may spontaneously deliver
OP, may be manually or instrumentally rotated to an OA position, or may be
delivered OP by forceps or vacuum (Bertholdt, 2019). In many cases, the
cause of a persistent OP position and of the difficulty in accomplishing
rotation is an anthropoid pelvis. This architecture opposes rotation and
predisposes to posterior delivery (Fig. 2-16, p. 29).
With forceps delivery from an OP position, downward and outward
traction is applied until the base of the nose passes under the symphysis (Fig.
29-11). The handles are then slowly elevated until the occiput gradually
emerges over the perineum’s fourchette. The forceps are directed downward
again, and the nose, mouth, and chin successively emerge from the vulva.

FIGURE 29-11 Outlet forceps delivery from an OP position. The head should be flexed after the
bregma passes under the symphysis.

OP delivery causes greater vulvar distention, and an episiotomy may be
needed. OP deliveries have a higher incidence of severe perineal lacerations
and of extensive episiotomy compared with OA positions (de Leeuw, 2008;
Pearl, 1993). Also, newborns undergoing OVD from OP positions have a
higher incidence of Erb and facial nerve palsies, 1 and 2 percent,
respectively, than those delivered from OA positions. As expected, rotations
to OA ultimately decrease perineal delivery trauma (Bradley, 2013).
For forceps rotations from an OP to OA position, Kielland forceps are
preferred because they have a less pronounced pelvic curve (Fig. 29-12).
Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd edition offers a more
detailed description and illustration of this Kielland forceps procedure
(Yeomans, 2017).

FIGURE 29-12 Kielland forceps. The characteristic features are minimal pelvic curvature (A), sliding
lock (B), and light weight.

■ Occiput Transverse Positions
With occiput transverse (OT) fetal head positions, rotation is required for
delivery. For this, the head may be manually or instrumentally rotated into an
OA position. Manual rotation was described earlier in that section (p. 540).
Forceps rotation by experienced operators can offer high success rates
with minimal maternal morbidity (Burke, 2012; Stock, 2013b). Either
standard forceps or specialized forceps, such as Kielland forceps, are used.
With the latter, each handle has a small knob, and branches are placed so that
this knob faces the occiput.
Kielland described two methods of applying the anterior blade. In this
example, placement with a left OT (LOT) position is described. With the
wandering method, the anterior blade is first introduced into the posterior
pelvis (Fig. 29-13). The blade is then arched around the face to an anterior
position. To permit this sweep of the blade, the handle is held close to the
left maternal buttock throughout the maneuver. The second blade is
introduced posteriorly, and the branches are locked.

FIGURE 29-13 A. Application of the right branch of the Kielland forceps to a head in LOT position.
The knob on this branch (colored blue) will ultimately face the occiput. B. The right branch is
wandered to its final position behind the symphysis. C. Insertion of the left branch of the Kielland
forceps directly posterior along the hollow of the sacrum. This branch is inserted to the maternal right of
the anterior branch to aid in engaging the sliding lock. (Reproduced with permission from Yeomans ER:
Operative vaginal delivery. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al (eds): Cunningham and
Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2017.)

After checking the application, the provider pulls the handles of the
Kielland forceps slightly to the patient’s right to flex the fetal head and create
a smaller diameter for rotation. The first and second fingers of the left hand
are placed over the finger guards with the palm against the handles. This
palm faces the maternal left. Concurrently, the first two fingers of the
operator’s right hand are placed against the anterior lambdoid suture. The
fetal head is then elevated and slightly destationed. For rotation in a
counterclockwise direction, the wrist of the left hand supinates, to direct this
palm upward. Simultaneously, two fingers of the right hand press against the
lambdoid suture ridge. This ensures that the fetal head turns with the blades
and does not slip. As a newer adjunct, abdominal sonography can follow and
document head rotation (Hinkson, 2021).
The second type of blade application introduces the anterior blade with
its cephalic curve directed upward to curve under the symphysis. After it has
been advanced far enough toward the upper vagina, it is turned on its long
axis through 180 degrees to adapt the cephalic curvature to the head. The
second blade is introduced posteriorly, and the branches are locked.
After rotation of the fetal occiput into the anterior pelvis, two acceptable
methods for delivery are available. In one, the operator applies traction on
the Kielland forceps using a bimanual grip described previously for
conventional forceps (p. 539). When the posterior fontanel has passed under
the subpubic arch, the handles can be elevated to the horizontal, but no
further. Raising the handles above the horizontal may cause vaginal sulcus

tears because of the reverse pelvic curve (Dennen, 1955). Alternatively, the
Kielland forceps can be removed after rotation and replaced with
conventional forceps. With this approach, moderate traction is first employed
to seat the head before switching instruments.

■ Face Presentations
With a mentum anterior face presentation, OVD is an option. The blades are
applied to the sides of the head along the occipitomental diameter, with the
pelvic curve directed toward the neck (see Fig. 29-1). Downward traction is
exerted until the chin appears under the symphysis. Then, by an upward
movement, the face is slowly extracted, with the nose, eyes, brow, and
occiput appearing in succession over the anterior margin of the perineum.
Forceps should not be applied to the mentum posterior presentation
because vaginal delivery is impossible except in very small fetuses.

VACUUM-ASSISTED DELIVERY
■ Vacuum Extractor Design
With vacuum-assisted OVD, suction is created within a cup placed on the
fetal scalp such that traction on the cup aids fetal birth. In the United States,
vacuum extractor is the preferred term, whereas in Europe it is commonly
called a ventouse (Fig. 29-14). Theoretical benefits of this tool compared
with forceps include simpler requirements for precise positioning on the fetal
head and avoidance of space-occupying blades within the vagina to help
mitigate maternal trauma.

FIGURE 29-14 Vacuum delivery systems. A. The Kiwi OmniCup contains a handheld vacuumgenerating pump, which is attached via flexible tubing to a rigid plastic mushroom cup. B. The Mityvac
Mystic II MitySoft Bell Cup has a soft bell cup attached by a semirigid shaft to a handheld pump.

Vacuum devices contain a cup, shaft, handle, and vacuum generator.
Vacuum cups are metal or plastic and differ in their shape, size, and
reusability. In the United States, plastic cups are generally preferred. Of
these, the soft cup is a pliable bell-shaped dome, whereas the rigid type has a
firm flattened mushroom-shaped cup and circular ridge around the cup rim
(Table 29-2). When compared, rigid mushroom cups generate significantly
more traction force (Hofmeyr, 1990; Muise, 1993). With OP positions or
with asynclitism, the flatter cup also permits improved placement at the
flexion point, which is typically less accessible with these head positions.
The trade-off is that the flatter cups have higher scalp laceration rates. Thus,
many manufacturers recommend soft bell cups for more straightforward OA
deliveries.
TABLE 29-2. Vacuum Cups for Operative Vaginal Delivery

Several investigators have compared outcomes with various rigid and
soft cups. Metal cups yield higher success rates but greater rates of scalp
injuries, including cephalohematomas (O’Mahony, 2010). In another study,
Kuit and colleagues (1993) found that the only advantage of the soft cups was

a lower incidence of scalp injury. In a review, Vacca (2002) concluded that
fewer scalp lacerations occurred with the soft cup, but that the rate of
cephalohematomas and subgaleal hemorrhage was similar between soft and
rigid cups. Importantly, high-pressure vacuum generates large amounts of
force regardless of the cup used (Duchon, 1998).
Aside from the cup, the shaft that connects the cup and handle may be
flexible or semiflexible. Tubing-like flexible shafts may be preferred for OP
positions or asynclitism to permit better seating of the cup. Last, the vacuum
generator may be handheld and actuated by the operator, or it may be held
and operated by an assistant.

■ Technique
An important step in vacuum-assisted OVD is proper cup placement over the
flexion point. This pivot point maximizes traction, minimizes cup
detachment, flexes the neck, and delivers the smallest head diameter through
the pelvic outlet. This improves success rates, lowers scalp injury rates, and
lessens perineal trauma because the smallest head diameter distends the
vulva (Baskett, 2008).
The flexion point is found along the sagittal suture, approximately 3 cm
from the posterior fontanel’s center and approximately 6 cm from the anterior
fontanel’s center. Because most cup diameters measure 5 to 6 cm, when
properly placed, the cup rim lies at the posterior fontanel’s border and 3 cm
from the anterior fontanel (Fig. 29-15). Placement of the cup more anteriorly
on the fetal cranium—near the anterior fontanel—is ideally avoided as it
leads to neck extension during traction unless the fetus is small. Such
placement delivers a wider head diameter through the vaginal opening. Last,
asymmetrical placement relative to the sagittal suture may worsen
asynclitism. Cup placement in OA positions is seldom difficult. In contrast, if
the indication for delivery is failure to descend caused by occipital
malposition, cup positioning can be difficult.

FIGURE 29-15 Drawing demonstrates correct cup placement at the flexion point. Along the sagittal
suture, this spot lies 3 cm from the posterior fontanel and 6 cm from the anterior fontanel.

During cup placement, maternal soft tissue entrapment predisposes the
mother to lacerations and virtually ensures cup dislodgement, colloquially
called a “pop off.” Thus, the entire cup circumference should be palpated
both before and after the vacuum has been created and again prior to traction
to exclude such entrapment. Gradual vacuum creation is advocated by some
and is generated by increasing the suction in increments of 0.2 kg/cm2 every
2 minutes until a total negative pressure of 0.8 kg/cm2 is reached (Table 293). That said, other studies have shown that negative pressure can be
increased to 0.8 kg/cm2 in <2 minutes without a significant difference in
efficacy or in maternal and fetal outcomes (Suwannachat, 2011, 2012).
TABLE 29-3. Vacuum Pressure Conversions

Once suction is created, the instrument handle is grasped, and traction is
initiated. Similar to forceps delivery, traction angles mirror that in Figure 298 and should be steady without jerking or rocking. The number of needed
pulls increases with higher station but typically ranges from one to four.
Efforts are intermittent, and each pull is coordinated with maternal pushing.
Manual torque to the cup is avoided as it can cause cup displacement or
cephalohematomas and, with metal cups, “cookie-cutter”–type scalp
lacerations. Thus, OA oblique positions are corrected not by rotation, but
solely by downward outward traction. Similarly, for OP positions, rotational
forces should not be applied. Instead, with correct flexion point placement
and line of traction, the head will usually rotate by itself (van den Akker,
2019).
During pulls, the operator should place the nondominant hand within the
vagina, with the thumb on the extractor cup and one or more fingers on the
fetal scalp. So positioned, descent of the presenting part can be judged and
the traction angle can be adjusted with head descent. In addition, the
relationship of the cup edge to the scalp can be assessed to help detect cup
separation.
Between contractions, some physicians will lower the suction levels to
decrease scalp injury rates, whereas others will maintain suction in cases
with a nonreassuring FHR to aid rapid delivery. No differences in maternal
or fetal outcome were noted if the vacuum level was decreased between
contractions or if an effort was made to prevent fetal loss of station (Bofill,
1997). Once the head is delivered, the vacuum pressure is relieved and the
cup removed.
Vacuum extraction should be considered a trial. Without early and clear
evidence of descent toward delivery, an alternative delivery approach should
be adopted. As a general guideline, progressive descent should accompany

each traction attempt. Neither data nor consensus are available regarding the
number of pulls required to effect delivery, the maximum number of cup popoffs that can be tolerated, or optimal total duration of the procedure. Some
manufacturers have recommendations regarding these (Clinical Innovations,
2018; CooperSurgical, 2018).
During a vacuum-assisted delivery trial, cup dislodgement due to
technical failure or less than optimal placement should not be equated with
dislodgement under ideal conditions of exact cup placement and optimal
vacuum maintenance. Technical failures may merit either additional attempts
at cup placement or, alternatively, a trial of forceps (Ezenagu, 1999;
Williams, 1991). The least desirable cases are those in which traction
without progress or multiple disengagements occur following correct cup
application and appropriate traction. As with forceps, clinicians should
embrace a willingness to abandon attempts at vacuum-assisted delivery if
satisfactory progress is not made (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2020a).

TRAINING
As the OVD rate has declined, so have opportunities for resident training
(Fitzwater, 2015; Kyser, 2014). In accredited programs, the median number
of these procedures completed by trainees has reached critically low levels,
and for recent graduates it approximated only 20 (Accreditation Council for
Graduate Medical Education, 2019; Dildy, 2016). For residents completing
training in 2021, the Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education
(2020) minimum requirement is 15 procedures.
To adapt, residency programs should have readily available skilled
operators to teach these procedures by simulation as well as through actual
cases (Spong, 2012). In one study, a 59-percent increase in forceps
deliveries over 2 years was related to a single experienced and proactive
instructor assigned to teach forceps to residents in labor and delivery (Solt,
2011).
In another, following implementation of a formal education program that
included a manikin and pelvic model simulation, rates of neonatal morbidity
and of severe maternal cervical, labial, and vaginal lacerations declined.
However, OASIS rates were unchanged (Cheong, 2004). Gossett and

associates (2016) found a 22-percent reduction in the OASIS rate following
an OVD simulation curriculum.

REFERENCES
Åberg K, Norman M, Ekéus C: Preterm birth by vacuum extraction and neonatal outcome: a populationbased cohort study. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth 14:42, 2014
Åberg K, Norman M, Pettersson K, et al: Protracted vacuum extraction and neonatal intracranial
hemorrhage among infants born at term: a nationwide case-control study. Acta Obstet Gynecol
Scand 98(4):523, 2019
Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education: Case log minimum numbers: obstetrics and
gynecology. 2020. Available at:
https://www.acgme.org/Portals/0/PFAssets/ProgramResources/220_Ob_Gyn_Minimum_Numbers_
Announcement.pdf?ver=2018-06-25-104354-993. Accessed July 23, 2020
Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education: Obstetrics and gynecology case logs. 2019.
Available at:
https://www.acgme.org/Portals/0/PDFs/220_National_Report_Program_Version_2018-2019.pdf.
Accessed July 23, 2020
Aiken AR, Aiken CE, Alberry MS, et al: Management of fetal malposition in the second stage of labor:
a propensity score analysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 212(3):355.e1, 2015
Alexander JM, Leveno KJ, Hauth JC, et al: Failed operative vaginal delivery. Obstet Gynecol
114(5):1017, 2009
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine: Safe
prevention of the primary cesarean delivery. Obstetric Care Consensus No. 1, March 2014,
Reaffirmed 2019
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Operative vaginal birth. Practice Bulletin No.
219, April 2020a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Prevention and management of obstetrical
lacerations at vaginal birth. Practice Bulletin No. 198, June 2018, Reaffirmed 2020b
Anim-Somuah M, Smyth RM, Cyna AM, et al: Epidural versus non-epidural or no analgesia for pain
management in labour Cochrane Database Syst Rev 5:CD000331, 2018
Baerthlein WC, Moodley S, Stinson SK: Comparison of maternal and neonatal morbidity in midforceps
delivery and midpelvis vacuum extraction. Obstet Gynecol 67(4):594, 1986
Bahl R, Patel RR, Swingler R, et al: Neurodevelopmental outcome at 5 years after operative delivery in
the second stage of labor: a cohort study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 197:147, 2007
Bahl R, Van de Venne M, Macleod M, et al: Maternal and neonatal morbidity in relation to the
instrument used for mid-cavity rotational operative vaginal delivery: a prospective cohort study.
BJOG 120(12):1526, 2013
Bailit JL, Grobman WA, Rice MM, et al: Evaluation of delivery options for second-stage events. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 214(5):638.e1, 2016
Barth WH Jr: Persistent occiput posterior. Obstet Gynecol 125(3):695, 2015
Bashore RA, Phillips WH Jr, Brinkman CR III: A comparison of the morbidity of midforceps and
cesarean delivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 162(6):1428, 1990

Baskett TF, Fanning CA, Young DC, et al: A prospective observational study of 1000 vacuum assisted
deliveries with the OmniCup device. J Obstet Gynaecol Can 30(7):573, 2008
Ben-Haroush A, Melamed N, Kaplan B, et al: Predictors of failed operative vaginal delivery: a singlecenter experience. Am J Obstet Gynecol 197:308.e1, 2007
Bertholdt C, Gauchotte E, Dap M, et al: Predictors of successful manual rotation for occiput posterior
positions. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 144(2):210, 2019
Blanc J, Castel P, Mauviel F, et al: Prophylactic manual rotation of occiput posterior and transverse
positions to decrease operative delivery: the PROPOP randomized clinical trial. Am J Obstet
Gynecol May 24, 2021 [Epub ahead of print]
Bofill JA, Rust OA, Schorr SJ, et al: A randomized trial of two vacuum extraction techniques. Obstet
Gynecol 89(5 Pt 1):758, 1997
Bols EM, Hendriks EJ, Berghmans BC, et al: A systematic review of etiological factors for postpartum
fecal incontinence. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 89(3):302, 2010
Bradley MS, Kaminski RJ, Streitman DC, et al: Effect of rotation on perineal lacerations in forcepsassisted vaginal deliveries. Obstet Gynecol 122(1):132, 2013
Broman SH, Nichols PL, Kennedy WA: Preschool IQ: prenatal and early developmental correlates.
Hillside, L. Erlbaum Associates, 1975
Burke N, Field K, Mujahid F, et al: Use and safety of Kielland’s forceps in current obstetric practice.
Obstet Gynecol 120(4):766, 2012
Cheong YC, Abdullahi H, Lashen H, et al: Can formal education and training improve the outcome of
instrumental delivery? Eur J Obstet Gynecol 113:139, 2004
Cibils LA, Ringler GE: Evaluation of midforceps delivery as an alternative. J Perinat Med 18(1):5, 1990
Clinical Innovations: Kiwi complete vacuum delivery system instructions for use. 2018. Available at:
clinicalinnovations.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/10/Kiwi-M_ME-IFU.pdf. Accessed August 13,
2020
Contag SA, Clifton RG, Bloom SL, et al: Neonatal outcomes and operative vaginal delivery versus
cesarean delivery. Am J Perinatol 27(6):493, 2010
Cooper Surgical: Mityvac vacuum-assisted delivery system. 2018. Available at:
www.coopersurgical.com/product-resources/5cf330cb-141e-4573-83caf67b4147ba4f_Mityvac_MitySoft_Bell_Cup_Instruction_for_Use.pdf. Accessed August 13, 2020
Dall’Asta A, Ghi T, Pedrazzi G, et al: Does vacuum delivery carry a higher risk of shoulder dystocia?
Review and meta-analysis of the literature. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 204:62, 2016
Damron DP, Capeless EL: Operative vaginal delivery: a comparison of forceps and vacuum for success
rate and risk of rectal sphincter injury. Am J Obstet Gynecol 191:907, 2004
de Leeuw JW, de Wit C, Kuijken JP, et al: Mediolateral episiotomy reduces the risk for anal sphincter
injury during operative vaginal delivery. BJOG 115:104, 2008
DeLancey JO, Morgan DM, Fenner DE, et al: Comparison of levator ani muscle defects and function in
women with and without pelvic organ prolapse. Obstet Gynecol 109:295, 2007
Demissie K, Rhoads GG, Smulian JC, et al: Operative vaginal delivery and neonatal and infant adverse
outcomes: population based retrospective analysis. BMJ 329(7456):24, 2004
Dennen EH: Forceps Delivery. Philadelphia, F.A. Davis Company, 1955
Dierker LJ, Rosen MG, Thompson K, et al: Midforceps deliveries: long-term outcome of infants. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 154:764, 1986
Dierker LJ, Rosen MG, Thompson K, et al: The midforceps: maternal and neonatal outcomes. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 152(2):176, 1985
Dietz HP, Simpson JM: Levator trauma is associated with pelvic organ prolapse. BJOG 115:979, 2008

Dildy GA, Belfort MA, Clark SL: Obstetric forceps: a species on the brink of extinction. Obstet Gynecol
128(3):436, 2016
Dolan LM, Hilton P: Obstetric risk factors and pelvic floor dysfunction 20 years after first delivery. Int
Urogynecol J Pelvic Floor Dysfunct 21:535, 2010
Ducarme G, Hamel JF, Bouet PE, et al: Maternal and neonatal morbidity after attempted operative
vaginal delivery according to fetal head station. Obstet Gynecol 126(3):521, 2015
Duchon MA, DeMund MA, Brown RH: Laboratory comparison of modern vacuum extractors. Obstet
Gynecol 72:155, 1998
Duggal N, Mercado C, Daniels K, et al: Antibiotic prophylaxis for prevention of postpartum perineal
wound complications: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol 111(6):1268, 2008
Dupuis O, Silveira R, Dupont C, et al: Comparison of “instrument-associated” and “spontaneous”
obstetric depressed skull fractures in a cohort of 68 neonates. Am J Obstet Gynecol 192(1):165,
2005
Evers EC, Blomquist JL, McDermott KC, et al: Obstetrical anal sphincter laceration and anal
incontinence 5–10 years after childbirth. Am J Obstet Gynecol 207(5):425.e1, 2012
Ezenagu LC, Kakaria R, Bofill JA: Sequential use of instruments at operative vaginal delivery: is it safe?
Am J Obstet Gynecol 180:1446, 1999
Fitzwater JL, Owen J, Ankumah NA, et al: Nulliparous women in the second stage of labor: changes in
delivery outcomes between two cohorts from 2000 and 2011. Obstet Gynecol 126(1):81, 2015
Friedman AM, Ananth CV, Prendergast E, et al: Evaluation of third-degree and fourth-degree laceration
rates as quality indicators. Obstet Gynecol 125(4):927, 2015
Friedman EA, Sachtleben-Murray MR, Dahrouge D, et al: Long-term effects of labor and delivery on
offspring: a matched-pair analysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 150:941, 1984
Friedman T, Eslick GD, Dietz HP: Delivery mode and the risk of levator muscle avulsion: a metaanalysis. Int Urogynecol J 30(6):901, 2019
Gardella C, Taylor M, Benedetti T, et al: The effect of sequential use of vacuum and forceps for
assisted vaginal delivery on neonatal and maternal outcomes. Am J Obstet Gynecol 185(4):896, 2001
Gartland D, MacArthur C, Woolhouse H, et al: Frequency, severity and risk factors for urinary and
faecal incontinence at 4 years postpartum: a prospective cohort. BJOG 123(7):1203, 2016
Ghi T, Eggebø T, Lees C, et al: ISUOG practice guidelines: intrapartum ultrasound. Ultrasound Obstet
Gynecol 52:128, 2018
Gilstrap LC 3rd, Hauth JC, Schiano S, et al: Neonatal acidosis and method of delivery. Obstet Gynecol
63(5):681, 1984
Gordon MT, DeLancey JO, Renfroe A, et al: Development of anatomically based customizable threedimensional finite-element model of pelvic floor support system: POP-SIM1.0. Interface Focus
9(4):20190022, 2019
Gossett DR, Gilchrist-Scott D, Wayne DB, et al: Simulation training for forceps-assisted vaginal delivery
and rates of maternal perineal trauma. Obstet Gynecol 128(3):429, 2016
Gurol-Urganci I, Cromwell DA, Edozien LC, et al: Third- and fourth-degree perineal tears among
primiparous women in England between 2000 and 2012: time trends and risk factors. BJOG
120(12):1516, 2013
Gyhagen M, Bullarbo M, Nielsen T, et al: The prevalence of urinary incontinence 20 years after
childbirth: a national cohort study in singleton primiparae after vaginal or caesarean delivery. BJOG
120:144, 2013
Hagadorn-Freathy AS, Yeomans ER, Hankins GD: Validation of the 1988 ACOG forceps classification
system. Obstet Gynecol 77:356, 1991

Halscott TL, Reddy UM, Landy HJ, et al: Maternal and neonatal outcomes by attempted mode of
operative delivery from a low station in the second stage of labor. Obstet Gynecol 126(6):1265, 2015
Handa VL, Blomquist JL, Roem J, et al: Pelvic floor disorders after obstetric avulsion of the levator ani
muscle. Female Pelvic Med Reconstr Surg 25(1):3, 2019
Hinkson L, Henrich W, Tutschek B: Intrapartum ultrasound during rotational forceps delivery: a novel
tool for safety, quality control and teaching. Am J Obstet Gynecol 224(1):93.e1, 2021
Hofmeyr GJ, Gobetz L, Sonnendecker EW, et al: New design rigid and soft vacuum extractor cups: a
preliminary comparison of traction forces. BJOG 97(8):681, 1990
Jangö H, Langhoff-Roos J, Rosthøj S, et al: Modifiable risk factors of obstetric anal sphincter injury in
primiparous women: a population-based cohort study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 210(1):59.e1, 2014
Knight M, Chiocchia V, Partlett C, et al: Prophylactic antibiotics in the prevention of infection after
operative vaginal delivery (ANODE): a multicentre randomised controlled trial. Lancet
393(10189):2395, 2019
Kudish B, Blackwell S, Mcneeley SG, et al: Operative vaginal delivery and midline episiotomy: a bad
combination for the perineum. Am J Obstet Gynecol 195(3):749, 2006
Kuit JA, Eppinga HG, Wallenburg HC, et al: A randomized comparison of vacuum extraction delivery
with a rigid and a pliable cup. Obstet Gynecol 82:280, 1993
Kyser KL, Lu X, Santillan D, et al: Forceps delivery volumes in teaching and nonteaching hospitals: are
volumes sufficient for physicians to acquire and maintain competence? Acad Med 89(1):71, 2014
Landy HJ, Laughon SK, Bailit JL, et al: Characteristics associated with severe perineal and cervical
lacerations during vaginal delivery. Obstet Gynecol 117(3):627, 2011
Le Ray C, Deneux-Tharaux C, Khireddine I, et al: Manual rotation to decrease operative delivery in
posterior or transverse positions. Obstet Gynecol 122(3):634, 2013
Le Ray C, Serres P, Schmitz T, et al: Manual rotation in occiput posterior or transverse positions. Obstet
Gynecol 110:873, 2007
Leijonhufvud A, Lundholm C, Cnattingius S, et al: Risks of stress urinary incontinence and pelvic organ
prolapse surgery in relation to mode of childbirth. Am J Obstet Gynecol 204(1):70.e1, 2011
Levin G, Elchalal U, Yagel S, et al: Risk factors associated with subgaleal hemorrhage in neonates
exposed to vacuum extraction. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 98(11):1464, 2019
Lewicky-Gaupp C, Leader-Cramer A, Johnson LL, et al: Wound complications after obstetric anal
sphincter injuries. Obstet Gynecol 125(5):1088, 2015
Liu EH, Sia AT: Rates of caesarean section and instrumental vaginal delivery in nulliparous women after
low concentration epidural infusions or opioid analgesia: systematic review. BMJ 328(7453):1410,
2004
Lowe B: Fear of failure: a place for the trial of instrumental delivery. BJOG 94:60, 1987
MacArthur C, Wilson D, Herbison P, et al: Faecal incontinence persisting after childbirth: a 12-year
longitudinal study. BJOG 120(2):169, 2013
MacArthur C, Wilson D, Herbison P, et al: Urinary incontinence persisting after childbirth: extent,
delivery history, and effects in a 12-year longitudinal cohort study. Prolong Study Group. BJOG
123(6):1022, 2016
Martin JA, Hamilton BE, Osterman MJ, et al: Births: final data for 2015. Natl Vital Stat Rep 66(1):1,
2017
Miller ES, Lai Y, Bailit J, et al: Duration of operative vaginal delivery and adverse obstetric outcomes.
Am J Perinatol 37(5):503, 2020
Muise KL, Duchon MA, Brown RH: The effect of artificial caput on performance of vacuum
extractors. Obstet Gynecol 81(2):170, 1993

Mulder F, Schoffelmeer M, Hakvoort R, et al: Risk factors for postpartum urinary retention: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. BJOG 119(12):1440, 2012
Muraca GM, Skoll A, Lisonkova S, et al: Perinatal and maternal morbidity and mortality among term
singletons following midcavity operative vaginal delivery versus caesarean delivery. BJOG
125(6):693, 2018
Murphy DJ, Libby G, Chien P, et al: Cohort study of forceps delivery and the risk of epilepsy in
adulthood. Am J Obstet Gynecol 191:392, 2004
Murphy DJ, Macleod M, Bahl R, et al: A cohort study of maternal and neonatal morbidity in relation to
use of sequential instruments at operative vaginal delivery. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol
156(1):41, 2011
Nelson RL, Furner SE, Westercamp M, et al: Cesarean delivery for the prevention of anal incontinence.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2:CD006756, 2010
Nilsen ST: Boys born by forceps and vacuum extraction examined at 18 years of age. Acta Obstet
Gynecol Scand 63:549, 1984
Nygaard IE, Rao SS, Dawson JD: Anal incontinence after anal sphincter disruption: a 30-year
retrospective cohort study. Obstet Gynecol 89:896, 1997
O’Callaghan ME, MacLennan AH, Gibson CS, et al: Epidemiologic associations with cerebral palsy.
Obstet Gynecol 118(3):576, 2011
O’Mahony F, Hofmeyr GJ, Menon V: Choice of instruments for assisted vaginal delivery. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 11:CD005455, 2010
Osterman MJ, Martin JA, Menacker F: Expanded health data from the new birth certificate, 2006. Natl
Vital Stat Rep 58(5):1, 2009
Palatnik A, Grobman WA, Hellendag MG, et al: Predictors of failed operative vaginal delivery in a
contemporary obstetric cohort. Obstet Gynecol 127(3):501, 2016
Pearl ML, Roberts JM, Laros RK, et al: Vaginal delivery from the persistent occiput posterior position:
influence on maternal and neonatal morbidity. J Reprod Med 38:955, 1993
Pifarotti P, Gargasole C, Folcini C, et al: Acute post-partum urinary retention: analysis of risk factors, a
case-control study. Arch Gynecol Obstet 289(6):1249, 2014
Ramphul M, Kennelly MM, Burke G, et al: Risk factors and morbidity associated with suboptimal
instrument placement at instrumental delivery: observational study nested within the Instrumental
Delivery & Ultrasound randomised controlled trial ISRCTN 72230496. BJOG 122(4):558, 2015
Robertson PA, Laros RK, Zhao RL: Neonatal and maternal outcome in low-pelvic and mid-pelvic
operative deliveries. Am J Obstet Gynecol 162:1436, 1990
Rortveit G, Daltveit AK, Hannestad YS, et al: Urinary incontinence after vaginal delivery or cesarean
section. N Engl J Med 348:9000, 2003
Schuit E, Kwee A, Westerhuis ME, et al: A clinical prediction model to assess the risk of operative
delivery. BJOG 119(8):915, 2012
Seidman DS, Laor A, Gale R, et al: Long-term effects of vacuum and forceps deliveries. Lancet
337:1583, 1991
Shaffer BL, Cheng YW, Vargas JE, et al: Manual rotation to reduce caesarean delivery in persistent
occiput posterior or transverse position. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 24(1):65, 2011
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Staat B, Combs CA: SMFM special statement: operative vaginal
delivery: checklists for performance and documentation. Am J Obstet Gynecol 222(5):B15, 2020
Solt I, Jackson S, Moore T, et al: Teaching forceps: the impact of proactive faculty. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 204(5):448.e1, 2011

Spiliopoulos M, Kareti A, Jain NJ, et al: Risk of peripartum hysterectomy by mode of delivery and prior
obstetric history: data from a population-based study. Arch Gynecol Obstet 283(6):1261, 2011
Spong CY, Berghella V, Wenstrom KD, et al: Preventing the first cesarean delivery: summary of a Joint
Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, Society for
Maternal-Fetal Medicine, and American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists Workshop.
Obstet Gynecol 120(5):1181, 2012
Stock L, Basham E, Gossett DR, et al: Factors associated with wound complications in women with
obstetric anal sphincter injuries (OASIS). Am J Obstet Gynecol 208(4):327.e1, 2013a
Stock SJ, Josephs K, Farquharson S, et al: Maternal and neonatal outcomes of successful Kielland’s
rotational forceps delivery. Obstet Gynecol 121(5):1032, 2013b
Suwannachat B, Laopaiboon M, Tonmat S, et al: Rapid versus stepwise application of negative pressure
in vacuum extraction-assisted vaginal delivery: a multicentre randomised controlled non-inferiority
trial. BJOG 118(10):1247, 2011
Suwannachat B, Lumbiganon P, Laopaiboon M: Rapid versus stepwise negative pressure application for
vacuum extraction assisted vaginal delivery. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 8:CD006636, 2012
Tempest N, Hart A, Walkinshaw S, et al: A re-evaluation of the role of rotational forceps: retrospective
comparison of maternal and perinatal outcomes following different methods of birth for malposition
in the second stage of labor. BJOG 120(10):1277, 2013
Towner D, Castro MA, Eby-Wilkens E, et al: Effect of mode of delivery in nulliparous women on
neonatal intracranial injury. N Engl J Med 341:1709, 1999
Towner DR, Ciotti MC: Operative vaginal delivery: a cause of birth injury or is it? Clin Obstet Gynecol
50(3):563, 2007
Vacca A: Vacuum-assisted delivery. Best Pract Res Clin Obstet Gynaecol 16:17, 2002
van Bavel J, Hukkelhoven CW, de Vries C, et al: The effectiveness of mediolateral episiotomy in
preventing obstetric anal sphincter injuries during operative vaginal delivery: a ten-year analysis of a
national registry. Int Urogynecol J 29(3):407, 2018
van den Akker T: Vacuum extraction for non-rotational and rotational assisted vaginal birth. Best Pract
Res Clin Obstet Gynaecol 56:47, 2019
Verhoeven CJ, Nuij C, Janssen-Rolf CR, et al: Predictors for failure of vacuum-assisted vaginal
delivery: a case-control study. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 200:29, 2016
Volløyhaug I, Mørkved S, Salvesen Ø, et al: Forceps delivery is associated with increased risk of pelvic
organ prolapse and muscle trauma: a cross-sectional study 16–24 years after first delivery.
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 46(4):487, 2015
Walsh CA, Robson M, McAuliffe FM: Mode of delivery at term and adverse neonatal outcomes. Obstet
Gynecol 121(1):122, 2013
Wan L, Xia W, Zhang J: Effect of perineum protection cooperated by two operators in the forcepsassisted vaginal delivery: a case-control study. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 12:1, 2020
Wen SW, Liu S, Kramer MS, et al: Comparison of maternal and infant outcomes between vacuum
extraction and forceps deliveries. Am J Epidemiol 153(2):103, 2001
Werner EF, Janevic TM, Illuzzi J, et al: Mode of delivery in nulliparous women and neonatal intracranial
injury. Obstet Gynecol 118(6):1239, 2011
Wesley B, van den Berg B, Reece EA: The effect of operative vaginal delivery on cognitive
development. Am J Obstet Gynecol 166:288, 1992
Wesley BD, van den Berg BJ, Reece EA: The effect of forceps delivery on cognitive development. Am
J Obstet Gynecol 169(5):1091, 1993

Williams MC, Knuppel RA, O’Brien WF, et al: A randomized comparison of assisted vaginal delivery by
obstetric forceps and polyethylene vacuum cup. Obstet Gynecol 78:789, 1991
Yeomans ER: Operative vaginal delivery. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al (eds):
Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2017
Yeomans ER: Operative vaginal delivery. Obstet Gynecol 115(3):645, 2010

CHAPTER 30

Cesarean Delivery and Peripartum
Hysterectomy

DEFINITIONS
CESAREAN DELIVERY RISKS
PATIENT PREPARATION
CESAREAN DELIVERY TECHNIQUE
LAPAROTOMY
HYSTEROTOMY
PERIPARTUM HYSTERECTOMY
POSTOPERATIVE CARE
REFERENCES
In the United States, the cesarean delivery rate rose most dramatically from
4.5 percent in 1970 to 32.9 percent in 2009. The rate has since plateaued and
was 31.9 percent in 2018 (Martin, 2019). Some indications for performing
cesarean delivery are shown in Table 30-1. More than 85 percent of these
operations are performed for four reasons—prior cesarean delivery, labor
dystocia or arrest, fetal jeopardy, or abnormal fetal presentation. The latter
three compose the main indications for primary cesarean delivery (Barber,
2011; Boyle, 2013). Efforts to lower these rates are outlined in Safe

Prevention of the Primary Cesarean Delivery by the American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019b).
TABLE 30-1. Some Indications for Cesarean Delivery

Reasons for persistently elevated cesarean rates are not completely
understood, but some explanations include the following:
1. Women are having fewer children, thus, a greater percentage of births are
among nulliparas, who are at increased risk for cesarean delivery.
2. Average maternal age is rising, and older women, especially older
nulliparas, have a higher cesarean delivery risk.
3. Electronic fetal monitoring use is widespread and associated with a higher
cesarean delivery rate compared with intermittent fetal heart rate
auscultation.
4. Most breech fetuses are now delivered by cesarean.
5. The frequency of operative vaginal delivery has declined.
6. Obesity, which is a cesarean delivery risk, has reached epidemic
proportions.
7. Rates of cesarean delivery in women with preeclampsia have risen,
whereas labor induction rates for these patients have declined.
8. The vaginal birth after cesarean (VBAC) rate has decreased from a high of
28 percent in 1996 to 13.3 percent in 2018 (Martin, 2019).
9. Assisted reproductive technology is more widely used and is linked with
greater cesarean delivery rates (Luke, 2019).

DEFINITIONS
Cesarean delivery defines the birth of a fetus by laparotomy and then
hysterotomy. This definition is not applied to removal of the fetus from the
abdominal cavity in the case of uterine rupture or of abdominal pregnancy.
Rarely, hysterotomy is performed in a woman who has just died or in whom

death is expected soon—postmortem or perimortem cesarean delivery
(Chap. 50, p. 897).
In some cases, abdominal hysterectomy is indicated after delivery. When
performed at the time of cesarean delivery, the operation is cesarean
hysterectomy. If done shortly after vaginal delivery, it is postpartum
hysterectomy. Peripartum hysterectomy is a broader term that combines
these two. In most cases, total hysterectomy is performed and removes the
uterine body and cervix. Supracervical hysterectomy is selected less often
and removes only the uterine body. With either, adnexa are not usually
excised. In most instances, a simple hysterectomy, which is also a type I
hysterectomy, is performed. However, for women with invasive cervical
cancer, radical hysterectomy removes the uterus, parametrium, and proximal
vagina to achieve tumor excision with negative margins. For cases of
placenta percreta that extend toward the pelvic sidewall, similar radical
excision of the parametrium may be needed.

CESAREAN DELIVERY RISKS
To provide accurate informed consent, knowledge of maternal and neonatal
risks and benefits with surgery is essential. In broad terms, cesarean delivery
generally has higher maternal surgical risks for the current and subsequent
pregnancies compared with spontaneous vaginal birth. This is balanced
against lower rates of perineal injury and short-term pelvic floor disorders.
For the neonate, cesarean delivery generally offers lower rates of birth
trauma and stillbirth but greater rates of initial respiratory difficulties.

■ Maternal Mortality and Morbidity
For the mother, death attributable solely to cesarean delivery is rare in the
United States. A review of nearly 1.5 million pregnancies found maternal
mortality rates of 2.2 per 100,000 cesarean deliveries compared with 0.2 per
100,000 vaginal births (Clark, 2008). In a metaanalysis of 203 studies, Guise
and coworkers (2010) reported a maternal mortality rate of 13 per 100,000
with elective repeat cesarean compared with 4 per 100,000 with trial of
labor.

Some element of this risk may stem from the underlying indication for the
cesarean delivery. For example, long first-stage labor increases not only
cesarean risk but also rates of maternal fever and postpartum hemorrhage
(Blankenship, 2020). Additionally, in a study of more than 100,000
deliveries in China, where cesarean birth without a medical indication is
common, the maternal mortality rate was not higher in those with
nonindicated cesarean delivery than in women with spontaneous vaginal
birth (Hou, 2017).
Similar to mortality rates, the overall frequencies of some maternal
morbidities are increased with cesarean delivery. Villar and associates
(2007) reported that maternal morbidity rates were twofold higher with
cesarean delivery than with vaginal birth. Principal among these are
infection, hemorrhage, and venous thromboembolism (VTE). In addition,
anesthetic complications, which also rarely include death, have a greater
incidence with cesarean delivery compared with vaginal birth (Cheesman,
2009; Hawkins, 2011). Adjacent organs infrequently may be injured, which
is described in detail later (p. 563).
Women who undergo a cesarean delivery are much more likely to be
delivered by a repeat operation in subsequent pregnancies. For women
undergoing subsequent cesarean, the maternal risks just described are even
greater (Cahill, 2006; Marshall, 2011; Silver, 2006). Specifically outlined in
Chapter 31 (p. 580), abnormal placentation, wound and uterine infections,
adjacent organ injury, cesarean hysterectomy, and blood transfusion are
among the morbidity that accrues with multiple subsequent cesarean
operations.
As an advantage, cesarean delivery is associated with lower rates of
urinary incontinence and pelvic organ prolapse than is vaginal birth
(Gyhagen, 2013a,b; Handa, 2011). Rates of anal incontinence appear
uninfluenced by a vaginal or cesarean route (Blomquist, 2018; Nelson,
2019). In subgroup evaluation, operative vaginal delivery does carry an
overall greater anal incontinence risk, which likely stems from higher
sphincter injury rates with these procedures (Chap. 29, p. 535).
Pelvic floor advantages persist to some degree over time, but cesarean
delivery is not totally protective. Moreover, longitudinal studies suggest that
initial pelvic floor advantages gained from cesarean delivery are lost as
women age (Dolan, 2010; MacArthur, 2011, 2013). During their State-of-theScience Conference, the National Institutes of Health panel (2006)

summarized that stress urinary incontinence rates after elective cesarean
delivery are lower than those following vaginal delivery. However, the
duration of this protection is unclear, particularly in older and multiparous
populations. Defining women who would be at highest long-term risk for
pregnancy-related pelvic floor disorders might allow accurate delivery
counseling (Jelovsek, 2018).

■ Neonatal Morbidity
Cesarean delivery is associated with a lower rate of fetal trauma (Linder,
2013; Moczygemba, 2010). Alexander and colleagues (2006) found that fetal
injury complicated 1 percent of cesarean deliveries. Skin laceration was
most common, but others included cephalohematoma, clavicular fracture,
brachial plexopathy, skull fracture, and facial nerve palsy. Cesarean
deliveries following a failed operative vaginal delivery attempt had the
highest injury rate. The lowest rate—0.5 percent—occurred in the elective
cesarean delivery group. That said, Worley and associates (2009) found that
approximately a third of women who were delivered at Parkland Hospital
entered spontaneous labor at term, and 96 percent of these delivered
vaginally without adverse neonatal outcomes.

■ Cesarean Delivery on Maternal Request
Some women request elective cesarean delivery. Data regarding the true
incidence of cesarean delivery on maternal request (CDMR) are poor. An
older estimate in the United States was 5 percent (Declercq, 2005).
Reasons for the request include protection of pelvic floor support,
convenience, fear of childbirth, and reduced risk of fetal injury. One
retrospective study of more than 66,000 Chinese parturients compared
outcomes of those who elected planned vaginal birth or requested primary
cesarean delivery (Liu, 2015). Short-term serious maternal morbidity and
neonatal mortality rates were similar. For the newborns, rates of birth
trauma, infection, and hypoxic ischemic encephalopathy were low in both
groups but statistically lower with cesarean delivery. Respiratory distress
syndrome rates were greater in the CDMR cohort. A smaller study
comparing these two routes of delivery support these findings (Larsson,
2011).

The debate surrounding CDMR includes two medical points: the concept
of informed free choice by the woman, and the autonomy of the physician in
offering CDMR. To address this, the National Institutes of Health (2006)
held a State-of-the-Science Conference on Cesarean Delivery on Maternal
Request. Notably, most of the maternal and neonatal outcomes examined had
insufficient data to permit recommendations. Indeed, one of the main
conclusions of the conference was that more high-quality research is needed
to fully evaluate the issue. Guidelines from the American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020a) note that CDMR should not be
performed before 39 weeks’ gestation. It is ideally avoided in women
desiring several children because of the earlier-described morbidity from
accruing cesarean operations.

PATIENT PREPARATION
■ Delivery Availability
No nationally recognized standard of care currently dictates the acceptable
time interval to begin cesarean delivery. Previously, a 30-minute decision-toincision interval was recommended. However, Bloom and colleagues (2006)
evaluated nearly 3000 cesarean deliveries performed for emergency
indications. They reported that failure to achieve a cesarean delivery
decision-to-incision time <30 minutes was not associated with a negative
neonatal outcome. A subsequent systematic review echoed this finding
(Tolcher, 2014). Despite this, when faced with an acute, catastrophic
deterioration in fetal condition, cesarean delivery usually is indicated as
rapidly as possible, and thus purposeful delays are inappropriate. The
American Academy of Pediatrics and the American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists (2017) recommend that facilities giving obstetrical care
should have the ability to initiate cesarean delivery in a time frame that best
incorporates maternal and fetal risks and benefits.

■ Informed Consent
Informed consent is a process and not merely a medical document. The
consenting conversation should enhance a woman’s awareness of her
diagnosis and contain a discussion of medical and surgical care alternatives,

procedure goals and limitations, and operative risks. For women with a prior
cesarean delivery, the option of a trial of labor should be included for
suitable candidates. For those desiring permanent sterilization or intrauterine
device (IUD) insertion, consenting for these can be completed concurrently
(Chaps. 38 and 39, pp. 665 and 684).
An informed patient may decline a particular recommended intervention,
and a woman’s decision-making autonomy must be respected. In the medical
record, providers should document the reasons for refusal and should note
that the intervention’s value and the health consequences of not proceeding
with it have been explained.
For Jehovah’s Witnesses, informed consent discussions regarding blood
products ideally begin early in pregnancy. Acceptable blood products vary
widely among individual women, and a preoperative checklist of approved
products allows superior preparation (Hubbard, 2015). In general, red cells,
white cells, platelets, and plasma are considered primary blood components
and are declined. However, certain clotting factors or cell fractions may be
acceptable (Lawson, 2015). Before and after surgery, iron, folate, and, if
necessary, erythropoietin are accepted agents to help maximize hemoglobin
levels. Perioperatively, phlebotomy is limited, and pediatric collection tubes
are preferable. Intraoperative options include prompt treatment of atony to
limit blood loss and use of topical hemostatic agents, tranexamic acid, and
desmopressin to promote clot formation. Red blood cell salvage can provide
autologous donation. Normovolemic hemodilution and controlled
hypotensive or hypothermic anesthesia can limit red cell losses. To minimize
uncontrolled vessel bleeding, uterine artery embolization, occlusive vascular
balloons, and other options are described in Chapter 44 (p. 779) (Scharman,
2017).

■ Timing of Scheduled Cesarean Delivery
With elective delivery before 39 completed weeks, adverse neonatal
sequelae from neonatal immaturity are appreciable (Tita, 2009). To avoid
these, assurance of fetal maturity before scheduled elective surgery is
essential. Supporting criteria include corroborative ultrasound measurements
obtained prior to 20 weeks’ gestation, fetal heart tones heard for the past 30
weeks, and passage of 36 weeks since an initial positive pregnancy test
result (American Academy of Pediatrics, 2017).

■ Preoperative Care
Current perioperative care is guided by evidence-based enhanced recovery
after surgery (ERAS) recommendations. Among these, solid food intake is
stopped at least 6 hours before the procedure. Uncomplicated patients may
consume moderate amounts of clear liquids up to 2 hours before surgery
(American Society of Anesthesiologists, 2016). Bowel preparation is not
recommended (Wilson, 2018).
The woman scheduled for cesarean delivery typically is admitted the day
of surgery and evaluated by the obstetrical and anesthesia teams. Recently
performed hematocrit and indirect Coombs test are reviewed. If the latter is
positive, compatible blood availability must be ensured.
Regional analgesia is preferred for cesarean delivery. To minimize the
lung injury risk from rare aspiration, gastric acid is ideally buffered. An oral
antacid is consumed shortly before regional analgesia or induction of general
anesthesia. One example is Bicitra, 30 mL orally in a single dose. This can
be coupled with an intravenous (IV) dose of an H2-receptor antagonist,
which also raises gastric pH (Wilson, 2018).
Once the woman is supine, a wedge beneath the right hip and lower back
creates a left lateral tilt to aid venous return and avoid hypotension. Data are
insufficient to determine the value of fetal monitoring before scheduled
cesarean delivery in women without risk factors. Our practice is to obtain a
5-minute tracing prior to elective cases. At minimum, fetal heart sounds
should be documented in the operating room prior to surgery.
Of further preparations, hair removal at the surgical site does not lower
surgical site infection (SSI) rates (Kowalski, 2016). However, if hair is
obscuring, it is removed the day of surgery by clipping, which is associated
with fewer SSIs than shaving (Tanner, 2011). Chemical depilation the night
before surgery compared with clipping has similar SSI rates (Lefebvre,
2015). An electrosurgical grounding pad is placed near the surgical incision
and typically on the lateral thigh. At Parkland Hospital, we typically insert an
indwelling bladder catheter to collapse the bladder away from the
hysterotomy incision, to avert urinary retention secondary to regional
analgesia, and to allow accurate postoperative urine measurement. Small
studies show that catheterization may be withheld in hemodynamically stable
women. Catheter-related discomfort can be avoided, but urinary tract
infection rates are not lower (Abdel-Aleem, 2014).

The risk of VTE is increased with pregnancy. In the United States in
2014, women with cesarean delivery had a VTE rate of 8 per 10,000, which
almost doubled the rate for those with vaginal birth (Abe, 2019).
Accordingly, for all women not already receiving thromboprophylaxis, the
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020c) recommends
initiation of pneumatic compression stockings before cesarean delivery.
These are usually discontinued once the woman ambulates. Consensus varies
among organizations, and the American College of Chest Physicians suggests
only early ambulation for women without risk factors who are undergoing
cesarean delivery (Bates, 2012). For women already receiving prophylaxis
or those with increased risk factors, they support escalation of prophylaxis.
Last, the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists (2015) is the
most conservative and suggest pharmacological prophylaxis for the largest
proportion of patients. These various methods and recommendations are
discussed in Chapter 55 (p. 989).
Some women scheduled for cesarean delivery have a comorbidity that
requires specific management in anticipation of surgery. Among others, these
include insulin-requiring diabetes, coagulopathy or thrombophilia, chronic
corticosteroid use, and significant reactive airway disease. Surgical
preparations are discussed in the respective chapters covering these topics.

■ Infection Prevention
Antibiotic Prophylaxis
Cesarean delivery is considered a clean contaminated case, and
postoperative febrile morbidity is common. Numerous trials show that a
single dose of an antibiotic given at the time of cesarean delivery
significantly decreases infectious morbidity (Smaill, 2014). Although more
obvious for women in active labor who then require cesarean delivery, this
practice also pertains to gravidas undergoing elective surgery. Depending on
drug allergies, most recommend a single IV dose of a β-lactam antibiotic—
either a cephalosporin or extended-spectrum penicillin. A 1-g dose of
cefazolin (Ancef) is an efficacious and cost-effective choice. Additional
doses are considered in cases with blood loss >1500 mL or with duration
longer than 3 hours. Recommendations for a 2- or 3-g cefazolin dose in
obese parturients are conflicting (Ahmadzia, 2015; Maggio, 2015; Swank,

2015; Young, 2015). The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
recommends a 2-g dose for weights ≥80 kg and 3 g for those ≥120 kg
(Berríos-Torres, 2017). The American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2020d) recognizes either dose as suitable for women ≥80 kg.
One pharmacokinetic analysis in obese women showed sufficient tissue
levels with a 2-g dose for cesarean deliveries lasting 1.5 hours. Authors
recommended consideration for redosing in obese women if surgeries were
longer (Grupper, 2017).
Evidence also supports extending the antibiotic spectrum (Markwei,
2021; Tita, 2008). One large randomized trial added azithromycin, 500 mg
IV, to standard prophylaxis prior to cesarean delivery for women in labor or
with ruptured membranes (Tita, 2016). Rates of SSIs and endometritis were
significantly lower in the extended-spectrum group compared with those in
the standard prophylaxis cohort.
In pregnant women with a history of infection with methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), a single, 15-mg/kg dose of vancomycin can
be added to the standard prophylaxis. Decolonization plays a limited role but
may be considered prior to a planned cesarean delivery in women with
known MRSA colonization (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2020d).
Significant β-lactam allergy manifests as anaphylaxis, angioedema,
respiratory distress, or urticaria. This merits prophylaxis with a single, 900mg IV dose of clindamycin combined with a weight-based, 5-mg/kg dose of
an aminoglycoside as an alternative. The 900-mg clindamycin dose is also
used for obese patients. Some studies link higher SSI rates to regimens that
lack a β-lactam (Wilhelm, 2020). Antepartum penicillin-allergy evaluation
by a specialist may redefine the significance of the patient’s prior reaction.
Advantageously, this clarification may remove an allergy label and expanded
options (Wolfson, 2021).
Antibiotic administration before surgical incision lowers postoperative
infection rates without adverse neonatal effects compared with drug
administration after umbilical cord clamping (Mackeen, 2014b; Sullivan,
2007). Prophylaxis is ideally administered within the 60 minutes prior to the
start of planned cesarean delivery. For emergent delivery, antibiotics are
given as soon as feasible.
Preoperative preparation of the abdominal wall skin immediately prior to
surgery can help prevent SSIs. Chlorhexidine-alcohol or povidone-iodine

solutions are suitable, but data favor chlorhexidine (Hadiati, 2020; Tolcher,
2019). However, adding a wiping of the skin with chlorhexidine the night
before surgery was no better than placebo (Stone, 2020). Once abdominal
preparation is completed and dry, surgical drapes cover the patient. One type
has a cut-out window in the lower abdomen that is surrounded by an
adhesive border. Others are adhesive incisional drapes, in which the skin
and plastic drape must be incised together. The latter may slightly raise SSI
rates (Eckler, 2019; Hadiati, 2020).
Although not our practice, preoperative vaginal cleansing with a 1percent povidone-iodine scrub lowered endometritis and SSI rates in some
studies (Haas, 2020; Roeckner, 2019). With povidone allergy, 4-percent
chlorhexidine gluconate solution is an alternative. Last, some early evidence
may support extending oral antibiotic prophylaxis for 48 hours postcesarean
in obese women to lower SSIs (Valent, 2017).
Antibiotic prophylaxis against infective endocarditis is not recommended
for most cardiac conditions. Exceptions are women with repaired or
unrepaired cyanotic heart disease, prosthetic valves, or both. Prior infective
endocarditis or cardiac transplantation with resulting valve regurgitation are
others (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020d). Drug
infusion is 30 to 60 minutes prior to expected delivery (Table 52-9, p. 935).
Cesarean infection prophylaxis regimens also serve as appropriate
endocarditis coverage.

Other Preventions
Glycemic control in diabetics lowers wound infection rates and is
emphasized in Chapter 60 (p. 1068). Smoking is another modifiable risk
(Avila, 2012). Intraoperative normothermia lowers wound infection rates in
general surgery cases (Balki, 2020; Berríos-Torres, 2017). This tenet is
logically extrapolated to cesarean delivery (Caughey, 2018).
In children delivered by cesarean, some evidence shows higher asthma
and allergy rates (Kristensen, 2016). Gut microbiome differences between
vaginal and cesarean birth groups are a suggested cause (Shao, 2019). With
the hope to improve neonatal microbiota, swabbing the newborn mouth with
a gauze that was incubated in the maternal vagina 1 hour before surgery has
been described in preliminary studies. However, the American College of

Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019c) does not encourage this practice
due to few data and the potential for transmission of harmful organisms.

■ Surgical Safety
The Joint Commission (2020) describes a protocol to prevent surgical
errors. For cesarean delivery, all relevant documents are verified
immediately before surgery, and a “time out” is completed. The “time out”
requires attention of the entire team to confirm that the patient, site, and
procedure are correct. Important discussions also include introduction of the
patient-care team members, verification of prophylactic antibiotics,
estimation of procedure length, and communication of anticipated
complications. Additionally, requests for special instrumentation should be
addressed preoperatively to prevent potential patient compromise and
intraoperative delays.
Surgical fires are a specific safety focus. As prevention, surgeons ideally
assess the fire risk at the procedure’s start, allow adequate drying of alcoholbased skin antiseptics, and keep ignition sources off the patient or drapes
when not in use (Food and Drug Administration, 2018; Wolf, 2013).
An instrument, sponge, and needle count before and after surgery is
essential. Moreover, active communication during surgery should clearly
convey items added to the operative field. At surgery completion, if counts
are not reconciled, portable radiographic imaging for retained objects is
done.

CESAREAN DELIVERY TECHNIQUE
■ Laparotomy
As with all surgery, a clear understanding of relevant anatomy is essential
(Chap. 2, p. 12). For entry into the abdomen, a suprapubic transverse
incision or a midline vertical one is chosen for cesarean delivery. Suitable
transverse incisions are Pfannenstiel or Maylard incisions, and the
Pfannenstiel type is selected most frequently.
Transverse incisions follow Langer lines of skin tension, and thus exert
less stress on the closed wound. Compared with vertical ones, Pfannenstiel
incisions offer superior cosmesis and lower incisional hernia rates. The

Pfannenstiel incision, however, is often discouraged for cases in which a
large operating space is essential or in which access to the upper abdomen
may be needed. With transverse incisions, because of the layers created
during incision of the internal and external oblique aponeuroses, purulent
fluid can collect between these. Therefore, some favor a midline vertical
incision for cases with high infection risks. Emergent entry is typically faster
with vertical incision during primary and repeat cesarean delivery (Wylie,
2010). Last, neurovascular structures, which include the ilioinguinal and
iliohypogastric nerves and superficial and inferior epigastric vessels, are
often encountered with transverse incisions. Logically, bleeding, wound
hematoma, and neurological disruption may more frequently complicate these
incisions compared with vertical ones. The best incision for the morbidly
obese parturient is unclear (Smid, 2016). Our preference for women with
morbid obesity is a periumbilical midline vertical incision (Chap. 51, p.
909).
The Maylard incision differs mainly from the Pfannenstiel in that the
rectus abdominis muscle bellies and their investing rectus sheath are
transected horizontally to widen the operating space. It is technically more
difficult due to required muscle cutting and ligation of the inferior epigastric
arteries, which lie laterally to these muscle bellies.
Once access is gained, metal handheld retractors provide exposure for
hysterotomy. One metaanalysis with nearly 1700 women showed no lowering
of postcesarean SSI rates with a disposable plastic barrier retractor (AlexisO) (Waring, 2018).

Transverse Incisions
With the Pfannenstiel incision, the skin and subcutaneous tissue are incised
using a low, transverse, slightly curvilinear incision. This is made at the
pubic hairline, which is typically 3 cm above the superior border of the
symphysis pubis. The incision is extended laterally to accommodate delivery
—12 to 15 cm is typical.
Sharp dissection is continued through the subcutaneous layer to the
fascia. The superficial epigastric vessels can usually be identified halfway
between the skin and fascia, several centimeters from the midline, and these
are coagulated.

The fascia is then incised sharply at the midline. The anterior abdominal
fascia is typically composed of two visible layers, the aponeurosis from the
external oblique muscle and a fused layer containing aponeuroses of the
internal oblique and transverse abdominis muscles. Ideally, the two layers
are individually incised during lateral extension of the fascial incision. The
inferior epigastric vessels usually lie outside the lateral border of the rectus
abdominis muscle and beneath the fused aponeuroses of the internal oblique
and transverse abdominis muscles. Thus, although infrequently required,
further lateral extension of the fascial incision may encounter these vessels.
In this case, vessels ideally are identified and coagulated or ligated to
prevent bleeding and vessel retraction.
Once the fascia is incised, the inferior fascial edge is grasped with
Kocher clamps and elevated by an assistant as the operator separates the
fascial sheath from the underlying rectus abdominis muscle either bluntly or
sharply until the superior border of the symphysis pubis is reached. Next, the
superior fascial edge is grasped and again, separation of fascia from the
rectus muscle is completed. Blood vessels coursing between the sheath and
muscles are clamped, cut, and ligated, or they are coagulated with an
electrosurgery blade. Meticulous hemostasis is imperative to lower rates of
incisional hematoma and infection. The fascial separation progresses
cephalad and laterally to create a semicircular area above the transverse
incision with a radius of approximately 8 cm. This will vary depending on
fetal size. The rectus abdominis and pyramidalis muscles are separated in the
midline to expose the transversalis fascia and peritoneum.
The transversalis fascia and preperitoneal fat are bluntly dissected away
to reach the underlying peritoneum. The peritoneum near the upper end of the
incision is opened carefully, either bluntly or by elevating it with two
hemostats placed approximately 2 cm apart. This upper site lowers
cystotomy risks. The tented fold of peritoneum between the clamps is
examined and palpated to ensure that omentum, bowel, or bladder is not
adjacent. The peritoneum is then incised. As the incision is extended
cephalad above the arcuate line, the transverse fibers of the posterior rectus
sheath are seen and are cut along with the peritoneum. The peritoneal
incision is then extended downward to just above the peritoneal reflection
over the bladder. Importantly, in women with prior intraabdominal surgery,
including cesarean delivery, omentum or bowel may be adhered to the

undersurface of the peritoneum. In women with obstructed labor, the bladder
may be pushed remarkably cephalad.

Midline Vertical Incision
This incision begins 2 to 3 cm above the superior margin of the symphysis. It
should be sufficiently long to allow fetal delivery, and 12 to 15 cm is typical.
Sharp or electrosurgical blade dissection through the subcutaneous layers
ultimately exposes the anterior rectus sheath. A small opening is made
sharply with scalpel in the upper half of the linea alba. Placement here helps
avoid potential cystotomy. Index and middle fingers are placed beneath the
fascia, and the fascial incision is extended first superiorly and then inferiorly
with scissors. Midline separation of the rectus muscles and pyramidalis
muscles and peritoneal entry are similar to those just described for the
Pfannenstiel incision.

■ Hysterotomy
Most often, the lower uterine segment is incised transversely as described by
Kerr in 1921. Occasionally, vertical incision confined solely to the lower
uterine segment may be elected (Krönig, 1912). In contrast, a classical
incision begins as a low vertical incision, which is then extended cephalad
into the active portion of the uterine corpus. Last, a fundal or even posterior
uterine incision may be selected for cases with placenta accreta syndrome.

Low Transverse Cesarean Incision
For most cesarean deliveries, this incision is preferred. Compared with a
classical incision, it repairs easily, causes less incision-site bleeding, and
promotes less bowel or omentum adherence to the myometrial incision.
Located in the inactive segment, it is also less likely to rupture during a
subsequent pregnancy.
Before hysterotomy, the surgeon palpates the fundus to identify degrees of
uterine rotation. The uterus may be rotated so that one round ligament is more
anterior and closer to the midline (Chap. 3, p. 46). In such cases, the uterus
can be manually reoriented and held to permit centering of the incision. This
avoids incision extension into and laceration of the adjacent uterine artery. A

moist sponge may be used to pack protruding bowel away from the operative
field.
The reflection of peritoneum at the upper margin of the bladder and
overlying the lower uterine segment is grasped in the midline with forceps
and incised transversely with scissors (Fig. 30-1). Following this initial
incision, scissors are inserted between peritoneum and lower-uterinesegment myometrium. Open scissors are pushed laterally from the midline on
each side. This transverse peritoneal incision extends almost the full length
of the lower uterine segment. As the lateral margin on each side is
approached, the scissors are directed slightly cephalad (Fig. 30-2). The
lower edge of peritoneum is elevated, and the bladder is gently separated
from the underlying lower uterine segment with blunt or sharp dissection
within this vesicouterine space (Fig. 30-3). This bladder flap creation
effectively moves the bladder away from the planned hysterotomy site. It also
helps prevent bladder laceration if an unintended inferior hysterotomy
extension occurs during fetal delivery. If dense adhesions complicate
vesicouterine space dissection, sharp dissection is preferred. If unclear, the
bladder and its upper border can be identified by distending or “back filling”
it with fluid instilled through a Foley catheter (Saaqib, 2020).

FIGURE 30-1 The loose peritoneum above the bladder reflection is grasped with forceps and incised
with Metzenbaum scissors.

FIGURE 30-2 This peritoneal edge is elevated and incised laterally.

FIGURE 30-3 Cross section shows blunt dissection of the bladder off the uterus to expose the lower
uterine segment.

In general, this caudad separation of bladder does not exceed 5 cm and
usually is less. However, in instances in which cesarean hysterectomy is
planned or anticipated, extended caudad bladder dissection is recommended
to aid total hysterectomy and decrease the risk of cystotomy.
Some surgeons do not create a bladder flap. The main advantage is a
shorter skin incision-to-delivery time. However, data supporting this practice
are currently limited (O’Neill, 2014; Tuuli, 2012).
Uterine Incision. The uterus is entered through the lower uterine segment.
Digital palpation to find the physiological border between firmer upper

segment myometrium and the more flexible lower segment can guide
placement. This is often at the level of the bladder flap incision.
For women with advanced or complete cervical dilation, the hysterotomy
is placed relatively higher. Failure to adjust increases the risk of lateral
extension of the incision into the uterine arteries. It may also lead to incision
of the cervix or vagina rather than the lower uterine segment. Such incisions
into the cervix distort postoperative cervical anatomy.
The uterus can be incised by various techniques. Each is initiated by
using a scalpel to transversely incise the exposed lower uterine segment for 1
to 2 cm in the midline (Fig. 30-4). Repetitive shallow strokes help avoid
fetal laceration. As the myometrium thins, a fingertip can then bluntly enter
the uterine cavity. Once the uterus is entered, the hysterotomy is lengthened
by simply spreading the incision, using lateral and slightly upward pressure
applied with each index finger (Fig. 30-5). Instead, some evidence supports
widening the lower-uterine-segment incision by pulling with fingers in a
cephalocaudad direction to help lower hysterotomy extension rates (Morales,
2019; Xodo, 2016).

FIGURE 30-4 The myometrium is incised with shallow strokes to avoid cutting the fetal head.

FIGURE 30-5 After entering the uterine cavity, the incision is extended laterally with fingers or with
bandage scissors (inset).

The goal is to create an incision sufficiently wide to deliver the
presenting fetal part yet avoid overextending the incision. Extensions usually
tear downward into the lower uterine segment or laterally into the uterine
vessels. Extensive inferior tears may include the cervix or vagina. Risk
factors for extensions include occiput posterior fetal head position, primary
cesarean delivery, and advanced first-stage or second-stage labor (de la
Torre, 2006; Karavani, 2020). Specific maneuvers to ameliorate this last
high-risk setting are discussed in the next section.
Alternatively, if the lower uterine segment is thick and unyielding, cutting
laterally and then slightly upward with bandage scissors will lengthen the
incision. Importantly, when scissors are used, the index and middle fingers of
the nondominant hand are insinuated beneath the myometrium and above fetal
parts to help avert fetal laceration. Comparing blunt and sharp expansion of

the initial uterine incision, blunt stretch is associated with fewer unintended
incision extensions, shorter operative time, and less blood loss. However,
the rates of infection and need for transfusion do not differ (Asıcıoğlu, 2014;
Saad, 2014).
During hysterotomy creation, if the placenta lies in the incision line, it
must be either detached or incised. Placental function is thereby
compromised, and thus delivery is expedited.
At times, a low transverse hysterotomy is selected but provides
inadequate room for delivery. In such instances, one corner of the
hysterotomy incision is extended cephalad into the contractile portion of the
myometrium—a J incision. If this is completed bilaterally, a U incision is
formed. Last, some prefer to extend in the midline—a T incision. As
expected, these have been linked with higher intraoperative blood loss
(Boyle, 1996; Patterson, 2002).
J-, U-, and T-incisions extend into the contractile portion, and a
subsequent trial of labor after cesarean (TOLAC) is more likely to be
complicated by uterine rupture. Similarly, from limited data, inferior
hysterotomy extensions also are associated with higher rupture rates, and in
our practice these preclude TOLAC (Goldfarb, 2011). The Royal College of
Obstetricians and Gynaecologists (2015) notes insufficient evidence to
support the general safety of TOLAC in women with a prior significant
uterine extension and cautions for decisions to be individualized. Last, a
prior classical incision, described later, or a fundal incision substantially
raises the rupture risk during subsequent TOLAC. Thus, following a primary
cesarean delivery complicated by these exceptional incision types, a
conversation disclosing these events and their significance should ensue with
the patient and are carefully described in the operative report.
Delivery of the Fetus. With a cephalic presentation, a hand is slipped into the
uterine cavity between the symphysis and fetal head. The head is elevated
gently with the fingers and palm through the incision. Once the head enters
the incision, delivery may be aided by modest fundal pressure (Fig. 30-6).

FIGURE 30-6 Delivery of the fetal head. (Figures 30-6 to 30-8: Reproduced with permission from
Johnson DD: Cesarean delivery. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al (eds): Cunningham
and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2017.)

After a long labor with cephalopelvic disproportion, the fetal head may
be tightly wedged in the birth canal. This situation raises the risk of
hysterotomy extension, of associated blood loss, and of fetal skull fracture.
First, a “push” method may be used. With this, upward pressure exerted by a
hand in the vagina by an assistant will help to dislodge the head and push it
cephalad. If this is anticipated, a patient in frog-leg position may allow
easier vaginal access.
Second, as an alternative, a “pull” method grasps the fetal legs and brings
them through the hysterotomy. The fetus is then delivered as one would
complete a breech extraction. Support for this latter approach comes from
small randomized trials and retrospective cohort studies (Berhan, 2014;
Jeve, 2016). The main advantage appears to be lower uterine extension rates.

Another pull method attempts to free the head by placing a palm on each
fetal shoulder and gently elevating them. Last, a least-common method uses a
“fetal pillow.” This is a distensible intravaginal balloon that is positioned
below the head and then inflated to elevate the fetal head. Evidence for its
superiority to the push method is limited and conflicting (Sacre, 2021; Seal,
2016).
Conversely, in women without labor, the fetal head may be unmolded and
lack a leading cephalic point. The round head may be difficult to lift through
the uterine incision in a relatively thick lower segment that is unattenuated by
labor. In such instances, either forceps or a vacuum device may be used to
deliver the fetal head. For this, the fetal head is manually grasped and turned
to an occiput transverse position. In this example, the head is left OT (LOT)
position. Two or more fingers of the right hand are introduced inside the
hysterotomy and behind the fetal head (Fig. 30-7). Fingers of the left hand
grasp the handle of the forceps. The blade’s toe is gently introduced between
the hand and fetal head. It is curved inward between the fetal head and the
palmar surface of the fingers. For the upper blade, two or more fingers of the
left hand are inserted into the right posterolateral aspect of the hysterotomy.
The forceps handle is grasped by the right hand. The blade toe is then gently
introduced along the posterior left lower uterine segment wall. It is curved
inward between the fetal face and the palmar surface of the fingers (Fig. 308A). The fingers of the left hand are moved beneath the lower edge of this
blade. Upward pressure against this edge will sweep or wander the blade
into position. As the blade reaches its final position, the shank and handle
come to rest in the midline, and the two handles are articulated (Fig. 30-8B).
Traction is up and out to guide the occiput through the hysterotomy.
Concurrent, gentle fundal pressure can be applied by an assistant.

FIGURE 30-7 To place the first forceps blade, the operator’s palm is slipped beneath the head. It is
guided along the palm to ultimately lie across the fetal malar and lower parietal bone as in vaginal
forceps application.

FIGURE 30-8 A. To apply the second blade, the operator’s hand is inserted into the posterolateral
aspect of the hysterotomy. The forceps blade is slipped inward across the palm. This hand then guides
the blade to overlie the upper malar and parietal bones. B. Once positioned, the handles are interlocked.
Slight upward and outward traction is used to lift the head through the incision.

After head delivery, a finger is passed across the fetal neck to determine
whether it is encircled by one or more umbilical cord loops. If present, these
are slipped over the head. The head is rotated to an occiput transverse
position, which aligns the fetal bisacromial diameter vertically. The sides of
the head are grasped with two hands, and gentle axial traction is applied until
the anterior shoulder enters the hysterotomy incision. Next, by upward axial
traction, the posterior shoulder is delivered. During delivery, abrupt or
powerful lateral force is avoided to avert brachial plexus injury. With steady
outward traction, the rest of the body then readily follows. Gentle fundal
pressure may aid this.
With some exceptions, current American Heart Association recommends
against routine neonatal suctioning immediately after birth, even with
meconium present (Wyckoff, 2015). A fuller discussion of this and delayed

umbilical cord clamping is found in Chapter 27 (p. 500). Specific to
cesarean delivery, delayed clamping does not lower maternal hemoglobin
levels on the first postoperative day (Jenusaitis, 2020; Purisch, 2019). After
the umbilical cord is clamped, the newborn is given to the team member who
will conduct care.
Comparing elective cesarean under neuraxial anesthesia and spontaneous
vaginal deliveries, studies show that the need for neonatal resuscitation is not
practically different between the two (Gordon, 2005). The American
Academy of Pediatrics and the American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2017) recommend that “a qualified person who is skilled in
neonatal resuscitation should be in the delivery room.” At Parkland Hospital,
pediatric nurse practitioners attend uncomplicated, scheduled cesarean
deliveries. Notably, as anticipated neonatal risks rise, so too should the
resuscitative skills of the attendants (Wyckoff, 2015).
To promote breastfeeding, the American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2020b) recommends skin-to-skin contact between newborn
and mother in the delivery room. Although most randomized trials focus on
vaginal birth, several small studies support such contact following cesarean
delivery, and this is our practice (Frederick, 2020; Moore, 2016).
Breastfeeding can be initiated the day of surgery.
Delivery of the Placenta. The uterine incision is observed for any vigorously
bleeding sites. These should be quickly clamped with Pennington or ring
forceps. Although some surgeons may prefer manual removal of the placenta,
spontaneous delivery prompted by some gentle steady cord traction may
reduce the risk of operative blood loss and infection (Anorlu, 2008; Baksu,
2005). Traction is coupled with fundal massage to hasten placental
separation and delivery (Fig. 30-9).

FIGURE 30-9 Placenta bulging through the uterine incision as the uterus contracts. A hand gently
massages the fundus to help aid spontaneous placental separation.

Immediately after delivery and quick gross inspection of the placenta for
missing portions, the uterine cavity is suctioned and wiped out with a gauze
sponge to remove avulsed membranes, vernix, and clots. In the past, doublegloved fingers or ring forceps placed through the hysterotomy incision were
used to dilate a closed cervix. This does not reduce infection or postpartum
hemorrhage rates and is not our practice (Kirscht, 2017; Liabsuetrakul,
2018).
To help prevent uterine atony after birth, an IV infusion containing two
ampules or 20 units of oxytocin per liter of crystalloid is infused at 10
mL/min. Some prefer higher infusion rates, however, nondilute boluses are
avoided because of associated hypotension (Roach, 2013). Once the uterus
contracts satisfactorily, the rate can be reduced. Although not available in the
United States, an alternative is carbetocin, which is a longer-acting oxytocin

derivative. It provides suitable, albeit more expensive, hemorrhage
prophylaxis (Kalafat, 2021). Other choices for hemorrhage prophylaxis
include misoprostol (Cytotec) and the ergots, namely methylergonovine
(Methergine) and ergonovine (Ergotrate). A combination agent of oxytocin
plus ergonovine (Syntometrine) is used outside the United States. Of agents,
the World Health Organization (2018) recommends oxytocin for first-line
use. Last, tranexamic acid (TXA) can be added to a standard oxytocin
infusion to help prevent blood loss. Despite early encouraging evidence,
methodology flaws have been cited (Franchini, 2018; Ker, 2016). With TXA
in one large trial, rates of estimated blood loss >1000 mL or red-cell
transfusion were lower than with placebo. But, TXA did not lower rates of
common blood loss–related secondary clinical outcomes (Sentilhes, 2021).
In contrast to prevention, treatment of atony is found in Chapter 42 (p. 734).
Uterine Repair. After placental delivery, the uterus is lifted through the
incision and onto the draped abdominal wall. We favor exteriorizing and
believe a relaxed, atonic uterus can be recognized quickly and massage
applied. Incision and bleeding points are more easily visualized and
repaired, especially if extensions were torn or the patient is obese. Adnexal
exposure is superior, and thus, tubal sterilization is easier. In contrast, some
clinicians prefer to close the hysterotomy with the uterus in situ. Comparing
these two approaches, the Coronis Collaborative Group (2013) trial
randomly assigned nearly 5000 parturients and found no differences in the
endometritis or transfusion rate. In one large metaanalysis, nausea and
vomiting and associated pain rates were comparable with either method
(Zaphiratos, 2015).
Before hysterotomy closure, IUD insertion, if planned, is completed
(Chap. 38, p. 668). Our practice is to perform a primary needle and sponge
count prior to uterine incision closure completion. For closure, one end of
the uterine incision is grasped to stabilize and maneuver the incision. The
uterine incision is then closed with one or two layers of continuous 0- or no.
1 absorbable suture (Fig. 30-10). Chromic catgut suture is used by many, but
some prefer synthetic delayed-absorbable polyglactin 910 (Vicryl). In
subsequent pregnancy, neither suture type is superior in mitigating against
greater rates of adverse pregnancy outcomes such as uterine incision rupture
(CORONIS Collaborative Group, 2016).

FIGURE 30-10 The cut edges of the uterine incision are approximated with a running, locking suture.

Single-layer closure is typically faster and is not associated with higher
rates of infection or transfusion (CAESAR Study Collaborative Group, 2010;
Dodd, 2014; Roberge, 2014). Moreover, most studies observed that the
number of layers does not significantly affect complication rates in the next
pregnancy (Chapman, 1997; CORONIS Collaborative Group, 2016;
Durnwald, 2003). One randomized trial with nearly 1600 parturients found a
slightly greater formation rate of cesarean scar niches at 3 months after
double-layer closure (Stegwee, 2021).
At Parkland Hospital, we use a one-layer uterine closure with chromic
catgut. The initial suture is placed just beyond one end of the uterine incision.

A continuous, locking suture line for hemostasis is performed, and each
suture penetrates the full myometrial thickness. The suture line then extends
to a point just beyond the incision’s opposite end. If bleeding sites or defects
persist after a single layer, more sutures are required. Another layer of
running suture or individually targeted figure-eight or mattress stitches are
options.
Although not our routine practice, the peritoneum in the anterior cul-desac can be approximated with a continuous 2-0 chromic catgut suture line.
Multiple randomized trials suggest that omission of this step causes no
postoperative complications (Grundsell, 1998; Irion, 1996; Nagele, 1996). If
tubal sterilization is planned, it is completed as described in Chapter 39 (p.
683).

Adhesions
Following cesarean delivery, adhesions commonly form within the
vesicouterine space or between the anterior abdominal wall and uterus. With
each successive pregnancy, the percentage of affected women and adhesion
severity rise (Morales, 2007; Tulandi, 2009). Adhesions can significantly
lengthen incision-to-delivery time and total operative time (Rossouw, 2013;
Sikirica, 2012). Rates of cystotomy and bowel injury also are raised because
of adhesive disease (Rahman, 2009; Silver, 2006).
Intuitively, scarring can be reduced by handling tissues delicately,
achieving hemostasis, and minimizing tissue ischemia, infection, and foreignbody reaction. Most recent data on short- and long-term outcomes show no
benefit to peritoneal closure (CAESAR Study Collaborative Group, 2010;
CORONIS Collaborative Group, 2013, 2016; Kapustian, 2012). Similarly,
most studies show no benefit from placement of an adhesion barrier at the
hysterotomy site (Edwards, 2014; Kiefer, 2016).

Abdominal Closure
Any laparotomy sponges are removed, and the paracolic gutters and cul-desac are gently suctioned of blood and amnionic fluid. Some surgeons irrigate
the gutters and cul-de-sac, especially in the presence of infection or
meconium. Routine irrigation in low-risk women, however, leads to greater
intraoperative nausea but not to lower postoperative infection rates (Eke,
2016; Viney, 2012).

Prior to abdominal closure, correct sponge and instrument counts are
verified. The rectus abdominis muscle bellies are allowed to fall into place.
The overlying rectus fascia is closed by a continuous, nonlocking technique
with a delayed-absorbable suture. In patients with a higher risk for infection,
monofilament suture may be preferable to braided material.
The subcutaneous tissue usually need not be closed if it is <2 cm thick.
With thicker layers, however, closure is recommended to minimize seroma
and hematoma formation, which can lead to wound infection, disruption, or
both (Bohman, 1992; Chelmow, 2004). Adding a subcutaneous drain does not
prevent significant wound complications (Hellums, 2007; Ramsey, 2005).
Skin is closed with a running subcuticular stitch of 4-0 delayedabsorbable suture, with adhesive glue, or with staples. In comparison, final
cosmetic results and infection rates appear similar, skin suturing takes longer,
but wound separation rates are higher with metal staples (Basha, 2010;
Figueroa, 2013; Mackeen, 2014a, 2015). Poliglecaprone 25 (Monocryl) or
polyglactin 910 (Vicryl) are both suitable (Tuuli, 2016). Outcomes with 2octyl cyanoacrylate adhesive (Dermabond) were equivalent to sutures for
Pfannenstiel incisions (Daykan, 2017; Siddiqui, 2013). A sterile thin
abdominal wound dressing is sufficient. In obese women, most evidence
favors against a negative-pressure wound vacuum atop the closed skin
incision compared with a standard wound dressing to lower wound infection
rates (Gillespie, 2021; Hussamy, 2019; Tuuli, 2020).

Joel-Cohen and Misgav Ladach Techniques
The Pfannenstiel-Kerr technique just described has been used for decades.
Others include the more recent Joel-Cohen and Misgav Ladach techniques
(Holmgren, 1999). These differ from traditional Pfannenstiel-Kerr entry
mainly by their initial incision placement and greater use of blunt dissection.
The Joel-Cohen technique creates a straight 10-cm transverse skin
incision 3 cm below the level of the anterior superior iliac spines (Olofsson,
2015). The subcutaneous tissue layer is opened sharply 2 to 3 cm in the
midline. This is carried down, without lateral extension, to the fascia. A
small transverse incision is made in the fascia, and curved Mayo scissors are
pushed laterally on each side and beneath intact subcutaneous fat to incise the
fascia. With this incision completed, an index finger from each hand is
inserted between the rectus abdominis muscle bellies and beneath the fascia.

One finger is moved cranially and the other caudally, in opposition, to
separate the bellies and further open the fascial incision. Then, a finger from
each hand hooks under each belly to stretch the muscles laterally. The
peritoneum is entered sharply, and this incision is sharply extended
cephalocaudad. Entry with the Misgav Ladach technique differs in that the
peritoneum is entered bluntly (Holmgren, 1999).
Modifications to the Joel-Cohen method abound. For emergency delivery,
we begin along a line somewhat lower on the abdomen and similar to that for
Pfannenstiel incision. For speed, we extend the initial fascial incision bluntly
by hooking index fingers in the fascial incision’s lateral corners and pulling
laterally (Hofmeyr, 2009; Oloffson, 2015). Index fingers insinuated between
the rectus bellies then move cephalocaudad in opposition to separate the
muscle bellies. Blunt index-finger dissection enters the peritoneum, and
again, cranial and caudad opposing stretch lengthens the peritoneal incision.
Last, all the layers of the abdominal wall are grasped together and pulled
laterally in opposition to further open the operating space.
These techniques have been associated with shorter operative times and
with lower rates of intraoperative blood loss and postoperative pain
(Mathai, 2013). They may, however, prove difficult for women with
preexisting anterior rectus fibrosis and peritoneal adhesions (Bolze, 2013).

Classical Cesarean Incision
Indications. This incision is usually avoided because it encompasses the
active upper uterine segment and thus is prone to rupture with subsequent
pregnancies. Some indications stem from difficulty in exposing or safely
entering the lower uterine segment. For example, a densely adhered bladder
from previous surgery is encountered; a leiomyoma occupies the lower
uterine segment; or the cervix is currently invaded by cancer. Women with
prior radical trachelectomy for cervix cancer are usually delivered by
classical incision. Massive maternal obesity can preclude safe access to the
lower uterine segment. A classical incision is also preferred for placenta
previa with anterior implantation, especially those complicated by placenta
accreta syndrome. In extreme cases of this, the typical classical hysterotomy
may be placed even higher in the uterine body or posteriorly to avoid the
placenta. Fetuses with cephalic presentation are then delivered in a manner
similar to total breech extraction.

In other instances, fetal indications dictate the need. Transverse lie of a
large fetus, especially if the membranes are ruptured and the shoulder is
impacted in the birth canal, usually requires a classical incision. Second,
with a fetus presenting as a back-down transverse lie, the back precludes
easy grasping of a leg through a transverse uterine incision for breech
delivery. Here, a classical incision provides superior room. Third, in
instances when the fetus is very small and breech, a classical incision may be
preferable (Osmundson, 2013). In such cases, the poorly developed lower
uterine segment provides inadequate space for the manipulations required for
breech delivery. Or, less commonly, the small fetal head may become
entrapped by a contracting uterine fundus following membrane rupture. With
multiple fetuses, a classical incision again may provide needed room for
extraction of fetuses that may be malpositioned or preterm (Osmundson,
2015). A large fetal malformation or conjoined twins may require the added
space afforded by a classical incision.
Uterine Incision and Repair. A vertical uterine incision is initiated with a
scalpel beginning as low as possible and preferably within the lower uterine
segment (Fig. 30-11). If adhesions, insufficient exposure, a tumor, or placenta
percreta preclude development of a bladder flap, then the incision is made
above the level of the bladder. Described earlier (p. 553), back filling the
bladder may aid this.

FIGURE 30-11 An initial small vertical hysterotomy incision is made in the lower uterine segment.
Fingers are insinuated between the myometrium and fetus to avoid fetal laceration. Scissors extend the
incision cephalad as needed for delivery. (Figures 30-11 and 30-12: Reproduced with permission from
Johnson DD: Cesarean delivery. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al (eds): Cunningham
and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2017.)

Once the uterus is entered with a scalpel, the incision is extended
cephalad with bandage scissors until it is long enough to permit fetal
delivery. With scissor use, the fetus can be better protected from laceration.
Fingers of the surgeon’s nondominant hand are insinuated between the
myometrium and fetus to prevent scissor cuts. As the incision is opened,
numerous large vessels that bleed profusely are commonly encountered
within the myometrium. The remainder of fetal and placental delivery
mirrors that with a low transverse hysterotomy.

For incision closure, one method employs a layer of 0- or no. 1 chromic
catgut with a running stitch to approximate the deeper length of the incision
(Fig. 30-12). The outer layer of myometrium is then closed along its length
with similar suture and with a running suture line. To achieve good
approximation and to prevent the suture from tearing through the myometrium,
it is helpful to have an assistant relieve tension by compressing the uterus on
each side of the wound toward the midline as each stitch is placed.

FIGURE 30-12 Classical incision closure. The deeper half (A) and superficial half (B) of the incision
are closed in a running fashion. The serosa is then closed (C).

PERIPARTUM HYSTERECTOMY
■ Indications
Hysterectomy is most commonly performed to arrest or prevent hemorrhage
from intractable uterine atony, surgical trauma/tears, or abnormal
placentation (Bateman, 2012; Kallianidis, 2020). It is more often completed
during or after cesarean delivery but may be needed following vaginal birth.
Among all deliveries, the peripartum hysterectomy rate in the United States
approximates 1 per 1000 births and has risen significantly during the past

few decades (Bateman, 2012; Govindappagari, 2016). During a 25-year
period, the rate of peripartum hysterectomy at Parkland Hospital was 1.7 per
1000 births (Hernandez, 2012). Most of this rise is attributed to the
increasing rates of cesarean delivery and its associated complications in
subsequent pregnancy (Flood, 2009; Orbach, 2011). Of hysterectomies,
approximately one half to two thirds are total, whereas the remaining cases
are supracervical (Rossi, 2010; Shellhaas, 2009).
Major complications of peripartum hysterectomy include greater blood
loss and risk of urinary tract damage. Blood loss is usually appreciable
because hysterectomy is being performed for hemorrhage that frequently is
torrential, and the procedure itself is associated with substantial bleeding.
Although many cases with hemorrhage cannot be anticipated, those with
abnormal implantation are often identified antepartum. Preparations for
placenta accreta syndrome are discussed in Chapter 43 (p. 763) and are
outlined by the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2018).
An important factor affecting the cesarean hysterectomy complication rate
is whether the operation is performed electively or emergently. With
anticipated or planned cesarean hysterectomy, rates of blood loss, blood
transfusion, and urinary tract complications are lower those with emergent
procedures (Briery, 2007; Glaze, 2008).

■ Hysterectomy Technique
Total or supracervical hysterectomy is performed using standard operative
techniques. Adequate exposure is essential, but initially, placement of a selfretaining retractor such as a Balfour is not necessary. Rather, satisfactory
exposure is obtained with cephalad traction on the uterus by an assistant,
along with handheld Richardson or Deaver retractors. The bladder flap is
deflected caudad to the level of the cervix if possible to permit total
hysterectomy. In cases in which cesarean hysterectomy is planned or strongly
suspected, extended bladder flap dissection is ideally completed before
initial hysterotomy. Later attempts at bladder dissection may be obscured by
bleeding, or excess blood may be lost during this dissection.
After cesarean delivery, the placenta is typically removed. In cases of
placenta accreta syndrome for which hysterectomy is already planned, the
placenta is usually left undisturbed in situ. If the hysterotomy incision is
bleeding appreciably, it can be quickly reapproximated with full-thickness

sutures, or Pennington or sponge forceps can be applied for hemostasis. If
bleeding is minimal, neither maneuver is necessary.
The round ligament is divided close to the uterus between clamps, and
each pedicle is ligated (Fig. 30-13). Either 0 or no. 1 suture can be used in
either chromic gut or delayed-absorbable material. Division of the round
provides access to the anterior leaf of the broad ligament, which is incised
downward to meet the former bladder flap incision. The posterior leaf of the
broad ligament adjacent to the uterus is bluntly or sharply perforated at a
point beneath the fallopian tube, uteroovarian ligament, and ovarian vessels
(Fig. 30-14). These structures together are then divided between sturdy
clamps placed close to the uterus (Fig. 30-15). The lateral pedicle is doubly
ligated. The medial clamp remains and is removed later with the entire
uterine specimen. The posterior leaf of the broad ligament is then incised
caudad toward the uterosacral ligaments (Fig. 30-16). The bladder and
attached peritoneal flap are further deflected and dissected as needed. If the
bladder flap is densely adhered, as it may be after previous hysterotomy
incisions, careful sharp dissection is employed (Fig. 30-17).

FIGURE 30-13 The round ligaments are clamped, ligated, and transected bilaterally. (Figures 30-13 to
30-21: Reproduced with permission from Cunningham FG, Gilstrap LC III: Peripartum hysterectomy. In
Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al (eds): Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative
Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2017.)

FIGURE 30-14 The posterior leaf of the broad ligament adjacent to the uterus is perforated just
beneath the fallopian tube, uteroovarian ligaments, and ovarian vessels.

FIGURE 30-15 The uteroovarian ligament and fallopian tube are clamped and cut. The lateral pedicle
is doubly ligated.

FIGURE 30-16 The posterior leaf of the broad ligament is divided inferiorly toward the uterosacral
ligament.

FIGURE 30-17 The bladder is dissected sharply from the lower uterine segment.

Special care is required from this point on to avoid injury to the ureters,
which pass beneath the uterine arteries. To help accomplish this, an assistant
places constant traction to pull the uterus in the direction away from the side
on which the uterine vessels are being ligated. The ascending uterine artery
and veins on either side are identified. These vessels are then clamped
adjacent to the uterus (Fig. 30-18). For security, some may prefer two lateral
clamps. The medial-most clamp helps prevent back bleeding from the uterus.
The uterine vessels are divided, and the lateral tissue pedicle is doubly
suture ligated. The medial clamp remains for later removal with the
specimen. After securing the uterine vessels on one side, the round ligament,
adnexal pedicle, and uterine vessels are then addressed on the contralateral
side.

FIGURE 30-18 The uterine vessels are clamped. Once divided, the lateral vascular pedicle is doubly
ligated to ensure hemostasis.

In cases with profuse hemorrhage, time and rapid hemostasis can be
gained by quickly clamping and dividing all of the just-described pedicles.
Once all are clamped, the surgical team can then return to ligate each pedicle
individually.

Total Hysterectomy
Even if total hysterectomy is planned, we find it technically easier in many
cases to finish the operation after amputating the uterine fundus and placing
Ochsner or Kocher clamps on the cervical stump for traction and hemostasis.
Self-retaining retractors also may be placed at this time. To remove the
cervix, the bladder is mobilized further if needed. This carries the ureters
caudad as the bladder is retracted beneath the symphysis. Bladder retraction

can also help prevent laceration or suturing of the bladder during cervical
excision and vaginal cuff closure.
The cardinal ligament, the uterosacral ligaments, and the many large
vessels within these ligaments are clamped systematically with sturdy
Heaney-type curved or straight clamps (Fig. 30-19). The clamps are placed
as close to the cervix as possible, taking care not to include excessive tissue
in each clamp. The tissue between the pair of clamps is incised, and the
lateral pedicle is suture ligated. These steps are repeated caudally and
bilaterally until the level of the lateral vaginal fornix is reached on each side.
In this way, the descending branches of the uterine vessels are clamped, cut,
and ligated as the cervix is separated from the cardinal ligaments.

FIGURE 30-19 The cardinal ligaments are clamped, incised, and ligated.

If the cervix is effaced and dilated considerably, its softness may obscure
palpable identification of the cervicovaginal junction. The junction location
can be ascertained either through the open hysterotomy incision or through a
vertical uterine incision made anteriorly in the midline at the level of the
ligated uterine vessels. A finger is directed inferiorly through the incision to
identify the free margin of the dilated, effaced cervix. The contaminated
glove is replaced. Another useful method to identify the cervical margins in
cases of planned hysterectomy is to transvaginally place four metal skin clips
or brightly colored sutures at 12, 3, 6, and 9 o’clock positions on the cervical
edges.
Immediately below the level of the cervix, a curved clamp is placed
across the lateral vaginal fornix on each side, and the vagina is incised above
the clamp (Fig. 30-20). The cervix is inspected to ensure that it has been
completely removed. A transfixing suture is used for vaginal cuff closure as
each clamp is removed. Interrupted stitches may be added to approximate the
middle portion of the cuff (Fig. 30-21). Each lateral vaginal fornix is secured
to the uterosacral ligaments to mitigate later vaginal prolapse. For cuff
closure, some surgeons instead prefer to close the vagina by apposing the
anterior and posterior vaginal walls with interrupted figure-eight sutures or
running suture line.

FIGURE 30-20 A curved clamp is placed across the lateral vaginal fornix below the level of the
cervix, and the tissue incised medially to the point of the clamp.

FIGURE 30-21 A transfixing stitch is placed on each side to close the lateral vaginal cuff. Interrupted
stitches (dotted lines) may be needed to close any midline gap.

All sites are examined carefully for bleeding. One technique is to
perform a systematic bilateral survey from the fallopian tube and ovarian
ligament pedicles to the vaginal vault and bladder flap. Bleeding sites are
ligated with care to avoid the ureters. The abdominal wall normally is closed
in layers, as previously described for cesarean delivery (p. 558).

Supracervical Hysterectomy
To perform a subtotal hysterectomy, the uterine body is amputated
immediately above the level of uterine artery ligation. The cervical stump
may be closed with a continuous or interrupted suture line of chromic catgut
or delayed-absorbable material. Subtotal hysterectomy is often all that is
necessary to stop hemorrhage. It may be preferred for women who would
benefit from a shorter surgery or for those with extensive adhesions that
threaten significant urinary tract injury.

Salpingo-oophorectomy
Because of the large adnexal vessels and their close proximity to the uterus,
it may be necessary to remove one or both adnexa to obtain hemostasis.
Briery and colleagues (2007) reported unilateral or bilateral oophorectomy

in a fourth of cases. Preoperative counseling for anticipated hysterectomy
should include this possibility.

■ Urinary Tract or Bowel Injury
These injuries are rare during cesarean delivery. The bladder laceration rate
approximates 2 injuries per 1000 cesarean deliveries, whereas that for
ureteral trauma nears 0.3 events per 1000 cases (Güngördük, 2010; Oliphant,
2014). Bowel is damaged in about 1 in 1000 cesarean deliveries (Silver,
2006).

Cystotomy
Bladder laceration most commonly occurs during blunt or sharp dissection in
the vesicouterine space to create the bladder flap, during peritoneal cavity
entry, and during hysterotomy (Phipps, 2005; Rahman, 2009). Risks are prior
cesarean delivery; comorbid adhesive disease; emergency cesarean delivery;
cesarean hysterectomy, especially cases with morbidly adherent placenta;
and surgery in second-stage labor compared with first-stage (Alexander,
2007; Salman, 2017; Silver, 2006).
Bladder injury is typically identified intraoperatively, and a clear-fluid
gush or the Foley bulb are indicators. In suspected cases, cystotomy can be
confirmed with retrograde instillation of fluid through a Foley catheter and
into the bladder. Dilute sterile infant formula is a common, available option.
Methylene blue–stained saline is another. Leakage of the indicator fluid aids
laceration identification and delineation of its borders. The dome is
lacerated most often, and trigone injuries make up the remainder (Phipps,
2005; Salman, 2017).
Prior to cystotomy repair, ureters are examined, and urine jets from each
orifice are sought. Inspection can be done directly through the cystotomy, if at
the dome. A separate diagnostic extraperitoneal cystotomy may be preferable
if the laceration nears the trigone. To aid viewing, urine jets can be colored
by IV dye, as described in the next section.
Once ureteral patency is confirmed, the bladder can be closed with a
two- or three-layer running closure using a 3-0 absorbable or delayedabsorbable suture (Fig. 30-22). The first layer inverts the mucosa into the
bladder. Subsequent layers reapproximate the bladder muscularis. After the

final layer, the bladder is filled with a marker fluid to demonstrate repair
integrity. Leaking defects are closed with interrupted reinforcing stitches.

FIGURE 30-22 Cystotomy repair. A. The primary layer inverts the bladder mucosa with running or
interrupted sutures of 3-0 delayed-absorbable or absorbable suture. B. Second and possibly a third layer
approximate the bladder muscularis to reinforce the incision closure. (Reproduced with permission from
Balgobin S: Urologic and gastrointestinal injuries. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al
(eds): Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2017.)

Postoperative care requires continuous bladder drainage for 7 to 14 days
to permit healing and minimize the risk of fistula formation. Uropathogen
prophylaxis during this drainage is not required. Prior to catheter removal,

cystourethrography may not be needed for a simple, single laceration
measuring under 1 cm (Glaser, 2019).
Larger lacerations in or near the trigone require careful attention.
Specialists may be consulted, and in preparation, ureteral catheters,
described in the next section, can be assembled. Ureteral orifices are directly
inspected to document jets from both. If not seen, a ureteral catheter may be
passed through the cystotomy and into each orifice to confirm patency. Once
this is confirmed, repair should not disrupt the ureteral orifices, and stents
may remain to ensure their patency.
Unrecognized cystotomy can manifest postoperatively as hematuria,
oliguria, abdominal pain, ileus, ascites, peritonitis, fever, urinoma, or fistula.
For diagnosis, retrograde cystography or abdominal computed tomography
(CT) with cystography can be used (Tarney, 2013). Cystoscopy is also an
option but may require a procedural room. Once cystotomy is identified,
prompt repair is indicated (Balgobin, 2017).

Ureteral Injury
The ureter may be at risk during cesarean hysterectomy, especially those
complicated by placenta accreta syndrome. (Woldu, 2014). Although not our
practice, some advocate preoperative ureteral catheter placement to aid
intraoperative ureter identification (Eller, 2009; Matsubara, 2013).
Organization guidelines recommend individualization of this practice
depending on anticipated placenta accreta syndrome complexity (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2018; Collins, 2019). Further,
initial dorsal lithotomy positioning of the patient for these cases can permit
cystoscopy. Aside from hysterectomy, the ureter is also at risk during repair
of hysterotomy extensions into the broad ligament or vagina (Safrai, 2020).
If ureteral injury is suspected, IV dye is administered, and the pelvis is
directly inspected for extravasation. Of options, 50 mg of IV methylene blue
may be given over 5 minutes. However, methylene blue carries the potential
for inciting methemoglobinemia in patients with glucose-6-phosphate
dehydrogenase deficiency. Another option is 25 or 50 mg of IV 10-percent
sodium fluorescein, which stains bright yellow (Espaillat-Rijo, 2016;
Grimes, 2017).
Next, brisk dye-stained urine jets are sought from each orifice to exclude
ureteral kinking or ligation. Orifice viewing may be via cystoscopy, if

available; through a comorbid traumatic cystotomy; or through an intentional
diagnostic cystotomy. For the last, a midline extraperitoneal cystotomy in the
bladder dome gives excellent exposure. Sluggish or absent jets may reflect
patient hypovolemia, and ongoing volume resuscitation may yield expected
orifice jets. If not, consultation with a specialist is typically requested to
exclude ureteral injury.
While waiting, catheters and stents can be assembled. Semantically,
ureteral catheters are diagnostic tools, and typically are inserted and
removed in the same therapeutic intervention. Most stents are designed to
remain indwelling for prolonged ureteral drainage. Both types are hollow to
permit radiopaque medium injection and to allow urine egress through or
around them (Corton, 2020).
To exclude ureteral obstruction, a 4F to 6F open-ended or whistle-tip
catheter is threaded into one orifice. Once inserted, the catheter is advanced
to the level of suspected obstruction. If the tool threads easily up toward the
renal pelvis, obstruction is unlikely. In most, ureteral injury occurs at or
below the pelvic brim, and the distance from the ureteral orifice to the brim
approximates 13 cm (Jackson, 2019). Failure to easily advance the catheter
may indicate ureteral kinking, ligation, or crush injury. The appearance of the
catheter in the abdominal cavity indicates partial or complete transection
(Balgobin, 2017). Repair of ureteral injuries is dependent upon the type of
injury and location.
First, kinked or ligated ureters can be relieved by release of ensnaring
sutures. Crush injuries are inspected to ensure vital tissue. In these cases,
stents are left to avert ureteral stricture. Ureteral stents range from 4F to 7F.
Stents vary in length from 20 to 30 cm, and a 24-cm or 26-cm length is
appropriate for most adults. Double-pigtail or double-J stents describe their
tip shape, and the ends coil within the renal pelvis and bladder, respectively,
to prevent stent migration (Corton, 2020). A Foley catheter remains for 7 to
10 days, and the ureteral stents are removed via cystoscopy after 14 days.
Intravenous pyelography (IVP) is usually not necessary before removal of the
stent if it was placed as a precautionary measure after relatively minor injury
(Davis, 1999).
Crush injuries with devascularization, thermal injury, or transection
require more extensive repair. If a healthy-appearing ureter can be
reimplanted into the bladder without undue tension, then
ureteroneocystostomy is preferable. For more proximal injuries, a

ureteroureterostomy, a psoas hitch, or a Boari flap may be needed. An
explanation of these more extensive procedures is found in Cunningham and
Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd edition (Balgobin, 2017).
Unrecognized ureteral injury can mimic that of cystotomy with the
addition of possible costovertebral angle tenderness. CT urography is a
preferred initial diagnostic tool (Sharp, 2016). The duration of time from
injury to identification directs repair. Those identified early are often
suitable for immediate repair.

Bowel Injury
Serosal tears represent weak points in the small bowel. If obstruction
develops postoperatively, these weak spots may perforate, leading to
peritonitis. If serosal tears are few, they can be oversewn with either a fine
absorbable or nonabsorbable suture (Davis, 1999). More significant
lacerations are often repaired in consultation with a general surgeon or
gynecologic oncologist.

POSTOPERATIVE CARE
■ Euvolemia Evaluation
During and after cesarean delivery, requirements for IV fluids can vary
considerably. Current ERAS strategies aim for euvolemic replacement
(Caughey, 2018). Administered fluids consist of either lactated Ringer
solution or a similar crystalloid solution with 5-percent dextrose. Blood loss
with uncomplicated cesarean delivery approximates 1000 mL. The averagesized woman with a hematocrit of 30 percent or more and with a normally
expanded blood and extracellular fluid volume most often will tolerate blood
loss up to 2000 mL without difficulty. Unappreciated bleeding through the
vagina during the procedure, bleeding concealed in the uterus after its
closure, or both commonly lead to underestimation.
Blood loss averages 1500 mL with elective cesarean hysterectomy,
although this is variable (Pritchard, 1965). Most peripartum hysterectomies
are unscheduled, and blood loss in these cases is correspondingly greater.
Thus, in addition to close monitoring of vital signs and urine output, the
hematocrit should be determined intra- or postoperatively as indicated.

■ Recovery Suite
The amount of vaginal bleeding is closely monitored for at least an hour in
the immediate postoperative period. The uterine fundus is also identified
frequently by palpation to ensure that the uterus remains firmly contracted.
Criteria for transfer to the postpartum ward include minimal bleeding, stable
vital signs, and adequate urine output.

■ Hospital Care until Discharge
Analgesia, Vital Signs, Intravenous Fluids
Several schemes are suitable for postoperative pain control. First, adding
intrathecal opioid or epidural opioid such as morphine to neuraxial analgesia
can provide 12 to 24 hours of postoperative relief (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019a; Caughey, 2018). Sedation and
respiratory depression rise with increasing intrathecal opioid doses.
Postoperative monitoring protocols reflect this and are outlined in Chapter
25 (p. 472) (Bauchat, 2019). Other potential side effects include pruritus,
nausea, or vomiting (Sultan, 2016). Despite these, long-acting neuraxial
analgesia is recommended instead of intermittent parental opioid dosing
(American Society of Anesthesiologists, 2016). For additional relief,
nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) can alternate with
acetaminophen (Ong, 2010). Breakthrough pain can be relieved by
oxycodone 2.5 to 5 mg every 4 hours (Bollag, 2021). Neonatal sedation is a
concern, and total oxycodone doses higher 30 mg/d are not recommended
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019a). Instead, for
severe breakthrough pain, intramuscular (IM) meperidine, 50 to 75 mg every
3 to 4 hours, or IM morphine, 10 to 15 mg every 3 to 4 hours, is an option.
For those without neuraxial anesthesia, a transversus abdominis place
(TAP) block can be considered (Fig. 2-2, p. 14). Patient-controlled analgesia
(PCA) also is reasonable. One PCA regimen uses IV morphine given as
needed as a 1-mg dose with a 6-minute lockout interval and maximum dose
of 30 mg in 4 hours. An additional 2-mg booster dose is permitted for a
maximum of two doses.
After transfer to her room, the woman is assessed at least hourly for 4
hours, and thereafter at intervals of 4 hours. Deep breathing and coughing are
encouraged to prevent atelectasis. Vital signs, uterine tone, urine output, and

vaginal and incisional bleeding are evaluated. The hematocrit is routinely
measured the morning after surgery. It is checked sooner if blood loss was
significant or if postoperative hypotension, tachycardia, oliguria, or other
evidence suggests hypovolemia. If the hematocrit is significantly lower than
the preoperative level, the measurement is repeated and a search for the
cause is instituted. Clinical and objective thresholds for transfusion are
described fully in Chapter 44 (p. 771). If ongoing blood loss is not expected,
iron therapy is preferred to transfusion.
Postpartum, the patient begins to mobilize and excrete her
physiologically expanded extravascular volume. Thus, maintenance IV fluid
proves adequate after surgery until consistent oral intake is reestablished. If
urine output falls below 30 mL/hr, however, a woman should be reevaluated
promptly. The cause of the oliguria may range from unrecognized blood loss
to an antidiuretic effect from infused oxytocin.
Women undergoing unscheduled cesarean delivery may have pathological
retention or constriction of the extracellular fluid compartment caused by
severe preeclampsia, sepsis syndrome, vomiting, prolonged labor without
adequate fluid intake, or increased blood loss. Women with these
complications are generally observed in the recovery room until improved.

Bladder and Bowel Function
A Foley catheter is often required to accurately assess urinary output. For
women not needing such monitoring, organizations differ in their
recommendations. The Society for Obstetric Anesthesia and Perinatology
suggests removal after 6 to 12 hours and cites the urinary retention risks
associated with long-acting neuraxial anesthesia (Bollag, 2021). The ERAS
Society recommends immediate postoperative removal (Macones, 2019).
The prevalence of urinary retention following cesarean delivery
approximates 5 percent (Chap. 36, p. 643). Failure to progress in labor and
postoperative narcotic analgesia are identified risks (Chai, 2008; Liang,
2007).
In uncomplicated cases, liquids or solid food may be offered within
hours of surgery and advanced as tolerated (Guo, 2015; Macones, 2019).
Some degree of adynamic ileus follows virtually every laparotomy but is
negligible after most cesarean deliveries. Postoperative ileus symptoms
include abdominal distention, colic, and an inability to pass flatus or stool.

With persistent nausea and vomiting or with prolonged bowel function delay,
radiological imaging may help exclude bowel obstruction. A plain
abdominal radiograph is a frequent first choice. However, in the general
population, this study is diagnostic in only 50 to 60 percent of small-bowel
obstruction (SBO) cases (Maglinte, 1997). Thus, a radiograph may best
serve as a triage tool in cases in which ileus is the suspected diagnosis.
Notably, an enlarged postpartum uterus can compress the rectosigmoid and
prevent it from filling with gas. Thus, findings suggesting a distal colonic
obstruction may confuse true cases of transient ileus (Kammen, 2000). CT
with IV and oral contrast provides greater accuracy for SBO diagnosis. Last,
although uncommon, an unrecognized bowel injury may underlie otherwise
unexplained fever and bowel dysfunction. Again, CT would be the more
diagnostic examination.
For treatment of ileus, IV fluids compensate for poor oral intake and
losses from emesis. Electrolyte imbalances are corrected to improve bowel
motility and avoid bowel edema. Nasogastric decompression is necessary
only with persistent vomiting or severe distention.
For prevention, surgical goals strive to minimize bowel manipulation,
avoid excess IV fluids or profound hypovolemia, and limit surgery length
(Bragg, 2015). After surgery, gum chewing enhances early bowel function
recovery (Ciardulli, 2018). Among studies, chewing was initiated
immediately or up to 12 hours later, lasted 15 to 60 minutes, and was
repeated in at least three sessions daily (Pereira Gomes Morais, 2016).

Ambulation and Wound Care
As discussed earlier, women undergoing cesarean delivery have an
increased VTE risk compared with those delivering vaginally (Chap. 55, p.
989). Early ambulation lowers this risk. Walking to the bathroom begins,
initially with assistance. Brief walks are encouraged. For women with
marked abdominal laxity, an abdominal binder can aid comfortable deep
coughing and ambulation. Evidence supporting routine application for all
parturients is limited and conflicting (Chankhunaphas, 2020; Gillier, 2016).
Although not evidence based, we remove the surgical dressing after 24
hours and inspect the incision daily. One small randomized trial showed no
wound healing effects if removed at 6 hours (Peleg, 2016). By the third
postpartum day, showering does not harm the incision. Prior to this, a plastic

covering can maintain dryness during showers. If used, staples are often
removed on the fourth postoperative day. In their place, tape strips can
remain for 1 week to reinforce skin edge integrity. If potential superficial
wound separation, without infection, is a concern, staples can remain for 7 to
10 days.

■ Hospital Discharge
For uncomplicated cesarean delivery, the average hospitalization length is 3
to 4 days (Buie, 2010). Data from studies suggest that earlier discharge is
feasible for properly selected women and newborns (Bayoumi, 2016; Tan,
2012). Protocols ideally include earlier reevaluation for neonatal jaundice.
However, discharge before 96 hours leads to a greater neonatal readmission
rate (Jones, 2020).
Activities during the first week are limited to self-care and newborn care
with assistance. Driving can be resumed when pain does not limit the ability
to brake quickly and when narcotic medications are not in use. In women
with cesarean delivery, intercourse was resumed in 44 percent by 6 weeks
postpartum, 81 percent by 3 months, and 97 percent at 1 year (McDonald,
2013). After the puerperium, the quality of sexual functioning does not differ
between those undergoing spontaneous vaginal birth or cesarean delivery
(Chang, 2015; Fehniger, 2013; Rogers, 2014). Return to work is variable.
Six weeks is commonly cited, although many women use the Family and
Medical Leave Act to allow up to 12 weeks for recovery and newborn
bonding.

REFERENCES
Abdel-Aleem H, Aboelnasr MF, Jayousi TM, et al: Indwelling bladder catheterisation as part of
intraoperative and postoperative care for caesarean section. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
4:CD010322, 2014
Abe K, Kuklina EV, Hooper WC, et al: Venous thromboembolism as a cause of severe maternal
morbidity and mortality in the United States. Semin Perinatol 43(4):200, 2019
Ahmadzia HK, Patel EM, Joshi D, et al: Obstetric surgical site infections: 2 grams compared with 3
grams of cefazolin in morbidly obese women. Obstet Gynecol 126(4):708, 2015
Alexander JM, Leveno KJ, Hauth J, et al: Fetal injury associated with cesarean delivery. Obstet
Gynecol 108(4):885, 2006
Alexander JM, Leveno KJ, Rouse DJ, et al: Comparison of maternal and infant outcomes from primary
cesarean delivery during the second compared with first stage of labor. Obstet Gynecol 109(4):917,

2007
American Academy of Pediatrics, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Guidelines for
Perinatal Care, 8th ed. Elk Grove, American Academy of Pediatrics, 2017
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Placenta accreta spectrum. Obstetric Care
Consensus No. 7, 2018
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Obstetric analgesia and anesthesia. Practice
Bulletin No. 209, March 2019a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Safe prevention of the primary cesarean delivery.
Obstetric Care Consensus No. 1, March 2014, Reaffirmed 2019b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Vaginal seeding. Committee Opinion No. 725,
November 2017, Reaffirmed 2019c
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Cesarean delivery on maternal request.
Committee Opinion No. 761, December 2018, Reaffirmed 2020a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Optimizing support for breastfeeding as part of
obstetric practice. Committee Opinion No. 756, September 2018, Reaffirmed 2020b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Thromboembolism in pregnancy. Practice
Bulletin No. 196, June 2018, Reaffirmed 2020c
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Use of prophylactic antibiotics in labor and
delivery. Practice Bulletin No. 199, August 2018, Reaffirmed 2020d
American Society of Anesthesiologists: Task Force on Obstetrical Anesthesia: practice guidelines for
obstetrical anesthesia. Anesthesiology 124:270, 2016
Anorlu RI, Maholwana B, Hofmeyr GJ: Methods of delivering the placenta at caesarean section.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 3:CD004737, 2008
Asıcıoğlu O, Güngördük K, Asıcıoğlu BB, et al: Unintended extension of the lower segment uterine
incision at cesarean delivery: a randomized comparison of sharp versus blunt techniques. Am J
Perinatol 31(10):837, 2014
Avila C, Bhangoo R, Figueroa R, et al: Association of smoking with wound complications after cesarean
delivery. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 25(8):1250, 2012
Baksu A, Kalan A, Ozkan A, et al: The effect of placental removal method and site of uterine repair on
postcesarean endometritis and operative blood loss. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 84(3):266, 2005
Balgobin S: Urologic and gastrointestinal injuries. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al
(eds): Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, McGraw Hill Education,
2017
Balki I, Khan JS, Staibano P, et al: Effect of perioperative active body surface warming systems on
analgesic and clinical outcomes: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled
trials. Anesth Analg 131(5):1430, 2020
Barber EL, Lundsberg LS, Belanger K, et al: Indications contributing to the increasing cesarean delivery
rate. Obstet Gynecol 118(1):29, 2011
Basha SL, Rochon ML, Quiñones JN, et al: Randomized controlled trial of wound complication rates of
subcuticular suture vs staples for skin closure at cesarean delivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol
203(3):285.e1, 2010
Bateman BT, Mhyre JM, Callaghan WM, et al: Peripartum hysterectomy in the United States:
nationwide 14 year experience. Am J Obstet Gynecol 206(1):63.e1, 2012
Bates SM, Greer IA, Middeldorp S, et al: VTE, thrombophilia, antithrombotic therapy, and pregnancy:
Antithrombotic Therapy and Prevention of Thrombosis, 9th ed: American College of Chest
Physicians Evidence-Based Clinical Practice Guidelines. Chest 141(2 Suppl):e691S, 2012

Bauchat JR, Weiniger CF, Sultan P, et al: Society for Obstetric Anesthesia and Perinatology consensus
statement: monitoring recommendations for prevention and detection of respiratory depression
associated with administration of neuraxial morphine for cesarean delivery analgesia: Anesth Analg
129(2):458, 2019
Bayoumi YA, Bassiouny YA, Hassan AA, et al: Is there a difference in the maternal and neonatal
outcomes between patients discharged after 24 h versus 72 h following cesarean section? A
prospective randomized observational study on 2998 patients. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med
29(8):1339, 2016
Berhan Y, Berhan A: A meta-analysis of reverse breech extraction to deliver a deeply impacted head
during cesarean delivery. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 124(2):99, 2014
Berríos-Torres SI, Umscheid CA, Bratzler DW, et al: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
guideline for the prevention of surgical site infection, 2017. JAMA Surg 152(8):784, 2017
Blankenship SA, Raghuraman N, Delhi A, et al: Association of abnormal first stage of labor duration
and maternal and neonatal morbidity. Am J Obstet Gynecol 223(3):445.e1, 2020
Blomquist JL, Muñoz A, Carroll M: Association of delivery mode with pelvic floor disorders after
childbirth. JAMA 320(23):2438, 2018
Bloom SL, Leveno KJ, Spong CY, et al: Decision-to-incision times and maternal and fetal outcomes.
Obstet Gynecol 108(1):6, 2006
Bohman VR, Gilstrap L, Leveno K, et al: Subcutaneous tissue: to close or not to close at cesarean
section. Am J Obstet Gynecol 166:407, 1992
Bollag L, Lim G, Sultan P, et al: Society for Obstetric Anesthesia and Perinatology: consensus statement
and recommendations for enhanced recovery after cesarean. Anesth Analg 132(5):1362, 2021
Bolze PA, Massoud M, Gaucherand P, et al: What about the Misgav-Ladach surgical technique in
patients with previous cesarean sections? Am J Perinatol 30(3):197, 2013
Boyle A, Reddy UM, Landy HJ, et al: Primary cesarean delivery in the United States. Obstet Gynecol
122(1):33, 2013
Boyle JG, Gabbe SG: T and J vertical extensions in low transverse cesarean births. Obstet Gynecol
87(2):238, 1996
Bragg D, El-Sharkawy AM, Psaltis E, et al: Postoperative ileus: recent developments in pathophysiology
and management. Clin Nutr 34(3):367, 2015
Briery CM, Rose CH, Hudson WT, et al: Planned vs emergent cesarean hysterectomy. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 197(2):154.e1, 2007
Buie VC, Owings MF, DeFrances CJ, et al: National Hospital Discharge Survey: 2006 summary.
National Center for Health Statistics. Vital Health Stat 13(168):1, 2010
CAESAR Study Collaborative Group: Caesarean section surgical techniques: a randomised factorial trial
(CAESAR). BJOG 117(11):1366, 2010
Cahill AG, Stamilio DM, Odibo AO, et al: Is vaginal birth after cesarean (VBAC) or elective repeat
cesarean safer in women with a prior vaginal delivery? Am J Obstet Gynecol 195(4):1143, 2006
Caughey AB, Wood SL, Macones GA, et al: Guidelines for intraoperative care in cesarean delivery:
Enhanced Recovery after Surgery Society recommendations (Part 2). Am J Obstet Gynecol
219(6):533, 2018
Chai AH, Wong T, Mak HL, et al: Prevalence and associated risk factors of retention of urine after
caesarean section. Int Urogynecol J Pelvic Floor Dysfunct 194(4):537, 2008
Chang SR, Chen KH, Ho HN, et al: Depressive symptoms, pain, and sexual dysfunction over the first
year following vaginal or cesarean delivery: a prospective longitudinal study. Int J Nurs Stud
52(9):1433, 2015

Chankhunaphas W, Charoenkwan K.: Effect of elastic abdominal binder on pain and functional recovery
after caesarean delivery: a randomised controlled trial. J Obstet Gynaecol 40(4):473, 2020
Chapman SJ, Owen J, Hauth JC: One versus two-layer closure of a low transverse cesarean: the next
pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 89:16, 1997
Cheesman K, Brady JE, Flood P, et al: Epidemiology of anesthesia-related complications in labor and
delivery, New York State, 2002–2005. Anesth Analg 109:1174, 2009
Chelmow D, Rodriguez EJ, Sabatini MM: Suture closure of subcutaneous fat and wound disruption after
cesarean delivery: a meta-analysis. Obstet Gynecol 103:974, 2004
Ciardulli A, Saccone G, Di Mascio D, et al: Chewing gum improves postoperative recovery of
gastrointestinal function after cesarean delivery: a systematic review and meta-analysis of
randomized trials. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 31(14):1924, 2018
Clark SL, Belfort MA, Dildy GA, et al: Maternal death in the 21st century: causes, prevention, and
relationship to cesarean delivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 199(1):36.e1, 2008
Collins SL, Alemdar B, van Beekhuizen HJ, et al: Evidence-based guidelines for the management of
abnormally invasive placenta: recommendations from the International Society for Abnormally
Invasive Placenta. Am J Obstet Gynecol 220(6):511, 2019
CORONIS Collaborative Group, Abalos E, Addo V, et al: Caesarean section surgical techniques: 3 year
follow-up of the CORONIS fractional, factorial, unmasked, randomised controlled trial. Lancet
388(10039):62, 2016
CORONIS Collaborative Group, Abalos E, Addo V, et al: Caesarean section surgical techniques
(CORONIS): a fractional, factorial, unmasked, randomised controlled trial. Lancet 382(9888):234,
2013
Corton MM, Schaffer JI: Surgeries for pelvic floor disorders. In Hoffman BL, Schorge JO, Halvorson
LM, et al (eds): Williams Gynecology, 4th ed. New York, McGraw Hill Education, 2020
Davis JD: Management of injuries to the urinary and gastrointestinal tract during cesarean section.
Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am 26(3):469, 1999
Daykan Y, Sharon-Weiner M, Pasternak Y, et al: Skin closure at cesarean delivery, glue versus
subcuticular sutures: a randomized controlled trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol 216(4):406.e1, 2017
Declercq E, Menacker F, MacDorman M: Rise in “no indicated risk” primary caesareans in the United
States, 1991–2001: cross sectional analysis. BMJ 330(7482):71, 2005
de la Torre L, González-Quintero VH, Mayor-Lynn K, et al: Significance of accidental extensions in the
lower uterine segment during cesarean delivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 194(5):e4, 2006
Dodd JM, Anderson ER, Gates S, et al: Surgical techniques for uterine incision and uterine closure at
the time of caesarean section. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 7:CD004732, 2014
Dolan LM, Hilton P: Obstetric risk factors and pelvic floor dysfunction 20 years after first delivery. Int
Urogynecol J 21(5):535, 2010
Durnwald C, Mercer B: Uterine rupture, perioperative and perinatal morbidity after single-layer and
double-layer closure at cesarean delivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 189:925, 2003
Eckler R, Quist-Nelson J, Saccone G, et al: Adhesive incisional drapes during cesarean delivery for
preventing wound infection: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials.
Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol X 4:100090, 2019
Edwards RK, Ingersoll M, Gerkin RD, et al: Carboxymethylcellulose adhesion barrier placement at
primary cesarean delivery and outcomes at repeat cesarean delivery. Obstet Gynecol 123(5):923,
2014
Eke AC, Shukr GH, Chaalan TT, et al: Intra-abdominal saline irrigation at cesarean section: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 29(10):1588, 2016

Eller AG, Porter TF, Soisson P, et al: Optimal management strategies for placenta accreta. BJOG
116(5):648, 2009
Espaillat-Rijo L, Siff L, Alas AN, et al: Intraoperative cystoscopic evaluation of ureteral patency: a
randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol 128(6):1378, 2016
Fehniger JE, Brown JS, Creasman JM, et al: Childbirth and female sexual function later in life. Obstet
Gynecol 122(5):988, 2013
Figueroa D, Jauk VC, Szychowski JM, et al: Surgical staples compared with subcuticular suture for skin
closure after cesarean delivery: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol 121(1):33, 2013
Flood KM, Said S, Geary M, et al: Changing trends in peripartum hysterectomy over the last 4 decades.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 200(6):632.e1, 2009
Food and Drug Administration: Recommendations to reduce surgical fires and related patient injury:
FDA safety communication. 2018. Available at:
https://www.fda.gov/MedicalDevices/Safety/AlertsandNotices/ucm608637.htm. Accessed February
6, 2019
Franchini M, Mengoli C, Cruciani M, et al: Safety and efficacy of tranexamic acid for prevention of
obstetric haemorrhage: an updated systematic review and meta-analysis. Blood Transfus 16(4):329,
2018
Frederick A, Fry T, Clowtis L: Intraoperative mother and baby skin-to-skin contact during cesarean
birth: systematic review. MCN Am J Matern Child Nurs 45(5):296, 2020
Gillespie BM, Webster J, Ellwood D, et al: Closed incision negative pressure wound therapy versus
standard dressings in obese women undergoing caesarean section: multicentre parallel group
randomised controlled trial. BMJ 373:n893, 2021
Gillier CM, Sparks JR, Kriner R, et al: A randomized controlled trial of abdominal binders for the
management of postoperative pain and distress after cesarean delivery. Int J Gynaecol Obstet
133(2):188, 2016
Glaser LM, Milad MP: Bowel and bladder injury repair and follow-up after gynecologic surgery. Obstet
Gynecol 133(2):313, 2019
Glaze S, Ekwalanga P, Roberts G, et al: Peripartum hysterectomy: 1999 to 2006. Obstet Gynecol
111(3):732, 2008
Goldfarb I, Henry D, Dumont O, et al: Inadvertent hysterotomy extension at cesarean delivery and risk
of uterine rupture in the next pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 204(1, Suppl): S266, 2011
Gordon A, McKechnie EJ, Jeffery H: Pediatric presence at cesarean section: justified or not? Am J
Obstet Gynecol 193(3 pt 1):599, 2005
Govindappagari S, Wright JD, Ananth CV, et al: Risk of peripartum hysterectomy and center
hysterectomy and delivery volume. Obstet Gynecol 128(6):1215, 2016
Grimes CL, Patankar S, Ryntz T, et al: Evaluating ureteral patency in the post-indigo carmine era: a
randomized controlled trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol 217(5):601.e1, 2017
Grundsell HS, Rizk DE, Kumar RM: Randomized study of non-closure of peritoneum in lower segment
cesarean section. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 77:110, 1998
Grupper M, Kuti JL, Swank ML, et al: Population pharmacokinetics of cefazolin in serum and adipose
tissue from overweight and obese women undergoing cesarean delivery. J Clin Pharmacol 57(6):712,
2017
Guise JM, Denman MA, Emeis C, et al: Vaginal birth after cesarean: new insights on maternal and
neonatal outcomes. Obstet Gynecol 115(6):1267, 2010
Güngördük K, Asıcıoğlu O, Celikkol O, et al: Iatrogenic bladder injuries during caesarean delivery: a
case control study. J Obstet Gynaecol 30(7):667, 2010

Guo J, Long S, Li H, et al: Early versus delayed oral feeding for patients after cesarean. Int J Gynaecol
Obstet 128(2):100, 2015
Gyhagen M, Bullarbo M, Nielsen TF, et al: Prevalence and risk factors for pelvic organ prolapse 20
years after childbirth: a national cohort study in singleton primiparae after vaginal or caesarean
delivery. BJOG 120(2):152, 2013a
Gyhagen M, Bullarbo M, Nielsen TF, et al: The prevalence of urinary incontinence 20 years after
childbirth: a national cohort study in singleton primiparae after vaginal or caesarean delivery. BJOG
120(2):144, 2013b
Haas DM, Morgan S, Contreras K: Vaginal preparation with antiseptic solution before cesarean section
for preventing postoperative infections. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 4:CD007892, 2020
Hadiati DR, Hakimi M, Nurdiati DS, et al: Skin preparation for preventing infection following caesarean
section. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 6:CD007462, 2020
Handa VL, Blomquist JL, Knoepp LR, et al: Pelvic floor disorders 5–10 years after vaginal or cesarean
childbirth. Obstet Gynecol 118(4):777, 2011
Hawkins JL, Chang J, Palmer SK, et al: Anesthesia-related maternal mortality in the United States:
1979–2002. Obstet Gynecol 117(1):69, 2011
Hellums EK, Lin MG, Ramsey PS: Prophylactic subcutaneous drainage for prevention of wound
complications after cesarean delivery—a metaanalysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 197(3):229, 2007
Hernandez JS, Nuangchamnong N, Ziadie M, et al: Placental and uterine pathology in women
undergoing peripartum hysterectomy. Obstet Gynecol 119(6):1137, 2012
Hofmeyr JG, Novikova N, Mathai M, et al: Techniques for cesarean section. Am J Obstet Gynecol
201(5):431, 2009
Holmgren G, Sjöholm L, Stark M: The Misgav Ladach method for cesarean section: method description.
Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 78(7):615, 1999
Hou L, Hellerstein S, Vitonis A, et al: Cross sectional study of mode of delivery and maternal and
perinatal outcomes in mainland China. PLoS One 12(2):e0171779, 2017
Hubbard R, Waters JH, Yazer MH: Heterogeneity in blood product acceptance among antenatal
patients of the Jehovah’s Witness faith. Obstet Gynecol 126(5):974, 2015
Hussamy DJ, Wortman AC, McIntire DD, et al: Closed incision negative pressure therapy in morbidly
obese women undergoing cesarean delivery: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol
134(4):781, 2019
Irion O, Luzuy F, Beguin F: Nonclosure of the visceral and parietal peritoneum at caesarean section: a
randomised controlled trial. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 103:690, 1996
Jackson LA, Ramirez DM, Carrick KS, et al: Gross and histologic anatomy of the pelvic ureter: clinical
applications to pelvic surgery. Obstet Gynecol 133(5):896, 2019
Jelovsek JE, Chagin K, Gyhagen M, et al: Predicting risk of pelvic floor disorders 12 and 20 years after
delivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 218(2):222.e1, 2018
Jenusaitis L, Keplinger KB, Dean K, et al: Impact of a delayed cord clamping protocol on maternal and
neonatal outcomes in patients undergoing term cesarean section. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med
December 7, 2020 [Epub ahead of print]
Jeve YB, Navti OB, Konje JC: Comparison of techniques used to deliver a deeply impacted fetal head
at full dilation: a systematic review and meta-analysis. BJOG 123(3):337, 2016
Johnson DD: Cesarean delivery. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al (eds): Cunningham
and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, McGraw Hill Education, 2017
Jones E, Taylor B, MacArthur C, et al: Early postnatal discharge for infants: a meta-analysis. Pediatrics
146(3):e20193365, 2020

Kalafat E, Gokce A, O’Brien P, et al: Efficacy of carbetocin in the prevention of postpartum
hemorrhage: a systematic review and Bayesian meta-analysis of randomized trials. J Matern Fetal
Neonatal Med 34(14):2303, 2021
Kallianidis AF, Maraschini A, Danis J, et al: Epidemiological analysis of peripartum hysterectomy across
nine European countries. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 99(10):1364, 2020
Kammen BF, Levine MS, Rubesin SE, et al: Adynamic ileus after caesarean section mimicking intestinal
obstruction: findings on abdominal radiographs. Br J Radiol 73(873):951, 2000
Kapustian V, Anteby EY, Gdalevich M, et al: Effect of closure versus nonclosure of peritoneum at
cesarean section on adhesions: a prospective randomized study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 206(1):56.e1,
2012
Karavani G, Chill HH, Reuveni-Salzman A: Risk factors for uterine incision extension during cesarean
delivery. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med June 24, 2020 [Epub ahead of print]
Ker K, Shakur H, Roberts I: Does tranexamic acid prevent postpartum haemorrhage? A systematic
review of randomised controlled trials. BJOG 123(11):1745, 2016
Kerr JM: The lower uterine segment incision in conservative caesarean section. J Obstet Gynaecol Br
Emp 28:475, 1921
Kiefer DG, Muscat JC, Santorelli J, et al: Effectiveness and short-term safety of modified sodium
hyaluronic acid-carboxymethylcellulose at cesarean delivery: a randomized trial. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 214(3):373.e1, 2016
Kirscht J, Weiss C, Nickol J, et al: Dilatation or no dilatation of the cervix during cesarean section
(Dondi Trial): a randomized controlled trial. Arch Gynecol Obstet 295(1):39, 2017
Kowalski TJ, Kothari SN, Mathiason MA, et al: Impact of hair removal on surgical site infection rates: a
prospective randomized noninferiority trial. J Am Coll Surg 223(5):704, 2016
Kristensen K, Henriksen L: Cesarean section and disease associated with immune function. J Allergy
Clin Immunol 137:587, 2016
Krönig B: Transperitonealer cervikaler Kaiserschnitt. In: Doderlein A, Krönig B (eds): Operative
Gynäkologie, 3rd ed. Leipzig, Thieme, 1912
Larsson C, Saltvedt S, Wiklund I, et al: Planned vaginal delivery versus planned caesarean section:
short-term medical outcome analyzed according to intended mode of delivery. J Obstet Gynaecol
Can 33(8):796, 2011
Lawson T, Ralph C: Perioperative Jehovah’s Witnesses: a review. Br J Anaesth 115(5):676, 2015
Lefebvre A, Saliou P, Lucet JC, et al: Preoperative hair removal and surgical site infections: network
meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. J Hosp Infect 91(2):100, 2015
Liabsuetrakul T, Peeyananjarassri K: Mechanical dilatation of the cervix during elective caeserean
section before the onset of labour for reducing postoperative morbidity. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev 8:CD008019, 2018
Liang CC, Chang SD, Chang YL, et al: Postpartum urinary retention after cesarean delivery. Int J
Gynaecol Obstet 99(3):229, 2007
Linder N, Linder I, Fridman E, et al: Birth trauma—risk factors and short-term neonatal outcome. J
Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 26(15):1491, 2013
Liu X, Landon MB, Cheng W, et al: Cesarean delivery on maternal request in China: what are the risks
and benefits? Am J Obstet Gynecol 212(6):817.e1, 2015
Luke B, Brown MB, Wantman E, et al: Risk of severe maternal morbidity by maternal fertility status: a
US study in 8 states. Am J Obstet Gynecol 220(2):195.e1, 2019
MacArthur C, Glazener C, Lancashire R, et al: Exclusive caesarean section delivery and subsequent
urinary and faecal incontinence: a 12-year longitudinal study. BJOG 118(8):1001, 2011

MacArthur C, Wilson D, Herbison P, et al: Faecal incontinence persisting after childbirth: a 12 year
longitudinal study. BJOG 120(2):169, 2013
Mackeen AD, Khalifeh A, Fleisher J, et al: Suture compared with staple skin closure after cesarean
delivery: a randomized controlled trial Obstet Gynecol 123(6):1169, 2014a
Mackeen AD, Packard RE, Ota E, et al: Timing of intravenous prophylactic antibiotics for preventing
postpartum infectious morbidity in women undergoing cesarean delivery. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev 12:CD009516, 2014b
Mackeen AD, Schuster M, Berghella V: Suture versus staples for skin closure after cesarean: a
metaanalysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 212(5):621.e1, 2015
Macones GA, Caughey AB, Wood SL, et al: Guidelines for postoperative care in cesarean delivery:
Enhanced Recovery after Surgery (ERAS) Society recommendations (part 3). Am J Obstet
Gynecol 221(3):247.e1, 2019
Maggio L, Nicolau DP, DaCosta M, et al: Cefazolin prophylaxis in obese women undergoing cesarean
delivery: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol 125(5):1205, 2015
Maglinte DD, Balthazar EJ, Kelvin FM, et al: The role of radiology in the diagnosis of small bowel
obstruction. AJR Am J Roentgenol 168(5):1171, 1997
Markwei MT, Babatunde I, Rathi N, et al: Preincision adjunctive prophylaxis for cesarean deliveries a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol May 5, 2021 [Epub ahead of print]
Marshall NE, Fu R, Guise JM: Impact of multiple cesarean deliveries on maternal morbidity: a
systematic review. Am J Obstet Gynecol 205(3):262.e1, 2011
Martin JA, Hamilton BE, Osterman MJ: Births: final data for 2018. Natl Vital Stat Rep 68(13):1, 2019
Mathai M, Hofmeyr GJ, Mathai NE: Abdominal surgical incisions for caesarean section. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 5:CD004453, 2013
Matsubara S, Kuwata T, Usui R, et al: Important surgical measures and techniques at cesarean
hysterectomy for placenta previa accreta. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 92(4):372, 2013
McDonald EA, Brown SJ: Does method of birth make a difference to when women resume sex after
childbirth? BJOG 120(7):823, 2013
Moczygemba CK, Paramsothy P, Meikle S, et al: Route of delivery and neonatal birth trauma. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 202(4):361.e1, 2010
Moore ER, Bergman N, Anderson GC, et al: Early skin-to-skin contact for mothers and their healthy
newborn infants. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 11:CD003519, 2016
Morales A, Reyes O, Cárdenas G: Type of blunt expansion of the low transverse uterine incision during
caesarean section and the risk of postoperative complications: a prospective randomized controlled
trial. J Obstet Gynaecol Can 41(3):306, 2019
Morales KJ, Gordon MC, Bates GW Jr: Postcesarean delivery adhesions associated with delayed
delivery of infant. Am J Obstet Gynecol 196(5):461.e1, 2007
Nagele F, Karas H, Spitzer D, et al: Closure or nonclosure of the visceral peritoneum at cesarean
delivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 174:1366, 1996
National Institutes of Health: State-of-the-Science Conference Statement on Cesarean Delivery on
Maternal Request. NIH Consens Sci Statements 23(1):1, 2006
Nelson RL, Go C, Darwish R, et al: Cesarean delivery to prevent anal incontinence: a systematic review
and meta-analysis. Tech Coloproctol 23(9):809, 2019
Oliphant SS, Bochenska K, Tolge ME, et al: Maternal lower urinary tract injury at the time of cesarean
delivery. Int Urogynecol J 25(12):1709, 2014
Olofsson P: Opening of the abdomen ad modum Joel Cohen, Joel-Cohen, Joel Joel-Cohen, or just
Cohen? Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 94(2):224, 2015

O’Neill HA, Egan G, Walsh CA, et al: Omission of the bladder flap at caesarean section reduces
delivery time without increased morbidity: a meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. Eur J
Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 174:20, 2014
Ong CK, Seymour RA, Lirk P, et al: Combining paracetamol (acetaminophen) with nonsteroidal
antiinflammatory drugs: a qualitative systematic review of analgesic efficacy for acute postoperative
pain. Anesth Analg 110:1170, 2010
Orbach A, Levy A, Wiznitzer A, et al: Peripartum cesarean hysterectomy: critical analysis of risk
factors and trends over the years. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 24(3):480, 2011
Osmundson SS, Garabedian MJ, Lyell DJ: Risk factors for classical hysterotomy by gestational age.
Obstet Gynecol 122:845, 2013
Osmundson SS, Garabedian MJ, Yeaton-Massey A, et al: Risk factors for classical hysterotomy in twin
pregnancies. Obstet Gynecol 125(3):643, 2015
Patterson LS, O’Connell CM, Baskett TF: Maternal and perinatal morbidity associated with classic and
inverted T cesarean incisions. Obstet Gynecol 100(4):633, 2002
Peleg D, Eberstark E, Warsof SL, et al: Early wound dressing removal after scheduled cesarean
delivery: a randomized controlled trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol 215(3):388.e1, 2016
Pereira Gomes Morais E, Riera R, Porfírio GJ, et al: Chewing gum for enhancing early recovery of
bowel function after caesarean section. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 10:CD011562, 2016
Phipps MG, Watabe B, Clemons JL, et al: Risk factors for bladder injury during cesarean delivery.
Obstet Gynecol 105(1):156, 2005
Pritchard JA: Changes in the blood volume during pregnancy and delivery. Anesthesiology 26:393, 1965
Purisch SE, Ananth CV, Arditi B, et al: Effect of delayed vs immediate umbilical cord clamping on
maternal blood loss in term cesarean delivery: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA 322(19):1869, 2019
Rahman MS, Gasem T, Al Suleiman SA, et al: Bladder injuries during cesarean section in a university
hospital: a 25-year review. Arch Gynecol Obstet 279(3):349, 2009
Ramsey PS, White AM, Guinn DA, et al: Subcutaneous tissue reapproximation, alone or in combination
with drain, in obese women undergoing cesarean delivery. Obstet Gynecol 105(5 Pt 1):967, 2005
Roach MK, Abramovici A, Tita AT: Dose and duration of oxytocin to prevent postpartum hemorrhage: a
review. Am J Perinatol 30(7):523, 2013
Roberge S, Demers S, Berghella V, et al: Impact of single- vs double-layer closure on adverse outcomes
and uterine scar defect: a systematic review and metaanalysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 211(5):453,
2014
Roeckner JT, Sanchez-Ramos L, Mitta M, et al: Povidone-iodine 1% is the most effective vaginal
antiseptic for preventing post-cesarean endometritis: a systematic review and network metaanalysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 221(3):261.e1, 2019
Rogers RG, Leeman LM, Borders N, et al: Contribution of the second stage of labour to pelvic floor
dysfunction: a prospective cohort comparison of nulliparous women. BJOG 121(9):1145, 2014
Rossi AC, Lee RH, Chmait RH: Emergency postpartum hysterectomy for uncontrolled postpartum
bleeding: a systematic review. Obstet Gynecol 115(3):637, 2010
Rossouw JN, Hall D, Harvey J: Time between skin incision and delivery during cesarean. Int J
Gynaecol Obstet 121(1):82, 2013
Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists: Birth after previous caesarean birth. Green-Top
Guideline No. 45, October 2015
Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists: Reducing the risk of venous thromboembolism
during pregnancy and the puerperium. Green-Top Guideline No. 37a, April 2015

Saad AF, Rahman M, Costantine MM, et al: Blunt versus sharp uterine incision expansion during low
transverse cesarean delivery: a metaanalysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 211(6):684.e1, 2014
Saaqib S, Iqbal A, Naheed M, et al: A randomized controlled trial of cystoinflation to prevent bladder
injury in the adhesive disease of multiple caesarean sections. Sci Rep 10(1):15297, 2020
Sacre H, Bird A, Clement-Jones M, et al: Effectiveness of the fetal pillow to prevent adverse maternal
and fetal outcomes at full dilatation cesarean section in routine practice. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand
100(5):949, 2021
Safrai M, Stern S, Gofrit ON, et al: Urinary tract injuries during cesarean delivery: long-term outcome
and management. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med October 4, 2020 [Epub ahead of print]
Salman L, Aharony S, Shmueli A, et al: Urinary bladder injury during cesarean delivery: maternal
outcome from a contemporary large case series. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 213:26, 2017
Scharman CD, Burger D, Shatzel JJ, et al: Treatment of individuals who cannot receive blood products
for religious or other reasons. Am J Hematol 92(12):1370, 2017
Seal SL, Dey A, Barman SC, et al: Randomized controlled trial of elevation of the fetal head with a fetal
pillow during cesarean delivery at full cervical dilatation. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 133(2):178, 2016
Sentilhes L, Sénat MV, Le Lous M, et al: Tranexamic acid for the prevention of blood loss after
cesarean delivery N Engl J Med 384(17):1623, 2021
Shao Y, Forster SC, Tsaliki E, et al: Stunted microbiota and opportunistic pathogen colonization in
caesarean-section birth. Nature 574(7776):117, 2019
Sharp HT, Adelman MR. Prevention, recognition, and management of urologic injuries during
gynecologic surgery. Obstet Gynecol 127(6):1085, 2016
Shellhaas CS, Gilbert S, Landon MB, et al: The frequency and complication rates of hysterectomy
accompanying cesarean delivery. Obstet Gynecol 114(2 Pt 1):224, 2009
Siddiqui DS, Lacuna EM, Chen HY, et al: Skin closure of Pfannenstiel incision with Dermabond, staples,
or suture during cesarean delivery: experience of a single attending. Am J Perinatol 30(3):219, 2013
Sikirica V, Broder MS, Chang E, et al: Clinical and economic impact of adhesiolysis during repeat
cesarean delivery. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 91(6):719, 2012
Silver RM, Landon MB, Rouse DJ, et al: Maternal morbidity associated with multiple repeat cesarean
deliveries. Obstet Gynecol 107:1226, 2006
Smaill FM, Grivell RM: Antibiotic prophylaxis versus no prophylaxis for preventing infection after
cesarean section. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 10:CD007482, 2014
Smid MC, Smiley SG, Schulkin J, et al: The problem of the pannus: physician preference survey and a
review of the literature on cesarean skin incision in morbidly obese women. Am J Perinatol
33(5):463, 2016
Stegwee SI, van der Voet LF, Ben AJ, et al: Effect of single- versus double-layer uterine closure during
caesarean section on postmenstrual spotting (2Close): multicentre, double-blind, randomised
controlled superiority trial. BJOG 128(5):866, 2021
Stone J, Bianco A, Monro J, et al: Study to reduce infection prior to elective cesarean deliveries
(STRIPES): a randomized clinical trial of chlorhexidine. Am J Obstet Gynecol 223(1):113.e1, 2020
Sullivan SA, Smith T, Chang E, et al: Administration of cefazolin prior to skin incision is superior to
cefazolin at cord clamping in preventing postcesarean infectious morbidity: a randomized controlled
trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol 196:455, 2007
Sultan P, Halpern SH, Pushpanathan E, et al: The effect of intrathecal morphine dose on outcomes after
elective cesarean delivery: a meta-analysis. Anesth Analg 123(1):154, 2016
Swank ML, Wing DA, Nicolau DP, et al: Increased 3-gram cefazolin dosing for cesarean delivery
prophylaxis in obese women. Am J Obstet Gynecol 213(3):415.e1, 2015

Tan PG, Norazilah MJ, Omar SZ: Hospital discharge on the first compared with the second day after a
planned cesarean delivery: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol 120(6):1273, 2012
Tanner J, Norrie P, Melen K: Preoperative hair removal to reduce surgical site infection. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 11:CD004122, 2011
Tarney CM: Bladder injury during cesarean delivery. Curr Womens Health Rev 9(2):70, 2013
The Joint Commission: The universal protocol. 2020. Available at:
https://www.jointcommission.org/standards/universal-protocol/. Accessed December 1, 2020
Tita AT, Hauth JC, Grimes A, et al: Decreasing incidence of postcesarean endometritis with extendedspectrum antibiotic prophylaxis. Obstet Gynecol 111(1):51, 2008
Tita AT, Landon MB, Spong CY, et al: Timing of elective repeat cesarean delivery at term and neonatal
outcomes. N Engl J Med 360(2):111, 2009
Tita AT, Szychowski JM, Boggess K, et al: Adjunctive azithromycin prophylaxis for cesarean delivery. N
Engl J Med 375(13):1231, 2016
Tolcher MC, Johnson RL, El-Nashar SA, et al: Decision-to-incision time and neonatal outcomes: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Obstet Gynecol 123(3):536, 2014
Tolcher MC, Whitham MD, El-Nashar SA, et al: Chlorhexidine-alcohol compared with povidone-iodine
preoperative skin antisepsis for cesarean delivery: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J
Perinatol 36(2):118, 2019
Tulandi T, Agdi M, Zarei A, Miner L, et al: Adhesion development and morbidity after repeat cesarean
delivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 201(1):56.e1, 2009
Tuuli MG, Liu J, Tita AT, et al: Effect of prophylactic negative pressure wound therapy vs standard
wound dressing on surgical-site infection in obese women after cesarean delivery: a randomized
clinical trial. JAMA 324(12):1180, 2020
Tuuli MG, Odibo AO, Fogertey P, et al: Utility of the bladder flap at cesarean delivery: a randomized
controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol 119(4):815, 2012
Tuuli MG, Stout MJ, Martin S, et al: Comparison of suture materials for subcuticular skin closure at
cesarean delivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 215(4):490.e1, 2016
Valent AM, DeArmond C, Houston JM, et al: Effect of post-cesarean delivery oral cephalexin and
metronidazole on surgical site infection among obese women: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA
318(11):1026, 2017
Villar J, Carroli G, Zavaleta N, et al: Maternal and neonatal individual risks and benefits associated with
caesarean delivery: multicentre prospective study. BJM 335:1025, 2007
Viney R, Isaacs C, Chelmow D: Intra-abdominal irrigation at cesarean delivery: a randomized controlled
trial. Obstet Gynecol 119(6):1106, 2012
Waring GJ, Shawer S, Hinshaw K: The use of O-ring retractors at caesarean section: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 228:209, 2018
Wilhelm NB, Bonsall TJ, Miller CL: The effect of beta-lactam allergy status on the rate of surgical site
infections: a retrospective cohort study. Ann Surg June 3, 2020 [Epub ahead of print]
Wilson RD, Caughey AB, Wood SL, et al: Guidelines for antenatal and preoperative care in cesarean
delivery: Enhanced Recovery after Surgery Society recommendations (Part 1). Am J Obstet
Gynecol 219(6):523.e1, 2018
Woldu SL, Ordonez MA, Devine PC, et al: Urologic considerations of placenta accreta: a contemporary
tertiary care institutional experience. Urol Int 93(1):74, 2014
Wolf O, Weissman O, Harats M, et al: Birth wind and fire: raising awareness to operating room fires
during delivery. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 26(13):1303, 2013

Wolfson AR, Mancini CM, Banerji A, et al: Penicillin allergy assessment in pregnancy: safety and
impact on antibiotic use. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract 9(3):1338, 2021
World Health Organization: WHO recommendations: uterotonics for the prevention of postpartum
haemorrhage. Geneva, WHO, 2018
Worley KC, McIntire DD, Leveno KJ: The prognosis for spontaneous labor in women with
uncomplicated term pregnancies: implications for cesarean delivery on maternal request. Obstet
Gynecol 113(4):812, 2009
Wyckoff MH, Aziz K, Escobedo MB, et al: Part 13: Neonatal resuscitation: 2015 American Heart
Association guidelines update for cardiopulmonary resuscitation and emergency cardiovascular care.
Circulation 132(18 Suppl 2):S543, 2015
Wylie BJ, Gilbert S, Landon MB, et al: Comparison of transverse and vertical skin incision for
emergency cesarean delivery. Obstet Gynecol 115(6):1134, 2010
Xodo S, Saccone G, Cromi A, et al: Cephalad-caudad versus transverse blunt expansion of the low
transverse uterine incision during cesarean delivery. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 202:75, 2016
Young OM, Shaik IH, Twedt R, et al: Pharmacokinetics of cefazolin prophylaxis in obese gravidae at
time of cesarean delivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 213(4):541.e1, 2015
Zaphiratos V, George RB, Boyd JC, et al: Uterine exteriorization compared with in situ repair for
cesarean delivery: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Can J Anaesth 62(11):1209, 2015

CHAPTER 31

Prior Cesarean Delivery

100 YEARS OF CONTROVERSY
INFLUENCING FACTORS
DELIVERY ROUTE RISKS
TRIAL OF LABOR SELECTION CONSIDERATIONS
LABOR AND DELIVERY CONSIDERATIONS
UTERINE SCAR RUPTURE
MULTIPLE REPEAT CESAREAN DELIVERIES
VAGINAL BIRTH AFTER CESAREAN—2021
REFERENCES
By the beginning of the 20th century, cesarean delivery had become a
relatively safe procedure. However, rupture of the uterine scar with
subsequent labor was appreciated early. This danger resulted in the oftquoted remark by Cragin (1916) that “Once a cesarean, always a cesarean.”
During the intervening 50 years, enthusiasm developed to allow many of
these women to be delivered vaginally. But, as chronicled next, this support
has waned during the past three decades. So, as we reach the 100-year mark
of Cragin’s pronouncement, the issue remains largely unsettled.

100 YEARS OF CONTROVERSY

Despite Cragin’s early philosophy, some practitioners did allow labor in a
subsequent pregnancy after a cesarean delivery. Eastman (1950) described a
30-percent postcesarean vaginal delivery rate at Johns Hopkins Hospital. He
also reported a 2-percent uterine rupture rate and associated 10-percent
maternal mortality rate. As modern techniques made cesarean delivery safer,
observational studies during the 1960s suggested that postcesarean vaginal
delivery was a reasonable option (Pauerstein, 1966, 1969). Germane to this
is that through the 1960s, the overall cesarean delivery rate approximated
only 5 percent. Since then, as the primary cesarean rate has escalated, the
repeat cesarean delivery rate followed (Rosenstein, 2013).
During the 1980s, a National Institutes of Health (NIH) Consensus
Development Conference on Vaginal Birth After Cesarean (1981) was
convened, and the participants questioned the necessity of routine repeat
cesarean delivery. With support and encouragement from the American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (1988, 1994), enthusiastic
attempts were begun to increase the practice rate of vaginal birth after
cesarean—VBAC. These attempts were highly successful, and VBAC rates
rose from 3.4 percent in 1980 to a peak of 28.3 percent in 1996. This rate
and a concomitant decline in total cesarean delivery rate for the United
States, are shown in Figure 31-1. Also, a new lexicon was developed to
describe these practices and outcomes (Table 31-1).

FIGURE 31-1 Total, primary, and low-risk cesarean delivery (CD) rates and vaginal birth after
previous cesarean (VBAC) rates in the United States, 1989–2018. Epochs denoted within rectangles
represent contemporaneous ongoing events related to these rates. ACOG = American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists; NIH = National Institutes of Health; PB = practice bulletin. (Data
from Hamilton, 2015, 2016; Martin, 2019; National Institutes of Health: NIH Consensus Development
Conference, 2010.)

TABLE 31-1. Acronyms Used to Describe Management of Women with a
Prior Cesarean Delivery

However, with the higher postcesarean vaginal delivery rate, reports of
uterine rupture-related maternal and perinatal morbidity and mortality began
to appear (McMahon, 1996; Sachs, 1999). These complications dampened
prevailing enthusiasm for a trial of labor after cesarean section (TOLAC).
They also prompted the American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (1998) to caution that such trials should be attempted only in
appropriately equipped institutions with physicians readily available to
provide emergency care. Less than a year later, the College (1999)
recommended that physicians should be immediately available when
pursuing a TOLAC. Many believe that this one-word change—from readily
to immediately available—was an impetus for the resulting decade-long
decline in national VBAC rates illustrated in Figure 31-1 (Cheng, 2014;
Leeman, 2013).
In a cross-sectional analysis between 1990 and 2009, the proportion of
women with a prior cesarean delivery who underwent a TOLAC peaked in
1995, and slightly more than half of these women chose this option (Fig. 312). After this, the proportion of women attempting TOLAC declined to a
nadir of 16 percent in 2006 and subsequently rose to 21 percent through
2009. Additionally, the percentage of VBACs reached its peak of 70 percent

in 2000 but subsequently declined to a nadir of 38 percent in 2006 (Uddin,
2013).

FIGURE 31-2 Percentage of women with a prior cesarean delivery who attempted a trial of labor
(TOLAC) compared with the successful vaginal delivery (VBAC) rate for the United States 1990–
2009. (Data from Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; National Center for Health Statistics;
Curtin, 2015; Simon, 2013; Uddin, 2013).

Using birth certificate data for 2013, Curtin and associates (2015)
reported that only 1 in 5 women with one prior cesarean delivery attempted a
TOLAC. In women with two or more prior cesarean deliveries, less than 1 in
10 women attempt a TOLAC, and half resulted in successful vaginal
deliveries. At Parkland Hospital, although only 15 percent of women choose
a TOLAC, the VBAC rate is 86 percent.
Thus, multiple interrelated factors—both medical and nonmedical—
undoubtedly contributed to declining VBAC rates. Because of this, in 2010
the NIH convened a Consensus Development Conference Panel to study the
issue. The panel report included a contemporaneous summary concerning the
risks and benefits of repeat cesarean versus vaginal delivery. These findings
were subsequently described and coupled with current recommendations by
various professional organizations. As shown in Figure 31-1, it would seem
that this report was followed by a slight rise in the VBAC rate.

INFLUENCING FACTORS
For the woman with a prior cesarean delivery, planning for future
pregnancies and delivery route should begin with preconceptional counseling
and be addressed again early in prenatal care. Importantly, decisions made
throughout pregnancy regarding delivery mode are subject to continuing
revisions as dictated by exigencies that arise during pregnancy. Assuming no
mitigating circumstances, there are two basic choices. First, a TOLAC offers
the goal of achieving a VBAC. If cesarean delivery becomes necessary during
the trial, it is a failed TOLAC. A second choice is elective repeat cesarean
delivery (ERCD). This includes scheduled cesarean delivery as well as
unscheduled but planned cesarean delivery for spontaneous labor or another
delivery indication.
The decision regarding delivery mode should weigh clinical factors
known to influence TOLAC success as well as benefits and risks (Table 312). As expected, TOLAC rates vary between institutions and providers. Last,
economics, staffing, and medicolegal factors also may shape the decision to
offer TOLAC.
TABLE 31-2. Some Factors That Influence a Successful Trial of Labor in a
Woman with Prior Cesarean Delivery (CD)

DELIVERY ROUTE RISKS

As evidence mounted that the uterine rupture risk might be greater than
expected, the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (1988,
1994, 1998, 1999, 2015, 2019a,d) issued updated bulletins supporting
TOLAC but also urging a more cautious approach. It is problematic that
both options have risks and benefits to mother and fetus but that these are
not always congruent.

■ Maternal Risks
Rates of uterine rupture and associated complications clearly are increased
with TOLAC. As shown in Table 31-1, uterine rupture typically is classified
as either: (1) complete, when all uterine wall layers are separated, or (2)
incomplete, when the uterine muscle is separated but the visceral peritoneum
is intact. Incomplete rupture is also commonly referred to as uterine
dehiscence (Chap. 42, p. 742). It is these risks that underpin most of the angst
in attempting TOLAC. Despite this, some argue that these factors should
weigh only minimally in the decision because their absolute risk is low. For
example, a systematic review by Guise and coworkers (2010) concludes that
the uterine rupture risk was significantly elevated in women undergoing
TOLAC—absolute risk of 0.47 percent and relative risk of 20.7—compared
with women choosing ERCD.
The Maternal-Fetal Medicine Units (MFMU) Network conducted a
prospective study at 19 medical centers (Landon, 2004). Shown in Table 313 are outcomes of nearly 18,000 women attempting TOLAC that were
compared with those of more than 15,000 gravidas undergoing ERCD. The
absolute risk of uterine rupture was 0.7 percent compared with no reported
uterine ruptures in the ERCD cohort. Various reports suggest either no or an
increased mortality risk for ERCD compared with attempted TOLAC (Guise,
2010; Wen, 2004).
TABLE 31-3. Complications in Women with a Prior Cesarean Delivery
Enrolled in the Study by the NICHD MFMU, 1999–2002

Maternal morbidity estimates also are conflicting. The review by Guise
and coworkers (2010) observed no significant differences in hysterectomy or
transfusion risk. But, another metaanalysis reported that women undergoing
TOLAC were approximately half as likely to require transfusion or
hysterectomy compared with those undergoing ERCD (Mozurkewich, 2000).
Conversely, in the MFMU Network study, the risks for transfusion and
infection were significantly greater for women attempting TOLAC (Landon,
2004). A recent large retrospective Canadian cohort study compared
maternal and neonatal outcomes (Young, 2018). The absolute rates of severe
maternal morbidity and mortality were low. However, women attempting
TOLAC had significantly higher adjusted risk ratios of uterine rupture (6.41),
severe postpartum hemorrhage with transfusion (2.80), and composite

maternal morbidity (1.96) compared with women who underwent ERCD.
This disparity is also found among other studies. Importantly, compared with
a successful TOLAC, the risk of these major complications was fivefold
greater with a failed TOLAC (Rossi, 2008).

■ Perinatal Risks
In the Canadian study cited previously, rates of composite severe neonatal
morbidity and mortality were higher among women delivering after an
attempted VBAC compared with those delivering by ERCD—adjusted odds
ratio (aOR) 1.49 (Young, 2018). In this study failed VBAC was also
associated with a significantly increased rate of neonatal death—aOR 3.22.
Both the prospective MFMU Network study shown in Table 31-3 and review
by Guise (2010) found significantly higher perinatal mortality rates with
TOLAC compared with ERCD. In the latter review, the perinatal mortality
rate with TOLAC was 0.13 percent compared with 0.05 percent for ERCD.
In the Canadian study cited previously, adjusted risk ratios for neonatal death
(3.22) and for composite severe neonatal morbidity and mortality (1.49)
were significantly higher among women delivering after an attempted
TOLAC compared with those delivering by ERCD (Young, 2018). In another
study of nearly 25,000 women with a prior cesarean delivery, the TOLACrelated perinatal death rate was 1.3 per 1000 among 15,515 women (Smith,
2002). Although this absolute risk is small, it is 11 times greater than the
perinatal risk found in 9014 women with ERCD.
TOLAC also appears to be associated with a higher risk of hypoxic
ischemic encephalopathy (HIE) compared with that for ERCD. The MFMU
Network study reported the incidence of encephalopathy at term to be 46 per
100,000 TOLACs compared with zero cases in women undergoing ERCD
(Landon, 2004). In the review by Guise (2010), the absolute risk of transient
tachypnea of the newborn was slightly higher with ERCD compared with
TOLAC—4.2 versus 3.6 percent. But, neonatal bag and mask ventilation was
used more often in newborns delivered following TOLAC than in those
delivered by ERCD—5.4 versus 2.5 percent. The 5-minute Apgar scores or
neonatal intensive care unit admission rates for newborns delivered by
TOLAC did not differ from those delivered by ERCD.

TRIAL OF LABOR SELECTION CONSIDERATIONS
Both patients and providers ideally would like individualized risks when
counseling regarding the chance of successful TOLAC. However, few highquality data guide selection of suitable TOLAC candidates. Several
TOLAC/VBAC calculators can be used at entry to prenatal care and again at
the time of labor to assist in successful TOLAC prediction. However, these
have not been validated as predictors of adverse maternal outcomes, such as
uterine rupture. Similarly, algorithms and nomograms to aid prediction fail to
demonstrated reasonable prognostic value (Grobman, 2007b, 2008, 2021;
Metz, 2013; Wyckoff, 2020). Lipschuetz and colleagues (2020) applied
newer statistical analysis techniques to help improve prognostic accuracy.
Despite the limitations of these predictive tools, several points are
pertinent to candidate evaluation and are described subsequently. Current
recommendations of the American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2019d) are that most women with one prior low transverse
hysterotomy are candidates, and if appropriate, they should be counseled
regarding both TOLAC and ERCD options. It is further recommended that
home birth is a contraindication for TOLAC.

■ Prior Uterine Incision
Prior Incision Type
The type and number of prior cesarean deliveries are overriding factors in
recommending TOLAC (see Table 31-2). And these caveats aim to avoid
intrapartum uterine rupture. As shown in Table 31-4, women with one prior
low transverse hysterotomy have the lowest risk of symptomatic scar
separation. However, asymptomatic dehiscence or complete rupture is still a
concern in these women (Fig. 31-3). The uterine rupture risk in women with
a prior vertical incision that did not extend into the fundus is unclear. Martin
(1997) and Shipp (1999) and their associates reported that these low vertical
uterine incisions do not have a higher risk for rupture compared with low
transverse incisions. The American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2015) concluded that although evidence is limited, women
with a prior vertical incision in the lower uterine segment without fundal
extension may be candidates for TOLAC. This is in contrast to prior

classical or T-shaped uterine incisions, which are considered by most as
contraindications to labor.
TABLE 31-4. Types of Prior Uterine Incisions and Estimated Risks for
Uterine Rupture

FIGURE 31-3 Extensive “uterine window” in a woman at term with one prior low transverse cesarean
delivery. A. Transabdominal sonogram shows the uterine defect (arrow), bulging amnionic sac, and

adjacent anatomy. B = Bladder. B. At the time of cesarean delivery, the amnionic sac is seen protruding
through the defect and is visible beneath the thin vesicocervical peritoneum. (Reproduced with
permission from Dr. Angela Seasley.)

The highest risks are with prior vertical incisions extending into the
fundus. Importantly, women with a classical uterine scar may rupture before
labor onset, and this may even occur before term. Chauhun and colleagues
(2002) reviewed 157 women with a prior classical cesarean incision. They
used a policy of fetal lung maturity assessment at 36 weeks and then delivery
if mature. With a mean gestational age of 35.6 weeks at delivery, they
reported one uterine rupture at 29 weeks that resulted in fetal death; 9percent uterine dehiscence rate; and 25-percent risk of maternal morbidity.
For a woman with a prior classical cesarean delivery, the authors concluded
that uterine rupture and dehiscence are neither predictable nor preventable
despite early delivery. The risk for earlier rupture is even greater in women
who have undergone open maternal-fetal surgery (Chmait, 2019; Goodnight,
2019). The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2021)
recommends delivery between 360/7 and 370/7 weeks for a prior classical
incision.
Although few indications dictate a primary classical incision, 53 percent
of women undergoing cesarean delivery between 240/7 weeks and 256/7
weeks have such an incision (Osmundson, 2013). By 28 weeks’ gestation, the
risk drops to 35 percent and declines to <10 percent by 32 weeks. The
likelihood of classical uterine incision is also increased by noncephalic
presentations. In those instances—for example, preterm breech fetus with an
undeveloped lower segment—the “low vertical” incision almost invariably
extends into the active segment. From their review, Moramarco and
colleagues (2020) reported that prior preterm classical cesarean delivery
was associated with a 1-percent risk for rupture. Lannon and coworkers
(2015) compared 456 women with a prior periviable cesarean delivery with
more than 10,000 women whose prior cesarean delivery was done at term.
The uterine rupture rate was 1.8 percent in the prior periviable group and 0.4
percent in the prior term group. Of the uterine ruptures in the periviable
group, half were in women whose prior uterine incision was described as
low transverse. Harper and associates (2009) did not confirm these findings.
The type of uterine incision cannot be confirmed in all women. Unless
clinical circumstances raise concern for a prior classical uterine incision, the

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019d) consider
these women as potential TOLAC candidates.
Special consideration is given to women with uterine malformations who
have undergone cesarean delivery. Earlier reports suggested that the uterine
rupture risk in a subsequent pregnancy was greater than the risk in those with
a normal uterus and a prior low transverse hysterotomy (Ravasia, 1999).
However, in a study of 103 women with müllerian duct anomalies, there
were no cases of uterine rupture (Erez, 2007).

Prior Incision Closure
As discussed in Chapter 30 (p. 558), the low transverse uterine incision can
be sutured in either one or two layers. One metaanalysis compared singleversus double-layer closure and locking versus nonlocking suture for uterine
closure (Roberge, 2014). The uterine dehiscence or rupture rates for these
closures did not differ significantly. Both single-layer closure and closure
that locked the first layer, however, were associated with a reduced
myometrial thickness during subsequent sonographic measurement. In
contrast, Bennich and coworkers (2016) reported that a double-layer closure
did not increase the residual myometrial thickness when saline contrast
sonography was done several months postpartum. Our practice at Parkland
Hospital is to routinely suture the lower-segment incision with one running,
locking suture line.

Number of Prior Cesarean Incisions
At least three studies report a doubling or tripling of the uterine rupture rate
in women with two compared with one prior transverse hysterotomy
(Macones, 2005a; Miller, 1994; Tahseen, 2010). In contrast, an analysis of
the MFMU Network database did not confirm this (Landon, 2006). Namely,
in 975 women with multiple prior cesarean deliveries, the rupture rate was
0.9 percent and not significantly different from the 0.7-percent rate in 16,915
women with a single prior operation.

Imaging of Prior Incision
Sonographic measurement of a prior hysterotomy incision has been used to
predict rupture risk. Large defects in a nonpregnant uterus forecast a greater
risk (Osser, 2011). Naji and coworkers (2013a,b) found that the residual

myometrial thickness decreased as pregnancy progressed and that rupture
risk correlated positively with a thinner scar.
Jastrow and colleagues (2010a) did a systematic review of women with
a prior low transverse hysterotomy incision who underwent third-trimester
sonographic evaluation. They concluded that a uterine scar defect was
strongly predicted by a thin lower uterine segment. They defined this segment
as the smallest measurement between urine in the maternal bladder and
amnionic fluid. That said, they could not find an ideal threshold value to
recommend safe TOLAC. This same group subsequently recruited 1856
women contemplating vaginal birth after a single low transverse incision,
and they sonographically measured lower uterine segment thickness between
340/7 and 386/7 weeks (Jastrow, 2016). Women were grouped into three risk
categories for uterine rupture during TOLAC based on measurements: high
risk <2.0 mm; intermediate risk 2.0 to 2.4 mm; and low risk ≥2.5 mm. The
TOLAC rates were 9, 42, and 61 percent in the three categories,
respectively. Of the 984 TOLACs, there were no symptomatic uterine
ruptures. At Parkland Hospital, we do not assess the lower uterine segment
in women with a prior cesarean delivery.

■ Prior Uterine Rupture
Women who have previously sustained a uterine rupture are at greater risk
for recurrence. As shown in Table 31-4, those with a prior lower-segment
rupture have up to a 6-percent recurrence risk, whereas prior upper-segment
rupture confers a 9- to 32-percent risk (Reyes-Ceja, 1969; Ritchie, 1971).
Sheth (1968) described outcomes of 21 subsequent pregnancies in 13 women
who underwent uterine rupture repair. Rupture recurred in four pregnancies
—approximately 20 percent. Usta and colleagues (2007) reported similar
results. Fox and associates (2014) reported 14 women with prior uterine
rupture and 30 women with prior uterine dehiscence. In 60 subsequent
pregnancies, they noted no uterine ruptures or severe complications if women
underwent ERCD prior to labor onset or immediately at the onset of preterm
labor. Delivery is recommended between 360/7 and 370/7 weeks’ gestation
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2021).

■ Interdelivery Interval

Magnetic resonance imaging studies of myometrial healing suggest that
complete uterine involution and restoration of anatomy may require at least 6
months (Dicle, 1997). As a potential risk for uterine rupture, the relationship
between interdelivery interval and uterine rupture in 2409 women with one
prior cesarean delivery was examined (Shipp, 2001). There were 29 women
with a uterine rupture—1.4 percent. Interdelivery intervals ≤18 months were
associated with a threefold greater risk of symptomatic rupture during a
subsequent TOLAC compared with intervals >18 months. Similarly, Stamilio
and associates (2007) noted a threefold augmented risk of uterine rupture in
women with an interpregnancy interval <6 months compared with one ≥6
months.

■ Prior Vaginal Delivery
Prior vaginal delivery, either before or after a cesarean birth, significantly
improves the prognosis for a successful TOLAC (Grinstead, 2004; Hendler,
2004; Mercer, 2008). Prior vaginal delivery also lowers the TOLAC-related
risk of subsequent uterine rupture and other morbidities (Cahill, 2006;
Hochler, 2014; Zelop, 1999).

■ Prior Cesarean Delivery Indication
Women with a nonrecurring indication—for example, breech presentation—
have the highest successful TOLAC rate—nearly 90 percent (Wing, 1999).
Those with a prior cesarean delivery for fetal compromise have an
approximately 80-percent VBAC rate, and for those done for labor arrest,
VBAC rates approximate only 60 percent (Bujold, 2001; Peaceman, 2006).
Prior second-stage cesarean delivery can be associated with secondstage uterine rupture in a subsequent pregnancy (Jastrow, 2013). A secondary
analysis of the MFMU Cesarean Registry revealed that a prolonged second
stage of labor—exceeding 3 hours—during TOLAC will often lead to
VBAC. However, adverse maternal outcomes including uterine rupture or
dehiscence were observed to be more common as the second stage lengthens
(Hehir, 2018).

■ Fetal Size and Lie

Most studies show that increasing fetal size is inversely related to VBAC
rates. The risk for uterine rupture is less robustly linked. Zelop and
colleagues (2001) studied outcomes of almost 2750 women undergoing
TOLAC, and the uterine rupture rate increased—albeit not significantly—
with rising fetal weight. The rate was 1.0 percent for fetal weight <4000 g,
1.6 percent for >4000 g, and 2.4 percent for >4250 g. Similarly, others have
found associated increased risks for uterine rupture with fetuses >4000 g
(Jastrow, 2010b). With preterm fetuses, compared with term ones, women
who attempt a TOLAC have similar or higher VBAC rates and lower uterine
rupture rates (Durnwald, 2006; Quiñones, 2005).
Few studies address the choice of TOLAC for a singleton term breech
fetus. Very limited data suggest a possible link with adverse perinatal
outcome (Azria, 2012; Macharey, 2017). Data supporting external cephalic
version for breech presentation with a prior cesarean scar also are limited
and are derived from small studies (Impey, 2018; Weill, 2017). From these,
version success and adverse event rates appear comparable with women
without a prior cesarean delivery. The American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists (2020) does not consider a prior uterine incision to be a
contraindication for attempted version. At Parkland Hospital, we do not
attempt version or vaginal breech delivery in these women.

■ Multifetal Gestation
Twin pregnancy does not appear to increase the risk of uterine rupture. In one
study of 1850 women with twins, the VBAC rate was 45 percent, and the
rupture rate was 0.9 percent (Ford, 2006). Similar studies by Cahill (2005)
and Varner (2007) and their coworkers reported rupture rates of 0.7 to 1.1
percent and VBAC rates of 75 to 85 percent. According to the American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019d), women with twins and
a prior low transverse hysterotomy can safely undergo TOLAC.

■ Maternal Obesity
Multiple studies have reported an inverse relationship between prepregnancy
body mass index (BMI) and successful TOLAC rates (Juhasz, 2005; Wu,
2019). Hibbard and associates (2006) reported the following rates: 85

percent with a normal BMI, 78 percent with a BMI between 25 and 30, 70
percent with a BMI between 30 and 40, and 61 percent with a BMI ≥40.

■ Fetal Death
Most women with a prior cesarean delivery and fetal death in the current
pregnancy would prefer a vaginal delivery. Although fetal concerns are
obviated, available data suggest that maternal risks are increased. Nearly
46,000 women with a prior cesarean delivery in the MFMU Network
database had a total of 209 fetal deaths at an average gestational age of 32.8
weeks (Ramirez, 2010). Of the 158 women who elected TOLAC, the VBAC
rate was 87 percent. In the entire TOLAC group, the uterine rupture rate was
2.4 percent, and in 116 women who underwent an induction of labor, the
rupture rate was 3.4 percent. Labor induction for second-trimester fetal
demise has a low complication rate (Bahar, 2021).

LABOR AND DELIVERY CONSIDERATIONS
■ Timing
The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019a)
recommends delaying nonmedically indicated deliveries until 39 completed
weeks of gestation or beyond. Data from Tita and colleagues in Figure 31-4
show significant and appreciable adverse neonatal morbidity has been
reported with ERCD before 39 completed weeks (Chiossi, 2013; Clark,
2009). Thus, if ERCD is planned, it is essential that the fetus be mature.
Conversely, delaying delivery beyond 40 weeks is associated with higher
neonatal morbidity rates.

FIGURE 31-4 Neonatal morbidity rates seen with 13,258 elective repeat cesarean deliveries. Any
adverse outcome includes death. Sepsis includes suspected and proven. RDS = respiratory distress
syndrome; TTN = transient tachypnea of the newborn.

Accurate pregnancy dating is paramount prior to ERCD. The American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019c) offers guidelines to
assist in accurate pregnancy dating using a combination of last menstrual
period and sonography. The most accurate method to confirm or establish
gestational age is by sonographic measurement of an early embryo-fetus.

■ Intrapartum Care
Because uterine rupture during TOLAC may be unpredictable, the American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019d) recommends that labor
in women attempting TOLAC should be undertaken in facilities that can
provide emergency cesarean delivery for situations associated with
immediate threats to the life of the women or her fetus. If those resources are
not available, the College recommends discussion of the hospital’s resources
and availability of providers with the patient considering TOLAC.
Ultimately, the best alternative may be referral to an institution with
resources appropriate for TOLAC.

Some argue that these provisions deny women full access to choices. For
example, in an earlier survey of Ohio hospitals, 15 percent of Level I, 63
percent of Level II, and 100 percent of Level III institutions met these
requirements (Lavin, 2002). Moreover, an obstetrical anesthesia workforce
survey reported that due to staffing limitations, TOLAC was allowed in only
88 percent of hospitals with ≥1500 annual deliveries, in 59 percent of those
with 500 to 1499 deliveries, and in 43 percent of those with <500 deliveries
(Traynor, 2016).

■ Cervical Ripening and Labor Stimulation
Labor induction is associated with a higher TOLAC failure rate compared
with spontaneous labor. The risks for uterine rupture, however, are less clear
with induction or augmentation, with the exception of prostaglandin E1
(PGE1)—misoprostol—which is contraindicated (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019d). Of other considerations, induction
or augmentation is ideally avoided in women with an unknown prior incision
type, an unfavorable cervix, or pregnancy >40 weeks. At Parkland Hospital
we do not induce or augment labor pharmacologically in women electing
TOLAC. Instead, we attempt induction only by amniotomy.

Oxytocin
Use of oxytocin for labor induction or augmentation has been implicated in
increased uterine rupture rates in women undergoing TOLAC (Zelop, 1999).
In the MFMU Network study reported by Landon (2004), uterine rupture was
more frequent in women induced with oxytocin alone—1.1 percent—
compared with those presenting in spontaneous labor—0.4 percent. Labor
augmentation was associated with uterine rupture in 0.9 percent. Among
women in this cohort without a prior vaginal delivery, the uterine rupture risk
associated with oxytocin induction was 1.8 percent—a fourfold greater risk
compared with spontaneous labor (Grobman, 2007a). In contrast, in one
case-control study, induction was not associated with a higher rupture risk
(Harper, 2012a). Cahill (2008) and Goetzl (2001) and their coworkers
reported a dose-related risk of rupture with oxytocin.

Prostaglandins

Various prostaglandin preparations commonly employed for cervical
ripening or labor induction are discussed in Chapter 26 (p. 489). Wing and
colleagues (1998) compared misoprostol versus oxytocin for labor induction
in women with a prior cesarean delivery. They terminated their trial after
two of the first 17 women assigned to misoprostol developed a uterine
rupture. Other studies confirmed this. The American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists (2019d) recommends that misoprostol should not be used
for cervical ripening or labor induction in women at term with a prior
cesarean delivery or major uterine surgery.
Studies using other prostaglandin agents for labor induction are
contradictory. Ravasia and coworkers (2000) compared uterine rupture rates
in 172 women given PGE2 gel with 1544 women in spontaneous labor. The
rupture rate of 2.9 percent was significantly greater in women treated with
PGE2 gel compared with 0.9 percent in those with spontaneous labor. LydonRochelle and associates (2001) found similar results. In the MFMU Network
study cited previously, however, the uterine rupture rate was 1.4 percent
when any prostaglandin was used in combination with oxytocin (Landon,
2004). But, in the subgroup of 227 women in whom labor was induced with a
prostaglandin alone, there were no ruptures. Similar findings were reported
with intravaginal prostaglandins, which were not associated with a greater
uterine rupture risk (Macones, 2005b). These latter investigators, along with
Kayani and colleagues (2005), found that sequential use of a prostaglandin
followed by oxytocin was associated with a threefold greater rupture risk
compared with spontaneous labor.

Mechanical Methods
In a retrospective study of 2479 women with a prior cesarean delivery, the
uterine rupture risk using a transcervical Foley catheter for labor induction
(1.6 percent) was not significantly greater than that with spontaneous labor
(1.1 percent)—or with amniotomy with or without oxytocin (1.2 percent)
(Bujold, 2004). In 101 women induced with a balloon catheter, a 50-percent
successful TOLAC rate and no uterine ruptures was reported (Sarreau 2020).
In contrast, Hoffman and coworkers (2004) described 138 women who
underwent preinduction cervical ripening with a Foley catheter compared
with 536 women who entered labor spontaneously. The inordinately high
intrapartum uterine rupture rate of 6.5 percent following Foley catheter

cervical ripening was greater than the 1.9-percent rate with spontaneous
labor.

■ Epidural Analgesia
Concerns that epidural analgesia for labor might mask the pain of uterine
rupture have not been verified. Fewer than 10 percent of women with scar
separation experience pain and bleeding, and fetal heart rate decelerations
are the most likely sign of rupture (Kieser, 2002). That said, Cahill and
associates (2010a) documented that more frequent episodes of epidural
catheter dosing were associated with increasing uterine rupture rates. VBAC
rates are similar, and in some cases higher, among women with labor
epidural analgesia compared with those using other analgesia forms (Landon,
2005). Perhaps related, almost a fourth of VBAC deliveries were completed
with either forceps or vacuum (Inbar, 2017). The American Academy of
Pediatrics and the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
(2017) have concluded that epidural analgesia may safely be used during
TOLAC.

■ Uterine Scar Exploration
Following VBAC, some clinicians routinely document the integrity of a prior
scar by placing a hand through the dilated cervix and along the inner surface
of the lower uterine segment. But, routine uterine exploration is considered
by others to be unnecessary. In a longitudinal study of 3469 women who had
a VBAC, seven uterine dehiscences and one uterine rupture yielded an
overall event rate of 0.23 percent (Silberstein, 1998). These investigators
concluded that transcervical evaluation need only be performed for those
with severe third-stage bleeding.
Currently, the benefits of routine scar evaluation in the asymptomatic
woman are unclear, however, surgical correction of a dehiscence is
necessary for associated significant bleeding. At Parkland Hospital, we
routinely examine the lower uterine segment following a VBAC and
document its integrity. A large tear, a breach into the peritoneal cavity, and
presence of active bleeding favor a decision for laparotomy and repair.

UTERINE SCAR RUPTURE
■ Diagnosis
Progress of labor in women attempting TOLAC is similar to normal labor,
and no specific pattern presages uterine rupture (Graseck, 2012; Harper,
2012b). Before hypovolemic shock develops, symptoms and physical
findings in women with uterine rupture may appear bizarre unless the
possibility is kept in mind. For example, hemoperitoneum from a ruptured
uterus may result in diaphragmatic irritation with pain referred to the chest.
This may suggest a diagnosis of pulmonary or amnionic fluid embolism
instead of uterine rupture. As the example shown in Figure 31-5, the most
common sign of uterine rupture is a nonreassuring fetal heart rate pattern with
variable decelerations that may evolve into late decelerations and
bradycardia. In one report of 36 cases during TOLAC, fetal signs of uterine
rupture were evident in 24, maternal signs in eight, and a combination of
maternal and fetal in three (Holmgren, 2012). Few women experience
cessation of contractions following uterine rupture, and the use of intrauterine
pressure catheters does not assist reliably in the diagnosis (Rodriguez,
1989).

FIGURE 31-5 Fetal heart rate tracing in a woman whose uterus ruptured during labor while pushing.
The rupture apparently stimulated a reflex push, after which uterine tone diminished and fetal
bradycardia worsened.

The clinical appearance of uterine rupture associated with a TOLAC may
mirror that of placental abruption but with little appreciable pain or
tenderness. Also, because most women in labor are treated for discomfort
with either narcotics or epidural analgesia, pain and tenderness may not be
readily apparent. Ultimately, the diagnosis of uterine rupture becomes
evident because of fetal distress and occasionally because of maternal
hypovolemia from concealed hemorrhage.
If the fetal presenting part has already entered the pelvis with labor, loss
of station may be detected by pelvic examination. If the fetus is partly or
totally extruded from the uterine rupture site, abdominal palpation or vaginal
examination may be helpful to identify the presenting part, which will have
moved away from the pelvic inlet. A firm contracted uterus may at times be
felt alongside the fetus. Emergent sonography in the labor unit may be
helpful.

■ Management
With rupture and expulsion of the fetus into the peritoneal cavity, the chances
for intact fetal survival are poor. Fetal condition depends on the degree to
which the placental implantation remains intact, although this can change
within minutes. The only chance of intact fetal survival is afforded by
immediate delivery—most often by laparotomy—otherwise, hypoxia is
inevitable. If rupture is followed by total placental separation, very few
neurologically intact fetuses will be salvaged.
Thus, even in the best of circumstances, some fetal outcomes will be
impaired. The Utah experiences are instructive here (Holmgren, 2012). Of
the 35 laboring patients with uterine rupture, the decision-to-delivery time
was <18 minutes in 17, and none of these infants had an adverse neurological
outcome. Of the 18 born >18 minutes from decision time, the three infants
with long-term neurological impairments were delivered at 31, 40, and 42
minutes. There were no deaths, but severe neonatal neurological morbidity
developed in 8 percent of this group of 35 women with uterine rupture.
Importantly, delivery within 30 minutes did not prevent every case of low
cord pH or low 5-minute Apgar score. When uterine rupture was identified
and delivery was accomplished is less than 30 minutes, there was no longterm neonatal morbidity. In the MFMU Network study cited earlier, seven of

the 114 uterine ruptures associated with TOLAC—6 percent—were
complicated by development of neonatal encephalopathy (Spong, 2007).
Neonatal mortality rate is likewise increased several fold. In a study
using the Swedish Birth Registry, the risk of neonatal death following uterine
rupture was 5 percent (Kaczmarczyk, 2007).
Maternal deaths from uterine rupture are uncommon. Of 2.5 million
women who gave birth in Canada between 1991 and 2001, there were 1898
cases of uterine rupture, and four of these—0.2 percent—resulted in maternal
death (Wen, 2005). In other regions of the world, however, maternal
mortality rates are much higher. From rural India, the maternal mortality rate
associated with uterine rupture was 30 percent (Chatterjee, 2007).
Following complete rupture during TOLAC, hysterectomy may be
required. In selected cases, however, suture repair with uterine preservation
may be performed. Subsequent pregnancy following such repair was
described earlier (p. 576). Bladder injury may be comorbid, and
interrogation of its integrity is prudent (Chap. 30, p. 563) (Phipps, 2005;
Webb, 2000).

MULTIPLE REPEAT CESAREAN DELIVERIES
The incidences of some common complications for women with a prior
transverse cesarean delivery who undergo an ERCD were shown in Table
31-3 (Landon, 2004). Rates of these complications and of other serious
maternal morbidity rise with the number of prior cesarean deliveries
(Marshall, 2011).
First, the incidence of placenta accreta spectrum (PAS), which includes
placenta accreta, increta, or percreta increases markedly with the number of
previous hysterotomies. In an MFMU Network cohort of 30,132 women who
had from one to six repeat cesarean deliveries, a significant association
between an accruing number of cesarean deliveries and PAS in women with
placenta previa was noted (Fig. 31-6) (Silver, 2006). The PAS rate grew
from 11 percent for women with a placenta previa undergoing their second
cesarean delivery to 67 percent for women undergoing their fifth (Fig. 43-12,
p. 761). Indeed, almost half of cesarean hysterectomies done at Parkland
Hospital are in women with one or more prior cesarean deliveries
(Hernandez, 2013).

FIGURE 31-6 Maternal-Fetal Medicine Units Network: rates of some complications with increasing
number of repeat cesarean deliveries.

Other maternal morbidity data come from the same MFMU Network
cohort and are shown in Figure 31-6 (Silver, 2006). In addition, rates of
bowel or bladder injury, admission to an intensive care unit or need for
ventilator therapy, maternal mortality, and length of surgery and
hospitalization showed significantly rising trends. Similar results have been
reported by others (Nisenblat, 2006; Usta, 2005). More difficult to quantify
are risks for bowel obstruction and pelvic pain from peritoneal adhesive

disease, both of which increase after each successive cesarean delivery
(Andolf, 2010; Mankuta, 2013).
From the United Kingdom Obstetric Surveillance System (UKOSS),
adverse sequelae in women with five or more cesarean deliveries were
described (Cook, 2013). These women had significantly higher rates of
morbidity compared with those with one prior operation. Specifically, the
major hemorrhage rate increased 18-fold; visceral damage, 17-fold; critical
care admissions, 15-fold; and delivery <37 weeks, sixfold. Much of this
morbidity was in the 18 percent who had a placenta previa or PAS. This
same study showed higher neonatal complication rates stemming mainly from
indicated premature delivery.

VAGINAL BIRTH AFTER CESAREAN—2021
Unfortunately for women and their providers, no large randomized trials
compare maternal or neonatal outcomes in those pursuing either TOLAC or
ERCD. Most studies have compared actual routes of delivery rather than the
intended route of delivery. Thus, we agree with Scott (2011) regarding a
common-sense approach. The woman—and if she wishes, her partner—are
encouraged to actively participate with the provider in an informed-consent
discussion. Patient decision aids often assist shared decision making
(Poprzenczny, 2020). Although the absolute rates of adverse maternal and
neonatal outcomes are low, TOLAC is associated with a higher rate of both
maternal and neonatal morbidity and mortality compared with ERCD.
Counseling should include documentation of the prior uterine incision
and discussion of risks, benefits, and probable outcomes associated with
TOLAC or ERCD. This includes consideration of risks involving future
pregnancies. Ideally, counseling begins preconceptionally and continues
throughout pregnancy, with flexible options extending up to delivery. For
women who desire TOLAC despite a factor that increases their specific risk,
additions to the consent form are recommended by the American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019d). Bonanno and colleagues (2011)
have provided such an example. Tsakiridis and coworkers (2018) have
compared national guidelines of societies in the United States, Canada, and
the United Kingdom. A composite of these recommendations of professional
society guidelines is shown in Table 31-5 (Dy, 2019). Guidelines that tend to
be more conservative are shown in Table 31-6.

TABLE 31-5. Some Recommendations of Professional Societies
Concerning TOLAC

TABLE 31-6. Conservative Approach to TOLAC

REFERENCES
American Academy of Pediatrics, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Guidelines for
Perinatal Care, 8th ed. Elk Grove Village, 2017
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Guidelines for vaginal delivery after a previous
cesarean birth. Committee Opinion No. 64, October 1988
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Vaginal delivery after previous cesarean birth.
Committee Opinion No. 143, October 1994
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Vaginal birth after previous cesarean delivery.
Practice Bulletin No. 2, October 1998
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Vaginal birth after previous cesarean delivery.
Practice Bulletin No. 5, July 1999
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Vaginal birth after cesarean delivery. Practice
Bulletin No. 115, August 2010, Reaffirmed 2015
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Vaginal birth after cesarean delivery. Practice
Bulletin No. 184, November 2017
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Avoidance of nonmedically indicated early term
deliveries and associated neonate morbidity. Committee Opinion No. 765, February 2019a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Method for estimating the due date. Committee
Opinion No. 700, May 2019c
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Vaginal birth after previous cesarean delivery.
Practice Bulletin No. 205, February 2019d
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: External cephalic version. Practice Bulletin No.
221, April 2020
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Medically indicated late-preterm and early-term
deliveries. Committee Opinion No. 831, June 2021
Arlier S, Seyfettinoğlu S, Yilmaz E, et al: Incidence of adhesions and maternal and neonatal morbidity
after repeat cesarean section. Arch Gynecol Obstet 295(2):303, 2017
Azria E, Le Meaux JP, Khoshnood B, et al: Factors associated with adverse perinatal outcomes for term
breech fetuses with planned vaginal delivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 207(4):285.e1, 2012
Bahar R, Alexandroni H, Karavani G, et al: Safety of medical second trimester abortions for women
with prior cesarean sections. Arch Gynecol Obstet 303:1217, 2021
Bennich G, Rudnicki M, Wilken-Jensen C, et al: Impact of adding a second layer to a single unlocked
closure of a cesarean uterine incision: randomized controlled trial. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol
47(4):417, 2016
Bonanno C, Clausing M, Berkowitz R: VBAC: a medicolegal perspective. Clin Perinatol 38:217, 2011
Bujold E, Blackwell SC, Gauthier RJ: Cervical ripening with transcervical Foley catheter and the risk of
uterine rupture. Obstet Gynecol 103(1):18 2004
Bujold E, Gauthier RJ: Should we allow a trial of labor after a previous cesarean for dystocia in the
second stage of labor? Obstet Gynecol 98:652, 2001
Cahill A, Stamilio DM, Paré E, et al: Vaginal birth after cesarean (VBAC) attempt in twin pregnancies:
is it safe? Am J Obstet Gynecol 193:1050, 2005
Cahill AG, Odibo AO, Allswroth JE, et al: Frequent epidural dosing as a marker for impending uterine
rupture in patients who attempt vaginal birth after cesarean delivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol
202:355.e1, 2010a

Cahill AG, Stamilio DM, Odibo A, et al: Is vaginal birth after cesarean (VBAC) or elective repeat
cesarean safer in women with a prior vaginal delivery? Am J Obstet Gynecol 195:1143, 2006
Cahill AG, Tuuli M, Odibo AO, et al: Vaginal birth after caesarean for women with three or more prior
caesareans: assessing safety and success. BJOG 117:422, 2010b
Cahill AG, Waterman BM, Stamilio DM, et al: Higher maximum doses of oxytocin are associated with
an unacceptably high risk for uterine rupture in patients attempting vaginal birth after cesarean
delivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 199:32.e1, 2008
Chatterjee SR, Bhaduri S: Clinical analysis of 40 cases of uterine rupture at Durgapur Subdivisional
Hospital: an observational study. J Indian Med Assoc 105:510, 2007
Chauhan SP, Magann EF, Wiggs CD, et al: Pregnancy after classic cesarean delivery. Obstet Gynecol
100:946, 2002
Cheng Y, Snowden J, Cottrell E, et al: Trends in proportions of hospitals with VBAC: impact of ACOG
guidelines. Am J Obstet Gynecol 210:S241, 2014
Chiossi G, Lai Y, Landon MB, et al: Timing of delivery and adverse outcomes in term singleton repeat
cesarean deliveries. Obstet Gynecol 121:561, 2013
Chmait RH, Kontopoulos EV, Quintero RA: Uterine legacy of open maternal-fetal surgery: preterm
uterine rupture. Am J Obstet Gynecol 221(5):535, 2019
Clark SL, Miller DD, Belfort MA, et al: Neonatal and maternal outcomes associated with elective term
delivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 200(2):156.e1, 2009
Cook J, Javis S, Knight M, et al: Multiple repeat caesarean section in the UK: incidence and
consequences to mother and child. A national, prospective, cohort study. BJOG 120(1):85, 2013
Curtin SC, Gregory KD, Korst LL, et al: Maternal morbidity for vaginal and cesarean deliveries,
according to previous cesarean history: new data from the birth certificate. 2013. Natl Vital Stat Rep
62(4):1, 2015
Cragin E: Conservatism in obstetrics. N Y Med J 104:1, 1916
Dicle O, Kücükler C, Pirnar T: Magnetic resonance imaging evaluation of incision healing after
cesarean sections. Eur Radiol 7:31, 1997
Durnwald CP, Rouse DJ, Leveno KJ, et al: The Maternal-Fetal Medicine Units Cesarean Registry:
safety and efficacy of a trial of labor in preterm pregnancy after a prior cesarean delivery. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 195:1119, 2006
Dy J, DeMeester S, Lipworth H, et al: No. 382-trial of labour after caesarean. J Obstet Gynecaecol
Can 41(7):992, 2019
Eastman NJ: Williams Obstetrics, 10th ed. New York, Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1950
Erez O, Dulder D, Novack L, et al: Trial of labor and vaginal birth after cesarean section in patients with
uterine müllerian anomalies: a population-based study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 196:537.e1, 2007
Ford AA, Bateman BT, Simpson LL: Vaginal birth after cesarean delivery in twin gestations: a large,
nationwide sample of deliveries. Am J Obstet Gynecol 195:1138, 2006
Fox NS, Gerber RS, Mourad M, et al: Pregnancy outcomes in patients with prior uterine rupture or
dehiscence. Obstet Gynecol 123(4):785, 2014
Goetzl L, Shipp TD, Cohen A, et al: Oxytocin dose and the risk of uterine rupture in trial of labor after
cesarean. Obstet Gynecol 97:381, 2001
Goodnight WH, Bahtiyar O, Bennett KA, et al: Subsequent pregnancy outcomes after open maternalfetal surgery for myelomeningocele. Am J Obstet Gynecol 220:494.e1, 2019
Graseck AS, Odibo AO, Tuuli M, et al: Normal first stage of labor in women undergoing trial of labor
after cesarean delivery. Obstet Gynecol 119(4):732, 2012

Grinstead J, Grobman WA: Induction of labor after one prior cesarean: predictors of vaginal delivery.
Obstet Gynecol 103:534, 2004
Grobman WA, Gilbert S, Landon MB, et al: Outcomes of induction of labor after one prior cesarean.
Obstet Gynecol 109:262, 2007a
Grobman WA, Lai Y, Landon MB, et al: Development of a nomogram for prediction of vaginal birth
after cesarean delivery. Obstet Gynecol 109:806, 2007b
Grobman WA, Lai Y, Landon MB, et al: Prediction of uterine rupture associated with attempted vaginal
birth after cesarean delivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 199:30.e1, 2008
Grobman WA, Sandoval G, Rice MM, et al: Prediction of a vaginal birth after cesarean in term
gestation. A calculator without race and ethnicity. Am J Obstet Gynecol May 24, 2021 [Epub ahead
of print]
Guise JM, Denman MA, Emeis C, et al: Vaginal birth after cesarean: new insights on maternal and
neonatal outcomes. Obstet Gynecol 115:1267, 2010
Hamilton BE, Martin JA, Osterman MJ, et al: Births: final data for 2014. Natl Vital Stat Rep 64(12):1,
2015
Hamilton BE, Martin JA, Osterman MJ: Births: preliminary data for 2015. Natl Vital Stat Rep 65(3):1,
2016
Harper LM, Cahill AG, Boslaugh S, et al: Association of induction of labor and uterine rupture in women
attempting vaginal birth after cesarean: a survival analysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 206:51.e1, 2012a
Harper LM, Cahill AG, Roehl KA, et al: The pattern of labor preceding uterine rupture. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 207(3):210.e1, 2012b
Harper LM, Cahill AG, Stamilio DM, et al: Effect of gestational age at the prior cesarean delivery on
maternal morbidity in subsequent VBAC attempt. Am J Obstet Gynecol 200(3):276.e1, 2009
Hehir MP, Rouse DJ, Miller RS, et al: Second-stage duration and outcomes among women who labored
after a prior cesarean delivery Obstet Gynecol 131:514, 2018
Hendler I, Bujold E: Effect of prior vaginal delivery or prior vaginal birth after cesarean delivery on
obstetric outcomes in women undergoing trial of labor. Obstet Gynecol 104(2):273, 2004
Hernandez JS, Wendel GD, Sheffield JS: Trends in emergency peripartum hysterectomy at a single
institution: 1988–2009. Am J Perinatol 30:365, 2013
Hibbard JU, Gilbert S, Landon MB, et al: Trial of labor or repeat cesarean delivery in women with
morbid obesity and previous cesarean delivery. Obstet Gynecol 108:125, 2006
Hochler H, Yaffe H, Schwed P, et al: Safety of a trial of labor after cesarean delivery in
grandmultiparous women. Obstet Gynecol 123:304, 2014
Hoffman MK, Sciscione A, Srinivasana M, et al: Uterine rupture in patients with a prior cesarean
delivery: the impact of cervical ripening. Am J Perinatol 21(4):217, 2004
Holmgren C, Scott JR, Porter TF, et al: Uterine rupture with attempted vaginal birth after cesarean
delivery. Obstet Gynecol 119:725, 2012
Impey OR, Greenwood CE, Impey LW: External cephalic version after previous cesarean section: a
cohort study of 100 consecutive attempts. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. 231:210, 2018
Inbar R, Mazaaki S, Kalter A, et al: Trial of labour after caesarean (TOLAC) is associated with
increased risk for instrumental delivery. J Obstet Gynaecol 37(1):44, 2017
Jastrow N, Chailet N, Roberge S, et al: Sonographic lower uterine segment thickness and risk of uterine
scar defect: a systematic review. J Obstet Gynaecol Can 32(4):321, 2010a
Jastrow N, Demers S, Chaillet N, et al: Lower uterine segment thickness to prevent uterine rupture and
adverse perinatal outcomes: a multicenter prospective study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 215(5):604.e1,
2016

Jastrow N, Demers S, Gauthier RI, et al: Adverse obstetric outcomes in women with previous cesarean
for dystocia in second stage labor. Am J Perinatol 30:173, 2013
Jastrow N, Robere S, Gauthier RJ, et al: Effect of birth weight on adverse obstetric outcomes in vaginal
birth after cesarean delivery. Obstet Gynecol 115(2):338, 2010b
Juhasz G, Gyamfi C, Gyamfi P, et al: Effect of body mass index and excessive weight gain on success
of vaginal birth after cesarean delivery. Obstet Gynecol 106:741, 2005
Kaczmarczyk M, Sparén P, Terry P, et al: Risk factors for uterine rupture and neonatal consequences of
uterine rupture: a population-based study of successive pregnancies in Sweden. BJOG 114:1208,
2007
Kayani SI, Alfirevic Z: Uterine rupture after induction of labour in women with previous caesarean
section. BJOG 112:451, 2005
Kieser KE, Baskett TF: A 10-year population-based study of uterine rupture. Obstet Gynecol 100:749,
2002
Landon MB, Hauth JC, Leveno KJ, et al: Maternal and perinatal outcomes associated with a trial of
labor after prior cesarean delivery. N Engl J Med 351:2581, 2004
Landon MB, Leindecker S, Spong CY, et al: The MFMU Cesarean Registry: factors affecting the
success of trial of labor after previous cesarean delivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 193:1016, 2005
Landon MB, Spong CY, Thom E, et al: Risk of uterine rupture with a trial of labor in women with
multiple and single prior cesarean delivery. Obstet Gynecol 108:12, 2006
Lannon SM, Guthrie KA, Vanderhoeven JP, et al: Uterine rupture risk after periviable cesarean delivery.
Obstet Gynecol 125:1095, 2015
Lavin JP, DiPasquale L, Crane S, et al: A state-wide assessment of the obstetric, anesthesia, and
operative team personnel who are available to manage the labors and deliveries and to treat the
complications of women who attempt vaginal birth after cesarean delivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol
187:611, 2002
Leeman LM, Beagle M, Espey E, et al: Diminishing availability of trial of labor after cesarean delivery
in New Mexico hospitals. Obstet Gynecol 122:242, 2013
Lipschuetz M, Guedalia J, Rottenstreich A, et al: Prediction of vaginal birth after cesarean deliveries
using machine learning. Am J Obstet Gynecol 222(6):613.e1, 2020
Lydon-Rochelle M, Holt VL, Easterling TR, et al: Risk of uterine rupture during labor among women
with a prior cesarean delivery. N Engl J Med 345:3, 2001
Macharey G, Gissler M, Rahkonen L, et al: Breech presentation at term and associated obstetric risks
factors-a nationwide population based cohort study. Arch Gynecol Obstet 295(4):833, 2017
Macones GA, Cahill A, Pare E, et al: Obstetric outcomes in women with two prior cesarean deliveries:
is vaginal birth after cesarean delivery a viable option? Am J Obstet Gynecol 192:1223, 2005a
Macones GA, Peipert J, Nelson DB, et al: Maternal complications with vaginal birth after cesarean
delivery: a multicenter study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 193:1656, 2005b
Marshall NE, Fu R, Guise JM: Impact of multiple cesarean deliveries on maternal morbidity: a
systematic review. Am J Obstet Gynecol 205:262.e1, 2011
Martin JA, Hamilton BE, Osterman MJ: Births in the United States, 2018. NCHS Data Brief 346:1,
2019
Martin JN, Perry KG, Roberts WE, et al: The care for trial of labor in the patients with a prior lowsegment vertical cesarean incision. Am J Obstet Gynecol 177:144, 1997
McMahon MJ, Luther ER, Bowes WA Jr, et al: Comparison of a trial of labor with an elective second
cesarean section. N Engl J Med 335:689, 1996

Mercer BM, Gilbert S, Landon MB, et al: Labor outcomes with increasing number of prior vaginal births
after cesarean delivery. Obstet Gynecol 111:285, 2008
Metz TD, Stoddard GJ, Henry E, et al: Simple, validated vaginal birth after cesarean delivery prediction
model for use at the time of admission. Obstet Gynecol 122:571, 2013
Miller DA, Diaz FG, Paul RH: Vaginal birth after cesarean: a 10-year experience. Obstet Gynecol
84(2):255, 1994
Moramarco V, Korale Liyanage S, Ninan K, et al: Classical cesarean: what are the maternal and infant
risks compared with low transverse cesarean in preterm birth, and subsequent uterine rupture? A
systematic review and meta-analysis. J Obstet Gynaecol Can 42(2):179, 2020
Mozurkewich EL, Hutton EK: Elective repeat cesarean delivery versus trial of labor: a meta-analysis of
the literature from 1989 to 1999. Am J Obstet Gynecol 183(5):1187, 2000
Naji O, Daemen A, Smith A, et al: Changes in cesarean section scar dimensions during pregnancy: a
prospective longitudinal study. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 41(5):556, 2013a
Naji O, Wynants L, Smith A, et al: Predicting successful vaginal birth after cesarean section using a
model based on cesarean scar features examined using transvaginal sonography. Ultrasound Obstet
Gynecol 41(6):672, 2013b
National Institutes of Health: Consensus Development Conference of Cesarean Childbirth, September
1980. NIH Pub No. 82–2067, Bethesda, NIH, 1981
National Institutes of Health Consensus Development Conference Panel: National Institutes of Health
Consensus Development Conference statement: Vaginal birth after cesarean: new insights. March
8–10, 2010. Obstet Gynecol 115:1279, 2010
Nisenblat V, Barak S, Griness OB, et al: Maternal complications associated with multiple cesarean
deliveries. Obstet Gynecol 108:21, 2006
Osmundson SS, Garabedian MJ, Lyell DJ: Risk factors for classical hysterotomy by gestational age.
Obstet Gynecol 122:845, 2013
Osser OV, Valentin L: Clinical importance of appearance of cesarean hysterotomy scar at transvaginal
ultrasonography in nonpregnant women. Obstet Gynecol 117:525, 2011
Pauerstein CJ: Once a section, always a trial of labor? Obstet Gynecol 28:273, 1966
Pauerstein CJ, Karp L, Muher S: Trial of labor after low segment cesarean section. S Med J 62:925,
1969
Peaceman AM, Gersnoviez R, Landon MB, et al: The MFMU cesarean registry: impact of fetal size on
trial of labor success for patients with previous cesarean for dystocia. Am J Obstet Gynecol
195:1127, 2006
Phipps MG, Watabe B, Clemons JL, et al: Risk factors for bladder injury during cesarean delivery.
Obstet Gynecol 105(1):156, 2005
Poprzeczny AJ, Stocking K, Showell M, et al: Patient decision aids to facilitate shared decision making
in obstetrics and gynecology: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Obstet Gynecol 135(2):444,
2020
Quiñones JN, Stamilio DM, Paré E, et al: The effect of prematurity on vaginal birth after cesarean
delivery: success and maternal morbidity. Obstet Gynecol 105:519, 2005
Ramirez MM, Gilbert S, Landon MB, et al: Mode of delivery in women with antepartum fetal death and
prior cesarean delivery. Am J Perinatol 27:825, 2010
Ravasia DJ, Brain PH, Pollard JK: Incidence of uterine rupture among women with müllerian duct
anomalies who attempt vaginal birth after cesarean delivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 181:877, 1999
Ravasia DJ, Wood SL, Pollard JK: Uterine rupture during induced trial of labor among women with
previous cesarean delivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 183:1176, 2000

Reyes-Ceja L, Cabrera R, Insfran E, et al: Pregnancy following previous uterine rupture: study of 19
patients. Obstet Gynecol 34:387, 1969
Ritchie EH: Pregnancy after rupture of the pregnant uterus: a report of 36 pregnancies and a study of
cases reported since 1932. J Obstet Gynaecol Br Commonw 78:642, 1971
Roberge S, Demers S, Bergella V, et al: Impact of single- vs double-layer closure on adverse outcomes
and uterine scar defect: a systematic review and metaanalysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 211:453, 2014
Rodriguez MH, Masaki DI, Phelan JP, et al: Uterine rupture: are intrauterine pressure catheters useful
in the diagnosis? Am J Obstet Gynecol 161:666, 1989
Rosenstein MG, Kuppermann M, Gregorich SE, et al: Association between vaginal birth after cesarean
delivery and primary cesarean delivery rates. Obstet Gynecol 122:1010, 2013
Rossi AC, D’Addario V: Maternal morbidity following a trial of labor after cesarean section vs elective
repeat cesarean delivery: a systematic review with metaanalysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 199(3):224,
2008
Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists: Birth after previous caesarean birth. Green-top
Guideline No. 45, October 2015
Sachs BP, Koblin C, Castro MA, et al: The risk of lowering the cesarean-delivery rate. N Engl J Med
340:5, 1999
Sarreau M, Isly H, Poulain P, et al: Balloon catheter vs oxytocin alone for induction of labor in women
with a previous cesarean section: a randomized controlled trial. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand
99(2):259, 2020
Sciscione AC, Landon MB, Leveno KJ, et al: Previous preterm cesarean delivery and risk of
subsequent uterine rupture. Obstet Gynecol 111:648, 2008
Scott JR: Vaginal birth after cesarean delivery: a common-sense approach. Obstet Gynecol 118:342,
2011
Sheth SS: Results of treatment of rupture of the uterus by suturing. J Obstet Gynaecol Br Commonw
75:55, 1968
Shipp TD, Zelop CM, Repke JT, et al: Interdelivery interval and risk of symptomatic uterine rupture.
Obstet Gynecol 97:175, 2001
Shipp TD, Zelop CM, Repke JT, et al: Intrapartum uterine rupture and dehiscence in patients with prior
lower uterine segment vertical and transverse incisions. Obstet Gynecol 94:735, 1999
Silberstein T, Wiznitzer A, Katz M, et al: Routine revision of uterine scar after cesarean section: has it
ever been necessary? Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 78:29, 1998
Silver RM, Landon MB, Rouse DJ, et al: Maternal morbidity associated with multiple repeat cesarean
deliveries. Obstet Gynecol 207:1226, 2006
Simon AE, Uddin SG: National trends in primary cesarean delivery, labor attempts, and labor success,
1990–2010. Am J Obstet Gynecol 209(6):554.e1, 2013
Smith GC, Pell JP, Cameron AD, et al: Risk of perinatal death associated with labor after previous
cesarean delivery in uncomplicated term pregnancies. JAMA 287:2684, 2002
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine: Counseling and management of women with prior classical
cesarean delivery. Contemp OB/GYN 57(6):26, 2012
Spong CY, Landon MB, Gilbert S, et al: Risk of uterine rupture and adverse perinatal outcome at term
after cesarean delivery. Obstet Gynecol 110:801, 2007
Stamilio DM, DeFranco E, Paré E, et al: Short interpregnancy interval. Risk of uterine rupture and
complications of vaginal birth after cesarean delivery. Obstet Gynecol 110, 1075, 2007
Tahseen S, Griffiths M: Vaginal birth after two caesarean sections (VBAC-2)—a systematic review
with meta-analysis of success rate and adverse outcomes of VBAC-2 versus VBAC-1 and repeat

(third) caesarean sections. BJOG 117:5, 2010
Tita AT, Landon MB, Spong CY, et al: Timing of elective repeat cesarean delivery at term and neonatal
outcomes. N Engl J Med 360(2):111, 2009
Traynor AJ, Aragon M, Ghosh D, et al: Obstetric Anesthesia Workforce Survey: a 30-year update.
Anesth Analg 122(6):1939, 2016
Tsakiridis I, Mamopoulos A, Athanasiadis A, et al: Vaginal birth after previous cesarean birth: a
comparison of 3 national guidelines. Obstet Gynecol Surv 73(9):537, 2018
Tulandi T, Agdi M, Zarei A, et al: Adhesion development and morbidity after repeat cesarean delivery.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 201(1):56, 2009
Uddin SF, Simon AE: Rates and success rates of trial of labor after cesarean delivery in the United
States, 1990–2009. Matern Child Health J 17:1309, 2013
Usta IM, Hamdi MA, Abu Musa AA, et al: Pregnancy outcome in patients with previous uterine
rupture. Acta Obstet Gynecol 86:172, 2007
Usta IM, Hobeika EM, Abu-Musa AA, et al: Placenta previa-accreta: risk factors and complications.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 193:1045, 2005
Varner MW, Thom E, Spong CY, et al: Trial of labor after one previous cesarean delivery for multifetal
gestation. Obstet Gynecol 110:814, 2007
Webb JC, Gilson G, Gordon L: Late second stage rupture of the uterus and bladder with vaginal birth
after cesarean section: a case report and review of the literature. J Matern Fetal Med 9(6):362,
2000
Weill Y, Pollack RN: The efficacy and safety of external cephalic version after a previous caesarean
delivery. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol 57(3):323, 2017
Wen SW, Huang L, Liston R, et al: Severe maternal morbidity in Canada, 1991–2001. CMAJ 173:759,
2005
Wen SW, Rusen ID, Walker M, et al: Comparison of maternal mortality and morbidity between trial of
labor and elective cesarean section among women with previous cesarean delivery. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 191(4):1263, 2004
Wing DA, Lovett K, Paul RH: Disruption of prior uterine incision following misoprostol for labor
induction in women with previous cesarean delivery. Obstet Gynecol 91:828, 1998
Wing DA, Paul RH: Vaginal birth after cesarean section: selection and management. Clin Obstet
Gynecol 42:836, 1999
Wu Y, Kataria Y, Wang Z, et al: Factors associated with successful vaginal birth after a cesarean
section: a systematic review and meta-analysis. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth 19(1):360, 2019
Wyckoff ET, Cua GM, Gibson DJ, et al: Efficacy of the NICHD vaginal birth after cesarean delivery
calculator: a single center experience. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 33(4):553, 2020
Young CB, Liu S, Muraca GM, et al: Mode of delivery after a previous cesarean birth, and associated
maternal and neonatal morbidity. CMAJ 190(18):E556, 2018
Zelop CM, Shipp TD, Repke JT, et al: Outcomes of trial of labor following previous cesarean delivery
among women with fetuses weighing >4000 g. Am J Obstet Gynecol 185:903, 2001
Zelop CM, Shipp TD, Repke JT, et al: Uterine rupture during induced or augmented labor in gravid
women with one prior cesarean delivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 181:882, 1999

SECTION 9

THE NEWBORN

CHAPTER 32

The Newborn

TRANSITION TO AIR BREATHING
CARE IN THE DELIVERY ROOM
EVALUATION OF NEWBORN CONDITION
PREVENTIVE CARE
ROUTINE NEWBORN CARE
REFERENCES
In most instances at delivery, the newborn is healthy and vigorous, but at
times, special care may be needed. For this reason, the American Academy
of Pediatrics and the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
(2017a) recommend that every birth should be attended by at least one
qualified individual. This person should be skilled in the initial steps of
newborn care and positive-pressure ventilation, and their only responsibility
is management of the newborn. This usually is a pediatrician, nurse
practitioner, anesthesiologist, nurse anesthetist, or specially trained nurse.
However, in their absence, the responsibility for neonatal resuscitation falls
to the obstetrical attendant. Thus, obstetricians should be well versed in
measures for immediate care of the newborn.
The number and qualifications of personnel who attend the delivery will
vary depending on the anticipated risk, the number of babies, and the hospital
setting. A qualified team with full resuscitation skills should be present for
high-risk deliveries and immediately available for every resuscitation. This

team should not be on call at home or in a remote area of the hospital.
Moreover, team training through frequent simulation practice is
recommended for all who may be called to attend deliveries (Aziz, 2020).

TRANSITION TO AIR BREATHING
Immediately following birth, the newborn must promptly convert from
placental to pulmonary gas exchange. Pulmonary vascular resistance must
fall, pulmonary perfusion must rapidly rise, and unique fetal vascular shunts
must begin to close to separate the systemic and pulmonary circulations.
These shunts include the patent ductus arteriosus and patent foramen ovale,
described in Chapter 7 (p. 128). Lung aeration is not only critical for
pulmonary gas exchange. Specifically, recent studies suggest that it is
responsible for initiating cardiovascular changes at birth (Hooper, 2019).
In utero, the fetal lungs are filled with amnionic fluid, which must be
cleared quickly for air breathing. Various means contribute, and these
mechanisms may depend on gestational age and mode of delivery. First, in
term fetuses, a large release of fetal adrenaline late in labor stimulates
pulmonary epithelial cells to stop secreting and instead to start reabsorbing
lung liquid due to sodium-channel activation (te Pas, 2008). This mechanism
is likely a minor one, as blockade of the receptors for sodium-channel
activation reduces or delays but does not prevent liquid clearance from the
lungs at birth (Buchiboyina, 2017).
As a second method, mechanical forces aid lung fluid clearance. Early
reports described expulsion of lung liquid by compression of the fetal thorax
and abdomen as they passed through the birth canal (Karlberg, 1962;
Saunders, 1978). By this mechanism, up to a third of lung liquid is expelled
in a jet of fluid from the nose and mouth once the respiratory tract is exposed
to the lower outside pressure. However, it appears that uterine contractions
force a change in fetal posture, which compresses the thorax and raises
intrathoracic pressures. This expels lung liquid early in labor more so than
the “vaginal squeeze” theory (Hooper, 2019; te Pas, 2008; Vyas, 1981).
In a third mechanism, a significant amount of lung liquid is cleared after
birth (Hooper, 2019). In animal studies, most lung aeration occurs during
inspiration—within three to five breaths after birth (Hooper, 2007). The
transpulmonary pressure gradient during inspiration promotes movement of

fluid into the interstitial tissue. No liquid clears between breaths. From the
interstitium, fluid is gradually cleared, probably by the pulmonary circulation
and lymphatic vessels. It is possible for lung interstitial tissue pressure to
rise to a point that fluid can actually move back into the airspaces during
expiration unless positive end-expiratory pressure opposes liquid reentry
(Siew, 2009). This may contribute to development of transient tachypnea of
the newborn.
As fluid is replaced by air, compression of the pulmonary vasculature is
reduced considerably, and in turn, resistance to blood flow is lowered. With
the fall in pulmonary arterial blood pressure, the ductus arteriosus normally
closes.
High, negative intrathoracic pressures are required to permit the initial
entry of air into the fluid-filled alveoli. Normally, from the first breath after
birth, progressively more residual air accumulates in the lung. With each
successive breath, lower pulmonary opening pressure is required. In the
normal mature newborn, by approximately the fifth breath, pressure-volume
changes achieved with each respiration are very similar to those of the adult.
Thus, the breathing pattern shifts from shallow episodic inspirations
characteristic of the fetus to regular, deeper inhalations.
As a last mechanism, surfactant is synthesized by type II pneumocytes. It
lowers alveolar surface tension and helps maintain lung inflation by
preventing alveolar collapse. Insufficient surfactant, which is common in
preterm neonates, leads promptly to respiratory distress syndrome (Chap. 34,
p. 615).
In utero, umbilical venous return is the main source of preload for the left
ventricle. Namely, the fetal pulmonary blood flow is very low due to high
pulmonary vascular resistance and is unable to provide sufficient venous
return to maintain left ventricular output (Hooper, 2019).
Clamping the umbilical cord reduces preload for the left ventricle and
thus reduces cardiac output. Until the lungs aerate and pulmonary blood flow
increases, the reduced cardiac output will manifest as bradycardia. If cord
clamping is delayed until after the lungs have aerated, the transition is
smoother and cardiac output does not fall (Bhatt, 2013). This understanding
has led to interest in delayed (physiological) cord clamping, especially if it
can be done after successful inflation of the lung. Specialized resuscitation
trolleys have been developed to aid this practice, and several international
randomized trials are underway.

CARE IN THE DELIVERY ROOM
The International Liaison Committee on Resuscitation (ILCOR) updated its
scientific review for neonatal delivery room care and resuscitation (Wyckoff,
2020). This review is used by the American Academy of Pediatrics and the
American Heart Association to develop the neonatal resuscitation guidelines
for North America (Aziz, 2020).

■ Immediate Care
Before and during delivery, several determinants of neonatal well-being are
carefully considered. Risk factors can include: (1) poor maternal health
status; (2) prenatal complications, including any suspected fetal
malformations; (3) preterm gestational age; (4) labor complications; (5) long
duration of labor and ruptured membranes; (6) anesthesia that may affect
placental perfusion; (7) difficult delivery; and (8) various medications given
during labor and their dosages, administration routes, and timing.
When risk factors are present, neonatal resuscitation providers should be
present for the delivery. This team readies equipment, ensures that adequate
personnel are present, delegates roles and responsibilities, and considers
contingency plans to stabilize the newborn. In preparation, a neonatal
provider will ask the delivery provider regarding expected gestational age,
amnionic fluid color, additional maternal and fetal risk factors, and the
management plan for umbilical cord clamping (Weiner, 2021). Several
neonatal conditions are associated with a nonvigorous presentation. These
may include immaturity, hypoxemia or acidosis from any cause, sepsis,
recent drugs administered to the mother, meconium-stained amnionic fluid,
and central nervous system developmental abnormalities. Those related to
the respiratory tract are lung abnormalities, upper airway obstruction,
pneumothorax, and meconium aspiration.

■ Umbilical Cord Management
Obstetrical and pediatric care teams should ideally discuss plans regarding
umbilical cord management prior to delivery. Deferred cord clamping
provides transfusion of placental blood to the newborn. In term neonates,
delaying cord clamping by 30 to 60 seconds raises hemoglobin levels at birth

and improves iron stores during infancy. The only reported negative outcome
is hyperbilirubinemia and a higher subsequent rate of phototherapy
(Gomersall, 2021). In preterm neonates, deferred cord clamping may reduce
rates of blood transfusion, intraventricular hemorrhage, and necrotizing
enterocolitis and improves survival rates (Seidler, 2021).
Delayed cord clamping should be performed in preterm and term
newborns who do not require resuscitation at birth. There should be no delay
if a newborn requires resuscitation or if placental abruption, cord avulsion,
or bleeding placenta previa or vasa previa complicates delivery. Cord
milking is a reasonable alternative to immediate cord clamping for late
preterm and term newborns. It should be avoided in neonates <28 weeks’
gestation (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020a;
Gomersall, 2021; Seidler, 2021).

■ Newborn Resuscitation
Approximately 10 percent of newborns require some degree of active
resuscitation to stimulate breathing, and 1 percent need extensive care.
Perhaps not coincidentally, the neonatal death rate with home birth in the
United States is small but still fourfold greater than attended hospital births
(Grünebaum, 2020).
When deprived of adequate gas exchange, either before or after birth,
neonates demonstrate a well-defined sequence of events leading to apnea
(Fig. 32-1). With oxygen deprivation and carbon dioxide (CO2) elevation,
there is a transient period of rapid breathing, and if it persists, breathing
stops, which is termed primary apnea. This stage is accompanied by a fall in
heart rate and loss of neuromuscular tone. Simple stimulation will usually
reverse primary apnea. If oxygen deprivation and asphyxia persist, however,
the newborn will develop deep gasping respirations, followed by secondary
apnea. This latter stage is associated with a further decline in heart rate, fall
in blood pressure, and loss of neuromuscular tone. Neonates in secondary
apnea will not respond to stimulation and will not spontaneously resume
respiratory efforts. Unless ventilation is assisted, death follows.

FIGURE 32-1 Physiological changes associated with primary and secondary apnea in the newborn.
bpm = beats per minute; HR = heart rate; MAP = mean arterial pressure. (Reproduced with permission
from Kattwinkel J: Textbook of Neonatal Resuscitation, 6th ed. Elk Grove Village, American Academy
of Pediatrics and American Heart Association, 2010.)

Clinically, primary and secondary apneas are initially indistinguishable.
When a response to stimulation is not immediate, resuscitation with effective
ventilation of the apneic newborn must begin quickly. Effective positivepressure ventilation is the most critical intervention in neonatal resuscitation.

■ Resuscitation Protocol
Initial Assessment
Immediately after birth and usually during the delay for umbilical cord
clamping, newborn tone, respiratory effort, and heart rate are evaluated (Fig.
32-2). Most term neonates are vigorous by 10 to 30 seconds after birth
(Ersdal, 2012). For these, initial steps of warming the newborn can be done
on the mother’s chest or abdomen. Direct skin-to-skin contact with the mother
and drying and covering the newborn with a warm blanket will help maintain
euthermia (36.5 to 37.5°C). A vigorously crying newborn does not require
routine oral suctioning (Aziz 2020; Foster, 2017). Instead, bulb suctioning to
remove secretions is best reserved for those who cannot clear secretions on
their own due to apnea or copious secretions. Additional routine care steps

include drying, gentle stimulation by rubbing the newborn’s back, and
continued observation during the transition period.

FIGURE 32-2 Algorithm for resuscitation of the newborn based on the International Liaison
Committee on Resuscitation scientific review and recommended by the American Academy of
Pediatrics and American Heart Association (Aziz, 2020; Wyckoff, 2020). bpm = beats per minute;
CPAP = continuous positive airway pressure; ECG = electrocardiogram; ETT = endotracheal tube; HR
= heart rate; IV = intravenous; PPV = positive-pressure ventilation; SpO2 = peripheral oxygen
saturation; UVC = umbilical venous catheter.

If not vigorous or if preterm, the neonate is carried to a prewarmed
radiant warmer for initial newborn care steps. The initial wet birth blanket is
removed to allow newborn drying. Cold stress is associated with multiple
neonatal morbidities and mortality. Preterm infants are particularly
vulnerable, and special steps can help maintain euthermia. These are
providing a warm delivery room (>25°C), covering the neonatal head with
either a plastic or wool hat, applying polyethylene plastic “ponchos” or
wraps to slow evaporative heat losses, using chemically activated thermal
mattresses to reduce conductive heat loss, and administering warm,
humidified respiratory gases during respiratory stabilization (Aziz, 2020;
Wyckoff, 2020).
At the radiant warmer, newborns are positioned with mild neck extension
to maximally open the airway. If the newborn is apneic or has copious
secretions that obstruct the airway, then a bulb syringe or suction catheter can
help clear the mouth and the nose. Routine intubation and suctioning of
meconium-stained amnionic fluid is not recommended for the nonvigorous
newborn (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2021a;
Wyckoff, 2020). Intubation and suction are reserved for suspected airway

obstruction. Meconium-stained amnionic fluid is a significant risk factor for
the need for advanced resuscitation. In rare circumstances, the meconiumstained fluid can obstruct the newborn’s airway and necessitate intubation
and tracheal suctioning (Aziz, 2020; Wyckoff, 2020).
After completion of the initial stabilization steps, persisting apnea,
gasping respirations, or heart rate ≤100 beats per minute (bpm) should
prompt immediate administration of positive-pressure ventilation with room
air (Fig. 32-3). This should be started by 60 seconds of life, if not sooner,
once the initial steps are completed.

FIGURE 32-3 Correct use of bag-and-mask ventilation. The head should be in a sniffing position with
the tip of the nose pointing to the ceiling. The neck should not be hyperextended.

Mask Ventilation
Assisted ventilation by facemask at a rate of 40 to 60 breaths per minute is
recommended as an initial resuscitation step. Oxygen saturation is monitored
by pulse oximetry. Supplemental oxygen can be given in graduated, rising
percentages to maintain oxygen saturation values within a normal range.
Percentage goals rise progressively with accruing minutes of life (Table 321) (Weiner, 2021). Adequate ventilation is best indicated by an improved
heart rate. A colorimetric end-tidal carbon dioxide (ETCO2) monitor that

lies between the positive-pressure device and facemask serves as a helpful
adjunct to detect successful gas exchange during mask ventilation.
TABLE 32-1. Oxygen Saturation Goals per Minute of Life

If the heart rate remains ≤100 beats per minute after 5 to 10 positive
pressure breaths, and the attempted ventilation is inadequate, then further
corrective steps should begin. These can be remembered by the mnemonic
MR. SOPA (Table 32-2) (Weiner, 2021). The two most common problems
are mask leak due to an ineffective seal and malposition of the airway
(Schmölzer, 2019). Mask positioning should maintain an open mouth. This
provides a superior conduit for gas transfer than the narrow-caliber nares. If
the other corrective steps do not raise the heart rate, either intubation with an
endotracheal tube or placement of a supraglottic airway is required.
TABLE 32-2. Ventilation Corrective Steps (MR. SOPA)

Alternative Airway
If mask ventilation is ineffective or prolonged, an alternative airway is
placed. For tracheal intubation, a laryngoscope with a straight blade—size 0
for a preterm newborn and size 1 for a term neonate—is used. Gentle cricoid
pressure may be useful. An increasing heart rate and ETCO2 detection after
several breaths are the primary methods to confirm intubation of the trachea

and not the esophagus. One can also look for symmetrical chest wall motion;
auscultate for equal breath sounds, especially in the axillae; and auscultate
for the absence of breath sounds or gurgling over the stomach.
Once in place, the tube is used for tracheal suctioning only for a
suspected obstructed airway. Otherwise, an appropriate positive-pressure
device (self-inflating bag, flow-inflating bag, or T-piece resuscitator) is
attached to the endotracheal tube (Roehr, 2021). Ventilation breaths are
delivered at a rate of 40 to 60 per minute with a force adequate to stabilize
the heart rate. In term newborns, opening pressures of 30 to 40 cm H2O
typically will expand the alveoli without causing barotrauma. Once the lung
is inflated, less pressure is typically needed (20 to 25 cm H2O). For preterm
neonates, pressures of 20 to 25 cm H2O are typically used. Increases in heart
rate and peripheral oxygen saturation (SpO2) levels to acceptable ranges
reflect a positive response.

Chest Compressions
Most commonly, effective ventilation is all that is required to stabilize the
newborn in the delivery room. If the heart rate remains <60 bpm despite
ventilation corrective steps, including placement of an endotracheal tube,
chest compressions are initiated. Once the endotracheal tube is secured,
compressions are done from the head of the bed rather than the side so that
space is opened up for a provider to have umbilical venous access. When
compressions are initiated, the oxygen concentration is increased to 100
percent. With the two-thumb compression method, hands encircle the chest,
while the thumbs depress the sternum. Compressions are delivered on the
lower third of the sternum at a depth sufficient to generate a palpable pulse.
This is typically one third of the anterior-posterior diameter of the chest.
Compared with other techniques, this method offers less provider fatigue
over time, yields higher generated perfusion pressures, and lessens hand
malpositioning that could cause traumatic injury (Kapadia, 2012).
A 3:1 compressions-to-ventilation ratio is recommended, and 90
compressions and 30 breaths achieve approximately 120 events each minute.
Coordinated chest compressions and ventilations should continue until the
spontaneous heart rate is ≥60 bpm (Wyckoff, 2020).
If the heart rate remains ≤60 bpm after adequate ventilation and chest
compressions, intravenously administered epinephrine is indicated. The

recommended intravenous dose is 0.01 to 0.03 mg/kg. Epinephrine may be
given through the endotracheal tube if venous access has not been
established, but its action is less reliable (Isayama, 2020). If given through
the endotracheal tube, higher doses are employed—0.05 to 0.1 mg/kg.

Resuscitation Discontinuation
ILCOR concludes that it is reasonable to discontinue resuscitative efforts for
a neonate who remains without a heartbeat despite at least 20 minutes of
continuous and adequate resuscitative efforts (Wyckoff, 2020). Notably, the
decision to continue or discontinue resuscitative efforts must be
individualized. The time was recently lengthened due to reports of some
newborns enrolled in therapeutic hypothermia trials who had a 10-minute
Apgar score of 0 yet survived without disability. This suggests the need for
caution in limiting resuscitation to 10 minutes (Foglia, 2020).

EVALUATION OF NEWBORN CONDITION
■ Apgar Score
The scoring system described by Dr. Virginia Apgar in 1953 remains a useful
clinical tool to classify newborn health immediately after birth and to assess
the effectiveness of resuscitative measures (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2021b). During scoring, each of five easily
identifiable characteristics—heart rate, respiratory effort, muscle tone, reflex
irritability, and color—is assessed and assigned a value of 0, 1, or 2 (Table
32-3). In the currently recommended expanded form, concurrent resuscitation
interventions also are recorded over time. The total score, based on the sum
of the five components, is determined in all neonates at 1 and 5 minutes after
delivery. In those with a score <7, the score may be calculated at further 5minute intervals until a 20-minute Apgar score is assigned or resuscitation
efforts are halted (Weiner, 2021).
TABLE 32-3. 20-Minute Expanded Apgar Score

In an analysis of more than 150,000 newborns delivered at Parkland
Hospital, Casey and associates (2001b) assessed the significance of the 5minute score for predicting survival during the first 28 days of life. They
found that in term neonates, the risk of neonatal death was approximately 1 in
5000 for those with Apgar scores of 7 to 10. This risk compares with a
mortality rate of 25 percent for term newborns with 5-minute scores ≤3. Low
5-minute scores were comparably predictive of neonatal death in preterm
neonates. Similarly, an analysis of more than 113,000 preterm neonates
ranging from 22 to 36 weeks’ gestation found that Apgar scores at 5 and 10
minutes provided prognostic information for neonatal survival rates across
gestational-age strata (Cnattingius, 2020). Thus, the Apgar scoring system
remains relevant for the prediction of neonatal survival.
Apgar scores alone are not predictive of hypoxic ischemic
encephalopathy (HIE). However, in cohorts of babies diagnosed with HIE
based on umbilical cord blood pH and standardized neurologic
examinations, low 10-minute Apgar scores are significantly associated with
school-age outcomes (Natarajan, 2013).
Previously, many groups established erroneous definitions of asphyxia
based solely on low Apgar scores. These prompted the American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists and American Academy of Pediatrics
(2021b) to issue a series of joint opinions with important caveats regarding
Apgar score limitations. Certain elements of the Apgar score are partially
dependent on the physiological maturity of the newborn, and a healthy,
preterm neonate may receive a low score only because of immaturity. Other

influencing factors include fetal malformations, maternal medications, and
infection. Thus, it is inappropriate to use an Apgar score alone to diagnose
asphyxia. Moreover, the Apgar score alone cannot establish hypoxia as the
cause of cerebral palsy, as discussed in Chapter 33 (p. 604).

■ Umbilical Cord Blood Acid–Base Studies
Blood taken from umbilical vessels may be used for acid–base studies to
assess the metabolic status of the neonate. Blood collection is performed
following delivery by immediately isolating a 10- to 20-cm segment of cord
with two clamps placed near the neonate and another two clamps positioned
nearer the placenta. The cord is then cut between the two proximal clamps
and then the two distal clamps (Blickstein, 2007).
Arterial blood is drawn from the isolated cord segment into a 1- to 2-mL
commercially prepared plastic syringe containing lyophilized heparin or a
similar syringe that has been flushed with a heparin solution containing 1000
U/mL. Once sampling is completed, the needle is capped and the syringe
transported, on ice, to the laboratory. Although efforts should be made for
prompt transport, neither the pH nor partial pressure of CO2 (Pco2) values
change significantly in blood kept at room temperature for up to 60 minutes
(Lynn, 2007). Mathematical models have been developed that allow
reasonable prediction of birth acid–base status in properly collected cord
blood samples analyzed as late as 60 hours after delivery (Chauhan, 1994).
Notably, acid–base measurements can show significant variances between
different analyzing devices (Mokarami, 2012).

■ Fetal Acid–Base Physiology
The fetus produces both carbonic and organic acids. Carbonic acid (H2CO3)
forms from oxidative metabolism of CO2. The fetus usually rapidly clears
CO2 through the placental circulation. If CO2 clearance drops, carbonic acid
levels rise. This often follows impaired placental exchange. When H2CO3
accumulates in fetal blood and organic acids do not concurrently rise, the
result is respiratory acidemia.
In contrast, organic acids primarily include lactic and β-hydroxybutyric
acids. Levels of these increase with persistent placental exchange

impairment, and they result from anaerobic glycolysis. These organic acids
are cleared slowly from fetal blood. When they accumulate, without a
concurrent increase in H2CO3, the result is metabolic acidemia. With the
development of metabolic acidemia, bicarbonate (HCO3−) levels drop
because it is used to buffer the organic acid. A rise in H2CO3 concentrations
accompanied by greater organic acid levels, reflected by decreased HCO3−
levels, causes mixed respiratory-metabolic acidemia.
In the fetus, respiratory and metabolic acidemia and ultimately tissue
acidosis are most likely part of a progressively worsening continuum. This is
different from adult pathophysiology, in which distinct conditions result
either in respiratory acidosis—for example, pulmonary disease, or in
metabolic acidosis—for example, diabetes. In the fetus, the placenta serves
as both the lungs and, to a certain degree, the kidneys. One principal cause of
fetal acidemia is a drop in uteroplacental perfusion. This creates retention of
CO2, that is, respiratory acidemia, and if protracted and severe enough,
yields a mixed or metabolic acidemia.
Assuming that maternal pH and blood gases are normal, the actual pH of
fetal blood depends on the proportion of carbonic and organic acids and the
amount of bicarbonate, which is the major buffer in blood. This can best be
illustrated by the Henderson–Hasselbalch equation:

For clinical purposes, HCO3− represents the metabolic component and is
reported in mEq/L. The H2CO3 concentration reflects the respiratory
component and is reported as the Pco2 in mm Hg. Thus:

The result of this equation is a pH value. Because pH is a logarithmic
term, it does not give a linear measure of acid accumulation. For example, a
change in hydrogen ion concentration associated with a fall in pH from 7.0 to
6.9 is almost twice that which is associated with a fall in pH from 7.3 to 7.2.

For this reason, the change in base—termed delta base—offers a more linear
measure of the degree of accumulation of metabolic acid (Armstrong, 2007).
The delta base is a calculated number used as a measure of the change in
buffering capacity of bicarbonate (HCO3−). The formula for calculating the
base excess (BE) is as follows:

Shown in Figure 32-4 is a nomogram from which these can be calculated
if only two parameters are known. For example, the HCO3− concentration
declines with a metabolic acidemia as it is consumed to maintain a normal
pH. A base deficit develops when the HCO3− concentration drops below
normal levels, and a base excess occurs when HCO3− values are above
normal. Importantly, a mixed respiratory–metabolic acidemia with a large
base deficit and a low HCO3−, for example 12 mmol/L, is more often
associated with a depressed neonate than is a mixed acidemia with a minimal
base deficit and a more nearly normal HCO3− level.

FIGURE 32-4 Nomogram for determining the delta base. (Reproduced with permission from SiggaardAnderson O: Blood acid–base alignment nomogram. Scand J Clin Lab Invest. 1963;15:211–7.)

■ Clinical Significance of Acidemia
Fetal oxygenation and pH generally decline during the course of normal
labor. Normal umbilical cord blood pH and blood gas values at delivery in

term newborns are summarized in Table 32-4. Similar values have been
reported for preterm neonates (Ramin, 1989; Skiold, 2017). The lower limits
of normal pH in the newborn range from 7.05 to 7.16 for newborns 28 to 42
weeks’ gestation at birth, with some variation based on gestational age
(Skiold, 2017). Thus, these values should be considered to define neonatal
acidemia. Even so, most fetuses will tolerate intrapartum acidemia with a pH
as low as 7.00 without incurring neurological impairment (American College
of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2014; Lee, 2020). That said, in a study
of newborns with a pH <7.0 from Parkland Hospital, the incidences of
neonatal deaths—8 percent, intensive care admissions—39 percent,
intubations—14 percent, and seizures—13 percent, were notable (Goldaber,
1991). In a study of more than 51,000 term newborns, the incidence of
neonatal encephalopathy in those with a birth pH <7.0 was 3 percent (Yeh,
2012). Even those who had normal 5-minute Apgar scores but who had an
arterial cord pH values <7.0 experienced a higher risk of morbidity. This
included respiratory distress, neonatal intensive care unit admission, and
sepsis (Sabol, 2016). Faster acidemia resolution after birth is associated
with better outcome (Casey, 2001a).
TABLE 32-4. Umbilical Cord Blood pH and Blood Gas Values in Normal
Term Newborns

Respiratory Acidemia

Acute interruption in placental gas exchange is accompanied by subsequent
CO2 retention and respiratory acidemia. The most common antecedent factor
is transient umbilical cord compression. Generally, respiratory acidemia is
not harmful to the fetus (Low, 1994).
The degree to which pH is affected by Pco2—the respiratory component
of the acidosis—can be calculated. First, the upper normal neonatal Pco2
value of about 50 mm Hg is subtracted from the cord blood gas Pco2 value.
Each additional 10 mm Hg Pco2 increment will lower the pH by 0.08 units
(Eisenberg, 1987). Thus, in a mixed respiratory–metabolic acidemia, the
benign respiratory component can be calculated. As an example, acute cord
prolapse during labor prompts cesarean delivery of a neonate 20 minutes
later. The umbilical artery blood gas pH was 6.95 and the Pco2 was 90 mm
Hg. The degree to which the cord compression and subsequent impairment of
CO2 exchange affected the pH is calculated using the relationship given
earlier and shown below.

Thus, the pH before cord prolapse was approximately 7.27, well within
normal limits. Thus, the low pH resulted from respiratory acidosis.

Metabolic Acidemia
The fetus begins to develop metabolic acidemia when oxygen deprivation is
sufficiently long and severe to require anaerobic metabolism for cellular
energy needs. Low and associates (1997) defined fetal acidosis as a base
deficit ≥12 mmol/L, and severe fetal acidosis as a base deficit ≥16 mmol/L.
In the Parkland study of more than 150,000 newborns cited earlier, metabolic
acidemia was defined using umbilical cord blood gas thresholds that were
two standard deviations below the mean (Casey, 2001b). Thus, metabolic
acidemia was an umbilical artery blood pH <7.00 accompanied by a Pco2
≤76.3 mm Hg, with higher values indicating a respiratory component; HCO3−
concentration ≤17.7 mmol/L; and base deficit ≥10.3 mEq/L. From the
standpoint of possible neurological injury, the American College of

Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2014) defines metabolic acidosis as
umbilical arterial pH <7.0 and a base deficit ≥12 mmol/L.
Metabolic acidemia is associated with a high rate of multiorgan
dysfunction. In rare cases, such hypoxia-induced metabolic acidemia may be
so severe that it causes subsequent hypoxic ischemic encephalopathy (Chap.
33, p. 601). Severe metabolic acidosis is poorly predictive of subsequent
neurological impairment in the term neonate (Cahill, 2017). In fact, a fetus
without such acidemia cannot by definition have suffered recent hypoxicinduced injury. In preterm infants, newborn acid–base status is more closely
linked to intraventricular hemorrhage, periventricular leukomalacia, and
poorer long-term neurological outcomes (Baalbaki, 2021; Morgan, 2017).
Associations between metabolic acidemia, low Apgar scores, and
neonatal death have been described in term and preterm newborns (Morgan,
2015). Regarding term neonates, the risk of neonatal death was more than
3200-fold greater in term neonates with metabolic acidemia and 5-minute
scores ≤3 compared with those with a 5-minute Apgar score ≥7 (Casey,
2001b).

■ Recommendations for Cord Blood Gas Determinations
In some centers, cord gas analysis is performed in all neonates at birth
(Morgan, 2015; Sabol, 2016). Cost-effectiveness analysis for universal cord
blood gas measurement suggests benefit and potential cost savings (White,
2016). It seems reasonable to obtain cord blood gas determinations for
intrapartum cases of cesarean delivery for fetal compromise, abnormal fetal
heart rate tracing, fever, and low 5-minute Apgar score. Multifetal gestation
and severely growth-restricted fetuses are others.
Although umbilical cord acid–base blood determinations are poorly
predictive of either immediate or long-term adverse neurological outcome,
they provide the most objective evidence of the fetal metabolic status at
birth.

PREVENTIVE CARE
■ Eye Infection Prophylaxis

Ophthalmia neonatorum is mucopurulent conjunctivitis of newborns.
Gonococcal and chlamydial infections are among the most common causes
(American Academy of Pediatrics, 2021b).
Neisseria gonorrhoeae infection acquired at birth was a common cause
of childhood blindness in the past. Gonococcal prophylaxis is now
mandatory for all neonates in most states (American Academy of Pediatrics,
2017a). For prophylaxis soon after delivery, 0.5-percent erythromycin
ophthalmic ointment is recommended (U.S. Preventive Services Task Force,
2019).
For a neonate born to a mother with untreated gonorrhea, treatment of
presumptive neonatal gonococcal conjunctivitis is a single ceftriaxone dose,
25 to 50 mg/kg, intravenously or intramuscularly, not to exceed 125 mg
intramuscularly (American Academy of Pediatrics, 2021b). Before treatment,
neonatal testing for both gonococcal and chlamydia infections should be
obtained.
With chlamydial conjunctivitis, adequate neonatal prophylaxis is
challenging. Ideally, prenatal screening and treatment for Chlamydia
trachomatis obviates conjunctival infection (Hammerschlag, 2011) (Chap.
68, p. 1212). In neonates delivered vaginally of mothers with an active
chlamydial infection, 30 to 50 percent will develop conjunctivitis (Zikic,
2018). Prophylactic topical eye treatments do not reliably reduce the
incidence of chlamydial conjunctivitis.
Conjunctivitis in a newborn up to age 3 months should prompt
consideration for chlamydial infection (Moore, 2015). Treatment for neonatal
chlamydial conjunctivitis is oral erythromycin base or ethylsuccinate, 50
mg/kg/d given daily and divided into four doses for 14 days. Another is oral
azithromycin, 20 mg/kg given as a single daily dose for 3 days. A second
course may be required since the efficacy of erythromycin therapy
approximates only 80 percent. Posttreatment follow-up of these infants is
recommended (American Academy of Pediatrics, 2021b).

■ Hepatitis B Immunization
Routine immunization with thimerosal-free vaccine against hepatitis B within
the first 24 hours of life is standard practice for all medically stable
newborns with birthweights >2000 g (American Academy of Pediatrics,
2017b). If the mother is seropositive for hepatitis B surface antigen, the

neonate is also passively immunized with hepatitis B immune globulin. For
high-risk or even all seropositive women during pregnancy, some advocate
treatment with antiviral nucleoside or nucleotide analogues to minimize fetal
transmission (Dunkelberg, 2014) (Chap. 58, p. 1038).

■ Vitamin K
Supplemental vitamin K injection will prevent vitamin K deficiency bleeding
of the newborn (Chap. 33, p. 606). A single intramuscular dose of vitamin K,
0.5 to 1 mg, is given within 1 hour of birth (American Academy of
Pediatrics, 2017a).

■ COVID-19
The novel SARS-CoV-2 virus is very contagious, spreads person to person,
and can cause severe morbidity or mortality. Thus, birth attendants at the
delivery of a mother with COVID-19 should implement airborne and contact
isolation precautions to protect themselves during potentially aerosolizing
resuscitation procedures (Edelson, 2020).
National data suggest that approximately 2 percent of newborns of
women who test positive for SARS-CoV-2 near delivery have also tested
positive in the first 24 to 96 hours of life (American Academy of Pediatrics,
2021a). Newborn death directly attributable to perinatal infection with
SARS-CoV-2 is rare in the United States. However, evidence suggests that
symptomatic maternal infection at delivery is associated with increased risks
of preterm birth and perinatal morbidity (Chap. 67, p. 1188).
Infected mothers should wear a mask while holding their newborn. A
mother who is acutely ill with COVID-19 may be unable to care for her
neonate and may need temporary separation until she improves. Mothers who
are infected but who are not acutely ill can room-in with their well newborn
but should maintain a reasonable distance from their babies when possible.
Breastfeeding while wearing a mask and maintaining good hand hygiene is
suitable (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020b). The
newborn should be tested at least once for SARS-CoV-2 prior to discharge
(American Academy of Pediatrics, 2021a).

■ Newborn Screening
Mass-screening tests are available for 35 newborn conditions, and these are
recommended by the Advisory Committee on Heritable Disorders in
Newborns and Children (2018). Shown in Table 32-5, many are mandated by
various state laws. Most states require that all tests in the core panel be
performed. Supplemental conditions—secondary conditions—are listed on
the Advisory Committee’s website. Some states require some of these in
addition to their mandated core panel. Each practitioner should be familiar
with their individual state requirements, which are available at:
babysfirsttest.org/newborn-screening/states.
TABLE 32-5. Newborn Screening Core Panel

ROUTINE NEWBORN CARE
■ Gestational Age Estimation
Newborn gestational age can be estimated very soon after delivery. The
relationship between gestational age and birthweight can identify neonates at
risk for complications. For example, neonates who are either small or large
for gestational age are at greater risk for hypoglycemia and polycythemia,
and measurements of blood glucose and hematocrit are indicated.

■ Care of Skin and Umbilical Cord

All excess vernix, blood, and meconium is gently wiped off after delivery
while keeping the newborn warm. Any remaining vernix is readily absorbed
and disappears within 24 hours. The first bath is postponed until the
neonate’s temperature is stable.
Aseptic precautions are observed in the immediate care of the cord. The
American Academy of Pediatrics (2017a) has concluded that keeping the
cord dry is sufficient care. The umbilical cord begins to lose water from its
Wharton jelly shortly after birth. Within 24 hours, the cord stump loses its
characteristic bluish-white, moist appearance and soon becomes dry and
black. Within several days to weeks, the stump sloughs and leaves a small,
granulating wound, which after healing forms the umbilicus. Separation
usually takes place within the first 2 weeks. The umbilical cord dries more
quickly and separates more readily when exposed to air (López-Medina,
2020). Thus, a dressing is not recommended.
In resource-poor countries, local antimicrobial prophylaxis is reasonable
(Salam, 2014). The World Health Organization (2014) recommends
cleansing with chlorhexidine in situations in which hygienic conditions are
poor or infection rates are high.
Despite precautions, a serious umbilical infection—omphalitis—
sometimes develops. The most likely offending organisms are
Staphylococcus aureus, group A and B streptococcus, and gram-negative
rods such as Escherichia coli (Stewart, 2016). Typical signs of cellulitis and
stump discharge usually aid diagnosis. Mild erythema and some bleeding at
the stump site with cord detachment is common, but some cases present with
no outward signs.

■ Feeding and Weight Loss
Exclusive breastfeeding is preferred for the newborn’s first 6 months. In
2020, 84 percent of U.S. newborns were initially breastfed, 58 percent were
still nursing at 6 months, and 35 percent at 1 year (Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention, 2020). In many hospitals, breastfeeding begins in the
delivery room. Most term newborns thrive best when fed 8 to 12 times daily
for approximately 15 minutes each episode. Preterm or growth-restricted
newborns require feedings at shorter intervals. Breastfeeding is discussed
further in Chapter 36 (p. 639).

Because most neonates actually receive little nutriment for the first 3 or 4
days of life, they progressively lose weight until the flow of maternal milk is
established or other feeding is instituted. Preterm neonates lose relatively
more weight and regain their birthweight more slowly. Conversely, growthrestricted but otherwise healthy newborns regain their initial weight more
quickly than those born preterm. With proper nourishment, birthweight of
term newborns usually is regained by 10 days.

■ Stools and Urine
For the first 2 or 3 days after birth, the colon contains soft, brown-green
meconium. This consists of desquamated epithelial cells from the intestinal
tract, mucus, epidermal cells, and lanugo (fetal hair) that have been
swallowed along with amnionic fluid. The characteristic color results from
bile pigments. During fetal life and for a few hours after birth, the intestinal
contents are sterile, but bacteria quickly colonize the bowel contents.
Meconium stooling is seen in 90 percent of newborns within the first 24
hours and in most of the rest within 36 hours. Usually, newborns first void
shortly after birth but may not until the second day. Meconium and urine
passage indicates patency of the gastrointestinal and urinary tracts,
respectively. Failure of the newborn to stool or urinate after these times
suggests a congenital defect, such as Hirschsprung disease, imperforate anus,
or posterior urethral valve. After the third or fourth day, as a result of milk
ingestion, meconium is replaced by light-yellow, softer, homogeneous feces.

■ Neonatal Hyperbilirubinemia
Between the second and fifth day of life approximately one third of all
neonates develop physiological jaundice of the newborn. It has special
significance considering most hospitals have policies for early discharge.
Guidelines regarding standard phototherapy equipment and monitoring, as
well as treatment recommendations per gestational age, hour of life, and risk
factors are used (American Academy of Pediatrics, 2017a).
Hyperbilirubinemia is discussed further in Chapter 33 (p. 606).

■ Male Circumcision

Indications
Neonatal circumcision of male newborns has been a controversial topic in
the United States for at least 35 years. Even so, scientific evidence supports
several medical benefits that include prevention of phimosis, paraphimosis,
and balanoposthitis. Circumcision also lowers the incidence of penile cancer
and of cervical cancer among their sexual partners. The Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention (2011) estimates that the newborn male circumcision
rate has declined over the past decades in the United States, and rates vary
widely by region. From a national database, the overall circumcision rate
decreased from 57 percent in 2003 to 52 percent in 2016 (Jacobson, 2021).
The American Academy of Pediatrics Task Force on Circumcision
(2012) concluded that health benefits of newborn male circumcision
outweigh the risks. Specific benefits include prevention of urinary tract
infections, penile cancer, and transmission of some sexually transmitted
infections, including HIV (American Academy of Pediatrics, 2017a). Thus,
access to the procedure is justified for families who choose it. The Task
Force stopped short of recommending circumcision for all newborns.

Surgical Technique
Circumcision is performed only in a healthy neonate. Other contraindications
include any genital abnormalities such as hypospadias and a family history of
a bleeding disorder, unless excluded in the newborn.
The Task Force (2012) recommends procedural analgesia. Various pain
relief techniques include lidocaine-prilocaine topical cream, local analgesia
infiltration, dorsal penile nerve block, or ring block. The dorsal penile nerve
block or the ring block is superior to topical analgesia. The use of a pacifier
dipped in sucrose is a useful adjunct to these methods (Rossi 2021).
After appropriate penile cleansing, the ring block places a wheal of 1percent lidocaine at the base of the penis and then advances the needle in a
180-degree arc around the base of the penis. The needle is advanced first to
one side and then to the other to achieve a circumferential ring of analgesia.
The maximum dose of lidocaine is 1.0 mL. No vasoactive compounds such
as epinephrine should ever be added to a local analgesic agent for
circumcision.
The most commonly used instruments are shown in Figure 32-5 and are
Gomco and Mogen clamps and the Plastibell device. Compared with the

Gomco procedure, Kaufman and colleagues (2002) reported that the Mogen
technique required less time to perform and was associated with less
apparent discomfort for the newborn. Regardless of the method used, the goal
is to remove enough shaft skin and inner preputial epithelium so that the glans
is exposed sufficiently to prevent phimosis. Suitable technique ensures that:
(1) the amount of external skin to be removed must be accurately estimated,
(2) the preputial orifice must be dilated to visualize the glans and ensure that
it is normal, (3) the inner preputial epithelium must be freed from the glans
epithelium, and (4) the circumcision device must be left in place long enough
to produce hemostasis before excising the prepuce (Omole, 2020).

FIGURE 32-5 Three different tools used for circumcision. A. Mogen clamp. The arms of the clamp
open to a 3-mm maximum width. B. Gomco clamp, assembled. C. Plastibell device.

The risks for bleeding, infection, and hematoma formation are low.
Unusual complications include distal glans amputation, acquisition of HIV
infection or other sexually transmitted infection, meatal stenosis, penile
denudation, penile destruction with electrosurgical coagulation, subsequent
epidermal inclusion cyst and urethrocutaneous fistula, and ischemia
following the inappropriate use of lidocaine with epinephrine (El Bcheraoui,
2014; Pippi-Salle, 2013; Omole, 2020).

■ Rooming In and Hospital Discharge
Hospital rooming in places newborns in their mothers’ rooms instead of
central nurseries. This practice attempts to make all phases of childbearing
as natural as possible. It aims to foster early mother-child relationships and
establish effective breast feeding practices. By 24 hours, the mother is
generally fully ambulatory. Thereafter, she can usually provide routine care
for herself and her newborn.
Traditionally, the newborn is discharged with its mother, and in most
cases, maternal stay has determined that of the neonate. From 1970 to the
mid-1990s, average maternal postpartum length of stay declined steadily, and
many mothers were discharged before 48 hours. The World Health
Organization (2014) cites a minimal stay of only 24 hours. Although it is
clear that most newborns can be safely discharged within 48 hours, this is not
uniformly true. When Belgium recently reduced postpartum stays by 1 day,
rates of neonatal readmission for jaundice and dehydration increased
(Plusquin, 2020). Using Washington state data, Malkin and coworkers (2000)
found that the 28-day mortality rate was increased fourfold in newborns
discharged within 30 hours of birth, and the 1-year mortality rate grew
twofold. Safe discharge for late-preterm newborns has special concerns
(Whyte, 2012).
Because of the increased scrutiny regarding short hospital stays, federal
legislation—The Newborns’ and Mothers’ Health Protection Act of 1996—
was enacted to prohibit insurers from restricting hospital stays for mothers
and newborns to less than 2 days for vaginal delivery or 4 days for cesarean
delivery. In an analysis of more than 662,000 births in California, Datar and
Sood (2006) found that readmission rates declined by 9, 12, and 20 percent,
respectively, at 1, 2, and 3 years after the legislation was implemented.

REFERENCES
Advisory Committee on Heritable Disorders in Newborns and Children: Recommended uniform
screening panel. 2018. Available at: http://www.hrsa.gov/advisory-committees/heritabledisorders/rusp/index.html. Accessed June 16, 2021
American Academy of Pediatrics: FAQs: management of infants born to mothers with suspected or
confirmed COVID-19. 2021a. Available at https://services.aap.org/en/pages/2019-novelcoronavirus-covid-19-infections/clinical-guidance/faqs-management-of-infants-born-to-covid-19mothers/. Accessed June 16, 2021

American Academy of Pediatrics, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Care of the
newborn. In Guidelines for Perinatal Care, 8th ed. Elk Grove Village, AAP, 2017a
American Academy of Pediatrics, Committee on Infectious Diseases, Committee on Fetus and
Newborn: Elimination of perinatal hepatitis B: providing the first vaccine dose within 24 hours of
birth. Pediatrics 140(3):e20171870, 2017b
American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on Infectious Diseases: Red Book: Report of the
Committee on Infectious Diseases. Elk Grove Village, AAP, 2021b
American Academy of Pediatrics Task Force on Circumcision: Circumcision policy statement.
Pediatrics 130(3):585, 2012
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Executive summary: neonatal encephalopathy
and neurologic outcome, second edition. Report of the American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists’ Task Force on Neonatal Encephalopathy. Obstet Gynecol 123(4):896, 2014
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Delayed umbilical cord clamping after birth.
Committee Opinion No. 814, December 2020a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: General information regarding pregnant
individuals and COVID-19. 2020b. Available at: https://www.acog.org/clinical/clinicalguidance/practice-advisory/articles/2020/03/novel-coronavirus-2019. Accessed June 16, 2021
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Delivery of a newborn with meconium-stained
amniotic fluid. Committee Opinion No. 689, April 2017, Reaffirmed 2021a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, American Academy of Pediatrics: The Apgar
score. Committee Opinion No. 644, October 2015, Reaffirmed 2021b
Apgar V: A proposal for a new method of evaluation of the newborn infant. Curr Res Anesth Analg
32:260, 1953
Armstrong L, Stenson BJ: Use of umbilical cord blood gas analysis in the assessment of the newborn.
Arch Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed 92:430, 2007
Aziz K, Lee HC, Escobedo MB, et al: Part 5: Neonatal resuscitation: 2020 American Heart Association
guidelines for cardiopulmonary resuscitation and emergency cardiovascular care. Circulation
142:S524, 2020
Baalbaki SH, Wood SL, Tita AT, et al: Predicting long-term neurodevelopmental outcomes in very
preterm neonates by umbilical cord gas parameters. Am J Obstet Gynecol MFM 3(1):100248, 2021
Bhatt S, Alison BJ, Wallace EM, et al: Delaying cord clamping until ventilation onset improves
cardiovascular function at birth in preterm lambs. J Physiol 591(8):2113, 2013
Blickstein I, Green T: Umbilical cord blood gases. Clin Perinatol 34(3):451, 2007
Buchiboyina A, Jasani B, Deshmukh M, et al: Strategies for managing transient tachypnoea of the
newborn—a systematic review. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 30:1524, 2017
Cahill AG, Mathur AM, Smyser CD, et al: Neurologic injury in acidemic term infants. Am J Perinatol
34(7):668, 2017
Casey BM, Goldaber KG, McIntire DD, et al: Outcomes among term infants when two-hour postnatal
pH is compared with pH at delivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 184:447, 2001a
Casey BM, McIntire DD, Leveno KJ: The continuing value of the Apgar score for the assessment of
newborn infants. N Engl J Med 344:467, 2001b
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Breastfeeding report card: United States, 2020. Available
at: http://www.cdc.gov/breastfeeding/data/reportcard.htm. Accessed June 6, 2021
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Trends in in-hospital newborn male circumcision—United
States, 1999–2010. MMWR 60(34):1167, 2011

Chauhan SP, Cowan BD, Meydrech EF, et al: Determination of fetal acidemia at birth from a remote
umbilical arterial blood gas analysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 170:1705, 1994
Cnattingius S, Johansson S, Razaz N: Apgar score and risk of neonatal death among preterm infants. N
Engl J Med 383(1):49, 2020
Datar A, Sood N: Impact of postpartum hospital-stay legislation on newborn length of stay, readmission,
and mortality in California. Pediatrics 118:63, 2006
Dunkelberg JC, Berkley EM, Thiel KW, et al: Hepatitis B and C in pregnancy: a review and
recommendations for care. J Perinatol 34(12):882, 2014
Edelson DP, Sasson C, Chan PS, et al: Interim guidance for basic and advanced life support in adults,
children, and neonates with suspected or confirmed COVID-19. Circulation 141(25):e933, 2020
Eisenberg MS, Cummins RO, Ho MT: Code Blue: Cardiac Arrest and Resuscitation. Philadelphia,
Saunders, 1987
El Bcheraoui C, Zhang X, Cooper CS, et al: Rates of adverse events associated with male circumcision
in U.S. medical settings, 2001 to 2010. JAMA Pediatr 168(7):625, 2014
Ersdal HL, Mduma E, Svensen E, et al: Early initiation of basic resuscitation interventions including face
mask ventilation may reduce birth asphyxia related mortality in low-income countries: a prospective
descriptive observational study. Resuscitation 83(7):869, 2012
Foglia EE, Weiner G, de Almeida MF, et al: Duration of resuscitation at birth, mortality, and
neurodevelopment: a systematic review. Pediatrics 146(3:e20201449, 2020
Foster JP, Dawson JA, Davis PG et al: Routine oro/nasopharyngeal suction versus no suction at birth.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 4:CD010332, 2017
Goldaber KG, Gilstrap LC III, Leveno KJ, et al: Pathologic fetal acidemia. Obstet Gynecol 78:1103,
1991
Gomersall J, Berber S, Middleton P, et al: Umbilical cord management at term and late preterm birth: a
meta-analysis. Pediatrics 147(3):e2020015404, 2021
Grünebaum A, McCullough LB, Orosz B, et al: Neonatal mortality in the United States is related to
location of birth (hospital versus home) rather than the type of birth attendant. Am J Obstet Gynecol
223(2):254.e1, 2020
Hammerschlag MR: Chlamydial and gonococcal infections in infants and children. Clin Infect Dis
53(3):S99, 2011
Hooper SB, Kitchen MJ, Wallace MJ, et al: Imaging lung aeration and lung liquid clearance at birth.
FASEB J 21(12):3329, 2007
Hooper SB, Roberts C, Dekker J, et al: Issues in cardiopulmonary transition at birth. Semin Fetal
Neonatal Med 24:101033, 2019
Isayama T, Mildenhall L, Schmolzer GM, et al: The route, dose, and interval of epinephrine for neonatal
resuscitation: a systematic review. Pediatrics 146:(4):e20200586, 2020
Jacobson DL, Balmert LC, Holl JL, et al: Nationwide circumcision trends: 2003 to 2016. J Urol
205(1):257, 2021
Kapadia V, Wyckoff MH: Chest compressions for bradycardia or asystole in neonates. Clin Perinatol
39(4):833, 2012
Karlberg P, Adams FH, Geubelle F, et al: Alteration of the infant’s thorax during vaginal delivery. Acta
Obstet Gynecol Scand 41:223, 1962
Kattwinkel J: Textbook of Neonatal Resuscitation, 6th ed. Elk Grove Village, American Academy of
Pediatrics and American Heart Association, 2010
Kaufman GE, Cimo S, Miller LW, et al: An evaluation of the effects of sucrose on neonatal pain with 2
commonly used circumcision methods. Am J Obstet Gynecol 186:564, 2002

Kotaska K, Urinovska R, Klapkova E, et al: Re-evaluation of cord blood arterial and venous reference
ranges for pH, pO2, pCO2, according to spontaneous or cesarean delivery. J Clin Lab Anal
24(5):300, 2010
Lee JH, Jung J, Park H, et al: Umbilical cord arterial blood gas analysis in term singleton pregnancies: a
retrospective analysis over 11 years. Obstet Gynecol Sci 63(3):293, 2020
López-Medina MD, López-Araque AB, Linares-Abad M, et al: Umbilical cord separation time,
predictors and healing complications in newborns with dry care. PLoS One 15(1): e0227209, 2020
Low JA, Lindsay BG, Derrick EJ: Threshold of metabolic acidosis associated with newborn
complications. Am J Obstet Gynecol 177:1391, 1997
Low JA, Panagiotopoulos C, Derrick EJ: Newborn complications after intrapartum asphyxia with
metabolic acidosis in the term fetus. Am J Obstet Gynecol 170:1081, 1994
Lynn A, Beeby P: Cord and placenta arterial gas analysis: the accuracy of delayed sampling. Arch Dis
Child Fetal Neonatal Ed 92(4):F281, 2007
Malkin JD, Garber S, Broder MS, et al: Infant mortality and early postpartum discharge. Obstet Gynecol
96:183, 2000
Mokarami P, Wiberg N, Olofsson P: An overlooked aspect on metabolic acidosis at birth: blood gas
analyzers calculate base deficit differently. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 91(5):574, 2012
Moore DL, MacDonald NE, Canadian Paediatric Society Infectious Disease and Immunization
Committee: Preventing ophthalmia neonatorum. Paediatr Child Health 20(2):93, 2015
Morgan JL, Casey BM, Bloom SL, et al: Metabolic acidemia in live births at 35 weeks of gestation or
greater. Obstet Gynecol 126(2):279, 2015
Morgan JL, Nelson DB, Casey BM, et al: Impact of metabolic acidemia at birth on neonatal outcomes
in infants born before 34 weeks’ gestation. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 30(16):1902, 2017
Natarajan G, Shankaran S, Laptook AR, et al: Apgar scores at 10 min and outcomes at 6–7 years
following hypoxic-ischaemic encephalopathy. Arch Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed 98:F473, 2013
Omole F, Smith W, Carter-Wicker K: Newborn circumcision techniques. Am Fam Physician
101(11):680, 2020
Pippi-Salle JL, Jesus LE, Lorenzo AJ, et al: Glans amputation during routine neonatal circumcision:
mechanism of injury and strategy for prevention. J Pediatr Urol 9:763, 2013
Plusquin C, Uvin V, Drakopoulos P, et al: Reduction of hospital stay at maternity unit: an evaluation of
the impact on maternal and neonatal readmission. J Obstet Gynaecol 40(1):46, 2020.
Ramin SM, Gilstrap LC, Leveno KJ, et al: Umbilical artery acid–base status in the preterm infant.
Obstet Gynecol 74:256, 1989
Riley RJ, Jonson JW: Collecting and analyzing cord blood gases. Clin Obstet Gynecol 36:13, 1993
Roehr CC, Davis PG, Weiner GM, et al: T-piece resuscitator or self-inflating bag during neonatal
resuscitation: a scoping review. Pediatr Res 89:760, 2021
Rossi S, Buonocore G, Bellieni CV: Management of pain in newborn circumcision: a systematic review.
Eur J Pediatr 180(1):13, 2021
Sabol BA, Caughey AB: Acidemia in neonates with a 5-minute Apgar score of 7 or greater—what are
the outcomes? Am J Obstet Gynecol 215(4):486 e481, 2016
Salam RA, Mansoor T, Mallick D, et al: Essential childbirth and postnatal interventions for improved
maternal and neonatal health. Reprod Health 11 Suppl 1:S3, 2014
Saunders RA, Milner AD: Pulmonary pressure/volume relationships during the last phase of delivery
and the first postnatal breaths in human subjects. J Pediatr 93:667, 1978

Schmölzer GM, Morley CJ, Kamlin OC: Enhanced monitoring during neonatal resuscitation. Semin
Perinatol 43(8):151177, 2019
Seidler AL, Gyte GML, Rabe H, et al: Umbilical cord management for newborns <34 weeks’ gestation:
a meta-analysis. Pediatrics 147(3):e20200576, 2021
Siew ML, te Pas AB, Wallace MJ, et al: Positive end-expiratory pressure enhances development of a
functional residual capacity in preterm rabbits ventilated from birth. J Appl Physiol (1985)
106(5):1487, 2009
Siggaard-Anderson O: Blood acid–base alignment nomogram. Scand J Clin Lab Invest 15:211, 1963
Skiold B, Petersson G, Ahlberg M, et al: Population-based reference curve for umbilical cord arterial pH
in infants born at 28 to 42 weeks. J Perinatol 37:254, 2017
Stewart D, Benitz W, AAP Committee on Fetus and Newborn: Umbilical cord care in the newborn
infant. Pediatrics 138(3):e20162149, 2016
te Pas AB, Davis PG, Hooper SB, et al: From liquid to air: breathing after birth. J Pediatr 152(5):607,
2008
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, Curry SJ, Krist AH, et al: Ocular prophylaxis for gonococcal
ophthalmia neonatorum: U.S. Preventive Services Task Force reaffirmation recommendation
statement. JAMA 321(4):394, 2019
Watson MS, Mann MY, Lloyd-Puryear MA, et al: Newborn screening: towards a uniform screening
panel and system. Executive summary. Genet Med 8(Suppl 5):1S, 2006
Vyas H, Milner AD, Hopkins IE: Intrathoracic pressure and volume changes during the spontaneous
onset of respiration in babies born by cesarean section and by vaginal delivery. J Pediatr 99(5):787,
1981
Weiner GM, Zaichkin J: Textbook of Neonatal Resuscitation. 8th ed. Elk Grove Village, American
Academy of Pediatrics, 2021
White CR, Doherty DA, Cannon JW, et al: Cost effectiveness of universal umbilical cord blood gas and
lactate analysis in a tertiary level maternity unit. J Perinat Med 44(5):573, 2016
Whyte RK: Neonatal management and safe discharge of late and moderate preterm infants. Semin
Fetal Neonatal Med 17(3):153, 2012
World Health Organization: Postnatal care of the mother and newborn, 2013. Geneva, WHO, 2014
Wyckoff MH, Wyllie J, Aziz K, et al: Neonatal life support: 2020 International Consensus on
Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation and Emergency Cardiovascular Care Science with Treatment
Recommendations. Circulation 142:S185, 2020
Yeh P, Emary K, Impey L: The relationship between umbilical cord arterial pH and serious adverse
neonatal outcome: analysis of 51,519 consecutive validated samples. BJOG 119(7):824, 2012
Zikic A, Schünemann H, Wi T, et al: Treatment of neonatal chlamydial conjunctivitis: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. J Pediatric Infect Dis Soc 7(3):e107, 2018

CHAPTER 33

Complications of the Term Newborn

RESPIRATORY DISTRESS
NEONATAL ENCEPHALOPATHY AND CEREBRAL PALSY
NEONATAL ABSTINENCE SYNDROME
HEMATOLOGICAL DISORDERS
NEWBORN INJURIES
REFERENCES
Term newborns are susceptible to various illnesses and injuries. In many
instances, clinical manifestations of these disorders are extensions of
pathological effects already incurred by the fetus. A common example is the
newborn who is depressed and acidotic because of intrapartum septicemia.
Susceptibility varies depending upon gestational age, and those more
common in term newborns are considered here. Those more frequent in
preterm neonates are discussed in Chapter 34. Specific disorders that are the
direct consequence of maternal diseases are discussed in pertinent chapters.

RESPIRATORY DISTRESS
At the time of delivery, the newborn must convert rapidly to air breathing as
described in Chapter 32 (p. 586). With inspiration, alveoli expand, lung fluid
is cleared, and surfactant prevents alveolar collapse. Interference with these
functions can create respiratory insufficiency. The neonate demonstrates

hypoxemia and compensatory tachypnea, nasal flaring, chest wall retractions,
and grunting. In preterm neonates, this is often caused by lung immaturity and
insufficient surfactant—respiratory distress syndrome (RDS), which is
discussed in Chapter 34 (p. 615).
As fetuses approach term, surfactant deficiency as a cause of respiratory
distress diminishes. The leading causes in term newborns are transient
tachypnea of the newborn (TTN), meconium aspiration syndrome,
pneumonia, and pneumothorax. Less common etiologies are RDS, persistent
pulmonary hypertension, acid/base disturbances, central nervous system
(CNS) insults, and congenital chest, respiratory tract, CNS, or cardiac
anomalies (Alhassen, 2021).
Following birth, successful neonatal transition to air breathing may be
delayed. With longer delays, evaluations to identify the cause of respiratory
distress are warranted. The initial neonatal evaluation includes chest
radiographs. Complete blood count or C-reactive protein levels and blood
cultures are obtained to identify infection. Arterial blood gas assessments
can define respiratory status and direct oxygenation care.
In general, treatment of respiratory distress is supportive with oxygen
therapy provided as needed. Depending on the etiology and severity,
continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) or mechanical ventilation may
be needed. Nutritional intake may be oral, gavage, or intravenous depending
on the degree of neonatal tachypnea. High respiratory rates can limit
effective breastfeeding and raise aspiration risk.

■ Transient Tachypnea of the Newborn
TTN is benign, self-limited, and stems from slow clearance of fetal lung
fluid after birth. Neonates of any gestational age can be affected. However,
delivery before 39 weeks’ gestation raises risk, and rates vary inversely with
gestational age. Other risk factors are cesarean delivery without labor, male
gender, perinatal asphyxia, and large- or small-for-gestational-age
birthweight. Maternal gestational diabetes or asthma are others.
TTN is a diagnosis of exclusion. Thus, the evaluation outlined in the last
section excludes pathological sources. Treatment is supportive with oxygen
therapy as needed. Most TTN cases resolve within 48 hours.

■ Respiratory Distress Syndrome
This condition stems from surfactant deficiency and has a relatively low
incidence at term (Berthelot-Ricou, 2012). Risks include male gender, white
race, and maternal diabetes (Anadkat, 2012; Li, 2019). Less frequently, rare
mutations in genes that code for surfactant protein synthesis may contribute.
Four are surfactant protein B, surfactant protein C, adenosine triphosphate
(ATP)-binding cassette subfamily A member 3 (ABCA3), and thyroid
transcription factor 1 genes (Liszewski, 2017). Regardless of etiology,
when surfactant secretion is diminished, the pulmonary pathophysiology,
clinical course, and management are similar to that for preterm infants.
Treatment includes CPAP or mechanical ventilation and potentially surfactant
replacement either through an endotracheal tube or by less invasive
surfactant techniques (Chap. 34, p. 616). Bacterial pneumonia, especially
related to group B Streptococcus in a newborn is often clinically and
radiographically indistinguishable from RDS. Thus, empirical antibiotics are
often added to respiratory management. The prognosis in term newborns with
RDS largely depends on the cause, severity, and response to treatment.
Antenatal maternal corticosteroid treatment is employed for threatened
preterm birth and described in Chapter 45 (p. 802). In late-preterm fetuses
34 to 37 weeks’ gestation, this therapy also enhances surfactant synthesis
(Gyamfi-Bannerman, 2016). At Parkland Hospital, corticosteroids are not
given in the late-preterm period for this indication. Neonatal hypoglycemia is
a concern with such treatment, and long-term effects are unknown. However,
data indicate that hypoglycemia, if promptly treated, creates no adverse
sequelae (McKinlay, 2015).

■ Meconium Aspiration Syndrome
The physiology of meconium passage and amnionic fluid contamination is
considered in Chapter 24 (p. 458). In some instances, inhalation of
meconium-stained fluid at or near delivery causes acute airway obstruction,
chemical pneumonitis, surfactant dysfunction or inactivation, and pulmonary
hypertension (Vain, 2017). If severe, hypoxemia may lead to neonatal death
or long-term neurological sequelae in survivors.
Meconium-stained fluid in labor is common. Fortunately, severe
aspiration leading to overt respiratory failure is much less frequent. In one

study, the incidence of severe disease was 4 cases per 1000 newborn
hospital discharges, and rates rise progressively from 37 to 43 weeks’
gestation (Thornton, 2019). Mortality rates depend on severity.
Fetal morbidity is more often associated with thicker meconium content.
Presumably, in most cases, amnionic fluid is ample to dilute the meconium to
permit prompt clearance by normal fetal physiological mechanisms.
Meconium aspiration syndrome still occasionally develops with light
staining. Many newborns are affected after a normal labor and uncomplicated
delivery. However, some associated obstetrical factors include postterm
pregnancy and fetal-growth restriction. These fetuses are at highest risk
because diminished amnionic fluid and labor with cord compression or
uteroplacental insufficiency are often comorbid. These can enhance the
likelihood of meconium passage that is thick and undiluted (Leveno, 1984).

Prevention
Previously, aspiration was thought to be stimulated by fetal hypoxic
episodes, and fetal heart rate tracing abnormalities were used to identify
fetuses at greatest risk during labor. Unfortunately, this was found to be an
unreliable predictor (Dooley, 1985). As another potential prevention,
oropharyngeal suctioning at the perineum was standard care for a time.
However, this was abandoned when evidence failed to support a reduction in
meconium aspiration syndrome incidence or severity (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2021b; Vain, 2004). From other studies,
endotracheal intubation and suctioning for both vigorous and nonvigorous
meconium-stained neonates provides no benefit and is no longer
recommended as a routine (Trevisanuto, 2020; Wiswell, 2000; Wyckoff,
2020). Because neonates born through meconium may need effective positive
pressure ventilation for stabilization, it is still critical that pediatric
providers attend such deliveries (Aziz, 2020).
Intrapartum amnioinfusion has been used successfully in laboring
women with diminished amnionic fluid volume to help resolve frequent
variable fetal heart rate decelerations (Chap. 24, p. 459). Earlier, it was also
studied as a preventive measure in labors complicated by meconium staining.
This practice fails to lower rates of meconium aspiration syndrome in
settings with standard peripartum surveillance (Hofmeyr, 2014). A trial was
conducted with almost 2000 women at 36 weeks’ gestation or later and in
whom labor was complicated by thick meconium (Fraser, 2005). The

perinatal death rate with and without amnioinfusion was 0.05 percent in both
groups. Rates of moderate or severe meconium aspiration also were not
significantly different in those with (4.4 percent) and without (3.1 percent)
amnioinfusion. Last, cesarean delivery rates were similar—32 versus 29
percent, respectively.

Treatment
Ventilatory support including CPAP, intubation, and mechanical ventilation is
carried out as needed (Pandita, 2018). Because some aspects of meconium
aspiration syndrome are caused by surfactant deficiency, replacement therapy
is beneficial (Natarajan, 2016a). In a review of randomized trials, authors
found that surfactant replacement may reduce the need for extracorporeal
membrane oxygenation (ECMO) but did not lower the mortality rate (El
Shahed, 2014). Inhaled corticosteroids may partially ameliorate the severity
of meconium aspiration syndrome, but neither inhaled or systemic
corticosteroids consistently improve critical outcomes (Garg, 2016; Yeung,
2021). Newborns with meconium aspiration syndrome and pulmonary
hypertension are often treated with inhaled nitric oxide, which reduces rates
of death and need for ECMO (Vain, 2017). ECMO therapy is reserved for
neonates who remain poorly oxygenated despite maximal ventilatory
assistance (Hirakawa, 2017). The proportion that requires ECMO treatment
varies. From the California Perinatal Quality Care Collaborative, 0.35
percent of more than 5100 cases of meconium aspiration syndrome required
ECMO treatment. The associated mortality rate was 5.3 percent (Kalra,
2020).

NEONATAL ENCEPHALOPATHY AND CEREBRAL
PALSY
Few events evoke more apprehension in parents and obstetricians than the
specter of “brain injury,” which immediately prompts concerns for disabling
cerebral palsy and intellectual disability. Although most brain disorders or
injuries are less profound, history has helped to perpetuate the more dismal
outlook. In his first edition of this textbook, Williams (1903) limited
discussions of brain injury to those sustained from birth trauma. When later
editions introduced the concept that asphyxia neonatorum was another cause

of cerebral palsy, this too was linked to traumatic birth. Even as brain
damage caused by traumatic delivery became uncommon during the ensuing
decades, the belief—albeit erroneous—was that intrapartum events caused
most neurological disability. This was a major reason for the escalating
cesarean delivery rate beginning in the 1970s. Unfortunately, because the
genesis of cerebral palsy occurs long before labor in most cases, cesarean
delivery did little to mitigate cerebral palsy risks. Cerebral palsy rates have
remained the same for 50 years despite a sixfold rise in cesarean birth rates
(MacLennan, 2015).
These realizations stimulated scientific investigations to determine the
etiopathogenesis of fetal brain disorders, including those leading to cerebral
palsy. Seminal observations, including those of Nelson and Ellenberg (1984,
1985, 1986a), are discussed subsequently. These investigators are
appropriately credited with proving that these neurological disorders are due
to complex multifactorial processes caused by a combination of genetic,
physiological, environmental, and obstetrical factors. Importantly, these
studies showed that few neurological disorders are associated with
peripartum events. However, continuing international interest was garnered
to codify the potential role of intrapartum events. In 2000, a task force of the
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists was appointed to
study neonatal encephalopathy and cerebral palsy. The multispecialty
coalition reviewed data and provided criteria to define various neonatal
brain disorders. Their findings were promulgated by the American Academy
of Pediatrics and American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
(2003).
Ten years later, a second task force updated the findings (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2014a). The 2014 Task Force
findings are more circumspect in contrast to the earlier ones. Specifically,
more limitations are cited in identifying cause(s) of peripartum hypoxicischemic encephalopathy (HIE) compared with other etiologies of neonatal
encephalopathy. The 2014 Task Force recommends multidimensional
assessment of each affected infant. They add the caveat that no one strategy is
infallible, and thus no single strategy will achieve 100-percent certainty in
attributing a cause to neonatal encephalopathy.

■ Neonatal Encephalopathy

The 2014 Task Force defined neonatal encephalopathy as a syndrome of
neurological dysfunction identified in the earliest days of life in neonates
born at ≥35 weeks’ gestation. It is manifested by seizures or subnormal
levels of consciousness and is often accompanied by difficulty with initiating
and maintaining respiration and by depressed tone and reflexes. The
incidence of encephalopathy has been cited to be 1 to 2 cases per 1000 term
liveborn neonates, and it is much more frequent in preterm newborns
(Ensing, 2015; Laptook, 2016; Novak, 2018; Ravichandran, 2020). The 2014
Task Force concluded that many etiologies may lead to encephalopathy and
cerebral palsy, however, it focused on HIE and causes that were thought to
be incurred intrapartum. To identify affected infants, a thorough evaluation is
necessary and includes maternal history, obstetrical antecedents, intrapartum
factors, placental pathology, and newborn course. These are complemented
by laboratory and neuroimaging findings.
Three clinically defined levels categorize encephalopathy. Mild
encephalopathy is characterized by hyperalertness, irritability, jitteriness,
and hypertonia and hypotonia. Moderate encephalopathy shows lethargy,
abnormal tone, and occasional seizures. Severe encephalopathy is manifest
by coma, multiple seizures, and recurrent apnea.
The 2014 Task Force also concluded that of the several forms of cerebral
palsy, only the spastic quadriplegic type can result from acute peripartum
ischemia. Other forms—hemiparetic or hemiplegic cerebral palsy, spastic
diplegia, and ataxia—are unlikely to result from an intrapartum event.
Purely dyskinetic or ataxic cerebral palsy, especially when accompanied by
a learning disorder, usually has a genetic origin (Nelson, 2015).

Criteria for Hypoxic-Ischemic Encephalopathy
The 2014 Task Force radically revised the 2003 criteria used to define an
acute peripartum event that is consistent with HIE and neonatal
encephalopathy. These are outlined in Table 33-1 and are considered with
the following caveats (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2014b).
TABLE 33-1. Findings Consistent with an Acute Peripartum or Intrapartum
Event Leading to Hypoxic-Ischemic Encephalopathy

First, Apgar scores that are low at 5 and 10 minutes are associated with
greater risk for neurological impairment. Low scores stem from many causes,
and most of these infants will not develop cerebral palsy. With a 5-minute
Apgar ≥7, it is unlikely that peripartum HIE caused cerebral palsy.
Acid-base study results define a second HIE criterion. Low pH and high
base deficit levels raise the likelihood that neonatal encephalopathy was
caused by HIE. Decreasing pH levels form a continuum of increasing risk,
but most acidemic neonates will be neurologically normal (Lee, 2020b). A
cord artery pH ≥7.2 is very unlikely to be associated with HIE.
Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging or MR spectroscopy (MRS) is the
best modality with which to visualize findings consistent with HIE. The 2014
Task Force concluded that cranial sonography and computed tomography
(CT) lack sensitivity in the term newborn. Normal imaging findings after the
first 24 hours of life, however, effectively exclude a hypoxic-ischemic cause
of encephalopathy. MR imaging between 24 and 96 hours may be more
sensitive for the timing of peripartum cerebral injury, and MR imaging at 7 to
21 days following birth is the best technique to delineate the full extent of
cerebral injury.
Last, multisystem involvement of injury is consistent with HIE. These
include renal, gastrointestinal, hepatic, or cardiac injury; hematological
abnormalities; or combinations of these. The severity of neurological injury
does not necessarily correlate with injuries to these other systems.
The 2014 Task Force also found that certain contributing factors may be
consistent with an acute peripartum event. Of these, sentinel events are
considered adverse obstetrical events that may lead to catastrophic clinical
outcomes. Examples include ruptured uterus, severe placental abruption,

cord prolapse, and amnionic fluid embolism. Martinez-Biarge and associates
(2012) studied almost 58,000 deliveries and identified 192 cases with one of
these sentinel events. Of these 192 fetus/newborns, 6 percent died
intrapartum or in the early neonatal period, and 10 percent developed
neonatal encephalopathy. Other risk factors for neonatal acidosis include
prior or emergent cesarean delivery, maternal age ≥35 years, maternal
obesity, thick meconium, chorioamnionitis, and general anesthesia
(Johansson, 2018; Johnson, 2014; Nelson, 2014).
Differentiating an abnormal fetal heart rate (FHR) tracing on
presentation versus one that develops subsequently also was emphasized by
the 2014 Task Force. A category 1 or 2 FHR tracing associated with Apgar
scores ≥7 at 5 minutes, normal cord gases (±1 SD), or both are not consistent
with an acute HIE event (Graham, 2014). An FHR pattern at the time of
presentation with persistently minimal or absent variability and lacking
accelerations, with duration ≥60 minutes, and even without decelerations is
suggestive of an already compromised fetus (Chap. 24, p. 450). The 2014
Task Force further recommended that with these findings present, if fetal
well-being cannot be established, the woman should be evaluated for the
method and timing of delivery.

Prevention
In term newborns, one of the best-studied interventions for neonatal HIE is
postnatally induced hypothermia. Cooling initiated within the first 6 hours of
life to a level of 33.5°C for 72 hours reduces death and moderate to severe
neurological disability in term newborns (Jacobs, 2013; Natarajan, 2016b).
One metaanalysis of more than 1500 neonates concluded that hypothermia
improves survival rates and neurodevelopment by 24 months of age (Jacobs,
2013). This neuroprotection extends to childhood (Azzopardi, 2014; Guillet,
2012; Shankaran, 2012). MR imaging studies have demonstrated a slowing of
diffusional abnormalities and fewer infarctions with hypothermia (Bednarek,
2012; Natarajan, 2016b). Longer or deeper cooling does not offer additional
protection compared with standard cooling (Shankaran, 2017).
Importantly, hospitals should develop plans for timely transfer of
encephalopathic newborns to a cooling center for evaluation and possible
treatment. A trial of “late” hypothermia, with cooling initiated after 6 hours
of life, showed some benefit. However, brain protection was not as robust as
with cooling initiated in the first 6 hours (Laptook, 2017).

Since therapeutic hypothermia is not completely protective, adjuvant
therapies are being explored. In preclinical HIE models, erythropoietin has
both early and late beneficial effects. These include antiapoptosis and
antiinflammatory effects and greater neurogenesis, oligodendrogenesis, and
angiogenesis (McAdams, 2016). One metaanalysis of small clinical trials
evaluating this therapy for neuroprophylaxis reports some reductions in
cognitive impairment and cerebral palsy rates (Razak, 2019). A large
national trial has completed enrollment and is in the follow-up phase (Juul,
2018). Other adjuvant therapies under investigation are allopurinol, xenon,
melatonin, and stem cell therapies (McAdams, 2016).

■ Cerebral Palsy
This term refers to a group of nonprogressive disorders of movement or
posture caused by abnormal development or damage to brain centers for
motor control. Cerebral palsy is further classified by the type of neurological
dysfunction—spastic, dyskinetic, or ataxic—and by the number and
distribution of limbs involved—quadriplegia, diplegia, hemiplegia, or
monoplegia. Together, the major types are spastic quadriplegia—the most
common—which has a strong association with mental retardation and seizure
disorders; diplegia, which is common in preterm or low-birthweight
neonates; hemiplegia; choreoathetoid types; and mixed varieties. Although
epilepsy and intellectual disability frequently accompany cerebral palsy,
these two disorders seldom are associated with perinatal asphyxia in the
absence of cerebral palsy.

Incidence and Epidemiological Correlates
According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2021), the
prevalence of cerebral palsy in the United States approximates 3 cases in
1000 children. It is crucial to emphasize that this rate is derived from all
children—including those born preterm. Because of the remarkably greater
survival rates of the latter currently, and despite the elevated cesarean
delivery rate, the overall rate of cerebral palsy has remained essentially
unchanged (Fig. 33-1). For example, neonates born at 23 to 27 weeks’
gestation in a Swedish birth cohort had a cerebral palsy incidence of 105
cases per 1000 infants alive at 1 year (Hafström, 2018). Similar findings
have been reported for Australian births (Smithers-Sheedy, 2016). In

absolute numbers, term newborns constitute half of cerebral palsy cases
because preterm births are proportionately far fewer. It is again emphasized
that most studies of cerebral palsy rates have not made distinctions between
term and preterm neonates.

FIGURE 33-1 Elective and emergency cesarean deliveries and live births with cerebral palsy.
(Reproduced with permission from Nelson KB, Blair E: Prenatal factors in singletons with cerebral
palsy born at or near term, N Engl J Med. 2015 Sep 3;373(10):946–953.)

As noted earlier, Nelson and Ellenberg (1984, 1985, 1986a) made many
fundamental observations concerning cerebral palsy. Their initial studies
emanated from data from the Collaborative Perinatal Project. This included
children from almost 54,000 pregnancies who were followed until age 7.
They found that the most frequently associated risk factors for cerebral palsy
were: (1) evidence of genetic abnormalities such as maternal mental
retardation or fetal congenital malformations; (2) birthweight <2000 g; (3)
birth before 32 weeks; and (4) perinatal infection. They also found that
obstetrical complications were not strongly predictive, and only a fifth of
affected children had markers of perinatal asphyxia. For the first time, solid
evidence supported that the cause of most cases of cerebral palsy was
unknown, and importantly, only a small proportion stemmed from neonatal
HIE. Equally importantly, no foreseeable single intervention would likely
prevent a large proportion of cases.

Numerous studies have since confirmed many of these findings and have
identified an imposing list of other risk factors (Table 33-2). As expected,
preterm birth continues to be the single most important risk (Nelson, 2015).
Small-for-gestational-age neonates also are at higher risk. In one study,
cerebral palsy was due to antepartum factors in more than 90 percent of
growth-restricted newborns (Stoknes, 2012).
TABLE 33-2. Perinatal Risk Factors Reported to Be Increased in Children
with Cerebral Palsy

Many other placental and neonatal risk factors are associated with
neurodevelopmental abnormalities (MacLennan, 2015). Some placental
factors are discussed further in Chapter 6 (p. 111). One example is the

substantively greater risk from chorioamnionitis (Shevell, 2014; Shi, 2017).
Of neonatal causes, one is arterial ischemic stroke, which may be associated
with inherited fetal thrombophilias (Harteman, 2013; Wanenaar, 2018).
Additionally, newborns with isolated congenital heart lesions have an
elevated risk for microcephaly, possibly due to chronic fetal hypoxemia
(Barbu, 2009). Other miscellaneous etiologies of cerebral palsy include fetal
anemia, twin-twin transfusion syndrome, intrauterine transfusions, and fetal
alcohol syndrome (DeJong, 2012; Nelson, 2015; O’Leary, 2012; Rossi,
2011; Schou, 2019).
Apart from these causes, intrapartum hypoxemia was linked to only a few
cases of cerebral palsy by the National Collaborative Perinatal Project. The
contribution of HIE to subsequent neurological disorders was discussed
earlier. The 2003 Task Force applied these criteria to more contemporaneous
outcomes and determined that only 1.6 cases of cerebral palsy per 10,000
deliveries are attributable solely to intrapartum hypoxia. This finding is
supported by a study of nearly 1000 infants in which fetal-growth restriction
and birth defects recognized by age 6 years were more substantial
contributors to cerebral palsy and neonatal death than potentially asphyxial
birth events and inflammation (McIntyre, 2013).

Intrapartum Fetal Heart Rate Monitoring
Despite persistent attempts to validate continuous intrapartum electronic
FHR monitoring as effective to prevent adverse perinatal outcomes, evidence
does not support its ability to predict or reduce cerebral palsy risk
(Alfirevic, 2017). Moreover, no specific FHR patterns is predictive of
cerebral palsy, and no relationship has been found between the clinician’s
response to abnormal patterns and neurological outcome. Efforts using
computer-assisted analysis of FHR tracings have not enhanced predictions
(Alfirevic, 2017; INFANT Collaborative Group, 2017). Indeed, an abnormal
heart rate pattern in fetuses that ultimately develop cerebral palsy may reflect
a preexisting neurological abnormality (Phelan, 1994). Because of these
studies, the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019a;
2021a) concludes that electronic FHR monitoring does not reduce the
incidence of long-term neurological impairment.

Apgar Scores

In general, 1- and 5-minute Apgar scores are poor predictors of long-term
neurological impairment (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2021c). However, if the 5-minute Apgar score is ≤3, neonatal
death or the risk of neurological sequelae rises substantially (Chen, 2020;
Nelson, 1984). In a Swedish study, 5 percent of such children subsequently
required special schooling (Stuart, 2011). In a Scottish study, the incidence
of these low Apgar scores was 0.3 percent in more than 750,000 children
who were born at term and were in national school census records. Low
Apgar score was strongly associated in a dose-dependent manner with the
need for additional educational support in later life, after adjusting for
confounding factors. The strongest association was for the support of
physical and motor impairments and was followed by visual, hearing, and
cognitive impairments (Tweed, 2016).
Persistence past 5 minutes of these extremely low scores correlates
strongly with a higher risk for neurological morbidity and death (Foglia,
2020). This of course is not absolute, and the 2003 Task Force cited a 10percent risk for cerebral palsy for neonates with 10-minute scores of 0 to 3.
For 15-minute scores ≤2, the cited mortality rate was 53 percent, and
cerebral palsy rate was 36 percent. For 20-minute scores ≤2, the mortality
rate was 60 percent, and cerebral palsy rate was 57 percent. Outcomes from
a Norwegian population study of neonates who were born from low-risk
pregnancies and who had low 5-minute Apgar scores are shown in Table 333 (Moster, 2001).
TABLE 33-3. Comparison of Mortality and Morbidity in Norwegian Infants
Weighing >2500 g According to 5-Minute Apgar Scores

Umbilical Cord Blood Gas Studies
Objective evidence of metabolic acidosis, that is, cord arterial blood pH
<7.0 and base deficit ≥12 mmol/L, is a risk factor for encephalopathy and for
cerebral palsy (p. 601). The risk accrues as acidosis worsens. From one
review of 51 studies, low pH in arterial umbilical cord blood correlates
with greater risk for neonatal encephalopathy and cerebral palsy (Malin,
2010). When used alone, however, these determinations are not accurate in
predicting long-term neurological sequelae (Yeh, 2012).
Data from several studies corroborate that a pH <7.0 is the threshold for
clinically significant acidemia (Gilstrap, 1989; Goldaber, 1991). The
likelihood of neonatal death grows as the cord artery pH falls to ≤7.0. Casey
and colleagues (2001) reported that when the pH was ≤6.8, the neonatal
mortality rate rose 1400-fold. When the cord pH was ≤7.0 and the 5-minute
Apgar score was 0 to 3, the risk of neonatal death rose 3200-fold.
In a study from Oxford, the rate of adverse neurological outcomes was
0.36 percent with pH <7.1 and was 3 percent with pH <7.0 (Yeh, 2012). A
systematic review that includes 12 studies suggests that cord blood lactate
levels also help predict neonatal outcomes (Allanson, 2017).

Nucleated Red Blood Cells and Lymphocytes
Both immature red cells and lymphocytes enter the circulation of term
newborns in response to hypoxia or hemorrhage. During the past two
decades, quantification of these cells has been proposed as a measure of
hypoxia, but not all studies support this premise (Boskabadi, 2017; Silva,
2006; Walsh, 2011, 2013).

■ Neuroimaging Studies in Encephalopathy and Cerebral
Palsy
Various neuroimaging techniques have provided important insight into the
etiology and evolution of perinatal HIE and later cerebral palsy. Findings
vary by fetal age, and the preterm neonatal brain responds differently to an
ischemic episode than that of a term newborn. Other factors include insult
severity and duration and restoration of cerebrovascular hypoperfusion.
Thus, precise timing of an injury with neuroimaging studies is not a
realistic goal. Moreover, the grade of neonatal encephalopathy, that is, mild,
moderate, or severe, does not correlate with MR imaging findings (Walsh,
2017).

Neuroimaging in the Neonatal Period
The 2014 Task Force concluded that for term newborns, imaging studies are
helpful in timing an injury, but they provide only a time window that is
imprecise. The 2014 Task Force reported that these head imaging techniques
provide the following information:
1. Neonatal sonography findings are generally normal on the day of birth.
With injury, the thalami and basal ganglia become increasingly echogenic
beginning at approximately 24 hours. This progresses over 2 to 3 days and
persists for 5 to 7 days.
2. CT images are usually normal the first day in term newborns. With injury,
the thalami or basal ganglia show decreased density beginning at
approximately 24 hours, and this persists for 5 to 7 days.
3. MR imaging will detect some abnormalities on the first day. Within 24
hours, MR imaging may show restricted water diffusion that peaks at
approximately 5 days and disappears within 2 weeks. T1- and T2-

weighted images display variable abnormalities, which have an onset from
less than 24 hours to several days. In a study of 175 term neonates with
acute encephalopathy, MR imaging that showed basal ganglia lesions
accurately predicted motor impairment at 2 years of age (Martinez-Biarge,
2012).

Neuroimaging in Older Children with Cerebral Palsy
Imaging studies performed in children diagnosed with cerebral palsy
frequently show abnormal findings. Wu and associates (2006) used CT or
MR imaging to study 273 children who were born after 36 weeks’ gestation
and who were later diagnosed with cerebral palsy. Although a third of these
imaging studies were normal, focal arterial infarction was seen in 22
percent; brain malformations in 14 percent; and periventricular white-matter
injuries in 12 percent. In another study of 351 children with cerebral palsy,
of whom approximately half were born near term, MR imaging findings were
abnormal in 88 percent (Bax, 2006). One MR imaging study found
pathological findings in 84 percent of children with spastic quadriplegia
(Robinson, 2008). Remember, the 2014 Task Force concluded that this
neurological lesion correlated with neonatal encephalopathy.
Imaging techniques in older children also help define the timing of fetal
or perinatal cerebral injury. Due to concerns regarding the radiation exposure
of CT scans, MR imaging is more often used. Wiklund and coworkers
(1991a,b) studied 83 children between ages 5 and 16 years who were born at
term and who developed hemiplegic cerebral palsy. Nearly 75 percent had
abnormal CT findings, and these investigators concluded that more than half
had CT changes that suggested a prenatal injury. Approximately 20 percent
were attributed to a perinatal injury.

■ Intellectual Disability and Seizure Disorders
These both frequently accompany cerebral palsy. However, when either
manifests alone, it is seldom caused by perinatal hypoxia (Nelson, 1984,
1986a, 2015). Severe mental disability has a prevalence of 3 cases per 1000
children, and its most frequent causes are chromosomal, gene mutation, and
other congenital malformations. Last, preterm birth also is associated with
these (Hientz, 2018).

The major predictors of seizure disorders are fetal malformations—
cerebral and noncerebral; family history of seizures; and neonatal seizures
(Nelson, 1986b; Pisani, 2015). Neonatal encephalopathy causes a small
proportion of seizure disorders. Reports from the Neonatal Research
Network and other studies conclude that increasing severity of
encephalopathy correlates best with seizures (Glass, 2011; Kwon, 2011).

Autism Spectrum Disorders
According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the frequency
of autism spectrum disorders is 15 cases per 1000 8-year-old children
(Christensen, 2016). Although these may be associated with maternal
metabolic conditions, none has been linked convincingly to peripartum
events (Krakowiak, 2012).

NEONATAL ABSTINENCE SYNDROME
This is a drug-withdrawal syndrome that most commonly follows in-utero
exposure to maternal opioids. It also can complicate exposure to alcohol or
benzodiazepines. The syndrome shows hypertonia, autonomic instability,
irritability, poor sucking reflex, and seizures (Finnegan, 1975). Its incidence
has risen six- to sevenfold during the past decade, coincidental with growing
opioid use. For example, 4 percent of all neonatal intensive care unit days in
2013 were attributed to care of these affected newborns (Tolia, 2015).
Care includes close observation, and pharmacotherapy is usually given.
In addition to morphine and methadone, other treatment may include
phenobarbital, benzodiazepines, and clonidine (Tolia, 2015). More recently,
buprenorphine compared with morphine was reported to result in shorter
lengths of treatment and hospital stays (Kraft, 2017; Lee, 2019). Consensus is
lacking regarding the most effective regimen. The American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists and the American Society of Addiction
Medicine (2019c) have taken the lead in screening, intervention, and
treatment of opioid use disorders in pregnant women (Chap. 64, p. 1150).

HEMATOLOGICAL DISORDERS

Obstetricians should be familiar with a few neonatal disorders of
erythrocytes, platelets, and coagulation. Many of these manifest in the fetus
and persist in the newborn.

■ Anemia
After 35 weeks’ gestation, the mean cord hemoglobin concentration
approximates 17 g/dL, and values below 14 g/dL are considered abnormal.
In newborns, delayed umbilical cord clamping raises hemoglobin levels at
birth and improves iron stores in the first several months. A review of nearly
9200 late-preterm and term deliveries found delayed cord clamping was
associated with a mean neonatal hemoglobin rise of 1.2 g/dL at birth
(Gomersall, 2021). However, rates of infant anemia at 6 months were similar
in groups with or without delayed cord clamping. Moreover, this practice
raises the incidence of hyperbilirubinemia that requires phototherapy but
does not prolong hospital stay. Discussed further in Chapter 27 (p. 500), the
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020) recommends a
30- to 60-second delay in cord clamping in all healthy newborns.
Significant neonatal anemia may predate or follow delivery. First,
neonatal anemia may reflect an extension of antenatal fetal anemia. General
etiological groups are immune-medicated red cell destruction, aneuploidy,
hematology-related genetic defects, fetomaternal hemorrhage, fetal infection,
and placental abnormalities such as chorioangioma or twin anastomotic
defects.
Second, at delivery, acute anemia with hypovolemia can follow
laceration of the placenta, fetal vessel, or umbilical cord. Intracranial or
extracranial injury or trauma to fetal intraabdominal organs also can cause
hemorrhage with acute anemia (Malec, 2020).

■ Polycythemia
Neonatal polycythemia can be associated with chronic or acute fetal hypoxia,
twin anemia-polycythemia syndrome, maternal diabetes or hypertension,
placental- and fetal-growth restriction, aneuploidy, and delayed cord
clamping. When the hematocrit rises above 65, blood viscosity markedly
increases. Routine neonatal screening is not recommended in newborns
without symptoms (Remon, 2011). Frequent signs are hypotonia, a ruddy

complexion (plethora), respiratory distress with cyanosis, jitteriness, or
hypoglycemia. Because of the shorter life span of macrocytic fetal
erythrocytes, hyperbilirubinemia commonly follows. Associated blood
hyperviscosity can lead to end-organ damage and neurodevelopmental harm.
Isovolemic partial exchange transfusion (PET) with saline can lower the
hematocrit and improve symptoms, however, it is not neuroprotective and has
associated complications (Dempsey, 2006). From limited data, PET is often
reserved for neonates with acute symptoms or hypoglycemia (Hopewell,
2011).

■ Hyperbilirubinemia
Excessive serum bilirubin levels can be neurotoxic for newborns. In fetuses,
hepatic maturation is incomplete, and some unconjugated bilirubin is cleared
by placental transfer to be conjugated and excreted by the mother. After
delivery, clearance relies on neonatal hepatic function, and thus varying
degrees of neonatal hyperbilirubinemia arise. Even in the mature newborn,
serum bilirubin levels usually increase for 3 to 4 days to reach up to 10
mg/dL. After this, concentrations usually fall rapidly. In approximately 15
percent of term newborns, bilirubin levels cause jaundice. Of risks,
polycythemia, hemolysis such as from ABO incompatibility or glucose-6phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency, and extravasation of blood such as
from a cephalohematoma all raise bilirubin burden. Decreased bilirubin
clearance is seen with prematurity.
With excessive serum bilirubin levels, toxicity has two forms. Acute
bilirubin encephalopathy develops in the first days of life and may cause
hypotonia, poor feeding, lethargy, and abnormal auditory-evoked responses.
Immediate recognition and treatment will usually mitigate progressive
neurotoxicity.
The chronic form is termed kernicterus. With this, profound neuronal
degeneration follows bilirubin deposition and staining of the basal ganglia
and hippocampus. Survivors have spasticity, muscular incoordination, and
varying degrees of mental deficiencies. Continuing hemolysis is a risk factor
for kernicterus (El Houchi, 2017; Vandborg, 2012).
Initial prevention emphasizes effective breastfeeding to avoid neonatal
dehydration. Surveillance for jaundiced skin is recommended at the same
time other newborn vital signs are obtained. Moreover, prior to hospital

discharge, universal screening of total serum bilirubin assessment from
blood or more commonly by transcutaneous bilirubinometry is done
(Maisels, 2009). The latter is a handheld meter that directs light into the skin
and measures the intensity of specific returned wavelengths.
Once diagnosed, various forms of phototherapy are used to treat neonatal
hyperbilirubinemia. These “bili-lights” emit a spectrum of 460 to 490 nm,
which augments bilirubin oxidation to enhance its renal clearance and lower
serum levels. Sunlight filtered to remove ultraviolet light can be used in
resource-poor countries (Slusher, 2015). Light that penetrates the skin also
raises peripheral blood flow, which further enhances photo-oxidation.
For term newborns, the American Academy of Pediatrics and the
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2017) stress early
detection and prompt phototherapy to prevent bilirubin encephalopathy.
Despite these measures, bilirubin encephalopathy persists, and this is
somewhat related to early hospital discharges (Kuzniewicz, 2014). In the
United States, hospitalizations for kernicterus in term newborns were 5 cases
per 100,000 in 1988 (Burke, 2009). Since then, this rate has dropped to 0.4
to 2.7 cases per 100,000 births (Watchko, 2013). Legislation to minimize
brief postpartum hospital stays may be contributory (Chap. 36, p. 645).

■ Vitamin K Deficiency Bleeding
Newborns are vitamin K deficient due to insufficient antenatal liver stores,
limited synthesis in an initially sterile gut, and low vitamin K content in
breast milk. Vitamin K deficiency bleeding (VKDB) describes spontaneous
internal or external bleeding, and its onset is grouped as early, classic, or
late onset. Most cases result from abnormally low levels of the vitamin K–
dependent clotting factors. Early onset is within the first 24 hours, and one
cause is maternal vitamin K deficiency. Classic hemorrhagic disease is
usually apparent between days 2 and 7 of life in neonates not given vitamin K
prophylaxis at delivery. Delayed hemorrhage may occur at 2 to 12 weeks in
exclusively breastfed infants.
The American Academy of Pediatrics and the American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2017) recommend routine prophylaxis with
a single, intramuscular, 0.5- to 1-mg dose of vitamin K1 (phytonadione). Oral
administration is less effective, and maternal vitamin K administration
results in very little transport to the fetus (Sankar, 2016). Evidence does not

support initial links with vitamin K and childhood leukemia (Fear, 2003;
Roman, 2002).
Hemorrhagic disease of the newborn includes VKDB but also bleeding
from other etiologies. These include congenital clotting factor deficiency,
disseminated intravascular coagulopathy, birth trauma, and
thrombocytopenia.

■ Thrombocytopenia
Abnormally low platelet concentrations in term newborns are often
categorized as early onset, within the first 72 hours, and late onset
thereafter. In the term neonate, causes include immune disorders, infections,
inherited platelet defects, or congenital syndromes (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019b; Cremer, 2016). Of immunologic
sources, neonatal thrombocytopenia stemming from alloimmunization or from
maternal idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura are described in Chapter 18
(p. 359). Neonatal lupus syndrome can also show thrombocytopenia (Chap.
62, p. 1113). With all these, antiplatelet IgG transferred to the fetus may
cause accelerated platelet destruction.
Alternatively, thrombocytopenia can be an extension of fetal infection
with B19 parvovirus, cytomegalovirus, toxoplasmosis, and others discussed
in Chapters 67 and 68. Neonatal thrombocytopenia has been reported with
maternal antiretroviral therapy for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
infection (Smith, 2016). Term newborns with sepsis can have accelerated
platelet consumption (Eissa, 2013). Last, inherited platelet disorders are
described in Chapter 59 (p. 1059).

NEWBORN INJURIES
■ Incidence
Birth injury can complicate any term delivery, and from population studies,
its incidence approximates 2 percent of deliveries (Linder, 2012; SauberSchatz, 2010). Imprecision in these numbers may stem from lumping of major
and minor injuries and trauma definitions. In one population study from
Washington State, the rate of neonatal birth trauma declined by 14 percent
and from 5.3 events per 1000 live births in 2004 to 4.5 in 2013 (Wen, 2017).

Major injury rates were highest with forceps or vacuum delivery and
substantially lower for all caesarean delivery categories.

■ Cranial Injuries
The fetal head has considerable plasticity and can undergo appreciable
molding during labor. However, traumatic head injuries can occur and result
in bony fracture or in intracranial or extracranial hemorrhage. With intra- and
extracranial hemorrhages, anatomical location defines their classification
(Table 33-4).
TABLE 33-4. Major Types of Cranial Hemorrhage

Intracranial Hemorrhage
Most aspects of neonatal intracranial hemorrhage are related to gestational
age. Of the categories shown in Table 33-4, the term newborn may suffer
subdural and intracerebral hemorrhages most often. Intraventricular,
subarachnoid, or cerebellar hemorrhages are more frequent in the preterm
neonate. In those born preterm, blood pressure instability, hypoxia, and
ischemia are prominent causes and described in Chapter 34 (p. 618). In term
neonates, birth trauma is the most frequent etiology. Other uncommon causes

or contributors include acquired or congenital fetal coagulopathy, vascular
anomaly, tumor, genetic mutation, and infection (Tan, 2018). Importantly, in
some newborns, intracranial hemorrhage may follow an apparently
uneventful vaginal delivery, and no cause is found.
Term newborns with intracranial hemorrhage may initially display
seizures, apnea or tachypnea, poor feeding, and temperature instability (OuYang, 2010). Imaging options are sonography or CT, but MR imaging is often
preferred. With most lesions, treatment is supportive and nonsurgical.
However, acute hydrocephalus, rising intracranial pressure, or mass effects
are infrequent complications that can prompt surgery (Tan, 2018).
Names of intracranial lesions reflect anatomy. First, the meninges forms
from the dura, arachnoid, and pia mater, and the dura mater is the external
layer. Subdural hemorrhage collects between the dura and arachnoid mater.
Prolonged and difficult delivery can produce cranial molding, dural stretch,
and tearing of bridging veins in the subdural space (Towner, 1999; Hong,
2018). Asymptomatic subdural hemorrhage can also accompany uneventful
vaginal or cesarean delivery (Rooks, 2008). In asymptomatic newborns,
prognosis is good (Zamora, 2021). Poorer outcome may attend those with
comorbid conditions or lesions (Hong, 2018).
Less commonly, subarachnoid hemorrhage collects between the
arachnoid and pia mater. Rarely, epidural hemorrhage collects outside the
dura mater and beneath the periosteum. In both these hemorrhage types, risks,
mechanisms, and recovery are similar to subdural hemorrhage (Hong, 2018;
Shah, 2016).
Intraventricular hemorrhage is less common in term than preterm
newborns. Described in Chapter 34 (p. 618), the vascular germinal matrix is
a vulnerable site for preterm neonates but has mainly regressed by term.
Instead, the choroid plexus, thalamus, or residual germinal matrix are
bleeding sources at term. Etiology can include birth trauma, hypoxia, or
coagulation dysfunction. Additional rare causes are listed in this section’s
first paragraph. However, in small case series, one to two thirds had no
identified antecedent (Roland, 1990; Wu, 2003). Prognosis varies, and worse
outcomes are associated with advanced hemorrhage grade or thalamic
hemorrhage (Kaur, 2020).
Intracerebral hemorrhage or neonatal hemorrhagic stroke is
uncommon at term. Risk factors are coagulation defects, vascular anomalies,

and intrapartum factors that include FHR abnormalities and low Apgar
scores. Trauma is less often implicated (Cole, 2017).
Intracerebellar hemorrhage is infrequent in the term newborn. In one
series, associated factors were FHR abnormalities, operative vaginal
delivery, emergent cesarean delivery, and delivery-room resuscitation
(Limperopoulos, 2009). Prognosis with both intracerebral and
intracerebellar hemorrhages is affected by lesion size, presence of additional
hemorrhage sites, and associated hydrocephalus or elevated intracranial
pressure.

Extracranial Hemorrhage
These blood collections accumulate outside the calvarium (see Table 33-4).
From its most superficial surface inward, the scalp consists of skin,
subcutaneous tissue, galea aponeurotica, subgaleal space, and calvarium
periosteum (Fig. 33-2). The galea aponeurotica is dense fibrous tissue,
whereas the subgaleal space contains loose, fibroareolar tissue. Traversing
across the subgaleal space are emissary veins, which connect the dural
sinuses inside the skull with superficial scalp veins.

FIGURE 33-2 Schematic of extracranial lesions in the neonate that include caput succedaneum,
subgaleal hemorrhage, and cephalohematoma.

Caput succedaneum is soft-tissue edema of the scalp. It forms from
repetitive contractions that press the head against an unyielding cervix. The
caput is maximal at birth, rapidly grows smaller, and usually disappears
within hours or days.
Cephalohematoma is a cranial subperiosteal hematoma. It has an
incidence of 1 percent and makes up a large percentage of birth injuries
(Werner, 2011; Kekki, 2020). It usually develops in the setting of dystocia or

operative vaginal delivery. Vacuum-assisted births have a greater association
than births by forceps or cesarean delivery (Alexander, 2006; Werner, 2011).
Cephalohematoma develops from shearing forces during labor and delivery,
which lacerate the emissary or diploic veins. Fortunately, the densely
adhered periosteum impedes rapid enlargement and limits final hematoma
size. Hemorrhage can be over one or both parietal bones, but collections do
not cross suture lines. A cephalohematoma may not be apparent until hours
after delivery, when bleeding is sufficient to raise the periosteum. After it is
identified, it often grows larger and persists for weeks or even months, and
bleeding may cause anemia or hyperbilirubinemia. Outcomes are good in the
absence of additional injuries. Rare hematoma complications are infection or
calcification (Kandemirli, 2020; Zimmermann, 2016).
Subgaleal hemorrhage is rare and results from emissary vein laceration
and bleeding between the galea aponeurotica and the skull periosteum. Both
the galea aponeurotica and subgaleal space span across the occipital,
parietal, and frontal bones. Because of its loose areolar tissue and large
surface area, significant blood volumes can collect in this potential space
and may extend from the neck to the orbits and laterally to the temporal fascia
above the ears (Modanlou, 2016). Resulting hypovolemia can lead to shock
and significant morbidity, and cited mortality rates approximate 15 percent
(El Dib, 2019; Lee, 2018; Swanson, 2011). Other findings are seizures,
enlarging head circumference, and respiratory distress. The subgaleal
hemorrhage rate is 0.05 percent with spontaneous birth but is ten times
greater with vacuum-assisted delivery (Colditz, 2015). The most frequent
associate is operative vaginal delivery, especially with vacuum devices, but
cases can follow spontaneous vaginal or cesarean delivery (Christensen,
2011).
In general, diagnosis of extracranial lesions begins with head ultrasound
(Bansal, 2018). This may be sufficient for cephalohematomas. CT or MR
imaging may benefit those with subgaleal hemorrhage to exclude comorbid
cranial injuries.

Skull Fractures
These are rare but are especially worrisome because of their association
with intracranial hemorrhage. The incidence of birth-related skull fractures
approximates 1 case per 100,000 births (Högberg, 2020). Operative vaginal
delivery is an associated factor (Dupuis, 2005). However, cases can also

attend spontaneous or cesarean delivery (Fig. 33-3) (Dolivet, 2018; Merhar,
2016). In these, fracture may result from tight skull compression against the
bony pelvis, by hand pressure used by the surgeon to lift the head at cesarean
delivery, or from transvaginally applied upward hand pressure by an
assistant. Fractures are diagnosed with radiographs or CT. Depending on
type, a fracture may be managed expectantly or require surgery. Prognosis is
mainly influenced by comorbid intra- or extracranial injuries.

FIGURE 33-3 Depressed skull fracture evident immediately after cesarean delivery. Labor had
progressed, and the head was deep in the pelvis. Dislodgment of the head from the birth canal was
performed by an assistant using manual pressure upward through the vagina. (Reproduced with
permission from Dr. Kimberly M. Spoonts.)

■ Spinal Cord Injury
Overstretch of the spinal cord and its associated hemorrhage and edema are
rare. The cervical spine is most often injured, and excessive traction,
rotation, or hyperextension during shoulder dystocia manipulations, breech
vaginal delivery, and operative vaginal delivery are implicated (Lee, 2020a;
Menticoglou, 1995). Upper cervical spinal cord injury is often fatal, and

survivors can be quadriplegic (Lee, 2020a). Immediate treatment has
included ventilator support coupled with corticosteroids or therapeutic
hypothermia.

■ Peripheral Nerve Injuries
Brachial Plexopathy
Injury can involve a single nerve or can affect a nerve root, plexus, or trunk.
Trauma to the brachial plexus is infrequent. In one database study, the rate
was 1 case per 1000 term births in the United States. The incidence was 1.3
per 1000 vaginal deliveries and 0.2 per 1000 cesarean deliveries (Chen,
2021). Shoulder dystocia, labor dystocia, and breech delivery are risks
(Johnson, 2020).
With plexopathy, the injury damages the nerve roots that supply the
brachial plexus—C5–8 and T1. With hemorrhage and edema, axonal function
may be temporarily impaired, but the recovery chances are good. However,
with avulsion, the prognosis for complete recovery is poor. Damage to the
C5–6 nerve roots can cause Erb palsy. Injuries with breech delivery are
normally of this type, whereas the more extensive and persistent lesions can
follow difficult cephalic deliveries. The latter are more often forceps or
vacuum-assisted vaginal deliveries (Wilson, 2016). The C5–6 roots join to
form the upper trunk of the plexus, and injury leads to paralysis of the
deltoid, infraspinatus, and flexor muscles of the forearm. The affected arm is
held straight and internally rotated, the elbow is extended, and the wrist and
fingers flexed. Finger function usually is retained.
Damage to the C8-T1 roots supplying the lower plexus results in Klumpke
palsy, in which the hand is flaccid. With total involvement of all brachial
plexus nerve roots, flaccidity of the arm and hand results. Rarely, with severe
injury, phrenic nerve damage can cause ipsilateral diaphragm paralysis, or
injury to sympathetic nerve fibers can cause Horner syndrome, which
manifests as ptosis, miosis, and anhidrosis (Rizeq, 2020). Clavicle or
humeral fracture can be comorbid, and clinical concern may prompt chest
radiography. MR imaging may be obtained with concern for nerve avulsion
(Govindan, 2019).
Because of the importance of brachial plexopathy, the American College
of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2014b) convened a task force to review

extant studies. This Task Force concluded that shoulder dystocia cannot be
accurately predicted, but in most cases, axonal death does not occur and the
prognosis is good. Lindqvist and associates (2012) reported complete
recovery in 86 percent of children with C5–6 trauma, which was the most
common injury, and in 38 percent of those with C5–7 damage. However, those
with global C5–8–T1 injuries always had permanent disability.
Early physical therapy is initiated to prevent contractures or joint
deformity. Maintaining passive joint motion, promoting extremity use,
strengthening affected muscles, and providing compensatory techniques are
goals (Smith, 2018). Severe injuries may require surgical exploration and
nerve reconstruction, usually at 3 to 6 months (Vuillermin, 2016; Wilson,
2016).

Facial Paralysis
The facial nerve can be injured as it emerges from the stylomastoid foramen,
and this may cause facial paralysis (Fig. 33-4). From one series, the
incidence was 0.3 cases per 1000 term births (Al Tawil, 2010). Of these
vaginal births, forceps were used in one fourth, and three fourths followed
spontaneous birth. Pressure from the forceps blade or the bony pelvis,
respectively, are suggested injury mechanisms. It can follow cesarean
delivery (Alexander, 2006). Spontaneous recovery within a few days is the
rule, however, permanent paralysis has been described (Al Tawil, 2010).

FIGURE 33-4 Left facial nerve injury. Classically, the eye fails to close tightly, the labionasal fold is
lost, and the mouth pulls to the unaffected side during crying. This was almost completely resolved two
days after delivery.

■ Fractures
Most long-bone fractures follow difficult deliveries, however, this is not
always the case. At minimum, palpation of the clavicles and long bones is
indicated for all newborns after a difficult delivery. Overlying crepitation or
irregularity will prompt radiography.
Clavicular fractures are common, unpredictable, and una-voidable
complications of normal birth (Ahn, 2015; Roberts, 1995). Their incidence
approximates 5 cases in 1000 live births (Kekki, 2020; Linder, 2012). Rates
are tenfold higher with vaginal birth than with cesarean delivery (Ahn,
2015). With vaginal birth, shoulder dystocia is an association (Högberg,
2020). With cesarean delivery, greater birth weight is a factor (Choi, 2017).
Humeral fractures and femoral fractures are rare. For the humerus,
associated settings are breech delivery or posterior arm delivery during
shoulder dystocia release (Rietberg, 2003; von Heideken, 2020). Those of
the femur are usually associated with breech presentation. Because most

breech-presenting fetuses now undergo cesarean delivery, most of these
fractures are associated with this mode (Kancherla, 2012). As potential
prevention for both fracture types, careful splinting of the bone along its long
axis and avoiding perpendicular forces during extraction are encouraged.
Last, rib fractures are rare at term. In one series, none was associated
with cardiopulmonary resuscitation (Högberg, 2020). Instead, compression
forces to the chest during difficult birth or shoulder dystocia are implicated
(van Rijn, 2009).

■ Soft Tissue Injury
Conceivably, any fetal organ or part could be injured with either vaginal or
cesarean delivery. Intraabdominal hemorrhage is rare and most often stems
from the liver, spleen, or adrenal glands, which are disproportionally large
in the newborn. Risks are difficult delivery, especially those presenting
breech; cardiac resuscitation; macrosomia; or pathologic enlargement of the
involved organ (Schullinger, 1993). Retroperitoneal bleeding with these may
manifest as bruising of the flanks, umbilicus, groin, upper thigh, or scrotum
(Akin 2011; Heyman, 2011; Raveenthiran, 2008). Pale skin, distended
abdomen, and falling hematocrit reflect associated hypovolemia. Treatment
involves hemodynamic resuscitation and control of bleeding.

■ Congenital Deformity Injuries
In congenital torticollis, one sternocleidomastoid muscle fails to elongate
sufficiently. The head gradually turns toward the side of the injury. Its
etiology is unclear. Some cases are associated with breech presentation,
operative vaginal birth, or difficult delivery. However, many follow
uncomplicated birth, and intrauterine positioning, genetics, and ischemia are
some suggested theories (Hardgrib, 2017; Sargent, 2019). Early physical
therapy is recommended (Kaplan, 2018).
With congenital deformations, a normally developed fetal structure
becomes deformed usually by restrictive intrauterine mechanical forces.
Common factors are chronic oligohydramnios, multifetal gestation, or
abnormally shaped or small uterine cavity. Some mechanical deformations
include talipes equinovarus (clubfoot) and oligohydramnios sequence
(Hall, 2014; Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, 2019). The latter may

lead to pulmonary hypoplasia and deformations of the head, face, skin, and
limbs. This sequence and talipes can also be associated with genetic
abnormalities or malformations and are discussed in Chapters 14 and 15 (p.
260 and 303).
Last, congenital hip dislocation is strongly associated with an in-utero
breech presentation (Yang, 2019). Physical examination screening for all
newborns is recommended. Treatment may include observation or bracing
(Shaw, 2016).

REFERENCES
Ahlin K, Himmelmann K, Hagberg G, et al: Cerebral palsy and perinatal infection in children born at
term. Obstet Gynecol 122:41, 2013
Ahn ES, Jung MS, Lee YK, et al: Neonatal clavicular fracture: recent 10 year study. Pediatr Int
57(1):60, 2015
Akin MA, Coban D, Doganay S, et al: Intrahepatic and adrenal hemorrhage as a rare cause of neonatal
anemia. J Perinat Med 39(3):353, 2011
Alexander JM, Leveno KJ, Hauth J, et al: Fetal injury associated with cesarean delivery. Obstet
Gynecol 108:885, 2006
Alfirevic Z, Devane D, Gyte GM, et al: Continuous cardiotocography (CTG) as a form of electronic
fetal monitoring (EFM) for fetal assessment during labour. Cochrane Database System Rev
2:CD006066, 2017
Alhassen Z, Vali P, Guglani L, et al: Recent advances in pathophysiology and management of transient
tachypnea of newborn. J Perinatol 41(1):6, 2021
Allanson ER, Waqar T, White C, et al: Umbilical lactate as a measure of acidosis and predictor of
neonatal risk: a systematic review. BJOG 124(4):584, 2017
Al Tawil K, Saleem N, Kadri H, et al: Traumatic facial nerve palsy in newborns: is it always iatrogenic?
Am J Perinatol 27:711, 2010
American Academy of Pediatrics, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Guidelines for
perinatal care, 8th ed. Elk Grove Village, AAP, 2017
American Academy of Pediatrics, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Neonatal
encephalopathy and cerebral palsy. Defining the pathogenesis and pathophysiology. Elk Grove
Village, AAP, 2003
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Neonatal encephalopathy and neurologic
outcome, second edition. Report of the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists’ Task
Force on Neonatal Encephalopathy. Obstet Gynecol 123(4):896, 2014a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Neonatal brachial plexus palsy. Report of the
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists’ Task Force on Neonatal Brachial Plexus
Palsy. Obstet Gynecol 123(4):902, 2014b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Intrapartum fetal heart rate monitoring:
nomenclature, interpretation, and general management principles. Practice Bulletin No. 106, July
2009, Reaffirmed 2019a

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Thrombocytopenia in pregnancy. Practice
Bulletin No. 207, February 2019b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, American Society of Addiction Medicine: Opioid
use disorder in pregnancy. Committee Opinion No. 711, August 2017, Reaffirmed 2019c
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Delayed umbilical cord clamping after birth.
Committee Opinion No. 814, November 2017, Reaffirmed 2020
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Approaches to limit intervention during labor and
birth. Committee Opinion No. 766, December 2018, Reaffirmed 2021a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Delivery of a newborn with meconium-stained
amniotic fluid. Committee Opinion No. 689, March 2017, Reaffirmed 2021b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, American Academy of Pediatrics: The Apgar
score. Committee Opinion No. 644, October 2015, Reaffirmed 2021c
Anadkat KS, Kuzniewicz MW, Chaudhari BP, et al: Increased risk for respiratory distress among white,
male, late preterm and term infants. J Perinatol 32(10):750, 2012
Aziz K, Lee HC, Escobedo MB, Hoover AV, et al: Part 5: Neonatal Resuscitation: 2020 American
Heart Association Guidelines for Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation and Emergency Cardiovascular
Care. Circulation 142:S524, 2020
Azzopardi D, Strohm B, Marlow N, et al: Effects of hypothermia for perinatal asphyxia on childhood
outcomes. N Engl J Med 371(2):140, 2014
Bansal AG, Oudsema R, Masseaux JA, et al: US of pediatric superficial masses of the head and neck.
Radiographics 38(4):1239, 2018
Barbu D, Mert I, Kruger M, et al: Evidence of fetal central nervous system injury in isolated congenital
heart defects: microcephaly at birth. Am J Obstet Gynecol 201(1):43.e1, 2009
Bax M, Tydeman C, Flodmark O: Clinical and MRI correlates of cerebral palsy: the European cerebral
palsy study. JAMA 296:1602, 2006
Bednarek N, Mathur A, Inder T, et al: Impact of therapeutic hypothermia on MRI diffusion changes in
neonatal encephalopathy. Neurology 78:1420, 2012
Berthelot-Ricou A, Lacroze V, Courbiere B, et al: Respiratory distress syndrome after elective
caesarean section in near term infants: a 5-year cohort study. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med
26(2):176, 2012
Blair E, de Groot JH, Nelson KD: Placental infarction identified by macroscopic examination and risk of
cerebral palsy in infants at 35 weeks of gestational age and over. Am J Obstet Gynecol
205(2):124.e1, 2011
Boskabadi H, Zakerihamid M, Sadeghian MH, et al: Nucleated red blood cells count as a prognostic
biomarker in predicting the complications of asphyxia in neonates. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med
30(21):2551, 2017
Burke BL, Robbins JM, Bird TM, et al: Trends in hospitalizations for neonatal jaundice and kernicterus
in the United States, 1988–2005. Pediatrics 123(2):524, 2009
Casey BM, McIntire DD, Leveno KJ: The continuing value of the Apgar score for the assessment of
newborn infants. N Engl J Med 344:467, 2001
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Data and statistics for cerebral palsy. 2016. Available at:
https://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/cp/data.html. Accessed June 2021
Chen HY, Blackwell SC, Chauhan SP. Association between Apgar score at 5 minutes and adverse
outcomes among low-risk pregnancies. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 16:1, 2020
Chen HY, Blackwell SC, Yang LJ, et al: Neonatal brachial plexus palsy: associated birth injury
outcomes, hospital length of stay and costs. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med February 25, 2021 [Epub

ahead of print]
Choi HA, Lee YK, Ko SY, et al: Neonatal clavicle fracture in cesarean delivery: incidence and risk
factors. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 30(14):1689, 2017
Christensen DL, Baio J, Van Naarden Braun K, et al: Prevalence and characteristics of autism
spectrum disorder among children 8 years—Autism and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring
Network, 11 sites, United States, 2012. MMWR 65(3):1, 2016
Christensen RD, Baer VL, Henry E: Neonatal subgaleal hemorrhage in a multihospital healthcare
system: prevalence, associations, and outcomes. Eur J Neonatol Res 1:4, 2011
Colditz MJ, Lai MM, Cartwright DW, et al: Subgaleal haemorrhage in the newborn: a call for early
diagnosis and aggressive management. J Paediatr Child Health 51(2):140, 2015
Cole L, Dewey D, Letourneau N, et al: Clinical characteristics, risk factors, and outcomes associated
with neonatal hemorrhagic stroke: a population-based case-control study. JAMA Pediatr 171(3):230,
2017
Cremer M, Sallmon H, Kling PJ, et al: Thrombocytopenia and platelet transfusion in the neonate. Semin
Fetal Neonatal Med 21(1):10, 2016
DeJong EP, Lindenburg IT, van Klink JM, et al: Intrauterine transfusion for parvovirus B19 infection:
long term neurodevelopmental outcome. Am J Obstet Gynecol 206(3):204.e1, 2012
Dempsey EM, Barrington K: Short and long term outcomes following partial exchange transfusion in the
polycythaemic newborn: a systematic review. Arch Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed 91(1):F2, 2006
Dolivet E, Delesalle C, Morello R, et al: A case-control study about foetal trauma during caesarean
delivery. J Gynecol Obstet Hum Reprod 47(7):32, 2018
Dooley SL, Pesavento DJ, Depp R, et al: Meconium below the vocal cords at delivery: correlation with
intrapartum events. Am J Obstet Gynecol 153:767, 1985
Dupuis O, Silveira R, Dupont C, et al: Comparison of “instrument-associated” and “spontaneous”
obstetric depressed skull fractures in a cohort of 68 neonates. Am J Obstet Gynecol 192:165, 2005
Eissa DS, El-Farrash RA: New insights into thrombopoiesis in neonatal sepsis. Platelets 24(2):122, 2013
El-Dib M, Parziale MP, Johnson L, et al: Encephalopathy in neonates with subgaleal hemorrhage is a
key predictor of outcome. Pediatr Res 86(2):234, 2019
El Shahed AI, Dargaville PA, Ohlsson A, et al: Surfactant for meconium aspiration syndrome in term
and late preterm infants. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 12:CD002054, 2014
Ensing S, Abu-Hanna A, Schaaf JM, et al: Trends in birth asphyxia, obstetric interventions and perinatal
mortality among term singletons: a nationwide cohort study. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 28(6):632,
2015
Fear NT, Roman E, Ansell P, et al: Vitamin K and childhood cancer: a report from the United Kingdom
Childhood Cancer Study. Br J Cancer 89(7):1228, 2003
Finnegan LP, Connaughton JF Jr, Kron RE, et al: Neonatal abstinence syndrome: assessment and
management. Addict Dis 2:141, 1975
Foglia EE, Weiner G, de Almeida MF, et al: Duration of resuscitation at birth, mortality, and
neurodevelopment: a systematic review. Pediatrics 146(3):e20201449, 2020
Fraser WD, Hofmeyr J, Lede R, et al: Amnioinfusion for the prevention of the meconium aspiration
syndrome. Amnioinfusion Trial Group. N Engl J Med 353:909, 2005
Garg N, Choudhary M, Sharma D, et al: The role of early inhaled budesonide therapy in meconium
aspiration in term newborns: a randomized control study. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 29(1):36,
2016
Gilstrap LC III, Leveno KJ, Burris J, et al: Diagnosis of asphyxia on the basis of fetal pH, Apgar score,
and newborn cerebral dysfunction. Am J Obstet Gynecol 161:825, 1989

Glass HG, Hong KJ, Rogers EE, et al: Risk factors for epilepsy in children with neonatal
encephalopathy. Pediatr Res 70(5):535, 2011
Goldaber KG, Gilstrap LC III, Leveno KJ, et al: Pathologic fetal acidemia. Obstet Gynecol 78:1103,
1991
Gomersall J, Berber S, Middleton P, et al: Umbilical cord management at term and late preterm birth: a
meta-analysis. Pediatrics 147(3):e2020015404, 2021
Govindan M, Burrows HL: Neonatal brachial plexus injury. Pediatr Rev 40(9):494, 2019
Graham EM, Adami RR, McKenney SL, et al: Diagnostic accuracy of fetal heart rate monitoring in the
identification of neonatal encephalopathy. Obstet Gynecol 124(3):507, 2014
Guillet R, Edwards AD, Thoresen M, et al: Seven-to-eight year follow-up of the CoolCap trial of head
cooling for neonatal encephalopathy. Pediatr Res 71(12):205, 2012
Gyamfi-Bannerman C, Blackwell TS, Tita AT, et al: Antenatal betamethasone for women at risk for late
preterm delivery. N Engl J Med 374(14):1311, 2016
Hafström M, Källén K, Serenius F, et al: Cerebral palsy in extremely preterm infants. Pediatrics
141(1):e20171433, 2018
Hall JG: Oligohydramnios sequence revisited in relationship to arthrogryposis, with distinctive skin
changes. Am J Med Genet A 164A(11):2775, 2014
Hardgrib N, Rahbek O, Møller-Madsen B, et al: Do obstetric risk factors truly influence the
etiopathogenesis of congenital muscular torticollis? J Orthop Traumatol 18(4):359, 2017
Harteman J, Groenendaal F, Benders M, et al: Role of thrombophilic factors in full-term infants with
neonatal encephalopathy. Pediatr Res 73(1):80, 2013
Heyman S, Vervloessem D: Bryant’s and Stabler’s signs after a difficult delivery. N Engl J Med
365:1824, 2011
Hintz SR, Vohr BR, Bann CM, et al: Preterm neuroimaging and school-age cognitive outcomes.
Pediatrics 142(1):e20174058, 2018
Hirakawa E, Ibara S, Tokuhisa T, et al: Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation in 61 neonates: singlecenter experience. Pediatr Int 59(4):438, 2017
Hofmeyr GJ, Xu H, Eke AC: Amnioinfusion for meconium-stained liquor in labour. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev 23:CD000014, 2014
Högberg U, Fellman V, Thiblin I, et al: Difficult birth is the main contributor to birth-related fracture and
accidents to other neonatal fractures. Acta Paediatr 109(10):2040, 2020
Hong HS, Lee JY: Intracranial hemorrhage in term neonates. Childs Nerv Syst 34(6):1135, 2018
Hopewell B, Steiner LA, Ehrenkranz RA, et al: Partial exchange transfusion for polycythemia
hyperviscosity syndrome. Am J Perinatol 28(7):557, 2011
INFANT Collaborative Group: Computerised interpretation of fetal heart rate during labour (INFANT):
a randomised controlled trial. Lancet 389(10080):1719, 2017
Jacobs SE, Berg M, Hunt R, et al: Cooling for newborns with hypoxic ischaemic encephalopathy.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev (1):CD003311, 2013
Johansson S, Sandström A, Cnattingius S: Maternal overweight and obesity increase the risk of fetal
acidosis during labor. J Perinatol 38(9):1144, 2018
Johnson C, Burd I, Northington F, et al: Clinical chorioamnionitis is associated with a more severe
metabolic acidosis in neonates with suspected hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 210:S205, 2014
Johnson GJ, Denning S, Clark SL, et al: Pathophysiologic origins of brachial plexus injury. Obstet
Gynecol 136(4):725, 2020

Juul SE, Comstock BA, Heagerty PJ, et al: High-dose erythropoietin for asphyxia and encephalopathy
(HEAL): a randomized controlled trial—background, aims, and study protocol. Neonatology
113(4):3315, 2018
Kalra VK, Lee HC, Sie L, et al: Change in neonatal resuscitation guidelines and trends in incidence of
meconium aspiration syndrome in California. J Perinatol 40(1):46, 2020
Kancherla R, Sankineani SR, Naranje S, et al: Birth-related femoral fracture in newborns: risk factors
and management. J Child Orthop 6(3):177, 2012
Kandemirli SG, Cingoz M, Bilgin C, et al: Temporal evolution of imaging findings in ossified
cephalohematoma. Craniofac Surg 31(4):e375, 2020
Kaplan SL, Coulter C, Sargent B: Physical therapy management of congenital muscular torticollis: a
2018 evidence-based clinical practice guideline from the APTA Academy of Pediatric Physical
Therapy. Pediatr Phys Ther 30(4):240, 2018
Kaur A, Luu TM, Shah PS, et al: Neonatal Intraventricular Hemorrhage and Hospitalization in
Childhood. Pediatr Neurol 103:35, 2020
Kekki M, Salonen A, Tihtonen K, et al: The incidence of birth injuries decreased in Finland between
1997 and 2017: a nationwide register study. Acta Paediatr 109(12):2562, 2020
Kraft WK, Adeniyl-Jones SC, Chervoneva I, et al: Buprenorphine for the treatment of the neonatal
abstinence syndrome. N Engl J Med 376(24):2341, 2017
Krakowiak P, Walker CK, Bremer AA, et al: Maternal metabolic conditions and risk for autism and
other neurodevelopmental disorders. Pediatrics 129(5):1, 2012
Kuzniewicz MW, Wickremasinghe AC, Wu YW, et al: Incidence, etiology, and outcomes of hazardous
hyperbilirubinemia in newborns. Pediatrics 134(3):504, 2014
Kwon JM, Guillet R, Shankaran S, et al: Clinical seizures in neonatal hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy
have no independent impact on neurodevelopmental outcome: secondary analyses of data from the
Neonatal Research Network hypothermia trial. J Child Neurol 26:322, 2011
Laptook AR: Birth asphyxia and hypoxic-ischemic brain injury in the preterm infant. Clin Perinatol
43(3):529, 2016
Laptook AR, Shankaran S, Tyson JE, et al: Effect of therapeutic hypothermia initiated after 6 hours of
age on death or disability among newborns with hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy: a randomized
clinical trial. JAMA 318(16):1550, 2017
Lee CC, Chou IJ, Chang YJ, et al: Unusual presentations of birth related cervical spinal cord injury.
Front Pediatr 8:514, 2020a
Lee JH, Jung J, Park H, et al: Umbilical cord arterial blood gas analysis in term singleton pregnancies: a
retrospective analysis over 11 years. Obstet Gynecol Sci 63(3):293, 2020b
Lee JJ, Chen J, Eisler L, et al: Comparative effectiveness of opioid replacement agents for neonatal
opioid withdrawal syndrome: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Perinatol 39(11):1535, 2019
Lee SJ, Kim JK, Kim SJ: The clinical characteristics and prognosis of subgaleal hemorrhage in
newborn. Korean J Pediatr 61(12):387, 2018
Leveno KJ, Quirk JG Jr, Cunningham FG, et al: Prolonged pregnancy. I. Observations concerning the
causes of fetal distress. Am J Obstet Gynecol 150:465, 1984
Li Y, Wang W, Zhang D: Maternal diabetes mellitus and risk of neonatal respiratory distress syndrome:
a meta-analysis. Acta Diabetol 56(7):729, 2019
Limperopoulos C, Robertson RL, Sullivan NR, et al: Cerebellar injury in term infants: clinical
characteristics, magnetic resonance imaging findings, and outcome. Pediatr Neurol 41(1):1, 2009
Linder I, Melamed N, Kogan A, et al: Gender and birth trauma in full-term infants. J Matern Fetal
Neonatal Med 25(9):1603, 2012

Lindqvist PG, Erichs K, Molnar C, et al: Characteristics and outcome of brachial plexus birth palsy in
neonates. Acta Paediatr 101(6):579, 2012
Liszewski MC, Stanescu AL, Phillips G, et al: Distress in neonates: underlying causes and current
imaging assessment. Radiol Clin North Am 55(4):629, 2017
MacLennan AH, Thompson SC, Gecz J: Cerebral palsy: causes, pathways, and the role of genetic
variants. Am J Obstet Gynecol 213(6):779, 2015
Maisels MJ, Bhutani VK, Bogen D, et al: Hyperbilirubinemia in the newborn infant >or = 35 weeks’
gestation: an update with clarifications. Pediatrics 124(4):1193, 2009
Malec L: Nonimmune anemias. Clin Perinatol 47(1):143, 2020
Malin GL, Morris RK, Khan KS: Strength of association between umbilical cord pH and perinatal and
long term outcomes: systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ 340:c1471, 2010
Martinez-Biarge M, Madero R, Gonzalez A, et al: Perinatal morbidity and risk of hypoxic-ischemic
encephalopathy associated with intrapartum sentinel events. Am J Obstet Gynecol 206(2):148, 2012
McAdams RM, Juul SE. Neonatal encephalopathy: update on therapeutic hypothermia and other novel
therapeutics. Clin Perinatol 43(3):485, 2016
McIntyre S, Blair E, Badawi N, et al: Antecedents of cerebral palsy and perinatal death in term and late
preterm singletons. Obstet Gynecol 122:869, 2013
McKinlay CJ, Alsweiler JM, Ansell JM, et al: Neonatal glycemia and neurodevelopmental outcomes at
2 years. N Engl J Med 373(16):1507, 2015
Menticoglou SM, Perlman M, Manning FA: High cervical spinal cord injury in neonates delivered with
forceps: report of 15 cases. Obstet Gynecol 86:589, 1995
Merhar SL, Kline-Fath BM, Nathan AT, et al: Identification and management of neonatal skull
fractures. J Perinatol 36(8):640, 2016
Modanlou H, Hutson S, Merritt AT: Early blood transfusion and resolution of disseminated intravascular
coagulation associated with massive subgaleal hemorrhage. Neonatal Netw 35(1):37, 2016
Moster D, Lie RT, Irgens LM: The association of the Apgar score with subsequent death and cerebral
palsy: a population-based study in term infants. J Pediatr 138(6):798, 2001
Moster D, Lie RT, Markestad T: Long-term medical and social consequences of preterm birth. N Engl J
Med 359:262, 2008
Natarajan CK, Sankar MJ, Jain K, et al: Surfactant therapy and antibiotics in neonates with meconium
aspiration syndrome: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Perinatol 36(Suppl 1):S49 2016a
Natarajan G, Pappas A, Shankaran S: Outcomes in childhood following therapeutic hypothermia for
neonatal hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy (HIE). Semin Perinatol 40(8):549, 2016b
Nelson DB, Lucke AM, McIntire DD, et al: Obstetric antecedents to body cooling treatment of the
newborn infant. Am J Obstet Gynecol 211:115, 2014
Nelson KB, Blair E: Prenatal factors in singletons with cerebral palsy born at or near term. N Engl J
Med 373(10):946, 2015
Nelson KB, Ellenberg JH: Antecedents of cerebral palsy: multivariate analysis of risk. N Engl J Med
315:81, 1986a
Nelson KB, Ellenberg JH: Antecedents of cerebral palsy: univariate analysis of risks. Am J Dis Child
139:1031, 1985
Nelson KB, Ellenberg JH: Antecedents of seizure disorders in early childhood. Am J Dis Child
140:1053, 1986b
Nelson KB, Ellenberg JH: Obstetric complications as risk factors for cerebral palsy or seizure disorders.
JAMA 251:1843, 1984

Novak CM, Ozen M, Burd I: Perinatal brain injury: mechanisms, prevention, and outcomes. Clin
Perinatol 45(2):357, 2018
O’Callaghan M, MacLennan A: Cesarean delivery and cerebral palsy: a systematic review and metaanalysis. Obstet Gynecol 122:1169, 2013
O’Leary CM, Watson L, D’Antoine H, et al: Heavy maternal alcohol consumption and cerebral palsy in
the offspring. Dec Med Child Neurol 54:224, 2012
Ou-Yang MC, Huang CB, Huang HC, et al: Clinical manifestations of symptomatic intracranial
hemorrhage in term neonates: 18 years of experience in a medical center. Pediatr Neonatol
51(4):208, 2010
Pandita A, Murki S, Oleti TP, et al: Effect of nasal continuous positive airway pressure on infants with
meconium aspiration syndrome: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA Pediatr 172(2):161, 2018
Phelan JP, Ahn MO: Perinatal observations in forty-eight neurologically impaired term infants. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 171:424, 1994
Pisani F, Facini C, Pavlidis E, et al: Epilepsy after neonatal seizures: literature review. Eur J Paediatr
Neurol 19(1):6, 2015
Raveenthiran V, Cenita S, Viswanathan P: Stabler’s sign revisited in a spontaneously ruptured
neuroblastoma of the newborn. Am J Perinatol 25(1):17, 2008
Ravichandran L, Allen VM, Allen AC, et al: Incidence, intrapartum risk factors, and prognosis of
neonatal hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy among infants born at 35 weeks gestation or more. J
Obstet Gynaecol Can 42(12):1489, 2020
Razak A, Hussain A: Erythropoietin in perinatal hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy: a systematic review
and meta-analysis. J Perinat Med 47(4):478, 2019
Remon JI, Raghavan A, Maheshwari A: Polycythemia in the newborn. NeoReviews 12(1):e20, 2011
Rietberg CC, Elferink-Stinkens PM, Brand R, et al: Term breech presentation in The Netherlands from
1995 to 1999: mortality and morbidity in relation to the mode of delivery of 33824 infants. BJOG
110(6):604, 2003
Rizeq YK, Many BT, Vacek JC, et al: Diaphragmatic paralysis after phrenic nerve injury in newborns. J
Pediatr Surg 55(2):240, 2020
Roberts SW, Hernandez C, Maberry MC, et al: Obstetric clavicular fracture: the enigma of normal birth.
Obstet Gynecol 86(6):978, 1995
Robinson MN, Peake LJ, Ditchfield MR, et al: Magnetic resonance imaging findings in a populationbased cohort of children with cerebral palsy. Dev Med Child Neurol 51(1):39, 2008
Roland EH, Flodmark O, Hill A: Thalamic hemorrhage with intraventricular hemorrhage in the full-term
newborn. Pediatrics 85(5):737, 1990
Roman E, Fear NT, Ansell P, et al: Vitamin K and childhood cancer: analysis of individual patient data
from six case-control studies. Br J Cancer 86(1):63, 2002
Rooks VJ, Eaton JP, Ruess L, et al: Prevalence and evolution of intracranial hemorrhage in
asymptomatic term infants. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 29(6):1082, 2008
Rossi AC, Vanderbilt D, Chmait RH: Neurodevelopmental outcomes after laser therapy for twin-twin
transfusion syndrome: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Obstet Gynecol 118(5):1145, 2011
Sankar MJ, Chandrasekaran A, Kumar P, et al: Vitamin K prophylaxis for prevention of vitamin K
deficiency bleeding: a systematic review. J Perinatol 36 (Suppl 1):S29, 2016
Sargent B, Kaplan SL, Coulter C, et al: Congenital muscular torticollis: bridging the gap between
research and clinical practice. Pediatrics 144(2):e20190582, 2019
Sauber-Schatz EK, Markovic N, Weiss HB, et al: Descriptive epidemiology of birth trauma in the United
States in 2003. Paediatr Perinat Epidemiol 24(2):116, 2010

Schou KV, Lando AV, Ekelund CK, et al: Long-term neurodevelopmental outcome of monochorionic
twins after laser therapy or umbilical cord occlusion for twin-twin transfusion syndrome. Fetal Diagn
Ther 46(1):20, 2019
Schullinger JN: Birth trauma. Pediatr Clin North Am 40(6):1351, 1993
Shah NA, Wusthoff CJ: Intracranial hemorrhage in the neonate. Neonatal Netw 35(2):67, 2016
Shankaran S, Laptook AR, Pappas A, et al: Effect of depth and duration of cooling on death or disability
at age 18 months among neonates with hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy: a randomized clinical trial.
JAMA 318(1):57, 2017
Shankaran S, Pappas A, McDonald SA, et al: Childhood outcomes after hypothermia for neonatal
encephalopathy. N Engl J Med 366(22):2085, 2012
Shatrov JG, Birch SC, Lam FT, et al: Chorioamnionitis and cerebral palsy: a meta-analysis. Obstet
Gynecol 116:387, 2010
Shaw BA, Segal LS: Evaluation and referral for developmental dysplasia of the hip in infants. Pediatrics
138(6):e20163107, 2016
Shevell A, Wintermark P, Benini R, et al: Chorioamnionitis and cerebral palsy: lessons from a patient
registry. Eur J Paediatr Neurol 18(3):301, 2014
Shi Z, Ma L, Luo K, et al: Chorioamnionitis in the development of cerebral palsy: a meta-analysis and
systematic review. Pediatrics 139(6):e2016378, 2017
Silva AM, Smith RN, Lehmann CU, et al: Neonatal nucleated red blood cells and the prediction of
cerebral white matter injury in preterm infants. Obstet Gynecol 107:550, 2006
Slusher TM, Olusanya BO, Vreman HJ, et al: A randomized trial of phototherapy with filtered sunlight in
African neonates. N Engl J Med 373(12):1115, 2015
Smith BW, Daunter AK, Yang LJ, et al: An update on the management of neonatal brachial plexus palsy
—replacing old paradigms: a review. JAMA Pediatr 172(6):585, 2018
Smith C, Weinberg A, Forster JE, et al: Maternal lopinavir-ritonavir is associated with fewer adverse
events in infants than nelfinavir or atazanavir. Infect Dis Obstet Gynecol 2016:9848041, 2016
Smithers-Sheedy H, McIntyre S, Gibson C, et al: A special supplement: findings from the Australian
Cerebral Palsy Register, birth years 1993 to 2006. Dev Med Child Neurol 58(Suppl 2):5, 2016
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, McKinney J, Rac MW, et al: Congenital talipes equinovarus
(clubfoot). Am J Obstet Gynecol 221(6):B10, 2019
Stoknes M, Andersen GL, Dahlseng MO, et al: Cerebral palsy and neonatal death in term singletons
born small for gestational age. Pediatrics 130(6):e1629, 2012
Stuart A, Olausson PO, Kallen K: Apgar scores at 5 minutes after birth in relation to school
performance at 16 years of age. Obstet Gynecol 118(2 Pt 1):201, 2011
Swanson AE, Veldman A, Wallace EM, et al: Subgaleal hemorrhage: risk factors and outcomes. Acta
Obstet Gynecol Scand 91(2):260, 2012
Takenouchi T, Kasdorf E, Engel M, et al: Changing pattern of perinatal brain injury in term infants in
recent years. Pediatr Neurol 46(2):106, 2012
Tan AP, Svrckova P, Cowan F, et al: Intracranial hemorrhage in neonates: a review of etiologies,
patterns and predicted clinical outcomes. Eur J Paediatr Neurol 22(4):690, 2018
Thornton PD, Campbell RT, Mogos MF, et al: Meconium aspiration syndrome: incidence and outcomes
using discharge data. Early Hum Dev 136:21, 2019
Tolia VN, Patrick SW, Bennett MM, et al: Increasing incidence of the neonatal abstinence syndrome in
U.S. neonatal ICUs. N Engl J Med 372(22):2118, 2015
Torfs CP, van den Berg B, Oechsli FW, et al: Prenatal and perinatal factors in the etiology of cerebral
palsy. J Pediatr 116:615, 1990

Towner D, Castro MA, Eby-Wilkens E, et al: Effect of mode of delivery in nulliparous women on
neonatal intracranial injury. N Engl J Med 341(23):1709, 1999
Tweed EJ, Mackay DF, Nelson SM, et al: Five-minute Apgar score and educational outcomes:
retrospective cohort study of 751,369 children. Arch Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed 101(2):F121, 2016
Vain NE, Batton DG: Meconium “aspiration” (or respiratory distress associated with meconium-stained
amniotic fluid?). Semin Fetal Neonatal Med 22(4):214, 2017
Vain NE, Szyld EG, Prudent LM, et al: Oropharyngeal and nasopharyngeal suctioning of meconiumstained neonates before delivery of their shoulders: multicenter, randomized controlled trial. Lancet
364:597, 2004
Vandborg PK, Hansen BM, Greisen G, et al: Follow-up of neonates with total serum bilirubin levels ≥25
mg/dL: a Danish population-based study. Pediatrics 130(1):61, 2012
van Rijn RR, Bilo RA, Robben SG: Birth-related mid-posterior rib fractures in neonates: a report of
three cases (and a possible fourth case) and a review of the literature. Pediatr Radiol 39(1):30, 2009
Villamor E, Tedroff K, Peterson M, et al: Association between maternal body mass index in early
pregnancy and incidence of cerebral palsy. JAMA 317(9):925, 2017
von Heideken J, Thiblin I, Högberg U: The epidemiology of infant shaft fractures of femur or humerus
by incidence, birth, accidents, and other causes. BMC Musculoskelet Disord 21(1):840, 2020
Vuillermin C, Bauer AS: Boston Children’s Hospital approach to brachial plexus birth palsy. J Pediatr
Orthop B 25(4):296, 2016
Wagenaar N, Martinez-Biarge M, van der Aa NE, et al: Neurodevelopment after perinatal arterial
ischemic stroke. Pediatrics 142(3):e20174164, 2018
Walsh B, Boylan G, Dempsey E, et al: Association of nucleated red blood cells and severity of
encephalopathy in normothermic and hypothermic infants. Acta Paediatr 102(2):e64, 2013
Walsh BH, Bovian GB, Murray DM: Nucleated red blood cells and early EEG: predicting Sarnat stage
and two year outcome. Early Hum Dev 87(5):335, 2011
Walsh BH, Neil J, Morey J, et al: The frequency and severity of magnetic resonance imaging
abnormalities in infants with mild neonatal encephalopathy. J Pediatr 187:26, 2017
Watchko JF, Tiribelli C: Bilirubin-induced neurologic damage—mechanisms and management
approaches. N Engl J Med 369:21, 2013
Wen Q, Muraca GM, Ting J, et al: Temporal trends in severe maternal and neonatal trauma during
childbirth: a population-based observational study. BMJ Open 8:e020578, 2018
Werner EF, Janevic TM, Illuzzi J, et al: Mode of delivery in nulliparous women and neonatal intracranial
injury. Obstet Gynecol 118(6):1239, 2011
Wiklund LM, Uvebrant P, Flodmark O: Computed tomography as an adjunct in etiological analysis of
hemiplegic cerebral palsy. I: Children born preterm. Neuropediatrics 22:50, 1991a
Wiklund LM, Uvebrant P, Flodmark O: Computed tomography as an adjunct in etiological analysis of
hemiplegic cerebral palsy; II. Children born at term. Neuropediatrics 22:121, 1991b
Williams JW: Obstetrics: a textbook for the use of students and practitioners. New York, Appleton, 1903
Wilson TJ, Chang KW, Chauhan SP, et al: Peripartum and neonatal factors associated with the
persistence of neonatal brachial plexus palsy at 1 year: a review of 382 cases. J Neurosurg Pediatr
17(5):618, 2016
Wiswell TE, Gannon CM, Jacob J, et al: Delivery room management of the apparently vigorous
meconium-stained neonate: results of the multicenter, international collaborative trial. Pediatrics
105(1 Pt 1):1, 2000
Wu YW, Bauer LA, Ballard RA, et al: Erythropoietin for neuroprotection in neonatal encephalopathy:
safety and pharmacokinetics. Pediatrics 130(4):683, 2012

Wu YW, Croen LA, Shah SJ, et al: Cerebral palsy in a term population: risk factors and neuroimaging
findings. Pediatrics 118:691, 2006
Wu YW, Hamrick SE, Miller SP, et al: Intraventricular hemorrhage in term neonates caused by
sinovenous thrombosis. Ann Neurol 54(1):123, 2003
Wyckoff MH, Wyllie J, Aziz K, et al: Neonatal life support: 2020 International Consensus on
Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation and Emergency Cardiovascular Care Science with Treatment
Recommendations. Circulation 142:S185, 2020
Yang S, Zusman N, Lieberman E, et al: Developmental dysplasia of the hip. Pediatrics
143(1):e20181147, 2019
Yeh P, Emary K, Impey L: The relationship between umbilical cord arterial pH and serious adverse
neonatal outcome: analysis of 51,519 consecutive validated samples. BJOG 119(7):824, 2012
Yeung T, Jasani B, Shah PS: Steroids for the management of neonates with meconium aspiration
syndrome: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Indian Pediatr 58(4):370, 2021
Zamora C, Sams C, Cornea EA, et al: Subdural hemorrhage in asymptomatic neonates:
neurodevelopmental outcomes and MRI findings at 2 years. Radiology 298(1):173, 2021
Zimmermann P, Duppenthaler A: Infected cephalhaematoma in a five-week-old infant—case report and
review of the literature. BMC Infect Dis 16(1):636, 2016

CHAPTER 34

The Preterm Newborn

RESPIRATORY DISTRESS SYNDROME
NECROTIZING ENTEROCOLITIS
RETINOPATHY OF PREMATURITY
BRAIN DISORDERS
INTRACRANIAL HEMORRHAGE
CEREBRAL PALSY
REFERENCES
At the time of this textbook’s first edition in 1903, preterm delivery was
often followed by neonatal death. However, subsequent scientific innovation
has advanced the threshold of viability to 22 to 24 weeks’ gestation
(Watkins, 2020). Moreover, the overall survival rate for preterm neonates
<29 weeks’ gestation approaches 80 percent (Travers 2018). Still, the
preterm newborn is susceptible to many serious medical complications both
early and later in life (Table 34-1).
TABLE 34-1. Complications of Prematurity

The complications of prematurity can be serious, and this is reflected in
overall neonatal mortality rates. In 2018, two thirds of all infant deaths in the
United States were in the 10 percent born before 37 weeks (Ely, 2020;
Hamilton, 2021). Fortunately, rates of preterm birth have declined from
approximately 12 percent in 2007 to 10 percent in 2020. The rate of early
preterm births (<34 weeks’ gestation) declined from 2.77 to 2.69 percent,
which is the lowest level reported since 2007 (Hamilton, 2021).

RESPIRATORY DISTRESS SYNDROME
The seminal complication of the preterm newborn is respiratory distress
syndrome (RDS). This results from immature lungs that are unable to sustain
necessary oxygenation due to surfactant deficiency. The resulting hypoxia can
be associated with pulmonary hypertension and neurologic damage such as
cerebral palsy. In addition, hyperoxia, a side effect of RDS treatment,
contributes to other preterm morbidities including bronchopulmonary
dysplasia, necrotizing enterocolitis, periventricular leukomalacia, and
retinopathy of prematurity.

■ Etiopathogenesis
To provide blood gas exchange immediately following delivery, the lungs
must rapidly fill with air while being cleared of fluid. Concurrently,

pulmonary arterial blood flow must rise. Although some of the fluid is
expelled as the chest is compressed during vaginal delivery, most is
absorbed through the pulmonary lymphatics via complex mechanisms
described in Chapter 32 (p. 586). Sufficient surfactant, synthesized by type II
pneumocytes, is essential to stabilize the air-expanded alveoli. This
lipoprotein lowers surface tension and thereby prevents lung collapse during
expiration (Chap. 7, p. 131). If surfactant is inadequate, hyaline membranes
form in the distal bronchioles and alveoli, and RDS develops. Although RDS
is generally a disease of preterm neonates, it can develop in term newborns,
especially with sepsis, pneumonia, or meconium aspiration. In these cases,
surfactant can be inactivated by inflammation and/or the presence of
meconium (Chap. 33, p. 600).
With inadequate surfactant, alveoli are unstable and collapse with the
low pressures of end expiration. Pneumocyte nutrition is compromised by
hypoxia and systemic hypotension. Partial persistence of the fetal circulation
may lead to pulmonary hypertension and a relative right-to-left shunt.
Eventually, alveolar cells undergo ischemic necrosis. When oxygen therapy
is initiated, the pulmonary vascular bed dilates, and the shunt reverses.
Protein-filled fluid leaks into the alveolar ducts, and the cells lining the ducts
slough. Hyaline membranes composed of fibrin-rich protein and cellular
debris line the dilated alveoli and terminal bronchioles. The epithelium
underlying the membrane becomes necrotic. At autopsy, with histological
staining of lung tissue with hematoxylin-eosin, these membranes appear
amorphous and eosinophilic, like hyaline cartilage. Because of this,
respiratory distress syndrome is also termed hyaline membrane disease.

■ Clinical Course
In typical RDS, tachypnea develops, the chest wall retracts, and expiration is
accompanied by nostril flaring and by grunting—in an attempt to provide a
positive end-expiratory pressure to prevent lung collapse. Shunting of blood
through nonventilated lung contributes to hypoxemia and to metabolic and
respiratory acidosis. Poor peripheral circulation and systemic hypotension
may be evident. The typical chest radiograph shows a diffuse
reticulogranular infiltrate and an air-filled tracheobronchial tree—air
bronchograms (Fig. 34-1).

FIGURE 34-1 Chest radiograph of a preterm newborn with moderate respiratory distress syndrome.
Note the diffuse granularity throughout the lungs and mild, central, air bronchograms. The lungs are only
eight ribs expanded despite mechanical ventilation.

Respiratory insufficiency can also be caused by sepsis, pneumonia,
meconium aspiration, pneumothorax, persistent fetal circulation, heart
failure, and congenital malformations involving thoracic structures, such as
diaphragmatic hernia (Chap. 33, p. 599). Common mutations in surfactant
protein production and the phospholipid transporter (ABCA3) are rare
causes of RDS (Singh, 2021).

■ Treatment
An important factor influencing survival is neonatal intensive care. Although
hypoxemia prompts application of supplemental oxygen, excess oxygen can
damage the pulmonary epithelium, retina, and other immature tissues. Despite
this, advances in mechanical ventilation technology have improved neonatal
survival rates. For example, continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP)
prevents the collapse of unstable alveoli. This allows high concentrations of
inspired oxygen to be reduced, thereby minimizing its toxicity. To help limit

the need for tracheal intubation and intermittent positive-pressure ventilation,
CPAP has been studied in well-designed trials (Morley, 2008; SUPPORT
Study Group, 2010b). An initial CPAP strategy coupled with subsequent
selective surfactant use is a beneficial alternative to immediate intubation
and surfactant for neonates of extremely early gestational age (Wyckoff,
2020). Less-invasive surfactant administration techniques allow surfactant
delivery while maintaining the preterm newborn on CPAP. Such methods
reduce the need for intubation and mechanical ventilation in the first 72 hours
and decrease rates of death or bronchopulmonary dysplasia (Abdel-Latif,
2021).
Mechanical ventilation has undoubtedly improved survival rates, but it is
an important factor in the genesis of chronic lung disease of prematurity—
bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD). Namely, mechanical ventilation places
a newborn at risk for barotrauma and volutrauma. Moreover, hyperoxia can
create reactive oxygen species that trigger inflammation. Infection also can
be contributory. In affected newborns, alveolar and pulmonary vascular
development is disrupted, leading to hypoxia, hypercarbia, and chronic
oxygen dependence. It can also affect adult lung function (Thébaud, 2019).
BPD remains the most frequent complication of extreme preterm birth (Stoll,
2015).
High-frequency oscillatory ventilation is an alternative to conventional
mechanical ventilation for preterm newborns. However, benefits and risks
vary considerably between studies (Cools, 2015). Similarly, thus far, the
evidence for high-frequency jet ventilation is not superior to conventional
ventilation for this population (Rojas-Reyes, 2015).
In the past, ventilator-dependent preterm neonates were often treated with
glucocorticoids to prevent and treat BPD. This differs from antenatal use,
described in the next sections. The American Academy of Pediatrics now
recommends against routine neonatal corticosteroid use because of limited
benefits and greater rates of impaired motor and cognitive function and
school performance in exposed newborns (Watterberg, 2010). The risk of
adverse neurodevelopment is highest if dexamethasone is given to preterm
newborns at low risk of BPD. Attempts have been made to identify the
highest-risk neonates for whom the benefits would exceed the risks (Cuna,
2018). Different types of corticosteroids, with various timing and
administration routes, have been studied. Current trials are focused on
corticosteroids, mixed with surfactant, delivered intratracheally directly to

the lung. This approach may avoid some systemic adverse effects of
corticosteroids (Cheong, 2019).
In other efforts to prevent BPD, early animal studies demonstrated
significant improvements in lung function with weeks of inhaled nitric oxide
(McCurnin, 2005). Despite initial enthusiasm, clinical trials failed to
demonstrate a consistent benefit (Greenough, 2020). A National Institutes of
Health (NIH) consensus statement concluded that the available data do not
support its use to prevent or treat BPD (Cole, 2011).
Caffeine has been used widely to treat apnea of prematurity, but it also
has bronchodilatory effects. One large randomized trial of caffeine versus
placebo showed lower BPD rates, improved neurodevelopmental outcomes
during early childhood, and good evidence of safety up to 11 years (Schmidt,
2006, 2012, 2017). This therapy is now widely used for newborns weighing
≤1250 g.
The antioxidant vitamin A is necessary for normal lung growth and the
integrity of respiratory tract epithelial cells. Preterm newborns have low
vitamin A levels at birth, and this is associated with a greater risk of
developing BPD. Randomized trials support the use of vitamin A to modestly
reduce BPD rates for very-low-birthweight neonates weighing <1500 g
(Darlow, 2016). Unfortunately, production shortages have limited the use of
vitamin A prophylaxis in the past decade.

Surfactant Prophylaxis and Rescue Therapy
Surfactant replacement was established decades ago as an effective and safe
therapy for RDS. Surfactant improves mortality rates, reduces the need for
ventilation, and improves short-term outcomes for low-birth-weight neonates
(Hentschel, 2020). It is standard therapy for newborn RDS (American
Academy of Pediatrics, 2017).
Exogenous surfactant products are most commonly delivered via
endotracheal tube to help treat RDS. They contain biological or animal
surfactants such as bovine—Survanta, calf—Infasurf, or porcine—
Curosurf. One Cochrane review found that animal-derived surfactants led to
better outcomes than synthetic ones, which do not contain important
surfactant proteins (Ardell, 2015). Currently, no synthetic surfactants are
available, yet newer ones are in testing (Hentschel, 2020).

For rescue surfactant therapy, less invasive methods of delivery to
spontaneously breathing preterm neonates have been developed. These
include surfactant application into the pharynx, surfactant nebulization, and
application via laryngeal mask (Hentschel, 2020). Administration of
surfactant via a thin catheter while maintaining the newborn on CPAP is
associated with reduced risk of death or BPD, lower intubation rate in the
first 72 hours, reduced incidence of major complications, and a reduced inhospital mortality rate compared with administration via an endotracheal
tube (Abdel-Latif, 2021).
Surfactant has been used for prophylaxis of preterm, at-risk newborns.
Given together, antenatal corticosteroids and postnatal surfactant result in an
even greater reduction in the overall death rate. However, randomized trials
indicate that in populations with high use of antenatal corticosteroids and
routine use of CPAP in the delivery room, prophylactic surfactant is no
longer beneficial and is associated with greater risk of death or BPD (RojasReyes, 2012; Sardesai, 2017).

■ Prevention
Antenatal Corticosteroids
More than two decades ago, the NIH (2000) concluded that a single course
of antenatal corticosteroid therapy reduces RDS and intraventricular
hemorrhage rates in preterm neonates born between 24 and 34 weeks’
gestation (p. 619). The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
(2020a) considers all women at risk for preterm birth in this gestational-age
range to be potential candidates for therapy. It also may be considered for
pregnant women starting at 23 weeks’ gestation who are at risk of preterm
delivery within 7 days. For the periviable fetus, other management guidelines
are listed in Table 45-4 (p. 786). Administration of corticosteroids for
pregnant women during the periviable period who are at risk of preterm
delivery within 7 days should be linked to a family’s decision regarding
resuscitation and should be considered in that context. Thus, as survival at
even earlier gestations improves, the threshold for administration may
decrease as well.
Administration of antenatal corticosteroids to women at risk for latepreterm delivery (34 to 36 weeks’ gestation) reduces the rate of neonatal

respiratory complications (Gyamfi-Bannerman, 2016). Consideration of a
single course of betamethasone for women at risk for late-preterm delivery is
supported by the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
(2020a). Based on data presented in Chapter 45 (p. 802), at Parkland
Hospital, this is not currently our practice.

Amniocentesis to Assess Fetal Lung Maturity
Amniocentesis to assess fetal lung maturity was used previously to predict
the neonatal risk for RDS. However, this use of amniocentesis to guide
delivery decisions in any clinical situation of pregnancy is not currently
supported or recommended (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2021a,b).

NECROTIZING ENTEROCOLITIS
This newborn bowel disorder has clinical findings that include abdominal
distention, emesis, ileus, bilious gastric aspirates, and bloody stools. Often,
radiological images show pneumatosis intestinalis, which is bowel wall gas
derived from invading bacteria (Fig. 34-2). Other classic imaging findings
include hepatobiliary gas and pneumoperitoneum. Bowel perforation
necessitates prompt resection.

FIGURE 34-2 Abdominal radiograph of a preterm newborn with necrotizing enterocolitis. Note the
distended air-filled loops of large and small bowel. Significant pneumatosis intestinalis, which is
intramural bowel gas, is visualized within the right lower quadrant and within the pelvis. Not seen here,
an associated finding is air in the portal veins of the liver.

Necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC) is seen primarily in low-birthweight
newborns but occasionally in mature neonates. Hypothesized causes include
perinatal hypotension, hypoxia, sepsis, umbilical catheterization, exchange
transfusions, blood transfusions, and the feeding of cow milk and hypertonic
solutions (Neu, 2011). The pathophysiology is thought to be multifactorial,
and genetic disposition, intestinal immaturity, imbalance in microvascular
tone, abnormal microbial colonization in the intestine, exposure to enteral
feeds, and highly immunoreactive intestinal mucosa play potential roles
(Bazacliu, 2019; Neu, 2011).
Medical treatment includes abdominal decompression, bowel rest,
broad-spectrum antibiotics, and parenteral nutrition. Surgery is reserved for
neonates with intestinal perforation or deteriorating clinical or biochemical
status. Possible surgical procedures include drain placement, exploratory
laparotomy with resection of diseased bowel, or enterostomy with creation
of a stoma (Neu, 2011).

RETINOPATHY OF PREMATURITY
By 1950, this condition, formerly known as retrolental fibroplasia, became
the largest single cause of blindness in this country. After the discovery that
the disease resulted from hyperoxemia, its frequency declined but began to
rise again with the increasing survival rates of extremely preterm newborns.
Normally, the fetal retina vascularizes centrifugally from the optic nerve
starting at approximately the fourth month, and this continues until shortly
after birth. During vascularization, excessive oxygen induces severe retinal
vasoconstriction, which leads to endothelial damage and vessel obliteration.
This is followed by subsequent aberrant neovascularization, in which the
new vessels penetrate the retina and extend into the vitreous. Here, they are
prone to leak proteins or to burst and bleed. Adhesions can form to detach
the retina. Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) contributes to normal
angiogenesis and is upregulated during retinopathy of prematurity (ROP)
development (Hellström, 2019). This understanding has opened new avenues
of treatment with anti-VEGF therapies.
The precise levels of hyperoxemia that can be sustained without causing
ROP are unknown. After birth, there is a “relative” hyperoxia compared with
in-utero oxygen content, even in newborns not exposed to higher inspired
oxygen concentrations. To better understand the oxygen saturation threshold
necessary to minimize ROP without raising rates of other adverse outcomes,
the Neonatal Research Network performed a randomized trial of oxygenation
in 1316 neonates born between 24 and 27 weeks’ gestation (SUPPORT Study
Group, 2010a). The two target ranges of oxygen saturation were 85 to 89
percent in one arm and 91 to 95 percent in the other arm. These targets were
both commonly employed in neonatal intensive care units. Death before
discharge occurred significantly more frequently in the lower-oxygen
saturation group—20 versus 16 percent. However, severe ROP among
survivors developed significantly less often in the lower-oxygen saturation
group—8.6 versus 17.9 percent.

BRAIN DISORDERS
Central nervous system injury usually creates different neuroanatomical
sequelae in preterm newborns compared with those at term (Chap. 33, p.
607). In preterm neonates, cerebral lesions detected by neuroimaging include

intraventricular hemorrhage, cerebellar hemorrhage, periventricular
hemorrhagic infarction, cystic periventricular leukomalacia, and diffuse
white matter injury. All of these are strongly associated with adverse
neurodevelopmental outcomes (Kwon, 2014).
Cranial sonography remains the preferred approach for detecting
frequently occurring brain abnormalities and acute events in the preterm
neonate. It is readily available and reliable for detecting common
abnormalities and monitoring brain growth. Because cystic injuries may take
2 to 5 weeks to evolve, serial scans are obtained during this time. In those
whose findings are transient and resolve in the neonatal period, prognosis is
improved compared with infants whose lesions remain and evolve. At the
same time, however, between 4 and 10 percent of prematurely born children
may develop cerebral palsy (CP) in the absence of lesions. Put another way,
90 to 96 percent of preterm newborns with CP have cerebral lesions that are
detectable using cranial sonography.

■ Intracranial Hemorrhage
There are five major categories of intracranial hemorrhage in the neonate
(Table 33-4, p. 607) (Volpe, 2016). Primary subarachnoid hemorrhage is
more common in those born preterm and is frequently benign. Cerebellar
hemorrhage is also more frequent in preterm neonates and is increasingly
recognized as a cause of serious sequelae. Intraventricular hemorrhage
(IVH) is almost exclusively seen in preterm newborns, is relatively common,
and can have serious effects (Hintz, 2015, 2018). Subdural hemorrhages are
more frequent in term newborns and can be serious (Chap. 33, p. 608).
Miscellaneous intraparenchymal hemorrhage is also more frequent in those
born at term and is of variable concern.

■ Intraventricular Hemorrhage
The germinal matrix is a highly cellular and vascular region of the
developing brain located beneath the lateral ventricles. In preterm neonates,
the germinal matrix capillary network is fragile for several reasons. First, the
subependymal germinal matrix provides poor support for the vessels
coursing through it. Second, venous anatomy in this region causes stasis and
congestion, which makes vessels susceptible to bursting if intravascular

pressure rises. Third, vascular autoregulation is impaired in the preterm
neonate (Verhagen, 2014; Volpe, 2016).
If fragile capillaries in the germinal matrix rupture, blood escapes into
the ventricular system—intraventricular hemorrhage (IVH). This may dilate
the ventricle, which then can obstruct venous drainage of the surrounding
tissue. As a result, venous infarction and hemorrhage, termed periventricular
hemorrhagic infarction, may follow.
Risk of severe IVH is inversely related to gestational age (Stoll, 2015).
IVH is a serious complication of preterm neonates born before 32 weeks and
is particularly frequent in those born before 27 weeks. The germinal matrix
involutes between 34 and 36 weeks’ gestation. Thus, IVH is infrequent after
that period of brain development (Guillot, 2020). Most hemorrhages develop
within 72 hours of birth (Hand, 2020). Because IVH usually is recognized
within 3 days of delivery, its genesis is sometimes erroneously attributed to
birth events. It is important to realize that prelabor IVH also can occur
(Dunbar, 2021).
The pathogenesis of IVH is multifactorial and includes hypoxic-ischemic
events, carbon dioxide elevations, anatomical factors, blood pressure
instability, coagulopathy, genetic factors, and many others (Gilard, 2020;
Leijser, 2019). Moreover, preterm birth is frequently associated with
infection, which further predisposes to endothelial activation, platelet
adherence, and thrombi (Villamor-Martinez, 2018). Respiratory distress and
mechanical ventilation are commonly associated factors (Leijser, 2019).
Almost half of hemorrhages are clinically silent. Most small germinal
matrix hemorrhages and those confined to the cerebral ventricles resolve
without impairment. But, nearly half do show some sign of neurological
impairment (Leijser, 2019). Survivors of extensive
periventricular/intraventricular hemorrhage can have major
neurodevelopmental handicaps (Mukerji, 2015). Large lesions can result in
hydrocephalus or in degenerated cystic areas termed periventricular
leukomalacia (PVL), discussed later. Importantly, the extent of PVL
correlates with CP risk (Dorner, 2018).

Incidence and Severity
IVH incidences vary according to gestational age at birth. Severe IVH rates
have declined (Handley, 2018; Yeo, 2020). From the Neonatal Research

Network, the incidence from 1993 to 2012 for neonates <29 weeks’ gestation
dropped from 19 to 13 percent (Stoll, 2015). In 2012, the incidence ranged
from 11 percent in those born at 23 weeks to only 5 percent for those born at
28 weeks.
The severity of IVH can be assessed by neuroimaging studies. Papile and
coworkers (1978) devised the most widely used grading scheme to quantify
the lesion extent and estimate prognosis. Since the initial report, the Papile
classification has been modified (Hand, 2020):
• Grade I—hemorrhage is limited to the germinal matrix
• Grade II—IVH occupies 10 to 50 percent of the ventricular area
• Grade III—hemorrhage with >50 percent of the ventricular area involved
• Parenchymal hemorrhage (previously called Grade IV)—most likely
attributable to hemorrhagic venous infarction rather than extension of IVH
into the parenchyma.

Antenatal Corticosteroids
If given at least 48 hours before delivery, corticosteroids prevent or reduce
the incidence of severe IVH (Battarbee, 2020). A Consensus Development
Conference of the NIH (1994) concluded that such therapy reduced rates of
mortality, RDS, and IVH in preterm neonates born between 24 and 32 weeks’
gestation. A second consensus statement by the NIH (2000) recommended
that repeated courses of corticosteroids not be given (Chap. 45, p. 803).
Subsequently, the Maternal–Fetal Medicine Units Network reported that
repeated corticosteroid courses were associated with some improved
preterm neonatal outcomes, but also with reduced birthweight and increased
risk for fetal-growth restriction (Wapner, 2006). Surveillance of this cohort
through age 2 to 3 years found that children exposed to repeated versus
single-dose corticosteroid courses did not differ significantly in physical or
neurocognitive measures (Wapner, 2007). It was worrisome, however, that
infants exposed to multiple courses had a nonsignificant 5.7-fold relative risk
of CP.
At the same time, the 2-year follow-up of the Australian Collaborative
Trial was reported by Crowther and coworkers (2007). In more than 1100
newborns, the incidence of CP was almost identical—4.2 versus 4.8 percent
—in those given repeated versus single-course corticosteroids, respectively.

More recently, it was reported that for those born before 28 weeks’
gestation, if 10 days or more had passed since betamethasone administration,
the incidence of severe IVH was higher (Liebowitz, 2016). This is not a
consistent finding in all studies (Battarbee, 2020).
The most recent recommendations from the American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020a) are for a single course of
corticosteroids for pregnant women between 240/7 weeks and 336/7 weeks’
gestation who are at risk for preterm delivery. They further note that those
given their initial course more than 14 days prior and who have imminent
risk of preterm delivery may receive a second “rescue” course.

Other Preventive Methods
Although antenatal magnesium sulfate for those at risk for preterm delivery
does not reduce the incidence of IVH, it does offer protection from
neurodevelopmental impairment (Shepherd, 2018). The American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020b) recommends its use for this
indication, as discussed further in Chapter 45 (p. 803). Antenatal vitamin K
and phenobarbital and postnatal phenobarbital have not consistently reduced
the incidence of IVH in studies (Crowther, 2010a,b; Smit, 2013). Although
vitamin E reduced IVH rates, the associated risk for sepsis was increased
(Brion, 2003). Metaanalyses of the many randomized trials of postnatal
indomethacin and other prostaglandin inhibitors show inconsistent results
regarding reductions in IVH rates (Fowlie, 2010; Mitra, 2018). None has
shown improvements in neurodevelopmental impairment.
The benefits of cesarean delivery compared with vaginal birth to lower
IVH rates remains controversial. One metaanalysis reported that cesarean
delivery for very-low-birthweight neonates had no effect on rates of severe
IVH but did reduce overall IVH rates (Barzilay, 2016). The benefits of
cesarean delivery to lower IVH rates in breech and growth-restricted fetuses
are unclear from current observational data (Baalbaki, 2018). Prospective
trials are needed.
Delayed umbilical cord clamping compared to immediate cord clamping
has been reported to reduce the risk for any grade of IVH in preterm
newborns but has not reduced rates of severe IVH (Rabe, 2019; Seidler,
2021). In preterm neonates, deferred cord clamping may also raise
hemoglobin and hematocrit levels and improve survival rates (Seidler,

2021). Cord milking is associated with higher rates of severe IVH in
neonates <28 weeks’ gestation and should be avoided (Katheria, 2019;
Wyckoff, 2020).

■ Periventricular Leukomalacia
This histological description refers to cystic areas deep in brain white matter
that develop after hemorrhagic or ischemic infarction. Tissue ischemia leads
to regional necrosis. Because brain tissue does not regenerate and the
preterm neonate has minimal gliosis, these irreversibly damaged areas
appear as echolucent cysts in neuroimaging studies. Generally, they require at
least 2 weeks to form but may develop as late as 4 months after the initial
insult. Thus, their presence at birth may help to determine the timing of an
inciting event.

CEREBRAL PALSY
This group of conditions is characterized by chronic movement or posture
abnormalities that are cerebral in origin, arise early in life, and are
nonprogressive (Nelson, 2003). Epilepsy and mental retardation frequently
accompany CP. Its cause differs in preterm and term neonates, and the latter
is described in Chapter 33 (p. 602).
CP is commonly classified by the type of neurological dysfunction—
spastic, dyskinetic, or ataxic—and by the number and distribution of limbs
involved—quadriplegia, diplegia, hemiplegia, or monoplegia.
• Spastic quadriplegia has a strong association with developmental
retardation and epilepsy. Spastic quadriplegia is the most severe form of
spastic CP and affects all four limbs, the trunk, and the face.
• Spastic diplegia is common in preterm or low-birthweight neonates. In this
CP type, muscle stiffness is mainly in the legs, and the arms are less or not
involved. Affected persons might have difficulty walking because tight
extremity muscles cause their legs to pull together, turn inward, and cross at
the knees.
• Spastic hemiplegia affects only one side of a person’s body, and the arm is
affected usually more than the leg.

• Dyskinetic CP includes athetoid, choreoathetoid, and dystonic cerebral
forms. Poor control of hand, arm, feet, and leg movements make sitting and
walking difficult. Movements may be slow and writhing or rapid and jerky.
• Ataxic CP manifests as problems with balance and coordination.
• Mixed CP manifests with symptoms of more than one CP type. The most
common type is spastic–dyskinetic CP (National Institute of Neurological
Disorders and Stroke, 2020).

■ Incidence
According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2020a), the
prevalence of CP in the United States approximates 3 cases in 1000 children.
Hafström and coworkers (2018) reported the 6-year follow-up of all babies
born at gestational ages <28 weeks in Sweden from 2004 to 2007. The CP
rate overall was 10.5 percent, and no linear association was found between
gestational age at birth and CP rates in this cohort.

■ Risks
Intraventricular Hemorrhage
Various clinical and pathological data link CP with associated severe IVH
(grade III or IV) and resulting PVL. Low-grade IVH is generally considered
benign, but it is associated with higher rates of CP in school-aged children
born extremely preterm (Hollebrandse, 2021). Higher IVH grades are
associated with even greater rates.

Ischemia
Preterm newborns are susceptible to brain ischemia and PVL. This is in part
due to immature cerebral vasculature and an immature cerebrovascular
autoregulation system that is pressure passive. In response to systemic
hypotension, preterm infants cannot increase cerebral perfusion to borderzone regions of the brain supplied by the immature penetrating cerebral
vasculature (Novak, 2018). This triggers a cascade of events caused by
hypoxia–ischemia that results in pyramidal tract damage, which can cause
spastic diplegia.

Perinatal Infection/Inflammation
PVL is associated with infection and inflammation. In one study of 753
neonates born between 24 and 32 weeks’ gestation, 9 percent developed
PVL (Zupan, 1996). Those born before 28 weeks, those who had
inflammatory events during the last days to weeks before delivery, and those
who had both were at highest risk. In another study, PVL was strongly
associated with prolonged membrane rupture, chorioamnionitis, and neonatal
hypotension (Perlman, 1996). Bailis and coworkers (2008) reported that
chronic—and not acute—placental inflammation was associated with PVL.
In another study of 3094 singletons born before 33 weeks’ gestation, 15
percent had evidence of clinical chorioamnionitis (Soraisham, 2009).
Compared with noninfected infants, cases complicated by infection had
significantly higher rates of IVH—22 versus 12 percent.
Fetal infection may be a key element in the pathway between preterm
birth and CP (Burd, 2012; Leviton, 2010, Novack, 2018). As discussed in
Chapter 45 (p. 789), chorioamnionitis is a major cause of spontaneous
preterm delivery. In the pathway proposed in Figure 34-3, antenatal
reproductive tract infection evokes the production of cytokines such as tumor
necrosis factor (TNF) and interleukins 1, 6, and 8. These in turn stimulate
prostaglandin production and preterm labor. Preterm fetal intracranial blood
vessels are susceptible to rupture and damage, and the cytokines that
stimulate preterm labor also have direct toxic effects on oligodendrocytes
and myelin. Vessel rupture, tissue hypoxia, and cytokine-mediated damage
result in massive neuronal cell death. Glutamate is released, which
stimulates membrane receptors to allow excess calcium to enter the neurons.
High intracellular calcium levels are toxic to white matter, and glutamate
may be directly toxic to oligodendrocytes (Khwaja, 2008). Inflammation
induced by the activation of microglia and macrophages with the production
and release of proinflammatory cytokines, chemokines, proteases,
complement factors, excitotoxic amino acids, reactive oxygen species, and
nitric oxide further exacerbates secondary brain injury (Novack, 2018).

FIGURE 34-3 Schematic representation of the hypothesized pathway between maternal or intrauterine
infection and preterm birth or periventricular leukomalacia. Both potentially lead to cerebral palsy. LPS
= lipopolysaccharide; PG = prostaglandin.

Many studies show that infection and cytokines can directly damage the
immature brain (Chau, 2014; Yoon, 1997a). TNF and interleukin 6 were
more frequently found in the brains of infants who died with PVL (Yoon,
1997b). Cytokines are strongly linked to white matter lesions even when
organisms cannot be demonstrated (Yoon, 2000).

■ Prevention—Neuroprotection
The benefits of antenatal magnesium sulfate and corticosteroids are well
described (Gentle, 2020). Another potential neuroprotective therapy is
erythropoiesis-stimulating agents (ESAs) such as erythropoietin and

darbepoetin. In addition to stimulating erythropoiesis, ESAs protect the
developing brain in animal models (Wassink, 2017). One recent metaanalysis
found decreased rates of IVH and PVL in preterm neonates treated with
ESAs soon after birth. The effects on neurodevelopmental impairment are
unclear (Ohlsson, 2020). In one large trial, early high-dose erythropoietin
compared with placebo did not lower the risk of severe neurodevelopmental
impairment or death at age 2 years (Juul, 2020). A large trial of the longeracting darbepoetin has completed enrollment and is in the follow-up phase
(clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT01471015). Last, discussed in Chapter 33
(p. 602) for neonates >36 weeks, induced hypothermia for neuroprotection is
not recommended for preterm newborns. This stems from their different
pattern of gray and white matter injury and their greater susceptibility to cold
stress. The exact gestational age for which therapeutic cooling for hypoxicischemic encephalopathy (HIE) would provide more benefit than harm is
unknown. A trial of cooling for neonates born at 330/7 to 356/7 weeks’
gestation with moderate/severe HIE has completed enrollment and is in the
follow-up phase.

REFERENCES
Abdel-Latif ME, Davis PG, Wheeler KI, et al: Surfactant therapy via thin catheter in preterm infants
with or at risk of respiratory distress syndrome. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 5:CD011672, 2021
American Academy of Pediatrics, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Neonatal
complications. In Guidelines for Perinatal Care, 8th ed. Elk Grove Village, AAP, 2017
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Antenatal corticosteroid therapy for fetal
maturation. Committee Opinion No. 713. August 2017, Reaffirmed 2020a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine: Magnesium
sulfate before anticipated preterm birth for neuroprotection. Committee Opinion No. 455, March
2010, Reaffirmed 2020b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Avoidance of nonmedically indicated early-term
deliveries and associated neonatal morbidities. Committee Opinion No. 765, January 2019,
Reaffirmed 2021a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Medically indicated late-preterm and early-term
deliveries. Committee Opinion No. 831, June 2021b
Ardell S, Pfister RH, Soll R: Animal derived surfactant extract versus protein free synthetic surfactant
for the prevention and treatment of respiratory distress syndrome. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
5:CD000144, 2015
Baalbaki SH, Kuper SG, Wang MJ, et al: Impact of intended mode of delivery on outcomes in preterm
growth-restricted fetuses. Am J Perinatol 35(7):605, 2018
Bailis A, Maleki Z, Askin F, et al: Histopathological placental features associated with development of
periventricular leukomalacia in preterm infants. Am J Obstet Gynecol 199(6):S43, 2008

Barzilay E, Gadot Y, Koren G: Safety of vaginal delivery in very low birthweight vertex singletons: a
meta-analysis. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 29(22):3724, 2016
Battarbee AN, Ros ST, Esplin MS, et al: Optimal timing of antenatal corticosteroid administration and
preterm neonatal and early childhood outcomes. Am J Obstet Gynecol MFM 2(1):100077, 2020
Bazacliu C, Neu J. Pathophysiology of necrotizing enterocolitis: an update. Curr Pediatr Rev 15(2):68,
2019
Brion LP, Bell EF, Raghuveer TS: Vitamin E supplementation for prevention of morbidity and mortality
in preterm infants. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 4:CD003665, 2003
Burd I, Balakrishnan B, Kannan S: Models of fetal brain injury, intrauterine inflammation, and preterm
birth. Am J Reprod Immunol 67(4):287, 2012
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Data and statistics for cerebral palsy. 2020. Available at:
www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/cp/data.html. Accessed June 30, 2021
Chau V, McFadden DE, Poskitt KJ, et al: Chorioamnionitis in the pathogenesis of brain injury in preterm
infants. Clin Perinatol 41(1):83, 2014
Cheong JL, Doyle LW: Long-term effects of postnatal corticosteroids to prevent or treat
bronchopulmonary dysplasia: balancing the risks and benefits. Semin Fetal Neonatal Med 24(3):197,
2019
Cole FS, Alleyne C, Barks JD et al: NIH Consensus Development Conference statement: inhaled nitricoxide therapy for premature infants. Pediatrics 127:363, 2011
Cools F, Offringa M, Askie LM: Elective high frequency oscillatory ventilation versus conventional
ventilation for acute pulmonary dysfunction in preterm infants. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
3:CD000104, 2015
Crowther CA, Crosby DD, Henderson-Smart DJ: Phenobarbital prior to preterm birth for preventing
neonatal periventricular haemorrhage. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 1:CD000164, 2010a
Crowther CA, Crosby DD, Henderson-Smart DJ: Vitamin K prior to preterm birth for preventing
neonatal periventricular haemorrhage. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 1:CD000229, 2010b
Crowther CA, Doyle LW, Haslam RR, et al: Outcomes at 2 years of age after repeat doses of antenatal
corticosteroids. N Engl J Med 357:1179, 2007
Cuna A, Liu C, Govindarajan S, et al: Usefulness of an online risk estimator for bronchopulmonary
dysplasia in predicting corticosteroid treatment in infants born preterm. J Pediatr 197:23, 2018
Darlow BA, Graham PJ, Rojas-Reyes MX: Vitamin A supplementation to prevent mortality and shortand long-term morbidity in very low birth weight infants. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 8:CD000501,
2016
Dorner RA, Burton VJ, Allen MC, et al: Preterm neuroimaging and neurodevelopmental outcome: a
focus on intraventricular hemorrhage, post-hemorrhagic hydrocephalus, and associated brain injury. J
Perinatol 38(11):1431, 2018
Dunbar MJ, Woodward K, Leijser LM, et al: Antenatal diagnosis of fetal intraventricular hemorrhage:
systematic review and meta-analysis. Dev Med Child Neurol 63(2):144, 2021
Ely DM, Driscoll AK: Infant mortality in the United States, 2018: data from the period linked birth/infant
death file. Natl Vital Stat Rep 69(7):1, 2020
Fowlie PW, Davis PG, McGuire W: Prophylactic intravenous indomethacin for preventing mortality and
morbidity in preterm infants. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 7:CD000174, 2010
Gentle SJ, Carlo WA, Tan S, et al: Association of antenatal corticosteroids and magnesium sulfate
therapy with neurodevelopmental outcome in extremely preterm children. Obstet Gynecol
135(6):1377, 2020

Gilard V, Tebani A, Bekri S, et al: Intraventricular hemorrhage in very preterm infants: a comprehensive
review. J Clin Med 9(8):2447, 2020
Greenough A, Decobert F, Field D, et al: Inhaled nitric oxide (iNO) for preventing prematurity-related
bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD): 7-year follow-up of the European Union Nitric Oxide (EUNO)
trial. J Perinat Med 49(1):104, 2020
Guillot M, Chau V, Lemyre B: Routine imaging of the preterm neonatal brain. Paediatr Child Health
25(4):249, 2020
Gyamfi-Bannerman C, Thom EA, Blackwell SC, et al: Antenatal betamethasone for women at risk for
late preterm delivery. N Engl J Med 374(14):1311, 2016
Hafström M, Källén K, Serenius F, et al: cerebral palsy in extremely preterm infants. Pediatrics
141(1):e20171433, 2018
Hamilton BE, Martin JA, Osterman MJ: Births: provisional data for 2020. 2021. Available at:
https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/104993. Accessed June 30, 2021
Hand IL, Shellhaas RA, Milla SS: Routine neuroimaging of the preterm brain. Pediatrics
146(5):e2020029082, 2020
Handley SC, Passarella M, Lee HC, et al: Incidence trends and risk factor variation in severe
intraventricular hemorrhage across a population based cohort. J Pediatr 200:24, 2018
Hellström A, Hård AL: Screening and novel therapies for retinopathy of prematurity—a review. Early
Hum Dev 138:104846, 2019
Hentschel R, Bohlin K, van Kaam A, et al: Surfactant replacement therapy: from biological basis to
current clinical practice. Pediatr Res 88:176, 2020
Hintz SR, Barnes PD, Bulas D, et al: Neuroimaging and neurodevelopmental outcome in extremely
preterm infants. Pediatrics 135(1):e32, 2015
Hintz SR, Vohr BR, Bann CM, et al: Preterm neuroimaging and school-age cognitive outcomes.
Pediatrics 142(1):e20174058, 2018
Hollebrandse NL, Spittle AJ, Burnett AC, et al: School-age outcomes following intraventricular
haemorrhage in infants born extremely preterm. Arch Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed 106(1):42021,
2021.
Juul SE, Comstock BA, Wadhawan R, et al: A randomized trial of erythropoietin for neuroprotection in
preterm infants. N Engl J Med 382(3):233, 2020
Katheria A, Reister F, Essers J, et al: Association of umbilical cord milking vs delayed umbilical cord
clamping with death or severe intraventricular hemorrhage among preterm infants. JAMA
322(19):1877, 2019
Khwaja O, Volpe JJ: Pathogenesis of cerebral white matter injury of prematurity. Arch Dis Child Fetal
Neonatal Ed 93(2):F153, 2008
Kwon SH, Vasung L, Ment LR et al: The role of neuroimaging in predicting neurodevelopmental
outcomes of preterm neonates. Clin Perinatol 41(1):257, 2014
Leijser LM, de Vries LS: Preterm brain injury: germinal matrix-intraventricular hemorrhage and posthemorrhagic ventricular dilatation. Handb Clin Neurol 162:173, 2019
Leviton A, Allred EN, Kuban KC, et al: Microbiologic and histologic characteristics of the extremely
preterm infant’s placenta predict white matter damage and later cerebral palsy. The ELGAN study.
Pediatr Res 67:95, 2010
Liebowitz M, Clyman R: Antenatal betamethasone: a prolonged time interval from administration to
delivery is associated with an increased incidence of intraventricular hemorrhage before 28 weeks
gestation. J Pediatr 177:114, 2016

McCurnin DC, Pierce RA, Chang LY, et al: Inhaled NO improves early pulmonary function and
modifies lung growth and elastin deposition in a baboon model of neonatal chronic lung disease. Am
J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 288:L540, 2005
Mitra S, Florez ID, Tamayo ME, et al: Association of placebo, indomethacin, ibuprofen, and
acetaminophen with closure of hemodynamically significant patent ductus arteriosus in preterm
infants: a systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA 319(12):1221, 2018
Morley CJ, Davis PG, Doyle LW et al: Nasal CPAP or intubation at birth for very preterm infants. N
Engl J Med 358:700, 2008
Mukerji A, Shah V, Shah PS: Periventricular/intraventricular hemorrhage and neurodevelopmental
outcomes: a meta-analysis. Pediatrics 136(6):1132, 2015
National Institutes of Health: Antenatal corticosteroids revisited: repeat courses. NIH Consensus
Statement 17(2):1, 2000
National Institutes of Health: The effects of corticosteroids for fetal maturation on perinatal outcomes.
NIH Consensus Statement 12(2):1, 1994
National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke: Cerebral palsy: hope through research. 2020.
Available at: www.ninds.nih.gov/Disorders/Patient-Caregiver-Education/Hope-ThroughResearch/Cerebral-Palsy-Hope-Through-Research. Accessed June 30, 2021
Nelson KB: Can we prevent cerebral palsy? N Engl J Med 349:1765, 2003
Neu J, Walker WA: Necrotizing enterocolitis. N Engl J Med 364:255, 2011
Novak CM, Ozen M, Burd I: Perinatal brain injury: mechanisms, prevention, and outcomes. Clin
Perinatol 45(2):357, 2018
Ohlsson A, Aher SM: Early erythropoiesis-stimulating agents in preterm or low birth weight infants.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2:CD004863, 2020
Papile LA, Burstein J, Burstein R, et al: Incidence and evolution of subependymal and intraventricular
hemorrhage: a study of infants with birth weights less than 1500 gm. J Pediatr 92:529, 1978
Perlman JM, Risser R, Broyles RS: Bilateral cystic leukomalacia in the premature infant: associated risk
factors. Pediatrics 97:822, 1996
Rabe H, Gyte GM, Díaz-Rossello JL, et al: Effect of timing of umbilical cord clamping and other
strategies to influence placental transfusion at preterm birth on maternal and infant outcomes.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 9:CD003248, 2019
Rojas-Reyes MX, Morley CJ, Soll R: Prophylactic versus selective use of surfactant in preventing
morbidity and mortality in preterm infants. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 3:CD000510, 2012
Rojas-Reyes MX, Orrego-Rojas PA. Rescue high-frequency jet ventilation versus conventional
ventilation for severe pulmonary dysfunction in preterm infants. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
10:CD000437, 2015
Sardesai S, Biniwale M, Wertheimer F, et al: Evolution of surfactant therapy for respiratory distress
syndrome: past, present, and future. Pediatr Res 81(1–2):240, 2017
Schmidt B, Anderson PJ, Doyle LW, et al: Survival without disability to age 5 years after neonatal
caffeine therapy for apnea of prematurity. JAMA 307(3):275, 2012
Schmidt B, Roberts RS, Anderson PJ, et al: Academic performance, motor function, and behavior 11
years after neonatal caffeine citrate therapy for apnea of prematurity: an 11-year follow-up of the
CAP Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA Pediatr 171(6):564, 2017
Schmidt B, Roberts RS, Davis P, et al: Caffeine therapy for apnea of prematurity. N Engl J Med
354(20):2112, 2006
Schmidt S, Norman M, Misselwitz B, et al: Mode of delivery and mortality and morbidity for very
preterm singleton infants in a breech position: a European cohort study. Eur J Obstet Gynecol

Reprod Biol 234:96, 2019
Seidler AL, Gyte GML, Rabe H, et al: Umbilical cord management for newborns < 34 weeks’ gestation:
a meta-analysis. Pediatrics 147(3):e20200576, 2021
Shepherd E, Salam RA, Middleton P, et al: Neonatal interventions for preventing cerebral palsy: an
overview of Cochrane Systematic Reviews. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 6:CD012409, 2018
Singh J, Jaffe A, Schultz A, et al: Surfactant protein disorders in childhood interstitial lung disease. Eur J
Pediatr 180(9):2711, 2021
Smit E, Odd D, Whitelaw A: Postnatal phenobarbital for the prevention of intraventricular haemorrhage
in preterm infants. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 8:CD001691, 2013
Soraisham AS, Singhal N, McMillan DD, et al: A multicenter study on the clinical outcome of
chorioamnionitis in preterm infants. Am J Obstet Gynecol 200:372.e1, 2009
Stoll BJ, Hansen NI, Bell EF, et al: Trends in care practices, morbidity, and mortality of extremely
preterm neonates, 1993–2012. JAMA 314(10):1039, 2015
SUPPORT Study Group of the Eunice Kennedy Shriver NICHD Neonatal Research Network, Carlo
WA, Finer NN, et al: Target ranges of oxygen saturation in extremely preterm infants. N Engl J Med
362(21):1959, 2010a
SUPPORT Study Group of the Eunice Kennedy Shriver NICHD Neonatal Research Network, Finer
NN, Carlo WA, et al: Early CPAP versus surfactant in extremely preterm infants. N Engl J Med
362(21):1970, 2010b
Thébaud B, Goss KN, Laughon M, et al: Bronchopulmonary dysplasia. Nat Rev Dis Primers 5(1):78,
2019
Travers CP, Carlo WA, McDonald SA, et al: Mortality and pulmonary outcomes of extremely preterm
infants exposed to antenatal corticosteroids. Am J Obstet Gynecol 218(1):130.e1, 2018
Verhagen EA, Hummel LA, Bos AF, et al: Near-infrared spectroscopy to detect absence of
cerebrovascular autoregulation in preterm infants. Clin Neurophysiol 125(1):47, 2014
Villamor-Martinez E, Fumagalli M, Mohammed Rahim O, et al: Chorioamnionitis is a risk factor for
intraventricular hemorrhage in preterm infants: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Front Physiol
9:1253, 2018
Volpe JJ: Neurology of the Newborn, 6th ed. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2016
Wapner RJ, Sorokin Y, Mele L, et al: Long-term outcomes after repeated doses of antenatal
corticosteroids. N Engl J Med 357:1190, 2007
Wapner RJ, Sorokin Y, Thom EA, et al: Single versus weekly courses of antenatal corticosteroids:
evaluation of safety and efficacy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 195:633, 2006
Wassink G, Davidson JO, Dhillon SK, et al: Partial white and grey matter protection with prolonged
infusion of recombinant human erythropoietin after asphyxia in preterm fetal sheep. J Cereb Blood
Flow Metab 37(3):1080, 2017
Watkins PL, Dagle JM, Bell EF, et al: outcomes at 18 to 22 months of corrected age for infants born at
22 to 25 weeks of gestation in a center practicing active management. J Pediatr 217:52, 2020
Watterberg KL, American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on Fetus and Newborn: Policy statement
—postnatal corticosteroids to prevent or treat bronchopulmonary dysplasia. Pediatrics 126(4):800,
2010
Wyckoff MH, Wyllie J, Aziz K, et al: Neonatal life support: 2020 International Consensus on
Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation and Emergency Cardiovascular Care Science with Treatment
Recommendations. Circulation 142:S185, 2020
Yeo KT, Thomas R, Chow SS, et al: Australian and New Zealand Neonatal Network. Improving
incidence trends of severe intraventricular haemorrhages in preterm infants <32 weeks gestation: a

cohort study. Arch Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed 105(2):145, 2020
Yoon BH, Kim CJ, Romero R, et al: Experimentally induced intrauterine infection causes fetal brain
white matter lesions in rabbits. Am J Obstet Gynecol 177:797, 1997a
Yoon BH, Romero R, Kim CJ, et al: High expression of tumor necrosis factor-alpha and interleukin-6 in
periventricular leukomalacia. Am J Obstet Gynecol 177:406, 1997b
Yoon BH, Romero R, Park JS, et al: Fetal exposure to an intra-amniotic inflammation and the
development of cerebral palsy at the age of three years. Am J Obstet Gynecol 182:675, 2000
Zupan V, Gonzalez P, Lacaze-Masmonteil T, et al: Periventricular leukomalacia: risk factors revisited.
Dev Med Child Neurol 38:1061, 1996

CHAPTER 35

Stillbirth

DEFINITIONS
ETIOLOGIES
RISK FACTORS
EVALUATION OF THE STILLBORN FETUS
PERINATAL CARE
PRIOR STILLBIRTH
CHANGES IN STILLBIRTH RATES
REFERENCES
Perinatal mortality combines fetal and neonatal deaths and is one measure of
healthcare quality before, during, and after delivery. Fetal mortality data
from the National Vital Statistics system are usually presented for fetal
deaths after the 20-week threshold. Using this threshold, the numbers of fetal
deaths in the United States in 2013 slightly surpassed numbers of neonatal
deaths when considering fetal deaths beyond 20 weeks (Fig. 35-1)
(MacDorman, 2015a).

FIGURE 35-1 Distribution of fetal and neonatal deaths in the United States, 2013. (Data from
MacDorman, 2015a.)

DEFINITIONS
As discussed in Chapter 1 (p. 3), the current definition of fetal death adopted
in the United States by the National Center for Health Statistics is based on
one recommended by the World Health Organization (MacDorman, 2015a). It
states that “Fetal death means death prior to complete expulsion or
extraction from the mother of a product of human conception irrespective
of the duration of pregnancy and which is not an induced termination of
pregnancy. The death is indicated by the fact that after such expulsion or
extraction, the fetus does not breathe or show any other evidence of life
such as beating of the heart, pulsation of the umbilical cord, or definite
movement of voluntary muscles. Heartbeats are to be distinguished from
transient cardiac contractions; respirations are to be distinguished from
fleeting respiratory efforts or gasps.”
Reporting requirements for fetal deaths in the United States are
determined by each state, and thus criteria differ. Most states mandate
reporting of deaths of fetuses that are 20 weeks’ gestation or older or have a

minimum birthweight of 350 g, which roughly equates to that at 20 weeks—
or a combination of both. However, evidence shows that not all required
fetal deaths are reported, especially at earlier gestational ages (MacDorman,
2015a).
Similarly, comparisons of rates among countries are limited by
incomplete fetal death data. Internationally, less than 5 percent of neonatal
deaths have formalized documentation (Lawn, 2016). Further, comparative
analyses using birthweight versus gestational age among countries yield
discordant results. In the United States, if stillbirth were defined by a
birthweight ≥500 g, the stillbirth rate would be reduced by 40 percent
compared with a 20-week-age defined cohort (Blencowe, 2016).
Three fetal mortality epochs are generally recognized. Early describes
deaths before 20 completed weeks’ gestation; intermediate for those
between 20 and 27 weeks; and late for those ≥28 weeks. The fetal mortality
rate in each epoch has changed little since 2006. As shown in Figure 35-2,
fetal death rates are highest at the earliest and latest gestational ages, which
suggests etiological differences.

FIGURE 35-2 National Vital Statistics Report: fetal mortality rate per 1000 births by weeks’ gestation.
(Data from MacDorman, 2015a.)

ETIOLOGIES
To ascertain stillbirth causes in racially and geographically diverse
populations in the United States, the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National

Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD) organized the
Stillbirth Collaborative Research Network Writing Group (2011b). The
group examined reasons for death at 20 weeks’ gestation or later between
2006 and 2008 in 59 tertiary care and community hospitals in five states.
Standardized evaluations included autopsy, placental histology, and testing of
maternal or fetal blood/tissues, including fetal karyotyping. Evaluations were
performed in 500 women with 512 stillbirths. Of these losses, 83 percent
were before labor. Causes were divided into eight categories (Table 35-1).
These categories were then classified as probable, possible, or unknown
causes. As an example, diabetes was considered a probable cause if the
fetus had diabetic embryopathy with lethal anomalies or if the mother had
diabetic ketoacidosis. It was a possible cause if the mother had poor
glycemic control and the fetus had abnormal growth. A probable or possible
source was identified in 76 percent of cases. This proportion is similar to
that from Australia using a comparable national audit tool (Lehner, 2019).
TABLE 35-1. Causes of 512 Stillbirths in the Stillbirth Collaborative
Research Network Study

This Network study is unprecedented in the United States for several
reasons. It was a population-based cohort of stillbirths, in which all
underwent systematic and thorough evaluation. Each assigned cause of fetal
death is reasonably straightforward and comprehensible except for
“placental abnormalities.” This category contains uteroplacental
insufficiency and a few other less clearly defined placental entities. This
aside, the leading reasons for fetal death were obstetrical and primarily
included abruption, multifetal gestation complications, and spontaneous labor
or ruptured membranes before viability. Structural anomaly was another
(Son, 2021a). This study also illustrated that systematic evaluation may

identify a likely cause in approximately three fourths of stillbirths. This high
rate emphasizes the importance of standardized evaluation. However, a
Cochrane database study concluded that evidence specifically from
randomized trials to support specific tests for stillbirth evaluation was
lacking (Wojcieszek, 2018b).

RISK FACTORS
Many factors are associated with an increased stillbirth risk (Table 35-2).
Major associations include sociodemographic factors such as non-Hispanic
black women, who have higher incidences of hypertension, diabetes,
placental abruption, and preterm premature rupture of membranes (Healy,
2006). Other common associations are maternal age at either end of the
spectrum, obesity, preeclampsia, diabetes, substance use, and late-term
pregnancy (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020;
Page, 2018). Multifetal pregnancies, especially monochorionic gestations,
are high risk (Korlesky, 2019). Women with prior adverse pregnancy
outcomes—such as stillbirth, preterm birth, or growth restriction—also carry
an increased risk (Reddy, 2010; Varner, 2014). Pregnancies complicated by
current fetal-growth restriction are particularly vulnerable because of their
associations with hypertension, diabetes, fetal infection, autoimmune
disorders, and chronic renal disease (Brackett, 2020; Silver, 2018).
Recently, the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic has posed both direct and indirect risks
for adverse perinatal outcomes. Data are mixed as to whether rates of
stillbirth have been higher during the pandemic (Khalil, 2020; Srivastava,
2021; Simon, 2021; Son, 2021b). Some suggest greater risks in low-source
countries (Leisher, 2021). Although with recognized limitations, these
findings merit further investigation regarding perinatal care during this
pandemic (Hu, 2021; Rasmussen, 2020). In 245 gravidas with SARS-CoV-2
infection at Parkland Hospital, the stillbirth rate was not increased compared
with that in gravidas with negative test results during the same period.
TABLE 35-2. Maternal Risk Factors and Estimated Stillbirth Rate

To help lower stillbirth rates, two major studies assessed whether risk
factors could be identified either before or shortly after pregnancy
confirmation. In the first, Reddy and colleagues (2010) analyzed data from
the NICHD Consortium on Safe Labor. Briefly, the pregnancy outcomes of
206,969 women delivered between 2002 and 2008 at 19 hospitals in the
United States were analyzed. When stillbirths were apportioned according to
gestational age, most occurred primarily at term. These investigators
concluded that their results did not support routine antenatal surveillance for
any demographic risk factors.
The second analysis of risk factors was included in the Stillbirth
Collaborative Research Network study described earlier (2011a). The
validity of stillbirth prediction was assessed based on risks identified in
early pregnancy. They found that pregnancy factors known at the start of
pregnancy accounted for only a small proportion of stillbirth risk. Indeed,
except for prior stillbirth or pregnancy loss from causes such as preterm birth
or fetal-growth restriction, other risks had limited predictive value. Prior
stillbirth as a risk for recurrence has been emphasized by others (Lamont,
2015; Sharma, 2006). Specifically, the stillbirth risk was fivefold higher in
women with a prior stillbirth. From another report, prior preterm birth, fetalgrowth restriction, preeclampsia, and placental abruption were strongly
associated with subsequent stillbirth (Rasmussen, 2009).

EVALUATION OF THE STILLBORN FETUS
■ Clinical Examination
Determining the cause of fetal death aids maternal coping, helps assuage
perceived guilt, permits more accurate counseling regarding recurrence risk,
and may prompt intervention to prevent a recurrent outcome. Identification of
inherited syndromes also assists other family members. Important tests
include autopsy, chromosomal analysis, and pathological examination of the
placenta, cord, and chorioamnionic membranes (Pinar, 2014). Page and
coworkers (2017) found placental pathology and fetal autopsy to be the most
useful.
Clinically, the fetal weight, head circumference, and length and the
placental weight are measured (Fig. 35-3). Photographs are taken of the

extremities and palms. Frontal plus profile views of the whole fetus and face
also are obtained. A full radiograph of the fetus—a fetogram—may be
performed (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020).
Postnatal magnetic resonance (MR) imaging, radiographs, or sonography may
be especially important if parents decline a full autopsy (McPherson, 2017;
Shruthi, 2018). Findings are documented in the medical record, and relevant
ante- and intrapartum events are delineated.

FIGURE 35-3 Flow chart for stillbirth evaluation. APAS = antiphospholipid antibody syndrome; KB =
Kleihauer-Betke; MR = magnetic resonance; SLE = systemic lupus erythematosus. (From American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020; Page, 2017, 2018.)

The reported incidence of fetal anomalies varies. For example, FayePetersen and colleagues (1999) reported that if autopsy and chromosomal
studies are performed, up to 35 percent of stillborn fetuses were discovered
to have major structural anomalies. Approximately 20 percent had
dysmorphic features or skeletal anomalies, and 8 percent had chromosomal
abnormalities (Pauli, 1994; Saller, 1995). As shown in Table 35-1, however,

the incidence of structural anomalies in the Stillbirth Collaborative Research
Network (2011b) was only 14 percent.

■ Laboratory Evaluation
In the absence of anatomical dysmorphology, up to 5 percent of stillborn
fetuses will have a chromosomal abnormality (Korteweg, 2008). Previously,
karyotyping all stillborn fetuses was standard practice, but whole-genome
sequencing—such as with chromosomal microarray analysis (CMA)—is
now recommended for stillborns (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2020; Holmes, 2018; Martinez-Portilla, 2019). Described
further in Chapter 16 (p. 325), this technique does not require dividing cells.
This is especially helpful because culturing of macerated fetal tissue is
frequently unsuccessful (Reddy, 2012).
Looking to the future, Stanley and associates (2020) evaluated exome
sequencing in 246 unexplained stillbirths to search for disease-causing
variants in the coding region of the genome. These investigators found that
8.5 percent of stillbirths with a normal chromosomal microarray and without
probable maternal or obstetrical causes were probably attributable to
mendelian disorders. These findings suggest that a portion of stillbirth cases
is caused by pathological variants in genes known to underlie disorders in
infants and adults. In addition, a similar number of cases are caused by lossof-function variants in genes that are critical to in-utero survival but not
currently known to be associated with stillbirth. Thus, the full phenotypic
spectrum of many known mendelian disorders is not fully understood without
the inclusion of cases resulting in stillbirth (Wojcik, 2020).
To take fetal samples, a provider must obtain appropriate parental
consent. Any type of fetal or placental tissue or amnionic fluid can be
submitted for genetic testing using CMA (American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists, 2018). Contamination with maternal tissue or blood is
ideally avoided. Specimens are collected by sterile technique and kept at
room temperature. If fetal blood cannot be withdrawn from the umbilical
cord or heart, at least one of the following can be sent for testing: (1)
placental block measuring 1 × 1 cm taken below the cord insertion site in a
specimen not fixed in formalin; (2) 1.5-cm-long umbilical cord segment; or
(3) internal fetal tissue sample from the costochondral junction, fascia lata,
or patella. Tissue is washed with sterile saline and suspended in Ringer

solution, or sterile cytogenetic medium. Formalin or alcohol kills viable
cells.
If conventional karyotyping is the only test available and the death is
recent, amnionic fluid can be obtained by amniocentesis. This is particularly
valuable if delivery is not expected imminently. As such, these cells provide
a greater likelihood of cell growth and eventual results compared with tissue
harvested after delivery.
Maternal blood is obtained for Kleihauer-Betke staining; for
antiphospholipid antibody and lupus anticoagulant testing if indicated; and
for serum glucose measurement to exclude overt diabetes (Silver, 2013).
Testing for syphilis is reasonable if no prior screen has been performed, if
the patient has exposure risk factors, or if patient, fetus, or placenta show
suggestive findings, described in Chapter 68 (p. 1208) (Page, 2017).
Although some have recommended routine evaluation of heritable
thrombophilias, no evidence supports the clinical efficiency of screening in
an unselected population. Silver and colleagues (2016) found that most
maternal and fetal thrombophilias were not associated with stillbirth and
recommended against routine testing. This is echoed by the American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists and the Society for MaternalFetal Medicine (2020).

■ Placental Examination
Gross and microscopical examination of the placenta, membranes, and cord
by a perinatal pathologist is ideal. Numerous maternal and fetal disorders
can be identified. Cord knotting and placental microvascular abnormalities
are examples and discussed in Chapter 6 (p. 107). Implicated infections are
described in Chapters 67 and 68.

■ Autopsy
Parents are encouraged to allow a full autopsy, which is more likely to yield
valuable data. Pinar and coworkers (2012) provide the autopsy protocol
used by the Stillbirth Collaborative Research Network. An analysis of 400
consecutive fetal deaths in Wales showed that autopsy altered the presumed
cause of death in 13 percent and provided new data in another 26 percent
(Cartlidge, 1995). Other investigators have found that autopsy results

changed the recurrence risk estimates and parental counseling in 25 to 50
percent of cases (Faye-Petersen, 1999; Silver, 2007). Miller and associates
(2016) reported that placental examination with autopsy altered future
medical management in 45 percent of cases. Limited autopsy protocols can
also yield valuable information. Of components, external examination
combined with photography, radiography, MR imaging, bacterial cultures,
and selective use of chromosomal and histopathological studies often aids
determination.
According to one survey, most hospitals do not audit stillbirths
(Goldenberg, 2013). In other centers, including ours, maternal records and
autopsy findings are reviewed monthly by a stillbirth committee composed of
obstetricians, maternal-fetal medicine specialists, neonatologists, geneticists,
and perinatal pathologists. If possible, the cause of death is assigned from
available evidence. Most importantly, parents are then contacted and offered
counseling regarding the cause of death, the potential recurrence risk, and
possible strategies to avoid recurrence (Page, 2020).

PERINATAL CARE
Fetal death is psychologically traumatic for a woman and her family. Further
stressors include an interval of more than 24 hours between the diagnosis of
fetal death and labor induction; not seeing her neonate for as long as she
desires; having no tokens of remembrance; and poor communication with
caregivers (Heazell, 2016; Siassakos, 2018). Seeing and holding a stillborn
neonate assists parental psychological well-being (Kingdon, 2015).
Unfortunately, few obstetrical providers receive formal training in perinatal
bereavement care (Nuzum, 2014). At Parkland Hospital, care is coordinated
through a dedicated nursing team affiliated with labor and delivery.
Intervention includes time with the neonate, keepsake items, photographs,
chaplaincy consultation, and bereavement support information. These
principles dovetail with the recent global consensus recommendations for
bereavement care (Shakespeare, 2020). A woman experiencing a stillbirth or
early miscarriage is at increased risk for depression and posttraumatic stress
disorder and should be closely monitored (Nelson, 2013) (Chap. 64, p.
1145).
Distinct from stillbirth, fetuses with life-limiting conditions and short
survival also merit special consideration. Conceptually, perinatal palliative

care provides obstetrical and neonatal care to maximize the comfort and
quality of life for these newborns (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2019). Components of this care include review of the
diagnosis, creation of a birth plan, bereavement counseling, and consultation
with neonatal services. This care is typically provided by a team that is able
to offer medical, psychological, and spiritual support. During planning,
parents’ values, goals, and fears are a focus.

PRIOR STILLBIRTH
The woman with a prior stillbirth has a substantial risk for a recurrence (see
Table 35-2). Preterm or growth-restricted stillborn fetuses magnify this risk
(Malacova, 2018). In one cohort of 43 women with a recurrent stillbirth,
most fetuses died before 28 weeks’ gestation (Fig. 35-4) (Whitham, 2020).

FIGURE 35-4 Stillbirth Collaborative Research Network: gestational age distribution of recurrent
stillbirths.

An outlined approach for women with a prior stillbirth is shown in Table
35-3. Importantly, these recommendations are based primarily on limited or

inconsistent scientific evidence or on expert opinions. Few studies address
management of affected women (Wojcieszek, 2018a).
TABLE 35-3. Management of Subsequent Pregnancy after Stillbirth

Very few risk factors for stillbirth are modifiable (Whitham, 2020).
Intuitively some such as hypertension or diabetes warrant disease-specific
prevention strategies. Women with a prior fetal death due to placental
insufficiency also are at increased risk for subsequent adverse perinatal
outcomes (Monari, 2016). According to Reddy (2007), almost half of fetal
deaths are associated with growth restriction, and thus sonographic
anatomical assessment beginning at midpregnancy is recommended. This is
followed by serial growth studies beginning at 28 weeks. Detection of
growth restriction may lead to iatrogenic prematurity and its associated longterm childhood consequences but to fewer intrauterine deaths (Andreasen,
2021).
Weeks and associates (1995) evaluated fetal biophysical testing in 300
women whose only indication was prior stillbirth. There was one subsequent
stillbirth, and only three fetuses had abnormal testing results before 32
weeks. Notably, the gestational age of the prior stillborn fetus did not relate
to the incidence or timing of abnormal test results or fetal jeopardy in the
subsequent pregnancy. These investigators concluded that antepartum
surveillance should begin at 32 weeks’ gestation or later in the otherwise
healthy woman with a history of stillbirth. The American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists and the Society for Maternal-Fetal
Medicine (2020) support this, with the caveat that it increases the iatrogenic
preterm delivery rate. Although fetal movement counting strategies are
routinely employed and described in Chapter 20 (p. 384), few data guide its
use in clinical practice for those with a prior stillbirth (Mangesi, 2015).
Unless other indications intervene, delivery at 39 weeks’ gestation is
recommended. This timing minimizes fetal mortality rates, although the

degree of risk reduction may be greater for older women (Page, 2013). Labor
induction is suitable, and cesarean delivery is reserved for those with a
contraindication to induction.

CHANGES IN STILLBIRTH RATES
As noted, following declines through 2011, the United States fetal mortality
rate has changed little (Middleton, 2018). Interpretation of these rates in the
context of changing healthcare strategies has spawned debate. One example
is the trend against nonmedically indicated deliveries before 39 weeks’
gestation and its subsequent effect on term stillbirth rates (Middleton, 2018).
This practice’s value for neonatal outcome is described in Chapter 26 (p.
486). To analyze whether implementation of this 39-week rule has altered the
term stillbirth rate, data from 45 states and the District of Columbia were
examined (Nicholson, 2016). The proportion of births before 39 weeks
progressively declined from 2007 and 2013, but the term stillbirth rate
increased. This suggests that the 39-week rule may cause unintended harm.
One review of studies with 15 million pregnancies showed that the
prospective risk of stillbirth rose from 0.11 per 1000 births at 37 weeks to
3.18 per 1000 births at 42 weeks (Muglu, 2019).
MacDorman and associates (2015b) also evaluated trends in stillbirth
rates by gestational ages in the United States between 2006 and 2012. They
used a “traditional stillbirth rate,” which was calculated using a denominator
composed of the live-birth number plus the stillbirth number at a given
gestational age. They found increased rates at 24 to 27, 34 to 36, and 38
weeks’ gestation. Alternatively, no differences were found in “prospective
stillbirth rates.” These rates were calculated using a denominator composed
of the number of women who are pregnant at a given gestational age for
weeks 21 through 42. The discrepancies in stillbirth rates appear to
primarily derive from the decline in the birth numbers in the preterm and
early-term gestational ages.
In sum, implementation of the 39-week rule has reduced the number of
elective births before 39 weeks’ gestation, although an unintended
consequence may be an increase in term stillbirths—especially among
women with medical complications. The importance of induction before 39
weeks in pregnant women with complications to prevent stillbirth is
underscored by Little and colleagues (2015). These authors performed a

retrospective multistate analysis of early-term deliveries—370/7 to 386/7
weeks—from 2005 to 2011. They noted a decline in the number of early-term
deliveries during this time but not a significant change in the term stillbirth
rates. There was, however, a 25-percent rise in the rate of term, singleton
stillbirths among women with diabetes, and this was attributed to clinicians
misapplying early-term delivery policies to high-risk women. Undoubtedly,
continued surveillance of stillbirth rates is warranted for both high- and lowrisk pregnancies at the state and national level.

REFERENCES
Adhikari EH, Moreno W, Zofkie AC, et al: Pregnancy outcomes among women with and without severe
acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 infection. JAMA Netw Open 3(11): e2029256, 2020
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Prenatal diagnostic testing for genetic disorders.
Practice Bulletin No. 162, May 2016, Reaffirmed 2018
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Perinatal palliative care. Committee Opinion No.
786, August 2019
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine:
Management of stillbirth. Obstetric Care Consensus No. 10, February 2020
Andreasen LA, Tabor A, Nøgaard LN, et al: Detection of growth-restricted fetuses during pregnancy is
associated with fewer intrauterine deaths but increased adverse childhood outcomes: an
observational study. BJOG 128(1):77, 2021
Blencowe H, Cousens S, Bianchi JF, et al: National, regional, and worldwide estimates of stillbirth rates
in 2015, with trends from 2000: a systematic analysis. Lancet Glob Health 4(2):e98, 2016
Brackett EE, Hall ES, DeFranco EA, et al: Factors associated with occurrence of stillbirth before 32
weeks of gestation in a contemporary cohort. Am J Perinatol July 31, 2020 [Epub ahead of print]
Cartlidge PH, Stewart JH: Effect of changing the stillbirth definition on evaluation of perinatal mortality
rates. Lancet 346:486, 1995
Faye-Petersen OM, Guinn DA, Wenstrom KD: Value of perinatal autopsy. Obstet Gynecol 94(6):915,
1999
Fretts RC: Etiology and prevention of stillbirth. Am J Obstet Gynecol 193(6):1923, 2005
Goldenberg RL, Farrow V, McClure EM, et al: Stillbirth: knowledge and practice among U.S.
obstetrician-gynecologists. Am J Perinatol 30(10):813, 2013
Gregory EC, Drake P, Martin JA: Lack of change in perinatal mortality in the United States, 2014–2016.
NCHS Data Brief, August 2018
Healy AJ, Malone FD, Sullivan LM, et al: Early access to prenatal care: implications for racial disparity
in perinatal mortality. Obstet Gynecol 107(3):625, 2006
Heazell AEP, Siassakos D, Blencowe H, et al: Stillbirths: economic and psychosocial consequences.
Lancet 387(10018):604, 2016
Holmes LB, Nasri H, Beroukhim R, et al: Stillborn infants: associated malformations. Birth Defects Res
110(2):114, 2018
Hu YJ, Wake M, Saffery R: Clarifying the sweeping consequences of COVID-19 in pregnant women,
newborns, and children with existing cohorts. JAMA Pediatr 175(2):117, 2021

Khalil A, von Dadelszen P, Draycott T, et al: Change in the incidence of stillbirth and preterm delivery
during the COVID-19 pandemic. JAMA 324(7):705, 2020
Kingdon C, Givens JL, O’Donnell E, et al: Seeing and holding Baby: systematic review of clinical
management and parental outcomes after stillbirth. Birth 42(3):206, 2015
Korlesky C, McPherson E: Early demise of twins in a cohort of stillbirths and second trimester
miscarriages. Am J Med Genet A 179(3):350, 2019
Korteweg FJ, Bouman K, Erwich JJ, et al: Cytogenetic analysis after evaluation of 750 fetal deaths.
Obstet Gynecol 111:865, 2008
Lamont K, Scott NW, Jones GT, et al: Risk of recurrent stillbirth: systematic review and meta-analysis.
BMJ 350:h3080, 2015
Lawn JE, Blencowe H, Waiswa P, et al: Stillbirths: rates, risk factors, and acceleration towards 2030.
Lancet 387(10018):587, 2016
Lehner C, Harry A, Pelecanos A, et al: The feasibility of a clinical audit tool to investigate stillbirth in
Australia–a single centre experience. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol 59(1):59, 2019
Leisher SH, International Stillbirth Alliance: COVID-19 and maternal and perinatal outcomes Lancet
Glob Health 9(8):e1061, 2021
Little SE, Zera CA, Clapp MA, et al: A multi-state analysis of early-term delivery trends and the
association with term stillbirth. Obstet Gynecol 126(6):1138, 2015
MacDorman MF, Gregory EC: Fetal and perinatal mortality, United States, 2013. Natl Vital Stat Rep
64(8):1, 2015a
MacDorman MF, Reddy UM, Silver RM: Trends in stillbirth by gestational age in the United States,
2006–2012. Obstet Gynecol 126(6):1146, 2015b
Malacova E, Regan A, Nassar N, et al: Risk of stillbirth, preterm delivery, and fetal growth restriction
following exposure in a previous birth: systematic review and meta-analysis. BJOG 125(2):183, 2018
Mangesi L, Hofmeyr GJ, Smith V, et al: Fetal movement counting for assessment of fetal wellbeing.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 10:CD004909, 2015
Martinez-Portilla RJ, Pauta M, Hawkins-Villarreal A, et al: Added value of chromosomal microarray
analysis over conventional karyotyping in stillbirth work-up: systematic review and meta-analysis.
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 53(5):590, 2019
McPherson E, Nestoridi E, Heinke D, et al: Alternatives to autopsy for fetal and early neonatal
(perinatal) deaths: insights from the Wisconsin stillbirth service program. Birth Defects Res
109(18):1430, 2017
Middleton P, Shepherd E, Crowther CA: Induction of labour for improving birth outcomes for women at
or beyond term. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 5:CD004945, 2018
Miller ES, Minturn L, Linn R, et al: Stillbirth evaluation: a stepwise assessment of placental pathology
and autopsy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 214:115, 2016
Monari F, Pedrielli G, Vergani P, et al: Adverse perinatal outcome in subsequent pregnancy after stillbirth
by placental vascular disorders. PLoS One 11(5):e0155761, 2016
Muglu J, Rather H, Arroyo-Manzano D, et al: Risks of stillbirth and neonatal death with advancing
gestation at term: a systematic review and meta-analysis of cohort studies of 15 million pregnancies.
PLoS Med 16(7):e1002838, 2019
Nelson DB, Freeman MP, Johnson NL, et al: A prospective study of postpartum depression in 17,648
parturients. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 26(12):1155, 2013
Nicholson JM, Kellar LC, Ahmad S, et al: US term stillbirth rates and the 39-week rule: a cause for
concern? Am J Obstet Gynecol 214:621, 2016

Nuzum D, Meaney S, O’Donoghue K: The impact of stillbirth on consultant obstetrician gynaecologists:
a qualitative study. BJOG 121:1020, 2014
Page JM, Christiansen-Lindquist L, Thorsten V, et al: Diagnostic tests for evaluation of stillbirth: results
from the Stillbirth Collaborative Research Network. Obstet Gynecol 129(4):699, 2017
Page JM, Silver RM: Evaluation of stillbirth. Curr Opin Obstet Gynecol 30:130, 2018
Page JM, Silver RM: Stillbirth: evaluation and follow-up. Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am 47(3):439, 2020
Page JM, Snowden JM, Cheng YW, et al: The risk of stillbirth and infant death by each additional week
of expectant management stratified by maternal age. Am J Obstet Gynecol 209(4):375.e1, 2013
Pauli RM, Reiser CA: Wisconsin Stillbirth Service Program: II. Analysis of diagnoses and diagnostic
categories in the first 1,000 referrals. Am J Med Genet 50:135, 1994
Pinar H, Goldenberg RL, Koch MA, et al: Placental findings in singleton stillbirths. Obstet Gynecol
123:325, 2014
Pinar H, Koch MA, Hawkins H, et al: The stillbirth collaborative research network postmortem
examination protocol. Am J Perinatol 29:187, 2012
Rasmussen S, Irgens LM, Skjaerven R, et al: Prior adverse pregnancy outcome and the risk of stillbirth.
Obstet Gynecol 114(6):1259, 2009
Rasmussen SA, Jamieson DJ: Caring for women who are planning a pregnancy, pregnant, or
postpartum during the COVID-19 pandemic. JAMA 324(2):190, 2020
Reddy UM: Prediction and prevention of recurrent stillbirth. Obstet Gynecol 110:1151, 2007
Reddy UM, Laughon SK, Sun L, et al: Prepregnancy risk factors for antepartum stillbirth in the United
States. Obstet Gynecol 116:1119, 2010
Reddy UM, Page GP, Saade GR, et al: Karyotype versus microarray testing for genetic abnormalities
after stillbirth. N Engl J Med 367(23):2185, 2012
Rosenstein MG, Snowden JM, Cheng YW, et al: The mortality risk of expectant management compared
with delivery stratified by gestational age and race and ethnicity. Am J Obstet Gynecol
211(6):660.e1, 2014
Saller DN Jr, Lesser KB, Harrel U, et al: The clinical utility of the perinatal autopsy. JAMA 273:663,
1995
Shakespeare C, Merriel A, Bakhbakhi D, et al: The RESPECT Study for consensus on global
bereavement care after stillbirth. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 149(2):137, 2020
Sharma PP, Salihu HM, Oyelese Y, et al: Is race a determinant of stillbirth recurrence? Obstet Gynecol
107(2 Pt 1):391, 2006
Shruthi M, Gupta N, Jana M, et al: Comparative study of conventional and virtual autopsy using
postmortem MRI in the phenotypic characterization of stillbirths and malformed fetuses. Ultrasound
Obstet Gynecol 51(2):236, 2018
Siassakos D, Jackson S, Gleeson K, et al: All bereaved parents are entitled to good care after stillbirth: a
mixed-methods multicentre study (INSIGHT). BJOG 125(2):160, 2018
Silver RM: Examining the link between placental pathology, growth restriction, and stillbirth. Best Pract
Res Clin Obstet Gynaecol 49:89, 2018
Silver RM: Fetal death. Obstet Gynecol 109:153, 2007
Silver RM, Parker CB, Reddy UM, et al: Antiphospholipid antibodies in stillbirth. Obstet Gynecol
122(3):641, 2013
Silver RM, Saade GR, Thorsten V, et al: Factor V Leiden prothrombin G20210A, and methylene
tetrahydrofolate reductase mutations and stillbirth: the Stillbirth Collaborative Research Network.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 215:468, 2016

Simon E, Cottenet J, Mariet AS, et al: Impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on preterm birth and stillbirth:
a nationwide, population-based retrospective cohort study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 225(3):347, 2021
Son SL, Allshouse AA, Page JM, et al: Stillbirth and fetal anomalies: secondary analysis of a casecontrol study BJOG 128(2):252, 2021a
Son M, Gallagher K, Lo JY, et al: Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic and pregnancy
outcomes in a U.S. population. Obstet Gynecol 138(4):542, 2021b
Srivastava K. Covid-19: why has India had a spike in stillbirths? BMJ 374:n2133, 2021
Stanley KE, Giordano J, Throsten V, et al: Causal genetic variants in stillbirth. N Engl J Med
383(12):1107, 2020
Stillbirth Collaborative Research Network Writing Group: Association between stillbirth and risk factors
known at pregnancy confirmation. JAMA 306(22):2469, 2011a
Stillbirth Collaborative Research Network Writing Group: Causes of death among stillbirths. JAMA
306(22):2459, 2011b
Varner JW, Silver RM, Rowland Hogue CJ, et al: Association between stillbirth and illicit drug use and
smoking during pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 123:113, 2014
Weeks JW, Asrat T, Morgan MA, et al: Antepartum surveillance for a history of stillbirth: when to
begin? Am J Obstet Gynecol 172:486, 1995
Whitman M, Gammon E, Chronister BC, et al: Risk factors for recurrent stillbirth (SB): results from the
Stillbirth Collaborative Research Network (SCRN). Abstract No. 161, Am J Obstet Gynecol
222:S116 2020
Wojcieszek AM, Shepherd E, Middleton P, et al: Care prior to and during subsequent pregnancies
following stillbirth for improving outcomes. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 12:CD012203, 2018a
Wojcieszek AM, Shepherd, Middleton P, et al: Interventions for investigating and identifying the causes
of stillbirth. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 4:CD012504, 2018b
Wojcik M: Genomic insights into stillbirth. N Engl J Med 383(12):1182, 2020

SECTION 10

THE PUERPERIUM

CHAPTER 36

The Puerperium

THE FOURTH TRIMESTER
REPRODUCTIVE TRACT INVOLUTION
PLACENTAL SITE INVOLUTION
URINARY TRACT
PERITONEUM AND ABDOMINAL WALL
BLOOD AND BLOOD VOLUME
LACTATION AND BREASTFEEDING
HOSPITAL CARE
HOME CARE
REFERENCES
The word puerperium is derived from Latin—puer, child + parus, bringing
forth. It defines the time following delivery during which pregnancy-induced
maternal anatomical and physiological changes return to the nonpregnant
state. Its duration is inexact but is considered to last between 4 and 6 weeks.
Although much less complex compared with pregnancy, the puerperium has
appreciable changes, and maternal morbidity is surprisingly common. For
example, in a survey of 1246 British mothers, 3 percent required hospital
readmission within 8 weeks (Thompson, 2002). Moreover, almost three
fourths of women continue to have health problems for up to 18 months

(Glazener, 1995). Of self-reported concerns, pain, breastfeeding, and
psychosocial topics are prominent. Table 36-1 lists data on these from the
Pregnancy Risk Assessment Surveillance System—PRAMS—of the Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).
TABLE 36-1. Concerns Raised by Women in the Puerperium

THE FOURTH TRIMESTER
Because the weeks following childbirth are a critical period for the woman
and her infant, the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
(2018a) promulgated the concept of a “fourth trimester.” This concept
reinforces the importance of the 12 weeks following birth, and components
of this model are outlined in Table 36-2. Thus, the comprehensive
postpartum visit includes a full assessment of physical, social, and
psychological well-being.
TABLE 36-2. Components of Postpartum Care for the Fourth Trimester

An initial visit is recommended at 3 weeks postdelivery and a final
summary visit at 12 weeks. Between this time, visits can be added as needed.
For example, women with chronic hypertension, overt diabetes,
cardiovascular disease, and depression may require additional
multidisciplinary care during this period. For all puerpera, a discussion of
positive lifestyle changes can be initiated. This time also affords the
opportunity to update immunizations (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2019). At the end of the 12-week fourth trimester, follow-up
then transitions into well-woman care, ongoing primary or specialty care,
and when necessary, preconceptional counseling (Chap. 9, p. 165).

REPRODUCTIVE TRACT INVOLUTION
■ Birth Canal
Return of the tissues in the birth canal to the nonpregnant state begins soon
after delivery. The vagina and its outlet gradually diminish in size but rarely
regain their nulliparous dimensions. Rugae begin to reappear by the third
week but are less prominent than before. The hymen is represented by
several small tags of tissue, which scar to form the myrtiform caruncles. The
vaginal epithelium reflects the hypoestrogenic state, and it does not begin to
proliferate until 4 to 6 weeks. This timing is usually coincidental with
resumed ovarian estrogen production. Lacerations or stretching of the

perineum during delivery can lead to vaginal outlet relaxation. Some damage
to the pelvic floor may be inevitable, and parturition predisposes to pelvic
organ prolapse (Chap. 30, p. 548).

■ Uterus
The massively augmented uterine blood flow necessary to maintain
pregnancy derives from significant hypertrophy and remodeling of pelvic
vessels. After delivery, their caliber gradually diminishes to approximately
that of the prepregnant state. Within the puerperal uterus, larger blood vessels
become obliterated by hyaline changes. They are gradually resorbed and
replaced by smaller ones. Minor vestiges of the larger vessels, however, may
persist for years.
During labor and vaginal delivery, the margin of the dilated cervix,
which corresponds to the external os, may be lacerated. The cervical opening
contracts slowly, and for a few days immediately after labor, it readily
admits two fingers. By the end of the first week, this opening narrows, the
cervix thickens, and the endocervical canal reforms. The external os does not
completely resume its pregravid appearance. It remains somewhat wider, and
typically, ectocervical depressions at the site of lacerations become
permanent. These changes are characteristic of a parous cervix (Fig. 36-1).
Cervical epithelium also undergoes considerable remodeling. This actually
may be salutary because almost half of women have regression of high-grade
dysplasia following delivery (Ahdoot, 1998; Kaneshiro, 2005).

FIGURE 36-1 Common appearance of nulliparous (A) and parous (B) cervices.

After delivery, the fundus of the contracted uterus lies slightly below the
umbilicus. It consists mostly of myometrium covered by serosa and internally
lined by decidua. The markedly attenuated lower uterine segment contracts
and retracts, but not as forcefully as the uterine corpus. During the next few
weeks, the lower segment is converted from a clearly distinct substructure
large enough to accommodate the fetal head to a barely discernible uterine
isthmus located between the corpus and internal cervical os. Immediately
postpartum, the anterior and posterior walls, which lie in close apposition,
are each 4 to 5 cm thick (Buhimschi, 2003). At this time, the uterus weighs
approximately 1000 g.
Myometrial involution is a truly remarkable feat of destruction or
deconstruction that begins as soon as 2 days after delivery (Williams, 1931).
The total number of myocytes does not decline appreciably—rather, their
size decreases markedly. Weights from removed uteri approximate 500 g by
1 week postpartum, 300 g by 2 weeks, and at 4 weeks, involution is complete
and the uterus weighs approximately 100 g (Williams, 1931). After each
successive delivery, the uterus is usually slightly larger than before the most
recent pregnancy.

Sonographic Findings
Uterine involution and declining uterine volume is best measured by
sonography (Fig. 36-2) (Wataganara, 2015). With this, estimates again show
uterine size declines of more than half, from 450 to 200 g, in the first 2
weeks. Sonographically, the uterus and endometrium return to the pregravid
size by 8 weeks postpartum. Complete involution in the multiparous uterus is
longer than for the nulliparous organ (Paliulyte, 2017). In the event of a
cesarean delivery, the residual myometrial thickness over the uterine incision
is thicker if a two-layer closure was used (Roberge, 2016).

FIGURE 36-2 Pattern of uterine involution through 7 weeks postpartum as estimated by sonography.

In a study of 42 normal puerperas, fluid in the endometrial cavity was
noted in 78 percent of women at 2 weeks, 52 percent at 3 weeks, 30 percent
at 4 weeks, and 10 percent at 5 weeks (Tekay, 1993). Belachew and
coworkers (2012) used three-dimensional sonography and visualized
intracavitary tissue matter in a third on day 1, 95 percent on day 7, 87 percent
on day 14, and 28 percent on day 28. By day 56, the small cavity was empty.
Doppler ultrasound of the uterine artery shows continuously increasing
vascular resistance throughout the first 7 weeks postpartum (Sohn, 1988;
Wataganara, 2015). Uterine artery flow impedance does not differ between
women undergoing vaginal versus cesarean delivery (Baron, 2016).

Decidual and Endometrial Regeneration
Because separation of the placenta and membranes involves the spongy layer,
the decidua basalis is not sloughed. The in situ decidua varies markedly in
thickness, it has an irregular jagged border, and it is infiltrated with blood,
especially at the placental site. Within 2 or 3 days after delivery, the
remaining decidua becomes differentiated into two layers. The superficial
layer becomes necrotic and is sloughed in the lochia. The basal layer
adjacent to the myometrium remains intact and is the source of new
endometrium. Decidual vessels are near normal by delivery and

endovascular trophoblasts are diminished. These vessels and the spiral
arteries also undergo involution (Zhang, 2018).
Endometrial regeneration is rapid, except at the placental site. Within a
week or so, the free surface becomes covered by epithelium. Sharman (1953)
identified a fully restored endometrium in all biopsy specimens obtained
from the 16th day onward. Histological endometritis is part of the normal
reparative process. Also, microscopic inflammatory changes characteristic
of noninfectious acute salpingitis are seen in almost half of women between 5
and 15 days (Andrews, 1951).

Clinical Aspects
Afterpains. Several clinical findings coincide with uterine involution. In
primiparas, the uterus tends to remain tonically contracted following
delivery. In multiparas, however, it often contracts vigorously at intervals
and gives rise to afterpains, which are similar to but milder than labor
contractions. These are more pronounced as parity increases and worsen
when the newborn suckles, likely because of oxytocin release (Holdcroft,
2003). Usually, afterpains decrease in intensity and become mild by the third
day. We have encountered unusually severe and persistent afterpains in
women with postpartum uterine infections (Chap. 37, p. 651).
Lochia. Early in the puerperium, sloughing of decidual tissue results in a
vaginal discharge of variable quantity. The discharge is termed lochia and
contains erythrocytes, shredded decidua, epithelial cells, and bacteria. For
the first few days after delivery, there is blood sufficient to color it red—
lochia rubra. After 3 or 4 days, lochia becomes progressively pale in color
—lochia serosa. After approximately the 10th day, because of an admixture
of leukocytes and reduced fluid content, lochia assumes a white or yellowwhite color—lochia alba. The average duration of lochial discharge ranges
from 24 to 36 days (Fletcher, 2012). Because of this expected leukocyte
component, saline preparations of lochia for microscopic evaluation in cases
of suspected puerperal metritis are typically uninformative.

PLACENTAL SITE INVOLUTION

Complete extrusion of the placental site takes up to 6 weeks (Williams,
1931). Immediately after delivery, the placental site is approximately palmsized. Within hours of delivery, it normally contains many thrombosed
vessels that ultimately undergo organization. By the end of the second week,
it measures 3 to 4 cm in diameter.
Placental site involution is an exfoliation process, which is prompted in
great part by undermining of the implantation site by new endometrial
proliferation (Williams, 1931). Thus, involution is not simply absorption in
situ. Exfoliation consists of both extension and “downgrowth” of
endometrium from the margins of the placental site, as well as “upward”
development of endometrial tissue from the glands and stroma left deep in the
decidua basalis after placental separation. Anderson and Davis (1968)
concluded that placental site exfoliation results from sloughing of infarcted
and necrotic superficial tissues followed by a remodeling process.

■ Subinvolution
In some cases, uterine involution is hindered because of incompletely
remodeled spiral arteries, retained placental fragments, or infection. Such
subinvolution is accompanied by varied intervals of prolonged lochia and by
irregular or excessive uterine bleeding. During bimanual examination, the
uterus is larger and softer than would be expected.
Inadequate conversion of spiral arteries into remodeled uteroplacental
arteries can cause subinvolution (Kavalar, 2012). These noninvoluted
vessels are filled with thromboses and lack an endothelial lining.
Perivascular trophoblasts are also identified in the vessel walls, which
suggests an aberrant interaction between uterine and trophoblast cells.
With bleeding, pelvic sonography may help differentiate subinvolution
from retained placenta. Characteristic findings of retained products include a
thickened endometrium or endometrial mass (Fig. 36-3). Vascularity within
this area increases the likelihood of retained products (Sellmyer, 2013).
Comparatively, subinvolution is characterized by an enlarged uterus with
tubular hypoechoic areas in the myometrium. These tubular structures reflect
neovascularization and dilated uterine vessels.

FIGURE 36-3 Sonographic appearance of puerperal uterine complications. A. Retained products of
conception. Tissue vascularity is highlighted here by color Doppler. B. Retained clot marked by calipers
shows mixed echogenicity in a woman with subinvolutional hemorrhage. Anechoic cystic areas within
the fundal myometrium reflect dilated vessels.

For treatment, uterotonics are recommended by many but their efficacy is
questionable (Hoyveda, 2001; American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2017d). At Parkland hospital, conservative management is
undertaken with methylergonovine (Methergine) 0.2 mg orally every 3 to 4
hours for 24 to 48 hours. For initially brisk bleeding, an intramuscular dose
of methylergonovine may be coupled with an infusion of synthetic oxytocin
(Pitocin) (20 units in 1 L crystalloid).
For cases with suspected comorbid infection, antimicrobial therapy
usually leads to a good response. Wager and associates (1980) reported that
a third of late cases of postpartum metritis are caused by Chlamydia
trachomatis. Empirical therapy with azithromycin or doxycycline usually
prompts resolution regardless of bacterial etiology. At our institution,
common oral options taken twice daily for 7 to 10 days include azithromycin,
500 mg; amoxicillin-clavulanate (Augmentin), 875 mg; or doxycycline, 100
mg.

■ Late Postpartum Hemorrhage
The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2017d) defines
secondary postpartum hemorrhage as bleeding 24 hours to 12 weeks after
delivery. Clinically worrisome uterine hemorrhage develops within 1 to 2
weeks in perhaps 1 percent of women. Such bleeding most often stems from
abnormal involution of the placental site. It occasionally is caused by

retention of a placental fragment or by a uterine artery pseudoaneurysm.
Rarely, retained products may undergo necrosis with fibrin deposition and
neovascularization, thus forming a placental polypoid mass. Severe
hemorrhage occurs in only 6 percent of these cases due to rupture of blood
vessels (Marques, 2011). Sonographically, a discrete hypervascular
endometrial mass that may extend into the myometrium is visualized (Fig. 364). As discussed in Chapter 59 (p. 1062), delayed postpartum hemorrhage
may also be caused by von Willebrand disease or other inherited
coagulopathies (Lipe, 2011).

FIGURE 36-4 Sonogram of a polypoid placental mass with color Doppler applied. The mass is
demarcated by the dashed white lines. Hypervascularity is seen extending from the mass into the
myometrium.

In our experiences, few women with delayed hemorrhage are found to
have retained placental fragments. Thus, we and others do not routinely
perform curettage (Lee, 1981). Another concern is that curettage may worsen
bleeding by avulsing part of the implantation site. Thus, in a stable patient, if
sonographic examination shows an empty cavity, then oxytocin,
methylergonovine, or a prostaglandin analogue is given. Suitable dosing is
found in Table 13-3 (p. 240). Antimicrobials are added if uterine infection is

suspected. If large clots are seen in the uterine cavity with sonography, then
gentle suction curettage is considered. Otherwise, curettage is carried out
only if appreciable bleeding persists or recurs after medical management.

URINARY TRACT
Normal pregnancy-induced glomerular hyperfiltration persists during the
puerperium but returns to prepregnancy baseline by 2 weeks (Hladunewich,
2004). Parturition induces a transient rise in excretion of glomerular
podocytes (Furuta, 2017). Dilated ureters and renal pelves return to their
prepregnant state by 2 to 8 weeks postpartum. Because of this dilated
collecting system, coupled with residual urine and bacteriuria in a
traumatized bladder, symptomatic urinary tract infection remains a concern in
the puerperium.
Funnell and colleagues (1954) used cystoscopy immediately postpartum
and described varying degrees of submucosal hemorrhage and edema.
Bladder trauma is associated most closely with labor length and thus to some
degree accompanies normal vaginal delivery. Postpartum, the bladder has a
greater capacity and a relative insensitivity to intravesical pressure.
Consequently, overdistention, incomplete emptying, and excessive residual
urine are frequent (Buchanan, 2014; Mulder, 2014). Acute urinary retention
is more common with epidural or narcotic analgesia (Kandadai, 2014). The
management of urinary retention is discussed later (p. 643).
Stress urinary incontinence during the puerperium may occur in 5 percent
of women (Wang, 2017). Much attention has been given to the potential for
subsequent development of urinary incontinence and other pelvic floor
disorders in the years following delivery (Colla, 2018). A more detailed
discussion is found in Chapter 30 (p. 548).

PERITONEUM AND ABDOMINAL WALL
The broad and round ligaments require considerable time to recover from
stretching and loosening during pregnancy. The abdominal wall remains soft
and flaccid as a result of ruptured elastic fibers in the skin and prolonged
distention by the gravid uterus. If the abdomen is unusually lax or pendulous,
an ordinary girdle is often satisfactory. An abdominal binder is another

temporary measure. Several weeks are required for these structures to return
to normal, and exercise aids recovery. These may be started anytime
following vaginal delivery. After cesarean delivery, a 6-week interval to
allow anterior abdominal wall fascia to heal and abdominal soreness to
diminish is reasonable. Silvery abdominal striae commonly develop as
striae gravidarum (Chap. 4, p. 55). Except for these, the abdominal wall
usually resumes its prepregnancy appearance. When muscles remain atonic,
however, the abdominal wall also remains lax.
Marked separation of the rectus abdominis muscles—diastasis recti—
may result. This separation develops from a gradual thinning and widening of
the linea alba and is coupled with a general laxity of the ventral abdominal
wall muscles. Importantly, musculofascial continuity and lack of a true hernia
sac differentiates this from a ventral hernia (Mommers, 2017).

BLOOD AND BLOOD VOLUME
■ Hematological and Coagulation Changes
Marked leukocytosis and thrombocytosis may occur during and after labor.
The white blood cell count seldom exceeds 25,000/μL, and the rise is
predominantly due to granulocytes (Arbib, 2016; Sanci, 2017). A relative
lymphopenia and an absolute eosinopenia is typical. Normally, during the
first few postpartum days, hemoglobin concentration and hematocrit decrease
moderately. If they fall much below prelabor levels, a considerable amount
of blood has been lost.
By the end of pregnancy, laboratory values that assess coagulation are
altered (Kenny, 2015). These changes are discussed in Chapter 4 (p. 61) and
listed in the Appendix (p. 1228). Many extend variably in the puerperium.
For example, a markedly higher plasma fibrinogen level is maintained at
least through the first week. This contributes to hypercoagulability (Chap. 55,
p. 975). As one result, the pregnancy-associated risks for deep-vein
thrombosis and pulmonary embolism persist in the 12 weeks following
childbirth (Kamel, 2014).

■ Pregnancy-Induced Hypervolemia

When the amount of blood attained by normal pregnancy hypervolemia is lost
as postpartum hemorrhage, the woman almost immediately regains her
nonpregnant blood volume (Chap. 42, p. 732). If less has been lost at
delivery, blood volume generally nearly returns to its nonpregnant level by 1
week after delivery. Cardiac output usually remains elevated for 24 to 48
hours postpartum and declines to nonpregnant values by 10 days (Robson,
1987). Heart rate changes follow this pattern, and blood pressure similarly
returns to nonpregnant values (Fig. 36-5). Correspondingly, systemic
vascular resistance remains in the lower range characteristic of pregnancy
for 2 days postpartum and then begins to steadily rise to normal nonpregnant
values (Hibbard, 2015). Despite this, Morris and coworkers (2015) found
that reduced arterial stiffness persists following pregnancy. They suggest a
significant favorable effect of pregnancy on maternal cardiovascular
remodeling. This may represent a mechanism by which preeclampsia risk is
reduced in subsequent pregnancies.

FIGURE 36-5 During the early puerperium, blood pressure normally rises toward nonpregnant values.
MAP = mean arterial pressure.

■ Postpartum Diuresis
Normal pregnancy is associated with appreciable extracellular sodium and
water retention, and postpartum diuresis is a physiological reversal of this

process. Chesley and associates (1959) demonstrated an approximate 2 liter
decline in sodium space during the first week postpartum. This corresponds
with loss of residual pregnancy hypervolemia. In preeclampsia, pathological
retention of fluid antepartum and then its normal diuresis postpartum may be
prodigious (Chap. 41, p. 724).
Postpartum diuresis results in a relatively rapid weight loss of 2 to 3 kg,
which is additive to the 5 to 6 kg incurred by delivery and normal blood loss.
Weight loss from pregnancy itself likely peaks by the end of the second week
postpartum. Any residual weight compared with prepregnancy values
probably represents fat stores that will persist.

LACTATION AND BREASTFEEDING
■ Breast Anatomy and Secretory Products
Each mature mammary gland or breast is composed of 15 to 25 lobes. They
are arranged radially and are separated from one another by varying amounts
of fat. Each lobe consists of several lobules, which in turn are composed of
numerous alveoli. Each alveolus is provided with a small duct that joins
others to form a single larger duct for each lobe (Fig. 36-6). These
lactiferous ducts open separately on the nipple, where they may be
distinguished as small but distinct orifices. The alveolar secretory epithelium
synthesizes the various milk constituents.

FIGURE 36-6 Schematic of the alveolar and ductal system during lactation. Note the myoepithelial
fibers (M) that surround the outside of the uppermost alveolus. The secretions from the glandular
elements are extruded into the lumen of the alveoli (A) and ejected by the myoepithelial cells into the
ductal system (D), which empties through the nipple. Arterial blood supply to the alveolus is identified by
the upper right arrow and venous drainage by the arrow beneath.

After delivery, the breasts begin to secrete colostrum, which is a deepyellow liquid. It usually can be expressed from the nipples by the second

postpartum day. Compared with mature milk, colostrum is rich in
immunological components and contains more minerals and amino acids (Y
de Vries, 2018). It also has more protein, much of which is globulin, but less
sugar and fat. Secretion persists for 5 to 14 days, with gradual conversion to
mature milk by 4 to 6 weeks. The colostrum content of immunoglobulin A
(IgA) offers the newborn protection against enteric pathogens. Other host
resistance factors found in colostrum and milk include complement,
macrophages, lymphocytes, lactoferrin, lactoperoxidase, and lysozymes.
A lactating mother produces upwards of 600 mL of milk daily, and
maternal gestational weight gain has little impact on its quantity or quality.
Mature milk is a complex and dynamic biological fluid that includes fat,
proteins, carbohydrates, bioactive factors, minerals, vitamins, hormones, and
many cellular products (Table 36-3). The contents and concentrations of
human milk change even during a single feed and are influenced by maternal
diet and by newborn age, health, and needs. Milk is isotonic with plasma,
and lactose accounts for half of the osmotic pressure. Essential amino acids
are derived from blood, and nonessential amino acids are derived in part
from blood or synthesized in the mammary gland. Most milk proteins are
unique and include alpha-lactalbumin, beta-lactoglobulin, and casein. Fatty
acids are synthesized in the alveoli from glucose and are secreted by an
apocrine-like process. Variable amounts of most vitamins are found in human
milk. Vitamin K is virtually absent, and thus, an intramuscular dose is given
to the newborn (Chap. 33, p. 606). Vitamin D content is low, and newborn
supplementation is recommended by the American Academy of Pediatrics
and the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2017).
TABLE 36-3. Average Composition of Human Breast Milk

Whey is milk serum and contains large amounts of interleukin-6 and other
chemokines (Polat, 2016). Human milk has a whey-to-casein ratio of 60:40,
which is considered ideal for absorption. Prolactin appears to be actively
secreted into breast milk. Epidermal growth factor has been identified, and
because it is not destroyed by gastric proteolytic enzymes, it may be
absorbed to promote growth and maturation of newborn intestinal mucosa.
Other critical components in human milk include melatonin and
oligosaccharides.

■ Lactation Endocrinology
The precise humoral and neural mechanisms involved in lactation are
complex. Progesterone, estrogen, and placental lactogen, as well as
prolactin, cortisol, and insulin, appear to act in concert to stimulate the
growth and development of the milk-secreting apparatus (Stuebe, 2014).
With delivery, the maternal serum levels of progesterone and estrogen
decline abruptly and profoundly. This drop removes the inhibitory influence
of progesterone on alpha-lactalbumin production and stimulates lactose

synthase to raise milk lactose levels. Progesterone withdrawal also allows
prolactin to act unopposed in its stimulation of alpha-lactalbumin production.
Activation of calcium-sensing receptors in mammary epithelial cells
downregulates parathyroid hormone–related protein (PTHrP) and increases
calcium transport into milk (Vanhouten, 2013). Serotonin also is produced in
mammary epithelial cells and has a role in maintaining milk production
(Collier, 2012).
The intensity and duration of subsequent lactation are controlled, in large
part, by the repetitive stimulus of suckling and emptying of milk from the
breast. Prolactin is essential for lactation, and women with extensive
pituitary necrosis—Sheehan syndrome—do not lactate (Chap. 61, p. 1104).
Although plasma prolactin levels fall after delivery to levels lower than
during pregnancy, each act of suckling triggers a rise in levels. Presumably a
stimulus from the breast curtails the release of dopamine—also known as
prolactin-inhibiting factor—from the hypothalamus. In turn, this transiently
induces increased prolactin secretion.
The posterior pituitary secretes oxytocin in pulsatile fashion. This
stimulates milk expression from a lactating breast by causing contraction of
myoepithelial cells in the alveoli and small milk ducts (see Fig. 36-6). Milk
ejection, or letting down, is a reflex initiated especially by suckling, which
stimulates the posterior pituitary to liberate oxytocin. The reflex may even be
provoked by an infant cry and can be inhibited by maternal fright or stress
(Stuebe, 2014).

■ Immunological Consequences of Breastfeeding
Human milk contains several protective immunological substances, including
secretory IgA and growth factors. The antibodies in human milk are
specifically directed against maternal environmental antigens such as
Escherichia coli (Macpherson, 2017). According to the CDC, breastfeeding
decreases the incidence of ear, respiratory, and gastrointestinal infections;
necrotizing enterocolitis; and sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS) (Perrine,
2015). Breastfeeding is especially important for immunity in preterm infants
(Lewis, 2017).
Much attention has been directed to the role of maternal breast milk
lymphocytes in neonatal immunological processes. Milk contains both T and
B lymphocytes, but the T lymphocytes appear to differ from those found in

blood. Specifically, milk T lymphocytes are almost exclusively composed of
cells that exhibit specific membrane antigens. These memory T cells appear
to be an avenue for the neonate to benefit from the maternal immunological
experience.

■ Lactation
The ideal time to begin breastfeeding is within an hour of birth. Human milk
is ideal food for newborns in that it provides age-specific nutrients,
immunological factors, and antibacterial substances. Milk also contains
factors that act as biological signals for promoting cellular growth and
differentiation. A list of the advantages of breastfeeding is shown in Table
36-4. Lactation has long-term benefits for both the mother and the infant. For
example, women who breastfeed have a lower risk of breast and
reproductive cancer. Children who were breastfed have higher adult
intelligence scores independent of a wide range of possible confounding
factors (Jong, 2012; Kramer, 2008). In the short term, lactation is associated
with less postpartum weight retention (Baker, 2008). In addition, rates of
SIDS are significantly lower among breast-fed infants. Bartek and colleagues
(2013) estimate that a 90-percent breastfeeding rate for 12 months would
save more than $3 billion annually in excess infant and maternal morbidity
costs. For all these reasons, the American Academy of Pediatrics and
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2017) support the
World Health Organization (2011) recommendations of exclusive
breastfeeding for up to 6 months.
TABLE 36-4. Advantages of Breastfeeding

Currently, 55 percent of women breastfeed at 6 months compared with a
Healthy People 2020 goal of 61 percent. (American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists 2018b). The Baby-Friendly Hospital Initiative is an
international program to raise rates of exclusive breastfeeding and to extend
its duration. It is based on the World Health Organization (2018) Ten Steps to
Successful Breastfeeding (Table 36-5). Worldwide, almost 20,000 hospitals
are deemed “baby-friendly,” however, only 15 to 20 percent of hospitals in
the United States are so designated (Baby-Friendly USA, 2018; Perrine,
2015). In a large population-based study done in the United States, fewer
than two thirds of term neonates were exclusively breastfed at the time of
discharge (McDonald, 2012). By 3 months, according to the CDC, less than
half of these infants are exclusively breastfed (Olaiya, 2016).
TABLE 36-5. Ten Steps to Successful Breastfeeding

Various individual resources are available online for lactating mothers
from the American Academy of Pediatrics (www.aap.org) and La Leche

League International (www.llli.org).

■ Breast Care
The nipples require little attention other than cleanliness and attention to skin
fissures. Fissured nipples render lactation painful, and they may have a
deleterious influence on milk production. These cracks also provide a portal
of entry for pyogenic bacteria. Because dried milk is likely to accumulate
and irritate the nipples, washing the areola with water and mild soap is
helpful before and after nursing. When the nipples are irritated or fissured,
some recommend topical lanolin and a nipple shield for 24 hours or longer
(Dennis, 2014). If fissuring is severe, the newborn should not be permitted to
nurse on the affected side. Instead, the breast is emptied regularly with a
pump until the lesions are healed.
Poor latching of the neonate to the breast can create such fissures. For
example, the newborn may take into its mouth only the nipple, which is then
is forced against the hard palate during suckling. Ideally, the nipple and
areola are both taken in to evenly distribute suckling forces. Moreover, the
force of the hard palate against the lactiferous sinuses aids their efficient
emptying, while the nipple is thereby positioned closer to the soft palate.

■ Breastfeeding Contraindications
Lactation is contraindicated in women who take street drugs or do not control
their alcohol use; have an infant with galactosemia; have human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection; have active, untreated tuberculosis;
take certain medications; or are undergoing breast cancer treatment
(American Academy of Pediatrics, 2017). Breastfeeding has been recognized
for some time as a mode of HIV transmission and is proscribed in developed
countries in which adequate nutrition is otherwise available (Chap. 68, p.
1222). Other viral infections do not contraindicate lactation. For example,
with maternal cytomegalovirus infection, both virus and antibodies are
present in breast milk. And, although hepatitis B virus is excreted in milk,
breastfeeding is not contraindicated if hepatitis B immune globulin is given
to the newborns of affected mothers. Maternal hepatitis C infection is not a
contraindication because breastfeeding has not been shown to transmit
infection. Women with active herpes simplex virus may suckle their infants if

there are no breast lesions and if particular care is directed to hand washing
before nursing. From the CDC (2021a), those with COVID-19 should wear a
mask and practice hand-hygiene.

■ Drugs Secreted in Milk
Most drugs given to the mother are secreted in breast milk, although the
amount ingested by the infant typically is small. Factors influencing drug
excretion include plasma concentration, degree of protein binding, plasma
and milk pH, degree of ionization, lipid solubility, and molecular weight
(Rowe, 2013). The ratio of drug concentration in breast milk to that in
maternal plasma is the milk-to-plasma drug-concentration ratio. Ideally, to
minimize infant exposure, medication selection favors drugs with a shorter
half-life, poorer oral absorption, and lower lipid solubility. If multiple daily
drug doses are required, each is taken by the mother after the closest feed.
Single daily-dosed drugs may be taken just before the longest infant sleep
interval—usually at bedtime.
Only a few drugs are absolutely contraindicated while breastfeeding
(American Academy of Pediatrics and American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists, 2017). Cytotoxic drugs may interfere with cellular
metabolism and potentially cause immune suppression or neutropenia, affect
growth, and at least theoretically, increase the childhood cancer risk.
Examples include cyclophosphamide, cyclosporine, doxorubicin,
methotrexate, and mycophenolate (Briggs, 2017). If a medication presents a
concern, its importance should be ascertained. A provider can also seek a
safer alternative or determine if neonatal exposure can be minimized if the
medication dose is taken immediately after each breastfeeding session. Last,
recreational drugs such as marijuana and alcohol should be avoided
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2017c; Metz, 2018).
Data on individual drugs are available through the National Institutes of
Health website, LactMed, which can be found at
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK501922/.
Radioactive isotopes of copper, gallium, indium, iodine, sodium, and
technetium rapidly appear in breast milk. Consultation with a nuclear
medicine specialist is recommended before performing a diagnostic study
with these isotopes (Chap. 49, p. 875). Ideally, a radionuclide with the
shortest excretion time in breast milk is selected. The mother should pump

her breasts before the study and store enough milk in a freezer to feed the
infant. After the study, she should pump her breasts to maintain milk
production but discard all milk produced during the time that radioactivity is
present. This ranges from 15 hours to 2 weeks, depending on the isotope
used. Importantly, radioactive iodine concentrates and persists in the thyroid.
Its special considerations are discussed in Chapter 66 (p. 1174). For
magnetic resonance (MR) imaging, breastfeeding should not be interrupted
after gadolinium administration (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2017a).

■ Breast Engorgement
This is common in women who do not breastfeed. It is typified by milk
leakage and breast pain, which peak 3 to 5 days after delivery. Up to half of
affected women require analgesia for breast pain relief, and as many as 10
percent report severe pain for up to 14 days.
Evidence is insufficient to firmly support any specific treatment
(Mangesi, 2016). That said, breasts can be supported with a well-fitting
brassiere, breast binder, or sports bra. Cool packs and oral analgesics for 12
to 24 hours aid discomfort. Pharmacological or hormonal agents in general
are not recommended to suppress lactation.
Fever caused by breast engorgement was common before the renaissance
of breastfeeding. In one study, 13 percent of puerperas with engorgement had
fever ranging from 37.8 to 39°C (Almeida, 1986). Fever seldom persists for
longer than 4 to 16 hours. The incidence and severity of engorgement and of
the fever associated with it are much lower if women breastfeed. Other
causes of fever, especially those due to infection, must be excluded. Mastitis
is infection of the mammary parenchyma and is relatively common in
lactating women (Chap. 37, p. 659).

■ Other Lactation Issues
With inverted nipples, lactiferous ducts open directly into a depression at the
center of the areola. With these depressed nipples, nursing is difficult. If the
depression is not deep, milk sometimes can be drawn out by a breast pump.
If instead the nipple is greatly inverted, daily attempts are made during the

last few months of pregnancy to draw or “tease” the nipple out with the
fingers.
Extra breasts—polymastia, or extra nipples—polythelia, may develop
along the former embryonic mammary ridge. Also termed the milk line, this
line extends from the axilla to the groin bilaterally. In some women, rests of
accessory breast tissue can be found in the mons pubis or vulva (Wagner,
2013). In the general population, the incidence of accessory breast tissue
ranges from 0.22 to 6 percent (Loukas, 2007). These breasts may be so small
as to be mistaken for pigmented moles, or if without a nipple, for
lymphadenopathy or lipoma. Polymastia has no obstetrical significance,
although occasionally enlargement of these accessory breasts during
pregnancy or engorgement postpartum may result in patient discomfort and
anxiety.
Galactocele is a milk duct that becomes obstructed by inspissated
secretions. The amount is ordinarily limited, but an excess may form a
fluctuant mass—a galactocele—that can cause pressure symptoms and have
the appearance of an abscess. It may resolve spontaneously or require
aspiration.
Among individuals, the volume of milk secreted varies markedly. This
depends not on general maternal health but on breast glandular development.
Rarely, there is complete lack of mammary secretion—agalactia.
Occasionally, mammary secretion is excessive—polygalactia.

Lactation-Associated Osteoporosis
This is a rare disorder of unknown etiology that may be associated with
severe back pain or vertebral fractures (Li, 2018; Zhang, 2017). Preliminary
studies indicate that bisphosphonates are effective in its management.
However, for almost all women, lactation is not associated with later-onset
osteoporosis (Crandall, 2017). Pregnancy-associated osteoporosis is
discussed in Chapter 61 (p. 1100).

HOSPITAL CARE
For 2 hours after delivery, blood pressure and pulse are taken every 15
minutes, at minimum. Temperature is assessed every 4 hours for the first 8
hours and then at least every 8 hours subsequently (American Academy of

Pediatrics and American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2017).
If regional analgesia or general anesthesia was used for labor or delivery, the
mother should be observed in an appropriately equipped and staffed
recovery area. Expected anesthesia recovery and complications are
described in Chapter 25 (p. 473).
Because the likelihood of significant hemorrhage is greatest immediately
postpartum, vaginal bleeding is closely monitored. The uterine fundus is
palpated to ensure that it is well contracted. If relaxation is detected, the
uterus should be massaged through the abdominal wall until it remains
contracted. Uterotonics also are sometimes required. Blood may accumulate
within the uterus without external bleeding. This may be detected early by
uterine enlargement during fundal palpation in the first postdelivery hours.
Postpartum hemorrhage is discussed in Chapter 41.
Early ambulation within a few hours after delivery is encouraged. An
attendant should be present for at least the first time, in case the woman
becomes syncopal. The many confirmed advantages of early ambulation
include fewer bladder complications, less frequent constipation, and reduced
rates of puerperal venous thromboembolism. As discussed, deep-vein
thrombosis and pulmonary embolism are common in the puerperium. In our
audits of puerperal women at Parkland Hospital, the frequency of venous
thromboembolism is extremely low. We attribute this to early ambulation.
Risk factors and other measures to diminish the frequency of
thromboembolism are discussed in Chapter 55 (p. 984).
Diets need not be restricted for women who give birth vaginally.
Generally, two hours after uncomplicated vaginal delivery, a woman is
allowed to eat. With lactation, the level of calories and protein consumed
during pregnancy is increased slightly as recommended by the Food and
Nutrition Board of the National Research Council (Chap. 10, p. 184). If the
mother does not breastfeed, dietary requirements are the same as for a
nonpregnant woman. We recommend oral iron supplementation for at least 3
months after delivery and hematocrit evaluation at the first postpartum visit.
As noted earlier, profound drops in estrogen levels follow removal of the
placenta. Reminiscent of the menopause, postpartum women may experience
hot flushes, especially at night. Importantly, the patient’s temperature is
assessed to differentiate these physiological vasomotor events from
infection.

In women with migraines, dramatic hypoestrogenism may trigger
headaches. Importantly, severe headaches should be differentiated from
postdural puncture headache or hypertensive complications. Care varies
depending on headache severity. Mild headaches may respond to analgesics
such as ibuprofen or acetaminophen. For more severe headaches, oral or
systemic narcotics can be used. Alternatively, a triptan, such as sumatriptan
(Imitrex), can relieve headaches by causing intracranial vasoconstriction,
and it is breastfeeding compatible.

■ Perineal Care
The woman is instructed to clean the vulva from anterior to posterior—the
vulva toward the anus. A cool pack applied to the perineum may help reduce
edema and discomfort during the first 24 hours if there is a perineal
laceration or an episiotomy. Most women also appear to obtain a measure of
relief from the periodic application of a local anesthetic spray. Severe
perineal, vaginal, or rectal pain always warrants careful inspection and
palpation. Severe discomfort usually indicates a problem, such as a
hematoma within the first day or so and infection after the third or fourth day
(Chap. 37, p. 657 and Chap. 42, p. 740). Beginning approximately 24 hours
after delivery, moist heat as provided by warm sitz baths can reduce local
discomfort. Tub bathing after uncomplicated delivery is allowed. The
episiotomy incision normally is firmly healed and nearly asymptomatic by
the third week.
Rarely, the cervix, and occasionally a portion of the uterine body, may
protrude from the vulva following delivery. This is accompanied by variable
degrees of anterior and posterior vaginal wall prolapse. Symptoms include a
palpable mass at or past the introitus, voiding difficulties, or pressure.
Puerperal procidentia typically improves with time as the weight of the
uterus lessens with involution. As a temporizing measure for pronounced
prolapse, the uterus can be replaced and held in position with a space-filling
pessary, such as a donut type.
Rectal veins are often congested at term. Thrombosis of these
hemorrhoids is common and may be promoted by second-stage pushing.
Treatment includes topically applied anesthetics, warm soaks, and stoolsoftening agents. Nonprescription topical preparations containing

corticosteroids, astringents, or phenylephrine are often used. However, no
randomized studies support their efficacy compared with symptomatic care.

■ Bladder Function
In most delivery units, intravenous fluids are infused during labor and for an
hour or so after vaginal delivery. Oxytocin, in doses that have an antidiuretic
effect, is typically infused postpartum, and rapid bladder filling is common.
Moreover, both bladder sensation and capability to empty spontaneously may
be diminished by components of the labor and delivery process. Thus,
urinary retention and bladder overdistention is common in the early
puerperium. The incidence in more than 5500 women studied with a bladder
scanner was 5 percent (Buchanan, 2014). It is much less clinically. Risk
factors that increased the likelihood of retention include primiparity, epidural
analgesia, cesarean delivery, perineal lacerations, operative vaginal
delivery, catheterization during labor, and prolonged second-stage labor
(Stephansson, 2016; Wang, 2017).
Prevention of bladder overdistention demands observation after delivery
to ensure that the bladder does not overfill and that it empties adequately
with each voiding. The enlarged bladder can be palpated suprapubically, or
it is evident abdominally indirectly as it elevates the fundus above the
umbilicus. Most currently use an automated sonography system to detect high
bladder volumes and thus postpartum urinary retention (Buchanan, 2014).
If a woman has not voided within 4 hours after delivery, it is likely that
she cannot. If she has trouble voiding initially, she also is likely to have
further trouble. First, an examination for perineal and genital-tract
hematomas is completed, as these may be contributory. With an
overdistended bladder, an indwelling catheter should be placed and left until
the factors causing retention have abated. Even without a demonstrable
cause, it usually is best to leave the catheter in place for at least 24 hours.
This prevents recurrence and allows recovery of normal bladder tone and
sensation.
When the catheter is removed, a voiding trial is completed to
demonstrate an ability to void appropriately. If a woman cannot void after 4
hours, urine volumes are measured sonographically. If more than 200 mL, the
bladder is not functioning appropriately, and the catheter is replaced and
remains for another 24 hours. Although rare, if retention persists after a

second voiding trial, an indwelling catheter and leg bag can be elected, and
the patient returns in 1 week for an outpatient voiding trial. In a study of 27
women with a protracted course, all resumed normal voiding by 3 weeks
postpartum (Mevorach Zussman, 2020).
During a voiding trial, if less than 200 mL of urine is obtained, the
catheter can be removed and the bladder subsequently monitored clinically
and sonographically as described earlier. Harris and coworkers (1977)
reported that 40 percent of such women develop bacteriuria, and thus a
single dose or short course of antimicrobial therapy against uropathogens is
reasonable after the catheter is removed.

■ Pain, Mood, and Cognition
Discomfort and its causes following cesarean delivery are considered in
Chapter 30 (p. 565). During the first few days after vaginal delivery, the
mother may be uncomfortable because of afterpains, episiotomy and
lacerations, breast engorgement, and at times, postdural puncture headache.
Mild analgesics containing codeine, ibuprofen, or acetaminophen, preferably
in combinations, are given as frequently as every 4 hours during the first few
days.
It is important to screen the postpartum woman for depression (Mangla,
2019). Commonly, mothers exhibit some degree of depressed mood a few
days after delivery. Termed postpartum blues, this likely is the consequence
of several factors. These include the emotional letdown that follows the
excitement and fears experienced during pregnancy and delivery, discomforts
of the early puerperium, fatigue from sleep deprivation, anxiety over the
ability to provide appropriate newborn care, and body image concerns. In
most women, effective treatment includes anticipation, recognition, and
reassurance. This disorder is usually mild and self-limited to 2 to 3 days,
although it sometimes lasts for up to 10 days. Should these moods persist or
worsen, an evaluation for symptoms of major depression is done (Chap. 64,
p. 1145).
Last, postpartum hormonal changes in some women may affect brain
function. Bannbers and colleagues (2013) observed a functional decline in
executive function in postpartum women.

■ Neuromusculoskeletal Problems
Obstetrical Neuropathies
Pressure on branches of the lumbosacral nerve plexus during labor may
manifest as complaints of intense neuralgia or cramplike pains extending
down one or both legs as soon as the head descends into the pelvis. If the
nerve is injured, pain may continue after delivery, and variable degrees of
sensory loss or muscle paralysis can result. In some cases, there is footdrop,
which can be secondary to injury at the level of the lumbosacral plexus,
sciatic nerve, or common fibular (peroneal) nerve (Bunch, 2014).
Components of the lumbosacral plexus cross the pelvic brim and can be
compressed by the fetal head or by forceps. The common fibular nerves may
be externally compressed when the legs are positioned in stirrups, especially
during prolonged second-stage labor.
Obstetrical neuropathy is relatively infrequent. Evaluation of more than
6000 puerperas found that approximately 1 percent had a confirmed nerve
injury (Wong, 2003). Lateral femoral cutaneous neuropathies were the most
common (24 percent), followed by femoral neuropathies (14 percent). A
motor deficit accompanied a third of injuries. Nulliparity, prolonged secondstage labor, and pushing for a long duration in the semi-Fowler position were
risk factors. The median duration of symptoms was 2 months, and the range
was 2 weeks to 18 months.
Injury of the iliohypogastric and ilioinguinal nerves may occur with
cesarean delivery (Rahn, 2010; Yazici Yilmaz, 2018). We have rarely
encountered lumbar arachnoiditis following epidural analgesia causing
severe bilateral neuropathic pain.

Musculoskeletal Injuries
Pain in the pelvic girdle, hips, or lower extremities may follow stretching or
tearing injuries sustained at normal or difficult delivery. MR imaging is often
informative when clinical examination is normal (Miller, 2015). Most
injuries resolve with antiinflammatory agents and physical therapy. Rarely,
there may be septic pyomyositis such as with iliopsoas muscle abscess
(Nelson, 2010; Young, 2010).
Separation of the symphysis pubis or one of the sacroiliac synchondroses
during labor leads to pain and marked interference with locomotion (Fig. 36-

7). Estimates of the frequency of this event vary widely from 1 in 600 to 1 in
30,000 deliveries (Reis, 1932; Taylor, 1986). In our experiences,
symptomatic separations are uncommon. Their onset of pain is often acute
during delivery, but symptoms may manifest either antepartum or up to 48
hours postpartum (Snow, 1997). Radiography is typically used for
evaluation. The normal distance of the symphyseal joint is 0.4 to 0.5 cm, and
symphyseal separation >1 cm is diagnostic for diastasis. Treatment is
generally conservative, with rest in a lateral decubitus position and an
appropriately fitted pelvic binder (Lasbleiz, 2017). Surgery is occasionally
necessary in some symphyseal separations >4 cm (Kharrazi, 1997). The
recurrence risk is high in subsequent pregnancies, and Culligan and
associates (2002) recommend consideration for cesarean delivery.

FIGURE 36-7 Pubic symphyseal separation found on the first postpartum day following vaginal
delivery of a 2840-g newborn. The patient had pain over the pubic bone and pain with ambulation. A
shuffling gait was noted, and she had difficulty with leg elevation when supine. The patient was treated
with physical therapy and analgesics. A pelvic binder was applied, and a rolling walker was provided.
She improved quickly and was discharged home on postpartum day 5.

In rare cases, fractures of the sacrum or pubic ramus are caused by even
uncomplicated deliveries (Alonso-Burgos, 2007; Speziali, 2015). Discussed

in Chapter 61 (p. 1100), the latter is more likely with osteoporosis
associated with heparin or corticosteroid therapy. In rare but serious cases,
bacterial osteomyelitis—osteitis pubis—can be devastating. Lawford and
coworkers (2010) reported such a case that caused massive vulvar edema.

■ Immunizations
The D-negative woman who is not isoimmunized and whose newborn is Dpositive is given 300 μg of anti-D immune globulin shortly after delivery
(Chap. 18, p. 357). Women who are not already immune to rubella or
varicella are excellent candidates for vaccination before discharge (Swamy,
2015). Those who have not received a tetanus/diphtheria (Tdap/Td) or
influenza vaccine should be given these (American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists, 2017e) (Table 10-7, p. 189). The CDC (2021b)
recommends the COVID-19 vaccine, and includes breastfeeding women.
Morgan and colleagues (2015) reported that implementation of a bestpractices alert in the electronic medical record was associated with a Tdap
immunization rate of 97 percent at Parkland Hospital. When permissible by
law, the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019)
recommends standing orders for indicated immunizations.

■ Contraception
During the hospital stay, a concerted effort is made to provide family
planning education. Various forms of contraception are discussed throughout
Chapter 38 and sterilization procedures in Chapter 39. The immediate
puerperium is an ideal time for consideration of long-acting reversible
contraception—LARC (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2017b).
Women not breastfeeding have return of menses usually within 6 to 8
weeks. At times, however, it is difficult clinically to assign a specific date to
the first menstrual period after delivery. A minority of women bleed small to
moderate amounts intermittently starting soon after delivery. Ovulation
occurs at a mean of 7 weeks but ranges from 5 to 11 weeks (Perez, 1972).
That said, ovulation before 28 days has been described (Hytten, 1995). Thus,
conception is possible during the early puerperium. Women who become
sexually active during the puerperium and who do not desire to conceive

should initiate contraception. Kelly and associates (2005) reported that by
the third month postpartum, 58 percent of adolescents had resumed sexual
intercourse, but only 80 percent of these were using contraception. Because
of this, many recommend LARC during the puerperium.
Women who breastfeed ovulate much less frequently compared with
those who do not, but variation is great. Timing of ovulation depends on
individual biological variation and the intensity of breastfeeding. Lactating
women may first menstruate as early as the second or as late as the 18th
month after delivery. Campbell and Gray (1993) analyzed daily urine
specimens in 92 lactating women. Breastfeeding in general delays
resumption of ovulation, although it does not invariably forestall it. Other
findings in their study included the following:
1. Resumption of ovulation was frequently marked by return of normal
menstrual bleeding.
2. Breastfeeding episodes lasting 15 minutes seven times daily delayed
ovulation resumption.
3. Ovulation can occur without bleeding.
4. Bleeding can be anovulatory.
5. The risk of pregnancy in breastfeeding women was approximately 4
percent per year.
For the breastfeeding woman, progestin-only contraceptives, such as
progestin pills, depot medroxyprogesterone, or progestin implants or IUDs,
do not affect the quality or quantity of milk. Not available in the United
States, success with the progesterone-releasing vaginal ring also has been
described (Carr, 2016). These may be initiated any time during the
puerperium. Estrogen-progestin contraceptives likely reduce the quantity of
breast milk, but under the proper circumstances, they too can be used by
lactating women. These hormonal methods are discussed in Chapter 38 (p.
671).

■ Hospital Discharge
Following uncomplicated vaginal delivery, hospitalization is seldom
warranted for more than 48 hours. Hospital stay length following labor and
delivery is now regulated by federal law (Chap. 32, p. 596). Currently, the

norms are hospital stays up to 48 hours following uncomplicated vaginal
delivery and up to 96 hours following uncomplicated cesarean delivery
(American Academy of Pediatrics and American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists, 2017; Blumenfield, 2015). Earlier hospital discharge is
acceptable for appropriately selected women if they desire it. A woman
should receive instructions concerning anticipated normal physiological
puerperal changes, including lochia patterns, weight loss from diuresis, and
milk let-down. She also should receive instructions concerning fever,
excessive vaginal bleeding, or leg pain, swelling, or tenderness. Persistent
headaches, shortness of breath, or chest pain warrant immediate concern.

HOME CARE
■ Coitus
No evidence-based data guide resumption of coitus after delivery, and
practices are individualized (Minig, 2009). After 2 weeks, coitus may be
resumed based on desire and comfort. Wallwiener and colleagues (2017)
reported that 60 percent of women resumed sexual activity by 1 week and 80
percent by 4 months. They also reported that a third of these women had
sexual dysfunction.
Intercourse too soon may be unpleasant, if not painful, and this may be
related to episiotomy incisions or perineal lacerations. In a study of women
without an episiotomy, only 0.4 percent of those with a first- or seconddegree tear had dyspareunia (Ventolini, 2014). Conversely, in primiparas
with an episiotomy, 67 percent had sexual dysfunction at 3 months, 31
percent at 6 months, and 15 percent at 12 months (Chayachinda, 2015). Only
40 percent of women with an anal sphincter injury had resumed intercourse
by 12 weeks (Leader-Cramer, 2016). Last, dyspareunia was also common
following cesarean delivery (McDonald, 2015).
Postpartum, the vulvovaginal epithelium is thin, and very little
lubrication follows sexual stimulation. This stems from the hypoestrogenic
state following delivery, which lasts until ovulation resumes. It may be
particularly problematic in breastfeeding women who are hypoestrogenic for
many months postpartum (Palmer, 2003). For treatment, small amounts of
topical estrogen cream can be applied daily for several weeks to vulvar
tissues. Additionally, vaginal lubricants may be used with coitus.

This same thinning of the vulvovaginal epithelium can lead to dysuria.
Topical estrogen can again be offered once cystitis is excluded.

■ Follow-Up Care
By discharge, women who had an uncomplicated vaginal delivery can
resume most activities, including bathing, driving, and household functions.
Despite this, Tulman and Fawcett (1988) reported that only half of mothers
regained their usual level of energy by 6 weeks. Women who delivered
vaginally were twice as likely to have normal energy levels at this time
compared with those with a cesarean delivery. Ideally, the care and nurturing
of the infant should be provided by the mother with ample help from the
father. Jimenez and Newton (1979) tabulated cross-cultural information on
202 societies from various international geographical regions. Following
childbirth, most societies did not restrict work activity, and approximately
half expected a return to full duties within 2 weeks. Wallace and coworkers
(2013) reported that 80 percent of women who worked during pregnancy
resume work by 1 year after delivery.
Discussed on page 634, during this fourth trimester, the American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2018a) recommends a
comprehensive visit within 12 weeks after delivery. This has proved quite
satisfactory to identify abnormalities beyond the immediate puerperium and
to initiate contraceptive practices.

REFERENCES
Ahdoot D, Van Nostrand KM, Nguyen NJ, et al: The effect of route of delivery on regression of
abnormal cervical cytologic findings in the postpartum period. Am J Obstet Gynecol 178:1116, 1998
Almeida OD Jr, Kitay DZ: Lactation suppression and puerperal fever. Am J Obstet Gynecol 154:940,
1986
Alonso-Burgos A, Royo P, Diaz L, et al: Labor-related sacral and pubic fractures. J Bone Joint Surg
89:396, 2007
American Academy of Pediatrics, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Guidelines for
Perinatal Care, 8th ed. Washington, 2017
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Guidelines for diagnostic imaging during
pregnancy and lactation. Committee Opinion No. 723, October 2017a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Long-acting reversible contraception: implants
and intrauterine devices. Practice Bulletin No. 186, November 2017b

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Marijuana use during pregnancy and lactation.
Committee Opinion No. 722, October 2017c
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Postpartum hemorrhage. Practice Bulletin No.
183, October 2017d
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Update on immunization and pregnancy: tetanus,
diphtheria, and pertussis vaccine. Committee Opinion No. 718, September 2017e
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Optimizing postpartum care. Committee Opinion
No. 736, May 2018a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Optimizing support for breastfeeding as part of
obstetric practice. Committee Opinion No. 756, October 2018b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologist: Immunization implementation strategies for
Obstetricians-Gynecologists. Committee Opinion No. 772, March 2019
Anderson WR, Davis J: Placental site involution. Am J Obstet Gynecol 102:23, 1968
Andrews MC: Epithelial changes in the puerperal fallopian tube. Am J Obstet Gynecol 62:28, 1951
Arbib N, Aviram A, Gabbay Ben-Ziv R, et al: The effect of labor and delivery on white blood cell count.
J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 29(18):2904, 2016
Baby-Friendly USA: Celebrating 500 baby-friendly designated facilities in the United States. 2018.
Available at: www.babyfriendlyusa.org/news/babyfriendly-usa-celebrates-major-milestone-of-500baby-friendly-designatedfacilities-in-the-united-states/. Accessed July 1, 2019
Baker JL, Gamborg M, Heitmann BL, et al: Breastfeeding reduces postpartum weight retention. Am J
Clin Nutr 88(6):1543, 2008
Bannbers E, Gingnell M, Engman J, et al: Prefrontal activity during response inhibition decreases over
time in the postpartum period. Behav Brain Res 241:132, 2013
Baron J, Hershkovitz R, Baumfeld Y, et al: Postpartum uterine artery blood flow impedance following
cesarean section or vaginal delivery. J Clin Ultrasound 44(5):278, 2016
Bartek MC, Stuebe AM, Schwarz EB, et al: Cost analysis of maternal disease associated with
suboptimal breastfeeding. Obstet Gynecol 122:111, 2013
Belachew J, Axelsson O, Mulic-Lutvica A, et al: Longitudinal study of the uterine body and cavity with
three-dimensional ultrasonography in the puerperium. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 91(10):1184, 2012
Blumenfield YJ, El-sayed YY, Lyell DJ, et al: Risk factors for prolonged postpartum length of stay
following cesarean delivery. Am J Perinatol 32:825, 2015
Briggs GG, Freeman RK, Towers CV, et al: Drugs in Pregnancy and Lactation, 11th ed. Philadelphia,
Wolters Kluwer, 2017
Buchanan J, Beckmann M: Postpartum voiding dysfunction: identifying the risk factors. Aust N Z J
Obstet Gynaecol 54(1):41, 2014
Buhimschi CS, Buhimschi IA, Malinow AM, et al: Myometrial thickness during human labor and
immediately postpartum. Am J Obstet Gynecol 188:553, 2003
Bunch K, Hope E: An uncommon case of bilateral peroneal nerve palsy following delivery: a case
report and review of the literature. Case Rep Obstet Gynecol 2014:746480, 2014
Campbell OM, Gray RH: Characteristics and determinants of postpartum ovarian function in women in
the United States. Am J Obstet Gynecol 169:55, 1993
Carr SL, Gaffield ME, Dragoman MV, et al: Safety of the progesterone-releasing vaginal ring (PVR)
among lactating women. Contraception 94(3):253, 2016
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Care for breastfeeding people. 2021a. Available at:
https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/hcp/care-for-breastfeeding-women.html. Accessed

October 11, 2021
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: COVID-19 vaccines while pregnant or breastfeeding.
2021b. Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019ncov/vaccines/recommendations/pregnancy.html. Accessed October 8, 2021
Chayachinda C, Titapant V, Ungkanungdecha A: Dyspareunia and sexual dysfunction after vaginal
delivery in Thai primiparous women with episiotomy. J Sex Med 12(5):1275, 2015
Chesley LC, Valenti C, Uichano L: Alterations in body fluid compartments and exchangeable sodium in
early puerperium. Am J Obstet Gynecol 77:1054, 1959
Childbirth Connection: Listening to mothers III: Pregnancy and birth. 2013a. Available at:
www.nationalpartnership.org/our-work/resources/health-care/maternity/listening-to-mothers-iiipregnancy-and-birth-2013.pdf. Accessed February 11, 2020
Childbirth Connection: Listening to mothers III: New mothers speak out. 2013b. Available at:
www.nationalpartnership.org/our-work/resources/health-care/maternity/listening-to-mothers-iii-newmothers-speak-out-major-findings-2013.pdf. Accessed February 11, 2020
Colla C, Paiva LL, Ferla L, et al: Pelvic floor dysfunction in the immediate puerperium, and 1 and 3
months after vaginal or cesarean delivery. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 143(1):94, 2018
Collier RJ, Hernandez LL, Horseman ND: Serotonin as a homeostatic regulator of lactation. Domest
Anim Endocrinol 43(2):161, 2012
Crandall CJ, Liu J, Cauley J, et al: Association of parity, breastfeeding, and fractures in the women’s
health observation study. Obstet Gynecol 130(1):171, 2017
Culligan P, Hill S, Heit M: Rupture of the symphysis pubis during vaginal delivery followed by two
subsequent uneventful pregnancies. Obstet Gynecol 100:1114, 2002
Dennis CL, Jackson K, Watson J: Interventions for treating painful nipples among breastfeeding women.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 12:CD007366, 2014
Fletcher S, Grotegut CA, James AH: Lochia patterns among normal women: a systematic review. J
Womens Health (Larchmt) 21(12):1290, 2012
Funnell JW, Klawans AH, Cottrell TL: The postpartum bladder. Am J Obstet Gynecol 67:1249, 1954
Furuta I, Zhai T, Umazume T, et al: Effects of childbirth on podocyturia in women with normotensive,
uncomplicated pregnancies. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol 312(6):F112, 2017
Glazener CM, Abdalla M, Stroud P, et al: Postnatal maternal morbidity: extent, causes, prevention and
treatment. BJOG 102:282, 1995
Harris RE, Thomas VL, Hui GW: Postpartum surveillance for urinary tract infection: patients at risk of
developing pyelonephritis after catheterization. South Med J 70:1273, 1977
Hibbard JU, Schroff SG, Cunningham FG: Cardiovascular alterations in normal and preeclamptic
pregnancy. In Taylor RN, Roberts JM, Cunningham FG (eds): Chesley’s Hypertensive Disorders in
Pregnancy, 4th ed. Amsterdam, Academic Press, 2015
Hladunewich MA, Lafayette RA, Derby GC, et al: The dynamics of glomerular filtration in the
puerperium. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol 286:F496, 2004
Holdcroft A, Snidvongs S, Cason A, et al: Pain and uterine contractions during breast feeding in the
immediate post-partum period increase with parity. Pain 104:589, 2003
Hoyveda F, MacKenzie IZ: Secondary postpartum hemorrhage: incidence, morbidity, and current
management. BJOG 108:927, 2001
Hytten F: The Clinical Physiology of the Puerperium. London, Farrand Press, 1995
Jimenez MH, Newton N: Activity and work during pregnancy and the postpartum period: a crosscultural study of 202 societies. Am J Obstet Gynecol 135:171, 1979

Jong DE, Kikkert HR, Fidler V, et al: Effects of long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acid supplementation
of infant formula on cognition and behavior at 9 years of age. Dev Med Child Neurol 54(12):1102,
2012
Kamel H, Navi B, Sriram N, et al: Risk of a thrombotic event after the 6-week postpartum period. N
Engl J Med 370:1307, 2014
Kandadai P, Kandadai V, Saini J, et al: Acute urinary retention after cesarean delivery: a case-control
study. Female Pelvic Med Reconstr Surg 20(5):276, 2014
Kaneshiro BE, Acoba JD, Holzman J, et al: Effect of delivery route on natural history of cervical
dysplasia. Am J Obstet Gynecol 192(5):1452, 2005
Kanotra S, D’Angelo D, Phares T, et al: Challenges faced by new mothers in the early postpartum
period: An analysis of comment data from the 2000 Pregnancy Risk Assessment Monitoring
Systems (PRAMS) survey. Matern Child Health J 11(6):549, 2007
Kavalar R, Arko D, Fokter Dovnik N, et al: Subinvolution of placental bed vessels: case report and
review of the literature. Wien Klin Wochenschr 124(19–20):725, 2012
Kelly LS, Sheeder J, Stevens-Simon C: Why lightning strikes twice: postpartum resumption of sexual
activity during adolescence. J Pediatr Adolesc Gynecol 18:327, 2005
Kenny LC, McCrae KR, Cunningham FG: Platelets, coagulation, and the liver. In Taylor RN, Roberts
JM, Cunningham FG (eds): Chesley’s Hypertensive Disorders in Pregnancy, 4th ed. Amsterdam,
Academic Press, 2015
Kharrazi FD, Rodgers WB, Kennedy JG, et al: Parturition-induced pelvic dislocation: a report of four
cases. J Orthop Trauma 11:277, 1997
Kramer MS, Aboud F, Mironova E, et al: Breastfeeding and child cognitive development: new evidence
from a large randomized trial. Arch Gen Psychiatry 65(5):578, 2008
Lasbleiz J, Sevestre FX, Moquet PY: Using an elastic band device after a severe obstetric pubic
symphyseal separation: clinical and imaging evaluation. Obstet Gynecol 130(3):625, 2017
Lawford AM, Scott K, Lust K: A case of massive vulvar oedema due to septic pubic symphysitis
complicating pregnancy. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol 50(6):576, 2010
Leader-Cramer A, Kentaon K, Davé B, et al: Factors associated with timing of return to intercourse
after obstetric anal sphincter injuries. J Sex Med 13(10):1523, 2016
Lee CY, Madrazo B, Drukker BH: Ultrasonic evaluation of the postpartum uterus in the management of
postpartum bleeding. Obstet Gynecol 58:227, 1981
Lewis ED, Richard C, Larsen BM, et al: The importance of human milk for immunity in preterm infants.
Clin Perinatol 44(1):23, 2017
Li LJ, Zhang J, Gao P, et al: Clinical characteristics and bisphosphonates treatment of rare pregnancyand lactation-associated osteoporosis. Clin Rheumatol 37(11):3141, 2018
Lipe BC, Dumas MA, Ornstein DL: Von Willebrand disease in pregnancy. Hematol Oncol Clin North
Am 25(2):335, 2011
Loukas M, Clarke P, Tubbs RS: Accessory breasts: a historical and current perspective. Am Surg
73(5):525, 2007
Macpherson AJ, de Agüero MG, Ganal-Vonarburg SC: How nutrition and the maternal microbiota
shape the neonatal immune system. Nat Rev Immunol 17(8):508, 2017
Mangesi L, Zakarija-Grkovic I: Treatment for breast engorgement during lactation. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev 6:CD006946, 2016
Mangla K, Hoffman MC, Trumpff C, et al: Maternal self-harm deaths: an unrecognized and preventable
outcome. Am J Obstet Gynecol 221(4):295, 2019

Marques K, Looney C, Hayslip C et al: Modern management of hypervascular placental polypoid mass
following spontaneous abortion: a case report and literature review. Am J Obstet Gynecol 205(2):e9,
2011
McDonald EA, Gartland D, Small R, et al: Dyspareunia and childbirth: a prospective cohort study.
BJOG 122:672, 2015
McDonald SD, Pullenayegum E, Chapman B, et al: Prevalence and predictors of exclusive
breastfeeding at hospital discharge. Obstet Gynecol 119(6):1171, 2012
Metz TD, Borgett LM: Marijuana use in pregnancy and while breastfeeding. Obstet Gynecol
132(5):1198, 2018
Mevorach Zussman N, Gonen N, Kovo M, et al: Protracted postpartum urinary retention—a long-term
problem or a transient condition? Int Urogynecol J 31(3):513, 2020
Miller JM, Low LK, Zielinski R, et al: Evaluating maternal recovery from labor and delivery: bone and
levator ani injuries. Am J Obstet Gynecol 213:188e1, 2015
Minig L, Trimble EL, Sarsotti C, et al: Building the evidence base for postoperative and postpartum
advice. Obstet Gynecol 114(4):892, 2009
Mommers EH, Ponten JE, Al Omar AK, et al: The general surgeon’s perspective of rectusdiastasis. A
systematic review of treatment options. Surg Endosc 31(12):4934, 2017
Morgan JL, Baggari SR, Chung W, et al: Association of a Best-Practice Alert and prenatal
administration with tetanus toxoid, reduced diphtheria toxoid, and acellular pertussis vaccination
rates. Obstet Gynecol 126(2):333, 2015
Morris EA, Hale SA, Badger GJ, et al: Pregnancy induces persistent changes in vascular compliance in
primiparous women. Am J Obstet Gynecol 212(5):633.e1, 2015
Mulder FE, Hakvoort RA, Schoffelmeer MA, et al: Postpartum urinary retention: a systematic review of
adverse effects and management. Int Urogynecol J 25(12):1605, 2014
Nelson DB, Manders DB, Shivvers SA: Primary iliopsoas abscess and pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol
116(2 Pt 2):479, 2010
Olaiya O, Dee DL, Sharma AJ, et al: Maternity care practices and breastfeeding among adolescent
mothers aged 12–19 years—United States, 2009–2011. MMWR 65(2):17, 2016
Paliulyte V, Drasutiene GS, Ramasauskaite D, et al: Physiological uterine involution in primiparous and
multiparous women: ultrasound study. Obstet Gynecol Int 2017:6739345, 2017
Palmer AR, Likis FE: Lactational atrophic vaginitis. J Midwifery Womens Health 48:282, 2003
Perez A, Vela P, Masnick GS, et al: First ovulation after childbirth: the effect of breastfeeding. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 114:1041, 1972
Perrine CG, Galuska DA, Dohack JL, et al: Vital signs: improvements in maternity care policies and
practices that support breastfeeding—United States, 2007–2013. MMWR 64:1112, 2015
Polat A, Tunc T, Erdem G, et al: Interleukin-8 and its receptors in human milk from mothers of full-term
and premature infants. Breastfeed Med 11:247, 2016
Rahn DD, Phelan JN, Roshanravan SM, et al: Anterior abdominal wall nerve and vessel anatomy:
clinical implications for gynecologic surgery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 202(3):234.e1, 2010
Reis RA, Baer JL, Arens RA, et al: Traumatic separation of the symphysis pubis during spontaneous
labor: with a clinical and x-ray study of the normal symphysis pubis during pregnancy and the
puerperium. Surg Gynecol Obstet 55:336, 1932
Roberge S, Demers S, Girard M, et al: Impact of uterine closure on residual myometrial thickness after
cesarean: a randomized controlled trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol 214(4):507.e1, 2016
Robson SC, Dunlop W, Hunter S: Haemodynamic changes during the early puerperium. BMJ (Clin Res
Ed) 294:1065, 1987

Rowe H, Baker T, Hale TW: Maternal medication, drug use and breastfeeding. Pediatr Clin North Am
6(1):275, 2013
Sanci M, Töz E, Ince O, et al: Reference values for maternal total and differential leukocyte counts in
different trimesters of pregnancy and the initial postpartum period in western Turkey. J Obstet
Gynecol 37(5):571, 2017
Sellmyer MA, Desser TS, Maturen KE, et al: Physiologic, histologic, and imaging features of retained
products of conception. Radiographics 33(3):781, 2013
Sharman A: Postpartum regeneration of the human endometrium. J Anat 87:1, 1953
Snow RE, Neubert AG: Peripartum pubic symphysis separation: a case series and review of the
literature. Obstet Gynecol Surv 52:438, 1997
Sohn C, Fendel H, Kesternich P: Involution-induced changes in arterial uterine blood flow [German]. Z
Geburtshilfe Perinatol 192:203, 1988
Speziali A, Tei MM, Placella G, et al: Postpartum sacral stress fracture. Case Rep Orthop 2015:704393,
2015
Stephansson O, Sandström A, Petersson G, et al: Prolonged second stage of labour, maternal infectious
disease, urinary retention and other complications in the early postpartum period. BJOG 123(4):608,
2016
Stuebe AM: Enabling women to achieve their breastfeeding goals. Obstet Gynecol 123:643, 2014
Swamy G, Heine RP: Vaccinations for pregnant women. Obstet Gynecol 125:212, 2015
Taylor RN, Sonson RD: Separation of the pubic symphysis. An underrecognized peripartum
complication. J Reprod Med 31:203, 1986
Tekay A, Jouppila P: A longitudinal Doppler ultrasonographic assessment of the alterations in peripheral
vascular resistance of uterine arteries and ultrasonographic findings of the involuting uterus during
the puerperium. Am J Obstet Gynecol 168(1 Pt 1):190, 1993
Thompson JF, Roberts CL, Currie M, et al: Prevalence and persistence of health problems after
childbirth: associations with parity and method of birth. Birth 29:83, 2002
Tulman L, Fawcett J: Return of functional ability after childbirth. Nurs Res 37:77, 1988
Vanhouten JN, Wysolmerski JJ: The calcium-sensing receptor in the breast. Best Prac Res Clin
Endocrinol Metab 27(3)403, 2013
Ventolini G, Yaklic JL, Galloway ML, et al: Obstetric vulvar lacerations and postpartum dyspareunia. J
Reprod Med 59(11-12):560, 2014
Wager GP, Martin DH, Koutsky L, et al: Puerperal infectious morbidity: relationship to route of delivery
and to antepartum Chlamydia trachomatis infection. Am J Obstet Gynecol 138:1028, 1980
Wagner IJ, Damitz LA, Carey E, et al: Bilateral accessory breast tissue of the vulva: a case report
introducing a novel labiaplasty technique. Ann Plast Surg 70(5):549, 2013
Wallace M, Saurel-Cubizolles MJ, EDEN mother–child cohort study group: Returning to work one year
after childbirth: data from the mother-child cohort EDEN. Matern Child Health J 17(8):1432, 2013
Wallwiener S, Müller M, Doster A, et al: Sexual activity and sexual dysfunction of women in the
perinatal period: a longitudinal study. Arch Gynecol Obstet 295(4):873, 2017
Wang H, Ghoniem G: Postpartum stress urinary incontinence, is it related to vaginal delivery? J Matern
Fetal Neonatal Med 30(13):1552, 2017
Wataganara T, Phithakwatchara N, Komoltri C, et al: Functional three-dimensional sonographic study of
the postpartum uterus. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 28(18):2221, 2015
Williams JW: Regeneration of the uterine mucosa after delivery with especial reference to the placental
site. Am J Obstet Gynecol 22:664, 1931

Wong CA, Scavone BM, Dugan S, et al: Incidence of postpartum lumbosacral spine and lower
extremity nerve injuries. Obstet Gynecol 101:279, 2003
World Health Organization: Exclusive breastfeeding for six months best for babies everywhere. 2011.
Available at: www.who.int/mediacentre/news/statements/2011/breastfeeding_20110115/en/.
Accessed July 1, 2019
World Health Organization: Protecting, promoting, and supporting breastfeeding in facilities providing
maternity and newborn services: the revised Baby-friendly Hospital Initiative 2018. Geneva, World
Health Organization, 2018
Yazici Yilmaz F, Aydogan Mathyk B, Yildiz S, et al: Postoperative pain and neuropathy after caesarean
operation featuring blunt or sharp opening of the fascia: a randomised, parallel group, double-blind
study. J Obstet Gynecol 38(7):933, 2018
Y de Vries J, Pundir S, Mckenzie E, et al: Maternal circulating vitamin status and colostrum vitamin
composition in healthy lactating women-a systematic approach. Nutrients 10(6):E687, 2018
Young OM, Werner E, Sfakianaki AK: Primary psoas muscle abscess after an uncomplicated
spontaneous vaginal delivery. Obstet Gynecol 116(2 Pt 2):477, 2010
Zhang M, Chen P, Li B, et al: Approach to the patient with pregnancy and lactation-associated
osteoporosis: a case report and a review of the literature. Medicine (Baltimore) 96(46):e8671, 2017
Zhang P: Decidual vasculopathy in preeclampsia and spiral artery remodeling revisited: shallow invasion
versus failure of involution. AJP Rep 8(4):e241, 2018

CHAPTER 37

Puerperal Infection

PUERPERAL PELVIC INFECTIONS
UTERINE INFECTION
ABDOMINAL INCISIONAL INFECTIONS
PERITONITIS AND ADNEXAL ABSCESSES
PARAMETRIAL PHLEGMON
SEPTIC PELVIC THROMBOPHLEBITIS
PERINEAL INFECTIONS
TOXIC SHOCK SYNDROME
BREAST INFECTIONS
BREAST ABSCESS
REFERENCES
Women are susceptible to several potentially serious complications during
the fourth trimester. Many of these conditions are encountered during
pregnancy, and others are unique to the puerperium. Historically, infection
was the most important source of postpartum maternal morbidity and
mortality, since emphasized by the studies of Semmelweis and Lister (Kadar,
2021). Puerperal infections include pelvic infections, mastitis, and breast
abscesses. Discussed in their respective chapters, cardiovascular disease
(Chap. 52, p. 915), venous thromboembolism (Chap. 55, p. 980), and

hemorrhage (Chap. 42, p. 731) currently are leading noninfectious puerperal
complications (Callaghan, 2012; Creanga, 2017). However, the incidence of
postpartum hospitalization due to sepsis is rising. Other puerperal issues and
their management are discussed in Chapter 36.

PUERPERAL PELVIC INFECTIONS
Traditionally, the term puerperal infection describes any bacterial infection
of the genital tract after delivery. Infection, preeclampsia, and obstetrical
hemorrhage formed the lethal triad of maternal death causes before and
during the 20th century. Fortunately, maternal mortality from puerperal
infection is uncommon because of effective antibiotics. Creanga and
associates (2017) reported results from the Pregnancy Mortality Surveillance
System, which contained 4693 pregnancy-related maternal deaths in the
United States from 2006 through 2010. Infection caused 13.6 percent of the
deaths and was the second leading etiology. In an analysis of the North
Carolina population, Berg and colleagues (2005) reported that 40 percent of
infection-related maternal deaths were preventable.

■ Puerperal Fever
Several infective and noninfective factors cause puerperal fever defined by
a temperature of 38.0°C (100.4°F) or higher. Using this conservative
definition, Filker and Monif (1979) reported that only approximately 20
percent of women febrile within the first 24 hours after vaginal delivery
were subsequently diagnosed with pelvic infection. This value was 70
percent in those undergoing cesarean delivery. Most persistent fevers after
childbirth are caused by genital tract infection. Of note, spiking fevers
≥39°C within the first 24 hours postpartum may be associated with virulent
pelvic infection caused by group A streptococcus (p. 651).
Other sources of puerperal fever include breast engorgement, urinary
infections, episiotomy and abdominal incisions, perineal lacerations, and
postcesarean respiratory complications. Approximately 15 percent of women
who do not breastfeed develop fever from breast engorgement. “Breast
fever” rarely exceeds 39°C in the first few postpartum days and usually lasts
<24 hours. The incidence of fever is lower in breastfeeding women (Chap.
36, p. 642). Postpartum urinary infections are uncommon because of the

normal diuresis. Acute pyelonephritis has a variable clinical picture. The
first sign of renal infection may be fever, followed later by costovertebral
angle tenderness, nausea, and vomiting. Atelectasis following general
anesthesia for cesarean delivery is caused by hypoventilation and is best
prevented by coughing and deep breathing on a fixed schedule following
surgery. Fever with atelectasis is due to infection triggered by proliferation
of normal flora distal to obstructing mucus plugs.

■ Uterine Infection
Postpartum uterine infection has been called endometritis, endomyometritis,
and endoparametritis. Following vaginal delivery, infection involves not
only the decidua but also the myometrium and parametrial tissues. Infection
after cesarean delivery is essentially a surgical site infection involving the
incised myometrium. In either case, we prefer the inclusive term metritis
with pelvic cellulitis.

Predisposing Factors
Route of delivery is the single most significant risk factor for the
development of uterine infection (Boggess, 2017; Moulton, 2018). In women
undergoing cesarean delivery, rehospitalization rates for wound
complications and metritis are higher than those with a vaginal birth
(Axelsson, 2018; Fein, 2019). In the French Confidential Enquiry on
Maternal Deaths, Deneux-Tharaux and coworkers (2006) cited a nearly 25fold greater infection-related mortality rate with cesarean delivery.
With vaginal delivery, women delivered at Parkland Hospital have a 1to 2-percent incidence of metritis. This rate rises to 5 to 6 percent in those
with ruptured membranes, prolonged labor, and multiple cervical
examinations. If intrapartum chorioamnionitis is present, the risk of persistent
uterine infection has exceeded 13 percent (DeNoble, 2019; Maberry, 1991).
These figures are similar to those reported by the Maternal Fetal Medicine
Units Network from a cohort of more than 115,000 women in whom the
overall pelvic infection rate approximated 5 percent (Grobman, 2015).
With operative vaginal delivery, women carry higher risks for metritis
and perineal infections than spontaneous birth (Mohamed-Ahmed, 2019).
Notably, these deliveries are often implemented in the context of prolonged

labor, which is a known metritis risk. One study of 3500 such women
showed that those receiving a single dose of prophylactic antibiotics had a
lower maternal infection rate (Knight, 2019). Infections include those of the
urinary tract, uterus, or perineal wound. Labor lengths were not presented,
but in approximately 50 percent of participants, “failure to progress” was the
operative vaginal delivery indication. Moreover, 10 percent of women had
rupture of membranes lengths between 24 and 48 hours. The contribution of
these, rather than the delivery mode, will require further investigation before
this prophylaxis is widely adopted solely for the indication of operative
vaginal delivery.
With cesarean delivery, hysterotomy is associated with significant
infectious morbidity. In the 1970s, pelvic infection complicated 50 percent of
cesarean deliveries at Parkland Hospital. Fortunately, antimicrobial
prophylaxis has done more to decrease the incidence and severity of
postcesarean infections than any other intervention in the past 30 years. Thus,
a single dose of perioperative antibiotics is recommended for all women
undergoing cesarean delivery (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2018b). Such practices lower the puerperal pelvic infection
risk by 65 to 75 percent (Smaill, 2014). β-lactam antimicrobials are superior
to other agents, and elements of this prophylaxis are outlined in Chapter 30
(p. 551) (Harris, 2019). Important risk factors for infection following surgery
include prolonged labor, membrane rupture, multiple cervical examinations,
and internal fetal monitoring.
Regardless of delivery route, pelvic infection generally is more frequent
in women of lower socioeconomic status (Maharaj, 2007). Except in extreme
cases usually not seen in developed countries, it is uncommon that anemia or
poor nutrition predispose to infection. Bacterial colonization of the lower
genital tract with certain microorganisms—for example, group B
streptococcus, Chlamydia trachomatis, Mycoplasma hominis, Ureaplasma
urealyticum, and Gardnerella vaginalis—has been associated with an
increased postpartum infection risk (Andrews, 1995; Jacobsson, 2002; Watts,
1990). Other factors associated with a greater risk include general
anesthesia, significant hysterotomy extension, young maternal age, nulliparity,
prolonged labor induction, chorioamnionitis, obesity, and meconium-stained
amnionic fluid (Acosta, 2012; Leth, 2011; Patel, 2019; Siriwachirachai,
2014).

Microbiology
Common Pathogens. Most pelvic infections are caused by bacteria
indigenous to the genital tract and listed in Table 37-1. Most of these
infections are polymicrobial, which enhances bacterial synergy. Other factors
that promote virulence are hematomas and devitalized tissue. Although the
cervix and vagina routinely harbor bacteria, the uterine cavity is usually
sterile before rupture of the amnionic sac. As the consequence of labor and
delivery and associated manipulations, anaerobic and aerobic bacteria
contaminate the amnionic fluid and uterus.
TABLE 37-1. Bacteria Commonly Responsible for Female Genital
Infections

Prior to the routine use of antimicrobial prophylaxis, Gilstrap and
Cunningham (1979) cultured amnionic fluid obtained at cesarean delivery
from women in labor with membranes ruptured more than 6 hours. All had
bacterial growth, and an average of 2.5 organisms was identified from each
specimen. Anaerobic and aerobic organisms were found in 63 percent,
anaerobes alone in 30 percent, and aerobes alone in only 7 percent.

Anaerobes included Peptostreptococcus and Peptococcus species in 45
percent, Bacteroides species in 9 percent, and Clostridium species in 3
percent. Clostridial species rarely cause puerperal infections, but infections
can be severe in those cases (Herrera, 2016). Aerobes included
Enterococcus in 14 percent, group B Streptococcus in 8 percent, and
Escherichia coli in 9 percent of isolates. Sherman and associates (1999)
later showed that bacterial isolates at cesarean delivery correlated with
those taken from women with metritis at 3 days postpartum. Group B
streptococci, E coli, and enterococci are some of the more common blood
culture isolates with metritis (Cape, 2013; O’Higgins, 2014). In the past 15
years, skin and soft-tissue infections due to methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) have become prevalent (Chap. 67, p. 1196).
However, MRSA is more commonly implicated in abdominal and perineal
incisional infections and less often in puerperal metritis (Anderson, 2007;
Patel, 2007).
Group A β-hemolytic streptococcal infections have a reported incidence
of 1 in 1220 births (Rottenstreich, 2019). During the past 25 years, group A
streptococcus has been reported to cause a toxic shock–like syndrome and
life-threatening infection (Donders, 2021; Gustafson, 2017; Shinar, 2016). In
reviews by Crum (2002) and Udagawa (1999), group A streptococcal
infections manifested before, during, or within 12 hours of delivery. Affected
women had a maternal mortality rate of almost 90 percent, and the fetal
mortality rate exceeded 50 percent.
The role of other organisms in the etiology of these infections is unclear.
Observations of Chaim and coworkers (2003) suggest that heavy cervical
colonization of U urealyticum may contribute to metritis development. To
counter this potential pathogen, azithromycin-based extended-spectrum
antibiotic prophylaxis reduces postoperative cesarean delivery infections
from 12 to 6 percent compared with β-lactam agents alone (Harper, 2017;
Tita, 2016). Chlamydial infections have been implicated in late-onset,
indolent metritis (Ismail, 1985). Last, Jacobsson and colleagues (2002)
reported a threefold higher risk of puerperal infection in a group of Swedish
women in whom bacterial vaginosis was identified in early pregnancy
(Chap. 68, p. 1216).
Bacterial Cultures. Routine genital tract cultures obtained before treatment
serve little clinical use and add significant costs. Women with a temperature

>102°F are more likely to have bacteremia (Easter, 2017). Even so, routine
blood cultures seldom modify care. In two studies done before perioperative
prophylaxis was used, blood cultures were positive in 13 percent of women
with postcesarean metritis at Parkland Hospital and in 24 percent of those at
Los Angeles County Hospital (Cunningham, 1978; DiZerega, 1979). In a later
Finnish study, bacteremia was identified in only 5 percent of women with
puerperal sepsis (Kankuri, 2003). Exceptions might be women with
exceedingly high temperature spikes that may signify virulent infection with
group A streptococci (Chap. 50, p. 890).

Pathogenesis and Clinical Course
Puerperal infection following vaginal delivery primarily involves the
placental implantation site, decidua and adjacent myometrium, or
cervicovaginal lacerations. The pathogenesis of uterine infection following
cesarean delivery is that of an infected surgical incision. Bacteria that
colonize the cervix and vagina gain access to the uterus during labor.
Postpartum, they invade devitalized uterine tissue. Parametrial cellulitis
follows with infection of the pelvic retroperitoneal fibroareolar connective
tissue. With early treatment, infection is contained within the parametrial and
paravaginal tissue, but it may extend deep into the pelvis.
Fever is the most important criterion for the diagnosis of postpartum
metritis. Intuitively, the degree of fever is believed proportional to the extent
of infection and sepsis. Temperatures usually are 38 to 39°C, and
temperatures >39°C suggest bacteremia or endotoxemia (Easter, 2017;
Suffredini, 1989). Women usually complain of abdominal pain, and
parametrial tenderness is elicited on abdominal and bimanual examination.
Leukocytosis may range from 15,000 to 30,000 cells/μL, but recall that
cesarean delivery itself raises the leukocyte count. Although an offensive
odor can develop, many women have foul-smelling lochia without evidence
for infection, and vice versa. Some other infections, notably those caused by
group A β-hemolytic streptococci, may be associated with scant, odorless
lochia (Anderson, 2014).

Treatment
If metritis develops following vaginal delivery, treatment with an oral or
intramuscular antimicrobial agent may be sufficient (Meaney-Delman, 2015).

For moderate to severe infections, however, intravenous therapy with a
broad-spectrum antibiotic regimen is indicated. Improvement occurs in 48 to
72 hours in nearly 90 percent of women treated with one of several regimens
discussed below. Persistent fever after this interval mandates a careful
search for causes of refractory pelvic infection. These include a parametrial
phlegmon—an area of intense cellulitis; an abdominal incisional or pelvic
abscess or infected hematoma; and septic pelvic thrombophlebitis. In our
experience, persistent fever is seldom due to antimicrobial-resistant bacteria
or due to drug side effects. The woman may be discharged home after she has
been afebrile for at least 24 hours, and further oral antimicrobial therapy is
not needed (Mackeen, 2015).
Choice of Antimicrobials. Therapy is empirical and initial treatment is
directed against the mixed flora shown in Table 37-1. For infections
following vaginal delivery, as many as 90 percent of women respond to
regimens such as ampicillin plus gentamicin. In contrast, anaerobic coverage
is included for infections following cesarean delivery (Table 37-2).
TABLE 37-2. Antimicrobial Regimens for Pelvic Infections Following
Cesarean Delivery

In 1979, DiZerega and coworkers compared the effectiveness of
clindamycin plus gentamicin with that of penicillin G plus gentamicin for
treatment of pelvic infections following cesarean delivery. Women given the
clindamycin-gentamicin regimen had a 95-percent response rate, and this
regimen is still considered by most to be the standard by which others are
measured (Mackeen, 2015). Despite this standard therapy, enterococcal
cultures may be persistently positive. The addition of ampicillin, either

initially or following no response after 48 to 72 hours, targets enterococci
(Brumfield, 2000).
Many authorities recommend periodical monitoring of serum gentamicin
levels. At Parkland Hospital, we do not routinely do so if a woman has
adequate renal function, which is evidenced by a normal serum creatinine
level. Once-daily dosing versus multiple dosing with gentamicin provides
adequate serum levels, and either method has similar cure rates (Livingston,
2003). In the event of diminished glomerular filtration, some recommend a
combination of clindamycin and a second-generation cephalosporin, because
of potential nephrotoxicity and ototoxicity with gentamicin. Instead, others
recommend a combination of clindamycin and aztreonam—the latter is a
monobactam compound with activity similar to the aminoglycosides.
The spectra of β-lactam antimicrobials include activity against many
anaerobic pathogens. Some examples include cephalosporins such as
cefoxitin, cefotetan, cefotaxime, and ceftriaxone. Extended-spectrum
penicillins are piperacillin, ticarcillin, and mezlocillin. β-lactam
antimicrobials are inherently safe and, except for allergic reactions, are free
of major toxicity. The β-lactamase inhibitors clavulanic acid, sulbactam,
and tazobactam have been combined with ampicillin, amoxicillin, ticarcillin,
and piperacillin to extend their spectra. Metronidazole has superior in vitro
activity against most anaerobes. This agent given with ampicillin and an
aminoglycoside provides coverage against most organisms encountered in
serious pelvic infections. It is also used second line to treat some cases of
Clostridioides difficile colitis.
Imipenem and similar antimicrobials are in the carbapenem family.
These offer broad-spectrum coverage against most organisms associated
with metritis. Imipenem coupled with cilastatin inhibits the antibiotic’s renal
metabolism. Because of imipenem’s higher cost, it is reasonable from both a
medical and an economic standpoint to reserve this drug for serious
nonobstetrical infections.
Vancomycin is a glycopeptide antimicrobial active against gram-positive
bacteria. It is used in lieu of β-lactam therapy for a patient with a type 1
allergic reaction and given for suspected infections due to S aureus and to
treat C difficile colitis (Chap. 57, p. 1019).

Perioperative Prophylaxis

The use of periprocedural techniques for infection prevention is common in
obstetrics (Table 37-3). Numerous studies show that prophylactic antibiotics
at the time of cesarean delivery reduce wound and postpartum pelvic
infection rates (Carter, 2017; Smaill, 2014). The observed benefit applies to
both elective and nonelective cesarean delivery. As noted from preliminary
data, antimicrobials may decrease pelvic infection rates after operative
vaginal delivery (p. 650). However, data are insufficient to suggest
prophylactic antimicrobials lower infection rates after spontaneous vaginal
delivery, repair of all episiotomies, or manual extraction of the placenta
(Bonet 2017a,b; Chongsomchai, 2014). The American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2018a) concluded that a single antibiotic
dose with third- and fourth-degree perineal laceration is reasonable and has
evidenced-based support.
TABLE 37-3. Various Prophylactic Methods for Decreasing Pelvic and
Wound Infection Rates Following Delivery

Single-dose prophylaxis with a 2-g dose of a first-generation
cephalosporin is ideal. This regimen has similar efficacy of broad-spectrum
agents or multiple-dose regimens (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2018b). For obese women, evidence supports a 3-g dose of
cefazolin to reach optimal tissue concentrations (Swank, 2015). Some
evidence supports addition of azithromycin to lower postcesarean uterine
infection rates (Markwei, 2021; Pierce, 2021; Tita, 2016). Women colonized
with MRSA are given vancomycin in addition to a cephalosporin (Chap. 67,
p. 1196). It is controversial whether the infection rate is reduced further if the
antimicrobial is given before the skin incision compared with after umbilical
cord clamping (Baaqeel, 2013; Macones, 2012; Sun, 2013; Ward, 2016). The
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2018b) has
concluded that the evidence favors predelivery administration.
Most women with a stated allergy to penicillin are not prone to
developing anaphylaxis. Without a history of anaphylaxis, most of these

women can safely be given a cephalosporin (Chap. 30, p. 551). If not, then
vancomycin is given along with clindamycin and gentamicin (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2018b).
Preoperative abdominal skin preparation decreases the risk for pelvic
and wound infections (Hadiati, 2018). Skin preparation with chlorhexidinealcohol is superior to iodine-alcohol for preventing surgical-site infections
(Tuuli, 2016). Additive beneficial effects may be gained by preoperative
vaginal cleansing with povidone-iodine rinse or application of
metronidazole gel (Caissutti, 2017; Felder, 2019; Haas, 2018).
Other Methods of Prophylaxis. Several studies have addressed the value of
prenatal cervicovaginal cultures. These are obtained in the hope of
identifying pathogens that might be eradicated to lower incidences of preterm
labor, chorioamnionitis, and puerperal infections. Unfortunately, treatment of
asymptomatic vaginal infections does not prevent these complications. For
asymptomatic bacterial vaginosis, Carey and associates (2000) reported no
beneficial effects for women treated. For asymptomatic Trichomonas
vaginalis infection, a similar postpartum infection rate was found in women
treated in the second trimester compared with placebo-treated women
(Klebanoff, 2001).
Technical maneuvers done to alter the postcesarean infection rate have
been studied (Chap. 30, p. 551). Allowing the placenta to separate
spontaneously and exteriorizing the uterus to close the hysterotomy may
reduce the infection risk (Jacobs-Jokhan, 2004; Lasley, 1997). However,
changing gloves after placental delivery, cleaning the intrauterine cavity, and
dilating the lower segment and cervix do not alter the infection rate
(Atkinson, 1996; Eke, 2019; Liabsuetrakul, 2018). No differences were
found in postoperative infection rates when single- and two-layer uterine
closures were compared (Hauth, 1992). Similarly, infection rates are not
affected by closure versus nonclosure of the peritoneum (Bamigboye, 2014;
Tulandi, 2003). Importantly, closure of subcutaneous tissue in obese women
does not lower the wound infection rate, but it does decrease the wound
separation incidence (Chelmow, 2004). Similarly, skin closure with staples
versus suture has a greater incidence of noninfectious skin separation
(Mackeen, 2012; Tuuli, 2011).

■ Complications of Uterine and Pelvic Infections
Metritis responds to antimicrobial treatment within 48 to 72 hours in more
than 90 percent of women. In some of the remainder, any of several
complications may arise. These include wound infection, complex pelvic
infection such as a phlegmon or an abscess, and septic pelvic
thrombophlebitis (Brown, 1999; Jaiyeoba, 2012). As with other aspects of
puerperal infections, the incidence and severity of these complications are
reduced by perioperative antimicrobial prophylaxis.

■ Abdominal Incisional Infections
Wound infection is a common cause of persistent fever in women treated for
metritis. Incisional infection risk factors include obesity, diabetes,
corticosteroid therapy, immunosuppression, anemia, hypertension, and
hematoma formation from inadequate hemostasis. If prophylactic
antimicrobials are given, the incidence of wound infection following
cesarean delivery ranges from 2 to 10 percent depending on risk factors
(Andrews, 2003; Chaim, 2000). From our experiences at Parkland Hospital,
the incidence is closer to 2 percent, but this risk rises with increasing body
mass (Hussamy, 2018).
Incisional abscesses that develop following cesarean delivery usually
cause persistent fever or fever that begins on approximately the fourth day.
The wound is erythematous and drains pus. Organisms that cause wound
infections are generally the same as those isolated from amnionic fluid at
cesarean delivery, however, hospital-acquired pathogens also may be
causative.
Treatment includes antimicrobials and surgical drainage and debridement
of devitalized tissue. This typically requires spinal analgesia or general
anesthesia. The fascia is carefully inspected to document integrity. Local
wound care thereafter is completed twice daily. Before each dressing
change, procedural analgesia is tailored to wound size and location, and
oral, intramuscular, or intravenous dosage routes are suitable. Topical
lidocaine also may be added. Necrotic tissue is removed, and the wound is
repacked with moist gauze. At 4 to 6 days, healthy granulation tissue is
typically present, and secondary en bloc closure of the open layers can
usually be accomplished (Wechter, 2005). As shown in Figure 37-1, a

polypropylene or nylon suture of appropriate gauge enters 2 to 3 cm from one
wound edge. It crosses the wound to incorporate the full wound thickness and
emerges 3 cm from the other wound edge. These are placed in series to close
the opening. In most cases, sutures may be removed on postprocedural day
10.

FIGURE 37-1 Secondary abdominal wound closure technique. (Reproduced with permission from
Worley KC: Postoperative complications. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al [eds]:
Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2017).

Vacuum-Assisted Wound Closure
This system promotes healing by applying negative pressure to the wound
(Fig. 37-2). The technique is variably referred to as vacuum-assisted
closure (VAC), topical negative pressure (TNP), and negative-pressure
wound therapy (NPWT). Negative-pressure systems are used for open
wounds after infection or for prophylaxis against wound disruption. Mouës

and colleagues (2011) confirmed that NPWT enhances blood flow to the
wound, promotes angiogenesis, induces cellular proliferation, and shrinks
wound size. Several systems are available and widely accepted, despite
meager formal evidence for clinical efficacy.

FIGURE 37-2 Theoretical effects of negative-pressure wound therapy include macro- and
microdeformation, removal of tissue fluid, and creation of a warm and moist environment. As shown in
the inset, tissue fluid is drawn out by suction tubing. It travels through the porous sponge dressing that
fills the wound and into an adjacent collection canister. As healing progresses, a layer of granulation
tissue (red) forms at the wound-sponge interface. (Reproduced with permission from Cunningham FG:
Surgical instruments. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al [eds]: Cunningham and
Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2017.)

Open abdominal wounds once infection has cleared or an “open surgical
abdomen” is a major indication for NPWT. Vacuum therapy is the most
efficient method of temporary abdominal closure for patients with open
abdominal wounds (Bruhin, 2014; Quyn, 2012). However, no trials have
compared vacuum-assisted wound closure with conventional wound care
after cesarean delivery. Also, these devices are used for closure of perineal

wounds resulting from infected episiotomies, hematomas, or abscesses
(Aviki, 2015). Very few randomized trials have compared vacuum-assisted
wound closure with conventional wound care (Kawakita, 2021; Yu, 2018).
Prophylaxis. Negative-pressure devices are also marketed to prevent wound
infections in incisions closed to heal by primary intention. Such prophylactic
use in 441 obese women undergoing cesarean delivery has been evaluated in
two large randomized trials. Hussamy and associates (2019) found in obese
women that the incidence of wound morbidity was similar in the standard
dressing group compared with the NPWT group (Table 37-4). The second
trial was a multicenter study from Denmark of 876 obese women (Hyldig,
2019). In the NPWT group, the surgical site infection rate was 4.6 percent
compared with 9.2 percent in the group of women treated with standard
dressing. Similarly, a systematic review found use of prophylactic NPWT
reduced wound complications (Yu, 2018). The cost effectiveness of these
systems is inconclusive in multiple studies (Echebiri, 2015; Lewis, 2014).
Smid and coworkers (2017) questioned the effectiveness of such therapy.
Because of these uncertainties, we agree with Tuuli (2019) that routine use of
prophylactic NPWT needs more evaluation before its widespread
acceptance.
TABLE 37-4. Randomized Trial of Prophylactic Incisional NegativePressure Wound Therapy (iNPWT) Versus Standard Surgical Dressing for
Morbidly Obese Women Undergoing Cesarean Delivery

Fascial Dehiscence
This separation of the fascial layer is a serious complication, and bowel
evisceration can be comorbid. Wound infection and obesity are prominent
risk factors (Poole, 1985; Subramaniam, 2014). For example, McNeeley and
associates (1998) reported a fascial dehiscence rate of approximately 1 per
300 operations in almost 9000 women undergoing cesarean delivery. Two
thirds of the 27 fascial dehiscences in this study were associated with
concurrent fascial infection and tissue necrosis.
Fascial dehiscence generally presents within the first 7 to 10
postoperative days. Superficial disruption of the subcutaneous layer and
extensive leakage of peritoneal fluid or purulent drainage are indicative. In
unclear cases, CT scanning may be elected preoperatively, if obtained
expeditiously.
Dehiscence is a surgical emergency. If abdominal contents have
eviscerated, sterile towels or gauze soaked in saline can be used early to

cover and gently replace bowel or omentum. Broad-spectrum antibiotics are
generally recommended to minimize ensuing peritonitis.
Given the high mortality risk associated with fascial dehiscence and
bowel evisceration, examination under anesthesia to estimate the extent of
separation is often warranted. Surgery aims to assess bowel health, debride
necrotic wound tissue, and close the fascia, if possible. For closure, an
interrupted mass closure using a no. 2 permanent suture is recommended
typically (Fig. 37-3). In cases with infection, the subcutaneous layers are left
to close secondarily. General surgery consultation is considered if bowel
ischemia or difficult fascial closure is anticipated.

FIGURE 37-3 Mass closure: each stitch is placed 1.5 to 2 cm from the wound edge (A) and
incorporates the peritoneum, rectus muscle, and rectus sheath (B). Stitches are spaced 1 cm apart along
the length of the incision. A.R.S. = anterior rectus sheath; P.R.S. = posterior rectus sheath; SubQ =
subcutaneous layer. (Reproduced with permission from Cundiff GW: Incisions and closures. In Yeomans
ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al [eds]: Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed.
New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2017.)

■ Necrotizing Fasciitis
This uncommon severe wound infection is associated with high mortality
rates. In obstetrics, necrotizing fasciitis may involve abdominal incisions, or
it may complicate episiotomy or other perineal lacerations. As the name
implies, tissue necrosis is significant. Of the risk factors for fasciitis
summarized by Owen and Andrews (1994), diabetes, obesity, and
hypertension are increasingly common in gravidas. Like pelvic infections,
this wound complication usually is polymicrobial and caused by organisms
that make up the normal vaginal flora. In some cases, however, infection is
caused by a single virulent bacterial species such as group A β-hemolytic
streptococcus (Anderson, 2014; Rimawi, 2012). Occasionally, rarely
encountered pathogens cause necrotizing infections (Chong, 2016; Swartz,
2004).
Goepfert and coworkers (1997) described nine cases of necrotizing
fasciitis in more than 5000 cesarean deliveries. The infection was fatal in
two women—one with metastatic breast cancer and the other with sepsis. In
another report, Schorge and colleagues (1998) described five women with
fasciitis following cesarean delivery. None of these women had predisposing
risk factors, and none died.
Infection may involve skin, superficial and deep subcutaneous tissues,
and any of the abdominopelvic fascial layers. In some cases, muscle also is
involved—myofasciitis. Most of these necrotizing infections do not cause
symptoms until 3 to 5 days after delivery. Some virulent infections develop
earlier. Clinical findings vary, and it is frequently difficult to differentiate
more innocuous superficial wound infections from a deep fascial one. If
myofasciitis progresses, the woman may become ill from septicemia. A high
index of suspicion, with surgical exploration if the diagnosis is uncertain,
may be lifesaving (Goh, 2014). We aggressively pursue early exploration
(Chap. 50, p. 890).
Successful treatment of necrotizing soft-tissue infections involves early
diagnosis, source control by surgical debridement, antimicrobials, and
intensive care (Gallup, 2002; Goh, 2014; Society for Maternal-Fetal
Medicine, 2019). Surgery includes thorough debridement of all infected
tissue, leaving wide margins of healthy bleeding tissue. This may include
extensive abdominal or vulvar debridement and excision of abdominal, thigh,
or buttock fascia. Death is virtually universal without surgical treatment, and

rates approach 50 percent even if exhaustive debridement is performed
(Johnson, 2020). With substantial resection, synthetic mesh may ultimately be
required later to close the fascial incision once infection is cleared (Gallup,
2002; McNeeley, 1998).

■ Peritonitis and Adnexal Abscesses
Following cesarean delivery, peritonitis is infrequent. It almost always is
preceded by metritis, especially cases with uterine incisional necrosis and
dehiscence. However, it may stem from a ruptured adnexal abscess or an
inadvertent intraoperative bowel injury. Perforative appendicitis also can
cause peritonitis (Chap. 57, p. 1024). In these cases, prompt surgical
treatment is usually indicated.
After vaginal delivery, peritonitis is rarely encountered, and many such
cases are due to virulent strains of group A β-hemolytic streptococci or
similar organisms. Importantly, abdominal rigidity may not be prominent with
puerperal peritonitis because of physiological abdominal wall laxity from
pregnancy. Pain may be severe, but frequently, the first symptoms of
peritonitis are those of adynamic ileus. Marked bowel distention may
develop, which is unusual after vaginal birth. Normally, if the infection
begins in an intact uterus and extends into the peritoneum, antimicrobial
treatment alone suffices.
An ovarian abscess rarely develops in the puerperium. These are
presumably caused by bacterial invasion through an opening in the ovarian
capsule (Wetchler, 1985). The abscess is usually unilateral, and women
typically present 1 to 2 weeks after delivery. Rupture is common, and
peritonitis may be severe.

■ Parametrial Phlegmon
For some women in whom metritis develops following cesarean delivery,
parametrial cellulitis is intense and forms an area of induration—a phlegmon
—within the leaves of the broad ligament (Fig. 37-4). These infections are
considered when fever persists longer than 72 hours despite intravenous
antimicrobial therapy (Brown, 1999; DePalma, 1982).

FIGURE 37-4 Left-sided parametrial phlegmon: cellulitis causes induration in the parametrium adjacent
to the hysterotomy incision. (Reproduced with permission from Worley KC: Postoperative
complications. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al [eds]: Cunningham and Gilstrap’s
Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2017).

Phlegmons are usually unilateral, and they frequently are limited to the
parametrium at the base of the broad ligament. If the inflammatory reaction is
more intense, cellulitis extends along natural lines of cleavage. The most
common form of extension is laterally along the broad ligament, with a
tendency to extend to the pelvic sidewall. Occasionally, posterior extension
may involve the rectovaginal septum, producing a firm mass posterior to the

cervix. In most women, clinical improvement follows continued treatment
with a broad-spectrum antimicrobial regimen. Typically, fever resolves in 5
to 7 days.
Severe cellulitis of the uterine incision may ultimately lead to necrosis
and separation (Treszezamsky, 2011). Extrusion of purulent material causes
intraabdominal abscess formation and peritonitis as described above.
Surgery is reserved for women in whom uterine incisional necrosis is
suspected. For most, hysterectomy and surgical debridement are needed.
These cases are difficult because the cervix and lower uterine segment are
involved with an intense inflammatory process that extends to the pelvic
sidewall. The adnexa are seldom involved, and one or both ovaries can
usually be conserved. Blood loss is often appreciable, and transfusion is
common.

Imaging Studies
Persistent puerperal infections can be evaluated using computed tomography
(CT) or magnetic resonance (MR) imaging (Wang, 2020). Brown and
associates (1991) used CT imaging in women in whom pelvic infection was
refractory to antimicrobial therapy given for 5 days. They found at least one
abnormal radiological finding in 75 percent of these women, and most were
nonsurgical lesions. Fishel Bartal and colleagues (2018) reported abnormal
CT findings in almost 60 percent of women with refractory fever persisting
>3 days. Pelvic fluid collections were seen in 22 percent, and surgical
intervention was prompted in 8 percent. Thus, imaging can be used to
dissuade surgical exploration in most cases.
Uterine incisional dehiscence such as shown in Figure 37-5 can
sometimes be confirmed based on CT images. These findings must be
interpreted within the clinical context because apparent uterine incisional
defects thought to represent edema can be seen even after uncomplicated
cesarean delivery. Shown in Figure 37-6 is a necrotic hysterotomy incision,
which had leaked into the peritoneal cavity.

FIGURE 37-5 Pelvic computed tomography scan showing necrosis of the uterine incision with gas in
the myometrium (arrows). A large abscess (a) fills the right parametrium.

FIGURE 37-6 Necrotic hysterotomy infection. Severe cellulitis of the uterine incision resulted in
dehiscence with subsequent leakage into the peritoneal cavity. Hysterectomy was required for sufficient
debridement of necrotic tissue. (Reproduced with permission from Dr. Denisse Holcomb.)

Occasionally, a parametrial phlegmon may suppurate, forming a fluctuant
broad ligament abscess that may point above the inguinal ligament. These
abscesses can dissect anteriorly and be amenable to CT-directed needle
drainage. A psoas abscess is rare, and despite antimicrobial therapy,
percutaneous drainage may be required to effectively treat it (Shahabi, 2002;
Swanson, 2008). If a phlegmon involving the rectovaginal septum suppurates,
surgical drainage is easily effected by colpotomy. Absorption of the
induration may require several days to weeks.

■ Septic Pelvic Thrombophlebitis
Suppurative thrombophlebitis was a frequent complication in the
preantibiotic era, and septic embolization was common. However, with the
advent of antimicrobial therapy, the mortality rate and need for surgical
therapy for these infections diminished. Septic phlebitis arises as an
extension along venous routes and may cause thrombosis. Lymphangitis often
coexists. The ovarian veins may then become involved because they drain the
upper uterus and therefore the placental implantation site. The experiences of
Witlin and Sibai (1995) and Brown and coworkers (1999) suggest that
puerperal septic thrombophlebitis is likely to involve one or both ovarian
venous plexuses. In a fourth of women, the clot extends into the inferior vena
cava and occasionally to the renal vein.
The incidence of septic phlebitis varies in several reports. In a 5-year
survey of 45,000 women who were delivered at Parkland Hospital, Brown
and workers (1999) found an incidence of 1 case per 9000 vaginal births and
1 per 800 cesarean deliveries. In a cohort of 16,650 women undergoing
primary cesarean delivery, Rouse and coworkers (2004) reported an
incidence of 1 case per 400 surgeries. Incidences approximated 1 per 175
cesarean deliveries if chorioamnionitis was antecedent, but only 1 per 500 if
there was no intrapartum infection.
Except for chills and occasional lower quadrant pain, women with septic
thrombophlebitis usually lack symptoms (Wouterlood, 2021). The diagnosis
can be confirmed by pelvic CT or MR imaging (Fig. 37-7). Using either,
Brown and coworkers (1999) found that 20 percent of 69 women with

persistent fever following >5 days of antimicrobial therapy for metritis had
septic pelvic thrombophlebitis. In a later study, Fischel Bartal and associates
(2018) reported that 6 percent of women with refractory fever ≥3 days had
septic phlebitis. These women normally have symptomatic improvement with
antimicrobial treatment, however, they continue to have fever.

FIGURE 37-7 Septic ovarian vein thrombosis—contrast-enhanced computed tomography scan: A.
Enlarged right ovarian vein filled with low-density thrombus (black arrow). Contrast is seen in ureter
(white arrow). R = lower pole, right kidney. B. Coronal image demonstrates enlarged right ovarian vein
filled with low-density thrombus (arrows). (B: Reproduced with permission from Dr. April Bailey in
Worley KC: Postoperative complications. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al [eds]:
Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2017.)

Treatment with heparin is controversial. In a randomized study of 14
women, the addition of heparin to antimicrobial therapy for septic pelvic
thrombophlebitis did not hasten recovery or improve outcome (Brown,
1999). We and others are of the opinion that heparin is unnecessary (Witlin,
1995). Others, however, continue to recommend anticoagulation (Klima,
2008; Lenz, 2017). Certainly, no evidence supports long-term anticoagulation
(Brown, 2018).

■ Perineal Infections
Episiotomy infections are uncommon, because the operation is now
performed less frequently (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2018a; Dillon, 2019). Reasons for this are discussed in
Chapter 27 (p. 510). In an older study, Owen and Hauth (1990) described
only 10 episiotomy infections in 20,000 women delivered vaginally. With
infection, however, dehiscence is a concern. Ramin and colleagues (1992)
reported an episiotomy dehiscence rate of 0.5 percent at Parkland Hospital,
and 80 percent of these were infected. Uygur and associates (2004) reported
a 1-percent dehiscence rate and attributed two thirds to infection.
When the anal sphincter is disrupted at delivery, the subsequent infection
rate is higher and is likely influenced by intrapartum antimicrobial treatment

(Buppasiri, 2014; Stock, 2013). Lewicky-Gaupp and colleagues (2015)
reported a 20-percent infection rate when the sphincter was torn. Goldaber
and coworkers (1993) described fourth-degree lacerations in 390
parturients, of whom 5.4 percent had morbidity. In these women, 2.8 percent
had infection and dehiscence, 1.8 percent had only dehiscence, and 0.8
percent only infection.

Pathogenesis and Clinical Course
As noted, perineal laceration infection may be complicated by dehiscence.
Other factors for separation include coagulation disorders, smoking, and
human papillomavirus infection (Ramin, 1994). No data suggest that
dehiscence is related to faulty repair.
With infection, local pain and dysuria, with or without urinary retention,
are frequent symptoms. Ramin and colleagues (1992) reported that the most
common findings were pain in 65 percent, purulent discharge in 65 percent,
and fever in 44 percent. In extreme cases, the entire vulva may become
edematous, ulcerated, and covered with exudate. Although life-threatening,
septic shock or necrotizing fasciitis is rare (p. 654).
Vaginal lacerations may also become infected directly or by extension
from the perineum. The epithelium becomes red and swollen and may then
become necrotic and slough. Parametrial extension can lead to lymphangitis.
Cervical lacerations are seldom noticeably infected, but instead may
manifest as metritis. Deep lacerations that extend directly into the base of the
broad ligament may become infected and cause lymphangitis, parametritis,
and bacteremia.

Treatment
Infected episiotomies are managed similar to other infected surgical wounds.
In women with obvious cellulitis but no purulence, close observation and
broad-spectrum antimicrobial therapy alone may be appropriate. With
purulence, drainage is established, and in most cases, sutures are removed
and the infected wound debrided. With dehiscence, local wound care is
coupled with intravenous antimicrobials. Hauth and associates (1986) were
the first to advocate for early episiotomy repair after infection subsided.
Hankins and colleagues (1990) described successful early repair in 94
percent of women, and the average duration from dehiscence to repair was 6

days. The two women with failures developed a pinpoint rectovaginal fistula
that was treated with a small rectal flap. Other studies have shown similar
high rates with early repair (Ramin, 1992; Uygur, 2004).
Before performing early repair, diligent preparation is essential (Table
37-5). The surgical wound must be properly cleaned and cleared of
infection. Once the surface of the wound is free of exudate and covered by
pink granulation tissue, secondary repair can be accomplished. The tissue
must be adequately mobilized, with special attention to identify and mobilize
the anal sphincter muscle. A tension-free suture line is essential to avoid
repeated dehiscence. Secondary closure of the wound is accomplished in
layers, as described for primary episiotomy closure (Chap. 27, p. 510).
Postoperative care includes local wound care, stool softeners, and nothing
per vagina or rectum until healed. Hard stools risk wound disruption, but
liquid stool can seep between sutures to reincite infection. Thus, soft formed
stools are the goal.
TABLE 37-5. Preoperative Protocol for Early Repair of Episiotomy
Dehiscence

■ Toxic Shock Syndrome

This acute febrile illness with severe multisystem derangement has a casefatality rate of 10 to 15 percent. Usual findings are fever, headache, mental
confusion, diffuse macular erythematous rash, nausea, vomiting, watery
diarrhea, and marked hemoconcentration. Renal failure followed by hepatic
failure, disseminated intravascular coagulation, and circulatory collapse may
progress in rapid sequence. During recovery, the rash-covered areas
desquamate. In early investigations of toxic shock syndrome (TSS),
Staphylococcus aureus was recovered from almost all afflicted persons.
Specifically, a staphylococcal exotoxin, termed toxic shock syndrome toxin
1 (TSST-1), was found to cause the clinical manifestations by provoking
profound endothelial injury. A very small amount of TSST-1 can activate T
cells to create a “cytokine storm” (Heying, 2007; Que, 2005). Toxic shock
syndrome has also been reported with MRSA (Deguchi, 2018).
Subsequent investigations have also implicated virulent group A βhemolytic streptococcal infection (Anderson, 2014; Rottenstreich, 2019;
Shinar, 2016). Heavy colonization or infection is complicated in some cases
by streptococcal toxic shock syndrome, which is produced when pyrogenic
exotoxin is elaborated. Serotypes M1 and M3 are particularly virulent
(Beres, 2004; Okumura, 2004). Last, almost identical findings of toxic shock
have been reported in pregnant women with Clostridium sordellii and novyi
colonization (Herrera, 2016; Robbie, 2000).
Thus, in some cases of toxic shock syndrome, infection is not apparent,
and colonization of a mucosal surface is the presumed source (Olp, 2020). At
least 10 to 20 percent of pregnant women have vaginal colonization with S
aureus. And Clostridium perfringens and sordellii are cultured from 3 to 10
percent of asymptomatic women (Chong, 2016). Thus, it is not surprising that
the disease develops in postpartum women when growth of vaginal bacteria
is abundant (Chen, 2006; Guerinot, 1982).
Delayed diagnosis and treatment are associated with maternal mortality
(Schummer, 2002). Crum and colleagues (2002) described a neonatal death
following antenatal toxic shock syndrome. Principal therapy is supportive,
while allowing reversal of capillary endothelial injury. Antimicrobial
therapy includes coverage against staphylococcal and streptococcal species.
With evidence of pelvic infection, antimicrobial therapy must also include
agents used for polymicrobial infections. Women with these infections may
require wound debridement and possibly hysterectomy. Because the toxin is
so potent, the mortality rate is correspondingly high (Hotchkiss, 2003).

BREAST INFECTIONS
Parenchymal infection of the mammary glands is a rare antepartum
complication, but the postpartum incidence of mastitis approximates 3
percent (Lee, 2010). No evidence supports use of prophylactic measures to
prevent breast infection (Crepinsek, 2012). Risk factors include nursing
difficulties, cracked nipples, and oral antibiotic therapy (Branch-Elliman,
2012; Mediano, 2014).
Symptoms of suppurative mastitis seldom appear before the end of the
first week postpartum and usually are not seen until the third or fourth week.
Infection almost invariably is unilateral, and marked engorgement usually
precedes inflammation. Symptoms include chills or actual rigors, which are
soon followed by fever and tachycardia. Pain is severe, and the breast(s)
becomes hard and red. Approximately 10 percent of women with mastitis
develop an abscess. Detection of fluctuation may be difficult, and sonography
is usually diagnostic (Fig. 37-8). Although rare, toxic shock syndrome from
mastitis caused by S aureus has been reported (Demey, 1989; Fujiwara,
2001).

FIGURE 37-8 Puerperal mastitis with breast abscess. A. Indurated, erythematous skin overlies the
area of right-sided breast infection. B. Sonographic picture of this 5-cm abscess.

■ Etiology
S aureus, especially MRSA, is the most commonly isolated organism in
breast infections. Matheson and coworkers (1988) found it in 40 percent of
women with mastitis. Other commonly isolated organisms are coagulasenegative staphylococci and viridans streptococci. The immediate source of
mastitis-causing organisms is almost always the newborn’s nose and throat.
Bacteria enter the breast through the nipple at fissures or small abrasions.
The infecting organism can usually be cultured from milk.
At times, suppurative mastitis reaches epidemic levels among nursing
mothers. Such outbreaks most often coincide with the appearance of a new
strain of antibiotic-resistant staphylococcus. A contemporaneous example is
MRSA, which has rapidly become the most commonly isolated
staphylococcal species in some areas (Berens, 2010; Klevens, 2007). At
Parkland Hospital from 2000 to 2004, Laibl and associates (2005) reported
that a fourth of community-acquired MRSA isolates were from pregnant or
postpartum women with mastitis. Hospital-acquired MRSA may cause
mastitis when the newborn becomes colonized after contact with nursery
personnel who are colonized (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
2006). Stafford and colleagues (2008) found a higher incidence of recurrent
abscess in those with MRSA-associated mastitis.

■ Management
Provided that appropriate therapy for mastitis is started before suppuration
begins, the infection usually resolves within 48 hours. Many recommend that
milk be expressed from the affected breast onto a swab and cultured before
beginning therapy. Bacterial identification and antimicrobial sensitivities can
provide information for a successful program of nosocomial infection
surveillance (Lee, 2010).
The most effective treatment has not been clarified (Jahanfar, 2013).
Thus, the initial antimicrobial choice is influenced by current experience
with staphylococcal infections at a given institution. Dicloxacillin, 500 mg
orally four times daily, may be started empirically. Erythromycin is given to
women who are penicillin sensitive. If the infection is caused by resistant,
penicillinase-producing staphylococcus species or if resistant organisms are
suspected while awaiting the culture results, then vancomycin, clindamycin,

or trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole is given (Sheffield, 2013). Although
clinical response may be prompt, treatment is recommended for 10 days.
Marshall and coworkers (1975) demonstrated the importance of
continued breastfeeding. They reported that of 65 women with mastitis, the
only three who developed abscesses were among the 15 women who quit
breastfeeding. Vigorous milk expression may be sufficient treatment alone
(Thomsen, 1984). Sometimes the infant will not nurse on the inflamed breast.
This probably is not related to any changes in the milk taste but is secondary
to engorgement and edema, which can make the areola harder to grip.
Pumping can alleviate this. When nursing bilaterally, it is best to begin
suckling on the uninvolved breast. This allows let-down to commence before
moving to the tender breast.
In resource-poor countries, breastfeeding in women infected with the
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) is not contraindicated. However, in the
setting of mastitis or breast abscess, it is recommended to stop feeding from
the infected breast. This is because HIV RNA levels rise in affected breast
milk. These levels return to baseline after symptoms resolve (Semrau, 2013).

■ Breast Abscess
In a population-based study of nearly 1.5 million Swedish women, the
incidence of breast abscess was 0.1 percent (Kvist, 2005). An abscess
should be suspected when defervescence does not follow within 48 to 72
hours of treatment or when a mass is palpable. Again, sonographic imaging is
valuable. Breast abscesses can be large, and in one case report, 2 L of pus
were released (Martic, 2012). Traditional therapy has been surgical
drainage, which usually requires general anesthesia. The incision ideally is
placed along Langer skin lines for a cosmetic result (Stehman, 1990). In
early cases, a single incision over the most dependent portion of fluctuation
is usually sufficient. Multiple abscesses require several incisions and
disruption of loculations. The resulting cavity is loosely packed with gauze,
which should be replaced at the end of 24 hours by a smaller pack.
More recently, sonographically guided needle aspiration using local
analgesia has become favored (Patani, 2018). This has an 80- to 90-percent
success rate (Geiss, 2014). In a randomized trial, Naeem and colleagues
(2012) compared surgical drainage with aspiration. At 8 weeks, they found
93 percent undergoing aspiration were healed compared with 77 percent

undergoing surgical drainage. Sonographic findings, initial choice of
antimicrobials, and infecting organism do not predict aspiration failure
(David, 2018).
Other etiologies should be considered in the setting of a nonhealing
abscess. Rarely, granulomatous mastitis presents as puerperal mastitis
(Ding, 2021 Freeman, 2017). Cancer or tuberculosis are other considerations
(Wu, 2020).

REFERENCES
Acosta CD, Bhattacharya S, Tuffnell D, et al: Maternal sepsis: a Scottish population-based case-control
study. BJOG 119(4):474, 2012
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Prevention and management of obstetrical
lacerations at vaginal birth. Practice Bulletin No. 198, June 2018a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Use of prophylactic antibiotics in labor and
delivery. Practice Bulletin No. 199, August 2018b
Anderson BL: Puerperal group A streptococcal infection: beyond Semmelweis. Obstet Gynecol
123(4):874, 2014
Anderson DJ, Sexton DJ, Kanafani ZA, et al: Severe surgical site infection in community hospitals:
epidemiology, key procedures, and the changing prevalence of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus
aureus. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 28 (9):1047, 2007
Andrews WW, Hauth JC, Cliver SP, et al: Randomized clinical trial of extended spectrum antibiotic
prophylaxis with coverage for Ureaplasma urealyticum to reduce post-cesarean delivery
endometritis. Obstet Gynecol 101:1183, 2003
Andrews WW, Shah SR, Goldenberg RL, et al: Association of post-cesarean delivery endometritis with
colonization of the chorioamnion by Ureaplasma urealyticum. Obstet Gynecol 85:509, 1995
Atkinson MW, Owen J, Wren A, et al: The effect of manual removal of the placenta on post-cesarean
endometritis. Obstet Gynecol 87:99, 1996
Aviki EM, Batalden RP, del Carmen MG, et al: Vacuum-assisted closure for episiotomy dehiscence.
Obstet Gynecol 126(3):530, 2015
Axelsson D, Brynhildsen J, Blomberg M: Postpartum infection in relation to maternal characteristics,
obstetric interventions, and complications. J Perinat Med 46(3):271, 2018
Baaqeel H, Baaqeel R: Timing of administration of prophylactic antibiotics for caesarean section: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. BJOG 120(6):661, 2013
Bamigboye AA, Hofmeyr GJ: Closure versus non-closure of the peritoneum at caesarean section.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 8:CD000163, 2014
Berens P, Swaim L, Peterson B: Incidence of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus in
postpartum breast abscesses. Breastfeed Med 5(3):113, 2010
Beres SB, Sylva GL, Sturdevant DE, et al: Genome-wide molecular dissection of serotype M3 group A
Streptococcus strains causing two epidemics of invasive infections. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
101:11833, 2004
Berg CJ, Harper MA, Atkinson SM, et al: Preventability of pregnancy-related deaths: results of a statewide review. Obstet Gynecol 106:1228, 2005

Boggess KA, Tita A, Jauk V, et al: Risk factors for postcesarean maternal infection in a trial of
extended-spectrum antibiotic prophylaxis. Obstet Gynecol 129(3):481, 2017
Bonet M, Ota E, Chibueze CE, et al: Antibiotic prophylaxis for episiotomy repair following vaginal birth.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 11:CD012136, 2017a
Bonet M, Ota E, Chibueze CE, et al: Routine antibiotic prophylaxis after normal vaginal birth for
reducing maternal infectious morbidity. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 11:CD012137, 2017b
Branch-Elliman W, Golen TH, Gold HS, et al: Risk factors for Staphylococcus aureus postpartum
breast abscess. Clin Infect Dis 54(1):71, 2012
Brown CE, Cunningham FG: Ovarian vein thrombosis: incidence of recurrent venous thromboembolism
and survival. Obstet Gynecol 131(4):740, 2018
Brown CE, Dunn DH, Harrell R, et al: Computed tomography for evaluation of puerperal infection. Surg
Gynecol Obstet 172:2, 1991
Brown CE, Stettler RW, Twickler D, et al: Puerperal septic pelvic thrombophlebitis: incidence and
response to heparin therapy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 181:143, 1999
Bruhin A, Ferreira F, Chariker M, et al: Systematic review and evidence based recommendations for the
use of negative pressure wound therapy in the open abdomen. Int J Surg 12(10)1105, 2014
Brumfield CG, Hauth JC, Andrews WW: Puerperal infection after cesarean delivery: evaluation of a
standardized protocol. Am J Obstet Gynecol 182:1147, 2000
Buppasiri P, Lumbiganon P, Thinkhamrop J, et al: Antibiotic prophylaxis for third- and fourth–degree
perineal tear during vaginal birth. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 10:CD005125, 2014
Caissutti C, Saccone G, Zullo F, et al: Vaginal cleansing before cesarean delivery: a systematic review
and meta-analysis. Obstet Gynecol 130(3):527, 2017
Callaghan WM, Creanga AA, Kuklina EV: Severe maternal morbidity among delivery and postpartum
hospitalizations in the United States. Obstet Gynecol 120:1029, 2012
Cape A, Tuomala RE, Taylor C, et al: Peripartum bacteremia in the era of group B streptococcus
prophylaxis. Obstet Gynecol 121(4):812, 2013
Carey JC, Klebanoff MA, Hauth JC, et al: Metronidazole to prevent preterm delivery in pregnant
women with asymptomatic bacterial vaginosis. N Engl J Med 342:534, 2000
Carter EB, Temming LA, Fowler S, et al: Evidence-based bundles and cesarean delivery surgical site
infections: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Obstet Gynecol 130(4):735, 2017
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Community-associated methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus infection among healthy newborns—Chicago and Los Angeles County,
2004. MMWR 55(12):329, 2006
Chaim W, Bashiri A, Bar-David J, et al: Prevalence and clinical significance of postpartum endometritis
and wound infection. Infect Dis Obstet Gynecol 8:77, 2000
Chaim W, Horowitz S, David JB, et al: Ureaplasma urealyticum in the development of postpartum
endometritis. Eur J Obstet Reprod Biol 15:145, 2003
Chelmow D, Rodriguez EJ, Sabatini MM: Suture closure of subcutaneous fat and wound disruption after
cesarean delivery: a meta-analysis. Obstet Gynecol 103:974, 2004
Chen KT, Huard RC, Della-Latta P, et al: Prevalence of methicillin-sensitive and methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus in pregnant women. Obstet Gynecol 108:482, 2006
Chong E, Winikoff B, Charles D, et al: Vaginal and rectal Clostridium sordellii and Clostridium
perfringens presence among women in the United States. Obstet Gynecol 127:360, 2016
Chongsomchai C, Lumbiganon P, Laopaiboon M: Prophylactic antibiotics for manual removal of retained
placenta in vaginal birth. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 10:CD004904, 2014

Creanga AA, Syverson C, Seed K, et al: Pregnancy-related mortality in the United States, 2011–2013.
Obstet Gynecol 130(2):366, 2017
Crepinsek MA, Crowe L, Michener K, et al: Interventions for preventing mastitis after childbirth.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 10:CD007239, 2012
Crum NF, Chun HM, Gaylord TG, et al: Group A streptococcal toxic shock syndrome developing in the
third trimester of pregnancy. Infect Dis Obstet Gynecol 10:209, 2002
Cunningham FG: Surgical instruments. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al (eds):
Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2017
Cunningham FG, Hauth JC, Strong JD, et al: Infectious morbidity following cesarean: comparison of two
treatment regimens. Obstet Gynecol 52:656, 1978
David M, Handa P, Castaldi M: Predictors of outcomes in managing breast abscesses—a large
retrospective single-center analysis. Breast J 24(5):755, 2018
Deguchi Y, Horiuchi Y, Shojima K, et al: Postpartum methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus toxic
shock syndrome caused by a perineal infection. Case Rep Obstet Gynecol 2018:2670179, 2018
Demey HE, Hautekeete MI, Buytaert P, et al: Mastitis and toxic shock syndrome. A case report. Acta
Obstet Gynecol Scand 68:87, 1989
Deneux-Tharaux C, Carmona E, Bouvier-Colle MH, et al: Postpartum maternal mortality and cesarean
delivery. Obstet Gynecol 108:541, 2006
DeNoble AE, Heine RP, Dotters-Katz SK: Chorioamnionitis and infectious complications after vaginal
delivery. Am J Perinatol 36(14):1437, 2019
DePalma RT, Cunningham FG, Leveno KJ, et al: Continuing investigation of women at high risk for
infection following cesarean delivery. Obstet Gynecol 60:53, 1982
Dillon SJ, Nelson DB, Spong CY, et al: Episiotomy: evolution of a common obstetric practice at a single
public hospital. Abstract No. 801, Am J Obstet Gynecol 220:S523, 2019
Ding ST, Gao YJ, Qin CX, et al: Granulomatous mastitis in multiparae during pregnancy and lactation:
observational study (STROBE compliant). Medicine (Baltimore) 100:e25912, 2021
DiZerega G, Yonekura L, Roy S, et al: A comparison of clindamycin-gentamicin and penicillin
gentamicin in the treatment of post–cesarean section endomyometritis. Am J Obstet Gynecol
134:238, 1979
Donders G, Greenhouse P, Donders F, et al: Genital tract GAS infection ISIDOG guidelines. J Clin Med
10:2043, 2021
Easter SR, Molina RL, Venkatesh KK, et al: Clinical risk factors associated with peripartum maternal
bacteremia. Obstet Gynecol 130(4):710, 2017
Echebiri NC, McDoom MM, Aalto MM, et al: Prophylactic use of negative pressure wound therapy
after cesarean delivery. Obstet Gynecol 125(2):299, 2015
Eke AC, Drnec S, Buras A, et al: Intrauterine cleaning after placental delivery at cesarean section: a
randomized controlled trial. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 32(2):236, 2019
Felder L, Paternostro A, Quist-Nelson J, et al: Implementation of vaginal cleansing prior to cesarean
delivery to decrease endometritis rates. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 32(12):1997, 2019
Fein AW, Wen T, D’Alton ME, et al: Risk factors and temporality for postpartum infection readmissions.
Abstract No. 618, Am J Obstet Gynecol 220:S409, 2019
Filker RS, Monif GR: Postpartum septicemia due to group G streptococci. Obstet Gynecol 53:28S, 1979
Fishel Bartal M, Sibai BM, Ben-Mayor Bashi T, et al: Abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan in
the evaluation of refractory puerperal fever: impact on management. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med
33(4):577, 2020

Freeman CM, Xia BT, Wilson GC, et al: Idiopathic granulomatous mastitis: a diagnostic and therapeutic
challenge. Am J Surg 214(4):701, 2017
Fujiwara Y, Endo S: A case of toxic shock syndrome secondary to mastitis caused by methicillinresistant Staphylococcus aureus. Kansenshogaku Zasshi 75:898, 2001
Gallup DG, Freedman MA, Meguiar RV, et al: Necrotizing fasciitis in gynecologic and obstetric patients:
a surgical emergency. Am J Obstet Gynecol 187(2)305, 2002
Geiss CS, Golshan M, Flaherty K, et al: Clinical experience with aspiration of breast abscesses based on
size and etiology at an academic medical center. J Clin Ultrasound 42(9):513, 2014
Gilstrap LC III, Cunningham FG: The bacterial pathogenesis of infection following cesarean section.
Obstet Gynecol 53:545, 1979
Goepfert AR, Guinn DA, Andrews WW, et al: Necrotizing fasciitis after cesarean section. Obstet
Gynecol 89:409, 1997
Goh T, Goh LG, Ang CH, et al: Early diagnosis of necrotizing fasciitis. Br J Surg 101(1):e119, 2014
Goldaber KG, Wendel PJ, McIntire DD, et al: Postpartum perineal morbidity after fourth degree
perineal repair. Am J Obstet Gynecol 168:489, 1993
Grobman WA, Bailit JL, Rice MM, et al: Racial and ethnic disparities in maternal morbidity and obstetric
care. Obstet Gynecol 125(6):1460, 2015
Guerinot GT, Gitomer SD, Sanko SR: Postpartum patient with toxic shock syndrome. Obstet Gynecol
59:43S, 1982
Gustafson LW, Blaakær Helming RB: Group A streptococci infection. A systematic clinical review
exemplified by cases from on obstetric department. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 215:33, 2017
Haas DM, Morgan S, Contreras K: Vaginal preparation with antiseptic solution before cesarean section
for preventing postoperative infections. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 1:CD007892, 2018
Hadiati DR, Hakimi M, Nurdiati DS, et al: Skin preparation for preventing infection following cesarean
section. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 10:CD007462, 2018
Hankins GD, Hauth JC, Gilstrap LC III, et al: Early repair of episiotomy dehiscence. Obstet Gynecol
75:48, 1990
Harper LM, Kilgore M, Szychowski JM, et al: Economic evaluation of adjunctive azithromycin
prophylaxis for cesarean delivery. Obstet Gynecol 130(2):328, 2017
Harris BS, Hopkins MK, Villers MS, et al: Efficacy of non-beta-lactam antibiotics for prevention of
cesarean delivery surgical site infections. AJP Rep 9(2):e167, 2019
Hauth JC, Gilstrap LC III, Ward SC, et al: Early repair of an external sphincter ani muscle and rectal
mucosal dehiscence. Obstet Gynecol 67:806, 1986
Hauth JC, Owen J, Davis RO: Transverse uterine incision closure: one versus two layers. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 167:1108, 1992
Herrera C, Meehan R, Podduturi V, et al: Maternal death due to Clostridium novyi in an injection drug
user. Obstet Gynecol 128(4):876, 2016
Heying R, van de Gevel J, Que YA, et al: Fibronectin-binding proteins and clumping factor A in
Staphylococcus aureus experimental endocarditis: FnBPA is sufficient to activate human
endothelial cells. Thromb Haemost 97:617, 2007
Hotchkiss RS, Karl IE: The pathophysiology and treatment of sepsis. N Engl J Med 348:2, 2003
Hussamy DJ, Wortman AC, McIntire DD, et al: A randomized trial of closed incision negative pressure
therapy in morbidly obese women undergoing cesarean delivery. [Abstract No. 45]. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 218:S35, 2018
Hussamy DJ, Wortman AC, McIntire DD, et al: Closed incision negative pressure therapy in morbidly
obese women undergoing cesarean delivery: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol 134:781,

2019
Hyldig N, Vinter CA, Kruse M, et al: Prophylactic incisional negative pressure wound therapy reduces
the risk of surgical site infection after caesarean section in obese women: a pragmatic randomised
clinical trial. BJOG 126(5):628, 2019
Ismail MA, Chandler AE, Beem ME: Chlamydial colonization of the cervix in pregnant adolescents. J
Reprod Med 30:549, 1985
Jacobs-Jokhan D, Hofmeyr G: Extra-abdominal versus intra-abdominal repair of the uterine incision at
caesarean section. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 4:CD000085, 2004
Jacobsson B, Pernevi P, Chidekel L, et al: Bacterial vaginosis in early pregnancy may predispose for
preterm birth and postpartum endometritis. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 81:1006, 2002
Jahanfar S, Ng CJ, Teng CL: Antibiotics for mastitis in breastfeeding women. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev 2:CD005458, 2013
Jaiyeoba O: Postoperative infections in obstetrics and gynecology. Clin Obstet Gynecol 55(4):904, 2012
Johnson O, Pouncey AL, Gardiner S, et al: A woman with spreading erythema after cesarean section.
BMJ 368:m445, 2020
Kadar N: Vindicating a traduced genius: Ignaz Philipp Semmelweis (1818–1865). Am J Obstet Gynecol
225:310, 2021
Kankuri E, Kurki T, Carlson P, et al: Incidence, treatment and outcome of peripartum sepsis. Acta
Obstet Gynecol Scand 82:730, 2003
Kawakita T, Iqbal SN, Overcash RT: Negative pressure wound therapy system in extremely obese
women after cesarean delivery compared with standard dressing. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med
34(4):634, 2021
Klebanoff MA, Carey JC, Hauth JC, et al: Failure of metronidazole to prevent preterm delivery among
pregnant women with asymptomatic Trichomonas vaginalis infection. N Engl J Med 345:487, 2001
Klevens RM, Morrison MA, Nadle J, et al: Invasive methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
infections in the United States. JAMA 298:1763, 2007
Klima DA, Snyder TE: Postpartum ovarian vein thrombosis. Obstet Gynecol 111:431, 2008
Knight M, Chiocchia V, Partlett C, et al: Prophylactic antibiotics in the prevention of infection after
operative vaginal delivery (ANODE): a multicentre randomised controlled trial. Lancet
393(10189):2395, 2019
Kvist LJ, Rydhstroem H: Factors related to breast abscess after delivery: a population-based study.
BJOG 112:1070, 2005
Laibl VR, Sheffield JS, Roberts S, et al: Clinical presentation of community-acquired methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 106:461, 2005
Lasley DS, Eblen A, Yancey MK, et al: The effect of placental removal method on the incidence of
postcesarean infections. Am J Obstet Gynecol 176(6):1250, 1997
Lee IW, Kang L, Hsu HP, et al: Puerperal mastitis requiring hospitalization during a nine-year period.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 203(4):332, 2010
Lenz CJ, Wysokinski WE, Henkin S, et al: Ovarian vein thrombosis: incidence of recurrent venous
thromboembolism and survival. Obstet Gynecol 130(5):1127, 2017
Leth RA, Uldbjerg N, Norgaard M, et al: Obesity, diabetes, and the risk of infections diagnosed in
hospital and post-discharge infections after cesarean section: a prospective cohort study. Acta
Obstet Gynecol Scand 90(5):501, 2011
Lewicky-Gaupp C, Leader-Cramer A, Johnson LL, et al: Wound complications after obstetric anal
sphincter injuries. Obstet Gynecol 125(5):1088, 2015

Lewis LS, Convery PA, Bolac CS, et al: Cost of care using prophylactic negative pressure wound
vacuum on closed laparotomy incisions. Gynecol Oncol 132(3):684, 2014
Liabsuetrakul T, Peeyananjarassri K: Mechanical dilatation of the cervix at non-labour caesarean
section for reducing postoperative morbidity. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 11:CD008019, 2018
Livingston JC, Llata E, Rinehart E, et al: Gentamicin and clindamycin therapy in postpartum
endometritis: the efficacy of daily dosing versus dosing every 8 hours. Am J Obstet Gynecol
188:149, 2003
Maberry MC, Gilstrap LC III, Bawdon RE, et al: Anaerobic coverage for intra-amnionic infection:
maternal and perinatal impact. Am J Perinatol 8:338, 1991
Mackeen AD, Berghella V, Larsen ML: Techniques and materials for skin closure in caesarean section.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 11:CD003577, 2012
Mackeen AD, Packard RE, Ota E, et al: Antibiotic regimens for postpartum endometritis. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 2:CD001067, 2015
Macones GA, Cleary KL, Parry S, et al: The timing of antibiotics at cesarean: a randomized controlled
trial. Am J Perinatol 29(4):273, 2012
Maharaj D: Puerperal pyrexia: a review. Part II: Obstet Gynecol Surv 62:400, 2007
Markwei MT, Babatunde I, Rathi N, et al: Preincision adjunctive prophylaxis for cesarean deliveries a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol May 5, 2021 [Epub ahead of print]
Marshall BR, Hepper JK, Zirbel CC: Sporadic puerperal mastitis—an infection that need not interrupt
lactation. JAMA 344:1377, 1975
Martic K, Vasilj O: Extremely large breast abscess in a breastfeeding mother. J Hum Lact 28(4):460,
2012
Matheson I, Aursnes I, Horgen M, et al: Bacteriological findings and clinical symptoms in relation to
clinical outcome in puerperal mastitis. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 67:723, 1988
McNeeley SG Jr, Hendrix SL, Bennett SM, et al: Synthetic graft placement in the treatment of fascial
dehiscence with necrosis and infection. Am J Obstet Gynecol 179:1430, 1998
Meaney-Delman D, Bartlett LA, Gravett MG, et al: Oral and intramuscular treatment options for early
postpartum endometritis in low-resource settings: a systematic review. Obstet Gynecol 125(4):789,
2015
Mediano P, Fernandez L, Rodriguez JM, et al: Case-control study of risk factors for infectious mastitis in
Spanish breastfeeding women. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth 14:195, 2014
Mohamed-Ahmed O, Hinshaw K, Knight M: Operative vaginal delivery and post-partum infection. Best
Pract Res Clin Obstet Gynaecol 56:93, 2019
Moulton LJ, Eric Jelovsek J, Lachiewicz M, et al: A model to predict risk of postpartum infection after
caesarean delivery. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 31(18):2409, 2018
Mouës CM, Heule F, Hovius SE: A review of topical negative pressure therapy in wound healing:
sufficient evidence? Am J Surg 201(4):544, 2011
Naeem M, Rahimnajjad MK, Rahimnajjad NA, et al: Comparison of incision and drainage against needle
aspiration for the treatment of breast abscess. Am Surg 78(11):1224, 2012
O’Higgins AC, Egan AF, Murphy OC, et al: A clinical review of maternal bacteremia. Int Gynaecol
Obstet 124(3):226, 2014
Okumura K, Schroff R, Campbell R, et al: Group A streptococcal puerperal sepsis with retroperitoneal
involvement developing in a late postpartum woman: case report. Am Surg 70:730, 2004
Olp RJ, Chamales IA, Schmiedecke SS: A case study of puerperal group A streptococcal infection
complicated by toxic shock syndrome. Am J Perinatol Rep 10:e1, 2020
Owen J, Andrews WW: Wound complications after cesarean section. Clin Obstet Gynecol 27:842, 1994

Owen J, Hauth JC: Episiotomy infection and dehiscence. In Gilstrap LC III, Faro S (eds): Infections in
Pregnancy. New York, Liss, 1990, p 61
Patani N, MacAskill F, Eshelby S, et al: Best-practice care pathway for improving management of
mastitis and breast abscess. Br J Surg 105(12):1615, 2018
Patel M, Kumar RA, Stamm AM, et al: USA300 genotype community-associated methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus as a cause of surgical site infection. J Clin Microbiol 45 (10):3431, 2007
Patel SS, Koelper NC, Srinivas SK, et al: Adverse maternal outcomes associated with uterine
extensions at the time of cesarean delivery. Am J Perinatol 36(8):785, 2019
Pierce SL, Bisson CM, Dubois ME, et al: Clinical effectiveness of adding azithromycin to antimicrobial
prophylaxis for cesarean delivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 225:335.e1, 2021
Poole GV Jr: Mechanical factors in abdominal wound closure: the prevention of fascial dehiscence.
Surgery 97(6):631, 1985
Que YA, Haefliger JA, Piroth L, et al: Fibrinogen and fibronectin binding cooperative for valve infection
and invasion in Staphylococcus aureus experimental endocarditis. J Exp Med 201:1627, 2005
Quyn AJ, Johnston C, Hall D, et al: The open abdomen and temporary abdominal closure systems—
historical evolution and systematic review. Colorectal Dis 14(8):e429, 2012
Ramin SM, Gilstrap LC III: Episiotomy and early repair of dehiscence. Clin Obstet Gynecol 37:816,
1994
Ramin SM, Ramus R, Little B, et al: Early repair of episiotomy dehiscence associated with infection.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 167:1104, 1992
Rimawi BH, Soper DE, Eschenbach DA: Group A streptococcal infections in obstetrics and
gynecology. Clin Obstet Gynecol 55(4):864, 2012
Robbie LA, Dummer S, Booth NA, et al: Plasminogen activator inhibitor 2 and urokinase-type
plasminogen activator in plasma and leucocytes in patients with severe sepsis. Br J Haematol
109:342, 2000
Rottenstreich A, Benenson S, Levin G, et al: Risk factors, clinical course and outcomes of pregnancyrelated group A streptococcal infections: retrospective 13-year cohort study. Clin Microbiol Infect
25(2):251.e1, 2019
Rouse DJ, Landon M, Leveno KJ, et al: The Maternal-Fetal Medicine Units cesarean registry:
chorioamnionitis at term and its duration—relationship to outcomes. Am J Obstet Gynecol 191:211,
2004
Schorge JO, Granter SR, Lerner LH, et al: Postpartum and vulvar necrotizing fasciitis: early clinical
diagnosis and histopathologic correlation. J Reprod Med 43:586, 1998
Schummer W, Schummer C: Two cases of delayed diagnosis of postpartal streptococcal toxic shock
syndrome. Infect Dis Obstet Gynecol 10:217, 2002
Semrau K, Kuhn L, Brooks DR, et al: Dynamics of breast milk HIV-1 RNA with unilateral mastitis or
abscess. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr 62(3):348, 2013
Shahabi S, Klein JP, Rinaudo PF: Primary psoas abscess complicating a normal vaginal delivery. Obstet
Gynecol 99:906, 2002
Sheffield JS: Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus in obstetrics. Am J Perinatol 30(2):125, 2013
Sherman D, Lurie S, Betzer M, et al: Uterine flora at cesarean and its relationship to postpartum
endometritis. Obstet Gynecol 94:787, 1999
Shinar S, Foulks Y, Amit S, et al: Clinical characteristics of and preventative strategies for peripartum
group A streptococcal infections. Obstet Gynecol 127(2):227, 2016
Siriwachirachai T, Sangkomkamhang US, Lumbiganon P, et al: Antibiotics for meconium-stained
amniotic fluid in labour for preventing maternal and neonatal infections. Cochrane Database Syst

Rev 12:CD007772, 2014
Smaill FM, Grivell RM: Antibiotic prophylaxis versus no prophylaxis for preventing infection after
cesarean section. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 10:CD007482, 2014
Smid MC, Dotters-Katz SK, Grace M, et al: Prophylactic negative pressure wound therapy for obese
women after cesarean delivery: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Obstet Gynecol 130(5):969,
2017
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine (SMFM), Plante LA, Pacheco LD, et al: SMFM Consult Series
#47: sepsis during pregnancy and the puerperium. Am J Obstet Gynecol 220(4):B2, 2019
Stafford I, Hernandez J, Laibl V, et al: Community-acquired methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus
aureus among patients with puerperal mastitis requiring hospitalization. Obstet Gynecol 112(3):533,
2008
Stehman FB: Infections and inflammations of the breast. In Hindle WH (ed): Breast Disease for
Gynecologists. Norwalk, Appleton & Lange, 1990, p 151
Stock L, Basham E, Gossett DR, et al: Factors associated with wound complications in women with
obstetric and sphincter injuries (OASIS). Am J Obstet Gynecol 208(4):327.e1, 2013
Subramaniam A, Jauk VC, Figueroa D, et al: Risk factors for wound disruption following cesarean
delivery. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 27(12):1237, 2014
Suffredini AF, Fromm RE, Parker MM, et al: The cardiovascular response of normal humans to the
administration of endotoxin. N Engl J Med 321(5):280, 1989
Sun J, Ding M, Liu J, et al: Prophylactic administration of cefazolin prior to skin incision versus
antibiotics at cord clamping in preventing postcesarean infectious morbidity: a systematic review and
meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Gynecol Obstet Invest 75(3):175, 2013
Swank ML, Wing DA, Nicolau DP, et al: Increased 3-gram cefazolin dosing for cesarean delivery
prophylaxis in obese women. Am J Obstet Gynecol 213(3):415.e1, 2015
Swanson A, Lau KK, Kornman T, et al: Primary psoas muscle abscess in pregnancy. Aust N Z J
Obstet Gynaecol 48(6):607, 2008
Swartz MN: Cellulitis. N Engl J Med 350:904, 2004
Tita A, Szychowski J, Boggess K, et al: Adjunctive azithromycin prophylaxis for cesarean delivery. N
Engl J Med 375(13):1231, 2016
Thomsen AC, Espersen T, Maigaard S: Course and treatment of milk stasis, noninfectious inflammation
of the breast, and infectious mastitis in nursing women. Am J Obstet Gynecol 149:492, 1984
Treszezamsky AD, Feldman D, Sarabanchong VO: Concurrent postpartum uterine and abdominal wall
dehiscence and Streptococcus anginosus infection. Obstet Gynecol 118(2):449, 2011
Tulandi T, Al-Jaroudi D: Nonclosure of peritoneum: a reappraisal. Am J Obstet Gynecol 189:609, 2003
Tuuli M: Prophylactic negative pressure wound therapy at caesarean: are we there yet? BJOG
126(5):635, 2019
Tuuli MG, Liu J, Stout MJ, et al: A randomized trial comparing skin antiseptic agents at cesarean
delivery. N Engl J Med 374(7):647, 2016
Tuuli MG, Rampersad RM, Carbone JF, et al: Staples compared with subcuticular suture for skin closure
after cesarean delivery: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Obstet Gynecol 117(3):682, 2011
Udagawa H, Oshio Y, Shimizu Y: Serious group A streptococcal infection around delivery. Obstet
Gynecol 94:153, 1999
Uygur D, Yesildaglar N, Kis S, et al: Early repair of episiotomy dehiscence. Aust N Z J Obstet
Gynaecol 44:244, 2004
Wang SS, Shum D, Kennedy A: Imaging of postpartum/peripartum complications. Radiol Clin North Am
58:431, 2020

Ward E, Duff P: A comparison of 3 antibiotic regimens for prevention of postcesarean endometritis: an
historical cohort study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 214(6):751.e1, 2016
Watts DH, Krohn MA, Hillier SL, et al: Bacterial vaginosis as a risk factor for post-cesarean
endometritis. Obstet Gynecol 75:52, 1990
Wechter ME, Pearlman MD, Hartmann KE: Reclosure of the disrupted laparotomy wound. A
systematic review. Obstet Gynecol 106:376, 2005
Wetchler SJ, Dunn LJ: Ovarian abscess. Report of a case and a review of the literature. Obstet
Gynecol Surv 40:476, 1985
Witlin AG, Sibai BM: Postpartum ovarian vein thrombosis after vaginal delivery: a report of 11 cases.
Obstet Gynecol 85:775, 1995
Worley KC: Postoperative complications. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al (eds):
Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2017
Wouterlood MA, Malhame I, Levesque, K, et al: Pregnancy-associated pelvic vein thrombosis: insights
from a multicenter case series. J Thromb Haemost 19:1926, 2021
Wu JM, Turashvili G: Cystic neutrophilic granulomatous mastitis: an update. J Clin Pathol 73(8):445,
2020
Yu L, Kronen RJ, Simon LE, et al: Prophylactic negative-pressure wound therapy after cesarean is
associated with reduced risk of surgical site infection: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 218(2):200.e1, 2018

CHAPTER 38

Contraception

INTRAUTERINE DEVICES
PROGESTIN-ONLY CONTRACEPTIVES
COMBINATION HORMONAL CONTRACEPTIVES
BARRIER METHODS
FERTILITY AWARENESS-BASED METHODS
SPERMICIDES
EMERGENCY CONTRACEPTION
REFERENCES
The puerperium offers an excellent opportunity to provide effective
contraception. For mothers who are nursing exclusively, ovulation during the
first 10 weeks after delivery is unlikely. Nursing, however, is not a reliable
method of family planning for women whose infants breastfeed only during
the day. Moreover, waiting for first menses involves a risk of pregnancy,
because ovulation usually antedates menstruation. Certainly, after the first
menses, contraception is essential unless the woman desires pregnancy.
Nearly half of all pregnancies each year in the United States are
unintended (Finer, 2016). These may follow contraceptive method failure or
stem from lack of contraceptive use. For those seeking contraception,
effective options are available (Table 38-1). Among these, estimated failure
rates of perfect and typical use during the first year differ widely (Trussell,

2018). Efficacy tiers reflect these failure rates, and implants and intrauterine
devices (IUDs) are found in the top tier (Steiner, 2006). They effectively
drop unintended pregnancy rates and are considered long-acting reversible
contraception (LARC). Clinicians provide counseling on all options and
encourage LARC for appropriate candidates (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019d).
TABLE 38-1. Contraceptive Failure Rates of Reversible Methods During
the First Year and Use Ratesa

No contraceptive method is completely without side effects, but
contraception usually poses less risk than pregnancy. However, some
disorders or medications can raise the risks of certain contraceptives. The
World Health Organization (2015) has provided guidelines for the use of
effective reversible contraceptive methods by women with various health
conditions. Individual countries have subsequently modified these guidelines.
The United States Medical Eligibility Criteria (US MEC) was updated in
2016 by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and is available at
their website (Curtis, 2016b).
In the US MEC, reversible contraceptive methods are organized into six
groups: levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine system (LNG-IUS), copper
intrauterine devices (Cu-IUDs), implants, depot medroxyprogesterone
acetate (DMPA), progestin-only pills (POPs), and combination hormonal
contraceptives (CHCs). This last group includes combination oral
contraceptives (COCs), rings, and patches. For a given health condition, each
method is categorized 1 through 4. The score describes the safety profile for
a typical woman with that condition: (1) no restriction of method use, (2)
method advantages outweigh risks, (3) method risks outweigh advantages,
and (4) method poses an unacceptable health risk.
Alternatively, depending on the underlying disorder or patient desire,
male or female sterilization may be a preferred or recommended permanent

contraceptive method. These options are discussed in Chapter 39.

INTRAUTERINE DEVICES
The five IUDs currently approved for use in the United States are chemically
active and continually elute either copper or a progestin. All have a flexible,
T-shaped, polyethylene frame compounded with barium to render them
radiopaque. The progestin-eluting devices are similarly shaped, but each
differs by size, string color, longevity, and presence or absence of a silver
band at the junction of the stem and arms (Table 38-2). Among these,
smaller-sized devices are thought to better fit a nulliparous uterus (GemzellDanielsson, 2012). In contrast, the copper device, the T380A IUD named
ParaGard, contains a thin copper strand wound around its stem and a copper
bracelet on each arm.
TABLE 38-2. Properties of Intrauterine Devices

■ Contraceptive Action
The contraceptive mechanism of IUDs is not precisely defined, but
prevention of fertilization is now favored. Within the uterus, an intense local
endometrial inflammatory response is induced, especially by the Cu-IUD.
Inflammatory fluid fills the uterine cavity and fallopian tubes to decrease
sperm and egg viability (Ortiz, 2007). Also, in the unlikely event that
fertilization does occur, the same inflammatory actions are directed against
the blastocyst. With the LNG-IUS, progestin release atrophies the
endometrium to hinder normal implantation and creates scant viscous
cervical mucus to obstruct sperm motility (Apter, 2014; Silverberg, 1986).

The above effects are considered primary because ovulation inhibition is
inconsistent with the LNG-IUS and lacking with the Cu-IUD (Nilsson, 1984).

■ Method-specific Adverse Effects
Ectopic Pregnancy
In the past, IUDs were perceived to increase the risk of ectopic pregnancy,
but this has since been clarified. Specifically, IUDs provide effective
contraception and lower the absolute number of ectopic pregnancies by half
compared with the rate in noncontracepting women (World Health
Organization, 1985). But, the IUD mechanisms of action are more effective in
preventing intrauterine implantation. Thus, if an IUD fails, a higher
proportion of pregnancies are likely to be ectopic (Furlong, 2002; Teal,
2019).

Lost Device
Expulsion of an IUD from the uterus is most common during the first month.
Thus, women are examined approximately 4 to 6 weeks following IUD
insertion, usually after menses, to identify the tails trailing from the cervix.
Following this, a woman is instructed to palpate the strings each month after
menses. Regardless of IUD type, the cumulative 3-year expulsion rate
approximates 10 percent following nonpuerperal insertion (Madden, 2014;
Simonatto, 2016).
If the tail of an IUD cannot be visualized, the device may have been
expelled, may have perforated the uterus, or may be malpositioned.
Alternatively, the device may be normally positioned with its tail folded
within the endocervical canal or uterine cavity. To investigate, after
excluding pregnancy, a cytological brush can be twirled within the
endocervical canal to entangle the strings and bring them gently into the
vagina. If unsuccessful, the uterine cavity is probed gently with a Randall
stone clamp or with a specialized rod with a terminal hook to retrieve the
strings.
One should not assume that a device has been expelled unless it was
seen. Thus, if tails are not visible and the device is not felt by gentle probing
of the uterine cavity, transvaginal sonography (TVS) can be used to ascertain
if the device lies within the uterus. Although traditional TVS will document

IUD position adequately in most cases, three-dimensional TVS offers
improved views (Moschos, 2011). If sonography is inconclusive or if no
device is seen, a plain radiograph of the abdominopelvis is taken. Computed
tomography (CT) scanning or magnetic resonance (MR) imaging is an
alternative depending on coexisting pregnancy and study access. MR imaging
at 1.5 or 3 Tesla with an IUD in place is safe (Ciet, 2015).

Perforation
During sounding or IUD insertion, the uterus may be perforated, which is
identified by the tool traveling farther than expected based on initial
bimanual uterine examination. Rates approximate 1 case per 1000 insertions,
and risks include puerperal insertion and breastfeeding (Barnett, 2017;
Kaislasuo, 2012).
With acute perforation, the fundus is the more common site, and bleeding
is often minimal due to myometrial contraction around the puncture site. If no
brisk bleeding is noted from the os following removal of the wounding tool,
patient observation alone is reasonable. Rarely, lateral perforations may
lacerate the uterine artery, and subsequent heavy bleeding prompts
laparoscopy or laparotomy for control.
With occult perforation, a device can penetrate the myometrium to
varying degrees. Abdominal pain, uterine bleeding, or missing strings are
clues, and imaging described in the last section is a primary step (Kaislasuo,
2013). A device with an arm partially embedded can sometimes be removed
transcervically with steady traction. Otherwise, IUDs with a mainly
intrauterine location are usually removed hysteroscopically. Devices that
have nearly or completely perforated through the uterine wall are more easily
extracted laparoscopically. Devices often embed on posterior cul-de-sac
structures and omentum, but bowel and bladder perforations are possible
(Şengül, 2014; Zeino, 2011).

Menstrual Changes
Dysmenorrhea and irregular bleeding can complicate IUD use. These can be
treated with some degree of success by nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs) or tranexamic acid, which is an antifibrinolytic (Friedlander,
2015). Of IUD types, heavy bleeding more often complicates Cu-IUD use and
may cause iron-deficiency anemia, for which oral iron salts are given. With

the LNG-IUS, irregular spotting for up to 6 months after placement often
gives way to progressive amenorrhea, which is reported by approximately
10 percent of women after year 1 and 35 percent after 3 years (Goldthwaite,
2019). This is frequently associated with improved dysmenorrhea.

Infection
The risk of upper genital tract device-related infection is greatest during the
first 3 weeks following IUD insertion (Farley, 1992; Turok, 2016). Pathogens
include Neisseria gonorrhoeae, Chlamydia trachomatis, and vaginal flora.
Women at risk for sexually transmitted diseases (STDs) should be screened
either before or at the time of IUD insertion (Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, 2015). That said, device insertion need not be delayed while
awaiting STD or Pap test results in asymptomatic women (Birgisson, 2015).
If these bacteria are subsequently found, the IUD may remain and treatment
may be prescribed. Routine antimicrobial prophylaxis before insertion is not
recommended (Grimes, 2012). Bacterial endocarditis prophylaxis is not
needed with insertion (Nishimura, 2017).
After the first month, infection risk is not elevated in IUD users who
would otherwise be at low risk of STDs. Correspondingly, IUDs cause little,
if any, increase in infertility rates in these low-risk patients (Hubacher,
2001). The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020a)
recommends that women at low risk for STDs, including adolescents, be
considered good candidates for IUDs. The IUD is also safe and effective in
women with immunosuppression, including human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV) infection (Tepper, 2016a). Moreover, IUD use does not appear to raise
HIV acquisition rates (Curtis, 2020).
If infection does develop, it may take several forms and typically
requires broad-spectrum antibiotics. Pelvic inflammatory disease (PID)
without abscess is treated with antibiotics. There are theoretical concerns
that a coexistent IUD may worsen the infection or delay resolution. A
provider may choose to remove an IUD in this setting, although growing
evidence supports allowing device retention during treatment in those with
mild or moderate PID (Curtis, 2016a; Tepper, 2013). If infection fails to
improve during 48 to 72 hours of treatment, the device is removed.
Tuboovarian abscess can complicate PID and is treated aggressively with
intravenous broad-spectrum antibiotics and IUD removal. Last, septic
abortion mandates immediate uterine evacuation and antibiotics.

Actinomyces israelii is a gram-positive, slow-growing, anaerobic,
indigenous vaginal bacterium. It is frequently identified in the vaginal flora
or on the Pap smears of IUD users (Curtis, 1981; Kim, 2014). If found, an
asymptomatic woman may retain her IUD and does not require antibiotics
(Lippes, 1999; Westhoff, 2007a). However, with infection in a woman who
harbors Actinomyces species, the device is removed and antibiotics with
gram-positive coverage are given. Early findings with infection include
fever, weight loss, abdominal pain, and abnormal uterine bleeding or
discharge.

Pregnancy with an IUD
For women who become pregnant despite an IUD, ectopic pregnancy and
pelvic infection each must be excluded. Pregnant women with a retained IUD
and infection are treated with broad-spectrum antibiotics and prompt uterine
evacuation.
For those with intrauterine pregnancy without infection, the IUD tail can
be grasped, and the IUD removed by gentle outward traction. This action
reduces rates of subsequent abortion, chorioamnionitis, and preterm birth
(Brahmi, 2012). Specifically, in one cohort, a 54-percent abortion rate and
17-percent preterm delivery rate was noted if the device remained in situ.
More favorably, rates of 25 percent and 4 percent, respectively, resulted
from prompt Cu-IUD removal (Tatum, 1976). Few data guide management
with the LNG-IUS, and most practice extrapolates from copper devices.
If the tail is not visible, attempts to locate and remove the device may
result in abortion. Some case reports and small series describe sonography
or hysteroscopy to assist difficult device removals, but this is not our
practice (Pérez-Medina, 2014; Schiesser, 2004). In women who give birth
with a device in place, appropriate steps should be taken at delivery to
identify and remove the IUD.

■ Intrauterine Device Insertion
Timing
Before insertion, IUD contraindications are sought (Table 38-3). Candidates
are counseled, and written consent obtained.

TABLE 38-3. Contraindications to IUD Use

To reduce expulsion rates, IUD insertion traditionally has followed
complete uterine involution and is termed interval placement. Instead,
immediately following miscarriage, surgical abortion, or delivery, an IUD
may be inserted in the absence of overt infection (Roe, 2019; Whitaker,
2018). Also, early insertion 1 week after mifepristone and completed
medical abortion has been described (Sääv, 2012; Shimoni, 2011).
Compared with interval insertion, the IUD expulsion rate is slightly higher
with immediate placement, defined as the first 10 minutes after placenta
delivery. The highest rates are with early placement, defined as later than 10
minutes but within the first month postpartum (Jatlaoui, 2018). The higher US
MEC scores seen in Table 38-4 reflect these early-placement expulsion
risks. However, the number of women in immediate-placement groups who
ultimately receive and retain an IUD is greater than in groups scheduled for
interval placement, because some fail to return for insertion (Bednarek,
2011; Chen, 2010).
TABLE 38-4. U.S. Medical Eligibility Criteria Category of Contraceptive
Methods Related to Breastfeeding and Time After Delivery

Postpregnancy Insertion Techniques
With immediate insertion, techniques depend on uterine size. After firsttrimester evacuation, the IUD can be placed using the manufacturer’s
standard instructions. If the uterine cavity is larger, the IUD can be placed
using ring forceps with sonographic guidance (Fox, 2011).

Immediately following vaginal or cesarean delivery, an IUD can be
placed by a hand, by its inserter tube, or by ring forceps (Levi, 2015). The
arms of the IUD need not be folded into the inserter tube prior to insertion.
During cesarean delivery placement, the hand or inserter travels through the
unsutured hysterotomy opening to deposit the device at the fundus (Fig. 381). A second hand cupping the outer fundus can provide back pressure and
stabilize the uterus during insertion. Strings are gently directed but not pulled
toward the cervix.

FIGURE 38-1 A. Intrauterine device (IUD) insertion at cesarean delivery. The device inserter guides
the device to the uterine fundus. A hand at the fundus can provide back pressure to stabilize the uterus
during insertion. B. IUD insertion after vaginal delivery. Ring forceps direct the device to the uterine
fundus. Back pressure against the fundus by an abdominal hand can help guide positioning. (Reproduced
with permission from Stuart GS, Hoffman BL: Puerperal sterilization. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL,
Gilstrap LC III, et al (eds): Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York,
McGraw Hill; 2017.)

For instrumented insertion following vaginal delivery, the clinician
resterilizes the vulva and changes gloves after placental delivery but before
perineal repairs. The anterior lip of the floppy cervix is held with ring
forceps. A second ring forceps gently grasps the IUD stem, guides it up into
the uterine cavity, and deposits it at the fundus. During forceps removal, the
jaws remain open to avoid ensnaring the strings. For manual insertion
following vaginal delivery, the provider holds the IUD between fingers to
deposit the device. In either case, back pressure against the fundus by an
abdominal hand can guide fundal positioning (Stuart, 2017).

Interval Insertion Technique
For placement not related to pregnancy, insertion near the end of normal
menstruation, when the cervix is usually softer and somewhat more dilated,
may be easier and also helps exclude early pregnancy. However, for the

woman who is sure she is not pregnant and does not want to be pregnant,
insertion is done at any time.
To ease insertional pain, applying lidocaine-prilocaine cream locally or
placing paracervical blockade can be helpful (Akers, 2017; Samy, 2019).
Bimanual pelvic examination delineates uterine position and size.
Abnormalities are evaluated, as they may contraindicate insertion.
Mucopurulent cervicitis or significant vaginitis is appropriately treated and
resolved before IUD insertion.
The ectocervix is cleansed with an antiseptic solution, and sterile
instruments are used. A tenaculum is placed on the cervical lip, and the
endocervical canal and uterine cavity are straightened by applying gentle
outward traction. A uterine sound is guided into the cavity to identify its
direction and depth. Specific steps of Cu-IUD and LNG-IUS insertions are
outlined in their respective package inserts.
Following insertion, only the threads should be visible trailing from the
cervix. These are trimmed to allow 3 to 4 cm to protrude into the vagina, and
their length is recorded. An oral NSAID can be used for cramping after
insertion (Ngo, 2015).
If improper device positioning is suspected, placement should be
confirmed, using sonography if necessary. If the IUD is not positioned
completely within the uterus, it is removed and replaced with a new device.
An expelled or partially expelled device should not be reinserted.

PROGESTIN-ONLY CONTRACEPTIVES
■ Actions and Side Effects
Progestin-only contraceptives include implants, injectables, and pills. These
suppress luteinizing hormone (LH) to block ovulation, cervical mucus
thickens to retard sperm passage, and atrophy renders the endometrium
unfavorable for implantation. Fertility is restored rapidly following cessation
except for DMPA, described later (Mansour, 2011).
After placenta delivery, progesterone withdrawal may contribute to
lactogenesis, and early progestin use theoretically could hinder breastmilk
establishment. Although studies support the safety of early puerperal use of
progestins, this theoretical risk is still reflected in their higher US MEC
score (see Table 38-4) (Carmo, 2017; Phillips, 2016).

For all progestin-only methods, irregular uterine bleeding is the most
frequent adverse event prompting discontinuation. Often, counseling and
reassurance is sufficient. In others, troublesome bleeding may be improved
by combining the progestin method with a 2-week course of estrogen or with
a short course of NSAIDs (Abdel-Aleem, 2013). A few cycles of COCs
combined with DMPA or an implant is another option. Fortunately, with
prolonged use, progestins induce endometrial atrophy, which can lead to
sustained amenorrhea. For the informed patient, this is often an advantage.
Iron-deficiency anemia is also less likely.
Most progestin-only contraceptive methods do not significantly affect
lipid metabolism, glucose levels, hemostatic factors, liver function, thyroid
function, or blood pressure (Dorflinger, 2002). However, the increased lowdensity lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol and decreased high-density lipoprotein
(HDL) cholesterol levels seen with DMPA are less desirable for women
with cardiovascular disease risks (Kongsayreepong, 1993).
Risks for genital tract, liver, or breast neoplasia are not increased with
progestin-only methods (Samson, 2016; Wilailak, 2012; World Health
Organization, 1991a,b, 1992). Weight gain and bone fracture are not
prominent side effects of this contraceptive group, except for DMPA,
discussed later (Lopez, 2012, 2013). Functional ovarian cysts are seen more
often in women using progestin-only agents, although intervention is not
usually required (European Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology,
2001). Last, concern for a higher depression rate is not supported by recent
studies (Skovlund, 2016; Worly, 2018).

■ Progestin Contraindications
Current pregnancy, breast cancer, acute liver disease, liver tumors, and
undiagnosed abnormal genital bleeding are absolute contraindications. For
Nexplanon and DMPA, their manufacturers also add current or past history of
thromboembolic disorders (Merck, 2019; Pfizer, 2017). However, for
women with these disorders, the US MEC considers progestin-containing
methods category 2 (Curtis, 2016b).

■ Progestin Implants

These thin, pliable, progestin-containing cylinders can be implanted in the
upper arm to release contraceptive hormone over several years. Implants are
an effective, top-tier method (Mommers, 2012; Sivin, 1998; Steiner, 2010).
These systems are placed subdermally on the inner arm approximately 8
cm from the elbow. Implants vary in their insertion technique, and
manufacturer instructions should be consulted. After their expiration date,
implants are removed, and may be replaced at the same site or in the
opposite arm.
Nexplanon is a single-rod etonogestrel implant that releases at least 30
µg of hormone daily and may be used for 3 years. The inserter design assists
with subdermal positioning and averting deeper placement. Nexplanon
replaced Implanon, which is still approved by the Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) but no longer distributed by the manufacturer.
Levonorgestrel implants are two-rod systems available outside the
United States and contain a total LNG dose of 150 mg. Jadelle provides
contraception for 5 years. It is approved by the FDA but not marketed in the
United States. Sino-implant II provides 3 years of contraception (Steiner,
2019).

Method-specific Adverse Effects
In addition to the hormonal side effects listed earlier, the implants themselves
can cause adverse events. These complicate approximately 1 percent of
implant insertions and 5 percent of removals (Creinin, 2017; Reed, 2019). Of
serious events, branches of the medial antebrachial cutaneous nerve and
median nerve can be injured during an implant insertion that is too deep or
during exploration for implant removal (Laumonerie, 2018). Thus, implants
found deep in muscle or near neurovascular structures are best removed by
surgeons with a clear understanding of upper arm anatomy (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019a).
Nonpalpable devices are not uncommon and require imaging for
localization prior to attempted removal. Nexplanon is radiopaque and can be
imaged by two-dimensional x-ray views. Implanon is not radiopaque, and
sonography using a 10- to 15-MHz linear array transducer or MR imaging is
needed (Correia, 2012; Shulman, 2006). Rarely, an implant can migrate to
distant sites such as the lung (Kang, 2017). If imaging fails to locate an
implant, etonogestrel blood levels can help verify that the implant is indeed

in situ. This assay must be coordinated with the manufacturer (877-8884231).

Implant Insertion
The etonogestrel implant is ideally inserted within 5 days of menses onset.
With LNG-releasing implants, contraception is established within 24 hours if
inserted within the first 7 days of the menstrual cycle. For transitioning
methods, an implant is placed on the day of the first placebo COC pill; on the
day that the next DMPA injection would be due; or within 24 hours of the last
POP (Merck, 2019). In women certain that they are not pregnant, insertion at
other times of the cycle is followed by an additional method that serves as a
back-up method for 7 days. Postabortion or postpartum, an implant may be
inserted before discharge home (Madden, 2012; Sothornwit, 2017).
For insertion, the supine patient positions her nondominant arm against
the bed so that the arm is abducted and the elbow is flexed. With a sterile
pen, the insertion site is marked 8 to 10 cm proximal to the humerus’ medial
condyle and 3 to 5 cm posterior to the groove between biceps and triceps
muscles (Iwanaga, 2019). A second mark is placed 4 cm proximal to the first
and serves as a guide for the insertion path along the arm’s long axis. The
Nexplanon is inserted using sterile technique. The area is cleansed
aseptically, and a 1-percent lidocaine anesthetic track is injected beneath the
skin along the planned insertion path. The implant is then placed as shown in
Figure 38-2. After placement, both patient and provider should palpate and
identify both ends of the 4-cm implant. To minimize bruising at the site, a
pressure bandage is created around the arm and is removed the following
day.

FIGURE 38-2 Nexplanon insertion. A sterile pen marks the insertion site, which is 8 to 10 cm proximal
to the medial humeral condyle. A second mark is placed 4 cm proximally along the arm’s long axis. The
area is cleaned aseptically, and a 1-percent lidocaine anesthetic track is injected along the planned

insertion path. A. The insertion device is grasped at its gripper bubbles found on either side, and the
needle cap is removed outward. The device can be seen within the needle bore. The needle bevel then
pierces the skin at a 30-degree angle. B. Once the complete bevel is subcutaneous, the needle is quickly
angled downward to lie horizontally. C. Importantly, the skin is tented upward by the needle as the
needle is slowly advanced horizontally and subdermally. D. Once the needle is completely inserted, the
lever on the top of the device is pulled backward toward the operator. This retracts the needle and
thereby deposits the implant. The device is then lifted away from the skin. After placement, both patient
and operator should palpate the 4-cm implant.

With implant extraction, the removal site is first cleansed with antiseptic.
The proximal end of the implant is depressed with a finger to allow the distal
end to lift up toward the skin. After anesthetizing the skin over this bulge, the
skin is incised 2 mm toward the elbow along the arm’s long axis. The
implant’s proximal butt is then pushed toward this incision. Once visible, the
implant’s distal end is grasped with a hemostat and removed. Superficial
adhesions surrounding an implant are common and are dissected away with
hemostat tips.

■ Injectable Progestin Contraceptives
DMPA, 150 mg every 3 months, and norethisterone enanthate, 200 mg every
2 months, are two intramuscular injectable progestin-only contraceptives
used worldwide. Of the two, DMPA is available in the United States and
marketed as Depo-Provera. DMPA is injected into the deltoid or gluteus
muscle, but massage is avoided to ensure that the drug is released slowly. A
subcutaneous version, depo-subQ provera 104, is injected into the
subcutaneous tissue of the anterior thigh or abdomen every 3 months. This
form may be self-administered (Curtis, 2021).
Initial injection is given within the first 5 days following menses onset.
Serum levels sufficient for contraception are present by 24 hours. Thus, no
additional contraceptive method is required for initiation within this
window. Limited data support a quick start, or initiation of DMPA
regardless of cycle day. If so implemented, investigators recommend an
initial negative pregnancy test result before injection, a supplemental
contraceptive method during the 7 days following injection, and a second
pregnancy test after 3 to 6 weeks to identify an early pregnancy (Sneed,
2005). Conceptions during DMPA use do not have higher fetal anomaly rates
(Katz, 1985).

Method-specific Adverse Effects
Unique to DMPA, prolonged anovulation can follow discontinuation and
results in delayed fertility resumption (Paulen, 2009). After injections are
stopped, a fourth of patients do not resume regular menses for up to 1 year
(Gardner, 1970). Thus, DMPA may be less ideal for women who plan to use
birth control only briefly before attempting conception.
As with other progestins, DMPA is not associated with cardiovascular
events or stroke in otherwise healthy women. However, in those with severe
hypertension, a higher risk of stroke has been found in DMPA users (World
Health Organization, 1998). The US MEC authors express concerns
regarding DMPA’s hypoestrogenic effects and reduced HDL levels for
women with vascular disease or multiple cardiovascular disease risks
(Curtis, 2016b).
Weight gain is generally attributed to DMPA, and ranges from 1 to 3 kg in
the first year (Dianat, 2019). In long-term users, bone density loss is also
greater than in nonusers (Petitti, 2000; Scholes, 1999). It is somewhat
reassuring that bone loss appears to slowly reverse after cessation (Clark,
2006; Scholes, 2002). In 2004, the FDA added a black box warning to
DMPA labeling, which notes that this concern is probably most relevant for
adolescents, who are building bone mass, and perimenopausal women, who
will soon have increased bone loss during menopause. Despite this, DMPA
should not be restricted in those high-risk groups (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019b).

■ Progestin-only Pills
Also called mini-pills, this group contains norethindrone-only, desogestrelonly, and drospirenone-only pills. Of these, each norethindrone-only pill
provides 0.35 mg of hormone and is taken daily and continuously. This
specific drug does not reliably inhibit ovulation. Efficacy stems from
cervical mucus thickening and endometrial atrophy. Because mucus changes
are not sustained, these pills are best taken at the same time each day. If the
pill is taken even 3 hours late (missed-pill window), a back-up form of
contraception is used for the next 48 hours.
In contrast, the drospirenone-only pill marketed as Slynd delivers 4 mg
of hormone and is taken for 24 consecutive days out of a 28-day cycle.

Progestin withdrawal during the last 4 days aims to minimize irregular
bleeding (Archer, 2015). Both drospirenone and desogestrel pills alter
mucus and endometrium plus reliably inhibit ovulation. Slynd offers a 24hour missed-pill window, which mirrors that of COC pills (Duijkers, 2016).
Drospirenone is structurally similar to spironolactone. It displays
antiandrogenic activity, provides an antialdosterone action to minimize water
retention, and has antimineralocorticoid properties that may, in theory, cause
potassium retention and hyperkalemia (Krattenmacher, 2000). Thus,
contraindications are renal or adrenal insufficiency in addition to traditional
progestin contraindications, listed earlier (p. 669). Serum potassium level
monitoring is recommended in the first month for patients chronically treated
with any drug associated with potassium retention. These include NSAIDs,
angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, angiotensin II antagonists,
heparin, aldosterone antagonists, and potassium-sparing diuretics.
Last, desogestrel-only pills contain 0.075 mg of hormone and are used
daily and continuously. Its missed-pill window is 12 hours. These are not
available in the United States.

COMBINATION HORMONAL CONTRACEPTIVES
■ Mechanism of Action
The most important contraceptive effect of both the estrogen and progestin
components of CHCs is suppression of hypothalamic gonadotropin-releasing
factors to inhibit ovulation. The progestin also thickens cervical mucus to
retard sperm passage and renders the endometrium unfavorable for
implantation. Estrogen stabilizes the endometrium, which prevents
intermenstrual bleeding—also known as breakthrough bleeding. This benefit
is termed cycle control. The net effect is an extremely effective yet highly
reversible contraceptive method.

■ Combination Oral Contraceptive Pills
Composition
COCs are marketed in various estrogen and progestin combinations (Table
38-5). Ethinyl estradiol is the most common estrogen present in formulations

in the United States. Less frequently, mestranol, estetrol, or estradiol valerate
is used. Unwanted effects most often attributed to the estrogen component are
breast tenderness, weight gain, nausea, and headache.
TABLE 38-5. Estrogen and Progestins Used in FDA-Approved
Combination Oral Contraceptive Pills

COCs contain one of several progestins that are structurally related to
progesterone, testosterone, or spironolactone. Thus, these progestins bind
variably to progesterone, androgen, glucocorticoid, and mineralocorticoid
receptors. These affinities explain many pill-related side effects and are
often used to compare one progestin with another. However, the advantage of
one progestin over another is less apparent clinically (Lawrie, 2011;
Moreau, 2007).
To minimize adverse effects, estrogen and progestin content in COCs has
dropped remarkably. Currently, the lowest acceptable dose is limited by the
ability to prevent pregnancy yet maintain cycle control. Thus, the daily
estrogen content varies from 10 to 50 μg of ethinyl estradiol, and most
contain ≤35 μg.
In a few COCs, inert placebo pills have been replaced by tablets
containing iron. These have the suffix Fe added to their name. Instead, Beyaz
and Sayfral have a form of folate—levomefolate calcium—within both its
active and placebo pills.
With COCs termed monophasic, the progestin dose remains constant. In
others, the dose frequently is varied, and term biphasic, triphasic, or
quadriphasic is used depending on the number of dose changes within one
cycle. In some formulations, the estrogen dose also varies. In general, phasic
pills aim to reduce the total progestin content and associated side effects per
cycle without sacrificing contraceptive efficacy or cycle control. The
theoretical advantage of this approach, however, has not been borne out
clinically (Moreau, 2007). Cycle control also appears similar among mono-,
bi-, and triphasic pills (van Vliet, 2011a,b,c).

Administration
Hormones are taken daily for a specified time (21 to 81 days) and then
replaced by placebo for a specified time (4 to 7 days), which is called the
pill-free interval. During these pill-free days, bleeding prompted by
hormonal withdrawal is expected.
With the trend toward lower estrogen doses, follicular growth and
ovulation may occur. To counter this, the active-pill duration in some
formulations is extended to 24 days. In comparison, these 24/4 regimens
perform similarly to 21/7 regimens (Anttila, 2011; Marr, 2012).

Longer durations of active hormone are designed to minimize the number
of withdrawal bleeding episodes. This practice has similar efficacy and
safety profiles compared with traditional administration (Edelman, 2014).
These extended-cycle products produce a 13-week cycle, that is, 12 weeks
of hormone use, followed by a week for withdrawal menses. Instead, the
product Amethyst provides continuous active hormone pills for 365 days
each year. These extended-cycle and continuous regimens may be especially
suited for women with significant menstrual symptoms (Mendoza, 2014).
Women ideally begin COCs on the first day of a menstrual cycle. In such
cases, a back-up method is unnecessary. With the more traditional “Sunday
start,” women begin pills on the first Sunday that follows menses onset, and a
back-up method is added for 1 week. If menses begin on a Sunday, pills are
begun that day and no back-up method is required. Alternatively, with a quick
start, COCs are started on any day, commonly the day prescribed. A back-up
method is added for 1 week (Westhoff, 2007b). If the woman is unknowingly
already pregnant, COCs are not teratogenic (Rothman, 1978; Savolainen,
1981). A missed menses after COC initiation should prompt pregnancy
testing. Similar initiation methods are used for contraceptive vaginal rings or
patches.
For maximum efficiency, pills are best taken at the same time each day. If
one dose is missed, the missed pill is taken immediately; the scheduled dose
for that day is taken on time; and then daily pills are continued. If two or
more doses are missed, the most recent missed pill is taken immediately; the
scheduled dose for that day is taken on time; and a back-up method is used
for 7 days while daily pills are then continued (Curtis, 2016a). If withdrawal
bleeding fails to occur during the pill-free interval, a woman should continue
her pills but exclude pregnancy.
With COC initiation, spotting or bleeding is common. It does not reflect
contraceptive failure and typically resolves within one to three cycles. If
unscheduled bleeding persists, those with bleeding during the first part of a
pill pack may benefit from an increase in the estrogen dose, whereas those
with bleeding during the second part may improve with a higher progestin
dose (Nelson, 2011).

■ Method-specific Effects
Altered Drug Efficacy

Some drugs decrease COC effectiveness, and choosing another contraceptive
method is preferable. Most notable are rifampin/rifabutin, but other
antibiotics are not implicated (Simmons, 2018). Cytochrome P450–inducing
anticonvulsants are another group and include phenytoin, phenobarbital,
primidone, carbamazepine, oxcarbazepine, topiramate, rufinamide, and
felbamate (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020b).
Some antiretroviral drugs, mainly among the protease inhibitor group, can
interact with COCs. A rapidly evolving list is provided by the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services (2019).
In obese women, COCs are effective (Simmons, 2016). With the Ortho
Evra transdermal patch, however, obesity may alter pharmacokinetics and
lower efficacy (p. 674).
On the other hand, some COCs lower the actions of certain drugs.
Notably, lamotrigine efficacy is lowered by COCs (Gaffield, 2011).

Metabolic Changes, Risks, and Benefits
The hormones in COCs can induce metabolic changes that may aggravate
underlying medical conditions. Most of the contraindications to COCs reflect
these metabolic alterations (Table 38-6).
TABLE 38-6. Contraindications to the Use of Combination Oral
Contraceptive Pills

Hepatic angiotensinogen synthesis is augmented by COCs. Its conversion
by renin to angiotensin I may be associated with pill-induced hypertension.
Thus, patients return 8 to 12 weeks after COC initiation for evaluation of
blood pressure and other symptoms. However, women using low-dose COC
formulations rarely develop clinically significant hypertension (ChasanTaber, 1996).
In women with well-controlled hypertension, COC use is linked to
greater risks than in nonusers for stroke, acute myocardial infarction, and
peripheral arterial disease, and in these women, COCs are considered US
MEC category 3 (Curtis, 2016b). Severe forms of hypertension, especially
those with end-organ involvement, preclude COC use.
The estrogen component of COCs boosts hepatic production of fibrinogen
and many of the clotting factors. Deep-vein thrombosis and pulmonary
embolism rates are increased in women who use COCs (Stadel, 1981).
These events are estrogen-dose related, and rates have substantively
declined with lower-dose formulations containing 10 to 35 μg of ethinyl
estradiol. The general-population risk of venous thromboembolism (VTE) is
4 to 5 events per 100,000 woman-years. The incidence of VTE with COC

use increases three- to fivefold compared with nonusers (Shaw, 2013; van
Hylckama Vlieg, 2009). Obesity raises the general VTE risk, which is
compounded by COCs (Horton, 2016; Suchon, 2016). Accordingly, in an
obese woman, COCs are considered a US MEC category 2. VTE rates are
also significantly increased in women smokers older than 35 years, and
COCs are not recommended. Those most at risk for VTE include women
with thrombophilias (ESHRE Capri Workshop Group, 2013). Moreover,
COC use during the month before a major operative procedure appears to
double the risk for postoperative VTE (Robinson, 1991). Thus, the American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2021) recommends balancing
the risks of VTE and the degree of postoperative immobility with the risk of
unintended pregnancy during the 4 to 6 weeks required to reverse the
thrombogenic effects of COCs before surgery. In the early puerperium, VTE
risks are also increased, and COCs are not recommended early (see Table
38-4).
Certain progestins within COC are also linked with greater VTE rates. A
slightly higher VTE risk with drospirenone-containing COCs has been shown
in two studies. In response, an assessment of benefits and VTE risks in users
of these pills has been emphasized (Food and Drug Administration, 2012;
Jick, 2011; Parkin, 2011). Desogestrel and gestodene are also implicated and
carry similarly elevated risks (Stegeman, 2013; Vinogradova, 2015).
For women with prior myocardial infarction, COCs should not be
considered. Also, for women with multiple cardiovascular risk factors,
which include smoking, hypertension, older age, dyslipidemias, and diabetes,
the risk for myocardial infarction outweighs the benefits of this method. For
women with no cardiovascular risks, low-dose oral contraceptives are not
associated with an increased risk of myocardial infarction (Margolis, 2007;
World Health Organization, 1997).
For nonsmoking women younger than 35, stroke is rare (World Health
Organization, 1996). COCs are associated with a small increased risk for
ischemic stroke (Chan, 2004; Lidegaard, 2012). Rates rise significantly for
women who have hypertension, who smoke, or who have migraine headaches
with visual aura or other focal neurological changes and use COCs
(MacClellan, 2007; Tepper, 2016b). The evidence for stroke risk in
migraineurs without aura is less clear (Etminan, 2005; Schürks, 2009). COC
initiation may be considered for women with preexisting migraines without
aura if they are otherwise healthy, younger, normotensive nonsmokers. For

women with prior stroke, COCs should not be considered to avoid repeat
events.
Regarding carbohydrate metabolism, the risk of developing diabetes is
not increased with COC use (Kim, 2002). For diabetic women, COCs may
be used in nonsmokers with disease duration <20 years and without
associated vascular disease, nephropathy, retinopathy, or neuropathy (Curtis,
2016b). In general, COCs raise serum triglycerides and total and HDL
cholesterol levels but lower LDL cholesterol concentrations. Last, studies do
not support a connection between COCs and weight gain (Gallo, 2014).
Regarding neoplasia, COCs offer a protective effect against ovarian and
endometrial cancers (Collaborative Group on Epidemiological Studies of
Ovarian Cancer, 2008; Tsilidis, 2011). As an exception, the relative risk of
cervical dysplasia and cervical cancer is higher in current COC users, but
this declines after use is discontinued. Following 10 or more years, risk
returns to that of never users (International Collaboration of Epidemiological
Studies of Cervical Cancer, 2007). It is unclear whether COCs contribute to
breast cancer development. Major studies show no risk or a small risk
among current users, which drops with time following cessation
(Collaborative Group on Hormonal Factors in Breast Cancer, 1996;
Hannaford, 2007; Marchbanks, 2002).
COCs are not a risk for liver tumors (Heinemann, 1998; Maheshwari,
2007). For women with known tumors, COCs may be used in those with
focal nodular hyperplasia, but avoided in those with benign hepatic adenoma
and hepatocellular carcinoma (Kapp, 2009c). Rates of colorectal cancer
appear to be reduced in ever users (Bosetti, 2009; Luan, 2015).
Of other potential effects, cholestasis and cholestatic jaundice are
uncommon and resolve when COCs are discontinued. In women who have
active hepatitis, COCs should not be initiated, but these may be continued in
women who experience a flare of their liver disease while already taking
COCs. Use of progestin-only contraception in these women is not restricted.
Moreover, COCs are suitable for women who have recovered. Mild
compensated cirrhosis does not limit the use of COCs or progestin-only
methods. With severe decompensated disease, all hormonal methods are
avoided (Kapp, 2009a).
Chloasma, which is hyperpigmentation of the face and forehead, is more
likely in women who demonstrated such a change during pregnancy. This is
less common with low-dose estrogen formulations.

Previously, COCs were used to treat functional ovarian cysts. However,
data do not support use of current low-dose COC formulations to resolve or
prevent these (European Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology,
2001; Grimes, 2014).
Last, many noncontraceptive benefits are associated with COC use
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2018). COCs are
often selected for these effects, even in those without contraceptive needs.
First, dysmenorrhea and heavy menstrual bleeding declines. COCs also
elevate hepatic production of sex hormone–binding globulin. This binds
bioavailable testosterone to diminish the action of androgens. Thus,
conditions such as acne and hirsutism can improve. For women with
premenstrual dysphoric disorder, drospirenone-containing COCs can lessen
symptoms (Pearlstein, 2005; Yonkers, 2005).

■ Intravaginal Rings
NuvaRing is a flexible clear intravaginal ring that measures 54 mm in
diameter and 4 mm in cross section. Its core releases ethinyl estradiol and
etonogestrel, which are absorbed across the vaginal epithelium. Annovera is
a new ring that releases ethinyl estradiol and segesterone acetate. Colored
white, it measures 56 mm in diameter and 8.4 mm in cross section.
For both, the ring is inserted within 5 days of menses onset and, after 3
weeks of use, is removed for 1 week to allow withdrawal bleeding.
Nuvaring is single use, and after menses, a new ring is placed. In contrast,
after removal and washing, the same Annovera ring is reinserted for another
3 weeks. One ring can function for 13 such cycles (Nelson, 2019).
With insertion, the ring is compressed and advanced into the vagina, but
no specific final orientation within the vagina is required. Patient satisfaction
is high with this method, although vaginitis, ring-related events, and
leukorrhea are more common than with COCs (Gemzell-Danielsson, 2019;
Oddsson, 2005). A ring may be used concurrently with vaginal medications
or with a tampon (Verhoeven, 2004a,b). However, with Annovera,
miconazole suppositories raised hormone levels. These were not altered
with miconazole cream, and thus cream or oral antifungals are preferable
(Simmons, 2018). Partners may feel the ring during intercourse (Dieben,
2002). If this is bothersome, the ring may be removed for intercourse but

should be replaced within 3 hours for Nuvaring and within 2 hours for
Annovera to maintain efficacy.

■ Transdermal Patches
The Ortho Evra patch and its generic Xulane each contain ethinyl estradiol
and norelgestromin. A newer patch, Twirla, releases ethinyl estradiol and
levonorgestrel. Either patch may be applied to the buttocks, upper outer arm,
lower abdomen, or upper torso, but the breasts are avoided. Rates of
application-site skin reaction are low (Kaunitz, 2015; Smallwood, 2001). If
a patch is so poorly adhered that it requires reinforcement with tape, it
should be replaced. Women can wear the patch in saunas and whirlpools
without decreased efficacy (Abrams, 2001; Archer, 2013). However, with
Twirla, swimming is limited to 30 minutes.
Initiation of the patch is the same as for COCs, and a new patch is
applied weekly for 3 weeks, followed by a patch-free week to allow
withdrawal bleeding. In general, the transdermal patches and vaginal rings
produce metabolic changes, side effects, and efficacy rates comparable to
those with COC pills.
However, the Ortho Evra patch has been associated with a higher VTE
risk in some but not all studies (Cole, 2007; Jick, 2010; Lidegaard, 2011).
Labeling for the patch states that the risk for VTE may be increased
compared with COCs, and relative risk estimates range from 1.2 to 2.2. In
addition, obesity—90 kg or greater—may be associated with a higher risk
for patch contraceptive failure (Zieman, 2002).
In contrast, the LNG-containing patch showed comparable VTE rates
compared with COCs in one randomized trial (Kaunitz, 2015). Moreover,
efficacy was similar between obese and normal-weight users.

BARRIER METHODS
■ Male Condom
For many years, male and female condoms, vaginal diaphragms, and periodic
abstinence have been used for contraception with variable success. When
used properly, condoms provide considerable but not absolute protection
against a broad range of STDs, including HIV (Eaton, 2014). Contraceptive

efficacy of the male condom is enhanced by a reservoir tip and by the
addition of a spermicide. Adjunct lubricant and spermicides should be
water-based because oil-based products degrade latex.
For individuals sensitive to latex, condoms made from lamb intestines
are effective, but they do not provide infection protection. Instead,
nonallergenic condoms made of polyurethane or of synthetic elastomers are
available. Polyurethane condoms are effective against STDs but have a
higher breakage and slippage rate compared with latex condoms (Gallo,
2015).

■ Female Condom
The only female condom available in the United States is marketed as the
FC2 Female Condom. It contains a nitrile sheath and outer ring and a
flexible polyurethane inner ring. Its open ring remains outside the vagina,
whereas its closed internal ring is fitted under the symphysis like a
diaphragm (Fig. 38-3). The inner and outer sheath are covered with siliconebased lubricant, and other-based lubricants can be added. Male condoms
should not be used concurrently because simultaneous use creates friction
that leads to condom slipping, tearing, and displacement. Following use, the
female condom outer ring should be twisted to seal the condom so that no
semen spills. As an added value, the female condom may offer some
protection against STDs (Minnis, 2005).

FIGURE 38-3 FC2 Female Condom insertion and positioning. A. The inner ring is squeezed for
insertion. The sheath is inserted similarly to a diaphragm. B. The inner ring is pushed inward with an
index finger.

■ Diaphragm plus Spermicide
The diaphragm consists of a latex dome of various diameters supported by a
circular latex-covered metal spring. It is effective when used in combination
with water-based spermicidal jelly or cream, which is applied into the dome
cup and along the device rim. The diaphragm is then positioned so that the
cup faces the cervix and the cervix is partitioned effectively from the
remainder of the vagina and the penis. In this fashion, the centrally placed
spermicide is held against the cervix. When appropriately positioned, one
rim is lodged deep in the posterior vaginal fornix, and the opposite rim fits
behind the inner surface of the symphysis and immediately below the urethra.
If a diaphragm is too small, it will not remain in place. If it is too large, it is
uncomfortable when forced into position. Coexistent pelvic organ prolapse
typically leads to instability and expulsion. Because size and spring
flexibility must be individualized, the diaphragm is fitted by providers and
available only by prescription.
The diaphragm and spermicide can be inserted hours before intercourse.
If more than 6 hours elapse, the diaphragm can remain but additional
spermicide is placed in the vagina for maximum protection. Spermicide is
reapplied before each coital episode. The diaphragm is not removed for at
least 6 hours after intercourse. Because toxic shock syndrome has been
described following its use, it may be worthwhile to remove the diaphragm
at 6 hours, or at least the next morning, to minimize this rare event.
Diaphragm use is associated with a slightly greater rate of urinary infections,
presumably from urethral irritation by the ring under the symphysis.

■ Cervical Cap
FemCap is the only cervical cap currently available in the United States.
Made of silicone rubber, it has a sailor-cap shape with a dome that covers
the cervix and a flared brim, which allows the cap to be held in place by the
upper vagina’s muscular walls. Available in 22-, 26-, and 30-mm sizes, it is
used with a spermicide applied once at insertion to both sides of the dome

cup. For contraception, it should remain in place for 6 hours following coitus
and may remain for up to 48 hours. Even with proper fitting and correct use,
pregnancy rates with this method are higher than those with the diaphragm
(Gallo, 2012).

FERTILITY AWARENESS–BASED METHODS
These attempt to identify the fertile days each cycle and advise sexual
abstinence during these days. Fertility awareness–based methods (FABMs)
as a group have a 15-percent pregnancy rate with typical use (Trussell,
2018). Some smartphone applications aim to assist these practices (Berglund
Scherwitzl, 2017; Jennings, 2019).
The Standard Days Method counsels women to avoid unprotected
intercourse during cycle days 8 through 19. For successful use, women must
have regular monthly cycles of 26 to 32 days. Those who use this method can
mark a calendar or can use Cycle-Beads, which is a ring of counting beads,
to keep track of their days.
The TwoDay Method relies on awareness of vaginal wetness, which
reflects changes in the amount and quality of cervical mucus at different times
in the menstrual cycle. Intercourse is considered safe if a woman did not note
mucus on the day of planned intercourse or the day prior.
The Symptothermal Method combines changes in cervical mucus—onset
of the fertile period; changes in basal body temperature—end of the fertile
period; and calculations to estimate ovulation. A sustained 0.4°F rise in the
basal body temperature usually precedes ovulation. For maximum efficacy,
the woman must abstain from intercourse from the first day of menses through
the third day after the temperature increase. Overall, this method is more
complex to learn and apply, and it does not appreciably improve efficacy.

SPERMICIDES
Most spermicides contain nonoxynol-9 and are sold over-the-counter as
creams, jellies, suppositories, films, and foams. They are a less effective
method but provide a chemical spermicidal action and a physical barrier to
sperm penetration. Their duration of maximal effectiveness is usually no

more than 1 hour, and these do not offer STD protection. If pregnancy does
occur, nonoxynol-9 is not teratogenic (Briggs, 2017).
In 2020, a vaginal contraceptive gel containing lactic acid, citric acid,
and potassium bitartrate was FDA approved as Phexxi. As an acidifying
agent, it resists the buffering effect of semen and thereby allows the vagina’s
normally acidic pH to work as a spermicide (Garg, 2001; Nelson, 2018).
This pH effect also has potential as a microbicide, which warrants additional
study.
Ideally, either agent is deposited high in the vagina up to 1 hour before
coitus. Thereafter, each must be reinserted before repeat intercourse.

■ Contraceptive Sponge
The Today contraceptive sponge is an over-the-counter, one-size-fits-all
device. The nonoxynol-9–impregnated polyurethane disc is 2.5 cm thick and
5.5 cm wide. One side has a dimple that faces the cervix, and the other has a
satin loop for removal. The sponge can be inserted up to 24 hours prior to
intercourse, and while in place, it provides contraception regardless of coital
frequency. It should remain in place for 6 hours after intercourse. Pregnancy
is prevented primarily by the spermicide and to a lesser extent by covering
the cervix and absorbing semen.
Although the sponge is possibly more convenient than the diaphragm or
condom, it is less effective than either (Kuyoh, 2013). Most common causes
for method discontinuance are pregnancy, discomfort, or vaginitis (Beckman,
1989). Although toxic shock syndrome has been reported with the
contraceptive sponge, it is rare, and evidence suggests that the sponge may
actually limit production of the responsible staphylococcal exotoxin
(Remington, 1987). Still, it is recommended that the sponge not be used
during menses or the puerperium.

EMERGENCY CONTRACEPTION
Following unprotected sexual intercourse, several emergency contraception
(EC) regimens substantially lower the likelihood of an unwanted pregnancy.
Current methods include COCs, a progestin, a selective progesteronereceptor modulator (SPRM), and the Cu-IUD (Table 38-7). Notably, the

single-dose LNG pill is available over-the-counter without a prescription to
all reproductive-aged individuals. Patients can obtain information regarding
EC by calling 888-NOT-2-LATE or accessing The Emergency Contraception
Website: http://not-2-late.com. Although not yet adopted as EC, early
efficacy data find the LNG-IUS not inferior to the Cu-IUD for EC (Turok,
2021).
TABLE 38-7. Emergency Contraception Methods and Some Brand-Name
Examples

■ Hormonal Emergency Contraception
Except for allergy to a particular component, no conditions in the US MEC
contraindicate hormonal EC methods. Moreover, clinical examination or
pregnancy testing is not required before EC provision (American College of

Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019c). With all methods, dosing begins as
early as possible and ideally within 72 hours of unprotected coitus. It may be
given up to 120 hours after coitus (Fine, 2010; Rodrigues, 2001; von
Hertzen, 2002).
The major mechanism with all hormonal regimens is inhibition or delay
of ovulation. Of oral methods, failure rates are lowest with ulipristal (1 to 2
percent) and greatest with the Yuzpe method (2 to 3.5 percent) (Cleland,
2014). If EC fails to prevent pregnancy or is mistimed, no associations with
major congenital malformation or pregnancy complications have been noted
with these hormonal methods (Jatlaoui, 2016; Levy, 2014). With EC
administration, nausea and vomiting can be an important side effect.
Accordingly, an oral antiemetic may be prescribed at least 1 hour before
each dose (Rodriguez, 2013). If a woman vomits within 2 hours of a dose,
the dose is repeated.
For subsequent coitus, a barrier method is recommended until long-term
contraception is begun. If not, EC can be repeated within a given menstrual
cycle. Quick start initiation of contraceptive methods is suitable and is
discussed in the respective method sections. Notably, because ulipristal
competes at the progesterone receptor, a 5-day delay is recommended before
starting progestin-containing contraceptives.

■ Copper-containing Intrauterine Devices
For women who are candidates, Cu-IUD insertion is the most effective EC
method and provides an effective 10-year form of contraception. If an IUD is
placed up to 5 days after unprotected coitus, the pregnancy rate approximates
only 0.1 percent (Cleland, 2012; Wu, 2010).

REFERENCES
Abdel-Aleem H, d’Arcangues C, Vogelsong KM, et al: Treatment of vaginal bleeding irregularities
induced by progestin only contraceptives. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 10:CD003449, 2013
Abrams LS, Skee DM, Natarajan J, et al: Pharmacokinetics of norelgestromin and ethinyl estradiol
delivered by a contraceptive patch (Ortho Evra/Evra) under conditions of heat, humidity, and
exercise. J Clin Pharmacol 41(12):1301, 2001
Abrams LS, Skee DM, Wong FA, et al: Pharmacokinetics of norelgestromin and ethinyl estradiol from
two consecutive contraceptive patches. J Clin Pharmacol 41:1232, 2001

Akers AY, Steinway C, Sonalkar S, et al: Reducing pain during intrauterine device insertion: a
randomized controlled trial in adolescents and young women. Obstet Gynecol 130(4):795, 2017
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Noncontraceptive use of hormonal
contraceptives. Practice Bulletin No. 110, January 2010, Reaffirmed 2018
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Clinical challenges of long-acting reversible
contraceptive methods. Committee Opinion No. 672, September 2016, Reaffirmed 2019a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Depot medroxyprogesterone acetate and bone
effects. Committee Opinion No. 602, June 2014, Reaffirmed 2019b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Emergency contraception. Practice Bulletin No.
152, September 2015, Reaffirmed 2019c
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Long-acting reversible contraception: implants
and intrauterine devices. Practice Bulletin No. 186, November 2017, Reaffirmed 2019d
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Adolescents and long-acting reversible
contraception: implants and intrauterine devices. Committee Opinion No. 735, May 2018,
Reaffirmed 2020a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Gynecologic management of adolescents and
young women with seizure disorders. Committee Opinion No. 806, May 2020b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Prevention of venous thromboembolism in
gynecologic surgery. Practice Bulletin No. 232, July 2021
Anttila L, Bachmann G, Hernádi L, et al: Contraceptive efficacy of a combined oral contraceptive
containing ethinyl oestradiol 20 μg/drospirenone 3 mg administered in a 24/4 regimen: a pooled
analysis of four open-label studies. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 155(2):180, 2011
Apter D, Gemzell-Danielsson K, Hauck B, et al: Pharmacokinetics of two low-dose levonorgestrelreleasing intrauterine systems and effects on ovulation rate and cervical function: pooled analyses of
phase II and III studies. Fertil Steril 101(6):1656, 2014
Archer DF, Ahrendt HJ, Drouin D: Drospirenone-only oral contraceptive: results from a multicenter
noncomparative trial of efficacy, safety and tolerability. Contraception 92(5):439, 2015
Archer DF, Stanczyk FZ, Rubin A, et al: Pharmacokinetics and adhesion of the Agile transdermal
contraceptive patch (AG200-15) during daily exposure to external conditions of heat, humidity and
exercise. Contraception 87(2):212, 2013
Barnett C, Moehner S, Do Minh T, et al: Perforation risk and intra-uterine devices: results of the
EURAS-IUD 5-year extension study. Eur J Contracept Reprod Health Care 22(6):424, 2017
Bayer HealthCare Pharmaceuticals: Mirena: highlights of prescribing information. 2017. Available at:
https://labeling.bayerhealthcare.com/html/products/pi/Mirena_PI.pdf. Accessed August 15, 2020
Beckman LJ, Murray J, Harvey SM: The contraceptive sponge: factors in initiation and discontinuation
of use. Contraception 40:481, 1989
Bednarek PH, Creinin MD, Reeves MF, et al: Immediate versus delayed IUD insertion after uterine
aspiration. N Engl J Med 364(23):2208, 2011
Berglund Scherwitzl E, Lundberg O, Kopp Kallner H, et al: Perfect-use and typical-use Pearl Index of a
contraceptive mobile app. Contraception 96(6):420, 2017
Birgisson NE, Zhao Q, Secura GM, et al: Positive testing for Neisseria gonorrhoeae and Chlamydia
trachomatis and the risk of pelvic inflammatory disease in IUD users. J Womens Health 24(5):354,
2015
Bosetti C, Bravi F, Negri E, et al: Oral contraceptives and colorectal cancer risk: a systematic review
and meta-analysis. Hum Reprod Update 15(5):489, 2009

Brahmi D, Steenland MW, Renner RM, et al: Pregnancy outcomes with an IUD in situ: a systematic
review. Contraception 85(2):131, 2012
Briggs GG, Freeman RK, Towers CV, et al: Drugs in Pregnancy and Lactation, 11th ed. Philadelphia,
Wolters Kluwer, 2017
Carmo LSMP, Braga GC, Ferriani RA, et al: Timing of etonogestrel-releasing implants and growth of
breastfed infants: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol 130(1):100, 2017
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Sexually transmitted diseases treatment guidelines, 2015.
MMWR 64(3):1, 2015
Chan WS, Ray J, Wai EK, et al: Risk of stroke in women exposed to low-dose oral contraceptives: a
critical evaluation of the evidence. Arch Intern Med 164:741, 2004
Chasan-Taber L, Willett WC, Manson JE, et al: Prospective study of oral contraceptives and
hypertension among women in the United States. Circulation 94:483, 1996
Chen BA, Reeves MF, Hayes JL, et al: Postplacental or delayed insertion of the levonorgestrel
intrauterine device after vaginal delivery: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol 116(5):1079,
2010
Ciet P, Litmanovich DE: MR safety issues particular to women. Magn Reson Imaging Clin N Am
23(1):59, 2015
Clark MK, Sowers M, Levy B, et al: Bone mineral density loss and recovery during 48 months in firsttime users of depot medroxyprogesterone acetate. Fertil Steril 86:1466, 2006
Cleland K, Raymond EG, Westley E, et al: Emergency contraception review: evidence-based
recommendations for clinicians. Clin Obstet Gynecol 57(4):741, 2014
Cleland K, Zhu H, Goldstuck N, et al: The efficacy of intrauterine devices for emergency contraception:
a systematic review of 35 years of experience. Hum Reprod 27(7):1994, 2012
Cole JA, Norman H, Doherty M, et al: Venous thromboembolism, myocardial infarction, and stroke
among transdermal contraceptive system users. Obstet Gynecol 109:339, 2007
Collaborative Group on Epidemiological Studies of Ovarian Cancer, Beral V, Doll R, et al: Ovarian
cancer and oral contraceptives: collaborative reanalysis of data of 45 epidemiological studies
including 23,257 women with ovarian cancer and 87,303 controls. Lancet 371:303, 2008
Collaborative Group on Hormonal Factors in Breast Cancer: Breast cancer and hormonal
contraceptives: collaborative reanalysis of individual data on 53,297 women with breast cancer and
100,239 women without breast cancer from 54 epidemiological studies. Lancet 347:1713, 1996
CooperSurgical: Paragard: highlights of prescribing information. 2020. Available at:
https://www.paragard.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/10/PARAGARD-PI.pdf. Accessed August 15,
2020
Correia L, Ramos AB, Machado AI, et al: Magnetic resonance imaging and gynecological devices.
Contraception 85(6):538, 2012
Creinin MD, Kaunitz AM, Darney PD, et al: The US etonogestrel implant mandatory clinical training
and active monitoring programs: 6-year experience. Contraception 95(2):205, 2017
Curtis EM, Pine L: Actinomyces in the vaginas of women with and without intrauterine contraceptive
devices. Am J Obstet Gynecol 140:880, 1981
Curtis KM, Hannaford PC, Rodriguez MI, et al: Hormonal contraception and HIV acquisition among
women: an updated systematic review. BMJ Sex Reprod Health 46(1):8, 2020
Curtis KM, Jatlaoui TC, Tepper NK, et al: U.S. selected practice recommendations for contraceptive
use, 2016. MMWR 65(4):1, 2016a
Curtis KM, Nguyen A, Reeves JA, et al: Update to U.S. selected practice recommendations for
contraceptive use: self-administration of subcutaneous depot medroxyprogesterone acetate. MMWR

70(20):739, 2021
Curtis KM, Tepper NK, Jatlaoui TC, et al: U.S. medical eligibility criteria for contraceptive use, 2016.
MMWR 65(3):1, 2016b
Dianat S, Fox E, Ahrens KA, et al: Side effects and health benefits of depot medroxyprogesterone
acetate: a systematic review. Obstet Gynecol 133(2):332, 2019
Dieben TO, Roumen FJ, Apter D: Efficacy, cycle control, and user acceptability of a novel combined
contraceptive vaginal ring. Obstet Gynecol 100:585, 2002
Dorflinger LJ: Metabolic effects of implantable steroid contraceptives for women. Contraception
65(1):47, 2002
Duijkers IJM, Heger-Mahn D, Drouin D, Colli E, Skouby S. Maintenance of ovulation inhibition with a
new progestogen-only pill containing drospirenone after scheduled 24-h delays in pill intake.
Contraception 93(4):303, 2016
Eaton EF, Hoesley CJ: Barrier methods for human immunodeficiency virus prevention. Infect Dis Clin
North Am 28(4):585, 2014
Edelman A, Micks E, Gallo MF, et al: Continuous or extended cycle vs. cyclic use of combined
hormonal contraceptives for contraception. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 7:CD004695, 2014
ESHRE Capri Workshop Group: Venous thromboembolism in women: a specific reproductive health
risk. Hum Reprod Update 19(5):471, 2013
Etminan M, Takkouche B, Isorna FC, et al: Risk of ischaemic stroke in people with migraine: systematic
review and meta-analysis of observational studies. BMJ 330:63, 2005
European Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology—ESHRE Capri Workshop Group: Ovarian
and endometrial function during hormonal contraception. Hum Reprod 16(7):1527, 2001
Farley TM, Rosenberg MJ, Rowe PJ, et al: Intrauterine devices and pelvic inflammatory disease: an
international perspective. Lancet 339:785, 1992
Fine P, Mathé H, Ginde S, Cullins V, Morfesis J, Gainer E. Ulipristal acetate taken 48–120 hours after
intercourse for emergency contraception. Obstet Gynecol 115(2 Pt 1):257, 2010
Finer LB, Zolna MR: Declines in unintended pregnancy in the United States, 2008–2011. N Engl J Med
374(9):843, 2016
Food and Drug Administration: FDA Drug Safety Communication: Updated information about the risk
of blood clots in women taking birth control pills containing drospirenone. 2012. Available at:
http://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm299305.htm. Accessed July 7, 2016
Fox MC, Oat-Judge J, Severson K, et al: Immediate placement of intrauterine devices after first and
second trimester pregnancy termination. Contraception 83(1):34, 2011
Friedlander E, Kaneshiro B. Therapeutic options for unscheduled bleeding associated with long-acting
reversible contraception. Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am 42(4):593, 2015
Furlong LA: Ectopic pregnancy risk when contraception fails. J Reprod Med 47:881, 2002
Gaffield ME, Culwell KR, Lee CR: The use of hormonal contraception among women taking
anticonvulsant therapy. Contraception 83(1):16, 2011
Gallo MF, Grimes DA, Lopez LM, et al: Non-latex versus latex male condoms for contraception.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 1:CD003550, 2006, Reaffirmed 2015
Gallo MF, Grimes DA, Schulz KF: Cervical cap versus diaphragm for contraception. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 4:CD003551, 2002, Reassessed 2012
Gallo MF, Lopez LM, Grimes DA, et al: Combination contraceptives: effects on weight. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 1:CD003987, 2014
Gardner JM, Mishell DR Jr: Analysis of bleeding patterns and resumption of fertility following
discontinuation of a long-acting injectable contraceptive. Fertil Steril 21:286, 1970

Garg S, Anderson RA, Chany CJ, et al. Properties of a new acid-buffering bioadhesive vaginal
formulation (ACIDFORM). Contraception 64(1):67, 2001
Gemzell-Danielsson K, Schellschmidt I, Apter D: A randomized, phase II study describing the efficacy,
bleeding profile, and safety of two low-dose levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine contraceptive
systems and Mirena. Fertil Steril 97(3):616, 2012
Gemzell-Danielsson K, Sitruk-Ware R, Creinin MD, et al: Segesterone acetate/ethinyl estradiol 12month contraceptive vaginal system safety evaluation. Contraception 99(6):323, 2019
Goldthwaite LM, Creinin MD: Comparing bleeding patterns for the levonorgestrel 52 mg, 19.5 mg, and
13.5 mg intrauterine systems. Contraception 100(2):128, 2019
Grimes DA, Jones LB, Lopez LM, et al: Oral contraceptives for functional ovarian cysts. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 4:CD006134, 2014
Grimes DA, Lopez LM; Schulz KF: Antibiotic prophylaxis for intrauterine contraceptive device
insertion. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2:CD001327, 2001, Reaffirmed 2012
Guttmacher Institute: Contraceptive use in the United States. 2020. Available at:
https://www.guttmacher.org/fact-sheet/contraceptive-use-united-states. Accessed August 21, 2020
Hall KS, Trussell J, Schwarz EB: Progestin-only contraceptive pill use among women in the United
States. Contraception 86(6):653, 2012
Hannaford PC, Selvaraj S, Elliott AM, et al: Cancer risk among users of oral contraceptives: cohort data
from the Royal College of General Practitioners’ oral contraception study. BMJ 335:651, 2007
Heinemann LA, Weimann A, Gerken G, et al: Modern oral contraceptive use and benign liver tumors:
the German Benign Liver Tumor Case-Control Study. Eur J Contracept Reprod Health Care 3:194,
1998
Horton LG, Simmons KB, Curtis KM: Combined hormonal contraceptive use among obese women and
risk for cardiovascular events: a systematic review. Contraception 94(6):590 2016
Hubacher D, Lara-Ricalde R, Taylor DJ, et al: Use of copper intrauterine devices and the risk of tubal
infertility among nulligravid women. N Engl J Med 345:561, 2001
International Collaboration of Epidemiological Studies of Cervical Cancer: Cervical cancer and hormonal
contraceptives: collaborative reanalysis of individual data for 16,573 women with cervical cancer
and 35,509 women without cervical cancer from 24 epidemiological studies. Lancet 370:1609, 2007
Iwanaga J, Fox MC, Rekers H, Schwartz L, Tubbs RS. Neurovascular anatomy of the adult female
medial arm in relationship to potential sites for insertion of the etonogestrel contraceptive implant.
Contraception 100(1):26, 2019
Jatlaoui TC, Riley H, Curtis KM: Safety data for levonorgestrel, ulipristal acetate and Yuzpe regimens
for emergency contraception. Contraception 93(2):93, 2016
Jatlaoui TC, Whiteman MK, Jeng G, et al: Intrauterine device expulsion after postpartum placement: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Obstet Gynecol 132(4):895, 2018
Jennings V, Haile LT, Simmons RG, et al: Perfect- and typical-use effectiveness of the Dot fertility app
over 13 cycles: results from a prospective contraceptive effectiveness trial. Eur J Contracept
Reprod Health Care 24(2):148, 2019
Jick SS, Hagberg KW, Kaye JA: ORTHO EVRA and venous thromboembolism: an update.
Contraception 81(5):452, 2010
Jick SS, Hernandez RK: Risk of non-fatal venous thromboembolism in women using oral contraceptives
containing drospirenone compared with women using oral contraceptives containing levonorgestrel:
case-control study using United States claims data. BMJ 340:d2151, 2011
Kaislasuo J, Suhonen S, Gissler M, et al: Intrauterine contraception: incidence and factors associated
with uterine perforation–a population-based study. Hum Reprod 27(9):2658, 2012

Kaislasuo J, Suhonen S, Gissler M, et al: Uterine perforation caused by intrauterine devices: clinical
course and treatment. Hum Reprod 28(6):1546, 2013
Kang S, Niak A, Gada N, et al: Etonogestrel implant migration to the vasculature, chest wall, and distant
body sites: cases from a pharmacovigilance database. Contraception 96(6):439, 2017
Kapp N, Curtis KM: Hormonal contraceptive use among women with liver tumors: a systematic review.
Contraception 80(4):387, 2009a
Kapp N, Curtis KM: Intrauterine device insertion during the postpartum period: a systematic review.
Contraception 80(4):327, 2009b
Kapp N, Tilley IB, Curtis KM: The effects of hormonal contraceptive use among women with viral
hepatitis or cirrhosis of the liver: a systematic review. Contraception 80(4):381, 2009c
Katz Z, Lancet M, Skornik J, et al: Teratogenicity of progestogens given during the first trimester of
pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 65(6):775, 1985
Kaunitz AM, Archer DF, Mishell DR Jr, et al: Safety and tolerability of a new low-dose contraceptive
patch in obese and nonobese women. Am J Obstet Gynecol 212(3):318.e1, 2015
Kim C, Siscovick DS, Sidney S, et al: Oral contraceptive use and association with glucose, insulin, and
diabetes in young adult women: the CARDIA Study. Coronary Artery Risk Development in Young
Adults. Diabetes Care 25:1027, 2002
Kim YJ, Youm J, Kim JH, et al: Actinomyces-like organisms in cervical smears: the association with
intrauterine device and pelvic inflammatory diseases. Obstet Gynecol Sci 57(5):393, 2014
Kongsayreepong R, Chutivongse S, George P, et al: A multicentre comparative study of serum lipids and
apolipoproteins in long-term users of DMPA and a control group of IUD users. World Health
Organization. Task Force on Long-Acting Systemic Agents for Fertility Regulation Special
Programme of Research, Development and Research Training in Human Reproduction.
Contraception 47(2):177, 1993
Krattenmacher R: Drospirenone: pharmacology and pharmacokinetics of a unique progestogen.
Contraception 62:29, 2000
Kuyoh MA, Toroitich-Ruto C, Grimes DA, et al: Sponge versus diaphragm for contraception. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 5:CD003172, 2013
Lammer EJ, Cordero JF: Exogenous sex hormone exposure and the risk for major malformations.
JAMA 255:3128, 1986
Laumonerie P, Blasco L, Tibbo ME, et al: Peripheral nerve injury associated with a subdermal
contraceptive implant: illustrative cases and systematic review of literature. World Neurosurg
111:317, 2018
Lawrie TA, Helmerhorst FM, Maitra NK, et al: Types of progestogens in combined oral contraception:
effectiveness and side-effects. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 5:CD004861, 2011
Levi EE, Stuart GS, Zerden ML, et al: Intrauterine device placement during cesarean delivery and
continued use 6 months postpartum: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol 126(1):5, 2015
Levy DP, Jager M, Kapp N, et al: Ulipristal acetate for emergency contraception: postmarketing
experience after use by more than 1 million women. Contraception 89(5):431, 2014
Lidegaard Ø, Løkkegaard E, Jensen A, et al: Thrombotic stroke and myocardial infarction with
hormonal contraception. N Engl J Med 366(24):2257, 2012
Lidegaard Ø, Nielsen LH, Skovlund CW, et al: Risk of venous thromboembolism from use of oral
contraceptives containing different progestogens and oestrogen doses: Danish cohort study, 2001–9.
BMJ 343:d6423, 2011
Lippes J: Pelvic actinomycosis: a review and preliminary look at prevalence. Am J Obstet Gynecol
180:265, 1999

Lopez LM, Chen M, Mullins S, et al: Steroidal contraceptives and bone fractures in women: evidence
from observational studies. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 8:CD009849, 2012
Lopez LM, Edelman A, Chen M, et al: Progestin-only contraceptives: effects on weight. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 7:CD008815, 2013
Luan NN, Wu L, Gong TT, et al: Nonlinear reduction in risk for colorectal cancer by oral contraceptive
use: a meta-analysis of epidemiological studies. Cancer Causes Control 26(1):65, 2015
MacClellan LR, Giles W, Cole J, et al: Probable migraine with visual aura and risk of ischemic stroke:
the Stroke Prevention in Young Women Study. Stroke 38:2438, 2007
Madden T, Eisenberg DL, Zhao Q, et al: Continuation of the etonogestrel implant in women undergoing
immediate postabortion placement. Obstet Gynecol 120(5):1053, 2012
Madden T, McNicholas C, Zhao Q, et al: Association of age and parity with intrauterine device
expulsion. Obstet Gynecol 124(4):718, 2014
Madden T, Proehl S, Allsworth JE, et al: Naproxen or estradiol for bleeding and spotting with the
levonorgestrel intrauterine system: a randomized controlled trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol
206(2):129.e1, 2012
Maheshwari S, Sarraj A, Kramer J, et al: Oral contraception and the risk of hepatocellular carcinoma. J
Hepatol 47:506, 2007
Mansour D, Gemzell-Danielsson K, Inki P, et al: Fertility after discontinuation of contraception: a
comprehensive review of the literature. Contraception 84(5):465, 2011
Marchbanks PA, McDonald JA, Wilson HG, et al: Oral contraceptives and the risk of breast cancer. N
Engl J Med 346(26):2025, 2002
Margolis KL, Adami HO, Luo J, et al: A prospective study of oral contraceptive use and risk of
myocardial infarction among Swedish women. Fertil Steril 88:310, 2007
Marr J, Gerlinger C, Kunz M: A historical cycle control comparison of two drospirenone-containing
combined oral contraceptives: ethinyl estradiol 30 μg/drospirenone 3 mg administered in a 21/7
regimen versus ethinyl estradiol 20 μg/drospirenone 3 mg administered in a 24/4 regimen. Eur J
Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 162(1):91, 2012
Mendoza N, Lobo P, Lertxundi R, et al: Extended regimens of combined hormonal contraception to
reduce symptoms related to withdrawal bleeding and the hormone-free interval: a systematic review
of randomised and observational studies. Eur J Contracept Reprod Health Care 19(5):321, 2014
Merck: Nexplanon: highlights of prescribing information. 2019. Available at:
https://www.merck.com/product/usa/pi_circulars/n/nexplanon/nexplanon_pi.pdf. Accessed August
21, 2020
Minnis AM, Padian NS: Effectiveness of female controlled barrier methods in preventing sexually
transmitted infections and HIV: current evidence and future research directions. Sex Transm Infect
81(3):193, 2005
Mommers E, Blum GF, Gent TG, et al: Nexplanon, a radiopaque etonogestrel implant in combination
with a next-generation applicator: 3-year results of a noncomparative multicenter trial. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 207(5):388.e1, 2012
Moreau C, Trussell J, Gilbert F, et al: Oral contraceptive tolerance: does the type of pill matter? Obstet
Gynecol 109:1277, 2007
Moschos E, Twickler DM: Does the type of intrauterine device affect conspicuity on 2D and 3D
ultrasound? AJR Am J Roentgenol 196(6):1439, 2011
Nelson AL, Cwiak C: Combined oral contraceptives (COCs). In Hatcher RA, Trussell J, Nelson AL, et
al (eds): Contraceptive Technology, 20th ed. New York, Ardent Media, 2011

Nelson AL: An overview of properties of Amphora (Acidform) contraceptive vaginal gel. Expert Opin
Drug Saf 17(9):935, 2018
Nelson AL: Comprehensive overview of the recently FDA-approved contraceptive vaginal ring
releasing segesterone acetate and ethinylestradiol: A new year-long, patient controlled, reversible
birth control method. Expert Rev Clin Pharmacol 12(10):953, 2019
Ngo LL, Ward KK, Mody SK: Ketorolac for pain control with intrauterine device placement: a
randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol 126(1):29, 2015
Nilsson CG, Lähteenmäki PL, Luukkainen T: Ovarian function in amenorrheic and menstruating users of
a levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine device. Fertil Steril 41(1):52, 1984
Nishimura RA, Otto CM, Bonow RO, et al: 2017 AHA/ACC focused update of the 2014 AHA/ACC
Guideline for the Management of Patients with Valvular Heart Disease: A Report of the American
College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines.
Circulation 135(25):e1159, 2017
Oddsson K, Leifels-Fischer B, Wiel-Masson D, et al: Superior cycle control with a contraceptive vaginal
ring compared with an oral contraceptive containing 30 microg ethinylestradiol and 150 microg
levonorgestrel: a randomized trial. Hum Reprod 20:557, 2005
Ortiz ME, Croxatto HB: Copper-T intrauterine device and levonorgestrel intrauterine system: biological
bases of their mechanism of action. Contraception 75:S16, 2007
Parkin L, Sharples K, Hernandez RK, et al: Risk of venous thromboembolism in users of oral
contraceptives containing drospirenone or levonorgestrel: nested case-control study based on UK
General Practice Research Database. BMJ 340:d2139, 2011
Paulen ME, Curtis KM: When can a woman have repeat progestogen-only injectables–depot
medroxyprogesterone acetate or norethisterone enantate? Contraception 80(4):391, 2009
Pearlstein TB, Bachmann GA, Zacur HA, et al: Treatment of premenstrual dysphoric disorder with a
new drospirenone-containing oral contraceptive formulation. Contraception 72:414, 2005
Pérez-Medina T, Sancho-Saúco J, Ríos M, et al: Hysteroscopy in pregnancy-related conditions:
descriptive analysis in 273 patients. J Minim Invasive Gynecol 21(3):417, 2014
Petitti DB, Piaggio G, Mehta S, et al: Steroid hormone contraception and bone mineral density: a crosssectional study in an international population. The WHO Study of Hormonal Contraception and Bone
Health. Obstet Gynecol 95(5):736, 2000
Pfizer: Depo-Provera (medroxyprogesterone acetate) injectable suspension: highlights of prescribing
information. 2017. Available at: https://labeling.pfizer.com/ShowLabeling.aspx?id=522. Accessed
August 21, 2020
Phillips SJ, Tepper NK, Kapp N, et al: Progestogen-only contraceptive use among breastfeeding
women: a systematic review. Contraception 94(3):226, 2016
Raps M, Curvers J, Helmerhorst FM, et al: Thyroid function, activated protein C resistance and the risk
of venous thrombosis in users of hormonal contraceptives. Thromb Res 133(4):640, 2014
Reed S, Do Minh T, Lange JA, et al: Real world data on Nexplanon® procedure-related events: final
results from the Nexplanon Observational Risk Assessment study (NORA). Contraception
100(1):31, 2019
Remington KM, Buller RS, Kelly JR: Effect of the Today contraceptive sponge on growth and toxic
shock syndrome toxin-1 production by Staphylococcus aureus. Obstet Gynecol 69:563, 1987
Robinson GE, Burren T, Mackie IJ, et al: Changes in haemostasis after stopping the combined
contraceptive pill: implications for major surgery. BMJ 302:269, 1991
Rodrigues I, Grou F, Joly J: Effectiveness of emergency contraceptive pills between 72 and 120 hours
after unprotected sexual intercourse. Am J Obstet Gynecol 184(4):531, 2001

Rodriguez MI, Godfrey EM, Warden M, et al: Prevention and management of nausea and vomiting with
emergency contraception: a systematic review. Contraception 87(5):583, 2013
Roe AH, Bartz D: Society of family planning clinical recommendations: contraception after surgical
abortion. Contraception 99(1):2, 2019
Rothman KJ, Louik C: Oral contraceptives and birth defects. N Engl J Med 299:522, 1978
Sääv I, Stephansson O, Gemzell-Danielsson K: Early versus delayed insertion of intrauterine
contraception after medical abortion—a randomized controlled trial. PLoS One 7(11):e48948, 2012
Samson M, Porter N, Orekoya O, et al: Progestin and breast cancer risk: a systematic review. Breast
Cancer Res Treat 155(1):3, 2016
Samy A, Abbas AM, Mahmoud M, et al: Evaluating different pain lowering medications during
intrauterine device insertion: a systematic review and network meta-analysis. Fertil Steril 111(3):553,
2019
Savolainen E, Saksela E, Saxen L: Teratogenic hazards of oral contraceptives analyzed in a national
malformation register. Am J Obstet Gynecol 140:521, 1981
Schiesser M, Lapaire O, Tercanli S, et al: Lost intrauterine devices during pregnancy: maternal and fetal
outcome after ultrasound-guided extraction. An analysis of 82 cases. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol
23:486, 2004
Scholes D, LaCroix AS, Ichikawa LE, et al: Injectable hormone contraception and bone density: results
from a prospective study. Epidemiology 13:581, 2002
Scholes D, LaCroix AS, Ott SM, et al: Bone mineral density in women using depot
medroxyprogesterone acetate for contraception. Obstet Gynecol 93:233, 1999
Schürks M, Rist PM, Bigal ME, et al: Migraine and cardiovascular disease: systematic review and
meta-analysis. BMJ 339:b3914, 2009
Şengül Ö, Dilbaz B, Kavak D, et al: J Surgical management of extrauterine mislocated intrauterine
contraceptive devices and related risks. Obstet Gynaecol 34(1):70, 2014
Shaw KA, Edelman AB: Obesity and oral contraceptives: a clinician’s guide. Best Pract Res Clin
Endocrinol Metab 27(1):55, 2013
Shimoni N, Davis A, Ramos ME, et al: Timing of copper intrauterine device insertion after medical
abortion: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol 118(3):623, 2011
Shulman LP, Gabriel H: Management and localization strategies for the nonpalpable Implanon rod.
Contraception 73:325, 2006
Silverberg SG, Haukkamaa M, Arko H, et al: Endometrial morphology during long-term use of
levonorgestrel releasing intrauterine devices. Int J Gynecol Pathol 5:235, 1986
Simmons KB, Edelman AB: Hormonal contraception and obesity. Fertil Steril 106(6):1282, 2016
Simmons KB, Kumar N, Plagianos M, et al: Effects of concurrent vaginal miconazole treatment on the
absorption and exposure of Nestorone® (segesterone acetate) and ethinyl estradiol delivered from a
contraceptive vaginal ring: a randomized, crossover drug-drug interaction study. Contraception
97(3):270, 2018
Simonatto P, Bahamondes MV, Fernandes A, et al: Comparison of two cohorts of women who expulsed
either a copper-intrauterine device or a levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine system. J Obstet
Gynaecol Res 42(5):554, 2016
Sivin I, Campodonico I, Kiriwat O, et al: The performance of levonorgestrel rod and Norplant
contraceptive implants: a 5 year randomized study. Hum Reprod 13(12):3371, 1998
Skovlund CW, Mørch LS, Kessing LV, et al: Association of hormonal contraception with depression.
JAMA Psychiatry 73(11):1154, 2016

Smallwood GH, Meador ML, Lenihan JP, et al: Efficacy and safety of a transdermal contraceptive
system. Obstet Gynecol, 98 (5 Pt. 1) 799, 2001
Sneed R, Westhoff C, Morroni C, et al: A prospective study of immediate initiation of depot
medroxyprogesterone acetate contraceptive injection. Contraception 71(2):99, 2005
Sothornwit J, et al: Immediate versus delayed postpartum insertion of contraceptive implant for
contraception. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 4(4):CD011913, 2017
Stadel BV: Oral contraceptives and cardiovascular disease. N Engl J Med 305:612, 1981
Stegeman BH, de Bastos M, Rosendaal FR, et al: Different combined oral contraceptives and the risk
of venous thrombosis: systematic review and network meta-analysis. BMJ 347:f5298, 2013
Steiner M, Lopez M, Grimes D, et al: Sino-implant (II)—a levonorgestrel releasing two-rod implant:
systematic review of the randomized controlled trials. Contraception 81(3)197, 2010
Steiner MJ, Brache V, Taylor D, et al: Randomized trial to evaluate contraceptive efficacy, safety and
acceptability of a two-rod contraceptive implant over 4 years in the Dominican Republic. Contracept
X 1(100006): 1, 2019
Steiner MJ, Trussell J, Mehta N, et al: Communicating contraceptive effectiveness: a randomized
controlled trial to inform a World Health Organization family planning handbook. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 195(1):85, 2006
Stuart GS, Hoffman BL: Puerperal sterilization. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al
(eds): Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education,
2017
Suchon P, Al Frouh F, Henneuse A, et al: Risk factors for venous thromboembolism in women under
combined oral contraceptive. The PILl Genetic Risk Monitoring (PILGRIM) Study. Thromb
Haemost 115(1):13, 2016
Tatum HJ, Schmidt FH, Jain AK: Management and outcome of pregnancies associated with Copper-T
intrauterine contraceptive device. Am J Obstet Gynecol 126:869, 1976
Teal SB, Turok DK, Chen BA, et al: Five-year contraceptive efficacy and safety of a levonorgestrel 52mg intrauterine system. Obstet Gynecol 133(1):63, 2019
Tepper NK, Curtis KM, Nanda K, et al: Safety of intrauterine devices among women with HIV: a
systematic review. Contraception 94(6):713, 2016a
Tepper NK, Steenland MW, Gaffield ME, et al: Retention of intrauterine devices in women who acquire
pelvic inflammatory disease: a systematic review. Contraception 87(5):655, 2013
Tepper NK, Whiteman MK, Zapata LB, et al: Safety of hormonal contraceptives among women with
migraine: a systematic review. Contraception 94(6):630, 2016b
Trussell J, Aikens AR, Micks E, et al: Efficacy, safety, and personal considerations. In Hatcher RA,
Nelson AL, Trussell J, et al (eds): Contraceptive Technology, 21st ed. New York, Ayer Company,
2018, p 100
Tsilidis KK, Allen NE, Key TJ, et al: Oral contraceptive use and reproductive factors and risk of ovarian
cancer in the European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition. Br J Cancer
105(9):1436, 2011
Turok DK, Eisenberg DL, Teal SB, et al: A prospective assessment of pelvic infection risk following
same-day sexually transmitted infection testing and levonorgestrel intrauterine system placement.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 215(5):599.e1, 2016
Turok DK, Gero A, Simmons RG, et al: Levonorgestrel vs. copper intrauterine devices for emergency
contraception. N Engl J Med 384(4):335, 2021
US Department of Health and Human Services: Guidelines for the use of antiretroviral agents in adults
and adolescents with HIV. 2019. Available at: https://clinicalinfo.hiv.gov/sites/default/files/inline-

files/AdultandAdolescentGL.pdf. Accessed October 17, 2020
van Hylckama Vlieg A, Helmerhorst FM, Vandenbroucke JP, et al: The venous thrombotic risk of oral
contraceptives, effects of oestrogen dose and progestogen type: results of the MEGA case-control
study. BMJ 339:b2921, 2009
Van Vliet HA, Grimes DA, Helmerhorst FM, et al: Biphasic versus monophasic oral contraceptives for
contraception. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 6:CD002032, 2006, Reaffirmed 2011a
Van Vliet HA, Grimes DA, Lopez LM, et al: Triphasic versus monophasic oral contraceptives for
contraception. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 11:CD003553, 2011b
Van Vliet HA, Raps M, Lopez LM, et al: Quadriphasic versus monophasic oral contraceptives for
contraception. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 11:CD009038, 2011c
Verhoeven CH, Dieben TO: The combined contraceptive vaginal ring, NuvaRing, and tampon co-usage.
Contraception 69(3):197, 2004a
Verhoeven CH, van den Heuvel MW, Mulders TM, et al: The contraceptive vaginal ring, NuvaRing, and
antimycotic co-medication. Contraception 69(2):129, 2004b
Vinogradova Y, Coupland C, Hippisley-Cox J: Use of combined oral contraceptives and risk of venous
thromboembolism: nested case-control studies using the Research and CPRD data-bases. BMJ
350:h2135, 2015
von Hertzen H, Piaggio G, Ding J, et al: Low dose mifepristone and two regimens of levonorgestrel for
emergency contraception: a WHO multicentre randomised trial. WHO Research Group on Postovulatory Methods of Fertility Regulation. Lancet 360(9348):1803, 2002
Westhoff C, Heartwell S, Edwards S, et al: Initiation of oral contraceptive using a quick start compared
with a conventional start: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol 109:1270, 2007b
Westhoff C: IUDs and colonization or infection with Actinomyces. Contraception 75:S48, 2007a
Whitaker AK, Chen BA: Society of family planning guidelines: postplacental insertion of intrauterine
devices. Contraception 97(1):2, 2018
Wilailak S, Vipupinyo C, Suraseranivong V, et al: Depot medroxyprogesterone acetate and epithelial
ovarian cancer: a multicentre case-control study. BJOG 119(6):672, 2012
World Health Organization: A multinational case-control study of ectopic pregnancy. Clin Reprod Fertil
3:131, 1985
World Health Organization: Acute myocardial infarction and combined oral contraceptives: results of an
international multi-center case-control study. Lancet 349:1202, 1997
World Health Organization: Cardiovascular disease and use of oral and injectable progestogen-only
contraceptives and combined injectable contraceptives. Results of an international, multicenter, casecontrol study. Contraception 57:315, 1998
World Health Organization: Depot-medroxyprogesterone acetate (DMPA) and risk of endometrial
cancer. Int J Cancer 49:186, 1991a
World Health Organization: Depot-medroxyprogesterone acetate (DMPA) and risk of liver cancer. Int J
Cancer 49(2):182, 1991b
World Health Organization: Depot-medroxyprogesterone acetate (DMPA) and risk of invasive
squamous cell cervical cancer. Contraception 45(4): 299, 1992
World Health Organization: Ischaemic stroke and combined oral contraceptives: results of an
international, multi-center case-control study. Lancet 348:498, 1996
World Health Organization: Medical Eligibility for Contraceptive Use, 5th ed. Geneva, World Health
Organization, 2015
Worly BL, Gur TL, Schaffir J: The relationship between progestin hormonal contraception and
depression: a systematic review. Contraception 97(6):478, 2018

Wu S, Godfrey EM, Wojdyla D, et al: Copper T380A intrauterine device for emergency contraception: a
prospective, multicentre, cohort clinical trial. BJOG 117(10):1205, 2010
Yonkers KA, Brown C, Pearlstein TB, et al: Efficacy of a new low-dose oral contraceptive with
drospirenone in premenstrual dysphoric disorder. Obstet Gynecol 106:492, 2005
Zeino MY, Wietfeldt ED, Advani V, et al: Laparoscopic removal of a copper intrauterine device from
the sigmoid colon. JSLS 15(4):568, 2011
Zieman M, Guillebaud J, Weisberg E, et al: Contraceptive efficacy and cycle control with the Ortho
Evra/Evra transdermal system: the analysis of pooled data. Fertil Steril 77:S13, 2002

CHAPTER 39

Sterilization

PUERPERAL TUBAL STERILIZATION
NONPUERPERAL TUBAL STERILIZATION
LONG-TERM COMPLICATIONS
TRANSCERVICAL STERILIZATION
VASECTOMY
REFERENCES
Among women using contraception in the United States, 28 percent rely on
either male or female sterilization (Kavanaugh, 2018). Tubal interruption or
excision is suitable for those requesting sterilization and who clearly
understand its permanence and its difficult and often unsuccessful reversal.
Alternative contraceptive choices also should be presented. Ultimately,
following provision of information, patient autonomy and her decision for
sterilization should be respected (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2017, 2019).
Female sterilization is usually accomplished by occlusion, excision, or
division of the fallopian tubes. Puerperal sterilization procedures follow
cesarean or vaginal delivery and approximately 7 percent of all live births in
the United States (Moniz, 2017). Nonpuerperal tubal sterilization is done at
a time unrelated to recent pregnancy and is also termed interval
sterilization. More recently, consideration of total salpingectomy for

sterilization and for ovarian cancer risk reduction is now recommended (p.
682).

PUERPERAL TUBAL STERILIZATION
■ Timing
Several days postpartum, the uterine fundus lies at the level of the umbilicus,
and fallopian tubes are accessible directly beneath the abdominal wall.
Moreover, abdominal laxity allows easy repositioning of the incision over
each uterine cornu.
On our service, puerperal tubal ligation is performed the morning after
delivery by a surgical team designated solely to this role. This timing
minimizes hospital stay but lowers the likelihood that postpartum hemorrhage
would complicate recovery following surgery. The status of the newborn
also can be better ascertained before surgery. In contrast, some prefer to
perform sterilization immediately following delivery and use neuraxial
analgesia already placed for labor. Designating these postpartum surgeries as
nonelective can help lessen barriers. This is especially so for high-volume
labor and delivery units, which typically prioritize their limited operatingroom availability for intrapartum procedures (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2021). From one large series, postpartum
tubal ligation was a safe, reasonable option, regardless of body mass index
(Byrne, 2020).

■ Method Selection
In general for postpartum sterilization, a midtubal segment of tube is excised,
and the severed ends seal by fibrosis and peritoneal regrowth. Commonly
used methods include the Parkland, Pomeroy, and modified Pomeroy
techniques. Less often, Filshie clips are used, and evidence points to slightly
decreased efficacy (Madari, 2011; Rodriquez, 2011, 2013). Also, in the
absence of uterine or other pelvic disease, hysterectomy solely for
sterilization is difficult to justify because of its significantly higher risk for
surgical morbidity compared with tubal sterilization.
Most pelvic serous cancers are thought to originate from the distal
fallopian tube (Erickson, 2013). Because of this, although currently

theoretical, evidence suggests that bilateral salpingectomy may lower these
ovarian cancer rates (Falconer, 2015; Lessard-Anderson, 2014). With this
knowledge, the Society of Gynecologic Oncologists (Walker, 2015) and
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019b) recommend
consideration of salpingectomy to lower these cancer risks. Specifically, for
women at average risk of ovarian cancer, risk-reducing salpingectomy should
be discussed and considered with abdominopelvic surgery, with
hysterectomy, or in lieu of tubal ligation.
In the discussion of salpingectomy, several points are instructive. First,
the lifetime risk for ovarian cancer approximates 1 percent (National Cancer
Institute, 2019). Data from epidemiologic studies show that tubal interruption
alone offers an approximate 30-percent decline in ovarian cancer rates
(Rice, 2012; Sieh, 2013). Salpingectomy may reduce the risk by 42 to 78
percent (Gockley, 2018). However, no prospective studies of sufficient size
or duration have yet been done to demonstrate the true risk and benefit ratio
for women at low risk of ovarian cancer. Also, few data describe the effects
on ovarian reserve from tubal blood supply disruption. In small studies
comparing the two surgeries, no differences in antimüllerian hormone levels,
which are a measure of ovarian reserve, were found (Findley, 2013; Ganer
Herman, 2017). In other comparisons, total salpingectomy at cesarean
delivery takes 5 to 10 minutes longer than partial salpingectomy (Ferrari,
2019; Powell, 2017). Blood loss rates are comparable or slightly higher but
do not lead to higher transfusion rates or greater postsurgical declines in
hematocrit values. Only a few small studies have evaluated salpingectomy
following vaginal delivery (Danis, 2016; Powell, 2017).

■ Technique
Spinal analgesia is typically selected for cases scheduled on the first
postpartum day. General anesthesia may be less desirable due to residual
pregnancy-related aspiration risks (Bucklin, 2003). If done more proximate
to delivery, the same epidural catheter used for labor analgesia can be used
for sterilization analgesia. Generally, with thrombocytopenia-related
conditions, platelet levels should be >70,000 for spinal blockade (Chap. 25,
p. 478). The bladder is emptied before surgery to avoid its laceration. A full
bladder can also push the fundus and tubes above the umbilicus and incision.
Considered a clean case, antibiotic prophylaxis is not required.

To begin, a small infraumbilical incision is ideal for several reasons. As
noted, the fundus in most cases lies near the umbilicus. Second, the umbilicus
usually remains the thinnest portion of the anterior abdominal wall and
requires less subcutaneous dissection to reach the linea alba fascia. Third, an
infraumbilical incision offers fascia with sufficient integrity to provide a
closure with minimal risk for later incisional hernia. Last, incisions that
follow the natural curve of the lower umbilical skin fold yield suitable
cosmesis. A 2- to 3-cm transverse or vertical skin incision is usually
sufficient for normal-weight women. For obese women, a 4- to 5-cm incision
may be needed for adequate abdominal access.
Beneath this incision, the subcutaneous tissue is bluntly separated to
reach the linea alba fascia. For this, an Allis clamp can be opened and
closed as downward pressure is exerted. Similarly, the blades of two armynavy retractors both pulling in downward yet opposite directions can part the
subcutaneous layer. Clearing this fatty tissue away from the fascia isolates
the fascia for incision and for later closure without intervening fat, which
may impede wound healing.
The fascial incision may be transverse or vertical and follows the same
orientation of the skin incision. For this, once the linea alba is reached, it is
grasped with two Allis clamps—one placed on either side of the planned
fascial incision (Fig. 39-1). The purchase of tissue with each clamp should
be substantial and creates a small roll of fascia to be incised. Often, the
peritoneum is incorporated simultaneously and entered. If not, the peritoneum
is grasped with two hemostats and sharply cut. Others may prefer to bluntly
enter with a single index finger. Notably, if the initial fascial incision is too
small, it can be extended with curved Mayo scissors.

FIGURE 39-1 Fascia is grasped by two Allis clamps and elevated away from viscera beneath.
Planned fascial incision is marked by dashed line. (Modified and reproduced with permission from Kho
KA: Diagnostic and operative laparoscopy. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap, III, et al [eds]:
Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2017.)

Adequate exposure is critical, and army-navy or appendiceal retractors
are suitable. For obese women, a slightly larger incision and narrow deeper
retractors may be needed. If bowel or omentum is obstructing, Trendelenburg
position can help displace these cephalad. Digitally packing with a single,
moist, fanned-out piece of surgical gauze also can be used, but a hemostat
should always be attached to the distal end to avert its intraabdominal
retention. At times, mechanically tilting the entire table to the opposite side
of the tube being exposed also can assist tube isolation.

The fallopian tube is identified and grasped at its midportion with a
Babcock clamp. A second slightly more distal clamp grasps the tube, which
is similarly lifted. This allows the fimbriated end to be seen. Such
confirmation prevents confusing the round ligament for the fallopian tube. A
common reason for sterilization failure is ligation of the wrong structure,
typically the round ligament. If the tube is inadvertently dropped, it is
mandatory to repeat this identification process. Surgical steps for ligation are
outlined in Figures 39-2 and 39-3.

FIGURE 39-2 Parkland method. A. An avascular site in the mesosalpinx adjacent to the fallopian tube
is perforated with a small hemostat. The jaws are opened to separate the fallopian tube from the
adjacent mesosalpinx for approximately 2.5 cm. B. The isolated tubal portion is ligated proximally and
distally with 0-chromic suture. The intervening segment of approximately 2 cm is excised, and the
excision site is inspected for hemostasis. This method was designed to avoid the initial intimate proximity
of the cut ends of the fallopian tube inherent with the Pomeroy procedure. (Reproduced with permission
from Hoffman BL, Hamid CA, Corton MM: Surgeries for benign gynecologic conditions. In Hoffman
BL, Schorge JO, Halvorson LM, et al: Williams Gynecology, 4th ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill;
2020.)

FIGURE 39-3 Pomeroy method. During ligation of a midsegment tubal loop, plain catgut is used to
ensure prompt absorption of the ligature and subsequent separation of the severed tubal ends.
(Reproduced with permission from Hoffman BL, Hamid CA, Corton MM: Surgeries for benign
gynecologic conditions. In Hoffman BL, Schorge JO, Halvorson LM, et al: Williams Gynecology, 4th ed.
New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2020.)

For total salpingectomy, the umbilical incision generally will need to be
larger to allow an adequate view of the tube and mesosalpinx and to place
clamps (Fig. 39-4). The entire mesosalpinx must be divided to free the
fallopian tube. Thus, risks include bleeding from the often large, congested
mesosalpingeal veins, control of which requires extension of the laparotomy
incision or even an adnexectomy. Some prefer to use a bipolar
electrosurgical coagulation device (LigaSure, ENSEAL), which seals and
divides the mesosalpinx simultaneously. This may add speed but also
expense.

FIGURE 39-4 A. With salpingectomy, the mesosalpinx is sequentially clamped, cut, and ligated. B. At
the cornu, clamps are placed across the fallopian tube and its adjacent mesosalpinx prior to tubal
transection. (Reproduced with permission from Stuart GS: Puerperal sterilization. In Yeomans ER,
Hoffman BL, Gilstrap, III, et al [eds]: Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New
York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2017.)

After surgery, diet is given as tolerated, and walking is encouraged. Ileus
is infrequent and should prompt concern for bowel injury, albeit rare. Most
women have an uncomplicated course and are discharged on the first
postoperative day.

NONPUERPERAL TUBAL STERILIZATION
These techniques and other modifications basically consist of (1) ligation
and resection at laparotomy as described earlier for puerperal sterilization;
(2) application of permanent rings, clips, or inserts to the fallopian tubes by
laparoscopy or hysteroscopy; or (3) electrocoagulation of a tubal segment,
usually through a laparoscope. A detailed description and illustration of
these can be found in Williams Gynecology, 4th edition (Kho, 2020).
In the United States, a laparoscopic approach to interval tubal
sterilization is the most common. The procedure is frequently performed in
an ambulatory surgical setting under general anesthesia. In almost all cases,
the patient can be discharged within several hours. Minilaparotomy using a
3-cm suprapubic incision also is popular, especially in resource-poor
countries. Major morbidity is rare with either minilaparotomy or
laparoscopy. Although not often used, the peritoneal cavity can be entered

through the posterior vaginal fornix via colpotomy to perform tubal
interruption.

LONG-TERM COMPLICATIONS
■ Contraceptive Failure
Pregnancy following sterilization is infrequent. The Collaborative Review of
Sterilization (CREST) study followed 10,863 women who had undergone
tubal sterilization from 1978 through 1986 (Peterson, 1996). The cumulative
failure rate for the various tubal procedures was 18.5 per 1000 or
approximately 0.5 percent. The study found puerperal sterilization to be
highly effective. The 5-year failure rate was 5 per 1000, and at 12 years, it
was 7 per 1000.
Puerperal sterilization fails for two major reasons. First, surgical errors
include transection of the round ligament or only partial transection of the
tube. For this reason, both tubal segments are submitted for pathological
confirmation. Second, a fistulous tract or spontaneous reanastomosis may
form between the severed tubal stumps.
Approximately 30 percent of pregnancies that follow failed tubal
sterilization are ectopic. This rate is 20 percent for those following a
postpartum procedure (Peterson, 1996, 1997). Thus, any symptoms of
pregnancy in a woman after tubal sterilization must be investigated to
exclude ectopic pregnancy.

■ Other Effects
Women who have undergone tubal sterilization are highly unlikely to
subsequently have salpingitis (Levgur, 2000). Most studies also find that
rates of heavy menstrual or intermenstrual bleeding are not increased
following the procedure (DeStefano, 1985; Peterson, 2000; Shy, 1992).
Moreover, in the CREST study, Costello (2002) found that tubal ligation did
not change sexual interest or pleasure in 80 percent of women. In most of the
20 percent of women who did report a change, positive effects were 10 to 15
times more likely.
Invariably, some women express regrets regarding sterilization, and this
is especially true if it is performed at a younger age (Curtis, 2006; Kelekçi,

2005). In the CREST study, Jamieson (2002) reported that 7 percent of
women who had undergone tubal ligation had regrets by 5 years. This is not
limited to their own sterilization, because 6.1 percent of women whose
husbands had undergone vasectomy had similar regrets.

■ Tubal Sterilization Reversal
No woman should undergo tubal sterilization believing that subsequent
fertility is guaranteed either by surgery or by assisted reproductive
technologies. Both approaches are technically difficult, expensive, and not
always successful. In general, pregnancy rates after tubal reversal favor
women with 7 cm of remaining tube, with age younger than 35 years, with a
short time from antecedent sterilization, and with isthmic–isthmic repairs.
With reanastomosis via laparotomy, rates of live births range from 44 to 82
percent (Deffieux, 2011; Malacova, 2015). The rate of ectopic pregnancy is
2 to 10 percent after reanastomosis (American Society for Reproductive
Medicine, 2015). With reanastomosis to reverse Essure sterilization, the
subsequent live birth rates range from 0 to 27 percent (Fernandez, 2014;
Monteith, 2014).

TRANSCERVICAL STERILIZATION
A transcervical approach to reach the tubal ostia can be used for
sterilization. However, no methods using this approach are currently
approved in the United States.
Mechanical methods employ insertion of a device into the proximal
fallopian tubes via hysteroscopy. Both the Essure system and the Adiana
Permanent Contraception system have been removed from the U.S. market.
The Adiana is a cylindrical, nonabsorbent silicone elastomer matrix that
once inserted stimulates tissue ingrowth to occlude the tubal lumen (Hologic,
2012).
The Essure Permanent Birth Control System is a long, slender, coiled,
metallic tubal insert. Once placed, fibroblastic proliferation within the
device similarly causes tubal occlusion. With this method, contraceptive
failure rates range from <1 percent to 5 percent (Gariepy, 2014; Munro,
2014).

Chronic pelvic pain after hysteroscopic sterilization may develop in 2 to
6 percent of those with Essure inserts (Chudnoff, 2015; Kamencic, 2016;
Yunker, 2015). Pain may stem from tubal perforation, device migration, or
the device itself (Adelman, 2014). For those desiring removal, proximal
linear salpingostomy and device removal is feasible (Kho, 2020).
Importantly, device removal is not curative in all symptomatic patients
(Clark, 2017; Maassen, 2019). Other cited adverse events include abnormal
bleeding and allergy or hypersensitivity reaction to its components (Al-Safi,
2013; Mao, 2015).
Chemical agents may also be placed into the uterine cavity or tubal ostia
to incite an inflammatory response to cause tubal occlusion. Used in lowerresource areas, one method employs an intrauterine device–type inserter to
place quinacrine pellets into the uterine fundus. From randomized trials,
pregnancy rates were 1 and 12 percent at 1 and 10 years, respectively
(Sokal, 2008). The World Health Organization (2009) has recommended
against quinacrine use because of carcinogenesis concerns. Evidence is
contradictory, and some consider it a potential option for resource-poor
countries (Lippes, 2015).

VASECTOMY
Currently, up to a half million men in the United States undergo vasectomy
each year (Barone, 2006; Eisenberg, 2010). And, 5 percent of women rely on
this method for contraception (Daniels, 2015). For sterilization, the vas
deferens lumen is disrupted to block the passage of sperm from the testes
(Fig. 39-5).

FIGURE 39-5 Anatomy of male reproductive system showing procedure for vasectomy.

Vasectomy is safer than female tubal sterilization because it is less
invasive and is performed with local analgesia (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019a). In a review that compared the two,
female tubal sterilization had a 20-fold higher complication rate and a 10- to
37-fold higher failure rate (Hendrix, 1999).
One disadvantage is that sterilization following vasectomy is not
immediate. Sperm stored in the reproductive tract beyond the interrupted vas
deferens takes approximately 3 months or 20 ejaculations for complete
release. The American Urological Association recommends a postprocedural
semen analysis at 8 to 16 weeks to document sterility (Sharlip, 2012). Before
azoospermia is documented, another form of contraception should be used.
The failure rate for vasectomy during the first year is 9.4 per 1000
procedures but only 11.4 per 1000 at 2, 3, and 5 years (Jamieson, 2004).

Failures result from unprotected intercourse too soon after ligation,
incomplete vas deferens occlusion, or recanalization (Awsare, 2005;
Deneux-Tharaux, 2004).
Reanastomosis of the vas deferens can be completed most effectively
using microsurgical techniques. Conception rates following reversal are
adversely affected by longer duration from vasectomy, poor sperm quality
found at reversal, and type of reversal procedure required (American Society
for Reproductive Medicine, 2008).

REFERENCES
Al-Safi ZA, Shavell VI, Hobson DT, et al: Analysis of adverse events with Essure hysteroscopic
sterilization reported to the Manufacturer and User Facility Device Experience database. J Minim
Invasive Gynecol 20(6):825, 2013
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Sterilization of women: ethical issues and
considerations. Committee Opinion No. 695, April 2017
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Benefits and risks of sterilization. Practice
Bulletin No. 208, February 2019a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Opportunistic salpingectomy as a strategy for
epithelial ovarian cancer prevention. Committee Opinion No. 774, March 2019b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Access to postpartum sterilization. Committee
Opinion No. 827, March 2021
American Society for Reproductive Medicine: Vasectomy reversal. Fertil Steril 90:S78, 2008
American Society for Reproductive Medicine: Role of tubal surgery in the era of assisted reproductive
technology: a committee opinion. Fertil Steril 103(6):e37, 2015
Awsare N, Krishnan J, Boustead GB, et al: Complications of vasectomy. Ann R Coll Surg Engl 87:406,
2005
Barone MA, Hutchison PL, Johnson CH, et al: Vasectomy in the Unites States, 2002. J Urol 176:232,
2006
Bucklin BA: Postpartum tubal ligation: timing and other anesthetic considerations. Clin Obstet Gynecol
46(3):657, 2003
Byrne JJ, Smith EM, Saucedo AM, et al: Examining the association of obesity with postpartum tubal
ligation. Obstet Gynecol 136(2):342, 2020
Chudnoff SG, Nichols JE Jr, Levie M: Hysteroscopic Essure inserts for permanent contraception:
extended follow-up results of a phase III multicenter international study. J Minim Invasive Gynecol
22(6):951, 2015
Clark NV, Rademaker D, Mushinski AA, et al: Essure removal for the treatment of device-attributed
symptoms: an expanded case series and follow-up survey. J Minim Invasive Gynecol 24(6):971,
2017
Costello C, Hillis S, Marchbanks P, et al: The effect of interval tubal sterilization on sexual interest and
pleasure. Obstet Gynecol 100:3, 2002
Curtis KM, Mohllajee AP, Peterson HB: Regret following female sterilization at a young age: a
systematic review. Contraception 73:205, 2006

Daniels K, Daugherty J, Jones J, et al: Current contraceptive use and variation by selected
characteristics among women aged 15–44: United States, 2011–2013. Natl Health Stat Report 86:1,
2015
Danis RB, Della Badia CR, Richard SD: Postpartum permanent sterilization: could bilateral
salpingectomy replace bilateral tubal ligation? J Minim Invasive Gynecol 23(6):928, 2016
Deffieux X, Morin Surroca M, Faivre E, et al: Tubal anastomosis after tubal sterilization: a review. Arch
Gynecol Obstet 83(5):1149, 2011
Deneux-Tharaux C, Kahn E, Nazerali H, et al: Pregnancy rates after vasectomy: a survey of U.S.
urologists. Contraception 69:401, 2004
DeStefano F, Perlman JA, Peterson HB, et al: Long term risk of menstrual disturbances after tubal
sterilization. Am J Obstet Gynecol 152:835, 1985
Eisenberg ML, Lipshultz LI: Estimating the number of vasectomies performed annually in the United
States: data from the National Survey of Family Growth. J Urol 184(5):2068, 2010
Erickson BK, Conner MG, Landen CN Jr: The role of the fallopian tube in the origin of ovarian cancer.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 209(5):409, 2013
Falconer H, Yin L, Grönberg H, et al: Ovarian cancer risk after salpingectomy: a nationwide populationbased study. J Natl Cancer Inst 107(2), 2015
Fernandez H, Legendre G, Blein C, et al: Tubal sterilization: pregnancy rates after hysteroscopic versus
laparoscopic sterilization in France, 2006–2010. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 180:133, 2014
Ferrari F, Forte S, Prefumo F, et al: Opportunistic salpingectomy during postpartum contraception
procedures at elective and unscheduled cesarean delivery. Contraception 99(6):373, 2019
Findley AD, Siedhoff MT, Hobbs KA, et al: Short-term effects of salpingectomy during laparoscopic
hysterectomy on ovarian reserve: a pilot randomized controlled trial. Fertil Steril 100(6):1704, 2013
Ganer Herman H, Gluck O, Keidar R, et al: Ovarian reserve following cesarean section with
salpingectomy vs tubal ligation: a randomized trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol 217(4):472, 2017
Gariepy AM, Creinin MD, Smith KJ, et al: Probability of pregnancy after sterilization: a comparison of
hysteroscopic versus laparoscopic sterilization. Contraception 90(2):174, 2014
Gockley AA, Elias KM: Fallopian tube tumorigenesis and clinical implications for ovarian cancer riskreduction. Cancer Treat Rev 69:66, 2018
Hendrix NW, Chauhan SP, Morrison JC: Sterilization and its consequences. Obstet Gynecol Surv 54:766,
1999
Hoffman BL, Hamid CA, Corton MM: Surgeries for benign gynecologic disorders. In Hoffman BL,
Schorge JO, Halvorson LM, et al (eds): Williams Gynecology, 4th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill
Education, 2020
Hologic: Hologic announces second quarter fiscal 2012 operating results. 2012. Available online at:
investors.hologic.com/press-releases/press-release-details/2012/Hologic-Announces-SecondQuarter-Fiscal-2012-Operating-Results/default.aspx. Accessed September 23, 2019
Jamieson DJ, Costello C, Trussell J, et al: The risk of pregnancy after vasectomy. Obstet Gynecol
103:848, 2004
Jamieson DJ, Kaufman SC, Costello C, et al: A comparison of women’s regret after vasectomy versus
tubal sterilization. Obstet Gynecol 99:1073, 2002
Kavanaugh ML, Jerman J: Contraceptive method use in the United States: trends and characteristics
between 2008, 2012 and 2014. Contraception 97(1):14, 2018
Kelekçi S, Erdemoglu E, Kutluk S, et al: Risk factors for tubal ligation: regret and psychological effects.
Impact of Beck Depression Inventory. Contraception 71:417, 2005

Kho KA: Diagnostic and operative laparoscopy. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap III, et al (eds):
Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2017
Kho KA, Rogers DE: Minimally invasive surgery. In Hoffman BL, Schorge JO, Halvorson LM, et al
(eds): Williams Gynecology, 4th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2020
Lessard-Anderson CR, Handlogten KS, Molitor RJ, et al: Effect of tubal sterilization technique on risk
of serous epithelial ovarian and primary peritoneal carcinoma. Gynecol Oncol 135(3):423, 2014
Levgur M, Duvivier R: Pelvic inflammatory disease after tubal sterilization: a review. Obstet Gynecol
Surv 55:41, 2000
Lippes J: Quinacrine sterilization (QS): time for reconsideration. Contraception 92(2):91, 2015
Kamencic H, Thiel L, Karreman E, et al: Does Essure cause significant de novo pain? A retrospective
review of indications for second surgeries after Essure placement. J Minim Invasive Gynecol
23(7):1158, 2016
Maassen LW, van Gastel DM, Haveman I, et al: Removal of Essure sterilization devices: a retrospective
cohort study in the Netherlands. J Minim Invasive Gynecol 26(6):1056, 2019
Madari S, Varma R, Gupta J: A comparison of the modified Pomeroy tubal ligation and Filshie clips for
immediate postpartum sterilisation: a systematic review. Eur J Contracept Reprod Health Care
16(5):341, 2011
Malacova E, Kemp-Casey A, Bremner A, et al: Live delivery outcome after tubal sterilization reversal:
a population-based study. Fertil Steril 104(4):92, 2015
Mao J, Pfeifer S, Schlegel P, et al: Safety and efficacy of hysteroscopic sterilization compared with
laparoscopic sterilization: an observational cohort study. BMJ 351:h5162, 2015
Moniz MH, Chang T, Heisler M, et al: Inpatient postpartum long-acting reversible contraception and
sterilization in the United States, 2008–2013. Obstet Gynecol 129(6):1078, 2017
Monteith CW, Berger GS, Zerden ML: Pregnancy success after hysteroscopic sterilization reversal.
Obstet Gynecol 124(6):1183, 2014
Munro MG, Nichols JE, Levy B, et al: Hysteroscopic sterilization: 10-year retrospective analysis of
worldwide pregnancy reports. J Minim Invasive Gynecol 21(2):245, 2014
National Cancer Institute: DevCan—probability of developing or dying of cancer. Available at:
surveillance.cancer.gov/devcan/. Accessed September 24, 2019
Peterson HB, Jeng G, Folger SG, et al: The risk of menstrual abnormalities after tubal sterilization. N
Engl J Med 343:1681, 2000
Peterson HB, Xia Z, Hughes JM, et al: The risk of ectopic pregnancy after tubal sterilization. U.S.
Collaborative Review of Sterilization Working Group. N Engl J Med 336(11):762, 1997
Peterson HB, Xia Z, Hughes JM, et al: The risk of pregnancy after tubal sterilization: findings from the
U.S. Collaborative Review of Sterilization. Am J Obstet Gynecol 174:1161, 1996
Powell CB, Alabaster A, Simmons S, et al: Salpingectomy for sterilization: change in practice in a large
integrated health care system, 2011–2016. Obstet Gynecol 130(5):961, 2017
Rice MS, Murphy MA, Tworoger SS: Tubal ligation, hysterectomy and ovarian cancer: a meta-analysis.
J Ovarian Res 5(1):13, 2012
Rodriguez MI, Edelman AB, Kapp N: Postpartum sterilization with the titanium clip: a systematic
review. Obstet Gynecol 118(1):143, 2011
Rodriguez MI, Seuc A, Sokal DC: Comparative efficacy of postpartum sterilisation with the titanium clip
versus partial salpingectomy: a randomised controlled trial. BJOG 120(1):108, 2013
Sharlip ID, Belker AM, Honig S, et al: Vasectomy: AUA guideline. Outcomes of microsurgical
vasovasostomy for vasectomy reversal: a meta-analysis and systematic review. J Urol 188(6
Suppl):2482, 2012

Shy KK, Stergachis A, Grothaus LG, et al: Tubal sterilization and risk of subsequent hospital admission
for menstrual disorders. Am J Obstet Gynecol 166:1698, 1992
Sieh W, Salvador S, McGuire V, et al: Tubal ligation and risk of ovarian cancer subtypes: a pooled
analysis of case-control studies. Int J Epidemiol 42(2):579, 2013
Sokal DC, Hieu do T, Loan ND, et al: Contraceptive effectiveness of two insertions of quinacrine:
results from 10-year follow-up in Vietnam. Contraception 78:61, 2008
Stuart GS: Puerperal sterilization. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap III, et al (eds): Cunningham
and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2017
Walker JL, Powell CB, Chen LM, et al: Society of Gynecologic Oncology recommendations for the
prevention of ovarian cancer. Cancer 121(13):2108, 2015
World Health Organization: The safety of quinacrine when used as a method of non-surgical sterilization
in women. Interim statement. Geneva, WHO, 2009
Yunker AC, Ritch JM, Robinson EF, et al: Incidence and risk factors for chronic pelvic pain after
hysteroscopic sterilization. J Minim Invasive Gynecol 22(3):390, 2015

SECTION 11

OBSTETRICAL
COMPLICATIONS

CHAPTER 40

Preeclampsia Syndrome

TERMINOLOGY AND DIAGNOSIS
INCIDENCE AND RISK FACTORS
ETIOPATHOGENESIS
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
PREDICTION
PREVENTION
REFERENCES
Hypertensive disorders include preeclampsia, gestational hypertension, and
chronic hypertension and complicate up to 10 percent of pregnancies. As a
group, they are one member of the deadly triad—along with hemorrhage and
infection—that contributes greatly to maternal morbidity (Judy, 2019).
Preeclampsia, either alone or superimposed on chronic hypertension, is
the most dangerous. In the United States from 2011 to 2015, 7 percent of
pregnancy-related maternal deaths were caused by preeclampsia or
eclampsia (Petersen, 2019). Most hypertension-related deaths are deemed
preventable (Katsuragi, 2019). In response, Joint Commission (2019)
accredited hospitals are now required to track their recognition and timely
treatment of hypertension.
In 2018, a workshop to study preeclampsia was convened by the
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. This builds on the prior work of

the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists’ Task Force on
Hypertension in Pregnancy (2013). Its purpose was to review topics
regarding all aspects of preeclampsia and to recommend future research
areas. Many of these topics are discussed throughout this chapter and Chapter
41.

TERMINOLOGY AND DIAGNOSIS
To codify the classification of hypertensive disorders of pregnancy, the
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2013, 2020)
describes four types of hypertensive disease:
1. Preeclampsia and eclampsia syndrome
2. Chronic hypertension of any etiology
3. Preeclampsia superimposed on chronic hypertension
4. Gestational hypertension, in which definitive evidence for the
preeclampsia syndrome does not develop and hypertension resolves by 12
weeks postpartum.
This classification aims to differentiate preeclampsia syndrome, which is
potentially more ominous, from other hypertensive disorders.

■ Diagnosis of Hypertensive Disorders
Hypertension is diagnosed empirically when systolic and diastolic blood
pressures exceed 140 mm Hg and 90 mm Hg, respectively. Korotkoff phase
V is used to define diastolic pressure.
Previously for pregnant women, increases of 30 mm Hg systolic or 15
mm Hg diastolic above blood pressure values taken at midpregnancy had
also been used as diagnostic criteria, even when absolute values were
<140/90 mm Hg. These incremental changes are no longer used to define
hypertension. However, blood pressure surveillance in these gravidas is
reasonable because eclamptic seizures develop in some whose blood
pressures have stayed below 140/90 mm Hg (Alexander, 2006).
In other cases, mean arterial pressures that suddenly rise but that still lie
in normal range—“delta hypertension”—may signify preeclampsia

(Macdonald-Wallis, 2012; Zeeman, 2007). We use this term to describe a
relatively acute rise in blood pressure in individual patients, albeit some still
with pressures <140/90 mm Hg (Fig. 40-1). Some of these women will go on
to have obvious preeclampsia, and some even develop eclamptic seizures or
hemolysis, elevated liver enzyme levels, and low platelet count (HELLP)
syndrome.

FIGURE 40-1 Schematic of normal reference ranges for mean arterial blood pressure changes across
pregnancy. Patient A (blue) has mean blood pressures near the 20th percentile throughout pregnancy.
Patient B (red) has a similar pattern with mean pressures at the 25th percentile until approximately 36
weeks’ gestation, at which time her blood pressure begins to rise. By term, it is substantively higher and
in the 75th percentile, but she is still considered “normotensive.” This increase from the 25th to 75th
percentile can be termed “delta hypertension.”

Historically, systolic and diastolic blood pressure levels of 140/90 mm
Hg have been arbitrarily used since the 1950s to define “hypertension” in
nonpregnant individuals. However, these levels were selected by insurance
companies to characterize a population of middle-aged men. It seems more
realistic to define normal-range blood pressures for specific populations—
such as young, healthy, pregnant women (Lu, 2019; Reddy, 2020). To provide
such data, >1000 women were recently studied longitudinally through
pregnancy (Green, 2020). Data of this type may shape future thresholds.

■ Gestational Hypertension
Women with gestational hypertension have blood pressures that reach 140/90
mm Hg or greater for the first time after midpregnancy but lack proteinuria.
Almost half of affected women subsequently develop preeclampsia (Jim,
2017). Even so, when blood pressure rises appreciably, it is dangerous to
both mother and fetus to ignore this elevation only because proteinuria has
not yet developed (Fishel Bartal, 2020). As Chesley (1985) emphasized, 10
percent of eclamptic seizures develop before overt proteinuria can be
detected. Gestational hypertension is reclassified by some as transient
hypertension if preeclampsia does not develop and blood pressure returns to
normal by 12 weeks postpartum.

■ Preeclampsia Syndrome
Preeclampsia is best described as a pregnancy-specific syndrome that can
affect virtually every organ system. Although preeclampsia is more than
simply gestational hypertension with proteinuria, the appearance of protein
remains a primary diagnostic criterion. It is an objective marker and reflects
the system-wide endothelial leak that characterizes the preeclampsia
syndrome. Last, preeclampsia can be divided into early onset, <34 weeks;
late onset, ≥34 weeks; preterm onset, <37 weeks; and term onset, ≥37 weeks
(Burton, 2019; Poon, 2019).
In some women with preeclampsia, neither overt proteinuria nor fetalgrowth restriction are features (Sibai, 2009). Because of this, the Task Force
(2013) suggests other diagnostic criteria, some of which are shown in Table
40-1. Multiorgan involvement may be reflected by thrombocytopenia, renal
dysfunction, hepatocellular necrosis, central nervous system perturbations, or
pulmonary edema.
TABLE 40-1. Classification and Diagnosis of Pregnancy-Associated
Hypertension

The markers listed in Table 40-1 help also to classify preeclampsia
syndrome severity. Although many use a dichotomous “mild” and “severe”
classification, the Task Force (2013) discourages the use of “mild
preeclampsia.” It is problematic that there are criteria for the diagnosis of
“severe” preeclampsia, but the binary default classification is either implied
or specifically termed “mild,” “less severe,” or “nonsevere” (Alexander,
2003; Lindheimer, 2008). No consensus criteria define “moderate”
preeclampsia, which is an elusive third category. We use the criteria
recommended by the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
(2020), some of which are listed in Table 40-2 and categorize disease as
“severe” versus “nonsevere.”
TABLE 40-2. Indicators of Severity of Gestational Hypertensive
Disordersa

Some symptoms are considered ominous. Headaches or visual
disturbances can precede eclampsia, which is a convulsion in a woman with
preeclampsia that is not attributable to another cause. The seizures are
generalized and may appear before, during, or after labor. The proportion
that develops seizures later—after 48 hours postpartum—approximates 10
percent (Sibai, 2005; Zwart, 2008). Another symptom, epigastric or right
upper quadrant pain, frequently accompanies hepatocellular necrosis,
ischemia, and hepatic edema. Elevated serum hepatic transaminase levels
can be one marker. Last, thrombocytopenia also signifies worsening
preeclampsia. It represents platelet activation and aggregation and

microangiopathic hemolysis. Other factors indicative of severe preeclampsia
include renal or cardiac involvement. When these signs and symptoms are
profound, they likely cannot be temporized, and delivery will more likely be
required. Importantly, differentiating nonsevere and severe gestational
hypertension or preeclampsia can be misleading because what might be
apparently mild disease may progress rapidly to severe disease.

■ Preeclampsia Superimposed on Chronic Hypertension
Any chronic hypertensive disorder predisposes a woman to develop
superimposed preeclampsia syndrome. Chronic underlying hypertension is
diagnosed in women with documented blood pressures ≥140/90 mm Hg
before pregnancy or before 20 weeks’ gestation, or both. Thus, in women
who are not first seen until after midpregnancy, hypertensive disorders can
be difficult to classify. For example, a woman with previously undiagnosed
chronic vascular disease who is seen before 20 weeks frequently has blood
pressures within normal range. During the third trimester, however, as blood
pressures return to their originally hypertensive levels, it may be difficult to
determine whether hypertension is chronic or induced by pregnancy. Even a
careful search for evidence of preexisting end-organ damage may be futile,
as many of these women have mild disease and no evidence of ventricular
hypertrophy, retinal vascular changes, or renal involvement.
In 20 to 50 percent of women with chronic hypertension, blood pressure
rises to obviously abnormal levels, typically after 24 weeks’ gestation. If
new-onset or worsening baseline hypertension is accompanied by new-onset
proteinuria or other findings listed in Table 40-1, superimposed
preeclampsia is diagnosed (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2019a). Compared with “pure” preeclampsia, superimposed
preeclampsia commonly develops earlier in pregnancy. It tends to be more
severe and more often is accompanied by fetal-growth restriction. The same
criteria shown in Table 40-2 also further characterize the severity of
superimposed preeclampsia.

INCIDENCE AND RISK FACTORS
Preeclampsia is identified in 5 to 8 percent of all pregnancies (Jim, 2017;
Poon, 2019). Young and nulliparous women are particularly vulnerable,

whereas older women are at greater risk for chronic hypertension with
superimposed preeclampsia (Sheen, 2020). In one review of global studies,
the incidence of preeclampsia in nulliparas ranged from 3 to 10 percent
(Staff, 2015). In multiparas, the incidence ranges from 2 to 5 percent (Jim,
2017; Poon, 2019).
The incidence of preeclampsia is also influenced by race, ethnicity, and
genetic predisposition. In one study by the Maternal–Fetal Medicine Units
(MFMU) Network, the incidence of preeclampsia was 5 percent in white, 9
percent in Hispanic, and 11 percent in African American nulliparas (Myatt,
2012a,b). In addition, black women carry higher risk for associated severe
adverse outcomes (Gyamfi-Bannerman, 2020).
For several clinical factors, Bartsch and associates (2016) extracted data
from more than 25 million pregnancies and calculated relative risks (Table
40-3). Major risks include older age, nulliparity, obesity, diabetes, and
chronic hypertension. Another is preeclampsia and especially HELLP
syndrome in a prior pregnancy (Malström, 2020). Underlying metabolic
syndrome, hyperhomocysteinemia, or chronic kidney disease are others
(Masoudian, 2016; Wiles, 2020).
TABLE 40-3. Selected Clinical Risk Factors for Preeclampsia

Of lesser factors, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) seropositivity,
sleep-disordered breathing, and a male fetus pose a slightly higher risk
(Facco, 2017; Jaskolka, 2017; Sansone, 2016). Previously affected family
members are another, and maternal and fetal genetics are assuming greater
predictive importance (Burton, 2019; Gray, 2018; Phipps, 2019). Last,
preeclampsia frequently complicates the “mirror syndrome” (Chap. 18, p.
364) (Trad, 2021). Although smoking during pregnancy causes various
adverse pregnancy outcomes, ironically, it lowers the risk for hypertension
during pregnancy.
For eclampsia, seizure incidence has declined in areas where health care
is more readily available. In countries with adequate resources, the
incidence averages 1 case in 2000 to 3000 deliveries (Jaatinen, 2016;
O’Connor, 2013; Schaap, 2019). At Parkland Hospital, the incidence has

declined appreciably during the past decade and approximates 1 case in
2000 births (Fig. 40-2). This frequency may be related to improved access to
prenatal care and our active management approach (Chap. 41, p. 717).

FIGURE 40-2 Incidence of eclampsia per 10,000 deliveries at Parkland Hospital (p <0.05 for trend).

ETIOPATHOGENESIS
The mechanisms by which pregnancy incites or aggravates hypertension
remain unsolved. Any satisfactory theory concerning the origins of
preeclampsia must account for the observation that gestational hypertensive
disorders are more likely to develop in women with the following
characteristics:
• Exposure to chorionic villi for the first time
• Exposure to a superabundance of chorionic villi, as with twins or
hydatidiform mole

• Preexisting conditions associated with endothelial cell activation or
inflammation
• Genetic predisposition to hypertension developing during pregnancy.
A fetus is not a requisite for preeclampsia to develop. Although
chorionic villi are essential, they need not be intrauterine. For example,
preeclampsia can develop with an advanced abdominal pregnancy (Worley,
2008). Regardless of precipitating etiology, the cascade of promoting events
leads to systemic vascular endothelial damage, vasospasm, plasma
transudation, and ischemic and thrombotic sequelae.

■ Phenotypic Expression
This varies widely for preeclampsia, and phenotype is affected by the degree
of remodeling of uterine spiral arterioles by endovascular trophoblasts. This
process underlies the “two-stage disorder” theory of preeclampsia
pathogenesis. According to Redman and coworkers (2015), stage I—the
placental syndrome—is caused by faulty endovascular trophoblastic
remodeling that downstream causes stage II—the maternal syndrome.
Importantly, stage II can be modified by maternal conditions that also
manifest endothelial cell activation or inflammation. These include chronic
hypertension, renal disease, obesity, immunological or connective tissue
disorders, and diabetes.
Such staging is artificial, and preeclampsia syndrome presents a
spectrum of disease (Burton, 2019). Moreover, “isoforms” likely exist and
are discussed subsequently. Differences include maternal and fetal
characteristics, placental findings, genetic factors, and early- versus lateonset disease (Gray, 2018; Phipps, 2019; Poon, 2019).

■ Etiology
Of suggested mechanisms to explain the cause of preeclampsia, primary ones
include:
• Placental implantation with abnormal trophoblastic invasion of uterine
vessels
• Dysfunctional immunological tolerance between maternal, paternal
(placental), and fetal tissues

• Maternal maladaptation to cardiovascular or inflammatory changes of
normal pregnancy
• Genetic factors that include predisposing genes and epigenetic influences.

■ Stage I—Placental Syndrome
Normal placental implantation, as discussed in Chapter 5 (p. 90), is
characterized by extensive remodeling of the spiral arterioles within the
decidua basalis (Fig. 40-3). In this “placental bed,” endovascular
trophoblasts replace the vascular endothelial and muscular linings. This
advantageously enlarges arteriole diameter (Brosens, 2019). Veins are
invaded only superficially. In some preeclampsia cases, but not all,
trophoblastic invasion may be incomplete. With this, decidual vessels, but
not myometrial vessels, become lined with endovascular trophoblasts. The
deeper myometrial arterioles thus do not lose their endothelial lining and
musculoelastic tissue. As a result, their mean external diameter is only half
that of corresponding vessels in normal placentas (Fisher, 2015). This
mechanism is more prevalent in women with early-onset preeclampsia
(Khodzhaeva, 2016). Evidence suggests a critical role for soluble
antiangiogenic growth factors in this faulty endovascular remodeling
(McMahon, 2014).

FIGURE 40-3 Schematic representation of normal placental implantation shows proliferation of
extravillous trophoblasts from an anchoring villus. These trophoblasts invade the decidua and extend into
the walls of the spiral arteriole to replace the endothelium and muscular wall to create a dilated lowresistance vessel. With preeclampsia, there is defective implantation characterized by incomplete
invasion of the spiral arteriolar wall by extravillous trophoblasts. This results in a small-caliber vessel
with high resistance to flow.

From placental electron microscopy studies, early preeclamptic changes
include endothelial damage, insudation of plasma constituents into vessel
walls, myointimal cell proliferation, and medial necrosis (De Wolf, 1980).
Hertig (1945) referred to lipid accumulation in myointimal cells and
macrophages as atherosis. These findings are more common in placentas
from women diagnosed with preeclampsia before 34 weeks’ gestation
(Nelson, 2014). Acute placental vascular atherosis may also identify a group
of women at greater risk for atherosclerosis and cardiovascular disease later
in life (Staff, 2015) (Chap. 41, p. 726). In pregnancy, abnormally narrow
spiral arteriole lumens likely impair placental blood flow, reduce perfusion,
and create a hypoxic environment (Burton, 2019).
At this point, these changes incite a systemic inflammatory response,
which is stage II or the maternal syndrome. Defective placentation is posited
to further predispose affected women to gestational hypertension,
preeclampsia syndrome, preterm delivery, fetal growth-restriction, and
placental abruption (Brosens, 2019; Labarrere, 2017; Nelson, 2014).

Immunological Factors
Maternal immune tolerance to paternally derived placental and fetal antigens
is discussed in Chapter 5 (p. 85). Loss of this tolerance is another cited
theory for preeclampsia (Erlebacher, 2013). Certainly, histological changes
at the maternal–placental interface in those with preeclampsia suggest acute
graft rejection.
Tolerance dysregulation might also explain the elevated risk when the
paternal antigenic load is increased. One example is complete molar
pregnancies, which have diploid complement of chromosomes solely from
the father. Those with later-stage moles, have a high incidence of early-onset
preeclampsia.
Women with a trisomy 13 fetus also have a 30- to 40-percent incidence
of preeclampsia. The gene for one preeclampsia-linked factor, soluble fmslike tyrosine kinase 1, is on chromosome 13 (Bdolah, 2006). These women

have elevated serum levels of antiangiogenic factors, which can affect the
placenta (p. 694). Last, women previously exposed to paternal antigens, such
as a prior pregnancy with the same partner, may be “immunized” against
preeclampsia. Conversely, multiparas impregnated by a new partner have a
greater risk of preeclampsia (Mostello, 2002).
Burton and colleagues (2019) reviewed the possible role of immune
maladaptation in preeclampsia pathophysiology. In women destined to have
preeclampsia, extravillous trophoblasts early in pregnancy express reduced
amounts of immunosuppressive nonclassic human leukocyte antigen G (HLAG). Black women more commonly have the 1597∆C gene allele, which is
associated with incomplete HLA-G expression and may predispose to
preeclampsia (Loisel, 2013). This immune maladaptation may contribute to
the defective placental vascularization seen with preeclampsia.
As discussed in Chapter 4 (p. 61), T-helper (Th) lymphocytes during
normal pregnancy are produced so that type 2 activity is increased in relation
to type 1. This is the so-called type 2 bias (Phipps, 2019; Redman, 2015).
Th2 cells promote humoral immunity, whereas Th1 cells stimulate
inflammatory cytokine secretion (Ma, 2019). Beginning in the early second
trimester in women who develop preeclampsia, Th1 action is increased.

Genetic Factors
Preeclampsia appears to be a multifactorial, polygenic disorder. In one study
of almost 1.2 million Swedish births, a genetic association was found for
gestational hypertension and for preeclampsia (Nilsson, 2004). Ward and
Taylor (2015) cite an incident risk for preeclampsia of 20 to 40 percent for
daughters of preeclamptic mothers; 11 to 37 percent for sisters of
preeclamptic women; and 22 to 47 percent for twins. Ethnoracial factors are
important and evidenced by the high incidence of preeclampsia in African
American women. Latina women have a lower incidence because of
interactions of American Indian and white race genes (Shahabi, 2013).
The hereditary predisposition for preeclampsia likely stems from
interactions of literally hundreds of inherited genes—both maternal and
paternal—that control many enzymatic and metabolic functions throughout
every organ system (Burton, 2019; Triche, 2014). Plasma-derived factors
may induce some of these genes in preeclampsia (Leseva, 2020; Mackenzie,
2012). Thus, the clinical manifestation in any given woman with the

preeclampsia syndrome will reflect a spectrum. In this regard, phenotypic
expression will differ among similar genotypes depending on interactions
with environmental components (Yang, 2013).
Hundreds of genes have been studied for their possible association with
preeclampsia (Buurma, 2013; Sakowicz, 2016; Ward, 2015). However,
because of the complex phenotypic expression of preeclampsia, it is doubtful
that any one candidate gene will be found responsible. Last, a preeclampsia
predisposition has also been linked to genes of the fetus (Burton, 2019; Gray,
2018; Leseva, 2020).

■ Stage II—Maternal Syndrome
Endothelial Cell Activation
Inflammatory changes are believed to be a continuation of the placental
syndrome. In response to ischemia or other inciting causes, placental factors
are released and initiate a series of events (Burton, 2019; Davidge, 2015).
Thus, antiangiogenic and metabolic factors and other inflammatory leukocyte
mediators are thought to provoke the systemic endotheliopathy, which is
used synonymously here with endothelial cell activation or dysfunction.
Injury to systemic endothelial cells is seen as a centerpiece of preeclampsia
pathogenesis (Burton, 2019; Phipps, 2019).
Cellular dysfunction may result from an extreme activated state of
leukocytes in the maternal circulation (Gervasi, 2001). Briefly, cytokines
such as tumor necrosis factor α (TNF-α) and the interleukins may contribute
to the systemic oxidative stress associated with preeclampsia. This is
characterized by generation of highly toxic oxygen radicals. These injure
systemic vascular endothelial cells, lower nitric oxide production by these
cells, and interfere with prostaglandin balance. Other sequelae include
production of the lipid-laden macrophage foam cells seen in placental
atherosis; activation of systemic microvascular coagulation, which is
manifested by thrombocytopenia; and greater systemic capillary
permeability, which is reflected by edema and proteinuria.
Intact endothelium has anticoagulant properties. Also, systemic
endothelial cells, by releasing nitric oxide, blunt the response of vascular
smooth muscle to agonists. Injured or activated endothelial cells may
produce less nitric oxide and may secrete substances that promote

coagulation and vasopressor sensitivity. Further evidence of endothelial
activation includes changes in glomerular capillary endothelial morphology,
greater capillary permeability, and elevated blood concentrations of
substances associated with endothelial activations. Likely, multiple factors in
the plasma of preeclamptic women combine to exert these vasoactive effects
(Myers, 2007; Walsh, 2009).

Vasospasm and Hypertension
Vasospasm has long been associated with preeclampsia. Systemic
endothelial activation causes vasospasm, which elevates resistance to
produce hypertension. Concurrently, systemic endothelial cell injury
promotes interstitial leakage, and platelets and fibrinogen are deposited in
the subendothelial space. Endothelial junctional proteins are also disrupted,
and the subendothelial region of resistance arteries undergoes ultrastructural
change (Suzuki, 2003; Wang, 2002). The much larger venous circuit is
similarly involved.
With diminished blood flow because of maldistribution from vasospasm
and interstitial leakage, ischemia of the surrounding tissues can cause
necrosis, hemorrhage, and other end-organ disturbances. One important
clinical correlate to these changes is the markedly attenuated blood volume
seen in women with severe preeclampsia (Zeeman, 2009).

Increased Pressor Responses
As discussed in Chapter 4 (p. 53), pregnant women normally develop
refractoriness to infused vasopressors (Abdul-Karim, 1961). Women with
early preeclampsia, however, have enhanced vascular reactivity to infused
norepinephrine and angiotensin II (Raab, 1956; Talledo, 1968). Moreover,
increased sensitivity to angiotensin II clearly precedes the onset of
gestational hypertension (Gant, 1974). Paradoxically, women who develop
preterm preeclampsia have lower circulating levels of angiotensin II (Chase,
2017).
Numerous prostaglandins are thought to be central to preeclampsia
syndrome pathophysiology. Specifically, the blunted pressor response seen in
normal pregnancy is at least partially due to diminished vascular
responsiveness mediated by endothelial prostaglandin synthesis. For
example, compared with normal pregnancy, endothelial prostacyclin (PGI2)

production is lower in preeclampsia. This action appears to be mediated by
phospholipase A2 (Davidge, 2015). At the same time, thromboxane A2
secretion by platelets is increased, and the prostacyclin: thromboxane A2
ratio declines. The net result favors greater sensitivity to infused angiotensin
II and vasoconstriction (Spitz, 1988). These changes appear as early as 22
weeks in gravidas who later develop preeclampsia (Chavarria, 2003).
Nitric oxide is a potent vasodilator and is synthesized from 1-arginine by
endothelial cells. Inhibition of nitric oxide synthesis raises mean arterial
pressure, lowers heart rate, and reverses the pregnancy-induced
refractoriness to vasopressors. Nitric oxide likely is the compound that
maintains the normal low-pressure vasodilated state characteristic of normal
fetoplacental perfusion (Myatt, 1992). Nitric oxide mediates the effects of
placental growth factor (PlGF) and vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF) in vitro (Zhang, 2017). The effects of nitric oxide production in
preeclampsia are unclear. It appears that the syndrome is associated with
decreased endothelial nitric oxide synthase expression and thus lower nitric
oxide activity (Davidge, 2015).
Endothelins are 21-amino-acid peptides and potent vasoconstrictors.
Endothelin l (ET-1) is the primary isoform produced by human endothelium
(Karumanchi, 2016a). Plasma ET-1 levels are elevated in normotensive
pregnant women. Women with preeclampsia have even higher levels, and
these peptides may mediate renal injury (Phipps, 2019). Woman with
preeclampsia develop functional autoantibodies to the endothelin and
angiotensin II receptors (Buttrup, 2018). Interestingly, treatment of
preeclamptic women with magnesium sulfate lowers ET-1 concentrations
(Sagsoz, 2003). In animal studies, sildenafil reduces ET-1 concentrations
(Gillis, 2016).

Angiogenic and Antiangiogenic Factors
Placental vasculogenesis is evident by 21 days after conception. The list of
pro- and antiangiogenic substances involved in placental vascular
development is extensive, and the VEGF and angiopoietin families are the
most studied. Angiogenic imbalance describes excessive amounts of
antiangiogenic factors, which are thought to be stimulated by worsening
hypoxia at the uteroplacental interface. Trophoblast of women destined to

develop preeclampsia overproduce at least two antiangiogenic peptides that
enter the maternal circulation (Karumanchi, 2016b).
First, soluble fms-like tyrosine kinase 1 (sF1t-1) is a soluble variant of
the membrane-bound receptor for VEGF. As depicted in Figure 40-4,
elevated maternal sFlt-1 levels inactivate and reduce circulating PlGF and
VEGF concentrations, leading to endothelial dysfunction (Phipps, 2019). As
shown in data from Myatt and coworkers (2013), sFlt-1 levels begin to rise
in maternal serum months before preeclampsia is evident (Fig. 40-5). These
high levels in the second trimester are associated with a much higher risk for
preeclampsia development (Haggerty, 2012; March, 2015). This elevation
from normal levels appears even sooner with early-onset disease (Vatten,
2012). These factors are also operative in pregnancies complicated by fetalgrowth restriction (Herraiz, 2012).

FIGURE 40-4 Schematic of receptor blocking action of soluble fms-like tyrosine kinase 1 (sFlt-1) and
soluble endoglin (sENG).

FIGURE 40-5 Angiogenic and antiangiogenic factors in normotensive (NT) and preeclamptic (PE)
women across pregnancy. Both pairs of factors are significantly divergent by 23 to 26 weeks’ gestation.
sFlt-1 = soluble fms-like tyrosine kinase 1; PlGF = placental growth factor.

A second antiangiogenic peptide, soluble endoglin (sEng), inhibits
various transforming growth factor beta (TGF-β) isoforms from binding to

endothelial receptors (see Fig. 40-4). Endoglin is one of these receptors.
Decreased binding to endoglin diminishes endothelial nitric oxide-dependent
vasodilation. Serum levels of sEng also begin to rise months before clinical
preeclampsia develops (Haggerty, 2012).
Simultaneously elevated levels of sFlt-1 and sEng are associated with
more severe forms of preeclampsia (Phipps, 2019). In one systematic
review, third-trimester increases in sFlt-1 levels and lower PlGF
concentrations were found to correlate with preeclampsia development after
25 weeks’ gestation (Widmer, 2007). From another study, doubling of sFlt-1
and sEng expression increased the preeclampsia risk by 39 and 74 percent,
respectively (Haggerty, 2012). The cause of placental overproduction of
antiangiogenic proteins remains an enigma. Concentrations of the soluble
forms are not higher in fetal circulation or amnionic fluid of preeclamptic
women, and their levels in maternal blood dissipate after delivery (Staff,
2007).
Clinical use of antiangiogenic protein levels to predict and diagnosis
preeclampsia is being evaluated (p. 703). Moreover, one preliminary report
described therapeutic apheresis to reduce sFlt-1 levels (Thadhani, 2016).

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
■ Cardiovascular System
Disturbances in the cardiovascular system are common with preeclampsia
syndrome. These are related to: (1) greater cardiac afterload imposed by
hypertension; (2) cardiac preload, which is reduced by a pathologically
diminished volume expansion during pregnancy and which is increased by
administration of intravenous crystalloid or oncotic solutions; and (3)
endothelial activation leading to leakage of intravascular fluid into the
extracellular space.

Hemodynamic Changes and Cardiac Function
The cardiovascular aberrations of pregnancy-related hypertensive disorders
vary. Modifying factors include preeclampsia severity, degree of
hypertension, presence of underlying chronic disease, and the point in the
clinical spectrum in which these are studied. In some women, these
cardiovascular changes may precede hypertension (Easterling, 1990; Khalil,

2012; Melchiorre, 2013). Nevertheless, with the clinical onset of
preeclampsia, cardiac output declines, due at least in part to greater
peripheral resistance (Ferrazzi, 2018).

Myocardial Function
Serial echocardiographic studies document diastolic dysfunction in up to 45
percent of women with preeclampsia (Guirguis, 2015; Vaught, 2018). With
this dysfunction, ventricles do not properly relax and cannot fill
appropriately. In some affected women, functional differences persist up to 4
years after delivery (Evans, 2011; Orabona, 2017). Diastolic dysfunction
stems from ventricular remodeling, which is a maladaptive response to the
increased afterload of preeclampsia and aims to maintain normal
contractility. High levels of antiangiogenic proteins may be contributory
(Shahul, 2016). In otherwise healthy gravidas, these changes are usually
inconsequential. But in those with underlying ventricular dysfunction—for
example, concentric ventricular hypertrophy from chronic hypertension—
further diastolic dysfunction may cause cardiogenic pulmonary edema
(Wardhana, 2018). This is discussed further in Chapters 50 (p. 883) and 52
(p. 916).

Ventricular Function
Despite the relatively high frequency of diastolic dysfunction with
preeclampsia, clinical cardiac function in most affected women is
appropriate (Hibbard, 2015). In some preeclamptic women, high-sensitivity
cardiac troponin levels are slightly elevated (Morton, 2018). With severe
preeclampsia, amino-terminal pro–brain natriuretic peptide (NT–pro-BNP)
levels are increased (Zachary, 2017).
Women with preeclampsia syndrome usually have slightly hyperdynamic
ventricular function (Fig. 40-6). Both these and normotensive pregnant
women have a cardiac output that is appropriate for left-sided filling
pressures. This pressure can be altered by intravenous fluid volumes. Thus,
aggressive hydration results in overtly hyperdynamic ventricular function.
This is accompanied by elevated pulmonary capillary wedge pressures, and
pulmonary edema may develop despite normal ventricular function. This is
partly because of an alveolar endothelial-epithelial leak, and it is
compounded by decreased oncotic pressure from a low serum albumin

concentration. In sum, aggressive fluid administration to otherwise normal
women with severe preeclampsia substantially elevates normal left-sided
filling pressures and raises a physiologically normal cardiac output to
hyperdynamic levels.

FIGURE 40-6 Ventricular function in normally pregnant women (striped area) and in women with
eclampsia (boxed area) is plotted on a Braunwald ventricular function curve. Normal values are from
Clark, 1989, and those for eclampsia are from Hankins, 1984. PCWP = pulmonary capillary wedge
pressure; LVSWI = left ventricular stroke work index.

■ Blood Volume
In those with eclampsia, hemoconcentration is a hallmark feature (Pritchard,
1984). Data from Zeeman and associates (2009) show that normally expected
pregnancy blood volume expansion is severely curtailed (Fig. 40-7). Women
of average size have a nonpregnant blood volume of 3000 mL, and during the
last several weeks of a normal pregnancy, this averages 4500 mL (Chap. 4,

p. 59). With eclampsia, however, much or all of the anticipated 1500 mL
excess is lost. Such hemoconcentration results from generalized vasospasm
that follows endothelial activation and then from leakage of plasma into the
interstitial space. In women with preeclampsia—depending on its severity—
hemoconcentration is usually not as marked.

FIGURE 40-7 Total blood volumes in normotensive women compared with those with eclampsia. The
vertical extensions are one standard deviation from the mean. In the eclamptic women, note the
minimally increased blood volume compared with a subsequent normotensive pregnancy.

These changes have substantial clinical consequences. Women with
severe hemoconcentration are unduly sensitive to blood loss at delivery that
otherwise may be considered normal. Vasospasm and endothelial leakage of
plasma persist for a variable time after delivery as the endothelium is
restored to normal. As this takes place, vasoconstriction reverses, and as the
blood volume reexpands, the hematocrit usually falls from dilution.

Importantly, a substantive cause of this fall in hematocrit frequently is the
blood loss incurred at delivery.

■ Hematological Changes
Thrombocytopenia
The platelet count is routinely measured in women with any form of
gestational hypertension. The frequency and intensity of thrombocytopenia
vary and are dependent on the severity and duration of preeclampsia
(Hellmann, 2007; Hupuczi, 2007). Overt thrombocytopenia—defined by a
platelet count <100,000/µL—reflects severe disease (see Table 40-2). In
general, the lower the platelet count, the higher the likelihood of maternal and
fetal morbidity and mortality. In most cases, delivery is advisable because
thrombocytopenia usually worsens.
After delivery, the platelet count may continue to decline for the first day
or so. It then usually rises progressively to reach a normal level within 3 to 5
days. As discussed later, in some instances with HELLP syndrome, the
platelet count continues to fall after delivery. If this nadir is delayed until 48
to 72 hours, preeclampsia syndrome may be incorrectly attributed to one of
the thrombotic microangiopathies (Chap. 59, p. 1060).
Another platelet alteration is platelet activation and increased αdegranulation. This leads to release of β-thromboglobulin and factor 4 and to
enhanced platelet clearance (Kenny, 2015). Platelet volume concomitantly
increases as young platelets are released (Bellos, 2018). Paradoxically, in
most studies, in vitro platelet aggregation is reduced compared with the
normal increase that is characteristic of pregnancy. This likely is due to
platelet “exhaustion” following in-vivo activation. Although the cause is
unknown, immunological processes or simply platelet deposition at sites of
endothelial damage may be implicated. Levels of platelet-bound and
circulating platelet-bindable immunoglobulins are elevated, which suggests
platelet surface alterations. Abnormally low platelet levels do not develop in
the fetuses of women with preeclampsia despite severe maternal
thrombocytopenia (Kenny, 2015; Pritchard, 1987). Thus, thrombocytopenia
in a hypertensive woman is not a fetal indication for cesarean delivery.

Hemolysis

Severe preeclampsia is frequently accompanied by hemolysis, which
manifests as elevated serum lactate dehydrogenase levels and reduced
haptoglobin levels (Burwick, 2018). Other evidence comes from
schizocytosis, spherocytosis, and reticulocytosis in peripheral blood
(Cunningham, 1985; Pritchard, 1954, 1976). Red cell distribution width
(RDW) reflects variability in the size of circulating red blood cells, and
RDW is higher in preeclamptic women (Adam, 2019). These derangements
result in part from microangiopathic hemolysis caused by endothelial
disruption with platelet adherence and fibrin deposition. Cunningham and
coworkers (1995) postulated that erythrocyte morphological changes were
partially caused by serum lipid alterations. Related, substantively decreased
long-chain fatty acid content is found in erythrocytes of women with
preeclampsia (Mackay, 2012).
After early reports of hemolysis and thrombocytopenia with severe
preeclampsia, descriptions were added of abnormally elevated serum liver
transaminase levels that indicated hepatocellular necrosis (Chesley, 1978).
Weinstein (1982) referred to this combination of events as the HELLP
syndrome (p. 699).

Coagulation Changes
Subtle changes consistent with intravascular coagulation commonly are found
with preeclampsia and eclampsia (Cunningham, 2015; von Dadelszen, 2018).
Some include elevated factor VIII consumption, increased levels of
fibrinopeptides A and B and of D-dimers, and reduced concentrations of the
regulatory proteins—antithrombin III and proteins C and S. Coagulation
aberrations generally are mild and seldom clinically significant (Kenny,
2015; Pritchard, 1984). Unless placental abruption is comorbid, plasma
fibrinogen levels do not differ remarkably from levels found in normal
pregnancy (Cunningham, 2015). As preeclampsia worsens, so do abnormal
findings with thromboelastography, which is described in Chapter 44 (p.
774) (Pisani-Conway, 2013). Despite these changes, routine laboratory
assessments of coagulation, such as prothrombin time (PT), activated partial
thromboplastin time (aPTT), and plasma fibrinogen level, are not required in
the management of pregnancy-associated hypertensive disorders.

■ Endocrine and Hormonal Alterations

Plasma levels of renin, angiotensin II, aldosterone, deoxycorticosterone,
and atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) are substantively augmented during
normal pregnancy. ANP is released during atrial wall stretching from blood
volume expansion, and it responds to cardiac contractility (Chap. 4, p. 65).
Serum ANP levels rise in pregnancy, and its secretion is further enhanced in
preeclampsia (Gu, 2018). Levels of its precursor—proatrial natriuretic
peptide—also are elevated in preeclampsia. Vasopressin levels are similar
in nonpregnant, in normally pregnant, and in preeclamptic women, although
its metabolic clearance is elevated in the latter two (Dürr, 1999).

■ Fluid and Electrolyte Alterations
In women with severe preeclampsia, the volume of extracellular fluid,
which manifests as edema, is usually much greater than that in normal
pregnant women. The mechanism responsible for pathological fluid retention
is endothelial injury and subsequent extravasation of intravascular fluid.
Affected women also have reduced plasma oncotic pressure. This further
displaces intravascular fluid into the surrounding interstitium. In women with
preeclampsia, electrolyte concentrations do not differ appreciably from those
of normal pregnant women.
Following an eclamptic convulsion, the serum pH and bicarbonate
concentration are lowered due to lactic acidosis and compensatory
respiratory loss of carbon dioxide. The intensity of acidosis relates to the
amount of lactic acid produced— metabolic acidosis—and the rate at which
carbon dioxide is exhaled—respiratory acidosis.

■ Kidney
During normal pregnancy, renal blood flow and glomerular filtration rate
(GFR) rise appreciably (Chap. 4, p. 68). With preeclampsia, several
reversible physiological changes ensue. Of clinical importance, renal
perfusion and GFR are slightly reduced. Most of the decrement in GFR is
from increased renal afferent arteriolar resistance that may be elevated up to
fivefold (Conrad, 2015; Cornelis, 2011).
Morphological changes are characterized by glomerular endotheliosis,
which blocks filtration (Phipps, 2019). Diminished filtration causes serum

creatinine levels to rise to values seen in nonpregnant individuals, that is, 1
mg/mL, and sometimes higher. Acute kidney injury is discussed subsequently.
Plasma uric acid concentration is typically elevated in preeclampsia. The
elevation exceeds that attributable to the reduced GFR and likely is also due
to enhanced tubular reabsorption (Chesley, 1945). At the same time,
preeclampsia is associated with diminished urinary excretion of calcium,
perhaps because of greater tubular reabsorption (Taufield, 1987).

Proteinuria
Detection of proteinuria helps to establish the diagnosis of preeclampsia (see
Table 40-1). Abnormal protein excretion is empirically defined by 24-hour
urinary excretion exceeding 300 mg; a spot urine protein: creatinine ratio
≥0.3; or persistent protein values of 30 mg/dL (1+ dipstick) in random urine
samples. Although worsening or nephrotic-range proteinuria was in the past
considered by most to be a sign of severe disease, this does not appear to be
the case (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2013;
Bartal, 2020).
Problematically, the optimal method of establishing abnormal levels of
either urine protein or albumin remains to be defined. For a 24-hour
quantitative specimen, the consensus threshold value is ≥300 mg/24 h
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2013; Bartal, 2020).
Using a urinary protein excretion threshold of 165 mg in a 12-hour sample
shows equivalent efficacy (Stout, 2015).
Determination of urinary protein: creatinine ratio may supplant the
cumbersome 24-hour quantification (Morris, 2012). In one systematic
review, random urine protein:creatinine ratios <130 to 150 mg/g, that is, 0.13
to 0.15, indicate a low likelihood of proteinuria exceeding 300 mg/d
(Papanna, 2008). Ratios <0.08 or >1.19 have negative and positive
predictive values of 86 and 96 percent, respectively (Stout, 2013). However,
midrange ratios, for example, 300 mg/g or 0.3, have poor sensitivity and
specificity. Any midrange ratio should be repeated, and if persistent, a 24hour urine collection for measurement of protein excretion should be
considered.
With urine dipstick assessment, results depend on urine concentration and
are notorious for false-positive and -negative results. A concentrated urine

specimen may show a dipstick value of 1+ to 2+ in women who actually
excrete <300 mg/d.
Importantly, proteinuria may develop late, and some women may already
be delivered or have had an eclamptic convulsion before it appears. At
presentation, 10 to 15 percent of women with HELLP syndrome do not have
proteinuria (Sibai, 2004). In another report, 17 percent of women with
eclampsia did not have proteinuria by the time of seizures (Zwart, 2008).

Anatomical Changes
Sheehan and Lynch (1973) frequently found microscopic changes that were
identified at autopsy in the kidneys of eclamptic women. Glomeruli are
enlarged by approximately 20 percent, they are “bloodless,” and capillary
loops variably are dilated and contracted. Endothelial cells are swollen—
termed glomerular capillary endotheliosis (Spargo, 1959). Such swelling
may be severe enough to block or partially block the capillary lumens (Fig.
40-8). Last, homogeneous subendothelial deposits of proteins and fibrin-like
material are seen (Hecht, 2017).

FIGURE 40-8 Schematic showing glomerular capillary endotheliosis. The capillary of the normal
glomerulus shown on the left has wide endothelial fenestrations, and the pedicels emanating from the
podocytes are widely spaced (arrow). The illustration on the right is of a glomerulus with changes

induced by the preeclampsia syndrome. The endothelial cells are swollen and their fenestrae narrowed,
as are the pedicels that now abut each other.

Endothelial swelling may result from angiogenic protein “withdrawal.”
This is caused by the complexing of free angiogenic proteins with a
compatible circulating antiangiogenic protein receptor (see Fig. 40-4). The
angiogenic proteins are crucial for podocyte health, and their inactivation
leads to podocyte dysfunction and endothelial swelling (Conrad, 2015;
Phipps, 2019). Eclampsia is characterized by greater excretion of these
epithelial podocytes (White, 2014).

Acute Kidney Injury
In one study, preeclampsia syndrome caused acute kidney injury (AKI) in 5
percent of patients and in 14 percent of those with HELLP syndrome
(Novotny, 2020). With severe preeclampsia, Rodriguez and colleagues
(2021) reported AKI in 15 percent of women in a study from Parkland
Hospital. In most, AKI was stage 1. In another study of 72 women with
preeclampsia and renal failure, half had HELLP syndrome, and a third had
placental abruption (Drakeley, 2002). In a review of 183 women with
HELLP syndrome, 5 percent had AKI (Haddad, 2000). Of those with renal
injury, half had placental abruption, and most had postpartum hemorrhage.
Abnormal renal values usually begin to normalize 10 days or later after
delivery (Cornelis, 2011; Spaan, 2012). Although mild degrees of AKI are
encountered, clinically apparent acute tubular necrosis is almost invariably
induced by comorbid hemorrhage and subsequent hypovolemia and
hypotension (Chap. 43, p. 753).
To evaluate AKI etiology clinically, urine electrolytes may be obtained.
Results with preeclampsia reflect an intrarenal cause. In most with
preeclampsia, the urine sodium concentration is elevated. Instead, changes
that indicate a prerenal mechanism include increase urine osmolality,
elevated urine: plasma creatinine ratio, and low fractional excretion of
sodium.
In response to oliguria, sodium-containing crystalloid temporarily
improves urine output. However, rapid infusions may cause clinically
apparent pulmonary edema (p. 695). Intensive intravenous fluid therapy is
not indicated as “treatment” for women with preeclampsia and oliguria,
unless urine output is diminished from hemorrhage or fluid loss from

vomiting or fever. In nonpregnant individuals, intravenous saline infusions
have demonstrated a negative impact on renal function. However, at Parkland
Hospital, transition from Ringer lactate to normal saline did not significantly
impair renal function in women with preeclampsia (Yule, 2020).

■ Liver
Hepatic changes are common in women with severe preeclampsia syndrome.
Several gross and microscopic anatomical derangements lead to elevated
serum hepatic transaminase levels. This transaminitis indicates
hepatocellular injury and is a marker for severe preeclampsia. Values are
seldom more than 500 U/L, but levels exceeding 2000 U/L have been
reported (Chap. 58, p. 1031). In general, serum concentrations inversely
follow platelet levels, and they both usually return to normal levels within 3
days after delivery.

Anatomical Changes
Regions of periportal hemorrhage in the liver periphery typify the hepatic
lesions of eclampsia (Hecht, 2017; Sheehan, 1973). Extensive involvement
such as shown in Figure 40-9 is unusual. Sheehan and Lynch (1973)
described that some degree of hepatic infarction accompanied hemorrhage in
almost half of women who died with eclampsia. These findings
corresponded with reports during the 1960s that described elevated serum
hepatic transaminase levels. Pritchard and associates (1954) described
hemolysis and thrombocytopenia with eclampsia. This constellation of
hemolysis, hepatocellular necrosis, and thrombocytopenia was later termed
HELLP syndrome. Similarities with hepatic sinusoidal obstruction are
reviewed by von Salmuth and coworkers (2020).

FIGURE 40-9 Hepatic section from a woman with HELLP syndrome who died of aspiration
pneumonia. There are areas of ischemia and infarction, and histopathological examination showed
periportal hemorrhages.

Liver involvement with preeclampsia may clinically display several
manifestations. First, pain is considered a sign of severe disease. It typically
manifests as moderate to severe right upper quadrant or midepigastric pain
and tenderness. These women usually have elevated serum aspartate
transaminase (AST) or alanine transaminase (ALT) levels. In some cases,
however, the amount of hepatic tissue involved with infarction may be
surprisingly extensive yet still clinically insignificant. To study this, we
performed magnetic resonance (MR) imaging in 16 women with HELLP
syndrome (Nelson, 2018). All but two had evidence of acute liver injury, and
the volume of involvement correlated with serum AST levels. Frank
infarction is unusual, and in our experiences, it may be worsened or
precipitated by hypotension from obstetrical hemorrhage. It occasionally
causes hepatic failure—also called shock liver (Morgan, 2019; Yoshihara,
2016).

Hepatic Hematoma

In another presentation, periportal hemorrhage and infarction may extend to
develop a hepatic hematoma. This in turn can extend to form a subcapsular
hematoma that may rupture. Computed tomography (CT) scanning or MR
imaging greatly aids diagnosis (Fig. 40-10). Unruptured hematomas are
probably more common than clinically suspected and are more likely to be
found with HELLP syndrome (Nelson, 2018). Although once considered a
surgical condition, current management of a hepatic hematoma is usually
observation unless bleeding is ongoing. In some cases, however, prompt
surgical intervention or angiographic embolization may be lifesaving
(Chandrasekaran, 2020). In one review of 180 cases of hepatic hematoma or
rupture, 94 percent of affected gravidas had HELLP syndrome, and in 90
percent of the total, the capsule had ruptured (Vigil-De Gracia, 2012). The
maternal mortality rate was 22 percent, and the perinatal mortality rate was
31 percent. Another review of 73 cases found similar outcomes (Gupta,
2021). In rare cases, liver transplantation is necessary (Escobar Vidarte,
2019).

FIGURE 40-10 Abdominal CT imaging performed postpartum in a woman with severe HELLP
syndrome and right-upper quadrant pain. A large subcapsular hematoma (asterisk) is seen confluent
with intrahepatic infarction and hematoma (arrowhead). Numerous flame-shaped hemorrhages are
seen at the hematoma interface (arrows).

Acute fatty liver of pregnancy is sometimes confused with preeclampsia
(Byrne, 2020; Nelson, 2013). It too has an onset in late pregnancy, and often
hypertension, elevated serum transaminase and creatinine levels, and
thrombocytopenia are comorbid. In distinction, the hallmark of acute fatty
liver is marked liver dysfunction. Liver function overall is usually normal in
HELLP syndrome. Table 58-1 (p. 1031) highlights these clinical differences.
No convincing data link pancreatic involvement with preeclampsia
syndrome. In 407 women with severe preeclampsia, the incidence was 1
percent (Sang, 2019). That said, the occasional case of concurrent
hemorrhagic pancreatitis is likely unrelated (Lynch, 2015). In our
experiences from Parkland Hospital, lipase and amylase levels are seldom
elevated in women with preeclampsia (Nelson, 2018).

HELLP Syndrome
This acronym stands for hemolysis, elevated liver enzyme levels, and low
platelet count. No strict definition of the syndrome is universally accepted,
and thus its reported incidence varies.
In women with preeclampsia, those with HELLP syndrome typically have
worse outcomes than those without it (Martin, 2012, 2013). In the previously
noted study of 183 women with HELLP syndrome, 40 percent had adverse
outcomes, and two mothers died (Haddad, 2000). Complications included
eclampsia in 6 percent, placental abruption—10 percent, AKI—5 percent,
and pulmonary edema—10 percent. Stroke, hepatic hematoma, coagulopathy,
acute respiratory distress syndrome, and sepsis were other complications. In
one review of 693 women with HELLP syndrome, 10 percent had concurrent
eclampsia (Keiser, 2011). Obstetrical outcomes also may suffer. In one study
comparing women with HELLP against those with preeclampsia, rates of
eclampsia were greater with HELLP—15 versus 4 percent; preterm birth—
93 versus 78 percent; and perinatal mortality—9 versus 4 percent,
respectively (Sep, 2009). Because of these marked clinical differences, some
postulate that HELLP syndrome has a distinct pathogenesis (Reimer, 2013;
Vaught, 2016).

■ Central Nervous System

Headaches and visual symptoms are common with severe preeclampsia, and
associated convulsions define eclampsia. The earliest anatomical
descriptions of brain involvement came from autopsy specimens, but CT and
MR imaging and Doppler studies have added important insights.

Neuroanatomical Lesions
From early anatomical descriptions, brain pathology accounted for only
approximately a third of fatal cases, such as the one shown in Figure 40-11.
In fact, most deaths were from pulmonary edema, and brain lesions were
coincidental. Thus, although gross intracerebral hemorrhage was seen in up
to 60 percent of eclamptic women, it was fatal in only half of these
(Richards, 1988). With data from Sheehan and Lynch (1973) shown in Figure
40-12, cortical and subcortical petechial hemorrhages are other principal
lesions found at autopsy in women with eclampsia. The classic microscopic
vascular lesions consist of fibrinoid necrosis of the arterial wall and
perivascular microinfarcts and hemorrhages. Other lesions include
nonhemorrhagic areas of “softening” throughout the brain, hemorrhages in the
white matter, and subcortical edema (Hecht, 2017; Willard, 2018).
Hemorrhage in the basal ganglia or pons, often with rupture into the
ventricles, may develop.

FIGURE 40-11 This autopsy brain slice shows a fatal hypertensive hemorrhage in a primigravida with
eclampsia.

FIGURE 40-12 Composite illustration showing location of cerebral hemorrhages and petechiae in
women with eclampsia. Insert shows the level of the brain from which the main image was constructed.

Cerebrovascular Pathophysiology
Clinical, pathological, and neuroimaging findings have led to two general
theories to explain cerebral abnormalities with eclampsia. Endothelial cell
dysfunction likely plays a key role in both. The first theory suggests that in
response to acute and severe hypertension, cerebrovascular overregulation
leads to vasospasm and eventual tissue infarction (Trommer, 1988). Little
objective evidence supports this mechanism.
The second theory is that sudden elevations in systemic blood pressure
exceed the normal cerebrovascular autoregulatory capacity (Schwartz,
2000). Regions of forced vasodilation and vasoconstriction develop,
especially in arterial boundary zones. At the capillary level, disruption of
end-capillary pressure causes increased hydrostatic pressure,
hyperperfusion, and extravasation of plasma and red cells through
endothelial tight-junction openings. This leads to vasogenic edema.

Most likely, the true mechanism combines these two. Thus, a
preeclampsia-associated interendothelial cell leak develops at blood
pressure levels much lower than those that usually cause vasogenic edema,
and this is coupled with a loss of upper-limit autoregulation (Fugate, 2015;
Zeeman, 2009). As shown in Figure 40-13, these abnormalities manifest as
the posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome (PRES). Lesions
principally involve the occipital and parietal cortices, but other areas are
often involved, although less extensively (Edlow, 2013; Zeeman, 2004a).

FIGURE 40-13 Cranial magnetic resonance imaging in a nullipara with eclampsia. This T2-FLAIR
image shows an occipital lesion consistent with posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome (PRES).
FLAIR = fluid-attenuated inversion recovery.

Cerebral Blood Flow
Autoregulation is the mechanism by which cerebral blood flow remains
relatively constant despite alterations in cerebral perfusion pressure. In
nonpregnant individuals, this mechanism protects the brain from
hyperperfusion when mean arterial pressures increase up to 160 mm Hg.
These pressures are far greater than those seen in most women with
eclampsia. Thus, to explain eclamptic seizures, it was theorized that

autoregulation must be altered by pregnancy. Some investigators have shown
impaired autoregulation in women with preeclampsia (Bergman, 2021b;
Janzarik, 2014). When studied 2 to 3 years postpartum, women who had
preeclampsia had returned to normal autoregulation (Janzarik, 2018).
Zeeman and associates (2003) showed that cerebral blood flow during
the first two trimesters of normal pregnancy is similar to nonpregnant values.
But during the last trimester, flow significantly drops by 20 percent. They
found greater cerebral blood flow in this trimester in women with severe
preeclampsia compared with flow in normotensive pregnant women (Lee,
2019; Zeeman, 2004b). Taken together, these findings suggest that eclampsia
occurs when cerebral hyperperfusion forces capillary fluid interstitially
because of endothelial damage. This leak leads to perivascular edema. Some
data suggest that the blood-brain barrier is not impaired, but in-vitro studies
may indicate increased permeability (Bergman, 2021a; Burwick, 2018).

Neurological Manifestations
Several neurological manifestations typify the preeclampsia syndrome. Each
signifies severe involvement and requires immediate attention.
First, headache and scotomata are thought to arise from cerebrovascular
hyperperfusion that has a predilection for the occipital lobes. In women
preceding an eclamptic convulsion, up to 75 percent have headaches, and 20
to 30 percent have visual changes (Sibai, 2005; Zwart, 2008). The headaches
vary in severity and persistence. In our experiences, they are unique in that
they do not usually respond to traditional analgesia but frequently improve
after magnesium sulfate infusion.
Convulsions are diagnostic for eclampsia. These are caused by abnormal
excessive or synchronous neural activity in the brain. Evidence suggests that
extended seizures can cause significant brain injury and later brain
dysfunction.
Blindness and generalized cerebral edema are discussed in subsequent
sections. Last, women with eclampsia have been shown to have some
cognitive decline when studied 5 to 10 years following the involved
pregnancy (Bergman, 2021c). This is discussed further in Chapter 41 (p.
727).

Neuroimaging Studies

With CT imaging, localized hypodense lesions are frequently seen with
eclampsia at the gray- and white-matter junction and primarily in the
parietooccipital lobes. Frontal and inferior temporal lobes, the basal ganglia,
and thalamus are other sites (Brown, 1988). These hypodense areas
correspond to petechial hemorrhages and local edema. Edema of the
occipital lobes or diffuse cerebral edema may cause blindness, lethargy, and
confusion (Cunningham, 2000). Widespread edema can appear as marked
compression or even obliteration of the cerebral ventricles. Such women
may develop signs of impending life-threatening transtentorial herniation.
Several MR imaging acquisitions are used to study women with
eclampsia (Singh, 2021). Common findings are hyperintense T2 lesions in
the subcortical and cortical regions of the parietal and occipital lobes, which
reflect PRES (see Fig. 40-13). The basal ganglia, brainstem, and cerebellum
are other involved sites (Brewer, 2013; Zeeman, 2004a). PRES lesions are
almost universal in women with eclampsia, and their incidence in women
with severe preeclampsia approximates 20 percent (Hosapatna
Basavarajappa, 2020; Mayama, 2016). Although usually reversible, a fourth
of these hyperintense lesions with eclampsia have restricted diffusion that
signify cerebral infarctions. These have persistent MR imaging findings
(Loureiro, 2003; Zeeman, 2004a).

Visual Changes and Blindness
Retinal artery and venular calibers are decreased in women with
preeclampsia (Soma-Pillay, 2018). These changes, along with visual cortex
involvement, can cause scotomata, blurred vision, or diplopia, which is
common with severe preeclampsia and eclampsia. These symptoms usually
improve with magnesium sulfate therapy, or lowered blood pressure, or both.
Blindness is rare with preeclampsia alone, but it complicates up to 15
percent of women with eclampsia (Cunningham, 1995). It can develop a
week or more following delivery. Blindness is usually reversible and may
arise from three potential areas. These are the occipital lobe’s visual cortex,
the lateral geniculate nuclei, and the retina.
Occipital blindness is also called amaurosis. With MR imaging, affected
women usually have evidence of extensive occipital lobe vasogenic edema.
Of 15 women cared for at Parkland Hospital, occipital blindness lasted from
4 hours to 8 days, but it resolved completely in all cases (Cunningham,

1995). Rarely, extensive cerebral infarctions may result in total or partial
visual defects.
In the retina, ischemia, infarction, or serous detachment may occur
(Handor, 2014). Retinal infarction, termed Purtscher retinopathy, is rare
(Fig. 40-14). Serous retinal detachment is usually unilateral and seldom
causes total visual loss. Asymptomatic serous retinal detachment is relatively
common with preeclampsia (Gupta, 2019). In most cases of eclampsiaassociated blindness, visual acuity subsequently improves (Mandura, 2021).
If blindness is caused by retinal artery occlusion, vision may be permanently
impaired (Roos, 2012).

FIGURE 40-14 Purtscher retinopathy caused by choroidal ischemia and infarction in preeclampsia
syndrome. Ophthalmoscopy shows scattered yellowish, opaque lesions of the retina (arrows).
(Reproduced with permission from Lam, DS, Chan W: Images in clinical medicine. Choroidal ischemia
in preeclampsia. N Engl J Med 344(10):739, 2001).

Cerebral Edema
Manifestations that suggest widespread cerebral edema are worrisome.
During 13 years at Parkland Hospital, 10 of 175 women with eclampsia
were diagnosed with symptomatic cerebral edema (Cunningham, 2000).

Symptoms ranged from lethargy, confusion, and blurred vision to obtundation
and coma. In most cases, symptoms waxed and waned. Of these 10, three
became comatose and had imaging findings of transtentorial herniation. One
woman died.
Mental status changes generally correlated with the degree of
involvement seen with CT and MR imaging studies. These women are very
susceptible to sudden and severe blood pressure elevations, which can
acutely worsen the already widespread vasogenic edema. Thus, careful
blood pressure control is essential.

■ Uteroplacental Perfusion
Compromised uteroplacental perfusion is almost certainly a major
contributor to the increased perinatal morbidity and mortality rates
associated with preeclampsia syndrome (Harmon, 2015). Contributing
defects in endovascular trophoblastic invasion were discussed earlier (p.
692). Thus, measurement of uterine, intervillous, and placental blood flow
would likely be informative. Attempts to assess these in humans have been
hampered. Barriers include the placenta’s inaccessibility, the complexity of
its venous effluent, and the need for invasive techniques or radioisotopes.
As a surrogate, sonographic measurement of uterine artery blood flow
velocity can estimate resistance to uteroplacental blood flow. Vascular
resistance is estimated by comparing arterial systolic and diastolic velocity
waveforms (Chap. 14, p. 262). By the completion of placentation, impedance
to uterine artery blood flow is markedly decreased, but with abnormal
placentation, abnormally high resistance persists (Everett, 2012; Napolitano,
2012). In earlier studies, peak systolic:diastolic velocity ratios from uterine
and umbilical arteries in preeclamptic pregnancies were measured. In some
cases, but not all, resistance was higher (Ferrazzi, 2018; Trudinger, 1990).
Another Doppler waveform, termed uterine artery “notching,” has been
linked with increased risks for preeclampsia or fetal-growth restriction
(Groom, 2009). However, in one MFMU Network study, notching had a low
predictive value except for early-onset, severe disease (Myatt, 2012a).
Resistance in uterine spiral arteries also has been measured. In one
study, mean resistance values were greater in all women with preeclampsia
compared with those in normotensive controls (Matijevic, 1999). Another
study used MR imaging and other techniques to assess placental perfusion ex

vivo in the myometrial arteries removed from women with preeclampsia or
fetal-growth restriction (Ong, 2003). In both conditions, myometrial arteries
exhibited similar vascular responses.
Despite these findings, evidence for compromised uteroplacental
circulation is found in only a few women who later develop preeclampsia.
Indeed, when preeclampsia develops during the third trimester, only a third
of women with severe disease have abnormal uterine artery velocimetry (Li,
2005). In a study of 50 women with HELLP syndrome, only a third had
abnormal uterine artery waveforms (Bush, 2001). In general, the extent of
abnormal waveforms correlates with severity of fetal involvement (Ghidini,
2008; Groom, 2009).
These sonographic findings have value for prediction of fetal-growth
restriction but not preeclampsia (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2019b; Demers, 2019). Several other flow velocity
waveforms have been investigated for preeclampsia prediction. However,
none is suitable for clinical use (De Kat, 2019; Townsend, 2018).

Fetal-growth Restriction
Discussed in detail in Chapter 47, this potential consequence of
preeclampsia can serve as one severity indicator (see Table 40-2). Namely,
poor growth is usually confined to fetuses of women destined to develop
severe preeclampsia (Mateus, 2019). Perry and colleagues (2020) reported
that pregnancies complicated by fetal-growth restriction more likely had
maternal hemodynamic indices similar to preeclampsia. Measures showed
higher mean arterial pressure, greater systemic vascular resistance, lower
cardiac output, and elevated uterine artery pulsatility index. Fetuses born to
preeclamptic mothers have cardiac remodeling similar to growth-restricted
fetuses (Youseff, 2020).

PREDICTION
Some biological markers implicated in the genesis of the preeclampsia
syndrome have been measured to help predict its development. Although
most have been evaluated in the first half of pregnancy, some have been
tested as predictors of severity in the third trimester. Still others have been
used to forecast recurrent preeclampsia. Overall, these efforts have resulted

in testing strategies with poor sensitivity and poor positive predictive values
for preeclampsia (Conde-Agudelo, 2015; De Kat, 2019). Currently, no
screening tests for preeclampsia are predictably reliable, valid, and
economical.
Because combinations of tests and risk factors might be superior to single
predictors, some have developed multivariable screening algorithms (Boutin,
2021; Brunelli, 2020; Copel, 2020; Serra, 2020; Snell, 2020). One firsttrimester screening protocol using serum sFlt-1 levels has been proposed
(Pihl, 2020). Other examples are midpregnancy algorithms (Black, 2020;
Peguero, 2021; Stepan, 2020). None has been adequately verified sufficiently
for widespread clinical use (Capriglione, 2020).

■ Vascular Resistance Testing and Placental Perfusion
Most tests in this category are cumbersome, time consuming, and inaccurate.
To evaluate blood pressure changes, three tests assess the blood pressure
rise in response to a stimulus. In one, women at 28 to 32 weeks’ gestation
rest in the left lateral decubitus position and then roll to lie supine. With this
roll-over test, rising blood pressure in response to the maneuver signifies a
positive test. The isometric exercise test employs the same principle by
squeezing a handball. The angiotensin II infusion test provides
incrementally higher doses intravenously, and the hypertensive response is
quantified. Sensitivities of all three tests range from 55 to 70 percent, and
specificities approximated 85 percent (Conde-Agudelo, 2015).
Uterine artery Doppler velocimetry is posited to reflect faulty
trophoblastic invasion of the spiral arteries. The poor predictive value of
this for preeclampsia was described in the Uteroplacental Perfusion section
(p. 702).

■ Fetal-Placental Unit Endocrine Function
Several serum analytes have been proposed to help predict preeclampsia.
Newer ones are continually added. In general, none of these tests is clinically
beneficial for hypertension prediction.

■ Renal Function Tests

Hyperuricemia results from reduced uric acid clearance caused by
diminished glomerular filtration, increased tubular reabsorption, and
decreased secretion. In one study, the sensitivity of serum uric acid levels to
detect preeclampsia ranged from 0 to 55 percent, and specificity was 77 to
95 percent (Cnossen, 2006). These are seldom used to diagnose
preeclampsia (Chescheir, 2019).
Isolated gestational proteinuria is a risk factor for preeclampsia
(Jayaballa, 2015; Morgan, 2016). But, as a predictive test for preeclampsia,
microalbuminuria has sensitivities ranging from 7 to 90 percent and
specificities spanning 29 to 97 percent (Conde-Agudelo, 2015).

■ Endothelial Dysfunction and Oxidative Stress
Endothelial activation and inflammation are major participants in
preeclampsia pathophysiology. Levels of some implicated compounds are
elevated in the blood of affected women and have been assessed as
predictors.
Fibronectins are high-molecular-weight glycoproteins released from
endothelial cells and extracellular matrix following endothelial injury. In one
systematic review, however, neither cellular nor total fibronectin levels were
clinically useful to predict preeclampsia (Leeflang, 2007).
Thrombocytopenia and platelet dysfunction are integral features of
preeclampsia. Platelet activation causes their augmented destruction and
lower blood concentrations. Platelet volume is increased because of platelet
immaturity, and platelet volume has been described to be an early predictor
of preeclampsia (Bellos, 2019; Mayer-Pickel, 2021). Although markers of
coagulation activation described earlier (p. 696) are elevated, they
substantively overlap with levels in normotensive pregnant women (von
Dadelszen, 2018).
Of oxidative stress markers, higher levels of lipid peroxides coupled
with decreased antioxidant activity can be seen with preeclampsia. Other
markers are iron, transferrin, and ferritin; resistin; hyperhomocysteinemia;
blood lipids; and antioxidants such as ascorbic acid and vitamin E
(Christiansen, 2015; Conde-Agudelo, 2015; Mackay, 2012; Mignini, 2005).
However, none has sufficient predictive value.

■ Angiogenic and Antiangiogenic Factor Imbalance
An imbalance in angiogenic and antiangiogenic factors is convincingly linked
to preeclampsia pathogenesis (p. 694). Serum levels of VEGF and PlGF
begin to drop before clinical preeclampsia develops. At the same time,
levels of some antiangiogenic factors, such as sFlt-1 and sEng, begin to rise.
Factor levels and ratios differ significantly between women with
preeclampsia and those who are normotensive. These show especially good
predictive performance with early-onset preeclampsia (Burton, 2019;
Cerdeira, 2019; Phipps, 2019; Stepan, 2020).
These tests also can serve as diagnostic adjuncts (Duhig, 2019; Zeisler,
2016). First, they may aid differentiating between preeclampsia and mimics
that include chronic hypertension, chronic kidney disease, systemic lupus
erythematosus, and immunological thrombocytopenia. These tests can also
help differentiate mild and severe disease. These plus other multiple markers
will likely have a future role in first-trimester preeclampsia screening
(Sovio, 2019).

■ Other Markers
Cell-free DNA (cfDNA) of placental origin can be detected in maternal
plasma (Chap. 16, p. 327). It is hypothesized that cfDNA is released in
preeclampsia by accelerated apoptosis of cytotrophoblasts. However, one
MFMU Network study found no correlation between total cfDNA levels and
preeclampsia prediction (Silver, 2017).
Other investigated markers include glycosylated hemoglobin A1c, serum
cystatin-c, and first-trimester estimated placental volume (Bellos, 2019;
Cavero-Redondo, 2018; Kim, 2021). Proteomic, metabolomic, and
transcriptomic technologies can be employed to study serum and urinary
proteins and cellular metabolites. Preliminary studies indicate their potential
predictive value (Bahado-Singh, 2013; Ma, 2014).

PREVENTION
Various strategies used to prevent or modify preeclampsia severity have been
evaluated. Some are listed in Table 40-4. With the possible exception of
aspirin, none is convincingly and reproducibly effective.

TABLE 40-4. Some Methods to Prevent Preeclampsia That Have Been
Evaluated in Randomized Trials

■ Dietary and Lifestyle Modifications
A low-salt diet was one of the earliest researched preventions but is not
supported by data (De Snoo, 1937). Of studies, one randomized trial showed
that a sodium-restricted diet was ineffective in preventing preeclampsia
(Knuist, 1998).
Regular exercise during pregnancy is linked to a lower risk of
developing preeclampsia (Barakat, 2016; Morris, 2017). In one systematic
review, a similar trend toward risk reduction with exercise was noted
(Kasawara, 2012). Only a few studies have been randomized.
Somewhat related, one retrospective cohort study of 677 nonhypertensive
women were hospitalized for bed rest because of threatened preterm
delivery (Abenhaim, 2008). When outcomes of these women were compared
with those of the general obstetrical population, bed rest was associated with
a significantly reduced risk of developing preeclampsia (relative risk 0.27).
From two small randomized trials, prophylactic bed rest for 4 to 6 hours
daily at home was successful in significantly lowering the preeclampsia
incidence in women with normal blood pressures (Meher, 2006). Currently,
the Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine (2020) does not recommend
reduced activity for women with hypertensive disorders or for prevention of
preeclampsia.
Calcium supplementation has been studied, but in one trial of more than
4500 low-risk nulliparas, supplementation failed to decrease the risk for
preeclampsia or pregnancy-associated hypertension (Levine, 1997). Similar
findings were reported from another trial (Hofmeyer, 2019). In aggregate,
most trials show that unless women are calcium deficient, supplementation
offers no benefits (Palacios, 2019; Sanchez-Ramos, 2017).

Subclinical hypothyroidism is associated with increased preeclampsia
risk. This insufficiency has been postulated to stem from iodine deficiency,
but a recent metaanalysis found no association between iodine sufficiency
and preeclampsia (Businge, 2021). Folic acid was evaluated in a
randomized trial (Wen, 2018). Nearly 2500 high-risk women were given a 4mg folic acid dose daily or placebo. The incidence of preeclampsia in both
groups approximated 14 percent.
Cardioprotective fatty acids found in some fish likely prevent
inflammation-mediated atherogenesis. Thus, it was posited that they might
also prevent preeclampsia. However, randomized trials conducted thus far
show no such benefits from fish oil supplementation (Zhou, 2012). In one
longitudinal cohort study, a seafood diet, compared with a western one,
provided a protective effect against preeclampsia (Ikem, 2019).

■ Antihypertensive Drugs
Because of the prior purported benefits of sodium restriction for
preeclampsia prevention, diuretic therapy became popular with the advent of
chlorothiazide in 1957 (Flowers, 1962). In one metaanalysis of nine
randomized trials with more than 7000 pregnancies, women given diuretics
had a lower incidence of edema and hypertension but not of preeclampsia
(Churchill, 2007). Because women with chronic hypertension are at high risk
for preeclampsia, several randomized trials have evaluated various
antihypertensive drugs to reduce the incidence of superimposed
preeclampsia (Chap. 41, p. 713). A critical analysis of these trials by Staff
and coworkers (2015) failed to demonstrate benefits for this goal.

■ Antioxidants
Data imply that an imbalance between oxidant and antioxidant activity plays
a role in preeclampsia pathogenesis. Thus, naturally occurring antioxidants—
vitamins C, D, and E—might reduce such oxidation. Several randomized
studies have assessed antioxidant vitamin supplementation for women at high
risk for preeclampsia (Burton, 2019; Villar, 2009). The Combined
Antioxidant and Preeclampsia Prediction Studies (CAPPS) by the MFMU
Network included almost 10,000 low-risk nulliparas (Roberts, 2010). None

of these studies showed reduced preeclampsia rates in women supplemented
with vitamins C and E compared with those given placebo.
Statins were proposed to prevent preeclampsia because they stimulate
heme oxygenase-1 expression, which inhibits sF1t-1 release. Early animal
data suggest that statins may prevent hypertensive disorders of pregnancy
(Lewis, 2017). The MFMU Network plans a randomized trial to test
pravastatin for prevention, and a pilot study is completed (Costantine, 2016).
Metformin inhibits hypoxic inducible factor 1α by lowering
mitochondrial electron transport chain activity. It reduces sFlt-1 and sEng
activity and thus has potential to prevent preeclampsia (Brownfoot, 2016). In
a preliminary study, prediabetic women were given metformin or placebo
throughout pregnancy, and metformin-treated women had a lower incidence
of severe preeclampsia (Racine, 2021). However, other clinical studies are
lacking.

■ Antithrombotic Agents
Preeclampsia is characterized by vasospasm, endothelial cell dysfunction,
inflammation, and activation of platelets and the coagulation–hemostasis
system. Other sequelae include placental infarction and spiral artery
thrombosis (Nelson, 2014). Thus, antithrombotic agents have been evaluated
to prevent preeclampsia. Low-molecular-weight heparin has been studied in
randomized trials. In a subsequent metaanalysis using individual data from
963 women, the risk for recurrent preeclampsia, abruption, or fetal-growth
restriction was similar in women receiving heparin or placebo (Rodger,
2016).

Low-dose Aspirin
In low doses of 50 to 150 mg daily, aspirin effectively inhibits platelet
thromboxane A2 biosynthesis. It has minimal effects on vascular prostacyclin
production. Still, several clinical trials have shown limited benefits in
preeclampsia prevention. In a randomized trial from the MFMU Network,
risks for adverse outcomes were not significantly reduced with aspirin
therapy (Caritis, 1998). This study was followed by numerous similar
studies and metaanalyses.

In another randomized trial of more than 1600 women at high risk for
preterm preeclampsia, oral low-dose aspirin was given daily from 11 to 14
weeks’ gestation until 36 weeks to prevent recurrence (Rolnik, 2017). The
rate of preterm preeclampsia recurrence was 1.6 percent in the aspirin group
compared with 4.3 percent in the placebo arm. In a metaanalysis, Roberge
and colleagues (2017) found that aspirin prophylaxis initiated before 16
weeks’ gestation was associated with a significant risk reduction—
approximately 60 percent—of preeclampsia and fetal-growth restriction. At
the same time, however, Meher and associates (2017) performed an
individual participant data metaanalysis and reported a much lower—
approximately 10 percent—risk reduction. Effects were significant whether
therapy was initiated before or after 16 weeks’ gestation.
In a subsequent metaanalysis, Roberge and coworkers (2018) found that
aspirin prophylaxis given starting ≤16 weeks’ gestation reduced the risk of
preterm, but not term, preeclampsia. Turner and colleagues (2020) reported
that aspirin improved some perinatal outcomes independent of effects on
preeclampsia risk. But to the contrary, the review by Chaemsaithong and
coworkers (2020) found no benefits even when low-dose aspirin was given
before 11 weeks’ gestation.
Based on these data, the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (2021)
recommends low-dose aspirin prophylaxis for women at high risk for
preeclampsia. The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
(2018, 2020) now recommends low-dose aspirin be given between 12 and
28 weeks’ gestation to help prevent preeclampsia in high-risk women.
Candidates include those with ≥1 of the following: prior preeclampsia,
chronic hypertension, overt diabetes, renal disease, autoimmune disorders,
and multifetal gestation. Supplementation may be considered for those with
more than one of these qualities: nulliparous, aged older than 35 years,
obese, family history of preeclampsia, vulnerable sociodemographics, and
prior low-birthweight or growth-restricted neonate. These results have also
raised the question as to whether all pregnant women should be given aspirin
(Ayala, 2019).
Low-dose aspirin coupled with heparin mitigates thrombotic sequelae in
women with lupus anticoagulant (Chap. 62, p. 1116). Because of a similarly
high prevalence of placental thrombotic lesions found with severe
preeclampsia, trials have assessed the possible merits of such treatments for
women with prior preeclampsia. In two randomized trials, women with a

history of early-onset preeclampsia were given aspirin alone or a regimen of
enoxaparin plus aspirin (Groom, 2017; Haddad, 2016). Outcomes were
similar. Low-molecular-weight heparin, with or without aspirin, may
decrease the risk for preeclampsia in high-risk women (de Vries, 2012;
Wang, 2020).

REFERENCES
Abdul-Karim R, Assali NS: Pressor response to angiotonin in pregnant and nonpregnant women. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 82:246, 1961
Abenhaim HA, Bujold E, Benjamin A, et al: Evaluating the role of bedrest on the prevention of
hypertensive disease of pregnancy and growth restriction. Hypertens Pregnancy 27(2):197, 2008
Adam I, Mutabingwa TK, Malik EM: Red cell distribution width and preeclampsia: a systematic review
and meta-analysis. Clin Hypertens 25:15, 2019
Alexander JM, McIntire DD, Leveno KJ, et al: Magnesium sulfate for the prevention of eclampsia in
women with mild hypertension. Am J Obstet Gynecol 189:S89, 2003
Alexander JM, McIntire DD, Leveno KJ, et al: Selective magnesium sulfate prophylaxis for the
prevention of eclampsia in women with gestational hypertension. Obstet Gynecol 108: 826, 2006
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Hypertension in pregnancy. Report of the
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists’ Task Force on Hypertension in Pregnancy.
Obstet Gynecol 122:1122, 2013
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Low-dose aspirin use during pregnancy.
Committee Opinion No. 743, June, 2018
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Chronic hypertension in pregnancy. Practice
Bulletin No. 203, January 2019a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Obstetric analgesia and anesthesia. Practice
Bulletin No. 209, February 2019b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Gestational hypertension and preeclampsia.
Practice Bulletin No. 222, June 2020
Ayala NK, Rouse DJ: A nudge toward universal aspirin for preeclampsia prevention. Obstet Gynecol
133(4):725, 2019
Bahado-Singh RO, Akolekar R, Mandal R, et al: First-trimester metabolomic detection of late-onset
preeclampsia. Am J Obstet Gynecol 208(1):58e1, 2013
Baltajian K, Bajracharya S, Salahuddin S, et al: Sequential plasma angiogenic factors levels in women
with suspected preeclampsia. Am J Obstet Gynecol 215(1):89.e1, 2016
Barakat R, Pelaez M, Cordero Y, et al: Exercise during pregnancy protects against hypertension and
macrosomia: randomized clinical trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol 214:649.e1, 2016
Bartsch E, Medcalf KE, Park AL, et al: Clinical risk factors for preeclampsia determined in early
pregnancy: systematic review and meta-analysis of large cohort studies. BMJ 353:il753, 2016
Bdolah Y, Palomaki GE, Yaron Y, et al: Circulating angiogenic proteins in trisomy 13. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 194(1):239, 2006
Bellos I, Fitrou G, Daskalakis G, et al: Serum cystatin-c as predictive factor of preeclampsia: a
metaanalysis of 27 observational studies. Pregnancy Hypertens 16:97, 2019

Bergman L, Acurio J, Leon J, et al: Preeclampsia and increased permeability over the blood-brain
barrier: a role of vascular endothelial growth receptor 2. Am J Hypertens 34(1):73, 2021a
Bergman L, Cluver C, Carlberg N, et al: Cerebral perfusion pressure and autoregulation in eclampsia—
a case control study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 225(2):185.e1, 2021b
Bergman L, Thorgeirsdottir L, Elden H, et al: Cognitive impairment in preeclampsia complicated by
eclampsia and pulmonary edema after delivery. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 100(7):1280, 2021c
Black C, Rolnik DL, Al-Amin A, et al: Prediction of preterm preeclampsia at midpregnancy using a
multivariable screening algorithm. Aust N S J Obstet Gynaecol 60(5):675, 2020
Boutin A, Gasse C, Guerby P, et al: First-trimester preterm preeclampsia screening in nulliparous
women: the great obstetrical syndrome (GOS) study. J Obstet Gynaecol Can 43(1):43, 2021
Brewer J, Owens MY, Wallace K, et al: Posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome in 46 of 47
patients with eclampsia. Am J Obstet Gynecol 208(6):468e1, 2013
Brosens I, Puttemans P, Benagiano G: Placental bed research: 1. The placental bed. From spiral arteries
remodeling to the great obstetrical syndromes. Am J Obstet Gynecol 221(5):437, 2019
Brown CE, Purdy P, Cunningham FG: Head computed tomographic scans in women with eclampsia.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 159(4):915, 1988
Brownfoot FC, Hastie R, Hannan NJ, et al: Metformin as a prevention and treatment for preeclampsia:
effects on soluble fms-like tyrosine kinase 1 and soluble endoglin secretion and endothelial
dysfunction. Am J Obstet Gynecol 214(3):356.el, 2016
Brunelli E, Seidenari A, Germano C, et al: External validation of a simple risk score based on the
ASPRE trial algorithm for preterm preeclampsia considering maternal characteristics in nulliparous
pregnant women: a multicentric retrospective cohort study. BJOG 127(10):1210, 2020
Burton GJ, Redman CW, Roberts JM, et al: Preeclampsia: pathophysiology and clinical implications.
BMJ 366:12381, 2019
Burwick RM, Rincon M, Beeraka SS, et al: Evaluation of hemolysis as a severe feature of
preeclampsia. Hypertension 72(2):460, 2018
Bush KD, O’Brien JM, Barton JR: The utility of umbilical artery Doppler investigation in women with
HELLP (hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, and low platelet count) syndrome. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 184:1087, 2001
Businge C, Usenbo A, Longo-Mbenza B, et al: Insufficient iodine nutrition status and the risk of
preeclampsia: a systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ Open 11(2):e043505, 2021
Buttrup LS, Wallukat G, Schimke I, et al: Functional autoantibodies against endothelin-l receptor type A
and angiotensin II receptor type 1 in patients with preeclampsia. Pregnancy Hypertens Oct 14:189,
2018
Buurma AJ, Turner RJ, Driessen JH, et al: Genetic variants in preeclampsia: a meta-analysis. Hum
Reprod Update 19(3):289, 2013
Byrne JJ, Seasely A, Nelson DB, et al: Comparing acute fatty liver of pregnancy from hemolysis,
elevated liver enzymes, and low platelets syndrome. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 19:1, 2020
Capriglione S, Plotti F, Terranova C, et al: Preeclampsia and the challenge of early prediction: reality or
utopia? State of art and critical review of literature. J Matern Fetal Neonatal 33(4):677, 2020
Caritis S, Sibai B, Hauth J, et al: Low-dose aspirin to prevent preeclampsia in women at high risk.
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development Network of Maternal-Fetal Medicine
Units. N Engl J Med 338(11):70, 1998
Cavero-Redondo I, Martinez-Vizcaino V, Soriano-Cano A, et al: Glycated haemoglobin A1c as a
predictor of preeclampsia in type 1 diabetic pregnant women: a systematic review and metaanalysis.
Pregnancy Hypertens 14:49, 2018

Cerdeira AS, O’Sullivan J, Ohuma EO, et al: Randomized interventional study on prediction of
preeclampsia/eclampsia in women with suspected preeclampsia. Hypertension 74(4):983, 2019
Chaemsaithong P, Cuenca-Gomez D, Plana MN, et al: Does low-dose aspirin initiated before 11 weeks’
gestation reduce the rate of preeclampsia? Am J Obstet Gynecol 222(5):437, 2020
Chandrasekaran D, Simon R: Hepatic complications in preeclampsia. Clin Obstet Gynecol 63(1):165,
2020
Chase VL, McBride CA, Badger GJ, et al: Association of pre- pregnancy and longitudinal change in
angiotensin-II with preterm preeclampsia. Abstract No. 934, Am J Obstet Gynecol 216:S530, 2017
Chavarria ME, Lara-Gonzålez L, Gonzålez-Gleason A, et al: Prostacyclin/thromboxane early changes in
pregnancies that are complicated by preeclampsia. Am J Obstet Gynecol 188:986, 2003
Chescheir NC: Serum uric acid measurement in women with hypertensive disorders of pregnancy.
Obstet Gynecol 134(3): 636, 2019
Chesley LC: Diagnosis of preeclampsia. Obstet Gynecol 65:423, 1985
Chesley LC (ed): Hypertensive Disorders in Pregnancy. Appleton Century—Crofts, New York, 1978
Chesley LC, Williams LO: Renal glomerular and tubular function in relation to the hyperuricemia of
preeclampsia and eclampsia. Am J Obstet Gynecol 50:367, 1945
Christiansen M, Hedley PL, Placing S, et al: Maternal serum resistin is reduced in first trimester
preeclampsia pregnancies and is a marker of clinical severity. Hypertens Pregnancy 34(4):422, 2015
Churchill D, Beever GD, Meher S, et al: Diuretics for preventing preeclampsia. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev 1:CD004451, 2007
Cnossen JS, de Ruyter-Hanhijarvi H, van der Post JA, et al: Accuracy of serum uric acid determination
in predicting pre-eclampsia: a systematic review. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 85(5):519, 2006
Conde-Agudelo A, Romero R, Roberts JM: Tests to predict preeclampsia. In Taylor RN, Roberts JM,
Cunningham FG (eds): Chesley’s Hypertensive Disorders in Pregnancy, 4th ed. Amsterdam,
Academic Press, 2015
Conrad KP, Stillman I, Lindheimer MD: The kidney in normal pregnancy and preeclampsia. In Taylor
RN, Roberts JM, Cunningham FG (eds): Chesley’s Hypertensive Disorders in Pregnancy, 4th ed.
Amsterdam, Academic Press, 2015
Copel JA, Platt LD, Hobbins JC, et al: Gottesfe1d-Hohler memorial foundation risk assessment for early
onset preeclampsia in the United States. Obstet Gynecol 135(1):36, 2020
Cornelis T, Odutayo A, Keunen J, et al: The kidney in normal pregnancy and preeclampsia. Semin
Nephrol 31(1):4, 2011
Costantine MM, Cleary K, Hebert MF, et al: Safety and pharmacokinetics of pravastatin used for the
prevention of preeclampsia in high-risk pregnant women: a pilot randomized controlled trial Am J
Obstet Gynecol 214(6):720.e1, 2016
Cunningham FG, Fernandez CO, Hernandez C: Blindness associated with preeclampsia and eclampsia.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 172:1291, 1995
Cunningham FG, Lowe T, Guss S, et al: Erythrocyte morphology in women with severe preeclampsia
and eclampsia. Am J Obstet Gynecol 153:358, 1985
Cunningham FG, Nelson DB: Disseminated intravascular coagulation syndromes in obstetrics. Obstet
Gynecol 126(5):999, 2015
Cunningham FG, Twickler D: Cerebral edema complicating eclampsia. Am J Obstet Gynecol 182:94,
2000
Davidge S, de Groot C, Taylor RN: Endothelial cell dysfunction and oxidative stress. In Taylor RN,
Roberts JM, Cunningham FG (eds): Chesley’s Hypertensive Disorders in Pregnancy, 4th ed.
Amsterdam, Academic Press, 2015

De Kat AC, Hirst J, Woodward M, et al: Prediction models for preeclampsia: a systematic review.
Pregnancy Hypertens 16:48, 2019
Demers S, Boutin A, Gassee C, et al: First-trimester uterine artery Doppler for the prediction of
preeclampsia in nulliparous women: the great obstetrical syndrome study. Am J Perinatal 36(9):930,
2019
De Snoo K: The prevention of eclampsia. Am J Obstet Gynecol 34:911, 1937
de Vries JI, van Pampus MG, Hague WM: Low-molecular-weight heparin added to aspirin in the
prevention of recurrent early- onset pre-eclampsia in women with inheritable thrombophilia: the
FRUIT-RCT. J Thromb Haemost 10(1):64, 2012
De Wolf F, De Wolf-Peeters C, Brosens I, et al: The human placental bed: electron microscopic study
of trophoblastic invasion of spiral arteries. Am J Obstet Gynecol 137:58, 1980
Drakeley AJ, Le Roux PA, Anthony J, et al: Acute renal failure complicating severe preeclampsia
requiring admission to an obstetric intensive care unit. Am J Obstet Gynecol 186:253, 2002
Drassinower D, Friedman AM, Levin H, et al: Does magnesium exposure affect neonatal resuscitation?
Am J Obstet Gynecol 213:424.e1, 2015
Duckworth S, Griffin M, Seed PT, et al: Diagnostic biomarkers in women with suspected preeclampsia
in a prospective multicenter study. Obstet Gynecol 128(2):245, 2016
Duhig KE, Myers J, Seed PT, et al: Placental growth factor testing to assess women with suspected
preeclampsia: a multi centre, pragmatic, stepped-wedge cluster-randomised controlled trial. Lancet
393(10183):1807, 2019
Dürr JA, Lindheimer MD: Control of volume and body tonicity. In Lindheimer MD, Roberts JM,
Cunningham FG (eds): Chesley’s Hypertensive Disorders in Pregnancy, 2nd ed. Stamford, Appleton
& Lange, 1999
Easterling TR, Benedetti TJ, Schmucker BC, et al: Maternal hemodynamics in normal and preeclamptic
pregnancies: a longitudinal study. Obstet Gynecol 76:1061, 1990
Edlow JA, Caplan LR, O’Brien K, et al: Diagnosis of acute neurological emergencies in pregnant and
postpartum women. Lancet Neurol 12(2):175, 2013
Erlebacher A: Immunology of the maternal-fetal interface. Ann Rev Immunol 31:387, 2013
Escobar Vidarte MF, Montes D, Perez A, et al: Hepatic rupture associated with preeclampsia, report of
three cases and literature review. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 32(16):2767, 2019
Evans CS, Gooch L, Flotta D, et al: Cardiovascular system during the postpartum state in women with a
history of preeclampsia. Hypertension 58:57, 2011
Everett TR, Mahendru AA, McEniery CM, et al: Raised uterine artery impedance is associated with
increased maternal arterial stiffness in the late second trimester. Placenta 33(7):572, 2012
Facco FL, Parker CB, Reddy UM, et al: Association between sleep- disordered breathing and
hypertensive disorders of pregnancy and gestational diabetes mellitus. Obstet Gynecol 129(1):31,
2017
Ferrazzi E, Stampalija T, Monasta L, et al: Maternal hemodynamics: a method to classify hypertensive
disorders of pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 218(1):124.e1, 2018
Fishel Bartal M, Lindheimer MD, Sibai BM: Proteinuria during pregnancy: definition, pathophysiology,
methodology, and clinical significance. Am J Obstet Gynecol September 1, 2020 [Epub ahead of
print]
Fisher S, Roberts JM: The placenta in normal pregnancy and preeclampsia. In Taylor RN, Roberts JM,
Cunningham FG (eds): Chesley’s Hypertensive Disorders in Pregnancy, 4th ed. Amsterdam,
Academic Press, 2015

Flowers CE, Grizzle JE, Easterling WE, et al: Chlorothiazide as a prophylaxis against toxemia of
pregnancy. A double-blind study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 84:919, 1962
Fugate JE, Rabinstein AA: Posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome: clinical and radiological
manifestations, pathophysiology, and outstanding questions. Lancet Neurol 14(9):914, 2015
Gant NF, Chand S, Worley RJ, et al: A clinical test useful for predicting the development of acute
hypertension in pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 120:1, 1974
Gervasi MT, Chaiworapongsa T, Pacora P, et al: Phenotypic and metabolic characteristics of monocytes
and granulocytes in preeclampsia. Am J Obstet Gynecol 185:792, 2001
Ghidini A, Locatelli A: Monitoring of fetal well-being: role of uterine artery Doppler. Semin Perinatol
32:258, 2008
Gillis EE, Mooney JN, Garrett MR, et al: Sildenafil treatment ameliorates the maternal syndrome of
preeclampsia and rescues fetal growth in the Dahl salt-sensitive rat. Hypertension 67:647, 2016
Gray KJ, Saxena R, Karumanchi A: Genetic predisposition to preeclampsia is conferred by fetal DNA
variants near FLT1, a gene involved in the regulation of angiogenesis. Am J Obstet Gynecol
218(2):211, 2018
Green LJ, Mackillop LH, Salvi D, et al: Gestation-specific vital sign reference ranges in pregnancy.
Obstet Gynecol 135(3):653, 2020
Groom K, McCowan L, MacKay L, et al: Enoxaparin for the prevention of preeclampsia and
intrauterine growth restriction in women with a history: a randomized trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol
216(3):296.e1, 2017
Groom KM, North RA, Stone PR, et al: Patterns of change in uterine artery Doppler studies between
20 and 24 weeks of gestation and pregnancy outcomes. Obstet Gynecol 113(2):332, 2009
Gu Y, Thompson D, Xu J, et al: Aberrant proatrial natriuretic peptide/corin/natriuretic peptide receptor
signaling is present in maternal vascular endothelium in preeclampsia. Pregnancy Hypertens 11:1,
2018
Guirguis GF, Aziz MM, Boccia Liang C, et al: Is preeclampsia an independent predictor of diastolic
dysfunction: a retrospective cohort study. Pregnancy Hypertens 5(4):359, 2015
Gupta R, Sheidow T: Bilateral serous retinal detachment in association with preeclampsia. Can J
Ophthalmol 54(3):e98, 2019
Gyamfi-Bannerman C, Pandita A, Miller EC, et al: Preeclampsia outcomes at delivery and race. J
Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 33(21):3619, 2020
Haddad B, Barton JR, Livingston JC, et al: Risk factors for adverse maternal outcomes among women
with HELLP (hemolysis, e1evated liver enzymes, and low plate1et count) syndrome. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 183:444, 2000
Haddad B, Winer N, Chitrit Y, et al: Enoxaparin and aspirin compared with aspirin alone to prevent
placenta—mediated pregnancy complications. Obstet Gynecol 128(5):1053, 2016
Haggerty CL, Seifert ME, Tang G: Second trimester antiangiogenic proteins and preeclampsia.
Pregnancy Hypertens 2(2):158, 2012
Handor H, Daoudi R: Images in clinical medicine. Hypertensive retinopathy associated with
preeclampsia. N Engl J Med 370(8):752, 2014
Harmon QE, Huang L, Umbach DM, et al: Risk of fetal death with preeclampsia. Obstet Gynecol
125(3):628, 2015
Hecht JL, Ordi J, Carrilho C, et al: The pathology of eclampsia: an autopsy series. Hypertens Pregnancy
36:259, 2017
Heilmann L, Rath W, Pollow K: Hemostatic abnormalities in patients with severe preeclampsia. Clin
Appl Thromb Hemost 13: 285, 2007

Herraiz I, Escribano D, Gömez—Arriaga PI, et al: Predictive value of sequential mode1s of uterine
artery Doppler in pregnancies at high risk for pre—eclampsia. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 40(1):68,
2012
Hertig AT: Vascular pathology in the hypertensive albuminuric toxemias of pregnancy. Clinics 4:602,
1945
Hibbard JU, Shroff SG, Cunningham FG: Cardiovascular alterations in normal and preeclamptic
pregnancy. In Taylor RN, Roberts JM, Cunningham FG (eds): Chesley’s Hypertensive Disorders in
Pregnancy, 4th ed. Amsterdam, Academic Press, 2015
Hofmeyer GJ, Betran AP, Singata-Mad1ik M, et al: Prepregnancy and early pregnancy calcium
supplementation among women at high risk of preeclampsia: a multicentre, double-blind, randomised,
placebo-controlled trial. Lancet 393(10169):330, 2019
Hosapatna Basavarajappa D, Saha PK, Baga R, et al: Neuroradiological perspectives of severe
preeclampsia and eclampsia spectrum corre1ation from posterior reversible encephalopathy
syndrome. Pregnancy Hypertens 7(20):119, 2020
Hupuczi P, Nagy B, Sziller I, et al: Characteristic laboratory changes in pregnancies complicated by
HE1LP syndrome. Hypertens Pregnancy 26:389, 2007
Ikem E, Halldorsson TI, Birgisdöttir BE, et al: Dietary patterns and the risk of pregnancy-associated
hypertension in the Danish National Birth Cohort: a prospective longitudinal study. BJOG 126(5):663,
2019
Jaatinen N, Ekholm E: Eclampsia in Finland: 2006 to 2010. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 95(7):787, 2016
Janzarik WG, Ehlers E, Ehmann R, et al: Dynamic cerebral autoregulation in pregnancy and the risk of
preeclampsia. Hypertension 63:161, 2014
Janzarik WG, Gerber A, Markfeld-Erol F, et al: No long-term impairment of cerebral autoregulation
after preeclampsia. Pregnancy Hypertens 13:171, 2018
Jaskolka D, Retnakaran R, Zinman B, et al: Fetal sex and maternal risk of preeclampsia/eclampsia: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. BJOG 124(4):553, 2017
Jayaballa M, Sood S, Alahakoon I, et al: Microalbuminuria is a predictor of adverse pregnancy outcomes
including preeclampsia. Pregnancy Hypertens 5(4):303, 2015
Jim B, Karaumanchi SA: Preeclampsia: Pathogenesis, prevention, and long-term consequences. Semin
Nephrol 37(4):386, 2017
Joint Commission: R3 Report, Provision of care, treatment, and services standards for maternal safety.
August 21, 2019
Judy AE, McCain CL, Lawton ES, et al: Systolic hypertension, preeclampsia-re1ated mortality, and
stroke in California. Obstet Gynecol 133(6):1151, 2019
Karumanchi GA, Granger JP: Preeclampsia and pregnancy-re1ated hypertensive disorders.
Hypertension 67:238, 2016a
Karumanchi SA: Angiogenic factors in preeclampsia from diagnosis to therapy. Hypertension 67:1072,
2016b
Kasawara KT, do Nascimento SL, Costa ML, et al: Exercise and physical activity in the prevention of
preeclampsia: systematic review. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 91(10):1147, 2012
Katsuragi S, Tanaka H, Hasegawa J, et al: Analysis of preventability of hypertensive disorder in
pregnancy-re1ated maternal death using the nationwide registration system of maternal deaths in
Japan. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 32(20):3420, 2019
Keiser S, Owens M, Parrish M, et al: HELLP syndrome with and without eclampsia. Am J Perinatol
28(3):187, 2011

Kenny L, McCrae K, Cunningham FG: Plate1ets, coagulation, and the liver. In Taylor RN, Roberts JM,
Cunningham FG (eds): Chesley’s Hypertensive Disorders in Pregnancy, 4th ed. Amsterdam,
Academic Press, 2015
Khalil A, Akolekar R, Synge1aki A, et al: Maternal hemodynamics at 11–13 weeks’ gestation and risk
of pre-eclampsia. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 40(1):28, 2012
Khan KS, Wojdyla D, Say L, et al: WHO analysis of causes of maternal death: a systematic review.
Lancet 367:1066, 2006
Khodzhaeva ZS, Kogan YA, Shmakov RG, et al: Clinical and pathogenetic features of early- and lateonset preeclampsia. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 29(18):2980, 2016
Kim YR, Jung I, Park G, et al: First-trimester screening for early preeclampsia risk using maternal
characteristics and estimate placental volume. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 34(7):1155, 2021
Knuist M, Bonse1 GJ, Zondervan HA, et al: Low sodium diet and pregnancy-induced hypertension: a
multicentre randomized controlled trial. BJOG 105:430, 1998
Labarrere CA, DiCarlo HL, Bammerlin E, et al: Failure of physiologic transformation of spiral arteries,
endothe1ial and trophoblast ce1l activation, and acute atherosis in the basal plate of the placenta.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 216:287.e1, 2017
Lam DS, Chan W: Images in clinical medicine. Choroidal ischemia in preeclampsia. N Engl J Med
344(10):739, 2001
Lee YJ, Lee S, Jo HN, et al: Alterations in transcranial Doppler indices of pregnant women with
complicated preeclampsia. Pregnancy Hypertens January; 15:189, 2019
Leeflang MM, Cnossen JS, van der Post JA, et al: Accuracy of fibronectin tests for the prediction of
pre-eclampsia: a systematic review. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 133(1):12, 2007
Leseva MN, Binder AM, Ponsonby AL, et al: Differential gene expression and limited epigenetic
dysregulation at the maternofetal interface in preeclampsia. Hum Mol Genet 29(2):335, 2020
Levine RJ, Hauth JC, Curet LB, et al: Trial of calcium to prevent preeclampsia. N Engl J Med 337:69,
1997
Lewis AR, Afroze SH, Wesley KB, et al: Pravastatin protects cytotrophoblasts from a hyperglycemiainduced preeclampsia phenotype. Abstract No. 879, Am J Obstet Gynecol 216:S502, 2017
Li H, Gudnason H, Olofsson P, et al: Increased uterine artery vascular impedance is re1ated to adverse
outcome of pregnancy but is present in only one-third of late third-trimester preeclampsia women.
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 25:459, 2005
Lindheimer MD, Taler SJ, Cunningham FG: Hypertension in pregnancy [Invited Am Soc Hypertension
position paper]. J Amer Soc Hypertens 2:848, 2008
Loisel DA, Billstrand C, Murray K, et al: The maternal HLA-G 1597 DC null mutation is associated
with increased risk of preeclampsia and reduced HLA-G expression during pregnancy in AfricanAmerican women. Mol Hum Reprod 19(3):144, 2013
Loureiro R, Leite CC, Kahhale S, et al: Diffusion imaging may predict reversible brain lesions in
eclampsia and severe preeclampsia: initial experience. Am J Obstet Gynecol 189:1350, 2003
Lu Y, Lu C, Ji X, et al: Roles of microRNAs in preeclampsia. J Ce1l Physiol 234(2):1052, 2019
Lynch TA, Dexter SC: Alcoholic pancreatitis masquerading as preeclampsia. Obstet Gynecol
126(6):1276, 2015
Ma K, Jin H, Hu R, et al: A proteomic analysis of placental trophoblastic ce1ls in preeclampsia—
eclampsia. Ce1l Biochem Biophys 69(2):247, 2014
Ma Y, Ye Y, Zhang J, et al: Immune imbalance is associated with the deve1opment of preeclampsia.
Medicine (Baltimore) 98(14):e15080, 2019

Macdonald-Wallis C, Lawlor DA, Fraser A, et al: Blood pressure change in normotensive, gestational
hypertensive, preeclamptic, and essential hypertensive pregnancies. Hypertension 59(6):1241, 2012
Mackay VA, Huda SS, Stewart FM, et al: Preeclampsia is associated with compromised maternal
synthesis of long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids, leading to offspring deficiency. Hypertension
60(4):1078, 2012
Mackenzie RM, Sandrim VC, Carty DM, et al: Endothe1ial FOS expression and preeclampsia. BJOG
119(13):1564, 2012
Malmström, Håberg SE, Morken NH: Probability and outcomes of second pregnancy after HELLP
syndrome in the first: a population-based registry study. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 99(9):1206,
2020
Mandura RA: Bilateral serous retinal detachment and posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome
precipitated by eclamptic attack. Cureus 13(2):e13444, 2021
March MI, Geahchan C, Wenger J, Raghuraman N, et al: Circulating angiogenic factors and the risk of
adverse outcomes among Haitian women with preeclampsia. PLoS One 10(5):e0126815, 2015
Martin JN Jr, Brewer JM, Wallace K, et al: HELLP syndrome and composite major maternal morbidity:
importance of Mississippi classification System. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 26(12):1201, 2013
Martin JN Jr, Owens MY, Keiser SD, et al: Standardized Mississippi protocol treatment of 190 patients
with HELLP syndrome: slowing disease progression and preventing new major maternal morbidity.
Hypertens Pregnancy 31(1):79, 2012
Masoudian P, Nasr A, de Nanassy J: Oocyte donation pregnancies and the risk of preeclampsia or
gestation hypertension: a systematic review and metaanalysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 214(3):328,
2016
Mateus J, Newman RB, Zhang C, et al: Fetal growth patterns in pregnancy-associated hypertensive
disorders: NICHD fetal growth studies. Am J Obstet Gynecol 221(6):635.e1, 2019
Matijevic R, Johnston T: In vivo assessment of failed trophoblastic invasion of the spiral arteries in
preeclampsia. BJOG 106:78, 1999
Mayama M, Uno K, Tano S, et al: Incidence of posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome in
eclamptic and patients with preeclampsia with neurologic symptoms. Am J Obstet Gynecol
215(2):239e1, 2016
Mayer-Pickel K, Stern C, Eberhard K, et al: Comparison of mean platelet volume (MPV) and sFlt1/PlGF ratio as predictive markers for preeclampsia. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 34(9):1407, 2021
McMahon K, Karumanchi SA, Stillman IE, et al: Does soluble fms-like tyrosine kinase-1 regulate
placental invasion? Insight from the invasive placenta. Am J Obstet Gynecol 10:66e1, 2014
Meher S, Duley L: Rest during pregnancy for preventing preeclampsia and its complications in women
with normal blood pressure. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 19:CD005939, 2006
Meher S, Duley L, Hunter K, et al: Antiplatelet therapy before or after 16 weeks’ gestation for
preventing preeclampsia: an individual participant data meta-analysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol
216(2):121, 2017
Melchiorre K, Sutherland G, Sharma R, et al: Mid-gestational maternal cardiovascular profile in preterm
and term preeclampsia: a prospective study. BJOG 120(4):496, 2013
Mignini LE, Latthe PM, Villar J, et al: Mapping the theories of preeclampsia: the role of homocysteine.
Obstet Gynecol 105:411, 2005
Morgan JL, Nelson DB, Roberts SW, et al: Association of baseline proteinuria and adverse outcomes in
pregnant women with treated chronic hypertension. Obstet Gynecol 128(2):270, 2016
Morgan K, Della Torre M, Whelan AR, et al: A case of massive hepatic infarction in a patient with
HELLP syndrome. AJP Rep 9(1):e84, 2019

Morris E, McBride CA, Badger GJ, et al: Prepregnancy fitness and risk of hypertensive disorders of
pregnancy. Abstract No. 853, Am J Obstet Gynecol 216:S488, 2017
Morris RK, Riley RD, Doug M, et al: Diagnostic accuracy of spot urinary protein and albumin to
creatinine ratios for detection of significant proteinuria or adverse pregnancy outcome in patients
with suspected pre-eclampsia: a systematic review and metaanalysis. BMJ 345:e4342, 2012
Morton A, Morton A: High sensitivity cardiac troponin I levels in preeclampsia. Pregnancy Hypertens
13:79, 2018
Mostello D, Catlin TK, Roman L, et al: Preeclampsia in the parous woman: who is at risk? Am J Obstet
Gynecol 187:425, 2002
Myatt L, Brewer AS, Langdon G, et al: Attenuation of the vasoconstrictor effects of thromboxane and
endothelin by nitric oxide in the human fetal–placental circulation. Am J Obstet Gynecol 166:224,
1992
Myatt L, Clifton R, Roberts J, et al: Can changes in angiogenic biomarkers between the first and second
trimesters of pregnancy predict development of preeclampsia in a low-risk nulliparous patient
population? BJOG 120(10):1183, 2013
Myatt L, Clifton RG, Roberts JM, et al: First-trimester prediction of preeclampsia in nulliparous women
at low risk. Obstet Gynecol 119(6):2012a
Myatt L, Clifton RG, Roberts JM, et al: The utility of uterine artery Doppler velocimetry in prediction of
preeclampsia in a low-risk population. Obstet Gynecol 120(4):815, 2012b
Myers JE, Hart S, Armstrong S, et al: Evidence for multiple circulating factor in preeclampsia. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 196(3):266.e1, 2007
Napolitano R, Thilaganathan B: Mean, lowest, and highest pulsatility index of the uterine artery and
adverse pregnancy outcome in twin pregnancies. Am J Obstet Gynecol 206(6):e8, 2012
Nelson DB, Byrne JJ, Cunningham FG: Acute fatty liver of pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 137(3):535, 2021
Nelson DB, Kjan A, Bailey A, et al: Liver injury in hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, and low platelets
syndrome measured by diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance imaging. Am J Perinatol 35:741,
2018
Nelson DB, Yost NP, Cunningham FG: Acute fatty liver of pregnancy: clinical outcomes and expected
duration of recovery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 209(5):456e1, 2013
Nelson DB, Ziadie MS, McIntire DD, et al: Placental pathology suggesting that preeclampsia is more
than one disease. Am J Obstet Gynecol 210:66e1, 2014
Nilsson E, Ros HS, Cnattingius S, et al: The importance of genetic and environmental effects for pre—
eclampsia and gestational hypertension: a family study. BJOG 111:200, 2004
Novotny S, Lee-Plenty N, Wallace K, et al: Acute kidney injury associated with preeclampsia or
hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, and low platelets syndrome. Pregnancy Hypertens 19:94, 2020
O’Connor HD, Hehir MP, Kent EM, et al: Eclampsia: trends in incidence and outcomes over 30 years.
Am J Perinatol 30(8):661, 2013
Ong SS, Moore RJ, Warren AY, et al: Myometrial and placental artery reactivity alone cannot explain
reduced placental perfusion in preeclampsia and intrauterine growth restriction. BJOG 110(10):909,
2003
Orabona R, Vizzardi E, Sciatti E, et al: Insights into cardiac alterations after preeclampsia: an
echocardiographic study. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 49(1):124, 2017
Palacios C, Kostiuk LK, Pefia-Rosas J P: Vitamin D supplementation for women during pregnancy.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 7:CD008873, 2019
Palatnik A, Grobman WA, Miller ES: Is a history of preeclampsia associated with an increased risk of a
small for gestational age infant in a future pregnancy? Am J Obstet Gynecol 215(3):355e1, 2016

Papanna R, Mann LK, Kouides RW, et al: Protein/creatinine ratio in preeclampsia: a systematic review.
Obstet Gynecol 112: 135, 2008
Peguero A, Fernandez-Blanco L, Mazarico E, et al: Added prognostic value of longitudinal changes of
angiogenic factors in early-onset-severe preeclampsia: a prospective cohort study. BJOG
128(2):158, 2021
Perry H, Lehmann H, Mantovani E, et al: Are maternal hemodynamic indices markers of fetal growth
restriction in pregnancies with small-for-gestational-age fetus? Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol
55(2):210, 2020
Petersen EE, Davis NL, Goodman D, et al: Vital signs: pregnancy- related deaths, United States, 2011—
2015, and strategies for prevention, 13 states, 2013—2017. MMWR 68(18):423, 2019
Phipps EA, Thadhani R, Benzing T, et al: Preeclampsia: pathogenesis, novel diagnostics and therapies.
Nat Rev Nephrol 15(5):275, 2019
Pihl K, Sørensen S, Stener Jørgensen F: Prediction of preeclampsia in nulliparous women according to
first trimester maternal factors and serum markers. Fetal Diagn Ther 47(4):277, 2020
Pisani-Conway C, Simhan H: Does abnormal hemostasis as reflected by a thromboelastogram (TEC)
correlate with preeclampsia disease severity? Abstract No. 621, Am J Obstet Gynecol 208(1
suppl):S264, 2013
Poon LC, Shennan A, Hyett JA, et al: The International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics
(FIGO) initiative on preeclampsia: a pragmatic guide for first-trimester screening and prevention. Int
J Gynecol Obstet 145 (Suppl 1):1, 2019
Pritchard JA, Cunningham FG, Mason RA: Coagulation changes in eclampsia: their frequency and
pathogenesis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 124:855, 1976
Pritchard JA, Cunningham FG, Pritchard SA, et al: How often does maternal preeclampsia-eclampsia
incite thrombocytopenia in the fetus? Obstet Gynecol 69:292, 1987
Pritchard JA, Cunningham FG, Pritchard SA: The Parkland Memorial Hospital protocol for treatment of
eclampsia: evaluation of 245 cases. Am J Obstet Gynecol 148(7):951, 1984
Pritchard JA, Weisman R Jr, Ratnoff OD, et al: Intravascular hemolysis, thrombocytopenia and other
hematologic abnormalities associated with severe toxemia of pregnancy. N Engl J Med 250:87, 1954
Raab W, Schroeder G, Wagner R, et al: Vascular reactivity and electrolytes in normal and toxemic
pregnancy. J Clin Endocrinol 16:1196, 1956
Racine JL, Adams JH, Antony KM, et al: Metformin exposure and risk of hypertensive disorders of
pregnancy in patients with type 2 diabetes. Am J Perinatol May 3, 2021 [Epub ahead of print]
Ravichangran J, Woon SY, Quek YS, et al: High-sensitivity cardiac troponin I levels in normal and
hypertensive pregnancy. Am J Med 132(3):362, 2019
Reddy M, Rolnik DL, Harris K, et al: Challenging the definition of hypertension in pregnancy: Am J
Obstet Gynecol 222:606.e1, 2020
Redman CW, Sargent IL, Taylor RN: Immunology of abnormal pregnancy and preeclampsia. In Taylor
RN, Roberts JM, Cunningham FG (eds): Chesley’s Hypertensive Disorders in Pregnancy, 4th ed.
Amsterdam, Academic Press, 2015a
Reimer T, Rohrmann H, Stubert J, et al: Angiogenic factors and acute-phase proteins in serum samples
of preeclampsia and HELLP syndrome patients: a matched-pair analysis. J Matern Fetal Neonatal
Med 26(3):263, 2013
Richards A, Graham DI, Bullock MR: Clinicopathological study of neurological complications due to
hypertensive disorders of pregnancy. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 51:416, 1988
Roberge A, Nicolaides K, Demers S, et al: The role of aspirin dose on the prevention of preeclampsia
and fetal growth restriction: systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 216(2):110,

2017
Roberge S, Bujold E, Nicolaides KH: Aspirin for the prevention of preterm and term preeclampsia:
systematic review and metaanalysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 218(3):287, 2018
Roberts JM, Myatt L, Spong CY, et al: Vitamins C and E to prevent complications of pregnancyassociated hypertension. N Engl J Med 362(14):1282, 2010
Rodger MA, Gris JC, de Vries JI, et al: Low-molecular-weight- heparin and recurrent placentamediated pregnancy complications: a meta-analysis of individual patient data from randomised
controlled trials. Lancet 388(10060): 2629, 2016
Rodriguez AN, Nelson DB, Spong CY, et al: Acute kidney injury in pregnancies complicated by
preeclampsia with severe features. Abstract No. 1012. Am J Obstet Gynecol 220:S627, 2021
Rolnik DL, Wright D, Poon LC, et al: Aspirin versus placebo in pregnancies at high risk for preterm
preeclampsia. N Engl J Med 377:613, 2017
Roos NM, Wiegman MJ, Jansonius NM, et al: Visual disturbance in (pre)eclampsia. Obstet Gynecol
Surv 67(4):242, 2012
Sagsoz N, Kucukozkan T: The effect of treatment on endothelin-1 concentration and mean arterial
pressure in preeclampsia and eclampsia. Hypertens Pregnancy 22:185, 2003
Sakowicz A, Hejduk P, Pietrucha T, et al: Finding NEMO in preeclampsia. Am J Obstet Gynecol
214:538e1, 2017
Sanchez-Ramos L, Roeckner JT, Kaunitz AM: Which agent most effectively prevents preeclampsia? A
systematic review with multi-treatment comparison (network meta-analysis) of large multicenter
randomized controlled trials. Abstract No. 883, Am J Obstet Gynecol 216:S504, 2017
Sang C, Wang S, Zhang Z, et al: Characteristics and outcome of severe preeclampsia/eclampsia
concurrent with or complicated by acute pancreatitis: a report of five cases and literature review. J
Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 32(4):633, 2019
Sansone M, Sarno L, Saccone G, et al: Risk of preeclampsia in human immunodeficiency virus-infected
pregnant women. Obstet Gynecol 127(6):1027, 2016
Schaap TP, van den Akker T, Zwart JJ, et al: A national surveillance approach to monitor incidence of
eclampsia: the Netherlands Obstetric Surveillance System. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 98(3):342,
2019
Schwartz RB, Feske SK, Polak JF, et al: Preeclampsia-eclampsia: clinical and neuroradiographic
correlates and insights into the pathogenesis of hypertensive encephalopathy. Radiology 217:371,
2000
Sep S, Verbeek J, Spaanderman M, et al: Clinical differences between preeclampsia and the HELLP
syndrome suggest different pathogeneses. Reprod Sci 16:176A, 2009
Serra B, Mendoza M, Scazzocchio E, et al: A new model for screening for early-onset preeclampsia.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 222:608.e1, 2020
Shahabi A, Wilson ML, Lewinger JP, et al: Genetic admixture and risk of hypertensive disorders of
pregnancy among Latinas in Los Angeles County. Epidemiology 24(2):285, 2013
Shahul S, Medvedofsky D, Wenger JB, et al: Antiangiogenic factors and myocardial dysfunction.
Hypertension 67:1273, 2016
Sheehan HL, Lynch JB (eds): Cerebral lesions. In: Pathology of Toxaemia of Pregnancy. Baltimore,
Williams & Wilkins, 1973
Sheen JJ, Huang Y, Andrikopoulou M, et al: Maternal age and preeclampsia outcomes during delivery
hospitalizations. Am J Perinatol 37(1):44, 2020
Sibai BM: Diagnosis, controversies, and management of the syndrome of hemolysis, elevated liver
enzymes, and low platelet count. Obstet Gynecol 103:981, 2004

Sibai BM: Diagnosis, prevention, and management of eclampsia. Obstet Gynecol 105:402, 2005
Sibai BM, Stella CL: Diagnosis and management of atypical preeclampsia-eclampsia. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 200(5):481e.1, 2009
Silver RM, Myatt L, Hauth JC, et al: Cell-free total and fetal DNA in first trimester maternal serum and
subsequent development of preeclampsia. Am J Perinatol 34(2):191, 2017
Singh S, Mohakud S, Nail S, et al: Predictors of posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome in women
with hypertension in pregnancy: a prospective observational study. Pregnancy Hypertens 23:191,
2021
Snell KI, Allotey J, Smuk M, et al: External validation of prognostic models predicting preeclampsia:
individual participant data meta-analysis. BMC Med 18(1):302, 2020
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Lauder J, Sciscione A, et al: The role of activity restriction in
obstetric management. Consult Series #50, August 2020
Soma-Pillay P, Pillay R, Wong TT, et al: The effect of preeclampsia on retinal microvascular caliber at
delivery and postpartum. Obstetric Medicine 11(3):116, 2018
Sovio U, Smith G: Evaluation of a simple risk score to predict preterm preeclampsia using maternal
characteristics: a prospective cohort study. BJOG 126(8):963, 2019
Spaan JJ, Ekhart T, Spaanderman ME, et al: Renal function after preeclampsia: a longitudinal pilot study.
Nephron Clin Pract 120(3):c156, 2012
Spargo B, McCartney CP, Winemiller R: Glomerular capillary endotheliosis in toxemia of pregnancy.
Arch Pathol 68:593, 1959
Spitz B, Magness RR, Cox SM: Low-dose aspirin. I. Effect on angiotensin II pressor responses and
blood prostaglandin concentrations in pregnant women sensitive to angiotensin II. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 159(5):1035, 1988
Staff AC, Braekke K, Johnsen GM, et al: Circulating concentration of soluble endoglin (CD105) in fetal
and maternal serum and in amniotic fluid in preeclampsia. Am J Obstet Gynecol 197(2):176.e1, 2007
Staff AC, Sibai BM, Cunningham FG: Prevention of preeclampsia and eclampsia. In Taylor RN,
Roberts JM, Cunningham FG (eds): Chesley’s Hypertensive Disorders in Pregnancy, 4th ed.
Amsterdam, Academic Press, 2015
Stepan H, Hund M, Andraczek T: Combining biomarkers to predict pregnancy complications and
redefine preeclampsia: the angiogenic-placental syndrome. Hypertension 75(4):918, 2020
Stout MJ, Conner SN, Colditz GA, et al: The utility of 12-hour urine collection for the diagnosis of
preeclampsia. Obstet Gynecol 126(4):731, 2015
Stout MJ, Scifres CM, Stamilio DM: Diagnostic utility of urine protein-to-creatinine ratio for identifying
proteinuria in pregnancy. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 26(1):66, 2013
Suzuki Y, Yamamoto T, Mabuchi Y, et al: Ultrastructural changes in omental resistance artery in women
with preeclampsia. Am J Obstet Gynecol 189:216, 2003
Talledo OE, Chesley LC, Zuspan FP: Renin-angiotensin system in normal and toxemic pregnancies. III.
Differential sensitivity to angiotensin II and norepinephrine in toxemia of pregnancy. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 100:218, 1968
Taufield PA, Ales KL, Resnick LM, et al: Hypocalciuria in preeclampsia. N Engl J Med 316:715, 1987
Thadhani R, Hagmann H, Schaarschmidt W, et al: Removal of soluble fms-like tyrosine kinase-1 by
dextran sulfate apheresis in preeclampsia. J Am Soc Nephrol 27(3):903, 2016
Townsend R, Khalil A, Premakurnar Y, et al: Prediction of preeclampsia: review of reviews. Ultrasound
Obstet Gynecol 54(1):16, 2019
Trad A, Czeresnia R, Elrefaei A, et al: What do we know about the diagnosis and management of
mirror syndrome? J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med March 15, 2021 [Epub ahead of print]

Triche EW, Uzun A, DeWan AT, et al: Bioinformatic approach to the genetics of preeclampsia. Obstet
Gynecol 123(6):1155, 2014
Trommer BL, Homer D, Mikhael MA: Cerebral vasospasm and eclampsia. Stroke 19:326, 1988
Trudinger BJ, Cook CM: Doppler umbilical and uterine flow waveforms in severe pregnancy
hypertension. BJOG 97:142, 1990
Turner JM, Robertson NT, Hartel G, et al: Impact of low-dose aspirin on adverse perinatal outcome:
meta-analysis and meta-regression. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 55(2):157, 2020
U.S. Preventive Task Force: Aspirin use to prevent morbidity and mortality from preeclampsia:
preventive medication. Available at: www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/uspstf/draftrecommendation/aspirin-use-to-prevent-preeclampsia-and-related-morbidity-and-mortalitypreventive-medication1#fullrecommendationstart. Accessed May 25, 2021
Vatten LJ, Asvold BO, Eskild A: Angiogenic factors in maternal circulation and preeclampsia with or
without fetal growth restriction. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 91(12):1388, 2012
Vaught AJ, Gavriilaki E, Hueppchen N, et al: Direct evidence of complement activation in HELLP
syndrome: a link to atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome. Exp Hematol 44:390, 2016
Vaught AJ, Kovell LC, Szymanski LM, et al: Acute cardiac effects of severe preeclampsia. JACC
72(1):2, 2018
Vigil-De Gracia P, Ortega-Paz L: Preeclampsia/eclampsia and hepatic rupture. Int J Gynaecol Obstet
118(3):186, 2012
Villar J, Purwar M, Merialdi M, et al: World Health Organisation multicentre randomised trial of
supplementation with vitamins C and E among pregnant women at high risk for pre—eclampsia in
populations of low nutritional status from developing countries. BJOG 116(6):780, 2009
von Dadelszen P, Firoz T, Donnay F, et al: Preeclampsia in low and middle income countries—health
services lessons learned from the PRE-EMPT (PRE-eclampsia monitoring, prevention, and
treatment) Project. J Obstet Gynaecol Can 34(10):917, 2012
von Dadelszen P, Magee LA, Benton SJ, et al: Activated protein C as disease-modifying therapy in
antenatal preeclampsia: an open-label, single arm safety and efficacy trial. Pregnancy Hypertens
13:121, 2018
Von Salmuth V, van der Heiden Y, Bekkers I, et al: The role of hepatic sinusoidal obstruction in the
pathogenesis of the hepatic involvement in HELLP syndrome: exploring the literature. Pregnancy
Hypertens 19:37, 2020
Walsh SW: Plasma from preeclamptic women stimulates transendothelial migration of neutrophils.
Reprod Sci 16(3):320, 2009
Wang X, Gao H: Prevention of preeclampsia in high risk patients with low-molecular-weight heparin: a
metaanalysis. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 33(13):2202, 2020
Wang Y, Gu Y, Granger DN, et al: Endothelial junctional protein redistribution and increased monolayer
permeability in human umbilical vein endothelial cells isolated during preeclampsia. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 186:214, 2002
Ward K, Taylor RN: Genetic factors in the etiology of preeclampsia. In Taylor RN, Roberts JM,
Cunningham FG (eds): Chesley’s Hypertensive Disorders in Pregnancy, 4th ed. Amsterdam,
Academic Press, 2015
Wardhana MP, Dachlan EG, Dekker G: Pulmonary edema in preeclampsia: an Indonesian case-control
study. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 31(6):689, 2018
Weinstein L: Syndrome of hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes and low platelet count: a severe
consequence of hypertension in pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 142:159, 1982

Wen SW, White RR, Rybak N, et al: Effect of high dose folic acid supplementation in pregnancy on
preeclampsia (FACT): double blind, phase III, randomised controlled, international, multicentre trial.
BMJ 362:k3478, 2018
White WM, Garrett AT, Craici IM, et al: Persistent urinary podocyte loss following preeclampsia may
reflect subclinical renal injury. PLoS One 9(3):e92693, 2014
Widmer M, Villar J, Benigni A, et al: Mapping the theories of preeclampsia and the role of angiogenic
factors. Obstet Gynecol 109:169, 2007
Wiles K, Chappell LC, Lightstone L, et al: Updates in diagnosis and management of preeclampsia in
women with CKD. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 15(9):1371, 2020
Willard N, Honce J, Kleinschmidt-DeMasters B: PRES: review of histological features. J Neuropathol
Exp Neurol 77(2):100, 2018
Worley LC, Hnat MD, Cunningham FG: Advanced extrauterine pregnancy: diagnostic and therapeutic
challenges. Am J Obstet Gynecol 198(3):297e1, 2008
Yang J, Pearl M, DeLorenze GN, et al: Racial-ethnic differences in midtrimester maternal serum levels
of angiogenic and anti-angiogenic factors. Am J Obstet Gynecol 215:359e1, 2016
Yoshihara M, Mayama M, Ukai M, et al: Fulminant liver failure resulting from massive hepatic infarction
associated with hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, and low platelets syndrome. J Obstet Gynaecol
Res 42(10):1375, 2016
Youssef L, Miranda J, Paules C, et al: Fetal cardiac remodeling and dysfunction is associated with both
preeclampsia and fetal growth restriction. Am J Obstet Gynecol 222(1):79.e1, 2020
Yule CS, Ambia AM, Duryea EL, et al: The effect of normal saline on renal function and electrolytes in
women with preeclampsia. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med November 18, 2020 [Epub ahead of print]
Zachary S, Rubeo ZS, Jortani SA: The association of N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide with
severe preeclampsia, HELLP syndrome, and eclampsia Abstract No. 990, Am J Obstet Gynecol
216:S557, 2017
Zeeman G, Alexander JM, Vollaard E, et al: “Delta eclampsia”—a hypertensive encephalopathy of
pregnancy in “normotensive” women. Abstract No. 479, Am J Obstet Gynecol 197(6 Supp I): S140,
2007
Zeeman GG, Alexander JM, McIntire DD, et al: Homocysteine plasma concentration levels for the
prediction of preeclampsia in women with chronic hypertension. Am J Obstet Gynecol 189:574, 2003
Zeeman GG, Cunningham FG, Pritchard JA: The magnitude of hemoconcentration with eclampsia.
Hypertens Pregnancy 28(2):127, 2009
Zeeman GG, Fleckenstein JL, Twickler DM, et al: Cerebral infarction in eclampsia. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 190:714, 2004a
Zeeman GG, Hatab M, Twickler DM: Increased cerebral blood flow in preeclampsia with magnetic
resonance imaging. Am J Obstet Gynecol 191(4):1425, 2004b
Zeisler H, Llurba E, Chantraine F, et al: Predictive value of the sFlt-1: PlGF ration in women with
suspected preeclampsia. N Engl J Med 374:13, 2016
Zhang H, Chen J, Sheibani L, et al: Pregnancy augments VEGF-stimulated in vitro angiogenesis and
vasodilator (NO and H2S) production in human uterine artery endothelial cells. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab 102(7):2382, 2017
Zhou SJ, Yelland L, McPhee AJ, et al: Fish-oil supplementation in pregnancy does not reduce the risk of
gestational diabetes or preeclampsia. Am J Clin Nutr 95(6):1378, 2012
Zwart JJ, Richters A, Öry F, et al: Eclampsia in The Netherlands. Obstet Gynecol 112:820, 2008

CHAPTER 41

Clinical Management of the Preeclampsia
Syndrome

DIAGNOSIS AND EVALUATION
CONSIDERATION FOR DELIVERY
SEVERE PREECLAMPSIA AND ECLAMPSIA
MAGNESIUM SULFATE
SEVERE HYPERTENSION TREATMENT
PERSISTENT SEVERE POSTPARTUM HYPERTENSION
LONG-TERM CONSEQUENCES
REFERENCES
Preeclampsia remains one of the leading causes of death and severe maternal
morbidity. This chapter discusses many clinical aspects of the preeclampsia
syndrome and its management after recognition. Also presented are the longterm consequences that may accrue in affected women. The pathophysiology
of preeclampsia was detailed in Chapter 40.

DIAGNOSIS AND EVALUATION
■ Diagnosis

In routine prenatal care, gravidas are seen more often during the third
trimester, and this aids early detection of preeclampsia. However, it cannot
always be diagnosed definitively. Increases in systolic and diastolic blood
pressure can be either normal physiological changes or signs of developing
pathology.
Women without overt hypertension, but in whom the early development
of preeclampsia is suspected, are seen more frequently. Heightened
surveillance permits recognition of ominous changes in blood pressure,
critical laboratory findings, and clinical signs and symptoms. Outpatient
surveillance continues unless overt hypertension, proteinuria, headache,
visual changes, or epigastric pain supervene. At Parkland Hospital, women
with new-onset overt hypertension—either diastolic pressures ≥90 mm Hg or
systolic pressures ≥140 mm Hg—are admitted to exclude preeclampsia or to
define its severity.

■ Evaluation
With hospitalization, a systematic evaluation begins:
• Detailed examination, which is coupled with daily scrutiny for headache,
visual changes, or epigastric pain
• Daily weight measurement to identify rapid weight gain
• Quantification of proteinuria or a urine protein: creatinine ratio
• Blood pressure readings with an appropriate-size cuff every 4 hours, unless
previously elevated, which would mandate more frequent readings
• Measurements of serum creatinine and hepatic transaminase levels and a
hemogram that includes a platelet count. The frequency of testing is
determined by hypertension severity. Although some recommend
assessment of serum uric acid and lactate dehydrogenase levels and
coagulation, their value has been questioned (Chescheir, 2019; CondeAgudelo, 2015)
• Evaluation of fetal size and well-being and amnionic fluid volume
• Reduced physical activity may have benefits, although evidence is not
robust.
Still investigational as a clinical tool, measurements of placental growth
factor (PlGF) and soluble fms-like tyrosine kinase 1 (sF1t-1) levels will

likely be available to help predict preeclampsia (Barton, 2020; Chappell,
2013; Zeisler, 2016). Chapter 40 (p. 694) describes their role in
preeclampsia genesis.
In sum, evaluation goals are early identification of preeclampsia and then
management until timely delivery. Complete abatement of all signs and
symptoms is uncommon until after delivery. If severe preeclampsia is
diagnosed using the criteria in Table 40-2 (p. 690), further management is
subsequently described.

■ Consideration for Delivery
With gestational hypertension, its morbidity and management vary depending
on hypertension severity, presence of preeclampsia, and gestational age of
the fetus. The basic management objectives for any pregnancy complicated
by preeclampsia are: (1) termination of pregnancy with the least possible
trauma to mother and fetus, (2) birth of a healthy newborn that subsequently
thrives, and (3) complete restoration of health to the mother. In many with
preeclampsia, especially those at or near term, all three objectives are
served equally well by induction of labor.
Termination of pregnancy is the only known cure for preeclampsia.
Headache, visual changes, or epigastric pain are indicative that convulsions
may be imminent, and oliguria is another ominous sign. Severe preeclampsia
almost always demands anticonvulsant and antihypertensive therapy,
followed by delivery. Treatment for eclampsia is identical. Prime objectives
are to forestall convulsions, control blood pressure to prevent intracranial
hemorrhage and serious damage to other organs, and deliver a healthy
newborn. This is true even when the cervix is unfavorable. Labor induction
is carried out, usually with preinduction cervical ripening (Chap. 26, p. 488).
Concerns stemming from an unfavorable cervix, a perceived sense of
urgency because of preeclampsia severity, and a need to coordinate neonatal
intensive care have led some to advocate for cesarean delivery. In an earlier
study from Parkland Hospital, Alexander and colleagues (1999) reviewed
278 singleton liveborn neonates weighing 750 to 1500 g delivered of women
with severe preeclampsia. In half of the women, labor was induced, and
induction was successful in accomplishing vaginal delivery in a third.
Similar data were reported from the Consortium on Safe Labor (Coviello,
2019). In this study, half of 914 women with severe preeclampsia underwent

induction, and half of these were delivered vaginally. Others have reported
similar observations (Alanis, 2008; Roland, 2017). For these reasons, we
attempt labor induction and reserve cesarean delivery for other obstetrical
indications.
With preeclampsia without severe features, optimal delivery timing has
not been widely studied. A randomized trial of 756 women with mild
preeclampsia supported delivery after 37 weeks’ gestation (Koopmans,
2009). This practice is also supported by the American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020a). At Parkland Hospital, we deliver
women with preeclampsia without severe features at 38 weeks’ gestation.
With a preterm fetus, the tendency is to delay delivery to help reduce the
risk of neonatal death or serious morbidity from prematurity. Such a policy
certainly is justified in milder cases. Assessments of fetal well-being and
placental function are performed, especially when the fetus is immature. To
assess these, most recommend frequent performance of nonstress testing or
biophysical profiles, which are described in Chapter 20 (p. 392). The
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2021a,b)
recommends consideration for antenatal surveillance twice weekly for those
with gestational hypertension and nonsevere features and daily testing for
those with severe features.
With late-preterm fetuses, that is, those between 34 and 36 weeks’
gestation, the decision to deliver is less clear (Barton, 2011; Langenveld,
2011). The Dutch HYPITAT-II study randomly assigned women with
nonsevere hypertension between 34 and 37 weeks to immediate delivery or
to expectant management (Broekhuijsen, 2015). Immediate delivery reduced
the risks for adverse maternal outcomes—1.1 versus 3.1 percent. However,
it increased the risk for neonatal respiratory distress syndrome— 5.7 versus
1.7 percent.
In a more recent study, 901 women at 34 to <37 weeks’ gestation with
nonsevere preeclampsia were randomly assigned to early delivery or
expectant management (Chappell, 2019). A third of each group self-stratified
into intervals of 34, 35, and 36 weeks’ gestation. For women in the
immediate delivery group, rates of the primary maternal outcomes, which
were features of severe preeclampsia, were significantly lower than in the
expectant group. Conversely, rates of adverse perinatal outcomes, which
were perinatal deaths or neonatal unit admission, were significantly greater
in the immediate delivery group. Similar findings were reported by other

(Bernardes, 2019; Chatzakis, 2021). Last, the PEACOCK study found that
angiogenic biomarkers did not help determine the need for delivery in latepreterm preeclampsia (Duhig, 2021). At Parkland Hospital, we favor an
active management approach given the maternal risks of expectant
management. However, if preeclampsia is nonsevere, we routinely induce
after 38 completed weeks.

■ Inpatient or Outpatient Care
For women with mild to moderate stable hypertension, whether or not
preeclampsia has been confirmed, monitoring is continued. During
surveillance, reduced physical activity throughout much of the day, at least
intuitively, seems reasonable. Complete bed rest was not recommended in
the prior consensus work of the American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists’ Task Force on Hypertension in Pregnancy (2013). Also, the
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine (2020b) suggests that activity
restriction not be prescribed for women with hypertensive disorders.
Complete bed rest is pragmatically unachievable because of the severe
restrictions it places on otherwise well women. It likely also predisposes to
thromboembolism (Knight, 2007; McCarty-Singleton, 2014).
To reduce activity, several studies have addressed the benefits of
inpatient care and outpatient management. The concept of prolonged
hospitalization for women with hypertension arose during the 1970s. At
Parkland Hospital, an inpatient antepartum unit was established in 1973 by
Dr. Peggy Whalley to provide care for such women. Initial results from this
unit were reported by Hauth (1976) and Gilstrap (1978) and their coworkers.
Most hospitalized women have a beneficial response characterized by
amelioration or improvement of hypertension. These women are not
“cured,” and nearly 90 percent have recurrent hypertension before or
during labor. By 2020, more than 10,000 nulliparas with mild to moderate,
early-onset hypertension during pregnancy had been managed successfully in
this unit. This relatively simple unit requires modest nursing care, no drugs
other than iron and folate supplements, and few essential laboratory tests.
Provider costs—not charges—for this care are minimal compared with the
cost of neonatal intensive care for a preterm neonate. Importantly,
thromboembolic disease has been rare in these women.

Many clinicians believe that further hospitalization is not warranted if
hypertension abates within a few days, and this has emboldened third-party
payers to deny inpatient reimbursement. Consequently, many women with
mild to moderate hypertension are managed at home. For women in
vulnerable sociodemographic home situations, this strategy may not be
feasible. In other groups, outpatient management may continue as long as
preeclampsia syndrome does not worsen and fetal jeopardy is not suspected.
Decreased activity is recommended, and women are encouraged to report
symptoms. Home blood pressure and urine protein monitoring or frequent
evaluations by a visiting nurse may be beneficial.
To assess this approach, 1182 nulliparas with mild gestational
hypertension—20 percent had proteinuria—were managed with home care
(Barton, 2002). Their mean gestational ages were 32 to 33 weeks at
enrollment and 36 to 37 weeks at delivery. Severe preeclampsia developed
in approximately 20 percent, two women had eclampsia, and 3 percent
developed hemolysis, elevated liver enzyme levels, and low platelet count
(HELLP) syndrome. Perinatal outcomes were generally good. In
approximately 20 percent, fetal growth was restricted, and the perinatal
mortality rate was 4.2 deaths in 1000 births.
Table 41-1 presents two studies that compare continued hospitalization
and outpatient care. In the first trial, after hospital evaluation, 218 women
with mild gestational nonproteinuric hypertension were randomly assigned to
continued hospitalization versus home care (Crowther, 1992). The mean
hospitalization duration was 22.2 days for women with inpatient management
compared with only 6.5 days in the home care group. Severe hypertension
and preterm delivery before 34 and before 37 weeks’ gestation were
significantly increased twofold in the outpatient group. Despite this, maternal
and newborn outcomes were otherwise similar.
TABLE 41-1. Randomized Clinical Trials Comparing Hospitalization
Versus Routine Care for Women with Mild Gestational Hypertension or
Preeclampsia

1
Another approach, popular in Europe, is day care. In the second trial
(Table 41-1), 374 women with gestational hypertension were randomized to
either day care or inpatient care (Turnbull, 2004). Almost 95 percent had
mild to moderate hypertension and 86 women had ≥1+ proteinuria. There
were no perinatal deaths, and none of the women developed eclampsia or
HELLP syndrome. Costs for either scheme were not significantly different,
and general satisfaction favored day care.
In sum, either inpatient or close outpatient management is appropriate for
a woman with mild de novo hypertension, including those with nonsevere
preeclampsia. Keys to success are close surveillance and patients with home
support and access to care.

■ Antihypertensive Therapy for Mild to Moderate
Hypertension
Antihypertensive drugs have been evaluated to prolong pregnancy or modify
perinatal outcomes in pregnancies complicated by various hypertensive
disorders. Treatment for women with chronic hypertension complicating
pregnancy is discussed in Chapter 53 (p. 949). Drug treatment for early mild
preeclampsia has been disappointing (Table 41-2). Sibai and associates
(1987a) reported that women given labetalol had significantly lower mean
blood pressures than those given a placebo. However, mean pregnancy
prolongation, gestational age at delivery, and birthweights did not differ
between groups. The cesarean delivery rate and the number of newborns
admitted to special-care nurseries also were similar. The frequency of

growth-restricted neonates was doubled in women given labetalol
compared with placebo—19 versus 9 percent.
TABLE 41-2. Randomized Placebo-Controlled Trials of Antihypertensive
Therapy for Early Mild Gestational Hypertension

The three other studies listed in Table 41-2 compare labetalol or a
calcium-channel blocker drugs against placebo. Except for fewer episodes of
severe hypertension, none of these studies showed any benefits from
antihypertensive treatment (Magee, 2015). One review of 49 randomized
trials of antihypertensive therapy for mild to moderate gestational
hypertension compared with either no treatment or placebo reached similar
conclusions (Abalos, 2014).

■ Expectant Management of Preterm Severe Preeclampsia
Up through the early 1990s, women with severe preeclampsia were usually
immediately delivered. Subsequently, however, another approach for women
with preterm severe preeclampsia was studied. The aim of “expectant”
management was to improve neonatal outcome without compromising
maternal safety. This approach always includes careful daily—and usually
more frequent—inpatient monitoring of the mother and her fetus.

Theoretically, antihypertensive therapy has potential application when
severe preeclampsia develops before intact neonatal survival is expected.
Such management has been controversial and is potentially dangerous
(Churchill, 2018). In one of the first studies, Sibai and the Memphis group
(1985) attempted to prolong pregnancy because of fetal immaturity in 60
women with severe preeclampsia between 18 and 27 weeks. The results
were disastrous. The perinatal mortality rate was 87 percent. Although no
mothers died, 13 suffered placental abruption, 10 had eclampsia, three
developed renal failure, two had hypertensive encephalopathy, one had an
intracerebral hemorrhage, and another had a ruptured hepatic hematoma.
Because of their early study, the Memphis group redefined criteria and
performed a randomized trial of aggressive versus expectant management for
95 women who had severe preeclampsia but with more advanced gestations
of 28 to 32 weeks (Sibai, 1994). Women with HELLP syndrome were
excluded from this trial. Aggressive management included glucocorticoid
administration for fetal lung maturation followed by delivery in 48 hours.
Expectantly managed women were observed at bed rest and given either
labetalol or nifedipine orally for severe hypertension. In this study,
pregnancy was prolonged for a mean of 15.4 days in the expectant
management group. An overall improvement in neonatal outcomes also was
reported.
In women expectantly managed at 23 to 34 weeks’ gestation, serious
complications have included placental abruption, HELLP syndrome,
pulmonary edema, renal failure, and eclampsia (Table 41-3). Moreover,
perinatal mortality rates averaged 90 per 1000 births. Fetal-growth
restriction was common, and in studies from The Netherlands, it was an
astounding 94 percent (Ganzevoort, 2005a,b). Perinatal mortality rates were
disproportionately high in these growth-restricted neonates (Haddad, 2007;
Shear, 2005).
TABLE 41-3. Maternal and Perinatal Outcomes with Expectant
Management of Severe Preeclampsia from 23 to 34 Weeks

Following these experiences, expectant management became more
commonly practiced, with the caveat that women with HELLP syndrome or
growth-restricted fetuses were usually excluded. More recently, a
prospective comparative study reported that expectant management of women
with “stable” HELLP syndrome at <34 weeks may benefit mother and fetus
(Cavaignac-Vitalis, 2019). The MEXPRE Latin Study was a multicenter trial
that randomly assigned 267 women with severe preeclampsia at 28 to 32
weeks’ gestation to prompt delivery or to expectant management (Vigil-De
Gracia, 2013). The perinatal mortality rate approximated 90 per 1000 in
each group, and the composite neonatal morbidity outcome was not improved
with expectant management. Conversely, fetal-growth restriction—22 versus
9 percent—and placental abruption—7.6 versus 1.5 percent—were
significantly higher in the group managed expectantly.
Churchill and colleagues (2018) performed a Cochrane Database review
of six randomized trials of interventionist versus expectant care for severe
preeclampsia between 24 and 34 weeks. Their review had findings similar
to those in Table 41-3 and suggested that expectant management was
beneficial to perinatal outcome. However, data were insufficient to establish
conclusions on maternal health.

■ Expectant Management of Midtrimester Preeclampsia

Several small studies have focused on expectant management of severe
preeclampsia syndrome before 28 weeks’ gestation. In one review of eight
such studies, maternal complications were common among nearly 200
women with severe preeclampsia with an onset <26 completed weeks
(Bombrys, 2009). Because no neonates survived when delivered before 23
weeks, most experts recommend pregnancy termination in these cases. For
women with slightly more advanced pregnancies, however, the decision is
less clear. For example, at 23 weeks’ gestation, the perinatal survival rate
was 18 percent, but long-term perinatal morbidity is yet unknown. For
women with pregnancies at 24 to 26 weeks, perinatal survival approaches 60
percent, and it averages almost 90 percent for those at 26 weeks.
As shown in Table 41-4, maternal complications—especially HELLP
syndrome—were commonplace and one mother died. Perinatal mortality
exceeded 50 percent. At this time, no comparative studies attest to perinatal
benefits of such expectant treatment versus early delivery in the face of
serious maternal complications, which approach rates of 50 percent.
TABLE 41-4. Pregnancy Outcomes with Expectant Management of Women
with Severe Midtrimester Preeclampsiaa

Corticosteroids for Lung Maturation
To enhance fetal lung maturation, glucocorticoids have been administered to
women with severe hypertension who are remote from term. Treatment does
not seem to worsen maternal hypertension, and a lower incidence of
respiratory distress and improved fetal survival rates have been cited. That
said, only one randomized trial has evaluated corticosteroids given to
hypertensive women for fetal lung maturation. This trial included 218 women
who had severe preeclampsia between 26 and 34 weeks’ gestation and who

were randomly assigned to betamethasone or placebo administration
(Amorim, 1999). Rates of neonatal complications that included respiratory
distress, intraventricular hemorrhage, and death were reduced significantly
when betamethasone was given compared with placebo. On the heavily
weighted negative side, there were two maternal deaths and 18 stillbirths.
We add these findings to buttress our unenthusiastic acceptance of attempts to
prolong gestation in many of these women (Alexander, 2015; Bloom, 2003).

Corticosteroids to Ameliorate HELLP Syndrome
Several observational studies have indicated that corticosteroid therapy
would ameliorate facets of the HELLP syndrome (Añez-Aguayo, 2018;
Martin, 2016). Subsequently, at least three randomized trials aimed to
evaluate the benefits of glucocorticoids given to improve the laboratory
abnormalities associated with HELLP syndrome. Fonseca and associates
(2005) randomly assigned 132 women with HELLP syndrome to either
dexamethasone or placebo administration. Outcomes assessed included
hospitalization length, recovery time of abnormal laboratory test results,
resolution of clinical parameters, and complications that included acute renal
failure, pulmonary edema, eclampsia, and death. None of these was
significantly different between the two groups. In another study, 105
postpartum women with HELLP syndrome were assigned to dexamethasone
or placebo treatment. Katz and colleagues (2008) found no advantage to
dexamethasone (Fig. 41-1). In the third study, preeclamptic women were
given either placebo or methylprednisolone if their platelet count was
between 50,000 and 150,000/μL (Pourrat, 2016). Again, no benefits were
gained from corticosteroid therapy. A Bolivian study did show benefits from
corticosteroid therapy, however, it was not randomized (Añez-Aguayo,
2018). Because of these findings, the 2013 Task Force does not recommend
corticosteroid treatment to improve thrombocytopenia with HELLP
syndrome.

FIGURE 41-2 Clinical management algorithm for severe preeclampsia at <34 weeks. HELLP =
hemolysis, elevated liver enzyme levels, low platelet count; L & D = labor and delivery; MgS04=
magnesium sulfate; UOP = urine output.

■ Expectant Management Recommendations
Taken in toto, these studies do not show overwhelming benefits of expectant
management of severe preeclampsia in women with gestations from 24 to 32
weeks compared with maternal risks. Despite these caveats, the Society for
Maternal-Fetal Medicine (2011) has determined that such management is a
reasonable alternative in selected women with severe preeclampsia before
34 weeks (Fig. 41-2). The Task Force (2013) supports this recommendation.
As shown in Table 41-5, such management calls for inpatient maternal and
fetal surveillance with delivery prompted by evidence for worsening severe
preeclampsia or maternal or fetal compromise. Although attempts are made
for vaginal delivery in most cases, the likelihood of cesarean delivery rises
with decreasing gestational age.

FIGURE 41-1 Recovery times for platelet counts and serum aspartate transaminase (AST) levels in
women with HELLP syndrome assigned to receive treatment with dexamethasone or placebo.

TABLE 41-5. Indications for Delivery in Women <34 Weeks’ Gestation
Managed Expectantly

Our view is more conservative. Undoubtedly, the overriding reason to
terminate pregnancies with severe preeclampsia is maternal safety. Indeed, it
seems obvious that a delay to prolong gestation in women with severe
preeclampsia may have serious maternal consequences. These observations
are even more pertinent when considered with the absence of convincing
evidence that perinatal outcomes are markedly improved by the average

prolongation of pregnancy by approximately 1 week. If undertaken, the
caveats that mandate delivery shown in Table 41-5 should be strictly heeded.

■ Experimental Therapies
In preliminary studies, therapies have been used to lower serum levels of
antiangiogenic factors in hopes to mitigate their adverse actions. Some of
these include therapeutic apheresis to lower sFlt-1 levels (Thadhani, 2016;
Winkler, 2018). Another novel therapy uses RNA molecules to silence
placental sFlt-1 (Turanov, 2018). The proton-pump inhibitor esomeprazole
was studied in women with early-onset preeclampsia (Cluver, 2018).
Sildenafil citrate, a phosphodiesterase inhibitor, has been provided to
promote vasodilation (Trapani, 2016; Vigil-De Gracia, 2016). Other studies
compared recombinant antithrombin infusion with placebo (Paidas, 2020).
In general, none of these therapies has shown promise.

SEVERE PREECLAMPSIA AND ECLAMPSIA
Classification of preeclampsia with severe features is summarized in Table
40-2 (p. 690). Briefly, features include systolic blood pressure ≥160 mm Hg
or diastolic pressure ≥110 mm Hg; liver derangement with transaminitis;
thrombocytopenia; renal insufficiency; pulmonary edema; new-onset
headache; or visual changes. Eclampsia is defined by new-onset tonicclonic, focal, or multifocal seizures in the absence of other causes.

■ Eclampsia
The development of eclampsia appreciably raises the risk to mother and fetus
(Fishel-Bartal, 2020). In an earlier report, Mattar and Sibai (2000)
described outcomes in 399 consecutive women with eclampsia from 1977
through 1998. Major maternal complications included placental abruption—
10 percent, neurological deficits—7 percent, aspiration pneumonia—7
percent, pulmonary edema—5 percent, cardiopulmonary arrest—4 percent,
and acute kidney injury (AKI)—4 percent. Moreover, 1 percent of these
women died. Several subsequent reports similarly described excessive
maternal morbidity and mortality rates with eclampsia that also included

HELLP syndrome, pulmonary embolism, and stroke (Andersgaard, 2006;
Knight, 2007).
Almost without exception—but at times unnoticed— preeclampsia
precedes convulsions. Eclampsia is most common in the last trimester and
becomes increasingly frequent as term approaches. Postpartum, the incidence
of eclampsia has declined during the past decade. Improved access to
prenatal care, earlier detection of antepartum preeclampsia, and prophylactic
use of magnesium sulfate are explanations (Chames, 2002). Other diagnoses
should be considered in women with convulsions more than 48 hours
postpartum or in women with focal neurological deficits, prolonged coma, or
atypical eclampsia.

■ Clinical Findings with Eclampsia
Eclamptic seizures may be violent, and the woman must be protected,
especially her airway. So forceful are the muscular movements that the
woman may throw herself out of her bed, and if not protected, her tongue is
bitten by the violent action of the jaws (Fig. 41-3). This phase, in which the
muscles alternately contract and relax, may last approximately a minute.

FIGURE 41-3 Hematoma of tongue from laceration during an eclamptic convulsion.
Thrombocytopenia may have contributed to the bleeding.

Gradually, the muscular movements become smaller and less frequent,
and finally the woman lies motionless.
After a seizure, the woman is postictal, but in some, a coma of variable
duration ensues. When the convulsions are infrequent, the woman usually
recovers some degree of consciousness after each attack. As the woman
arouses, a semiconscious combative state may ensue. In severe cases, coma
persists from one convulsion to another, and death may result.
Rarely, a single convulsion may be followed by coma from which the
woman may never emerge. As a rule, however, death does not occur until
after frequent convulsions. Last, and also rarely, convulsions continue
unabated—status epilepticus—and require deep sedation and even general
anesthesia to obviate anoxic encephalopathy.
The respiratory rate after an eclamptic convulsion usually rises and may
reach 50 or more per minute in response to hypercarbia, lactic acidemia, and
transient hypoxia. Cyanosis may be observed in severe cases. High fever is a
grave sign as it likely emanates from cerebrovascular hemorrhage.
Proteinuria is usually present, and a fourth of women with severe
preeclampsia have some degree of AKI (Rodriguez, 2021). Urine output may
be diminished appreciably, and occasionally anuria develops.
Hemoglobinuria may be seen, but hemoglobinemia is rare. Edema may be
pronounced (Fig. 41-4).

FIGURE 41-4 Severe edema in a young nullipara with antepartum preeclampsia. Fingerprint
indentations from clinical assessment can be seen on both shins. Rings at the ankles formed from elastic
sock bands. (Reproduced with permission from Dr. Nidhi Shah.)

With severe preeclampsia, urinary output rises after delivery and is
usually an early sign of improvement. With renal dysfunction, serum
creatinine levels are serially monitored. Proteinuria and edema ordinarily
disappear within a week postpartum. In most cases, blood pressure returns to
normal within a few days to 2 weeks after delivery (Berks, 2009). As
subsequently discussed, persisting and severe hypertension likely predicts
underlying chronic vascular disease.
In antepartum eclampsia, labor may begin spontaneously shortly after
convulsions ensue and may progress rapidly. If the seizures develop during
labor, contractions may increase in frequency and intensity, and the duration
of labor may be shortened. Because of maternal hypoxemia and lactic
acidemia caused by convulsions, fetal bradycardia often follows a seizure
(Fig. 41-5). In our experiences, the fetal heart rate usually recovers within 2
to 10 minutes. If it persists more than 10 minutes, another cause of
bradycardia, such as placental abruption, should be considered.

FIGURE 41-5 Fetal heart rate tracing shows fetal bradycardia following an intrapartum eclamptic
convulsion. Bradycardia resolved and beat—to—beat variability returned approximately 5 minutes
following the seizure.

Pulmonary edema may follow shortly after eclamptic convulsions or
several hours later. This complication is further explored on page 724.
Occasionally, sudden death occurs synchronously with an eclamptic
seizure, or it follows shortly thereafter. Most often in these cases, a massive
cerebral hemorrhage is the cause (Fig. 40-11, p. 700). Hemiplegia may result
from sublethal hemorrhage. Cerebral hemorrhages are more likely in older
women with underlying chronic hypertension. For women with a
neurological deficit after an eclamptic seizure, consideration is given for
emergent cranial computed tomography (CT) scanning. Up to 5 percent of
women with eclampsia have altered consciousness, including persistent
coma, following a seizure. This may be due to extensive cerebral edema, and
associated transtentorial herniation may cause death (Cunningham, 2000). In
approximately 10 percent of eclamptic women, some degree of blindness
follows a seizure. The causes of impaired vision which usually improves
postpartum, are discussed in Chapter 40 (p. 701).
Rarely, eclampsia is followed by psychosis, and the woman becomes
violent. This may last for several days to 2 weeks. The prognosis for return
to normal function is good, provided mental illness was not preexisting. It is
presumed to be similar to postpartum psychosis discussed in Chapter 64 (p.

1148). Antipsychotic medications have been effective in the few cases of
posteclampsia psychosis treated at Parkland Hospital.
Generally, eclampsia is more likely to be diagnosed too frequently rather
than overlooked. Epilepsy, encephalitis, meningitis, brain tumor,
neurocysticercosis, amnionic fluid embolism, postdural puncture cephalalgia,
and ruptured cerebral aneurysm during late pregnancy or in the puerperium
may simulate eclampsia. Until other such causes are excluded, however, all
pregnant women with convulsions should be considered to have eclampsia.
As a pragmatic rule, loading with magnesium sulfate should be considered
while alternate diagnoses are explored.

MANAGEMENT OF SEVERE PREECLAMPSIAECLAMPSIA
Most eclampsia regimens in the United States adhere to a similar philosophy:
• Control or prevent convulsions using an intravenous loading dose of
magnesium sulfate. This is followed by maintenance dosing, usually given
intravenously
• Provide intermittent antihypertensive medication to lower dangerously high
blood pressure
• Avoid diuretics unless pulmonary edema is obvious; limit intravenous fluid
administration unless fluid loss is excessive; and avoid hyperosmotic
agents
• Deliver the fetus to resolve preeclampsia.

■ Magnesium Sulfate
This parenterally administered agent is an effective anticonvulsant and
avoids producing central nervous system depression. It may be given
intravenously by continuous infusion or intramuscularly by intermittent
injection (Table 41-6). A third option is intermittent, intravenous, 2-g
injections (Easterling, 2018). Dosages for severe preeclampsia mirror those
for eclampsia. Because labor and delivery is a more likely time for seizures
to develop, women with severe preeclampsia or eclampsia usually are given
magnesium sulfate during labor and for 24 hours postpartum. In the United

States, magnesium sulfate is almost universally administered intravenously.
Of concern, magnesium sulfate solutions, although inexpensive to prepare,
are not readily available in all parts of the developing world. Even if
solutions are available, the technology to infuse them may not be. Thus, the
drug can be administered intramuscularly, and this is as effective as
intravenous infusion (Pritchard, 1955, 1975, 1984; Salinger, 2013).
TABLE 41-6. Magnesium Sulfate Dosage Schedule for Severe
Preeclampsia and Eclampsia

Magnesium sulfate is not given to treat hypertension. Magnesium ion most
likely exerts a specific anticonvulsant action on the cerebral cortex.
Typically, the mother stops convulsing after the initial 4-g loading dose. By
an hour or two, she regains consciousness sufficiently to be oriented to place
and time.
The magnesium sulfate dosage regimens presented in Table 41-6 usually
result in increased plasma magnesium levels. Data from Brookfield and
associates (2016) are illustrated in Figure 41-6. When magnesium sulfate is
given to arrest an eclamptic seizure, up to 15 percent of women will have a
subsequent convulsion. If so, an additional 2-g dose of magnesium sulfate in
a 20-percent solution is slowly administered intravenously. In a small
woman, this additional 2-g dose may be used once, but it can be given twice

if needed in a larger woman. In only 5 of 245 women with eclampsia at
Parkland Hospital was it necessary to use alternative supplementary
anticonvulsant medication to control seizures (Pritchard, 1984). For these, a
small dose of a short-acting benzodiazepine such as midazolam or lorazepam
is given intravenously. Their prolonged use is avoided because of an
associated higher mortality rate from aspiration pneumonia (Royal College
of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists, 2006).

FIGURE 41-6 Serum magnesium concentration in normotensive and preeclamptic women following a
4-g loading dose of magnesium sulfate and 2 g/h infusion.

Maintenance magnesium sulfate therapy has traditionally been continued
for 24 hours after delivery. For eclampsia that develops postpartum,
magnesium sulfate is administered for 24 hours after the onset of
convulsions. A few investigators have truncated this therapy duration to 12
hours and reported no seizures (Anjum, 2016; Ehrenberg, 2006; Kashanian,
2016). Outcomes have also been reported when magnesium sulfate therapy
was stopped after delivery (Ludmir, 2017; Vigil-De Gracia, 2018). These
studies are relatively small, and the abbreviated magnesium sulfate regimens
need further study before being routinely implemented.

Pharmacology and Toxicology

Parenterally administered magnesium is cleared almost totally by renal
excretion, and magnesium clearance rate is approximately a third of
glomerular filtration rate (GFR) determined by creatinine clearance.
Magnesium intoxication is unusual when the GFR is normal or only slightly
reduced. Adequate urine output usually correlates with preserved GFR. That
said, magnesium excretion is not urine flow dependent, and urinary volume
per unit time does not, per se, predict renal function. Thus, serum creatinine
levels must be measured to confirm a decreased GFR.
Eclamptic convulsions are almost always prevented or arrested by
plasma magnesium levels maintained at 4 to 7 mEq/L, 4.8 to 8.4 mg/dL, or
2.0 to 3.5 mmol/L. However, one review of magnesium pharmacokinetics
showed that most regimens result in much lower serum magnesium levels
(Okusanya, 2016). This was especially true if only 1 g/hr was infused (Yefet,
2017). Importantly, the obesity epidemic has affected these observations
(Cunningham, 2016). Tudela and colleagues (2013) described our results
from Parkland Hospital with magnesium administration to obese women.
More than 60 percent of women who had a body mass index (BMI) >30
kg/m2 and who were receiving a 2-g/hr dose had subtherapeutic levels at 4
hours. Thus, most obese women would require 3 g/hr to maintain effective
plasma levels. That said, most currently do not recommend routine
magnesium level measurements (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2020a; Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists,
2006).
Patellar reflexes disappear when the plasma magnesium level reaches 10
mEq/L—approximately 12 mg/dL—presumably because of a curariform
action. This sign serves to warn of impending magnesium toxicity. When
plasma levels rise above 10 mEq/L, breathing weakens. At 12 mEq/L or
higher levels, respiratory paralysis and respiratory arrest follow (Somjen,
1966). Treating with calcium gluconate or calcium chloride, 1 g
intravenously, coupled with magnesium sulfate discontinuation, usually
reverses mild to moderate respiratory depression. One of these agents
should be readily available whenever magnesium is being infused.
Unfortunately, the effects of intravenously administered calcium may be
short-lived if a steady-state toxic magnesium level has been reached. For
severe respiratory depression and arrest, prompt tracheal intubation and
mechanical ventilation are lifesaving. Direct toxic effects on the myocardium
from high levels of magnesium sulfate are uncommon (Morisaki, 2000).

Because magnesium is cleared almost exclusively by renal excretion,
our described dosages of magnesium sulfate will become excessive if the
GFR is substantially decreased. The initial 4- or 6-g loading dose of
magnesium sulfate can be safely administered regardless of renal function. It
is important to administer the standard loading dose and not to reduce it. A
loading dose achieves the desired therapeutic level, and the infusion
maintains the steady-state level. Thus, only the maintenance infusion rate
should be altered for those with a diminished GFR. Renal function is
estimated by measuring plasma creatinine. Whenever plasma creatinine
levels are >1.0 mg/mL, serial serum magnesium levels are determined to
guide the infusion rate (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2020a).
After a 4-g intravenous dose is administered during 15 minutes, mean
arterial pressure falls slightly and is accompanied by a 13-percent rise in
cardiac index (Cotton, 1986b). Thus, magnesium lowers systemic vascular
resistance and mean arterial pressure. At the same time, cardiac output is
increased. These findings are coincidental with transient nausea and flushing,
and the cardiovascular effects persist for only 15 minutes despite continued
magnesium infusion. Magnesium-induced vasodilation is weaker in placental
vessels because of diminished calcium-channel activity (Tang, 2018).
Thurnau and coworkers (1987) showed that magnesium therapy led to a
small but significant rise in the cerebrospinal fluid’s total magnesium
concentration. The magnitude was directly proportional to the corresponding
serum concentration.

Other Effects
Magnesium has anticonvulsant and neuroprotective effects in animal models.
Some proposed mechanisms of action include: (1) reduced presynaptic
release of the neurotransmitter glutamate, (2) blockade of glutamatergic Nmethyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors, (3) potentiation of adenosine action,
(4) improved calcium buffering by mitochondria, and (5) blockage of
calcium entry via voltage-gated channels (Arango, 2008; Wang, 2012).
In the uterus, relatively high serum magnesium concentrations depress
myometrial contractility. Inhibition of uterine contractility is magnesium dose
dependent, and serum levels of at least 8 to 10 mEq/L are needed to inhibit
uterine contractions (Watt-Morse, 1995). With the suggested magnesium

sulfate regimens for seizure prevention, prolonged myometrial depression
has not been observed. A transient decline in activity during and immediately
after the initial intravenous loading dose can be seen (Leveno, 1998; Witlin,
1997). Blood loss at delivery is not increased by standard magnesium sulfate
treatment (Graham, 2016).

■ Neuroprophylaxis—Prevention of Seizures
Several randomized trials have tested the efficacy of seizure prophylaxis for
women with gestational hypertension, with or without proteinuria. In all,
magnesium sulfate was superior to the comparator agent to prevent
eclampsia. Four of the larger studies are summarized in Table 41-7. In the
study from Parkland Hospital, magnesium sulfate therapy was superior to
phenytoin to prevent seizures in women with gestational hypertension or
preeclampsia (Lucas, 1995). In another study, magnesium sulfate and
nimodipine, which is a calcium-channel blocking drug with specific cerebral
vasodilator activity, were compared in 1650 women with severe
preeclampsia (Belfort, 2003). The rate of eclampsia was more than threefold
higher for women allocated to the nimodipine group—2.6 versus 0.8 percent.
TABLE 41-7. Randomized Comparative Trials of Prophylaxis with
Magnesium Sulfate and Placebo or Another Anticonvulsant in Women with
Gestational Hypertension

The largest comparative study was Magnesium Sulfate for Prevention of
Eclampsia reported by the Magpie Trial Collaboration Group (2002). More
than 10,000 women with severe preeclampsia from 33 countries were
randomly allocated to treatment with magnesium sulfate or placebo. Women
given magnesium had a 58-percent significantly lower risk of eclampsia than
those given placebo. Maternal mortality and placental abruption rates also
were decreased. Child behavior at 18 months did not differ between groups
(Smyth, 2009).

Who Should Be Given Magnesium Sulfate?
Magnesium will prevent proportionately more seizures in women with
correspondingly worse disease. However, severity is difficult to quantify,
and thus deciding which woman might benefit most from neuroprophylaxis is
sometimes difficult. The American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2020a) recommends that women with either eclampsia or
severe preeclampsia should be given magnesium sulfate prophylaxis. Again,
criteria that establish “severity” are not universal.
Thus, the conundrum is whether women with “nonsevere” gestational
hypertension or preeclampsia should receive magnesium neuroprophylaxis.
We found that approximately 1 woman in 100 who has nonsevere

preeclampsia but who is not given magnesium sulfate prophylaxis can be
expected to have a seizure. A fourth of these women likely will require
emergent cesarean delivery and be exposed to the attendant maternal and
perinatal morbidity from general anesthesia. From this, the major question
regarding management of nonsevere gestational hypertension remains
whether it is acceptable to avoid unnecessary treatment of 99 women to risk
eclampsia in one. The answer appears to be yes, as suggested by the
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020a). At Parkland
Hospital, our policy is to give magnesium neuroprophylaxis to women with
preeclampsia with severe features, and conservatively to those with
proteinuria hypertension (Table 40-1, p. 689).

Fetal and Neonatal Effects
Magnesium administered parenterally promptly crosses the placenta to
achieve equilibrium in fetal serum and less so in amnionic fluid (GortzakUzan, 2005; Narasimhulu, 2017). Magnesium sulfate has small but significant
effects on the fetal heart rate pattern and specifically on beat-to-beat
variability (Hallak, 1999). One study showed a lower baseline heart rate that
was within the normal range; decreased variability; and fewer prolonged
decelerations (Duffy, 2012).
Overall, maternal magnesium therapy appears safe for perinates
(Drassinower, 2015). One study of more than 1500 exposed preterm neonates
found no association between the need for neonatal resuscitation and cord
blood magnesium levels (Johnson, 2012). Still, a few neonatal adverse
events are associated with its use. In a Parkland Hospital study of 6654
mostly term, exposed newborns, 6 percent had hypotonia (AbbassiGhanavati, 2012). In addition, exposed neonates had lower 1- and 5-minute
Apgar scores, a higher intubation rate, and more admissions to the special
care nursery. Neonatal depression occurs only if hypermagnesemia at
delivery is severe.
Observational studies suggest a protective effect of magnesium against
the development of cerebral palsy in very-low- birthweight newborns
(Crowther, 2017). These beneficial effects may extend to growth-restricted
fetuses. Randomized trials have also assessed neuroprotective effects for
preterm neonates, and findings are discussed in Chapter 45 (p. 803). One
review expanded this possibility to include term newborns, but data were
insufficient to draw conclusions (Nguyen, 2013).

Maternal Safety and Efficacy
The multinational Eclampsia Trial Collaborative Group study (1995)
involved 1687 women with eclampsia randomly allocated to one of three
different anticonvulsant regimens: magnesium sulfate, diazepam, or phenytoin
(Table 41-8). In aggregate, magnesium sulfate therapy was associated with a
significantly lower incidence of recurrent seizures (9.7 percent) compared
with women given phenytoin (28 percent) or diazepam (17 percent).
Moreover, the aggregate maternal death rate of 3.2 percent with magnesium
sulfate was significantly lower than that of 5.2 percent for the other two
regimens.
TABLE 41-8. Randomized Comparative Trials of Magnesium Sulfate
versus Phenytoin and Diazepam to Prevent Recurrent Eclamptic
Convulsions

■ Severe Hypertension Treatment
Dangerous hypertension can cause cerebrovascular hemorrhage and
hypertensive encephalopathy, and it can trigger eclamptic convulsions. Other
complications are placental abruption and congestive heart failure induced
by elevated hypertensive afterload. Studies highlight the importance of
treating systolic hypertension when blood pressures are >160 mm Hg (Judy,
2019; Martin, 2005, 2016).
Because of these serious sequelae, the Working Group for the National
High Blood Pressure Education Program (2000) and the American College
of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020a) recommend treatment to lower

systolic pressures to a level ≤160 mm Hg and diastolic pressures to ≤110
mm Hg. Lower diastolic pressures can compromise placental perfusion.
From other observations, it seems likely that at least half of serious
hemorrhagic strokes associated with preeclampsia are in women with
chronic hypertension (Cunningham, 2005; Zofkie, 2018). Long-standing
hypertension results in development of Charcot–Bouchard aneurysms in the
deep penetrating arteries of the lenticulostriate branch of the middle cerebral
arteries. These vessels supply the basal ganglia, putamen, thalamus, adjacent
deep white matter, pons, and deep cerebellum. These unique aneurysmal
weakenings predispose these small arteries to rupture during sudden
hypertensive episodes.
Several drugs are available to rapidly lower dangerously elevated blood
pressure in women with pregnancy-associated hypertension. Hydralazine,
labetalol, and nifedipine are recommended as first-line agents by the
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020a). Evidence
supports their value to decrease stroke risk (Cleary, 2018).
All three agents have equivalent efficacy. Comparative studies of
hydralazine and labetalol show similar results (Mable, 1987; Umans, 2015).
Hydralazine causes significantly more maternal tachycardia and palpitations,
whereas labetalol more frequently leads to maternal hypotension and
bradycardia. Randomized trials that compared nifedipine with labetalol
found neither drug definitively superior, but nifedipine lowered blood
pressure more quickly (Gainder, 2019; Zulfeen, 2019). Both drugs are
associated with a reduced frequency of fetal heart rate accelerations (Cahill,
2013). Last, a study comparing nifedipine and hydralazine showed similar
efficacy (Sharma, 2017).
A few other generally available antihypertensive agents have been tested
in clinical trials but are not widely used (Umans, 2015). These include
verapamil, nitroglycerin, nitroprusside, ketanserin, nicardipine, and
nimodipine (Belfort, 2003; Cornette, 2016). Experimental antihypertensive
drugs may eventually be useful for preeclampsia treatment (Lam, 2013).

Hydralazine
This antihypertensive agent is administered intravenously or intramuscularly.
An initial 5- to 10-mg dose can act as rapidly as 10 minutes. If needed, this is
followed by 10-mg doses at 15- to 20-minute intervals until a satisfactory

response is achieved (Table 41-9). Although we will administer a third dose,
the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020a)
recommends labetalol therapy if severe hypertension persists after the
second dose. Another regimen continuously infuses hydralazine at a rate of
0.5 to 10 mg/hr.
TABLE 41-9. Antihypertensive Agents for Urgent Control of Severe
Hypertension

For higher blood pressures, the tendency to give a larger initial dose of
hydralazine should be avoided. The response to 5- to 10-mg doses cannot be
predicted by hypertension severity. Thus, our protocol is to always
administer 5 mg as the initial dose. An adverse response to exceeding this
initial dose is shown in Figure 41-7. This woman had chronic hypertension
complicated by severe superimposed preeclampsia, and hydralazine was
injected more frequently than recommended. Her blood pressure in less than
1 hour dropped from 270/150 mm Hg to 110/80 mm Hg. Fetal heart rate
decelerations characteristic of uteroplacental insufficiency became evident.
Decelerations persisted until her blood pressure was raised with rapid
crystalloid infusion. In some cases, this fetal response to diminished uterine
perfusion may be confused with placental abruption and may result in
unnecessary and potentially dangerous emergency cesarean delivery.

FIGURE 41-7 Hydralazine was given at 5-minute intervals instead of 15-minute intervals. The mean
arterial pressure dropped from 180 to 90 mm Hg within 1 hour and was associated with fetal
bradycardia. Rapid crystalloid infusion raised the mean pressure to 115 mm Hg, and the fetus
recovered.

Labetalol
This effective intravenous antihypertensive agent is an α- and nonselective βblocker. Some prefer its use to hydralazine because of fewer side effects.
Importantly, labetalol is usually not given to asthmatic women.
At Parkland Hospital, we give 10 mg intravenously initially. If blood
pressure has not declined to suitable levels in 10 minutes, 20 mg is given.
The next 10-minute incremental dose is 40 mg and is followed by another 40
mg if needed. If a salutary response is not achieved, an 80-mg dose is
provided (see Table 41-9). The American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2020a) recommends starting with a 10- to 20-mg intravenous
bolus. If not effective, this is followed by 20 to 80 mg every 10 to 30
minutes. If hypertension persists, hydralazine is then given.

Nifedipine
This calcium-channel blocking agent is given initially as a 10- to 20-mg oral
dose of immediate release medication. If necessary after 20 minutes, a 10- to
20-mg oral dose is repeated. With an unsatisfactory response, labetalol is
provided. Nifedipine given sublingually is no longer recommended. This
route is associated with dangerously rapid and extensive effects.

Diuretics
Potent loop diuretics can further compromise placental perfusion. Immediate
effects include redistribution of intravascular volume, which most often is
already reduced in severe preeclampsia (p. 724). Thus, before delivery,
diuretics are not used to lower blood pressure (Zeeman, 2009; Zondervan,
1988). Furosemide or similar drugs are used before delivery solely to treat
pulmonary edema. Discussed on page 725, they may have a role in treatment
of postpartum hypertension.

■ Fluid Therapy
Crystalloid solution is administered routinely at a rate between 60 and 125
mL per hour, unless fluid loss is unusual from vomiting, diarrhea,
diaphoresis, or excessive blood loss. Oliguria is common with severe
preeclampsia. Coupled with the knowledge that maternal blood volume is
likely constricted compared with that of normal pregnancy, it is tempting to
administer intravenous fluids more vigorously. However, controlled,
conservative fluid administration is preferred for the typical woman with
severe preeclampsia. These gravidas already have excessive extracellular
fluid that has inappropriately extravasated from the intravascular
compartment.
Infusion of large fluid volumes enhances the maldistribution and thereby
elevates the risk of pulmonary and cerebral edema (Sciscioner, 2003;
Zinaman, 1985). Thus, for preeclamptic women with anuria, small
incremental boluses can be given to maintain urine output above 30 mL/hr.
Diminished intravascular volume from hemorrhage or fluid loss from
vomiting or fever can similarly be replaced by gradual incremental boluses
of crystalloid. For labor analgesia with neuraxial analgesia, crystalloid
solutions are infused slowly in graded amounts (Chap. 25, p. 479).

Pulmonary Edema
Women with severe preeclampsia who develop pulmonary edema most often
do so postpartum (Cunningham, 1986, 2012). With pulmonary edema in the
eclamptic woman, aspiration of gastric contents, which may be the result of
convulsions, anesthesia, or oversedation, should be excluded. Otherwise, in
women with severe preeclampsia, three common causes of pulmonary edema

are pulmonary capillary permeability edema, cardiogenic edema, or their
combination.
First, in women with preeclampsia, both increased capillary
permeability and greater extravascular fluid oncotic pressure are found
(Brown, 1989; Øian, 1986). If intravenous fluid replacement is vigorous,
pulmonary congestion can follow.
Second, in some women, pulmonary edema may be caused by ventricular
failure from increased afterload that results from severe hypertension. Such
pulmonary edema from ventricular failure is more common in morbidly
obese women and in those with chronic hypertension.

Invasive Hemodynamic Monitoring
Knowledge concerning cardiovascular and hemodynamic pathophysiological
alterations associated with severe preeclampsia–eclampsia has accrued from
studies done using invasive monitoring and a pulmonary artery catheter (Fig.
40-5, p. 694). Two conditions frequently cited as indications are
preeclampsia associated with oliguria or with pulmonary edema (Clark,
2010). Somewhat ironically, it is usually vigorous treatment of the former
that results in most cases of the latter. The Task Force (2013) recommends
against routine invasive monitoring. This is best reserved for women with
severe preeclampsia and with accompanying cardiac disease, renal disease,
or both or with refractory hypertension, oliguria, and pulmonary edema.
Preliminary data from studies using a noninvasive cardiac monitoring
system need to be verified before widespread clinical application (Lavie,
2018).

■ Plasma Volume Expansion
Because the preeclampsia syndrome is associated with hemoconcentration,
some have infused various fluids, starch polymers, albumin concentrates, or
combinations to expand blood volume. Older studies describe serious
complications—especially pulmonary edema—with volume expansion
(Benedetti, 1985; Sibai, 1987b).
The Amsterdam randomized study reported by Ganzevoort and
coworkers (2005a,b) was a well-designed investigation done to evaluate
volume expansion. A total of 216 women with severe preeclampsia were

enrolled between 24 and 34 weeks’ gestation. The study included women
whose preeclampsia was complicated by HELLP syndrome, eclampsia,
pulmonary edema, or fetal-growth restriction. In the group randomly assigned
to volume expansion, each woman was given 250 mL of 6-percent
hydroxyethyl starch infused over 4 hours twice daily. Pregnancy outcomes
were compared with a control group, and none of these were significantly
different. Importantly, serious maternal morbidity and a substantive perinatal
mortality rate accompanied their expectant management.

■ Analgesia and Anesthesia
During the past 25 years, the use of neuraxial analgesia for women with
preeclampsia syndrome has proved ideal. Randomized studies attest to its
safety, and these trials are fully described in Chapter 25 (p. 478).
Initial problems with neuraxial analgesia included hypotension and
diminished uterine perfusion caused by sympathetic blockade in
preeclamptic women, who already have attenuated hypervolemia. However,
slow induction of epidural analgesia with dilute solutions of anesthetic
agents counter the need for rapid infusion of large volumes of crystalloid or
colloid to prevent maternal hypotension (Hogg, 1999; Wallace, 1995).
Importantly, epidural blockade avoids general anesthesia, in which the
stimulation of tracheal intubation may cause sudden severe hypertension.
Such blood pressure spikes can cause pulmonary edema, cerebral edema, or
intracranial hemorrhage. Last, tracheal intubation may be particularly
difficult and thus hazardous in women with airway edema due to
preeclampsia (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists,
2020b).
Judicious fluid administration is essential in women with severe
preeclampsia who receive regional analgesia. Vigorous crystalloid infusion
with epidural blockade in women with severe preeclampsia elevates
pulmonary capillary wedge pressures (Newsome, 1986). Aggressive volume
replacement in preeclamptic women raises their risk for pulmonary edema,
especially in the first 72 hours postpartum (Clark, 1985; Cotton, 1986a).
Last, most cases of pharyngolaryngeal edema are related to aggressive
volume therapy (Heller, 1983). In sum, general anesthesia, epidural
analgesia, or combined spinal-epidural analgesia are acceptable for women
severe preeclampsia if steps are taken to ensure a careful approach to the

selected method. At Parkland Hospital, a gentle bolus is given accompanying
epidural placement (Chap. 25, p. 479).

■ Blood Loss at Delivery
Hemoconcentration or lack of normal pregnancy-induced hypervolemia is an
almost predictable feature of severe preeclampsia–eclampsia (Fig. 40-7, p.
696) (Zeeman, 2009). These women, who consequently lack normal
pregnancy hypervolemia, may poorly tolerate even normal blood loss.
Thus, an appreciable fall in blood pressure soon after delivery most often
means excessive blood loss and not sudden resolution of vasospasm and
endothelial damage. When oliguria follows delivery, the hematocrit should
be evaluated frequently to help detect excessive blood loss. If identified,
hemorrhage should be treated appropriately by crystalloid and blood
transfusion.

■ Persistent Severe Postpartum Hypertension
Postpartum, 8 percent of women develop de novo hypertension (Goel, 2015).
At times, controlling severe hypertension may be difficult or intravenous
hydralazine or labetalol or oral immediate-release nifedipine are being used
repeatedly. In these cases, oral maintenance regimens can be given.
Examples include labetalol or another β-blocking agent; nifedipine extended
release; amlodipine; or another calcium-channel blocking agent (Sharma,
2017). Women so treated are less likely to require readmission (Stamilio,
2021; Wen, 2019). The Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine (2020a) has
developed a check list for postpartum care of women with hypertensive
disorders.
Persistent hypertension is likely aggravated by pathological interstitial
fluid that is now returning to the intravascular compartment, by underlying
chronic hypertension, or by both (Sibai, 2012; Tan, 2002). Nonsteroidal
antiinflammatory drugs do not aggravate postpartum hypertension (Anastasio,
2018; Penfield, 2019). In some women with chronic hypertension and leftventricular hypertrophy, severe postpartum hypertension can cause
pulmonary edema from cardiac failure (Cunningham, 1986, 2019; Sibai,
1987a).

Furosemide
Severe hypertension persists depending on the onset and length of
extracellular fluid mobilization and diuresis. Thus, it seems logical that
furosemide-augmented diuresis might serve to hasten blood pressure control
(Ascarelli, 2005). In one randomized trial of 384 women with hypertensive
disorders of pregnancy, a cohort that received furosemide postpartum had
significantly lower blood pressures at 7 days—6 versus 14 percent—
compared with women who received placebo (Lopes Perdigao, 2021). The
need for antihypertensive treatment to be given at discharge in the furosemide
group also was significantly reduced. In another randomized study, women
with severe postpartum preeclampsia received nifedipine plus furosemide or
nifedipine alone. The furosemide regimen significantly lowered the need for
additional antihypertensive agents—8 versus 26 percent, respectively
(Veena, 2017). Conversely, in one study, torsemide had no significant
benefits (Viteri, 2018).
We use a simple method to estimate excessive extracellular fluid. The
postpartum weight is compared with the most recent prenatal weight, either
from the last clinic visit or from admission for delivery. Typically, soon after
delivery, maternal weight should be reduced by at least 10 to 15 pounds
depending on newborn and placental weight, amnionic fluid volume, and
blood loss. Because of various interventions, especially intravenous
crystalloid infusions given with labor epidural analgesia or during operative
vaginal or cesarean delivery, women with severe preeclampsia often have an
immediate postpartum weight in excess of their last prenatal weight. If this
weight increase is associated with severe persistent postpartum
hypertension, diuresis with intravenous furosemide can be helpful in
controlling blood pressure.

Thrombotic Microangiopathy
Occasionally, women have an atypical syndrome in which severe
preeclampsia–eclampsia persists despite delivery. Martin and associates
(1995) described 18 such women whom they encountered during a 10-year
period. They advocate single or multiple plasma exchange for these women.
In some cases, 3 L of plasma was exchanged three times before a response
was forthcoming. This is a 36- to 45-donor-unit exposure for each patient.
Others have described plasma exchange performed in postpartum women

with HELLP syndrome (Förster, 2002; Obeidat, 2002). In all of these cases,
however, the distinction between HELLP syndrome and thrombotic
thrombocytopenic purpura or hemolytic uremic syndrome was not clear
(Tsai, 2016). In our experiences with more than 55,000 women with
gestational hypertension among nearly 500,000 pregnancies cared for at
Parkland Hospital through 2021, we have encountered very few women with
persistent postpartum hypertension, thrombocytopenia, and renal dysfunction
who were diagnosed as having a thrombotic microangiopathy (Dashe, 1998).

Reversible Cerebral Vasoconstriction Syndrome
This is another cause of persistent hypertension, “thunderclap” headaches,
seizures, and central nervous system findings. Reversible cerebral
vasoconstriction syndrome is characterized by diffuse segmental
constriction of cerebral arteries and may be associated with ischemic and
hemorrhagic strokes. This syndrome has several inciting causes that include
pregnancy and particularly preeclampsia (Ducros, 2012). It is more frequent
in women, and long-term sequelae are uncommon. However, in some cases,
vasoconstriction may be so severe as to cause cerebral ischemia and
infarction (Boitet, 2020). We have encountered only a few women with a
stroke cause by this arteriopathy (Zofkie, 2019). The most appropriate
management is unclear (Cho, 2019).

LONG-TERM CONSEQUENCES
■ Future Pregnancies
Women with preeclampsia during an index pregnancy are at risk for
hypertensive and other disorders in subsequent pregnancies and later in life
(Wang, 2021). In some, but not all women, the risk for hypertension is higher
in the first 6 months postpartum (Giorgione, 2021; Mulder, 2021). Even in
subsequent nonhypertensive pregnancies, women who had preterm
preeclampsia have a higher risk for preterm birth and growth-restricted
neonates (Connealy, 2014; Palatnik, 2016). Generally, the earlier
preeclampsia is diagnosed during the index pregnancy, the greater the
likelihood of recurrence. Women with preeclampsia near term had a
recurrence risk of 23 percent, but nulliparas diagnosed with preeclampsia

before 30 weeks had a recurrence risk as high as 40 percent (Bramham,
2011; Sibai 1986, 1991).
As perhaps expected, women with HELLP syndrome have a substantive
risk for recurrence in subsequent pregnancies. Even if HELLP syndrome
does not recur with subsequent pregnancies, again incidences of preterm
delivery, fetal-growth restriction, placental abruption, and cesarean delivery
are increased (Habli, 2009; Malmström, 2020).

■ Cardiovascular Morbidity
The preeclampsia syndrome is also a marker for subsequent long-term
cardiovascular morbidity (Table 41-10) (Hammad, 2020; Stuart, 2018;
Wang, 2021). Thus, women with hypertension identified during pregnancy
should be evaluated during the first several months postpartum.
TABLE 41-10. Some Long-Term Consequences in Women with
Preeclampsia Syndrome

The Working Group of the NHBPEP (2000) concluded that hypertension
attributable to pregnancy should resolve within 12 weeks of delivery, and
hypertension persisting beyond this time is considered chronic (Chap. 53, p.
944). The Magpie Trial Follow-Up Collaborative Group (2007) reported
that 20 percent of 3375 preeclamptic women seen at a median of 26 months
postpartum had hypertension. From one metanaalysis, a 28-percent incidence
of hypertension was found within 2 years of deliveries complicated by
preeclampsia (Giorgione, 2021). From a Danish registry and after a mean of
almost 15 years, the incidence of chronic hypertension was fivefold higher in
those who had gestational hypertension, fourfold greater after mild
preeclampsia, and sixfold higher after severe preeclampsia compared with
women without hypertension in pregnancy (Lykke, 2009).
Any hypertension during pregnancy is a risk marker for cardiovascular
morbidity in later life (Wang, 2021). As shown in data from Brouwers and
coworkers (2018), the risk is greater in women with recurrent preeclampsia
(Table 41-11). In a study from Iceland, the prevalence of ischemic heart
disease—24 versus 15 percent, and of stroke—9.5 versus 6.5 percent, were
increased in women who had gestational hypertension compared with
normotensive controls (Arnadottir, 2005). In a Swedish population study of
more than 400,000 women, those with recurrent preeclampsia had systolic
dysfunction and a greater incidence of ischemic heart disease (Valensise,
2016). Diastolic dysfunction also is more common (Bokslag, 2018).
Preeclampsia is also a risk for coronary artery calcification and idiopathic
cardiomyopathy (Gammill, 2018; White, 2016).
TABLE 41-11. Long-Term Cardiovascular Morbidities After Recurrent
Preeclampsia Compared with a Single Pregnancy with Preeclampsia and a
Subsequent Normal Pregnancy

Women who have preeclampsia and who develop chronic hypertension
later in life have an increased ventricular mass index before they become
hypertensive (Ghossein-Doha, 2013). Last, in at least some women with
prior preeclampsia, hypertensive cardiovascular pathologies appear to have
begun near the time of their own births. A similar phenomenon is associated
with preterm birth and with fetal-growth disorders.
Other cofactors or comorbidities are related to acquisition of these longterm adverse outcomes (Gastrich, 2012; Harskamp, 2007; Hermes, 2012;
Spaan, 2012). These include the metabolic syndrome, diabetes, obesity,
dyslipidemia, and atherosclerosis (Catzov, 2021; Cho, 2019; Kajantie,
2017). Women with pregnancy-associated hypertension are at increased risk
for type 2 diabetes (Stuart, 2018). Preeclampsia predisposes for later
diabetic retinopathy and retinal detachment (Auger, 2017; Beharier, 2016).

■ Renal Sequelae
Preeclampsia is a marker for subsequent renal disease. Almost 15 percent of
women with prior preeclampsia have renal dysfunction (Lopes van Balen,
2017). This may be related to AKI associated with preeclampsia (Novotny,
2020; Rodriquez, 2021). In a Danish study with more than a million women,
the chronic renal disease rate was sixfold greater in those who had
preeclampsia (Kristensen, 2019). These data need to be considered in light
of the findings that 15 to 20 percent of women with preeclampsia who

undergo renal biopsy have evidence of chronic renal disease (Chesley,
1978). In another long-term study, women with prior preeclampsia were
significantly more likely to be chronically hypertensive—55 versus 7 percent
—compared with control women. They also had higher peripheral vascular
and renovascular resistance and decreased renal blood flow. These data do
not permit conclusions as to cause versus effect (Spaan, 2009).

■ Central Nervous System Sequelae
Eclamptic seizures were once believed to have no significant long-term CNS
sequelae. However, this likely is not the case (Bergman, 2021c; Theilen,
2016). Recall that almost all eclamptic women have multifocal areas of
perivascular edema, and approximately a fourth also have areas of cerebral
infarction (Zeeman, 2004).
In several long-term studies in women with severe preeclampsia and
eclampsia, white-matter lesions in the brain that followed eclamptic
convulsions persist (Aukes, 2009, 2012). Specifically, with magnetic
resonance (MR) imaging, 40 percent of women with prior eclampsia had
more numerous and larger aggregate white-matter lesions compared with 17
percent of normotensive control women. These white-matter lesions were
also found in women with preeclampsia without convulsions (Aukes, 2012).
Others found temporal lobe white-matter changes and reduced cortical
volume in women with prior preeclampsia (Siepmann, 2017).
In some, but not all studies, women with prior eclampsia had
subjectively impaired cognitive functioning and increased risk for dementia
(Basit, 2018; Elharram, 2018). They also had a modest increase in the
frequency of seizure disorders (Nerenberg, 2017). In another study, women
with prior eclampsia had lower vision-related quality of life compared with
control women (Wiegman, 2012).

REFERENCES
Abalos E, Duley L, Steyn DW, et al: Antihypertensive drug therapy for mild to moderate hypertension
during pregnancy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2:CD002252, 2014
Abbassi-Ghanavati M, Alexander JM, McIntire DD: Neonatal effects of magnesium sulfate given to the
mother. Am J Perinatol 29(10):795, 2012
Abdel-Hady ES, Fawzy M, El-Negri M, et al: Is expectant management of early-onset severe
preeclampsia worthwhile in low-resource settings? Arch Gynecol Obstet 282(1):23, 2010

Alanis MC, Robinson CJ, Hulsey TC, et al: Early-onset severe preeclampsia: induction of labor vs
elective cesarean delivery and neonatal outcomes. Am J Obstet Gynecol 199:262e1, 2008
Alexander JM, Bloom SL, McIntire DD, et al: Severe preeclampsia and the very low-birthweight infant:
is induction of labor harmful? Obstet Gynecol 93:485, 1999
Alexander JM, Cunningham FG: Management. In: Taylor RN, Roberts JM, Cunningham FG (eds):
Chesley’s Hypertensive Disorders in Pregnancy, 4th ed. Amsterdam, Academic Press, 2015
Altman D, Carroli G, Duley L, et al: Do women with pre-eclampsia, and their babies, benefit from
magnesium sulphate? The Magpie Trial: a randomised placebo-controlled trial. Lancet
359(9321):1877, 2002
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Hypertension in pregnancy. Report of the
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists’ Task Force on Hypertension in Pregnancy.
Obstet Gynecol 122:1122, 2013
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Gestational hypertension and preeclampsia.
Practice Bulletin No. 222, June 2020a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Obstetric analgesia and anesthesia. Practice
Bulletin No. 209, February 2019, Reaffirmed 2020b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Antepartum fetal surveillance. Practice Bulletin
No. 145, June 2021a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Indications for outpatient antepartum fetal
surveillance. Practice Bulletin No. 145, June 2021b
Amorim MM, Santos LC, Faündes A: Corticosteroid therapy for prevention of respiratory distress
syndrome in severe preeclampsia. Am J Obstet Gynecol 180:1283, 1999
Anastasio HB, Campbell LE, Buermeyer A, et al: Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug administration and
postpartum blood pressure in women with hypertensive disorders of pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol
132(6):1471, 2018
Andersgaard AB, Herbst A, Johansen M, et al: Eclampsia in Scandinavia: incidence, substandard care,
and potentially preventable cases. Acta Obstet Gynecol 85:929, 2006
Anez-Aguayo M, Vigil-De Garcia: Dexamethasone in HELLP syndrome: experience in Bolivia. J
Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 33(1):1, 2018
Anjum S, Goel N, Shrama R, et al: Maternal outcomes after 12 hours and 24 hours of magnesium
sulfate therapy for eclampsia. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 132(1):68, 2016
Arango ME, Mejia-Mantilla JH: Magnesium for acute traumatic brain injury. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev 4:CD005400, 2008
Arnadottir GA, Geirsson RT, Arngrimsson R, et al: Cardiovascular death in women who had
hypertension in pregnancy: a case- control study. BJOG 112:286, 2005
Ascarelli MH, Johnson V, McCreary H, et al: Postpartum preeclampsia management with furosemide: a
randomized clinical trial. Obstet Gynecol 105:29, 2005
Auger N, Fraser WD, Paradis G, et al: Preeclampsia and long—term risk of maternal retinal disorders.
Obstet Gynecol 129(1):42, 2017
Aukes AM, de Groot JC, Aarnoudse JG, et al: Brain lesions several years after eclampsia. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 200(5):504.e1, 2009
Aukes AM, de Groot JC, Wiegman MJ, et al: Long-term cerebral imaging after preeclampsia. BJOG
119(9):1117, 2012
Barton JR, Woelkers DA, Newman RB, et al: Placental growth factor predicts time to delivery in
women with signs or symptoms of early preterm preeclampsia: a prospective multicenter study. Am
J Obstet Gynecol 229:259.e1, 2020

Barton CR, Barton JR, O’Brien JM, et al: Mild gestational hypertension: differences in ethnicity are
associated with altered outcomes in women who undergo outpatient treatment. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 186:896, 2002
Barton J, Barton L, Istwan N, et al: Elective delivery at 340/7 to 366/7 weeks’ gestation and its impact
on neonatal outcomes in women with stable mild gestational hypertension. Am J Obstet Gynecol
204(1):44e1, 2011
Basit S, Wohlfahrt J, Boyd HA: Preeclampsia and risk of dementia later in life: a nationwide cohort
study. BMJ 363:k4109, 2018
Beharier O, Davidson E, Sergienko R, et al: Preeclampsia and future risk for maternal ophthalmic
complications. Am J Perinatol 33(7):703, 2016
Belfort M, Anthony J, Saade G, et al: A comparison of magnesium sulfate and nimodipine for the
prevention of eclampsia. N Engl J Med 348:304, 2003
Belghiti J, Kayem G, Tsatsaris V, et al: Benefits and risks of expectant management of severe
preeclampsia at less than 26 weeks gestation: the impact of gestational age and severe fetal growth
restriction. Am J Obstet Gynecol 205(5):465.e1, 2011
Benedetti TJ, Kates R, Williams V: Hemodynamic observations in severe preeclampsia complicated by
pulmonary edema. Am J Obstet Gynecol 152:330, 1985
Berks D, Steegers EA, Molas M, et al: Resolution of hypertension and proteinuria after preeclampsia.
Obstet Gynecol 114(6):1307, 2009
Bernardes TP, Zwertbroek EF, Broekhuijsen K, et al: Delivery or expectant management for prevention
of adverse maternal and neonatal outcomes in hypertensive disorders of pregnancy: an individual
participant data meta-analysis. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 53(4):43, 2019
Bloom SL, Leveno KJ: Corticosteroid use in special circumstances: preterm ruptured membranes,
hypertension, fetal growth restriction, multiple fetuses. Clin Obstet Gynecol 46:150, 2003
Boitet R, de Gaalon S, Duflos C, et al: Long-term outcomes after reversible cerebral vasoconstriction
syndrome. Stroke 51(2):670, 2020
Bokslag A, Franssen C, Alma LJ, et al: Early-onset preeclampsia predisposes to preclinical diastolic left
ventricular dysfunction in the fifth decade of life: An observational study. PLoS One 13(6):e0198908,
2018
Bombrys AE, Barton JR, Habli M, Sibai BM: Expectant management of severe preeclampsia at 27(0/7)
to 33(6/7) weeks’ gestation: maternal and perinatal outcomes according to gestational age by weeks
at onset of expectant management. Am J Perinatol 26: 441, 2009
Bombrys AE, Barton JR, Nowacki EA, et al: Expectant management of severe preeclampsia at less
than 27 weeks’ gestation: maternal and perinatal outcomes according to gestational age by weeks at
onset of expectant management. Am J Obstet Gynecol 199:247.e1, 2008
Bramham K, Briley AL, Seed P, et al: Adverse maternal and perinatal outcomes in women with
previous preeclampsia: a prospective study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 204(6):512e1, 2011
Broekhuijsen K, van Baaren GJ, van Pampus MG, et al: Immediate delivery versus expectant
monitoring for hypertensive disorders of pregnancy between 34 and 37 weeks of gestation
(HYPITAT-II): an open—label, randomised controlled trial. Lancet 385(9986):2492, 2015
Brookfield KF, Su F, Elkomy MH, et al: Pharmacokinetics and placental transfer of magnesium sulfate
in pregnant women. Am J Obstet Gynecol 214:737e1, 2016
Brouwers L, van der Meiden-van Roest AJ, Savelkoul C, et al: Recurrence of preeclampsia and the risk
of future hypertension and cardiovascular disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis. BJOG
125(13):1642, 2018

Brown MA, Zammit VC, Lowe SA: Capillary permeability and extracellular fluid volumes in pregnancyinduced hypertension. Clin Sci 77:599, 1989
Budden A, Wilkinson L, Buksh MJ, et al: Pregnancy outcomes in women presenting with pre-eclampsia
at less than 25 weeks gestation. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol 46(5):407, 2006
Cahill A, Odibo A, Roehl K, et al: Impact of intrapartum antihypertensives on electronic fetal heart rate
(EFM) patterns in labor. Abstract No. 615, Am J Obstet Gynecol 208 (1 Suppl):S262, 2013
Catzov JM, McNeil RB, Marsh DJ, et al: Early pregnancy atherogenic profile in a first pregnancy and
hypertension risk 2 to 7 years after delivery. J Am Heart Assoc 10(5):e017216, 2021
Cavaignac-Vitalis M, Vidal F, Simon-Toulza C, et al: Conservative versus active management in HELLP
syndrome: results from a cohort study. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 32(11):1769, 2019
Chames MC, Livingston JC, Ivester TS, et al: Late postpartum eclampsia: a preventable disease? Am J
Obstet Gynecol 186: 1174, 2002
Chappell LC, Brocklehurst P, Green ME, et al: Planned early delivery or expectant management for late
preterm pre-eclampsia (PHOENIX): a randomised controlled trial. Lancet 394(10204):1181, 2019
Chappell LC, Brocklehurst P, Green ME, et al: Planned early delivery or expectant management for late
preterm pre-eclampsia (PHOENIX): a randomised controlled trial Lancet 394(10204):1181, 2019
Chappell LC, Duckworth S, Seed P T, et al: Diagnostic accuracy of placental growth factor in women
with suspected preeclampsia: a prospective multicenter study. Circulation 128 (19):2121, 2013
Chatzakis CV, Liberis A, Zavlanos A, et al: Early delivery or expectant management for later preterm
preeclampsia: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Act Obstet Gynecol Scand
100(8):1392, 2021
Chescheir NC: Serum uric acid measurement in women with hypertensive disorders of pregnancy.
Obstet Gynecol 134(3): 636, 2019
Chesley LC (ed): Hypertensive Disorders in Pregnancy. Appleton Century—Crofts, New York, 1978
Cho GJ, Jung US, Sim JY, et al: Is preeclampsia itself a risk factor for the development of metabolic
syndrome after delivery? Obstet Gynecol 62(4):233, 2019
Churchill D, Duley L, Thornton JG, et al: Interventionist versus expectant care for severe preeclampsia
between 24 and 34 weeks’ gestation. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 10: CD003106, 2018
Clark SL, Dildy GA III: Pulmonary artery catheterization. In: Belfort M, Saade GR, Foley MR, et al
(eds): Critical Care Obstetrics, 5th ed. West Sussex, Wiley-Blackwell, 2010
Clark SL, Divon MY, Phelan JP: Preeclampsia/eclampsia: hemodynamic and neurologic correlations.
Obstet Gynecol 66:337, 1985
Cleary KL, Siddiq Z, Ananth VC, et al: Use of antihypertensive medications during delivery
hospitalizations complicated by preeclampsia. Obstet Gynecol 131(3):441, 2018
Cluver CA, Hannan NJ, van Papendorp E, et al: Esomeprazole to treat women with preterm
preeclampsia: a randomized placebo controlled trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol 19(4):388, 2018
Coetzee EJ, Dommisse J, Anthony J: A randomised controlled trial of intravenous magnesium sulphate
versus placebo in the management of women with severe pre-eclampsia. BJOG 105(3):300, 1998
Conde-Agudelo A, Romero R, Roberts JM: Tests to predict preeclampsia. In: Taylor RN, Roberts JM,
Cunningham FG (eds): Chesley’s Hypertensive Disorders in Pregnancy, 4th ed. Amsterdam,
Academic Press, 2015
Connealy B, Carreno C, Kase B, et al: A history of prior preeclampsia as a risk factor for preterm birth.
Am J Perinatol 31(6):483, 2014
Cornette J, Buijs EA, Duvekot JJ, et al: Hemodynamic effects of intravenous nicardipine in severely
preeclamptic women with a hypertensive crisis. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 47(1):89, 2016

Cotton DB, Jones MM, Longmire S, et al: Role of intravenous nitroglycerine in the treatment of severe
pregnancy-induced hypertension complicated by pulmonary edema. Am J Obstet Gynecol 154:91,
1986a
Cotton DB, Longmire S, Jones MM, et al: Cardiovascular alterations in severe pregnancy-induced
hypertension: effects of intravenous nitroglycerin coupled with blood volume expansion. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 154:1053, 1986b
Coviello EM, Iqbal SN, Grantz KL, et al: Early preterm preeclampsia outcomes by intended mode of
delivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 220(1):100.e1, 2019
Crowther CA, Bouwmeester AM, Ashurst HM: Does admission to hospital for bed rest prevent disease
progression or improve fetal outcome in pregnancy complicated by non-proteinuric hypertension?
BJOG 99:13, 1992
Cunningham FG: Peripartum cardiomyopathy: we’ve come a long way, but…. Obstet Gynecol
120(5):992, 2012
Cunningham FG: Severe preeclampsia and eclampsia: systolic hypertension is also important. Obstet
Gynecol 105(2):237, 2005
Cunningham FG, Byrne JJ, Nelson DB: Peripartum cardiomyopathy. Obstet Gynecol 133(1):167, 2019
Cunningham FG, Nelson DB: Magnesium sulphate: too much of a good thing? BJOG 123:356, 2016
Cunningham FG, Pritchard JA, Hankins GD, et al: Peripartum heart failure: idiopathic cardiomyopathy
or compounding cardiovascular events? Obstet Gynecol 67:157, 1986
Cunningham FG, Twickler D: Cerebral edema complicating eclampsia. Am J Obstet Gynecol 182:94,
2000
Dashe JS, Ramin SM, Cunningham FG: The long-term consequences of thrombotic microangiopathy
(thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura and hemolytic uremic syndrome) in pregnancy. Obstet
Gynecol 91:662, 1998
Ducros A: Reversible cerebral vasoconstriction syndrome. Lancet Neurol 11(10):906, 2012
Duffy CR, Odibo AO, Roehl KA, et al: Effect of magnesium sulfate on fetal heart rate patterns in the
second stage of labor. Obstet Gynecol 119(6):1129, 2012
Duhig KE, Seed PT, Placzek A, et al: Prognostic indicators of severe disease in late preterm
preeclampsia to guide decision making on timing of delivery: the PEACOCK study. Pregnancy
Hypertens 24:90, 2021
Easterling TR, Benedetti TJ, Schmucker BC, et al: Maternal hemodynamics in normal and preeclamptic
pregnancies: a longitudinal study. Obstet Gynecol 76:1061, 1990
Ehrenberg HM, Mercer BM: Abbreviated postpartum magnesium sulphate therapy for women with mild
preeclampsia: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol 108(4):833, 2006
Elharram M, Dayan N, Kaur A, et al: Long-term cognitive impairment after preeclampsia: a systematic
review and metaanalysis. Obstet Gynecol 132(2):355, 2018
Eclampsia Trial Collaborative Group: Which anticonvulsant for women with eclampsia? Evidence from
the collaborative eclampsia trial. Lancet 345:1455, 1995
Fishel-Bartal M, Sibai BM: Eclampsia in the 21st century. Am J Obstet Gynecol 9378(20):31128, 2020
Fonseca JE, Méndez F, Cataho C, et al: Dexamethasone treatment does not improve the outcome of
women with HELLP syndrome: a double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomized clinical trial. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 193:1591, 2005
Förster JG, Peltonen S, Kaaja R, et al: Plasma exchange in severe postpartum HELLP syndrome. Acta
Anaesthesiol Scand 46:955, 2002

Gainder S, Thakur M, Saha SC, et al: To study the changes in fetal hemodynamics with intravenous
labetalol or nifedipine in acute severe hypertension. Pregnancy Hypertens 15:12, 2019
Gammill HS, Chettier R, Brewer A, et al: Cardiomyopathy and preeclampsia. Circulation 138(21):2359,
2018
Ganzevoort W, Rep A, Bonsel GJ, et al: A randomized trial of plasma volume expansion in hypertensive
disorders of pregnancy: influence on the pulsatile indices of the fetal umbilical artery and middle
cerebral artery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 192:233, 2005a
Ganzevoort W, Rep A, PERTA investigators, et al: A randomized controlled trial comparing two
temporizing management strategies, one with and one without plasma volume expansion, for severe
and early onset pre-eclampsia. BJOG 112:1337, 2005b
Gastrich MD, Gandhi SK, Pantazopoulos J, et al: Cardiovascular outcomes after preeclampsia or
eclampsia complicate myocardial infarction or stroke. Obstet Gynecol 120(4):823, 2012
Gaugler-Senden IP, Huijssoon AG, Visser W, et al: Maternal and perinatal outcome of preeclampsia
with an onset before 24 weeks’ gestation. Audit in a tertiary referral center. Eur J Obstet Gynecol
Reprod Biol 128:216, 2006
Ghossein-Doha C, Peeters L, van Jeijster S, et al: Hypertension after preeclampsia is preceded by
changes in cardiac structures and function. Hypertension 62(2):382, 2013
Gilstrap LC, Cunningham FG, Whalley PJ: Management of pregnancy-induced hypertension in the
nulliparous patient remote from term. Semin Perinatol 2:73, 1978
Giorgione V, Ridder A, Kalafat E, et al: Incidence of postpartum hypertension within 2 years of a
pregnancy complicated by preeclampsia: a systematic review and meta-analysis. BJOG 128(3):495,
2021
Goel A, Maski MR, Bajracharya S, et al: Epidemiology and mechanisms of de novo and persistent
hypertension in the postpartum period. Circulation 132(18):1726, 2015
Gortzak-Uzan L, Mezad D, Smolin A: Increasing amniotic fluid magnesium concentrations with stable
maternal serum levels. A prospective clinical trial. J Reprod Med 50:817, 2005
Graham NM, Gimovsky AC, Roman A, et al: Blood loss at cesarean delivery in women on magnesium
sulfate for preeclampsia. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 29(11):1817, 2016
Habli M, Eftekhari N, Wiebracht E, et al: Long-term maternal and subsequent pregnancy outcomes 5
years after hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, and low platelets (HELLP) syndrome. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 201(4):385.e1, 2009
Haddad B, Kayem G, Deis S, et al: Are perinatal and maternal outcomes different during expectant
management of severe preeclampsia in the presence of intrauterine growth restriction? Am J Obstet
Gynecol 196:237.e1, 2007
Hallak M, Martinez-Poyer J, Kruger ML, et al: The effect of magnesium sulfate on fetal heart rate
parameters: a randomized, placebo-controlled trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol 181:1122, 1999
Hammad IA, Meeks H, Fraser A, et al: Risks of cause-specific mortality in offspring of pregnancies
complicated by hypertensive disease of pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 222:75e.1, 2020
Harskamp RE, Zeeman GG: Preeclampsia: at risk for remote cardiovascular disease. Am J Med Sci
334(4):291, 2007
Hauth JC, Cunningham FG, Whalley PJ: Management of pregnancy- induced hypertension in the
nullipara. Obstet Gynecol 48: 253, 1976
Heller PJ, Scheider EP, Marx GF: Pharyngo-laryngeal edema as a presenting symptom in preeclampsia.
Obstet Gynecol 62:523, 1983
Hermes W, Ket JC, van Pampus MG, et al: Biochemical cardiovascular risk factors after hypertensive
pregnancy disorders: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Obstet Gynecol Surv 67(12):793, 2012

Hogg B, Hauth JC, Caritis SN, et al: Safety of labor epidural anesthesia for women with severe
hypertensive disease. Am J Obstet Gynecol 181:1096, 1999
Hoshino A, Obata S, Tochio A, et al: Efficacy of expectant management of severe preeclampsia and
preeclampsia superimposed on chronic hypertension before 34 weeks gestation. Pregnancy
Hypertens 15:177, 2019
Johnson LH, Mapp DC, Rouse DJ: Association of cord blood magnesium concentration and neonatal
resuscitation. J Pediatr 160(4):573, 2012
Judy AE, McCain CL, Lawton ES, et al: Systolic hypertension, preeclampsia-re1ated mortality, and
stroke in California. Obstet Gynecol 133(6):1151, 2019
Kajantie E, Osmond C, Eriksson JG: Gestational hypertension is associated with increased risk of type 2
diabetes in adult offspring: the He1sinki Birth Cohort Study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 216(3):281.e1,
2017
Kashanian M, Koohpayehzadeh J, Sheikhansari N, et al: A comparison between the two methods of
magnesium sulfate administration for duration of 12 versus 24 h after de1ivery in patients with
severe preeclampsia. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 29(14):2282, 2016
Katz L, de Amorim MM, Figueroa JN, et al: Postpartum dexamethasone for women with hemolysis,
e1evated liver enzymes, and low plate1ets (HE1LP) syndrome: a double-blind, placebo-controlled,
randomized clinical trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol 198:283.e1, 2008
Knight M, UK Obstetric Surveillance System (UKOSS): Eclampsia in the United Kingdom 2005. BJOG
114:1072, 2007
Koopmans CM, Bijlenga D, Groen H, et al: Induction of labour versus expectant monitoring for
gestational hypertension or mild pre-eclampsia after 36 weeks’ gestation (HYPITAT): a multicentre,
open-labe1 randomized controlled trial. Lancet 374(9694):979, 2009
Kristensen JH, Basit S, Wohlfahrt J, et al: Preeclampsia and risk of later kidney disease: nationwide
cohort study. BMJ 365:1516, 2019
Lam DS, Chan W: Images in clinical medicine. Choroidal ischemia in preeclampsia. N Engl J Med
344(10):739, 2001
Langenve1d J, Rave1li AC, van Kaam AH, et al: Neonatal outcome of pregnancies complicated by
hypertensive disorders between 34 and 37 weeks of gestation: a 7 year retrospective analysis of
national registry. Am J Obstet Gynecol 205(6):540.e1, 2011
Lavie A, Ram M, Lev S, et al: Maternal cardiovascular hemodynamics in normotensive versus
preeclamptic pregnancies: a prospective longitudinal study using a noninvasive cardiac system
(NICaSTM) BMC Pregnancy Childbirth 18(1):229, 2018
Leveno KJ, Alexander JM, McIntire DD, et al: Does magnesium sulfate given for prevention of
eclampsia affect the outcome of labor? Am J Obstet Gynecol 178:707, 1998
Lopes van Balen VA, Spaan JJ, Corne1is T, et al: Prevalence of chronic kidney disease after
preeclampsia. J Nephrol 30(3):403, 2017
Lopes Perdigao J, Lewey J, Hirshberg A, et al: Furosemide for acce1erated recovery of blood pressure
postpartum: a randomized placebo controlled trial. Hypertension 77(5):1517, 2021
Lucas MJ, Leveno KJ, Cunningham FG: A comparison of magnesium sulfate with phenytoin for the
prevention of eclampsia. N Engl J Med 333:201, 1995
Ludmir J, Vigil-De Gracia P, Mag-Pip (Magnesium postpartum in preeclampsia) study group: Is
magnesium sulfate use of benefit postpartum? A randomized controlled trial. Abstract No. 4, Am J
Obstet Gynecol 216:S3, 2017
Lykke JA, Langhoff-Roos J, Sibai BM, et al: Hypertensive pregnancy disorders and subsequent
cardiovascular morbidity and type 2 diabetes me1litus in the mother. Hypertension 53:944, 2009

Mable WC, Gonzalez AR, Sibai BM, et al: A comparative trial of labetalol and hydralazine in the acute
management of severe hypertension complicating pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 70:328, 1987
Magee LA, von Dade1szen P, Rey E, et al: Less-tight versus tight control of hypertension in pregnancy.
N Engl J Med 372(5):407, 2015
Magpie Trial Collaboration Group: Do women with preeclampsia, and their babies, benefit from
magnesium sulphate? The Magpie Trial: a randomised placebo-controlled trial. Lancet 359:1877,
2002
Magpie Trial Follow-Up Collaborative Group: The Magpie Trial: a randomized trial comparing
magnesium sulphate with placebo for preeclampsia. Outcome for women at 2 years. BJOG 114:300,
2007
Malmström, Håberg SE, Morken NH: Probability and outcomes of second pregnancy after HE1LP
syndrome in the first: a population-based registry study. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 99(9):1206,
2020
Martin JN Jr: Severe systolic hypertension and the search for safer motherhood. Semin Perinatol
40(2):119, 2016
Martin JN Jr, Files JC, Blake PG, et al: Postpartum plasma exchange for atypical preeclampsia–
eclampsia as HELLP (hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, and low platelets) syndrome. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 172:1107, 1995
Martin JN Jr, Thigpen BI, Moore RC, et al: Stroke and severe preeclampsia and eclampsia: a paradigm
shift focusing on systolic blood pressure. Obstet Gynecol 105(2):246, 2005
Mattar F, Sibai BM: Eclampsia. VIII. Risk factors for maternal morbidity. Am J Obstet Gynecol
182:307, 2000
McCarty-Singleton S, Sciscione AS: Maternal activity restriction in pregnancy and the prevention of
preterm birth: an evidence-based review. Clin Obstet Gynaecol 57:616, 2014
Mooney SS, Lee RM, Tong S, et al: Expectant management of severe preterm preeclampsia: a
comparison of maternal and fetal indications for delivery. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 29(23):3821,
2016
Morisaki H, Yamamoto S, Morita Y, et al: Hypermagnesemia-induced cardiopulmonary arrest before
induction of anesthesia for emergency cesarean section. J Clin Anesth 12(3):224, 2000
Mulder EG, Ghossein-Doha C, Crutsen J, et al: Effect of pregnancy prolongation in early-onsetpreeclampsia on postpartum maternal cardiovascular, renal and metabolic function in primiparous
women: an observational study. BJOG 128(1):121, 2021
Narasimhulu D, Brown A, Egbert NM, et al: Maternal magnesium therapy, neonatal serum magnesium
concentration and immediate neonatal outcomes. J Perinatol 37(12):1297, 2017
National High Blood Pressure Education Program: Working group report on high blood pressure in
pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 183:51, 2000
Nerenberg KA, Park AL, Vigod SN, et al: Long-term risk of a seizure disorder after eclampsia. Obstet
Gynecol 130(6):1327, 2017
Newsome LR, Bramwell RS, Curling PE: Severe preeclampsia: hemodynamic effects of lumbar
epidural anesthesia. Anesth Analg 65:31, 1986
Nguyen TM, Crowther CA, Wilkinson D, et al: Magnesium sulfate for women at term for
neuroprotection of the fetus. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2:CD009395, 2013
Novotny S, Lee-Plenty N, Wallace K, et al: Acute kidney injury associated with preeclampsia or
hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, and low platelets syndrome. Pregnancy Hypertens 19:94, 2020
Obeidat B, MacDougall J, Harding K: Plasma exchange in a woman with thrombotic thrombocytopenic
purpura or severe preeclampsia eclampsia. BJOG 109:961, 2002

Øian P, Maltau JM, Noddleland H, et al: Transcapillary fluid balance in preeclampsia. BJOG 93:235,
1986
Okusanya BO, Oladapo OT, Long O, et al: Clinical pharmacokinetic properties of magnesium sulphate
in women with preeclampsia and eclampsia. BJOG 123(3):356, 2016
Paidas MJ, Tita AT, Macones GA, et al: Prospective, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled
evaluation of the pharmacokinetics, safety and efficacy of recombinant antithrombin versus placebo
in preterm preeclampsia. Am J Obstet Gynecol 223(5):739.e1, 2020
Penfield CA, McNulty JA, Oakes MC, et al: Ibuprofen and postpartum blood pressure in women with
hypertensive disorders of pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 134(6):1219, 2019
Pickles CJ, Broughton Pipkin F, Symonds EM: A randomised placebo controlled trial of labetalol in the
treatment of mild to moderate pregnancy induced hypertension. BJOG 99(12):964, 1992
Pourrat O, Dorey M, Ragot S, et al: High-dose methylprednisolone to prevent platelet decline in
preeclampsia: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol 128:153, 2016
Pritchard JA: The use of magnesium ion in the management of eclamptogenic toxemias. Surg Gynecol
Obstet 100:131, 1955
Pritchard JA, Cunningham FG, Pritchard SA: The Parkland Memorial Hospital protocol for treatment of
eclampsia: evaluation of 245 cases. Am J Obstet Gynecol 148(7):951, 1984
Pritchard JA, Pritchard SA: Standardized treatment of 154 consecutive cases of eclampsia. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 123(5):543, 1975
Rodriguez AN, Nelson DB, Spong CY, et al: Acute kidney injury in pregnancies complicated by
preeclampsia with severe features. Abstract No. 1012. Am J Obstet Gynecol 220:S627, 2021
Roland C, Warshak CR, DeFranco EA: Success of labor induction for preeclampsia at preterm and
term gestational ages. J Perinatol 37(6):636, 2017
Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists: The management of severe pre-eclampsia. RCOG
Guideline 10A:1, 2006
Salinger DH, Mundie S, Regi A, et al: Magnesium sulphate for prevention of eclampsia: are
intramuscular and intravenous regimens equivalent? A population pharmacokinetic study. BJOG
120(7):894, 2013
Sciscione AC, Ivester T, Largoza M, et al: Acute pulmonary edema in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol
101:511, 2003
Sharma KJ, Greene N, Kilpatrick SJ: Oral labetalol compared to oral nifedipine for postpartum
hypertension: a randomized controlled trial. Hypertens Pregnancy 36(1):44, 2017
Shear RM, Rinfret D, Leduc L: Should we offer expectant management in cases of severe preterm
preeclampsia with fetal growth restriction? Am J Obstet Gynecol 192:1119, 2005
Sibai BM: Etiology and management of postpartum hypertension and preeclampsia. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 206(6):470, 2012
Sibai BM, Barton JR, Akl S, et al: A randomized prospective comparison of nifedipine and bed rest
versus bed rest alone in the management of pre-eclampsia remote from term. Am J Obstet Gynecol
167(1):879, 1992
Sibai BM, El-Nazer A, Gonzalez-Ruiz A: Severe preeclampsia- eclampsia in young primigravid women:
subsequent pregnancy outcome and remote prognosis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 155:011, 1986
Sibai BM, Gonzalez AR, Mable WC, et al: A comparison of labetalol plus hospitalization versus
hospitalization alone in the management of preeclampsia remote from term. Obstet Gynecol 70:323,
1987a
Sibai BM, Mable BC, Harvey CJ, et al: Pulmonary edema in severe preeclampsia-eclampsia: analysis of
thirty-seven consecutive cases. Am J Obstet Gynecol 156:1174, 1987b

Sibai BM, Mercer B, Sarinoglu C: Severe preeclampsia in the second trimester: recurrence risk and long
—term prognosis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 165:1408, 1991
Sibai BM, Mercer BM, Schiff E, et al: Aggressive versus expectant management of severe
preeclampsia at 28 to 32 weeks’ gestation: a randomized controlled trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol
171:818, 1994
Sibai BM, Spinnato JA, Watson DL, et al: Eclampsia. IV. Neurological findings and future outcome. Am
J Obstet Gynecol 15:184, 1985
Siepmann T, Boardman H, Bilderbeck A, et al: Long-term cerebral white and gray matter changes after
preeclampsia. Neurology 88(13):1256, 2017
Smyth RM, Spark P, Armstrong N, et al: Magpie Trial in the UK: methods and additional data for
women and children at 2 years following pregnancy complicated by preeclampsia. BMC Pregnancy
Childbirth 9:15, 2009
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Gibson KS, Hameed AB: Special statement: checklist for
postpartum discharge of women with hypertensive disorders. Am J Obstet Gynecol 223(4):B18,
2020a
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Lauder J, Sciscione A, et al: The role of activity restriction in
obstetric management. Consult Series No. 50, August 2020b
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Sibai BM: Evaluation and management of severe preeclampsia
before 34 weeks’ gestation. Am J Obstet Gynecol 205(3):191, 2011
Somjen G, Hilmy M, Stephen CR: Failure to anesthetize human subjects by intravenous administration of
magnesium sulfate. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 154(3):652, 1966
Spaan JJ, Ekhart T, Spaanderman ME, et al: Remote hemodynamics and renal function in formerly
preeclamptic women. Obstet Gynecol 113:853, 2009
Spaan JJ, Sep SJ, Lopes van Balen V, et al: Metabolic syndrome as a risk factor for hypertension after
preeclampsia. Obstet Gynecol 120(2 Pt 1):311, 2012
Stamilio DM, Beckham AJ, Boggess KA, et al: Risk factors for postpartum readmission for
preeclampsia or hypertension before delivery discharge among low-risk women: a case-control
study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 3(3):100317, 2021
Stuart JJ, Tanz LJ, Missmer SA, et al: Hypertensive disorders of pregnancy and maternal cardiovascular
disease risk factor development: an observational cohort study. Ann Intern Med 169(4):224, 2018
Tan LK, de Swiet M: The management of postpartum hypertension. BJOG 109(7):733, 2002
Tang J, He A, Li N, et al: Magnesium sulfate—mediated vascular relaxation and calcium channel
activity in placental vessels different from nonplacental vessels. J Am Heart Assoc 7(14):e009896,
2018
Thadhani R, Hagmann H, Schaarschmidt W, et al: Removal of soluble fms-like tyrosine kinase-l by
dextran sulfate apheresis in preeclampsia. J Am Soc Nephrol 27(3):903, 2016
Theilen LH, Fraser A, Hollingshaus MS, et al: All-cause and cause-specific mortality after hypertensive
disease of pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 128(2):238, 2016
Thurnau GR, Kemp DB, Jarvis A: Cerebrospinal fluid levels of magnesium in patients with preeclampsia
after treatment with intravenous magnesium sulfate: a preliminary report. Am J Obstet Gynecol
157:1435, 1987
Tsai HM, Kuo E: From gestational hypertension and preeclampsia to atypical hemolytic uremic
syndrome. Obstet Gynecol 127:907, 2016
Tudela CM, McIntire DD, Alexander JM: Effect of maternal body mass index on serum magnesium
levels given for seizure prophylaxis. Obstet Gynecol 121(2 Pt 1):314, 2013

Turanov M, Lo A, Hassier MR, et al: RNAi modulation of placental sFLT1 for the treatment of
preeclampsia. Nat Biotechnol November 19, 2018 [Epub ahead of print]
Turnbull DA, Wilkinson C, Gerard K, et al: Clinical, psychosocial, and economic effects of antenatal day
care for three medical complications of pregnancy: a randomized controlled trial of 395 women.
Lancet 363:1104, 2004
Umans JG, Abalos E: Cunningham FG: Antihypertensive treatment. In: Taylor RN, Roberts JM,
Cunningham FG (eds): Chesley’s Hypertensive Disorders in Pregnancy, 4th ed. Amsterdam,
Academic Press, 2015
Valensise H, Lo Presti D, Gagliardi G, et al. Persistent maternal cardiac dysfunction after preeclampsia
identifies patients at risk for recurrent preeclampsia. Hypertension 67(4):748, 2016
Veena P, Lakshimdeepthi P, Raghavan SS: Furosemide in postpartum management of severe
preeclampsia: a randomized controlled trial. Hypertens Preg 36:84, 2017
Vigil-De Gracia P, Ludmir J: Perinatal and hemodynamic evaluation of sildenafil citrate for preeclampsia
treatment: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol 128(5): 1181, 2016
Vigil-De Gracia P, Ludmir J, Ng J, et al: Is there benefit to continue magnesium sulphate postpartum in
women receiving magnesium sulphate before delivery? A randomised controlled study. BJOG
125(10):1304, 2018
Vigil-De Gracia P, Tejada OR, Minaca AC, et al: Expectant management of severe preeclampsia
remote from term: the MEXPRE Latin Study, a randomized multicenter clinical trial. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 209:425e1, 2013
Wallace DH, Leveno KJ, Cunningham FG, et al: Randomized comparison of general and regional
anesthesia for cesarean delivery in pregnancies complicated by severe preeclampsia. Obstet
Gynecol 86:193, 1995
Wang Y, Arvizu A, Rich-Edwards J, et al: Hypertensive disorders of pregnancy and subsequent risk of
premature mortality. J Am Coll Cardiol 77(10):1302, 2021
Wang LC, Huang C Y, Want HK, et al: Magnesium sulfate and nimesulide have synergistic effects on
rescuing brain damage after transient focal ischemia. J Neurotrauma 29(7):1518, 2012
Watt-Morse ML, Caritis SN, Kridgen PL: Magnesium sulfate is a poor inhibitor of oxytocin-induced
contractility in pregnant sheep. J Matern Fetal Med 4:139, 1995
Wen SW, White RR, Rybak N, et al: Effect of high dose folic acid supplementation in pregnancy on
preeclampsia (FACT): double blind, phase III, randomised controlled, international, multi centre trial.
BMJ 362:k3478, 2018
White WM, Mielke MM, Araoz PA, et al: A history of preeclampsia is associated with a risk for
coronary artery calcification 3 decades later. Am J Obstet Gynecol 214(4):519.e1, 2016
Wide-Swensson DH, Ingemarsson I, Lunell NO, et al: Calcium channel blockade (isradipine) in
treatment of hypertension in pregnancy: a randomized placebo-controlled study. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 173(1):872, 1995
Wiegman MJ, de Groot JC, Jansonius NM, et al: Long-term visual functioning after eclampsia. Obstet
Gynecol 119(5): 959, 2012
Winkler K, Contini C, Konig B, et al: Treatment of very preterm preeclampsia via heparin-mediated
extracorporeal LDL-precipitation (H.E.L.P.) apheresis: The Freiburg preeclampsia H.E.L.P.Apheresis study. Pregnancy Hypertens 12:136, 2018
Witlin AG, Friedman SA, Sibai BA: The effect of magnesium sulfate therapy on the duration of labor in
women with mild preeclampsia at term: a randomized, double-blind, placebo- controlled trial. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 176:623, 1997

Yefet E, Braester Y, Suleiman A, et al: The effect of magnesium sulfate at 1 gram versus 2 grams
maintenance doses on serum magnesium concentrations and adverse effects profile in women with
severe preeclampsia. Abstract No. 884, Am J Obstet Gynecol 216:S504, 2017
Zeeman GG, Cunningham FG, Pritchard JA: The magnitude of hemoconcentration with eclampsia.
Hypertens Pregnancy 28(2):127, 2009
Zeeman GG, Fleckenstein JL, Twickler DM, et al: Cerebral infarction in eclampsia. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 190:714, 2004
Zeisler H, Llurba E, Chantraine F, et al: Predictive value of the sFlt-1:PIGF ratio in women with
suspected preeclampsia. N Engl J Med 374:13, 2016
Zinaman M, Rubin J, Lindheimer MD: Serial plasma oncotic pressure levels and echoencephalography
during and after delivery in severe preeclampsia. Lancet 1:1245, 1985
Zofkie A, Cunningham FG: 33-year single center experience with pregnancy-associated strokes.
Abstract No. 799, Am J Obstet Gynecol 218:S476, 2018
Zondervan HA, Oosting J, Smorenberg-Schoorl ME, et al: Maternal whole blood viscosity in pregnancy
hypertension. Gynecol Obstet Invest 25:83, 1988
Zulfeen M, Tatapudi R, Sowjanya R: IV labetalol and oral nifedipine in acute control of severe
hypertension in pregnancy—a randomized controlled trial. Eur J Obstet Reprod Biol 236:46, 2019

CHAPTER 42

Causes of Obstetrical Hemorrhage

GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
UTERINE ATONY
UTERINE INVERSION
BIRTH CANAL INJURIES
UTERINE RUPTURE
AMNIONIC FLUID EMBOLISM
REFERENCES
In addition to hypertension and infection, obstetrical hemorrhage remains
among the infamous triad of maternal death causes. Of more than 7000
pregnancy-related maternal deaths in the United States from 2006 to 2015,
hemorrhage was a direct cause in 11 percent (Creanga, 2015, 2017; Petersen,
2019). Hemorrhage is also the single most important cause of maternal death
worldwide (Goffman, 2016; Oladapo, 2016). Notably, perhaps a third of
severe cases of hemorrhage are likely preventable (Lepine, 2020).
These statistics have prompted several organizations to develop
programs to prevent hemorrhage-related maternal morbidity. In the United
States, one example is the Alliance for Innovation on Maternal Health (AIM)
(2015), with its intent to standardize recognition, response, and reporting of
obstetrical hemorrhage. The Joint Commission (2019) has also implemented
standards under the Provision of Care, Treatment, and Services chapter for

obstetrical hemorrhage—the R3 Report. Our following three chapters align
with these.

GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
■ Mechanisms of Normal Hemostasis
Near term, an incredible amount of blood—at least 600 mL/min—flows
through the spiral arteries and into the intervillous space (Pates, 2010).
Averaging 120 in number, the spiral arteries lack a muscular layer because of
their remodeling by trophoblasts and thereby form a low-pressure system.
With placental separation, vessels at the implantation site are avulsed.
Hemostasis is achieved first by myometrial contraction, which directly
compresses the arteries. Compression is followed by clotting and eventually
by obliteration of vessel lumens.
If, after delivery, the myometrium contracts vigorously, substantial
hemorrhage from the placental implantation site is unlikely. Importantly, an
intact coagulation system is not necessary for postpartum hemostasis
unless there are lacerations in the uterus, birth canal, or perineum.
However, fatal postpartum hemorrhage can result from uterine atony despite
normal coagulation.

■ Definition and Incidence
Historically, postpartum hemorrhage has been defined as blood losses ≥500
mL after the third stage of labor. This is problematic because almost half of
all women delivered vaginally shed that amount of blood or more when
losses are carefully measured. Moreover, approximately 5 percent of women
delivering vaginally lose >1000 mL of blood (Fig. 42-1) (Pritchard, 1962).
Almost a third of women undergoing cesarean delivery have blood loss
>1000 mL. The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
(2019a) now defines postpartum hemorrhage as cumulative blood loss >1000
mL or blood loss accompanied by signs and symptoms of hypovolemia.

FIGURE 42-1 Measured blood loss with vaginal delivery, repeat cesarean delivery, and repeat
cesarean delivery plus hysterectomy.

In a Maternal-Fetal Network Units study of more than 115,000 deliveries,
the incidence of hemorrhage with vaginal delivery was 5.3 percent, and it
was 10.5 percent for cesarean delivery (Yee, 2019). Importantly, hemorrhage
is underreported. From the National Hospital Discharge Summary database,
the reported postpartum hemorrhage incidence between 2001 and 2005 was
only 2.6 percent (Berg, 2009).

■ Blood Loss Assessment
At delivery, visual estimation is often used as a qualitative measure of blood
loss. However, this method is more likely to under estimate the actual blood
loss when volumes are high and to over estimate it when volumes are low
(Al Kadri, 2011; Natrella, 2018). Thus, estimated blood loss that is
considered greater than “average” should alert the provider.
Instead, different methods can be used as quantitative measures. First,
gravimetric measurement weighs blood-soaked items and subtracts pre-use
dry weights. Another evolving tool uses a tablet-device camera and
colorimetric analysis to calculate blood loss (Spies, 2020; Venkatesh, 2020).
The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019b)
recognizes the use of quantitative methods to help identify severe
hemorrhage.

Intrapartum, quantitative measurement is more accurate than visual
estimation, but the effectiveness of these methods on clinical outcomes has
not been demonstrated. A Cochrane Review of three trials found no
differences between subjective and objective methods when comparing
outcomes that included need for transfusion, plasma expanders, or
uterotonics (Diaz, 2018).
Postpartum, retrospective estimation also can be informative. The blood
volume of a pregnant woman with normal pregnancy-induced hypervolemia
usually rises by 50 percent. However, individual increases range from 30 to
60 percent, that is, 1500 to 2000 mL for an average-sized woman (Pritchard,
1965). The equation to calculate blood volume is shown in Table 42-1. It is
axiomatic that a normal pregnant woman tolerates, without any decrease in
postpartum hematocrit, blood loss at delivery that approaches the volume of
blood that was added during pregnancy. Thus, if blood loss is less than the
pregnancy-added volume, the hematocrit remains the same acutely and during
the first several days postpartum. It then rises as nonpregnant plasma volume
levels return during the next week or so. Whenever the postpartum
hematocrit is lower than one obtained on admission for delivery, blood
loss can be estimated as the sum of the calculated pregnancy-added
volume plus 500 mL for each 3-volume-percent decline of the hematocrit.
TABLE 42-1. Calculation of Maternal Total Blood Volume

For research and clinical care initiatives, excessive blood loss has been
estimated by several methods (Coviello, 2019; Saoud, 2019). Tita and
colleagues (2012) used a 6-volume-percent drop in the postpartum

hematocrit to define clinically significant blood loss with vaginal delivery.
This decline easily signifies a >1000-mL blood loss in the average-sized
woman. They documented this amount in a fourth of women.
Another marker used to estimate hemorrhage incidence is the transfusion
rate. In the study by Tita just cited, more than 6 percent of women who
delivered vaginally underwent blood transfusion. In a study of more than
66,000 women delivered at Parkland Hospital, 2.3 percent overall were
given blood transfusions for hypovolemia (Hernandez, 2012). Half of these
women had undergone cesarean delivery. Importantly, for those transfused,
these investigators calculated blood loss to average approximately 3500 mL!
The need for blood transfusion is now followed as a severe maternal
morbidity (SMM) indicator. The heightened awareness of SMM is outlined
in Chapter 1 (p. 5). Transfusions represent more than 80 percent of total
SMM rates. The incidence of massive transfusion for postpartum
hemorrhage has been reported to be from 25 to 65 per 100,000 births (Green,
2016; Ramler, 2019). However, defining healthcare quality using transfusion
as an SMM metric is problematic. First, this metric is solely derived from
administrative billing codes. Second, transfusion rates may be skewed based
on the hospital’s case-mix (Bailit, 2013). This can distort values for regional
referral centers that care for women at high risk for hemorrhage, such as
those with placenta accreta spectrum.

■ Risk Factors
Hemorrhage can manifest at any time during pregnancy, delivery, or the
puerperium. Contributions to maternal death from some of these causes of are
shown in Figure 42-2. The Joint Commission (2019) requires accredited
delivery services to employ tools that evaluate maternal hemorrhage risk on
admission to labor and delivery and postpartum. Several methods are
available, and the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists’
(2019b) scoring tool stratifies risk using several obstetrical factors listed in
Table 42-2. Unfortunately, these scoring systems only modestly predict
hemorrhage (Chu, 2020). Kawakita and colleagues (2019) examined three
commonly referenced tools and found moderate performance in identifying
women at risk during cesarean delivery. In contrast, the Association of
Women’s Health, Obstetric and Neonatal Nurses (AWHONN) risk
assessment tool was predictive of those at high risk (Colalillo, 2021).

FIGURE 42-2 Contributions to maternal death from various causes of obstetrical hemorrhage.
Percentages are approximations because of different classification schemata used. DIC = disseminated
intravascular coagulopathy; PAS = placenta accreta spectrum. (Data from Al-Zirqi, 2008; Berg, 2010;
Creanga, 2015; Zwart, 2008.)

TABLE 42-2. Obstetrical Hemorrhage: Causes, Predisposing Factors, and
Vulnerable Patients

■ Timing of Hemorrhage
Obstetrical hemorrhage is traditionally classified as antepartum—such as
with placenta previa or placental abruption, or as postpartum—commonly
caused by uterine atony or genital tract lacerations. In individual women,
however, these terms are nonspecific, and it is reasonable to specify the
cause and gestational age as descriptors.
With antepartum hemorrhage, timing may give a clue to its cause. Many
aspects of bleeding during the first half of pregnancy from abortion or
ectopic pregnancy are covered in Chapters 11 and 12. Discussions that
follow concern pregnancies with a viable-size fetus. In these cases, rapid

assessment should always consider the deleterious fetal effects of maternal
hemorrhage.
During active labor, slight vaginal bleeding is common. This “bloody
show” is the consequence of cervical effacement and dilation and concurrent
tearing of small vessels. However, with uterine bleeding above the cervix,
placental abruption, placenta previa, and vasa previa must be considered.
The first two are presented in Chapter 43 and vasa previa is discussed in
Chapter 6 (p. 115). In some women, especially those with a placenta previa,
cervical varicosities may bleed (O’Brien, 2013).
Near term in many women, the source of uterine bleeding is not
identified, bleeding ceases, and no apparent anatomical cause is found at
delivery. In most of these cases, bleeding likely originated from a slight
marginal placental separation. Despite this, any pregnancy with antepartum
bleeding remains at higher risk for an adverse outcome even though
bleeding has stopped and placenta previa has been excluded
sonographically.
Bleeding after midpregnancy is associated with several adverse
outcomes. The Canadian Perinatal Network described 806 women with
hemorrhage between 22 and 28 weeks’ gestation (Sabourin, 2012). Placental
abruption (32 percent), previa (21 percent), and cervical bleeding (6.6
percent) were the most frequent causes identified. In a third, no cause was
found. Of all women, 44 percent were delivered before 29 weeks’ gestation.
In more than 68,000 women in Scotland, the incidence of antepartum
hemorrhage after the first trimester was 11 percent (Bhandari, 2014). These
women were at significantly higher risk for preterm birth, labor induction,
and postpartum hemorrhage.
With postpartum hemorrhage, the source in most cases can and should be
determined. Frequent causes are uterine atony with placental site bleeding,
genital tract trauma, or both. Postpartum hemorrhage is usually obvious.
Important exceptions are unrecognized intrauterine and intravaginal blood
accumulation and uterine rupture with intraperitoneal or retroperitoneal
bleeding. Another consideration is an expanding vulvar or vaginal hematoma
(p. 740). Initial evaluation includes attempts to differentiate uterine atony
from genital tract lacerations. For this, risk factors are sought, the lower
genital tract is examined, and uterine tone is assessed. Atony is identified by
a boggy, soft uterus during bimanual examination and by expression of clots
and hemorrhage during uterine massage.

Persistent bleeding despite a firm, well-contracted uterus suggests that
hemorrhage most likely is from lacerations. Bright red blood further suggests
arterial bleeding. To confirm that lacerations are a source of bleeding,
careful inspection of the vagina, cervix, and uterus is essential.
Examination is easier if regional analgesia is employed. Transfer from a
labor and delivery room to an operative suite also may be prudent. If there
are no lower genital tract lacerations and the uterus is contracted, yet
supracervical bleeding persists, manual exploration of the uterus is done to
exclude a uterine tear (Kaplanoglu, 2016). This also is completed routinely
after internal podalic version or breech extraction. Some perform this after
successful vaginal birth after cesarean, and this is our practice. Late
postpartum hemorrhage describes bleeding after the first 24 hours. Found in
up to 1 percent of women, one risk factor is postpartum hemorrhage at the
time of delivery (Fein, 2021). Delayed hemorrhage may be serious and is
discussed in Chapter 36 (p. 637).

■ Appreciation of Estimated Blood Loss
As discussed, visual blood loss estimates are often inaccurate, especially
with excessive bleeding. Instead of sudden and massive hemorrhage,
postpartum bleeding is frequently steady. If bleeding from atony or laceration
persists, it may appear to be only moderate at any given instant but may
continue until serious hypovolemia develops. In some cases, after placental
separation, blood may not escape vaginally but instead may collect within the
uterine cavity, which can become distended by 1000 mL or more of blood.
Moreover, postpartum uterine massage will be ineffective if applied to a roll
of abdominal fat mistaken for the uterus. All of these factors can lead to an
underappreciation of the magnitude of hemorrhage over time.
The effects of hemorrhage depend mainly on the maternal nonpregnant
blood volume and the corresponding degree of pregnancy-induced
hypervolemia. Small women—even those with appropriate pregnancyinduced hypervolemia—do not tolerate more than seemingly average blood
loss. Some gravidas may be particularly susceptible to hemorrhage because
their blood volume expansion is less than expected. An example is women
with severe preeclampsia or eclampsia, who are more vulnerable to
hemorrhage because they frequently do not have a normal blood volume
accrual. Specifically, Zeeman and associates (2009) documented a mean

increase above nonpregnant volume of only 10 percent in eclamptic women
(Chap. 40, p. 693). Another example is the moderate to severe curtailing of
pregnancy-induced volume expansion in women with chronic renal
insufficiency (Chap. 56, p. 1004). When excessive hemorrhage is suspected
in these high-risk women, crystalloid and blood are promptly administered
for suspected hypovolemia.
A treacherous feature of postpartum hemorrhage is the failure of the
pulse and blood pressure to undergo more than moderate alterations until
large amounts of blood have been lost. The normotensive woman initially
may actually become somewhat hypertensive from catecholamine release in
response to hemorrhage. Importantly, women with preeclampsia may become
“normotensive” despite remarkable hypovolemia. Accordingly, hypovolemia
may not be recognized until very late.

UTERINE ATONY
■ Third-stage Labor Management
The most frequent cause of obstetrical hemorrhage is failure of the uterus
after delivery to contract sufficiently and arrest bleeding from vessels at the
placental implantation site (Yee, 2019). That said, some bleeding is
inevitable during third-stage labor as the placenta begins to separate. Blood
from the implantation site may escape into the vagina immediately—the
Duncan mechanism of placental separation, or it remains concealed behind
the placenta and membranes until the placenta is delivered—the Schultze
mechanism. Placental descent is signified by a slack umbilical cord. After
signs of placental separation, the uterus should be massaged if it is not
contracted firmly. Importantly, separation and delivery of the placenta by
cord traction, especially when the uterus is atonic, may cause uterine
inversion.
Following placental delivery, the fundus is always palpated to confirm
that the uterus is well contracted. If it is not firm, vigorous fundal massage
usually prevents postpartum hemorrhage from atony (Hofmeyr, 2013).
Concurrent administration of a uterotonic agent, discussed in the next
sections, is another recommended preventive measure.

■ Risk Factors
In many women with known risks, uterine atony can at least be anticipated.
However, as discussed earlier (p. 733), risk-based scoring systems have
limited value. In one study, up to half of women with atony after cesarean
delivery had no risk factors (Rouse, 2006). The magnitude of risk for atony
imposed by each of the factors shown in Table 42-2 varies considerably
between reports. Primiparity and high parity are two factors (Driessen,
2011). In one study, the incidence of postpartum hemorrhage rose from 0.3
percent in women of low parity to 1.9 percent with parity of four or greater.
It was 2.7 percent with parity of seven or greater (Babinszki, 1999). The
overdistended uterus is prone to hypotonia after delivery, and thus women
with a large fetus, multiple fetuses, or hydramnios carry greater risk (Blitz,
2019). Labor abnormalities predispose to atony and include hyper- or
hypotonic labor. Similarly, labor induction or augmentation with either
prostaglandins or oxytocin is more likely to be followed by atony (Driessen,
2011). The frequency of hemorrhage increases with third-stage labor lasting
>20 minutes (Frolova, 2016). Last, the woman who has had a prior
postpartum hemorrhage is at risk for recurrence.

■ Evaluation and Management
To improve immediate postpartum care, clinical safety bundles provide a
standardized response (Fig. 42-3). In principle, all of these programs suggest
notifying unit personnel, activating resources, and standardizing management.
With immediate postpartum hemorrhage, careful inspection aims to exclude
birth canal laceration. In some cases, bleeding is caused by retained
placental fragments, and placental inspection after delivery should be
routine. If a defect is seen, the uterus should be manually explored and the
fragment removed. Occasionally, retention of a succenturiate lobe may cause
postpartum hemorrhage (Chap. 6, p. 108). During examination for lacerations
and causes of atony, the uterus is massaged and uterotonic agents are
administered.

FIGURE 42-3 Parkland Hospital algorithm for management of postpartum hemorrhage. CBC =
complete blood count; EBL = estimated blood loss; INR = international normalized ratio; IV =
intravenous; PT = prothrombin time; PTT = partial thromboplastin time.

Manual Removal of the Placenta
If heavy bleeding persists after delivery of the newborn but while the
placenta remains partially or totally attached, then manual placental removal
is indicated (Cummings, 2016; Frolova, 2016). For this, adequate analgesia
is mandatory, and aseptic surgical technique is used. As illustrated in Figure
27-8 (p. 508), the fingertips of one hand, with fingers approximated, are
insinuated between the uterine wall and placenta. A sweeping forward
motion in this plane will peel the placenta off its uterine attachment. After its
removal, trailing membranes are carefully teased free from the decidua using
ring forceps as needed. Another method to clear membranes is to wipe out
the uterine cavity with a gauze-wrapped hand. Bierer forceps guided by
ultrasound to remove retained placenta also has been described (Siegel,
2020).
Some administer a single dose of intravenous antibiotics after manual
uterine exploration, however, one systematic review of observational studies
found no benefits (Chibueze, 2015). The American College of Obstetricians

and Gynecologists (2020b) concluded that data neither support nor refute this
practice. The World Health Organization (WHO) (2015) recommends
ampicillin or cefazolin antimicrobial prophylaxis after manual placenta
removal. At Parkland Hospital, we routinely provide a single dose of
cefazolin after manual exploration.

Uterotonic Agents
Several compounds can be used to prompt the postpartum uterus to contract.
One of these is routinely selected and given to prevent postpartum bleeding.
Choices for prophylaxis include oxytocin (Pitocin); the ergots, namely
ergonovine (Ergotrate) and methylergonovine (Methergine); or misoprostol
(Cytotec) (Chap. 27, p. 507). The WHO (2018) recommends oxytocin for
first-line use for prophylaxis. For administration, 20 units of oxytocin in
1000 mL of crystalloid solution is effective and given intravenously (IV) at
10 mL/min for a dose of 200 mU/min. Higher concentrations are minimally
more efficient (Tita, 2012). A summary of oxytocin administration regimens
is found in the Practice Brief of the Association of Women’s Health
Objective and Neonatal Nurses—AWHONN (2014). In those without IV
access, oxytocin may be given intramuscularly (IM). Adnan and colleagues
(2018) found the IV route to more effectively prevent severe hemorrhage
compared with IM administration. Oxytocin is never given as an undiluted
bolus dose because serious hypotension or cardiac arrhythmias can
develop.
Most agents for prevention of atony are also used to treat it. For atony, IV
oxytocin is continued or may be initiated if not selected initially. It is
considered first-line treatment by the WHO (2012). If bleeding and atony are
refractory, an agent from a different group can be added (American College
of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019a).
Ergot alkaloids have been used for centuries to treat uterine atony. If
atony persists despite oxytocin and other preventive measures, ergot
derivatives can be used for second-line treatment. Given parenterally, these
drugs rapidly stimulate tetanic uterine contractions and act for approximately
45 minutes (Schimmer, 2011). A common regimen is 0.2 mg of either drug
given IM. Methergine can be repeated at 2- to 4-hour intervals as needed. A
caveat is that ergot agents, especially given IV, may cause dangerous
hypertension, especially in women with preeclampsia. Severe hypertension
is also seen with concomitant use of protease inhibitors given for human

immunodeficiency viral (HIV) infection. These adverse effects
notwithstanding, it is speculative whether ergot derivatives offer superior
therapeutic effects compared with oxytocin.
Other second-line agents for atony have included the E- and F-series
prostaglandins. Carboprost tromethamine (Hemabate) is the 15-methyl
derivative of prostaglandin F2α. It is approved for uterine atony treatment in a
dose of 250 μg (0.25 mg) given IM. This dose can be repeated if necessary,
at 15- to 90-minute intervals up to a maximum of eight doses. Observational
data indicate an 88-percent success rate (Oleen, 1990).
Carboprost causes side effects in approximately 20 percent of women.
These include, in descending order of frequency, diarrhea, hypertension,
vomiting, fever, flushing, and tachycardia. Another pharmacological effect is
pulmonary airway and vascular constriction. Thus, carboprost should not be
used for asthmatic women or those with pulmonary hypertension, including
women those with suspected amnionic fluid embolism (p. 745). It has also
been reported to cause arterial oxygen desaturation that averaged 10 percent
(Hankins, 1988). We have occasionally encountered severe hypertension
with carboprost given to women with preeclampsia. Other relative
contraindications to carboprost include renal, liver, and cardiac disease
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019a).
Misoprostol is a synthetic prostaglandin E1 analogue. In a Cochrane
review, Mousa and associates (2014) reported no added benefits for
misoprostol use for treatment compared with oxytocin or ergonovine. If
misoprostol is used to treat atony, the American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2019a) recommends a dose of 600 to 1000 µg rectally,
orally, or sublingually.
Dinoprostone (Cervidil, Prepidil) is prostaglandin E2. It may also be
used off label for atony treatment and is given as a 20-mg suppository per
rectum or per vagina every 2 hours. It typically causes diarrhea, which is
problematic for the rectal route, whereas vigorous vaginal bleeding may
preclude its use per vagina. Hypotension, which is commonly encountered
with hemorrhage, is considered a contraindication by some. For this reason,
this agent is not deployed for hemorrhage management at Parkland Hospital.
IV prostaglandin E2—sulprostone—is used in Europe, but it is not available
in the United States.

Tranexamic Acid
This antifibrinolytic agent has been evaluated to treat postpartum
hemorrhage. In the randomized WOMAN trial of gravidas with hemorrhage
following vaginal birth or during cesarean delivery, mortality rates from
obstetrical hemorrhage were 1.2 percent in those given a 1-g IV tranexamic
acid dose plus traditional care for bleeding. This rate was significantly
lower than the 1.7-percent death rate in women given traditional care alone
(WOMAN Trial Collaborators, 2017). Another study of women with
hemorrhage following vaginal birth found that rates of progression to severe
PPH, of transfusion, and of peripartum hysterectomy were lower in the TXA
group compared with the traditional-care group (Ducloy-Bouthors, 2011).
Use of tranexamic acid in hemorrhage is discussed further in Chapter 44 (p.
773).

Bleeding Unresponsive to Uterotonic Agents
If bleeding persists after initial measures for atony, the following
management steps are performed immediately and simultaneously:
1. Begin bimanual uterine compression, which is easily done and controls
most cases of continuing hemorrhage (Fig. 42-4). This technique is not
simply fundal massage. The posterior uterine wall is massaged by one
hand on the abdomen, while the other hand is made into a fist and placed
into the vagina. This fist kneads the anterior uterine wall through the
anterior vaginal wall, and the uterus is compressed between the two hands.

FIGURE 42-4 Bimanual compression for uterine atony. The uterus is positioned with the fist of one
hand in the anterior fornix pushing against the anterior wall, which is held in place by the other hand on
the abdomen. The abdominal hand is also used for uterine massage.

2. Mobilize the emergent-care obstetrical team and call for whole blood or
packed red cells.
3. Request urgent help from the anesthesia team.
4. Secure at least two large-bore IV catheters so that crystalloid with
oxytocin can be continued simultaneously with blood products. Insert a
Foley catheter for continuous urine output monitoring.
5. Begin volume resuscitation with rapid IV crystalloid infusion (p. 734).
6. With sedation, analgesia, or anesthesia established and now with optimal
exposure, once again manually explore the uterine cavity for retained
placental fragments and for uterine abnormalities, including lacerations or
rupture.
7. Thoroughly inspect the cervix and vagina again for lacerations that may
have escaped attention.
8. Administer blood transfusions if the woman is still unstable or if bleeding
persists (Chap. 44, p. 771).

At this juncture, after causes other than atony have been excluded and
after hypovolemia is reversed, several other measures are considered if
bleeding continues (Merriam, 2020). Their use depends on several factors
such as parity, desire for sterilization, and experience with each method.
Balloon Tamponade and Surgical Procedures. For this, the tip of a 24F to
30F Foley catheter with a 30-mL balloon is guided into the uterine cavity and
filled with 60 to 80 mL of saline. The open tip permits continuous drainage
of blood from the uterus. We have experienced balloon rupture when more
than 50 mL was instilled into the balloon, thus a 34F Foley with a 60-ml
balloon can be used. If bleeding subsides, the catheter is typically removed
after 12 to 24 hours. Similar devices for tamponade include SengstakenBlakemore, Rusch, and ebb balloons and condom catheters (Antony, 2017;
Kondoh, 2019). Antibiotic prophylaxis using cefazolin, 1 gram every 8 hours
until removal, has recently been suggested to reduce risk of postpartum
endometritis (Martingano, 2020).
Instead, specially constructed intrauterine balloons are available to treat
hemorrhage from uterine atony and other causes. A Bakri Postpartum
Balloon or BT-Cath may be inserted and inflated to tamponade the
endometrial cavity and stop bleeding (Fig. 42-5). Insertion requires two or
three team members. The first performs abdominal sonography during the
procedure. The second places the deflated balloon into the uterus and
stabilizes it. The third member instills fluid to inflate the balloon, rapidly
infusing at least 150 mL followed by further instillation over a few minutes
for a total of 300 to 500 mL to arrest hemorrhage. It is reasonable to remove
the balloon after approximately 12 hours (Einerson, 2017).

FIGURE 42-5 Intrauterine Bakri balloon for postpartum hemorrhage.

In small studies evaluating uterine balloons for all causes, the success
rate approximated 85 percent (Kaya, 2016; Said Ali, 2021; Vintejoux, 2015).
From their review, Suarez and associates (2020) used balloon tamponade in
4729 women and reported a similar success rate. At least one case of uterine
rupture with a balloon has been reported (Ngyuen, 2018). Combinations of
balloon tamponade and uterine compression sutures also have been
described (Diemert, 2012; Yoong, 2012).
Failure of uterotonic agents and tamponade requires more invasive
methods. These include uterine compression sutures, major pelvic vessel
ligation, angiographic embolization, and hysterectomy. These are discussed
in detail in Chapters 44 (p. 778). Peripartum hysterectomy is illustrated in
Chapter 30 (p. 560).

UTERINE INVERSION
Puerperal inversion of the uterus is one of the classic hemorrhagic disasters
encountered in obstetrics. Unless promptly recognized and managed
appropriately, associated bleeding often is massive. Risk factors include

alone or in combination: (1) placental implantation at the fundus, (2) uterine
atony, (3) cord traction applied before placental separation, and (4)
abnormally adherent placentation seen with placenta accreta spectrum
disorders (Chap. 43, p. 759). Other risk factors are a short cord, uterine wall
weakening at the implantation site, uterine tumors, and excessive fundal
pressure (Wendel, 2018).
Depending on which of these factors are contributory, the incidence and
severity of uterine inversion varies and can be progressive (Fig. 42-6). The
worst scenario is complete inversion with the uterus protruding from the
birth canal (Fig. 42-7).

FIGURE 42-6 Progressive degrees of uterine inversion.

FIGURE 42-7 Maternal death during home delivery caused by exsanguination from uterine inversion,
which stemmed from a fundally implanted placenta increta.

The incidence of uterine inversion ranges from 1 case in 2000 to 1 in
20,000 vaginal deliveries (Coad, 2017; Witteveen, 2013). Our experiences
at Parkland Hospital correspond with the higher 1:2000 incidence. This is
despite our policy of discouraging placental delivery by cord traction alone,
and before certainty of its separation. It is unknown if active management of
third-stage labor with cord traction applied ostensibly after signs of
placental separation raises the likelihood of uterine inversion (DeneuxTharaux, 2013; Prick, 2013).

■ Recognition and Management
Immediate recognition of uterine inversion improves the chances of a quick
resolution and good outcome. If initially unrecognized, continued hemorrhage
likely will prompt closer examination of the birth canal. Although complete
inversion is usually evident, the partially inverted uterus can be mistaken for

a uterine myoma, and sonography can aid differentiation (Pan, 2015;
Smulian, 2013). Many cases are associated with immediate life-threatening
hemorrhage, and a fourth require blood replacement (Coad, 2017).
Once any degree of uterine inversion is recognized, several steps must be
implemented urgently and simultaneously:
1. Immediate assistance is summoned, including obstetrical and anesthesia
personnel.
2. Blood is brought to the delivery suite for potential use.
3. Two large-bore IV infusion systems are secured to begin rapid crystalloid
infusion to treat hypovolemia while awaiting arrival of blood products.
4. The woman is evaluated for emergency general anesthesia.
5. If the recently inverted uterus has not contracted and retracted completely
and if the placenta has already separated, the uterus may often be replaced
simply by pushing up on the inverted fundus with the palm of the hand and
fingers in the direction of the long axis of the vagina (Fig. 42-8). Some use
two fingers rigidly extended to push the center of the fundus upward. Care
is taken not to apply so much pressure as to perforate the uterus with the
fingertips.

FIGURE 42-8 Incomplete uterine inversion can be repositioned by using the abdominal hand for
palpation of the crater-like depression while simultaneously gently pushing the inverted fundus upward.

6. If the placenta is still attached, attempts are made to reposition the uterus
with the placenta in situ. In theory, the uterus contracts to a lesser degree
and placenta-site blood loss is less with an attached placenta. At this time
a trial of an intravenously administered tocolytic drug may aid uterine
relaxation and repositioning. Of options, a 250-µg subcutaneous dose of
terbutaline, a 50- to 100-µg IV dose of nitroglycerin, or a 4-g IV dose of
magnesium sulfate are suitable (Catanzarite, 1986; Dufour, 1997). If these
fail to provide sufficient relaxation, then a rapid-acting halogenated
inhalational agent is administered by anesthesia staff. After the uterus is
replaced, the placenta is carefully manually removed.
7. If uterine repositioning fails with the placenta attached, it is peeled off,
and uterine repositioning is attempted again.

8. Once the uterus is restored to its normal configuration, tocolysis is
stopped, oxytocin is then infused, and other uterotonic agents may be given
as described for atony (p. 735). Meanwhile, the operator maintains the
fundus in its normal anatomical position while applying bimanual
compression to control further hemorrhage until the uterus is well
contracted (see Fig. 42-4). The operator continues to monitor the uterus
transvaginally for evidence of subsequent inversion. A Bakri balloon has
been used by some to maintain the repositioned uterus (Haeri, 2015; Ida,
2015).

■ Surgical Intervention
In most cases, the inverted uterus can be restored to its normal position by
the just-described techniques. Occasionally, manual replacement fails. One
cause is a dense myometrial constriction ring. At this point, laparotomy is
imperative. The anatomical configuration found at surgery can be confusing
as shown in Figure 42-9. During laparotomy and after tocolysis is given, a
combined effort is made to reposition the uterus by concurrently pushing
upward from below and pulling upward from above. Application of
atraumatic clamps to each round ligament and upward traction may be helpful
—the Huntington procedure. In some cases, placing a deep traction suture in
the inverted fundus or grasping it with tissue forceps may help but can be
technically difficult. If a constriction ring still prohibits repositioning, a
sagittal surgical cut—Haultain incision—is made posteriorly through the
muscular ring to release it. The exposed fundus can then be reinverted
(Sangwan, 2009).

FIGURE 42-9 Surgical anatomy of a completely inverted uterus viewed from above at laparotomy.

After uterine replacement, tocolytics are stopped, and oxytocin and other
uterotonic agents are given. If the Haultain method is used, the uterine
incision is repaired. Risks of separation of this posterior hysterotomy
incision during subsequent pregnancy, labor, and delivery are unknown
(Wendel, 2018). Further illustration and discussion are found in Cunningham
and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd edition (Timofeev, 2017).
In some cases, the uterus will again invert almost immediately after
repositioning. With this problem, uterine compression sutures can be used to
prevent another inversion (Matsubara, 2009; Mondal, 2012). Occasionally,
chronic puerperal uterine inversion may become apparent weeks after
delivery.

BIRTH CANAL INJURIES
■ Vulvovaginal Lacerations

Childbirth is invariably associated with trauma to the uterus and cervix,
vagina, and perineum. Injuries range from minor mucosal tears to lacerations
that create life-threatening hemorrhage or hematomas. According to the
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020a), up to 80
percent of women sustain some type of laceration at vaginal birth. These may
lie proximally or distally along the lower genital tract.
Small tears of the vaginal wall near the urethra are relatively common.
They are often superficial with little to no bleeding but occasionally require
fine-gauge absorbable sutures for hemostasis. Those large enough to require
extensive repair are typically associated with short-term voiding difficulty,
and an indwelling bladder catheter will obviate this.
Deeper perineal lacerations are usually accompanied by varying degrees
of injury to the outer third of the vagina. Some extend to involve the anal
sphincter or varying depths of the vaginal walls. Repair of these perineal
lacerations is detailed in Chapter 27 (p. 510).
Lacerations involving the middle or upper third of the vagina usually are
comorbid with injuries of the perineum or cervix. These sometimes are
missed unless inspection is thorough. Those that extend upward usually are
longitudinal. They may follow spontaneous delivery but frequently result
from injuries sustained during operative vaginal delivery. Most involve
deeper underlying tissues and thus usually cause significant hemorrhage,
which is controlled by suture repair. For this, effective analgesia or
anesthesia, clear visualization, capable assistance, and sufficient
resuscitation of hypovolemia are mandatory.
Extensive vaginal or cervical tears should prompt a careful search for
evidence of retroperitoneal hemorrhage or of peritoneal perforation with
hemorrhage. Intrauterine exploration is also considered to exclude uterine
tears or rupture (Conrad, 2015). If peritoneal perforation or uterine rupture is
strongly suspected, laparotomy is reasonable (Rafi, 2010). As discussed
later (p. 742), imaging and potential embolization may be suitable for large
retroperitoneal hematomas.

■ Cervical Lacerations
Superficial lacerations of the cervix can be seen on close inspection in more
than half of all vaginal deliveries. Most of these measure <0.5 cm and
seldom require repair. Deeper lacerations are less frequent, but even these

may be unnoticed. Such lacerations are more likely to be associated with
vacuum- or forceps-assisted vaginal delivery (Fong, 2014). Due to
ascertainment bias, variable incidences are described. For example, with
close inspection, the incidence of cervical lacerations in the Consortium on
Safe Labor database was 1 percent in nulliparas and 0.5 percent in
multiparas (Landy, 2011). But, the overall incidence in a study of more than
81,000 Israeli women was only 0.16 percent (Melamed, 2009).
Cervical lacerations are not usually problematic unless they cause
hemorrhage or extend to the vagina. Rarely, the cervix may be entirely or
partially avulsed from the vagina in the anterior, posterior, or lateral
fornices, an injury termed colporrhexis. Another rare injury is avulsion of
the entire vaginal portion of the cervix—annular or circular detachment.
These injuries sometimes follow forceps deliveries performed through an
incompletely dilated cervix and with the blades applied against the cervix. In
some women, cervical tears reach into the lower uterine segment and involve
the uterine artery and its major branches. They occasionally extend into the
peritoneal cavity. More severe lacerations usually manifest as external
hemorrhage or as a hematoma, however, they may occasionally be
unsuspected. In the Israeli study just cited, almost 11 percent of women with
a cervical laceration required blood transfusions (Melamed, 2009).
At times, the edematous anterior cervical lip is compressed between the
fetal head and maternal symphysis pubis. This usually is of little consequence
and resolves spontaneously. Rarely, this causes severe ischemia, and the
anterior lip may undergo necrosis and later separate from the rest of the
cervix.
As with vulvovaginal lacerations, cervical tears can be more fully
appreciated with adequate exposure, which may be best attained with
transfer to an operating room. An assistant applies firm downward pressure
on the uterus, while the operator exerts gentle traction on the lips of the
cervix with ring forceps. A second assistant can provide even better
exposure with right-angle vaginal wall retractors or Breisky vaginal
retractors. Yankauer or other suction tips also can aid viewing.
In general, cervical lacerations of 1 to 2 cm are not repaired unless they
are bleeding. Such tears heal rapidly and ultimately form an irregular,
sometimes stellate-appearing, external cervical os (Fig. 36-1, p. 635).
Deep cervical tears usually require surgical repair. When the laceration
is limited to the cervix or even when it extends somewhat into the vaginal

fornix, satisfactory results are obtained by suturing the cervix after bringing it
into view as depicted in Figure 42-10. While cervical lacerations are
repaired, any associated vaginal lacerations or an episiotomy may be
tamponaded with gauze packs to arrest their bleeding. Because hemorrhage
usually comes from the upper angle of the wound, the first suture using 2–0
chromic or polyglactin is placed in tissue above the angle. Subsequently,
either interrupted or continuous locking sutures are serially placed outward
toward the operator. If the uterus is involved and hemorrhage persists, some
of the surgical and angiographic methods described in Chapter 44 (p. 777)
may be necessary to obtain hemostasis. Following cervical lacerations,
subsequent pregnancy outcomes include excessive recurrent lacerations,
cervical incompetence, preterm labor, cesarean delivery, and severe perineal
lacerations (Hamou, 2020).

FIGURE 42-10 Repair of cervical laceration with appropriate surgical exposure. Continuous
absorbable sutures are placed beginning at the upper angle of the laceration.

■ Puerperal Hematomas
Pelvic hematomas can have several anatomical manifestations following
childbirth. One classification is anatomical and describes vulvar,
vulvovaginal, paravaginal, and retroperitoneal hematomas. Vulvar
hematomas may involve the vestibular bulb or branches of the pudendal
artery, which are the inferior rectal, perineal, and clitoral arteries (Fig. 4211). Paravaginal hematomas may involve the descending branch of the
uterine artery. In some cases, a torn vessel lies above the pelvic fascia, and a

supralevator hematoma develops. These can extend into the upper portion of
the vaginal canal and may almost occlude its lumen. Continued bleeding may
dissect retroperitoneally to form a mass palpable above the inguinal
ligament. In some cases, it may even dissect up behind the ascending colon to
the hepatic flexure (Rafi, 2010).

FIGURE 42-11 Schematic drawing showing types of puerperal hematomas. A. Coronal view showing
a supralevator hematoma. B. Coronal view showing a hematoma in the urogenital triangle. C. Perineal
view showing anal triangle anatomy and an ischioanal fossa hematoma. (Reproduced with permission
from Cunningham FG: Genital tract lacerations and hematomas. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap
LC III, et al (eds): Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, NY: McGraw
Hill; 2017a.)

Risks for puerperal hematomas include vaginal or perineal laceration,
episiotomy, or operative vaginal delivery (Iskender, 2016). Any hematoma
can also develop following stretch and rupture of a blood vessel without an
associated laceration (Alturki, 2018; Lee, 2020). This may be especially true

with forceps delivery. Occasionally, they are associated with an underlying
coagulopathy (Chap. 44, p. 775).

Diagnosis
Perineal, vulvar, and paravaginal hematomas can develop rapidly and
frequently cause excruciating pain (Fig. 42-12). A tense, tender swelling of
varying size rapidly develops, encroaches on the vaginal lumen, and causes
overlying skin or epithelium to become ecchymotic. A paravaginal hematoma
may escape detection initially. However, symptoms of pelvic pressure, pain,
or inability to void should prompt evaluation. Others may go undetected until
other measures of hypovolemia become evident. With a supralevator
extension, the hematoma extends upward in the paravaginal space and
between the leaves of the broad ligament. The hematoma may escape
detection until it can be felt on abdominal palpation or until hypovolemia
develops. Imaging with sonography or computed tomographic scanning may
be useful (Cichowski, 2017; Kawamura, 2014).

FIGURE 42-12 Right vulvar hematoma that required evacuation. A Foley catheter was placed for
bladder drainage. (Reproduced with permission from Dr. Emily H. Adhikari.)

Management
Small hematomas often remain contained and show minimal expansion. In
others, the tissues overlying an expanding hematoma may rupture from
pressure necrosis. In some, profuse hemorrhage may follow, but in other
cases, the hematoma drains in the form of large clots and old blood. In those
that involve the paravaginal space and extend above the levator sling,
retroperitoneal bleeding may be massive and occasionally fatal. In rare
instances, we encountered hematomas that rebled up to 2 weeks postpartum
(Cunningham, 2017).
Vulvovaginal hematomas are managed according to their size, location,
duration since delivery, and expansion. If bleeding ceases, then small- to
moderate-sized hematomas may be treated expectantly until absorbed. Cool
packs and analgesics are supportive care, and an inability to void merits
catheter drainage. But, if pain is severe or if the hematoma continues to
enlarge, surgical exploration is preferable. Blood loss with large puerperal
hematomas is nearly always considerably more than the clinical estimate.
Hypovolemia is common, and transfusions are frequently required when
surgical repair is necessary.
For repair, an incision is made at the point of maximal distention, blood
and clots are evacuated, and bleeding points ligated. Often, no distinct
bleeding vessels are identified. The cavity may then be obliterated in layers
with absorbable sutures. With this, layered tissue closure acts to tamponade
low-pressure bleeding. With vaginal hematomas, the vagina is packed with 1
to 2 gauze roll(s) for 12 to 24 hours, and the number of rolls is recorded.
Supralevator hematomas are more difficult to treat. Although some can be
evacuated by vulvar or vaginal incisions, laparotomy or angiographic
embolization are considerations if bleeding continues.
Embolization has become popular for management of some puerperal
hematomas. This is especially true for supralevator or retroperitoneal
hematomas. Embolization can be used primarily, or more likely secondarily,
if surgical attempts at hemostasis have failed or if the hematoma is difficult
to access surgically (Distefano, 2013; Lee, 2012; Poujade, 2012). The use of
a Bakri balloon for a paracervical hematoma also has been described
(Gizzo, 2013; Grönvall, 2014). Last, ultrasound-guided drainage of a
recurrent supralevator hematoma has been reported (Mukhopadhyay, 2015).

UTERINE RUPTURE
■ Predisposing Factors
Uterine rupture is another event that may lead to potentially catastrophic
hemorrhage. Rupture may be primary, defined as occurring in a previously
intact or unscarred uterus. More often, rupture is secondary and associated
with a preexisting incision, anomaly, or injury of the myometrium (Table 423).
TABLE 42-3. Some Causes of Uterine Rupture

The contribution of each of these underlying causes has evolved during
the past 50 years. Before 1960, when cesarean delivery was infrequent and
women of great parity were numerous, primary uterine rupture predominated.
As the incidence of cesarean delivery rose, and especially as a subsequent
trial of labor in these women became prevalent through the 1990s, uterine
rupture through the cesarean hysterotomy scar became the preeminent cause
(Chang, 2020; Gibbins, 2015; Mone, 2016).
Concurrent with the diminished enthusiasm for a trial of labor after
cesarean delivery (TOLAC), incidence trends for the two types of rupture
have again changed. In a study of 3942 cases of uterine rupture in more than
15 million women, only approximately half were in women with a prior

cesarean delivery (Yao, 2017). The International Network of Obstetric
Survey Systems (INOSS) identified 864 complete uterine ruptures in more
than 2.6 million deliveries (Vanderberghe, 2019). The overall prevalence
was 3 cases per 10,000 births. In women without a prior cesarean delivery,
the prevalence was 0.6 per 10,000 births, and it was 22 per 10,000 in those
with a prior cesarean delivery. This is similar to the recent overall rate of 5
cases per 10,000 births at Parkland Hospital. During this time, there were 40
cases of uterine rupture, and despite a very conservative TOLAC policy, 25
of the 40 events were in women with a prior hysterotomy.
The current lower incidence of women of great parity also has lowered
the primary-rupture rate. In this regard, advancing maternal age may be a
greater risk factor (Hochler, 2020). Another risk is excessive or
inappropriate uterine stimulation with oxytocin. This previously frequent
cause has mostly disappeared. In an analysis of three trials comparing
contemporaneous high- and low-dose oxytocin regimens for labor induction
in those with an unscarred uterus, the rate of uterine rupture did not differ
between groups (Budden, 2014). The rate of rupture, however, is increased
with sequential induction of labor with prostaglandins and oxytocin in those
both with and without prior cesarean delivery (Al-Zirqi, 2017).
Other operations that traumatize the myometrium include uterine curettage
or perforation, endometrial ablation, myomectomy, operative hysteroscopy,
or prior uterine rupture (Frank, 2018; Zhao, 2019). Uterine rupture is also
linked with disorders associated with connective tissue weakness
(Cauldwell, 2019a,b; Noh, 2013). Another report described rupture in a
woman with prior childhood pelvic radiotherapy (Huarte Cignada, 2020).
Blunt abdominal trauma also can rupture a substantially gravid uterus
(Miller, 1996). Thus, pregnant women in the later second- and third
trimesters who sustain such trauma are ideally monitored for signs of uterine
rupture. Specific monitoring protocols are outlined in Chapter 50 (p. 896).
Uncommon causes today are those due to internal podalic version and
extraction, difficult forceps delivery, breech extraction, and unusual fetal
enlargement such as with hydrocephalus. In one unusual case, fundal rupture
followed spontaneous labor in a woman with an abdominal cerclage
(Dandapani, 2019). Rupture associated with multifetal pregnancy or uterine
anomalies also is rare (Bankada, 2015; Tarney, 2013; Tola, 2014). Although
rare, rudimentary uterine horns are especially susceptible and described in

Chapter 3 (p. 43). Discussed in Chapter 43 (p. 760), placenta percreta may
cause focal myometrial weakness and rupture (Sun, 2016).

■ Pathogenesis
Rupture of the previously intact uterus during labor most often involves the
thinned-out lower uterine segment. When the rent is in the immediate vicinity
of the cervix, it frequently extends transversely or obliquely. When the rent
forms in the portion of the uterus adjacent to the broad ligament, the tear is
usually longitudinal (Fig. 42-13). Although these tears develop primarily in
the lower uterine segment, they can extend upward into the active segment or
downward through the cervix and into the vagina. In some cases, the bladder
also may be lacerated.

FIGURE 42-13 Peripartum hysterectomy specimen. A right broad ligament hematoma is seen lateral
to the closed hysterotomy incision and medial to the ovary. (Reproduced with permission from Dr. Emily
H. Adhikari.)

If the rupture is of sufficient size, the uterine contents will usually escape
into the peritoneal cavity. If the presenting fetal part is firmly engaged,
however, then only a portion of the fetus may be extruded from the uterus.

Fetal prognosis is largely dependent on the size of the rent, the degree of
placental separation, the magnitude of maternal hypovolemia, and the
rapidity of diagnosis and response (Al-Zirqi, 2018; Rottenstreich, 2021). In
some cases, the overlying peritoneum remains intact, and this usually is
accompanied by hemorrhage that extends into the broad ligament to cause a
large retroperitoneal hematoma.
Following vaginal delivery in an unscarred uterus, we and others have
occasionally encountered cases of an incomplete tear on the inside of the
uterus that extends vertically into the active segment to cause profuse
hemorrhage (Conrad, 2015). These tears are usually not visible from below
but are found at the time of hysterectomy for intractable bleeding despite a
contracted uterus. Hemorrhage with this type of tear can be torrential, and
bleeding is usually not slowed until the uterine artery pedicles are clamped
bilaterally.

■ Management and Outcomes
The varied clinical presentations of uterine rupture and its management are
discussed in detail in Chapter 31 (p. 579). In the most recent national
maternal mortality statistics, uterine rupture accounted for nearly 10 percent
of hemorrhage-associated deaths (Creanga, 2015, 2017). Maternal morbidity
includes hysterectomy that may be necessary to control hemorrhage. Rates of
perinatal mortality and morbidity, which may include severe neurological
impairment, also are high (Al-Zirqi, 2018; Rottenstreich, 2021). Table 42-4
lists some perinatal outcomes in 72 women with uterine rupture. Last,
maternal obesity comorbid with uterine rupture is associated with increased
rates of adverse neonatal outcomes (Yao, 2017). With prior rupture and a
subsequent pregnancy, Fox (2020) recommends cesarean delivery prior to
labor or at the onset of preterm labor.
TABLE 42-4. Some Maternal and Perinatal Outcomes in 72 Women with
Uterine Rupture

AMNIONIC FLUID EMBOLISM
■ Pathophysiology
This syndrome usually is caused by intravenous embolization of meconiumladen amnionic fluid. It results in rapid cardiorespiratory collapse and
profound consumptive coagulopathy. The understanding of the mechanism of
injury for amnionic fluid embolism (AFE) has evolved. Early theories
proposed that amnionic fluid and debris entered the maternal circulation and
obstructed pulmonary artery flow, which led to hypoxia, right heart failure,
and death. However, during normal delivery, amnionic fluid commonly enters

maternal circulation through venous channels at the placental implantation
site or small lacerations. Accordingly, squames, fetal cells, and trophoblasts
can often be identified in maternal peripheral blood at delivery (Clark, 1986;
Lee, 1986). And, at least in experimental animals, infused clear amnionic
fluid is generally innocuous, even in large amounts (Adamsons, 1971; Stolte,
1967).
Instead, meconium-laden amnionic fluid is likely a potent cause of
symptomatic AFE (Hankins, 1993). Disruption of the maternal-fetal interface
allows material from the fetal compartment to enter maternal circulation.
This dyad leads to abnormal activation of proinflammatory mediator systems,
similar to the systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS), and causes
initial, transient pulmonary vasoconstriction and hypertension (Bernstein,
2019). Pulmonary hypertension causes acute right ventricular failure, which
is followed by hemodynamic collapse from right ventricular infarction,
interventricular septum displacement, and decreased left-sided cardiac
output (Pacheco, 2020). This right and then left ventricular dysfunction leads
to cardiogenic pulmonary edema and systemic hypotension. Acute respiratory
failure with severe hypoxemia from shunting develops. Notably, the resulting
multiorgan dysfunction is an interrelated process, with both the cardiac and
pulmonary systems affecting each other.
Women who survive beyond these first phases invariably develop the
third component of the classic triad—a consumptive coagulopathy. Material
from the fetal compartment that contains tissue factor then activates factor
VII. This leads to the development of disseminated intravascular coagulation.
The rapidity of the coagulopathy is amazing (Fig. 42-14).

FIGURE 42-14 Fatal amnionic fluid embolism. Results of some coagulation studies show an abrupt
drop in plasma fibrinogen levels and platelet count but an extremely elevated serum fibrin split product
level.

To those who succumb, postmortem histopathological findings may be
obvious. However, detection of squames and keratin may require special
stains, and even then, debris may not be seen. In one study, fetal elements
were detected in 75 percent of autopsies and in 50 percent of specimens
prepared from concentrated buffy coat aspirates taken antepartum from a
pulmonary artery catheter (Clark, 1995).

■ Incidence and Risk Factors
Most reports describe an AFE frequency of 1 to 2 cases per 100,000 births
(Clark, 2014; Fitzpatrick, 2019; Knight, 2010). The case-fatality rate in all of
these studies ranges from 11 to 43 percent. From another perspective, AFE
caused 5 to 15 percent of all pregnancy-related deaths in the United States,
Canada, and France (Bonnet, 2018; Kramer, 2012; Petersen, 2019).
Predisposing conditions are rapid labor, meconium-stained amnionic
fluid, and tears into uterine and other large pelvic veins that permit an

exchange of fluids between the maternal and fetal compartment (Society of
Maternal-Fetal Medicine, 2016). Other commonly cited risks include older
maternal age; postterm pregnancy; labor induction or augmentation;
eclampsia; cesarean, forceps, or vacuum delivery; placental abruption or
previa; and hydramnios (Indraccolo, 2018; Knight, 2012; Kramer, 2012). The
associations of uterine hypertonus appears to be the effect rather than the
cause because uterine blood flow ceases when intrauterine pressures exceed
35 to 40 mm Hg. Thus, a hypertonic contraction would be the least likely
circumstance for amnionic fluid and other debris to enter uterine veins
(Clark, 1985). For this reason, hypertonus from oxytocin does not seem
implicated.

■ Diagnosis
The classic triad of abrupt hemodynamic and respiratory compromise along
with consumptive coagulopathy underpins its diagnosis (Pacheco, 2020).
Proposed criteria for AFE diagnosis are shown in Table 42-5. In a French
study, only 60 percent of women with autopsy-confirmed AFE had all four
criteria (Bonnet, 2018). The classic example is dramatic, and a woman in the
late stages of labor or immediately postpartum begins gasping for air.
Seizures or cardiorespiratory arrest rapidly follow and are accompanied by
massive hemorrhage from consumptive coagulopathy (Bernstein, 2019;
Tanaka, 2017). Clinical manifestations vary, and we and others have
managed several women in whom otherwise uncomplicated vaginal or
cesarean delivery was followed by severe acute consumptive coagulopathy
without overt cardiorespiratory difficulties. In these women, consumptive
coagulopathy appears to be the forme fruste of AFE (Kramer, 2012; Porter,
1996).
TABLE 42-5. Diagnostic Criteria for Amnionic Fluid Embolism

In such cases, other sources of acute cardiac or respiratory failure should
be considered. These include myocardial infarction, pulmonary or air
embolism, high spinal blockage, eclampsia, and anaphylactic shock
(Bernstein, 2019). In some cases, the temporal relationship of events aids
diagnosis. Unfortunately, no specific diagnostic laboratory test confirms
or refutes the diagnosis of AFE, and it remains a clinical diagnosis.
Importantly, women suffering from excessive blood loss and resulting
coagulopathy may be misdiagnosed with AFE, when the true culprit is
unrecognized or underappreciated hemorrhage (Clark, 2016). In either event,
a woman with cardiopulmonary compromise should receive immediate
resuscitation (Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, 2016).

■ Management
The initial period of systemic and pulmonary hypertension with AFE is
transient. Thus, immediate high-quality cardiopulmonary resuscitation and
advanced cardiac life support must be initiated without delay (Pacheco,
2020; Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, 2016). These are discussed in
detail in Chapter 50 (p. 897). Coagulopathy is managed as described in
Chapter 44 (p. 777).
If resuscitation is successful, hemodynamic instability is common in
survivors. Both fever and hyperoxia will worsen ischemia-reperfusion injury
to the brain. A suitable goal for temperature is 36°C and for mean arterial
pressure is 65 mm Hg (Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, 2016).
Additional supportive care measures such as intubation are usually
necessary. During the phase of right ventricular failure, inotropic agents such
as dobutamine may improve right heart output, and later systemic hypotension

should be treated with vasopressors such as norepinephrine. Excess fluid
administration is discouraged because it can worsen dilation of an already
engorged right ventricle, which may cause right-sided myocardial infarction
and interventricular septum displacement.
Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) has been described in
the treatment of AFE (Bernstein, 2019; Webster, 2020). Further discussed in
Chapter 50 (p. 886), venovenous ECMO is used for severe hypoxemic
respiratory failure, without right or left ventricular failure. Venoarterial
ECMO is less readily available and used for impending cardiac arrest and
ventricular failure. One recent review of outcomes in 20 women with AFE
managed with ECMO reported a maternal mortality rate of only 15 percent.
The authors concluded that publication biases may have overestimated the
favorable outcomes (Viau-Lapointe, 2019).
Either immediately after cardiopulmonary collapse or during the ensuing
phases of injury, a coagulopathy develops in most cases from activation of
factor VII and X. This may be exacerbated by ongoing hemorrhage, and a
common source is uterine atony. Thus, immediate evaluation of coagulation
parameters is indicated with concurrent management of bleeding.

■ Clinical Outcomes
Most reports describe significant maternal and perinatal mortality with AFE.
This is likely influenced by underdiagnosis and reporting biases that favor
the most severe cases with the highest mortality rates. From a California
database of 1.1 million deliveries, the mortality rate with AFE was 60
percent (Gilbert, 1999). In the INOSS database, maternal mortality rates
ranged from 30 to 41 percent (Fitzpatrick, 2019). Death can be rapid, and in
one study, 12 of the 34 women died within 30 minutes (Weiwen, 2000). The
mortality rate is highest in women who present with cardiac arrest—89
percent (Fitzpatrick, 2019).
Survivors commonly have profound neurological impairment. Clark
(1995) observed that only 8 percent of women who lived despite cardiac
arrest survived without neurological injury. In a report of 20 cases, the
maternal mortality rate was 15 percent, and 40 percent of survivors had
neurological disability (Skolnik, 2019). Overall, the prognosis appears to be
more associated with disease severity and the attendant cardiac arrest than
with any specific treatment modality (Clark, 2014; Fitzpatrick, 2019).

As perhaps expected, perinatal outcomes also are poor and are inversely
related to the maternal cardiac arrest-to-delivery interval. Even so, the
neonatal survival rate is 70 percent, but unfortunately, up to half of survivors
suffer residual neurological impairment. In a Canadian study, 28 percent of
neonates were considered to be asphyxiated at birth (Kramer, 2012).

REFERENCES
Adamsons K, Mueller-Heubach E, Myers RE: The innocuousness of amniotic fluid infusion in the
pregnant rhesus monkey. Am J Obstet Gynecol 109:977, 1971
Adnan N, Conian-Trant R, McCormick C, et al: Intramuscular versus intravenous oxytocin to prevent
postpartum haemorrhage at vaginal delivery: randomised controlled trial. BMJ 362:k3546, 2018
Al-Kadri HM, Al Anazi BK, Tamin HM: Visual estimation versus gravimetric measurement of
postpartum blood loss: a prospective cohort study. Arch Gynecol Obstet 283(6):1207, 2011
Alliance for Innovation on Maternal Health: Obstetric hemorrhage patient safety bundle. 2015. Available
at: https://safehealthcareforeverywoman.org/aim/patient-safety-bundles/maternal-safetybundles/obstetric-hemorrahage-patient-safety-bundle-2/. Accessed February 27, 2021
Al-Zirqi I, Daltveit AK, Forsén L, et al: Risk factors for complete uterine rupture. Am J Obstet Gynecol
216(2):165.el, 2017
Al-Zirqi I, Daltveit AK, Vangen S: Infant outcome after complete uterine rupture. Am J Obstet Gynecol
219:109.el, 2018
Al-Zirqi I, Vangen S, Forsen L, et al: Prevalence and risk factors of severe obstetric haemorrhage.
BJOG 115:1265, 2008
Alturki F, Ponette V, Boucher LM: Spontaneous retroperitoneal hematomas following uncomplicated
vaginal deliveries: a case report and literature review. J Obstet Gynaecol Can 40(6):712, 2018
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Postpartum hemorrhage. Practice Bulletin No.
183, October 2017, Reaffirmed 2019a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Quantitative blood loss in obstetric hemorrhage.
Committee Opinion No. 794, November, 2019b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Prevention and management of obstetric
lacerations at vaginal delivery. Practice Bulletin No. 198, August 2018, Reaffirmed 2020a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Use of prophylactic antibiotics in labor and
delivery. Practice Bulletin No. 199, August 2018, Reaffirmed 2020b
Antony KM, Racusin DA, Belfort MA, et al: Under pressure: intraluminal filling pressures of
postpartum hemorrhage tamponade balloons. AJP Rep 7(2):e86, 2017
Association of Women’s Health, Obstetric and Neonatal Nurses: Guidelines for oxytocin administration
after birth. AWHONN PB No. 2 JOGNN 44:161, 2014
Babinszki A, Kerenyi T, Torok O, et al: Perinatal outcome in grand and great-grand multi parity: effects
of parity on obstetric risk factors. Am J Obstet Gynecol 181:669, 1999
Bailit JL, Grobman WA, Rice MM, et al: Risk-adjusted models for adverse obstetric outcomes and
variation in risk-adjusted outcomes across hospitals. Am J Obstet Gynecol 209(5):446.e1, 2013
Bankada V, Purra P, Ningappa AM, et al: A rare case of bilateral broad ligament haematoma in twin
pregnancy. J Clin Diagn Res 9(10):QD03, 2015

Berg CJ, Callaghan WM, Syverson C, et al: Pregnancy-related mortality in the United States, 1998–
2005. Obstet Gynecol 116(6):1302, 2010
Berg CJ, MacKay AP, Qin C, et al: Overview of maternal morbidity during hospitalizations for labor and
delivery in the United States. 1993–1997 and 2001–2005. Obstet Gynecol 113(5):1075, 2009
Bernstein SN, Cudemus-Deseda GA, Ortiz V E, et al: Case 33–2019: a 35-year old woman with
cardiopulmonary arrest during cesarean section. N Engl J Med 381(17):1664, 2019
Bhandari S, Raja EA, Shetty A, et al: Maternal and perinatal consequences of antepartum haemorrhage
of unknown origin. BJOG 121(1):44, 2014
Blitz MJ, Yukhayev A, Pachtman SL, et al: Twin pregnancy and risk of postpartum hemorrhage. J
Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 5:1, 2019
Bonnet MP, Zlotnik D, Saucedo M, et al: Maternal death due to amniotic fluid embolism: a national study
in France. Anesth Analg 126(1):175, 2018
Budden A, Chen LJ, Henry A: High-dose versus low-dose oxytocin infusion regimens for induction of
labour at term. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 10:CD009701, 2014
Catanzarite VA, Moffitt KD, Baker ML: New approaches to the management of acute puerperal
uterine inversion. Obstet Gynecol 68(3 Suppl):7S, 1986
Cauldwell M, Steer PJ, Curtis SL: Maternal and fetal outcomes in pregnancies complicated by Marfan
syndrome. Heart 105(22):1725, 2019a
Cauldwell M, Steer PJ, Curtis S, et al: Maternal and fetal outcomes in pregnancies complicated by the
inherited aortopathy Loeys-Dietz syndrome. BJOG 126(8):1025, 2019b
Chang YH: Uterine rupture over 11 years: a retrospective descriptive study. Aust N Z J Obstet
Gynaecol 60(5):709, 2020
Chibueze EC, Parsons AJ, Ota E, et al: Prophylactic antibiotics for manual removal of retained placenta
during vaginal birth: a systematic review of observational studies and meta-analysis. BMC
Pregnancy Childbirth 15:313, 2015
Chu T, Rodriguez AN, Kleinmann W, et al: Correlation of postpartum hemorrhage risk stratification with
calculated blood loss greater than 1000 milliliters. Abstract No. 1092, Am J Obstet Gynecol
222(1):S673, 2020
Cichowski S, Rogers RG: Managing complications of perineal lacerations. Contemp Ob/Gyn 62:22, 2017
Clark SL: Amniotic fluid embolism. Obstet Gynecol 123:337, 2014
Clark SL, Hankins GD, Dudley DA, et al: Amniotic fluid embolism: analysis of the National Registry.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 172:1158, 1995
Clark SL, Pavlova Z, Greenspoon J, et al: Squamous cells in the maternal pulmonary circulation. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 154:104, 1986
Clark SL, Phelan JP, Yeh SY: Hypogastric artery ligation for obstetric hemorrhage. Obstet Gynecol
66:353, 1985
Clark SL, Romero R, Dildy GA, et al: Proposed diagnostic criteria for the case definition of amniotic
fluid embolism in research studies. Am J Obstet Gynecol October, 2016
Coad S, Dahlgren L, Hutcheson JA: Risk and consequences of puerperal uterine inversion in the United
States, 2004–2013. Am J Obstet Gynecol 217:377, 2017
Colalillo E, Sparks A, Phillips J, et al: Obstetric hemorrhage risk assessment tool predicts composite
maternal morbidity. Sci Rep 11(1):14709, 2021
Conrad LB, Groome KJ, Black DR: Management of persistent postpartum hemorrhage caused by inner
myometrial lacerations. Obstet Gynecol 126(2):266, 2015
Coviello E, Igbal S, Kawakita T, et al: Effect of implementing quantitative blood loss assessment at the
time of delivery. Am J Perinatol 36(13):1332, 2019

Creanga AA, Berg CJ, Syverson C, et al: Pregnancy-related mortality in the United States, 2006–2010.
Obstet Gynecol 125(1):5, 2015
Creanga AA, Berg CJ, Syverson C, et al: Pregnancy-related mortality in the United States, 2011–2013.
Obstet Gynecol 130:366, 2017
Cummings K, Doherty DA, Magann EF, et al: Timing of manual placenta removal to prevent postpartum
hemorrhage: is it time to act? J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 29(24):3930, 2016
Cunningham FG: Genital tract lacerations and hematomas. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC
III, et al (eds): Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, McGraw Hill
Education, 2017
Dandapani M, Pflugner LP, Fanning NS: Uterine rupture at term in a patient with abdominal cerclage.
Obstet Gynecol 133(5):940, 2019
Deneux-Tharaux C, Sentilhes L, Maillard F, et al: Effect of routine controlled cord traction as part of the
active management of the third stage of labour on postpartum hemorrhage: multicentre randomized
controlled trial (TRACOR). BMJ 346:f1541, 2013
Diaz V, Abalos E, Carroli G: Methods for blood loss estimation after vaginal birth. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev. 9:CD010980, 2018
Diemert A, Ortmeyer G, Hollwitz B, et al: The combination of intrauterine balloon tamponade and the
B-Lynch procedure for the treatment of severe postpartum hemorrhage. Am J Obstet Gynecol
206(1):65.e1, 2012
Distefano M, Casarella L, Amoroso S, et al: Selective arterial embolization as a first-line treatment for
postpartum hematomas. Obstet Gynecol 121(2 Pt 2 Supp I):443, 2013
Driessen M, Bouvier-Colle MH, Dupont C, et al: Postpartum hemorrhage resulting from uterine atony
after vaginal delivery. Factors associated with severity. Obstet Gynecol 117(1):21, 2011
Ducloy-Bouthors AS, Jude B, Duhamel A: High-dose tranexamic acid reduces blood loss in postpartum
haemorrhage. Crit Care 15(2):R117, 2011
Dufour P, Vinatier D, Puech F: The use of intravenous nitroglycerin for cervico-uterine relaxation: a
review of the literature. Arch Gynecol Obstet 261(1):1, 1997
Einerson BD, Son M, Schneider P, et al: The association between intrauterine balloon tamponade
duration and postpartum hemorrhage outcomes. Am J Obstet Gynecol 216:300.e1, 2017
Fein A, Wen T, Wright JD, et al: Postpartum hemorrhage and risk for postpartum readmission. J Matern
Fetal Neonatal 34(2):187, 2021
Fitzpatrick KE, van den Akker T, Bloemenkamp KW, et al: Risk factors, management, and outcomes of
amniotic fluid embolism: a multicountry, population-based cohort and nested case-control study.
PLoS Med 16(11):e1002962, 2019
Fong A, Wu E, Pan D, et al: Temporal trends and morbidities of vacuum, forceps, and combined use of
both. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 27(8):1886, 2014
Fox NS: Pregnancy outcomes in patients with prior uterine rupture or dehiscence: a 5-year update.
Obstet Gynecol 135(1):211, 2020
Frank ZC, Caughey AB: Pregnancy in women with a history of uterine rupture. Obstet Gynecol Surv
73(12):703, 2018
Frolova Al, Stout MJ, Tuuli MG, et al: Duration of the third stage of labor and risk of postpartum
hemorrhage. Obstet Gynecol 127(5):951, 2016
Gibbins KJ, Weber T, Holmgren CM, et al: Maternal and fetal morbidity associated with uterine rupture
of the unscarred uterus. Am J Obstet Gynecol 213(3):382.e1, 2015
Gilbert WM, Danielsen B: Amniotic fluid embolism: decreased mortality in a population-based study.
Obstet Gynecol 93:973, 1999

Gizzo S, Saccardi C, Patrelli TS, et al: Bakri balloon in vaginal-perineal hematomas complicating vaginal
delivery: a new therapeutic approach. J Low Genit Tract Dis 17:125, 2013
Goffman D, Nathan L, Chazotte C: Obstetric hemorrhage: a global review. Semin Perinatol 40(2):96,
2016
Green L, Knight M, Seeney FM, et al: The epidemiology and outcomes of women with postpartum
haemorrhage requiring massive transfusion with eight or more units of red cells: a national crosssectional study. BJOG 123(13):2164, 2016
Grönvall M, Tikkanen M, Metsätähti M, et al: Pelvic arterial embolization in severe obstetric
hemorrhage. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 93(7):716, 2014
Haeri S, Rais S, Monks B: Intrauterine tamponade balloon use in the treatment of uterine inversion.
BMJ Case Rep January 6, 2015
Hamou B, Sheiner E, Coreanu T, et al: Intrapartum cervical lacerations and their impact on future
pregnancy outcome. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 33(5):883, 2020
Hankins GD, Berryman GK, Scott RT Jr, et al: Maternal arterial desaturation with 15-methyl
prostaglandin F2 alpha for uterine atony. Obstet Gynecol 72: 367, 1988
Hankins GD, Snyder RR, Clark SL, et al: Acute hemodynamic and respiratory effects of amniotic fluid
embolism in the pregnant goat model. Am J Obstet Gynecol 168(4):1113, 1993
Hernandez JS, Alexander JM, Sarode R, et al: Calculated blood loss in severe obstetric hemorrhage and
its relation to body mass index. Am J Perinatol 29(7):557, 2012
Hochler H, Wainstock T, Lipschuetz M, et al: Grandmultiparity, maternal age, and the risk for uterine
rupture–a multicenter cohort study. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 99(2):267, 2020
Hofmeyr GJ, Abdel-Aleem H, Abde1-A1eem MA: Uterine massage for preventing postpartum
haemorrhage. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 7:CD006431, 2013
Huarte Cignada M, Estaun Echavarren C, Garcia Jimenez A, et al: Spontaneous uterine rupture in the
second trimester in a patient with previous pelvic radiotherapy in childhood: a case report. J Obstet
Gynaecol Can 42(1):84, 2020
Ida A, Ito K, Kubota Y, et al: Successful reduction of acute puerperal uterine inversion with the use of a
Bakri postpartum balloon. Case Rep Obstet Gynecol 2015:424891, 2015
Indraccolo U, Battistoni C, Mastrantonio I, et al: Risk factors for fatality in amniotic fluid embolism: a
systematic review and analysis of a data pool. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 31(5):661, 2018
Iskender C, Topcu HO, Timur H, et al: Evaluation of risk factors in women with puerperal genital
hematomas. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 29(9):1435, 2016
Kaplanoglu M, Kaplanoglu D, Bulbul M, et al: Inner myometrial laceration—an unusual presentation of
antepartum and postpartum hemorrhage: case reports and review of the literature. J Matern Fetal
Neonatal Med 29(16):2621, 2016
Kawakita T, Mokhtari N, Huang JC, et al: Evaluation of risk assessment tools for severe postpartum
hemorrhage in women undergoing cesarean delivery. Obstet Gynecol 134(6):1308, 2019
Kawamura Y, Kondoh E, Hamanishi J, et al: Treatment decision- making for postpartum hemorrhage
using dynamic contrast-enhanced computed tomography. J Obstet Gynaecol Res 40(1):67, 2014
Kaya B, Guralp O, Tuten A, et al: Which uterine sparing technique should be used for uterine atony
during cesarean section? The Bakri balloon or the B-Lynch suture? Arch Gynecol Obstet
294(3):511, 2016
Knight M, Berg C, Brocklehurst P, et al: Amniotic fluid embolism incidence, risk factors and outcomes: a
review and recommendations. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth 12:7, 2012
Knight M, Tuffnell D, Brocklehurst P, et al: Incidence and risk factors for amniotic-fluid embolism.
Obstet Gynecol 115(5):910, 2010

Kondoh E, Chigusa Y, Ueda A, et al: Novel intrauterine balloon tamponade systems for postpartum
hemorrhage. Gynecol Scand 98(12):1612, 2019
Kramer MS, Rouleau J, Liu S, et al: Amniotic fluid embolism: incidence, risk factors, and impact on
perinatal outcomes. BJOG 119(7):1144, 2012
Landy HJ, Laughon K, Bailit JL, et al: Characteristics associated with severe perineal and cervical
lacerations during vaginal delivery. Obstet Gynecol 117(3):627, 2011
Lee HJ, Na ED, Kim HC, et al: Massive broad ligament hematoma caused by spontaneous uterine
artery rupture after uncomplicated vaginal delivery. J Minim Invasive Gynecol 27(2):250, 2020
Lee HY, Shin JH, Kim J, et al: Primary postpartum hemorrhage: outcome of pelvic arterial embolization
in 251 patients at a single institution. Radiology 264(3):903, 2012
Lee W, Ginsburg KA, Cotton DB, et al: Squamous and trophoblastic cells in the maternal pulmonary
circulation identified by invasive hemodynamic monitoring during the peripartum period. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 155:999, 1986
Lepine SJ, Geller SE, Pledger M, et al: Severe maternal morbidity due to obstetric haemorrhage:
potential preventability. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol 60(2):212, 2020
Martingano D, Mitrofanova A, Kin AF, et al: Antibiotic prophylaxis during intrauterine balloon
tamponade following vaginal deliveries with postpartum hemorrhage. Abstract No. 381, Am J
Obstet Gynecol 222(1):S253, 2020
Matsubara S, Yano H, Taneichi A, et al: Uterine compression suture against impending recurrence of
uterine inversion immediately after laparotomy positioning. J Obstet Gynaecol Res 35(4):819, 2009
Melamed N, Ben-Haroush A, Chen R, Kaplan B, et al: Intrapartum cervical lacerations: characteristics,
risk factors, and effects on subsequent pregnancies. Am J Obstet Gynecol 200(4):388.e1, 2009
Merriam AA, Huang Y, Wright JD, et al: Use of uterine tamponade and interventional radiology
procedures during delivery hospitalizations. Obstet Gynecol 135(3):674, 2020
Miller DA, Paul RH: Rupture of the unscarred uterus. Am J Obstet Gynecol 174:345, 1996
Mondal PC, Ghosh D, Santra D, et al: Role of Hayman technique and its modification in recurrent
puerperal uterine inversion. Obstet Gynaecol Res 38(2):438, 2012
Mone F, Elsayed S, McAuliffe FM, et al: Uterine rupture—when, why and emerging trends in an Irish
population. Abstract No. 433, Am J Obstet Gynecol 214(1):S238, 2016
Mousa HA, Blum J, Abou El Senoun G, et al: Treatment for primary postpartum haemorrhage.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2:CD003249, 2014
Mukhopadhyay D, Jennings PE, Banerjee M, et al: Ultrasound—guided drainage of supralevator
hematoma in a hemodynamically stable patient. Obstet Gynecol 126(6):1188, 2015
Natrella M, Di Naro E, Loverro M, et al: The more you lose the more you miss: accuracy of postpartum
blood loss visual estimation. A systematic review of the literature. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med
31(1):106, 2018
Nguyen KT, Lozada MJ, Gorrindo P, et al: Massive hemorrhage from suspected iatrogenic uterine
rupture. Obstet Gynecol 132(6):149, 2018
Noh JJ, Park CH, Jo MH, et al: Rupture of an unscarred uterus in a woman with long-term steroid
treatment for systemic lupus erythematosus. Obstet Gynecol 122(2 Pt 2):472, 2013
O’Brien B, Smoleneic J: Cervical varicosities and placenta praevia. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol
53(5):451, 2013
Oladapo OT, Adetoro OO, Ekele BA, et al: When getting there is not enough: a nationwide crosssectional study of 998 maternal deaths and 1451 near-misses in public tertiary hospitals in a lowincome country. BJOG 123(6):928, 2016

Oleen MA, Mariano J P: Controlling refractory atonic postpartum hemorrhage with Hemabate sterile
solution. Am J Obstet Gynecol 162:205, 1990
Pan J, Zhou L, Huang A, et al: Sonographic diagnosis of complete uterine inversion: an unusual case.
Clin Exp Obstet Gynecol 42(2):240, 2015
Pates JA, Hatab MR, McIntire DD, et al: Determining uterine blood flow in pregnancy with magnetic
resonance imaging. Magn Reson Imaging 28(4):507, 2010
Pacheco LD, Clark SL, Klassen M, et al: Amniotic fluid embolism: principles of early clinical
management. Am J Obstet Gynecol 222(1):48, 2020
Petersen EE, Davis NL, Goodman D, et al: Vital signs: pregnancy related deaths, United States, 2011–
2015, and strategies for prevention, 13 states, 2013–2017. MMWR 68(35):423, 2019
Porter TF, Clark SL, Dildy GA, et al: Isolated disseminated intravascular coagulation and amniotic fluid
embolism. Am J Obstet Gynecol 174:486, 1996
Poujade O, Zappa M, Letendre I, et al: Predictive factors for failure of pelvic arterial embolization for
postpartum hemorrhage. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 117(2):119, 2012
Prick BW, Vos AA, Hop WC, et al: The current state of active third stage management to prevent
postpartum hemorrhage: a cross-sectional study. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 92(11):1277, 2013
Pritchard JA: Changes in the blood volume during pregnancy and delivery. Anesthesiology 26:393, 1965
Pritchard JA, Baldwin RM, Dickey JC, et al: Blood volume changes in pregnancy and the puerperium,
2. Red blood cell loss and changes in apparent blood volume during and following vaginal delivery,
cesarean section, and cesarean section plus total hysterectomy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 84:1271, 1962
Rafi J, Muppala H: Retroperitoneal haematomas in obstetrics: literature review. Arch Gynecol Obstet
281(3):435, 2010
Ramler PI, van den Akker T, Henriquez D, et al: Women receiving massive transfusion due to
postpartum hemorrhage: a comparison over time between two nationwide cohort studies. Acta
Obstet Gynecol Scand 98(6):795, 2019
Rottenstreich M, Rotem R, Hirsch A, et al: Delayed diagnosis of intrapartum uterine rupture-maternal
and neonatal consequences. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 34(5):708, 2021
Rouse DJ, MacPherson C, Landon M, et al: Blood transfusion and cesarean delivery. Obstet Gynecol
108:891, 2006
Sabourin JN, Lee T, Magee LA, et al: Indications for, timing of, and modes of delivery in a national
cohort of women admitted with antepartum hemorrhage at 22+0 to 28+6 weeks’ gestation. J Obstet
Gynaecol Can 34(11):1043, 2012
Said Ali A, Faraag E, Mohammed M, et al: The safety and effectiveness of Bakri balloon in the
management of postpartum hemorrhage: a systematic review. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med
34(2):300, 2021
Sangwan N, Nanda S, Singhal S, et al: Puerperal uterine inversion associated with unicornuate uterus.
Arch Gynecol Obstet 280(4):625, 2009
Saoud F, Stone A, Nutter A, et al: The validation of a new method to assess estimated blood loss in the
obstetric population undergoing cesarean delivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 221(3):267.e1, 2019
Schimmer BP, Parker KL: Contraception and pharmacotherapy of obstetrical and gynecological
disorders. In Brunton LL, Chabner BA, Knollmann BC (eds): Goodman and Gilman’s The
Pharmacological Basis of Therapeutics, 12th ed. New York, McGraw Hill, 2011
Siegel MR, Drey E, Rosenstein MG: The use of bierer forceps to treat retained placenta after vaginal
delivery. Abstract No. 830, Am J Obstet Gynecol 222:S521, 2020
Skolnik S, Ioscovich A, Eidelman LA, et al: Anesthetic management of amniotic fluid embolism a multicenter, retrospective, cohort study. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 32(8):1262, 2019

Smulian JC, DeFu1vio JD, Diven L, et al: Sonographic findings in acute uterine inversion. J Clin
Ultrasound 41(7):453, 2013
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Pacheco LK, Saade G, et al: Amniotic fluid embolism; diagnosis
and management. Am J Obstet Gynecol 215(2):B16, 2016
Spies N, Woolfolk C, Macones GA, et al: Can machine-learning predict the need for postpartum
transfusion with clinical knowledge at the time of delivery? Abstract No. 57, Am J Obstet Gynecol
222(1):S49, 2020
Stolte L, van Kessel H, Seelen J, et al: Failure to produce the syndrome of amniotic fluid embolism by
infusion of amniotic fluid and meconium into monkeys. Am J Obstet Gynecol 98:694, 1967
Suarez S, Conde-Agudelo A, Borovac-Pinheiro A, et al: Uterine balloon tamponade for the treatment of
postpartum hemorrhage: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol
222(4):293.e1, 2020
Sun JN, Zhang BL, Yu HY, et al: Spontaneous uterine rupture due to placenta percreta during
pregnancy. Am J Emerg Med 34(9):1918.e1, 2016
Tanaka H, Katsuragi S, Osato K, et al: Value of fibrinogen in cases of maternal death related to
amniotic fluid embolism. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 30(24):2940, 2017
Tarney CM, Whitecar P, Sewell M, et al: Rupture of an unscarred uterus in a quadruplet pregnancy.
Obstet Gynecol 121(2 Pt 2 Suppl 1):483, 2013
The Joint Commission: R3 Report: requirement, rationale, reference. Issue 24, 2019
Tita AT, Szychowski JM, Rouse DJ, et al: Higher-dose oxytocin and hemorrhage after vaginal delivery.
Obstet Gynecol 119(2 Pt 1):293, 2012
Tola EN: First trimester spontaneous uterine rupture in a young woman with uterine anomaly. Case Rep
Obstet Gynecol 2014:967386, 2014
Vandenberghe G, Bioemenkamp K, Beriage S, et al: The International Network of Obstetric Survey
Systems study of uterine rupture: a descriptive multi-country population-based study. BJOG
126(3):370, 2019
Venkatesh KK, Strauss R, Grotegut C, et al: Machine learning- based prediction models for postpartum
hemorrhage. Obstet Gynecol 135(4):935, 2020
Viau-Lapointe J, Filewod N: Extracorporeal therapies for amniotic fluid embolism. Obstet Gynecol
134(5):989, 2019
Vintejoux E, Ulrich D, Mousty E, et al: Success factors for Bakri balloon usage secondary to uterine
atony: a retrospective, multicenter study. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol 55(6):572, 2015
Webster CM, Smith KA, Manuck TA: Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation in pregnant and
postpartum women: a ten-year case series. Am J Obstet Gynecol MFM 2(2):100108, 2020
Weiwen Y: Study of the diagnosis and management of amniotic fluid embolism: 38 cases of analysis.
Obstet Gynecol 95:385, 2000
Wendel MP, Shnaekel KL, Magann EF: Uterine inversion: a review of a life-threatening obstetrical
emergency. Obstet Gynecol Surv 73(7):411, 2018
Witteveen T, van Stralen G, Zwart J, et al: Puerperal uterine inversion in the Netherlands: a nationwide
cohort study. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 92(3):334, 2013
WOMAN Trial Collaborators: Effect of early tranexamic acid administration on mortality, hysterectomy,
and other morbidities in women with post-partum haemorrhage (WOMAN): an international,
randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet 389(10084):2105, 2017
World Health Organization: WHO recommendations for prevention and treatment of maternal
peripartum infections. Geneva, WHO, 2015

World Health Organization: WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum
haemorrhage. Geneva, WHO, 2012
World Health Organization: WHO recommendations: uterotonics for the prevention of postpartum
haemorrhage. Geneva, WHO, 2018
Yao R, Goetziner KR, Crimmins SD, et al: Association of maternal obesity with maternal and neonatal
outcomes in cases of uterine rupture. Obstet Gynecol 129:683, 2017
Yee LM, McGee P, Bailit JL, et al: Daytime compared with nighttime differences in management and
outcomes of postpartum hemorrhage Obstet Gynecol 133(1):155, 2019
Yoong W, Ridout A, Memtsa M, et al: Application of uterine compression suture in association with
intrauterine balloon tamponade (“uterine sandwich”) for postpartum hemorrhage. Acta Obstet
Gynecol Scand 91(1):147, 2012
Yule CS, Happe KK, McIntire DD, et al: The impact of uterine rupture on perinatal outcomes.
Presented at the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists Annual Meeting, Nashville
TN, May 2019
Timofeev J, Zahn CM: Uterine inversion. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al (eds):
Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, McGraw Hill Education, 2017
Zeeman GG, Cunningham FG, Pritchard JA: The magnitude of hemoconcentration with eclampsia.
Hypertens Pregnancy 28(2):127, 2009
Zhao B, Wang Y, Zhang Y: Uterine rupture in patients with a history of laparoscopy or hysteroscopy
procedures: three case reports. Medicine (Baltimore) 98(20):e15491, 2019
Zwart JJ, Richters JM, Öry F, et al: Severe maternal morbidity during pregnancy, delivery and
puerperium in the Netherlands: a nationwide population-based study of 371,000 pregnancies. BJOG
115:842, 2008

CHAPTER 43

Hemorrhagic Placental Disorders

PLACENTAL ABRUPTION
DIAGNOSIS
MANAGEMENT
PLACENTA PREVIA
DIAGNOSIS
MANAGEMENT
PLACENTA ACCRETA SPECTRUM
DIAGNOSIS
MANAGEMENT
REFERENCES
Hemorrhage following partial or complete separation of the placenta can be
torrential. Recall that the amount of blood flowing through the intervillous
space at term exceeds 600 mL/min (Pates, 2010). In the second half of
pregnancy, three placental disorders contribute substantially to maternal
mortality rates. These include placental abruption, placenta previa, and
placenta accreta spectrum.
The contributions of hemorrhagic placental disorders to maternal
mortality are discussed in Chapter 1 (p. 7) and Chapter 42 (p. 733). The
management and clinical experience with these disorders span more than a

generation. Placental abruption, for example, has been emphasized in this text
for more than 50 years beginning with the work of Dr. Jack Pritchard. Now
more common than years past, placenta accreta spectrum is another
substantial threat to maternal well-being.

PLACENTAL ABRUPTION
■ Etiopathogenesis
Separation of the placenta—either partially or totally—from its implantation
site before delivery is called placental abruption or abruptio placentae.
From Latin, the latter translates as “rending asunder of the placenta,” which
denotes a sudden accident, which is characteristic of most cases. In the
purest sense, the cumbersome—and thus seldom used—term premature
separation of the normally implanted placenta is most descriptive because
it excludes separation of a placenta previa.
Abruption likely begins with rupture of a decidual spiral artery and
hemorrhage into the decidual basalis. The subsequent expanding
retroplacental hematoma splits the decidua and leaves a thin layer adherent
to the myometrium. The decidual hematoma grows to lift away and compress
the adjacent placenta. In some cases that are associated with preeclampsia,
impaired trophoblastic invasion with subsequent atherosis is one underlying
predisposition (Brosens, 2011). Inflammation or infection also may be
contributory (Mhatre, 2016). However, histological findings cannot be used
to determine the timing of the abruption (Chen, 2017).
In the early stages of placental abruption, clinical symptoms may be
absent. Even with continued bleeding and placental separation, placental
abruption can still be either total or partial (Fig. 43-1). With either, bleeding
typically insinuates itself between the membranes and uterine wall,
ultimately escaping through the cervix to cause external hemorrhage. Less
often, the blood is retained, leading to concealed hemorrhage and delayed
diagnosis. The delay translates into greater maternal and fetal hazards. With
concealed hemorrhage, the likelihood of consumptive coagulopathy is also
increased. This is because increased pressure within the intervillous space,
caused by the expanding retroplacental clot, forces more placental
thromboplastin into the maternal circulation (Chap. 44, p. 775).

FIGURE 43-1 Schematic of placental abruption. Shown to the left is total placental abruption with
concealed hemorrhage. To the right is a partial abruption with blood and clots that dissect between
membranes and decidua to reach the internal cervical os and then the vagina.

Most blood in the retroplacental hematoma in a nontraumatic placental
abruption is maternal. This is because hemorrhage derives from separation
within the maternal decidua, and placental villi are usually initially intact. In
78 women at Parkland Hospital with a nontraumatic placental abruption,
fetal-to-maternal hemorrhage was documented in only 20 percent. All of
these had <10 mL fetal blood loss (Stettler, 1992). In another series of 68
women with a placental abruption, fetal cells were found in peripheral blood
in only 4 percent (Atkinson, 2015).
Placental abruption can create a visible circumscribed depression on the
maternal surface of a freshly delivered placenta. These depressions usually
measure a few centimeters in diameter and are covered by dark, clotted

blood. Because several minutes are required for these anatomical changes to
materialize, a very recently separated placenta may appear totally normal at
delivery. Our experiences are like those of Benirschke and associates (2012)
in that the “age” of the retroplacental clot cannot be determined exactly. In
the example shown in Figure 43-2, a large dark clot is well formed. It has
depressed the placental bulk and likely is at least several hours old.

FIGURE 43-2 Partial placental abruption with a dark adherent clot.

Defining placental abruption severity is problematic. We consider
placental abruption severe when the fetus dies. However, maternal and fetal
complications are frequently serious even with a liveborn fetus. Ananth and
coworkers (2016) have defined severe placental abruption as displaying one
or more of the following: (1) maternal sequelae that include disseminated
intravascular coagulation (DIC), shock, transfusion, hysterectomy, renal
failure, or death; (2) fetal complications such as nonreassuring fetal status,
growth restriction, or death; or (3) neonatal outcomes that include death,
preterm delivery, or growth restriction.

Traumatic Abruption

External trauma—usually from motor vehicle crashes or aggravated assault
—can cause placental separation. The frequency of abruption originating
from trauma varies. Importantly, abruption can stem from relatively minor
trauma (Huls, 2018). The clinical presentation and consequences of these
abruptions differ somewhat from spontaneous cases. For example, associated
fetomaternal hemorrhage, while seldom clinically significant with most
spontaneous abruptions, is more common with trauma because of
concomitant placental tears or “fractures” (Fig. 50-10, p. 895). In eight
women with traumatic placental abruption cared for at Parkland Hospital, we
found fetal-to-maternal hemorrhage of 80 to 100 mL in three (Stettler, 1992).
Importantly, in some cases of trauma, a nonreassuring fetal heart rate tracing
may not be accompanied by other evidence of placental separation. A
sinusoidal tracing is one example. Following blunt abdominal trauma, uterine
contractions are the single most important predictor of placental abruption
(Greco, 2019). Traumatic abruption is considered in more detail in Chapter
50 (p. 894).

Chronic Abruption
When placental separation is not followed by delivery, the placental
abruption is termed chronic. Some of these cases begin early in pregnancy.
Dugoff and coworkers (2004) observed an association between some
abnormally elevated maternal serum aneuploidy markers and subsequent
abruption. Others have correlated first- and second-trimester bleeding with
third-trimester placental abruption (Ananth, 2006; Weiss, 2004). In some
cases, chronic abruption and oligohydramnios develop and are called the
chronic abruption–oligohydramnios sequence (CAOS) (Elliott, 1998).
Even later in pregnancy, hemorrhage with retroplacental hematoma formation
is occasionally arrested completely without delivery. These women may
have abnormally elevated levels of maternal serum alpha-fetoprotein
(MSAFP) or placenta-specific RNAs as markers of the event (Miura, 2017;
Ngai, 2012).

■ Frequency
The reported incidence of placental abruption varies because of differing
criteria used for diagnosis. Its frequency averages 0.5 percent or 1 case in
200 deliveries. From one database of more than 125 million births from

1979 through 2010, the incidence of placental abruption was nearly 1 percent
(Hill, 2020). In more than 250,000 deliveries at Parkland Hospital from
2000 through 2015, the incidence of placental abruption averaged 1 case in
290 births (Fig. 43-3).

FIGURE 43-3 Frequency of placental abruption and placenta previa by maternal age at Parkland
Hospital from 2000 through 2015.

The frequency of placental abruption has risen in this country, and most
of this increase is in black women (Ananth, 2005, 2016). This disproportion
may be explained in part by the conservative management of early-onset
preeclampsia in some institutions (Chap. 41, p. 714). At Parkland Hospital,
however, the frequency of severe placental abruption has declined.
Specifically, with placental abruption so extensive as to kill the fetus, the
incidence was 0.24 percent or 1 case in 420 births from 1956 through 1967
(Pritchard, 1967). Through 2020, this same frequency dropped to 0.05
percent or 1 case in 2060 births. This likely reflects a concurrent decline in
the number of high-parity women giving birth and rise in the availability of
prenatal care and emergency transportation.

■ Perinatal Morbidity and Mortality
Overall, perinatal outcomes are influenced by gestational age, and the
frequency of placental abruption rises across the third trimester. As seen in
Figure 43-4, more than half of the placental abruptions at Parkland Hospital
developed at gestational ages ≥37 weeks’ gestation. Perinatal mortality and
morbidity, however, are more common with earlier abruptions and with
concomitant preeclampsia (Furukawa, 2015; Han, 2019). Of other related
factors, major fetal congenital anomalies have greater association with
placental abruption (Riihimäki, 2013).

FIGURE 43-4 Frequency of placental abruption by gestational age at Parkland Hospital.

Although the rates of fetal death have declined, the contribution of
abruption as a cause of stillbirth remains prominent because other causes
also have decreased. For example, since the early 1990s, 10 to 12 percent of
all third-trimester stillbirths at Parkland Hospital have been the consequence
of placental abruption. In a review of more than 15 million singleton births
between 1995 and 1998 in the United States, the perinatal mortality rate
associated with placental abruption was 119 death per 1000 births. This was
higher than the rate of 8 deaths per 1000 births in the general obstetrical
population (Salihu, 2005).

Neonatal deaths also are common following placental abruption. At
Parkland Hospital, 15 percent of liveborn neonates die. Perinatal morbidity
also is common in this group (Downes, 2017). Moreover, associated
childhood mortality mainly stems from birth-related asphyxia and prematurity
(Riihimäki, 2018). In one series, 20 percent of 43 liveborn neonates had
severe fetal acidemia following placental abruption, and 20 percent of
survivors developed cerebral palsy (Matsuda, 2013). In another study of 84
liveborns, 29 (35 percent) had an umbilical artery pH <7.00 (Onishi, 2019).
Ananth and coworkers (2017) attribute some of the adverse
neurodevelopmental outcomes to preterm delivery.

■ Predisposing Factors
Demographic Factors
Several predisposing factors raise the placental abruption risk (Table 43-1).
Advancing maternal age is one risk, although data regarding women of great
parity are conflicting (see Fig. 43-3) (Okby, 2017). Race or ethnicity also
appears important (Eubanks, 2021). In an earlier study, in almost 366,000
deliveries at Parkland Hospital, abruption severe enough to kill the fetus was
most common in black and white women—1 case in 200 births; less so in
Asian women—1 in 300; and least common in Latinas—1 in 350 (Pritchard,
1991). A familial association was found from one Norwegian populationbased registry (Rasmussen, 2009). In this study, if a woman had a severe
abruption, the risk for her sister was doubled. Candidate genes involved in
mitochondrial biogenesis and oxidative phosphorylation pathways, which
confer risk for placental abruption, have been described (Workalemahu,
2018).
TABLE 43-1. Risk Factors for Placental Abruption

Pregnancy-associated Hypertension
Some form of hypertension is the most frequent condition associated with
placental abruption. This includes gestational hypertension, preeclampsia,
chronic hypertension, or a combination. The hemolysis, elevated liver
enzyme levels, low platelet count (HELLP) syndrome carries an increased
risk for placental abruption. Moreover, expectant management of
preeclampsia in significantly preterm pregnancies was complicated by
placental abruption in 4 percent (Shoopala, 2019). In a report by Pritchard
and colleagues (1991) that described 408 women with placental abruption
and fetal demise, hypertension was apparent in half once hypovolemia was
corrected. Half of these latter women—a fourth of all 408—had chronic
hypertension. Examined another way, one Maternal-Fetal Medicine Units
(MFMU) Network study found that 1.5 percent of pregnant women with
chronic hypertension suffered placental abruption (Sibai, 1998). At Parkland
Hospital, the placental abruption frequency in women with treated chronic

hypertension and significant proteinuria was almost 1 percent. This incidence
compared with the 0.3-percent incidence in women with treated hypertension
without substantial proteinuria (Morgan, 2016).
Chronic hypertension with superimposed preeclampsia or with fetalgrowth restriction confers an even greater risk (Lueth, 2020). Even so, the
severity of hypertension does not necessarily correlate with abruption
incidence (Morgan, 2016; Zetterstrom, 2005). However, women with
preeclampsia that experience placental abruption have worse maternal, fetal,
and neonatal outcomes compared with women experiencing abruption alone
(Han, 2019). The long-term effects of these associations are apparent from
the significantly elevated cardiovascular mortality risk in women with prior
abruption, with or without chronic hypertension (DeRoo, 2016; Pariente,
2013). Observations from the Magpie Trial Collaborative Group suggest that
women with preeclampsia, with or without chronic hypertension, given
magnesium sulfate may have a reduced risk for abruption (Altman, 2002).
Last, Roberge and colleagues (2018), performed a metaanalysis and reported
that a 100-mg daily aspirin may decrease the incidence of placental
abruption.

Preterm Prelabor Ruptured Membranes
The placental abruption risk substantially rises when placental membranes
rupture before term. (Hackney, 2016). Of 756 women with ruptured
membranes between 20 and 36 weeks’ gestation, 5 percent developed an
abruption (Major, 1995). The frequency was 17 percent with previable
prelabor ruptured membranes (Kibel, 2016). The risk for abruption with
preterm membrane rupture is further elevated with comorbid infection
(Ananth, 2004). In one cohort study of pregnancies ≥34 weeks’ gestation, the
placental abruption rate was eightfold higher if hydramnios was comorbid
(Aviram, 2015). From a metaanalysis of 10 studies that included term and
preterm gestational ages, hydramnios was associated with a twofold greater
rate of placental abruption (Khazaei, 2019). Abrupt uterine decompression
during membrane rupture may be an inciting factor.

Prior Abruption
Many of the predisposing factors in women with a history of an abruption are
chronic conditions, and in these cases, placental abruption has a high

recurrence rate. Women with abruption and fetal death have a recurrence rate
of 12 percent, and half of these abruptions caused another fetal death
(Pritchard, 1970). Furuhashi and colleagues (2002) reported a 22-percent
recurrence rate, and half recurred at a gestational age 1 to 3 weeks earlier
than the first abruption. In one longitudinal Dutch study, Ruiter and
coworkers (2015) cited a recurrence risk of 5.8 percent. In a populationbased study of 767,000 pregnancies, the authors found a sevenfold higher
risk for recurrence of a “mild” abruption and twelvefold risk for a “severe”
abruption (Rasmussen, 2009). For women who had two severe abruptions,
the risk for a third was increased 50-fold.
Management of a pregnancy subsequent to an abruption is difficult
because another separation may suddenly occur, even remote from term. In
many of these recurrences, evaluation of fetal well-being is almost always
reassuring beforehand. Thus, antepartum fetal testing is usually not
predictive. Because term abruptions tend to be recurrent, Ruiter and
coworkers (2015) recommend labor induction at 37 weeks’ gestation. It
seems reasonable to induce labor at 38 completed weeks if other
complications do not develop beforehand.

Other Associations
Of these listed in Table 43-1, cigarette smoking is linked to an elevated risk
for placental abruption (Eubanks, 2021). One metaanalysis of 1.6 million
pregnancies in smokers found a twofold risk (Ananth, 1999). This risk was
five- to eightfold if smokers had chronic hypertension, severe preeclampsia,
or both. Similar findings are reported by others (Hogberg, 2007; Kaminsky,
2007). Cocaine abuse is linked, and in one series of 50 women who abused
cocaine during pregnancy, eight had a stillbirth caused by placental abruption
(Bingol, 1987).
Of potential serum markers, MSAFP, inhibin, and pregnancy-associated
plasma protein in abnormal levels carry increased risk (Ananth, 2017).
Indeed, preliminary data shows that MSAFP levels >280 µg/L in the third
trimester may be predictive (Ngai, 2012). Subclinical hypothyroidism or
high levels of antithyroid antibodies have been associated with a two- to
threefold higher risk for placental abruption (Abbassi-Ghanavati, 2010;
Maraka, 2016). Lupus anticoagulant is associated with maternal floor
infarction of the placenta but is less so with typical abruptions. Women
affected by some of the thrombophilias have higher associated rates of

thromboembolic events during pregnancy, however, no convincing evidence
supports a link between thrombophilias and placental abruption (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019; 2020).

■ Diagnosis
The signs and symptoms of placental abruption can vary considerably.
Classically, affected women have a sudden onset of abdominal pain, vaginal
bleeding, and uterine tenderness. In an earlier study, 78 percent had vaginal
bleeding, 66 percent had uterine tenderness or back pain, and 60 percent had
a nonreassuring fetal status (Hurd, 1983). Other findings included frequent
contractions and persistent hypertonus. However, in a fifth, preterm labor
was diagnosed, and placental abruption was not suspected until fetal distress
or death followed.
In some women, external bleeding can be profuse, yet placental
separation may not be so extensive as to compromise the fetus. In others,
external bleeding is absent, but the placenta is sufficiently sheared off to kill
the fetus—a concealed abruption. In either case, bleeding can be massive and
leads to hypovolemic shock. In an earlier report from Parkland Hospital,
Pritchard and Brekken (1967) described 141 women with abruption so
severe as to kill the fetus. Blood loss in these women often amounted to at
least half of their pregnant blood volume.

Consumptive Coagulopathy
With placental abruption, some degree of intravascular coagulation is almost
universal. Placental abruption is the most common cause of clinically
profound consumptive coagulopathy in obstetrics and probably in all
specialties (Cunningham, 2015). A primary consequence of intravascular
coagulation is the activation of plasminogen to plasmin, which then lyses
fibrin microemboli to maintain microcirculatory patency. With placental
abruption severe enough to kill the fetus, pathological levels of fibrinogen–
fibrin degradation products and D-dimers are almost always found in
maternal serum (Erez, 2015). Their quantification is not clinically useful.
In a third of women with an abruption severe enough to kill the fetus, the
plasma fibrinogen level will be <150 mg/dL. These levels are dependent on
the maternal preabruption fibrinogen level, and thus higher levels are

“protective” (Cunningham, 2015; Wang, 2016). Clinically significant low
levels may cause troublesome surgical bleeding, and measurement of levels
assists fibrinogen-replacement efforts. Levels of several other coagulation
factors also are variably decreased. These are not specifically measured in
DIC, but factors are replaced empirically with fresh frozen plasma as a part
of massive transfusion protocols (Chap. 44, p. 772). In addition,
thrombocytopenia, sometimes profound, may accompany severe
hypofibrinogenemia and can be common after repeated blood transfusions.
This “dilutional coagulopathy” is additive to DIC (Chap. 44, p. 772).
Consumptive coagulopathy is more likely with a concealed abruption
because intrauterine pressure is higher. This forces more thromboplastin into
the large veins draining the implantation site. With a partial abruption and a
live fetus, severe coagulation defects are less common. Our experience has
been that if serious coagulopathy develops, it is usually evident by the time
abruption symptoms appear. In one unusual case, a woman cared for at
Parkland Hospital presented with a nosebleed. She had no pain or vaginal
bleeding, but her fetus was dead. Her blood did not clot, and the plasma
fibrinogen level was 25 mg/dL. A total placental abruption was confirmed at
delivery.

Couvelaire Uterus
At the time of cesarean delivery, it is not uncommon to find widespread
extravasation of blood into the uterine musculature and beneath the serosa
(Fig. 43-5). This phenomenon is named after Couvelaire, who in the early
1900s termed it uteroplacental apoplexy. These myometrial hemorrhages
may incite uterine atony, but are not a sole indication for hysterectomy.
Effusions of blood may collect beneath the tubal serosa, between the leaves
of the broad ligaments, in the ovaries, or in the peritoneal cavity.

FIGURE 43-5 Couvelaire uterus from total placental abruption after cesarean delivery. Blood
markedly infiltrates the myometrium to reach the serosa. (Reproduced with permission from Dr. Steven
Blaine Holloway.)

End-organ Injury
Acute kidney injury (AKI) is a general term describing renal dysfunction
from many causes (Chap. 56, p. 1006). Delayed or incomplete treatment of
hypovolemia is one. However, even with placental abruption complicated by
severe DIC, prompt and vigorous treatment with blood and crystalloid
solutions usually prevents significant renal dysfunction. The risk for renal
injury with placental abruption rises when preeclampsia coexists
(Alexander, 2015; Drakeley, 2002). Most cases of AKI are reversible, do not
require dialysis, and generally have good long-term outcomes (Arazi, 2015).
However, irreversible acute cortical necrosis occasionally stems from
placental abruption (Gopalakrishnan, 2015).
Rarely, pituitary failure—Sheehan syndrome—follows severe
intrapartum or early postpartum hemorrhage. Described in Chapter 61 (p.
1104), the exact pathogenesis is not well understood, especially because
endocrine abnormalities are infrequent even in women who suffer
catastrophic hemorrhage (Matsuwaki, 2014).

Differential Diagnosis
Severe placental abruption usually is obvious. However, less severe forms
are not always recognized with certainty, and the diagnosis becomes one of
exclusion. Unfortunately, no laboratory tests or other diagnostic methods
accurately confirm lesser degrees of placental separation. Sonography has
limited use because the placenta and fresh clots may have similar imaging
characteristics. In a study of 149 women with a suspected placental
abruption, the sensitivity for sonography was only 24 percent (Glantz, 2002).
Thus, negative findings with sonographic examination do not exclude
placental abruption. Conversely, magnetic resonance (MR) imaging is highly
sensitive for placental abruption and should be considered if the diagnostic
information would change management (Masselli, 2011). Last, elevated
serum levels of D-dimers may be suggestive, but this has not been adequately
tested.
Thus, in the woman with vaginal bleeding and a live fetus, placenta
previa and other bleeding causes are sought with clinical and sonographic
evaluation. It has long been taught—perhaps with some justification—that
painful uterine bleeding signifies placental abruption, whereas painless
uterine bleeding indicates placenta previa. The differential diagnosis is
usually not this straightforward, and labor accompanying previa may cause
pain that suggests placental abruption. Conversely, pain from placental
abruption may mimic normal labor, or it may be painless, especially with a
posterior placenta. At times, the vaginal bleeding source remains obscure
even after delivery.

■ Management
Treatment varies depending on maternofetal clinical condition, gestational
age, and amount of associated hemorrhage. With a living viable-aged fetus
and with vaginal delivery not imminent, emergency cesarean delivery is
chosen by most. In some women, fetal compromise will be evident as shown
in Figure 43-6. When evaluating fetal status, sonographic confirmation of
fetal heart activity may be necessary because sometimes an electrode applied
directly to a dead fetus will provide misleading information by recording the
maternal heart rate (Chap. 24, p. 447).

FIGURE 43-6 Placental abruption with fetal compromise. Lower panel: Uterine hypertonus with a
baseline pressure of 20 to 25 mm Hg and frequent contractions peaking at approximately 75 mm Hg.
Upper panel: The fetal heart rate demonstrates baseline bradycardia with repetitive late decelerations.

If the fetus has died or if it is not considered sufficiently mature to live
outside the uterus, vaginal birth is preferable for the mother. In either case,
prompt and intensive resuscitation with blood products and crystalloids is
begun. These measures are lifesaving for the mother and hopefully for her
fetus. If the diagnosis of placental abruption is uncertain and the fetus is alive
and without evidence of compromise, close observation may be warranted
provided that immediate intervention is available. Colón and coworkers
(2016) performed a randomized trial and found no benefits to magnesium
sulfate tocolysis given to women with a preterm “nonsevere” abruption at 24
to 34 weeks’ gestation.

Cesarean Delivery
The compromised fetus is usually best served by cesarean delivery, and the
speed of response is an important factor in perinatal outcomes. In one study
of 33 singleton pregnancies with a clinically overt placental abruption and
fetal bradycardia, 15 of the 22 neurologically intact survivors were
delivered within a 20-minute decision-to-delivery interval (Kayani, 2003).
However, eight of 11 infants who died or developed cerebral palsy were
delivered after a 20-minute intervals. Onishi and colleagues (2019) also

found a significant negative correlation between these intervals and cord
arterial pH. At Parkland Hospital, placental abruption was one of the most
powerful antecedents to body-cooling treatment for neonatal encephalopathy
(Nelson, 2014).
A major hazard to cesarean delivery is imposed by clinically significant
consumptive coagulopathy. Preparations include two large-bore intravenous
catheters and plans for blood and component replacement. Measures of
hemoglobin, platelet, and fibrinogen levels as well as protime (PT) and
partial thromboplastin time (PTT) guide product replacement.

Vaginal Delivery
If the fetus has died, vaginal delivery is usually preferred. As reviewed
earlier, hemostasis at the placental implantation site depends primarily on
myometrial contraction and not blood coagulability. Thus, after vaginal
delivery, uterotonic agents and uterine massage are used to stimulate
myometrial contractions. Uterine muscle fibers compress placental site
vessels and prompt hemostasis even if coagulation is defective. In some
instances, vaginal delivery may not be preferable, even with a dead fetus.
One example is brisk hemorrhage that cannot be successfully managed by
vigorous blood replacement. Others are the myriad obstetrical complications
that prohibit vaginal delivery in general. In some women with extensive
placental abruption, labor tends to be rapid because the uterus is usually
persistently hypertonic (see Fig. 43-6). This can magnify fetal compromise.
In some cases, baseline intraamnionic pressures reach 50 mm Hg or higher,
and with contractions, pressures may attain levels exceeding 100 mm Hg.
Overall, however, first- and second-stage labor does not appear to be shorter
than usual (Downes, 2017).
Early amniotomy has long been championed in the management of
placental abruption. This ostensibly achieves better spiral artery
compression to diminish implantation site bleeding and reduce
thromboplastin infusion into the maternal vascular system. Although evidence
supporting this theory is lacking, membrane rupture may hasten delivery.
However, if the fetus is small, the intact sac may be more efficient in
promoting cervical dilation. If rhythmic uterine contractions are not
superimposed on baseline hypertonus, oxytocin is given in standard doses.
No data indicate that oxytocin augments thromboplastin escape into the
maternal circulation to worsen coagulopathy. In 1ight of hypertonus

associated with placental abruption, misoprostol may be a less favored
induction agent due to its association with uterine tachysystole.
In the past, some had set arbitrary time limits to permit vaginal delivery.
Instead, experiences illustrate that maternal outcome depends on the
diligence with which adequate fluid and blood replacement therapy are
pursued rather than on the interval to delivery. Observations from Parkland
Hospital described by Pritchard and Brekken (1967) are similar to those
from the University of Virginia reported by Brame and associates (1968).
Specifically, women with severe abruption who were transfused during 18
hours or more before delivery had similar outcomes to those in whom
delivery was accomplished sooner.

Expectant Management
If possible, delaying delivery may benefit an immature fetus. In one series,
43 women with placental abruption before 35 weeks’ gestation were
expectantly managed, and 31 of them were given tocolytic therapy (Bond,
1989). The mean interval until delivery for all 43 approximated 12 days.
Cesarean delivery was performed in 75 percent, and there were no
stillbirths. As discussed earlier, women with a very early abruption may
develop chronic abruption–oligohydramnios sequence. In one report, four
women with an abruption at a mean gestational age of 20 weeks subsequently
developed oligohydramnios and delivered at an average gestational age of
28 weeks (Elliott, 1998). In another description of 256 women with an
abruption at <28 weeks’ gestation, a mean of 1.6 weeks was gained
(Sabourin, 2012). Of the group, 65 percent were delivered before 29 weeks,
and half of all women underwent emergent cesarean delivery.
Unfortunately, even continuous fetal heart rate monitoring does not
guarantee universally good outcomes. A normal tracing may precede sudden
further separation with instant fetal compromise. In some of these, if the
separation is sufficient, the fetus will die before it can be delivered.
Tocolysis is advocated by some for suspected abruption if the fetus does not
display compromise. Some investigators have observed that tocolysis
improved outcomes in a highly selected cohort of women with preterm
pregnancies (Bond, 1989; Combs, 1992). In another study, Towers and
coworkers (1999) administered magnesium sulfate, terbutaline, or both to 95
of 131 women with abruption diagnosed before 36 weeks’ gestation. The
perinatal mortality rate was 5 percent in both groups with or without

tocolysis. Similar results were reported from a randomized trial (Colón,
2016). A clinical consideration to the use of tocolytic agents, such as
terbutaline, is that the drug-induced tachycardia may mask maternal
compromise. We are of the opinion that suspected placental abruption
contraindicates tocolytic agent use.

PLACENTA PREVIA
■ Classification
The Latin previa means going before, and in this sense, the placenta goes
before the fetus into the birth canal. Placenta previa describes a placenta that
is implanted somewhere in the lower uterine segment, either over or very
near the internal cervical os. Because these anatomical relationships cannot
always be precisely defined and because they frequently change across
pregnancy, terminology can sometimes be confusing.
Terminology for placenta previa has evolved, and the National Institutes
of Health (NIH)-sponsored Fetal Imaging Workshop (Reddy, 2014)
recommends the following classification:
• Placenta previa: the internal os is covered partially or completely by
placenta (Figs. 43-7 and 43-8). In the past, these were further classified as
either total or partial previa.

FIGURE 43-7 Placenta previa showing that copious hemorrhage could be anticipated with any cervical
dilation.

FIGURE 43-8 On speculum examination, placenta is visible protruding through the cervical os.
(Reproduced with permission from Dr. Maureen E. Flowers.)

• Low-lying placenta: implantation in the lower uterine segment is such that
the placental edge does not cover the internal os but lies within a 2-cm
wide perimeter around the os. A previously used term, marginal previa,
described a placenta that was at the edge of the internal os but did not
overlie it.
Clearly, the classification of some cases will depend on cervical dilation
at the time of assessment. For example, a low-lying placenta at 2-cm dilation
may become a partial placenta previa at 4-cm dilation because the cervix has
opened to expose the placental edge. Conversely, a placenta previa that
appears to be total before cervical dilation may become partial at 4-cm
dilation because the cervical opening now extends beyond the edge of the
placenta. Digital palpation in an attempt to ascertain these changing
relations between the placental edge and internal os as the cervix dilates
usually causes severe hemorrhage!
With any degree of placenta previa, a certain amount of spontaneous
placental separation is inevitable during lower uterine segment remodeling

and cervical dilation. Although this frequently causes bleeding and thus
technically constitutes a placental abruption, this term is usually not applied
in these instances.
Somewhat but not always related is vasa previa, in which fetal vessels
course through membranes and present at the cervical os. Vasa previa has
been reviewed by the Society for Maternal–Fetal Medicine (2015) and is
discussed in Chapter 6 (p. 115).

■ Placental Migration
Beginning with the use of sonography in obstetrics, the term placental
migration was coined to describe the apparent movement of the placenta
away from the internal os (King, 1973). Obviously, the placenta does not
actually move, and the mechanism of apparent movement is not completely
understood. To begin with, migration is clearly a misnomer, because
decidual invasion anchors chorionic villi.
Explanations of placental migration are likely additive. First, apparent
movement of the low-lying placenta relative to the internal os is related to
the imprecision of two-dimensional sonography. Second, as pregnancy
progresses, growth of the lower and upper uterine segments differs. With
greater blood flow in the upper uterus, placental growth toward this supply,
termed trophotropism, is thus more likely directed toward the fundus. Many
of those placentas that “migrate” most likely never were circumferentially
implanted with true villous invasion that reached the internal cervical os.
Importantly, a low-lying placenta or placenta previa is less likely to
“migrate” if there is a prior cesarean delivery scar.
The frequency of placental migration has been quantified. In one study of
4300 women at midpregnancy, 12 percent had a low-lying placenta
(Sanderson, 1991). Of placentas not covering the internal os, previa did not
persist, and none subsequently had placental hemorrhage. Conversely,
approximately 40 percent of placentas that covered the os at midpregnancy
continued to do so until delivery. Thus, placentas that lie close to but not
over the internal os until the early third trimester are unlikely to persist as a
previa by term (Heller, 2014; Parrott, 2015). The chance that placenta previa
persists increases with a hysterotomy scar (Kohari, 2012; Oyelese, 2006).

■ Incidence and Associated Factors
The incidence of placenta previa has risen during the past 30 years. Reported
incidences average about 0.4 percent or 1 case per 250 to 400 deliveries
(Hill, 2020). The frequency at Parkland Hospital from 1988 through 2003 for
nearly 250,000 births was 2.6 cases per 1000. For the 2004 to 2020 epoch, it
rose to 3.8 cases per 1000. Similar frequencies have been reported from
Austria, Finland, and Israel (Kollmann, 2016; Räisänen, 2014; Rosenberg,
2011).
Several demographic factors may contribute to this higher rate of
placenta previa. First, maternal age increases the frequency (Biro, 2012;
Roberts, 2012). In the First- and Second-Trimester Evaluation of Risk
(FASTER) trial, which included more than 36,000 women, the frequency of
previa was 0.5 percent for women <35 years compared with 1.1 percent in
those ≥35 years (Cleary–Goldman, 2005). At Parkland Hospital, the
incidence ranged from a rate of approximately 0.65 cases per 1000 births for
women ≤19 years to almost 10 cases per 1000 births for women older than
35.
Multiparity also elevates the rate of placenta previa (Räisänen, 2014).
Obviously, the effects of advancing maternal age and parity are confounding.
Still, Babinszki and colleagues (1999) reported that the 2.2-percent
incidence in women with parity of five or greater was significantly higher
than that of women with lower parity. The interpregnancy interval does not
affect this rate (Fox, 2015).
Cigarette smoking increases the relative risk of placenta previa at least
twofold (Usta, 2005). It has been postulated that carbon monoxide hypoxemia
causes compensatory placental hypertrophy and greater surface area.
Smoking may also be related to decidual vasculopathy.
Several clinical characteristics also raise placenta previa risks.
Foremost, women with one or more prior cesarean deliveries are at greater
risk for subsequent placental disorders that include placenta previa,
placental abruption, or placenta accreta spectrum (PAS) (Gibbins, 2018;
Klar, 2014). The cumulative risks for placenta previa that accrue with the
increasing number of cesarean deliveries are extraordinary. In one MFMU
Network study of 30,132 women undergoing cesarean delivery, the incidence
was 1.3 percent for those with only one prior cesarean delivery, but it was
3.4 percent if there were six or more prior cesareans (Silver, 2006). In a

retrospective cohort of nearly 400,000 women who were delivered of two
consecutive singletons, those with a cesarean delivery for the first pregnancy
had a 1.6-fold greater rate for previa in the second pregnancy (GurolUrganci, 2011). These same investigators reported a 1.5-fold higher rate
from six similar population-based studies. This risk is increased eightfold in
women with parity greater than four and who have more than four prior
cesarean deliveries (Gilliam, 2002).
Importantly, women with a prior uterine incision and placenta previa
have an increased likelihood that cesarean hysterectomy will be necessary
because of associated PAS (p. 761). In one study, 6 percent of women with a
primary cesarean delivery for placenta previa required a hysterectomy. This
rate was 25 percent for women with a placenta previa undergoing repeat
cesarean delivery (Frederiksen, 1999).
Multifetal gestation raises placenta previa risk (Ananth, 2003a; Luke,
2017a). Compared with monochorionic twins, dichorionic ones show higher
rates, which perhaps stems from having two implantation sites (Weis, 2012).
MSAFP levels, if abnormally elevated for otherwise unexplained reasons
during prenatal screening, raise the risk for placenta previa and a host of
other abnormalities. Moreover, women with a placenta previa and comorbid
MSAFP level >2.0 multiples of the median (MoM) at 16 weeks’ gestation
were at greater risk for late-pregnancy bleeding and preterm birth (Chap. 17,
p. 338).
Assisted reproductive technology (ART) used for conception elevates
placenta previa rates. Some of this association may derive from overlapping
effects. First, older women constitute a significant portion of patients electing
ART (Luke, 2017b). Second, even adjusting for multifetal gestation, ART is
still associated with higher previa rates (Karami, 2018). Last, in one
systematic review including nearly 256,000 births, uterine leiomyomas were
associated with higher placenta previa rates (Jenabi, 2019).

■ Clinical Features
Painless bleeding is the most characteristic event with placenta previa.
Bleeding usually does not develop until near the end of the second trimester
or later, but it can begin even before midpregnancy. Undoubtedly, some late
abortions are caused by an abnormally located placenta. Initial bleeding from
a previa usually begins without warning, and this sentinel bleed is rarely so

profuse as to prove fatal. Usually it ceases, only to recur. However, in
perhaps 10 percent of women, particularly those with a placenta implanted
near but not over the cervical os, bleeding is delayed until labor onset.
Bleeding at this time varies in degree, and it may mimic placental abruption.
In cases in which the placenta is located over the internal os, a specific
sequence of events leads to bleeding. First, the uterine body remodels to
form the lower uterine segment. With this, the internal os dilates, and some of
the implanted placenta inevitably separates. Bleeding that ensues is
augmented by the inherent inability of myometrial fibers in the lower uterine
segment to contract and thereby constrict torn vessels. Similarly, bleeding
from this lower-segment implantation site also frequently continues after
placental delivery. Last, lacerations in the friable cervix and lower segment
will bleed. These may be especially problematic following manual removal
of a somewhat adhered placenta.
Cervical length may alter the clinical course. Stafford (2010) but not
Trudell (2013), both with their associates, found that a placenta previa and a
third-trimester cervical length <30 mm increased the risks for hemorrhage,
uterine activity, and preterm birth. Similarly, Friszer (2013) but not Trudell
(2013), both with their coworkers, showed that women admitted for bleeding
had a greater chance of delivery in the subsequent 7 days when the cervical
length measured <25 mm sonographically.
Placenta accreta spectrum is a frequent and serious complication
associated with placenta previa. This abnormal placental attachment derives
in part from poorly developed decidua that lines the lower uterine segment.
Biswas and coworkers (1999) performed placental bed biopsies in 50
women with a placenta previa and in 50 control women. Infiltration of spiral
arterioles by trophoblastic giant cells, rather than by the expected
endovascular trophoblast cells, was found in half of specimens. In contrast,
only 20 percent of biopsies from normally implanted placentas had these
changes. In another study of 514 cases of placenta previa, abnormal placental
attachment was identified in 7 percent (Frederiksen, 1999). As discussed,
placenta previa overlying a prior cesarean incision conveys a particularly
high risk for PAS.
Coagulopathy rarely complicate placenta previa, even when
implantation site separation is extensive (Cunningham, 2015). Placental
thromboplastin, which incites the intravascular coagulation seen with
placental abruption, is presumed to readily escape through the cervical canal

rather than be forced into the maternal circulation. The paucity of large
myometrial veins in this area also may be protective.

■ Diagnosis
For uterine bleeding after midpregnancy, placenta previa and placental
abruption are always considered. In one Canadian study, placenta previa
accounted for 21 percent of women admitted from 22 to 28 weeks’ gestation
with vaginal bleeding (Sabourin, 2012). Previa should not be excluded until
sonographic evaluation has clearly proved its absence. If sonography is not
readily available, diagnosis by digital cervical examination is done in an
operating room and with preparations in place for operative delivery. We
call these preparations a double set-up technique. Even the gentlest
examination can cause torrential hemorrhage.
Using standard sonographic techniques, quick and accurate placental
localization can be accomplished (American Institute of Ultrasound in
Medicine, 2018). This is usually done with transabdominal sonography. If the
placenta clearly overlies the cervix or if it lies away from the lower uterine
segment, the examination has excellent sensitivity and negative predictive
value (Olive, 2006; Quant, 2014). Obese women may hinder clear viewing
of the lower uterine segment. A full bladder may artificially elongate the
cervix and compress the lower uterine segment to give the impression that the
placenta overlies the cervix.
If placental location remains unclear, transvaginal sonography is the most
accurate sonographic method and is safe even with vaginal bleeding (Fig.
43-9). In a comprehensive study, the internal os was visualized in all cases
with transvaginal sonography but in only 30 percent with transabdominal
sonography (Farine, 1988). As discussed, if the placental edge lies <2 cm
from the internal os, but not covering it, the placenta is considered low lying
(Reddy, 2014). In the absence of any other indication, sonography need not
be frequently repeated simply to document placental position. At Parkland
Hospital, women with placenta previa identified at 18 to 22 weeks’ gestation
and a prior cesarean delivery are reevaluated sonographically at 28 weeks
and again at 32 weeks if it persists. Those with a placenta previa but without
prior cesarean delivery undergo reimaging at 32 weeks. Restriction of
activity is not necessary unless a previa persists beyond 28 weeks’ gestation
or if clinical findings such as bleeding or contractions develop before this

time. At 32 weeks’ gestation, if the placental edge is still <2 cm from the os,
transvaginal sonography is repeated at 36 weeks’ gestation.

FIGURE 43-9 In this transvaginal image at 21 weeks’ gestation, the posterior placenta (P) completely
covers the internal cervical os (arrowhead). The dotted line represents the cervical canal.

Using MR imaging, several investigators report excellent visualization of
placental abnormalities. However, it is unlikely that this modality will
replace sonography for routine evaluation anytime soon given availability
and cost differences compared with sonography. However, MR imaging is
useful for evaluation of PAS (p. 761).

■ Management
Care with placenta previa is individualized, and three prominent factors
include fetal maturity, associated labor, and bleeding severity. In one study of
214 women with a placenta previa, 43 percent had an emergency delivery,
and half of these were preterm (Ruiter, 2015). Instead, if active bleeding
subsides and the fetus is immature, close observation in an obstetrical unit is
indicated. Data are sparse regarding tocolytic administration for uterine

contractions. Although robust randomized trials are lacking, Bose and
colleagues (2011) recommend that if tocolytics are given, they be limited to
48 hours of administration. As noted earlier, the physiological
cardiovascular responses to tocolytic agents that include hypotension and
tachycardia can mask maternal compromise. We categorically recommend
against their use in this setting.
After bleeding has ceased for approximately 2 days and the fetus is
judged to be healthy, a woman can usually be discharged home with
instructions for “pelvic rest.” The Society for Maternal–Fetal Medicine
(2018) does not recommend routine cervical length screening in these
women. Importantly, the woman and her family must appreciate the
possibility of recurrent bleeding and be prepared for immediate transport
back to the hospital. In other cases, prolonged hospitalization may be
necessary.
The frequency of emergency delivery in women with placenta previa
ranges from 25 to 40 percent (Erfani, 2019; Gibbons, 2018). In properly
selected patients, however, long-term inpatient care does not appear to add
benefits compared with outpatient management (Neilson, 2003). In one
randomized study of 53 women who had a bleeding previa at 24 to 36
weeks’ gestation, maternal or fetal morbidity rates did not differ between
management methods (Wing, 1996). Of all study women, 60 percent had
recurrent bleeding, and half eventually required expeditious cesarean
delivery.
For women who are near term and who are not bleeding, plans are made
for scheduled cesarean delivery. A planned delivery in a controlled setting is
optimal, and timing balances fetal immaturity against antepartum hemorrhage.
The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists and Society for
Maternal–Fetal Medicine (2021) recommend delivery for otherwise
uncomplicated placenta previa between 360/7 and 376/7 weeks. At Parkland
Hospital, we usually perform elective cesarean delivery at 380/7 weeks.
Recommendations for delivery of women with PAS are outlined in that
section.

■ Delivery

Practically all women with placenta previa undergo cesarean delivery. Some
recommend a vertical laparotomy incision to provide rapid entry if bleeding
is torrential or if generous operating space is required for hysterectomy. As
discussed, cesarean delivery is emergently performed in more than half
because of hemorrhage, for which about a fourth require blood transfusion
(Sabourin, 2012). Although a low transverse hysterotomy is usually possible,
this may cause fetal bleeding if the placenta is implanted anteriorly and the
placenta is incised. In such cases, fetal delivery should be expeditious
(Silver, 2015a). Thus, a vertical uterine incision may be preferable in some
instances. In either case, even when the incision extends through the placenta,
maternal or fetal outcomes are rarely compromised.
Following placental removal, the implantation site may bleed
uncontrollably due to poorly contracted smooth muscle, which is
characteristic of the lower uterine segment. If hemostasis at the placental
implantation site cannot be obtained by uterotonic agent administration and
pressure, it can be oversewn with no. 0 chromic sutures. Cho and associates
(1991) described placing interrupted sutures at 1-cm intervals to form a
circle around the bleeding portion of the lower segment to control
hemorrhage. Others have reported success with compression sutures that
traverse and compress the anterior and posterior uterine wall (Mohamed,
2019; Sallam, 2019).
Of other methods, Bakri or Foley balloon tamponade used alone or
coupled with compression sutures has been described (Albayrak, 2011;
Diemert, 2012). Other surgical options are bilateral uterine or internal iliac
artery ligation, illustrated in Chapter 44 (p. 779). Pelvic artery embolization
also has gained acceptance. Yu and colleagues (2020) performed a
randomized trial of perioperative prophylactic internal iliac artery balloon
occlusion during cesarean delivery for placenta previa and found that
deployment did not reduce postpartum hemorrhage or alter maternal or
neonatal morbidity.
If these more conservative methods fail and bleeding is brisk,
hysterectomy is necessary. Placenta previa—especially with PAS—currently
is a common indication for peripartum hysterectomy at Parkland Hospital and
other institutions (Jakobsson, 2015; Wong, 2011). In cases without PAS, the
reported incidence of hysterectomy with placenta previa is 2 percent
(Gibbins, 2018).

Thus, it is not possible to accurately estimate the effect on the
hysterectomy rate from placenta previa alone without considering the
associated PAS. Again, for women whose placenta previa is implanted
anteriorly at the site of a prior uterine incision, the likelihood of an
associated morbidly adherent placenta and need for hysterectomy is
increased. In a study of 318 peripartum hysterectomies performed in the
United Kingdom, 40 percent were done for abnormal placentation (Knight,
2007). At Parkland Hospital, 44 percent of cesarean hysterectomies were
done for bleeding placenta previa or for PAS (Wortman, 2015). The
technique for peripartum hysterectomy is described in Chapter 30 (p. 560).

■ Maternal and Perinatal Outcomes
Placenta previa and coexistent PAS both contribute substantively to maternal
morbidity and mortality rates. The maternal mortality ratio is increased
approximately threefold for women with a placenta previa (Gibbins, 2018).
In a report of 5367 maternal deaths in the United States from 2006 to 2013,
placenta previa alone accounted for nearly 3 percent of deaths from
hemorrhage (Creanga, 2014, 2017).
The report from the Consortium on Safe Labor emphasizes the ongoing
perinatal morbidity with placenta previa (Lai, 2012). In these cases, preterm
delivery continues to be a major cause of perinatal death (Balachandar,
2020; Nørgaard, 2012; Salihu, 2003). Ananth and colleagues (2003b)
reported a comparably elevated risk of neonatal death even for fetuses who
delivered at term. This is at least partially related to the fetal anomaly rate,
which is two- to threefold higher in pregnancies with placenta previa (Crane,
1999; Kancherla, 2015).
The association of fetal-growth restriction with placenta previa is likely
minimal after controlling for gestational age. In a population-based cohort of
more than 500,000 singleton births, most low-birthweight newborns
associated with placenta previa resulted from preterm birth (Ananth, 2001).
From their large metaanalysis, Balayla and coworkers (2019) found a
slightly increased frequency of fetal-growth restriction. At least two other
studies reported an elevated risk (Räisänen, 2014; Weiner, 2016).
Apparently, fetal growth effects are similar with placenta previa and PAS
(Jauniaux, 2019).

PLACENTA ACCRETA SPECTRUM
The term placenta accreta spectrum (PAS) describes aberrant placentation
characterized by abnormally implanted, invasive, or adhered placenta.
Derivation of accreta comes from the Latin ac- + crescere—to adhere or
become attached to (Benirschke, 2012). It is also referred to as the morbidly
adherent placenta, and in Europe it is referred to as a pernicious placenta
previa with accreta and abnormally adherent placenta.

■ Etiopathogenesis
The major clinical problem is placental failure to separate normally from the
myometrium after fetal delivery. This abnormal adherence stems in part from
partial or total absence of the decidua basalis and imperfect development of
the fibrinoid or Nitabuch layer, described in Chapter 5 (p. 85). If the
decidual spongy layer is lacking either partially or totally, the physiological
line of cleavage is absent, and some or all cotyledons are densely anchored.
Microscopically, placental villi attach to smooth muscle fibers rather than to
decidual cells. This decidual deficiency then prevents normal separation
after delivery. The surface area involved at the implantation site and the
depth of trophoblast ingrowth vary between women, but all affected
placentas can potentially cause significant hemorrhage.
Data now suggest that PAS is not solely caused by the decidua’s
anatomical deficiency. Indeed, the cytotrophoblasts may control decidual
invasion through factors such as angiogenesis (Duzyj, 2018; Goh, 2016).
Moreover, some tissue specimens show immunologically mediated
“hyperinvasiveness” (Harris, 2019). Some genes that code for remodeling
and for adherence may be highly expressed (Matsukawa, 2019; Shainker,
2020). Myometrial fibers attached to the basal plate in an antecedent
pregnancy are predictive markers for a subsequent PAS (Linn, 2015; Miller,
2016). This implies an antecedent “constitutional endometrial defect” in most
cases. The greater risk conveyed by previous surgical uterine trauma may be
partially explained by an enhanced vulnerability to trophoblast invasion
(Einerson, 2020; Jauniaux, 2018).
This association with prior trauma is reinforced by the close relationship
between cesarean scar pregnancy (CSP) and later development of PAS in
the same pregnancy. Indeed, accruing evidence suggests that CSP and PAS lie

on a spectrum and that CSP is a precursor (Happe, 2020; Timor-Tritsch,
2019). Described in Chapter 12 (p. 229), early rupture and hemorrhage with
CSP are not uncommon, and women often elect pregnancy-terminating
interventions to avoid these (Society for Maternal–Fetal Medicine, 2020;
Timor-Tritsch, 2019).

■ Classification
Variants of PAS are classified by the depth of trophoblastic growth (Figs. 4310 and 43-11). Placenta accreta indicates that villi are attached to the
myometrium. With placenta increta, villi actually invade the myometrium,
and placenta percreta defines villi that penetrate through the myometrium
and to or through the serosa (Silver, 2018). In clinical practice, these three
variants are encountered in an approximate ratio of 80:15:5, respectively
(Wong, 2008). At a referral center, however, the distribution was 22, 24, and
54 percent respectively (Birgani, 2020). In all three varieties, abnormal
adherence may involve all lobules—total placenta accreta. If all or part of a
single lobule is abnormally attached, it is described as focal placenta
accreta. Histological diagnosis cannot be made from the placenta alone, and
myometrial samples are necessary for confirmation (Jauniaux, 2021).
Terminology for consistent classification has been lacking because of varying
clinical criteria and lack of detailed pathological examinations. To alleviate
this, the International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics (FIGO) has
recently proposed a clinical classification system for PAS (Jauniaux, 2019).

FIGURE 43-10 Placenta accreta spectrum. A. Placenta accreta. B. Placenta increta. C. Placenta
percreta.

FIGURE 43-11 Varying degrees of myometrial invasion with placenta accreta spectrum disorders.
Incisions begin on the serosal surface and extend through to the placenta. A. In this case, the
myometrium (M) shows minimal invasion by the placenta (P). S = uterine serosa. B. A greater degree
of myometrial invasion is seen here. C. In this example, the placenta (brackets) extends to the serosal
edge, held by the surgeon’s hand. No myometrium remains at this site. (Reproduced with permission
from Dr. C. Edward Wells in Cunningham FG: Placenta previa and morbidly adherent placenta. In
Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al (eds): Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative
Obstetrics, 3rd edition. New York, McGraw Hill Education, 2017.)

■ Incidence and Risk Factors
Decades ago, the frequency of PAS was 1 in 20,000 births (McKeogh, 1951).
As late as 1971, Hellman and Pritchard in the 14th edition of Williams
Obstetrics described PAS as the subject of case reports. Since then, the
incidence has grown remarkably in direct relationship to the rising cesarean
delivery rate. For example, the incidence was 1 case in 2500 births in the
1980s, but it was 1 case per 731 births in a report from the MFMU Network
comprising 115,502 women (Bailit, 2015). From the Nationwide Inpatient
Sample, the PAS rate was an astounding 1 case in 270 births (Mogos, 2016).
This rising frequency has made PAS one of the most formidable problems
in obstetrics. Of 5367 pregnancy-related maternal deaths in the United States
from 2006 to 2013, 13 percent were due to hemorrhage caused by PAS
(Creanga, 2015, 2017). In addition, PAS is a leading cause of hemorrhage
and emergency peripartum hysterectomy (Awan, 2011; Eller, 2011; Rossi,
2010). The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists and the
Society for Maternal–Fetal Medicine (2018) have outlined optimal
management. The International Society for Abnormally Invasive Placenta
also has published guidelines (Collins, 2019).
In subsequent pregnancies following PAS, recurrence risks are high.
Women in whom hysterectomy is avoided have an estimated 20-percent
incidence of recurrence (Cunningham, 2016; Roeca, 2017). Some evidence
shows that these women also have greater risks for placenta previa, uterine
rupture, manual placental removal, preterm delivery, and hysterectomy
(Baldwin, 2020; Eshkoli, 2013).
PAS risk factors are similar to those for placenta previa (p. 756). Shown
in Figure 43-12, the two most important elements are an associated placenta

previa, a prior cesarean delivery, or more likely both (Klar, 2014; Silver,
2006). A classical hysterotomy incision has a higher risk for subsequent PAS
than a lower uterine segment one (Gyamfi-Bannerman, 2012). Of women
with a prior cesarean delivery, almost half had myometrial fibers seen
microscopically adhered to the placenta (Hardardottir, 1996; Miller, 2016).
Dysfunctional decidua may also follow other myometrial trauma such as
curettage or endometrial ablation (Baldwin, 2018; Gill, 2015). ART is an
independent risk factor for PAS (Salmanian, 2020).

FIGURE 43-12 Frequency of placenta accreta spectrum in women with one to four prior cesarean
deliveries (CDs) and now with a placenta previa.

Other risk markers are prenatal MSAFP and human chorionic
gonadotropin (hCG) used to screen for neural-tube defects and aneuploidies.
In one study of more than 9300 women screened at 14 to 22 weeks’ gestation,
the risk for PAS was eightfold higher with MSAFP levels >2.5 MoM, and it
was increased fourfold with maternal serum free β-hCG levels >2.5 MoM
(Hung, 1999).

■ Diagnosis
With first- and second-trimester PAS, hemorrhage usually stems from a
coexisting placenta previa. Such bleeding will typically prompt evaluation,
and ideally sonography is used (Chantraine, 2013; Jauniaux, 2018).
With lesser degrees of bleeding, first-trimester measurement of the
smallest myometrial thickness can help predict the later risk for peripartum
hysterectomy with PAS (Happe, 2020). In a screening study of more than
22,000 singleton pregnancies at 11 to 13 weeks’ gestation, 6 percent were at
high risk for PAS (Panaiotova, 2019). However imaging was less than
perfect to identify all of these placentas early. Subsequently, only 14 had a
suspected clinical diagnosis, and 13 of these were confirmed at delivery.
Five characteristic sonographic findings suggest PAS: (1) placental
lacunae; (2) thinning of the retroplacental myometrium; (3) disruption of the
bladder-uterine serosal interface; (4) bridging vessels from the placenta to
the bladder-serosal interface; and (5) placental bulge that pushes outward
and distorts the contour of the uterus (Fig. 43-13). In a metaanalysis, the
sensitivities of these criteria to identify placenta accreta, increta, and
percreta were 91, 93, and 89 percent, respectively. Corresponding
specificities were 97, 98, and 99 percent, respectively (Pagani, 2018).

FIGURE 43-13 Transabdominal sonogram of placental percreta shows multiple and massive placental
“lakes” or “lacunae” (L).

These figures may be overestimated because of clinical bias and
considerable interobserver variability (Silver, 2018). Some investigators
report fewer spectacular results with sonography (Jauniaux, 2016; Primo,
2014). Bowman and colleagues (2014) described the sensitivity of
sonography to be 54 percent; specificity, 88 percent; positive predictive
value, 82 percent; negative predictive value, 65 percent; and accuracy, 65
percent. Location affects sonographic accuracy. Posterior placental location
is associated with delayed diagnosis and increased surgical complications
(Morgan, 2019; Tinari, 2021). In one study, the detection rate was 90 percent
for anterior placenta accreta compared with 50 percent for posterior ones
(Pilloni, 2016). Nageotte (2014) concluded that identification of PAS with
sonography should be interpreted with clinical and operative findings.
Better results have been found by some using three-dimensional (3-D)
sonography and power Doppler (Collins, 2015). We too have found that the
addition of Doppler color flow mapping aids prediction of myometrial
invasion (Fig. 43-14). Invasion is suspected if the distance between the
uterine serosa–bladder wall interface and the retroplacental vessels

measures <1 mm and if large intraplacental lacunae are seen (Rac, 2015a;
Twickler, 2000). In another study, hypervascularity of the uterine serosa–
bladder wall interface had the highest positive and negative predictive
values for placenta percreta (Cali, 2013). Intracervical lakes also have been
reported with placenta percreta (di Pasquo, 2020).

FIGURE 43-14 Transvaginal sonogram of placental invasion with a placenta percreta. Retroplacental
vessels (color Doppler) invade the myometrium, and abnormal intraplacental venous lakes (L) are
commonly seen in this setting.

Yule and coworkers (2020) reported that the placenta accreta index was
useful for diagnosis. This index incorporates the number of prior cesarean
deliveries, placental location, lacunae, bridging vessels, and smallest
myometrial distance. These investigators are also exploring first-trimester
color mapping to develop a quantification algorithm (Yule 2021).
To further delineate anatomy, MR imaging can be added. We and others
use it to identify invasion of adjacent structures (Chalubinski, 2013; Reddy,
2014). Interobserver variability was reported to be excellent to diagnose
PAS and assess invasion depth. There was less agreement in assessing
topography of invasion (Finazzo, 2020). Using MR imaging, Mori and

colleagues (2020) described a high prevalence of pelvic parasitic arteries
with PAS. However, not all investigators have found MR imaging to be
beneficial (Einerson, 2018).
Although gadolinium is usually not added during pregnancy, this contrast
may enhance images (Millischer, 2017). Lax and coworkers (2007)
described three MR imaging findings that suggest PAS: uterine bulging, dark
intraplacental bands on T2-weighted imaging, and heterogeneous signal
intensity within the placenta indicative of lacunae. Some recommend MR
imaging if sonography results are inconclusive or there is a posterior previa
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2018; Silver, 2018).

■ Management
Preoperative assessment ideally begins once a possible PAS is recognized
antenatally. A major decision concerns the timing and the ideal facility for
delivery. Considerations include appropriate surgical, anesthesia, intensive
care, and blood banking capabilities. An obstetrical surgeon or
gynecological oncologist and surgical, urological, and interventional
radiological consultants should be available (Collins, 2019; Shamshirsaz,
2018). The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2018) and
the Society for Maternal–Fetal Medicine recommend planned delivery in a
tertiary-care facility. In some, specially designed teams have been assembled
and are on call (Shamshirsaz, 2018). A metaanalysis described the improved
maternal outcomes with such management (Bartels, 2018).
Silver and colleagues (2015b) have provided requisites for accreta
centers of excellence and their criteria to consider transfer to a higher levelof-care hospital (Table 43-2). If possible, delivery is best scheduled for
peak availability of all resources and team members. Even so, a third of
cases require unscheduled delivery, and contingency plans should be ready
(Pettit, 2019). Women who refuse blood or its derivatives pose especially
difficult management dilemmas (Barth, 2011).
TABLE 43-2. Criteria to Consider for Delivery of Placenta Accreta
Spectrum (PAS) in a Center of Excellence

Delivery Timing
In one study, 40 percent of women with PAS had bleeding mandating
unplanned delivery prior to 34 weeks’ gestation. Timing balances fetal
immaturity against adverse maternal consequences of hemorrhage and
emergency cesarean delivery (Perlman, 2017; Pettit, 2019). The American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2018; 2021) recommends
individualization and suggests delivery between 340/7 and 356/7 weeks’
gestation. They cite a decision-analysis study that justifies elective delivery
without fetal lung maturity testing after 34 completed weeks (Robinson,
2010). The Society for Maternal–Fetal Medicine (2018) recommends
delivery between 34 and 37 weeks. Two earlier surveys found that most
practitioners do not deliver these women until 36 weeks or later (Esakoff,
2012; Wright, 2013). At Parkland Hospital, we generally schedule these
procedures after 36 completed weeks but are prepared also to manage them
in nonelective situations (Rac, 2015b).
In some cases, PAS is not recognized until laparotomy. If resources are
inadequate to surgically manage the percreta and if the woman is stable and
not bleeding, the fetus is not delivered. The abdominal incision is closed,
and she is transferred to a tertiary-care facility.

Preoperative Prophylactic Catheterization
In cases that may involve the ureters, catheterization may aid their dissection
or identification. However, these catheters overall do not lower urinary tract
injury rates (Crocetto, 2021). Some, but not all, advocate preoperative
ureteral catheterization (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2018; Eller, 2011). The role of catheters for ureteral injury
repair is outlined in Chapter 30 (p. 564).

With arterial catheterization, balloon-tipped catheters aim to mitigate
blood loss and thereby enhance surgical visibility. Catheters are advanced
preoperatively into the internal iliac arteries and are inflated after fetal
delivery to occlude pelvic blood flow (Ballas, 2012; Desai, 2012; Zhou,
2021). Some prefer an infrarenal aortic balloon occlusion catheter (Mei,
2020). Alternatively, the catheters can be used to deliver occluding emboli to
bleeding arterial sites (Mei, 2018). Others have concluded that these
procedures offer borderline efficacy and have serious risks (Chen, 2020;
Makary, 2019; Mohr-Sasson, 2020). Rare complications have included
thrombosis of the common iliac artery (Bishop, 2011). At this time, the
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2018) concludes that
a firm recommendation cannot be made for or against intraarterial catheter
use. Similarly, there are no obvious benefits to prophylactic internal iliac
artery ligation in this setting (Po, 2012; Yu, 2020).

Cesarean Delivery and Hysterectomy
Before commencing with delivery, the risk of hysterectomy to prevent
exsanguination should be estimated. Some of these abnormal placentations,
especially if partial, may be amenable to placental delivery with hemostatic
suture placement. Confirmation of a percreta or increta almost always
mandates hysterectomy. Because the scope of invasion may not be apparent
before delivery of the fetus, some complete a number of dissection steps
early. This also minimizes blood loss during potentially tedious dissection
after hysterotomy and if the placenta bleeds. Thus, an attempt can be made to
create a wide bladder flap before making the hysterotomy incision
(Cunningham, 2017). The round ligaments are divided, and the lateral edges
of the peritoneal reflection are dissected downward. If possible, these
incisions are extended to encircle the entire placental implantation site that
visibly occupies the prevesical space and posterior bladder wall. Following
this, a classical hysterotomy, transverse fundal, or high posterior incision is
made to avoid the placenta (Kotsuji, 2013).
After fetal delivery, the extent of placental invasion is assessed without
attempts at manual placental removal. In a report from the United Kingdom,
attempts at partial or total placental removal prior to hysterectomy were
associated with twice as much blood loss (Fitzpatrick, 2014). Generally
speaking, with obvious percreta or increta, hysterectomy is usually the best
course, and the placenta is left in situ. With more extensive placental

ingrowth, bleeding may be minimal until manual placental removal is
attempted. Unless there is spontaneous separation with bleeding that
mandates emergency hysterectomy, the operation begins after full assessment
is made. Cesarean hysterectomy is carried out as described in Chapter 30
(p.560).
With heavy bleeding, successful treatment depends on immediate blood
replacement and other measures that can include uterine or internal iliac
artery ligation, balloon occlusion, or embolization. In some cases, the
operation is made easier by performance of a supracervical hysterectomy
(Levin, 2020). Kingdom and colleagues (2020) have described a modified
radical hysterectomy for PAS (Table 43-3). This technique is also detailed in
Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd edition (Cunningham,
2017). Because of a high risk for postoperative venous thromboembolism,
consideration is given for thromboprophylaxis (Silver, 2018).
TABLE 43-3. Steps in Cesarean Hysterectomy for Management of Placenta
Percreta

Conservative Management
Occasionally, it may be possible to trim the umbilical cord, repair the
hysterotomy incision, leave the placenta in situ, and not pursue hysterectomy
(Sentilhes, 2021). This option may be used for women in whom abnormal
placentation was not suspected before cesarean delivery and in whom uterine
closure stops bleeding. After this, she can be transferred to a higher level-ofcare facility for definitive management. Another consideration is the woman
with a strong desire for fertility and who has received extensive counseling.
Resection of the adherent placenta and underlying myometrium has been
advocated as a uterine-sparing technique (Palacios-Jaraquemada, 2020).
Conservative management was reviewed by Perez-Delboy (2014) and
Fox (2015) and their colleagues. In some of these cases, the placenta
spontaneously resorbed between 1 and 12 months with a mean of 6 months.

Numerous complications can occur and include sepsis, coagulopathy,
pulmonary embolism, and arteriovenous malformation (Fox, 2015; Judy,
2015; Roach, 2015). In other cases, sutures are placed through the outside
wall of the uterus overlying the placental bed. Shih and associates (2019)
described this using a Nausicaa procedure.
In some of these women, a subsequent hysterectomy—either planned or
prompted by bleeding or infection—is performed days to weeks postpartum
when blood loss might be less (Al-Khan, 2014; Sentilhes, 2009, 2021;
Zuckerwise, 2020). In some studies, 20 percent or fewer of women
ultimately required hysterectomy (Bretelle, 2007; Kutuk, 2018). In other
reports, however, up to 60 percent eventually required emergency
hysterectomy (Clausen, 2013; Pather, 2014). Evidence that treatment with
methotrexate aids resorption is lacking. Last, for women in whom the
placenta is left in situ, serial serum β-hCG measurements are not informative,
and serial sonographic or MR imaging is recommended (Timmermans, 2007;
Worley, 2008).
At this time, we agree with the American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2018) that leaving the placenta in situ should be considered
investigational. Exceptions permit transfer to a higher level of care.
Guidelines from the International Society for Abnormally Invasive Placenta
are more permissive (Collins, 2019).

■ Pregnancy Outcomes
In sum, PAS can have disastrous outcomes for both mother and fetus.
Although the depth of placental invasion does not correspond with perinatal
outcome, it is of paramount maternal significance. Table 43-4 displays
outcomes of women at tertiary-care hospitals and in whom the PAS diagnosis
was usually made preoperatively. Despite these advantages, complications
included hemorrhage, urinary tract injury, intensive care unit admission,
secondary surgical procedures, and maternal death. Some of these same
reports chronicle outcomes in a second cohort of women in whom care was
not given at a tertiary-care facility or in whom the diagnosis of percreta was
not made until delivery, or both. In these cohorts, morbidity and mortality
rates were higher (Erfani, 2019).

TABLE 43-4. Selected Maternal Outcomes in Women with Placenta
Accreta Spectrum Identified Prenatally and Delivered in Tertiary-Care
Units

REFERENCES
Abbassi-Ghanavati M, Casey BM, Spong CY, et al: Pregnancy outcomes in women with thyroid
peroxidase antibodies. Obstet Gynecol 116: 381, 2010
Albayrak M, Ozdemir I, Koc O, et al: Postpartum haemorrhage from the lower uterine segment
secondary to placenta previa/accreta: successful conservative management with Foley balloon
tamponade. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol 51(4):377, 2011
Alexander JM, Cunningham FG: Management. In Taylor RN, Roberts JM, Cunningham FG (eds):
Chesley’s Hypertensive Disorders in Pregnancy, 4th ed. Amsterdam, Academic Press, 2015
Al-Khan A, Gupta V, Illsley NP, et al: Maternal and fetal outcomes in placenta accreta after institution
of team-managed care. Reprod Sci 21(6):761, 2014
Altman D, Carroli G, Duley L, et al: Do women with preeclampsia, and their babies, benefit from
magnesium sulphate? The Magpie Trial: a randomised placebo-controlled trial. Lancet 359:1877,
2002
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Society for Maternal–Fetal Medicine: Placenta
accreta spectrum. Obstetric Care Consensus No. 7, November, 2018
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Antiphospholipid syndrome. Practice Bulletin No.
132, December 2012, Reaffirmed 2019

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Inherited thrombophilias in pregnancy. Practice
Bulletin No. 197, June 2018, Reaffirmed 2020
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Medically indicated late-preterm and early-term
deliveries. Committee Opinion No. 818, January 2021
American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine: AIUM-ACR-ACOG-SMFM-SRU practice parameter
for the performance of standard diagnostic obstetric ultrasound examinations. J Ultrasound Med
37(11):e13, 2018
Ananth CV, Demissie K, Smulian JC, et al: Placenta previa in singleton and twin births in the United
States, 1989 through 1998: a comparison of risk factor profiles and associated conditions. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 188(1):275, 2003a
Ananth CV, Demissie K, Smulian JC, et al: Relationship among placenta previa, fetal growth restriction,
and preterm delivery: a population-based study. Obstet Gynecol 98:299, 2001
Ananth CV, Friedman AM, Lavery JA, et al: Neurodevelopmental outcomes in children in relation to
placental abruption. BJOG 124(3):463, 2017
Ananth CV, Getahun D, Peltier MR et al: Placental abruption in term and preterm gestations. Obstet
Gynecol 107:785, 2006
Ananth CV, Lavery JA, Vintzileos AM, et al: Severe placental abruption: clinical definition and
associations with maternal complications. Am J Obstet Gynecol 214(2):272.e1, 2016
Ananth CV, Oyelese Y, Srinivas N, et al: Preterm premature rupture of membranes, intrauterine
infection, and oligohydramnios: risk factors for placental abruption. Obstet Gynecol 104:71, 2004
Ananth CV, Oyelese Y, Yeo L, et al: Placental abruption in the United States, 1979 through 2001:
temporal trends and potential determinants. Am J Obstet Gynecol 192(1):191, 2005
Ananth CV, Smulian JC, Vintzileos AM: Incidence of placental abruption in relation to cigarette smoking
and hypertensive disorders during pregnancy: a meta-analysis of observational studies. Obstet
Gynecol 93:622, 1999
Ananth CV, Smulian JC, Vintzileos AM: The effect of placenta previa on neonatal mortality: a
population-based study in the United States, 1989 through 1997. Am J Obstet Gynecol 188:1299,
2003b
Arazi ES, Kessous R, Shoham-Vardi I, et al: Is there an association between a history of placental
abruption and long-term maternal renal complications? J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 28(14):1641,
2015
Atkinson AL, Santolaya-Forgas J, Matta P, et al: The sensitivity of the Kleihauer-Betke test for
placental abruption. J Obstet Gynaecol 35(2):139, 2015
Aviram A, Salzer L, Hiersch L, et al: Association of isolated polyhydramnios at or beyond 34 weeks of
gestation and pregnancy outcome. Obstet Gynecol 125(4):825, 2015
Awan N, Bennett MJ, Walters WA: Emergency peripartum hysterectomy: a 10-year review at the
Royal Hospital for Women, Sydney. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol 51(3):210, 2011
Babinszki A, Kerenyi T, Torok O, et al: Perinatal outcome in grand and great-grand multi parity: effects
of parity on obstetric risk factors. Am J Obstet Gynecol 181: 669, 1999
Bailit JL, Grobman WA, Rice MM, et al: Morbidly adherent placenta treatments and outcomes. Obstet
Gynecol 125(3):683, 2015
Balachandar K, Melov SJ, Nayyar R: The risk of adverse maternal outcomes in cases of placenta
praevia in an Australian population between 2007 and 2017. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol 60(6):890,
2020
Balayla J, Desilets J, Shrem G: Placenta previa and the risk of intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR): a
systematic review and meta-analysis. J Perinat Med 47(6):577, 2019

Baldwin HJ, Nippita TA, Torvaldsen S, et al: Outcomes of subsequent births after placenta accreta
spectrum. Obstet Gynecol 136(4):745, 2020
Baldwin HJ, Patterson JA, Nippita TA, et al: Antecedents of abnormally invasive placenta in
primiparous women. Obstet Gynecol 131(2):227, 2018
Ballas J, Hull AD, Saenz, et al: Preoperative intravascular balloon catheters and surgical outcomes in
pregnancies complicated by placenta accreta: a management paradox. Am J Obstet Gynecol
207(3):216.e1, 2012
Bartels HC, Rogers AC, O’Brien D, et al: Association of implementing a multidisciplinary team
approach in the management of morbidly adherent placenta with maternal morbidity and mortality.
Obstet Gynecol 132(5):1167, 2018
Barth WH Jr, Kwolek CJ, Abrams JL, et al: Case records of the Massachusetts General Hospital. Case
23—2011. A 40-year-old pregnant woman with placenta accreta who declined blood products. N
Engl J Med 365(4):359, 2011
Benirschke K, Burton, Baergen RN: Pathology of the Human Placenta, 6th ed. New York, Springer,
2012, p 204
Bingol N, Fuchs M, Diaz V, et al: Teratogenicity of cocaine in humans. J Pediatr 110:93, 1987
Birgani S, Salmanian B, Shamshirsaz AA, et al: Placenta accreta spectrum FIGO clinical classification
in association with histopathological findings. Abstract No. 588, Am J Obstet Gynecol 222:S588,
2020
Biro MA, Davey MA, Caro Ian M, et al: Advanced maternal age and obstetric morbidity for women
giving birth in Victoria, Australia: a population-based study. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol 52(3):229,
2012
Bishop S, Butler K, Monaghan S, et al: Multiple complications following the use of prophylactic internal
iliac artery balloon catheterization in a patient with placenta percreta. Int J Obstet Anesth 20(1):70,
2011
Biswas R, Sawhney H, Dass R, et al: Histopathological study of placental bed biopsy in placenta previa.
Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 78:173, 1999
Bond AL, Edersheim TG, Curry L, et al: Expectant management of abruptio placentae before 35
weeks’ gestation. Am J Perinatol 6:121, 1989
Bose DA, Assel BG, Hill JB, et al: Maintenance tocolytics for preterm symptomatic placenta previa: a
review. Am J Perinatol 28(1):45, 2011
Bowman ZS, Eller AG, Kennedy AM, et al: Accuracy of ultrasound for the prediction of placenta
accreta. Am J Obstet Gynecol 211(2): 177.e1, 2014
Brame RG, Harbert GM Jr, McGaughey HS Jr, et al: Maternal risk in abruption. Obstet Gynecol 31:224,
1968
Bretelle F, Courbiére B, Mazouni C, et al: Management of placenta accreta: morbidity and outcome. Eur
J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 133(1):34, 2007
Brosens I, Pijnenborg R, Vercruysse L, et al: The “great obstetrical syndromes” are associated with
disorders of deep placentation. Am J Obstet Gynecol 204(3):193, 2011
Cali G, Biambanco L, Puccio G, et al: Morbidly adherent placenta: evaluation of ultrasound diagnostic
criteria and differentiation of placenta accreta from percreta. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 41(4):406,
2013
Chalubinski KM, Pils S, Klein K, et al: Prenatal sonography can predict the degree of placental invasion.
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 42(5):518, 2013
Chantraine F, Braun T, Gonser M, et al: Prenatal diagnosis of abnormally invasive placenta reduces
maternal peripartum hemorrhage and morbidity. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 92(4):439, 2013

Chen AL, Goldfarb IT, Scourtas AO, et al: The histologic evolution of revealed, acute abruptions. Hum
Pathol 67:187, 2017
Chen M, Liu X, You Y, et al: Internal iliac artery balloon occlusion for placenta previa and suspected
placenta accreta: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol 135(5):1112, 2020
Cho JY, Kim SJ, Cha KY, et al: Interrupted circular suture: bleeding control during cesarean delivery in
placenta previa accreta. Obstet Gynecol 78:876, 1991
Clausen C, Stensballe J, Albrechtsen CK, et al: Balloon occlusion of the internal iliac arteries in the
multidisciplinary management of placenta percreta. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 92(4):386, 2013
Cleary-Goldman J, Malone FD, Vidaver J, et al: Impact of maternal age on obstetric outcome. Obstet
Gynecol 105:983, 2005
Collins SL, Alemdar B, van Beekhuizen HJ, et al: Evidence-based guidelines for the management of
abnormally invasive placenta: recommendations from the International Society for Abnormally
Invasive Placenta. Am J Obstet Gynecol 220(6):511, 2019
Collins SL, Stevenson GN, Al-Khan A, et al: Three-dimensional power Doppler ultrasonography for
diagnosing abnormally invasive placenta and quantifying the risk. Obstet Gynecol 126(3):645, 2015
Colón I, Berletti M, Garabedian MJ, et al: Randomized, double-blinded trial of magnesium sulfate
tocolysis versus intravenous normal saline for preterm nonsevere placental abruption. Am J
Perinatol 33(7):696, 2016
Combs CA, Nyberg DA, Mack LA, et al: Expectant management after sonographic diagnosis of
placental abruption. Am J Perinatol 9:170, 1992
Crane JM, Van Den Hof MC, Dodds L, et al: Neonatal outcomes with placenta previa. Obstet Gynecol
93:541, 1999
Creanga AA, Bateman BT, Kuklina EV, et al: Racial and ethnic disparities in severe maternal morbidity:
a multistate analysis, 2008–2010. Am J Obstet Gynecol 210(5):435.e1, 2014
Creanga AA, Berg CJ, Syverson C, et al: Pregnancy-related mortality in the United States, 2006–2010.
Obstet Gynecol 125(1):5, 2015
Creanga AA, Berg CJ, Syverson C, et al: Pregnancy-related mortality in the United States, 2011–2013.
Obstet Gynecol 130:366, 2017
Crocetto F, Esposito R, Saccone G, et al: Use of routine ureteral stents in cesarean hysterectomy for
placenta accreta. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 34(3):386, 2021
Cunningham FG: Placenta previa and morbidly adherent placentae In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL,
Gilstrap LC III, et al (eds): Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York,
McGraw Hill Education, 2017
Cunningham FG, Nelson DB: Disseminated intravascular coagulation syndromes in obstetrics. Obstet
Gynecol 126(5):999, 2015
Cunningham KM, Anwar A, Lindow SW: The recurrence risk of placenta accreta following uterine
conserving management. J Neonatal Perinatal Med 8(4):293, 2016
DeRoo L, Skjaervan R, Wilcox A, et al: Placental abruption and long-term maternal cardiovascular
disease mortality: a population-based registry study in Norway and Sweden. Eur J Epidemiol
31(5):501, 2016
Desai N, Tam HT, Fleischer A: Prophylactic arterial catheterization may improve operative morbidity in
suspected placenta accreta and reduce the need for hysterectomy. Am J Obstet Gynecol
206(1):S44, 2012
Diemert A, Ortmeyer G, Hollwitz B, et al: The combination of intrauterine balloon tamponade and the
B-Lynch procedure for the treatment of severe postpartum hemorrhage. Am J Obstet Gynecol
206(1):65.e1, 2012

di Pasquo E, Ghi T, Cali G, et al: Intracervical lakes as sonographic marker of placenta accreta
spectrum disorder in patients with placenta previa or low-lying placenta. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol
55(4):460, 2020
Downes KL, Grantz KL, Shenassa ED: Maternal, labor, delivery, and perinatal outcomes associated
with placental abruption: a systematic review. Am J Perinatol 34:935, 2017
Drakeley AJ, Le Roux PA, Anthony J, et al: Acute renal failure complicating severe preeclampsia
requiring admission to an obstetric intensive care unit. Am J Obstet Gynecol 186:253, 2002
Dugoff L, Hobbins JC, Malone FD, et al: First trimester maternal serum PAPPA and free-beta subunit
human chorionic gonadotropin concentrations and nuchal translucency are associated with obstetric
complications: a population-based screening study (The FASTER Trial). Am J Obstet Gynecol
191:1446, 2004
Duzyj CM, Buhimschi IA, Laky CA, et al: Extravillous trophoblast invasion in placenta accreta is
associated with differential local expression of angiogenic and growth factors: a cross-sectional
study. BJOG 125(11):1441, 2018
Einerson BD, Comstock J, Silver RM, et al: Placenta accreta spectrum disorder: uterine dehiscence, not
placental invasion. Obstet Gynecol 135(5):1104, 2020
Einerson BD, Rodriguez CE, Kennedy AM, et al: Magnetic resonance imaging is often misleading when
used as an adjunct to ultrasound in the management of placenta accreta spectrum disorders. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 218(6):618.e1, 2018
Eller AG, Bennett MA, Sharshiner M, et al: Maternal morbidity in cases of placenta accreta managed
by a multidisciplinary care team compared with standard obstetric care. Obstet Gynecol 117 (2 Pt
1):331, 2011
Elliott JP, Gilpin B, Strong TH Jr, et al: Chronic abruption—oligohydramnios sequence. J Reprod Med
43:418, 1998
Erez O, Mastrolia SA, Thachil J: Disseminated intravascular coagulation in pregnancy: insights in
pathophysiology, diagnosis and management. Am J Obstet Gynecol 213(4):452, 2015
Erfani H, Kassir E, Fox KA, et al: Placenta previa without morbidly adherent placenta: comparison of
characteristics and outcomes between planned and emergent deliveries in a tertiary center. J Matern
Fetal Neonatal Med 32(6):906, 2019
Erfani H, Fox KA, Clark SL, et al: Maternal outcomes in unexpected placenta accreta spectrum
disorders: single-center experience with a multidisciplinary team. Am J Obstet Gynecol
221(4):337.e1, 2019
Esakoff TF, Handler SJ, Granados JM, et al: PAMUS: placenta accreta management across the United
States. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 25:761, 2012
Eshkoli T, Weintraub AY, Sergienko R, et al: Placenta accreta: risk factors, perinatal outcomes, and
consequences for subsequent births. Am J Obstet Gynecol 208(3):219.e1, 2013
Eubanks AA, Walz S, Thiel LM: Maternal risk factors and neonatal outcomes in placental abruption
among patients with equal access to health care. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 34(13):2101, 2021
Farine D, Fox HE, Jakobson S, et al: Vaginal ultrasound for diagnosis of placenta previa. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 159:566, 1988
Finazzo F, D’Antonio F, Masselli G, et al: Interobserver variability in MRI assessment of the severity of
placenta accreta spectrum disorders. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 55(4):467, 2020
Fitzpatrick K, Sellers S, Spark P, et al: The management and outcomes of placenta accreta, increta, and
percreta in the UK: a Population-based descriptive study. BJOG 121(1):62, 2014
Fox K, Shamshirsaz A, Salmanian B, et al: Is interpregnancy interval a predictor of severity of invasion
in morbidly adherent placenta? Abstract No. 821, Am J Obstet Gynecol 212(1):s395, 2015

Frederiksen MC, Glassenberg R, Stika CS: Placenta previa: a 22-year analysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol
180:1432, 1999
Friszer S, Le Ray C, Tort J, et al: Symptomatic placenta praevia: short cervix at admission is a predictive
factor for delivery within 7 days. Abstract No. 158, Am J Obstet Gynecol 208(1):S78, 2013
Furuhashi M, Kurauchi O, Suganuma N: Pregnancy following placental abruption. Arch Gynecol Obstet
267:11, 2002
Furukawa S, Doi K, Furuta K, et al: The effect of placental abruption on the outcome of extremely
premature infants. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 28(6):705, 2015
Gibbins KJ, Einerson BD, Varner MI, et al: Placenta previa and maternal hemorrhagic morbidity. J
Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 31(4):494, 2018
Gill LA, Baldwin E, Lessard-Anderson C, et al: Septic abortion with placenta accreta in pregnancy after
endometrial ablation. Obstet Gynecol 125(4):822, 2015
Gilliam M, Rosenberg D, Davis F: The likelihood of placenta previa with greater number of cesarean
deliveries and higher parity. Obstet Gynecol 99:976, 2002
Glantz C, Purnell L: Clinical utility of sonography in the diagnosis and treatment of placental abruption. J
Ultrasound Med 21:837, 2002
Goh WA, Zalud I: Placenta accreta: diagnosis, management and the molecular biology of the morbidly
adherent placenta. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 29(11):1795, 2016
Gopalakrishnan N, Dhanapriya J, Muthkumar P, et al: Acute kidney injury in pregnancy—a single center
experience. Ren Fail 37(9):1476, 2015
Greco PS, Day LJ, Pearlman MD: Guidance for evaluation and management of blunt abdominal trauma
in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 134(6):1343, 2019
Gurol-Urganci I, Cromwell DA, Edozien LC, et al: Risk of placenta previa in second birth after first
birth cesarean section. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth 11:95, 2011
Gutvirtz G, Walfisch A, Beharier O, et al: Isolated single umbilical artery is an independent risk factor
for perinatal mortality and adverse outcomes in term neonates. Arch Gynecol Obstet 294(5):931,
2016
Gyamfi-Bannerman C, Gilbert S, Landon MB, et al: Risk of uterine rupture and placenta accreta with
prior uterine surgery outside of the lower segment. Obstet Gynecol 120(6):1332, 2012
Hackney DN, Kuo K, Petersen RJ, et al: Determinants of the competing outcomes of intrauterine
infection, abruption, or spontaneous preterm birth after preterm premature rupture of membranes. J
Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 29(2):258, 2016
Han M, Lui D, Zeb S, et al: Are maternal and neonatal outcomes different in placental abruption
between women with and without preeclampsia? Placenta 85:69, 2019
Happe SK, Rac MW, Moschos E, et al: Prospective first-trimester ultrasound imaging of low
implantation and placenta accreta spectrum. J Ultrasound Med 39(10):1907, 2020
Hardardottir H, Borgida AE, Sanders MM, et al: Histologic myometrial fibers adherent to the placenta:
impact of method of placental removal. Am J Obstet Gynecol 174:358, 1996
Harris LK, Benagiano M, D’Elios MM, et al: Placental bed research: 2. Functional and immunological
investigations of the placental bed. Am J Obstet Gynecol 221(5):457, 2019
Heller HT, Mullen KM, Gordon RW, et al: Outcomes of pregnancies with a low-lying placenta
diagnosed on second-trimester sonography. J Ultrasound Med 33(4):691, 2014
Hill JM, Yadava S, Patrick HS, et al: Pregnancy complications among women diagnosed with placenta
previa and placental abruption. Abstract No. 446, Am J Obstet Gynecol 222:S92, 2020
Hogberg V, Rasmussen S, Irgens L: The effect of smoking and hypertensive disorders on abruptio
placentae in Norway 1999–2002. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 86:304, 2007

Huls CK, Detlefs C: Trauma in pregnancy. Semin Perinatol 42(1):13, 2018
Hung TH, Shau WY, Hsieh CC, et al: Risk factors for placenta accreta. Obstet Gynecol 93:545, 1999
Hurd WW, Miodovnik M, Hertzberg V, et al: Selective management of abruptio placentae: a prospective
study. Obstet Gynecol 61:467, 1983
Jakobsson M, Tapper AM, Colmorn LB, et al: Emergency peripartum hysterectomy: results from the
prospective Nordic Obstetric Surveillance Study (NOSS). Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 94(7):745,
2015
Jauniaux E, Collins S, Burton GJ: Placenta accreta spectrum: pathophysiology and evidence-based
anatomy for prenatal ultrasound imaging. Am J Obstet Gynecol 218(1):75, 2018
Jauniaux E, Collins SL, Jurkovic D, et al: Accreta placentation: a systematic review of prenatal
ultrasound imaging and grading of villous invasiveness. Am J Obstet Gynecol 215(6):712, 2016
Jauniaux E, Dimitrova I, Kenyon N, et al: Impact of placenta previa with placenta accreta spectrum
disorder on fetal growth. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 54(5):643, 2019
Jauniaux E, Hecht JL: Perinatal diagnosis of placenta accreta spectrum disorders in the twenty-first
century: visual inspection at birth is not enough. BJOG 128(2):328, 2021
Jenabi E, Fereidooni B: The uterine leiomyoma and placenta previa: a meta-analysis. J Matern Fetal
Neonatal Med 32(7):1200, 2019
Judy AE, Lyell DJ, Druzin ML, et al: Disseminated intravascular coagulation complicating the
conservative management of placenta percreta. Obstet Gynecol 126(5):1016, 2015
Kaminsky LM, Ananth CV, Prasad V, et al: The influence of maternal cigarette smoking on placental
pathology in pregnancies complicated by abruption. Am J Obstet Gynecol 197:275.e1, 2007
Kancherla V, Räisänen S, Gissler M, et al: Placenta previa and risk of major congenital malformations
among singleton births in Finland. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol 103(6):527, 2015
Karami M, Jenabi E, Fereidooni B: The association of placenta previa and assisted reproductive
techniques: a meta-analysis. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 31(14):1940, 2018
Kayani SI, Walkinshaw SA, Preston C: Pregnancy outcome in severe placental abruption. BJOG
110:679, 2003
Khazaei S, Jenabi E: The association between polyhydramnios and the risk of placenta abruption: a
meta-analysis. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med Jan 24:1, 2019
Kibel M, Asztalos E, Barrett J, et al: Outcomes of pregnancies complicated by preterm premature
rupture of membranes between 20 and 24 weeks of gestation. Obstet Gynecol 128:313, 2016
King DL: Placental migration demonstrated by ultrasonography. Radiology 109:167, 1973
Kingdom JC, Hobson SR, Murji A, et al: Minimizing surgical blood loss at cesarean hysterectomy for
placenta previa with evidence of placenta increta or placenta percreta: the state of play in 2020. Am
J Obstet Gynecol 223(3):322, 2020
Klar M, Michels KB: Cesarean section and placental disorders in subsequent pregnancies—a metaanalysis. J Perinat Med 42(5): 571, 2014
Knight M, UKOSS: Peripartum hysterectomy in the UK: management and outcomes of the associated
haemorrhage. BJOG 114:1380, 2007
Kohari KS, Roman AS, Fox NS, et al: Persistence of placenta previa in twin gestations based on
gestational age at sonographic detection. J Ultrasound Med 31(7):985, 2012
Kollmann M, Gaulhofer J, Lang U, et al: Placenta previa: incidence, risk factors and outcome. J Matern
Fetal Neonatal Med 29(9):1395, 2016
Kortekaas JC, Kazemier BM, Keulen JK, et al: Risk of adverse pregnancy outcomes of late- and
postterm pregnancies in advanced maternal age: a national cohort study. Acta Obstet Gynecol
Scand 99(8):1022, 2020

Kotsuji F, Nishihima K, Kurokawa T, et al: Transverse uterine fundal incision for placenta praevia with
accreta, involving the entire anterior uterine wall: a case series. BJOG 120(9):1144, 2013
Kutuk MS, Ak M, Ozgun MT: Leaving the placenta in situ versus conservative and radical surgery in
the treatment of placenta accreta spectrum disorders. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 140: 338, 2018
Lai J, Caughey AB, Qidwai GI, et al: Neonatal outcomes in women with sonographically identified
uterine leiomyomata. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 25(6):710, 2012
Lax A, Prince MR, Mennitt KW, et al: The value of specific MRI features in the evaluation of
suspected placental invasion. Magn Reson Imaging 25:87, 2007
Levin G, Rottenstreich A, Benshushan A, et al: The role of supracervical hysterectomy in reducing
blood products requirement in the management of placenta accreta: a case control study. J Matern
Fetal Neonatal Med 33(15):2522, 2020
Linn RL, Miller ES, Lim G, et al: Adherent basal plate myometrial fibers in the delivered placenta as a
risk factor for development of subsequent placenta accreta. Placenta 36(12):1419, 2015
Lueth A, Blue NR, Silver RM: Placental abruption in nulliparous women. Abstract No. 1186, Am J
Obstet Gynecol 222:S729, 2020
Luke B, Gopal D, Cabral H, et al: Adverse pregnancy, birth, and infant outcomes in twins: effects of
maternal fertility status and infant gender combinations; the Massachusetts Outcomes Study of
Assisted Reproductive Technology. Am J Obstet Gynecol 217(3):330.e1, 2017a
Luke B, Gopal D, Cabral H, et al: Pregnancy, birth, and infant outcomes by maternal fertility status: the
Massachusetts Outcomes Study of Assisted Reproductive Technology. Am J Obstet Gynecol
217(3):327.el, 2017b
Major CA, deVeciana M, Lewis DF, et al: Preterm premature rupture of membranes and abruptio
placentae: is there an association between these pregnancy complications? Am J Obstet Gynecol
172:672, 1995
Makary M, Chowdary P, Westgate JA: Vascular balloon occlusion and planned caesarean hysterectomy
for morbidly adherent placenta: a systematic review. J Obstet Gynaecol 59(5):608, 2019
Maraka S, Ospina NM, O’Keeffe DT, et al: Subclinical hypothyroidism in pregnancy: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. Thyroid 26(4):580, 2016
Masselli G, Brunelli R, Di Tola M, et al: MR imaging in the evaluation of placental abruption: correlation
with sonographic findings. Radiology 259(1):222, 2011
Matsuda Y, Ogawa M, Konno J, et al: Prediction of fetal academia in placental abruption. BMC
Pregnancy Childbirth 13:156, 2013
Matsukawa S, Sumigama S, Kotani T, et al: Possible association between cathepsin V and the
development of placenta accreta spectrum disorders. Gynecol Obstet Invest 84(4):396, 2019
Matsuwaki T, Khan KN, Inoue T, et al: Evaluation of obstetrical factors related to Sheehan syndrome. J
Obstet Gynaecol Res 40(1):46, 2014
McKeogh RP, D’Errico E: Placental accreta: clinical manifestations and conservative management. N
Engl J Med 245:159, 1951
Mei Y, Luo D, Lin Y: Clinical application of prophylactic internal iliac artery balloon occlusion combined
with uterine artery embolization in patients with abnormally invasive placenta. J Matern Fetal
Neonatal Med 31(24):3287, 2018
Mei Y, Luo D, Wei S, et al: Comparison of emergency cesarean hysterectomy with and without
prophylactic placement of intravascular balloon catheters in patients with placenta accreta spectrum.
J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med September 20, 2020 [Epub ahead of print]
Mhatre MV, Potter JA, Lockwood CJ, et al: Thrombin augments LPS-induced human endometrial
endothelial ell inflammation via PARK1 activation. Am J Reprod Immunol 76(1):29, 2016

Miller ES, Linn RL, Ernst LM: Does the presence of placental basal plate myometrial fibers in a prior
pregnancy improve prediction of placenta accreta? BJOG 123(13):2140, 2016
Millischer AE, Solomon LJ, Porcher R, et al: Magnetic resonance imaging for abnormally invasive
placenta: the added value of intravenous gadolinium injection. BJOG 124(1): 88, 2017
Mitric C, Desilets J, Baayla J, et al: Surgical management of the placenta accreta spectrum: an
institutional experience. Obstet Gynaecol Can 41(11):1551, 2019
Miura K, Higashijima A, Murakami Y, et al: Circulating levels of pregnancy-associated, placentaspecific microRNAs in pregnant women with placental abruption. Reprod Sci 24(1):148, 2017
Mogos MF, Salemi JL, Ashley M, et al: Recent trends in placenta accreta in the United States and its
impact on maternal-fetal morbidity and healthcare-associated costs, 1998–2011. Ultrasound Obstet
Gynecol 29(7):1077, 2016
Mohamed MA, Mohammed AH: Parallel vertical compression sutures to control bleeding in cases of
placenta previa and accreta. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 32(4):641, 2019
Mohr-Sasson A, Hochman R, Anteby M, et al: Cesarean delivery with and without uterine artery
embolization for the management of placenta accreta spectrum disorder—a comparative study.
Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 99(10):1374, 2020
Morgan EA, Sidebottom A, Vacquier M, et al: The effect of placental location in cases of placenta
accreta spectrum. Am J Obstet Gynecol 221(4):357, 2019
Morgan JL, Nelson DB, Roberts SW, et al: The impact of baseline proteinuria in pregnant women with
treated chronic hypertension. Obstet Gynecol 128:270, 2016
Mori K, Saida T, Hoshiai S, et al: High prevalence of intrapelvic parasitic arteries in patients with
placenta accreta spectrum: a case-control study using unenhanced magnetic resonance angiography.
Clin Imaging 65:50, 2020
Nageotte MP: Always be vigilant for placenta accreta. Am J Obstet Gynecol 211(2):87, 2014
Neilson JP: Interventions for suspected placenta praevia. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2:CD001998,
2003
Nelson DB, Lucke AM, McIntire DD, et al: Obstetric antecedents to body-cooling treatment of the
newborn infant. Am J Obstet Gynecol 211:155.el, 2014
Ngai I, Bernstein P, Chazotte C, et al: Maternal serum alpha fetoprotein (MSAFP) and placental
abruption. Abstract No. 122, Am J Obstet Gynecol 206(1):S66, 2012
Nørgaard LN, Pinborg A, Lidegaard Ø, et al: A Danish national cohort study on neonatal outcome in
singleton pregnancies with placenta previa. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 91(5):546, 2012
Okby R, Atawaz AA, Wainstock T, et al: Placental abruption in twin pregnancies, risk factors and
perinatal outcomes. Abstract No. 978, Am J Obstet Gynecol 216:S551, 2017
Olive EC, Roberts CL, Nassar N, et al: Test characteristics of placental location screening by
transabdominal ultrasound at 18–20 weeks. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 28(7):944, 2006
Onishi K, Tsuda H, Furna K, et al: The impact of the abruption severity and the onset-to-delivery time
on the maternal and neonatal outcomes of placental abruption. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med Mar
8:1, 2019
Oyelese Y, Smulian JC: Placenta previa, placenta accreta, and vasa previa. Obstet Gynecol 107:927,
2006
Pagani G, Cali G, Acharya G, et al: Diagnostic accuracy of ultrasound in detecting the severity of
abnormally invasive placentation: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Acta Obstet Gynecol
Scand 97(1):325, 2018
Palacios-Jaraquemada JM, Fiorillo A, Hamer J, et al: Placenta accreta spectrum: a hysterectomy can be
prevented in almost 80% of cases using a resective-reconstructive technique. J Matern Fetal

Neonatal Med January 26, 2020 [Epub ahead of print]
Panaiotova J, Tokunaka M, Krajewska K, et al: Screening for morbidly adherent placenta in early
pregnancy. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 53(1):101, 2019
Pariente G, Shoham-Vardi I, Kessous R, et al: Placental abruption as a marker for long term
cardiovascular mortality: a follow-up period of more than a decade. Am J Obstet Gynecol
208(1):S62, 2013
Parrott J, Holland M: Second-trimester marginal previa: is follow-up necessary? Abstract No. 653, Am
J Obstet Gynecol 212(1):S322, 2015
Pates JA, Hatab MR, McIntire DD, et al: Determining uterine blood flow in pregnancy with magnetic
resonance imaging. Magn Reson Imaging 28(4):507, 2010
Pather S, Strockyj S, Richards A, et al: Maternal outcome after conservative management of placenta
percreta at caesarean section: a report of three cases and a review of the literature. Aust N Z J
Obstet Gynaecol 54(1):84, 2014
Perez-Delboy A, Wright JD: Surgical management of placenta accreta: to leave or remove the
placenta? BJOG 121:163, 2014
Perlman NC, Little SE, Thomas A, et al: Patient selection for later delivery timing with suspected
previa-accreta. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 96(8):1021, 2017
Pettit KE, Stephenson ML, Truong YN, et al: Maternal and neonatal outcomes among scheduled versus
unscheduled deliveries in women with prenatally diagnosed, pathologically proven placenta accreta.
J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 32(6):927, 2019
Pilloni E, Alemanno MG, Gaglioti P, et al: Accuracy of ultrasound in antenatal diagnosis of placental
attachment disorders. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 47(3):302, 2016
Po LK, Simons ME, Levinsky ES: Concealed postpartum hemorrhage treated with transcatheter arterial
embolization. Obstet Gynecol 120(2 Pt 2):461, 2012
Primo LF, Arbogast K, Digiacomo T, et al: Placenta accreta: can we forecast its arrival? Obstet
Gynecol 123(Suppl 1):166, 2014
Pritchard JA, Brekken AL: Clinical and laboratory studies on severe abruptio placentae. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 97:681, 1967
Pritchard JA, Cunningham FG, Pritchard SA, et al: On reducing the frequency of severe abruptio
placentae. Am J Obstet Gynecol 165:1345, 1991
Pritchard JA, Mason R, Corley M, et al: Genesis of severe placental abruption. Am J Obstet Gynecol
108:22, 1970
Quant HS, Friedman AM, Wang E, et al: Transabdominal sonography as a screening test for secondtrimester placenta previa. Obstet Gynecol 13(3):628, 2014
Rac MW, Dashe JS, Wells CE, et al: Ultrasound predictors of placental invasion: the Placenta Accreta
Index. Am J Obstet Gynecol 212:343, 2015a
Rac MW, Wells CE, Twicker DM, et al: Placenta accreta and vaginal bleeding according to gestational
age at delivery. Obstet Gynecol 125(4):808, 2015b
Räisänen S, Kancherla V, Kramer MR, et al: Placenta previa and the risk of delivering a small-forgestational-age newborn. Obstet Gynecol 124(2 Pt 1):285, 2014
Rasmussen S, Irgens LM: Occurrence of placental abruption in relatives. BJOG 116:693, 2009
Reddy UM, Abuhamad AZ, Levine D, et al: Fetal imaging: executive summary of a joint Eunice
Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, Society for Maternal
—Fetal Medicine, American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine, American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists, American College of Radiology, Society for Pediatric Radiology, and Society of
Radiologists in Ultrasound Fetal Imaging Workshop. Obstet Gynecol 123(5):1070, 2014

Riihimäki O, Metsäranta M, Paavonen J, et al: Placental abruption and child mortality. Pediatrics
142(2):e20173915, 2018
Riihimäki O, Metsäranta M, Ritvanen A, et al: Increased prevalence of major congenital anomalies in
births with placental abruption. Obstet Gynecol 122(2 Pt 1):268, 2013
Roach MK, Thomassee MS: Acquired uterine arteriovenous malformation and retained placenta
increta. Obstet Gynecol 126(3):642, 2015
Roberge S, Bujold E, Nicolaides KH: Meta—analysis on the effect of aspirin use for prevention of
preeclampsia on placenta abruption and antepartum hemorrhage. Am J Obstet Gynecol 218(5):483,
2018
Roberts CL, Algert CS, Warrendorf J, et al: Trends and recurrence of placenta previa: a populationbased study. Aust NZJ Obstet Gynaecol 52(5):483, 2012
Robinson CJ, Villers MS, Johnson DD, et al: Timing of elective repeat cesarean delivery at term and
neonatal outcomes: a cost analysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 202(6):632, 2010
Roeca C, Little SE, Carusi D: Pathologically diagnosed accrete and hemorrhagic morbidity in a
subsequent pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 129(2):321, 2017
Rosenberg T, Pariente G, Sergienko R, et al: Critical analysis of risk factors and outcome of placenta
previa. Arch Gynecol Obstet 284(1):47, 2011
Rossi AC, Lee RH, Chmait RH: Emergency postpartum hysterectomy for uncontrolled postpartum
bleeding: a systematic review. Obstet Gynecol 115(3):637, 2010
Ruiter L, Ravelli AC, de Graaf IM, et al: Incidence and recurrence rate of placental abruption: a
longitudinal linked national cohort study in the Netherlands. Am J Obstet Gynecol 213(4): 573.el,
2015
Sabourin JN, Lee T, Magee LA, et al: Indications for timing of, and modes of delivery in a national
cohort of women admitted with antepartum hemorrhage at 22+0 to 28+6 weeks’ gestation. J Obstet
Gynaecol Can 34(11):1043, 2012
Salihu HM, Bekan B, Aliyu MH, et al: Perinatal mortality associated with abruptio placenta in singletons
and multiples. Am J Obstet Gynecol 193:198, 2005
Salihu HM, Li Q, Rouse DJ, et al: Placenta previa: neonatal death after live births in the United States.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 188:1305, 2003
Sallam HF, Shady NW: A sandwich technique (N & H variation technique) to reduce blood loss during
cesarean delivery for complete placenta previa: a randomized controlled trial. J Matern Fetal
Neonatal Med 32(19):3145, 2019
Salmanian B, Fox KA, Arian S, et al: In vitro fertilization as an independent risk factor for placenta
accreta spectrum. Am J Obstet Gynecol 223(4):568.e1, 2020
Sanderson DA, Milton PJ: The effectiveness of ultrasound screening at 18–20 weeks’ gestational age
for predication of placenta previa. J Obstet Gynaecol 11:320 1991
Sentilhes L, Gromez A, Clavier E, et al: Predictors of failed pelvic arterial embolization for severe
postpartum hemorrhage. Obstet Gynecol 113:992, 2009
Sentilhes L, Kayem G, Mattuizzi A: Conservative approach: intentional retention of the placenta. Best
Pract Res Clin Obstet Gynaecol 72:52, 2021
Shainker SA, Silver RM, Modest AM, et al: Placenta accreta spectrum: biomarker discovery using
plasma proteomics. Am J Obstet Gynecol 223(3):433.e1, 2020
Shamshirsaz AA, Fox KA, Erfani H, et al: Outcomes of planned compared with urgent deliveries using
a multidisciplinary team approach for morbidly adherent placenta. Obstet Gynecol 131(2):234, 2018
Shih JC, Liu KL, Kang J, et al: “Nausicaa” compression suture: a simple and effective alternative to
hysterectomy in placenta accreta spectrum and other causes of severe postpartum haemorrhage.

BJOG 126(3):412, 2019
Shoopala HM, Hall DR: Re-evaluation of abruptio placentae and other maternal complications during
expectant management of early onset preeclampsia. Pregnancy Hypertens 16:38, 2019
Sibai BM, Lindheimer M, Hauth J, et al: Risk factors for preeclampsia, abruptio placentae, and adverse
neonatal outcomes among women with chronic hypertension. N Engl J Med 339:667, 1998
Silver RM: Abnormal placentation: placenta previa, vasa previa, and placenta accreta. Obstet Gynecol
126(3):654, 2015a
Silver RM, Branch DW: Placenta accreta spectrum. N Engl J Med 378(16):152, 2018
Silver RM, Fox KA, Barton JR, et al: Center of excellence for placenta accreta. Am J Obstet Gynecol
212(5):561, 2015b
Silver RM, Landon MB, Rouse DJ, et al: Maternal morbidity associated with multiple repeat cesarean
deliveries. Obstet Gynecol 107:1226, 2006
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Gyamfi-Bannerman C: Management of bleeding in the late
preterm period. Consult Series No. 44, Am J Obstet Gynecol 218(1):B2, 2018
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Miller R, Timor-Tritsch IE, et al: Cesarean scar pregnancy.
Consult Series No. 49, Am J Obstet Gynecol 222(5):B2, 2020
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Sinkey RG, Odibo AO, et al: Diagnosis and management of vasa
previa. Am J Obstet Gynecol 213(5):615, 2015
Stafford IA, Dashe JS, Shivvers SA, et al: Ultrasonographic cervical length and risk of hemorrhage in
pregnancies with placenta previa. Obstet Gynecol 116(3):595, 2010
Stettler RW, Lutich A, Pritchard JA, et al: Traumatic placental abruption: a separation from traditional
thought. Presented at the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists Clinical Meeting,
April 27, 1992
Timmermans S, van Hof AC, Duvekot JJ: Conservative management of abnormally invasive
placentation. Obstet Gynecol Surv 62:529, 2007
Timor-Tritsch IE, Monteagudo A, Cali G, et al: Cesarean scar pregnancies: diagnosis and pathogenesis.
Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am 46(4):797, 2019
Tinari S, Buca D, Cali G, et al: Risk factors, histopathology and diagnostic accuracy in posterior placenta
accreta spectrum disorders: systematic review and meta-analysis. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol
57(6):903, 2021
Towers CV, Pircon RA, Heppard M: Is tocolysis safe in the management of third-trimester bleeding?
Am J Obstet Gynecol 180:1572, 1999
Trudell A, Stout M, Cahill A, et al: Second trimester cervical length and persistence of placental previa
in the third trimester. Abstract No. 91, Presented at the 33rd Annual Meeting of the Society for
Maternal-Fetal Medicine, February 11–16, 2013
Tuuli MG, Norman SM, Odibo AO, et al: Perinatal outcomes in women with subchorionic hematoma: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Obstet Gynecol 117(5):1205, 2011
Twickler DM, Lucas MJ, Balis AB, et al: Color flow mapping for myometrial invasion in women with a
prior cesarean delivery. J Matern Fetal Med 9:330, 2000
Usta IM, Hobeika EM, Abu Musa AA, et al: Placenta previa- accreta: risk factors and complications.
Am J Obstet Gynecol Rev 193:1045, 2005
Wang L, Matsunaga S, Mikami Y, et al: Pre-delivery fibrinogen predicts adverse maternal or neonatal
outcomes in patients with placental abruption. J Obstet Gynaecol Res 42(7):796, 2016
Warshak CR, Ramos GA, Eskander R, et al: Effect of predelivery diagnosis in 99 consecutive cases of
placenta accreta. Obstet Gynecol 115(1):65, 2010

Weiner E, Miremberg H, Grinstein E, et al: The effect of placenta previa on fetal growth and pregnancy
outcome in correlation with placental pathology. J Perinatol 36(12):1073, 2016
Weis MA, Harper LM, Roehl KA, et al: Natural history of placenta previa in twins. Obstet Gynecol
120(4):753, 2012
Weiss JL, Malone FD, Vidaver J, et al: Threatened abortion: a risk factor for poor pregnancy outcome, a
population-based screening study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 190:745, 2004
Wing DA, Paul RH, Millar LK: Management of the symptomatic placenta previa: a randomized,
controlled trial of inpatient versus outpatient expectant management. Am J Obstet Gynecol 174:305,
1996
Wong HS, Cheung YK, Zuccollo J, et al: Evaluation of sonographic diagnostic criteria for placenta
accreta. J Clin Ultrasound 36(9):551, 2008
Wong TY: Emergency peripartum hysterectomy: a 10-year review in a tertiary obstetric hospital. N Z
Med J 124(1345):34, 2011
Workalemahu T, Enquobahrie DA, Gelaye B, et al: Abruptio placentae risk and genetic variations in
mitochondrial biogenesis and oxidative phosphorylation: replication of a candidate gene association
study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 219:617.e1, 2018
Worley KC, Hnat MD, Cunningham FG: Advanced extrauterine pregnancy: diagnostic and therapeutic
challenges. Am J Obstet Gynecol 198:297.e1, 2008
Wortman A, Schaefer S, Wilson K, et al: Maternal morbidity associated with placenta previa with and
without placental invasion. Abstract No. 601, Am J Obstet Gynecol 212(1):S299, 2015
Wright JD, Silver RM, Bonanno C, et al: Practice patterns and knowledge of obstetricians and
gynecologists regarding placenta accreta. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 26(16):1602, 2013
Yasin N, Slade L, Atkinson E, et al: The multidisciplinary management of placenta accreta spectrum
(PAS) within single tertiary centre: a ten-year experience. Aust N Z Obstet Gynaecol 59(4):550,
2019
Yu SC, Cheng YK, Tse WT, et al: Perioperative prophylactic internal iliac artery balloon occlusion in the
prevention of postpartum hemorrhage in placenta previa: a randomized controlled trial. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 223(1):117.e1, 2020
Yule CS, Happe SK, Rac M, et al: Placenta accreta index predicts placenta accreta spectrum severe
enough to result in hysterectomy. Abstract No. 140, Am J Obstet Gynecol 222(1):S105, 2020
Yule CS, Lewis MA, Do QN, et al: Transvaginal color mapping ultrasound in the first trimester predicts
placenta accreta spectrum: a retrospective cohort study. J Ultrasound Med March 16, 2021 [Epub
ahead of print]
Zetterstrom K, Lindeberg SN, Haglund B, et al: Maternal complications in women with chronic
hypertension: a population-based cohort study. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 84:419, 2005
Zhou X, Sun X, Wang M, et al: The effectiveness of prophylactic internal iliac artery balloon occlusion in
the treatment of patients with pernicious placenta previa coexisting with placenta accreta. J Matern
Fetal Neonatal Med 34(1):93, 2021
Zuckerwise LC, Craig AM, Newton JM, et al: Outcomes following a clinical algorithm allowing for
delayed hysterectomy in the management of severe placenta accreta spectrum. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 222:179.e1, 2020

CHAPTER 44

Management of Obstetrical Hemorrhage

MANAGEMENT OF HEMORRHAGE
BLOOD REPLACEMENT
OBSTETRICAL COAGULOPATHIES
SURGICAL MANAGEMENT OF HEMORRHAGE
REFERENCES
Recognition of obstetrical hemorrhage severity is crucial to its management.
However, visual estimates, especially when blood losses are excessive, are
notoriously inaccurate. In many cases, true volume losses are often two to
three times the clinical estimate. Moreover, in obstetrics, part and sometimes
even all of the lost blood may be concealed. Estimation is further
complicated in that peripartum hemorrhage also includes the pregnancyaugmented blood volume. After pregnancy hypervolemia is lost at delivery,
blood loss can be estimated by calculating 500 mL loss for each 3 volume
percent drop in hematocrit. Its nadir depends on the speed of resuscitation
with intravenous crystalloids and blood products. With ongoing blood loss,
the real-time hematocrit is at its maximum whenever measured in the
delivery, operating, or recovery room.
Prudently, if blood loss is considered more than average, the hematocrit
is determined, and plans are made for close observation for potential
physiological deterioration. Blood loss determination as recommended by
the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019b) is

discussed in detail in Chapter 42. Urine output measured hourly is one of the
most important “vital signs.” Unless diuretic agents are given—and these
are seldom indicated with active bleeding—accurately measured urine
flow reflects renal perfusion. This in turn reflects perfusion of other vital
organs. The volume of urine output should be ≥30 mL/hr and preferably ≥50
mL/hr.
Another important factor to consider with management of hemorrhage is
whether there are adequate procoagulants to achieve clot formation and
stability. Many cases of severe obstetrical hemorrhage are further
complicated by disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC), in which
blood has dysfunctional coagulation (p. 775).

MANAGEMENT OF HEMORRHAGE
■ Hypovolemic Shock
Shock from hemorrhage evolves through several stages (Cannon, 2018).
Early, the mean arterial pressure, stroke volume, cardiac output, central
venous pressure, and pulmonary capillary wedge pressure decline. Greater
differences in arteriovenous oxygen content values reflect enhanced tissue
oxygen extraction, although overall oxygen consumption falls.
Blood flow to capillary beds is controlled by arterioles, which are
resistance vessels and partially controlled by the central nervous system
(CNS). However, approximately 70 percent of total blood volume is
contained in venules, which are passive resistance vessels controlled by
humoral factors. Thus, the catecholamine release during hemorrhage prompts
greater venular tone, and this provides an autotransfusion from this
capacitance reservoir. This volume boost is accompanied by compensatory
rises in heart rate, systemic and pulmonary vascular resistance, and
myocardial contractility. At the same time, selective, CNS-mediated
arteriolar constriction or relaxation, termed autoregulation, preferentially
redistributes cardiac output and blood volume. Thus, more blood flow is
diverted to the heart, brain, and adrenal glands, whereas perfusion to the
kidneys, splanchnic beds, muscles, skin, and uterus is relatively diminished.
When the blood volume deficit exceeds approximately 25 percent,
compensatory mechanisms usually are inadequate to maintain cardiac output
and blood pressure. Importantly, additional small losses of blood will now

cause rapid clinical deterioration. Following an initial augmented total
oxygen extraction by maternal tissue, maldistribution of blood flow results in
local tissue hypoxia and metabolic acidosis. This creates a vicious cycle of
vasoconstriction, organ ischemia, and cellular death.
Hemorrhage also activates lymphocytes and monocytes, which in turn
prompts endothelial cell activation and platelet aggregation (Cannon, 2018).
This endotheliopathy promotes release of vasoactive mediators that occlude
small vessels and further impair microcirculatory perfusion. Comorbid
preeclampsia or sepsis also leads to loss of capillary endothelial integrity,
additional loss of intravascular volume into the extracellular space, and
platelet aggregation. These then can incite DIC.
The pathophysiological events just described create important but often
overlooked extracellular fluid and electrolyte shifts involved in both the
genesis and successful treatment of hypovolemic shock. These include
changes in the cellular transport of various ions such as sodium and water
into skeletal muscle as well as potassium loss. Replacement of extracellular
fluid and intravascular volume are both necessary. Patient survival rates are
enhanced in acute hemorrhagic shock if blood plus crystalloid solution are
given compared with blood transfusions alone.

■ Fluid Resuscitation
Whenever excessive blood loss is suspected, steps are simultaneously taken
to identify the bleeding source and to begin resuscitation. Refer to the
algorithm for hemorrhage management (Fig. 42-3, p. 735). If the woman is
undelivered, restoration of blood volume benefits both mother and fetus. It
also prepares for emergent delivery. If she is postpartum, immediately
identifying uterine atony, retained placental fragments, or genital tract
lacerations is essential. One or two large-bore intravenous infusion systems
are ideally established promptly, crystalloid solutions are rapidly infused,
and blood products are ordered. An operating room is readied, and a
surgical and anesthesia team are quickly assembled. Specific management of
hemorrhage is further dependent on its etiology. A neonatal resuscitation
team is included if imminent delivery is planned.
Serious hemorrhage demands prompt and adequate refilling of the
intravascular compartment with crystalloid solutions. These rapidly
equilibrate into the extravascular space, and only 20 percent of crystalloid

remains intravascular in critically ill patients after 1 hour (Zuckerbraun,
2010). Because of this, initial fluid is infused in a volume two to three
times the estimated blood loss.

Crystalloid Versus Colloid Solutions
Resuscitation of hypovolemic shock with colloid versus crystalloid solutions
has been debated. In a Cochrane review of resuscitation of nonpregnant
critically ill patients, Lewis and coworkers (2018) found selection of
colloids versus crystalloids probably makes little or no difference to
mortality rates. Similar results were found in the Saline versus Albumin
Fluid Evaluation (SAFE) randomized trial of almost 7000 nonpregnant
patients (Finfer, 2004). At Parkland Hospital, acute volume resuscitation is
preferably done with crystalloid solutions and blood.
Either a saline-based or a balanced crystalloid solution may be infused.
The latter includes Ringer lactate and Plasma-Lyte solutions, which have
electrolyte compositions similar to plasma. In some studies, but not in all,
balanced crystalloid solutions were found to be superior to saline-based
ones (Semler, 2018; Yule, 2020). Excessive saline-based crystalloid solution
can theoretically lead to hyperchloremic acidosis. In comparisons, the
difficulty lies in separating the effects of the underlying pathophysiology
driving the acidosis.

■ Blood Replacement
Type and Screen Versus Crossmatch
A blood type and antibody screen should be performed for any woman at
significant risk for hemorrhage. Because prediction of women at risk for
postpartum hemorrhage is poor, we perform type and screen in all women
upon admission to labor and delivery. Screening involves mixing maternal
serum with standard reagent red cells that carry antigens to which most of the
common clinically significant antibodies react. Instead, crossmatching
involves the use of actual donor erythrocytes rather than the standardized red
cells. This process is efficient, and only 0.03 to 0.07 percent of patients
identified as having no antibodies are subsequently found to them (Boral,
1979). Importantly, administration of screened blood rarely results in
adverse clinical sequelae.

Transfusion Thresholds
The hematocrit level or hemoglobin concentration threshold that mandates
blood transfusion is controversial (Bienstock, 2021). Cardiac output does not
substantively drop until the hemoglobin concentration falls to approximately
7 g/dL or when the hematocrit approximates 20 volume percent. Military
combat trauma units have used a target hematocrit of 21 volume percent, and
at this level, most experts recommend consideration of red cell transfusion
(Carson, 2017; Kogutt, 2019). In general, with ongoing obstetrical
hemorrhage, we recommend rapid blood infusion when the hematocrit is <25
volume percent. Other decision-modifying factors are whether the fetus is
undelivered; surgery is imminent or ongoing operative blood loss is
expected; or maternal hypoxia, vascular collapse, or other factors are
present.
Limited data address these issues. In a study from the Canadian Critical
Care Trials Group, nonpregnant patients were randomly assigned to
restrictive red cell transfusions to maintain hemoglobin concentration >7
g/dL or to liberal transfusions to maintain the hemoglobin level at 10 to 12
g/dL. The 30-day mortality rate was similar—19 versus 23 percent—in the
restrictive versus liberal groups, respectively (Hébert, 1999). Transfusion
therapy in nonpregnant patients with septic shock had similar mortality rates
when 7 g/dL was compared with 9 g/dL as targets for transfusions (Holst,
2014). The number of units transfused in a given woman to reach a target
hematocrit depends on her body mass and on the expectations of
additional blood loss.

Blood Component Products
The content and effects of transfusion of various blood components are
shown in Table 44-1. Because whole blood is rarely available, most women
with obstetrical hemorrhage and ongoing massive blood loss are given
packed red cells, crystalloid solutions, and blood components. As
subsequently discussed, many institutions use massive transfusion protocols
(MTPs) designed to anticipate all facets of massive obstetrical hemorrhage.
These protocols commonly contain plasma, cryoprecipitate, and platelets in
various ratios (Cunningham, 2015; Shields, 2011).

TABLE 44-1. Blood Products Commonly Transfused in Obstetrical
Hemorrhage

Several studies have assessed plasma:red cell ratios with MTPs used in
civilian trauma units and military combat hospitals (Hardin, 2014; Rahouma,
2018). Patients receiving a massive transfusion—defined as 10 or more units
of blood—had much higher survival rates as the ratio of plasma to red cell
units neared 1:1.4, that is, one unit of plasma given for each 1.4 units of
packed red cells. By way of contrast, the highest mortality group had a ratio
of 1:8.
From the foregoing, when red cell replacement exceeds five units or so,
evaluation of platelet count, clotting studies, and plasma fibrinogen
concentration is reasonable (Bienstock, 2021; Pacheco, 2019). In the woman
with obstetrical hemorrhage, the platelet count should be maintained
>50,000/µL by the infusion of platelet concentrates. A fibrinogen level <150
mg/dL or a sufficiently prolonged PT or PTT in a woman with surgical
bleeding is an indication for replacement. Fresh-frozen plasma is
administered in doses of 10 to 15 mL/kg, or alternatively, cryoprecipitate is
infused (see Table 44-1).
At Parkland Hospital, we use a standardized response to active
hemorrhage. If whole blood is not available, the following escalation of
blood products is applied: 2 units packed red blood cells, and if continued
bleeding, 2 units packed red blood cells and 2 units fresh-frozen plasma are
automatically ordered. Beyond this, MTP is initiated.

Whole Blood and Packed Red Blood Cells

Compatible whole blood is ideal for management of severe obstetrical
hemorrhage. It has a shelf life of 40 days, and 70 percent of the transfused
red cells function for at least 24 hours following transfusion. One unit raises
the hematocrit by 3 to 4 volume percent. Important for obstetrical
hemorrhage, whole blood replaces many coagulation factors needed in
obstetrics—especially fibrinogen—and its plasma treats hypovolemia. A
collateral derivative is that women with severe hemorrhage are resuscitated
with fewer blood donor exposures than with packed red cells and
components.
Experience at Parkland Hospital supports the preferable use of whole
blood for massive hemorrhage (Alexander, 2009; Hernandez, 2012). Of more
than 66,000 deliveries, women with obstetrical hemorrhage treated with
whole blood had significantly lower incidences of severe maternal morbidity
that included renal failure, acute respiratory distress syndrome, pulmonary
edema, hypofibrinogenemia, intensive care unit admissions, or maternal
death compared with those given packed red cells and component therapy.
One unit of packed erythrocytes is derived from one unit of whole blood to
have a hematocrit of 55 to 80 volume percent. One unit will increase the
hematocrit by 3 to 4 volume percent depending on the size of the woman.

Dilutional Coagulopathy
A major drawback of massive hemorrhage treatment with crystalloid
solutions and packed red blood cells is depletion of platelets and clotting
factors. Discussed later, this can lead to a dilutional coagulopathy that is
clinically indistinguishable from DIC (Cunningham, 2015; Hossain, 2013).
Thrombocytopenia is the most frequent coagulation defect found with blood
loss and multiple transfusions. In addition, packed red cells have only very
small amounts of soluble clotting factors, and stored whole blood is deficient
in platelets and in factors V, VIII, and XI. Thus, hypofibrinogenemia and
prolongation of the prothrombin (PT) and partial thromboplastin times (PTT)
are other sequelae. Because many causes of obstetrical hemorrhage also
cause DIC, the distinction between dilutional and consumptive coagulopathy
can be confusing. Fortunately, treatment for both is similar.

Platelets

Platelet transfusions are considered with ongoing obstetrical hemorrhage if
the platelet count falls below 50,000/µL (Kenny, 2015). In the nonsurgical
patient, bleeding is rarely encountered if the platelet count is 10,000/µL or
higher (Murphy, 2010). The preferable source of platelets is one “bag”
obtained by single-donor apheresis. This contains the equivalent of one unit
each from six individual donors. Depending on maternal size, each singledonor-apheresis, six-unit bag raises the platelet count by approximately
20,000/µL. If these bags are not available, then individual-donor platelet
units are used, and six to eight such units are generally transfused.
Importantly, the donor plasma in platelet units must be compatible with
recipient erythrocytes. Further, because some red blood cells are invariably
transfused along with the platelets, only units from D-negative donors should
be given to D-negative recipients.

Fresh-frozen Plasma
This component is prepared by separating plasma from whole blood and then
freezing it. Approximately 30 minutes are required for frozen plasma to thaw.
It is a source of all stable and labile clotting factors, including fibrinogen.
Thus, it is often used for treatment of women with consumptive or dilutional
coagulopathy. Plasma is not a suitable volume expander in the absence of
specific clotting factor deficiencies. It is considered in a bleeding woman
with a fibrinogen level <150 mg/dL or with an abnormal PT or PTT.
An alternative to frozen plasma is liquid plasma (LQP). This neverfrozen plasma is stored at 1 to 60 C for up to 40 days, and its use compares
favorably with fresh-frozen plasma (Backholder, 2017). Liquid plasma is not
universally available in many centers.

Cryoprecipitate and Fibrinogen Concentrate
Each unit of cryoprecipitate is prepared from one unit of fresh-frozen plasma.
Each 10- to 15-mL unit contains at least 200 mg of fibrinogen along with
factor VIII:C, factor VIII:von Willebrand factor, factor XIII, and fibronectin
(American Association of Blood Banks, 2017). It is usually given as a
“pool” or “bag” using an aliquot of fibrinogen concentrate taken from 8 to
120 donors. Cryoprecipitate is an ideal source of fibrinogen when levels are
dangerously low and surgical incisions show oozing. Because of transit time,
the return of cryoprecipitate to transfusion services is often not feasible and

is considered wastage if not deployed. Nearly 17 percent of ordered
cryoprecipitate has been reported to be wasted in labor and delivery units,
and this is the most commonly wasted product (Yee, 2019). Another
alternative is virus-inactivated fibrinogen concentrate (Ng, 2020). These
pooled fibrinogen products are marketed as RiaSTAP and Fibryna. Each
gram of concentrate raises the plasma fibrinogen level approximately 40
mg/dL. These concentrates are used to treat congenital hypofibrinogenemia
syndromes.

Recombinant Activated Factor VII
This synthetic vitamin K–dependent protein is available as NovoSeven.
Recombinant activated factor VII (rFVIIa) binds to exposed tissue factor at
the injury site to generate thrombin that activates platelets and the coagulation
cascade. Since its introduction, rFVIIa has been used to help control
hemorrhage from surgery, trauma, and obstetrical causes (Goodnough, 2016;
Murakami, 2015). Many Level I trauma centers include it in MTPs.
Importantly, rFVIIa will not be effective if the plasma fibrinogen level is <50
mg/dL or the platelet count is <30,000/µL.
One concern with rFVIIa is associated arterial—and to a lesser degree—
venous thrombosis. In a review of 35 randomized trials, arterial
thromboembolism developed in 55 percent (Levi, 2010). A second concern
is that it has been found to have only marginal efficacy (Pacheco, 2019).

Tranexamic Acid
Normally, plasminogen binds with tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) to form
plasmin. This binding degrades fibrin into fibrinogen–fibrin degradation
products and leads to clot lysis. Instead, tranexamic acid (TXA) reversibly
binds to plasminogen, and thereby blocks plasmin binding to fibrin. Fibrin
strands are not broken, and a clot persists to slow down bleeding.
Ahmadzia and coworkers (2021) recently reported the
pharmacodynamics of TXA at cesarean delivery using rotational
thromboelastometry. TXA inhibited tPA-induced clot lysis in a dosedependent manner. In the randomized WOMAN trial of gravidas with
hemorrhage following vaginal birth or during cesarean delivery, mortality
rates from obstetrical hemorrhage were 1.2 percent in those given a 1-g
intravenous TXA dose plus traditional care for bleeding. This rate was

statistically lower than the 1.7-percent death rate in women given traditional
care alone (WOMAN Trial Collaborators, 2017). The trial was carried out
in developing nations and because of the results, the drug is recommended by
the World Health Organization (2017). In a large randomized trial of
tranexamic acid given for prophylaxis, the drug did not decrease the rate of
postpartum hemorrhage following vaginal delivery (Sentilhes, 2018). In the
Tranexamic Acid for Preventing Postpartum Hemorrhage Following a
Cesarean Delivery—TRAAP2 trial—women undergoing cesarean delivery
who were given tranexamic acid prophylaxis had a lower incidence of redcell transfusions (Sentilhes, 2021).
Gayet-Ageron and coworkers (2018) conducted a metaanalysis with
more than 1000 patients with postpartum hemorrhage treated with TXA. They
also analyzed data from two randomized trials that included more than
40,000 women treated with TXA. They concluded that treatment must be
given soon after bleeding onset to reduce maternal mortality rates. Shakur
and colleagues (2018) performed a Cochrane database review and also
concluded that early TXA administration decreases maternal deaths.
Most of these studies were conducted in impoverished countries, and the
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019a) does not
recommend TXA for either prophylaxis or first-line treatment of obstetrical
hemorrhage. If used, administration within 3 hours of delivery is
recommended.

Massive Transfusion Protocols
As noted, these protocols are initiated once four to five units of packed red
cells have been given within 2 hours or so. These protocols speed blood
product delivery to provide early resuscitation and help avoid dilutional
coagulopathy. Once activated, packed red cells, plasma, platelets, and
fibrinogen are given set ratios (Table 44-2). Some protocols include rFVIIa,
TXA, or prothrombin complex concentrates (Jackson, 2018).
TABLE 44-2. Parkland Hospital Obstetrical Massive Transfusion Protocol

The data supporting the superiority of MTPs compared with traditional
component replacement to improve survival rates in obstetrical studies are
limited. Most reports describe nonpregnant trauma victims, but some
observational studies address obstetrical hemorrhage (Green, 2016;
Pacheco, 2016).

Viscoelastic Assays
Thromboelastography (TEG) and rotational thromboelastometry (ROTEM)
are point-of-care tests that assess coagulation in whole blood during massive
transfusions. These tests work by analyzing both clot formation and
breakdown in a whole blood sample from a given patient. Testing produces a
profile of coagulation dynamics, and displayed values indicate the speed and
quality of clot formation (Fig. 44-1). These assays provide information
regarding time to clot formation, clot strength, and fibrinolysis (Arnolds,
2020). Currently, they guide blood product replacement in trauma, liver
transplant, and cardiac surgery patients. Studies of TEG and ROTEM
techniques in pregnant women have confirmed the hypercoagulable state of
pregnancy and provide reference ranges for use in this population (Lee,
2021; McNamara, 2019; Pacheco, 2019).

FIGURE 44-1 Normal thromboelastograph (TEG). R (reaction time: start of test to clot forming. K
(clotting time): from start to 20 mm amplitude. Alpha (α) angle: speed of fibrin formation. A15, A20:
amplitude at 15 and 20 minutes. MCF: maximum clot firmness. LY30: amount of clot lysed at 30
minutes.

Although promising, they also have several limitations. For example, they
are less informative in a woman with torrential hemorrhage in whom clotting
function would need to be measured minute-by-minute. They cannot be used
to detect disorders of primary hemostasis (Solomon, 2012). A major
drawback is the risk of misinterpretation when tests are used by inadequately
trained personnel. Although use is gaining favor, we and others recommend
further study before these tests are widely applied for obstetrical hemorrhage
treatment (Amgalan, 2020). We have found this testing modality to be more
applicable after initial management of hemorrhage and with intensive care
recovery than during acute hemorrhage.

Cell Salvage and Autologous Transfusion
Preoperative patient phlebotomy and autologous blood storage for
transfusion in obstetrics has been disappointing. Exceptions are women with
a rare blood type or with unusual antibodies (Pacheco, 2013; Sullivan,
2019).
Intraoperative blood salvage with reinfusion is considered a safe
intervention in obstetrical patients. This practice may aid women declining

transfusion (Chap. 30, p. 549). Prior concern centered on amnionic fluid
contamination and embolism (Dhariwal, 2014; Goucher, 2015). To evaluate
benefits, one trial randomly assigned 3028 women at risk for hemorrhage and
undergoing cesarean delivery either to routine care or to cell salvage. The
rate of nonautologous donor blood transfusion was not significantly reduced
in the cell salvage group—2.5 versus 3.5 percent (Khan, 2017). In another
study, Sullivan and colleagues (2019) routinely set up most cesarean
deliveries for autologous transfusions and reported a lower rate of
nonautologous donor transfusion. Similar to prior reports, no cases of
amnionic fluid embolism were reported in these two studies.

■ Transfusion Complications
Of serious known risks, transfusion of an incompatible blood component
may result in acute hemolysis. If severe, this can cause DIC, acute kidney
injury, and death. Preventable errors responsible for most of these reactions
frequently include mislabeling of a specimen or incorrectly transfusing a
patient not slated for those products.
The rate of such errors in the United States is estimated to be 1 case in
14,000 units, but these events are likely underreported (Lerner, 2010). A
transfusion reaction is characterized by fever, hypotension, tachycardia,
dyspnea, chest or back pain, flushing, severe anxiety, and hemoglobinuria.
Immediate supportive measures include stopping the transfusion, treating
hypotension and hyperkalemia, provoking diuresis, and alkalinizing the urine.
Transfusion-related acute lung injury (TRALI) and transfusionassociated circulatory overload (TACO) are the most common causes of
transfusion-related mortality (Semple, 2019). Affected women
characteristically have severe dyspnea, hypoxia, and pulmonary edema that
develop within 6 hours of transfusion (Peters, 2015). Of the two, TACO is
more common, and its incidence nears 1 percent. TRALI is estimated to
complicate at least 1 in 12,000 transfusions (Carson, 2017). Although their
pathogenesis is incompletely understood, injury to the pulmonary capillaries
may arise from human leukocyte antigen (HLA) antibodies and human
neutrophil antibodies (HNA) in donor plasma (McCullough, 2016).
Management is supportive and may include mechanical ventilation (Chap.
50, p. 885).

Bacterial infection from transfusion of a contaminated blood component
is unusual because organism growth is discouraged by refrigeration. The
most often implicated contaminants of red cells include Yersinia,
Pseudomonas, Serratia, Acinetobacter, and Escherichia species. The more
important risk is from bacterial contamination of platelets, which are stored
at room temperature. Current estimates are that 1 in 1000 to 2000 platelet
units are contaminated. Death from transfusion-related sepsis is 1 case in
17,000 transfused single-donor platelets and 1 case in 61,000 transfused
apheresis-donor packs (Lerner, 2010).
Viral infection risks from transfusion have been curtailed. The estimated
risk of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) or of hepatitis C virus infection
in screened blood is 1 case in 1 to 2 million transfused units (Carson, 2017).
The estimated hepatitis B transmission rate is <1 case in 100,000 transfused
units (Jackson, 2003). Because of the high prevalence of the virus,
cytomegalovirus-infected leukocytes are often transfused.
Risks for transmitting West Nile virus, parvovirus B19, human Tlymphotropic virus type 1, and toxoplasmosis are slight (American
Association of Blood Banks, 2013; Foroutan-Rad, 2016). Although rare,
Zika virus has emerged as another relevant transfusion-transmitted infection
(Motta, 2016). Collection of all whole blood components now includes
testing for Zika virus (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2018). At
this time, transmission of SARS-CoV-2 virus from a COVID-positive donor
is hypothetical (Leblanc, 2020).

OBSTETRICAL COAGULOPATHIES
The terms consumptive coagulopathy, defibrination syndrome, and
disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) are often used
interchangeably, but distinctions are important. Actual consumption of
procoagulants within the intravascular tree results in a consumptive
coagulopathy. In contrast, massive loss of procoagulants from hemorrhage
results in a dilutional coagulopathy. Semantics aside, consumptive
coagulopathy culminates in a systemic intravascular activation that
completely disrupts natural hemostasis. As a result, an ineffective balance of
natural anticoagulant mechanisms leads to widespread fibrin deposition that
can cause multiorgan failure (Levi, 2016).

■ Pregnancy-induced Coagulation Changes
During normal pregnancy, the balance between coagulation and fibrinolysis
changes to create a procoagulant state. Changes that promote coagulation
include appreciable elevation in the plasma concentrations of factors I
(fibrinogen), VII, VII, IX, and X. A partial list of these normal values is
found in the Appendix (p. 1228). Concurrently, levels of plasminogen, which
lyses fibrin, rise considerably. However, plasminogen activator inhibitor 1
and 2 (PAI-1 and PAI-2) levels also increase. Thus, plasmin activity usually
declines until after delivery (Hale, 2012; Hui, 2012). As shown in Figure 47, (p. 62), mean platelet count drops by 10 percent during pregnancy, and
platelet activation is enhanced (Kenny, 2015; Reese, 2018).
The net results of these changes include greater levels of fibrinopeptide
A, β-thromboglobulin, platelet factor 4, and fibrinogen–fibrin degradation
products, which includes D-dimers. In addition to lower concentrations of the
anticoagulant protein S, pregnancy-related hypercoagulability, and decreased
fibrinolysis, there is augmented—yet compensated—intravascular
coagulation that may function to maintain the uteroplacental interface.

■ Disseminated Intravascular Coagulation
Because of the many definitions and variable severity, the incidence of
consumptive coagulopathy in gravidas varies and ranges from 0.03 to 0.35
percent (Erez, 2014; Rattray, 2012). For example, some degree of significant
coagulopathy is found in virtually all cases of placental abruption and
amnionic fluid embolism. Other instances in which frequently occurring but
less recognized degrees of coagulation activation can be found include
sepsis; thrombotic microangiopathies; acute kidney injury; acute fatty liver;
severe preeclampsia; and hemolysis, elevated liver enzyme levels, low
platelet count (HELLP) syndrome (Cunningham, 2015).
When consumptive coagulopathy is severe, the likelihood of maternal and
perinatal morbidity and mortality rises. In one study of 49 cases, antecedent
causes included those listed above, and 59 percent received blood
transfusions, 18 percent underwent hysterectomy, 6 percent required renal
dialysis, and three mothers died (Rattray, 2012). In this series, the perinatal
mortality rate was 30 percent. From 2010 to 2011, DIC was the second most
common severe maternal morbidity indicator (Creanga, 2014). DIC was

associated with nearly a fourth of maternal deaths during this study period.
Despite these statistics, consumptive coagulopathy as the sole cause of
maternal death is uncommon and accounts for only 0.2 percent of pregnancyrelated deaths in the United States (Creanga, 2015).

■ Activation of Normal Coagulation
Instead of the “waterfall” sequential activation of the clotting cascade, a
current theory proposes that tissue factor—an integral membrane
glycoprotein—serves as the principal initiator of coagulation (Levi, 2016).
Coagulation then moves forward but incorporates a feedback loop. To begin,
tissue factor forms complexes with factor VII/VIIa to activate factors IX and
X. Tissue factor is found in highly vascularized organs such as the brain,
lungs, and placenta; in amnionic fluid; and in certain other cells (Kuczyfiski,
2002; Østerud, 2006; Uszyfiski, 2001).
Tissue factor–factor VIIa complexes ultimately generate activated factor
X (Xa) to initiate clotting. Subsequently, the previously labeled “intrinsic”
pathway amplifies this process. Specifically, the initial thrombin produced
directly activates factor XI by providing a feedback amplification loop (Fig.
44-2). The end result of this amplified coagulation process is fibrin
formation. This is then counterbalanced by the fibrinolytic system, in which
plasminogen is activated. Even this process is tied initially to tissue factor.
The final product is fibrin degradation products, sometimes called fibrin
split products, which include D-dimers.

FIGURE 44-2 Coagulation pathway schematic. FSP = fibrin split products; PAI = plasminogen
activator inhibitor; TFPI = tissue factor pathway inhibitor.

■ Activation of Pathological Coagulation
With DIC, pathological entities prompt tissue factor release from
subendothelial tissue and stimulated monocytes, which in turn provoke
cytokine release from the endothelium. With generalized endothelial
activation, diffuse activation of coagulation follows. This pathological cycle
of coagulation and fibrinolysis becomes clinically important when
coagulation factors and platelets are sufficiently depleted to create
consumptive coagulopathy.

Purpura fulminans is a severe—often lethal—form of consumptive
coagulopathy. It is caused by microthrombi in small blood vessels leading to
skin necrosis and sometimes vasculitis. Debridement of large areas of skin
over the extremities and buttocks frequently requires treatment in a burn unit.
Rarely, four-extremity amputation is required (Bhatti, 2019). Purpura
fulminans usually complicates sepsis in women with heterozygous protein C
deficiencies and low protein C serum levels (Bhatti, 2019; Levi, 2016).
Importantly, homozygous protein C or S deficiency results in neonatal
purpura fulminans, which is fatal (Chap. 55, p. 976).

■ Inciting Conditions
Several obstetrical syndromes can trigger consumptive coagulopathy. Of
these, placental abruption is the most common cause of severe consumptive
coagulopathy in obstetrics and is discussed more fully in Chapter 43 (p.
749). With preeclampsia, eclampsia, and HELLP syndrome, endothelial
activation is a hallmark. Perhaps 10 percent of HELLP cases have some
disseminated coagulation (Haram, 2017). In general, the clinical severity of
preeclampsia is directly correlated with thrombocytopenia and fibrin
degradation products (Gedik 2017; Kenny, 2015). That said, intravascular
coagulation is seldom severe enough to be clinically worrisome (Pritchard,
1976). Acute fatty liver of pregnancy also causes intravascular coagulation in
addition to decreased procoagulant synthesis (Chap. 58, p. 1034).
Amnionic fluid embolism is usually caused by intravenous embolization
of meconium-laden amnionic fluid. It results in rapid cardiorespiratory
collapse and profound consumptive coagulopathy. The Society for MaternalFetal Medicine (2021) has developed a checklist for the initial management
of amnionic fluid embolism. It is discussed in Chapter 42 (p. 745).
Sepsis stemming from various infections can be accompanied by endo-or
exotoxin release. Although a feature of sepsis syndrome includes activation
of coagulation, seldom does sepsis alone cause massive procoagulant
consumption. Escherichia coli bacteremia is frequently seen with antepartum
pyelonephritis and puerperal infections, however, accompanying
consumptive coagulopathy is usually not severe. Some notable exceptions are
septicemia caused by exotoxins released from group A Streptococcus
pyogenes, Staphylococcus aureus, or Clostridium perfringens, C sordellii,
or C novyi (Herrera, 2016; Pritchard, 1971). Treatment of sepsis and septic

shock is discussed in Chapter 50 (p. 889). Septic abortion—especially
associated with these organisms—can incite coagulation and worsen
hemorrhage.
Second-trimester induced abortions can stimulate intravascular
coagulation even in the absence of sepsis. Ben-Ami and associates (2012)
described a 1.6-percent incidence in 1249 late-second-trimester pregnancies
terminated by dilation and evacuation. Two thirds were done for fetal
demise, which may have contributed to coagulopathy (Kerns, 2019). Another
source of intense coagulation is instillation of hypertonic solutions to effect
midtrimester abortions. These are not commonly used currently for pregnancy
terminations. The mechanism is thought to initiate coagulation by
thromboplastin release into maternal circulation from the placenta, fetus, and
decidua by the necrobiotic effect of hypertonic solutions.
Prolonged retention of a dead fetus is an unusual cause of consumptive
coagulopathy today. Namely, fetal death can be easily confirmed, and highly
effective methods for labor induction are available. Moreover, if the dead
fetus is undelivered, most women enter spontaneous labor within 2 weeks
and gross disruption of maternal coagulation rarely develops before 4 weeks
(Pritchard, 1959, 1973). After 1 month, however, almost a fourth will
develop consumptive coagulopathy.

■ Diagnosis
Bioassay is an excellent method to detect or suspect clinically significant
coagulopathy. Excessive bleeding at sites of modest trauma characterizes
defective hemostasis. Examples include persistent bleeding from
venipuncture sites, nicks from preoperative shaving, trauma from bladder
catheterization, and spontaneous bleeding from the gums, nose, or
gastrointestinal tract. Purpura or petechiae at pressure sites such as
sphygmomanometer cuffs or tourniquets suggest significant
thrombocytopenia. Any surgical procedure provides the ultimate bioassay
and elicits generalized oozing from abdominal wall layers, the
retroperitoneal space, the episiotomy, or incisions and dissections for
cesarean delivery or hysterectomy.
Of laboratory tests, fibrinogen and D-dimer levels can be informative. In
late pregnancy, plasma fibrinogen levels typically have risen to 300 to 600
mg/dL. Thus, even with severe consumptive coagulopathy, levels may

sometimes be sufficiently high to protect against clinically harmful
hypofibrinogenemia. For example, defibrination caused by a placental
abruption might lower an initial fibrinogen level of 600 mg/dL to 250 mg/dL.
Although this would indicate massive fibrinogen consumption, levels are still
adequate to promote clinical coagulation. The clinically impactful threshold
usually approximates 150 mg/dL. The effects of serious hypofibrinogenemia
—less than 50 mg/dL—can be illustrated with clinical thrombin clot test.
With low fibrinogen levels, the clot formed from whole blood in a glass
phlebotomy tube will initially be soft and cannot retract in volume. Instead,
during the next half hour, platelet-induced clot retraction ensues, and this
causes a tighter clot to form.
As depicted in Figure 44-2, fibrinolysis cleaves fibrin into various fibrin
degradation products, and one of the smaller ones is the D-dimer. Several
sensitive assays contain monoclonal antibodies specific for D-dimers
(Johnson, 2019). Assay values are almost always abnormally high with
clinically significant consumptive coagulopathy. At least in obstetrical
disorders, quantification does not correlate with outcomes. Examples of the
magnitude of fibrin split product elevations in various obstetrical
coagulopathies are shown in Figure 44-3.

FIGURE 44-3 Quantification of fibrin split products in various obstetrical syndromes that cause
disseminated intravascular coagulation. AFLP = acute fatty liver of pregnancy; HELLP = hemolysis,
elevated liver enzyme levels, low platelet count. (Reproduced with permission from Cunningham FG,
Nelson DB: Disseminated intravascular coagulation syndromes in obstetrics. Obstet Gynecol. 2015
Nov;126(5):999–1011)

Thrombocytopenia is likely if petechiae are abundant or if clotted blood
fails to retract within an hour or so. Confirmation is provided by a low
platelet count. If severe preeclampsia syndrome is comorbid, qualitative
platelet dysfunction may coexist (Chap. 40, p. 696).
Prothrombin time (PT) and partial thromboplastin time (PTT) are
standard coagulation tests. Prolongation may stem from very low fibrinogen
concentrations, from appreciably reduced levels of the procoagulants needed
to generate thrombin, or from large amounts of circulating fibrinogen–fibrin
degradation products.
Thromboelastometry and thromboelastography are point-of-care tests
used as adjuncts to conventional laboratory studies (McNamara, 2019;
Pacheco, 2019). Their current role may serve to guide blood product
replacements as discussed earlier (p. 774). Using many of these tests, several

organizations have attempted to establish a more uniform definition of DIC.
One is the International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis (ISTH)
scoring system. The score is used only after a condition known to cause
intravascular coagulation is identified and is calculated using a combination
of laboratory tests. Composite ISTH-DIC scores <5 suggest nonovert DIC,
whereas scores ≥5 are compatible with overt DIC. A scoring system for
nonovert DIC has been developed by Alhousseini and coworkers (2020).
These scoring systems have not been applied widely in obstetrics
(Hizkiyahu, 2019; Jonard, 2016; Nelson, 2014).

■ General Management
To halt ongoing defibrination, identifying and removing the inciting source is
a priority. With incisions or extensive lacerations accompanied by severe
hemorrhage, rapid replacement of procoagulants is usually indicated.
Vigorous restoration and maintenance of the circulation to treat hypovolemia
cannot be overemphasized. Adequate perfusion restores hepatic and
endothelial synthesis of procoagulants and permits prompt removal of
activated coagulation factors, fibrin, and fibrin degradation products by the
reticuloendothelial system.
Aside from these fundamental steps, few other agents have proved
soundly effective. Although its use is seemingly counterintuitive,
unfractionated heparin has now been abandoned. Other agents not
recommended for first-line use include tranexamic acid or epsilonaminocaproic acid, both antifibrinolytic agents (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019a; Pacheco, 2017). This is because the
fibrinolytic system is necessary for dissolution of widespread fibrin
thromboses caused by generalized intravascular coagulation (Levi, 2016).
Discussed earlier (p. 773), recombinant factor VIIa (rFVIIa) can be used to
help control severe obstetrical hemorrhage from other causes. However,
current clinical evidence is insufficient to make firm recommendations on its
administration for obstetrical coagulopathies.

SURGICAL MANAGEMENT OF HEMORRHAGE
Several invasive procedures can help to arrest severe postpartum
hemorrhage. A report from the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality

concluded that most studies addressing these methods are of poor quality
(Likis, 2015). In one study of 6660 women with postpartum hemorrhage, 4
percent underwent an invasive procedure, and 1 percent had a hysterectomy
(Kayem, 2016). The failure rate of conservative surgical and embolization
procedures was 15 percent.
Of specific methods, use of uterine balloon tamponade for treatment of
atony has doubled in the past decade (Merriam, 2020; Suarez, 2020). It is
described in Chapter 42 (p. 737).
For low-pressure bleeding, topical hemostatic agents can be used to
control persistent surgical oozing. These were reviewed by Stachowicz and
colleagues (2020). Other than for cesarean hysterectomy, these are seldom
used in obstetrical hemorrhage.

■ Uterine Compression Sutures
This surgical technique uses a no. 2 chromic suture to compress the anterior
and posterior uterine walls together (B-Lynch, 1997). Because they give the
appearance of suspenders, they are also called braces (Fig. 44-4). Several
modifications of the B-Lynch technique have been described (Gilmandyar,
2019; Matsubara, 2013; Nelson, 2007).

FIGURE 44-4 Uterine compression suture or “brace.” The B-Lynch suture technique is illustrated
from an anterior view of the uterus in Figures A, B, and D and a posterior view in Figure C. The
numbers denote the sequential path of the suture and are shown in more than one figure. Step 1.
Beginning below the incision, the needle pierces the lower uterine segment to enter the uterine cavity.
Step 2. The needle exits the cavity above the incision. The suture then loops up and around the fundus
to the posterior uterine surface. Step 3. The needle pierces the posterior uterine wall to reenter the

uterine cavity. The suture then traverses to the opposite side within the cavity. Step 4. The needle exits
the uterine cavity through the posterior uterine wall. From the back of the uterus, the suture loops up
and around the fundus to the front of the uterus. Step 5. The needle pierces the myometrium above the
incision to reenter the uterine cavity. Step 6. The needle exits below the incision, and the sutures at
points 1 and 6 are tied below the incision. The hysterotomy incision is then closed in the usual fashion.

B-Lynch sutures are mainly used to treat atony. These may help diminish
DIC-associated bleeding, while coagulation is corrected by transfusion.
Success rates vary by indication. For example, B-Lynch (2005) cited 948
cases with only 7 failures. Conversely, in other series, overall failure rates
were 20 to 25 percent (Kaya, 2016; Kayem, 2011).
Some unique complications can rarely follow compression sutures
(Matsubara, 2013). Most involve variations of uterine ischemic necrosis
with peritonitis (Gottlieb, 2008; Joshi, 2004; Treloar, 2006). In most cases,
subsequent pregnancies are uneventful if compression sutures are used (An,
2013). A few women with B-Lynch sutures, however, developed uterine wall
defects or uterine cavity synechiae (Akoury, 2008; Alouini, 2011; Ibrahim,
2013).

■ Artery Ligation
Ligation of arterial blood flow to the uterus can halt or diminish obstetrical
hemorrhage. Common indications include uterine hysterotomy incision
laceration, uterine atony, and abnormal placentation.
Uterine artery ligation may be unilateral or bilateral and is used mainly
for lacerations at the lateral part of a hysterotomy incision (Fig. 44-5). In our
experiences, this procedure is less helpful for other hemorrhage etiologies. In
rare cases with torrential hemorrhage from placenta accreta syndrome, a
tourniquet wrapped around the lower uterine segment may slow bleeding
sufficiently while resuscitation ensues and dissection for hysterectomy is
performed.

FIGURE 44-5 Uterine artery ligation. The suture goes through the lateral uterine wall anteriorly,
curves posteriorly, and then re-enters anteriorly. When tied, it encompasses the uterine artery.

Internal iliac artery ligation may also be unilateral or bilateral. For
years, ligation has been used to reduce pelvic hemorrhage. However, the
procedure may be technically difficult and is successful in only half of cases
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019a; Bienstock,
2021). Wei and colleagues (2019) reported it to be successful for improved
hemostasis with placenta previa. It is not particularly helpful for abating
hemorrhage with postpartum atony (Clark, 1985).
For internal iliac ligation, adequate exposure is obtained by opening the
peritoneum over the common iliac artery and dissecting down to the
bifurcation of the external and internal iliac arteries (Fig. 44-6). Branches
distal to the external iliac arteries are palpated to verify pulsations at or
below the inguinal area. Ligation of the internal iliac artery at a point 5 cm
distal to the common iliac bifurcation will usually avoid the internal iliac

artery’s posterior division branches (Bleich, 2007). The areolar sheath of the
artery is incised longitudinally, and a right-angle clamp is carefully passed
just beneath the artery from lateral to medial. Care must be taken not to
perforate contiguous large veins, especially the internal iliac vein. Suture—
usually nonabsorbable—is passed under the artery with a clamp, and the
vessel is then securely ligated.

FIGURE 44-6 Ligation of the right internal iliac artery. Unembalmed cadaveric dissection shows the
right-angle clamp passing underneath the anterior division of the internal iliac artery just distal to its
posterior division. (Reproduced with permission from Dr. Marlene Corton.)

The most important mechanism of action with internal iliac artery ligation
is an 85-percent reduction in pulse pressure in those arteries distal to the
ligation (Burchell, 1968). This converts an arterial pressure system into one

with pressures approaching those in the venous circulation. This creates
vessels more amenable to hemostasis via pressure and clot formation.
Even bilateral internal iliac artery ligation does not appear to interfere
with subsequent reproduction. Nizard and colleagues (2003) reported
subsequent pregnancy in 17 such women. From a total of 21 pregnancies, 13
were normal, 3 ended with miscarriage, 3 were terminated, and 2 were
ectopic.

■ Angiographic Embolization
This modality is now used for many causes of intractable hemorrhage when
surgical access is difficult. Its use has increased remarkably in the past
decade (Merriam, 2020). In more than 500 pregnancy-related cases,
embolization was effective in 90 percent (Grönvall, 2014; Lee, 2012;
Poujade, 2011; Zhang, 2015). After his review, Rouse (2013) concluded that
embolization can be used to arrest refractory postpartum hemorrhage. Other
reports have been less enthusiastic. Fertility is not impaired, and many
subsequent successful pregnancies have been reported (Fiori, 2009;
Kolomeyevskaya, 2009). An important caveat for these procedures is that
women with hemodynamic instability related to active bleeding should not
be removed from the operating room.
Complications are relatively uncommon but can be severe. Case reports
detail instances of iatrogenic iliac artery rupture, uterine ischemic necrosis,
and uterine infection (Grönvall, 2014; Katakam, 2009; Nakash, 2012). A rare
case of massive buttock necrosis and paraplegia followed bilateral internal
iliac artery embolization (Al-Thunyun, 2012). A myometrial defect in
subsequent pregnancy also has been reported (Choo, 2019).
In a few instances, massive blood loss and difficult surgical dissection is
anticipated. The use of balloon-tipped catheters preoperatively inserted into
the iliac or uterine arteries is described in management of placenta accreta
spectrum (Chap. 43, p. 759).

■ Aortic Compression
Prophylactic use of an aortic balloon occlusion device has been reported to
reduce blood loss and the need for hysterectomy (Chen, 2019). Also known
as resuscitative endovascular balloon occlusion of the aorta (REBOA),

such occlusion lowers the perfusion pressure distally, increases cardiac
afterload, and redistributes blood volume to the heart and brain (Cannon,
2018). Prolonged occlusion can result in lower limb ischemia requiring
amputation. Whittington and colleagues (2020) described its successful
prophylactic use in 11 women with placenta accreta spectrum disorders.
Instead, manual compression of the aorta above the sacral promontory
can be used in cases in which pelvic hemorrhage is torrential. If the abdomen
is closed, pressure placed above the umbilicus reduces blood pressure
distally (Barbieri, 2018).

■ Pelvic Packing
If hysterectomy fails to curtail hemorrhage, then pelvic packing with gauze
and termination of the operation may be considered (Pacheo, 2018; Touhami,
2018). Rolls of gauze are packed to provide constant local pressure. In some
cases, this may serve as a temporizing step prior to interventional
embolization. In other cases, packing alone may be left for 48 to 72 hours. If
the patient is stable and bleeding appears to have stopped, packing is
removed. In one review of 104 cases, the success rate was 79 percent.
Packing failed in 24 patients, and 13 of these women died, yielding an
overall mortality rate of 13 percent (Touhami, 2018).
The umbrella or parachute pack uses a similar concept (Logothetopulos,
1926). Although seldom used today, it can be lifesaving if all other measures
have failed, especially in low-resource areas (Dildy, 2006; Touhami, 2018).
The pack is constructed of a sturdy sterile plastic bag that is filled with gauze
rolls that are unwound and knotted together. Sufficient rolls are used to
provide adequate volume in the bag to fill the pelvis. The pack is introduced
transabdominally with the stalk exiting the vagina. Mild traction is applied
by tying the stalk to a 1-liter fluid bag, which is hung over the foot of the bed.
The umbrella pack is removed vaginally after 24 hours.

REFERENCES
Ahmadzia HK, Luban NL, Li S, et al: Optimal use of intravenous tranexamic acid for hemorrhage
prevention in pregnant women. Am J Obstet Gynecol 225(1):85.e1, 2021
Akoury H, Sherman C: Uterine wall partial thickness necrosis following combined B-Lynch and Cho
square sutures for the treatment of primary postpartum hemorrhage. J Obstet Gynaecol Can 30:421,

2008
Alexander JM, Sarode R, McIntire DD, et al: Use of whole blood in the management of hypovolemia
due to obstetric hemorrhage. Obstet Gynecol 113:1320, 2009
Alhousseini A, Romero R, Benshalom-Tirosh N, et al: Nonovert disseminated intravascular coagulation
(DIC) in pregnancy: a new scoring system for the identification of patients at risk for obstetrical
hemorrhage requiring blood product transfusion. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med February 3, 2020
[Epub ahead of print]
Alouini S, Coly S, Megier P, Lemaire B, et al: Multiple square sutures for postpartum hemorrhage:
results and hysteroscopic assessment. Am J Obstet Gynecol 205(4):335, 2011
Al-Thunyan A, Al-Meshal O, Al-Hussainan H, et al: Buttock necrosis and paraplegia after bilateral
internal iliac artery embolization for postpartum hemorrhage. Obstet Gynecol 120(2 Pt 2):468, 2012
American Association of Blood Banks: Circular of information for the use of human blood and blood
components. 2017. Available at: https://www.aabb.org/docs/default-source/default-documentlibrary/resources/circular-of-information-10-17.pdf. Accessed February 14, 2021
American Association of Blood Banks: Human parvovirus B19. 2013. Available at:
https://www.aabb.org/tm/eid/Documents/Human—Parvovirus—B19.pdf. Accessed February 14,
2021
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Postpartum hemorrhage. Practice Bulletin No.
183, October 2019a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Quantitative blood loss in obstetric hemorrhage.
Committee Opinion No. 794, December 2019b
Amgalan A, Allen T, Othman M, et al: Systematic review of viscoelastic testing (TEG/ROTEM) in
obstetrics and recommendations from the Women’s SSC of the ISTH. J Thromb Haemost
18(8):1813, 2020
An GH, Ryu HM, Kim My, et al: Outcomes of subsequent pregnancies after uterine compression
sutures for postpartum hemorrhage. Obstet Gynecol 122(3):565, 2013
Arnolds DE, Scavone BM: Thromboelastographic assessment of fibrinolytic activity in postpartum
hemorrhage: a retrospective single-center observational study. Anesth Analg 131(5):1373, 2020
Backholder L, Green L, Huish S, et al: A paired comparison of thawed and liquid plasma. Transfusion
57:881, 2017
Barbieri RL: Postpartum hemorrhage: aortic compression to reduce pelvic bleeding. OBG Management
30(10):10, 2018
Ben-Ami I, Fuchs N, Schneider D, et al: Coagulopathy associated with dilation and evacuation for
second-trimester abortion. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 91(1):10, 2012
Bhatti UF, Williams AM, Raghavendran K, et al: Four-extremity amputation following disseminated
intravascular coagulation and purpura fulminans. BMJ Case Rep 12(3):e228028, 2019
Bienstock JL, Ahizechukwu C, Eke C, et al: Postpartum hemorrhage. N Engl J Med 384:1635, 2021
Bleich AT, Rahn DD, Wieslander CK, et al: Posterior division of the internal iliac artery: anatomic
variations and clinical applications. Am J Obstet Gynecol 197:658.e1, 2007
B-Lynch C: Partial ischemic necrosis of the uterus following a uterine brace compression suture. BJOG
112:126, 2005
B-Lynch CB, Coker A, Laval AH, et al: The B-Lynch surgical technique for control of massive
postpartum hemorrhage: an alternative to hysterectomy? Five cases reported. BJOG 104:372, 1997
Boral LI, Hill SS, Apollon CJ, et al: The type and antibody screen, revisited. Am J Clin Pathol 71:578,
1979
Burchell RC: Physiology of internal iliac artery ligation. J Obstet Gynaecol Br Commonw 75:642, 1968

Cannon JW: Hemorrhagic shock. N Engl J Med 378(4):370, 2018
Carson JL, Triulzi DJ, Ness PM: Indications for and adverse effects of red-cell transfusion. N Engl J
Med 377:13, 2017
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Zika and blood transfusions. 2018. Available at:
https://www.cdc.gov/zika/transmission/blood-transfusion.html. Accessed February 14, 2021
Chen L, Wang X, Wang H, et al: Clinical evaluation of prophylactic abdominal aortic balloon occlusion in
patients with placenta accreta: a systematic review and meta-analysis. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth
19(1):30, 2019
Choo S, Wiseman D, MacMillan J, et al: Myometrial defect in a subsequent pregnancy after uterine
artery embolization for postpartum hemorrhage, in the absence of leiomyomas or previous uterine
surgery. J Obstet Gynaecol Can 42(2):173, 2019
Clark SL, Phelan JP, Yeh SY: Hypogastric artery ligation for obstetric hemorrhage. Obstet Gynecol
66:353, 1985
Creanga AA, Bateman BT, Kuklina EV, et al: Racial and ethnic disparities in severe maternal morbidity:
a multistate analysis, 2008–2010. Am J Obstet Gynecol 210(5):435.e1, 2014
Creanga AA, Berg CJ, Syverson C, et al: Pregnancy-related mortality in the United States, 2006–2010.
Obstet Gynecol 125(1):5, 2015
Cunningham FG, Nelson DB: Disseminated intravascular coagulation syndromes in obstetrics. Obstet
Gynecol 126(5):999, 2015
Dhariwal SK, Khan KS, Allard S, et al: Does current evidence support the use of intraoperative cell
salvage in reducing the need for blood transfusion in caesarean section? Curr Opin Obstet Gynecol
26(6):425, 2014
Dildy GA, Scott AR, Saffer CS: An effective pressure pack for severe pelvic hemorrhage. Obstet
Gynecol 108(5):1222, 2006
Erez O, Novack L, Beer—Weisel R, et al: DIC score in pregnant women—a population based
modification of the International Society on Thrombosis and Hemostasis score. PLoS One 9:e93240,
2014
Finfer S, Bellomo R, Boyce N, et al: A comparison of albumin and saline for fluid resuscitation in the
intensive care unit. N Engl J Med 350:2247, 2004
Fiori O, Deux JF, Kambale JC, et al: Impact of pelvic arterial embolization for intractable postpartum
hemorrhage on fertility. Am J Obstet Gynecol 200:384.e1, 2009
Foroutan-Rad M, Majidan H, Dalvand S, et al: Toxoplasmosis in blood donors: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. Transfus Med Rev 30(3):116, 2016
Gayet-Ageron A, Prieto—Merino D, Ker K, et al: Effect of treatment delay on the effectiveness and
safety of anti-fibrinolytics in acute severe haemorrhage: a meta-analysis of individual patient-level
data from 40 to 138 bleeding patients. Lancet 391(10116):125, 2018
Gedik E, Yücel N, Sahin T, et al: Hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, and low platelet syndrome:
outcomes for patients admitted to intensive care at a tertiary referral hospital. Hypertens Pregnancy
36(1):21, 2017
Gilmandyar D, Thornburg LL: Surgical management of postpartum hemorrhage. Semin Perinatol
43(1):27, 2019
Goodnough LT, Levy JH: The judicious use of recombinant factor VIIa. Semin Thromb Hemost
42(2):125, 2016
Gottlieb AG, Pandipati S, Davis KM, et al: Uterine necrosis. A complication of uterine compression
sutures. Obstet Gynecol 112:429, 2008
Goucher H, Wong CA, Patel SK, et al: Cell salvage in obstetrics. Anesth Analg 121(2):465, 2015

Green L, Knight M, Seeney FM, et al: The epidemiology and outcomes of women with postpartum
haemorrhage requiring massive transfusion with eight or more units of red cells: a national crosssectional study. BJOG 123(13):2164, 2016
Grönvall M, Tikkanen M, Metsätähti M, et al: Pelvic arterial embolization in severe obstetric
hemorrhage. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 93(7):716, 2014
Hale SA, Sobel B, Benvenuto A, et al: Coagulation and fibrinolytic system protein profiles in women
with normal pregnancies and pregnancies complicated by hypertension. Pregnancy Hypertens
2(2):152, 2012
Haram K, Mortensen JH, Mastrolia SA, et al: Disseminated intravascular coagulation in the HELLP
syndrome: how much do we-really know? J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 30(7):779, 2017
Hardin MO, Ritchie JD, Aden JK, et al: Plasma-to-red cell ratio and mechanism of injury in massively
transfused combat casualties. Mil Med 179(1):92, 2014
Hébert PC: Anemia and red cell transfusion in critical care. Transfusion Requirements in Critical Care
Investigators and the Canadian Critical Care Trials Group. Minerva Anestesiol 65(6):293, 1999
Hernandez JS, Alexander JM, Sarode R, et al: Calculated blood loss in severe obstetric hemorrhage and
its relation to body mass index. Am J Perinatol 29(7):557, 2012
Herrera C, Meehan R, Poddutori V, et al: Maternal deaths due to Clostridium novyi in an injection drug
user. Obstet Gynecol 128:876, 2016
Hizkiyahu R, Rabinovich A, Thachil J, et al: Modified ISTH pregnancy-specific DIC score in parturients
with liver rupture: population-based case series. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 32(15):2517, 2019
Holst LB, Haase N, Wetterslev J, et al: Lower versus higher hemoglobin threshold for transfusion in
septic shock. N Engl J Med 371(15):1381, 2014
Hossain N, Paidas MJ: Disseminated intravascular coagulation. Semin Perinatol 37(4):257, 2013
Hui C, Lili M, Libin C, et al: Changes in coagulation and hemodynamics during pregnancy: a prospective
longitudinal study of 58 cases. Arch Gynecol Obstet 285(5):1231, 2012
Ibrahim MI, Raafat TA, Ellaithy MI, et al: Risk of postpartum uterine synechiae following uterine
compression suturing during postpartum haemorrhage. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynecol 53(1):37, 2013
Jackson BR, Busch MP, Stramer SL, et al: The cost-effectiveness of NAT for HTV, HCV, and HBV in
whole-blood donations. Transfusion 43:721, 2003
Jackson D, DeLoughery TG: Postpartum hemorrhage: management of massive transfusion. Obstet
Gynecol Surv 73(7):418, 2018
Johnson ED, Schell JC, Rodgers GM: The D-dimer assay. Am J Hematol 94:833, 2019
Jonard M, Ducloy-Bouthors AS, Fourrier F: Comparison of two diagnostic scores of disseminated
intravascular coagulation in pregnant women admitted to the ICU. PLoS One 11(11):e016647, 2016
Joshi MM, Shrivastava M: Partial ischemic necrosis of the uterus following a uterine brace compression
suture. BJOG 111:279, 2004
Katakam N, Vitthala S, Sasson S, et al: Complications and failure of uterine artery embolization for
intractable postpartum haemorrhage. BJOG 116(6):863, 2009
Kaya B, Guralp O, Tuten A, et al: Which uterine sparing technique should be used for uterine atony
during cesarean section? The Bakri balloon or the B-Lynch suture? Arch Gynecol Obstet
294(3):511, 2016
Kayem G, Dupont C, Bouvier-Colle MH, et al: Invasive therapies for primary postpartum haemorrhage:
a population-based study in France. BJOG 123(4):598, 2016
Kayem G, Kurinczuk JJ, Alfirevic A, et al: Uterine compression sutures for the management of severe
postpartum hemorrhage. Obstet Gynecol 117(1):14, 2011

Kenny L, McCrae K, Cunningham FG: Platelets, coagulation, and the liver. In Taylor R, Roberts JM,
Cunningham FG (eds): Chesley’s Hypertension in Pregnancy, 4th ed. Amsterdam, Academic Press,
2015
Kerns JL, Ti A, Aksel S, et al: Disseminated intravascular coagulation and hemorrhage after dilation and
evacuation abortion for fetal death. Obstet Gynecol 134(4):708, 2019
Khan KS, Moore PAS, Wilson MJ, et al: Cell salvage and donor blood transfusion during cesarean
section: A pragmatic, multicentre randomised controlled trial (SALVO). PLoS Med
14(12):e1002471, 2017
Kogutt BK, Vaught AJ: Postpartum hemorrhage: blood product management and massive transfusion.
Semin Perinatol 43(1):44, 2019
Kolomeyevskaya NV, Tanyi JL, Coleman NM, et al: Balloon tamponade of hemorrhage after uterine
curettage for gestational trophoblastic disease. Obstet Gynecol 113:557, 2009
Kuczyfiski J, Uszyfiski W, Zekanowska E, et al: Tissue factor (TF) and tissue factor pathway inhibitor
(TFPI) in the placenta and myometrium. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 105:15, 2002
Leblanc JF, Germain M, Delage G, et al: Risk of transmission of severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2 by transfusion: a literature review. Transfusion 60(12):3046, 2020
Lee HJ, Kim M, Lim B, et al: Transcatheter arterial embolization in the management of postpartum
hemorrhage due to genital tract injury after vaginal delivery. J Vasc Interv Radiol 32(1):99, 2021
Lee HY, Shin JH, Kim J, et al: Primary postpartum hemorrhage: outcome of pelvic arterial embolization
in 251 patients at a single institution. Radiology 264(3):903, 2012
Lerner NB, Refaai MA, Blumberg N: Red cell transfusion. In Kaushansky K, Lichtman M, Beutler K,
et al (eds): Williams Hematology, 8th ed. New York, McGraw Hill, 2010, p 2287
Levi M, Levy JH, Andersen H F, et al: Safety of recombinant activated factor VI I in randomized
clinical trials. N Engl J Med 363(19):1791, 2010
Levi M, Seligsohn U: Disseminated intravascular coagulation. In Kaushansky K, Lichtman M, Prchal
JT, et al (eds): In Williams Hematology, 9th ed. New York, McGraw Hill Education, 2016, p 2199
Lewis SR, Pritchard MW, Evans DJ, et al: Colloids versus crystalloids for fluid resuscitation in critically
ill patients. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 8:CD000567, 2018
Likis FE, Sathe NA, Morgans AK, et al: Management of postpartum hemorrhage. Comparative
Effectiveness Reviews, No. 151, Rockville, Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, 2015
Logothetopulos K: Eine absolut sichere blutstillungsmethode bei vagina len und abdominal en
gynakologischen operationen. Zentralbl Gynakol 50:3202, 1926
Matsubara S, Yano H, Ohkuchi A, et al: Uterine compression suture for postpartum hemorrhage: an
overview. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 92(4):378, 2013
McCullough J, Refaai MA, Cohn CS: Blood procurement and red cell transfusion. In Kaushansky K,
Lichtman MA, Prchal JJ, et al (eds): Williams Hematology, 9th ed. McGraw Hill Education, 2016, p
2374
McNamara H, Kenyon C, Smith R, et al: Four years’ experience of a ROTEM® guided algorithm for
treatment of coagulopathy in obstetric haemorrhage. Anesthesia 74(8):984, 2019
Merriam AA, Huang Y, Wright JD, et al: Use of uterine tamponade and interventional radiology
procedures during delivery hospitalizations. Obstet Gynecol 135(3):674, 2020
Motta IJ, Spencer BR, Cordeiro da Silva SGI et al: Evidence for transmission of Zika virus by platelet
transfusion. N Engl J Med 375(11):1101, 2016
Murakami M, Kobayashi T, Kubo T, et al: Experience with recombinant activated factor VI I for severe
postpartum hemorrhage in Japan, investigated by Perinatology Committee, Japan Society of
Obstetrics and Gynecology. J Obstet Gynaecol Res 41(8):1161, 2015

Murphy M, Vassallo R: Preservation and clinical use of platelets. In Kaushansky K, Lichtman M,
Beutler K, et al (eds): Williams Hematology, 8th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2010
Nakash A, Tuck S, Davies N: Uterine sepsis with uterine artery embolization in the management of
obstetric bleeding. J Obstet Gynecol 32(1):26, 2012
Nelson DB, Lucke AM, McIntire DD, et al: Obstetric antecedents to body-cooling treatment of the
newborn infant. Am J Obstet Gynecol 211:155.el, 2014
Nelson WL, O’Brien JM: The uterine sandwich for persistent uterine atony: combining the B-Lynch
compression suture and an intrauterine Bakri balloon. Am J Obstet Gynecol 196(5):e9, 2007
Ng KT, Yap JL, Kwok PE: The effect of fibrinogen concentrate on postoperative blood loss: a
systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials. J Clin Anesth 63:109782, 2020
Nizard J, Barrinque L, Frydman R, et al: Fertility and pregnancy outcomes following hypogastric artery
ligation for severe postpartum haemorrhage. Hum Reprod 18:844, 2003
Østerud B, Bjorklid E: Sources of tissue factor. Semin Thromb Hemost 32(1):11, 2006
Pacheco LD, Hankins GV, Saad AF, et al: Tranexamic acid for the management of obstetric
hemorrhage. Obstet Gynecol 130:765, 2017
Pacheco LD, Lozada MJ, Saade GR, et al: Damage control surgery for obstetric hemorrhage. Obstet
Gynecol 132(2):423, 2018
Pacheco LD, Saade GR, Costantine MM, et al: An update on the use of massive transfusion protocols
in obstetrics. Am J Obstet Gynecol 214(3):340, 2016
Pacheco LD, Saade GR, Costantine MM, et al: The role of massive transfusion protocols in obstetrics.
Am J Perinatol 30(1):1, 2013
Pacheco LD, Saade GR, Hankins GD: Medical management of postpartum hemorrhage: an update.
Semin Perinatol 43(1):22, 2019
Peters Al, Van Stein D, Vlaar AP: Antibody-mediated transfusion-related acute lung injury: from
discovery to prevention. Br J Haematol 170(5):597, 2015
Poujade O, Grossetti A, Mougel L, et al: Risk of synechiae following uterine compression sutures in the
management of major postpartum haemorrhage. BJOG 118(4):433, 2011
Pritchard JA: Fetal death in utero. Obstet Gynecol 14:573, 1959
Pritchard JA: Haematological problems associated with delivery, placental abruption, retained dead
fetus, and amniotic fluid embolism. Clin Haematol 2:563, 1973
Pritchard JA, Cunningham FG, Mason RA: Coagulation changes in eclampsia: their frequency and
pathogenesis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 124:855, 1976
Pritchard JA, Whalley PJ: Abortion complicated by Clostridium perfringens infection. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 111:484, 1971
Rahouma M, Kamei M, Jodeh D, et al: Does a balanced transfusion ratio of plasma to packed red blood
cells improve outcomes in both trauma and surgical patients? A meta-analysis of randomized
controlled trails and observational studies. Am J Surg 216(2):342, 2018
Rattray DD, O’Connell CM, Baskett TF: Acute disseminated intravascular coagulation in obstetrics: a
tertiary centre population review (1980 to 2009). J Obstet Gynaecol Can 34(4):341, 2012
Reese JA, Peck JD, Deschamps DR, et al: Platelet counts during pregnancy. N Engl J Med 379(1):32,
2018
Rouse DJ: Epidemiological investigation of a temporal increase in atonic postpartum haemorrhage: a
population-based retrospective cohort study. Obstet Gynecol 122(3):693, 2013
Saraiya M, Green CA, Berg CJ, et al: Spontaneous abortion- related deaths among women in the United
States—1981–1991. Obstet Gynecol 94:172, 1999

Sathe NA, Likis FE, Young JL, et al: Procedures and uterine- sparing surgeries for managing
postpartum hemorrhage: a systematic review. Obstet Gynecol Surv 71(2):99, 2016
Semler MW, Self WH, Wanderer JP, et al: Balanced crystalloids versus saline in critically ill adults. N
Engl J Med 378(9):829, 2018
Semple JW, Rebetz J, Kapur R: Transfusion-associated circulatory overload and transfusion-related
acute lung injury. Blood 133(17):1840, 2019
Sentilhes L, Senat MV, Le Lous M, et al: Tranexamic acid for the prevention of blood loss after
cesarean delivery. N Engl J Med 384:1623, 2021
Sentilhes L, Winer N, Azria E, et al: Tranexamic acid for the prevention of blood loss after vaginal
delivery. N Engl J Med 379(8):731, 2018
Shakur H, Beaumont D, Pavord S, et al: Anti fibrinolytic drugs for treating primary postpartum
haemorrhage. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2:CD012964, 2018
Shields LE, Smalarz K, Reffigee L, et al: Comprehensive maternal hemorrhage protocols improve
patient safety and reduce utilization of blood products. Am J Obstet Gynecol 205:368.el, 2011
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine: Patient safety and quality committee, Combs CA, Montgomery
DM, et al: Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine special statement: checklist for initial management
of amniotic fluid embolism. Am J Obstet Gynecol 224(4):B29, 2021
Solomon C, Collis RE, Collins PW: Haemostatic monitoring during postpartum haemorrhage and
implications for management. Br J Anesth 109(6):851, 2012
Stachowicz AM, Whiteside JL: Topical hemostatic agents in gynecologic surgery for benign indications.
Obstet Gynecol 135(2):463, 2020
Suarez S, Conde-Agudelo A, Borovac-Pinheiro A, et al: Uterine balloon tamponade for the treatment of
postpartum hemorrhage: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol
222(4):293.e1, 2020
Sullivan IJ, Ralph CJ: Obstetric intra-operative cell salvage: a review of an established cell salvage
service with 1170 reinfused cases. Anaesthesia 74(8):976, 2019
Touhami O, Bouzid A, Ben Marzouk S, et al: Pelvic packing for intractable obstetric hemorrhage after
emergency peripartum hysterectomy: a review. Obstet Gynecol Surv 73(2):110, 2018
Treloar EJ, Anderson RS, Andrews HG, et al: Uterine necrosis following B-Lynch suture for primary
postpartum haemorrhage. BJOG 113:486, 2006
Uszyfiski M, Zekanowska E, Uszyfiski W, et al: Tissue factor (TF) and tissue factor pathway inhibitor
(TFPI) in amniotic fluid and blood plasma: implications for the mechanism of amniotic fluid
embolism. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 95:163, 2001
Wei Y, Luo J, Luo D: Comparison of efficacy between internal iliac artery and abdominal aorta balloon
occlusions in pernicious placenta previa patients with placenta accreta. Gynecol Obstet Invest
84(4):343, 2019
Whittington JR, Pagen ME, Nevil BD, et al: Risk of vascular complications in prophylactic compared to
emergent resuscitative endovascular balloon occlusion of the aorta (REBOA) in the management of
placenta accreta spectrum. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med August 11, 2020 [Epub ahead of print]
WOMAN Trial Collaborators Effect of early tranexamic acid administration on mortality, hysterectomy,
and other morbidities in women with post-partum haemorrhage (WOMAN): an international,
randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet 389(10084):2105, 2017
World Health Organization: WHO recommendation on tranexamic acid for the treatment of postpartum
haemorrhage. Geneva, WHO, 2017
Yee LM, McGee P, Bailit JL, et al: Daytime compared with nighttime differences in management and
outcomes of postpartum hemorrhage. Obstet Gynecol 133(1):155, 2019

Yule CS, Ambia A, Duryea E, et al: The effect of normal saline on renal function and electrolytes in
women with preeclampsia. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med November 18, 2020
Zhang E, Liu L, Owen R: Pelvic artery embolization in the management of obstetrical hemorrhage:
predictive factors for clinical outcomes. Cardiovasc Intervent Radiol 38(6):1477, 2015
Zuckerbraun BS, Peitzman AB, Billiar TR: Shock. In Brunicardi FC, Andersen DK, Billiar TR, et al
(eds): Schwartz’s Principles of Surgery, 9th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2010

CHAPTER 45

Preterm Birth

DEFINITION OF PRETERM BIRTH
PRETERM BIRTH RATE TRENDS
PRETERM NEWBORN MORBIDITY
CAUSES OF PRETERM BIRTH
CONTRIBUTING FACTORS
DIAGNOSIS
PRETERM BIRTH PREVENTION
MANAGEMENT OF PRETERM PRELABOR RUPTURE OF
MEMBRANES
MANAGEMENT OF PRETERM LABOR WITH INTACT
MEMBRANES
REFERENCES
Preterm birth is a substantial global health issue with significant
consequences to the newborn, family, and society. Preterm delivery affects
nearly 15 million births worldwide, is the leading cause of death in children
younger than 5 years, and remains a prominent issue in obstetrics
(Chawanpaiboon, 2019). Although the burden of preterm birth is clear,
defining the biology of human parturition and identifying strategies to reduce
preterm birth rates remain elusive.

DEFINITION OF PRETERM BIRTH
Preterm birth is delivery before 37 completed weeks, that is, before 366/7
weeks. Subdivisions vary among organizations. According to the American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2021b), births occurring
between 34 and 36 completed weeks are considered late preterm. The
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recognizes this late preterm
definition but also labels births before 336/7 weeks as early preterm (Martin,
2021). Instead, the World Health Organization (2018) defines births before
28 completed weeks as extremely preterm, those from 28 to 32 weeks as
very preterm, and from 32 to 37 weeks as moderate to late preterm.
These definitions lack a functional basis and should be distinguished
from the concept of prematurity, which represents incomplete development
of various organ systems at birth. For example, the lungs are particularly
affected and may be susceptible to the respiratory distress syndrome (Chap.
34, p. 615). Similarly, neonates born before term can be small or large for
gestational age but are still preterm by definition. Low birthweight refers to
neonates weighing 1500 to 2500 g; very low birthweight describes those
between 1000 and 1500 g; and extremely low birthweight refers to those
<1000 g (World Health Organization, 2019).

PRETERM BIRTH RATE TRENDS
In the United States, the preterm birth rate rose from 10.02 percent in 2018 to
10.23 percent for 2019. When interpreting these data, important factors and
trends merit discussion. First, during the past two decades, the percentage of
preterm neonates fell from 2007 to 2014 but has since risen (Martin, 2021).
Some argue that the rate drop reflected changes in obstetrical dating criteria
rather than true declines (Frey, 2016). Specifically, beginning in 2014, the
National Center for Health Statistics transitioned to a new standard for
estimating newborn gestational age for birth certificate completion (Martin,
2015). The new measure, which is the obstetrical estimate of gestational age
at delivery, replaced calculations based on the date of the last menstrual
period. These measures differ and do not provide equivalent absolute
numerical comparisons of preterm birth rates. Thus, current national data
are now not directly comparable to previously reported preterm birth
rates.

Although the percentage of neonates born early preterm rose slightly, the
rise in the overall preterm rate from 2018 to 2019 was due primarily to the
increase in late-preterm births. Rates of these preterm births have gradually
risen since 2013 (Martin, 2021). Notably, national data do not separate
spontaneous preterm births from those that may be prompted for medical
indication.
One disturbing aspect of preterm birth rate trends in the United States is
persistent disparities. Rates of preterm birth among black women are
markedly elevated above those for white and Hispanic women (Martin,
2021). Some investigators attribute this to differing socioeconomical
circumstances (Collins, 2007; Leveno, 2009). The rates of preterm birth in
the United States are also higher compared with those in other industrialized
countries (Ananth, 2009; Delnord, 2017). Internationally, preterm birth rates
also are rising (Chawanpaiboon, 2019).
Last, births in singleton pregnancies should be analyzed separately from
all births. Namely, multifetal gestations have a shorter average gestational
length and raise preterm birth rates (Martin, 2021).

PRETERM NEWBORN MORBIDITY AND MORTALITY
In 2018 in the United States, 21,498 infants died in their first year of life, and
66 percent of infant deaths were among those born preterm. Gestational age
at delivery and the risk of neonatal morbidity and mortality are inversely
related. Namely, neonates born in the early-preterm period make up the
smallest proportion of births, but these infants experience disproportionately
higher rates of prematurity-related complications, including death (Table 451) (Ely, 2020). For context, the infant mortality rate in those born at less than
28 weeks’ gestation was 186 times higher than in those born at 37 to 41
weeks in the United States in 2018.
TABLE 45-1. Infant Mortality Rates in the United States in 2018

The joint effect of gestational age and infant condition at birth also has
been examined. Data from the Swedish Medical Birth Register correlated
Apgar scores at 5 and 10 minutes in preterm neonates across gestational
ages. The relative risk of death consistently increased with decreased Apgar
scores (Cnattingius, 2020). Low Apgar scores in preterm newborns may
reflect biological immaturity rather than fetal depression. However, Apgar
scores and changes in the score between 5 and 10 minutes were associated
with neonatal mortality among preterm newborns.
Preterm neonates who survive are at risk for a range of short- and longterm morbidities, largely due to organ system immaturity (Table 45-2)
(Eichenwald, 2008). That said, remarkable strides have been made in
neonatal survival for those born preterm. In a study of more than 18,000
newborns weighing between 400 and 1500 g or aged between 22 and 32
weeks’ gestation, survival rates were analyzed as a function of both
birthweight and gestational age (Fanaroff, 2007). After achieving a
birthweight ≥1000 g, a gestational age ≥28 weeks for females, or age ≥30
weeks for males, survival rates reach 95 percent.
TABLE 45-2. Major Short- and Long-Term Problems in Very-LowBirthweight Infants

■ Threshold of Viability
Births once considered to be “abortuses” because the fetus weighed <500 g
are now classified as live births. In the United States in 2019, 5189 live
births weighed <500 g (Martin, 2021). Fortunately, perinatal and neonatal
care has advanced tremendously for these births. As a result, the threshold of
viability, which is the lower limit of fetal maturation compatible with
extrauterine survival, has been reassessed. Currently, the threshold of
viability lies between 200/7 and 256/7 weeks’ gestation. Neonates born in this
periviable period are vulnerable because of their immature organ systems.
Complications include brain injury and sepsis, both described in Chapter 34,
(p. 618). To guide obstetrical decision-making and care of these fetuses, a
national perinatal workshop convened in 2013 (Raju, 2014). The executive
summary statement from this meeting served as the foundation for an
Obstetric Care Consensus document (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2019d).

Periviable Neonatal Survival
Delivery before 23 weeks’ gestation often results in death, and survival rates
approximate 5 to 10 percent (Fig. 45-1). Among survivors, morbidity is
significant. Practices regarding active resuscitation vary between institutions
and may explain the differing perinatal outcomes among these. Neonatal

survival rates also vary among international comparisons, and rates at 24
weeks’ gestation range from 35 to 84 percent (Helenius, 2017).

FIGURE 45-1 Neonatal survival rates according to condition at birth and gestational age. Ishii (2013)
data curve reflects liveborn survival rates; Stoll (2010) curve reflects liveborn survival rates; Rysavy
(2015) curve reflects overall survival rates; Younge (2017) curve reflects survival and
neurodevelopmental outcomes.

A retrospective analysis of infants born at the University of Iowa from
2006 to 2015 at 22 to 25 weeks’ gestation underscores this issue (Watkins,
2020). After excluding anomalous fetuses, death in the delivery room, and
parental request for palliation, the neurodevelopmental outcomes were
analyzed for 169 of 214 survivors at 18 to 22 months. Active management
was defined as antenatal corticosteroids and resuscitation when desired by
the parents. The survival rate was lower in neonates born at 22 to 23 weeks’
than at 24 to 25 weeks’ gestation. However, mild or no neurodevelopmental
impairment was reported in 64 percent of the surviving 22- to 23-week
infants.
An important caveat when examining perinatal outcomes, however, is
ascertainment bias. For example, the mean survival rate is 45 percent if the
denominator is all live births compared with 72 percent if the denominator is
only newborns admitted to neonatal intensive care (Guillen, 2011). Another
source of bias is use of multicenter datasets with considerable differences in
obstetrical and early neonatal interventions (Stoll, 2010).
To evaluate contemporaneous outcomes of neonates born at 22 to 24
weeks, the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development
(NICHD) Neonatal Research Network reported both survival and

neurodevelopmental outcomes across consecutive birth-year epochs of 2000
to 2003, 2004 to 2007, and 2008 to 2011 in infants aged 18 to 22 months
(Younge, 2017). The percentage of infants who survived rose significantly
from 30 percent in 2000 to 2003 to 36 percent in 2008 to 2011. The
percentage of infants who survived without neurodevelopmental impairment
also significantly grew from 16 percent to 20 percent during the same time
period. Although rates of survival without neurodevelopmental impairment
increased over time for those born at 23 and 24 weeks, only 1 percent of
infants born at 22 weeks survived without neurodevelopmental impairment
(Younge, 2017).
Somewhat similar results were published from Sweden. This report
details a national population-based study of all neonates born at 22 to 26
weeks. Rates of survival to 1 year from 2004 to 2007 were compared with
rates from 2014 to 2016. Survival rates at 1 year among live-born neonates
at 22 to 26 weeks’ gestation significantly improved during the later period
(Table 45-3) (Norman, 2019).
TABLE 45-3. One-Year Survival Among Infants Delivered at 22–26
Weeks’ Gestational Age in Sweden

Clinical Management
The Periviable Birth Obstetric Care Consensus document also addresses
management options based on the clinical characteristics of a given
pregnancy. Nonmodifiable factors are fetal gender, weight, and plurality.
Potentially modifiable antepartum and intrapartum factors include the
location of delivery, intent to intervene by cesarean delivery, and
administration of antenatal corticosteroids (Table 45-4). Postnatal
management addresses the initiation or withdrawal of intensive care after
birth.
TABLE 45-4. General Guidance for Threatened Periviable Birth

Cesarean delivery at the threshold of viability is controversial. If the
fetus-neonate is perceived to be too immature for aggressive support,
cesarean delivery for common indications such as breech presentation or
nonreassuring fetal heart rate patterns might be preempted. Moreover,
observational studies have been inconsistent in demonstrating a benefit of
cesarean delivery for the sole indication of periviability. Moreover, cesarean
delivery may predispose the gravida to adverse intraoperative events and
morbidity (Bertholdt, 2018; Blanc, 2019).
In a study of 2906 singletons between 240/7 and 316/7 weeks eligible for
attempted vaginal birth, 84 percent of cephalic presenting fetuses were
delivered vaginally (Reddy, 2012). Neonatal mortality rates did not differ
compared with those associated with planned cesarean delivery. For breech
presentations, however, relative risk for mortality was threefold higher with
attempted vaginal delivery. In another study, Werner and colleagues (2013)
analyzed 20,231 newborns delivered at 24 to 34 weeks. Cesarean delivery
did not protect against poor outcomes such as neonatal death, intraventricular
hemorrhage, seizures, respiratory distress, and subdural hemorrhage.
From these findings, the Obstetric Care Consensus proposes that
cesarean delivery be considered for fetal indications at 230/7 to 246/7 weeks.
However, before 22 weeks, this route is reserved only for maternal
indications. As emphasized by the authors of the Iowa report cited earlier,
providing active management—such as antenatal corticosteroids—can be
uncoupled from the decision of cesarean in the periviable period (Watkins,
2020). That said, the frequency of cesarean in the 23rd week has increased in
the United States following publication of the perinatal workshop executive
summary in 2014 (Rossi, 2019).

It is difficult to summarize the current practices of obstetrical care in the
management of the periviable pregnancy given its continued rapid evolution.
Moreover, it appears that maternal and neonatal interventions are shifting
during the 22- to 23-week gestational age period. Data from the National
Center for Health Statistics show that rates of at least one maternal or
neonatal intervention were 38.9 percent and 78.3 percent for 22 and 23
weeks’ gestation, respectively (Hajdu, 2020).
In this uncertain environment, individualized, patient-centered care with
a multidisciplinary team remains essential. This is particularly relevant given
that nearly 20 percent of women may have serious morbidity with delivery
during the periviable period (Rossi, 2018).
For cases with threatened periviable delivery, neonatal and perinatal
consultation aids informed decision-making and helps form expectations for
the family. For fetuses with a life-limiting condition, such as extreme
prematurity, perinatal palliative care is a strategy that emphasizes comfort
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019c). Care team
members can include obstetric and neonatal professionals, chaplaincy, and
mental health specialists.

■ Late-preterm Birth
As discussed, neonates born between 34 and 36 weeks’ gestation account for
more than 70 percent of all preterm births (Fig. 45-2) (Martin, 2021). Most
of the increase in the total preterm birth rate for the United States 2018 to
2019 was among neonates born at 34 to 36 weeks. To estimate the risks
associated with late-preterm births, investigators analyzed neonatal mortality
and morbidity rates at 34, 35, and 36 weeks compared with those of births at
term at Parkland Hospital (McIntire, 2008). Approximately 3 percent of all
births during the study period were between 24 and 32 weeks, and 9 percent
were during the late-preterm period. Thus, and similar to the national rates,
late-preterm births accounted for three fourths of all preterm births.
Approximately 80 percent of these resulted from idiopathic spontaneous
preterm labor or prematurely ruptured membranes (Fig. 45-3). Other
obstetrical complications were implicated in the remaining 20 percent of
cases. Rates of morbidity and mortality were greater in these late-preterm
newborns compared with rates in term ones (Table 45-5) (McIntire, 2008).
Similarly, Tomashek (2007) reported higher neonatal mortality rates for late-

preterm newborns. Rates of adverse neurodevelopment outcomes also are
increased in these late-preterm infants (Petrini, 2009). Taken together, these
findings suggest that a health-care focus on prematurity should include these
late-preterm births.

FIGURE 45-2 Distribution of preterm births by gestational age in the United States in 2019.

FIGURE 45-3 Obstetrical complications associated with 21,771 late-preterm births at Parkland
Hospital.

TABLE 45-5. Neonatal Outcomes in Live Births Delivered Late Preterm
Compared with Referent Group at 39 Weeks

CAUSES OF PRETERM BIRTH

Four direct causes for preterm births in the United States include (1)
spontaneous unexplained preterm labor with intact membranes, (2) idiopathic
preterm prelabor rupture of membranes, (3) delivery for maternal or fetal
indications, and (4) twins and higher-order multifetal births. Of all preterm
births, 30 to 35 percent are indicated, 40 to 45 percent are due to
spontaneous preterm labor, and 30 to 35 percent follow preterm membrane
rupture (Goldenberg, 2008). More than 98 percent of triplets and 60 percent
of twins are born preterm (Martin, 2021).
At term, a common parturition pathway is activated physiologically and
leads to labor. For preterm labor, several disease processes are thought to
activate one or more of the components of this common pathway (Romero,
2014). Put another way, preterm labor is not simply labor that starts too soon.
This paradigm is supported by the rationale that causes of preterm birth have
multiple, often interacting, antecedents and contributing factors that lead to a
heterogenous syndrome (Deindl, 2020; Esplin, 2016). Analogous to other
complex disease processes, multiple coexistent genetic alterations, bacterial
and viral colonization, and diverse environmental factors may lead to
preterm birth (Bayar, 2020; Mekonnen, 2021; Volozonoka, 2020). These
multiple factors continue to pose challenges in identifying predictive
biomarkers in blood, urine, or cervicovaginal fluid, despite significant
technical advances in multiomic approaches (Ghaemi, 2021; Jehan, 2020;
Peterson, 2020; Parry, 2020).

■ Spontaneous Preterm Labor
Pregnancies with spontaneous preterm labor yet intact fetal membranes must
be distinguished from those complicated by ruptured membranes. Even so,
spontaneous preterm labor does not constitute a homogeneous group.
Evidence suggests it is a syndrome attributable to multiple pathological
processes (Romero, 2014). Among the more common associated findings are
multifetal pregnancy, intrauterine infection, bleeding, placental infarction,
premature cervical dilation, cervical insufficiency, hydramnios, uterine
fundal abnormalities, and fetal anomalies. Severe maternal illness from
infections, autoimmune diseases, and gestational hypertension also elevate
preterm labor risks.
These processes culminate in a common end point of premature cervical
dilation, effacement, and activation of uterine contractions. Importantly, the

actual process of preterm labor should be considered a final step stemming
from progressive or acute changes that could be initiated days or even weeks
before labor onset. Diverse pathways to instigate parturition exist and are
dependent on the etiology of preterm birth (Fig. 45-4) (Romero, 2014).
Major causes include uterine overdistention, premature cervical changes,
infection, and maternal–fetal stress. Genetic and environmental factors likely
contribute to each mechanism.

FIGURE 45-4 Proposed mechanisms of disease implicated in spontaneous preterm labor. Genetic and
environmental factors are likely contributors to each mechanism.

Uterine Overdistention
Multifetal pregnancy and hydramnios are well-recognized risks for preterm
birth. With these, uterine overdistention imparts greater stress on the
myometrium. In nonhuman primates, inflation of intraamnionic balloons can
stimulate uterine contractility, preterm labor, and an “inflammatory pulse.”
Similar inflammatory responses have been observed in the amnion of women
with polyhydramnios and twins (Adams Waldorf, 2015).
Early uterine overdistention likely acts to initiate expression of
contraction-associated proteins in the myometrium. These genes include
those coding for gap-junction proteins, oxytocin receptors, and prostaglandin
synthase (Korita, 2002; Lyall, 2002; Sooranna, 2004). Excessive uterine

distention also leads to early activation of the placental–fetal endocrine
cascade (Chap. 21, p. 407). Taken together, mechanical stress-induced
distension and activation of endocrine cascades both lead to premature
activation of inflammatory responses that result in uterine contractile
activation (Gomez-Lopez, 2014; Stephen, 2015). A possible compensatory
response to uterine distention is tissue remodeling and muscle growth
(Adams Waldorf, 2015).

Cervical Dysfunction
In most cases, premature cervical remodeling precedes labor onset. In some
instances, cervical dysfunction of the epithelia or its stromal extracellular
matrix is the underlying cause (Nallasamy, 2017). Importantly, an intact
cervical epithelial barrier is critical to prevent ascending infection. For
example, loss of hyaluronan in cervical epithelia or colonization of group B
streptococcus (GBS) enhances risk of preterm birth (Akgul, 2014; Coleman,
2021). GBS has the unique ability to synthesize the hyaluronan-degrading
enzyme hyaluronidase to aid bacterial ascension (Vornhagen, 2017). Second,
the mechanical competence of the cervix can be reduced. Genetic mutations
in components of collagen and elastic fibers or proteins required for their
assembly can be risk factors for cervical insufficiency and preterm birth
(Nallasamy, 2017; Volozonoka, 2020).

Infection
Of all the mechanisms listed in Figure 45-4, only intraamnionic infection has
been causally linked to spontaneous preterm delivery (Romero, 2014).
Bacteria can gain access to intrauterine tissues through (1) transplacental
transfer of maternal systemic infection, (2) flow of infection via the fallopian
tubes, or (3) ascending infection with bacteria from the vagina and cervix.
Because the lower pole of the fetal membrane–decidual junction is
contiguous with the cervical canal orifice, this anatomical arrangement
provides a passageway for microorganisms. Ascending infection is
considered to be the most common entry route where microorganisms
colonize the cervix, decidua, and possibly the membranes, and then may enter
the amnionic sac.
Colonization with an infectious agent has been detected in 25 to 40
percent of all preterm deliveries (Goldenberg, 2008). In some instances,

histological evidence of microbial inflammation is found in the fetal
membranes, decidua, or umbilical cord. Other cases are deemed sterile
intraamnionic inflammation. Despite the substantial association of infection
with preterm birth, the cellular and molecular mechanisms underlying
inflammation-driven preterm birth remain undefined (Cappelletti, 2020;
Purisch, 2017).
Current data suggest that microbial invasion of the reproductive tract is
sufficient to induce infection-mediated preterm birth. The level and kinetics
of inflammation can vary between a polymicrobial or single-microbe
exposure (Tong, 2021). Affected women are more likely to develop clinical
chorioamnionitis and rupture of membranes compared with women whose
cultures are sterile. Moreover, their neonates are also more likely to have
perinatal complications such as neonatal sepsis (Villamor-Martinez, 2020).
Although the clinical course is more severe when intraamnionic infection is
obvious, inflammation in the absence of detectable intraamnionic
microorganisms—termed sterile intraamnionic inflammation—is also a
risk factor for an inflammatory response (Motomura, 2021). In sum, the
earlier the onset of preterm labor, the greater the likelihood of underlying
infection (Goldenberg, 2000; Goncalves, 2002).
Paradoxically, the incidence of culture-positive amnionic fluid collected
by amniocentesis during spontaneous labor at term is similar to that with
preterm labor (Gomez, 1994; Romero, 1993). It has been suggested that at
term, amnionic fluid is infiltrated by bacteria as a consequence of labor,
whereas in preterm pregnancies, bacteria represent an inciting cause. Thus,
fetal infection, as defined by bacteria detected within amnionic fluid, has
differing etiologies and consequences.
With chorioamnionitis, microbes may invade only maternal tissue and not
amnionic fluid. Despite this, endotoxins can stimulate amnionic cells to
secrete cytokines that enter amnionic fluid. This scenario may serve to
explain the apparently contradictory observations concerning an association
between amnionic fluid cytokines and preterm labor in cases in which
microbes are not detected in the amnionic fluid.
Inflammatory Responses. These responses drive the pathogenesis of
infection-induced preterm labor. Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) or other toxins
elaborated by bacteria are recognized by receptors such as toll-like
receptors (TLRs) (Janssens, 2003). These receptors are present on

mononuclear phagocytes, decidual cells, cervical epithelia, and trophoblasts
(Gonzalez, 2007; Holmlund, 2002). The expression of TLRs on maternal
immune cells is necessary to recognize inflammatory stimuli in inflammationmediated preterm birth (Cappelletti, 2020). Activation of TLRs induces a
signaling cascade that activates production of chemokines such as interleukin
8 (IL-8) and cytokines such as IL-1β. Activation also recruits immune cells
into the reproductive tract. Cytokines are produced by immune cells and by
cells within the cervix, decidua, membranes, or fetus itself.
LPS-induced production of IL-1β in turn promotes a series of responses
that include (1) increased synthesis of others, that is, IL-6, IL-8, and tumor
necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α); (2) proliferation, activation, and migration of
leukocytes; (3) modifications in extracellular matrix proteins; and (4)
mitogenic and cytotoxic effects such as fever and acute-phase response (ElBastawissi, 2000). In many tissues, including myometrium, decidua, and
amnion, IL-1β also promotes prostaglandin formation that induces cervical
ripening and loss of myometrial quiescence (Challis, 2002; Keelan, 2003).
The importance of prostaglandins to infection-mediated preterm birth is
supported by the observation that prostaglandin inhibitors can reduce the rate
of LPS-induced preterm birth in both the mouse and nonhuman primate
(Gravett, 2007; Timmons, 2014). Inhibition of cyclooxygenase 2 prevents
inflammation-mediated preterm labor in the mouse. For these reasons,
clinical approaches described on page 806 are being explored.
Proteases such as matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) also are induced by
inflammatory cytokines and function to break down extracellular matrix
components such as collagen or elastic fibers. This disrupts the structural
integrity of fetal membranes or the cervix. Current evidence from animal and
human studies suggests that many aspects of infection-mediated preterm birth
differ from pathways that regulate term parturition (Hamilton, 2012;
Shynlova, 2013a,b; Willcockson, 2018).
Origin of Cytokines. Secretion of uterine cytokines is likely important for
preterm labor. Cytokines produced in maternal decidua and myometrium
have effects confined to that side, whereas cytokines produced in the
membranes or in cells within the amnionic fluid will not be transferred to
maternal tissues. In general, resident and invading leukocytes produce the
bulk of cytokines in cases of inflammation resulting from infection.

The presence of cytokines in amnionic fluid and their association with
preterm labor is well documented. But, their exact cellular origin—with or
without recoverable microorganisms—is not well defined. Amnionic fluid
cytokines are most likely secreted by mononuclear phagocytes or neutrophils
activated and recruited into the amnionic fluid (Tong, 2020). Thus, the
amount of amnionic fluid IL-1β would be determined by the number of
leukocytes recruited, their activational status, or the effect of amnionic fluid
constituents on their IL-1β secretion rate.
Microbiota. Mucosal immunity and barrier function of the cervicovaginal
epithelia, the vaginal microbiota composition, and their interplay among
differing populations are major research topics (Elovitz, 2019; Fettweis,
2019; Serrano, 2019). To explore these, advanced genomic analysis
techniques are used and show that the nonpregnant vagina hosts a complex
microbial community (Gajer, 2012; White, 2011). And, the vaginal
microbiome changes during normal pregnancy (Stout, 2017). Specifically, the
diversity of microbe populations are reduced during pregnancy and become
more stable.
Some but not all studies report an increased population of certain
microbes—for example, Gardnerella vaginalis and Ureaplasma
urealyticum—in women with preterm birth (Donders, 2009; Nelson, 2014).
In contrast, Schuster and coworkers (2020) reported that asymptomatic
vaginal Candida colonization was not associated with preterm birth.
Differences in populations studied, preterm birth definitions, and data
analysis complicate interpretation of these data. Currently, the strongest
evidence for the role of the microbiome in preterm birth relates to the vaginal
microbiota. The most consistent finding across almost all studies is the
benefit of a vaginal microbiota characterized by Lactobacillus crispatus
(Bayar, 2020).
Aagaard and colleagues (2014) suggested that the placenta contains a
microbiome akin to the oral microbiome. Subsequent studies, however, have
failed to confirm this (Lauder, 2016; Theis, 2019). Recently, de Goffau and
associates (2019) found no evidence of bacteria in most of 537 placental
samples from both complicated and uncomplicated pregnancies. Almost all
samples pointed to acquisition of bacteria during labor and delivery or to
contamination of laboratory reagents with the exception of Streptococcus

agalactiae. Thus, the human placenta does not appear to have a relevant
microbiome (Bayar, 2020).

■ Preterm Prelabor Rupture of Membranes
Previously referred to as preterm premature rupture of membranes, preterm
prelabor rupture of membranes (PPROM) defines spontaneous membrane
rupture before 37 completed weeks and before labor onset (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020g). Such rupture likely has
various causes, but intrauterine infection, oxidative stress–induced DNA
damage, and premature cellular senescence are major predisposing events
(Dutta, 2016; Mercer, 2003). Associated risk factors are similar to those at
term and include lower socioeconomical status, low body mass index,
nutritional deficiencies, and cigarette smoking. Women with PPROM carry
an enhanced risk for recurrence during a subsequent pregnancy (Bloom,
2001). Despite these known risk factors, none are identified in many cases.
Bacterial cultures of amnionic fluid support a role for infection in
PPROM. One review of 18 studies and almost 1500 women with PPROM
found that bacteria were isolated from amnionic fluid in a third of cases
(Goncalves, 2002). Microbiome-mediated preterm birth and PPROM are
current research areas (Bayar, 2020). One goal is to identify early risk
markers for PPROM.

Molecular Changes
In pregnancies with PPROM, the amnion exhibits a higher degree of cell
death and more apoptosis markers than in term amnion (ArechavaletaVelasco, 2002; Fortunato, 2003). In vitro studies indicate that apoptosis is
likely regulated by bacterial endotoxin, IL-1β, and TNF-α. In addition,
oxidative stress initiated by events other than infection can induce DNA
damage, premature senescence, and subsequent inflammation and proteolysis
that leads to PPROM (Menon, 2020).
With membrane rupture, thrombin activity rises, which activates MMPs
and prostaglandin synthesis. Studies by Mogami (2013) provide a mechanism
by which bacterial endotoxin or TNF-α elicits release of fetal fibronectin
(fFN) by amnion epithelial cells. The fFN then binds toll-like receptor 4 in
the amnion mesenchymal cells to activate signaling cascades. These result in

augmented prostaglandin E (PGE2) synthesis and elevated activity of MMPs.
Increasing prostaglandin levels promote cervical ripening and uterine
contractions. Greater MMP concentrations allow collagen breakdown in the
fetal membranes, resulting in premature rupture. Last, proteins involved in
collagen synthesis or promoting its tensile strength are altered in membranes
with premature rupture (Wang, 2006). Recently, Blois and associates (2020)
introduced the concept of galectins, a family of glycan-binding proteins.
They may serve as a mediator in fetal-maternal immune tolerance and work
to prevent microbial infections that lead to preterm birth.
Both preterm labor and PPROM arise from distinct pathophysiological
pathways but share inflammation as a common underlying mechanism.
Excellent reviews are presented by Menon (2020) and Diemert (2020) and
their coworkers.

■ Maternal-Fetal Stress
In this context, stress is defined as a condition that disturbs the normal
physiological or psychological functioning of an individual. Since the 1940s,
the association of maternal stress with birth outcomes has been explored.
Results vary partly because of methodological difference in measuring stress
(Hong, 2021). Quantitative measure is difficult, but considerable evidence
shows that psychosocial stress in the form of racial discrimination—
especially in black populations—results in poor health outcomes, including
preterm birth (Salow, 2018). Psychological duress can include childhood
stress, depression, or posttraumatic stress syndrome (Gillespie, 2017;
Goldstein, 2017; Venkatesh, 2016). In one review of more than 50 studies, a
significant link was found between low birthweight and preterm birth in
women impacted by intimate partner violence (Donovan, 2016).
One potential mechanism for stress-induced preterm birth is premature
activation of the placental–adrenal endocrine axis. Another mechanism by
which stress may translate to preterm birth is premature cellular senescence.
As part of normal physiology, aging of fetal and decidual cells precipitates
release of uterotonic signals for uterine activation at term. The interplay
between preterm birth and maternal stress was recently reviewed by Hong
and colleagues (2021).

CONTRIBUTING FACTORS
Several factors associated with preterm birth include pregnancy factors,
lifestyle and behaviors, genetic and demographic features, and aspects of
obstetrical history (Table 45-6). Disentangling association from causation
remains a dilemma.
TABLE 45-6. Factors That May Contribute to the Genesis of Preterm Labor

■ Prior Preterm Birth
The most important risk factor for preterm labor is a prior preterm birth.
Data from nearly 16,000 women delivered at Parkland Hospital are
instructive (Bloom, 2001). Namely, the recurrent preterm delivery risk for
women with a preterm first delivery was threefold greater than that of
women whose first neonate was born at term. More than a third of women
whose first two newborns were preterm subsequently delivered a third
preterm newborn. Most—70 percent—of the recurrent births occurred within
2 weeks of the gestational age of the prior preterm delivery. The causes of
prior preterm delivery also recurred. Although women with prior preterm
births are clearly at risk for recurrence, they represented only 10 percent of
the total preterm births. Expressed another way, 90 percent of the preterm
births at Parkland Hospital could not be predicted based on a history of
preterm birth. Others have confirmed the importance of prior spontaneous
preterm birth (Laughon, 2014). Moreover, prior indicated preterm birth was

strongly associated with subsequent spontaneous preterm birth. Variable
definitions of spontaneous and indicated may explain this association.
Ultimately, risk of recurrent preterm birth is influenced by three factors:
the frequency of prior preterm deliveries, severity as measured by
gestational age, and the order in which the prior preterm delivery occurred
(McManemy, 2007). That is, an individual woman’s risk for recurrent
preterm birth is influenced by her past number and sequence of preterm and
term births. For example, a risk of recurrent preterm birth for a gravida 3
para 2 woman with a prior preterm birth followed by a term birth is less than
that for a woman with a prior term birth followed by preterm birth. Thus, the
influence of reproductive history has a profound prognostic significance for
risk of recurrence. This may also influence the supposed benefit attributed to
interventions described later.

■ Pregnancy Factors
Of these, threatened abortion in early pregnancy is associated with higher
rates of later adverse outcomes. Weiss (2004) reported outcomes in nearly
14,000 women with vaginal bleeding at 6 to 13 weeks’ gestation. Both light
and heavy bleeding were associated with subsequent preterm labor, placental
abruption, and pregnancy loss before 24 weeks. Birth defects in the fetus
also may predispose to preterm birth. In a secondary analysis of data from
the First- and Second-Trimester Evaluation of Risk (FASTER) trial, birth
defects were associated with preterm birth and low-birthweight neonates
(Dolan, 2007). Multifetal gestation is another well-recognized associate.
Importantly, preterm delivery continues to be the major cause of the
excessive perinatal morbidity and mortality for these pregnancies.

■ Lifestyle Factors
Extremes of maternal weight—both underweight and obese mothers—have
an enhanced risk of preterm birth (Cnattingius, 2013; Girsen, 2016). Other
maternal factors implicated include young or advanced maternal age,
poverty, short stature, and vitamin C deficiency (Casanueva, 2005;
Goldenberg, 2008; Leveno, 2009). Cigarette smoking, inadequate maternal
weight gain, and illicit drug use affect the incidence and outcome of lowbirthweight neonates (Chap. 47, p. 825).

Studies of work and physical activity related to preterm birth have
yielded conflicting results (Goldenberg, 2008). Some evidence suggests that
working long hours, fixed night shifts, and hard physical labor are probably
linked to a higher risk of preterm birth (Cai, 2020). However, aerobic
exercise in normal-weight women with uncomplicated singleton pregnancies
appears to be safe and not associated with preterm birth (American College
of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020f; Di Mascio, 2016). One
metaanalysis of physical activity found that leisure-time physical activity
was associated with a reduced risk of preterm birth (Aune, 2017).
Because of the observational nature of many of the studies with the
potential for confounding, the American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2020b) has offered guidance for employment considerations
during pregnancy. It is emphasized that accommodations that allow a woman
to keep working are the most reliable way to guarantee pay, benefits, and job
protection.

■ Genetic Factors
Evidence for a genetic component to preterm birth is supported by familial
recurrent preterm births (Crider, 2005). Genome-wide studies have
identified genetic variants associated with gestational duration and preterm
birth (Zhang, 2017). Common variants in EBF1, EEFSEC, and AGTR2 genes
have an association with preterm birth. Data sets, however, included only
women with European ancestry, and thus future efforts will ideally include
other populations. Recent large-scale transcriptome studies have identified
additional loci associated with gestation length (Marinić, 2021; Sakabe,
2020).

■ Periodontal Disease
Gingivitis is a chronic anaerobic inflammation that affects as many as 50
percent of pregnant women in the United States (Goepfert, 2004). One
metaanalysis of 17 studies showed that periodontal disease was significantly
associated with preterm birth (Vergnes, 2007). To better study this
relationship, 813 pregnant women between 13 and 17 weeks’ gestation who
had periodontal disease were randomly assigned to treatment during
pregnancy or postpartum. Treatment during pregnancy improved periodontal

disease, however, it failed to significantly alter preterm birth rates
(Michalowicz, 2006). A workshop of the European Federation of
Periodontology and the American Academy of Periodontology reaffirmed
this position (Sanz, 2013).

■ Interpregnancy Interval
In one metaanalysis, intervals <18 months and >59 months were associated
with greater risks for both preterm birth and small-for-gestational-age
newborns (Conde-Agudelo, 2006). The causal effect of short interpregnancy
intervals, however, has been questioned (Ball, 2014). A recent cohort study
of more than three million births across four countries, including the United
States, found that associations between interpregnancy intervals and preterm
birth are modified by whether the previous pregnancy was preterm
(Marinovich, 2021).

■ Infection
Antimicrobial Prophylaxis
As discussed on page 789, a link between some cases of preterm birth and
infection seems irrefutable (Goldenberg, 2008). In several studies,
antimicrobial treatment has been given to prevent preterm labor that was
thought to stem from microbial invasion. Some of these strategies have
targeted Mycoplasma species.
First, Andrews and associates (2006) reported results of a randomized
trial in which they provided a course of azithromycin plus metronidazole
every 4 months to 241 nonpregnant women whose last pregnancy resulted in
spontaneous delivery before 34 weeks. Approximately 80 percent of the
women with subsequent pregnancies had received study drug within 6 months
of their subsequent conception. Such interconceptional antimicrobial
treatment did not reduce the rate of recurrent preterm birth. From a subgroup
analysis of this data, Tita and coworkers (2007) concluded that such use of
antimicrobials may be harmful.
In another randomized study, 2661 women were given placebo or
metronidazole plus erythromycin between 20 and 24 weeks’ gestation
followed by ampicillin plus metronidazole during labor (Goldenberg, 2006).

This antimicrobial regimen did not reduce the rate of preterm birth or
histological chorioamnionitis. As discussed later, antibiotic prophylaxis to
prevent preterm birth is not currently recommended in women with preterm
labor and intact membranes (Flenady, 2013).

Bacterial Vaginosis
In this condition, normal, hydrogen peroxide–producing, lactobacilluspredominant vaginal flora is replaced with anaerobes. For nearly 40 years,
bacterial vaginosis has been recognized to be associated with spontaneous
abortion, preterm labor, rupture of membranes, chorioamnionitis, and
amnionic fluid infection (Gravett, 1986; Hillier, 1995). Unfortunately,
screening and treatment have not prevented preterm birth (Haahr, 2016).
Moreover, microbial resistance or antimicrobial-induced change in the
vaginal flora results from regimens intended to eliminate bacterial vaginosis
(Beigi, 2004; Carey, 2005).

COVID-19
Early reports suggested an increase in rates of preterm birth in pregnant
women with COVID-19. However, population-level data show conflicting
results on the changes, if any, in preterm birth rates (Berghella, 2020;
Hedermann, 2021; Main, 2021). At Parkland Hospital, Adhikari and
colleagues (2020) did not identify higher rates of preterm birth in 252
women with COVID-19 compared with 3122 gravidas who tested negative.
However, women with severe infection are often delivered preterm for
maternal indications (Pierce-Williams, 2020).

DIAGNOSIS
■ Symptoms
Contractions, pelvic pressure, menstrual-like cramps, watery vaginal
discharge, and lower back pain are typical symptoms of preterm labor. These
can also be seen with normal pregnancy and may be minimized by patients
and providers. Early differentiation between true and false labor is difficult
—especially before demonstrable cervical effacement and dilation. Uterine
activity alone can be misleading because of Braxton Hicks contractions

(Chap. 4, p. 52). Accordingly, the American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2020e) defines preterm labor to be regular contractions
accompanied by a change in cervical dilation, effacement, or both or to be
regular contractions and cervical dilation of at least 2 cm at initial
presentation.
Chao (2011) prospectively studied 843 women with a singleton fetus
who presented to Parkland Hospital with preterm labor symptoms between
240/7 and 336/7 weeks, intact membranes, and cervical dilation <2 cm. Those
whose cervix remained <2 cm were sent home with a diagnosis of false
preterm labor. When analyzed against the general obstetrical population,
women sent home had a similar rate of birth before 34 weeks—2 versus 1
percent. However, these women did have significantly higher rates of birth
between 34 and 36 weeks—5 percent compared with 2 percent. Women with
cervical dilation of 1 cm at discharge were significantly more likely to
deliver before 34 weeks compared with women without cervical dilation—5
percent versus 1 percent. Almost 90 percent of the 1-cm group delivered
within 21 days of the initial presentation.

■ Cervical Change
Asymptomatic cervical dilation after midpregnancy is suspected to be a
preterm delivery risk factor. Multiparity alone is not sufficient to explain
cervical dilation discovered early in the third trimester. Cook (1996)
longitudinally evaluated cervical status with transvaginal sonography
between 18 and 30 weeks’ gestation in nulliparas and multiparas who all
subsequently gave birth at term. Cervical length and diameter were identical
in both groups throughout these critical weeks. In a study from Parkland
Hospital, routine digital cervical examinations were performed between 26
and 30 weeks in 185 asymptomatic women. Approximately 25 percent of
women whose cervix was dilated 2 or 3 cm delivered before 34 weeks
(Leveno, 1986a). Other investigators have verified cervical dilation as a
predictor of increased preterm delivery risk (Copper, 1995).
Although women with dilation and effacement in the third trimester are at
greater risk for preterm birth, detection does not necessarily improve
pregnancy outcome. In one randomized study, 2719 women undergoing
routine cervical examinations at each prenatal visit were compared with
2721 gravidas in whom serial examinations were not performed. Knowledge

of antenatal cervical dilation did not affect any pregnancy outcome related to
preterm birth or the frequency of interventions for preterm labor (Buekens,
1994). Thus, it seems that prenatal cervical examinations in asymptomatic
women are neither beneficial nor harmful. Numerous cervical imaging
technologies are under investigation for early, accurate prediction of cervical
changes associated with preterm birth (Pizzella, 2020).

■ Ambulatory Uterine Monitoring
An external tocodynamometer belted around the abdomen and connected to
an electronic waist recorder allows a woman to ambulate while uterine
activity is recorded. Results are transmitted via telephone daily. Women are
educated concerning signs and symptoms of preterm labor, and clinicians are
kept apprised of their progress. The 1985 approval of this monitor by the
U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) prompted its widespread clinical
use. Subsequently, it was proven that this expensive and time-consuming
system did not reduce preterm birth rates (Collaborative Home Uterine
Monitoring Study Group, 1995; Iams, 2002). Despite technology
improvements, use of such monitoring is discouraged (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2021c).

■ Biomarkers
Because clinical symptoms alone are not predictive of preterm birth,
surrogate biomarkers have been evaluated. These include fetal fibronectin
(fFN), phosphorylated insulin-like growth factor–binding protein 1
(phIGFBP-1), and placental alpha microglobulin 1 (PAMG-1). Their
performance varies between studies and is influenced by demographic and
other factors (Melchor, 2018).

Fetal Fibronectin
This glycoprotein is produced in 20 different molecular forms by various
cell types, including hepatocytes, fibroblasts, endothelial cells, and fetal
amnion cells. Present in high concentrations in maternal blood and amnionic
fluid, fFN is thought to function in intercellular adhesion during implantation
and in maintenance of placental adherence to uterine decidua (Leeson, 1996).

Detected in cervicovaginal secretions in women who have normal
pregnancies with intact membranes at term, fFN appears to reflect stromal
remodeling of the cervix before labor. Qualitative and quantitative fFN
levels are measured using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays, and values
exceeding 50 ng/mL are considered positive. Sample contamination by
amnionic fluid and maternal blood should be avoided. Interventional studies
based on fFN screening results in asymptomatic women have not
demonstrated improved perinatal outcomes (Andrews, 2003; Esplin, 2017).
The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2021c) does not
recommend screening with fFN tests. In one review of 16 trials involving
management based upon fFN results, the low quality of existing evidence and
need for cost-effectiveness analyses were noted (Berghella, 2019).

■ Cervical Length Measurement
Progressively shorter cervical canals assessed sonographically are
associated with increased rates of preterm birth (Iams, 1996). The
sonographic technique is described in Chapter 14 (p. 254). The Society for
Maternal-Fetal Medicine (2016b) has provided guidance for proper cervical
length measurement and recommends that sonographers and practitioners
obtain specific training through accreditation programs in the acquisition and
interpretation of cervical length images.
Transvaginal cervical sonography is not affected by maternal obesity,
cervix position, or shadowing from the fetal presenting part. Because of the
inability to easily distinguish the lower uterine segment from the cervix in
early gestation, transvaginal cervical length assessment is typically
performed after 16 weeks’ gestation. Such interrogation is currently limited
to singleton gestations and not recommended for multifetal gestations outside
of research trials (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists,
2021c).
Indications for cervical length measurement are controversial. For those
women with a history of prior spontaneous preterm birth, the Society for
Maternal-Fetal Medicine (2016b) recommends transvaginal cervical length
screening. And, the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
(2021c) now also recommends screening for this indication. In women with
singleton pregnancies but without a history of prior preterm birth, the Society

for Maternal-Fetal Medicine and the College view cervical length screening
as reasonable yet acknowledges that this remains an area of debate.
Biomarkers have been incorporated with hopes to improve screening
performance. Esplin and colleagues (2017) prospectively studied 9410
nulliparas with singleton pregnancies. Universal screening of
sonographically measured cervical length and quantitative measurement of
vaginal fFN levels were evaluated as predictors of women who would
spontaneously deliver before 37 weeks. These measures had poor predictive
performance as a screening test. Based on these findings, routine use of these
screening tests in a low-risk population is not recommended. Of other
markers, PAMG-1 has emerged as superior to predict potential preterm birth
compared with fFN, particularly among symptomatic women (Nikolova,
2018; Pirjani, 2019; Wing, 2017). Incorporating results of cervicovaginal
fluid proteomic markers and microRNAs obtained from peripheral blood
also has been assessed (Parry, 2020; Winger, 2020). Although evidence
seems promising, any firm recommendations should await larger clinical
trials (Jones, 2020). This is particularly important given the challenges with
accuracy and utility of screening, especially in low-risk women, who
represent most of the population with preterm birth.
A second concern with screening is the efficacy of interventions to
improve perinatal outcomes once cervical length screening, biomarkers, or
both have isolated at-risk women. Cervical cerclage or vaginal progesterone
have been evaluated, and their efficacy is described in the next section.
Bloom and Leveno (2017) subsequently critiqued the use of transvaginal
cervical length screening in low-risk women and the promulgation of
consensus guidelines. They highlighted the staggering costs encumbering the
healthcare system in the United States as a result of such strategies. Similar
concerns were raised by Kuusela and associates (2021) who evaluated
cervical length screening among 11,456 asymptomatic gravidas.

PRETERM BIRTH PREVENTION
Prevention of preterm birth remains an elusive goal. Yet, experts continue to
debate the optimal strategies to prevent or manage preterm birth (Medley,
2018). Dietary supplementations, for example, have not shown benefit
(Makrides, 2019; Palacios, 2019). Still, recent reports suggest that

prevention in selected populations may be achievable (Breslin, 2020;
Goodfellow, 2021).

■ Cervical Cerclage
Cerclage placement may be used to prevent preterm birth in at least three
circumstances. First, the procedure may benefit women who have a history of
recurrent second-trimester loss and who are diagnosed with cervical
insufficiency. A second instance is the woman identified during sonographic
examination to have a short cervix. The third indication is a “rescue”
cerclage, done emergently when cervical incompetence is recognized in
women with threatened preterm labor. Cerclage placement in twin
pregnancies for clinical indications is an evolving area (Li, 2019; Roman,
2020). In this chapter, however, cerclage placement will be in the context of
a singleton pregnancy.
An accurate history is critical for management decisions. For recurrent
abortion from cervical incompetence, historical clues are outlined in Chapter
11 (p. 205). For women with a short cervix incidentally detected by
sonography, the benefit of cerclage placement appears directly related to
whether the woman has a history of prior preterm birth. In those without a
prior preterm birth, cerclage for a sonographically detected short cervix
alone offers no advantage (Berghella, 2017). To and associates (2004)
screened 47,123 women and randomly assigned the 253 women with a
cervix measuring <15 mm, with or without a history of preterm birth, to
cerclage or no cerclage groups. The frequency of preterm delivery before 33
weeks did not differ significantly between the two cohorts.
In contrast, women with a sonographically diagnosed short cervix and a
history of preterm birth may benefit. Owen and colleagues (2009) randomly
assigned 302 women with prior preterm birth plus a short cervix—defined as
length <25 mm—to cerclage or no-procedure groups. The primary study
outcome was not supported by the intervention. However, women with a
cervical length <15 mm delivered before 35 weeks significantly less often
following cerclage compared with women with no cerclage—30 versus 65
percent. This study suggested that recurrent preterm birth could be prevented
in a subset of women with asymptomatic singleton gestations with both
previous preterm birth and short cervical length.

These findings prompted a reassessment by Berghella and coworkers
(2011), who performed a metaanalysis using individual patient data (Fig. 455). The primary outcomes from the included trials did not support cerclage
placement. However, these investigators concluded that cerclage
significantly prevented preterm birth and improved composite perinatal
mortality and morbidity outcomes in women with prior spontaneous preterm
birth, singleton gestation, and cervical length <25 mm.

FIGURE 45-5 Cerclage versus no cerclage for prevention of recurrent preterm birth in women with a
cervical length <25 mm. Forest plot analysis of composite perinatal mortality and morbidity. CI =
confidence interval; M-H = Mantel-Haenszel.

One caveat in the interpretation of this cerclage data is the influence of
obstetrical history. For example, all of the trials comprising the metaanalysis
included preterm birth as early as 16 to 17 weeks’ gestation. Defining these
early second-trimester losses as preterm births, rather than cervical
incompetence, is problematic. Thus, it is difficult to distinguish whether
these women were treated in the context of cervical incompetence or of
preterm labor at 16 weeks. Nonetheless, based on these findings, the
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2021c) concluded
that in women with a singleton pregnancy, prior spontaneous preterm birth,

cervical length <25 mm, and gestational age <24 weeks, cerclage placement
may be considered versus vaginal progesterone (p. 797).

Technique
The operative placement of cervical cerclage is shown in Chapter 11 (p.
206). Several emerging trends, however, merit comment. For example,
indication for cerclage placement may influence selection of suture material
(Battarbee, 2019). Tocolysis and antibiotics with cerclage placement is
another controversy (Eleje, 2020). In a retrospective report of 142 cases, 72
received perioperative prophylaxis, which consisted of perioperative
cefazolin and indomethacin, during physical examination–indicated cerclage
placement. This practice was associated with a significant prolongation in
gestational latency (Premkumar, 2020). At Parkland Hospital, we have not
adopted such practices. Last, for women with a history of a failed cerclage,
transabdominal cerclage appears to be superior to vaginal cerclage
(Shennan, 2020).

■ Prophylaxis with Progestogen Compounds
In most mammals, progesterone withdrawal is considered to be a
parturition-triggering event. During human parturition, however, maternal,
fetal, and amnionic fluid progesterone levels remain elevated. It has been
proposed that human parturition involves functional progesterone withdrawal
mediated by decreased activity of progesterone receptors (Chap. 21, p. 406).
It follows conceptually that progesterone administration may prevent preterm
labor. This hypothesis has stimulated several studies of both 17-alpha
hydroxyprogesterone caproate and vaginally administered progesterone in
women with varying risks for preterm birth.
At present, reported benefits of either progestogen therapy are largely
limited to women with singleton pregnancies. Progestogen prophylaxis
specifically in multifetal gestations has not lowered preterm birth rates
(Caritis, 2009; Dodd, 2019; Rehal, 2020; Rouse, 2007). Accordingly, both
the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2021c) and the
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine (2020b) support the use of progestogen
therapy for prevention of preterm birth in select women with singleton
pregnancies despite the challenges chronicled (Nelson, 2021). Either a

history of prior preterm birth or no prior preterm birth but a sonographically
identified short cervix is a criterion.

■ Prior Preterm Birth and Progestogen Compounds
The synthetic progestogen 17-alpha-hydroxyprogesterone caproate (17OHPC) is the focus of current controversy. It remains the first, and only, drug
approved by the FDA for prevention of recurrent preterm birth. This therapy
was originally approved in 2011 through an accelerated process for orphan
drugs and based on the findings of Maternal-Fetal Medicine Units (MFMU)
Network study, described next. However, this approval and justification for
continued use is now disputed (Chang, 2020; Food and Drug Administration,
2019, 2020; Greene, 2020; Nelson, 2021).

Maternal-Fetal Medicine Units Network Trial
In the MFMU Network trial, 463 women with a prior preterm birth were
randomly assigned to receive weekly intramuscular injections of inert oil
placebo or 17-OHPC from 16 through 36 weeks’ gestation (Meis, 2003).
Recurrence of preterm birth rates were 36 percent in women receiving 17OHPC and 55 percent in those given placebo. This study was challenged
because of the unexpectedly high preterm delivery rate in the placebo arm
(Romero, 2013). One explanation for this high rate was asymmetry in the
risks of recurrence. Indeed, 41 percent of the placebo group had ≥2 prior
preterm births compared with only 28 percent in the 17-OHPC group.
Another concern was that the injection dosage of 17-OHPC, which was 250
mg weekly, was empirically chosen (Caritis, 2012, 2014). Because of these
reported challenges, the FDA granted approval but called for a confirmatory
randomized clinical trial before final FDA approval (Food and Drug
Administration, 2019). The multicenter, international, randomized trial was
launched in 2009 but required 9 years to complete (Blackwell, 2020).

Pricing Concerns
Following the accelerated approval, drug-overpricing claims prompted
concern (Cohen, 2011; Romero, 2013). In 2011, the FDA gave temporary
approval to KV Pharmaceutical to market 17-OHPC under the brand name
Makena. Because regulations prohibited compounding, there was no

competitor for this relatively inexpensive drug, and Makena was priced at
$1500 per injection. This caused widespread concern because the
cumulative cost of Makena would be more than $30,000 per pregnancy.
Parkland Hospital, given these pricing concerns, contracted a local
compounding pharmacy to provide 250-mg, single-dose vials of 17-OHPC in
sesame oil at a cost of $25 per dose. Nelson and colleagues (2017) reported
their findings from this program in a prospective study of 430 women given
this compounded 17-OHPC. It was ineffective for prevention of recurrent
preterm birth at 35 weeks or less compared with a historical cohort from
Parkland Hospital. Moreover, 17-OHPC did not significantly reduce the
rates of recurrent preterm birth regardless of prior preterm birth number or
sequence. Moreover, plasma concentrations of 17-OHPC were not different
at 24 weeks or 32 weeks between women delivered at ≤35 weeks and those
delivered later.

Metabolism
Despite its widespread use, the mechanism of action for 17-OHPC remains
unknown. Sharma and associates (2008) reported that the metabolism of 17OHPC was predominantly mediated by the CYP3A enzymatic system. Thus,
other agents that induce or inhibit this system or hepatic impairment may alter
drug levels. They also showed that 17-OHPC is not converted after
administration to the progesterone metabolite 17α-hydroxyprogesterone. The
relative binding affinity of 17-OHPC to progesterone receptors approximates
only 30 percent of that by progesterone (Attardi, 2007).
Caritis and colleagues (2012) examined 61 women receiving 17-OHPC
therapy and found that the half-life was relatively long (median 16.2 days).
Pharmacokinetic parameters were affected by maternal body habitus and
varied widely between subjects. In addition, 17-OHPC crossed the placental
barrier and was detectible in cord plasma 44 days after the last maternal
injection (Caritis, 2012). Despite this, evidence to date suggests that 17OHPC is safe for the fetus (Food and Drug Administration, 2019). No
abnormalities, including abnormal genitalia, were found in a 48-month
follow-up study of infants exposed in the 2003 MFMU Network trial
(Northen, 2007). Simons and coworkers (2021) also reported no effect of
progestogens on child development in a systematic review comprising
numerous developmental measurements.

PROLONG Trial
The FDA-required confirmatory trial was the PROLONG trial and
completed in October 2018. A total of 1708 women were randomly assigned
in a 2:1 ratio to receive 17-OHPC or placebo. This trial had two primary
endpoints, which were birth <35 weeks’ gestation and a neonatal composite.
Data were analyzed for 1651 of the liveborn neonates (Table 45-7)
(Blackwell, 2020). Progesterone was not effective in preventing recurrent
preterm birth. In the analysis of various secondary outcomes, 17-OHPC
treatment also lacked efficacy.
TABLE 45-7. Perinatal Outcomes of PROLONG Trial

FDA Recommendations
In October 2019, the FDA convened an Advisory Committee meeting to
review 17-OHPC and the new data. Efficacy, side effects, and several
subgroup analyses were studied, and none supported 17-OHPC efficacy (Fig.
45-6). The FDA concluded that the PROLONG trial did not demonstrate a

treatment benefit of 17-OHPC in reducing the neonatal composite index or
the rate of spontaneous preterm birth prior to 35 weeks’ gestation. The
Advisory Committee recommended to withdraw approval. In November
2020, the Center for Drug Evaluation and Research proposed that Makena
(17-OHPC) be withdrawn from the market (Food and Drug Administration,
2020).

FIGURE 45-6 In analysis of co-primary endpoints for the PROLONG Trial, five of the included
defining risk factors were noted to be different from those in the Maternal-Fetal Medicine Units
Network trial (see text). These are black race, >1 prior spontaneous preterm birth, single or without a
partner, substance use during pregnancy, and ≤12 years of formal education. The three groups examined
in this post-hoc composite risk profile analysis were those with no risk factors, those with ≥1 risk factor,
and those with ≥2 risk factors. Makena is the brand name of 17-OHPC.

Response to the FDA position has been mixed. Both the American
College of Obstetricians (2019a, 2021a) and Society for Maternal-Fetal
Medicine (2020b) have issued statements endorsing continued use of 17OHPC for prevention of recurrent preterm birth in women with singleton
pregnancies. Endorsements by these organizations continue after publication
of a metaanalysis by the Evaluating Progestogens for Preventing Preterm
birth International Collaborative (EPPPIC) Group (2021). These
investigators summarized that vaginal progesterone and 17-OHPC both
reduced birth rates before 34 weeks’ gestation in high-risk singleton
pregnancies. Notably, the findings for 17-OHPC did not reach statistical
significance. Moreover, this metaanalysis grouped together trials of patients
with differing risk profiles. It combined women with and without a prior
preterm birth as well as women with and without a short cervix.

These positions have stimulated several dueling commentaries regarding
its use (Chang, 2020; Godlewski, 2020; Greene, 2020; Sibai, 2020). At this
time, the FDA has not withdrawn the accelerated approval. If formally
withdrawn, however, a consequence may be continued “off-label” use, with
the caveat that insurers may not provide payment coverage.

■ Progesterone Prophylaxis with Shortened Cervix
Three randomized trials are at the center of whether progestogen therapy
should be used in women without prior preterm births but who have a
shortened cervix (Table 45-8). In the first trial, 250 women with short
cervices measuring ≤15 mm identified during routine prenatal care were
nightly given 200-mg micronized progesterone vaginal capsules or placebo
from 24 to 34 weeks’ gestation (Fonseca, 2007). The rate of spontaneous
delivery <34 weeks was significantly reduced by progesterone therapy.
Importantly, this trial included nulliparas and also those with twins or prior
preterm birth.
TABLE 45-8. Randomized Trials of Progestogen Compounds Given
Prophylactically to Prevent Preterm Labor

In the second trial, 465 women with a short cervix—10 to 20 mm—were
given vaginal progesterone gel, 90 mg daily, or placebo (Hassan, 2011).
Those receiving progesterone had significantly lower rates of preterm birth
<33 weeks. This trial also included nulliparas and women with prior preterm
births. According to Likis and colleagues (2012), the heterogeneity of these
first two studies that included women with varied indications for

progestogen treatment, combined with the fact that outcomes were not
reported by risk factors such as nulliparity, made it impossible to interpret
the efficacy of progesterone for specific indications.
The third study randomly assigned administration of 17-OHPC
intramuscular injection or placebo between 16 and 223/7 weeks’ gestation to
nulliparas with a singleton gestation and a cervical length <30 mm detected
sonographically (Grobman, 2012). Treatment with 17-OHPC did not reduce
the frequency of preterm birth <37 weeks. Regardless of cervical length, 17OHPC was ineffective.
From these, vaginal progesterone, but not intramuscular 17-OHPC,
appears to benefit women with a sonographically measured short cervix.
Romero and Stanczyk (2013) provided a review to explain the conflicting
evidence and argued that naturally occurring progesterone, which is used in
the vaginal preparations, is not the same as synthetic 17-OHPC. Likewise,
Furcron and coworkers (2015) found that 17-OHPC did not have local
antiinflammatory effects at the maternal-fetal interface or cervix. Further, 17OHPC did not protect against endotoxin-induced preterm birth.
From all these studies, the American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2021c) concluded that universal cervical length screening in
women without a prior preterm birth is not mandatory. However, this
screening strategy could be considered in the context of treatment with
vaginal progesterone.
Because of the preliminary results suggesting success of vaginally
administered progesterone, the OPPTIMUM study was carried out—does
progesterone prophylaxis to prevent preterm labor improve outcome?
(Norman, 2016). High-risk women were defined as those with a prior
spontaneous birth ≤34 weeks or with a cervical length ≤25 mm or a positive
fFN test result combined with other clinical risk factors for preterm birth.
The primary outcomes of OPPTIMUM were unique in that both
immediate obstetrical and childhood outcomes were examined. These were
fetal death or birth <34 weeks; a composite of death, brain injury, or
bronchopulmonary dysplasia; and a standardized cognitive score at age 2
years. Contrary to earlier reports, vaginal progesterone was not associated
with a lower risk of preterm birth or composite neonatal adverse outcomes.
In children at 2 years, vaginal progesterone had no long-term benefit or harm.

■ Progestogens Summary
Thus, evidence remains conflicting as to the efficacy of progestogens across
various indications. Some have attempted to resolve these issues through
systematic review and metaanalysis (Conde-Agudelo, 2018; da Fonseca,
2020; Jarde, 2019; Prior, 2017; Romero, 2018). However, virtually all
evidence supporting progestogen use for a specific indication can be
challenged in some way. At this time, we agree with Norman and colleagues
(2016) that the results of recent studies should prompt a major review of
progesterone use for preterm birth prophylaxis, a search to identify specific
women who might benefit, and a redoubling of efforts to find alternative
strategies to prevent preterm birth in women at risk.

■ Geography-based Public Health-care Programs
A well-organized prenatal system can lower preterm birth rates in high-risk
indigent populations (Creasy, 1980). For example, in the Parkland Hospital
prenatal clinic system, a declining preterm birth rate between 1988 and 2006
coincided with a substantial rise in prenatal visit attendance (Fig. 45-7)
(Leveno, 2009). In the early 1990s, a concerted effort was made to improve
access by creating seamless care that began with antenatal enrollment and
extended through delivery and the puerperium. Prenatal clinics were placed
strategically throughout Dallas County to provide convenient access for
patients. Prenatal protocols are used by nurse practitioners at all clinic sites
to guarantee homogeneous care. Women with high-risk pregnancy
complications are referred to a hospital-based central clinic system. Here,
maternal-fetal medicine clinics operate each weekday and are staffed by
residents and midwives who are supervised by fellows and faculty.

FIGURE 45-7 Percentage of births before 37 weeks’ gestation at Parkland Hospital from 1988 to
2006 compared with that in the United States from 1996 to 2002. Analysis in both cohorts was limited to
singleton liveborn infants ≥500 g who received prenatal care. (Reproduced with permission from
Leveno KJ, McIntire DD, Bloom SL, et al: Decreased preterm births in an inner-city public hospital.
Obstet Gynecol. 2009 Mar;113(3):578–584.)

A similar obstetrical care system for indigent women at the University of
Alabama at Birmingham also has produced salutary results (Tita, 2011).
Given the recent emphasis on access to care, especially among underserved
minorities, these experiences remain relevant (United States Congress,
2019). Prenatal care is an important component of a comprehensive public
health-care system that at least partially affects the preterm birth rate.

■ Aspirin
Acetylsalicylic acid (ASA) is a cyclooxygenase inhibitor with
antiinflammatory and antiplatelet properties that has been used in pregnancy
most commonly to prevent or delay onset of preeclampsia (Chap. 41, p. 705).
Data now suggest that low-dose aspirin may also reduce spontaneous
preterm birth rates (Andrikopoulou, 2018). In one randomized study of
11,976 nulliparas in six low- and middle-income countries, women were
randomly assigned to receive low-dose aspirin (81 mg) or placebo initiated

between 60/7 and 136/7 weeks’ gestation (Hoffman, 2020). Low-dose aspirin
decreased the incidence of birth <37 weeks and reduced the perinatal
mortality rate. Although this trial did not differentiate spontaneous from
indicated preterm birth, it requires replication in high-resource settings. The
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020c) does not
recommend low-dose aspirin prophylaxis to prevent spontaneous preterm
birth in the absence of preeclampsia risk factors.

MANAGEMENT OF PRETERM PRELABOR RUPTURE
OF MEMBRANES
Methods used to diagnose ruptured membranes are detailed in Chapter 22 (p.
426). A history of vaginal leakage of fluid, either as a continuous stream or a
gush, should prompt a speculum examination to visualize gross vaginal
pooling of amnionic fluid, clear fluid from the cervical canal, or both.
Confirmation of rupture of membranes is usually accompanied by
sonographic examination to assess amnionic fluid volume, to identify the
presenting part, and if not previously determined, to estimate gestational age.
Once PPROM is identified, the general scheme shown in Table 45-9 can
guide management.
TABLE 45-9. Management of Prelabor Rupture of Membranes

■ Natural History
The time from PPROM to delivery is inversely related to the gestational age
at which rupture occurs. Very few days are gained if membranes rupture
during the third trimester compared with midpregnancy (Fig. 45-8) (Carroll,
1995).

FIGURE 45-8 Relationship of time between preterm membrane rupture and delivery in 172 singleton
pregnancies. (Reproduced with permission from Carroll SG, Blott M, Nicolaides KH: Preterm prelabor
amniorrhexis: Outcome of live births. Obstet Gynecol 1995 Jul;86(1):18–25.)

In an earlier study from Parkland Hospital, 298 consecutive women with
spontaneously ruptured membranes between 24 and 34 weeks’ gestation
were analyzed (Cox, 1988). PPROM constituted 1.7 percent of pregnancies
during the study period. At the time they presented, 76 percent of the women
were already in labor, and 5 percent were delivered for other complications.
Thus, only 19 percent initially were suitable for expectant management.
Ultimately, delivery was delayed 48 hours or more after membrane rupture in
only 7 percent of the total study cohort. None of the neonates in this group
died. This contrasted with a neonatal death rate of 8 percent in preterm
newborns delivered within 48 hours of membrane rupture. Others have
reported similar results (Nelson, 1994).

■ Hospitalization
Most clinicians hospitalize women with PPROM. Concerns regarding the
costs of lengthy hospitalizations are usually moot, because most women enter

labor within a week or less after membrane rupture. Carlan and coworkers
(1993) randomly assigned 67 women with PPROM at <37 weeks’ gestation
to home or hospital management. The mean gestational age was 31 weeks.
No benefits were found for hospitalization, and maternal hospital stays were
reduced by 50 percent in those sent home—14 versus 7 days. Importantly, the
investigators emphasized that this study was too small to conclude that home
management was safe in regard to umbilical cord prolapse.
If hospitalization is chosen, no consensus guides the optimal frequency of
inpatient assessment. The American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2020g) notes that an acceptable strategy would include
periodic sonograms for fetal growth, fetal heart rate monitoring, and clinical
surveillance for maternal infection—particularly fever. During the periviable
period and at gestation ages before interventions would be planned, a short
period of initial observation and consideration of outpatient monitoring in
select cases is reasonable. Hospitalization would then be practiced at the
time of viability.

■ Intentional Delivery
Before the mid-1970s, labor was usually induced in women with PPROM
because of sepsis fears. Maternal infection risk and fetal prematurity risk
vary according to the gestational age at membrane rupture, and management
decisions incorporate this data. With periviable pregnancy, Morales (1993b)
expectantly managed 94 singleton pregnancies with PPROM before 25
weeks. The average time gained was 11 days. Although 41 percent of infants
survived to age 1 year, only 27 percent of the original cohort were
neurologically normal. Similar results were reported by Farooqi (1998) and
Winn (2000) and their colleagues. Management of these early pregnancies is
discussed on page 785.
For PPROM in general, two randomized trials in the 1990s compared
labor induction with expectant management (Cox, 1995; Mercer, 1993). In
both of these studies, the balance of risk and benefit was difficult to
ascertain, as neither immediate delivery nor expectant management was
superior for neonatal outcomes. Lieman and associates (2005) found that
neonatal outcomes did not improve with expectant management beyond 33
weeks. McElrath and coworkers (2003) found that prolonged latency after
membrane rupture was not associated with a greater incidence of fetal

neurological damage. An important correlate is that infection—specifically
chorioamnionitis—is a recognized risk factor for neonatal neurological
injury (Gaudet, 2001; Wu, 2000).
Bond and colleagues (2017) compared planned early birth with expectant
management for women with PPROM before 37 weeks’ gestation. They
evaluated 12 randomized trials totaling 3617 women and 3628 newborns. No
clinically important differences in the incidence of neonatal sepsis between
women who immediately delivered and those managed expectantly were
identified. Although the incidence of chorioamnionitis was lower, neonates
of women randomized to early birth were more likely to be born at an earlier
gestational age and encountered attendant perinatal sequelae. The authors
concluded that in women with rupture of membranes before 37 weeks’
gestation without contraindications to continuing the pregnancy, a policy of
expectant management with careful monitoring was associated with better
outcomes for both the mother and newborn. A subsequent metaanalysis of
late-preterm prelabor rupture of membranes by Quist-Nelson and coworkers
(2018) noted that immediate delivery and expectant management resulted in
comparable rates of the composite of adverse neonatal outcomes.
Because of conflicting data and the controversies of immediate delivery
compared with expectant management, the American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020g) cannot make firm
recommendations. Clearly, gestational age is an important consideration. At
240/7 to 336/7 weeks, expectant management in the absence of nonreassuring
fetal status, clinical chorioamnionitis, or placental abruption is
recommended. At 340/7 to 366/7 weeks’ gestation, delivery was once
recommended, however, it is now considered reasonable to offer either
expectant management or immediate delivery following consideration of
risks and benefits, counseling, and shared decision-making. Expectant
management should not go beyond 370/7 weeks’ gestation. Based upon
limitations of access to care and resources, our current practices at Parkland
Hospital continue to favor immediate delivery after 34 weeks’ gestation.

■ Expectant Management
Several considerations arise during expectant management of PPROM
(Boettcher, 2020; Shaddeau, 2020). One is digital cervical examination.

Alexander and colleagues (2000) analyzed findings in women with
membrane rupture expectantly managed between 24 and 32 weeks’ gestation.
They compared those who had one or two digital cervical examinations with
women who were not examined. Those who were examined had a rupture-todelivery interval of 3 days compared with 5 days in those not examined. This
difference did not worsen maternal or neonatal outcomes. At Parkland
Hospital, digital cervical examination is used judiciously in PPROM cases.
Rupture of membranes following second-trimester amniocentesis is
uncommon (Chap. 17, p. 345). Compared with women with spontaneous
rupture during the second trimester, Borgida and associates (2000) found that
pregnancies complicated by PPROM after genetic amniocentesis resulted in
significantly better perinatal outcomes. The perinatal survival rate was 91
percent. After counseling, affected women are typically managed expectantly
as outpatients with serial surveillance of amnionic fluid volume and selfassessment of temperature (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2020g). In the series cited above, the mean time to
documentation of a normal amnionic fluid volume after amniocentesis
approximated 2 weeks.
Tocolysis given with PPROM has been reported in few studies. In
women with ruptured membranes and lack of labor, prophylactic tocolysis
does not improve neonatal outcomes but is associated with greater
chorioamnionitis rates (Mackeen, 2014). Similarly, therapeutic tocolysis—
for those with ruptured membranes and labor—has not provided significant
perinatal benefit (Garite, 1987).
Management of PPROM in the woman who has undergone cervical
cerclage is complex (American College of Obstetricians, 2020g). McElrath
and associates (2002) studied 114 women with a cerclage in place who later
had ruptured membranes before 34 weeks. They were compared with 288
controls. Pregnancy outcomes were equivalent in both groups. Cerclage
retention for more than 24 hours after PPROM may be associated with
pregnancy prolongation, however, intrauterine infection and its consequences
are risks (Giraldo-Isaza, 2011; Laskin, 2012). At Parkland Hospital,
cerclage retention in the absence of infection or labor is currently practiced
with close clinical surveillance in those with PPROM.
With PPROM in pregnancies before 26 weeks, the volume of amnionic
fluid remaining after rupture appears to have prognostic importance (Carroll,
1995; Hadi, 1994). Although varied by report, current rates of pulmonary

hypoplasia with PPROM before 24 weeks among surviving neonates can be
as high as 30 percent (Kiver, 2018). This suggests that 23 weeks reflects a
threshold for lung hypoplasia development (Chap. 7, p. 131). Further, when
contemplating early expectant management, oligohydramnios and resultant
limb compression deformities are influencing considerations.
For neonates born to women who have active herpetic lesions and who
are expectantly managed, the infectious morbidity risk appears to be
outweighed by risks associated with preterm birth (Chap. 68, p. 1216)
(Major, 2003). Lewis and associates (2007) found that expectant
management of women with PPROM and noncephalic presentation was
associated with a higher rate of umbilical cord prolapse, especially before
26 weeks.
Tissue sealants are often used to gain surgical hemostasis. Limited
reports describe their use for repair of fetal membranes (Chap. 11, p. 203).
Crowley and coworkers (2016) concluded that available data are currently
insufficient to assess the value of sealing procedures for PPROM. We do not
use these agents for this indication.

■ Clinical Chorioamnionitis
Infection is a major concern with membrane rupture. Although some cases
remain subclinical, if chorioamnionitis is diagnosed, prompt efforts to effect
delivery, preferably vaginally, are initiated. Because maternal leukocytosis
alone is not a consistent finding, fever is the only reliable indicator for the
diagnosis of chorioamnionitis. Institutional practices and protocols vary in
defining the temperature threshold. Traditionally, a temperature ≥38°C
(100.4°F) accompanying ruptured membranes has implied infection. At
Parkland Hospital, we still adhere to this criterion.
In 2015, a workshop sponsored by the NICHD was convened and
suggested renaming this condition intraamnionic infection and inflammation
—triple I (Higgins, 2016). The merits of this terminology have been
questioned (Barth, 2016). Nonetheless, the American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019b) revised both the definitions and
temperature thresholds for intraamnionic infection. Using these new
definitions, the diagnosis of suspected intraamnionic infection is made when
the maternal temperature is ≥39.0°C or when the maternal temperature is
38.0 to 38.9°C and one additional clinical risk factor is present. The latter

include low parity, multiple digital examinations, internal uterine and fetal
monitors, meconium-stained amnionic fluid, and the presence of certain
genital tract pathogens, such as group B streptococcus (GBS) and sexually
transmitted agents. Isolated maternal fever is defined as any maternal
temperature between 38.0°C and 38.9°C with no additional risk factors
present, and with or without persistent temperature elevation.
With chorioamnionitis, fetal and neonatal morbidity are substantively
increased. Alexander and colleagues (1998) studied 1367 very-lowbirthweight neonates delivered at Parkland Hospital. Approximately 7
percent were born to women with overt chorioamnionitis, and their outcomes
were compared with similar newborns without clinical infection. Those in
the infected group had higher incidences of sepsis, respiratory distress,
early-onset seizures, intraventricular hemorrhage, and periventricular
leukomalacia. Yoon and colleagues (2000) found that intraamnionic infection
in preterm neonates was associated with increased rates of cerebral palsy. In
one study of more than 11 million singleton live births in the United States
from 1995 to 1997, 1.6 percent of gravidas had fever during labor. This was
a strong predictor of infection-related death in both term and preterm
neonates (Petrova, 2001).

■ Antimicrobial Therapy
Various antimicrobials have been evaluated to forestall preterm delivery.
Mercer and associates (1995) reviewed 13 randomized trials that evaluated
antibiotics for PPROM before 35 weeks. Their metaanalysis indicated that
only three of 10 outcomes were possibly benefited: (1) fewer women
developed chorioamnionitis, (2) fewer newborns developed sepsis, and (3)
pregnancy was more often prolonged 7 days in women given antibiotics.
However, rates of other neonatal outcomes, including survival and
respiratory distress, were unaffected.
In an MFMU Network trial, women with membrane rupture between 24
and 32 weeks’ gestation were randomly assigned to expectant management
combined with placebo or to a 7-day antibiotic regimen. Treatment included
intravenous ampicillin plus erythromycin every 6 hours for 48 hours, which
was followed by oral amoxicillin plus erythromycin, every 8 hours for 5
days. Neither tocolytics nor corticosteroids were given. Antimicrobialtreated women had significantly fewer newborns with respiratory distress,

necrotizing enterocolitis, and composite adverse outcomes (Mercer, 1997).
The latency period was also significantly longer. Specifically, 50 percent of
women given an antimicrobial regimen remained undelivered after 7 days of
treatment compared with only 25 percent of those given placebo. Also, a
significantly greater number of treated pregnancies were undelivered at 14
and 21 days. Cervicovaginal GBS colonization did not alter these results.
Other studies have examined the efficacy of shorter treatment lengths and
different antimicrobial combinations. Three-day treatments compared with 7day regimens using either ampicillin or ampicillin-sulbactam appear equally
effective in regard to perinatal outcomes (Lewis, 2003; Segel, 2003).
Similarly, erythromycin compared with placebo offered a range of significant
neonatal benefits. The substitution of azithromycin for erythromycin does not
appear to impact maternal or neonatal outcomes, and the former has an
improved side-effect profile (Dotters-Katz, 2020). An amoxicillinclavulanate regimen is not recommended, however, because of its
association with an increased incidence of neonatal necrotizing enterocolitis
(Kenyon, 2004).
Some predicted that prolonged antimicrobial therapy in such pregnancies
might have unwanted consequences (Carroll, 1996; Mercer, 1999). Stoll and
associates (2002) studied 4337 neonates weighing from 400 to 1500 g and
born from 1998 to 2000. Their outcomes were compared with those of 7606
neonates of similar birthweight born from 1991 to 1993 and prior to the
practice of antibiotic prophylaxis. The overall rate of early-onset sepsis did
not change between these two epochs. But, the rate of GBS sepsis dropped
from 5.9 per 1000 births in the earlier group to 1.7 per 1000 births in the
later group. Comparing these same epochs, the rate of Escherichia coli
sepsis, however, rose from 3.2 to 6.8 per 1000 births. Almost 85 percent of
isolates from the more recent cohort were resistant to ampicillin. Neonates
with early-onset sepsis were more likely to die, especially if they were
infected with coliforms. Long term, Kenyon and coworkers (2008a) found
that antimicrobials given for women with PPROM had no effect on the health
of children at age 7 years.

■ Corticosteroid Therapy
A single course of corticosteroids is recommended for pregnant women with
PPROM between 240/7 and 340/7 weeks’ gestation (American College of

Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020g). A single course of corticosteroids
as early as 230/7 weeks in those at risk for preterm delivery within 7 days
may be considered. A similar controversy is found at the other end of the
gestational age spectrum, 340/7 to 366/7 weeks’ gestation and with rescue
therapy (p. 803). These issues were summarized by Battarbee (2020) in a
recent review.

MANAGEMENT OF PRETERM LABOR WITH INTACT
MEMBRANES
Women with signs and symptoms of preterm labor with intact membranes are
managed similarly to those with PPROM. If possible, delivery before 34
weeks’ gestation is delayed. Drugs used to abate or suppress preterm uterine
contractions are subsequently discussed.

■ Amniocentesis to Detect Infection
One of every 10 women with preterm labor and intact membranes will have
intraamnionic infection that is largely subclinical (Yoon, 2019). Because of
this, several tests have been used to diagnose intraamnionic infection
(Andrews, 1995; Romero, 1993; Yoon, 1996). Although such infection can
be identified with a positive test result, routine amniocentesis offers little
value.

■ Corticosteroid Therapy
Glucocorticosteroids were found to accelerate lung maturation in preterm
sheep fetuses, and Liggins and Howie (1972) evaluated them to treat women
with preterm labor. Corticosteroid therapy was effective in lowering the
incidence of respiratory distress syndrome (RDS) and neonatal mortality
rates if birth was delayed for at least 24 hours after initiation of
betamethasone. Infants exposed to corticosteroids in these early studies have
now been followed into adulthood with no ill effects detected.
In 1995, a National Institutes of Health (NIH) Consensus Development
Conference panel recommended corticosteroids for fetal lung maturation in
threatened preterm birth. A subsequent NIH Conference (2000) summarized

that data were insufficient to assess corticosteroid effectiveness in
pregnancies complicated by hypertension, diabetes, multifetal gestation,
fetal-growth restriction, or fetal hydrops. It was concluded, however, that
administering corticosteroids to these women is reasonable.
One metaanalysis of 30 studies totaling 7774 women and 8158 infants
quantified the benefit of a single course of corticosteroids (Roberts, 2017).
Treatment was associated with lower rates of perinatal death, neonatal death,
RDS, intraventricular hemorrhage, necrotizing enterocolitis, mechanical
ventilation, and systemic infection in the first 48 hours of life. No obvious
benefits were gained for chronic lung disease, death in childhood, or
neurodevelopmental delay in childhood. Therapy was not associated with
chorioamnionitis.
Parenthetically, corticosteroids given prophylactically to women at risk
of preterm birth in low- and middle-income countries actually increased
perinatal mortality rates (Althabe, 2015). Because of this unexpected finding,
a multicountry randomized trial comparing dexamethasone to placebo and
involving pregnant women between 260/7 and 336/7 weeks’ gestation was
recently completed (WHO ACTION Trials Collaborators, 2020). The trial
was stopped early due to benefits of dexamethasone, which resulted in a
significantly lower risk of stillbirth or neonatal death. The discrepancy
between the two reports was attributed to inaccuracies in gestational age
assessment (Rohwer, 2020).
A single course of corticosteroids is currently recommended for women
between 24 and 34 weeks’ gestation who are at risk for delivery within 7
days (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020a). This
recommendation for premature twins has been challenged (Viteri, 2016). For
pregnancies at 23 weeks and at risk of delivery within 7 days, a single
course of corticosteroids may be considered (p. 785). Administration of
corticosteroids during the periviable period is linked to parental decisions
regarding resuscitation and should be considered in that context (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019d).

Agent Selection
Betamethasone and dexamethasone are glucocorticoids that appear
equivalent in stimulating fetal lung maturation (Murphy, 2007). Reduced rates
of major preterm neonatal morbidities and increased rates of survival

without neurosensory disability at age 2 years do not differ between them
(Crowther, 2019; Elimian, 2007). A treatment course may be two 12-mg
doses of betamethasone, and each dose is given intramuscularly 24 hours
apart. With dexamethasone, 6-mg doses are given intramuscularly every 12
hours for four doses. Because treatment for less than 24 hours may be
beneficial and reduce neonatal morbidity and mortality rates, a first dose of
antenatal corticosteroids is administered regardless of the ability to complete
additional doses before delivery (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2020a).

Late-preterm Delivery
Antenatal betamethasone has been compared against placebo for neonates
that are likely to deliver in the late-preterm period (Gyamfi-Bannerman,
2016). Although only 60 percent of 2831 women received both injections,
the rate of respiratory complications measured as a composite outcome was
significantly lower with corticosteroid use compared with placebo—11.6
versus 14.4 percent. Because of these findings, consideration for
administration of a single course of betamethasone for women between 340/7
and 366/7 weeks is advocated by both the American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists (2020a) and the Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine
(2016a).
Adoption of this practice has not been universal because of both shortand long-term neonatal safety concerns (Crowther, 2016; Kamath-Rayne,
2016). Specifically, in the newborns receiving betamethasone, rates of
hypoglycemia were significantly greater (Gyamfi-Bannerman, 2016).
Neonatal hypoglycemia is particularly worrisome for possible adverse longterm consequences that include developmental delay (Kerstjens, 2012).
Another caveat is that the largest effects of betamethasone included a
reduction in transient tachypnea of the newborn (TTN), which is a selflimited condition with little clinical significance (Kamath-Rayne, 2016).
Specifically, the rates of TTN were 6.7 and 9.9 percent in those given
betamethasone and placebo, respectively. These rates are three- to fourfold
higher than those reported by the Consortium on Safe Labor (2010). The
latter was a retrospective, observational study from 19 hospitals across the
United States that included 233,844 deliveries. Because of these issues, we

do not provide corticosteroids beyond 34 weeks at Parkland Hospital at this
time.

Repeated Courses
A single dose of intramuscular corticosteroids has been compared with
repeated courses for lung maturation in two major randomized trials. Both
found that repeated courses reduced neonatal respiratory morbidity rates, but
the long-term consequences were much different. In one study, all women
were given a primary course of betamethasone. If the preterm delivery risk
persisted, they were assigned to serial weekly doses of betamethasone or
placebo. These investigators found no adverse effects in the infants followed
to age 2 years (Crowther, 2007).
In the second study, 495 women were randomly assigned to receive a
single corticosteroid course that contained two doses or assigned to repeated
courses that were given weekly (Wapner, 2007). In infants exposed to
repeated courses, a nonsignificant rise in the cerebral palsy rate was
identified. Still, exposure to the doubled betamethasone dose was worrisome
because some experimental evidence supports the view that adverse effects
are dose dependent (Bruschettini, 2006). We agree with Stiles (2007) who
summarized these two studies as “early gain, long-term questions.” At
Parkland Hospital, our practice is to follow the recommendations of the
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020a) for singlecourse therapy.

Rescue Therapy
This refers to administration of a second corticosteroid dose when delivery
becomes imminent and more than 7 days have elapsed since the initial dose.
In one randomized trial, 326 women received placebo or a single 12-mg
dose of betamethasone (Peltoniemi, 2007). Paradoxically, the rescue dose of
betamethasone increased the risk of RDS. In another randomized study of 437
women with gestations <33 weeks, Garite and associates (2009) reported
significantly lower rates of respiratory complications and neonatal
composite morbidity with rescue corticosteroids versus placebo. Rates of
perinatal mortality and other morbidities, however, did not differ. Another
study found that treated infants had improved respiratory compliance
(McEvoy, 2010). In a metaanalysis, Crowther and colleagues (2011)

concluded that a single rescue course of corticosteroids should be
considered in women whose prior course was administered at least 7 days
previously and who were <34 weeks’ gestation.
The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020a) notes
that a single rescue course of antenatal corticosteroids should be considered
in women with fetuses <34 weeks’ gestation whose prior course was
administered at least 7 days previously. Effects of rescue therapy beyond 34
weeks are unknown. At Parkland Hospital, we currently do not provide
additional courses of corticosteroids beyond the initial single-course therapy.

■ Magnesium Sulfate for Neuroprotection
Very-low-birthweight neonates whose mothers were treated with magnesium
sulfate for preterm labor or preeclampsia were found to have a reduced
incidence of cerebral palsy at 3 years (Grether, 2000; Nelson, 1995).
Because of this, randomized trials were designed to investigate this
hypothesis. In one trial, 1063 women at risk of delivery before 30 weeks’
gestation were given magnesium sulfate or placebo (Crowther, 2003).
Magnesium exposure improved some perinatal outcomes. Namely, rates of
both neonatal death and cerebral palsy were lower in the magnesium-treated
group. However, this study was not sufficiently powered. The multicenter
French trial reported by Marret and associates (2008) had similar problems.
More convincing evidence for magnesium neuroprotection came from the
randomized MFMU Network study—Beneficial Effects of Antenatal
Magnesium Sulfate—BEAM—study (Rouse, 2008). In the study, 2241
women at imminent risk for preterm birth between 24 and 31 weeks’
gestation were assigned to magnesium sulfate or placebo. Magnesium sulfate
was given as a 6-g bolus over 20 to 30 minutes and was followed with a
maintenance infusion of 2 g/hr. Magnesium sulfate was actually infusing at
the time of delivery in approximately half of the treated women. Infusion
continuation protocols vary by institution, including ours. In the BEAM study,
after 12 hours with no signs of imminent delivery, the infusion was stopped
and resumed if delivery again seemed imminent. If >6 hours had passed since
discontinuation, another loading dose was given.
A 2-year assessment was available for 96 percent of the children in the
BEAM trial (Table 45-10) (Rouse, 2008). The results can be interpreted
differently depending on statistical methodologies employed. Some interpret

these findings to mean that magnesium sulfate infusion prevents cerebral
palsy regardless of the gestational age at which therapy is given. Those with
a differing view conclude that this trial only supports use of magnesium
sulfate for prevention of cerebral palsy potentially before 28 weeks.
TABLE 45-10. Magnesium Sulfate for the Prevention of Cerebral Palsya

Subsequently, Doyle and associates (2009) reviewed five randomized
trials to assess neuroprotective effects. A total of 6145 infants were studied,
and these reviewers concluded that magnesium sulfate exposure compared
with no exposure significantly lowered risks for cerebral palsy. Rates of
other neonatal morbidities did not differ significantly. It was calculated that
treatment given to 63 women would prevent one case of cerebral palsy.
Controversy surrounding magnesium sulfate efficacy for neuroprotection
prompted a debate at the 2011 annual meeting of the Society for MaternalFetal Medicine. Rouse (2011) spoke for the benefits of magnesium sulfate,
whereas Sibai (2011) challenged that the reported benefits were falsely
positive due to random statistical error in the metaanalysis by Doyle (2009).
Another peculiarity is the apparent lack of dose-response for efficacy
(McPherson, 2014).
Because none of the individual studies found a benefit from magnesium
sulfate for fetal neuroprotection, the American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2020d,g) concluded that those electing prophylaxis should

develop specific guidelines, and this includes those with PPROM. In a recent
prospective observational study of infants born at 220/7 to 266/7 weeks’
gestation, exposure to both corticosteroids and magnesium sulfate was
associated with lower rates of neurodevelopmental impairment and death
compared with corticosteroids alone (Gentle, 2020). At Parkland Hospital,
for the periviable fetus, we individualize management as shown in Table 454.

■ Antimicrobial Treatment
Results have been disappointing in studies of antibiotics given to arrest
preterm labor. From one Cochrane metaanalysis, antimicrobial prophylaxis
given to women with intact membranes did not reduce preterm birth rates or
affect other clinically important short-term outcomes (Flenady, 2013).
However, rates of short- and longer-term harm were higher for children of
mothers exposed to antibiotics.
In the ORACLE Collaborative Group study of 6295 women with
spontaneous preterm labor, intact membranes, but without evidence of
infection, women were randomly assigned to receive antimicrobial or
placebo therapy (Kenyon, 2001). The primary outcomes of neonatal death,
chronic lung disease, and major cerebral abnormality were similar in both
groups. In a follow-up of the ORACLE II trial, fetal exposure to
antimicrobials in this setting was associated with an increased cerebral palsy
rate at age 7 years compared with that in children without fetal exposure
(Kenyon, 2008b). Moreover, although preterm birth is associated with
bacterial vaginosis, treatment with clindamycin in more recent randomized
trials has failed to lower preterm birth rates (Bellad, 2018; Subtil, 2018).
Importantly, antimicrobial use described here is distinct from that given for
GBS prophylaxis (Chap. 67, p. 1195).

■ Bed Rest
This has been one of the most often prescribed interventions, yet one of the
least supported by evidence (McCall, 2013). An earlier systematic review
concluded that evidence neither supported nor refuted bed rest for preterm
birth prevention (Sosa, 2004). Moreover, possible harms are
thromboembolic events, deconditioning, and bone loss (Kovacevich, 2000;

Promislow, 2004). Grobman and associates (2013) reported that women
with activity restriction were nearly 2.5 times more likely to have a preterm
birth before 34 weeks. This finding, however, may reflect ascertainment bias.
That is, women with restricted activity may have been assigned to bed rest
because they were viewed to have a greater risk for preterm delivery. The
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine (2020a) and the American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020f) recommend against activity
restriction to reduce preterm birth rates.

■ Cervical Pessaries
Silicone rings, such as the Arabin pessary, have been used to support the
cervix in women with a sonographically short cervix. In one study, 385
women with a cervical length ≤25 mm were provided a silicone pessary or
expectant management (Goya, 2012). Newborns spontaneously delivered
before 34 weeks’ gestation in 6 percent of women in the pessary group
compared with 27 percent in the expectant management group. In another
randomized trial, almost 100 women with a cervical length <25 mm at 20 to
24 weeks’ gestation received either pessaries or expectant management (Hui,
2013). The pessary did not lower the rate of delivery <34 weeks. Others
have reported similar findings (Nicolaides, 2016). Moreover, authors of a
recent systematic review totaling 4687 women and 7167 infants found that
current evidence does not support pessary use to prevent preterm birth or
improve perinatal outcomes in singleton or twin gestations with a short
cervix or in unselected twin gestations (Conde-Agudelo, 2020). The Society
for Maternal-Fetal Medicine (2017) currently recommends pessary
prophylaxis only within research protocols.

■ Emergency or Rescue Cerclage
Some evidence supports the concept that cervical incompetence and preterm
labor lie along a spectrum leading to preterm delivery. Consequently,
cerclage placement after preterm labor begins to manifest clinically has been
studied. Importantly, for women with labor and active cervical change,
cerclage is contraindicated.
In one study, 23 women with cervical incompetence before 27 weeks’
gestation were randomly assigned to bed rest, with or without an adjunctive

emergency McDonald cerclage (Althuisius, 2003). Delivery delay was
significantly greater in the cerclage group compared with those assigned to
bed rest alone—54 versus 24 days, respectively. Terkildsen and coworkers
(2003) studied 116 women who underwent second-trimester emergency
cerclage. Nulliparity, membranes extending beyond the external cervical os,
and cerclage before 22 weeks’ gestation were associated with a significantly
lower chance of significant pregnancy continuation. More recently, a
multicenter randomized trial assessed women with twin pregnancies and
asymptomatic cervical dilation of 1 to 5 cm between 160/7 and 236/7 weeks’
gestation (Roman, 2020). From a total of 30 enrolled women, 17 women
received physical examination-indicated cerclage, and 13 women received
no cerclage. Of note, all women who underwent cerclage received
indomethacin and antibiotics. In the cerclage group, the preterm birth rate
was significantly decreased at all evaluated gestational ages, and
specifically, cerclage lowered the birth rate for those <28 weeks by 50
percent. From these limited reports, for women facing a poor pregnancy
prognosis due to cervical dilation at midgestation, emergency or rescue
cerclage with appropriate counseling is reasonable. At this time, however, it
is unclear if such interventions truly confer a benefit or merely increase the
risk of membrane rupture and infection (Hawkins, 2017).

■ Tocolysis
Although several drugs have been used to prevent or inhibit preterm labor,
none is completely effective. The American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2020e) has concluded that tocolytic agents do not markedly
prolong gestation but may delay delivery in some women for up to 48 hours.
This may allow transport to an obstetrical center with higher-level neonatal
care and permit time for a course of corticosteroid therapy. Although
delivery may be delayed to administer corticosteroids, evidence does not
support that tocolytic therapy has any direct favorable effect on neonatal
outcomes or that any prolongation of pregnancy afforded by tocolytics alone
translates into statistically significant neonatal benefit.
Beta-adrenergic agonists, magnesium sulfate, calcium-channel blockers,
or indomethacin are the recommended tocolytic agents for short-term use.
The gestational age range for tocolytic use is debatable (Mendez-Figueroa,
2020). But, because the perinatal outcomes in preterm neonates are generally

good after 34 weeks’ gestation, most do not recommend use of tocolytics
after 33 weeks.
In many women, tocolytics stop contractions temporarily but rarely
prevent preterm birth. Moreover, the American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2020e) has concluded that maintenance therapy with
tocolytics is ineffective for preventing preterm birth. No trial has ever
convincingly shown reduced rates of any important adverse outcome by a
tocolytic drug compared with placebo (Walker, 2016).

β-Adrenergic Receptor Agonists
Several compounds stimulate β-adrenergic receptors to reduce intracellular
ionized calcium levels and prevent activation of myometrial contractile
proteins (Chap. 21, p. 403). Of β-mimetic drugs in the United States,
ritodrine and terbutaline have been used in obstetrics, but only ritodrine is
FDA-approved for preterm labor.
Ritodrine was voluntarily withdrawn from the United States market in
2003, but a discussion of ritodrine is included here to present issues with βmimetic drug use. In a randomized trial at Parkland Hospital, intravenous
ritodrine delayed delivery for 24 hours but without other benefits (Leveno,
1986b). Additional studies confirmed a delivery delay up to 48 hours
(Canadian Preterm Labor Investigators Group, 1992).
Importantly, β-agonist infusion resulted in serious and even fatal maternal
side effects. Pulmonary edema is a special concern, and its cause is
multifactorial. Risk factors include tocolytic therapy with β-agonist drugs,
multifetal gestation, concurrent corticosteroid therapy, tocolysis for more
than 24 hours, and intravenous infusion of large volumes of crystalloid. βAgonist agents cause retention of sodium and water, and with time—usually
24 to 48 hours—these can cause volume overload (Hankins, 1988). The
drugs have been implicated in increased capillary permeability, cardiac
rhythm disturbances, and myocardial ischemia. For example, in an earlier
study, tocolysis was the third most common cause of acute respiratory
distress and death in pregnant women during a 14-year period in Mississippi
(Perry, 1998).
Terbutaline is commonly used in the United States to forestall preterm
labor. Like ritodrine, it may cause pulmonary edema (Angel, 1988). Lowdose terbutaline can be administered long-term by subcutaneous pump, but

randomized trials fail to show benefit for such therapy (Guinn, 1998;
Wenstrom, 1997). Oral terbutaline also is ineffective (How, 1995; Parilla,
1993). In one trial, 203 women with arrested preterm labor at 24 to 34
weeks’ gestation were randomly assigned to receive 5-mg terbutaline tablets
or placebo every 4 hours (Lewis, 1996). Of outcomes, delivery rates at 1
week, median days of pregnancy extension, mean gestational age at delivery,
and incidence of preterm labor relapse were similar in both groups.
Because of serious maternal side effects, the FDA (2011) issued a
warning regarding terbutaline use for preterm labor. The American College
of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020e) recommends only short-term
inpatient use of terbutaline as a tocolytic or as acute therapy for uterine
tachysystole. Subcutaneous dosages of 0.25 mg are commonly used for the
latter indication.

Magnesium Sulfate
Ionic magnesium in a sufficiently high concentration can alter myometrial
contractility. It functions as a calcium antagonist, and when given in
pharmacological doses, it may inhibit labor. Magnesium sulfate treatment has
been associated with pulmonary edema (Samol, 2005). As discussed in
Chapter 41 (p. 720), this has not been our experience at Parkland Hospital
with treatment of tens of thousands of preeclamptic women with
intramuscular or intravenous magnesium sulfate.
In one randomized trial, 54 women with preterm labor received
magnesium sulfate, ritodrine, or placebo. Few differences in outcomes were
identified (Cotton, 1984). Cox and coworkers (1990) randomly assigned 156
women to receive magnesium sulfate or infusions of normal saline.
Magnesium sulfate–treated women and their neonates had identical outcomes
compared with those given placebo. Because of these findings, this method
of tocolysis was abandoned at Parkland Hospital. Similarly, Crowther and
associates (2014) concluded that magnesium sulfate to treat preterm labor
was ineffective and potentially harmful. Last, the FDA (2013) has warned
against prolonged use of magnesium sulfate given to arrest preterm labor
because of bone thinning and fractures in fetuses exposed for more than 5 to 7
days. This was attributed to low calcium levels in the fetus. Yule and
associates (2020) demonstrated the influence of magnesium sulfate on
maternal serum calcium levels.

Prostaglandin Inhibitors
These compounds are intimately involved in the contractions of normal labor
(Chap. 21, p. 413). Antagonists act by inhibiting prostaglandin synthesis or
by blocking their action on target organs.
Indomethacin, a nonselective cyclooxygenase inhibitor, was first used as
a tocolytic in one study of 50 women (Zuckerman, 1974). Studies that
followed reported the efficacy of indomethacin in halting contractions and
delaying preterm birth (Muench, 2003; Niebyl, 1980). Morales and
coworkers (1989, 1993a), however, compared indomethacin with either
ritodrine or magnesium sulfate and found no difference in their efficacy to
forestall preterm delivery. Berghella and associates (2006) reviewed four
trials of indomethacin given to women with a sonographically determined
short cervix and found such therapy to be ineffective to halt labor. But, as
discussed earlier, its use with cerclage is gaining favor.
Most studies have limited indomethacin use to 24 to 48 hours because of
concerns for oligohydramnios, which can develop with therapeutic doses. If
amnionic fluid is monitored, oligohydramnios can be detected early, and it is
reversible with drug discontinuation. There has also been considerable
debate on the association of necrotizing enterocolitis or early ductus
arteriosus closure and use of indomethacin (Doni, 2020; Hammers, 2015;
Muench, 2001). Two metaanalyses of the effects of antenatal indomethacin on
neonatal outcomes had conflicting findings (Amin, 2007; Loe, 2005). In one
review of 20 studies, cyclooxygenase inhibitors, including indomethacin,
provided no clear benefit compared with placebo or any other tocolytic agent
(Reinebrant, 2015).

Calcium-channel Blockers
Myometrial activity is directly related to cytoplasmic free calcium, and
reduced calcium concentrations inhibit contractions. Calcium-channel
blockers inhibit, by various mechanisms, calcium entry through cell
membrane channels.
From study results, calcium-channel blockers, especially nifedipine, are
safer and more effective tocolytic agents than β-agonist drugs (King, 2003;
Papatsonis, 1997). Comparing magnesium sulfate and nifedipine, one study
of 192 women at 24 to 33 weeks’ gestation found no substantial differences
in efficacy or adverse effects (Lyell, 2007). Comparing nifedipine and

atosiban in 145 women with preterm labor between 24 and 33 weeks,
another randomized study showed that neither agent was superior to delay
delivery. Neonatal morbidity rates were equivalent (Salim, 2012).
Flenady and coworkers (2014b) reviewed 38 trials of calcium-channel
blockers for preterm labor and concluded that these agents have benefits
compared with placebo. It is problematic, however, that this conclusion
stemmed from a trial with unclear risk of selection bias and a three-arm study
of 84 women that was not blinded (Ara, 2008; Zhang, 2002). More recently,
Hawkins and associates (2021) performed a randomized, placebo-controlled
trial of nifedipine for acute tocolysis of preterm labor at Parkland Hospital.
Acute tocolysis with nifedipine did not affect preterm birth rates. However,
the study results were obtained following an interim analysis demonstrating
futility for study continuation.
Importantly, the combination of nifedipine and magnesium sulfate for
tocolysis is potentially dangerous. Ben-Ami (1994) and Kurtzman (1993) and
their coworkers reported that nifedipine enhances the neuromuscular
blocking effects of magnesium, which can interfere with pulmonary and
cardiac function. In one small study of 54 women with preterm labor who
received either magnesium sulfate plus nifedipine or no tocolytic, neither
benefit nor harm was found (How, 2006).

Other Agents
Atosiban is a nonapeptide oxytocin analogue and an oxytocin-receptor
antagonist that is used in European countries to forestall labor. In randomized
trials, atosiban failed to improve relevant neonatal outcomes and was linked
with significant neonatal morbidity (Flenady, 2014a; Moutquin, 2000;
Romero, 2000). The FDA has denied approval of atosiban for use in the
United States because of these findings.
Nitric oxide donors are potent smooth-muscle relaxants that affect the
vasculature, gut, and uterus. In randomized clinical trials, nitroglycerin
administered orally, transdermally, or intravenously was ineffective or
showed no superiority compared with other tocolytics. In addition, maternal
hypotension is a common side effect (Bisits, 2004; Lees, 1999).

■ Labor and Delivery

Fetal heart rate and uterine contractions are monitored with preterm labor.
We prefer continuous electronic monitoring. Fetal tachycardia, especially
with ruptured membranes, suggests sepsis. Some evidence supports that
intrapartum acidemia may intensify some of the neonatal complications
usually attributed to preterm delivery. For example, Morgan and associates
(2017) found that metabolic acidemia significantly raised the risks related to
prematurity in neonates delivered <34 weeks’ gestation. Low and colleagues
(1995) observed that intrapartum acidosis—umbilical artery blood pH <7.0
—had an important role in neonatal complications. GBS infections are
common and dangerous in the preterm neonate, and antimicrobial prophylaxis
should be provided (Chap. 67, p. 1195).
For delivery, perinatal outcome data do not support routine episiotomy or
forceps delivery to protect the “fragile” preterm fetal head. Staff proficient in
resuscitative techniques commensurate with the gestational age and fully
oriented to any specific problems should be present at delivery. The
importance of specialized personnel and facilities for preterm newborn care
is underscored by the improved survival rates of these neonates when
delivered in tertiary-care centers. For community-based hospitals,
multidisciplinary team-based simulation for preterm delivery can improve
performance (Barbato, 2020).
Preterm newborns frequently have intracranial germinal matrix bleeding
that can extend to more serious intraventricular hemorrhage. It was
hypothesized that cesarean delivery to obviate trauma from labor and vaginal
delivery might prevent these complications. This has not been validated by
subsequent studies (Malloy, 1991). At Parkland Hospital, cesarean delivery
is reserved for usual obstetrical indications.

REFERENCES
Aagaard K, Ma J, Antony KM, et al: The placenta harbors a unique microbiome. Sci Transl Med
6(237):234ra65, 2014
Adams Waldorf KM, Singh N, Mohan AR, et al: Uterine overdistention induces preterm labor mediated
by inflammation: observations in pregnant women and nonhuman primates. Am J Obstet Gynecol
213(6):830.e1, 2015
Adhikari EH, Moreno W, Zofkie AC, et al: Pregnancy outcomes among women with and without severe
acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 infection. JAMA Netw Open 3(11):e2029256, 2020
Akgul Y, Word RA, Ensign LM, et al: Hyaluronan in cervical epithelia protects against infectionmediated preterm birth. J Clin Invest 124(12):5481, 2014

Alexander JM, Gilstrap LC, Cox SM, et al: Clinical chorioamnionitis and the prognosis for very low
birthweight infants. Obstet Gynecol 91:725, 1998
Alexander JM, Mercer BM, Miodovnik M, et al: The impact of digital cervical examination on
expectantly managed preterm ruptured membranes. Am J Obstet Gynecol 183:1003, 2000
Althabe F, Belizán JM, McClure EM, et al: A population-based, multifaceted strategy to implement
antenatal corticosteroid treatment versus standard care for the reduction of neonatal mortality due to
preterm birth in low-income and middle-income countries: the ACT cluster-randomised trial. Lancet
385(9968):629, 2015
Althuisius SM, Dekker G, Hummel P, et al: Cervical incompetence prevention randomized cerclage trial:
emergency cerclage with bed rest versus bed rest alone. Am J Obstet Gynecol 189:907, 2003
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Clinical guidance for integration of the findings of
the PROLONG study: progestin’s role in optimizing neonatal gestation. Practice advisory. 2019a.
Available at: http://www.acog.org/clinical/clinical-guidance/practiceadvisory/articles/2019/10/clinical-guidance-for-integration-of-the-findings-of-the-prolong-study.
Accessed March 13, 2021
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Intrapartum management of intraamniotic
infection. Committee Opinion No. 712, August 2017, Reaffirmed 2019b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Perinatal palliative care. Committee Opinion No.
786, August 2019c
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine: Periviable
birth. Obstetric Care Consensus No. 6, October 2017, Reaffirmed 2019d
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Antenatal corticosteroid therapy for fetal
maturation. Committee Opinion No. 713, August 2017, Reaffirmed 2020a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Employment considerations during pregnancy and
the postpartum period. Committee Opinion No. 733, April 2018, Reaffirmed 2020b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Low-dose aspirin use during pregnancy.
Committee Opinion No. 743, June 2018, Reaffirmed 2020c
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Magnesium sulfate before anticipated preterm
birth for neuroprotection. Committee Opinion No. 455, March 2010, Reaffirmed 2020d
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Management of preterm labor. Practice Bulletin
No. 171, October 2016, Reaffirmed 2020e
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Physical activity and exercise during pregnancy
and the postpartum period. Committee Opinion No. 804, April 2020f
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Prelabor rupture of membranes. Practice Bulletin
No. 217, February 2020g
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Prevention of group B streptococcal early-onset
disease in newborns. Committee Opinion No. 797, February 2020h
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Clinical guidance for the integration of the
findings of the EPPPIC meta-analysis: Evaluating Progestogens for Preventing Preterm Birth
International Collaborative. 2021a. Available at: www.acog.org/clinical/clinical-guidance/practiceadvisory/articles/2021/03/clinical-guidance-for-the-integration-of-the-findings-of-the-epppic-metaanalysis-evaluating-progestogens-for-preventing-preterm-birth-international-collaborative. Accessed
April 28, 2021
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Medically indicated late-preterm and early-term
deliveries. Committee Opinion No. 818, February 2021b

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Prediction and prevention of spontaneous
preterm birth. Practice Bulletin No. 234, August 2021c
Amin SB, Sinkin RA, Glantz C: Metaanalysis of the effect of antenatal indomethacin on neonatal
outcomes. Am J Obstet Gynecol 197:486, 2007
Ananth CV, Liu S, Joseph KS, et al: A comparison of foetal and infant mortality in the United States and
Canada. Int J Epidemiol 38(2):480, 2009
Andrews WW, Goldenberg RL, Hauth JC, et al: Interconceptional antibiotics to prevent spontaneous
preterm birth: a randomized clinical trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol 194:617, 2006
Andrews WW, Hauth JC, Goldenberg RL, et al: Amniotic fluid interleukin-6: correlation with upper
genital tract microbial colonization and gestational age in women delivered after spontaneous labor
versus indicated delivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 173:606, 1995
Andrews WW, Sibai BM, Thom EA, et al: Randomized clinical trial of metronidazole plus erythromycin
to prevent spontaneous preterm delivery in fetal fibronectin-positive women. Obstet Gynecol
101:847, 2003
Andrikopoulou M, Purisch SE, Handal-Orefice R, et al: Low-dose aspirin is associated with reduced
spontaneous preterm birth in nulliparous women. Am J Obstet Gynecol 219(4):399, e1, 2018
Angel JL, O’Brien WF, Knuppel RA, et al: Carbohydrate intolerance in patients receiving oral
tocolytics. Am J Obstet Gynecol 159:762, 1988
Ara I, Banu H: A prospective randomised trial of nifedipine versus placebo in preterm labour.
Bangladesh J Obstet Gynaecol 23(2):61, 2008
Arechavaleta-Velasco F, Mayon-Gonzalez J, Gonzalez-Jimenez M, et al: Association of type II apoptosis
and 92-kDa type IV collagenase expression in human amniochorion in prematurely ruptured
membranes with tumor necrosis factor receptor-1 expression. J Soc Gynecol Investig 9:60, 2002
Attardi BJ, Zeleznik A, Simhan H, et al: Comparison of progesterone and glucocorticoid receptor binding
and stimulation of gene expression by progesterone, 17-alpha hydroxyprogesterone caproate, and
related progestins. Am J Obstet Gynecol 197(6):599.e1, 2007
Aune D, Schlesinger S, Henriksen T, et al: Physical activity and the risk of preterm birth: a systematic
review and meta-analysis of epidemiological studies. BJOG 124(12):1816, 2017
Ball SJ, Pereira G, Jacoby P, et al: Re-evaluation of link between interpregnancy interval and adverse
birth outcomes: retrospective cohort study matching two intervals per mother. BMJ 349:g4333, 2014
Barbato AL, Wetzel EA, Li W, et al: Simulation education for preterm infant delivery room management
at community hospitals. Pediatrics 146(6):e20193688, 2020
Barth WH Jr: Lost in translation: the changing language of our specialty. Obstet Gynecol 127(3):423,
2016
Battarbee AN, Pfister A, Manuck TA: Suture thickness and transvaginal cervical cerclage outcomes.
Am J Obstet Gynecol MFM 1(4):100056, 2019
Battarbee AN: Use of antenatal corticosteroids in preterm prelabor rupture of membranes. Obstet
Gynecol Clin North Am 47(4):587, 2020
Bayar E, Bennett PR, Chan D, et al: The pregnancy microbiome and preterm birth. Semin
Immunopathol 42(4):487, 2020
Beigi RH, Austin MN, Meyn LA, et al: Antimicrobial resistance associated with the treatment of
bacterial vaginosis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 191:1124, 2004
Bellad MB, Hoffman MK, Mallapur AA, et al: Clindamycin to reduce preterm birth in a low resource
setting: a randomised placebo-controlled clinical trial. BJOG 125(12):1601, 2018
Ben-Ami M, Giladi Y, Shalev E: The combination of magnesium sulphate and nifedipine: a cause of
neuromuscular blockade. BJOG 101:262, 1994

Berghella V, Boelig R, Roman A, et al: Decreased incidence of preterm birth during coronavirus disease
2019 pandemic. Am J Obstet Gynecol MFM 2(4):100258, 2020
Berghella V, Ciardulli A, Rust OA, et al: Cerclage for sonographic short cervix in singleton gestations
without prior spontaneous preterm birth: systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized
controlled trials using individual patient-level data. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 50(5):569, 2017
Berghella V, Rafael TJ, Szychowski JM, et al: Cerclage for short cervix on ultrasonography in women
with singleton gestations and previous preterm birth: a meta-analysis. Obstet Gynecol 117(3):663,
2011
Berghella V, Rust OA, Althuisius SM: Short cervix on ultrasound: does indomethacin prevent preterm
birth? Am J Obstet Gynecol 195:809, 2006
Berghella V, Saccone G: Fetal fibronectin testing for reducing the risk of preterm birth. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 7:CD006843, 2019
Bertholdt C, Menard S, Delorme P, et al: Intraoperative adverse events associated with extremely
preterm cesarean deliveries. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 97(5):608, 2018
Bisits A, Madsen G, Knox M, et al: The randomized nitric oxide tocolysis trial (RNOTT) for the
treatment of preterm labor. Am J Obstet Gynecol 191:683, 2004
Blackwell SC, Gyamfi-Bannerman C, Biggio JR Jr, et al: 17-OHPC to prevent recurrent preterm birth in
singleton gestations (PROLONG study): a multicenter, international, randomized double-blind trial.
Am J Perinatol 37(2):127, 2020
Blanc J, Resseguier N, Goffinet F, et al: Association between gestational age and severe maternal
morbidity and mortality of preterm cesarean delivery: a population-based cohort study. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 220(4):399.e1, 2019
Blois SM, Velohren S, We G, et al: Role of galectin-glycan circuits in reproduction: from healthy
pregnant to preterm birth (PTB). Semin Immunopathol 42(4):469, 2020
Bloom SL, Leveno KJ: Unproven technologies in maternal-fetal medicine and the high cost of US health
care. JAMA 317(10):1025, 2017
Bloom SL, Yost NP, McIntire DD, et al: Recurrence of preterm birth in singleton and twin pregnancies.
Obstet Gynecol 98:379, 2001
Boettcher LB, Clark EA: Neonatal and childhood outcomes following preterm premature rupture of
membranes. Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am 47(4):671, 2020
Bond DM, Middleton P, Levett KM, et al: Planned early birth versus expectant management for women
with preterm prelabour rupture of membranes prior to 37 weeks’ gestation for improving pregnancy
outcome. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 3:CD004735, 2017
Borgida AF, Mills AA, Feldman DM, et al: Outcome of pregnancies complicated by ruptured
membranes after genetic amniocentesis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 183(4):937, 2000
Breslin N, Gyamfi-Bannerman C: Current preterm birth prevention strategies. Clin Perinatol 47(4):705,
2020
Bruschettini M, van den Hove DL, Gazzolo D, et al: Lowering the dose of antenatal steroids: the effects
of a single course of betamethasone on somatic growth and brain cell proliferation in the rat. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 194:1341, 2006
Buekens P, Alexander S, Boutsen M, et al: Randomised controlled trial of routine cervical examinations
in pregnancy. Lancet 344:841, 1994
Cai C, Vandermeer B, Khurana R, et al: The impact of occupational activities during pregnancy on
pregnancy outcomes: a systematic review and metaanalysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 222(3):224, 2020
Canadian Preterm Labor Investigators Group: Treatment of preterm labor with the beta-adrenergic
agonist ritodrine. N Engl J Med 327:308, 1992

Cappelletti M, Doll JR, Stankiewicz TE, et al: Maternal regulation of inflammatory cues is required for
induction of preterm birth. JCI Insight 5(22):e138812, 2020
Carey JC, Klebanoff MA: Is a change in the vaginal flora associated with an increased risk of preterm
birth? Am J Obstet Gynecol 192(4):1341, 2005
Caritis SN, Rouse DJ, Peaceman AM, et al: Prevention of preterm birth in triplets using 17alphahydroxyprogesterone caproate. Obstet Gynecol 113:285, 2009
Caritis SN, Sharma S, Venkataramanan R, et al: Pharmacology and placental transport of 17hydroxyprogesterone caproate in singleton gestation. Am J Obstet Gynecol 207(5):398.e1, 2012
Caritis SN, Venkataramanan R, Thom E, et al: Relationship between 17-alpha hydroxyprogesterone
caproate concentration and spontaneous preterm birth. Am J Obstet Gynecol 210(2):128.e1, 2014
Carlan SJ, O’Brien WF, Parsons MT, et al: Preterm premature rupture of membranes: a randomized
study of home versus hospital management. Obstet Gynecol 81:61, 1993
Carroll SG, Blott M, Nicolaides KH: Preterm prelabor amniorrhexis: outcome of live births. Obstet
Gynecol 86:18, 1995
Carroll SG, Papaionnou S, Ntumazah IL, et al: Lower genital tract swabs in the prediction of intrauterine
infection in preterm prelabour rupture of the membranes. BJOG 103:54, 1996
Casanueva E, Ripoll C, Meza-Camacho C, et al: Possible interplay between vitamin C deficiency and
prolactin in pregnant women with premature rupture of membranes: facts and hypothesis. Med
Hypotheses 64:241, 2005
Challis JR, Sloboda DM, Alfaidy N, et al: Prostaglandins and mechanisms of preterm birth.
Reproduction 124:1, 2002
Chang CY, Nguyen CP, Wesley B, et al: Withdrawing approval of Makena—a proposal from the FDA
Center for Drug Evaluation and Research. N Engl J Med 383(24):e131, 2020
Chao TT, Bloom SL, Mitchell JS, et al: The diagnosis and natural history of false preterm labor. Obstet
Gynecol 118(6):1301, 2011
Chawanpaiboon S, Vogel JP, Moller AB, et al: Global, regional, and national estimates of levels of
preterm birth in 2014: a systematic review and modelling analysis. Lancet Glob Health 7(1):e37,
2019
Cnattingius S, Johansson S, Razaz N: Apgar score and risk of neonatal death among preterm infants. N
Engl J Med 383(1):49, 2020
Cnattingius S, Villamor E, Johansson S, et al: Maternal obesity and risk of preterm delivery. JAMA
309(22):2362, 2013
Cohen AW, Copel JA, Macones GA, et al: Unjustified increase in cost of care resulting from U.S. Food
and Drug Administration approval of Makena (17α-hydroxyprogesterone caproate). Obstet Gynecol
117(6):1408, 2011
Coleman M, Armistead B, Orvis A, et al: Hyaluronidase impairs neutrophil function and promotes group
B Streptococcus invasion and preterm labor in nonhuman primates. mBio 12(1):e03115, 2021
Collaborative Home Uterine Monitoring Study Group: A multicenter randomized controlled trial of home
uterine monitoring: active versus sham device. Am J Obstet Gynecol 173:1170, 1995
Collins JW Jr, David RJ, Simon DM, et al: Preterm birth among African American and white women
with a lifelong residence in high-income Chicago neighborhoods: an exploratory study. Ethn Dis
17(1):113, 2007
Conde-Agudelo A, Romero R, Da Fonseca E, et al: Vaginal progesterone is as effective as cervical
cerclage to prevent preterm birth in women with a singleton gestation, previous spontaneous preterm
birth, and a short cervix: updated indirect comparison meta-analysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol
219(1):10, 2018

Conde-Agudelo A, Romero R, Nicolaides KH: Cervical pessary to prevent preterm birth in
asymptomatic high-risk women: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol
223(1):42, 2020
Conde-Agudelo A, Rosas-Bermúdez A, Kafury-Goeta AC: Birth spacing and risk of adverse perinatal
outcomes: a meta-analysis. JAMA 295:1809, 2006
Consortium on Safe Labor: Respiratory morbidity in late preterm births. JAMA 304(4):419, 2010
Cook CM, Ellwood DA: A longitudinal study of the cervix in pregnancy using transvaginal ultrasound.
BJOG 103:16, 1996
Copper RL, Goldenberg RL, Dubard MB, et al: Cervical examination and tocodynamometry at 28
weeks’ gestation: prediction of spontaneous preterm birth. Am J Obstet Gynecol 172:666, 1995
Cotton DB, Strassner HT, Hill LM, et al: Comparison between magnesium sulfate, terbutaline and a
placebo for inhibition of preterm labor: a randomized study. J Reprod Med 29:92, 1984
Cox SM, Leveno KJ: Intentional delivery versus expectant management with preterm ruptured
membranes at 30–34 weeks’ gestation. Obstet Gynecol 86:875, 1995
Cox SM, Sherman ML, Leveno KJ: Randomized investigation of magnesium sulfate for prevention of
preterm birth. Am J Obstet Gynecol 163:767, 1990
Cox SM, Williams ML, Leveno KJ: The natural history of preterm ruptured membranes: what to expect
of expectant management. Obstet Gynecol 71:558, 1988
Creasy RK, Gummer BA, Liggins GC: System for predicting spontaneous preterm birth. Obstet Gynecol
55(6):692, 1980
Crider KS, Whitehead N, Buus RM: Genetic variation associated with preterm birth: a HuGE review.
Genet Med 7(9):593, 2005
Crowley AE, Grivell RM, Dodd JM: Sealing procedures for preterm prelabour rupture of membranes.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 7:CD010218, 2016
Crowther CA, Ashwood P, Andersen CC, et al: Maternal intramuscular dexamethasone versus
betamethasone before preterm birth (ASTEROID): a multicentre, double-blind, randomised
controlled trial. Lancet Child Adolesc Health 3(11):769, 2019
Crowther CA, Brown J, McKinlay CJ, et al: Magnesium sulphate for preventing preterm birth in
threatened preterm labour. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 8:CD001060, 2014
Crowther CA, Doyle LW, Haslam RR, et al: Outcomes at 2 years of age after repeat doses of antenatal
corticosteroids. N Engl J Med 357:1179, 2007
Crowther CA, Harding JE: Antenatal glucocorticoids for late preterm birth. N Engl J Med 374(14):1376,
2016
Crowther CA, Hiller JE, Doyle LW, et al: Effect of magnesium sulfate given for neuroprotection before
preterm birth: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA 290:2669, 2003
Crowther CA, McKinlay CJ, Middleton P, et al: Repeat doses of prenatal corticosteroids for women at
risk for preterm birth for improving neonatal health outcomes. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
6:CD003935, 2011
da Fonseca EB, Damião R, Moreira DA: Preterm birth prevention. Best Pract Res Clin Obstet
Gynaecol 69:40, 2020
De Goffau MC, Lager S, Sovio U, et al: Human placenta has no microbiome but can contain potential
pathogens. Nature 572(7769):329, 2019
Deindl P, Diemert A: From structural modalities in perinatal medicine to the frequency of preterm birth.
Semin Immunopathol 42(4):377, 2020
Delnord M, Hindori-Mohangoo AD, Smith LK, et al: Variations in very preterm birth rates in 30 highincome countries: are valid international comparisons possible using routine data. BJOG 124(5):785,

2017
Di Mascio D, Magro-Malosso ER, Saccone G, et al: Exercise during pregnancy in normal-weight
women and risk of preterm birth: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled
trials. Am J Obstet Gynecol 215(5):561, 2016
Diemert A, Arck PC: Preterm birth: pathogenesis and clinical consequences revisited. Semin
Immunopathol 42(4):375, 2020
Dodd JM, Grivell RM, Obrien CM, et al: Prenatal administration of progestogens for preventing
spontaneous preterm birth in women with a multiple pregnancy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
11:CD012024, 2019
Dolan SM, Gross SJ, Merkatz IR, et al: The contribution of birth defects to preterm birth and low birth
weight. Obstet Gynecol 110:318, 2007
Donders GG, Van Calsteren K, Bellen G, et al: Predictive value for preterm birth of abnormal vaginal
flora, bacterial vaginosis and aerobic vaginitis during the first trimester of pregnancy. BJOG
116(10):1315, 2009
Doni D, Paterlini G, Locatelli A, et al: Effects of antenatal indomethacin on ductus arteriosus early
closure and on adverse outcomes in preterm neonates. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 33(4):645,
2020
Donovan BM, Spracklen CN, Schweizer ML, et al: Intimate partner violence during pregnancy and the
risk for adverse infant outcomes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. BJOG 123(8):1289, 2016
Dotters-Katz S: Antibiotics for prophylaxis in the setting of preterm prelabor rupture of membranes.
Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am 47(4):595, 2020
Doyle LW, Crowther CA, Middleton S, et al: Magnesium sulfate for women at risk of preterm birth for
neuroprotection of the fetus. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 1:CD004661, 2009
Dutta EH, Behnia F, Boldogh I, et al: Oxidative stress damage-associated molecular signaling pathways
differentiate spontaneous preterm birth and preterm premature rupture of the membranes. Mol Hum
Reprod 22(2):143, 2016
Eichenwald EC, Stark AR: Management and outcomes of very low birth weight. N Engl J Med
358(16):1700, 2008
El-Bastawissi AY, Williams MA, Riley DE, et al: Amniotic fluid interleukin-6 and preterm delivery: a
review. Obstet Gynecol 95:1056, 2000
Eleje GU, Eke AC, Ikechebelu JI, et al: Cervical stitch (cerclage) in combination with other treatments
for preventing spontaneous preterm birth in singleton pregnancies. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
9:CD012871, 2020
Elimian A, Garry D, Figueroa R, et al: Antenatal betamethasone compared with dexamethasone
(Betacode Trial): a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol 110:26, 2007
Elovitz MA, Gajer P, Riis V, et al: Cervicovaginal microbiota and local immune response modulate the
risk of spontaneous preterm delivery. Nat Commun 10(1):1305, 2019
Ely DM, Driscoll AK: Infant mortality in the United States, 2018: data from the period linked birth/infant
death file. Natl Vital Stat Rep 69(7):1, 2020
EPPPIC Group: Evaluating Progestogens for Preventing Preterm birth International Collaborative
(EPPPIC): meta-analysis of individual participant data from randomised controlled trials. Lancet
397(10280):1183, 2021
Esplin MS, Elovitz MA, Iams JD, et al: Predictive accuracy of serial transvaginal cervical lengths and
quantitative vaginal fetal fibronectin levels for spontaneous preterm birth among nulliparous women.
JAMA 317(10):1047, 2017

Esplin MS: The importance of clinical phenotype in understanding and preventing spontaneous preterm
birth. Am J Perinatol 33(3):236, 2016
Fanaroff AA, Stoll BJ, Wright LL, et al: Trends in neonatal morbidity and mortality for very low
birthweight infants. Am J Obstet Gynecol 196:e1.147, 2007
Farooqi A, Holmgren PA, Engberg S, et al: Survival and 2-year outcome with expectant management of
second trimester rupture of membranes. Obstet Gynecol 92:895, 1998
Fettweis JM, Serrano MG, Brooks JP, et al: The vaginal microbiome and preterm birth. Nat Med
25(6):1012, 2019
Flenady V, Hawley G, Stock OM, et al: Prophylactic antibiotics for inhibiting preterm labour with intact
membranes. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 12:CD000246, 2013
Flenady V, Reinebrant HE, Liley HG, et al: Oxytocin receptor antagonists for inhibiting preterm labour.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 6:CD004452, 2014a
Flenady V, Wojcieszek AM, Papatsonis DN, et al: Calcium channel blockers for inhibiting preterm
labour and birth. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 6:CD002255, 2014b
Fonseca EB, Celik E, Para M, et al: Progesterone and the risk of preterm birth among women with a
short cervix. N Engl J Med 357:462, 2007
Food and Drug Administration: CDER proposes withdrawal of approval for Makena. 2020. Available at:
www.fda.gov/drugs/drug-safety-and-availability/cder-proposes-withdrawal-approval-makena.
Accessed March 13, 2021
Food and Drug Administration: FDA drug safety communication: FDA recommends against prolonged
use of magnesium sulfate to stop pre-term labor due to bone changes in exposed babies. 2013.
Available at: www.fda.gov/drugs/drug-safety-and-availability/fda-drug-safety-communication-fdarecommends-against-prolonged-use-magnesium-sulfate-stop-pre-term. Accessed March 24, 2021
Food and Drug Administration: FDA drug safety communication: new warnings against use of
terbutaline to treat preterm labor. 2011. Available at:
www.fda.gov/drugs/drugsafety/ucm243539.htm. Accessed March 24, 2021
Food and Drug Administration: Makena (hydroxyprogesterone caproate injection). New Drug
Application 021945/Supplement 023. 2019. Available at: www.fda.gov/media/132431/download.
Accessed March 24, 2021
Fortunato SJ, Menon R: IL-1 beta is a better inducer of apoptosis in human fetal membranes than IL-6.
Placenta 24:922, 2003
Frey HA, Klebanoff MA: The epidemiology, etiology, and costs of preterm birth. Semin Fetal Neonatal
Med 21(2):68, 2016
Furcron AE, Romero R, Plazyo O, et al: Vaginal progesterone, but not 17α-hydroxyprogesterone
caproate, has antiinflammatory effects at the murine maternal-fetal interface. Am J Obstet Gynecol
213(6):846.e1, 2015
Gajer P, Brotman RM, Bai G, et al: Temporal dynamics of the human vaginal microbiota. Sci Transl Med
4(132):132ra52, 2012
Garite TJ, Keegan KA, Freeman RK, et al: A randomized trial of ritodrine tocolysis versus expectant
management in patients with premature rupture of membranes at 25 to 30 weeks of gestation. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 157:388, 1987
Garite TJ, Kurtzman J, Maurel K, et al: Impact of a “rescue course” of antenatal corticosteroids: a
multicenter randomized placebo-controlled trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol 200:248.e.1, 2009
Gaudet LM, Smith G: Cerebral palsy and chorioamnionitis: the inflammatory cytokine link. Obstet
Gynecol Surv 56(7):433, 2001

Gentle SJ, Carlo WA, Tan S, et al: Association of antenatal corticosteroids and magnesium sulfate
therapy with neurodevelopmental outcome in extremely preterm children. Obstet Gynecol
135(6):1377, 2020
Ghaemi MS, Tarca AL, Romero R, et al: Proteomic signatures predict preeclampsia in individual cohorts
but not across cohorts-implications for clinical biomarker studies. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med
March 2, 2021 [Epub ahead of print]
Gillespie SL, Christian LM, Alston AD, et al: Childhood stress and birth timing among African American
women: cortisol as biological mediator. Psychoneuroendocrinology 84:32, 2017
Giraldo-Isaza MA, Berghella V: Cervical cerclage and preterm PROM. Clin Obstet Gynecol 54(2):313,
2011
Girsen AI, Mayo JA, Carmichael SL, et al: Women’s prepregnancy underweight as a risk factor for
preterm birth: a retrospective study. BJOG 123(12):2001, 2016
Godlewski BJ, Sobolik LI, King VJ, et al: Accelerated approval of 17α-hydroxyprogesterone caproate: a
cautionary tale. Obstet Gynecol 135(5):1207, 2020
Goepfert AR, Jeffcoat MK, Andrews W, et al: Periodontal disease and upper genital tract inflammation
in early spontaneous preterm birth. Obstet Gynecol 104:777, 2004
Goldenberg RL, Culhane JF, Iams JD, et al: Preterm birth 1: epidemiology and causes of preterm birth.
Lancet 371:75, 2008
Goldenberg RL, Hauth JC, Andrews WW: Intrauterine infection and preterm delivery. N Engl J Med
342:1500, 2000
Goldenberg RL, Mwatha A, Read JS, et al: The HPTN 024 Study: the efficacy of antibiotics to prevent
chorioamnionitis and preterm birth. Am J Obstet Gynecol 194:650, 2006
Goldstein B, Bradley B, Ressler KJ, et al: Associations between posttraumatic stress disorder, emotion
dysregulation, and alcohol dependence symptoms among inner city females. J Clin Psychol
73(3):319, 2017
Gomez R, Romero R, Glasasso M, et al: The value of amniotic fluid interleukin-6, white blood cell count,
and gram stain in the diagnosis of microbial invasion of the amniotic cavity in patients at term. Am J
Reprod Immunol 32:200, 1994
Gomez-Lopez N, StLouis D, Lehr MA, et al: Immune cells in term and preterm labor. Cell Mol Immunol
11(6):571, 2014
Goncalves LF, Chaiworapongsa T, Romero R: Intrauterine infection and prematurity. Ment Retard Dev
Disabil Res Rev 8:3, 2002
Gonzalez JM, Xu H, Ofori E, et al: Toll-like receptors in the uterus, cervix, and placenta: is pregnancy an
immunosuppressed state? Am J Obstet Gynecol 197(3):296, 2007
Goodfellow L, Care A, Alfirevic Z: Controversies in the prevention of spontaneous preterm birth in
asymptomatic women: an evidence summary and expert opinion. BJOG 128(2):177, 2021
Goya M, Pratcorona L, Merced C, et al: Cervical pessary in pregnant women with a short cervix
(PECEP): an open-label randomised controlled trial. Lancet 379(9828):1790, 2012
Gravett MG, Adams KM, Sadowsky DW, et al: Immunomodulators plus antibiotics delay preterm
delivery after experimental intraamniotic infection in a nonhuman primate model. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 197(5):518.e1, 2007
Gravett MG, Nelson HP, DeRouen T, et al: Independent associations of bacterial vaginosis and
Chlamydia trachomatis infection with adverse pregnancy outcome. JAMA 256(14):1899, 1986
Greene MF, Klebankoff MA, Harrington D: Preterm birth and 17OHP-why the FDA should not
withdraw approval. N Engl J Med 383(24):e130, 2020

Grether JK, Hoogstrate J, Walsh-Greene E, et al: Magnesium sulfate for tocolysis and risk of spastic
cerebral palsy in premature children born to women without preeclampsia. Am J Obstet Gynecol
183:717, 2000
Grobman WA, Gilbert SA, Iams JD, et al: Activity restriction among women with a short cervix. Obstet
Gynecol 121:1181, 2013
Grobman WA, Thom EA, Spong CY, et al: 17alpha-Hydroxyprogesterone caproate to prevent
prematurity in nulliparas with cervical length less than 30 mm. Am J Obstet Gynecol 207(5):390e.1,
2012
Guillen Ú, DeMauro S, Ma L, et al: Survival rates in extremely low birthweight infants depend on the
denominator: avoiding potential for bias by specifying denominators. Am J Obstet Gynecol
205:328.e1, 2011
Guinn DA, Goepfert AR, Owen J, et al: Terbutaline pump maintenance therapy for prevention of
preterm delivery: a double-blind trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol 179:874, 1998
Gyamfi-Bannerman C, Thom EA, Blackwell SC, et al: Antenatal betamethasone for women at risk for
late preterm delivery. N Engl J Med 374(14):1311, 2016
Haahr T, Ersbøll AS, Karlsen MA, et al: Treatment of bacterial vaginosis in pregnancy in order to
reduce the risk of spontaneous preterm delivery – a clinical recommendation. Acta Obstet Gynecol
Scand 95(8):850, 2016
Hadi HA, Hodson CA, Strickland D: Premature rupture of the membranes between 20 and 25 weeks’
gestation: role of amniotic fluid volume in perinatal outcome. Am J Obstet Gynecol 170:1139, 1994
Hajdu SA, Rossi RM, DeFranco EA: factors associated with maternal and neonatal interventions at the
threshold of viability. Obstet Gynecol 135(6):1398, 2020
Hamilton S, Oomomian Y, Stephen G, et al: Macrophages infiltrate the human and rat decidua during
term and preterm labor: evidence that decidual inflammation precedes labor. Biol Reprod 86(2):39,
2012
Hammers AL, Sanchez-Ramos L, Kaunitz AM: Antenatal exposure to indomethacin increases the risk
of severe intraventricular hemorrhage, necrotizing enterocolitis, and periventricular leukomalacia: a
systematic review with metaanalysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 212:505.e1, 2015
Hankins GD, Hauth JC, Cissik JH, et al: Effects of ritodrine hydrochloride on arteriovenous blood gas
and shunt in healthy pregnant yellow baboons. Am J Obstet Gynecol 158:658, 1988
Hassan SS, Romero R, Vidyadhari D, et al: Vaginal progesterone reduces the rate of preterm birth in
women with sonographic short cervix: a multicenter, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled
trial. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 38:18, 2011
Hawkins JS, Wells CE, Casey BM, et al: Nifedipine for acute tocolysis of preterm labor: a placebocontrolled randomized trial. Obstet Gynecol 138(1):73, 2021
Hawkins JS: Lower genital tract procedures. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al (eds):
Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2017
Hedermann G, Hedley PL, Bækvad-Hansen M, et al: Danish premature birth rates during the COVID19 lockdown. Arc Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed 106(1):93, 2021
Helenius K, Sjörs G, Shah PS, et al: Survival in very preterm infants: an international comparison of 10
national neonatal networks. Pediatrics 140(6):e20171264, 2017
Higgins RD, Saade G, Polin RA, et al: Evaluation and management of women and newborns with a
maternal diagnosis of chorioamnionitis: summary of a workshop. Obstet Gynecol 127(3):426, 2016
Hillier SL, Nugent RP, Eschenbach DA, et al: Association between bacterial vaginosis and preterm
delivery of a low-birthweight infant. N Engl J Med 333:1737, 1995

Hoffman MK, Goudar SS, Kodkany BS, et al: Low-dose aspirin for the prevention of preterm delivery
in nulliparous women with a singleton pregnancy (ASPIRIN): a randomised, double-blind, placebocontrolled trial. Lancet 395(10220):285, 2020
Holmlund U, Cabers G, Dahlfors AR, et al: Expression and regulation of the pattern recognition
receptors Toll-like receptor-2 and Toll-like receptor-4 in the human placenta. Immunology 107:145,
2002
Hong X, Bartell TR, Wang X: Gaining a deeper understanding of social determinants of preterm birth by
integrating multi-omics data. Pediatr Res 89(2):336, 2021
How HY, Hughes SA, Vogel RL, et al: Oral terbutaline in the outpatient management of preterm labor.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 173:1518, 1995
How HY, Zafaranchi L, Stella CL, et al: Tocolysis in women with preterm labor between 320/7 and
346/7 weeks of gestation: a randomized controlled pilot study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 194:976, 2006
Hui SY, Chor CM, Lau TK, et al: Cerclage pessary for preventing preterm birth in women with a
singleton pregnancy and a short cervix at 20 to 24 weeks: a randomized controlled trial. Am J
Perinatol 30:283, 2013
Iams JD, Goldenberg RL, Meis PJ, et al: The length of the cervix and the risk of spontaneous premature
delivery. N Engl J Med 334:567, 1996
Iams JD, Newman RB, Thom EA, et al: Frequency of uterine contractions and the risk of spontaneous
preterm birth. N Engl J Med 346:250, 2002
Ishii N, Kono Y, Yonemoto N, et al: Outcomes of infants born at 22 and 23 weeks’ gestation. Pediatrics
132(1):62, 2013
Janssens S, Beyaert R: Role of Toll-like receptors in pathogen recognition. Clin Microbiol Rev 16:637,
2003
Jarde A, Lutsiv O, Beyene J, et al: Vaginal progesterone, oral progesterone, 17-OHPC, cerclage, and
pessary for preventing preterm birth in at-risk singleton pregnancies: an updated systematic review
and network meta-analysis. BJOG 126(5):556, 2019
Jehan F, Sazawal S, Baqui AH, et al: Multiomics characterization of preterm birth in low- and middleincome countries. JAMA Netw Open 3(12):e2029655, 2020
Jones EO, Liew ZQ, Rust OA: The short cervix: a critical analysis of diagnosis and treatment. Obstet
Gynecol Clin North Am 47(4):545, 2020
Kamath-Rayne BD, Rozance PJ, Goldenberg RL, et al: Antenatal corticosteroids beyond 34 weeks
gestation: what do we do now? Am J Obstet Gynecol 215(4):423, 2016
Keelan JA, Blumenstein M, Helliwell RJ, et al: Cytokines, prostaglandins and parturition—a review.
Placenta 24:S33, 2003
Kenyon S, Boulvain M, Neilson J: Antibiotics for preterm rupture of the membranes: a systematic
review. Obstet Gynecol 104:1051, 2004
Kenyon S, Pike K, Jones DR, et al: Childhood outcomes after prescription of antibiotics to pregnant
women with preterm rupture of the membranes: 7-year follow-up of the ORACLE I trial. Lancet
372:1310, 2008a
Kenyon S, Pike K, Jones DR, et al: Childhood outcomes after prescription of antibiotics to pregnant
women with spontaneous preterm labour: 7-year follow-up of the ORACLE II trial. Lancet
372:1319, 2008b
Kenyon SL, Taylor DJ, Tarnow-Mordi, et al: Broad-spectrum antibiotics for spontaneous preterm labour:
the ORACLE II randomized trial. Lancet 357:989, 2001

Kerstjens JM, Bocca-Tjeertes IF, de Winter AF, et al: Neonatal morbidities and developmental delay in
moderately preterm-born children. Pediatrics 130(2):e265, 2012
King JF, Flenady V, Papatsonis D, et al: Calcium channel blockers for inhibiting preterm labour: a
systematic review of the evidence and a protocol for administration of nifedipine. Aust N Z J Obstet
Gynaecol 43:192, 2003
Kiver V, Boos V, Thomas A, et al: Perinatal outcomes after previable preterm premature rupture of
membranes before 24 weeks gestation. J Perinat Med 46(5):555, 2018
Korita D, Sagawa N, Itoh H, et al: Cyclic mechanical stretch augments prostacyclin production in
cultured human uterine myometrial cells from pregnant women: possible involvement of upregulation of prostacyclin synthase expression. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 87:5209, 2002
Kovacevich GJ, Gaich SA, Lavin JP, et al: The prevalence of thromboembolic events among women
with extended bed rest prescribed as part of the treatment for premature labor or preterm premature
rupture of membranes. Am J Obstet Gynecol 182:1089, 2000
Kurtzman JL, Thorp JM Jr, Spielman FJ, et al: Do nifedipine and verapamil potentiate the cardiac
toxicity of magnesium sulfate? Am J Perinatol 10:450, 1993
Kuusela P, Jacobsson B, Hagberg H, et al: Second trimester transvaginal ultrasound measurement of
cervical length for prediction of preterm birth: a blinded prospective multicentre diagnostic accuracy
study. BJOG 128(2):195, 2021
Laskin MD, Yinon Y, Whittle WL: Preterm premature rupture of membranes in the presence of
cerclage: is the risk for intra-uterine infection and adverse neonatal outcome increased. J Matern
Fetal Neonatal Med 25(4):424, 2012
Lauder AP, Roche AM, Sherrill-Mix S, et al: Comparison of placenta samples with contamination
controls does not provide evidence for a distinct placenta microbiota. Microbiome 4(1):29, 2016
Laughon SK, Albert PS, Leishear K, et al: The NICHD Consecutive Pregnancies Study: recurrent
preterm delivery by subtype. Am J Obstet Gynecol 210(2):131.e1, 2014
Lees CC, Lojacono A, Thompson C, et al: Glyceryl trinitrate and ritodrine in tocolysis: an international
multicenter randomized study. Obstet Gynecol 94:403, 1999
Leeson SC, Maresh MJ, Martindale EA, et al: Detection of fetal fibronectin as a predictor of preterm
delivery in high risk symptomatic pregnancies. BJOG 103:48, 1996
Leveno KJ, Cox K, Roark ML: Cervical dilatation and prematurity revisited. Obstet Gynecol 68(3):434,
1986a
Leveno KJ, Klein VR, Guzick DS, et al: Single-centre randomised trial of ritodrine hydrochloride for
preterm labour. Lancet 1:1293, 1986b
Leveno KJ, McIntire DD, Bloom SL, et al: Decreased preterm births in an inner-city public hospital.
Obstet Gynecol 113(3):578, 2009
Lewis DF, Adair CD, Robichaux AG, et al: Antibiotic therapy in preterm premature rupture of
membranes: are seven days necessary? A preliminary, randomized clinical trial. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 188:1413, 2003
Lewis DF, Robichaux AG, Jaekle RK, et al: Expectant management of preterm premature rupture of
membranes and nonvertex presentation: what are the risks? Am J Obstet Gynecol 196:566, 2007
Lewis R, Mercer BM, Salama M, et al: Oral terbutaline after parenteral tocolysis: a randomized, doubleblind, placebo-controlled trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol 175:834, 1996
Li C, Shen J, Hua K: Cerclage for women with twin pregnancies: a systematic review and
metaanalysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 220(6):543, 2019
Lieman JM, Brumfield CG, Carlo W, et al: Preterm premature rupture of membranes: is there an
optimal gestational age for delivery? Obstet Gynecol 105:12, 2005

Liggins GC, Howie RN: A controlled trial of antepartum glucocorticoid treatment for prevention of the
respiratory distress syndrome in premature infants. Pediatrics 50:515, 1972
Likis FE, Velez Edwards DR, Andrews JC, et al: Progestogens for preterm birth prevention. Obstet
Gynecol 120:897, 2012
Loe SM, Sanchez-Ramos L, Kaunitz AM: Assessing the neonatal safety of indomethacin tocolysis: a
systematic review with meta-analysis. Obstet Gynecol 106:173, 2005
Low JA, Panagiotopoulos C, Derrick EJ: Newborn complication after intrapartum asphyxia with
metabolic acidosis in the preterm fetus. Am J Obstet Gynecol 172:805, 1995
Lyall F, Lye S, Teoh T, et al: Expression of Gsalpha, connexin-43, connexin-26, and EP1, 3, and 4
receptors in myometrium of prelabor singleton versus multiple gestations and the effects of
mechanical stretch and steroids on Gsalpha. J Soc Gynecol Investig 9:299, 2002
Lyell DJ, Pullen K, Campbell L, et al: Magnesium sulfate compared with nifedipine for acute tocolysis of
preterm labor: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol 1108:61, 2007
Mackeen AD, Seibel-Seamon J, Muhammad J, et al: Tocolytics for preterm premature rupture of
membranes. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2:CD007062, 2014
Main EK, Change SC, Carpenter AM, et al: Singleton preterm birth rates for racial and ethnic groups
during the coronavirus disease 2019 pandemic in California. Am J Obstet Gynecol 224(2): 239, 2021
Major CA, Towers CW, Lewis DF, et al: Expectant management of preterm premature rupture of
membranes complicated by active recurrent genital herpes. Am J Obstet Gynecol 188:1551, 2003
Makrides M, Best K, Yelland L, et al: A randomized trial of prenatal n-3 fatty acid supplementation and
preterm delivery. N Engl J Med 381(11):1035, 2019
Malloy MH, Onstad L, Wright E: The effect of cesarean delivery on birth outcome in very low birth
weight infants. Obstet Gynecol 77:498, 1991
Marinić M, Mika K, Chigurupati S, et al: Evolutionary transcriptomics implicates HAND2 in the origins
of implantation and regulation of gestation length. Elife 10:e61257, 2021
Marinovich ML, Regan AK, Gissler M, et al: Associations between interpregnancy interval and preterm
birth by previous preterm birth status in four high-income countries: a cohort study. BJOG
128(7):1134, 2021.
Marret S, Marpeau L, Bénichou J: Benefit of magnesium sulfate given before very preterm birth to
protect infant brain. Pediatrics 121(1):225, 2008
Martin JA, Hamilton BE, Osterman MJ, et al: Births: final data for 2019. Natl Vital Stat Rep 70(2):1,
2021
Martin JA, Osterman MJ, Kirmeyer SE, et al: Measuring gestational age in vital statistics data:
transitioning to the obstetric estimate. Natl Vital Stat Rep 64(5):1, 2015
McCall CA, Grimes DA, Drapkin Lyerly A: “Therapeutic” bed rest in pregnancy unethical and
unsupported by data. Obstet Gynecol 121:1305, 2013
McElrath TF, Allred E, Leviton A: Prolonged latency after preterm premature rupture of membranes: an
evaluation of histologic condition and intracranial ultrasonic abnormality in the neonate born at <28
weeks of gestation. Am J Obstet Gynecol 189:794, 2003
McElrath TF, Norwitz ER, Lieberman ES, et al: Perinatal outcome after preterm premature rupture of
membranes with in situ cervical cerclage. Am J Obstet Gynecol 187:1147, 2002
McEvoy C, Schilling D, Segel S, et al: Improved respiratory compliance in preterm infants after a single
rescue course of antenatal steroids: a randomized trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol 202(6):544.e1, 2010
McIntire DD, Leveno KJ: Neonatal mortality and morbidity rates in later preterm births compared with
births at term. Obstet Gynecol 111:35, 2008

McManemy J, Cooke E, Amon E, et al: Recurrence risk for preterm delivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol
196(6):576.e1, 2007
McPherson JA, Rouse DJ, Grobman WA, et al: Association of duration of neuroprotective magnesium
sulfate infusion with neonatal and maternal outcomes. Obstet Gynecol 124(4):749, 2014
Medley N, Poljak B, Mammarella S, et al: Clinical guidelines for prevention and management of preterm
birth: a systematic review. BJOG 125(1):1361, 2018
Meis PJ, Klebanoff M, Thom E, et al: Prevention of recurrent preterm delivery by 17alphahydroxyprogesterone caproate. N Engl J Med 348:2379, 2003
Mekonnen ZK, Oehlert JW, Eskenazi B, et al: The relationship between air pollutants and maternal
socioeconomic factors on preterm birth in California urban counties. J Expo Sci Environ Epidemiol
31:503, 2021.
Melchor JC, Khalil A, Wing D, et al: Prediction of preterm delivery in symptomatic women using
PAMG-1, fetal fibronectin and phIGFBP-1 tests: systematic review and meta-analysis. Ultrasound
Obstet Gynecol 52(4):442, 2018
Mendez-Figueroa H, Chauhan SP: Tocolytic therapy in preterm premature rupture of membranes.
Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am 47(4):569, 2020
Menon R, Behnia F, Polettini J, et al: Novel pathways of inflammation in human fetal membranes
associated with preterm birth and preterm pre-labor rupture of the membranes. Semin
Immunopathol 42(4):431, 2020
Mercer BM, Arheart KL: Antimicrobial therapy in expectant management of preterm premature
rupture of the membranes. Lancet 346:1271, 1995
Mercer BM, Carr TL, Beazley DD, et al: Antibiotic use in pregnancy and drug-resistant infant sepsis.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 181:816, 1999
Mercer BM, Crocker LG, Boe NM, et al: Induction versus expectant management in premature rupture
of the membranes with mature amniotic fluid at 32 to 36 weeks: a randomized trial. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 169:775, 1993
Mercer BM, Miodovnik M, Thurnau GR, et al: Antibiotic therapy for reduction of infant morbidity after
preterm premature rupture of the membranes. JAMA 278:989, 1997
Mercer BM: Preterm premature rupture of the membranes. Obstet Gynecol 101:178, 2003
Michalowicz BS, Hodges JS, DiAngelis AJ, et al: Treatment of periodontal disease and the risk of
preterm birth. N Engl J Med 355:1885, 2006
Mogami H, Kishore AH, Shi H, et al: Fetal fibronectin signaling induces matrix metalloproteases and
cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) in amnion cells and preterm birth in mice. J Biol Chem 288(3):1953,
2013
Morales WJ, Madhav H: Efficacy and safety of indomethacin compared with magnesium sulfate in the
management of preterm labor: a randomized study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 169:97, 1993a
Morales WJ, Smith SG, Angel JL, et al: Efficacy and safety of indomethacin versus ritodrine in the
management of preterm labor: a randomized study. Obstet Gynecol 74:567, 1989
Morales WJ, Talley T: Premature rupture of membranes at <25 weeks: a management dilemma. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 168:503, 1993b
Morgan JL, Nelson DB, Casey BM, et al: Impact of metabolic acidemia at birth on neonatal outcomes
in infants born before 34 weeks’ gestation. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 30(16):1902, 2017
Motomura K, Romero R, Galaz J, et al: RNA Sequencing reveals distinct immune responses in the
chorioamniotic membranes of women with preterm labor and microbial or sterile intra-amniotic
inflammation. Infect Immun 89(5):e00819, 2021

Moutquin JM, Sherman D, Cohen H, et al: Double-blind, randomized, controlled trial of atosiban and
ritodrine in the treatment of preterm labor: a multicenter effectiveness and safety study. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 183:1191, 2000
Muench MV, Baschat AA, Kopelman J, et al: Indomethacin therapy initiated before 24 weeks of
gestation for the prevention of preterm birth. Obstet Gynecol 101:65S, 2003
Muench MV, Harman CR, Baschat AA, et al: Early fetal exposure to long term indomethacin therapy to
prevent preterm delivery: neonatal outcome. Am J Obstet Gynecol 185:S149, 2001
Murphy KE: Betamethasone compared with dexamethasone for preterm birth: a call for trials. Obstet
Gynecol 110:7, 2007
Nallasamy S, Mahendroo M: Distinct roles of cervical epithelia and stroma in pregnancy and parturition.
Semin Reprod Med 35(2):190, 2017
National Institutes of Health: Antenatal corticosteroids revisited: repeat courses. NIH Consens
Statement 17(2):1, 2000
Nelson DB, Hanlon A, Nachamkin I, et al: Early pregnancy changes in bacterial vaginosis-associated
bacteria and preterm delivery. Paediatr Perinat Epidemiol 28(2):88, 2014
Nelson DB, McIntire DD, Leveno KJ: A chronicle of the 17OHP-C story to prevent recurrent preterm
birth. Am J Obstet Gynecol 224(2):175, 2021
Nelson DB, McIntire DD, McDonald J, et al: 17-alpha hydroxyprogesterone caproate did not reduce the
rate of recurrent preterm birth in a prospective cohort study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 216(6):600.e1,
2017
Nelson KB, Grether JK: Can magnesium sulfate reduce the risk of cerebral palsy in very-lowbirthweight infants? Pediatrics 95:263, 1995
Nelson LH, Anderson RL, O’Shea M, et al: Expectant management of preterm premature rupture of
the membranes. Am J Obstet Gynecol 171:350, 1994
Nicolaides KH, Syngelaki A, Poon LC, et al: A randomized trial of a cervical pessary to prevent
preterm singleton birth. N Engl J Med 374(11):1044, 2016
Niebyl JR, Blake DA, White RD, et al: The inhibition of premature labor with indomethacin. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 136:1014, 1980
Nikolova T, Uotila J, Nikolova N, et al: Prediction of spontaneous preterm delivery in women presenting
with premature labor: a comparison of placenta alpha microglobulin-1, phosphorylated insulin-like
growth factor binding protein-1, and cervical length. Am J Obstet Gynecol 219(6):610.e1, 2018
Norman JE, Marlow N, Messow CM, et al: Vaginal progesterone prophylaxis for preterm birth (the
OPPTIMUM study): a multicenter, randomized, double-blind trial. Lancet 387(10033):2106, 2016
Norman M, Hallberg B, Abrahamsson T, et al: Association between year of birth and 1-year survival
among extremely preterm infants in Sweden during 2004–2007 and 2014–2016. JAMA
321(12):1188, 2019
Northen AT, Norman GS, Anderson K, et al: Follow-up of children exposed in utero to 17 alphahydroxyprogesterone caproate compared with placebo. Obstet Gynecol 110(4):865, 2007
Owen J, Hankins G, Iams JD, et al: Multicenter randomized trial of cerclage for preterm birth
prevention in high-risk women with shortened mid-trimester cervical length. Am J Obstet Gynecol
201(4):375.e1, 2009
Palacios C, Kostiuk LK, Peña-Rosas JP: Vitamin D supplementation for women during pregnancy.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 7:CD008873, 2019
Papatsonis DN, Van Geijn HP, Ader HJ, et al: Nifedipine and ritodrine in the management of preterm
labor: a randomized multicenter trial. Obstet Gynecol 90:230, 1997

Parilla BV, Dooley SL, Minogue JP, et al: The efficacy of oral terbutaline after intravenous tocolysis.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 169:965, 1993
Parry S, Leite R, Esplin MS, et al: Cervicovaginal fluid proteomic analysis to identify potential
biomarkers for preterm birth. Am J Obstet Gynecol 222(5):493.e1, 2020
Peltoniemi OM, Kari MA, Tammela O, et al: Randomized trial of a single repeat dose of prenatal
betamethasone treatment in imminent preterm birth. Pediatrics, 119:290, 2007
Perry KG Jr, Martin RW, Blake PG, et al: Maternal mortality associated with adult respiratory distress
syndrome. South Med J 91(5):441, 1998
Peterson LS, Stelzer IA, Tsai AS, et al: Multiomic immune clockworks of pregnancy. Semin
Immunopathol 42(4):397, 2020
Petrini JR, Dias T, McCormick MC, et al: Increased risk of adverse neurological development for late
preterm infants. J Pediatr 154(2):169, 2009
Petrova A, Demissie K, Rhoads GG, et al: Association of maternal fever during labor with neonatal and
infant morbidity and mortality. Obstet Gynecol 98:20, 2001
Pierce-Williams RA, Burd J, Felder L, et al: Clinical course of severe and critical coronavirus disease
2019 in hospitalized pregnancies: a United States cohort study. Am J Obstet Gynecol MFM
2(3):100134, 2020
Pirjani R, Moini A, Almasi-Hashiani A, et al: Placenta alpha microglobulin-1 (PartoSure) test for the
prediction of preterm birth: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med
November 17, 2019 [Epub ahead of print]
Pizzella S, El Helou N, Chubiz J, et al: Evolving cervical imaging technologies to predict preterm birth.
Semin Immunopathol 42(4):385, 2020
Premkumar A, Sinha N, Miller ES, et al: Perioperative use of cefazolin and indomethacin for physical
examination-indicated cerclages to improve gestational latency. Obstet Gynecol 135(6):1409, 2020
Prior M, Hibberd R, Asemota N, et al: Inadvertent P-hacking among trials and systematic reviews of
the effect of progestogens in pregnancy? A systematic review and meta-analysis. BJOG
124(7):1008, 2017
Promislow JH, Hertz-Picciotto I, Schramm M, et al: Bed rest and other determinants of bone loss during
pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 191:1077, 2004
Purisch SE, Gyamfi-Bannerman C: Epidemiology of preterm birth. Semin Perinatol 41(7):387, 2017
Quist-Nelson J, de Ruigh AA, Seidler AL, et al: Immediate delivery compared with expectant
management in late preterm prelabor rupture of membranes: an individual participant data metaanalysis. Obstet Gynecol 131(2):269, 2018
Raju TN, Mercer BM, Burchfield DJ, et al: Periviable birth: executive summary of a joint workshop by
the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, Society for
Maternal-Fetal Medicine, American Academy of Pediatrics, and American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists. Obstet Gynecol 123(5):1083, 2014
Reddy UM, Zhang J, Sun L, et al: Neonatal mortality by attempted route of delivery in early preterm
birth. Am J Obstet Gynecol 207:117.e1, 2012
Rehal A, Benkó Z, De Paco Matallana C, et al: Early vaginal progesterone versus placebo in twin
pregnancies for the prevention of spontaneous preterm birth: a randomized, double-blind trial. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 224(1):86.e1, 2020
Reinebrant HE, Pileggi-Castro C, Romero CL, et al: Cyclo-oxygenase (COX) inhibitors for treating
preterm labour. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 6:CD001992, 2015
Roberts D, Brown J, Medley N, et al: Antenatal corticosteroids for accelerating fetal lung maturation for
women at risk of preterm birth. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 3:CD004454, 2017

Rohwer AC, Oladapo OT, Hofmeyr GJ: Strategies for optimizing antenatal corticosteroid administration
for women with anticipated preterm birth. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 5:CD013633, 2020
Roman A, Zork N, Haeri S, et al: Physical examination-indicated cerclage in twin pregnancy: a
randomized controlled trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol 223(6):902.e1, 2020
Romero R, Conde-Agudelo A, Da Fonseca E, et al: Vaginal progesterone for preventing preterm birth
and adverse perinatal outcomes in singleton gestations with a short cervix: a meta-analysis of
individual patient data. Am J Obstet Gynecol 218(2):161, 2018
Romero R, Dey SK, Fisher SJ: Preterm labor: one syndrome, many causes. 345(6198):760, 2014
Romero R, Nores J, Mazor M, et al: Microbial invasion of the amniotic cavity during term labor.
Prevalence and clinical significance. J Reprod Med 38:543, 1993
Romero R, Sibai BM, Sanchez-Ramos L, et al: An oxytocin receptor antagonist (atosiban) in the
treatment of preterm labor: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial with tocolytic rescue.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 182:1173, 2000
Romero R, Stanczyk FZ: Progesterone is not the same as 17α-hydroxyprogesterone caproate:
implications for obstetrical practice. Am J Obstet Gynecol 208(6):421, 2013
Rossi RM, DeFranco EA: Maternal complications associated with periviable birth. Obstet Gynecol
132(1):107, 2018
Rossi RM, Hall E, DeFranco EA: Contemporary trends in cesarean delivery utilization for live births
between 22 0/7 and 23 6/7 weeks of gestation. Obstet Gynecol 133(3):451, 2019
Rouse DJ, Caritis SN, Peaceman AM, et al: A trial of 17alpha-hydroxyprogesterone caproate to prevent
prematurity in twins. N Engl J Med 357:454, 2007
Rouse DJ, Hirtz DG, Thom E, et al: A randomized, controlled trial of magnesium sulfate for the
prevention of cerebral palsy. N Engl J Med 359:895, 2008
Rouse DJ: Magnesium sulfate for fetal neuroprotection. Am J Obstet Gynecol 205(4):296, 2011
Rysavy MA, Li L, Bell EF: Between-hospital variation in treatment and outcomes in extremely preterm
infants. N Engl J Med 372(19):1801, 2015
Sakabe NJ, Aneas I, Knoblauch N, et al: Transcriptome and regulatory maps of decidua-derived stromal
cells inform gene discovery in preterm birth. Sci Adv 6(49):eabc8696, 2020
Salim R, Garmi G, Zohar N, et al: Nifedipine compared with atosiban for treating preterm labor: a
randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol 120(6):1323, 2012
Salow AD, Pool LR, Grobman WA, et al: Associations of neighborhood-level racial residential
segregation with adverse pregnancy outcomes. Am J Obstet Gynecol 218(3):351.e1, 2018
Samol JM, Lambers DS: Magnesium sulfate tocolysis and pulmonary edema: the drug or the vehicle?
Am J Obstet Gynecol 192:1430, 2005
Sanz M, Kornman K, Working group 3 of the joint EFP/AAP workshop: Periodontitis and adverse
pregnancy outcomes: consensus report of the Joint EFP/AAP Workshop on Periodontitis and
Systemic Diseases. J Periodontol 84(4 Suppl):S164, 2013
Schuster HJ, de Jonghe BA, Limpens J, et al: Asymptomatic vaginal Candida colonization and adverse
pregnancy outcomes including preterm birth: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J Obstet
Gynecol MFM 2(3):100163, 2020
Segel SY, Miles AM, Clothier B, et al: Duration of antibiotic therapy after preterm premature rupture of
fetal membranes. Am J Obstet Gynecol 189:799, 2003
Serrano MG, Parikh HI, Brooks JP, et al: Racioethnic diversity in the dynamics of the vaginal
microbiome during pregnancy. Nat Med 25(6):1001, 2019
Shaddeau AK, Burd I: Antenatal monitoring after preterm rupture of membranes. Obstet Gynecol Clin
North Am 47(4):625, 2020

Sharma S, Ou J, Strom S, et al: Identification of enzymes involved in the metabolism of 17alphahydroxyprogesterone caproate: an effective agent for prevention of preterm birth. Drug Metab
Dispos 36(9):1896, 2008
Shennan A, Chandiramani M, Bennett P, et al: MAVRIC: a multicenter randomized controlled trial of
transabdominal vs transvaginal cervical cerclage. Am J Obstet Gynecol 222(3):261.e1, 2020
Shynlova O, Nedd-Roderique T, Li Y, et al: Infiltration of myeloid cells into decidua is a critical early
event in the labour cascade and post-partum uterine remodeling. J Cell Mol Med 17(2):311, 2013a
Shynlova O, Nedd-Roderique T, Li Y, et al: Myometrial immune cells contribute to term parturition,
preterm labour and post-partum involution in mice. J Cell Mol Med 17(1):90, 2013b
Sibai B, Saade GR, Das AF: Re-examining the Meis trials for evidence of false-positive results. Obstet
Gynecol 136(3):622, 2020
Sibai BM: Magnesium sulfate for neuroprotection in patients at risk for early preterm delivery: not yet.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 205(4):296, 2011
Simons NE, Leeuw M, Hooft JV, et al: The long-term effect of prenatal progesterone treatment on child
development, behavior and health: a systematic review. BJOG 128(6):964, 2021.
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, McIntosh J, Feltovich H, et al: The role of routine cervical length
screening in selected high- and low-risk women for preterm birth prevention. Am J Obstet Gynecol
215(3):B2, 2016b
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine: Implementation of the use of antenatal corticosteroids in the late
preterm birth period in women at risk for preterm delivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 215(2):B13, 2016a
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine: SMFM statement: use of 17-alpha hydroxyprogesterone caproate
for prevention of recurrent preterm birth. Am J Obstet Gynecol 223(1):B16, 2020b
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine: Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine Consult Series #50: the role
of activity restriction in obstetric management: (replaces consult number 33, August 2014). Am J
Obstet Gynecol 223(2):B2, 2020a
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine: The role of cervical pessary placement to prevent preterm birth in
clinical practice. Am J Obstet Gynecol 216(3):B8, 2017
Sooranna SR, Lee Y, Kim LU, et al: Mechanical stretch activates type 2 cyclooxygenase via activator
protein-1 transcription factor in human myometrial cells. Mol Hum Reprod 10:109, 2004
Sosa C, Althabe F, Belizan J, et al: Bed rest in singleton pregnancies for preventing preterm birth.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 1:CD003581, 2004
Stephen GL, Lui S, Hamilton SA, et al: Transcriptomic profiling of human choriodecidua during term
labor: inflammation as a key driver of labor. Am J Reprod Immunol 73(1):36, 2015
Stiles AD: Prenatal corticosteroids—early gain, long-term questions. N Engl J Med 357:1248, 2007
Stoll BJ, Hansen N, Fanaroff AA, et al: Changes in pathogens causing early-onset sepsis in very-lowbirth-weight infants. N Engl J Med 347:240, 2002
Stoll BJ, Hansen NI, Bell EF, et al: Neonatal outcomes of extremely preterm infants from the NICHD
Neonatal Research Network. Pediatrics 126:443, 2010
Stout MJ, Zhou Y, Wylie KM, et al: Early pregnancy vaginal microbiome trends and preterm birth. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 217(3):356.e1, 2017
Subtil D, Brabant G, Tilloy E, et al: Early clindamycin for bacterial vaginosis in pregnancy (PREMEVA):
a multicentre, double-blind, randomised controlled trial. Lancet 392(10160):2018
Terkildsen MF, Parilla BV, Kumar P, et al: Factors associated with success of emergent secondtrimester cerclage. Obstet Gynecol 101:565, 2003
Theis KR, Romero R, Winters AD, et al: Does the human placenta delivered at term have a microbiota?
Results of cultivation, quantitative real-time PCR, 16S rRNA gene sequencing, and metagenomics.

Am J Obstet Gynecol 220(3):267.e1, 2019
Timmons BC, Reese J, Socrate S, et al: Prostaglandins are essential for cervical ripening in LPSmediated preterm birth but not term or antiprogestin-driven preterm ripening. Endocrinology
155(1):287, 2014
Tita A, Owen J, Cliver S, et al: Decreasing temporal trends in adjusted preterm birth among women
receiving prenatal care at a university-based health system. Am J Obstet Gynecol 204:S183, 2011
Tita AT, Cliver SP, Goepfert AR, et al: Clinical trial of interconceptional antibiotics to prevent preterm
birth: subgroup analyses and possible adverse antibiotic-microbial interaction. Am J Obstet Gynecol
196:367, 2007
To MS, Alfirevic Z, Heath VC, et al: Cervical cerclage for prevention of preterm delivery in women
with short cervix: randomized controlled trial. Lancet 363(9424):1849, 2004
Tomashek KM, Shapiro-Mendoza CK, Davidoff MJ, et al: Differences in mortality between latepreterm and term singleton infants in the United States, 1995–2002. J Pediatr 151:450, 2007
Tong M, Abrahms VM: Neutrophils in preterm birth: friend or foe? Placenta 102:17, 2020
Tong M, Hanna SE, Abrahams VM: Polymicrobial stimulation of human fetal membranes induce
neutrophil activation and neutrophil extracellular trap release. J Reprod Immunol 145:103306, 2021
United States Congress: Hearing on improving maternal health: legislation to advance prevention efforts
and access to care. 2019. Available at https://energycommerce.house.gov/committee/activity/hearings/hearing-on-improving-maternal-health-legislation-to-advance-prevention. Accessed
March 13, 2021
Venkatesh KK, Riley L, Castro VM, et al: Association of antenatal depression symptoms and
antidepressant treatment with preterm birth. Obstet Gynecol 127(5):926, 2016
Vergnes JN, Sixou M: Preterm low birthweight and maternal periodontal status: a meta-analysis. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 196:135.e1, 2007
Villamor-Martinez E, Lubach GA, Rahim OM, et al: Association of histological and clinical
chorioamnionitis with neonatal sepsis among preterm infants: a systematic review, meta-analysis,
and meta-regression. Front Immunol 11:972, 2020
Viteri OA, Blackwell SC, Chauhan SP, et al: Antenatal corticosteroids for the prevention of respiratory
distress syndrome in premature twins. Obstet Gynecol 128(3):583, 2016
Volozonoka L, Rots D, Kempa I, et al: Genetic landscape of preterm birth due to cervical insufficiency:
comprehensive gene analysis and patient next-generation sequencing data interpretation. PLoS One
15(3):e0230771, 2020
Vornhagen J, Adams Waldorf KM, Rajagopal L: Perinatal group B streptococcal infections: virulence
factors, immunity, and prevention strategies. Trends Microbiol 25(11):919, 2017
Walker KF, Thornton JG: Tocolysis and preterm labour. Lancet 387(10033): 2068, 2016
Wang H, Parry S, Macones G, et al: A functional SNP in the promoter of the SERPINH1 gene
increases risk of preterm premature rupture of membranes in African Americans. PNAS 103:13463,
2006
Wapner RJ, Sorokin Y, Mele L, et al: Long-term outcomes after repeat doses of antenatal
corticosteroids. N Engl J Med 357:1190, 2007
Watkins PL, Dagle JM, Bell EF, et al: Outcomes at 18 to 22 months of corrected age for infants born at
22 to 25 weeks of gestation in a center practicing active management. J Pediatr 217:52, 2020
Weiss JL, Malone FD, Vidaver J, et al: Threatened abortion: a risk factor for poor pregnancy outcome, a
population-based screening study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 190:745, 2004
Wenstrom K, Weiner CP, Merrill D, et al: A placebo controlled randomized trial of the terbutaline pump
for prevention of preterm delivery. Am J Perinatol 14:87, 1997

Werner EF, Han CS, Savitz DA, et al: Health outcomes for vaginal compared with cesarean delivery of
appropriately grown preterm neonates. Obstet Gynecol 121:1195, 2013
White BA, Creedon DJ, Nelson KE, et al: The vaginal microbiome in health and disease. Trends
Endocrinol Metab 22(10):389, 2011
WHO ACTION Trials Collaborators, Oladapo OT, Vogel JP, et al: Antenatal dexamethasone for early
preterm birth in low-resource countries. N Engl J Med 383(26):2020
Willcockson AR, Nandu T, Liu CL, et al: Transcriptome signature identifies distinct cervical pathways
induced in lipopolysaccharide-mediated preterm birth. Biol Reprod 98(3):408, 2018
Wing DA, Haeri S, Silber AC, et al: Placental alpha microglobulin-1 compared with fetal fibronectin to
predict preterm delivery in symptomatic women. Obstet Gynecol 130(6):1183, 2017
Winger EE, Reed JL, Ji X, et al: MicroRNAs isolated from peripheral blood in the first trimester predict
spontaneous preterm birth. PLoS One 15(8):e0236805, 2020
Winn HN, Chen M, Amon E, et al: Neonatal pulmonary hypoplasia and perinatal mortality in patients
with mid-trimester rupture of amniotic membranes—a critical analysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol
182:1638, 2000
World Health Organization: International statistical classification of diseases and related health problems,
11th revision. 2019. Available at: www.who.int/classifications/classification-of-diseases. Accessed
April 27, 2021
World Health Organization: Preterm birth. 2018. Available at: www.who.int/news-room/factsheets/detail/preterm-birth. Accessed March 26, 2021
Wu YW, Colford JM Jr: Chorioamnionitis as a risk factor for cerebral palsy: a meta-analysis. JAMA
284(11):1417, 2000
Yoon BH, Romero R, Park JS, et al: Fetal exposure to an intra-amniotic inflammation and the
development of cerebral palsy at the age of three years. Am J Obstet Gynecol 182:675, 2000
Yoon BH, Romero R, Park JY, et al: Antibiotic administration can eradicate intra-amniotic infection or
intra-amniotic inflammation in a subset of patients with preterm labor and intact membranes. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 221(2):141.e1, 2019
Yoon BH, Yang SH, Jun JK, et al: Maternal blood C-reactive protein, white blood cell count, and
temperature in preterm labor: a comparison with amniotic fluid white blood cell count. Obstet
Gynecol 87:231, 1996
Younge N, Goldstein RF, Bann CM, et al: Survival and neurodevelopmental outcomes among periviable
infants. N Engl J Med 376(7):617, 2017
Yule CS, Ambia AM, Duryea EL, et al: The effect of normal saline on renal function and electrolytes in
women with preeclampsia. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med November 18, 2020 [Epub ahead of print]
Zhang G, Feenstra B, Bacelis J, et al: Genetic associations with gestational duration and spontaneous
preterm birth. N Engl J Med 377(12):1156, 2017
Zhang X, Liu M: Clinical observations on the prevention and treatment of premature labor with
nifedipine. [Chinese] Hua Xi Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao 33(2):288, 2002
Zuckerman H, Reiss U, Rubinstein I: Inhibition of human premature labor by indomethacin. Obstet
Gynecol 44:787, 1974

CHAPTER 46

Postterm Pregnancy

ESTIMATED GESTATIONAL AGE
INCIDENCE
PERINATAL MORTALITY AND MORBIDITY
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
COMPLICATIONS
ANTEPARTUM MANAGEMENT
INTRAPARTUM MANAGEMENT
REFERENCES
The adjectives postterm, prolonged, postdates, and postmature are used
interchangeably to describe pregnancies that have exceeded a duration
considered to be the upper limit of normal. We eschew use of the term
postdates because the real issue in many postterm pregnancies is uncertainty
in the estimated date of delivery (EDD). Postmature is reserved for the
uncommon clinical fetal syndrome in which the newborn has recognizable
features indicating a pathologically prolonged pregnancy. Thus, postterm or
prolonged pregnancy is our preferred term for an extended pregnancy.
The definition of postterm pregnancy is one that exceeds 420/7 weeks or
is ≥294 days from the first day of the last menstrual period (LMP).
Importantly, this is 42 “completed weeks.” Pregnancies between 411/7 and

416/7 weeks, although in the 42nd week, do not complete 42 weeks until the
seventh day has elapsed. These are considered late term (American College
of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019e, 2020b).

ESTIMATED GESTATIONAL AGE
The current definition of postterm pregnancy assumes that ovulation occurs 2
weeks after the LMP. Thus, some pregnancies may not actually be postterm
because of error in menstrual date recall or delayed ovulation. Even with
exactly recalled menstrual dates, there still is imprecision, and first-trimester
sonography is the most accurate method to establish or confirm gestational
age (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019b, 2020b).
Several studies support this (Bennett, 2004; Joseph, 2007). If available,
gestational ages calculated from the LMP and from the first accurate
ultrasound are reconciled as shown in Table 14-1 (p. 248), and the EDD is
recorded (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019c).

INCIDENCE
Of the 3.75 million neonates born in the United States during 2019, 0.3
percent were delivered at ≥42 weeks (Martin, 2021). This rate has declined
because of improved pregnancy dating accuracy and earlier intervention. To
identify predisposing factors for postterm pregnancy, one analysis of the
Danish Birth Cohort found only prepregnancy body mass index ≥25 and
nulliparity to be significantly associated (Olesen, 2006). Others reported
similar associations (Arrowsmith, 2011; Mission, 2015). Nulliparas with a
long midpregnancy cervical length (third or fourth quartile) are twice as
likely to deliver after 42 weeks (van der Ven, 2016). Last, the risk for
adverse pregnancy outcomes in postterm pregnancies increases with
advancing maternal age (Kortekaas, 2020).
The tendency for some mothers to have repeated postterm births suggests
that some prolonged pregnancies are biologically determined. In one study, if
a mother and daughter had a prolonged pregnancy, the risk for the daughter to
have a subsequent postterm pregnancy was significantly increased (Oberg,
2013). Maternal, not paternal, genes influence prolonged pregnancy
(Laursen, 2004). For example, genes from one locus of chromosome 2q13

are associated with gestational duration (Liu, 2019). As discussed in Chapter
5 (p. 102), rare fetal-placental factors that predispose to postterm pregnancy
include anencephaly, adrenal hypoplasia, and X-linked placental sulfatase
deficiency (Ayyavoo, 2014; MacDonald, 1965).

PERINATAL MORTALITY AND MORBIDITY
Rates of stillbirth, neonatal death, and infant morbidity all rise after the EDD.
Data from times before widespread intervention for postterm pregnancies are
most illustrative. In two large Swedish studies, the perinatal mortality rate
reached a nadir at 39 to 40 weeks’ gestation and rose thereafter (Fig. 46-1).
This trend is also reported for the United States (MacDorman, 2009). The
major causes of morbidity in these studies include gestational hypertension,
prolonged labor with cephalopelvic disproportion, birth injuries, and
hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy (Table 46-1). Similar outcomes were
reported in 78,022 women with postterm pregnancies delivered before
routine labor induction was adopted in Denmark (Olesen, 2003). A slight
increase in cerebral palsy rates and two-point lower intelligence quotient
(IQ) scores have been reported in postterm births (Moster, 2010; Williams,
2020; Yang, 2010). Conversely, data do not associate autism with postterm
birth (Gardener, 2011).

FIGURE 46-1 Perinatal mortality rates in late pregnancy according to gestational age of all births in
Sweden during 1943–1952 compared with those during 1977–1978. The partially compressed scale is
used for convenience in depiction. (Adapted from Bakketeig, 1991; Lindell, 1956.)

TABLE 46-1. Adverse Maternal and Perinatal Outcomes Associated with
Postterm Pregnancy

Alexander and colleagues (2000a) reviewed 56,317 singleton
pregnancies delivered at ≥40 weeks between 1988 and 1998 at Parkland
Hospital. Labor was induced in 35 percent of pregnancies completing 42
weeks. The rate of cesarean delivery for dystocia or fetal distress was
significantly greater at 42 weeks compared with earlier gestations. More
newborns of postterm pregnancies were admitted to intensive care units.
Notably, the incidence of neonatal seizures and deaths was doubled at 42
weeks.
Smith (2001) has challenged analyses such as these because the
population at risk for perinatal mortality in a given week consists of all
ongoing pregnancies rather than just the births in a given week. He calculated
perinatal mortality rates using only births in a given week of gestation from
37 to 43 completed weeks compared with the cumulative probability—the
perinatal index—of death when all ongoing pregnancies are included in the
denominator. Using this computation, delivery at 38 weeks’ gestation had the
lowest risk for perinatal death. In current practice, perinatal death is
balanced against morbidity associated with immaturity. This shapes the
rationale for delaying delivery until 39 weeks’ gestation unless a

comorbidity warrants earlier intervention (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019d).

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
■ Postmaturity Syndrome
The postmature newborn is unique, and features include wrinkled, patchy,
peeling skin; a long, thin body that suggests wasting; and advanced maturity
in that the neonate is open-eyed, unusually alert, and appears old and worried
(Fig. 46-2). Skin wrinkling can be prominent on the palms and soles, and
nails are typically long. Most postmature neonates are not technically growth
restricted because their birthweight seldom falls below the 10th percentile
for gestational age (Chap. 47, p. 825). However, severe growth restriction—
which logically must have preceded completion of 42 weeks—may be
present.

FIGURE 46-2 Postmaturity syndrome. Neonate delivered at 43 weeks’ gestation with thick, viscous
meconium coating the desquamating skin. Note the long, thin appearance and wrinkling of the hands.

The incidence of postmaturity syndrome in newborns at 41, 42, or 43
weeks, respectively, has not been conclusively determined, but the syndrome
complicates 10 to 20 percent of pregnancies at 42 completed weeks
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020b). Associated
oligohydramnios substantially raises the likelihood of postmaturity. Trimmer
and associates (1990) reported that 88 percent of fetuses were postmature if
there was oligohydramnios, defined by a sonographic maximal vertical
amnionic fluid pocket that measured ≤1 cm at 42 weeks.

■ Placental Dysfunction
Many believe that postterm pregnancy is an abnormal state. Redman and Staff
(2015) suggest that limited placental capacity, characterized by dysfunctional
syncytiotrophoblast, explains the greater risks of the postmaturity syndrome.
A murine model of stillborn fetuses supports this theory (Rahman, 2017).
Clifford (1954) proposed that the associated skin changes follow loss of
the protective effects of vernix caseosa. He also attributed the postmaturity
syndrome to placental senescence, although he did not find placental
degeneration histologically. Still, the concept that postmaturity stems from
placental insufficiency has persisted despite an absence of morphological or
significant quantitative findings (Larsen, 1995; Redman, 2015; Rushton,
1991). However, the rate of placental apoptosis—programmed cell death—
is significantly greater at 41 to 42 completed weeks compared with that at 36
to 39 weeks (Smith, 1999). Several proapoptotic genes such as kisspeptin
are upregulated in postterm placental explants compared with the same genes
in term ones (Torricelli, 2012). The clinical significance of such apoptosis is
unclear.
Jazayeri and coworkers (1998) investigated cord blood erythropoietin
levels in 124 appropriately grown newborns delivered from 37 to 43 weeks.
The only known stimulator of erythropoietin is decreased partial oxygen
pressure. Thus, they sought to assess whether fetal oxygenation was
compromised due to placental aging in postterm pregnancies. All women had
an uncomplicated labor and delivery. Cord blood erythropoietin levels were
significantly elevated in pregnancies reaching 41 weeks or more. Although
Apgar scores and acid-base studies were normal, these researchers
concluded that fetal oxygenation was decreased in some postterm gestations.
However, the postterm fetus typically continues to gain weight and thus
be unusually large at birth. This suggests that placental function is not
severely compromised. Indeed, continued fetal growth is the norm—albeit at
a slower rate beginning at 37 completed weeks (Fig. 46-3). Nahum and
associates (1995) confirmed that fetal growth continues until at least 42
weeks. However, umbilical blood flow does not increase concomitantly
(Link, 2007).

FIGURE 46-3 Mean daily fetal growth during previous week of gestation. (Redrawn from Hendricks
CH: Patterns of fetal and placental growth: the second half of pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 24:357, 1964.)

■ Fetal Distress and Oligohydramnios
The principal reasons for increased risks to postterm fetuses were described
by Leveno and colleagues (1984). Both antepartum fetal jeopardy and
intrapartum nonreassuring fetal status were found to be the consequence of
cord compression associated with oligohydramnios. In their analysis of 727
postterm pregnancies, intrapartum nonreassuring fetal status detected with
electronic monitoring was not associated with late decelerations
characteristic of uteroplacental insufficiency. Instead, one or more prolonged
decelerations such as shown in Figure 46-4 preceded three fourths of
emergency cesarean deliveries for nonreassuring fetal heart rate tracings. In
all but two cases, there were also variable decelerations. Another common
fetal heart rate pattern, although not ominous by itself, was the saltatory
baseline. As described in Chapter 24 (p. 453), these findings are consistent
with cord occlusion as the proximate cause of the nonreassuring tracings.
Other correlates included oligohydramnios and viscous meconium. Schaffer
and coworkers (2005) implicated a nuchal cord in abnormal intrapartum fetal
heart rate patterns, meconium, and compromised newborn condition in
prolonged pregnancies.

FIGURE 46-4 A. Prolonged fetal heart rate deceleration before emergency cesarean delivery in a
postterm pregnancy with oligohydramnios. B. Variable decelerations in a postterm pregnancy with
oligohydramnios. C. Saltatory baseline fetal heart rate showing oscillations exceeding 20 bpm and
associated with oligohydramnios in a postterm pregnancy. (Reproduced with permission from Leveno
KJ, Quirk JG, Cunningham FG, et al: Prolonged pregnancy, I. Observations concerning the causes of
fetal distress, Am J Obstet Gynecol. 1984 Nov 1;150(5 Pt 1):465–473.)

Normally, the volume of amnionic fluid continues to decline after 38
weeks, and logically oligohydramnios may become problematic. Moreover,
meconium release into an already reduced amnionic fluid volume results in
thick, viscous fluid that may cause meconium aspiration syndrome (Chap.
33, p. 600). The risk for this increases to 5 percent at 42 weeks (Ward,
2020).

■ Fetal-growth Restriction
In the late 1990s, the clinical significance of fetal-growth restriction in the
otherwise uncomplicated pregnancy became more fully appreciated. Data
from the National Swedish Medical Birth Registry showed that stillbirths
were more common among growth-restricted newborns who were delivered
after 42 weeks (Clausson, 1999; Divon, 1998). Indeed, a third of postterm
stillborn neonates were growth restricted. During this time in Sweden, labor
induction and antenatal fetal testing usually commenced at 42 weeks. In a
study from Parkland Hospital, Alexander and colleagues (2000d) analyzed
outcomes for 355 neonates from gestations ≥42 weeks and with birthweights
<3rd percentile. These outcomes were compared with those of 14,520
similarly aged newborns above the 3rd percentile. Morbidity and mortality
rates were significantly higher in the growth-restricted neonates. Moreover, a
fourth of all stillbirths associated with prolonged pregnancy were in this
comparatively small number of growth-restricted fetuses.

COMPLICATIONS
■ Oligohydramnios
Recognized postterm complications include oligohydramnios and fetal
macrosomia. In 38 postterm pregnancies, Trimmer and colleagues (1990)
sonographically measured hourly fetal urine production using sequential
bladder volume measurements. Diminished urine production was found to be
associated with oligohydramnios. Using Doppler waveforms, Oz and
associates (2002) concluded that fetal renal blood flow is reduced in
postterm pregnancies complicated by oligohydramnios. The lack of
increasing umbilical blood flow postterm may be a possible cause (Link,
2007).
Diminished amnionic fluid volume at any gestational age signifies
increased fetal risk. Unfortunately, an exact method to define this decreased
volume is lacking. Currently, sonographic measurement of the deepest
vertical pocket or calculation of the amnionic fluid index (AFI) are options
(Chap. 14, p. 257). One study of postterm pregnancies attempted to determine
which amnionic fluid volume criteria best predicted normal and abnormal
outcomes (Fischer, 1993). The smaller the amnionic fluid pocket, the greater
the likelihood of clinically significant oligohydramnios. However, normal
amnionic fluid volume did not preclude abnormal outcomes. One randomized
trial assigned 500 women with postterm pregnancies to assessment using
either AFI or the deepest vertical pocket (Alfirevic, 1997). The authors
concluded that the AFI overestimated the number of abnormal outcomes in
postterm pregnancies.
Regardless of the criteria used to diagnose oligohydramnios in postterm
pregnancies, most investigators have found a higher incidence of some
measure of “fetal compromise” during labor. Thus, oligohydramnios by most
definitions is a clinically meaningful finding. Conversely, reassurance of
continued fetal well-being in the presence of “normal” amnionic fluid
volume is tenuous. This may be related to how quickly pathological
oligohydramnios can develop.

■ Macrosomia

The velocity of fetal weight gain peaks at approximately 37 weeks (see Fig.
46-3). Although growth velocity slows at that time, most fetuses continue to
gain weight. According to Duryea and associates (2014), the 95th percentile
at 42 weeks is 4475 g. Even so, in one study, brachial plexus injury was not
related to postterm gestation (Walsh, 2011).
Intuitively, it seems that both maternal and fetal morbidity associated
with macrosomia would be mitigated with timely induction to preempt
further growth. This, however, does not appear to be the case. The American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020a) concludes that current
evidence does not support such a practice in women at term with suspected
fetal macrosomia. Moreover, the College notes that in the absence of
diabetes, vaginal delivery is not contraindicated for women with an
estimated fetal weight up to 5000 g (Chap. 27, p. 501). Obvious problems
with all such recommendations are substantive variations in fetal weight
estimation.

ANTEPARTUM MANAGEMENT
After completing 42 weeks, labor induction is recommended to help avoid
the just-described morbidity and mortality. For late-term gestations, some
intervention is indicated, but the method and timing are not unanimous. The
decision focuses on whether labor induction is warranted or if expectant
management with fetal surveillance is best. In a survey done more than 15
years ago, 73 percent of members of the American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists reported routinely induced women at 41 weeks (ClearyGoldman, 2006). Most of the remainder performed twice-weekly fetal
antepartum testing until 42 completed weeks.

■ Induction Factors
A cervix that is soft, dilated, and effaced improves labor induction success.
However, investigators have used differing criteria in studies of prolonged
pregnancy. Harris and coworkers (1983) defined an unfavorable cervix by a
Bishop score <7 and reported this in 92 percent of women at 42 weeks
(Chap. 26, p. 488). Others found that 40 percent of women with a 41-week
gestation had an “undilated cervix” (Hannah, 1992). In a study of 800 women
undergoing induction for postterm pregnancy at Parkland Hospital, women

without cervical dilation had a twofold higher cesarean delivery rate for
“dystocia” (Alexander, 2000b). Instead, a cervical length ≤3 cm measured
with transvaginal sonography predicted successful induction (Yang, 2004). In
a similar study, cervical length ≤25 mm positively predicted spontaneous
labor or successful induction (Vankayalapati, 2008).
Several investigators have evaluated prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) and E1
(PGE1) for induction in women with an unfavorable cervix and postterm
pregnancy. A study by the Maternal–Fetal Medicine Units Network (1994)
found that PGE2 gel was not more effective than placebo. Alexander and
associates (2000c) treated 393 women with a postterm pregnancy with
PGE2, regardless of cervical “favorability,” and reported that almost half of
the 84 women with cervical dilation of 2 to 4 cm entered labor with PGE2
use alone. Prostaglandins and other agents used for cervical ripening are
discussed in Chapter 26 (p. 488).
Sweeping or stripping of the membranes to induce labor and thereby
prevent postterm pregnancy has been evaluated. A metaanalysis of 44 studies
found that membrane stripping slightly increased spontaneous labor and
lowered induction rates (Finucane, 2020). However, this practice did not
lower the cesarean delivery rate. Other trials have found that sweeping
membranes did not reduce the need to induce labor (Hill, 2008; Kashanian
2006; Wong, 2002). Drawbacks of membrane stripping included pain,
vaginal bleeding, and irregular contractions without labor.
The station of the fetal head within the pelvis is another predictor of
successful postterm pregnancy induction. Shin and colleagues (2004) studied
484 nulliparas who underwent induction after 41 weeks’ gestation. The
cesarean delivery rate was directly related to station. The rate was 6 percent
if the vertex before induction was at –1 station; 20 percent at –2 station; 43
percent at –3 station; and 77 percent at –4 station.

■ Induction versus Fetal Testing
The less than optimal benefits from induction with an unfavorable cervix
lead some clinicians to prefer fetal antepartum testing beginning at 41
completed weeks. In a Canadian study, 3407 women were randomly assigned
at ≥41 weeks to induction or to fetal testing (Hannah, 1992). Labor induction
resulted in a small but significant reduction in the cesarean delivery rate

compared with fetal testing—21 versus 24 percent, respectively. There were
only two stillbirths in the fetal testing group.
The Maternal–Fetal Medicine Network then performed a randomized
trial of induction versus fetal testing beginning at 41 weeks’ gestation
(Gardner, 1996). Fetal surveillance included nonstress testing and
sonographic estimation of amnionic fluid volume performed twice weekly in
175 women. Perinatal outcomes were compared with those of 265 women
also at 41 weeks but randomly assigned to induction with or without cervical
ripening. There were no perinatal deaths, and the cesarean delivery rate did
not differ between groups. The results of this study support the validity of
either management scheme.
In another study of women reaching 41 completed weeks’ gestation, those
who entered spontaneous labor prior to 420/7 weeks had a lower cesarean
delivery rate than those who did not spontaneously labor but who underwent
induction after 420/7 weeks (Alexander, 2001). Cesarean delivery rates were
significantly increased—19 versus 14 percent—in the induced group because
of failure to progress.
A study from Denmark is also instructive (Zizzo, 2017). In 2011, the
Danish national guidelines were changed from labor induction at 420/7 weeks
with no fetal surveillance to labor induction at 412/7 to 416/7 weeks with fetal
surveillance beginning at 410/7 weeks. They compared two 3-year epochs—
one before and one after 2011. The rate of pregnancies that progressed past
420/7 weeks decreased from 2.85 to 0.62 percent. Concurrently, as expected,
the induction rate rose significantly, and this was accompanied by a drop in
the perinatal mortality rate—22 to 13 per 1000 births. The cesarean delivery
rate was not changed. A similar before-and-after observational study
reported that induction at ≥42 weeks’ gestation was associated with a
significantly lower cesarean delivery rate—15 versus 19.4 percent
(Bleicher, 2017).
To further address the question, the SWEdish Post-term Induction Study
—SWEPIS—was a randomized trial that included 2760 low-risk
pregnancies at 41 weeks’ gestation. The trial compared outcomes with
induction of labor at 41 weeks against expectant management and induction at
42 weeks. As shown in Table 46-2, maternal and perinatal outcomes were
not different with the exception of perinatal mortality and macrosomia
(Wennerholm, 2019). The study was stopped early because of a significantly

higher perinatal mortality rate in the expectantly management group. The
investigators concluded that these results should be interpreted with caution
because the primary composite outcomes were not significantly different.
TABLE 46-2. Selected Maternal and Perinatal Outcomes from SWEPIS
Trial

■ Management Strategies
At this time, evidence is insufficient to mandate a management strategy
between 40 and 42 completed weeks. Thus, induction of labor or initiation of
fetal surveillance at 41 weeks’ gestation is a reasonable option. The
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists and the Society for
Maternal-Fetal Medicine (2021) suggest that fetal surveillance should be
done once or twice weekly beginning at 41 0/7 weeks. After completing 42
weeks, labor induction is recommended. A management algorithm by the
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020b) is
summarized in Figure 46-5. In light of the recent studies that show an

increased stillbirth rate associated with expectant management at 41 weeks,
it is likely that routine induction will eventually become preferable in most
circumstances.

FIGURE 46-5 Algorithm for management of postterm pregnancy.

When gestational age is uncertain, the American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists (2019b) recommends delivery at 41 weeks’ gestation
using the best clinical estimate of gestational age. The College also
recommends against amniocentesis for fetal lung maturity.

INTRAPARTUM MANAGEMENT
Labor is a particularly dangerous time for the postterm fetus. Thus, women
whose pregnancies are known or suspected to be postterm ideally come to
the hospital as soon as they suspect labor. While being evaluated for active
labor, fetal heart rate and uterine contractions are monitored electronically
for variations consistent with fetal compromise (Chap. 24, p. 457).
During labor, the decision to perform amniotomy is problematic. Further
reduction in fluid volume following amniotomy can enhance the possibility of
cord compression. Conversely, after membrane rupture, a scalp electrode
and an intrauterine pressure catheter can be placed. These usually provide

more precise data concerning fetal heart rate and uterine contractions.
Amniotomy also aids identification of thick meconium.
Thick meconium in the amnionic fluid is particularly worrisome. The
viscosity probably signifies the lack of liquid and thus oligohydramnios.
Aspiration of thick meconium may cause severe pulmonary dysfunction and
neonatal death (Chap. 33, p. 600). According to the American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019a), amnioinfusion does not prevent
meconium aspiration syndrome. However, it remains a reasonable treatment
approach for repetitive variable decelerations (Chap, 24, p. 459). Suctioning
the pharynx once the head is delivered is not recommended (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019a; Wyckoff, 2020). If the
depressed newborn has meconium-stained fluid, intubation is performed.
The likelihood of a successful vaginal delivery is reduced appreciably
for the nullipara who is in early labor with thick, meconium-stained amnionic
fluid. Thus, if a woman is remote from delivery, strong consideration should
be given to prompt cesarean delivery, especially when cephalopelvic
disproportion is suspected or either hypotonic or hypertonic dysfunctional
labor is evident. Some practitioners choose to avoid oxytocin use in these
cases.

REFERENCES
Alexander JM, McIntire DD, Leveno KJ: Forty weeks and beyond: pregnancy outcomes by week of
gestation. Obstet Gynecol 96(2):291, 2000a
Alexander JM, McIntire DD, Leveno KJ: Postterm pregnancy: does induction increase cesarean rates?
J Soc Gynecol Invest 7:79A, 2000b
Alexander JM, McIntire DD, Leveno KJ: Postterm pregnancy: is cervical “ripening” being used in the
right patients? J Soc Gynecol Invest 7:247A, 2000c
Alexander JM, McIntire DD, Leveno KJ: Prolonged pregnancy: induction of labor and cesarean births.
Obstet Gynecol 97(6):911, 2001
Alexander JM, McIntire DD, Leveno KJ: The effect of fetal growth restriction on neonatal outcome in
postterm pregnancy. Abstract No. 463. Am J Obstet Gynecol 182:S148, 2000d
Alfirevic Z, Luckas M, Walkinshaw SA, et al: A randomized comparison between amniotic fluid index
and maximum pool depth in the monitoring of postterm pregnancy. BJOG 104(2):207, 1997
Amark H, Pilo C, Varli IH: Stillbirth in term and late term gestations in Stockholm during a 20-year
period, incidence and causes. PLos One 16:e0251965, 2021
American College of Obstetrics and Gynecologists: Delivery of a newborn with meconium-stained
amniotic fluid. Committee Opinion No. 689, March 2017, Reaffirmed 2019a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Management of suboptimally dated pregnancies.
Committee Opinion No. 688, March 2017, Reaffirmed 2019b

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine,
Society for Maternal–Fetal Medicine: Methods for estimating the due date. Committee Opinion No.
700, May 2017, Reaffirmed 2019c
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine: Avoidance
of nonmedically indicated early-term deliveries and associated neonatal morbidities. Committee
Opinion No. 765, November 2013, Reaffirmed 2019d
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine: Definition
of term pregnancy. Committee Opinion No. 579, November 2013, Reaffirmed 2019e
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine: Indications
for outpatient antenatal fetal surveillance. Committee Opinion No. 828, June 2021
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Macrosomia. Practice Bulletin No. 216, January
2020a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Management of late-term and postterm
pregnancies. Practice Bulletin No. 146, August 2014, Reaffirmed 2020b
Arrowsmith S, Wray S, Quenby S: Maternal obesity and labour complications following induction of
labour in prolonged pregnancy. BJOG 118(5):578, 2011
Ayyavoo A, Derraik JG, Hofman PL, et al: Postterm births: are prolonged pregnancies too long? J
Pediatr 164(3):647, 2014
Bakketeig LS, BergsjØ P: Post-term pregnancy: magnitude of the problem. In Chalmers I, Enkin M,
Keirse M (eds): Effective Care in Pregnancy and Childbirth. Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1991,
p 765
Bennett KA, Crane JM, O’Shea P, et al: First trimester ultrasound screening is effective in reducing
postterm labor induction rates: a randomized controlled trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol 190(4):1077, 2004
Bleicher I, Vinter D, Iofe A, et al: When should pregnancies that extended beyond term be induced? J
Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 30(2):219, 2017
Clausson B, Cnattingus S, Axelsson O: Outcomes of postterm births: the role of fetal growth restriction
and malformations. Obstet Gynecol 94:758, 1999
Cleary-Goldman J, Bettes B, Robinon JN, et al: Postterm pregnancy: practice patterns of contemporary
obstetricians and gynecologists. Am J Perinatol 23:15, 2006
Clifford SH: Postmaturity with placental dysfunction. Clinical syndromes and pathologic findings. J
Pediatr 44(1):1, 1954
Divon MY, Haglund B, Nisell H, et al: Fetal and neonatal mortality in the postterm pregnancy: the
impact of gestational age and fetal growth restriction. Am J Obstet Gynecol 178(4):726, 1998
Duryea EL, Hawkins JS, McIntire DD, et al: A revised birth weight reference for the United States.
Obstet Gynecol 124(1):16, 2014
Finucane EM, Murphy DJ, Biesty LM, et al: Membrane sweeping for induction of labour. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 1:CD000451, 2020
Fischer RL, McDonnell M, Bianculli KW, et al: Amniotic fluid volume estimation in the postdate
pregnancy: a comparison of techniques. Obstet Gynecol 81:698, 1993
Fraser WD, Hofmeyr J, Lede R, et al: Amnioinfusion for the prevention of the meconium aspiration
syndrome. N Engl J Med 353(9):909, 2005
Gardener H, Spiegelman D, Buka SL: Perinatal and neonatal risk factors for autism: a comprehensive
meta-analysis. Pediatrics 128(2):344, 2011
Gardner M, Rouse D, Goldenberg R, et al: Cost comparison of induction of labor at 41 weeks versus
expectant management in the postterm pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 174:351, 1996

Hannah ME, Hannah WJ, Hellman J, et al: Induction of labor as compared with serial antenatal
monitoring in post-term pregnancy. N Engl J Med 326(24):1587, 1992
Harris BA Jr, Huddleston JF, Sutliff G, et al: The unfavorable cervix in prolonged pregnancy. Obstet
Gynecol 62(2):171, 1983
Hendricks CH: Patterns of fetal and placental growth: the second half of pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol
24:357, 1964
Hill MJ, McWilliams GC, Garcia-Sur, et al: The effect of membrane sweeping on prelabor rupture of
membranes: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol 111(6):1313, 2008
Jazayeri A, Tsibris JC, Spellacy WN: Elevated umbilical cord plasma erythropoietin levels in prolonged
pregnancies. Obstet Gynecol 92(1):61, 1998
Joseph KS, Huang L, Liu S, et al: Reconciling the high rates of preterm and postterm birth in the United
States. Obstet Gynecol 109(4):798, 2007
Kashanian M, Aktarian A, Baradaron H, et al: Effect of membrane sweeping at term pregnancy on
duration of pregnancy and labor induction: a randomized trial. Gynecol Obstet Invest 62(1):41, 2006
Kortekaas JC, Kazemier BM, Keulen JKJ, et al: Risk of adverse pregnancy outcomes of late- and
postterm pregnancies in advanced maternal age: a national cohort study. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scan
99(8):1022, 2020
Larsen LG, Clausen HV, Andersen B, et al: A stereologic study of postmature placentas fixed by dual
perfusion. Am J Obstet Gynecol 172:500, 1995
Laursen M, Bille C, Olesen AW, et al: Genetic influence on prolonged gestation: a population-based
Danish twin study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 190(2):489, 2004
Leveno KJ, Quirk JG, Cunningham FG, et al: Prolonged pregnancy, I. Observations concerning the
causes of fetal distress. Am J Obstet Gynecol 150:465, 1984
Lindell A: Prolonged pregnancy. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 35(2):136, 1956
Lindquist AC, Hastie RM, Hiscock RJ, et al: Risk of major labour-related complications for pregnancies
progressing to 42 weeks or beyond. BMC Med 19:126, 2021
Link G, Clark KE, Lang U: Umbilical blood flow during pregnancy: evidence for decreasing placental
perfusion. Am J Obstet Gynecol 196(5)489.e1, 2007
Liu X, Helenius D, Skotte L, et al: Variants in the fetal genome near pro-inflammatory cytokine genes on
2q13 associate with gestational duration. Nat Commun 10(1):3927, 2019
MacDonald PC, Siiteri PK: Origin of estrogen in women pregnant with an anencephalic fetus. J Clin
Invest 44(3):465, 1965
MacDorman MF, Kirmeyer S: Fetal and perinatal mortality, United States, 2005. Natl Vital Stat Rep
57(8):1, 2009
Martin JA, Hamilton BE, Osterman MJK, et al: Births: final data for 2019. Natl Vital Stat Rep 70(2):1,
2021
Maternal–Fetal Medicine Units Network: A clinical trial of induction of labor versus expectant
management in postterm pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 170(3):716, 1994
Maoz O, Wainstock T, Sheiner E, et al: Immediate perinatal outcomes of postterm deliveries. J Matern
Fetal Neonatal Med 32(11):1847, 2019
Middleton P, Shepherd E, Morris J, et al: Induction of labour for improving birth outcomes for women at
or beyond 37 weeks’ gestation. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 7:CD004945, 2020
Mission JF, Marshall NE, Caughey AB: Pregnancy risks associated with obesity. Obstet Gynecol Clin
North Am 42(2):335, 2015
Moster D, Wilcox AJ, Vollset SE, et al: Cerebral palsy among term and postterm births. JAMA
304(9):976, 2010

Nahum GG, Stanislaw H, Huffaker BJ: Fetal weight gain at term: linear with minimal dependence on
maternal obesity. Am J Obstet Gynecol 172(5):1387, 1995
Oberg AS, Frisell T, Svensson AC, et al: Maternal and fetal genetic contributions to postterm birth:
familial clustering in a population-based sample of 475,429 Swedish births. Am J Epidemiol
177(6):531, 2013
Olesen AW, Westergaard JG, Olsen J: Perinatal and maternal complications related to postterm delivery:
a national register-based study, 1978–1993. Am J Obstet Gynecol 189(1):227, 2003
Olesen AW, Westergaard JG, Olsen J: Prenatal risk indicators of a prolonged pregnancy. The Danish
Birth Cohort 1998–2001. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 85(11):1338, 2006
Oz AU, Holub B, Mendilcioglu I, et al: Renal artery Doppler investigation of the etiology of
oligohydramnios in postterm pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 100(4):715, 2002
Rahman A, Cahill LS, Zhou YQ, et al: A mouse model of antepartum stillbirth. Am J Obstet Gynecol
217(4):443.e1, 2017
Redman CW, Staff AC: Preeclamptic biomarkers, syncytiotrophoblast stress, and placental capacity.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 213 (4 Suppl):S9.e1, 2015
Rushton DI: Pathology of placenta. In Wigglesworth JS, Singer DB (eds): Textbook of Fetal and
Perinatal Pathology. Boston, Blackwell, 1991, p 171
Schaffer L, Burkhardt T, Zimmerman R, et al: Nuchal cords in term and postterm deliveries—do we
need to know? Obstet Gynecol 106(1):23, 2005
Shin KS, Brubaker KL, Ackerson LM: Risk of cesarean delivery in nulliparous women at greater than
41 weeks’ gestational age with an unengaged vertex. Am J Obstet Gynecol 190(1):129, 2004
Smith GC: Life-table analysis of the risk of perinatal death at term and post term in singleton
pregnancies. Am J Obstet Gynecol 184(3):489, 2001
Smith SC, Baker PN: Placental apoptosis is increased in postterm pregnancies. BJOG 106(8):861, 1999
Torricelli M, Novembri R, Conti N, et al: Correlation with kisspeptin in postterm pregnancy and
apoptosis. Reprod Sci 19(10):1133, 2012
Trimmer KJ, Leveno KJ, Peters MT, et al: Observation on the cause of oligohydramnios in prolonged
pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 163:1900, 1990
Van der Ven AJ, van Os MA, Kleinrouweler CE, et al: Midpregnancy cervical length in nulliparous
women and its association with postterm delivery and intrapartum cesarean delivery. Am J Perinatol
33(1):40, 2016
Vankayalapati P, Sethna F, Roberts N, et al: Ultrasound assessment of cervical length in prolonged
pregnancy: prediction of spontaneous onset of labor and successful vaginal delivery. Ultrasound
Obstet Gynecol 31(3):328, 2008
Ward C, Caughey AB: The risk of meconium aspiration syndrome (MAS) increases with gestational
age at term. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med March 31, 2020 [Epub ahead of print]
Walsh JM, Kandamany N, Shuibhne NN, et al: Neonatal brachial plexus injury: comparison of incidence
and antecedents between 2 decades. Am J Obstet Gynecol 204(4):324, 2011
Wennerholm UB, Saltvedt S, Wessberg A, et al: Induction of labour at 41 weeks versus expectant
management and induction of labour at 42 weeks (SWEdish Post-term Induction Study, SWEPIS):
multicentre, open label, randomised, superiority trial. BMJ 367:I6131, 2019
Williams AG, Odd D: Investigating the association between post-term birth and long term cognitive,
developmental and educational impacts: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Matern Fetal
Neonatal Med 33(7):1253, 2020
Wong SF, Hui SK, Choi H, et al: Does sweeping of membranes beyond 40 weeks reduce the need for
formal induction of labour? BJOG 109(6):632, 2002

Wyckoff MH, Wyllie J, Aziz K, et al: Neonatal life support: 2020 Interna-tional Consensus on
Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation and Emergency Car-diovascular Care Science with Treatment
Recommendations. Circulation 142:S185, 2020
Yang S, Platt RW, Kramer MS: Variation in child cognitive ability by week of gestation among healthy
term births. Am J Epidemiol 171(4):399, 2010
Yang SH, Roh CR, Kim JH: Transvaginal ultrasonography for cervical assessment before induction of
labor. J Ultrasound Med 23(3):375, 2004
Zizzo AR, Kirkegaard I, Pinborg A, et al: Decline in stillbirths and perinatal mortality after
implementation of a more aggressive induction policy in post-date pregnancies: a nationwide register
study. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 96(7):862, 2017

CHAPTER 47

Fetal-Growth Disorders

NORMAL FETAL GROWTH
FETAL-GROWTH RESTRICTION
DETECTION
RISK FACTORS
MANAGEMENT
FETAL MACROSOMIA
RISK FACTORS
MANAGEMENT
REFERENCES
Disorders of fetal growth occur at both ends of the spectrum, either fetalgrowth restriction or macrosomia. Each poses concern because of associated
morbidities and potential mortality. However, in both categories most of
these newborns are ultimately deemed normal and healthy but merely
constitutionally small or large. The clinical challenge thus lies in the
evaluation and management of suspected fetal-growth disorders.

NORMAL FETAL GROWTH

Fetal growth may be divided into three phases. The initial phase of
hyperplasia occurs in the first 16 weeks and is characterized by a rapid rise
in cell number. The second phase, which extends up to 32 weeks’ gestation,
includes both cellular hyperplasia and hypertrophy. After 32 weeks, fetal
mass accrues by cellular hypertrophy, and it is during this phase that most
fetal fat and glycogen accumulate. The corresponding fetal-growth rates
during these three phases approximate 5 g/d at 15 weeks’ gestation, 15 g/d at
24 weeks’, and 30 g/d at 34 weeks’ (Grantz, 2018; Williams, 1982).
In the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development Fetal
Growth Studies, serial sonographic evaluations were performed in 1733
nonobese, low-risk pregnancies at 12 sites across the United States (Grantz,
2018). As shown in Figure 47-1, growth velocity peaked at 35 weeks’
gestation (Grantz, 2018). The investigators demonstrated that fetal growth
varies considerably and that it is not highly correlated with fetal birthweight
percentile. Some fetuses with initial estimated weights below the 5th
percentile maintained their growth velocity and ultimately weighed more at
birth than other fetuses whose weight percentiles were initially higher but
whose growth was slower. Such findings support our understanding that large
and small fetal weight percentiles reflect constitutional size in some but
indicate disordered growth in others. They further highlight the importance of
serial sonography when abnormal growth is a concern.

FIGURE 47-1 Fetal weight gain in grams per day by race/ethnicity throughout gestation.

■ Normal Birthweight
Accurate gestational age assessment is critical for determining whether
birthweight is normal. Current normative data are based on birthweights from
pregnancies in which gestational age is established using an obstetrical
estimate that includes sonography and discussed in Chapter 14 (p. 248)
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019b). The
birthweight percentiles shown in Table 47-1 were derived using data from
more than 3 million liveborn singletons delivered across the United States in

2011 (Duryea, 2014). As shown in Figure 47-2, use of a birthweight
percentile curve in which gestational age is based on a last menstrual period
alone yields significantly larger weights for a given gestational age,
particularly in the preterm period. The accuracy of a birthweight reference
thus has potential to affect the prevalence of neonates diagnosed as small or
large for gestational age.
TABLE 47-1. 2011 Gestational Age Birthweight (g) Percentiles for
3,252,011 Singleton Live Births in the United States

FIGURE 47-2 Fetal-growth curves for births in the United States in 2011. Curves vary depending on
whether gestational age was calculated from the last menstrual period or from an improved obstetrical
estimate, derived in part using sonography. (Modified with permission from Duryea EL, Hawkins JS,
McIntire DD, et al: A revised birth weight reference for the United States. Obstet Gynecol. 2014
Jul;124(1):16–22.)

The curve by Duryea and associates (2014) is most accurately termed a
population reference, rather than a standard. A population reference
incorporates pregnancies of varying risks, along with the resulting outcomes,
both normal and abnormal. In contrast, a standard incorporates normal
pregnancies with normal outcomes. Because population references include
preterm births, which are more likely to be growth restricted, it has been
argued that the associated birthweight data overestimate impaired fetal
growth (Mayer, 2013; Zhang, 2010).

■ Physiology of Fetal Growth
Fetal development is believed to be determined by maternal provision of
substrate and its placental transfer, whereas fetal growth potential is
governed by the genome. The precise cellular and molecular mechanisms
leading to normal fetal growth are incompletely understood. Considerable
evidence supports the role of insulin and insulin-like growth factors in fetal
growth and weight gain regulation (Luo, 2012). These growth factors are
produced by virtually all organs and are potent stimulators of cell division

and differentiation. Other hormones implicated in fetal growth include leptin
and other adipokines, which are derived from adipose tissue. Fetal leptin
concentrations rise during gestation, and they correlate both with birthweight
and with neonatal fat mass (Briffa, 2015; Ökdemir, 2018; Simpson, 2017).
Both excessive and diminished maternal glucose availability also have
the potential to affect fetal growth (Chap. 7, p. 135). That said, growthrestricted neonates do not typically show pathologically low glucose
concentrations in cord blood (Pardi, 2006). Fetal-growth restriction in
response to glucose deprivation generally results only after long-term severe
maternal caloric deprivation (Lechtig, 1975). Conversely, hyperglycemia
more consistently results in excessive growth. The Hyperglycemia and
Adverse Pregnancy Outcomes (HAPO) Study Cooperative Research Group
(2008) found that elevated cord C-peptide levels, which reflect fetal
hyperinsulinemia, are associated with greater birthweight. This relationship
was noted even in women with maternal glucose levels below the threshold
for diabetes.
Excessive transfer of lipids has similarly been implicated in fetal
overgrowth (Delhaes, 2018). Free or nonesterified fatty acids in maternal
plasma may be transferred to the fetus via facilitated diffusion or after
liberation of fatty acids from triglycerides by trophoblastic lipases (GilSánchez, 2012). Independent of prepregnancy body mass index (BMI), higher
maternal free fatty acid levels during the latter half of pregnancy correlate
with birthweight (Crume, 2015). Greater intake of certain fatty acids,
particularly omega-3, is associated with greater birthweight (CalabuigNavarro, 2016).
Placental fatty acid metabolism and transfer may be dysregulated in fetalgrowth restriction and in maternal conditions associated with fetal
overgrowth. For example, levels of endothelial lipase are reduced with
deficient fetal growth, and this enzyme is overexpressed in placentas of
women with diabetes (Gauster, 2007, 2011). Others have reported that
diabetes and obesity are associated with altered placental lipid-transport
gene expression (Segura, 2017). Obesity is also linked with greater
expression of fatty acid binding/transport proteins within the trophoblast
(Myatt, 2016). These alterations lead to an abnormal accumulation of lipids
that can result in pathological placental inflammation and dysfunction
(Calabuig-Navarro, 2016; Myatt, 2016; Yang, 2016).

FETAL-GROWTH RESTRICTION
Fundamental to understanding fetal-growth restriction (FGR) is an
appreciation of the strengths and limitations of its defining criteria. A
diagnosis based on estimated fetal weight alone does not indicate disease
but rather a fetus that is in an at-risk category. Benefits of definitions such as
the one used by the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists are
ease of application and promotion of consistency across care settings.
However, if applied to an otherwise low-risk population, a 10th-percentile
threshold will label nearly 10 percent of fetuses as growth restricted,
although most are merely constitutionally small rather than compromised.
Moreover, a threshold will fail to identify at-risk fetuses with a weight above
that threshold but who have not reached their growth potential. Thus, the
definition is intended to strike a balance between false-positive and falsenegative diagnoses.

■ Definition
Various criteria and thresholds have been used to define FGR. These have
included estimated fetal weights (EFW) below the 3rd, 5th, or 10th
percentiles; similar abdominal circumference (AC) percentiles; a specified
decline in the EFW percentile or AC percentile over serial assessments; and
various abnormal Doppler findings (Lees, 2020). All definitions are based
solely on prenatal sonography and rely on accurate gestational age
assessment.
Currently, the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
(2021a) and the Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine (2020) recommend
defining FGR as either an EFW <10th percentile for gestational age or an AC
<10th percentile for gestational age. Use of the AC threshold may correctly
identify one additional small-for-gestational age (SGA) newborn for every
14 sonograms performed in the last month of pregnancy (Blue, 2018).
Importantly, management recommendations are further stratified based on
lower percentile thresholds and findings such as oligohydramnios or
abnormal umbilical artery Doppler velocimetry, as discussed subsequently
(p. 829).
To more precisely identify growth-restricted fetuses, investigators have
derived customized growth charts that incorporate variables such as maternal

height and weight, race or ethnicity, parity, and fetal sex. However,
customized growth curves do not improve outcomes and thus are not
recommended (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists,
2021a; Chiossi, 2017; Costantine, 2013; Grobman, 2013; Zhang, 2011).
FGR should be differentiated from SGA, which is a postnatal designation
based on birthweight percentile. When considering FGR detection,
investigators study the proportion of SGA neonates identified as FGR during
prenatal sonography. However, FGR often does not equate to SGA because
of the inherent error of sonographic measurement. One population-based
study of routine third-trimester sonography found that 50 percent of those
with suspected FGR had birthweights above the 10th percentile (Monier,
2015). Those with false-positive diagnoses of FGR were delivered 2 weeks
earlier in gestation, which raises concerns about potential iatrogenic
sequelae of routine screening.
Importantly, as many as 70 percent of SGA newborns are not
pathologically growth restricted. Indeed, such children have normal
outcomes and are thought to be appropriately grown when maternal ethnic
group, parity, weight, and height are considered (Unterscheider, 2015). In a
Swedish study of 130,000 term births, the maternal and paternal birthweights
were estimated to account for 6 and 3 percent of variance in birthweight,
respectively (Mattsson, 2013). Additionally, as shown in Figure 47-3, most
adverse outcomes occur in newborns smaller than the 3rd percentile
(Manning, 1995). In a review of more than 80,000 singleton term births from
Parkland Hospital, McIntire and colleagues (1999) found that neonatal
mortality and most neonatal morbidity rates rose only at birthweights at or
below the 3rd percentile.

FIGURE 47-3 Relationship between birthweight percentile and perinatal mortality and morbidity rates
in 1560 small-for-gestational-age fetuses. A progressive increase in both mortality and morbidity rates is
observed as birthweight percentile decreases.

Small-but-normal neonates do not show evidence of the postnatal
metabolic derangements commonly associated with deficient fetal growth.
Moreover, these intrinsically small newborns remain significantly smaller
during surveillance to 2 years compared with appropriate-for-gestational-age
sized neonates. However, they do not show differences in measures of
metabolic risk that included glucose and insulin levels (Milovanovic, 2012).
As discussed later, true SGA newborns carry short- and long-term metabolic
risks.

■ Detection

Identification of truly impaired fetal growth remains a challenge. Ideally, it
involves detecting fetuses who meet the aforementioned definition and also
discerning those at risk for compromise. There are three main tenets:
1. The diagnosis relies on accurate gestational age assessment, optimally
confirmed with sonography in the first or early second trimester (Table 141, p. 248). If gestational age is uncertain and the diagnosis is suspected,
serial sonography is considered.
2. In low-risk pregnancies, the diagnosis is suspected based on clinical
abdominal examination after 24 weeks’ gestation in which the fundal
height lags by ≥3 cm. Sonography is then performed.
3. If the pregnancy is at risk for FGR, based on factors reviewed in the next
section, sonography is considered to assist with detection. This is
performed at approximately 32 weeks’ gestation. Care is individualized,
and in some cases sonography may be needed every 4 weeks to assess
fetal growth. One example of the latter is twin gestations, because fundal
height cannot evaluate individual twin growth (Chap. 48, p. 851).

Uterine Fundal Height
At each prenatal visit after 20 weeks’ gestation, fundal height is assessed to
screen for fetal-growth impairment (Chap. 10, p. 182). The measurement in
centimeters approximates the gestational age in weeks. The uterine size-date
discrepancy may be unrelated to fetal size. However, if the measurement
differs by ≥3 cm in the absence of an obvious explanation, sonography is
generally performed.
Serial fundal height measurement is the only routine screening for FGR
that is endorsed by the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
and Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine (2021a). International consensus
also indicates that carefully performed serial fundal height measurements are
a simple, safe, inexpensive, and reasonably accurate method to screen for
FGR (McCowan, 2018).
Limitations of fundal height screening are well documented. The overall
sensitivity of fundal height to detect FGR ranges from 11 to 25 percent
(Goetzinger, 2012; Grantz, 2021; Roex, 2012; Sparks, 2011). Detection rates
are lower in obese women than in those with normal BMI (Goetzinger,
2012).

Sonographic Assessment
Studies of routine screening for FGR using third-trimester sonography have
yielded variable results, and detection of SGA neonates ranges from <20
percent to >60 percent (Hammad, 2016; Monier, 2015; Sovio, 2015;
Wanyonyi, 2021). One reason for poor detection is that sonography
performed at any point in gestation will fail to detect pregnancies in which
FGR develops later. Also, it will miss those needing delivery for FGR
before the sonographic examination was performed. Compounding this is that
EFW is an imperfect metric. Given that most SGA neonates are
constitutionally small, it is not unexpected that the recurrence risk for FGR
approximates 20 percent. Many of these cases are merely smaller mothers
having smaller healthy children in successive pregnancies.
Routine third-trimester sonography to assess fetal growth is not
recommended because it has not been demonstrated to improve outcomes
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2021a). Indeed, a
Cochrane database analysis of 13 trials with 34,980 women found that
routine late-pregnancy ultrasound for a low-risk or an unselected population
was not associated with maternal or fetal benefit (Bricker, 2015).

■ Pathophysiology
Fetal-growth restriction is one of the “major obstetrical syndromes”
associated with defects in early placentation (Brosens, 2015). Mechanisms
leading to abnormal trophoblastic invasion are likely multifactorial, and both
vascular and immunological etiologies have been proposed. For example,
atrial natriuretic peptide converting enzyme, also known as corin, plays a
critical role in trophoblastic invasion and remodeling of the uterine spiral
arteries (Cui, 2012). These processes are impaired in corin-deficient mice,
which also develop evidence of preeclampsia. Moreover, mutations in the
gene for corin are reported in women with preeclampsia (Chen, 2015).
Several immunological abnormalities are associated with FGR. This
raises the prospect of maternal rejection of the “paternal semiallograft.”
Rudzinski and colleagues (2013) studied C4d, a component of complement
that is associated with humoral rejection of transplanted tissues. They found
this to be highly associated with chronic villitis—88 percent of cases versus
only 5 percent of controls—and with reduced placental weight. In a study of

10,204 placentas, chronic villitis was associated with placental
hypoperfusion, fetal acidemia, and FGR and its sequelae (Greer, 2012). Kim
and coworkers (2015) extensively reviewed chronic inflammatory placental
lesions and their association with fetal-growth restriction, preeclampsia, and
preterm birth.

■ Risk Factors
Risk factors for impaired fetal growth may be divided into three overlapping
categories or “compartments”: those in the mother, the fetus, or the placenta.
Some of these are depicted in Figure 47-4. Many causes of FGR are
prospectively considered risk factors, because impaired fetal growth is not
consistent in all affected women.

FIGURE 47-4 Risk factors and causes of impaired fetal growth centering on the mother, fetus, and
placenta.

Gestational Weight Gain and Nutrition

Maternal weight gain during pregnancy is positively correlated with fetal
size (Hutcheon, 2019). Among women with gestational diabetes, gestational
weight gain is also associated with both neonatal birthweight and adiposity
(Blackwell, 2016). In contrast, a gestational weight gain during the second
and third trimesters that is less than that recommended by the Institute of
Medicine is associated with increased risk of an SGA neonate in women of
all weight categories except class II or III obesity (Durie, 2011) (Chap. 10,
p. 183). The best-documented effect of famine on fetal growth was in the
winter of 1944 in Holland. For 6 months, the German occupation army
restricted dietary intake to 500 kcal/d for civilians, including pregnant
women. As a result, the average birthweight declined by 250 g (Stein, 1975).
Undernourished women may benefit from micronutrient supplementation.
In one study, almost 32,000 Indonesian women were randomly assigned to
receive micronutrient supplementation or only iron and folate tablets (Prado,
2012). Offspring of those receiving the supplement had lower risks of early
infant mortality and low birthweight and had improved childhood motor and
cognitive abilities. A Cochrane review of 20 trials involving 141,849
women concluded that supplementation of micronutrients may lower the risk
of low birthweight (Keats, 2019). The importance of antenatal vitamins and
trace metals is discussed in Chapter 10 (p. 185).

Socioeconomic Factors
The effect of social deprivation on birthweight is interconnected with
lifestyle factors such as smoking, alcohol or other substance abuse, and poor
nutrition. With appropriate modifying interventions, women with
psychosocial factors were significantly less likely to deliver a lowbirthweight newborn and also had fewer preterm births and other pregnancy
complications (Coker, 2012).
Food insecurity, late entry into prenatal care, and limited access to
healthcare are all contributors to fetal-growth restriction (Bryant, 2010).
Hall (2020) found that in a military population with equal access to
healthcare, racial differences in late entry to prenatal care and FGR persist.
An Australian study showed that the proportion of pregnancies affected by
fetal-growth restriction increased as levels of social disadvantage rose
(Langridge, 2011).

Vascular and Renal Disease
Especially when complicated by superimposed preeclampsia, chronic
vascular disease commonly restricts fetal growth (Chap. 53, p. 948).
Maternal vascular disease as evidenced by abnormal uterine artery Doppler
velocimetry early in pregnancy is associated with higher rates of
preeclampsia, SGA neonates, and delivery before 34 weeks (He, 2020;
Poon, 2019). Using Washington state birth certificate data, Leary and
colleagues (2012) found that maternal ischemic heart disease was associated
with a 16-percent risk of having an SGA newborn.
Chronic renal insufficiency is frequently associated with underlying
hypertension and vascular disease. Nephropathies are commonly
accompanied by restricted fetal growth (Cunningham, 1990; Feng, 2015;
Saliem, 2016). These relationships are considered further in Chapter 56 (p.
1004).

Pregestational Diabetes
Fetal-growth restriction in newborns of women with diabetes may be related
to congenital malformations or may follow substrate deprivation from
advanced maternal vascular disease (Chap. 60, p. 1072). The likelihood of
restricted growth increases with worsening White classification, particularly
nephropathy (Klemetti, 2016). That said, the prevalence of serious vascular
disease associated with diabetes in pregnancy is low.

Chronic Hypoxia
Conditions associated with chronic hypoxia include asthma, maternal
cyanotic heart disease, other chronic pulmonary disease, cigarette smoking,
and living at high altitude. When exposed to a chronically hypoxic
environment, some fetuses have significantly reduced birthweight. Smoking
causes a dose-dependent reduction in fetal growth, resulting in an average
birthweight 200 g below that of newborns of nonsmokers (D’Souza, 1981).
For each 1000-meter rise in altitude, the birthweight declined 150 g in a
study of more than 1.8 million births in Austria (Waldhoer, 2015).

Anemia
In most cases, maternal anemia does not impair fetal growth. Exceptions
include sickle-cell disease and other inherited anemias (Desai, 2017; Thame,

2016). Importantly, curtailed maternal blood-volume expansion is linked to
FGR (de Haas, 2017; Stott, 2017). This is further discussed in Chapter 4 (p.
59).

Antiphospholipid Syndrome
Adverse obstetrical outcomes including fetal-growth restriction have been
associated with three types of antiphospholipid antibodies: anticardiolipin
antibodies, lupus anticoagulant, and anti-β2 glycoprotein-I antibodies.
Mechanistically, a “two-hit” hypothesis suggests that initial endothelial
damage is then followed by intervillous placental thrombosis. More
specifically, oxidative damage to certain membrane proteins is followed by
antiphospholipid antibody binding, which leads to immune-complex
formation and ultimately to thrombosis (Giannakopoulos, 2013). This
syndrome is considered in detail in Chapters 55 (p. 979) and 62 (p. 1115).
Women with more than one type of antiphospholipid antibody are at higher
risk for FGR compared with those with only one antibody (Saccone, 2017).
Also, anti-β2 glycoprotein-I antibodies may have a stronger association
with FGR, particularly early-onset disease.

Placental, Cord, and Uterine Abnormalities
Several placental abnormalities are associated with poor fetal growth, which
is presumed secondary to uteroplacental insufficiency. These are discussed
further throughout Chapter 6 and include chronic placental abruption,
extensive infarction, chorioangioma, velamentous cord insertion, and
umbilical artery thrombosis. Abnormal placental implantation leading to
endothelial dysfunction may also limit fetal growth (Brosens, 2015). This
pathology is implicated in pregnancies complicated by preeclampsia (Chap.
40, p. 694). Last, some uterine malformations are linked to impaired fetal
growth (Chap. 3, p. 43).

Multifetal Gestation
Pregnancy with two or more fetuses is more likely to be complicated by
diminished growth of one or more fetuses compared with that of singletons
(Fig. 47-5). Serial sonography is recommended for this reason. With the
understanding that normal twin growth may be less than that of singletons, we
use a chorionicity-specific twin nomogram to diagnose FGR at Parkland

Hospital. Discordance in estimated fetal weight also is considered when
evaluating twin growth (Chap. 48, p. 851).

FIGURE 47-5 Birthweight and gestational age relationships in multifetal gestations without
malformations delivered at Parkland Hospital.

Medications and Other Substances
Fortunately, most medications do not affect fetal growth. Selected
medications and other substances that have been associated with FGR due to
fetotoxicity are discussed in Chapter 8. Examples include cyclophosphamide
and other antineoplastic drugs, significant lead exposure, and drugs such as
cocaine and methamphetamine. Alcohol and tobacco each have potent effects
on fetal growth. FGR is included among the diagnostic criteria for fetal
alcohol syndrome, and cigarette smoking is associated with a two- to
threefold increased risk of FGR (Werler, 1997).

Maternal and Fetal Infections
Viral, bacterial, protozoan, and spirochetal infections have been implicated
in up to 5 percent of FGR cases and are discussed in Chapters 67 and 68.
The best known of these are rubella and cytomegalovirus infection. Both
promote calcifications in the fetus that are associated with cell death, and
infection earlier in pregnancy correlates with worse outcomes. Toda and
colleagues (2015) described a Vietnamese epidemic in which 39 percent of

292 term newborns with congenital rubella syndrome were low birthweight.
In one study of 238 primary cytomegalovirus infections, no severe cases
were observed when infection occurred after 14 weeks’ gestation (Picone,
2013). These investigators later identified sonographic findings in 30 of 69
cases of congenital infection, and growth restriction was noted in 30 percent
of these 30 cases (Picone, 2014).
Tuberculosis and syphilis also are associated with poor fetal growth.
Both extrapulmonary and pulmonary tuberculosis are linked with low
birthweight (Chap. 54, p. 965). Sobhy (2017) analyzed 13 studies that
included a total of 3384 women with active tuberculosis. The odds ratio was
1.7 for low birthweight. The etiology is uncertain, however, the adverse
effects on maternal health, compounded by effects of poor nutrition and
poverty, are important (Jana, 2012). Congenital syphilis is more common,
and paradoxically, the placenta is almost always larger and heavier than
normal due to edema and perivascular inflammation (Chap. 68, p. 1208).
Congenital syphilis is strongly linked with preterm birth and thus lowbirthweight newborns (Sheffield, 2002).
Congenital infection with toxoplasma gondii is associated with FGR.
Capobiango (2014) described 31 Brazilian pregnancies complicated by
congenital toxoplasmosis. Only 13 percent were treated antepartum for
toxoplasmosis, and low birthweight complicated nearly 40 percent of all the
pregnancies. Congenital malaria may similarly cause low birthweight and
poor fetal growth. Briand and colleagues (2016) emphasize the importance
of prophylaxis early in pregnancy for women at risk.

Congenital Malformations
In a classic review of more than 13,000 fetuses with major malformations
and chromosomal abnormalities, the rate of growth restriction was double
the population prevalence (Khoury, 1988). The birth defect most strongly
linked with FGR is gastroschisis. Nelson (2015) reviewed 111 fetuses with
gastroschisis and found that a third had birthweights <10th percentile.
Congenital cardiac abnormalities are also associated with a slight increase
in FGR risk. In a recent review of 1789 singleton neonates with isolated
congenital cardiac abnormalities, the prevalence of SGA was 13 percent,
which was 3 percent higher than the general-population risk (Ghanchi, 2021).
With few exceptions, the identification of growth restriction in the setting of a
structural malformation further increases the risk for an underlying genetic

syndrome. If not already performed, amniocentesis with chromosomal
microarray analysis should be offered.

Genetic Abnormalities
Many genetic syndromes are strongly linked with prenatal-growth
impairment or postnatal failure to thrive. Among liveborn neonates with
autosomal trisomies, trisomy 21 is associated with an SGA prevalence of 15
to 30 percent (Herrera, 2020; Khoury, 1988). With trisomies 13 and 18, the
risk of SGA is significantly greater, 50 percent and >80 percent, respectively
(Khoury, 1988). In trisomy 18, the combination of fetal abnormalities plus
FGR and hydramnios is particularly common. The crown-rump length in
fetuses with trisomy 18 and 13, unlike that with trisomy 21, is also typically
shorter than expected (Bahado-Singh, 1997; Schemmer, 1997). Poor fetal
growth similarly complicates Turner syndrome, and the severity correlates
with increasing haploinsufficiency of the short arm of the X chromosome
(Fiot, 2016). In contrast, poor growth is not characteristic of an increased
number of X chromosomes (Ottesen, 2010; Wigby, 2016). Discussed in
Chapter 16 (p. 318), confined placental mosaicism is a recognized cause of
FGR.

■ Management
If FGR is detected, efforts are made to assess the fetal condition and search
for possible causes. The risk for stillbirth is increased, and early-onset
growth restriction is especially problematic. General tenets of management
include serial evaluation of fetal growth every 3 weeks and at least weekly
evaluation of amnionic fluid and umbilical artery Doppler velocimetry. A
fetus with slow but progressing EFW is more reassuring than one that has
plateaued growth. This is supplemented with antepartum evaluation of fetal
well-being, which is usually nonstress testing or biophysical profile
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2021a) (Chap. 20, p.
387). Consideration is also given to performing a detailed fetal anatomic
survey and amniocentesis to assess for underlying genetic abnormalities or
infection—particularly with early-onset FGR. A management algorithm is
shown in Figure 47-6.

FIGURE 47-6 Algorithm for management of fetal-growth restriction. EFW = estimated fetal weight;
FLM = fetal lung maturity; NST = nonstress test; TORCH = toxoplasmosis, other, rubella,
cytomegalovirus, herpesvirus; UA = umbilical artery.

Delivery timing balances the risks of fetal death with the hazards of
preterm birth. Several multicenter studies address these problems, but
unfortunately, none has elucidated the optimal timing of delivery. For the
preterm fetus, the only randomized trial of delivery timing is the Growth
Restriction Intervention Trial (GRIT) (Thornton, 2004). This trial involved
548 women between 24 and 36 weeks’ gestation. Women were randomly
assigned to immediate delivery or to delayed delivery until the situation

worsened. The primary outcome was perinatal death or disability after
reaching age 2 years. Mortality rates did not differ through 2 years of age.
Moreover, children aged 6 to 13 years did not show clinically significant
differences between the two groups (Walker, 2011). The Disproportionate
Intrauterine Growth Intervention Trial at Term (DIGITAT) study examined the
delivery timing of growth-restricted fetuses who were 36 weeks’ gestation or
older. The 321 enrolled women were randomly assigned to labor induction
or to expectant management. Composite neonatal morbidity rates did not
differ, except that neonatal admissions were lower after 38 weeks’ gestation
in a secondary analysis (Boers, 2010, 2012). Secondary analyses of
DIGITAT did not identify a clear subgroup that benefited from labor
induction, and neurodevelopmental and behavioral outcomes at age 2 were
similar in both groups (Tajik, 2014; Van Wyk, 2012).

Doppler Velocimetry
Umbilical artery Doppler flow studies are central to the evaluation and
management of the fetus with growth restriction (Chap. 14, p. 262).
Abnormalities represent the negative progression from fetal adaptation to
failure. Specifically, initially increased impedance to flow in the umbilical
artery may progress to absent end-diastolic flow and then reversed enddiastolic flow (Fig. 47-7). This negative progression correlates with
hypoxia, acidosis, and fetal death. In one prospective series of 1116 fetuses
with EFW <10th percentile, only 1 percent of those with normal umbilical
artery Doppler studies had adverse outcomes compared with 12 percent of
fetuses with Doppler abnormalities (O’Dwyer, 2014). The stillbirth risk in
the setting of absent and reversed end-diastolic flow is 7 percent and 19
percent, respectively (Caradeux, 2018). Because of these findings, the
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2021a,b) and Society
for Maternal-Fetal Medicine (2020) recommend serial umbilical artery
Doppler studies in the management of FGR.

FIGURE 47-7 Doppler velocity waveforms. A. Normal waveform with normal S/D ratio. B.
Increased impedance to flow with abnormally elevated S/D ratio. C. Absent end-diastolic flow. D.
Reversed end-diastolic flow.

Doppler abnormalities in other vessels may convey information
regarding pathophysiology, but interrogation of these is not recommended for
routine management of the pregnancy complicated by FGR (American
college of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2021a; Society for MaternalFetal Medicine, 2020). Doppler abnormalities of the ductus venosus (Fig.
14-12, p. 264) reflect increased central venous pressure from decreased
cardiac compliance and higher right ventricular end-diastolic pressure.
Fetuses with abnormal ductus venosus Doppler flow have a 20-percent risk
for stillbirth, and this increases to 46 percent in cases with a reversed Awave (Caradeux, 2018). Second, pulsatile flow in the umbilical vein
waveform (Fig. 14-12) indicates cardiac dysfunction. Last, cerebral
vasodilation is the fetal adaptative response to hypoxemia in the setting of
growth restriction. The cerebroplacental ratio (CPR)—defined as middle
cerebral artery pulsatility index divided by umbilical artery pulsatility index
—is a measure of this adaptation and may be abnormal in severe cases of
FGR. An abnormal CPR <1 has been associated with greater risk for earlier
delivery, lower birthweight, cesarean delivery, neonatal intensive care unit
admission, and perinatal death (DeVore, 2015; Flood, 2014). However, a
metaanalysis of 18,731 fetuses found the CPR was not predictive of adverse
perinatal outcomes (Vollgraff, 2021).

Management of the Near-term Fetus
Delivery of a suspected growth-restricted fetus with normal umbilical artery
Doppler velocimetry, normal amnionic fluid volume, and reassuring fetal
testing can likely be deferred until 37 to 38 weeks’ gestation (see Fig. 47-6).
Expectant management can be guided using antepartum evaluation of fetal
well-being described in Chapter 20. If oligohydramnios is present, delivery
between 360/7 and 376/7 weeks’ gestation is recommended (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2021c; Society for MaternalFetal Medicine, 2020). With a normal fetal heart rate pattern, vaginal
delivery is planned. Notably, some of these fetuses do not tolerate labor.

Management of the Fetus Remote from Term

If growth restriction is identified in a fetus before 34 weeks, and amnionic
fluid volume and fetal surveillance findings are normal, observation is
recommended. As long as interval fetal growth and fetal surveillance test
results are normal, pregnancy is allowed to continue (see Fig. 47-6).
Reassessment of fetal growth is typically made no sooner than 3 weeks later.
Weekly outpatient assessment of umbilical artery Doppler velocimetry and
amnionic fluid volume is combined with fetal well-being testing. If umbilical
artery Doppler studies indicate absent or reversed end-diastolic flow,
inpatient surveillance is undertaken. During hospitalization, more frequent
sonographic evaluations and antenatal testing of fetal well-being and close
proximity to labor and delivery are advantages.
With growth restriction remote from term, no specific treatment
ameliorates the condition. Evidence does not support diminished activity or
bed rest to accelerate growth or improve outcomes. Nutrient
supplementation, attempts at plasma volume expansion, oxygen therapy,
antihypertensive drugs, heparin, and aspirin are all ineffective (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2021a).
Management decisions hinge on assessment of the relative risks of fetal
death during expectant management versus the risks from preterm delivery.
Reassuring results from fetal well-being tests may allow observation with
continued maturation. However, long-term neurological outcome, which
theoretically may suffer from additional weeks in an inhospitable intrauterine
environment, is a concern (Baschat, 2014; Lees, 2015; Thornton, 2004).
Baschat and associates (2009) showed that neurodevelopmental outcome at 2
years in growth-restricted fetuses was best predicted by birthweight and
gestational age. Doppler abnormalities are generally not associated with
poor childhood cognitive developmental scores among low-birthweight
fetuses delivered in the third trimester (Llurba, 2013). These findings
emphasize that adverse neurodevelopmental outcomes cannot always be
predicted.

■ Intrapartum Management
When lagging fetal growth is the result of placental insufficiency due to poor
maternal perfusion or reduction of functional placenta, the fetal condition
may be aggravated by labor. Equally important, oligohydramnios raises the

likelihood of cord compression during labor. For these and other reasons, the
frequency of cesarean delivery is increased.
The risk of neonatal hypoxia or meconium aspiration is also greater.
Thus, care for the newborn should be provided immediately by an attendant
who can skillfully clear the airway and ventilate a neonate as needed (Chap.
32, p. 586). The severely growth-restricted newborn is particularly
susceptible to hypothermia and may also develop other metabolic
derangements such as hypoglycemia, polycythemia, and hyperviscosity. Risk
is greatest at the lowest extremes of birthweight (Baschat, 2009, 2014;
Llurba, 2013).

■ Outcomes
Lessons learned from SGA neonates inform concerns about FGR. More than
50 years ago, Battaglia and Lubchenco (1967) classified SGA neonates as
those whose weights were below the 10th percentile for their gestational age.
The mortality rate of SGA neonates born at 38 weeks was 1 percent
compared with 0.2 percent in those with larger birthweights. More recent
data also indicate that the overall stillbirth rate among SGA neonates
approximates 1 percent, which is twice as high as the population prevalence
(Getahun, 2007).
The risk for abnormal neurological development also is greater in SGA
neonates. In an analysis of nearly 3000 newborns born before 27 weeks’
gestation, those weighing <10th percentile had a nearly fourfold higher risk
of neonatal death or neurodevelopmental impairment and a nearly threefold
greater risk of cerebral palsy compared with non-SGA neonates (De Jesus,
2013). In another analysis of more than 91,000 otherwise uncomplicated
pregnancies, newborns with birthweights <5th percentile had a higher risk of
low 5-minute Apgar score, respiratory distress, necrotizing enterocolitis, and
neonatal sepsis than appropriate-weight neonates. The risks of stillbirth and
neonatal death were sixfold and fourfold higher, respectively (MendezFigueroa, 2016).
Newborns at the lowest birthweight percentiles are at greatest risk for
adverse outcome. In one study of more than 44,561 neonates, only 14 percent
of those weighing <1st percentile at birth survived to discharge (Griffin,
2015). Poor motor, cognitive, language and attention, and behavioral

outcomes in growth-restricted newborns unfortunately persist into early
childhood and adolescence (Baschat, 2014; Levine, 2015; Rogne, 2015).

Early-onset Growth Restriction
Perinatal morbidities are further increased in the 30 percent of FGR
pregnancies diagnosed prior to 32 weeks’ gestation (Savchev, 2014). Thus,
this gestational age is used to demarcate early-onset from late-onset growth
restriction (Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, 2020). Early-onset FGR is
typically more severe and more commonly associated with placental
dysfunction and maternal hypertension than late-onset growth restriction
(Aviram, 2019; Dall’Asta, 2017). Pregnancies with early-onset FGR have
greater rates of umbilical artery Doppler abnormalities compared with those
with late onset. Similar to pregnancies complicated by preeclampsia,
increased maternal serum levels of antiangiogenic factors that include
soluble vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 1 (sVEGFR-1) and
soluble fms-like tyrosine kinase 1 (sFlt-1) are reported in pregnancies
complicated by early-onset growth restriction (Kingdom, 2018;
Korzeniewski, 2016) (Chap. 40, p. 694).

Barker Hypothesis
Thirty years ago, Barker (1992) hypothesized that adult mortality and
morbidity are related to fetal and infant health. This includes both under- and
overgrowth. In the context of FGR, numerous reports describe a relationship
between suboptimal fetal nutrition and a higher risk of subsequent adult
hypertension, atherosclerosis, type 2 diabetes, and metabolic derangement
(Colella, 2018; Jornayvaz, 2016). The degree to which low birthweight
mediates adult disease is controversial, as weight gain in early life also
appears important (Breij, 2014; Kerkhof, 2012; McCloskey, 2016).
Evidence suggests that FGR may affect organ development, particularly
that of the heart. Individuals with low birthweight demonstrate cardiac
structural changes and dysfunction that persist through childhood,
adolescence, and adulthood (Crispi, 2018). In one study, 80 infants who
were born SGA before 34 weeks’ gestation were compared at 6 months with
80 normally grown infants (Cruz-Lemini, 2016). The ventricle in SGA
infants was more globular, resulting in systolic and diastolic dysfunction. In
another study, echocardiography in 418 adolescents showed that low

birthweight was associated with a thicker left ventricular posterior wall
(Hietalampi, 2012). However, these findings have unclear long-term
significance (Cohen, 2016).
Growth restriction is also associated with postnatal structural and
functional renal changes. Luyckx and Brenner (2015) concluded that both low
and high birthweight, maternal obesity, and gestational diabetes adversely
affect in-utero development of the kidney and its health into adulthood.
However, other variables that include childhood nutrition, acute kidney
injury, excessive childhood weight gain, and obesity also worsen long-term
renal function.

■ Prevention
Ideally, prevention begins before conception. Maternal medical conditions
are treated, and medications are modified to help lower FGR risks. Smoking
cessation is critical. Other risk factors are tailored to the maternal condition,
such as antimalarial prophylaxis for women living in endemic areas and
correction of nutritional deficiencies. Treatment of mild to moderate
hypertension does not reduce the incidence of SGA newborns (Chap. 53, p.
950).
Currently, no pharmacologic therapies prevent growth restriction.
Considerable study of low-dose aspirin therapy has not demonstrated
consistent benefit in low-risk pregnancies. Daily aspirin therapy did not
reduce the risk for SGA neonates in a randomized trial of 1700 women
(Rolnik, 2017). Two large metaanalyses involving more than 20,000 women
did find that low-dose aspirin was associated with a significantly lower risk
of FGR, whether initiated prior to or after 16 weeks’ gestation (Meher, 2017;
Roberge, 2017). A Cochrane database analysis showed a small reduction in
the risk of SGA neonates with maternal aspirin therapy (Duley, 2019).
However, these studies included women at risk for preeclampsia, and the
modest decrease in the risk for growth restriction was a secondary finding.
Because evidence in women without risk factors for preeclampsia is lacking,
aspirin therapy for the prevention of FGR is not recommended (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020a, 2021a; Society for
Maternal-Fetal Medicine, 2020)

FETAL MACROSOMIA
■ Definition
The term macrosomia is used rather imprecisely to describe a fetus whose
estimated weight exceeds a threshold—typically 4000 g, 4500 g, or even
5000 g (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019a).
Although obstetricians generally agree that neonates weighing <4000 g are
not excessively large, a similar consensus has not been reached for the
definition of macrosomia.
Large for gestational age (LGA) denotes a fetus or newborn whose
weight exceeds the 90th percentile for gestational age. Similar to SGA, the
term LGA does not imply that growth is necessarily abnormal. Indeed, most
such neonates are simply constitutionally larger than their peers. The 90th
percentile for birthweight at 39 weeks’ gestation approximates 3900 g
(Duryea, 2014). Thus, most LGA neonates would not meet any of the
common definitions of macrosomia.
In the United States in 2019, 6.4 percent of all newborns weighed 4000
to 4499 g; 0.9 percent weighed 4500 to 4999 g; and 0.1 percent were born
weighing ≥5000 g (Martin, 2021). Similarly, during a 30-year period at
Parkland Hospital, during which more than 350,000 singletons were born,
only 1.4 percent of neonates weighed ≥4500 g (Table 47-2). We are of the
view that the upper limit of fetal growth, above which growth can be deemed
abnormal, is likely to be two standard deviations above the mean. This
represents perhaps 3 percent of births. At 40 weeks, such a threshold would
correspond to approximately 4500 g.
TABLE 47-2. Birthweight Distribution of 354,509 Liveborn Infants at
Parkland Hospital between 1988 and 2012

■ Detection
Because current methods fail to accurately estimate excessive fetal size,
macrosomia cannot be definitively diagnosed until delivery (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019a). Inaccuracy in estimates
of fetal weight, by either fundal height measurement or sonography, are often
attributable to maternal obesity. In one study of 502 patients with
sonographic estimated fetal weights >4000 g within 2 weeks of delivery, the
risk of birthweight overestimation was >50 percent (Zafman, 2020). Of those
who underwent cesarean delivery for suspected LGA, almost 30 percent
delivered a neonate weighing <4000 g.

■ Pathophysiology
Particularly in women with diabetes and elevated cord blood levels of
insulin-like growth factor 1, fetal macrosomia is associated with greater
neonatal fat mass and morphological heart changes. Pedersen (1954) first
proposed that hyperglycemia leads to fetal hyperinsulinemia and fetal
overgrowth. This has been extended to organ dysmorphia, for example,
increased interventricular septal thickness in neonates of mothers with
gestational diabetes (Aman, 2011; Garcia-Flores, 2011). The
cardiopulmonary vasculature also is adversely affected by diabetes in
pregnancy. In 3277 cases of persistent pulmonary hypertension of the

newborn, maternal obesity, diabetes, and both deficient and excessive fetal
growth were independent risk factors (Steurer, 2017). Long-term metabolic
consequences of fetal macrosomia in the setting of maternal obesity are
discussed in Chapter 51 (p. 907).

■ Risk Factors
Some factors associated with fetal macrosomia are listed in Table 47-3.
Many are interrelated. Advancing age usually correlates with multiparity and
risk for diabetes, and obesity is similarly associated with diabetes. In one
study, the birth prevalence of macrosomia exceeded 24 percent among obese
women in China, and macrosomia rates were approximately 2.5-fold higher
for prolonged pregnancy and gestational diabetes (Wang, 2017). As shown in
Table 47-2, maternal diabetes is strongly associated with neonates weighing
>4000 g. In a prospective study of 682 consecutive pregnancies complicated
by diabetes, women with type 1 diabetes were significantly more likely than
women with type 2 diabetes to have a neonate weighing above the 90th and
97.7th percentiles (Murphy, 2011). Higher third-trimester glucose
concentration correlates with fetal macrosomia, and hemoglobin A1c and
fasting glucose values are independent predictors of macrosomia risk
(Cyganek, 2017). Notably, maternal diabetes is associated with only a small
percentage of the total number of LGA newborns.
TABLE 47-3. Risk Factors for Fetal Macrosomia

■ Management

Several interventions have been proposed to interdict suspected or
“impending” fetal overgrowth. Exercise in pregnancy is beneficial to the
mother, does not increase the risk for growth impairment, and decreases
macrosomia risk. One metaanalysis of 28 studies involving 5322 women
concluded that exercise reduces the risk of an LGA newborn or birthweight
>4000 g without raising the risk of an SGA neonate or birthweight <2500 g
(Wiebe, 2015). Similarly, others have concluded that aerobic exercise
increases the likelihood of a normal weight neonate (Di Mascio, 2016;
Perales, 2016).
For women with diabetes, insulin therapy and glycemic control may
lower the prevalence of neonatal macrosomia but have not consistently
translated into reduced cesarean delivery rates. Fetal macrosomia,
irrespective of the diagnosis of diabetes mellitus, is strongly associated with
maternal obesity and excessive gestational weight gain (Durie, 2011; Durst,
2016; Harper, 2015). Currently recommended weight gains for pregnancy
according to maternal BMI are described in Chapter 10 (p. 183).

“Prophylactic” Labor Induction
Some clinicians have induced labor when fetal macrosomia was suspected in
nondiabetic women. The rationale for this approach was to obviate further
fetal growth and, in theory, reduce the risk of delivery complications or
cesarean delivery. In a systematic review of 11 studies of expectant
management compared with labor induction for suspected macrosomia, labor
induction significantly increased cesarean delivery rates without improving
perinatal outcomes (Sanchez-Ramos, 2002). In contrast, Magro-Malosso and
colleagues (2017) performed a metaanalysis of four randomized trials
involving 1190 women and concluded that labor induction at ≥38 weeks’
gestation for suspected macrosomia significantly reduces the frequency of
fetal overgrowth and fractures. In one of these studies, 822 women with
suspected LGA fetuses were randomly assigned either to early-term delivery
or to expectant management (Boulvain, 2015). There was a higher rate of
vaginal delivery that was marginally significant and a lower composite
measure of morbidity. The authors cautioned that any benefits should be
balanced with the risks of early-term labor induction and delivery. Namely, a
review of early-term births indicates that elective delivery before 39 weeks’
gestation does not improve maternal outcomes and is associated with worse
neonatal outcomes (Tita, 2016). We agree with the American College of

Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019a, 2020b) that current evidence does
not support a policy for early labor induction or delivery before 39 weeks’
gestation.

Elective Cesarean Delivery
With the delivery of macrosomic neonates, shoulder dystocia and its
attendant risks described in Chapter 27 (p. 501) are major concerns. That
said, 9 percent of these injuries still follow cesarean delivery (Johnson,
2020). Therefore, planned cesarean delivery on the basis of suspected
macrosomia to prevent brachial plexopathy is an unreasonable strategy in the
general population (Chauhan, 2005). Ecker and coworkers (1997) analyzed
80 cases of brachial plexus injury in 77,616 consecutive newborns at
Brigham and Women’s Hospital. They concluded that an excessive number of
otherwise unnecessary cesarean deliveries would be needed to prevent a
single brachial plexus injury in neonates born to women without diabetes.
Others echoed these sentiments in their analysis of nondiabetic mothers
(Rouse, 1996; Van der Looven, 2020).
Conversely, planned cesarean delivery may be a reasonable strategy for
diabetic women with an estimated fetal weight >4250 or >4500 g. Conway
and Langer (1998) described a protocol of routine cesarean delivery for
sonographic estimates of ≥4250 g in diabetic women. This management
significantly lowered the shoulder dystocia rate from 2.4 to 1.1 percent.
In summary, we agree with the American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists that elective delivery for the fetus that is suspected to be
overgrown is inadvisable, particularly before 39 weeks’ gestation. Last, we
also conclude that elective cesarean delivery is not indicated when estimated
fetal weight is <5000 g among women without diabetes and <4500 g among
women with diabetes (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists,
2019a, 2020b).

■ Outcomes
The adverse consequences of excessive fetal growth are considerable.
Neonates with a birthweight of at least 4000 g have cesarean delivery rates
exceeding 50 percent. This is particularly true with maternal obesity or
diabetes or with birthweights >5000 g (Cordero, 2015; Crosby, 2017; Hehir,

2015). Neonatal morbidity is higher in LGA neonates compared with those
with lower birthweights. Macrosomic newborns have higher rates of
shoulder dystocia, obstetrical brachial plexus injuries, and birth fractures
(Beta, 2019; Chauhan, 2017). Rates of shoulder dystocia vary greatly and can
reach nearly 30 percent for macrosomic neonates when maternal diabetes is
comorbid (Cordero, 2015). In general obstetrical populations that include
diabetic mothers, dystocia rates are at least 5 percent for neonates with
birthweights ≥5000 g (Crosby, 2017; Hehir, 2015). The risk for stillbirth is
greater with macrosomia, and this risk rises with increasing birth weight
(Salihu, 2020). Rates of postpartum hemorrhage, perineal laceration, and
maternal infection, which are related complications, also are higher in
mothers delivering overgrown newborns. Table 47-4 shows maternal and
neonatal outcomes by birthweight for neonates >4000 g delivered at Parkland
Hospital.
TABLE 47-4. Maternal and Fetal Outcomes for 208,090 Pregnancies
Delivered at Parkland Hospital from 1998 through 2012

REFERENCES
Aman J, Hansson U, Ostlund I, et al: Increased fat mass and cardiac septal hypertrophy in newborn
infants of mothers with well-controlled diabetes during pregnancy. Neonatology 100(2):147, 2011
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Macrosomia. Practice Bulletin No. 216,
December 2019a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Methods for estimating the due date. Committee
Opinion No. 700, May 2017, Reaffirmed 2019b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Low-dose aspirin use during pregnancy.
Committee Opinion No. 743, June 2018, Reaffirmed 2020a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Shoulder dystocia. Practice Bulletin No. 178,
May 2017, Reaffirmed 2020b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Fetal growth restriction. Practice Bulletin No.
227, January 2021a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Indications for outpatient antenatal fetal
surveillance. Committee Opinion No. 828, May 2021b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Medically indicated late-preterm and early-term
deliveries. Committee Opinion No. 831, January 2021c
Aviram A, Sherman C, Kingdom J, et al: Defining early vs late fetal growth restriction by placental
pathology. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 98(3):365, 2019
Bahado-Singh RO, Lynch L, Deren O, et al: First-trimester growth restriction and fetal aneuploidy: the
effect of type of aneuploidy and gestational age. Am J Obstet Gynecol 176(5):976, 1997
Barker DJ (ed): Fetal and Infant Origins of Adult Disease. London, BMJ Publishing, 1992
Baschat AA: Neurodevelopment after fetal growth restriction. Fetal Diagn Ther 36:136, 2014
Baschat AA, Viscardi RM, Hussey-Gardner B, et al: Infant neurodevelopment following fetal growth
restriction: relationship with antepartum surveillance parameters. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol
33(1):44, 2009
Battaglia FC, Lubchenco LO: A practical classification of newborn infants by weight and gestational
age. J Pediatr 71(2):159, 1967
Beta J, Khan N, Khalil A, et al: Maternal and neonatal complications of fetal macrosomia: systematic
review and meta-analysis. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 54(3):308-318, 2019
Blackwell SC, Landon MB, Mele L, et al: Relationship between excessive gestational weight gain and
neonatal adiposity in women with mild gestational diabetes mellitus. Obstet Gynecol 128:1325, 2016
Blue NR, Beddow ME, Savabi M, et al: A comparison of methods for the diagnosis of fetal growth
restriction between the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists and the American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Obstet Gynecol 131(5):835, 2018
Boers KE, van Wyk L, van der Post JA, et al: Neonatal morbidity after induction vs expectant
monitoring in intrauterine growth restriction at term: a subanalysis of the DIGITAT RCT. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 206:344.e1, 2012
Boers KE, Vijgen SM, Bijlenga D, et al: Induction versus expectant monitoring for intrauterine growth
restriction at term: randomised equivalence trial (DIGITAT). BMJ 341:c7087, 2010
Boulvain M, Senat MV, Perrotin F, et al: Induction of labour versus expectant management for largefor-date fetuses: a randomised controlled trial. Lancet 385:2600, 2015
Breij LM, Kerkhof GF, Hokken-Koelega AC: Accelerated infant weight gain and risk for nonalcoholic
fatty liver disease in early adulthood. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 99:1189, 2014

Briand V, Saal J, Ghafari C, et al: Fetal growth restriction is associated with malaria in pregnancy: a
prospective longitudinal study in Benin. J Infect Dis 214:417, 2016
Bricker L, Medley N, Pratt JJ: Routine ultrasound in late pregnancy (after 24 weeks’ gestation).
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 6:CD001451, 2015
Briffa JF, McAinch AJ, Romano T, et al: Leptin in pregnancy and development: a contributor to
adulthood disease? Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 308:E335, 2015
Brosens I, Benagiano G, Brosens JJ: The potential perinatal origin of placentation disorders in the young
primigravida. Am J Obstet Gynecol 212:580, 2015
Bryant AS, Worjoloh A, Caughey AB, et al: Racial/ethnic disparities in obstetric outcomes and care:
prevalence and determinants. Am J Obstet Gynecol 202(4):335, 2010
Calabuig-Navarro V, Puchowicz M, Glazebrook P, et al: Effect of ω-3 supplementation on placental lipid
metabolism in overweight and obese women. Am J Clin Nutr 103:1064, 2016
Capobiango JD, Breganó RM, Navarro IT, et al: Congenital toxoplasmosis in a reference center of
Paraná, Southern Brazil. Braz J Infect Dis 18:364, 2014
Caradeux J, Martinez-Portilla RJ, Basuki TR, et al: Risk of fetal death in growth-restricted fetuses with
umbilical and/or ductus venosus absent or reversed end-diastolic velocities before 34 weeks of
gestation: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 218(2S):S774, 2018
Chauhan SP, Grobman WA, Gherman RA, et al: Suspicion and treatment of the macrosomic fetus: a
review. Am J Obstet Gynecol 193(2):332, 2005
Chauhan SP, Rice MM, Grobman WA, et al: Neonatal morbidity of small- and large-for-gestational-age
neonates born at term in uncomplicated pregnancies. Obstet Gynecol 130(3):511, 2017
Chen S, Cao P, Dong N, et al: PCSK6-mediated corin activation is essential for normal blood pressure.
Nat Med 21:1048, 2015
Chiossi G, Pedroza C, Costantine MM, et al: Customized versus population-based growth charts to
identify neonates at risk of adverse outcomes: a systematic review and Bayesian meta-analysis of
observational studies. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 50(2):156, 2017
Cohen E, Wong FY, Horne RS, Yiallourou SR: Intrauterine growth restriction: impact on cardiovascular
development and function throughout infancy. Pediatr Res 79:821, 2016
Coker AL, Garcia LS, Williams CM, et al: Universal psychosocial screening and adverse pregnancy
outcomes in an academic obstetric clinic. Obstet Gynecol 119(6):1180, 2012
Colella M, Frérot A, Novais AR, et al: Neonatal and long-term consequences of fetal growth restriction.
Curr Pediatr Rev 14(4):212, 2018
Conway DL, Langer O: Elective delivery of infants with macrosomia in diabetic women: reduced
shoulder dystocia versus increased cesarean deliveries. Am J Obstet Gynecol 178(5):922, 1998
Cordero L, Paetow P, Landon MB, et al: Neonatal outcomes of macrosomic infants of diabetic and nondiabetic mothers. J Neonatal Perinatal Med 8:105, 2015
Costantine MM, Mele L, Landon MB, et al: Customized versus population approach for evaluation of
fetal overgrowth. Am J Perinatol 30:565, 2013
Crispi F, Miranda J, Gratacós E: Long-term cardiovascular consequences of fetal growth restriction:
biology, clinical implications, and opportunities for prevention of adult disease. Am J Obstet Gynecol
218(2S):S869, 2018
Crosby DA, Ahmed S, Razley A, et al: Obstetric and neonatal characteristics of pregnancy and delivery
for infant birthweight ≥5.0 kg. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 30(24):2961, 2017
Crume TL, Shapiro AL, Brinton JT, et al: Maternal fuels and metabolic measures during pregnancy and
neonatal body composition: the healthy start study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 100:1672, 2015

Cruz-Lemini M, Crispi F, Valenzuela-Alcaraz B, et al: Fetal cardiovascular remodeling persists at 6
months in infants with intrauterine growth restriction. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 48:349, 2016
Cui Y, Wang W, Dong N, et al: Role of corin in trophoblast invasion and uterine spiral artery remodelling
in pregnancy. Nature 484(7393):246, 2012
Cunningham FG, Cox SM, Harstad TW, et al: Chronic renal disease and pregnancy outcome. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 163(2):453, 1990
Cyganek K, Skupien J, Katra B, et al: Risk of macrosomia remains glucose-dependent in a cohort of
women with pregestational type 1 diabetes and good glycemic control. Endocrine 55(2):447, 2017
Dall’Asta A, Brunelli V, Prefumo F, et al: Early onset fetal growth restriction. Matern Health Neonatol
Perinatol 3:2, 2017
de Haas S, Ghossein-Doha C, van Kuijk SM, et al: Physiologic adaptation of maternal plasma volume
during pregnancy: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 49(2):177,
2017
De Jesus LC, Pappas A, Shankaran S, et al: Outcomes of small for gestational age infants born at <27
weeks’ gestation. J Pediatr 163:55.e1, 2013
Delhaes F, Giza SA, Koreman T, et al: Altered maternal and placental lipid metabolism and fetal fat
development in obesity: current knowledge and advances in non-invasive assessment. Placenta.
69:118, 2018
Desai G, Anand A, Shah P, et al: Sickle cell disease and pregnancy outcomes: a study of the
community-based hospital in a tribal block of Gujarat, India. J Health Popul Nutr 36:3, 2017
DeVore GR: The importance of the cerebroplacental ratio in the evaluation of fetal well-being in SGA
and AGA fetuses. Am J Obstet Gynecol 213(1):5, 2015
Di Mascio D, Magro-Malosso R, Saccone G, et al: Exercise during pregnancy in normal-weight women
and risk of preterm birth: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Am
J Obstet Gynecol 215(5):561, 2016
D’Souza SW, Black P, Richards B: Smoking in pregnancy: associations with skinfold thickness, maternal
weight gain, and fetal size at birth. Br Med J (Clin Res Ed) 282(6277):1661, 1981
Duley L, Meher S, Hunter KE, et al: Antiplatelet agents for preventing pre-eclampsia and its
complications. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2019(10):CD004659, 2019
Durie DE, Thornburg LL, Glantz JC: Effect of second-trimester and third-trimester rate of gestational
weight gain on maternal and neonatal outcomes. Obstet Gynecol 118(3):569, 2011
Durst JK, Sutton AL, Cliver SP, et al: Impact of gestational weight gain on perinatal outcomes in obese
women. Am J Perinatol 33:849, 2016
Duryea EL, Hawkins JS, McIntire DD, et al: A revised birth weight reference for the United States.
Obstet Gynecol 124:16, 2014
Ecker JL, Greenberg JA, Norwitz ER, et al: Birthweight as a predictor of brachial plexus injury. Obstet
Gynecol 89(5 pt 1):643, 1997
Feng Z, Minard C, Raghavan R: Pregnancy outcomes in advanced kidney disease. Clin Nephrol 83:272;
2015
Fiot E, Zenaty D, Boizeau P, et al: X-chromosome gene dosage as a determinant of impaired pre and
postnatal growth and adult height in Turner syndrome. Eur J Endocrinol 174:281, 2016
Flood K, Unterscheider J, Daly S, et al: The role of brain sparing in the prediction of adverse outcomes
in intrauterine growth restriction: results of the multicenter PORTO Study. Am J Obstet Gynecol
211(3):288, 2014
Garcia-Flores J, Jañez M, Gonzalez MC, et al: Fetal myocardial morphological and functional changes
associated with well-controlled gestational diabetes. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 154(1):24,

2011
Gauster M, Hiden U, Blaschitz A, et al: Dysregulation of placental endothelial lipase and lipoprotein
lipase in intrauterine growth-restricted pregnancies. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 92(6):2256, 2007
Gauster M, Hiden U, van Poppel M, et al: Dysregulation of placental endothelial lipase in obese women
with gestational diabetes mellitus. Diabetes 60(10):2457, 2011
Getahun D, Ananth CV, Kinzler WL: Risk factors for antepartum and intrapartum stillbirth: a populationbased study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 196(6):499, 2007
Ghanchi A, Rahshenas M, Bonnet D, et al: Prevalence of growth restriction at birth for newborns with
congenital heart defects: a population-based prospective cohort study EPICARD. Front Pediatr
9:676994, 2021
Giannakopoulos B, Krilis SA: The pathogenesis of the antiphospholipid syndrome. N Engl J Med
368(11):1033, 2013
Gil-Sánchez A, Koletzko B, Larqué E: Current understanding of placental fatty acid transport. Curr
Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care 15(3):265, 2012
Goetzinger KR, Tuuli MG, Odibo AO, et al: Screening for fetal growth disorders by clinical exam in the
era of obesity. J Perinatol 33(5):352, 2012
Grantz KL, Kim S, Grobman WA, et al: Fetal growth velocity: the NICHD fetal growth studies. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 219:285, 2018
Grantz KL, Ortega-Villa AM, Pugh SJ, et al: Combination of fundal height and ultrasound to predict
small for gestational age at birth. Am J Perinatol May 3, 2021 [Epub ahead of print]
Greer LG, Ziadie MS, Casey BM, et al: An immunologic basis for placental insufficiency in fetal growth
restriction. Am J Perinatol 29(7):533, 2012
Griffin IJ, Lee HC, Profit J, et al: The smallest of the small: short-term outcomes of profoundly growth
restricted and profoundly low birth weight preterm infants. J Perinatol 35:503, 2015
Grobman WA, Lai Y, Rouse DJ, et al: The association of cerebral palsy and death with small-forgestational-age birthweight in preterm neonates by individualized and population-based percentiles.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 209(4):340.e1, 2013
Hall C, Bukowinski AT, McGill AL, et al: Racial disparities in prenatal care utilization and infant small
for gestational age among active duty US military women. Matern Child Health J 24(7):885, 2020
Hammad IA, Chauhan CP, Mlynarczyk M, et al: Uncomplicated pregnancies and ultrasounds for fetal
growth restriction: a pilot randomized clinical trial. Am J Perinatol 6(1):e83, 2016
HAPO Study Cooperative Research Group: Hyperglycemia and adverse pregnancy outcomes. N Engl J
Med 358(19):1991, 2008
Harper LM, Tita A, Biggio JR: The Institute of Medicine guidelines for gestational weight gain after a
diagnosis of gestational diabetes and pregnancy outcomes. Am J Perinatol 32:239, 2015
He B, Hu C, Zhou Y: First-trimester screening for fetal growth restriction using Doppler color flow
analysis of the uterine artery and serum PAPP-A levels in unselected pregnancies. J Matern Fetal
Neonatal Med 12:1, 2020
Hehir MP, Mchugh AF, Maguire PJ, et al: Extreme macrosomia—obstetric outcomes and complications
in birthweights >5000 g. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol 55:42, 2015
Herrera CL, Hussamy DJ, McIntire DD, et al: Femur length parameters in fetuses with Down
syndrome. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 33(15):2516, 2020
Hietalampi H, Pahkala K, Jokinen E, et al: Left ventricular mass and geometry in adolescence: early
childhood determinants. Hypertension 60(5):1266, 2012
Hutcheon JA, Stephansson O, Cnattingius S, et al: Is the association between pregnancy weight gain
and fetal size casual?: a re-examination using a sibling comparison design. Epidemiology 30(2):234,

2019
Jana N, Barik S, Arora N, et al: Tuberculosis in pregnancy: the challenges for South Asian countries. J
Obstet Gynaecol Res 38(9):1125, 2012
Johnson GJ, Denning S, Clark SL, et al: Pathophysiologic origins of brachial plexus injury. Obstet
Gynecol 136(4):725, 2020
Jornayvaz FR, Vollenweider P, Bochud M, et al: Low birth weight leads to obesity, diabetes and
increased leptin levels in adults: the CoLaus study. Cardiovasc Diabetol 15:73, 2016
Keats EC, Haider BA, Tam E, et al: Multiple-micronutrient supplementation for women during
pregnancy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 3(3):CD004905, 2019
Kerkhof GF, Willemsen RH, Leunissen RW, et al: Health profile of young adults born preterm: negative
effects of rapid weight gain in early life. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 97(12):4498, 2012
Khoury MJ, Erickson JD, Cordero JF, et al: Congenital malformations and intrauterine growth
retardation: a population study. Pediatrics 82(1):83, 1988
Kim CJ, Romero R, Chaemsaithong P, et al: Chronic inflammation of the placenta: definition,
classification, pathogenesis, and clinical significance. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2213:S53, 2015
Kingdom JC, Audette MC, Hobson SR, et al: A placenta clinic approach to the diagnosis and
management of fetal growth restriction. Am J Obstet Gynecol 218(2S):S803, 2018
Klemetti MM, Laivuori H, Tikkanen M, et al: White’s classification and pregnancy outcome in women
with type 1 diabetes: a population-based cohort study. Diabetologia 59(1):92, 2016
Korzeniewski SJ, Romero R, Chaiworapongsa T, et al: Maternal plasma angiogenic index-1 (placental
growth factor/soluble vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-1) is a biomarker for the burden of
placental lesions consistent with uteroplacental underperfusion: a longitudinal case-cohort study. Am
J Obstet Gynecol 214(5):629, 2016
Langridge AT, Li J, Nassar N, et al: Community-level socioeconomic inequalities in infants with poor
fetal growth in Western Australia, 1984 to 2006. Ann Epidemiol 21(7):473-80, 2011
Leary PJ, Leary SE, Stout KK, et al: Maternal, perinatal, and post neonatal outcomes in women with
chronic heart disease in Washington State. Obstet Gynecol 120:1283, 2012
Lechtig A, Delgado H, Lasky RE, et al: Maternal nutrition and fetal growth in developing societies. Am
J Dis Child 129(5):434, 1975
Lees CC, Stampalija T, Baschat A, et al: ISUOG Practice Guildelines: diagnosis and management of
small-for-gestational-age fetus and fetal growth restriction. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 56(2):298,
2020
Lees CC, Marlow N, van Wassenaer-Leemhuis A, et al: 2 year neurodevelopmental and intermediate
perinatal outcomes in infants with very preterm fetal growth restriction (TRUFFLE): a randomised
trial. Lancet 385:2162, 2015
Levine TA, Grunau RE, McAuliffe FM, et al. Early childhood neurodevelopment after intrauterine
growth restriction: a systematic review. Pediatrics 135:126, 2015
Llurba E, Baschat AA, Turan OM, et al: Childhood cognitive development after fetal growth restriction.
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 41(4):383, 2013
Luo ZC, Nuyt AM, Delvin E, et al: Maternal and fetal IGF-I and IGF-II levels, fetal growth, and
gestational diabetes. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 97(5):1720, 2012
Luyckx VA, Brenner BM: Birth weight, malnutrition and kidney-associated outcomes-a global concern.
Nat Rev Nephrol 11:135, 2015
Magro-Malosso ER, Saccone G, Chen M, et al: Induction of labour for suspected macrosomia at term in
non-diabetic women: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. BJOG
124:414, 2017

Manning FA (ed): Intrauterine growth retardation. In Fetal Medicine Principles and Practice. Norwalk,
Appleton & Lange, 1995
Martin JA, Hamilton BE, Osterman MJ, et al: Births: final data for 2019. Natl Vital Stat Rep 70(2):1,
2021
Mattsson K, Rylander L: Influence of maternal and paternal birthweight on offspring birthweight—a
population-based intergenerational study. Paediatr Perinat Epidemiol 27(2):138, 2013
Mayer C, Joseph KS: Fetal growth: a review of terms, concepts and issues relevant to obstetrics.
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 41(2):136, 2013
McCloskey K, Burgner D, Carlin JB, et al: Infant adiposity at birth and early postnatal weight gain
predict increased aortic intima-media thickness at 6 weeks of age: a population-derived cohort study.
Clin Sci 130:443, 2016
McCowan LM, Figueras F, Anderson NH: Evidence-based national guidelines for the management of
suspected fetal growth restriction: comparison, consensus, and controversy. Am J Obstet Gynecol
218(2S):S855, 2018
McIntire DD, Bloom SL, Casey BM, et al: Birthweight in relation to morbidity and mortality among
newborn infants. N Engl J Med 340(16):1234, 1999
Meher S, Duley L, Hunter K, et al: Antiplatelet therapy before or after 16 weeks’ gestation for
preventing preeclampsia: an individual participant data meta-analysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol
216(2):121, 2017
Mendez-Figueroa H, Truong VT, Pedroza C, et al: Small-for-gestational-age infants among
uncomplicated pregnancies at term: a secondary analysis of 9 Maternal-Fetal Medicine Units
Network studies. Am J Obstet Gynecol 215:628.e1, 2016
Milovanovic I, Njuieyon F, Deghmoun S, et al: Innate small babies are metabolically healthy children. J
Clin Endocrinol Metab 97(12):4407, 2012
Monier I, Blondel B, Ego A, et al: Poor effectiveness of antenatal detection of fetal growth restriction
and consequences for obstetric management and neonatal outcomes: a French national study. BJOG
122(4):518, 2015
Murphy HR, Steel SA, Roland JM, et al: East Anglia Study Group for Improving Pregnancy Outcomes
in Women with Diabetes (EASIPOD). Obstetric and perinatal outcomes in pregnancies complicated
by Type 1 and Type 2 diabetes: influences of glycaemic control, obesity and social disadvantage.
Diabet Med 28(9):1060, 2011
Myatt L, Maloyan A: Obesity and placental function. Semin Reprod Med 34:42, 2016
Nelson DB, Martin R, Twickler DM, et al: Sonographic detection and clinical importance of growth
restriction in pregnancies with gastroschisis. J Ultrasound Med 34:2217, 2015
Ökdemir D, Hatipoğlu N, Kurtoğlu S, et al: The role of irisin, insulin and leptin in maternal and fetal
interaction. J Clin Res Pediatr Endocrinol 10(4):307, 2018
Ottesen AM, Aksglaede L, Garn I, et al: Increased number of sex chromosomes affects height in a
nonlinear fashion: a study of 305 patients with sex chromosome aneuploidy. Am J Med Genet A
152A:1206, 2010
Pardi G, Cetin I: Human fetal growth and organ development: 50 years of discoveries. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 194(4):1008, 2006
Pedersen J: Weight and length at birth of infants of diabetic mothers. Acta Endocrinol (Copenh) 16:330,
1954
Perales M, Santos-Lozano A, Ruiz JR, et al: Benefits of aerobic or resistance training during pregnancy
on maternal health and perinatal outcomes: a systematic review. Early Hum Dev 94:43, 2016

Picone O, Teissier N, Cordier AG, et al: Detailed in utero ultrasound description of 30 cases of
congenital cytomegalovirus infection. Prenat Diagn 34:518, 2014
Picone O, Vauloup-Fellous C, Cordier AG, et al: A series of 238 cytomegalovirus primary infections
during pregnancy: description and outcome. Prenat Diagn 2:1, 2013
Poon LC, Shennan A, Hyett JA, et al: The International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics
(FIGO) initiative on pre-eclampsia: a pragmatic guide for first-trimester screening and prevention.
Int J Gynaecol Obstet 145 Suppl 1(Suppl 1):1, 2019
Prado EL, Alcock KJ, Muadz H, et al: Maternal multiple micronutrient supplements and child cognition:
a randomized trial in Indonesia. Pediatrics 130(3):e536, 2012
Roberge S, Nicolaides K, Demers S, et al: The role of aspirin dose on the prevention of preeclampsia
and fetal growth restriction: systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 216(2):110,
2017
Roex A, Nikpoor P, van Eerd E, et al: Serial plotting on customized fundal height charts results in
doubling of the antenatal detection of small for gestational age fetuses in nulliparous women. Aust N
Z J Obstet Gynaecol 52(1):78, 2012
Rogne T, Engstrøm AA, Jacobsen GW, et al: Fetal growth, cognitive function, and brain volumes in
childhood and adolescence. Obstet Gynecol 125:673, 2015
Rolnik DL, Wright D, Poon LC, et al: Aspirin versus Placebo in Pregnancies at High Risk for Preterm
Preeclampsia. N Engl J Med 377(7):613, 2017
Rouse DJ, Owen J, Goldenberg RL, et al: The effectiveness and costs of elective cesarean delivery for
fetal macrosomia diagnosed by ultrasound. JAMA 276(2):1480, 1996
Rudzinski E, Gilroy M, Newbill C, et al: Positive C4d immunostaining of placental villous
syncytiotrophoblasts supports host-versus-graft rejection in villitis of unknown etiology. Pediatr Dev
Pathol 16(1):7, 2013
Saccone G, Berghella V, Maruotti GM, et al: Antiphospholipid antibody profile based obstetric outcomes
of primary antiphospholipid syndrome: the PREGNANTS study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 216(5):525,
2017
Saliem S, Patenaude V, Abenhaim HA: Pregnancy outcomes among renal transplant recipients and
patients with end-stage renal disease on dialysis. J Perinat Med 44:321, 2016
Salihu HM, Dongarwar D, King LM, et al: Phenotypes of fetal macrosomia and risk of stillbirth among
term deliveries over the previous four decades. Birth 47(2):202, 2020
Sanchez-Ramos L, Bernstein S, Kaunitz AM: Expectant management versus labor induction for
suspected fetal macrosomia: a systematic review. Obstet Gynecol 100(5 pt 1):997, 2002
Savchev S, Figueras F, Sanz-Cortes M, et al: Evaluation of an optimal gestational age cut-off for the
definition of early- and late-onset fetal growth restriction. Fetal Diagn Ther 36(2):9, 2014
Schemmer G, Wapner RJ, Johnson A, et al: First-trimester growth patterns of aneuploid fetuses. Prenat
Diagn 17(2):155, 1997
Segura MT, Demmelmair H, Krauss-Etschmann S, et al: Maternal BMI and gestational diabetes alter
placental lipid transporters and fatty acid composition. Placenta 57:144, 2017
Sheffield JS, Sánchez PJ, Morris G, et al: Congenital syphilis after maternal treatment for syphilis during
pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 186(3):569, 2002
Simpson J, Smith AD, Fraser A, et al: Programming of adiposity in childhood and adolescence:
associations with birth weight and cord blood adipokines. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 102(2):499, 2017
Sobhy S, Babiker Z, Zamora J, et al: Maternal and perinatal mortality and morbidity associated with
tuberculosis during pregnancy and the postpartum period: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
BJOG 124(5):727, 2017

Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Martins JG, Biggio JR, et al: Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine
consult series #52: diagnosis and management of fetal growth restriction. Am J Obstet Gynecol
223(4):B2, 2020
Sovio U, White IR, Dacey A, et al: Screening for fetal growth restriction with universal third trimester
ultrasonography in nulliparous women in the Pregnancy Outcome Prediction (POP) study: a
prospective cohort study. Lancet 386:2089, 2015
Sparks TN, Cheng YW, McLaughlin B, et al: Fundal height: a useful screening tool for fetal growth? J
Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 24(5):708, 2011
Stein Z, Susser M, Saenger G, et al: Famine and Human Development: The Dutch Hunger Winter of
1944–1945. New York, Oxford University Press, 1975
Steurer MA, Jelliffe-Pawlowski LL, Baer RJ, et al: Persistent Pulmonary Hypertension of the Newborn
in Late Preterm and Term Infants in California. Pediatrics 139(1):e20161165, 2017
Stott D, Papastefanou I, Paraschiv D, et al: Longitudinal maternal haemodynamics in fetal growth
restriction in pregnancies at high risk for placental insufficiency. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol
49(6):761, 2017
Tajik P, van Wyk L, Boers KE, et al: Which intrauterine growth restricted fetuses at term benefit from
early labour induction? A secondary analysis of the DIGITAT randomised trial. Eur J Obstet
Gynecol Reprod Biol 172:20, 2014
Thame MM, Singh-Minott I, Osmond C, et al: Pregnancy in sickle cell-haemoglobin C (SC) disease. A
retrospective study of birth size and maternal weight gain. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 203:16,
2016
Thornton JG, Hornbuckle J, Vail A, et al: Infant well-being at 2 years of age in the Growth Restriction
Intervention Trial (GRIT): multicenter randomized controlled trial. Lancet 364(9433):513, 2004
Tita AT: What we have learned about scheduling elective repeat cesarean delivery at term. Semin
Perinatol 40:287, 2016
Toda K, Reef S, Tsuruoka M, et al: Congenital rubella syndrome (CRS) in Vietnam 2011–2012–CRS
epidemic after rubella epidemic in 2010–2011. Vaccine 33:3673, 2015
Unterscheider J, O’Donoghue K, Malone FD: Guidelines of fetal growth restriction: a comparison of
recent national publications. Am J Perinatol 32:307, 2015
Van der Looven R, Le Roy L, Tanghe E, et al: Risk factors for neonatal brachial plexus palsy: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Dev Med Child Neurol 62(6):673, 2020
van Wyk L, Boers KE, van der Post JA, et al: Effects on (neuro)developmental and behavioral outcome
at 2 years of age of induced labor compared with expectant management in intrauterine growthrestricted infants: long-term outcomes of the DIGITAT trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol 206(5):406.e1,
2012
Vollgraff CA, van Osch IR, Heymans MW, et al: Cerebroplacental ratio in predicting adverse perinatal
outcome: a meta-analysis of individual participant data. 128(2):226, 2021
Waldhoer T, Klebermass-Schrehof K: The impact of altitude on birth weight depends on further motherand infant-related factors: a population-based study in an altitude range up to 1600 m in Austria
between 1984 and 2013. J Perinatol 35:689, 2015
Walker DM, Marlow N, Upstone L, et al: The Growth Restriction Intervention Trial: long-term
outcomes in a randomized trial of timing of delivery in fetal growth restriction. Am J Obstet Gynecol
204(1):34.e1, 2011
Wang D, Hong Y, Zhu L, et al: Risk factors and outcomes of macrosomia in China: a multicentric
survey based on birth data. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 30:623, 2017

Wanyyonyi SZ, Orwa J, Ozelle H, et al: Routine third-trimester ultrasound for the detection of small-forgestational age in low-risk pregnancies (ROTTUS study): randomized controlled trial. Ultrasound
Obstet Gynecol 57(6):910, 2021
Werler MM: Teratogen update: smoking and reproductive outcomes. Teratology 55(6):382, 1997
Wiebe HW, Boulé NG, Chari R, et al: The effect of supervised prenatal exercise on fetal growth: a
meta-analysis. Obstet Gynecol 125:1185, 2015
Wigby K, D’Epagnier C, Howell S, et al: Expanding the phenotype of Triple X syndrome: a comparison
of prenatal versus postnatal diagnosis. Am J Med Genet A 170:2870, 2016
Williams RL, Creasy RK, Cunningham GC, et al: Fetal growth and perinatal viability in California.
Obstet Gynecol 59:624, 1982
Yang X, Li M, Haghiac M, Catalano PM, et al: Causal relationship between obesity-related traits and
TLR4-driven responses at the maternal-fetal interface. Diabetologia 59:2459, 2016
Zafman KB, Bergh E, Fox NS: Accuracy of sonographic estimated fetal weight in suspected
macrosomia: the likelihood of overestimating and underestimating the true birthweight. J Matern
Fetal Neonatal Med 33(6):967, 2020
Zhang J, Merialdi M, Platt LD, et al: Defining normal and abnormal fetal growth: promises and
challenges. Am J Obstet Gynecol 202(6):522, 2010
Zhang J, Mikolajczyk R, Grewal J, et al: Prenatal application of the individualized fetal growth
reference. Am J Epidemiol 173(5):539, 2011

CHAPTER 48

Multifetal Pregnancy

MECHANISMS OF MULTIFETAL GESTATIONS
DIAGNOSIS OF MULTIFETAL GESTATION
MATERNAL PHYSIOLOGICAL ADAPTATIONS
PREGNANCY COMPLICATIONS
UNIQUE FETAL COMPLICATIONS
DISCORDANT GROWTH
FETAL DEMISE
PRENATAL CARE
PRETERM BIRTH
LABOR AND DELIVERY
REDUCING FETAL NUMBER
REFERENCES
Multifetal pregnancies may result from two or more fertilization events, from
a single fertilization followed by a splitting of the zygote, or both. In part
because of infertility therapy, the twin birth rate in the United States was 3.2
percent in 2019. For higher-order multifetal births, the number peaked in
1998 at 0.2 percent of all births. Subsequent efforts in the reproductive
endocrinology community to curb this rate have led to declines. Specifically,

the rate of triplets or more declined by 55 percent from 1998 to 2019
(Martin, 2021).
Multifetal gestations remain problematic for both the mother and her
fetuses. For the fetus, multifetal births accounted for 3 percent of all live
births in 2013 but for 15 percent of all infant deaths. Specifically, the infant
mortality rate for twins was more than four times the rate for singletons, and
for triplets it was 12-fold higher (Matthews, 2015). Neonates from multifetal
gestations also make up a disproportionate percentage of very-lowbirthweight newborns in the United States (Martin, 2021). These two
outcomes in singletons and twins from Parkland Hospital are shown in Table
48-1. Risks for congenital malformations and preterm birth are greater with
multifetal gestation and discussed later.
TABLE 48-1. Selected Outcomes in Singleton and Twin Pregnancies
Delivered at Parkland Hospital from 1988 through 2021

The mother may also experience higher morbidity and mortality rates,
and these rise with the number of fetuses (Society for Maternal-Fetal
Medicine, 2019). In one study of more than 44,000 multifetal pregnancies,
the risks for preeclampsia, postpartum hemorrhage, and maternal death were
twofold higher than these rates in singleton gestations (Walker, 2004). Rates
of placenta previa and placenta accreta spectrum are increased (Miller,

2021a). Moreover, compared with rates for singletons, the peripartum
hysterectomy rate was threefold greater for twins and 24-fold higher for
triplets or quadruplets in one study (Francois, 2005).

MECHANISMS OF MULTIFETAL GESTATIONS
■ Dizygotic versus Monozygotic Twinning
Multifetal gestations are often described by zygosity, amnionicity, and
chorionicity, which are the number of zygotes, amnions, and chorions,
respectively. Twin fetuses most often result from fertilization of two separate
ova, which yields dizygotic or fraternal twins. Less often, twins arise from a
single fertilized ovum that then divides to create monozygotic or identical
twins.
Dizygotic twins are not in a strict sense true twins because they result
from the maturation and fertilization of two ova during a single ovulatory
cycle. Genetically, these twins are like any other pair of siblings. Twins of
opposite sex are almost always dizygotic. Rarely, somatic mutations or
chromosome aberration in one monozygotic twin can yield differing gender
karyotype or phenotype. For example, postzygotic loss of the Y chromosome
in one 46,XY twin creates a phenotypically female twin with 45,X Turner
syndrome.
Monozygotic twins, although they have the same genetic heritage, also are
usually not identical. For example, the division of one fertilized zygote into
two does not necessarily yield equal sharing of protoplasmic material. In
addition, monozygotic twins may be discordant for genetic mutations because
of a postzygotic mutation, or they may have the same genetic disease but with
marked variability in its expression. In female fetuses, skewed lyonization
can produce differential expression of X-linked traits or diseases. Last,
sesquizygosity is a rare event of dispermic fertilization that leads to
monozygotic twins. Some cases may have sex discordance (Gabbett, 2019).

■ Monozygotic Twinning
Mechanisms underlying monozygotic twinning are poorly understood. One
association is assisted reproductive technology (ART) and in-vitro
fertilization (IVF). The monozygotic twinning incidence is twofold greater in

pregnancies conceived using blastocyst transfer compared with transfer of a
later-stage embryo. The predisposition to splitting may stem from culture
media effects (Busnelli, 2019).
The outcome of the monozygotic twinning process depends on when
division occurs as depicted in Figure 48-1. If zygotes divide within the first
72 hours after fertilization, two embryos, two amnions, and two chorions
develop, and a monozygotic, dichorionic, diamnionic twin gestation
evolves. Two distinct placentas or a single, fused placenta may develop. If
division occurs between days 4 through 8, a monozygotic, monochorionic,
diamnionic twin pregnancy results. By 8 days, the chorion and the amnion
have already differentiated, and division results in two embryos within a
common amnionic sac, which is a monozygotic, monochorionic,
monoamnionic twin gestation. Conjoined twins result if division initiates
later.

FIGURE 48-1 Mechanism of monozygotic twinning. Black boxing and blue arrows in columns A, B,
and C indicate timing of division. A. At 0 to 4 days postfertilization, an early conceptus may divide into
two. Division at this early stage creates two chorions and two amnions (dichorionic, diamnionic).
Placentas may be separate or fused. B. Division between 4 to 8 days leads to formation of a blastocyst
with two separate embryoblasts (inner cell masses). Each embryoblast will form its own amnion within
a shared chorion (monochorionic, diamnionic). C. Between 8 and 12 days, the amnion and amnionic
cavity form above the germinal disc. Embryonic division leads to two embryos with a shared amnion and
shared chorion (monochorionic, monoamnionic). D. Differing theories explain conjoined twin
development. One describes an incomplete splitting of one embryo into two. The other describes fusion
of a portion of one embryo from a monozygotic pair onto the other.

Rarely, monochorionic twins may be dizygotic. Mechanisms are unclear.
In one review of 31 cases, nearly 80 percent were conceived after ART
procedures, and 90 percent were associated with chimerism (Peters, 2017).

■ Factors Affecting Twinning
Dizygotic twinning is much more common than monozygotic splitting of a
single oocyte, and its incidence is positively influenced by infertility
treatment and by maternal age, race, heredity, and size. By contrast, the
frequency of monozygotic twin births is relatively constant worldwide—
approximately one set per 250 births. This incidence is generally
independent of most demographic factors, except ART.
Of infertility therapies, ovulation induction with clomiphene citrate or
with follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) plus human chorionic gonadotropin
(hCG) remarkably enhances the likelihood of multiple concurrent ovulations.
Moreover, with IVF, the greater the number of embryos that are transferred,
the greater the risk of twins or more. In 2017, ART contributed to 1.9 percent
of all newborns in the United States and to 14.7 percent of all neonates in
multifetal gestations (Sunderam, 2020). The American Society for
Reproductive Medicine (2017) revised their guidelines regarding the number
of embryos or blastocysts transferred during IVF to reduce the incidence of
multifetal pregnancies. For example, women younger than 35 years are
encouraged to receive a single-embryo transfer, regardless of embryo stage.
These practices have effectively lowered multifetal rates (Martin, 2021).
Advancing maternal age and delayed childbearing are other important
risk factors (Adashi, 2018; Otta, 2016). One explanation is FSH levels,
which rise with age and lead to greater ovarian stimulation (Beemsterboer,
2006). Higher levels of FSH have been linked with dizygotic twinning
(Lambalk, 1998). Another explanation may be a higher use of ART in older
women. Paternal age has also been linked to twinning, but its effect is felt to
be small (Abel, 2012).
Different races and ethnic groups vary in their frequency of multifetal
births. In the United States in 2019, the twin birth rate was 4.1 percent in
black women, 3.3 percent in whites, and 2.5 in Hispanics (Martin, 2021). In
one rural community in Nigeria, twinning occurred once in every 20 births
(Knox, 1960). These marked differences in twinning frequency may stem
from racial variations in FSH levels (Nylander, 1973).
Heredity is another factor, and maternal influence appears to supersede
that of the father. In a study of 4000 genealogical records, women who
themselves were a dizygotic twin gave birth to twins at a rate of one set per
58 births (White, 1964). Women who were not a twin, but whose husbands

were a dizygotic twin, gave birth to twins at a rate of one set per 116
pregnancies. Genome-wide association studies have identified potentially
contributory genes, and two are related to FSH (Mbarek, 2016). However,
the contribution of these variants to the overall incidence of twinning is
likely small (Hoekstra, 2008).
Maternal size is another risk factor. Nylander (1971) showed an
increasing gradient in the twinning rate in taller, heavier women. These had a
twinning rate 25 to 30 percent higher than short, nutritionally deprived
women. Likewise, another study found an association between greater
maternal weight and dizygotic twinning (Reddy, 2005). Evidence acquired
during and after World War II suggests that twinning correlates more with
nutrition than with body size. Widespread undernourishment in Europe during
those years was associated with a marked fall in the dizygotic twinning rate
(Bulmer, 1959).

■ Superfecundation and Superfetation
Superfecundation is fertilization of two ova within the same menstrual cycle
but not at the same coitus nor necessarily by sperm from the same male. The
latter leads to heteropaternity (Silver, 2021).
In superfetation, an interval as long as or longer than a menstrual cycle
intervenes between fertilizations. Superfetation is not known to occur
spontaneously and is likely due to ART (Lantieri, 2010). Pseudosuperfetation often results from markedly unequal growth of twins with the
same gestational age.

DIAGNOSIS OF MULTIFETAL GESTATION
■ Clinical Evaluation
Early diagnosis can help with management of the associated risks posed by
twins. Accurate fundal height measurement can be an initial tool. With
multiples, uterine size is typically larger during the second trimester than that
expected for a singleton. In one study, fundal heights obtained between 20
and 30 weeks’ gestation averaged 5 cm greater in twins than in singletons
(Rouse, 1993).

Palpation of fetal parts to diagnose twins before the third trimester is
difficult. Even then, obesity or hydramnios can hinder assessment. Palpating
two fetal heads strongly supports the diagnosis. Moreover, a hand-held
Doppler ultrasonic unit may isolate two fetal heartbeats if their rates are
clearly distinct from each other and from the mother.
Overall, however, clinical criteria alone to diagnose multifetal gestations
is unreliable. In the Routine Antenatal Diagnostic Imaging with Ultrasound
(RADIUS) trial, for 37 percent of women who did not have a screening
ultrasound examination, their twin pregnancy was not diagnosed until 26
weeks’ gestation. In 13 percent of unscanned women, their multifetal
gestation was identified only during their admission for delivery (LeFevre,
1993).

■ Sonography
Sonographic examination should detect practically all sets of twins. Further,
it should aim to determine fetal number, estimated gestational age,
chorionicity, and amnionicity. Importantly, the risk for many twin-specific
complications varies in relation to these (Table 48-2) (Hack, 2008; Manning,
1995).
TABLE 48-2. Incidence of Some Complications Related to Twin
Characteristics

With sonography, separate gestational sacs, if present, can be identified
early in twin pregnancy (Fig. 48-2). Subsequently, each fetal head should be
seen in two perpendicular planes to avoid mistaking a fetal trunk for a
second fetal head. Ideally, two fetal heads or two abdomens are seen in the
same image plane to avoid scanning the same fetus twice and interpreting it

as twins. Higher-order multifetal gestations are more challenging to evaluate.
Even in the first trimester, identifying the actual number of fetuses and their
position can be difficult. This determination is especially important if
selective reduction is considered (p. 858).

FIGURE 48-2 Sonograms of first-trimester twins. A. Dichorionic diamnionic twin pregnancy at 6
weeks’ gestation. Note the thick dividing chorion (yellow arrow). One of the yolk sacs is indicated
(blue arrow). B. Monochorionic diamnionic twin pregnancy at 8 weeks’ gestation. Note the thin
amnion encircling each embryo, resulting in a thin dividing membrane (blue arrow).

In determining chorionicity, sonography’s accuracy diminishes as
gestational age advances. It has a 98-percent accuracy in the first trimester
but may be incorrect in up to 10 percent of second-trimester examinations.
Overall, chorionicity can be correctly determined with sonography before 24
weeks in approximately 95 percent of cases (Emery, 2015; Lee, 2006).
The sonographic features that are used to determine chorionicity vary
according to gestational age. Early in the first trimester, the number of
chorions equates to the number of gestational sacs. A thick band of chorion
that separates two gestational sacs signals a dichorionic pregnancy, whereas
monochorionic twins have a single gestational sac. If the gestation is
monochorionic diamnionic, it may be difficult to visualize the thin
intervening amnion before 8 weeks’ gestation. If the intervening membrane is
difficult to visualize, the number of yolk sacs usually correlates with the
number of amnions. However, the number of yolk sacs as a predictor of
amnionicity may not always be accurate (Shen, 2006). Although uncommonly
seen early, cord entanglement identifies a monoamnionic gestation.
At 10 to 14 weeks’ gestation, sonographic assessment of chorionicity
may be determined using four features. These are the number of placental

masses, presence of an intervening membrane dividing the sacs, thickness of
that membrane, and fetal gender (Emery, 2015; Khalil, 2016). First, two
separate placentas suggest dichorionicity. The converse is not necessarily
true, such as cases with a single fused placental mass. Second, identification
of a thick dividing membrane—generally ≥2 mm—supports a presumed
diagnosis of dichorionicity. In a dichorionic pregnancy, this visualized
membrane is composed of four layers—two amnions and two chorions. Also,
the twin peak sign—also called lambda or delta sign—is seen by examining
the point of origin of the dividing membrane on the placental surface. The
peak appears as a triangular projection of placental tissue extending a short
distance between the layers of the dividing membrane (Fig. 48-3).

FIGURE 48-3 A. Sonographic image of the “twin-peak” sign, also termed the “lambda sign,” in a 24week gestation. At the top of this sonogram, tissue from the anterior placenta is seen extending
downward between the amnion layers. This sign confirms dichorionic twinning. B. The “twin-peak” sign

is seen at the bottom of this schematic diagram. The triangular portion of placenta insinuates between
the amniochorion layers.

In contrast, monochorionic pregnancies have a dividing membrane that is
so thin (generally <2 mm) that it may not be seen until the second trimester.
The relationship between the membranes and placenta without apparent
extension of placenta between the dividing membranes is called the T sign
(Fig. 48-4). Evaluation of the dividing membrane can establish chorionicity
in more than 99 percent of pregnancies in the first trimester (Maruotti, 2016;
Miller, 2012). Lack of a dividing membrane signals a monochorionic
monoamnionic gestation.

FIGURE 48-4 A. Sonographic image of the “T” sign in a monochorionic diamnionic gestation at 30
weeks. At the top of this sonogram, the two apposed amnion layers are seen as the thin line extending
downward. B. Schematic diagram of the “T” sign. Twins are separated only by a membrane created by
the juxtaposed amnion of each twin. A “T” is formed at the point at which amnions meet the placenta.

Last, twins with differing gender indicates a dichorionic (and dizygotic)
gestation. Rare exceptions were described earlier (p. 839).

■ Other Diagnostic Aids
Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging may help delineate complications in
monochorionic twins, including conjoined twins (Hu, 2006). Abdominal
radiography can be used if fetal number in a higher-order multifetal gestation
is uncertain. However, radiographs generally have limited utility and lead to
an incorrect diagnosis if fetuses move during the exposure.
No biochemical test reliably identifies multifetal gestations. Serum levels
of β-hCG and of maternal serum alpha-fetoprotein (MSAFP) are usually
higher, but ranges may overlap with those of singletons.

■ Placental Examination
Careful visual examination of the placenta and membranes after delivery can
establish zygosity and chorionicity in many cases. First, the placenta is gently
delivered to preserve the attachment of the amnion and chorion. With one
common amnionic sac or with juxtaposed amnions not separated by chorion,
the fetuses are monozygotic (see Fig. 48-1). If adjacent amnions are
separated by chorion, the fetuses could be either dizygotic or monozygotic,
but dizygosity is more common (Fig. 48-5). If the neonates are of the same
sex, blood typing of cord blood samples may be helpful. Different genders or
blood types reflects dizygosity, although the same gender or blood type in
each fetus does not confirm monozygosity. Postnatal zygosity genetic testing
is available, and the benefits and ethics have been debated (Brown, 2015;
Craig, 2015).

FIGURE 48-5 Dichorionic diamnionic twin placenta. The membrane partition that separated twin
fetuses is elevated and consists of chorion (c) between two amnions (a).

MATERNAL PHYSIOLOGICAL ADAPTATIONS
The physiological burdens of pregnancy and likelihood of serious maternal
complications are typically greater with multifetal gestations than with
singleton ones. In the first trimester and with its higher serum β-hCG levels,
multifetal gestations often cause nausea and vomiting. In women carrying
more than one fetus, blood volume expansion is greater and averages 50 to
60 percent compared with 40 to 50 percent in those with a singleton
(Pritchard, 1965). This augmented hypervolemia teleologically offsets blood
loss with vaginal delivery of twins, which is twice that with a single fetus.
Although red cell mass also accrues, it does so proportionately less in twin
pregnancies. Combined with greater iron and folate requirements, this
predisposes to anemia.
Women carrying twins also have a typical pattern of blood pressure
change. One study assessed serial blood pressures in more than 13,000
singleton and twin pregnancies (MacDonald-Wallis, 2012). As early as 8

weeks’ gestation, the diastolic blood pressure in women with twins was
lower than that with singleton pregnancies. It generally rose by a greater
degree at term. An earlier study demonstrated that this later rise was at least
15 mm Hg in 95 percent of women with twins compared with only 54 percent
of women with a singleton (Campbell, 1986).
Hypervolemia along with decreased vascular resistance has an
impressive effect on cardiac function. In one study of 119 women with twins,
cardiac output rose another 20 percent above that in women with a singleton
(Kametas, 2003). Similarly, a study of serial maternal echocardiography
examinations found a greater elevation in cardiac output in 20 women with
uncomplicated twin pregnancies (Kuleva, 2011). Both studies found that the
augmented cardiac output was predominantly due to greater stroke volume
rather than higher heart rate. Vascular resistance was significantly lower in
twin gestations throughout pregnancy compared with singleton ones. In a
study of 30 uncomplicated twin pregnancies, this same group of investigators
identified progressive diastolic dysfunction from the first to third trimester.
The dysfunction subsequently normalized after delivery (Ghi, 2015).
Uterine growth in a multifetal gestation is substantively greater than in a
singleton one. The uterus and its nonfetal contents may achieve a volume of
10 L or more and weigh in excess of 20 pounds. Especially with
monozygotic twins, excessive amounts of amnionic fluid may rapidly
accumulate. In these circumstances, maternal abdominal viscera and lungs
can be appreciably compressed and displaced by the expanding uterus. As a
result, the size and weight of the large uterus may preclude more than a
sedentary existence for these women.
Rarely, maternal renal function can become seriously impaired, most
likely as the consequence of obstructive uropathy (Jena, 1996). Hydramnios
is a common associate, and therapeutic amniocentesis may provide relief for
the mother, may improve obstructive uropathy, and possibly may lower rates
of preterm labor or rupture of membranes. Unfortunately, hydramnios often
develops remote from term and rapidly reaccumulates.

PREGNANCY COMPLICATIONS
Several complications, discussed next, complicate multifetal pregnancy.
Others are preterm birth and discordant fetal growth, which are discussed in

later sections.

■ Spontaneous Abortion and Vanishing Fetus
Among twins, monochorionic twins have significantly higher early fetal loss
rates than dichorionic pairs (D’Antonio, 2013). Twins achieved through ART
may be at greater risk for abortion compared with those conceived
spontaneously (Szymusik, 2012). However, among ART-conceived
gestations, twins have lower miscarriage rates than singletons (Matias,
2007).
In some cases, only one fetus is spontaneously lost. As a result, the
incidence of twins in the first trimester is much greater than the incidence of
twins at birth. Estimates suggest that while 1 in 8 pregnancies begin
multifetal, only 1 in 80 births are multifetal (Corsello, 2010). Sonography
studies in the first trimester have shown that one twin dies and “vanishes”
before the second trimester in 10 to 40 percent of all twin pregnancies
(Brady, 2013; Harris, 2020). The incidence is higher following ART
conception.
A vanishing fetus is more common in higher-order multiples. In one study
of spontaneous reduction in 709 multifetal pregnancies before 12 weeks’
gestation, one or more embryos died in 36 percent of twin pregnancies, in 53
percent of triplet pregnancies, and in 65 percent of quadruplet pregnancies
(Dickey, 2002). Interestingly, in one study, ultimate pregnancy duration and
birthweight were inversely related to initial gestational sac number
regardless of the final number of fetuses at delivery (Seong, 2020). This
effect was most pronounced in twins who started as quadruplets. Evidence
for adverse immediate and long-term effects of twin spontaneous reduction
on the remaining pregnancy is conflicting (Harris, 2020; McNamara, 2016).
Spontaneous reduction of a twin gestation may affect prenatal screening
results. In one study of ART-conceived gestations, 56 twin pregnancies with
a single early demise and 897 singleton gestations were compared (Gjerris,
2009). First-trimester serum marker concentrations did not differ between the
groups if the embryonic loss was identified before 9 weeks’ gestation. If
diagnosed after 9 weeks, the marker levels were higher and less precise.
With a vanishing twin, first-trimester maternal serum levels of the pregnancyassociated plasma protein A (PAPP-A) can be elevated. Second-trimester
MSAFP and dimeric inhibin A levels also can be higher (Huang, 2015).

Early loss of one twin may also affect noninvasive prenatal testing using
cell-free DNA (cfDNA) (Chap. 17, p. 336). In one report, 15 percent of the
false-positive results were attributed to this effect (Futch, 2013). The
development of single-nucleotide polymorphism technology for cfDNA
testing holds promise in better identifying these cases (Curnow, 2015). Thus,
a spontaneously reduced abortus is ideally identified to help avoid confusion
with results from aneuploidy and neural-tube defect screening.

■ Congenital Malformations
The incidence of these is appreciably higher in multifetal gestations
compared with singleton ones. In one study, the congenital malformation rate
was 406 per 10,000 twins compared with 238 per 10,000 singletons
(Glinianaia, 2008). This rate in monochorionic twins was almost twice that
of dichorionic twin gestations. One large study between 1998 and 2010
found that twins had a 73-percent greater risk of congenital heart disease than
singletons. The occurrence risk and concordance were substantially higher
among monochorionic twins (Best, 2015; Gijtenbeek, 2019).
From a 30-year European registry of multifetal births, structural anomaly
rates rose steadily from 2.2 percent in 1987 to 3.3 percent in 2007 (Boyle,
2013). Yet, during this time, the proportion of dizygotic twins grew by 30
percent, whereas the proportion of monozygotic twins remained stable. This
higher risk of congenital malformations in dizygotic twins over time
correlated with increased availability of ART. An increase in birth defect
rates related to ART has been reported (Wen, 2020). However, if data are
adjusted for maternal age or duration of subfertility, the risk of congenital
anomalies does not appear to be increased by ART (Zhu, 2006).

■ Low Birthweight
Multifetal gestations are more likely to be low birthweight than singleton
pregnancies due to restricted fetal growth and preterm delivery. Birthweights
in twins closely paralleled those of singletons until 28 to 30 weeks’
gestation. Thereafter, twin birthweights progressively lagged (Fig. 48-6).
Beginning at 35 to 36 weeks’ gestation, twin birthweights clearly diverge
from those of singletons. Thus, abnormal growth should be diagnosed only
when fetal size is less than expected for multifetal gestation. Accordingly,

twin and triplet growth curves have been developed (Kim, 2010; Odibo,
2013; Vora, 2006). To confirm suitable growth in dichorionic pairs, we
perform sonography every 4 weeks, starting at 16 to 20 weeks.
Monochorionic twins are imaged every 2 weeks for twin-twin transfusion
syndrome (p. 848). To identify suspected fetal-growth restriction, we use the
standards of birthweight for twin gestations stratified by placental
chorionicity (Ananth, 1998).

FIGURE 48-6 Birthweight percentiles (25th to 75th) for 357,205 singleton neonates compared with the
50th birthweight percentile for 3714 twins, Parkland Hospital 1988–2012. Infants with major
malformations, pregnancies complicated by stillbirth, and twin gestations with >25 percent discordance
also were excluded. (Data from Dr. Don McIntire.)

■ Hypertension
Compared with mothers of singletons, those with multifetal gestations are
more likely to develop a pregnancy-associated hypertensive disorder, and the
incidence further rises with advancing fetal number (Day, 2005). In one
analysis, 14 percent of parturients with twins developed a hypertensive
disorder of pregnancy (Aviram, 2021). No specific zygosity confers a greater
rate of these disorders (Lučovnik, 2016). However, with twins and
gestational diabetes, the preeclampsia incidence is increased (Dave, 2021).

Similar to singleton pregnancies with hypertensive disorders, fetal-growth
restriction is a potential outcome (Proctor, 2019) (Chap. 40, p. 702).
Data suggest that rising fetal number and levels of antiangiogenic factor
play roles in preeclampsia pathogenesis in multiples (Chap. 40, p. 694).
Nonhypertensive women with twins compared with those with singletons
have higher levels of the antiangiogenic factors soluble fms-like tyrosine
kinase 1 (sFlt-1) and soluble endoglin and lower levels of proangiogenic
placental growth factor (PlGF) (Faupel-Badger, 2015). In women with
twins and preeclampsia in one study, both sFlt-1 levels and sFlt-1/PlGF
ratios rose and PlGF concentrations declined compared with normotensive
women with twins (Rana, 2012). Aspirin therapy is recommended to help
prevent preeclampsia and is discussed with prenatal care (p. 853).

■ Long-term Infant Development
In cohort studies evaluating twin and singletons, academic performance is
similar and is unaffected by ART-assisted conception (Christensen, 2006;
Spangmose, 2017). For mono- or dichorionic pairs born preterm,
neurodevelopment at 2 years was reported to be similar (Tosello, 2021).
However, among normal-birthweight neonates, the cerebral palsy (CP)
risk is twofold higher among multifetal pregnancies compared with
singletons. In term and preterm neonates from 12 large CP registries, the
overall CP rate was 1.6 per 1000 singleton live births and 7 per 1000 live
births from multifetal pregnancies (Perra, 2021). In this and another registry
study, the higher CP rate in multifetal gestations was attributed mainly to
prematurity (Sellier, 2021) (Chap. 34, p. 620). Fetal-growth restriction,
congenital anomalies, twin-twin transfusion syndrome, and fetal demise of a
co-twin are other potential contributors.

UNIQUE FETAL COMPLICATIONS
Several unique complications arise in multifetal pregnancies. These are
described in twins but also can be found in higher-order multifetal gestations.
Most fetal complications attributed to the twinning process itself are seen
with monozygotic twins. Their pathogenesis is best understood after
reviewing the possibilities shown in Figure 48-1.

■ Monoamnionic Twins
These twins make up less than 1 percent of all twin pregnancies and 4
percent of monochorionic pairs (Chitrit, 2021; Sebire, 2000). However, they
have high rates of many significant complications.
Fetal loss rates in monoamnionic twins are substantial. Among fetuses
alive before 16 weeks’ gestation, less than half survive to the neonatal
period. Fetal abnormalities and spontaneous miscarriage contribute to most
losses (Prefumo, 2015). A high perinatal death rate is attributable to preterm
birth, twin-twin transfusion syndrome, cord entanglement, birthweight
discordance, and congenital anomalies (Buca, 2020; Saccone, 2020).
Congenital anomaly rates in monoamnionic twins reach 18 to 28 percent
(Post, 2015). Concordance of anomalies is found in only approximately one
quarter of cases. Because of the greater risk of cardiac anomalies, fetal
echocardiography is indicated. Of note, monoamnionic twins are by
definition monozygotic and thus presumed to be genetically identical, except
in rare cases (Zwijnenburg, 2010). Interestingly, the risk for Down syndrome
in each fetus of the monozygotic pair is similar to or lower than the risk in
maternal age-matched singletons (Sparks, 2016).
Twin-twin transfusion syndrome rates in monoamnionic twins are lower
than in monochorionic diamnionic pregnancies (Murgano, 2020). This may
be due to the near universal presence in monoamnionic twins of
arterioarterial anastomoses, which are presumed to be protective (Hack,
2009). Nonetheless, twin-twin transfusion syndrome surveillance is
recommended and described in that section.
Umbilical cord entanglement is a frequent event (Fig. 48-7). Although
color-flow Doppler sonography can help diagnose entanglement, factors that
lead to pathological umbilical vessel constriction are unknown. Fetal death
from cord entanglement is thus unpredictable, and monitoring for this is
relatively ineffective. Moreover, studies of inpatient or outpatient fetal
surveillance of monoamnionic twin pregnancies show conflicting data.
Heyborne and coworkers (2005) reported no stillbirths in 43 women
admitted at 26 to 27 weeks’ gestation for daily fetal surveillance.
Conversely, 13 fetuses died in 44 women managed as outpatients. In the
MONOMONO Working Group (2019) study of 195 women with these twins,
the fetal death rate was 3.3 percent in 75 mothers admitted at 24 to 29
weeks’ gestation compared with 10.8 percent in the 120 gravidas monitored

outpatient. Notably, no fetal deaths occurred after 32 weeks’ gestation in
either group. Last, Van Mieghem and associates (2014) found the risk of
“potentially preventable death” was not significantly different in women with
inpatient (2.1 percent) or outpatient (4.7 percent) fetal surveillance.

FIGURE 48-7 Monochorionic monoamnionic cord entanglement. A. Despite marked knotting of the
cords, vigorous twins were delivered by cesarean. B. Preoperative sonogram of this pregnancy shows
entwined cords. C. This finding is accentuated with application of color Doppler. (Reproduced with
permission from Dr. Julie Lo.)

In the United States, mothers with monoamnionic twins are often admitted
at 24 to 28 weeks’ gestation to begin 1 hour of daily fetal heart rate
monitoring (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2021b).
Optimal surveillance is unclear and may include nonstress testing or
biophysical profile assessment (Chap. 20, p. 386). Betamethasone, discussed
later, is considered to promote pulmonary maturation (p. 855). If fetal testing
remains reassuring and no other intervening indications arise, cesarean
delivery is performed at 320/7 to 340/7 weeks’ gestation. To help manage
these many care items, the Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine (2020) offers
a prenatal checklist.

■ Unique and Aberrant Twinning
Several aberrations in monozygotic twinning result in a spectrum of fetal
malformations. These are traditionally ascribed to incomplete splitting of an

embryo into two separate twins. However, they theoretically may result from
early secondary fusion of two separate embryos. These separated embryos
are either symmetrical or asymmetrical. The spectrum of asymmetrical
twinning includes external parasitic twins, fetus-in-fetu, and twin reversedarterial-perfusion (TRAP) sequence, which is described later (p. 850).

Conjoined Twins
Joining of the twins may begin at either pole and produce characteristic
forms depending on which body parts are joined or shared (Fig. 48-8)
(Spencer, 2000). The frequency of conjoined twins has a prevalence of 1.5 in
100,000 births, and thoracopagus is the most common type (Mutchinick,
2011).

FIGURE 48-8 Types of conjoined twins.

Conjoined twins can be identified using sonography in the first trimester
(Chen, 2011). This provides an opportunity for parents to decide whether to
continue the pregnancy. During sonographic interrogation, fetal poles are
seen to be closely associated and do not change relative position from one
another (Fig. 48-9). Other clues are more than three vessels in the umbilical
cord, fewer limbs than expected, spine hyperflexion, bifid fetal pole, and
increased nuchal thickness. Three-dimensional ultrasound, color Doppler,
and MR imaging are valuable adjuncts to clarify shared organs (Baken,
2013).

FIGURE 48-9 Sonogram of a conjoined twin pregnancy at 13 weeks’ gestation. These
thoracoomphalopagus twins have two heads but a shared chest and abdomen.

Postnatal surgical separation may be successful if essential organs are
not shared. Conjoined twins may have discordant structural anomalies that
further complicate decisions about whether to continue the pregnancy.
Consultation with a pediatric surgeon often assists with parental decisions.
Viable-aged conjoined twins should be delivered by cesarean. For
pregnancy termination, however, vaginal delivery is possible because the
union is often pliable. Still, dystocia is common, and vaginal delivery may be
traumatic to the uterus or cervix.

External Parasitic Twins and Fetus-in-fetu
Attached to a relatively normal twin, an external parasitic twin is a grossly
defective fetus or merely fetal parts. It usually consists of externally attached
supernumerary limbs, often with some viscera. Classically, however, a
functional heart or brain is absent. Parasitic twins are believed to derive
from a dead defective twin, whose surviving tissue attaches to and receives
vascular support from the normal co-twin (Spencer, 2001). In one study,
parasitic twins accounted for 4 percent of all conjoined twins (Mutchinick,
2011).

With fetus-in-fetu, one embryo may enfold early within its co-twin and
mainly intraabdominally. Normal development of this rare parasitic twin
usually arrests in the first trimester. Thus, normal spatial arrangement and
many organs are lacking. Classically, vertebral or axial bones are found in
the fetiform mass, whereas a heart and brain are absent. These masses are
thought to be a monozygotic, monochorionic diamnionic twin gestation and
are typically supported by large parasitic vessels to the host (McNamara,
2016).

■ Monochorionic Twins and Vascular Anastomoses
All monochorionic placentas likely share some anastomotic connections.
With rare exceptions, anastomoses between twins are unique to
monochorionic twin placentas. However, the number, size, and direction of
these seemingly haphazard connections vary markedly (Fig. 48-10). In one
analysis of more than 200 monochorionic placentas, the median number of
anastomoses was eight (Zhao, 2013).

FIGURE 48-10 Shared placenta from pregnancy complicated by twin-twin transfusion syndrome. The
following color code was applied for injection. Left twin: yellow = artery, blue = vein; right twin: red =
artery, green = vein. A. Part of the arterial network of the right twin is filled with yellow dye, due to the
presence of a small artery-to-artery anastomosis (arrow). B. Close-up of the lower portion of the
placenta displays the yellow dye-filled anastomosis. (Reproduced with permission from De Paepe ME,
DeKoninck P, Friedman RM: Vascular distribution patterns in monochorionic twin placentas, Placenta.
2005 Jul;26(6):471–475.)

Anastomoses may be artery-to-artery, vein-to-vein, or artery-to-vein
communications and are located on the chorionic surface of the placenta. In
contrast to these superficial connections, deep artery-to-vein communications

can extend through the capillary bed of a given villus (Fig. 48-11). These
deep arteriovenous anastomoses create a common villous compartment or
“third circulation” that has been identified in approximately half of
monochorionic twin placentas.

FIGURE 48-11 Anastomoses between twins may be artery-to-vein (AV), artery-to-artery (AA), or
vein-to-vein (VV). Schematic representation of an AV anastomosis in twin-twin transfusion syndrome
that forms a “common villous district” or “third circulation” deep within the villous tissue. Blood from a
donor twin may be transferred to a recipient twin through this shared circulation. This transfer leads to a

growth-restricted discordant donor twin (left) with markedly reduced amnionic fluid, causing it to be
“stuck.”

Whether these anastomoses are dangerous to either twin depends on the
degree to which they are hemodynamically balanced. In those with significant
pressure or flow gradients, a shunt will develop between fetuses. This
chronic fetofetal transfusion may result in several clinical syndromes that
include twin-twin transfusion syndrome (TTTS), twin anemia–polycythemia
sequence (TAPS), and twin reversed-arterial-perfusion (TRAP) sequence.

Twin-Twin Transfusion Syndrome
In this syndrome, blood is transfused from a donor twin to its recipient
sibling such that the donor may eventually become anemic and its growth may
be restricted. In contrast, the recipient becomes polycythemic and may
develop circulatory overload with heart failure manifest as hydrops.
Classically, the donor twin is smaller and pale, and its recipient sibling is
larger and has volume excess. As a result, the recipient neonate may suffer
hyperviscosity and occlusive complications. Polycythemia in the recipient
twin may also lead to severe hyperbilirubinemia and kernicterus (Chap. 33,
p. 606). TTTS complicates 10 to 15 percent of monochorionic twins
(Marwan, 2019).
Chronic TTTS results from unidirectional flow through deep
arteriovenous anastomoses. Deoxygenated blood from a donor placental
artery is pumped into a cotyledon shared by the recipient (see Fig. 48-11).
Once oxygen exchange is completed in the chorionic villus, the oxygenated
blood leaves the cotyledon via a placental vein of the recipient twin. Unless
compensated—typically through superficial arterioarterial anastomoses—
this unidirectional flow leads to volume depletion in the donor and volume
excess in the recipient (Lewi, 2013).
TTTS typically presents in midpregnancy when the donor fetus becomes
oliguric from hypovolemia and decreased renal perfusion (Society for
Maternal-Fetal Medicine, 2013). This fetus develops oligohydramnios, and
the recipient fetus develops severe hydramnios, presumably due to increased
urine production from hypervolemia. Virtual absence of amnionic fluid in the
donor sac prevents fetal motion, giving rise to the descriptive term stuck
twin or polyhydramnios–oligohydramnios syndrome—“poly–oli.” This
amnionic fluid imbalance is associated with growth restriction, contractures,

and pulmonary hypoplasia in the donor twin, and premature rupture of the
membranes and heart failure in the recipient.
Fetal Brain Damage. Cerebral palsy, microcephaly, porencephaly, and
multicystic encephalomalacia are serious complications associated with
placental vascular anastomoses. The exact pathogenesis of neurological
damage is not fully understood but is likely caused by ischemic necrosis
leading to cavitary brain lesions. In the donor twin, ischemia results from
hypotension, anemia, or both. In the recipient, ischemia develops from blood
pressure instability and episodes of profound hypotension (Lopriore, 2011).
Cerebral lesions may also be associated with preterm delivery (Chap. 34, p.
618). In one review of 315 liveborn fetuses from pregnancies with TTTS,
cerebral abnormalities were found in 8 percent (Quarello, 2007).
If one twin of an affected pregnancy dies, blood is acutely transfused
from high-pressure vessels of the living twin through anastomoses to lowresistance vessels of the dead twin. This leads rapidly to hypovolemia and
possible ischemic antenatal brain damage in the survivor (Fusi, 1990, 1991).
A less likely cause is emboli of thromboplastic material originating from the
dead fetus.
The acuity of hypotension following the death of one twin with TTTS
makes successful intervention for the survivor nearly impossible. Even with
delivery immediately after a co-twin demise is recognized, the hypotension
that occurs at the moment of death has likely already caused irreversible
brain damage (Langer, 1997; Wada, 1998). As such, immediate delivery is
not considered beneficial in the absence of another indication.
Diagnosis. TTTS is diagnosed based on two sonographic criteria (Society
for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, 2013). First, a monochorionic pregnancy is
identified. Second, hydramnios defined by a largest vertical pocket >8 cm in
one sac and oligohydramnios defined by a largest vertical pocket <2 cm in
the other twin is found. Growth discordance or growth restriction may be
found with TTTS, but these per se are not considered diagnostic criteria.
Organizations that include the American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2021b), Society for Maternal–Fetal Medicine (2013), and
North American Fetal Therapy Network recommend sonographic
surveillance of pregnancies at risk for TTTS (Emery, 2015). These
examinations begin at approximately 16 weeks’ gestation, and studies are

performed every 2 weeks. In one study of 108 monochorionic twin pairs, a
sonographic evaluation interval >2 weeks was associated with a higher
Quintero stage at the time of TTTS diagnosis (Thorson, 2011).
Once identified, TTTS is typically classified by the Quintero (1999)
staging system (Fig. 48-12):

FIGURE 48-12 A. Sonogram of stage I TTTS at 19 weeks’ gestation. Oligohydramnios in the donor
twin sac causes the membrane to essentially wrap around the “stuck twin” and suspend it from the
anterior uterine wall. B. In this same pregnancy, hydramnios is seen in the recipient twin sac. The
measured pocket exceeds 10 cm. C. Stage II TTTS in a donor twin at 17 weeks’ gestation. Color
Doppler highlights the arteries that outline the fetal bladder, which contains no urine.

• Stage I—discordant amnionic fluid volumes as described in the earlier
paragraph, but urine is still visible sonographically within the bladder of
the donor twin
• Stage II—criteria of stage I, but urine is not visible within the donor
bladder
• Stage III—criteria of stage II and abnormal Doppler studies of the
umbilical artery, ductus venosus, or umbilical vein
• Stage IV—ascites or frank hydrops in either twin
• Stage V—demise of either fetus.
In addition to these criteria, cardiac function of the recipient twin also
declines with TTTS (Wohlmuth, 2018). Although fetal echocardiographic
findings are not part of the Quintero staging system, many centers routinely
perform fetal echocardiography for TTTS. Theoretically, earlier diagnosis of
fetal cardiomyopathy may identify pregnancies that would benefit from early
intervention (Votava-Smith, 2015). One measure, the myocardial
performance index (MPI), is a Doppler index of each ventricle’s function.
Scoring systems that include cardiac function have been developed, but their

usefulness to predict outcomes remains controversial (Miller, 2021b; Society
for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, 2013).
Management and Prognosis. The prognosis for multifetal gestations
complicated by TTTS is related to Quintero stage and gestational age at
presentation. Some stage I cases remain stable or regress without
intervention. However, 60 percent progress (Emery, 2016; Stirnemann,
2021). Conversely, outcomes in those identified at stage III or higher are
much worse, and the perinatal loss rate is 70 to 100 percent without
intervention (Miller, 2021b; Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, 2013).
Several therapies available for TTTS include laser ablation of vascular
placental anastomoses, amnioreduction, and selective feticide. Similar to
amniocentesis (Chap. 17, p. 344), amnioreduction is needle drainage of
excess amnionic fluid.
These techniques have been evaluated in randomized trials. The
Eurofetus trial included 142 women with severe TTTS diagnosed before 26
weeks’ gestation. Participants were randomly assigned to laser ablation of
vascular anastomoses or to serial amnioreduction (Senat, 2004). Laser
ablation yielded a 76-percent rate of survival to age 6 months for at least one
twin compared with a 51-percent rate with amnioreduction. Analyses of most
randomized studies confirm better neonatal outcomes with laser therapy
compared with selective amnioreduction (Marwan, 2019; Roberts, 2008;
Rossi, 2008, 2009). However, evaluation of twins from the Eurofetus trial
through 6 years of age did not demonstrate an additional survival benefit
beyond 6 months or improved neurological outcomes in those treated with
laser (Salomon, 2010). At this time, laser ablation of anastomoses is
preferred for severe TTTS (stages II–IV). Optimal therapy for stage I disease
is controversial, and laser ablation or expectant surveillance is an option
(Emery, 2015; Stirnemann, 2021).
Of techniques, an ablation method may laser individual anastomoses or
may ablate the entire the vascular equator. This equator is the border
between twin vasculature on the chorionic surface. Equatorial ablation,
which is referred to as a Solomon technique, reduces the likelihood of TTTS
recurrence. This method also lowers rates of TAPS, which can be a lasertherapy sequelae and described next (Slaghekke, 2014).
After laser therapy, close ongoing surveillance is necessary. Weekly
ultrasound and Doppler studies are recommended (Marwan, 2019; Miller

2021b). These evaluations monitor fetal growth, amnionic fluid volumes,
placental function, and anemia. Delivery timing is usually influenced by
TTTS recurrence, fetal-growth restriction, or by abnormal Doppler
velocimetry values, which reflect poor placental function (Chap. 47, p. 830).
Another treatment option, selective fetal reduction, has generally been
considered if severe amnionic fluid and growth disturbances develop before
20 weeks. In such cases, both fetuses typically will die without intervention.
Any substance injected into one twin may affect the other twin because of
shared circulations. Thus, for the fetus chosen for reduction, feticidal
methods aim to occlude the umbilical vein or umbilical cord.
Radiofrequency ablation, fetoscopic ligation, or coagulation with laser,
monopolar, or bipolar energy are options (Challis, 1999; Chang, 2009;
Parra-Cordero, 2016). Even after these procedures, however, risks to the
remaining fetus are still appreciable (Rossi, 2009). Early termination of the
entire pregnancy is yet another option.

Twin Anemia–Polycythemia Sequence
Chronic fetofetal transfusion underlies this form, which is characterized by
significant hemoglobin differences between donor and recipient twins.
Similar to TTTS, the donor twin in spontaneous TAPS is anemic and usually
smaller than the recipient twin, which is polycythemic. However, TAPS
lacks the discrepancies in amnionic fluid volumes typical of TTTS.
Spontaneous TAPS can develop at any gestational age and complicates 1 to
6 percent of monochorionic twins (Marwan, 2019). Iatrogenic TAPS
develops in up to 13 percent of pregnancies after laser ablation of the
placenta and usually develops within 5 weeks of a procedure (Lewi, 2013;
Tollenaar, 2021). In iatrogenic TAPS, the former TTTS recipient twin
usually becomes anemic, whereas the former donor becomes polycythemic
(Tollenaar, 2016).
Sonographically measuring blood flow velocity in the fetal middle
cerebral artery (MCA) can accurately identify fetal anemia (Chap. 14, 262).
Antenatally, TAPS is diagnosed by discordant MCA peak systolic velocity
(PSV) values between twins. Specifically, an MCA-PSV value that is >1.5
multiples of the median (MoM) in the donor twin and <1.0 MoM in the
recipient twin (Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, 2013). Others have
suggested alternative threshold values (Khalil, 2020; Tollenaar, 2019).

A staging system for TAPS has been proposed, and higher stage is
associated with increased perinatal mortality rate (Slaghekke, 2010;
Tollenaar, 2021). Screening for spontaneous TAPS is controversial, as
improvements in perinatal outcomes have not been demonstrated (Khalil,
2016; Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, 2013).
Management options include expectant care, delivery, laser surgery,
intrauterine transfusion, selective feticide, and pregnancy termination. A
clinical trial evaluating fetoscopic laser therapy for TAPS is currently
ongoing. Antenatal surveillance mirrors that just described for TTTS. Again,
delivery timing is usually influenced by worsening fetal growth or by
abnormal Doppler velocimetry values. Postnatal treatment often requires
blood transfusion for the donor twin and partial exchange transfusion of the
recipient twin.

Twin Reversed-arterial-perfusion Sequence
Also known as acardiac twinning, this rare, serious complication of
monochorionic multifetal gestation has an estimated incidence of 1 case in
35,000 births. With classic TRAP sequence, the twin pair is a normally
formed donor twin that shows features of heart failure and a grossly
malformed recipient twin that lacks a heart (acardius) and other structures. In
one theory, the TRAP sequence is caused by a large artery-to-artery placental
shunt, often also accompanied by a vein-to-vein shunt (Fig. 48-13). Within
the single, shared placenta, arterial perfusion pressure of the donor twin
exceeds that in the recipient twin. The recipient thus receives reversed blood
flow containing deoxygenated arterial blood from its co-twin (Lewi, 2013).
This “used” arterial blood reaches the recipient twin through its umbilical
arteries and preferentially goes to its iliac vessels. Thus, only the lower body
is perfused, and disrupted growth and development of the upper body
follows. In these cases, failed head growth is called acardius acephalus; a
partially developed head with identifiable limbs is called acardius
myelacephalus; and failure of any recognizable structure to form is acardius
amorphous, which is shown in Figure 48-14. Because of this vascular
connection, the normal donor twin must not only support its own circulation
but also must pump blood to and through the underdeveloped acardiac
recipient. This may lead to cardiomegaly and high-output heart failure in the
donor twin (Fox, 2007; Marwan, 2019).

FIGURE 48-13 Twin reversed-arterial-perfusion sequence. In the TRAP sequence, there is usually a
normally formed donor twin that has features of heart failure, and a recipient twin that lacks a heart. It
is hypothesized that the TRAP sequence follows a large artery-to-artery placental shunt, often also
accompanied by a vein-to-vein shunt. Within the single, shared placenta, perfusion pressure of the donor
twin overpowers that in the recipient twin, who thus receives reverse blood flow from its twin sibling.
The “used” arterial blood that reaches the recipient twin preferentially goes to its iliac vessels and thus
perfuses only the lower body. This disrupts growth and development of the upper body.

FIGURE 48-14 Photograph of an acardiac twin weighing 475 grams. The underdeveloped head is
indicated by the black arrow, and its details are shown in the inset. A yellow clamp is seen on its
umbilical cord. Its viable donor co-twin was delivered vaginally at 36 weeks and weighed 2325 grams.
(Reproduced with permission from Dr. Michael D. Hnat.)

In the past, the donor-twin mortality rate exceeded 50 percent. This
stemmed largely from complications of prematurity or from a prolonged
high-output state leading to cardiac failure (Dashe, 2001). Risk is directly
related to size of the acardiac twin. When the acardiac twin is large,
treatment is generally offered. Radiofrequency ablation (RFA) is the
preferred modality of therapy, and contemporary reports now suggest
improved perinatal outcomes. The North American Fetal Therapy Network
reviewed their experiences with 98 cases from 1998 to 2008 in which RFA
of the umbilical cord was performed. Median gestational age at delivery was
37 weeks’ gestation, and 80 percent of donor neonates survived (Lee, 2013).

■ Hydatidiform Mole with Coexisting Normal Fetus
This rare gestation contains one normal fetus, and its co-twin is a complete
molar pregnancy. It must be differentiated from a partial molar pregnancy,
which is a singleton, triploid fetus and its placenta composed of molar tissue
(Fig. 13-4, p. 238).
Diagnosis in the first half of pregnancy is common. Sonographically, a
normal-appearing twin is accompanied by its co-twin, which is a large
placenta containing multiple small anechoic cysts. Often, these pregnancies
are terminated, but pregnancy continuation is increasingly adopted. The live
birth rate from one review was 50 percent (Zilberman, 2020). The risk of
gestational trophoblastic neoplasia (GTN), which is a malignant sequelae of
hydatidiform mole, is similar whether the pregnancy is terminated or not
(Massardier, 2009; Sebire, 2002). Given the limited number of cases, robust
data for firm recommendations are lacking. Discussed in Chapter 13 (p.
237), complications of expectant management include vaginal bleeding,
hyperemesis gravidarum, thyrotoxicosis, and early-onset preeclampsia. Many
of these complications result in preterm birth with its attendant adverse
perinatal outcomes. Logically, close antepartum and postpartum surveillance
is needed for those continuing the pregnancy. Postpartum GTN surveillance
is essential and described in Chapter 13 (p. 240).

DISCORDANT GROWTH
Fetal size inequality develops in approximately 15 percent of twin gestations
(Miller, 2012). Generally, as the weight difference within a twin pair grows,
the perinatal mortality rate rises proportionately. Earlier discordancy and
monochorionicity pose increased mortality risks for the smaller twin.
Specifically, with discordant growth identified at or before 20 weeks’
gestation in studies, 8 to 15 percent of the growth-restricted fetuses die
(Couck, 2020; Curado, 2020; D’Antonio, 2018).

■ Pathogenesis
The etiology of growth discordance in monochorionic twins likely differs
from that in dichorionic twins. First, in monochorionic twins, the single
placenta is not always equally shared, and this leads to higher discordant

growth rates than in dichorionic pairs (Fig. 48-15). In cases with TTTS,
discordancy in monochorionic twins is usually attributed to placental
anastomoses that cause a perfusion imbalance between twins. Reduced
perfusion of the donor twin can diminish placental and fetal growth (Lewi,
2013). Last, monochorionic twins at times can be discordant in size because
they are discordant for structural anomalies.

FIGURE 48-15 Marked growth discordance in monochorionic twins. (Reproduced with permission
from Dr. Laura Greer.)

In dichorionic twins, discordancy may result from various factors.
Dizygotic fetuses may have different genetic growth potential, especially if
they are of opposite genders. Second, because the placentas are separate and
require more implantation space, one placenta might have a suboptimal
implantation site. Additionally, umbilical cord abnormalities such as
velamentous insertion, marginal insertion, or vasa previa may play a role
(Chap. 6, p. 114). One study showed that the incidence of severe discordancy
is twice as great in triplets as it is in twins (Bagchi, 2006). This supports the
view that in-utero crowding promotes multifetal growth restriction. Placental

pathology may be contributory. In one study of 668 twin placentas, a strong
relationship between histological placental abnormalities and birthweight
discordancy was observed in dichorionic but not monochorionic twin
pregnancies (Kent, 2012).

■ Diagnosis
Antenatal size discordancy between twins can be best determined
sonographically. Crown-rump length differences are not reliable predictors
for birthweight discordance (Miller, 2012). Thus, most discordancy
surveillance begins after the first trimester. One common method uses
sonographic fetal biometry to compute an estimated weight for each twin
(Chap. 15, p. 274). Percent discordancy is then calculated as the weight of
the larger twin minus the weight of the smaller twin, divided by the weight of
the larger twin. The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
(2021b) defines discordance as an estimated fetal weight difference >20
percent.

■ Management
The risk for adverse perinatal outcomes in the setting of growth discordance
remains controversial. Some suggest that twin gestations with discordant
growth between two fetuses that are appropriately grown for gestational age
are not at increased risk for adverse outcomes (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2021b; Appleton, 2007). Others have
shown an increased risk for adverse fetal outcomes but not for poor neonatal
outcomes (Amaru, 2004; D’Antonio, 2018). However, accumulated data
suggest that weight discordancy exceeding 25 to 30 percent most accurately
predicts an adverse perinatal outcome (Cohen, 2001; Chen, 2019). At
Parkland Hospital, twin weight-discordancy values from 1370 delivered
twin pairs were stratified by percentage increments (Hollier, 1999). The
incidence of respiratory distress syndrome, intraventricular hemorrhage,
seizures, periventricular leukomalacia, sepsis, and necrotizing enterocolitis
rose directly with the percentage of weight discordancy. Rates of these
conditions grew substantially if discordancy exceeded 25 percent. The
relative risk of fetal death increased significantly to 5.6 if weight
discordancy was >30 percent and rose to 18.9 if >40 percent.

Nonstress testing and biophysical profile assessment have all been
recommended in management of twin growth discordancy. If significant
discordancy is identified in a monochorionic twin pair, umbilical artery
Doppler studies in the smaller fetus may help guide management (Gratacós,
2007). Data are limited to establish the optimal timing of delivery of twins
with size discordancy alone. At advanced gestational ages, delivery can be
pursued.

Selective Fetal-growth Restriction
Restricted growth of one twin fetus is termed selective fetal-growth
restriction (sFGR) and usually develops late in the second and early third
trimester. Some diagnose sFGR if the abdominal circumference (AC)
measurement difference exceeds 20 mm or if fetal-growth discordance is >20
percent (Khalil, 2019). If sFGR is diagnosed, weekly testing of fetal wellbeing, evaluation of amnionic fluid volume, and umbilical artery Doppler
velocimetry are undertaken. Investigators have correlated Doppler results
with placental findings and with the degree of sFGR to predict fetal outcome
(Gratacós, 2012). These correlations have yielded categories of sFGR.
• Type I shows positive end-diastolic flow, a smaller degree of weight
discordance, and a relatively benign clinical course.
• Type II displays persistently absent end-diastolic flow in the smaller twin
and carries a high risk of deterioration and demise.
• Type III has intermittently absent or reversed end-diastolic flow. Because
of large artery-to-artery anastomoses associated with the placentas in this
last category, type III is associated with a lower risk of deterioration than
type II. In all evaluated cases, unequally shared placenta was noted to some
degree.
Serial evaluation of fetal growth is performed every 3 weeks (Chap 47,
p. 829). At Parkland Hospital, daily inpatient surveillance is undertaken in
women with fetal-growth restriction in one twin or with twin discordancy
exceeding 25 percent in the setting of a twin with restricted growth.

FETAL DEMISE

At any time during multifetal pregnancy, one or more fetuses may die, either
simultaneously or sequentially. Most causes stem from complications of fetal
anomaly or chorionicity. Related to the latter, compared with dichorionic
twins, monochorionic pairs suffer higher rates of sFGR, TTTS, or TAPS
from unequal vascular anastomoses, and monoamnionic pairs can die from
cord entanglement.
When death is early, it may manifest as a vanishing twin (p. 843). For the
survivor, the risk of death after the first trimester is not increased, and the
pregnancy requires no additional surveillance for this specific indication. In
a slightly more advanced gestation, the dead fetus may be compressed
appreciably—fetus compressus, or it may be flattened remarkably through
desiccation—fetus papyraceus (Fig. 48-16).

FIGURE 48-16 This fetus papyraceus is a tan ovoid mass compressed against the fetal membranes.
Anatomical parts can be identified as marked. Demise of this twin had been noted during sonographic
examination performed at 17 weeks’ gestation. Its viable co-twin delivered at 40 weeks. (Reproduced
with permission from Dr. Michael V. Zaretsky.)

In gestations past 20 weeks, the stillbirth rate in twins in the United
States was 1.4 percent of live births and exceeded the 0.6-percent rate in
singletons (MacDorman, 2015). After a single intrauterine fetal demise
(sIUFD) in these later gestations, risks to the remaining co-twin include
death, preterm birth, and neurological injury (D’Antonio, 2017; Mackie,
2019). With the last, acute hypovolemia from volume shifts within placental
anastomoses occurs immediately, and neurological injury is not preventable.
Related to co-twin death, monochorionic diamnionic twins with an
sIUFD were 16 times more likely to experience death of the co-twin than
were dichorionic twins with an sIUFD in one large series (Morikawa, 2012).
In most studies, the rate of co-twin demise after sIUFD declines after 26 to
28 weeks’ gestation and with advancing gestational age (Mackie, 2019;
McPherson, 2012; Southwest Thames Obstetric Research Collaborative,
2012; Wood, 2014).
The rate of preterm birth following sIUFD is increased but is similar
between mono- and dichorionic twins. Advancing rates are seen at later
gestational ages (D’Antonio, 2017; Ong, 2006).
The neurological prognosis for a surviving co-twin is influenced by
chorionicity. In one review of diamnionic twin pregnancies complicated by
sIUFD before 34 weeks, neurodevelopmental morbidity was 29 percent in
monochorionic twins and was threefold higher than in dichorionic gestations
(Mackie, 2019). In other series with sIUFD after 34 weeks, the likelihood of
neurological deficits was essentially the same between monochorionic and
dichorionic twin pregnancies (Hillman, 2011).
Because of this significant neurological risk, if one fetus of a
monochorionic twin gestation dies after the first trimester but before
viability, pregnancy termination can be considered (Blickstein, 2013). After
viability, ultimate delivery timing balances the risk of prematurity against cotwin demise. Early management emphasizes maternal and co-twin safety and
gestation prolongation (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2021b). Antenatal corticosteroids for survivor lung maturity
can be considered. For sIUFD occurring after 34 weeks’ gestation, delivery
is reasonable (Spong, 2011).
Last, the death of one fetus could theoretically trigger coagulation defects
in the mother. Only a few cases of maternal coagulopathy after a single fetal
death in a twin pregnancy have been reported. This is probably because the

surviving twin is usually delivered within a few weeks of the demise (Eddib,
2006).

PRENATAL CARE
At Parkland Hospital clinics, women with multifetal gestations are seen
every 2 weeks beginning at 22 weeks’ gestation. One imperative is preterm
delivery prevention, and a digital cervical examination is performed at each
visit to screen for cervical shortening or dilation.
The maternal diet should provide additional requirements for calories,
protein, minerals, vitamins, and essential fatty acids. The Institute of
Medicine (IOM) (2009) recommends a 37- to 54-lb weight gain for women
with twins and a normal body mass index. The daily recommended
augmented caloric intake for women with twins is 40 to 45 kcal/kg/d. Diets
contain 20 percent protein, 40 percent carbohydrate, and 40 percent fat
divided into three meals and three snacks daily. Based on upper-intake levels
from the Food and Nutrition Board of the IOM, one review endorsed
supplementation of calcium, magnesium, zinc, and vitamins C, D, and E
(Goodnight, 2009).
Discussed in Chapter 40 (p. 705), low-dose aspirin prophylaxis is
recommended in women at high risk of preeclampsia, which includes those
with a multifetal pregnancy (LeFevre, 2014). An 81-mg oral daily dose is
initiated between 12 and 28 weeks’ gestation and is continued until delivery
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020b).
Prenatal screening for fetal aneuploidy is carried out as described in
Chapter 17 (p. 334). Thus, the combined test or secondary screening is done
and interpreted with value thresholds set for multifetal pregnancies.
Noninvasive prenatal screening with cfDNA also is acceptable (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020d; Judah, 2021; Khalil,
2021). Interpretation caveats for those with a vanishing twin were described
earlier (p. 844).
To screen for structural anomalies, a midpregnancy anatomic sonography
survey is performed. In addition, monochorionic twins undergo
echocardiography because of an increased risk for cardiac anomalies
(Bahtiyar, 2007). As noted earlier (p. 844), fetal growth is assessed with
sonography. Amnionic fluid volume is quantified using the deepest vertical

pocket in each sac. A measurement <2 cm is considered oligohydramnios,
and a measurement >8 cm is considered hydramnios (Duryea, 2017;
Hernandez, 2012).
Twin pregnancies are at increased risk for stillbirth compared to
singleton gestations. The intrauterine fetal death rate is two- to threefold
higher in monochorionic pregnancies compared with dichorionic gestations
(Lee, 2008; Morikawa, 2012). Cheong-See and colleagues (2016) reported a
higher stillbirth rate in monochorionic gestations compared with dichorionic
gestations beyond 34 weeks’ gestation. Outpatient weekly nonstress test or
biophysical profile may help lower the rate of intrauterine death in twin
gestations (Booker, 2015; Burgess, 2014). Weekly antenatal surveillance is
undertaken at 36 weeks’ gestation for uncomplicated dichorionic pregnancies
and at 32 weeks’ gestation or uncomplicated monochorionic gestations
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2021a). However,
all antenatal testing schemes have high false-positive rates. In cases of
abnormal testing in one twin and normal results in another, iatrogenic preterm
delivery remains a major concern. Therefore, patients are carefully
counseled prior to initiating antenatal testing in twins.

PRETERM BIRTH
Gestational length shortens and preterm birth risk rises with accruing fetal
number. In 2019 in the United States, the preterm birth rate in twins and
triplets was 60 and 98 percent, respectively (Martin, 2021). One review
showed that approximately 60 percent of preterm births in twins are
indicated, a third result from spontaneous labor, and 10 percent follow
preterm prelabor rupture of membranes (PPROM) (Chauhan, 2010).
Of risks, preterm birth rates vary with chorionicity and are higher with
monochorionic compared with dichorionic twins. Other implicated factors
are prior preterm birth, adolescence, nulliparity, obesity, and diabetes
(Marleen, 2018, 2021).

■ Prediction
One goal of multifetal prenatal care is to identify women likely to experience
preterm delivery. To and associates (2006) sonographically measured

cervical length in 1163 twin pregnancies at 22 to 24 weeks’ gestation. Rates
of preterm delivery before 32 weeks were 66 percent in those with cervical
lengths of 10 mm; 24 percent for lengths of 20 mm; and only 1 percent for
lengths of 40 mm. In one review, a cervical length <20 mm was most
accurate for predicting birth before 34 weeks’ gestation. The specificity was
97 percent, and positive likelihood ratio was 9.0 (Conde-Agudelo, 2010).
Notably, a closed internal os by digital examination predicted postponed
delivery equally well as the combination of a normal sonographically
measured cervical length and negative fetal fibronectin test result (McMahon,
2002).
Unfortunately, cervical length assessment in twin pregnancies has not led
to improved outcomes (Gordon, 2016). The Society for Maternal–Fetal
Medicine (2016) recommends against routine cervical length screening in
multifetal gestations.
Fetal fibronectin levels also may predict preterm birth (Marleen, 2020).
Again, neonatal outcomes are not improved in twins, and this screening tool
is not recommended (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists,
2021b).

■ Prevention
Bed Rest
In general, most strategies for preterm birth prevention are ineffective for
singleton and multifetal pregnancies (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2021b). Of options, bed rest with or without hospitalization
does not prolong multifetal pregnancy. In one metaanalysis, the practice did
not reduce the risk of preterm birth (da Silva Lopes, 2017). At Parkland
Hospital, elective hospitalization was compared with outpatient management,
and no advantages were found (Andrews, 1991). Importantly, however,
almost half of women managed as outpatients required admission for specific
indications such as hypertension or threatened preterm delivery.
Limited physical activity, early work leave, more frequent health-care
visits, serial sonographic examinations, and structured maternal education
regarding preterm delivery risks have been advocated to reduce preterm
birth rates in women with multiple fetuses. However, little evidence suggests
that these practices substantially change this outcome.

Prophylactic Tocolysis
This has not been studied extensively in multifetal pregnancies. In one
review of prophylactic oral beta-mimetic therapy that included 374 twin
pregnancies, treatment did not reduce the rate of twins delivering before 37
or before 34 weeks’ gestation (Yamasmit, 2015). In light of the Food and
Drug Administration warning against the use of oral terbutaline because of
maternal side effects, the prophylactic use of beta-mimetic drugs in multifetal
gestations seems unwarranted.

Progesterone Therapy
17-alpha-hydroxyprogesterone caproate (17-OHPC) injections are not
effective for multifetal gestations (Caritis, 2009; Combs, 2011; Rouse,
2007). Moreover, women carrying twins and having a cervical length <36
mm or a length <25 mm did not benefit despite their greater risk for preterm
birth (Durnwald, 2010; Senat, 2013).
Vaginal micronized progesterone in various formulations in randomized
studies has also proved ineffective for preterm birth prevention before 34
weeks in a general twin population (Norman, 2009; Rode, 2011). For women
with a short cervix, subgroup analysis and a metaanalysis show conflicting
results regarding benefits (D’Antonio, 2021; Klein, 2011; Rehal, 2021). At
Parkland Hospital, current management of multifetal gestations does not
typically include any progesterone therapy.

Cervical Cerclage
Prophylactic cerclage does not improve perinatal outcome in women with
twin pregnancies. Studies have included women with and without a short
cervix (D’Antonio, 2021; Jarde, 2017; Newman, 2002). Physical
examination–indicated cerclage in women with a second-trimester twin
gestation and a dilated cervix may be beneficial. Roman and coworkers
(2016, 2020) reported that women undergoing rescue cerclage plus
prophylactic antibiotic and indomethacin administration before 24 weeks’
gestation had lower preterm birth and perinatal mortality rates than those
without a cerclage.

Pessary

The silicone Arabin vaginal pessary encircles and theoretically compresses
the cervix, alters the inclination of the cervical canal, and relieves direct
pressure on the internal cervical os. In a study of its use in women with a
short cervix between 18 and 22 weeks’ gestation, a subgroup analysis of 23
women with twins showed a significant reduction in the delivery rate before
32 weeks compared with the rate in 23 control pregnancies (Arabin, 2003).
In another randomized trial of twins, women treated with a cervical pessary
had significantly fewer births before 34 weeks (Goya, 2016).
Other randomized studies comparing pessary against expectant care are
less favorable. In one trial with 1180 uncomplicated twin pregnancies,
pessary use failed to alter the preterm birth rate (Nicolaides, 2016). Another
trial of 813 unselected women had similar findings. However, delivery rates
before 32 weeks were lower—29 versus 14 percent—in a subset of women
with a cervical length <38 mm (Liem, 2013). Instead, other trials show no
benefit from pessary use in this subgroup (Nicolaides, 2016; Norman, 2021).
At this time, pessary use is not recommended by the American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2021b).

■ Treatment
Tocolytic therapy to help halt preterm labor in multifetal pregnancy does not
measurably improve neonatal outcomes (Canadian Preterm Labor
Investigators Group, 1992; Yamasmit, 2015). Moreover, tocolytic therapy in
women with a multifetal pregnancy entails higher maternal risk than in
singleton pregnancy. This stems in part from augmented pregnancy-induced
hypervolemia, which raises cardiac demands and increases the susceptibility
to iatrogenic pulmonary edema (Chap. 50, p. 883). In one study, all women
with a multifetal gestation treated with a beta-mimetic drug for preterm labor
had more cardiovascular complications—43 versus 4 percent—than women
with singletons (Gabriel, 1994). In a retrospective analysis, nifedipine
tocolysis in 58 singleton and 32 twin pregnancies led to higher incidences of
side effects such as maternal tachycardia in women with twins—19 versus 9
percent (Derbent, 2011).
Antenatal corticosteroids for fetal lung maturation have not been well
studied in multifetal gestations. Of studies, many compare outcomes among
singletons and twins whose mothers either did or did not receive this therapy.
In one large retrospective study evaluating betamethasone, neonatal

morbidity rates were reduced in both twin and singleton treated groups
(Melamed, 2016). Another similar comparison found reduced rates of
periventricular hemorrhage rates in treated groups but not improved
respiratory distress syndrome (RDS) rates (Gonçalves-Ferri, 2021).
Similarly, in another study, short-term neurological outcome was better in
treated twin and singletons, but rates of mortality, RDS, and cerebral palsy
were not reduced (Ushida, 2020). However, in one study solely with twins,
the rate of RDS or of composite neonatal morbidity was not lower with
corticosteroid therapy (Viteri, 2016). These authors posited
pharmacokinetics in twin gestation as a potential explanation. Currently,
recommended use of agents is the same for multifetal and singleton gestations
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2021b). This therapy
is described fully in Chapter 45 (p. 802).

■ Preterm Prelabor Membrane Rupture
The frequency of PPROM rises with increasing plurality. In a populationbased study of more than 290,000 live births, the proportion of preterm birth
complicated by PPROM was 13 percent in singletons. This rate was 17, 20,
20, and 100 percent in twins, triplets, quadruplets, and higher-order
multiples, respectively (Pakrashi, 2013). For both twin and singleton
pregnancies, most studies show comparable neonatal risk with expectant
management, which is outlined in Chapter 45 (p. 798) (Kibel, 2017).
However, the time between births, often termed latency, is shorter with
twins. With PPROM after 24 weeks’ gestation, the median number of days to
subsequent delivery was 4 days for twins compared with 7 days for
singletons in one study (Madden, 2021). After 30 weeks’ gestation, this
latency for twins is significantly shortened (Mercer, 1993).

■ Delayed Delivery of Second Twin
Rarely, after preterm birth of one fetus, it may be advantageous for
undelivered fetus(es) to remain in utero. This may be especially so at
periviable gestational ages. However, this advantage must be balanced
against substantial maternal risk. In one systematic review, nearly 40 percent
of mothers suffered complications with delayed delivery (Cheung, 2020).
These include infection, postpartum hemorrhage, and placental abruption.

From population-based data of delayed deliveries, the median latency
duration was 6 days (range 6 to 107 days) in 200 twin pregnancies (Zhang,
2004). In all studies, retained fetuses had better overall survival rates than
the first-born neonate. In one series of 38 twins, the mean latency was 19
days. Of first-born twins born at <25 weeks’ gestation, none survived, but 50
percent of their co-twins did. Beyond 25 weeks, survival rates were 65 for
first-born and 95 percent for second-born twins (Arabin, 2009). In their
series of 28 twin pairs, cerclage, antibiotic therapy, and tocolysis did not
improve outcomes (Fayad 2003).
If delayed delivery is attempted, counseling should include the potential
for serious maternal complications. The range of gestational age for which
benefits outweigh the risks for delayed delivery is likely narrow, and
gestations of 22 to 24 weeks would seem the most probable to benefit
(Oyelese, 2005). In our experience, good candidates for delayed delivery are
rare.

LABOR AND DELIVERY
■ Delivery Timing
Several factors affect this timing and include gestational age, fetal growth,
maternal complications, lung maturity, and stillbirth risk. The substantially
greater stillbirth rate in monochorionic monoamnionic twins was discussed
earlier (p. 845). In dichorionic diamnionic twins, stillbirth rates rose to 10.6
deaths per 1000 pregnancies at 386/7 weeks’ gestation in a systematic review
of more than 30,000 twin pairs. The peak rate in monochorionic diamnionic
twins was 9.6 deaths per 1000 pregnancies at 376/7 weeks (Cheong-See,
2016).
In uncomplicated twins, stillbirth risk is balanced against the morbidity
of prematurity. Pulmonary maturation is usually synchronous in twins and
occurs several weeks earlier than in singletons (Leveno, 1984). However, in
some cases, pulmonary function may differ. With sFGR, the smaller, stressed
twin has lower rates of RDS but higher rates of bronchopulmonary dysplasia
(Groene, 2021).
The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2021b)
recommends delivery at 380/7 to 386/7 weeks’ gestation for uncomplicated

dichorionic diamnionic twin pregnancies. Uncomplicated monochorionic
diamnionic twin pregnancies can be delivered between 340/7 and 376/7
weeks. For monochorionic monoamnionic twin pregnancies, delivery is
recommended at 320/7 to 340/7 weeks. At Parkland Hospital, we generally
follow these recommendations and do not routinely deliver monochorionic
diamnionic twin pregnancies before 37 weeks unless another obstetrical
indication develops.

■ Preparations
A litany of complications may be encountered during labor and delivery of
multiple fetuses. Rates of uterine contractile dysfunction, abnormal fetal
presentation, umbilical cord prolapse, placenta previa, placental abruption,
emergent operative delivery, and postpartum hemorrhage rates from uterine
atony are higher. Moreover, second twins at term have worse composite
neonatal outcomes compared with outcomes of their co-twin regardless of
delivery method (Smith, 2007; Thorngren-Jerneck, 2001). All of these must
be anticipated, and thus certain precautions and special arrangements are
prudent. These include the following:
1. An appropriately trained obstetrical attendant should remain with the
mother throughout labor. Continuous electronic monitoring is preferable. If
membranes are ruptured and the cervix dilated, the presenting fetus is
monitored internally.
2. An intravenous infusion system capable of delivering fluid rapidly is
established. In the absence of hemorrhage, lactated Ringer or an aqueous
dextrose solution is infused at a rate of 60 to 125 mL/hr.
3. Blood for transfusion is readily available if needed.
4. An obstetrician skilled in intrauterine identification of fetal parts and in
intrauterine manipulation of a fetus should be present.
5. A sonography machine is readily available to evaluate the presentation
and position of the fetuses during labor and to image the remaining fetus
after delivery of the first.
6. An anesthesia team is immediately available in the event that emergent
cesarean delivery is necessary or that intrauterine manipulation is required
for vaginal delivery.

7. For each fetus, at least one attendant who is skilled in resuscitation and
care of newborns and who has been appropriately informed of the case
should be immediately available.
8. The delivery area should provide adequate space for the nursing,
obstetrical, anesthesia, and pediatric team members to work effectively.
Equipment must be on site to provide emergent anesthesia, operative
intervention, and maternal and neonatal resuscitation.

■ Analgesia and Anesthesia
For multifetal pregnancies, decisions regarding analgesia and anesthesia
must factor planned route of delivery. Other potential problems may stem
from preterm labor, preeclampsia, desultory labor, need for intrauterine
manipulation, and postpartum uterine atony and hemorrhage.
Labor epidural analgesia is ideal because it provides excellent pain
relief and can be rapidly extended cephalad if internal podalic version or
cesarean delivery is required. If general anesthesia becomes necessary for
intrauterine manipulation during vaginal birth, uterine relaxation can be
accomplished rapidly with a halogenated inhalation agent (Chap. 25, p. 481).
Some clinicians use intravenous or sublingual nitroglycerin or intravenous
terbutaline to achieve uterine relaxation. If used, these agents are usually best
administered by the anesthesia team.

■ Fetal Presentation
For labor and delivery, the fetal presentations are best determined
sonographically. If active labor is confirmed, the decision for vaginal or
cesarean delivery is reached, and fetal presentation is a major factor. Among
the possible presentation combinations, those most common at admission for
delivery are cephalic-cephalic, cephalic-breech, and cephalic-transverse. At
Parkland Hospital between 2008 and 2013, 71 percent of twin pregnancies
had a cephalic presentation of the first fetus at the time of labor and delivery
admission. During parturition, fetal presentation of a second twin can be
unstable. For them, compound or footling breech presentations and face or
brow attitudes are relatively common and even more so if fetuses are small
or numerous, amnionic fluid is excessive, or maternal parity is high. Cord
prolapse also is frequent in these circumstances.

■ Delivery Route
Cephalic First Twin
With cephalic–cephalic presentation, general consensus supports
consideration of vaginal birth in a laboring woman near term (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2021b; D’Alton, 2010). From
studies, planned cesarean delivery does not improve neonatal outcome when
both twins are cephalic (de Castro, 2016; Schmitz, 2017). With trials of
labor, vaginal delivery rates approximate 80 percent.
With cephalic–noncephalic presentation, the optimal delivery route
remains controversial. Patient selection and provider expertise with vaginal
breech delivery is crucial and described in Chapter 28 (p. 527). As a result,
one common option is cesarean delivery of both twins. Less often, after
spontaneous vaginal delivery of a first twin, intrapartum external cephalic
version of the second twin can be performed. In case series, this practice,
compared with internal podalic version, was associated with higher rates of
intrapartum cesarean delivery and fetal distress (Gocke, 1989; Smith 1997).
With internal podalic version, a hand placed into the uterus grasps fetal feet
to deliver the fetus by breech extraction (Fig. 48-17). Last and least
desirable is vaginal delivery of the first but cesarean delivery of the second
twin due to intrapartum complications. These are umbilical cord prolapse,
placental abruption, contracting cervix, or nonreassuring fetal heart rate.
Most but not all studies report the worst composite fetal outcomes for this
scenario (Alexander, 2008; Rossi, 2011).

FIGURE 48-17 Internal podalic version. Upward pressure on the head by an abdominal hand is applied
(not shown) as downward traction is exerted on the feet.

For cephalic–noncephalic twins, each with birthweights >1500 g and
gestational ages >32 weeks, several reports attest to the safety of vaginal
delivery. In one study of 5915 pregnancies with a cephalic first twin and
either cephalic or noncephalic second twin, 25 percent planned for cesarean
delivery (Schmitz, 2017). The other 75 percent planned a trial of vaginal
delivery, which was successful in 80 percent. Interestingly, perinatal
mortality and morbidity rates were significantly higher in the planned
cesarean delivery group delivered at <37 weeks—5.2 versus 3.0 percent,
respectively. Additionally, for those delivered vaginally, neonatal outcomes
were similar for second twins that were cephalic or noncephalic (Schmitz,
2018). The Twin Birth Study had similar inclusion criteria and randomly
assigned women to planned vaginal or planned cesarean delivery. Perinatal
outcomes were similar in both groups. For those delivered vaginally,
neonatal outcomes were similar for second twins that were cephalic or
noncephalic (Barrett, 2013).
For neonates weighing <1500 g compared with those weighing more,
comparable or even better fetal outcomes with vaginal delivery compared

with cesarean delivery have been reported (Mol, 2020; Sentilhes, 2015).
However, rates of urgent operations for the second twin may be higher
(Hiersch, 2021).
Other investigators advocate cesarean delivery for both fetuses of a
cephalic–noncephalic twin pair (Armson, 2006; Hoffmann, 2012). Yang and
coworkers (2005a,b) studied 15,185 cephalic–noncephalic pairs. The risks
of asphyxia-related neonatal deaths and morbidity were higher in the group in
which both twins were delivered vaginally compared with the group in
which both twins were delivered surgically.

Breech First Twin
Problems with the first twin presenting as a breech are similar to those
encountered with a singleton breech fetus. First, the fetal body can be small,
and delivery of the extremities and trunk through an inadequately effaced and
dilated cervix can leave the relatively larger head trapped above the cervix.
This is more likely when disproportion between the head and body is
significant. Examples are preterm or growth-restricted fetuses or those with
macrocephaly from hydrocephaly. Second, umbilical cord prolapse is an
ever-present risk. Last, twin fetuses may become locked together during
delivery if the first presents breech and the second cephalic. As the breech of
the first twin descends through the birth canal, the chin locks between the
neck and chin of the second cephalic-presenting co-twin. This phenomenon is
rare, and Cohen and coworkers (1965) described it only once in 817 twin
gestations.
If these problems are anticipated or identified, cesarean delivery is often
preferred with a viable-sized fetus. Even without these problems, many
obstetricians perform cesarean delivery if the first twin presents as breech,
and this is our practice. However, data support the safety of vaginal delivery
for twins older than 32 weeks and weighing >1500 g (Blickstein, 2000). In
one study, cesarean delivery was planned in 1169 such pairs. Vaginal
delivery was planned in 298 pairs and was successful in 64 percent.
Cesarean delivery of the second twin was done in 1 percent. Neonatal
mortality or morbidity measures did not differ between delivery groups
(Korb, 2020).

■ Labor Augmentation or Induction

In general, active labor with twins progresses more slowly in both nulliparas
and multiparas compared with that in singletons (Hochler, 2021). Secondstage labor of the first twin also is longer (Levin, 2021).
In women with twins who meet all criteria for oxytocin administration,
labor augmentation is suitable (Chap. 26, p. 492). For labor induction,
studies have found that oxytocin alone or in combination with cervical
ripening can safely be used in twin gestations (Hamou, 2016; Ko, 2014).
Compared with prelabor cesarean delivery, others have found higher
maternal morbidity rates with labor induction, and ultimate cesarean delivery
rates approximate 40 percent (Dougan, 2020; Grossman, 2021). In an
analysis of twin births in the United States, induction rates of twin
pregnancies have declined from nearly 14 percent in 1999 to 10 percent in
2008 (Lee, 2011). Generally, at Parkland Hospital we do not augment or
induce labor in women with a multifetal gestation. Concerns include risks for
uterine rupture from an overdistended uterus and postpartum hemorrhage. In
suitable candidates with a strong desire for vaginal birth, amniotomy
induction has been one option.

■ Vaginal Delivery
After delivery of the firstborn, one clamp is placed near the neonate, and
another is placed nearer the placenta. Until the last fetus is delivered, each
cord must remain clamped to prevent fetal hypovolemia and anemia caused
by blood leaving the placenta via anastomoses and then through an
unclamped cord. Cord blood is generally not collected until after delivery of
all fetuses. After the second neonate is delivered, two plastic clamps are
placed on the placenta’s cord to differentiate it from the first. In higher-order
deliveries, color-tagged or alphabetically labeled clamps can be simpler
than adding additional clamps. This same practice holds for cesarean
delivery. At this time, evidence is insufficient to recommend for or against
delayed umbilical cord clamping in multifetal gestations (American College
of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020a).
Following vaginal delivery of the first twin, the presenting part of the
second twin, its size, and its relationship to the birth canal should be quickly
ascertained by combined abdominal, vaginal, and, at times, intrauterine
examination. Sonography is a valuable aid. If the fetal head or the breech is
fixed in the birth canal, moderate fundal pressure is applied and membranes

are ruptured. Immediately afterward, digital examination of the cervix is
repeated to exclude cord prolapse. Labor is allowed to resume. If
contractions do not begin within approximately 10 minutes, dilute oxytocin
may be used to stimulate contractions.
The preferred interval between delivery of the first and second twins is
frequently cited as <30 minutes. In some studies, longer intertwin intervals
are associated with poorer outcome of the second twin (Leung, 2002; Stein,
2008). Others have correlated fetal heart rate tracing abnormalities during
the intertwin interval rather than its length with poorer outcome (Algeri,
2019).
If the occiput or breech presents immediately over the pelvic inlet, but is
not fixed in the birth canal, the presenting part can often be guided into the
pelvis by one hand in the vagina, while a second hand on the uterine fundus
exerts moderate pressure caudally. A presenting shoulder may be gently
converted into a cephalic presentation. Alternatively, with abdominal
manipulation, an assistant can guide the presenting part into the pelvis.
Sonography can aid guidance and allow heart rate monitoring.
If the occiput or breech is not over the pelvic inlet and cannot be so
positioned by gentle pressure or if appreciable uterine bleeding develops,
delivery of the second twin can be problematic. To obtain a favorable
outcome, an obstetrician skilled in intrauterine fetal manipulation and
anesthesia personnel skilled in providing anesthesia to effectively relax the
uterus for vaginal delivery of a noncephalic second twin are essential
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2021b). To take
maximum advantage of the dilated cervix before the uterus contracts and the
cervix retracts, delay should be avoided. Prompt cesarean delivery of the
second fetus is preferred if no one present is skilled in the performance of
internal podalic version or if anesthesia that will provide effective uterine
relaxation is not immediately available.

■ Trial of Labor after Cesarean Delivery
The main concern with trial of labor after cesarean delivery (TOLAC) is
uterine rupture from a distended uterus. One metaanalysis found rates of
rupture and of successful vaginal birth were comparable with those for
TOLAC in singleton gestations (Kabiri, 2019). Other studies also support the
safety of TOLAC for selected women with twins (Cahill, 2005; Ford, 2006).

In one assessment of 186 women undergoing TOLAC, two thirds delivered
both twins vaginally. Of failed attempts, 45 percent underwent cesarean for
delivery of the second twin (Varner, 2005). According to the American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019), evidence currently does
not suggest an increased risk of uterine rupture, and women with twins and
one previous cesarean delivery with a low transverse incision may be
considered TOLAC candidates. At Parkland Hospital, we recommend repeat
cesarean delivery.

■ Cesarean Delivery Technique
Several unusual intraoperative problems can arise during cesarean delivery
of twins or higher-order multiples. Supine hypotension is common, and thus
gravidas are positioned in a left lateral tilt to deflect uterine weight off the
aorta. A low transverse hysterotomy is preferable if the incision can be made
large enough to allow atraumatic delivery of all fetuses. Piper forceps can be
used if a second twin is presenting breech. In some cases, a vertical
hysterotomy beginning as low as possible in the lower uterine segment may
be advantageous. For example, if a fetus is transverse with its back down and
the arms are inadvertently delivered first, it is much easier and safer to
extend a vertical uterine incision upward than to extend a transverse incision
laterally or to make a “T” incision vertically.

■ Triplet or Higher-order Gestation
Fetal heart rate monitoring during labor with triplet pregnancies is
challenging. A scalp electrode can be attached to the presenting fetus, but it
is difficult to ensure that the other two fetuses are each being monitored
separately. With vaginal delivery, the first neonate is usually born with little
or no manipulation. Subsequent fetuses, however, are delivered according to
the presenting part. This often requires complicated obstetrical maneuvers
such as total breech extraction with or without internal podalic version or
even cesarean delivery. Associated with malposition of fetuses is an
increased incidence of cord prolapse. Moreover, reduced placental perfusion
and hemorrhage from separating placentas are more likely during delivery.
Data from the Consortium on Safe Labor found that only 17 percent of
women with triplet gestation attempting vaginal birth were actually delivered

vaginally. In these births, composite neonatal morbidity rates were increased
(Lappen, 2016). In 7000 triplet pregnancies, vaginal delivery also was
associated with a higher perinatal mortality rate (Vintzeleos, 2005). For all
these reasons, we deliver most pregnancies complicated by three or more
fetuses by cesarean delivery. Vaginal delivery is reserved for those
circumstances in which survival is not expected because fetuses are
markedly immature or abnormal or maternal complications make cesarean
delivery hazardous to the mother. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(2009) national data show that 94 percent of triplets are delivered by
cesarean.
Other cases series describe more positive outcomes (Grobman, 1998;
Peress, 2019). In sum, the American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2021b) notes vaginal birth may be considered for
uncomplicated triplet pregnancies, if the first fetus is cephalic and attendants
are experienced with multifetal vaginal birth. As with twins, candidate
fetuses should weigh >1500 g.

REDUCING FETAL NUMBER
For multifetal gestations, multifetal pregnancy reduction (MPR) aims to
lower fetal number to improve survival rates of the remaining fetuses.
Instead, with selective reduction, early pregnancy intervention focuses on a
fetus with an anomaly or serious health risk. With selective termination, the
indications are analogous to those for selective reduction, but interventions
are performed at a later gestational age (American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists, 2020c).
Selective reduction or MPR is typically done in the late first trimester.
This gestational age is chosen because most spontaneous abortions have
already occurred, the remaining fetuses are large enough to be evaluated
sonographically, the amount of devitalized fetal tissue remaining after the
procedure is small, and the risk of aborting the entire pregnancy as a result of
the procedure is low.
Skill in sonographically guiding needles through the mother’s abdomen
and uterus is required. For reductions of fetuses with their own chorion,
potassium chloride is used and is injected into the fetal heart or thorax.
Entering or traversing the sacs of fetuses picked for retention is avoided. For

monochorionic fetuses and potentially shared vasculature, cord-occlusion is
used, and with radiofrequency ablation (RFA), the needle is inserted into the
intrafetal portion of the umbilical cord.
Before reduction procedures, discussion should include the morbidity
and mortality rates associated with expectant care, entire pregnancy
termination, or selective fetal reduction (American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists, 2020c). With these options, specific risks include (1)
loss of all remaining fetuses, (2) abortion or retention of the wrong fetus, (3)
damage without death to a fetus, (4) preterm labor, (5) fetuses with
discordant or growth restriction, and (6) maternal complications. With
reduction procedures, uncommon potential complications are infection,
hemorrhage, or disseminated intravascular coagulopathy because of retained
products of conception.

■ Multifetal Pregnancy Reduction
In most cases of MPR, higher-order gestations are reduced by one or more
fetuses. With triplets, reduction to twins or a singleton lowers the rate of
preterm birth before 34 weeks compared with expectant management.
Miscarriage rates are not higher (Anthoulakis, 2017; Morlando, 2015). With
even higher-order multiples, spontaneous loss and preterm birth rates also
decline after MPR (Evans, 2014; Liu, 2020).
Twin gestations also may be reduced to a singleton pregnancy. Maternal
comorbidities or concerns for monochorionic twin complications, described
earlier, are frequent indications (Rao, 2021; Vieira, 2019).

■ Selective Reduction or Selective Termination
If multiple fetuses are discordant for anatomical or genetic anomalies,
elimination of the abnormal fetus is an option. Other indications are severe
TTTS, TAPS, TRAP, or sFGR. Because abnormalities are often not fully
delineated until the second trimester, selective termination is performed later
in gestation than selective reduction and entails greater risk. This procedure
is therefore usually not performed unless the abnormality is severe but not
lethal. In some cases, termination is considered because the abnormal fetus
may jeopardize the normal one.

REFERENCES
Abel EL, Kruger ML: Maternal and paternal age and twinning in the United States, 2004–2008. J
Perinat Med 40:237, 2012
Adashi EY, Gutman R: Delayed childbearing as a growing, previously unrecognized contributor to the
national plural birth excess. Obstet Gynecol 132(4):999, 2018
Alexander JM, Leveno KJ, Rouse D, et al: Cesarean delivery for the second twin. Obstet Gynecol
112(4):748, 2008
Algeri P, Callegari C, Bernasconi DP, et al: Neonatal hypoxia of the second twin after vaginal delivery
of the first twin: what matters? J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 32(17):2889, 2019
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Vaginal birth after cesarean delivery. Practice
Bulletin No. 205, January 2019
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Delayed umbilical cord clamping after birth.
Committee Opinion No. 814, November 2020a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Low-dose aspirin use during pregnancy.
Committee Opinion No. 743, June 2018, Reaffirmed 2020b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Multifetal pregnancy reduction. Committee
Opinion No. 719, September 2017, Reaffirmed 2020c
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Screening for fetal chromosomal abnormalities.
Practice Bulletin No. 226, August 2020d
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Indications for outpatient antenatal fetal
surveillance. Committee Opinion No. 828, June 2021a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Multifetal gestations: twin, triplet, and higherorder multifetal pregnancies. Practice Bulletin No. 231, May 2021b
American Society for Reproductive Medicine, Society for Assisted Reproductive Technology: Guidance
on the limits to the number of embryos to transfer: a committee opinion. Fertil Steril 107(4):901, 2017
Amaru RC, Bush MC, Berkowitz RL, et al: Is discordant growth on twins an independent risk factor for
adverse neonatal outcome? Obstet Gynecol 103(1):71, 2004
Ananth CV, Vintzileos AM, Shen-Schwarz S, et al: Standards of birth weight in twin gestations stratified
by placental chorionicity. Obstet Gynecol 91(6):917, 1998
Andrews WW, Leveno KJ, Sherman ML, et al: Elective hospitalization in the management of twin
pregnancies. Obstet Gynecol 77:826, 1991
Anthoulakis C, Dagklis T, Mamopoulos A, et al: Risks of miscarriage or preterm delivery in trichorionic
and dichorionic triplet pregnancies with embryo reduction versus expectant management: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Hum Reprod 32(6):1351, 2017
Appleton C, Pinto L, Centeno M, et al: Near term twin pregnancy: clinical relevance of weight
discordance at birth. J Perinat Med 35:62, 2007
Arabin B, Halbesma JR, Vork F, et al: Is treatment with vaginal pessaries an option in patients with a
sonographically detected short cervix? J Perinat Med 31:122, 2003
Arabin B, van Eyck J: Delayed-interval delivery in twin and triplet pregnancies: 17 years of experience
in 1 perinatal center. Am J Obstet Gynecol 200(2):154.e1, 2009
Armson BA, O’Connell C, Persad V, et al: Determinants of perinatal mortality and serious neonatal
morbidity in the second twin. Obstet Gynecol 108(3 Pt 1):556, 2006
Aviram A, Berger H, Abdulaziz KE, et al: Outcomes associated with hypertensive disorders of
pregnancy in twin compared with singleton gestations. Obstet Gynecol 138(3):449, 2021

Bagchi S, Salihu HM: Birth weight discordance in multiple gestations: occurrence and outcomes. J
Obstet Gynaecol 26(4):291, 2006
Bahtiyar MO, Dulay AT, Weeks BP, et al: Prevalence of congenital heart defects in
monochorionic/diamniotic twin gestations: a systematic literature review. J Ultrasound Med
26(11):1491, 2007
Baken L, Rousian M, Kompanje EJ, et al: Diagnostic techniques and criteria for first-trimester conjoined
twin documentation: a review of the literature illustrated by three recent cases. Obstet Gynecol Surv
68(11):743, 2013
Barrett JF, Hannah ME, Hutton EK, et al: A randomized trial of planned cesarean or vaginal delivery for
twin pregnancy. N Engl J Med 369:1295, 2013
Beemsterboer SN, Homburg R, Gorter NA, et al: The paradox of declining fertility but increasing
twinning rates with advancing maternal age. Hum Reprod 21:1531, 2006
Best KE, Rankin J: Increased risk of congenital heart disease in twins in the North of England between
1998 and 2010. Heart 101(22):1807, 2015
Blickstein I, Goldman RD, Kupferminc M: Delivery of breech first twins: a multicenter retrospective
study. Obstet Gynecol 95:37, 2000
Blickstein I, Perlman S: Single fetal death in twin gestations. J Perinat Med 41:65, 2013
Booker W, Fox NS, Gupta S, et al: Antenatal surveillance in twin pregnancies using the biophysical
profile. J Ultrasound Med 34(11):2071, 2015
Boyle B, McConkey R, Garne E, et al: Trends in the prevalence, risk and pregnancy outcome of multiple
births with congenital anomaly: a registry-based study in 14 European countries 1984–2007. BJOG
120:707, 2013
Brady PC, Correia KF, Missmer SA, et al: Early β-human chorionic gonadotropin trends in vanishing
twin pregnancies. Fertil Steril 100(1):116, 2013
Brown R: Zygosity testing should be encouraged for all same-sex twins: AGAINST: benefit of this
knowledge should be weighed against potential pitfalls. BJOG 122(12):1641, 2015
Buca D, Di Mascio D, Khalil A, et al: Neonatal morbidity of monoamniotic twin pregnancies: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J Perinatol July 28, 2020 [Epub ahead of print]
Bulmer MG: The effect of parental age, parity, and duration of marriage on the twinning rate. Hum
Genet 23:454, 1959
Burgess JL, Unal ER, Nietert PJ, et al: Risk of late-preterm stillbirth and neonatal morbidity for
monochorionic and dichorionic twins. Am J Obstet Gynecol 210(6):578, 2014
Busnelli A, Dallagiovanna C, Reschini M, et al: Risk factors for monozygotic twinning after in vitro
fertilization: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Fertil Steril 111(2):302, 2019
Cahill A, Stamilio DM, Paré E, et al: Vaginal birth after cesarean (VBAC) attempt in twin pregnancies:
is it safe? Am J Obstet Gynecol 193:1050, 2005
Campbell DM: Maternal adaptation in twin pregnancy. Semin Perinatol 10:14, 1986
Canadian Preterm Labor Investigators Group: Treatment of preterm labor with the beta-adrenergic
agonist ritodrine. N Engl J Med 327(5):308, 1992
Caritis SN, Rouse DJ, Peaceman AM, et al: Prevention of preterm birth in triplets using 17 alphahydroxyprogesterone caproate: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol 113(2 Pt 1):285, 2009
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Quickstats: percentage of live births by cesarean delivery,
by plurality—United States, 1996, 2000, and 2006. MMWR 58(19):542, 2009
Challis D, Gratacos E, Deprest JA: Cord occlusion techniques for selective termination in monochorionic
twins. J Perinat Med 27:327, 1999

Chang E, Park M, Kim Y, et al: A case of successful selective abortion using radio-frequency ablation in
twin pregnancy suffering from severe twin to twin transfusion syndrome. J Korean Med Sci 24:513,
2009
Chauhan SP, Scardo JA, Hayes E, et al: Twins: prevalence, problems, and preterm births. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 203(4):305, 2010
Chen CP, Hsu CY, Su JW, et al: Conjoined twins detected in the first trimester: a review. Taiwan J
Obstet Gynecol 50(4):424, 2011
Chen X, Zhou Q, Xiao X, et al: The value of ultrasound in predicting isolated intertwin discordance and
adverse perinatal outcomes. Arch Gynecol Obstet 99(2):459, 2019
Cheong-See F, Schuit E, Arroyo-Manzano D, et al: Prospective risk of stillbirth and neonatal
complications in twin pregnancies: systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ 354:i4353, 2016
Cheung KW, Seto MT, Wang W, et al: Effect of delayed interval delivery of remaining fetus(es) in
multiple pregnancies on survival: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol
222(4):306, 2020
Chitrit Y, Korb D, Morin C, et al: Perinatal mortality and morbidity, timing and route of delivery in
monoamniotic twin pregnancies: a retrospective cohort study. Arch Gynecol Obstet 303(3):685, 2021
Christensen K, Petersen I, Skytthe A, et al: Comparison of academic performance of twins and
singletons in adolescence: follow-up study. BMJ 333:1095, 2006
Cohen M, Kohl SG, Rosenthal AH: Fetal interlocking complicating twin gestation. Am J Obstet Gynecol
91:407, 1965
Cohen SB, Elizur SE, Goldenberg M, et al: Outcome of twin pregnancies with extreme weight
discordancy. Am J Perinatol 18(8):427, 2001
Combs CA, Garite T, Maurel K, et al: 17-Hydroxyprogesterone caproate for twin pregnancy: a doubleblind, randomized clinical trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol 204(3):221.e1, 2011
Conde-Agudelo A, Romero R, Hassan SS, et al: Transvaginal sonographic cervical length for the
prediction of spontaneous preterm birth in twin pregnancies: a systematic review and metaanalysis.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 203:128.e1, 2010
Corsello G, Piro E: The world of twins: an update. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 23(S3):59, 2010
Craig JM, Segal NL, Umstad MP, et al: Zygosity testing should be encouraged for all same-sex twins:
FOR: A genetic test is essential to determine zygosity. BJOG 122(12):1641, 2015
Couck I, Ponnet S, Deprest J, et al: Outcome of monochorionic twin pregnancy with selective fetal
growth restriction at 16, 20 or 30 weeks according to new Delphi consensus definition. Ultrasound
Obstet Gynecol 56(6):821, 2020
Curado J, Sileo F, Bhide A, et al: Early- and late-onset selective fetal growth restriction in
monochorionic diamniotic twin pregnancy: natural history and diagnostic criteria. Ultrasound Obstet
Gynecol 55(5):661, 2020
Curnow KJ, Wilkins-Haug L, Ryan A, et al: Detection of triploid, molar, and vanishing twin pregnancies
by a single-nucleotide polymorphism-based noninvasive prenatal test. Am J Obstet Gynecol
212(1):79.e1, 2015
D’Alton ME: Delivery of the second twin. Obstet Gynecol 115(2):221, 2010
D’Antonio F, Berghella V, Di Mascio D, et al: Role of progesterone, cerclage and pessary in preventing
preterm birth in twin pregnancies: a systematic review and network meta-analysis. Eur J Obstet
Gynecol Reprod Biol 261:166, 2021
D’Antonio F, Khalil A, Dias T, et al: Early fetal loss in monochorionic and dichorionic twin pregnancies:
analysis of the Southwest Thames Obstetric Research Collaborative (STORK) multiple pregnancy
cohort. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 41(6):632, 2013

D’Antonio F, Odibo AO, Prefumo F, et al: Weight discordance and perinatal mortality in twin pregnancy:
systematic review and meta-analysis. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 52(1):11, 2018
D’Antonio F, Thilaganathan B, Dias T, et al: Influence of chorionicity and gestational age at single fetal
loss on risk of preterm birth in twin pregnancy: analysis of STORK multiple pregnancy cohort.
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 50(6):72, 2017
da Silva Lopes K, Takemoto Y, Ota E, et al: Bed rest with and without hospitalisation in multiple
pregnancy for improving perinatal outcomes. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 3:CD012031, 2017
Dashe JS, Fernandez CO, Twickler DM: Utility of Doppler velocimetry in predicting outcome in twin
reversed-arterial perfusion sequence. Am J Obstet Gynecol 185(1):135, 2001
Dave ED, Bodnar LM, Vani K, et al: Perinatal outcomes in twin pregnancies complicated by gestational
diabetes. Am J Obstet Gynecol MFM 3(5):100396, 2021
Day MC, Barton JR, O’Brien JM, et al: The effect of fetal number on the development of hypertensive
conditions of pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 106(5 Pt 1):927, 2005
de Castro H, Haas J, Schiff E, et al: Trial of labour in twin pregnancies: a retrospective cohort study.
BJOG 126(6):940, 2016
De Paepe ME, DeKoninck P, Friedman RM: Vascular distribution patterns in monochorionic twin
placentas. Placenta 26(6):471, 2005
Derbent A, Simavli S, Gumus I, et al: Nifedipine for the treatment of preterm labor in twin and singleton
pregnancies. Arch Gynecol Obstet 284:821, 2011
Dickey RP, Taylor SN, Lu PY, et al: Spontaneous reduction of multiple pregnancy: incidence and effect
on outcome. Am J Obstet Gynecol 186:77, 2002
Dougan C, Gotha L, Melamed N, et al: Cesarean delivery or induction of labor in pre-labor twin
gestations: a secondary analysis of the twin birth study. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth 20(1):702, 2020
Durnwald CP, Momirova V, Rouse DJ, et al: Second trimester cervical length and risk of preterm birth
in women with twin gestations treated with 17-α hydroxyprogesterone caproate. J Matern Fetal
Neonatal Med 23(12):1360, 2010
Duryea EL, Happe SK, McIntire DD, et al: Sonography interval and the diagnosis of twin-twin
transfusion syndrome. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 30(6):640, 2017
Eddib A, Rodgers B, Lawler J, et al: Monochorionic pseudomonoamniotic twin pregnancy with fetal
demise of one twin and development of maternal consumptive coagulopathy. Ultrasound Obstet
Gynecol 28:735, 2006
Emery SP, Bahriyar MO, Dashe JS, et al: The North American Fetal Therapy Network Consensus
Statement: prenatal management of uncomplicated monochorionic gestations. Obstet Gynecol
125(5):1236, 2015
Emery SP, Hasley SK, Catov JM, et al: North American Fetal Therapy Network: intervention vs
expectant management for stage I twin-twin transfusion syndrome. Am J Obstet Gynecol
215(3):346, 2016
Evans MI, Andriole S, Britt DW: Fetal reduction: 25 years’ experience. Fetal Diagn Ther 35(2):69, 2014
Faupel-Badger JM, McElrath TF, Lauria M, et al: Maternal circulating angiogenic factors in twin and
singleton pregnancies. Am J Obstet Gynecol 212(5):636.e1, 2015
Fayad S, Bongain A, Holhfeld P, et al: Delayed delivery of second twin: a multicentre study of 35 cases.
Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 109(1):16, 2003
Ford AA, Bateman BT, Simpson LL: Vaginal birth after cesarean delivery in twin gestations: a large,
nationwide sample of deliveries. Am J Obstet Gynecol 195:1138, 2006
Fox H, Sebire NJ: Pathology of the Placenta, 3rd ed. Philadelphia, Saunders, 2007

Francois K, Ortiz J, Harris C, et al: Is peripartum hysterectomy more common in multiple gestations?
Obstet Gynecol 105:1369, 2005
Fusi L, Gordon H: Twin pregnancy complicated by single intrauterine death. Problems and outcome with
conservative management. BJOG 97:511, 1990
Fusi L, McParland P, Fisk N, et al: Acute twin-twin transfusion: a possible mechanism for braindamaged survivors after intrauterine death of a monochorionic twin. Obstet Gynecol 78:517, 1991
Futch T, Spinosa J, Bhatt S, et al: Initial clinical laboratory experience in noninvasive prenatal testing for
fetal aneuploidy from maternal plasma DNA samples. Prenat Diagn 33(6):569, 2013
Gabbett MT, Laporte J, Sekar R, et al: Molecular support for heterogonesis resulting in sesquizygotic
twinning. N Eng J Med 380(9):842, 2019
Gabriel R, Harika G, Saniez D, et al: Prolonged intravenous ritodrine therapy: a comparison between
multiple and singleton pregnancies. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 57:65, 1994
Ghi T, degli Esposti D, Montaguti E, et al: Maternal cardiac evaluation during uncomplicated twin
pregnancy with emphasis on the diastolic function. Am J Obstet Gynecol 213(3):376, 2015
Gijtenbeek M, Shirzada MR, Ten Harkel AD, et al: Congenital heart defects in monochorionic twins: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. J Clin Med 8(6):902, 2019
Gjerris AC, Loft A, Pinborg A, et al: The effect of a “vanishing twin” on biochemical and ultrasound
first trimester screening markers for Down’s syndrome in pregnancies conceived by assisted
reproductive technology. Hum Reprod 24(1):55, 2009
Glinianaia SV, Rankin J, Wright C: Congenital anomalies in twins: a register-based study. Hum Reprod
23:1306, 2008
Gocke SE, Nageotte MP, Garite T, et al: Management of the nonvertex second twin: primary cesarean
section, external version, or primary breech extraction. Am J Obstet Gynecol 161(1):111, 1989
Gonçalves-Ferri WA, Martinez FE, Martins-Celini FP, et al: Evaluation of the effectiveness of antenatal
corticoid in preterm twin and single pregnancies: a multicenter cohort study. J Matern Fetal Neonatal
Med June 22, 2021 [Epub ahead of print]
Goodnight W, Newman R: Optimal nutrition for improved twin pregnancy outcome. Obstet Gynecol
114:1121, 2009
Gordon MC, McKenna DS, Stewart TL, et al: Transvaginal cervical length scans to prevent prematurity
in twins: a randomized controlled trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol 214(2):277.e1, 2016
Goya M, de la Calle M, Pratcorona L, et al: Cervical pessary to prevent preterm birth in women with
twin gestation and sonographic short cervix: a multicenter randomized controlled trial (PECEPTwins). Am J Obstet Gynecol 214(2):145, 2016
Gratacós E, Lewi L, Muñoz B, et al: A classification system for selective intrauterine growth restriction
in monochorionic pregnancies according to umbilical artery Doppler flow in the smaller twin.
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 30(1):28, 2007
Gratacós E, Ortiz JU, Martinez JM: A systematic approach to the differential and management of the
complications of monochorionic twin pregnancies. Fetal Diagn Ther 32(3):145, 2012
Grobman WA, Peaceman AM, Haney EI, et al: Neonatal outcomes in triplet gestations after a trial of
labor. Am J Obstet Gynecol 179(4):942, 1998
Groene SG, Spekman JA, Te Pas AB, et al: Respiratory distress syndrome and bronchopulmonary
dysplasia after fetal growth restriction: lessons from a natural experiment in identical twins.
EClinicalMedicine 32:100725, 2021
Grossman TB, Tesfamariam R, Chasen ST, et al: Maternal morbidity of induction of labor compared to
planned cesarean delivery in twin gestations. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 34(21):3562, 2021

Hack KE, Derks JB, Elias SG, et al: Increased perinatal mortality and morbidity in monochorionic versus
dichorionic twin pregnancies: clinical implications of a large Dutch cohort study. BJOG 115:58, 2008
Hack KE, van Gemert MJ, Lopriore E, et al: Placental characteristics of monoamniotic twin
pregnancies in relation to perinatal outcome. Placenta 30(1):62, 2009
Hamou B, Wainstock T, Mastrolia SA, et al: Induction of labor in twin gestation: lessons from a
population based study. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 29(24):3999, 2016
Harris AL, Sacha CR, Basnet KM, et al: Vanishing twins conceived through fresh in vitro fertilization.
Obstet Gynecol 135(6):1426, 2020
Hernandez JS, Twickler DM, McIntire DD, et al: Hydramnios in twin gestations. Obstet Gynecol
120(4):759, 2012
Heyborne KD, Porreco RP, Garite TJ, et al: Improved perinatal survival of monoamniotic twins with
intensive inpatient monitoring. Am J Obstet Gynecol 192(1):96, 2005
Hiersch L, Shah PS, Khurshid F, et al: Mode of delivery and neonatal outcomes in extremely preterm
vertex/nonvertex twins. Am J Obstet Gynecol 224(6):613.e1, 2021
Hillman SC, Morris RK, Kilby MD: Co-twin prognosis after single fetal death. A systematic review and
meta-analysis. Obstet Gynecol 118(4):928, 2011
Hochler H, Guedalia J, Lipschuetz M, et al: Normal labor curve in twin gestation. Am J Obstet Gynecol
August 4, 2021 [Epub ahead of print]
Hoekstra C, Zhao ZZ, Lambalk CB, et al: Dizygotic twinning. Hum Reprod Update 14:37, 2008
Hoffmann E, Oldenburg A, Rode L, et al: Twin births: cesarean section or vaginal delivery? Acta Obstet
Gynecol Scand 91(4):463, 2012
Hollier LM, McIntire DD, Leveno KJ: Outcome of twin pregnancies according to intrapair birth weight
differences. Obstet Gynecol 94:1006, 1999
Hu LS, Caire J, Twickler DM: MR findings of complicated multifetal gestations. Pediatr Radiol 36:76,
2006
Huang T, Boucher K, Aul R, et al: First and second trimester maternal serum markers in pregnancies
with a vanishing twin. Prenat Diagn 35(1):90, 2015
Institute of Medicine and National Research Council: Weight Gain During Pregnancy: Reexamining the
Guidelines. Washington, DC, National Academies Press, 2009
Jarde A, Lutsiv O, Park CK, et al: Preterm birth prevention in twin pregnancies with progesterone,
pessary, or cerclage: a systematic review and meta-analysis. BJOG 124(8):1163, 2017
Jena M, Mitch WE: Rapidly reversible acute renal failure from ureteral obstruction in pregnancy. Am J
Kidney Dis 28(3):457, 1996
Judah H, Gil MM, Syngelaki A, et al: Cell-free DNA testing of maternal blood in screening for trisomies
in twin pregnancy: updated cohort study at 10–14 weeks and updated meta-analysis. Ultrasound
Obstet Gynecol 58(2):178, 2021
Kabiri D, Masarwy R, Schachter-Safrai N, et al: Trial of labor after cesarean delivery in twin gestations:
systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 220(4):336, 2019
Kametas NA, McAuliffe F, Krampl E, et al: Maternal cardiac function in twin pregnancy. Obstet
Gynecol 102:806, 2003
Kaufman D, Du L, Velcek F, et al: Fetus-in-fetu. J Am Coll Surg 205(2):378, 2007
Kent EM, Breathnach FM, Gillan JE, et al: Placental pathology, birthweight discordance, and growth
restriction in twin pregnancy: results of the ESPRIT Study. Am J Obstet 207(3):220.e1, 2012
Khalil A, Archer R, Hutchinson V, et al: Noninvasive prenatal screening in twin pregnancies with cellfree DNA using the IONA test: a prospective multicenter study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 225(1)79.e1,
2021

Khalil A, Beune I, Hecher K, et al: Consensus definition and essential reporting parameters of selective
fetal growth restriction in twin pregnancy: a Delphi procedure. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 53(1):47,
2019
Khalil A, Gordijn S, Ganzevoort W, et al: Consensus diagnostic criteria and monitoring of twin anemia
polycythemia sequence: a Delphi procedure. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 56:388, 2020
Khalil A, Rodgers M, Baschat A, et al: ISUOG Practice Guidelines: role of ultrasound in twin
pregnancy. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 47(2):247, 2016
Kibel M, Barrett J, Tward C, et al: The natural history of preterm premature rupture of membranes in
twin pregnancies. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 30(15):1829, 2017
Kim JH, Park SW, Lee JJ: Birth weight reference for triples in Korea. J Korean Med Sci 25:900, 2010
Klein K, Rode L, Nicolaides KH, et al: Vaginal micronized progesterone and risk of preterm delivery in
high-risk twin pregnancies: secondary analysis of a placebo-controlled randomized trial and metaanalysis. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 38(3):281, 2011
Knox G, Morley D: Twinning in Yoruba women. J Obstet Gynaecol Br Emp 67:981, 1960
Ko HJ, Jun JK: Clinical factors associated with failed trials of labor in late preterm and term twin
pregnancies. J Perinat Med 42(4):449, 2014
Korb D, Goffinet F, Bretelle F, et al: First twin in breech presentation and neonatal mortality and
morbidity according to planned mode of delivery. Obstet Gynecol 135(5):1015, 2020
Kuleva M, Youssef A, Maroni E, et al: Maternal cardiac function in normal twin pregnancy: a
longitudinal study. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 38:575, 2011
Lambalk CB, Boomsma DI, De Boer L, et al: Increased levels and pulsatility of follicle-stimulating
hormone in mothers of hereditary dizygotic twins. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 83(2):481, 1998
Langer B, Boudier E, Gasser B, et al: Antenatal diagnosis of brain damage in the survivor after the
second trimester death of a monochorionic monoamniotic co-twin: case report and literature review.
Fetal Diagn Ther 12:286, 1997
Lantieri T, Revelli A, Gaglioti P, et al: Superfetation after ovulation induction and intrauterine
insemination performed during an unknown ectopic pregnancy. Reprod Biomed Online 20(5):664,
2010
Lappen JR, Hackney DN, Bailit JL: Maternal and neonatal outcomes of attempted vaginal compared
with planned cesarean delivery in triplet gestations. Am J Obstet Gynecol 215(4):493.e1, 2016
Lee H, Bebbington M, Crombleholme TM, et al: The North American Fetal Therapy Network Registry
data on outcomes of radiofrequency ablation for twin-reversed arterial perfusion sequence. Fetal
Diagn Ther 33(4):224, 2013
Lee HC, Gould JB, Boscardin WJ, et al: Trends in cesarean delivery for twin births in the United State
1995–2008. Obstet Gynecol 118(5):1095, 2011
Lee YM, Clery-Goldman J, Thaker HM, et al: Antenatal sonographic prediction of twin chorionicity. Am
J Obstet Gynecol 195(3):863, 2006
Lee YM, Wylie BJ, Simpson LL, et al: Twin chorionicity and the risk of stillbirth. Obstet Gynecol
111:301, 2008
LeFevre ML, Bain RP, Ewigman BG, et al: A randomized trial of prenatal ultrasonographic screening:
impact on maternal management and outcomes. RADIUS (Routine Antenatal Diagnostic Imaging
with Ultrasound) Study Group. Am J Obstet Gynecol 169(3):483, 1993
LeFevre ML, U.S. Preventive Services Task Force: Low-dose aspirin use for the prevention of
morbidity and mortality from preeclampsia: U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommendation
statement. Ann Intern Med 161(11):819, 2014

Leung TY, Tam WH, Leung TN, et al: Effect of twin-to-twin delivery interval on umbilical cord blood
gas in the second twins. BJOG 109(1):63, 2002
Leveno KJ, Quirk JG, Whalley PJ, et al: Fetal lung maturation in twin gestation. Am J Obstet Gynecol
148:405, 1984
Levin G, Meyer R, Many A, et al: Length of the second stage of labor in women delivering twins.
Obstet Gynecol 137(4):664, 2021
Lewi L, Deprest J, Hecher K: The vascular anastomoses in monochorionic twin pregnancies and their
clinical consequences. Am J Obstet Gynecol 208(1):19, 2013
Liem S, Schuit E, Hegerman M, et al: Cervical pessaries for prevention of preterm birth in women with
a multiple pregnancy (ProTWIN): a multicenter, open-label randomised controlled trial. Lancet
382(9901):1341, 2013
Liu Y, Wang XT, Li HY, et al: Safety and efficacy of higher order multifetal pregnancy reduction: a
single-center retrospective study. AJP Rep 10(3):e228, 2020
Lopriore E, Oepkes D: Neonatal morbidity in twin-twin transfusion syndrome. Early Hum Dev 87:595,
2011
Lučovnik M, Blickstein I, Lasič M, et al: Hypertensive disorders during monozygotic and dizygotic twin
gestations: a population-based study. Hypertens Pregnancy 135(4):542, 2016
MacDonald-Wallis C, Lawlor DA, Fraser A, et al: Blood pressure change in normotensive, gestational
hypertensive, preeclamptic, and essential hypertensive pregnancies. Hypertension 59:1241, 2012
MacDorman MF, Reddy UM, Silver RM: Trends in stillbirth by gestational age in the United States,
2006–2012. Obstet Gynecol 126(6):1146, 2015
Mackie FL, Rigby A, Morris RK, et al: Prognosis of the co-twin following spontaneous single
intrauterine fetal death in twin pregnancies: a systematic review and meta-analysis. BJOG
126(5):569, 2019
Madden N, Andrikopoulou M, Overton E, et al: Latency period after preterm premature rupture of
membranes: singletons versus twins. Am J Perinatol April 20, 2021 [Epub ahead of print]
Manning FA (ed): Fetal biophysical profile scoring. In Fetal Medicine: Principles and Practices.
Norwalk, Appleton & Lange, 1995
Marleen S, Dias C, Nandasena R, et al: Association between chorionicity and preterm birth in twin
pregnancies: a systematic review involving 29,864 twin pregnancies. BJOG 128(5):788, 2021
Marleen S, Dias C, MacGregor R, et al: Biochemical predictors of preterm birth in twin pregnancies: a
systematic review involving 6077 twin pregnancies. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 250:130, 2020
Marleen S, Hettiarachchi J, Dandeniya R, et al: Maternal clinical predictors of preterm birth in twin
pregnancies: a systematic review involving 2,930,958 twin pregnancies. Eur J Obstet Gynecol
Reprod Biol 230:159, 2018
Martin JA, Hamilton BE, Osterman MJ, et al: Births: final data for 2019. Natl Vital Stat Rep 70(2):1,
2021
Maruotti GM, Saccone G, Morlando M, et al: First-trimester ultrasound determination of chorionicity in
twin gestations using the lambda sign: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Eur J Obstet Gynecol
Reprod Biol 202:66, 2016
Marwan AI, Zaretsky M, Feltis B: Complex multigestational anomalies. Semin Pediatr Surg
28(4):150825, 2019
Massardier J, Golfner F, Journet D, et al: Twin pregnancy with complete hydatidiform mole and
coexistent fetus obstetrical and oncological outcomes in a series of 14 cases. Eur J Obstet Gynecol
Reprod Biol 143:84, 2009

Matias A, La Sala GB, Blickstein I: Early loss rates of entire pregnancies after assisted reproduction are
lower in twin than in singleton pregnancies. Fertil Steril 88(5):1452, 2007
Matthews TJ, MacDorman MF, Thoma ME: Infant mortality statistics from the 2013 period linked
birth/infant death data set. Natl Vital Stat Rep 64(9):1, 2015
Mbarek H, Steinberg S, Nyholt DR, et al: Identification of common genetic variants influencing
spontaneous dizygotic twinning and female fertility. Am J Hum Genet 98(5):898, 2016
McMahon KS, Neerhof MG, Haney EI, et al: Prematurity in multiple gestations: identification of patients
who are at low risk. Am J Obstet Gynecol 186:1137, 2002
McNamara HC, Kane SC, Craig JM, et al: A review of the mechanisms and evidence for typical and
atypical twinning. Am J Obstet Gynecol 214(2):172, 2016
McPherson JA, Odibo AO, Shanks AL, et al: Impact of chorionicity on risk and timing of intrauterine
fetal demise in twin pregnancies. Am J Obstet Gynecol 207(3):190.e1, 2012
Melamed N, Shah J, Yoon EW, et al: The role of antenatal corticosteroids in twin pregnancies
complicated by preterm birth. Am J Obstet Gynecol 215(4):482.e1, 2016
Mercer BM, Crocker LG, Pierce WF, et al: Clinical characteristics and outcome of twin gestation
complicated by preterm premature rupture of the membranes. Am J Obstet Gynecol 168(5):1467,
1993
Miller HE, Leonard SA, Fox KA, et al: Placenta accreta spectrum among women with twin gestations.
Obstet Gynecol 137(1):132, 2021a
Miller J, Chauhan SP, Abuhamad AZ: Discordant twins: diagnosis, evaluation and management. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 206(1):10, 2012
Miller JL: Twin to twin transfusion syndrome. Transl Pediatr 10(5):1518, 2021b
Mol BW, Bergenhenegouwen L, Ensing S, et al: The impact of mode of delivery on the outcome in very
preterm twins. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 33(12):2089, 2020
MONOMONO Working Group: Inpatient vs outpatient management and timing of delivery of
uncomplicated monochorionic monoamniotic twin pregnancy: the MONOMONO study. Ultrasound
Obstet Gynecol 53(2):175, 2019
Morikawa M, Yamada T, Yamada T, et al: Prospective risk of stillbirth: monochorionic diamniotic twins
vs dichorionic twins. J Perinat Med 40:245, 2012
Morlando M, Ferrara L, D’Antonio F, et al: Dichorionic triplet pregnancies: risk of miscarriage and
severe preterm delivery with fetal reduction versus expectant management. Outcomes of a cohort
study and systematic review. BJOG 122(8):1053, 2015
Murgano D, Khalil A, Prefumo F, et al: Outcome of twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome in monochorionic
monoamniotic twin pregnancy: systematic review and meta-analysis. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol
55(3):310, 2020
Mutchinick OM, Luna-Munoz L, Amar E, et al: Conjoined twins: a worldwide collaborative
epidemiological study of the international clearinghouse for birth defects surveillance and research.
Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet 157C(4):274, 2011
Newman RB, Krombach S, Myers MC, et al: Effect of cerclage on obstetrical outcome in twin
gestations with a shortened cervical length. Am J Obstet Gynecol 186:634, 2002
Nicolaides KH, Syngelaki A, Poon LC, et al: Cervical pessary placement for prevention of preterm birth
in unselected twin pregnancies: a randomized controlled trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol 214(1):3.e1,
2016
Norman JE, Mackenzie F, Owen P, et al: Progesterone for the prevention of preterm birth in twin
pregnancy (STOPPIT): a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled study and meta-analysis.
Lancet 373:2034, 2009

Norman JE, Norrie J, MacLennan G, et al: The Arabin pessary to prevent preterm birth in women with
a twin pregnancy and a short cervix: the STOPPIT 2 RCT. Health Technol Assess 25(44):1, 2021
Nylander PP: Biosocial aspects of multiple births. J Biosoc Sci 3:29, 1971
Nylander PP: Serum levels of gonadotropins in relation to multiple pregnancy in Nigeria. BJOG 80:651,
1973
Odibo AO, Cahill AG, Goetzinger KR, et al: Customized growth charts for twin gestations to optimize
identification of small-for-gestational age fetuses at risk of intrauterine fetal death. Ultrasound
Obstet Gynecol 41:637, 2013
Ong SS, Zamora J, Khan KS, et al: Prognosis for the co-twin following single-twin death: a systematic
review. BJOG 113:992, 2006
Otta E, Fernandes ES, Acquaviva TG, et al: Twinning and multiple birth rates according to maternal age
in the city of Sao Paulo, Brazil: 2003–2014. Twin Res Hum Genet 19(6):679, 2016
Oyelese Y, Ananth CV, Smulian JC, et al: Delayed interval delivery in twin pregnancies in the United
States: impact on perinatal mortality and morbidity. Am J Obstet Gynecol 192(2):439, 2005
Pakrashi T, Defranco EA: The relative proportion of preterm births complicated by premature rupture of
membranes in multifetal gestations: a population-based study. Am J Perinatol 30:69, 2013
Parra-Cordero M, Bennasar M, Martínez JM, et al: Cord occlusion in monochorionic twins with early
selective intrauterine growth restriction and abnormal umbilical artery doppler: a consecutive series
of 90 cases. Fetal Diagn Ther 39(3):186, 2016
Peress D, Dude A, Peaceman A, et al: Maternal and neonatal outcomes in triplet gestations by trial of
labor versus planned cesarean delivery. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 32(11):1874, 2019
Perra O, Rankin J, Platt MJ, et al: Decreasing cerebral palsy prevalence in multiple births in the modern
era: a population cohort study of European data. Arch Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed 106(2):125, 2021
Peters HE, König TE, Verhoven MO, et al: Unusual twinning resulting in chimerism: a systematic
review on monochorionic dizygotic twins. Twin Res Hum Genet 20(2):161, 2017
Post A, Heyborne K: Managing monoamniotic twin pregnancies. Clin Obstet Gynecol 58(3):643, 2015
Prefumo F, Fichera A, Pagani G, et al: The natural history of monoamniotic twin pregnancies: a case
series and systematic review of the literature. Prenat Diagn 35(3):274, 2015
Pritchard JA: Changes in blood volume during pregnancy. Anesthesiology 26:393, 1965
Proctor LK, Kfouri J, Hiersch L, et al: Association between hypertensive disorders and fetal growth
restriction in twin compared with singleton gestations. Am J Obstet Gynecol 221(3):251.e1, 2019
Quarello E, Molho M, Ville Y: Incidence, mechanisms, and patterns of fetal cerebral lesions in twin-totwin transfusion syndrome. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 20:589, 2007
Quintero RA, Morales WJ, Allen MH, et al: Staging of twin-twin transfusion syndrome. J Perinatol
19:550, 1999
Rana S, Hacker MR, Modest AM, et al: Circulating angiogenic factors and risk of adverse maternal and
perinatal outcomes in twin pregnancies with suspected preeclampsia: novelty and significance.
Hypertension 60:451, 2012
Rao MM, Vieira L, Kaplowitz ME, et al: Elective fetal reduction by radiofrequency ablation in
monochorionic diamniotic twins decreases adverse outcomes compared to ongoing monochorionic
diamniotic twins. Am J Obstet Gynecol MFM 3(6):100447, 2021
Reddy UM, Branum AM, Klebanoff MA: Relationship of maternal body mass index and height to
twinning. Obstet Gynecol 105(3):593, 2005
Rehal A, Benkő Z, De Paco Matallana C, et al: Early vaginal progesterone versus placebo in twin
pregnancies for the prevention of spontaneous preterm birth: a randomized, double-blind trial. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 224(1):86.e1, 2021

Roberts D, Gates S, Kilby M, et al: Interventions for twin-twin transfusion syndrome: a Cochrane
review. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 31:701, 2008
Rode L, Klein K, Nicolaides KH, et al: Prevention of preterm delivery in twin gestations (PREDICT): a
multicenter, randomized, placebo-controlled trial on the effect of vaginal micronized progesterone.
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 38:272, 2011
Roman A, Rochelson B, Martinelli P, et al: Cerclage in twin pregnancy with dilated cervix between 16 to
24 weeks of gestation: retrospective cohort study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 215(1):98.e1, 2016
Roman A, Zork N, Haeri S, et al: Physical examination-indicated cerclage in twin pregnancy: a
randomized controlled trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol 223(6):902.e1, 2020
Rossi AC, D’Addario V: Laser therapy and serial amnioreduction as treatment for twin-twin transfusion
syndrome: a metaanalysis and review of literature. Am J Obstet Gynecol 198:147, 2008
Rossi AC, D’Addario V: Umbilical cord occlusion for selective feticide in complicated monochorionic
twins: a systematic review of literature. Am J Obstet Gynecol 200(2):123, 2009
Rossi AC, Mullin PM, Chmait RH: Neonatal outcomes of twins according to birth order, presentation
and mode of delivery: a systematic review and meta-analysis. BJOG 118(5):523, 2011
Rouse DJ, Caritis SN, Peaceman AM, et al: A trial of 17alpha-hydroxyprogesterone caproate to prevent
prematurity in twins. N Engl J Med 357:454, 2007
Rouse DJ, Skopec GS, Zlatnik FJ: Fundal height as a predictor of preterm twin delivery. Obstet Gynecol
81:211, 1993
Saccone G, Khalil A, Thilaganathan B, et al: Weight discordance and perinatal mortality in monoamniotic
twin pregnancy: analysis of MONOMONO, NorSTAMP and STORK multiple-pregnancy cohorts.
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 55(3):332, 2020
Salomon LJ, Örtqviast L, Aegerter P, et al: Long-term developmental follow-up of infants who
participated in a randomized clinical trial of amniocentesis vs laser photocoagulation for the
treatment of twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome. Am J Obstet Gynecol 203(5):444.e1, 2010
Schmitz T, Korb D, Battie C, et al: Neonatal morbidity associated with vaginal delivery of noncephalic
second twins. Am J Obstet Gynecol 218(4):449.e1, 2018
Schmitz T, Prunet C, Azria E, et al: Association between planned cesarean delivery and neonatal
mortality and morbidity in twin pregnancies. Obstet Gynecol 129(6):986, 2017
Sebire NJ, Foskett M, Paradinas FJ, et al: Outcome of twin pregnancies with complete hydatidiform
mole and healthy co-twin. Lancet 359:2165, 2002
Sebire NJ, Souka A, Skentou H, et al: First trimester diagnosis of monoamniotic twin pregnancies.
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 16(3):223, 2000
Sellier E, Goldsmith S, McIntyre S, et al: Cerebral palsy in twins and higher multiple births: a EuropeAustralia population-based study. Dev Med Child Neurol 63(6):712, 2021
Senat MV, Deprest J, Boulvain M, et al: Endoscopic laser surgery versus serial amnioreduction for
severe twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome. N Engl J Med 351:136, 2004
Senat MV, Porcher R, Winer N, et al: Prevention of preterm delivery by 17alpha-hydroxyprogesterone
caproate in asymptomatic twin pregnancies with a short cervix: a randomized controlled trial. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 208(3):194.e1, 2013
Sentilhes L, Oppenheimer A, Bouhours AC, et al: Neonatal outcome of very preterm twins: policy of
planned vaginal or cesarean delivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 213(1):73.e1, 2015
Seong J, Han Y, Kim M, et al: The risk of preterm birth in vanishing twin: a multicenter prospective
cohort study. PLoS One 15(5):e0233097, 2020
Shen O, Samueloff A, Beller U, et al: Number of yolk sacs does not predict amnionicity in early firsttrimester monochorionic multiple gestations. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 27(1):53, 2006

Silver IA, Nedelec JL, Segal NL, et al: Heteropaternal siblings misclassified as dizygotic twins: a
potential biasing factor for heritability estimates? Behav Genet 51(2):137, 2021
Slaghekke F, Kist WJ, Oepkes D, et al: Twin anemia-polycythemia sequence: diagnostic criteria,
classification, perinatal management and outcome. Fetal Diagn Ther 27(4):181, 2010
Slaghekke F, Lopriore E, Lewi L, et al: Fetoscopic laser coagulation of the vascular equator versus
selective coagulation for twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome: an open-label randomised controlled
trial. Lancet 383(9935):2144, 2014
Smith GC, Fleming KM, White IR: Birth order of twins and risk of perinatal death related to delivery in
England, Northern Ireland, and Wales, 1994–2003: retrospective cohort study. BMJ 334(7593):576,
2007
Smith SJ, Zebrowitz J, Latta RA: Method of delivery of the nonvertex second twin: a community
hospital experience. J Matern Fetal Med 6(3):146, 1997
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Grantz KL, Kawakita T, et al: SMFM Special Statement: state of
the science on multifetal gestations: unique considerations and importance. Am J Obstet Gynecol
221(2):B2, 2019
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Hoskins IA, Combs CA: SMFM Special Statement: updated
checklists for management of monochorionic twin pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 223(5):B16,
2020
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, McIntosh J, Feltovich H, et al: The role of routine cervical length
screening in selected high- and low-risk women for preterm birth prevention. Am J Obstet Gynecol
215(3):B2, 2016
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Simpson LL: Twin-twin transfusion syndrome. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 208(1):3, 2013
Southwest Thames Obstetric Research Collaborative (STORK): Prospective risk of late stillbirth in
monochorionic twins: a regional cohort study. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 39(5):500, 2012
Spangmose AL, Malchau SS, Schmidt L, et al: Academic performance in adolescents born after ART-a
nationwide registry-based cohort study. Hum Reprod 32(2):447, 2017
Sparks TN, Norton ME, Flessel M, et al: Observed rate of Down syndrome in twin pregnancies. Obstet
Gynecol 128(5):1127, 2016
Spencer R: Parasitic conjoined twins: external, internal (fetuses in fetu and teratomas), and detached
(acardiacs). Clin Anat 14:428, 2001
Spencer R: Theoretical and analytical embryology of conjoined twins: part I: embryogenesis. Clin Anat
13(1):36, 2000
Spong CY, Mercer BM, D’Alton M, et al: Timing of indicated late-preterm and early-term birth. Obstet
Gynecol 118(2 Pt 1):323, 2011
Stein W, Misselwitz B, Schmidt S: Twin-to-twin delivery time interval: influencing factors and effect on
short term outcome of the second twin. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 87(3):346, 2008
Stirnemann J, Slaghekke F, Khalek N, et al: Intrauterine fetoscopic laser surgery versus expectant
management in stage 1 twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome: an international randomized trial. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 224(5):528, 2021
Sunderam S, Kissin DM, Zhang Y, et al: Assisted reproductive technology surveillance—United States,
2017. MMWR 69(9):1, 2020
Szymusik I, Kosinska-Kaczynska K, Bomba-Opon D, et al: IVF versus spontaneous twin pregnancies—
which are at higher risk of complications? J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 25(12):2725, 2012
Thorngren-Jerneck K, Herbst A: Low 5-minute Apgar score: a population-based register study of 1
million term births. Obstet Gynecol 98(1):65, 2001

Thorson HL, Ramaeker DM, Emery ST: Optimal interval for ultrasound surveillance in monochorionic
twin gestations. Obstet Gynecol 117(1):131, 2011
To MS, Fonseca EB, Molina FS, et al: Maternal characteristics and cervical length in the prediction of
spontaneous early preterm delivery in twins. Am J Obstet Gynecol 194(5):1360, 2006
Tollenaar LS, Lopriore E, Middeldorp JM, et al. Improved prediction of twin anemia—polycythemia
sequence by delta middle cerebral artery peak systolic velocity: new antenatal classification system.
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 53:788, 2019
Tollenaar LS, Slaghekke F, Lewi L, et al: Spontaneous twin anemia polycythemia sequence: diagnosis,
management, and outcome in an international cohort of 249 cases. Am J Obstet Gynecol 224(2):213,
2021
Tollenaar LS, Slaghekke F, Middeldorp JM, et al: Twin anemia polycythemia sequence: current views on
pathogenesis, diagnostic criteria, perinatal management, and outcome. Twin Res Hum Genet
19(3):222, 2016
Tosello B, Garbi A, Blanc J, et al: The impact of chorionicity on pregnancy outcome and
neurodevelopment at 2 years old among twins born preterm: the EPIPAGE-2 cohort study. BJOG
128(2):281, 2021
Ushida T, Kotani T, Sadachi R, et al: Antenatal corticosteroids and outcomes in preterm twins. Obstet
Gynecol 135(6):1387, 2020
Van Mieghem T, De Heus R, Lewi L, et al: Prenatal management of monoamniotic twin pregnancies.
Obstet Gynecol 124(3):498, 2014
Varner MW, Leindecker S, Spong CY, et al: The Maternal-Fetal Medicine Unit Cesarean Registry: trial
of labor with a twin gestation. Am J Obstet Gynecol 193:135, 2005
Vieira LA, Warren L, Pan S, et al: Comparing pregnancy outcomes and loss rates in elective twin
pregnancy reduction with ongoing twin gestations in a large contemporary cohort. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 221(3):253.e1, 2019
Vintzileos AM, Ananth CV, Kontopoulos E, et al: Mode of delivery and risk of stillbirth and infant
mortality in triplet gestations: United States, 1995 through 1998. Am J Obstet Gynecol 192:464, 2005
Viteri OA, Blackwell SC, Chauhan SP, et al: Antenatal corticosteroids for the prevention of respiratory
distress syndrome in premature twins. Obstet Gynecol 128(3):583, 2016
Vora NL, Ruthazer R, House M, et al: Triplet ultrasound growth parameters. Obstet Gynecol 107:694,
2006
Votava-Smith JK, Habli M, Cnota JF, et al: Diastolic dysfunction and cerebrovascular redistribution
precede overt recipient twin cardiomyopathy in early-stage twin-twin transfusion syndrome. J Am
Soc Echocardiogr 28(5):533, 2015
Wada H, Nunogami K, Wada T, et al: Diffuse brain damage caused by acute twin-twin transfusion
during late pregnancy. Acta Paediatr Jpn 40:370, 1998
Walker MC, Murphy KE, Pan S, et al: Adverse maternal outcomes in multifetal pregnancies. BJOG
111:1294, 2004
Wen SW, Miao Q, Taljaard M, et al: Associations of assisted reproductive technology and twin
pregnancy with risk of congenital heart defects. JAMA Pediatr 174(5):446, 2020
White C, Wyshak G: Inheritance in human dizygotic twinning. N Engl J Med 271:1003, 1964
Wohlmuth C, Boudreaux D, Moise KJ Jr, et al: Cardiac pathophysiology in twin-twin transfusion
syndrome: new insights into its evolution. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 51(3):341, 2018
Wood S, Tang S, Ross S, et al: Stillbirth in twins, exploring the optimal gestational age for delivery: a
retrospective cohort study. BJOG 121(10):1284, 2014

Yamasmit W, Chaithongwongwatthana S, Tolosa JE, et al: Prophylactic oral betamimetics for reducing
preterm birth in women with a twin pregnancy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 12:CD004733, 2015
Yang Q, Wen SW, Chen Y, et al: Neonatal death and morbidity in vertex-nonvertex second twins
according to mode of delivery and birth weight. Am J Obstet Gynecol 192(3):840, 2005a
Yang Q, Wen SW, Chen Y, et al: Occurrence and clinical predictors of operative delivery for the vertex
second twin after normal vaginal delivery of the first twin. Am J Obstet Gynecol 192(1):178, 2005b
Zhang J, Hamilton B, Martin J, et al: Delayed interval delivery and infant survival: a population-based
study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 191(2):470, 2004
Zhao DP, de Villiers SF, Slaghekke F, et al: Prevalence, size, number and localization of vascular
anastomoses in monochorionic placentas. Placenta 34:589, 2013
Zhu JL, Basso O, Obel C, et al: Infertility, infertility treatment, and congenital malformations: Danish
national birth cohort. BMJ 333(7570):679, 2006
Zilberman N, Maymon R, Melcer Y, et al: Obstetric outcomes of twin pregnancies presenting with a
complete hydatidiform mole and coexistent normal fetus: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
BJOG 127(12):1450, 2020
Zwijnenburg PJ, Meijiers-Heijboer H, Boomsma DI: Identical but not the same: the value of discordant
monozygotic twins in genetic research. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet 153B(6):1134,
2010

SECTION 12

MEDICAL AND SURGICAL
COMPLICATIONS

CHAPTER 49

General Considerations and Maternal
Evaluation

MEDICATIONS
NONOBSTETRICAL SURGERY
LAPAROSCOPIC SURGERY
RADIOGRAPHY
DIAGNOSTIC RADIATION
SONOGRAPHY
MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING
REFERENCES
Pregnant women are susceptible to any medical and surgical disorder that
can affect women of childbearing age. Chronic illnesses often precede
pregnancy, and an acute condition can complicate an otherwise normal
pregnancy. Both chronic and acute disorders raise the risk for antepartum
hospitalization. Approximately 10 per 100 pregnant women incur an
antepartum admission, and one third are for nonobstetrical conditions that
include renal, pulmonary, and infectious diseases (Gazmararian, 2002). The
hospitalization rate due to trauma approximates 4 admissions per 1000
deliveries (Kuo, 2007). Those with intellectual and developmental
disabilities have a higher incidence of hospitalization (Mitra, 2018). Last, 1

to 2 percent of pregnant women will undergo a nonobstetrical surgical
procedure (Tolcher, 2018).
Obstetricians should have a working knowledge of the wide-ranging
medical disorders common to childbearing-aged women. Many of these are
within the purview of the general obstetrician. Other disorders, however,
will warrant consultation with specialists in maternal-fetal medicine, and
still others require a multidisciplinary team. The latter may include internists
and medical subspecialists, surgeons, and anesthesiologists (Levine, 2016).
The Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine (2014) has redefined aspects of
maternal care and proposed conditions requiring specialized care.
Treatment should never be withheld because a woman is pregnant. To
ensure this and allow for individualized care, several questions must be
addressed:
• What management would be recommended if the woman were not pregnant?
• If the proposed management is different because the woman is pregnant, can
this be justified?
• What are the risks and benefits to the mother and her fetus, and are they
counter to each other?
• Can an individualized management plan be devised that balances risks
versus benefits?

MATERNAL PHYSIOLOGY AND LABORATORY
VALUES
Pregnancy induces physiological changes in virtually all organ systems.
Many of these are discussed in Chapter 4 and in the subsequent chapters in
this section. In turn, numerous laboratory test results also are normally
altered. Some values would be considered abnormal in the nonpregnant
woman. Conversely, some may appear to be within a normal range but are
decidedly abnormal for the gravida. These changes may complicate the
evaluation of coexisting conditions. To aid interpretation, normal laboratory
values in pregnancy are listed in the Appendix (p. 1227).

MEDICATIONS

Fortunately, most medications needed to treat frequently encountered
illnesses in pregnancy can be given with relative safety (Briggs, 2017). That
said, notable exceptions are considered in Chapter 8 and throughout this text.
The risks and benefits of medication use during pregnancy and lactation are
outlined in drug labels using the Pregnancy and Lactation Labeling Rule
(PLLR) requirement from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA).

NONOBSTETRICAL SURGERY
The chances of adverse maternal and perinatal outcomes following
nonobstetrical surgery during pregnancy are relatively low and cannot be
separated from risks of the underlying condition (Balinskaite, 2017).
However, risks are likely greater with complications. Compared with simple
appendicitis, perforated appendicitis with feculent peritonitis has
significantly higher maternal and perinatal morbidity and mortality rates even
if surgical and anesthetic techniques are flawless. Moreover, procedurerelated complications may adversely affect outcomes. For example, a woman
who has uncomplicated removal of an inflamed appendix may suffer
aspiration of acidic gastric contents during tracheal intubation or extubation.

■ Maternal Morbidity
The most frequent nonobstetrical surgical procedures performed during
pregnancy are appendectomy, cholecystectomy, and adnexal surgery (Vujic,
2019; Yu, 2018). Postoperative complications in nonpregnant patients can
similarly harm gravid women. However, data comparing these complications
in these two groups are conflicting. The National Surgical Quality
Improvement Program showed that morbidity and mortality rates from
nonobstetrical surgery did not differ between pregnant and nonpregnant
women (Moore, 2015). In a Taiwanese cohort of nearly 5600 gravidas, the
infectious postoperative complication rate was slightly higher and the
mortality rate was fourfold greater than those rates in nonpregnant women
(Huang, 2016).
The reported postoperative complication rate in gravidas approximates 5
percent, and the maternal mortality rate in these cases is <1 percent (Huang,
2016; Vujic, 2019). Moreover, preoperative infection, specifically sepsis, is
associated with a higher risk of maternal death (Erekson, 2012).

■ Perinatal Morbidity
Excessive perinatal morbidity associated with nonobstetrical surgery is also
attributable in many cases to the disease itself rather than to surgery and
anesthesia. Two- to threefold elevated risks for spontaneous abortion,
preterm delivery, preeclampsia, and cesarean delivery have been reported
(Yu, 2018). Balinskaite and associates (2017) identified a greater risk of
fetal death, preterm birth, fetal-growth restriction, and cesarean delivery in
47,628 women undergoing nonobstetrical surgery. Most of these
complications developed in cases performed emergently (Vujic, 2019). The
Swedish Birth Registry provides valuable data comparing perinatal
outcomes in women undergoing surgery with those of the general obstetrical
population (Table 49-1) (Mazze, 1989). The incidences of congenital
malformations and stillbirth were not significantly different from those of
nonexposed newborns. However, incidences of low birthweight, preterm
birth, and neonatal death were significantly higher. Increased neonatal death
rates were largely due to prematurity.
TABLE 49-1. Birth Outcomes in 5405 Pregnant Women Undergoing
Nonobstetrical Surgery

Fetal abnormality rates are not associated with maternal surgery in early
pregnancy. Källén and Mazze (1990) reported a nonsignificant relationship
between elevated neural-tube defect rates and operations performed at 4 to 5
weeks’ gestation. A large database study found no evidence that anesthetic

agents were teratogenic (Czeizel, 1998). According to Briggs and coworkers
(2017), most inhalation anesthetic agents appear safe.
More recently, concerns of neurodevelopmental harm with the use of
anesthetics for obstetrical or fetal surgery have been raised. In 2016, the
FDA issued a warning regarding impaired brain development in children
following in utero exposure to inhaled isoflurane, sevoflurane, and
desflurane as well as intravenous propofol and midazolam. Such risks
appear to accrue after 3 hours or more of exposure (Olutoye, 2018).

LAPAROSCOPIC SURGERY
In the first trimester, laparoscopy is the most common procedure used for
diagnosis and management of several surgical disorders. In 2017, the Society
of American Gastrointestinal and Endoscopic Surgeons (SAGES) updated its
recommendations concerning laparoscopy use in pregnant women (Table 492) (Pearl, 2017).
TABLE 49-2. Some Guidelines from the Society of American
Gastrointestinal Endoscopic Surgeons (SAGES) for Laparoscopic Surgery
in Pregnant Women

For pregnancy in general, laparotomy also is common. One 5-year study
of almost 1300 pregnant women reported that open appendectomy was
performed in 36 percent of 857 gravidas compared with only 17 percent of
nonpregnant patients. Of those undergoing cholecystectomy, an open
approach was used in 10 percent of 436 pregnant women compared with 5
percent of nonpregnant women (Silvestri, 2011). In a study from Japan,
Shigemi and colleagues (2019) described 6018 pregnant women undergoing

abdominal surgery—4047 by laparotomy and 1971 by laparoscopy.
Operative times, hospital stay lengths, and rates of adverse fetal events and
blood transfusion were all greater in the laparotomy group (Table 49-3).
Others instead report equally satisfactory outcomes with either approach
(Cox, 2016; Lee, 2019). Randomized trials to compare benefits and risks of
laparoscopy versus laparotomy during pregnancy are needed, but
implementation seems unfeasible (Bunyavejchevin, 2013; Lee, 2019).
TABLE 49-3. Comparative Outcomes in Pregnant Women Undergoing
Abdominal Surgery

For adnexal mass surgery in pregnancy, laparoscopy is preferred, and
several studies confirm its relative safety (Daykan, 2016; Webb, 2015). In
addition, laparoscopic splenectomy, adrenalectomy, and nephrectomy also
have been described in pregnant women (Asizare, 2014; Dong, 2014; Miller,
2012).
When first used, 26 to 28 weeks became the upper gestational-age limit
recommended. However, as experience has accrued, many now describe
laparoscopic surgery performed in the third trimester (Shigemi, 2019). In one
report, a third of gravidas undergoing laparoscopic cholecystectomy or
appendectomy were >26 weeks’ gestation (Rollins, 2004). No serious
adverse sequelae are linked to these procedures, and laparoscopy can safely
be performed in all trimesters.

■ Hemodynamic Effects

Precise effects of laparoscopy in the human fetus are unknown, but animal
investigations are informative. During laparoscopy, required abdominal
insufflation causes hemodynamic changes that are summarized in Table 49-4.
Reedy and associates (1995) studied baboons at the human equivalent of 22
to 26 weeks’ gestation. No substantive physiological changes were found
with insufflation pressures of 10 mm Hg, but 20 mm Hg caused significant
maternal cardiovascular and respiratory changes after 20 minutes. These
included faster respiratory rate, respiratory acidosis, diminished cardiac
output, and increased pulmonary artery and capillary wedge pressures. In
pregnant ewes, uteroplacental blood flow declines when intraperitoneal
insufflation pressure exceeded 15 mm Hg (Barnard, 1995; Hunter, 1995).
This stemmed from decreased perfusion pressure and elevated placental
vessel resistance (see Table 49-4).
TABLE 49-4. Physiological Effects of CO2 Insufflation of the Peritoneal
Cavity

In women, cardiorespiratory changes are generally not severe if
insufflation pressures remain <15 mm Hg. Despite maintaining these low
insufflation pressures in women at midpregnancy, the cardiac index dropped
26 percent after 5 minutes of insufflation and 21 percent after 15 minutes
(Steinbrook, 2001). Even so, mean arterial pressures, systemic vascular
resistance, and heart rate did not change significantly.

■ Technique
The following is an overview of laparoscopic technique in pregnancy. For a
detailed description and illustrations refer to Chapter 15 in Cunningham and
Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd edition (Kho, 2017).
Preparation for laparoscopy differs little from that used for laparotomy.
Bowel cleansing is not needed but may aid visualization and manipulations
by emptying the colon. Nasogastric or orogastric decompression reduces the
risk of stomach trocar puncture and aspiration. Aortocaval compression is
avoided by a left-lateral tilt of the patient’s body. Positioning of the lower
extremities in boot-type stirrups maintains access to the vagina for fetal
sonographic assessment or manual uterine displacement. Intrauterine
manipulators are logically avoided. Pregnancy-related hypercoagulability
combined with pneumoperitoneum-associated, lower-extremity venous stasis
raises venous thromboembolism risks. Prophylactic pneumatic compression
devices are wrapped around the calves during patient positioning.
Most reports describe the use of general endotracheal anesthesia with
monitoring of end-tidal carbon dioxide—EtCO2 (Hong, 2006; Ribic-Pucelj,
2007). With controlled ventilation, EtCO2 is maintained between 30 and 35
mm Hg.
Beyond the first trimester, technical modifications of standard pelvic
laparoscopic entry are required to avoid uterine puncture or laceration (Fig.
49-1). Many recommend open entry techniques to avoid perforations of the
uterus, pelvic vessels, and adnexa. With the method described by Hasson
(1971, 1974), the abdomen is incised at or above the umbilicus, and the
peritoneal cavity entered under direct visualization (Fig. 49-2). At this point,
the cannula is connected to the insufflation system, and a 12–mm Hg
pneumoperitoneum is created. The initial insufflation should be conducted
slowly to allow for prompt assessment and reversal of any untoward
pressure-related effects. Gas leakage around the cannula is managed by
tightening the surrounding skin with a towel clamp. Insertion of secondary
trocars into the abdomen is most safely performed under direct laparoscopic
viewing. Single-port surgery also has been described (Dursun, 2013).

FIGURE 49-1 Pregnant uterus at 10, 20, and 36 weeks’ gestation depicting distortion of other
intraperitoneal organs. (Reproduced with permission from Kho KA: Diagnostic and operative
laparoscopy. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al (eds): Cunningham and Gilstrap’s
Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2017.)

FIGURE 49-2 Hasson open entry technique for laparoscopic instrument placement. A. Fascia grasped
with two Allis clamps and elevated prior to sharp incision. B. Two fascial stitches incorporate the
peritoneum and fascia. C. These fascial sutures are wrapped around holders of the Hasson cannula to
anchor it in place. (Reproduced with permission from Kho KA: Diagnostic and operative laparoscopy.
In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al (eds): Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative
Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2017.)

In more advanced pregnancies, direct entry through a left upper quadrant
port in the midclavicular line, 2 cm beneath the costal margin, may better
avoid the fundus (Donkervoort, 2011; Stepp, 2004). Known as the Palmer
point, this entry site is also used in gynecological laparoscopy because
visceroparietal adhesions infrequently form here (Vilos, 2007).

Gasless laparoscopy is a less commonly selected alternative approach
that uses a rod with intraabdominal fan-blade-shaped retractors. When
opened, these allow the abdominal wall to be lifted upward. It avoids the
typical laparoscopic cardiovascular changes because abdominal wall
elevation is created by retraction rather than insufflation (Phupong, 2007).

■ Complications
Risks inherent to any abdominal endoscopic procedure are probably slightly
greater during pregnancy. The obvious unique one is perforation of the
pregnant uterus with a trocar or Veress needle (Kizer, 2011; Mala, 2014).
That said, reported complications are infrequent (Choi, 2021; Koo, 2012;
Post, 2019).

■ Perinatal Outcomes
Perinatal outcomes in women are limited to observational studies. Reedy and
colleagues (1997) used the updated Swedish Birth Registry database to
analyze a 20-year period with more than 2 million deliveries. Of 2181
laparoscopic procedures, most were performed during the first trimester.
Perinatal outcomes for these women were compared with those of all women
in the database and those undergoing open surgical procedures. These
investigators confirmed the earlier findings of an increased risk of low
birthweight, preterm delivery, and fetal-growth restriction with surgery
during pregnancy. Differences were not found, however, in outcomes of
women undergoing laparoscopy versus laparotomy. An observational study
of 262 women undergoing surgery for an adnexal mass noted similar findings
(Koo, 2012). Although the abortion and stillbirth rates are low with
abdominal surgery, laparotomy has more adverse outcomes compared with
laparoscopy (see Table 49-3).

RADIOGRAPHY
Imaging modalities are used as adjuncts for diagnosis and therapy during
pregnancy. Options include sonography, radiography, computed tomography
(CT), and magnetic resonance (MR) imaging. Of these, radiography is the

most problematic. Inevitably, some radiographic procedures are performed
before recognition of early pregnancy, usually because of trauma or serious
illness (Herfel, 2018). Fortunately, most diagnostic radiographic procedures
are associated with minimal fetal risks. However, as with medications, these
procedures may lead to a needless therapeutic abortion because of patient or
physician anxiety or to litigation if pregnancy outcome is adverse.
The American College of Radiology (ACR) has addressed the growing
concern of collective radiation doses in all fields of medicine (Amis, 2007).
More recent publications have been in support of FDA efforts to decrease
radiation exposure and to reduce the number of unnecessary examinations.
Recommendations also include considerations for radiosensitive
populations, such as children and pregnant or potentially pregnant women. At
our institutions, special recommendations are made for gravidas. Radiation
exposure values and duration are recorded and monitored in high-exposure
areas such as CT and fluoroscopy units. Last, consultation with the
radiologist is advised (Chansakul, 2017).

■ Ionizing Radiation
The term radiation refers to energy transmission and thus is applied to x-rays
and also to microwaves, ultrasound, diathermy, and radio waves. Of these, xrays and gamma rays have short wavelengths with very high energy and are
ionizing radiation forms. The other four energy forms have rather long
wavelengths and low energy (Brent, 2009).
Ionizing radiation can directly damage DNA or can create free hydroxyl
radicals that in turn damage DNA (Hall, 1991; National Research Council,
1990). Methods of measuring the effects of x-rays are summarized in Table
49-5. The standard terms used are exposure (in air), dose (to tissue), and
relative effective dose (to tissue accounting for biological effects). In the
range of energies for diagnostic x-rays, the dose is now expressed in grays
(Gy), and the relative effective dose is expressed in sieverts (Sv). These can
be used interchangeably. For consistency, all doses discussed subsequently
are expressed in currently used units of gray (1 Gy = 100 rad) or sievert (1
Sv = 100 rem). To convert, 1 Sv = 100 rem = 100 rad.
TABLE 49-5. Some Measures of Ionizing Radiation

As noted, x- and gamma-radiation at high doses can damage DNA, and
this yields two biological effects in the fetus (Brent, 2009). These are
deterministic effects and stochastic effects.

■ Deterministic Effects
One potential harm of radiation exposure is deterministic, which may result
in abortion, growth restriction, congenital malformations, or intellectual
disability. These deterministic effects are threshold effects, and the threshold
level is the NOAEL—no observed adverse effect level (Brent, 2009).
Although controversial, the NOAEL concept supports that there is no risk
below the threshold dose of 0.05 Gy or 5 rad. It also suggests that the
threshold for gross fetal malformations is more likely to be 0.2 Gy (20 rad)
(Lowe, 2020).
The deterministic effects of ionizing radiation have been extensively
studied for cell damage that leads to disordered embryogenesis. These have
been assessed in animal models as well as in Japanese atomic bomb
survivors and the Oxford Survey of Childhood Cancers (Sorahan, 1995).
Other sources have confirmed prior observations and provide additional
information (Groen, 2012).

Animal Studies
In the mouse model, the lethality risk is highest during the preimplantation
period, which extends up to 10 days postconception (Kanter, 2014).
Blastomere destruction caused by chromosomal damage is the likely cause
(Hall, 1991).
During organogenesis, high-dose radiation—1 Gy or 100 rad—is more
likely to cause malformations and growth restriction and less likely to be
lethal. Studies of brain development suggest effects on neuronal development
and a window of cortical sensitivity in early and midfetal periods. Instead,
acute low-dose ionizing radiation appears to have no deleterious effects
(Howell, 2013).

Human Data
Data on adverse human effects of high-dose ionizing radiation mostly derive
from the atomic bomb survivors of Hiroshima and Nagasaki (Greskovich,
2000; Otake, 1987). The International Commission on Radiological
Protection (2003) confirmed initial studies showing that the risk of severe
intellectual disability was greatest between 8 and 15 weeks’ gestation (Table
49-6) (American College of Radiology, 2018). The mean decrease in
intelligence quotient (IQ) scores was 25 points per Gy or 100 rad. The dose
response appears linear, but it is unclear whether there is a threshold dose.
At <8 weeks’ or >25 weeks’ gestation, a higher risk of intellectual disability
in humans has not been documented, even with doses exceeding 0.5 Gy or 50
rad (International Commission on Radiological Protection, 2003). Most
estimates err on the conservative side by assuming a linear nonthreshold
hypothesis. In a study of fetuses exposed to a low radiation dose in the first
trimester, Guilbaud and colleagues (2019) did not find an increased risk for
miscarriage, congenital anomalies, or fetal-growth restriction.
TABLE 49-6. Deterministic Effects of Ionizing Radiation in Pregnancy

Reports have described high-dose radiation used to treat women for
malignancy, menorrhagia, and uterine myomas. Dekaban (1968) described 22
infants with microcephaly, intellectual disability, or both following exposure
in the first half of pregnancy to an estimated 2.5 Gy or 250 rad for
therapeutic radiation. These doses are also carcinogenic for the fetus (Brent,
2015).

Summary of Fetal Radiation Exposure
From 8 to 15 weeks’ gestation, the fetus is most susceptible to radiationinduced intellectual disability (see Table 49-6). Whether this is a threshold
or nonthreshold linear function of dose is unresolved. The Committee on
Biological Effects (1990) estimates the risk of severe intellectual disability
to be as low as 4 percent for 0.1 Gy (10 rad) and as high as 60 percent for
1.5 Gy (150 rad). Recall that these doses are 2 to 100 times higher than those
considered maximal from diagnostic radiation. Importantly, cumulative doses
from multiple procedures may reach the harmful range, especially at 8 to 15
weeks’ gestation. At 16 to 25 weeks’ gestation, the risk is less, and there is
no proven risk before 8 weeks or after 25 weeks (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2017).
Embryofetal risks from low-dose diagnostic radiation appear to be
minimal. Current evidence suggests that risks for malformations, growth
restriction, or spontaneous abortion are not increased from a radiation dose
of less than 0.05 Gy (5 rad). Brent (2009) concluded that gross congenital
malformation rates would not be greater with exposure to less than 0.2 Gy
(20 rad). Diagnostic radiographs seldom exceed 0.1 Gy (10 rad) and thus,
these procedures are unlikely to cause deterministic effects (Strzelczyk,

2007). As emphasized by Groen and coworkers (2012), 0.1 Gy is the
radiation equivalent to that from more than 1000 chest x-rays.

■ Stochastic Effects
These effects refer to random, presumably unpredictable oncogenic or
mutagenic effects of radiation exposure. Stochastic effects concern
associations between fetal diagnostic radiation exposure and increased risk
of childhood cancers or genetic diseases. Excess cancers can result from in
utero exposure to doses as low as 0.01 Sv or 1 rad (Doll, 1997; National
Research Council, 2006). The estimated risk of childhood cancer following
fetal exposure to 0.03 Gy or 3 rad doubles the background risk of 1 cancer in
600 exposed fetuses to that of 2 in 600 (Hurwitz, 2006).
In one report, in utero radiation exposure was linked to 10 solid cancers
in adults from age 17 to 45 years. There was a dose-response relationship as
previously noted at the 0.1 Sv or 10 rem threshold. These cancers likely are
associated with a complex series of interactions between DNA and ionizing
radiation. These interactions make it more problematic to predict cancer risk
from low-dose radiation of less than 10 rem. Importantly, below doses of 0.1
to 0.2 Sv, evidence of a carcinogenic effect is not convincing (Brent, 2009,
2014; Preston, 2008; Strzelczyk, 2007).

■ X-Ray Dosimetry
Estimates of dose to the uterus and embryo for various frequently used
radiographic examinations are summarized in Table 49-7. Imaging of
maternal body parts farthest from the uterus results in a very small dose of
radiation scatter to the embryo or fetus. The size of the woman, radiographic
technique, and equipment performance are other variables (Wagner, 1997).
Thus, data in the table serve only as guidelines. When the radiation dose for
a specific individual is required, a medical physicist should be consulted.
The Health Physics Society lists answers to questions commonly asked by
patients (Health Physics Society, 2020).
TABLE 49-7. Dose to the Uterus for Common Radiologic Procedures

■ Therapeutic Radiation
The Radiation Therapy Committee Task Group of the American Association
of Physics in Medicine emphasizes careful individualization of cancer
radiotherapy for the pregnant woman (Stovall, 1995). In some cases,
shielding of the fetus and other safeguards can be employed (Fenig, 2001;
Nuyttens, 2002). However, in other instances, the fetus will be exposed to
dangerous radiation doses, and a carefully designed plan must be improvised
(Prado, 2000). Models that estimate the fetal dose given during maternal
brain radiotherapy or tangential breast irradiation have been developed
(Mazonakis, 2017). The adverse pregnancy outcomes that occur years after
abdominopelvic radiotherapy are detailed in Chapter 66 (p. 1164). (Brent,
2015; Wo, 2009).

■ Diagnostic Radiation
Radiographs

To estimate fetal risk, approximate x-ray dosimetry must be known.
According to the American College of Radiology, no single diagnostic
procedure results in a radiation dose significant enough to threaten embryofetal well-being (Hall, 1991).
For standard radiographs, dosimetry is presented in Table 49-7. In
pregnancy, the anterior-posterior-view chest radiograph is the most common
study, and fetal exposure is exceptionally small—0.0007 Gy or 70 mrad. The
dose with one abdominal radiograph is higher—0.001 Gy or 100 mrad—
because the embryo or fetus lies directly in the x-ray beam path. The standard
intravenous pyelogram may exceed 0.005 Gy or 500 mrad because of several
exposures. The one-shot pyelogram described in Chapter 56 (p. 999) is
useful when urolithiasis or other causes of urinary tract obstruction are
unproven by sonography. Mammography and most “trauma series”
radiographs of an extremity, skull, or rib deliver low doses because of
distance from the fetus (Cepeda-Martins, 2021; Shakerian, 2015).

Fluoroscopy and Angiography
Dosimetry calculations are much more difficult with these procedures
because of variations in the number of radiographs obtained, total
fluoroscopy time, and fluoroscopy time during which the fetus lies in the
radiation field. As shown in Table 49-8, the range varies. Although the FDA
limits the exposure rate for conventional fluoroscopy such as barium studies,
special-purpose systems such as angiography units have the potential for
much higher exposure.
TABLE 49-8. Estimated X-Ray Doses to the Uterus/Embryo from Common
Fluoroscopic Procedures

Angiography and vascular embolization may occasionally be necessary
for trauma and for serious maternal disorders. As before, a greater distance
from the embryo or fetus lowers the exposure and risk.

Computed Tomography
In a recent report describing nearly 3.5 million pregnancies, the use of CT
imaging from 1996 to 2016 increased fivefold (Kwan, 2019). These studies
are usually performed by obtaining a spiral of 360-degree images that are
postprocessed in multiple planes. Of these, the axial image remains the most
frequently obtained. Multidetector CT (MDCT) images are now standard for
common clinical indications. The most recent detectors have more channels,
and these multidetector protocols may result in higher dosimetry compared
with prior CT imaging techniques. Several imaging parameters have an effect
on exposure (Brenner, 2007). These include pitch, kilovoltage, tube current,

collimation, slice number, tube rotation, and total acquisition time. If a study
is performed with and without contrast, the dose is doubled because twice as
many images are obtained. Fetal exposure also varies with maternal size and
fetal size and position. As with plain radiography, the closer the target area
is to the fetus, the greater the delivered dose.
Cranial CT imaging for evaluation of neurological disorders and
eclampsia is the most frequently performed CT study in gravidas (Chaps. 41,
p. 718 and 63, p. 1126). Nonenhanced CT scanning is often used to detect
acute hemorrhage within the epidural, subdural, or subarachnoid spaces (Fig.
49-3). Radiation dosage is negligible because of distance from the fetus
(Goldberg-Stein, 2012).

FIGURE 49-3 An image from a noncontrast computed tomography head study demonstrates a large
right-sided frontoparietal temporal intraparenchymal hematoma (H ). The midline (arrow) is shifted to
the left due to mass effect from the hematoma. (Reproduced with permission from Dr. Amanda
Zofkie.)

Abdominal procedures are more problematic. Hurwitz and associates
(2006) employed a 16-channel multidetector scanner to calculate fetal
exposure at 0 and 3 months’ gestation using a phantom model. Calculations
were made for three commonly requested procedures in pregnant women

(Table 49-9). The study showed their pulmonary embolism protocol has the
same dosimetry exposure as the ventilation-perfusion (V/Q) lung scan
discussed subsequently. Although the appendicitis protocol has the highest
radiation exposure, it is very useful clinically when MR imaging is not
available. Using a greater pitch markedly decreases the dosimetry and yields
a sensitivity of 92 percent, a specificity of 99 percent, and a negativepredictive value of 99 percent (Lazarus, 2007). This is discussed further in
Chapter 55 (p. 987). For suspected urolithiasis, the multidetector-scan
protocol is used if sonography is nondiagnostic. White and coworkers (2007)
identified urolithiasis in 13 of 20 women with gestations aged an average of
26 weeks. Last, as shown in Figure 49-4, abdominal tomography is
performed if indicated in the pregnant woman with severe trauma (Herfel,
2018; Shakerian, 2015).
TABLE 49-9. Estimated Radiation Dosimetry with 16-Channel
Multidetector Computed-Tomographic (MDCT) Imaging Protocols

FIGURE 49-4 This woman in her third trimester was involved in a high-speed motor vehicle accident.
A. Maximum intensity projection acquired for maternal indications readily identifies fetal skull fractures

(arrows). B. 3-D reformatted CT image in a bone algorithm demonstrates the fetal skeleton from data
acquired during the maternal examination. Again, the arrow marks one fracture site. (Reproduced with
permission from Bailey AA, Twickler DM: Perioperative imaging. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL,
Gilstrap LC III, et al (eds): Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, NY:
McGraw Hill; 2017. Photo contributor: Dr. Travis Browning.)

Most experience with chest CT imaging is with cases of suspected
pulmonary embolism. Historically, pulmonary scintigraphy—the V/Q scan—
was recommended for pregnant women by 70 percent of radiologists and
chest CT angiography by 30 percent (Stein, 2007). However, most currently
agree that multidetector-CT pulmonary angiography (CTPA) has improved
accuracy because of increasingly faster acquisition times (Brown, 2014).
Despite advances in technology, scintigraphy is still recommended by the
American Thoracic Society for gravidas with a normal chest x-ray (Leung,
2012). A higher use rate for CTPA has been reported, and dosimetry similar
to that with V/Q scintigraphy has been emphasized (Brenner, 2007; Greer,
2015; Tromeur, 2019). The rapid turnaround time with current CTPA
protocols at most hospitals has advanced its selection as the preferred
modality (Sheen, 2018). The algorithm in the YEARS study describes the use
of D-dimer values and clinical criteria to define a subgroup of gravidas
warranting further imaging. Thus, the number of indicated CTPA studies
resulting from this algorithm is markedly reduced (van der Pol, 2019). In
pregnancy, although a negative D-dimer test is helpful, these levels may be
normally elevated with increasing gestation and certain maternal
complications (Chap. 55, p. 982).
Of other aspects in study selection, the fetal radiation doses are lower
with CT pulmonary angiography (CTPA) compared with the V/Q scan.
However, maternal chest radiation doses are substantially higher with CTPA
(van Mens, 2017). The most recent ongoing Optimised Computed
Tomography Pulmonary Angiography in Pregnancy Quality and Safety
(OPTICA) study is a prospective trial using a uniform low-dose CTPA
protocol to enable definitive recommendations. Until results are known, our
reduced-exposure CTPA protocol is recommended as the initial preferred
imaging modality in suspected pulmonary embolism (Chap. 55, p. 987).
CT pelvimetry is used by some before attempting breech vaginal delivery
(Chap. 28, p. 522). The fetal dose approaches 0.015 Gy or 1.5 rad, but use of
a low-exposure technique may reduce this to 0.0025 Gy or 0.25 rad.

Radiographic Contrast Agents
These can be given intravenously or taken orally. Intravenous contrast agents
are considered category B by the FDA. These agents are iodinated and of
low osmolality, and thus they cross the placenta to the fetus. With watersoluble iodinated contrast, no cases of neonatal hypothyroidism or other
adverse effects have been documented (American College of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, 2017). Oral contrast preparations, typically containing iodine or
barium, have minimal systemic absorption, and are unlikely to affect the
fetus.

Nuclear Medicine Studies
These studies are performed by “tagging” a radioactive element to a carrier
that can be injected, inhaled, or swallowed. For example, the radioisotope
technetium-99m (Tc-99m) may be tagged to red blood cells, sulfur colloid,
or pertechnetate. The method used to tag the agent determines fetal radiation
exposure. The amount of placental transfer is obviously important, but
maternal renal clearance is also factored because of fetal proximity to her
bladder. Measurement of radioactive technetium is based on its decay, and
the units used are the curie (Ci) or the Becquerel (Bq). Dosimetry is usually
expressed in millicuries (mCi). The effective tissue dose is expressed in
sievert units (Sv) with conversion of 1 Sv = 100 rem = 100 rad (see Table
49-5).
Depending on the physical and biochemical properties of a radioisotope,
an average fetal exposure can be calculated (Wagner, 1997; Zanzonico,
2000). Commonly used radiopharmaceuticals and estimated absorbed fetal
doses are given in Table 49-10. The radionuclide dose should be kept as low
as possible (Zanotti-Fregonara, 2017). Exposures vary with gestational age
and are greatest earlier in pregnancy for most radiopharmaceuticals. One
exception is the later effect of iodine-131 on the fetal thyroid (Wagner,
1997).
TABLE 49-10. Radiopharmaceuticals Used in Nuclear Medicine Studies

In a V/Q scan, perfusion is measured with injected Tc-99m
macroaggregated albumin, and ventilation is measured with inhaled xenon127 or xenon-133. Fetal exposure with either is negligible (Chan, 2002;
Mountford, 1997).
Thyroid scanning with iodine-123 or iodine-131 seldom is indicated in
pregnancy. However, with the trace diagnostic doses used, fetal risk is
minimal. In contrast, therapeutic doses of radioiodine to treat maternal
Graves disease or thyroid cancer may cause fetal thyroid ablation and
cretinism.
The sentinel lymphoscintigram is a commonly used preoperative study in
nonpregnant women to detect the axillary lymph node most likely to have
metastases from breast cancer. Tc-99m–sulfur colloid is used in this
diagnostic study (Newman, 2007; Spanheimer, 2009). The calculated dose
approximates 0.014 mSv or 1.4 mrad, which should not preclude its safe use
during pregnancy.

SONOGRAPHY
The development of sonography for study of the fetus and mother is one of the
greater achievements in obstetrics. The technique has become virtually
indispensable in everyday practice. Its wide-ranging clinical uses are further
discussed in Chapters 14 and 15 and in other sections of this book.

MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING
Magnetic resonance technology does not use ionizing radiation, and its use in
pregnancy is constantly evolving (Gopireddy, 2021; Mervak, 2019).
Advantages include sharp resolution at soft-tissue interfaces, ability to
characterize tissue composition, and acquisition of images in any plane—
particularly axial, sagittal, and coronal. A portion of Chapter 14 (p. 263) is
devoted to mechanisms that generate MR images, and imaging examples are
provided throughout this book.

■ Safety

The update of the expert panel on MR safety of the ACR was summarized by
Kanal and colleagues (2013). The panel concluded that no harmful human
effects are reported from MR imaging. Similar conclusions were reached by
the International Society for Ultrasound in Obstetrics and Gynecology
(2017).
When operated within standardized limits, maternal and fetal imaging can
be safely performed at clinical magnet strengths—3 tesla (T) and below. MR
imaging can be used regardless of trimester: (1) if the information cannot be
obtained with another nonionizing modality, namely sonography; (2) if the
study results will guide maternal or fetal management during pregnancy; and
(3) if the imaging cannot be delayed until the woman is no longer pregnant.
The decision to use a magnetic field strength >1.5 T may be made for
specific maternal indications. Early work also suggests imaging at 3 T is safe
and it improves fetal assessment (Chartier, 2019; Victoria, 2016). No
demonstrable fetal heart rate pattern changes occur during MR imaging of
gravidas (Vadeyar, 2000). Last, studies evaluating children exposed in utero
have shown no deleterious effects (Kok, 2004; Reeves, 2010).
Contraindications to MR imaging include internal cardiac pacemakers,
neurostimulators, implanted defibrillators and infusion pumps, cochlear
implants, shrapnel or other metal in biologically sensitive areas, some
intracranial aneurysm clips, and any metallic foreign body in the eye. Of
more than 51,000 nonpregnant patients scheduled for MR imaging, one study
found that only 0.4 percent had an absolute contraindication to the procedure
(Dewey, 2007).

■ Contrast Agents
Several different elemental gadolinium chelates are used to create
paramagnetic contrast. These cross the placenta and are found in the fetus and
placenta and are concentrated in amnionic fluid (Oh, 2015). In doses
approximately 10 times the normal human dose, a gadolinium-based contrast
agent caused slight developmental delay in rabbit fetuses. Inadvertant fetal
exposure usually occurs in early pregnancy (Bird, 2019). The American
College of Radiology cites a study of 26 women given a gadolinium
derivative in the first trimester without adverse fetal effects (Kanal, 2013).
Despite this, routine use of gadolinium is not recommended unless potential
benefits outweigh fetal risks (American College of Obstetricians and

Gynecologists, 2017; American College of Radiology, 2020; Briggs, 2017).
This recommendation stems from a possible dissociation of the toxic
gadolinium ion from its ligand within amnionic fluid and thus potential
prolonged exposure of the fetus.

■ Maternal Indications
In some cases, MR imaging may complement CT, and in others, MR imaging
is preferable (Mervak, 2019). MR imaging is also a superb tool to evaluate
the maternal abdomen and retroperitoneal space. One example is evaluation
of right lower quadrant pain in pregnancy, specifically with suspected
appendicitis (Aguilera, 2018; Tsai, 2017). It can aid detection and
localization of adrenal, renal, and gastrointestinal lesions as well as pelvic
masses in pregnancy (Boyd, 2012; Raj, 2020; Tica, 2013).
Maternal central nervous system abnormalities, such as brain tumors or
spinal trauma, are more clearly seen with MR imaging. This makes it
invaluable in the diagnosis of neurological emergencies (Edlow, 2013).
Other modalities include MR urography for renal urolithiasis and cardiac
MR for investigating normal physiology, complex defects, and
cardiomyopathies (Mullins, 2012; Nelson, 2015; Stewart, 2016). The
application of cardiovascular MR imaging in pregnant women is expanding
(Ducas, 2019).
MR imaging helps also evaluate many pregnancy-specific disorders. It is
chosen by many to determine the degree and extent of invasion in placenta
accreta spectrum (Chap. 43, p. 762). As discussed in Chapter 40 (p. 701),
MR imaging has provided important insights into the pathophysiology of
preeclampsia (Nelander, 2018; Zeeman, 2014). As discussed in Chapter 37
(p. 656), CT and MR imaging are useful for puerperal infection evaluation,
but MR imaging provides better visualization of the bladder flap area
following cesarean delivery (Brown, 1999; Twickler, 1997). Last,
preliminary studies of placental function with MR imaging are promising
(Hutter, 2019).

■ Fetal Indications
Fetal MR imaging provides a complement to sonography (Laifer-Narin,
2007; Sandrasegaran, 2006). According to Zaretsky and associates (2003a),

MR imaging can be used to display almost all elements of the standard fetal
anatomical survey. Moreover, the quality of three-dimensional anatomical
reconstruction with MR fetal imaging is superb (Werner, 2019). The most
frequent fetal indications are evaluation of complex abnormalities of the
brain, chest, and genitourinary systems (Williams, 2017). Reichel (2003) and
Twickler (2002) and their colleagues have validated its use for fetal central
nervous system anomalies and biometry (Fig. 49-5). Others have described
MR imaging of fetuses with suprarenal masses or with renal anomalies and
oligohydramnios (Castro, 2019; Hawkins, 2008). Fetal weight estimation
may be more accurate with MR imaging than with sonography (Kadji, 2019;
Zaretsky, 2003b). And MR imaging has been shown to accurately identify
fetal anemia requiring transfusions (Jørgensen, 2019).

FIGURE 49-5 Nullipara with a 27 weeks’ gestation. A. Axial T2-weighted MR image shows mild fetal
unilateral ventriculomegaly involving the left lateral ventricle (arrow). B. Sagittal T2-weighted MR
image demonstrates normal development of the corpus callosum (arrowheads) and vermis (arrow).

Fetal movement is problematic for MR imaging, but faster acquisitions
eliminate the problem. Morphology is primarily assessed with fast T2weighted sequences such as half-Fourier acquisition single shot turbo spin
echo (HASTE) or single shot fast spin echo (SSFSE). Fetal indications and
findings of MR imaging are discussed more extensively in Chapter 14 (p.
266) and throughout this book.

IMAGING DURING PREGNANCY

The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2017) has
reviewed the effects of radiographic, sonographic, and magnetic-resonance
exposure during pregnancy. Its suggested guidelines are shown in Table 4911.
TABLE 49-11. Guidelines for Diagnostic Imaging During Pregnancy and
Lactation

REFERENCES
Adelstein SJ: Administered radionuclides in pregnancy. Teratology 59:236, 1999
Aguilera F, Gilchrist BF, Farkas DT: Accuracy of MRI in diagnosing appendicitis during pregnancy. Am
Surg 84(8):1326, 2018
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Guidelines for diagnostic imaging during
pregnancy and lactation. Committee Opinion No. 723, October 2017
American College of Radiology: ACR manual on contrast media. Version 10.3, 2020
American College of Radiology: ACR-SPR practice parameter for imaging pregnant or potentially
pregnant adolescents and women with ionizing radiation. Resolution 39, Revised 2018
Amis ES Jr, Butler PF, Applegate KE, et al: American College of Radiology white paper on radiation
dose in medicine. J Am Coll Radiol 4(5):272, 2007
Asizare M, 2015; Alipour M, Taghavi M, et al: Bilateral laparoscopic adrenalectomy in a pregnant
women with Cushing’s syndrome. Urol J 11(5):1911, 2014
Bailey AA, Twickler DM: Perioperative imaging. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al
(eds): Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education,
2017
Balinskaite V, Bottle A, Sodhi V, et al: The risk of adverse pregnancy outcomes following nonobsteric
surgery during pregnancy: estimates from a retrospective cohort study of 6.5 million pregnancies.
Ann Surg 266(2):260, 2017
Barnard JM, Chaffin D, Droste S, et al: Fetal response to carbon dioxide pneumoperitoneum in the
pregnant ewe. Obstet Gynecol 85:669, 1995
Bednarek DR, Rudin S, Wong, et al: Reduction of fluoroscopic exposure for the air-contrast barium
enema. Br J Radiol 56:823, 1983
Bird ST, Gelperin K, Sahin L, et al: First-trimester exposure to gadolinium-based contrast agents: a
utilization study of 4.6 million U.S. pregnancies. Radiology 293(1):193, 2019
Boyd CA, Benarroch-Gampel J, Kilic G, et al: Pancreatic neoplasms in pregnancy: diagnosis,
complications, and management. J Gastrointest Surg 16(5):1064, 2012

Brenner DJ, Hall JH, Phil D: Computed tomography—an increasing source of radiation exposure. N
Engl J Med 357:2277, 2007
Brent RL: Carcinogenic risks of prenatal ionizing radiation. Semin Fetal Neonatal Med 19(3):203, 2014
Brent RL: Saving lives and changing family histories: appropriate counseling of pregnant women and
men and women of reproductive age, concerning risk of diagnostic radiation exposure during and
before pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 200(1):4, 2009
Brent RL: Protection of the gametes embryo/fetus from prenatal radiation exposure. Health Phys
108(2):242, 2015
Briggs GG, Freeman RK, Towers CV, et al: Drugs in pregnancy and lactation, 11th ed. Philadelphia,
Wolters Kluwer, 2017
Brown AM, Cronin CG, NiMhuircheartaigh J, et al: Evaluation of imaging quality of pulmonary 64MDCT angiography in pregnancy and puerperium. AJR Am J Roentgenol 202(1):60, 2014
Brown CE, Stettler RW, Twickler D, et al: Puerperal septic pelvic thrombophlebitis: incidence and
response to heparin therapy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 181:143, 1999
Bunyavejchevin S, Phupong V: Laparoscopic surgery for presumed benign ovarian tumor during
pregnancy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 1:CD005459, 2013
Castro P, Paula Matos A, Werner H, et al: Prenatal diagnosis of suprarenal mass by magnetic
resonance imaging: a case series. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 32(22):3882, 2019
Cepeda-Martins AR, De Maria S, Alonso J, et al: Assessment of the uterine dose in digital
mammography and digital breast tomosynthesis. Radiography (Lond.) September 23, 2021 [Epub
ahead of print]
Chan WS, Ray JG, Murray S, et al: Suspected pulmonary embolism in pregnancy. Arch Intern Med
152:1170, 2002
Chansakul T, Young GS: Neuroimaging in pregnant women. Semin Neurol 37(6):712, 2017
Chartier AL, Bouvier MJ, McPherson DR, et al: The safety of maternal and fetal MRI at 3 T. AJR Am
J Roetgenol 213(5):1170, 2019
Choi HN, Ng BR, Arafat Y, et al: Evaluation of safety and foeto-maternal outcomes following nonobstetric surgery in pregnancy: a retrospective single-site Australian study. ANZ J Surg 91:627, 2021
Committee on Biological Effects of Ionizing Radiation: Other somatic and fetal effects. In BEIR V:
Effects of Exposure to Low Levels of Ionizing Radiation. Washington, National Academy Press,
1990
Conway A: The uncertain effects of small radiation doses. Radiogr Today 55(624):59, 1989
Cox TC, Huntington CR, Blair LJ, et al: Laparoscopic appendectomy and cholecystectomy versus open:
a study in 1999 pregnant patients. Surg Endosc 30(2):593, 2016
Czeizel AE, Pataki T, Rockenbauer M: Reproductive outcome after exposure to surgery under
anesthesia during pregnancy. Arch Gynecol Obstet 261:193, 1998
Daykan Y, Klein Z, Bugin R, et al: Ovarian torsion during pregnancy—perinatal and delivery outcome
after surgical treatment. Am J Obstet Gynecol 214:S110, 2016
Dekaban AS: Abnormalities in children exposed to x-irradiation during various stages of gestation:
tentative timetable of radiation injury to the human fetus. J Nucl Med 9:471, 1968
Dewey M, Schink T, Dewey CF: Frequency of referral of patients with safety-related contraindications
to magnetic resonance imaging. Eur J Radiol 63(1):124, 2007
Doll R, Wakeford R: Risk of childhood cancer from fetal irradiation. Br J Radiol 70:130, 1997
Dong D, Li H: Diagnosis and treatment of pheochromocytoma during pregnancy. J Matern Neonatal
Med 27(18):1930, 2014

Donkervoort SC, Boerma D: Suspicion of acute appendicitis in the third trimester of pregnancy: pros
and cons of a laparoscopic procedure. JSLS 15(3):379, 2011
Ducas R, Nguyen ET, Wald RM: Contemporary considerations for the use of cardiovascular magnetic
resonance imaging during pregnancy. Obstet Med 12(4):158, 2019
Dursun P, Gülümser C, Cağlar M, et al: Laparoendoscopic single-site surgery for acute adnexal
pathology during pregnancy: preliminary experience. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 26(13):1282,
2013
Edlow JA, Caplan LR, O’Brien K, et al: Diagnosis of acute neurological emergencies in pregnant and
postpartum women. Lancet Neurol 12(2):175, 2013
Erekson EA, Brousseau EC, Dick-Biascoechea MA, et al: Maternal postoperative complications after
nonobstetertic antenatal surgery. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med. 25(12):2639, 2012
Fenig E, Mishaeli M, Kalish Y, et al: Pregnancy and radiation. Cancer Treat Rev 27:1, 2001
Finci L, Meier B, Steffenino G, et al: Radiation exposure during diagnostic catheterization and singleand double-vessel percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty. Am J Cardiol 60:1401, 1987
Gazmararian JA, Petersen R, Jamieson DJ, et al: Hospitalizations during pregnancy among managed
care enrollees. Obstet Gynecol 100:94, 2002
Goldberg-Stein SA, Liu B, Hahn PF, et al: Radiation dose management: part 2, estimating fetal radiation
risk from CT during pregnancy. AJR Am J Roentgenol 198(4):W352, 2012
Gopireddy DR, Le R, Virakar ME, et al: Magnetic resonance imaging evaluation of ectopic pregnancy: a
value-added review. J Comput Assist Tomog 45:374, 2021
Gorson RO, Lassen M, Rosenstein M: Patient dosimetry in diagnostic radiology. In Waggener RG,
Kereiakes JG, Shalek R (eds): Handbook of Medical Physics, Vol II. Boca Raton, CRC Press, 1984
Greer IA: Clinical practice. Pregnancy complicated by venous thrombosis. N Engl J Med 373(6):540,
2015
Greskovich JF, Macklis RM: Radiation therapy in pregnancy: risk calculation and risk minimization.
Semin Oncol 27:633, 2000
Groen RS, Bae JY, Lim KJ: Fear of the unknown: ionizing radiation exposure during pregnancy. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 206(6):456, 2012
Guilbaud L, Beghin D, Dhombres F, et al: Pregnancy outcome after first trimester exposure to ionizing
radiations. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Biol 232:18, 2019
Hall EJ: Scientific view of low-level radiation risks. Radiographics 11:509, 1991
Hasson HM: A modified instrument and method for laparoscopy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 110:886, 1971
Hasson HM: Open laparoscopy: a report of 150 cases. J Reprod Med 12:234, 1974
Hawkins JS, Dashe JS, Twickler DM: Magnetic resonance imaging diagnosis of severe fetal renal
anomalies. Am J Obstet Gynecol 198:328.e1, 2008
Healthy Physics Society: Radiology and the pregnant patients Q&A. 2020. Available at
http://hps.org/physicians/radiology_pregnant_patient_qa.html. Accessed April 21, 2020.
Herfel ES, Hill JH, Lieber M: Radiography evaluation of the pregnant trauma patient: what are we
willing to miss? Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 228:325, 2018
Hong JY: Adnexal mass surgery and anesthesia during pregnancy: a 10-year retrospective review. Int J
Obstet Anesth 15:212, 2006
Howell EK, Gaschak SP, Griffith KD: Radioadaptive response following in utero low-dose irradiation.
Radiat Res 179(1):29, 2013
Huang SY, Lo PH, Liu WM, et al: Outcomes after nonobstetric surgery in pregnant patients: a
nationwide study. Mayo Clin Proc 91(9):1166, 2016

Hunter JG, Swanstrom L, Thornburg K: Carbon dioxide pneumoperitoneum induces fetal acidosis in a
pregnant ewe model. Surg Endosc 9:272, 1995
Hurwitz LM, Yoshizumi T, Reiman RE, et al: Radiation dose to the fetus from body MDCT during early
gestation. AJR Am J Roentgenol 186:871, 2006
Hutter J, Slator PJ, Jackson L, et al: Multi-modal functional MRI to explore placental function over
gestation. Magn Reson Med 81(2):1191, 2019
International Commission on Radiological Protection: Biological effects after prenatal irradiation
(embryo and fetus). IRCP Publication 90, Ann IRCP, September/December 2003
International Society of Ultrasound in Obstetrics and Gynecology: Performance of fetal magnetic
resonance imaging. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 49:671, 2017
Jørgensen DS, Vejlstrup N, Rode L, et al: Magnetic resonance imaging: a new tool to optimize the
prediction of fetal anemia? Fetal Diagn Ther 46(4):257, 2019
Kadji C, Cannie MM, Resta S, et al: Magnetic resonance imaging for prenatal estimation of birth weight
in pregnancy: review of available data, techniques, and future perspectives. Am J Obstet Gynecol
220(5):428, 2019
Källén B, Mazze RI: Neural tube defects and first trimester operations. Teratology 41:717, 1990
Kanal E, Barkovich AJ, Bell C, et al: American College of Radiology guidance document on MR safe
practices: 2013. J Magn Reson Imaging 37:501, 2013
Kanter DJ, O’Brien MB, Shi XH, et al: The impact of ionizing radiation on placental trophoblasts.
Placenta 35(2):85, 2014
Kho KA: Diagnostic and operative laparoscopy. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al
(eds): Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education,
2017
Kizer NT, Powell MA: Surgery in the pregnant patient. Clin Obstet Gynecol 54(4):633, 2011
Kok RD, de Vries MM, Heerschap A, et al: Absence of harmful effects of magnetic resonance
exposure at 1.5 T in utero during the third trimester of pregnancy: a follow-up study. Magn Reson
Imaging 22(6):851, 2004
Koo YJ, Kim HJ, Lim KT, et al: Laparotomy versus laparoscopy for the treatment of adnexal masses
during pregnancy. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynecol 52:34, 2012
Kuo C, Jamieson DJ, McPheeters ML, et al: Injury hospitalizations of pregnant women in the United
States, 2002. Am J Obstet Gynecol 196:161, 2007
Kwan ML, Miglioretti DL, Marlow EC, et al: Trend in medical imaging during pregnancy in the United
States and Ontario, Canada, 1996 to 2016. JAMA Netw Open 2(7):e197249, 2019
Laifer-Narin S, Budorick NE, Simpson LL, et al: Fetal magnetic resonance imaging: a review. Curr Opin
Obstet Gynecol 19:151, 2007
Laws PW, Rosenstein M: A somatic dose index for diagnostic radiology. Health Phys 35(5):629, 1978
Lazarus E, Mayo-Smith WW, Mainiero MB, et al: CT in the evaluation of nontraumatic abdominal pain
in pregnant women. Radiology 244:784, 2007
Lee SH, Lee JY, Choi YY, et al: Laparoscopic appendectomy versus open appendectomy for suspected
appendicitis during pregnancy: a systematic review and updated meta-analysis. BMC Surg 19(1):41,
2019
Leung AN, Bull TM, Jaeschke R, et al: American Thoracic Society documents: an official American
Thoracic Society/Society of Thoracic Radiology Clinical Practice Guidelines—evaluation of
suspected pulmonary embolism in pregnancy. Radiology 262(2):635, 2012
Levine LD, Schulkin J, Mercer BM, et al: Role of the hospital and maternal fetal medicine physician in
obstetrical inpatient care. Am J Perinatol 33(2):123, 2016

Lowe SA: Ionizing radiation for maternal medical indications. Prenat Diagn 40(9):1150, 2020
Magin RL, Le JK, Klintsova A, et al: Biological effects of long duration, high-field (4T) MRI on growth
and development in the mouse. J Magn Res Imaging 12(1):140, 2000
Mala T, Harsem NK, Rostad S, et al: Perforation of the pregnant uterus during laparoscopy for
suspected internal herniation after gastric bypass. Case Rep Obstet Gynecol 2014:720181, 2014
Mazonakis M, Damilakis J: Estimation and reduction of the radiation dose to the fetus from externalbeam radiotherapy. Phys Med 43:148, 2017
Mazze RI, Källén B: Reproductive outcome after anesthesia and operation during pregnancy: a registry
study of 5405 cases. Am J Obstet Gynecol 161:1178, 1989
Mervak BM, Altun E, McGinty KA, et al: MRI in pregnancy: indications and practical considerations. J
Magn Reson Imaging 49(3):621, 2019
Miller MA, Mazzaglia PJ, Larson L, et al: Laparoscopic adrenalectomy for phaeochromocytoma in a
twin gestation. J Obstet Gynaecol 32(2):186, 2012
Mitra M, Parish SL, Clements KM, et al: Antenatal hospitalization among U.S. women with intellectual
and developmental disabilities: a retrospective cohort study. Am J Intellect Dev Disabil 123(5):399,
2018
Moore HB, Juarez-Colunga E, Bronsert M, et al: Effect of pregnancy on adverse outcomes after
general surgery. JAMA Surg 150(7):637, 2015
Mountford PJ: Risk assessment of the nuclear medicine patient. Br J Radiol 100:671, 1997
Mullins JK, Semins MJ, Hayams ES, et al: Half Fourier single-shot turbo-echo magnetic resonance
urography for the evaluation of suspected renal colic in pregnancy. Urology 79(6):1252, 2012
National Council on Radiation Protection and Measurements: Medical X-ray, electron beam and
gamma-ray protection for energies up to 50 MeV. Report No. 102, Bethesda, 1989
National Research Council: Health effects of exposure to low levels of ionizing radiation BEIR V.
Committee on the Biological Effects of Ionizing Radiations. Board on Radiation Effects Research
Commission on Life Sciences. Washington, National Academy Press, 1990
Nelander M, Hannsberger D, Sundström-Poromaa I, et al: Assessment of cerebral perfusion and edema
in preeclampsia with intravoxel incoherent motion MRI. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 97(10):1212,
2018
Nelson DB, Stewart RD, Matulevicius SA, et al: The effects of maternal position and habitus on
maternal cardiovascular parameters as measured by cardiac magnetic resonance. Am J Perinatol
32(14):1318, 2015
Newman EA, Newman LA: Lymphatic mapping techniques and sentinel lymph node biopsy in breast
cancer. Surg Clin North Am 87:353, 2007
Nuyttens JJ, Prado KL, Jenrette JM, et al: Fetal dose during radiotherapy: clinical implementation and
review of the literature. Cancer Radiother 6:352, 2002
Oh KY, Roberts VH, Schabel MC, et al: Gadolinium chelate contrast material in pregnancy: fetal
biodistribution in the nonhuman primate. Radiology 276(1):110, 2015
Olutoye OA, Baker BW, Belfort MA, et al: Food and Drug Administration warning on anesthesia and
brain development: implications for obstetric and fetal surgery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 218(1):98, 2018
O’Rourke N, Kodali BS: Laparoscopic surgery during pregnancy. Curr Opin Anaesthesiol 19:254, 2006
Otake M, Yoshimaru H, Schull WJ: Severe mental retardation among the prenatally exposed survivors
of the atomic bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki: a comparison of the old and new dosimetry
systems. Radiation Effects Research Foundation, Technical Report No. 16–87, 1987
Pearl JP, Price RR, Tonkin AE, et al: SAGES guidelines for the use of laparoscopy during pregnancy.
Surg Endosc 31(10):3767, 2017

Phupong V, Bunyavejchewin S: Gasless laparoscopic surgery for ovarian cyst in a second trimester
pregnant patient with a ventricular septal defect. Surg Laparosc Endosc Percutan Tech 17:565, 2007
Post RJ, Friedrich E, Amaya KE, et al: Inadvertent perforation of a gravid uterus during laparoscopy.
JSLS 23(3):1, 2019
Prado KL, Nelson SJ, Nuyttens JJ, et al: Clinical implementation of the AAPM Task Group 36
recommendations on fetal dose from radiotherapy with photon beams: a head and neck irradiation
case report. J Appl Clin Med Phys 1(1):1, 2000
Preston DL, Cullings H, Suyama A, et al: Solid cancer incidence in atomic bomb survivors exposed in
utero or as young children. J Natl Cancer Inst 100:428, 2008
Raj MH, Mullins JN, Chi JM, et al: The utility of abdominopelvic CT in pregnant patients with abdominal
pain and a negative or inconclusive abdominal MRI. Clin Imaging 59(1):88, 2020
Reedy MB, Galan HL, Bean-Lijewski JD, et al: Maternal and fetal effects of laparoscopic insufflation in
the gravid baboon. J Am Assoc Gynecol Laparosc 2:399, 1995
Reedy MB, Källén B, Kuehl TJ: Laparoscopy during pregnancy: a study of five fetal outcome
parameters with use of the Swedish Health Registry. Am J Obstet Gynecol 177:673, 1997
Reeves MJ, Brandreth M, Whitby EH, et al: Neonatal cochlear function: measurement after exposure to
acoustic noise during in utero MR imaging. Radiology 257(3):802, 2010
Reichel TF, Ramus RM, Caire JT, et al: Fetal central nervous system biometry on MR imaging. AJR
Am J Roentgenol 180:1155, 2003
Reynolds JD, Booth JV, de la Fuente S, et al: A review of laparoscopy for non-obstetric-related surgery
during pregnancy. Curr Surg 60:164, 2003
Ribic-Pucelj M, Kobal B, Peternelj-Marinsek S: Surgical treatment of adnexal masses in pregnancy:
indications, surgical approach and pregnancy outcome. J Reprod Med 52:273, 2007
Rollins MD, Chan KJ, Price RR: Laparoscopy for appendicitis and cholelithiasis during pregnancy. Surg
Endosc 18:237, 2004
Rowley KA, Hill SJ, Watkins RA, et al: An investigation into the levels of radiation exposure in
diagnostic examinations involving fluoroscopy. Br J Radiol 60:167, 1987
Sandrasegaran K, Lall CG, Aisen AA: Fetal magnetic resonance imaging. Curr Opin Obstet Gynecol
18:605, 2006
Schwartz JL, Mozurkewich EL, Johnson TM: Current management of patients with melanoma who are
pregnant, want to get pregnant, or do not want to get pregnant. Cancer 97:2130, 2003
Shakerian R, Thomson BN, Judson R, et al: Radiation fear: impact on compliance with trauma imaging
guidelines in the pregnant patient. J Trauma Acute Care Surg 78(1):88, 2015
Sheen JJ, Haramati LB, Natenzon A, et al: Performance of low-dose perfusion scintigraphy and CT
pulmonary angiography for pulmonary embolism in pregnancy. Chest 153(1):152, 2018
Shigemi D, Aso S, Matsui H, et al: Safety of laparoscopic surgery for benign diseases during pregnancy:
a nationwide retrospective cohort study. J Minim Invasive Gynecol 26(3):501, 2019
Silvestri MT, Pettker CM, Brousseau EC, et al: Morbidity of appendectomy and cholecystectomy in
pregnant and nonpregnant women. Obstet Gynecol 118(6):1261, 2011
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine (SMFM), Sciscione A, Berghella V, et al: Society for MaternalFetal Medicine (SMFM) Special Report: the maternal-fetal medicine subspecialists’ role within a
health care system. Am J Obstet Gynecol 21(6):607, 2014
Sorahan T, Lancashire RJ, Temperton DH, et al: Childhood cancer and paternal exposure to ionizing
radiation: a second report from the Oxford Survey of Childhood Cancers. Am J Ind Med 28(1):71,
1995

Spanheimer PM, Graham MM, Sugg SL, et al: Measurement of uterine radiation exposure from
lymphoscintigraphy indicates safety of sentinel lymph node biopsy during pregnancy. Ann Surg
Oncol 16(5):1143, 2009
Stather JW, Phipps AW, Harrison JD, et al: Dose coefficients for the embryo and fetus following intakes
of radionuclides by the mother. J Radiol Prot 22:1, 2002
Stein PD, Woodard PK, Weg JG, et al: Diagnostic pathways in acute pulmonary embolism:
recommendations of the PIOPED II investigators. Radiology 242(1):15, 2007
Steinbrook RA, Bhavani-Shankar K: Hemodynamics during laparoscopic surgery in pregnancy. Anesth
Analg 93:1570, 2001
Stepp K, Falcone T: Laparoscopy in the second trimester of pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am
31:485, 2004
Stewart RD, Nelson DB, Matulevicius SA, et al: Cardiac magnetic resonance to assess the impact of
maternal habitus on cardiac remodeling during pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 214(5):640.e1, 2016
Stovall M, Blackwell CR, Cundif J, et al: Fetal dose from radiotherapy with photon beams: report of
AAPM Radiation Therapy Committee Task Group No. 36. Med Phys 22:63, 1995
Strzelczyk J, Damilakis J, Marx MV, et al: Facts and controversies about radiation exposure, part 2: lowlevel exposures and cancer risk. J Am Coll Radiol 4:32, 2007
Suleiman OH, Anderson J, Jones B, et al: Tissue doses in the upper gastrointestinal examination.
Radiology 178(3):653, 1991
Tica AA, Tica OS, Saftoiu A, et al: Large pancreatic mucinous cystic neoplasm during pregnancy: what
should be done? Gynecol Obstet Invest 75(2):132, 2013
Tolcher MC, Fisher WE, Clark SL: Nonobstetric surgery during pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 132(2):395,
2018
Tromeur C, van der Pol LM, Le Roux PY, et al: Computed tomography pulmonary angiography versus
ventilation-perfusion lung scanning for diagnosing pulmonary embolism during pregnancy: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Haematologica 104(1):176, 2019
Tsai R, Raptis C, Fowler KJ, et al: MRI of suspected appendicitis during pregnancy: interradiologist
agreement, indeterminate interpretation, and the meaning of non-visualization of the appendix. Br J
Radiol 90:1079, 2017
Twickler DM, Reichel T, McIntire DD, et al: Fetal central nervous system ventricle and cisterna magna
measurements by magnetic resonance imaging. Am J Obstet Gynecol 187:927, 2002
Twickler DM, Setiawan AT, Evans R, et al: Imaging of puerperal septic thrombophlebitis: a prospective
comparison of MR imaging, CT, and sonography. AJR Am J Roentgenol 169:1039, 1997
Vadeyar SH, Moore RJ, Strachan BK, et al: Effect of fetal magnetic resonance imaging on fetal heart
rate patterns. Am J Obstet Gynecol 182:666, 2000
van der Pol LM, Tromeur C, Bistervels IM, et al: Pregnancy-adapted YEARS algorithm for diagnosis of
suspected pulmonary embolism. N Engl J Med 380(12):139, 2019
van Mens TE, Scheres LJ, de Jong PG, et al: Imaging for the exclusion of pulmonary embolism in
pregnancy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 1:CD011053, 2017
Victoria T, Johnson AM, Edgar JC, et al: Comparison between 1.5-T and 3-T MRI for fetal imaging: is
there an advantage to imaging with a higher field strength? AJR Am J Roentgenol 206:195, 2016
Vilos GA, Ternamian A, Dempster J, et al: Laparoscopic entry: a review of techniques, technologies,
and complications. J Obstet Gynaecol Can 29:433, 2007
Vujic J, Marsoner K, Lipp-Pump AH, et al: Non-obstetric surgery during pregnancy—an eleven-year
retrospective analysis. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth 19(1):382, 2019

Wagner LK, Lester RG, Saldana LR: Exposure of the Pregnant Patient to Diagnostic Radiation.
Philadelphia, Medical Physics Publishing, 1997
Webb KE, Sakhel K, Chauhan SP, et al: Adnexal mass during pregnancy: a review. Am J Perinatol
32(11):1010, 2015
Werner H, Marcondes M, Daltro P, et al: Three-dimensional reconstruction of fetal abnormalities using
ultrasonography and magnetic imaging. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 32(20):3502, 2019
White WM, Zite NB, Gash J, et al: Low-dose computer tomography for the evaluation of flank pain in
the pregnant population. J Endourol 21:1255, 2007
Williams F, Griffiths PD: In utero MR imaging in fetuses at high risk of lissencephaly. Br J Radiol
90(1072):20160902, 2017
Wo JY, Viswanathan AN: Impact of radiotherapy on fertility, pregnancy, and neonatal outcomes in
female cancer patients. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 73(5):1304, 2009
Yu CH, Weng SF, Ho CH, et al: Pregnancy outcomes following nonobstetric surgery during gestation: a
nationwide population-based case-control study in Taiwan. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth 18(1):460,
2018
Zanotti-Fregonara P, Hindie E: Performing nuclear medicine examinations in pregnant women. Phys
Med 43:159, 2017
Zanzonico PB: Internal radionuclide radiation dosimetry: a review of basic concepts and recent
developments. J Nucl Med 41:297, 2000
Zaretsky M, McIntire DD, Twickler DM: Feasibility of the fetal anatomic and maternal pelvic survey by
magnetic resonance imaging at term. Am J Obstet Gynecol 189:997, 2003a
Zaretsky M, Reichel TF, McIntire DD, et al: Comparison of magnetic resonance imaging to ultrasound
in the estimation of birth weight at term. Am J Obstet Gynecol 189:1017, 2003b
Zeeman GG, Cipolla MJ, Cunningham FG: Cerebrovascular (patho)physiology in preeclampsia. In
Taylor RN, Roberts JM, Cunningham FG, et al (eds): Chesley’s Hypertensive Disorders in
Pregnancy, 4th ed. Amsterdam, Elsevier, 2014, p 269

CHAPTER 50

Critical Care and Trauma

CRITICAL CARE
ACUTE PULMONARY EDEMA
ACUTE RESPIRATORY DISTRESS SYNDROME
SEPSIS AND SEPTIC SHOCK
TRAUMA
THERMAL INJURY
CARDIOPULMONARY RESUSCITATION
REFERENCES
Treatment of the critically ill pregnant woman has improved over the past
three decades with advances in intensive care capabilities. To achieve
optimal outcomes, severe medical, surgical, and obstetrical disorders
complicating pregnancy are frequently managed by a multidisciplinary team.
Importantly, obstetricians and these other health-care team members must
have a working knowledge of the unique considerations for pregnancy
(Padilla, 2021). Some discussed in Chapter 49 include pregnancy-induced
physiological changes, alterations in normal laboratory values, and
consideration for the second patient—the fetus. Because critically ill women
are usually young and healthy, their prognosis is generally good (Gaffney,
2014).

CRITICAL CARE
Despite noted gains, evidence suggests that severe morbidity rates are
increasing (Friedman, 2016). In the United States, 1 to 3 percent of pregnant
women require critical care services each year. The risk of death during such
admissions ranges from 2 to 11 percent (American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists, 2019a). Black women and Medicaid recipients are
disparately affected (Wen, 2020).
Those with pregnancy-associated complications—especially
hemorrhage, sepsis, and hypertension—have the greatest need for intensive
care (Chantry, 2015; Guntupalli, 2015a,b). That said, many antepartum
admissions are for nonobstetrical reasons, and these include diabetes,
pneumonia or asthma, heart disease, chronic hypertension, pyelonephritis,
and thyrotoxicosis (Guntupalli, 2015b; Zeeman, 2006). Cardiac disease is
the leading non-obstetrical indication for intensive care unit (ICU) admission
(Small, 2012). In instances of life-threatening hemorrhage, surgical
procedures may be necessary, and close proximity to an operating room is
paramount. For women who are undelivered, fetal well-being also is better
served by this close proximity, especially because many are delivered
preterm (Kilpatrick, 2016).

■ Organization of Critical Care
The concept and development of critical care for all aspects of medicine and
surgery began in the 1960s. As a part of this effort, the National Institutes of
Health held a Consensus Conference (1983) and the Society of Critical Care
Medicine (1988, 1999) established guidelines for ICUs. Especially pertinent
to obstetrics, these costly units prompted the evolution of a step-down
intermediate care unit. These latter units were designed for patients who did
not require intensive care but who needed a higher level of treatment than
that provided on a general ward. The American College of Critical Care
Medicine and the Society of Critical Care Medicine (1998) have published
guidelines for these units (Table 50-1).
TABLE 50-1. Guidelines for Conditions That Could Qualify for
Intermediate Care

■ Obstetrical Critical Care
Although critical care for obstetrical patients has generally evolved along the
path described in the last section, no detailed guidelines direct this care.
Most hospitals employ a blend of these concepts, and in general, units can be
divided into three types.
First, medical and surgical ICUs in most hospitals care for severely ill
obstetrical patients. These are staffed by specialists often certified in critical
care medicine. Admissions or transfers to these units are situation-specific
and based on the acuity of care needed and on the ability of the facility to
provide it. For example, pregnant women who require ventilatory support,
invasive monitoring, or pharmacological support of circulation are typically
transferred to an ICU (Chantry, 2015). In an earlier review of more than 25
tertiary-care referral institutions, approximately 0.5 percent of obstetrical
patients were transferred to these ICU types (Zeeman, 2006).
A second option is the obstetrical intermediate care unit. Sometimes
referred to as a high-dependency care unit, this type is found at Parkland
Hospital. Located within the labor and delivery unit, it has designated rooms
staffed by experienced personnel. This two-tiered system incorporates the
guidelines for intermediate and intensive care. Care is provided by maternalfetal medicine specialists, obstetricians, and nurses with experience in
critical care obstetrics. As needed, this team is expanded to include other
obstetricians and anesthesiologists, hospitalists, gynecological oncologists,
pulmonologists, cardiologists, surgeons, and other medical and surgical
subspecialists (Stevens, 2015). Many tertiary-care centers have developed
similar intermediate care units and use selected triage to ICUs.

Last, a few services have a full-care ICU as described first. However, it
is distinctly operated by obstetrical and anesthesia personnel near the labor
and delivery unit (Zeeman, 2003, 2006).
The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019a) has
summarized critical obstetrical care implementation depending on hospital
size and technical facilities. For intrahospital transfers, the federal
Emergency Medical Treatment and Labor Act (EMTALA) guidelines must be
followed. Moreover, according to the American Academy of Pediatrics and
the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2017), the
minimal monitoring required for a critically ill patient during transport
includes continuous pulse oximetry, electrocardiography, and regular
assessment of vital signs. Patients must have secure venous access, and those
who are mechanically ventilated must have endotracheal tube position
confirmed and secured. Left uterine displacement and supplemental oxygen is
applied routinely during transport of antepartum patients. Continuous fetal
heart rate or tocodynamic monitoring is individualized.

■ Severe Maternal Morbidity
Childbirth can result in significant morbidity for the pregnant woman. To
help address this, severe maternal morbidity (SMM) was developed as a
population-based monitoring standard for the most common of these
complications (Callaghan, 2012). An overall SMM rate is derived from 18
SMM indicators, which are abstracted from International Classification of
Diseases-10 (ICD-10) codes in administrative databases. SMM rates for an
individual indicator also may be informative. Some indicators are found in
Table 50-1, and the full list is available at
www.cdc.gov/reproductivehealth/maternalinfanthealth/smm/severemorbidity-ICD.htm. Several of these are included in this chapter, whereas
others are addressed in specific chapters on their topic.
The goal of SMM monitoring is to identify opportunities for intervention
and prevention. Despite its promise, limitations should be recognized. First,
the rate does not factor underlying patient comorbidities and obstetrical
risks. Thus, a tertiary-care center that serves as a referral center for women
with placenta accreta spectrum will understandably have higher blood
transfusion rates. Second, the ICD-10 indicators for existing SMM events are
not comprehensive. For example, only codes for total abdominal

hysterectomy are currently included in the SMM rate, whereas supracervical
hysterectomy is not. With these limitations in mind, caution should be
exercised when using SMM as a quality metric to compare hospitals
(Callaghan, 2012).

■ Hemodynamic Changes in Pregnancy
Data obtained during pregnancy with pulmonary artery catheterization (PAC)
have contributed immensely to the understanding of normal pregnancy
hemodynamics and pathophysiology of common obstetrical conditions. Clark
and coworkers (1989) used PAC to obtain cardiovascular measurements in
healthy pregnant women and again in these same women when nonpregnant
(Chap. 4, p. 64). Other evaluated conditions include preeclampsiaeclampsia, acute respiratory distress syndrome, and amnionic-fluid
embolism (Clark, 1997; Cunningham, 1987; Hankins, 1985). Because of
these studies, most have concluded that such monitoring is seldom necessary
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2013, 2019a, 2020;
Magder, 2015).
Formulas for deriving some hemodynamic parameters are shown in Table
50-2. These measurements can be indexed for body size by dividing by body
surface area. Normal values for nonpregnant adults are used, but with the
caveat that these may not necessarily reflect changes induced by the lowresistance uteroplacental circulation.
TABLE 50-2. Formulas for Deriving Various Cardiopulmonary Parameters

Cardiac complications are a common indication for ICU admission of
pregnant women (Guntupalli, 2015b). Evaluation of cardiac function is
frequently performed using echocardiography. This technology is
indispensable in interrogating cardiac anatomy and especially rightventricular function (Krishnan, 2015; Thiele, 2015). It is considered in more
detail in Chapter 52 (p. 918), and some normal values are listed in the
Appendix (p. 1233).
Given the association of cardiac dysfunction with maternal morbidity and
mortality, efforts have strived to expand cardiac monitoring by including
noninvasive cardiac output monitoring (NICOM). With this tool, a small
electrical current is applied to the chest, and voltage signals are captured by
four skin sensors arranged in a box on the chest. Compared with Doppler
echocardiography, NICOM significantly overestimates stroke volume and
cardiac output (McLaughlin, 2017). This modality has not yet been widely
adopted for use in the obstetrical population.

ACUTE PULMONARY EDEMA

The incidence of pulmonary edema complicating pregnancy averages 1 in
500 deliveries at tertiary referral centers. Of the two general etiologies,
cardiogenic, namely, hydrostatic edema is caused by high pulmonary
capillary hydraulic pressures. The other is noncardiogenic, that is,
permeability edema caused by capillary endothelial and alveolar epithelial
damage. In pregnancy, noncardiogenic pulmonary edema is more common.
More than half of pregnant women who develop pulmonary edema have some
degree of sepsis in conjunction with tocolysis, severe preeclampsia, or
obstetrical hemorrhage combined with vigorous fluid therapy (O’Dwyer,
2015; Pordeus, 2018).
In one study, the etiologies of pulmonary edema were hypertension,
cardiogenic, or both, and iatrogenic fluid overload (Pordeus, 2018). In
another study of 53 cases, 83 percent were caused by hypertensive disorders;
11 percent, cardiac events; and 6 percent, sepsis (O’Dwyer, 2015). Although
used less commonly today, tocolytic therapy with β-mimetic drugs was the
cause of up to 40 percent of pulmonary edema cases (Gandhi, 2014; Jenkins,
2003).

■ Noncardiogenic Permeability Edema
Endotheliopathy is the common denominator that is associated with
preeclampsia, sepsis, and acute hemorrhage—or frequently combinations
thereof—and they are the most common predisposing factors to pulmonary
edema (Table 50-3). These clinical scenarios are often associated with
corticosteroids given to induce fetal lung maturation along with vigorous
fluid replacement and tocolytic therapy (Thornton, 2011). Parenteral βagonists are indisputedly linked to pulmonary edema. Some studies have also
associated magnesium sulfate given for preeclampsia (Gandhi, 2014; Wilson,
2014; Xiao, 2014). Combined therapy is causative.
TABLE 50-3. Some Causes and Associated Factors for Pulmonary Edema
in Pregnancy

■ Cardiogenic Hydrostatic Edema
Ventricular failure causing pulmonary edema in pregnancy is usually
associated with some form of hypertension, hemorrhage and anemia, and
sepsis (Cunningham, 2019; Vaught, 2018). Although it can be due to
congenital or acquired anatomical defects, diastolic dysfunction is frequently
from chronic hypertension, obesity, or both (Jessup, 2003; Kenchaiah, 2002).
In these women, acute systolic hypertension exacerbates diastolic
dysfunction and causes pulmonary edema (Dennis, 2012; Vaught, 2018). In
two studies of pregnant women with preeclampsia and pulmonary edema,
half of them were undelivered (Gandhi, 2014; Pordeus, 2018).

■ Diagnosis
Clinical examination is confirmed by chest radiographs. Bedside lung
sonography may be helpful to detect fluid in the interstitial space and alveoli

(Pachtman, 2017). In many cases, when echocardiography is done later,
systolic function is normal as measured by ejection fraction.
In addition, ventricular myocytes and fibroblasts secrete brain
natriuretic peptide (BNP) and atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) with the
distention seen in heart failure. In nonpregnant patients, concentrations <100
pg/mL have an excellent negative predictive value, and levels >500 pg/mL
have an excellent positive predictive value. It is problematic that levels
frequently are 100 to 500 pg/mL and thus are nondiagnostic. Moreover,
concentrations of N-terminal BNP and ANP are both elevated with
preeclampsia (Szabo, 2014; Tihtonen, 2007). Normal values are discussed in
Chapter 4 (p. 65), and those for normal pregnancy are given in the Appendix
(p. 1231).

■ Management
Acute pulmonary edema requires emergency care. Oxygen therapy is initiated
and furosemide is given in periodic 20- to 40-mg intravenous doses as
needed. For oxygen delivery, nasal cannula, simple masks, and
nonrebreathing masks are first-line systems. Both nasal cannula and simple
mask allow mixing of supplemental oxygen with room air. Consequently,
oxygen administration is imprecise (Bateman, 1998). A nonrebreathing mask
has valves that limit the mixing of exhaled gas and room air with the oxygen
supply. Flow rates up to 10 to 15 L/min may be achieved, and oxygen
concentrations approach 95 percent (Boumphrey, 2003). As a treatment goal,
a pulse oximetry reading >92 percent reflects adequate oxygenation.
Further treatment depends on whether a woman is ante- or postpartum. A
live fetus prohibits the use of cardioactive drugs that might rapidly lower
peripheral resistance and in turn severely diminish uteroplacental
circulation. The cause of cardiogenic failure is determined by
echocardiography, which will help direct further therapy. Importantly, acute
pulmonary edema is not an indication for emergency cesarean delivery.

ACUTE RESPIRATORY DISTRESS SYNDROME
Acute lung injury that causes a form of severe permeability pulmonary edema
and respiratory failure is termed acute respiratory distress syndrome

(ARDS). This is a pathophysiological continuum from mild pulmonary
insufficiency to dependence on high inspired oxygen concentrations and
mechanical ventilation. Uniform criteria for its diagnosis are lacking, and
thus the incidence is variably reported for pregnancy. Rush and colleagues
(2017) queried the nationwide inpatient samples of more than 5.4 million
pregnancies and cited an incidence of 60 ventilated cases per 100,000 births.
They found an overall mortality rate of 9 percent. This rate is much higher if
caused or complicated by sepsis. Last, if ARDS develops antepartum, the
perinatal mortality rate is correspondingly high.

■ Definitions
Physiological criteria required for diagnosis of acute lung injury are study
dependent. In general, less precise terms are used for clinical care. Clinical
findings include dyspnea, tachypnea, and oxygen desaturation. Most
investigators define ARDS as radiographically documented pulmonary
infiltrates, a ratio of arterial oxygen tension to the fraction of inspired oxygen
(PaO2:FiO2) <200, and no evidence of heart failure (Baron, 2018). Revised
by international consensus, the Berlin Definition includes categories of mild,
moderate, and severe (Fan, 2018).

■ Etiopathogenesis
ARDS begins with an acute lung injury from various causes (Table 50-4).
More than half of pregnant women with ARDS have some combination of
sepsis, hemorrhage, shock, and fluid overload. Diffuse infectious pneumonia
and sepsis are two of the most frequent single-agent causes. Because it is
common, influenza pneumonitis often is a cause. Other etiologies such as
pneumococcal, metapneumovirus, and Legionnaire disease also are
encountered (Close, 2016; Fuchs, 2017). Of sepsis causes, pyelonephritis,
puerperal pelvic infection, and chorioamnionitis are the most frequent. The
contribution of transfusion-related acute lung injury (TRALI) is unclear
(Chap. 44, p. 774).
TABLE 50-4. Some Causes of Acute Lung Injury and Respiratory Failure

Endothelial injury in the lung capillaries releases cytokines that recruit
neutrophils to the inflammation site. Here, they elaborate more cytokines to
worsen tissue injury. Three stages describe ARDS development (Baron,
2018). First, the exudative phase follows widespread injury to the alveolar
epithelium and to the microvascular endothelium, including the pulmonary
vasculature. This endotheliopathy results in increased pulmonary capillary
permeability, surfactant loss or inactivation, diminished lung volume, and
vascular shunting that creates arterial hypoxemia. Next, the proliferative
phase usually begins approximately 7 days later and lasts up to 21 days.
Most patients recover during this phase. Last, the fibrotic phase results from
healing. Despite these insults, the long-term prognosis for pulmonary function
is surprisingly good (Baron, 2018; Herridge, 2003).

■ Clinical Course
With pulmonary injury, the clinical condition depends largely on the insult
magnitude, the ability to compensate for it, and the disease stage. At first,
physical examination findings are absent, except perhaps hyperventilation,
and arterial oxygenation usually is adequate. With worsening, clinical and
radiological evidence for pulmonary edema, decreased lung compliance, and
increased intrapulmonary blood shunting become apparent. Progressive
alveolar and interstitial edema develops, and inflammatory cells and
erythrocytes extravasate. Ideally, pulmonary injury is identified at this early
stage, and specific therapy is directed at the underlying insult.
Further progression to acute respiratory failure is characterized by
marked dyspnea, tachypnea, and hypoxemia. Additional functional lung
volume loss results in worsening of pulmonary compliance and greater
shunting. Diffuse abnormalities are heard by auscultation, and a chest
radiograph characteristically demonstrates bilateral lung involvement (Fig.
50-1). At this phase, the injury ordinarily would be lethal without ventilatory
support. When shunting exceeds 30 percent, severe refractory hypoxemia
develops. Comorbid metabolic and respiratory acidosis can result in
myocardial irritability, dysfunction, and cardiac arrest.

FIGURE 50-1 Anteroposterior chest radiograph of a second-trimester pregnant woman with marked
bilateral parenchymal and pleural opacification secondary to acute respiratory distress syndrome
(ARDS).

■ Management
ARDS mortality rates have declined because of advances in critical care
medicine (Baron, 2018; Fan, 2018). Management requires close attention to
recognizing and treating underlying medical and surgical disorders. In cases
of severe acute lung injury, providing adequate oxygenation of peripheral
tissues is balanced against ventilatory maneuvers that further aggravate lung
injury. At least intuitively, increasing oxygen delivery should produce a
corresponding rise in tissue uptake, but this is difficult to measure. Support
of systemic perfusion with intravenous crystalloid and blood is imperative.
Because sepsis is commonplace in lung injury, aggressive antimicrobial
therapy is given for infection, and any necrotic tissues are debrided. Oxygen
delivery can be greatly improved by correcting anemia. Specifically, each
gram of hemoglobin carries 1.25 mL of oxygen when 90-percent saturated.
By comparison, raising the arterial PaO2 from 100 to 200 mm Hg results in
the transport of only 0.1 mL of additional oxygen for each 100 mL of blood.

Reasonable goals in caring for the woman with severe lung injury are a
PaO2 of 60 mm Hg or 90-percent oxygen saturation using an inspired oxygen
content <50 percent and positive end-expiratory pressures <15 mm Hg. With
regard to the pregnancy, it remains controversial whether delivery of the
fetus improves maternal oxygenation (Mallampalli, 2010). In a study of 29
women undergoing mechanical ventilation, 10 were delivered while
intubated (Lapinsky, 2015). Respiratory function modestly improved in half,
but no factors were identified that predicted a better outcome.

■ Mechanical Ventilation
Noninvasive ventilation, that is, positive-pressure ventilation by face mask,
may be effective in some women in early stages of pulmonary insufficiency
(Duarte, 2014). Conventional ventilation is done with tracheal intubation.
Early intubation is preferred in the gravida if respiratory failure is more
likely than not and especially if it appears imminent. Because of the
physiological changes outlined in Chapter 4 (p. 67), PaCO2 is normally
reduced in a gravida relative to a nonpregnant woman. Thus, intubation
should be considered when PaCO2 levels reach 35 to 40 mm Hg.
Mechanical ventilation is used to assist or replace spontaneous
respiration (Celli, 2018). It improves oxygenation by its application of highoxygen-content gas and positive pressure. Many successful formulas for
mechanical ventilation are employed, and initially a tidal volume ≤6 mL/kg
is optimal (Fan, 2018; Schwaiberger, 2016). Adjustments are made to obtain
a PaO2 >60 mm Hg or a hemoglobin oxygen saturation ≥90 percent and to
reach a PaCO2 of 35 to 45 mm Hg. Lower PaO2 levels are avoided, because
placental perfusion may be impaired.
The mode is the manner in which ventilator breaths are triggered, cycled,
and limited. Three commonly used ventilation modes of include assistcontrol, intermittent mandatory, and pressure-support ventilation. Although
not a support mode, continuous positive airway pressure can be used in
patients with an intact ventilatory system who require little ventilatory
support.

Pregnancy

In a study of 51 women with ARDS, almost half had severe preeclampsia,
and most required intubation postpartum. Eleven were delivered while being
ventilated, and another six were discharged undelivered (Jenkins, 2003).
Two mothers died, and this included a woman who died as a complication of
tocolytic treatment. In a multicenter report, Lapinsky and associates (2015)
described 29 pregnant women undergoing mechanical ventilation for various
indications. Only a few had severe ARDS, and the mortality rate was 10
percent. Ten women delivered while being ventilated, but this had little
beneficial effect on their respiratory status.

Positive End-Expiratory Pressure
With severe lung injury and high intrapulmonary shunt fractions, it may not be
possible to provide adequate oxygenation with usual ventilatory pressures,
even with 100-percent oxygen. Positive end-expiratory pressure is usually
successful in decreasing the shunt by recruiting collapsed alveoli. At low
levels of 5 to 15 mm Hg, positive pressure can typically be used safely. At
higher levels, impaired right-sided venous return can result in decreased
cardiac output, lowered uteroplacental perfusion, alveolar overdistention,
falling compliance, and barotrauma (Celli, 2018; Schwaiberger, 2016).

Extracorporeal Membrane Oxygenation
As discussed in Chapter 33 (p. 600), extracorporeal membrane oxygenation
(ECMO) has been successfully used for neonatal meconium aspiration
syndrome. Some preliminary observations suggest that veno-venous ECMO
may be useful in adults with ARDS (Combes, 2018; Ende, 2016; Matthay,
2018). In one case series, 12 pregnant women with influenza-induced lung
failure were treated with ECMO, and of four maternal deaths, three were due
to anticoagulation-related hemorrhage (Nair, 2011). ECMO use also has been
reported for status asthmaticus (Clifford, 2018; Steinack, 2017). In multiple
reviews, ECMO was used mostly for ARDS, and the maternal and perinatal
mortality rate approximated 30 percent (Liu, 2018; Ramanathan, 2020; Saad,
2016). Maternal survival appears to be significantly lower compared with
nonpregnant women requiring ECMO (Webster, 2019).

Fetal Oxygenation

The propensity of the hemoglobin molecule to release oxygen is described by
the oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve (Fig. 50-2). For clinical purposes, the
curve can be divided into an upper oxygen association curve representing the
alveolar-capillary environment and a lower oxygen dissociation portion
representing the tissue-capillary environment. Shifts of the curve have their
greatest effect at the steep portion because they affect oxygen delivery. A
rightward shift is associated with decreased hemoglobin affinity for oxygen
and hence greater tissue-capillary oxygen interchange. Hypercapnia,
metabolic acidosis, fever, and increased 2,3-diphosphoglycerate levels
produce rightward shifts. During normal pregnancy, the erythrocyte
concentration of 2,3-diphosphoglycerate rises by approximately 30 percent,
which favors oxygen delivery.

FIGURE 50-2 Oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve. With higher oxygen tension (PaO2) in the pulmonary
alveoli, adult hemoglobin is maximally saturated compared with that at the lower oxygen tension in the
tissue capillaries. Note that at any given oxygen tension, fetal hemoglobin carries more oxygen than
adult hemoglobin, as indicated by percent saturation.

Fetal hemoglobin has a higher oxygen affinity than adult hemoglobin. As
seen in Figure 50-2, its oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve is positioned to
the left of the adult curve. To achieve 50-percent hemoglobin saturation in the
mother, the PaO2 must be 27 mm Hg compared with only 19 mm Hg in the
fetus. Under normal physiological conditions, the fetus is constantly on the
dissociation, or tissue, portion of the curve. Even with severe maternal lung
disease and very low PaO2 levels, oxygen displacement to fetal tissues is
favored. For example, in pregnant women who live at high altitudes, and
despite a maternal PaO2 of only 60 mm Hg, the fetal PaO2 is equivalent to that
seen at sea level (Subrevilla, 1971).

Intravenous Fluids
Although mortality rates are similar, conservative versus liberal fluid
management is associated with fewer days of mechanical ventilation
(Wiedemann, 2006). Some normal pregnancy-induced physiological changes
predispose to a greater risk of permeability edema from vigorous fluid
therapy. Serum albumin concentration determines colloid oncotic pressure
(COP), and 1 g/dL exerts approximately 6 mm Hg of pressure. As discussed
in Chapter 4 (p. 70), serum albumin concentrations normally drop in
pregnancy. This results in a decline in COP from 28 mm Hg in the
nonpregnant woman to 23 mm Hg at term and to 17 mm Hg in the puerperium
(Dennis, 2012). With preeclampsia, endotheliopathy causes extravascular
albumin loss and lowered serum albumin levels. These changes have a
significant clinical effect on the colloid oncotic pressure/wedge pressure
gradient. Normally, this gradient exceeds 8 mm Hg. However, when it is ≤4
mm Hg, the risk for pulmonary edema rises due to Starling forces. Finally, no
benefits are gained by albumin versus crystalloid infusions in these women
(Uhlig, 2014).

■ Long-Term Outcomes
Most patients with ARDS regain nearly normal lung function (Baron, 2018).
In nonpregnant subjects, however, risks for impaired global cognitive
function at 3 and 12 months are significant (Pandharipande, 2013).
Moreover, return to basic normal activity is delayed 1 to 2 years. In a 5-year
follow-up study, Herridge and coworkers (2011) reported normal lung

function but significant exercise limitation as well as physical and
psychological sequelae. Long-term follow-up studies of pregnant women
who recover from ARDS are lacking.

SEPSIS AND SEPTIC SHOCK
Sepsis is defined as infection with organ dysfunction, and septic shock
manifests with unresponsive hypotension (Cecconi, 2018). The Third
International Consensus Definition—“Sepsis-3”—denotes clinical criteria
for sepsis to include suspected infection and acute organ dysfunction
(Seymour, 2018). Use of the terms systemic inflammatory response
syndrome (SIRS) and severe sepsis are no longer recommended. The
syndrome is induced by a systemic inflammatory response to bacteria or
viruses or their by-products such as endotoxins or exotoxins. Its severity is a
continuum (Fig. 50-3). In an analysis of 55 million births, Kendle and
associates (2019) found an incidence of 2.4 cases per 10,000 deliveries. The
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine cites the incidence to be 4 to 10 cases
per 10,000 births. According to the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC), infection and sepsis caused 12 percent of pregnancyrelated deaths in the United States from 2013 to 2017 (Petersen, 2019).

FIGURE 50-3 Sepsis begins with a systemic inflammatory response to infection that may progress to
septic shock.

Infections that most commonly cause sepsis syndrome in obstetrics are
pyelonephritis (Chap. 56, p. 997), chorioamnionitis and puerperal sepsis
(Chap. 37, p. 651), pneumonia (Chap. 54, p. 962), septic abortion (Chap. 11,
p. 203), and necrotizing fasciitis (Chap. 37, p. 654). Septic shock is defined
by the need for vasopressor therapy despite fluid resuscitation. The mortality
rate for this in nonpregnant patients is 20 percent (Snyder, 2013). The
maternal mortality risk from sepsis is significantly underestimated (Bauer,
2015; Chebbo, 2016). However, most evidence indicates that case-fatality
rates are lower for pregnant women compared with age-matched nonpregnant
controls (Kidson, 2018).

■ Etiopathogenesis
Most information concerning sepsis pathogenesis derives from study of
lipopolysaccharide (LPS), which is the endotoxin portion of gram-negative
bacteria. The lipid A moiety is bound by mononuclear blood cells, becomes
internalized, and stimulates release of mediators and a series of complex
downstream perturbations. Clinical aspects of sepsis manifest when
cytokines that have endocrine, paracrine, and autocrine actions are released
(Seymour, 2018; Suffredini, 1989).
Although sepsis in obstetrics may be caused by several pathogens, most
cases stem from a small group. Sepsis and bacteremia complicating
pyelonephritis are commonly caused by Escherichia coli and Klebsiella
species (Cunningham, 1987; Snyder, 2013). Although pelvic infections are
usually polymicrobial, bacteria that cause severe sepsis are frequently
endotoxin-producing Enterobacteriaceae, and most commonly E coli
(Eschenbach, 2015). Other pelvic pathogens are aerobic and anaerobic
streptococci, Bacteroides species, and Clostridium species. Of these, group
A streptococcal infections are a significant source of infection (Leonard,
2019). Some strains of group A β-hemolytic streptococci and
Staphylococcus aureus—including community-acquired methicillin-resistant
S aureus strains (CA-MRSA)—produce a superantigen that activates T cells
to rapidly cause all features of sepsis. This manifests as toxic shock
syndrome, which is discussed further in Chapter 37 (p. 659) (Moellering,
2011; Soper, 2011).

Potent bacterial exotoxins also can cause severe sepsis syndrome.
Examples include exotoxins from Clostridium perfringens or sordellii, toxic
shock syndrome toxin 1 (TSST-1) from S aureus, and toxic shock–like
exotoxin from group A β-hemolytic streptococci (Herrera, 2016; Kaiser,
2018). These last exotoxins cause rapid and extensive tissue necrosis and
gangrene, especially of the postpartum uterus, and may cause profound
cardiovascular collapse and maternal death. In a review discussed
subsequently, the maternal mortality rate from these infections was 58
percent (Yamada, 2010).
Sepsis begins with an inflammatory response that is directed against
microbial endotoxins and exotoxins. CD4 T cells and leukocytes are
stimulated to produce proinflammatory compounds that include tumor
necrosis factor α (TNF-α), several interleukins, and other cytokines,
proteases, oxidants, and bradykinin that result in a “cytokine storm.” Many
other cellular reactions then follow and include stimulation of pro- and
antiinflammatory compounds, procoagulant activity, gene activation, receptor
regulation, and immune suppression (Seymour, 2018). It is also likely that
interleukin 6 (IL-6) mediates myocardial suppression (Pathan, 2004).
The pathophysiological response to this cascade is selective vasodilation
with maldistribution of blood flow. Leukocyte and platelet aggregation cause
capillary plugging. Worsening endotheliopathy causes profound permeability,
capillary leakage, and interstitial fluid accumulation. Depending on the
degree of endothelial injury and inflammatory response, a pathophysiological
and clinical continuum evolves as depicted in Figure 50-3. The clinical
syndrome begins with subtle signs of sepsis from infection and terminates
with septic shock. In its early stages, clinical shock results primarily from
lowered systemic vascular resistance that is not compensated fully by
increased cardiac output. Hypoperfusion worsens lactic acidosis, decreases
tissue oxygen extraction, and leads to end-organ dysfunction that includes
acute lung and kidney injury. Finally, septic cardiomyopathy with global
involvement is common with severe sepsis (Beesley, 2018; Martin, 2018).

■ Clinical Manifestations
Sepsis has myriad clinical manifestations that, at least in part, are dependent
on the specific invading microorganism and its particular endo- or exotoxins.
Some of the general effects of LPS are shown in Table 50-5.

TABLE 50-5. Clinical Manifestations of Sepsis

Thus, although capillary leakage initially causes hypovolemia, if
intravenous crystalloid is given at this point, sepsis hemodynamically can be
described as a high-cardiac-output, low-systemic-vascular-resistance
condition (Fig. 50-4). Concomitantly, pulmonary hypertension develops, and
despite the high cardiac output, severe sepsis also causes myocardial
depression (Seymour, 2018). This is often referred to as the warm phase of
septic shock. These findings are the most common cardiovascular
manifestations of early sepsis, but they can be accompanied by some of the
other clinical or laboratory aberrations listed in the prior section.

FIGURE 50-4 Hemodynamic effects of sepsis. Values for normal women at term are shown by dots.
With early sepsis, there is high cardiac output and low vascular resistance. With fluid resuscitation,
cardiac output increases even more, but so does capillary hydraulic pressure. With continued sepsis,
there may be myocardial depression to further increase capillary hydraulic pressure. Decreased plasma
oncotic pressure (serum albumin [g] × 6 mm Hg) contributes to interstitial lung fluid and endo/epithelial
leak causes alveolar flooding. IV = intravenous; LVSWI = left ventricular stroke work index; PCWP =
pulmonary capillary wedge pressure.

The response to initial intravenous hydration may be prognostic. Most
pregnant women who have early sepsis show a salutary response with
crystalloid and antimicrobial therapy, and if indicated, debridement of
infected tissue. Conversely, if following vigorous fluid infusion, septic shock
results, then the prognosis is more guarded. At this juncture, if β-adrenergic

inotropic agents fail to improve cardiovascular status, this indicates severe
and unresponsive extracellular fluid extravasation with vascular
insufficiency, overwhelming myocardial depression, or both. Oliguria and
continued peripheral vasoconstriction characterize a secondary, cold phase
of septic shock that is rarely survived. Another poor prognostic sign is
continued renal, pulmonary, and cerebral dysfunction once hypotension is
corrected (Chebbo, 2016; Seymour, 2018). The average risk of death rises by
15 to 20 percent with failure of each organ system.

■ Management
In 2004, an international consensus effort was launched as the Surviving
Sepsis Campaign (Dellinger, 2013). The cornerstone of management was
termed early goal-directed therapy (EGDT), which stressed prompt
recognition of serious bacterial infection and close monitoring of vital signs
and urine flow. After three multicenter trials did not show that this protocol
improved survival rates, this strategy is no longer recommended (PRISM
Investigators, 2017; Seymour, 2018).
Similar conclusions were reached with sets of early warning systems in
obstetrics (Edwards, 2015; Mhyre, 2014). Modified Early Warning Score
(MEWS) failed to predict sepsis in obstetrical populations with positive
predictive values as low as 1 to 2 percent (Lappen, 2010). Reasons for such
poor performance in pregnant women include physiological changes of vital
signs; relatively fewer comorbidities in a younger, healthier population; and
predominantly genitourinary infections. Thus, current efforts such as the
Sepsis in Obstetrics Score have been designed to identify women who
benefit from ICU admission early in their hospital course (Albright, 2017).
However, the validity of these findings beyond a single center and against
controls is yet unstudied.
Still, the major tenets of EGDT are employed for sepsis treatment.
Management of sepsis stresses prompt administration of broad-spectrum
antimicrobials, collection of specimens for culture, serum lactate level
measurement, an intravenous fluid bolus, and vasopressors as needed
(Seymour, 2018). An algorithm for management of sepsis is shown in Figure
50-5. The three basic steps are performed as simultaneously as possible and
include evaluation of the sepsis source and its sequelae, cardiopulmonary
function assessment, and immediate management. The most important step in

sepsis management is rapid infusion of 2 L and sometimes as many as 4 to 6
L of crystalloid fluids to restore renal perfusion in severely affected women
(Vincent, 2013). Simultaneously, appropriately chosen broad-spectrum
antimicrobials are begun, preferentially within 1 hour (Chen, 2019; Society
for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, 2019). Because hemoconcentration is caused
by the capillary leak, if anemia coexists, blood is given. Specific thresholds
for gravidas are lacking. In a group of nonpregnant individuals admitted to an
ICU, maintaining the hemoglobin concentration ≥9 g/dL did not have superior
outcomes compared with levels ≥7 g/dL (Holst, 2014). That said, fetal
oxygenation is improved by the higher concentration, as discussed earlier (p.
886).

FIGURE 50-5 Algorithm for evaluation and management of sepsis. Rapid and aggressive
implementation is paramount for success. The three steps—Evaluate, Assess, and Manage—are
carried out as simultaneously as possible.

The use of a colloid solution such as hetastarch is controversial
(Seymour, 2018). One Scandinavian randomized trial comparing
hydroxyethyl starch and Ringer acetate solutions reported a higher mortality
rate with the starch solution (Perner, 2012). Another study found equivalent
results with 6-percent hydroxyethyl starch compared with normal saline

(Myburgh, 2012). Additionally, albumin was not found to be superior to
crystalloids (Caironi, 2014).
Aggressive volume replacement ideally is promptly followed by urinary
output of at least 30 and preferably 50 mL/h, as well as other indicators of
improved perfusion. If not, vasoactive drug therapy is considered (Pacheco,
2014). As discussed, mortality rates are high when sepsis is further
complicated by respiratory or renal failure. With severe sepsis, damage to
pulmonary capillary endothelium and alveolar epithelium causes alveolar
flooding and pulmonary edema. This may occur even with low or normal
pulmonary capillary wedge pressures, as with the ARDS (p. 884). Therefore,
in some women, mechanical ventilation is indicated.
Broad-spectrum antimicrobials are chosen empirically based on the
probable source of infection. They are given promptly in maximal doses after
appropriate cultures are taken of blood, urine, or exudates not contaminated
by normal flora. In severe sepsis, appropriate and early empirical coverage
results in better survival rates (Seymour, 2017, 2018). Acute pyelonephritis
is usually caused by Enterobacteriaceae, as discussed in Chapter 56 (p. 997).
For pelvic infections, empirical selection of a regimen such as ampicillin,
gentamicin, plus clindamycin, which in sum covers aerobic and anaerobic
pathogens, generally suffices (Chap. 37, p. 651). Associated incisional and
other soft-tissue infections are increasingly likely to be caused by MRSA,
thus vancomycin may be added (Klevens, 2007). With septic abortion or
deep fascial infections, a Gram-stained smear may be helpful in identifying
Clostridium species or group A streptococcal organisms.

Surgical Treatment
Continuing sepsis may prove fatal, and debridement of necrotic tissue or
drainage of purulent material is crucial (Pacheco, 2014). Puerperal pelvic
infections include metritis and infections of perineal lacerations or of
hysterotomy or laparotomy incisions. If complicated by abscess, these may
require drainage. With a septic abortion, uterine contents must be removed
expeditiously by curettage as described in Chapter 11 (p. 203). Hysterectomy
is seldom indicated unless gangrene has resulted.
For women with pyelonephritis, continuing sepsis should prompt a
search for obstruction caused by calculi or by a perinephric or intrarenal
phlegmon or abscess. Renal sonography or “one-shot” pyelography can help

diagnose obstruction and calculi. With obstruction, ureteral catheterization,
percutaneous nephrostomy, or flank exploration may be lifesaving (Chap. 56,
p. 998). Computed tomography (CT) or magnetic-resonance imaging aids
identification of a renal phlegmon or abscess.
Puerperal Infections. Most cases of puerperal pelvic sepsis are clinically
manifested in the first several postpartum days, and intravenous
antimicrobial therapy without tissue debridement is generally curative. At
least four exceptions are notable.
First, massive uterine myonecrosis can be caused by group A βhemolytic streptococcal or clostridial infections (Kaiser, 2018; Soper, 2011).
Those with early-onset disease present with findings listed in Table 50-6.
The mortality rate in these women with gangrene, shown in Figure 50-6 is
high, and prompt hysterectomy may be lifesaving. Group A β-hemolytic
streptococci and clostridial colonization or infection also cause toxic-shock
syndrome without obvious gangrene (Mason, 2012). These are due to either
streptococcal toxic shock syndrome–like toxin or clostridial exotoxin that
evolved from S aureus (Chap. 37, p. 659). In many of these cases,
bacteremia and widespread tissue invasion develops, but uterine and
abdominal incisions are intact. If uterine necrosis can be excluded—usually
by CT scanning—then in our experiences, as well as in others, hysterectomy
may not be necessary (Soper, 2011). Still, these infections can be highly
lethal (Chen, 2019; Yamada, 2010).
TABLE 50-6. Clinical Findings in 126 Women with Group A β-Hemolytic
Streptococcal Infection

FIGURE 50-6 A fatal case of group A β-hemolytic Streptococcus pyogenes puerperal infection
following an uncomplicated vaginal delivery at term. The infection caused uterine gangrene and
overwhelming sepsis. Arrows point to overtly “ballooned-out” black gangrenous areas of the postpartum
uterus at the time of laparotomy for hysterectomy.

A second exception, necrotizing fasciitis of the episiotomy site or of the
abdominal surgical incision, is a surgical emergency. Described by Gallup
and coworkers (2002), these infections are aggressively managed as

discussed in Chapter 37 (p. 655). In one instance, Sinha and colleagues
(2015) described a woman with Fournier gangrene who required radical
debridement and colostomy.
Third, persistent or aggressive postpartum uterine infection with
necrosis, uterine incision dehiscence, and severe peritonitis may lead to
sepsis (Chap. 37, p. 651). In this regard, women following cesarean delivery
who are suspected of having peritonitis should be carefully evaluated for
uterine incisional necrosis or bowel perforation. These infections tend to be
less aggressive than necrotizing group A streptococcal infections and
develop later postpartum. CT imaging of the abdomen and pelvis can
frequently disclose these. If either is suspected, timely surgical exploration is
considered. With uterine incision necrosis, hysterectomy is usually necessary
(Fig. 37-5, p. 657). Last, peritonitis and sepsis much less commonly may
result from a ruptured parametrial, intraabdominal, or ovarian abscess
(Chap. 37, p. 656).

Adjunctive Therapy
A woman with severe sepsis is supported with continuing crystalloid
infusion, blood transfusions, and ventilation. In some cases, other measures
are needed. Vasoactive drugs are not given unless aggressive fluid treatment
fails to correct hypotension and perfusion abnormalities. First-line
vasopressors are norepinephrine and vasopressin (Seymour, 2018).
According to the Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine (2019),
norepinephrine has been studied most in pregnant women.
Glucocorticoid use in this setting remains controversial, and some but not
all studies show a favorable effect (Marik, 2018; Venkatesh, 2018). In a
recent study by Annane and colleagues (2018), hydrocortisone plus
fludrocortisone compared with placebo resulted in a significantly lower
mortality rate at 90 days. Thus, low-dose corticosteroid therapy can be
considered with septic shock (Suffredini, 2018).
Endotoxin stimulates endothelial cells to upregulate tissue factor and thus
procoagulant production (Cunningham, 2015). Consumptive coagulopathy
associated with sepsis is discussed in Chapter 44 (p. 776). At the same time,
endotoxin decreases the anticoagulant action of activated protein C. Several
agents developed to block coagulation, however, do not improve outcomes.

Last, induced hypothermia does not improve survival in patients with septic
shock and respiratory failure (Itenov, 2018).

TRAUMA
Depending on definitions used, 10 to 20 percent of gravidas suffer physical
trauma (Al-Thani, 2018; Mendez-Figueroa, 2017). Moreover, injury-related
deaths are the most commonly identified nonobstetrical cause of maternal
mortality (Huls, 2018; La Rosa, 2020). According to Deshpande and
coworkers (2017), pregnant victims of trauma are twice as likely to die
compared with nonpregnant affected women. In an audit from Parkland
Hospital, motor vehicle accidents and falls accounted for 85 percent of
injuries sustained by gravidas (Hawkins, 2007). From the National Violent
Death Reporting System, Palladino and colleagues (2011) found 2
pregnancy-associated suicides per 100,000 live births. The rate was 3 per
100,000 for pregnancy-associated homicides. Notably, intimate partner
violence may be linked to these suicides (Chisholm, 2017). Last, injury
prevention and education of high-risk patients may help decrease morbidity
rates (Globevnik, 2018).

■ Intimate Partner Violence
According to the CDC, intimate partner violence (IPV) describes physical,
sexual, or psychological harm by a current or former partner or spouse
(Breiding, 2015). Such violence affects 1 in 5 women in their lifetime
(Miller, 2019). One goal in violence prevention for Healthy People 2020 is
the reduction of physical abuse directed at women by male partners.
Even more appalling is that IPV continues during pregnancy (Hahn,
2018). Abuse is linked to poverty, poor education, and use of tobacco,
alcohol, and illicit drugs. Unfortunately, abused women tend to remain with
their abusers, and one major risk factor for intimate partner homicide is prior
IPV (Globevnik, 2018). Last, women seeking pregnancy termination have a
higher incidence of IPV (Bourassa, 2007).
In one study, pregnant women hospitalized in California as a result of
assault had significantly increased perinatal morbidity rates (El Kady, 2005).
Immediate sequelae were uterine rupture, preterm delivery, and maternal and

perinatal death. Subsequent outcomes included higher rates of placental
abruption, preterm and low-birthweight newborns, and other adverse
outcomes. Silverman and associates (2006) reported similar results from the
Pregnancy Risk Assessment Monitoring System. In a metaanalysis, women
suffering IPV had threefold increased risk for perinatal death (PastorMoreno, 2020).
The American Academy of Pediatrics and the American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2017) recommend universal screening for
IPV at the initial prenatal visit, during each trimester, and again at the
postpartum visit (Chap. 10, p. 180). A challenge in these recommendations is
that women who refuse to answer the screening question for IPV may be most
at risk (Yost, 2005). Moreover, the woman who is physically abused tends to
present late, if at all, for prenatal care.

■ Sexual Assault
The lifetime prevalence of sexual assault in the United States is 20 percent
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019c; Vrees, 2017).
Satin and associates (1992) reviewed more than 5700 female sexual assault
victims in Dallas County and reported that 2 percent were pregnant.
Associated physical trauma is common. From a forensic standpoint, the
evidence collection protocol is not altered (Linden, 2011).
In addition to attention to physical injuries, exposure to sexually
transmitted diseases must be considered. The CDC (2015, 2016)
recommends antimicrobial prophylaxis against gonorrhea, chlamydial
infection, and trichomoniasis (Table 50-7). At Parkland Hospital, we also
offer at-risk exposed assault victims HIV prophylaxis. If the woman is not
pregnant, another very important aspect is emergency contraception, as
recommended by the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
(2018a; 2019c) and discussed in Chapter 38 (p. 676).
TABLE 50-7. Guidelines for Prophylaxis Against Sexually Transmitted
Disease in Pregnant Victims of Sexual Assault

Last, the importance of psychological counseling for the rape victim and
her family cannot be overemphasized. As discussed in Chapter 64 (p. 1142),
a 30- to 35-percent lifetime risk each for posttraumatic stress disorder, major
depression, and suicide contemplation follows sexual assault (Linden, 2011).

■ Automobile Accidents
At least 3 percent of pregnant women are involved in motor vehicle
accidents each year in the United States. These crashes account for 90
percent of nonviolent blunt trauma in pregnancy (Sakamoto, 2019). Thus, they
are the most common causes of serious, life-threatening, or fatal blunt trauma
during pregnancy (Al-Thani, 2018; Greco, 2019; Petrone, 2017). Mattox and
Goetzl (2005) report these accidents to be the leading cause of traumatic
fetal deaths as well. This also was true from our experiences from Parkland
Hospital (Hawkins, 2007). As with all motor vehicle crashes, alcohol use is
often associated. Up to half of accidents occur without seat-belt use, and
many of these deaths would likely be preventable by the three-point restraints
shown in Figure 50-7 (Schuster, 2016). Seat belts prevent contact with the
steering wheel, and they reduce abdominal impact pressure.

FIGURE 50-7 Illustration showing correct use of three-point automobile restraint. The upper belt is
above the uterus, and the lower belt fits snugly across the upper thighs and well below the uterus.

Original concerns regarding injuries caused by airbag deployment have
been somewhat allayed. In a retrospective cohort study that included 2207

pregnant women in crashes with airbag deployment, perinatal outcomes were
not clinically different from 1141 controls without airbags (Schiff, 2010).
Importantly, 96 percent of both groups used seat belts. Logically, it appears
that injuries with airbag deployment are related to the severity of the crash
(Mendez-Figueroa, 2017).

■ Other Blunt Trauma
Some other common causes of blunt trauma are falls and aggravated assaults.
In the California review reported by El Kady and associates (2005),
approximately a third of pregnant women who were hospitalized for trauma
suffered intentionally inflicted injuries. Less common are blast or crush
injury.
With blunt trauma, intraabdominal injuries can be serious. Even so,
bowel injuries are less frequent because of the protective effect of a large
uterus. Still, diaphragmatic, splenic, liver, and kidney damage also may be
sustained. Particularly worrisome is the specter of amnionic-fluid embolism,
which has been reported with even mild trauma (Ellingsen, 2007;
Pluymakers, 2007). Retroperitoneal hemorrhage is likely more common than
in nonpregnant women (Takehana, 2011).
Orthopedic injuries also are encountered with some regularity (Desai,
2007). From the Parkland Hospital trauma unit, 6 percent of 1682 pregnant
women evaluated had orthopedic injuries. Additionally, this subset was at
increased risk for placental abruption, preterm delivery, and perinatal
mortality. In a review of 101 pelvic fractures during pregnancy, the maternal
mortality rate was 9 percent, and the fetal rate was 35 percent (Leggon,
2002). In another study of pelvic and acetabular fractures during 15
pregnancies, one maternal and four fetal deaths were reported (Almog,
2007). Last, head trauma and neurosurgical care raise unique issues (Qaiser,
2007).

■ Fetal Injury and Death
Perinatal death rates rise with the severity of maternal injuries. Fetal death is
more likely with direct fetoplacental injury, maternal shock, pelvic fracture,
maternal head injury, or hypoxia (Mendez-Figueroa, 2017; Pearlman, 2008).
In an earlier study, motor vehicle accidents caused 82 percent of fetal deaths

from trauma. Death resulted from placental injury in half and from uterine
rupture in 4 percent (Weiss, 2001).
Although uncommon, fetal skull and brain injuries are more likely if the
head is engaged and the maternal pelvis is fractured. Conversely, fetal head
injuries, presumably from a contrecoup effect, may be sustained in unengaged
vertex or nonvertex presentations. Fetal skull fractures are rare and best seen
using CT imaging (Sadro, 2012). One example is shown in Figure 50-8.
Intracranial hemorrhage may be another sequela (Gherman, 2014). Other
injuries have included fetal decapitation or incomplete midabdominal fetal
transection at midpregnancy (Rowe, 1996; Weir, 2008).

FIGURE 50-8 This woman in her third trimester was involved in a high-speed motor vehicle accident.
A. Maximum intensity projection acquired for maternal indications readily identifies fetal skull fractures

(arrows). B. Three-dimensional reformatted computed tomography (CT) image in a bone algorithm
demonstrates the fetal skeleton from data acquired during the maternal examination. Again, the arrow
marks one fracture site. (Photograph contributed by Dr. Travis Browning. Reproduced with permission
from Bailey AA, Twickler DM: Perioperative imaging. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III,
et al [eds]: Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill;
2017.)

■ Placental Injuries
Catastrophic events that potentially accompany blunt trauma include
placental abruption or placental tear or both. Placental abruption caused by
trauma is likely due to deformation of the elastic myometrium around the
relatively inelastic placenta (Crosby, 1968). This may result from a
deceleration injury as the forward-moving uterus meets the immovable
steering wheel or seat belt. Instead, placental injury may follow a contrecoup
injury, which is illustrated in Figure 50-9.

FIGURE 50-9 Mechanism of placental tear or “fracture” caused by a coup-contrecoup injury.
Although not shown here, forward momentum of the uterus at the time of initial impact propels it
forward. This is followed by a contrecoup, in which forces are directed backward. In this image, the
inelastic placenta fractures against the sacral promontory. During each phase, tremendous
intraabdominal pressure is generated that can lead to abruption, shown here as blood collecting in the
retroplacental space. Inset. Blood can be forced into placental bed venules and enter maternal
circulation. Such maternofetal hemorrhage may be identified with Kleihauer-Betke testing.

Some degree of abruption complicates 1 to 6 percent of minor injuries
and up to 50 percent of major ones (Schiff, 2002). Abruption is more likely if
vehicle speed exceeds 30 mph (Reis, 2000).

Clinical findings with traumatic abruption may be similar to those for
spontaneous placental abruption (Chap. 42, p. 753). Kettel and coworkers
(1988) emphasized that traumatic abruption may be occult and not
accompanied by uterine pain, tenderness, or bleeding. In our experiences
with 13 such women at Parkland Hospital, 11 had uterine tenderness, but
only five had vaginal bleeding. Because traumatic abruption is more likely to
be concealed and generate higher intrauterine pressures, associated
coagulopathy is more often seen than with atraumatic abruption (Cunningham,
2015). Partial separation also may generate uterine activity, which is
described more fully later (p. 896). Evidence of fetal compromise such as
fetal tachycardia, sinusoidal pattern, late decelerations, acidosis, and fetal
death are other worrisome features. CT imaging has been shown to be
accurate for diagnosis of traumatic abruption (Kopelman, 2013, 2016; Sadro,
2012). However, because routine placental evaluation by radiologists is not
common, these authors did not advocate for CT screening for abruption.
With a placental tear, life-threatening fetal hemorrhage may follow, and
blood enters either the amnionic sac or maternal circulation. As shown in
Figure 50-10, the tear is linear or stellate. Also shown is a Kleihauer-Betke
stain of maternal blood that is used to quantify fetomaternal hemorrhage. A
small amount of fetal-maternal bleeding has been described in up to a third of
trauma cases, and in 90 percent of these, the volume is <15 mL (Pearlman,
1990). Parenthetically, atraumatic placental abruption is much less often
associated with significant fetomaternal hemorrhage because only minimal
fetal blood enters into the intervillous space. With traumatic abruption,
however, massive fetomaternal hemorrhage may follow. In one study, the risk
of associated uterine contractions and preterm labor was 20-fold if there was
evidence for a fetomaternal bleed (Muench, 2004). With severe fetal
bleeding, long-term adverse neurological outcomes are frequent (Kadooka,
2014).

FIGURE 50-10 A. Partial placental abruption in which the adherent blood clot has been removed.
Note the laceration of the placenta (arrow), which caused fetal death from massive fetomaternal
hemorrhage. B. Kleihauer–Betke stain of a peripheral smear of maternal blood from the same woman.
The dark cells containing hemoglobin that constituted 4.5 percent of red blood cells are fetal in origin,
whereas the empty cells are maternal.

■ Uterine Rupture
Blunt trauma leads to uterine rupture in <1 percent of severe cases
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2017a; Greco,
2019). Rupture is more likely in a previously scarred uterus and is usually
associated with a direct impact of substantial force. Decelerative forces
following a 25-mph collision can generate up to 500 mm Hg of intrauterine
pressure in a properly restrained woman (Crosby, 1968). Clinical findings
may be identical to those for placental abruption with an intact uterus, and
maternal and fetal deterioration are inevitable. Weir and colleagues (2008)
described supracervical uterine avulsion and fetal transection at 22 weeks.

■ Penetrating Trauma
In a study of 321 pregnant women with abdominal trauma, Petrone (2011)
reported a 9-percent incidence of penetrating injuries. Of these, 77 percent
were gunshot wounds, and 23 percent were stab wounds. The incidence of
maternal visceral injury with penetrating trauma is only 15 to 40 percent
compared with 80 to 90 percent in nonpregnant individuals (Stone, 1999).

However, the large, intervening uterus is disproportionately involved
(Awwad, 1994). When the uterus sustains penetrating wounds, the fetus is
more likely than the mother to be seriously injured. The fetus sustains injury
in two thirds of cases, whereas maternal visceral damage is seen in only 20
percent. Still, their seriousness is underscored in that maternal-fetal mortality
rates are significantly higher than those seen with blunt abdominal injuries.
Specifically, maternal mortality rates were 7 versus 2 percent, and fetal
mortality rates were 73 versus 10 percent, respectively.

■ Management of Trauma
As discussed, maternal and fetal outcomes are directly related to injury
severity. That said, commonly used methods of severity scoring do not
account for the significant morbidity and mortality rates related to placental
abruption and thus to pregnancy outcomes. In a study of 582 pregnant women
hospitalized for injuries, the injury severity score did not accurately predict
adverse pregnancy outcomes (Schiff, 2005). Importantly, relatively minor
injuries were associated with preterm labor and placental abruption. In a
study of 317 women at ≥24 weeks’ gestation who had “minor trauma,” 14
percent had clinically significant uterine contractions requiring extended fetal
evaluation past 4 hours (Cahill, 2008).
With few exceptions, treatment priorities in injured pregnant women are
multidisciplinary (MacArthur, 2019; Mendez-Figueroa, 2017). Primary goals
are to evaluate and stabilize maternal injuries. Attention to fetal assessment
during the acute evaluation may divert attention from life-threatening
maternal injuries (American Academy of Pediatrics, 2017). Basic rules of
resuscitation include ventilation, arrest of hemorrhage, and treatment of
hypovolemia with crystalloid and blood products. After midpregnancy, the
large uterus is positioned off the great vessels to relieve vessel compression,
which decreases cardiac output (Nelson, 2015).
Following emergency resuscitation, fractures, internal injuries, bleeding
sites, and placental, uterine, and fetal trauma are sought (Greco, 2019;
MacArthur, 2019). Radiography is not proscribed, but special attention is
given each indication. Not surprisingly, one report observed that pregnant
trauma victims had less radiation exposure than nonpregnant controls
(Ylagan, 2008). Some advocate screening abdominal sonography followed
by CT scanning for positive sonographic findings (Saphier, 2014).

Procedures used include the FAST scan—focused assessment with
sonography for trauma. This is a 5-minute, four- to six-view imaging study
that evaluates perihepatic, perisplenic, pelvic, and pericardial views
(Mendez-Figueroa, 2017). In nonpregnant women, if fluid is seen in the
upper abdominal views, the hemoperitoneum volume is >500 mL (Fig. 5011) (Branney, 1995; Rodgerson, 2001). Importantly, this amount has not been
corroborated for pregnancy. In some cases, open peritoneal lavage may be
informative (Tsuei, 2006).

FIGURE 50-11 Fast scan. Upper quadrant scans show free fluid (blood) between the liver and kidney
(Morison pouch) and around the spleen. The patient had 2500 mL of blood in the peritoneal cavity.
(Reproduced with permission from Mendez-Figueroa H, Rouse DJ: Trauma in pregnancy. In Yeomans
ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al [eds]: Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed.
New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2017.)

Penetrating injuries in most cases must be evaluated using radiography.
Because clinical response to peritoneal irritation is blunted during
pregnancy, an aggressive approach to exploratory laparotomy is pursued.
Whereas exploration is mandatory for abdominal gunshot wounds, some
clinicians advocate close observation for selected stab wounds. Diagnostic
laparoscopy also has been used (Chap. 49, p. 868).

Cesarean Delivery
The necessity for cesarean delivery depends on several factors. Laparotomy
itself is not an indication for hysterotomy. Some considerations include
gestational age, fetal condition, extent of uterine injury, and whether the large
uterus hinders adequate management of other intraabdominal injuries (Tsuei,
2006).

Electronic Monitoring
Because fetal well-being may reflect the status of the mother, fetal monitoring
is another “vital sign” that helps evaluate the extent of maternal injuries.
Even if the mother is stable, electronic monitoring may suggest placental
abruption. In a study by Pearlman and coworkers (1990), no woman had an
abruption if uterine contractions were less often than every 10 minutes within
the 4 hours after trauma was sustained. Almost 20 percent of women who had
contractions more frequently than every 10 minutes in the first 4 hours had an
associated placental abruption. In these cases, abnormal tracings were
common and included fetal tachycardia and late decelerations. Conversely,
no adverse outcomes were reported in women who had normal monitor
tracings (Connolly, 1997). Importantly, if tocolytics are used for these
contractions, they may obfuscate findings, and we do not recommend them.
Because placental abruption usually develops early following trauma,
fetal monitoring is begun as soon as the mother is stable. The ideal duration
of posttrauma monitoring is not precisely known. From data just cited,
observation for 4 hours is reasonable if the fetal heart rate tracing is normal
and no other sentinel findings such as contractions, uterine tenderness, or
bleeding are noted. Certainly, monitoring should be continued as long as
there are uterine contractions, nonreassuring fetal heart patterns, vaginal
bleeding, uterine tenderness or irritability, serious maternal injury, or
ruptured membranes (Mendez-Figueroa, 2017). In rare cases, placental
abruption has developed days after trauma (Higgins, 1984).

■ Fetal-Maternal Hemorrhage
It is unclear whether routine use of the Kleihauer-Betke or an equivalent test
in pregnant trauma victims might modify adverse outcomes associated with
fetal anemia, cardiac arrhythmias, and death (Pak, 1998). In a retrospective

review of 125 pregnant women with blunt injuries, the Kleihauer-Betke test
was judged to be of little value during acute trauma management (Towery,
1993). Others have reached similar conclusions, although a positive test
result with fetal cells composing 0.1 percent predicted uterine contractions
or preterm labor (Muench, 2003, 2004).
For the woman who is D-negative, administration of anti-D
immunoglobulin should be considered (American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists, 2017b). This may be omitted if a test result for fetal
bleeding is negative. Even with anti-D immunoglobulin, alloimmunization
may still develop if the fetal-maternal hemorrhage exceeds 15 mL of fetal
cells. Immunoglobulin dose calculations are described in Chapter 18 (p.
357).
For the pregnant trauma patient, confirmation of current tetanus
immunization status is pertinent. When indicated, a dose of tetanus toxoid,
reduced diphtheria toxoid, and acellular pertussis (Tdap) vaccine is
preferred for its neonatal pertussis immunity benefits (Chap. 10, p. 188).

THERMAL INJURY
Treatment of the burned gravida is similar to that for nonpregnant individuals
(Correia-Sa, 2021). It is generally agreed that pregnancy does not alter
maternal outcome from thermal injury compared with that of nonpregnant
women of similar age. As perhaps expected, maternal and fetal survival
parallels the percentage of burned surface area. Karimi and colleagues
(2009) reported higher mortality rates for both with burns from suicide
attempts and inhalational injuries. The composite mortality rate for more than
200 women from six studies rose in a linear fashion as the percentage of
burned body surface area increased (Fig. 50-12). For 20-, 40-, and 60percent burns, the maternal mortality rates were approximately 4, 30, and 93
percent, respectively. The corresponding fetal mortality rates were 20, 48,
and 96 percent, respectively. With severe burns, the woman usually enters
labor spontaneously within a few days to a week and often delivers a
stillborn. Contributory factors are hypovolemia, pulmonary injury,
septicemia, and the burn-associated, intense catabolic state (Radosevich,
2013).

FIGURE 50-12 Maternal and fetal mortality rates by burn severity in 211 women. (Data from Akhtar,
1994; Amy, 1985; Mabrouk, 1977; Maghsoudi, 2006; Rayburn, 1984; Rode, 1990.)

Following serious abdominal burns, skin contractures that develop may
be painful during a subsequent pregnancy and may even require surgical
decompression and split-skin autografts (Mitsukawa, 2015; Radosevich,
2013). Loss or distortion of nipples may cause problems in breastfeeding.
Mitsukawa and associates (2015) reported that contracture release was
indicated with scars spanning >75 percent of the total abdominal area.
Alternatively, normal abdominal tissue expansion due to pregnancy appears
to be an excellent source for obtaining skin grafts postpartum to correct scar
deformities at other body sites (Del Frari, 2004).

■ Electrical and Lightning Injuries
Earlier case reports suggested a high fetal mortality rate with electric shock
(Fatovich, 1993). In a prospective cohort study, however, Einarson and
associates (1997) showed similar perinatal outcomes in 31 injured women
compared with those of noninjured controls. They concluded that traditional
110-volt North American electrical current likely is less dangerous than the
220-volt currents available in Europe. Thermal burns with electrocution may
be extensive, and a woman with brain death from cardiac arrest has been
described (Sparic, 2014).
The pathophysiological effects of lightning injuries can be devastating.
García Gutiérrez and colleagues (2005) reviewed 13 case reports of

lightning injuries during pregnancy and cited a 50-percent stillbirth rate.

CARDIOPULMONARY RESUSCITATION
Maternal cardiac arrest complicates from 1 in 12,000 to 36,000 delivery
admissions (Balki, 2017; Beckett, 2017; Zelop, 2018). The most common
causes are hemorrhage, anesthesia, heart failure, amnionic-fluid embolism,
and sepsis. Shown in Table 50-8 is the alphabetical A–H checklist of cardiac
arrest causes. General topics regarding planning and equipment have been
reviewed by the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
(2018b) and the Society for Obstetric Anesthesia and Perinatology (Lipman,
2014).
TABLE 50-8. Possible Etiologies for Cardiac Arrest During Pregnancy

Special considerations for cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR)
conducted in the second half of pregnancy are outlined in the American Heart
Association 2010 guidelines (Jeejeebhoy, 2015). The committee
acknowledges the following as standards: (1) relieve possible vena caval
compression by left lateral uterine displacement; (2) administer 100-percent
oxygen; (3) establish intravenous access above the diaphragm; (4) assess for
hypotension that warrants therapy, which is defined as systolic blood
pressure <100 mm Hg or <80 percent of baseline; and (5) review possible
causes of critical illness and treat these as early as possible.
The position of the heart for external compressions is not different from
that in nonpregnant women (Holmes, 2015). In nonpregnant women, external
chest compressions result in a cardiac output that is approximately 30
percent of normal. However, in late pregnancy, this may be less because of
uterine aortocaval compression (Nelson, 2015). Thus, uterine displacement
should accompany other resuscitative efforts. This can be accomplished by
tilting the operating table laterally, by placing a wedge under the right hip, or
by pushing the uterus to the left manually (Rose, 2015). Components of highquality cardiopulmonary resuscitation in pregnancy are shown in Table 50-9
(Society for Maternal–Fetal Medicine, 2018).
TABLE 50-9. High-Quality Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation in Pregnancy

■ Perimortem Cesarean Delivery

The maternal survival rate from cardiac arrest is 60 to 70 percent, and many
deaths are associated with out-of-hospital arrest (Beckett, 2017; He, 2021).
Because of pregnancy-induced hindrances on CPR efforts, emergent
perimortem cesarean delivery for improved maternal resuscitation and fetal
salvage is recommended by most. Specifically, the American Heart
Association and the Society for Obstetric Anesthesia and Perinatology
recommend operative delivery within 4 to 5 minutes of beginning CPR if the
fetus is viable and circulation is not restored (Zelop, 2018). In women
delivered by perimortem cesarean, neurologically intact neonatal survival
and the cardiac arrest-to-delivery interval are inversely related (Beckett,
2017; Katz, 2012). Specifically, of newborns delivered within 5 minutes of
arrest, 98 percent are neurologically intact; within 6 to 15 minutes, 83
percent are intact; within 16 to 25 minutes, 33 percent are intact; and within
26 to 35 minutes, only 25 percent are intact (Clark, 1997).
This serious and sometimes contentious issue is far from evidence based.
For example, the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
(2019a) recommends consideration for perimortem cesarean delivery
beginning at 4 minutes. Katz and associates (2005) reviewed 38 perimortem
cesarean deliveries with a “large selection bias.” They concluded that these
reports supported—but “fell far from proving”—that perimortem cesarean
delivery within 4 minutes of maternal cardiac arrest improves maternal and
fetal outcomes. Even so, as emphasized by Clark (1997) and Rose (2015)
and their coworkers, and in our experiences, these goals rarely can be met in
actual practice. For example, many cases of cardiac arrest occur in
uncontrolled circumstances, and thus, the time to CPR initiation alone would
consume the first 5 minutes. Thus “crash” cesarean delivery would supersede
resuscitative efforts, would possibly be done without appropriate anesthesia
or surgical equipment, and might lead to otherwise preventable maternal
death. Moreover, the distinction between a perimortem versus postmortem
cesarean operation is imperative (Katz, 2012; Rose, 2015). Last, in the
balance, any choice may favor survival of the mother over the fetus, or vice
versa, and thus there are immediate unresolvable ethical concerns. Katz
(2012) and Zelop and colleagues (2018) have provided scholarly reviews of
perimortem cesarean delivery.
Successful CPR can have morbid complications. Severe neurological
injury is the most feared (Romagano, 2017). Cox and coworkers (2018)

described liver lacerations in 3 of 7 survivors. Takotsubo cardiomyopathy
also has been reported (Kraft, 2017).

■ Maternal Brain Death
Occasionally, a pregnant woman with a supposedly healthy intact fetus will
be kept on somatic support to await fetal viability or maturity. This is
discussed in Chapter 63 (p. 1138).

ENVENOMATION
According to their review, Brown and coworkers (2013) reported that
clinically significant envenomations in pregnant women are from snakes,
spiders, scorpions, jellyfish, and hymenoptera. This last group includes bees,
wasps, hornets, and ants. Adverse outcomes are related to maternal effects.
Available evidence supports a venom-specific approach that incorporates
symptomatic care, antivenom administration when appropriate, anaphylaxis
treatment, and fetal assessment (Ghosh, 2018). One management scheme for
North American snakebites was provided by Lei and associates (2015).

REFERENCES
Akhtar MA, Mulawkar PM, Kulkarni HR: Burns in pregnancy: effect on maternal and fetal outcomes.
Burns 20:351, 1994
Albright CM, Has P, Rouse DJ, et al: Internal validation of the sepsis in obstetrics score to identify risk
of morbidity from sepsis in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 130(4):747, 2017
Almog G, Liebergall M, Tsafrir A, et al: Management of pelvic fractures during pregnancy. Am J
Orthop 36:E153, 2007
Al-Thani H, El-Menyar A, Sathian B, et al: Blunt traumatic injury during pregnancy: a descriptive
analysis from a level 1 trauma center. Eur J Trauma Emerg Surg 45(3):393, 2019
American Academy of Pediatrics, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Guidelines for
Perinatal Care, 8th ed. Washington, 2017
American College of Critical Care Medicine, Society of Critical Care Medicine: Guidelines on admission
and discharge for adult intermediate care units. Crit Care Med 26:607, 1998
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Hypertension in pregnancy: report of the
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists’ task force on hypertension in pregnancy.
Executive summary. Obstet Gynecol 122:1122, 2013
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Critical care in pregnancy. Practice Bulletin No.
170, October 2016, Reaffirmed 2017a

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Prevention of Rh D alloimmunization. Practice
Bulletin No. 181, August 2017b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Emergency contraception. Practice Bulletin No.
152, September 2015, Reaffirmed 2018a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Preparing for clinical emergencies in obstetrics
and gynecology. Committee Opinion No. 590, March 2014, Reaffirmed 2018b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Critical care in pregnancy. Practice Bulletin No.
211, April 2019a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Sexual assault. Committee Opinion No. 777,
April 2019c
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Gestational hypertension and preeclampsia.
Practice Bulletin No. 222, May 2020
Amy BW, McManus WF, Goodwin CW, et al: Thermal injury in the pregnant patient. Surg Gynecol
Obstet 161:209, 1985
Annane D, Renault A, Brun-Buisson C, et al: Hydrocortisone plus fludrocortisone for adults with septic
shock. N Engl J Med 378(9):809, 2018
Awwad JT, Azar GB, Seoud MA, et al: High-velocity penetrating wounds of the gravid uterus: Review
of 16 years of civil war. Obstet Gynecol 83(2):259, 1994
Bailey AA, Twickler DM: Perioperative imaging. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al
(eds): Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education,
2017
Balki M, Liu S, León JA, et al: Epidemiology of cardiac arrest during hospitalization for delivery in
Canada: a nationwide study. Anesth Analg 124(3):890, 2017
Baron RM, Levey BD: Acute respiratory distress syndrome: In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et
al (eds): Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education,
2018, p 2030
Bauer ME, Lorenz RP, Bauer ST, et al: Maternal deaths due to sepsis in the state of Michigan, 1999–
2006. Obstet Gynecol 126(4):747, 2015
Beckett VA, Knight M, Sharpe P: The CAPS Study: incidence, management and outcomes of cardiac
arrest in pregnancy in the UK: a prospective, descriptive study. BJOG 124(9):1374, 2017
Beesley SJ, Weber G, Sarge T, et al: Septic cardiomyopathy. Crit Care Med 46(4):625, 2018
Bourassa D, Bérubé J: The prevalence of intimate partner violence among women and teenagers
seeking abortion compared with those continuing pregnancy. J Obstet Gynaecol Can 29:415, 2007
Branney SW, Wolfe RE, Moore EE, et al: Quantitative sensitivity of ultrasound in detecting free
intraperitoneal fluid. J Trauma 40(6):1052, 1995
Breiding MJ, Basile KC, Smith SG, et al: Intimate partner violence surveillance: uniform definitions and
recommended data elements. Version 2.0, 2015. Available at:
www.cdc.gov/violenceprevention/pdf/intimatepartnerviolence.pdf. Accessed October 9, 2019
Brown SA, Seifert SA, Rayburn WF: Management of envenomations during pregnancy. Clin Toxicol
51:3, 2013
Cahill AG, Bastek JA, Stamilio DM, et al: Minor trauma in pregnancy—is the evaluation unwarranted?
Am J Obstet Gynecol 198:208.e1, 2008
Caironi P, Tognoni G, Masson S, et al: Albumin replacement in patients with severe sepsis or septic
shock. N Engl J Med 370(15):1412, 2014
Callaghan WM, Creanga AA, Kuklina EV: Severe maternal morbidity among delivery and postpartum
hospitalizations in the United States. Obstet Gynecol 120(5):1029, 2012

Cecconi M, Evans L, Levy M, et al: Sepsis and septic shock. Lancet 392(10141):75, 2018
Celli BR: Mechanical ventilatory support. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL (eds): Harrison’s
Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2018, p 2035
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Sexually transmitted diseases treatment guidelines, 2015.
MMWR 64(3):1, 2015
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Updated guidelines for antiretroviral postexposure
prophylaxis after sexual, injection drug use, or other nonoccupational exposure to HIV-United States,
2016. MMWR 65:458, 2016
Chantry AA, Deneux-Tharaux C, Bonnet MP, et al: Pregnancy-related ICU admissions in France:
trends in rate and severity, 2006–2009. Crit Care Med 43:78, 2015
Chebbo A, Tan S, Kassis C, et al: Maternal sepsis and septic shock. Crit Care Clin 32(1):119, 2016
Chen AX, Simpson SQ, Pallin DJ: Sepsis guidelines. N Engl J Med 380(14):1369, 2019
Chisholm CA, Bullock L, Ferguson JEJ II, et al: Intimate partner violence and pregnancy: epidemiology
and impact. Am J Obstet Gynecol 217(2):141, 2017
Clark SL, Cotton DB, Hankins GD, et al: Critical Care Obstetrics, 3rd ed. Boston, Blackwell Science,
1997
Clark SL, Cotton DB, Lee W, et al: Central hemodynamic assessment of normal term pregnancy. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 161:1439, 1989
Clifford C, Mhatre M, Craigo S: Successful use of extracorporeal membrane oxygenation for status
asthmaticus in a woman with a periviable pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 132(4):1007, 2018
Close A, Gimovsky A, Macri C: Adult respiratory distress disorders due to Legionnaires disease in
pregnancy: a case report. J Reprod Med 61(1–2):83, 2016
Combes A, Hajage D, Capellier G, et al: Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation for severe acute
respiratory distress syndrome. N Engl J Med 378(21):1965, 2018
Connolly AM, Katz VL, Bash KL, et al: Trauma and pregnancy. Am J Perinatol 14:331, 1997
Correia-Sa I, Marques M, Horta R, et al: Experience in management of burn injury during pregnancy in
a burn unit. J Burn Care Res 42:232, 2021
Cox TR, Crimmins SD, Shannon AM, et al: Liver lacerations as a complication of CPR during
pregnancy. Resuscitation 122:121, 2018
Crosby WM, Snyder RG, Snow CC, et al: Impact injuries in pregnancy, 1. Experimental studies. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 101:100, 1968
Cunningham FG, Byrne JJ, Nelson DB: Peripartum cardiomyopathy. Obstet Gynecol 133(1):167, 2019
Cunningham FG, Lucas MJ, Hankins GD: Pulmonary injury complicating antepartum pyelonephritis. Am
J Obstet Gynecol 156:797, 1987
Cunningham FG, Nelson DB: Disseminated intravascular coagulation syndromes in obstetrics. Obstet
Gynecol 126:999, 2015
Del Frari B, Pulzl P, Schoeller T, et al: Pregnancy as a tissue expander in the correction of a scar
deformity. Am J Obstet Gynecol 190:579, 2004
Dellinger RP, Levy MM, Rhodes A, et al: Surviving Sepsis Campaign: international guidelines for
management of severe sepsis and septic shock: 2012. Crit Care Med 41(580), 2013
Dennis AT, Solnordal CB: Acute pulmonary oedema in pregnant women. Anaesthesia 67(6):646, 2012
Desai P, Suk M: Orthopedic trauma in pregnancy. Am J Orthop 36:E160, 2007
Deshpande NA, Kucirka LM, Smith RN, et al: Pregnant trauma victims experience nearly 2-fold higher
mortality compared to their nonpregnant counterparts. Am J Obstet Gynecol 217(5):590.e1, 2017
Duarte AG: ARDS in pregnancy. Clin Obstet Gynecol 57(4):862, 2014

Edwards SE, Grobman WA, Lappen JR, et al: Modified obstetric early warning scoring systems
(MOEWS): validating the diagnostic performance for severe sepsis in women with chorioamnionitis.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 212(4):536.e1, 2015
Einarson A, Bailey B, Inocencion G, et al: Accidental electric shock in pregnancy: a prospective cohort
study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 176:678, 1997
El Kady D, Gilbert WM, Xing G, et al: Maternal and neonatal outcomes of assaults during pregnancy.
Obstet Gynecol 105:357, 2005
Ellingsen CL, Eggebo TM, Lexow K: Amniotic fluid embolism after blunt abdominal trauma.
Resuscitation 75(1):180, 2007
Ende H, Varelmann D: Respiratory considerations including airway and ventilation issues in critical care
obstetric patients. Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am 43(4):699, 2016
Eschenbach DA: Treating spontaneous and induced septic abortions. Obstet Gynecol 125(5):1042, 2015
Fan E, Brodie D, Slutsky AS: Acute respiratory distress syndrome: advances in diagnosis and treatment.
JAMA 319(7):698, 2018
Fatovich DM: Electric shock in pregnancy. J Emerg Med 11:175, 1993
Friedman AM, Ananth CV, Huang Y, et al: Hospital delivery volume, severe obstetrical morbidity, and
failure to rescue. Am J Obstet Gynecol 215(6):795.e1, 2016
Fuchs A, McLaren R Jr, Saunders P, et al: Human metapneumovirus infection and acute respiratory
distress syndrome during pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 130(3):630, 2017
Gaffney A: Critical care in pregnancy—is it different? Semin Perinatol 38(6):329, 2014
Gallup DG, Freedman MA, Meguiar RV, et al: Necrotizing fasciitis in gynecologic and obstetric patients:
a surgical emergency. Am J Obstet Gynecol 187:305, 2002
Gandhi S, Sun D, Park AL, et al: The Pulmonary Edema Preeclampsia Evaluation (PEPE) Study. J
Obstet Gynaecol 36(12):1065, 2014
García Gutiérrez JJ, Meléndez J, Torrero JV, et al: Lightning injuries in a pregnant woman: a case report
and review of the literature. Burns 31:1045, 2005
Gherman RB, Chauhan SP: Placental abruption and fetal intraventricular hemorrhage after airbag
deployment: a case report. J Reprod Med 59(9–10):501, 2014
Ghosh N, Henderson JA, Kim HG, et al: Rattlesnake envenomation in the third trimester of pregnancy.
Obstet Gynecol 132(3):682, 2018
Globevnik Vilikonja V, Lučovnik M, Premru Sršen T, et al: Violence before pregnancy and the risk of
violence during pregnancy. J Perinat Med 46(1):29, 2018
Greco PS, Day LJ, Pearlman MD: Guidance for evaluation and management of blunt abdominal trauma
in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 134:1343, 2019
Grobman WA, Bailit JL, Rice MM, et al: Can differences in obstetric outcomes be explained by
differences in the care provided? The MFMU Network APEX study. Am J Obstet Gynecol
21(2):147e.1, 2014
Guntupalli KK, Hall N, Karnard DR, et al: Critical illness in pregnancy: part I: an approach to a pregnant
patient in the ICU and common obstetric disorders. Chest 148(4):1093, 2015a
Guntupalli KK, Karnad DR, Bandi V, et al: Critical illness in pregnancy: part II: common medical
conditions complicating pregnancy and puerperium. Chest 148(5):1333, 2015b
Hahn CK, Gilmore AK, Aguayo RO, et al: Perinatal intimate partner violence. Obstet Gynecol Clin
North Am 45(3):535, 2018
Hankins GD, Wendel GD, Leveno KJ, et al: Myocardial infarction during pregnancy. A review. Obstet
Gynecol 65:139, 1985

Hawkins JS, Casey BM, Minei J, et al: Outcomes after trauma in pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol
197:S92, 2007
He F, Li RR, Liu PS, et al: Maternal cardiac arrest: a retrospective analysis. BJOG 128:1200, 2021
Herrera C, Meehan R, Podduturi V, et al: Maternal death due to Clostridium novyi in an injection drug
user. Obstet Gynecol 128(4):876, 2016
Herridge MS, Cheung AM, Tansey CM, et al: One-year outcomes in survivors of the acute respiratory
distress syndrome. N Engl J Med 348:683, 2003
Herridge MS, Tansey CM, Matté A, et al: Functional disability 5 years after acute respiratory distress
syndrome. N Engl J Med 364(14):1293, 2011
Higgins SD, Garite TJ: Late abruptio placentae in trauma patients: implications for monitoring. Obstet
Gynecol 63:10S, 1984
Holmes S, Kirkpatrick IDC, Zelop CM, et al: MRI evaluation of maternal cardiac displacement in
pregnancy: implications for cardiopulmonary resuscitation. Am J Obstet Gynecol 213:401.e1, 2015
Holst LB, Haase N, Wetterslev J, et al: Lower versus higher hemoglobin threshold for transfusion in
septic shock. N Engl J Med 371(15):1381, 2014
Huls CK, Detlefs C: Trauma in pregnancy. Semin Perinatol 42(1):13, 2018
Itenov TS, Johansen ME, Bestle M, et al: Induced hypothermia in patients with septic shock and
respiratory failure (CASS): a randomised, controlled, open-label trial. Lancet Respir Med 6(3):183,
2018
Jeejeebhoy FM, Zelop CM, Lipman S, et al: Cardiac arrest in pregnancy. Circulation 132(18):1747, 2015
Jenkins TM, Troiano NH, Graves CR, et al: Mechanical ventilation in an obstetric population:
characteristics and delivery rates. Am J Obstet Gynecol 188:439, 2003
Jessup M, Brozena S: Heart failure. N Engl J Med 348:2007, 2003
Kadooka M, Kato H, Kato A, et al: Effects of neonatal hemoglobin concentration on long-term outcome
of infants affected by fetomaternal hemorrhage. Early Hum Dev 90(9):431, 2014
Kaiser JE, Bakian AV, Silver RM, et al: Clinical variables associated with adverse maternal outcomes in
puerperal group A streptococci infection. Obstet Gynecol 132(1):179, 2018
Karimi H, Momeni M, Momeni M, et al: Burn injuries during pregnancy in Iran. Int J Gynaecol Obstet
104(2):132, 2009
Katz V, Balderston K, DeFreest M: Perimortem cesarean delivery: were our assumptions correct? Am
J Obstet Gynecol 192:1916, 2005
Katz VL: Perimortem cesarean delivery: its role in maternal mortality. Semin Perinatol 36(1):68, 2012
Kenchaiah S, Evans JC, Levy D, et al: Obesity and the risk of heart failure. N Engl J Med 347:305,
2002
Kendle AM, Salemi JL, Tanner JP, et al: Delivery-associated sepsis: trends in prevalence and mortality.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 220(4):391.e1, 2019
Kettel LM, Branch DW, Scott JR: Occult placental abruption after maternal trauma. Obstet Gynecol
71:449, 1988
Kidson KM, Henderson WR, Hutcheon JA: Case fatality and adverse outcomes are reduced in
pregnant women with severe sepsis or septic shock compared with age-matched comorbid-matched
nonpregnant women. Crit Care Med 46(11):1775, 2018
Kilpatrick SJ, Abreo A, Gould J, et al: Confirmed severe maternal morbidity is associated with high rate
of preterm. Am J Obstet Gynecol 215(2):233.e1, 2016
Klevens RM, Morrison MA, Nadle J, et al: Invasive methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
infections in the United States. JAMA 298 (15):1763, 2007

Kopelman TR, Bogert JN, Walters JW, et al: Computed tomographic imaging interpretation improves
fetal outcomes after maternal trauma. J Trauma Acute Care Surg 81(6):1131, 2016
Kopelman TR, Manriquez NE, Gridley M, et al: The ability of computed tomography to diagnose
placental abruption in the trauma patient. J Trauma Acute Care Surg 74(1):236, 2013
Kraft K, Graf M, Karch M, et al: Takotsubo syndrome after cardiopulmonary resuscitation during
emergency cesarean delivery. Obstet Gynecol 129(3):521, 2017
Krishnan S, Schmidt GA: Acute right ventricular dysfunction: real-time management with
echocardiography. Chest 147(3):835, 2015
La Rosa M, Loaiza S, Zambrano MA, et al: Trauma in pregnancy. Clin Obstet Gynecol 63(2):447, 2020
Lapinsky SE, Rojas-Suarez JA, Crozier TM, et al: Mechanical ventilation in critically-ill pregnant
women: a case series. Int J Obstet Anesth 24:323, 2015
Lappen JR, Keene M, Lore M, et al: Existing models fail to predict sepsis in an obstetric population with
intrauterine infection. Am J Obstet Gynecol 203(6):537.e1, 2010
Leggon RE, Wood GC, Indeck MC: Pelvic fractures in pregnancy: factors influencing maternal and fetal
outcomes. J Trauma 53:796, 2002
Lei C, Badowski NJ, Auerbach PS, et al: Disorders caused by venomous snakebites and marine animal
exposures. In Kasper DL, Fauci AS, Hauser SL, et al (eds): Harrison’s Principles of Internal
Medicine, 19th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2015, p 2736
Leonard A, Wright A, Saavedra-Campos M, et al: Sever group A streptococcal infections in mothers
and their newborns in London and the South East, 2010–2016: assessment of risk and audit of public
health management. BJOG 126(1):44, 2019
Linden JA: Care of the adult patient after sexual assault. N Engl J Med 365(9):834, 2011
Lipman S, Cohen S, Einav S, et al: The Society for Obstetric Anesthesia and Perinatology consensus
statement on the management of cardiac arrest in pregnancy. Anesth Analg 118(5):1003, 2014
Liu C, Sun W, Wang C, et al: Delivery during extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) support
of pregnant woman with severe respiratory distress syndrome caused by influenza: a case report
and review of the literature. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 32(15):2570, 2019
Mabrouk AR, el-Feky AE: Burns during pregnancy: a gloomy outcome. Burns 23:596, 1977
MacArthur B, Foley M, Gray K, et al: Trauma in pregnancy: a comprehensive approach to the mother
and fetus. Am J Obstet Gynecol 220(5):465, 2019
Magder S: Invasive hemodynamic monitoring. Crit Care Clin 31(1):67, 2015
Maghsoudi H, Samnia R, Garadaghi A, et al: Burns in pregnancy. Burns 32:246, 2006
Mallampalli A, Hanania A, Guntupalli KK: Acute lung injury and acute respiratory distress syndrome. In
Belfort MA, Saade GR, Foley MR, et al (eds): Critical Care Obstetrics, 5th ed. Hoboken, WileyBlackwell, 2010, p 338
Marik PE: The role of glucocorticoids as adjunctive treatment for sepsis in the modern era. Lancet
Respir Med 6(10):793, 2018
Martin L, Derwall M, Al Zoubi S, et al: The SEPTIC HEART current understanding of molecular
mechanisms and clinical implications. Chest 155(2):427, 2019
Mason KL, Aronoff DM: Postpartum group A Streptococcus sepsis and maternal immunology. Am J
Reprod Immunol 67(2):91, 2012
Matsushita H, Harada A, Sato T, et al: Fetal intracranial injuries following motor vehicle accidents with
airbag deployment. J Obstet Gynaecol Res 40(2):599, 2014
Matthay MA: Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation for severe acute respiratory distress syndrome. N
Engl J Med 379(9):884, 2018
Mattox KL, Goetzl L: Trauma in pregnancy. Crit Care Med 33:S385, 2005

Mendez-Figueroa H, Rouse DJ: Trauma in pregnancy. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et
al (eds): Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, McGraw-Hill
Education, 2017, p. 276
McLaughlin K, Wright SP, Kingdom JC, et al: Clinical validation of non-invasive cardiac output
monitoring in healthy pregnant women. J Obstet Gynaecol Can 39(11):1008, 2017
Mhyre JM, Tsen LC, Einav S, et al: Cardiac arrest during hospitalization for delivery in the United
States, 1998–2011. Anesthesiology 120(4):810, 2014
Miller E, McCaw B: Intimate partner violence. N Engl J Med 380(9):850, 2019
Mitsukawa N, Saiga A, Satoh K: Protocol of surgical indications for scar contracture release before
childbirth: women with severe abdominal scars after burn injuries. J Plast Surg Hand Surg 49(1):32,
2015
Moellering RC Jr, Abbott GF, Ferraro MJ: Case 2–2011: a 30-year-old woman with shock after
treatment for a furuncle. N Engl J Med 364(3):266, 2011
Muench M, Baschat A, Kush M, et al: Maternal fetal hemorrhage of greater than or equal to 0.1
percent predicts preterm labor in blunt maternal trauma. Am J Obstet Gynecol 189:S119, 2003
Muench MV, Baschat AA, Reddy UM, et al: Kleihauer-Betke testing is important in all cases of
maternal trauma. J Trauma 57:1094, 2004
Myburgh JA, Finfer S, Bellomo R, et al: Hydroxyethyl starch or saline for fluid resuscitation in intensive
care. N Engl J Med 367(20):1901, 2012
Nair P, Davies AR, Beca J, et al: Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation for severe ARDS in pregnant
and postpartum women during the 2009 H1N1 pandemic. Intensive Care Med 37(4):648, 2011
Nasraway SA, Cohen IL, Dennis RC, et al: Guidelines on admission and discharge for adult
intermediate care units. Crit Care Med 26(3):607, 1998
National Institutes of Health: Critical Care Medicine Consensus Conference. JAMA 250:798, 1983
Nelson DB, Stewart RD, Matulevicius SA, et al: The effects of maternal position and habitus on
maternal cardiovascular parameters as measured by cardiac magnetic resonance. Am J Perinatol
32:1318, 2015
O’Dwyer SL, Gupta M, Anthony J: Pulmonary edema in pregnancy and the puerperium: a cohort study
of 53 cases. J Perinat Med 43:675, 2015
Pacheco LD, Saade GR, Hankins GD: Severe sepsis during pregnancy. Clin Obstet Gynecol 57(4):827,
2014
Pachtman S, Koenig S, Meirowitz N: Detecting pulmonary edema in obstetric patients through point-ofcare lung ultrasonography. Obstet Gynecol 129(3):525, 2017
Padilla C, Markwei M, Easter SR, et al: Critical care in obstetrics: a strategy for addressing maternal
mortality. Am J Obstet Gynecol 224:567, 2021
Pak LL, Reece EA, Chan L: Is adverse pregnancy outcome predictable after blunt abdominal trauma?
Am J Obstet Gynecol 179:1140, 1998
Palladino CL, Singh V, Campbell J, et al: Homicide and suicide during the perinatal period. Obstet
Gynecol 118(5):1056, 2011
Pandharipande PP, Girad TD, Jackson A, et al: Long-term cognitive impairment after critical illness. N
Engl J Med 369:1306, 2013
Pastor-Moreno G, Ruiz-Perez I, Henares-Montiel J, et al: Intimate partner violence during pregnancy
and risk of fetal and neonatal death: a metaanalysis with socioeconomic context indicators. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 222(2):123, 2020
Pathan N, Hemingway CA, Alizadeh AA, et al: Role of interleukin 6 in myocardial dysfunction of
meningococcal septic shock. Lancet 363:203, 2004

Pearlman MD, Klinch KD, Flannagan CAC: Fetal outcome in motor-vehicle crashes: effects of crash
characteristics and maternal restraint. Am J Obstet Gynecol 198(4):450.e1, 2008
Pearlman MD, Tintinalli JE, Lorenz RP: A prospective controlled study of outcome after trauma during
pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 162:1502, 1990
Petersen EE, Davis NL, Goodman D, et al: Vital signs: pregnancy-related deaths, United States, 2011–
2015, and strategies for prevention, 13 states, 2013–2017. MMWR 68:423, 2019
Perner A, Naase N, Guttormsen, et al: Hydroxyethyl starch 130/0.4 versus Ringer’s acetate in severe
sepsis. N Engl J Med 367(2):124, 2012
Petrone P, Jiménez-Morillas P, Axelrad A, et al: Traumatic injuries to the pregnant patient: a critical
literature review. Eur J Trauma Surg 45(3):383, 2019
Petrone P, Talving P, Browder T, et al: Abdominal injuries in pregnancy: a 155-month study at two level
1 trauma centers. Injury 42(1):47, 2011
Pluymakers C, De Weerdt A, Jacquemyn Y, et al: Amniotic fluid embolism after surgical trauma: two
case reports and review of the literature. Resuscitation 72(2):324, 2007
Pordeus ACB, Katz L, Soares MC, et al: Acute pulmonary edema in a obstetric intensive care unit: a
case series study. Medicine (Baltimore) 97(28):e11508, 2018
PRISM Investigators, Rowan KM, Angus DC, et al: Early, goal-directed therapy for septic shock—a
patient-level meta-analysis. N Engl J Med 376(23):2223, 2017
Qaiser R, Black P: Neurosurgery in pregnancy. Semin Neurol 27:476, 2007
Radosevich MA, Finegold H, Goldfarb W, et al: Anesthetic management of the pregnant burn patient:
excision and grafting to emergency cesarean section. J Clin Anesth 25(7):582, 2013
Ramanathan K, Tan CS, Rycus P, et al: Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation in pregnancy: an analysis
of the extracorporeal life support organization registry. Crit Care Med 48(5):696, 2020
Rayburn W, Smith B, Feller I, et al: Major burns during pregnancy: effects on fetal well-being. Surg
Gynecol Obstet 63:392, 1984
Reis PM, Sander CM, Pearlman MD: Abruptio placentae after auto accidents. A case control study. J
Reprod Med 45:6, 2000
Rode H, Millar AJ, Cywes S, et al: Thermal injury in pregnancy—the neglected tragedy. S Afr Med J
77:346, 1990
Rodgerson JD, Heegaard WG, Plummer D, et al: Emergency department right upper quadrant
ultrasound is associated with a reduced time to diagnosis and treatment of ruptured ectopic
pregnancies. Acad Emerg Med 8(4):331, 2001
Romagano MP, Scorza WE, Lammers SE, et al: Treatment of a pregnant patient in a persistent
vegetative state. Obstet Gynecol 129(1):107, 2017
Rose CH, Faksh A, Traynor KD, et al: Challenging the 4- to 5-minute rule: from perimortem cesarean to
resuscitative hysterotomy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 213(5):653, 2015
Rowe TF, Lafayette S, Cox S: An unusual fetal complication of traumatic uterine rupture. J Emerg Med
14:173, 1996
Rush B, Martinka P, Kilb B, et al: Acute respiratory distress syndrome in pregnant women. Obstet
Gynecol 129(3):530, 2017
Saad AF, Rahman M, Maybauer DM, et al: Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation in pregnant and
postpartum women with H1N1-related acute respiratory distress syndrome: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. Obstet Gynecol 127(2):247, 2016
Sadro CT, Zins AM, Debiec K, et al: Case report: lethal fetal head injury and placental abruption in a
pregnant trauma patient. Emerg Radiol 19(2):175, 2012

Sakamoto J, Michels C, Eisfelder B, et al: Trauma in pregnancy. Emerg Med Clin North Am 37(2):317,
2019
Saphier NB, Kopelman TR: Traumatic Abruptio Placenta Scale (TAPS): a proposed grading system of
computed tomography evaluation of placental abruption in the trauma patient. Emerg Radiol
21(1):17, 2014
Satin AJ, Ramin JM, Paicurich J, et al: The prevalence of sexual assault: a survey of 2404 puerperal
women. Am J Obstet Gynecol 167:973, 1992
Schiff MA, Holt VL: Pregnancy outcomes following hospitalization for motor vehicle crashes in
Washington State from 1989 to 2001. Am J Epidemiol 161:503, 2005
Schiff MA, Holt VL, Daling JR: Maternal and infant outcomes after injury during pregnancy in
Washington state from 1989 to 1997. J Trauma 53:939, 2002
Schiff MA, Mack CD, Kaufman RP, et al: The effect of air bags on pregnancy outcomes in Washington
state: 2002–2005. Obstet Gynecol 115(1):85, 2010
Schuster M, Becker N, Mackeen AD: Blunt trauma in pregnancy. Abstract No. 363. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 214:S203, 2016
Schwaiberger D, Karcz M, Menk M, et al: Respiratory failure and mechanical ventilation in the
pregnant patient. Crit Care Clin 32(1):85, 2016
Seymour CW, Angus DC: Sepsis and septic shock. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al (eds):
Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2018, p
2044
Seymour CW, Gesten F, Prescott HC, et al: Time to treatment and mortality during mandated
emergency care for sepsis. N Engl J Med 376(23):2235, 2017
Sibai BM, Viteri OA: Diabetic ketoacidosis in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 123:167, 2014
Silverman JG, Decker MR, Reed E, et al: Intimate partner violence victimization prior to and during
pregnancy among women residing in 26 U.S. states: associations with maternal and neonatal death.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 195:140, 2006
Sinha R, Arachchi A, Lee P, et al: Fournier gangrene in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 125(6):1342, 2015
Small MJ, James AH, Kershaw T, et al: Near-miss maternal mortality: cardiac dysfunction as the
principal cause of obstetric intensive care unit admissions. Obstet Gynecol 119(2 Pt 1):250, 2012
Snyder CC, Barton JR, Habli M, et al: Severe sepsis and septic shock in pregnancy: indications for
delivery and maternal and perinatal outcomes. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 26(5):503, 2013
Soar J, Becker LB, Berg KM, et al: Cardiopulmonary resuscitation in special circumstances. Lancet
298:1257, 2021
Society of Critical Care Medicine: Guidelines for intensive care unit admission, discharge, and triage.
Crit Care Med 27(3):633, 1999
Society of Critical Care Medicine: Recommendations for intensive care unit admission and discharge
criteria. Crit Care Med 16(8):807, 1988
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine (SMFM), Pacheco LD, Saade G, et al: Amniotic fluid embolism:
diagnosis and management. Am J Obstet Gynecol 215(2):B16, 2016
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine (SMFM), Plante LA, Pacheco LD, et al: SMFM Consult Series
#47: sepsis during pregnancy and the puerperium. Am J Obstet Gynecol 220(4):B2, 2019
Soper DE, Lee SI, Kim JY, et al: Case 35–2011: a 33-year-old woman with postpartum leukocytosis and
gram-positive bacteremia. N Engl J Med 365(20):1916, 2011
Sparic R, Berisavac I, Kadija S, et al: Accidental electrocution in pregnancy. Int J Gynaecol Obstet
126(2):181, 2014

Steinack C, Lenherr R, Hendra H, et al: The use of life-saving extracorporeal membrane oxygenation
(ECMO) for pregnant woman with status asthmaticus. J Asthma 54(1):84, 2017
Stevens TA, Swaim LS, Clark SL: The role of obstetrics/gynecology hospitalists in reducing maternal
mortality. Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am 42(3):463, 2015
Stone IK: Trauma in the obstetric patient. Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am 26:459, 1999
Subrevilla LA, Cassinelli MT, Carcelen A, et al: Human fetal and maternal oxygen tension and acidbase status during delivery at high altitude. Am J Obstet Gynecol 111:1111, 1971
Suffredini AF: A role for hydrocortisone therapy in septic shock? N Engl J Med 378(9):860, 2018
Suffredini AF, Fromm RE, Parker MM, et al: The cardiovascular response of normal humans to the
administration of endotoxin. N Engl J Med 321(5):280, 1989
Szabo G, Molvarec A, Nagy B, et al: Increased B-type natriuretic peptide levels in early-onset versus
late-onset preeclampsia. Clin Chem Lab Med 52:281, 2014
Takehana CS, Kang YS: Acute traumatic gonadal vein rupture in a pregnant patient involved in a major
motor vehicle collision. Emerg Radiol 18(4):349, 2011
Thiele RH, Bartels K, Gan TJ: Cardiac output monitoring: a contemporary assessment and review. Crit
Care Med 43(1):177, 2015
Thornton CE, von Dadelszen P, Makris A, et al: Acute pulmonary oedema as a complication of
hypertension during pregnancy. Hypertens Pregnancy 30(2):169, 2011
Tihtonen KM, Kööbi T, Vuolteenaho O, et al: Natriuretic peptides and hemodynamics in preeclampsia.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 196:328, 2007
Towery R, English TP, Wisner D: Evaluation of pregnant women after blunt injury. J Trauma 35:731,
1993
Tsuei BJ: Assessment of the pregnant trauma patient. Injury Int J Care Injured 37:367, 2006
Uhlig C, Silva PL, Deckert S, et al: Albumin versus crystalloid solutions in patients with the acute
respiratory distress syndrome: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Crit Care 18(1):R10, 2014
Vaught AJ, Kovell LC, Szymanski LM, et al: Acute cardiac effects of severe pre-eclampsia. J Am Coll
Cardiol 72(1):1, 2018
Venkatesh B, Finfer S, Cohen J, et al: Adjunctive glucocorticoid therapy in patients with septic shock. N
Engl J Med 378(9):797, 2018
Vincent JL, De Backer D: Circulatory shock. N Engl J Med 369:1726, 2013
Vrees RA: Evaluation and management of female victims of sexual assault. Obstet Gynecol Surv
72(1):39, 2017
Webster CM, Manuck T: Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation in pregnant and postpartum women: a
ten-year cohort. Am J Obstet Gynecol 220(1):S545, 2019
Weir LF, Pierce BT, Vazquez JO: Complete fetal transection after a motor vehicle collision. Obstet
Gynecol 111(2):530, 2008
Weiss HB, Songer TJ, Fabio A: Fetal deaths related to maternal injury. JAMA 286:1863, 2001
Wen T, Syeda SK, Kern-Goldberger A, et al: Socioeconomic and racial disparities in intesive care level
utilization in a national sample. Abst. No. 686 Am J Obstet Gynecol 222:s434, 2020
Wiedemann HP, Wheeler AP, Bernard GR, et al: Comparison of two fluid-management strategies in
acute lung injury. N Engl J Med 354(24):2213, 2006
Wilson MS, Ingersoll M, Meschter E, et al: Evaluating the side effects of treatment for preterm labor in
a center that uses “high-dose” magnesium sulfate. Am J Perinatol 31(8):711, 2014
Xiao C, Gangal M, Abenhaim HA: Effect of magnesium sulfate and nifedipine on the risk of developing
pulmonary edema in preterm births. J Perinat Med 42(5):585, 2014

Yamada T, Yamada T, Yamamura MK, et al: Invasive group A streptococcal infection in pregnancy. J
Infect 60(6):417, 2010
Ylagan MV, Trivedi N, Basu T, et al: Radiation exposure in the pregnant trauma patient: implications for
fetal risk counseling. Abstract No. 320. Am J Obstet Gynecol 199(6):S100, 2008
Yost NP, Bloom SL, McIntire DD, et al: A prospective observational study of domestic violence during
pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 106(1):61, 2005
Zeeman GG: Obstetric critical care: a blueprint for improved outcomes. Crit Care Med 34:S208, 2006
Zeeman GG, Wendel GD Jr, Cunningham FG: A blueprint for obstetric critical care. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 188:532, 2003
Zelop CM, Einav S, Mhyre JM, et al: Cardiac arrest during pregnancy: ongoing clinical conundrum. Am
J Obstet Gynecol 219(1):52, 2018

CHAPTER 51

Obesity

GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
PREGNANCY AND OBESITY
ANTEPARTUM MANAGEMENT
INTRAPARTUM MANAGEMENT
BARIATRIC SURGERY
REFERENCES
Extensive weight gain is a major health problem today in many affluent
societies. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) (2020)
reported the prevalence in the United States during 2017 to 2018 to be 42
percent among all adults. The adverse health aspects of obesity are
staggering and include increased risks for type 2 diabetes, heart disease,
hypertension, and osteoarthritis. Importantly, obese women and their fetuses
are predisposed to numerous pregnancy-related complications and to longterm morbidity and mortality.

GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
■ Definitions and Prevalence
Of systems to classify obesity, the body mass index (BMI), also known as the
Quetelet index, is most often used. The BMI is calculated as weight in

kilograms divided by the square of the height in meters (kg/m2). Calculated
BMI values are available in various chart and graphic forms (Fig. 51-1). The
National Institutes of Health (2000) classifies adults according to BMI as
follows: normal is 18.5 to 24.9 kg/m2, overweight is 25 to 29.9 kg/m2, and
obese is ≥30 kg/m2. Obesity is further divided into: class 1 is 30 to 34.9
kg/m2, class 2 is 35 to 39.9 kg/m2, and class 3 is ≥40 kg/m2. Class 3 obesity
is often referred to as morbid obesity, and supermorbid obesity describes a
BMI ≥50 kg/m2.

FIGURE 51-1 Chart for estimating body mass index (BMI). To find the BMI category for a particular
subject, locate the point at which the height and weight intersect.

Using these definitions, from 2015 to 2016 in the United States, among
girls and women, the prevalence of obesity rose with age and varied among
ethnicities (Fig. 51-2) (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2020).

Overall, severity also advances with increasing poverty. Last, a genetic
predisposition has been identified (Locke, 2015; Shungin, 2015).

FIGURE 51-2 Prevalence of obesity in the United States by race: United States 2015–2016.

■ Adipose Pathophysiology
Fat tissue is much more complex than merely its energy storage function.
Many fat tissue cells communicate with all other tissues via endocrine and
paracrine factors, which are cytokines specifically termed adipokines,
lipokines, and exosomal microRNAs (Scheja, 2019). Some of these with
metabolic functions include adiponectin, leptin, tumor necrosis factor α
(TNF-α), interleukin 6 (IL-6), resistin, visfatin, apelin, vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF), lipoprotein lipase, and insulin-like growth factor.
Adiponectin is a principal adipokine. It enhances insulin sensitivity, blocks
hepatic glucose release, and has cardioprotective effects on circulating
plasma lipids. An adiponectin deficit is linked with diabetes, hypertension,
endothelial cell activation, and cardiovascular disease.
Cytokines that result in insulin resistance are leptin, resistin, TNF-α, and
IL-6, and higher levels of these are found during pregnancy. Indeed,

adipokines, especially the inflammatory cytokines, may be the primary
stimulant of insulin resistance (Yang, 2016). Conversely, adiponectin has
antiinflammatory and insulin-sensitizing roles and is negatively regulated by
fat mass. Perivascular adipose tissue also serves as a signaling mediator in
regulating vascular function (Ahmadieh, 2020). Placental production of these
adipokines is also important (Sartori, 2016) (Chap. 5, p. 99).

■ Metabolic Syndrome
Given its multifaceted endocrine and paracrine functions, the detrimental
effects of excessive adipose tissue are not surprising (Gilmore, 2015).
Obesity interacts with inherited factors to cause insulin resistance. This
resistance is characterized by impaired glucose metabolism and a
predisposition to type 2 diabetes. Insulin resistance also causes several
subclinical abnormalities that predispose to cardiovascular disease and
accelerate its onset. The most important among these are type 2 diabetes,
dyslipidemia, and hypertension, which are constituents of the metabolic
syndrome.
Criteria to define this syndrome are found in Table 51-1. Waist
circumference is the preferred measurement for screening, but any three of
five factors listed are sufficient to diagnose the metabolic syndrome.
Notably, most patients with type 2 diabetes have metabolic syndrome
according to these criteria. Also, obese women with hypertension typically
demonstrate elevated plasma insulin levels.
TABLE 51-1. Criteria for Diagnosis of the Metabolic Syndrome

The National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) of the
CDC documented an overall prevalence of 34 percent for the metabolic
syndrome in the United States by 2012 (Moore, 2017). As expected, the
prevalence rose with age. It was 20 percent for those aged 18 to 29 years and
was 36 percent for those aged 30 to 49 years.

■ Nonalcoholic Fatty Liver Disease
Generally speaking, visceral adiposity correlates with hepatic fat content
(Cornier, 2011). With obesity, excessive fat accumulates in the liver and is
termed hepatic steatosis. This is also called nonalcoholic fatty liver
disease (NAFLD). In persons with the metabolic syndrome, steatosis can
progress to nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) and then potentially to
cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma. It is the major cause of cirrhosis and
liver cancer, and annual medical costs of NAFLD in the United States exceed
$100 billion (Diehl, 2017). Moreover, NAFLD is strongly associated with
cardiovascular disease (Targher, 2016). These interactions are explored
further in Chapter 58 (p. 1040).

■ Obesity-associated Morbidity

Obese individuals suffer well-known consequences such as glucose
intolerance, hypertension, dyslipidemia, and metabolic syndrome.
Furthermore, metabolic syndrome and obesity are linked with cardiovascular
disease, including myocardial infarction, atrial fibrillation, heart failure, and
stroke (Koliaki, 2019). Excessive adiposity raises blood pressure and
accounts for up to 75 percent of primary hypertension (Hall, 2019). Insulin
resistance and metabolic syndrome cause structural cerebral changes in the
hippocampus and lower executive functioning and memory in adults
(Kullman, 2016). And cytokine-induced osteoarthritis has long been linked to
obesity (Tu, 2019).
Because of the foregoing, it is not surprising that obesity is associated
with higher rates of all-cause early mortality. Cardiovascular mortality data
from 19 prospective studies are shown in Figure 51-3 (Gonzalez, 2010). In
these and other studies, mortality risk from cardiovascular disease and
cancer grew proportionally with increasing BMI. However, an obesity
paradox—whereby certain groups actually derive a survival advantage from
being obese—is hypothesized (Hainer, 2013). Despite this, the health
benefits of weight normalization are well documented (Cheung, 2017).

FIGURE 51-3 Estimated hazard ratios (95% CI) for death due to cardiovascular disease according to
body mass index among 1.46 million white adult men and women.

■ Obesity Treatment
Weight loss is tremendously difficult. If achieved, long-term maintenance
poses equally daunting challenges. Obstetrician-gynecologists are
encouraged to aid weight loss in obese adult women. Successful approaches
include behavioral, pharmacological, and surgical techniques or a
combination of these (Dixon, 2016; Heymsfield, 2017). Dietary changes and
exercise reduce weight and rates of the associated metabolic syndrome
(Garvey, 2016; Martin, 2018). When used in conjunction with bariatric
surgery, glucose control in those with type 2 diabetes is improved. However,
both surgical and medical interventions are associated with appreciable
long-term failure rates. Indeed, the failure rate is 50 percent in patients with
diabetes undergoing bariatric surgery (Mingrone, 2015).

PREGNANCY AND OBESITY
Obese women unequivocally have reproductive disadvantages (Lainez,
2019). This translates into difficulty in achieving pregnancy, early and
recurrent pregnancy loss, preterm delivery, and several obstetrical, medical,
and surgical complications with pregnancy, labor, delivery, and the
puerperium (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2021).
Also, oral contraceptive pill failure and associated thromboembolism may
be more likely. Second-trimester surgical abortion in obese women also
carries an increased complication risk (Mark, 2018). Last, infants—and
later, adult children—of obese mothers have correspondingly higher
morbidity rates (Godfrey, 2017; He, 2020).
Obesity complicating pregnancy has grown substantially in this country.
Our experiences at Parkland Hospital over three epochs are shown in Figure
51-4. Most recently, obese women constitute >60 percent of pregnant
gravidas in our health system.

FIGURE 51-4 Increasing prevalence of obesity during four epochs in pregnant women classified at the
time of their first prenatal visit at Parkland Hospital.

■ Maternal Morbidity

For overweight women, higher rates of adverse outcomes complicate
pregnancy. Shown in Table 51-2 are results from five studies including more
than 1 million singleton pregnancies. Although not as magnified as in the
obese cohort, rates of almost all complications are significantly greater in
overweight women than in those with normal BMI.
TABLE 51-2. Adverse Pregnancy Effects in Overweight and Obese Women

For obese women, definitions used in studies of adverse outcomes vary
widely, and BMIs from >30 kg/m2 to >50 kg/m2 have served as thresholds
(Crane, 2013; Pratt, 2020; Stamilio, 2014). In one study, Mariona (2017)
reviewed maternal deaths in Michigan and found that the maternal mortality
rate was nearly fourfold higher in obese women. Women with supermorbid
obesity experience very high rates of maternal and neonatal complications
including preeclampsia, macrosomia, and cesarean delivery, along with
higher rates of neonatal meconium aspiration, ventilator support, and
neonatal death (Marshall, 2014; Smid, 2016). Data from one large study are
shown in Figure 51-5 (Weiss, 2004).

FIGURE 51-5 Incidence of selected pregnancy outcomes in women enrolled in the FASTER (Firstand Second-Trimester Evaluation of Risk) trial according to BMI.

Especially striking are the markedly elevated rates of hypertension and
gestational diabetes. As discussed previously, obesity and the metabolic
syndrome are characterized by insulin resistance, which creates low-grade
inflammation, endothelial activation, and increased sodium reabsorption
(Hall, 2019). These latter effects play a central role in preeclampsia (Chap.
40, p. 691). The overwhelming association between rising maternal BMI and
the incidence of preeclampsia is depicted in Figure 51-6 (HAPO Study
Cooperative Research Group, 2008). The risks for hypertension are highest
in women with a BMI >50 kg/m2 (Pratt, 2020). Similar observations were
reported from a large Canadian study and by the Safe Labor Consortium
(Kim, 2016; Schummers, 2015).

FIGURE 51-6 Hyperglycemia and Adverse Pregnancy Outcome (HAPO) study: frequency of
preeclampsia according to BMI.

Obesity and hypertension are common cofactors in peripartum heart
failure (Cunningham, 2012). Stewart and colleagues (2016) used magnetic
resonance imaging to prospectively study the effect of obesity on cardiac
remodeling in pregnancy. Concentric remodeling, which was considered
abnormal, was greater in overweight or obese women (Fig. 51-7). This,
however, regressed to normal by 3 months postpartum. Triebwasser and
coworkers (2019) found that women with abnormal cardiac remodeling had
a higher incidence of pregnancy-associated hypertensive disorders.

FIGURE 51-7 Geometric changes of ventricular remodeling across pregnancy in obese and normalweight women determined by cardiac MR imaging. LVM = left ventricular mass, LVEDV = left
ventricular end-diastolic volume.

Obesity and gestational diabetes are inextricably linked as shown in
Table 51-2. Their coexistence and associated adverse pregnancy outcomes
are discussed in Chapter 60 (p. 1068). Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease is
associated with several adverse pregnancy outcomes (Chap. 58, p. 1040). In
a cohort of women with NAFLD, risks for preeclampsia, preterm birth, lowbirthweight neonates, cesarean delivery, and gestational diabetes were
elevated (Hagström, 2016). In one prospective study of 476 pregnancies,
first-trimester sonographic evidence of maternal NAFLD was strongly
associated with gestational diabetes (De Souza, 2016a,b). Meyer and
associates (2013) found that overweight and obese gravidas had a higher
proportion of low-density lipoprotein III (LDL-III) compared with that of
normal-weight women. LDL-III predominance is a hallmark of the ectopic
liver fat accumulation that is typical of NAFLD. At Parkland Hospital, we
are now frequently encountering obese gravidas who have NAFLD and
evidence of steatohepatitis manifest by elevated serum hepatic transaminase
levels. In rare cases, liver biopsy is necessary to exclude other causes for
these findings.
Quality-of-life measures also are negatively affected by obesity during
pregnancy (Ruhstaller, 2017). One systematic review found significantly

higher risks of depression in overweight and obese women during and after
pregnancy (Molyneaux, 2014). Obese women were also significantly more
likely to experience anxiety during pregnancy.

■ Perinatal Mortality
Stillbirths are more prevalent as the degree of obesity accrues (Schummers,
2015). In a review of almost 100 studies, obesity was the highest-ranking
modifiable risk factor for stillbirth (Flenady, 2011). In women with
supermorbid obesity compared with normal-weight gravidas, Yao and
associates (2014) found 5.7 and 13.6-fold higher stillbirth rates at 39 and 41
weeks’ gestation, respectively. Remarkably, 25 percent of term stillbirths in
this study involved obese women. Chronic hypertension with superimposed
preeclampsia associated with obesity is one cause of excessive stillbirths.
These fetal deaths may be associated with placental lesions of decidual
arteriopathy and infarctions (Avagliano, 2020).
Evaluating perinatal death rates, Lindam and coworkers (2016) reported
that high maternal BMI in early pregnancy was a risk factor. The risk of
neonatal death also is greater for obese women (Johansson, 2014; Meehan,
2014). Last, one study found that accruing weight between pregnancies is a
risk factor for perinatal mortality, whereas weight loss between pregnancies
for overweight women lowers this risk (Cnattingius, 2016).

■ Perinatal Morbidity
Both fetal and neonatal complication rates are increased in obese women.
Two important and interrelated cofactors that contribute to excessive rates of
perinatal morbidity are chronic hypertension and diabetes, both of which are
associated with maternal obesity. These comorbidities each may play a role
in the higher rates of fetal-growth restriction and indicated preterm birth that
are seen in obese women (Liu, 2019; Tanner, 2020). Perinates of obese
women with preterm prematurely ruptured membranes have a higher
incidence of respiratory complications than those born to normal-weight
women (Lynch, 2020). Pregestational diabetes also raises the birth defect
rate, and gestational diabetes is complicated by excessive numbers of largefor-gestational-age and macrosomic fetuses (Chap. 47, p. 833).

Even when diabetes and hypertension are not considered, the prevalence
of neonatal morbidity is greater in offspring of obese women (Kim, 2016;
Polnaszek, 2018; Schummers, 2015). The propensity for preterm birth may
be related to increased adipokines and cytokines causing chronic
inflammation (Tersigni, 2020). The group from MetroHealth Medical Center
in Cleveland has extensively studied prepregnancy obesity, gestational
weight gain, and diabetes and their relationship to adverse pregnancy
outcomes and to greater newborn weight and fat mass (Catalano, 2015; Ma,
2016; Yang, 2016). Although each of these variables is associated with
larger and more corpulent newborns, prepregnancy BMI and its effect on
inflammation and placental gene expression has the strongest influence on the
prevalence of macrosomic neonates.
Rates of birth defects also are higher with obesity (Auger, 2019). For
neural-tube defects, elevated risks of 1.2-, 1.7-, and 3.1-fold have been
described for overweight, obese, and severely obese women, respectively
(Rasmussen, 2008). The National Birth Defect Prevention Study reported a
correlation between BMI and congenital heart defects (Gilboa, 2010).
However, this may be related to diabetes as a cofactor (Biggio, 2010).
Importantly, obesity degrades the accuracy of obstetrical ultrasound
examination and antepartum identification of birth defects (Adekola, 2015;
Dashe, 2009; Yaqub, 2021).

■ Long-term Offspring Morbidity
Obese women beget obese children, who themselves become obese adults.
Catalano and coworkers (2009) studied offspring at a mean age of 9 years
and found a direct association with maternal prepregnancy obesity and
childhood obesity. They also reported associations with central obesity,
elevated systolic blood pressure, increased insulin resistance, and lipid
abnormalities—all elements of the metabolic syndrome. Reynolds and
associates (2013) reported higher rates of cardiovascular disease and allcause mortality in 37,709 adult offspring of overweight and obese mothers.
Similar cardiometabolic health effects in offspring were echoed by Gaillard
and colleagues (2016). Other data suggest that excessive maternal weight
gain in pregnancy may predict obesity in adult offspring (Lawrence, 2014).
Last, rates of glucose intolerance and metabolic syndrome are higher among
offspring of obese women (Gaillard, 2016).

The potential biological mechanisms of these associations are unclear.
But such studies raise the possibility of fetal programming, that is, the fetal
environment may lead to adverse adult health outcomes. Elucidation is
limited by insufficient data regarding the influence of maternal and genetic
predisposition compared with the diet and activity environment of the infant
and child (Gluck, 2009). The science of epigenetics has provided some
support for the possibility that perturbations of the maternal–fetal
environment can adversely alter postdelivery events (Kitsiou-Tzeli, 2017).

ANTEPARTUM MANAGEMENT
■ Maternal Weight Gain
The Institute of Medicine (2009) has updated its previous maternal weight
gain determinants (Table 10-4, p. 183). For overweight women, weight gain
of 15 to 25 pounds is suggested. For obese women, the Institute recommends
a gain of 11 to 20 pounds. Intuitively, maternal weight must increase
sufficiently to provide for fetal and placental tissue accrual and for amnionic
fluid and maternal blood volume expansion. Thus, maternal weight loss
during pregnancy is discouraged. The American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2021) endorses these guidelines.
It is emphasized that these recommendations were issued without firm
scientific evidence to support them, and their value remains unproven
(Comstock, 2019; Most, 2019). For example, recent studies differ with
respect to the effect of insufficient weight gain for obese women. Bodnar and
colleagues (2016) reported no greater risk for low-birthweight or small-forgestational-age newborns among 47,494 obese women who had inadequate
weight gain during pregnancy. Bogaerts and associates (2015) also found that
even weight loss among obese women did not yield poor fetal growth. In
contrast, however, Hannaford and coworkers (2017) reported that obese
women who gained less than the Institute recommendations were almost three
times more likely to deliver a small-for-gestational-age neonate. Another
study similarly found an almost twofold greater risk of growth-restricted
newborns among obese women who lost weight during pregnancy (Cox
Bauer, 2016).
Excessive gestational weight gain may portend greater risks for the obese
mother. Berggren and coworkers (2016) noted that overweight and obese

women accrued maternal fat with excessive gestational weight gain. From
another analysis, overall higher rates of hypertensive disorders, cesarean
delivery, and fetal overgrowth and lower rates of spontaneous preterm birth
and fetal undergrowth were found among women gaining more than
recommended (Johnson, 2013). However, when analyzed according to BMI
category, significantly higher rates of preeclampsia, cesarean delivery, and
fetal overgrowth were identified among the 1937 overweight women, but not
the 1445 obese women, who gained excess weight. Last, overweight and
obese women have excessive postpartum weight retention (Siegel, 2020).

■ Dietary Intervention
Several dietary interventions can help limit and achieve the weight gain
targets listed in the previous section. Options include lifestyle changes such
as changes in physical activity. In one randomized trial of exercise in 300
overweight women, risks for gestational diabetes were lowered (Wang,
2017). In other trials, however, dietary intervention had no effect on weight
gain (Okasene-Gafa, 2019; Seneviratne, 2016). Also, a Cochrane database
analysis of 11,444 women suggests that lifestyle interventions confer only a
modest reduction in maternal weight gain, and their benefits for fetal
overgrowth, cesarean delivery rate, and adverse neonatal outcome are not
significant (Muktabhant, 2015). Last, metformin treatment for obese pregnant
women does not improve pregnancy outcomes (Dodd, 2018).
Regarding neonatal outcomes, the poor success of lifestyle interventions
during pregnancy has been attributed to their late introduction. In this regard,
it is presumed that early gene expression within the placenta has already
been programmed (Catalano, 2015).

■ Prenatal Care
Close prenatal monitoring detects most early signs of diabetes or
hypertension. Early gestational diabetes screening did not result in less
morbidity compared with standard screening (Harper, 2020). Obstructive
sleep apnea is common in obese women (Dominquez, 2018). Standard
screening tests for fetal anomalies are sufficient, while remembering the
sonographic limitations for fetal anomaly detection in this group. Even so,
ultrasound predicts fetal weight accurately in these women (O’Brien, 2020).

Accurate fetal-growth surveillance in obese women usually requires serial
sonographic assessment. Dude and coworkers (2019) reported that
ultrasound as a detection tool had high specificity but poor sensitivity for
growth restriction and a low positive predictive value for macrosomia.
Antepartum external fetal heart rate monitoring is likewise more difficult.

INTRAPARTUM MANAGEMENT
Obesity poses increased risk for multiple labor or intrapartum complications.
These include postterm pregnancy or labor abnormalities (Carpenter, 2016;
Shenouda, 2020). In one study of 143,519 women, the odds of spontaneous
labor at term in obese women was approximately half that of normal-weight
women (Denison, 2008). In an analysis of more than 5000 parturients,
women with a BMI >30 kg/m2 had a longer duration and slower early
progression of first-stage labor (Norman, 2012). Epidural analgesia
apparently does not affect the length of labor in obese women (Polónia
Valente, 2020).

■ Labor Induction
As shown in Table 51-2, compared with normal-weight women, obese
women are nearly twice as likely to undergo labor induction (Denison,
2008). However, obese women are more likely to experience a failed
induction, and this risk rises with increasing obesity (Kerbage, 2020). The
duration of labor resulting in vaginal delivery lengthens with increasing
maternal BMI (Carlhäll, 2020). In a retrospective analysis of 470 nulliparous
women with a BMI >30 kg/m2, those who underwent labor induction at 39
weeks’ gestation had a greater cesarean delivery rate—26 versus 40 percent
compared with a cohort expectantly managed (Wolfe, 2014). In a study of
485 women with class III obesity, the overall cesarean delivery rate after
failed induction was 49 percent (Paidas Teefey, 2020). The rate was 46
percent for those with a BMI 30–40, 63 percent for a BMI 40–50, and 69
percent for a BMI >60.
Although perhaps not unexpected, these findings have been challenged.
Lee and associates (2016) reviewed statistics from 74,725 deliveries in
obese women and reported that elective induction at 37 to 39 weeks’

gestation was actually associated with a lower cesarean delivery rate.
Additionally, in a secondary analysis of one randomized trial, obese
nulliparas who were randomly assigned to Foley catheter cervical ripening
plus misoprostol for labor induction had a reduced labor duration and lower
rate of cesarean delivery compared with those given solely misoprostol
(Seasely, 2021). These conflicting results highlight the difficulties faced by
obstetricians as they contemplate the seemingly competing interests of the
fetus and the obese mother.

■ Anesthesia Risks
Obese women present anesthesia challenges that include difficult epidural
and spinal analgesia placement and complications from failed or difficult
intubations. Evaluation of gravidas with supermorbid obesity by the
anesthesiologist is recommended during prenatal care or upon arrival to the
labor unit (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019b).
Regional analgesia for morbidly obese women is associated with longer
neuraxial procedure times and more failed placement attempts (Li, 2019).
Importantly, however, spinal analgesia in obese women for cesarean delivery
does not appear to have greater benefits than combined spinal-epidural. One
study comparing single-shot spinal analgesia and combined spinal-epidural
analgesia found that both methods could be placed with equal expediency
and efficacy in morbidly obese gravidas (Ross, 2014).
Obese women who undergo neuraxial analgesia that is complicated by
relative hypotension more frequently have neonates with umbilical artery
cord blood acidemia, which probably stems from delayed delivery. One
study of 572 obese women showed that cord blood pH significantly dropped
and base deficit rose with increasing BMI (Edwards, 2013). The rate of
gases with a pH <7.1 doubled from 3.5 percent for a BMI <25 kg/m2 to 7.1
percent for a BMI ≥40 kg/m2. Anesthetic risks and complications are
discussed in Chapter 25.

■ Cesarean Delivery
As shown in Table 51-2, rates of cesarean delivery are significantly greater
in obese women compared with normal-weight gravidas. In an analysis of

226,958 women, cesarean delivery rates rose significantly for overweight
(34 percent), class I (38 percent), class II (43 percent), and class III (50
percent) obesity (Schummers, 2015). Our experiences at Parkland Hospital
are similar (Fig. 51-8). Moreover, obese women had less composite
morbidity when labor was attempted compared with cesarean delivery
(Gibbs Pickens, 2018; Grasch, 2017). More worrisome is that obese women
also have higher rates of emergency cesarean delivery, and obesity lengthens
times for decision-to-incision and for delivery (Girsen, 2014; Pulman,
2015).

FIGURE 51-8 Cesarean delivery rates in more than 300,000 women according to BMI categories over
a 30-year period at Parkland Hospital.

Discussed in Chapter 31 (p. 577), the incidence of failed trial of labor
after cesarean is higher in obese women (Grasch, 2017; Wilson, 2020).
Women who gain weight between pregnancies also have significantly lower
rates of vaginal birth after cesarean.

■ Surgical Concerns
For cesarean delivery, forethought is given to optimal placement and type of
abdominal incision to provide access to the fetus and to effect the best wound
closure. We prefer a vertical incision in obese women to provide the most

direct access (Fig. 51-9). Others prefer a low transverse abdominal incision,
with or without rostral taping of the pendulous abdomen (Karimyar, 2020;
Lakhi, 2018). Individual differences in maternal body habitus preclude
naming any one approach as superior (Turan, 2016). Some observational
studies have compared wound outcomes associated with vertical and
transverse skin incisions, but results are conflicting as to a superior option
(Karimyar, 2020; Marrs, 2014; Sutton, 2016).

FIGURE 51-9 Abdominal incision for the obese woman. A. Frontal view. The dotted line indicates an
appropriate skin incision for abdominal entry relative to the panniculus. As shown by the uterus in the
background, selection of this periumbilical site permits access to the lower uterine segment. B. Sagittal
view.

The frequency of abdominal wound infections is directly related to BMI.
Conner and associates (2014) found the risk of wound infection is threefold
higher—23 versus 7 percent—in women with supermorbid obesity compared
with nonobese patients. Among women with a BMI >45 kg/m2, reported
wound complication rates range from 14 to 19 percent (Smid, 2015;
Stamilio, 2014). Comorbid diabetes apparently raises this risk (Leth, 2011).
Other studies describe wound complication rates ranging from 2 to >40
percent in obese women (Conner, 2014; Marrs, 2014; Smid, 2015;
Thornburg, 2012).
Several interventions may be preventive. Closure of subcutaneous tissue
when at least 2 cm deep reduces wound complication rates (Tipton, 2011).
Steel staples and subcuticular skin closure produce identical results (Zaki,
2018). Studies have also examined the use of higher doses of perioperative
prophylactic antibiotics. Pharmacokinetic studies indicate that tissue
concentrations of prophylactic antibiotics are lower with increasing BMI
(Pevzner, 2011; Young, 2015). One prospective study showed that a 3-g dose
of cefazolin resulted in higher tissue concentrations compared with a 2-g
dose (Swank, 2015). A retrospective analysis of 335 women with a median
weight of 310 pounds found that the higher dose of cefazolin did not result in
fewer surgical site infections (SSIs) (Ahmadzia, 2015). The American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020) recognizes either 2- or 3g doses of cefazolin as suitable for those with weights ≥80 kg. The Centers

for Disease Control and Prevention recommends a 2-g dose for weights ≥80
kg and 3-g dose for those ≥120 kg (Berríos-Torres, 2017). One
pharmacokinetic analysis in obese women showed sufficient tissue levels
with a 2-g dose for cesarean deliveries lasting 1.5 hours. Authors
recommended consideration for redosing in obese women if surgeries were
longer (Grupper, 2016). Last, some early evidence may support extending
oral antibiotic prophylaxis for 48 hours postcesarean in obese women to
lower SSIs (Valent, 2017). Obese women administered preoperative
cephalosporin prophylaxis had a surgical infection rate of 13.4 percent
compared with a rate of 6.4 percent for those given a 2-day postoperative
course of oral cephalexin and metronidazole in addition to routine
preoperative prophylaxis.
Negative-pressure wound therapy (NPWT) also has been used
prophylactically (Mark, 2014). To address this, Hussamy and colleagues
(2019) designed a randomized trial of NPWT versus routine dressing in 441
obese women undergoing cesarean delivery. Such therapy did not
significantly lower the postoperative wound complication rate compared
with routine care—17 versus 19 percent, respectively. A subsequent report
confirmed these findings (Tuuli, 2020).
For the obese woman who is delivered vaginally, puerperal tubal
sterilization is safe regardless of BMI (Byrne, 2020). These procedures are
described in Chapter 39. The risks for postpartum venous thromboembolism
are increased in obese women. This is despite the fact that velocity of lowerextremity blood flow is increased in obese pregnant women (Dutta, 2020).
As discussed in Chapter 55 (p. 990), thromboprophylaxis is controversial.
To lower thromboembolic complications, graduated compression stockings,
hydration, and early mobilization after cesarean delivery in obese women are
recommended by the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
(2019b). If there are additional risk factors other than class III obesity, the
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine (2020) recommends enoxaparin. We do
not routinely use thromboprophylaxis for obesity alone at Parkland Hospital.
This practice has recently been confirmed by Lu and associates (2021).

BARIATRIC SURGERY
Several surgical procedures are designed to treat morbid obesity either by
diminishing gastric volume (restrictive) or by bypassing gastrointestinal

absorption (restrictive malabsorptive). In nonpregnant patients, these
procedures serve to improve or resolve diabetes, hyperlipidemia,
hypertension, and obstructive sleep apnea and to reduce risks of myocardial
infarction and death (Beamish, 2016).

■ Restrictive Procedures
Of options, the approved laparoscopic adjustable silicone gastric banding
(LASGB) procedure—LAPBAND—places a band 2 cm below the
gastroesophageal junction to create a small stomach pouch above the ring.
The ring diameter is controlled by a saline reservoir in the band.
These procedures can have positive effects on pregnancy outcomes. One
study compared pregnancy outcomes in bariatric surgery patients whose
surgery was done after the first pregnancy. Following bariatric surgery, the
incidences of hypertension, gestational diabetes, and preterm birth were
significantly lower in the bariatric surgery patients (Ibiebele, 2020). The
results from these and other studies are shown in Table 51-3.
TABLE 51-3. Pregnancy Outcomes Following Bariatric Surgery

Deflation of the band during pregnancy affects maternal and fetal weight
gain. Pilone and coworkers (2014) studied 22 pregnancies after band
placement and reported that all women underwent full deflation of the band
in the first trimester and gained an average of 14.7 kg during pregnancy. In
another study, 42 women underwent deflation of the band, whereas 54
women maintained band inflation. A deflated band was associated with
higher mean maternal weight gain—15.4 kg versus 7.6 kg, increased
birthweight—3712 versus 3380 g, and a twofold greater risk of macrosomia
compared with an inflated band (Cornthwaite, 2015). Rarely, the band may
slip due to nausea and vomiting, especially with advancing gestation or after
delivery (Pilone, 2014; Schmitt, 2016; Suffee, 2012). One fetus suffered a
fatal cerebral hemorrhage caused by maternal vitamin K deficiency
secondary to prolonged vomiting due to band slippage that created a gastric
outlet obstruction (Van Mieghem, 2008).

■ Restrictive Malabsorptive Procedures
The laparoscopically performed Roux-en-Y gastric bypass is the most
commonly used procedure for gastric restriction and selective
malabsorption. Pregnancy outcomes are changed remarkably following
Roux-en-Y bypass (Adams, 2015). As shown in Table 51-3, rates of
hypertension, gestational diabetes, and fetal macrosomia are reduced.
Serious complications with bypass operations are uncommon, however,
upper abdominal pain is frequent in pregnancy and may be associated with
internal herniation, which is protrusion of the bowel through a window
defect in the mesentery. Petersen and associates (2017) described outcomes
in a birth cohort including 139 pregnancies. Upper abdominal pain
complicated 46 percent, and a third of these had internal herniation. The
preterm birth rate was 14 of 64 among those with upper abdominal pain
versus 1 of 75 in those without pain. Intussusception and small bowel
obstruction can develop from internal herniation, and maternal deaths from
herniation and obstruction are reported (Moore, 2004; Renault, 2012).
Bowel obstruction is notoriously difficult to diagnose during pregnancy
(Vannevel, 2016; Wax, 2013).

■ Pregnancy

Because of its associated health successes, bariatric surgery is popular, and
many women subsequently become pregnant (Narayanan, 2016). From
studies, fertility improves and obstetrical complication rates decline in
women after bariatric surgery compared with morbidly obese controls
(Getahun, 2021; Kominiarek, 2017; Yi, 2015). In one of these studies,
despite surgical treatment, almost half of 670 women were still obese at the
time of their first pregnancy after bypass (Johansson, 2015). Nevertheless,
the frequency of large-for-gestational-age newborns dropped from 22 to 8.6
percent and of small-for-gestational-age neonates rose from 7.6 to 15.6
percent. In a systematic review, Kwong and colleagues (2018) confirmed
these fetal weight trends after bariatric surgery. According to Maric and
colleagues (2020), fetuses are smaller because of lower maternal glucose
levels rather than alterations of the fetoplacental circulation. Also, risks for
diabetes and preeclampsia were reduced. Last, evidence suggests that the
risk for congenital anomalies is decreased (Auger, 2019; Neovius, 2019).
Currently, the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
(2019b) recommends that women who have undergone bariatric surgery be
assessed for vitamin and nutritional sufficiency. When indicated, vitamins
B12 and D, folic acid, and calcium supplementation are given. Vitamin A
deficiency also is possible (Chagas, 2013). Women with a gastric band
should be monitored by their bariatric team during pregnancy because band
adjustments may be necessary. Last, special vigilance for signs of internal
herniation with intestinal obstruction is encouraged (Stuart, 2017; Wax,
2013).

REFERENCES
Adams TD, Hammoud AO, Davidson LE, et al: Maternal and neonatal outcomes for pregnancies
before and after gastric bypass surgery. Int J Obes (Lond) 39:686, 2015
Adekola H, Soto E, Dai J, et al: Optimal visualization of the fetal four-chamber and outflow tract views
with transabdominal ultrasound in the morbidly obese: are we there yet? J Clin Ultrasound 43:548,
2015
Ahmadieh S, Kim HW, Weintraub NL: Potential role of perivascular adipose tissue in modulating
atherosclerosis. Clin Sci 134(1):3, 2020
Ahmadzia HK, Patel EM, Joshi D, et al: Obstetric surgical site infections: 2 grams compared with 3
grams of cefazolin in morbidly obese women. Obstet Gynecol 126:708, 2015
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Obstetric analgesia and anesthesia. Practice
Bulletin No. 209, February 2019b

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Use of prophylactic antibiotics in labor and
delivery. Practice Bulletin No. 199, August 2018, Reaffirmed 2020
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Obesity in pregnancy. Practice Bulletin No. 230,
May 2021
Auger N, Bilodeau-Bertrans MN, Tith RM, et al: Bariatric surgery and the risks of congenital anomalies
in subsequent pregnancies. Am J Clin Nutr 110(5):1168, 2019
Avagliano L, Monari F, Po G, et al: The burden of placental histopathology in still births associated with
maternal obesity. Am J Clin Pathol 154(2):225, 2020
Bar-Zohar D, Azem F, Klausner J, et al: Pregnancy after laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding:
perinatal outcome is favorable also for women with relatively high gestational weight gain. Surg
Endosc 20:1580, 2006
Beamish AJ, Olbers T, Kelly AS, et al: Cardiovascular effects of bariatric surgery. Nat Rev Cardiol
13:730, 2016
Berggren EK, Groh-Wargo S, Presley L, et al: Maternal fat, but not lean, mass is increased among
overweight/obese women with excess gestational weight gain. Am J Obstet Gynecol 214:745.e1,
2016
Berríos-Torres SI, Umscheid CA, Bratzler DW, et al: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
guideline for the prevention of surgical site infection, 2017. JAMA Surg 152(8):784, 2017
Biggio JR Jr, Chapman V, Neely C, et al: Fetal anomalies in obese women: the contribution of diabetes.
Obstet Gynecol 115:290, 2010
Bodnar LM, Pugh SJ, Lash TL, et al: Low gestational weight gain and risk of adverse perinatal
outcomes in obese and severely obese women. Epidemiology 27:894, 2016
Bogaerts A, Ameye L, Martens E, et al: Weight loss in obese pregnant women and risk for adverse
perinatal outcomes. Obstet Gynecol 125:566, 2015
Byrne JJ, Smith EM, Saucedo AM, et al: Examining the association of obesity with postpartum tubal
ligation. Obstet Gynecol 136(1):1, 2020
Carelli AM1, Ren CJ, Youn HA, et al: Impact of laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding on pregnancy,
maternal weight, and neonatal health. Obes Surg 21:1552, 2011
Carlhäll S, Källén K, Blomberg M: The effect of maternal body mass index on duration of induced labor.
Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 99(5):669, 2020
Carpenter JR: Intrapartum management of the obese gravida. Clin Obstet Gynecol 59:172, 2016
Catalano P, deMouzon SH: Maternal obesity and metabolic risk to the offspring: why lifestyle
interventions have not achieved the desired outcomes. Int J Obes (Lond) 39:642, 2015
Catalano PM, Farrell K, Thomas A, et al: Perinatal risk factors for childhood obesity and metabolic
dysregulation. Am J Clin Nutr 90:1303, 2009
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Overweight and obesity. 2020. Available
at:www.cdc.gov/obesity. Accessed December 7, 2020
Chagas CB, Saunders C, Pereira S, et al: Vitamin A deficiency in pregnancy: perspectives after
bariatric surgery. Obes Surg 23:249, 2013
Cheung YM, Joham A, Marks S, et al: The obesity paradox: an endocrine perspective. Intern Med J
47(7):727, 2017
Cnattingius S, Villamor E: Weight change between successive pregnancies and risks of stillbirth and
infant mortality: a nationwide cohort study. Lancet 387:558, 2016
Comstock SS: Time to change weight gain recommendations for pregnant women with obesity. J Clin
Invest 129(11):4567, 2019

Conner SN, Verticchio JC, Tuuli MG, et al: Maternal obesity and risk of postcesarean wound
complications. Am J Perinatol 31:299, 2014
Cornier MA, Després JP, Davis N, et al: Assessing adiposity: a scientific statement from the American
Heart Association. Circulation 124:1996, 2011
Cornthwaite K, Jefferys A, Lenguerrand E, et al: One size does not fit all. Management of the
laparoscopic adjustable gastric band in pregnancy: a national prospective cohort study. Lancet 385
Suppl 1:S32, 2015
Cox Bauer CM, Bernhard KA, Greer DM, et al: Maternal and neonatal outcomes in obese women who
lose weight during pregnancy. J Perinatol 36:278, 2016
Crane JM, Murphy P, Burrage L, et al: Maternal and perinatal outcomes of extreme obesity in
pregnancy. J Obstet Gynaecol Can 35: 606, 2013
Cunningham FG: Peripartum cardiomyopathy: we’ve come a long way, but…. Obstet Gynecol
120(5):992, 2012
Dashe JS, McIntire DD, Twickler DM: Effect of maternal obesity on the ultrasound detection of
anomalous fetuses. Obstet Gynecol 113:1001, 2009
De Gonzalez AB, Hartge P, Cherhan JR, et al: Body mass index and mortality among 1.46 million white
adults. N Engl J Med 363:23, 2010
De Souza LR, Berger H, Retnakaran R, et al: Hepatic fat and abdominal adiposity in early pregnancy
together predict impaired glucose homeostasis in mid-pregnancy. Nutr Diabetes 6:e229, 2016a
De Souza LR, Berger H, Retnakaran R, et al: Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease in early pregnancy
predicts dysglycemia in mid-pregnancy: prospective study. Am J Gastroenterol 111:665, 2016b
Denison FC, Price J, Graham C, et al: Maternal obesity, length of gestation, risk of postdates pregnancy
and spontaneous onset of labour at term. BJOG 115:720, 2008
Diehl AM, Day C: Cause, pathogenesis, and treatment of nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. N Engl J Med
377(21):2063, 2017
Dixon JB: Obesity in 2015: advances in managing obesity. Nat Rev Endocrinol 12:65, 2016
Dodd JM, Grivell RM, Deussen AR, et al: Metformin for women who are overweight or obese during
pregnancy for improving maternal and infant outcomes. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 7:CD01054,
2018
Dominguez JE, Grotegut CA, Cooter M, et al: Screening extremely obese pregnant women for
obstructive sleep apnea. Am J Obstet Gynecol 219(6):613.e1, 2018
Ducarme G, Parisio L, Santulli P, et al: Neonatal outcomes in pregnancies after bariatric surgery: a
retrospective multi-centric cohort study in three French referral centers. J Matern Fetal Neonatal
Med 26:275, 2013
Dude AM, Davis B, Delaney K, et al: Identifying fetal growth disorders using ultrasound in obese
nulliparous women. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 1:1, 2019
Dutta EH, Burns RN, Pacheco LD, et al: Lower extremity blood flow velocity in obese versus nonobese
pregnant women. Am J Perinatol 37(4):384, 2020
Edwards RK, Cantu J, Cliver S, et al: The association of maternal obesity with fetal pH and base deficit
at cesarean delivery. Obstet Gynecol 122(2 Pt 1):262, 2013
Facchiano E, Iannelli A, Santulli P, et al: Pregnancy after laparoscopic bariatric surgery: comparative
study of adjustable gastric banding and Roux-en-Y gastric bypass. Surg Obes Relat Dis 8:429, 2012
Flenady V, Koopmans L, Middleton P, et al: Major risk factors for stillbirth in high-income countries: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet 377:1331, 2011
Gaillard R, Welten M, Oddy WH, et al: Associations of maternal prepregnancy body mass index and
gestational weight gain with cardio-metabolic risk factors in adolescent offspring: a prospective

cohort study. BJOG 123:207, 2016
Garvey WT, Mechanick JI, Brett EM, et al: American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists and
American College of Endocrinology comprehensive clinical practice guidelines for medical care of
patients with obesity. Endocr Pract 22:842, 2016
Getahun D, Fassett MJ, Jacobsen SJ, et al: Perinatal outcomes after bariatric surgery. Am J Obstet
Gynecol June 30, 2021 [Epub ahead of print]
Gibbs Pickens CM, Kramer MR, Howards PP, et al: Term elective induction of labor and pregnancy
outcomes among obese women and their offspring. Obstet Gynecol 131:12, 2018
Gilboa SM, Correa A, Botto LD, et al: Association between prepregnancy body mass index and
congenital heart defects. Am J Obstet Gynecol 202:51.e1, 2010
Gilmore LA, Klempel-Donchenko M, Redman LM: Pregnancy as a window to future health: excessive
gestational weight gain and obesity. Semin Perinatol 39:296, 2015
Girsen AI, Osmundson SS, Naqvi M, et al: Body mass index and operative times at cesarean delivery.
Obstet Gynecol 124:684, 2014
Gluck ME, Venti CA, Lindsay RS, et al: Maternal influence, not diabetic intrauterine environment,
predicts children’s energy intake. Obesity 17:772, 2009
Godfrey KM, Reynolds RM, Prescott SL, et al: Influence of maternal obesity on the long-term health of
offspring. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 5:53, 2017
González I, Rubio MA, Cordido F, et al: Maternal and perinatal outcomes after bariatric surgery: a
Spanish multicenter study. Obes Surg 25:436, 2015
Grasch JL, Thompson JL, Newton JM, et al: Trial of labor compared with cesarean delivery in
superobese women. Obstet Gynecol 130(5):994, 2017
Grupper M, Kuti JL, Swank ML, et al: Population pharmacokinetics of cefazolin in serum and adipose
tissue from overweight and obese women undergoing cesarean delivery. J Clin Pharmacol 57(6):712,
2017
Hagström H, Höijer J, Ludvigsson JF, et al: Adverse outcomes of pregnancy in women with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Liver Int 36:268, 2016
Hainer V, Aldhoon-Hainerová I: Obesity paradox does exist. Diabetes Care 36 Suppl 2:S276, 2013
Hall JE, do Carmo JM, da Silva AA, et al: Obesity, kidney dysfunction and hypertension: mechanistic
links. Nat Rev Nephrol 15(6):367, 2019
Hannaford KE, Tuuli MG, Odibo L, et al: Gestational weight gain: association with adverse pregnancy
outcomes. Am J Perinatol 34:147, 2017
HAPO Study Cooperative Research Group, Metzger BE, Lowe LP, et al: Hyperglycemia and adverse
pregnancy outcomes. N Engl J Med 358(19):1991, 2008
Harper LM, Jauk V, Longo S, et al: Early gestational diabetes screening in obese women: a randomized
controlled trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol 222(5):495.e1, 2020
He Y, Tian J, Blizzard L, et al: Associations of childhood adiposity and changes in adiposity status from
childhood to adulthood with pregnancy hypertension. Pregnancy Hypertens 19:218, 2020
Heymsfield SB, Wadden TA: Mechanisms, pathophysiology, and management of obesity. N Engl J Med
376(3):254, 2017
Hussamy DJ, Wortman AC, McIntire DD, et al: Closed incision negative pressure therapy in morbidly
obese women undergoing cesarean delivery: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol
134(4):781, 2019
Ibiebele I, Gallimore F, Schnitzler M, et al: Perinatal outcomes following bariatric surgery between a first
and second pregnancy: a population data linkage study. BJOG 127(3):345, 2020

Institute of Medicine, National Research Council, Rasmussen KM, et al (eds): Weight Gain during
Pregnancy: Reexamining the Guidelines. Washington, National Academy of Sciences, 2009
Johansson K, Cnattingius S, Näslund I, et al: Outcomes of pregnancy after bariatric surgery. N Engl J
Med 372:814, 2015
Johansson S, Villamor E, Altman M, et al: Maternal overweight and obesity in early pregnancy and risk
of infant mortality: a population based cohort study in Sweden. BMJ 349:g6572, 2014
Johnson J, Clifton RG, Roberts JM, et al: Pregnancy outcomes with weight gain above or below the
2009 Institute of Medicine guidelines. Obstet Gynecol 121:969, 2013
Karimyar T, Leonardo P: Surgery in the obese pregnant patient. Clin Obstet Gynecol 63(2):416, 2020
Kerbage Y, Senat MV, Drumez E, et al: Risk factors for failed induction of labor among pregnant
women with Class III obesity. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 99(5):637, 2020
Kim SS, Zhu Y, Grantz KL, et al: Obstetric and neonatal risks among obese women without chronic
disease. Obstet Gynecol 128:104, 2016
Kitsiou-Tzeli S, Tzetis M: Maternal epigenetics and fetal and neonatal growth. Curr Opin Endocrinol
Diabetes Obes 24:43, 2017
Koliaki C, Liatis S, Kokkinos A: Obesity and cardiovascular disease: revisiting an old relationship.
Metabolism 92:98, 2019
Kominiarek MA, Jungheim ES, Hoeger KM, et al: American Society for Metabolic and Bariatric
Surgery position statement on the impact of obesity and obesity treatment on fertility and fertility
therapy. Endorsed by the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists and the Obesity
Society. Surg Obes Relat Dis 13(5):750, 2017
Kullmann S, Heni M, Hallschmid M, et al: Brain insulin resistance at the crossroads of metabolic and
cognitive disorders in humans. Physiol Rev 96(4):1169, 2016
Kwong W, Tomlinson G, Feig DS: Maternal and neonatal outcomes after bariatric surgery; a systematic
review and meta-analysis: do the benefits outweigh the risks? Am J Obstet Gynecol 218(6):573,
2018
Lainez NM, Coss D: Obesity, Neuroinflammation, and reproductive function. Endocrinology
160(11):2719, 2019
Lakhi NA, Williamson K, Moretti ML: An original suprapannicular incision technique for cesarean
delivery in the morbidly obese parturient. Obstet Gynecol 132(3):619, 2018
Lapolla A, Marangon M, Dalfrà MG, et al: Pregnancy outcome in morbidly obese women before and
after laparoscopic gastric banding. Obes Surg 20:1251, 2010
Lawrence GM, Shulman S, Friedlander Y, et al: Associations of maternal pre-pregnancy and gestational
body size with offspring longitudinal change in BMI. Obesity (Silver Spring) 22:1165, 2014
Lee VR, Darney BG, Snowden JM, et al: Term elective induction of labour and perinatal outcomes in
obese women: retrospective cohort study. BJOG 123:271, 2016
Leth RA, Uldbjerg N, Norgaard M, et al: Obesity, diabetes, and the risk of infections diagnosed in
hospital and post-discharge infections after cesarean section: a prospective cohort study. Acta
Obstet Gynecol Scand 90(5):501, 2011
Li M, Ni X, Xu Z, et al: Ultrasound assisted technology versus the conventional landmark location
method in spinal anesthesia for cesarean delivery in obese parturients: a randomized controlled trial.
Anesth Analg 129(1):155, 2019
Lindam A, Johansson S, Stephansson O, et al: High maternal body mass index in early pregnancy and
risks of stillbirth and infant mortality—a population-based sibling study in Sweden. Am J Epidemiol
184:98, 2016

Lisonkova S, Muraca GM, Potts J, et al: Association between prepregnancy body mass index and
severe maternal morbidity. JAMA 318:1777, 2017
Liu B, Xu G, Sun Y, et al: Association between maternal pre-pregnancy obesity and preterm birth
according to maternal age and race or ethnicity: a population-based study. Lance Diabetes
Endocrinol 7(9):707, 2019
Locke AE, Kahali B, Berndt SI, et al: Genetic studies of body mass index yield new insights for obesity
biology. Nature 518:197, 2015
Lu MY, Blanchard CT, Ausbeck EB, et al: Evaluation of a risk-stratified, heparin-based, obstetric
thromboprophylaxis protocol. Obstet Gynecol 138(4):530, 2021
Lynch TA, Malshe A, Colihan S, et al: Impact of maternal obesity on perinatal outcomes in preterm
prelabor rupture of membranes ≥34 weeks. Am J Perinatol 37(5):467, 2020
Ma RC, Schmidt MI, Tam WH, et al: Clinical management of pregnancy in the obese mother: before
conception, during pregnancy, and postpartum. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 4:1037, 2016
Maric T, Kanu C, Muller DC, et al: Fetal growth and fetoplacental circulation in pregnancies following
bariatric surgery: a prospective study. BJOG 127:839, 2020
Mariona FG: Does maternal obesity impact pregnancy-related deaths? Michigan experience. J Matern
Fetal Neonatal Med 30(9):1060, 2017
Mark KS, Alger L, Terplan M: Incisional negative pressure therapy to prevent wound complications
following cesarean section in morbidly obese women: a pilot study. Surg Innov 21:345, 2014
Mark KS, Bragg B, Talaie T, et al: Risk of complication during surgical abortion in obese women. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 218(2):238.e1, 2018
Marrs CC, Moussa HN, Sibai BM, et al: The relationship between primary cesarean delivery skin
incision type and wound complications in women with morbid obesity. Am J Obstet Gynecol
210:319.e1, 2014
Marshall NE, Guild C, Cheng YW, et al: The effect of maternal body mass index on perinatal outcomes
in women with diabetes. Am J Perinatol 31:249, 2014
Martin CA, Gowda U, Smith BJ et al: Systematic review of the effect of lifestyle interventions on the
components of the metabolic syndrome in South Asian migrants. J Immigr Minor Health 20(1):231,
2018
Meehan S, Beck CR, Mair-Jenkins J, et al: Maternal obesity and infant mortality: a meta-analysis.
Pediatrics 133:863, 2014
Meyer BJ, Stewart FM, Brown EA, et al: Maternal obesity is associated with the formation of small
dense LDL and hypoadiponectinemia in the third trimester. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 98:643, 2013
Mingrone G, Panunzi S, De Gaetano A, et al: Bariatric-metabolic surgery versus conventional medical
treatment in obese patients with type 2 diabetes: 5 year follow-up of an open-label, single-centre,
randomised controlled trial. Lancet 386:964, 2015
Molyneaux E, Poston L, Ashurst-Williams S, et al: Obesity and mental disorders during pregnancy and
postpartum: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Obstet Gynecol 123:857, 2014
Moore JX, Chaudhary N, Akinyemiju T, et al: Metabolic syndrome prevalence by race/ethnicity and sex
in the United States, National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey, 1988–2012. Prev Chronic
Dis 14:160287, 2017
Moore KA, Ouyang DW, Whang EE: Maternal and fetal deaths after gastric bypass surgery for morbid
obesity. N Engl J Med 351:721, 2004
Most J, Amant MS, Hsia DS, et al: Evidence-based recommendations for energy intake in pregnant
women with obesity. J Clin Invest 130:4682, 2019

Muktabhant B, Lawrie TA, Lumbiganon P, et al: Diet or exercise, or both, for preventing excessive
weight gain in pregnancy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 6:CD007145, 2015
Narayanan RP, Syed AA: Pregnancy following bariatric surgery—medical complications and
management. Obes Surg 26:2523, 2016
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI): Metabolic syndrome. 2019. Available at:
www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health-topics/metabolic-syndrome. Accessed December 7, 2020
National Institutes of Health: The practical guide: identification, evaluation, and treatment of overweight
and obesity in adults. NIH Publication 00–4084. Bethesda, National Institutes of Health, 2000
Neovius M, Pasternak B, Näslund I, et al: Association of maternal gastric bypass surgery with offspring
birth defects. JAMA 322(15):1515, 2019
Norman SM, Tuuli MG, Obido AO, et al: The effects of obesity on the first stage of labor. Obstet
Gynecol 120:130, 2012
O’Brien CM, Louise J, Deussen A, et al: In overweight and obese women, fetal ultrasound biometry
accurately predicts newborn measures. Aust N Z Obstet Gynaecol 60(1):101, 2020
Okesene-Gafa KAM, Li M, McKinlay CJD, et al: Effect of antenatal dietary interventions in maternal
obesity on pregnancy weight-gain and birthweight: healthy mums and babies (HUMBA) randomized
trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol 221(2):152.e1, 2019
Ovesen P, Rasmussen S, Kesmodel U: Effect of prepregnancy maternal overweight and obesity on
pregnancy outcome. Obstet Gynecol 118(2 Pt 1):305, 2011
Paidas Teefey C, Reforma L, Koelper NC, et al: Risk factors associated with cesarean delivery after
induction of labor in women with class III obesity. Obstet Gynecol 135(3):542, 2020
Petersen L, Lauenborg J, Svare J, et al: The impact of upper abdominal pain during pregnancy following
a gastric bypass. Obes Surg 27(3):688, 2017
Pevzner L, Swank M, Krepel C, et al: Effects of maternal obesity on tissue concentrations of
prophylactic cefazolin during cesarean delivery. Obstet Gynecol 117:877, 2011
Pilone V, Hasani A, Di Micco R, et al: Pregnancy after laparoscopic gastric banding: maternal and
neonatal outcomes. Int J Surg 12 Suppl 1:S136, 2014
Polnaszek BE, Raghuraman N, Lopez JD, et al: Neonatal morbidity in the offspring of obese women
without hypertension or diabetes. Obstet Gynecol 132(4):835, 2018
Polönia Valente R, Santos P, Ferraz T, et al: Effect of obesity on labor duration among nulliparous
women with epidural analgesia. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 33(13):2195, 2020
Pratt A, Howat P, Hui L: Maternal and perinatal outcomes for women with body mass index ≥50 kg/m2
in a non-tertiary hospital setting. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol 60(3):361, 2020
Pulman KJ, Tohidi M, Pudwell J, et al: Emergency caesarean section in obese parturients: Is a 30minute decision-to-incision interval feasible? J Obstet Gynaecol Can 37:988, 2015
Rasmussen SA, Chu SY, Kim SY, et al: Maternal obesity and risk of neural tube defects: a
metaanalysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 198(6):611, 2008
Renault K, Gyrtrup HJ, Damgaard K, et al: Pregnant women with fatal complication after laparoscopic
Roux-en-Y gastric bypass. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 91:873, 2012
Reynolds RM, Allan KM, Raja EA, et al: Maternal obesity during pregnancy and premature mortality
from cardiovascular event in adult offspring: follow-up of 1 323 275 person years. BMJ 347:f4539,
2013
Ross VH, Dean LS, Thomas JA, et al: A randomized controlled comparison between combined spinalepidural and single-shot spinal techniques in morbidly obese parturients undergoing cesarean
delivery: time for initiation of anesthesia. Anesth Analg 118:168, 2014

Ruhstaller KE, Elovitz MA, Stringer M, et al: Obesity and the association with maternal mental health
symptoms. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 10:1, 2017
Santos S, Voerman E, Amiano P, et al: Impact of maternal body mass index and gestational weight gain
on pregnancy complications: an individual participant data meta-analysis of European, North
American and Australian cohorts. BJOG 126(8):984, 2019
Sartori C, Lazzeroni P, Merli S: From placenta to polycystic ovarian syndrome: the role of adipokines.
Mediators Inflamm 2016:4981916, 2016
Scheja L, Heeren J: The endocrine function of adipose tissues in health and cardiometabolic disease.
Nat Rev Endocrinol 15(9):507, 2019
Schmitt F, Topart P, Salle A, et al: Early postpartum gastric band slippage after bariatric surgery in an
adolescent obese girl. J Surg Case Rep 2016(9), 2016
Schummers L, Hutcheon JA, Bodnar LM, et al: Risk of adverse pregnancy outcomes by prepregnancy
body mass index: a population-based study to inform prepregnancy weight loss counseling. Obstet
Gynecol 125:133, 2015
Seasely AR, Xue Y, Ausbeck EB, et al: Outpatient cervical ripening with foley catheter for elective
induction of labor (eIOL) in obese nulliparas. Abstract No. 341. Am J Obstet Gynecol 224:S224,
2021
Seneviratne SN, Jiang Y, Derraik J, et al: Effects of antenatal exercise in overweight and obese
pregnant women on maternal and perinatal outcomes: a randomised controlled trial. BJOG 123:588,
2016
Sheiner E, Balaban E, Dreiher J, et al: Pregnancy outcome in patients following different types of
bariatric surgeries. Obes Surg 19:1286, 2009
Shenouda C, Wijesooriya A, Toufeili A, et al: Labor progression in obese women: are women with
increased body mass index having unnecessary caesarean sections? J Obstet Gynaecol Can
42(3):293, 2020
Shungin D, Winkler TW, Croteau-Chonka DC, et al: New genetic loci link adipose and insulin biology to
body fat distribution. Nature 518:187, 2015
Siegel AM, Tucker A, Adkins LD, et al: Postpartum weight loss in women with class-III obesity: do
they lose what they gain? Am J Perinatol 37(1):53, 2020
Smid MC, Kearney MS, Stamilio DM: Extreme obesity and postcesarean wound complications in the
Maternal-Fetal Medicine Unit cesarean registry. Am J Perinatol 32:1336, 2015
Smid MC, Vladutiu CJ, Dotters-Katz SK, et al: Maternal super obesity and neonatal morbidity after
term cesarean delivery. Am J Perinatol 33:1198, 2016
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine (SMFM), Pacheco LD, Saade G, et al: Society for Maternal-Fetal
Medicine (SMFM) Consult Series #51: thromboembolism prophylaxis for cesarean delivery. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 223(2):B11, 2020
Stamilio DM, Scifres CM: Extreme obesity and postcesarean maternal complications. Obstet Gynecol
124(2 Pt 1):227, 2014
Stewart RD, Nelson DB, Matulevicius SA, et al: Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging to assess the
impact of maternal habitus on cardiac remodeling during pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol
214:640.e1, 2016
Stuart A, Kallen K: Risk of abdominal surgery in pregnancy among women who have undergone
bariatric surgery. Obstet Gynecol 129:887, 2017
Suffee MT, Poncelet C, Barrat C: Gastric band slippage at 30 weeks’ gestation: diagnosis and
laparoscopic management. Surg Obes Relat Dis 8(3):366, 2012

Sutton AL, Sanders LB, Subramaniam A, et al: Abdominal incision selection for cesarean delivery of
women with class III obesity. Am J Perinatol 33:547, 2016
Swank ML, Wing DA, Nicolau DP, et al: Increased 3-gram cefazolin dosing for cesarean delivery
prophylaxis in obese women. Am J Obstet Gynecol 213:415.e1, 2015
Tanner LD, Brock C, Chauhan SP: Severity of fetal growth restriction stratified according to maternal
obesity J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 1:1, 2020
Targher G, Byrne CD, Lonardo A, et al: Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease and risk of incident
cardiovascular disease: a meta-analysis. J Hepatol 65:589, 2016
Tersigni C, Neri C, D’Ippolito S, et al: Impact of maternal obesity on the risk of preterm delivery:
insights into pathogenic mechanisms. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 17:1, 2020
Thornburg LL, Linder MA, Durie DE, et al: Risk factors for wound complications in morbidly obese
women undergoing primary cesarean delivery. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 25:1544, 2012
Tipton AM, Cohen SA, Chelmow D: Wound infection in the obese pregnant woman. Semin Perinatol
35:345, 2011
Triebwasser JE, Kazzi NG, Davis NB, et al: Cardiac remodeling in morbidly obese women and its
association with adverse perinatal outcomes. Pregnancy Hypertens 17:104, 2019
Tu C, He J, Wu B, et al: An extensive review regarding the adipokines in the pathogenesis and
progression of osteoarthritis. Cytokine 113:1, 2019
Turan OM, Rosenbloom J, Galey JL, et al: The relationship between rostral retraction of the pannus and
outcomes at cesarean section. Am J Perinatol 33:951, 2016
Tuuli MG, Liu J, Tita A, et al: Effect of prophylactic negative pressure wound therapy vs standard
wound dressing on surgical-site infection in obese women after cesarean delivery: a randomized
clinical trial. JAMA 324(12):1180, 2020
Valenti AM, DeArmond C, Houston JM, et al: Effect of post-cesarean delivery cephalexin and
metronidazole on surgical site infection among obese women. A randomized trial. JAMA 318:1026,
2017
Van Mieghem T, Van Schoubroeck D, Depiere M, et al: Fetal cerebral hemorrhage caused by vitamin K
deficiency after complicated bariatric surgery. Obstet Gynecol 112:434, 2008
Vannevel V, Jans G, Bialecka M, et al: Internal herniation in pregnancy after gastric bypass. A
systematic review. Obstet Gynecol 127:1013, 2016
Wang C, Wei Y, Zhang X, et al: A randomized clinical trial of exercise during pregnancy to prevent
gestational diabetes mellitus and improve pregnancy outcome in overweight and obese women. Am
J Obstet Gynecol 216:340, 2017
Wax JF, Pinette MG, Cartin A: Roux-en-Y gastric bypass-associated bowel obstruction complicating
pregnancy—an obstetrician’s map to the clinical minefield. Am J Obstet Gynecol 208:265, 2013
Weiss JL, Malon FD, Emig D, et al: Obesity, obstetric complications and cesarean delivery rate—a
population based screening study. FASTER Research Consortium. Am J Obstet Gynecol 190:1091,
2004
Wilson E, Sivanesan K, Veerasingham M: Rates of vaginal birth after caesarean section: what chance
do obese women have? Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol 60(1):88, 2020
Wolfe H, Timofeev J, Tefera E, et al: Risk of cesarean in obese nulliparous women with unfavorable
cervix: elective induction vs expectant management at term. Am J Obstet Gynecol 211:53.e1, 2014
Yang X, Li M, Haghiac M, et al: Causal relationship between obesity-related traits and TLR-4-driven
responses at the maternal-fetal interface. Diabetologia 59:2459, 2016
Yao R, Ananth CV, Park BY, et al: Obesity and the risk of still birth: a population-based cohort study.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 210:457.e1, 2014

Yaqub M, Kelly B, Noble JA, et al: The effect of maternal body mass index on fetal ultrasound image
quality. Am J Obstet Gynecol 225(2):200, 2021
Yi XY, Li QF, Zhang J, et al: A meta-analysis of maternal and fetal outcomes of pregnancy after
bariatric surgery. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 130:3, 2015
Young OM, Shaik IH, Twedt R, et al: Pharmacokinetics of Cefazolin prophylaxis in obese gravidae at
time of cesarean delivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 213:541.e1, 2015
Zaki MN, Wing DA, McNulty JA: Comparison of staples vs subcuticular suture in class III obese
women undergoing cesarean: a randomized controlled trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol 218(4):451.e1,
2018

CHAPTER 52

Cardiovascular Disorders

PHYSIOLOGICAL CONSIDERATIONS IN PREGNANCY
DIAGNOSIS OF HEART DISEASE
GENERAL PREGNANCY CONSIDERATIONS
HEART FAILURE
SURGICALLY CORRECTED HEART DISEASE
VALVULAR HEART DISEASE
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE
PULMONARY HYPERTENSION
CARDIOMYOPATHIES
INFECTIVE ENDOCARDITIS
ARRHYTHMIAS
DISEASES OF THE AORTA
ISCHEMIC HEART DISEASE
COMMON OBSTETRICAL MEDICATIONS
REFERENCES
In an analysis of maternal mortality in the United States between 2011 and
2013, deaths related to hemorrhage, hypertensive disorders, and embolism

showed declining rates. In contrast, deaths attributable to cardiovascular
diseases are rising and are responsible for one fourth of all pregnancyrelated mortalities (Creanga, 2017; Petersen, 2019). Recent development of
state-level maternal mortality review committees have emphasized this issue
and highlighted the relatively protracted timeline of illness. Up to a year after
delivery, cardiac events were among the leading causes of death for women
in Texas in 2013 (Texas Maternal Morbidity Task Force, 2020). These
disorders account also for significant maternal morbidity and are a common
reason for intensive care unit admissions (Small, 2012).
Cardiovascular disease complicates 1 to 4 percent of pregnancies in the
United States (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019).
The increasing prevalence is likely multifactorial and includes the higher
rates of obesity, hypertension, and diabetes (Klingberg, 2017). According to
the National Center for Health Statistics, almost half of adults aged 20 and
older have at least one risk factor for cardiovascular disease (Fryar, 2012).
Another related reason is delayed childbearing. Last, as discussed
subsequently (p. 927), an increasing number of women with congenital heart
disease are now becoming pregnant.
The importance of heart disease and its adverse effect on pregnancy
morbidity and mortality led the American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists to create a Task Force on Pregnancy and Heart Disease. Its
purpose is to emphasize the prevalence and effect of heart disease in
pregnancy, provide guidance for risk factor identification, outline common
cardiovascular disorders, provide recommendations for management, and
develop a comprehensive interpregnancy plan. Multidisciplinary care is
essential (Quinones, 2021).

PHYSIOLOGICAL CONSIDERATIONS IN PREGNANCY
■ Cardiovascular Physiology
The marked pregnancy-induced anatomical and functional changes in cardiac
physiology can have a profound, negative effect on underlying heart disease.
These changes are discussed in detail in Chapter 4 (p. 62), and some are
listed in Table 52-1 (Clark, 1989). Importantly, cardiac output increases
approximately 40 percent during pregnancy. Almost half of this total takes
place by 8 weeks’ gestation and is maximal by midpregnancy (Capeless,

1989). This early rise stems from augmented stroke volume, which results
from lowered vascular resistance. Later in pregnancy, resting pulse and
stroke volume are even higher because of greater end-diastolic ventricular
volume that results from augmented pregnancy blood volume. These
adaptations are even more profound in multifetal pregnancies (Ghi, 2019).
Intrinsic left ventricular contractility does not change, and thus normal left
ventricular function is maintained during pregnancy. Namely, pregnancy is
not characterized by hyperdynamic function or a high cardiac-output state.
TABLE 52-1. Hemodynamic Changes in 10 Normal Pregnant Women at
Term Compared with Repeat Values Obtained 12 Weeks Postpartum

Women with underlying cardiac disease may not always accommodate
these changes, and ventricular dysfunction leads to cardiogenic heart failure.
A few women with severe cardiac dysfunction can experience evidence of
heart failure before midpregnancy. In others, heart failure may develop after
28 weeks’ gestation, when pregnancy-induced hypervolemia and cardiac
output reach their maximum. In most, however, heart failure develops
peripartum, when labor, delivery, and several common obstetrical conditions
add undue cardiac burdens. Some of the latter include preeclampsia,
hemorrhage and anemia, and sepsis.

■ Ventricular Function in Pregnancy
Ventricular volumes and mass accrue to accommodate pregnancy-induced
hypervolemia. This is reflected by greater end-systolic and end-diastolic

dimensions. At the same time, however, septal thickness and ejection fraction
are unchanged. This is because these alterations are accompanied by
substantive ventricular remodeling—plasticity—which is characterized by
eccentric expansion of left-ventricular mass that averages 30 to 35 percent
near term. All of these adaptations return to prepregnancy values within a
few months postpartum.
Certainly for clinical purposes, ventricular function during pregnancy is
normal as estimated by the Braunwald ventricular function graph (Fig. 4-9,
p. 63). Thus, for given filling pressures, cardiac output is appropriate and
allows eudynamic cardiac function during pregnancy. Esoteric changes in
pregnancy-related cardiac physiology continue to be clarified. In nonpregnant
subjects with a normal heart who sustain a high-output state, the left ventricle
undergoes longitudinal remodeling, and echocardiographic functional
indices of its deformation show normal values. In pregnancy, the ventricle
instead undergoes spherical remodeling, and the calculated indices that
measure longitudinal deformation are depressed. Thus, normal nonpregnant
indices are likely less accurate when used to assess function in pregnant
women because they do not account for the spherical remodeling (Savu,
2012; Stewart, 2016).
Adjusting for these geometrical changes, Melchiorre and coworkers
(2016) studied normal cardiac echocardiographic findings in 559 nulliparas
at four points during pregnancy and again at 1 year postpartum. At term,
significant chamber diastolic dysfunction was present in 18 percent and
impaired myocardial relaxation was evident in 28 percent of the women.
Also, a significant proportion of women demonstrated a drop in stroke
volume index and a tendency toward eccentric remodeling. These findings
suggest cardiovascular maladaptation to the expanded volume demands in a
substantial proportion of apparently normal pregnancies. Significant dyspnea
at rest was reported by 7.4 percent of the women at term, most of whom had
chamber diastolic dysfunction. Cardiac function and all signs of dyspnea
fully recovered at 1 year postpartum.
Cardiac magnetic resonance (MR) imaging increasingly is used to
evaluate cardiac structure and function. Stewart and associates (2016)
performed cardiac MR imaging studies in 23 women longitudinally across
pregnancy and at 12 weeks postpartum. Compared with studies performed at
12 to 16 weeks’ gestation, left ventricular mass grew significantly for both
normal-weight and overweight women. The calculated geometrical ratio of

left ventricular mass to left ventricular end-diastolic volume demonstrated
concentric remodeling throughout gestation, which resolved by 12 weeks’
postpartum. The right ventricle also undergoes remodeling (Martin, 2017).
These observations likely mean that pregnancy causes a mixture of eccentric
and concentric ventricular remodeling.

DIAGNOSIS OF HEART DISEASE
The physiological adaptations of normal pregnancy can induce symptoms and
alter clinical findings that may confound the diagnosis of heart disease. For
example, in normal pregnancy, functional systolic heart murmurs are
common, respiratory effort is accentuated, edema frequently accrues in lower
extremities after midpregnancy, and fatigue and exercise intolerance often
develop. Some systolic flow murmurs can be loud, and normal changes in the
various heart sounds depicted in Figure 52-1 may erroneously suggest
cardiac disease. In contrast, clinical findings that are more likely to suggest
heart disease are listed in Table 52-2.

FIGURE 52-1 Normal cardiac examination findings in the pregnant woman. S1 = first sound; M1 =
mitral first sound; S2 = second sound; P 2 = pulmonary second sound. (Data from Gei, 2001; Hytten,
1991.)

TABLE 52-2. Clinical Indicators of Heart Disease During Pregnancy

■ Diagnostic Studies
Noninvasive cardiovascular studies such as electrocardiography, chest
radiography, and echocardiography will provide the data necessary for
cardiac functional evaluation in most women.
In the electrocardiogram (ECG), an average 15-degree left-axis
deviation is found as the diaphragm is elevated in advancing pregnancy.
Other findings are described in Figure 52-2 (Angeli, 2014). Pregnancy does
not alter voltage findings. Atrial and ventricular premature contractions are
relatively frequent.

FIGURE 52-2 Normal electrocardiograph (ECG) adaptations during pregnancy, including a reduced
mean PR interval, increased heart rate, left axis deviation, inverted or flattened T waves, and a Q wave
in lead DIII. HR = heart rate. (Reproduced with permission from Angeli F, Angeli E, Verdecchia P:
Electrocardiographic changes in hypertensive disorders of pregnancy, Hypertens Res 2014
Nov;37(11):973–975.)

With radiography, anteroposterior (AP) and lateral chest radiographs
are useful, and when a lead apron shield is used, fetal radiation exposure is
minimal. Gross cardiomegaly can usually be excluded, but slight heart
enlargement is poorly detected because the heart silhouette normally is larger
in pregnancy. This is accentuated further with a portable posterior-anterior
chest radiograph.
Echocardiography is now widely used and permits accurate diagnosis of
most heart diseases during pregnancy. Some normal pregnancy-induced
changes include a small increase in the dimensions of all cardiac chambers, a
slight but significant growth in left ventricular mass, and greater tricuspid
and mitral valve regurgitation (Grewal, 2014). Of note, systolic function
normally does not change and ejection fraction is preserved. Late geometric
changes such as interventricular septum dimension (IVd) are likely to be

abnormal before changes in ejection fraction. Savu (2012) and Vitarelli
(2011) and their colleagues have provided normal echocardiographic
parameters for pregnancy, which are listed in the Appendix (p. 1233). In
some situations, such as complex congenital heart disease, transesophageal
echocardiography may be useful.
Cardiovascular MR imaging, compared with echocardiography, is
associated with higher reproducibility and is less hindered by ventricular
geometry and body habitus. It is useful for assessment of the right ventricle
and visualization of congenital heart lesions and myocarditis (Herrey, 2019;
Martin, 2017). Ducas and coworkers (2014) have published normal
reference values for pregnancy.
Exercise stress testing is an objective assessment of maternal functional
capacity. It is also useful to diagnose exercise-induced arrhythmias. Stress
testing can be performed in women with known heart disease prior to
pregnancy or, if necessary, in the asymptomatic pregnant women (RegitzZagrosek, 2018). Dennis and associates (2019) have described findings in
normal pregnant women using the 6-minute walk test.
Myocardial perfusion studies using albumin or red cells tagged with
technetium-99m are rarely needed during pregnancy to evaluate ventricular
function. That said, the estimated fetal radiation exposure from nuclear
medicine studies of myocardial perfusion is negligible (Chap. 49, p. 875).
Cardiac catheterization with limited fluoroscopy time also is safe to
perform. During coronary angiography, the mean radiation exposure to the
unshielded abdomen is 1.5 mGy, and less than 20 percent of this reaches the
fetus (Regitz-Zagrosek, 2018). Shortening the fluoroscopic time may help to
minimize radiation exposure (Raman, 2015; Tuzcu, 2015). In women with
clear indications, any minimal theoretical fetal risk is outweighed by
maternal benefits, and such studies should be performed as indicated.

■ Functional Classification of Heart Disease
Pregnancy is a stress test of cardiovascular reserve. However, no clinically
applicable test accurately measures functional cardiac capacity. The clinical
classification of the New York Heart Association (NYHA) is based on past
and present disability and is uninfluenced by physical signs:

• Class I. Uncompromised—no limitation of physical activity: These
women do not have symptoms of cardiac insufficiency or experience
anginal pain.
• Class II. Slight limitation of physical activity: These women are
comfortable at rest, but with ordinary physical activity, discomfort in the
form of excessive fatigue, palpitation, dyspnea, or anginal pain results.
• Class III. Marked limitation of physical activity: These women are
comfortable at rest, but less than ordinary activity causes excessive
fatigue, palpitation, dyspnea, or anginal pain.
• Class IV. Severely compromised—inability to perform any physical
activity without discomfort: Symptoms of cardiac insufficiency or angina
may develop even at rest. If any physical activity is undertaken, discomfort
is increased.
At least four predictive systems detect and classify heart disease in
pregnant women. These include CARPREG I and II, ZAHARA, and the
World Health Organization (WHO) system (Wolfe, 2019). Of these, the most
comprehensive risk stratification system is the modified WHO Risk
Classification of Cardiovascular Disease and Pregnancy (Table 52-3). This
classification system was validated in an international cohort of 2742
pregnant women with heart disease (van Hagen, 2016). It is especially useful
for assessing maternal risk and for preconceptional counseling. Lu (2015)
and Pijuan-Domènech (2015) and their colleagues concluded that the
modified WHO classification provides the greatest predictive accuracy for
cardiac complications during pregnancy.
TABLE 52-3. World Health Organization (WHO) Risk Classification of
Cardiovascular Disease and Pregnancy with Management Recommendations

GENERAL PREGNANCY CONSIDERATIONS

■ Preconceptional Counseling
Women with severe heart disease will benefit immensely from counseling
before pregnancy, and they usually are referred for maternal-fetal medicine
or cardiology consultation (Clark, 2012; Wolfe, 2019). Optimizing cardiac
function to mitigate complications during pregnancy is the goal. Maternal
mortality rates generally correlate directly with functional classification,
however, this relationship may change as pregnancy progresses. Siu and
coworkers (2001b) observed significant worsening of NYHA class in 4.4
percent of 579 pregnancies in which the baseline class was I or II.
As described later, some women have life-threatening cardiac
abnormalities that can be reversed by corrective surgery, and subsequent
pregnancy becomes less dangerous. In other cases, such as women with
mechanical valves taking warfarin, fetal teratogenic concerns predominate.
Last, because many congenital heart lesions are inherited as polygenic
characteristics, some women with congenital heart lesions give birth to
similarly affected neonates. This risk varies widely based on the specific
abnormality (Table 52-4) (Lupton, 2002).
TABLE 52-4. Risks for Fetal Heart Lesions Related to Affected Family
Members

Risk Factors
According to the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
(2019), four maternal risk factors are linked to cardiovascular disease
morbidity and mortality: (1) race/ethnicity, with morbidity highest in
African-American women; (2) age, with increased morbidity in women
older than 40 years; (3) hypertension of all varieties; (4) obesity, with
higher morbidity associated with increasing degrees of obesity (Ackerman,
2019). To these, social and health disparities could be added because lower
income, food and housing insecurity, and lack of childcare are directly linked
to underutilization of prenatal care (Gadson, 2017). In turn, lack of prenatal
care is a risk factor for maternal morbidity and mortality (Howland, 2019).

■ Antepartum Care
In most instances, management involves a team approach with an
obstetrician, cardiologist, anesthesiologist, and other specialists as needed.
With complex lesions or other high-risk cases, evaluation by a
multidisciplinary team is recommended early in pregnancy. Both prognosis
and management are influenced by the type and severity of the specific lesion

and by the maternal functional classification. In some, pregnancy termination
may be advisable.
With rare exceptions, women in NYHA class I and most in class II
negotiate pregnancy without morbidity. Special attention is directed toward
both prevention and early recognition of heart failure. Of specific risks,
infection with sepsis can precipitate decompensation. Also, bacterial
endocarditis is a deadly complication of valvular heart disease (p. 934).
Each woman is instructed to avoid contact with persons who have
respiratory infections, including the common cold, and to immediately report
any evidence for infection. Pneumococcal vaccine, if not previously
administered, and yearly influenza vaccine are recommended (Chap. 10, p.
188).
Cigarette smoking is prohibited. Illicit drug use may be particularly
harmful, an example being the cardiovascular effects of cocaine or
amphetamines. In addition, intravenous drug use raises the infective
endocarditis risk.
Fortunately, gravidas in NYHA class III and IV are uncommon today. In
the Canadian study, only 3 percent of the approximately 600 pregnancies
were complicated by NYHA class III heart disease, and no women had class
IV when first seen (Siu, 2001b). If a woman chooses pregnancy, she must
understand the risks and is encouraged to be compliant with planned care. In
some women, prolonged hospitalization or bed rest is often necessary.

■ Labor and Delivery
In general, vaginal delivery is preferred, and labor induction is usually safe
(Thurman, 2017). From the large Registry on Pregnancy and Cardiac
Disease, Ruys and associates (2015) compared pregnancy outcomes between
869 women who had a planned vaginal delivery and 393 gravidas who had a
planned cesarean delivery. Planned cesarean delivery conferred no
advantage for maternal or neonatal outcome. Similar results were reported
from Brigham and Women’s Hospital (Easter, 2020).
Cesarean delivery is usually limited to obstetrical indications, and
considerations are given for the specific cardiac lesion, overall maternal
condition, and availability of experienced anesthesia personnel and hospital
capabilities. Some of these women tolerate major surgical procedures poorly
and are best delivered in a unit experienced with management of complicated

cardiac disease. Occasionally, pulmonary artery catheterization may be
needed for hemodynamic monitoring (Chap. 50, p. 883). In our experiences,
however, invasive monitoring is rarely indicated.
Based on her review, Simpson (2012) recommends cesarean delivery for
women with the following: (1) dilated aortic root >4 cm or aortic aneurysm;
(2) acute severe congestive heart failure; (3) recent myocardial infarction;
(4) severe symptomatic aortic stenosis; (5) need for emergency valve
replacement immediately after delivery; and (6) warfarin administration
within 2 weeks of delivery due to fetal risk for intracerebral hemorrhage
because the fetal liver takes up to 2 weeks to metabolize warfarin. Although
we agree with most of these, we have some caveats. For congestive heart
failure, we prefer aggressive medical stabilization of pulmonary edema
followed by vaginal delivery if possible.
During labor, the mother with significant heart disease should be kept in a
semirecumbent position with a lateral tilt. Vital signs are taken frequently
between contractions. Elevations in pulse rate much above 100 beats per
minute (bpm) or respiratory rate above 24 breaths per minute, particularly
when associated with dyspnea, may suggest impending ventricular failure.
For evidence of cardiac decompensation, intensive medical management
must be instituted immediately. Delivery itself does not necessarily improve
the maternal condition and, in fact, may worsen it. Moreover, emergency
cesarean delivery may be particularly hazardous. Clearly, both maternal and
fetal status must be considered in the decision to hasten delivery under these
circumstances.

Analgesia and Anesthesia
Relief from pain and from apprehension is important. Although intravenous
analgesics provide satisfactory pain relief for some women, continuous
epidural analgesia is recommended for most. The major problem with
conduction analgesia is maternal hypotension (Chap. 25, p. 473). This is
especially dangerous in women with intracardiac shunts in whom flow may
be reversed. Hypotension can also be life-threatening if there is pulmonary
arterial hypertension or aortic stenosis. In these, ventricular output is
dependent on adequate preload. In women with these conditions, narcotic
regional analgesia; low-dose, slow-infusion epidural; or general anesthesia
may be preferable.

For vaginal delivery in women with only mild cardiovascular
compromise, epidural analgesia given with intravenous sedation often
suffices. This minimizes intrapartum cardiac output fluctuations and allows
forceps or vacuum-assisted delivery. Incrementally dosed subarachnoid
blockade is approached especially cautiously in women with significant
heart disease due to associated hypotension. For cesarean delivery, epidural
analgesia is preferred by most clinicians with caution for its use with
pulmonary arterial hypertension (p. 932).

Intrapartum Heart Failure
From the Nationwide Inpatient Sample, one fourth of cases of heart failure
during pregnancy were encountered intrapartum (Mogos, 2018). Women with
underlying cardiovascular disorders are at higher risk (Schlichting, 2019).
The physiological stress and fluid shifts associated with labor and delivery
explain this risk. Catecholamine release due to pain and second stage
Valsalva increase left ventricular work, which can precipitate heart failure
(Anthony, 2016).
Obstetrical complications can either advance or precipitate heart failure.
Preeclampsia is common and may provoke afterload failure (Vaught, 2018).
Findings from the Registry on Pregnancy and Cardiac Disease indicate that
women with preexisting heart disease who develop preeclampsia have a 30percent risk of developing heart failure during pregnancy (Ruys, 2014).
Obesity is another common cofactor (Vonck, 2019). Also, high-output states
caused by hemorrhage and acute anemia elevate cardiac workload and
magnify the physiological effects of compromised ventricular function.
Similarly, infection and sepsis increase cardiac output and oxygen utilization
and depress myocardial function.
Chronic hypertension with superimposed preeclampsia is the most
frequent cause of heart failure in pregnancy in numerous populations. Many
of these women have preexisting concentric left ventricular hypertrophy
(Ambia, 2017, 2018). In some, mild antecedent undiagnosed hypertension
causes covert cardiomyopathy, and when superimposed preeclampsia
develops, together they may cause otherwise inexplicable peripartum heart
failure. Obesity is frequently comorbid with chronic hypertension, and it also
is associated with ventricular hypertrophy (Kenchaiah, 2002).

Cardiovascular decompensation during labor may manifest as pulmonary
edema with hypoxia or as hypotension, or both. The proper therapeutic
approach depends on the specific hemodynamic status and the underlying
cardiac lesion. Continuous pulse oximetry and invasive blood pressure
monitoring with an arterial line is helpful in some cases (Easter, 2020) In
general, pulmonary edema due to fluid overload is often best treated with
aggressive diuresis. If precipitated by tachycardia, heart rate control with βblocking agents is preferred. However, unless the underlying
pathophysiology is understood and the cause of the decompensation is clear,
empirical therapy may be hazardous. Details of heart failure management and
specific cardiovascular disorders are discussed below.

■ Puerperium
Women who have shown little or no evidence of cardiac compromise during
pregnancy, labor, or delivery may still decompensate postpartum (Mogos,
2018). Fluid mobilized into the intravascular compartment and reduced
peripheral vascular resistance place higher demands on myocardial
performance. Therefore, meticulous care is continued into the puerperium
(Sliwa, 2018; Zeeman, 2006). Postpartum hemorrhage, anemia, infection, and
thromboembolism are much more serious complications with heart disease.
Indeed, these factors often act in concert to precipitate postpartum heart
failure. In addition, sepsis and severe preeclampsia cause or worsen
pulmonary edema because of endothelial activation and capillary-alveolar
leakage. For example, women with pregnancy-associated hypertensive
diseases have a greater risk for readmission for heart failure within 90 days
of delivery (Nizamuddin, 2019).
For puerperal tubal sterilization after vaginal delivery, the procedure can
be delayed up to several days to ensure that the mother has normalized
hemodynamically and that she is afebrile, not anemic, and ambulatory. For
those desiring future fertility, contraception is crucial (Abarbanell, 2019;
Sobhani, 2019). Detailed contraceptive advice is available in the U.S.
Medical Eligibility Criteria for Contraceptive Use guidelines (Curtis,
2016). These are discussed in Chapter 38 (p. 664).

HEART FAILURE

Primary structural or functional cardiac disorders can lead to this clinical
syndrome caused by impaired ventricular function. Mitral stenosis,
pulmonary hypertension, and peripartum cardiomyopathy are some examples.
Chronic pressure overload leads to ventricular dilation and impaired
function over time. Associated perinatal mortality rates are high (Bright,
2021).

■ Diagnosis
Heart failure is best thought of as chronic underlying ventricular myopathy
with episodic worsening causing clinical symptoms (Packer, 2019). Thus,
failure can have a gradual onset or may present as acute “flash” pulmonary
edema. In pregnant women, onset is most likely at the end of the second or
beginning of the third trimester and peripartum (Ruys, 2014). Of symptoms,
dyspnea is universal and others are orthopnea, palpitations, substernal chest
pain, nocturnal cough, and a sudden decline in the ability to complete usual
duties. Clinical findings include persistent basilar rales, hemoptysis,
progressive edema, tachypnea, and tachycardia. According to Malhamé and
associates (2019), serum levels of brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) are
variably elevated (Appendix, p. 1231). Cardiomegaly and pulmonary edema
are hallmark radiographic findings. Acutely, there is usually systolic failure.
Echocardiography may show an ejection fraction <0.45 or a fractional
shortening <30 percent, or both, and an end-diastolic dimension >2.7 cm/m2
(Hibbard, 1999). Coincidental diastolic failure also may be found,
depending on the underlying cause (Redfield, 2016). Last, the cause of
ventricular dysfunction—such as valvular abnormalities or concentric
hypertrophy—may become apparent.

■ Management
Pulmonary edema from heart failure usually responds promptly with diuretic
administration to reduce preload. Recall that furosemide (Lasix) is a potent
venodilator in addition to its diuretic action. Hypertension is common in
pregnancy, and afterload reduction is accomplished with hydralazine,
nifedipine, or another vasodilator. Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors
are withheld until after delivery because of marked fetal effects (Chap. 8, p.
150). β-blocking agents lower mortality rates in the setting of heart failure,

and carvedilol (Coreg) is commonly used in pregnancy. Last, digoxin
provides inotropic support and is associated with decreased hospitalizations.
With chronic heart failure, the incidence of associated thromboembolism is
high, and therefore prophylactic heparin is often recommended.
Left ventricular assist devices are now employed more frequently for
acute and chronic heart failure treatment. A few reports describe their use
during pregnancy (Hamdan, 2017; Makdisi, 2017). Extracorporeal
membrane oxygenation (ECMO) was reported to be lifesaving in a woman
with fulminating peripartum cardiomyopathy, and it may be used in women
with pulmonary hypertension (Meng, 2017; Pacheco, 2018).

SURGICALLY CORRECTED HEART DISEASE
Most clinically significant congenital heart lesions are repaired during
childhood. Those frequently not diagnosed until adulthood include atrial
septal defects, pulmonic stenosis, bicuspid aortic valve, and aortic
coarctation (Brickner, 2014). In some cases, the defect is mild and does not
require repair. In others, a significant anomaly is amenable to corrective
surgery, performed ideally before pregnancy. Rarely, surgical corrections are
necessary during pregnancy.

■ Valve Replacement Before Pregnancy
Numerous reports describe subsequent pregnancy outcomes in women who
have a prosthetic mitral or aortic valve placed before pregnancy. From one
review, the overall estimated maternal mortality rate was 1.2 percent
(Lawley, 2015). Using the Registry of Pregnancy and Cardiac Disease, the
maternal mortality rate was 1.4 percent in women with a mechanical heart
valve and 1.5 percent in women with a tissue heart valve (van Hagen, 2015).
Compared with the general maternal mortality rate measured per 100,000
births, this risk is more than 50-fold higher (Chap. 1, p. 4).
The type of valve, either mechanical or bioprosthetic, is paramount.
From the just-described cohort, mechanical heart valve thrombosis
complicated 4.7 percent. Only 58 percent of women with a mechanical heart
valve had a pregnancy free of serious adverse events compared with 79
percent of patients with a tissue heart valve (Table 52-5) (van Hagen, 2015).

A study of 417 women showed that pregnancy loss occurred in 61 and 15
percent with mechanical and bioprosthetic valves, respectively (Batra,
2018). Anticoagulation is a requisite with mechanical valves because of
thrombosis risks, and its complications are described in the next section.
Thus, pregnancy is undertaken only after serious consideration for women
with a mechanical valve.
TABLE 52-5. Selected Outcomes in Pregnancies Complicated by HeartValve Replacement

Bouhout and associates (2014) reported the outcomes of 27 pregnancies
in 14 women who underwent an aortic valve replacement prior to pregnancy.
Seven of the 27 pregnancies occurred in five women with a mechanical
valve. Complications in this group included two embolic myocardial
infarctions and one each of miscarriage, postpartum hemorrhage, placental
abruption, and preterm birth. In the bioprosthetic group, there were nine
miscarriages.
Adverse maternal and fetal outcomes plague also women with a
mechanical mitral valve. In one report of 28 pregnancies, Vause and
colleagues (2017) described severe maternal morbidity and mortality in 57
percent. A review of pregnancy outcomes in 800 women reported similar
results (Steinberg, 2017).
Porcine tissue mitral valves are safer during pregnancy, primarily
because thrombosis is rare, and anticoagulation is not required (see Table

52-5). However, valvular dysfunction with cardiac deterioration poses a
serious risk. Another drawback is that bioprostheses are less durable than
mechanical ones, and valve replacement longevity averages 10 to 15 years.
Batra and coworkers (2018) concluded that pregnancy accelerated the risk
for subsequent replacement.

Anticoagulation
This is critical for women with mechanical valves. Unfortunately, warfarin is
the most effective anticoagulant for preventing maternal thromboembolism
but causes harmful fetal effects. As seen in Table 52-6, anticoagulation with
heparin is less hazardous for the fetus, however, the risk of maternal
thromboembolic complications is increased (Steinberg, 2017). As a
compromise, some use heparin in early pregnancy, and then transition to
warfarin in the second trimester.
TABLE 52-6. Maternal and Fetal Composite Outcomes in 800 Women with
a Mechanical Heart Value Receiving Anticoagulation

Warfarin is teratogenic and causes miscarriages, stillbirths, and fetal
malformations (Chap. 8, p. 156). In one study of 71 women given warfarin
throughout pregnancy, the rates of miscarriage were 32 percent; stillbirth, 7
percent; and embryopathy, 6 percent (Cotrufo, 2002). The risk was highest
when the mean daily dose of warfarin exceeded 5 mg. Similarly, the

American College of Cardiology and the American Heart Association
estimate that the risk of embryopathy is dose dependent, and the risk is <3
percent if the warfarin dose is ≤5 mg/d (Nishimura, 2014). Women treated
with <5 mg/d of warfarin had fetal risks similar to the low-molecular-weight
heparin (LMWH) regimen (Steinberg, 2017). If the dosage is >5 mg/d, the
risk of embryopathy exceeds 8 percent.
Anticoagulation for mechanical valves using low-dose unfractionated
heparin (UFH) is definitely inadequate and carries a high associated
maternal mortality rate (Chan, 2000; Iturbe-Alessio, 1986). Even full
anticoagulation with either UFH or one of the LMWHs is associated with
valvular thrombosis (Leyh, 2002, 2003; Rowan, 2001). However,
compliance with dosing and therapeutic monitoring may have contributed
(McLintock, 2014). Therefore, if full anticoagulation with dose-adjusted
UFH or LMWH is used, meticulous monitoring is recommended. The
activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) should be at least 2 times
control or anti-Xa levels should be 0.8 to 1.2 U/mL at 4 to 6 hours postdose
(Nishimura, 2014).

Recommendations for Anticoagulation
Several different treatment options exist, although all are principally based
on consensus opinion, and none is completely ideal. Warfarin and LMWH
are associated with fewer valve thromboses and therefore favored over
subcutaneous UFH (D’Souza, 2017). In addition, therapeutic subcutaneous
UFH dosing is difficult to achieve due to lower peak plasma concentrations
in pregnant women, especially with advancing gestation (Barbour, 1995;
Brancazio, 1995). One guideline from the American College of Cardiology
and the American Heart Association offers different treatment options based
on trimester and baseline warfarin dose (Nishimura, 2014). Figure 52-3
displays a treatment algorithm based on these guidelines. All
recommendations also include aspirin 75 to 100 mg orally daily.

FIGURE 52-3 Algorithm for anticoagulation in gravidas with a mechanical heart valve. INR =
international normalized ratio; IV = intravenous; LMWH = low-molecular-weight heparin; aPTT =
activated partial thromboplastin time; UFH = unfractionated heparin. (From Elkayam, 2020; Nishimura,
2014; Roeder, 2011.)

Vaginal or cesarean delivery is ideally scheduled to allow controlled
discontinuation of anticoagulation and partial reversal of its effects. This

also permits administration of regional anesthesia, which requires a degree
of coagulation to avoid epidural hematoma formation (Chap. 25, p. 478). If
delivery intervenes while the anticoagulant is still effective, and extensive
bleeding is encountered, protamine sulfate is given intravenously to reverse
heparin effects. Patients should be counseled that in these situations regional
anesthesia may not safely be possible.
Following vaginal delivery, anticoagulant therapy with warfarin or
heparin may be restarted 6 hours later, usually with no problems. Following
cesarean delivery, full anticoagulation is withheld, but the optimal duration is
unclear. The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2018a)
recommends resuming UFH or LMWH 6 to 12 hours after cesarean delivery.
At Parkland Hospital, however, we wait at least 24 hours following a major
surgical procedure given inherent bleeding risks. Following first-trimester
dilation and curettage heparin is begun immediately.
Warfarin, LMWH, and UFH are compatible with breastfeeding. They do
not accumulate in breast milk and thus do not induce anticoagulant effects in
the newborn (Briggs, 2022).

■ Cardiac Surgery During Pregnancy
Although usually postponed until after delivery, valve replacement or other
cardiac surgery during pregnancy may be lifesaving. Several reviews
confirm that such surgery is associated with major maternal and fetal
morbidity (Liu, 2021). Elassy and associates (2014) described 23 women
who underwent urgent open cardiac surgery for severe valve malfunction.
Two women and 10 fetuses—all at a gestational age below 28 weeks—died
before hospital discharge. Only six fetuses were delivered at term. In a
review of 154 women undergoing bypass surgery during pregnancy, the
maternal mortality rate was 11 percent, and the fetal loss rate was 33 percent
(Jha, 2018). To optimize outcomes, Chandrasekhar and coworkers (2009)
recommend that surgery be elective when possible, pump flow rate should
remain >2.5 L/min/m2, perfusion pressure should exceed 70 mm Hg, and
hematocrit should be kept >28 percent.

■ Pregnancy after Heart Transplantation

Many successful pregnancies have followed cardiac transplantation
(D’Souza, 2018; Macera, 2018). Current recommendations from the
International Society of Heart and Lung Transplantation do not discourage
pregnancy in stable heart transplant recipients who are more than 1 year
posttransplant (Costanzo, 2010). Obviously, a highly specialized level of
care and multidisciplinary team is necessary.
The transplanted heart appears to respond normally to pregnancy-induced
alterations (Cowan, 2012). Despite this, complications are common during
pregnancy. Of 103 pregnancies in 57 heart recipients from the National
Transplantation Pregnancy Registry, almost half developed hypertension, and
11 percent suffered at least one rejection episode during pregnancy (Coscia,
2010). They were usually delivered by cesarean at a mean of 37 weeks’
gestation. Life expectancy following heart transplantation is known to be
limited. At follow-up, at least 16 women had died more than 2 years
postpartum. In another small study, pregnancy itself did not worsen long-term
survival rates (Dagher, 2018).

VALVULAR HEART DISEASE
Rheumatic fever is uncommon in the United States because of less crowded
living conditions, penicillin availability, and evolution of nonrheumatogenic
streptococcal strains. Still, it remains the chief cause of serious mitral
valvular disease in women of childbearing age in the nonindustrialized
world (Liaw, 2021; van Hagen, 2018).

■ Mitral Stenosis
Rheumatic endocarditis causes most mitral stenosis lesions. The normal
mitral valve surface area is 4.0 cm2, and when stenosis narrows this to <2.5
cm2, symptoms usually develop. The contracted valve impedes blood flow
from the left atrium to the ventricle.
With more severe stenosis, the left atrium dilates, left atrial pressure is
chronically elevated, and significant pulmonary hypertension develops
(Table 52-7) (Galiè, 2016). These women have a relatively fixed cardiac
output, and thus the increased preload of normal pregnancy and other factors
that raise cardiac output may cause ventricular failure and pulmonary edema.

Cardiac failure develops for the first time during pregnancy in one fourth of
women with mitral stenosis (Caulin-Glaser, 1999). The resulting pulmonary
venous hypertension and pulmonary edema create symptoms of dyspnea,
fatigue, palpitations, cough, and hemoptysis. The classic murmur may not be
heard in some women, and this clinical picture at term may be confused with
idiopathic peripartum cardiomyopathy (Cunningham, 1986, 2019).
TABLE 52-7. Major Cardiac Valve Disorders

Also with significant stenosis, tachycardia shortens ventricular diastolic
filling time and elevates the mitral gradient. This too may lead to pulmonary
edema, and therefore, sinus tachycardia is often treated prophylactically with
β-blocking agents. Atrial tachyarrhythmias, including fibrillation, are
common in mitral stenosis and are treated aggressively. Atrial fibrillation
predisposes to mural thrombus formation and cerebrovascular embolization
that can cause stroke (Chap. 63, p. 1132). Atrial thrombosis can also develop
despite a sinus rhythm (Hameed, 2005).

Pregnancy Outcomes
In general, complications are directly associated with the degree of valvular
stenosis. Women with a mitral-valve area <2 cm2 are at greatest risk (Siu,
2001b). In one study of 273 gravidas with mitral stenosis, 43 percent
developed heart failure, and almost a fourth of these women required
admission (van Hagen, 2018). For women with severe stenosis, half

developed heart failure, and one woman died. Fetal-growth restriction was
more common in women with a mitral valve area <1.0 cm2.
Prognosis also is related to maternal functional capacity. Among 486
pregnancies complicated by rheumatic heart disease—predominantly mitral
stenosis—8 of 10 maternal deaths were in women in NYHA classes III or IV
(Sawhney, 2003).

Management
Limited physical activity is generally recommended in women with mitral
stenosis. If symptoms of pulmonary congestion develop, activity is further
reduced, dietary sodium is restricted, and diuretics are given. Also, βblocker drug therapy slows the ventricular response to activity. If new-onset
atrial fibrillation develops, intravenous verapamil, 5 to 10 mg, is given, or
electrocardioversion is performed. For chronic fibrillation, digoxin, a βblocker, or a calcium-channel blocker can slow ventricular response.
Therapeutic anticoagulation is indicated with persistent fibrillation, left
atrial thrombus, and/or a history of embolism (Nanna, 2014).
Surgical intervention is considered for women with symptomatic severe
mitral stenosis. Other candidates are those with mitral-valve area 1.5 to 2.0
cm2 complicated by recurrent systemic embolization or severe pulmonary
hypertension. Balloon valvuloplasty is preferred if the valve is pliable (Bui,
2014). In one review of 71 pregnant women with severe mitral stenosis and
heart failure who underwent percutaneous valvuloplasty, 98 percent were
either NYHA class I or II by the time of delivery (Esteves, 2006). At a mean
of 44 months, the total event-free maternal survival rate was 54 percent.
However, eight women required another surgical intervention. All of the 66
newborns who were delivered at term had normal growth and development.
Labor and delivery are particularly stressful for women with
symptomatic mitral stenosis. Pain, exertion, and anxiety cause tachycardia
with possible rate-related heart failure. Epidural analgesia for labor is ideal.
Fluid overload should be avoided, and these women are best managed on the
“dry” side. As shown in Figure 52-4 uterine contractions raise cardiac output
by increasing circulating blood volume. Abrupt expansion in preload may
elevate pulmonary capillary wedge pressure and cause pulmonary edema.
Wedge pressures rise immediately postpartum. One hypothesis for this
suggests that the loss of the low-resistance placental circulation couples with

venous “autotransfusion” from a now-empty, contracted uterus and from the
lower extremities and pelvis (Clark, 1985). Thus, pulmonary edema may
manifest immediately postpartum.

FIGURE 52-4 Mean pulmonary capillary wedge pressure measurements (red graph line) in eight
women with mitral valve stenosis. Shaded yellow and blue boxes are mean (± 1 SD) pressures in
nonlaboring normal women at term. A. First-stage labor. B. Second-stage labor 15 to 30 minutes before
delivery. C. Postpartum 5 to 15 minutes. D. Postpartum 4 to 6 hours. E. Postpartum 18 to 24 hours.
(Data from Clark, 1985, 1989.)

Most prefer vaginal delivery in women with mitral stenosis. Elective
induction is reasonable so that labor and delivery are attended by a
scheduled, experienced team. With severe stenosis and chronic heart failure,
insertion of a pulmonary artery catheter may help guide management.

■ Mitral Insufficiency
A trivial degree of mitral insufficiency is found in most normal patients. But
if mitral valve leaflets align improperly during systole, abnormal degrees of
mitral regurgitation can develop. This is eventually followed by left
ventricular dilation and eccentric hypertrophy (see Table 52-7). Acute mitral
insufficiency is caused by chordae tendineae rupture, papillary muscle

infarction, or leaflet perforation from infective endocarditis. Chronic mitral
regurgitation, in contrast, may derive from rheumatic fever, connective
tissue diseases, mitral valve prolapse, or left ventricular dilation of any
etiology—for example, dilated cardiomyopathy. Less common causes include
a calcified mitral annulus, possibly some appetite suppressants, and in older
women, ischemic heart disease. Mitral valve vegetations—Libman-Sacks
endocarditis—are relatively common in women with antiphospholipid
antibodies (Shroff, 2012). These sometimes coexist with systemic lupus
erythematosus (Chap. 62, p. 1114).
In nonpregnant patients, symptoms from mitral valve insufficiency are
rare, and valve replacement is seldom indicated unless infective endocarditis
develops. During pregnancy, mitral regurgitation is similarly well tolerated,
probably because the lowered systemic vascular resistance yields less
regurgitation. In the report by van Hagen and associates (2018), of 117
women with moderate or severe regurgitation, 23 percent developed heart
failure during pregnancy. Occasionally tachyarrhythmias or severely
depressed systolic function require treatment.

■ Mitral Valve Prolapse
This diagnosis implies the presence of a pathological connective tissue
disorder—often termed myxomatous degeneration—which may involve the
valve leaflets, the annulus, or the chordae tendineae. Mitral insufficiency may
develop. Most women with mitral valve prolapse are asymptomatic and are
diagnosed during routine examination or echocardiography. The few women
with symptoms have anxiety, palpitations, atypical chest pain, dyspnea with
exertion, and syncope (Guy, 2012).
Pregnant women with mitral valve prolapse rarely have cardiac
complications. Hypervolemia may even improve alignment of the mitral
valve, and women without pathological myxomatous degeneration generally
have excellent pregnancy outcomes (Leśniak-Sobelga, 2004). For women
who are symptomatic, β-blocking drugs diminish sympathetic tone, relieve
chest pain and palpitations, and reduce the risk of life-threatening
arrhythmias.

■ Aortic Stenosis

Since the decline in incidence of rheumatic disease, congenital bicuspid
valve is now the most frequent cause of aortic stenosis in young women in
the United States (Carabello, 2017). A normal aortic valve has an area of 3
to 4 cm2, with a pressure gradient <5 mm Hg. If the valve area is <1 cm2,
flow is severely obstructed, and progressive pressure overload on the left
ventricle develops. Concentric left ventricular hypertrophy follows, and if it
is severe, end-diastolic pressures become elevated, ejection fraction
decreases, and cardiac output is reduced (see Table 52-7). Severity is
estimated by peak velocity of flow across the aortic valve. Mild stenosis has
a peak velocity of 2–2.9 m/s, moderate 3-3.9 m/s, and severe ≥4 m/s.
Corresponding mean pressure gradients are <20, 20–39, and ≥40 mm Hg,
respectively (Carabello, 2017). Characteristic manifestations develop late
and include chest pain, syncope, heart failure, and sudden death from
arrhythmias. In asymptomatic patients, the mortality rate is 1 percent per
year, but with symptoms it increases to 25 percent per year. Thus, valve
replacement is indicated for symptomatic patients.

Pregnancy
In one single-center study, aortic stenosis accounted for 15 percent of cases
of congenital heart disease in 178 pregnant women (Kim, 2019). That said,
clinically significant aortic stenosis is infrequent during pregnancy. Mild to
moderate degrees of stenosis are well tolerated. Severe disease is lifethreatening and carries a 6-percent mortality risk (Lin, 2017). The principal
underlying hemodynamic problem is the fixed cardiac output associated with
severe stenosis. During pregnancy, several common events acutely lower
preload further and thus aggravate the fixed cardiac output. These include
vena caval occlusion from the gravid uterus, regional analgesia, sepsis, and
hemorrhage. From the earlier-cited Canadian study, complication rates were
higher if the aortic valve area measured <1.5 cm2 (Siu, 2001b).

Management
For asymptomatic women with aortic stenosis, no treatment except close
observation is required. Management of a symptomatic woman is undertaken
in conjunction with a cardiologist and includes strict limitation of activity
and cautious use of diuretics. If symptoms persist, surgical intervention or
preterm delivery may be considered. Catheter-based valvuloplasty is

associated with risks to both the mother and fetus and shows poor long-term
efficacy (Pessel, 2014). Namely, the aortic valve can again narrow or new
aortic regurgitation may develop. The alternative surgical approach—valve
replacement—is associated with significant risk of fetal demise due to the
hypotension associated with cardiac bypass. Transcatheter aortic valve
replacement (TAVR) has been performed in low-risk nonpregnant women,
but there is little experience with this procedure during pregnancy (Hodson,
2016; Mack, 2019). Accordingly, the American College of Cardiology, the
American Heart Association, and the European Society of Cardiology
recommend delaying conception until after surgical correction for severe
aortic stenosis (Nishimura, 2014; Regitz-Zagrosek, 2018). For those with
uncorrected severe symptomatic aortic stenosis, cesarean delivery is
preferred. For asymptomatic women with severe stenosis, care is
individualized. In nonsevere stenosis, vaginal delivery is preferred (RegitzZagrosek, 2018).
For women with critical aortic stenosis, intensive monitoring during
labor is essential. Pulmonary artery catheterization may be helpful because of
the narrow margin separating fluid overload from hypovolemia. Women with
aortic stenosis are dependent on adequate end-diastolic ventricular filling
pressures to maintain cardiac output and systemic perfusion. Abrupt drops in
end-diastolic volume may result in hypotension, syncope, myocardial
infarction, and sudden death. Thus, avoiding diminished ventricular preload
and maintaining cardiac output are key. During labor and delivery, affected
women are best managed on the “wet” side. This provides a margin of safety
in intravascular volume in anticipation of possible hemorrhage. In women
with a competent mitral valve, pulmonary edema is rare.
During labor, narcotic or low-dose, slow-infusion epidural analgesia
seems ideal and avoids potentially hazardous hypotension. Easterling and
coworkers (1988) studied the effects of epidural analgesia in five women
with severe stenosis and demonstrated immediate and profound effects from
decreased filling pressures. Xia and colleagues (2006) emphasize slow
administration of dilute local anesthetic agents into the epidural space. In
hemodynamically stable women, forceps or vacuum delivery is used only for
standard obstetrical indications. In those experiencing dizziness, shortness of
breath, or tachycardia with pushing, an operative vaginal delivery is
preferred.

■ Aortic Insufficiency
Aortic valve regurgitation or insufficiency allows diastolic flow of blood
from the aorta back into the left ventricle. Frequent causes of insufficiency
are rheumatic fever, connective tissue abnormalities, and congenital lesions
(Carabello, 2017). With Marfan syndrome, the aortic root may dilate and
create regurgitation (p. 936). Acute insufficiency may also develop with
bacterial endocarditis or aortic dissection. Last, aortic and mitral valve
insufficiency have both been linked to the appetite suppressants fenfluramine
and dexfenfluramine and to the ergot-derived dopamine agonists cabergoline
and pergolide (Schade, 2007; Zanettini, 2007). With chronic insufficiency,
left ventricular hypertrophy and dilation develop. Slow-onset fatigue,
dyspnea, and pulmonary edema follows ventricular dilation with subsequent
rapid deterioration (see Table 52-7).
Aortic insufficiency is generally well tolerated during pregnancy. Like
mitral valve insufficiency, reduced vascular resistance is thought to improve
hemodynamic function. If symptoms of heart failure develop, diuretics are
given, and bed rest is encouraged.

■ Pulmonic Stenosis
This lesion is usually congenital and may be associated with Fallot tetralogy
or Noonan syndrome (Chikwe, 2017). The greater hemodynamic burden of
pregnancy can precipitate right-sided heart failure or atrial arrhythmias in
women with severe stenosis. Surgical correction ideally is done before
pregnancy, but if symptoms progress, a balloon valvuloplasty may be
necessary antepartum (Galal, 2015; Siu, 2001a).
In studying pregnancy outcomes, Drenthen and associates (2006) found
infrequent cardiac complications in 81 pregnancies in 51 Dutch women with
pulmonic stenosis. The NYHA classification worsened in two women, and
nine experienced palpitations or arrhythmias. No changes in pulmonary
valvular function or other adverse cardiac events were reported. However,
noncardiac complication rates were significant—17 percent had preterm
delivery, 15 percent had hypertension, and 4 percent developed
thromboembolism.

CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE
The incidence of congenital heart disease in the United States approximates
1.9 percent of live births, and half of these are moderate to severe forms
(Lin, 2017). With modern surgeries, approximately 90 percent of those born
with congenital heart disease survive to childbearing age, and it is now the
most common type of heart disease encountered during pregnancy (Hopkins,
2018). Specifically, analysis from the United States Nationwide Inpatient
Sample database showed a linear rise in the prevalence of congenital heart
disease between 2000 and 2010—from 6.4 to 9.0 per 10,000 women
admitted for delivery (Thompson, 2015).
The odds of obstetrical and perinatal complications are increased two- to
threefold in women with congenital heart disease compared with unaffected
women (Ramage, 2019). Also, the maternal mortality rate was higher for
women with congenital heart disease at 178 per 100,000 deliveries
compared with 7 per 100,000 deliveries in unaffected gravidas (Thompson,
2015).

■ Atrial Septal Defects
A patent foramen ovale (PFO) is a persisting incompetence of the fossa
ovale, and this flap has the potential to open under increased hydrostatic
pressure. Of all adults, approximately one fourth have this defect (Silvestry,
2015). The small risk of PFO-related stroke, discussed subsequently, is
likely higher in pregnant than in nonpregnant women and mainly attributed to
normal pregnancy hypercoagulability (Chen, 2016). Preventive PFO repair is
not recommended (Kernan, 2014).
An atrial septal defect (ASD) is a true hole in the septum. The secundumtype defect accounts for 70 percent, and associated mitral valve myxomatous
abnormalities with prolapse are common. Most ASDs are typically
asymptomatic until the third or fourth decade of life (Lin, 2017). If an ASD is
discovered in adulthood, most recommend repair.
Pregnancy with an unrepaired ASD is well tolerated unless pulmonary
hypertension has developed, but this is uncommon (Bredy, 2018). Medical
treatment during pregnancy is indicated for congestive heart failure or an
arrhythmia. The risk of endocarditis with an ASD is negligible.

With the potential to shunt blood from right to left, a paradoxical
embolism is possible. A venous thrombus enters the systemic arterial
circulation through the ASD, causing an embolic stroke (Bredy, 2018). For
this reason, filters should be placed on intravenous access sites. In a gravida
with an ASD but without current venous thromboembolism (VTE), the
decision to add anticoagulant prophylaxis to counter this potential embolism
risk is problematic. However, for a pregnant woman with an ASD who is
immobile or has another risk factor for thromboembolism, compression
stockings and prophylactic heparin are reasonable.

■ Ventricular Septal Defects
These lesions close spontaneously during childhood in 90 percent of cases.
Of the four main ventricular septal defect (VSD) types, most defects are
paramembranous. This location is well below the outlet valves yet above the
ventricular musculature. The degree of associated left-to-right shunt and
physiological derangements are related to lesion size. In general, if the defect
measures <1.25 cm2, pulmonary hypertension and heart failure do not
develop. If the effective defect size exceeds that of the aortic valve orifice,
symptoms rapidly develop. For these reasons, most children undergo surgical
repair before pulmonary hypertension develops. Adults with unrepaired
large defects develop left ventricular failure and pulmonary hypertension and
have a high incidence of bacterial endocarditis (Brickner, 2014).
Pregnancy is well tolerated with small- to moderate-sized VSD shunts.
However, if pulmonary arterial pressures reach systemic levels, flow is
reversed or bidirectional—Eisenmenger syndrome (p. 929). If this cyanotic
condition develops, the maternal and fetal mortality rates are significantly
higher, and thus pregnancy is generally not advisable (Lin, 2017). Bacterial
endocarditis is more common with unrepaired defects, and antimicrobial
prophylaxis is often required (p. 934). As shown in Table 52-4, 16 percent
of offspring born to these women also have a VSD.

■ Atrioventricular Septal Defects
An atrioventricular (AV) septal defect is characterized by a common, ovoid
AV junction. These account for approximately 3 percent of all congenital
cardiac malformations and are distinct from isolated ASDs or VSDs. This

defect is associated with aneuploidy, Eisenmenger syndrome, and other
malformations (Foeller, 2018). Compared with simple septal defects,
complications are more frequent during pregnancy. In a review of 48
pregnancies in 29 affected women, complications included persistent
deterioration of NYHA class in 23 percent, significant arrhythmias in 19
percent, and heart failure in 2 percent (Drenthen, 2005). Congenital heart
disease was identified in 15 percent of the offspring.

■ Persistent (Patent) Ductus Arteriosus
The ductus connects the proximal left pulmonary artery to the descending
aorta just distal to the left subclavian artery. Functional closure of the ductus
from vasoconstriction occurs shortly after term birth. The physiological
consequences with its persistence are related to its size. Most significant
lesions are repaired in childhood. However, in women with an unrepaired
ductus, pulmonary hypertension, heart failure, or cyanosis will develop if
systemic blood pressure falls and blood flow reverses from the pulmonary
artery into the aorta (Foeller, 2018). A sudden blood pressure decline at
delivery—such as with regional analgesia or hemorrhage—may lead to fatal
collapse. Therefore, hypotension is avoided but treated vigorously if it
develops. Prophylaxis for bacterial endocarditis is indicated at delivery for
unrepaired defects (p. 934). As shown in Table 52-4, the incidence of
inheritance approximates 4 percent.

■ Cyanotic Heart Disease
Cyanosis develops when congenital heart lesions produce right-to-left
shunting of blood past the pulmonary capillary bed. The classic and most
commonly encountered lesion in adults and during pregnancy is the Fallot
tetralogy (Foeller, 2018). This is characterized by a large VSD, pulmonary
stenosis, right ventricular hypertrophy, and an overriding aorta that receives
blood from both the right and left ventricles. The magnitude of the shunt
varies inversely with systemic vascular resistance. Hence, during pregnancy,
when peripheral resistance decreases, shunt flow increases and cyanosis
worsens.
Generally, women with cyanotic heart disease do poorly during
pregnancy. Those with concomitant Eisenmenger syndrome are at greatest

risk (p. 929). With uncorrected Fallot tetralogy, maternal mortality rates
approach 10 percent. For fetal outcome, there is a relationship between
chronic hypoxemia, polycythemia, and complications such as miscarriage
and perinatal morbidity. When hypoxemia is intense enough to stimulate a
rise in hemoglobin concentration >20 g/dL, pregnancy wastage is virtually
100 percent (Lin, 2017).
Although not all cyanotic lesions are repairable, with satisfactory
surgical correction before pregnancy, maternal and fetal outcomes are much
improved. In a review of 197 pregnancies in 99 women with surgically
corrected Fallot tetralogy, pregnancy was usually well tolerated, and no
mothers died (Cauldwell, 2017). Still, almost 9 percent of pregnancies were
complicated by adverse cardiac events including new-onset or worsening
arrhythmias and heart failure (Balci, 2011; Kamiya, 2012).
Some women with Ebstein anomaly, characterized by a malpositioned
and malformed tricuspid valve, may reach reproductive age. The right
ventricle is small and the right atrium is severely dilated. Right-sided heart
failure is common. These women are very preload dependent, and
pregnancy-induced hypervolemia can worsen the tricuspid regurgitation
(Kanoh, 2018). Arrhythmias also are common, especially Wolff-ParkinsonWhite syndrome (p. 936). Vaginal delivery seems preferable in most cases.
In the absence of cyanosis, heart failure, or significant arrhythmias, affected
women usually tolerate pregnancy well (Safi, 2016).

■ Pregnancy after Surgical Repair
Transposition of the Great Vessels
Pregnancy following arterial switch operation for transposition is
associated with good outcomes. A major concern is fatal arrhythmias that
usually are precipitated by exercise (Lin, 2017). Earlier studies cited a
relatively high rate of heart failure and arrhythmias, but more recent studies
have favorable pregnancy outcomes (Trigas, 2014). In one study of 20
pregnancies, there were three cases of heart failure (Horiuchi, 2019). Stoll
and coworkers (2018) reported no adverse cardiac events in 25 pregnancies.
Of other defects, repaired truncus arteriosus and double-outlet right
ventricle with subsequent successful, although eventful, pregnancies have
been described (Drenthen, 2008; Hoendermis, 2008). Ironically,

preconceptional counseling did little to dissuade these women from
childbearing (Cauldwell, 2016).

Single Functional Ventricle
With hypoplastic left heart syndrome, most affected women are now
expected to survive into adulthood (Davis, 2018). Frequently, these women
become pregnant, and those who have undergone a Fontan repair carry a
particularly higher risk for complications. In brief, this procedure involves
diverting blood via a surgical anastomosis from the vena cava to the
pulmonary artery without passing through the right ventricle. Blood flows
passively to the pulmonary vasculature. Preload drives circulation in the
Fontan circuit, and thus patients are sensitive to volume changes (Moroney,
2018).
From their review of 255 pregnancies in 133 women, Garcia-Ropero and
colleagues (2018) reported 115 miscarriages (45 percent) and 19 elective
terminations (7 percent). Cardiac complications included arrhythmias in 8
percent and heart failure in 4 percent of pregnancies. Among 133 live births,
there were 68 preterm births (59 percent) and 7 perinatal deaths (6 percent).
Postpartum venous thromboembolism also is common (Moroney, 2020).
Similar complications attend a maternal systemic right ventricle, that is,
one in which the right ventricle rather than the left pumps blood to the
systemic circulation (Khan, 2015).

■ Eisenmenger Syndrome
This describes secondary pulmonary hypertension that arises from any
cardiac lesion. The most common underlying defects are ASD, VSD, and
persistent ductus arteriosus (Fig. 52-5). The syndrome develops when
pulmonary vascular resistance exceeds systemic resistance and leads to
concomitant right-to-left shunting. Patients are asymptomatic for years, but
eventually pulmonary hypertension becomes severe enough to cause this
shunting.

FIGURE 52-5 Eisenmenger syndrome due to a ventricular septal defect (VSD). A. Substantial left-toright shunting through the VSD leads to morphological changes in the smaller pulmonary arteries and
arterioles. Specifically, medial hypertrophy, intimal cellular proliferations, and fibrosis lead to narrowing
or closure of the vessel lumen. These vascular changes create pulmonary hypertension and a resultant
reversal of the intracardiac shunt (B). With sustained pulmonary hypertension, extensive atherosclerosis
and calcification often develop in the large pulmonary arteries. Although a VSD is shown here,
Eisenmenger syndrome may also develop in association with a large atrial septal defect or persistent
ductus arteriosus.

Pregnant women with Eisenmenger syndrome tolerate hypotension
poorly, and death usually is caused by right ventricular failure with
cardiogenic shock. In a review of 73 pregnancies, Weiss and associates
(1998) cited a 36-percent maternal death rate. Three of 26 deaths were
antepartum, and the remainder of women died intrapartum or within a month
of delivery. In another study of 13 gravidas, one mother died 17 days after
delivery, and there were five perinatal deaths (Wang, 2011). Last, in a series
of 11 pregnancies in China, four mothers died (Duan, 2016). Given such
poor outcomes for both mother and fetus, Eisenmenger syndrome is
considered to be an absolute contraindication to pregnancy (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019; Foeller, 2018; Meng,
2017).

PULMONARY HYPERTENSION
Normal resting mean pulmonary artery pressure is 12 to 16 mm Hg. Most
define pulmonary hypertension in nonpregnant individuals as a resting mean
pulmonary pressure >25 mm Hg (Franco, 2019). Pulmonary vascular
resistance in late normal pregnancy approximates 80 dyne/sec/cm−5, which is
34-percent less than the nonpregnant value of 120 dyne/sec/cm−5 (Clark,
1989).
Physiologically, pregnancy is associated increased cardiac output, and in
healthy gravidas, pulmonary vascular resistance decreases to help
accommodate this (Clark, 1989). With pulmonary hypertension, the stiff
pulmonary vasculature does not allow the normal fall in pulmonary vascular
resistance. Thus, the normal increased cardiac output actually leads to further
pulmonary artery pressure elevation and then eventually to right heart failure.
With failure, the interventricular septum bulges leftward to impair left
ventricular diastolic filling, which compromises cardiac output (Gei, 2014;
Pieper, 2011).
The current clinical classification system, shown in Table 52-8, contains
five groups of disorders that cause pulmonary hypertension (Galiè, 2016).
Important prognostic and therapeutic distinctions separate group 1 pulmonary
arterial hypertension and the other groups. Group 1, which is more common
in nonpregnant women, indicates that a specific disease affects pulmonary
arterioles. It includes idiopathic or primary pulmonary arterial hypertension
as well as those cases secondary to a known cause such as connective tissue
disease. For example, approximately a third of women with scleroderma and
10 percent with systemic lupus erythematosus have pulmonary arterial
hypertension (Franco, 2019). Other causes in young women are human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection, sickle-cell disease, and
thyrotoxicosis.
TABLE 52-8. Comprehensive Clinical Classification of Pulmonary
Hypertension of the European Society of Cardiology and the European
Respiratory Society

In pregnant women, group 2 disorders are the most common. These are
secondary to pulmonary venous hypertension caused by left-sided atrial,
ventricular, or valvular disorders. A typical example is mitral stenosis
discussed earlier (p. 924). In contrast, groups 3 through 5 are seen
infrequently in young otherwise healthy women.

■ Diagnosis and Prognosis
Symptoms may be vague, and dyspnea with exertion is the most frequent.
With group 2 disorders, orthopnea and nocturnal dyspnea are also usually
present. Angina and syncope occur when right ventricular output is fixed, and
they suggest advanced disease. Chest radiography often shows enlarged

pulmonary hilar arteries and attenuated peripheral markings. It may also
disclose parenchymal causes of hypertension. Noninvasive echocardiography
can provide an estimate of pulmonary artery pressures, although cardiac
catheterization remains the standard for measurement. In studies of pregnant
women who underwent both echocardiography and cardiac catheterization,
pulmonary artery pressures were significantly overestimated by
echocardiography in approximately a third of cases (Herrera, 2020; Wylie,
2007).
Regardless of the etiology, the final common pathway of pulmonary
hypertension is right heart failure and death. The average survival length
after diagnosis is <4 years (Krexi, 2015). That said, longevity depends on the
severity and cause of pulmonary hypertension at discovery. As discussed
later, some disorders respond to medical interventions, which may improve
quality of life. Preconceptional and contraceptive counseling are imperative
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019).

■ Pregnancy
The maternal mortality rate is appreciable in affected women, and this is
especially so with idiopathic pulmonary arterial hypertension (Martin,
2019). In the past, the ability to accurately identify causes and assess disease
severity were often poor. Thus, although most severe cases of idiopathic
pulmonary arterial hypertension had the worst prognosis, it was erroneously
assumed that all types of pulmonary hypertension were equally dangerous.
With widespread use of echocardiography, less-severe lesions with a better
prognosis are now discernible. The maternal mortality rate for pulmonary
hypertension has improved. In one study, it was 25 percent during the decade
ending in 2007 compared with 38 percent for the decade ending in 1996
(Bédard, 2009). Importantly, almost 80 percent of the deaths were during the
first month postpartum. Meng and associates (2017) reported mortality rates
of 23 percent with group 1 and 5 percent with the other groups. Mortality risk
correlates positively with advancing pulmonary hypertension severity, which
is characterized by Eisenmenger syndrome, severe hypertension, and higher
NYHA class (Keepanasseril, 2019; Sun, 2018). In an audit of 47 pregnancies
in women with pulmonary hypertension at Parkland Hospital, the maternal
mortality rate was 9 percent (Herrera, 2020). Of four deaths, three women

had severe hypertension. A striking example of right ventricular hypertrophy
in one of these women who died is shown in Figure 52-6.

FIGURE 52-6 Cross-sectional display of right cardiac dysmorphology in a pregnant woman who died
from undiagnosed primary pulmonary hypertension. There is prominent dilation of the right ventricle with
right ventricular hypertrophy (arrow).

Pregnancy is contraindicated with severe disease. This is especially true
in women with pulmonary arterial changes, which develop in most group 1
cases. With milder disease from other causes—group 2 being the most
common—the prognosis is better. With the more frequent use of
echocardiography and pulmonary artery catheterization in young women with
heart disease, we have identified women with mild to moderate pulmonary
hypertension who tolerate pregnancy, labor, and delivery well (Herrera,
2020).

■ Management
Treatment of symptomatic pregnant women includes limiting activity and
avoiding supine position later in gestation. Diuretics, supplemental oxygen,
and pulmonary vasodilator drugs are standard therapy for symptoms. Some
recommend anticoagulation. Several reports describe the successful use of
intravenous pulmonary artery vasodilators (Foeller, 2018; Franco, 2019).
Prostacyclin analogues that can be administered parenterally include
epoprostenol (Flolan) and treprostinil (Remodulin), whereas iloprost

(Ventavis) is inhaled. Each has been used in pregnancy. Inhaled nitric oxide
is an option that has been employed in cases of acute cardiopulmonary
decompensation. As reviewed by Običan and Cleary (2014),
phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitors, such as sildenafil (Viagra), cause
vasodilation of both the pulmonary and systemic vascular beds and have an
inotropic effect on the hypertrophic right ventricle. This also has been used
to advantage during pregnancy (Meng, 2017). Bosentan—an endothelinreceptor antagonist, and riociguat—a soluble guanylate cyclase stimulator,
are teratogenic in mice and contraindicated in pregnancy (Franco, 2019).
During labor and delivery, supplemental oxygen is given to maintain >90
percent saturation. These women are at greatest risk when venous return and
right ventricular filling are diminished. To avoid hypotension, assiduous
attention is given to epidural analgesia induction, fluid therapy, and blood
loss prevention and treatment at delivery (Martin, 2019; Meng, 2017).

CARDIOMYOPATHIES
The American Heart Association defines these as a heterogeneous group of
myocardial diseases associated with mechanical and/or electrical
dysfunction (Narula, 2017). Affected women usually have inappropriate
ventricular hypertrophy or dilation. Cardiomyopathies stem from varied
causes, and the most frequent is genetic. Of the two major divisions, primary
cardiomyopathies are solely or predominantly confined to the heart muscle.
Examples are hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, dilated cardiomyopathies, and
peripartum cardiomyopathy. Secondary cardiomyopathies result from
generalized systemic disorders that produce pathological myocardial
involvement. Diabetes, systemic lupus erythematosus, chronic hypertension,
and thyroid disorders are representative conditions.

■ Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy
This disorder affects approximately 1 in 500 adults (Herrey, 2014).
Characterized by cardiac hypertrophy, myocyte disarray, and interstitial
fibrosis, the condition in up to 60 percent of affected patients is caused by
mutations in genes that encode cardiac sarcomere proteins. In such cases,
inheritance is autosomal dominant, and genetic screening is complex (Cirino,
2019; Elliott, 2014). Other genetic and nongenetic etiologies underlie 5 to 10

percent of cases, and the cause is unknown in approximately 25 percent. The
resulting myocardial muscle abnormality is typified by left ventricular
myocardial hypertrophy with a pressure gradient against left ventricular
outflow. Diagnosis is established by echocardiographic identification of a
hypertrophied and nondilated left ventricle in the absence of other
cardiovascular conditions.
Most affected women are asymptomatic, but dyspnea, anginal or atypical
chest pain, syncope, and arrhythmias may develop. Complex arrhythmias may
progress to sudden death, which is the most frequent cause of death.
Asymptomatic patients with runs of ventricular tachycardia are especially
prone to sudden death. Symptoms usually worsen with exercise.
Studies that include more than 700 pregnancies in 500 women indicate an
overall relatively good prognosis (Schaufelberger, 2019). In a systematic
review with 237 women with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy who had a
combined 408 pregnancies, the maternal mortality rate was 0.5 percent
(Schinkel, 2014). Worsening of symptoms or other complications developed
in 29 percent, and 26 percent delivered preterm.
Management is similar to that for aortic stenosis (p. 926). Controlling
heart rate and avoiding preload and afterload reduction are therapy basics.
Strenuous exercise is prohibited during pregnancy. Abrupt positional changes
are avoided to prevent reflex vasodilation and decreased preload. If
symptoms develop, especially angina, β-adrenergic or calcium-channel
blocking drugs are given. Drugs that evoke diuresis or reduce vascular
resistance are generally not used because they decrease preload. But if these
are necessary, women should be closely monitored. The delivery route is
determined by obstetrical indications. Choice of anesthesia is controversial,
and some consider general anesthesia the safest. Regional analgesia can be
used with carefully titrated, adequate intravascular volume to maintain left
ventricular filling pressure. Neonates rarely demonstrate inherited lesions at
birth.

■ Dilated Cardiomyopathy
This is characterized by left and/or right ventricular enlargement and reduced
systolic function in the absence of coronary, valvular, congenital, or systemic
disease known to cause myocardial dysfunction. Although there are many
known inherited and acquired causes of dilated cardiomyopathy, the etiology

remains undefined in approximately half of cases (Schaufelberger, 2019).
Some result from viral infections, including myocarditis and HIV. Other
causes, which are potentially reversible, include alcoholism, cocaine abuse,
coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), and thyroid disease.
In affected gravidas, the rate of major adverse cardiovascular events in
pregnancy ranges from 25 to 40 percent (American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists, 2019; Grewal, 2009). Heart failure and arrhythmias are
the most common, and women with preexisting moderate or severe left
ventricular dysfunction or NYHA functional class III or IV are at greatest
risk. Dilated cardiomyopathy is managed with therapy for standard heart
failure and for the specific underlying etiology (Bozkurt, 2016).

■ Peripartum Cardiomyopathy
This disorder is similar to other forms of nonischemic dilated
cardiomyopathy except for its unique relationship with pregnancy.
Peripartum cardiomyopathy shares a genetic predisposition with both
familial and sporadic idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy (Cunningham, 2019;
Ware, 2016). It is a diagnosis of exclusion following a concurrent evaluation
for peripartum heart failure.
Although the term peripartum cardiomyopathy has been used widely,
until recently, little evidence supported a unique pregnancy-induced
cardiomyopathy. Pearson (2000) reported findings of a workshop of the
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute that established the following
diagnostic criteria:
Development of cardiac failure in the last month of pregnancy or within 5
months after delivery (Fig. 52-7),

FIGURE 52-7 Peripartum cardiomyopathy with mild pulmonary edema. Chest radiograph of a woman
with an abnormally enlarged heart and mild perihilar opacification consistent with dilated
cardiomyopathy.

• Absence of an identifiable cause for the cardiac failure,
• Absence of recognizable heart disease prior to the last month of pregnancy,
and
• Left ventricular systolic dysfunction demonstrated by classic
echocardiographic criteria. These include depressed ejection fraction or
fractional shortening along with a dilated left ventricle.
The incidence of peripartum cardiomyopathy varies considerably and
depends on the population studied and the diligence of the search for a cause.
The average frequency in the United States is 1 per 1000 to 4000 births
(Cruz, 2018; Cunningham, 2019).
The etiology of peripartum cardiomyopathy remains unknown, and
proposed causes include viral myocarditis, abnormal immune response to
pregnancy, aberrant response to the greater hemodynamic burden of
pregnancy, hormonal interactions, malnutrition, inflammation, and apoptosis.
The current theory regarding pathophysiology is that of a “two-hit

hypothesis” (Cruz, 2018; Ricke-Hoch, 2020). In this regard, peripartum
cardiomyopathy affects genetically susceptible women who have one of
several cardiac gene mutations to include TTNC1, TTN, and STAT3.
Pregnancy at term is further characterized by prodigious secretion of
prolactin by the maternal pituitary. At the same time, the placenta secretes
high levels of the antiangiogenic molecule soluble fms-like tyrosine kinase
(sFlt-1). Although a number of putative triggering events have been
hypothesized, a 16-kDa prolactin fragment—vasoinhibin—acts to cause
myocardial damage with clinically apparent ventricular dysfunction. This is
made worse by high levels of sFlt-1, which is superabundant in women with
preeclampsia, multifetal pregnancy, or both. Bromocriptine therapy has been
evaluated because it inhibits prolactin secretion, and preliminary studies
support its use (Haghikia, 2019). For the same reason, it is also reasonable
to proscribe breastfeeding.
Hypertensive disorders frequently coexist with peripartum
cardiomyopathy, and another proposed mechanism links peripartum
cardiomyopathy to preeclampsia (Cunningham, 2019). Antiangiogenic factors
are known to be associated with preeclampsia and can induce peripartum
cardiomyopathy in susceptible mice. Thus, cardiomyopathy may be
precipitated by antiangiogenic factors in a genetically predisposed host
because of insufficient proangiogenic factors.
Ntusi and coworkers (2015) analyzed the clinical features of women with
peripartum cardiomyopathy compared with those with hypertensive heart
failure. All women with peripartum cardiomyopathy became symptomatic in
the postpartum period, whereas 85 percent of women with hypertensive heart
failure developed symptoms antepartum. Peripartum cardiomyopathy was
significantly linked with twin gestation, smoking, and echocardiographic
abnormalities. In contrast, hypertensive heart failure patients more often had
a family history of hypertension, hypertension and preeclampsia in a prior
pregnancy, and left ventricular hypertrophy.

Management
Management of peripartum cardiomyopathy is the same as that of heart
failure, and described earlier (p. 922). Therapy is aimed at volume overload,
afterload reduction, rhythm control, and inotropic support (Davis, 2020). In
addition, β-blocker therapy is used to decrease mortality rates.
Anticoagulation with LMWH is considered when the ejection fraction

reaches 30 to 35 percent because of the increased risk for left ventricular
thrombi (Bauersachs, 2016; Bozkurt, 2016).
In one pilot study, bromocriptine resulted in higher rates of left
ventricular recovery at 6 months and lower mortality rates (Sliwa, 2010). A
larger study of 115 women showed no difference in full restoration of left
ventricular function between those treated and untreated with bromocriptine
(Haghikia, 2013). Another investigation of 63 women showed no difference
in left ventricular function improvement with short-term versus long-term
bromocriptine therapy (Hilfiker-Kleiner, 2017). The use of bromocriptine as
adjuvant therapy is considered experimental at this time.

Prognosis
Approximately half of women suffering from peripartum cardiomyopathy
recover baseline ventricular function within 6 months of delivery. This rate
is lower in obese women (Davis, 2018). In a group of 100 women with
newly diagnosed peripartum cardiomyopathy, 72 percent had a left
ventricular ejection fraction ≥50 percent at 1 year postpartum (McNamara,
2015). Recovery to this level occurred in almost 90 percent of women whose
baseline ejection fraction was at least 30 percent. This is compared with <40
percent in women whose baseline ventricular ejection fraction was <30
percent. Recovery was also related to the baseline left ventricular enddiastolic diameter. Event-free survival at 1 year occurred in 93 percent. Six
women experienced nine major events that included four deaths, four left
ventricular assist device implantations, and one heart transplantation. Li and
colleagues (2016) also found that a baseline left ventricular ejection fraction
<34 percent and a BNP level >1860 pg/mL were associated with an
approximately threefold greater risk of persistent left ventricular systolic
dysfunction. The mortality rate approaches 5 to 10 percent at 1 year in
women with persistent cardiac failure (American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists, 2019).
Long-term follow-up was reported in 28 women with a median
surveillance of 91 months (Ersbøll, 2018). Although most women were
asymptomatic, compared with controls, they had lower ejection fractions,
less maximal exercise capacity, and subtle diastolic dysfunction.

Subsequent Pregnancy

From the largest studies on the topic, approximately a third of women with a
history of peripartum cardiomyopathy will suffer relapse with worsening of
symptoms and deterioration of left ventricular function during another
pregnancy (Elkayam, 2014a). The risk of relapse in women with persistent
left ventricular dysfunction is substantially higher than in those who have
recovered normal ventricular function before a subsequent pregnancy
(Hilfiker-Kleiner, 2017). However, normalization of left ventricular function
does not guarantee an uncomplicated pregnancy, because approximately 20
percent of these women are at risk for deterioration in that function (Codsi,
2018).

■ Other Cardiomyopathy Types
Arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia is a unique cardiomyopathy
defined histologically by progressive replacement of right ventricular
myocardium with adipose and fibrous tissue. It has an estimated population
prevalence of 1 in 5000, predisposes to ventricular tachyarrhythmias, and is
a cause of sudden death, particularly in younger individuals (Agir, 2014).
Studies of pregnancies in affected women reported symptoms, including heart
failure, in 18 to 33 percent of pregnancies (Schaufelberger, 2019). Based on
their systematic review, Krul and coworkers (2011) counsel against
pregnancy.
Restrictive cardiomyopathy is probably the least common type. This
inherited cardiomyopathy is characterized by a ventricular filling pattern in
which worsening myocardial stiffness raises ventricular pressure
precipitously and allows only a small filling volume (Elliott, 2008).
Pregnancy is not advised because of the severe clinical course and poor
prognosis in general.
Takotsubo cardiomyopathy is a rare form of acute reversible left
ventricular apical wall ballooning (Kraft, 2017). It is considered to be
“stress induced” and appears to be more common with preeclampsia and
cesarean delivery. Myocardial infarction must be excluded (Oindi, 2019).

INFECTIVE ENDOCARDITIS

Persons at greatest risk for endocarditis are those with congenital heart
lesions, intravenous drug use, degenerative valve disease, and intracardiac
devices (Karchmer, 2018). Subacute bacterial endocarditis usually stems
from a low-virulence bacterial infection superimposed on an underlying
structural lesion. These are usually native valve infections. Organisms that
cause indolent endocarditis are most often viridans-group streptococci or
Staphylococcus or Enterococcus species. Among intravenous drug abusers
and those with catheter-related infections, Staphylococcus aureus
predominates. With prosthetic valve infections, Staphylococcus epidermidis
is a frequent cause. Streptococcus pneumoniae and Neisseria gonorrhoeae
may occasionally cause acute, fulminating disease. Others have reported
other Neisseria species, group B streptococcus, and Escherichia coli
endocarditis during pregnancy or peripartum.

■ Diagnosis and Management
Infective endocarditis symptoms vary and often develop insidiously. Fever,
often with chills, is seen in 80 to 90 percent of cases; a murmur is heard in up
to 85 percent; and anorexia, fatigue, and other constitutional symptoms are
common (Karchmer, 2018). Clinical clues are anemia, proteinuria, and
manifestations of embolic lesions that include petechiae, focal neurological
changes, chest or abdominal pain, and extremity ischemia. In some cases,
heart failure develops. Symptoms may persist for several weeks before the
diagnosis is found, and a high index of suspicion is necessary.
Diagnosis is made using the Duke-Li classification, which combines
microbiology and imaging criteria with five minor criteria (Iung, 2019).
Echocardiography may be diagnostic, but lesions <2 mm or those on the
tricuspid valve may be missed. If uncertain, transesophageal
echocardiography is accurate and informative. Importantly, a negative
echocardiographic study does not exclude endocarditis.
Treatment is primarily medical, and ascertainment of the infecting
organism and its sensitivities is imperative for antimicrobial selection.
Guidelines for appropriate antibiotic treatment are published by professional
societies and updated regularly (Habib, 2015; Karchmer, 2018). Recalcitrant
bacteremia and heart failure due to valvular dysfunction are a few reasons
for which persistent infection may require valve replacement (Iung, 2019).

■ Pregnancy
Infective endocarditis is uncommon during pregnancy and the puerperium. In
an earlier period, the incidence of endocarditis at Parkland Hospital
approximated 1 in 16,000 births (Cox, 1988). With the current opioid use
disorder epidemic, endocarditis may become more frequent (Prasad, 2019).
Associated maternal and fetal mortality rates are from 25 to 35 percent
(Dagher, 2021; Habib, 2015). In one review, risk factors were intravenous
drug use (14 percent), congenital heart disease (12 percent), and rheumatic
heart disease (12 percent). The most common pathogens were streptococcal
(43 percent) and staphylococcal (26 percent) species. Among 51
pregnancies, the maternal mortality rate was 11 percent (Kebed, 2014).

■ Endocarditis Prophylaxis
For years, patients with any heart valve problem were given periprocedural
antibiotics for endocarditis prophylaxis. Currently, however,
recommendations are more stringent. The American Heart Association
recommends prophylaxis for dental procedures in those with: (1) a prosthetic
valve or prosthetic material used in a valve repair, (2) prior endocarditis,
(3) unrepaired cyanotic heart defect or repaired lesion with residual defect at
prosthetic sites, and (4) valvulopathy after heart transplantation (Nishimura,
2017). In the absence of pelvic infection, the American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2018b) does not recommend endocarditis
prophylaxis for either vaginal or cesarean delivery, except with the lesions
cited above.
Pregnant women at highest risk for endocarditis are those with cyanotic
cardiac disease, prosthetic valves, or both. Table 52-9 shows prophylactic
regimens for women not already receiving intrapartum antimicrobial therapy
for another indication that would also provide coverage against endocarditis.
These are administered as close to 30 to 60 minutes before the anticipated
delivery time as is feasible.
TABLE 52-9. Single-Dose Antibiotic Prophylaxis for Infective
Endocarditis in High-Risk Patients

ARRHYTHMIAS
Both preexisting and new-onset cardiac arrhythmias are often encountered
during pregnancy, labor, delivery, and the puerperium. They are usually
benign and their incidence in pregnancy appears to be increasing (MacIntyre,
2018). The mechanism(s) responsible for the higher incidence are not clear.
From some studies, estradiol and progesterone are proarrhythmic. Estrogen
augments the number of adrenergic receptors in the myocardium, and
adrenergic responsiveness seems to be greater in pregnancy (Enriquez,
2014). Perhaps the normal but mild hypokalemia of pregnancy and/or the
physiological rise in heart rate serves to induce arrhythmias. Alternatively,
detection of arrhythmias may be greater because of the frequent visits in
routine prenatal care.

■ Bradyarrhythmias
Slow heart rhythms, including complete heart block, are compatible with a
successful pregnancy outcome (Keepanasseril, 2015). Some women with
complete heart block have syncope during labor and delivery, and
occasionally temporary cardiac pacing is necessary. In our experiences and
from others, women with permanent artificial pacemakers usually tolerate
pregnancy well (Hidaka, 2011). With fixed-rate devices, cardiac output
apparently is increased by augmented stroke volume.
Patients with pacemakers or other electrical implants require special
precautions during surgery. Stray current may be interpreted as an
intracardiac signal by the implanted device and lead to pacing changes. In

addition, myocardial burns may result from conduction of electrosurgical
current to the pacing electrode rather than to the grounding pad. With these
devices, preventive steps include cardiology consultation; bipolar
electrosurgery or Harmonic scalpel use rather than monopolar current; if
needed, minimal monopolar settings; continuous cardiac and pulse oximetry
monitoring; contingency plans for arrhythmias; and close proximity of active
(electrosurgical pencil) and return (electrosurgical grounding pad)
electrodes (Crossley, 2011).

■ Supraventricular Tachycardias
The most common arrhythmia seen in reproductive-aged women is
paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia (SVT). The prevalence during
pregnancy is 24 cases per 100,000 hospital admissions, and approximately
20 percent will experience symptomatic exacerbations during pregnancy
(Enriquez, 2014). Interestingly, the mean heart rate of pregnant women with
paroxysmal SVT is 184 bpm compared with 166 bpm in nonpregnant affected
women (Yu, 2015). In one study, approximately half of women with
paroxysmal SVT had an initial onset during pregnancy (Bánhidy, 2015).
Notably, maternal paroxysmal SVT was associated with a twofold higher
risk of septal cardiac defects, particularly secundum atrial septal defects, in
their offspring.
For acute SVT treatment, vagal maneuvers, which include Valsalva
maneuver, carotid sinus massage, bearing down, and immersion of the face in
ice water, raise vagal tone and block the atrioventricular node. Intravenous
adenosine is a short-acting endogenous nucleotide that also blocks AV nodal
conduction. Our experiences are similar to those of others in that adenosine
is safe and effective for cardioversion in hemodynamically stable gravidas
(Page, 2015). Transient fetal bradycardia has been described with adenosine
(Dunn, 2000).
If pharmacological therapy is ineffective or contraindicated, the
American College of Cardiology and the American Heart Association
recommend synchronized cardioversion in pregnant women with
hemodynamically unstable SVT (Page, 2015). Although electrical
cardioversion with standard energy settings is not contraindicated in
pregnancy, vigilance is important. Barnes and colleagues (2002) described a
case in which direct current cardioversion led to a sustained uterine

contraction and fetal bradycardia. As an aside, pregnancy has no effect on the
operation of implantable cardioverter-defibrillator devices (Boulé, 2014).
If cardioversion fails or is unsafe because of concurrent thrombus, then
long-term anticoagulation and heart rate control with medication are
necessary (DiCarlo-Meacham, 2011). Other treatment options recommended
by the American College of Cardiology and the American Heart Association
(Page, 2015) include:
• Intravenous metoprolol or propranolol when adenosine is ineffective or
contraindicated,
• Intravenous verapamil when adenosine and β-blocking agents are
ineffective or contraindicated,
• Intravenous procainamide,
• Intravenous amiodarone for potentially life-threatening SVT and when other
therapies are ineffective or contraindicated.
Atrial fibrillation and atrial flutter rarely present for the first time
during pregnancy. A new-onset atrial fibrillation should prompt a search for
underlying etiologies that include cardiac anomalies, hyperthyroidism,
pulmonary embolism, drug toxicity, and electrolyte disturbances (MacIntyre,
2018). Major complications include embolic stroke. When associated with
mitral stenosis, pulmonary edema may develop in later pregnancy if the
ventricular rate is increased. Unstable patients are treated with cardioversion
and rate control.
Pregnancy may predispose otherwise asymptomatic women with WolffParkinson-White (WPW) syndrome to exhibit arrhythmias. In a study of
women with asymptomatic or mildly symptomatic disease, half developed
SVT for the first time, and the other half experienced an increase in their
attack rate (Kounis, 1995). In some patients, accessory pathway ablation may
be indicated. Patients with Ebstein anomaly are prone to have WPW
syndrome. Driver and associates (2015) have provided a review.

■ Ventricular Tachycardia
This form of arrhythmia is uncommon but potentially fatal in healthy young
women without underlying heart disease. Brodsky and coworkers (1992)
described seven pregnant women with new-onset ventricular tachycardia and

reviewed 23 reports. Most of these women were not found to have structural
heart disease. In 14 cases, tachycardia was precipitated by physical exercise
or psychological stress. Abnormalities found included two cases of
myocardial infarction, two of prolonged QT interval, and one of anesthesiaprovoked tachycardia. They concluded that pregnancy events precipitated the
tachycardia and recommended β-blocking agents for control. As previously
discussed (p. 934), arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia will result
occasionally in ventricular tachyarrhythmias. If unstable, emergency
cardioversion is indicated, and standard adult energy settings are adequate
(Lin, 2015).

■ Prolonged QT-Interval
The long QT syndrome is the most frequent inherited channelopathy
(MacIntyre, 2018). This conduction anomaly may predispose individuals to a
potentially fatal ventricular arrhythmia known as torsades de pointes. Two
studies comprised of 502 pregnant women with long QT syndrome both
reported a significant rise in cardiac events postpartum but not during
pregnancy (Rashba, 1998; Seth, 2007). The normal elevation in heart rate
during pregnancy may be partially protective. Paradoxically, β-blocking
agents—preferably propranolol—lower the risk of torsades de pointes in
patients with long QT syndrome and should be continued throughout
pregnancy and the puerperium (Ishibashi, 2017). Importantly, many
medications, including some used during pregnancy, such as the
erythromycins and many antiemetics, may predispose to QT prolongation.
For opioid-addicted women, the use of methadone to treat withdrawal
symptoms may be problematic (Bogen, 2017). Last, Cuneo and colleagues
(2020) observed an eightfold risk for stillbirth in women with long QT
syndrome (Chap. 35, p. 624).

DISEASES OF THE AORTA
■ Aortic Dissection
Marfan syndrome and coarctation are two aortic diseases that place the
pregnant woman at greater risk for aortic dissection (Russo, 2017). Indeed,
half of dissection cases in young women are related to pregnancy (O’Gara,

2004). Other risk factors are bicuspid aortic valve and Turner, Noonan,
Loeys-Dietz, or Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (Cauldwell, 2019b; Russo, 2018).
Pregnancy-related cardiac guidance for women with Turner syndrome is
outlined in Chapter 3 (p. 37). Although the mechanism(s) involved are
unclear, the initiating event is a tear in the intimal layer of the aorta, followed
by hemorrhage into the media, and finally rupture.
In most cases, aortic dissection presents with severe chest pain described
as ripping, tearing, or stabbing. Diminution or loss of peripheral pulses
coupled with a recently acquired aortic insufficiency murmur is an important
physical finding. The differential diagnosis of aortic dissection in pregnancy
includes myocardial infarction, pulmonary embolism, pneumothorax, aortic
valve rupture, and obstetrical catastrophes such as placental abruption and
uterine rupture.
More than 90 percent of patients with aortic dissection have an abnormal
chest radiograph. Aortic angiography is the most definitive method for
diagnosis confirmation. However, sonography, computed tomography, and
MR imaging are used more frequently depending on the clinical urgency.
Initial medical treatment is given to lower blood pressure. Proximal
dissections most often need to be resected, and the aortic valve replaced if
necessary. Distal dissections are more complex, and many may be treated
medically. Among nonpregnant patients with abdominal aortic aneurysms
<5.5 cm, survival is not improved by immediate elective repair compared
with surveillance and delayed repair. Karthikesalingam and associates
(2016) suggest that the size threshold for aneurysm repair should be
revisited.

■ Marfan Syndrome
This autosomal dominant connective tissue disorder has an incidence of 1
per 3000 to 5000 individuals and is without racial or ethnic predilection
(Azizad-Pinto, 2017). As discussed in Chapter 62 (p. 1121), Marfan
syndrome is caused by any of more than 1000 mutations in the fibrillin
(FBN1) gene. It is characterized by generalized tissue weakness that can
result in dangerous cardiovascular complications. All tissues are involved,
and other frequent defects include joint laxity and scoliosis. Progressive
aortic dilation causes aortic valve insufficiency, and infective endocarditis
or mitral valve prolapse with insufficiency may be comorbid. Aortic dilation

and dissecting aneurysm are the most serious abnormalities. Early death is
due to either a dissecting aneurysm or to valvular insufficiency and heart
failure.
During pregnancy, the primary concern with Marfan syndrome is aortic
dissection (Curry, 2014; Russo, 2017). A study using the Nationwide
Inpatient Sample from 2003 to 2010 described 339 deliveries in women with
Marfan syndrome. There was one maternal death and six (1.8 percent) aortic
dissections (Hassan, 2015). From the United Kingdom, Cauldwell and
colleagues (2019a) described 258 pregnancies in 151 affected women.
Although no women died, 1.9 percent had an aortic dissection.
The aortic root usually measures approximately 2 cm, and during normal
pregnancy, it expands slightly. With Marfan syndrome, aortic root repair is
recommended at diameters of 4.0 to 4.5 cm (Azizad-Pinto, 2017). The
guidelines of the American College of Cardiology, the American Heart
Association, and the American Association of Thoracic Surgeons advise
prophylactic aortic repair in women considering pregnancy if the diameter of
the ascending aorta exceeds 4 cm (Hiratzka, 2010). The guidelines of the
European Society of Cardiology advise repair of the aorta at diameters >4.5
cm (Regitz-Zagrosek, 2018). Surgical repair is also considered using a
formula indexed to height because shorter patients have dissection at a
smaller diameter (Bradley, 2014).
For pregnant women with known thoracic aortic root or ascending aortic
dilation, monthly or bimonthly echocardiographic measurements of the
ascending aortic dimensions are recommended to detect expansion
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019). Prophylactic
β-blocking agents have become standard for gravidas with Marfan syndrome
because they reduce hemodynamic stress on the ascending aorta and slow the
dilation rate. Ideally, pregnant women with aortic aneurysms are delivered at
facilities in which cardiothoracic surgery is available. Vaginal delivery with
regional analgesia and an assisted second stage seem safe for women with an
aortic root diameter <4 cm.
Cesarean delivery may be considered for values between 4.0 and 4.5 cm.
When the aortic root measures >4.5 cm, elective cesarean delivery is
recommended, and direct replacement of the proximal aorta with a prosthetic
graft can be considered (Regitz-Zagrosek, 2018). Successful aortic root
replacement during pregnancy has been described, but the surgery has also
been associated with fetal hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy (Seeburger,

2007). Several case reports describe emergency cesarean deliveries in
women with acute type A dissections that were repaired successfully at the
time of delivery (Guo, 2011; Haas, 2011; Papatsonis, 2009).
To evaluate obstetrical outcomes, investigators for one study of 63
women with Marfan syndrome analyzed their 142 pregnancies. Of 111
pregnancies progressing past 20 weeks’ gestation, 15 percent delivered
preterm, and 5 percent had preterm prematurely ruptured membranes
(Meijboom, 2006). There were eight perinatal deaths, and half of the
neonatal survivors were subsequently diagnosed with Marfan syndrome.

■ Aortic Coarctation
In this relatively rare lesion, the aorta is abnormally narrowed and is often
accompanied by abnormalities of other large arteries. A fourth of affected
patients have a bicuspid aortic valve, and another 10 percent have cerebral
artery aneurysms. Other associated lesions are persistent ductus arteriosus,
septal defects, and Turner syndrome. The collateral circulation arising above
the coarctation remodels and expands, often strikingly, to cause localized
erosion of rib margins by hypertrophied intercostal arteries. Typical findings
include hypertension in the upper extremities but normal or decreased
pressures in the lower extremities. Some have described diagnosis during
pregnancy using MR imaging (Sherer, 2002; Zwiers, 2006). Jimenez-Juan
and associates (2014) found that aortic diameter measured by MR imaging
and the risk of adverse events during pregnancy were inversely correlated.
Of note, no adverse outcomes occurred if the minimum diameter at the
coarctation exceeded 15 mm.
Major complications with aortic coarctation include congestive heart
failure after long-standing severe hypertension, bacterial endocarditis of an
associated bicuspid aortic valve, and aortic rupture. Antihypertensive
therapy using β-blocking drugs is usually required because hypertension may
worsen in pregnancy. Aortic rupture is more likely late in pregnancy or early
puerperium. Cerebral hemorrhage from circle of Willis aneurysms also may
occur. According to the World Health Organization, severe coarctation
should preclude pregnancy (Foeller, 2018).
In one study of outcomes from 188 pregnancies, a third of women had
hypertension that was related to significant coarctation gradients, and one
woman died from dissection at 36 weeks’ gestation (Beauchesne, 2001). In

700 deliveries complicated with coarctation, hypertensive complications of
pregnancy were increased three- to fourfold (Krieger, 2011). Importantly,
almost 5 percent of women with coarctation had an adverse cardiovascular
outcome—maternal death, heart failure, arrhythmia, cerebrovascular or other
embolic event—compared with only 0.3 percent of controls. Of women with
coarctation, 41 percent underwent cesarean delivery compared with 26
percent of controls.
Congestive heart failure demands vigorous efforts to improve cardiac
function and may warrant pregnancy interruption. In this setting, some authors
recommend that resection of the coarctation be undertaken to protect against
the possibility of a dissecting aneurysm and aortic rupture. This poses
significant perfusion risk, especially for the fetus, because all the arterial
collaterals must be clamped for variable periods.

ISCHEMIC HEART DISEASE
Pregnant women with coronary artery disease commonly have the classic
risk factors of family history, diabetes, smoking, hypertension,
hyperlipidemia, and obesity (Tripathi, 2019). The rate of ischemic heart
disease is estimated to be 10 cases per 100,000 pregnancy and postpartum
hospitalizations (Smilowitz, 2018; Tripathi, 2019). Although relatively rare,
the risk of acute myocardial infarction is approximately threefold higher in
pregnant women compared with nonpregnant women of similar age
(Elkayam, 2014b).

■ Acute Coronary Syndrome
Myocardial infarction (MI) is the end result of an acute coronary syndrome.
It can result from coronary artery atherosclerosis, dissection, embolism,
spasm, or arteritis (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists,
2019; Cauldwell, 2020). The mortality rate with MI in pregnancy is higher
compared with age-matched nonpregnant women. In a Nationwide Inpatient
Sample study totaling 859 pregnancies complicated by acute MI, the death
rate was 5.1 percent (James, 2006). Women who sustain an infarction <2
weeks before delivery are at especially high risk of death due to the greater
myocardial demand of labor and delivery (Esplin, 1999).

In a systematic review of 150 cases, most women developed an acute MI
during the third trimester or postpartum (Elkayam, 2014b). Approximately
three fourths presented with ST segment-elevation MI (STEMI). The leading
mechanisms of acute infarction included spontaneous coronary dissection
(43 percent) and atherosclerotic disease (27 percent). Significant
complications included heart failure (38 percent), recurrent angina or
infarction (19 percent), and ventricular arrhythmias (12 percent). The
maternal and fetal mortality rates were 7 and 5 percent, respectively.
Diagnosis of acute coronary syndrome during pregnancy does not differ
from that in nonpregnant patients and is based on clinical presentation,
characteristic ECG changes, and evidence of myocardial necrosis reflected
by elevated serum high-sensitivity troponin I levels (Pacheco, 2014).
Consider that troponin I levels are greater, however, in preeclamptic and
hypertensive women compared with normotensive gravidas (Ravichandran,
2019).
With spontaneous coronary artery dissection, establishing the diagnosis
requires an increased index of suspicion in the women presenting with chest
pain (Codsi, 2016). For this condition, coronary angiography is considered
the diagnostic gold standard and should be expeditiously performed if acute
coronary syndrome—either MI or unstable angina—is present (Hayes,
2018).
Treatment of acute MI is similar to that for nonpregnant patients
(Pacheco, 2014). Several reports describe successful percutaneous
transluminal coronary angioplasty and stent placement during pregnancy
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019).
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation may be required, as described in Chapter 50
(p. 897). If the infarct has healed sufficiently, cesarean delivery is reserved
for obstetrical indications, and epidural analgesia is ideal for labor.

■ Pregnancy with Prior Ischemic Heart Disease
Ischemic heart disease is characteristically progressive, and because it is
usually associated with hypertension or diabetes, pregnancy in most of these
women seems inadvisable. In an earlier review of 30 pregnancies in women
who had sustained an infarction remote from pregnancy, none of the women
died, four had congestive heart failure, and four had worsening angina during
pregnancy (Vinatier, 1994). Pombar and coworkers (1995) evaluated

outcomes of women with diabetes-associated ischemic heart disease and
infarction. Three had undergone coronary artery bypass grafting before
pregnancy. Of 17 women, eight died during pregnancy. Certainly, pregnancy
raises cardiac workload, and these investigators concluded that ventricular
performance should be assessed using ventriculography, radionuclide
studies, echocardiography, or coronary angiography before conception.
Without significant ventricular dysfunction, pregnancy will likely be
tolerated. For the woman who becomes pregnant before these studies are
performed, echocardiography is done. Exercise tolerance testing may be
indicated, and radionuclide ventriculography exposes the fetus to minimal
radiation (Chap. 49, p. 875).

COMMON OBSTETRICAL MEDICATIONS
Common medications used in pregnancy require special consideration in
women with cardiac conditions. Terbutaline causes vasodilation and
tachycardia, which can be dangerous in patients with mitral and aortic
stenosis. Nifedipine for hypertension control or tocolysis results in
hypotension that can have negative consequences for patients with aortic
stenosis, pulmonary hypertension, and Eisenmenger syndrome. Postpartum
hemorrhage should be managed aggressively, and methylergonovine
generally is a safe choice. Prostaglandin F2α may cause pulmonary shunting
and bronchospasm, which results in elevation of pulmonary artery pressure.
Consideration is given to the vasodilatory effects of hydralazine in
conditions such as hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Hydralazine also causes
tachycardia. The β-blocking agent labetalol is a safe choice unless there is
ventricular failure. In general, oxytocin and magnesium sulfate have minimal
cardiac effects.

REFERENCES
Abarbanell G, Tepper NK, Farr SL: Safety of contraceptive use among women with congenital heart
disease: a systematic review. Congenit Heart Dis 14(3):331, 2019
Ackerman CM, Platner MH, Spatz ES, et al: Severe cardiovascular morbidity in women with
hypertensive diseases during delivery hospitalization. Am J Obstet Gynecol 220(6):582.e1, 2019
Agir A, Bozyel S, Celikyurt U: Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy in pregnancy. Int Heart
J 55(4):372, 2014

Ambia AM, Morgan JL, Wells CE, et al: Perinatal outcomes associated with abnormal cardiac
remodeling in women with treated chronic hypertension. Am J Obstet Gynecol 218(5):519.e1, 2018
Ambia AM, Morgan JL, Wilson KL, et al: Frequency and consequences of ventricular hypertrophy in
pregnant women with treated chronic hypertension. Am J Obstet Gynecol 217(4):467.e1, 2017
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Thromboembolism in pregnancy. Practice
Bulletin No. 196, June 2018a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Use of prophylactic antibiotics in labor and
delivery. Practice Bulletin No. 199, August 2018b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Pregnancy and heart disease. Practice Bulletin
No. 212, May 2019
Angeli F, Angeli E, Verdecchia P: Electrocardiographic changes in hypertensive disorders of pregnancy.
Hypertens Res 37(11):973, 2014
Anthony J, Sliwa K: Decompensated Heart Failure in Pregnancy. Card Fail Rev 2(1):20, 2016
Arbustini E, Serio A, Favalli A, et al: Dilated cardiomyopathy. In Fuster V, Harrington RA, Narula J, et
al (eds): Hurst’s The Heart, 14th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2017, p 1468
Azizad-Pinto P, Tapson VF: Rheumatologic diseases and the cardiovascular system. In Fuster V,
Harrington RA, Narula J, et al (eds): Hurst’s The Heart, 14th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill
Education, 2017, p 2302
Balci A, Drenthen W, Mulder BJ, et al: Pregnancy in women with corrected tetralogy of Fallot:
occurrence and predictors of adverse events. Am Heart J 161:307, 2011
Bánhidy F, Ács N, Puhó EH, et al: Paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia in pregnant women and
birth outcomes of their children: a population-based study. Am J Med Genet A 167A(8):1779, 2015
Barbour LA, Smith JM, Marlar RA. Heparin levels to guide thromboembolism prophylaxis during
pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 173(6):1869, 1995
Barnes EJ, Eben F, Patterson D: Direct current cardioversion during pregnancy should be performed
with facilities available for fetal monitoring and emergency caesarean section. BJOG 109:1406, 2002
Bates SM, Greer IA, Middleldorp S, et al: VTE, thrombophilia, antithrombotic therapy, and pregnancy.
Chest 141:e691S, 2012
Batra J, Itagaki S, Egorova NN, et al: Outcome and long-term effects of pregnancy in women with
biologic and mechanical valve prostheses. Am J Cardiol 122(10):1738, 2018
Bauersachs J, Arrigo M, Hilfiker-Kleiner D, et al: Current management of patients with severe acute
peripartum cardiomyopathy: practical guidance from the Heart Failure Association of the European
Society of Cardiology Study Group on peripartum cardiomyopathy. Eur J Heart Fail 18:1096, 2016
Beauchesne LM, Connolly HM, Ammash NM, et al: Coarctation of the aorta: outcome of pregnancy. J
Am Coll Cardiol 38:1728, 2001
Bédard E, Dimopoulos K, Gatzoulis MA: Has there been any progress made on pulmonary outcomes
among women with pulmonary arterial hypertension? Eur Heart J 30:256, 2009
Bogen DL, Hanusa BH, Perel JM, et al: Corrected QT interval and methadone does and concentrations
in pregnant and postpartum women. J Clin Psychiatry 78(8):e1013, 2017
Bouhout I, Poirier N, Mazine A, et al: Cardiac, obstetric, and fetal outcomes during pregnancy after
biological or mechanical aortic valve replacement. Can J Cardiol 30(7):801, 2014
Boulé S, Ovart L, Marquié C, et al: Pregnancy in women with an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator:
is it safe? Europace 16(11):1587, 2014
Bozkurt B, Colvin M, Cook J, Current diagnostic and treatment strategies for specific dilated
cardiomyopathies: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation
134(23):e579, 2016

Bradley EA, Zaidi AN, Goldsmith P, et al: Major adverse maternal cardiovascular-related events in
those with aortopathies. What should we expect? Int J Cardiol 177(1):229, 2014
Brancazio LR, Roperti KA, Stierer R, et al: Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of subcutaneous
heparin during the early third trimester of pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 173(4):1240, 1995
Bredy C, Mongeon FP, Leduc L, et al: Pregnancy in adults with repaired/unrepaired atrial septal defect.
J Thorac Dis 10(Suppl 24):S2945, 2018
Brickner ME: Cardiovascular management in pregnancy: congenital heart disease. Circulation
130(3):273, 2014
Briggs GG, Towers CV, Forinash AB: Drugs in Pregnancy and Lactation, 12th ed. Philadelphia, Wolters
Kluwer, 2022
Bright RA, Lima FV, Avila C, et al: Maternal heart failure. J Am Heart Assoc 10(14):e021019, 2021
Brodsky M, Doria R, Allen B, et al: New-onset ventricular tachycardia during pregnancy. Am Heart J
123:933, 1992
Bui AH, O’Gara PT, Economy KE, et al: Clinical problem-solving. A tight predicament. N Engl J Med
371(10):953, 2014
Capeless EL, Clapp JF: Cardiovascular changes in early phase of pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol
161:1449, 1989
Carabello BA, Hahn RT: Aortic valve disease. In Fuster V, Harrington RA, Narula J, et al (eds): Hurst’s
The Heart, 14th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2017, p 1196
Cauldwell M, Quail MA, Smith GS, et al: Effect of pregnancy on ventricular and aortic dimensions in
repaired tetralogy of Fallot. J Am Heart Assoc 6(7):1, 2017
Cauldwell M, Steer PJ, Curtis S, et al: Maternal and fetal outcomes in pregnancies complicated by
Marfan syndrome. Heart 105(22):1725, 2019a
Cauldwell M, Steer PJ, Curtis S, et al: Maternal and fetal outcomes in pregnancies complicated by the
inherited aortopathy Loeys-Dietz syndrome. BJOG 126(8):1025, 2019b
Cauldwell M, Steer PJ, von Klemperer K, et al: Maternal and neonatal outcomes in women with a
history of coronary artery disease. Heart 106(5):380, 2020
Cauldwell M, von Klemperer K, Uebing A, et al: A cohort study of women with a Fontan circulation
undergoing preconception counseling. Heart 102(27):534, 2016
Caulin-Glaser T, Setaro JF: Pregnancy and cardiovascular disease. In Burrow GN, Duffy TP (eds):
Medical Complications During Pregnancy, 5th ed. Philadelphia, Saunders, 1999
Chan WS, Anand S, Ginsberg JS: Anticoagulation of pregnant women with mechanical heart valves: a
systematic review of the literature. Arch Intern Med 160:191, 2000
Chandrasekhar S, Cook CR, Collard CD: Cardiac surgery in the parturient. Anesth Analg 108:777, 2009
Chen L, Deng W, Palacios I, et al: Patent foramen ovale (PFO), stroke and pregnancy. J Investig Med
64(5):992, 2016
Chikwe JY, Castillo JG: Ticispid and pulmonary valve disease. In Fuster V, Harrington RA, Narula J, et
al (eds): Hurst’s The Heart, 14th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2017, p 1260
Cirino AL, Seidman CE, Ho CY: Genetic testing and counseling for hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
Cardiol Clin 37(1):35, 2019
Clark SL, Cotton DB, Lee W, et al: Central hemodynamic assessment of normal term pregnancy. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 161:1439, 1989
Clark SL, Hankins GD: Preventing maternal death: 10 clinical diamonds. Obstet Gynecol 119:360, 2012
Clark SL, Phelan JP, Greenspoon J, et al: Labor and delivery in the presence of mitral stenosis: central
hemodynamic observations. Am J Obstet Gynecol 152:984, 1985

Codsi E, Rose CH, Blauwet LA: Subsequent pregnancy outcomes in patients with peripartum
cardiomyopathy. Obstet Gynecol 131(2):322, 2018
Codsi E, Tweet MS, Rose CH, et al: Spontaneous coronary artery dissection in pregnancy. Obstet
Gynecol 128(4):731, 2016
Coscia LA, Constaniescu S, Mortiz MJ, et al: Report from the National Transplantation Pregnancy
Registry (NTPR): outcomes of pregnancy after transplantation. In: Terasaki PI, Cecka JM, editors.
Clinical Transplants 2010. Los Angeles (CA): Terasaki Foundation Laboratory; 2011. p. 65
Costanzo MR, Dipchand A, Starling R, et al: The International Society of Heart and Lung
Transplantation guidelines for the heart transplant recipient. J Heart Lung Transplant 29(8):914, 2010
Cotrufo M, De Feo M, De Santo LS, et al: Risk of warfarin during pregnancy with mechanical valve
prostheses. Obstet Gynecol 99:35, 2002
Cowan SW, Davison JM, Doria C, et al: Pregnancy after cardiac transplantation. Cardiol Clin 30(3):441,
2012
Cox SM, Hankins GD, Leveno KJ, et al: Bacterial endocarditis: a serious pregnancy complication. J
Reprod Med 33:671, 1988
Creanga AA, Syverson CJ, Seed K, et al: Pregnancy-related mortality in the United States, 2011–2013.
Obstet Gynecol 130(2):366, 2017
Crossley GH, Poole JE, Rozner MA, et al: The Heart Rhythm Society (HRS)/American Society of
Anesthesiologists (ASA) Expert Consensus Statement on the perioperative management of patients
with implantable defibrillators, pacemakers and arrhythmia monitors: facilities and patient
management. Heart Rhythm 8(7):1114, 2011
Cruz MO, Briller J, Hibbard JU: New insights in peripartum cardiomyopathy. Obstet Gynecol Clin North
Am 45(2):281, 2018
Cuneo BF, Kaizer AM, Ann Clur S, et al: Mothers with long QT syndrome are at increased risk for fetal
death: findings from a multicenter international study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 222:263.e1, 2020
Cunningham FG, Byrne JJ, Nelson DB: Peripartum cardiomyopathy. Obstet Gynecol 133(1):167, 2019
Cunningham FG, Pritchard JA, Hankins GD, et al: Peripartum heart failure: idiopathic cardiomyopathy
or compounding cardiovascular events? Obstet Gynecol 67:157, 1986
Curry RA, Gelson E, Swan L, et al: Marfan syndrome and pregnancy: maternal and neonatal outcomes.
BJOG 121(5):610, 2014
Curtis KM, Tepper NK, Jatlaoui TC, et al: U.S. medical eligibility criteria for contraceptive use, 2016.
MMWR 65(3):1, 2016
Dagher MM, Eichenberger EM, Adddae-Konadu KI, et al: Maternal and fetal outcomes associated with
infective endocarditis in pregnancy. Clin Infect Dis June 10, 2021 [Epub ahead of print]
Dagher O, Alami Laroussi N, Carrier M, et al: Pregnancy after heart transplantation: a well-thought-out
decision? The Quebec provincial experience – a multi-centre cohort study. Transpl Int 31:977, 2018
Davis MB, Arany Z, McNamara DM, et al: Peripartum cardiomyopathy: JACC state-of-the-art review.
J Am Coll Cardiol 75(2):207, 2020
Davis MB, Rogers IS: Pregnancy after Fontan palliation: caution when details are lost in translation.
Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes 11(5):e004734, 2018
Dennis AT, Salman M, Paxton E, et al: Resting hemodynamics and response to exercise using the 6minute walk test in late pregnancy: an international prospective multicenter study. Anesth Analg
129(2):450, 2019
DiCarlo-Meacham LT, Dahlke LC: Atrial fibrillation in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 117:389, 2011
Drenthen W, Pieper PG, Roos-Hesselink JW, et al: Non-cardiac complications during pregnancy in
women with isolated congenital pulmonary valvar stenosis. Heart 92:1838, 2006

Drenthen W, Pieper PG, van der Tuuk K, et al: Cardiac complications relating to pregnancy and
recurrence of disease in the offspring of women with atrioventricular septal defects. Eur Heart J
26:2581, 2005
Drenthen W, Pieper PG, van der Tuuk K, et al: Fertility, pregnancy and delivery in women after
biventricular repair for double outlet right ventricle. Cardiology 109:105, 2008
Driver K, Chisholm CA, Darby AE, et al: Catheter ablation of arrhythmia during pregnancy. J
Cardiovasc Electrophysiol 26(6):698, 2015
D’Souza R, Soete E, Silversides CK, et al: Pregnancy outcomes following cardiac transplantation. J
Obstet Gynecol Can 40(5):566, 2018
D’Souza R, Ostro J, Shah PS, et al: Anticoagulation for pregnant women with mechanical heart valves:
a systematic review and meta-analysis. Eur Heart J 38(19):150, 2017
Duan R, Xu X, Wang X, et al: Pregnancy outcome in women with Eisenmenger’s syndrome: a case
series from west China. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth 16(1):356, 2016
Ducas RA, Elliot JE, Melnyk SF, et al: Cardiovascular magnetic resonance in pregnancy: insights from
the Cardiac Hemodynamic Imaging and Remodeling in Pregnancy (CHIRP) study. J Cardiovasc
Magn Reson 16:1, 2014
Dunn JS Jr, Brost BC: Fetal bradycardia after IV adenosine for maternal PSVT. Am J Emerg Med
18:234, 2000
Easter SR, Rouse CE, Duarte V, et al: Planned vaginal delivery and cardiovascular morbidity in pregnant
women with heart disease. Am J Obstet Gynecol 222(1):77, 2020
Easter SR, Valente AM: Creating a multidisciplinary pregnancy heart team. Curr Treat Options
Cardiovasc Med 22(1):3, 2020
Easterling TR, Chadwick HS, Otto CM, et al: Aortic stenosis in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 72:113, 1988
Elassy SMR, Elmidany AA, Elbawab HY: Urgent cardiac surgery during pregnancy: a continuous
challenge. Ann Thorac Surg 97(5):1624, 2014
Elkayam U: Pregnancy in the patient with prosthetic heart valve. In Elkayam U (ed): Cardiac Problems
in Pregnancy, 4th edition. Hoboken, Wiley Blackwell, 2020, p 90
Elkayam U: Risk of subsequent pregnancy in women with a history of peripartum cardiomyopathy. J
Am Coll Cardiol 64(15):1629, 2014a
Elkayam U, Jalnapurkar S, Barakkat MN, et al: Pregnancy-associated acute myocardial infarction: a
review of contemporary experience in 150 cases between 2006 and 2011. Circulation 129(16):1695,
2014b
Elliott P, Andersson B, Arbustini E, et al: Classification of the cardiomyopathies: a position statement
from the European Society of Cardiology working group on myocardial and pericardial diseases.
Euro Heart J 29:270, 2008
Elliott PM, Anastasakis A, Borger MA, et al: 2014 ESC Guidelines on diagnosis and management of
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: the Task Force for the Diagnosis and Management of Hypertrophic
Cardiomyopathy of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC). Eur Heart J 35(39):2733, 2014
Enriquez AD, Economy KE, Tedrow UB: Contemporary management of arrhythmias during pregnancy.
Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol 7(5):961, 2014
Ersbøll AS, Bojer AS, Hauge MG, et al: Long-term cardiac function after peripartum cardiomyopathy
and preeclampsia: a Danish nationwide, clinical follow-up study using maximal exercise testing and
cardiac magnetic resonance imaging. J Am Heart Assoc 7(20):e008991, 2018
Esplin S, Clark SL: Ischemic heart disease and myocardial infarction during pregnancy. Contemp
Ob/Gyn 44:27, 1999

Esteves CA, Munoz JS, Braga S, et al: Immediate and long-term follow-up of percutaneous balloon
mitral valvuloplasty in pregnant patients with rheumatic mitral stenosis. Am J Cardiol 98:812, 2006
Foeller ME, Foeller TM, Druzin M: Maternal congenital heart disease in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol Clin
North Am 45(2):267, 2018
Franco V, Ryan JJ, McLaughlin VV: Pulmonary hypertension in women. Heart Fail Clin 15(1):137, 2019
Fryar CD, Chen T, Li X: Prevalence of uncontrolled risk factors for cardiovascular disease: United
States, 1999–2010. NCHS Data Brief 103:1, 2012
Gadson A, Akpovi E, Mehta PK: Exploring the social determinants of racial/ethnic disparities in prenatal
care utilization and maternal outcome. Semin Perinatol 41(5):308, 2017
Galal MO, Jadoon S, Momenah TS: Pulmonary valvuloplasty in a pregnant woman using sole
transthoracic echo guidance: technical considerations. Can J Cardiol 31(1):103.e5, 2015
Galiè N, Humbert M, Vachiery JL, et al: 2015 ESC/ERC guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of
pulmonary hypertension: the Joint Task Force for the Diagnosis and Treatment of Pulmonary
Hypertension of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) and the European Respiratory Society
(ERS): endorsed by: Association for European Paediatric and Congenital Cardiology (AEPC),
International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation (ISHLT). Eur Heart J 37(1):67, 2016
Garcia-Ropero A, Baskar S, Roos Hesselink JW, et al: Pregnancy in women with a Fontan circulation: a
systematic review of the literature. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes 11(5):e004575, 2018
Gei A, Montúfar-Rueda C: Pulmonary hypertension and pregnancy: an overview. Clin Obstet Gynecol
57(4):806, 2014
Gei AF, Hankins GD: Cardiac disease and pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am 28:465, 2001
Ghi T, Dall’Asta A, Franchi L, et al: The effect of chorionicity on maternal cardiac adaptation to
uncomplicated twin pregnancy: a prospective longitudinal study. Fetal Diagn Ther 45(6):394, 2019
Grewal J, Silversides CK, Colman JM: Pregnancy in women with heart disease: risk assessment and
management of heart failure. Heart Fail Clin 10(1):117, 2014
Guo C, Xu D, Wang C: Successful treatment for acute aortic dissection in pregnancy—Bentall
procedure concomitant with cesarean section. J Cardiothorac Surg 6:139, 2011
Guy TS, Hill AC: Mitral valve prolapse. Annu Rev Med 63:277, 2012
Haas S, Trepte C, Rybczynski M, et al: Type A aortic dissection during late pregnancy in a patient with
Marfan syndrome. Can J Anesth 58:1024, 2011
Habib G, Lancellotti P, Antunes MJ, et al: 2015 ESC Guidelines of the management of infective
endocarditis: the TASK Force for the Management of Infective Endocarditis of the European
Society of Cardiology (ESC). Endorsed by: European Association for Cardio-Thoracic Surgery
(EACTS), the European Association of Nuclear Medicine (EANM). Eur Heart J 36(44):3075, 2015
Haghikia A, Podewski E, Libhaber E, et al: Phenotyping and outcome on contemporary management in
a German cohort of patients with peripartum cardiomyopathy. Basic Res Cardiol 108(4):366, 2013
Haghikia A, Schwab J, Vogel-Claussen J, et al: Bromocriptine treatment in patients with peripartum
cardiomyopathy and right ventricular dysfunction. Clin Res Cardiol 108(3):290, 2019
Hamdan R, Nassar P, Zein A, et al: Peripartum cardiomyopathy, place of drug therapy, assist devices,
and outcome after left ventricular assistance. J Crit Care 37:185, 2017
Hameed A, Akhter M, Bitar F, et al: Left atrial thrombosis in pregnant women with mitral stenosis and
sinus rhythm. Am J Obstet Gynecol 193:501, 2005
Hassan N, Patenaude V, Oddy L, et al: Pregnancy outcomes in Marfan syndrome: a retrospective
cohort study. Am J Perinatol 30(2):123, 2015
Hayes SN, Kim ES, Saw J, et al: Spontaneous coronary artery dissection: current state of the science: a
scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation 137(19):e523, 2018

Herrera CL, Schell RC, McIntire DD, et al: Pulmonary hypertension complicating pregnancy: cardiac
remodeling and residual concerns. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med November 23, 2020 [Epub ahead
of print]
Herrey AS: Pregnancy in inherited and acquired cardiomyopathies. Best Pract Res Clin Obstet
Gynaecol 28(4):563, 2014
Herrey AS, Francis JM, Hughes M, et al: Cardiovascular magnetic resonance can be undertaken in
pregnancy and guide clinical decision-making in this patient population. Eur Heart J Cardoivasc
Imaging 20(3):291, 2019
Hibbard JU, Lindheimer M, Lang RM: A modified definition for peripartum cardiomyopathy and
prognosis based on echocardiography. Obstet Gynecol 94:311, 1999
Hidaka N, Chiba Y, Fukushima K, et al: Pregnant women with complete atrioventricular block: perinatal
risks and review of management. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol 34:1161, 2011
Hilfiker-Kleiner D, Hadhikia A, Berliner D, et al: Bromocriptine for the treatment of peripartum
cardiomyopathy: a multicentre randomized study. Eur Heart J 38(35):2671, 2017
Hiratzka LF, Bakris GL, Beckman JA, et al: 2010
ACCF/AHA/AATS/ACRA/ASA/SCA/SCAI/SIR/STS/SVM guidelines for the diagnosis and
management of patients with thoracic aortic disease: a report of the American College of Cardiology
Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines, American Association
for Thoracic Surgery, American College of Radiology, American Stroke Association, Society of
Cardiovascular Anesthesiologists, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions,
Society of Interventional Radiology, Society of Thoracic Surgeons, and Society of Vascular
Medicine. Circulation 121(13):e266, 2010
Hodson R, Kirker E, Swanson J, et al: Transcatheter aortic valve replacement during pregnancy. Circ
Cardiovasc Interv 9(10):e004006, 2016
Hoendermis ES, Drenthen W, Sollie KM, et al: Severe pregnancy-induced deterioration of truncal valve
regurgitation in an adolescent patient with repaired truncus arteriosus. Cardiology 109:177, 2008
Hopkins MK, Goldstein SA, Ward CC, et al: Evaluation and management of maternal congenital heart
disease: a review. Obstet Gynecol Surv 73(2):116, 2018
Horiuchi C, Kamiya CA, Ohuchi H, et al: Pregnancy outcomes and mid-term prognosis in women after
arterial switch operation for dextro-transposition of the great arteries—tertiary hospital experiences
and review of literature. J Cardiol 73(3):247, 2019
Howland RE, Angley M, Won SH, et al: Determinants of severe maternal morbidity and its racial/ethnic
disparities in New York City, 2008–2012. Matern Child Health J 23(3):346, 2019
Hytten FE, Chamberlain G: Clinical Physiology in Obstetrics. Oxford, Blackwell, 1991
Ishibashi K, Aiba T, Kamiya C, et al: Arrhythmia risk and β-blocker therapy in pregnant women with
long QT syndrome. Heart 103(17):1374, 2017
Iturbe-Alessio I, Fonseca MD, Mutchinik O, et al: Risks of anticoagulant therapy in pregnant women
with artificial heart valves. N Engl J Med 315:1390, 1986
Iung B, Duval X: Infective endocarditis: innovations in the management of an old disease. Nat Rev
Cardiol 16(10):623, 2019
James AH, Jamison MG, Biswas MS, et al: Acute myocardial infarction in pregnancy: a United States
population-base study. Circulation 113:1564, 2006
Jimenez-Juan L, Krieger EV, Valente AM, et al: Cardiovascular magnetic resonance imaging predictors
of pregnancy outcomes in women with coarctation of the aorta. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging
15(3):299, 2014

Jha N, Jha AK, Chand Chauhan R, et al: Maternal and fetal outcome after cardiac operations during
pregnancy: a meta-analysis. Ann Thorac Surg 106(2):618, 2018
Kamiya CA, Iwamiya T, Neki R, et al: Outcome of pregnancy and effects on the right heart in women
with repaired tetralogy of Fallot. Circ J 76(4):957, 2012
Kanoh M, Inai K, Shinohara T, et al: Influence of pregnancy on cardiac function and hemodynamics in
women with Ebstein’s anomaly. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 97:1025, 2018
Karchmer A: Infective endocarditis. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Ksaper DL, et al (eds): Harrison’s
Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2018, p 2305
Karthikesalingam A, Vidal-Diez A, Holt PJ, et al: Thresholds for abdominal aortic aneurysm repair in
England and the United States. N Engl J Med 375(21):2051, 2016
Kebed KY, Bishu K, Al Adham RI, et al: Pregnancy and postpartum infective endocarditis: a systematic
review. Mayo Clin Proc 89(8):1143, 2014
Keepanasseril A, Maurya DK, Suriya Y, et al: Complete atrioventricular block in pregnancy: report of
seven pregnancies in a patient without pacemaker. BMJ Case Rep 2015: bcr2014208618, 2015
Keepanasseril A, Pillai AA, Yavanasuriya J, et al: Outcome of pregnancies in women with pulmonary
hypertension: a single centre experience from South India. BJOG 126(Suppl 4):43, 2019
Kenchaiah S, Evans JC, Levy D, et al: Obesity and the risk of heart failure. N Engl J Med 347:305,
2002
Kernan WN, Ovbiagele B, Black HR, et al: Guidelines for the prevention of stroke in patients with
stroke and transient ischemic attack: a guideline for healthcare professionals from the American
Heart Association/American Stroke Association. Stroke 45(7):2160, 2014
Khan A, Kim YY: Pregnancy in complex CHD: focus on patients with Fontan circulation and patients
with a systemic right ventricle. Cardiol Young 25(8):1608, 2015
Kim YY, Goldberg LA, Awh K, et al: Accuracy of risk prediction scores in pregnant women with
congenital heart disease. Congenit Heart Dis 14(3):470, 2019
Klingberg S, Brekke HK, Winkvist A, et al: Parity, weight change, and maternal risk of cardiovascular
events. Am J Obstet Gynecol 216(2):172.e1, 2017
Kounis NG, Zavras GM, Papadaki PJ, et al: Pregnancy-induced increase of supraventricular
arrhythmias in Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome. Clin Cardiol 18(3):137, 1995
Kraft K, Graf M, Karch M, et al: Takotsubo syndrome after cardiopulmonary resuscitation during
emergency cesarean delivery. Obstet Gynecol 129:521, 2017
Krexi D, Sheppard MN: Pulmonary hypertensive vascular changes in lungs of patients with sudden
unexpected death. Emphasis on congenital heart disease, Eisenmenger syndrome, postoperative
deaths, and death during pregnancy and postpartum. J Clin Pathol 68(1):18, 2015
Krieger EV, Landzberg MJ, Economy KE, et al: Comparison of risk of hypertensive complications of
pregnancy among women with versus without coarctation of the aorta. Am J Cardiol 107:1529, 2011
Krul SP, van der Smag JJ, van den Berg MP, et al: Systematic review of pregnancy in women with
inherited cardiomyopathies. Euro J Heart Failure 13:584, 2011
Lawley CM, Lain SJ, Algert CS, et al: Prosthetic heart valves in pregnancy, outcomes for women and
their babies: a systematic review and meta-analysis. BJOG 122(11):1446, 2015
Leśniak-Sobelga A, Tracz W, Kostkiewicz M, et al: Clinical and echocardiographic assessment of
pregnant women with valvular heart disease—maternal and fetal outcome. Int J Cardiol 94:15, 2004
Leyh RG, Fischer S, Ruhparwar A, et al: Anticoagulation for prosthetic heart valves during pregnancy:
is low-molecular-weight heparin an alternative?. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg 21:577, 2002
Leyh RG, Fischer S, Ruhparwar A, et al: Anticoagulation therapy in pregnant women with mechanical
valves. Arch Gynecol Obstet 268:1, 2003

Li W, Li H, Long Y: Clinical characteristics and long-term predictors of persistent left ventricular
systolic dysfunction in peripartum cardiomyopathy. Can J Cardiol 32:362, 2016
Liaw J, Walker B, Hall L, et al: Rheumatic heart disease in pregnancy and neonatal outcomes: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. PLos One 16:e0253581, 2021
Lin JP, Aboulhosn JA, Child JS: Congenital heart disease in adolescents and adults. In Fuster V,
Harrington RA, Narula J, et al (eds): Hurst’s The Heart, 14th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill
Education, 2017, p 1363
Lin LT, Tsui KH, Change R, et al: Management of recurrent and refractory ventricular tachycardia in
pregnancy. Taiwan J Obstet Gynecol 54(3):319, 2015
Lindley KJ, Conner SN, Cahill AG: Adult congenital heart disease in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol Surv
70(6):397, 2015
Liu Y, Han F, Zhuang J, et al: Cardiac operation under cardiopulmonary bypass during pregnancy. J
Cardiothorac Surg 15:92, 2021
Lu CW, Shih JC, Chen SY, et al: Comparison of 3 risk estimation methods for predicting cardiac
outcomes in pregnant women with congenital heart disease. Circ J 79(7):1609, 2015
Lupton M, Oteng-Ntim E, Ayida G, et al: Cardiac disease in pregnancy. Curr Opin Obstet Gynecol
14:137, 2002
Macera F, Occhi L, Masciocco G, et al: A new life: motherhood after heart transplantation. A singlecenter experience and review of literature. Transplantation 102(9):1538, 2018
MacIntyre C, Iwuala C, Parkash R: Cardiac arrhythmias and pregnancy. Curr Treat Options Cardiovasc
Med 20(8):63, 2018
Mack MJ, Leon MB, Thourani VH, et al: Transcatheter aortic-valve replacement with a balloonexpandable valve in low-risk patients. N Engl J Med 380(18):1695, 2019
Makdisi G, Jan MY, Dungy-Poythress L, et al: Successful delivery in a patient with left ventricular assist
devise and unplanned pregnancy. Ann Thorac Surg 104(1):e31, 2017
Malhamé I, Hurlburt H, Larson L, et al: Sensitivity and specificity of B-type natriuretic peptide in
diagnosing heart failure in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 134(3):440, 2019
Martin RB, Nelson DB, Stewart R, et al: Impact of pregnancy on maternal cardiac atria. Am J Perinatol
34(11):1097, 2017
Martin SR, Edwards A: Pulmonary hypertension and pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 134(5):974, 2019
McLintock C: Thromboembolism in pregnancy: challenges and controversies in the prevention of
pregnancy-associated venous thromboembolism and management of anticoagulation in women with
mechanical prosthetic heart valves. Best Pract Res Clin Obstet Gynecol 28(4):519, 2014
McNamara DM, Elkayam U, Alharethi R, et al: Clinical outcomes for peripartum cardiomyopathy in
North America: results of the IPAC study (investigations of pregnancy-associated cardiomyopathy).
J Am Coll Cardiol 66(8):905, 2015
Meijboom LJ, Drenthen W, Pieper PG, et al: Obstetric complications in Marfan syndrome. Intl J Cardiol
110:53, 2006
Melchiorre K, Sharma R, Khalil A, et al: Maternal cardiovascular function in normal pregnancy:
evidence of maladaptation to chronic volume overload. Hypertension 67(4):754, 2016
Meng ML, Landau R, Viktorsdottir O, et al: Pulmonary hypertension in pregnancy: a report of 49 cases
at four tertiary North American sites. Obstet Gynecol 129(3):511, 2017
Mogos MF, Piano MR, McFarlin BL, et al: Heart failure in pregnant women: a concern across the
pregnancy continuum. Circ Heart Fail 11(1):e004005, 2018
Moroney E, Posma E, Dennis A, et al: Pregnancy in a woman with a Fontan circulation: a review.
Obstet Med 11(1):6, 2018

Moroney E, Zannino D, Cordina R, et al: Does pregnancy impact subsequent health outcomes in the
maternal Fontan circulation? Int J Cardiol 15(301):67, 2020
Nanna M, Stergiopoulos K: Pregnancy complicated by valvular heart disease: an update. J Am Heart
Assoc 3:e000712, 2014
Narula J, Maron BJ, Narula N, et al: Classification of cardiomyopathies. In Fuster V, Harrington RA,
Narula J, et al (eds): Hurst’s The Heart, 14th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2017, p 1197
Nishimura RA, Otto CM, Bonow RO, et al: 2014 AHA/ACC guidelines for the management of patients
with valvular heart disease: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart
Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. J Thorac Cardiovasc 148(1):e1, 2014
Nishimura RA, Otto CM, Bonow RO, et al: 2017 AHA/ACC focused update of the 2014 AHA/ACC
guideline for the management of patients with valvular heart disease: a report of the American
College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines.
Circulation 135(25):e1159, 2017
Nizamuddin J, Gupta S, Patel V, et al: Hypertensive disease of pregnancy increase risk of readmission
with heart failure: a national readmissions database study. Mayo Clin Proc 94(5):811, 2019
Ntusi NB, Badri M, Gumedze F, et al: Pregnancy-associated heart failure: a comparison of clinical
presentation and outcome between hypertensive heart failure of pregnancy and idiopathic
peripartum cardiomyopathy. PLoS One 10(8):e0133466, 2015
Običan SG, Cleary KL: Pulmonary arterial hypertension in pregnancy. Semin Perinatol 35(5):289, 2014
O’Gara PT, Greenfield AJ, Afridi NA, et al: Case 12–2004: a 38-year-old woman with acute onset of
pain in the chest. N Engl J Med 350:16, 2004
Oindi FM, Sequeira E, Sequira HR, et al: Takotsubo cardiomyopathy in pregnancy: a case report and
literature review. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth 19(1):89, 2019
Pacheco LD, Saade GR, Hankins GD: Acute myocardial infarction during pregnancy. Clin Obstet
Gynecol 57(4):835, 2014
Pacheco LD, Saade GR, Hankins GD: Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) during
pregnancy and postpartum. Semin Perinatol 42(1):21, 2018
Packer M: Why are physicians so confused about acute heart failure? N Engl J Med 38(18):776, 2019
Page RL, Joglar JA, Caldwell MA, et al: 2015 ACC/AHA/HRS guideline for the management of adult
patients with supraventricular tachycardia: executive summary. Circulation 133:e471, 2015
Papatsonis DNM, Heetkamp A, van den Hombergh C, et al: Acute type A aortic dissection
complicating pregnancy at 32 weeks: surgical repair after cesarean section. Am J Perinatol 26:153,
2009
Pappone C, Santinelli V, Manguso F, et al: A randomized study of prophylactic catheter ablation in
asymptomatic patients with the Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome. N Engl J Med 349:1803, 2003
Pearson GD, Veille JC, Rahimtoola S, et al: Peripartum cardiomyopathy. National Heart, Lung, and
Blood Institute and Office of Rare Diseases (National Institutes of Health) workshop
recommendations and review. JAMA 283:1183, 2000
Petersen EE, Davis NL, Goodman D, et al: Vital signs: pregnancy-related deaths, United States, 2011–
2015, and strategies for prevention, 13 states, 2013–2017. MMWR 68(18):423, 2019
Pessel C, Bonanno C: Valve disease in pregnancy. Semin Perinatal 38(5):273, 2014
Pieper PG, Hoendermis ES. Pregnancy in women with pulmonary hypertension. Neth Heart J
19(12):504, 2011
Pijuan-Domènech A, Galian L, Goya M, et al: Cardiac complications during pregnancy are better
predicted with the modified WHO risk score. Int J Cardiol 195:149, 2015

Pombar X, Strassner HT, Fenner PC: Pregnancy in a woman with class H diabetes mellitus and
previous coronary artery bypass graft: a case report and review of the literature. Obstet Gynecol
85:825, 1995
Prasad M, Jones M: Medical complications of opioid use disorder in pregnancy. Semin Perinatol
43(3):162, 2019
Quinones JN, Walheim L, Rochon M, et al: Impact of type of maternal cardiovascular disease on
pregnancy outcomes among women managed in a multidisciplinary cardio-obstetrics program. Am J
Obstet Gynecol MFM 3(4):100377, 2021
Ramage K, Grabowska K, Silversides C, et al: Association of adult congenital heart disease with
pregnancy, maternal, and neonatal outcomes. JAMA Netw Open 2(5):e193667, 2019
Raman AS, Sharma S, Hariharan: Minimal use of fluoroscopy to reduce fetal radiation exposure. Tex
Heart Inst J 42(2):152, 2015
Rashba EJ, Zareba W, Moss AJ, et al: Influence of pregnancy on the risk for cardiac events in patients
with hereditary long QT syndrome. Circulation 97:451, 1998
Ravichandran J, Woon SY, Quek YS, et al: High-sensitivity cardiac troponin I levels in normal and
hypertensive pregnancy. Am J Med 132(3):362, 2019
Redfield MM: Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction. N Engl J Med 375(19):1868, 2016
Regitz-Zagrosek V, Roos-Hesselink JW, Bauersachs J, et al: 2018 ESC guidelines for the management
of cardiovascular diseases during pregnancy. ESC Scientific Document Group. Eur Heart J 39:3165,
2018
Ricke-Hoch M, Pfeffer TJ, Hilfiker-Kleiner D: Peripartum cardiomyopathy: basic mechanisms and hope
for new therapies. Cardiovasc Res 116(3):520, 2020
Roeder HA, Kuller JA, Barker PC, et al: Maternal valvular heart disease in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol
Surv 66(9):561, 2011
Rowan JA, McCowan LM, Raudkivi PJ, et al: Enoxaparin treatment in women with mechanical heart
valves during pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 185:633, 2001
Russo ML, Gandhi M, Morris SA: Aortic dissection in pregnancy—a Texas population-based study.
Abstract No. 769, Am J Obstet Gynecol 216:S445, 2017
Russo ML, Sukhavasi N, Mathur V, et al: Obstetric management of Loeys-Dietz syndrome. Obstet
Gynecol 131(6):1080, 2018
Ruys TP, Roos-Hesselink JW, Hall R, et al: Heart failure in pregnant women with cardiac disease: data
from the ROPAC. Heart 100(3):231, 2014
Ruys TP, Roos-Hesselink JW, Pijuan-Domènech A, et al: Is a planned caesarean section in women with
cardiac disease beneficial? Heart 101(7):530, 2015
Safi LM, Liberthson RR, Bhatt A: Current management of Ebstein’s anomaly in the adult. Curr Treat
Options Cardiovasc Med 18(9):56, 2016
Savu O, Jurcuţ R, Giuşcă S, et al: Morphological and functional adaptation of the maternal heart during
pregnancy. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging 5:289, 2012
Sawhney H, Aggarwal N, Suri V, et al: Maternal and perinatal outcome in rheumatic heart disease. Int J
Gynaecol Obstet 80:9, 2003
Schade R, Andersohn F, Suissa S, et al: Dopamine agonists and the risk of cardiac-valve regurgitation.
N Engl J Med 356:29, 2007
Schaufelberger M: Cardiomyopathy and pregnancy. Heart 105(20):1543, 2019
Schinkel AF: Pregnancy in women with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Cardio Rev 22(5):217, 2014
Schlichting LE, Insaf TZ, Zaidi AN, et al: Maternal comorbidities and complications of delivery in
pregnant women with congenital heart disease. J Am Coll Cardiol 73(17):2181, 2019

Seeburger J, Wilhelm-Mohr F, Falk V: Acute type A dissection at 17 weeks of gestation in a Marfan
patient. Ann Thorac Surg 83:674, 2007
Seth R, Moss AJ, McNitt S, et al: Long QT syndrome and pregnancy. J Am Coll Cardiol 49:1092, 2007
Sherer DM: Coarctation of the descending thoracic aorta diagnosed during pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol
100:1094, 2002
Shroff H, Benenstein R, Freedberg R, et al: Mitral valve Libman-Sacks endocarditis visualized by real
time three-dimensional transesophageal echocardiography. Echocardiography 29:E100, 2012
Silvestry FE, Cohen MS, Armsby LB, et al: Guidelines for the echocardiographic assessment of atrial
septal defect and patent foramen ovale: from the American Society of Echocardiography and
Society for Cardiac Angiography and Interventions. J Am Soc Echocardiogr 28(8):910, 2015
Simpson LL: Maternal cardiac disease: update for the clinician. Obstet Gynecol 119:345, 2012
Siu SC, Colman JM: Congenital heart disease: heart disease and pregnancy. Heart 85:710, 2001a
Siu SC, Sermer M, Colman JM, et al: Prospective multicenter study of pregnancy outcomes in women
with heart disease. Circulation 104:515, 2001b
Sliwa K, Azibani F, Baard J, et al: Reducing late maternal death due to cardiovascular disease—a
pragmatic pilot study. Int J Cardiol 272:70, 2018
Sliwa K, Blauwet L, Tibazarwa K, et al: Evaluation of bromocriptine in the treatment of acute severe
peripartum cardiomyopathy: a proof-of-concept pilot study. Circulation. 121(13):1465, 2016
Small MJ, James AH, Kershaw T, et al: Near-miss maternal mortality: cardiac dysfunction as the
principal cause of obstetric intensive care unit admissions. Obstet Gynecol 119:250, 2012
Smilowitz NR, Gupta N, Guo Y, et al: Acute myocardial infarction during pregnancy and the puerperium
in the United States. Mayo Clin Proc 93(10):1404, 2018
Sobhani NC, Schultz H, Kheiwa A, et al: Contraceptive choices in the immediate postpartum period in
women with cardiac disease. Am J Cardiol 123(8):1364, 2019
Steinberg ZL, Dominguez-Islas CP, Otto CM, et al: Maternal and fetal outcomes of anticoagulation in
pregnant women with mechanical heart valves. J Am Coll Cardiol 69(22):2681, 2017
Stewart RD, Nelson DB, Matulevicious SA, et al: Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging to assess the
impact of maternal habitus on cardiac remodeling during pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol
214(5):640.e1, 2016
Stoll VM, Drury NE, Thorne S, et al: Pregnancy outcomes in women with transposition of the great
arteries after an arterial switch operation. JAMA Cardiol 3(11):1119, 2018
Sun X, Feng J, Shi J: Pregnancy and pulmonary hypertension: an exploratory analysis of risk factors and
outcomes. Medicine (Baltimore) 97(44):e13035, 2018
Texas Maternal Mortality and Morbidity Task Force: Maternal Mortality and Morbidity Task Force and
Department of State Health Services Joint Biennial Report, 2020. Available at:
https://www.dshs.texas.gov/mch/pdf/DSHS-MMMRC-2020-UPDATED-11282020.pdf. Accessed
October 23, 2021
Thompson JL, Kuklina EV, Bateman BT, et al: Medical and obstetric outcomes among pregnant women
with congenital heart disease. Obstet Gynecol 126(2):346, 2015
Thorne S, MacGregor A, Nelson-Piercy C: Risks of contraception and pregnancy in heart disease.
Heart 92(10):152, 2006
Thurman R, Zaffar N, Sayyer P, et al: Labour profile and outcomes in pregnant women with heart
disease. Abstract No. 799, Am J Obstet Gynecol 216:S459, 2017
Trigas V, Nagdyman N, Pildner von Steinburg S , et al: Pregnancy-related obstetric and cardiologic
problems in women after atrial switch operation for transposition of the great arteries. Circ J
78(2):443, 2014

Tripathi B, Kumar V, Pitiliya A, et al: Trends in incidence and outcomes of pregnancy-related acute
myocardial infarction (from a Nationwide Inpatient Sample database). Am J Cardiol 123(8):1220,
2019
Tuzcu V, Gul EE, Erdem A, et al: Cardiac interventions in pregnant patients without fluoroscopy. Pediatr
Cardiol 36(6):1304, 2015
van Hagen IM, Boersma E, Johnson MR, et al: Global cardiac risk assessment in the Registry of
Pregnancy and Cardiac disease: results of a registry from the European Society of Cardiology. Eur J
Heart Fail 18(5):523, 2016
van Hagen IM, Roose-Hesselink JW, Ruys TP, et al: Pregnancy in women with a mechanical heart
valve: data of the European Society of Cardiology Registry of Pregnancy and Cardiac Disease
(ROPAC). Circulation 132(2):132, 2015
van Hagen IM, Torne SA, Taha N, et al: Pregnancy outcomes in women with rheumatic mitral valve
disease: results from the registry of pregnancy and cardiac disease. Circulation 137(8):806, 2018
Vaught AJ, Kovell LC, Szymanski LM, et al: Acute cardiac effects of severe pre-eclampsia. J Am Coll
Cardiol 72(1):1, 2018
Vause S, Clarke B, Tower CL, et al: Pregnancy outcomes in women with mechanical prosthetic heart
valves: a prospective descriptive population based study using the United Kingdom Obstetric
Surveillance System (UKOSS) data collection system. BJOG 124(9):1411, 2017
Vinatier D, Virelizier S, Depret-Mosser S, et al: Pregnancy after myocardial infarction. Eur J Obstet
Gynecol Reprod Biol 56:89, 1994
Vitarelli A, Capotosto L: Role of echocardiography in the assessment and management of adult
congenital heart disease in pregnancy. Int J Cardiovasc Imaging 27:843, 2011
Vonck S, Lanssens D, Staelens AS, et al: Obesity in pregnancy causes a volume overload in third
trimester. Eur J Clin Invest 49(11), 2019
Wang H, Zhang W, Liu T: Experience of managing pregnant women with Eisenmenger’s syndrome:
maternal and fetal outcome in 13 cases. J Obstet Gynaecol Res 37:64, 2011
Ware JS, Seidman JG, Arany Z: Shared genetic predisposition in peripartum and dilated
cardiomyopathies. N Engl J Med 374(26):2601, 2016
Weiss BM, Zemp L, Seifert B, et al: Outcome of pulmonary vascular disease in pregnancy: a systematic
overview from 1978 through 1996. J Am Coll Cardiol 31:1650, 1998
Wolfe DS, Hameed AB, Taub CC, et al: Addressing maternal mortality: the pregnant cardiac patient.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 220(2):167.e1, 2019
Wylie BJ, Epps KC, Gaddipati S, et al: Correlation of transthoracic echocardiography and right heart
catheterization in pregnancy. J Perinat Med 35(6):497, 2007
Xia VW, Messerlian AK, Mackley J, et al: Successful epidural anesthesia for cesarean section in a
parturient with severe aortic stenosis and a recent history of pulmonary edema—a case report. J
Clin Anesth 18:142, 2006
Yu M, Yi K, Zhou L, et al: Pregnancy increases heart rates during paroxysmal supraventricular
tachycardia. Can J Cardiol 31(6):820.e5, 2015
Zanettini R, Antonini A, Gatto G, et al: Valvular heart disease and the use of dopamine agonists for
Parkinson’s disease. N Engl J Med 356:39, 2007
Zeeman GG: Obstetric critical care: a blueprint for improved outcomes. Crit Care Med 34:S208, 2006
Zwiers WJ, Blodgett TM, Vallejo MC, et al: Successful vaginal delivery for a parturient with complete
aortic coarctation. J Clin Anesth 18:300, 2006

CHAPTER 53

Chronic Hypertension

GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
PREGNANCY CONSIDERATIONS
DIAGNOSIS AND EVALUATION
ADVERSE PREGNANCY EFFECTS
ANTIHYPERTENSIVE DRUGS
ANTIHYPERTENSIVE TREATMENT IN PREGNANCY
SUPERIMPOSED PREECLAMPSIA
FETAL ASSESSMENT
DELIVERY TIMING
POSTPARTUM CARE
REFERENCES
In reproductive-aged women, the prevalence of hypertension approximates 6
percent (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2017). Thus, not
surprisingly, chronic hypertension is one of the most common serious
complications encountered during pregnancy. In one study of more than 56
million births, the incidence was 1.8 percent (Bateman, 2012). Chronic
hypertension complicated 2.3 percent of pregnancies in data from the
Medicaid Analytic Extract (Bateman, 2015). Despite an increasing

prevalence from 1970 to 2010, optimal management has not been well
studied (Ananth, 2019).
Chronic hypertension usually improves during early pregnancy. This is
followed by variable behavior later in pregnancy and may include
development of superimposed preeclampsia. The latter carries significant
risks for maternal and perinatal morbidity and mortality.

GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
Blood pressure is a polygenic biological variant that differs between
populations. Numerous epigenetic factors also influence penetrance
differences between individuals. Moreover, clinical features such as
increasing age and weight correlate positively with rising pressures. Last,
resting blood pressure measurements do not reflect daily activities.
Therefore, adults have a broad range of normal blood pressure values, which
makes defining hypertension difficult.

■ Definition and Classification
Chronic hypertension would logically be defined as some level of sustained
resting blood pressure that is associated with acute or long-term adverse
effects. Most consider 140/90 mm Hg as the upper limit of normal. In the
United States, these values were derived primarily from life insurance
actuarial tables constructed using data from white adult males. These
“norms” disregard ethnicity, gender, and other covariants. The importance of
race is emphasized by Kotchen (2018), who cites the incidence of
hypertension—defined as blood pressure >140/90 mm Hg—to be 34 percent
in blacks, 29 percent in whites, and 21 percent in Mexican Americans.
For many years, the Joint National Committee promulgated guidelines for
diagnosis, classification, and management of chronic hypertension. Recently,
a coalition led by the American College of Cardiology and the American
Heart Association published criteria for the diagnosis of hypertension (Table
53-1) (Whelton, 2018).
TABLE 53-1. Criteria for Diagnosis of Hypertension

■ Treatment and Benefits for Nonpregnant Adults
Chronic hypertension accounts for nearly 15 percent of deaths worldwide
(Kotchen, 2018). Long term, hypertension raises substantively the risk of
cardiovascular disease, coronary heart disease, congestive heart failure,
stroke, renal failure, peripheral arterial disease, and mortality. These risks
decline with treatment of otherwise normal adults who have sustained
hypertension.
Based on these benefits, current guidelines recommend antihypertensive
therapy for stage 1 hypertension in nonpregnant adults with risk factors for
current or future cardiovascular disease. However, given the different
diagnostic criteria in pregnancy (see Table 53-1), the best management for
women being treated and contemplating pregnancy, for those undergoing
treatment who become pregnant, or for those first identified to have chronic
hypertension during pregnancy is unknown (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2018a; August, 2015). In these women, the
benefits and safety of instituting antihypertensive therapy are less clear, as
subsequently discussed.

■ Preconceptional Counseling
Women with chronic hypertension ideally undergo counseling before
pregnancy (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2018b).
Initial questions ascertain hypertension duration, degree of blood pressure
control, and current therapy. Home measurement devices are checked for
accuracy. General health, daily activities, and dietary habits also are
assessed (Table 53-2). Women who require multiple medications for control
or who have poorly controlled pressures carry greater risk for adverse
pregnancy outcomes. Patient counseling should disclose maternal and fetal
risks, which are detailed in later sections (pp. 946 and 948).
TABLE 53-2. Lifestyle Modifications for Hypertensive Patients

For hypertensive women with disease exceeding 5 years or with
comorbid diabetes, cardiovascular and renal function are assessed (August,
2015; Chahine, 2019). Renal function is evaluated by serum creatinine
measurement and urine spot protein/creatinine ratio measurement. If the ratio
is abnormally high (>0.3), proteinuria can be further quantified with a 24hour urine collection (Kuper, 2016; Morgan, 2016a).
Women with evidence of organ dysfunction or those with prior adverse
events such as a stroke, myocardial infarction, arrhythmias, or ventricular
failure carry markedly higher risks for a recurrence or worsening dysfunction
during pregnancy. Specific preconceptional guidance for these conditions is
found in Chapters 63 (p. 1132) and 52 (p. 918), respectively. Although
poorly controlled hypertension is considered a contraindication for
pregnancy by some, there is no consensus. Women who maintain persistent
systolic pressures ≥160 mm Hg or diastolic pressures ≥110 mm Hg despite
therapy; require multiple antihypertensive agents; have a serum creatinine

level >2 mg/dL; or have a history of prior stroke, myocardial infarction, or
cardiac failure must be counseled regarding the marked risks to themselves
and to their fetus. These are described in the next sections.

PREGNANCY CONSIDERATIONS
■ Diagnosis and Evaluation
Chronic hypertension is diagnosed if it precedes pregnancy or if it is
identified before 20 weeks’ gestation. Prior to this gestational age,
preeclampsia is rarely seen (Chap 40, p. 690). The American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2018a, 2020) defines hypertension as a
systolic pressure ≥140 mm Hg or a diastolic pressure ≥90 mm Hg (see Table
53-1). In suspected cases of “white-coat” hypertension, serial ambulatory
monitoring can be considered. In some women without overt chronic
hypertension, a history of repeated pregnancies complicated by gestational
hypertension, with or without preeclampsia, may be elicited. Either is a risk
factor for latent chronic hypertension. This is especially true for prior
preeclampsia and particularly for early-onset preeclampsia (van Eerden,
2018). In many ways, gestational hypertension is analogous to gestational
diabetes. Women with the former have a chronic hypertensive diathesis, in
which heredity and epigenetics play a major role.
Although uncommon, secondary causes of hypertension are always a
possibility in affected women. Thus, chronic renal disease, obstructive sleep
apnea, connective tissue disease, primary aldosteronism, Cushing syndrome,
pheochromocytoma, and myriad other causes are considered during
evaluation (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2018a).
That said, most pregnant women with antecedent hypertension will have
otherwise uncomplicated disease. The hypertensive disorders that uniquely
complicate pregnancy are discussed in Chapter 40.

■ Risk Factors
Several factors increase the likelihood that pregnant women will have
chronic hypertension. Three of those most frequently cited are ethnicity,
obesity, and diabetes. As previously noted, black women are more commonly
affected. Related to this, hundreds of blood pressure–related phenotypes and

genomic regions have been identified (Ward, 2015). Obesity may raise the
prevalence of chronic hypertension tenfold (Chap. 51, p. 904). In addition,
obese women are more likely to develop superimposed preeclampsia
(Ornaghi, 2018).
The metabolic syndrome is a clinical cluster that includes hypertension,
high blood sugar, excess fat at the waist, and abnormal cholesterol or
triglyceride levels. This constellation is a risk marker for superimposed
preeclampsia and for persistent postpartum hypertension (Jeyabalan, 2015).
Diabetes is also prevalent in chronically hypertensive women, and its
interplay with obesity and preeclampsia is prominent (Leon, 2016). The most
frequent comorbidities associated with chronic hypertension are
pregestational diabetes—6.6 percent, thyroid disorders—4.1 percent, and
collagen vascular disease—0.6 percent (Bateman, 2012).

■ Physiological Effects of Chronic Hypertension
Blood pressure decreases in the first trimester due to a 30-percent drop in
systemic vascular resistance. In most women with chronic hypertension, this
decline is followed by a rise in blood pressure during the third trimester
(Fig. 53-1). Women with chronic hypertension have persistently elevated
vascular resistance and possibly reduced intravascular volume expansion
(Tihtonen, 2007). Moreover, in women with superimposed preeclampsia,
arterial mechanical properties are most marked (Hibbard, 2015).

FIGURE 53-1 Mean systolic and diastolic blood pressures across pregnancy in 107 untreated
chronically hypertensive women (yellow) compared with blood pressures across pregnancy in 4589
healthy nulliparas (blue). (Data from August, 2015; Levine, 1997; Sibai, 1990.)

ADVERSE PREGNANCY EFFECTS
Chronic hypertension is associated with adverse maternal and perinatal
outcomes listed in Table 53-3. Rates of these complications positively
correlate with the severity and duration of prepregnancy hypertension.
Elevated blood pressure defined by criteria in Table 53-1 may herald
adverse outcomes similar to those in women with chronic hypertension
defined by criteria of the American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (Keene, 2019; Sutton, 2018). Development of superimposed
preeclampsia, particularly early-onset disease, is especially dangerous.
TABLE 53-3. Some Adverse Effects of Chronic Hypertension on Maternal
and Perinatal Outcomes

■ Maternal Morbidity and Mortality
Most women with satisfactorily controlled hypertension and no end-organ
damage will do well in pregnancy. Complications are more likely with
severe baseline hypertension and documented end-organ damage, especially
ventricular hypertrophy and hypertensive glomerulosclerosis (Ambia, 2018,
2019; Morgan, 2016b). Women with chronic hypertension have higher rates
of stroke, pulmonary edema, and renal failure (Gilbert, 2007; Zofkie, 2018).
These observations were verified in the report from the Nationwide Patient
Sample (Bateman, 2012). In this study, hypertension complications included
pulmonary edema—1.5 per 1000, stroke—2.7 per 1000, mechanical
ventilation—3.8 per 1000, acute kidney injury—5.9 per 1000, and maternal
mortality—0.4 per 1000. In another report, the maternal mortality rate was
greater in women with severe hypertension (Akbar, 2019). Peripartum
cardiomyopathy is another associated risk (Cunningham, 2019).
Dangerous blood pressure elevation can develop with chronic
hypertension. Systolic pressure ≥160 mm Hg or diastolic pressure ≥110 mm
Hg will rapidly cause renal or cardiopulmonary dysfunction or cerebral
hemorrhage (Clark, 2012). In addition to hypertensive heart failure
mentioned above, coronary artery and aortic dissection have been described

(Faden, 2016; Weissman-Brenner, 2004). With superimposed preeclampsia
or eclampsia, the maternal prognosis is poor unless the pregnancy is ended
(Becker, 2018). Placental abruption is a common and serious complication
(p. 946).
Chronic hypertension is associated with a fivefold higher risk for
maternal death (Gilbert, 2007). In the United States from 2011 to 2013,
hypertensive disorders, including chronic hypertension and preeclampsia
syndrome, accounted for 7.4 percent of 2009 pregnancy-related deaths
(Creanga, 2017). Undoubtedly related were other causes of death such as
cardiovascular conditions—15.5 percent, cerebrovascular accidents—6.6
percent, and cardiomyopathy—11 percent. Moodley (2007) reported similar
findings in 3406 maternal deaths from South Africa.

■ Superimposed Preeclampsia
The reported incidence of superimposed preeclampsia varies from 20 to 50
percent because it is not precisely defined (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2018a, 2020; Bramham, 2016; Moussa,
2017). In a Maternal-Fetal Medicine Units Network trial, superimposed
preeclampsia was diagnosed in 25 percent of hypertensive gravidas (Caritis,
1998). August and colleagues (2015) hypothesize that this predilection may
stem from similar genetic, biochemical, and metabolic abnormalities.
The risk for superimposed preeclampsia positively correlates with the
severity of baseline hypertension and the need for antihypertensive therapy
(Ankumah, 2014; Morgan, 2016a). Preliminary observations indicate that
pregnant women with initial blood pressures ≥130/80 mm Hg early in
pregnancy have excessive rates of preeclampsia (Greiner, 2020; Keene,
2019; Roman, 2020). Moreover, compared with women who do not develop
preeclampsia, these pressures nadir earlier in gestation (Fig. 53-2) (Morgan,
2016a). The preeclampsia risk is even greater if end-organ damage, such as
baseline proteinuria, is present.

FIGURE 53-2 Blood pressure trends in treated, chronically hypertensive women with and without
superimposed preeclampsia. Mean maternal pressures (MAPs) at entry (p = 0.002) and throughout
gestation (p <0.001) are significantly different for each group. MAP nadir at 23.3 weeks (95% CI,
22.5–24.1) for superimposed preeclampsia versus 26.4 weeks (95% CI, 22.5–27.6) for those without
preeclampsia is significant (3.1 weeks, 95% CI, 2.3–4.3).

Prediction
Thus far, individual predictive tests for superimposed preeclampsia have
been disappointing (Conde-Agudelo, 2015; Correa, 2016). First-trimester
serum markers used for aneuploidy screening are one group (Chap. 17, p.
338). Of these, inhibin A levels are reduced in patients destined to develop
preeclampsia, but its low sensitivity makes it clinically unuseful (Sibai,
2008; Zeeman, 2003). Similarly, maternal serum pregnancy-associated
plasma protein-A (PAPP-A) levels are decreased in the first trimester of
pregnancies that are later complicated by preeclampsia (Tan, 2018). Of
angiogenic and antiangiogenic factors, low plasma levels of placental growth
factor (PlGF) and high levels of soluble fms-like tyrosine kinase-1 (sFlt-1)
have been associated with superimposed preeclampsia development (Binder
2020; Nzelu, 2020). Last, the umbilical artery pulsatility index appears to be
elevated in the first trimester of these pregnancies (O’Gorman, 2016).
Combining all these factors may be useful in predicting superimposed
preeclampsia (O’Gorman, 2016; Stepan, 2020).

Prevention
Trials using various medications to prevent preeclampsia in women with
chronic hypertension show little or no benefit. Low-dose aspirin has been
evaluated most frequently (Mol, 2016; Staff, 2015). The U.S. Preventive
Services Task Force concluded with “moderate certainty” that treatment with
low-dose aspirin for chronically hypertensive women at high risk for
preeclampsia is beneficial (Henderson, 2014). The American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2018a) subsequently recommended
initiating 81 mg between 12 and 28 weeks’ gestation and continuing therapy
until delivery for these at-risk gravidas.
Antioxidants to prevent preeclampsia have been studied. Spinnato and
coworkers (2007) randomly assigned 311 women with chronic hypertension
to treatment with vitamins C and E or with a placebo. A similar number in
both groups developed preeclampsia—17 versus 20 percent, respectively.

Placental Abruption
Chronic hypertension increases the risk two- to threefold for premature
placental separation. This event’s harms are detailed in Chapter 43 (p. 753).
The general obstetrical population risk is 1 abruption in 200 to 300
pregnancies, and in women with chronic hypertension, this rises to 1 in 60 to
120 pregnancies (Ankumah, 2014; Cruz, 2011; Magee, 2015). Most
abruptions affect women with worsening hypertension or superimposed
preeclampsia. Vigil-De Gracia and associates (2004) reported an 8.4percent risk in women with severe hypertension.

■ Perinatal Morbidity and Mortality
Rates of almost all adverse perinatal outcomes are greater in women with
chronic hypertension than in normotensive gravidas. Those who develop
preeclampsia have substantially higher adverse outcome rates. As shown in
Figure 53-3, adverse outcome rates rise incrementally with increasing blood
pressures (Ankumah, 2014). There is evidence to suggest that chronic
hypertension—treated or untreated—is associated with congenital anomalies
(Battarbee, 2020). Data from untreated women help tease away drug effects
on organogenesis. Bateman and coworkers (2015) found an odds ratio of 1.5
for cardiac defects. A systematic review noted a comparable risk ratio of 1.4

(Ramakrishnan, 2015). From one large birth defect study, five cases of fetal
esophageal atresia were found in those with untreated hypertension and
yielded an adjusted odds ratio of 3.2 (van Gelder, 2015).

FIGURE 53-3 Frequency of selected adverse maternal and perinatal outcomes by blood pressure
stratification in women with mild chronic hypertension. SGA = small for gestational age.

The stillbirth frequency with chronic hypertension is substantively
greater, and common etiologies include superimposed severe preeclampsia,
abruption, and fetal-growth restriction. Rates range from 15 to 24 deaths per
1000 births (Ahmad, 2012; Ankumah, 2014; Bateman, 2012). Lowbirthweight neonates also are common and result from fetal-growth
restriction, indicated preterm delivery, or both (see Fig. 53-3).
The incidence of fetal-growth restriction averages 20 percent.
Zetterström and colleagues (2006) reported a 2.5-fold risk for fetal-growth
restriction in 2754 chronically hypertensive Swedish women compared with
the risk in normotensive gravidas. Another study of 1609 Dutch nulliparas
showed a 1.3-fold greater risk (Broekhuijsen, 2012). As with other
complications, fetal-growth dysfunction is more likely in those who develop
superimposed preeclampsia. In one study, the incidence of growth-restricted
fetuses born to women with superimposed preeclampsia was almost 50
percent compared with only 21 percent in chronically hypertensive women
without preeclampsia (Chappell, 2008). Last, women with chronic

hypertension severe enough to warrant treatment had an 11-percent incidence
of fetal-growth restriction sufficiently severe to yield birthweights ≤3rd
percentile (Morgan, 2016a). Thus, neonates born to these women have a
correspondingly high rate of intensive-care unit (ICU) admission.
All of these adverse perinatal effects of chronic hypertension contribute
to the greater perinatal mortality rate, which is two- to fourfold higher than
the rate in nonaffected gravidas (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2018a). Stratified by severity, the perinatal death rate was 31
per 1000 births in those with mild hypertension, 72 per 1000 births with
moderate disease, and 100 per 1000 births in women with severe chronic
hypertension (Ankumah, 2014). In a study from Parkland Hospital, the
perinatal mortality rate was 32 per 1000 births in women with hypertension
severe enough to require treatment (Morgan, 2016a). As expected, the highest
rates are in women who develop superimposed preeclampsia, for whom the
risk doubles (Al Khalaf, 2021; Grover, 2021).
If diabetes coexists with chronic hypertension, preterm delivery, fetalgrowth restriction, and perinatal mortality rates are increased even more
(Yanit, 2012). Last, children born to women with chronic hypertension have
long-term endocrine and metabolic morbidities, specifically obesity (Imterat,
2020). This epigenetic effect of hypertension and of other maternal chronic
diseases is detailed in Chapter 47 (p. 831).

MANAGEMENT DURING PREGNANCY
Chronic hypertension management aims to prevent moderate or severe
hypertension, to delay or dampen superimposed preeclampsia, and to reduce
rates of adverse maternal or perinatal outcomes. Blood pressure selfmonitoring is encouraged, but for accuracy, automated devices must be
properly calibrated (Whelton, 2018). Dietary counseling and reduction of
behaviors such as tobacco, alcohol, cocaine, or other substance use serve as
early interventions. A low-sodium diet and low-dose aspirin are others
(Battarbee, 2020; Chaemsaithong, 2020). Last, pharmacologic therapy is
instituted to maintain blood pressures within suitable ranges, which are
outlined later (p. 951).
Some women—especially those with long-term or untreated hypertension
—have complications that raise the risk of adverse pregnancy events.

Concentric ventricular hypertrophy and proteinuria are concerns in these
women. (Ambia, 2017, 2019; Kim, 2016; Morgan, 2016a,b). Thus, early in
prenatal care, cardiovascular and renal baseline functions are assessed with
echocardiogram and a 24-hour urine collection for protein measurement.

■ Antihypertensive Drugs
Treatment of hypertension during pregnancy has included every drug class,
but information is still limited regarding safety and efficacy (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists 2013, 2018a). Some commonly
used drugs are listed in Table 53-4 and the following summary is abstracted
from several sources, including the 2020 Prescribers’ Digital Reference.
Possible fetal effects of many of these drugs are also discussed in Chapter 8.
TABLE 53-4. Some Antihypertensive Drugs Used for Treatment of Chronic
Hypertension During Pregnancya

Adrenergic Receptor–Blocking Agents
Peripherally acting β-adrenergic-receptor blockers cause a generalized
decline in sympathetic tone and lower cardiac output. Examples are
propranolol (Inderal) and metoprolol (Lopressor, Toprol). Atenolol is not
recommended because of its link with fetal-growth restriction (Bello, 2021).
Labetalol (Normodyne) is an α/β-adrenergic blocker that is considered safe.

Clonidine (Catapres) and α-methyldopa (Aldomet) act centrally by reducing
sympathetic outflow to effect a generalized decreased vascular tone. Drugs in
this class most frequently used in pregnancy are methyldopa and labetalol
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2018a).

Calcium Channel–Blocking Agents
These drugs are divided into three subclasses based on their calcium-channel
actions. Common agents include nifedipine (Procardia, Adalat)—a
dihydropyridine—and verapamil (Calan)—a phenylalkyl amine derivative.
These agents have negative inotropic effects and thus worsen ventricular
dysfunction and congestive heart failure. Theoretically, they may potentiate
the vasoactive actions of magnesium sulfate administered for eclampsia
neuroprophylaxis. Webster and coworkers (2017) found nifedipine equally
effective as labetalol for treatment of chronic hypertension in pregnancy.
However, those treated with nifedipine advantageously had less blood
pressure variation than those treated with labetalol (Shawkat, 2018).
Although data are limited, calcium channel–blocking agents appear to be safe
therapy for chronic hypertension during pregnancy (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2018a; Briggs, 2022).

Diuretics
Thiazide diuretics are sulfonamides, and these were the first drug group used
to successfully treat chronic hypertension. These agents and loop-acting
diuretics such as furosemide (Lasix) are commonly used in nonpregnant
patients. Short term, they provide sodium and water diuresis with volume
depletion. Over time, there is sodium escape, and volume depletion partially
corrects. Some aspect of lowered peripheral vascular resistance likely
contributes to their effectiveness in reducing long-term morbidity (Umans,
2015).
Thiazide drugs may be mildly diabetogenic, and the normal expected
volume expansion of pregnancy may be curtailed (Sibai, 1984). Although
rates of adverse perinatal outcomes are not greater with diuretic use,
concerns have curtailed diuretic use as first-line therapy for chronic
hypertension in pregnancy and particularly after 20 weeks’ gestation
(Working Group Report, 2000). Overall, thiazide diuretics are considered
safe in pregnancy (Briggs, 2022).

Vasodilators
Hydralazine (Apresoline) relaxes arterial smooth muscle and has been used
parenterally for decades to safely treat severe peripartum hypertension
(Chap. 41, p. 722). However, oral hydralazine monotherapy for chronic
hypertension is not generally used because of its weak antihypertensive
effects and resultant tachycardia. It is employed as an effective vasodilator
adjunct for long-term use with other antihypertensives in women with chronic
renal insufficiency or ventricular dysfunction.

Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme Inhibitors
These drugs inhibit the conversion of angiotensin-I to the potent
vasoconstrictor angiotensin-II. They can cause severe fetal malformations
when given in the second and third trimesters. These include
oligohydramnios, hypocalvaria, and renal dysfunction (Chap. 8, p. 150).
Some preliminary studies also suggest teratogenic effects (Hoeltzenbein,
2018). They are not recommended at any time during pregnancy (Briggs,
2022).
Angiotensin-receptor blockers act in a similar manner. However, instead
of blocking the production of angiotensin-II, they inhibit binding to its
receptor. They are presumed to have the same adverse fetal effects as
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors and also are contraindicated in
pregnancy.

■ Antihypertensive Treatment in Pregnancy
Mild or Moderate Hypertension
Initiating or continuing prepregnancy antihypertensive treatment during
pregnancy is debatable for women with mild or moderate hypertension (see
Table 53-1). In older observational reports, most pregnancy outcomes were
generally good in women with untreated mild to moderate hypertension.
However, these studies were relatively small and had widely varying
inclusion and outcome criteria. More recently, a Cochrane review of
approximately 5000 women with mild to moderate hypertension reported that
the risk for severe hypertension in these individuals with initially milder
hypertension declined with therapy (Abalos, 2018). The frequencies of

superimposed preeclampsia, preterm birth, small-for-gestational age
newborns, and perinatal mortality, however, did not differ.
Lowering blood pressure can theoretically decrease uteroplacental
perfusion and lead to small-for-gestational age neonates. von Dadelszen and
coworkers (2000) found that the decline in mean arterial pressure associated
with antihypertensive therapy was linked to a higher frequency of small-forgestational age newborns. Other studies both confirm and refute these
findings (Mitchell, 2019; Morgan, 2020). In two of the larger randomized
trials, the incidence of growth restriction was not higher in women randomly
assigned to treatment (Gruppo di Studio Ipertensione in Gravidanza, 1998;
Sibai, 1990). Conversely, worsening blood pressure itself is associated with
abnormal fetal growth. Also, some suggest that the drugs have a direct fetal
action (Umans, 2015). Therefore, the question regarding treatment of mild to
moderate chronic hypertension in pregnancy is yet to be resolved.

Severe Chronic Hypertension
As classified by the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
(2018a), severe hypertension includes a systolic pressure ≥160 mm Hg or a
diastolic pressure ≥110 mm Hg. Treatment should be initiated for persistent
severe hypertension to reduce maternal morbidity and mortality risks (Akbar,
2019). In women with cardiovascular or renal end-organ damage, treatment
may be instituted at systolic pressures ≥140 to 150 mm Hg or diastolic
pressures ≥90 to 100 mm Hg in an attempt to mitigate further damage.
Women whose hypertension is severe enough to require antihypertensive
therapy or cause end-organ damage carry an increased risk for superimposed
preeclampsia. In an older study, Sibai and coworkers (1986) described
outcomes from 44 pregnancies in women whose blood pressure at 6 to 11
weeks’ gestation was ≥170/110 mm Hg. All were given oral treatment with
α-methyldopa and hydralazine to maintain pressures <160/110 mm Hg. Half
of these women developed superimposed preeclampsia, and all adverse
perinatal outcomes were in this group. Conversely, those women with severe
chronic hypertension who did not develop superimposed preeclampsia had
reasonably good outcomes. Morgan and colleagues (2016a) confirmed these
findings in their study of 447 women requiring treatment for chronic
hypertension prior to 20 weeks.

Cardiac abnormalities and renal insufficiency resulting from uncontrolled
hypertension raise the risk for adverse pregnancy outcomes. Women with
baseline proteinuria >300 mg/d have higher rates of superimposed
preeclampsia, preterm birth, and small-for-gestational age neonates
compared with those whose 24-hour protein excretion is <300 mg/d (Table
53-5) (Morgan, 2016b). Abnormal cardiac remodeling and left ventricular
hypertrophy also are associated with superimposed preeclampsia, preterm
birth, and neonatal ICU admission (Ambia, 2018, 2019).
TABLE 53-5. Selected Pregnancy Outcomes in Women with Chronic
Hypertension with and without Baseline Proteinuriaa and Who Were Treated
During Pregnancy

“Tight Control”
During the past decade, the concept of tight control of blood pressure has
been advocated to optimize maternal and perinatal outcomes. Such control is
analogous to that of glycemic control for diabetes management. The
observational study by Ankumah and colleagues (2014) noted earlier lends
credence to tighter blood pressure control. They showed that the adverse
pregnancy outcome risk was lower when blood pressures before 20 weeks’

gestation were <140 mm Hg compared with higher-pressure categories and
increasing blood pressures.
Unfortunately, those observations were not confirmed. Magee and
associates (2015) randomized 987 women to either less-tight or tight control
of hypertension. Except for a lower rate of severe hypertension in the tightly
controlled group, other outcomes between these two groups did not differ
(Table 53-6). Analyzing the same cohort, no gestational age was identified at
which tight control was preferable (Pels, 2018). A systematic review
reported similar results (Panaitesc, 2017). At this time, no proven benefits or
risks are attributed to “tight”—target diastolic pressure <85 mm Hg—versus
“less-tight”—target diastolic pressure <100 mm Hg—control of chronic
hypertension during pregnancy (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2018a). A randomized trial—Project CHAP—is ongoing to
help address this question (U.S. National Library of Medicine, 2020).
TABLE 53-6. Selected Maternal and Perinatal Outcomes in Pregnant
Women with Chronic Hypertension According to Less-Tight versus Tight
Control

Recommendations for Therapy
Until the treatment of uncomplicated mild to moderate chronic hypertension
in pregnancy is confirmed to have benefits, it seems reasonable to follow the
guidelines of the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
(2018a) and the Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine (2015). Thus, pregnant
women with severe hypertension must be treated for maternal neuro-,
cardio-, and renoprotection. Treatment is also mandatory for women with
prior adverse outcomes such as a stroke, myocardial infarction, and evidence
for cardiac or renal dysfunction.
Many find it reasonable to begin antihypertensive treatment in otherwise
healthy pregnant women with persistent systolic pressures >150 mm Hg or
diastolic pressures >95 to 100 mm Hg (August, 2015; Webster, 2017). Drugs
commonly used are listed in Table 53-4. At Parkland Hospital, we initiate
treatment with antihypertensive agents at blood pressures ≥150/100 mm Hg.
Our preferred regimens include monotherapy with a β-blocking drug such as
labetalol or a calcium channel–blocking agent such as nifedipine or
amlodipine (Norvasc). Adjunct therapy with a thiazide diuretic seems
reasonable for women in the first half of pregnancy. This is more beneficial
in black women, in whom the prevalence of salt-sensitive chronic
hypertension is high.
Controversy surrounds women who present early in pregnancy and who
are already taking antihypertensive drugs (Rezk, 2016). According to the
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2018a) and the
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine (2015), for women with mild to
moderate hypertension, it is reasonable to discontinue medications during the
first trimester and to restart them if blood pressures approach the severe
range. At Parkland Hospital, we continue treatment if the woman is already
taking medications when she presents for prenatal care. As exceptions,
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors and angiotensin-receptor blockers
are stopped.
Some women will have persistently worrisome hypertension despite
usual therapy. In these women, development of superimposed preeclampsia
becomes a primary concern and is detailed next. Other possibilities include
inaccurate blood pressure measurements, suboptimal treatment, illicit drug
use, and antagonizing substances such as chronic ingestion of nonsteroidal
antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) (Moser, 2006; Sowers, 2005).

■ Superimposed Preeclampsia
As discussed in Chapter 40 (p. 690), conditions that support the diagnosis of
superimposed preeclampsia include worsening hypertension, new-onset
proteinuria, neurological symptoms such as severe headaches and visual
disturbances, generalized edema, oliguria, and certainly, convulsions or
pulmonary edema. These same criteria apply to women with chronic
hypertension.
However, preeclampsia can be difficult to diagnose in a chronically
hypertensive woman. First, blood pressures may increase during pregnancy
in women with chronic hypertension alone and without superimposed
preeclampsia. This is most commonly encountered near the end of the second
trimester. In the absence of other supporting criteria for superimposed
preeclampsia, this likely represents the higher end of the normal bloodpressure curve shown in Figure 53-1. In such women, if preeclampsia is
excluded, it is reasonable to begin or to increase the dose of antihypertensive
therapy.
As a second diagnostic obstacle, many chronically hypertensive patients
have preexisting end-organ damage and laboratory values that mimic
preeclampsia. New-onset proteinuria is consistent with the diagnosis of
superimposed preeclampsia. However, this is not applicable to women who
have underlying renal disease with chronic proteinuria (Cunningham, 1990;
Morgan, 2016b). In these women, diagnosing superimposed preeclampsia
based on worsening proteinuria is problematic. Laboratory abnormalities
that support preeclampsia include rising serum creatinine or hepatic
transaminase levels, thrombocytopenia, or any of the facets of HELLP
(hemolysis, elevated liver enzyme levels, low platelet count) syndrome. For
women with chronic hypertension and superimposed preeclampsia with
severe features, magnesium sulfate for maternal neuroprophylaxis is
recommended (Chap. 41, p. 719).

Expectant Management of Early-Onset Preeclampsia
Given that 40 to 50 percent of cases of superimposed preeclampsia develop
early and before 37 weeks, considerations for expectant management to
allow fetal maturation may be reasonable (Harper, 2016). However, most
maternal outcomes are better when women with superimposed preeclampsia
are delivered, even when the fetus is markedly preterm. Increased risk for

placental abruption, cerebral hemorrhage, and peripartum heart failure attend
delivery delays (Cunningham, 1986, 2005; Martin, 2005). And prolonged
expectant management is associated with an increased risk of maternal
cardiac disease in the ensuing years (Rosenbloom, 2020). In a study from
Magee-Women’s Hospital, 42 of 68 carefully selected women with a median
gestational age of 31.6 weeks were expectantly managed (Samuel, 2011).
Despite liberal criteria to mandate delivery, 17 percent of these mothers
developed either placental abruption or pulmonary edema. The latency
period was extended by a mean of 10 days. There were no perinatal deaths,
however, neonatal outcomes were no better than those in the group delivered
immediately. Women with superimposed preeclampsia before 34 weeks’
gestation may be candidates for expectant management at facilities with
adequate maternal and neonatal ICU resources (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2018a). At Parkland Hospital, we pursue
delivery when superimposed preeclampsia is diagnosed.

■ Fetal Assessment
Because of greater stillbirth and fetal-growth restriction risks, antepartum
fetal surveillance is recommended for women with chronic hypertension.
However, data are limited regarding which subpopulations with chronic
hypertension benefit most. The ideal test, testing interval, and gestational age
of initiation are other unknowns (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2018a; Freeman, 2008).
All women with chronic hypertension should undergo a sonographic
fetal-growth assessment in the third trimester. Additionally, Chahine and
colleagues (2019) recommend that women with low-risk disease undergo
weekly antepartum testing. They defined low-risk by four criteria: (1)
women ≤35 years of age, (2) mild- to moderate-range blood pressures not
requiring medication, (3) no prior hypertension-related adverse pregnancy
outcomes, and (4) no end-organ damage. For antepartum testing, a nonstress
test or a biophysical profile is suitable (Chap. 20, p. 392).
Women with high-risk disease fail to meet these four criteria. For them,
sonography and antepartum testing are considered earlier, and the value of
these tools to assess fetal-growth restriction is detailed in Chapter 47 (p.
830). One surveillance algorithm for suspected fetal-growth restriction is
outlined in Figure 47-6 (p. 829).

■ Delivery Timing
For women with mild to moderate chronic hypertension who have an
otherwise uncomplicated pregnancy, the American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists (2018a) recommends waiting for delivery until 37 to 38
weeks’ gestation. Women taking antihypertensive drugs are not delivered
before 370/7 weeks, and those not receiving drug treatment are delivered no
earlier than 380/7 weeks. A nationally convened consensus committee
recommended consideration for delivery at 38 to 39 weeks, that is, ≥37
completed weeks (Spong, 2011). A large population-based Canadian study
showed similar results (Ram, 2018). Expectant management beyond 39
weeks’ gestation is associated with an increasing incidence of severe
preeclampsia, and planned delivery before 37 weeks was associated with a
rise in rates of adverse neonatal outcomes (Harper, 206).
For women who have fetal-growth restriction, the decision to deliver
incorporates clinical judgment. Maternal health is balanced against estimated
fetal weight, gestational age, and chance of neonatal survival.

■ Intrapartum Considerations
For women with chronic hypertension, obstetrical factors dictate delivery
route. Magnesium sulfate is not given unless there is superimposed severe
preeclampsia. Epidural analgesia is ideal but does not substantively lower
blood pressure. A trial of labor induction is preferable, and many of these
women will deliver vaginally (Alexander, 1999; Atkinson, 1995). Similarly,
for the growth-restricted fetus, delivery route is based on obstetrical factors.
However, many fetuses with growth restriction exhibit nonreassuring fetal
heart rate patterns and require cesarean delivery (McKinney, 2016).
For women with superimposed preeclampsia, intrapartum management
mirrors that described in Chapter 41 (p. 719). These women may have a
longer first-stage labor (Bregand-White, 2017). Epidural analgesia for labor
and delivery is optimal, but it is not provided with the intent to treat
hypertension (Lucas, 2001). That said, women with superimposed
preeclampsia are more sensitive to the acute hypotensive effects of epidural
analgesia (Vricella, 2012). Magnesium sulfate neuroprophylaxis is initiated
for eclampsia prevention. Severe hypertension—diastolic blood pressure
≥110 mm Hg or systolic pressure ≥160 mm Hg—is treated with either

intravenous hydralazine, intravenous labetalol, or oral nifedipine. Some
prefer to treat women when the diastolic pressure reaches 100 to 105 mm
Hg. Vigil-De Gracia and coworkers (2006) randomly assigned 200 gravidas
to receive intravenous hydralazine or labetalol to acutely lower severe high
blood pressure. Outcomes were similar except for significantly higher rates
of maternal palpitations and tachycardia with hydralazine and significantly
greater rates of neonatal hypotension and bradycardia with labetalol.

■ Postpartum Care
Prevention and management of adverse postpartum complications is similar
in women with severe chronic hypertension and in those with severe
preeclampsia–eclampsia. For persistent severe hypertension, consideration
is given to causes such as pheochromocytoma or Cushing disease (Sibai,
2012). In women with chronic end-organ damage, certain complications are
more common. These include cerebral or pulmonary edema, heart failure,
renal dysfunction, or cerebral hemorrhage, especially within the first 48
hours after delivery. These frequently are preceded by sudden elevations of
mean arterial blood pressure, especially of the systolic component
(Cunningham, 2000, 2005; Martin, 2005).
Following delivery, as maternal peripheral resistance rises, left
ventricular workload also grows. This elevation is further aggravated by
appreciable and pathological amounts of interstitial fluid that are mobilized
to be excreted as endothelial disruption from preeclampsia resolves. In these
women, sudden hypertension—either moderate or severe—may exacerbate
diastolic dysfunction, cause systolic dysfunction, and lead to pulmonary
edema (Cunningham, 1986; Gandhi, 2001). Prompt hypertension control,
along with furosemide-evoked diuresis, usually quickly resolves pulmonary
edema.
The antihypertensive regimen given antepartum may be continued in the
puerperium. In untreated women, labetalol or nifedipine can also be used for
persistent hypertension (Sharma, 2017). It also is possible in many women to
forestall postpartum hypertension by administering intravenous or oral
furosemide to augment normal postpartum diuresis. In one study, 20 mg oral
furosemide given daily for 5 days to postpartum women with severe
preeclampsia aided blood pressure control (Ascarelli, 2005). A recent
randomized trial showed that daily furosemide decreased the need for

antihypertensive therapy at hospital discharge (Perdigao, 2020). Daily
weights are helpful in this regard. On average, a woman should weigh 15
pounds less immediately after delivery. Excessive extracellular fluid can
then be estimated by comparing her last prenatal weight plus 15 pounds
against the puerpera’s current weight.
Some evidence supports that chronic ingestion of NSAIDs in the
puerperium elevates blood pressure in women with severe preeclampsia
(Vigil-De Gracia, 2017). This may not be problematic if these drugs are
given only intermittently and as needed (Blue, 2018). Postpartum admission
rates for severe hypertension approximate 1.5 percent (Chornock, 2021).
Discussion of postpartum contraception may begin prior to delivery. As
described in Chapter 38 (p. 672), certain methods are less ideal or
contraindicated for some women with chronic hypertension. Moreover, for
puerpera at highest risk for future pregnancy complications, the Society for
Maternal–Fetal Medicine (2019) encourages immediate postpartum longacting reversible contraceptive (LARC) insertion for suitable candidates.

■ Long-Term Prognosis
Women with chronic hypertension are at high risk for lifetime cardiovascular
complications, especially when accompanied by diabetes, obesity, and the
metabolic syndrome. Persistent hypertension 3 years after severe
preeclampsia was associated with a thicker left-ventricular septum
compared with women who became normotensive (Vaught, 2019). The
lifetime cardiovascular morbidity and mortality risks associated with
hypertensive disorders of pregnancy are discussed in Chapter 41 (p. 726)
(Wu, 2021).

REFERENCES
Abalos E, Duley L, Steyn DW, et al: Antihypertensive drug therapy for mild to moderate hypertension
during pregnancy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2:CD002252, 2014
Ahmad AS, Samuelsen SO: Hypertensive disorders in pregnancy and fetal death at different gestational
lengths: a population study of 2 121 371 pregnancies. BJOG 119(12):1521, 2012
Akbar MA, Adibrata MA, Aditiawarman, et al: Maternal and perinatal outcome related to severity of
chronic hypertension in pregnancy. Pregnancy Hypertens 16:154, 2019
Alexander JM, Bloom SL, McIntire DD, et al: Severe preeclampsia and the very low birth weight infant:
is induction of labor harmful?. Obstet Gynecol 93:485, 1999

Al Khalaf SY, O’Reilly EJ, Barrett FM, et al: Impact of chronic hypertension and antihypertensive
treatment on adverse perinatal outcomes: systematic review and meta-analysis. J Am Heart Assoc
10(9):e018494, 2021
Ambia AM, Morgan JL, Wells CE, et al: Perinatal outcomes associated with abnormal cardiac
remodeling in women with treated chronic hypertension. Am J Obstet Gynecol 218(5):519.e1, 2018
Ambia AM, Morgan JL, Wilson KL, et al: Frequency and consequences of ventricular hypertrophy in
pregnant women with treated chronic hypertension. Am J Obstet Gynecol 217:467.e1, 2017
Ambia AM, Nelson DB, Morgan JL, et al: Maternal interventricular septum thickness and association
with perinatal outcomes. Abstract No. 827. Am J Obstet Gynecol 218:S539, 2019
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Chronic hypertension in pregnancy. Practice
Bulletin No. 203, December 2018a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Pregnancy counseling. Committee Opinion No.
762, December 2018b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Gestational hypertension and preeclampsia.
Practice Bulletin No. 220, 2020
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Task Force on Hypertension in Pregnancy:
Chronic hypertension in pregnancy and superimposed preeclampsia. In: Hypertension in Pregnancy.
Report of the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists’ Task Force on Hypertension in
Pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 122(5):1122, 2013
Ananth CV, Duzyj CM, Yadava S, et al: Changes in the prevalence of chronic hypertension in
pregnancy, United States, 1970 to 2010. Hypertension 74(5):1089, 2019
Ankumah NA, Cantu J, Jauk V, et al: Risk of adverse pregnancy outcomes in women with mild chronic
hypertension before 20 weeks of gestation. Obstet Gynecol 123(5):966, 2014
Ascarelli MH, Johnson V, McCreary H, et al: Postpartum preeclampsia management with furosemide: a
randomized clinical trial. Obstet Gynecol 105(1):29, 2005
Atkinson MW, Guinn D, Owen J, et al: Does magnesium sulfate affect the length of labor induction in
women with pregnancy-associated hypertension? Am J Obstet Gynecol 173(4):1219, 1995
August P, Jeyabalan A, Roberts JM: Chronic hypertension and pregnancy. In Taylor RN, Roberts JM,
Cunningham FG, et al (eds): Chesley’s Hypertensive Disorders in Pregnancy, 4th ed. Amsterdam,
Academic Press, 2015
Bateman BT, Bansil P, Hernandez-Diaz S, et al: Prevalence, trends, and outcomes of chronic
hypertension: a nationwide sample of delivery admissions. Am J Obstet Gynecol 206(2):134.e1, 2012
Bateman BT, Huybrechts KF, Fischer MA, et al: Chronic hypertension in pregnancy and the risk of
congenital malformations: a cohort study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 212:337.e1, 2015
Battarbee AN, Sinkey RG, Harper LM, et al: Chronic hypertension in pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol
222:532, 2020
Becker DA, Machemehl HC, Biggio JR, et al: Pregnancy outcomes of exacerbated chronic
hypertension compared with superimposed preeclampsia. Am J Perinatol 36(8):872, 2019
Bellos I, Pergialiotis V, Papapanagiotou A, et al: Comparative efficacy and safety of oral
antihypertensive agents in pregnant women with chronic hypertension: a network metaanalysis. Am
J Obstet Gynecol 225:525, 2021
Binder J, Kalafat E, Palmrich P, et al: Angiogenic markers and their longitudinal change for predicting
adverse outcomes in pregnant women with chronic hypertension. Am J Obstet Gynecol 225:305,
2020
Blue NR, Murray-Krezan C, Drake-Lavelle S, et al: Effect of ibuprofen vs acetaminophen on
postpartum hypertension in preeclampsia with severe features: a double-masked, randomized

controlled trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol 218:616e.1, 2018
Bramham K, Hladunewich MA, Jim B, et al: Pregnancy and kidney disease. NephSAP Nephrology
Assessment Program 15(2):1, 2016
Bregand-White JM, Kominiarek MA, Hibbard JU: Hypertension and patterns of induced labor at term.
Pregnancy Hypertens 10:57, 2017
Briggs GG, Towers CV, Forinash AB: Drugs in Pregnancy and Lactation, 12th ed. Philadelphia, Wolters
Kluwer, 2022
Broekhuijsen K, Langeveld J, van den Berg P, et al: Maternal and neonatal outcomes in pregnancy in
women with chronic hypertension. Am J Obstet Gynecol 206:S344, 2012
Caritis S, Sibai B, Hauth J, et al: Low-dose aspirin to prevent preeclampsia in women at high risk. N
Engl J Med 338(11):701, 1998
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Hypertensive prevalence among adults: United States
2015–2016. NCHS Data Brief No. 289, October 2017
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Vital signs: prevalence, treatment, and control of
hypertension—United States, 1999–2002 and 2005–2008. MMWR 60(4):1, 2011
Chaemsaithong P, Cuenca-Gomez D, Plana MN, et at: Does low-dose aspirin initiated before 11 weeks’
gestation reduce the rate of preeclampsia? Am J Obstet Gynecol 220:437, 2020
Chahine KM, Sibai BM: Chronic hypertension in pregnancy: new concepts for classification and
management. Am J Perinatol 36:161, 2019
Chappell LC, Enye S, Seed P, et al: Adverse perinatal outcomes and risk factors for preeclampsia in
women with chronic hypertension: a prospective study. Hypertension 51(4):1002, 2008
Chornock R, Iqbal N, Kawakita T: Racial disparity in postpartum readmission due to hypertension
among women with pregnancy-associated hypertension. Am J Perinatol 38:1297, 2021
Clark SL, Hankins GD: Preventing maternal death. 10 clinical diamonds. Obstet Gynecol 119(2):360,
2012
Conde-Agudelo A, Romero R, Roberts JM: Tests to predict preeclampsia. In Taylor RN, Roberts JM,
Cunningham FG, et al (eds): Chesley’s Hypertensive Disorders in Pregnancy, 4th ed. Amsterdam,
Academic Press, 2015
Correa PJ, Palmeiro Y, Soto MJ, et al: Etiogpathogenesis, prediction, and prevention of preeclampsia.
Hypertens Pregnancy 35(3):280, 2016
Creanga AA, Syverson C, Seed K, et al: Pregnancy-related mortality in the United States, 2011–2013.
Obstet Gynecol 130(2):366, 2017
Cruz MO, Gao W, Hibbard JU: Obstetrical and perinatal outcomes among women with gestational
hypertension, mild preeclampsia, and mild chronic hypertension. Am J Obstet Gynecol 205:260.e1,
2011
Cunningham FG: Severe preeclampsia and eclampsia: systolic hypertension is also important. Obstet
Gynecol 105:237, 2005
Cunningham FG, Byrne JJ, Nelson DB: Peripartum cardiomyopathy. Obstet Gynecol 133(1):167, 2019
Cunningham FG, Cox SM, Harstad TW, et al: Chronic renal disease and pregnancy outcome. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 163:453, 1990
Cunningham FG, Pritchard JA, Hankins GD, et al: Idiopathic cardiomyopathy or compounding
cardiovascular events?. Obstet Gynecol 67:157, 1986
Cunningham FG, Twickler D: Cerebral edema complicating eclampsia. Am J Obstet Gynecol 182(1):94,
2000
Faden MS, Bottega N, Benjamin A, et al: A nationwide evaluation of spontaneous coronary artery
dissection in pregnancy and the puerperium. Heart 102(24):1974, 2016

Freeman RK: Antepartum testing in patients with hypertensive disorders in pregnancy. Semin Perinatol
32(4):271, 2008
Gandhi SK, Powers JC, Nomeir A, et al: The pathogenesis of acute pulmonary edema associated with
hypertension. N Engl J Med 344(1):17, 2001
Gilbert WM, Young AL, Danielsen B: Pregnancy-outcomes in women with chronic hypertension: a
population-based study. J Reprod Med 52(11):1046, 2007
Greiner K, Speranza R, Rincon M, et al: Stage 1 hypertension and association with adverse outcomes in
women with hypertensive disorders of pregnancy. Abstract No. 703. Am J Obstet Gynecol
222:S445, 2020
Grover S, Brandt JS, Reddy UM, et al: Chronic hypertension, perinatal mortality and the impact of
preterm delivery: a population-based study. BJOG September 18, 2021 [Epub ahead of print]
Gruppo di Studio Ipertensione in Gravidanza: Nifedipine versus expectant management in mild to
moderate hypertension in pregnancy. BJOG 105(7):718, 1998
Harper LM, Biggio JR, Anderson S, et al: Gestational age of delivery in pregnancies complicated by
chronic hypertension. Obstet Gynecol 127(6):1101, 2016
Henderson JT, Whitlock EP, O’Connor E, et al: Low-dose aspirin for prevention of morbidity and
mortality from preeclampsia: a systematic evidence review for the U.S. Preventive Services Task
Force. Ann Intern Med 160(10):695, 2014
Hibbard JU, Shroff SG, Cunningham FG: Cardiovascular alterations in pregnancy and preeclamptic
pregnancy. In Taylor RN, Roberts JM, Cunningham FG, et al (eds): Chesley’s Hypertensive
Disorders in Pregnancy, 4th ed. Amsterdam, Academic Press, 2015
Hoeltzenbein M, Tissen-Diabaté T, Fietz AK, et al: Increased rate of birth defects after first trimester
use of angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors—treatment of hypertension related? An
observational cohort study. Hypertens 13:65, 2018
Imterat M, Wainstock T, Landau D, et al: Maternal chronic hypertension elevates the risk for long-term
selected endocrine and metabolic morbidity in the offspring, particularly childhood obesity. Child
Obes 16(6):421, 2020
Jeyabalan A, Hubel CA, Roberts JM: Metabolic syndrome and preeclampsia. In Taylor RN, Roberts
JM, Cunningham FG, et al (eds): Chesley’s Hypertensive Disorders in Pregnancy, 4th ed.
Amsterdam, Academic Press, 2015
Keene K, Morris EA, McBride CA, et al: Re-defining chronic hypertension in pregnancy. Abstract No.
452. Am J Obstet Gynecol 220:S304, 2019
Kim MJ, Seo J, Cho KI, et al: Echocardiographic assessment of structural and hemodynamic changes in
hypertension-related pregnancy. J Cardiovasc Ultrasound 24:28, 2016
Kotchen TA: Hypertensive vascular disease. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al (eds):
Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2018, p
1890
Kuper SG, Tita AT, Youngstrom ML, et al: Baseline renal function tests and adverse outcomes in
pregnant patients with chronic hypertension. Obstet Gynecol 128:93, 2016
Leon MG, Moussa HN, Longo M, et al: Rate of gestational diabetes mellitus and pregnancy outcomes in
patients with chronic hypertension. Am J Perinatol 33(8):745, 2016
Levine RJ, Hauth JC, Curet LB, et al: Trial of calcium to prevent preeclampsia. N Engl J Med
337(2):69, 1997
Lucas MJ, Sharma SK, McIntire DD, et al: A randomized trial of labor analgesia in women with
pregnancy-induced hypertension. Am J Obstet Gynecol 185(4):970, 2001

Magee LA, von Dadelszen P, Rey E, et al: Less-tight versus tight control of hypertension in pregnancy.
N Engl J Med 372(5):407, 2015
Martin JN Jr, Thigpen BD, Moore RC, et al: Stroke and severe preeclampsia and eclampsia: a paradigm
shift focusing on systolic blood pressure. Obstet Gynecol 105(2):246, 2005
McKinney D, Boyd H, Langager A, et al: The impact of fetal growth restriction on latency in the setting
of expectant management of preeclampsia. Am J Obstet Gynecol 214(3):395, 2016
Mitchell CJ, Tita A, Anderson SB, et al: Adverse outcomes with maternal blood pressure less than
140/90 in pregnancy complicated by hypertension. Am J Perinatol 36(13):1394, 2019
Mol BW, Roberts CT, Thangaratinam S, et al: Pre-eclampsia. Lancet 387(10022):999, 2016
Moodley J: Maternal deaths due to hypertensive disorders in pregnancy: Saving Mothers report 2002–
2004. Cardiovasc J Afr 18:358, 2007
Morgan JA, McDaniel MS, Cormier CM: Chronic hypertension in pregnancy: are outcomes the same in
patients who require antihypertensives? J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med October 22, 2020 [Epub
ahead of print]
Morgan JL, Nelson DB, Roberts SW, et al: Blood pressure profiles across pregnancy in women with
chronic hypertension. Am J Perinatol 33(12):1128, 2016a
Morgan JL, Nelson DB, Roberts SW, et al: The association of baseline proteinuria and adverse
pregnancy outcomes in pregnant women with treated chronic hypertension. Obstet Gynecol 128:270,
2016b
Moser M, Setaro JF: Resistant or difficult-to-control hypertension. N Engl J Med 355:385, 2006
Moussa HN, Leon MG, Marti A, et al: Pregnancy outcomes in women with preeclampsia superimposed
on chronic hypertension with and without severe features. Am J Perinatol 34(4):403, 2017
Nzelu D, Biris D, Karampitsakos T, et al: First trimester serum angiogenic and anti-angiogenic factors in
women with chronic hypertension for the prediction of preeclampsia. Am J Obstet Gynecol
222(4):374, 2020
O’Gorman N, Wright D, Syngelaki A, et al: Competing risks model in screening for preeclampsia by
maternal factors and biomarkers at 11–13 weeks gestation. Am J Obstet Gynecol 214(1):103, 2016
Ornaghi S, Algeri P, Todyrenchuk L, et al: Impact of excessive pre-pregnancy body mass index and
abnormal gestational weight gain on pregnancy outcomes in women with chronic hypertension.
Hypertens 12:90, 2018
Panaitescu AM, Roberge S, Nicolaides KH: Chronic hypertension: effect of blood pressure control on
pregnancy outcome. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 32(5):857, 2017
Pels A, Moi BW, Singer J, et al: Influence of gestational age at initiation of antihypertensive therapy:
secondary analysis of CHIPS trial data (Control of Hypertension in Pregnancy Study). Hypertension
71(6):1170, 2018
Perdigao JL, Lewey J, Hirshberg A, et al: Furosemide for Accelerated Recovery of Blood Pressure
Postpartum: a randomized placebo controlled trial (FoR BP). Abstract No. LB 4. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 222:S759, 2020
Ram M, Berger H, Geary M, et al: Timing of delivery in women with chronic hypertension. Obstet
Gynecol 132(3):669, 2018
Ramakrishnan A, Lee LJ, Mitchell LE, et al: Maternal hypertension during pregnancy and the risk of
congenital heart defects in offspring: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Pediatr Cardiol
36(7):1442, 2015
Rezk M, Eliakwa H, Gamal A, et al: Maternal and fetal morbidity following discontinuation of
antihypertensive drugs in mild to moderate chronic hypertension: a 4-year observational study.
Pregnancy Hypertens 6:291, 2016

Roman T, Martin E, Prewit EB, et al: Risk of preeclampsia in women diagnosed with hypertension using
revised guidelines versus contemporary diagnostic criteria. Abstract No. 900. Am J Obstet Gynecol
222:S559, 2020
Rosenbloom JI, Lewkowitz AK, Lindley AK, et al: Expectant management of hypertensive disorders of
pregnancy and future cardiovascular morbidity. Obstet Gynecol 135:27, 2020
Samuel A, Lin C, Parviainen K, et al: Expectant management of preeclampsia superimposed on chronic
hypertension. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 24(7):907, 2011
Sharma KJ, Greene N, Kilpatrick SJ: Oral labetalol compared to oral nifedipine for postpartum
hypertension: a randomized controlled trial. Hypertens 36(1):44, 2017
Shawkat E, Mistry H, Chmiel C, et al: The effect of labetalol and nifedipine MR on blood pressure in
women with chronic hypertension in pregnancy. Pregnancy Hypertens 11:92, 2018
Sibai BM: Etiology and management of postpartum hypertension-preeclampsia. Am J Obstet Gynecol
206(6):470, 2012
Sibai BM, Anderson GD: Pregnancy outcome of intensive therapy in severe hypertension in first
trimester. Obstet Gynecol 67(4):517, 1986
Sibai BM, Grossman RA, Grossman HG: Effects of diuretics on plasma volume in pregnancies with
long-term hypertension. Am J Obstet Gynecol 150(7):831, 1984
Sibai BM, Koch MA, Freire S, et al: Serum inhibin A and angiogenic factor levels in pregnancies with
previous preeclampsia and/or chronic hypertension: are they useful markers for prediction of
subsequent preeclampsia? Am J Obstet Gynecol 199(3):268.e1, 2008
Sibai BM, Mabie WC, Shamsa F, et al: A comparison of no medication versus methyldopa or labetalol in
chronic hypertension during pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 162(4):960, 1990
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine: SMFM statement: benefit of antihypertensive therapy for mild-tomoderate chronic hypertension during pregnancy remains uncertain. Am J Obstet Gynecol 213(1):3,
2015
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Vricella LK, Gawron LM, et al: Society for Maternal-Fetal
Medicine (SMFM) Consult Series #48: Immediate postpartum long-acting reversible contraception
for women at high-risk for medical complications. Am J Obstet Gynecol 220(5):B2, 2019
Sowers JR, White WB, Pitt B, et al: The effects of cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitors and nonsteroidal antiinflammatory therapy on 24-hour blood pressure in patients with hypertension, osteoarthritis, and
type 2 diabetes mellitus. Arch Intern Med 165(2):161, 2005
Spinnato JA 2nd, Freire S, Pinto E, Silva JL, et al: Antioxidant therapy to prevent preeclampsia: a
randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol 110(6):1311, 2007
Spong CY, Mercer BM, D’Alton M, et al: Timing of indicated late-preterm and early-term birth. Obstet
Gynecol 118(2 Pt 1):323, 2011
Staff CA, Sibai BM, Cunningham FG: Prevention of preeclampsia and eclampsia. In Taylor RN,
Roberts JM, Cunningham FG, et al (eds): Chesley’s Hypertensive Disorders in Pregnancy, 4th ed.
Amsterdam, Academic Press, 2015
Stepan H, Hund M, Andraczek T: Combining biomarkers to predict pregnancy complications and
redefine preeclampsia: the angiogenic-placental syndrome. Hypertension 75(4):918, 2020
Sutton EF, Hauspurg A, Caritis SN, et al: Maternal outcomes with lower range stage 1 hypertension.
Obstet Gynecol 132(4):843, 2018
Tan MY, Syngelaki A, Poon LC, et al: Screening for pre-eclampsia by maternal factors and biomarkers
at 11–13 weeks’ gestation. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 52(2):186, 2018
Tihtonen K, Kööbi T, Huhtala H, et al: Hemodynamic adaptation during pregnancy in chronic
hypertension. Hypertens Pregnancy 26(3):315, 2007

Umans JG, Abalos E, Cunningham FG: Antihypertensive treatment. In Taylor RN, Roberts JM,
Cunningham FG, et al (eds): Chesley’s Hypertensive Disorders in Pregnancy, 4th ed. Amsterdam,
Academic Press, 2015
U.S. National Library of Medicine: Chronic Hypertension and Pregnancy (CHAP) Project (CHAP).
2020. Available at: https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT02299414. Accessed May 4, 2020
van Eerden L, de Groot CJ, Zeeman GG, et al: Subsequent pregnancy outcome after mid-trimester
termination of pregnancy for preeclampsia. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol 58(2):204, 2018
van Gelder MM, Van Bennekom CM, Louik C, et al: Maternal hypertensive disorders, antihypertensive
medication use, and the risk of birth defects: a case control-study. BJOG 122(7):1002, 2015
Vaught AJ, Kovell LC, Vaidya D, et al: Echocardiographic markers aid in risk stratification with
persistent hypertension after preeclamptic pregnancy, Abstract No. 429. Am J Obstet Gynecol
220:S290, 2019
Vigil-De Gracia P, Lasso M, Montufar-Rueda C: Perinatal outcome in women with severe chronic
hypertension during the second half of pregnancy. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 85(2):139, 2004
Vigil-De Gracia P, Lasso M, Ruiz E, et al: Severe hypertension in pregnancy: hydralazine or labetalol a
randomized clinical trial. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 128(1–2):157, 2006
Vigil-De Gracia P, Solis V, Ortega N: Ibuprofen versus acetaminophen as a post-partum analgesic for
women with severe pre-eclampsia: randomized clinical study. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med
30(11):1279, 2017
von Dadelszen P, Ornstein MP, Bull SB, et al: Fall in mean arterial pressure and fetal growth restriction
in pregnancy hypertension: a meta-analysis. Lancet 355(9198):87, 2000
Vricella LK, Louis JM, Mercer BM, et al: Epidural-associated hypotension is more common among
severely preeclamptic patients in labor. Am J Obstet Gynecol 207(4):335.e1, 2012
Ward K, Taylor RN: Genetic factors in the etiology of preeclampsia/eclampsia. In Taylor RN, Roberts
JM, Cunningham FG, et al (eds): Chesley’s Hypertensive Disorders in Pregnancy, 4th ed.
Amsterdam, Academic Press, 2015
Webster LM, Myers JE, Nelson-Piercy C, et al: Labetalol versus nifedipine as antihypertensive
treatment for chronic hypertension in pregnancy: a randomized controlled trial. Hypertension 70:915,
2017
Weissman-Brenner A, Schoen R, Divon MY: Aortic dissection in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 103:1110,
2004
Whelton PK, Carey RM, Aronow WS, et al: 2017
ACC/AHA/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/AGS/APhA/ASH/ASPC/NMA/PCNA guideline for the
prevention, detection, evaluation, and management of high blood pressure in adults: a report of the
American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice
Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol 71:e127, 2018
Working Group Report on High Blood Pressure in Pregnancy: Report of the National High Blood
Pressure Education Program Working Group on High Blood Pressure in Pregnancy. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 183:S1, 2000
Wu MY, Hu PJ, Wong CS, et al: Long-term clinical outcome of major adverse vascular events after
hypertensive disorders of pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 137:285, 2021
Yanit KE, Snowden JM, Cheng YW, et al: The impact of chronic hypertension and pregestational
diabetes on pregnancy outcomes. Am J Obstet Gynecol 207(4):333.e1, 2012
Zeeman GG, Alexander JM, McIntire DD, et al: Inhibin-A and superimposed preeclampsia in women
with chronic hypertension. Obstet Gynecol 101(2):232, 2003

Zetterström K, Lindeberg SN, Haglund B, et al: Chronic hypertension as a risk factor for offspring to be
born small for gestational age. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 85(9):1046, 2006
Zofkie A, Cunningham FG: 33-year single center experience with pregnancy-associated strokes.
Abstract No. 799. Am J Obstet Gynecol 218:S476, 2018

CHAPTER 54

Pulmonary Disorders

ASTHMA
ACUTE BRONCHITIS
PNEUMONIA
TUBERCULOSIS
SARCOIDOSIS
CYSTIC FIBROSIS
CARBON MONOXIDE POISONING
REFERENCES
During pregnancy, pulmonary disorders are frequently encountered. In one
study, asthma and community-acquired pneumonia accounted for almost 10
percent of nonobstetrical antepartum hospitalizations (Gazmararian, 2002).
Pregnant women, especially those in the last trimester, tolerate lung disease
poorly because of important pregnancy-induced changes in ventilatory
physiology (Han, 2018). Lung volumes and capacities are significantly
altered. In turn, these shift gas concentrations and acid-base values in blood.
These important and sometimes marked changes are reviewed in Chapter 4
(p. 66), and normal values for blood gas can be found in the Appendix (p.
1232). Some of these can be summarized as follows:

1. Vital capacity and inspiratory capacity increase by approximately 20
percent by late pregnancy.
2. Expiratory reserve volume declines from 1300 mL to approximately 1100
mL.
3. Progesterone-driven respiratory stimulation raises tidal volume
approximately 40 percent.
4. Minute ventilation increases 30 to 40 percent due to higher tidal volume.
As a result, arterial partial pressure of oxygen (PaO2) rises from 100 to
105 mm Hg.
5. Expanded metabolic demands cause a 30-percent increase in carbon
dioxide (CO2) production. But, because of its concomitantly greater
diffusion capacity and hyperventilation, the PaCO2 is reduced from 40 to 32
mm Hg.
6. Residual volume diminishes approximately 20 percent from 1500 mL to
1200 mL.
7. An expanding uterus and higher intraabdominal pressure lower chest wall
compliance by one third. This causes a 10- to 25-percent reduction in
functional residual capacity—the sum of expiratory reserve and residual
volumes.
Beginning at 14 to 16 weeks’ gestation forced vital capacity and peak
expiratory flow progressively increase (Grindheim, 2012). The result of
these pregnancy-induced changes is substantively greater ventilation due to
deeper but not more frequent breathing. This is thought to be stimulated by
basal oxygen consumption, which incrementally rises from 20 to 40 mL/min
in the second half of pregnancy.

ASTHMA
■ Pathophysiology
Asthma is a chronic inflammatory airway syndrome with a major hereditary
component. Polymorphism genes on chromosome 5q that include cytokine
gene clusters, β-adrenergic and glucocorticoid receptor genes, and the T-cell
antigen receptor gene are associated with greater airway responsiveness and
persistent subacute inflammation (Barnes, 2018). Racial differences are

seen, and morbidity rates are disproportionately higher in black compared
with white women (Kodadhala, 2018). Asthma is etiologically and clinically
heterogeneous, and an environmental allergic stimulant such as influenza or
cigarette smoke serves as a promoter for susceptible individuals.
The hallmarks of asthma are reversible airway obstruction from
bronchial smooth muscle contraction, vascular congestion, tenacious mucus,
and mucosal edema. Stimuli cause acute infiltration of eosinophils, mast
cells, and T lymphocytes. Inflammatory mediators produced by these and
other cells include histamine, leukotrienes, prostaglandins, cytokines,
immunoglobulin E (IgE), and many others. F-series prostaglandins and
ergonovine exacerbate asthma, and these commonly used uterotonics are
avoided if possible.

■ Clinical Course
Asthma manifestations range from mild wheezing to severe
bronchoconstriction, which obstructs airways and decreases airflow. This
lowers the forced expiratory volume in 1 second/forced vital capacity
(FEV1/FVC) ratio and the peak expiratory flow rate (PEFR). The work of
breathing progressively increases, and patients note chest tightness,
wheezing, or breathlessness. Subsequent worsening of oxygenation primarily
reflects ventilation–perfusion mismatching. This results from an uneven
distribution of airway narrowing.
Varied manifestations of asthma have led to a classification system that
considers severity, onset, and duration of symptoms (Table 54-1). With
persistent or worsening bronchial obstruction, clinical stages progress as
shown in Figure 54-1. Hypoxia initially is mitigated by hyperventilation,
which maintains the PaO2 within a normal range but lowers PaCO2, creating
respiratory alkalosis. As airway narrowing worsens, the degree of
ventilation–perfusion defects is accentuated, and arterial hypoxemia ensues.
With severe obstruction, fatigue causes early CO2 retention and impairs
ventilation. Because of hyperventilation, this may only be seen initially as the
PaCO2 returning to the normal range. With continuing obstruction, respiratory
failure follows.
TABLE 54-1. Classification of Asthma Severity

FIGURE 54-1 Clinical stages of asthma. FEV1 = forced expiratory volume in 1 second.

These changes are generally reversible and well tolerated by the healthy
nonpregnant individual. However, even early asthma stages may be
dangerous for the pregnant woman and her fetus. This is because diminished
functional residual capacity and greater pulmonary shunting render the
gravida more susceptible to hypoxia and hypoxemia.

Effects of Pregnancy on Asthma
Chronic asthma or an acute exacerbation affects up to 8 percent of gravidas
(Baghlaf, 2019; Flores, 2020; Mazurek, 2018). Pulmonary function changes
in pregnancy are more pronounced in asthmatics compared with healthy
women (Zairina, 2015). Despite this, pregnancy has an unpredictable effect
on underlying asthma. In a review of more than 2000 gravidas, approximately
a third each improved, remained unchanged, or clearly worsened (Gluck,
2006). Exacerbations are more common with severe disease (Ali, 2013). In a
study by Schatz and associates (2003), baseline severity correlated with
asthma morbidity during pregnancy. With mild disease, 13 percent of women
had an exacerbation and 2.3 percent required admission; with moderate
disease, these numbers were 26 and 7 percent; and for severe asthma, 52 and
27 percent. Others have reported similar findings (Charlton, 2013; Hendler,
2006).
Intrapartum exacerbation rates are controversial. In one study, 20 percent
of women with mild or moderate asthma had an intrapartum exacerbation
(Schatz, 2003). Mabie and coworkers (1992) reported an 18-fold greater
exacerbation risk following cesarean versus vaginal delivery. Conversely,
Wendel and colleagues (1996) reported exacerbations at the time of delivery
in only 1 percent of asthmatics.

Pregnancy Outcome
Asthma remains a potential risk factor for worse pregnancy outcomes despite
continued improvements in treatment. Data from two large studies are shown
in Table 54-2. The incidences of small-for-gestational-age neonates and
perinatal mortality also are significantly greater in women with asthma
(Kemppainen, 2018). However, these findings are not consistent among all
studies. A study of approximately 3000 pregnancies complicated by asthma
showed higher rates of maternal pneumonia and cesarean delivery but not of
perinatal mortality (Shaked, 2019). In a European report of 37,585

pregnancies of women with asthma, the risks for most obstetrical
complications were not increased (Tata, 2007). Blais and associates (2013)
noted that the incidence of spontaneous abortion may be slightly greater in
women with asthma.
TABLE 54-2. Maternal and Perinatal Outcomes in Women with Asthma

Some evidence suggests that severe disease, poor control, or both is
linked to higher morbidity rates. In a study by the Maternal-Fetal Medicine
Units (MFMU) Network, delivery before 37 weeks’ gestation was not more
frequent in pregnancies of women with asthma compared with controls
(Dombrowski, 2004). However, for women with severe asthma, the rate was

approximately twofold higher. The MFMU Network study suggests also a
direct relationship of baseline pregnancy FEV1 with birthweight and an
inverse relationship with rates of gestational hypertension and preterm
delivery (Schatz, 2006). Kemppainen and coworkers (2018) found that
women requiring treatment for asthma during pregnancy are at greater risk for
adverse perinatal outcomes.
Maternal morbidity rises markedly with status asthmaticus and includes
life-threatening complications such as muscle fatigue with respiratory arrest,
pneumothorax, pneumomediastinum, acute cor pulmonale, and cardiac
arrhythmias. Not surprisingly, maternal and perinatal mortality rates rise
substantively when mechanical ventilation is required.

Fetal Effects
Animal and human studies suggest that development of maternal respiratory
alkalosis leads to fetal hypoxemia well before the alkalosis compromises
maternal oxygenation (Rolston, 1974). Theories hypothesize that the fetus is
jeopardized by decreased uterine blood flow, reduced maternal venous
return, and an alkaline-induced leftward shift of the oxyhemoglobin
dissociation curve (Chap. 50, p. 886). The fetal response to maternal
hypoxemia is lower umbilical blood flow, higher systemic and pulmonary
vascular resistance, and decreased cardiac output. Several studies cited
above confirm that fetal-growth restriction rates rise with asthma severity.
Because the fetus may be seriously compromised, aggressive management is
necessary. Monitoring the fetal response is, in effect, an indicator of maternal
status. A return of moderate variability or accelerations in the fetal heart rate
is an indicator of improving maternal oxygen status.
Possible teratogenic or adverse fetal effects of drugs given to control
asthma are a concern. Several reports show a slightly greater risk for
abnormalities such as cleft lip and palate and autism spectrum disorders, but
further verification is necessary (Eltonsy, 2016; Gidaya, 2016; Murphy,
2013b; Wang, 2014). It is worrisome that up to half of women discontinue
essential treatment between 5- and 13-weeks’ gestation (Enriquez, 2006).

■ Clinical Evaluation

The subjective severity of asthma frequently does not correlate with
objective measures of airway function or ventilation. Clinical examination
also can be an inaccurate predictor, but useful signs include labored
breathing, tachycardia, pulsus paradoxus, prolonged expiration, and use of
accessory muscles. Signs of a potentially fatal exacerbation include central
cyanosis and altered consciousness.
Pulmonary function testing should be routine in the management of
asthma. Sequential measurement of the FEV1 or of the PEFR is the best
measure of severity (see Table 54-1). An FEV1 <1 L, or <20 percent of
predicted value, correlates with severe disease defined by hypoxia, poor
response to therapy, and a high relapse rate. The PEFR correlates well with
the FEV1, and it can be measured reliably with inexpensive portable meters.
It is advantageous for each woman to determine her own baseline when
asymptomatic to compare with values when symptomatic.

■ Management of Chronic Asthma
Asthma management by an experienced team produces better outcomes (Lim,
2014; Wendel, 1996). Management guidelines include:
1. Patient education about general asthma management and its effect on
pregnancy (Bonham, 2018; Robijn, 2019).
2. Avoidance or control of precipitating environmental factors. Viral
infections that include the common cold are frequent triggers (Ali, 2013;
Murphy, 2013a). Influenza and pneumococcal vaccination is encouraged.
3. Objective assessment of pulmonary function with PEFR or FEV1 and of
fetal status with serial growth ultrasound and antepartum testing if
indicated (Chap. 20, p. 392).
4. Pharmacological therapy with appropriate combinations and doses to
provide baseline control and treat exacerbations. Periodic medication
reviews are helpful to avoid noncompliance (Robijn, 2019).
5. Treatment of related disorders including smoking, depression, rhinitis, and
gastroesophageal reflux (Bonham, 2018).
In general, women with moderate to severe asthma ideally measure and
record either their FEV1 or PEFR twice daily. The FEV1 ideally is >80

percent of predicted. For PEFR, predicted values range from 380 to 550
L/min. Each woman has her own baseline value, and therapeutic adjustments
can be made using this (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2019). Another described method is a management algorithm
using fractional exhaled nitric oxide (FeNO) as a noninvasive marker of
airway inflammation (Powell, 2011). Asthma exacerbations were reduced by
50 percent with this approach (Clifton, 2019).

Agents for Chronic Treatment
Selection depends on disease severity. No therapeutic regimen for
management of asthma in pregnancy is universally accepted (Bain, 2014). βagonists help abate bronchospasm, and corticosteroids treat inflammation.
Stepwise regimens recommended for outpatient management are listed in
Figure 54-2.

FIGURE 54-2 Stepwise approach to asthma treatment. ICS = inhaled corticosteroids; LABA = longacting β-agonists; OCS = oral corticosteroids. (Barnes, 2018; National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute,
2007.)

For mild intermittent asthma, short-acting inhaled β-agonists as needed
are usually sufficient. Table 54-3 lists suitable agents.

TABLE 54-3. Chronic Asthma Treatment

For persistent asthma, most inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) are
administered twice daily. The goal is to reduce β-agonists use for
symptomatic relief. Initial low-dose ICS may be augmented to mediumranging dosing if the moderate or severe symptoms shown in Table 54-1
persist. A case-control study from Canada with a cohort of more than 15,600
nonpregnant women with asthma showed that ICS reduced hospitalizations
by 80 percent (Blais, 1998). At Parkland Hospital, Wendel and colleagues
(1996) achieved a 55-percent reduction in readmissions when severe
exacerbations were treated with ICS. In one study of nonpregnant subjects
with mild asthma, as-needed budesonide-formoterol, which is an aerosol ICS

and β-agonist combination, was superior to albuterol alone to prevent
exacerbations (Beasley, 2019). This is incorporated in new guidelines
(Cloutier, 2020).
Theophylline has been used less frequently since ICS became available.
Minimal benefit is gained with these compounds, and they have a high rate of
side effects. However, some theophylline derivatives are considered useful
for oral maintenance therapy if the initial response to ICS and β-agonists is
not optimal (Barnes, 2018).
Of other agents, antileukotrienes inhibit leukotriene synthesis and include
zileuton, zafirlukast, and montelukast. These drugs are given orally or by
inhalation for prevention, but they are ineffective for acute disease (Barnes,
2018). For maintenance, they are used in conjunction with ICS to allow
minimal corticosteroid dosing. Approximately half of individuals with
asthma will improve with these drugs. However, they are less effective than
ICS, and experience with their use in pregnancy is limited (Fanta, 2009).
Last, cromones, which are mast cell degranulation inhibitors, are ineffective
for acute asthma. They are used primarily to treat childhood asthma.

Vitamin D
Epidemiological data support an association between vitamin D
insufficiency and asthma severity. The proposed mechanism is modulation of
immunological pathways that diminish inflammatory responses (Pfeffer,
2018). Jensen and coworkers (2019) reported that pregnant women with
asthma have low vitamin D levels. One systematic review suggested that
increasing maternal vitamin D intake might prevent childhood asthma (Shi,
2021). Adams and colleagues (2021) reported an association between
decreased maternal vitamin D levels and childhood wheezing. However, a
randomized trial with antenatal vitamin D supplementation showed no
lowering of childhood asthma risks at 6 years of age (Brustad, 2019).

■ Management of Acute Asthma
Early Treatment
Treatment of acute asthma during pregnancy is similar to that for the
nonpregnant patient (Figure 54-3). Importantly, the threshold for
hospitalization is significantly lower. Intravenous (IV) hydration may help

clear pulmonary secretions, and supplemental oxygen is given by mask. The
therapeutic aim is to maintain the PaO2 >60 mm Hg, and preferably normal,
along with 90- to 95-percent oxygen saturation. Baseline pulmonary function
testing includes FEV1 or PEFR. Continuous pulse oximetry and electronic
fetal monitoring, depending on gestational age, may provide useful
information. Arterial blood gas analysis aides in assessing the severity of an
acute attack by providing objective assessment of maternal oxygenation,
ventilation, and acid-base status (see Fig. 54-1). However, Wendel and
associates (1996) found that routine arterial blood gas analysis did not help
to manage most pregnant women who required admission for asthma control.
If used, the results must be interpreted in relation to normal values for
pregnancy. For example, a PaCO2 >35 mm Hg with a pH <7.35 is consistent
with hyperventilation and CO2 retention in a pregnant woman. Antibiotics are
not given unless pneumonitis is comorbid (p. 962) (Terraneo, 2014).

FIGURE 54-3 Protocol for management of acute asthma at Parkland Hospital. aOf predicted value.
bLabor & delivery unit, recovery area, or intensive care unit. FEV = forced expiratory volume at 1
1
second; PEFR = peak expiratory flow rate (liters per minute).

First-line therapy for acute asthma includes a short-acting β-adrenergic
agonist, such as terbutaline, albuterol, isoetharine, epinephrine,
isoproterenol, or metaproterenol, which are given subcutaneously, taken

orally, or inhaled. In severely ill women, these drugs can be given
intravenously (Barnes, 2018).
Systemic corticosteroids are given early to all patients with severe acute
asthma. One regimen is oral prednisone or prednisolone or IV
methylprednisolone in a dose of 30 to 45 mg daily for 5 to 10 days without
tapering (Barnes, 2018). At Parkland Hospital, we use a higher daily IV dose
(see Figure 54-3). Because their onset of action is several hours,
corticosteroids are given initially along with β-agonists for severe acute
asthma. If the response is unsatisfactory, a nebulized anticholinergic drug
may be added. These drugs act to relax smooth muscle and diminish mucus.
By nebulizer, a 0.5-mg dose of ipratropium bromide is provided every 20
minutes as needed for three consecutive doses. Additional doses every 6 to 8
hours can be used (National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, 2007). Also,
for severe exacerbations, IV magnesium sulfate or theophylline may prove
efficacious.
Further management depends on the severity and response to therapy. If
initial therapy with a β-agonist is associated with FEV1 or PEFR
improvement to a level >70 percent of baseline, discharge can be
considered. For the woman with obvious respiratory distress or with an
FEV1 or PEFR <70 percent of predicted after three doses of a β-agonist,
admission is usually advisable (Lazarus, 2010). Intensive therapy is
continued with short-acting inhaled β-agonists, IV corticosteroids, inhaled
anticholinergics, and close observation for worsening respiratory distress or
fatigue in breathing (Racusin, 2013). The woman is cared for in the delivery
unit or an intermediate or intensive care unit (ICU) (Dombrowski, 2006;
Zeeman, 2003).

Status Asthmaticus and Respiratory Failure
Severe asthma of any type not responding after 30 to 60 minutes of intensive
therapy is termed status asthmaticus. Generally, management of nonpregnant
patients with status asthmaticus in an intensive care setting results in a good
outcome. In pregnant women, consideration should be given to early
intubation when maternal respiratory status worsens despite aggressive
treatment (see Fig. 54-1). Fatigue, CO2 retention, and hypoxemia are
indications for mechanical ventilation (Chan, 2015). In refractory cases,
venovenous extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) has been

successfully used for status asthmaticus during pregnancy (Clifford, 2018;
Steinack, 2017).

■ Labor and Delivery
For the laboring patient who has symptomatic asthma, the PEFR or FEV1 is
determined on admission, and serial measurements are taken. Maintenance
medications are continued through delivery, and stress-dose corticosteroids
are not necessary (Sylvester-Armstrong, 2020).
Oxytocin or prostaglandins E1 or E2 can be used for cervical ripening
and induction. A non-histamine-releasing narcotic such as fentanyl may be
preferable to meperidine for labor, and epidural analgesia is ideal. For
surgical delivery, conduction analgesia is preferred because tracheal
intubation can trigger severe bronchospasm. Postpartum hemorrhage is
treated with oxytocin or prostaglandin E1 (misoprostol) or E2 (dinoprostone
[Prostin]). Prostaglandin F2α (Hemabate) is contraindicated because it may
cause significant bronchospasm.

ACUTE BRONCHITIS
Large airway infection is manifest by cough without pneumonitis. It is
common in adults, especially in winter months. Infections are usually caused
by viruses, and of these, influenza A and B, parainfluenza, respiratory
syncytial, coronavirus, adenovirus, and rhinovirus are frequent isolates
(Irwin, 2018). Bacterial agents causing community-acquired pneumonia are
rarely implicated. The cough of acute bronchitis persists for 10 to 20 days
and occasionally lasts for a month or longer. Evidence supporting the
benefits of antimicrobial therapy is limited (Smith, 2017). As supportive
care, cough suppressants containing dextromethorphan and expectorants with
guaifenesin appear safe in pregnancy (Briggs, 2022).

PNEUMONIA
Infection of the lungs is a leading cause of death in the United States (Heron,
2017). Current classification includes community-acquired pneumonia
(CAP), which is typically encountered in healthy young women, including

gravidas. Patients in outpatient care facilities develop an infection that more
closely resembles hospital-acquired pneumonia (HAP) (Mandell, 2018).
In most cases of CAP, the offending pathogen is not identified. In a study
from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), pathogens were
identified in only 38 percent of nearly 2500 adults with pneumonia (Jain,
2015). These included viruses in 23 percent, bacteria in 11 percent, both in 3
percent, and fungi or protozoa in 1 percent. These percentages changed in
2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic (p. 964). Half of bacterial isolates
were Streptococcus pneumoniae.
Pneumonia in pregnant women is relatively common (Brito, 2011;
Sheffield, 2009). Gazmararian and coworkers (2002) reported that
pneumonia accounts for 4.2 percent of antepartum admissions for
nonobstetrical complications. Pneumonia is also a frequent indication for
postpartum readmission (Belfort, 2010). Admission rates for respiratory
illnesses during influenza season are higher than rates in the remaining
months.
Regardless of etiology, mortality from pneumonia is infrequent in young
women. However, during pregnancy, severe pneumonitis with appreciable
loss of ventilatory capacity is less well tolerated (Callaghan, 2015; Rogers,
2010). Hypoxemia and acidosis are also poorly accommodated by the fetus,
and they may stimulate preterm labor after midpregnancy. Because many
cases of pneumonia follow viral upper respiratory illnesses, worsening or
persistence of symptoms may represent developing pneumonia. Any gravida
suspected of having pneumonia should undergo chest radiography.

■ Bacterial Pneumonia
Many bacteria that cause CAP, such as S pneumoniae, are part of the normal
flora. Some factors that perturb the symbiotic relationship between
colonizing bacteria and mucosal phagocytic defenses include acquisition of a
virulent strain or bacterial infections following a viral infection. Cigarette
smoking and chronic bronchitis favor colonization with S pneumoniae,
Haemophilus influenzae, and Legionella species. Other risk factors include
asthma, binge drinking, and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection
(Mandell, 2018).

Incidence and Causes

Pregnancy itself does not appear to predispose to pneumonia. Jin and
associates (2003) reported the antepartum hospitalization rate for pneumonia
to be 1.5 per 1000 deliveries—almost identical to the rate of 1.47 per 1000
for nonpregnant women. Similarly, among 75,000 pregnancies at Parkland
Hospital, the incidence was 1.5 per 1000 (Yost, 2000). As discussed, at least
half are caused by viruses—influenza A and B, metapneumovirus,
adenovirus, and respiratory syncytial virus (Mandell, 2018). A fourth are
bacterial, and S pneumoniae causes half of these. Community-acquired
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (CA-MRSA) has emerged as a
common pathogen that may cause necrotizing pneumonia (Moran, 2013).
Occasionally, Legionnaires disease is encountered (Close, 2016).

Diagnosis
Typical symptoms of pneumonia include cough, dyspnea, sputum production,
and pleuritic chest pain. Mild upper respiratory symptoms and malaise
precede these symptoms, and mild leukocytosis is usually present. Chest
radiography is essential for diagnosis (Fig. 54-4). Radiographical findings
do not accurately predict the etiology, and as discussed, the responsible
pathogen is often not identified. Tests to identify a specific agent are optional
(Mandell, 2018). Sputum cultures, polymerase chain reaction (PCR) tests,
serological testing, cold agglutinin identification, and tests for bacterial
antigens are not routinely recommended. Exceptions are rapid PCR testing of
nasal swab samples for influenza A and B and for COVID-19. An assay to
screen for all three is available. Determination of serum procalcitonin levels
did not improve diagnostic efficacy (Huang, 2018).

FIGURE 54-4 Chest radiograph in a pregnant woman with right middle lobe and left upper lobe
pneumonia. Rounded right middle lobe and left apical infiltrates are consistent with the diagnosis.

Management
Many healthy young adults can be safely treated as outpatients, and the
pneumonia severity index (PSI) and the CURB-65 scoring system are guides
to admission (Mandell, 2018). Neither has been studied in pregnancy, and at
Parkland Hospital, we hospitalize all gravidas with radiographically proven
pneumonia. Outpatient therapy or 23-hour observation with optimal followup are reasonable options. Table 54-4 displays risk factors that should
prompt consideration for hospitalization (Mandel, 2018).
TABLE 54-4. Risk Factors for Early Deterioration in Community-Acquired
Pneumonia

With severe disease, admission to an ICU or intermediate care unit is
advisable. Approximately 20 percent of pregnant women with pneumonia
admitted to Parkland Hospital require this level of care (Zeeman, 2003).
Severe pneumonia is a relatively common cause of acute respiratory distress
syndrome (ARDS) during pregnancy, and mechanical ventilation may become
necessary (Chap. 50, p. 885). In a review of 51 gravidas who required
mechanical ventilation, 12 percent had pneumonia (Jenkins, 2003). Still,
their mortality rate is lower than that for other causes of ARDS (Rush, 2017).
Initial antimicrobial and antiviral treatment is empirical (Mandell, 2018).
In most otherwise healthy pregnant women, bacterial pneumonias are caused
by pneumococci, Mycoplasma, or Chlamydophila. Monotherapy initially is
with a macrolide (Table 54-5). Yost and colleagues (2000) reported that
erythromycin monotherapy, given intravenously and then orally, was effective
in all but one of 99 pregnant women with uncomplicated pneumonia. During
influenza season, we routinely administer oseltamivir (Tamiflu) along with
empirical therapy for bacterial pneumonia.
TABLE 54-5. Empirical Inpatient Antimicrobial Treatment for CommunityAcquired Pneumonia in Pregnancya

For women with more severe disease according to criteria in Table 54-4,
Mandell and Wunderink (2018) recommend: (1) a respiratory
fluoroquinolone or (2) a macrolide plus a preferred β-lactam (see Table 545). Resistance of pneumococcal isolates to macrolides will favor
fluoroquinolone regimens. The teratogenicity risk of fluoroquinolones is low,
and these should be given if indicated (Briggs, 2022). If MRSA is suspected,
IV vancomycin, 15 mg/kg every 12 hours, or linezolid, 600 mg every 12
hours, is added (Metlay, 2019).
Clinical improvement is usually evident in 48 to 72 hours with resolution
of fever in 2 to 4 days. With improvement, patients can be transitioned to oral
forms. Treatment of uncomplicated pneumonia is recommended for 5 to 7
days total (Musher, 2014). Patients should be afebrile for 48 to 72 hours and
demonstrate signs of clinical stability before therapy is discontinued.
Radiographic abnormalities may take up to 6 weeks to completely resolve
(Torres, 2008).
Worsening disease is a poor prognostic feature, and serial radiography is
recommended if fever persists. Even with improvement, however,
approximately 20 percent of women develop a pleural effusion. Treatment
failure may occur in up to 15 percent of cases, and a wider antimicrobial
regimen and more extensive diagnostic testing is warranted. For example, in
some cases, computed tomography of the chest may be necessary to identify
empyema that requires drainage.

Pregnancy Outcome
Maternal and perinatal morbidity and mortality rates from pneumonia remain
formidable. In five studies with a total of 632 women published after 1990,
almost 7 percent required intubation and mechanical ventilation, and the
maternal mortality rate was 0.8 percent.
In up to a third of cases of acute lung infection, prematurely ruptured
membranes and preterm delivery are frequent complications (Getahun, 2007;
Shariatzadeh, 2006). Likely related to these, older studies report a twofold
increase in rates of low-birthweight neonates (Sheffield, 2009). In one
population-based study from Taiwan of nearly 219,000 births, incidences of
preterm and growth-restricted newborns and of preeclampsia and cesarean
delivery were significantly higher (Chen, 2012).

Prevention
Two pneumococcal vaccines are available—a 23-serotype preparation
(PPSV23 [Pneumovax]) and a newer 13-serotype vaccine (PCV13 [Prevnar
13]). PPSV23 is 60- to 70-percent protective, and its use lowers emergence
of drug-resistant pneumococci. Neither vaccine is recommended for healthy
pregnant women. However, for gravidas with chronic diabetes mellitus or
with chronic heart, lung, or liver disease, one lifetime dose of PPSV23 is
suggested, if not previously provided. Moreover, for women with chronic
immunocompromise, generalized malignancy, chronic renal disease, cochlear
implant, or asplenia, such as with sickle-cell disease, one lifetime PCV13
dose is followed by one PPSV23 dose at least 8 weeks later and then again 5
years later if not provided previously (Freedman, 2021).

■ Influenza Pneumonia
Influenza A and B are RNA viruses that cause potentially epidemic
respiratory infection, including pneumonitis, in the winter months. The virus
is spread by aerosolized droplets and quickly infects ciliated columnar
epithelium, alveolar cells, mucus gland cells, and macrophages.

Clinical Presentation
Each year, 10 percent of pregnant women develop influenza (Cantu, 2013).
Disease onset follows 1 to 4 days after exposure, and common symptoms

include fever, cough, myalgia, and chills (Wright, 2018). In most healthy
adults, infection is self-limited. Pneumonia is the most frequent complication
and mimics bacterial pneumonia. According to the CDC, infected pregnant
women are more likely to be hospitalized and admitted to an ICU (Lindley,
2019). Others have corroborated these observations (Mertz, 2019; Prasad,
2019). At Parkland Hospital during the 2003–2004 influenza season,
pneumonia developed in 12 percent of pregnant women with influenza
(Rogers, 2010).
The 2009–2010 pandemic with the influenza (A/H1N1) pdm09 strain
was particularly severe (Rasmussen, 2014). In an MFMU Network study, 10
percent of pregnant or postpartum women admitted with H1N1 influenza
were cared for in an ICU, and 11 percent of these patients died (Varner,
2011). Risk factors included advanced pregnancy, smoking, and chronic
hypertension. Overall, influenza accounted for 12 percent of pregnancyrelated deaths during the 2009–2010 pandemic (Callaghan, 2015). During the
2013–2014 influenza season, a fourth of pregnant women admitted to
California ICUs died (Louie, 2015). ECMO may be lifesaving (Anselmi,
2015; Saad, 2016).
Rapid PCR testing of nasal swab samples for influenza A and B is
available. Primary influenza pneumonitis is characterized by sparse sputum
production and radiographic interstitial infiltrates (Wright, 2018). More
commonly, secondary or mixed pneumonia develop from bacterial
superinfection by streptococci or staphylococci after 2 to 3 days of initial
clinical improvement. The CDC (2007) reported several cases in which CAMRSA caused influenza-associated pneumonitis with a case-fatality rate of
25 percent.

Management
Supportive treatment is recommended for uncomplicated influenza, and early
antiviral therapy is effective (Oboho, 2016; Wright, 2018). The American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2018a) recommends treatment
of all pregnant women with suspected or proven influenza. This is regardless
of rapid influenza testing, which can have false-negative results (Datkhaeva,
2019). Hospitalization is considered for severely ill women and for those
with pneumonia. Influenza hospitalization rates for those with advanced
pregnancy are higher compared with nonpregnant women (Dodds, 2007;
Schanzer, 2007).

Treatment is with neuraminidase inhibitors, which interfere with release
of progeny virus from infected host cells and thus prevent infection of new
host cells. The preferred agent is oseltamivir (Tamiflu), which is given
orally, 75 mg twice daily. An alternative is zanamivir (Relenza), which is
given by inhalation, 10 mg twice daily. Recommended treatment duration
with either is 5 days. Last, peramivir (Rapivab) may be given as a 600-mg
IV dose over 15 to 30 minutes. All shorten the course of illness by 1 to 2
days, and they probably reduce the risk for pneumonitis (Belgi, 2014;
Muthuri, 2014). Few data guide use of these agents in pregnant women, but
the drugs are not teratogenic in animal studies and are considered low risk
(Briggs, 2022). Recently, the endonuclease inhibitor baloxavir marboxil
(Xofluza) was approved for use in nonpregnant individuals but is not
recommended for pregnant women.

Prevention
Vaccination against influenza A is recommended by the American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2018b) and the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention (2019a). During the 2018–2019 flu season, the CDC
reported that only half of pregnant women received the influenza vaccine
(Lindley, 2019). In a recent survey, however, O’Leary and colleagues (2019)
reported a 10-percent vaccine refusal rate in office practices.
Any inactivated influenza vaccines (IIV) or recombinant influenza
vaccine (RIV) may be used and is given once each flu season. Live
attenuated influenza vaccine (LAIV) should not be used in pregnancy
(Freedman, 2021). Prenatal vaccination affords some temporary protection
for infants (Madhi, 2014; Munoz, 2019; Tita, 2016). The vaccine has not
been linked with birth defects or adverse childhood health effects at 5 years
of age (Briggs, 2022; Conlin, 2018; Walsh, 2019). In one case-control study,
an association with vaccination and miscarriage was found (Donahue, 2017).
However, the observations were not definite and should not alter clinical
practice (Rasmussen, 2019; Sperling, 2018). Effects on pregnancy outcomes
are discussed in more detail in Chapter 67 (p. 1187).
A second coronavirus—Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERSCoV)—originated in Saudi Arabia in 2013. Fortunately, the epidemic was
contained and short lived.

■ Coronavirus
The first coronaviral infection in China in 2002 that caused severe acute
respiratory syndrome (SARS) was termed SARS-CoV. It caused atypical
pneumonitis with a case-fatality rate of approximately 10 percent (Dolin,
2012). SARS in pregnancy had a case-fatality rate of up to 40 percent
(Maxwell, 2017). Ng and associates (2006) reported that the placentas from
7 of 19 cases showed abnormal intervillous or subchorionic fibrin
deposition in three, and extensive fetal thrombotic vasculopathy in two.
In the winter of 2019–2020, a second worldwide outbreak of a
genetically similar virus originated in China. This was Coronavirus 2
(SARS-CoV2) known as COVID-19. Illness severity ranges from mild
common-cold symptoms to severe pneumonia or acute respiratory distress
syndrome (Rasmussen, 2020). From 18 affected pregnancies, the clinical
course of COVID-19 is similar to that seen in nonpregnant women. However,
preterm labor appears to be an associated risk (Chen, 2020; Zhu, 2020).
To minimize transmission of COVID-19, inpatient guidelines recommend
caring for an affected patient in a negative-pressure airborne infection
isolation room (AIIR) or transfer to an equipped facility. The potential for
vertical transmission (mother–to–newborn) transmission is currently unclear
Breslin, 2020). Neonates are suspected to have infection. Thus, isolation of
the newborn from other neonates is recommended. A newborn may room in
with its mother, who practices hand hygiene and wears a mask (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2021; Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention, 2020).

■ Varicella Pneumonia
Infection with varicella-zoster virus, the same agent responsible for
chickenpox, results in pneumonitis in 5 percent of gravidas (Harger, 2002).
Diagnosis and management are considered in Chapter 67 (p. 1186).

■ Pneumocystis Pneumonia
Fungal and yeast infections are usually of greatest consequence in
immunocompromised hosts, especially in women with acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). Of these, lung infection with

Pneumocystis jirovecii, formerly called Pneumocystis carinii, is a common
complication. The opportunistic yeast-like fungus causes interstitial
pneumonia characterized by dry cough, tachypnea, dyspnea, and diffuse
radiographic infiltrates. This organism is identified by polymerase chain
reaction testing of bronchoalveolar lavage secretions or, when necessary,
tissue staining of biopsy specimens (Morris, 2018). More common in HIVinfected persons, its incidence has risen in other immunocompromised
groups (Rego de Figueiredo, 2019).
In a report from the AIDS Clinical Trials Centers, pneumocystis
pneumonia was the most frequent HIV-related disorder in pregnant women
(Stratton, 1992). Ahmad and associates (2001) reviewed 22 cases during
pregnancy and cited a 50-percent mortality rate. Treatment is with
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole for 14 to 21 days. Alternative agents include
sulfadiazine plus pyrimethamine. Glucocorticoids also improve survival
rates. Echinocandins have been used successfully in nonpregnant patients
(Huang, 2019). Tracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation may be
required in some cases.
For prophylaxis, several international health agencies recommend one
double-strength trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole tablet orally daily for certain
groups of HIV-infected pregnant women. These include women with CD4+ Tlymphocyte counts <200/μL, those whose CD4+ T lymphocytes constitute
<14 percent, or if there is an AIDS-defining illness, particularly
oropharyngeal candidiasis (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
2021).

■ Fungal Pneumonia
Any of several fungi can cause pneumonia. In pregnancy, this is usually seen
in women with HIV infection or other sources of immunocompromise. In
uncompromised women, infection is usually mild and self-limited. It is
characterized initially by cough and fever, and dissemination is infrequent
(Mansour, 2015).
Histoplasmosis and blastomycosis do not appear to be more frequent or
more severe during pregnancy (Youssef, 2013). Data concerning
coccidioidomycosis are conflicting (Bercovitch, 2011; Patel, 2013). In a
case-control study from an endemic area, pregnancy was a significant risk

factor for disseminated disease (Rosenstein, 2001). In another study,
however, Caldwell and coworkers (2000) identified 32 serologically
confirmed cases during pregnancy and documented dissemination in only
three. Women with associated erythema nodosum have a better prognosis,
whereas mediastinal lymphadenopathy may more likely reflect disseminated
disease (Mayer, 2013). Last, Crum and Ballon-Landa (2006) reviewed 80
cases of antepartum coccidioidomycosis and found that almost all women
diagnosed in the third trimester had disseminated disease. Although the
overall maternal mortality rate was 40 percent, it was 20 percent for 29
cases reported since 1973. Spinello (2007) and Bercovitch (2011) with their
colleagues provide reviews of coccidioidomycosis in pregnancy.
Most cases of cryptococcosis reported during pregnancy manifest as
meningitis. Otherwise healthy pregnant women occasionally have
cryptococcal pneumonia (Asadi Gharabaghi, 2014). Diagnosis is difficult
because clinical presentation is similar to that of other community-acquired
pneumonias.
Itraconazole is the preferred therapy for most disseminated fungal
infections (Edwards, 2018). Pregnant women have also been given IV
amphotericin B or ketoconazole (Lewis, 2018; Paranyuk, 2006; Pilmis,
2015). Amphotericin B has been used extensively in pregnancy with no
embryofetal effects. Early in pregnancy, fluconazole and ketoconazole may
be embryotoxic in large doses. In the first trimester, these two and
itraconazole are ideally avoided if possible (Briggs, 2022).
Three echinocandin derivatives—caspofungin, micafungin, and
anidulafungin—are effective for invasive candidiasis (Edwards, 2018).
They are embryotoxic and teratogenic in laboratory animals and use in human
pregnancies has not been reported (Briggs, 2022).

TUBERCULOSIS
It is estimated that a third of the world population is infected with
Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Getahun, 2015). In the United States, it is
uncommon and is a disease of the elderly, the urban poor, minority groups,
and patients with HIV infection (Raviglione, 2018). According to the CDC
(2019b), the incidence of active tuberculosis in this country has plateaued
since 2000, and immigrants account for more than half of active cases.

Individuals born in the United States have newly acquired infection, whereas
foreign-born persons usually have reactivation of latent infection.
Infection begins with inhalation of mycobacteria, which incites a
granulomatous pulmonary reaction. In >90 percent of patients, infection is
contained and is dormant for long periods (Getahun, 2015). In those who are
immunocompromised, tuberculosis becomes reactivated to cause clinical
disease. Active disease manifests usually as cough with minimal sputum
production, low-grade fever, hemoptysis, and weight loss. Various
infiltrative patterns are seen on chest radiograph, and cavitation or
mediastinal lymphadenopathy may be associated. Stained smears of sputum
reveal acid-fast bacilli (AFB) in approximately two thirds of culturepositive individuals. Forms of extrapulmonary tuberculosis include
lymphadenitis, pleural, genitourinary, skeletal, meningeal, gastrointestinal,
and miliary or disseminated (Raviglione, 2018). Silent endometrial
tuberculosis can cause tubal infertility (Levison, 2010).

■ Tuberculosis and Pregnancy
The considerable influx of women into the United States from Asia, Africa,
Mexico, and Central America has been accompanied by an increased
frequency of tuberculosis in pregnancy. The prevalence of tuberculosis was
7.1 cases per 100,000 pregnancy-related hospitalizations (Dennis, 2018).
Sackoff and associates (2006) reported positive tuberculin test results in half
of 678 foreign-born women attending prenatal clinics in New York City. At
Jackson Memorial Hospital in Miami, 21 percent of 207 pregnant women
with HIV infection had a positive skin test result (Schulte, 2002).
One review of 3384 pregnant women showed that 72 percent of active
disease is pulmonary (Sobhy, 2017). It also confirmed earlier studies that
showed greater adverse maternal and perinatal outcomes (Table 54-6).
Others have found similar untoward effects (Dennis, 2018; El-Messidi,
2016). From her review, Efferen (2007) cited twofold greater rates of low
birthweight, preterm delivery, and preeclampsia. The perinatal mortality rate
was almost tenfold higher. Conversely, treated tuberculosis is usually
associated with good pregnancy outcomes (Moro, 2018; Taylor, 2013).
TABLE 54-6. Adverse Maternal and Perinatal Outcomes in 3384
Pregnancies Complicated by Active Tuberculosis

Extrapulmonary tuberculosis is less common, although its incidence
appears to be rising (El-Messidi, 2016). Llewelyn and colleagues (2000)
reported that 9 of 13 pregnant women with extrapulmonary disease had
delayed diagnoses. In the review cited above, 5.8 percent of women had
extrapulmonary infections, and they had worse outcomes (Sobhy, 2017). Jana
and coworkers (1999) described outcomes in 33 pregnant women with renal,
intestinal, and skeletal tuberculosis, and a third had low-birthweight
newborns. Prevost and Fung Kee Fung (1999) reviewed 56 cases of
tuberculous meningitis in which a third of mothers died. Spinal tuberculosis
may cause paraplegia, but vertebral fusion may prevent it from becoming
permanent (Badve, 2011). Psoas abscess develops in 5 percent of those with
spinal infections (Nigam, 2013). Other presentations include widespread
intraperitoneal tuberculosis simulating ovarian carcinomatosis or
degenerating leiomyoma, and hyperemesis gravidarum stemming from
tubercular meningitis (Kutlu, 2007; Moore, 2008; Sherer, 2005).

■ Diagnosis
For latent tuberculosis, two testing types are used. One is the time-honored
tuberculin skin test (TST), and the others are interferon-gamma release
assays (IGRAs), which are becoming preferred (Lewinsohn, 2017; Sosa,
2019). IGRAs are blood tests that measure interferon-gamma release in
response to antigens present in M tuberculosis but not in bacille CalmetteGuérin (BCG) vaccine.
The alternative is skin testing, for which the preferred antigen is purified
protein derivative (PPD) of intermediate strength of 5 tuberculin units. If the
intracutaneously applied test result is negative, no further evaluation is
needed. A positive skin test result measures ≥5 mm in diameter and requires
evaluation for active disease, including a chest radiograph. For active
infection, nucleic acid amplification testing and mycobacterial culture is
recommended (Raviglione, 2018).
Clinicians should promptly contact their state health department for cases
of suspected or confirmed active tuberculosis. Health departments can assist
in providing patient and public health management. This often includes
directly observed therapy (DOT) to ensure regimen compliance (Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention, 2013a). Each state’s control office can be
found at www.cdc.gov/tb/links/tboffices.htm.

■ Treatment
Latent Infection
In nonpregnant, tuberculin-positive patients younger than 35 years with no
evidence of active disease, treatment is given to substantially reduce the risk
that their latent infection will progress to active disease. The preferred
therapy is one of three rifamycin-based regimens with or without isoniazid
for 3 to 4 months duration (Sterling, 2020). Alternatively, isoniazid, 300 mg
orally daily, is given for 6 to 9 months. Isoniazid has been used for decades,
and it is considered safe in pregnancy (Briggs, 2022; Moro, 2018). However,
for gravidas with latent infection, most recommend that isoniazid therapy be
delayed until after delivery (Hill, 2019). Some even recommend withholding
treatment until 3 to 6 months after delivery because of a possibly increased
isoniazid-induced hepatitis risk in postpartum women. Serum levels of
hepatic transaminases should be monitored with isoniazid therapy.

Compliance is a major problem with postpartum therapy. Only 10 to 18
percent of postpartum patients complete treatment (Cruz, 2005; Sackoff,
2006). One obvious disconnect is that care for tuberculosis is given in health
systems apart from prenatal care (Zenner, 2012). In a decision model,
Boggess and colleagues (2000) reported fewer cases of tuberculosis if
treatment for a positive tuberculin skin test result occurred antepartum.
There are exceptions to delayed treatment for latent infection in
pregnancy. Recent skin test convertors are treated antepartum because the
incidence of active infection is 5 percent in the first year (Zumla, 2013).
Skin-test-positive women exposed to active infection are also treated
because the incidence of infection is 0.5 percent per year. Last, women with
HIV infection are treated because they have an approximate 10-percent
annual risk of active disease.

Active Infection
Regimens. Resistance to antituberculosis drugs has led to emergence of
multidrug-resistant tuberculosis (MDR-TB) strains. The World Health
Organization (2017) recommends isoniazid, rifampin, ethambutol, and
pyrazinamide together for 6 months for nonpregnant persons. These are used
until susceptibility studies are performed (Nahid, 2016). Pyridoxine is added
to help prevent isoniazid-associated neuropathy. A newer 4-month isoniazid,
rifapentine, moxifloxacin, and pyrazinamide regimen was not inferior to the
standard one (Dorman, 2021).
During pregnancy, in the first 2-month bactericidal phase, isoniazid,
rifampin, and ethambutol are given. This is followed by a 7-month
continuation phase with isoniazid and rifampin (Raviglione, 2018). A few
reports describe MDR-TB during pregnancy, and treatment options have
been reviewed (Esmail, 2018). Treatment should be undertaken in
consultation with infectious disease and the local health department.
Breastfeeding is not prohibited during antituberculous therapy. If neonatal
therapy is indicated, medication levels in breast milk are inadequate for this.
Treatment of active disease is of special concern in HIV-infected women
who are antiretroviral naïve. In these circumstances, beginning concomitant
therapy with antituberculosis and antiretroviral therapy can cause the
immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome (IRIS) with toxic drug
effects (Lai, 2016). That said, some studies support administration of

antiretroviral therapy 2 to 4 weeks after beginning antituberculosis therapy
(Blanc, 2011; Havlir, 2011). Also, rifampin or rifabutin may be
contraindicated if certain protease inhibitors or nonnucleoside reverse
transcriptase inhibitors are used. If there is resistance to rifabutin or
rifampin, then pyrazinamide therapy is given. Of the second-line regimens,
the aminoglycosides—streptomycin, kanamycin, amikacin, and capreomycin
—are ototoxic to the fetus and are contraindicated (Briggs, 2022).
Transmission Prevention. Inpatient airborne precautions should be initiated
for any patient with suspected active pulmonary tuberculosis or for patients
who remain infectious despite treatment. Precautions include rooming in a
negative-pressure room. Patients are encouraged to wear surgical masks
during interactions, and health-care workers should don personally fitted
N95 respirator masks. Patients undergoing treatment can be considered
noninfectious: (1) after 2 weeks of DOT treatment compliance, (2) after three
consecutive AFB-negative sputum smears, or (3) after clinical improvement
evidenced by absent fever and resolving cough (Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention, 2013b).

Neonatal Tuberculosis
Tuberculous bacillemia can infect the placenta, but the fetus infrequently
becomes infected. Congenital tuberculosis applies also to newborns who
are infected by aspiration of infected secretions at delivery. Each route
constitutes approximately half of the cases. Neonatal tuberculosis simulates
other congenital infections and manifests with hepatosplenomegaly,
respiratory distress, fever, and lymphadenopathy (Yeh, 2019).
Cantwell and colleagues (1994) reviewed 29 cases of congenital
tuberculosis. Only 12 of the mothers had active infection, and tuberculosis
was frequently demonstrated by postpartum endometrial biopsy. Adhikari
and associates (1997) described 11 South African postpartum women whose
endometrial biopsy was culture-positive. Six of their neonates had congenital
tuberculosis.
Neonatal infection is unlikely if the mother with active disease is treated
before delivery or if her sputum culture is negative. Most experts recommend
isolation of the susceptible newborn from the mother suspected of having
active disease. If the mother is infectious, 3 to 6 months of isoniazid
prophylaxis is given to the newborn. In an older study, the risk of disease in

the untreated infant born to a woman with active infection was 50 percent in
the first year (Jacobs, 1988).

SARCOIDOSIS
This is a chronic, multisystem inflammatory disease of unknown etiology
characterized by an accumulation of T-helper lymphocytes and phagocytes
within noncaseating granulomas (Baughman, 2018; Spagnolo, 2018).
Predisposition to the disease is genetically determined and characterized by
an exaggerated response of helper T lymphocytes to environmental triggers.
Pulmonary involvement is most common, followed by skin, eyes, lymph
nodes, and then all other organ systems. The prevalence of sarcoid in the
United States is 20 to 60 cases per 100,000, with equal sex distribution. It is
more than 10 times more common for blacks than for whites. Most patients
are between 20 and 40 years at disease presentation.
Pulmonary symptoms are dominant, and more than 90 percent of patients
have an abnormal chest radiograph at some point. Interstitial pneumonitis is
the hallmark of pulmonary involvement, and half of affected patients develop
permanent radiological changes. Lymphadenopathy, especially of the
mediastinum, is present in 75 to 90 percent of cases. A third each have
uveitis and skin involvement, the latter usually manifest as erythema
nodosum. In women, sarcoid causes approximately 10 percent of cases of
erythema nodosum (Mert, 2007). Importantly, any other organ system may be
involved. Confirmation of the diagnosis is with biopsy—preferably a lymph
node. However, because the lung may be the only obviously involved organ,
tissue acquisition is often difficult.
The overall prognosis for sarcoidosis is good, and it resolves without
treatment in 50 percent of patients. Still, quality of life is diminished, and in
20 percent chronic organ dysfunction, albeit mild and nonprogressive,
persists (Spagnolo, 2018). Approximately 5 percent die because of their
disease.
Glucocorticoids are the most widely used treatment for symptomatic
disease. Permanent organ derangement is seldom reversed by their use
(Spagnolo, 2018). Thus, the decision to treat is based on symptoms, physical
findings, chest radiograph, and pulmonary function tests. Unless respiratory
symptoms are prominent, therapy is usually withheld for a several-month

observation period. If inflammation does not subside, prednisone, 20 to 40
mg/d, is given daily and tapered to <10 mg by 6 months (Baughman, 2018).
For those with an inadequate response, immunosuppressive or cytotoxic
agents and cytokine modulators can be used.

■ Sarcoidosis and Pregnancy
Because it is uncommon and frequently benign, sarcoidosis is not often
diagnosed in pregnancy. In a study of the Nationwide Inpatient Sample, the
incidence was 9.6 cases per 100,000 births (Hadid, 2015). Meningitis, heart
failure, and neurosarcoidosis complicating pregnancy have been described
(Cardonick, 2000; Maisel, 1996; Wallmüller, 2012). Many small studies
report benign associations between sarcoidosis and pregnancy. However,
Table 54-7 displays the increased incidences of both maternal and fetal
adverse outcomes found in a Nationwide Inpatient Sample study of 678 cases
(Hadid, 2015). Risks for preeclampsia and preterm delivery were
approximately twofold greater. Risks for eclampsia, deep-vein thrombosis,
and pulmonary embolism were five- to sevenfold higher.
TABLE 54-7. Maternal and Perinatal Adverse Outcomes in 678 Women
with Sarcoidosis

Active sarcoidosis is treated using the same guidelines as for nongravid
women. Severe disease warrants serial pulmonary function determination.
Symptomatic uveitis, constitutional symptoms, and pulmonary symptoms are
treated with prednisone.

CYSTIC FIBROSIS
■ Pathophysiology
Cystic fibrosis is an autosomal recessive exocrinopathy and is one of the
most common fatal genetic disorders in Caucasians. Cystic fibrosis is caused
by one of more than 2000 mutations in a 230-kb gene on the long arm of
chromosome 7 (Sorscher, 2018). The normal peptide gene product functions
as a chloride channel and is termed the cystic fibrosis transmembrane
conductance regulator (CFTR). Mutations in the chloride channel alters
epithelial transport of electrolytes in CFTR-secretory cells. Affected sites
include the sinuses, lung, pancreas, liver, and reproductive tract.
Exocrine gland ductal obstruction develops from thick, viscid secretions.
In the lung, submucosal glandular ducts are affected. Eccrine sweat gland
abnormalities are the basis for the diagnostic sweat test, characterized by
elevated sodium, potassium, and chloride levels in sweat.
Lung involvement is commonplace and is usually the cause of death.
Bronchial gland hypertrophy with mucous plugging and small-airway
obstruction leads to subsequent infection that ultimately causes chronic
bronchitis and bronchiectasis. For complex and not completely explicable
reasons, chronic inflammation is caused by Pseudomonas aeruginosa, S
aureus, and H influenzae. Acute and chronic parenchymal inflammation
ultimately causes extensive fibrosis, and along with airway obstruction,
ventilation–perfusion mismatch develops. Pulmonary insufficiency is the end
result. Currently, the median predicted survival is 37 years, and nearly 80
percent of females with cystic fibrosis now survive to adulthood (Patel,
2015).
As discussed in Chapter 17 (p. 342), phenotypes vary widely, even
among homozygotes for the common Phe508del (∆F508) mutation. Disease
severity depends on which two alleles are inherited, and approximately 10
percent are disease-causing mutations (Sorscher, 2018). Homozygosity for
∆F508 is one of the most severe, and 90 percent of individuals with clinical
disease carry at least one F508 allele.

■ Preconceptional Counseling

Women with clinical cystic fibrosis are subfertile because of tenacious
cervical mucus. Traxler and colleagues (2019) recommend in-depth
preconceptional counseling regarding contraception. Males have
oligospermia or aspermia from associated congenital bilateral absence of
the vas deferens (CBAVD), and 98 percent are infertile (Ahmad, 2013).
Despite this, the North American Cystic Fibrosis Foundation estimated that 4
percent of affected women become pregnant every year (Edenborough,
1995). The endometrium and tubes express some CFTR but are functionally
normal, and the ovaries do not express the CFTR gene. Both intrauterine
insemination and in vitro fertilization can be successful for affected women.
Important factors are the long-term prognosis for the parent(s) and mutation
transmission to their offspring.

Screening
The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020)
recommends that carrier screening be offered to all women, affected by
cystic fibrosis or not, who are currently pregnant or considering conception
(Chap. 17, p. 342). The CDC also added cystic fibrosis to newborn
screening programs (Chap. 32, p. 594). The CFTR2 website
(www.cftr2.org) helps delineate which gene variants have a clear diseasecausing role and which are benign mutations.

■ Prenatal Care
Pregnancy outcome is inversely related to severity of lung dysfunction.
Advanced chronic lung disease, hypoxia, and frequent infections may prove
deleterious. At least in the past, cor pulmonale was common, but even that
does not preclude successful pregnancy (Cameron, 2005). In some women,
pancreatic dysfunction may cause malnutrition. Approximately 10 percent
have pregestational diabetes (Reynaud, 2017). Otherwise normal pregnancyinduced insulin resistance frequently results in gestational diabetes after
midpregnancy. In one study of 48 pregnancies, half had pancreatic
insufficiency, and a third required insulin (Thorpe-Beeston, 2013).
Cystic fibrosis is not affected by pregnancy. Early reports of a
deleterious effect on the course of cystic fibrosis were related to severe
disease (Olson, 1997). When matched with nonpregnant women by disease

severity, some reports indicate no deleterious effects on long-term survival
(Schechter, 2013).

■ Management
Prepregnancy counseling is imperative. Women who choose to become
pregnant require close surveillance for development of superimposed
infection, diabetes, and heart failure. Serial pulmonary function testing
assists management and estimates prognosis. If the FEV1 is at least 50
percent, women usually tolerate pregnancy well (Reynaud, 2020). Emphasis
is placed on postural drainage, bronchodilator therapy, and infection control.
β-Adrenergic bronchodilators help control airway constriction. Inhaled
recombinant human deoxyribonuclease I improves lung function by reducing
sputum viscosity (Sorscher, 2018). Inhaled 7-percent saline produces shortand long-term benefits. Nutritional status is assessed, and appropriate dietary
counseling given. Calcium and vitamin D are given for poor bone
mineralization. Pancreatic insufficiency requires replacement of oral
pancreatic enzymes. Promising new therapy to correct CFTR protein
dysfunction has been recently described. Using a combination of “CFTR
correctors” (tezacaftor–ivacaftor congeners), patients homozygous for the
Phe508del mutation significantly benefitted (Davies, 2018; Keating, 2018).
No reports of these drugs are available regarding pregnant women.
Infection is heralded by increasing cough and mucus production. Oral
semisynthetic penicillins or cephalosporins usually suffice to treat
staphylococcal infections. Pseudomonas infection is problematic, and
inhaled tobramycin and colistin have been used successfully to control this
organism. Serious pulmonary infections are treated with immediate
hospitalization and aggressive therapy. The threshold for hospitalization with
other complications is low. For labor and delivery, epidural analgesia is
recommended (Deighan, 2014).

■ Pregnancy Outcome
Earlier reports chronicled the poor maternal and perinatal outcomes in
affected women (Cohen, 1980; Kent, 1993). More recent reports describe
better outcomes, but there still are serious complications (Schlüter, 2019).

Disease severity is now quantified by pulmonary function studies, which are
the best predictor of pregnancy and long-term maternal outcome. One report
of 69 pregnancies found that if prepregnancy FEV1 was <60 percent of
predicted, the risk for preterm delivery, respiratory complications, and death
of the mother within a few years of childbirth was substantive (Edenborough,
2000). Others report similar findings (Fitzsimmons, 1996; Thorpe-Beeston,
2013).
Of 75 pregnancies from the French Cystic Fibrosis Registry, almost 20
percent of newborns were delivered preterm, and 30 percent had growth
restriction (Gillet, 2002). The one maternal death was due to Pseudomonas
sepsis in a woman whose prepregnancy FEV1 was 60 percent. Long-term,
however, 17 percent of women died, and four infants had confirmed cystic
fibrosis. Meconium peritonitis is found in 10 to 20 percent of affected fetuses
(Boczar, 2015; Terlizzi, 2016). In a more recent report from the French
registry, women with pregestational diabetes had outcomes similar to those
without diabetes (Reynaud, 2017).
Patel and associates (2015) queried the National Inpatient Sample
database and reported that the prevalence of cystic fibrosis in pregnancy had
a significant linear rise from 2000 to 2010. They analyzed 1119 affected
women and reported a litany of risks (Table 54-8). In contrast, perinatal
outcomes were surprisingly good.
TABLE 54-8. Odds Ratios for Maternal Complications in 1119 Pregnant
Women with Cystic Fibrosis Compared with Controls

■ Lung Transplantation
Cystic fibrosis is a common antecedent disease leading to lung
transplantation. Gyi and coworkers (2006) reviewed 10 pregnancies in
women following transplantation and reported nine liveborn neonates.
Maternal outcomes were less favorable. Of the three gravidas who
developed rejection during pregnancy, all had progressively declining
pulmonary function and died of chronic rejection by 38 months after delivery.
More recent international data show a median survival of 10.5 years in
patients living beyond the first year (Yusen, 2015).

CARBON MONOXIDE POISONING
Carbon monoxide is a ubiquitous gas, and most nonsmoking adults have a
carbon monoxyhemoglobin saturation of 1 to 3 percent. In cigarette smokers,
levels may be 5 to 15 percent, and polycythemia is comorbid. Carbon
monoxide is the most frequent cause of poisoning worldwide (Stoller, 2007).
Toxic levels are often encountered in inadequately ventilated areas warmed
by space heaters.
Carbon monoxide is particularly toxic because it is odorless and
tasteless and has a high affinity for hemoglobin binding. Thus, it displaces
oxygen and impedes its transfer with resultant hypoxia. Besides acute
sequelae including death and anoxic encephalopathy, cognitive defects
develop in as many as half of patients following loss of consciousness or in
those with carbon monoxide levels >25 percent (Weaver, 2002). Hypoxic
brain damage has a predilection for the cerebral cortex and white matter and
for the basal ganglia (Lo, 2007; Prockop, 2007). A Parkinson syndrome
sometimes follows after recovery.

■ Pregnancy and Carbon Monoxide Poisoning
Through several physiological alterations, the rate of endogenous carbon
monoxide production almost doubles in normal pregnancy (Longo, 1977).
Although the pregnant woman is not more susceptible to carbon monoxide
poisoning, the fetus does not tolerate excessive exposure (Friedman, 2015;
Nowadly, 2018). With chronic exposure, maternal symptoms usually appear
when the carboxyhemoglobin concentration is 5 to 20 percent. Symptoms

include headache, weakness, dizziness, physical and visual impairment,
palpitations, and nausea and vomiting. With acute exposure, concentrations of
30 to 50 percent produce symptoms of impending cardiovascular collapse.
Levels >50 percent may be fatal for the mother.
Because hemoglobin F has an even higher affinity for carbon monoxide,
fetal carboxyhemoglobin levels are 10 to 15 percent higher than those in the
mother. This may be due to facilitated diffusion (Longo, 1977). Importantly,
the half-life of carboxyhemoglobin is 2 hours in the mother but 7 hours in the
fetus. Carbon monoxide is bound so tightly to hemoglobin F, the fetus may be
hypoxic even before maternal carbon monoxide levels are appreciably
elevated. Several anomalies are associated with embryonic exposure, and
anoxic encephalopathy is the primary sequela of later fetal exposure (Alehan,
2007; Nowadly, 2018).

■ Treatment
For all victims, treatment of carbon monoxide poisoning is supportive along
with immediate administration of 100-percent inspired oxygen. Indications
for hyperbaric oxygen treatment in nonpregnant individuals are unclear (Kao,
2005). Weaver and associates (2002) reported that hyperbaric oxygen
treatment minimized the incidence of cognitive defects in adults at both 6
weeks and 1 year compared with normobaric oxygen. Hyperbaric oxygen is
generally recommended in pregnancy if carbon monoxide exposure has been
“significant” (Aubard, 2000; Ernst, 1998). The problem is how to define
significant exposure (Friedman, 2015). Although maternal carbon monoxide
levels are not accurately predictive of those in the fetus, some clinicians
recommend hyperbaric therapy if maternal levels exceed 15 to 20 percent.
Towers and Corcoran (2009) described affected fetuses to have an elevated
baseline heart rate, diminished variability, and absent accelerations and
decelerations with fetal monitoring. Treatment of the affected newborn with
hyperbaric oxygen also is controversial (Bar, 2007).
Elkharrat and coworkers (1991) described successful hyperbaric
treatments in 44 pregnant women. In another report, a woman’s abnormal
neurological and cardiopulmonary findings abated in a parallel fashion with
resolution of associated fetal heart rate variable decelerations (Silverman,
1997). Greingor and coworkers (2001) used 2.5-atm hyperbaric 100-percent
oxygen for 90 minutes in a 21-week-pregnant woman who was delivered of a

healthy neonate at term. The Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society
(2021) has a list of accredited facilities.

REFERENCES
Adams SN, Adjent MA, Gebretsadik T, et al: Prenatal vitamin D levels and child wheeze and asthma. J
Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 34(3):323, 2021
Adhikari M, Pillay T, Pillay DG: Tuberculosis in the newborn: an emerging disease. Pediatr Infect Dis J
16:1108, 1997
Ahmad A, Ahmed A, Patrizio P: Cystic fibrosis and fertility. Curr Opin Obstet Gynecol 25(3):167, 2013
Ahmad H, Mehta NJ, Manikal VM, et al: Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia in pregnancy. Chest 120:666,
2001
Alehan F, Erol I, Onay OS: Cerebral palsy due to nonlethal maternal carbon monoxide intoxication. Birth
Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol 79(8):614, 2007
Ali Z, Ulrik CS: Incidence and risk factors for exacerbations of asthma during pregnancy. J Asthma
Allergy 6:53, 2013
American Academy of Allergy Asthma & Immunology: Drug guide. 2020. Available at:
https://www.aaaai.org/Tools-for-the-Public/Drug-Guide. Accessed October 15, 2021
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Assessment and treatment of pregnant women
with suspected or confirmed influenza. Committee Opinion No. 753, October 2018a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Influenza vaccination during pregnancy.
Committee Opinion No. 732, April 2018b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Asthma in pregnancy. Practice Bulletin No. 90,
February 2008, Reaffirmed 2019
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Carrier screening for genetic conditions.
Committee Opinion No. 691, March 2017, Reaffirmed 2020
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Practice advisory: novel coronavirus 2019
(COVID-19). 2021. Available at: www.acog.org/Clinical-Guidance-and-Publications/PracticeAdvisories/Practice-Advisory-Novel-Coronavirus2019. Accessed October 15, 2021
Anselmi A, Ruggieri VG, Letheulle J, et al: Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation in pregnancy. J Card
Surg 30(10):781, 2015
Asadi Gharabaghi M, Allameh SF: Primary pulmonary cryptococcosis. BMJ Case Rep 2014:pii:
bcr2014203821, 2014
Aubard Y, Magne I: Carbon monoxide poisoning in pregnancy. BJOG 107:833, 2000
Badve SA, Ghate SD, Badve MS, et al: Tuberculosis of spine with neurological deficit in advanced
pregnancy: a report of three cases. Spine J 11(1):e9, 2011
Baghlaf H, Spence AR, Czuzoj-Shulman N, et al: Pregnancy outcomes among women with asthma. J
Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 32(8):1325, 2019
Bain E, Pierides KL, Clifton VL, et al: Interventions for managing asthma in pregnancy. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 10:CD010660, 2014
Bar R, Cohen M, Bentur Y, et al: Pre-labor exposure to carbon monoxide: should the neonate be treated
with hyperbaric oxygenation? Clin Toxicol 45(5):579, 2007
Barnes PJ: Asthma. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al: Harrison’s Principles of Internal
Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2018, p 1957

Baughman RP, Lower EE: Sarcoidosis. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al: Harrison’s
Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2018, p 2600
Beasley R, Holliday M, Reddel HK, et al: Controlled trial of Budesonide-Formoterol as needed for mild
asthma. N Engl J Med 380(21):2020, 2019
Belfort MA, Clark SL, Saade GR, et al: Hospital readmission after delivery: evidence for an increased
incidence of nonurogenital infection in the immediate postpartum period. Am J Obstet Gynecol
202:35.e1, 2010
Belgi RH, Venkataramanan R, Caritis SN, et al: Oseltamivir for influenza in pregnancy. Semin Perinatol
38(8):503, 2014
Bercovitch RS, Catanzaro A, Schwartz BS, et al: Coccidioidomycosis during pregnancy: a review and
recommendations for management. Clin Infect Dis 53(4):363, 2011
Blais L, Kettani FZ, Forget A: Relationship between maternal asthma, its severity and control and
abortion. Hum Reprod 28(4):908, 2013
Blais L, Suissa S, Boivin JF, et al: First treatment with inhaled corticosteroids and the prevention of
admissions to hospital for asthma. Thorax 53:1025, 1998
Blanc FX, Sok T, Laureillard D, et al: Earlier versus later start of antiretroviral therapy in HIV-infected
adults with tuberculosis. N Engl J Med 365(16):1471, 2011
Boczar M, Sawicka E, Zybert K: Meconium ileus in newborns with cystic fibrosis—results of treatment
in the group of patients operated on in the years 2000–2014. Dev Period Med 19(1):32, 2015
Boggess KA, Myers ER, Hamilton CD: Antepartum or postpartum isoniazid treatment of latent
tuberculosis infection. Obstet Gynecol 96:747, 2000
Bonham CA, Patterson KC, Strek ME: Asthma outcomes and management during pregnancy. Chest
153(2):515, 2018
Breslin N, Baptiste C, Gyamfi-Bannerman C, et al: COVID-19 infection among asymptomatic and
symptomatic pregnant women: Two weeks of confirmed presentations to an affiliated pair of New
York City hospitals. Am J Obstet Gynecol April 6. 2020
Briggs GG, Towers CV, Forinash CV: Drugs in Pregnancy and Lactation, 12th ed. Philadelphia, WoltersKluwer, 2022
Brito V, Niederman MS: Pneumonia complicating pregnancy. Clin Chest Med 32:121, 2011
Brustad N, Eliasen AU, Stokholm J, et al: High-dose vitamin D supplementation during pregnancy and
asthma in offspring at the age of 6 years. JAMA 321(10):1003, 2019
Caldwell JW, Asura EL, Kilgore WB, et al: Coccidioidomycosis in pregnancy during an epidemic in
California. Obstet Gynecol 95:236, 2000
Callaghan WM, Creanga AA, Jamieson DJ: Pregnancy-related mortality resulting from influenza in the
United States during the 2009–2010 pandemic. Obstet Gynecol 126:486, 2015
Cameron AJ, Skinner TA: Management of a parturient with respiratory failure secondary to cystic
fibrosis. Anaesthesia 60:77, 2005
Cantu J, Tita AT: Management of influenza in pregnancy. Am J Perinatol 30:99, 2013
Cantwell MF, Shehab ZM, Costello AM, et al: Congenital tuberculosis. N Engl J Med 330:1051, 1994
Cardonick EH, Naktin J, Berghella V: Neurosarcoidosis diagnosed during pregnancy by thoracoscopic
lymph node biopsy. J Reprod Med 45:585, 2000
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Severe methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
community-acquired pneumonia associated with influ-enza—Louisiana and Georgia—December
2006–January 2007. MMWR 56(14):325, 2007
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Treatment of tuberculosis disease. In Introduction to the
Core Curriculum on Tuberculosis: What the Clinician Should Know, 6th ed. 2013a

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Tuberculosis infection control. In Introduction to the Core
Curriculum on Tuberculosis: What the Clinician Should Know, 6th ed. 2013b
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Influenza (flu) vaccine and pregnancy. 2019a. Available at:
www.cdc.gov/vaccines/pregnancy/hcp-toolkit/flu-vaccine-pregnancy.html. Accessed October 16,
2021
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Tuberculosis (TB). 2019b. Available at:
www.cdc.gov/tb/statistics/surv/surv2018. Accessed October 16, 2021
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Evaluation and management considerations for neonates at
risk for COVID-19. 2020. Available at: www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/hcp/caring-fornewborns.html. Accessed October 15, 2021
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Guidelines for prevention and treatment of opportunistic
infections in adults and adolescents with HIV. 2021. Available at:
clinicalinfo.hiv.gov/sites/default/files/guidelines/documents/Adult_OI.pdf. Accessed October 15,
2021
Chan AL, Juarez MM, Gidwani N, et al: Management of critical asthma syndrome during pregnancy.
Clin Rev Allergy Immunol 45(1)45, 2015
Charlton RA, Hutchison A, Davis KJ, et al: Asthma management in pregnancy. PLoS One 8(4):e60247,
2013
Chen H, Guo J, Wang C, et al: Clinical characteristics and intrauterine vertical transmission potential of
COVID-19 infection in nine pregnant women: a retrospective review of medical records. Lancet
395(10226):809, 2020
Chen YH, Keller J, Wang IT, et al: Pneumonia and pregnancy outcomes: a nationwide population-base
study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 207:288.e1, 2012
Clifford C, Mhatre M, Craigo S: Successful use of extracorporeal membrane oxygenation for status
asthmaticus in a woman with a periviable pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 132(4):1007, 2018
Clifton VL: Managing asthma in pregnancy: effects on future child health. Lancet Respir Med 7(6):485,
2019
Close A, Gimovsky A, Macri C: Adult respiratory distress due to Legionnaires disease in pregnancy: a
case report. J Reprod Med 61(1–2):83, 2016
Cloutier MM, Baptist AP, Blake KV, et al: 2020 focused updates to the asthma management guidelines:
a report from the National Asthma Education and Prevention Program Coordinating Committee
Expert Panel Working Group. J Allergy Clin Immunol 146(6):1217, 2020
Cohen LF, di Sant Agnese PA, Friedlander J: Cystic fibrosis and pregnancy: a national survey. Lancet
2:842, 1980
Conlin AM, Bukowinski AT, Levine JA, et al: A follow-up comparative safety analysis of pandemic
H1N1 vaccination during pregnancy and risk of infant birth defects among U.S. military mothers.
Vaccine 36(20):2855, 2018
Crum NF, Ballon-Landa G: Coccidioidomycosis in pregnancy: case report and review of the literature.
Am J Med 119:993, 2006
Cruz CA, Caughey AB, Jasmer R: Postpartum follow-up of a positive purified protein derivative (PPD)
among an indigent population. Am J Obstet Gynecol 192:1455, 2005
Datkhaeva I, Has P, Fitzgerald K, et al: Outcomes of a negative rapid influenza diagnostic test in
pregnant women. Am J Perinatol 36(1):90, 2019
Davies JC, Moskowitz SM, Brown C, et al: VX-659-tezacaftor-ivacaftor in patients with cystic fibrosis
and one or two phe508del alleles. N Engl J Med 379(17):1599, 2018

Deighan M, Ash S, McMorrow R: Anaesthesia for parturients with severe cystic fibrosis: a case series.
Int J Obstet Anesth 23(1):75, 2014
Dennis EM, Hao Y, Tamambang M, et al: Tuberculosis during pregnancy in the United States:
racial/ethnic disparities in pregnancy complications and in-hospital death. PLoS One 13(3):e0194836,
2018
Dodds L, McNeil SA, Fell DB, et al: Impact of influenza exposure on rates of hospital admissions and
physician visits because of respiratory illness among pregnant women. CMAJ 17:463, 2007
Dolin R: Common viral respiratory infections. In Longo D, Fauci A, Kasper D, et al (eds): Harrison’s
Principles of Internal Medicine, 18th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2012, p 1485
Dombrowski MP: Asthma and pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 108:667, 2006
Dombrowski MP, Schatz M, Wise R, et al: Asthma during pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 103:5, 2004
Donahue JG, Kieke BA, King JP, et al: Association of spontaneous abortion with receipt of inactivated
influenza vaccine containing H1N1pdm09 in 2010–11 and 2011–12. Vaccine 35(40):5314, 2017
Dorman SE, Nahid P, Kurbatova EV, et al: Four-month rifapentine regimens with or without
moxifloxacin for tuberculosis. N Engl J Med 384(18):1705, 2021
Edenborough FP, Mackenzie WE, Stableforth DE: The outcome of 72 pregnancies in 55 women with
cystic fibrosis in the United Kingdom 1977–1996. BJOG 107:254, 2000
Edenborough FP, Stableforth DE, Webb AK, et al: The outcome of pregnancy in cystic fibrosis. Thorax
50:170, 1995
Edwards JE: Diagnosis and treatment of fungal infections. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al:
Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2018, p
1515
Efferen LS: Tuberculosis and pregnancy. Curr Opin Pulm Med 13:205, 2007
Elkharrat D, Raphael JC, Korach JM, et al: Acute carbon monoxide intoxication and hyperbaric oxygen
in pregnancy. Intensive Care Med 17:289, 1991
El-Messidi A, Czuzoj-Shulman N, Spence AR, et al: Medical and obstetric outcomes among pregnant
women with tuberculosis: a population-based study of 7.8 million births. Am J Obstet Gynecol
215(6):797.e1, 2016
Eltonsy S, Blais L: Asthma during pregnancy and congenital malformations: the challenging task of
separating the medication effect from asthma itself. J Allergy Clin Immunol 137(5):1623, 2016
Enriquez R, Pingsheng W, Griffin MR, et al: Cessation of asthma medication in early pregnancy. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 195:149, 2006
Ernst A, Zibrak JD: Carbon monoxide poisoning. N Engl J Med 339:1603, 1998
Esmail A, Sabur NF, Okpechi I, et al: Management of drug-resistant tuberculosis in special subpopulations including those with HIV co-infection, pregnancy, diabetes, organ-specific dysfunction,
and in the critically ill. J Thorac Dis 10(5):3102, 2018
Fanta CH: Asthma. N Engl J Med 360:1002, 2009
Finland M, Dublin TD: Pneumococcic pneumonias complicating pregnancy and the puerperium. JAMA
112:1027, 1939
Fitzsimmons SC, Fitzpatrick S, Thompson D, et al: A longitudinal study of the effects of pregnancy on
325 women with cystic fibrosis. Pediatr Pulmonol l13:99, 1996
Flores KF, Bandoli G, Chambers CD, et al: Asthma prevalence among women aged 18 to 44 in the
United States: national health and nutrition examination survey 2001–2016. J Asthma 57(7):693,
2020
Freedman MS, Ault K, Bernstein H: Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices recommended
immunization schedule for adults aged 19 years or older—United States, 2021. MMWR 70(6):193,

2021
Friedman P, Guo XM, Stiller RJ, et al: Carbon monoxide exposure during pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol
Surv 70(11):705, 2015
Gazmararian JA, Petersen R, Jamieson DJ, et al: Hospitalizations during pregnancy among managed
care enrollees. Obstet Gynecol 100:94, 2002
Getahun D, Ananth CV, Oyelese Y, et al: Acute and chronic respiratory diseases in pregnancy:
associations with spontaneous premature rupture of membranes. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med
20:669, 2007
Getahun H, Matteelli A, Chaisson R, et al: Latent Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection. N Engl J
Med 372:2127, 2015
Gidaya NB, Lee BK, Burstyn I, et al: In utero exposure to β-2-adrenergic receptor agonist drugs and
risk for autism spectrum disorders. Pediatrics 137(2):1, 2016
Gillet D, de Brackeleer M, Bellis G, et al: Cystic fibrosis and pregnancy. Report from French data
(1980–1999). BJOG 109:912, 2002
Gluck JC, Gluck PA: The effect of pregnancy on the course of asthma. Immunol Allergy Clin North Am
26:63, 2006
Greingor JL, Tosi JM, Ruhlmann S, et al: Acute carbon monoxide intoxication during pregnancy. One
case report and review of the literature. Emerg Med J 18:399, 2001
Grindheim G, Toska K, Estensen ME, et al: Changes in pulmonary function during pregnancy: a
longitudinal cohort study. BJOG 119:94, 2012
Gyi KM, Hodson ME, Yacoub MY: Pregnancy in cystic fibrosis lung transplant recipients: case series
and review. J Cyst Fibros 5(3):171, 2006
Hadid V, Patenaude V, Oddy L, et al: Sarcoidosis and pregnancy: obstetrical and neonatal outcomes in a
population-based cohort of 7 million births. J Perinat Med 43(2):201, 2015
Han Y, Lee JH, Chang JH, et al: Clinical features and outcomes in patients with pulmonary
complications during pregnancy and peripartum. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 33(7):1191, 2020
Harger JH, Ernest JM, Thurnau GR, et al: Risk factors and outcome of varicella-zoster virus pneumonia
in pregnant women. J Infect Dis 185:422, 2002
Havlir DV, Kendall MA, Ive P, et al: Timing of antiretroviral therapy for HIV-1 infection and
tuberculosis. N Engl J Med 365(16):1482, 2011
Hendler I, Schatz M, Momirova V, et al: Association of obesity with pulmonary and nonpulmonary
complications of pregnancy in asthmatic women. Obstet Gynecol 108(1):77, 2006
Heron M: Deaths: leading causes for 2015. Natl Vital Stat Rep 66(5):1, 2017
Hill WC, Paruolo JB, Giovino AC: Prophylaxis for tuberculosis in pregnant women. Clin Obstet Gynecol
62(4):846, 2019
Huang DT, Yealy DM, Filbin MR, et al: Procalcitonin-guided use of antibiotics for lower respiratory
tract infection. N Engl J Med 379(3):236, 2018
Huang YS, Liu CE, Lin SP, et al: Echinocandins as alternative treatment for HIV-infected patients with
Pneumocystis pneumonia. AIDS 33(8):1345, 2019
Irwin RS, French CL, Change AB, et al: Classification of cough as a symptom in adults and
management algorithms: CHEST guideline and expert panel report. Chest 153(1):196, 2018
Jacobs RF, Abernathy RS: Management of tuberculosis in pregnancy and the newborn. Clin Perinatol
15:305, 1988
Jain S, Self WH, Wunderink RG, et al: Community-acquired pneumonia requiring hospitalization among
U.S. adults. N Engl J Med 373:415, 2015

Jana N, Vasishta K, Saha SC, et al: Obstetrical outcomes among women with extrapulmonary
tuberculosis. N Engl J Med 341:645, 1999
Jenkins TM, Troiano NH, Grave CR, et al: Mechanical ventilation in an obstetric population:
characteristics and delivery rates. Am J Obstet Gynecol 188:549, 2003
Jensen ME, Murphy VE, Gibson PG, et al: Vitamin D status in pregnant women with asthma and its
association with adverse respiratory outcomes during infancy. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med
32(11):1820, 2019
Jin Y, Carriere KC, Marrie TJ, et al: The effects of community-acquired pneumonia during pregnancy
ending with a live birth. Am J Obstet Gynecol 188:800, 2003
Kao LW, Nañagas KA: Carbon monoxide poisoning. Med Clin North Am 89(6):1161, 2005
Keating D, Marigowda G, Burr L, et al: VX-445-tezacaftor-ivacaftor in patients with cystic fibrosis and
one or two Phe508del Alleles. N Engl J Med 379(17):1612, 2018
Kemppainen M, Lahesmaa-Korpinen AM, Kauppi P, et al: Maternal asthma is associated with
increased risk of perinatal mortality. PLoS One 13(5):e0197593, 2018
Kent NE, Farquharson DF: Cystic fibrosis in pregnancy. Can Med Assoc J 149:809, 1993
Kodadhala V, Obi J, Wessly P, et al: Asthma-related mortality in the United States, 1999 to 2015: A
multiple causes of death analysis. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 120(6):614, 2018
Kutlu T, Tugrul S, Aydin A, et al: Tuberculosis meningitis in pregnancy presenting as hyperemesis
gravidarum. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 20:357, 2007
Lai RP, Meintjes G, Wilkinson RJ: HIV-1 tuberculosis-associated immune reconstitution inflammatory
syndrome. Semin Immunopathol 38(2):185, 2016
Lazarus SC: Emergency treatment of asthma. N Engl J Med 363(8):755, 2010
Levison JH, Barbieri RL, Katx JT, et al: Hard to conceive. N Engl J Med 363(10):965, 2010
Lewinsohn DM, Leonard MK, LoBue PA, et al: Official American Thoracic Society/Infectious
Diseases Society of America/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention clinical practice
guidelines: diagnosis of tuberculosis in adults and children. Clin Infect Dis 65(2):111, 2017
Lewis PO, Khan I, Patel P: Successful stepdown treatment of pulmonary histoplasmosis with thriceweekly liposomal amphotericin B in a hospital-associated outpatient infusion centre: a case report. J
Clin Pharm Ther 43(2):269, 2018
Lim AS, Stewart K, Abramson MJ, et al: Multidisciplinary approach to management of maternal asthma
(MAMMA): a randomized controlled trial. Chest 145(5):1046, 2014
Lindley MD, Kahn KE, Bardenheier BH, et al: Burden and prevention of influenza and pertussis among
pregnant women and infants-United States. MMWR 68:885, 2019
Llewelyn M, Cropley I, Wilkinson RJ, et al: Tuberculosis diagnosed during pregnancy: a prospective
study from London. Thorax 55:129, 2000
Lo CP, Chen SY, Lee KW, et al: Brain injury after acute carbon monoxide poisoning: early and late
complications. AJR Am J Roentgenol 189(4):W205, 2007
Longo L: The biologic effects of carbon monoxide on the pregnant woman, fetus and newborn infant.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 129:69, 1977
Louie JK, Sailbay CJ, Kang M, et al: Pregnancy and severe influenza infection in the 2013–2014
influenza season. Obstet Gynecol 125(1):184, 2015
Mabie WC, Barton JR, Wasserstrum N, et al: Clinical observations on asthma in pregnancy. J Matern
Fetal Med 1:45, 1992
Madhi SA, Cutland CL, Kuwanda L, et al: Influenza vaccination of pregnant women and protection of
their infants. N Engl J Med 371(10):918, 2014

Maisel JA, Lynam T: Unexpected sudden death in a young pregnant woman: unusual presentation of
neurosarcoidosis. Ann Emerg Med 28:94, 1996
Mandell LA, Wunderink R: Pneumonia. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al: Harrison’s
Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2018, p 908
Mansour MK, Ackman JB, Branda JA, et al: Case 32–2015: a 57-year-old man with severe pneumonia
and hypoxemic respiratory failure. New Engl J Med 373:1554, 2015
Maxwell C, McGeer A, Tai KF, et al: No. 225-management guidelines for obstetric patients and
neonates born to mothers with suspected or probable severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS). J
Obstet Gynaecol Can 39(8):e130 2017
Mayer AP, Morris MF, Panse PM, et al: Does the presence of mediastinal adenopathy confer a risk for
disseminated infection in immunocompetent persons with pulmonary coccidioidomycosis? Mycoses
56(2):145, 2013
Mazurek JM, Syamlal G: Prevalence of asthma, asthma attacks, and emergency department visits for
asthma among working adults–national health interview survey, 2011–2016. MMWR 67(13):377,
2018
Mendola P, Laughon SK, Männistö TI, et al: Obstetric complications among US women with asthma.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 208(2):127.e1, 2013
Mendola P, Männistö TI, Leishear K, et al: Neonatal health of infants born to mothers with asthma. J
Allergy Clin Immunol 133(1):85, 2014
Mert A, Kumbasar H, Ozaras R, et al: Erythema nodosum: an evaluation of 100 cases. Clin Exp
Rheumatol 25:563, 2007
Mertz D, Lo CK, Lytvyn L, et al: Pregnancy as a risk factor for severe influenza infection: an individual
participant data meta-analysis. BMC Infect Dis 19(1):683, 2019
Metlay JP, Waterer GW, Long AC, et al: Diagnosis and treatment of adults with community-acquired
pneumonia. An official clinical practice guideline of the American Thoracic Society and Infectious
Diseases Society of America. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 200(7):e45, 2019
Moore AR, Rogers FM, Dietrick D, et al: Extrapulmonary tuberculosis in pregnancy masquerading as a
degenerating leiomyoma. Obstet Gynecol 111(2): 551, 2008
Moran GJ, Rothman RE, Volturo GA: Emergency management of community-acquired bacterial
pneumonia: what is new since the 2007 Infectious Diseases Society of America/American Thoracic
Society guidelines. Am J Obstet Gynecol 31:602, 2013
Moro RN, Scott NA, Vernon A, et al: Exposure to latent tuberculosis treatment during pregnancy. The
PREVENT TB and the iAdhere trials. Ann Am Thorac Soc 15(5):570, 2018
Morris A, Masur H: Pneumocystis infections. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al: Harrison’s
Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2018, p 1847
Munoz FM, Jamieson DJ: Maternal immunization. Obstet Gynecol 133(4):739, 2019
Murphy VE, Powell H, Wark PA: A prospective study of respiratory viral infection in pregnant women
with and without asthma. Chest 144(2):420, 2013a
Murphy VE, Wang G, Namazy JA, et al: The risk of congenital malformations, perinatal mortality and
neonatal hospitalization among pregnant women with asthma: a systematic review and metaanalysis. BJOG 120(7):812, 2013b
Musher DM, Thorner AR: Community-acquired pneumonia. N Engl J Med 371:1619, 2014
Muthuri SG, Venkatesan S, Myles PR, et al: Effectiveness of neuraminidase inhibitors in reducing
mortality in patients admitted to hospital with influenza A H1N1pdm09 virus infection: a metaanalysis of individual participant data. Lancet Respir Med 2:395, 2014

Nahid P, Dorman SE, Alipanah N, et al: Executive summary: Official American Thoracic
Society/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention/Infection Diseases Society of America clinical
practice guidelines: treatment of drug-susceptible tuberculosis. Clin Infect Dis 63(7):853, 2016
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute: Expert panel report 3: guidelines for the diagnosis and
management of asthma, 2007. Available at: www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health-topics/guidelines-fordiagnosis-management-of-asthma. Accessed January 10, 2020
Ng WF, Wong SF, Lam A, et al: The placentas of patients with severe acute respiratory syndrome: a
pathophysiological evaluation. Pathology 38:210, 2006
Nigam A, Prakash A, Pathak P, et al: Bilateral psoas abscess during pregnancy presenting as an acute
abdomen: atypical presentation. BMJ Case Rep 2013:pii:bcr2013200860, 2013
Nowadly C, Johnson-Arbor K, Boyle A: Severe unintentional first trimester carbon monoxide poisoning:
case report. Undersea Hyperb Med 45(4):453, 2018
Oboho IK, Reed C, Gargiullo P, et al: Benefit of early initiation of influenza antiviral treatment to
pregnant women hospitalized with laboratory-confirmed influenza. J Infect Dis 214(4):507, 2016
O’Leary ST, Riley LE, Lindley MC, et al: Obstetrician-Gynecologists’ strategies to address vaccine
refusal among pregnant women. Obstet Gynecol 133(1):40, 2019
Olson GL: Cystic fibrosis in pregnancy. Semin Perinatol 21:307, 1997
Paranyuk Y, Levine G, Figueroa R: Candida septicemia in a pregnant woman with hyperemesis
receiving parenteral nutrition. Obstet Gynecol 107:535, 2006
Patel EM, Swamy GK, Heine RP, et al: Medical and obstetric complications among pregnant women
with cystic fibrosis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 212:98.e1, 2015
Patel S, Lee RH: The case of the sinister spores: the patient was hospitalized for a menacing infection in
the second trimester of pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 208(5):417.e1, 2013
Pfeffer PE, Hawrylowicz CM: Vitamin D in asthma: mechanisms of action and considerations for
clinical trials. Chest 153(5):1229, 2018
Pilmis B, Jullien V, Sobel J, et al: Antifungal drugs during pregnancy: an updated review. J Antimicrob
Chemother 70(1):14, 2015
Powell H, Murphy VE, Taylor DR, et al: Management of asthma in pregnancy guided by measurement
of fraction of exhaled nitric oxide: a double-blind, randomised controlled trial. Lancet 378(9795):983,
2011
Prasad N, Huang QS, Wood T, et al: Influenza-associated outcomes among pregnant, postpartum, and
nonpregnant women of reproductive age. J Infect Dis 219(12):1893, 2019
Prevost MR, Fung Kee Fung KM: Tuberculous meningitis in pregnancy—implications for mother and
fetus: case report and literature review. J Matern Fetal Med 8:289, 1999
Prockop LD, Chichkova RI: Carbon monoxide intoxication: an updated review. J Neurol Sci 262(1–
2):122, 2007
Racusin DA, Fox KA, Ramin SM: Severe acute asthma. Semin Perinatol 37(4):234, 2013
Rasmussen SA, Jamieson DJ: 2009 H1N1 Influenza and pregnancy—5 years later. N Engl J Med
371:1373, 2014
Rasmussen SA, Jamieson DJ: Influenza and pregnancy: no time for complacency. Obstet Gynecol
133(1):23, 2019
Rasmussen SA, Smulian JC, Lednicky JA, et al: Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) and pregnancy:
what obstetricians need to know. Am J Obstet Gynecol 222(5):415, 2020
Raviglione MC: Tuberculosis. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al: Harrison’s Principles of
Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2018, p 1236

Rego de Figueiredo I, Vieira Alves R, Drummond Borges D, et al: Pneumocystosis pneumonia: a
comparison study between HIV and non-HIV immunocompromised patients. Pulmonology
25(5):271, 2019
Reynaud Q, Poupon-Bourdy S, Rabilloud M, et al: Pregnancy outcome in women with cystic fibrosisrelated diabetes. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 96(10):1223, 2017
Reynaud Q, Rousset Jablonski C, Poupon-Bourdy S, et al: Pregnancy outcome in women with cystic
fibrosis and poor pulmonary function. J Cyst Fibros 19(1):80, 2020
Robijn AL, Jensen ME, Gibson PG, et al: Trends in asthma self-management skills and inhaled
corticosteroid use during pregnancy and postpartum from 2004 to 2017. J Asthma 56(6):594, 2019
Rogers VL, Sheffield JS, Roberts SW, et al: Presentation of seasonal influenza A in pregnancy: 2003–
2004 influenza season. Obstet Gynecol 115(5):924, 2010
Rolston DH, Shnider SM, de Lorimer AA: Uterine blood flow and fetal acid–base changes after
bicarbonate administration to the pregnant ewe. Anesthesiology 40:348, 1974
Rosenstein NE, Emery KW, Werner SB, et al: Risk factors for severe pulmonary and disseminated
coccidioidomycosis: Kern County, California, 1995–1996. Clin Infect Dis 32:708, 2001
Rush B, Martinka P, Kilb B, et al: Acute respiratory distress syndrome in pregnant women. Obstet
Gynecol 129(3):530, 2017
Saad AF, Rahman M, Maybauer DM, et al: Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation in pregnant and
postpartum women with H1N1-related acute respiratory distress syndrome. Obstet Gynecol
127:241, 2016
Sackoff JE, Pfieffer MR, Driver CR, et al: Tuberculosis prevention for non-U.S.-born pregnant women.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 194:451, 2006
Schanzer DL, Langley JM, Tam TW: Influenza-attributed hospitalization rates among pregnant women
in Canada 1994–2000. J Obstet Gynaecol Can 29:622, 2007
Schatz M, Dombrowski MP, Wise R, et al: Asthma morbidity during pregnancy can be predicted by
severity classification. J Allergy Clin Immunol 112:283, 2003
Schatz M, Dombrowski MP, Wise R, et al: Spirometry is related to perinatal outcomes in pregnant
women with asthma. Am J Obstet Gynecol 194:120, 2006
Schechter MS, Quittner AL, Konstan MW, et al: Long-term effects of pregnancy and motherhood on
disease outcomes of women with cystic fibrosis. Ann Am Thorac Soc 10(3):213, 2013
Schlüter DK, Griffiths R, Adam A, et al: Impact of cystic fibrosis on birthweight: a population based
study of children in Denmark and Wales. Thorax 74(5):447, 2019
Schulte JM, Bryan P, Dodds S, et al: Tuberculosis skin testing among HIV-infected pregnant women in
Miami, 1995 to 1996. J Perinatol 22:159, 2002
Shaked E, Wainstock T, Sheiner E, et al: Maternal asthma: pregnancy course and outcome. J Matern
Fetal Neonatal Med 32(1):103, 2019
Shariatzadeh MR, Marrie TJ: Pneumonia during pregnancy. Am J Med 119:872, 2006
Sheffield JS, Cunningham FG: Management of community-acquired pneumonia in pregnancy. Obstet
Gynecol 114(4):915, 2009
Sherer DM, Osho JA, Zinn H, et al: Peripartum disseminated extrapulmonary tuberculosis simulating
ovarian carcinoma. Am J Perinatol 22:383, 2005
Shi D, Wang D, Meng Y, et al: Maternal vitamin D intake during pregnancy and risk of asthma and
wheeze in children: a systematic review and meta-analysis of observational studies. J Matern Fetal
Neonatal Med 34(4):653, 2021
Silverman RK, Montano J: Hyperbaric oxygen treatment during pregnancy in acute carbon monoxide
poisoning. A case report. J Reprod Med 42:309, 1997

Smith SM, Fahey T, Smucny J, et al: Antibiotics for acute bronchitis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
6:CD000245, 2017
Sobhy S, Babiker Z, Zamora J, et al: Maternal and perinatal mortality and morbidity associated with
tuberculosis during pregnancy and the postpartum period: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
BJOG 124(4):727, 2017
Sorscher EJ: Cystic fibrosis. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al: Harrison’s Principles of
Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2018, p 1986
Sosa LI, Njie GJ, Lobato MN, et al: Tuberculosis screening, testing, and treatment of U.S. health care
personnel: recommendations from the National Tuberculosis Controllers Association and CDC,
2019. MMWR 68(19):439, 2019
Spagnolo P, Rossi G, Trisolini R, et al: Pulmonary sarcoidosis. Lancet Respir Med 6(5):389, 2018
Sperling RS, Riley LE, Immunization and Emerging Infections Expert Work Group: influenza
vaccination, pregnancy safety, and risk of early pregnancy loss. Obstet Gynecol 131(5):799, 2018
Spinello IM, Johnson RH, Baqi S: Coccidioidomycosis and pregnancy: a review. Ann N Y Acad Sci
1111:358, 2007
Steinack C, Lenherr R, Hendra H, et al: The use of life-saving extracorporeal membrane oxygenation
(ECMO) for pregnant woman with status asthmaticus. J Asthma 54(1):84, 2017
Sterling TR, Njie G, Zenner D, et al: Guidelines for the treatment of latent tuberculosis infection:
recommendations from thhe National Tuberculosis Controllers Association and CDC, 2020. MMWR
69(1):1, 2020
Stoller KP: Hyperbaric oxygen and carbon monoxide poisoning: a critical review. Neurol Res 29(2):146,
2007
Stratton P, Mofenson LM, Willoughby AD: Human immunodeficiency virus infection in pregnant women
under care at AIDS Clinical Trials Centers in the United States. Obstet Gynecol 79:364, 1992
Sylvester-Armstrong KR, Duff P, Genç MR: Are peripartum stress-dose steroids necessary? Obstet
Gynecol 135(3):522, 2020
Tata LJ, Lewis SA, McKeever TM, et al: A comprehensive analysis of adverse obstetric and pediatric
complications in women with asthma. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 175:991, 2007
Taylor AW, Mosimaneotsile B, Mathebula U, et al: Pregnancy outcomes in HIV-infected women
receiving long-term isoniazid prophylaxis for tuberculosis and antiretroviral therapy. Infect Dis
Obstet Gynecol 2013:195637, 2013
Terlizzi V, Sciarrone A, Cook AC, et al: Extensive myocardial infarction in a fetus with cystic fibrosis
and meconium peritonitis. J Ultrasound Med 35(8):1826, 2016
Terraneo S, Polverino E, Cilloniz C, et al: Severity and outcomes of community acquired pneumonia in
asthmatic patients. Respir Med 108(11):1713, 2014
Therapeutic Research Center: inhaled corticosteroid dose comparison in asthma. 2017. Available at:
https://www.epocrates.com/sites/default/files/res/dacc/2017/InhaledCorticosteroidDoseComparePL1
704.pdf. Accessed February 24, 2020
Thorpe-Beeston JG, Madge S, Gyi K, et al: The outcome of pregnancies in women with cystic fibrosis
—single centre experience 1998–2011. BJOG 120(3):354, 2013
Tita AT, Andrews WW: Influenza vaccination and antiviral therapy in pregnant women. J Infect Dis
214(4):505, 2016
Torres A, Menéndez R: Hospital admission in community-acquired pneumonia. [Spanish]. Med Clin
(Barc) 131(6):216, 2008
Towers CV, Corcoran VA: Influence of carbon monoxide poisoning on the fetal heart monitor tracing: a
report of 3 cases. J Reprod Med 54(3):184, 2009

Traxler SA, Chavez V, Hadijiliadis D, et al: Fertility considerations and attitudes about family planning
among women with cystic fibrosis. Contraception 100(3):228, 2019
Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society: Chamber directory. 2021. Available at:
www.uhms.org/resources/chamber-directory.html. Accessed October 15, 2021
Varner MW, Rice MM, Anderson B, et al: Influenza-like illness in hospitalized pregnant and postpartum
women during the 2009–20120 H1N1 pandemic. Obstet Gynecol 118(3):593, 2011
Wallmüller C, Domanovits H, Mayr FB, et al: Cardiac arrest in a 35-year-old pregnant woman with
sarcoidosis. Resuscitation 83(6):e151, 2012
Walsh LK, Donelle J, Dodds L, et al: Health outcomes of young children born to mothers who received
2009 pandemic H1N1 influenza vaccination during pregnancy: retrospective cohort study. BMJ
366:l4151, 2019
Wang G, Murphy VE, Namazy J, et al: The risk of maternal and placental complications in pregnant
women with asthma: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med
27(9):934, 2014
Weaver LK, Hopkins RO, Chan KJ, et al: Hyperbaric oxygen for acute carbon monoxide poisoning. N
Engl J Med 347:1057, 2002
Wendel PJ, Ramin SM, Hamm CB, et al: Asthma treatment in pregnancy: a randomized controlled
study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 175:150, 1996
World Health Organization: Guidelines for treatment of drug-susceptible tuberculosis and patient care
(2017 update). 2017. Available at: https://www.who.int/tb/publications/2017/dstb_guidance_2017/en/.
Accessed February 17, 2020
Wright PF: Influenza. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al: Harrison’s Principles of Internal
Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2018, p 1382
Yeh JJ, Lin SC, Lin WC: Congenital tuberculosis in a neonate: a case report and literature review. Front
Pediatr 7:255, 2019
Yost NP, Bloom SL, Richey SD, et al: An appraisal of treatment guidelines for antepartum communityacquired pneumonia. Am J Obstet Gynecol 183: 131, 2000
Youssef D, Raval B, El-Abbassi A, et al: Pulmonary blastomycosis during pregnancy: case report and
review of the literature. Tenn Med 106(3):37, 2013
Yusen RD, Edwards LB, Kucheryavaya AY, et al: The registry of the International Society for Heart
and Lung Transplantation: thirty-second official adult lung and heart-lung transplantation report—
2015; focus theme: early graft failure. J Heart Lung Transplant 34(10):1264, 2015
Zairina E, Abramson MJ, McDonald CF, et al: A prospective cohort study of pulmonary function during
pregnancy in women with and without asthma. J Asthma 12:1, 2015
Zeeman GG, Wendel GD, Cunningham FG: A blueprint for obstetrical critical care. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 188:532, 2003
Zenner D, Kruijshaar ME, Andrews N, et al: Risk of tuberculosis in pregnancy: a national, primary carebased cohort and self-controlled case series study. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 185(7):779, 2012
Zhu H, Wang L, Fang C, et al: Clinical analysis of 10 neonates born to mothers with 2019-nCoV
pneumonia. Transl Pediatr 9(1):51, 2020
Zumla A, Raviglione M, Hafner R, et al: Tuberculosis. N Engl J Med 368:745, 2013

CHAPTER 55

Thromboembolic Disorders

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
THROMBOPHILIAS
ANTIPHOSPHOLIPID SYNDROME
THROMBOPHILIA SCREENING
DEEP-VEIN THROMBOSIS
LABOR AND DELIVERY
SUPERFICIAL VENOUS THROMBOPHLEBITIS
PULMONARY EMBOLISM
THROMBOPROPHYLAXIS
REFERENCES
During the past century, the frequency of venous thromboembolism (VTE)
during the puerperium decreased remarkably as early ambulation became
routine practice. Despite this and other advances in prevention and treatment,
thromboembolism remains a leading cause of maternal morbidity and
mortality (Abe, 2019). Thrombotic pulmonary embolism accounted for
almost 10 percent of pregnancy-related deaths in the United States between
2011 and 2015 (Creanga, 2017; Petersen, 2019).
The absolute incidence of VTE during pregnancy is low—1 or 2 cases
per 1000 pregnancies. However, the risk is approximately five times higher

than that among women who are not pregnant (Greer, 2015). Approximately
equal numbers of cases are identified antepartum and in the puerperium. But
deep-vein thrombosis alone is more frequent antepartum, and pulmonary
embolism is more common postpartum. During the first 6 weeks of the
puerperium, the estimated incidence of a thromboembolic complication is 22
events per 100,000 deliveries. Although still elevated, the risk falls to
approximately 3 cases per 100,000 deliveries during the second 6-week
postpartum period (Kamei, 2014). As many as 2 percent of these women
have postthrombotic syndrome (Govindappagari, 2020).

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Rudolf Virchow (1856) postulated that stasis, local trauma to the vessel
wall, and hypercoagulability predisposed to venous thrombosis. During
pregnancy, the risk for each of these rises. Compression of the pelvic veins
and inferior vena cava by the enlarging uterus renders the lower extremity
venous system particularly vulnerable to stasis. Marik and Plante (2008) cite
a 50-percent reduction in venous flow velocity in the legs that lasts from the
early third trimester until 6 weeks postpartum. This stasis is the most
constant predisposing risk factor for venous thrombosis. Venous stasis,
delivery, preeclampsia, and sepsis contribute to endothelial cell injury. Last,
as listed in the Appendix (p. 1228), the synthesis of most clotting factors is
markedly enhanced during pregnancy and favors coagulation.
Risk factors for developing VTE during pregnancy are shown in Table
55-1. The most important of these is a personal history of thrombosis.
Specifically, 15 to 25 percent of all VTE cases during pregnancy are
recurrent events (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists,
2020b). Another important individual risk factor is a genetically determined
thrombophilia. An estimated 20 to 50 percent of women who develop a
venous thrombosis during pregnancy or postpartum have an identifiable
underlying procoagulant genetic disorder (American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists, 2020a).
TABLE 55-1. Some Risk Factors Associated with an Increased Risk for
VTE

Calculated risks for thromboembolism are approximately doubled in
women with multifetal gestation, anemia, hyperemesis, hemorrhage, cesarean
delivery, obesity, preeclampsia, and postpartum infection (Waldman, 2013).
Scheres and coworkers (2020) had similar observations for women with
preeclampsia. Risks were significantly higher among women who had a
stillbirth or who underwent peripartum hysterectomy. Last, as discussed in

Chapter 57 (p. 1021), inflammatory bowel disease increases the risk two- to
threefold (Kim, 2019).

THROMBOPHILIAS
Several important regulatory proteins act as inhibitors in the coagulation
cascade (Fig. 55-1). Normal values for many of these proteins during
pregnancy are found in the Appendix (p. 1228). Inherited or acquired
deficiencies of these inhibitory proteins are collectively referred to as
thrombophilias. These can lead to hypercoagulability and recurrent VTE
(Connors, 2017). Although these disorders are collectively present in
approximately 15 percent of white European populations, they are
responsible for approximately 50 percent of all thromboembolic events
during pregnancy (Pierangeli, 2011). Some aspects of the more common
inherited thrombophilias related to VTE are summarized in Table 55-2.

FIGURE 55-1 Inherited thrombophilias and their effect(s) on the coagulation cascade.

TABLE 55-2. Inherited Thrombophilias and Their Association with Venous
Thromboembolism (VTE) in Pregnancy

■ Inherited Thrombophilias
Patients with inherited thrombophilic disorders often have a family history of
thrombosis. These mutations are also found in up to half of all patients who
present with VTE before the age of 45 years, particularly in those whose
event occurred in the absence of well-recognized risk factors. Of greatest
significance is a family history of sudden death due to pulmonary embolism
or a history of multiple family members requiring long-term anticoagulation
therapy because of recurrent thrombosis (Connors, 2017).

Antithrombin Deficiency
Synthesized in the liver, antithrombin is one of the most important inhibitors
of thrombin and inactivates thrombin and factor Xa (Rhéaume, 2016).
Notably, the rate of antithrombin interaction with its target is accelerated
over 1000–fo1d by heparin. Antithrombin deficiency may result from
hundreds of different mutations that are almost always autosomal dominant.
Type I deficiency results from reduced synthesis of biologically normal
antithrombin, and type II deficiency is characterized by normal levels of
antithrombin with reduced functional activity.

Homozygous antithrombin deficiency is lethal. Heterozygous deficiency
affects approximately 1 in 2500 individuals. It is the most thrombogenic of
the heritable coagulopathies. The risk for thrombosis correlates with the
degree of deficiency. Antithrombin deficiency is associated with a 25- to 50fold higher relative risk of VTE in the general population and a sixfold
increased risk of thromboembolic complications during pregnancy (Ilonczai,
2015). As shown in Table 55-2, those affected have an inordinately high risk
of VTE during pregnancy.
Sabadell and associates (2010) studied the outcomes of 18 pregnancies
complicated by antithrombin deficiency. Twelve of these women were
treated with therapeutic doses of low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH).
Three of the untreated patients suffered a thromboembolic episode compared
with none in the treated group. Untreated women also had a 50-percent risk
of stillbirth and fetal-growth restriction. By comparison, none of the treated
women had a stillbirth, but a fourth developed fetal-growth restriction.
Abbattista and coworkers (2020) reported a 7-percent risk of VTE for
women treated with LMWH during pregnancy and a 12-percent risk for those
not treated. Similar results were reported by Ilonczai and colleagues (2015).
Last, Garcia-Botella and associates (2016) described a mesenteric vein
thrombosis in a pregnant woman with antithrombin deficiency.
Given such risk, affected women are managed during pregnancy with
anticoagulation regardless of whether they have had a prior thrombosis
(Abbattista, 2020; Bates, 2018). When anticoagulation is necessarily
withheld, such as during surgery or delivery, or if VTE develops in an
anticoagulated woman, treatment with recombinant human antithrombin may
be protective (Paidas, 2016).

Protein C Deficiency
When thrombin is bound to thrombomodulin on endothelial cells of small
vessels, its procoagulant activities are neutralized. This binding also
activates protein C, a natural anticoagulant. It, in the presence of protein S,
controls thrombin generation, in part, by inactivating factors Va and VIIIa
(see Fig. 55-1). Protein C activity increases modestly but significantly
throughout the first half of pregnancy, and some have speculated that this
augmentation may play a role in maintaining early pregnancy through both
anticoagulant and inflammatory regulatory pathways (Said, 2010).

More than 160 different autosomal dominant mutations for the protein C
gene have been described (Louis-Jacques, 2016). The prevalence of
heterozygous protein C deficiency is 2 to 3 per 1000, but many of these
individuals do not have a thrombosis history because the phenotypic
expression is highly variable. These prevalence estimates correspond with
functional activity threshold values of 50 to 60 percent, which are used by
most laboratories. As shown in Table 55-2, these are associated with a sixto twelvefold higher risk for VTE (Lockwood, 2012). The rare cases of
homozygous protein C deficiency may cause fatal neonatal purpura
fulminans. Last, sepsis can result in purpura fulminans in the adult with
heterozygous protein C deficiency (Bendapudi, 2021).

Protein S Deficiency
This circulating anticoagulant is activated by protein C, which enhances the
capacity of protein S to inactivate factors Va and VIIIa (see Fig. 55-1).
Protein S deficiency may be caused by more than 130 different mutations,
with an aggregate heterozygous prevalence of approximately 0.3 to 1.3 per
1000 individuals (Louis-Jacques, 2016). Protein S deficiency may be
measured by antigenically determined free, functional, and total S levels. All
three decline substantively during normal gestation (Appendix, p. 1228).
Thus, the diagnosis in pregnant women—as well as in those taking certain
oral contraceptives—is difficult. If screening during pregnancy is necessary,
threshold values for free protein S antigen levels in the second and third
trimesters have been identified at <30 percent and <24 percent, respectively.
The risk of VTE in pregnancy is increased severalfold (see Table 55-2).
Among those with a positive family history, the VTE risk in pregnancy is 6 to
7 percent (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020a).
Conard and coworkers (1990) described thrombosis in five of 29
pregnant women with protein S deficiency. They, as well as Burneo and
colleagues (2002), reported maternal cerebral vein thrombosis. Neonatal
homozygous protein S deficiency is usually associated with purpura
fulminans, the fatal clinical phenotype.

Factor V Leiden Mutation
This is the most prevalent of the known thrombophilia syndromes and is
characterized by resistance of plasma to the anticoagulant effects of activated

protein C. There are several mutations that create this resistance, but the most
common is the factor V Leiden mutation. This missense mutation results from
a substitution of glutamine for arginine at position 506 in the factor V
polypeptide. As a result of this mutation, activated factor V is neutralized
approximately tenfold more slowly by activated protein C (see Fig. 55-1).
This leads to enhanced thrombin generation.
Heterozygous inheritance of factor V Leiden is the most common
heritable thrombophilia. It is found in 3 to 15 percent of select European
populations, 1.2 percent of African Americans, and 2.2 of Hispanic
Americans, but is virtually absent in African blacks and Asians (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020a). Women who are
heterozygous for factor V Leiden account for approximately 40 percent of
VTE cases during pregnancy. However, the actual risk among pregnant
women who are heterozygous and who do not have a personal history or a
first-degree relative with a thrombotic episode before age 50 years is 5 to 12
events per 1000 births (see Table 55-2). In contrast, this risk is at least 10
percent among pregnant women with a personal or family history. Pregnant
women who are homozygous without a personal or family history have a 1to 4-percent risk for VTE, whereas those with such a history have an
approximately 17-percent risk (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2020a).
Diagnosis during pregnancy is performed by DNA analysis for the mutant
factor V gene. Bioassay is not used because of the normal resistance that
develops after early pregnancy from alterations in other coagulation protein
concentrations. Of note, activated protein C resistance can also be caused by
antiphospholipid syndrome, which is described on page 979 and also
detailed in Chapter 62 (p. 1114).
To assess the prognostic significance of maternal factor V Leiden
mutation during pregnancy, Kjellberg and associates (2010) compared the
outcomes of 491 carriers with those of 1055 controls. All three of the
thromboembolic events occurred among the carriers. But, preterm birth rates,
birthweights, or hypertensive complication rates did not differ between the
two groups. In a prospective observational study of almost 5000 women
conducted by the Maternal-Fetal Medicine Units Network, the heterozygous
mutant gene incidence was 2.7 percent (Dizon-Townson, 2005). Of three
pulmonary emboli and one deep-vein thrombosis cases—a rate of 0.8 per
1000 pregnancies—none was among these carriers. Moreover, in the

heterozygous women, the risks of preeclampsia, placental abruption, fetalgrowth restriction, or pregnancy loss were not elevated. The investigators
concluded that universal prenatal screening for the Leiden mutation and
prophylaxis for carriers without a prior VTE is not indicated.

Prothrombin G20210A Mutation
This missense mutation in the prothrombin gene leads to excessive
accumulation of prothrombin, which may be converted to thrombin.
Prothrombin levels are increased approximately 30 percent in heterozygotes
and 70 percent in homozygotes (MacCallum, 2014). As with factor V Leiden,
a personal or family history of VTE in a first-degree relative before age 50
years raises the risk of VTE during pregnancy (see Table 55-2). For a
heterozygous carrier with such a history, the risk exceeds 10 percent. Without
such a history, heterozygous carriers of the mutation have less than a 1percent risk of VTE during pregnancy (American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists, 2020a).
Silver and coworkers (2010) tested nearly 4200 women for the
prothrombin G20210A mutation. A total of 157—or 3.8 percent—of the
women carried the mutation, and only one of these was homozygous. Carriers
had similar rates of pregnancy loss, preeclampsia, fetal-growth restriction,
and placental abruption compared with noncarriers. Three thromboembolic
events occurred in women who tested negative for the mutation.
Homozygous patients, or those who are doubly heterozygous for a
G20210A mutation with a factor V Leiden mutation, have a greater
thromboembolism risk than heterozygous carriers (Connors, 2017). Others
have provided detailed information on pregnancy outcomes in women with
such rare compound thrombophilias (Carroll, 2018; Lim, 2016).

Hyperhomocysteinemia
The most common cause of elevated homocysteine is the C667T thermolabile
mutation of the 5, 10– methylene–tetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR)
enzyme. Inheritance is autosomal recessive. Elevated homocysteine levels
may also result from deficiency of one of several enzymes involved in
methionine metabolism and from correctible nutritional deficiencies of folic
acid, vitamin B6, or vitamin B12. During normal pregnancy, mean

homocysteine plasma concentrations decline and make a diagnosis difficult
(Lockwood, 2002).
A metaanalysis by den Heijer and associates (2005) reported an
association between MTHFR polymorphisms and a slightly greater risk for
thrombosis in international studies, but no such association was found in
North American studies (den Heijer, 2005). The authors speculated that folic
acid supplementation could explain the difference. Recall that folic acid
serves as a cofactor in the remethylation reaction of homocysteine to
methionine. Similarly, the American College of Chest Physicians posited that
the lack of an association with thromboembolism could reflect the
physiological reductions in homocysteine levels associated with pregnancy
as well as the effects of widespread prenatal folic acid supplementation
(Bates, 2012). The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
(2020a) has concluded that there is insufficient evidence to support
assessment of MTHFR polymorphisms or measurement of fasting
homocysteine levels in the evaluation for VTE.

Other Thrombophilia Mutations
Protein Z is a vitamin K–dependent protein that serves as a cofactor in factor
Xa inactivation. Studies have found that low protein Z levels are associated
with an elevated thromboembolism risk in nonpregnant patients and may be
implicated in the pathogenesis of poor pregnancy outcomes (Almawi, 2013).
Similarly, plasminogen activator inhibitor type 1 (PAI-I) is an important
regulator of fibrinolysis. Certain polymorphisms in the gene promoter have
been associated with slightly higher VTE risks. Although these
thrombophilias may exacerbate risk among patients when coinherited with
other thrombophilias, the American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2020a) has concluded that evidence to recommend screening
is insufficient.

■ Acquired Thrombophilias
Some examples of acquired hypercoagulable states include antiphospholipid
syndrome (APS), heparin-induced thrombocytopenia, and cancer.

Antiphospholipid Syndrome

This prothrombotic disorder can affect both the venous and arterial
circulations. The deeper veins of the lower limbs and the cerebral arterial
circulation are the most frequent sites of venous and arterial thrombosis,
respectively (Garcia, 2018; Konkle, 2018). Besides thrombosis, the other
major clinical manifestations of APS are adverse obstetrical outcomes
(Table 11-4, p. 205). Criteria for APS include (1) at least one otherwise
unexplained fetal death at or beyond 10 weeks; (2) at least one preterm birth
before 34 weeks’ gestation because of eclampsia, severe preeclampsia, or
placental insufficiency; or (3) at least three unexplained consecutive
spontaneous abortions before 10 weeks. The syndrome is discussed in detail
in Chapter 62 (p. 1114).
Testing for antiphospholipid antibodies should be performed in women
with an unexplained arterial or venous thromboembolism or a history of one
fetal loss or three or more recurrent embryonic or fetal losses (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020a). At this time, preterm
severe preeclampsia and early-onset placental insufficiency do not support
such testing. That said, there is evidence that antiphospholipid positivity
confers a worse prognosis for pregnancies complicated by HELLP syndrome
(Pécourt, 2021). These patients should be tested for the presence of three
factors: (1) lupus anticoagulant, (2) anticardiolipin immunoglobulin G and M
(IgG and IgM) antibodies, and (3) anti-β2 glycoprotein-I IgG and IgM
antibodies. If any of these laboratory test results are positive, a confirmatory
test is performed 12 weeks later (Connors, 2017).
Based on their study of 750 singleton pregnancies complicated by APS,
Saccone and colleagues (2017) found that anticardiolipin antibody is the
most common sole antiphospholipid antibody present. Women with APS have
a 5- to 12-percent risk of thrombosis during pregnancy or the puerperium.
Indeed, up to 25 percent of these thrombotic events occur during pregnancy
or in the puerperium.

■ Thrombophilias and Pregnancy Complications
Contrary to past teaching, no definite causal link between inherited
thrombophilias and adverse pregnancy outcomes exists (Ormesher, 2017).
The confusion was caused by a number of observational studies that were
later followed by large prospective cohort studies. Currently, the American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020a) does not recommend

inherited thrombophilia screening for women with a history of fetal loss or
adverse pregnancy outcomes such as fetal-growth restriction, placental
abruption, and preeclampsia.
There are no convincing data that link inherited thrombophilias and fetal
loss. It follows that there is no benefit to aspirin or heparin therapy as might
accrue for recurrent pregnancy loss due to antiphospholipid antibodies
(Chap. 62, p. 1116). Stillbirths also are not more common with heterozygous
mutations, but there is a weak association with homozygous factor V Leiden
mutation (Silver, 2016). Last, there is insufficient evidence to screen for
inherited thrombophilias in women with a fetal death (Arachchillage, 2019).
Fetal-growth restriction also is not more common with inherited
thrombophilias (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists,
2020a; Infante-Rivard, 2002). Likewise, there have been a number of
prospective cohort studies that showed no association of inherited
thrombophilias with placental abruption (Dizon-Townson, 2005; Silver,
2010). Conversely, Alfirevic and coworkers (2002) reported an association
with these and both heterozygosity and homozygosity for factor V Leiden
mutations as well as heterozygous prothrombin G20210A mutation.
Studies showing an association of inherited thrombophilias and
preeclampsia also are conflicting (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2020a). One large systematic review and metaanalysis of
nearly 22,000 women did not show an association between factor V Leiden
or prothrombin gene mutations with preeclampsia (Rodger, 2010). Similarly,
a more recent prospective study failed to show an association between
preeclampsia and 12 hereditary thrombophilias (Fernandez Arias, 2019).
Thus, because of uncertainties in the magnitude of risk and in the benefits
of prophylaxis given to prevent pregnancy complications in women with
heritable thrombophilias, it remains unproven that universal screening is
indicated (Louis-Jacques, 2016). In contrast, the association between APS
and adverse pregnancy outcomes—including fetal loss, recurrent pregnancy
loss, and preeclampsia—is much stronger (Liu, 2019).

■ Thrombophilia Screening
Given the relatively high incidence of thrombophilia in the population and
the low incidence of VTE, universal screening during pregnancy is not costeffective. Thus, a selective screening strategy is required. The American

College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020a) recommends that
thrombophilia screening be considered in the following clinical
circumstances: (1) a personal history of VTE with or without a recurrent risk
factor such as fractures, surgery, or prolonged immobilization; and (2) a firstdegree relative (parent or sibling) with a history of a high-risk inherited
thrombophilia. As discussed previously, testing for inherited thrombophilias
in women who have experienced recurrent fetal loss or adverse pregnancy
outcomes is not recommended.
Methods of screening for the more common inherited thrombophilias are
shown in Table 55-3. Whenever possible, laboratory testing is performed at
least 6 weeks after the thrombotic event, while the patient is not pregnant,
and when she is not receiving anticoagulation or hormonal therapy. Last,
screening for hyperhomocysteinemia is not recommended (American College
of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020a).
TABLE 55-3. How to Test for Thrombophilias

DEEP-VEIN THROMBOSIS
■ Clinical Presentation
During pregnancy, most venous thromboses are confined to the deep veins of
the lower extremity. Most of these are located in the iliofemoral and iliac
veins without involvement of the calf veins (Chan, 2010). In contrast, in the
general population, more than 80 percent of deep-vein thromboses involve
calf veins (Huisman, 2015). The vast majority are left sided (Blanco-Molina,

2007). Greer (2003) hypothesizes that this results from compression of the
left iliac vein by the right iliac and ovarian arteries, both of which cross the
vein only on the left side. Yet, as described in Chapter 56 (p. 994), the ureter
is compressed more on the right side.
Signs and symptoms vary depending on the degree of occlusion and the
intensity of the inflammatory response. Classically, thrombosis involving the
lower extremity is abrupt in onset, and there is pain and edema of the leg and
thigh. The thrombus typically involves much of the deep-venous system to the
iliofemoral region. Occasionally, reflex arterial spasm causes a pale, cool
extremity with diminished pulsations. Calf measurements may identify a
discordance in size. Alternatively, there may be appreciable clot, yet little
pain, heat, or swelling. Importantly, calf pain, either spontaneous or in
response to squeezing or to Achilles tendon stretching—Homans sign—may
be caused by a strained muscle or contusion. Importantly, 30 to 60 percent
of women with a confirmed lower-extremity acute deep-vein thrombosis
(DVT) have an asymptomatic pulmonary embolism (p. 986).

■ Diagnosis
Clinical diagnosis of DVT is difficult without testing and is confirmed in
only 10 percent of cases (Hull, 1990). Another challenge is that many of the
common diagnostic tests that have been investigated extensively in
nonpregnant patients have not been validated appropriately in pregnancy
(Huisman, 2015). Shown in Figure 55-2 is one diagnostic algorithm that can
be used for evaluation of pregnant women. With a few modifications, we
follow a similar evaluation at Parkland Hospital.

FIGURE 55-2 Algorithm to evalate suspected venous thromboembolism in pregnancy depending upon
number of YEARS criteria met. Evidence of DVT should prompt compression ultrasound. aThe three
YEARS criteria are clinical signs of DVT, hemoptysis, and PE as the most likely diagnosis. bThe
American Thoracic Society and Society of Thoracic Radiology recommend CXR; cThe American
Society of Hematology recommends pulmonary V/Q scanning. CT = computed tomography; CTA =
computed tomography angiography; CXR = chest x-ray; DVT = deep-vein thrombosis; MR = magnetic
resonance; PE = pulmonary embolism; V/Q scan = ventilation perfusion scan. (From Bates, 2018;
Guyatt, 2012; Leung, 2011; van der Hulle, 2019; van der Pol, 2019.)

Compression Ultrasonography
With suspected DVT, the initial diagnostic test recommended is compression
ultrasonography of the proximal leg veins (American College of

Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020b). The diagnosis is based on the
noncompressibility and typical echoarchitecture of a thrombosed vein. For
nonpregnant patients with suspected thrombosis, the safety of withholding
anticoagulation for 1 week has been established in the setting of a normal
compression ultrasound examination (Birdwell, 1998). Serial compression
examinations are then performed because isolated undetected calf
thromboses that ultimately extend into the proximal veins will do so within 1
to 2 weeks of presentation in approximately a fourth of patients. In pregnant
women, however, normal findings with ultrasonography do not always
exclude a pulmonary embolism. This is because the thrombosis may have
already embolized or because it arose from iliac or other deep-pelvic veins,
which are less accessible to ultrasound evaluation.
Two studies are helpful for evaluating whether serial examinations are
necessary for pregnant women suspected of having a DVT. Chan and
associates (2013) studied 221 pregnant and postpartum women presenting
with a suspected DVT. The 205 women with a negative initial study result
underwent serial testing, which was negative in all cases. Of these, one
woman had a pulmonary embolism 7 weeks later. Le Gal and colleagues
(2012) studied 210 pregnant and postpartum women with a suspected DVT.
Of these, 177 women without a DVT were not anticoagulated and did not
undergo serial testing. Two had an objectively confirmed thrombosis
diagnosed within 3 months. In sum, these data suggest that a negative single
complete compression ultrasonography study may safely exclude the
diagnosis of DVT in most pregnant women.

Magnetic Resonance Imaging
This imaging technique allows excellent delineation of anatomical detail
above the inguinal ligament. Thus, in many cases, magnetic resonance (MR)
imaging is immensely useful for diagnosis of iliofemoral and pelvic vein
thrombosis. The venous system can also be reconstructed using MR
venography (Chap. 49, p. 875). MR imaging is 100-percent sensitive and 90percent specific for detection of venographically proven DVT in nonpregnant
patients (Erdman, 1990). Importantly, almost half of those without DVT were
found to have nonthrombotic conditions that included cellulitis, myositis,
edema, hematomas, and superficial phlebitis.

D-dimer Screening Tests
These specific fibrin degradation products are generated when fibrinolysin
(plasminogen) degrades fibrin, as occurs in thromboembolism. Their
measurement is usually incorporated into diagnostic algorithms for VTE in
nonpregnant patients (Righini, 2018). This method was shown to be accurate
in the YEARS study (van der Hulle, 2017). Screening with the D-dimer test
in pregnancy, however, is problematic for several reasons. Depending on
assay sensitivity, D-dimer serum levels rise with gestational age along with
substantively elevated plasma fibrinogen concentrations (Appendix, p. 1228)
(Johnson, 2019). Levels are also affected by multifetal gestation and
cesarean delivery (Hu, 2020; Miyamoto, 2020). Last, D-dimer concentrations
can also be elevated in pregnancy complications such as placental abruption,
preeclampsia, and sepsis (Cunningham, 2015).
Three large prospective studies have evaluated D-dimer testing in
pregnant women to diagnose VTE. Righini and colleagues (2018) found that
D-dimer measurement, bilateral leg ultrasound, and computed tomographyangiogram safely ruled out VTE. Subsequently, van der Pol and coworkers
(2019) used a pregnancy-adapted YEARS algorithm to diagnose suspected
pulmonary embolism. The algorithm used D-dimer measurements and clinical
suspicion to confirm VTE. With none of the clinical criteria present, and with
the D-dimer level <1000 ng/mL, or with one or more clinical criteria present
and with the D-dimer level <500 ng/mL, pulmonary embolism was safely
excluded (see Fig. 55-2). Last, the DiPEP study showed that neither clinical
risk factors nor D-dimer levels were accurate in identifying pulmonary
embolism in pregnant women (Goodacre, 2019). They concluded that
pregnant women with suspected pulmonary embolism should all undergo
imaging studies.
The findings of the YEARS study and subsequent others will no doubt
guide care. However, currently the American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2020b) recommends against the use of D-dimer assays to
diagnose VTE in pregnant women. We agree, and in our view, these positive
results need to be duplicated before adaptation of their widespread use in
pregnant women. Still, a negative D-dimer assay should be reassuring, unless
VTE is the most likely diagnosis (Viau-Lapointe, 2020).

■ Management of Venous Thromboembolism

Optimal management of VTE during pregnancy has not undergone major
clinical study to provide evidence-based practices. There is, however,
consensus for treatment with anticoagulation and limited activity.
Thrombophilia testing does not change treatment (Connors, 2017).
Anticoagulation is initiated with either unfractionated heparin (UFH) or
LMWH (Table 55-4). Although either type is acceptable, most recommend
one of the LMWHs (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists,
2020b; Kearon, 2016). The American Society of Hematology recommends
preferential use of LMWH during pregnancy because of better
bioavailability, longer plasma half-life, more predictable dose response,
reduced risks of osteoporosis and thrombocytopenia, and less frequent
dosing (Bates, 2018).
TABLE 55-4. Anticoagulation Regimen Definitions

The duration of full anticoagulation varies, and no studies have defined
the optimal duration for pregnancy-related thromboembolism. In nonpregnant
patients, evidence supports a minimum treatment duration of 3 months
(Kearon, 2012). For pregnant patients, the American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020b) recommends therapeutic
anticoagulation for 3 to 6 months followed by intermediate or prophylactic
therapy for the duration of pregnancy and the postpartum period. If the
woman is not breastfeeding, direct acting oral agents can be considered (p.
985).
Recall that pulmonary embolism develops in as many as 60 percent of
patients with untreated venous thrombosis, and anticoagulation decreases this
risk to less than 5 percent. In nonpregnant patients, the mortality rate with a
pulmonary embolism approximates 1 percent (Douketis, 1998; Pollack,
2011).
With DVT, over several days, leg pain dissipates. After symptoms have
abated, graded ambulation is begun. Elastic stockings are fitted, and
anticoagulation is continued. Recovery to this stage usually takes 7 to 10
days. Graduated compression stockings can be continued for 2 years after the
diagnosis to reduce the incidence of postthrombotic syndrome (Brandjes,
1997). Symptoms include chronic leg paresthesias or pain, intractable
edema, skin changes, and leg ulcers. According to the American Society of
Hematology, catheter-directed thrombolytic therapy does not mitigate against
this complication (Bates, 2018).

Unfractionated Heparin
This agent should be considered for the initial treatment of thromboembolism
and in situations in which delivery, surgery, or thrombolysis may be
necessary (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020b).
UFH can be administered by one of two alternatives: (1) initial intravenous
therapy followed by adjusted-dose subcutaneous UFH given every 12 hours;
or (2) twice-daily, adjusted-dose subcutaneous UFH with doses adjusted to
prolong the activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) into the therapeutic
range 6 hours post injection (Table 55-5).
TABLE 55-5. Some Recommendations for Thromboprophylaxis During
Pregnancy

For intravenous therapy, several protocols are acceptable. In general, if
UFH is used, it is initiated with a bolus intravenous dose of 70 to 100 U/kg,
which is 5000 to 10,000 U. This is followed by continuous intravenous
infusions beginning at 1000 U/hr or 15 to 20 U/kg/hr. This infusion rate is
titrated to achieve an aPTT 1.5 to 2.5 times control values (Linnemann,
2016). Intravenous anticoagulation is maintained for about 5 to 7 days, after
which treatment is converted to subcutaneous heparin to maintain the aPTT to
at least 1.5 to 2.5 times control throughout the dosing interval. For women
with lupus anticoagulant, aPTT does not accurately assess heparin
anticoagulation, and thus anti–factor Xa levels are preferred.

Low-molecular-weight Heparin
This is a family of derivatives of unfractionated heparin, and their molecular
weights average 4000 to 5000 daltons compared with 12,000 to 16,000
daltons for conventional heparin. None of these heparins cross the placenta,
and all exert their anticoagulant activity by activating antithrombin. UFH has
equivalent activity against factor Xa and thrombin compared with LMWHs,
which have greater activity against factor Xa than against thrombin. They
also have a more predictable anticoagulant response and fewer bleeding
complications than UFH because of their better bioavailability, longer halflife, dose-independent clearance, and decreased interference with platelets
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020b; Bates, 2018).
Their longer half-life prohibits neuraxial analgesia in laboring women.
LMWH compounds are cleared by the kidneys and must be used cautiously
when there is renal dysfunction.
Several studies have shown that VTE is treated effectively with LMWH
(Quinlan, 2004; Tapson, 2008). Using serial venograms, Breddin and
associates (2001) observed that these compounds were more effective than
UFH in reducing thrombus size without increasing mortality rates or major
bleeding complications. Several different treatment regimens using LMWH
for treatment of acute VTE are listed in Table 55-4 (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020b).
Whether LMWH requires adjustments during the course of pregnancy is
controversial (Berresheim, 2014). The American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists (2020b) recommends monitoring with an anti-Xa level 4
hours after an injection with dose adjustment to maintain a therapeutic level.
Large studies using clinical end points that demonstrate an optimal

therapeutic range or show that dose adjustments increase therapy, safety, or
efficacy are lacking. Accordingly, the American Society of Hematology and
others have concluded that routine monitoring with anti-Xa levels is difficult
to justify (Bates, 2018; McDonnell, 2017).
In general, heparin pharmacokinetics includes more rapid clearance of
heparins as pregnancy progresses. The peaks of anti-Xa activity of
enoxaparin (Lovenox) across pregnancy are shown in Figure 55-3. Similarly,
tinzaparin (Innohep) with a dosage of 75 to 175 U/kg/d was necessary to
achieve peak anti–factor Xa levels of 0.1 to 1.0 U/mL (Smith, 2004). In
studies of dalteparin (Fragmin) pharmacokinetics, conventional starting
doses of dalteparin—100 U/kg every 12 hours—were likely insufficient to
maintain full anticoagulation in pregnant women (Barbour, 2004; Jacobsen,
2003). Thus, slightly higher doses than that shown in Table 55-4 may be
required.

FIGURE 55-3 Anti–factor Xa activity with repeated daily administration of 40 mg enoxaparin
subcutaneously in nonpregnant women and those from each trimester (Data from Lebaudy, 2008).

Any concerns regarding teratogenicity of enoxaparin have been obviated
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020b; Bates, 2021).
A comprehensive study of 1267 pregnant women treated with tinzaparin
found no cases of heparin-induced thrombocytopenia, maternal deaths, or
complications from regional analgesia (Nelson-Piercy, 2011). A total of 43
women (3.4 percent) required medical intervention for bleeding. Of 15
stillbirths, four were judged as possibly being related to tinzaparin use.
LMWHs have been judged to be safe during breastfeeding (Bates, 2018).

Labor and Delivery
Women receiving either therapeutic or prophylactic anticoagulation should
be converted from LMWH to the shorter-half-life UFH in the last month of
pregnancy or sooner if delivery appears imminent. The purpose of
conversion to UFH has less to do with any risk of maternal bleeding at the
time of delivery, but rather with neuraxial blockade complicated by an
epidural or spinal hematoma (Chap. 25, p. 478). The Society for Obstetric
Anesthesia and Perinatology recommends that UFH low-dose
thromboprophylaxis be withheld for 4 to 6 hours; UFH intermediate-dose
thromboprophylaxis for 12 hours; and UFH therapeutic dose for 24 hours
before neuraxial analgesia (Leffert, 2018). For LMWH, the Society
recommends to withhold low doses for 12 hours; intermediate doses 12 to 24
hours; and therapeutic doses 24 hours.
If a woman begins labor while taking UFH, clearance can be verified by
an aPTT. Reversal of heparin with protamine sulfate—1 mg per 100 units
heparin with a maximum dose of 50 mg—is rarely required and is not
indicated with a prophylactic dose of heparin. For women in whom
anticoagulation therapy has temporarily been discontinued, pneumatic
compression devices are recommended.

Warfarin Compounds
Vitamin K antagonists are generally contraindicated because they readily
cross the placenta and cause fetal death and malformations from
hemorrhages. This is discussed in detail in Chapter 8 (p. 156). Their sole
antepartum use is in women with a mechanical heart valve (Daughety, 2020).
These compounds do not accumulate in breast milk and are thus safe during
breastfeeding.

Postpartum venous thrombosis is usually treated with intravenous heparin
and oral warfarin initiated simultaneously. The initial dose of warfarin is 5
to 10 mg for the first 2 days. Subsequent doses are titrated to achieve an
international normalized ratio (INR) of 2 to 3. To avoid paradoxical
thrombosis and skin necrosis from the early antiprotein C effect of warfarin,
these women are maintained on therapeutic doses of UFH or LMWH for 5
days and until the INR is in a therapeutic range for 2 consecutive days
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020b).
Treatment in the puerperium may require larger doses of anticoagulant.
Brooks and colleagues (2002) compared anticoagulation in postpartum
women with that of age-matched nonpregnant controls. The former required a
significantly larger median total dose of warfarin—45 versus 24 mg—and a
longer time—7 versus 4 days—to achieve the target INR.

Direct-acting Oral Anticoagulants
Of these newer oral anticoagulants, dabigatran (Pradaxa) inhibits thrombin
and rivaroxaban (Xarelto) and apixaban (Eliquis) inhibit factor Xa. These
agents are becoming the drugs of choice for nonpregnant subjects with
thromboembolism (Kruger, 2019). Currently, very few reports address these
newer agents during pregnancy and breastfeeding, and thus the human
reproductive risks are essentially unknown (Lameijer, 2018; Rosenbloom,
2019). Despite this, the GARFIELD-VTE study reported that direct-acting
oral anticoagulant use in pregnant women was gaining favor (Jerjes-Sanchez,
2021). Dabigatran crosses the placenta, however, it is unknown whether any
of these agents are excreted in breast milk (Bapat, 2014). At this time,
because of the potential for infant harm, a decision should be made to either
avoid breastfeeding or use an alternative anticoagulant, such as warfarin, in
breastfeeding women (Bates, 2021; Kruger, 2019).

■ Complications of Anticoagulation
Three significant complications associated with anticoagulation are
hemorrhage, thrombocytopenia, and osteoporosis. The latter two are unique
to heparin, and their risk may be reduced with LMWHs. The most serious
complication is hemorrhage, which is more likely if there has been recent
surgery or lacerations. Troublesome bleeding is also more likely if the
heparin dosage is excessive. Unfortunately, management schemes using

laboratory testing to identify when a heparin dosage is sufficient to inhibit
further thrombosis, yet not cause serious hemorrhage, have been
discouraging.

Heparin-induced Thrombocytopenia
There are two types—the most common is a nonimmune, benign, reversible
thrombocytopenia that develops within the first few days of therapy and
resolves in approximately 5 days without therapy cessation. The second is
the severe form of heparin-induced thrombocytopenia, which results from an
immune reaction involving IgG antibodies directed against complexes of
platelet factor 4 and heparin. The diagnosis of heparin-induced
thrombocytopenia (HIT) is based on a drop in the platelet count of more than
50 percent or thrombosis beginning 5 to 10 days after the start of heparin in
association with the appearance of platelet-activating HIT antibodies. The
fall in platelet count in HIT occurs rapidly—over a period of 1 to 3 days—
and is assessed relative to the highest platelet count after the start of heparin.
The typical nadir is 40,000 to 80,000 platelets per microliter (Greinacher,
2015).
Although the incidence of HIT is approximately 3 to 5 percent in
nonpregnant individuals, it is <0.1 percent in obstetrical patients (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020b). Fausett and coworkers
(2001) reported no cases among 244 heparin-treated gravidas compared with
10 among 244 nonpregnant patients. Accordingly, the American College of
Chest Physicians recommends against platelet count monitoring when the risk
of HIT is considered to be <1 percent (Linkins, 2012). In others, they suggest
monitoring every 2 or 3 days from day 4 until 14.
Women with a presumptive diagnosis of HIT should have laboratory
testing for antiplatelet antibodies or by functional assays. However, these
tests often require several days to return results, so initial management
should be directed by clinical findings. Heparin therapy is stopped, and
alternative anticoagulation initiated. LMWH may not be entirely safe because
it has some cross reactivity with UFH. The American Society of Hematology
recommends use of fondaparinux (Arixtra), which is a pentasaccharide factor
Xa inhibitor (Bates, 2018). Successful use in pregnancy has been reported
(De Carolis, 2015; Elsaigh, 2015). Last, platelet transfusions are avoided
(Greinacher, 2015).

Heparin-induced Osteoporosis
Bone loss may develop with long-term heparin administration—usually 6
months or longer—and is more prevalent in cigarette smokers. UFH can
cause osteopenia, and this is less likely with LMWHs. Women treated with
any heparin should be encouraged to take an oral daily 1500-mg calcium
supplement (Cunningham, 2005; Lockwood, 2012).

■ Anticoagulation and Abortion
The treatment of DVT with heparin does not preclude pregnancy termination
by careful curettage. After the products are removed without trauma to the
reproductive tract, full-dose heparin can be restarted in several hours.

■ Anticoagulation and Delivery
The effects of heparin on blood loss at delivery depend on several variables:
(1) dose, route, and timing of administration; (2) number and depth of
incisions and lacerations; (3) intensity of postpartum myometrial
contractions; and (4) presence of other coagulation defects. Blood loss
should not be greatly increased with vaginal delivery if there are no
lacerations, and the uterus promptly contracts. Unfortunately, such ideal
circumstances do not always prevail. Thus, heparin therapy generally is
stopped during labor and delivery.
The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020b)
recommends restarting UFH or LMWH no sooner than 4 to 6 hours after
vaginal delivery or 6 to 12 hours after cesarean delivery. From their review,
Moriuchi and associates (2019) found that thromboprophylaxis started
within 24 hours after cesarean delivery was safe. At Parkland Hospital, we
wait at least 24 hours to restart therapeutic-dose heparin after cesarean
delivery or after vaginal delivery with significant lacerations.

SUPERFICIAL VENOUS THROMBOPHLEBITIS
Thrombosis limited strictly to the superficial veins of the saphenous system
is typically associated with varicosities or as a sequela of an indwelling
intravenous catheter. It is treated with analgesia, elastic support, heat, and

rest. Superficial vein thrombosis raises the risk of DVT four- to six-fold. In a
metaanalysis of nonpregnant patients with thrombophlebitis, 18 percent had a
concomitant DVT and 7 percent had a pulmonary embolism (Di Minno,
2016). Although controversial, the American Society of Hematology suggests
LMWH therapy (Bates, 2018).

PULMONARY EMBOLISM
Although it causes approximately 10 percent of maternal deaths, pulmonary
embolism is relatively uncommon during pregnancy and the puerperium.
According to Marik and Plante (2008), 70 percent of gravidas presenting
with a pulmonary embolism have associated clinical evidence of DVT. And
recall that between 30 and 60 percent of women with a DVT will have a
coexisting silent pulmonary embolism.

■ Clinical Presentation
In almost 2500 nonpregnant patients with a proven pulmonary embolism,
symptoms included dyspnea in 82 percent, chest pain in 49 percent, cough in
20 percent, syncope in 14 percent, and hemoptysis in 7 percent (Goldhaber,
1999). Other predominant clinical findings typically include tachypnea,
apprehension, and tachycardia. In some cases, an accentuated pulmonic
closure sound, rales, and/or friction rub is heard.
Right axis deviation and T-wave inversion in the anterior chest leads may
be evident on the electrocardiogram. In most cases, chest radiography results
are normal. In others, nonspecific findings may include atelectasis, an
infiltrate, cardiomegaly, or an effusion. Vascular markings in the lung region
supplied by the obstructed artery can be lost. Although most women are
hypoxemic, a normal arterial blood gas analysis does not exclude pulmonary
embolism. Approximately a third of young patients have PO2 values >80 mm
Hg. Thus, the alveolar- arterial oxygen tension difference is a more useful
indicator of disease. More than 86 percent of patients with acute pulmonary
embolism will have an alveolar-arterial difference >20 mm Hg (Lockwood,
2012). Even with massive pulmonary embolism, signs, symptoms, and
laboratory data to support the diagnosis may be deceptively nonspecific.

■ Massive and Submassive Pulmonary Embolism
Defined as embolism causing hemodynamic instability, these account for 5 to
10 percent of cases (Handal-Örefice, 2019). Acute mechanical obstruction of
the pulmonary vasculature causes increased vascular resistance and
pulmonary hypertension followed by acute right ventricular dilation. In
otherwise healthy patients, significant pulmonary hypertension does not
develop until 60 to 75 percent of the pulmonary vascular tree is occluded
(Guyton, 1954). Moreover, circulatory collapse requires 75- to 80-percent
obstruction. This is depicted in Figure 55-4 and emphasizes that most acutely
symptomatic emboli are large and likely a saddle embolism (Singhal, 1973).
These are suspected when the pulmonary artery pressure is substantively
increased as estimated by echocardiography.

FIGURE 55-4 Schematic of pulmonary arterial circulation. Note that the cross-sectional area of the
pulmonary trunk and the combined pulmonary arteries is 9 cm. A large saddle embolism could occlude
50 to 90 percent of the pulmonary tree, causing hemodynamic instability. As the arteries give off distal
branches, the total surface area rapidly increases, that is, 13 cm for the combined five lobar arteries, 36
cm for the combined 19 segmental arteries, and more than 800 cm for the total 65 subsegmental arterial
branches. Thus, hemodynamic instability is less likely with emboli past the lobar arteries.

Submassive embolism is diagnosed when there is evidence of right
ventricular dysfunction (Handal-Örefice, 2019). The mortality rate
approaches 25 percent, which compares with a 1-percent rate without such

dysfunction (Kinane, 2008). It is important in these cases to infuse
crystalloids carefully and to support blood pressure with vasopressors.
Aggressive intravenous fluid infusion has been associated with worsening
right-sided ventricular dysfunction (Konstantides, 2014). As discussed on
page 988, oxygen treatment, tracheal intubation, and mechanical ventilation
are completed preparatory to thrombolysis, filter placement, or
embolectomy.

■ Diagnosis
In most cases, recognition of a pulmonary embolism requires a high index of
suspicion that prompts objective evaluation. Exposure of the mother and fetus
to ionizing radiation is a concern when investigating a suspected pulmonary
embolism during pregnancy. However, this concern is largely overruled by
the hazards of missing a potentially fatal diagnosis. Moreover, erroneously
assigning a diagnosis of pulmonary embolism to a pregnant woman is also
fraught with problems. It unnecessarily exposes the mother and fetus to the
risks of anticoagulation treatment and will impact delivery plans, future
contraception, and thromboprophylaxis during subsequent pregnancies.
Therefore, investigations should aim for diagnostic certainty (Cohen, 2020).
Diagnosis of a pulmonary embolism follows the same algorithm as for
DVT shown in Figure 55-2. In addition to compression ultrasound of the
extremities, if a pulmonary embolism is suspected, chest x-ray and
electrocardiogram may be revealing. Echocardiography is useful to detect
other conditions that mimic pulmonary embolism—acute myocardial
infarction, pericardial tamponade, and aortic dissection. Further imaging
with computed tomography (CT) scanning, MR imaging, or ventilationperfusion lung scanning confirms the diagnosis (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020b). As discussed later (p. 988), the
American Society of Hematology recommends lung scanning as the first-line
diagnostic tool (Bates, 2018). At Parkland Hospital we preferentially use
CT-pulmonary angiography for suspected pulmonary embolism.

Computed Tomographic Pulmonary Angiography
Multidetector CT-pulmonary angiography (CTPA) is the most commonly
employed technique to diagnose pulmonary embolism in nonpregnant
patients. The technique is described further in Chapter 49 (p. 874), and an

imaging example is shown in Figure 55-5. The estimated fetal radiation
exposure averages 0.45 to 0.6 mGy. The estimated maternal breast dose is 10
to 70 mGy (Waksmonski, 2014).

FIGURE 55-5 Axial image of the chest from a four-channel multidetector spiral computed
tomographic scan performed after administration of intravenous contrast. There is enhancement of the
pulmonary artery with a large thrombus on the right (arrow) consistent with pulmonary embolism.
(Reproduced with permission from Dr. Michael Landay.)

CTPA has many advantages, but we find that the higher resolution allows
detection of previously inaccessible smaller distal emboli that have uncertain
clinical significance. Similar observations have been reported by others
(Anderson, 2007; Hall, 2009). Bourjeily and colleagues (2012) performed a
follow-up study of 318 pregnant women who had a negative CTPA
performed for a suspected pulmonary embolism. All were seen 3 months
following their initial presentation or at 6 weeks postpartum. None of these
women were subsequently diagnosed with a thromboembolism.

Ventilation-Perfusion Scintigraphy Lung Scan

This technique involves a small dose of radiotracer such as intravenously
administered technetium-99m macroaggregated albumin. There is negligible
fetal and maternal breast radiation exposure—0.1 to 0.4 mGy. The scan may
not provide a definite diagnosis because many other conditions can cause
perfusion defects. Examples are pneumonia or local bronchospasm. Chan and
coworkers (2002) found that a fourth of ventilation-perfusion scans in
pregnant women were nondiagnostic. In these instances, CTPA is preferred
(Tromeur, 2017).
To compare the performance of lung scintigraphy and CTPA, Revel and
associates (2011) evaluated 137 pregnant women with suspected pulmonary
embolism. The two modalities performed comparably and had no significant
differences between the proportions of positive, negative, or indeterminate
results. Specifically, the proportion of indeterminate results for both
approximated 20 percent, Similarly, one systematic review concluded that
both CTPA and lung scintigraphy seem appropriate for exclusion of
pulmonary embolism during pregnancy (van Mens, 2017).

Intravascular Pulmonary Angiography
This requires catheterization of the right side of the heart and is considered
the reference test for pulmonary embolism. With newer-generation
multidetector CT scanners, however, the role of invasive pulmonary
angiography has been questioned. This is especially true given the higher
radiation exposure for the fetus (Konstantinides, 2014). Other detractions are
that it can be time consuming, uncomfortable, and associated with dyeinduced allergy and renal failure. It is reserved for confirmation when less
invasive tests are equivocal.

■ Management
Immediate treatment for pulmonary embolism is full anticoagulation similar
to that for DVT as discussed on page 982 and shown in Table 55-4. There
are several complementary procedures that may be indicated.

Vena Caval Filters
The woman who has very recently suffered a pulmonary embolism and who
must undergo cesarean delivery presents a particularly serious problem.

Reversal of anticoagulation may be followed by another embolus, and
surgery while fully anticoagulated frequently results in life-threatening
hemorrhage or troublesome hematomas. In these cases, placement of a vena
caval filter should be considered before surgery (Marik, 2008). Moreover, in
the very infrequent circumstances in which heparin therapy fails to prevent
recurrent pulmonary embolism from the pelvis or legs or in which embolism
develops from these sites despite heparin treatment, a vena caval filter may
also be indicated. Such filters can also be used following massive emboli in
patients who are not candidates for thrombolysis.
The device is inserted through either the jugular or femoral vein and can
be inserted during labor (Jamjute, 2006). Routine filter placement has no
added advantage to heparin given alone (Decousus, 1998). Retrievable
filters may be used as short-term protection and then removed 1 to 2 weeks
later (Liu, 2012). From their systematic review, Harris and colleagues
(2016) found that complication rates in pregnant women with vena caval
filters are comparable to those in nonpregnant patients. In another series of
24 filters placed in obstetrical patients, 29 percent had complications
including removal failure (Rottenstreich, 2019).

Thrombolysis
Compared with heparin, thrombolytic agents provide more rapid lysis of
pulmonary clots and improvement of pulmonary hypertension in lifethreatening cases (Bates, 2021; Goldhaber, 2018). In one study of
nonpregnant patients receiving heparin for an acute submassive pulmonary
embolism, those receiving the recombinant tissue plasminogen activator
alteplase had a lower risk of death or treatment escalation (Konstantinides,
2002). One metaanalysis of trials involving nonpregnant patients reported
that the risk of recurrence or death was significantly lower in patients given
thrombolytic agents and heparin compared with those given heparin alone—
10 versus 17 percent (Agnelli, 2002). Importantly, however, there were five
—2 percent—fatal bleeding episodes in the thrombolysis group and none in
the heparin-only group.
There have been several case reports and reviews of thrombolysis in
pregnant women. Leonhardt and coworkers (2006) identified 28 reports of
tissue plasminogen activator use during pregnancy. Ten cases were for
thromboembolism. Complication rates were similar to those in nonpregnant
patients, and the authors concluded that such therapy should not be withheld

during pregnancy if indicated. Akazawa and Nishida (2017) reviewed 13
cases of systemic thrombolytic therapy administered during the first 48 hours
after delivery. Blood transfusion was required in five of the eight cesarean
deliveries, including three cases of hysterectomy and two cases of hematoma
drainage. Sousa-Gomes and associates (2019) reviewed outcomes in 141
pregnant women undergoing thrombolysis for VTE or stroke. Maternal death
complicated 3 percent of cases, and major bleeding occurred in 9 percent.

Embolectomy
Given the efficacy of thrombolysis and filters, surgical embolectomy is
uncommonly indicated. Published experience with emergency embolectomy
during pregnancy is limited to case reports (Colombier, 2015; Saeed, 2014).
From their review, Ahearn and colleagues (2002) found that although the
operative risk to the mother is reasonable, the stillbirth rate is 20 to 40
percent.

THROMBOPROPHYLAXIS
A Cochrane review of guidelines for thromboprophylaxis in pregnancy
concluded that there is a lack of overall agreement about which women
should be offered thromboprophylaxis (Middleton, 2021). The American
Society of Hematology summarized that evidence-based recommendations
rely largely on observational studies and on data extrapolated from
nonpregnant patients. In many cases, this led them to suggest—rather than
recommend—various schemes for thromboprophylaxis (Bates, 2018). In an
earlier study, Cleary-Goldman and coworkers (2007) surveyed 151 fellows
of the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists and reported
that intervention without a clear indication is common. Table 55-5 lists
several consensus recommendations for thromboprophylaxis. In some cases,
more than one option is listed, thus illustrating the confusion that currently
reigns. It is important to emphasize that the decision to treat with
anticoagulation in pregnancy is influenced by personal VTE history, family
history of VTE, severity of thrombophilias, and additional risk factors such
as obesity, cesarean delivery, or prolonged immobility (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020a).

■ Prior Venous Thromboembolism
In general, either antepartum surveillance or heparin prophylaxis is
recommended for women with prior VTE but without a recurrent risk factor.
Tengborn and associates (1989), however, suggested that such management
may not be effective. They reported outcomes in 87 pregnant Swedish
women who had prior thromboembolic disease and were not tested for
thrombophilias. Despite unfractionated heparin prophylaxis, which was
usually 5000 U twice daily, 15 percent developed antepartum VTE
recurrence. This compared with 12 percent not given heparin.
Brill-Edwards and colleagues (2000) prospectively studied 125 pregnant
women with a single prior VTE. Antepartum heparin was not given, but
anticoagulant therapy was given for 4 to 6 weeks postpartum. Six women had
a recurrent venous thrombosis, but there were no recurrences in women
without a known thrombophilia or whose prior thrombosis was associated
with a temporary risk factor. A study of 88 women without antiphospholipid
antibodies and who were not given antithrombotic prophylaxis reported a
subsequent pregnancy- or puerperium-related VTE in 22 percent (De
Stefano, 2006). Of 20 women whose original thrombosis was associated
with a transient risk factor—not including pregnancy or oral contraceptive
use—there were no recurrences during pregnancy, but two during the
puerperium. These findings imply that women with a prior thrombosis in
association with a thrombophilia or in the absence of a temporary risk factor
generally should be given both antepartum and postpartum prophylaxis
(Connors, 2017). These data also suggest that for women with a prior VTE,
antithrombotic prophylaxis during pregnancy could be tailored according to
the circumstances of the original event.
It is important to emphasize that VTE may recur despite antithrombotic
prophylaxis. A study of 270 women who had at least one previous VTE
found that 10 percent suffered a recurrent VTE (Galambosi, 2014). Twelve
of these recurrences occurred early in pregnancy before the initiation of
antithrombotic prophylaxis, and 16 occurred despite prophylactic use of
LMWH.
Our practice at Parkland Hospital for many years for women with a
history of prior VTE was to administer subcutaneous UFH, 5000 to 7500
units two to three times daily. More recently, we have used 40 mg of
enoxaparin given subcutaneously daily with transition to UFH near delivery.

With either regimen, the recurrence of documented DVT embolization has
been uncommon.

■ Cesarean Delivery
The risk for DVT and especially for fatal thromboembolism rises many fold
following cesarean delivery compared with that after vaginal delivery. When
considering that a third of women giving birth in the United States yearly
undergo cesarean delivery, pulmonary embolism is understandably a major
cause of maternal mortality (Creanga, 2017; Petersen, 2019). That said, the
lack of consensus described earlier by Middleton and coworkers (2021)
creates considerable variation in the current recommendations promulgated
by the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, the Royal
College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists, and the American College of
Chest Physicians (Palmerola, 2016).
Adherence to individual society guidelines following cesarean delivery
confers a greater risk in some instances. According to the Society for
Maternal-Fetal Medicine (2020), if American College guidelines were
followed, only 1 percent of these women would be candidates for
thromboprophylaxis. Almost 85 percent of the same cohort would be given
thromboprophylaxis following Royal College guidelines and about 35
percent if American College of Chest Physician guidelines were followed.
Some comparisons of these thromboprophylaxis guidelines are shown in
Table 55-6.
TABLE 55-6. Thromboprophylaxis Guidelines for Women Undergoing
Cesarean Delivery

Since 2011, the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
(2020b) recommends placement of pneumatic compression devices before
cesarean delivery for all women not already receiving thromboprophylaxis.
This recommendation was based primarily on consensus and expert opinion.
For patients undergoing cesarean delivery with additional risk factors for
thromboembolism, both pneumatic compression devices and UFH or LMWH
may be recommended. The College stipulated that cesarean delivery in an
emergency setting should not be delayed because of the time necessary to
begin thromboprophylaxis.
Implementation of this strategy by the Hospital Corporation of America,
the largest for-profit obstetrical health care delivery system in the United
States, was associated with a reduction in deaths from pulmonary embolism
from 7 of 458,097 cesarean births to 1 of 465,880 cesarean births (Clark,
2011, 2014).
In 2016, the National Partnership for Maternal Safety published several
consensus recommendations for the prevention of maternal VTE (D’Alton,
2016). These recommendations included expanded use of antenatal
thromboprophylaxis for women hospitalized 3 days or longer, expanded use

of prophylaxis during and after vaginal delivery, and expanded use of
pharmacological prophylaxis to most women after cesarean delivery. In
response, Sibai and Rouse (2016) expressed concern that these new
recommendations derive from sparse data of questionable applicability to
obstetrical patients. They called for better quality evidence to measure the
benefits, harms, and costs of increased pharmacological thromboprophylaxis.
As aptly expressed by Macones (2017), “an intervention, such as increased
postcesarean pharmacologic thromboprophylaxis, where there are legitimate
concerns about efficacy and safety, requires a much higher degree of
evidence before a national guideline is implemented.” We agree with these
sentiments.

REFERENCES
Abbattista M, Gianiello F, Novembrino C, et al: Risk of pregnancy-related venous thromboembolism and
obstetrical complications in women with inherited type I antithrombin deficiency: a retrospective,
single-centre, cohort study. Lancet Haematol 7(4):e320, 2020
Abe K, Kuklina EV, Hooper WC, et al: Venous thromboembolism as a cause of severe maternal
morbidity and mortality in the United States. Semin Perinatal 43(4):e320, 2019
Agnelli G, Becattini C, Kirschstein T: Thrombolysis vs heparin in the treatment of pulmonary embolism.
Arch Intern Med 162: 2537, 2002
Ahearn GS, Hadjiliadis D, Govert JA, et al: Massive pulmonary embolism during pregnancy successfully
treated with recombinant tissue plasminogen activator. Arch Intern Med 162:1221, 2002
Akazawa M, Nishida M: Thrombolysis with intravenous recombinant tissue plasminogen activator during
early postpartum period: a review of the literature. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 96(5):529, 2017
Alfirevic Z, Roberts D, Martlew V: How strong is the association between maternal thrombophilia and
adverse pregnancy outcome? A systematic review. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 101:6, 2002
Almawi WY, Al-Shaikh FS, Melemedjian OK, et al: Protein Z, an anticoagulant protein with expanding
role in reproductive biology. Reproduction 146(2):R73, 2013
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Inherited thrombophilias in pregnancy. Practice
Bulletin No. 197, June 2018. Reaffirmed 2020a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Thromboembolism in pregnancy. Practice
Bulletin No. 196, June 2018. Reaffirmed 2020b
Anderson DR, Kahn SR, Rodger MA, et al: Computed tomographic pulmonary angiography vs
ventilation-perfusion lung scanning in patients with suspected pulmonary embolism: a randomized
controlled trial. JAMA 298:2743, 2007
Arachchillage DR, Makris M: Inherited thrombophilia and pregnancy complications: should we test?
Semin Thromb Hemost 45(1):50, 2019
Bapat P, Kedar R, Lubetsky A, et al: Transfer of dabigatran and dabigatran etexilate mesylate across
the dually perfused human placenta. Obstet Gynecol 123(6):1256, 2014
Barbour LA, Oja JL, Schultz LK: A prospective trial that demonstrates that dalteparin requirements
increase in pregnancy to maintain therapeutic levels of anticoagulation. Am J Obstet Gynecol

191:1024, 2004
Bates SM: Pulmonary embolism in pregnancy. Semin Respir Crit Care Med 42(2):284, 2021
Bates SM, Greer IA, Middledorp S, et al: VTE, thrombophilia, antithrombotic therapy, and pregnancy.
Chest 141:e691S, 2012
Bates SM, Rajasekhar A, Middeldorp S, et al: American Society of Hematology 2018 guidelines for
management of venous thromboembolism: venous thromboembolism in the context of pregnancy.
Blood Adv 2(22):3317, 2018
Bendapudi PK, Whalen MJ, Lahoud-Rahme M, et al: Case 7–2021: a 19-year-old man with shock,
multiple organ failure, and rash. N Engl J Med 384(30):953, 2021
Berresheim M, Wilkie J, Nerenberg KA, et al: A case series of LMWH use in pregnancy: should trough
anti-Xa levels guide dosing? Thromb Res 134(6):1234, 2014
Birdwell BG, Raskob GE, Whitsett TL, et al: The clinical validity of normal compression ultrasonography
in outpatients suspected of having deep venous thrombosis. Ann Intern Med 128:1, 1998
Blanco-Molina A, Trujillo-Santos J, Criado J, et al: Venous thromboembolism during pregnancy or
postpartum: findings from the RIETE Registry. Thromb Haemost 97:186, 2007
Bourjeily G, Khalil H, Raker C, et al: Outcomes of negative multidetector computed tomography with
pulmonary angiography in pregnant women suspected of pulmonary embolism. Lung 190:105, 2012
Brandjes DP, Buller HR, Heijboer H, et al: Randomised trial of effect of compression stockings in
patients with symptomatic proximal-vein thrombosis. Lancet 349:759, 1997
Breddin HK, Hach-Wunderle V, Nakov R, et al: Effects of a low-molecular-weight heparin on thrombus
regression and recurrent thromboembolism in patients with DVT. N Engl J Med 344:626, 2001
Brill-Edwards P, Ginsberg JS, Gent M, et al: Safety of withholding heparin in pregnant women with a
history of venous thromboembolism. N Engl J Med 343:1439, 2000
Brooks C, Rutherford JM, Gould J, et al: Warfarin dosage in postpartum women: a case-control study.
Br J Obstet Gynaecol 109:187, 2002
Burneo JG, Elias SB, Barkley GL: Cerebral venous thrombosis due to protein S deficiency in pregnancy.
Lancet 359:892, 2002
Carroll R, Rebarber A, Booker W, et al: Double versus single thrombophilias during pregnancy. J
Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 31(19):2590, 2018
Chan WS, Ray JG, Murray S, et al: Suspected pulmonary embolism in pregnancy. Arch Intern Med
162:1170, 2002
Chan WS, Spencer FA, Ginsberg JS: Anatomic distribution of deep vein thrombosis in pregnancy.
CMAJ 182:657, 2010
Chan WS, Spencer FA, Lee AY, et al: Safety of withholding anticoagulation in pregnant women with
suspected deep vein thrombosis following negative serial compression ultrasound and iliac vein
imaging. CMAJ 185(4):E194, 2013
Clark SL, Christmas JT, Frye DR, et al: Maternal mortality in the United States: predictability and the
impact of protocols on fatal postcesarean pulmonary embolism and hypertension-related intracranial
hemorrhage. Am J Obstet Gynecol 211:32, 2014
Clark SL, Meyers JA, Frye DK, et al: Patient safety in obstetrics—the Hospital Corporation of America
experience. Am J Obstet Gynecol 204(4):283, 2011
Cleary-Goldman J, Bettes B, Robinson JN, et al: Thrombophilia and the obstetric patient. Obstet
Gynecol 110:669, 2007
Cohen SL, Feizullayeva C, McCandish JA, et al: Comparison of international societal guidelines for the
diagnosis of suspected pulmonary embolism during pregnancy. Lancet Haematol 7(3):e247, 2020

Colombier S, Niclauss L: Successful surgical pulmonary embolectomy for massive perinatal embolism
after emergency cesarean section. Ann Vasc Surg 29(7):1452.e1, 2015
Conard J, Horellou MH, Van Dreden P, et al: Thrombosis and pregnancy in congenital deficiencies in AT
III, protein C or protein S: study of 78 women. Thromb Haemost 63:319, 1990
Connors JM: Thrombophilia testing and venous thrombosis. N Engl J Med 377(12):1177, 2017
Creanga AA, Syverson C, Seed K, et al: Pregnancy-related mortality in the United States, 2011–2013.
Obstet Gynecol 130(2):366, 2017
Croles FN, Nasserinejad K, Duvekot JJ, et al: Pregnancy, thrombophilia, and the risk of a first venous
thrombosis: systematic review and Bayesian meta-analysis. BMJ 359:j4452, 2017
Cunningham FG: Screening for osteoporosis. N Engl J Med 353:1975, 2005
Cunningham FG, Nelson DB: Disseminated intravascular coagulation syndromes in obstetrics. Obstet
Gynecol 126(5):999, 2015
D’Alton ME, Friedman AM, Smiley RM, et al: National partnership for maternal safety: consensus
bundle on venous thromboembolism. Obstet Gynecol 128(4):688, 2016
Daughety MM, Zilberman-Rudenko J, Shatzel JJ, et al: Management of anticoagulation in pregnant
women with mechanical heart valves. Obstet Gynecol Surv 75(3):190, 2020
De Carolis S, di Pasquo E, Rossi E, et al: Fondaparinux in pregnancy: could it be a safe option? A
review of the literature. Thromb Res. 135(6):1039, 2015
De Stefano V, Martinelli I, Rossi E, et al: The risk of recurrent venous thromboembolism in pregnancy
and puerperium without antithrombotic prophylaxis. Br J Haematol 135:386, 2006
Decousus H, Leizorovicz A, Parent F, et al: A clinical trial of vena caval filters in the prevention of
pulmonary embolism in patients with proximal deep-vein thrombosis. N Engl J Med 338:409, 1998
Den Heijer M, Lewington S, Clarke R: Homocysteine, MTHRF and risk of venous thrombosis: a metaanalysis of published epidemiological studies. Thromb Haemost 3:292, 2005
Di Minno MN, Ambrosino P, Ambrosini F, et al: Prevalence of deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary
embolism in patients with superficial vein thrombosis: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J
Thromb Haemost 14(5):964, 2016
Dizon-Townson D, Miller C, Sibai B, et al: The relationship of the factor V Leiden mutation and
pregnancy outcomes for mother and fetus. Obstet Gynecol 106:517, 2005
Douketis JD, Kearon C, Bates S, et al: Risk of fatal pulmonary embolism in patients with treated venous
thromboembolism. JAMA 279:458, 1998
Elsaigh E, Thachil J, Nash MJ, et al: The use of fondaparinux in pregnancy. Br J Haematol 168(5):762,
2015
Erdman WA, Jayson HT, Redman HC, et al: Deep venous thrombosis of extremities: role of MR
imaging in the diagnosis. Radiology 174:425, 1990
Fausett MB, Vogtlander M, Lee RM, et al: Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia is rare in pregnancy. Am
J Obstet Gynecol 185:148, 2001
Fernandez Arias M, Mazarico E, Gonzalex A, et al: Genetic risk assessment of thrombophilia in patients
with adverse obstetric outcomes. PLoS One 14(2):e0211114, 2019
Galambosi PJ, Ulander VM, Kaaja RJ: The incidence and risk factors of recurrent venous
thromboembolism during pregnancy. Thromb Res 134(2):240, 2014
Garcia D, Erkan D: Diagnosis and management of the antiphospholipid syndrome. N Engl J Med
378(21):2010, 2018
García-Botella A, Asenjo S, De la Morena-Barrio ME, et al: First case with antithrombin deficiency,
mesenteric vein thrombosis and pregnancy: multidisciplinary diagnosis and successful management.
Thromb Res 144:72, 2016

Goldhaber SZ, Visani L, De Rosa M: Acute pulmonary embolism: Clinical outcomes in the International
Cooperative Pulmonary Embolism Registry (ICOPER). Lancet 353:1386, 1999
Goodacre S, Horspool K, Nelson-Piercy C, et al: The DiPEP study: an observational study of the
diagnostic accuracy of clinical assessment, D-dimer and chest x-ray for suspected pulmonary
embolism in pregnancy and postpartum. BJOG 126:383, 2019
Govindappagari S, O’Shaughnessy FO, Huang Y, et al: Obstetric thromboembolism and risk for postthrombotic syndrome in months and years after delivery. Abstract No. 112, Am J Obstet Gynecol
222:S89, 2020
Greer IA: Clinical practice. Pregnancy complicated by venous thrombosis. N Engl J Med 373(6):540,
2015
Greer IA: Prevention and management of venous thromboembolism in pregnancy. Clin Chest Med
24:123, 2003
Greinacher A: Heparin induced thrombocytopenia. N Engl J Med 373(3):252, 2015
Guyatt GH, Akl EA, Crowther M, et al: Executive summary: antithrombotic therapy and prevention of
thrombosis, 9th ed: American College of Chest Physicians evidence-based clinical practice
guidelines. Chest 141:7S, 2012
Guyton AC, Lindsey AW, Gilluly JJ: The limits of right ventricular compensation following acute
increase in pulmonary circulatory resistance. Circ Res 2:326, 1954
Hall WB, Truitt SG, Scheunemann LP, et al: The prevalence of clinically relevant incidental findings on
chest computed tomographic angiograms ordered to diagnose pulmonary embolism. Arch Intern
Med 169:1961, 2009
Handal-Orefice RC, Moroz LA: Pulmonary embolism management in the critical care setting. Semin
Perinatol 43(4):205, 2019
Harris SA, Velineni R, Davies AH: Inferior vena cava filters in pregnancy: a systematic review. J Vasc
Interv Radiol 27(3):354, 2016
Hu W, Wang Y, Li J, et al: The predictive value of d-Dimer test for venous thromboembolism during
puerperium: a prospective cohort study. Clin Appl Thromb Hemost 26:1076029620901786, 2020
Huisman MV, Klok FA: Current challenges in diagnostic imaging of venous thromboembolism.
Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program 2015:202, 2015
Hull RD, Raskob GF, Carter CJ: Serial IPG in pregnancy patients with clinically suspected DVT: clinical
validity of negative findings. Ann Intern Med 112:663, 1990
Ilonczai P, Oláh Z, Selmeczi A, et al: Management and outcomes of pregnancies in women with
antithrombin deficiency: a single-center experience and review of literature. Blood Coagul
Fibrinolysis 26(7):798, 2015
Infante-Rivard C, Rivard G, Yotov W, et al: Absence of association of thrombophilia polymorphisms
with intrauterine growth restriction. N Engl J Med 347(1):19, 2002
Jacobsen AF, Qvigstad E, Sandset PM: Low molecular weight heparin (dalteparin) for the treatment of
venous thromboembolism in pregnancy. BJOG 110:139, 2003
Jamjute P, Reed N, Hinwood D: Use of inferior vena cava filters in thromboembolic disease during
labor: case report with a literature review. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 19:741, 2006
Jerjes-Sánchez C, Rodriguez D, Farjat E, et al: Pregnancy-associated venous thromboembolism: insights
from GARFILED-VTE. TH Open 5(1):e24, 2021
Johnson ED, Schell JC, Rodgers GM: The D-dimer assay. Am J Hematol 94(7):833, 2019
Kamei H, Navi BB, Sriram N, et al: Risk of a thrombotic event after the 6-week postpartum period. N
Engl J Med 370(14):1307, 2014

Kearon C, Akl EA, Comerota AJ, et al: Antithrombotic therapy for VTE disease: antithrombotic therapy
and prevention of thrombosis, 9th ed: American College of Chest Physicians evidence-based clinical
practice guidelines. Chest 141:e419S, 2012
Kearon C, Akl EA, Ornelas J, et al: Antithrombotic therapy for VTE disease: CHEST guidelines and
expert panel report. Chest 149(2):315, 2016
Kim YH, Pfaller B, Marson A, et al: The risk of venous thromboembolism in women with inflammatory
bowel disease during pregnancy and the postpartum period: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Medicine (Baltimore) 98(38):e17309, 2019
Kinane TB, Grabowski EF, Sharma A, et al: Case 7–2008: a 17-year-old girl with chest pain and
hemoptysis. N Engl J Med 358:941, 2008
Kjellberg U, van Rooijen M, Bremme K, et al: Factor V Leiden mutation and pregnancy-related
complications. Am J Obstet Gynecol 203:469.e1, 2010
Konstantinides S, Geibel A, Heusel G, et al: Heparin plus alteplase compared with heparin alone in
patients with submassive pulmonary embolism. N Engl J Med 347:1143, 2002
Konstantinides SV, Torbicki A, Agnelli G, et al: 2014 ESC guidelines on the diagnosis and management
of acute pulmonary embolism. Eur Heart J 35(43):3033, 2014
Kruger PC, Eikelboom JW, Douketis JD, et al: Deep vein thrombosis: update on diagnosis and
management. Med J Aust 210(11):516, 2019
Lameijer H, Aalberts J, van Veldhuisen D, et al: Efficacy and safety of direct oral anticoagulants during
pregnancy; a systematic literature review. Thromb Res 169:123, 2018
Le Gal G, Kercret G, Yahmed KB, et al: Diagnostic value of single complete compression
ultrasonography in pregnant and postpartum women with suspected deep vein thrombosis:
prospective study. BMJ 344:e2635, 2012
Lebaudy C, Hulot J, Amoura Z, et al: Changes in enoxaparin pharmacokinetics during pregnancy and
implications for antithrombotic therapeutic strategy. Clin Pharmacol Ther 84(3):370, 2008
Leffert L, Butwick A, Carvalho B, et al: The Society for Obstetric Anesthesia and Perinatology
consensus statement on the anesthetic management of pregnancy and postpartum women receiving
thromboprophylaxis or higher dose anticoagulants. Anesth Analg 126(3):928, 2018
Leonhardt G, Gaul C, Nietsch HH, et al: Thrombolytic therapy in pregnancy. J Thromb Thrombolysis
21:271, 2006
Leung AN, Bull TM, Jaeschke R, et al: An official American Thoracic Society/Society of Thoracic
Radiology Clinical Practice Guideline: evaluation of suspected pulmonary embolism in pregnancy.
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 184:1200, 2011
Lim MY, Deal AM, Musty MD, et al: Thrombophilic risk of individuals with rare compound factor V
Leiden and prothrombin G20210A polymorphisms: an international case series of 100 individuals.
Eur J Haematol 97(4):353, 2016
Linkins L-A, Dans AL, Moores LK, et al: Treatment and prevention of heparin-induced
thrombocytopenia. Chest 141:e495S, 2012
Linnemann B, Scholz U, Rott H, et al: Treatment of pregnancy-associated venous thromboembolismposition paper from the Working Group in Women’s Health of the Society of Thrombosis and
Haemostasis (GTH). Vasa 45(2):103, 2016
Liu L, Sun D: Pregnancy outcomes in patients with primary antiphospholipid syndrome: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. Medicine (Baltimore) 98(20):e15733, 2019
Liu Y, Sun Y, Zhang S, et al: Placement of a retrievable inferior vena cava filter for deep venous
thrombosis in term pregnancy. J Vasc Surg 55:1042, 2012

Lockwood C: Thrombosis, thrombophilia, and thromboembolism: clinical updates in women’s health
care. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists Vol. VI, No. 4, October 2007,
Reaffirmed 2012
Lockwood CJ: Inherited thrombophilias in pregnant patients: detection and treatment paradigm. Obstet
Gynecol 99:333, 2002
Louis-Jacques AF, Maggio L, Romero ST: Prenatal screening for thrombophilias. Clin Lab Med
36(2):421, 2016
MacCallum P, Bowles L, Keeling D: Diagnosis and management of heritable thrombophilias. BMJ
349:g4387, 2014
Macones GA: Patient safety in obstetrics. More evidence, less emotion. Obstet Gynecol 103(2):257,
2017
Marik PE, Plante LA: Venous thromboembolic disease and pregnancy. N Engl J Med 359:2025, 2008
McDonnell BP, Glennon K, McTiernan A, et al: Adjustment of therapeutic LMWH to achieve specific
target anti-FXa activity does not affect outcomes in pregnant patients with venous
thromboembolism. J Thromb Thrombolysis 43(1):105, 2017
Middleton P, Shepherd E, Gomersall J: Venous thromboembolism prophylaxis for women at risk during
pregnancy and the early postnatal period. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 3:CD001689, 2021
Miyamoto K, Komatus H, Nagaya Y, et al: Changes in serum D-dimer level and effect of enoxaparin
sodium after a cesarean section: a retrospective study. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 11:1, 2020
Moriuchi K, Chigusa Y, Kondoh E, et al: Enoxaparin administration within 24 hours of caesarean
section: a 6-year single-centre experience and patient outcomes. J Obstet Gynecol 39(4):451, 2019
Nelson-Piercy C, Powrie R, Borg JY, et al: Tinzaparin use in pregnancy: an international, retrospective
study of the safety and efficacy profile. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 159:293, 2011
Ormesher L, Simcox LE, Tower C, et al: To test or not to test, the arguments for and against
thrombophilia testing in obstetrics. Obstet Med 10(2):61, 2017
Paidas MJ, Triche EW, James AH, et al: Recombinant human antithrombin in pregnant patients with
hereditary antithrombin deficiency: integrated analysis of clinical data. Am J Perinatol 33(4):343,
2016
Palmerola KL, D’Alton ME, Brock CO, et al: A comparison of recommendations for pharmacologic
thromboembolism prophylaxis after caesarean delivery from three major guidelines. BJOG 123:2157,
2016
Pécourt M, Yelnik C, Ghesquiere L, et al: Is the presence of antiphospholipid antibodies a poor
prognostic factor for patients with HELLP syndrome? Am J Obstet Gynecol April 1, 2021 [Epub
ahead of print]
Petersen EE, Davis NL, Goodman D, et al: Vital signs: pregnancy-related deaths, United States, 2011–
2015, and strategies for prevention, 13 states, 2013–2017. MMWR 68:423, 2019
Pierangeli SS, Leader B, Barilaro G, et al: Acquired and inherited thrombophilia disorders in pregnancy.
Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am 38:271, 2011
Pollack CV, Schreiber D, Goldhaber SZ, et al: Clinical characteristics, management, and outcomes of
patients diagnosed with acute pulmonary embolism in the emergency department. JACC 57:700,
2011
Quinlan DJ, McQuillan A, Eikelboom JW: Low-molecular-weight heparin compared with intravenous
unfractionated heparin for treatment of pulmonary embolism: a meta-analysis of randomized,
controlled trials. Ann Intern Med 140:143, 2004
Revel MP, Cohen S, Sanchez O, et al: Pulmonary embolism during pregnancy: diagnosis with lung
scintigraphy or CT angiography? Radiology 258:590, 2011

Rhéaume M, Weber F, Durand M, et al: Pregnancy-related venous thromboembolism risk in
asymptomatic women with antithrombin deficiency: a systematic review. Obstet Gynecol 127(4):649,
2016
Righini M, Robert-Ebadi H, Elias A, et al: Diagnosis of pulmonary embolism during pregnancy: a
multicenter prospective management outcome study. Ann Intern Med 169(11):766, 2018
Rodger M: Evidence base for the management of venous thromboembolism in pregnancy. Hematology
Am Soc Hematol Educ Program 2010:173, 2010
Rosenbloom JI, Macones GA: Future research directions for prevention and treatment of obstetric
venous thromboembolism. Semin Perinatol 43(4):213, 2019
Rottenstreich A, Kalish Y, Elchalal U, et al: Retrievable inferior vena cava filter utilization in obstetric
patients. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 32(18):3045, 2019
Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists: Reducing the risk of venous thromboembolism
during pregnancy and the puerperium (Green-top Guidelines no. 37a). April, 2015
Sabadell J, Casellas M, Alijotas-Reig J, et al: Inherited antithrombin deficiency and pregnancy: maternal
and fetal outcomes. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 149:47, 2010
Saccone G, Berghella V, Maruotti GM, et al: Antiphospholipid antibody profile based obstetric outcomes
of primary antiphospholipid syndrome: the PREGNANTS study. Am J Obstet Gynecol
216(5):525.e1, 2017
Saeed G, Möller M, Neuzner J, et al: Emergent surgical pulmonary embolectomy in a pregnant woman:
case report and literature review. Tex Heart Inst J 41(2):188, 2014
Said JM, Ignjatovic V, Monagle PT, et al: Altered reference ranges for protein C and protein S during
early pregnancy: implications for the diagnosis of protein C and protein S deficiency during
pregnancy. Thromb Haemost 103:984, 2010
Scheres LJJ, Lijfering WM, Groenwegan NF, et al: Hypertensive complications of pregnancy and risk of
venous thromboembolism. Hypertension 75(3):781, 2020
Sibai BM, Rouse DJ: Pharmacologic thromboprophylaxis in obstetrics: broader use demands better data.
Obstet Gynecol 128(4):681, 2016
Silver RM, Saade GR, Thorsten V, et al: Factor V Leiden, prothrombin G20210A, and methylene
tetrahydrofolate reductase mutations and stillbirth: the Stillbirth Collaborative Research Network.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 215(4):468.e1, 2016
Silver RM, Zhao Y, Spong CY, et al: Prothrombin gene G20210A mutation and obstetric complications.
Obstet Gynecol 115:14, 2010
Singhal S, Henderson R, Horsfield K, et al: Morphometry of the human pulmonary arterial tree. Circ
Res 33:190, 1973
Smith MP, Norris LA, Steer PJ, et al: Tinzaparin sodium for thrombosis treatment and prevention during
pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 190:495, 2004
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine (SMFM); Pacheco LD, Saade G, et al: Thromboembolism
prophylaxis for cesarean delivery. Consult Series #5. August, 2020
Sousa-Gomes M, Guimarães M, Montenegro N: Thrombolysis in pregnancy: a literature review. J
Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 32(14):2418, 2019
Tapson VF: Acute pulmonary embolism. N Engl J Med 358:1037, 2008
Tengborn L, Bergqvist D, Matzsch T, et al: Recurrent thromboembolism in pregnancy and puerperium: is
there a need for thromboprophylaxis? Am J Obstet Gynecol 160:90, 1989
Tromeur C, van der Pol LM, Klok FA, et al: Pitfalls in the diagnostic management of pulmonary
embolism in pregnancy. Thromb Res 151 Suppl 1:S86, 2017

Van der Hulle T, Cheung W, Kooij S, et al: Simplified diagnostic management of suspected pulmonary
embolism (the YEARS study): a prospective, multicentre, cohort study. Lancet 390(10091):289, 2017
Van der Pol LM, Tromeur C, Bistervels IM, et al: Pregnancy-adapted YEARS algorithm for diagnosis
of suspected pulmonary embolism. N Engl J Med 380(12):1139, 2019
van Mens TE, Scheres LJ, de Jong PG, et al: Imaging for the exclusion of pulmonary embolism in
pregnancy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 1:CD011053, 2017
Viau-Lapointe J, Pier-Arsenault M: New evidence in diagnosis of pulmonary embolism during
pregnancy. Obstet Med 13(3):120, 2020
Virchow R: Gesammelte Abhandlungen zur wissenschaftlichen Medizin. Frankfurt: Medinger Sohn &
Co., 1856, p 219
Waksmonski CA: Cardiac imaging and functional assessment I pregnancy. Semin Perinatol 38(5):240,
2014
Waldman M, Sheiner E, Vardi IS: Can we profile patients at risk for thrombo-embolic events after
delivery: a decade of follow up. Am J Obstet Gynecol 208:S234, 2013

CHAPTER 56

Renal and Urinary Tract Disorders

PREGNANCY-INDUCED URINARY TRACT CHANGES
URINARY TRACT INFECTIONS
NEPHROLITHIASIS
PREGNANCY AFTER RENAL TRANSPLANTATION
POLYCYSTIC KIDNEY DISEASE
GLOMERULAR DISEASES
CHRONIC KIDNEY DISEASE
ACUTE KIDNEY INJURY
LOWER URINARY TRACT LESIONS
REFERENCES
Disorders of the kidneys and urinary tract are commonly encountered in
pregnancy. Some precede pregnancy—one example is nephrolithiasis.
Pregnancy-induced changes may predispose to the development or worsening
of urinary tract disorders—an example is the markedly increased risk for
pyelonephritis. Last, renal pathology unique to pregnancy, such as
preeclampsia, can develop. In one Australian study, kidney disorders had an
incidence of 0.3 percent in 407,580 births (Fitzpatrick, 2019).

PREGNANCY-INDUCED URINARY TRACT CHANGES
During normal pregnancy, significant changes in both structure and function
take place in the urinary tract (Chap. 4, p. 67). The kidneys become larger,
and dilation of the renal calyces and ureters can be striking. Some dilation
develops before 14 weeks and likely is due to progesterone-induced
relaxation of the muscularis. More marked dilation is apparent beginning in
midpregnancy and stems from ureteral compression, especially on the right
side. Vesicoureteral reflux also occurs during pregnancy. Important
consequences of these physiological changes are an increased risk of upper
urinary infection and erroneous interpretation of studies.
Evidence of functional renal hypertrophy becomes apparent very soon
after conception. Glomeruli are larger, although cell numbers are not greater
(Strevens, 2003). Intrarenal vasodilation lowers resistance of both afferent
and efferent arterioles, and leads to higher effective renal plasma flow and
glomerular filtration (Helal, 2012; Hussein, 2014). By 12 weeks’ gestation,
the glomerular filtration rate (GFR) is already 20 percent above nonpregnant
values (Hladunewich, 2004). Ultimately, renal plasma flow rises by 40
percent and GFR by 65 percent. Consequently, serum concentrations of
creatinine and urea decline substantively across pregnancy. Thus, values
within a nonpregnant normal range may be abnormal for pregnancy
(Appendix, p. 1232). Other alterations include those related to acid–base
homeostasis and osmoregulation.

■ Assessment of Renal Function During Pregnancy
Urinalysis results are essentially unchanged during normal pregnancy, except
for occasional glucosuria. In nondiabetic gravidas, glucosuria is thought to
stem from a pregnancy-related reduced rate of renal tubular glucose
reabsorption (Welsh, 1960). This normal physiological change may add
confusion and concerns for a gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) diagnosis.
Indeed, 1+ or greater urine dipstick readings have been associated with
subsequent GDM diagnosis later in pregnancy. Despite this association, urine
dipstick testing alone shows poor sensitivity to diagnose GDM (Buhlin,
2004; Olagbuji, 2015). For women with glucosuria, no guidelines in the
United States direct practice, but in the United Kingdom, early oral glucose
testing is considered for those with an isolated 2+ or repetitive 1+ urine

dipstick readings (National Institute for Health And Clinical Excellence,
2015). This seems to be a reasonable approach.
Protein excretion is slightly elevated, but it seldom reaches levels that
are detected by usual screening methods. Higby and colleagues (1994)
reported 24-hour protein excretion in normal pregnancy to be 115 mg, with a
95-percent confidence level of 260 mg/d (Chap. 4, p. 68). This value did not
significantly differ by trimester. Albumin constitutes only a small part of total
protein excretion, and amounts range from 5 to 30 mg/d. From their review,
Airoldi and Weinstein (2007) concluded that proteinuria must exceed 300
mg/d to be considered abnormal. Many consider 500 mg/d to be important
with gestational hypertension. As an initial surrogate for 24-hour collections,
quantification of the urinary protein-to-creatinine ratio in a spot urine sample
is helpful in estimating a 24-hour protein excretion rate. The ratio is nearly
the same numerically as the number of grams of protein excreted in urine per
day. This measurement is best obtained from a first morning void.
Surprisingly, women with lower urinary tract infections do not have more
proteinuria (Stephens, 2019).
Blood is another urinalysis marker. In one study, 3 percent of 4307
nulliparas who were screened before 20 weeks’ gestation had idiopathic
hematuria, defined as 1+ or greater blood on urine dipstick (Stehman-Breen,
2002). These women had a twofold higher risk of developing preeclampsia.
However, the link between preeclampsia and hematuria has not been found
by all (Brown, 2005; Shahriaki, 2016). In another study of 1000 women
screened during pregnancy, Brown and coworkers (2005) reported a 15percent incidence of dipstick microscopic hematuria. Most women had trace
levels of hematuria, and the false-positive rate with this tool was 40 percent.
Notably, other elements such as vitamin C, povidone-iodine, myoglobin, free
hemoglobin can produce false-positive results. Thus, positive dipstick
results should prompt formal urinalysis. Microscopic hematuria is defined as
>3 red blood cells (RBCs) per high-powered field (HPF).
For verified asymptomatic microscopic hematuria, few guidelines direct
the best evaluation. History and physical often point to benign causes. If not,
initial exclusion of infection by urinalysis or culture is reasonable. For early
glomerular disease, serum creatinine and blood urea nitrogen levels, a spot
protein-to-creatinine ratio or 24-hour urine collection, and urinalysis with
examination of urine sediment can aid diagnosis. With this last step,
proteinuria, dysmorphic RBCs, and cellular casts are characteristics. To help

exclude neoplastic or stone disease, magnetic resonance urography (MRU) of
the upper and lower urinary tract and cystoscopy is suitable in pregnancy
(Davis, 2012). However, the American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2017) recommends against the last steps to exclude cancer
for asymptomatic, low-risk, never-smoking women younger than 50 years
who have ≤25 RBCs seen per HPF.
If the serum creatinine level in pregnancy persistently exceeds 0.9 mg/dL
(75 µmol/L), intrinsic renal disease should be suspected (Wiles, 2019a). In
these cases, some determine the creatinine clearance as an estimate of the
GFR.
Of imaging tools, sonography informs on renal size, relative consistency,
and elements of obstruction. Full-sequence intravenous pyelography is not
done routinely. However, the clinical situation may warrant one-shot
pyelography, in which contrast medium injection is followed after 30
minutes by one or two abdominal radiographs (Chap. 49, p. 873). Magnetic
resonance (MR) imaging of renal masses provides excellent results due to its
excellent resolution at soft-tissue interfaces (Putra, 2009). Cystoscopy is
performed for the same indications as in the nonpregnant population.
Ureteroscopy similarly may be indicated and carries an approximate 5percent complication rate during stone removal during pregnancy (Johnson,
2012).
Although relatively safe during pregnancy, renal biopsy usually is
postponed unless results may change therapy. From a review of 243 biopsies
in pregnant women, the incidence of complications was 7 percent compared
with 1 percent in postpartum women (Piccoli, 2013). Lindheimer and
colleagues (2013) recommend its consideration for those with rapid
deterioration of renal function of unclear etiology or with symptomatic
nephrotic syndrome. We have found biopsy helpful in selected cases to direct
management. Renal biopsy performed in normal pregnant volunteers showed
that approximately 50 percent had slight to moderate glomerular
endotheliosis (Strevens, 2003). In contrast, all 27 women with proteinuric
hypertension had moderate to severe endotheliosis.

■ Pregnancy After Unilateral Nephrectomy
After removal of one kidney, a remaining normal kidney provides augmented
compensatory renal function. With pregnancy, this is further amplified.

Functional evaluation of the remaining kidney is essential, even though most
women have no difficulty in pregnancy. At minimum, the serum creatinine
level is measured and a urine spot protein:creatinine ratio is determined. No
long-term permanent consequences accompany kidney donation done before
pregnancy. However, the incidence of subsequent preeclampsia is greater
(Davis, 2019; Steele, 2019; Vannevel, 2018).

URINARY TRACT INFECTIONS
Asymptomatic or covert bacteriuria is frequent in pregnancy and is an
infection precursor. True infections of the urinary tract are the most prevalent
bacterial infections during pregnancy. Symptomatic infection includes
cystitis, or it may involve the renal calyces, pelvis, and parenchyma to cause
pyelonephritis.
Organisms from the normal perineal flora cause urinary infections.
Escherichia coli strains most commonly cause nonobstructive
pyelonephritis. In approximately 90 percent of these organisms, adhesins
such as P- and S-fimbriae are present. These are cell-surface protein
structures that enhance bacterial adherence to vaginal and uroepithelial cells
and virulence (Hooton, 2012; Spurbeck, 2011). Maternal deaths have been
attributed to E coli bearing Dr+ and P adhesins (Sledzińska, 2011).
Urinary stasis, vesicoureteral reflux, and diabetes mellitus predispose to
symptomatic upper urinary infections. Moreover, data suggest that pregnant
women have more severe sequelae from urosepsis. As one influence, the T
helper cell (Th1:Th2) ratio of normal pregnancy is reversed (Chap. 4, p. 61).
Additionally, various perturbations of cytokine expression have been
reported (Chaemsaithong, 2013).
In the puerperium, several risk factors also predispose a woman to
urinary infections. Bladder sensitivity to intravesical fluid tension is often
diminished as a consequence of labor trauma or conduction analgesia (Chap.
36, p. 638). Also, the sensation of bladder distention can be masked by
discomfort from an episiotomy, periurethral laceration, or vaginal wall
hematoma. Normal postpartum diuresis, while usually protective, may
worsen bladder overdistention, and catheterization performed to relieve
retention may lead to urinary infection.

■ Asymptomatic Bacteriuria
This refers to persistent, actively multiplying bacteria within the urinary tract
in asymptomatic women. It is defined as one or more bacterial species that
has a count ≥105 colony-forming units/mL determined by urine culture of a
voided specimen (Infectious Disease Society of America, 2019). Its
prevalence in sexually active nonpregnant women is 2 to 6 percent (Hooten,
2000; Nicolle, 2003). The highest incidence is in African-American
multiparas with sickle-cell trait, and the lowest incidence is in affluent white
women of low parity. Asymptomatic infection is also more common in
women with diabetes (Schneeberger, 2014). In most women, bacteriuria is
recurrent or persistent, and thus it frequently is discovered during prenatal
care. The incidence during pregnancy is similar to that in nonpregnant women
and varies from 2 to 7 percent (Nicolle, 2003).
Bacteriuria is typically already present at the time of the first prenatal
visit. An initial positive urine culture result should prompt treatment, after
which, fewer than 1 percent of women develop a symptomatic UTI (Whalley,
1967). It may be prudent to treat lower concentrations, because
pyelonephritis develops in some women with colony counts of only 20,000
to 50,000 organisms/mL (Lucas, 1993).

Significance
If asymptomatic bacteriuria (ASB) is not treated, approximately 25 percent
of affected women will develop symptomatic infection during pregnancy.
Eradication of bacteriuria with antimicrobial agents prevents most of these.
The American Academy of Pediatrics and the American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2017), as well as the U.S. Preventive
Services Task Force (2019), recommend screening for bacteriuria at the first
prenatal visit (Chap. 10, p. 181). Standard urine cultures may not be cost
effective when the prevalence is low. Instead, less expensive screening tests
such as the leukocyte esterase and nitrite dipstick are cost-effective (Chu,
2018). At Parkland Hospital, culture screening is done because of a 5- to 8percent prevalence of bacteriuria. Susceptibility determination is not
necessary because initial treatment is empirical (Hooton, 2012). Last, a
special agar-coated dipstick culture technique has excellent positive and
negative predictive values (Rogozińska, 2016).

Other than pyelonephritis prevention, it is unclear whether ASB treatment
provides other benefits. In many studies, there was no distinction from
symptomatic infection. For example, in a cohort of 25,746 mother-newborn
pairs, Schieve and coworkers (1994) reported UTI to be associated with
increased risks for low-birthweight neonates, preterm delivery, pregnancyassociated hypertension, and anemia. These findings vary from those of
Gilstrap and colleagues (1981b) and Whalley (1967), who studied
asymptomatic infection. A California database study reported 160,000
women with UTIs were treated in the emergency department or hospital
(Baer, 2021). These presumed symptomatic infections were associated with
a 1.4-fold higher preterm delivery rate in those <37 weeks.

Treatment
Bacteriuria responds to empirical treatment with any of several antimicrobial
regimens listed in Table 56-1. E coli is the most common species isolated in
pregnant women (Le Blanc, 1964; Nicolle, 2003). Selection can be based on
in vitro susceptibilities. However, in our extensive experience, empirical
oral treatment for 10 days with nitrofurantoin macrocrystals, 100 mg at
bedtime, is usually effective. Lumbiganon and associates (2009) reported
satisfactory results with a 7-day oral course of nitrofurantoin, 100 mg given
twice daily. Single-dose antimicrobial therapy also has been used with
success for bacteriuria. The important caveat is that, regardless of regimen
given, the recurrence rate approximates 30 percent. This may indicate covert
upper tract infection and the need for longer therapy.
TABLE 56-1. Oral Antimicrobial Agents Used for Treatment of Pregnant
Women with Asymptomatic Bacteriuria

Periodic surveillance is necessary to prevent recurrent UTIs
(Schneeberger, 2015). The first recurrence is considered a treatment failure
and extended therapy for 21 days is considered. For women with persistent
or frequent ASB, suppressive therapy for the remainder of pregnancy can be
given. We routinely use nitrofurantoin, 100 mg orally at bedtime. Its rare but
serious side effects are pulmonary and hepatic toxicity.

■ Cystitis and Urethritis

According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 7.2 percent of
pregnant women were treated as an outpatient for a UTI in 2014 (Ailes,
2018). Cystitis is characterized by dysuria, urgency, and frequency but causes
few associated systemic findings. Pyuria and bacteriuria are usually found.
Microscopic hematuria is common, and occasionally gross hematuria stems
from hemorrhagic cystitis. Although cystitis is usually uncomplicated, the
upper urinary tract may become involved by ascending infection. Almost 40
percent of pregnant women with acute pyelonephritis have preceding
symptoms of lower tract infection (Gilstrap, 1981a).
Women with cystitis respond readily to any of several regimens. Most of
the three-day regimens listed in Table 56-1 are usually 90-percent effective.
Single-dose therapy is less effective, and if it is used, concomitant
pyelonephritis must be confidently excluded.
Lower urinary tract symptoms with pyuria accompanied by a sterile urine
culture may be from urethritis caused by Chlamydia trachomatis.
Mucopurulent cervicitis usually coexists, and azithromycin therapy is
effective (Chap. 68, p. 1212).

■ Acute Pyelonephritis
Infection of the renal parenchyma is the most common serious nonobstetrical
medical complication of pregnancy. One study of the Nationwide Inpatient
Sample found that nearly 29,000 hospitalizations in 2006 were for acute
pyelonephritis in pregnancy (Jolley, 2012). The highest rates were noted for
adolescents at 17.5 per 1000 and for Hispanic women at 10.1 per 1000. In
another study of more than 70,000 pregnancies in a managed care
organization, 3.5 percent of antepartum admissions were for urinary
infections (Gazmararian, 2002). The seriousness is underscored by the
observations of Snyder and coworkers (2013) that pyelonephritis was the
leading cause of septic shock during pregnancy. Moreover, in a 2-year audit
of admissions to the Parkland Hospital Obstetrical Intermediate Care Unit,
12 percent of antepartum admissions were for sepsis caused by
pyelonephritis (Zeeman, 2003). Of concern, maternal urosepsis may be
related to an increased incidence of cerebral palsy in preterm newborns
(Jacobsson, 2002). Fortunately, data do not suggest serious long-term
maternal sequelae (Raz, 2003).

Clinical Findings
Renal infection develops more frequently in the second half of pregnancy,
and nulliparity and young age are risk factors (Hill, 2005). Pyelonephritis is
unilateral and right-sided in more than half of cases, and it is bilateral in a
fourth. Its abrupt onset is marked by fever, shaking chills, and aching pain in
one or both lumbar regions. Anorexia, nausea, and vomiting may worsen
dehydration. Tenderness usually can be elicited by percussion in one or both
costovertebral angles. The urinary sediment contains many leukocytes,
frequently in clumps, and numerous bacteria. The differential diagnosis
includes, among others, labor, chorioamnionitis, appendicitis, placental
abruption, or infarcted leiomyoma.
Bacteremia is demonstrated in 15 to 20 percent of these women. E coli is
isolated from urine or blood in 70 to 80 percent of infections, Klebsiella
pneumoniae in 3 to 5 percent, Enterobacter or Proteus species in 3 to 5
percent, and gram-positive organisms, including group B Streptococcus and
Staphylococcus aureus, in up to 10 percent of cases (Hill, 2005; Wing,
2000). Evidence of sepsis is common, and this is discussed in detail in
Chapter 50 (p. 888).
During care, plasma creatinine is monitored, because 5 percent of
pregnant women develop renal dysfunction despite aggressive fluid
resuscitation (Hill, 2005). Follow-up studies have demonstrated that this
endotoxin-induced damage is reversible in the long term (Whalley, 1975). In
up to 10 percent of women, varying degrees of respiratory insufficiency,
including frank pulmonary edema, may result from endotoxin-induced
alveolar injury (Cunningham, 1987; Sheffield, 2005; Snyder, 2013). In some
cases, pulmonary injury may be so severe that it causes acute respiratory
distress syndrome (ARDS).
Uterine activity from endotoxins is common and is related to fever
severity. In a study by Millar and associates (2003), women with
pyelonephritis averaged 5 contractions per hour at admission, and this
declined to 2 per hour within 6 hours of intravenous fluid and antimicrobial
administration. β-agonist therapy for tocolysis raises the likelihood of
respiratory insufficiency from permeability edema because of the sodiumand fluid-retaining properties of those agents (Chap. 50, p. 883). In one
study, the incidence of pulmonary edema in women with pyelonephritis who

were given β-agonists was 8 percent—a fourfold increase compared with
that expected (Towers, 1991).
Endotoxin-induced hemolysis is common, and approximately a third of
patients with pyelonephritis develop anemia (Cox, 1991). With recovery,
hemoglobin regeneration is normal because acute infection does not affect
erythropoietin production (Cavenee, 1994).

Management
One scheme for management of acute pyelonephritis is shown in Table 56-2.
Although we obtain blood cultures when the patient temperature exceeds
39°C, prospective trials show them to be of limited clinical utility (Wing,
2000). Intravenous hydration to ensure adequate urinary output is the
cornerstone of treatment. Antimicrobials also are begun promptly with the
caution that they may initially worsen endotoxemia from bacterial lysis.
Ongoing surveillance for worsening of sepsis is monitored by serial
determinations of urinary output, blood pressure, pulse, temperature, and
oxygen saturation. High fever should be lowered with a cooling blanket and
acetaminophen. This is especially important in early pregnancy because of
possible teratogenic effects of hyperthermia.
TABLE 56-2. Management of the Pregnant Woman with Acute
Pyelonephritis

Antimicrobial therapy usually is empirical, and ampicillin plus
gentamicin; cefazolin or ceftriaxone; or an extended-spectrum antibiotic were
all 95-percent effective in randomized trials (Sanchez-Ramos, 1995; Wing,
1998, 2000). Fewer than half of E coli strains are sensitive to ampicillin in
vitro, but gentamicin plus ampicillin or plus a cephalosporin generally have
a synergistic effect and excellent activity (Johnson, 2018). Serum creatinine
levels are monitored if nephrotoxic drugs are given. Initial treatment at
Parkland Hospital is ampicillin plus gentamicin. Some recommend suitable
substitutes if bacterial studies show in vitro resistance. With any of the
regimens discussed, response is usually prompt, and 95 percent of women
are afebrile by 72 hours (Hill, 2005; Wing, 2000). After discharge, most
recommend oral therapy to complete 10 to 14 days (Hooton, 2012; Johnson,
2018).
Recurrent infection—either covert or symptomatic—is common and
develops in 30 to 40 percent of women following completion of
pyelonephritis treatment. Unless other measures are taken to ensure urine

sterility, nitrofurantoin, 100 mg orally at bedtime given for the remainder of
the pregnancy, reduces bacteriuria recurrence.

Persistent Infection
Generally, stepwise defervescence of approximately 1°F per day follows
intravenous hydration and antimicrobial therapy. Upwards of 20 percent of
women are febrile for more than 4 days (Valent, 2017). With persistent
spiking fever or lack of clinical improvement by 48 to 72 hours, urinary tract
obstruction, calculi, or abscess is considered ( Johnson, 2018). In these
women, renal sonography is recommended to search for these.
Obstruction manifests by abnormal ureteral or pyelocaliceal dilation.
Nephrolithiasis, however, is not always seen in a renal sonogram (Butler,
2000; Maikranz, 1987). If stones are strongly suspected despite a
nondiagnostic sonographic examination, a plain abdominal radiograph will
identify nearly 90 percent. Another option is the modified one-shot
intravenous pyelography (p. 995) (Butler, 2000). Last, persistent infection
can be due to an intrarenal or perinephric abscess or phlegmon (Cox, 1988;
Rafi, 2012). MR imaging is preferred for abscess detection if renal
sonography is nonconclusive (Rubilotta, 2014).
Obstruction relief is important, and we have found that percutaneous
nephrostomy is preferable because the stents are more easily replaced.
Another method is cystoscopic placement of a double-J ureteral stent. These
stents are usually left in place until after delivery and often become encrusted
and need replacing (Lindquester, 2021). Last, in some women, surgical
removal of stones may be needed (p. 1000). Renal abscesses larger than 3
cm may necessitate percutaneous drainage or surgical treatment (Coelho,
2007; Mandal, 2017; Siegel, 1996).

Outpatient Management of Pyelonephritis
This is an option for nonpregnant women with uncomplicated pyelonephritis
(Fox, 2017; Johnson, 2018). Wing and colleagues (1999) described such
management in 92 pregnant women who were first given in-hospital
intramuscular ceftriaxone, two 1-g doses 24 hours apart. At this point, one
third of the group was considered suitable for outpatient therapy, and these
women were randomly assigned either to discharge and oral antimicrobials
or to continued hospitalization with intravenous therapy. A third of the

outpatient management group was unable to adhere to the treatment regimen
and was admitted. These findings suggest that outpatient management of
pyelonephritis is applicable only to very few pregnant women.

■ Reflux Nephropathy
This refers to loss of nephron mass from patchy interstitial scarring and
tubular atrophy due to high-pressure reflux of sterile urine from the bladder
to the kidneys. In adults, long-term complications include hypertension,
which may be severe if renal damage is demonstrable (Beck, 2018).
Moreover, reports describing 879 pregnancies in 432 women with reflux
nephropathy indicate that impaired renal function and bilateral renal scarring
were associated with higher rates of pregnancy-associated hypertensive
disorders (Attini, 2018). Many also had surgical correction of reflux as
children, and these women commonly have bacteriuria when pregnant (Mor,
2003). In other women with reflux nephropathy, no clear history implicates
recurrent cystitis, acute pyelonephritis, or obstructive disease (Gebäck,
2016). Chronic renal disease and pregnancy outcome is discussed further
later (p. 1003).

NEPHROLITHIASIS
Kidney stones develop in 9 percent of women during their lifetime with an
average age of onset in the third decade (Curhan, 2018). Calcium salts make
up approximately 80 percent of stones, and hyperparathyroidism should be
excluded. Calcium oxalate stones are most common in young nonpregnant
women, but in pregnancy most stones—65 to 75 percent—are calcium
phosphate or hydroxyapatite (Tan, 2013).
Nephrolithiasis is more common in women with prior pregnancies than in
nulligravidas. Normal physiological changes of the urinary system may
promote stone formation, and elevation of urinary pH reduces calcium
phosphate solubility (Reinstatler, 2017). More than half of patients who have
a stone typically form another stone within 10 years.
Contrary to past teachings, a low-calcium diet promotes stone formation.
Current recommendations to prevent recurrences include hydration and a diet
low in sodium and protein (Curhan, 2018). Thiazide diuretics also diminish

stone formation. In general, obstruction, infection, intractable pain, and heavy
bleeding are indications for stone removal. Extraction by a flexible basket
via cystoscopy, although used less often than in the past, is still a reasonable
consideration for pregnant women. In nonpregnant patients, stone destruction
by lithotripsy is preferred to surgical therapy in most cases. Limited
information guides the use of lithotripsy during pregnancy, and it is not
generally recommended.

■ Stone Disease During Pregnancy
The reported incidence of stone disease complicating pregnancy varies
widely. At the low end, Butler and coworkers (2000) found an incidence of
0.3 admissions per 1000 pregnancies in more than 186,000 deliveries at
Parkland Hospital. In an Israeli study, the incidence in nearly 220,000
pregnancies was 0.8 per 1000 (Rosenberg, 2011). Most stone episodes are
diagnosed in the second and third trimesters of pregnancy (Dai, 2021).
Bladder stones are rare, but recurrent infection and labor obstructed by
stones have been reported (Ait Benkaddour, 2006; Ruan, 2011).
Data are conflicting whether women with kidney stones have an
increased risk for adverse pregnancy outcomes. Swartz and colleagues
(2007) reported a preterm delivery rate of 10.6 percent in women with
nephrolithiasis compared with 6.4 percent in normal controls. A nationwide
case-control study from Taiwan also reported 20- to 40-percent increases in
low-birthweight newborns and preterm births (Chung, 2013). To the contrary,
a case-control study from Hungary reported that pregnancy outcomes,
including preterm delivery, were similar in women with and without stone
disease (Banhidy, 2007). Comparable conclusions were drawn from the
Israeli study noted earlier (Rosenberg, 2011). Women who have formed
stones prior to pregnancy have a higher incidence of gestational diabetes and
preeclampsia (Tangren, 2018).

Diagnosis
More than 90 percent of pregnant women with nephrolithiasis present with
pain. However, some evidence suggests that pregnant women may have
fewer symptoms with stone passage because of normal urinary tract dilation
(Tan, 2013). Gross hematuria is less common than in nonpregnant women and
has an incidence of 2 to 23 percent (Butler, 2000; Lewis, 2003).

Sonography is the first-line study to visualize stones, but as discussed
above, many are undetected (McAleer, 2004). Abnormal urinary tract
dilation or absent ureteral “jets” of urine into the bladder are indirect
indicators of urolithiasis (Fig. 56-1). If abnormal dilation is seen but no
stone is visualized, one-shot pyelography may be useful.

FIGURE 56-1 A. Sonographic image of the right upper quadrant demonstrates severe hydronephrosis
and thinned echogenic renal parenchyma. B. Application of color Doppler during sonography of the
bladder reveals a urine jet (red streak) from the left ureteral orifice. No flow was noted from the right
orifice during observation. C. Sagittal CT image shows an obstructing stone in the mid right ureter
(arrow) and hydroureteronephrosis (arrow head ).

Helical computed tomography (CT) scanning is preferred imaging for
nonpregnant individuals. In pregnancy, MR imaging is the second-line test
following a nondiagnostic sonographic evaluation (Masselli, 2013).
However, if CT imaging is needed, White and colleagues (2007) recommend
unenhanced helical CT and cite an average fetal radiation dose to be 7 mGy.

Management
Treatment depends on symptoms and gestational age (Semins, 2013).
Intravenous hydration and analgesics are given. Patients strain collected
urine to identify passed stones. In half of women with symptomatic stones,
infection will be identified, and this is treated vigorously. Although calculi
infrequently cause symptomatic obstruction during pregnancy, persistent
pyelonephritis should prompt a search for obstruction due to nephrolithiasis.
Approximately 75 percent of symptomatic women will improve with
conservative therapy, and the stone usually passes spontaneously (Tan,
2013). Others require an invasive procedure such as ureteral stenting,
ureteroscopy, percutaneous nephrostomy, transureteral laser lithotripsy, or
basket extraction (Butler, 2000; Hosseini, 2017). Watterson and coworkers

(2002) described successful transureteral holmium:YAG laser lithotripsy in
nine of 10 women. Ultimately, less than 2 percent of symptomatic pregnant
women require surgical exploration following one of the procedures listed
above (Swartz, 2007). The need for fluoroscopy limits the utility of
percutaneous nephrolithotomy. Extracorporeal shock-wave lithotripsy is
contraindicated in pregnancy.

PREGNANCY AFTER RENAL TRANSPLANTATION
In 2020, more than 100,000 registrants were waiting for renal
transplantations through the Organ Procurement and Transplantation Network
—OPTN (2020). The 1-year graft survival rate is 95 percent for those from
living donors and is 90 percent from deceased donors. Survival rates
approximately doubled in the 1990s, due in large part to the introduction of
cyclosporine and muromonab-CD3 (Orthoclone OKT3) to prevent and treat
organ rejection. The latter is a monoclonal antibody against the CD3 receptor
of T cells. Since then, mycophenolate mofetil and tacrolimus have further
reduced acute rejection episodes. However, the former is teratogenic
(Briggs, 2017). In the report from the National Transplant Pregnancy
Registry, 23 percent of fetuses exposed to mycophenolate had birth defects
(Coscia, 2010). Importantly, resumption of renal function after
transplantation promptly restores fertility in reproductive-aged women
(Yaprak, 2019). Thus, these women should be counseled to use
contraception, especially those treated with mycophenolate. In one study,
more than half of transplant recipients reported that they were not counseled
regarding contraception (French, 2013).

■ Pregnancy Outcomes
Women with solid organ transplant have higher severe maternal morbidity
rates (Sabr, 2019). Deshpande and associates (2011) reviewed the outcomes
of more than 4700 pregnancies in renal transplant recipients. Approximately
70 percent of pregnancies resulted in a live birth. However, rates of
preeclampsia, gestational diabetes, and preterm delivery were substantially
greater. Similar outcomes were described for the Australian and New
Zealand Transplant Registry (Wyld, 2013). In the United Kingdom, Bramham
and colleagues (2013) identified a live-birth rate that exceeded 90 percent in

renal transplant recipients. Half were delivered before 37 weeks’ gestation,
but only 9 percent before 32 weeks. Low birthweight complicated half of
pregnancies, and growth restriction complicated 25 percent. Notably, the
incidence of fetal malformations was not increased, except in those who took
mycophenolate mofetil.
The incidence of preeclampsia is high in all transplant recipients. In the
UK National Cohort Study reported by Bramham and associates (2013), the
incidence of preeclampsia was 22 percent. From their review, Josephson and
McKay (2011) cite an incidence of one third of pregnancies but question the
validity of this frequency. Importantly, in some cases, rejection is difficult to
distinguish from preeclampsia. That said, the incidence of rejection episodes
approximates only 2 percent (Bramham, 2013). Viral infections—especially
polyomavirus hominis 1, also called BK virus—are frequent. In addition,
gestational diabetes is found in approximately 5 percent. Both are likely
related to immunosuppression therapy. Similar outcomes have been reported
by several other investigators (Al Duraihimh, 2008; Cruz Lemini, 2007;
Ghafari, 2008).
The Italian Society of Nephrology recommends that women who have
undergone transplantation satisfy several requisites before attempting
pregnancy (Cabiddu, 2018). First, women should be in good general health
for at least 1 to 2 years after transplantation. Second, renal function should be
stable. Parameters include a GFR ≥60 mL/min, serum creatinine level <2
mg/dL, and proteinuria <500 mg/d. Third, there should be no recent evidence
for graft rejection and no treatment with teratogenic drugs. Last, hypertension
should be absent or well controlled.
Cyclosporine and tacrolimus are given routinely to renal transplantation
recipients. Coincident with expected pregnancy-related intravascular volume
expansion, cyclosporine blood levels decline during pregnancy. However,
this was not reported to be associated with rejection episodes (Thomas,
1997). Unfortunately, these agents are nephrotoxic and may also cause renal
hypertension. In fact, they likely contribute substantively to the chronic renal
disease that develops in 10 to 20 percent of patients with nonrenal solid
organ transplantation (Goes, 2007).
Concern persists regarding the possible late effects in offspring subjected
to immunosuppressive therapy in utero. These include malignancy, germ cell
dysfunction, and malformations in the children of the offspring. In addition,
cyclosporine is secreted in breast milk (Moretti, 2003). In two small studies,

these children had normal neurological and intellectual function (MoralesBuenrostro, 2019; Schreiber-Zamora, 2019).
Last, pregnancy-induced renal hyperfiltration theoretically may impair
long-term graft survival. However, Sturgiss and Davison (1995) found no
evidence for this in one study of 34 allograft recipients followed for a mean
of 15 years.

■ Management
Close surveillance is necessary. Covert bacteriuria is treated, and if it is
recurrent, suppressive treatment is given for the remainder of the pregnancy.
Serial hepatic enzyme concentrations and blood counts are monitored for
toxic effects of azathioprine and cyclosporine. Some recommend
measurement of serum cyclosporine levels. Gestational diabetes is more
common if corticosteroids are taken, and in these cases overt diabetes must
be excluded with glucose tolerance testing done at the initiation of prenatal
care. Surveillance for opportunistic infections from herpesvirus,
cytomegalovirus, and toxoplasmosis is important because these infections are
common. Some recommend surveillance for BK virus in women known to be
infected, however, diagnosis and treatment are problematic.
Renal function is monitored, and the GFR usually increases 20 to 25
percent. If a significant rise in the serum creatinine level is detected, its
cause must be determined. Possibilities include acute rejection, cyclosporine
toxicity, preeclampsia, infection, and urinary tract obstruction. Evidence of
pyelonephritis or graft rejection should prompt admission for aggressive
management. Imaging studies and kidney biopsy may be indicated. The
woman is carefully monitored for development or worsening of underlying
hypertension, and especially of superimposed preeclampsia. Management of
hypertension during pregnancy is the same as for patients without an organ
transplant (Chap. 53, p. 950).
Vigilant fetal surveillance is indicated because of the higher incidences
of fetal-growth restriction and preterm delivery. Although cesarean delivery
is reserved for obstetrical indications, occasionally the transplanted kidney
obstructs labor, and the overall cesarean delivery rate approaches 80 percent
(Bramham, 2013; Madej, 2018; Rocha, 2013).

POLYCYSTIC KIDNEY DISEASE
This usually autosomally dominant systemic disease primarily affects the
kidneys. Its basic pathophysiology is a ciliopathy that affects renal tubules,
although only approximately 5 percent develop cysts (Zhou, 2018). The
incidence is about 1 in 1000 births and it causes approximately 5 to 10
percent of end-stage renal disease in the United States. Although genetically
heterogeneous, almost 85 percent of cases are due to PKD1 gene mutations
on chromosome 16, and the other 15 percent to PKD2 mutations on
chromosome 4. Prenatal diagnosis is available if the mutation has been
identified in a family member or if linkage has been established in the family.
Preimplantation genetic screening reduces the risk of affected fetuses to 1 to
2 percent (Murphy, 2018).
Renal complications more commonly affect men than women, and
symptoms usually appear in the third or fourth decade. Flank pain, hematuria,
proteinuria, abdominal masses, and associated calculi and infection are
frequent findings. Hypertension develops in 75 percent, and progression to
renal failure is a major problem. Superimposed acute renal failure also may
develop from infection or obstruction from ureteral angulation. Specifically,
renal cyst may displace and create angles along the normal ureteral course.
Other organs are commonly involved. Asymptomatic hepatic cysts
coexist in a third of patients with polycystic kidneys. Hepatic involvement is
more common and more aggressive in women than in men. Approximately 10
percent of patients with polycystic kidney disease die from rupture of an
associated intracranial berry aneurysm. Up to a fourth of patients have
cardiac valvular lesions, which include mitral valve prolapse and mitral,
aortic, and tricuspid valvular incompetence.

■ Pregnancy Outcomes
The prognosis for pregnancy in women with polycystic kidney disease
depends on the degree of associated hypertension and renal insufficiency.
Urinary infections are common. Chapman and coworkers (1994) compared
pregnancy outcomes in 235 affected women who had 605 pregnancies with
those of 108 unaffected family members who had 244 pregnancies.
Composite perinatal complication rates were similar—33 versus 26 percent
—but hypertension, including preeclampsia, was more common in women

with polycystic kidneys. Pregnancy does not seem to accelerate the natural
disease course (Lindheimer, 2007).

GLOMERULAR DISEASES
The glomerulus and its capillaries are subject to numerous conditions and
agents that can lead to acute and chronic diseases. Glomerular damage can be
caused by toxins or infections or from systemic disorders such as
hypertension or diabetes. It may also be idiopathic. When there is capillary
inflammation, the process is termed glomerulonephritis, and in many of
these cases, an autoimmune process is involved. Glomerular disease or
glomerulonephritis may result from a single stimulus such as that following
group A streptococcal infections. It may also be a manifestation of a
multisystem disease such as systemic lupus erythematosus or diabetes (Blom,
2017).
Persistent glomerulonephritis eventually leads to decline of renal
function. Progression is variable and often does not become apparent until
chronic renal insufficiency is diagnosed. Lewis and Neilsen (2018) group
glomerular injuries into six syndromes based on clinical patterns (Table 563). Some underlying disorders—examples include infections, vasculitides,
and diabetes—can result in one clinical pattern in different individuals. Last,
disorders within each of these categories may be seen in young women, and
thus, these may already be established before pregnancy or may first manifest
then.
TABLE 56-3. Patterns of Clinical Glomerulonephritis

As with any renal disorder, goals to achieve optimal pregnancy outcomes
aim to stabilize rapid disease progression, minimize proteinuria with use of
appropriate immunosuppressive agents, control hypertension, and delay
pregnancy until these are achieved.

■ Acute Nephritic Syndromes
Acute glomerulonephritis may result from any of several causes (see Table
56-3). The clinical presentation usually includes hypertension, hematuria,
red-cell casts, pyuria, and proteinuria. Varying degrees of renal insufficiency
and salt and water retention result in edema, hypertension, and circulatory
congestion (Lewis, 2018). The prognosis and treatment of nephritic
syndromes depends on their etiology. Some recede spontaneously or with
treatment. However, in some patients, rapidly progressive
glomerulonephritis leads to end-stage renal failure. In others, chronic
glomerulonephritis develops and manifests as slowly progressive renal
disease.
The prototype is acute poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis, which is
historically interesting because it was confused with eclampsia until the mid1800s. Immunoglobulin A (IgA) nephropathy, also known as Berger
disease, is the most common form of acute glomerulonephritis worldwide
(Blom, 2017). The isolated form of IgA nephropathy occurs sporadically,
and it may be related to Henoch-Schönlein purpura as the systemic form.
Another isolated nephritis type may be due to anti–glomerular basement
membrane antibodies, which are typically IgG. These IgG antibodies may
also involve the lungs to manifest as a pulmonary-renal syndrome with
alveolar hemorrhage, which is termed Goodpasture syndrome.

Pregnancy
Acute nephritic syndromes during pregnancy can be difficult to differentiate
from severe preeclampsia. One example is systemic lupus erythematosus
with a flare during the second half of pregnancy (Zhao, 2013). In some cases,
renal biopsy may be necessary to determine etiology and direct management
(Lindheimer, 2013; Ramin, 2006). This is discussed further in Chapter 62 (p.
1112).

Whatever the underlying etiology, glomerular diseases have profound
effects on pregnancy outcome. In an older study, Packham and coworkers
(1989) described 395 pregnancies in 238 women with primary
glomerulonephritis diagnosed before pregnancy. The most common lesions
identified by biopsy were membranous glomerulonephritis, IgA
glomerulonephritis, and diffuse mesangial glomerulonephritis. Although most
of these women had normal renal function, half developed hypertension, a
fourth was delivered preterm, and the perinatal mortality rate after 28 weeks’
gestation was 80 per 1000. As expected, the worst perinatal outcomes were
in women with impaired renal function, early or severe hypertension, and
nephrotic-range proteinuria. O’Shaughnessy and colleagues (2017)
confirmed these findings. In 48 pregnancies complicated by
glomerulonephritis, a third developed preeclampsia, 39 percent had a
doubling of protein excretion, and 27 percent had a ≥50-percent rise in serum
creatinine levels. Half of the pregnancies ended in preterm birth and 13
percent in perinatal death.
Similar outcomes have been reported for pregnancies in women with IgA
nephropathy. From one review of 376 pregnancies, investigators reported a
perinatal mortality rate of 12-percent; preterm delivery, 9 percent; low
birthweight, 10 percent; and preeclampsia, 7 percent (Liu, 2016).
Progression of renal insufficiency during pregnancy is controversial. From
their reports, Su and coworkers (2017), but not Wang and colleagues (2019),
found that women with IgA nephropathy had renal insufficiency progression
during pregnancy.

■ Nephrotic Syndromes
Heavy proteinuria is the hallmark of the nephrotic syndromes. Several
primary and secondary kidney disorders cause immunological- or toxicmediated injury and glomerular capillary-wall breakdown that allows
excessive filtration of plasma proteins. In addition to heavy urine protein
excretion, the syndrome is characterized by hypoalbuminemia,
hypercholesterolemia, and edema. Hypertension is frequently comorbid.
This, coupled with albumin nephrotoxicity, contributes to eventual renal
insufficiency.
Some of the more common causes of the nephrotic syndrome are listed in
Table 56-4. Treatment depends on etiology, and renal biopsy will disclose

microscopic abnormalities that may help direct care. Edema is problematic,
especially during pregnancy. Normal amounts of dietary protein of high
biological value are encouraged, and this practice contrasts with high-protein
diets, which increase proteinuria. The incidence of thromboembolism is
greater and varies with the severity of hypertension, proteinuria, and renal
insufficiency (Spotti, 2019). Renal vein thrombosis is particularly
worrisome, although both arterial and venous thromboses may develop.
Explanations for this risk are platelet hyperactivity, urinary loss of
antithrombotic factors, and increased production of prothrombotic factors by
the liver (Mirrakhimov, 2014). Some recommend that women with a serum
albumin <2 g/dL or 24-hour urinary protein excretion >3.5 g should be given
thromboprophylaxis throughout pregnancy (Blom, 2017). Some cases of
nephrosis from primary glomerular disease respond to glucocorticosteroids
and other immunosuppressants or cytotoxic drug therapy. In most cases
caused by infection or drugs, proteinuria recedes once the underlying cause
is corrected.
TABLE 56-4. Causes of the Nephrotic Syndrome in Adults

Pregnancy
Maternal and perinatal outcomes in women with a nephrotic syndrome
depend on its underlying cause and severity. Whenever possible, these
should be ascertained, and renal biopsy may be indicated to determine if
there is a treatable etiology. Half of women with nephrotic-range proteinuria
will have higher daily protein excretion as pregnancy progresses (Packham,
1989). In women with nephrosis cared for at Parkland Hospital, we reported
that two thirds had protein excretion that exceeded 3 g/d (Stettler, 1992). At
the same time, however, if these women had only mild degrees of renal
dysfunction, they displayed a normally augmented GFR across pregnancy
(Cunningham, 1990).

Management of edema during pregnancy can be particularly challenging,
as it is intensified by normally rising hydrostatic pressure in the lower
extremities. In some women, massive vulvar edema may develop in those
with comorbid conditions such as diabetes, syphilis, preeclampsia, and
others (Fig. 56-2) (Jakobi, 1995). Another major problem is that up to half of
these women with nephrosis have chronic hypertension that may require
treatment (Chap. 53, p. 950). In these, as well as in previously normotensive
women, preeclampsia is common and often develops early in pregnancy
(Morgan, 2016).

FIGURE 56-2 Massive vulvar edema in a pregnant woman with marked proteinuria due to
preeclampsia.

Most women with a nephrotic syndrome who do not have severe
hypertension or renal insufficiency will have successful pregnancy outcomes.
Conversely, if there is renal insufficiency, moderate to severe hypertension,
or both, the prognosis is much worse. Our experiences caring for such
women with 65 pregnancies at Parkland Hospital showed that complications
are frequent (Stettler, 1992). Protein excretion during pregnancy averaged 4
g/d, and a third of the women had classic nephrotic syndrome. Some degree

of renal insufficiency was seen in 75 percent, chronic hypertension in 40
percent, and persistent anemia in 25 percent. Importantly, preeclampsia
developed in 60 percent, and 45 percent had preterm deliveries. Even so,
after excluding abortions, 53 of 57 neonates were born alive. De Castro and
associates (2017) reported similar results from 26 pregnancies complicated
by a mean protein excretion of 8 g/d.

Long-Term Outcomes
Women identified to have nephrotic syndromes either before or during
pregnancy are at risk for serious long-term adverse outcomes. Of the women
cared for at Parkland Hospital, at least 20 percent of women followed for 10
years progressed to end-stage renal failure (Stettler, 1992). Similarly, Chen
and associates (2001) reported short-term outcomes in 15 women with
nephrotic syndromes. By 2 years, three of these women had died, three had
developed chronic renal failure, and two had progressed to end-stage renal
disease. Women with serum creatinine levels >1.4 mg/dL and 24-hour
protein excretion >1 g/d have the shortest renal survival times following
pregnancy (Imbasciati, 2007).

CHRONIC KIDNEY DISEASE
This describes a pathophysiological process that can progress to end-stage
renal disease. The National Kidney Foundation (2019) describes six stages
of chronic kidney disease (CKD) defined by decreasing GFR. It progresses
from stage 0, in which GFR is ≥90 mL/min/1.73 m2, to stage 5, in which
GFR is <15 mL/min/1.73 m2.
Several diseases result in progressively declining renal function,
including the glomerular diseases discussed earlier. Those that most
commonly lead to end-stage disease requiring dialysis and kidney
transplantation include diabetes mellitus, chronic hypertension,
glomerulonephritis, and polycystic kidney disease (Bargman, 2018).
Most reproductive-aged women with these just-mentioned diseases have
varying degrees of renal insufficiency, proteinuria, or both. To counsel
regarding fertility and pregnancy outcome, the degree of renal functional
impairment and of associated hypertension are assessed. In general,
successful pregnancy outcome may be more related to these two factors than

to the specific underlying renal disorder. An overall prognosis can be
estimated by considering women with CKD in arbitrary categories of renal
function (Davison, 2011). These include normal or mild impairment—
defined as a serum creatinine <1.5 mg/dL; moderate impairment—defined
as a serum creatinine 1.5 to 3.0 mg/dL; and severe renal insufficiency—
defined as a serum creatinine >3.0 mg/dL. Some recommend using these
older categories, although others suggest adopting the classification of the
National Kidney Foundation described above (Davison, 2011; Piccoli, 2010,
2011). Thus, obstetricians must be familiar with both.

■ Pregnancy and Chronic Kidney Disease
The severity of renal insufficiency, along with any underlying hypertension,
strongly influences pregnancy outcome. Additionally, comorbidities
secondary to a systemic disorder—for example, diabetes or systemic lupus
erythematosus—portend a worse prognosis (Blom, 2017). For all women
with CKD, the incidences of hypertension and preeclampsia, preterm and
growth-restricted neonates, and other problems are high. Low-dose aspirin
starting at 12 to 28 weeks is recommended to help lower preeclampsia rates
(Chap. 41, p. 705).
Loss of renal tissue is associated with compensatory intrarenal
vasodilation and hypertrophy of the surviving nephrons. The resultant
hyperperfusion and hyperfiltration eventually damage surviving nephrons to
cause nephrosclerosis and worsening renal function. With mild renal
insufficiency, pregnancy causes greater augmentation of renal plasma flow
and GFR (Helal, 2012). With progressively worsening renal function, renal
plasma flow is augmented little, if any. In one study, only half of women with
moderate renal insufficiency demonstrated pregnancy-augmented glomerular
filtration, and women with severe disease had no increase (Cunningham,
1990).
Importantly, chronic renal insufficiency also curtails normal
pregnancy-induced hypervolemia. Blood volume expansion during
pregnancy is related to disease severity and correlates inversely with serum
creatinine concentration. As shown in Figure 56-3, women with mild to
moderate renal dysfunction have blood volume expansion that averages 55
percent above nonpregnant volumes. However, with severe renal
insufficiency, volume expansion averages only 25 percent, which is similar

to that seen with hemoconcentration from eclampsia. In addition, these
women have variable degrees of chronic anemia due to intrinsic renal
disease. Thus, they are at risk for hypovolemia and acute blood loss anemia
with even normal blood loss at delivery.

FIGURE 56-3 Blood volume expansion in 44 normally pregnant women at term compared with 29 who
had eclampsia; 10 with moderate chronic renal insufficiency (CRI)—serum creatinine 1.5 to 2.9 mg/dL;
and four with severe CRI—serum creatinine ≥3.0 mg/dL. (Data from Cunningham, 1990; Zeeman,
2009.)

Renal Disease with Preserved Function
In some women, although glomerular disease has not yet caused renal
insufficiency, incidences of pregnancy complications are still increased. As
shown in Table 56-5, these problems are less frequent than in cohorts of
women with moderate and severe renal insufficiency. Two older studies
illustrate this. In one, Surian and colleagues (1984) described outcomes of
123 pregnancies in women with biopsy-proven glomerular disease. Although
only a few of these women had renal dysfunction, 40 percent developed

obstetrical or renal complications. In another study of 395 pregnancies in
women with preexisting glomerulonephritis and minimal renal insufficiency,
impaired renal function developed in 15 percent of these women during
pregnancy, and 60 percent had worsening proteinuria (Packham, 1989). Only
12 percent had antecedent chronic hypertension, however, more than half of
the pregnancies were complicated by hypertension. The perinatal mortality
rate was 140 per 1000, and even without early-onset or severe hypertension
or nephrotic-range proteinuria, the rate was 50 per 1000. Importantly, in 5
percent of these women, worsening renal function was permanent.
TABLE 56-5. Complications (%) Associated with Chronic Kidney Disease
During Pregnancy

Chronic Renal Insufficiency
As noted, pregnancy complication rates are higher in women with CKD and
renal insufficiency compared with women who have preserved renal
function. Furthermore, adverse outcomes are generally directly related to the
degree of renal impairment. Of the more recent reports shown in Table 56-5,
outcomes of women with moderate or severe renal insufficiency are usually
not separated. A systematic review of 1514 pregnancies in women with CKD
described increased odds ratios of preeclampsia, 10.4; preterm delivery, 6.3;
fetal-growth restriction, 4.9; and cesarean delivery, 2.7 (Zhang, 2015).
Other investigators have described pregnancies complicated by moderate
or severe renal insufficiency (Cunningham, 1990; Imbasciati, 2007; Jones,
1996). Despite a high incidence of chronic hypertension, anemia,
preeclampsia, preterm delivery, and fetal-growth restriction, perinatal
outcomes were generally acceptable. As shown in Figure 56-4, fetal growth
is frequently impaired and related to renal dysfunction severity.

FIGURE 56-4 Birthweight percentiles of infants born to 29 women at Parkland Hospital with mild to
moderate renal insufficiency—serum creatinine 1.4–2.4 mg/dL (black points) and severe renal
insufficiency—serum creatinine ≥2.5 mg/dL (red points). (Data from Cunningham, 1990; Stettler, 1992.
Growth curves are those reported by Alexander, 1996.)

■ Management

Prenatal care for women with CKD incorporates several important aspects.
Frequent monitoring of blood pressure is paramount, and serum creatinine
levels and 24-hour protein excretion are quantified as indicated. Bacteriuria
is treated to lower the risk of pyelonephritis and further nephron loss.
Protein-restricted diets are not recommended. In some women with anemia
from chronic renal insufficiency, a response is seen with recombinant
erythropoietin. However, hypertension is a common side effect. Serial
sonography is performed to follow fetal growth. The differentiation between
worsening hypertension and superimposed preeclampsia is problematic.
Preliminary data indicate that the angiogenic biomarkers placental growth
factor (PlGF) and its soluble receptor, soluble fms-like tyrosine kinase 1
(sFlt-1), may be useful to separate chronic from gestational hypertension
(Fishel Bartal, 2020). This is described in Chapter 40 (p. 694).

■ Long-Term Effects
Pregnancy may accelerate CKD progression by augmenting hyperfiltration
and glomerular pressure to worsen nephrosclerosis (Bargman, 2018).
Women with severe renal insufficiency have greater susceptibility. Jungers
and associates (1995) reported few long-term pregnancy-related adverse
effects in 360 women with chronic glomerulonephritis and antecedent normal
renal function. In a study from Parkland Hospital, 20 percent of pregnant
women with moderate to severe renal insufficiency developed end-stage
renal failure by a mean of 4 years (Cunningham, 1990). He and coworkers
(2018) confirmed these findings in women who had stage 3 or 4 CKD.
As noted, progression is common for many women with chronic renal
disorders. At 1 year after pregnancy, Jones and Hayslett (1996) reported that
10 percent of the women had developed end-stage renal failure—stage 5
CKD. Similar findings in women with a median follow-up of 3 years were
described by Imbasciati and colleagues (2007). By this time, end-stage
disease was apparent in 30 percent of women whose prepregnancy serum
creatinine was ≥1.4 mg/dL and who had proteinuria >1 g/d.
Chronic proteinuria is also a marker for subsequent development of renal
failure. In one study, 20 percent of women with chronic proteinuria
discovered during pregnancy progressed to end-stage renal failure within
several years (Stettler, 1992). Another study reported that an equal number of
nonpregnant women had identical loss of function when similar durations

were compared (Zhang, 2015). It may be that pregnancy does not hasten an
already predetermined declining renal function.

■ Dialysis During Pregnancy
Significantly impaired renal function is accompanied by subfertility that may
be corrected with chronic renal replacement therapy—either hemodialysis or
peritoneal dialysis (Wiles, 2019b). Not unexpectedly, maternal
complications are common and include severe hypertension, placental
abruption, heart failure, and sepsis. To illustrate this, the outcomes of 233
pregnancies in women undergoing dialysis are shown in Table 56-6. The
high incidences of hypertension, low birthweight, and preterm delivery result
in a perinatal mortality rate of 250 per 1000. Piccoli and associates (2016)
performed a systematic review and described 681 pregnancies in 647
women undergoing dialysis. Of these, 616 had hemodialysis and 65 had
peritoneal dialysis. They chronicled a high incidence of hypertension,
preterm delivery, and fetal-growth restriction, and the perinatal mortality
was 180 per 1000. They found an inverse relationship between hours of
dialysis per week and adverse outcomes. Last, they reported that
hemodialysis was superior to peritoneal dialysis.
TABLE 56-6. Pregnancy Outcomes in Women Undergoing Dialysis During
Pregnancy

For the woman already undergoing either method of dialysis, it seems
reasonable to continue that method with consideration for its increasing
frequency. In the woman who has never been dialyzed, the threshold for

initiation during pregnancy is unclear. Hladunewich and colleagues (2016)
recommend consideration for dialysis when the creatinine clearance is 20
mL/min or less. Extension of dialysis frequency to five to six times weekly
may be necessary to avoid abrupt volume changes that cause hypotension.
Hladunewich and coworkers (2011) recommend attention to certain
protocols that include replacement of substances lost through dialysis.
Multivitamin doses are doubled, and oral calcium and iron salts are
provided along with sufficient dietary protein and calories. Chronic anemia
is treated with erythropoietin. To meet pregnancy changes, extra calcium is
added to the dialysate along with less bicarbonate.

ACUTE KIDNEY INJURY
Previously termed acute renal failure, acute kidney injury (AKI) is now used
to describe impairment of kidney function over days to weeks that leads to
retention of nitrogenous and other waste products normally excreted by the
kidneys. Current definitions include a rise in a serum creatinine level of at
least 0.3 mg/dL within 48 hours, or ≥50 percent increase from baseline
within a week, or urine output reduced to <0.5 mL/kg per hour for >6 hours
(Waikar, 2018).
Criteria for diagnosis in pregnancy have not been standardized (Gonzalez
Suarez, 2019). Most studies use a definition in which serum creatinine levels
rise ≥0.3 mg/dL from baseline. Animal studies have shown that pregnancy
protects the kidney from acute ischemic injury (Popkov, 2018). Although the
incidence of AKI in pregnancy has dropped substantially, it still occasionally
causes significant obstetrical morbidity and mortality. In a Canadian study,
the incidence was reported to be 2.68 per 10,000 births between 2009 and
2010 (Mehrabadi, 2014). Outcomes are available from four older studies
comprising a total of 266 women with AKI (Drakeley, 2002; Nzerue, 1998;
Sibai, 1990; Turney, 1989). Approximately 70 percent had preeclampsia, 50
percent had obstetrical hemorrhage, and 30 percent had a placental
abruption. Almost 20 percent required dialysis, and the maternal mortality
rate approximated 15 percent.
Although obstetrical cases of AKI requiring dialysis are less frequent
today, acute renal ischemia is still commonly associated with severe
preeclampsia and hemorrhage (Conti-Ramsden, 2019; Jim, 2017; Prakash,

2018). Notable contributors are placental abruption and hemolysis, elevated
liver enzymes, and low platelet count (HELLP) syndrome. Sepsis is another,
especially in resource-poor countries (Acharya, 2013). AKI also often
complicates acute fatty liver of pregnancy. Nelson and colleagues (2013)
reported some degree of renal insufficiency in virtually all of 52 such women
cared for at Parkland Hospital (Chap. 58, p. 1034). Dehydration caused by
severe hyperemesis gravidarum also can lead to AKI (Hill, 2002). Other
causes include thrombotic microangiopathies (Chap. 59, p. 1060).

■ Diagnosis and Management
In most women, renal failure develops postpartum, thus management is
usually not complicated by fetal considerations. Diagnostically, an acute rise
in serum creatinine levels is most often due to renal ischemia. But oliguria
also is an important sign of acutely impaired renal function. In obstetrical
cases, both prerenal and intrarenal factors commonly coincide. For example,
with total placental abruption, severe hypovolemia results from massive
hemorrhage, and frequently associated preeclampsia causes preexistent renal
ischemia (Chap. 40, p. 689).
When azotemia is severe and oliguria persists, some form of renal
replacement treatment may be indicated. Hemofiltration or dialysis is
initiated before patients markedly deteriorate, and hemodynamic
measurements are normalized. Medication dose adjustments are imperative,
and magnesium sulfate is a prominent example (Waikar, 2018). Early dialysis
appears to reduce the mortality rate appreciably and may enhance the extent
of renal function recovery. With time, renal function usually returns to normal
or near normal. Even so, women in subsequent pregnancies have higher
incidences of hypertension and adverse fetal outcomes (Tangren, 2017).

■ Prevention
AKI in obstetrics is most often due to acute blood loss and especially that
associated with preeclampsia. Thus, it may often be prevented by the
following means:
1. Prompt and vigorous volume replacement with crystalloid solutions and
blood in instances of massive hemorrhage, such as in placental abruption,

placenta previa, uterine rupture, and postpartum uterine atony (Chap. 44, p.
771).
2. Delivery or termination of pregnancies complicated by severe
preeclampsia or eclampsia, and careful blood transfusion if blood loss is
more than average (Chap. 41, p. 712).
3. Close observation for early signs of sepsis and shock in women with
pyelonephritis, septic abortion, chorioamnionitis, or other pelvic
infections (Chap. 50, p. 887).
4. Avoidance of loop diuretics to treat oliguria before ensuring that blood
volume and cardiac output are adequate for renal perfusion.
5. Judicious use of vasoconstrictor drugs to treat hypotension, and only after
it has been determined that pathological vasodilation is the cause.
Irreversible ischemic renal failure caused by acute cortical necrosis has
become exceedingly uncommon in obstetrics. Before widespread availability
of dialysis, it complicated a fourth of obstetrical renal failure cases
(Grünfeld, 1987; Turney, 1989). Most cases followed placental abruption,
preeclampsia-eclampsia, and endotoxin-induced shock. Once common with
septic abortion, this is a rare cause in the United States today (Jim, 2017).
Histologically, the lesion appears to result from thrombosis of segments of
the renal vascular system. The lesions may be focal, patchy, confluent, or
gross. Clinically, renal cortical necrosis follows the course of acute renal
failure, and its differentiation from acute tubular necrosis is not possible
during the early phase. The prognosis depends on the extent of the necrosis.
Recovery of function is variable, and stable renal insufficiency may result.

■ Obstructive Renal Failure
Rarely, bilateral ureteral compression by a very large pregnant uterus
obstructs ureters to cause severe oliguria and azotemia. An example is shown
in Figure 56-5. Brandes and Fritsche (1991) reviewed 13 cases that were the
consequence of a markedly overdistended uterus. They described a woman
with twins who developed anuria and a serum creatinine level of 12.2 mg/dL
at 34 weeks’ gestation. After amniotomy, urine flow resumed at 500 mL/h,
and a rapid decline in serum creatinine levels to normal range followed.
Eckford and Gingell (1991) described 10 women in whom ureteral

obstruction was relieved by stenting. The stents were left in place for a mean
of 15.5 weeks and removed 4 to 6 weeks postpartum.

FIGURE 56-5 A. Magnetic resonance image in a coronal plane of a pregnant woman with unilateral
hydronephrosis caused by ureteral obstruction. The serum creatinine was 8 mg/dL and decreased to 0.8
mg/dL after a percutaneous nephrostomy tube was placed. B. Left kidney (arrow) and associated
hydronephrosis (asterisk) are again noted in this axial plane image.

We have observed this phenomenon on several occasions. In our
experience, women with previous urinary tract surgery for reflux are more
likely to have such obstructions (Satin, 1993). Partial ureteral obstruction
may be accompanied by fluid retention and significant hypertension. When
the obstructive uropathy is relieved, diuresis ensues and hypertension
dissipates. In one woman with massive hydramnios (9.4 L) and an
anencephalic fetus, amniocentesis and removal of some of the amnionic fluid
was followed promptly by diuresis, a decline in the plasma creatinine
concentration, and an improvement of hypertension.

LOWER URINARY TRACT LESIONS
■ Urethral Diverticulum

Infrequently complicating pregnancy, this type of diverticulum is thought to
originate from an enlarging paraurethral gland abscess that ruptures into the
urethral lumen (Fig. 56-6). As infection clears, the remaining dilated
diverticular sac and its ostium into the urethra persist. Associated findings
may be urine collecting within and then dribbling from the sac, pain,
palpable mass, and recurrent urinary infections. In general, a diverticulum is
managed expectantly during pregnancy. Rarely, drainage may be necessary,
or surgery required (Iyer, 2013). If additional antepartum evaluation is
needed, MR imaging is preferred for its superior soft-tissue resolution and
ability to define complex diverticula (Dwarkasing, 2011; Pathi, 2013).

FIGURE 56-6 Asymptomatic urethral diverticulum, seen as a midline bulge beneath the urethral
meatus (arrow), identified during initial prenatal care examination.

■ Urinary Tract Fistulas
Fistulas found during pregnancy likely existed previously, but in rare cases,
they form during pregnancy. In developed countries, vesicovaginal fistula
following a McDonald cerclage has been reported (Massengill, 2012). These
fistulas may also form with the prolonged obstructed labor that is more

commonly seen in resource-poor countries. In these cases, the genital tract is
compressed between the fetal head and bony pelvis. Brief pressure is not
significant, but prolonged pressure leads to tissue necrosis and subsequent
fistula formation (Wall, 2012). Vesicouterine fistulas that developed after
prior cesarean delivery have been described (DiMarco, 2006; Manjunatha,
2012). Rarely, vesicocervical fistula may follow cesarean delivery or may
form if the anterior cervical lip is compressed against the symphysis pubis
(Dudderidge, 2005).

REFERENCES
Acharya A, Santos J, Linde B, et al: Acute kidney injury in pregnancy–current status. Adv Chronic
Kidney Dis 20:215, 2013
Ailes EC, Summers AD, Tran EL, et al: Antibiotics dispensed to privately insured pregnant women with
urinary tract infections–United States, 2014. MMWR 67(1):18, 2018
Airoldi J, Weinstein L: Clinical significance of proteinuria in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol Surv 62(2):117,
2007
Ait Benkaddour Y, Aboulfalah A, Abbassi H: Bladder stone: uncommon cause of mechanical dystocia.
Arch Gynecol Obstet 274(5):323, 2006
Al Duraihimh H, Ghamdi G, Moussa D, et al: Outcome of 234 pregnancies in 140 renal transplant
recipients from five Middle Eastern countries. Transplantation 85:840, 2008
Alexander GR, Himes JH, Kaufman RB, et al: A United States national reference for fetal growth.
Obstet Gynecol 87:163, 1996
Alsuwaida A, Mousa D, Al-Harbi A, et al: Impact of early chronic kidney disease on maternal and fetal
outcomes of pregnancy. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 24(12):1432, 2011
American Academy of Pediatrics, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Guidelines for
Perinatal Care, 8th ed. Elk Grove Village, AAP, 2017, p 159
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Asymptomatic microscopic hematuria in women.
Committee Opinion No. 703, June 2017.
Attini R, Kooij L, Montersino B, et al: Reflux nephropathy and the risk of preeclampsia and of other
adverse pregnancy-related outcomes: a systematic review and meta-analysis of case series and
reports in the new millennium. J Nephrol 31(6):833, 2018
Baer RJ, Nidey N, Bandoli G, et al: Risk of early birth among women with a urinary tract infection: a
retrospective cohort study. AJP Rep 11(1):e5, 2021
Banhidy F, Acs N, Puho EH, et al: Pregnancy complications and birth outcomes of pregnant women
with urinary tract infections and related drug treatments. Scand J Infect Dis 39:390, 2007
Bargman JM, Skorecki K: Chronic kidney disease. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al (eds):
Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2018, p
2111
Beck LH, Salant DJ: Tubulointerstitial diseases of the kidney. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et
al (eds): Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education,
2018, p 2160

Blom K, Odutayo A, Bramham K, et al: Pregnancy and glomerular disease: a systematic review of the
literature with management guidelines. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 12(11):1862, 2017
Bramham K, Nelson-Piercy C, Gao H, et al: Pregnancy in renal transplant recipients: a UK National
Cohort Study. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 8(2):290, 2013
Brandes JC, Fritsche C: Obstructive acute renal failure by a gravid uterus: a case report and review.
Am J Kidney Dis 18:398, 1991
Briggs GG, Freeman RK, Towers CV, et al: Drugs in pregnancy and lactation, 11th ed. Philadelphia,
Wolters Kluwer, 2017, p 987
Brown MA, Holt JL, Mangos GK, et al: Microscopic hematuria in pregnancy: relevance to pregnancy
outcome. Am J Kidney Dis 45:667, 2005
Buhling KJ, Elze L, Henrich W, et al: The usefulness of glycosuria and the influence of maternal blood
pressure in screening for gestational diabetes. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 113(2):145, 2004
Butler EL, Cox SM, Eberts E, et al: Symptomatic nephrolithiasis complicating pregnancy. Obstet
Gynecol 96:753, 2000
Cabiddu G, Spotti D, Gernone G, et al: A best-practice position statement on pregnancy after kidney
transplantation: focusing on the unsolved questions. The Kidney and Pregnancy Study Group of the
Italian Society of Nephrology. J Nephrol 31(5):665, 2018
Cavenee MR, Cox SM, Mason R, et al: Erythropoietin in pregnancies complicated by pyelonephritis.
Obstet Gynecol 84:252, 1994
Chaemsaithong P, Romero R, Korzeniewski SJ, et al: Soluble TRAIL in normal pregnancy and acute
pyelonephritis: a potential explanation for the susceptibility of pregnant women to microbial products
and infection. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 26(16):1568, 2013
Chapman AB, Johnson AM, Gabow PA: Pregnancy outcome and its relationship to progression of renal
failure in autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease. J Am Soc Nephrol 5:1178, 1994
Chen HH, Lin HC, Yeh JC, et al: Renal biopsy in pregnancies complicated by undetermined renal
disease. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 80:888, 2001
Chu CM, Lowder JL: Diagnosis and treatment of urinary tract infections across age groups. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 219(1):40, 2018
Chung SD, Chen YH, Keller JJ, et al: Urinary calculi increased the risk for adverse pregnancy
outcomes: a nationwide study. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 921:69, 2013
Coelho RF, Schneider-Monteiro ED, Mesquita JL, et al: Renal and perinephric abscesses: analysis of 65
consecutive cases. World J Surg 2:431, 2007
Conti-Ramsden FI, Nathan HL, De Greeff A, et al: Pregnancy-related acute kidney injury in
preeclampsia: risk factors and renal outcomes. Hypertension 74(5):1144, 2019
Coscia LA, Constantinescu S, Moritz MJ, et al: Report from the National Transplantation Pregnancy
Registry (NTPR): outcomes of pregnancy after transplantation. Clin Transpl 2010:65, 2010
Cox SM, Cunningham FG: Acute focal pyelonephritis (lobar nephronia) complicating pregnancy. Obstet
Gynecol 71:510, 1988
Cox SM, Shelburne P, Mason R, et al: Mechanisms of hemolysis and anemia associated with acute
antepartum pyelonephritis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 164:587, 1991
Cruz Lemini MC, Ibarguengoitia Ochoa F, Villanueva Gonzalez MA: Perinatal outcome following renal
transplantation. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 95:76, 2007
Cunningham FG, Cox SM, Harstad TW, et al: Chronic renal disease and pregnancy outcome. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 163:453, 1990
Cunningham FG, Lucas MJ, Hankins GC: Pulmonary injury complicating antepartum pyelonephritis. Am
J Obstet Gynecol 156:797, 1987

Curhan CG: Nephrolithiasis. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al (eds): Harrison’s Principles of
Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2018 p 2168
Dai JC, Nicholson TM, Chang HC, et al: Nephrolithiasis in pregnancy: treating for two. Urology 151:44,
2021
Davis S, Dylewski J, Shah PB, et al: Risk of adverse maternal and fetal outcomes during pregnancy in
living kidney donors: a matched cohort study. Clin Transplant 33(1):e13453, 2019
Davis R, Jones JS, Barocas DA, et al: Diagnosis, evaluation and follow-up of asymptomatic
microhematuria (AMH) in adults: AUA guideline. J Urol 188(6 Suppl):2473, 2012
Davison JM, Lindheimer MD: Pregnancy and chronic kidney disease. Semin Nephrol 31(1):86, 2011
De Castro I, Easterling TR, Bansal N, et al: Nephrotic syndrome in pregnancy poses risks with both
maternal and fetal complications. Kidney Int 91(6):1464, 2017
Deshpande NA, James NT, Kucirka LM, et al: Pregnancy outcomes in kidney transplant recipients: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J Transplant 11(11):2388, 2011
DiMarco CS, DiMarco DS, Klingele CJ, et al: Vesicouterine fistula: a review of eight cases. Int
Urogynecol J Pelvic Floor Dysfunct 17(4):395, 2006
Drakeley AJ, Le Roux PA, Anthony J, et al: Acute renal failure complicating severe preeclampsia
requiring admission to an obstetric intensive care unit. Am J Obstet Gynecol 186:253, 2002
Dudderidge TJ, Haynes SV, Davies AJ, et al: Vesicocervical fistula: rare complication of cesarean
section demonstrated by magnetic resonance imaging. Urology 65(1):174, 2005
Dwarkasing RS, Dinkelaar W, Hop WC, et al: MRI evaluation of urethral diverticula and differential
diagnosis in symptomatic women. AJR 197(3):676, 2011
Eckford SD, Gingell JC: Ureteric obstruction in pregnancy—diagnosis and management. BJOG 98:1137,
1991
Farwell J, Emerson J, Wyatt S, et al: Outcomes of pregnancies complicated by chronic kidney disease.
Abstract No. 346. Am J Obstet Gynecol 208:S153, 2013
Fishel Bartal M, Lindheimer MD, Sibai BM: Proteinuria during pregnancy: definition, pathophysiology,
methodology, and clinical significance. Am J Obstet Gynecol September 1, 2020 [Epub ahead of
print]
Fitzpatrick A, Venugopal K, Scheil W, et al: The spectrum of adverse pregnancy outcomes based on
kidney disease diagnoses: a 20-year population study. Am J Nephrol 49(5):400, 2019
Fox MT, Melia MT, Same RG, et al: A seven-day course of TMP-SMX may be effective as a sevenday course of ciprofloxacin for the treatment of pyelonephritis. Am J Med 130(7):842, 2017
French VA, Davis JB, Sayles HS, et al: Contraception and fertility awareness among women with solid
organ transplants. Obstet Gynecol 122:809, 2013
Gazmararian JA, Petersen R, Jamieson DJ, et al: Hospitalizations during pregnancy among managed
care enrollees. Obstet Gynecol 100:94, 2002
Gebäck C, Hansson S, Martinell J, et al: Obstetrical outcome in women with urinary tract infections in
childhood. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 95(4):452, 2016
Ghafari A, Sanadgol H: Pregnancy after renal transplantation: ten-year single-center experience.
Transplant Proc 40:251, 2008
Gilstrap LC III, Cunningham FG, Whalley PJ: Acute pyelonephritis in pregnancy: an anterospective
study. Obstet Gynecol 57:409, 1981a
Gilstrap LC III, Leveno KJ, Cunningham FG, et al: Renal infection and pregnancy outcome. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 141:708, 1981b
Goes NB, Calvin RB: Case 12–2007: A 56-year-old woman with renal failure after heart–lung
transplantation. N Engl J Med 356:1657, 2007

Gonzalez Suarez ML, Kattah A, Grande JP, et al: Renal disorders in pregnancy: core curriculum 2019.
Am J Kidney Dis 73(1):119, 2019
Grünfeld JP, Pertuiset N: Acute renal failure in pregnancy: 1987. Am J Kidney Dis 9:359, 1987
He Y, Liu J, Cai Q, et al: The pregnancy outcomes in patients with stage 3–4 chronic kidney disease and
the effects of pregnancy in the long-term kidney function. J Nephrol 31(6):953, 2018
Helal I, Fick-Brosnahan GM, Reed-Gitomer B, et al: Glomerular hyperfiltration: definitions, mechanisms,
and clinical implications. Nat Rev Nephrol 8:293, 2012
Higby K, Suiter CR, Phelps JY, et al: Normal values of urinary albumin and total protein excretion during
pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 171:984, 1994
Hill JB, Sheffield JS, McIntire DD, et al: Acute pyelonephritis in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 105:38,
2005
Hill JB, Yost NP, Wendel GD Jr: Acute renal failure in association with severe hyperemesis gravidarum.
Obstet Gynecol 100:1119, 2002
Hladunewich M, Herca AE, Keunen J, et al: Pregnancy in end stage renal disease. Semin Dial
24(6):634, 2011
Hladunewich MA, Lafayette RA, Derby GC, et al: The dynamics of glomerular filtration in the
puerperium. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol 286:F496, 2004
Hladunewich M, Schatell D. Intensive dialysis and pregnancy. Hemodial Int 20(3):339, 2016
Hooton TM: Uncomplicated urinary tract infection. N Engl J Med 366(11):1028, 2012
Hooton TM, Scholes D, Stapleton AE, et al: A prospective study of asymptomatic bacteriuria in sexually
active young women. N Engl J Med 343(14):992, 2000
Hosseini MM, Hassanpour A, Eslahi A, et al: Percutaneous nephrolithotomy during early pregnancy in
urgent situations: is it feasible and safe? Urol J 14(6):5034, 2017
Hussein W, Lafayette RA: Renal function in normal and disordered pregnancy. Curr Opin Nephrol
Hypertens 23:46, 2014
Imbasciati E, Gregorini G, Cabiddu G, et al: Pregnancy in CKD stages 3 to 5: fetal and maternal
outcomes. Am J Kidney Dis 49:753, 2007
Iyer S, Minassian VA: Resection of urethral diverticulum in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 122(2 Pt 2):467,
2013
Jacobsson B, Hagberg G, Hagberg B, et al: Cerebral palsy in preterm infants: a population-based casecontrol study of antenatal and intrapartal risk factors. Acta Paediatr 91:946, 2002
Jakobi P, Friedman M, Goldstein I, et al: Massive vulvar edema in pregnancy: a case report. J Reprod
Med 40:479, 1995
Jim B, Garovic VD: Acute kidney injury in pregnancy. Semin Nephrol 37(4):378, 2017
Johnson EB, Krambeck AE, White WM, et al: Obstetric complications of ureteroscopy during
pregnancy. J Urol 188(1):151, 2012
Johnson JR, Russo TA: Acute pyelonephritis in adults. N Engl J Med 378(12):1162, 2018
Jolley JA, Kim S, Wing DA: Acute pyelonephritis and associated complications during pregnancy in
2006 in US hospitals. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 25(12):2494, 2012
Jones DC, Hayslett JP: Outcome of pregnancy in women with moderate or severe renal insufficiency.
N Engl J Med 335:226, 1996
Josephson MA, McKay DB: Pregnancy and kidney transplantation. Semin Nephrol 31(1):100, 2011
Jungers P, Houillier P, Forget D, et al: Influence of pregnancy on the course of primary chronic
glomerulonephritis. Lancet 346:1122, 1995

Kristensen JH, Basit S, Wohlfahrt J, et al: Pre-eclampsia and risk of later kidney disease: nationwide
cohort study. BMJ 365:l1516, 2019
Le Blanc AL, McGanity: The impact of bacteriuria in pregnancy—a survey of 1300 pregnant patients.
Tex Rep Biol Med 22:336, 1964
Lewis DF, Robichaux AG III, Jaekle RK, et al: Urolithiasis in pregnancy: diagnosis, management and
pregnancy outcome. J Reprod Med 48:28, 2003
Lewis JB, Neilson EG: Glomerular diseases. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al (eds):
Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2018, p
2132
Lindheimer MD, Conrad KP, Karumanchi SA: Renal physiology and diseases in pregnancy. In Alpern
R, Hebert S (eds): Seldin and Giebisch’s The Kidney: physiology and pathophysiology, 5th ed. New
York, Elsevier, 2013, p 2712
Lindheimer MD, Davison JM: Pregnancy and CKD: any progress? Am J Kidney Dis 49:729, 2007
Lindquester WS, Novelli PM, Amesur NB, et al: A ten-year, single institution experience with
percutaneous nephrostomy during pregnancy. Clin Imaging 72:42, 2021
Liu Y, Ma X, Zheng J, et al: A systematic review and meta-analysis of kidney and pregnancy outcomes
in IgA nephropathy. Am J Nephrol 44(3):187, 2016
Lucas MJ, Cunningham FG: Urinary infection in pregnancy. Clin Obstet Gynecol 36:855, 1993
Lucas MJ, Cunningham FG: Urinary tract infections complicating pregnancy. Williams Obstetrics, 19th
ed. (Suppl 5). Norwalk, Appleton & Lange, February/March 1994
Lumbiganon P, Villar J, Laopaiboon M, et al: One-day compared with 7-day nitrofurantoin for
asymptomatic bacteriuria in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 113:339, 2009
Madej A, Mazanowska N, Szpotańska-Sikorska M, et al: Delivery mode in patients after liver or kidney
transplantation. Transplant Proc 50(7):2150, 2018
Maikranz P, Coe FL, Parks J, et al: Nephrolithiasis in pregnancy. Am J Kidney Dis 9:354, 1987
Mandal D, Saha MM, Pal DK: Urological disorders and pregnancy: An overall experience. Urol Ann
9(1):32, 2017
Manjunatha YC, Sonwalkar P: Spontaneous antepartum vesicouterine fistula causing severe
oligohydramnios in a patient with a previous cesarean delivery. J Ultrasound Med 31(8):1294, 2012
Maruotti GM, Sarno L, Napolitano R, et al: Preeclampsia in women with chronic kidney disease. J
Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 25(8):1367, 2012
Masselli G, Derme M, Laghi F, et al: Imaging of stone disease in pregnancy. Abdom Imaging
38(6):1409, 2013
Massengill JC, Baker TM, Von Pechmann WS, et al: Commonalities of cerclage-related genitourinary
fistulas. Female Pelvic Med Reconstr Surg 18(6):362, 2012
McAleer SJ, Loughlin KR: Nephrolithiasis and pregnancy. Curr Opin Urol 14:123, 2004
Mehrabadi A, Liu S, Bartholomew S, et al: Hypertensive disorders of pregnancy and the recent increase
in obstetric acute renal failure in Canada: population based retrospective cohort study. BMJ
349:g4731, 2014
Millar LK, DeBuque L, Wing DA: Uterine contraction frequency during treatment of pyelonephritis in
pregnancy and subsequent risk of preterm birth. J Perinat Med 31:41, 2003
Mirrakhimov AE, Ali AM, Barbaryan A, et al: Primary nephrotic syndrome in adults as a risk factor for
pulmonary embolism: an up-to-date review of the literature. Int J Nephrol 2014:916760, 2014
Mor Y, Leibovitch I, Zalts R, et al: Analysis of the long-term outcome of surgically corrected
vesicoureteric reflux. BJU Int 92:97, 2003

Morales-Buenrostro LE, Alberu J, Mancilla-Urrea E, et al: Intellectual performance of kidney transplant
recipients’ offspring: a cross-sectional, multicenter study. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 32(4):542,
2019
Moretti ME, Sgro M, Johnson DW, et al: Cyclosporine excretion into breast milk. Transplantation
75:2144, 2003
Morgan JL, Nelson DB, Roberts SW, et al: Association of baseline proteinuria and adverse outcomes in
pregnant women with treated chronic hypertension. Obstet Gynecol 128(2):270, 2016
Murphy EL, Droher ML, DiMaio MS, et al: Preimplantation genetic diagnosis counseling in autosomal
dominant polycystic kidney disease. Am J Kidney Dis 72(6):866, 2018
National Institute for Health And Clinical Excellence: Diabetes in pregnancy: management from
preconception to the postnatal period. 2015. Available at:
www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng3/resources/diabetes-in-pregnancy-management-from-preconceptionto-the-postnatal-period-51038446021. Accessed November 25, 2019
Nelson DB, Yost NP, Cunningham FG: Acute fatty liver of pregnancy: clinical outcomes and expected
durations of recovery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 209(5):456.e1, 2013
Nevis IF, Reitsma A, Dominic A, et al: Pregnancy outcomes in women with chronic kidney disease: a
systematic review. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 6:2587, 2011
Nicolle LE: Asymptomatic bacteriuria: when to screen and when to treat. Infect Dis Clin North Am
17(2):367, 2003
Nicolle LE, Gupta K, Bradley SF, et al: Clinical Practice Guideline for the Management of
Asymptomatic Bacteruria: 2019 update by the Infectious Diseases Society of America. Clin Infect
Dis 68(10):1611, 2019
Nzerue CM, Hewan-Lowe K, Nwawka C: Acute renal failure in pregnancy: a review of clinical
outcomes at an inner city hospital from 1986–1996. J Natl Med Assoc 90:486, 1998
Olagbuji BN, Atiba AS, Olofinbiyi BA, et al: Prevalence of and risk factors for gestational diabetes
using 1999, 2013 WHO and IADPSG criteria upon implementation of a universal one-step screening
and diagnostic strategy in a sub-Saharan African population. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol
189:27, 2015
Organ Procurement and Transplantation Network: Data. 2020. Available at:
optn.transplant.hrsa.gov/data/. Accessed March 31, 2020
O’Shaughnessy MM, Jobson MA, Sims K, et al: Pregnancy outcomes in patients with glomerular
disease attending a single academic center in North Carolina. Am J Nephrol 45(5):442, 2017
Packham DK, North RA, Fairley KF, et al: Primary glomerulonephritis and pregnancy. Q J Med 71:537,
1989
Pathi SD, Rahn DD, Sailors JL, et al: Utility of clinical parameters, cystourethroscopy, and magnetic
resonance imaging in the preoperative diagnosis of urethral diverticula. Int Urogynecol J 24(2):319,
2013
Piccoli GB, Attini R, Vasario E, et al: Pregnancy and chronic kidney disease: a challenge in all CKD
stages. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 5:844, 2010
Piccoli GB, Conijn A, Attini R, et al: Pregnancy in chronic kidney disease: need for a common language.
J Nephrol 24(03)282, 2011
Piccoli GB, Daidola G, Attini R, et al: Kidney biopsy in pregnancy: evidence for counseling? A
systematic narrative review. BJOG 120(4):412, 2013
Piccoli GB, Minelli F, Versino E, et al: Pregnancy in dialysis patients in the new millennium: a systematic
review and meta-regression analysis correlating dialysis schedules and pregnancy outcomes.
Nephrol Dial Transplant 31(11):1915, 2016

Popkov VA, Andrianova NV, Manskikh VN, et al: Pregnancy protects the kidney from acute ischemic
injury. Sci Rep 8(1):14534, 2018
Prakash J, Ganiger VC, Prakash S, et al: Acute kidney in pregnancy with special reference to
pregnancy-specific disorders: a hospital based study. J Nephrol 31(1):79, 2018
Putra LG, Minor TX, Bolton DM, et al: Improved assessment of renal lesions in pregnancy with
magnetic resonance imaging. Urology 74:535, 2009
Rafi J, Smith RB: Acute lobar nephronia in pregnancy: a rarely reported entity in obstetric renal
medicine. Arch Gynecol Obstet 286(3):797, 2012
Ramin SM, Vidaeff AC, Yeomans ER, et al: Chronic renal disease in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol
108(6):1531, 2006
Raz R, Sakran W, Chazan B, et al: Long-term follow-up of women hospitalized for acute pyelonephritis.
Clin Infect Dis 37:1014, 2003
Reinstatler L, Khaleel S, Pais VM Jr: Association of pregnancy with stone formation among women in
the United States: a NHANES analysis 2007 to 2012. J Urol 198(2):389, 2017
Rocha A, Cardoso A, Malheiro J, et al: Pregnancy after kidney transplantation: graft, mother, and
newborn complications. Transplant Proc 45(3):1088, 2013
Rogozińska E, Formina S, Zamora J, et al: Accuracy of onsite tests to detect asymptomatic bacteriuria
in pregnancy: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Obstet Gynecol 128(3):495, 2016
Rosenberg E, Sergienko R, Abu-Ghanem S: Nephrolithiasis during pregnancy: characteristics,
complications, and pregnancy outcome. World J Urol 29(6):743, 2011
Ruan JM, Adams SR, Carpinito G, et al: Bladder calculus presenting as recurrent urinary tract
infections: a late complication of cervical cerclage placement: a case report. J Reprod Med 56(3–
4):172, 2011
Rubilotta E, Balzarro M, Lacola V et al: Current clinical management of renal and perinephric
abscesses: a literature review. Urologia 81(3):144, 2014
Sabr Y, Lisonkova S, Skoll A, et al: Severe maternal morbidly among women with solid organ
transplants: a population-based study. Abstract. No. 612. Am J Obstet Gynecol 220:S405, 2019
Sanchez-Ramos L, McAlpine KJ, Adair CD, et al: Pyelonephritis in pregnancy: once a day ceftriaxone
versus multiple doses of cefazolin. A randomized double-blind trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol 172:129,
1995
Satin AJ, Seiken GL, Cunningham FG: Reversible hypertension in pregnancy caused by obstructive
uropathy. Obstet Gynecol 81:823, 1993
Schieve LA, Handler A, Hershow R, et al: Urinary tract infection during pregnancy: its association with
maternal morbidity and perinatal outcome. Am J Public Health 84:405, 1994
Schneeberger C, Geerlings SE, Middleton P, et al: Interventions for preventing recurrent urinary tract
infection during pregnancy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 11:CD009279, 2015
Schneeberger C, Kazemier BM, Geerlins SE: Asymptomatic bacteriuria and urinary tract infections in
special patient groups: women with diabetes mellitus and pregnant women. Curr Opin Infect Dis
27:106, 2014
Schreiber-Zamora J, Szpotanska-Sikorska M, Drozdowska-Szymczak A, et al: Neurological
development of children born to mothers after kidney transplantation. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med
32(9):1523, 2019
Semins MJ, Matlaga BR: Management of urolithiasis in pregnancy. Int J Womens Health 5:590, 2013
Shahraki AD, Bardeh ME, Najarzadegan MR: Investigation of the relationship between idiopathic
microscopic hematuria (in the first and second trimesters) and major adverse outcomes of
pregnancy. Adv Biomed Res 28:5, 2016

Sheffield JS, Cunningham FG: Urinary tract infection in women. Obstet Gynecol 106:1085, 2005
Sibai BM, Villar MA, Mabie BC: Acute renal failure in hypertensive disorders of pregnancy. Pregnancy
outcome and remote prognosis in thirty-one consecutive cases. Am J Obstet Gynecol 162(3):777,
1990
Siegel JF, Smith A, Moldwin R: Minimally invasive treatment of renal abscess. J Urol 1:52, 1996
Sledzińska A, Mielech A, Krawczyk B, et al: Fatal sepsis in a pregnant woman with pyelonephritis
caused by Escherichia coli bearing Dr and P adhesions: diagnosis based on postmortem strain
genotyping. BJOG 118(2):266, 2011
Snyder CC, Barton JR, Habli M, et al: Severe sepsis and septic shock in pregnancy: indications for
delivery and maternal and perinatal outcomes. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 26(5):503, 2013
Spotti D: Pregnancy in women with diabetic nephropathy. J Nephrol 32(3):379, 2019
Spurbeck RR, Stapleton AE, Johnson JR, et al: Fimbrial profiles predict virulence of uropathogenic
Escherichia coli strains: contribution of ygi and yad fimbriae. Infect Immun 79(12):4753, 2011
Steele SE, Terry JE, Page LM, et al: Pregnancy in women known to be living with a single kidney.
Obstet Gynecol 12(1):22, 2019
Stehman-Breen CO, Levine RJ, Qian C, et al: Increased risk of preeclampsia among nulliparous
pregnant women with idiopathic hematuria. Am J Obstet Gynecol 187:703, 2002
Stephens KK, Warstrak C: Urinary tract infection association with proteinuria in pregnancy as
measured by protein to creatinine ratio. Abstract No. 642. Am J Obstet Gynecol 220:S426, 2019
Stettler RW, Cunningham FG: Natural history of chronic proteinuria complicating pregnancy. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 167:1219, 1992
Strevens H, Wide-Swensson D, Hansen A, et al: Glomerular endotheliosis in normal pregnancy and preeclampsia. BJOG 110:831, 2003
Sturgiss SN, Davison JM: Effect of pregnancy on long-term function of renal allografts. Am J Kidney
Dis 26:54, 1995
Su X, Lv J, Liu Y, et al: Pregnancy and kidney outcomes in patients with IgA nephropathy: a cohort
study. Am J Kidney Dis 70(2):262, 2017
Surian M, Imbasciati E, Cosci P, et al: Glomerular disease and pregnancy: a study of 123 pregnancies in
patients with primary and secondary glomerular diseases. Nephron 36:101, 1984
Swartz MA, Lydon-Rochelle MT, Simon D, et al: Admission for nephrolithiasis in pregnancy and risk of
adverse birth outcomes. Obstet Gynecol 109(5):1099, 2007
Tan YK, Cha DY, Gupta M: Management of stones in abnormal situations. Urol Clin North Am
40(1):79, 2013
Tangren JS, Powe CE, Ankers E, et al: Pregnancy outcomes after clinical recovery from AKI. J Am
Soc Nephrol 28(5):1566, 2017
Tangren JS, Powe CE, Ecker J, et al: Metabolic and hypertensive complications of pregnancy in women
with nephrolithiasis. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 13(4):612, 2018
Thomas AG, Burrows L, Knight R, et al: The effect of pregnancy on cyclosporine levels in renal
allograft patients. Obstet Gynecol 90:916, 1997
Towers CV, Kaminskas CM, Garite TJ, et al: Pulmonary injury associated with antepartum
pyelonephritis: can patients at risk be identified? Am J Obstet Gynecol 164:974, 1991
Trevisan G, Ramos JG, Martins-Costa S, et al: Pregnancy in patients with chronic renal insufficiency at
Hospital de Clinicas of Porto Alegre, Brazil. Ren Fail 26:29, 2004
Turney JH, Ellis CM, Parsons FM: Obstetric acute renal failure 1956–1987. BJOG 96:679, 1989
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Asymptomatic Bacteriuria in Adults: Screening. 2019. Available
at: www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/Page/Document/UpdateSummaryFinal/asymptomatic-

bacteriuria-in-adults-screening1. Accessed December 31, 2019
Valent AM, Peticca K, DiMatteo A, et al: Pyelonephritis in pregnancy: prediction of prolonged
hospitalization and maternal morbidity using prognostic scoring systems. Am J Perinatol 34(12):1212,
2017
Vannevel V, Claes K, Baud D, et al: Preeclampsia and long-term renal function in women who
underwent kidney transplantation. Obstet Gynecol 131(1):57, 2018
Waikar SS, Bonventre JV: Acute kidney injury. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al (eds):
Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2018, p
1099
Wall LL: Preventing obstetric fistulas in low-resource countries: insights from a Haddon matrix. Obstet
Gynecol Surv 67(2):111, 2012
Wang F, Lu JD, Zhu Y, et al: Renal outcomes of pregnant patients with immunoglobulin a nephropathy: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J Nephrol 49(3):214, 2019
Watterson JD, Girvan AR, Beiko DT, et al: Management strategy for ureteral calculi in pregnancy.
Urology 60:383, 2002
Welsh GW III, Sims EA: The mechanisms of renal glucosuria in pregnancy. Diabetes 9:363, 1960
Whalley PJ: Bacteriuria of pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 97:723, 1967
Whalley PJ, Cunningham FG, Martin FG: Transient renal dysfunction associated with acute
pyelonephritis of pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 46(2):174, 1975
White WM, Zite NB, Gash J, et al: Low-dose computed tomography for the evaluation of flank pain in
the pregnant population. J Endourol 21(11):1255, 2007
Wiles K, Bramham K, Seed PT, et al: Serum creatinine in pregnancy: a systematic review. Kidney Int
Rep 4(3):408, 2019a
Wiles K, de Oliveira L: Dialysis in pregnancy. Best Pract Res Clin Obstet Gynaecol 57:33, 2019b
Wing DA, Hendershott CM, Debuque L, et al: A randomized trial of three antibiotic regimens for the
treatment of pyelonephritis in pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 92:249, 1998
Wing DA, Hendershott CM, Debuque L, et al: Outpatient treatment of acute pyelonephritis in pregnancy
after 24 weeks. Obstet Gynecol 94:683, 1999
Wing DA, Park AS, DeBuque L, et al: Limited clinical utility of blood and urine cultures in the treatment
of acute pyelonephritis during pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 182:1437, 2000
Wyld ML, Clayton PA, Jesudason S, et al: Pregnancy outcomes for kidney transplant recipients. Am J
Transplant 13:3173, 2013
Yaprak M, Doğru V, Sanhal CY, et al: Fertility outcome after renal transplantation: a single-center
experience. Transplant Proc 51(4):108, 2019
Zeeman GG, Cunningham FG, Pritchard JA: The magnitude of hemoconcentration with eclampsia.
Hypertens Pregnancy 28:127, 2009
Zeeman GG, Wendel GD Jr, Cunningham FG: A blueprint for obstetric critical care. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 188:532, 2003
Zhang JJ, Ma XX, Hao L, et al: A systematic review and meta-analysis of outcomes of pregnancy in
CKD and CKD outcomes in pregnancy. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 10(11):1964, 2015
Zhao C, Zhao J, Huang Y, et al: New-onset systemic lupus erythematosus during pregnancy. Clin
Rheumatol 32(6):815, 2013
Zhou J, Pollak MR: Polycystic kidney disease and other inherited disorders of tubule growth and
development. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al (eds): Harrison’s Principles of Internal
Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2018, p 2150

CHAPTER 57

Gastrointestinal Disorders

GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
UPPER GASTROINTESTINAL TRACT DISORDERS
HYPEREMESIS GRAVIDARUM
GASTROESOPHAGEAL REFLUX DISEASE
PEPTIC ULCER DISEASE
SMALL BOWEL AND COLON DISORDERS
ACUTE DIARRHEA
INFLAMMATORY BOWEL DISEASE
INTESTINAL OBSTRUCTION
APPENDICITIS
REFERENCES
During normal pregnancy, the gastrointestinal (GI) tract and its appendages
undergo remarkable anatomical, physiological, and functional alterations.
These changes, which are discussed in detail in Chapter 4 (p. 70), can
appreciably alter clinical findings normally relied on for diagnosis and
treatment. Moreover, as pregnancy progresses, GI findings become more
difficult to assess. The clinical examination is often obscured by a large
uterus that displaces abdominal organs and can alter the location and
intensity of pain and tenderness.

GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
■ Diagnostic Techniques
Endoscopy
Several endoscopic methods can be used to evaluate the gastrointestinal (GI)
tract during pregnancy without reliance on radiographic techniques. With
fiberoptic endoscopic instruments, the esophagus, stomach, duodenum, and
colon can be inspected (Savas, 2014; Song, 2018). The proximal jejunum
also can be studied, and the ampulla of Vater cannulated to perform
endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography—ERCP (Fogel, 2014;
Hedström, 2017). Experience in pregnancy with video capsule endoscopy
for small-bowel evaluation remains limited (Bandorski, 2016). Normal
pregnancy-related slowing of GI motility and thus increased transit time as
well as the recorder capsule’s electromagnetic field are theoretical concerns.
Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy is used for diagnosis and management
of several problems. Common bile duct exploration and drainage are used
for choledocholithiasis (Chap. 58, p. 1043). Sclerotherapy and placement of
percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) tubes also are performed
endoscopically.
Colonoscopy is indispensible for viewing the entire colon and distal
ileum. Except for the midtrimester, reports of colonoscopy during pregnancy
are limited, but most results suggest that it should be performed if necessary
(De Lima, 2015; Ludvigsson, 2017). Pregnancy indications include chronic
abdominal pain, hematochezia, and diarrhea (Cappell, 2011). Bowel
preparation is completed using polyethylene glycol electrolyte (GoLYTELY)
or sodium sulfate (Suprep) solutions (American Society for Gastrointestinal
Endoscopy, 2015). With these, most women avoid serious dehydration that
may cause diminished uteroplacental perfusion. In select cases, tap water
enemas may be an alternative for rectosigmoidoscopy to avoid some of these
risks.
Endoscopic procedures should be performed when indicated and ideally
in the second trimester (American Society for Gastrointestinal Endoscopy,
2012; Ludvigsson, 2017). A multidisciplinary approach with obstetricians,
gastroenterologists, and anesthesiologists is prudent. Table 57-1 outlines
preprocedural considerations in pregnancy.

TABLE 57-1. Preprocedural Considerations for Gastrointestinal
Endoscopy During Pregnancy

Noninvasive Imaging Techniques
The ideal technique for GI tract imaging during pregnancy is abdominal
sonography. However, the gravid uterus may obscure abdominal organs
making evaluation difficult. Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging allows
inspection of the abdomen and retroperitoneal space yet avoids radiation
exposure from computed tomography (CT) (Khandelwal, 2013). Examples
are MR cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) and MR enterography (MRE)
(Oto, 2009; Stern, 2014). These and other imaging modalities, and their safe
use in pregnancy, are discussed in Chapter 49.

Laparotomy and Laparoscopy
Surgery is lifesaving for certain GI conditions—perforative appendicitis
being the most common example. Intraabdominal surgery is the most
frequently performed nonobstetrical procedure during pregnancy (Devroe,
2019). Laparoscopic procedures have replaced traditional surgical
techniques for many abdominal disorders during pregnancy (Ye, 2019).
These are discussed in detail with descriptions of surgical technique in
Chapter 49 (p. 867) and in Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative
Obstetrics, 3rd edition (Kho, 2017). Guidelines for laparoscopy during
pregnancy have been provided by the American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2019) and the Society of American Gastrointestinal and
Endoscopic Surgeons (Pearl, 2017).

■ Nutritional Support

Specialized nutritional support can be delivered enterally, usually via
nasogastric tube feedings, or parenterally by venous catheter access, either
peripherally or centrally.
When possible, enteral alimentation is preferable because it has fewer
serious complications (Hoffer, 2018; Stokke, 2015). In obstetrical patients,
very few conditions prohibit enteral nutrition as a first effort to prevent
catabolism. For extreme cases, such as recalcitrant hyperemesis gravidarum,
percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy with a jejunal port (PEG-J tube) has
been described.
Parenteral nutrition provides nutrients when the intestinal tract must be
quiescent. Peripheral parenteral nutrition (PPN) administers dilute nutrient
admixtures and is appropriate for short-term use. Central venous access is
necessary for central parenteral nutrition (CPN) because its
hyperosmolarity requires rapid dilution in a high-flow vascular system
(Robinson, 2018; Worthington, 2017). These solutions provide 24 to 40
kcal/kg/d, principally as a hypertonic glucose solution. Various conditions
may prompt CPN during pregnancy (Table 57-2). The most common
indications are short bowel syndrome and dysmotility disorders, and feeding
duration averages 33 days (Billiauws, 2017).
TABLE 57-2. Some Conditions Treated with Enteral or Parenteral
Nutrition During Pregnancya

Parenteral nutrition complications are frequent and may be severe
(Hoffer, 2018). The most common is catheter sepsis, and Folk (2004)
reported a 25-percent incidence in 27 women with hyperemesis gravidarum.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention provides detailed guidelines
to prevent catheter-related sepsis (O’Grady, 2011). Other maternal
complications include upper-extremity venous thrombosis, volume overload,
and reversible liver dysfunction. Perinatal complications are rare, however,
fetal subdural hematoma caused by maternal vitamin K deficiency has been
described (Sakai, 2003).

Appreciable morbidity is also associated with long-term use of a
peripherally inserted central catheter (PICC). Again, infection is the most
common serious long-term complication (Hoffer, 2018; Holmgren, 2008). In
a series of 84 such catheters inserted in 66 pregnant women, Cape and
coworkers (2014) reported a 56-percent complication rate, and bacteremia
was the most frequent. For short-term nutrition lasting a few weeks, PICC
placement and its greater benefit-versus-risk ratio seems reasonable
(Worthington, 2017).

UPPER GASTROINTESTINAL TRACT DISORDERS
■ Hyperemesis Gravidarum
Mild to moderate nausea and vomiting are especially common in pregnant
women until approximately 16 weeks’ gestation (Chap. 10, p. 191). In a
small but significant proportion of these, however, it is severe and
unresponsive to simple dietary modification and antiemetics. Hyperemesis
gravidarum is defined variably as severe unrelenting nausea and vomiting
that produces weight loss, dehydration, ketosis, alkalosis from loss of
hydrochloric acid, and hypokalemia. Acidosis develops from partial
starvation. In some women, transient hepatic dysfunction develops, and
biliary sludge accumulates (Table 58-1, p. 1031). Other causes should first
be considered because hyperemesis gravidarum is a diagnosis of exclusion.
Study criteria are not standardized, and thus population incidences vary
(Koot, 2018). However, an ethnic or familial predilection has been
described (London, 2017). In several population-based studies, the
hospitalization rate for hyperemesis gravidarum was 0.5 to 2.1 percent
(Fiaschi, 2019; Vikanes, 2013). Up to 25 percent of those hospitalized in a
previous pregnancy for hyperemesis will again require admission (Nurmi,
2018).
The etiopathogenesis of hyperemesis gravidarum is unknown and is
likely multifactorial. High or rapidly rising serum levels of pregnancyrelated hormones such as human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG), estrogen,
progesterone, placental growth hormone, prolactin, thyroxine, and
adrenocortical hormones are implicated (London, 2017; Verberg, 2005).
Other associated hormones include ghrelins, leptin, nesfatin-1, and peptide
YY 3–36 (Albayrak, 2013; Gungor, 2013).

Superimposed on this hormonal cornucopia are many biological and
environmental factors. Moreover, in some but not all severe cases,
interrelated psychological components play a major role (Mitchell-Jones,
2017; Senturk, 2017). Factors that increase the risk for admission include
hyperthyroidism, previous pregnancy complicated by hyperemesis, diabetes,
GI illnesses, some restrictive diets, and asthma (Fell, 2006; Fiaschi, 2016;
Mullin, 2012). An association of Helicobacter pylori infection has been
proposed, but evidence is inconclusive (Goldberg, 2007; London, 2017).
Chronic marijuana use may cause the similar cannabinoid hyperemesis
syndrome (Alaniz, 2015; Andrews, 2015). And for unknown reasons—
perhaps estrogen-related—a female fetus raises the risk but smoking and
obesity decrease it by 1.5-fold (Cedergren, 2008; Fiaschi, 2016). Some have
reported a relationship between severe hyperemesis gravidarum and anemia,
venous thromboembolism (VTE), gestational hypertension, and preeclampsia
(Fiaschi, 2018). An association between hyperemesis and preterm birth is
unclear (Kleine, 2017). Koren and colleagues (2018) suggested that
prolonged vomiting may cause metabolic abnormalities that interfere with
fetal brain development. No long-term maternal consequences follow
hyperemesis. Specifically, two population-based studies found no
unfavorable cardiovascular risks in Norwegian women (Fossum, 2017,
2018).

Complications
Vomiting may be prolonged, frequent, and severe, and a list of potentially
fatal complications is given in Table 57-3. Various degrees of acute kidney
injury from dehydration are encountered, and rhabdomyolysis may be
contributory (Lassey, 2016). Rarely, we and others have encountered women
with renal failure requiring dialysis (Dayangan Sayan, 2018; Hill, 2002).
Mallory-Weiss tears result from continuous retching. Other complications
include pneumothorax, pneumomediastinum, diaphragmatic rupture, and
gastroesophageal rupture—Boerhaave syndrome (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2018; Chen, 2012).
TABLE 57-3. Some Serious and Life-Threatening Complications Reported
with Hyperemesis Gravidaruma

At least two serious vitamin deficiencies have been reported with
hyperemesis in pregnancy. One is Wernicke encephalopathy from thiamine
deficiency (Di Gangi, 2012; Palacios-Marqués, 2012). A systematic review
reported that ocular signs, confusion, and ataxia were common, and
approximately 60 percent had this triad (Oudman, 2019). In some women, an
abnormal electroencephalogram (EEG) may be seen, and usually MR
imaging shows findings (Oudman, 2019; Vaknin, 2006; Zara, 2012). One
woman had recurrent encephalopathy in a subsequent pregnancy (Stephens,
2019). Maternal deaths have been described, and long-term sequelae include
blindness, convulsions, and coma (Oudman, 2019; Selitsky, 2006). Vitamin
K is a second potential deficiency. Maternal coagulopathy, fetal intracranial
hemorrhage, and vitamin K embryopathy have been reported (Kawamura,
2008; Lane, 2015; Nijsten, 2021).

Management
One management algorithm for nausea and vomiting of pregnancy is shown in
Figure 57-1. Most women with mild to moderate symptoms respond to
outpatient therapy with any of several first-line antiemetic agents (Boelig,
2018, McParlin, 2016). One mainstay is Diclegis—a combination of
doxylamine (10 mg) plus pyridoxine (10 mg). The usual dose is two tablets
orally at bedtime, and it appears safe and effective (Briggs, 2017; Koren,

2014). If relief is insufficient, one additional first-morning tablet is added to
the bedtime dose. This can be further escalated to include one first-morning,
one midafternoon, and two bedtime tablets (Duchesnay Inc., 2018). At our
institution, for cost savings, we prescribe these two agents individually. The
formula is one half of a 25-mg Unisom (doxylamine) tablet plus a 25-mg
vitamin B6 (pyridoxine) tablet. The same graduated dosing is used but does
not exceed three total daily doses.

FIGURE 57-1 Algorithm for outpatient and inpatient management of pregnancy nausea and vomiting,
and hyperemesis gravidarum.

Ondansetron (Zofran) is slightly more effective than the combination of
doxylamine and pyridoxine (Oliveira, 2014; Pasternak, 2013). In some
studies, the former has been associated with birth defects (Briggs, 2017).
However, after a recent systematic review of Cochrane and Reprotox
databases, authors concluded that ondansetron is not teratogenic (Kaplan,
2019). Other drawbacks include potential maternal effects from prolonged
QT-interval and serotonin syndrome. For these reasons it is preferably
reserved for severe cases after 8 weeks’ gestation (Lavecchia, 2018).
When simple measures fail, intravenous (IV) crystalloid solutions are
given to correct dehydration, ketonemia, electrolyte deficits, and acid-base
imbalances. Hypokalemia is common, and cardiac arrest has been reported
(Walch, 2018). No benefits are gained by infusing 5-percent dextrose along
with crystalloids (Tan, 2013). Thiamine, 100 mg, is usually diluted in 1 L of
the selected crystalloid to prevent Wernicke encephalopathy for women who
require IV hydration and have vomited for more than 3 weeks (Giugale,
2015). It is infused at the maintenance rate desired for patient hydration. This
thiamine dose is provided daily for the next 2 to 3 days and is followed by
IV multivitamins if IV hydration continues (Levichek, 2002).
If vomiting persists after rehydration and failed outpatient management,
hospitalization is recommended (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2018). IV hydration is continued and antiemetics such as
promethazine, prochlorperazine, chlorpromazine, or metoclopramide are
given parenterally (Table 57-4). Several antiemetics are associated with the
long-QT syndrome, discussed in Chapter 52 (p. 936). Outpatient treatment
regimens at the hospital also are effective (McCarthy, 2014).
TABLE 57-4. Medications for Gastrointestinal Disorders in Pregnancy

Some, but not all, studies indicate that treatment with
glucocorticosteroids is not effective (Sridharan, 2020; Yost, 2003). They are
recommended only for refractory cases because of their putative
teratogenicity (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2018).
With persistent vomiting after hospitalization, appropriate steps should
be taken to exclude possible underlying diseases as a cause of hyperemesis.
That said, in one study, endoscopy did not change management in 49 women
(Debby, 2008). Other potential sources include gastroenteritis, cholecystitis,
pancreatitis, hepatitis, peptic ulcer, and pyelonephritis. In addition, severe
preeclampsia and fatty liver are more likely after midpregnancy. Although

clinical thyrotoxicosis has been implicated as a cause of hyperemesis, it is
more likely that abnormally elevated serum thyroxine levels are a surrogate
for higher-than-average serum hCG levels (Sun, 2014). This is discussed
further in Chapter 5 (p. 97). In our experiences, serum free thyroxine levels
normalize quickly with hydration and emesis treatment.
With treatment, most women will have a positive response and may be
sent home with oral antiemetic therapy. The readmission rate is 25 to 35
percent in most prospective studies. Risks for anxiety and depression are
increased in these women (Mitchell-Jones, 2017; Senturk, 2017). At
Parkland Hospital, more than one third of women with hyperemesis required
readmission. Patient characteristics had limited utility in predicting the risk
of readmission. For example, maternal demographics, substance use,
psychiatric illness, and initial hospitalization length were not associated with
readmission (White, 2018). If psychiatric and social factors contribute to the
illness, the woman usually improves remarkably while hospitalized
(Swallow, 2004). However, symptoms relapse in a fourth of these women,
and some go on to develop posttraumatic stress syndrome (Chap. 64, p.
1150) (Christodoulou-Smith, 2011; McCarthy, 2011; Nurmi, 2018). For some
women, hyperemesis may be an indication for elective termination
(Poursharif, 2007).
Grooten and colleagues (2017) showed that early enteral tube feeding has
no advantages. However, in the small percentage of women who have
recalcitrant vomiting after intensive therapy, consideration is given for
enteral nutrition (p. 1013). Stokke and associates (2015) described
successful use of nasojejunal feeding for up to 41 days in 107 such women.
Use of sonography to confirm correct tube placement has been described and
avoids radiation exposure (Swartzlander, 2013). PEG-J tubes also have been
reported (Saha, 2009; Schrag, 2007).
Only a very few women will require parenteral nutrition (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2018; Yost, 2003). In a study of
599 women, however, Peled and coworkers (2014) reported that 20 percent
required central parenteral nutrition.

■ Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease
Symptomatic reflux is seen in up to 15 percent of nonpregnant individuals
(Kahrilas, 2018). The spectrum of sequelae includes esophagitis, stricture,

Barrett esophagus, and adenocarcinoma. The main symptom of reflux is
pyrosis (heartburn), which is especially common in pregnancy. In one study,
its prevalence rose from 26 percent in the first trimester to 36 percent in the
second and 51 percent in the third trimester (Fill Malfertheiner, 2017). The
retrosternal burning sensation stems from esophagitis caused by
gastroesophageal reflux of stomach acid, which follows relaxation of the
lower esophageal sphincter. The diagnosis is typically made from symptoms
alone.
Symptoms usually respond to abstaining from tobacco and alcohol, eating
small meals, elevating the head of the bed, limiting postprandial recumbency,
and avoiding “trigger” foods. These may include fatty foods, tomato-based
foods, and coffee. Oral antacids are first-line therapy. If severe symptoms
persist, a proton-pump inhibitor is given and an H2-receptor antagonist and
sucralfate can be added (see Table 57-4). Both classes are generally safe for
use in pregnancy (Briggs, 2017). From preliminary data, proton-pump
inhibitors taken early in pregnancy may increase the risk for preeclampsia
(Hastie, 2019). Sucralfate is the aluminum salt of sulfated sucrose and
inhibits pepsin. Approximately 10 percent of the aluminum salt is absorbed,
and this agent is considered safe for pregnant women (Briggs, 2017). A 1-g
sucralfate tablet is taken orally 1 hour before each of the three meals and at
bedtime for up to 8 weeks. Antacids are not used within a half hour before or
after sucralfate doses. Despite attempts with these options, if relief is not
attained, endoscopy should be considered. Misoprostol is contraindicated
because it stimulates labor (Chap. 26, p. 490).
In nonpregnant patients, surgical fundoplication can be performed
(Kahrilas, 2018). Although the procedure is not done during pregnancy,
Biertho and colleagues (2006) described 25 women who had undergone
laparoscopic Nissen fundoplication before pregnancy. Only 20 percent had
reflux symptoms during pregnancy.

■ Hiatal Hernia
The older literature is informative regarding hiatal hernias in pregnancy.
Upper gastrointestinal radiographs performed in 195 women in late
pregnancy showed that 20 percent of 116 multiparas and 5 percent of 79
nulliparas had a hiatal hernia (Rigler, 1935). Of 10 women studied
postpartum, hernia persisted in three at 1 to 18 months.

The relationship of hiatal hernia with reflux esophagitis is not clear. One
study demonstrated no association and showed that the lower esophageal
sphincter functioned effectively even when displaced intrathoracically
(Cohen, 1971). Nevertheless, during pregnancy, hiatal hernias may cause
vomiting, epigastric pain, and bleeding from ulceration. Schwentner (2011)
reported severe herniation requiring surgical repair in a woman with a 12week gestation. Curran and coworkers (1999) described a 30-week
pregnancy complicated by gastric outlet obstruction from a paraesophageal
hernia.

■ Diaphragmatic Hernia
These are caused by herniations of abdominal contents through either the
foramen of Bochdalek or Morgagni. Fortunately, they rarely complicate
pregnancy. In one review of 18 pregnant women who developed acute
obstruction within a diaphragmatic hernia, the maternal mortality rate was 45
percent (Kurzel, 1988). Herniation has been reported in one woman who had
antireflux surgery in early pregnancy (Brygger, 2013). Several case reports
also describe spontaneous diaphragmatic rupture from elevated
intraabdominal pressure during delivery (Chen, 2012; Sharifah, 2003).
Surgical treatment is considered in symptomatic gravidas and is
individualized according to gestational age and clinical setting (Ménassa,
2019; Whang, 2018).

■ Achalasia
In this rare motility disorder, the lower esophageal sphincter fails to relax
properly with swallowing. The esophageal muscularis also displays
nonperistaltic contraction activity (Kahrilas, 2018). The defect is caused by
inflammatory destruction of the myenteric (Auerbach) plexus within smooth
muscle of the lower esophagus and its sphincter. Postganglionic cholinergic
neurons are unaffected, and thus sphincter stimulation is unopposed.
Symptoms are dysphagia, chest pain, and regurgitation. Barium swallow
radiography demonstrates bird beak or ace of spades narrowing at the distal
esophagus. Endoscopy is performed to exclude gastric carcinoma, and
manometry is confirmatory.

During pregnancy, normal physiological relaxation of the lower
esophageal sphincter in women with achalasia theoretically should not occur.
In one series, half of these women had worsened symptoms, but reflux is
uncommon (Vogel, 2018). In other pregnancy studies, most women did not
have worsening symptoms (Khudyak, 2006). At least one maternal death was
reported at 24 weeks’ gestation and perforation of a 14-cm-diameter
megaesophagus was implicated (Fassina, 1995).
Management of achalasia includes a soft diet and anticholinergic drugs.
With persistent symptoms, other options include nitrates, calcium-channel
antagonists, and botulinum toxin A injected locally (Hooft, 2015; Kahrilas,
2018). Balloon dilation of the sphincter may be necessary, and 85 percent of
nonpregnant patients respond (Vogel, 2018). One caveat is that esophageal
perforation is a serious complication of dilation. If dilation or medical
therapy fail to provide relief, myotomy is considered. In one report, a 29week pregnant woman with achalasia was treated for 10 weeks with
peripheral parenteral nutrition, and surgical myotomy was done postpartum
(Spiliopoulos, 2013).

■ Peptic Ulcer Disease
The lifetime prevalence of acid peptic disorders in women is 10 percent
(Del Valle, 2018). Erosive ulcer disease involves the stomach and
duodenum. Gastroduodenal ulcers commonly are caused by chronic gastritis
from Helicobacter pylori, or they develop from nonsteroidal
antiinflammatory drug (NSAID) use. Neither is common in pregnancy
(McKenna, 2003; Weyermann, 2003). Rosen and coworkers (2021) reported
2535 pregnant women with peptic ulcer disease and found that complications
were less frequent than in nonpregnant controls.
Acid secretion also is important, and this underlies the efficacy of
antisecretory agents. Natural gastroprotection during pregnancy probably
originates from physiological changes that include reduced gastric acid
secretion, decreased motility, and considerably increased mucus secretion
(Hytten, 1991). Despite this, ulcer disease may be underdiagnosed because
of frequent treatment for reflux esophagitis (Mehta, 2010). In the past 55
years at Parkland Hospital, during which time we have cared for more than
600,000 pregnant women, we have encountered very few who had proven
ulcer disease. Perforation is rare (Goel, 2014). Before appropriate therapy

was commonplace, Clark (1953) studied 313 pregnancies in 118 women
with ulcer disease and noted a clear remission during pregnancy in almost 90
percent. However, benefits were short lived. Symptoms recurred in more
than half by 3 months postpartum and in almost all by 2 years.
The mainstay of management is eradication of H pylori and prevention of
NSAID-induced disease. Antacids are usually self-prescribed, but other
first-line therapy is a proton-pump inhibitor or H2-receptor blocker (see
Table 57-4) (Del Valle, 2018; Laine, 2012). Sucralfate can be added and
provides a protective coating at the ulcer base.
With active ulcers, a search for H pylori is undertaken. Diagnostic aids
include the urea breath test, serological testing, fecal testing, or endoscopic
biopsy. If any of these yield positive results, combination antimicrobial plus
proton-pump inhibitor therapy is indicated (Chey, 2017). Several effective
oral treatment regimens do not include tetracycline and can be used during
pregnancy. One 14-day regimen includes clarithromycin, 500 mg twice daily,
which is paired either with amoxicillin, 1000 mg twice daily or with
metronidazole, 500 mg three times daily. These antibiotics are given with a
proton-pump inhibitor (Del Valle, 2018).

■ Upper Gastrointestinal Bleeding
In some women, persistent vomiting is accompanied by worrisome upper
gastrointestinal bleeding. Occasionally, a peptic ulcer is the source.
However, most of these women have small linear mucosal tears near the
gastroesophageal junction—Mallory-Weiss tears (p. 1014). Bleeding usually
responds promptly to conservative measures that include IV proton-pump
inhibitors and topical antacids (Laine, 2012). Transfusions may be needed,
and if bleeding persists, endoscopy is usually indicated (O’Mahony, 2007).
With sustained retching, the less common, but more serious, esophageal
rupture—Boerhaave syndrome—may develop from high esophageal
pressure.

SMALL BOWEL AND COLON DISORDERS
The small bowel has diminished motility during pregnancy. Lawson and
colleagues (1985) showed that the small bowel mean transit times of 99,

125, and 137 minutes in each successive trimester, respectively, were slower
than 75 minutes when nonpregnant. Muscular relaxation of the colon is
accompanied by increased absorption of water and sodium that predisposes
to constipation. This complaint is reported by almost 25 percent of women at
some time during pregnancy and the puerperium (Everson, 1992). Symptoms
are usually only mildly bothersome, and initial treatment includes increasing
fluid intake (>8 glasses/d) and fiber consumption (20 to 35 g/d) (Body,
2016). If these lifestyle modifications fail, bulk-forming agents such as
methylcellulose may be added, and in severe cases the stimulant laxative
bisacodyl. We have encountered several pregnant women who developed
megacolon from impacted stool. These women almost invariably had
chronically abused stimulatory laxatives.

■ Acute Diarrhea
The estimated monthly prevalence of diarrhea among adults is 3 to 7 percent
(DuPont, 2014). Diarrhea can be classified as acute (<2 weeks), persistent
(2 to 4 weeks), and chronic (>4 weeks). Most cases of acute diarrhea are
caused by infectious agents, and a third result from foodborne pathogens. The
large variety of viruses, bacteria, helminths, and protozoa that cause diarrhea
in adults also afflict pregnant women. These are usually accompanied by
vomiting, fever, and abdominal pain. Some of these are discussed in Chapter
64 (p. 1197).
Evaluation of acute diarrhea depends on its severity and duration. Some
indications for evaluation include profuse watery diarrhea with dehydration,
grossly bloody stools, fever >38°C, duration >48 hr without improvement,
recent antimicrobial use, and diarrhea in the immunocompromised patient
(Camilleri, 2018; DuPont, 2014). Cases of moderately severe diarrhea with
fecal leukocytes or gross blood may be treated with empirical antibiotics
rather than evaluation. However, risks and benefits should be considered,
and it is reasonable to withhold treatment until stool testing is completed to
exclude infection. Some features of the more common acute diarrheal
syndromes and their treatment are shown in Table 57-5.
TABLE 57-5. Etiology, Clinical Features, and Treatment of Common Acute
Diarrheal Syndromes

The mainstay of treatment is IV hydration using normal saline or Ringer
lactate and potassium supplementation in amounts to restore maternal blood
volume and to ensure uteroplacental perfusion. Vital signs and urine output
are monitored for signs of sepsis. For moderately severe nonfebrile illness
without bloody diarrhea or recent travel, antimotility agents such as
loperamide (Imodium) may be useful. An initial 4-mg (two capsules) dose
can be followed with another 2-mg capsule after subsequently passed watery
stools. Dosages should not exceed 8 mg/d, and loperamide is not used for
more than 48 h. Bismuth subsalicylate (Pepto-Bismol) also may alleviate
symptoms. The recommended dosage is 30 mL (525 mg) of its liquid form or
two tablets (263 mg/tablet) chewed well each 30 to 60 min and not to exceed
eight doses in 24 h. The drug will produce harmless black stools (Riddle,
2016).
Judicious use of antimicrobial agents is warranted. For moderately to
severely ill women, some recommend empirical treatment with
ciprofloxacin, 500 mg twice daily for 3 days. Specific pathogens are treated
as needed when identified (see Table 57-5). Syndromes for which treatment

is usually unnecessary include those caused by Escherichia coli,
staphylococcal species, Bacillus cereus, and norovirus. Severe illness
caused by Salmonella species is treated with ciprofloxacin or trimethoprimsulfamethoxazole; by Campylobacter species with azithromycin; by
Clostridioides difficile with oral vancomycin or fidaxomicin; and by
Giardia species and Entamoeba histolytica with metronidazole (DuPont,
2014; McDonald, 2018; Rocha-Castro, 2016).

Clostridioides difficile Infection
Formally known as Clostridium difficile, this anaerobic gram-positive
bacillus is transmitted by the fecal-oral route. In a study from China, 3.7
percent of normal gravidas were colonized (Ye, 2016). It is the most frequent
nosocomial infection in the United States. In 2011, 453,000 cases of C
difficile and 29,000 associated deaths were reported by the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention (Lessa, 2015). Its incidence in pregnant
women has doubled during the past decade (Ruiter-Ligeti, 2018). The most
important risk factor is antibiotic use, and the highest risk is with
aminopenicillins, clindamycin, cephalosporins, and fluoroquinolones. Other
risk factors include inflammatory bowel disease, immunosuppression,
advanced age, and gastrointestinal surgery. Most cases are hospital-acquired,
however, 10 percent are community-acquired cases (Gerding, 2018). With
severe colitis, the infection-related mortality rate is 5 percent.
Laboratory diagnosis from a stool sample uses nucleic-acid amplification
testing (NAAT) for C difficile itself or uses an enzyme-immunoassay-based
algorithm for a unique C difficile enzyme or its toxins A and B (McDonald,
2018). Less often, infection may be diagnosed endoscopically (Fig. 57-2).
Only patients with new-onset diarrhea and ≥3 unformed stool of unexplained
etiology should be tested, and posttreatment testing is not recommended.
Prevention is by soap-and-water hand washing, and infected individuals are
isolated. Treatment consists of stopping the offending antibiotics and giving
10 days of oral vancomycin, 125 mg four times daily, or fidaxomicin
(Dificid), 200 mg twice daily (McDonald, 2018). The risk of recurrence
after an initial episode is 20 percent. Fecal microbial transplantation may
become standard for recurrent clostridial colitis (Saeedi, 2017).

FIGURE 57-2 Causes of colitis. A. Ulcerative colitis with diffuse ulcerations and exudates. B. Crohn
colitis with deep ulcers. C. Pseudomembranous colitis with yellow, adherent membranes. D. Ischemic
colitis. (Reproduced with permission from Song LM, Topazian M: Gastrointestinal endoscopy. In
Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al (eds): Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed.
New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2018.)

■ Inflammatory Bowel Disease
Two presumably noninfectious forms of intestinal inflammation are
ulcerative colitis and Crohn disease. Differentiation between these is
important because treatment differs. That said, they both share common
features, and sometimes are indistinguishable if Crohn disease involves the
colon. The features shown in Table 57-6 permit a reasonably confident
diagnostic differentiation in most cases. The etiopathogenesis is enigmatic in
both, but a genetic predisposition is suspected, especially for Crohn disease.
Inflammation is thought to result from dysregulated mucosal immune function

in response to commensal microbiota, with or without an autoimmune
component (Friedman, 2018).
TABLE 57-6. Some Shared and Differentiating Characteristics of
Inflammatory Bowel Disease

Ulcerative Colitis
This is a mucosal disorder with inflammation confined to the superficial
luminal layers of the colon. It typically begins at the rectum and extends
proximally for a variable distance. In approximately 40 percent of cases,
disease is confined to the rectum or the rectosigmoid, but 20 percent have
pancolitis. For unknown reasons, prior appendectomy protects against
ulcerative colitis (Friedman, 2018). Endoscopic findings include mucosal
granularity and friability that is interspersed with mucosal ulcerations and a
mucopurulent exudate (see Fig. 57-2).
Major symptoms of ulcerative colitis include diarrhea, rectal bleeding,
tenesmus, and abdominal cramps. The disease is characterized by
exacerbations and remissions. Toxic megacolon and catastrophic hemorrhage
are particularly dangerous complications that may necessitate colectomy.
Extraintestinal manifestations include arthritis, uveitis, and erythema
nodosum. The risk of associated colon cancer approaches 1 percent per year.

With either ulcerative colitis or Crohn disease, risks for VTE are higher in
even asymptomatic women (Friedman, 2018; Mahadevan, 2019).

Crohn Disease
Also known as regional enteritis, Crohn ileitis, or granulomatous colitis,
Crohn disease has more protean manifestations than ulcerative colitis. It
involves not only the mucosa but also the deeper bowel layers (see Fig. 572). Lesions can be seen throughout the entire GI tract, from the mouth to the
anus, but it typically is segmental (Friedman, 2018). Approximately 30
percent of patients have only small-bowel involvement, 25 percent have
isolated colonic involvement, and 40 percent have both, usually with the
terminal ileum and colon involved. Perianal fistulas and abscesses develop
in a third of those with colonic involvement.
Symptoms depend on which bowel segment(s) is involved. Thus,
complaints may include lower-right-sided cramping abdominal pain,
diarrhea, weight loss, low-grade fever, and obstructive symptoms. The
disease is chronic with exacerbations and remissions, and importantly, it
cannot be cured medically or surgically. Approximately a third of patients
require surgery within the first year after diagnosis, and thereafter, the rate is
5 percent per year. Reactive arthritis is common, and the GI cancer risk,
although not as great as with ulcerative colitis, is increased substantially.

Inflammatory Bowel Disease and Fertility
Subfertility in women is linked to active disease, but normal fertility is likely
with quiescent colitis (Mahadevan, 2019). Subfertility may also be partially
attributed to sulfasalazine, which causes reversible sperm abnormalities
(Feagins, 2009).
For women requiring surgical resection, a laparoscopic approach has a
higher subsequent fertility rate (Beyer-Berjot, 2013). With colectomy,
however, although fertility is improved, up to half of women will be
persistently infertile (Bartels, 2012; Lee, 2019a). Sexual function and
fertility are only modestly affected by ileal pouch–anal anastomosis (Hor,
2016).

Inflammatory Bowel Disease and Pregnancy

Because ulcerative colitis and Crohn disease are relatively common in young
women, these disorders are encountered with some frequency in pregnancy.
In many studies, the outcomes are grouped together for both entities. For
example, in a study from Australia, Shand and colleagues (2016) reported a
prevalence of 1 inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) case in 320 births. In this
regard, some generalizations can be made. First, consensus supports that
pregnancy does not increase the likelihood of an IBD flare (Mahadevan,
2019). Indeed, in a 10-year surveillance of women in the European
Collaborative on Inflammatory Bowel Disease, the likelihood of a flare
during pregnancy was lower than the preconceptional rate (Riis, 2006).
Although most women with quiescent disease in early pregnancy do not have
relapses, when a flare develops, it may be severe. Also, and as discussed
subsequently, active disease in early pregnancy increases the likelihood of
disease relapse during pregnancy (de Lima-Karagiannis, 2016).
In general, most usual treatment regimens may be continued during
pregnancy. Diagnostic evaluations should be undertaken if needed to direct
management, and surgery should be performed if indicated (Mahadevan,
2019). Fecal calprotectin, an inflammatory biomarker in stool samples, is a
valid tool in pregnancy to identify IBD flares (Julsgaard, 2017; Lichtenstein,
2018; Rubin, 2019).
At first glance, it appears that adverse pregnancy outcomes are increased
with IBD (Boyd, 2015; Getahun, 2014). Initially, this was attributed to the
fact that most studies included women with either form of disease.
Specifically, Crohn disease was noted to be linked to excessive morbidity.
But, according to Reddy (2008) and others, these adverse outcomes were in
women with severe disease and multiple recurrences. Indeed, in the
prospective European case-control ECCO-EpiCom study of 332 pregnant
women with IBD, outcomes were similar in women with ulcerative colitis or
Crohn disease compared with unaffected pregnant women (Bortoli, 2011).
Still, women with active disease during pregnancy have an increased
frequency of preterm births (Kammerlander, 2017; Shand, 2016).
Importantly, perinatal mortality rates are not appreciably increased.
Ulcerative Colitis and Pregnancy. In one review of 755 pregnancies, colitis
that was quiescent at conception worsened in approximately a third of
pregnancies (Fonager, 1998). In women with active disease at the time of
conception, approximately 45 percent worsened, 25 percent remained

unchanged, and only 25 percent improved. These observations are similar to
those described in a review by Miller (1986) as well as in later reports (de
Lima-Karagiannis, 2016; Oron, 2012).
Osteoporosis is a significant complication in up to a third of affected
women. Thus, vitamin D—800 IU daily—and calcium—1200 mg daily—are
given. Folic acid, 2 to 4 mg orally daily, is recommended preconceptionally
and during the first trimester for neural-tube defect prevention (Mahadevan,
2019). This high dose counteracts the antifolate actions of sulfasalazine.
Flares may be caused by psychogenic stress, and reassurance is important.
Last, the venous thromboembolism risk is doubled, but thromboprophylaxis
is not routinely provided (Hansen, 2017).
Management for colitis for the most part mirrors that outside of
pregnancy. Treatment of active colitis and maintenance therapy incorporate
drugs that deliver 5-aminosalicyclic acid (5-ASA), also known as
mesalamine. Sulfasalazine (Azulfidine) is the prototype, and its 5-ASA
moiety inhibits prostaglandin synthase in colonic mucosa. Others include
olsalazine (Dipentum), balsalazide (Colazal), and delayed-release 5-ASA
derivatives (Apriso, Asacol, Pentasa, Lialda). Glucocorticoids are
beneficial and are given orally, parenterally, or by enema for moderate or
severe disease that does not respond to 5-ASA. Corticosteroids provide a
high remission rate for active disease, but they are not given for maintenance
therapy (Friedman, 2018). Recalcitrant disease is managed with
immunomodulating drugs, including azathioprine, 6-mercaptopurine,
cyclosporine, or tacrolimus, which all appear relatively safe in pregnancy
(Briggs, 2017; Mozaffari, 2015). Importantly, methotrexate is teratogenic
and contraindicated in pregnancy (Chap. 8, p. 152).
In the past, biologics were reserved for recalcitrant, moderate to severe
disease. Because of their considerable efficacy, however, these medications
are now frequently given initially for this severity of disease to prevent
future complications. These agents are antibodies against tumor necrosis
factor alpha (TNF-α). Those recommended for IBD treatment are shown in
Table 57-7 (Mahadevan, 2019). Women who begin pregnancy while taking
biologics should continue these through pregnancy until several weeks before
delivery to help avoid maternal infections from immunosuppression. These
agents are administered IV or subcutaneously. Several studies support their
safety in pregnancy, although there are concerns that their discontinuance may
prompt a relapse (Chaparro, 2018; Friedman, 2018; Luu, 2018). Another

worry is that they may cause immunosuppression in the newborn, and early
neonatal vaccination with live-attenuated agents are delayed for at least 6
months (Esteve-Solé, 2017; Julsgaard, 2016).
TABLE 57-7. Biologics Used to Treat Inflammatory Bowel Disease in
Pregnancy

Colorectal endoscopy is performed as indicated. Surgical management is
tailored to disease severity (Killeen, 2017). During pregnancy, colectomy
and ostomy creation for fulminant colitis may be needed as a lifesaving
measure, and it has been described during each trimester. Dozois (2006)
reviewed 42 such cases and found that, in general, outcomes have been good
with partial or complete colectomy. Parenteral nutrition is occasionally
needed for women with prolonged exacerbations.
For women with an ileal pouch and an anal anastomosis, frequency of
bowel movements, fecal incontinence, and pouchitis may temporarily worsen
with pregnancy. The last is an inflammatory condition of the ileoanal pouch
probably due to bacterial proliferation and stasis. Pouchitis usually responds
to ciprofloxacin or metronidazole. In one rare case, adhesions to the growing
uterus led to ileal pouch perforation (Aouthmany, 2004).
In general, women with uncomplicated colitis can be delivered vaginally
(Foulon, 2017). That said, the cesarean delivery rate in these women is
increased (Burke, 2017). It is controversial whether women who have had a
prior proctocolectomy and ileal pouch–anal anastomosis can be safely
delivered vaginally. Hahnloser (2004) reviewed delivery routes in women

with 235 pregnancies before and 232 pregnancies after ileoanal pouch
surgery. Functional outcomes were similar, and it was concluded that
cesarean delivery should be reserved for obstetrical indications. To the
contrary, following their systematic review, Foulon and coworkers (2017)
recommended cesarean delivery with the caveat that uncomplicated vaginal
delivery was safe.
As discussed, quiescent ulcerative colitis likely has minimal adverse
effects on pregnancy outcome. Modigliani (2000) reviewed perinatal
outcomes in 2398 pregnancies and reported them to be not substantively
different from those in the general obstetrical population. Specifically, the
incidences of spontaneous abortion, preterm delivery, and stillbirth were
remarkably low. These authors and others also describe a cesarean delivery
rate that was substantially higher than that for normal controls (Burke, 2017;
Mahadevan, 2015). The previously described ECCO-EpiCom study reported
similar outcomes in 187 gravidas with ulcerative colitis compared with
normal control women (Bortoli, 2011).
Crohn Disease and Pregnancy. In general, Crohn disease activity during
pregnancy is related to its status around the time of conception. In a cohort
study of 279 pregnancies conceived by 186 women whose disease was
inactive at conception, a fourth relapsed during pregnancy (Fonager, 1998).
In 93 with active disease at conception, however, two thirds either remained
active or worsened. Other reviews describe similar findings (Miller, 1986;
Oron, 2012).
Calcium, vitamin D, and folic acid supplementation mirror that for
ulcerative colitis. For maintenance during asymptomatic periods, no regimen
is universally effective. Sulfasalazine is effective for some, but the newer 5ASA formulations are better tolerated. Glucocorticoids induce a 60- to 70percent remission rate (Friedman, 2018). Prednisone therapy may control
moderate to severe flares but is less effective for small-bowel involvement.
Immunomodulators such as azathioprine, 6-mercaptopurine, cyclosporine,
and tacrolimus are used for active disease and for maintenance. These
appear relatively safe during pregnancy (Chaparro, 2018; Luu, 2018). As
discussed in Chapter 8 (p. 152), methotrexate is contraindicated in
pregnancy. As with ulcerative colitis, treatment with TNF-α inhibitors is
often used initially for active Crohn disease and maintenance (see Table 577) (Friedman, 2018; Mahadevan, 2019).

Endoscopy or conservative surgery is indicated for complications
(Killeen, 2017). Patients with small-bowel involvement are more likely to
require surgery for complications that include fistulas, strictures, obstruction,
abscesses, and intractable disease. In an earlier study, an abdominal surgical
procedure was required during 5 percent of pregnancies (Woolfson, 1990).
Parenteral nutrition has been used successfully during severe recurrences.
Those with an ileal loop colostomy may have significant problems. Unless
there is a perianal fistula or active perianal disease, women with Crohn
disease usually can undergo vaginal delivery without complications (Foulon,
2017; Mahadevan, 2019).
As discussed, Crohn disease compared with ulcerative colitis is
associated with higher adverse pregnancy outcome rates. Outcomes are
probably related to disease activities. In a case-control Danish study,
Norgård (2007) reported a twofold risk of preterm births. Dominitz (2002)
reported a two- to threefold increased risk for preterm delivery, low
birthweight, fetal-growth restriction, and cesarean delivery in 149 women
with Crohn disease. Recall, however, that the ECCO-EpiCom study found
pregnancy outcomes to be similar to those in unaffected women.

■ Ostomy and Pregnancy
A colostomy or an ileostomy can be problematic during pregnancy because
of its location (Hux, 2010). In a report of 82 pregnancies in 66 women with
an ostomy, stomal dysfunction was common, but it responded to
conservative management in most cases (Gopal, 1985). Surgical intervention
was necessary, however, in three of six women who developed bowel
obstruction and in another four with ileostomy prolapse—almost 10 percent
overall. In this older study, only a third of 82 women underwent cesarean
delivery, but Takahashi (2007) described six of seven cesarean deliveries in
women with Crohn disease and a stoma. Although adhesions usually are
involved with an obstructed ileostomy, the enlarging uterus may act to cause
obstruction (Porter, 2014). Last, Farouk and coworkers (2000) reported that
pregnancy did not worsen long-term ostomy function.

■ Intestinal Obstruction

The incidence of bowel obstruction is not increased during pregnancy,
although it generally is more difficult to diagnose. Meyerson (1995) reported
a 20-year incidence of 1 case in 17,000 deliveries at two Detroit hospitals.
Of acute abdomen cases in pregnancy, adhesive disease leading to smallbowel obstruction was second only to appendicitis—15 versus 30 percent,
respectively (Unal, 2011). Approximately half of cases are due to adhesions
from previous pelvic surgery that includes cesarean delivery (Andolf, 2010;
Lyell, 2011). Another 25 percent of bowel obstruction is caused by volvulus,
which may involve sigmoid colon, cecum, or small bowel. These have been
reported in late pregnancy or early puerperium (Al Maksoud, 2015; Bade,
2014). Bokslag (2014) and Wax (2013) and their colleagues described
small-bowel obstruction in pregnancy following the currently popular Rouxen-Y gastric bypass, which is performed for weight loss. Intussusception is
occasionally encountered (Bosman, 2014; Moliere, 2019). Bowel
obstruction subsequent to colorectal surgery for cancer was increased
threefold in women who had open versus laparoscopic surgery (Haggar,
2013). Last, Serra and coworkers (2014) described a massive ventral hernia
with intestinal obstruction.
Most cases of intestinal obstruction during pregnancy result from
pressure of the growing uterus on intestinal adhesions. This is more likely
around midpregnancy when the uterus becomes an abdominal organ; in the
third trimester when the fetal head descends; or immediately postpartum
when uterine size acutely shrinks (Davis, 1983). Perdue (1992) reported that
98 percent of affected pregnant women had either continuous or colicky
abdominal pain, and 80 percent had nausea and vomiting. Abdominal
tenderness was found in 70 percent, and abnormal bowel sounds noted in
only 55 percent. Plain abdominal radiographs following soluble contrast
showed evidence of obstruction in 90 percent of affected women. Plain
radiographs, however, are less accurate for diagnosing small-bowel
obstruction, and we and others have found that CT and MR imaging can be
diagnostic (Essilfie, 2007; Moliere, 2019). Colonoscopy can be both
diagnostic and therapeutic for colonic volvulus (Dray, 2012; Khan, 2012).
During pregnancy, mortality rates with obstruction can be excessive
because of difficult and thus delayed diagnosis, reluctance to operate during
pregnancy, and the need for emergency surgery (Firstenberg, 1998; Shui,
2011). In an older report of 66 pregnancies, Perdue and associates (1992)
described 6-percent maternal and 26-percent fetal mortality rates. Two of the

four women who died were in late pregnancy, and they had bowel
perforation from sigmoid or cecal volvulus caused by adhesions.

■ Colonic Pseudo-Obstruction
Also known as Ogilvie syndrome, pseudo-obstruction is caused by adynamic
colonic ileus. It is characterized by massive abdominal distention with cecal
and right-hemicolonic dilation (Fig. 57-3). Approximately 10 percent of all
cases are associated with pregnancy, and its reported frequency is 1 case in
1500 births (Reeves, 2015). The syndrome usually develops postpartum—90
percent after cesarean delivery—but it has been reported antepartum. In a
review, perforation was common, especially if the cecal diameter exceeded
12 cm (Jayaram, 2017). More recently, treatment with an IV infusion of
neostigmine, 2 mg, given during cardiac monitoring usually results in prompt
decompression (Song, 2018). In some cases, colonoscopic decompression is
performed, and in others, laparotomy is needed for perforation (Rawlings,
2010).

FIGURE 57-3 Ogilvie syndrome. Massive dilation of colon due to pseudo-obstruction in a woman
following cesarean delivery. A. Abdominal radiograph. B. Axial image from computed tomography.

■ Appendicitis
The lifetime incidence for appendicitis ranges from 7 to 10 percent (Flum,
2015). Thus, evaluation for possible appendicitis is relatively common
during pregnancy. Theilen and colleagues (2017) studied 171 such women
during a 5-year period, but only 14 women ultimately were found to have

pathologically confirmed appendicitis. After clinical and imaging evaluation,
the frequency of suspected appendicitis drops and that of confirmed
appendicitis in more than 8 million women ranged from 1 case in 1000 to
5500 births (Abbasi, 2014; Hée, 1999; Mazze, 1991).
It is repeatedly—and appropriately—emphasized that pregnancy makes
the diagnosis of appendicitis more difficult. Nausea and vomiting accompany
normal pregnancy, but also, as the uterus enlarges, the appendix commonly
moves upward and outward from the right lower quadrant (Baer, 1932;
Erkek, 2015; Pates, 2009). Another often-stated reason for late diagnosis is
that some degree of leukocytosis accompanies normal pregnancy. That said,
Theilen and coworkers (2017) observed that a white cell count >18,000/μL
made the diagnosis tenfold more likely. Neutrophilic shift is another
(Gentles, 2020). Pregnant women—especially in late gestation—frequently
do not have clinical findings “typical” for appendicitis. Thus, it commonly is
confused with cholecystitis, labor, pyelonephritis, renal colic, placental
abruption, or uterine leiomyoma degeneration.
Most reports indicate increasing morbidity and mortality rates with
advancing gestational age. And, as the appendix is progressively deflected
upward by the growing uterus, omental containment of infection becomes
increasingly unlikely. It is indisputable that appendiceal perforation is more
common during later pregnancy (Abbasi, 2014). In the studies by Andersson
(2001) and Ueberrueck (2004), the incidence of perforation was
approximately 8, 12, and 20 percent in successive trimesters.

Diagnosis
Persistent abdominal pain and tenderness are the most reproducible findings.
Right lower quadrant pain is the most frequent, although pain migrates
upward with appendiceal displacement (Mourad, 2000). For initial
evaluation, sonographic abdominal imaging is reasonable in suspected
appendicitis, even if to exclude an obstetrical cause of pain (Butala, 2010).
That said, graded compression sonography is difficult because of cecal
displacement and uterine imposition (Pedrosa, 2009). Appendiceal
computed tomography is more sensitive and accurate than sonography to
confirm suspected appendicitis (Katz, 2012; Raman, 2008). Specific views
can be designed to diminish fetal radiation exposure (Chap. 49, p. 873).

When available, MR imaging is the preferred modality for evaluation of
suspected appendicitis in pregnancy (Fig. 57-4). MR imaging has high
diagnostic yield and accuracy, and it also provides alternative diagnoses
(Fonseca, 2014; Theilen, 2015). One metaanalysis of 30 studies cited
positive- and negative-predictive values of 96 and 99.5 percent,
respectively, for MR imaging (Duke, 2016). Others report similar findings
(Burke, 2015; Kave, 2019). However, Aguilera and colleagues (2018) found
a sensitivity of only 18 percent in pregnant women.

FIGURE 57-4 Magnetic resonance T2 flair image of acute appendicitis in a midtrimester pregnancy.
The bright signal is inflammation and the block dot is a fecalith that can be seen in the midappendix
(arrow). The fetal trunk (T) and leg (L) and amnionic fluid (A) are seen within the gravid uterus
superior to the appendix. (Reproduced with permission by Dr. Christina Herrera.)

Management
When appendicitis is suspected, most recommend prompt surgical
exploration. Although diagnostic errors may lead to removal of a normal
appendix, surgical evaluation is preferable to postponed intervention and
generalized peritonitis (Abbasi, 2014). In earlier reports, the diagnosis was
verified in only 60 to 70 percent of pregnant women. As indicated above,

however, with CT and MR imaging, these figures have improved (Duke,
2016; Theilen, 2015). Still and importantly, the accuracy of diagnosis is
inversely proportional to gestational age.
Currently, laparoscopic resection is almost always used to treat
suspected appendicitis during the first two trimesters. In a report from a
Swedish database of nearly 2000 laparoscopic appendectomies, perinatal
outcomes were similar to those of more than 1500 open laparotomies done
before 20 weeks’ gestation (Reedy, 1997). Conversely, in their review,
Wilasrusmee and coworkers (2012) reported a higher rate of fetal loss with
laparoscopy. Authors of three more recent systematic reviews indicate that
the level of evidence is not strong enough to demonstrate a preferred
approach to appendectomy (Frountzas, 2019; Lee, 2019b; Walker, 2014). It
has evolved that in many centers, laparoscopic appendectomy is also
performed in most cases during the third trimester (Donkervoort, 2011). This
is encouraged by others, including the Society of American Gastrointestinal
and Endoscopic Surgeons (Pearl, 2017; Sekar, 2019; Soper, 2011).
Before exploration, IV antimicrobial therapy is begun, usually with a
second-generation cephalosporin or third-generation penicillin. Unless there
is gangrene, perforation, or a periappendiceal phlegmon, antimicrobial
therapy can usually be discontinued after surgery. Without generalized
peritonitis, the prognosis is excellent. Seldom is cesarean delivery indicated
at the time of appendectomy. Uterine contractions are common, and although
some clinicians recommend tocolytic agents, we do not. de Veciana (1994)
reported that tocolytic use substantially increased the risk for pulmonarypermeability edema caused by sepsis (Chap. 50, p. 883).

Antimicrobial versus Surgical Treatment
Because of European studies, some advocate that many cases of appendicitis
can be treated successfully with IV antimicrobials alone (Flum, 2015; Talan,
2019). In one study, 6 percent of pregnant women with appendicitis were
treated medically, and these gravidas had “considerably” elevated risks for
septic shock, peritonitis, and VTE compared with surgically managed cases
(Abbasi, 2014). In another study of 20 women, failure rate was 25 percent
(Joo, 2017). At this time, we discourage this practice until appropriate
studies have been done with pregnant women. Certainly, if elected, such
treatment should exclude women with obstructive appendicitis, and the
threshold to convert to surgical treatment must be low.

Pregnancy Outcomes
Appendicitis increases the likelihood of preterm labor, especially if
peritonitis has developed. Spontaneous labor after 23 weeks ensues with
greater frequency following surgery for appendicitis compared with surgery
for other indications (Ibiebele, 2019; Won, 2017). In one study, the fetal loss
rate was 22 percent if surgery was performed after 23 weeks’ gestation.
Three large population-based studies attest to the adverse outcomes from
appendicitis in pregnancy. From the California State Inpatient Database, the
fetal loss rate was 20 percent (Won, 2017). A nationwide study from Taiwan
found that risks for low birthweight and preterm delivery rose 1.5- to 2-fold
when outcomes in 908 women with acute appendicitis were compared with
those of controls (Wei, 2012). Last, an Australian population-based study
reported an almost twofold increased incidence of preterm birth following
appendectomy (Ibiebele, 2019).

REFERENCES
Abbasi N, Patenaude V, Abenhaim HA: Management and outcomes of acute appendicitis in pregnancy
—population-based study of over 7000 cases. BJOG 121(12):1509, 2014
Aguilera F, Gilchrist BF, Farkas DT: Accuracy of MRI in diagnosing appendicitis during pregnancy. Am
Surg 84(8):1326, 2018
Alaniz V, Liss J, Metz TD, et al: Cannabinoid hyperemesis syndrome: a cause of refractory nausea and
vomiting in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 125(6):1484, 2015
Albayrak M, Karatas A, Demiraran Y, et al: Ghrelin, acylated ghrelin, leptin, and PYY-3 levels in
hyperemesis gravidarum. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 26(9):866, 2013
Al Maksoud AM, Barsoum AK, Moneer MM: Sigmoid volvulus during pregnancy: a rare non-obstetric
complication. Report of a case and review of the literature. Int J Surg Case Rep 17:51, 2015
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Nausea and vomiting of pregnancy. Practice
Bulletin No. 189, January 2018
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Nonobstetric surgery during pregnancy.
Committee Opinion No. 775, April 2019
Andersson RE, Lambe M: Incidence of appendicitis during pregnancy. Int J Epidemiol 30:1281, 2001
Andolf E, Thorsell M, Käkkén K: Cesarean delivery and risk for postoperative adhesions and intestinal
obstruction: a nested case-control study of the Swedish Medical Birth Registry. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 203(4):406, 2010
Andrews KH, Bracero LA: Cannabinoid hyperemesis syndrome during pregnancy: a case report. J
Reprod Med 60(9-10):430, 2015
Aouthmany A, Horattas MC: Ileal pouch perforation in pregnancy: report of a case and review of the
literature. Dis Colon Rectum 47:243, 2004
ASGE Standards of Practice Committee, Khashab MA, Chithadi KV, et al: Antibiotic prophylaxis for GI
endoscopy. Gastrointest Endosc 81(1):8, 2015

ASGE Standards of Practice Committee, Saltzman JR, Cash BD, et al: Bowel preparation before
colonoscopy. Gastrointest Endosc 81(4):781, 2015
ASGE Standards of Practice Committee, Shergill AK, Ben-Menachem T, et al: Guidelines for
endoscopy in pregnant and lactating women. Gastrointest Endosc 76(1):18, 2012
Bade K, Omundsen M: Caecal volvulus: a rare cause of intestinal obstruction in pregnancy. ANZ J Surg
84(4):298, 2014
Baer JL, Reis RA, Arens RA: Appendicitis in pregnancy with changes in position and axis of normal
appendix in pregnancy. JAMA 98:1359, 1932
Bandorski D, Kurniawan N, Baltes P, et al: Contraindications for video capsule endoscopy. World J
Gastroenterol 22(45):9898, 2016
Bartels SA, D’Hoore A, Cuesta MA, et al: Significantly increased pregnancy rates after laparoscopic
restorative proctocolectomy: a cross-sectional study. Ann Surg 256(6):1045, 2012
Beyer-Berjot L, Maggiori L, Birnbaum D, et al: A total laparoscopic approach reduces the infertility rate
after ileal pouch-anal anastomosis: a 2-center study. Ann Surg 258(2):275, 2013
Biertho L, Sebajang H, Bamehriz F, et al: Effect of pregnancy on effectiveness of laparoscopic Nissen
fundoplication. Surg Endosc 20:385, 2006
Billiauws L, Armengol Debeir L, Poullenot F, et al: Pregnancy is possible on long-term home parenteral
nutrition in patients with chronic intestinal failure: results of a long term retrospective observational
study. Clin Nutr 36(4):1165, 2017
Body C, Christie JA: Gastrointestinal diseases in pregnancy: nausea, vomiting, hyperemesis gravidarum,
gastroesophageal reflux disease, constipation, and diarrhea. Gastroenterol Clin North Am 45(2):267,
2016
Boelig RC, Barton SJ, Saccone G, et al: Interventions for treating hyperemesis gravidarum: a Cochrane
systematic review and meta-analysis. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 31(18):2492, 2018
Bokslag A, Jebbink J, De Wit L, et al: Intussusception during pregnancy after laparoscopic Roux-en-Y
gastric bypass. BMJ Case Rep, November 18, 2014
Bortoli A, Pedersen N, Duricova D, et al: Pregnancy outcome in inflammatory bowel disease:
prospective European case-control ECCO-Epicom study, 2003–2006. Aliment Pharmacol Ther
34(7):724, 2011
Bosman WM, Veger HT, Hedeman Joosten PP, et al: Ileocaecal intussusception due to submucosal
lipoma in a pregnant woman. BMJ Case Rep 2014:pii:bcr2013203110, 2014
Boyd HA, Basit S, Harpsoe MC, et al: Inflammatory bowel disease and risk of adverse pregnancy
outcomes. PLoS One 10(6):e0129567, 2015
Briggs GG, Freeman RK, Towers CV, et al: Drugs in Pregnancy and Lactation, 11th edition.
Philadelphia, Wolters Kluwer, 2017
Brygger L, Fristrup CW, Harbo FS, et al: Acute gastric incarceration from thoracic herniation in
pregnancy following laparoscopic antireflux surgery. BMJ Case Rep 2013:pii: bcr2012008391, 2013
Burke KE, Haviland MJ, Hacker MR, et al: Indications for mode of delivery in pregnant women with
inflammatory bowel disease. Inflamm Bowel Dis 23(5):721, 2017
Burke LM, Bashir MR, Miller FH, et al: Magnetic resonance imaging of acute appendicitis in
pregnancy: a 5-year multiinstitutional study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 213:693.e1, 2015
Butala P, Greenstein AJ, Sur MD, et al: Surgical management of acute right lower-quadrant pain in
pregnancy: a prospective cohort study. J Am Coll Surg 211(4):491, 2010
Camilleri M, Murray JA: Diarrhea and constipation. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al (eds):
Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2018, p 261

Cape AV, Mogensen KM, Robinson MK, et al: Peripherally inserted central catheter (PICC)
complications during pregnancy. JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr 38(5):595, 2014
Cappell MS: Risks versus benefits of gastrointestinal endoscopy during pregnancy. Nat Rev
Gastroenterol Hepatol 8(11):610, 2011
Cedergren M, Brynhildsen, Josefsson A, et al: Hyperemesis gravidarum that requires hospitalization and
the use of antiemetic drugs in relation to maternal body composition. Am J Obstet Gynecol
198:412.e1, 2008
Chaparro M, Verreth A, Lobaton T, et al: Long-term safety of in utero exposure to anti-TNFα drugs for
the treatment of inflammatory bowel disease: results from the multicenter European TEDDY study.
Am J Gastroenterol 113(3):396, 2018
Chen X, Yang X, Cheng W: Diaphragmatic tear in pregnancy induced by intractable vomiting: a case
report and review of the literature. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 25(9):1822, 2012
Chey WD, Leontiadis GI, Howden CW, et al: ACG Clinical Guideline: Treatment of Helicobacter
pylori Infection. Am J Gastroenterol 112(2):212, 2017
Christodoulou-Smith J, Gold JI, Romero R, et al: Posttraumatic stress symptoms following pregnancy
complicated by hyperemesis gravidarum. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 24(11):1307, 2011
Clark DH: Peptic ulcer in women. BMJ 1:1254, 1953
Cohen S, Harris LD: Does hiatus hernia affect competence of the gastroesophageal sphincter? N Engl J
Med 284(19):1053, 1971
Curran D, Lorenz R, Czako P: Gastric outlet obstruction at 30 weeks’ gestation. Obstet Gynecol 93:851,
1999
Davis MR, Bohon CJ: Intestinal obstruction in pregnancy. Clin Obstet Gynecol 26:832, 1983
Dayangan Sayan C: A case of prolonged hyperemesis resulting in hepatorenal failure, foetal distress and
neonatal mortality. J Obstet Gynaecol 38(4):2018
Debby A, Golan A, Sadan O, et al: Clinical utility of esophagogastroduodenoscopy in the management of
recurrent and intractable vomiting in pregnancy. J Reprod Med 53:347, 2008
De Lima A, Galjart B, Wisse PH, et al: Does lower gastrointestinal endoscopy during pregnancy pose a
risk for mother and child?—a systematic review. BMC Gastroenterol 15:15, 2015
de Lima-Karagiannis A, Zelinkova-Detkova Z, van der Woude CJ: The effects of active IBD during
pregnancy in the era of novel IBD therapies. Am J Gastroenterol 111(9):1305, 2016
Del Valle J: Peptic ulcer disease and related disorders. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al
(eds): Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2018,
p 2220
de Veciana M, Towers CV, Major CA, et al: Pulmonary injury associated with appendicitis in pregnancy:
who is at risk? Am J Obstet Gynecol 171(4):1008, 1994
Devroe S, Bleeser T, Van de Velde M, et al: Anesthesia for non-obstetric surgery during pregnancy in a
tertiary referral center: a 16-year retrospective, matched case-control, cohort study. Int J Obstet
Anesth 39:74, 2019
Di Gangi S, Gizzo S, Patrelli TS, et al: Wernicke’s encephalopathy complicating hyperemesis
gravidarum: from the background to the present. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 25(8):1499, 2012
Dominitz JA, Young JC, Boyko EJ: Outcomes of infants born to mothers with inflammatory bowel
disease: a population-based cohort study. Am J Gastroenterol 97:641, 2002
Donkervoort SC, Boerma D: Suspicion of acute appendicitis in the third trimester of pregnancy: pros
and cons of a laparoscopic procedure. JSLS 15(3):379, 2011
Dozois EJ, Wolff BG, Tremaine WJ, et al: Maternal and fetal outcome after colectomy for fulminant
ulcerative colitis during pregnancy: case series and literature review. Dis Colon Rectum 49:64, 2006

Dray X, Hamzi L, Lo Dico R, et al: Endoscopic reduction of a volvulus of the sigmoid colon in a
pregnancy woman. Dig Liver Dis 44(5):447, 2012
Duke E, Kalb B, Arif-Tiwari H, et al: A systematic review and meta-analysis of diagnostic performance
of MRI for evaluation of acute appendicitis. AJR Am J Roentgenol 206(3):508, 2016
DuPont HL: Acute infectious diarrhea in immunocompetent adults. N Engl J Med 370:1532, 2014
Duchesnay Inc.: Diclegis prescribing information. 2018. Available at:
https://files.duchesnay.com/duchesnay-usa/diclegis/diclegis-prescribing-information.pdf. Accessed
April 10, 2020
Erkek A, Anik Ilhan G, Yidixhan B, et al: Location of the appendix at the third trimester of pregnancy: a
new approach to old dilemma. J Obstet Gynaecol 35(7):688, 2015
Essilfie P, Hussain M, Stokes IM: Small bowel infarction secondary to volvulus during pregnancy: a case
report. J Reprod Med 52:553, 2007
Esteve-Solé A, Deyà-Martínez À, Teixidó I, et al: Immunological changes in blood of newborns exposed
to anti-TNF-α during pregnancy. Front Immunol 8:112, 2017
Farouk R, Pemberton JH, Wolff BG, et al: Functional outcomes after ileal pouch–anal anastomosis for
chronic ulcerative colitis. Ann Surg 231:919, 2000
Fassina G, Osculati A: Achalasia and sudden death: a case report. Forensic Sci Int 75:133, 1995
Feagins LA, Kane SV: Sexual and reproductive issues for men with inflammatory bowel disease. Am J
Gastroenterol 104(3):768, 2009
Fell DB, Dodds L, Joseph KS, et al: Risk factors for hyperemesis gravidarum requiring hospital
admission during pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 107:277, 2006
Fiaschi L, Nelson-Piercy C, Deb S, et al: Clinical management of nausea and vomiting in pregnancy and
hyperemesis gravidarum across primary and secondary care: a population-based study. BJOG
126(10):1201, 2019
Fiaschi L, Nelson-Piercy C, Gibson J, et al: Adverse maternal and birth outcomes in women admitted to
hospital for hyperemesis gravidarum: a population-based cohort study. Paediatr Perinat Epidemiol
32(1):40, 2018
Fiaschi L, Nelson-Piercy C, Tata LJ: Hospital admission for hyperemesis gravidarum: a nationwide
study of occurrence, reoccurrence and risk factors among 8.2 million pregnancies. Hum Reprod
31(8):1675, 2016
Fill Malfertheiner S, Seelback-Göbel B, Costa SD, et al: Impact of gastroesophageal reflux disease
symptoms on the quality of life in pregnant women: a prospective study. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol
29(8):892, 2017
Firstenberg MS, Malangoni MA: Gastrointestinal surgery during pregnancy. Gastroenterol Clin North
Am 27:73, 1998
Flum DR: Acute appendicitis—appendectomy or the “antibiotics first” strategy. N Engl J Med 372:1937,
2015
Fogel EL, Sherman S: ERCP for gallstone pancreatitis. N Engl J Med 370:150, 2014
Folk JJ, Leslie-Brown HF, Nosovitch JT, et al: Hyperemesis gravidarum: outcomes and complications
with and without total parenteral nutrition. J Reprod Med 49:497, 2004
Fonager K, Sorensen HT, Olsen J, et al: Pregnancy outcome for women with Crohn’s disease: a followup study based on linkage between national registries. Am J Gastroenterol 93:2426, 1998
Fonseca AL, Schuster KM, Kaplan LJ, et al: The use of magnetic resonance imaging in the diagnosis of
suspected appendicitis in pregnancy: shortened length of stay without increase in hospital charges.
JAMA Surg 149(7):687, 2014

Fossum S, Halvorsen S, Vikanes ÅV, et al: Cardiovascular risk profile at the age of 40–45 women with
previous hyperemesis gravidarum or hypertensive disorders in pregnancy: a population-based study.
Pregnancy Hypertens 12:129, 2018
Fossum S, Vikanes Å, Naess Ø, et al: Hyperemesis gravidarum and long-term mortality: a populationbased cohort study. BJOG 124(7):1080, 2017
Foulon A, Dupas JL, Sabbagh C, et al: Defining the most appropriate delivery mode in women with
inflammatory bowel disease: a systematic review. Inflamm Bowel Dis 23(5):712, 2017
Friedman S, Blumberg RS: Inflammatory bowel disease. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al
(eds): Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2018,
p 2258
Frountzas M, Nikolaou C, Stergios K, et al: Is the laparoscopic approach a safe choice for the
management of acute appendicitis in pregnant women? A meta-analysis of observational studies.
Ann R Coll Surg Engl 101(4):235, 2019
Gentles JQ, Meglei G, Chen L, et al: Is neutrophilia the key to diagnosing appendicitis in pregnancy? Am
J Surg 219(5):855, 2020
Gerding DN, Johnson S. Clostridium difficile infection, including pseudomembranous colitis. In
Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al (eds): Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed.
New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2018, p 964
Getahun D, Fassett MJ, Longstreth GF, et al: Association between maternal inflammatory bowel disease
and adverse perinatal outcomes. J Perinatol 34(6):435, 2014
Giugale LE, Young OM, Streitman DC: Iatrogenic Wernicke encephalopathy in a patient with severe
hyperemesis gravidarum. Obstet Gynecol 125(5):1150, 2015
Goel B, Rani J, Huria A, et al: Perforated duodenal ulcer—a rare cause of acute abdomen in pregnancy.
J Clin Diagn Res 8(9):OD03, 2014
Goldberg D, Szilagyi A, Graves L: Hyperemesis gravidarum and Helicobacter pylori infection. Obstet
Gynecol 110:695, 2007
Gopal KA, Amshel AL, Shonberg IL, et al: Ostomy and pregnancy. Dis Colon Rectum 28:912, 1985
Grooten IJ, Koot MH, van der Post JA, et al: Early enteral tube feeding in optimizing treatment of
hyperemesis gravidarum: the Maternal and Offspring outcomes after Treatment of HyperEmesis by
Refeeding (MOTHER) randomized controlled trial. Am J Clin Nurt 106(3):812, 2017
Guglielmi FW, Baggio-Bertinet D, Federico A, et al: Total parenteral nutrition-related gastroenterological
complications. Digest Liver Dis 38:623, 2006
Gungor S, Gurates B, Aydin S, et al: Ghrelins, obestatin, nesfatin-1 and leptin levels in pregnant women
with and without hyperemesis gravidarum. Clin Biochem 46(9):828, 2013
Haggar F, Pereira G, Preen D, et al: Maternal and neonatal outcomes in pregnancies following
colorectal cancer. Surg Endosc 27(7):2327, 2013
Hahnloser D, Pemberton JH, Wolff BG, et al: Pregnancy and delivery before and after ileal pouch-anal
anastomosis for inflammatory bowel disease: immediate and long-term consequences and outcomes.
Dis Colon Rectum 47:1127, 2004
Hansen AT, Erichsen R, Horváth-Puhó E, et al: Inflammatory bowel disease and venous
thromboembolism during pregnancy and the postpartum period. J Thromb Haemost 15(4):702, 2017
Hastie R, Bergman L, Cluver CA, et al: Proton pump inhibitor and preeclampsia risk among 157,720
women. Hypertension 73(5):1097, 2019
Hedström J, Nilsson J, Andersson R, et al: Changing management of gallstone-related disease in
pregnancy—a retrospective cohort analysis. Scan J Gastroenterol 52(9):1016, 2017

Hée P, Viktrup L: The diagnosis of appendicitis during pregnancy and maternal and fetal outcome after
appendectomy. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 65:129, 1999
Hill JB, Yost NP, Wendel GW Jr: Acute renal failure in association with severe hyperemesis
gravidarum. Obstet Gynecol 100:1119, 2002
Hoffer LJ, Bistrian BR, Driscoll DF: Enteral and parenteral nutrition. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper
DL, et al (eds): Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill
Education, 2018, p 2324
Holmgren C, Aagaard-Tillery KM, Silver RM, et al: Hyperemesis in pregnancy: an evaluation of
treatment strategies with maternal and neonatal outcomes. Am J Obstet Gynecol 198:56.e1, 2008
Hooft N, Schmidt ES, Bremner RM: Achalasia in pregnancy: botulinum toxin A injection of lower
esophageal sphincter. Case Rep Surg 2015:328970, 2015
Hor T, Lefevre JH, Shields C, et al: Female sexual function and fertility after ileal-anal pouch
anastomosis. Int J Colorectal Dis 31(3):593, 2016
Hux C: Ostomy and pregnancy. Ostomy Wound Manage 56(1):48, 2010
Hytten FE: The alimentary system. In Hytten F, Chamberlain G (eds): Clinical Physiology in Obstetrics.
London, Blackwell, 1991, p 137
Ibiebele I, Schnitzler M, Nippita T, et al: Appendicectomy during pregnancy and the risk of preterm
birth: a population data linkage study. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol 59(1):45, 2019
Jayaram P, Mohan M, Lindow S, et al: Postpartum acute colonic pseudo-obstruction (Ogilvies’
Syndrome): a systematic review of case reports and case series. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol
214:145, 2017
Joo JI, Park HC, Kim MJ, et al: Outcomes of antibiotic therapy of uncomplicated appendicitis in
pregnancy. Am J Med 130(12):1467, 2017
Julsgaard M, Christensen LA, Gibson PR, et al: Concentrations of adalimumab and infliximab in mothers
and newborns, and effects on infection. Gastroenterology 151:110, 2016
Julsgaard M, Hvas CL, Gearry RB, et al: Fecal calprotectin is not affected by pregnancy: clinical
implications for the management of pregnant patients with inflammatory bowel disease. Inflamm
Bowel Dis 23(7):1240, 2017
Kahrilas PJ, Hirano I: Diseases of the esophagus. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al (eds):
Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2018, p
2209
Kammerlander H, Nielsen J, Kjeldsen J, et al: The effect of disease activity on birth outcomes in a
nationwide cohort of women with moderate to severe inflammatory bowel disease. Inflamm Bowel
Dis 23(6):1011, 2017
Kaplan YC, Richardson JL, Keskin-Arslan E, et al: Use of ondansetron during pregnancy and the risk
of major congenital malformations: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Reprod Toxicol 86:1,
2019
Katz DS, Klein MA, Ganson G, et al: Imaging of abdominal pain in pregnancy. Radiol Clin North Am
50(1):149, 2012
Kave M, Parooie F, Salarzaei M: Pregnancy and appendicitis: a systematic review and meta-analysis on
the clinical us of MRI in diagnosis of appendicitis in pregnant women. World J Emerg Surg 14:37,
2019
Kawamura Y, Kawamata K, Shinya M, et al: Vitamin K deficiency in hyperemesis gravidarum as a
potential cause of fetal intracranial hemorrhage and hydrocephalus. Prenat Diagn 28:59, 2008
Khan MR, Ur Rehman S: Sigmoid volvulus in pregnancy and puerperium: a surgical and obstetric
catastrophe. Report of a case and review of the world literature. World J Emerg Surg 7(1):10, 2012

Khandelwal A, Fasih N, Kielar A: Imaging of the acute abdomen in pregnancy. Radiol Clin North Am
51:1005, 2013
Kho KA: Diagnostic and operative laparoscopy. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al
(eds): Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education,
2017
Khudyak V, Lysy J, Mankuta D: Achalasia in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol Surv 61:207, 2006
Killeen S, Gunn J, Hartley J: Surgical management of complicated and medically refractory
inflammatory bowel disease during pregnancy. Colorectal Dis 19(2):123, 2017
Kleine I, Da Silva A, Ahmed W, et al: Hospital admission for hyperemesis gravidarum in women at
increased risk of spontaneous preterm birth. Birth 44(4):384, 2017
Koot MH, Boelig RC, Van’t Hooft J, et al: Variation in hyperemesis gravidarum definition and outcome
reporting in randomised clinical trials: a systematic review. BJOG 125(12):1514, 2018
Koren G: Treating morning sickness in the United States—changes in prescribing are needed. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 211(6):602, 2014
Koren G, Ornoy A, Berkovitch M: Hyperemesis gravidarum-is it a cause of abnormal fetal brain
development? Reprod Toxicol 79:84, 2018
Kurzel RB, Naunheim KS, Schwartz RA: Repair of symptomatic diaphragmatic hernia during
pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 71:869, 1988
Laine L, Jensen DM: Management of patients with ulcer bleeding Am J Gastroenterol 107(3):345, 2012
Lane AS, Stallworth JL, Eichelberger KY, et al: Vitamin K deficiency embryopathy from hyperemesis
gravidarum. Case Rep Obstet Gynecol 2015:324173, 2015
Lassey SC, Robinson JN: Rhabdomyolysis after hyperemesis gravidarum. Obstet Gynecol 128(1):195,
2016
Lavecchia M, Chari R, Campbell S, et al: Ondansetron in pregnancy and the risk of congenital
malformations: a systematic review. J Obstet Gynaecol Can 40(7):910, 2018
Lawson M, Kern F, Everson GT: Gastrointestinal transit time in human pregnancy: prolongation in the
second and third trimesters followed by postpartum normalization. Gastroenterology 89:996, 1985
Lee S, Crowe M, Seow CH, et al: The impact of surgical therapies for inflammatory bowel disease on
female fertility. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 7:CD012711, 2019a
Lee SH, Lee JY, Choi YY, et al: Laparoscopic appendectomy versus open appendectomy for suspected
appendicitis during pregnancy: a systematic review and updated meta-analysis. BMC Surg 19(1):41,
2019b
Lessa FC, Mu Y, Bamberg WM, et al: Burden of Clostridium difficile infection in the United States. N
Engl J Med 372(9):825, 2015
Lichtenstein GR, Loftus EV, Isaacs KL, et al ACG Clinical Guideline: management of Crohn’s disease
in adults. Am J Gastroenterol 113(4):481, 2018
Lichtenstein GR, Hanauer SB, Sandborn WJ, et al: Management of Crohn’s disease in adults. Am J
Gastroenterol 104(2):465, 2009
London V, Grube S, Sherer DM, et al: Hyperemesis gravidarum: a review of recent literature.
Pharmacology 100(3-4):161, 2017
Ludvigsson JF, Lebwohl B, Ekbom A, et al: Outcomes of pregnancies for women undergoing endoscopy
while they were pregnant: a nationwide cohort study. Gastroenterology 152(3):2017
Luu M, Benzenine E, Doret M, et al: Continuous anti-TNFα use throughout pregnancy: possible
complications for the mother but not for the fetus—a retrospective cohort on the French national
health insurance database (EVASION). Am J Gastroenterol 113(11):1669, 2018

Lyell DJ: Adhesions and perioperative complications of repeat cesarean delivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol
205(6 Suppl):S11, 2011
Mahadevan U, Matro R: Care of the pregnant patient with inflammatory bowel disease. Obstet Gynecol
126(2):401, 2015
Mahadevan U, Robinson C, Bernasko N, et al: Inflammatory bowel disease in pregnancy clinical care
pathway: a report from the American Gastroenterological Association IBD Parenthood Project
Working Group. Am J Obstet Gynecol 220(4):308, 2019
Mazze RI, Källén B: Appendectomy during pregnancy: a Swedish registry study of 778 cases. Obstet
Gynecol 77:835, 1991
McCarthy FP, Khashan AS, North RA, et al: A prospective cohort study investigating associations
between hyperemesis gravidarum and cognitive, behavioural and emotional well-being in pregnancy.
PLoS One 6(11):e27678, 2011
McCarthy FP, Murphy A, Khashan AS, et al: Day care compared with inpatient management of nausea
and vomiting of pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 124(4):743, 2014
McDonald LC, Gerdin DN, Johnson S, et al: Clinical practice guidelines for Clostridium difficile
infection in adults and children: 2017 update by the Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA)
and Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America (SHEA). Clin Infect Dis 66(7):e1, 2018
McKenna D, Watson P, Dornan J: Helicobacter pylori infection and dyspepsia in pregnancy. Obstet
Gynecol 102:845, 2003
McParlin C, O’Donnell A, Robson SC, et al: Treatments for hyperemesis gravidarum and nausea and
vomiting in pregnancy: a systematic review. JAMA 316(13):1392, 2016
Mehta N, Saha S, Chien EK, et al: Disorders of the gastrointestinal tract in pregnancy. In Powrie R,
Greene M, Camann W (eds): de Swiet’s Medical Disorders in Obstetric Practice, 5th ed. New
Jersey, Wiley-Blackwell, 2010, p 256
Ménassa M, Bergeron AM, Drolet S, et al: Strangulated congenital diaphragmatic hernia of Bochdalek
diagnosed in later pregnancy: a case report and review of the literature. J Obstet Gynaecol Can
41(10):1482, 2019
Meyerson S, Holtz T, Ehrinpresis M, et al: Small bowel obstruction in pregnancy. Am J Gastroenterol
90:299, 1995
Miller JP: Inflammatory bowel disease in pregnancy: a review. J R Soc Med 79:221, 1986
Mitchell-Jones N, Gallos I, Farren J, et al: Psychological morbidity associated with hyperemesis
gravidarum: a systematic review and meta-analysis. BJOG 124(1):20, 2017
Modigliani RM: Gastrointestinal and pancreatic disease. In Barron WM, Lindheimer MD, Davison JM
(eds): Medical Disorders of Pregnancy, 3rd ed. St. Louis, Mosby, 2000, p 316
Moliere S, Cavillon V, Mesli Y: The case for magnetic resonance imaging in bowel obstruction during
pregnancy: intussusception in a pregnant woman with Roux-en-Y gastric bypass. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 220(3):282, 2019
Mourad J, Elliott JP, Erickson L, et al: Appendicitis in pregnancy: new information that contradicts longheld clinical beliefs. Am J Obstet Gynecol 185:1027, 2000
Mozaffari S, Abdolghaffari AH, Nikfar S, et al: Pregnancy outcomes in women with inflammatory
bowel disease following exposure to thiopurines and antitumor necrosis factor drugs: a systematic
review with meta-analysis. Hum Exp Toxicol 35(5):445, 2015
Mullin PM, Ching C, Schoenberg R, et al: Risk factors, treatments, and outcomes associated with
prolonged hyperemesis gravidarum. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 25(6):632, 2012
Nijsten K, van der Minnen L, Wiegers HM, et al: Hyperemesis gravidarum and vitamin K deficiency: a
systematic review. Br J Nutr July 30, 2021 [Epub ahead of print]

Norgård B, Hundborg HH, Jacobsen BA, et al: Disease activity in pregnant women with Crohn’s
disease and birth outcomes: a regional Danish cohort study. Am J Gastroenterol 102:1947, 2007
Nurmi M, Rautava P, Gissler M, et al: Recurrence patterns of hyperemesis gravidarum. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 219(5):469.e1, 2018
O’Grady NP, Alexander M, Burns L: Guidelines for prevention of intravascular catheter-related
infections. Clin Infect Dis 52(9):e162, 2011
Oliveira LG, Capp SM, You WB, et al: Ondansetron compared with doxylamine and pyridoxine for
treatment of nausea in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 124(4):735, 2014
O’Mahony S: Endoscopy in pregnancy. Best Pract Res Clin Gastroenterol 21:893, 2007
Oron G, Yogev Y, Shkolnik S, et al: Inflammatory bowel disease: risk factors for adverse pregnancy
outcome and the impact of maternal weight gain. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 25(112):2256, 2012
Oto A, Ernst R, Ghulmiyyah L, et al: The role of MR cholangiopancreatography in the evaluation of
pregnant patients with acute pancreaticobiliary disease. Br J Radiol 82(976):279, 2009
Oudman E, Wijnia JW, Oey M, et al: Wernicke’s encephalopathy in hyperemesis gravidarum: a
systematic review. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 236:84, 2019
Palacios-Marqués A, Delgado-Garcia S, Martín-Bayón T, et al: Wernicke’s encephalopathy induced by
hyperemesis gravidarum. BMJ Case Rep June 8, 2012
Pasternak B, Svanström M, Henrik A: Ondansetron in pregnancy and risk of adverse fetal outcomes. N
Engl J Med 368:814, 2013
Pates JA, Avendanio TC, Zaretsky MV, et al: The appendix in pregnancy: confirming historical
observations with a contemporary modality. Obstet Gynecol 114(4):805, 2009
Pearl J, Price R, Tonkin AE, et al: SAGES guidelines for the use of laparoscopy during pregnancy. Surg
Endosc 31(10):3767, 2017
Pedrosa I, Lafornara M, Pandharipande PV, et al: Pregnant patients suspected of having acute
appendicitis: effect of MR imaging on negative laparotomy rate and appendiceal perforation rate.
Radiology 250(3):749, 2009
Peled Y, Melamed N, Hiersch L, et al: The impact of total parenteral nutrition support on pregnancy
outcome in women with hyperemesis gravidarum. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 27(11):1146, 2014
Perdue PW, Johnson HW Jr, Stafford PW: Intestinal obstruction complicating pregnancy. Am J Surg
164:384, 1992
Porter H, Seeho S: Obstructed ileostomy in the third trimester of pregnancy due to compression from
the gravid uterus: diagnosis and management. BMJ Case Rep August 19, 2014
Poursharif B, Korst LM, Macgibbon KW, et al: Elective pregnancy termination in a large cohort of
women with hyperemesis gravidarum. Contraception 76:451, 2007
Raman SS, Osuagwu FC, Kadell B, et al: Effect of CT on false positive diagnosis of appendicitis and
perforation. N Engl J Med 358:972, 2008
Rawlings C: Management of postcaesarian Ogilvie’s syndrome and their subsequent outcomes. Aust N
Z J Obstet Gynaecol 50(6):573, 2010
Reddy D, Murphy SJ, Kane SV, et al: Relapses of inflammatory bowel disease during pregnancy: inhospital management and birth outcomes. Am J Gastroenterol 103:1203, 2008
Reedy MB, Kallen B, Kuehl TJ: Laparoscopy during pregnancy: a study of five fetal outcome
parameters with use of the Swedish Health Registry. Am J Obstet Gynecol 177:673, 1997
Reeves M, Frizelle F, Wakeman C, et al: Acute colonic pseudo-obstruction in pregnancy. ANZ J Surg
85(10):728, 2015
Riddle MS, DuPont HL, Connor BA: ACG Clinical Guideline: Diagnosis, Treatment, and Prevention of
Acute Diarrheal Infections in Adults. Am J Gastroenterol 111(5):602, 2016

Rigler LG, Eneboe JB: Incidence of hiatus hernia in pregnant women and its significance. J Thorac Surg
4:262, 1935
Riis L, Vind I, Politi P, et al: Does pregnancy change the disease course? A study in a European cohort
of patients with inflammatory bowel disease. Am J Gastroenterol 101:1539, 2006
Robinson D, Walker R, Adams SC, et al: American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition
(ASPEN) Definition of Terms, Style, and Conventions Used in ASPEN Board of Directors–
Approved Documents. 2018. Available at:
http://www.nutritioncare.org/Guidelines_and_Clinical_Resources/Clinical_Practice_Library/Special_
Reports/. Accessed April 10, 2020
Rocha-Castro J, Kronbauer K, Dalle J, et al: Characteristics of bacterial acute diarrhea among women.
Int J Gynaecol Obstet 132(3):302, 2016
Rosen C, Czuzoj-Shulman N, Mishkin DS, et al: Management and outcomes of peptic ulcer disease in
pregnancy. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 34(9):1368, 2021
Rubin DT, Ananthakrishnan AN, Siegel CA, et al: ACG Clinical Guideline: ulcerative colitis in adults.
Am J Gastroenterol. 2019 Mar;114(3):384
Ruiter-Ligeti J, Vincent S, Czuzoj-Shulman N, et al: Risk factors, incidence, and morbidity associated
with obstetric clostridium difficile infection. Obstet Gynecol 131(2):387, 2018
Russo-Stieglitz KE, Levine AB, Wagner BA, et al: Pregnancy outcome in patients requiring parenteral
nutrition. J Matern Fetal Med 8:164, 1999
Saeedi BJ, Morison DG, Kraft CS, et al: Fecal microbiota transplant for clostridium difficile infection in
a pregnant patient. Obstet Gynecol 129(3):507, 2017
Saha S, Loranger D, Pricolo V, et al: Feeding jejunostomy for the treatment of severe hyperemesis
gravidarum: a case series. J Parenter Enteral Nutr 33(5):529, 2009
Sakai M, Yoneda S, Sasaki Y, et al: Maternal total parenteral nutrition and fetal subdural hematoma.
Obstet Gynecol 101:1142, 2003
Savas N: Gastrointestinal endoscopy in pregnancy. World J Gastroenterol 20(41):15241, 2014
Schrag SP, Sharma R, Jaik NP, et al: Complications related to percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy
(PEG) tubes: a comprehensive clinical review. J Gastrointest Liver Dis 16:407, 2007
Schwentner L, Wulff C, Kreienberg R, et al: Exacerbation of a maternal hiatus hernia in early
pregnancy presenting with symptoms of hyperemesis gravidarum: case report and review of the
literature. Arch Gynecol Obstet 283(3):409, 2011
Sekar H, Rajesh Thamaran N, Stoker D, et al: Should the laparoscopic approach be the norm for
appendicectomy in the third trimester of pregnancy? BMJ Case Rep 12:e228192, 2019
Senturk MB, Yildiz G, Yildiz P, et al: The relationship between hyperemesis gravidarum and maternal
psychiatric well-being during and after pregnancy: controlled study. J Matern Fetal neonatal Med
30(11):1314, 2017
Serra AE, Fong A, Chung H: A gut-wrenching feeling: pregnancy complicated by massive ventral
hernia with bowel obstruction. Am J Obstet Gynecol 211(1):79, 2014
Shand AW, Chen JS, Selby W, et al: Inflammatory bowel disease in pregnancy: a population-based study
of prevalence and pregnancy outcomes. BJOG 123(11):1862, 2016
Sharifah H, Naidu A, Vimal K: Diaphragmatic hernia: an unusual cause of postpartum collapse. BJOG
110:701, 2003
Shui LH, Rafi J, Corder A, et al: Mid-gut volvulus and mesenteric vessel thrombosis in pregnancy: case
report and literature review. Arch Gynecol Obstet 283 (Suppl 1):39, 2011
Song LMK, Topazian M: Gastrointestinal endoscopy. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al (eds):
Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2018

Soper NJ: SAGES’ guidelines for diagnosis, treatment, and use of laparoscopy for surgical problems
during pregnancy. Surg Endosc 25:3477, 2011
Spiliopoulos D, Spiliopoulos M, Awala A: Esophageal achalasia: an uncommon complication during
pregnancy treated conservatively. Case Rep Obstet Gynecol 2013(639698):1, 2013
Sridharan K, Sivaramakrishnan G: Interventions for treating hyperemesis gravidarum: a network metaanalysis of randomized clinical trials. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 33(8):1405, 2020
Stephens A, Patel K, Rao A, et al: Recurrent Wernicke’s encephalopathy in pregnancy: a case report.
Nutr Neurosci 22(7):528, 2019
Stern MD, Kopylov U Ben-Horin S, et al: Magnetic resonance enterography in pregnant women with
Crohn’s disease: case series and literature review. BMC Gastroenterol 14:146, 2014
Stokke G, Gjelsvik BL, Flaatten KT, et al: Hyperemesis gravidarum, nutritional treatment by nasogastric
tube feeding: a 10-year retrospective cohort study. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 94(4):359, 2015
Sun S, Qiu X, Zhou J: Clinical analysis of 65 cases of hyperemesis gravidarum with gestational transient
thyrotoxicosis. J Obstet Gynaecol Res 40 (6):1567, 2014
Swallow BL, Lindow SW, Masson EA, et al: Psychological health in early pregnancy: relationship with
nausea and vomiting. J Obstet Gynaecol 24:28, 2004
Swartzlander TK, Carlan SJ, Locksmith G, et al: Sonographic confirmation of the correct placement of a
nasoenteral tube in a woman with hyperemesis gravidarum: case report. J Clin Ultrasound 41(Suppl
1):18, 2013
Takahashi K, Funayama Y, Fukushima K, et al: Pregnancy and delivery in patients with enterostomy due
to anorectal complications from Crohn’s disease. Int J Colorectal Dis 22:313, 2007
Talan DA, Saltzman DJ, DeUgarte DA, et al: Methods of conservative antibiotic treatment of acute
uncomplicated appendicitis: a systematic review. J Trauma Acute Care Surg 86(4):722, 2019
Tan PC, Norazilah MJ, Omar SZ: Dextrose saline compared with normal saline rehydration of
hyperemesis gravidarum: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol 121(2 Pt1):291, 2013
Theilen LH, Mellnick VM, Longman RE, et al: Utility of magnetic resonance imaging for suspected
appendicitis in pregnant women. Am J Obstet Gynecol 12(3):345, 2015
Theilen LH, Mellnick VN, Shanks AL, et al: Acute appendicitis in pregnancy: predictive clinical factors
and pregnancy outcomes. Am J Perinatol 34(6):523, 2017
Ueberrueck T, Koch A, Meyer L, et al: Ninety-four appendectomies for suspected acute appendicitis
during pregnancy. World J Surg 28:508, 2004
Unal A, Sayherman SE, Ozel L, et al: Acute abdomen in pregnancy requiring surgical management: a
20-case series. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 159(1):87, 2011
Vaknin Z, Halperin R, Schneider D, et al: Hyperemesis gravidarum and nonspecific abnormal EEG
findings. J Reprod Med 51:623, 2006
Vandraas KF, Vikanes AV, Vangen S, et al: Hyperemesis gravidarum and birth outcomes-a populationbased cohort study of 2.2 million births in the Norwegian Birth Registry. BJOG 120(13):1654, 2013
Verberg MF, Gillott JD, Fardan NA, et al: Hyperemesis gravidarum, a literature review. Hum Reprod
Update 11:527, 2005
Vikanes AV, Stoer NC, Magnus P, et al: Hyperemesis gravidarum and pregnancy outcomes in the
Norwegian mother and child cohort—a cohort study. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth 13:169, 2013
Vogel T, Wrobel RM, Graupner O, et al: Esophageal achalasia and pregnancy: own observations in 43
patients and a review of the literature. Arch Gynecol Obstet 298(3):511, 2018
Walch A, Duke M, Autry T, et al: Profound hypokalaemia resulting in maternal cardiac arrest: a
catastrophic complication of hyperemesis gravidarum? Case Rep Obstet Gynecol 2018:4687587,
2018

Walker HG, Al Samaraee A, Mills SJ, et al: Laparoscopic appendicectomy in pregnancy: a systematic
review of the published evidence. Int J Surg 12(11):1235, 2014
Wax JR, Pinette MG, Cartin A: Roux-en-Y gastric bypass-associated bowel obstruction complicating
pregnancy—an obstetrician’s map to the clinical minefield. Am J Obstet Gynecol 208(4):265, 2013
Wei PL, Keller JJ, Liang HH, et al: Acute appendicitis and adverse pregnancy outcomes: a nationwide
population-based study. J Gastrointest Surg 16(6):1204, 2012
Weyermann M, Brenner H, Adler G, et al: Helicobacter pylori infection and the occurrence and
severity of gastrointestinal symptoms during pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 189:526, 2003
Whang B: Thoracic surgery in the pregnant patient. Thorac Surg Clin 28(1):1, 2018
White S, Byrne J, McIntire DD, et al: Hyperemesis gravidarum: can factors predict risk of readmission?
Abstract No. 21L. Presented at 2018 American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists Annual
Clinical and Scientific Meeting. April 27–30, 2018
Wilasrusmee C Sukrat B, McEvoy M, et al: Systematic review and meta-analysis of safety laparoscopic
versus open appendectomy for suspected appendicitis in pregnancy. Br J Surg 99(11):1470, 2012
Won RP, Friedlander S, Lee SL: Management and outcomes of appendectomy during pregnancy. Am
Surg 83(10):1103, 2017
Wong CS, Jelacic S, Habeeb RL, et al: The risk of the hemolytic-uremic syndrome after antibiotic
treatment of Escherichia coli O157:H7 infections. N Engl J Med 342(26):1930, 2000
Woolfson K, Cohen Z, McLeod RS: Crohn’s disease and pregnancy. Dis Colon Rectum 33:869, 1990
Worthington P, Balint J, Bechtold M, et al: When is parenteral nutrition appropriate? JPEN J Parenter
Enteral Nutr 41(3):324, 2017
Ye GY, Li N, Chen YB, et al: Clostridium difficile carriage in healthy pregnant women in China.
Anaerobe 37:54, 2016
Ye P, Zhao N, Shu J, et al: Laparoscopy versus open surgery for adnexal masses in pregnancy: a metaanalytic review. Arch Gynecol Obstet 299(3):625, 2019
Yost NP, McIntire DD, Wians FH Jr, et al: A randomized, placebo-controlled trial of corticosteroids for
hyperemesis due to pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 102:1250, 2003
Zara G, Codemo V, Palmieri A, et al: Neurological complications in hyperemesis gravidarum. Neurol Sci
33(1):133, 2012

CHAPTER 58

Hepatic, Biliary, and Pancreatic Disorders

HEPATIC DISORDERS
GALLBLADDER DISORDERS
PANCREATIC DISORDERS
REFERENCES
Disorders of the liver, gallbladder, and pancreas together constitute a
formidable list of complications that may arise in pregnancy. Some stem from
preexisting conditions, and some are unique to gestation. The relationships of
several of these with pregnancy can be intriguing and challenging.

HEPATIC DISORDERS
Liver diseases complicating pregnancy are placed into three general
categories. The first includes those specific to pregnancy and resolve either
spontaneously or following delivery. Hyperemesis gravidarum, intrahepatic
cholestasis, acute fatty liver, and HELLP syndrome—which is characterized
by hemolysis, elevated liver enzyme levels, and low platelet counts, are
examples. The second category involves acute hepatic disorders that are
coincidental to pregnancy, such as acute viral hepatitis. Last are chronic liver
diseases that predate pregnancy, such as chronic viral or autoimmune
hepatitis, cirrhosis, or esophageal varices.

Laboratory testing can aid differentiation of these disorders. Hepatic
dysfunction from hyperemesis gravidarum may manifest as mildly elevated
serum bilirubin and transaminase levels (Chap. 57, p. 1014). Others listed in
Table 58-1 can show more marked findings. One example, severe
preeclampsia syndrome, discussed in Chapter 40 (p. 689), can be further
complicated by the HELLP syndrome, which can rarely cause liver failure
(Casey, 2020).
TABLE 58-1. Clinical Findings with Liver Diseases in Pregnancy

Importantly, several normal pregnancy-induced physiological changes
induce appreciable liver-related clinical and laboratory manifestations
(Chap. 4, p. 70 and Appendix, p. 1229). Abnormalities such as increased
serum alkaline phosphatase levels, palmar erythema, and spider angiomas
are common during normal pregnancy. In addition, higher levels of estrogen,
progesterone, and other pregnancy hormones alter expression of the
cytochrome P450 system. For example, hepatic CYP1A2 expression

declines, but that of CYP2D6 and CYP3A4 rises. The latter pair possibly
affects metabolism of commonly used therapeutic agents in pregnancy
(Dallmann, 2018; Ornoy, 2019). Cytochrome enzymes are also expressed in
the placenta. The net effect is complex and likely influenced by gestational
age and organ of expression (Isoherranen, 2013). Despite these functional
changes, no major hepatic histological changes are induced by normal
pregnancy.

■ Acute Liver Failure in Pregnancy
Fortunately, liver failure is uncommon during pregnancy. Of the various
causes, drug-induced liver injury (DILI) is probably the most frequent nonpregnancy-related etiology (Hoofnagle, 2019). Acetaminophen toxicity is the
most prevalent cause in the United States (Lee, 2018). Other sources of liver
failure include acute fatty liver of pregnancy (AFLP), fulminant viral
hepatitis, environmental toxins, autoimmune hepatitis, shock liver, and
alternative medicines. In a highly selective study of 70 referred women with
a hepatic encephalopathy, half were caused by AFLP and half were
associated with HELLP syndrome (Casey, 2020).
The treatment of acute liver failure in pregnancy mirrors that for
nonpregnant individuals. Therapy targets the underlying etiology, and a team
of obstetricians, maternal-fetal medicine and critical care specialists,
hepatologists, and transplant surgeons is assembled. Laboratory studies
initially include serum levels of transaminases, bilirubin, amylase, lipase,
electrolytes, creatinine, albumin, fibrinogen, lactate, and total cholesterol;
complete blood count; and coagulation studies (Bacak, 2016). Etiologytargeted testing is described fully in later sections but broadly includes viral
and autoimmune serological assays and testing for acetaminophen, iron, and
copper toxicity. Computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance (MR)
imaging may be needed to investigate hepatic structure. For a pregnancyrelated etiology, delivery is undertaken. Because of comorbid coagulopathy,
vaginal delivery is preferable if it can be achieved expeditiously and fetal
condition allows. Hepatotoxic agents are avoided, coagulopathy is corrected,
and monitoring for cerebral edema and increased intracranial pressure is
necessary (Brown, 2018). Liver transplantation is problematic during
pregnancy, but delivery before transplantation is considered if necessary
(Bacak, 2016).

■ Intrahepatic Cholestasis of Pregnancy
Characterized by pruritus, jaundice, or both, this condition has been called
recurrent jaundice of pregnancy, cholestatic hepatosis, and icterus
gravidarum. Intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy (ICP) is more common in
multifetal pregnancy, and genetic influences are significant (Sticova, 2018).
Because of this, its incidence varies by population. In North America, the
overall incidence approximates 1 case in 500 to 1000 pregnancies, but its
rate nears 5.6 percent among pregnant Latina women in Los Angeles (Lee,
2006). Historically, indigenous women from Chile and Bolivia also have a
relatively high incidence of ICP. For unknown reasons, this incidence has
decreased since the 1970s and is now less than 2 percent (Reyes, 2016). In
Sweden, China, and Israel, the incidence varies from 0.25 to 1.5 percent
(Luo, 2015).

Pathogenesis
The cause of ICP is unclear, but changes in various sex steroid hormone
levels are implicated. In one study, women treated with vaginal progesterone
for preterm labor prophylaxis showed a fourfold increase in the ICP rate
(Zipori, 2020). Current research focuses on the numerous mutations in the
many genes that control hepatocellular transport systems. One example is
mutations of the ABCB4 gene, which encodes multidrug resistance protein 3
(MDR3) associated with progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis.
Another is error in the ABCB11 gene, which encodes a bile-salt export pump
(Reichert, 2018). Other potential gene products are the farnesoid X receptor
and transporting ATPase encoded by ATP8B1 (Abu-Hayyeh, 2016; Sticova,
2018). The latter predisposes to drug-induced cholestasis. In this regard, we
have encountered impressive cholestatic jaundice in gravidas taking
azathioprine following renal transplantation.
Following the inciting cause(s), bile acids are incompletely cleared and
accumulate in plasma. Hyperbilirubinemia results from retention of
conjugated pigment, but total plasma concentrations rarely exceed 4 to 5
mg/dL. Alkaline phosphatase levels are usually elevated even more than for
normal pregnancy. Serum transaminase levels are normal to moderately
elevated but seldom exceed 200 U/L (see Table 58-1). Liver biopsy shows
mild cholestasis with bile plugs in the hepatocytes and canaliculi of the
centrilobular regions. Inflammation or necrosis is absent. These changes

disappear after delivery but often recur in subsequent pregnancies or with
estrogen-containing contraceptives.

Clinical Presentation
Generalized pruritus that shows predilection for the palms and soles usually
develops in late pregnancy or occasionally earlier. Constitutional symptoms
are absent, and skin changes are limited to excoriations from scratching.
Serum transaminase and bile acid levels are measured in women with
suspected ICP. As a threshold for comparison, total serum bile acid levels
typically remain <10 μmol/L throughout normal pregnancy (Egan, 2012).
Elevated total serum bile acid or transaminase levels plus pruritus supports
an ICP diagnosis. Biochemical tests may be abnormal at presentation or may
follow initial pruritus after several weeks. Moreover, a rise in transaminase
levels may precede an increase in serum bile acid levels (Wood, 2018b).
Approximately 10 percent of women have concurrent jaundice.
With normal liver enzyme levels or with specific skin findings, pruritus
may instead reflect other dermatological disorders (Chap. 65, p. 1155).
Sonography may be warranted to exclude cholelithiasis and biliary
obstruction (p. 1042). Moreover, acute viral hepatitis is an unlikely
diagnosis because of the usually low serum transaminase levels seen with
ICP. Conversely, underlying chronic hepatitis C is associated with a
significantly greater risk of developing ICP, which may be as much as 20fold higher (Marschall, 2013).

Management
Pruritus may be troublesome and is thought to result from elevated serum bile
salt concentrations. Antihistamines and topical emollients usually provide
some relief. Cholestyramine is reported to be effective, but this compound
also lowers absorption of fat-soluble vitamins. This may lead to vitamin K
deficiency and fetal coagulopathy. Subsequent fetal intracranial hemorrhage
and stillbirth have been reported (Matos, 1997).
Currently, the most popular treatment is with ursodeoxycholic acid
(Actigall), which relieves pruritus and reduces serum levels of bile salts and
liver enzymes (Bacq, 2012; Parízek, 2016). It is available as 300-mg
capsules. Oral dosing is 10 to 15 mg/kg maternal body weight daily, which is
divided into two or three doses (Tran, 2016). In a large randomized trial, the

maternal “itch score” was not significantly lower with ursodeoxycholic acid
compared with placebo (Chappell, 2019). From our experiences at Parkland
Hospital, however, pruritus typically improves after 2 to 3 weeks of
ursodeoxycholic acid therapy (Yule, 2021). Such treatment has also been
reported to lower risks for stillbirth and fetal distress and is discussed
subsequently.
Other described treatments include therapeutic plasma exchange and
rifampin (Liu, 2018; Ovadia, 2018). A randomized trial comparing
ursodeoxycholic acid and rifampicin is underway (Australian New Zealand
Clinical Trials Registry, 2019).

Perinatal Outcomes
Early reports describe excessive adverse fetal outcomes in women with ICP.
However, data from the past two decades are ambiguous concerning
increased perinatal mortality rates and whether close fetal surveillance is
preventive. Sheiner and coworkers (2006) described no differences in
perinatal outcomes in 376 affected pregnancies compared with their overall
obstetrical population. However, rates of labor induction and cesarean
delivery in affected women were significantly higher. In a study of 5477
women with ICP from a database of 1.2 million births, neonates had a lower
5-minute Apgar score, but the stillbirth rate was not greater (Wikström
Shemer, 2013). The latter rate was thought to reflect a higher labor induction
rate, which at the time of the study was recommended to avoid stillbirth.
In some studies, complications developed more frequently in women
with higher total bile acid levels (Di Mascio, 2019; Herrera, 2018; Ovadia,
2019). These studies described stillbirths despite normal findings during
antenatal testing. One study of 693 Swedish women found a greater perinatal
mortality rate in women with bile acids levels >40 μmol/L (Glantz, 2004). In
others, an increased stillbirth risk was noted in women whose serum bile
acid levels were >100 μmol/L (Brouwers, 2015; Chappell, 2019, Kawakita,
2015). Chappell and associates (2019) also found that ursodeoxycholic acid
treatment did not lower perinatal death rates. The use of antenatal fetal
testing was not described. In a metaanalysis of 5557 women with ICP,
Ovadia and colleagues (2019) concluded that serum bile acid levels >100
μmol/L were associated with stillbirth.

Other adverse perinatal outcomes also have been described. Brouwers
and colleagues (2015) found higher rates of spontaneous preterm birth (19
percent) and meconium-stained amnionic fluid (48 percent), despite active
management leading to earlier delivery. Novel associations of ICP with
preeclampsia, gestational diabetes, and large for gestational age also are
reported (Wikström Shemer, 2013).
In summary, management is directed at early delivery to mitigate the
relatively uncommon incidence of fetal death. Treatment with
ursodeoxycholic acid does not always improve maternal symptoms or protect
against stillbirth. It is problematic that antenatal testing does not reliably
forecast impending fetal death. We do not routinely employ these for
uncomplicated ICP. The precise gestational age for labor induction is
uncertain, but many authors recommend 37 weeks’ gestation (Wood, 2018b).
At Parkland Hospital, we routinely induce labor at 38 weeks if symptoms
worsen or if serum bile acid levels exceed 40 μmol/L.

Fetal Effects of Bile Acids
As noted, evidence supports that maternal serum bile acid levels >100
μmol/L contribute to fetal death and meconium passage. Fetal death may be
related to the cardiotoxicity of bile acids, which causes cardiac dysfunction
and presumably cardiac arrest. In an ex-vivo preparation of cardiac
myocytes, cholic acid lowered beating rates in a dose-dependent fashion,
while elevating intracellular calcium concentration (Gao, 2014).
Prolongation of the fetal cardiac PR interval and successful reversal with
ursodeoxycholic acid has been described (Rodríguez, 2018; Strehlow,
2010). Last, Ozel and coworkers (2018) demonstrated impaired global
ventricular function in fetuses of pregnancies complicated by ICP.

■ Acute Fatty Liver of Pregnancy
The most frequent cause of acute liver failure during pregnancy is acute fatty
liver—also called acute fatty metamorphosis or acute yellow atrophy. It is
characterized by accumulation of microvesicular fat that literally “crowds
out” normal hepatocytic function (Fig. 58-1). Grossly, the liver is small, soft,
yellow, and greasy. In its worst form, the incidence approximates 1 case per
10,000 births (Nelson, 2013). AFLP recurring in subsequent pregnancy is
rare (Usta, 1994).

FIGURE 58-1 Acute fatty liver of pregnancy. Cross section of the liver from a woman who died as
the result of pulmonary aspiration and respiratory failure. The liver has a greasy yellow appearance.
Inset: Electron photomicrograph of a swollen hepatocyte containing numerous microvesicular fat
droplets (*). The nucleus (N) remains centered within the cell in contrast to the case with
macrovesicular fat deposition. (Reproduced with permission from Dr. Don Wheeler.)

Etiopathogenesis
Although the underlying cause remains unclear, many cases of AFLP are
associated with recessively inherited mitochondrial abnormalities of fatty
acid oxidation. Several mutations for the mitochondrial trifunctional protein
enzyme complex that catalyzes the last oxidative steps in the pathway are
implicated. The most common are the G1528C and E474Q missense
mutations of the gene on chromosome 2 that codes for long-chain-3hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase (LCHAD) (Liu, 2017a). Mutations for
medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (MCAD) and for carnitine
palmitoyltransferase 1 (CPT1) deficiency are others. These are similar to
mutations in children with Reye-like syndromes.
Sims and colleagues (1995) observed that some homozygous LCHADdeficient children with Reye-like syndromes had heterozygous mothers with
AFLP. This was also seen in women with a compound heterozygous fetus.
Although some conclude that only heterozygous LCHAD-deficient mothers
are at risk for ALFP when their fetus is homozygous, this is not always true

(Liu, 2017a). An association between fatty acid β-oxidation enzyme defects
and severe preeclampsia, especially in women with HELLP syndrome, is
also controversial (Chap. 40, p. 693). Most observations derive from
retrospective study of mothers with a child who later developed Reye-like
syndrome. One case-control study compared 50 mothers of children with a
fatty acid oxidation defect and 1250 mothers of matched control infants
(Browning, 2006). During their pregnancy, 12 percent of mothers with an
affected child developed HELLP syndrome and 4 percent developed AFLP.
Comparatively, only 0.9 percent of control women developed liver
problems. Despite these findings, the clinical, biochemical, and
histopathological findings are sufficiently disparate and support that severe
preeclampsia, with or without HELLP syndrome, and AFLP are distinct
syndromes (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2012;
Byrne, 2020).

Clinical Findings
AFLP almost always manifests in the last trimester and rarely midpregnancy
(Wong, 2020). From Parkland Hospital, Nelson and colleagues (2013)
described 51 women with AFLP at a mean gestational age of 37 weeks
(range 31.7 to 40.9 weeks). Approximately 41 percent were nulliparous and
20 percent were delivered at 34 weeks’ gestation or earlier. Women with a
multifetal gestation account for 20 percent of cases (Vigil-De Gracia, 2011).
AFLP has a broad spectrum of clinical features and severity, and
symptoms usually advance over several days. Persistent nausea and vomiting
are major complaints. Degrees of malaise, anorexia, epigastric pain, and
progressive jaundice vary. In almost all severe cases, acute liver injury
causes profound endothelial cell activation, capillary leakage, and
hemoconcentration; acute kidney injury; ascites; and sometimes pulmonary
permeability edema (Bernal, 2013). Half of affected women have
hypertension, proteinuria, and edema, alone or in combination. Notably, these
signs also suggest preeclampsia.
As shown in Tables 58-1 and 58-2, degrees of moderate to severe liver
dysfunction are manifest by hypofibrinogenemia, hypocholesterolemia, and
prolonged clotting times. Serum bilirubin levels usually are <10 mg/dL, and
serum transaminase levels are modestly elevated and usually <1000 U/L. An
AFLP diagnosis is arrived at by clinical and laboratory findings. Biopsy is
unnecessary. The Swansea criteria proposed by Ch’ng and associates (2002)

as a screening tool and predictor of severity shows suitable sensitivity
(Table 58-3) (Morton, 2018; Wang, 2017).
TABLE 58-2. Comparison of Clinical Findings at the Time of Admission in
67 Women with Acute Fatty Liver of Pregnancy and 67 with HELLP
Syndrome

TABLE 58-3. Swansea Criteria for AFLP Diagnosisa

Hemolysis can be severe and is thought to stem from effects of
hypocholesterolemia on erythrocyte membranes (Cunningham, 1985).
Laboratory evidence includes leukocytosis, nucleated red cells, mild to
moderate thrombocytopenia, and increased serum levels of lactic acid
dehydrogenase (LDH) or decreased haptoglobin levels. The peripheral
blood smear demonstrates echinocytosis. However, the hematocrit is often
high or within the normal range because of hemoconcentration. With severe
hemoconcentration, uteroplacental perfusion is reduced and this, along with
maternal acidosis, can cause fetal death. Likewise, maternal and fetal
acidemia are associated with a high incidence of fetal jeopardy and a
concordantly high cesarean delivery rate.
The degree of clotting dysfunction varies and can be potentially life
threatening, especially if cesarean delivery is undertaken. Coagulopathy is

caused by diminished hepatic procoagulant synthesis, although some
evidence supports increased consumption from disseminated intravascular
coagulopathy. As shown in Table 58-2, hypofibrinogenemia can be profound.
Of 51 women cared for at Parkland Hospital, almost one third had a plasma
fibrinogen level nadir below 100 mg/dL (Nelson, 2014). Elevated levels of
serum D-dimers or fibrin-split products also indicate an element of
consumptive coagulopathy (Lisman, 2017). Although usually modest,
occasionally thrombocytopenia is marked. Among the women from Parkland
Hospital, 20 percent had platelet counts <100,000/μL, and 10 percent had
platelet counts <50,000/μL (Byrne, 2020).
Because liver dysfunction and kidney injury are central to AFLP, Byrne
and colleagues (2020) have proposed the acronym FaCCT to differentiate
AFLP from HELLP syndrome using levels of commonly available laboratory
analytes: fibrinogen (<300 mg/dL) and cholesterol (<220 mg/dL), creatinine
(>0.9 mg/dL), and total bilirubin (>1 mg/dL). To emphasize, the clinical
features and sequelae of AFLP are attributed to liver dysfunction, whereas in
HELLP syndrome the procoagulant production and function of the liver
appears relatively preserved.
AFLP typically continues to worsen after diagnosis. Hypoglycemia is
common, and hepatic encephalopathy, severe coagulopathy, and some degree
of renal failure each develop in approximately half of women. Delivery
fortunately arrests liver function deterioration, but recovery may require
substantial supportive care.
Various liver imaging techniques can help confirm the diagnosis, but none
is particularly reliable (Liu, 2017a). In a prospective evaluation of the
Swansea criteria, only a quarter of women with AFLP had classic
sonographic findings that included maternal ascites or an echogenic hepatic
appearance (Knight, 2008). Although Châtel and coworkers (2016)
described greater liver fat detected by MR imaging, this has not been our
experience.
We have encountered several women with an underdeveloped form of
AFLP. Clinical involvement is relatively minor and laboratory aberrations—
usually only hemolysis and a decreased plasma fibrinogen level—herald the
syndrome. Thus, the spectrum of liver involvement can include unnoticed
milder cases, findings that are instead attributed to preeclampsia, or a severe
form displaying overt hepatic failure and associated encephalopathy.

Management
Intensive supportive measures and sound obstetrical care are essential.
Delivery of the fetus is necessary in the treatment of AFLP, and significant
procrastination increases maternal and fetal risks. We prefer a trial of labor
induction with close fetal surveillance. Although some recommend cesarean
delivery to hasten hepatic healing, this raises maternal bleeding complication
risks when coagulopathy is severe. Nonetheless, cesarean delivery is
common due to fetal intolerance of labor, and rates approach 90 percent. In
some cases, the fetus has already died when AFLP is diagnosed, and the
delivery route is less problematic. To correct coagulopathy, transfusions with
whole blood or packed red cells, along with fresh-frozen plasma,
cryoprecipitate, and platelets, are usually necessary for surgery or vaginal
laceration repair (Chap. 44, p. 772).
Hepatic function usually returns to normal within a week postpartum, but
in the interim, intensive medical support may be required. Two associated
conditions can be seen during this time. Perhaps a fourth of women have
evidence for transient diabetes insipidus. This presumably stems from
elevated vasopressinase concentrations caused by diminished hepatic
production of its inactivating enzyme. Second, acute pancreatitis develops
in approximately 20 percent.
With supportive care, recovery usually is complete. Maternal deaths are
caused by liver failure, sepsis, hemorrhage, aspiration, renal failure,
pancreatitis, and gastrointestinal bleeding. Two women died in the series
from Parkland Hospital. One had associated encephalopathy and aspirated
before intubation during transfer to our care. The other was a woman with
profound liver failure and nonresponsive hypotension (Nelson, 2013). Other
treatment measures have included plasma exchange and liver transplantation
(Ringers, 2016; Wu, 2018).

Maternal and Perinatal Outcomes
Maternal mortality rates with AFLP approached 75 percent in the past, but
the contemporaneous outlook is much better. From his review, Sibai (2007)
cites an average mortality rate of 7 percent. He also cited a 70-percent
preterm delivery rate and a 15-percent perinatal mortality rate, which in the
past was nearly 90 percent. During the past four decades at Parkland

Hospital, the maternal and perinatal mortality rates have been 4 percent and
12 percent, respectively (Byrne, 2020).

■ Viral Hepatitis
Most viral hepatitis syndromes are asymptomatic, and acute symptomatic
infections are becoming less common in the United States. There are at least
five distinct types of viruses causing hepatitis: A (HAV), B (HBV), D (HDV)
caused by the hepatitis B–associated delta agent, C (HCV), and E (HEV).
The clinical presentation of acute infection is similar in all, and although the
viruses themselves probably are not hepatotoxic, the immunological response
to them causes hepatocellular necrosis (Dienstag, 2018a,b). Several other
viral agents can infect the liver, and two examples are cytomegalovirus and
herpes simplex virus (Calix, 2020; McCormack, 2019).
Acute infections are most often subclinical and anicteric. When they are
clinically apparent, nausea and vomiting, headache, and malaise may precede
jaundice by 1 to 2 weeks. By the time jaundice develops, symptoms usually
are improving. Low-grade fever is more common with hepatitis A. Serum
transaminase levels vary, and their peaks do not correspond with disease
severity. Peak levels that range from 400 to 4000 U/L are usually reached by
the time jaundice develops (see Table 58-1). Serum bilirubin values
typically continue to rise, and peak at 5 to 20 mg/dL, despite falling serum
transaminase levels.
Severe features should prompt hospitalization. These include persistent
nausea and vomiting, prolonged prothrombin time, low serum albumin level,
hypoglycemia, high serum bilirubin level, or central nervous system
symptoms. In most cases, clinical and biochemical recovery is complete
within 1 to 2 months in all cases of hepatitis A, in most cases of hepatitis B,
but in only a small proportion of those caused by hepatitis C.
Patient’s feces, secretions, bedpans, and other articles in contact with the
intestinal tract should be handled with glove-protected hands. In hospitals,
extra precautions, such as double gloving during delivery and surgical
procedures, are recommended. Due to significant exposure of health-care
personnel to hepatitis B, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC) recommend active and passive vaccination, as described later (p.
1037) (Schillie, 2018). For hepatitis C, although direct antiviral regimens

have been developed, there is no vaccine. Guidelines instead recommend
postexposure serosurveillance only.
Acute hepatitis has a case-fatality rate of 0.1 percent. For those requiring
hospitalization, it may reach 1 percent. Most fatalities are due to fulminant
hepatic necrosis, which in later pregnancy may resemble AFLP. In these
cases, hepatic encephalopathy is the usual presentation, and the mortality rate
is 80 percent. Approximately half of patients with fulminant disease have
hepatitis B infection, and co-infection with the delta agent is common.
Chronic hepatitis is more prevalent than acute infection. The CDC (2019)
estimates that almost 3.5 million persons in the United States are living with
chronic viral hepatitis. Although most are asymptomatic, approximately 20
percent develop cirrhosis within 10 to 20 years (Dienstag, 2018a). When
present, symptoms are nonspecific and usually include fatigue. In some
patients, cirrhosis with liver failure or bleeding varices may be the initial
finding. Also, asymptomatic chronic viral hepatitis remains the leading cause
of liver cancer and the most frequent reason for liver transplantation.
Chronic viral hepatitis is usually diagnosed serologically (Table 58-4).
With persistently abnormal biochemical tests, liver biopsy usually discloses
active inflammation, continuing necrosis, and fibrosis that may lead to
cirrhosis. Chronic hepatitis is classified by cause; grade, defined by
histological activity; and stage, which is the degree of progression (Dienstag,
2018a).
TABLE 58-4. Laboratory Features of Chronic Hepatitis

Most young women with chronic viral hepatitis either are asymptomatic
or have only mild liver disease. For asymptomatic women, pregnancies are
usually uncomplicated. With symptomatic chronic active hepatitis, pregnancy
outcome depends primarily on disease severity, and especially on the
presence of portal hypertension (p. 1040). The few women whom we have
managed have done well, but their long-term prognosis is poor. Accordingly,
they should be counseled regarding possible liver transplantation as well as
contraceptive and sterilization options.

Hepatitis A
Vaccination has reduced the incidence of hepatitis A by 95 percent. In 2019,
the rate was 6 cases per 100,000 individuals in the United States (Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention, 2021). HAV is an RNA picornavirus and is
transmitted by the fecal–oral route and usually by contaminated food or water
ingestion. The incubation period approximates 4 weeks. Individuals shed
virus in their feces, and during the relatively brief period of viremia, their
blood also is infectious. Signs and symptoms are often nonspecific and
usually mild, although jaundice develops in most patients. Symptoms usually

last less than 2 months, but 10 to 15 percent of patients may remain
symptomatic or relapse for up to 6 months (Dienstag, 2018b). Early
serological testing identifies immunoglobulin M (IgM) anti-HAV antibody,
which may persist for several months. During convalescence, IgG antibody
predominates, and it provides subsequent immunity. Hepatitis A lacks a
chronic stage.
Vaccination during childhood with inactivated hepatitis viral vaccine is
more than 90-percent effective. The American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2018) and the Advisory Committee on Immunization
Practices recommends HAV vaccination for high-risk adults (Freedman,
2020). This includes pregnant women at risk (Nelson, 2020). Candidates are
persons with chronic liver disease, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
infection, homelessness, or illegal drug use. Those working in group
facilities with at-risk persons, conducting research with HAV, or traveling to
or adopting from endemic areas also are included. High-risk countries are
listed in the CDC (2020b) “Yellow Book”—Health Information for
International Travel.
For an unvaccinated gravida who is recently exposed by close personal
or sexual contact with a person with hepatitis A, passive immunization is
provided by a 0.1-mL/kg dose of immune globulin. Concurrently, the first
dose of the hepatitis A vaccine series is given in a separate arm (Nelson,
2020).
Pregnancy and Hepatitis A. Management of hepatitis A in pregnancy includes
a balanced diet and diminished physical activity. Women with mild illness
may be managed as outpatients. In developed countries, the effects of
hepatitis A on pregnancy outcomes are not dramatic (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2012, 2018). However, in resource-poor
countries, both perinatal and maternal mortality rates are substantively
higher. HAV is not teratogenic, and transmission to the fetus is negligible.
The risk of preterm birth may be higher, and neonatal cholestasis has been
reported (Urganci, 2003). Although HAV RNA has been isolated in breast
milk, no cases of neonatal hepatitis A have been reported secondary to
breastfeeding (Daudi, 2012).

Hepatitis B

This infection stems from a double-stranded DNA virus that is found
worldwide. HBV is endemic in Africa, Central and Southeast Asia, China,
Eastern Europe, the Middle East, and certain areas of South America. In all
these, infection prevalence reaches 5 to 20 percent. An estimated 1.6 million
people in the United States have chronic hepatitis B (Lim, 2020). HBV is
carcinogenic, and chronic infection is a known risk for hepatocellular
carcinoma. For others, cirrhosis can be a long-term sequela.
HBV is transmitted by exposure to blood or other body fluids from
infected individuals. In endemic countries, vertical transmission, that is from
mother to fetus or newborn, accounts for at least 35 to 50 percent of chronic
HBV infections. In low-prevalence countries such as the United States,
which has a prevalence below 2 percent, the more frequent transmission
mode is sexual contact or shared contaminated needles.
Acute hepatitis B develops after an incubation period that ranges from 40
to 150 days (Schillie, 2018). At least half of acute infections are
asymptomatic. Symptoms completely resolve within 3 to 4 months in most.
However, acute hepatitis B accounts for half of fulminant hepatitis cases.
Figure 58-2 details the sequence of the various HBV antigens and
antibodies in acute infection. The first serological marker is hepatitis B
surface antigen (HBsAg), which often precedes the rise in transaminase
levels. As HBsAg disappears, antibodies to the surface antigen develop
(anti-HBs), and this marks complete disease resolution. Hepatitis B core
antigen (HBcAg) is an intracellular antigen and not detectable in serum.
However, antibodies against this core antigen (anti-HBc) are detectable and
found within weeks of HBsAg appearance. The hepatitis B e antigen
(HBeAg) is present during times of high viral replication and often correlates
with detectable HBV DNA. After acute hepatitis, at least 90 percent of adults
recover completely, and the remainder are considered to have chronic
hepatitis B.

FIGURE 58-2 Sequence of various antigens and antibodies in acute hepatitis B. ALT = alanine
transaminase; anti-HBc = antibody to hepatitis B core antigen; anti-HBe = antibody to hepatitis B e
antigen; anti-HBs = antibody to hepatitis B surface antigen; HBeAg = hepatitis B e antigen; HBsAg =
hepatitis B surface antigen. (Redrawn from Dienstag JL: Acute viral hepatitis. In Jameson JL, Fauci
AS, Kasper DL, et al (eds): Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, NY:
McGraw Hill; 2018b, p 2347.)

Chronic HBV infection is often asymptomatic but may cause persistent
anorexia, weight loss, fatigue, and hepatosplenomegaly. Extrahepatic
manifestations include arthritis, generalized vasculitis, glomerulonephritis,
pericarditis, myocarditis, transverse myelitis, and peripheral neuropathy.
One risk factor for chronic disease is age at acquisition. Pertinent to the
obstetrician, this risk exceeds 90 percent in newborns. The risk is 50 percent
in young children and is less than 10 percent in immunocompetent adults
(Schillie, 2018). An immunocompromised state such as with HIV infection,
organ transplantation, or chemotherapy creates vulnerability.
Those with chronic HBV infection have serum test results that show
HBsAg persistence. These infected persons may be asymptomatic carriers or
may have chronic liver disease with or without cirrhosis or hepatocellular
cancer. The presence of HPV DNA in serum tests is a marker of HBV
replication. Those with high HBV replication, which is reflected in high

HBV DNA levels with or without HBeAg, have the greatest likelihood of
developing cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma.
Pregnancy and Hepatitis B. The US Preventive Services Task Force (2019)
recommends that all pregnant women be screened for HBV. This practice
identifies asymptomatic cases and later allows neonatal intervention. At the
first prenatal care visit, a serologic HBsAg level is obtained, and this is
repeated in high-risk women again at the time of delivery. All states require
cases of HBV infection to be reported, and 26 mandate that pregnant women
be screened (Culp, 2016). HBV infection does not cause excessive rates of
maternal morbidity or mortality (Stewart, 2013). In one regional study in the
United States, 14 percent of women with HBV infection had a worsening of
disease, sometimes termed a flare, either antepartum or in the 6 months
postpartum (Kushner, 2018). A review of data from the National Inpatient
Sample reported a modest rise in preterm birth rates in HBV-positive
mothers but no effect on fetal-growth restriction or preeclampsia rates
(Reddick, 2011). Others have shown similar results (Cui, 2017; Liu, 2017b).
Transplacental HBV infection is uncommon, and Towers and associates
(2001) reported that viral DNA is rarely found in amnionic fluid or cord
blood. The highest HBV DNA levels are found in women who transmitted
the virus to their fetuses (Dunkelberg, 2014; Society for Maternal-Fetal
Medicine, 2016).
To curb vertical transmission, newborns of seropositive mothers are
given hepatitis B immune globulin (HBIG) plus the first of a three-dose
hepatitis B recombinant vaccine series very soon after birth. In the absence
of HBV immunoprophylaxis, 10 to 20 percent of women positive for HBsAg
transmit viral infection to their infant. This rate rises to almost 90 percent if
the mother is HBsAg and HBeAg positive. Administration of
immunoprophylaxis and hepatitis B vaccine shortly after birth has lowered
transmission dramatically and prevented approximately 90 percent of
infections (Smith, 2012). But, women with high HBV viral loads—106 to 108
copies/mL—or those who are HBeAg positive still have at least a 10percent vertical transmission rate, regardless of immunoprophylaxis (Rogan,
2019; Yi, 2016). Hill and colleagues (2002) reported that the 2.4-percent
transmission rate was not increased with breastfeeding if neonatal
vaccination was completed. Although virus is present in breast milk, the
incidence of transmission is not diminished by formula feeding (Shi, 2011).

The American Academy of Pediatrics and the American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2018) do not consider maternal HBV
infection a contraindication to breastfeeding.
As a second transmission-prevention practice, the CDC and numerous
societies now recommend antiviral therapy to decrease viral levels in
gravidas whose viral load exceeds 106 to 108 copies/mL (Schillie, 2018).
Newer drugs include tenofovir, an adenosine nucleoside analogue, and
telbivudine, a thymidine analogue. Tenofovir is the first-line agent during
pregnancy, and no dose adjustments are necessary (Cressey, 2018). These
antiviral medications appear safe in pregnancy and are not associated with
greater rates of congenital malformations or adverse obstetrical outcomes
(Sylvester-Armstrong, 2019). Follow-up of children at age 6 to 7 years found
no related problems (Wen, 2020).
Regarding efficacy, one randomized trial in Thailand showed that
tenofovir compared with placebo beginning at 28 weeks’ gestation did not
reduce the low rate of vertical transmission if both active and passive
immunoprophylaxis were given at birth to the neonate (Jourdain, 2018). In
another similar randomized trial, vertical transmission rates were
significantly lowered (Pan, 2016).
For high-risk mothers who are seronegative, HBV vaccine can be given
during pregnancy. Candidates are persons with chronic liver disease,
diabetes, HIV or HCV infection, injection drug use, occupational exposure
risk, household contacts, or long-term travel to endemic areas. Those
requiring dialysis, living in a long-term-care or correctional facility, or
engaging in sex with multiple or HBV-infected partners also are included
(Schillie, 2018).
Vaccine efficacy is similar to that for nonpregnant adults, and overall
seroconversion rates approach 95 percent after three doses (Stewart, 2013).
The traditional vaccination schedule of 0, 1, and 6 months may be difficult to
complete during pregnancy, and compliance rates decline postpartum.
Sheffield and coworkers (2006) reported that an accelerated three-dose
regimen—given initially and at 1 and 4 months—resulted in seroconversion
rates of 56, 77, and 90 percent, respectively. This regimen was usually easily
completed during prenatal care.

Hepatitis D

Also called delta hepatitis, this is a defective RNA virus that is a hybrid
particle with an HBsAg coat and a delta core. The HDV must co-infect with
HBV either simultaneously or secondarily, and transmission is similar to
HBV.

Hepatitis C
This infection stems from a single-stranded RNA virus. Transmission is via
blood and other body fluids, although sexual transmission is inefficient. In the
United States, adult prevalence of HCV was reported to be 2 to 5 cases per
1000 births (Prasad, 2020; Rossi, 2020). Up to a third of anti-HCV positive
persons have no identifiable risk factors (Dienstag, 2018b).
Until recently, screening for HCV was encouraged only for high-risk
individuals. But in 2020, the CDC recommended HCV screening for all
adults at least once in a lifetime, and more regularly for those with risk
factors (Schillie 2020). These are injection drug use, hemodialysis, or
exposure to blood-contaminated items. The CDC also recommended prenatal
HCV screening for all women regardless of risk factors. The US Preventive
Services Task Force (2020) has published similar recommendations.
Chronic hepatitis C is diagnosed by identification of anti-HCV antibodies
detected with a serum immunoassay. Acute HCV infection is usually
asymptomatic or yields mild symptoms. Only 10 to 15 percent of patients
develop jaundice. The incubation period ranges from 15 to 160 days, with a
mean of 7 weeks. Transaminase levels are elevated episodically during the
acute infection. HCV RNA testing confirms clinical suspicion of active or
acute HCV infection. RNA levels may be found even before rises in
transaminase and anti-HCV levels. Anti-HCV antibody is not detected for an
average of 15 weeks and in some cases up to 1 year (Dienstag, 2018b).
Nearly 80 to 90 percent of patients with acute HCV will be chronically
infected. Although most remain asymptomatic, approximately 20 to 30
percent progress to cirrhosis within 20 to 30 years. Transaminase and HCV
RNA values fluctuate over time. Liver biopsy reveals chronic disease and
fibrosis in up to 50 percent, however, these findings are often mild. Overall,
the long-term prognosis for most patients is good.
Pregnancy and Hepatitis C. As expected, most pregnant women diagnosed
with HCV have chronic disease. Aggregate reports have chronicled modestly
greater fetal risks of low birthweight, neonatal intensive-care admission,

preterm delivery, and mechanical ventilation (Rossi, 2020; Society for
Maternal-Fetal Medicine, 2017). In some women, these adverse outcomes
may have been influenced by concurrent high-risk behaviors associated with
HCV infection.
The primary adverse perinatal outcome is vertical transmission of HCV
infection to the fetus-neonate. This is higher in mothers with viremia (Indolfi,
2014). Airoldi and Berghella (2006) cited a rate of 1 to 3 percent in HCVpositive, RNA-negative women compared with 4 to 6 percent in those who
were RNA-positive. In a report from Dublin, the vertical transmission rate in
545 women with HCV infection was 7 percent in RNA-positive women
compared with none in those who were RNA-negative (McMenamin, 2008).
Some have found an even higher risk when the mother is co-infected with
HIV (Snidjewind, 2015; Tovo, 2016). Approximately two thirds of prenatal
transmission cases occur peripartum. HCV genotype, invasive prenatal
procedures, breastfeeding, and delivery mode are not associated with
vertical transmission. That said, invasive procedures such as scalp-electrode
fetal heart rate monitoring are avoided. HCV infection is not a
contraindication to breastfeeding (Post, 2017).
No licensed vaccine is available for HCV prevention. In 2011, the first
direct-acting antiviral drugs against HCV became available. Since then,
second-generation prototypes with fewer adverse effects have been
developed and are given as combinations to nonpregnant individuals. They
are currently not recommended for use in pregnancy except in clinical trials
(Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, 2017). The combination of ledipasvir
plus sofosbuvir shows efficacy and reassuring safety data in early clinical
trials.

Hepatitis E
This infection stems from a water-borne RNA virus, which usually is
enterically transmitted by contaminated water supplies. Hepatitis E is found
worldwide, but the Centers for Disease Control (2020a) lists Mexico, Asia,
and Africa as endemic areas. In these regions, seroprevalence rates vary by
age and geography, but overall rates of 10 percent have been reported. In
Mexico, Durango State has the highest rate—37 percent (Fierro, 2016).
Hepatitis E is the most common cause of acute hepatitis worldwide but
rarely causes liver failure in the United States (Fontana, 2016). Epidemic

outbreaks in third-world countries result in substantial morbidity and
mortality rates. Pregnant women have a greater case-fatality rate than
nonpregnant individuals (Li, 2020). In a metaanalysis of nearly 4000 women
from Asia and Africa, maternal and fetal case-fatality rates were 21 and 34
percent, respectively (Jin, 2016a). Fulminant hepatitis, although rare, is more
common in gravidas and contributes to the increased mortality rates.
A recombinant HEV vaccine has been developed and licensed in China
(Zaman, 2020). It is >95 percent effective for 12 months after vaccination.
Long-term efficacy is 87 percent, and protective titers are maintained for up
to 4.5 years (Zhang, 2015). Preliminary data from inadvertently vaccinated
pregnant women show no adverse maternal or fetal events (Wu, 2012).

■ Autoimmune Hepatitis
This generally progressive chronic hepatitis is more common in women and
western countries. Autoimmune hepatitis frequently coexists with other types
of autoimmune disease, particularly autoimmune thyroid disease and Sjögren
syndrome. It is characterized by multiple autoimmune antibodies such as
antinuclear (ANA), anti-smooth muscle, and anti-liver, kidney microsome 1
(LKM1) antibodies (see Table 58-1). Rates of subsequent cirrhosis vary
worldwide. The less common type 2 autoimmune hepatitis has an even higher
prevalence in females and typically a more aggressive presentation. The
incidence peaks in childhood and adolescence.
Symptoms are typical of acute and chronic hepatitis, but a fourth of
patients may be asymptomatic. Treatment employs corticosteroids, alone or
combined with azathioprine (Dienstag, 2018a). Failure to respond to these
two agents is more frequent in those with type 2 disease. Nearly all women
with type 2 disease require long-term intensive therapy. In some patients with
progressive disease and cirrhosis, hepatocellular carcinoma develops.
In general, autoimmune hepatitis—especially when severe—increases
the risk of adverse pregnancy outcomes. Westbrook and coworkers (2012)
reported the outcomes of 81 pregnancies in 53 women. A third had a flare,
and these were more common in those not taking medication and those with
active disease in the year before conception. Women with cirrhosis had more
maternal and fetal complications. From a Swedish national database of 171
births, the frequencies of preterm birth, low birthweight, and diabetes were
elevated, but not those of preeclampsia or cesarean delivery (Stokkeland,

2016). Another study reported delivery before 38 weeks’ gestation in 25
percent of cases and development of a postpartum flare in a third
(Danielsson Borssén, 2016). However, adverse outcomes were not greater in
women with cirrhosis. Given the important role of procoagulant production,
surveillance of coagulation indices is advised to minimize obstetrical
hemorrhage complications. Also, the usual vaccines, along with
pneumococcal vaccine, should be given (Furer, 2020).

■ Iron and Copper Overload
Chronic hepatitis and cirrhosis can result from iron and copper overload.
Iron overload may stem from a primary cause, such as hereditary
hemochromatosis, or from secondary complications of erythrocyte disorders
(Chap. 56 p. 1052). Many gene mutations underlying hereditary
hemochromatosis involve hepcidin and result in dysregulated iron transport.
Some of these mutations are more common in certain populations from
northern Europe (Pietrangelo, 2016; Salgia, 2015). Cardiomyopathy,
diabetes, joint disease, and skin changes can coexist with liver disease.
Diagnosis is made by identifying an HFE gene mutation and elevated serum
ferritin and transferrin saturation levels. An abnormal HFE gene alone is not
diagnostic because the mutation has low penetrance. Pregnancy outcomes are
driven by the degree of liver dysfunction, although higher iron levels may
affect birthweight (Dorak, 2009).
A form of neonatal hemochromatosis that does not affect the mother is
now thought to be alloimmune and is called gestational alloimmune liver
disease (Anastasio, 2016; Ibrahim, 2020). With this, maternal autoantibodies
cross to the fetus and mediate dysfunction of iron homeostasis, although the
antigenic target of these alloantibodies remains unclear. It is associated with
significant neonatal morbidity and mortality and frequently recurs in
subsequent pregnancies. In these cases, antepartum treatment with
intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) may improve outcomes (Feldman, 2013;
Roumiantsev, 2015).
Wilson disease is caused by copper overload leading to chronic hepatitis
and cirrhosis. Autosomal recessive mutations of the ATP7B gene underlie
this disorder. This gene codes for the P-type ATPase involved in copper
transport to ceruloplasmin and bile (Bandman, 2015). This systemic
condition can also manifest with cardiomyopathy, renal disease,

neuropsychiatric symptoms, and certain endocrine abnormalities. Serum
ceruloplasmin, slit-lamp examination, and 24-hour urinary copper excretion
are used to identify this disease. A Kayser-Fleischer ring surrounding the iris
is highly specific, but a suspected diagnosis generally requires subsequent
genetic analysis confirmation.
With Wilson disease, infertility may be present, but pregnancy outcomes
among affected women are influenced by disease severity (Malik, 2013). In
one multicenter study of 282 pregnancies, the miscarriage rate was 26
percent, and 6 percent of the women had worsening liver disease
(Pfeiffenberger, 2018). Birth defects were not increased with chelation
treatment. Maternal and neonatal outcomes were good. The American
College of Gastroenterology states that few data guide which of the various
chelating agents is best (Tran, 2016). These include penicillamine, zinc, and
trientine, and any theoretical risks are outweighed by the risks of
discontinuing therapy. The latter include not only hepatic decompensation,
but also injury to the placenta and fetal liver. Accordingly, the American
College of Gastroenterology recommends that pregnant women should
continue their chelation therapy, although a dose reduction of 25 to 50
percent should be considered to promote wound healing in the event of a
surgical delivery.

■ Nonalcoholic Fatty Liver Disease
This is the most common chronic liver disease in the United States.
Unsurprisingly, because it is frequently comorbid with obesity, it is
demonstrable in 25 percent of American adults (Abdelmalek, 2018).
Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is a macrovesicular fatty liver
condition that resembles alcohol-induced liver injury but is seen without
ethanol abuse. Its most severe form—nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH)
—is an increasingly recognized condition that may occasionally progress to
hepatic cirrhosis. Currently, this is the third most common indication for liver
transplantation in the United States (Diehl, 2017).
Obesity, type 2 diabetes, and hyperlipidemia—syndrome X—frequently
coexist with NAFLD (Chap. 51, p. 904). The current hypothesis suggests that
these conditions may interact with other unknown etiological agents to cause
multiple insults that lead to hepatic injury (Buzzetti, 2016). In one study of
individuals with type 2 diabetes and normal liver enzyme levels, half had

NAFLD, and those with NAFLD showed greater insulin resistance (PortilloSanchex, 2015). In a study of obese adolescents undergoing bariatric surgery
and intraoperative core liver biopsy, more than a third had fatty liver without
hepatitis. An additional 20 percent had borderline or definite NASH
(Xanthakos, 2015).
Liver damage follows a progressive continuum from NAFLD to NASH
and then to hepatic fibrosis that may progress to cirrhosis (Goh, 2016). The
disease is usually asymptomatic, and it is a frequent explanation for elevated
serum transaminase levels found during routine screening. When other liver
disease is excluded, NAFLD is the cause of elevated asymptomatic
transaminase levels in up to 90 percent of cases. Currently, weight loss along
with control of diabetes and dyslipidemia is the only recommended
treatment.

Pregnancy
During the past decade, we have encountered an increasing number of obese
and diabetic gravidas with fatty liver infiltration. These women appear to
have no greater rates of adverse outcomes relative to liver involvement
compared with pregnant women of similar weight. However, some emerging
data indicate potential concerns. In one patient registry, risks of gestational
diabetes, preeclampsia, preterm birth, and low-birthweight newborns were
two- to threefold higher than in unaffected women (Hagström, 2016).
Yarrington and colleagues (2016) reported a high rate of gestational diabetes
among nonobese women who had elevated alanine transaminase levels in the
first trimester. Somewhat related, in another study, almost a fourth of women
with prior gestational diabetes had NAFLD (Foghsgaard, 2017). Last, some
evidence suggests that the fetus of an affected mother is at increased risk for
NAFLD in adulthood (Baker, 2018).

■ Cirrhosis
Irreversible chronic liver injury with extensive fibrosis and regenerative
nodules is the final common pathway for several disorders. Laënnec
cirrhosis from chronic alcohol exposure is the most frequent cause in the
general population. However, in young women, most cases are caused by
postnecrotic cirrhosis from chronic hepatitis B or C. As discussed, many
cases of cryptogenic cirrhosis are now known to be caused by NAFLD (Ge,

2016; Goh, 2016). Clinical manifestations of cirrhosis include jaundice,
edema, coagulopathy, and metabolic abnormalities. Of associated conditions,
portal hypertension can lead to gastroesophageal varices, and splenomegaly
may cause thrombocytopenia. Also, the incidence of venous
thromboembolism is increased. The prognosis is poor, and 75 percent have
progressive disease that leads to death in 1 to 5 years.
The incidence in pregnancy was reported to be 1 case in 3300 births
(Palatnik, 2017). Common complications include transient hepatic failure,
variceal hemorrhage, preterm delivery, fetal-growth restriction, spontaneous
bacterial peritonitis, and maternal death (Tan, 2008). Outcomes generally are
poor, especially if esophageal varices coexist. Another potentially fatal
cirrhosis complication arises from associated splenic artery aneurysms. Up
to 20 percent of aneurysm ruptures occur during pregnancy, and 70 percent of
these rupture in the third trimester (Tan, 2008). The 20-percent maternal
mortality rate is likely related to the emergent diagnosis of these aneurysms
(Ha, 2009).

■ Portal Hypertension and Esophageal Varices
In pregnant women, the causes of esophageal varices are equally divided
between cirrhosis and extrahepatic portal vein obstruction (Andrade, 2018).
Of the extrahepatic cases, some develop following portal vein thrombosis
associated with one of the thrombophilia syndromes (Chap. 55, p. 976).
Others follow thrombosis related to umbilical vein catheterization when the
woman was a neonate, especially if she was born preterm. Last, the rare
Budd-Chiari syndrome results from hepatic vein thrombosis that causes
extrahepatic portal hypertension. Of 16 pregnancies complicated by this
syndrome, one observational study reported favorable outcomes (Khan,
2017).
With either intrahepatic or extrahepatic resistance to flow, portal vein
pressure rises from its normal range of 5 to 10 mm Hg, and values may
exceed 30 mm Hg. Collateral circulation develops that carries portal blood
to the systemic circulation. Blood drains into the gastric, intercostal, and
other veins to reach the esophageal system, where varices develop. In rare
cases, abdominal wall varices develop (Wood, 2018a). Bleeding is usually
from varices near the gastroesophageal junction, and hemorrhage can be
severe. Bleeding during pregnancy from varices occurs in a third to half of

affected women and is the major cause of maternal mortality in this group
(Tan, 2008).
Maternal prognosis with esophageal varices largely depends on whether
these rupture. The mortality rate is 18 percent if varices are associated with
cirrhosis compared with 2 percent for varices without cirrhosis. Similarly,
perinatal mortality rates are high in women with varices and are worse if
cirrhosis caused the varices. Increased rates of neonatal demise, preterm
birth, low birthweight, preeclampsia, and postpartum hemorrhage have been
reported (Puljic, 2016).
Treatment is the same as for nonpregnant patients. Preventively, all
patients with cirrhosis, including pregnant women, should undergo
endoscopic screening for variceal dilation (Bacon, 2015). Beta-blocking
drugs such as propranolol are given to decrease portal pressure and bleeding
risk (Ge, 2016; Tran, 2016).
For acute bleeding and for prophylaxis, endoscopic band ligation is
preferred to sclerotherapy because it avoids any potential risk of injecting
sclerotherapeutic chemicals. Acute medical management for bleeding varices
verified endoscopically includes the intravenous vasoconstrictors octreotide
or somatostatin along with endoscopic banding. Vasopressin is less often
used. If endoscopy is not available, balloon tamponade using a triple-lumen
Sengstaken-Blakemore tube, which is placed into the esophagus and stomach
to compress bleeding varices, can be lifesaving. An interventional radiology
procedure—transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic stent shunting
(TIPSS)—also can control bleeding from gastric varices that is unresponsive
to other measures (Ge, 2016; Tan, 2008). We have had good outcomes with
this procedure done electively during pregnancy in women with prior
variceal hemorrhage (Chandramouli, 2020).

■ Acetaminophen Hepatotoxicity
As discussed earlier (p. 1030), acetaminophen is the most frequent cause of
acute liver failure in the United States (Lee, 2018). This commonly used
medication can be associated with hepatotoxicity at doses above 4 g/d, and
even less in certain populations (Clark, 2012). The drug is often used during
pregnancy, and overdose–either accidentally or by attempted suicide–may
lead to hepatocellular necrosis and acute liver failure (Taney, 2017).
Massive necrosis causes a cytokine storm and multiorgan dysfunction. Early

overdose symptoms are nausea, vomiting, diaphoresis, malaise, and pallor.
After a latent period of 24 to 48 hours, liver failure ensues, and it usually
begins to resolve in 5 days. In a prospective Danish study, only 35 percent of
patients who were treated for fulminant hepatic failure spontaneously
recovered before being listed for liver transplantation (Schmidt, 2007).
The antidote is N-acetylcysteine (NAC), which must be given promptly.
The drug is thought to raise glutathione levels, which aid metabolism of the
toxic metabolite, N-acetyl-p-benzoquinoneimine. The Rumack-Matthew
nomogram uses serum acetaminophen levels to predict subsequent plasma
hepatotoxic levels as a function of the time from acute ingestion (Rumack,
1975). The need for treatment is based on these projections, and online
nomograms and calculators are available. If the plasma level exceeds 150
μg/mL 4 hours after ingestion, treatment is given. When plasma
determinations are not available, empirical treatment is initiated if the
ingested amount is >7.5 g. An oral loading dose of 140 mg/kg is given
followed by 70 mg/kg every 4 hours for a total treatment duration of 72 hours
(Heard, 2008). Both the oral and an equally efficacious intravenous dosing
regimen have been reviewed by Hodgman and Garrard (2012). Although the
drug reaches therapeutic concentrations in the fetus, any protective effects of
NAC during acetaminophen overdose are unknown (Wiest, 2014).
After 14 weeks’ gestation, the fetus has some cytochrome P450 activity
necessary for metabolism of acetaminophen to the toxic metabolite. Riggs
and associates (1989) reported follow-up data from the Rocky Mountain
Poison and Drug Center in 60 women suffering overdose. The likelihood of
maternal and fetal survival was better if the antidote was given soon after
overdose. At least one 33-week fetus appears to have died as a direct result
of hepatotoxicity 2 days after maternal ingestion. In another case, Wang and
coworkers (1997) confirmed acetaminophen placental transfer and found
maternal and cord blood levels measuring 41 μg/mL. Both the mother and the
emergently delivered neonate died from hepatorenal failure.

■ Focal Nodular Hyperplasia
This benign lesion of the liver is characterized in most cases by a welldelineated accumulation of normal but disordered hepatocytes surrounding a
central stellate scar. These usually can be differentiated from hepatic
adenomas by MR and CT imaging. Except in rare situations of unremitting

pain, surgery is rarely indicated, and most women remain asymptomatic
during pregnancy. In one review of 20 cases, no woman had related
complications during pregnancy (Rifai, 2013). Three women showed 20percent tumor growth; in half, the tumor diminished in size; and the remaining
seven tumors were unchanged across pregnancy. In another surveillance of
44 lesions with MR imaging in 30 gravidas, tumor size was unchanged in 80
percent and decreased in most of the remainder (Ramírez-Fuentes, 2013).
Investigators concluded that size changes were unrelated to pregnancy,
combination oral contraceptive use, or menopause. This lesion is not a
contraindication to estrogen-containing contraceptives (Chap. 38, p. 673).

■ Hepatocellular Adenoma
This rare benign neoplasm develops most often in young women. Lesions are
more common in individuals taking combination oral contraceptives or other
steroid medications (Renzulli, 2019). Hepatic adenomas have a 5-percent
risk of malignant transformation and a significant risk of rupture-associated
hemorrhage, particularly in pregnancy. The rupture risk progresses with
lesion size, and surgery is generally recommended for tumors measuring >5
cm (Agrawal, 2015). Thus, differentiation from focal nodular hyperplasia is
important and can be achieved by MR or CT imaging.
Tran and associates (2016) recommend sonographic surveillance of
hepatic adenomas during pregnancy. In a study of 51 pregnancies in women
with an adenoma <5 cm, 25 percent of the lesions expanded approximately
14 mm (Gaspersz, 2020). In one review of 27 cases in pregnancy, 23 became
apparent in the third trimester and puerperium (Cobey, 2004). No bleeding
complications followed tumors measuring <6.5 cm. However, 60 percent
presented with tumor rupture that resulted in seven maternal deaths and six
fetal deaths. Of note, 13 of 27 women presented within 2 months postpartum,
and in half, hemorrhage heralded rupture. Bleeding adenomas can be
managed by angiographic embolization followed by resection (Tsilimigras,
2019).

■ Liver Transplantation
According to the Organ Procurement and Transplantation Network (2020)
more than 177,000 liver transplantations have been performed in the United

States. Analysis of the National Inpatient Sample database found 2 liver
transplantations per 100,000 deliveries (Ghazali, 2017). In most studies, the
80-percent live-birth rate compares favorably with that of the general
population. However, risks of preeclampsia, cesarean delivery, fetal-growth
restriction, and preterm birth are significantly elevated (Coscia, 2010;
Deshpande, 2012; Kanzaki, 2016). Although cesarean delivery is common,
vaginal delivery is not contraindicated (Madej, 2018). Mattila and
colleagues (2017) found that half of the women they cared for had maternal
complications, including acute graft rejection. Importantly, 4 percent of
mothers had died within a year after delivery, but this rate is comparable to
that in nonpregnant liver transplantation patients.

GALLBLADDER DISORDERS
■ Cholelithiasis and Cholecystitis
In the United States, 17 percent of women have gallstones. Most stones
contain cholesterol, and its oversecretion into bile is thought to be a major
factor in stone formation. The cumulative risk of all patients with gallstones
to become symptomatic is 20 percent (Lammert, 2016). For this reason,
prophylactic cholecystectomy is not warranted for asymptomatic stones.
Symptomatic cholelithiasis typically presents with right upper or
epigastric abdominal pain, bloating, belching, nausea, and fatty food
intolerance. Pain stems from gallbladder contraction, which forces a stone up
into the sac’s neck. With subsequent gallbladder relaxation, the stone falls
back to relieve the obstruction. Laboratory values are normal, and
leukocytosis or elevated liver and pancreatic enzymes should warn for acute
cholecystitis or pancreatitis. Standard care for symptomatic cholelithiasis is
laparoscopic cholecystectomy (Cafasso, 2014). Less often, oral
ursodeoxycholic acid therapy or extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy are
used, but experience with these during pregnancy is lacking.
Acute cholecystitis usually develops when a stone obstructs the cystic
duct, which connects the gallbladder to the common bile duct. Bacterial
infection plays a role in 50 to 85 percent of cases. In more than half of
patients with acute cholecystitis, a history of prior right upper quadrant pain
from biliary colic is elicited. With acute disease, pain is accompanied by
anorexia, nausea and vomiting, low-grade fever, and mild leukocytosis. As

shown in Figure 58-3, sonography will display stones, and both falsepositive and false-negative rates range from 2 to 4 percent (Greenberger,
2018). In acute cases, medical therapy consists of intravenous fluids,
antibiotics, analgesics, and in some instances, nasogastric suction. Surgical
therapy follows, and laparoscopic cholecystectomy is the preferred route for
most.

FIGURE 58-3 Sonogram shows multiple, hyperechoic gallstones collecting along the inferior wall of an
anechoic gallbladder.

■ Gallbladder Disease During Pregnancy
After the first trimester, the gallbladder fasting volume and the residual
volume after postprandial emptying are doubled. Incomplete emptying may
result in retention of cholesterol crystals, a prerequisite for cholesterol
gallstones. From studies, the combined incidence of biliary sludge and
gallstones is 5 to 8 percent (Ko, 2005, 2014).
Postpartum, sludge frequently regresses, and occasionally gallstones will
resorb. Still, gallbladder diseases are the most common cause of
nonobstetrical admissions in the first year following delivery (Lydon-

Rochelle, 2011). This is particularly true for women managed conservatively
during pregnancy. Jorge and coworkers (2015) reported that half of 53
women with symptomatic cholelithiasis in pregnancy underwent later
postpartum cholecystectomy. In 80 percent of these women, recurrent
symptoms had developed prior to surgery.

■ Medical versus Surgical Management
Symptomatic cholelithiasis is common in pregnancy. Othman and colleagues
(2012) showed that gravidas managed conservatively had greater pain, more
recurrent emergency department visits, more hospitalizations, and higher
cesarean delivery rate. Dhupar and associates (2010) reported more
complications with conservative management of gallbladder disease
compared with laparoscopic cholecystectomy in pregnancy. These included
multiple admissions, prolonged total parenteral nutrition (TPN), and
unplanned labor induction for worsening gallbladder symptoms. Therefore,
operative and endoscopic interventions are increasingly favored over
conservative measures.
Acute cholecystitis during pregnancy or the puerperium is also common.
Acute disease in pregnancy may be complicated by sepsis, pancreatitis,
venous thromboembolism, and bowel obstruction (El-Messidi, 2018).
Cholecystitis is initially managed similarly to that for nonpregnant women. In
the distant past, most favored medical therapy. However, the recurrence rate
during the same pregnancy is high, and 25 to 50 percent of women ultimately
require cholecystectomy for persistent symptoms (Dhupar, 2010). Moreover,
if cholecystitis recurs later in gestation, preterm labor is more likely and
cholecystectomy is technically more difficult.
Cholecystectomy can be performed safely in all trimesters (Kwon, 2018).
A metaanalysis found that cholecystectomy does not raise the risk of preterm
labor or of maternal or fetal mortality (Athwal, 2016). Of surgical routes,
laparoscopic cholecystectomy has evolved as the favored approach (Pearl,
2017; Shigemi, 2019). This is discussed further in Chapter 49 (p. 867).
Management at Parkland Hospital favors a surgical approach, especially if
biliary pancreatitis, as subsequently discussed, is comorbid (Juo, 2018).

■ Endoscopic Retrograde Cholangiopancreatography

Approximately 10 percent of patients with symptomatic stone disease have
common duct stones (Stinton, 2012). Symptomatic biliary duct gallstones
during pregnancy can be retrieved by endoscopic retrograde
cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) (Fogel, 2014; Greenberger, 2018). The
procedure is performed if common duct obstruction is suspected or proven.
ERCP can be modified in many cases so that radiation exposure from
fluoroscopy is avoided (Sethi, 2015). If standard fluoroscopy is used, a lead
apron shield is placed between the radiation source and the fetus.
In 68 ERCP procedures performed in pregnant women at Parkland
Hospital, all but two women had gallstones, and common duct stones were
identified in half of 65 women (Tang, 2009). Stones were successfully
removed in all but one woman. A biliary stent was placed in 22 percent of
cases and removed after delivery. Complications were minimal, but postERCP pancreatitis developed in 16 percent. Pregnancy outcomes were not
different from those in the general obstetrical population. As a less invasive
approach, MR cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) in pregnancy has been
reported (Oto, 2009).
Ascending cholangitis can complicate acute biliary obstruction. Nearly
70 percent of affected patients develop Charcot triad—jaundice, abdominal
pain, and fever. The diagnosis is aided by sonography, and treatment is
broad-spectrum antibiotics and biliary drainage by ERCP (Greenberger,
2018).

PANCREATIC DISORDERS
■ Pancreatitis
Acute pancreatic inflammation is triggered by factors that cause activation of
pancreatic trypsinogen followed by autodigestion. It is characterized by cellmembrane disruption and proteolysis, edema, hemorrhage, and necrosis
(Conwell, 2018). Up to 10 percent of patients develop necrotizing
pancreatitis, which carries a mortality risk of 15 percent. This rate rises if
infection develops (Cain, 2015).
The incidence of pancreatitis varies with the population studied. At
Parkland Hospital, with a predominant Mexican-American population, acute
pancreatitis complicated approximately 1 in 3300 pregnancies (Ramin,

1995). From other reviews, the incidence is 1 case in 3500 to 6000
pregnancies (Eddy, 2008; Hacker, 2015; Hernandez, 2007).
In nonpregnant patients, acute pancreatitis is almost equally associated
with gallstones and alcohol abuse. During pregnancy, however, cholelithiasis
is almost always the predisposing condition. Other causes are
hyperlipidemias, usually hypertriglyceridemia; hyperparathyroidism;
congenital ductal anomalies; recent ERCP; some drugs; and rarely
autoimmune pancreatitis (Conwell, 2018; Tang, 2018). Nonbiliary
pancreatitis occasionally develops postoperatively, or it is associated with
trauma, drugs, or some viral infections. Certain metabolic conditions,
including acute AFLP and familial hypertriglyceridemia, also predispose to
pancreatitis (Nelson, 2013). Cases of acute and chronic pancreatitis have
been linked to numerous mutations of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane
conductance regulator gene (Chang, 2015).

Diagnosis
Acute pancreatitis incites incapacitating epigastric pain, nausea and
vomiting, and abdominal distention. Patients are usually distressed and have
low-grade fever, tachycardia, hypotension, and abdominal tenderness. As
many as 10 percent have sepsis, which causes endothelial activation and can
lead to acute respiratory distress syndrome (Chap. 50, p. 887).
Serum lipase measurements are preferred for diagnosis, however,
amylase levels also can be used. In 173 pregnant women with pancreatitis,
the mean amylase value approximated 2000 IU/L, and the mean lipase value
approached 3000 IU/L (Table 58-5). Importantly, the degree of enzyme
elevation and disease severity do not reliably correlate. By 48 to 72 hours
amylase levels may return to normal despite other evidence for continuing
pancreatitis. Serum lipase activity typically remains increased with
continued inflammation. Leukocytosis is usually found, and 25 percent of
patients have hypocalcemia. Elevated serum bilirubin and aspartate
transaminase levels may signify concomitant gallstone disease.
TABLE 58-5. Laboratory Values in 173 Pregnant Women with Acute
Pancreatitis

Several prognostic scoring systems are used to classify pancreatitis
severity. However, the Ranson criteria and the Apache II scoring system may
be less relevant for pregnancy. In contrast, the Atlanta Classification
incorporates the degree of organ failure as a measure of severity and may be
more applicable in pregnancy (Cain, 2015; Conwell, 2018). With this last
tool, mild disease lacks organ failure or systemic complications. Moderately
severe disease shows organ failure lasting <48 h, with or without local or
systemic complications. Severe disease is defined by persistent single- or
multi-organ failure (Banks, 2013).

Management
Medical treatment mirrors that for nonpregnant patients. This includes
analgesics, intravenous hydration, and measures to decrease pancreatic
secretion by interdiction of oral intake. Nasogastric suction does not improve
outcomes of mild to moderate disease. In a series by Ramin and colleagues
(1995), all 43 affected pregnant women responded to conservative treatment
and were hospitalized for a mean of 8.5 days. If bacterial superinfection,
necrotizing pancreatitis, sepsis, or cholangitis is found, broad-spectrum
antimicrobials are administered. If common duct stones are found, ERCP is
indicated.
Enteral feeding may be helpful once pain improves and associated ileus
resolves. For women with more severe pancreatitis and prolonged disease
course, total enteral nutrition using nasojejunal feeding is superior to TPN
(Cain, 2015; Conwell, 2018). Cholecystectomy is considered after
inflammation subsides because women with gallstone pancreatitis carry a

greater risk of recurrent inflammation (Cain, 2015). Juo and coworkers
(2018) reported that a third of women with biliary pancreatitis not treated
with cholecystectomy were readmitted, and 30 percent of these had recurrent
pancreatitis. Of the initial group, those who instead did undergo
cholecystectomy had only a 5-percent readmission rate.

Pregnancy Outcomes
Increasing severity of pancreatitis is associated with adverse maternal and
fetal outcomes (Tang, 2018). In one review of 101 pancreatitis cases, Eddy
and coworkers (2008) found a 30-percent preterm delivery rate, and 11
percent were delivered before 35 weeks’ gestation. There were also 4
percent stillbirths. There were two pancreatitis-related maternal deaths.
Importantly, almost a third of women had recurrent pancreatitis during
pregnancy. In another study of 342 pregnancies complicated by pancreatitis,
preterm delivery and fetal mortality rates were comparable to the data from
Eddy (Hacker, 2015).

■ Pancreatic Transplantation
Few reports describe pregnancy following pancreas transplantation. Of 44
pregnancies in 73 women following pancreas-kidney transplantation,
outcomes are encouraging, and vaginal delivery has been described
(Mastrobattista, 2008). Although the incidence of hypertension,
preeclampsia, preterm delivery, and fetal-growth restriction are high, there
was only one perinatal death. Four rejection episodes developed during
pregnancy and were treated successfully. Pancreatic islet autotransplantation
and at least three subsequent successful pregnancies have been reported
(Jung, 2007).

REFERENCES
Abdelmalek MF, Diehl AM: Nonalcoholic fatty liver diseases and nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. In
Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al (eds): Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed.
New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2018, p 2401
Abu-Hayyeh S, Ovadia C, Lieu T, et al: Prognostic and mechanistic potential of progesterone sulfates in
intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy and pruritus gravidarum. Hepatology 63:1287, 2016
Agrawal S, Agarwal S, Arnason T, et al: Management of hepatocellular adenoma: recent advances. Clin
Gastroenterol Hepatol 13:1221, 2015

Airoldi J, Berghella V: Hepatitis C and pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol Surv 61(10):666, 2006
American Academy of Pediatrics and the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists:
Guidelines for Perinatal Care, 8th ed. Washington, DC, 2017
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Upper gastrointestinal tract, biliary, and
pancreatic disorders. Clinical Updates in Women’s Health Care, Vol. XI, No. 4, 2012
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Viral hepatitis in pregnancy. Practice Bulletin No.
86, October 2007, Reaffirmed 2018
Anastasio HB, Grundy M, Birsner ML, et al: Gestational alloimmune liver disease: a devastating
condition preventable with maternal intravenous immunoglobulin. Obstet Gynecol 128(5):1092, 2016
Andrade F, Shukla A, Bureau C, et al: Pregnancy in idiopathic non-cirrhotic portal hypertension: a
multicentric study on maternal and fetal management and outcome. J Hepatol 69(6):1242, 2018
Athwal R, Bhogal RH, Hodson J, et al: Surgery for gallstone disease during pregnancy does not
increase fetal or maternal mortality: a meta-analysis. Hepatobiliary Surg Nutr 5:53, 2016
Australian New Zealand Clinical Trials Registry. Trial of ursodeoxycholic acid versus rifampicin in
severe early onset intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy: the TURRIFIC study. 2019.
https://www.anzctr.org.au/Trial/Registration/TrialReview.aspx?id=374510. Accessed July 10, 2020
Bacak SJ, Thornburg LL: Liver failure in pregnancy. Crit Care Clin 32(1):61, 2016
Bacon BR: Cirrhosis and its complications. In Kasper DL, Fauci AS, Hauser SL, et al (eds): Harrison’s
Principles of Internal Medicine, 19th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2015
Bacq Y, Sentilhes L, Reyes HB, et al: Efficacy of ursodeoxycholic acid in treating intrahepatic
cholestasis of pregnancy: a meta-analysis. Gastroenterology 143(6):1492, 2012
Baker PR 2nd, Friedman JE: Mitochondrial role in the neonatal predisposition to developing nonalcoholic
fatty liver disease. J Clin Invest 128(9):3692, 2018
Bandman O, Weiss KH, Kaler SG: Wilson’s disease and other neurological copper disorders. Lancet
Neurol 14:103, 2015
Banks PA, Bollen TL, Dervenis C, et al: Classification of acute pancreatitis–2012: revision of the
Atlanta classification and definitions by international consensus. Gut 62(1):102, 2013
Bernal W, Wendon J: Acute liver failure. N Engl J Med 369(26):2525, 2013
Brouwers L, Koster MP, Page-Christiaens GC, et al: Intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy: maternal
and fetal outcomes associated with elevated bile acid levels. Am J Obstet Gynecol 212:100, 2015
Brown SA, Axenfeld E, Stonesifer EG, et al: Current and prospective therapies for acute liver failure.
Dis Mon 64(12):493, 2018
Browning MF, Levy HL, Wilkins-Haug LE, et al: Fetal fatty acid oxidation defects and maternal liver
disease in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 107:115, 2006
Buzzetti E, Pinzani M, Tsochatzis EA: The multiple-hit pathogenesis of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease
(NAFLD). Metabolism 65(8):1038, 2016
Byrne JJ, Seasely A, Nelson DB, et al: Comparing acute fatty liver of pregnancy from hemolysis,
elevated liver enzymes, and low platelets syndrome. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 19:1, 2020
Cafasso DE, Smith RR: Symptomatic cholelithiasis and functional disorders of the biliary tract. Surg Clin
North Am 94(2):233, 2014
Cain MA, Ellis J, Vengrove MA, et al: Gallstone and severe hypertriglyceride-induced pancreatitis in
pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol Surv 70:577, 2015
Calix RX, Loeliger KB, Burn MS, et al: Acute herpes simplex virus hepatitis in pregnancy. Obstet
Gynecol 135(2):396, 2020
Casey LC, Fontana RJ, Aday A, et al: Acute liver failure (ALF) in pregnancy: how much is pregnancyrelated? Hepatology 72:1366, 2020

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Hepatitis E FAQs for health professionals. 2020a.
Available at: http://www.cdc.gov/hepatitis/hev/hevfaq.htm. Accessed July 7, 2020
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Surveillance for viral hepatitis—United States, 2019. 2021.
Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/hepatitis/statistics/2017surveillance/. Accessed October 19, 2021
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Yellow book: table of contents. 2020b. Available at:
https://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/yellowbook/2020/table-of-contents. Accessed July 7, 2020
Chandramouli S, Lee WM, Lo J, et al: Prophylactic transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt
placement for cirrhosis management in pregnancy. Hepatology 71(5):1876, 2020
Chang MC, Jan IS, Liang PC, et al: Cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator gene variants
are associated with autoimmune pancreatitis and slow response to steroid treatment. J Cyst Fibros
14:661, 2015
Chappell LC, Bell JL, Smith A, et al: Ursodeoxycholic acid versus placebo in women with intrahepatic
cholestasis of pregnancy (PITCHES): a randomised controlled trial. Lancet 394(10201):849, 2019
Châtel P, Ronot M, Roux O, et al: Transient excess of liver fat detected by magnetic resonance imaging
in women with acute fatty liver of pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 214(1):127, 2016
Ch’ng CL, Morgan M, Hainsworth I, et al: Prospective study of liver dysfunction in pregnancy in
Southwest Wales. Gut 51(6):876, 2002
Clark R, Fisher JE, Sketris IS, et al: Population prevalence of high dose paracetamol in dispensed
paracetamol/opioid prescription combinations: an observational study. BMC Clin Pharmacol 12:11,
2012
Cobey FC, Salem RR: A review of liver masses in pregnancy and a proposed algorithm for their
diagnosis and management. Am J Surg 187(2):181, 2004
Conwell DL, Banks PA, Greenberger NJ: Acute and chronic pancreatitis. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS,
Kasper DL, et al (eds): Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGrawHill Education, 2018, p 2437
Coscia LA, Constantinescu S, Moritz MJ, et al: Report from the National Transplantation Pregnancy
Registry (NTPR): outcomes of pregnancy after transplantation. Clin Transpl 2010:65, 2010
Cressey TR, Harrison L, Achalapong J, et al: Tenofovir exposure during pregnancy and postpartum in
women receiving tenofovir disoproxil fumarate for the prevention of mother-to-child transmission of
hepatitis B virus. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 62(12):e01686, 2018
Cui AM, Shao JG, Li HB, et al: Association of chronic hepatitis B virus infection with preterm birth: our
experience and meta-analysis. J Perinat Med 45(8):933, 2017
Culp LA, Caucci L, Fenlon NE, et al: Assessment of state perinatal hepatitis B prevention laws. Am J
Prev Med 51(6):e179, 2016
Cunningham FG, Lowe TW, Guss S, et al: Erythrocyte morphology in women with severe preeclampsia
and eclampsia. Am J Obstet Gynecol 153:358, 1985
Dallmann A, Ince I, Coboeken K, et al: A physiologically base pharmacokinetic model for pregnant
women to predict the pharmacokinetics of drugs metabolized via several enzymatic pathways. Clin
Pharmacokinet 57(6):749, 2018
Daudi N, Shouval D, Stein-Zamir C, et al: Breastmilk hepatitis A virus DNA in nursing mothers with
acute hepatitis A virus infection. Breastfeed Med 7:313, 2012
Danielsson Borssén Å, Wallerstedt S, Nyhlin N, et al: Pregnancy and childbirth in women with
autoimmune hepatitis is safe, even in compensated cirrhosis. Scand J Gastroenterol 51:479, 2016
Deshpande NA, James NT, Kucirka LM, et al: Pregnancy outcomes of liver transplant recipients: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Liver Transpl 18(6):621, 2012

Dhupar R, Smaldone GM, Hamad GG: Is there a benefit to delaying cholecystectomy for symptomatic
gallbladder disease during pregnancy? Surg Endosc 24(1):108, 2010
Diehl AM, Day C: Cause, pathogenesis, and treatment of nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. N Engl J Med
377(21):2063, 2017
Dienstag JL: Chronic hepatitis. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al (eds): Harrison’s Principles
of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2018a, p 2375
Dienstag JL: Acute viral hepatitis. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al (eds): Harrison’s
Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2018b, p 2347
Di Mascio D, Quist-Nelson J, Riegel M, et al: Perinatal death by bile acid levels in intrahepatic
cholestasis of pregnancy: a systematic review. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 19:1, 2019
Dorak MT, Mackay RK, Relton CL, et al: Hereditary hemochromatosis gene (HFE) variants are
associated with birth weight and childhood leukemia risk. Pediatr Blood Cancer 53:1242, 2009
Dunkelberg JC, Berkley EM, Thiel KW, et al: Hepatitis B and C in pregnancy: a review and
recommendations for care. J Perinatol 34:882, 2014
Eddy JJ, Gideonsen MD, Song JY, et al: Pancreatitis in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 112:1075, 2008
Egan N, Bartels A, Khashan AS, et al: Reference standard for serum bile acids in pregnancy. BJOG
119:493, 2012
El-Messidi A, Alsarraj G, Czozuj-Shulman N, et al: Evaluation of management and surgical outcomes in
pregnancies complicated by acute cholecystitis. J Perinat Med 46(9):998, 2018
Fan L, Owusu-Edusei K Jr, Schillie SF, et al: Cost-effectiveness of active-passive prophylaxis and
antiviral prophylaxis during pregnancy to prevent perinatal hepatitis B virus infection. Hepatology
63:1471, 2016
Feldman AG, Whitington PF: Neonatal hemochromatosis. J Clin Exp Hepatology 3:313, 2013
Fierro NA, Realpe M, Meraz-Medina T, et al: Hepatitis E virus: an ancient hidden enemy in Latin
America. World J Gastroenterol 22:2271, 2016
Fogel EL, Sherman S: ERCP for gallstone pancreatitis. N Engl J Med 370:150, 2014
Foghsgaard S, Andreasen C, Vedtofte L, et al: Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease is prevalent in women
with prior gestational diabetes mellitus and independently associated with insulin resistance and waist
circumference. Diabetes Care 40(1):109, 2017
Fontana RJ, Engle RE, Scaglione S, et al: The role of hepatitis E virus infection in adult Americans with
acute liver failure. Hepatology 64(6):1870, 2016
Freedman MS, Hunter P, Ault K, et al: Advisory committee on immunization practices recommended
immunization schedule for adults aged 19 years or older—United States, 2020. MMWR 69(5):133,
2020
Furer V, Rondaan C, Heijstek MV, et al: 2019 update of EULAR recommendations for vaccination in
adult patients with autoimmune inflammatory rheumatic diseases. Ann Rheum Dis 79(1):39, 2020
Gao H, Chen LJ, Luo QQ, et al: Effect of cholic acid on fetal cardiac myocytes in intrahepatic
cholestasis of pregnancy. J Huazhong Univ Sci Technolog Med Sci 34:736, 2014
Gaspersz MP, Klompenhouwer AJ, Broker ME, et al: Growth of hepatocellular adenoma during
pregnancy: a prospective study. J Hepatol 72(1):119, 2020
Ge PS, Runyon BA: Treatment of patients with cirrhosis. N Engl J Med 375(8):767, 2016
Ghazali S, Czuzoj-Shulman N, Spence AR, et al: Pregnancy outcomes in liver transplant patients, a
population-based study. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 30(3):261, 2017
Glantz A, Marschall H, Mattsson L: Intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy: relationships between bile
acid levels and fetal complication rates. Hepatology 40:467, 2004
Goh GB, McCullough AJ: Natural history of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Dig Dis Sci 61:1226, 2016

Greenberger NJ, Paumgartner G: Disease of the gallbladder and bile ducts. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS,
Kasper DL, et al (eds): Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGrawHill Education, 2018, p 2422
Ha JF, Phillips M, Faulkner K: Splenic artery aneurysm rupture in pregnancy. Eur J Obstet Gynecol
Reprod Biol 146(2):133, 2009
Hacker FM, Whalen PS, Lee VR, et al: Maternal and fetal outcomes of pancreatitis in pregnancy. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 213:568, 2015
Hagström H, Höijer J, Ludvigsson JF, et al: Adverse outcomes of pregnancy in women with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Liver Int 36:268, 2016
Heard KJ: Acetylcysteine for acetaminophen poisoning. N Engl J Med 359(3):285, 2008
Hernandez A, Petrov MS, Brooks DC, et al: Acute pancreatitis and pregnancy: a 10-year single center
experience. J Gastrointest Surg 11:1623, 2007
Herrera CA, Manuck TA, Stoddard GJ, et al: Perinatal outcomes associated with intrahepatic
cholestasis of pregnancy. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 31(14):1913, 2018
Hill JB, Sheffield JS, Kim MJ, et al: Risk of hepatitis B transmission in breast-fed infants of chronic
hepatitis B carriers. Obstet Gynecol 99(6):1049, 2002
Hodgman MJ, Garrard AR: A review of acetaminophen poisoning. Crit Care Clin 28(4):499, 2012
Hoofnagle JH, Björnsson ES: Drug-induced liver injury—types and phenotypes. N Engl J med
381(3):264, 2019
Ibrahim SH, Jonas MM, Taylor SA, et al: Liver diseases in the perinatal period: interactions between
mother and infants. Hepatology 71(4):1474, 2020
Indolfi G, Azzari C, Resti M: Hepatitis: immunoregulation in pregnancy and perinatal transmission of
HCV. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol 11:6, 2014
Isoherranen N, Thummel KE: Drug metabolism and transport during pregnancy: how does drug
disposition change during pregnancy and what are the mechanisms that cause such changes? Drug
Metab Dispos 41(2):256, 2013
Jin H, Zhao Y, Zhang X, et al: Case-fatality risk of pregnant women with acute viral hepatitis type E: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Epidemiol Infect 144(10):2098, 2016
Jorge AM, Keswani RN, Veerappan A, et al: Non-operative management of symptomatic cholelithiasis
in pregnancy is associated with frequent hospitalizations. J Gastrointest Surg 19:598, 2015
Jourdain G, Ngo-Giang-Huong N, Harrison L, et al: Tenofovir versus placebo to prevent perinatal
transmission of hepatitis B. N Engl J Med 378(10):911, 2018
Jung HS, Choi SH, Noh JH, et al: Healthy twin birth after autologous islet transplantation in a
pancreatectomized patient due to a benign tumor. Transplant Proc 39(5):1723, 2007
Juo YY, Khrucharoen U, Sanaiha Y, et al: Cumulative financial burden of readmissions for biliary
pancreatitis in pregnant women. Obstet Gynecol 132(2):415, 2018
Kanzaki Y, Kondoh E, Kawasaki K, et al: Pregnancy outcomes in liver transplant recipients: a 15-year
single-center experience. J Obstet Gynaecol Res 42(11):1476, 2016
Kawakita T, Parikh LI, Ramsey PS, et al: Predictors of adverse neonatal outcomes in intrahepatic
cholestasis of pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 213:570, 2015
Khan F, Rowe I, Martin B, et al: Outcomes of pregnancy in patients with known Budd-Chiari syndrome.
World J Hepatol 9(21):945, 2017
Knight M, Nelson-Piercy C, Kurinczuk JJ, et al: A prospective national study of acute fatty liver of
pregnancy in the UK. Gut 57(7):951, 2008
Ko CW, Beresford SA, Schulte SJ, et al: Incidence, natural history, and risk factors for biliary sludge
and stones during pregnancy. Hepatology 41(2):359, 2005

Ko CW, Napolitano PG, Lee SP, et al: Physical activity, maternal metabolic measures, and the incidence
of gallbladder sludge or stones during pregnancy: a randomized trial. Am J Perinatol 31:39, 2014
Kwon H, Lee M, Park HS, et al: Laparoscopic management is feasible for nonobstetric surgical disease
in all trimesters of pregnancy. Surg Endosc 32(6):2643, 2018
Kushner T, Shaw PA, Kalra A, et al: Incidence, determinants and outcomes of pregnancy-associated
hepatitis B flares: a regional hospital-based cohort study. Liver Int 38(5):813, 2018
Lammert F, Gurusamy K, Ko CW, et al: Gallstones. Nat Rev Dis Primers 2:16024, 2016
Lee RH, Goodwin TM, Greenspoon J, et al: The prevalence of intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy in
a primarily Latina Los Angeles population. J Perinatol 26(9):527, 2006
Lee WM, Dienstag JL: Toxic and drug-induced hepatitis. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al
(eds): Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2018,
p 2366
Li M, Bu Q, Gong W, et al: Hepatitis E virus infection and its associated adverse feto-maternal
outcomes among pregnant women in Qinhuangdao, China. J Matern Neonatal Med 33(21):3647,
2020
Lim JK, Nguyen MH, Kim WR, et al: Prevalence of chronic hepatitis B virus infection in the United
States. Am J Gastroenterol 115(9):1429, 2020
Lisman T, Bernal W: Hemostatic issues in pregnancy-induced liver disease. Thromb Res 151 Suppl
1:S78, 2017
Liu J, Ghaziani TT, Wolf JL: Acute fatty liver disease of pregnancy: updates in pathogenesis, diagnosis,
and management. Am J Gastroenterol 112(6):838, 2017a
Liu J, Murray AM, Mankus EB, et al: Adjuvant use of rifampin for refractory intrahepatic cholestasis of
pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 132(3):678, 2018
Liu J, Zhang S, Liu M, et al: Maternal pre-pregnancy infection with hepatitis B virus and the risk of
preterm birth: a population-based cohort study. Lancet Glob Health 5(6):e624, 2017b
Luo XL, Zhang WY: Obstetrical disease spectrum in China: an epidemiological study of 111,767 cases in
2011. Chin Med J (Engl) 128:1137, 2015
Lydon-Rochelle M, Holt VL, Martin DP, et al: Association between method of delivery and maternal
rehospitalization. JAMA 283(18):2411, 2000
Madej A, Mazanowska N, Szpotańska-Sikorska M, et al: Delivery method in patients after liver or
kidney transplantation. Transplant Proc 50(7):2150, 2018
Malik A, Khawaja A, Sheikh L: Wilson’s disease in pregnancy: case series and review of literature.
BMC Res Notes 6:421, 2013
Marschall HU, Shemer EW, Ludvigsson JF, et al: Intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy and associated
hepatobiliary disease: a population-based cohort study. Hepatology 58(4):1385, 2013
Mastrobattista JM, Gomez-Lobo V: Pregnancy after solid organ transplantation. Obstet Gynecol
112:919, 2008
Matos A, Bernardes J, Ayres-de-Campos D, et al: Antepartum fetal cerebral hemorrhage not predicted
by current surveillance methods in cholestasis of pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 89:803, 1997
Mattila M, Kemppainen H, Isoniemi H, et al: Pregnancy outcomes after liver transplantation in Finland.
Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 96(9):1106, 2017
McCormack AL, Rabie N, Whittemore B, et al: HSV hepatitis in pregnancy: a review of the literature.
Obstet Gynecol Surv 74(2):93, 2019
McMenamin MB, Jackson AD, Lambert J, et al: Obstetric management of hepatitis C-positive mothers:
analysis of vertical transmission in 559 mother-infant pairs. Am J Obstet Gynecol 199:315.e1, 2008

Morton A, Laurie J: Physiological changes of pregnancy and the Swansea criteria in diagnosing acute
fatty liver of pregnancy. Obstet Med 11(3):126, 2018
Nelson DB, Byrne JJ, Cunningham FG: Acute fatty liver of pregnancy. Clin Obstet Gynecol 63(1):152,
2020
Nelson DB, Yost NP, Cunningham FG: Acute fatty liver of pregnancy: clinical outcomes and expected
durations of recovery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 209(5):456.e1, 2013
Nelson DB, Yost NP, Cunningham FG: Hemostatic dysfunction with acute fatty liver of pregnancy.
Obstet Gynecol 124:40, 2014
Nelson NP, Weng MK, Hofmeister MG, et al: Prevention of hepatitis A virus infection in the United
States: recommendations of the advisory committee on immunization practices. MMWR 69(5):1-38,
2020
Organ Procurement and Transplantation Network: National Data. Virginia, 2020. Available at:
https://optn.transplant.hrsa.gov/data/view-data-reports/national-data/. Accessed July 10, 2020
Ornoy A, Koren G. SSRIs and SNRIs (SRI) in pregnancy: effects on the course of pregnancy and the
offspring: how far are we from having all the answers? Int J Mol Sci 20(10):2370, 2019
Oto A, Ernst R, Ghulmiyyah L, et al: The role of MR cholangiopancreatography in the evaluation of
pregnant patients with acute pancreaticobiliary disease. Br J Radiol 82(976):279, 2009
Othman MO, Stone E, Hashimi M, et al: Conservative management of cholelithiasis and its
complications in pregnancy is associated with recurrent symptoms and more emergency department
visits. Gastrointest Endosc 76(3):564, 2012
Ovadia C, Lövgren-Sandblom A, Edwards LA, et al: Therapeutic plasma exchange as a novel treatment
for severe intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy: case series and mechanism of action. J Clin Apher
33(6):638, 2018
Ovadia C, Seed PT, Sklavounos A, et al: Association of adverse perinatal outcomes of intrahepatic
cholestasis of pregnancy with biochemical markers: results of aggregate and individual patient data
meta-analyses. Lancet 393(10174):899, 2019
Ozel A, Alici Davutoglu E, Eric Ozdemir M, et al: Assessment of fetal left ventricular modified
myocardial performance index and its prognostic significance for adverse perinatal outcome in
intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 12:1, 2018
Palatnik A, Rinella ME: Medical and obstetric complications among pregnant women with liver
cirrhosis. Obstet Gynecol 129(6):1118, 2017
Pan CQ, Duan Z, Dai E, et al: Tenofovir to prevent hepatitis B transmission in mothers with high viral
load. N Engl J Med 374:2324, 2016
Parízek A, Simják P, Cerný A, et al: Efficacy and safety of ursodeoxycholic acid in patients with
intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy. Ann Hepatol 15(5):757, 2016
Pearl JP, Price RR, Tonkin AE, et al: SAGES guidelines for the use of laparoscopy during pregnancy.
Surg Endosc 31(10):3767, 2017
Pfeiffenberger J, Beinhardt S, Gotthardt DN, et al: Pregnancy in Wilson’s disease: management and
outcome. Hepatology 67(4):1261, 2018
Pietrangelo A: Iron and the liver. Liver Int 36:116, 2016
Portillo-Sanchez P, Bril F, Maximos M, et al: High prevalence of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease in
patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus and normal plasma aminotransferase levels. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab 100(6):2231, 2015
Post JJ: Update on hepatitis C and implications for pregnancy. Obstet Med 10(4):157, 2017
Prasad M, Saade GR, Sandoval G, et al: Hepatitis C virus antibody screening in a cohort of pregnant
women: identifying seroprevalence and risk factors. Obstet Gynecol 135(4):778, 2020

Puljic A, Salati J, Doss A, et al: Outcomes of pregnancies complicated by liver cirrhosis, portal
hypertension, or esophageal varices. J Matern Fetal Med 29:506, 2016
Ramin KD, Ramin SM, Richey SD, et al: Acute pancreatitis in pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol
173:187, 1995
Ramírez-Fuentes C, Martí-Bonmatí L, Torregrosa A, et al: Variations in the size of focal nodular
hyperplasia on magnetic resonance imaging. Radiologia 55(6):499, 2013
Reddick KLB, Jhaveri R, Gandhi M, et al: Pregnancy outcomes associated with viral hepatitis. J Viral
Hepat 18(7):e394, 2011
Reichert MC, Lammert F: ABCB4 gene aberrations in human liver disease: an evolving spectrum.
Semin Liver Dis 38(4):299, 2018
Renzulli M, Clemente A, Tovoli F, et al: Hepatocellular adenoma: an unsolved diagnostic enigma. World
J Gastroenterol 25(20):2442, 2019
Reyes H: What have we learned about intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy? Hepatology 63:4, 2016
Rifai K, Mix H, Krusche S, et al: No evidence of substantial growth progression or complications of
large focal nodular hyperplasia during pregnancy. Scand J Gastroenterol 48(1):88, 2013
Riggs BS, Bronstein AC, Kulig K, et al: Acute acetaminophen overdose during pregnancy. Obstet
Gynecol 74:247, 1989
Ringers J, Bloemenkamp K, Francisco N, et al: Auxiliary or orthotopic liver transplantation for acute
fatty liver of pregnancy: case series and review of the literature. BJOG 123(8):1394, 2016
Rodríguez M, Sprohnle A, Muñoz J, et al: Treatment of intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy with
ursodeoxycholic acid associated with improvement of fetal first-degree atrioventricular block.
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 52(6):801, 2018
Rogan SC, Beigi RH: Treatment of viral infections in pregnancy. Clin Perinatol 46:235, 2019
Rossi RM, Wolfe C, Brokamp R, et al: Reported prevalence of maternal hepatitis C virus infection in the
United States. Obstet Gynecol 135(2):387, 2020
Roumiantsev S, Shah U, Westra SJ, et al: Case records of the Massachusetts general hospital. Case
20–2015. A newborn girl with hypotension coagulopathy, anemia, and hyperbilirubinemia. N Engl J
Med 372:2542, 2015
Rumack BH, Matthew H: Acetaminophen poisoning and toxicity. Pediatrics 55:871, 1975
Salgia RJ, Brown K: Diagnosis and management of hereditary hemochromatosis. Clin Liver Dis 19:187,
2015
Schillie S, Vellozzi C, Reingold A, et al: Prevention of hepatitis B virus infection in the United States:
recommendations of the advisory committee on immunization practices. MMWR 67(1):1, 2018
Schillie S, Wester C, Osborne M, et al: CDC recommendations for hepatitis C screening among adults—
United States, 2020. MMWR 69(2):1, 2020
Schmidt LE, Larsen FS: MELD score as a predictor of liver failure and death in patients with
acetaminophen-induced liver injury. Hepatology 45(3):789, 2007
Sethi S, Thosani N, Banerjee S: Radiation-free ERCP in pregnancy: a “sound” approach to leaving no
stone unturned. Dig Dis Sci 60:2604, 2015
Sheffield J, Roberts S, Laibl V, et al: The efficacy of an accelerated hepatitis B vaccination program
during pregnancy. Abstract No. 212. Am J Obstet Gynecol 195:S73, 2006
Sheiner E, Ohel I, Levy A, et al: Pregnancy outcome in women with pruritus gravidarum. J Reprod Med
51:394, 2006
Shi Z, Tang Y, Wang H, et al: Breastfeeding of newborns by mothers carrying hepatitis B virus: a metaanalysis and systematic review. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 165(9):837, 2011

Shigemi D, Aso S, Matsui H, et al: Safety of laparoscopic surgery for benign diseases during pregnancy:
a nationwide retrospective cohort study. J Minim Invasive Gynecol 26(3):501, 2019
Sibai BM: Imitators of severe preeclampsia. Obstet Gynecol 109:956, 2007
Sims HF, Brackett JC, Powell CK, et al: The molecular basis of pediatric long chain 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA
dehydrogenase deficiency associated with maternal acute fatty liver of pregnancy. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A 92:841, 1995
Smith EA, Jacques-Carroll L, Walker TY, et al: The national Perinatal Hepatitis B Prevention Program,
1994–2008. Pediatrics 129(4):609, 2012
Snidjewind IJ, Smit C, Schutten M, et al: Low mother-to-child-transmission rate of hepatitis C virus in
cART treated HIV-1 infected mothers. J Clin Virol 68:11, 2015
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine (SMFM), Dionne-Odom J, Tita AT, et al: Hepatitis B in pregnancy
screening, treatment, and prevention of vertical transmission. Consult Series No. 38. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 214:6, 2016
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine (SMFM), Hughes BL, Page CM, et al: Hepatitis C in pregnancy:
screening, treatment, and management. Am J Obstet Gynecol 217(5):B2, 2017
Stewart RD, Sheffield JS: Hepatitis B vaccination in pregnancy in the United States. Vaccines 1:167,
2013
Sticova E, Jirsa M, Pawlowska J: New insights in genetic cholestasis: from molecular mechanisms to
clinical implications. Can J Gastroenterol Hepatol 2018:2313675, 2018
Stinton LM, Shaffer EA: Epidemiology of gallbladder disease: cholelithiasis and cancer. Gut Liver 6:172,
2012
Stokkeland K, Ludvigsson JF, Hultcrantz R, et al: Increased risk of preterm birth in women with
autoimmune hepatitis—a nationwide cohort study. Liver Int 36:76, 2016
Strehlow SL, Pathak B, Goodwin TM, et al: The mechanical PR interval in fetuses of women with
intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 203:455.e1, 2010
Sylvester-Armstrong KR, Duff P: Evidence for use of tenofovir in pregnancy to prevent perinatal
transmission of hepatitis B infection. Clin Obstet Gynecol 62(4):835, 2019
Tan J, Surti B, Saab S: Pregnancy and cirrhosis. Liver Transpl 14(8):1081, 2008
Taney J, Anastasio H, Paternostro A, et al: Placental abruption with delayed fetal compromise in
maternal acetaminophen toxicity. Obstet Gynecol 130(1):159, 2017
Tang M, Xu JM, Song SS, et al: What may cause fetus loss from acute pancreatitis in pregnancy:
analysis of 54 cases. Medicine (Baltimore) 97(7):e9755, 2018
Tang S, Mayo MJ, Rodriguez-Frias E, et al: Safety and utility of ERCP during pregnancy. Gastrointest
Endosc 69:453, 2009
Tang SJ, Rodriguez-Frias E, Singh S, et al: Acute pancreatitis during pregnancy. Clin Gastroenterol
Hepatol 8(1):85, 2010
Tovo PA, Calitri C, Scolfaro C, et al: Vertically acquired hepatitis C virus infection: correlates of
transmission and disease progression. World J Gastroenterol 22:1382, 2016
Towers CV, Asrat T, Rumney P: The presence of hepatitis B surface antigen and deoxyribonucleic acid
in amniotic fluid and cord blood. Am J Obstet Gynecol 184:1514, 2001
Tran TT, Ahn J, Reau NS: ACG clinical guideline: Liver disease and pregnancy. Am J Gastroenterol
111:176, 2016
Tsilimigras DI, Rahnemai-Azar AA, Ntanasis-Stathopoulos I, et al: Current approaches in the
management of hepatic adenomas. J Gastrointest Surg 23(1):199, 2019
Turhan AN, Gönenç M, Kapan S, et al: Acute biliary pancreatitis related with pregnancy: a 5-year single
center experience. Ulus Travma Acil Cerrahi Derg 16(2):160, 2010

Urganci N, Arapoglu M, Akyildiz B, et al: Neonatal cholestasis resulting from vertical transmission of
hepatitis A infection. Pediatr Infect Dis J 22(4):381, 2003
US Preventive Services Task Force, Owens DK, Davidson KW, et al: Screening for hepatitis B virus
infection in pregnant women: US Preventive Services Task Force reaffirmation recommendation
statement. JAMA 322(4):349, 2019
US Preventive Services Task Force: Screening for hepatitis C virus infection in adolescents and adults:
US Preventive Services Task Force recommendation statement: JAMA 323:970, 2020
Usta IM, Barton JR, Amon EA, et al: Acute fatty liver of pregnancy: an experience in the diagnosis and
management of fourteen cases. Am J Obstet Gynecol 171:1342, 1994
Vigil-de Gracia P, Montufar-Rueda C: Acute fatty liver of pregnancy: diagnosis, treatment, and outcome
based on 35 consecutive cases. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 24(9):1143, 2011
Wang PH, Yang MJ, Lee WL, et al: Acetaminophen poisoning in late pregnancy. A case report. J
Reprod Med 42:367, 1997
Wang S, Li SL, Cao YX, et al: Noninvasive Swansea criteria are valuable alternatives for diagnosing
acute fatty liver of pregnancy in a Chinese population. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 30(24):2951,
2017
Wen WH, Chen HL, Ting-Fang Shih T, et al: Long-term growth and bone development in children of
HBV-infected mothers with and without fetal exposure to tenofovir disoproxil fumarate. J Hepatol
72(6):1082, 2020
Westbrook RH, Yeoman AD, Kriese S, et al: Outcomes of pregnancy in women with autoimmune
hepatitis. J Autoimmun 38(2–3):J239, 2012
Wiest DB, Chang E, Fanning D, et al: Antenatal pharmacokinetics and placental transfer of Nacetylcysteine in chorioamnionitis for fetal neuroprotection. J Pediatr 165:672, 2014
Wikström Shemer E, Marschall HU, Ludvigsson JF, et al: Intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy and
associated adverse pregnancy and fetal outcomes: a 12-year population-based cohort study. BJOG
120(6):717, 2013
Wong M, Hills F, Vogler K, et al: Acute fatty liver of pregnancy from 18 weeks gestation. Hepatology
71(6):2167, 2020
Wood AM, Grotegut CA, Ronald J, et al: Identification and management of abdominal wall varices in
pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 132(4):882, 2018a
Wood AM, Livingston EG, Hughes BL, et al: Intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy: a review of
diagnosis and management. Obstet Gynecol Surv 73(2):103, 2018b
Wu T, Zhu FC, Huang SJ, et al: Safety of the hepatitis E vaccine for pregnant women: a preliminary
analysis. Hepatology 55(6):2038, 2012
Wu Z, Huang P, Gong Y, et al: Treating acute fatty liver of pregnancy with artificial liver support
therapy: systematic review. Medicine (Baltimore) 97(38):e12473, 2018
Xanthakos SA, Jenkins TM, Kleiner DE, et al: Teen-LABS consortium. High prevalence of nonalcoholic
fatty liver disease in adolescents undergoing bariatric surgery. Gastroenterology 149:623, 2015
Yarrington CD, Cantonwine DE, Seely EW, et al: The association of alanine aminotransferase in early
pregnancy with gestational diabetes. Metab Syndr Relat Disord 14(5):254, 2016
Yi P, Chen R, Huang Y, et al: Management of mother-to-child transmission of hepatitis B virus:
propositions and challenges. J Clin Virol 77:32, 2016
Yule CS, Holcomb DS, Kraus AC, et al: Cholestasis: a prospective study of perinatal outcomes and time
to symptom improvement. Am J Perinatol 38(5):414, 2021
Zaman K, Dudman S, Stene-Johansen K, et al: HEV study protocol: design of a cluster-randomised,
blinded trial to assess the safety, immunogenicity and effectiveness of hepatitis E vaccine HEV 239

(Hecolin) in women of childbearing age in rural Bangladesh. BMJ Open 10(1):e033702, 2020
Zhang J, Zhang XF, Huang SJ, et al: Long-term efficacy of a hepatitis E vaccine. N Engl J Med
372:914, 2015
Zipori Y, Bachar G, Farago N, et al: Vaginal progesterone treatment for the prevention of preterm birth
and intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy: a case-control study. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol
253:117, 2020

CHAPTER 59

Hematological Disorders

IRON-DEFICIENCY ANEMIA
MEGALOBLASTIC ANEMIA
HEMOLYTIC ANEMIA
APLASTIC AND HYPOPLASTIC ANEMIA
POLYCYTHEMIAS
HEMOGLOBINOPATHIES
THALASSEMIA SYNDROMES
PLATELET DISORDERS
THROMBOTIC MICROANGIOPATHIES
INHERITED COAGULATION DEFECTS
REFERENCES
Pregnant women are susceptible to several hematological abnormalities that
may affect any woman of childbearing age. These include chronic disorders
such as hereditary anemias, immunological thrombocytopenia, and
hematological malignancies. Other disorders arise from pregnancy-induced
demands. Two are iron deficiency and megaloblastic anemias. Pregnancy
may also unmask underlying hematological conditions. Importantly,
pregnancy induces physiological changes that often confuse diagnosis and
assessment of these disorders (Chap. 4, p. 60).

ANEMIAS
■ Definition and Incidence
Normal values for concentrations of many cellular elements during pregnancy
are listed in the Appendix (p. 1227). The Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (1998) defined anemia in iron-supplemented pregnant women
using a cutoff of the 5th percentile, which is 11 g/dL in the first and third
trimesters and 10.5 g/dL in the second trimester. Notably, these were not
based on a U.S. population. Table 59-1 describes the distribution of
hematocrit values of 480 iron-sufficient women at Parkland Hospital (Zofkie,
2020). Using these data, values below 30 percent seem reasonable to define
anemia.
TABLE 59-1. Hematocrit Values in Pregnancy

The modest fall in hemoglobin and hematocrit values during pregnancy
stems from a relatively greater expansion of plasma volume compared with
red cell volume (Georgieff, 2020). The disproportion between the rates at
which plasma and erythrocytes add to the maternal circulation is greatest
during the second trimester. Late in pregnancy, plasma expansion essentially
ceases, while hemoglobin mass continues to accrue.
The causes of more common anemias encountered in pregnancy are listed
in Table 59-2. Their frequency is dependent on multiple factors such as
geography, ethnicity, socioeconomic level, nutrition, preexisting iron status,
and prenatal iron supplementation (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2021). In the United States, the prevalence of anemia in
pregnancy is 3 to 38 percent (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
1989).

TABLE 59-2. Causes of Anemia During Pregnancy

Initial evaluation of a pregnant woman with moderate anemia includes
measurements of hemoglobin, hematocrit, red cell indices, and serum iron or
ferritin levels; careful examination of a peripheral blood smear; and a sicklecell preparation if the woman has African lineage (Appendix p. 1227).

■ Effects on Pregnancy Outcomes
Anemia is associated with several adverse pregnancy outcomes (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2021; Rahmati, 2020). Most
anemia studies during pregnancy describe large populations and nutritional
anemias. In a Canadian study, 12 percent of more than 500,000 women had
mild anemia defined by a hemoglobin concentration of 9.0 to 10.9 g/dL
(Smith, 2019). These women had a 2.5-fold increased risk for blood
transfusions. With moderate anemia, incidences of fetal-growth restriction,
low 5-minute Apgar score, and perinatal mortality were increased. Ray and
coworkers (2020) reported similar results. Correction of iron-deficiency
anemia results in a lower transfusion rate with delivery (Ibinosa, 2020).
A seemingly paradoxical finding is that healthy pregnant women with
higher hemoglobin concentrations also are at greater risk for adverse
perinatal outcomes (von Tempelhoff, 2008). This may result from lower than

average plasma volume expansion of pregnancy concurrent with normal red
cell mass accrual. Scanlon and associates (2000) studied the relationship
between maternal hemoglobin levels and rates of preterm or growthrestricted newborns. Women whose hemoglobin concentration was three
standard deviations above the mean at 12 or 18 weeks’ gestation had a 1.3to 1.8-fold greater incidence of fetal-growth restriction. Placental weight
correlates negatively with maternal hemoglobin concentration (Larsen,
2016). These findings have led some to the illogical conclusion that
withholding iron to cause iron-deficiency anemia will improve pregnancy
outcomes (Ziaei, 2007).

■ Iron-deficiency Anemia
The two most common causes of anemia during pregnancy and the
puerperium are iron deficiency and acute blood loss (Vandevijvere, 2013). In
a typical singleton gestation, the maternal need for iron averages nearly 1000
mg (Chap. 4, p. 60). Multifetal gestational requirements are considerably
higher (Ru, 2016). These amounts exceed the iron stores of most women and
result in iron-deficiency anemia unless supplementation is provided.
In the third trimester, additional iron is needed to augment maternal
hemoglobin levels and for transport to the fetus. Because the amount of iron
diverted to the fetus is similar in a normal and in an iron-deficient mother, the
newborn of a severely anemic mother does not suffer from iron-deficiency
anemia. Neonatal iron stores are related to maternal iron status and to timing
of cord clamping.
Iron deficiency often manifests as an appreciable drop in hemoglobin
concentration. Classic morphological evidence is erythrocyte hypochromia
and microcytosis (Fig. 59-1). These may be less prominent in the pregnant
woman. A mean corpuscular volume <80 fL is classically seen (Appendix, p.
1227) (James, 2021). Serum ferritin levels normally decline during
pregnancy, and levels below 10 to 15 mg/L confirm iron-deficiency anemia.
In addition, hepcidin levels drop in pregnancy. This hormone inhibits iron
transport by binding to the iron-export channel ferroportin.

FIGURE 59-1 In this peripheral blood smear, iron-deficiency anemia is reflected by scattered
microcytic and hypochromic red cells (arrows). (Reproduced with permission from Dr. Siayareh
Rambally.)

Routinely in pregnancy, daily oral supplementation with 30 to 60 mg of
elemental iron and 400 μg of folic acid is recommended (World Health
Organization, 2016). For iron-deficiency anemia, resolution and restitution of
iron stores can be accomplished with simple iron salts that provide
approximately 200 mg daily of elemental iron. These include ferrous sulfate,
fumarate, or gluconate. If a woman cannot take oral iron preparations,
parenteral therapy is given. Although both are administered intravenously,
ferrous sucrose is safer than iron dextran (Auerbach, 2020; Pavord, 2020).
Moderate iron-deficiency anemia responds to adequate iron therapy, and
the hematological response is an elevated reticulocyte count. In gravidas, the
rise of hemoglobin concentration or hematocrit is typically slower than in
nonpregnant women due to the larger plasma volumes of pregnancy.
Hemoglobin and ferritin levels show equivalent rises in women treated with
either oral or parenteral iron therapy (Breymann, 2017; Daru, 2016; Neogi,
2019).

■ Anemia from Acute Blood Loss
In early pregnancy, anemia caused by acute blood loss is common with
abortion, ectopic pregnancy, and hydatidiform mole. Postpartum, anemia
commonly stems from obstetrical hemorrhage. Massive hemorrhage demands
immediate treatment and is described in Chapter 44 (p. 771). If a moderately
anemic woman—defined by a hemoglobin value of approximately 7 g/dL—is
hemodynamically stable, is able to ambulate without adverse symptoms, and
is not septic, then blood transfusions are not indicated. Instead, oral iron
therapy is provided for at least 3 months.

■ Anemia of Chronic Disease
Diseases associated with chronic inflammation can cause mild to moderate
anemia. Anemia stems from several cytokines produced by inflammatory
cells. These restrict erythropoiesis and shorten red cell lifespan. Hepcidin
levels are elevated with chronic inflammation, and this inhibits ironexporting activity from enterocytes (Ross, 2017). Anemia is usually
characterized by slightly hypochromic and microcytic erythrocytes, low
transferrin saturation, and a high serum ferritin level (Ganz, 2019). Along
with iron deficiency, it is the most common form of anemia worldwide.
During pregnancy, women with chronic disorders may develop anemia
for the first time. In those with preexisting anemia, it may worsen as plasma
volume expands. Frequent causes include chronic renal insufficiency,
inflammatory bowel disease, and connective tissue disorders. Others are
granulomatous infections and malignant neoplasms.
Chronic renal insufficiency is the most common disorder that we have
encountered during pregnancy as a cause of this anemia type. Some cases are
accompanied by erythropoietin deficiency. During pregnancy in women with
mild chronic renal disease, the degree of red cell mass expansion is
inversely related to renal impairment (Chap. 56, p. 1004). At the same time,
plasma volume expansion usually is normal, and thus anemia severity
intensifies (Cunningham, 1990).
For treatment, adequate iron stores must be ensured. Recombinant
erythropoietin, with or without intravenous iron, has been used to treat
anemia stemming from chronic disease (Ganz, 2019). In pregnancies
complicated by chronic renal insufficiency, recombinant erythropoietin is

usually considered when the hematocrit approximates 20 percent (Cyganek,
2011). One side effect is hypertension, which is already prevalent in women
with renal disease. Red cell aplasia and antierythropoietin antibodies also
have been reported (McCoy, 2008).

■ Megaloblastic Anemia
Folic Acid Deficiency
Megaloblastic anemias are characterized by blood and bone marrow
abnormalities from impaired DNA synthesis. This leads to large cells with
arrested nuclear maturation, whereas the cytoplasm matures more normally.
Worldwide, the pregnancy prevalence of this anemia varies considerably but
is low in the United States.
Megaloblastic anemia developing during pregnancy almost always
results from folic acid deficiency. In the past, this condition was called
pernicious anemia of pregnancy. It usually is found in women who do not
consume fresh green leafy vegetables, legumes, or animal protein. As folate
deficiency and anemia worsen, anorexia often intensifies and further
aggravates the dietary deficiency. Other causes are malabsorption syndromes
that include tropical sprue, extensive jejunal resection, gastrectomy, and
Crohn disease; hemolytic anemias; malignancy; and some antifolate drugs
(Hoffbrand, 2018).
Nonpregnant women need 50 to 100 μg of folic acid daily. During
pregnancy, requirements rise, and 400 μg/d is recommended. The earliest
biochemical evidence is low plasma folic acid concentrations (Appendix, p.
1227). Early morphological changes usually include hypersegmented
neutrophils and macrocytic erythrocytes. As the anemia worsens, peripheral
nucleated erythrocytes appear, and bone marrow examination discloses
megaloblastic erythropoiesis. Anemia may then become severe, and
thrombocytopenia, leukopenia, or both may develop. The fetus and placenta
effectively extract folate from maternal circulation, and the fetus is not
anemic despite severe maternal anemia.
For treatment, 5 to 15 mg of oral folic acid is provided with iron, and a
nutritious diet is encouraged (Hoffbrand, 2018). At 4 to 7 days of treatment,
the reticulocyte count is higher, and leukopenia and thrombocytopenia are
corrected.

For anemia prevention, a diet should contain sufficient folic acid.
Moreover, the role of folate deficiency in the genesis of neural-tube defects
is well studied (Chap. 15, p. 276).

Vitamin B12 Deficiency
With pregnancy, vitamin B12 levels are lower than nonpregnant values
because levels of binding proteins, namely, the transcobalamins decline.
However, in most gravidas, megaloblastic anemia is rarely from vitamin B12
deficiency. Of predisposing conditions, vitamin B12 deficiency in pregnancy
is more likely encountered following gastric resection. Women who have
undergone total gastrectomy require 1000 μg of intramuscular vitamin B12
(cyanocobalamin) monthly. Those with a partial gastrectomy usually do not
need supplementation, but adequate serum vitamin B12 levels should be
ensured (Appendix, p. 1230). Other causes of megaloblastic anemia from
vitamin B12 deficiency include Crohn disease, ileal resection, some drugs,
and bacterial overgrowth in the small bowel (Hoffbrand, 2018). Addisonian
pernicious anemia results from absent intrinsic factor that is requisite for
dietary vitamin B12 absorption. This autoimmune disorder usually has its
onset after age 40 years, which accounts for its uncommon occurrence in
pregnancy (Govindappagari, 2019).

■ Hemolytic Anemia
Several conditions accelerate erythrocyte destruction. Hemolysis may be a
primary disorder, and sickle-cell disease and hereditary spherocytosis are
examples. In others, hemolysis complicates an underlying condition such as
systemic lupus erythematosus or preeclampsia. Microangiopathic hemolytic
anemia from malignancy has been reported in pregnancy (Happe, 2016).

Autoimmune Hemolysis
The cause of aberrant antibody production is unknown. Typically, both the
direct and indirect antiglobulin (Coombs) tests are positive. Anemias caused
by these factors may be due to warm-active autoantibodies (80 to 90
percent), cold-active antibodies, or a combination. These syndromes may
also be classified as primary (idiopathic) or secondary due to underlying

diseases or other factors. Examples of the secondary group include
lymphomas and leukemias, connective tissue diseases, infections, chronic
inflammatory diseases, and drug-induced antibodies (Knuesel, 2018). Coldagglutinin disease may be induced by infectious etiologies such as
Mycoplasma pneumoniae or Epstein-Barr viral mononucleosis. Hemolysis
and positive antiglobulin test results may be the consequence of either
immunoglobulin M (IgM) or immunoglobulin G (IgG) antierythrocyte
antibodies. When thrombocytopenia is comorbid, it is termed Evans
syndrome (Wright, 2013).
In pregnancy, hemolysis can be markedly accelerated. Low-dose
rituximab (Truxima)—100mg weekly for 4 weeks—coupled with
prednisone, is first-line treatment (Luzzatto, 2018). Coincidental
thrombocytopenia usually corrects with therapy. Transfusion of red cells is
complicated by antierythrocyte antibodies, but warming the donor cells to
body temperature may decrease their destruction by cold agglutinins. In rare
cases, the fetus may be involved (Maroto, 2020).

Drug-induced Hemolysis
These hemolytic anemias must be differentiated from other causes of
autoimmune hemolysis. In most cases, hemolysis is mild and resolves with
drug withdrawal. Subsequently, avoiding the drug is preventive. One
mechanism is hemolysis induced through drug-mediated immunological
injury to red cells. If bound to a red cell protein, the drug may act as a highaffinity hapten to which antidrug antibodies attach. An example is IgM
antipenicillin or anticephalosporin antibodies. Garratty and colleagues
(1999) described seven women with severe Coombs-positive hemolysis
stimulated by cefotetan given as prophylaxis for obstetrical procedures.
Alpha-methyldopa can cause similar hemolysis (Grigoriadis, 2013). Some
other drugs, which include probenecid, quinidine, and rifampin, act as lowaffinity haptens and adhere to cell membrane proteins. A frequent mechanism
for drug-induced hemolysis relates to a congenital erythrocyte enzymatic
defect, such as glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency (p. 1052).

Pregnancy-associated Hemolysis
Unexplained severe hemolytic anemia can develop during early pregnancy
and resolves within months postpartum. Clear immune mechanisms or red

cell defects are not contributory. Because the fetus–neonate also may
demonstrate transient hemolysis, an immunological cause is suspected.
Maternal corticosteroid treatment is often—but not always—effective
(Kumar, 2001). We have cared for a woman who during each pregnancy
developed severe hemolysis with anemia that responded to prednisone. Her
fetuses were not affected, and hemolysis abated spontaneously after delivery.
In some cases, hemolysis is induced by conditions unique to pregnancy.
Mild microangiopathic hemolysis with thrombocytopenia is relatively
common with severe preeclampsia and eclampsia (Cunningham, 2015;
Kenny, 2015). This HELLP (hemolysis, elevated liver enzyme levels, low
platelet count) syndrome is discussed in Chapter 40 (p. 699). Another
example is acute fatty liver of pregnancy, which causes moderate to severe
hemolytic anemia (Chap. 58, p. 1033).

Paroxysmal Nocturnal Hemoglobinuria
Although commonly regarded as a hemolytic anemia, this hemopoietic stem
cell disorder is characterized by formation of defective platelets,
granulocytes, and erythrocytes. Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria is
acquired and arises from one abnormal clone of cells, much like a neoplasm.
In contrast, one mutated X-linked gene responsible for this condition is
termed PIG-A because it codes for phosphatidylinositol glycan protein A.
Resultant abnormal anchor proteins of the erythrocyte and granulocyte
membrane make these cells unusually susceptible to lysis by complement. A
serious complication is thrombosis, which is heightened in the
hypercoagulable state of pregnancy.
Chronic hemolysis has an insidious onset, and its severity ranges from
mild to lethal. Hemoglobinuria develops at irregular intervals and is not
necessarily nocturnal. Hemolysis may be initiated by transfusions, infections,
or surgery. Almost 40 percent of patients suffer venous thromboembolism
(VTE) and may also experience renal failure, hypertension, and Budd-Chiari
syndrome. To counter the VTE risk, prophylactic anticoagulation is
recommended (Luzzato, 2018). The preferred treatment is eculizumab
(Soliris), an antibody that inhibits complement activation (Kelly, 2015;
Stefanovic, 2019). The drug is apparently safe in pregnancy (Sarno, 2019).
Median survival after diagnosis of the syndrome is 10 years, and bone
marrow transplantation is the definitive treatment.

During pregnancy, paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria can be serious
and unpredictable. Complications may affect up to three fourths of affected
women, and the maternal mortality rate in the past was 10 to 20 percent (de
Guibert, 2011). Complications more often develop postpartum, and half of
affected women develop VTE. Kelly and coworkers (2015) described 75
pregnancies in 61 affected women treated with eculizumab. They described
no maternal deaths, but the stillbirth rate was 4 percent. Miyasaka and
associates (2016) found similar results.

Bacterial Toxins
The most fulminant acquired hemolytic anemia encountered during pregnancy
is caused by the exotoxin of Clostridium perfringens or by group A βhemolytic streptococcus (Chap. 50, p. 890). In additional, endotoxin of gramnegative bacteria, that is, lipopolysaccharide, may be accompanied by
hemolysis and mild to moderate anemia (Cox, 1991). For example, anemia
often accompanies acute pyelonephritis. With normal erythropoietin
production, red cell mass is restored following infection resolution
(Cavenee, 1994; Dotters-Katz, 2013).

Inherited Erythrocyte Membrane Defects
The normal erythrocyte is a flexible biconcave disc that allows numerous
cycles of reversible deformations. Several genes encode erythrocyte
structural membrane proteins and intraerythrocytic enzymes. Various
mutations can destabilize the lipid bilayer. The loss of lipids from the cell
membrane causes a surface area deficiency and poorly deformable
erythrocytes that undergo hemolysis (Iolascon, 2019). Anemia severity
depends on the degree of rigidity. Erythrocyte morphology similarly is
dependent on these factors, and these disorders are usually named after the
most dominant red cell shape. Three examples are hereditary spherocytosis,
pyropoikilocytosis, and ovalocytosis.
Hemolytic anemias that compose this group of inherited membrane
defects are among the most common complicating pregnancy. Mutations are
usually an autosomally dominant, variably penetrant α- and β-spectrin
deficiency. Others are dominant or recessive gene mutations that result from
deficiency of ankyrin, band 3, 4.1, and 4.2, or combinations of these
(Luzzato, 2018; Rencic, 2017). The degrees of anemia and jaundice vary, and

diagnosis is confirmed by identification of abnormal erythrocytes on
peripheral smear and their increased osmotic fragility.
Spherocytic anemias may be associated with a crisis typified by severe
anemia from accelerated hemolysis, and it develops in patients with an
enlarged spleen. Infection can also accelerate hemolysis or suppress
erythropoiesis to worsen anemia. An example of the latter is parvovirus B19
infection (Chap. 67, p. 1191). In severe cases, splenectomy reduces
hemolysis, anemia, and jaundice.
In general, women with inherited erythrocyte membrane defects do well
during pregnancy. Oral folic acid supplementation of 4 mg daily is given to
sustain erythropoiesis. Women with hereditary spherocytosis cared for at
Parkland Hospital had hematocrits ranging from 23 to 41 percent, with a
mean of 31 (Maberry, 1992). Reticulocyte counts varied from 1 to 23
percent. Among 50 pregnancies in 23 women, eight women miscarried. Four
of 42 infants were born preterm, but none was growth restricted. Infection in
four women intensified hemolysis, and three of these required transfusions.
Similar results were reported by Pajor and colleagues (1993).
Because these disorders are inherited, the newborn may be affected.
Preconceptional counseling emphasizes folic acid supplementation and
provides an opportunity to discuss prenatal diagnosis. Celkan and Alhaj
(2008) report prenatal diagnosis via cordocentesis at 18 weeks’ gestation
and testing for osmotic fragility. Although fetal anemia is uncommon,
newborns with hereditary spherocytosis may manifest hyperbilirubinemia
and anemia shortly after birth.

Erythrocyte Enzyme Deficiencies
An intraerythrocytic deficiency of enzymes that permit anaerobic glucose
metabolism may cause hereditary nonspherocytic anemia. Most of these
mutations are autosomal recessive traits. Most episodes of severe anemia
with these enzyme deficiencies are induced by drugs or infections.
Pyruvate kinase deficiency has a frequency of 1:10,000 persons and is
associated with variable degrees of anemia (Luzzatto, 2018). Recurrent
transfusions in homozygous carriers can lead to iron overload, and
associated myocardial dysfunction should be monitored (Dolan, 2002). The
fetus that is homozygous for this mutation may develop hydrops fetalis from
anemia and heart failure (Chap. 18, p. 360).

Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency is complex
because there are more than 200 enzyme variants. The most common stem
from a base substitution that leads to an amino acid replacement and a broad
range of phenotypic severity (Luzzatto, 2018; Puig, 2013). In the homozygous
or A variant, both X chromosomes are affected, and erythrocytes are
markedly deficient in G6PD activity. Approximately 2 percent of AfricanAmerican women are affected, and the heterozygous variant is found in 10 to
15 percent. In both cases, random X-chromosome inactivation—lyonization
—results in variable enzyme activity.
During pregnancy, hemolysis severity in G6PD-deficient heterozygotes or
homozygotes is related to enzyme activity. Anemia is usually episodic, but
some variants induce chronic nonspherocytic hemolysis. Because young
erythrocytes contain more enzyme activity, anemia stabilizes and corrects
soon after the inciting cause is resolved.
These women are offered preconceptional counseling to discuss risks of
adverse pregnancy outcomes, precipitating factors of hemolysis such as
pyelonephritis and pneumonia, and the limited list of safe medications
available for treatment during pregnancy. For example, macrodantin is used
for pyelonephritis suppression in pregnancy but can induce hemolysis in
those with G6PD deficiency. Because fetal and neonatal manifestations are
possible, these patients should undergo genetic counseling, with possible
partner testing, to assess fetal transmission risk.

■ Aplastic and Hypoplastic Anemia
Aplastic anemia is a grave complication characterized by pancytopenia and
markedly hypocellular bone marrow (Young, 2018). The functional defect is
a marked decline in the number of committed marrow stem cells. Etiologies
are multiple, and the inciting cause can be identified in approximately a third
of cases. These include immunological disorders, drugs, other chemicals,
infection, irradiation, leukemia, and inherited conditions such as Fanconi
anemia and Diamond-Blackfan syndrome (Green, 2009).
Immunosuppressive therapy is given, and in some nonresponders,
eltrombopag (Promacta) is successful (Townsley, 2017; Young, 2018).
Definitive treatment is bone marrow transplantation, and approximately three
fourths of patients have a good response and long-term survival (Tichelli,

2020). Umbilical cord blood–derived stem cells also can serve as a
potential transplant source (Moise, 2005; Pinto, 2008).

Pregnancy
Hypoplastic or aplastic anemia complicating pregnancy is rare. A study of 60
pregnancies complicated by aplastic anemia found that half were diagnosed
during pregnancy (Bo, 2016). In another series of 19 pregnancies, the
complication rate was 79 percent, but no women died (McGowan, 2019).
Pregnancy-induced hypoplastic anemia is rare, and the anemia and other
cytopenias improve or remit following delivery or pregnancy termination
(Choudhry, 2002; Edahiro, 2020). In some cases, anemia recurs in a
subsequent pregnancy.
Diamond-Blackfan anemia is rare form of pure red cell hypoplasia.
Approximately 40 percent of cases are familial and have autosomal dominant
inheritance (Orfali, 2004). The response to glucocorticoid therapy is usually
good. Continuous treatment is necessary, and most become at least partially
transfusion dependent (Gansner, 2017). In a study of 64 pregnancies
complicated by this syndrome, two thirds had problems related to placental
vascular etiologies that included miscarriage, preeclampsia, preterm birth,
fetal-growth restriction, or stillbirth (Faivre, 2006).
Gaucher disease is an autosomally recessive lysosomal enzyme
deficiency characterized by deficient activity of acid β-glucosidase.
Affected women have anemia and thrombocytopenia that usually worsens in
pregnancy. Elstein and colleagues (1997) described six pregnant women
whose disease improved with alglucerase enzyme replacement. Imiglucerase
(Cerezyme) is human recombinant enzyme replacement therapy.
The major risks with hypoplastic anemia are hemorrhage and infection.
Rates of preterm labor, preeclampsia, fetal-growth restriction, and stillbirth
are increased (Bo, 2016). Management depends on gestational age, and
supportive care includes continuous infection surveillance and prompt
antimicrobial therapy. Granulocyte transfusions are given only during
infections. Red cells are transfused to improve symptomatic anemia and
routinely to maintain the hematocrit above 20 volumes percent. Platelet
transfusions may be needed to control hemorrhage. Mortality rates reported
since 1960 have averaged nearly 50 percent but have declined more recently
(Giri, 2017).

Bone Marrow Transplantation
Several reports describe successful pregnancies in women who have
undergone bone marrow transplantation. In their review, Sanders and
coworkers (1996) reported 72 pregnancies in 41 such women. In the 52
pregnancies resulting in a liveborn neonate, almost half were complicated by
preterm delivery or hypertension. Data from the National Cancer Institute
regarding 102 pregnancies following transplantation showed 71 liveborns, of
which 16 were preterm. Of all women, 20 percent had decreased
hemopoiesis, and transfusions were required (Giri, 2017). Carter and
associates (2006) reported decreased fertility but generally good pregnancy
outcomes. Our experiences with a few of these women indicate that they have
normal pregnancy-augmented erythropoiesis and total blood volume
expansion. In pregnancy, cell-free DNA study results must account for donor
DNA contributions (Duque-Afonso, 2018).

POLYCYTHEMIAS
Excessive erythrocytosis during pregnancy is usually secondary and related
to chronic hypoxia. Etiologies include maternal congenital cyanotic cardiac
disease or a chronic pulmonary disorder. In addition, we have encountered
otherwise healthy pregnant women who were heavy smokers, had chronic
bronchitis, and had hematocrits ranging from 55 to 60 volumes percent! If
polycythemia is severe, the probability of a successful pregnancy outcome is
low.
Polycythemia vera is a primary clonal myeloproliferative hemopoietic
stem cell disorder characterized by excessive proliferation of erythroid,
myeloid, and megakaryocytic precursors. Virtually all patients have a JAK2
gene mutation (Spivak, 2018). Symptoms are related to greater blood
viscosity, and thrombotic complications are common. Treatment of
nonpregnant patients is with hydroxyurea or ruxolitinib.
Fetal loss rates are high in women with polycythemia vera, and
pregnancy outcome may be improved with aspirin therapy (Bertozzi, 2018;
Dewarrat, 2020). Women with a history of VTE are given prophylaxis with
low-molecular-weight heparin (Stein, 2019). If cytoreduction is required
during pregnancy, interferon alpha may be considered (Kreher, 2014).

HEMOGLOBINOPATHIES
■ Sickle-cell Hemoglobinopathies
Pathophysiology
Hemoglobin A is the most common hemoglobin tetramer and consists of two
α- and two β-globin chains. Genes HBA1 and HBA2 each code for α-globin,
whereas only HBB codes for β-globin. Sickle hemoglobin (hemoglobin S)
originates from a single β-globin substitution of glutamic acid by valine,
which stems from an A-for-T substitution. Hemoglobin C originates from a
single β-globin substitution of glutamic acid by lysine, which stems from a Tfor-C substitution. Hemoglobinopathies that can result in clinical features of
the sickle-cell syndrome include sickle-cell anemia (Hb SS); sickle-cell
hemoglobin C disease (Hb SC); sickle-cell β-thalassemia disease (either Hb
S/B0 or Hb S/B+); and sickle-cell E disease (Hb SE). All are associated
with higher pregnancy morbidity.
When deoxygenated, red cells containing hemoglobin S undergo sickling,
and the hemoglobin aggregates (Fig. 59-2). Constant sickling and unsickling
damages the cell membrane, and its shape may become irreversibly sickled.
Events that slow erythrocyte transit through the microcirculation include
adhesion to endothelial cells, erythrocyte dehydration, and vasomotor
dysregulation.

FIGURE 59-2 Peripheral smear of sickle cells (arrows) characteristic of sickle-cell anemia.
(Reproduced with permission from Dr. Imran Hitto.)

Clinically, sickling episodes are marked by ischemia and infarction in
various organs. The sickle-cell crisis produces pain, which is often severe.
Aplastic, megaloblastic, sequestration, and hemolytic crises can develop.
Chronic and acute changes from sickling include bony abnormalities such
as osteonecrosis of femoral and humeral heads, renal medullary damage,
autosplenectomy in homozygous SS patients but splenomegaly in other
variants, hepatomegaly, ventricular hypertrophy, pulmonary infarctions,
cerebrovascular accidents, leg ulcers, and a propensity for infection and
sepsis (Benz, 2018; Ware, 2017). Pulmonary hypertension can develop and is
found in 20 percent of adults with SS hemoglobin (Gladwin, 2008). Other
sequelae are cerebrovascular aneurysms and sickle-cell vasculopathy
(Buonanno, 2016).

Treatment
Good supportive care is essential to prevent mortality. Specific therapies are
evolving, and many are still experimental. One treatment is hemoglobin F
induction with drugs that stimulate γ-globin synthesis. Remember that

hemoglobin F is prominent in fetal life (Chap. 7, p. 129). This induction
raises hemoglobin F levels, which inhibits hemoglobin S polymerization.
One agent is hydroxyurea, which augments hemoglobin F production and
reduces the number of sickling episodes (Tshilolo, 2019). Hydroxyurea is
teratogenic in animals. A preliminary 17-year surveillance of antenatally
exposed children was reassuring (Ballas, 2009; Briggs, 2017).
Other agents include biologic antibody drugs and l-glutamine (Ataga,
2017, Niihara, 2018; Stefanovic, 2019). Various forms of hemopoietic cell
transplantation are emerging as “cures” for sickle-cell syndromes and severe
thalassemias (Oringanje, 2013; Kanter, 2021). Last, gene therapy has been
accomplished by viral vector–mediated addition of a β-globin gene into stem
cells (Harrison, 2019; Ribeil, 2017).

■ Sickle-cell Syndromes During Pregnancy
Pregnancy is a serious burden to women with any major sickle
hemoglobinopathy, particularly those with hemoglobin SS (Table 59-3)
(Kuo, 2016; Villers, 2008). Maternal mortality rates have improved, but
perinatal morbidity and mortality rates remain formidable (Bae, 2021;
Oteng-Ntim, 2015). Thus, women with sickle-cell hemoglobinopathies
require close prenatal observation. Specifically, any factor that impairs
erythropoiesis or increases red cell destruction aggravates the anemia.
Prenatal folic acid supplementation with 4 mg daily is needed to support
rapid red blood cell turnover.
TABLE 59-3. Pregnancy Morbidity with Hemoglobin SS and SC Disease

One danger is that a symptomatic woman may categorically be
considered to be suffering from a sickle-cell crisis. As a result, serious
obstetrical or medical problems that cause pain, anemia, or both may be
overlooked. Examples are ectopic pregnancy, placental abruption,
pyelonephritis, or appendicitis. Thus, a diagnosis of sickle-cell crisis should
be applied only after all other possible causes have been excluded. Pain with
sickle-cell syndromes is caused by intense sequestration of sickled
erythrocytes and infarction in various organs, particularly bone marrow.
These episodes develop acutely, especially late in pregnancy, during labor
and delivery, and early in the puerperium.
No randomized trials have evaluated treatment during pregnancy. At
minimum, intravenous fluids are given, and opioids are administered
promptly for severe pain. Oxygen via nasal cannula may decrease the
sickling intensity at the capillary level. We have found that red cell
transfusions after the onset of severe pain do not dramatically relieve pain
intensity and may not shorten its duration. Conversely, as discussed later,
prophylactic transfusions almost always prevent further vaso-occlusive
episodes and pain crises. Antenatal epidural analgesia may offer benefits for
pain (Verstraete, 2012; Winder, 2011). Long term, affected women can
become habituated to narcotics. This problem is highlighted by the elevated
rates of neonatal abstinence syndrome, which is a constellation of
withdrawal symptoms (Shirel, 2016).
Rates of covert bacteriuria and acute pyelonephritis are elevated
substantively, and screening and treatment for bacteriuria are essential. If
pyelonephritis develops, sickle cells are extremely susceptible to bacterial
endotoxin, which can incite dramatic, rapid red cell destruction and suppress
erythropoiesis. Pneumonia, especially due to Streptococcus pneumoniae, is
common. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2020)
recommends specific vaccination for those with sickle-cell disease and all
asplenic patients. These are polyvalent pneumococcal, Haemophilus
influenzae type B, and meningococcal vaccines (Table 10-7, p. 190).
Pulmonary complications are frequent. Of these, acute chest syndrome is
characterized by pleuritic chest pain, fever, cough, lung infiltrates, hypoxia,
and usually bone and joint pain (Vichinsky, 2000). It develops in
approximately 6 percent of pregnant women (Inparaj, 2020). In addition to
symptoms, radiographs show a new pulmonary infiltrate. The four
precipitants are infection, marrow emboli, thromboembolism, and atelectasis

(Medoff, 2005). Bacterial or viral infection causes approximately half of
cases. When acute chest syndrome develops, the mean duration of
hospitalization is 10.5 days. Mechanical ventilation is required in
approximately 15 percent, and the mortality rate nears 3 percent (Gladwin,
2008).
For nonpregnant adults, some recommend rapid simple transfusion or
exchange transfusions to remove the “trigger” for acute chest syndromes
(Ramphul, 2020). In a study of nonpregnant patients, Turner and colleagues
(2009) reported that exchange transfusion offered no increased benefits
compared with simple transfusions, and the former were associated with
fourfold greater blood usage. These results notwithstanding, the American
Society of Hematology suggests exchange transfusions instead of simple
transfusions. However, they state this recommendation is conditional due to
scarce high-quality evidence (Chou, 2020).
Women with sickle-cell disease usually have some degree of cardiac
dysfunction from ventricular hypertrophy. Chronic hypertension worsens the
dysfunction. During pregnancy, the basal hemodynamic state characterized by
high cardiac output and increased blood volume is augmented (Veille, 1994).
Although most women tolerate pregnancy without problems, complications
such as severe preeclampsia or serious infections may result in ventricular
failure (Cunningham, 1986). Heart failure caused by pulmonary hypertension
also must be considered.
In 4352 pregnancies in women with sickle-cell syndromes, Chakravarty
and associates (2008) reported significantly higher pregnancy complication
rates. Compared with controls, women with sickling disorders had a 63percent rate of nondelivery-related admissions. They had a 1.8-fold greater
incidence of hypertensive disorders—19 percent; a 2.9-fold higher rate of
fetal-growth restriction—6 percent; and a 1.7-fold increased cesarean
delivery rate—45 percent.
With hemoglobin SC disease, morbidity and mortality rates are
appreciably lower than those from sickle-cell anemia. Indeed, fewer than
half of these women have symptoms before pregnancy. In our experiences,
affected gravidas suffer attacks of severe bone pain and episodes of
pulmonary infarction and embolization more commonly than when not
pregnant (Cunningham, 1983). Some adverse pregnancy outcomes are shown
in Table 59-3.

Prophylactic Red Cell Transfusions
Chronic transfusion therapy has the most dramatic benefit on maternal
morbidity rates (Benites, 2016; Malinowski, 2015; Vianello, 2018). It is
problematic for universal application because of complications from
multiple transfusions. In an earlier 10-year prospective study at Parkland
Hospital, we offered prophylactic transfusions to all pregnant women with
sickle-cell syndromes. Transfusions were given throughout pregnancy to
maintain the hematocrit above 25 volumes percent and the portion of
hemoglobin S below 60 percent (Cunningham, 1979). Maternal morbidity
was minimal, and erythropoiesis suppression was not problematic. Their
outcomes were compared with historical controls who were not routinely
transfused. Overall, maternal morbidity and hospitalization rates were
reduced in the transfused group, but perinatal morbidity and mortality rates
remained increased because of preterm birth and fetal-growth restriction
(Cunningham, 1983).
In a multicenter trial, Koshy and coworkers (1988) randomly assigned 72
pregnant women with sickle-cell syndromes to prophylactic or indicated
transfusions. They reported a significant decline in the incidence of painful
sickle-cell crises with prophylactic transfusions but no differences in
perinatal outcomes. Because of risks inherent with blood administration, they
concluded that prophylactic transfusions were not indicated.
A metaanalysis of 12 studies found prophylactic transfusions improved
rates of most adverse maternal and neonatal outcomes, including maternal
mortality, pulmonary complications, and perinatal mortality (Malinowski,
2015). Undoubtedly, morbidity from multiple transfusions is significant. Up
to 10 percent of women had a delayed hemolytic transfusion reaction, and
infections are a major concern. Garratty (1997) reviewed 12 studies and
found alloimmunization developed in a fourth of women. Last, from liver
biopsies in these women, we found no evidence of transfusion-related iron
overload, hemochromatosis, or chronic hepatitis (Yeomans, 1990).
Because of what some consider marginal benefits, routine prophylactic
transfusions during pregnancy remain controversial (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019b). Current consensus is that their use
should be individualized. With such a practice, approximately 60 percent of
women will need transfusions during pregnancy (Sharif, 2018).

Fetal Assessment
Perinatal outcomes include increased risks for preterm birth, fetal-growth
restriction, and perinatal mortality. Thus, beginning in the mid-second
trimester, serial fetal-growth assessment with sonography is reasonable. At
32 to 34 weeks’ gestation, weekly antepartum surveillance with biophysical
profiles or nonstress test is considered (American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists, 2019b). Anyaegbunam and colleagues (1991) reported
nonreactive stress tests during sickling crises, which resumed reactivity with
crisis resolution. They concluded that transient effects of sickle-cell crisis do
not compromise umbilical blood flow. Of interest, placentas from sickle-cell
pregnancies show abnormalities in 69 percent (Malinowski, 2020).

Labor and Delivery
Management is essentially identical to that for women with cardiac disease
(Chap. 52, p. 920). Women are kept comfortable but not oversedated.
Conduction analgesia is ideal. Compatible blood should be available. If a
difficult vaginal or cesarean delivery is contemplated and the hematocrit is
<20 volumes percent, packed erythrocyte transfusions are administered.
Vaginal delivery is suitable, and cesarean delivery is reserved for obstetrical
indications (Rogers, 2010).
In the puerperium, many clinicians do not recommend combination
hormonal contraception because of potential adverse vascular and
thrombotic effects. However, one systematic review found that complication
rates were not higher with their use in women with sickle-cell syndromes
(Haddad, 2012). The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention categorizes
combination hormonal contraception, intrauterine devices, implants, and
progestin-only methods as having no risk or as having advantages that
generally outweigh theoretical or proven risks (Curtis, 2016).

■ Sickle-cell Trait
The frequency of sickle-cell trait among African Americans averages 8
percent. Carriers have occasional hematuria, renal papillary necrosis, and
hyposthenuria, which is urine of low specific gravity (Tsaras, 2009). Sickle
trait may be associated with progression of end-stage renal disease in blacks
(Olaniran, 2020). Although controversial, sickle-cell trait does not appear to

be associated with increased rates of abortion, perinatal mortality, low
birthweight, or pregnancy-induced hypertension (Pritchard, 1973;
Wellenstein, 2019; Wilson, 2020). In one study of more than 5000 women,
the incidence of gestational hypertension was significantly elevated, but that
of preeclampsia was not (O’Hara, 2020). Of note, they did not control for
chronic hypertension. One unquestioned relationship is the twofold greater
incidence of asymptomatic bacteriuria and urinary infection. Sickle-cell trait
is not considered a deterrent to pregnancy or to hormonal contraception.

■ Hemoglobin C and C-β-Thalassemia
Approximately 2 percent of African-Americans are heterozygous for
hemoglobin C, but even if homozygous, hemoglobin C is innocuous (Nagel,
2003). Only when coinherited with sickle-cell trait to yield hemoglobin SC
is the trait problematic. Pregnancy in women with homozygous hemoglobin
CC disease or C-β-thalassemia carries relatively benign associations. Other
than mild to moderate anemia, pregnancy outcomes were not abnormal
(Maberry, 1990). Supplementation with folic acid and iron is indicated.

■ Hemoglobin E
Although uncommon in the United States, hemoglobin E is the second most
frequent hemoglobin variant worldwide. The heterozygous E trait is common
in Southeast Asia. In one study, homozygous hemoglobin E, hemoglobin E
plus β-thalassemia, or hemoglobin E trait was identified in 36 percent of
Cambodians and 25 percent of Laotians (Hurst, 1983). Homozygosity for
hemoglobin E is associated with little or no anemia, hypochromia, marked
microcytosis, or erythrocyte targeting. With hemoglobin E trait, another study
found no increased pregnancy risks other than asymptomatic bacteriuria
between 1073 women and 2146 controls (Kemthong, 2016).
Conversely, doubly heterozygous E-β-thalassemia is a common cause of
severe childhood anemia in Southeast Asia (Taher, 2018). In a cohort study
of 54 women with singleton pregnancies, a threefold greater risk of preterm
birth and fetal-growth restriction was found in affected women (Luewan,
2009). It is unclear if hemoglobin SE disease is ominous during pregnancy.

■ Hemoglobinopathy in the Newborn
Neonates with homozygous SS, SC, and CC disease can be identified
accurately at birth by cord blood electrophoresis. The United States Health
Resources and Services Administration (2020) recommends that all
newborns be tested for sickle-cell disease. In most states, such screening is
mandated by law and performed routinely (Chap. 32, p. 594).

■ Prenatal Diagnosis
Inheritance is a concern for the fetus whenever a mother and father carry a
gene for abnormal hemoglobins that include S, C, and D or for β-thalassemia
trait. Sickle-cell anemia results from the inheritance of the gene for S
hemoglobin from each parent. In the United States, 1 of 12 AfricanAmericans has sickle-cell trait, which results from inheritance of one gene
for hemoglobin S and one for normal hemoglobin A. The computed incidence
of sickle-cell anemia among African-Americans is 1 in 576 (1/12 × 1/12 ×
1/4 = 1/576). The disease is less common in adults because of earlier
mortality. Approximately 1 in 40 African-Americans has the gene for
hemoglobin C. Thus, the theoretical incidence for coinheritance of the gene
for hemoglobin S and an allelic gene for hemoglobin C in an AfricanAmerican child is 1 in 2000 (1/12 × 1/40 × 1/4). β-Thalassemia minor
affects about 1 in 40, thus S-β-thalassemia also is found in approximately 1
in 2000 (1/12 × 1/40 × 1/4).
Many tests are available to detect sickle-cell disease antenatally. Most
are DNA based and use chorionic villus samples or amnionic fluid
specimens (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019b).
Several mutations that encode hemoglobin S and other abnormal hemoglobins
can be detected by targeted mutation analysis and polymerase chain reaction–
based techniques (Chap. 18, p. 325).

THALASSEMIA SYNDROMES
Hundreds of mutations affect the genes that control hemoglobin production
(Benz, 2018). Some of these impair synthesis of one or more of the normal
globin peptides and may result in a clinical syndrome characterized by
varying degrees of ineffective erythropoiesis, hemolysis, and anemia.

Thalassemias are classified according to the globin that is deficient. The two
major forms involve impaired production or instability of α-globin to cause
α-thalassemia or of β-globin to cause β-thalassemia. Clinically, these can be
divided into transfusion dependent and nontransfusion dependent (Taher,
2018).

■ Alpha Thalassemias
The two α-globin genes, HBA1 and HBA2, are both found on chromosome 16.
Because diploid chromosome sets contains four α-globin genes total, the
inheritance of α-thalassemia is more complicated than for β-thalassemia
(Piel, 2014). Some of the possible genotypes and phenotypes are shown in
Table 59-4. The γ-globin genes are similarly duplicated. Correspondingly,
the normal genotype for diploid cells can be expressed as αα/αα and γγ/γγ.
Of the two main groups of α-thalassemia determinants, α0-thalassemia is
mutation of both genes from one chromosome (––/αα), whereas α+thalassemia is mutation of a single gene from one allele (–α/αα heterozygote)
or from both alleles (–α/–α homozygote).
TABLE 59-4. Genotypes and Phenotypes of α-Thalassemia Syndromes

The relative frequency of the different α-thalassemia types varies
remarkably among racial groups, and all are encountered in Asians. In those
of African descent, although α-thalassemia minor has a frequency
approximating 2 percent, hemoglobin H disease is rare and hemoglobin Bart

disease is unreported. This is because Asians usually have α0-thalassemia
minor inherited with both gene deletions typically from the same
chromosome (––/αα), whereas blacks usually have α+-thalassemia minor in
which one gene is deleted from each chromosome (–α/–α).

Pregnancy
Important obstetrical aspects of some α-thalassemia syndromes depend on
the number of gene deletions in a given woman. Clinical severity closely
correlates with the degree of impaired α-globin synthesis. The silent carrier
state with one gene deletion may be associated with mild microcytic anemia
(Andolina, 2020). Deletion of two genes resulting in α-thalassemia minor is
characterized by minimal to moderate hypochromic microcytic anemia. This
is due to either α0- or α+-thalassemia trait, and thus genotypes may be ––/αα
or –α/–α, respectively. Differentiation is possible only by DNA analysis
(Piel, 2014). Because no other clinical abnormalities accompany either form
of α-thalassemia minor, it often goes unrecognized and is usually of no
maternal consequence (Hanprasertpong, 2013). The fetus with these forms of
thalassemia minor will have hemoglobin Bart (γ4) at birth, but as its levels
drop, it is not replaced by hemoglobin H (β4). Red cells are hypochromic
and microcytic, and the hemoglobin concentration is normal to slightly
depressed.
Hemoglobin H disease (β4) results from the compound heterozygous
state for α0- plus α+-thalassemia with deletion of three of four alpha genes
(––/–α). With only one functional α-globin gene per diploid genome, the
newborn will have abnormal red cells containing a mixture of hemoglobin
Bart (γ4), hemoglobin H (β4), and hemoglobin A. Of these three, fetal
hemoglobin Bart (γ4) and hemoglobin H (β4) transport oxygen poorly. The
neonate appears normal but soon develops hemolytic anemia as most of the
hemoglobin Bart (γ4) is replaced by hemoglobin H (β4). In adults, their low
hemoglobin A production leads to anemia that is moderate to severe and
usually worsens during pregnancy.
Inheritance of all four abnormal α-globin genes causes homozygous αthalassemia, which is also called Hb Bart disease and alpha thalassemia
major. Hemoglobin Bart (γ4) is predominantly produced. This hemoglobin
Bart has an appreciably increased affinity for oxygen, transfers oxygen to end

organs poorly, and is incompatible with extended survival. These fetuses are
stillborn or are hydropic and usually die soon after birth.
Sonographic measurement of the fetal cardiothoracic ratio at 12 to 13
weeks’ gestation can be used to identify affected fetuses (Lam, 1999; Zhen,
2015). Sonographic assessment of myocardial performance—the Tei index—
in the first half of pregnancy has been evaluated. Changes predate hydrops in
affected fetuses (Luewan, 2013). These noninvasive tests may aid pregnancy
counseling.

■ Beta Thalassemias
The β-thalassemias stem from impaired β-globin production or α-globin
instability. Genes that encode control of β-globin synthesis are in the δγβgene cluster on chromosome 11 (Chap. 7, p. 129). More than 150 point
mutations in the β-globin gene have been described (Weatherall, 2010). In βthalassemia, β-globin production is decreased, and excess α-globin
precipitate to damage cell membranes. Other forms of β-thalassemias derive
from α-globin instability (Kihm, 2002).
The heterozygous trait is β-thalassemia minor, and those most commonly
encountered have elevated hemoglobin A2 levels. This hemoglobin is
composed of two α- and two δ-globins, and concentrations are usually more
than 3.5 percent. Hemoglobin F—composed of two α- and two γ-globins—
also usually has increased concentrations that exceed 2 percent. Some
patients with heterozygous β-thalassemia minor do not have anemia, and
others have mild to moderate anemia characterized by hypochromia and
microcytosis.
Homozygous β-thalassemia—also called β-thalassemia major or Cooley
anemia—is a serious and frequently fatal disorder. Hemolysis is intense and
leads to severe anemia. Many patients become transfusion dependent, and the
subsequent iron load, along with abnormally greater gastrointestinal iron
absorption, leads to hemochromatosis, which is fatal in many cases. A
heterozygous form of β-thalassemia that clinically manifests as thalassemia
intermedia produces moderate anemia.
Several treatment schemes treat β-thalassemia. Stem cell transplantation
has been used to treat β-thalassemia major (Jagannath, 2014). Preliminary
observations indicate that a combination of thalidomide and hydroxyurea—

both contraindicated in pregnancy—may be beneficial to boost hemoglobin
production (Shah, 2020). Inserting a gene with a lentiviral vector into βglobin has been used to transfect harvested bone marrow stem cells
(Harrison, 2019). Last, luspatercept—a recombinant fusion protein—may
enhance erythroid maturation to reduce transfusion requirements (Cappellini,
2020).

Pregnancy
Iron and folate supplements are given to all affected women. Those with βthalassemia minor may have mild anemia during pregnancy (Charoenboon,
2016). This is caused by ineffective erythropoiesis and not hemolysis.
Shown in Figure 59-3 are comparable red cell survival times in women with
β-thalassemia minor compared with those from normally pregnant women. In
some women, anemia will worsen because slightly subnormal erythropoiesis
accompanies normal plasma volume expansion. Fetal-growth restriction has
been associated with thalassemia minor (Vafaei, 2020).

FIGURE 59-3 Erythrocyte-survival times with β-thalassemia minor (black solid line) are comparable
to those of normal red cells (shaded area).

Thalassemia major and some of the other severe forms were uncommonly
encountered during pregnancy before the advent of transfusion and ironchelation therapy. In reviews, 63 pregnancies with such management were
reported and suffered no serious complications (Aessopos, 1999;
Daskalakis, 1998). Pregnancy is considered reasonably safe if maternal
cardiac function is normal. Transfusions are provided throughout pregnancy
to maintain the hemoglobin concentration at 10 g/dL. This is coupled with
surveillance of fetal growth (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2019b).

■ Prenatal Diagnosis
Diagnosis of α-thalassemia major in the fetus can be accomplished by DNA
analysis using molecular techniques (Piel, 2014). Fetal diagnosis of
hemoglobin Bart (γ4) has been described using capillary electrophoresis or
high-performance liquid chromatography techniques (Sirichotiyakul, 2009).
Molecular genetic testing for HBA1 and HBA2 identifies 90 percent of
deletions and 10 percent of point mutations in affected individuals
(Galanello, 2011b).
Because β-thalassemia major is caused by numerous mutations, prenatal
diagnosis is difficult. For a given individual, targeted mutation analysis
requires prior identification of the familial mutation. The analysis is done
using chorionic villus sampling and other techniques discussed in Chapter 17
(p. 344). Noninvasive testing using cell-free fetal DNA for β-thalassemia
diagnosis has been described (Xiong, 2015; Zhang, 2019). Preimplantation
genetic testing allows for identification of affected offspring prior to
blastocyst transfer.

PLATELET DISORDERS
■ Thrombocytopenia
Platelet abnormalities are common and may precede pregnancy, develop
coincidentally during pregnancy, or be induced by pregnancy.
Thrombocytopenia—defined by a platelet count <150,000/μL—is identified
in nearly 10 percent of gravidas (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2019c). Of these cases, 75 percent are gestational

thrombocytopenia. The remainder is due to other causes, and HELLP
syndrome is a common one (Eslick, 2020). Thrombocytopenia may be
inherited or idiopathic, acute or chronic, and primary or associated with
other disorders (Table 59-5). Of recent importance is thrombocytopenia in
pregnancy complicated by COVID-19 infection (Tang, 2020; Zitiello, 2020).
TABLE 59-5. Some Causes of Thrombocytopenia in Pregnancy

■ Gestational Thrombocytopenia
In two studies of pregnant women, platelet counts falling below the 2.5th
percentile were 116,000 and 123,000/µL (American College of

Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019c). Approximately 1 percent have
values <100,000/μL. Bleeding is only encountered with drastically lower
values. It seems reasonable that a platelet count of <80,000/μL should trigger
an evaluation for etiologies other than incidental or gestational
thrombocytopenia, which is unlikely to have a platelet count <50,000/μL.
Platelet counts decline normally across pregnancy (Fig. 4-7, p. 62). With
gestational thrombocytopenia, the platelet concentration nadir is usually
evident in the third trimester and is thought to stem from hemodilution. The
normal increased splenic mass of pregnancy also may contribute (Maymon,
2006; Reese, 2018).

■ Inherited Thrombocytopenias
Bernard-Soulier syndrome and Glanzmann thrombasthenia lack a platelet
membrane glycoprotein, which leads to severe dysfunction (Grainger, 2018).
Moreover, women exposed to fetal platelets carrying this glycoprotein can
develop antibodies against this fetal GPIb/IX antigen to cause alloimmune
fetal thrombocytopenia (Poon, 2018). In 30 pregnancies in 18 women from
one review, the primary postpartum hemorrhage rate was 33 percent, and half
of women with bleeding required blood transfusion (Peitsidis, 2010). The
reviewers also described six cases of neonatal alloimmune
thrombocytopenia and two perinatal deaths. Close monitoring throughout
pregnancy and 6 weeks postpartum is critical to avoid potential lifethreatening hemorrhage (Prabu, 2006).
May-Hegglin anomaly is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized
by thrombocytopenia, giant platelets, and leukocyte inclusions. In one review
of 26 studies containing 75 pregnancies, there were four cases of postpartum
hemorrhage, 34 cases of neonatal thrombocytopenia, and two fetal deaths
(Hussein, 2013).

■ Immune Thrombocytopenic Purpura
The primary form—also termed idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP)
—is usually caused by a cluster of IgG antibodies directed against one or
more platelet glycoproteins. Antibody-coated platelets are destroyed
prematurely in the reticuloendothelial system, especially the spleen (Baucom,
2019; Cooper, 2019). With ITP, platelet counts range from 10,000 to

100,000/μL (George, 2014). Although not proven, ITP is probably mediated
by autoantibodies directed at platelet-associated immunoglobulins—PAIgG,
PAIgM, and PAIgA.
ITP classification is shown in Table 59-6 (Rodeghiero, 2009). In adults,
it usually is a chronic disease that rarely resolves spontaneously. Secondary
forms of immune-mediated chronic thrombocytopenia appear in association
with systemic lupus erythematosus, lymphomas, leukemias, and several
systemic diseases. Approximately 2 percent of thrombocytopenic patients
have positive serological tests for lupus, and in some cases, levels of
anticardiolipin antibodies are high. Last, approximately 10 percent of
patients with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) have associated
thrombocytopenia.
TABLE 59-6. Classification of Immune Thrombocytopenia (ITP)

Pregnancy
Pregnancy does not raise the risk of relapse or worsen active disease. The
estimated incidence of ITP complicating pregnancy approximates 1 case in
10,000 births (Care, 2018). However, it is not unusual for women who have
been in clinical remission for several years to have recurrent
thrombocytopenia during pregnancy. Although this may be from closer
surveillance, hyperestrogenemia is also implicated.
Therapy is considered if the woman has symptomatic bleeding and the
platelet count is below 30,000/μL. The corrected target level is 50,000/μL
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019c). Primary

treatment is corticosteroids, intravenous immune globulin (IVIG), or both
(Cooper, 2019). Initially, prednisone, 1 mg/kg daily, helps suppress the
phagocytic activity of the splenic monocyte–macrophage system. IVIG given
in a total dose of 2 g/kg over 2 to 5 days also is effective.
Some immunomodulating agents are avoided in pregnancy due to
teratogenicity risks. Azathioprine (Imuran) and rituximab (Truxima),
however, which are used in nonpregnant persons with ITP, have been used
for other conditions in pregnancy. Last, the thrombopoietin-receptor agonists
romiplostim (Nplate) and eltrombopag (Promacta) have stimulated responses
in some patients (Patras, 2020; Rosa María, 2020).
Prospective observations from the UK Obstetric Surveillance System
(UKOSS) of 107 pregnancies were described by Care and associates (2018).
Postpartum hemorrhage occurred in half, and in 20 percent it was severe. No
neonate needed therapy for thrombocytopenia, and no cases of intracranial
hemorrhage were noted. Comont and coworkers (2018) reported on 50
pregnancies in 39 women with ITP. Half had a platelet count <50,000/μL, but
84 percent were treated. They concluded that a third of these women were
overtreated.
In pregnant women with no response to corticosteroid or IVIG therapy,
open or laparoscopic splenectomy may be effective. In late pregnancy,
cesarean delivery may be necessary for surgical exposure. Improvement
usually follows splenectomy in 1 to 3 days and peaks at approximately 8
days.

Fetal and Neonatal Effects
Pregnancy complications that are increased with ITP include stillbirth, fetal
loss, and preterm birth (Wyszynski, 2016). Platelet-associated IgG
antibodies cross the placenta, and fetal death from hemorrhage occurs
occasionally. Studies that included more than 800 neonates born to women
with ITP cite an intracranial hemorrhage rate <1 percent (American College
of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019c). Hemorrhage was not associated
with route of delivery.
Investigators concur that fetal and maternal platelet counts lack strong
correlation (George, 2009; Hachisuga, 2014). Because of this, maternal IgG
free platelet antibody levels and platelet-associated antibody levels have
been evaluated to predict fetal platelet counts. Again, however, little

concurrence with these was found. Measuring fetal platelet counts by direct
sampling is not recommended (American College Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2019c).

Alloimmune Thrombocytopenia
Disparity between maternal and fetal platelet antigens can stimulate maternal
production of antiplatelet antibodies. Such platelet alloimmunization can be
severe, and its pathophysiology mirrors that caused by red cell antigens. This
is discussed in Chapter 18 (p. 352).

■ Thrombocytosis
Also called thrombocythemia, thrombocytosis generally is defined as
persistent platelet counts >450,000/μL. Common causes of secondary or
reactive thrombocytosis are infection, iron deficiency, trauma, inflammatory
diseases, and malignant tumors (Tefferi, 2019). Platelet counts seldom
exceed 1 million/μL in these secondary disorders, and prognosis depends on
the underlying disease. Instead, primary or essential thrombocytosis
accounts for most cases in which platelet counts exceed 1 million/μL. It is a
clonal disorder often due to an acquired mutation in the JAK2 gene (Spivak,
2018). Thrombocytosis usually is asymptomatic, but arterial and venous
thromboses may develop, and thrombosis is associated with pregnancy
complications (Rabinerson, 2007; Randi, 2014). First-line treatment is
aspirin and possibly hydroxyurea.
Normal pregnancies have been described in women whose mean platelet
counts were >1.25 million/μL. However, in a report of 40 pregnancies in 16
women with essential thrombocythemia, almost half had a spontaneous
abortion, fetal demise, or preeclampsia (Niittyvuopio, 2004). In 63
pregnancies in 36 women cared for at the Mayo Clinic, a third had a
miscarriage, but other pregnancy complications were uncommon (Gangat,
2009). In this observational study, aspirin therapy was associated with a
significantly lower abortion rate than that in untreated women—1 versus 75
percent, respectively. Suggested treatments during pregnancy include aspirin,
low-molecular-weight heparin, and interferon α (Finazzi, 2012; Vantroyen,
2002). Interferon α therapy during pregnancy was successful in a review of
11 women. One women had transient blindness at midpregnancy when her
platelet count was 2.3 million/μL (Delage, 1996).

THROMBOTIC MICROANGIOPATHIES
Although not a primary platelet disorder, some degree of thrombocytopenia
accompanies the thrombotic microangiopathies, which include thrombotic
thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP) and hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS).
These are characterized by thrombocytopenia, microangiopathic hemolysis,
and microvascular thrombosis (Konkle, 2018). Their similarities to HELLP
syndrome allude to their obstetrical ramifications.

■ Etiopathogenesis
Although different causes account for the variable findings within these
syndromes, clinically, they frequently are indistinguishable. Inherited or
idiopathic TTP is thought to be caused by antibodies to or a plasma
deficiency of ADAMTS13 (Konkle, 2018). This endothelium-derived
metalloprotease cleaves von Willebrand factor (vWF) to decrease its
activity. Conversely, HUS is usually from endothelial damage incited by
viral or bacterial infections and is seen primarily in children (George, 2014).
Secondary thrombotic microangiopathies are the most common—94 percent
(Bayer, 2019). A substantial number of all cases are pregnancy related. Other
common causes are malignancies, drugs, transplantations, and autoimmune
diseases. COVID-19 infection has been reported to precipitate TTP
(Futterman, 2020; Makatsariya, 2020).
With TTP, intravascular platelet aggregation stimulates a cascade that
leads to end-organ failure. There is endothelial activation and damage, but it
is unclear whether this is a consequence or a cause. Elevated levels of
unusually large multimers of vWF are identified with active TTP. Various
defects in the ADAMTS13 gene create differing clinical presentations. In
another mechanism, antibodies raised against ADAMTS13 neutralize its
action to cleave vWF multimers during an acute episode. The result is
microthrombi of hyaline material containing platelets and fibrin within
arterioles and capillaries. When sufficient in number or size, these
aggregates produce ischemia or infarction.

■ Manifestations

Thrombotic microangiopathies are characterized by thrombocytopenia,
fragmentation hemolysis, and organ dysfunction. TTP has the pentad of
thrombocytopenia, hemolytic anemia, fever, renal impairment, and
neurological abnormalities. HUS typically has more profound renal
involvement and fewer neurological aberrations (Gaggl, 2018).
Thrombocytopenia is usually severe, but fortunately, even with very low
platelet counts, spontaneous severe hemorrhage is uncommon.
Microangiopathic hemolysis is associated with moderate to marked anemia,
and erythrocyte transfusions are frequently necessary. The blood smear
shows erythrocyte fragmentation and schizocytosis. Reticulocytes and
nucleated red blood cells counts are increased, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH)
levels are high, and haptoglobin concentrations are decreased (Konkle,
2018). Consumptive coagulopathy, although common, is usually subtle and
clinically insignificant.

■ Treatment
The cornerstone of treatment for TTP is plasmapheresis with fresh-frozen
plasma replacement along with glucocorticoids. Plasma exchange removes
inhibitors and replaces the ADAMTS13 enzyme (George, 2014; Scully,
2019). Treatment with caplacizumab (Cablivi), the anti-vWF
immunoglobulin, inhibits the interaction between ultra-large vWF multimers
and platelets (Peyandi, 2016). These treatments have remarkably improved
outcomes in patients with these formerly fatal syndromes. Red cell
transfusions are imperative for life-threatening anemia. Treatment is usually
continued until the platelet count is normal for 2 days. Unfortunately, relapses
are common. Additionally, long-term sequelae such as renal impairment can
develop (Dashe, 1998; Vesely, 2015). Treatment for pregnancy-associated
HUS, which is complement mediated, is eculizumab (Soliris), the anti-C5
humanized monoclonal antibody (Fakhouri, 2016; Gupta, 2020).

■ Pregnancy
As shown in the Appendix (p. 1228), ADAMTS13 enzyme activity declines
across pregnancy by up to 50 percent (Sánchez-Luceros, 2004). Levels drop
even further with preeclampsia, and especially HELLP syndrome. This is
consonant with prevailing opinions that TTP is more commonly seen during

pregnancy. In the Parkland Hospital experience, 11 pregnancies were
complicated by these syndromes among nearly 275,000 gravidas—a
frequency of 1 in 25,000 (Dashe, 1998).
Some of the disparately higher incidence in pregnancy reported by others
may be from the inclusion of women with severe preeclampsia and
eclampsia (Hsu, 1995; Magann, 1994). Differences that usually allow
appropriate diagnosis are listed in Table 59-7. For example, moderate to
severe hemolysis is a rather constant feature of thrombotic
microangiopathies. This is seldom severe with preeclampsia, even when
complicated by HELLP syndrome (Chap. 40, p. 699). Moreover, although
hyaline microthrombi are seen in the liver with thrombotic microangiopathy,
hepatocellular necrosis and elevated serum hepatic transaminase levels,
which are characteristic of preeclampsia, are not a common feature
(Ganesan, 2011; Sadler, 2010).
TABLE 59-7. Some Differential Factors between HELLP Syndrome and
Thrombotic Microangiopathiesa

The diagnosis of thrombotic microangiopathies, rather than severe
preeclampsia, should be clear before initiating therapy. Unfortunately, recall
that determination of ADAMTS13 enzyme activity may be difficult to
interpret with HELLP syndrome (Franchini, 2007). Plasmapheresis is not
indicated for preeclampsia-eclampsia complicated by hemolysis and
thrombocytopenia. Importantly, delivery is imperative to reverse the
preeclampsia syndrome, but thrombotic microangiopathy is not improved by
delivery (Dashe, 1998; Letsky, 2000).
Thrombotic microangiopathy was previously fatal in up to half of
mothers. However, during the past two decades, and coincidental with
plasmapheresis and plasma exchange, maternal survival rates have improved
dramatically (Go, 2018; Gupta, 2020). Hunt and associates (2013) reported
that TTP accounted for 1 percent of maternal deaths in the United Kingdom
from 2003 to 2008. In a systematic review of 60 cases of pregnancyassociated HUS, two mothers died (Gupta, 2020).

Microangiopathic syndromes are usually recurrent and frequently
unassociated with pregnancy. For example, seven of the 11 women described
earlier at Parkland Hospital had recurrent disease either when not pregnant
or within the first trimester of a subsequent pregnancy. George (2009)
reported recurrent TTP in only five of 36 subsequent pregnancies. In 17
women with nonpregnant atypical HUS, recurrence developed in five of 32
pregnancies.

■ Long-term Prognosis
Women who are diagnosed with thrombotic microangiopathy during
pregnancy are at risk for serious long-term complications (Gaggl, 2018;
George, 2018). The relapse rate is as high as 40 percent in nonpregnant
patients (Konkle, 2018). The described Parkland experience included a mean
9-year surveillance period (Dashe, 1998). These women had multiple
recurrences; renal disease requiring dialysis, transplantation, or both; severe
chronic hypertension; and transfusion-acquired infection. Two women died
remote from pregnancy—one from dialysis complications and one from
transfusion-acquired HIV infection. In the review by Gupta (2020) cited
earlier, 15 percent of mothers with atypical HUS had long-term renal failure.
In 19 women with primary atypical HUS, eight progressed to end-stage renal
disease (Timmermans, 2020).

INHERITED COAGULATION DEFECTS
■ Hemophilias A and B
Obstetrical hemorrhage may infrequently be the consequence of an inherited
defect in a protein that controls coagulation (Majluf-Cruz, 2020). Hemophilia
and von Willebrand disease are examples.
Hemophilia A is an X-linked recessively transmitted disorder
characterized by a marked deficiency of factor VIII. Severity reflects plasma
factor levels and is categorized as mild—levels of 6 to 30 percent; moderate
—2 to 5 percent; or severe—less than 1 percent (Arruda, 2015). It is rare
among women compared with men, in whom the heterozygous state is
responsible for the disease. Heterozygous women have diminished factor
VIII levels, but almost invariably, the homozygous state is requisite for

hemophilia A. In a few instances, it appears in women spontaneously from a
newly mutated gene. Pregnancy-associated acquired hemophilia A from
antibodies may result in severe bleeding-related morbidity (Tengborn, 2012).
Christmas disease or hemophilia B is caused by severe deficiency of factor
IX and has similar genetic and clinical features.

Pregnancy
The risk of obstetrical bleeding with hemophilia is directly related to factor
VIII or IX levels. Affected women have a range of activity that is determined
by random X-chromosome inactivation—lyonization—although activity is
expected to average 50 percent (Letsky, 2000). Levels below 10 to 20
percent pose hemorrhage risks. If levels fall to near zero, this risk is
substantial. Pregnancy does afford some protection, however, because
concentrations of both these clotting factors rise appreciably during normal
pregnancy (Appendix, p. 1228). Treatment with desmopressin can stimulate
factor VIII release. Risks are further reduced by avoiding lacerations,
minimizing episiotomy use, and maximizing postpartum uterine contractions.
Operative vaginal delivery and cesarean delivery pose bleeding risks.
A few articles describe pregnancy courses. Kadir and colleagues (1997)
reported that 20 percent of carriers had postpartum hemorrhage. Guy and
associates (1992) reviewed five pregnancies in women with hemophilia B,
and in all, outcomes were favorable. They recommended factor IX
administration if levels are below 10 percent. Desmopressin in selected
cases has reduced obstetrical bleeding complications (Trigg, 2012). If a male
fetus has hemophilia, the risk of hemorrhage increases after delivery in the
neonate. This is especially true if circumcision is attempted.
Related to preconceptional counseling, most women with hemophilia A
or B carry one affected allele and the other X chromosome is normal. These
individuals will have all sons affected by the disease, and half of her
daughters will be carriers. Rarely, a woman may carry two abnormal alleles,
in which case all daughters will be carriers and all of her sons will inherit
the disease. Prenatal diagnosis of hemophilia is possible in some families
using chorionic villus biopsy (Chap. 17, p. 346). Preimplantation genetic
testing for hemophilia was reviewed by Lavery (2009).

■ Factor VIII or IX Inhibitors

Rarely, antibodies directed against factor VIII or IX are acquired and may
lead to life-threatening hemorrhage. Patients with hemophilia more
commonly develop antibodies, and their acquisition in patients without
hemophilia is extraordinary. It has been identified rarely in women during the
puerperium (Santoro, 2009). The prominent clinical feature is severe,
protracted, repetitive hemorrhage from the reproductive tract starting a week
or so after an apparently uncomplicated delivery (Gibson, 2016). The
activated partial thromboplastin time is markedly prolonged. Treatment has
included multiple blood-component transfusions, immunosuppressive
therapy, and attempts at various surgical procedures, especially curettage and
hysterectomy. A recombinant activated factor VII (NovoSeven) stops
bleeding in up to 75 percent of patients with these inhibitors (Arruda, 2015;
Gibson, 2016).

■ Von Willebrand Disease
At least 20 heterogeneous clinical disorders involve aberrations of factor
VIII complex and platelet dysfunction and collectively are termed von
Willebrand disease (vWD). These abnormalities are the most frequently
inherited bleeding disorders, and their prevalence is as high as 1 to 2 percent
(Arruda, 2015; Punt, 2020). Most von Willebrand disease variants are
inherited as autosomal dominant traits. Types I and II are the most common,
and type I accounts for 75 percent. Type III, which is the most severe, is a
recessive trait. Although most cases of acquired vWD develop after age 50
years, some have been reported in pregnant women (Lipkind, 2005).

Pathogenesis
The von Willebrand factor (vWF) is a series of large, plasma multimeric
glycoproteins that form part of the factor VIII complex. It is essential for
normal platelet adhesion to subendothelial collagen and formation of a
primary hemostatic plug. It also plays a major role in stabilizing the
coagulant properties of factor VIII. Factor VIII, a glycoprotein, is synthesized
by the liver. The von Willebrand precursor, which is present in platelets and
plasma, is instead synthesized by endothelium and megakaryocytes. The von
Willebrand factor antigen (vWF:Ag) is the antigenic determinant measured
by immunoassays.

Symptomatic women typically present with easy bruising, epistaxis,
mucosal hemorrhage, heavy menses, and excessive bleeding with trauma or
surgery. The classic autosomal dominant forms usually cause symptoms in the
heterozygous state. With vWD, laboratory features often include a prolonged
bleeding time, prolonged partial thromboplastin time, decreased vWF
antigen levels, decreased factor VIII immunological and coagulationpromoting activity, and inability of platelets from an affected person to react
to various stimuli.
Although most patients with vWD have heterozygous variants and
associated minor bleeding complications, the disease can be severe.
Moreover, homozygous offspring develop serious clotting dysfunction.
Chorionic villus sampling with DNA analysis to detect the missing genes has
been described, but the specific genetic mutation must be known. Some
authorities recommend cesarean delivery to avoid trauma to a possibly
affected fetus if the mother has severe disease.

Pregnancy
During normal pregnancy, maternal levels of both factor VIII and vWF
antigen increase substantively (Appendix, p. 1228). Because of this, pregnant
women with vWD often develop normal levels of factor VIII coagulant
activity and vWF antigen, although their measured bleeding time still may be
prolonged (Delbrück, 2019). If factor VIII activity is very low or if there is
bleeding, treatment is recommended. Desmopressin by infusion transiently
increases factor VIII and vWF levels (Arruda, 2015). With significant
bleeding, 15 or 20 units of cryoprecipitate are transfused every 12 hours.
Alternatively, factor VIII concentrates (Alphanate, Humate-P) that contain
high-molecular-weight vWF multimers may be given. Lubetsky and
colleagues (1999) described continuous infusion with Humate-P in a woman
during a vaginal delivery. According to Chi and coworkers (2009),
conduction analgesia can be provided safely if coagulation defects have
corrected or if hemostatic agents are administered prophylactically.
Pregnancy outcomes in women with vWD are generally good, but
postpartum hemorrhage is common. In one systematic review, with more than
800 deliveries, the postpartum hemorrhage incidence was 33 percent (Punt,
2020). In a database review of more than 2200 deliveries complicated by
vWD, this incidence was only about 5 percent (O’Brien, 2020). From two

reviews, postpartum hemorrhage may be primary and at the time of delivery,
or it may have a delayed onset (Makhamreh, 2021a,b).

■ Other Factor Deficiencies
In general, the activity of most procoagulant factors rises across pregnancy
(Appendix, p. 1228). Factor VII deficiency is a rare autosomal recessive
disorder. Levels of this factor increase during normal pregnancy, but these
may rise only mildly in women with factor VII deficiency (Fadel, 1989). A
systematic review of 94 births found no difference in postpartum hemorrhage
rates with or without prophylaxis with recombinant factor VIIa (Baumann
Kreuziger, 2013).
Factor X or Stuart-Prower factor deficiency is rare and inherited as an
autosomal recessive trait. Factor X levels typically rise by 50 percent during
normal pregnancy. Despite this, adverse pregnancy outcome are common.
Spiliopoulos and coworkers (2019) reported 31 pregnancies in 19 women.
They described a high rate of preterm birth, perinatal mortality, and
postpartum hemorrhage. Conversely, Nance and colleagues (2012) described
24 pregnancies, of which 18 resulted in a healthy baby. Treatment is with
plasma-derived factor X, fresh-frozen plasma, or prothrombin complex
concentrates.
Factor XI deficiency is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait in most
families. It manifests as severe disease in homozygotes but only as a minor
defect in heterozygotes. It is most prevalent in Ashkenazi Jews and is rarely
seen in pregnancy. In one review of 105 pregnancies from 33 affected
women, 70 percent had an uneventful pregnancy and delivery (Myers, 2007).
Authors recommended peripartum treatment with factor XI concentrate for
cesarean delivery and advised against epidural analgesia unless factor XI is
given. From another review, factor XI levels and bleeding severity
correlated poorly in women with severe deficiency (Martin-Salces, 2010).
Wiewel-Verschueren and associates (2016) performed a systematic review
of 27 studies with 372 women and reported that 18 percent had postpartum
hemorrhage.
Factor XII deficiency is another autosomal recessive disorder that rarely
complicates pregnancy. A greater incidence of thromboembolism is
encountered in nonpregnant patients with this deficiency.

Factor XIII deficiency is an autosomal recessive trait and may be
associated with maternal intracranial hemorrhage (Bouttefroy, 2020). In their
review, Kadir and associates (2009) cited an increased risk of recurrent
miscarriage and placental abruption. It has also been reported to cause
umbilical cord bleeding (Odame, 2014). Treatment is fresh frozen plasma.
Naderi and colleagues (2012) described 17 successful pregnancies in
women receiving weekly prophylaxis with factor XIII concentrate.
Fibrinogen abnormalities—either qualitative or quantitative—also may
cause coagulation abnormalities. Autosomally inherited abnormalities
usually involve the formation of a functionally defective fibrinogen—
commonly referred to as dysfibrinogenemia. Familial hypofibrinogenemia
and sometimes afibrinogenemia are infrequent recessive disorders. Our
experience suggests that hypofibrinogenemia represents a heterozygous
autosomal dominant state. The thrombin-clottable protein level in these
patients typically ranges from 80 to 110 mg/dL when nonpregnant. Cai and
coworkers (2018) described successful outcomes in affected women in
whom fibrinogen or plasma infusions were given throughout pregnancy.

THROMBOPHILIAS
Several important regulatory proteins act as inhibitors at strategic sites in the
coagulation cascade to maintain blood fluidity. Inherited deficiencies of these
inhibitory proteins are caused by gene mutations. Because they may be
associated with recurrent thromboembolism, they are collectively referred to
as thrombophilias. These are discussed in Chapter 55 (p. 976) and reviewed
by the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020).

REFERENCES
Aessopos A, Karabatsos F, Farmakis D, et al: Pregnancy in patients with well-treated β-thalassemia:
outcome for mothers and newborn infants. Am J Obstet Gynecol 180:360, 1999
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Hemoglobinopathies in pregnancy. Practice
Bulletin No. 78, January 2007, Reaffirmed 2019b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Thrombocytopenia in pregnancy. Practice
Bulletin No. 207, March 2019c
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Inherited thrombophilias in pregnancy. Practice
Bulletin No. 197, June 2020

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Anemia in pregnancy. Practice Bulletin No. 233,
July 2021
Andolina JR: Reexamining 1-gene deletion α-thalassemia: is the silent carrier of clinical significance?
Acta Haematol 143:407, 2020
Anyaegbunam A, Morel MI, Merkatz IR: Antepartum fetal surveillance tests during sickle cell crisis.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 165:1081, 1991
Arruda VR, High KA: Coagulation disorders. In: Kasper DL, Fauci AS, Hauser SL, et al (eds):
Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 19th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2015
Ataga LI, Kutlar A, Kanter J, et al: Crizanlizumab for the prevention of pain crises in sickle cell disease.
N Engl J Med 376:1796, 2017
Auerbach M, Gafter-Gvili A, Macdougall IC: Intravenous iron: a framework for changing the
management of iron deficiency. Lancet Haematol 7(4):e342, 2020
Bae E, Tangel V, Liu N, et al: Inpatient mortality and postpartum readmission rates in sickle cell disease
pregnancies: a multistate analysis, 2007–2014. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 34(17):2783, 2021
Ballas SK, McCarthy WF, Guo N, et al: Multicenter study of hydroxyurea in sickle cell anemia.
Exposure to hydroxyurea and pregnancy outcomes in patients with sickle cell anemia. J Natl Med
Assoc 101(10):1046, 2009
Baucom AM, Kuller JA, Dotters-Katz A: Immune thrombocytopenic purpura in pregnancy. Obstet
Gynecol Surv 74(8):490, 2019
Baumann Kreuziger LM, Morton CT, Reding MT: Is prophylaxis required for delivery in women with
factor VII deficiency? Haemophilia 19(6):827, 2013
Bayer G, von Tokarski F, Thoreau B, et al: Etiology and outcomes of thrombotic microangiopathies. Clin
J Am Soc Nephrol 14(4):557, 2019
Benites BD, Benevides TC, Valente IS, et al: The effects of exchange transfusion for prevention of
complications during pregnancy of sickle hemoglobin C disease patients. Transfusion 56(1):119, 2016
Benz EJ: Disorders of hemoglobin. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al (eds): Harrison’s
Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2018, p 690
Bertozzi I, Rumi E, Cavalloni C, et al: Pregnancy outcome and management of 25 pregnancies in
women with polycythemia vera. Am J Hematol 93(9):E234, 2018
Bo L, Mei-Ying L, Yang Z, et al: Aplastic anemia associated with pregnancy: maternal and fetal
complications. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 29(7):1120, 2016
Boafor TK, Olayemi E, Galadanci N, et al: Pregnancy outcomes in women with sickle-cell disease in
low and high income countries: a systematic review and meta-analysis. BJOG 123(5):691, 2016
Bouttefroy S, Meunier S, Milien V, et al: Congenital factor XIII deficiency: comprehensive overview of
the FranceCoag cohort. Br J Haematol 188(2):317, 2020
Breymann C, Milman N, Mezzacasa A, et al: Ferric carboxymaltose vs. oral iron in the treatment of
pregnant women with iron deficiency anemia: an international, open-label, randomized controlled trial
(FER-ASAP). J Perinat Med 45(4):443, 2017
Briggs GG, Freeman RK, Towers CV, et al: Drugs in pregnancy and lactation. 11th edition. Wolters
Kluwer, Philadelphia, 2017
Buonanno FS, Schmahmann JD, Romero JM, et al: Case 10–2016: a 22-year-old man with sickle cell
disease, headache, and difficulty speaking. N Engl J Med 374:1265, 2016
Cai H, Liang M, Yang J, et al: Congenital hypofibrinogenemia in pregnancy: a report of 11 cases. Blood
Coagul Fibrinolysis 29(2):155, 2018
Cappellini MD, Viprakasit V, Taher AT, et al: A phase 3 trial of luspatercept in patients with transfusiondependent β-thalassemia. N Engl J Med 382(13):1219, 2020

Care A, Pavord S, Knight M, et al: Severe primary autoimmune thrombocytopenia in pregnancy: a
national cohort study. BJOG 125(5):604, 2018
Carter A, Robison LL, Francisco L, et al: Prevalence of conception and pregnancy outcomes after
hematopoietic cell transplantation: report from the Bone Marrow Transplant Survivor Study. Bone
Marrow Transplant 37(11):1023, 2006
Cavenee MR, Cox SM, Mason R, et al: Erythropoietin in pregnancies complicated by pyelonephritis.
Obstet Gynecol 84:252, 1994
Celkan T, Alhaj S: Prenatal diagnosis of hereditary spherocytosis with osmotic fragility test. Indian
Pediatr 45(1):63, 2008
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: CDC criteria for anemia in children and childbearing-aged
women. MMWR 38(22):400, 1989
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Recommendations to prevent and control iron deficiency in
the United States. MMWR 47(3):1, 1998
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Recommended adult immunization schedule for ages 19
years or older, United States, 2020. Available at:
https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/schedules/hcp/imz/adult.html. Accessed September 6, 2020
Chakravarty EF, Khanna D, Chung L: Pregnancy outcomes in systemic sclerosis, primary pulmonary
hypertension, and sickle cell disease. Obstet Gynecol 111:927, 2008
Charoenboon C, Jatavan P, Traisrisilp K, et al: Pregnancy outcomes among women with betathalassemia trait. Arch Gynecol Obstet 293(4):771, 2016
Chi C, Lee CA, England A, et al: Obstetric analgesia and anaesthesia in women with inherited bleeding
disorders. Thromb Haemost 101(6):1104, 2009
Chou ST, Alsawas M, Fasano RM, et al: American Society of Hematology 2020 guidelines for sickle
cell disease: transfusion support. Blood Adv 4(2):327, 2020
Choudhry VP, Gupta S, Gupta M, et al: Pregnancy associated aplastic anemia—a series of 10 cases
with review of literature. Hematology 7(4):233, 2002
Comont T, Moulis G, Delavigne K, et al: Re: Severe primary autoimmune thrombocytopenia (ITP) in
pregnancy: a national cohort study primary immune thrombocytopenia management during
pregnancy. A French study. BJOG 125(5):629, 2018
Cooper N, Ghanima W: Immune thrombocytopenia. N Engl J Med 381(10):945, 2019
Cox SM, Shelburne P, Mason R, et al: Mechanisms of hemolysis and anemia associated with acute
antepartum pyelonephritis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 164:587, 1991
Cunningham FG, Cox SM, Harstad TW, et al: Chronic renal disease and pregnancy outcome. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 163:453, 1990
Cunningham FG, Nelson DB: Disseminated intravascular coagulation syndromes in obstetrics. Obstet
Gynecol 126(5):999, 2015
Cunningham FG, Pritchard JA: Prophylactic transfusions of normal red blood cells during pregnancies
complicated by sickle cell hemoglobinopathies. Am J Obstet Gynecol 135:994, 1979
Cunningham FG, Pritchard JA, Hankins GD, et al: Idiopathic cardiomyopathy or compounding
cardiovascular events. Obstet Gynecol 67:157, 1986
Cunningham FG, Pritchard JA, Mason R: Pregnancy and sickle hemoglobinopathy: results with and
without prophylactic transfusions. Obstet Gynecol 62:419, 1983
Curtis KM, Tepper NK, Jatlaoui TC, et al: U.S. Medical Eligibility Criteria for Contraceptive Use, 2016.
MMWR 65(3):1, 2016
Cyganek A, Pietrzak B, Kociszewska-Najman B, et al: Anemia treatment with erythropoietin in
pregnant renal recipients. Transplant Proc 43(8):2970, 2011

Daru J, Cooper NA, Khan KS: Systematic review of randomized trials of the effect of iron
supplementation on iron stores and oxygen carrying capacity in pregnancy. Acta Obstet Gynecol
Scand 95(3):270, 2016
Dashe JS, Ramin SM, Cunningham FG: The long-term consequences of thrombotic microangiopathy
(thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura and hemolytic uremic syndrome) in pregnancy. Obstet
Gynecol 91:662, 1998
Daskalakis GJ, Papageorgiou IS, Antsaklis AJ, et al: Pregnancy and homozygous beta thalassaemia
major. BJOG 105:1028, 1998
de Guibert S, Peffault de Latour R, et al: Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria and pregnancy before
the eculizumab era: the French experience. Haematologica 96(9):1276, 2011
Delage R, Demers C, Cantin G, et al: Treatment of essential thrombocythemia during pregnancy with
interferon-α. Obstet Gynecol 87:814, 1996
Delbrück C, Miesbach W: The course of von Willebrand factor and factor VIII activity in patients with
von Willebrand disease during pregnancy. Acta Haematol 142(2):71, 2019
Dewarrat N, Kaiser J, Baud D, et al: Pregnancy with Chuvash polycythaemia and other congenital
erythrocytosis. Acta Haematol 143(1):69, 2020
Dolan LM, Ryan M, Moohan J: Pyruvate kinase deficiency in pregnancy complicated by iron overload.
BJOG 109:844, 2002
Dotters-Katz SK, Grotegut CA, Heine RP: The effects of anemia on pregnancy outcome with
pyelonephritis. Inf Dis Obstet Gynecol 2013:780960, 2013
Duque-Afonso J, Waterhouse M, Pfeifer D, et al: Cell-free DNA characteristics and chimerism analysis
in patients after allogeneic cell transplantation. Clin Biochem 52:137, 2018
Edahiro Y, Yasuda H, Ando K, et al: Self-limiting pregnancy-associated pure red cell aplasia developing
in two consecutive pregnancies: case report and literature review. Int J Hematol 111(4):579, 2020
Elstein D, Granovsky-Grisaru S, Rabinowitz R, et al: Use of enzyme replacement therapy for Gaucher
disease during pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 177:1509, 1997
Eslick R, McLintock C: Managing ITP and thrombocytopenia in pregnancy. Platelets 31(3):300, 2020
Fadel HE, Krauss JS: Factor VII deficiency and pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 73:453, 1989
Faivre L, Meerpohl J, Da Costa L, et al: High-risk pregnancies in Diamond-Blackfan anemia: a survey
of 64 pregnancies from the French and German registries. Haematologica 91:530, 2006
Fakhouri F: Pregnancy-related thrombotic microangiopathies: clues from complement biology. Transfus
Apher Sci 54(2):199, 2016
Finazzi G: How to manage essential thrombocythemia. Leukemia 26(5):875, 2012
Franchini M, Montagnana M, Targher G, et al: Reduced von Willebrand factor-cleaving protease levels
in secondary thrombotic microangiopathies and other diseases. Semin Thromb Hemost 33(8):787,
2007
Futterman I, Toaff M, Navi L, et al: COVID-19 and HELLP: overlapping clinical pictures in tow gravid
patients. AJP Rep 10(2):e179, 2020
Gaggl M, Aigner C, Csuka D, et al: Maternal and fetal outcomes of pregnancies in women with atypical
hemolytic uremic syndrome. J Am Soc Naphrol 39(3):1020, 2018
Galanello R, Cao A: Alpha-thalassemia. In Pagon RA, Bird TD, Dolan CR, et al (eds): GeneReviews.
Seattle, University of Washington, 2011a
Galanello R, Cao A: Gene test review. Alpha-thalassemia. Genet Med 13(2):83, 2011b
Ganesan C, Maynard SE: Acute kidney injury in pregnancy: the thrombotic microangiopathies. J
Nephrol 24(5):554, 2011

Gangat N, Wolanskij AP, Schwager S, et al: Predictors of pregnancy outcomes in essential
thrombocythemia: a single institution study of 63 pregnancies. Eur J Haematol 82(5):350, 2009
Gansner JM, Achebe MM, Gray KJ, et al: Pregnancy outcomes in inherited bone marrow failure
syndromes. Blood 130(14):1671, 2017
Ganz T: Anemia of inflammation. N Engl J Med 381(12):1148, 2019
Garratty G: Severe reactions associated with transfusion of patients with sickle cell disease. Transfusion
37:357, 1997
Garratty G, Leger RM, Arndt PA: Severe immune hemolytic anemia associated with prophylactic use of
cefotetan in obstetric and gynecologic procedures. Am J Obstet Gynecol 181:103, 1999
George JN: The thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura and hemolytic uremic syndromes: overview of
pathogenesis (experience of The Oklahoma TTP-HUS Registry, 1989–2007). Kidney Int 75(112):S8,
2009
George JN: TTP: long-term outcomes following recovery. Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program
2018(1):548, 2018
George JN, Nester CM: Syndromes of thrombotic microangiopathy. N Engl J Med 371:654, 2014
Georgieff MK: Iron deficiency in pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 223:516, 2020
Gibson CJ, Berliner N, Miller AL, et al: A bruising loss. N Engl J Med 375:76, 2016
Giri N, Stratton P, Savage SA, et al: Pregnancies in patients with inherited bone marrow failure
syndromes in the NCI cohort. Blood 130(14):1674, 2017
Gladwin MT, Vichinsky E: Pulmonary complications of sickle cell disease. N Engl J Med 359:2254, 2008
Go RS, Leung N: Vascular injury to the kidney. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al (eds):
Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2018, p
2164
Govindappagari S, Nguyen M, Gupta M, et al: Severe vitamin B12 deficiency in pregnancy mimicking
HELLP syndrome. Case Rep Obstet Gynecol 2019:4325647, 2019
Grainger JD, Thachil J, Will AM: How we treat glycoprotein defects; Glanzmann thrombasthenia and
Bernard Soulier syndrome in children and adults. Br J Haemataol 182(5):621, 2018
Green AM, Kupfer GM: Fanconi anemia. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am 23(2):193, 2009
Grigoriadis C, Tympa A, Liapis A, et al: Alpha-methyldopa-induced autoimmune hemolytic anemia in the
third trimester of pregnancy. Case Rep Obstet Gynecol 2013:150278, 2013
Gupta M, Goviappagari S, Burwick RM: Pregnancy-associated atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome.
Obstet Gynecol 135(1):46, 2020
Guy GP, Baxi LV, Hurlet-Jensen A, et al: An unusual complication in a gravida with factor IX
deficiency: case report with review of the literature. Obstet Gynecol 80:502, 1992
Hachisuga K, Hidaka N, Fujita Y, et al: Can we predict neonatal thrombocytopenia in offspring of
women with idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura? Blood Res 49(4):259, 2014
Haddad LB, Curtis KM, Legardy-Williams JK, et al: Contraception for individuals with sickle cell
disease: a systematic review of the literature. Contraception 85(6):527, 2012
Hanprasertpong T, Kor-Anantakul O, Leetanaporn R, et al: Pregnancy outcomes amongst thalassemia
traits. Arch Gynecol Obstet 288(5):1051, 2013
Happe SK, Zofkie AC, Nelson DB: Microangiopathic hemolytic anemia due to malignancy in
pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 128:1437, 2016
Harrison C: First gene therapy for β-thalassemia approved. Nat Biotechnol 37(10):1102, 2019
Hoffbrand AV: Megaloblastic anemias. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al (eds): Harrison’s
Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2018, p 698

Hsu HW, Belfort MA, Vernino S, et al: Postpartum thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura complicated
by Budd–Chiari syndrome. Obstet Gynecol 85:839, 1995
Hunt BJ, Thomas-Dewing RR, Bramham K, et al: Preventing maternal deaths due to acquired
thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura. J Obstet Gynaecol Res 39(1):347, 2013
Hurst D, Little B, Kleman KM, et al: Anemia and hemoglobinopathies in Southeast Asian refugee
children. J Pediatr 102:692, 1983
Hussein BA, Gomez K, Kadir RA: May-Hegglin anomaly and pregnancy: a systematic review. Blood
Coagul Fibrinolysis 24(5):554, 2013
Ibinosa I, Leonard SA, Butwick AJ, et al: Antepartum anemia and racial/ethnic disparities in blood
transfusions in California. Abstract No. 464, Am J Obstet Gynecol 222:S304, 2020
Inparaj S, Buckingham M, Oakley L, et al: Pulmonary complications for women with sickle cell disease
in pregnancy: systematic review and meta-analysis. Thorax 75(7):568, 2020
Iolascon A, Andolfo I, Russo R: Advances in understanding the pathogenesis of red cell membrane
disorders. B J Haematol 187(1):13, 2019
Jagannath VA, Fedorowicz Z, Al Hajeri A, et al: Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation for people with
β-thalassaemia major. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 10:CD008708, 2014
James AH: Iron deficiency anemia in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 138(4):663, 2021
Kadir R, Chi C, Bolton-Maggs P: Pregnancy and rare bleeding disorders. Haemophilia 15(5):990, 2009
Kadir RA, Economides DL, Braithwaite J, et al: The obstetric experience of carriers of haemophilia.
BJOG 104:803, 1997
Kanter J, Liem RI, Bernaudin F, et al: American Society of Hematology 2021 guidelines for sickle cell
disease: stem cell transplantation. Blood Adv 5(18):3668, 2021
Kelly RJ, Hochsmann B, Szer J, et al: Eculizumab in pregnant patients with paroxysmal nocturnal
hemoglobinuria. N Engl J Med 373(11):1032, 2015
Kemthong W, Jatavan P, Traisrisilp K, et al: Pregnancy outcomes among women with hemoglobin E
trait. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 29(7):1146, 2016
Kenny L, McCrae K, Cunningham FG: Platelets, coagulation, and the liver. In Taylor RN, Roberts JM,
Cunningham FG (eds): Chesley’s Hypertensive Disorders in Pregnancy, 4th ed. London, Academic
Press, 2015
Kihm AJ, Kong Y, Hong W, et al: An abundant erythroid protein that stabilizes free alpha-haemoglobin.
Nature 417(6890):758, 2002
Knuesel SJ, Guseh JS II, Karp Leaf R, et al: Case 6–2018: a 35-year-old woman with headache,
subjective fever, and anemia. N Engl J Med 378(8):753, 2018
Konkle BA: Disorders of platelets and vessel wall. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al (eds):
Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2018, p 822
Koshy M, Burd L, Wallace D, et al: Prophylactic red-cell transfusions in pregnant patients with sickle
cell disease: a randomized cooperative study. N Engl J Med 319:1447, 1988
Kreher S, Ochsenreither S, Trappe RU, et al: Prophylaxis and management of venous thromboembolism
in patients with myeloproliferative neoplasms: consensus statement of the haemostasis working party
of the German Society of Hematology and Oncology (DGHO), the Austrian Society of Hematology
and Oncology (ÖGHO) and Society of Thrombosis and Haemostasis Research (GTHe.V.)
93(12):1953, 2014
Kumar R, Advani AR, Sharan J, et al: Pregnancy induced hemolytic anemia: an unexplained entity. Ann
Hematol 80:623, 2001
Kuo K, Caughey AB: Contemporary outcomes of sickle cell disease in pregnancy. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 215(4):505.e1, 2016

Lam YH, Tang MHY, Lee CP, et al: Prenatal ultrasonographic prediction of homozygous type 1 alphathalassemia at 12 to 13 weeks of gestation. Am J Obstet Gynecol 180:148, 1999
Larsen S, Bjelland EK, Haavaldsen C, et al: Placental weight in pregnancies with high or low
hemoglobin concentrations. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 206:48, 2016
Lavery S: Preimplantation genetic diagnosis of haemophilia. Br J Haematol 144(3):303, 2009
Letsky EA: Hematologic disorders. In Barron WM, Lindheimer MD (eds): Medical Disorders During
Pregnancy, 3rd ed. St. Louis, Mosby, 2000
Lipkind HS, Kurtis JD, Powrie R, et al: Acquired von Willebrand disease: management of labor and
delivery with intravenous dexamethasone, continuous factor concentrate, and immunoglobulin
infusion. Am J Obstet Gynecol 192:2067, 2005
Lubetsky A, Schulman S, Varon D, et al: Safety and efficacy of continuous infusion of a combined
factor VIII–von Willebrand factor (vWF) concentrate (Haemate-P) in patients with von Willebrand
disease. Thromb Haemost 81:229, 1999
Luewan S, Srisupundit K, Tongsong T: Outcomes of pregnancies complicated by betathalassemia/hemoglobin E disease. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 104(3):203, 2009
Luewan S, Tongprasert F, Srisupundit K, et al: Fetal myocardial performance (Tei) index in fetal
hemoglobin Bart’s disease. Ultraschall Med 34(4):355, 2013
Luzzatto L: Hemolytic anemias. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al (eds): Harrison’s Principles
of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2018, p 708
Maberry MC, Mason RA, Cunningham FG, et al: Pregnancy complicated by hemoglobin CC and C–
beta-thalassemia disease. Obstet Gynecol 76:324, 1990
Maberry MC, Mason RA, Cunningham FG, et al: Pregnancy complicated by hereditary spherocytosis.
Obstet Gynecol 79:735, 1992
Magann EF, Bass D, Chauhan SP, et al: Antepartum corticosteroids: disease stabilization in patients with
the syndrome of hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, and low platelets (HELLP). Am J Obstet
Gynecol 171:1148, 1994
Majluf-Cruz K, Anguiano-Robledo L, Calzada-Mendoza CC, et al: von Willebrand disease and other
hereditary haemostatic factor deficiencies in women with a history of postpartum haemorrhage.
Haemophilia 26(1):2020
Makatsariya AD, Slukhanchuk EV, Bitsadze VO, et al: Thrombotic microangiopathy, DIC-syndrome and
COVID-19: link with pregnancy prothrombotic state. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med July 6, 2020
[Epub ahead of print]
Makhamreh MM, Kass SL, Russo ML, et al: Type 3 von Willebrand disease in pregnancy: a systematic
literature review. Am J Perinatol 38(5):436, 2021a
Makhamreh MM, Russo ML, Karl T, et al: Type 2B von Willebrand disease in pregnancy: a systematic
literature review. Semin Thromb Hemost 47(2):201, 2021b
Malinowski AK, Dziegielewski C, Keating S, et al: Placental histopathology in sickle cell disease: a
descriptive and hypothesis-generating study. Placenta 95:9, 2020
Malinowski AK, Shehata N, D’Souza R, et al: Prophylactic transfusion for pregnant women with sickle
cell disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Blood 126(21):2424, 2015
Maroto A, Martinez-Diago C, Tio G, et al: Autoimmune hemolytic anemia in pregnancy: a challenge for
maternal and fetal follow-up. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med February 25, 2020 [Epub ahead of print]
Martin-Salces M, Jimenez-Yuste V, Alvarez MT, et al: Factor XI deficiency: review and management in
pregnant women. Clin Appl Thromb Hemost 16(2):209, 2010
Maymon R, Strauss S, Vaknin Z, et al: Normal sonographic values of maternal spleen size throughout
pregnancy. Ultrasound Med Biol 32(12):1827, 2006

McCoy JM, Stonecash RE, Cournoyer D, et al: Epoetin-associated pure red cell aplasia: past, present,
and future considerations. Transfusion 48(8):1754, 2008
McGowan KE, Malinowski AK, Schuh AC, et al: Aplastic anaemia in pregnancy—a single centre,
North American series. Br J Haematol 184(3):436, 2019
Medoff BD, Shepard JO, Smith RN, et al: Case 17–2005: a 22-year-old woman with back and leg pain
and respiratory failure. N Engl J Med 352:2425, 2005
Miyasaka N, Miura O, Kawaguchi T, et al: Pregnancy outcomes in patients with paroxysmal nocturnal
hemoglobinuria treated with eculizumab: a Japanese experience and updated review. Int J Hematol
103(6):703, 2016
Moise KJ Jr: Umbilical cord stem cells. Obstet Gynecol 106:1393, 2005
Myers B, Pavorod S, Kean L, et al: Pregnancy outcome in Factor XI deficiency: incidence of
miscarriage, antenatal and postnatal haemorrhage in 33 women with Factor XI deficiency. BJOG
114:643, 2007
Naderi M, Eshghi P, Cohan N, et al: Successful delivery in patients with FXIII deficiency receiving
prophylaxis: report of 17 cases in Iran. Haemophilia 18(5):773, 2012
Nagel RL, Fabry ME, Steinberg MH: The paradox of hemoglobin SC disease. Blood Rev 17(3):167,
2003
Nance D, Josephson NC, Paulyson-Nunez K, et al: Factor X deficiency and pregnancy: preconception
counselling and therapeutic options. Haemophilia 18(3):e277, 2012
Neogi SB, Devasenapathy N, Singh R, et al: Safety and effectiveness of intravenous iron sucrose
versus standard oral iron therapy in pregnant women with moderate-to-severe anaemia in India: a
multicentre, open-label, phase 3, randomised, controlled trial. Lancet Glob Health 7(12):e1706, 2019
Niihara Y, Miller ST, Kanter J, et al: A phase 3 trial of l-glutamine in sickle cell disease. N Engl J Med
379(3):226, 2018
Niittyvuopio R, Juvonen E, Kaaja R, et al: Pregnancy in essential thrombocythaemia: experience with 40
pregnancies. Eur J Haematol 73:431, 2004
O’Brien SH, Stanek JR, Kaur D, et al: Laboratory monitoring during pregnancy and post-partum
hemorrhage in women with von Willebrand disease. J Thromb Haemost 18(3):604, 2020
Odame JE, Chan AK, Breakey VR: Factor XIII deficiency management: a review of the literature.
Blood Coagul Fibrinolysis 25(3):199, 2014
O’Hara C, Singer DE, Niebuhr DW: The risk of pregnancy related hypertension disorder associated
with sickle cell trait in U.S. service women. Mil Med 185(1-2):e183, 2020
Olaniran KO, Allegretti AS, Zhao SH, et al: Kidney function decline among black patients with sickle
cell trait and sickle cell disease: an observational cohort study. J Am Soc Nephrol 31(2):393, 2020
Orfali KA, Ohene-Abuakwa Y, Ball SE: Diamond Blackfan anaemia in the UK: clinical and genetic
heterogeneity. Br J Haematol 125(2):243, 2004
Oringanje C, Nemecek E, Oniyangi O: Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation for children with sickle
cell disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 5:CD007001, 2013
Oteng-Ntim E, Meeks D, Seed PT, et al: Adverse maternal and perinatal outcomes in pregnant women
with sickle cell disease: systematic review and meta-analysis. Blood 125(21):3316, 2015
Pajor A, Lehoczky D, Szakács Z: Pregnancy and hereditary spherocytosis. Arch Gynecol Obstet
253:37, 1993
Patras A, Figueroa R, Singh AP, et al: Romiplostim for management of refractory immune
thrombocytopenic purpura in the immediate postpartum period. BMJ Case Rep 13(5):e234335, 2020
Pavord S, Daru J, Prasannan N, et al: UK guidelines on the management of iron deficiency in
pregnancy. Br J Haemataol 188(6):819, 2020

Peitsidis P, Datta T, Pafilis I, et al: Bernard-Soulier syndrome in pregnancy: a systematic review.
Haemophilia 16(4):584, 2010
Peyandi F, Scully M, Kremer Hovinga JA, et al: Caplacizumab for acquired thrombotic
thrombocytopenic purpura. N Engl J Med 374:511, 2016
Piel FB, Weatherall DJ: The α-Thalassemias. N Engl J Med 371:20, 2014
Pinto FO, Roberts I: Cord blood stem cell transplantation for haemoglobinopathies. Br J Haematol
141(3):309, 2008
Poon MC, d’Oiron R: Alloimmunization in congenital deficiencies of platelet surface glycoproteins: focus
on Glanzmann’s thrombasthenia and Bernard-Soulier’s syndrome. Semin Thromb Hemost 44(6):604,
2018
Prabu P, Parapia LA: Bernard-Soulier syndrome in pregnancy. Clin Lab Haem 28:198, 2006
Pritchard JA, Scott DE, Whalley PJ, et al: The effects of maternal sickle cell hemoglobinopathies and
sickle cell trait on reproductive performance. Am J Obstet Gynecol 117:662, 1973
Puig A, Dighe AS: Case 20–2013: a 29-year-old man with anemia and jaundice. N Engl J Med
368(26):2502, 2013
Punt MC, Waning ML, Mauser-Bunschoten EP, et al: Maternal and neonatal bleeding complications in
relation to peripartum management in women with Von Willebrand disease: a systematic review.
Blood Rev 39:100633, 2020
Rabinerson D, Fradin Z, Zeidman A, et al: Vulvar hematoma after cunnilingus in a teenager with
essential thrombocythemia: a case report. J Reprod Med 52:458, 2007
Rahmati S, Azami M, Badfar G, et al: The relationship between maternal anemia during pregnancy with
preterm birth: a systematic review meta-analysis. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 33(15):2679, 2020
Ramphul K, Majias SG, Joynauth J: Patients with sickle cell disease between ages 0 and 20 years
presenting with acute chest syndrome in the United States. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol 42(5):367, 2020
Randi ML, Bertozzi I, Rumi E, et al: Pregnancy complications predict thrombotic events in young
women with essential thrombocythemia. Am J Hematol 89(3):306, 2014
Ray JF, Davidson AJ, Berger H, et al: Haemoglobin levels in early pregnancy and severe maternal
morbidity: population-based cohort study. BJOG 127:1154, 2020
Reese JA, Peck JD, Deschamps DR, et al: Platelet counts during pregnancy. N Engl J Med 379(1):32,
2018
Rencic J, Zhou M, Hsu G, et al: Circling back for the diagnosis. N Engl J Med 377:1778, 2017
Ribeil J-A, Hacein-Bey-Abina S, Payen E, et al: Gene therapy in a patient with sickle cell disease. N
Engl J Med 376:848, 2017
Rodeghiero F, Stasi R, Gernsheimer T, et al: Standardization of terminology, definitions, and outcome
criteria in immune thrombocytopenic purpura of adults and children: report from an international
working group. Blood 113(11):2386, 2009
Rogers DT, Molokie R: Sickle cell disease in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am 37(2):223, 2010
Rosa María RN, Laura RL, Ángeles PB, et al: Use of romiplostim during pregnancy as a rescue
therapy in primary immune thrombocytopenia: literature review and case description. Platelets
31(3):403, 2020
Ross AC: Impact of chronic and acute inflammation on extra- and intracellular iron homeostasis. Am J
Clin Nutr 106 (Suppl 6):1581S, 2017
Ru Y, Pressman EK, Cooper EM, et al: Iron deficiency and anemia are prevalent in women with
multiple gestations. Am J Clin Nutr 104(4):1052, 2016
Sadler JE, Ponca M: Antibody-mediated thrombotic disorders: thrombotic disorders: thrombotic
thrombocytopenic purpura and heparin-induced thrombocytopenia. In Kaushansky K, Lichtman MA,

Beutler E, et al (eds): Williams Hematology, 8th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2010
Sánchez-Luceros A, Farias CE, Amaral MM, et al: von Willebrand factor–cleaving protease
(ADAMTS13) activity in normal non-pregnant women, pregnant and post-delivery women. Thromb
Haemost 92(6):1320, 2004
Sanders JE, Hawley J, Levy W, et al: Pregnancies following high-dose cyclophosphamide with or
without high-dose busulfan or total body irradiation and bone marrow transplantation. Blood 87:3045,
1996
Santoro RC, Prejanò S: Postpartum-acquired haemophilia A: a description of three cases and literature
review. Blood Coagul Fibrinolysis 20(6):461, 2009
Sarno L, Tufano A, Maruotti GM, et al: Eculizumab in pregnancy: a narrative overview. J Nephrol
32(1):17, 2019
Scanlon KS, Yip R, Schieve LA, et al: High and low hemoglobin levels during pregnancy: differential
risk for preterm birth and small for gestational age. Obstet Gynecol 96:741, 2000
Scully M, Cataland SR, Peyvandi F, et al: Caplacizumab treatment for acquired thrombotic
thrombocytopenic purpura. N Engl J Med 380(4):335, 2019
Shah S, Sheth R, Shah K, et al: Safety and effectiveness of thalidomide and hydroxyurea combination in
β-thalassaemia intermedia and major: a retrospective pilot study. Br J Maematol 188(3):318, 2020
Sharif J, Byrd L, Stevenson K, et al: Transfusion for sickle cell disease in pregnancy: a single-centre
survey. Transfus Med 38(3):231, 2018
Shirel T, Hubler CP, Shah R, et al: Maternalopioid dose is associated with neonatal abstinence syndrome
in children born to women with sickle cell disease. Am J Hematol 91(4):416, 2016
Sirichotiyakul S, Saetung R, Sanguansermsri T: Prenatal diagnosis of beta-thalassemia/Hb E by
hemoglobin typing compared to DNA analysis. Hemoglobin 33(1):17, 2009
Smith C, Teng F, Branch E, et al: Maternal and perinatal morbidity and mortality associated with anemia
in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 134(6):1234, 2019
Spiliopoulos D, Kadir RA: Congenital factor X deficiency in women: a systematic review of the
literature. Haemophilia 25(2):195, 2019
Spivak JL: Polycythemia vera and other myeloproliferative neoplasms. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS,
Kasper DL, et al (eds): Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGrawHill Education, 2018, p 733
Stefanovic V: The extended use of eculizumab in pregnancy and complement activation-associated
diseases affecting maternal, fetal, and neonatal kidneys-the future is now? J Clin Med 8(3):pii:E407,
2019
Stein BL, Martin K: From Budd-Chiari syndrome to acquired von Willebrand syndrome: thrombosis and
bleeding complications in the myeloproliferative neoplasms. Blood 134(22):1902, 2019
Stoof SC, van Steenbergen HW, Zwagemaker A, et al: Primary postpartum haemorrhage in women
with von Willebrand disease or carriership of haemophilla despite specialized care: a retrospective
survey. Haemophillia 21(4):505, 2015
Taher AT, Weatherall DJ, Cappellini MD: Thalassaemia. Lancet 391(10116):155, 2018
Tang MW, Nur E, Biemond BJ: Immune thrombocytopenia due to COVID-19 during pregnancy. Am J
Hematol 95(8):E191, 2020
Tefferi A, Pardanani A: Essential thrombocythemia. N Engl J Med 381(22):2135, 2019
Tengborn L, Baudo F, Huth-Kühne A, et al: Pregnancy-associated acquired haemophilia A: results from
the European Acquired Haemophilia (EACH2) registry. BJOG 119(12):1529, 2012
Tichelli A, Peffault de Latour R, Passweg J, et al: Long-term outcome of a randomized controlled study
in patients with newly diagnosed severe aplastic anemia treated with antithymocyte globuline,

cyclosporine, with or without G-CSF: a severe aplastic anemia working party trial from the
European Group of Blood Marrow Transplantation. Haematologica 105(5):1223, 2020
Timmermans SA, Werion A, Spaanderman ME, et al: The natural course of pregnancies in women with
primary atypical haemolytic uraemic syndrome and asymptomatic relatives. Br J Haematol
190(3):442, 2020
Townsley DM, Scheinberg P, Winkler T, et al: Eltrombopag added to standard immunosuppression for
aplastic anemia. N Engl J Med 376:1540, 2017
Trigg DE, Stergiotou I, Peitsidis P, et al: A systematic review: the use of desmopressin for treatment and
prophylaxis of bleeding disorders in pregnancy. Haemophilia 18(1):25, 2012
Tsaras G, Owusu-Ansah A, Boateng FO, et al: Complications associated with sickle cell trait: a brief
narrative review. Am J Med 122(6):507, 2009
Tshilolo L, Tomlinson G, Williams TN, et al: Hydroxyurea for children with sickle cell anemia in subSaharan Africa. N Engl J Med 380(2):121, 2019
Turner JM, Kaplan JB, Cohen HW, et al: Exchange versus simple transfusion for acute chest syndrome
in sickle cell anemia adults. Transfusion 49(5):863, 2009
U.S. Health Resources and Services Administration: Advisory Committee on Heritable Disorders in
Newborns and Children uniform screening panel. 2020. Available at: https://www.hrsa.gov/advisorycommittees/heritable-disorders/index.html. Accessed September 6, 2020
Vafaei H, Karimi S, Akbarzadeh Jahromi M, et al: The effect of mother’s β-thalassemia minor on
placental histology and neonatal outcomes. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med June 4, 2020 [Epub ahead
of print]
Vandevijvere S, Amsalkhir S, Oyen HV, et al: Iron status and its determinants in a nationally
representative sample of pregnant women. J Acad Nutr Diet 113(5):659, 2013
Vantroyen B, Vanstraelen D: Management of essential thrombocythemia during pregnancy with aspirin,
interferon alpha-2a and no treatment. A comparative analysis of the literature. Acta Haematol
107(3):158, 2002
Veille J, Hanson R: Left ventricular systolic and diastolic function in pregnant patients with sickle cell
disease. Am J Obstet Gynecol 170:107, 1994
Verstraete S, Verstraete R: Successful epidural analgesia for a vaso-occlusive crisis of sickle cell
disease during pregnancy: a case report. J Anesth 26(5):783, 2012
Vesely SK: Life after acquired thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura: morbidity mortality, and risks
during pregnancy. J Throm Haemost 13 Suppl 1:S216, 2015
Vianello A, Vencato E, Cantini M, et al: Improvement of maternal and fetal outcomes in women with
sickle cell disease treated with early prophylactic erythrocytapheresis. Transfusion 58(9):2192, 2018
Vichinsky EP, Neumayr LD, Earles AN, et al: Causes and outcomes of the acute chest syndrome in
sickle cell disease. N Engl J Med 342:1855, 2000
Villers MS, Jamison MG, De Castro LM, et al: Morbidity associated with sickle cell disease in
pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 199:125.e1, 2008
von Tempelhoff GF, Heilmann L, Rudig L, et al: Mean maternal second-trimester hemoglobin
concentration and outcome of pregnancy: a population based study. Clin Appl Thromb Hemost
14:19, 2008
Ware RE, de Montalembert, Tshilolo L, et al: Sickle cell anemia. Lancet 390(10091):311, 2017
Weatherall D: The thalassemias: disorders of globin chain synthesis. In Kaushansky K, Lichtman MA,
Beutler E, et al (eds): Williams Hematology, 8th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2010
Wellenstein WL, Sullivan S. Darbinian MJ, et al: Adverse pregnancy outcomes in women with sickle
cell trait. AJP Rep 9(4):e346, 2019

Wiewel-Verschueren S, Arendz IJ, M Knol H, et al: Gynaecological and obstetrical bleeding in women
with factor XI deficiency—a systematic review. Haemophilia 22(2):188, 2016
Wilson S, Ellsworth P, Key NS: Pregnancy in sickle cell trait: what we do and don’t know. Br J
Haematol 190(3):328, 2020
Winder AD, Johnson S, Murphy J, et al: Epidural analgesia for treatment of a sickle cell crisis during
pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 118(2 Pt 2):495, 2011
World Health Organization: WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy
experience. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2016
Wright DE, Rosovsky RP, Platt MY: Case 36–2013: a 38-year-old woman with anemia and
thrombocytopenia. N Engl J Med 369:21, 2013
Wyszynski DF, Carman WJ, Cantor AB, et al: Pregnancy and birth outcomes among women with
idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura. J Pregnancy 2016:8297407, 2016
Xiong L, Barrett AN, Hua R, et al: Non-invasive prenatal diagnostic testing for β-thalassaemia using
cell-free fetal DNA and next generation sequencing. Prenat Diagn 35(3):258, 2015
Yeomans E, Lowe TW, Eigenbrodt EH, et al: Liver histopathologic findings in women with sickle cell
disease given prophylactic transfusion during pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 163:958, 1990
Young NS: Aplastic anemia. N Engl J Med 379(17):1643, 2018
Zhang J, Li J, Saucier JB, et al: Non-invasive prenatal sequencing for multiple Mendelian monogenic
disorders using circulating cell-free fetal DNA. Nat Med 25(3):439, 2019
Zhen L, Pen M, Han J, et al: Non-invasive prenatal detection of haemoglobin Bart’s disease by
cardiothoracic ratio during the first trimester. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 193:92, 2015
Ziaei S, Norrozi M, Faghihzadeh S, et al: A randomized placebo-controlled trial to determine the effect
of iron supplementation on pregnancy outcome in pregnant women with haemoglobin ≥13.2 g/dl.
BJOG 114:684, 2007
Zitiello A, Grant GE, Ben Ali N, et al: Thrombocytopaenia in pregnancy: the importance of differential
diagnosis during the COVID-19 pandemic. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med July 8, 2020 [Epub ahead
of print]
Zofkie AC, Schell RA, Spong CY, et al: Defining anemia in pregnancy. Abstract No. 512, Am J Obstet
Gynecol 222:S332, 2020

CHAPTER 60

Diabetes Mellitus

TYPES OF DIABETES
PREGESTATIONAL DIABETES
DIAGNOSIS
FETAL EFFECTS
MATERNAL EFFECTS
MANAGEMENT IN PREGNANCY
GESTATIONAL DIABETES
SCREENING AND DIAGNOSIS
MATERNAL AND FETAL EFFECTS
MANAGEMENT
REFERENCES
According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2020), nearly
27 million adults in the United States have been diagnosed with diabetes.
Another 7.3 million are suspected to be undiagnosed, and an estimated 88
million have prediabetes. Reasons for these substantial rates include an aging
population, which is more likely to develop type 2 diabetes; population
growth within minority groups at particular risk for type 2 diabetes; and a
dramatic rise in obesity rates. In 2019, almost three in 10 women were
considered obese prior to becoming pregnant (Driscoll, 2020). The strong

relationship between diabetes and the current obesity epidemic in the United
States underlines the critical need for diet and lifestyle interventions to
change the trajectory of both.

TYPES OF DIABETES
In nonpregnant individuals, the type of diabetes is based on its presumed
pathogenesis and its manifestations. Absolute insulin deficiency, which
generally is autoimmune in etiology, characterizes type 1 diabetes. In
contrast, insulin resistance, relative insulin deficiency, or elevated glucose
production characterizes type 2 diabetes (Table 60-1). Both types are
generally preceded by a period of abnormal glucose homeostasis often
referred to as prediabetes. Pancreatic β-cell destruction can begin at any age,
but type 1 diabetes is clinically apparent most often before age 30. Type 2
diabetes usually develops with advancing age but is increasingly identified
in younger obese adolescents. Etiological overlap in diabetes subtypes is
well established and has led to the proposal of a single classification system
centered on β-cell function along with the concept of individualized treatment
strategies (World Health Organization, 2020). Other forms of diabetes
include maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY). The more common
MODY type is in obese adolescents (TODAY Study Group, 2021). The less
common form is an autosomal dominant condition and characterized by mild
diabetes diagnosed in adolescence or young adulthood (Udler, 2020).
TABLE 60-1. Etiological Classification of Diabetes Mellitus

■ Classification During Pregnancy
Diabetes is the most common medical complication of pregnancy. Women
can be separated into those diagnosed with diabetes before pregnancy—
pregestational or overt diabetes, and those diagnosed during pregnancy—
gestational diabetes.
The proportion of pregnancies complicated by diabetes more than
doubled between 1994 and 2008, after which rates have leveled (Deputy,
2018; Jovanovič, 2015). In 2018, 7.6 percent of pregnant women in this
country had some form of diabetes (Martin, 2019). Prevalence is highest
among non-Hispanic blacks, Mexican-Americans, Puerto Rican-Americans,
and Native Americans (Powers, 2018).

■ White Classification
Until the mid-1990s, the classification system of Priscilla White (1978) for
diabetic pregnant women was the linchpin of management. Today, the White
classification is used less often but still provides simple, useful information
on pregnancy risks and prognosis (Bennett, 2015). Because most currently
cited literature also contains data from these older classifications, the one

previously recommended by the American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (1986) is shown in Table 60-2.
TABLE 60-2. Modified White Classification Scheme Used from 1986
Through 1994 for Diabetes Complicating Pregnancy

The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019a) no
longer recommends the White classification. The current focus is whether
diabetes antedates pregnancy or is first diagnosed during pregnancy. Many
now recommend the system proposed by the American Diabetes Association
(Table 60-3).
TABLE 60-3. Proposed Classification System for Diabetes in Pregnancy

PREGESTATIONAL DIABETES

Considering the previously mentioned high percentage of undiagnosed
diabetes, many women identified with gestational diabetes likely have
previously unrecognized type 2 diabetes. Indeed, 5 to 10 percent of women
with gestational diabetes are diagnosed with overt diabetes immediately
after pregnancy.

■ Diagnosis
Women with high plasma glucose levels, glucosuria, and ketoacidosis
present no diagnostic challenge. Women with a random plasma glucose level
>200 mg/dL plus classic signs and symptoms such as polydipsia, polyuria,
and unexplained weight loss, those with a fasting glucose level >125 mg/dL,
or those with a first-trimester glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1c) level of ≥6.5
percent are considered by the American Diabetes Association (2019) and the
World Health Organization (2019) to have overt diabetes first detected in
pregnancy.
Women with only minimal metabolic derangement may be more difficult
to identify. To diagnose overt diabetes in pregnancy, the International
Association of Diabetes and Pregnancy Study Groups (IADPSG) Consensus
Panel (2010) recognizes the threshold values found in Table 60-4 for fasting
or random plasma glucose and HbA1c levels at prenatal care initiation. The
American Diabetes Association (2020) and the World Health Organization
(2019) now also consider a plasma glucose level >200 mg/dL measured 2
hours after a 75-g oral glucose load to be diagnostic. No consensus has been
reached as to whether such testing should be universal or limited to those
women classified as high risk.
TABLE 60-4. Diagnosis of Overt Diabetes in Pregnancya

Regardless, a presumed diagnosis of overt diabetes in pregnancy based
on these thresholds should be confirmed postpartum. Risk factors for
impaired carbohydrate metabolism in pregnant women include a strong
familial history of diabetes, prior delivery of a large newborn, persistent
glucosuria, or unexplained fetal losses.

■ Harm in Pregnancy
With overt diabetes, the embryo, fetus, and mother frequently experience
serious complications directly attributable to diabetes (Egan, 2020). Many of
these complications might be prevented each year by preconceptional care
for improved glycemic control (Peterson, 2015). Using HbA1c values as
objective risk quartiles, Finneran and Kiefer (2020) reported that glycemic
control throughout pregnancy and a late-pregnancy HbA1c level <6.5 percent
leads to reduced rates of adverse obstetrical and neonatal outcomes. The
likelihood of successful outcomes with overt diabetes, however, is not
simply related to glucose control. The degree of underlying cardiovascular
or renal disease may be more important. Thus, advancing stages of the White
classification, seen in Table 60-2, are inversely related to favorable
pregnancy outcomes. Shown in Table 60-5 are data that chronicle the adverse
pregnancy outcomes with overt diabetes, and many are described next
(Battarbee, 2020b).
TABLE 60-5. Selected Maternal and Perinatal Outcomes in Percent in
Women with Gestational and Overt Diabetes Compared with Nondiabetic

Womena

■ Fetal Effects
Spontaneous Abortion
Up to 25 percent of overtly diabetic mothers have an early miscarriage, and
poor glycemic control is an associated factor. In one study, those whose
HbA1c concentrations were >12 percent or whose preprandial glucose
concentrations persisted above 120 mg/dL had an elevated miscarriage risk
(Galindo, 2006). In a large Chinese population-based study, those with a
history of diabetes had an increased risk of miscarriage, and the risk rose 8

percent for each 20-mg/dL incremental rise in fasting glucose (Wei, 2019). In
89 pregnancies in women with the monogenic form of MODY, only women
with the causative glucose kinase (GCK) mutation were more likely to
miscarry (Bacon, 2015). Another analysis of 128 GCK-MODY pregnancies
showed that the observed miscarriage rate was comparable to the
background rate (Dickson, 2019). These women have hyperglycemic
variability that can be difficult to control.

Preterm Delivery
Overt diabetes is an undisputed risk factor for preterm birth. In an analysis of
more than 500,000 pregnancies in Ontario, almost 20 percent of women with
diabetes were delivered preterm compared with 5.6 percent of women
without diabetes, obesity, or hypertension (Berger, 2020). More than 60
percent were indicated preterm births, that is, due to obstetrical or medical
complications. Notably, more than 37 percent of women with diabetes and
chronic hypertension delivered preterm. In a review of California births, 19
percent of women with pregestational diabetes delivered before 37 weeks’
gestation compared with 9 percent of controls (Yanit, 2012). In a study from
the United Kingdom, the preterm delivery rate was 42 percent for 8690 type
1 diabetic women and 3 percent for those with type 2 diabetes (Murphy,
2021).

Malformations
The incidence of major malformations in fetuses of women with type 1
diabetes approximates 11 percent and is at least double the rate in fetuses of
nondiabetic mothers (Jovanovič, 2015). This risk is present for all women
with pregestational diabetes, including those with type 2 disease (Tinker,
2020). Congenital anomalies constitute almost half of perinatal deaths in
diabetic pregnancies.
Cardiovascular malformations account for more than half of the
anomalies, and Table 60-6 lists selected malformations reported by the
National Birth Defects Prevention Study (Tinker, 2020). In a study of more
than 2 million births in Canada, the risk of an isolated cardiac defect was
fivefold higher in women with type 1 diabetes compared with nondiabetic
mothers (Liu, 2013). The caudal regression sequence, described in Chapter
15 (p. 280), is a rare malformation that, according to the National Birth

Defects Prevention Study, is 80 times more likely in women with
pregestational diabetes.
TABLE 60-6. Selected Congenital Malformations in Pregnancies
Complicated by Overt Diabetes

Poorly controlled diabetes, both preconceptionally and early in
pregnancy, is thought to underlie this elevated risk for major malformation. In
one study of mothers with type 1 diabetes, a periconceptional HbA1c <6.5
percent carried a twofold risk for a fetal major cardiac defect, and a HbA1c
>9 percent carried a sixfold risk (Ludvigsson, 2018). Others cite similar
frequencies (Murphy, 2021). Figure 60-1 shows the association between
HbA1c levels and fetal congenital malformation rates in a Parkland Hospital
cohort of women with overt diabetes (Martin, 2021).

FIGURE 60-1 Association between fetal malformation rates and HbA1c values determined at initiation
of prenatal care in 1573 pregnancies in women with pregestational diabetes.

The etiological mechanisms that explain this link include excess
production of toxic superoxide radicals, altered cell signaling pathways,
upregulation of some genes by hyperglycemia, and activation of programmed
cell death (Basu, 2018; Reece, 2012). One review of potential molecular
mechanisms suggests that cellular responses to oxidative stress represent
possible therapeutic targets to prevent diabetes-induced embryopathy (Yang,
2015).

Altered Fetal Growth
Diminished fetal growth may result from congenital malformations or from
substrate deprivation due to advanced maternal vascular disease. That said,
fetal overgrowth is more typical of pregestational diabetes. Maternal
hyperglycemia prompts fetal hyperinsulinemia, and this in turn stimulates
excessive somatic growth. Except for the brain, most fetal organs are
affected by the macrosomia that characterizes the fetus of diabetic women.
Newborns are described as anthropometrically different from other large-

for-gestational age (LGA) neonates (Catalano, 2003; Durnwald, 2004).
Specifically, those whose mothers are diabetic have excessive fat deposition
on the shoulders and trunk, which predisposes to shoulder dystocia or
fetopelvic disproportion (Fig. 60-2).

FIGURE 60-2 This 6050-g macrosomic neonate was born to a woman with gestational diabetes.

The incidence of macrosomia rises significantly when mean maternal
blood glucose concentrations chronically exceed 130 mg/dL (Hay, 2012). In
addition, the overall birthweight distribution of neonates of diabetic mothers
is skewed toward consistently heavier birthweights. In one sonographic
study, the macrosomia rates for Nordic women with type 1, type 2, or
gestational diabetes were 35, 28, and 24 percent, respectively (Hammoud,
2013). Moreover, the abdominal circumference grew disproportionately
larger in the diabetic groups. Analysis of head circumference/abdominal
circumference (HC/AC) ratios shows that this disproportionate growth
occurs mainly in diabetic pregnancies that ultimately yield macrosomic
newborns.

Unexplained Fetal Demise

The risk of fetal death is three to four times higher in women with
pregestational diabetes (Gardosi, 2013; Patel, 2015). In the United Kingdom
study of more than 17,000 pregnancies in women with pregestational
diabetes, the stillbirth incidence was similar in those with type 1 or type 2
diabetes—10.4 versus 13.5 per 1000 live and stillbirths, respectively
(Murphy, 2021). Stillbirth without an identifiable cause is a phenomenon
relatively limited to pregnancies complicated by overt diabetes. These
stillbirths are “unexplained” because common factors such as obvious
placental insufficiency, placental abruption, fetal-growth restriction, or
oligohydramnios are not identified. These fetuses are typically LGA and die
before labor, usually later in the third trimester.
These unexplained stillbirths are usually associated with poor glycemic
control. In one study, suboptimal glycemic control was identified in two
thirds of unexplained stillbirths between 1990 and 2000 (Lauenborg, 2003).
Fetuses of diabetic mothers also often have elevated lactic acid levels.
Salvesen and colleagues (1992, 1993) analyzed fetal blood samples and
reported that mean umbilical venous blood pH was lower in diabetic
pregnancies and was significantly related to fetal insulin levels. These
findings support a hypothesis that hyperglycemic-mediated chronic
aberrations in oxygen and fetal metabolite transport may underlie these
unexplained fetal deaths (Pedersen, 1977).
Maternal ketoacidosis also can cause fetal death (Bryant, 2017).
Moreover, stillbirths from placental insufficiency occur with increased
frequency in women with overt diabetes and are usually associated with
severe preeclampsia. In the prior cited California study, the fetal death risk
was sevenfold higher in women with hypertension and pregestational
diabetes compared with the threefold increased risk associated with diabetes
alone (Yanit, 2012). Stillbirth rates are also elevated in women with
advanced diabetes and vascular complications.

Hydramnios
Diabetic pregnancies are often complicated by excess amnionic fluid. In one
sonographic study, 18 percent of 314 pregnancies complicated by
pregestational diabetes were found to have hydramnios in the third trimester,
which was defined as an amnionic fluid index (AFI) >24 cm. Women with
elevated HbA1c values in the third trimester were more likely to have

hydramnios (Idris, 2010). In a similar study, poor maternal glucose control
was associated with macrosomia and hydramnios (Vink, 2006). A likely—
albeit unproven—explanation is that fetal hyperglycemia causes fetal
polyuria (Chap. 14, p. 256). In a study from Parkland Hospital, Dashe and
coworkers (2000) found that the AFI parallels the amnionic fluid glucose
level among women with diabetes.

Neonatal Effects
Before tests of fetal health and maturity became available, delivery before
term was deliberately selected for women with diabetes to avoid
unexplained stillbirth. Although this practice has been largely abandoned, a
higher frequency of preterm delivery in women with diabetes persists. One
analysis of early-term delivery (370/7 to 386/7 weeks) showed a 13-percent
reduction in such deliveries in women with diabetes between 2005 and 2011
(Little, 2015). Most indicated deliveries are prompted by advanced diabetes
with superimposed preeclampsia.
Although modern neonatal care has reduced neonatal death rates due to
immaturity, neonatal morbidity due to preterm birth continues to be a serious
consequence. In one Neonatal Research Network study of 10,781 extremely
preterm neonates, those born to diabetic women treated with insulin prior to
pregnancy were at greater risk for necrotizing enterocolitis and late-onset
sepsis than similarly aged neonates of mothers without diabetes (Boghossian,
2016).

Respiratory Distress Syndrome
Gestational age rather than overt diabetes is likely the most significant factor
associated with respiratory distress syndrome (Chap. 34, p. 615). Indeed, in
one analysis of 19,399 very-low-birthweight neonates delivered between 24
and 33 weeks’ gestation, rates of respiratory distress syndrome in newborns
of diabetic mothers were not higher compared with rates in neonates of
nondiabetic mothers (Bental, 2011). Diabetes does not appear to alter the
beneficial effects of antenatal corticosteroids to hasten lung maturity
(Battarbee, 2020a).

Hypoglycemia and Hypocalcemia

Newborns of a diabetic mother experience a rapid drop in plasma glucose
concentration after delivery. This is attributed to the hyperplasia of fetal βislet cells that is induced by chronic maternal hyperglycemia. Low glucose
concentrations—defined as <45 mg/dL—are particularly common in
newborns of women with unstable glucose concentrations during labor (van
Kempen, 2020). Preliminary observations showed that early-term fetuses
exposed to antenatal corticosteroids have a high rate of hypoglycemia
(Gupta, 2020). Frequent blood glucose measurements in the newborn and
active early feeding practices can mitigate this complication.
Hypocalcemia is defined as a total serum calcium concentration <8
mg/dL in term newborns. Early-onset hypocalcemia is one of the potential
metabolic derangements in neonates of diabetic mothers. Its cause is unclear.
Theories include altered magnesium–calcium economy, asphyxia, and
preterm birth. In one randomized study, 137 pregnant women with type 1
diabetes were managed with strict versus customary glucose control
(DeMarini, 1994). Almost a third of neonates in the customary control group
developed hypocalcemia compared with only 18 percent of those in the
strict-control group.

Hyperbilirubinemia and Polycythemia
The pathogenesis of hyperbilirubinemia in neonates of diabetic mothers is
uncertain. A major contributing factor is newborn polycythemia, which raises
the bilirubin load (Chap. 33, p. 606). Polycythemia is thought to be a fetal
response to relative hypoxia. According to Hay (2012), the sources of this
fetal hypoxia are hyperglycemia-mediated elevations in maternal affinity for
oxygen and fetal oxygen consumption. Together with insulin-like growth
factors, this hypoxia leads to elevated fetal erythropoietin levels and red cell
production.

Cardiomyopathy
Newborns of pregestational and gestational diabetic pregnancies frequently
have hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. This remodeling can be associated with
cardiac dysfunction (Aguilera, 2020; Depla, 2021). Huang and coworkers
(2013) propose that pathological ventricular hypertrophy in neonates born to
women with diabetes is due to insulin excess. In severe cases, this
cardiomyopathy may lead to obstructive cardiac failure. In one study, the

fetuses of 26 women with pregestational diabetes underwent serial
echocardiographic evaluation. In the first trimester, fetal diastolic
dysfunction was already evident in some. In the third trimester, the fetal
interventricular septum and right ventricular wall were thicker in fetuses of
diabetic mothers (Russell, 2008). Others report similar observations
(Aguilera, 2020). Most affected newborns are asymptomatic following birth,
and hypertrophy usually resolves in the months after delivery. Any long-term
adverse sequelae remain to be determined (Depla, 2021).

Long-term Cognitive Development
Intrauterine metabolic conditions are linked to neurodevelopment in
offspring. In a study of more than 700,000 Swedish men, the intelligence
quotient of those whose mothers had diabetes during pregnancy averaged 1 to
2 points lower (Fraser, 2014). DeBoer and associates (2005) demonstrated
impaired memory performance at age 1 year in infants of diabetic mothers.
Results from the Childhood Autism Risks from Genetics and the Environment
(CHARGE) study indicated that autism spectrum disorders or developmental
delay also were more common in children of diabetic women (Krakowiak,
2012). Adane and colleagues (2016) confirmed a consistent relationship
between maternal diabetes and diminished cognitive and language
development in studies of younger children but not older children. Because
interpreting effects of the intrauterine environment on neurodevelopment is
confounded by postnatal factors, the link between maternal diabetes,
glycemic control, and long-term neurocognitive outcome remains
unconfirmed.

Inheritance
The risk of developing type 1 diabetes if either parent is affected is 3 to 5
percent. Type 2 diabetes has a much stronger genetic component. If both
parents have type 2 diabetes, the risk of their offspring developing it
approaches 40 percent (Powers, 2018). Both types of diabetes develop after
a complex interplay between genetic predisposition and environmental
factors. Type 1 diabetes is prompted by environmental triggers such as
infection, diet, or toxins and is heralded by the appearance of islet-cell
autoantibodies in genetically vulnerable people (Pociot, 2016).

■ Maternal Effects
Diabetes and pregnancy can interact to an extent that maternal welfare can be
jeopardized. With the possible exception of diabetic retinopathy, however,
the long-term course of diabetes does not appear to be affected by pregnancy.
In one analysis of more than 800,000 pregnancies, the 1125 mothers with
type 1 diabetes had greater risks for hypertension and respiratory
complications than nondiabetic gravidas (Jovanovič, 2015). The 10,126
mothers with type 2 diabetes had an elevated risk for hypertension, infection,
depression, and cardiac or respiratory complications compared with
nondiabetic gravidas.
Maternal death is uncommon, but rates in women with diabetes are still
higher than those in unaffected gravidas. In one analysis of 972 women with
type 1 diabetes, the maternal mortality rate was 0.5 percent. Deaths stemmed
from diabetic ketoacidosis, hypoglycemia, hypertension, and infection
(Leinonen, 2001).

Preeclampsia
Pregnancy-associated hypertension is the complication that most often forces
preterm delivery in diabetic women. The incidence of chronic and
gestational hypertension—and especially preeclampsia—is remarkably
increased (Chap. 40, p. 690). In one metaanalysis of 92 studies, women with
pregestational diabetes had a nearly fourfold higher pooled relative risk for
preeclampsia (Bartsch, 2016). In the prior cited California study,
preeclampsia developed three to four times more often in women with overt
diabetes. Moreover, those diabetics with coexistent chronic hypertension
were almost 12 times more likely to develop preeclampsia (Yanit, 2012).
Women with type 1 diabetes in more advanced White classes typically
exhibit preexisting vascular complications and nephropathy. These women
are more likely to develop preeclampsia (Fig. 60-3). This rising risk may be
related to oxidative stress, which plays a key role in the pathogenesis of
diabetic complications and preeclampsia. With this in mind, the Diabetes and
Preeclampsia Intervention Trial (DAPIT) randomly assigned 762 women
with type 1 diabetes to antioxidant vitamin C and E supplementation or
placebo in the first half of pregnancy (McCance, 2010). Preeclampsia rates
were not improved except in the few with a low antioxidant status at
baseline.

FIGURE 60-3 Incidence of preeclampsia in 491 women with type 1 diabetes stratefied by diabetic
class in Sweden and the United States. (Data from Hansona, 1993; Sibaib, 2000.)

Preventively, low-dose aspirin prophylaxis is recommended in women at
high risk of preeclampsia, which includes those with type 1 or type 2
diabetes (Chap. 40, p. 705). An 81-mg oral daily dose is initiated between
12 and 28 weeks’ gestation and is continued until delivery (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020a).

Diabetic Nephropathy
Diabetes is the leading cause of end-stage renal disease in the United States
(Chap. 56, p. 1003). Clinically detectable nephropathy begins with
microalbuminuria, recognized as 30 to 300 mg of protein in a 24-hour urine
collection specimen. This may manifest as early as 5 years after diabetes
onset. Macroalbuminuria—more than 300 mg in a 24-hour collection
specimen—develops in patients destined to have end-stage renal disease.
Hypertension almost invariably develops during this period, and renal failure
ensues typically in the next 5 to 10 years. The incidence of overt proteinuria
is nearly 30 percent in individuals with type 1 diabetes and ranges from 4 to
20 percent in those with type 2 diabetes (Reutens, 2013). Regression is
common, presumably from improved glucose control.
Approximately 5 percent of gravidas with overt diabetes already have
renal involvement (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists,

2020c). As many as 40 percent of these will develop preeclampsia (Vidaeff,
2008). In addition, Ambia and associates (2020) reported that the rates of
preterm delivery, preeclampsia, and fetal-growth restriction were
significantly higher in diabetic women with proteinuria >300 mg/d compared
with rates in diabetic gravidas whose 24-hour protein excretion was <300
mg/d.
In general, pregnancy does not appear to worsen diabetic nephropathy. In
one prospective study of 43 women with diabetes, diabetic nephropathy did
not progress through 12 months after delivery (Young, 2012). Most of these
women had only mild renal impairment. Conversely, pregnant women with
moderate to severe renal impairment may have accelerated progression of
their disease (Vidaeff, 2008). As in women with glomerulopathies,
hypertension or substantial proteinuria before or during pregnancy is a major
predictive factor for ultimate progression to renal failure in women with
diabetic nephropathy.

Diabetic Retinopathy
Retinal vasculopathy is a highly specific complication of both type 1 and
type 2 diabetes. In the United States, diabetic retinopathy is the most
important cause of visual impairment in working-aged adults. The first and
most common visible lesions are small microaneurysms followed by blot
hemorrhages that form when erythrocytes escape from the aneurysms. These
areas leak serous fluid that creates hard exudates. Such features are termed
background or nonproliferative retinopathy.
With increasingly severe retinopathy, the abnormal vessels of background
eye disease become occluded. This leads to retinal ischemia and infarctions
that appear as cotton wool exudates. These are considered preproliferative
retinopathy. In response to ischemia, neovascularization begins on the retinal
surface and out into the vitreous cavity. Vision is obscured when these
vessels bleed. Laser photocoagulation before hemorrhage reduces the rate of
visual loss progression and blindness by half. The procedure may be
performed during pregnancy when indicated.
In one study of nearly 500 pregnancies in women with type 1 diabetes, a
third had prepregnancy retinopathy and 16 percent of these showed
worsening (Bourry, 2021). Almost 25 percent of those without prepregnancy
retinopathy developed disease during pregnancy. Fortunately, development of

sight-threatening retinopathy was rare, and only 4 percent of patients
followed postpartum had progression of disease.
Another group of investigators evaluated 80 women with type 2 diabetes
and identified retinopathy, mostly mild, in 14 percent during early pregnancy
(Rasmussen, 2010). Progression was identified in 14 percent.
Other risk factors that have been associated with progression of
retinopathy include hypertension, higher levels of insulin-like growth factor
1, placental growth factor, and macular edema identified in early pregnancy
(Huang, 2015; Vestgaard, 2010). The American Academy of Ophthalmology
(2019) recommends that pregnant women with overt diabetes should be
offered retinal assessment after the first prenatal visit. Subsequent eye
examinations depend on severity of retinopathy and level of glucose control.
Currently, most agree that laser photocoagulation and good glycemic control
during pregnancy minimize the potential for deleterious effects of pregnancy.
Ironically, “acute” rigorous metabolic control during pregnancy has been
linked to acute worsening of retinopathy. In a study of 201 women with
retinopathy, almost 30 percent suffered eye disease progression during
pregnancy despite intensive glucose control (McElvy, 2001). That said,
Wang and coworkers (1993) observed that although retinopathy worsened
during the critical months of rigorous glucose control, long-term progression
of eye disease actually slowed.

Diabetic Neuropathy
Peripheral, symmetrical sensorimotor diabetic neuropathy is uncommon in
pregnant women. However, one form of this, diabetic gastropathy, can be
troublesome during pregnancy. It causes nausea and vomiting, nutritional
problems, and difficult glucose control. Affected women are advised that this
complication is associated with a high risk of morbidity and poor perinatal
outcome (Kitzmiller, 2008). Treatment with metoclopramide and dopamine
D2 receptor antagonists is sometimes successful. Gastric neurostimulators
have shown success during pregnancy (Fuglsang, 2015). Treatment of
hyperemesis gravidarum can be challenging, and we routinely provide
insulin initially by continuous infusion for diabetic women who are admitted
with this condition (Chap. 57, p. 1015).

Diabetic Ketoacidosis

This serious complication develops in approximately 1 percent of diabetic
pregnancies and is most often encountered in women with type 1 diabetes
(Ehrmann, 2020). It is increasingly being reported in women with type 2 or
even those with gestational diabetes (Bryant, 2017; Sibai, 2014). Diabetic
ketoacidosis (DKA) may develop with hyperemesis gravidarum, infection,
insulin noncompliance, insulin pump failures, β-mimetic drugs given for
tocolysis, and corticosteroids given to induce fetal lung maturation. DKA
results from an insulin deficiency combined with an excess in counterregulatory hormones such as glucagon. This leads to gluconeogenesis and
ketone body formation. The ketone body β-hydroxybutyrate is synthesized at
a much greater rate than acetoacetate, which is preferentially detected by
commonly used ketosis-detection methods. Thus, serum or plasma assays for
β-hydroxybutyrate more accurately reflect true ketone body levels.
The maternal mortality rate with DKA is <1 percent, but perinatal
mortality rates associated with a single episode of DKA may reach 35
percent (Bryant, 2017; Guntupalli, 2015). Noncompliance is a prominent
factor, and this and DKA were historically considered prognostically bad
signs in pregnancy (Pedersen, 1974). Importantly, pregnant women usually
develop DKA at lower blood glucose thresholds than when nonpregnant. In a
study from Parkland Hospital, the mean glucose level for pregnant women
with DKA was 380 mg/dL, and the mean HbA1C value was 10 percent
(Bryant, 2017). Euglycemic ketoacidosis during pregnancy also is possible
but is rare (Sibai, 2014; Smati, 2020).
One management protocol for diabetic ketoacidosis is shown in Table
60-7. An important cornerstone of management is vigorous rehydration with
crystalloid solutions of normal saline or Ringer lactate.
TABLE 60-7. Management of Diabetic Ketoacidosis During Pregnancy

Infections
The rates of many infections are higher in diabetic pregnant women. Common
ones include candidal vulvovaginitis, bacterial urinary and respiratory tract
infections, and puerperal pelvic sepsis. However, in one study of more than
1250 diabetic gravidas screened before 16 weeks’ gestation, rates of
bacterial vaginosis or vaginal colonization with Candida or Trichomonas
species were not increased (Marschalek, 2016).
In one population-based study of almost 200,000 pregnancies, the risk of
asymptomatic bacteriuria in women with diabetes was increased twofold
(Sheiner, 2009). Another study found positive urine culture results in 25
percent of diabetic women (Alvarez, 2010). In a 2-year analysis of
pyelonephritis in pregnant women at Parkland Hospital, 5 percent with
diabetes developed pyelonephritis compared with 1.3 percent without

diabetes (Hill, 2005). Rates of urinary tract infections can be minimized by
screening and eradicating asymptomatic bacteriuria (Chap. 56, p. 995).
Last, Johnston and colleagues (2017) reported that 16.5 percent of
women with pregestational diabetes had postoperative wound complications
following cesarean delivery. Prevention options are described in Chapter 30
(p. 550).

■ Preconceptional Care
Because of the close relationship between pregnancy complications and
maternal glycemic control, efforts to achieve glucose targets are typically
more aggressive during pregnancy. Unfortunately, nearly half of pregnancies
in the United States are unplanned, and diabetic women frequently begin
pregnancy with suboptimal glucose control (Finer, 2016; Kim, 2005).
Management preferably should begin before pregnancy and then include
specific goals during each trimester.
To minimize early pregnancy loss and congenital malformations, the
National Preconception Health and Healthcare Initiative Clinical Workgroup
established values for optimal glycemic control before conception (Frayne,
2016). This was defined as a HbA1c level <6.5 percent in women with
pregestational diabetes. The American Diabetes Association (2017b) has
also defined optimal preconceptional glucose control in those using insulin.
Reflective values are self-monitored preprandial glucose levels of 70 to 100
mg/dL, peak 2-hour postprandial values of 100 to 120 mg/dL, and mean daily
glucose concentrations <110 mg/dL.
In one prospective population-based study of 933 pregnant women with
type 1 diabetes, the risk of congenital malformations was not demonstrably
higher with HbA1c levels <6.9 percent compared with the risk in more than
70,000 nondiabetic gravidas (Jensen, 2010). However, a substantial fourfold
greater risk for malformations was found for HbA1c levels >10 percent (see
Fig. 60-1). Another study found fewer adverse outcomes with improved
HbA1c values from conception to midpregnancy (Davidson, 2020).
If indicated, evaluation and treatment for diabetic complications such as
retinopathy or nephropathy should be instituted before pregnancy. Last,
folate, 400 μg/d orally, is given periconceptionally and during early
pregnancy to decrease the risk of neural-tube defects (Egan, 2020).

■ First-trimester Care
Careful monitoring of glucose control is essential. For this reason, we
routinely hospitalize women with overt diabetes during early pregnancy to
initiate an individualized glucose control program and provide education.
This also affords an opportunity to assess the extent of diabetic vascular
complications and precisely establish gestational age. The checklist
provided by the Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine (2020) is helpful.
Some initial evaluations done at Parkland Hospital include assessment of 24hour urine protein excretion and serum creatinine level, retinal examination,
and echocardiogram if chronic hypertension is comorbid.
First-trimester screening for aneuploidy may include measurement of
maternal serum pregnancy-associated plasma protein A (PAPP-A), β-human
chorionic gonadotropin (hCG), and ultrasound measurement of fetal nuchal
translucency (Chap. 17, p. 333). Noninvasive prenatal testing with cell-free
DNA also is suitable. Although initially thought not to be different in women
with pregestational diabetes, one analysis of more than 100 insulin-treated
women identified reductions in median PAPP-A and β-hCG levels compared
with gravidas without diabetes (Gurram, 2014). Not surprisingly, they
detected no difference in nuchal translucency measurements. When
calculating aneuploidy risks in women with diabetes, these differences
should be considered.

■ Insulin Treatment
The gravida with overt diabetes is best treated with insulin. Although oral
hypoglycemic agents have been used successfully for gestational diabetes (p.
1083), these agents are not currently recommended for overt diabetes,
despite some controversy (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2020c). In an international, placebo-controlled trial including
502 insulin-treated women with type 2 diabetes, adjunctive metformin
therapy was associated with improved glycemic control, reduced maternal
weight gain, lower cesarean delivery rate, and less neonatal adiposity (Feig,
2020). Importantly, the proportion of small-for-gestational age newborns was
higher in the insulin plus metformin group, but the rate of composite serious
neonatal outcomes was not increased compared with those receiving insulin
plus placebo.

Maternal glycemic control can usually be achieved with multiple daily
insulin injections and adjustment of dietary intake. Table 60-8 lists the action
profiles of common short- and long-acting insulins (Powers, 2018).
Subcutaneous insulin infusion by a calibrated pump does not yield better
pregnancy outcomes compared with multiple daily injections. However, an
infusion pump is a safe alternative in appropriately selected patients (Farrar,
2016). With the advent of sensor-augmented insulin pumps and closed-loop
insulin delivery systems, improved glycemic control with either manual or
computer-generated insulin adjustments based on continuous glucose
monitoring is now possible (Bergenstal, 2021; Stewart, 2016). In one study
of insulin pump use in women with type 1 diabetes, total daily insulin doses
declined in the first trimester but later rose more than threefold. Postprandial
glucose elevations prompted most of the required daily-dose increases
(Roeder, 2012). If a continuous-infusion insulin pump is elected, initiation
prepregnancy may help avoid hypoglycemia and ketoacidosis risks
associated with the device’s learning curve (Sibai, 2014).
TABLE 60-8. Action Profiles of Commonly Used Insulins

Monitoring
Self-monitoring of capillary glucose levels using a glucometer is
recommended because this involves the woman in her own care (Dong,
2020). The American Diabetes Association (2017b) recommends fasting and
postprandial glucose monitoring, and Table 60-9 lists glucose goals
recommended in pregnancy. Currently not standard care, one study showed
that longitudinal HbA1c values could be used for risk stratification (Finneran,
2020). Advances in noninvasive glucose monitoring will undoubtedly render
intermittent capillary glucose monitoring obsolete. Subcutaneous continuous
glucose monitoring devices have shown that pregnant women with diabetes
experience significant periods of daytime hyperglycemia and nocturnal
hypoglycemia that are undetected by traditional monitoring (Combs, 2012).
Such glucose monitoring systems, coupled with a continuous insulin pump,
offer the potential of an “artificial pancreas” to avoid hypo- or
hyperglycemia during pregnancy (Bergenstal, 2021).
TABLE 60-9. Self-Monitored Capillary Blood Glucose Goals

Diet
Nutritional planning includes appropriate weight gain through carbohydrate
and caloric modifications based on height, weight, and degree of glucose
intolerance (American Diabetes Association, 2017b; Egan, 2020). The mix
of carbohydrate, protein, and fat is adjusted to meet the metabolic goals and
individual patient preferences. A minimum of 175 g/d of carbohydrates
ideally is provided. In one analysis of more than 200 obese pregnant women
with glucose intolerance, a lower carbohydrate intake, particularly late in

pregnancy, was associated with lower fat mass in offspring at birth (Renault,
2015). Allotted carbohydrates are distributed throughout the day in three
small- to moderate-sized meals and two to four snacks. Weight loss is not
recommended, but modest caloric restriction may be appropriate for
overweight or obese women. An ideal dietary composition is 55 percent
carbohydrate, 20 percent protein, and 25 percent fat, of which <10 percent is
saturated fat.

Hypoglycemia
Diabetic control can be unstable in the first half of pregnancy, and the
incidence of hypoglycemia peaks during the first trimester. One study found
hypoglycemic events—blood glucose values <40 mg/dL—in 37 of 60 women
with type 1 diabetes. A fourth of these were considered severe because the
women were unable to treat their own symptoms and required assistance
from another person (Chen, 2007). Caution is recommended when
attempting to achieve euglycemia in women with recurrent episodes of
hypoglycemia.
From one Cochrane database review, loose glycemic control, defined as
fasting glucose values >120 mg/dL, was associated with greater risks for
preeclampsia, cesarean delivery, and birthweight >90th percentile compared
with women with tight or moderate control (Middleton, 2016). With very
tight control, defined by fasting values <90 mg/dL, no obvious benefits were
gained, but the number of cases of hypoglycemia increased.

■ Second-trimester Care
Maternal serum alpha-fetoprotein determination at 16 to 20 weeks’ gestation
is used in association with targeted sonographic examination to detect
neural-tube defects and other anomalies (Chap. 17, p. 338). These serum
levels may be lower in diabetic pregnancies, and interpretation is altered
accordingly. Because the incidence of congenital cardiac anomalies shown in
Table 60-6 is increased fivefold in mothers with diabetes, fetal
echocardiography is an important part of second-trimester sonographic
evaluation (Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, 2020). Dashe and
coworkers (2009) cautioned that detection of fetal anomalies in obese
diabetic women is more difficult than in similarly sized women without
diabetes.

Regarding second-trimester glucose control, normoglycemia with selfmonitoring continues to be the goal. After the first trimester’s glucose
instability, a stable period ensues. This is then followed by higher insulin
requirements. These stem from the enhanced peripheral resistance to insulin
that is related to pregnancy and is described in Chapter 4 (p. 57).
Although most women with pregestational diabetes require a higher total
daily insulin dose with advancing gestational age, a small proportion will
experience a reduction in their daily dose later in pregnancy. The
significance of this drop remains uncertain. One Australian study evaluated
women with falling insulin requirements (FIR), defined as a ≥15 percent
drop in the peak total daily insulin dose after 20 weeks’ gestation
(Padmanabhan, 2017). In 158 women with type 1 and type 2 diabetes and
FIR, the risk for a composite of adverse outcomes indicative of placental
insufficiency was fourfold greater than in those without FIR. The composite
primary outcome included preeclampsia, fetal-growth disorders, delivery
before 30 weeks’ gestation, placental abruption, and fetal death before 20
weeks. FIR was more common in women with type 1 diabetes.

■ Third-trimester Care and Delivery
During the past several decades, the threat of late-pregnancy stillbirth in
women with diabetes prompted recommendations for various fetal
surveillance programs beginning in the third trimester. Such protocols
include fetal movement counting, periodic fetal heart rate monitoring,
intermittent biophysical profile evaluation, and contraction stress testing
(Chap. 20, p. 384). None of these techniques has been subjected to
prospective randomized clinical trials, and their primary value seems related
to their low false-negative rates. The American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2020c, 2021) suggests initiating such testing at 32 to 34
weeks’ gestation. With reassuring testing and no other complications,
delivery is anticipated between 390/7 and 396/7 weeks.
At Parkland Hospital, women with diabetes are seen in a specialized
Maternal–Fetal Medicine clinic every 2 weeks. During these visits, glycemic
control records are evaluated, and insulin doses are adjusted. Women are
routinely instructed to perform fetal kick counts beginning early in the third
trimester. At 34 weeks’ gestation, admission to our High-Risk Pregnancy
Unit is offered to all insulin-treated women. Approximately half of these

women choose admission. While in the hospital, they continue daily fetal
movement counts and undergo fetal heart rate monitoring three times a week.
With no other complications, delivery at Parkland is typically planned for 38
weeks.
At the University of Alabama at Birmingham, weekly antenatal testing is
initiated no later than 34 weeks’ gestation. Twice-weekly testing is reserved
for those with poorly controlled diabetes or supervening medical or
obstetrical complications. Delivery is planned for 39 weeks’ gestation in
those with good glycemic control and reassuring antenatal testing. Earlier
delivery is planned for those with poor glycemic control or significant
comorbidities.
For vaginal delivery, labor induction may be attempted when the fetus is
not excessively large and the cervix is considered favorable (Chap. 26, p.
486). Cesarean delivery at or near term has frequently been used to avoid the
traumatic birth of a large fetus in a woman with diabetes. In women with
more advanced diabetes, especially those with vascular disease, the reduced
likelihood of successful labor induction remote from term has also
contributed to an increased cesarean delivery rate.
In an analysis of pregnancy outcomes of diabetic women from University
of Alabama at Birmingham according to the White classification, the rates of
cesarean delivery and preeclampsia escalated with White class (Bennett,
2015). In another study, a HbA1c level >6.4 percent at delivery was
independently associated with urgent cesarean delivery (Miailhe, 2013).
This suggests that tighter glycemic control during the third trimester might
reduce late fetal compromise and cesarean delivery for fetal indications.
Many of these women have undergone prior cesarean delivery. Somewhat
related to this, the cesarean delivery rate for women with overt diabetes has
remained at approximately 80 percent for the past 40 years at Parkland
Hospital.
Reducing or withholding the dose of long-acting insulin on the day of
delivery is recommended. Regular insulin should be used to meet most or all
of the insulin needs of the mother during this time, because insulin
requirements typically drop markedly after delivery. During labor,
continuous insulin infusion by calibrated intravenous pump is most
satisfactory (Table 60-10). The woman should be adequately hydrated
intravenously and given glucose in sufficient amounts to maintain euglycemia.

Capillary or plasma glucose levels are checked hourly during active labor,
and regular insulin is administered accordingly.
TABLE 60-10. Insulin Management for Labor Induction or Scheduled
Cesarean Delivery

■ Puerperium
Often, many diabetic women may require virtually no insulin for the first 24
hours or more postpartum. Subsequently, insulin requirements may fluctuate
markedly during the next few days. Infection must be promptly detected and
treated. When appropriate, oral agents can be restarted. For type 2 diabetic
women who will be transitioned to oral agents, this can be done on
postoperative day 1.
Counseling in the puerperium should include a discussion of birth
control. Effective contraception is especially important in women with overt
diabetes to allow optimal glucose control before subsequent conception
(Chap. 38, p. 664).

GESTATIONAL DIABETES
In the United States in 2016, almost 6 percent of pregnancies were
complicated by gestational diabetes (Deputy, 2018). Worldwide, its
prevalence differs according to race, ethnicity, age, and body composition
and by screening and diagnostic criteria. As discussed in the following
sections, several persisting controversies pertain to the diagnosis and
treatment of gestational diabetes.
The word gestational implies that diabetes is induced by pregnancy—
ostensibly because of exaggerated physiological changes in glucose
metabolism (Chap. 4, p. 57). Gestational diabetes is defined as carbohydrate
intolerance of variable severity with its onset or first recognition during

pregnancy (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019a).
This definition applies whether or not insulin is used for treatment and
undoubtedly includes some women with previously unrecognized overt
diabetes.
The term gestational diabetes aims to communicate the need for
enhanced surveillance during pregnancy and to stimulate further testing
postpartum. The most important perinatal correlate is excessive fetal growth,
which may result in both maternal and fetal birth trauma. The likelihood of
fetal death with appropriately treated gestational diabetes is not different
from that in the general population. More than half of women with gestational
diabetes ultimately develop overt diabetes in the ensuing 20 years.
Moreover, mounting evidence implicates long-range complications that
include obesity and diabetes in their offspring.

■ Screening and Diagnosis
Despite almost 50 years of research, there is still no agreement on the
optimal screening method for gestational diabetes. The difficulty in achieving
consensus is underscored by the controversy following publication of the
single-step approach shown in Table 60-11, which assesses the glucose
values following a 75-g oral glucose load. This strategy is espoused by the
International Association of Diabetes and Pregnancy Study Groups
Consensus Panel (2010) and was greatly influenced by results of the
Hypoglycemia and Pregnancy Outcomes (HAPO) study, described
subsequently. Although the American Diabetes Association (2019) supports
this new scheme, the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
(2019a) continues to recommend a two-step approach to screen and then
diagnose gestational diabetes. Similarly, the National Institutes of Health
(NIH) Consensus Development Conference in 2013 concluded that evidence
is insufficient to adopt a one-step approach.
TABLE 60-12. Risk-Based Recommended Screening Strategy for Detecting
GDMa

The recommended two-step approach begins with either universal or
risk-based selective screening using a 50-g, 1-hour oral glucose challenge
test. Participants in the Fifth International Workshop Conferences on
Gestational Diabetes endorsed use of selective screening criteria shown in
Table 60-12 (Metzger, 1998). Conversely, the American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019a) recommends universal screening
of pregnant women with a protocol that provides a 50-g oral glucose load
and that is followed in 1 hour by a laboratory-based blood glucose test. It is
suggested that attempts to identify the minority of women who should not be
screened would add unnecessary complexity. Screening should be performed
between 24 and 28 weeks’ gestation in those women not known to have
glucose intolerance earlier in pregnancy. This 50-g screening test is
followed by a diagnostic 100-g, 3-hour oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT)

if screening results meet or exceed a predetermined plasma glucose
concentration.
TABLE 60-11. Threshold Values for Diagnosis of Gestational Diabetes
with 75-g OGTT

For the 50-g screening test, the plasma glucose level is measured 1 hour
after a 50-g oral glucose load without regard to the time of day or time of last
meal. In an earlier review, the pooled sensitivity for a threshold of 140
mg/dL ranged from 74 to 83 percent depending on 100-g thresholds used for
diagnosis (van Leeuwen, 2012). Sensitivity estimates for a 50-g screen
threshold of 135 mg/dL improved only slightly to 78 to 85 percent, but
specificity dropped from a range of 72 to 85 percent for 140 mg/dL to 65 to
81 percent. Using a threshold of 130 mg/dL marginally improves sensitivity
with a further decline in specificity (Donovan, 2013). In the absence of clear
evidence supporting one cutoff value over another, the American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019a) sanctions using any one of these
three 50-g screen thresholds. At Parkland Hospital, we continue to use 140
mg/dL as the screening threshold to prompt the 100-g test. The threshold used
at the University of Alabama at Birmingham is 135 mg/dL.

Justification for screening and treatment of women with gestational
diabetes was strengthened by a randomized treatment trial in 1000 women
(Crowther, 2005). Women diagnosed with gestational diabetes after a 75-g
OGTT and assigned to receive dietary advice with blood glucose monitoring
plus insulin therapy were compared with a cohort assigned to usual prenatal
care. The former group had a significantly lower risk of a composite
perinatal adverse outcome that included death, shoulder dystocia, bone
fracture, and nerve palsy. Macrosomia defined by birthweight ≥4000 g
complicated 10 percent of deliveries in the intervention group compared
with 21 percent in the routine prenatal care group. Cesarean delivery rates
were almost identical in the two study groups.
Slightly different results were reported by the Maternal–Fetal Medicine
Units Network randomized trial of 958 women identified with mild
gestational diabetes using a two-step screening and diagnosis approach
(Landon, 2009). They reported no differences in rates of composite
morbidity that included stillbirth, birth trauma, and neonatal hypoglycemia,
hyperinsulinemia, and hyperbilirubinemia. Secondary analyses did
demonstrate a 50-percent reduction in macrosomia, fewer cesarean
deliveries, and a significant decrease in shoulder dystocia rate—1.5 versus 4
percent—in treated versus routine care groups.
Based largely on these two landmark studies, the U.S. Preventive
Services Task Force (2021) recommends universal screening in low-risk
women after 24 weeks’ gestation. However, the Task Force concluded that
evidence is insufficient to assess the balance of benefits versus harms of
screening before 24 weeks. Earlier screening in obese women did not result
in better outcomes (Harper, 2020).
The optimal OGTT to identify gestational diabetes also is debated.
Proposed criteria for interpretation of the diagnostic 100-g OGTT are shown
in Table 60-13. Criteria for the 75-g OGTT are shown in Table 60-11. A
secondary analysis of the Maternal-Fetal Medicine Units Network treatment
trial showed that women diagnosed with either the National Diabetes Data
Group (NDDG) or the Carpenter-Coustan criteria benefited from treatment
(Harper, 2016). However, the number needed to treat to prevent a shoulder
dystocia was higher for the Carpenter-Coustan criteria. Others report similar
observations (Ghaffari, 2020). At Parkland Hospital, we use the NDDG
criteria for diagnosis, whereas Carpenter-Coustan criteria are preferred at
the University of Alabama at Birmingham.

TABLE 60-13. Diagnosis of Gestational Diabetes Mellitus Using
Threshold Glucose Values from 100-g Oral Glucose Tolerance Testa,b

Controversies of Screening and Diagnosis
The HAPO study was a 7-year international epidemiological study of 23,325
pregnant women at 15 centers in nine countries analyzing the association of
various levels of glucose intolerance during the third trimester with adverse
perinatal outcomes (HAPO Study Cooperative Research Group, 2008).
Blood glucose levels were stratified into seven categories (Fig. 60-4). These
values were then correlated with rates for birthweight >90th percentile,
primary cesarean delivery, neonatal hypoglycemia, and cord serum Cpeptide levels >90th percentile. Cord serum C-peptide is secreted in
equimolar concentrations with insulin and reflects fetal β-islet cell function.
Findings generally supported the supposition that increasing plasma glucose
levels were associated with increasing adverse outcomes.

FIGURE 60-4 Hyperglycemia and Adverse Pregnancy Outcome (HAPO) Study. The frequency of
newborn birthweight ≥90th percentile for gestational age plotted against glucose levels fasting and at 1and 2-hr intervals following a 75-g oral glucose load. LGA = large for gestational age. (Reproduced with
permission from HAPO Study Cooperative Research Group, Metzger BE, Lowe LP, et al:
Hyperglycemia and adverse pregnancy outcomes, N Engl J Med. 2008 May 8;358(19):1991–2002.)

The International Association of Diabetes and Pregnancy Study
Group
This workshop conference in 2008 concerned the diagnosis and
classification of gestational diabetes. After reviewing the results of the
HAPO study, a panel developed recommendations for the diagnosis and
classification of hyperglycemia during pregnancy. This panel allowed for the
diagnosis of overt diabetes during pregnancy as shown in Table 60-4. It also
recommended a single-step approach to the diagnosis of gestational diabetes
using the 75-g, 2-hour OGTT and thresholds derived using an arbitrary 1.75
odds ratio of outcomes such as LGA birthweight and cord serum C-peptide
levels >90th percentile. Only one of these thresholds, shown in Table 60-11,
would need to be met or exceeded to make the diagnosis of gestational
diabetes.

During their deliberations, the IADPSG estimated that implementation of
these recommendations would raise the prevalence of gestational diabetes in
the United States to 17.8 percent! Said another way, using this approach, the
number of women with mild gestational diabetes would increase almost
threefold with no evidence of treatment benefit (Cundy, 2012). Feldman and
coworkers (2016) evaluated the implementation of the IADPSG paradigm in
a before-after analysis that included more than 6000 women. Compared with
a two-step approach, the new strategy was associated with a significant rise
in gestational diabetes diagnosis rates but not with reduced macrosomia
rates. Remarkably, they identified a higher primary cesarean delivery rate
associated with adoption of the IADPSG recommendations. The American
Diabetes Association (2013, 2019) initially recommended adopting this new
approach, based on benefits inferred from trials in women identified using a
two-step approach described earlier. However, it now concludes that data
also support a two-step strategy.

NIH Consensus Development Conference
Prompted by these disparate recommendations, the NIH Consensus
Development Conference on Diagnosing Gestational Diabetes Mellitus
(2013) was convened. The panel found insufficient evidence to adopt the
one-step diagnostic process proposed by the IADPSG and recommended
continuation of the two-step approach. The Consensus Conference panel did
also suggest that further studies resolving the beneficial uncertainties
associated with the one-step approach could warrant revision of their
conclusions.
A recent trial compared the IADPSG single-step approach to the more
traditional two-step approach in almost 24,000 women (Hillier, 2021).
Consistent with the IADPSG prediction, the incidence of gestational diabetes
was 16.5 percent in those who underwent single-step testing compared with
8.5 percent in women assigned to two-step testing. However, incidences of
hypertensive disorders of pregnancy, primary cesarean delivery, LGA
newborns, and/or a perinatal composite outcome including measures of birth
trauma and perinatal death were not materially different between testing
groups. Thus, this large and pragmatic trial does not show maternal or
perinatal benefit and thus does not justify the increased patient and healthcare
costs of broadening the diagnosis of gestational diabetes using the proposed
single-step approach (Casey, 2021).

■ Maternal and Fetal Effects
Adverse consequences of gestational diabetes differ from those of
pregestational diabetes (see Table 60-5). Similar to women with overt
diabetes, adverse maternal effects associated with gestational diabetes
include a higher frequency of hypertension and cesarean delivery.
Unlike women with overt diabetes, women with gestational diabetes do
not appear to have fetuses with substantially higher rates of anomalies than
the general obstetrical population (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2019a; Sheffield, 2002). In a study of more than 1 million
women from the Swedish Medical Birth Registry, major malformation rates
were marginally elevated in fetuses of gestational diabetics compared with
those of nondiabetic controls—2.3 versus 1.8 percent (Fadl, 2010).
From this Registry, the stillbirth rate was not higher. Additionally, the
stillbirth rate was not increased in an analysis of more than 800,000
pregnancies from 2005 through 2011 (Jovanovič, 2015). That said, women
with elevated fasting glucose levels have elevated rates of unexplained
stillbirths similar to those of women with overt diabetes. This increasing risk
with progressive maternal hyperglycemia emphasizes the importance of
identifying women with evidence of preexisting diabetes early in pregnancy
(see Table 60-4).

Fetal Macrosomia
The primary effect attributed to gestational diabetes is excessive fetal size
that is variably defined and discussed in Chapter 47 (p. 832). The perinatal
goal is to avoid difficult delivery from macrosomia and concomitant birth
trauma associated with shoulder dystocia. In one analysis of more than
80,000 vaginal births in Chinese women, the calculated risk for shoulder
dystocia in newborns weighing ≥4200 g was 76-fold greater than the risk in
those weighing <3500 g (Cheng, 2013). However, the odds ratio for shoulder
dystocia in women with diabetes was <2. Said another way, although
gestational diabetes is certainly a risk factor, it accounts for only a small
number of pregnancies complicated by shoulder dystocia.
One study identified shoulder dystocia in approximately 4 percent of
women with mild gestational diabetes compared with <1 percent of women
with a 50-g glucose screen result <120 mg/dL (Landon, 2011). The excessive
shoulder and trunk fat that commonly characterizes the macrosomic newborn

of a diabetic mother predisposes such neonates to shoulder dystocia or
cesarean delivery (Durnwald, 2004; McFarland, 2000). However, one
prospective study of fetal adipose measurements demonstrated no differences
between measurements in 630 offspring of women with gestational diabetes
and 142 without diabetes (Buhling, 2012). The authors attributed this
negative finding to successful treatment of gestational diabetes.
Insulin-like growth factors also influence fetal growth. These
proinsulin-like polypeptides are produced by virtually all fetal organs and
are potent stimulators of cell differentiation and division. Although not a
current clinical tool, one study found that maternal insulin-like growth factor
1 levels strongly correlated with birthweight (Luo, 2012). The HAPO Study
Cooperative Research Group (2008) also found dramatic elevations in cord
serum C-peptide levels associated with rising maternal glucose levels
following a 75-g OGTT. C-peptide levels >90th percentile were found in
almost a third of newborns in the highest glucose categories. Other factors
implicated in macrosomia include epidermal growth factor, fibroblast growth
factor, platelet-derived growth factor, leptin, and adiponectin (Grissa, 2010;
Loukovaara, 2004; Mazaki-Tovi, 2005).
Maternal body mass index (BMI) is an independent and more substantial
risk factor for fetal macrosomia than is glucose intolerance (Ehrenberg,
2004; Mission, 2013). In a secondary analysis of women with either
untreated mild gestational diabetes or normal glucose tolerance testing
results, higher BMI levels were associated with rising birthweight,
regardless of glucose levels (Stuebe, 2012). Another analysis found that
gestational diabetes, compared with obesity or gestational weight gain,
contributed the least to the population-attributable fraction of LGA neonates
(Kim, 2014). The highest fraction of LGA neonates was attributable to
maternal obesity plus excessive gestational weight gain. Similarly, Egan and
colleagues (2014) found that excessive gestational weight gain is common in
women with gestational diabetes and confers an additive risk for fetal
macrosomia.
Weight distribution also seems to play a role because the risk of
gestational diabetes is greater with maternal truncal obesity. One cohort
study found that increased maternal abdominal subcutaneous fat thickness at
18 to 22 weeks’ gestation correlated with BMI and was a better predictor of
gestational diabetes (Suresh, 2012).

Neonatal Hypoglycemia
Hyperinsulinemia may provoke severe neonatal hypoglycemia within minutes
of birth, but only three fourths of these episodes occur in the first 6 hours
(Harris, 2012). The definition of neonatal hypoglycemia is debated, and
recommended clinical thresholds range from 35 to 45 mg/dL. One NIH
workshop conference on the topic supported a threshold of 35 mg/dL in term
newborns but cautioned that this practice is not strictly evidence based (Hay,
2009). Treating neonates with glucose levels <47 mg/dL did not improve
outcomes compared with treating those with glucose levels <36 mg/dL (van
Kempen, 2020).
Newborns described by the HAPO Study Cooperative Research Group
(2008) had an incidence of clinical neonatal hypoglycemia that rose with
increasing maternal OGTT result values defined in Figure 60-4. The
frequency varied from 1 to 2 percent, but it was as high as 4.6 percent in
women with fasting glucose levels ≥100 mg/dL. Similarly, an analysis of
more than 3000 Korean women who underwent a 50-g OGTT found that
neonates born to women with a screening result ≥200 mg/dL were 84 times
more likely to have hypoglycemia than those born to women with a result
<140 mg/dL (Cho, 2016). The risk of neonatal hypoglycemia correlates with
umbilical cord C-peptide levels. The risk also rises with birthweight,
independent of a maternal diabetes diagnosis (Mitanchez, 2014).

■ Management
Women with gestational diabetes can be divided into two functional classes
using fasting glucose levels. Pharmacological methods are usually
recommended if diet modification does not consistently maintain the fasting
plasma glucose levels <95 mg/dL or the 2-hour postprandial plasma glucose
<120 mg/dL (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019a).
Whether pharmacological treatment should be used in women with lesser
degrees of fasting hyperglycemia is unclear. No controlled trials have been
done to identify ideal glucose targets for fetal risk prevention. On the other
hand, the HAPO Study Cooperative Research Group (2008) did demonstrate
increased fetal risk at glucose levels below the threshold used for diagnosis
of diabetes. The Fifth International Workshop Conference recommended that
fasting capillary glucose levels be kept ≤95 mg/dL (Metzger, 2007).

In their systematic review, Hartling and associates (2013) concluded that
treating gestational diabetes resulted in significantly lower incidences of
preeclampsia, shoulder dystocia, and macrosomia. For example, the
calculated risk ratio was 0.50 for delivering a newborn >4000 g after
treatment. These investigators caution that the attributed risk for these
outcomes is low, especially when glucose values are only moderately
elevated. They were unable to demonstrate an effect on neonatal
hypoglycemia or on future metabolic outcomes in the offspring.

Diabetic Diet
Nutritional instructions generally include a carbohydrate-controlled diet
sufficient to maintain normoglycemia and avoid ketosis. On average, this
includes a caloric intake of 30 to 35 kcal/kg/d. In one study, 152 women with
gestational diabetes were randomly assigned to a 40- or a 55-percent daily
carbohydrate diet, and no differences in insulin levels and pregnancy
outcomes were found (Moreno-Castilla, 2013). The American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019a) suggests that carbohydrate intake be
limited to 33 to 40 percent of the total daily calories. The remaining calories
are apportioned to give 20 percent as protein and 40 percent as fat.
The most appropriate dietary approach for women with gestational
diabetes has not been established. One metaanalysis of trials of lowglycemic-index diets found that diets higher in complex carbohydrates and
dietary fiber reduced the risk of macrosomia and likelihood of insulin use in
women with gestational diabetes (Wei, 2016). However, there clearly are
limits to what can be accomplished with various dietary approaches alone.
Most and Langer (2012) found that insulin was effective in reducing the risk
of excessive birthweight in offspring of obese women with gestational
diabetes. Casey and colleagues (2015b) also found that dietary treatment
alone for morbidly obese women with mild gestational diabetes did not
reduce neonatal fat mass or LGA birthweights.

Exercise
Few trials have evaluated exercise specifically for women with gestational
diabetes. The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020b)
recommends regular physical activity that incorporates aerobic and strengthconditioning exercise during pregnancy and extends this to women with

gestational diabetes. Two recent metaanalyses demonstrate that structured
exercise programs during pregnancy diminish weight gain during pregnancy
and even reduce the risk of developing gestational diabetes (Russo, 2015;
Sanabria-Martinez, 2015). Exercise during pregnancy in women with
gestational diabetes also lowers glucose levels (Jovanovic-Peterson, 1989).

Glucose Monitoring
Hawkins and associates (2008) compared outcomes in 315 women with diettreated gestational diabetes who used personal glucose monitors against
those of 615 gestational diabetics who were also diet-treated but who
underwent intermittent fasting glucose evaluation during weekly obstetrical
visits. Women using daily blood-glucose self-monitoring had significantly
fewer macrosomic newborns. They also gained less weight after diagnosis
than women evaluated during clinic visits only. These findings support the
common practice of blood-glucose self-monitoring for women with diettreated gestational diabetes.
Postprandial surveillance for gestational diabetes is superior to
preprandial surveillance (DeVeciana, 1995). The American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019a) and the American Diabetes
Association (2019) recommend glucose assessment four times daily. The
first check is performed fasting, and the remainder are done 1 or 2 hours after
each meal. At Parkland Hospital in women with diet-treated gestational
diabetes, changing to postprandial monitoring significantly reduced weekly
maternal weight gain (0.45 lb) compared with preprandial monitoring (0.63
lb).

Insulin Treatment
Historically, insulin has been considered standard therapy in women with
gestational diabetes when target glucose levels cannot be consistently
achieved through nutrition and exercise. Insulin does not cross the placenta,
and tight glycemic control can usually be achieved. Insulin therapy is
typically added if fasting levels persist above 95 mg/dL in women with
gestational diabetes. The American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2019a) also recommends that insulin be considered in
women with 1-hour postprandial levels that persistently exceed 140 mg/dL
or those with 2-hour levels >120 mg/dL. Importantly, all of these thresholds

are extrapolated from recommendations for managing women with overt
diabetes.
The starting insulin dose is typically 0.7 to 1.0 U/kg/d and is given in
divided doses (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists,
2019a). A combination of intermediate-acting and short-acting insulin may be
used, and dose adjustments are based on glucose levels at particular times of
the day.
At Parkland Hospital, the starting daily dose is divided so that two thirds
is given in the morning before breakfast and one third in the evening before
dinner. In the morning dose, one third is regular insulin and two thirds are
NPH (neutral protamine Hagedorn) insulin. For the evening dose, one half is
regular insulin and the other half is NPH. Insulin instruction for these women
is accomplished either in a specialized outpatient clinic or during a short
hospital stay.
At the University of Alabama at Birmingham, a basal-bolus approach
using insulin glargine with rapid-acting insulin at each meal is preferred.
After calculating an initial insulin dose, half is given as long-acting glargine
at bedtime, and the other half is administered as rapid-acting insulin split into
three doses given before breakfast, lunch, and dinner. As shown in Table 608, when using insulin analogues such as insulin aspart and insulin lispro, the
more rapid onset of action must be considered during postprandial glucose
management.

Oral Hypoglycemic Agents
Insulin is the preferred first-line agent for persistent hyperglycemia in women
with gestational diabetes (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2019a; American Diabetes Association, 2017b). Both
organizations acknowledge that several studies support the safety and
efficacy of either metformin (Glucophage) or glyburide (Micronase), which
is also called glibenclamide (Feig, 2020; Langer, 2000; Nicholson, 2009).
Balsells and coworkers (2015) completed a metaanalyses of trials that
compared both agents with insulin or with each other. In the seven trials
comparing glyburide with insulin, glyburide was associated with higher
birthweight, more macrosomia, and more frequent neonatal hypoglycemia. In
the six trials comparing metformin with insulin, metformin was associated
with less maternal weight gain, more preterm birth, and less severe neonatal

hypoglycemia. Women requiring insulin initiation or insulin addition were
considered to have failed treatment. On average, such failures occurred in 6
percent of women treated with glyburide and 34 percent of those treated with
metformin. In the two studies directly comparing oral hypoglycemic agents,
however, treatment failure rates of both agents were equivalent. Moreover,
reminiscent of findings from the trial of adjunctive metformin therapy in
women with type 2 diabetes previously described, metformin treatment was
associated with less maternal weight gain, lower birthweight, and less
macrosomia. Conversely, in a randomized trial of glyburide treatment as an
adjunct to diet therapy in 395 women with mild gestational diabetes, Casey
and colleagues (2015a) did not identify any significant improvements in
pregnancy outcomes in women treated with adjunctive glyburide.
Concerns have also emerged regarding potential adverse outcomes
among women treated with glyburide. First, glyburide crosses the placenta
and reaches concentrations in the fetus that are more than two thirds of
maternal levels (Caritis, 2013). In a study of more than 9000 women with
gestational diabetes treated with either insulin or glyburide, a significant rise
in rates of neonatal intensive care unit admission, respiratory distress, and
neonatal hypoglycemia was associated with glyburide use (Castillo, 2015).
Similarly, metformin reaches fetal serum concentrations nearly equal to
maternal levels. However, in one study of 751 women with gestational
diabetes who were randomly assigned to metformin or insulin treatment,
short-term perinatal adverse events such as neonatal hypoglycemia,
respiratory distress syndrome, phototherapy, or birth trauma did not differ
between groups (Rowan, 2008; 2011). The fat distribution in children
exposed to metformin showed a tendency toward a more favorable pattern.
From a smaller randomized metformin trial, at 18 months, offspring exposed
as fetuses to metformin were slightly heavier. However, markers of early
motor or language development did not differ compared with those in
offspring exposed as fetuses to insulin (Ijäs, 2015).
The Food and Drug Administration has not approved glyburide or
metformin use for treatment of gestational diabetes. The American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019a) recognizes both as reasonable
choices for second-line glycemic control in women with gestational diabetes.
Because long-term outcomes have not been fully studied, the College
recommends disclosure of the limitations in current safety data.

■ Obstetrical Management
In general, for women with gestational diabetes who do not require insulin,
early delivery or other interventions are seldom required. There is no
consensus regarding the value or timing of antepartum fetal testing. It is
typically reserved for women with pregestational diabetes because of the
greater stillbirth risk. The American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2019a, 2020c) endorses fetal surveillance in women with
gestational diabetes and poor glycemic control. At Parkland Hospital,
women with gestational diabetes are routinely instructed to perform daily
fetal kick counts in the third trimester. As previously discussed, insulintreated women are offered inpatient admission after 34 weeks’ gestation.
Approximately half of these women accept admission, and antepartum fetal
monitoring is performed three times each week.
Women with gestational diabetes and adequate glycemic control are
managed expectantly. Elective labor induction to prevent shoulder dystocia
compared with spontaneous labor remains controversial. In the truncated
GINEXMAL randomized trial of 425 women with gestational diabetes,
outcomes of labor induction between 38 and 39 weeks’ were compared with
expectant management until 41 weeks’ gestation (Alberico, 2017). Although
underpowered, this trial demonstrated no clinically meaningful difference in
the cesarean delivery rate between the induction and expectantly managed
groups—12.6 versus 11.8 percent. However, with early labor induction,
neonatal hyperbilirubinemia rates were significantly higher, and there was a
nonsignificant threefold greater shoulder dystocia rate. In a cohort study of
8392 women with gestational diabetes, routine delivery at 38 or 39 weeks’
gestation was associated with a lower rate of cesarean delivery but with an
elevated rate of neonatal intensive care unit admission (Melamed, 2016).
The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019a)
recommends that routine labor induction in women with diet-treated
gestational diabetes should not occur before 39 weeks’ gestation. As
mentioned previously, at Parkland Hospital, those treated with insulin are
delivered at 38 weeks’ gestation. At the University of Alabama at
Birmingham, delivery is carried out after 39 weeks.
Elective cesarean delivery to avoid brachial plexus injuries in
overgrown fetuses is another issue. The American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists (2019b) concludes that data are insufficient to determine

whether women with gestational diabetes whose fetuses have a
sonographically estimated weight ≥4500 g should undergo cesarean delivery
to avoid risk of birth trauma. In one systematic review, Garabedian and
associates (2010) estimated that as many as 588 cesarean deliveries in
women with gestational diabetes and an estimated fetal weight of ≥4500 g
would be necessary to avoid one case of permanent brachial plexus palsy. In
one analysis of 903 women with gestational diabetes, sonographic estimates
of fetal weight within 1 month of delivery typically overdiagnosed fetuses as
being LGA. Only 22 percent of women estimated to have an LGA fetus
actually delivered an overgrown newborn (Scifres, 2015). Still, the
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020b)
acknowledges that prophylactic cesarean delivery may be considered in
diabetic women with an estimated fetal weight ≥4500 g.

■ Postpartum Evaluation
Recommendations for postpartum evaluation are based on the 50- to 75percent likelihood that women with gestational diabetes will develop overt
diabetes within 15 to 25 years (American Diabetes Association, 2019). The
Fifth International Workshop Conference on Gestational Diabetes
recommended that women diagnosed with gestational diabetes undergo
postpartum evaluation with a 75-g OGTT (Metzger, 2007). These
recommendations and the classification scheme of the American Diabetes
Association are shown in Table 60-14. However, one study of insurance
claim data from 2000 to 2013 showed that only 24 percent of women with a
pregnancy complicated by gestational diabetes underwent postpartum
screening within a year. Less than half of those underwent a 75-g OGTT
(Eggleston, 2016). The American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2019a) recommends either a fasting glucose assessment or a
75-g, 2-hour OGTT at 4 to 12 weeks postpartum for the diagnosis of overt
diabetes. The American Diabetes Association (2019) recommends testing
every 1 to 3 years in women with a history of gestational diabetes but normal
postpartum glucose screening.
TABLE 60-14. Fifth International Workshop-Conference: Metabolic
Assessments Recommended After Pregnancy with Gestational Diabetes

Women with a history of gestational diabetes are also at risk for
cardiovascular complications associated with dyslipidemia, hypertension,
and abdominal obesity—the metabolic syndrome (Chap. 51, p. 903). In a
study of 47,909 parous women, the nearly 5000 women with prior
gestational diabetes were 2.6 times more likely to be hospitalized for
cardiovascular morbidity (Kessous, 2013). Another study evaluated 483
women between 5 and 10 years after being diagnosed with mild gestational
diabetes (Varner, 2017). Investigators found no increased risk for developing
metabolic syndrome associated with additional pregnancies. However, risk
for subsequent diabetes rose almost fourfold if gestational diabetes
complicated at least one subsequent pregnancy.

■ Recurrent Gestational Diabetes
In one large metaanalysis, the pooled gestational diabetes recurrence rate
was 48 percent. The same investigative group identified elevated maternal
BMI, insulin use, fetal macrosomia, and weight gain between pregnancies as
additional risk factors for gestational diabetes recurrence (Schwartz, 2015,
2016).
Lifestyle behavioral changes that include weight control and exercise
between pregnancies would seem likely to prevent gestational diabetes
recurrence. However, women randomized to an exercise program that started
before 14 weeks’ gestation in a subsequent pregnancy did not have a lower
recurrence rate (Guelfi, 2016). Conversely, Ehrlich and coworkers (2011)
found that prepregnancy loss of at least two BMI units was associated with a

lower subsequent risk of gestational diabetes in women who were
overweight or obese in the first pregnancy.

REFERENCES
Adane AA, Mishra GD, Tooth LR: Diabetes in pregnancy and childhood cognitive development: a
systematic review. Pediatrics 137(5):pii:e20154234, 2016
Aguilera J, Semmier J, Coronel C: et al: Paired maternal and fetal cardiac functional measurements in
women with gestational diabetes mellitus at 35–36 weeks’ gestation. Am J Obstet Gynecol
223(4):574.e1, 2020
Alberico S, Erenbourg A, Hod M, et al: Immediate delivery or expectant management in GDM at term:
the GINEXMAL randomised controlled trial. BJOG 124(4):669, 2017
Alvarez JR, Fechner AJ, Williams SF, et al: Asymptomatic bacteriuria in pregestational diabetic
pregnancies and the role of group B streptococcus. Am J Perinat 27(3):231, 2010
Ambia AM, Seasely AR, Macias D, et al: The impact of baseline proteinuria in pregnancy in a
contemporary diabetic population. Am J Obstet Gynecol MFM 2:100072, 2020
American Academy of Ophthalmology: Diabetic Retinopathy PPP 2019. Available at:
https://www.aao.org/preferred-practice-pattern/diabetic-retinopathy-ppp-2019. Accessed August 30,
2021
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Management of diabetes mellitus in pregnancy.
Technical Bulletin No. 92, May 1986
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Gestational diabetes mellitus. Practice Bulletin
No. 190, February 2018. Reaffirmed 2019a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Macrosomia. Practice Bulletin No. 216,
December 2019b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Low-dose aspirin use during pregnancy.
Committee Opinion No. 743, June 2018, Reaffirmed 2020a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Physical activity and exercise during pregnancy
and the postpartum period. Committee Opinion No. 804, March 2020b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Pregestational diabetes mellitus. Practice Bulletin
No. 201, November 2020c
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Antepartum fetal surveillance. Practice Bulletin
No. 229, June 2021
American Diabetes Association: Classification and diagnosis of diabetes—2020. Diabetes Care 43(1
Suppl):S14, 2020
American Diabetes Association: Management of diabetes in pregnancy: standards of medical care in
diabetes-2019. Diabetes Care 42(1 Suppl):S165, 2019
American Diabetes Association: Standards of medical care in diabetes—2013. Diabetes Care 36(Suppl
1):S11, 2013
American Diabetes Association: Standards of medical care in diabetes—2017. Diabetes Care 40(1
Suppl):S114, 2017
Bacon S, Schmid J, McCarthy A, et al: The clinical management of hyperglycemia in pregnancy
complicated by maturity-onset diabetes of the young. Am J Obstet Gynecol 213(2):236.e1, 2015

Balsells M, García-Patterson A, Solà I, et al: Glibenclamide, metformin, and insulin for the treatment of
gestational diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ 350:h102, 2015
Bartsch E, Medcalf KE, Park AL, et al: Clinical risk factors for pre-eclampsia determined in early
pregnancy: systematic review and meta-analysis of large cohort studies. BMJ 353:i1753, 2016
Basu M, Garg V: Maternal hyperglycemia and fetal cardiac development: clinical impact and underlying
mechanisms. Birth Defects Research 110:1504, 2018
Battarbee AN, Sandoval G, Grobman W, et al: Antenatal corticosteroids and preterm neonatal morbidity
and mortality among women with and without diabetes in pregnancy. Am J Perinatol July 27, 2020a
[Epub ahead of print]
Battarbee AN, Venkatesh KK, Aliaga S, et al: The association of pregestational and gestational diabetes
with severe neonatal morbidity and mortality. J Perinatol 40(2):232, 2020b
Bennett SN, Tita A, Owen J, et al: Assessing White’s classification of pregestational diabetes in a
contemporary diabetic population. Obstet Gynecol 125(5):1217, 2015
Bental Y, Reichman B, Shiff Y, et al: Impact of maternal diabetes mellitus on mortality and morbidity of
preterm infants (24–33 weeks gestation). Pediatrics 128:e848, 2011
Bergenstal RM, Nimri R, Beck RW, et al: A comparison of two hybrid closed-loop systems in
adolescents and young adults with type 1 diabetes (FLAIR): a multicentre, randomised, crossover
trial. Lancet 397(10270):208, 2021
Berger H, Melamed N, Davis BM, et al: Impact of diabetes, obesity and hypertension on preterm birth:
population-based study. PLoS One 15(3):e0228743, 2020
Boghossian NS, Hansen NI, Bell EF, et al: Outcomes of extremely preterm infants born to insulindependent diabetic mothers. Pediatrics 137(6):e20153424, 2016
Bourry J, Courteville H, Ramdane N, et al: Progression of diabetic retinopathy and predictors of its
development and progression during pregnancy in patients with type 1 diabetes: a report of 499
pregnancies. Diabetes Care 44(1):181, 2021
Bryant SN, Herrera CL, Nelson DB, et al: Diabetic ketoacidosis complicating pregnancy. J Neonatal
Perinatal Med 10:17, 2017
Buhling KJ, Doll I, Siebert G, et al: Relationship between sonographically estimated fetal subcutaneous
adipose tissue measurements and neonatal skinfold measurements. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol
39:558, 2012
Caritis SN, Hebert MF: A pharmacologic approach to the use of glyburide in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol
121(6):1309, 2013
Casey B: Gestational diabetes–on broadening the diagnosis. N Engl J Med 384(10):965, 2021
Casey BM, Duryea EL, Abbassi-Ghanavati M, et al: Glyburide in women with mild gestational diabetes:
a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol 126(2):303, 2015a
Casey BM, Mele L, Landon MB, et al: Does maternal body mass index influence treatment effect in
women with mild gestational diabetes? Am J Perinatol 32(1):93, 2015b
Castillo WC, Boggess K, Stürmer T, et al: Association of adverse pregnancy outcomes with glyburide vs
insulin in women with gestational diabetes. JAMA Pediatr 169(5):452, 2015
Catalano PM, Thomas A, Huston-Presley L, et al: Increased fetal adiposity: a very sensitive marker of
abnormal in utero development. Am J Obstet Gynecol 189(6):1698, 2003
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: National diabetes statistics report, 2020. Available at:
https://www.cdc.gov/diabetes/data/statistics/statistics-report.html. Accessed August 30, 2021
Chen R, Ben-Haroush A, Weismann-Brenner A, et al: Level of glycemic control and pregnancy
outcome in type 1 diabetes: a comparison between multiple daily insulin injections and continuous
subcutaneous insulin infusions. Am J Obstet Gynecol 197:404e.1, 2007

Cheng YK, Lao TT, Sahota DS, et al: Use of birth weight threshold for macrosomia to identify fetuses
at risk of shoulder dystocia among Chinese populations. Int J Gynecol Obstet 120:249, 2013
Cho Hy, Jung I, Kim SJ: The association between maternal hyperglycemia and perinatal outcomes in
gestational diabetes mellitus patients: a retrospective cohort study. Medicine (Baltimore)
95(36):e4712, 2016
Combs CA: Continuous glucose monitoring and insulin pump therapy for diabetes in pregnancy. J
Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 25(10):2025, 2012
Crowther CA, Hiller JE, Moss JR, et al: Effect of treatment of gestational diabetes mellitus on
pregnancy outcomes. N Engl J Med 352:2477, 2005
Cundy T: Proposed new diagnostic criteria for gestational diabetes—a pause for thought? Diabet Med
29(2):176, 2012
Dashe JS, McIntire DD, Twickler DM: Effect of maternal obesity on the ultrasound detection of
anomalous fetuses. Obstet Gynecol 113(5):1001, 2009
Dashe JS, Nathan L, McIntire DD, et al: Correlation between amniotic fluid glucose concentration and
amniotic fluid volume in pregnancy complicated by diabetes. Am J Obstet Gynecol 182:901, 2000
Davidson AJ, Park AL, Berger H, et al: Association of improved periconception hemoglobin A1c with
pregnancy outcomes in women with diabetes. JAMA Netw Open 3(12):e2030207, 2020
DeBoer T, Wewerka S, Bauer PJ, et al: Explicit memory performance in infants of diabetic mothers at 1
year of age. Dev Med Child Neurol 47:525, 2005
DeMarini S, Mimouni F, Tsang RC, et al: Impact of metabolic control of diabetes during pregnancy on
neonatal hypocalcemia: a randomized study. Obstet Gynecol 83:918, 1994
Depla AL, de Wit L, Steenhius TJ, et al: Effects of maternal diabetes on fetal heart function at
echocardiography: systemic review and meta-analysis. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 57(4):539, 2021
Deputy NP, Kim SY, Conrey EJ, et al: Prevalence and changes in preexisting diabetes and gestational
diabetes among women who had a live birth–United States, 2012–2016. MMWR 67:1201, 2018
DeVeciana M, Major CA, Morgan M, et al: Postprandial versus preprandial blood glucose monitoring in
women with gestational diabetes mellitus requiring insulin therapy. N Engl J Med 333:1237, 1995
Dickson LT, LeTourneu LR, Sanyoura M, et al: Management and pregnancy outcomes in women with
GCK-MODY enrolled in the US Monogenic Diabetes Registry. Acta Diabetol 56(4):405, 2019
Dong W, Li Y, Sun J, et al: Do patients with gestational diabetes mellitus and their own blood glucose
meter have better pregnancy outcomes than those not using a glucose meter? Medicine (Baltimore)
99(51):e23793, 2020
Donovan L, Hartling L, Muise M, et al: Screening tests for gestational diabetes: a systematic review for
the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Ann Intern Med 159(2):115, 2013
Driscoll AK, Gregory EC: Increases in prepregnancy obesity: United States 2016–2019. NCHS Data
Brief 392: November 2020
Durnwald C, Huston-Presley L, Amini S, et al: Evaluation of body composition of large-for-gestationalage infants of women with gestational diabetes mellitus compared with women with normal glucose
levels. Am J Obstet Gynecol 191:804, 2004
Egan AM, Dennedy MC, Al-Ramli W: ATLANTIC-DIP: excessive gestational weight gain and
pregnancy outcomes in women with gestational or pregestational diabetes mellitus. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab 99(1):212, 2014
Egan AM, Dow ML, Vella A: A review of the pathophysiology and management of diabetes in
pregnancy. Mayo Clin Proc 95(12):2734, 2020
Eggleston EM, LeCates RF, Zhang F, et al: Variation in postpartum glycemic screening in women with a
history of gestational diabetes mellitus. Obstet Gynecol 128(1):159, 2016

Ehrenberg HM, Mercer BM, Catalano PM: The influence of obesity and diabetes on the prevalence of
macrosomia. Am J Obstet Gynecol 191:964, 2004
Ehrlich SF, Hedderson MM, Feng J, et al: Change in body mass index between pregnancies and the risk
of gestational diabetes in a second pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 117(6):1323, 2011
Ehrmann D, Kulzer B, Roos T, et al: Risk factors and prevention strategies for diabetic ketoacidosis in
people with established type 1 diabetes. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 8(5):436, 2020
Fadl HE, Ostlund KM, Magnusont AF, et al: Maternal and neonatal outcomes and time trends of
gestational diabetes mellitus in Sweden from 1991 to 2003. Diabet Med 27:436, 2010
Farrar D, Tufnell DJ, West J: Continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion versus multiple daily injections of
insulin for pregnant women with diabetes. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 6:CD005542, 2016
Feig DS, Donovan LE, Zinnman B, et al: Metformin in women with type 2 diabetes in pregnancy
(MiTy): a multicentre, international, randomized, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol
8(10):834, 2020
Feldman RK, Tieu RS, Yasumura L: Gestational diabetes screening: The International Association of the
Diabetes and Pregnancy Study Groups compared with Carpenter-Coustan screening. Obstet
Gynecol 127(1):10, 2016
Ferrara A, Hedderson MM, Quesenberry CP, et al: Prevalence of gestational diabetes mellitus detected
by the National Diabetes Data Group or the Carpenter and Coustan plasma glucose thresholds.
Diabetes Care 25(9):1625, 2002
Finer LB, Zolna MR: Declines in unintended pregnancy in the United States, 2008–2011. N Engl J Med
374(9):843, 2016
Finneran MM, Kiefer MK, Ware CA, et al: The use of longitudinal hemoglobin A1c values to predict
adverse obstetric and neonatal outcomes in pregnancies complicated by pregestational diabetes. Am
J Obstet Gynecol 2(1):100069, 2020
Fraser A, Almqvist C, Larsson H: Maternal diabetes in pregnancy and offspring cognitive ability: sibling
study with 723,775 men from 579,857 families. Diabetologia 57(1):102, 2014
Frayne DJ, Verbiest S, Chelmow D, et al: Health care system measures to advance preconception
wellness: consensus recommendations of the clinical workgroup of the national preconception health
and health care initiative. Obstet Gynecol 127(5):863, 2016
Fuglsang J, Ovesen PG: Pregnancy and delivery in a woman with type 1 diabetes, gastroparesis, and a
gastric neurostimulator. Diabetes Care 38(5):e75, 2015
Galindo A, Burguillo AG, Azriel S, et al: Outcome of fetuses in women with pregestational diabetes
mellitus. J Perinat Med 34(4):323, 2006
Garabedian C, Deruelle P: Delivery (timing, route, peripartum glycemic control) in women with
gestational diabetes mellitus. Diabetes Metab 36:515, 2010
Gardosi J, Madurasinghe V, Williams M, et al: Maternal and fetal risk factors for stillbirth: population
based study. BMJ 346:f108, 2013
Ghaffari N, Gonzalez JM, Rosenstein M: Does the 1-step method of gestational diabetes mellitus
screening improve pregnancy outcomes? Am J Obstet Gynecol MFM 2(4):100199, 2020
Grissa O, Yessoufou A, Mrisak I, et al: Growth factor concentrations and their placental mRNA
expression are modulated in gestational diabetes mellitus: possible interactions with macrosomia.
BMC Pregnancy Childbirth 10:7, 2010
Guelfi KJ, Ong MJ, Crisp NA, et al: Regular exercise to prevent the recurrence of gestational diabetes
mellitus: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol 128(4):819, 2016
Guntupalli KK, Karnad DR, Bandi V, et al: Critical illness in pregnancy: Part II: common medical
conditions complicating pregnancy and puerperium. Chest 148(5):1333, 2015

Gupat K, Rajagopal K, King F, et al: Complications of antenatal corticosteroids in infants born by early
term scheduled cesarean section. Diabetes Care 43(4):906, 2020
Gurram P, Benn P, Grady J, et al: First trimester aneuploidy screening markers in women with pregestational diabetes mellitus. J Clin Med 3:480, 2014
Hammoud NM, Visser GH, Peterst SA, et al: Fetal growth profiles of macrosomic and non-macrosomic
infants of women with pregestational or gestational diabetes. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 41(4):390,
2013
Hanson U, Persson B: Outcome of pregnancies complicated by type 1 insulin-dependent diabetes in
Sweden: acute pregnancy complications, neonatal mortality and morbidity. Am J Perinatol 10:330,
1993
HAPO Study Cooperative Research Group: Hyperglycemia and adverse pregnancy outcomes. N Engl J
Med 358:2061, 2008
Harper LM, Mele L, Landon MB, et al: Carpenter-Coustan compared with National Diabetes Data
Group criteria for diagnosing gestational diabetes. Obstet Gynecol 127(5):893, 2016
Harper LM, Jauk V, Longo S, et al: Early gestational diabetes screening in obese women: a randomized
controlled trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol 222(5):495.e1, 2020
Harris DL, Weston PJ, Harding JE: Incidence of neonatal hypoglycemia in babies identified as at risk. J
Pediatr 161(5):787, 2012
Hartling L, Dryden DM, Guthrie A, et al: Benefits and harms of treating gestational diabetes mellitus: a
systematic review and meta-analysis for the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force and the National
Institutes of Health Office of Medical Applications of Research. Ann Intern Med 159(2):123, 2013
Hawkins JS, Lo JY, Casey BM, et al: Diet-treated gestational diabetes: comparison of early versus
routine diagnosis. Am J Obstet Gynecol, 198:287, 2008
Hay WW: Care of the infant of the diabetic mother. Curr Diab Rep 12:4, 2012
Hay WW, Raju TN, Higgins RD, et al: Knowledge gaps and research needs for understanding and
treating neonatal hypoglycemia: workshop report from Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of
Child Health and Human Development. J Pediatrics 155(5):612, 2009
Hill JB, Sheffield JS, McIntire DD, et al: Acute pyelonephritis in pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol
105(1):18, 2005
Hillier TA, Pedula KL, Ogasawara KK, et al: A pragmatic randomized clinical trial of gestational
diabetes screening. N Engl J Med 384(10): 895, 2021
Huang H, He J, Johnson D, et al: Deletion of placental growth factor prevents diabetic retinopathy and
is associated with Akt activation and HIF1α-VEGF pathway inhibition. Diabetes 64(3):1067, 2015
Huang T, Kelly A, Becker SA, et al: Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in neonates with congenital
hyperinsulinism. Arch Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed 98(4):F351, 2013
Idris N, Wong SF, Thomae M, et al: Influence of polyhydramnios on perinatal outcome in pregestational
diabetic pregnancies. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 36(3):338, 2010
Ijäs H, Vääräsmäki M, Saarela T, et al: A follow-up of a randomised study of metformin and insulin in
gestational diabetes mellitus: growth and development of the children at the age of 18 months. BJOG
122(7):994, 2015
International Association of Diabetes and Pregnancy Study Groups Consensus Panel:
Recommendations on the diagnosis and classification of hyperglycemia in pregnancy. Diabetes Care
33(3), 2010
Jensen DM, Damm P, Ovesen P, et al: Microalbuminuria, preeclampsia, and preterm delivery in
pregnant women with type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Care 33:90, 2010

Johnston RC, Gabby L, Tith T, et al: Immediate postpartum glycemic control and risk of surgical site
infection. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 30(3):267, 2017
Jovanovič L, Liang Y, Weng W, et al: Trends in the incidence of diabetes, its clinical sequelae, and
associated costs in pregnancy. Diabetes Metab Res Rev 31(7):707, 2015
Jovanovic-Peterson L, Durak EP, Peterson CM: Randomized trial of diet versus diet plus cardiovascular
conditioning on glucose levels in gestational diabetes. Am J Obstet Gynecol 161:415, 1989
Kessous R, Shoham-Vardi I, Pariente G, et al: An association between gestational diabetes mellitus and
long-term maternal cardiovascular morbidity. Heart 99:1118, 2013
Kim C, Ferrara A, McEwen LN, et al: Preconception care in managed care: the translating research
into action for diabetes study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 192:227, 2005
Kim SY, Sharma AJ, Sappenfield W, et al: Association of maternal body mass index, excessive weight
gain, and gestational diabetes mellitus with large-for-gestational-age births. Obstet Gynecol
123(4):737, 2014
Kitzmiller JL, Block JM, Brown FM, et al: Managing preexisting diabetes for pregnancy. Diabetes Care
31(5):1060, 2008
Krakowiak P, Walker CK, Bremer AA, et al: Maternal metabolic conditions and risk for autism and
other neurodevelopmental disorders. Pediatrics 129:e1121, 2012
Landon MB, Mele L, Spong CY, et al: The relationship between maternal glycemia and perinatal
outcome. Obstet Gynecol 117(2):218, 2011
Landon MB, Spong CY, Thom E, et al: A multicenter, randomized treatment trial of mild gestational
diabetes. N Engl J Med 361(14):1339, 2009
Langer O, Conway DL, Berkus MD, et al: A comparison of glyburide and insulin in women with
gestational diabetes mellitus. N Engl J Med 343:1134, 2000
Lauenborg J, Mathiesen E, Ovesen P, et al: Audit on stillbirths in women with pregestational type 1
diabetes. Diabetes Care 26(5):1385, 2003
Leinonen PJ, Hiilesmaa VK, Kaaja RJ: Maternal mortality in type 1 diabetes. Diabetes Care 24(8):1501,
2001
Liu S, Joseph KS, Lisonkova S, et al: Association between maternal chronic conditions and congenital
heart defects: a population-based cohort study. Circulation 128(6):583, 2013
Loukovaara M, Leinonen P, Teramo K, et al: Diabetic pregnancy associated with increased epidermal
growth factor in cord serum at term. Obstet Gynecol 103:240, 2004
Ludvigsson JF, Neovius M, Soderling J, et al: Periconception glycaemic control in women with type 1
diabetes and risk of major birth defects: population based cohort study in Sweden. BMJ 362:2638,
2018
Luo ZC, Nuyt AM, Delvin E, et al: Maternal and fetal IGF-I and IGF-II levels, fetal growth, and
gestational diabetes. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 97:1720, 2012
Marschalek J, Farr A, Kiss H, et al: Risk of vaginal infections at early gestation in patients with diabetic
conditions during pregnancy: a retrospective cohort study. PLoS One 11(5):e0155182, 2016
Martin JA, Hamilton BE, Osterman MJ, et al: Births: final data for 2018. Natl Vital Stat Rep 68 (13):1,
2019
Martin RB, Duryea EL, Ambia A, et al: Congenital malformation risk according to hemoglobin A1c
values in a contemporary cohort with pregestational diabetes. Am J Perinatol June 4, 2021 [Epub
ahead of print]
Mazaki-Tovi S, Kanety H, Pariente C, et al: Cord blood adiponectin in large-for-gestational age
newborns. Am J Obstet Gynecol 193:1238, 2005

McCance DR, Holmes VA, Maresh MJ, et al: Vitamins C and E for prevention of preeclampsia in
women with type 1 diabetes (DAPIT): a randomised placebo-controlled trial. Lancet 376:259, 2010
McElvy SS, Demarini S, Miodovnik M, et al: Fetal weight and progression of diabetic retinopathy.
Obstet Gynecol 97:587, 2001
McFarland MB, Langer O, Fazioni E, et al: Anthropometric and body composition differences in largefor-gestational age, but not appropriate-for-gestational age infants of mothers with and without
diabetes mellitus. J Soc Gynecol Investig 7:231, 2000
Melamed N, Ray JG, Geary M, et al: Induction of labor before 40 weeks is associated with lower rate
of cesarean delivery in women with gestational diabetes mellitus. Am J Obstet Gynecol
214(3):364.e1, 2016
Metzger BE, Buchanan TA, Coustan DR, et al: Summary and recommendations of the Fifth
International Workshop-Conference on Gestational Diabetes. Diabetes Care 30(Suppl 2):S251, 2007
Metzger BE, Coustan DR: Summary and recommendations of the Fourth International WorkshopConference on Gestational Diabetes Mellitus. The organizing committee. Diabetes Care 21 (Supp
2):B161, 1998
Miailhe G, Le Ray C, Timsit J, et al: Factors associated with urgent cesarean delivery in women with
type 1 diabetes mellitus. Obstet Gynecol 121:983, 2013
Middleton P, Crowther CA, Simmonds L: Different intensities of glycaemic control for pregnant women
with pre-existing diabetes. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 5:CD008540, 2016
Mission JF, Marshall NE, Caughey AB: Obesity in pregnancy: a big problem and getting bigger. Obstet
Gynecol Sur 88(5):389, 2013
Mitanchez D, Burguet A, Simeoni U: Infants born to mothers with gestational diabetes mellitus: mild
neonatal effects, a long-term threat to global health. J Pediatr 164(3):445, 2014
Moreno-Castilla C, Hernandez M, Bergua M, et al: Low-carbohydrate diet for the treatment of
gestational diabetes mellitus. Diabetes Care 36:2233, 2013
Most O, Langer O: Gestational diabetes: maternal weight gain in relation to fetal growth, treatment
modality, BMI and glycemic control. J Matern Fetal Med 25(11):2458, 2012
Murphy HR, Howgate C, O’Keefe J, et al: Characteristics and outcomes of pregnant women with type
1 or type 2 diabetes: a 5-year national population-based cohort study. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol
9(3):153, 2021
National Institutes of Health: NIH Consensus Development Conference on Diagnosing Gestational
Diabetes Mellitus. 2013. Available at: https://consensus.nih.gov/2013/gdm.htm. Accessed August 30,
2021
Nicholson W, Bolen S, Witkop CT, et al: Benefits and risks of oral diabetes agents compared with insulin
in women with gestational diabetes. Obstet Gynecol 113(1):193, 2009
Padmanabhan S, Lee VW, Mclean M, et al: The association of falling insulin requirements with maternal
biomarkers and placental dysfunction: a prospective study of women with preexisting diabetes in
pregnancy. Diabetes Care 40:1323, 2017
Patel EM, Goodnight WH, James AH, et al: Temporal trends in maternal medical conditions and
stillbirth. Am J Obstet Gynecol 212(5):673.e1, 2015
Pedersen J: The Pregnant Diabetic and Her Newborn, 2nd ed. Baltimore, Williams & Wilkins, 1977
Pedersen J, Mølsted-Pedersen L, Andersen B: Assessors of fetal perinatal mortality in diabetic
pregnancy. Analysis of 1332 pregnancies in the Copenhagen series, 1946–1972. Diabetes 23:302,
1974
Peterson C, Grosse SD, Li R, et al: Preventable health and cost burden of adverse birth outcomes
associated with pregestational diabetes in the United State. Am J Obstet Gynecol 212(1):74.e1, 2015

Pociot F, Lernmark Å: Genetic risk factors for type 1 diabetes. Lancet 387(10035):2331, 2016
Powers AC, Niswender KD, Evans-Molina C: Diabetes mellitus: diagnosis, classifications, and
pathophysiology. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al (eds): Harrison’s Principles of Internal
Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw Hill Education, 2018
Rasmussen KL, Laugesen CS, Ringholm L, et al: Progression of diabetic retinopathy during pregnancy
in women with type 2 diabetes. Diabetologia 53:1076, 2010
Reece EA: Diabetes-induced birth defects: what do we know? What can we do? Curr Diab Rep 12:24,
2012
Renault KM, Carlsen EM, Nøgaard K, et al: Intake of carbohydrates during pregnancy in obese women
is associated with fat mass in the newborn offspring. Am J Clin Nutr 102(6):1475, 2015
Reutens AT: Epidemiology of diabetic kidney disease. Med Clin North Am 97:1, 2013
Roeder HA, Moore TR, Ramos GA: Insulin pump dosing across gestation in women with wellcontrolled type 1 diabetes mellitus. Am J Obstet Gynecol 207:324.e1, 2012
Rowan JA, Hague WM, Wanzhen G, et al: Metformin versus insulin for the treatment of gestational
diabetes. N Engl J Med 358:2003, 2008
Rowan JA, Rush EC, Obolonkin V, et al: Metformin in gestational diabetes: the offspring follow-up (MiG
TOFU): body composition at 2 years of age. Diabetes Care 34(10):2279, 2011
Russell NE, Foley M, Kinsley BT, et al: Effect of pregestational diabetes mellitus on fetal cardiac
function and structure. Am J Obstet Gynecol 199:312.e1, 2008
Russo LM, Nobles C, Ertel KA, et al: Physical activity interventions in pregnancy and risk of gestational
diabetes mellitus: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Obstet Gynecol 125(3):576, 2015
Salvesen DR, Brudenell MJ, Nicolaides KH: Fetal polycythemia and thrombocytopenia in pregnancies
complicated by maternal diabetes mellitus. Am J Obstet Gynecol 166:1287, 1992
Salvesen DR, Brudenell MJ, Snijders JM, et al: Fetal plasma erythropoietin in pregnancies complicated
by maternal diabetes mellitus. Am J Obstet Gynecol 168:88, 1993
Sanabria-Martinez G, García-Hermoso A, Poyatos-León R, et al: Effectiveness of physical activity
interventions on preventing gestational diabetes mellitus and excessive maternal weight gain: a metaanalysis. BJOG 122(9):1167, 2015
Schwartz N, Nachum Z, Green MS: Risk factors of gestational diabetes mellitus recurrence: a metaanalysis. Endocrine 53(3):662, 2016
Schwartz N, Nachum Z, Green MS: The prevalence of gestational diabetes mellitus recurrence—effect
of ethnicity and parity: a metaanalysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 213(3):310, 2015
Scifres CM, Feghali M, Dumont T, et al: Large-for-gestational-age ultrasound diagnosis and risk for
cesarean delivery in women with gestational diabetes mellitus. Obstet Gynecol 126(5):978, 2015
Sheffield JS, Butler-Koster EL, Casey BM, et al: Maternal diabetes mellitus and infant malformations.
Obstet Gynecol 100:925, 2002
Sheiner E, Mazor-Drey E, Levy A: Asymptomatic bacteriuria during pregnancy. J Matern Fetal
Neonatal Med 22(5):423, 2009
Sibai BM, Caritis S, Hauth J, et al: Risks of preeclampsia and adverse neonatal outcomes among
women with pregestational diabetes mellitus. Am J Obstet Gynecol 182:364, 2000
Sibai BM, Viteri OA: Diabetic ketoacidosis in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 123(1):167, 2014
Smati S, Mahot P, Bourdiol A, et al: Euglycaemic ketoacidosis during gestational diabetes with
concomitant COVID-19 infection. Diabetes Metab 29:S1262, 2020
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine: Special statement: updated checklist for antenatal care of
pregestational diabetes mellitus. Patient safety and quality committee. Am J Obstet Gynecol 223:82,
2020

Stewart ZA, Wilinska ME, Hartnell S, et al: Closed-loop insulin delivery pregnancy in women with type
1 diabetes. N Engl J Med 375(7):644, 2016
Stuebe AM, Landon MB, Lai Y, et al: Maternal BMI, glucose tolerance, and adverse pregnancy
outcomes. Am J Obstet Gynecol 207:62.e.1, 2012
Suresh A, Liu A, Poulton A, et al: Comparison of maternal abdominal subcutaneous fat thickness and
body mass index as markers for pregnancy outcomes: a stratified cohort study. Aust N Z J Obstet
Gynecol 52:420, 2012
Tinker SC, Gilboa SM, Moore CA, et al: Specific birth defects in pregnancies of women with diabetes:
National Birth Defects Prevention Study, 1997–2011. Am J Obstet Gynecol 222(2):176, 2020
TODAY Study Group, Bjornstad P, Drews KL, et al: Long-term complications in youth-onset type 2
diabetes. N Engl J Med 385(5):416, 2021
Udler MS, Powe CE, Austin-Tse CA: Case 6–2020: a 34-year-old woman with hyperglycemia. N Engl
J Med 382(8):745, 2020
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, Davidson KW, Barry MJ, et al: Behavioral counseling
interventions for healthy weight and weight gain in pregnancy: US Preventive Services Task Force
Recommendation Statement. JAMA 325(20):2087, 2021
Van Kempen AA, Eskes PF, Nuytemans DH, et al: Lower versus traditional treatment threshold for
neonatal hypoglycemia. N Engl J Med 382(6):534, 2020
Van Leeuwen M, Louwerse MD, Opmeer BC, et al: Glucose challenge test for detecting gestational
diabetes mellitus: a systematic review. BJOG 119(4):393, 2012
Varner MW, Rice MM, Landon MB, et al: Pregnancies after the diagnosis of mild gestational diabetes
mellitus and risk of cardiometabolic disorders. Obstet Gynecol 129(2):273, 2017
Vestgaard M, Ringholm L, Laugesen CS, et al: Pregnancy-induced sight-threatening diabetic retinopathy
in women with type 1 diabetes. Diabet Med 27:431, 2010
Vidaeff AC, Yeomans ER, Ramin SM: Pregnancy in women with renal disease. Part II: specific
underlying renal conditions. Am J Perinatol 25:399, 2008
Vink JY, Poggi SH, Ghidini A: Amniotic fluid index and birth weight: is there a relationship in diabetics
with poor glycemic control? Am J Obstet Gynecol 195:848, 2006
Wang PH, Lau J, Chalmers TC: Meta-analysis of effects of intensive blood-glucose control on late
complications of type 1 diabetes. Lancet 341:1306, 1993
Wei J, Heng W, Gao J: Effects of low glycemic index diets on gestational diabetes mellitus: a metaanalysis of randomized controlled clinical trials. Medicine (Baltimore) 95(22):e3792, 2016
Wei Y, Xu Q, Yang H, et al: Preconception diabetes mellitus and adverse pregnancy outcomes in over
6.4 million women: a population-based cohort study in China. PLoS Med 16(10):e1002926, 2019
White P: Classification of obstetric diabetes. Am J Obstet Gynecol 130:228, 1978
World Health Organization: Classification of Diabetes Mellitus. Geneva, WHO, 2019
World Health Organization: Diabetes. 2020. Available at: www.who.int/healthtopics/diabetes#tab=tab_1. Accessed August 30, 2021
Yang P, Reece EA, Wang F, et al: Decoding the oxidative stress hypothesis in diabetic embryopathy
through proapoptotic kinase signaling. Am J Obstet Gynecol 212(5):569, 2015
Yanit KE, Snowden JM, Cheng YW, et al: The impact of chronic hypertension and pregestational
diabetes on pregnancy outcomes. Am J Obstet Gynecol 207:333, 2012
Young EC, Pires M, Marques L, et al: Effects of pregnancy on the onset and progression of diabetic
nephropathy and of diabetic nephropathy on pregnancy outcomes. Diabetes Metab Syndr 5:137,
2012

CHAPTER 61

Endocrine Disorders

THYROID PHYSIOLOGY AND PREGNANCY
HYPERTHYROIDISM
HYPOTHYROIDISM
SUBCLINICAL HYPOTHYROIDISM
IODINE DEFICIENCY
CONGENITAL HYPOTHYROIDISM
POSTPARTUM THYROIDITIS
NODULAR THYROID DISEASE
PARATHYROID DISEASE
ADRENAL GLAND DISORDERS
PITUITARY DISORDERS
REFERENCES
Endocrinopathies are closely related to pregnancy for several reasons. One
example is the gestational proclivity for prodigious hormone secretion,
which is perhaps best illustrated by placental lactogen in diabetes. This is
the most common endocrinopathy encountered in pregnancy and discussed in
Chapter 57. Pregnancy is also interrelated with some endocrinopathies that
are at least partially due to autoimmune dysregulation. Clinical

manifestations result from complex interplay among genetic, environmental,
and endogenous factors that activate the immune system against targeted cells
within endocrine organs. In one extraordinary interaction, studies have
implicated maternal organ engraftment by fetal cells transferred during
pregnancy. These cells later provoke antibody production, tissue destruction,
and autoimmune endocrinopathies.

THYROID DISORDERS
Taken in aggregate, these disorders are common in young women and thus
frequently encountered in pregnancy. Maternal and fetal thyroid function are
intimately related, and drugs that affect the maternal thyroid affect the fetal
gland. Moreover, thyroid autoantibodies are associated with increased rates
of early pregnancy wastage. Uncontrolled thyrotoxicosis and untreated
hypothyroidism are both associated with adverse pregnancy outcomes. Last,
evidence suggests that the severity of some autoimmune thyroid disorders
may be ameliorated during pregnancy, only to be exacerbated postpartum.

■ Thyroid Physiology and Pregnancy
Maternal thyroid changes are substantial, and normally altered gland
structure and function can sometimes be confused with thyroid abnormalities.
These alterations are discussed in detail in Chapter 4 (p. 71), and normal
serum hormone level values are found in the Appendix (p. 1230). First,
maternal serum concentrations of thyroid binding globulin are increased
concomitantly with total or bound thyroid hormone levels. Second,
thyrotropin, also called thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), plays a central
role in screening and diagnosis of many thyroid disorders, but levels change
throughout pregnancy. Notably, TSH receptors are cross stimulated, albeit
weakly, by massive quantities of human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG)
secreted by placental trophoblast. Because TSH does not cross the placenta,
it has no direct fetal effects. During the first 12 weeks of gestation, when
maternal hCG serum levels are maximal, thyroid hormone secretion is
stimulated. The resulting greater serum free thyroxine (T4) levels act to
suppress hypothalamic thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) and in turn
limit pituitary TSH secretion (Fig. 61-1). Accordingly, TRH is undetectable

in maternal serum. Conversely, in fetal serum, beginning at midpregnancy,
TRH becomes detectable, but levels are static and do not rise.

FIGURE 61-1 Gestational-age-specific values for serum thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) levels
(black lines) and free thyroxine (T4) levels (blue lines). Data were derived from 17,298 women tested
during pregnancy. For each color, the dark solid lines represent the 50th percentile, whereas the upper
and lower light lines represent the 2.5th and 97.5th percentiles, respectively. (Data from Casey, 2005;
Dashe, 2005.)

Throughout pregnancy, maternal thyroxine is transferred to the fetus
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020). Maternal
thyroxine is important for normal fetal brain development, especially before
the onset of fetal thyroid gland function (Bernal, 2007; Korevaar, 2016b).
Both high and low maternal thyroid function in the first trimester are
negatively associated with cortical gray matter volume in childhood (Jansen,
2019). Although the fetal gland begins concentrating iodine and synthesizing
thyroid hormone after 12 weeks’ gestation, maternal thyroxine contribution
remains important. Maternal sources account for 30 percent of thyroxine in
fetal serum at term (Thorpe-Beeston, 1991). Still, developmental risks
associated with maternal hypothyroidism after midpregnancy remain poorly
understood (Morreale de Escobar, 2004; Sarkhail, 2016).

■ Autoimmunity and Thyroid Disease

Most thyroid disorders are inextricably linked to autoantibodies against
nearly 200 thyrocyte components. These antibodies variably stimulate
thyroid function, block function, or cause thyroid inflammation that may lead
to follicular cell destruction. Often, these effects overlap.
Thyroid-stimulating autoantibodies, also called thyroid-stimulating
immunoglobulins (TSIs), bind and activate the TSH receptor to cause thyroid
hyperfunction and growth. Although these antibodies are identified in most
patients with classic Graves disease, simultaneous production of thyroidstimulating blocking antibodies may blunt this effect (Jameson, 2015).
Thyroid peroxidase (TPO) is a thyroid gland enzyme that normally
functions to produce thyroid hormones. Thyroid peroxidase antibodies are
directed against TPO and are identified in 5 to 15 percent of all gravidas
(Fig. 61-2) (Abbassi-Ghanavati, 2010; Casey, 2007; Sarkhail, 2016). TPO
antibodies have been associated in some studies with early pregnancy loss
and preterm birth (Consortium on Thyroid and Pregnancy, 2019; Plowden,
2017; Thangaratinam, 2011). In another study with more than 1000 pregnant
women with TPO antibodies, the risk for preterm birth was not elevated. The
risk for placental abruption was greater (Abbassi-Ghanavati, 2010). These
women are also at high risk for postpartum thyroid dysfunction and at
lifelong risk for permanent thyroid failure (Andersen, 2016; Jameson, 2015).

FIGURE 61-2 Incidence of antithyroid peroxidase antibodies in 16,407 women who are normal or
euthyroid, in 233 with isolated maternal hypothyroxinemia (IMH), in 598 with subclinical hypothyroidism
(SCH), and in 134 with overt hypothyroidism.

■ Fetal Microchimerism
Autoimmune thyroid disease is more common in women than in men. One
intriguing explanation for this disparity is fetal-to-maternal cell trafficking
(Greer, 2011). Fetal cells are known to enter maternal circulation during
pregnancy. When fetal lymphocytes enter maternal circulation, they can live
for more than 20 years. Stem cell interchange can lead to engraftment in
several maternal tissues and is termed fetal microchimerism. In some cases,
this may involve the thyroid gland (Bianchi, 2003; Boddy, 2015). A high
prevalence of Y chromosome–positive cells has been identified in the
thyroid glands of women with Hashimoto thyroiditis—60 percent, or with
Graves disease—40 percent (Renné, 2004). In another study of women
giving birth to a male fetus, more circulating male mononuclear cells were
found in those with Hashimoto thyroiditis (Lepez, 2011). Conversely, for

some autoimmune thyroid disorders, fetal microchimerism may actually have
a protective role (Cirello, 2015).

■ Hyperthyroidism
The incidence of thyrotoxicosis or hyperthyroidism in pregnancy varies and
complicates between 0.4 and 1.7 percent of births when gestational-ageappropriate TSH threshold values are used (Table 61-1). Because normal
pregnancy simulates some clinical findings similar to thyroxine excess,
clinically mild thyrotoxicosis may be difficult to diagnose. Suggestive
findings include tachycardia that exceeds that usually seen with normal
pregnancy, thyromegaly, exophthalmos, and failure to gain weight despite
adequate food intake. Laboratory testing is confirmatory. TSH levels are
markedly depressed, while serum free T4 (fT4) levels are elevated. Rarely,
hyperthyroidism is caused by abnormally high serum triiodothyronine (T3)
levels and called T3-toxicosis.
TABLE 61-1. Incidence of Overt Hyperthyroidism in Pregnancy

Thyrotoxicosis and Pregnancy

The overwhelming cause of thyrotoxicosis in pregnancy is Graves disease,
an organ-specific autoimmune process associated with thyroid-stimulating
TSH-receptor antibodies (De Leo, 2016). These antibodies are specific for
Graves hyperthyroidism, and targeted assays have been proposed for
diagnosis, management, and prognosis in pregnancies complicated by
hyperthyroidism (Alexander, 2017; Barbesino, 2013). With Graves disease,
during the course of pregnancy, hyperthyroid symptoms may initially worsen
because of hCG stimulation. Symptoms then diminish after a decline in
receptor-antibody titers in the second half of pregnancy (Mestman, 2012;
Sarkhail, 2016). Levels of blocking antibodies also decline during pregnancy
(Amino, 2003).

Treatment
Thyrotoxicosis during pregnancy can nearly always be controlled by
thionamide drugs. Propylthiouracil (PTU) has been historically preferred
because it partially inhibits the conversion of T4 to T3 and crosses the
placenta less readily than methimazole. The latter has also been associated
with a rare methimazole embryopathy, characterized by esophageal or
choanal atresia and aplasia cutis, a congenital skin defect. In one analysis
of Japanese women with first-trimester hyperthyroidism, the risk of major
fetal malformation in pregnancies exposed to methimazole was twofold
higher than risks with either PTU or potassium iodide use (Yoshihara, 2012,
2015). Specifically, seven of nine cases with aplasia cutis and the only case
of esophageal atresia were in the group of methimazole-exposed fetuses. A
PTU-associated embryopathy also has been described (Andersen, 2014).
Treatment with PTU is associated with a higher risk for liver injury (Yu,
2020). In 2009, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration issued a safety alert
on PTU-associated hepatotoxicity. This warning initially prompted the
American Thyroid Association and the American Association of Clinical
Endocrinologists (2011) to recommend PTU therapy during the first trimester
followed by a switch to methimazole beginning in the second trimester. The
obvious disadvantage is that this might lead to poorly controlled thyroid
function. More recently, the American Thyroid Association recommends PTU
therapy through 16 weeks’ gestation but does not make a recommendation
regarding switching to methimazole treatment because both agents are

associated with adverse effects and the harm from poorer control during the
switch is unknown (Alexander, 2017).
Transient leukopenia can be documented in up to 10 percent of women
taking antithyroid drugs, but this does not require therapy cessation
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020). In
approximately 0.3 percent, however, agranulocytosis develops suddenly and
mandates drug discontinuance (Thomas, 2013). It is not dose related, and
because of its acute onset, routine serial leukocyte counts during therapy are
not helpful. Instead, if fever or sore throat develops, women are instructed
to discontinue medication immediately and report for a complete blood
count.
Therapy may have other side effects. First, as noted, hepatotoxicity
develops in approximately 0.1 percent of treated women. Serial measurement
of hepatic enzyme levels does not prevent fulminant PTU-related
hepatotoxicity. Second, an allergic rash may develop in 3 to 5 percent of
women taking thionamide drugs (Alexander, 2017). In addition, although
approximately 20 percent of patients treated with PTU develop
antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA), only a small percentage of
these subsequently develops serious vasculitis (Kimura, 2013). Last,
thionamides have the potential to cause fetal complications, but these are
uncommon. In some cases, thionamides may even be therapeutic for the fetus.
This is because TSH-receptor antibodies cross the placenta and can
stimulate the fetal thyroid gland to cause thyrotoxicosis and goiter.
The initial thionamide dose is empirical. For nonpregnant patients, the
American Thyroid Association recommends that methimazole be used at an
initial higher daily dose of 10 to 20 mg orally followed by a lower
maintenance dose of 5 to 10 mg. If PTU is selected, a dose of 50 to 150 mg
orally three times daily may be initiated depending on clinical severity. At
Parkland Hospital, we usually initially give 300 or 450 mg of PTU daily in
three divided doses for pregnant women. Occasionally, daily doses of 600
mg or higher are necessary. We routinely transition women to methimazole
after the first trimester. If a switch is deemed appropriate, a dose ratio of
20:1—PTU to methimazole—is recommended (Alexander, 2017). The goal
is treatment with the lowest possible thionamide dose to maintain thyroid
hormone levels slightly above or in the high normal range, while TSH levels
remains suppressed. Serum free T4 concentrations are measured every 4 to 6
weeks.

Subtotal thyroidectomy can be performed after thyrotoxicosis is
medically controlled. This seldom is done during pregnancy but may be
appropriate for the very few women who cannot adhere to medical treatment
or in whom drug therapy proves toxic (Pearce, 2019; Stagnaro-Green,
2012a). Surgery is best accomplished in the second trimester. Potential
drawbacks of thyroidectomy include inadvertent resection of parathyroid
glands and injury to the recurrent laryngeal nerve.
Thyroid ablation with therapeutic radioactive iodine is
contraindicated in pregnancy (Lee, 2021). These doses may also cause fetal
thyroid gland destruction. Thus, when radioactive iodine is given
unintentionally, some clinicians recommend abortion. Any exposed fetus must
be carefully evaluated, and the incidence of fetal hypothyroidism depends on
gestational age and radioiodine dose (Berlin, 2001). Importantly, several
cases of inadvertent periconceptional exposure to radioactive iodine have
been reported with no obvious ill effects for the offspring (Radacic-Aumiler,
2016; Sadakata, 2014). The International Commission on Radiological
Protection recommends that women avoid pregnancy for 6 months after
radioablative therapy (Brent, 2008). Moreover, during lactation, the breast
also concentrates a substantial amount of iodine. This may pose a neonatal
risk due to 131I-containing milk ingestion and maternal risk from significant
breast irradiation. To limit the latter, a delay of 3 months after breastfeeding
cessation will more reliably ensure complete breast involution.

Pregnancy Outcome
Women with thyrotoxicosis have pregnancy outcomes that largely depend on
whether metabolic control is achieved. For example, excess thyroxine may
cause miscarriage or preterm birth (Andersen, 2014; Moleti, 2019; Sheehan,
2015). In untreated women or in those who remain hyperthyroid despite
therapy, incidences of preeclampsia, heart failure, and adverse perinatal
outcomes are higher (Table 61-2). One case-cohort study in the Danish
National Birth Cohort found that maternal hyperthyroidism was also a risk
for epilepsy and autism spectrum disorders in children (Andersen, 2018).
TABLE 61-2. Pregnancy Outcomes in Women with Overt Thyrotoxicosis

Fetal and Neonatal Effects
In most cases, the perinate is euthyroid. In some, however, hyper- or
hypothyroidism can develop with or without a goiter (Fig. 61-3). Clinical
hyperthyroidism develops in up to 1 percent of neonates born to women with
Graves disease (Barbesino, 2013; Fitzpatrick, 2010). If fetal thyroid disease
is suspected, nomograms exist for sonographically measured thyroid volume
(Gietka-Czernel, 2012).

FIGURE 61-3 Term hypothyroid neonate delivered of a woman with a 3-year history of thyrotoxicosis
that recurred at 26 weeks’ gestation. The mother was given methimazole, 30 mg orally daily, and was
euthyroid at delivery.

The fetus or neonate who was exposed to excessive maternal thyroxine
may have any of several clinical presentations. First, goitrous thyrotoxicosis
stems from placental transfer of thyroid-stimulating immunoglobulins.
Nonimmune hydrops and fetal demise can complicate fetal thyrotoxicosis
(Nachum, 2003; Stulberg, 2000). The best predictor of perinatal
thyrotoxicosis is the presence of thyroid-stimulating TSH-receptor antibodies
in women with Graves disease (Moleti, 2019; Nathan, 2014). This is
especially true if their levels are more than threefold higher than the upper
normal limit (Barbesino, 2013). In one study of 72 pregnant women with
Graves disease, none of the fetuses in 31 low-risk mothers had a goiter, and
all were euthyroid at delivery (Luton, 2005). Low risk was defined as no
requirement for antithyroid medications during the third trimester or an
absence of antithyroid antibodies. Conversely, in a group of 41 women who
either were taking antithyroid medication at delivery or had thyroid-receptor
antibodies, 11 fetuses—27 percent—had sonographic evidence of a goiter at
32 weeks’ gestation. Seven of these 11 fetuses were determined to be
hypothyroid, and the remaining fetuses were hyperthyroid.

Because of these findings, the American Thyroid Association
recommends routine evaluation of TSH-receptor antibodies (TRAb) in early
pregnancy in women treated with antithyroid medication (Alexander, 2017).
In those who have elevated TRAb levels or who continue therapy, repeat
testing is recommended between 18 and 22 weeks’ gestation. The American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020), however, does not
recommend such testing. If the fetus is thyrotoxic, maternal thionamide drugs
are increased even though maternal thyroid function may be within targeted
range (Mestman, 2012). If secondary maternal hypothyroidism develops, the
fetus can be treated by a reduced maternal antithyroid medication dose and
injections of intraamnionic thyroxine if necessary. Although usually shortlived, neonatal thyrotoxicosis may require a short course of antithyroid drug
treatment (Levy-Shraga, 2014; Nathan, 2014).
A second fetal presentation is goitrous hypothyroidism caused by fetal
exposure to maternally administered thionamides (see Fig. 61-3). Despite
theoretical neurological implications, reports of adverse fetal effects seem to
have been exaggerated. For example, in at least 239 treated thyrotoxic
women shown in Table 61-2, evidence of hypothyroidism was found in only
four newborns. Furthermore, at least four long-term studies report no
abnormal intellectual or physical development of these children (Mestman,
1998). As long as the maternal free thyroxine level remains in the upper
therapeutic to mildly thyrotoxic range, the likelihood of fetal hypothyroidism
is remote (Moleti, 2019).
A third presentation, nongoitrous hypothyroidism, may develop from
transplacental passage of maternal TSH-receptor blocking antibodies
(Fitzpatrick, 2010). And last, fetal thyrotoxicosis after maternal thyroid
gland ablation, usually with 131I radioiodine, may result from transplacental
thyroid-stimulating antibodies. In one report of early fetal exposure to
radioiodine, neonatal thyroid studies indicated transient hyperthyroidism
from maternal transfer of stimulating antibodies (Tran, 2010).

Fetal Diagnosis
Evaluation of fetal thyroid function remains controversial. Although the fetal
thyroid volume can be measured sonographically in women taking
thionamide drugs or in those with thyroid-stimulating antibodies, most
investigators do not currently recommend this routinely (Cohen, 2003; Luton,

2005). Fetal hyper- or hypothyroidism may cause hydrops, growth
restriction, goiter, or tachycardia, and fetal blood sampling may be
appropriate (Brand, 2005). The American Thyroid Association guidelines
for management of thyroid disease during pregnancy recommend that
umbilical cord blood sampling only be considered when a fetal goiter is
detected and the thyroid status of the fetus is unclear (Alexander, 2017).
Diagnosis and treatment are considered further in Chapter 19 (p. 370).

Thyroid Storm and Thyrotoxic Heart Failure
Both of these are acute and life-threatening in pregnancy. Thyroid storm is a
hypermetabolic state and is rare in pregnancy. In contrast, pulmonary
hypertension and heart failure from cardiomyopathy caused by the profound
myocardial effects of thyroxine are common in pregnant women (Sheffield,
2004). As shown in Table 61-2, heart failure developed in 8 percent of 90
women with uncontrolled thyrotoxicosis. In a registry of almost 70,000
pregnancies from one province in China, six of 155 (4 percent) women
diagnosed with thyrotoxicosis were found to have hyperthyroid heart disease
(Shan, 2019).
The pregnant woman with thyrotoxicosis has minimal cardiac reserve,
and decompensation is usually precipitated by preeclampsia, anemia, sepsis,
or a combination. Fortunately, thyroxine-induced cardiomyopathy and
pulmonary hypertension are frequently reversible (Shan, 2019; Sheffield,
2004).

Management
Treatment is similar for thyroid storm and heart failure and should be carried
out in an intensive care area that may include special-care units within labor
and delivery (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020).
Shown in Figure 61-4 is our stepwise approach to medical management of
thyroid storm or thyrotoxic heart failure. An hour or two after initial
thionamide administration, iodide is given to inhibit thyroidal release of T3
and T4. It can be given intravenously (IV) as sodium iodide or orally as
either saturated solution of potassium iodide (SSKI) or Lugol solution. With
a history of iodine-induced anaphylaxis, lithium carbonate, 300 mg every 6
hours, is given instead. Most authorities recommend dexamethasone, 2 mg IV
every 6 hours for four doses, to further block peripheral conversion of T4 to

T3. If a β-blocking drug is given to control tachycardia, its effect on heart
failure must be considered. Propranolol, labetalol, and esmolol are options.
Coexisting severe preeclampsia, infection, or anemia are aggressively
managed before delivery is considered.

FIGURE 61-4 Parkland Hospital management for thyroid storm or thyrotoxic heart failure. gtt = drops;
IV = intravenous; NGT = nasogastric tube; PO = orally; PTU = propylthiouracil.

Hyperemesis Gravidarum
Transient biochemical features of hyperthyroidism may be observed in 2 to
15 percent of women in early pregnancy (Fitzpatrick, 2010). Many women

with hyperemesis gravidarum have abnormally high serum T4 levels and low
TSH levels (Chap. 57, p. 1014). This results from TSH-receptor stimulation
from hCG. This transient condition is also termed gestational transient
thyrotoxicosis. Even if associated with hyperemesis, antithyroid drugs are
not warranted (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020).
The hCG levels do not correlate with T4 and TSH values, which trend to
normal by midpregnancy (Nathan, 2014; Yoshihara, 2015).

Gestational Trophoblastic Disease
The prevalence of T4 level elevation in women with a molar pregnancy
ranges between 25 and 65 percent (Hershman, 2004). As discussed,
abnormally high hCG levels lead to overstimulation of the TSH receptor.
Because these tumors are now usually diagnosed early, clinically apparent
hyperthyroidism is less common. With molar evacuation, serum free T4
levels usually drop to normal levels rapidly in parallel with declining hCG
concentrations.

Subclinical Hyperthyroidism
Third-generation TSH assays with an analytical sensitivity of 0.002 mU/mL
permit identification of subclinical thyroid disorders. These biochemically
defined extremes usually represent normal biological variations but may
herald the earliest stages of thyroid dysfunction. Subclinical
hyperthyroidism is characterized by an abnormally low serum TSH
concentration in concert with normal T4 hormone levels. Long-term effects of
persistent subclinical thyrotoxicosis include osteoporosis, cardiovascular
morbidity, and progression to overt thyrotoxicosis or thyroid failure. In one
recent metaanalysis of 20 studies, the prevalence of subclinical
hyperthyroidism was 1.77 percent in pregnant women (Dong, 2019).
Importantly, subclinical hyperthyroidism has not been associated with
adverse pregnancy outcomes (Casey, 2006). In separate retrospective
analyses of almost 25,000 women who underwent thyroid screening
throughout pregnancy, investigators also found no relationship between
subclinical hyperthyroidism and preeclampsia or gestational diabetes
(Wilson, 2012; Tudela, 2012).

Treatment of subclinical hyperthyroidism is unwarranted in pregnancy
because antithyroid drugs may affect the fetus. These women may benefit
from periodic surveillance, and approximately half eventually have normal
TSH concentrations.

■ Hypothyroidism
Overt or symptomatic hypothyroidism complicates between 0.2 and 1.2
percent of pregnancies (Andersen, 2016; Casey, 2017). Its insidious,
nonspecific clinical findings include fatigue, constipation, cold intolerance,
muscle cramps, and weight gain. A pathologically enlarged thyroid gland
depends on the etiology of hypothyroidism and is more likely in women in
areas of endemic iodine deficiency or those with Hashimoto thyroiditis.
Other findings are edema, dry skin, hair loss, and a prolonged relaxation
phase of deep tendon reflexes. Clinical or overt hypothyroidism is
confirmed by an abnormally high serum TSH level and an abnormally low T4
level. Subclinical hypothyroidism, discussed later, is defined by an elevated
serum TSH level but normal serum T4 concentration (Jameson, 2015).
Asymptomatic individuals with high levels of anti-TPO or antithyroglobulin
antibodies often are included in the spectrum of subclinical thyroid disease
and will also be discussed.

Overt Hypothyroidism and Pregnancy
The most common cause of hypothyroidism in pregnancy is Hashimoto
thyroiditis, characterized by glandular destruction from autoantibodies,
particularly anti-TPO antibodies. Another cause is postablative Graves
disease. Clinical identification of hypothyroidism is especially difficult
during pregnancy because many of the signs or symptoms are also common
pregnancy itself. Thyroid analyte testing should be performed on
symptomatic women, those with a personal or family history of thyroid
disease, or those with type 1 diabetes (American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists, 2020). Severe hypothyroidism during pregnancy is
uncommon, probably because it is often associated with infertility and higher
miscarriage rates (De Groot, 2012).

Treatment

The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020)
recommends oral replacement therapy for overt hypothyroidism beginning
with levothyroxine in doses of 1 to 2 μg/kg/d or approximately 100 μg daily.
Women who are athyreotic after thyroidectomy or radioiodine therapy may
require higher doses. Surveillance is with TSH levels measured at 4-week
intervals in the first half of pregnancy and at least once in the third trimester.
The levothyroxine dose is adjusted by 25- to 50-μg increments until TSH
values approximate 2.5 mU/L. Pregnancy is associated with an increased
dose requirement in approximately a third of supplemented women
(Abalovich, 2010; Alexander, 2004). The greater demand in pregnancy is
believed to be related to augmented estrogen production (Arafah, 2001).
Higher dose requirements begin as early as 5 weeks’ gestation.
Significant hypothyroidism may develop early in women without thyroid
reserve, such as those with a previous thyroidectomy, those with prior
radioiodine ablation, or those undergoing assisted reproductive techniques
(Alexander, 2004; Loh, 2009). Theoretically, an anticipatory 25-percent
increase in the levothyroxine dose at pregnancy confirmation will reduce this
likelihood. However, one randomized trial compared empiric increases in
dose against dose adjustments based on TSH levels and found both equally
effective (Sullivan, 2017). Those in the empiric-dosing group had a higher
risk of TSH suppression. At Parkland Hospital, all women with
hypothyroidism undergo TSH testing at initiation of prenatal care and
subsequent indicated dose adjustments. TSH determinations are repeated in
each trimester.

Pregnancy Outcome with Overt Hypothyroidism
Observational studies, although limited, indicate that excessive adverse
perinatal outcomes are associated with overt T4 deficiency (Table 61-3).
Preterm birth rates also are higher (Sheehan, 2015). With appropriate
replacement therapy, however, rates of adverse effects are not increased in
most reports (Bryant, 2015; Matalon, 2006; Tan, 2006). In one dissenting
study, risks for some pregnancy complications were greater even in women
taking replacement therapy (Wikner, 2008). Most experts agree that adequate
hormone replacement during pregnancy minimizes the risk of adverse
outcomes and most complications.

TABLE 61-3. Pregnancy Complications in 440 Women with
Hypothyroidism

Fetal and Neonatal Effects
Undoubtedly, maternal and fetal thyroid abnormalities are related. In both,
thyroid function is dependent on adequate iodine intake, and its deficiency
early in pregnancy can cause both maternal and fetal hypothyroidism. In one
analysis of 4273 mother-child pairs, an association between maternal thyroid
function during pregnancy and both neonatal and childhood thyroid function
was confirmed (Korevaar, 2016a). As discussed, maternal TSH-receptorblocking antibodies can cross the placenta and cause fetal thyroid
dysfunction. Rovelli and colleagues (2010) evaluated 129 neonates born to
women with autoimmune thyroiditis. They found that 28 percent had an
elevated TSH level on the third or fourth day of life, and 47 percent of these
had TPO antibodies on day 15. Still, autoantibodies were undetectable at age
6 months. In their analysis, Korevaar and coworkers (2016a) concluded that
maternal TPO antibodies have no clinically relevant effects on the thyroid
function of offspring. Indeed, prevalence of fetal hypothyroidism in women

with Hashimoto thyroiditis is estimated to be only 1 case in 180,000
newborns (Brown, 1996).

■ Subclinical Hypothyroidism
Although common in women, the incidence of subclinical hypothyroidism
varies depending on age, race, dietary iodine intake, and serum TSH
thresholds used (Jameson, 2015). In two large studies totaling more than
25,000 pregnant women screened in the first half of pregnancy, subclinical
hypothyroidism was identified in 2.3 percent (Casey, 2005; Cleary-Goldman,
2008). The rate of progression to overt thyroid failure is affected by TSH
level, age, other disorders such as diabetes, and presence and concentration
of antithyroid antibodies.
Diez and Iglesias (2004) prospectively followed 93 nonpregnant women
with subclinical hypothyroidism for 5 years and reported that in a third, TSH
values became normal. In the other two thirds, those women whose TSH
levels were 10 to 15 mU/L developed overt disease at a rate of 19 cases per
100 patient-years. Those women whose TSH levels were <10 mU/L
developed overt hypothyroidism at a rate of 2 cases per 100 patient-years.
Regarding screening for subclinical hypothyroidism in nonpregnant
individuals, the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force also reports that nearly
all patients who develop overt hypothyroidism within 5 years have an initial
TSH level >10 mU/L (Helfand, 2004; Karmisholt, 2008). From one
metaanalysis of data from nonpregnant adults with subclinical
hypothyroidism, thyroid hormone therapy was not associated with improved
general quality of life, thyroid-related symptoms, depression, blood pressure,
or other cardiovascular outcomes (Feller, 2018).
In a 20-year follow-up study of 5805 women who were screened in early
pregnancy, only 3 percent developed thyroid disease. Of the 224 women
identified with subclinical hypothyroidism during pregnancy, 17 percent
developed thyroid disease in the next 20 years, and most of these had either
TPO or thyroglobulin antibodies during pregnancy (Männistö, 2010). Thus,
the likelihood of progression to overt hypothyroidism during pregnancy in
otherwise healthy women with subclinical hypothyroidism seems remote.

Subclinical Hypothyroidism and Pregnancy

Interest in this subject was heightened 20 years ago by two studies reporting
that undiagnosed maternal thyroid hypofunction may impair fetal
neuropsychological development (Haddow, 1999; Pop, 1999). Notably, in
the Haddow study, many women had both elevated TSH and abnormally low
serum free T4 levels and thus had overt hypothyroidism. To evaluate any
adverse pregnancy effects, Casey and colleagues (2005) identified
subclinical hypothyroidism in 2.3 percent of 17,298 women screened at
Parkland Hospital before midpregnancy. These women had small but
significantly higher incidences of preterm birth, placental abruption, and
neonates admitted to the intensive care nursery compared with euthyroid
women. In another study of 10,990 similar women, however, ClearyGoldman and associates (2008) did not find such associations.
Other studies subsequently confirmed a link between subclinical thyroid
function and adverse outcomes (Chen, 2017; Maraka, 2016). One included
24,883 women screened throughout pregnancy and showed an almost twofold
greater risk of severe preeclampsia (Wilson, 2012). In an analysis of the
latter cohort, a consistent relationship was shown between rising TSH levels
and the risk for gestational diabetes (Tudela, 2012). Last, Nelson and
associates (2014) found an elevated risk for diabetes and stillbirth.
Lazarus and coworkers (2012) reported the findings of the international
multicenter Controlled Antenatal Thyroid Screening (CATS) study. They
evaluated prenatal thyroid screening with randomized treatment of both
subclinical hypothyroidism and isolated maternal hypothyroxinemia. They
found that offspring IQ scores at age 3 years were not superior in the treated
cohort. Later evaluation of these offspring through age 9 confirmed that
maternal treatment offered no benefit (Hales, 2018). Last, the Maternal-Fetal
Medicine Units (MFMU) Network screened more than 97,000 pregnant
women for thyroid disorders and reported that 3.3 percent had subclinical
hypothyroidism. These 677 women were randomly assigned to thyroxine
replacement therapy or placebo. As reported by Casey and colleagues
(2017) and shown in Table 61-4, adverse pregnancy outcomes or cognitive
development in the offspring at 5 years did not differ between groups. Annual
developmental testing scores and behavioral and attention-deficit
hyperactivity disorder results also did not differ.

TABLE 61-4. Maternal-Fetal Medicine Unites Network: Pregnancy
Outcomes According to Diagnosis and Treatment of Thyroid Disordersa

Because of earlier study findings, some professional organizations began
to recommend routine prenatal screening and treatment of subclinical
hypothyroidism. However, after the CATS and MFMU Network studies,
more recent clinical practice guidelines from the Endocrine Society, the
American Thyroid Association, and the American Association of Clinical
Endocrinologists now uniformly recommended screening only those at
greater risk during pregnancy (Alexander, 2017; De Groot, 2012; Garber,
2012). This has been and still is the recommendation of the American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020).

Isolated Maternal Hypothyroxinemia
Women with low serum free T4 values but a normal-range TSH level are
considered to have isolated maternal hypothyroxinemia. Its incidence in
two large trials was 1.3 to 2.1 percent (Casey, 2007; Cleary-Goldman,

2008). As shown in Figure 61-2, unlike in subclinical hypothyroidism, these
women have a low prevalence of antithyroid antibodies.
Initial studies reported that offspring of women with isolated
hypothyroxinemia had neurodevelopmental difficulties (Levie, 2018; Li,
2010; Pop, 1999, 2003). Casey and colleagues (2007), however, found no
higher risks in these women for other adverse perinatal outcomes compared
with those of euthyroid women. In contrast, a recent individual patient data
systematic analysis including 47,045 pregnant women identified a higher risk
of preterm birth associated with isolated hypothyroxinemia (Consortium on
Thyroid and Pregnancy, 2019).
The aforementioned CATS study, including follow-up of offspring
through age 9 years, did not find improved neurodevelopmental outcomes in
women with isolated hypothyroxinemia who were then treated with thyroxine
(Hales, 2018; Lazarus, 2012). The randomized trial conducted by the MFMU
Network also demonstrated no improvement in neurocognitive development
with thyroxine treatment during pregnancy (Casey, 2017). This large
randomized study also found no higher rates of adverse pregnancy outcomes
between groups and found that early thyroxine treatment offered no benefits
(see Table 61-4). The American Thyroid Association currently recommends
against routine treatment of isolated hypothyroxinemia in pregnancy
(Alexander, 2017).

■ Euthyroid Autoimmune Thyroid Disease
Autoantibodies to TPO and thyroglobulin have been identified in 2 to 17
percent of pregnant women worldwide (Alexander, 2017). Most who test
positive for such antibodies, however, are euthyroid. That said, such women
carry a two- to fivefold increased risk for early pregnancy loss (StagnaroGreen, 2004; Thangaratinam, 2011). The presence of thyroid antibodies has
also been associated with preterm birth (He, 2012). In a randomized
treatment trial of 115 euthyroid women with TPO antibodies, levothyroxine
astoundingly reduced the preterm birth rate from 22 to 7 percent (Negro,
2006). In a follow-up trial restricted to women with a TSH <2.5 mU/L,
however, levothyroxine treatment had no effect on this risk (Negro, 2016).
In another study, Abbassi-Ghanavati and associates (2010) evaluated
pregnancy outcomes in more than 1000 untreated women with TPO
antibodies and did not find a higher risk for preterm birth compared with the

risk in 16,000 euthyroid women without antibodies. These investigators,
however, did find a threefold greater risk of placental abruption in these
women. More recently, the Consortium on Thyroid and Pregnancy-Study
Group on Preterm Birth (2019) estimated a marginal 1.3-fold increased risk
for preterm birth in their metaanalysis of women with TPO antibodies.
As with nonpregnant subjects with TPO antibodies, pregnant women are
also at increased risk in later life for progression of thyroid disease and
postpartum thyroiditis (Jameson, 2015; Stagnaro-Green, 2012a). Currently,
universal screening for the thyroid autoantibodies is not recommended by any
professional organization (Alexander, 2017; American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020; De Groot, 2012).

■ Iodine Deficiency
Decreasing iodide fortification of table salt and bread products in the United
States during the past 25 years has led to occasional iodide deficiency
(Caldwell, 2005; Hollowell, 1998). Importantly, the most recent National
Health and Nutrition Examination Survey indicated that, overall, the United
States population remains iodine sufficient (Herrick, 2018). However,
experts agree that iodine nutrition in vulnerable populations, such as pregnant
women, requires continued monitoring. In 2014, the Office of Dietary
Supplements of the National Institutes of Health sponsored three workshops
to identify information gaps and develop an iodine research agenda.
Participants emphasized the gradual decline in median urinary iodine levels
in pregnant women and the serious potential effects on developing fetuses
(Pearce, 2016).
Dietary iodine requirements are higher during pregnancy due to
augmented thyroid hormone production, increased renal losses, and fetal
iodine requirements. Adequate iodine is requisite for fetal neurological
development beginning soon after conception, and abnormalities vary by the
degree of deficiency. For example, Levie and colleagues (2019)
demonstrated a positive correlation between maternal urinary
iodine/creatinine ratio in the first trimester and offspring nonverbal IQ
scores. UNICEF (2018) estimates that nearly 19 million babies born globally
every year are at risk of permanent yet preventable brain damage or of
reduced cognitive function from iodine deficiency.

Although it is doubtful that mild deficiency causes intellectual
impairment, supplementation does prevent fetal goiter (Stagnaro-Green,
2012b). In one randomized trial with more than 800 women who had mild
deficiency, daily iodine supplementation had no effect on child
neurodevelopment at age 5 to 6 years (Gowachirapant, 2017).
Supplementation studies conducted in regions with moderate deficiency have
reported inconsistent findings with regard to psychomotor development
(Bell, 2016). Berbel and associates (2009) began daily supplementation in
more than 300 pregnant women with moderate deficiency at three time
periods. They found improved neurobehavioral development scores in
offspring of women supplemented with 200 μg of potassium iodide very
early in pregnancy. Similarly, Velasco and coworkers (2009) found improved
Bayley Psychomotor Development scores in offspring of women
supplemented with 300 μg of iodine daily in the first trimester. In contrast,
Murcia and colleagues (2011) identified lower psychomotor scores in 1year-old infants whose mothers reported daily supplementation of more than
150 μg. Severe deficiency is frequently associated with damage typically
encountered with endemic cretinism, and benefits of universal salt iodization
or supplementation have been confirmed (Alexander, 2017).
Regarding daily iodine intake, the Institute of Medicine (2001)
recommends 220 μg/d during pregnancy and 290 μg/d during lactation (Chap.
10, p. 185). The American Thyroid Association recommends an average
iodine intake of 250 μg/d in all pregnant women and has recommended that
150 μg of iodine be added to prenatal vitamins to achieve this average daily
oral intake (Alexander, 2017; Kerver, 2021). In an older study, Leung and
coworkers (2011) reported that only half of the prenatal multivitamins in the
United States contained iodine. Without evidence of benefit, however, it is
hard to justify the cost of iodine supplementation of large numbers of
pregnant women in areas with mild iodine deficiency (Pearce, 2016).
Importantly, experts caution against oversupplementation since excessive
iodine exposure can lead to subclinical thyroid dysfunction and is associated
with increased prevalence of thyroid autoimmunity (Pearce 2016; Shi, 2015).
The American Thyroid Association advises against exceeding twice the daily
recommended intake of iodine, which is 500 μg/d (Alexander, 2017).

■ Congenital Hypothyroidism

Universal newborn screening for neonatal hypothyroidism was introduced in
1974 and is now required by law in all states (Chap. 32, p. 594). This
develops in approximately 1 in 2000 newborns. The reported incidence has
increased during the past few decades and is thought to stem from greater
preterm neonate survival rates and methodological shifts in newborn
screening (McGrath, 2019). Variation in TSH percentiles according to
gestational age at delivery have led some to propose age-adjusted cutoffs to
avoid overdiagnosis (Kaluarachchi, 2019). Developmental disorders of the
thyroid gland such as agenesis and hypoplasia account for 80 to 90 percent of
cases. The remainder may be caused by hereditary defects in thyroid
hormone production, but it is estimated that up to 15 percent may have a
transient form of the disease (McGrath, 2018; Oron, 2018).
Early and aggressive thyroxine replacement is critical for affected
newborns (van Trotsenburg, 2021). In one study of 76 children with
congenital hypothyroidism, IQ scores at age 18 years did not differ from
those in 40 siblings, provided the initial thyroxine dose was sufficiently high
(Aleksander, 2018).

■ Postpartum Thyroiditis
Transient autoimmune thyroiditis is consistently found in approximately 5 to
10 percent of women during the first year after childbirth (Nathan, 2014;
Nguyen, 2019). With an onset within 12 months, postpartum thyroid
dysfunction includes hyperthyroidism, hypothyroidism, or both. The
propensity for thyroiditis antedates pregnancy and is directly related to
increasing serum levels of thyroid autoantibodies. Up to 50 percent of
women who have thyroid antibodies in the first trimester will develop
postpartum thyroiditis (Stagnaro-Green, 2012a). As mentioned previously,
routine thyroid autoantibody testing during pregnancy is currently not
recommended (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020).
In clinical practice, postpartum thyroiditis is diagnosed infrequently
because it typically develops months after delivery and causes vague
symptoms (Nguyen, 2019). The presentation varies, and classically two
clinical phases that may develop in succession are recognized. The first and
earliest is destruction-induced thyrotoxicosis with symptoms from
excessive release of hormone from glandular disruption. The onset is abrupt,
and a small, painless goiter is common. From many possible symptoms, only

fatigue and palpitations are more frequent in thyrotoxic women compared
with normal controls. This thyrotoxic phase usually lasts only a few months.
Thionamides are ineffective, and if symptoms are severe, a β-blocking agent
may be given. The second and usually later phase between 4 and 8 months
postpartum is hypothyroidism from thyroiditis. Thyromegaly and other
symptoms are common and more prominent than during the thyrotoxic phase.
Levothyroxine replacement at doses of 25 to 75 μg/d is typically given for 6
to 12 months.
Stagnaro-Green and associates (2011) reported postpartum surveillance
results in 4562 Italian gravidas who had been screened for thyroid disease in
pregnancy. Serum TSH and anti-TPO antibody levels were measured again at
6 and 12 months. Overall, 169 women (3.9 percent) developed postpartum
thyroiditis, and two thirds of these were identified to have hypothyroidism
only. The other third were diagnosed with hyperthyroidism. Only 14 percent
of all women demonstrated the classic biphasic progression. These findings
are consistent with data compiled from 20 other studies between 1982 and
2008 (Stagnaro-Green, 2012a).
Importantly, women who experience either type of postpartum thyroiditis
have a 20- to 30-percent risk of eventually developing permanent
hypothyroidism, and the annual progression rate is 3.6 percent (Nathan,
2014). Women at greater risk for developing hypothyroidism are those with
higher titers of thyroid antibodies and higher TSH levels during the initial
hypothyroid phase. Others may develop subclinical disease, but half of those
with thyroiditis who are positive for TPO antibodies develop permanent
hypothyroidism by 6 to 7 years (Stagnaro-Green, 2012a).
An association between postpartum thyroiditis and postpartum
depression has been proposed but remains unresolved (Alexander, 2017).
Similarly unsettled is the link between depression and thyroid antibodies.
Kuijpens and associates (2001) reported that TPO antibodies were a marker
for postpartum depression in euthyroid women. In a randomized trial,
however, Harris and coworkers (2002) reported no difference in postpartum
depression in 342 women with TPO antibodies who were given either
levothyroxine or placebo. Somewhat related, in the MFMU Network
randomized trial, women with subclinical hypothyroidism allocated to
thyroxine treatment during pregnancy did not experience improvement in their
depression (Costantine, 2020).

■ Nodular Thyroid Disease
Palpable thyroid nodules can be found in up to 5 percent of reproductiveaged women (Angell, 2019). Management of a palpable thyroid nodule
during pregnancy depends on gestational age and mass size. Small nodules
detected by sensitive sonographic methods are more common during
pregnancy in some populations. Kung and associates (2002) used highresolution sonography and found that 15 percent of Chinese women had
nodules larger than 2 mm in diameter. Almost half of cases had multiple
masses. The nodules usually enlarged modestly across pregnancy and did not
regress postpartum. Biopsy of those measuring >5 mm3 that persisted at 3
months usually showed nodular hyperplasia, and none was malignant. In most
studies, 90 to 95 percent of solitary nodules are benign (Burch, 2016).
Evaluation of thyroid nodules during pregnancy should be similar to that
for nonpregnant patients. As discussed in Chapter 49 (p. 875), radioiodine
scanning in pregnancy is usually not recommended (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020). Sonographic examination reliably
detects nodules >5 mm, and their solid or cystic structure also is determined.
According to the American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists,
sonographic characteristics associated with malignancy include
hypoechogenic pattern, irregular margins, and microcalcifications (Gharib,
2016). Fine-needle aspiration (FNA) under ultrasound guidance is an
excellent assessment method because cytological diagnostic criteria are not
substantially influenced by pregnancy (Gharib, 2016). If the FNA biopsy
shows a follicular lesion, surgery may be deferred until postpartum.
Evaluation of thyroid cancer involves a multidisciplinary approach
(Fagin, 2016). Most thyroid carcinomas are well differentiated and indolent.
Messuti and coworkers (2014) provided evidence that persistence or
recurrence of these tumors may be more common in pregnant women. For
thyroid malignancy diagnosed in the first or second trimester, thyroidectomy
may be performed before the third trimester. In women without evidence of
an aggressive thyroid cancer or in those diagnosed in the third trimester,
surgical treatment can be deferred until the early puerperium (Gharib, 2016)
(Chap. 66, p. 1174).

PARATHYROID DISEASE

Parathyroid hormone (PTH) maintains extracellular fluid calcium
concentration. This 84-amino-acid hormone acts directly on bone and kidney
and indirectly on small intestine to increase serum calcium (Potts, 2015).
PTH secretion is regulated by serum ionized calcium concentration through a
negative feedback system. Calcitonin is a potent parathyroid hormone that
acts as a physiological PTH antagonist. The relationships between these
hormones, calcium metabolism, and PTH-related protein (PTH-rP)
produced by fetal tissue are discussed in Chapter 4 (p. 73).
Of fetal demands, calcium requirements reach 300 mg/d in late pregnancy
and 30 g for the entire gestation. These needs and greater renal calcium loss
from augmented maternal glomerular filtration substantively raise maternal
calcium demands. Total serum calcium levels decline with serum albumin
concentrations, but ionized calcium levels remain unchanged. Pregnancy is
also associated with a twofold rise in serum concentrations of 1,25dihydroxyvitamin D, which increases gastrointestinal calcium absorption.
The effectuating hormone is probably of placental and decidual origin since
maternal PTH levels are low normal or decreased during pregnancy
(Cooper, 2011). Calcium is actively transported across the placenta and
deposited in the developing fetal skeletal system. Fetal calcium homeostasis
is maintained through a complex interplay between PTH-rP, PTH, and
receptors in the placenta, fetal kidney, and fetal skeleton (Hirai, 2015).

■ Hyperparathyroidism
Hypercalcemia is caused by hyperparathyroidism or cancer in 90 percent of
cases (Potts, 2015). Because many automated laboratory systems include
serum calcium measurement, hyperparathyroidism has changed from being a
condition defined by symptoms to one that is discovered on routine screening
(Pallan, 2012). Hypercalcemia has a reported prevalence of 2 to 3 cases per
1000 women, but some estimate the rate to reach 14 cases per 1000 if
asymptomatic women are included. Almost 80 percent are caused by a
solitary adenoma, and another 15 percent by hyperfunctioning of all four
glands. In the remainder, an associated malignancy is usually obvious. Of
note, PTH produced by tumors is not identical to the natural hormone and
may not be detected by routine assays.
In most patients with hyperparathyroidism, the serum calcium level is
elevated to within only 1 to 1.5 mg/dL above the upper normal limit. This

may help to explain why only 20 percent of those who have abnormally
elevated levels are symptomatic (Bilezikian, 2004). In a fourth, however,
symptoms become apparent when the serum calcium level continues to rise.
Hypercalcemic crisis manifests as stupor, nausea, vomiting, weakness,
fatigue, and dehydration.
Women with symptomatic hyperparathyroidism should be surgically
treated (Davis, 2020; Potts, 2015). Indications for parathyroidectomy include
a serum calcium level 1.0 mg/dL above the upper normal range, a calculated
creatinine clearance <60 mL/min, reduced bone density, or age >50 years
(Bilezikian, 2009). Those not meeting these criteria should undergo annual
serum calcium and creatinine level measurement and bone density
assessment every 1 to 2 years (Pallan, 2012).

Hyperparathyroidism in Pregnancy
In their review, Schnatz and Thaxton (2005) found fewer than 200 reported
cases of hyperparathyroidism complicating pregnancy. As in nonpregnant
patients, parathyroid adenoma is the most common etiology. Ectopic
parathyroid hormone production and rare cases of parathyroid carcinoma
have been reported in pregnancy (Montoro, 2000; Saad, 2014). Symptoms of
hyperparathyroidism during pregnancy include hyperemesis, generalized
weakness, renal calculi, and psychiatric disorders. Occasionally, pancreatitis
is the presenting disorder (Hirsch, 2015).
Pregnancy theoretically improves hyperparathyroidism by significantly
shunting calcium to the fetus and by augmented renal excretion. When these
effects are withdrawn, however, postpartum hypercalcemic crisis is a
danger. This life-threatening complication can be seen with serum calcium
levels >14 mg/dL, and nausea, vomiting, tremors, dehydration, and mental
status changes are symptoms (Malekar-Raikar, 2011).
Early reports described excessive stillbirths and preterm deliveries in
pregnancies complicated by hyperparathyroidism. More recent reports,
however, describe lower rates of stillbirth, neonatal death, and neonatal
tetany (Kovacs, 2011). Other fetal complications include miscarriage, fetalgrowth restriction, and low birthweight (Chamarthi, 2011).) One group
reported a 30-percent incidence of preeclampsia (Rigg, 2019).

Management in Pregnancy

Surgical removal of a symptomatic parathyroid adenoma is preferable. This
should prevent fetal and neonatal morbidities and postpartum parathyroid
crises (Kovacs, 2011). In one case series from an Australian referral
hospital, 22 pregnancies were managed medically, and six women underwent
parathyroidectomy. Preterm delivery was reported in 66 percent of
pregnancies managed without surgery, whereas all surgically treated women
delivered at term (Rigg, 2019). Elective neck exploration during pregnancy
is usually well tolerated, even in the third trimester (Hirsch, 2015; Stringer,
2017). In at least two cases, a mediastinal adenoma was removed at
midpregnancy (Rooney, 1998; Saad, 2014).
Medical management may however be appropriate in asymptomatic
pregnant women with mild hypercalcemia (Hirsch, 2015). If so, patients are
carefully monitored in the puerperium for hypercalcemic crisis. Initial
medical management might include calcitonin to decrease skeletal calcium
release, or oral phosphate, 1 to 1.5 g daily in divided doses, to bind excess
calcium. For women with dangerously elevated serum calcium levels or
those who are mentally obtunded with hypercalcemic crisis, emergency
treatment is instituted. Diuresis with IV normal saline is begun so that urine
flow exceeds 150 mL/hr. Furosemide is given in conventional doses to block
tubular calcium reabsorption. Importantly, hypokalemia and hypomagnesemia
should be prevented. Adjunctive therapy includes mithramycin, which
inhibits bone resorption.

Neonatal Effects
Normally, cord blood calcium levels are higher than maternal levels (Chap.
7, p. 136). With maternal hyperparathyroidism, abnormally elevated maternal
and thus fetal levels further suppress fetal parathyroid function. Because of
this, newborn calcium levels rapidly drop after birth, and 15 to 25 percent of
these neonates develop severe hypocalcemia with or without tetany (Molitch,
2000). Neonatal hypoparathyroidism caused by maternal
hyperparathyroidism is usually transient and is treated with calcium and
1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 (calcitriol). The latter will not be effective in
preterm infants, however, because the intestinal vitamin D receptor is
insufficiently expressed (Kovacs, 2011). Neonatal tetany or seizures should
stimulate an evaluation for maternal hyperparathyroidism (Beattie, 2000; Ip,
2003).

■ Hypoparathyroidism
The most common cause of hypocalcemia is hypoparathyroidism that usually
follows parathyroid or thyroid surgery. It is estimated that almost 80 percent
of cases are attributable to complications of anterior neck surgery (Gafni,
2019). Hypoparathyroidism is characterized by facial muscle spasms, muscle
cramps, and paresthesias of the lips, tongue, fingers, and feet. This can
progress to tetany and seizures (Potts, 2015). Chronically, hypocalcemic
pregnant women may also have a fetus with skeletal demineralization
resulting in multiple bone fractures in the neonatal period (Alikasifoglu,
2005).
Maternal treatment includes calcitriol, dihydrotachysterol, or large
vitamin D doses of 50,000 to 150,000 U/d; calcium gluconate or calcium
lactate in doses of 3 to 5 g/d; and a low-phosphate diet. Fetal risks from
large doses of vitamin D have not been established. During treatment, the
therapeutic challenge in women with known hypoparathyroidism is
management of blood calcium levels. It is possible that the greater calcium
absorption typical of pregnancy will result in lower calcium requirements or
that the fetal demand for calcium will result in greater need. The goal during
pregnancy is to maintain a corrected calcium level in the low normal range.

■ Pregnancy and Lactation-associated Osteoporosis
In most gravidas, even with their remarkably increased calcium
requirements, it is uncertain whether pregnancy causes osteopenia. In one
study of 200 women, bone density declined during pregnancy (Kraemer,
2011). Women who breastfed, carried twin pregnancies, or had a low body
mass index were at higher risk of bone loss. Thomas and Weisman (2006) in
their review cite a 3- to 4-percent average reduction in bone mineral density
during pregnancy. Lactation also represents a period of negative calcium
balance that may be corrected through maternal skeletal resorption.
However, data from the Women’s Health Initiative found that parity, number
of pregnancies, age at first pregnancy, breastfeeding, and duration of
breastfeeding were not associated with postmenopausal hip fracture risk or
bone density losses (Crandall, 2017).
The most common symptom of this rare disorder of pregnancy-associated
osteoporosis is back pain in late pregnancy or postpartum. Other symptoms

are hip pain, either unilateral or bilateral, and difficulty in weight bearing
until the woman is nearly immobilized (Maliha, 2012). In more than half of
women, no apparent reason for osteopenia is found. Some known causes are
heparin (unfractionated only), bed rest, and corticosteroid therapy
(Cunningham, 2005; Galambosi, 2016). In a few cases, overt
hyperparathyroidism or thyrotoxicosis eventually develops.
Treatment is problematic and includes calcium and vitamin D
supplementation and pain management. Long-term surveillance of osteopenia
indicates that although bone density improves, these women and their
offspring may have chronic osteopenia (Carbone, 1995). Related, prenatal
supplementation of normal women with cholecalciferol, 1000 IU/d, did not
increase offspring bone mineral content, although it did ensure maternal
vitamin D repletion (Cooper, 2016). In lactating women with osteoporosis,
some advocate cessation of breastfeeding (Zhang, 2017).

ADRENAL GLAND DISORDERS
■ Pheochromocytoma
Pregnancy has profound effects on adrenal cortical secretion. These
interrelationships were reviewed by Lekarev and New (2011) and are
discussed in detail in Chapter 4 (p. 73). Several adrenal disorders may be
encountered in pregnancy.
Of these, pheochromocytomas are chromaffin tumors that secrete
catecholamines and usually are located in the adrenal medulla, although 10
percent are located in sympathetic ganglia. They are called the 10-percent
tumor because approximately 10 percent are bilateral, 10 percent are extra
adrenal, and 10 percent are malignant. These tumors can be associated with
medullary thyroid carcinoma and hyperparathyroidism in some of the
autosomally dominant or recessive multiple endocrine neoplasia
syndromes, as well as in neurofibromatosis and von Hippel-Lindau disease
(Neumann, 2018).
Pheochromocytomas complicate approximately 1 per 50,000 pregnancies
(Quartermaine, 2018). Notably, they are found in 0.2 to 0.6 percent of
hypertensive patients (Lenders, 2019). Symptoms are usually paroxysmal and
manifest as hypertensive crisis, seizures, or anxiety attacks. Others are
headaches, sweating, palpitations, chest pain, nausea, vomiting, and pallor or

flushing. Hypertension is sustained in 60 percent of patients, but half of these
also have paroxysmal crises.
Standard screening is quantification of metanephrines and catecholamine
metabolites in a 24-hour urine specimen (Neumann, 2018). Diagnosis is
established by measurement of a 24-hour urine collection with at least two of
three assays for free catecholamines, metanephrines, or vanillylmandelic
acid (VMA). Determination of plasma catecholamine metabolite levels is the
most sensitive test, and a pheochromocytoma diagnosis is excluded if they
are within normal range (Eisenhofer, 2018). In nonpregnant patients, adrenal
localization is usually successful with either computed tomography (CT) or
magnetic resonance (MR) imaging. For most cases, preferred treatment is
laparoscopic adrenalectomy (Neumann, 2018).
In pregnancy, these tumors are rare but result in dangerous complications.
Geelhoed (1983) provided an earlier review of 89 cases in which 43
mothers died. Maternal death was much more common if the tumor was not
diagnosed antepartum—58 versus 18 percent. As seen in Table 61-5,
maternal mortality rates are now lower but still formidable. In one review of
77 cases, antepartum diagnosis was the most important determinant of
maternal mortality risk (Biggar, 2013). However, Salazar-Vega and
colleagues (2014) described good outcomes in women diagnosed after
delivery.
TABLE 61-5. Outcomes of Pregnancies Complicated by
Pheochromocytoma and Reported in Four Contiguous Epochs

Diagnosis of pheochromocytoma in pregnancy is similar to that for
nonpregnant patients. MR imaging is the preferred technique to locate
adrenal and extra-adrenal pheochromocytomas (Fig. 61-5). Importantly,
differentiating preeclampsia from the hypertensive crisis caused by
pheochromocytoma is essential.

FIGURE 61-5 Coronal magnetic resonance image taken in a 32-week pregnant woman shows a rightsided pheochromocytoma (arrow) and its position relative to the liver (L) above it.

Immediate control of hypertension and symptoms is attained with an αadrenergic blocking agent such as phenoxybenzamine. The dose is 10 to 30
mg, two to four times daily. After α-blockade is achieved, β-blocking drugs
such as propranolol may be given for tachycardia. In many cases, surgical
exploration and tumor removal are performed during pregnancy, preferably
during the second trimester (Biggar, 2013; Dong, 2014). Successful
laparoscopic removal of adrenal tumors has become the norm (Miller, 2012;
Zuluaga-Gómez, 2012). Donatini and colleagues (2018) described three
cases of women with bilateral tumors who had laparoscopic unilateral
adrenalectomy of the largest tumor during pregnancy and subsequent
contralateral adrenalectomy after delivery to avoid the maternal and fetal

effects of adrenal insufficiency. If diagnosed later in pregnancy, either
planned cesarean delivery with tumor excision or postpartum resection is
appropriate.
Recurrent tumors are troublesome, and even with good blood pressure
control, dangerous peripartum hypertension may develop. We have cared for
three women in whom recurrent pheochromocytoma was identified during
pregnancy. Hypertension was managed with phenoxybenzamine in all three.
Two newborns were healthy, but a third was stillborn in a mother with a
massive tumor burden who was receiving phenoxybenzamine, 100 mg daily.
In all three women, the tumor was resected postpartum.

■ Cushing Syndrome
This syndrome is rare and the female:male ratio is 3:1 (Arit, 2018). Most
cases of Cushing syndrome are iatrogenic from long-term corticosteroid
treatment. Excessive glucocorticoids can also be the result of a pituitary
adenoma, adrenal tumor, or bilateral adrenal hyperplasia (Melmed, 2020).
Cushing disease refers to bilateral adrenal hyperplasia stimulated by
corticotropin-producing pituitary adenomas. Corticotropin is also called
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH). Most adenomas are microadenomas
measuring <1 cm, and half measure <5 mm. Rarely, abnormal secretion of
hypothalamic corticotropin-releasing factor may cause corticotropic
hyperplasia. Such hyperplasia may also be caused by nonendocrine tumors
that produce polypeptides similar to either corticotropin-releasing factor or
corticotropin. Less than a fourth of cases of Cushing syndrome are
corticotropin independent, and most of these are caused by an adrenal
adenoma (Machado, 2018). Tumors are usually bilateral, and half are
malignant. Occasionally, associated androgen excess may lead to severe
virilization.
The typical cushingoid body habitus is caused by adipose tissue
deposition creating moon facies, a buffalo hump, and truncal obesity.
Fatigability and weakness, hypertension, hirsutism, and amenorrhea are each
encountered in 75 to 85 percent of nonpregnant patients (Hatipoglu, 2012;
Melmed, 2020). Personality changes, easy bruising, and cutaneous striae are
common. Up to 60 percent may have impaired glucose tolerance. Diagnosis
can be difficult and is suggested by elevated plasma cortisol levels that
cannot be suppressed by dexamethasone or by elevated 24-hour urinary free

cortisol excretion in three collections (Arit, 2018; Loriaux, 2017). Neither
test is totally accurate, and each is more difficult to interpret in obese
patients. Serum corticotropin levels and CT and MR imaging are used to
localize pituitary and adrenal tumors or hyperplasia.
In pregnancy, diagnosis can be difficult because of pregnancy-induced
increases in plasma cortisol, corticotropin, and corticotropin-releasing factor
levels. Measurement of urinary free cortisol excretion in a 24-hour collection
sample is recommended. With interpretation of results, the normal elevation
seen in pregnancy is factored. Because most women have corticotropindependent Cushing syndrome, associated androgen excess may cause
anovulation, and pregnancy is rare. Caimari and coworkers (2017) identified
263 pregnancies in 220 women with Cushing syndrome in their systematic
review. These differ compared with nonpregnant women in that more than
half are caused by corticotropin-independent adrenal adenomas (Kamoun,
2014; Lacroix, 2015; Machado, 2018). Approximately 30 percent of cases
are from a pituitary adenoma, and 10 percent from adrenal carcinomas.
Pregnancy outcomes reviewed by Caimari and associates (2017) in women
with Cushing syndrome are listed in Table 61-6.
TABLE 61-6. Complications in Pregnancies of Women with Active and
Cured Cushing Syndrome

Long-term medical therapy for Cushing syndrome usually is ineffective,
and definitive therapy is resection of the pituitary or adrenal adenoma or
bilateral adrenalectomy for hyperplasia (Lacroix, 2015; Machado, 2018).
During pregnancy, management of hypertension in mild cases may suffice
until delivery. In their review, Lindsay and associates (2005) described
primary medical therapy in 20 women with Cushing syndrome. Most were
successfully treated with metyrapone as an interim treatment until definitive
surgery after delivery. A few cases were treated with oral ketoconazole.
However, because this drug also blocks testicular steroidogenesis, treatment
during pregnancy with a male fetus is worrisome. Mifepristone, the
norethindrone derivative used for abortion and labor induction, has shown
promise for treating Cushing disease but should not be used in pregnancy for
obvious reasons. Transsphenoidal resection of a pituitary mass or
laparoscopic adrenalectomy are considered first-line treatment options in the
second trimester (Brue, 2018; Manoharan, 2020). Unilateral adrenalectomy
has been safely performed in the early third trimester and can also be
curative (Abdelmannan, 2011).

■ Adrenal Insufficiency—Addison Disease
Primary adrenocortical insufficiency is rare because more than 90 percent of
total gland volume must be destroyed for symptoms to develop. Autoimmune
adrenalitis is the most common cause in the developed world, but
tuberculosis is a more frequent etiology in resource-poor countries (Arit,
2018; Betterle, 2019; Kamoun, 2014). In the United States, the prevalence in
7.7 million births was 1 case per 10,000 to 20,000 (Schneiderman, 2017).
There is an increased incidence of concurrent Hashimoto thyroiditis, primary
ovarian insufficiency, type 1 diabetes, and Graves disease. These
polyglandular autoimmune syndromes also include pernicious anemia,
vitiligo, alopecia, nontropical sprue, and myasthenia gravis.
Untreated adrenal hypofunction frequently causes infertility, but with
replacement therapy, ovulation is restored. If untreated, women often note
weakness, nausea, vomiting, and weight loss. Low levels of plasma cortisol
and elevated ACTH levels are generally considered diagnostic (Betterle,
2019). Because serum cortisol levels rise during pregnancy, a short ACTHstimulation test documenting less than a twofold increase in plasma cortisol
in response to infused corticotropin confirms the diagnosis (Manoharan,
2020).
In a large cohort study, 1188 women with Addison disease were
compared with more than 11,000 age-matched controls who delivered
between 1973 and 2006 (Björnsdottir, 2010). Women diagnosed with adrenal
insufficiency within 3 years of delivery were significantly more likely to
deliver preterm, to deliver a low-birthweight newborn, and to undergo
cesarean delivery. Others have reported similar adverse outcomes
(Quartermaine, 2018). Most pregnant women with Addison disease are
already taking glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid replacement drugs.
These should be continued, and women are observed for evidence of either
inadequate or excessive corticosteroid replacement. A 20- to 40-percent
dose increase is usually expected after midpregnancy to mimic the
physiological cortisol elevation in pregnancy (Oliveira, 2018). During labor,
delivery, and postpartum, or after a surgical procedure, corticosteroid
replacement must be increased appreciably to approximate the normal
adrenal response. This augmented dose is called a stress dose, and one
option is hydrocortisone, 100 mg, given IV every 8 hours for 48 hours.

Importantly, shock from causes other than adrenocortical insufficiency—for
example, hemorrhage or sepsis—must be recognized and treated promptly.

■ Primary Aldosteronism
Hyperaldosteronism is caused by an adrenal adenoma—Conn syndrome—in
approximately 75 percent of cases. Idiopathic bilateral adrenal hyperplasia
makes up the remainder, except for rare cases of adrenal carcinoma (Eschler,
2015; Yang, 2020). Findings include hypertension, hypokalemia, and muscle
weakness. High serum or urine levels of aldosterone confirm the diagnosis.
In normal pregnancy, as discussed in Chapter 4 (p. 74), progesterone
blocks aldosterone action, and this results in very high aldosterone levels
(Appendix, p. 1230). Accordingly, the diagnosis of hyperaldosteronism
during pregnancy can be difficult. Because renin levels are suppressed in
pregnant women with hyperaldosteronism, a plasma aldosterone-to-renin
activity ratio may be helpful for diagnosis (Morton, 2015). Hypertension
worsens as pregnancy progresses, and medical management includes
potassium supplementation and antihypertensive therapy. In many cases,
hypertension responds to spironolactone. However, β-blocking or calcium
channel–blocking drugs may be preferred because of the potential fetal
antiandrogenic effects of spironolactone. Mascetti and coworkers (2011)
reported successful use of amiloride in a pregnant woman. Use of
eplerenone, a selective aldosterone-receptor antagonist, also has been
described (Manoharan, 2020). Laparoscopic tumor resection is considered
curative, but the optimal management during pregnancy, either surgical or
medical, remains unclear (Eschler, 2015; Morton, 2015).

PITUITARY DISORDERS
■ Prolactinomas
The pituitary enlarges impressively during pregnancy, predominantly from
lactotrophic cellular hyperplasia induced by estrogen (Chap. 4, p. 70).
Several pituitary disorders also can complicate pregnancy.
Of these, prolactinomas are tumors that constitute 75 percent of pituitary
adenomas in women (Melmed, 2020). They are often found in nonpregnant
women since the advent of widely available serum prolactin assays. Serum

levels <25 pg/mL are considered normal in nonpregnant women. Adenoma
symptoms and findings include amenorrhea, galactorrhea, and
hyperprolactinemia. Tumors are classified arbitrarily by their size measured
by CT or MR imaging. A microadenoma is ≤10 mm, and a macroadenoma is
>10 mm. Treatment for microadenomas is usually with bromocriptine, a
dopamine agonist and powerful prolactin inhibitor, which frequently restores
ovulation. For suprasellar macroadenomas, most recommend surgical
resection before pregnancy is attempted (Araujo, 2015; Melmed, 2020).
In a pooled analysis of more than 750 pregnant women with
prolactinomas, only 2.4 percent with microadenomas developed
symptomatic enlargement during pregnancy (Molitch, 2015). Symptomatic
enlargement of macroadenomas, however, is more frequent and was found in
21 percent of 238 pregnant women. In another study of 46 women with a
macroprolactinoma, 20 percent had tumor growth–related symptoms
(Barraud, 2020). Nonfunctioning adenomas can also cause symptoms of
pituitary expansion in pregnancy (Lambert, 2017).
Pregnant women with microadenomas should be queried regularly for
headaches and visual symptoms. Those with macroadenomas are followed
more closely and have visual field testing each trimester. CT or MR imaging
is recommended only if symptoms develop (Fig. 61-6). Serial serum
prolactin levels serve little use because of normal rises during pregnancy
(Appendix, p. 1231). Symptomatic tumor enlargement should be treated
immediately with a dopamine antagonist. The safety of bromocriptine in
pregnancy is well established. The safety profile is less well known for
cabergoline. This drug is increasingly used in nonpregnant women because it
is better tolerated and more effective. Cabergoline is generally considered
safe for use in pregnancy (Huang, 2019; O’Sullivan, 2020). Surgery is
recommended for women with no response, including those with pituitary
apoplexy (Barraud, 2020).

FIGURE 61-6 Magnetic resonance imaging of a pituitary adenoma. This sagittal T1-weighed image
demonstrates a fluid-fluid level, consistent with intratumoral hemorrhage (arrow). (Reproduced with
permission from Dr. Toral Patel.)

■ Acromegaly
This is caused by excessive growth hormone, usually from an acidophilic or
a chromophobic pituitary adenoma. In normal pregnancy, pituitary growth
hormone levels decline as placental epitopes are secreted. Diagnosis is
suggested by elevated insulin growth factor 1 (IGF-1) serum levels. Levels
are more indicative in the first half of pregnancy because IGF-1
concentrations rise in normal pregnancy after midpregnancy (Abucham,
2017; Melmed, 2020). Definitive diagnosis may best be postponed until after
delivery. Fewer than 100 cases of acromegaly have been reported during
pregnancy (Cheng, 2012; Dias, 2013). Pregnancy is rare in women with
acromegaly because half are hyperprolactinemic and anovulatory. During
pregnancy, affected women are at marginally greater risk for gestational
diabetes and hypertension (Dias, 2013; Jallad, 2018).
Management is similar to that for prolactinomas, and women are
monitored for symptoms of tumor enlargement. Dopamine agonist therapy is
less effective than for prolactinomas. Transsphenoidal resection, generally
considered first-line treatment outside of pregnancy, may be necessary for
symptomatic tumor enlargement during pregnancy (Motivala, 2011). Guven

and associates (2006) reported a case of pituitary apoplexy necessitating
emergent transsphenoidal adenoma resection and cesarean delivery at 34
weeks’ gestation. Successful treatment of pregnant women with the
somatostatin-receptor ligand octreotide and with the growth hormone
analogue pegvisomant has been reported (Dias, 2013; Fleseriu, 2015).

■ Diabetes Insipidus
Vasopressin deficiency evident in diabetes insipidus (DI) is most commonly
due to neurohypophysis agenesis or destruction. True DI rarely complicates
pregnancy. Instead, other types of DI encountered during pregnancy include
primary polydipsia, gestational DI, and nephrogenic DI. These show
suppressed secretion of, increased degradation of, and renal insensitivity to
vasopressin, respectively (Robertson, 2016). In our experiences, transient
secondary DI is more likely encountered with acute fatty liver of pregnancy
(Nelson, 2013). This probably stems from altered vasopressinase clearance
because of hepatic dysfunction (Chap. 58, p. 1035).
DI therapy is intranasal administration of a synthetic analogue of
vasopressin, desmopressin, which is 1-deamino-8-D-arginine vasopressin
(DDAVP). Available data on the safety of DDAVP during pregnancy is
reassuring (Chanson, 2019). Most women require higher doses during
pregnancy because of an increased metabolic clearance rate stimulated by
placental vasopressinase (Lindheimer, 1994). The prevalence of placental
vasopressinase-induced DI is estimated at 2 to 4 cases per 100,000
pregnancies (Wallia, 2013).

■ Sheehan Syndrome
Sheehan (1937) reported that pituitary ischemia and necrosis associated with
obstetrical blood loss could result in hypopituitarism. With modern methods
of hemorrhagic shock treatment, Sheehan syndrome rates have gradually
declined (Matsuzaki, 2017; Pappachan, 2015). Affected women may have
persistent hypotension, tachycardia, hypoglycemia, and lactation failure.
Because deficiencies of some or all pituitary-responsive hormones may
develop after the initial insult, Sheehan syndrome can be heterogenous and
may not be identified for years (Chanson, 2019). In one cohort study of 60
women with Sheehan syndrome, the average time to diagnosis was 13 years

(Gei-Guardia, 2011). Because adrenal insufficiency is the most lifethreatening complication, adrenal function should be immediately assessed.
After glucocorticoid replacement, subsequent analyses and replacement of
thyroid, gonadal, and growth hormones is considered. Women with Sheehan
syndrome who become pregnant likely have a livebirth (Vila, 2020).

■ Lymphocytic Hypophysitis
This rare autoimmune pituitary disorder is characterized by massive
infiltration by lymphocytes and plasma cells with parenchymal destruction of
the gland. Many cases are temporally linked to pregnancy, and more than half
of reported cases in women are identified during pregnancy or puerperium
(Gubbi, 2018). However, more recent reports describe fewer cases
associated with pregnancy (Chanson, 2019). The degrees of hypopituitarism
or mass effect symptoms, including headaches and visual field defects, vary.
A sellar mass is seen with CT or MR imaging. A mass accompanied by a
modestly elevated serum prolactin level—usually <100 pg/mL—suggests
lymphocytic hypophysitis. In contrast, levels >200 pg/mL are encountered
with prolactinoma. The etiology is unknown, but nearly 30 percent have a
history of coexisting autoimmune diseases including Hashimoto thyroiditis,
Addison disease, type 1 diabetes, or pernicious anemia (Chanson, 2019).
Treatment is with glucocorticoids and pituitary hormone replacement. The
disease may be self-limited, and a careful withdrawal of hormone
replacement is attempted after inflammation subsides (Foyouzi, 2011;
Melmed, 2020). More than two thirds of women who require treatment for
lymphocytic hypophysitis, however, will require long-term hormone
replacement (Gubbi, 2018).

REFERENCES
Abalovich M, Alcaraz G, Kleiman-Rubinsztein J, et al: The relationship of preconception thyrotropin
levels to requirements for increasing the levothyroxine dose during pregnancy in women with
primary hypothyroidism. Thyroid 20(10):1175, 2010
Abalovich M, Gutierrez S, Alcaraz G, et al: Overt and subclinical hypothyroidism complicating
pregnancy. Thyroid 12(1):63, 2002
Abbassi-Ghanavati M, Casey B, Spong C, et al: Pregnancy outcomes in women with thyroid peroxidase
antibodies. Obstet Gynecol 116(2, Pt 1):381, 2010

Abdelmannan D, Aron D: Adrenal disorders in pregnancy. Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am 40:779,
2011
Abucham J, Bronstein MD, Dias ML: Management of endocrine disease: Acromegaly and pregnancy: a
contemporary review. Eur J Endocrinol 177(1):R1, 2017
Ahlawat SK, Jain S, Kumari S, et al: Pheochromocytoma associated with pregnancy: case report and
review of the literature. Obstet Gynecol Surv 54:728, 1999
Aleksander PE, Bruckner-Spieler M, Stoehr AM, et al: Mean high-dose thyroxine treatment is efficient
and safe to achieve a normal IQ in young adult patients with congenital hypothyroidism. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab 103(4):1459, 2018
Alexander EK, Marquesee E, Lawrence J, et al: Timing and magnitude of increases in levothyroxine
requirements during pregnancy in women with hypothyroidism. N Engl J Med 351:241, 2004
Alexander EK, Pearce EN, Brent GA et al: 2017 Guidelines of the American Thyroid Association for
the diagnosis and management of thyroid disease during pregnancy and postpartum. Thyroid
27(3):315, 2017
Alikasifoglu A, Gonc EN, Yalcin E, et al: Neonatal hyperparathyroidism due to maternal
hypoparathyroidism and vitamin D deficiency: a cause of multiple bone fractures. Clin Pediatr
44:267, 2005
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Thyroid disease in pregnancy. Practice Bulletin
No. 223, May 2020
American Thyroid Association, American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists: Hyperthyroidism and
other causes of thyrotoxicosis: management guidelines of the American Thyroid Association and
American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists. Endocr Pract 17(3):456, 2011
Amino N, Izumi Y, Hidaka Y, et al: No increase of blocking type anti-thyrotropin receptor antibodies
during pregnancy in patients with Graves’ disease. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 88(12):5871, 2003
Andersen SL, Andersen S, Vestergaard P, et al: Maternal thyroid function in early pregnancy and child
neurodevelopmental disorders: a Danish nationwide case-cohort study. Thyroid 28(4):537, 2018
Andersen SL, Olsen J, Laurberg P: Maternal thyroid disease in the Danish National Birth Cohort:
prevalence and risk factors. Eur J Endocrinol 174(2):203, 2016
Andersen SL, Olsen J, Wu CS, et al: Severity of birth defects after propylthiouracil exposure in early
pregnancy. Thyroid 24(10):1533, 2014
Angell TE, Alexander EK: thyroid nodules and thyroid cancer in the pregnant woman. Endocrinol Metab
Clin N Am 48:557, 2019
Arafah BM: Increased need for thyroxine in women with hypothyroidism during estrogen therapy. N
Engl J Med 344:1743, 2001
Araujo PB, Vieira Neto L, Gadelha MR: Pituitary tumor management in pregnancy. Endocrinol Metab
Clin North Am 44(1):181, 2015
Arit W: Disorders of the adrenal cortex. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al (eds): Harrison’s
Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2018, p 2719
Barbesino G, Tomer Y: Clinical utility of TSH receptor antibodies. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 98(6):2247,
2013
Barraud S, Guédra L, Delemer B, et al: Evolution of macroprolactinomas during pregnancy: a cohort
study of 83 pregnancies. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) 92(5):421, 2020
Beattie GC, Ravi NR, Lewis M, et al: Rare presentation of maternal primary hyperparathyroidism. BMJ
321:223, 2000
Bell MA, Ross AP, Goodman G: Assessing infant cognitive development after prenatal iodine
supplementation. Am J Clin Nutr 104(Suppl):928S, 2016

Berbel P, Mestre JL, Santamaria A, et al: Delayed neurobehavioral development in children born to
pregnant women with mild hypothyroxinemia during the first month of gestation: the importance of
early iodine supplementation. Thyroid 19:511, 2009
Berlin L: Malpractice issues in radiology: iodine-131 and the pregnant patient. AJR Am J Roentgenol
176:869, 2001
Bernal J: Thyroid hormone receptors in brain development and function. Nat Clin Pract Endocrinol
Metab 3(3):249, 2007
Betterle C, Presotto F, Furmaniak J: Epidemiology, pathogenesis, and diagnosis of Addison’s disease in
adults. J Endocrinol Invest 42(12):1407, 2019
Bianchi DW, Romero R: Biological implications of bidirectional fetomaternal cell trafficking summary of
a National Institute of Child Health and Human Development-sponsored conference. J Matern Fetal
Neonatal Med 14:123, 2003
Biggar MA, Lennard TW: Systematic review of phaeochromocytoma in pregnancy. Br J Surg
100(2):182, 2013
Bilezikian JP, Khan AA, Potts JT Jr: Guidelines for the management of asymptomatic primary
hyperparathyroidism: summary statement of the Third International Workshop. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab 94(2):335, 2009
Bilezikian JP, Silverberg SJ: Asymptomatic primary hyperparathyroidism. N Engl J Med 350:1746, 2004
Björnsdottir S, Cnattingius S, Brandt L, et al: Addison’s disease in women is a risk factor for an adverse
pregnancy outcome. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 95(12):5249, 2010
Boddy AM, Fortunato A, Wilson Sayres M, et al: Fetal microchimerism and maternal health: a review
and evolutionary analysis of cooperation and conflict beyond the womb. Bioessays 37(10):1106, 2015
Brand F, Liegeois P, Langer B: One case of fetal and neonatal variable thyroid dysfunction in the
context of Graves’ disease. Fetal Diagn Ther 20:12, 2005
Brent GA: Graves’ disease. N Engl J Med 358:2594, 2008
Brown RS, Bellisario RL, Botero D, et al: Incidence of transient congenital hypothyroidism due to
maternal thyrotropin receptor-blocking antibodies in over one million babies. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
81:1147, 1996
Brue T, Amodru V, Castinetti F: Management of Cushing’s syndrome during pregnancy: solved and
unsolved questions. Eur J Endocrinol 178(6):R259, 2018
Bryant SN, Nelson DB, McIntire DD, et al: An analysis of population-based prenatal screening for
overt hypothyroidism. Am J Obstet Gynecol 213(4):565.e1, 2015
Burch HB, Burman KD, Cooper DS, et al: A 2015 survey of clinical practice patterns in the
management of thyroid nodules. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 101(7):2853, 2016
Caimari F, Valassi E, Garbayo P, et al: Cushing’s syndrome and pregnancy outcomes: a systematic
review of published cases. Endocrine 55:555, 2017
Caldwell KL, Jones R, Hollowell JG: Urinary iodine concentration: United States National Health and
Nutrition Examination Survey 2001–2002. Thyroid 15(7):692, 2005
Carbone LD, Palmieri GM, Graves SC, et al: Osteoporosis of pregnancy: long-term follow-up of patients
and their offspring. Obstet Gynecol 86:664, 1995
Casey BM, Dashe JS, Spong CY, et al: Perinatal significance of isolated maternal hypothyroxinemia
identified in the first half of pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 109(5):1129, 2007
Casey BM, Dashe JS, Wells CE, et al: Subclinical hypothyroidism pregnancy outcomes. Obstet Gynecol
105(2):239, 2005
Casey BM, Dashe JS, Wells CE, et al: Subclinical hyperthyroidism and pregnancy outcomes. Obstet
Gynecol 107(2 Pt 1):337, 2006

Casey BM, Thom EA, Peaceman AM, et al: Treatment of subclinical hypothyroidism or
hypothyroxinemia during pregnancy. N Engl J Med 376:815, 2017
Chamarthi B, Greene M, Dluhy R: A problem in gestation. N Engl J Med 365(9):843, 2011
Chanson P: Other pituitary conditions and pregnancy. Endocrinol Metab Clin N Am 48(3):583, 2019
Chen S, Zhou X, Zhu H, et al: Preconception TSH levels and pregnancy outcomes: a population-based
cohort study in 184,611 women Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) 86(6):816, 2017
Cheng S, Grasso L, Martinez-Orozco JA, et al: Pregnancy in acromegaly: experience from two referral
centers and systematic review of the literature. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) 76(2):264, 2012
Cirello V, Rizzo R, Crippa M, et al: Fetal cell microchimerism: a protective role in autoimmune thyroid
diseases. Eur J Endocrinol 173(1):111, 2015
Cleary-Goldman J, Malone FD, Lambert-Messerlian G, et al: Maternal thyroid hypofunction and
pregnancy outcome. Obstet Gynecol 112(1):85, 2008
Cohen O, Pinhas-Hamiel O, Sivian E, et al: Serial in utero ultrasonographic measurements of the fetal
thyroid: a new complementary tool in the management of maternal hyperthyroidism in pregnancy.
Prenat Diagn 23:740, 2003
Consortium on Thyroid and Pregnancy: Association of thyroid function test abnormalities and thyroid
autoimmunity with preterm birth: a systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA 322(7):632, 2019
Cooper C, Harvey NC, Bishop NJ, et al: Maternal gestational vitamin D supplementation and offspring
bone health (MAVIDOS): a multicentre, double-blind, randomised placebo-controlled trial. Lancet
Diabetes Endocrinol 4:393, 2016
Cooper MS: Disorders of calcium metabolism and parathyroid disease. Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol
Metabol 25:975, 2011
Costantine MM, Smith K, Thom EA: Effect of thyroxine therapy on depressive symptoms among
women with subclinical hypothyroidism. Obstet Gynecol 135(4):812, 2020
Crandall CJ, Liu J, Cauley J, et al: Associations of parity, breastfeeding, and fractures in the women’s
health observational study. Obstet Gynecol 130(1):171, 2017
Cunningham FG: Screening for osteoporosis. N Engl J Med 353:1975, 2005
Dashe JS, Casey BM, Wells CE, et al: Thyroid-stimulating hormone in singleton and twin pregnancy:
importance of gestational age-specific reference ranges. Obstet Gynecol 107(1):205, 2005
Davis C, Nippita T: Hyperparathyroidism in pregnancy. BMJ Case Rep 13(2):e232653, 2020
Davis LE, Leveno KL, Cunningham FG: Hypothyroidism complicating pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol
72(1):108, 1988
Davis LE, Lucas MJ, Hankins GD, et al: Thyrotoxicosis complicating pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol
160(1):63, 1989
De Groot L, Abalovich M, Alexander EK, et al: Management of thyroid dysfunction during pregnancy
and postpartum: an Endocrine Society clinical practice guideline. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
97(8):2543, 2012
De Leo S, Lee SY, Braverman LE: Hyperthyroidism. Lancet 388(10047):906, 2016
Dias M, Boquszewski C, Gadelha M, et al: Acromegaly and pregnancy: a prospective study. Eur J
Endocrinol 170(2):301, 2013
Diez JJ, Iglesias P: Spontaneous subclinical hypothyroidism in patients older than 55 years: an analysis of
natural course and risk factors for the development of overt thyroid failure. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
89(10):4890, 2004
Donatini G, Kraimps JL, Caillard C, et al: Pheochromocytoma diagnosed during pregnancy: lessons
learned from a series of ten patients. Surg Endosc 32(9):3890, 2018

Dong AC, Stagnaro-Green A: Differences in diagnostic criteria mask the true prevalence of thyroid
disease in pregnancy: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Thyroid 29(2):278, 2019
Dong D, Li H: Diagnosis and treatment of pheochromocytoma during pregnancy. J Matern Fetal
Neonatal Med 27(18):1930, 2014
Eisenhofer G, Aleksander P, Peitzsh M, et al: Biochemical diagnosis of chromaffin cell tumors in
patients at high and low risk of disease: Plasma versus urinary free or deconjugated O-methylated
catecholamine metabolites. Clin Chem 64(11):1646, 2018
Eschler DC, Kogekar N, Pessah-Pollack R: Management of adrenal tumors in pregnancy. Endocrinol
Metab Clin North Am 44(2):381, 2015
Fagin JA, Wells SA Jr: Biologic and clinical perspectives on thyroid cancer. N Engl J Med 375(11):1054,
2016
Feller M, Snel M, Moutouri E, et al: Association of thyroid hormone therapy with quality of life and
thyroid-related symptoms in patients with subclinical hypothyroidism. JAMA 320(13):1349, 2018
Fitzpatrick DL, Russell MA: Diagnosis and management of thyroid disease in pregnancy. Obstet
Gynecol Clin North Am 37(2):173, 2010
Fleseriu M: Medical treatment of acromegaly in pregnancy, highlights on new reports. Endocrine
49(3):577, 2015
Foyouzi N: Lymphocytic adenohypophysitis. Obstet Gynecol Surv 66(2):109, 2011
Gafni RI, Collins MT: Hypoparathyroidism. N Engl J Med 380(18):1738, 2019
Galambosi P, Hilsemaa V, Ulander VM, et al: Prolonged low-molecular-weight heparin use during
pregnancy and subsequent bone mineral density. Thromb Res 143:122, 2016
Garber JR, Cobin RH, Gharib H, et al: Clinical practice guidelines for hypothyroidism in adults:
cosponsored by the American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists and the American Thyroid
Association. Thyroid 22(12):1200, 2012
Geelhoed GW: Surgery of the endocrine glands in pregnancy. Clin Obstet Gynecol 26(4):865, 1983
Gei-Guardia O, Soto-Herrera E, Gei-Brealey A, et al: Sheehan syndrome in Costa Rica: clinical
experience with 60 cases. Endocr Pract 17(3):337, 2011
Gharib H, Papini E, Garber JR, et al: American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists, American
College of Endocrinology, and Association Medici Endocrinology, and European Thyroid Association
medical guidelines for clinical practice for the diagnosis and management of thyroid nodules–2016
update. Endocr Pract 22(Suppl 1), 2016
Gietka-Czernel M, Debska M, Kretowicz P, et al: Fetal thyroid in two-dimensional ultrasonography:
nomograms according to gestational age and biparietal diameter. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol
162(2):131, 2012
Gowachirapant S, Jaiswal N, Melse-Boonstra A, et al: Effect of iodine supplementation in pregnant
women on child neurodevelopment: a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet
Diabetes Endocrinol 5(11):853, 2017
Greer LG, Casey BM, Halvorson LM, et al: Antithyroid antibodies and parity: further evidence for
microchimerism in autoimmune thyroid disease. Am J Obstet Gynecol 205(5):471, 2011
Gubbi S, Hannah-Schmouni F, Stratakis CA, et al: Primary hypophysitis and other autoimmune disorders
of the sellar and suprasellar regions. Rev Endocr Metab Disord 19(4):335, 2018
Guven S, Durukan T, Berker M, et al: A case of acromegaly in pregnancy: concomitant transsphenoidal
adenomectomy and cesarean section. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 19(1):69, 2006
Haddow JE, Palomaki GE, Allan WC, et al: Maternal thyroid deficiency during pregnancy and
subsequent neuropsychological development of the child. N Engl J Med 341(8):549, 1999

Hales C, Taylor PN, Channon S, et al: Controlled antenatal thyroid screening II: Effect of treating
maternal suboptimal thyroid function on child cognition. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 103(4):1583, 2018
Harper MA, Murnaghan GA, Kennedy L, et al: Pheochromocytoma in pregnancy. Five cases and a
review of the literature. BJOG 96(5):594, 1989
Harris B, Oretti R, Lazarus J, et al: Randomised trial of thyroxine to prevent postnatal depression in
thyroid-antibody-positive women. Br J Psychiatry 180:327, 2002
Hatipoglu B: Cushing’s syndrome. J Surg Oncol 106(5):565, 2012
He X, Wang P, Wang Z, et al: Thyroid antibodies and risk of preterm birth: a meta-analysis of
prospective cohort studies. Eur J Endocrinol 167(4):455, 2012
Helfand M: Screening for subclinical thyroid dysfunction in nonpregnant adults: a summary of the
evidence for the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Ann Intern Med 140(2):128, 2004
Herrick KA, Perrine CG, Aoki Y, et al: Iodine status and consumption of key iodine sources in the U.S.
population with special attention to reproductive age women. Nutrients 10(7):874, 2018
Hershman J: Physiological and pathological aspects of the effect of human chorionic gonadotropin on
the thyroid. Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab 18(2):249, 2004
Hirai T, Kobayshi T, Nishimori S, et al: Bone is a major target of PTH/PTHrP receptor signaling in
regulation of fetal blood calcium homeostasis. Endocrinology 156(8):2774, 2015
Hirsch D, Kopel V, Nadler V, et al: Pregnancy outcomes in women with primary hyperparathyroidism. J
Clin Endocrinol Metab 100(5):2115, 2015
Hollowell JG, Staehling NW, Hannon WH, et al: Iodine nutrition in the United States. Trends and public
health implications: iodine excretion data from National Health and Nutrition Examination Surveys I
and III (1971–1974 and 1988–1994). J Clin Endocrinol Metab 83(10):3401, 1998
Huang W, Molitch ME: Pituitary tumors in pregnancy. Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am 48(3):569, 2019
Institute of Medicine: Dietary reference intakes for vitamin A, vitamin K, arsenic, boron, chromium,
copper, iodine, manganese, molybdenum, nickel, silicon, vanadium, and zinc. Washington, National
Academies Press, 2001
Ip P: Neonatal convulsion revealing maternal hyperparathyroidism: an unusual case of late neonatal
hypoparathyroidism. Arch Gynecol Obstet 268(3):227, 2003
Jallad RS, Shimon I, Fraenkel M, et al: Outcome of pregnancies in a large cohort of women with
acromegaly. Clin Endocrinol 88(6):896, 2018
Jameson JL, Mandel SJ, Weetman AP: Disorders of the thyroid gland. In Kasper DL, Fauci AS, Hauser
SL, et al (eds): Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 19th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill
Education, 2015
Jansen TA, Korevaar TI, Mulder TA, et al: Maternal thyroid function during pregnancy and child brain
morphology: a time window-specific analysis of a prospective cohort. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol
7(8):629, 2019
Kaluarachchi DC, Allen DB, Eickhoff JC, et al: Thyroid-stimulating hormone reference ranges for
preterm infants. Pediatrics 144(2):e20190290, 2019
Kamoun M, Mnif M, Charfi N, et al: Adrenal diseases during pregnancy: pathophysiology, diagnosis and
management strategies. Am J Med Sci 347(1):64, 2014
Karmisholt J, Andersen S, Laurberg P: Variation in thyroid function tests in patients with stable
untreated subclinical hypothyroidism. Thyroid 18(3):303, 2008
Kerver JM, Pearce EN, Ma T, et al: Prevalence of inadequate and excessive iodine intake in a US
pregnancy cohort. Am J Obstet Gynecol 224(1):82.e1, 2021
Kimura M, Seki T, Ozawa H, et al: The onset of antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody-associated
vasculitis immediately after methimazole was switched to propylthiouracil in a woman with Graves’

disease who wished to become pregnant. Endocr J 60(3):383, 2013
Korevaar TI, Chaker L, Jaddoe VW, et al: Maternal and birth characteristics are determinants of
offspring thyroid function. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 101(1): 206, 2016a
Korevaar TI, Muetzel R, Chaker L, et al: Association of maternal thyroid function during early
pregnancy with offspring IQ and brain morphology in childhood: a population-based prospective
cohort study. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 4(1):35, 2016b
Kovacs CS: Calcium and bone metabolism disorders during pregnancy and lactation. Endocrinol Metab
Clin North Am 40(4):795, 2011
Kraemer B, Schneider S, Rothmund R, et al: Influence of pregnancy on bone density: a risk factor for
osteoporosis? Measurements of the calcaneus by ultrasonometry. Arch Gynecol Obstet 285(4):907,
2011
Kriplani A, Buckshee K, Bhargava VL, et al: Maternal and perinatal outcome in thyrotoxicosis
complicating pregnancy. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 54(3):159, 1994
Kuijpens JL, Vader HL, Drexhage HA, et al: Thyroid peroxidase antibodies during gestation are a
marker for subsequent depression postpartum. Eur J Endocrinol 145(5):579, 2001
Kung AWC, Chau MT, LAO TT, et al: The effect of pregnancy on thyroid nodule formation. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab 87(3):1010, 2002
Lacroix A, Feelders RA, Stratakis CA, et al: Cushing’s syndrome. Lancet 386(9996):913, 2015
Lambert K, Rees K, Seed PT, et al: Macroprolactinomas and nonfunctioning pituitary adenomas and
pregnancy outcomes. Obstet Gynecol 129(1):185, 2017
Lazarus J, Kaklamanou K: Significance of low thyroid-stimulating hormone in pregnancy. Curr Opin
Endocrinol Diabetes Obes 14(5):389, 2007
Lazarus JH, Bestwick JP, Channon S, et al: Antenatal thyroid screening and childhood cognitive
function. N Engl J Med 366(6):493, 2012
Lee SY, Pearce EN: Testing, monitoring, and treatment of thyroid dysfunction in pregnancy J Clin
Endocrinol Metab 106(3):883, 2021
Lekarev O, New MI: Adrenal disease in pregnancy. Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab 25(6):959,
2011
Lenders JW, Langton K, Langenhuijsen JF, et al: Pheochromocytoma and pregnancy. Endocrinol Metab
Clin North Am 48(3):605, 2019
Lepez T, Vandewoesttyne M, Hussain S, et al: Fetal microchimeric cells in blood of women with an
autoimmune thyroid disease. PLoS One 6(12):1, 2011
Leung AM, Pearce EN, Braverman LE: Iodine nutrition in pregnancy and lactation. Endocrinol Metab
Clin North Am 40(4):765, 2011
Leung AS, Millar LE, Koonings PP, et al: Perinatal outcome in hypothyroid pregnancies. Obstet Gynecol
81(3):349, 1993
Levie D, Korevaar TM, Bath SC, et al: Association of maternal iodine status with child IQ: a metaanalysis of individual participant data. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 104(12):5957, 2019
Levie D, Korevaar TM, Bath SC, et al: Thyroid function in early pregnancy, child IQ, and autistic traits:
a meta-analysis of individual participant data. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 103(8): 2967, 2018
Levy-Shraga Y, Tamir-Hostovsky L, Boyko V, et al: Follow-up of newborns of mothers with Graves’
disease. Thyroid 24(6):1032, 2014
Li Y, Shan Z, Teng W, et al: Abnormalities of maternal thyroid function during pregnancy affect
neurodevelopment of their children at 25–30 months. Clin Endocrinol 72(6):825, 2010
Lindheimer MD, Barron WM: Water metabolism and vasopressin secretion during pregnancy. Baillieres
Clin Obstet Gynaecol 8(2):311, 1994

Lindsay JR, Jonklaas J, Oldfield EH, et al: Cushing’s syndrome during pregnancy: personal experience
and review of literature. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 90(5):3077, 2005
Loh JA, Wartofsky L, Jonklaas J, et al: The magnitude of increased levothyroxine requirements in
hypothyroid pregnant women depends upon the etiology of the hypothyroidism. Thyroid 19(3):269,
2009
Loriaux DL: Diagnosis and differential diagnosis of Cushing’s syndrome. N Engl J Med 376(15):1451,
2017
Luewan S, Chakkabut P, Tongsong T: Outcomes of pregnancy complicated with hyperthyroidism: a
cohort study. Arch Gynecol Obstet 283(2):243, 2011
Luton D, Le Gac I, Vuillard E, et al: Management of Graves’ disease during pregnancy: the key role of
fetal thyroid gland monitoring. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 90(11):6093, 2005
Machado MC, Fragoso MC, Bronstein MD: Pregnancy in patients with Cushing’s Syndrome. Endocrinol
Metab Clin North Am 47(2):441, 2018
Malekar-Raikar S, Sinnott B: Primary hyperparathyroidism in pregnancy—a rare case of lifethreatening hypercalcemia: case report and literature review. Case Rep Endocrinol 2011:520516,
2011
Maliha G, Morgan J, Varhas M: Transient osteoporosis of pregnancy. Injury 43(8):1237, 2012
Männistö T, Vääräsmäki M, Pouta A, et al: Perinatal outcome of children born to mothers with thyroid
dysfunction or antibodies: a prospective population-based cohort study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
94(3):772, 2009
Männistö T, Vääräsmäki M, Pouta A, et al: Thyroid dysfunction and autoantibodies during pregnancy as
predictive factors of pregnancy complications and maternal morbidity in later life. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab 95(3):1084, 2010
Manoharan M, Sinha P, Sibtain S: Adrenal disorders in pregnancy, labor and postpartum—an overview.
J Obstet Gynaecol 40(6):749, 2020
Maraka S, Ospina NM, O’Keeffe DT, et al: Subclinical hypothyroidism in pregnancy: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. Thyroid 26(4):580, 2016
Mascetti L, Bettinelli A, Simonetti GD, et al: Pregnancy in inherited hypokalemic salt-losing renal tubular
disorder. Obstet Gynecol 117(2 Pt 2):512, 2011
Matalon S, Sheiner E, Levy A, et al: Relationship of treated maternal hypothyroidism and perinatal
outcome. J Reprod Med 51(1):59, 2006
Matsuzaki S, Yutaka ME, Ueda Y, et al: A case of acute Sheehan’s syndrome and literature review: a
rare but life-threatening complication of postpartum hemorrhage. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth
17(1):188, 2017
McGrath N, Hawkes CP, Mayne P, et al: Optimal timing of repeat newborn screening for congenital
hypothyroidism in preterm infants to detect delayed thyroid-stimulating hormone elevation. J Pediatr
205:77, 2019
McGrath N, Hawkes CP, McDonnell CM, et al: Incidence of congenital hypothyroidism over 37 years in
Ireland. Pediatrics 142(4):e20181199, 2018
Medici M, Korevaar TI, Schalekamp-Timmermans S, et al: Maternal early-pregnancy thyroid function is
associated with subsequent hypertensive disorders of pregnancy: the Generation R Study. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab 99(12):E2591, 2014
Melmed S: Pituitary-tumor endocrinopathies. N Engl J Med 382(10):2020
Messuti I, Corvisieri S, Bardesono F, et al: Impact of pregnancy on prognosis of differentiated thyroid
cancer: clinical and molecular features. Eur J Endocrinol 170(5):659, 2014
Mestman JH: Hyperthyroidism in pregnancy. Curr Opin Endocrinol Diabetes Obes 19(5):394, 2012

Mestman JH: Hyperthyroidism in pregnancy. Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am 27(1):127, 1998
Millar LK, Wing DA, Leung AS, et al: Low birth weight and preeclampsia in pregnancies complicated
by hyperthyroidism. Obstet Gynecol 84(6):946, 1994
Miller MA, Mazzaglia PJ, Larson L, et al: Laparoscopic adrenalectomy for pheochromocytoma in a twin
gestation. J Obstet Gynecol 32(2):186, 2012
Moleti M, Di Mauro M, Sturniolo G, et al: Hyperthyroidism in the pregnant woman: maternal and fetal
aspects. J Clin Transl Endocrinol 16:100190, 2019
Molitch ME: Endocrinology in pregnancy: management of the pregnant patient with a prolactinoma. Eur
J Endocrinol 172(5):R205, 2015
Molitch ME: Pituitary, thyroid, adrenal, and parathyroid disorders. In Barron WM, Lindheimer MD
(eds): Medical Disorders During Pregnancy, 3rd ed. St. Louis, Mosby, 2000
Montoro MN, Paler RJ, Goodwin TM, et al: Parathyroid carcinoma during pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol
96(5 Pt. 2):841, 2000
Morreale de Escobar G, Obregon MJ, Escobar Del Rey F: Role of thyroid hormone during early brain
development. Eur J Endocrinol 151(Suppl 3):U25, 2004
Morton A: Primary aldosteronism and pregnancy. Pregnancy Hypertens 5(4):259, 2015
Motivala S, Gologorsky Y, Kostandinov J, et al: Pituitary disorders during pregnancy. Endocrinol Metab
Clin North Am 40(4):827, 2011
Murcia M, Rebagliato M, Iniguez C, et al: Effect of iodine supplementation during pregnancy on infant
neurodevelopment at 1 year of age. Am J Epidemiol 173(7):804, 2011
Nachum Z, Rakover Y, Weiner E, et al: Graves’ disease in pregnancy: prospective evaluation of a
selective invasive treatment protocol. Am J Obstet Gynecol 189(1):159, 2003
Nathan N, Sullivan SD: Thyroid disorders during pregnancy. Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am
43(2):573, 2014
Negro R, Schwartz A, Stagnaro-Green A: Impact of levothyroxine on miscarriage and preterm delivery
rates in first trimester thyroid antibody-positive women with TSH less than 2.5 mIU/L. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab 101(10):3685, 2016
Negro T, Formoso G, Mangieri T, et al: Levothyroxine treatment in euthyroid pregnant women with
autoimmune thyroid disease: effects on obstetrical complications. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
91(7):2587, 2006
Nelson DB, Casey BM, McIntire DD, et al: Subsequent pregnancy outcomes in women previously
diagnosed with subclinical hypothyroidism. Am J Perinatol 31(1):77, 2014
Nelson DB, Yost NP, Cunningham FG: Acute fatty liver of pregnancy: clinical outcomes and expected
durations of recovery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 209(5):456.e1, 2013
Neumann HP: Pheochromocytoma. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al (eds): Harrison’s
Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2018, p 2739
Nguyen CT, Mestman JH: Postpartum thyroiditis. Clin Obstet Gynecol 62(2):359, 2019
Oliveira D, Lages A, Paiva S et al: Treatment of Addison’s disease during pregnancy. Endocrinol
Diabetes Metab Case Rep 2018:17, 2018
Oron T, Lazar L, Ben-Yishai S, et al: Permanent versus transient congenital hypothyroidism: assessment
of predictive variables. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 103(12): 4428, 2018
O’Sullivan SM, Farrant MT, Ogilvie CM, et al: An observational study of pregnancy and postpartum
outcomes in women with prolactinoma treated with dopamine agonists. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol
60(3):405, 2020
Pallan S, Rahman M, Khan A: Diagnosis and management of primary hyperparathyroidism. BMJ
344:e1013, 2012

Pappachan JM, Raskauskiene D, Kutty VR, et al: Excess mortality associated with hypopituitarism in
adults: a meta-analysis of observational studies. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 100(4):1405, 2015
Pearce EN: Management of thyrotoxicosis: preconception, pregnancy, and the postpartum period.
Endocr Pract 25(1):62, 2019
Pearce EN, Lazarus JH, Moreno-Reyes R, et al: Consequences of iodine deficiency and excess in
pregnant women: an overview of current knowns and unknowns. Am J Clin Nutr 104(Suppl 3):918S,
2016
Plowden TC, Schisterman EF, Sjaarda LA, et al: Thyroid-stimulating hormone, anti-thyroid antibodies,
and pregnancy outcomes. Am J Obstet Gynecol 217(6):697.e1, 2017
Pop VJ, Brouwers EP, Vader HL, et al: Maternal hypothyroxinemia during early pregnancy and
subsequent child development: a 3-year follow-up study. Clin Endocrinol 59(3):282, 2003
Pop VJ, Kujipens JL, van Baar AL, et al: Low maternal free thyroxine concentrations during early
pregnancy are associated with impaired psychomotor development in infancy. Clin Endocrinol
50(2):149, 1999
Potts JT, Jüppner H: Disorders of the parathyroid gland and calcium homeostasis. In Kasper DL, Fauci
AS, Hauser SL, et al (eds): Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 19th ed. New York,
McGraw-Hill Education, 2015
Quartermaine G, Lambert K, Rees K, et al: Hormone-secreting adrenal tumours cause severe
hypertension and high rates of poor pregnancy outcome; a UK Obstetric Surveillance System study
with case control comparisons. BJOG 125(6):719, 2018
Radacic-Aumiler M, Kraljickovic I, Edeljic-Turk V, et al: No adverse effects after radioiodine treatment
at 3 weeks of pregnancy. Clin Nucl Med 41(12):964, 2016
Renné C, Lopez ER, Steimle-Grauer SA, et al: Thyroid fetal male microchimerisms in mothers with
thyroid disorders: presence of Y-chromosomal immunofluorescence in thyroid-infiltrating
lymphocytes is more prevalent in Hashimoto’s thyroiditis and Graves’ disease than in follicular
adenomas. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 89(11):5810, 2004
Rigg J, Gilbertson E, Barrett HL, et al: Primary hyperparathyroidism in pregnancy: maternofetal
outcomes at a quaternary referral obstetric hospital, 2000 through 2015. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
104(3):721, 2019
Robertson GL: Diabetes insipidus: differential diagnosis and management. Best Pract Res Clin
Endocrinol Metab 30(2):205, 2016
Rooney DP, Traub AI, Russell CFJ, et al: Cure of hyperparathyroidism in pregnancy by sternotomy and
removal of a mediastinal parathyroid adenoma. Postgrad Med J 74(870):233, 1998
Rovelli R, Vigone M, Giovanettoni C, et al: Newborns of mothers affected by autoimmune thyroiditis:
the importance of thyroid function monitoring in the first months of life. Ital J Pediatr 36:24, 2010
Saad AF, Pacheco LD, Costantine MM: Management of ectopic parathyroid adenoma in pregnancy.
Obstet Gynecol 124(2 Pt 2 Suppl):478, 2014
Sadakata H, Shinozaki H, Higuchi T, et al: Case of radioactive iodine exposure during pregnancy. J
Obstet Gynaecol Res 40(12):2201, 2014
Salazar-Vega JL, Levin G, Sansó G: Pheochromocytoma associated with pregnancy: unexpected
favourable outcome in patients diagnosed after delivery. J Hypertens 32(7):1458, 2014
Sarathi V, Lila A, Bandgar T, et al: Pheochromocytoma and pregnancy: a rare but dangerous
combination. Endocr Pract 16(2):300, 2010
Sarkhail P, Mehran L, Askari S, et al: Maternal thyroid function and autoimmunity in 3 trimesters of
pregnancy and their offspring’s thyroid function. Horm Metab Res 48(1):20, 2016

Schnatz PF, Thaxton S: Parathyroidectomy in the third trimester of pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol Surv
60(10):672, 2005
Schneiderman M, Czuzoj-Shulman N, Spence AR, et al: Maternal and neonatal outcomes of
pregnancies in women with Addison’s disease: a population-based cohort study on 7.7 million births.
BJOG 124(11):1772, 2017
Shan D, Bai Y, Chen QH, et al: Hyperthyroid heart disease in pregnancy: retrospective analysis of a
case series and review of the literature. World J Clin Cases 7(19):2953, 2019
Shi X, Han C, Li C, et al: Optimal and safe upper limits of iodine intake for early pregnancy in iodinesufficient regions: a cross-sectional study of 7190 pregnant women in China. I Clin Endocrinol
Metab 100(4):1630, 2015
Sheehan HL: Post-partum necrosis of the anterior pituitary. J Pathol Bacteriol 45:189, 1937
Sheehan PM, Nankervis A, Araujo Júnior E, et al: Maternal thyroid disease and preterm birth:
systematic review and meta-analysis. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 100(11):4325, 2015
Sheffield JS, Cunningham FG: Thyrotoxicosis and heart failure that complicate pregnancy. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 190(1):211, 2004
Stagnaro-Green A, Glinoer D: Thyroid autoimmunity and the risk of miscarriage. Best Pract Res Clin
Endocrinol Metab 18(2):167, 2004
Stagnaro-Green A, Pearce E: Thyroid disorders in pregnancy. Nat Rev Endocrinol 8(11):650, 2012a
Stagnaro-Green A, Schwartz A, Gismondi R, et al: High rate of persistent hypothyroidism in a largescale prospective study of postpartum thyroiditis in southern Italy. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
96(3):652, 2011
Stagnaro-Green A, Sullivan S, Pearch EN: Iodine supplementation during pregnancy and lactation.
JAMA 308(23):2463, 2012b
Stringer KM, Gough J, Gough IR: Primary hyperparathyroidism during pregnancy: management by
minimally invasive surgery based on ultrasound localization. ANZ J Surg 87(10):E134, 2017
Stulberg RA, Davies GA: Maternal thyrotoxicosis and fetal nonimmune hydrops. Obstet Gynecol 95(6
Pt 2):1036, 2000
Su PY, Huang K, Hao JH, et al: Maternal thyroid function in the first twenty weeks of pregnancy and
subsequent fetal and infant development: a prospective population-based cohort study in China. J
Clin Endocrinol Metab 96(10):3234, 2011
Sullivan SD, Downs E, Popoveniuc G, et al: Randomized trial comparing two algorithms for
levothyroxine dose adjustment in pregnant women with primary hypothyroidism. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab 102(9):3499, 2017
Tan TO, Cheng YW, Caughey AB: Are women who are treated for hypothyroidism at risk for
pregnancy complications? Am J Obstet Gynecol 194(5):e1, 2006
Thangaratinam S, Tan A, Knox E, et al: Association between thyroid autoantibodies and miscarriage and
preterm birth: meta-analysis of evidence. BMJ 342:d2616, 2011
Thomas M, Weisman SM: Calcium supplementation during pregnancy and lactation: effects on the
mother and the fetus. Am J Obstet Gynecol 194(4):937, 2006
Thomas SK, Sheffield JS, Roberts SW: Thionamide-induced neutropenia and ecthyma in a pregnant
patient with hyperthyroidism. Obstet Gynecol 122(2 Pt 2):490, 2013
Thorpe-Beeston JG, Nicolaides KH, Snijders RJ, et al: Thyroid function in small for gestational age
fetuses. Obstet Gynecol 77(5):701, 1991
Tran P, DeSimone S, Barrett M, et al: I-131 treatment of Graves’ disease in an unsuspected first
trimester pregnancy; the potential for adverse effects on the fetus and a review of the current
guidelines for pregnancy screening. Int J Pediatr Endocrinol 2010:858359, 2010

Tudela CM, Casey BM, McIntire DD, et al: Relationship of subclinical thyroid disease to the incidence
of gestational diabetes. Obstet Gynecol 119(5):983, 2012
UNICEF: Nearly 19 million newborns at risk of brain damage every year due to iodine deficiency. 2018.
Available at: https://www.unicef.org/eca/press-releases/newborns-brain-damage-iodine-deficiency.
Accessed September 11, 2020
Vaidya B, Anthony S, Bilous M, et al: Detection of thyroid dysfunction in early pregnancy: universal
screening or targeted high-risk case finding? J Clin Endocrinol Metab 92(1):203, 2007
van Trotsenburg P, Stoupa A, Léger J, et al: Congenital hypothyroidism: a 2020–2021 consensus
guidelines update-an ENDO-European Reference Network initiative endorsed by the European
Society for Pediatric Endocrinology and the European Society for Endocrinology. Thyroid 31(3):387,
2021
Velasco I, Carreira M, Santiago P, et al: Effect of iodine prophylaxis during pregnancy on neurocognitive
development of children during the first two years of life. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 94(9):3234, 2009
Vila G, Fleserui M: Fertility and pregnancy in women with hypopituitarism: a systematic literature
review. J Clin Endocrinol Meta 105(3):e55, 2020
Wallia A, Bizhanova A, Huang W, et al: Acute diabetes insipidus mediated by vasopressinase after
placental abruption. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 98(3):881, 2013
Wang W, Teng W, Shan Z, et al: The prevalence of thyroid disorders during early pregnancy in China:
the benefits of universal screening in the first trimester of pregnancy. Eur J Endocrinol 164(2):263,
2011
Wikner BN, Sparre LS, Stiller CO, et al: Maternal use of thyroid hormones in pregnancy and neonatal
outcome. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 87(6):617, 2008
Wilson KL, Casey BM, McIntire DD, et al: Diagnosis of subclinical hypothyroidism early in pregnancy
is a risk factor for the development of severe preeclampsia. Clin Thyroidol 24(5):15, 2012
Yang Y, Reincke M, Williams TA: Prevalence, diagnosis and outcomes of treatment for primary
aldosteronism. Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab 34(2): 101365, 2020
Yoshihara A, Noh JY, Mukasa K, et al: Serum human chorionic gonadotropin levels and thyroid hormone
levels in gestational transient thyrotoxicosis: is the serum hCG level useful for differentiating
between active Graves’ disease and GTT? Endocr J 62(6):557, 2015
Yoshihara A, Noh JY, Yamaguchi T, et al: Treatment of Graves disease with antithyroid drugs in the first
trimester of pregnancy and the prevalence of congenital malformation. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
97(7):2396, 2012
Yu W, Wu N, Li L, et al: Side effects of PTU and MMI in the treatment of hyperthyroidism: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Endocr Pract 26(2):2020
Zhang M, Chen P, Li B, et al: Approach to the patient with pregnancy and lactation-associated
osteoporosis. Medicine (Baltimore) 96(46):e8671, 2017
Zuluaga-Gómez A, Arrabal-Polo MÁ, Arrabal-Martin M, et al: Management of pheochromocytoma
during pregnancy: laparoscopic adrenalectomy. Am Surg 78(3):E156, 2012

CHAPTER 62

Connective Tissue Disorders

IMMUNE-MEDIATED CONNECTIVE TISSUE DISEASES
SYSTEMIC LUPUS ERYTHEMATOSUS
ANTIPHOSPHOLIPID SYNDROME
RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS
SYSTEMIC SCLEROSIS—SCLERODERMA
VASCULITIS SYNDROMES
INFLAMMATORY MYOPATHIES
HEREDITARY CONNECTIVE TISSUE DISORDERS
REFERENCES
Connective tissue disorders, also termed collagen vascular disorders, have
two basic underlying causes. First are the immune-complex diseases, in
which deposition of immune complexes causes connective tissue damage.
Because these manifest by sterile inflammation—predominantly of the skin,
joints, blood vessels, and kidneys—they are referred to as rheumatic
diseases. Many of these immune-complex diseases are more prevalent in
women, and systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and rheumatoid arthritis are
examples. Second are the inherited disorders that involve bone, skin,
cartilage, blood vessels, and basement membranes. These include Marfan
syndrome, osteogenesis imperfecta, and Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.

IMMUNE-MEDIATED CONNECTIVE TISSUE DISEASES
These disorders can be separated into those associated with and those
without autoantibody formation. The rheumatoid factor is an autoantibody
found in many autoimmune inflammatory conditions such as SLE, rheumatoid
arthritis, systemic sclerosis (scleroderma), mixed connective tissue disease,
dermatomyositis, polymyositis, and various vasculitis syndromes. Instead,
the RF-seronegative spondyloarthropathies are strongly associated with
expression of the antigen termed human leukocyte antigen B27 (HLA-B27).
These include ankylosing spondylitis, psoriatic arthritis, Reiter disease, and
other arthritis syndromes.
The normal immunosuppression of pregnancy that allows and is essential
for successful engraftment of fetal and placental tissues may mitigate activity
in some of these syndromes. First, estrogens upregulate and androgens
downregulate T-cell response, and progesterone is immunosuppressive
(Abdul Hussain, 2020; Robinson, 2012). Second, pregnancy induces a
predominance of T2 helper cells compared with cytokine-producing T1
helper cells (Petri, 2019). These changes are discussed in detail in Chapter 4
(p. 61).
However, active immune-mediated disease may contribute to obstetrical
complications (Kither, 2020). One longitudinal cohort study found that
unrecognized autoimmune systemic rheumatic disorders are associated with
significant risk for preeclampsia and fetal-growth restriction (Spinillo,
2016). In this study, the prevalence of unrecognized systemic rheumatic
diseases approximated 0.3 percent, and preeclampsia or fetal-growth
restriction complicated 25 percent of these pregnancies.
Last, some immune-mediated diseases may be either caused or activated
as a result of prior pregnancies. To explain, fetal cells and cell-free DNA are
detectable in maternal blood beginning early in pregnancy (Simpson, 2013;
Waldorf, 2008). Fetal cell microchimerism is the persistence of fetal cells in
the maternal circulation and in organs following pregnancy. These fetal cells
may become engrafted in maternal tissues and stimulate production of
autoantibodies. Evidence for this includes fetal stem cells engrafted in
tissues in women with autoimmune thyroiditis and systemic sclerosis
(Jimenez, 2005; Srivatsa, 2001). Such microchimerism has also been
described in women with SLE and those with rheumatoid arthritis–
associated HLA alleles (da Silva, 2016; Lee, 2010). Conversely, engrafted

maternal cells may provoke autoimmune conditions in a woman’s offspring
(Stevens, 2016; Ye, 2012).

SYSTEMIC LUPUS ERYTHEMATOSUS
This autoimmune disease has an intricate pathogenesis that results from
interactions between susceptibility genes and environmental factors (Hahn,
2018). Tissue-binding autoantibodies and immune complexes that are
directed at one or more nuclear components lead to cellular and organ
damage (Tsokos, 2011). In addition to this B-cell antibody production,
immunosuppression is impaired, including regulatory T-cell function (Tower,
2013). Some autoantibodies produced in patients with SLE are shown in
Table 62-1. Most patients have autoantibodies for many years before clinical
disease manifests.
TABLE 62-1. Some Autoantibodies Produced in Patients with Systemic
Lupus Erythematosus

Genetic influences are implicated, and the concordance is higher with
monozygotic compared with dizygotic twins—25 versus 2 percent,
respectively. Moreover, the frequency in patients with one affected family
member is 10 percent. The relative risk of disease rises if the “autoimmunity
gene” on chromosome 16 that predisposes to SLE, rheumatoid arthritis,
Crohn disease, and psoriasis is inherited. However, susceptibility genes such
as HLA-DR3, STAT4, APOL1, FCGR3A, and DNAse1 explain only a portion
of the genetic heritability (Hahn, 2018; Yang, 2013).

Interestingly, maternal exposure to fetal genes elevates susceptibility to
SLE development. A case-control study found that a child’s HLA-DRB1
genotype raises the risk of SLE in the mother (Cruz, 2016). In contrast,
neonatal lupus has been reported in an infant conceived via oocyte donor to a
mother with autoimmune disease with circulating anti-Ro and anti-La
antibodies (Chiou, 2016).

■ Clinical Manifestations and Diagnosis
Almost 90 percent of SLE cases develop in women, and it more commonly
affects African-American women compared with other populations (Izmirly,
2017; Stojan, 2018). Its prevalence in those of childbearing age
approximates 1 case in 500 (Pons-Estel, 2010). Accordingly, the disease is
encountered relatively frequently during pregnancy.
SLE notoriously varies in its presentation, course, and outcome (Table
62-2) (Hahn, 2018). Findings may be confined initially to one organ system,
and others become involved later. Instead, the disease may first be
multisystem. Frequent findings are malaise, fever, arthritis, rash,
pleuropericarditis, photosensitivity, anemia, and cognitive dysfunction. At
least half of patients have renal involvement. SLE is also associated with
declines in attention, memory, and reasoning (Hahn, 2018; Kozora, 2008).
TABLE 62-3. Clinical Criteria for Classification of Systemic Lupus
Erythematosus

Identification of antinuclear antibodies (ANA) is the best screening test,
however, a positive result is not specific for SLE. Low titers can be found in
normal individuals, other autoimmune diseases, acute viral infections, and
chronic inflammatory processes. Several drugs also can cause a positive
reaction. Antibodies to double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) and to Smith (Sm)
antigens are relatively specific for SLE, whereas other antibodies are not
(see Table 62-1). Although hundreds of autoantibodies have been described
in SLE, only a few have been shown to participate in tissue injury (Tsokos,

2011). Microarray profiles are being developed for more accurate diagnosis
(Putterman, 2016).
Chronic anemia develops frequently, and there may be leukopenia and
thrombocytopenia. Proteinuria and casts are found in the half of patients with
glomerular lesions. Lupus nephritis can also cause renal insufficiency, which
is more common if there are antiphospholipid antibodies (RianchoZarrabeitia, 2020). Other laboratory findings include false-positive syphilis
serology, prolonged partial thromboplastin time, and higher rheumatoid
factor levels. Increased serum D-dimer concentrations often follow a flare or
infection, but unexplained persistent elevations are associated with a high
risk for thrombosis (Wu, 2008).
The diagnostic criteria for SLE are listed in Table 62-3. If any four or
more of the 11 clinical criteria are present, serially or simultaneously, the
diagnosis is made. Importantly, numerous drugs can induce a lupus-like
syndrome. These include proton-pump inhibitors, thiazide diuretics,
antifungals, antihypertensives, chemotherapeutics, statins, and antiepileptics.
Drug-induced lupus is rarely associated with glomerulonephritis and usually
regresses when the medication is discontinued (Laurinaviciene, 2017).
TABLE 62-2. Some Clinical Manifestations of Systemic Lupus
Erythematosus

■ Lupus and Pregnancy

In a metaanalysis of nearly 9 million pregnancies, the incidence of lupus
approximated 1 case in 900 births (He, 2020). During pregnancy, lupus
improves in a third of women, remains unchanged in a third, and worsens in
the remaining third. Thus, in any pregnancy, the clinical condition can worsen
or flare without warning (Hahn, 2018).
In a cohort of 13,555 pregnant women with SLE, the maternal mortality
rate was 325 per 100,000 (Clowse, 2008). Maternal deaths invariably occur
in those with active disease (Ritchie, 2012). Women with SLE are at greater
risk for thrombotic complications, infection, postpartum hemorrhage, and
blood transfusion. He and Wei (2020) reported increased risks of adverse
pregnancy outcomes in women with SLE compared with unaffected women
(Table 62-4).
TABLE 62-4. Risk of Adverse Pregnancy Outcomes in Women with
Systemic Lupus Erythematosus

During the past several decades, pregnancy outcomes in women with
SLE have improved remarkably. For most women with inactive or
mild/moderate disease activity, pregnancy outcomes are relatively favorable
(Buyon, 2015). Women who have confined cutaneous lupus do not usually
have adverse outcomes (Hamed, 2013). However, newly diagnosed SLE
during pregnancy tends to be severe (Zhao, 2013). In general, pregnancy
outcome is best in women for whom: (1) lupus activity has been quiescent

for at least 6 months before conception; (2) lupus nephritis manifest by
proteinuria or renal dysfunction is absent; (3) neither antiphospholipid
syndrome nor lupus anticoagulant are detected; and (4) superimposed
preeclampsia does not develop (Peart, 2014; Petri, 2020a; Stojan, 2012).

■ Lupus Nephritis
Active nephritis is associated with adverse pregnancy outcomes, although
these have improved substantially and especially if disease remains in
remission (Stojan, 2012; Wagner, 2009). Of complications, women with
renal disease have a high incidence of gestational hypertension and
preeclampsia. Of 137 women with SLE reported by Rodrigues and
colleagues (2019), 27 percent of gravidas with preexisting renal disease
developed preeclampsia compared with only 16 percent of those without
underlying renal disease. In a review of 309 pregnancies complicated by
lupus nephritis, 30 percent suffered a flare, and 40 percent of these had
associated renal insufficiency (Moroni, 2005). The maternal mortality rate
was 1.3 percent. These findings were corroborated in a subsequent
prospective study (Moroni, 2016). In addition, a third of the 113 pregnancies
were delivered preterm. Compared with women without nephritis or with
inactive nephritis, those with active nephritis have a significantly increased
incidence of maternal and fetal complications (Rodrigues, 2019; Wagner,
2009). The higher the histological class, the greater the risk.
Most recommend continuation of immunosuppressive therapy for
nephritis during pregnancy. Hydroxychloroquine, cyclosporine, azathioprine,
and tacrolimus are permissible in pregnancy (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019b; Parikh, 2020). New-onset nephritis
or severe renal flare is treated aggressively with tacrolimus, and
consideration is given to adding intravenous corticosteroids,
immunosuppressive drugs, or intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) therapy
(Maynard, 2019; Parikh, 2020).

■ Lupus Versus Preeclampsia-Eclampsia
Chronic hypertension complicates up to 30 percent of pregnancies in women
with SLE (Egerman, 2005). Preeclampsia is common, and in those with
nephritis or antiphospholipid antibodies, superimposed preeclampsia is

encountered even more often and earlier (Bertsias, 2008; Dong, 2020).
Preeclampsia and SLE flares share features of hypertension, proteinuria,
edema, and renal function deterioration. However, the management is
distinct. Lupus nephritis is treated with immunosuppression, and severe
preeclampsia/eclampsia requires delivery. It may be difficult, if not
impossible, to discriminate a lupus flare with nephropathy from severe
preeclampsia if the kidney is the only involved organ (Petri, 2020b). Serum
uric acid and complement levels and dsDNA titers may aid in differentiating
the two. Last, central nervous system involvement with SLE may culminate in
convulsions similar to those of eclampsia.

■ Management During Pregnancy
Care consists primarily of monitoring maternal clinical and laboratory status
and fetal well-being. Establishment of baseline renal disease and
hematological values is important because pregnancy-induced laboratory
changes later in gestation can resemble SLE disease activity. A 24-hour urine
collection to assess proteinuria and serum creatinine level measurement
determine initial renal function. A complete blood count (CBC) identifies
preexisting anemia, leukopenia, and thrombocytopenia. Continued assessment
of renal function and hematological parameters is undertaken each trimester
unless symptoms develop. In this event, measures are monthly (Baer, 2011).
For monitoring of SLE activity, various laboratory techniques have been
recommended. As just discussed, establishing baseline values will assist
comparisons later in pregnancy. Serum complement levels (C3 and C4) and
dsDNA titers are drawn at the first prenatal care visit and when symptoms
develop. Serum complement levels are normally increased in pregnancy
(Appendix, p. 1231). Although falling or low C3 and C4 levels are more
likely to be associated with active disease, higher levels provide no
assurance against disease flare. If symptoms develop, the combination of
declining complement levels and rising dsDNA titers does indicate a lupus
flare (Baer, 2011). Women with SLE are also screened for antiphospholipid
antibodies at the beginning of pregnancy. Last, screening for anti-SS-A (antiRo) and anti-SS-B (anti-La) antibodies is recommended because of
associated fetal complications described later.

The combination of serial hematological, rheumatological, and renal
studies may detect changes in disease activity. SLE-associated hemolysis is
characterized by a positive Coombs test, anemia, reticulocytosis, and
unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia. Thrombocytopenia, leukopenia, or both
may develop. Chronic thrombocytopenia in early pregnancy may be due to
antiphospholipid antibodies (Lockshin, 1995). Later, thrombocytopenia may
indicate preeclampsia.
The fetus also is closely observed for adverse effects such as growth
restriction and oligohydramnios. Sonographic evaluations are performed
every 4 weeks beginning at 24 weeks’ gestation to assess for both.
Antepartum testing for fetal well-being is initiated in the third trimester and
described in Chapter 20 (p. 392) (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2021a,b). Unless evidence of maternal or fetal compromise
develops, pregnancy is allowed to progress to term.

■ Pharmacological Treatment
There is no cure for SLE, and complete remissions are rare. Approximately a
fourth of pregnant women have mild disease, which is not life threatening but
may be disabling because of pain and fatigue. Arthralgia and serositis can be
managed by nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). However,
during pregnancy, chronic or large intermittent dosing is avoided due to
related oligohydramnios or ductus arteriosus closure (Chap. 8, p. 151).
Antimalarials reduce dermatitis, arthritis, and fatigue (Hahn, 2018).
Although these agents cross the placenta, hydroxychloroquine (Plaquenil)
does not appear to cause congenital malformations (Briggs, 2022). Most
recommend continuation during pregnancy because therapy interruption can
precipitate a flare (Marder, 2019; Petri, 2019). For those not previously
using hydroxychloroquine, others favor initiation in the first trimester
because its use is associated with an 85-percent reduction in the risk of
having a small-for-gestational-age neonate (Parikh, 2020). Also, it lowers
the risk of fetal congenital heart block by 50 percent in women with anti-SSA antibodies. Low-dose aspirin can be used throughout gestation.
Severe disease is managed with corticosteroids such as prednisone, 1 to
2 mg/kg/d orally or methylprednisolone, 1000 mg given intravenously over
90 minutes daily for 3 days (Petri, 2007). After the disease is controlled, this
dose is tapered to a daily morning dose of 10 to 15 mg. Corticosteroid

therapy can lead to gestational diabetes. During labor, delivery, and
postpartum, corticosteroids in “stress doses” are given to women who take
these drugs chronically or who have done so recently. This augmented dose
reflects a normal adrenal response, and one option on admission for delivery
is hydrocortisone, 100 mg, given IV every 8 hours for 48 hours.
Tacrolimus, rituximab, and IVIG therapy also have been used to treat
lupus flares (Petri, 2019). These are usually reserved for lupus nephritis or
disease that is corticosteroid resistant. Azathioprine has a good safety record
during pregnancy (Hahn, 2018; Petri, 2019). Its recommended daily oral
dose is 2 mg/kg. Teratogenic medications to be avoided include
mycophenolate mofetil, methotrexate, and cyclophosphamide (Briggs, 2022;
Hahn, 2018). However, cyclophosphamide can be considered in the second
or third trimester for severe disease (Lazzaroni, 2016).
In nonpregnant subjects, antihypertensive therapy often includes an
angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor or an angiotensin-receptor
blocker. For pregnancy, these should be changed to safer fetal options such as
calcium-channel blockers, alpha methyldopa, or labetalol (Cabiddu, 2016).

■ Perinatal Mortality and Morbidity
Adverse perinatal outcome rates are significantly elevated in pregnancies
complicated by SLE. Among these are preterm delivery, fetal-growth
restriction, stillbirth, and neonatal lupus syndrome (see Table 62-4) (He,
2020; Phansenee, 2018). Perinatal outcome rates worsen in women with
active disease, significant proteinuria, or renal impairment and in those with
chronic hypertension, preeclampsia, or both (Lazzaroni, 2016). Adverse
outcomes are also more common in women with neuropsychiatric lupus (de
Jesus, 2017). Reasons at least partially responsible for adverse fetal
consequences include decidual vasculopathy with placental infarction and
decreased perfusion (Hanly, 1988).

■ Neonatal Lupus Syndrome
This is characterized by newborn skin lesions—lupus dermatitis; various
hematological and systemic derangements; and occasionally congenital heart
block (Hahn, 2018). Cutaneous manifestations can be present in 30 to 40
percent of infants and appear at 4 to 6 weeks of age (Silverman, 2010).

These are usually associated with anti-SS-A and SS-B antibodies, and up to
50 percent of women with SLE are positive for these (see Table 62-1).
Thrombocytopenia and hepatic involvement are seen in 5 to 10 percent of
affected infants.
In a review of outcomes in 128 infants born to women with lupus, 16
percent developed cutaneous lupus and 26 percent showed hematological
abnormalities and elevated transaminase levels (Cimaz, 2003). Cutaneous
lupus, thrombocytopenia, and autoimmune hemolysis are transient and clear
within a few months (Zuppa, 2017). In subsequent offspring, the recurrence
risk for neonatal lupus may approach 25 percent (Bramham, 2012). The only
maternal treatment that lowers the risk of neonatal lupus is
hydroxychloroquine (Izmirly, 2020; Petri, 2019).

■ Congenital Heart Block
Fetal and neonatal heart block results from diffuse myocarditis and fibrosis
in the region between the atrioventricular (AV) node and bundle of His.
Natural killer cells have been detected in fetal myocytes (Ivanchenko, 2021).
Congenital heart block develops almost exclusively in fetuses of women with
antibodies to the SS-A or SS-B antigens (Buyon, 1993). Even in the presence
of such antibodies, the incidence of fetal myocarditis is only 2 to 3 percent
(Bramham, 2012; Lateef, 2017). However, it rises to 20 percent with a prior
affected child. The cardiac lesion is permanent, and a pacemaker is generally
necessary. Long-term prognosis is poor. Of 325 infants with cardiac neonatal
lupus, nearly 20 percent died, and of these, a third were stillborn (Izmirly,
2011). Another autoimmune disease, Sjögren syndrome, also is associated
with fetal heart block (Brito-Zerón, 2020).
Maternal administration of corticosteroids, plasma exchange, or IVIG
therapy does not reduce the risk of congenital heart block. For women with
anti-SS-B and anti-SS-A antibodies, fetal cardiac monitoring is performed
between 18 and 26 weeks’ gestation. Maternal corticosteroid administration
for treatment of fetal congenital heart block is controversial and discussed
further in Chapter 19 (p. 369). This therapy to treat fetal heart block has not
been studied in randomized trials. However, some evidence derives from
fetuses exposed to their mother’s corticosteroid treatment for SLE and shows
that exposure may mitigate fetal myocarditis. Specifically, Shinohara and
coworkers (1999) reported no cases of heart block in 26 neonates whose

mothers received corticosteroids before 16 weeks’ gestation as part of SLE
maintenance therapy. By contrast, 15 of 61 neonates with heart block were
born to women in whom corticosteroid therapy was begun after 16 weeks for
an SLE exacerbation. Maternal hydroxychloroquine therapy is associated
with a lower incidence of fetal heart block, especially in those with a prior
affected child (Izmirly, 2010, 2020).

■ Long-term Prognosis and Contraception
The survival rate for women with SLE is 95 percent at 5 years, 90 percent at
10 years, and 78 percent at 20 years (Hahn, 2018). Infection, lupus flares,
end-organ failure, hypertension, stroke, and cardiovascular disease account
for most deaths. In general, women with SLE and chronic vascular or renal
disease may limit family size because of morbidity associated with the
disease and greater risks for adverse perinatal outcomes. For contraception,
combination oral contraceptives did not increase the incidence of lupus
flares in two large multicenter trials (Petri, 2005; Sánchez-Guerrero, 2005).
Notably, comorbid antiphospholipid antibodies are a contraindication to
estrogen-containing methods (Chap. 38, p. 672). Progestin-only implants and
injections provide effective contraception with no known effects on lupus
flare rates (Sammaritano, 2020). Data do not support the concern that
intrauterine device use and immunosuppressive therapy lead to higher
infection rates in these patients. Tubal sterilization may be advantageous and
is performed with greatest safety postpartum or whenever SLE is quiescent
(Chap. 39, p. 681).

ANTIPHOSPHOLIPID SYNDROME
This is an autoantibody-mediated acquired thrombophilia that predisposes to
recurrent thrombosis or pregnancy morbidity (Moutsopoulos, 2018).
Specifically, antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) is diagnosed in women with
persistently positive serum tests for antiphospholipid antibodies (APAs) plus
arterial and/or venous thromboses or obstetrical morbidity. APAs include
lupus anticoagulant, anticardiolipin antibody, and anti-β2 glycoprotein-I
antibody.
Phospholipids are the main lipid constituents of cell and organelle
membranes. Certain proteins in plasma associate noncovalently with these

phospholipids. APAs are directed against these phospholipids or these
phospholipid-binding proteins (Garcia, 2018; Giannakopoulos, 2013). This
antibody group may be of immunoglobulin G (IgG), IgM, and IgA classes,
alone or in combination. APAs are most common with SLE, other connective
tissue disorders, and APS. That said, a small proportion of normal women
and men have low levels of these antibodies.
The stimulus for autoantibody production is unclear, but it possibly is due
to a preceding infection or another event that causes endothelial disruption.
The resulting pathophysiology is mediated by one or more of the following:
(1) activation of various procoagulants, (2) inactivation of natural
anticoagulants, (3) complement activation, and (4) inhibition of
syncytiotrophoblast differentiation (Garcia, 2018). Clinically, these actions
lead to vascular thromboses or to pregnancy morbidity. Virtually every organ
system may be affected.
Central nervous system involvement is one of the most prominent clinical
manifestations. In addition to cerebrovascular arterial or venous thrombotic
events, psychiatric features and even multiple sclerosis can be present
(Binder, 2010). Renovascular involvement may lead to renal failure that can
be difficult to differentiate from lupus nephritis (D’Cruz, 2009). Peripheral
and visceral thromboses also are features. In one case, a puerpera developed
a mesenteric vessel infarction and subsequent spontaneous cecal perforation
(Ahmed, 2009). Obstetrical complications encompass recurrent pregnancy
loss and placental dysfunction reflected by fetal-growth restriction, stillbirth,
early-onset preeclampsia, and preterm birth. Treatment using aspirin,
heparin, and close monitoring has increased live-birth rates to more than 70
percent in these women (Hamulyák, 2020; Schreiber, 2016).
A small proportion of these patients develop the catastrophic
antiphospholipid antibody syndrome (CAPS) or Asherson syndrome. This is
defined as a rapidly progressive thromboembolic disorder simultaneously
affecting three or more organ systems or tissues (Garcia, 2018; Schreiber,
2016). It has a high mortality rate from activation of a cytokine storm. In half
of cases, a triggering event is identified.

■ Specific Antiphospholipid Antibodies
As mentioned, several antibodies in APS are directed against a specific
phospholipid or a phospholipid-binding protein:

1. β2 glycoprotein-I, also known as apolipoprotein H, is a phospholipidbinding plasma protein that inhibits prothrombinase activity within
platelets and prevents platelet aggregation (Giannakopoulos, 2013). Thus,
its normal action is to limit procoagulant binding and thereby prevent
coagulation cascade activation. Logically, antibodies directed against this
glycoprotein would reverse its anticoagulant activity and promote
thrombosis. This is important from an obstetrical viewpoint because β2
glycoprotein-I is expressed in high concentrations on the
syncytiotrophoblast surface. Complement activation may contribute to its
pathogenesis (Avalos, 2009; Tsokos, 2011). Teleologically, this seems
appropriate because the decidua intuitively should be a critical area to
prevent coagulation that might lead to intervillous space thrombosis.
2. Lupus anticoagulant (LAC) is a heterogeneous group of antibodies
directed against phospholipid-binding proteins. This antibody group
induces prolongation in vitro of the prothrombin, partial thromboplastin,
and Russell viper venom times. Thus, paradoxically, this so-called
anticoagulant is actually powerfully thrombotic in vivo. This is the only
APA that has been consistently associated with adverse pregnancy
outcomes (Petri, 2020a).
3. Anticardiolipin antibodies (ACAs) are directed against one of the many
phospholipid cardiolipins found in mitochondrial membranes and
platelets.

■ Antibodies Against Natural Anticoagulants
Some APAs are also directed against the natural anticoagulant proteins C and
S. Another is directed against the anticoagulant protein annexin V, which is
expressed in high concentrations by syncytiotrophoblast (Giannakopoulos,
2013). Testing for these other antibodies is not recommended (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019a). However, some studies
have evaluated these nonconventional antiphospholipid antibodies in women
who clinically meet APS criteria but do not have the classic antibody profile.
In one study, treatment of women who had these nonconventional antibodies
offered some benefits, such as a lower pregnancy loss rate (Mekinian, 2016).
Clinical features shown in Table 62-5 provide indications for testing. By
international consensus, APS is diagnosed based on laboratory and clinical
criteria (Table 11-4, p. 205). First, one of two clinical criteria—which are

vascular thrombosis or certain pregnancy morbidity—must be present. With
laboratory criteria, high IgG or IgM titers of ACA or anti-β2 glycoprotein-I
or LAC positivity should be confirmed on two occasions 12 weeks apart.
The diagnosis can be further stratified based on the number of these tests that
are positive.
TABLE 62-5. Some Clinical Features of Antiphospholipid Syndrome

Tests for LAC are nonspecific coagulation tests. The partial
thromboplastin time is generally prolonged because the anticoagulant
interferes with conversion of prothrombin to thrombin in vitro. The dilute
Russell viper venom test is considered more specific.
Branch and Khamashta (2003) recommend conservative interpretation of
results that are based on repeated tests from a reliable laboratory and that are
consistent with each clinical case. Only approximately 20 percent of patients
with APS have a positive LAC assay alone. Thus, ACA enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) testing also should be performed. Efforts have
been made to standardize ACA assays, however, these remain without
international standards (Garcia, 2018). For each APS test, interlaboratory
variation can be large, and agreement between commercial kits is poor.

■ Pregnancy and Antiphospholipid Antibodies
As many as 30 percent of patients with SLE have APAs. In women without
autoimmune diseases who have pregnancy complications, the prevalence of
positive results with APA testing is 7 percent (Garcia, 2018).
In women with elevated APA levels, and especially when LAC is
identified, risks for decidual vasculopathy, placental infarction, fetal-growth
restriction, early-onset preeclampsia, and recurrent fetal death are increased
(Saccone, 2017). Some of these women, like those with SLE, also have a

high incidence of venous and arterial thromboses, cerebral thrombosis,
hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia, and pulmonary hypertension (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019a; Clowse, 2008). In 191
LAC-negative women with APS, those with ACAs and β2-glycoprotein-I had
significantly greater miscarriage rates than if either one alone was positive
(Liu, 2013). Women with higher titers tend to have more adverse outcomes
(Alijotas-Reig, 2020; Gabbay-Benziv, 2018).

■ Pregnancy Pathophysiology
It is not precisely known how APAs cause damage, but it is likely that their
actions are multifactorial. Platelets may be damaged directly by APAs or
indirectly by binding β2-glycoprotein-I, which causes platelets to be
susceptible to aggregation (Giannakopoulos, 2013). One theory proposes that
phospholipid-containing endothelial cell or syncytiotrophoblast membranes
may be damaged directly by the APA or indirectly by antibody binding to
either β2 glycoprotein-I or annexin V (Rand, 1997, 1998). This prevents the
cell membranes from protecting the syncytiotrophoblast and endothelium.
This exposes the basement membrane, to which damaged platelets can adhere
and form a thrombus.
Pierro and colleagues (1999) reported that APAs decreased decidual
production of the vasodilating prostaglandin E2. Diminished protein C or S
activity and greater prothrombin activation also may be contributory
(Zangari, 1997). Evidence supports that thrombosis with APS stems from
activation of the tissue factor pathway (Amengual, 2003). Last, uncontrolled
placental complement activation by APAs is implicated in fetal loss and
growth restriction (Holers, 2002).
Complications in APS cannot be completely explained by thrombosis
alone. Animal models suggest that effects stem from inflammation rather than
thrombosis (Cohen, 2011). Some investigators hypothesize that APSassociated clotting is triggered as a “second hit” from innate inflammatory
immune responses. These investigators recommend treatment with
antiinflammatory agents (Meroni, 2011).

■ Adverse Pregnancy Outcomes

Overall, APAs are associated with higher rates of fetal wastage (Chap. 11, p.
204). In most early reports that describe these outcomes, however, women
were included because they had repeated adverse outcomes. Both antibody
prevalence and miscarriage are common—recall that the incidence of APAs
in the general obstetrical population is about 5 percent and early miscarriage
approximates 20 percent of call conceptions. Accordingly, current data are
too limited to conclude the exact risks for adverse effects of these antibodies
on pregnancy outcomes. Fetal deaths, however, are more characteristic with
APS than are first-trimester miscarriages (Garcia, 2018; Roque, 2004).
When otherwise unexplained fetal deaths are examined, the data are
mixed. One study measured ACA levels in 309 pregnancies with fetal death
and found no differences in their frequency compared with levels in 618
normal pregnancies (Haddow, 1991). In another study of women with
recurrent pregnancy loss, those with APAs had an increased rate of preterm
delivery (Clark, 2007). In a case-control study of 582 stillbirths and 1547
live births, a three- to fivefold higher risk for stillbirth was found in women
with elevated ACA and anti-β2 glycoprotein-I levels (Silver, 2013). In
women with APAs, adverse outcomes are more common in the presence of:
(1) all three classic APA types, (2) comorbid SLE or systemic autoimmune
diseases, and (3) prior thrombosis and pregnancy morbidity. Logistic
regression found the probability of pregnancy failure was 93 percent with
two or more APA types but was 63 percent for those with only one (Ruffatti,
2011).

■ Thrombosis Prevention in Pregnancy
Because of study heterogeneity, current treatment recommendations for
women with APAs can be confusing. Therapy is directed at thrombosis
prevention. As discussed, APAs are immunoglobulins that may be of G, M,
or A classes. Those directed against the phospholipids (PL) are termed GPL,
MPL, and APL, respectively. During testing, these are reported as
semiquantified phospholipid binding-unit levels and expressed as negative,
low-positive, medium-positive, or high-positive (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019a).
As discussed in Chapter 55 (p. 979), women with prior thromboembolic
events who have APAs are at risk for recurrence in subsequent pregnancies.
For these women, prophylactic anticoagulation with heparin throughout

pregnancy and for 6 weeks postpartum is recommended (American College
of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019a). For those without prior
thromboembolic events, recommendations for management vary and are
listed in Table 55-5 (p. 984). Some acceptable schemes include close
antepartum maternal observation with or without prophylactic or
intermediate-dose heparin, and then some form of postpartum anticoagulation
for 6 weeks. Sciascia and coworkers (2016) have presented preliminary
salutary results with hydroxychloroquine treatment. This currently is
considered investigational (Garcia, 2018; Latino, 2020).
Several researchers have questioned the need for heparin for women
with APAs but no history of thrombosis (Branch, 2010). Although this is less
clear, some recommend that women be treated if they have medium- or highpositive ACA titers or LAC activity and a prior second- or third-trimester
fetal death not attributable to other causes (Dizon-Townson, 1998; Lockshin,
1995). Others report that women with recurrent early pregnancy loss and
medium- or high-positive titers of antibodies may benefit from therapy
(Robertson, 2006).
Due to the risk of fetal-growth abnormalities and stillbirth, serial
sonographic assessment of fetal growth and antepartum testing in the third
trimester is recommended (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2019a, 2021a,b).

■ Specific Therapy in Pregnancy
Other agents are used to treat gravidas that have APS but no prior
thromboembolic event. Aspirin, in doses of 60 to 80 mg orally daily, blocks
conversion of arachidonic acid to thromboxane A2 while sparing
prostacyclin production. Thromboxane A2 usually causes platelet aggregation
and vasoconstriction, and prostacyclin has the opposite effect. The only
major side effect from low-dose aspirin is a slight risk of small-vessel
bleeding during surgical procedures. Low-dose aspirin does not reduce
adverse pregnancy outcomes in women who have APAs but who lack the
complete APS syndrome (Amengual, 2015). Thus, its use is recommended
for women with SLE or APS (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2020b; Rahman, 2020).

Unfractionated heparin is given subcutaneously in dosages of 5000 to
10,000 units every 12 hours. Some prefer low-molecular-weight heparin,
such as 40 mg enoxaparin (Lovenox) once daily (Kwak-Kim, 2013). With
therapeutic dosing, measurement of heparin levels may be useful because
clotting tests can be altered by LAC. The rationale for heparin therapy is to
prevent venous and arterial thrombotic episodes. Heparin therapy also
prevents thrombosis in the microcirculation, including the decidualtrophoblastic interface (Toglia, 1996). As discussed, heparin binds to β2glycoprotein-I, which coats the syncytiotrophoblast. This prevents binding of
ACAs and anti-β2 glycoprotein-I antibodies to their surfaces, which likely
prevents cellular damage (Tsokos, 2011). Heparin also binds to APAs in
vitro and likely in vivo.
Aspirin plus heparin therapy is the most effective regimen (de Jesus,
2014; Hamulyák, 2020). However, despite treatment, 30 percent of women
with APS do not achieve a successful outcome (Arslan, 2020). Heparin
therapy is associated with several complications that include bleeding,
thrombocytopenia, osteopenia, and osteoporosis. A description of various
heparins and their adverse effects is found in Chapter 55 (p. 983).
Corticosteroids generally should not be used with primary APS—that is,
without an associated connective tissue disorder. For women with SLE or
those being treated for APS who develop SLE, corticosteroid therapy is
indicated. In such cases of secondary APS seen with SLE, the dose of
prednisone should be maintained at the lowest effective level to prevent
flares.
IVIG therapy is controversial and has usually been reserved for women
with overt disease—including catastrophic antiphospholipid syndrome or
heparin-induced thrombocytopenia or both (Rahman, 2020). It is used when
other first-line therapies have failed, especially in the setting of
preeclampsia and fetal-growth restriction. IVIG is administered by some in
doses of 0.4 g/kg/d for 5 days—total dose of 2 g/kg. This is repeated
monthly, or it is given as a single dose of 1 g/kg each month. Treatment is
expensive, as one course costs more than $10,000. Tenti and colleagues
(2016) found no benefits from adding IVIG to low-dose aspirin and lowmolecular-weight heparin. One Cochrane review found no improvement in
the live-birth rate for IVIG therapy given to women with recurrent pregnancy
loss (Wong, 2014). Trials are needed before application of this expensive
and cumbersome therapy is recommended.

Immunosuppression with hydroxychloroquine is commonly used with
low-dose aspirin in the treatment of women with SLE. This regimen may be
beneficial by reducing the risk of thrombosis and improving pregnancy
outcomes in women who also have APS (Mekinian, 2015; Sciascia, 2016).
Statins have been examined due to their protective effects on
endothelium. In a small trial in 21 women with APS who developed fetalgrowth restriction or preeclampsia, the addition of pravastatin to low-dose
aspirin and low-molecular-weight heparin improved placental blood flow,
preeclampsia features, and pregnancy outcomes (Lefkou, 2016). Larger trials
are needed before this therapy is recommended.
Described earlier (p. 1114), catastrophic antiphospholipid syndrome is
treated aggressively with full anticoagulation, high-dose corticosteroids,
plasma exchange, and/or IVIG therapy (Garcia, 2018; Rahman, 2020).

■ Treatment Efficacy
Fetal loss is common in women with untreated APS, and especially in those
with LAC positivity. Even with treatment, recurrent fetal loss rates remain at
20 to 30 percent (Arslan, 2020; Empson, 2005; Ernest, 2011). Shown in
Table 62-6 are pregnancy outcomes from 750 treated women with primary
APS (Saccone, 2017). Participants were treated with low-dose aspirin and
prophylactic low-molecular-weight heparin starting in the first trimester.
Importantly, some women with SLE and APAs have normal pregnancy
outcomes without treatment. It is also emphasized that women with LAC and
prior poor pregnancy outcomes have had liveborn neonates without
treatment.
TABLE 62-6. Pregnancy Outcomes (%) in 750 Women Treated for
Antiphospholipid Syndrome—the PREGNANTS Study

In a manner similar to neonatal lupus syndrome (p. 1113), up to 30
percent of newborns demonstrate passively acquired APAs (Nalli, 2017).
One group found higher rates of learning disabilities in these children
(Tincani, 2009). Another reported a fourfold greater risk for perinatal strokes
(Simchen, 2009). Of 141 newborns followed in a European registry, the rate
of preterm birth was 16 percent; low birthweight occurred in 17 percent; and
later behavioral abnormalities developed in 4 percent of the children. There
were no cases of neonatal thrombosis (Motta, 2012). A 7-year study of 36
pregnancies in 26 women who had APS reported three cases of autism
spectrum disorder. All were associated with persistent neonatal anti-β2
glycoprotein-I IgG antibodies (Abisror, 2013).

RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS
This chronic inflammatory disease stems from immunological dysfunction,
and infiltrating T cells secrete cytokines to cause inflammation, polyarthritis,
and systemic symptoms. The cardinal feature is inflammatory synovitis that
usually involves the peripheral joints. The disease has a propensity for
cartilage destruction, bony erosions, and joint deformities. Pain, aggravated
by movement, is accompanied by swelling and tenderness. Extraarticular
manifestations include rheumatoid nodules, vasculitis, and pleuropulmonary
symptoms. Other complaints are fatigue, anorexia, and depression. The
American College of Rheumatology has published diagnostic criteria (Shah,
2018).
The worldwide prevalence of rheumatoid arthritis is 0.5 to 1 percent,
women are affected three times more often than men, and peak onset is from
25 to 55 years (Shah, 2018). There is a genetic predisposition, and

heritability is estimated at 15 to 30 percent (McInnes, 2011). Genome-wide
associated studies have identified more than 30 loci involved in rheumatoid
arthritis pathogenesis (Kurkó, 2013). Class II major histocompatibility
complex molecule HLA-DR4 and HLA-DRB1 alleles also show an
association (McInnes, 2011; Shah, 2018). Pregnancy provides a protection
against rheumatoid arthritis development, and this may be related to HLAdisparate fetal microchimerism (Förger, 2020; Guthrie, 2010).

■ Management
Treatment is directed at pain relief, inflammation reduction, protection of
articular structures, and preservation of function. Physical and occupational
therapy and self-care instructions are essential.
Aspirin and other NSAIDs nonspecifically inhibit both cyclooxygenase 1
(COX-1), which is an enzyme critical to normal platelet function, and COX2, which mediates inflammatory response mechanisms. However, in one
systematic review, a small increased rate of cardiac malformations was
found in newborns exposed to NSAIDs in the first trimester (Briggs, 2022).
In addition, NSAIDs are associated with early spontaneous abortions, ductus
arteriosus constriction, and neonatal pulmonary hypertension (Briggs, 2022).
Another potential side effect of chronic NSAID therapy is gastritis with acute
bleeding. Thus, risks versus benefits of these medications must be
considered. Glucocorticoid therapy in low to moderate doses is given to
achieve more rapid symptom control. Of these, prednisone, 7.5 mg orally
daily for the first 2 years of active disease, substantively reduces progressive
joint erosions (Shah, 2018).
Until recently, NSAIDs were the cornerstone of therapy, but they do not
retard disease progression. The American College of Rheumatology
recommends several disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs) that
may reduce or prevent joint damage (Singh, 2016). According to Shah and St.
Clair (2018), methotrexate has become the preferred DMARD outside of
pregnancy. NSAIDs thus are important in pregnancy because methotrexate
and leflunomide are contraindicated (Chap. 8, pp. 151–152). In one review
of drug exposure, a fourth of women with rheumatoid arthritis took a
DMARD within 6 months of conception (Kuriya, 2011). Of unplanned
exposures during pregnancy, 4 percent of 393 pregnant women were given a

category D or X medication—methotrexate was the most common at 2.9
percent.
Sulfasalazine and hydroxychloroquine are safe for use in pregnancy
(Briggs, 2022; Partlett, 2011). These, combined with relatively low-dose
prednisone—7.5 to 20 mg daily—usually successfully treat flares.
Biological DMARDs have revolutionized rheumatoid arthritis treatment.
These include the tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) inhibitors infliximab,
adalimumab, golimumab, certolizumab, and etanercept (Shah, 2018). Their
use in pregnancy is limited, but they appear to be safe for the fetus (Briggs,
2022). In one review, 13 percent of 393 pregnant women were given a
biological cytokine-inhibiting DMARD—primarily etanercept (Kuriya,
2011). In another review of 300 exposures, no fetal effects were noted
(Berthelot, 2009). A prospective study of 38 pregnant women found similar
results (Hoxha, 2017). In 74 women exposed to adalimumab during
pregnancy, no risks were identified (Burmester, 2017). Little is known
regarding the pregnancy effects of anakinra, an interleukin 1 receptor
antagonist, or of rituximab, an antagonist to the B-cell CD20 antigen. Other
biologics are abatacept, tocilizumab, and tofacitinib.

■ Pregnancy and Rheumatoid Arthritis
In up to 70 percent of women with rheumatoid arthritis, disease will improve
during pregnancy (Raine, 2020; Shah, 2018). Some studies suggest this may
be due to regulatory T-cell alterations (Förger, 2020). Even so, some women
develop disease during pregnancy, and others become worse. A downside to
this respite during pregnancy is that postpartum exacerbation occurs in 40 to
50 percent of women (Eudy, 2018; Jethwa, 2019). This may stem from
postpartum alterations in innate immunity (Häupl, 2008b).
Some studies report a protective effect of pregnancy against developing
new-onset rheumatoid arthritis. In a case-control study of 88 affected women,
pregnancy provided a degree of protection long term, but the likelihood of
new-onset rheumatoid arthritis was increased sixfold during the first 3
postpartum months (Silman, 1992). Pikwer and colleagues (2009) reported a
significant reduction in the risk of subsequent arthritis in women who
breastfed longer than 12 months.
These findings may reflect the interference of sex hormones with several
putative processes involved in arthritis pathogenesis, including

immunoregulation (Förger, 2020; Häupl, 2008a,b). First, Unger and
associates (1983) reported that amelioration of rheumatoid arthritis
correlated with serum levels of pregnancy-associated alpha2-glycoprotein.
This compound has immunosuppressive properties. Second, Nelson and
coworkers (1993) noted that disease improvement was associated with a
disparity in HLA class II antigens between mother and fetus. They suggested
that the maternal immune response to paternal HLA antigens may play a role
in pregnancy-induced remission of arthritis. In addition to monocyte
activations, there also may be T-lymphocyte activation (Förger, 2020).
Fertility is diminished in patients with rheumatoid arthritis, and adverse
pregnancy outcomes are increased. Kishore and colleagues (2019) reported
pregnancy outcomes from nearly 32,000 women with rheumatoid arthritis.
Compared with unaffected women, those with rheumatoid arthritis had
significantly greater rates of hypertensive diseases, preterm birth,
hemorrhage, and fetal-growth restriction.

■ Juvenile Rheumatoid Arthritis
This group of diseases is the most frequent cause of chronic arthritis in
children and persists into adulthood. In 76 pregnancies of 51 affected
Norwegian women, pregnancy had no effects on clinical presentation, but
disease activity usually became quiescent or remained so during pregnancy
(Østensen, 1991). Similar to rheumatoid arthritis, postpartum flares were
common. Joint deformities often developed in these women, and 15 of 20
cesarean deliveries were done for contracted pelves or joint prostheses.
Results from a summary of 39 Polish women with juvenile rheumatoid
arthritis were similar (Musiej-Nowakowska, 1999).
This arthritis portends few adverse pregnancy outcomes. The risk for
preterm birth is elevated, but fetal development is normal (Mohamed, 2016;
Rom, 2014; Wallenius, 2014). In a study of 1807 births, Remaeus and
associates (2017) reported increased incidences of preterm birth, fetalgrowth restriction, and preeclampsia. Disease severity in early pregnancy
was predictive of preterm delivery and fetal-growth restriction in one cohort
study (Bharti, 2015). And, patients with low disease activity scores in the
first trimester are likely to have low disease activity or remission in the third
trimester (Ince-Askan, 2017).

If the cervical spine is involved, particular attention is warranted during
pregnancy. Subluxation is common, and pregnancy, at least theoretically,
predisposes to this because of joint laxity. Importantly, there are anesthesia
concerns during endotracheal intubation.

SYSTEMIC SCLEROSIS—SCLERODERMA
This is a chronic multisystem connective tissue disorder of unknown
etiology. It is characterized by microvascular damage; inflammation from
immune system activation; and excessive deposition of collagen in the skin,
lungs, heart, gastrointestinal tract, and kidneys. It is uncommon, displays a 5to-1 female dominance, and typically affects those aged 30 to 50 years
(Clark, 2020; Varga, 2018).
This strong prevalence of scleroderma in women and its greater
incidence in the years following childbirth give credence to the hypothesis
that microchimerism is involved as discussed earlier (p. 1109) (Munira,
2020). Artlett and associates (1998) demonstrated Y-chromosomal DNA in
almost half of women with systemic sclerosis compared with only 4 percent
of controls. Rak and coworkers (2009) identified male microchimerism in
peripheral blood mononuclear cells more frequently in women with limited
versus diffuse scleroderma.

■ Clinical Course
The hallmark is overproduction of normal collagen. Limited cutaneous
systemic sclerosis is the more benign form and progresses slowly. With
diffuse cutaneous systemic sclerosis, skin fibrosis advances rapidly and is
followed by gastrointestinal tract fibrosis, especially the distal esophagus
(Varga, 2018). Pulmonary interstitial fibrosis along with vascular changes
may cause pulmonary hypertension, which develops in 15 percent of patients.
Antinuclear antibodies such as those listed in Table 62-1 are found in 95
percent of patients, and immunoincompetence often develops.
Raynaud phenomenon, which is typified by cold-induced, episodic,
rapidly reversible digital ischemia, is seen in 95 percent of patients. There
also may be swelling of the distal extremities and face. Symptoms from
esophageal involvement, especially fullness and epigastric burning pain,

occur in half of patients. Pulmonary involvement is frequent and causes
dyspnea. The 10-year cumulative survival rate is 70 percent in those with
pulmonary fibrosis, and pulmonary arterial hypertension is the main cause of
death (Clark, 2020; Varga, 2018). Women with limited cutaneous disease
such as the CREST syndrome—calcinosis, Raynaud phenomenon,
esophageal involvement, sclerodactyly, and telangiectasia—have milder
disease.
Overlap syndrome refers to systemic sclerosis with features of other
connective tissue disorders. Mixed connective tissue disease is a term used
for the syndrome involving features of SLE, systemic sclerosis, polymyositis,
rheumatoid arthritis, and high titers of anti-ribonucleoprotein (RNP)
antibodies (Rudder, 2021). The disorder is also termed undifferentiated
connective tissue disease (Radin, 2020; Zucchi, 2020).
Although systemic sclerosis is incurable, treatment directed at end-organ
involvement can sometimes relieve symptoms and improve function. Renal
involvement and hypertension are often comorbid. At times, ACE inhibitors
may be required for blood pressure control despite their known
teratogenicity. Obliterative vasculopathy of the renal cortical arteries
characterizes scleroderma renal crisis, which develops in up to a fourth of
these patients. This leads to renal failure and malignant hypertension.
Interstitial restrictive lung disease is common and frequently becomes life
threatening. Associated pulmonary hypertension is treated with bosentan or
sildenafil (Chap. 52, p. 931).

■ Pregnancy and Systemic Sclerosis
The prevalence of scleroderma in pregnancy approximates 1 case in 22,000
pregnancies (Chakravarty, 2008). If baseline function is good, these women
usually have stable disease during gestation. As perhaps expected, pregnancy
aggravates dysphagia and reflux esophagitis (Steen, 1999). Dysphagia results
from loss of esophageal motility due to neuromuscular dysfunction. A lower
amplitude or disappearance of peristaltic waves in the lower two thirds of
the esophagus is seen using manometry. Symptomatic treatment for reflux is
described in Chapter 57 (p. 1017).
Women with renal insufficiency and malignant hypertension have a higher
incidence of superimposed preeclampsia. With rapidly worsening renal or
cardiac disease, pregnancy termination should be considered. Renal crisis is

uncommon, but it is life threatening, and it does not improve with delivery
(Zucchi, 2020). Pulmonary hypertension usually contraindicates pregnancy
(Table 52-3, p. 919).
Vaginal delivery may be anticipated, unless the soft tissue thickening
wrought by scleroderma produces dystocia requiring cesarean delivery.
Tracheal intubation for general anesthesia has special concerns because of
limited ability of these women to open their mouths widely (Sobanski, 2016).
Because of esophageal dysfunction, aspiration is also more likely, and
neuraxial analgesia is preferable. Warming the delivery room and
intravenous fluids, extra blankets, and socks and gloves are considered to
improve impaired circulation from Raynaud phenomenon. If corticosteroids
were used frequently, stress doses of hydrocortisone, described earlier for
SLE (p. 1113), are recommended (Sobanski, 2016).
Maternal and fetal outcomes correlate with underlying disease severity.
In a review of 214 gravidas with systemic sclerosis, 45 percent had diffuse
disease (Steen, 1999). Major complications included renal crisis in three and
greater rates of preterm birth. A multicenter study of 109 pregnancies from
25 centers reported increased rates of preterm delivery, fetal-growth
restriction, and very-low-birthweight newborns (Taraborelli, 2012). In a
review of 307 affected pregnancies, risks for miscarriage, preterm births,
and gestational hypertension were increased (Blagojevic, 2020). These are
likely related to placental abnormalities that include decidual vasculopathy,
acute atherosis, and infarcts (Sobanski, 2016). Somewhat related, perinatal
outcomes are similar with undifferentiated connective tissue diseases (Radin,
2020; Zucchi, 2020).
Scleroderma may be associated with subfertility (Bernatsky, 2008;
Lambe, 2004). For women who do not choose pregnancy, several reversible
contraceptive methods are acceptable. However, hormonal agents, especially
combination oral contraceptives, probably should not be used, especially in
women with pulmonary, cardiac, or renal involvement. Due to the often
unrelenting progression of systemic sclerosis, permanent sterilization also is
considered.

VASCULITIS SYNDROMES

Inflammation and damage to blood vessels may be primary or caused by
another disease. Immune-complex deposition is presumed to underlie most
cases (Ross, 2020). Primary types are listed in Table 62-7 (Langford, 2018).
Small vessel vasculitides such as granulomatosis with polyangiitis and
eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis have antibodies directed
against proteins in the cytoplasmic granules of leukocytes—antineutrophil
cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA) (Pagnoux, 2016). In general, women with a
vasculitis syndrome have elevated rates of preterm birth and preeclampsia
(Nguyen, 2021).
TABLE 62-7. Primary Vasculitis Syndromes

■ Polyarteritis Nodosa
This necrotizing vasculitis of small and medium-sized arteries is
characterized clinically by myalgia, neuropathy, gastrointestinal disorders,
hypertension, and renal disease (Goodman, 2014). A third of cases are
associated with hepatitis B antigenemia (Langford, 2018). Symptoms are
nonspecific, and fever, weight loss, and malaise are present in more than half
of cases. Diagnosis is made by biopsy, and treatment is high-dose prednisone
plus cyclophosphamide. Vasculitis due to hepatitis B antigenemia responds to
antivirals, glucocorticosteroids, and plasma exchange (Chap. 58, p. 1037).
Only a few reports describe polyarteritis nodosa associated with
pregnancy. Of 12 affected gravidas, polyarteritis first manifested during
pregnancy in seven, and it was rapidly fatal by 6 weeks postpartum (Owen,
1989). The diagnosis was not made until autopsy in six of the seven women.
Four women continued pregnancy, which resulted in one stillborn and three
successful outcomes.

■ Granulomatosis with Polyangiitis—Wegener
Granulomatosis
This is a small-vessel necrotizing granulomatous vasculitis affecting the
upper and lower respiratory tract and kidney (Pagnoux, 2016). Disease
frequently includes sinusitis and nasal disease (90 percent); pulmonary
infiltrates, cavities, or nodules (85 percent); glomerulonephritis (75 percent);
and musculoskeletal lesions (65 percent) (Sneller, 1995). At least 90 percent
have polyangiitis (Langford, 2018). It is uncommon and usually encountered
after age 50. Koukoura and associates (2008) reviewed 36 cases in
association with pregnancy and found a higher preterm birth rate. In another
report, a second woman had disease-related pneumonitis, but pregnancy did
not appear to affect disease activity (Pagnoux, 2011). Because subglottic
stenosis is found in up to a fourth of patients, the anesthesiology service is
ideally consulted antepartum (Engel, 2011).
Therapeutic options are limited by teratogenicity and fetotoxicity (Daher,
2020). Corticosteroids are standard treatment, but azathioprine,
cyclosporine, and IVIG therapy may also be used. For severe disease in the
late second or third trimester, cyclophosphamide in combination with
prednisolone is highly effective. Rituximab is also approved for this disorder
and appears to be safe for the fetus (Briggs, 2022).

■ Takayasu Arteritis
Also called pulseless disease, this is a chronic inflammatory arteritis
affecting large vessels (Abisror, 2020). Unlike temporal arteritis, which
develops almost exclusively after age 55, the onset of Takayasu arteritis is
almost always before age 40. It is associated with abnormal angiography of
the upper aorta and its main branches and with upper extremity vascular
impairment. Death usually results from congestive heart failure or
cerebrovascular events. Computed tomography or magnetic resonance
angiography can detect this disorder before the development of severe
vascular compromise. Takayasu arteritis may respond symptomatically to
corticosteroid therapy, however, it is not curative. Surgical bypass or
angioplasty improves survival rates.
Comorbid severe renovascular hypertension, cardiac involvement, or
pulmonary hypertension worsen pregnancy prognosis (Comarmond, 2020;

Singh, 2015). Hypertension is relatively common and should be carefully
controlled. Blood pressure is most accurately measured in the lower
extremity. Overall, the prognosis for pregnancy is good (Kirshenbaum,
2018). A study of 43 pregnancies in 33 women with Takayasu arteritis
reported that half had complications (Abisror, 2020). Authors described an
increased risk of pregnancy-related hypertension and preeclampsia but
overall favorable maternal and fetal outcomes. A review from Comarmond
and colleagues (2020) cites a 5-percent life-threatening cardiovascular
complication rate. Involvement of the abdominal aorta portends worse
perinatal outcome (Sharma, 2000). Vaginal delivery is preferred, and
epidural analgesia has been advocated for labor and delivery.

■ Other Vasculitides
Behçet disease is rare, and its prevalence approximates 1 case per 100,000
births (Lee, 2019). In one series of 298 pregnancies in 94 affected women,
rates of miscarriage and smaller babies were higher than those in healthy
controls (Gungor, 2014). Although greater risks for preeclampsia, preterm
delivery, and venous thromboembolism are reported, pregnancy is not
contraindicated (Elliot, 2019; Merlino, 2020).
Formerly Churg-Strauss vasculitis, eosinophilic granulomatosis with
polyangiitis is rare in pregnancy (Jennette, 2013). One case report described
a pregnant woman who responded to IVIG therapy (Hot, 2007). Another
presented an affected 35-year-old woman at term whose necrotizing
vasculitis involved the heart, and she subsequently underwent cardiac
transplantation (Corradi, 2009). Edwards (2015) described one woman who
developed postpartum relapses of this vasculitis in each of two pregnancies.
Henoch-Schönlein purpura is uncommon after childhood. Characteristic
signs of the disorder include purpuric rash, arthralgia, abdominal pain, and
gastrointestinal bleeding. In one review of 20 pregnancies complicated by
this vasculitis, cutaneous lesions and arthralgias were present in three fourths
and in approximately one half, respectively (Tayabali, 2012). HenochSchönlein purpura responds well to corticosteroid therapy, and pregnancy
outcomes are generally good (Kalmantis, 2008).

INFLAMMATORY MYOPATHIES

These are acquired and potentially treatable causes of skeletal muscle
weakness with a prevalence of 14 to 32 cases in 100,000 persons
(Greenberg, 2018). Three major groups are polymyositis, dermatomyositis,
and inclusion-body myositis, which all present with progressive
asymmetrical muscle weakness. They have a variable association with
connective tissue diseases, malignancy, drugs, systemic autoimmune disease
such as Crohn disease, and viral, bacterial, and parasitic infections.
Polymyositis is a subacute inflammatory myopathy that is frequently
associated with one of the autoimmune connective tissue disorders
(Bitencourt, 2020; Munira, 2020). Dermatomyositis manifests as a
characteristic rash accompanying or preceding weakness. Laboratory
findings include elevated muscle enzyme levels in serum and an abnormal
electromyogram. Confirmation is by biopsy, which shows perivascular and
perimysial inflammatory infiltrates, vasculitis, and muscle fiber
degeneration. It usually develops alone but can overlap with systemic
sclerosis or mixed connective tissue disease.
Prevailing theories suggest that the syndromes are caused by viral
infections, autoimmune disorders, or both. Importantly, approximately 15
percent of adults who develop dermatomyositis have an associated
malignant tumor. The timing of myositis and tumor appearance may be
separated by several years. The most common sites of associated cancer are
breast, lung, stomach, and ovary. The disease usually responds to high-dose
corticosteroid therapy, immunosuppressive drugs such as azathioprine or
methotrexate, or IVIG (Dalakas, 2012; Linardaki, 2011).
Experiences in pregnancy are garnered mostly from case series and
reviews. One cohort of 17 gravidas with polymyositis/dermatomyositis had
higher rates of hypertension (23 percent), antepartum hemorrhage (11
percent), cesarean delivery (88 percent), and preterm birth (35 percent)
compared with unaffected pregnant women (Chen, 2015). In another series of
60 women with dermatomyositis and 38 with polymyositis, 80 percent had
no adverse effect on their disease. Similar results have been reported by
others (Missumi, 2015; Pinal-Fernandez, 2014). Pregnancy outcome is
related to dermatomyositis activity, and new-onset disease is particularly
aggressive (Munira, 2020).

HEREDITARY CONNECTIVE TISSUE DISORDERS

Numerous inherited mutations involve genes that encode for structural
proteins of bone, skin, cartilage, blood vessels, and basement membranes.
Although connective tissues contain many complex macromolecules such as
elastin and more than 30 proteoglycans, the most common constituents are
fibrillar collagen types I, II, and III. Various mutations, some recessively and
some dominantly inherited, result in clinical syndromes that include Marfan
and Ehlers-Danlos syndromes, osteogenesis imperfecta, chondrodysplasias,
and epidermolysis bulla. Of concern during pregnancy is the predilection for
these disorders to result in aortic aneurysms (Schoenhoff, 2013).

■ Marfan Syndrome
This is an autosomal dominant connective tissue disorder that has a
population prevalence of 1 case in 3000 to 5000 (Prockop, 2018). Marfan
syndrome affects both sexes equally. The syndrome is due to abnormal
fibrillin—a constituent of elastin—caused by any of several different
mutations in the FBN1 gene (Biggin, 2004). Located on chromosome 15q21,
the FBN1 gene has a high mutation rate. The lack of distinct genotypephenotype correlation and large clinical variability limits the ability to
predict disease severity in progeny. Currently, preimplantation genetic testing
and prenatal diagnosis are limited to the 80 percent of cases in which the
mutation in the FBN1 gene is known (Smok, 2014).
In severe disease, the elastic lamina in the media of the aorta shows
degeneration. This predisposes to aortic dilation or dissecting aneurysm,
which appears more commonly during pregnancy (Curry, 2014; Roman,
2016). Marfan syndrome was found to underlie 65 percent of cases of aortic
dissection in 27 pregnant women (Braverman, 2021). Marfan syndrome
complicating pregnancy is discussed in more detail in Chapter 52 (p. 936).

■ Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome
This disease is characterized by various connective tissue changes, including
skin hyperelasticity. Its prevalence is 7 cases per 100,000 births (Spiegel,
2020). Several disease types vary based on skin, joint, or other tissue
involvement. In the more severe types, rupture of any of several arteries can
cause either stroke or bleeding. Some types are autosomal dominant, some
recessive, and some X-linked (Solomons, 2013). Types I, II, and III are

autosomally dominant, and each accounts for approximately 30 percent of
cases. Type IV is uncommon but is known to predispose to preterm delivery,
great-vessel rupture, postpartum bleeding, and uterine rupture (Pepin, 2000).
In most, the underlying molecular defect affects collagen or procollagen.
In general, women with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome have a higher frequency
of preterm rupture of membranes, preterm delivery, antepartum and
postpartum hemorrhage, placenta previa, and cervical insufficiency (Hurst,
2014; Spiegel, 2020). Several cases of spontaneous uterine rupture have
been described (Rudd, 1983). Tissue fragility makes episiotomy repair and
cesarean delivery difficult. A maternal and fetal death from spontaneous
rupture of the right iliac artery has been reported (Esaka, 2009). In another
case, a newborn was found to have multiple congenital skull fractures and
intracranial hemorrhage caused by Ehlers-Danlos type VIIC (Bar-Yosef,
2008).

■ Osteogenesis Imperfecta
This disorder has a prevalence of 1 case in 20,000 births for type I and 1
case in 60,000 for type II (Prockop, 2018). It is characterized by brittle
bones, and affected patients often have blue sclerae, hearing loss, multiple
prior bone fractures, and dental abnormalities. There are up to 15 subtypes
based on the causative gene and clinical picture, which ranges from mild to
severe (Van Dijk, 2010). Genetic inheritance includes autosomal dominant,
autosomal recessive, and sporadic patterns. Type I is the mildest form, and
the typical mutation affects the COL1A1 gene (Sykes, 1990). Type II is
typically lethal in utero.
Women with osteogenesis imperfecta, most commonly type I, may have
successful pregnancies. However, risks include fractures, complications
related to scoliosis with restrictive lung disease, micrognathia, brittle teeth,
an unstable cervical spine, uterine rupture, and cephalopelvic disproportion.
A retrospective cohort of 295 women with osteogenesis imperfecta found
greater risks of antepartum hemorrhage, placental abruption, fetal-growth
restriction, congenital malformations, and preterm birth (Ruiter-Ligeti,
2016). It is not unusual for affected women to enter pregnancy with 20 to 30
prior fractures. Most require minimal treatment other than management of the
fractures and consideration of bisphosphonates to decrease bone loss.

Depending on the type of osteogenesis imperfecta, the fetus may be
affected and may also suffer fractures in utero or during delivery.
Preimplantation genetic testing and prenatal diagnosis is available in many
situations, if desired. In utero stem cell therapy is being evaluated (CouzinFrankel, 2016).

REFERENCES
Abdul Hussain G, Azizieh F, Makhseed M, et al: Effects of progesterone, dydrogesterone and estrogen
on the production of Th1/Th2/Th17 cytokines by lymphocytes from women with recurrent
spontaneous miscarriage. J Reprod Immunol 140:103132, 2020
Abisror N, Mekinian A, Hachulla E, et al: Analysis of risk factors for complications and adverse
obstetrical in women with Takayasu arteritis: a French retrospective study and literature review. Clin
Rheumatol 39(9):2707, 2020
Abisror N, Mekinian A, Lachassinne E, et al: Autism spectrum disorders in babies born to mothers with
antiphospholipid syndrome. Semin Arthritis Rheum 43(3):348, 2013
Ahmed K, Darakhshan A, Au E, et al: Postpartum spontaneous colonic perforation due to
antiphospholipid syndrome. World J Gastroenterol 15(4):502, 2009
Alijotas-Reig J, Esteve-Valverde E, Ferrer-Oliveras R, et al: Comparative study of obstetric
antiphospholipid syndrome (OAPS) and non-criteria obstetric APS (NC-OAPS): report of 1640
cases from the EUROAPS registry. Rheumatology (Oxford) 59(6):1306, 2020
Amengual O, Atsumi T, Khamashta MA: Tissue factor in antiphospholipid syndrome: shifting the focus
from coagulation to endothelium. Rheumatology 42:1029, 2003
Amengual O, Fujita D, Otta E, et al: Primary prophylaxis to prevent obstetric complications in
asymptomatic women with antiphospholipid antibodies: a systematic review. Lupus 24(11):1135, 2015
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Antiphospholipid syndrome. Practice Bulletin No.
132, December 2012, Reaffirmed 2019a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Immune modulating therapies in pregnancy and
lactation. Committee Opinion No. 776, March 2019b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Low-dose aspirin use during pregnancy.
Committee Opinion No. 743, June 2018, Reaffirmed 2020b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Antepartum fetal surveillance. Practice Bulletin
No. 229, May 2021a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Indications for outpatient antenatal fetal
surveillance. Committee Opinion No. 828, May 2021b
Arbuckle MF, McClain MT, Ruberstone MV, et al: Development of autoantibodies before the clinical
onset of systemic lupus erythematosus. N Engl J Med 349:1526, 2003
Arslan E, Branch DW: Antiphospholipid syndrome: diagnosis and management in the obstetric patient.
Best Pract Clin Obstet Gynaecol 64:31, 2020
Artlett CM, Smith B, Jimenez SA: Identification of fetal DNA and cells in skin lesions from women with
systemic sclerosis. N Engl J Med 338:1186, 1998
Avalos I, Tsokos GC: The role of complement in the antiphospholipid syndrome-associated pathology.
Clin Rev Allergy Immunol 34(2–3):141, 2009
Baer AN, Witter FR, Petri M: Lupus and pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol Surv 66(10):639, 2011

Bar-Yosef O, Polak-Charcon S, Hoffman C, et al: Multiple congenital skull fractures as a presentation
of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome type VIIC. Am J Med Genet A 146A:3054, 2008
Bernatsky S, Hudson M, Pope J, et al: Assessment of reproductive history in systemic sclerosis.
Arthritis Rheum 59:1661, 2008
Berthelot JM, De Bandt M, Goupille P, et al: Exposition to anti-TNF drugs during pregnancy: outcome of
15 cases and review of the literature. Joint Bone Spine 76(1):28, 2009
Bertsias G, Ionnidis JP, Boletis J, et al: EULAR recommendations for the management of systemic
lupus erythematosus (SLE). Ann Rheum Dis 67(2):195, 2008
Bharti B, Lindsay SP, Wingard DL, et al: Disease severity and pregnancy outcomes in women with
rheumatoid arthritis: results from the Organization of Teratology Information Specialists Autoimmune
Diseases in Pregnancy Project. J Rheumatol 42:1376, 2015
Biggin A, Holman K, Brett M, et al: Detection of thirty novel FBN1 mutations in patients with Marfan
syndrome or a related fibrillinopathy. Hum Mutat 23:99, 2004
Binder WD, Traum AZ, Makar RS, et al: Case 37–2010: a 16-year-old girl with confusion, anemia, and
thrombocytopenia. N Engl J Med 363(24):2352, 2010
Bitencourt N, Solow EB, Wright T, et al: Inflammatory myositis in systemic lupus erythematosus. Lupus
29(7):776, 2020
Blagojevic J, AlOdhaibi KA, Aly AM, et al: Pregnancy in systemic sclerosis: results of a systematic
review and metaanalysis. J Rheumatol 47(6):881, 2020
Bramham K, Soh MC, Nelson-Piercy C: Pregnancy and renal outcomes in lupus nephritis: an update
and guide to management. Lupus 21(12):1271, 2012
Branch DW, Gibson M, Silver RM: Recurrent miscarriage. N Engl J Med 363:18, 2010
Branch DW, Khamashta M: Antiphospholipid syndrome: obstetric diagnosis, management, and
controversies. Obstet Gynecol 101:1333, 2003
Braverman AC, Mitaue E, Harris KM, et al: Clinical features and outcomes of pregnancy-related acute
aortic dissection. JAMA Cardiol 6(1):58, 2021
Briggs GG, Towers CV, Forinash AB: Briggs Drugs in Pregnancy and Lactation: A Reference Guide to
Fetal and Neonatal Risk, 12th ed. Philadelphia, Wolters Kluwer, 2022
Brito-Zerón P, Pasoto SG, Robles-Marhuenda A, et al: Autoimmune congenital heart block and primary
Sjögren’s syndrome: characterization and outcomes of 49 cases. Clin Exp Rheumatol 38 Suppl
126(4):95, 2020
Burmester GR, Landewe R, Genovese MC, et al: Adalimumab long-term safety: infections, vaccination
response and pregnancy outcomes in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. Ann Rheum Dis 76(2):414,
2017
Buyon JP, Kim MY, Guerra MM, et al: Predictors of pregnancy outcomes in patients with lupus: a
cohort study. Ann Intern Med 163(3):153, 2015
Buyon JP, Winchester RJ, Slade SG, et al: Identification of mothers at risk for congenital heart block and
other neonatal lupus syndromes in their children. Comparison of enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay and immunoblot for measurement of anti SSA/Ro and anti SSB/La antibodies. Arthritis
Rheum 36:1263, 1993
Cabiddu G, Castellino S, Gernone G, et al: A best practice position statement on pregnancy in chronic
kidney disease: the Italian Study Group on Kidney and Pregnancy. J Nephrol 29(3):277, 2016
Chakravarty EF, Khanna D, Chung L: Pregnancy outcomes in systemic sclerosis, primary pulmonary
hypertension, and sickle cell disease. Obstet Gynecol 111(4):927, 2008
Chen JS, Roberts CL, Simpson JM, et al: Pregnancy outcomes in women with rare autoimmune
diseases. Arthritis Rheumatol 67(12):3314, 2015

Chiou AS, Sun G, Kim J, et al: Cutaneous neonatal lupus arising in an infant conceived from an oocyte
donation pregnancy. JAMA Dermatol 152(7):846, 2016
Cimaz R, Spence DL, Hornberger L, et al: Incidence and spectrum of neonatal lupus erythematosus: a
prospective study of infants born to mothers with anti-Ro autoantibodies. J Pediatr 142(6):678, 2003
Clark CA, Spitzer KA, Crowther MA, et al: Incidence of postpartum thrombosis and preterm delivery in
women with antiphospholipid antibodies and recurrent pregnancy loss. J Rheumatol 34:992, 2007
Clark KE, Etomi O, Ong VH: Systemic sclerosis in pregnancy. Obstet Med 13(3):105, 2020
Clowse ME, Jamison M, Myers E, et al: A national study of the complications of lupus in pregnancy.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 199:127.e1, 2008
Cohen D, Buurma A, Goemaere NN, et al: Classical complement activation as a footprint for murine
and human antiphospholipid antibody-induced fetal loss. J Pathol 225(4):502, 2011
Comarmond C, Saadoun D, Nizard J, et al: Pregnancy issues in Takayasu arteritis. Semin Arthritis
Rheum 50(5):911, 2020
Corradi D, Maestri R, Facchetti F: Postpartum Churg-Strauss syndrome with severe cardiac
involvement: description of a case and review of the literature. Clin Rheumatol 28(6):739, 2009
Couzin-Frankel J: The savior cells? Science 352(6283):284, 2016
Cruz GI, Shao X, Quach H, et al: A child’s HLA-DRBI genotype increases maternal risk of systemic
lupus erythematosus. J Autoimmun 74:201, 2016
Curry R, Gelson E, Swan L, et al: Marfan syndrome and pregnancy: maternal and neonatal outcomes.
BJOG 121(5):610, 2014
Daher A, Sauvetre G, Girszyn N, et al: Granulomatosis with polyangiitis and pregnancy: a case report
and review of the literature. Obstet Med 13(2):76, 2020
da Silva Florim GM, Caldas HC, Pavarino EC, et al: Variables associated to fetal microchimerism in
systemic lupus erythematosus patients. Clin Rheumatol 35(1):107, 2016
D’Cruz D: Renal manifestations of the antiphospholipid syndrome. Curr Rheumatol Rep 11(1):52, 2009
de Jesus GR, Rodrigues G, de Jesus NR, et al: Pregnancy morbidity in antiphospholipid syndrome: what
is the impact of treatment? Curr Rheumatol Rep 16:403, 2014
de Jesus GR, Rodrigues BC, Lacerda MI, et al: Gestational outcomes in patients with neuropsychiatric
systemic lupus erythematosus. Lupus 26:537, 2017
Dizon-Townson D, Branch DW: Anticoagulant treatment during pregnancy: an update. Semin Thromb
Hemost 24:55S, 1998
Dong Y, Yuan F, Dai Z, et al: Preeclampsia in systemic lupus erythematosus pregnancy: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. Clin Rheumatol 39(2):319, 2020
Edwards MH, Curtis EM, Ledingham JM: Postpartum onset and subsequent relapse of eosinophilic
granulomatosis with polyangiitis. BMJ Case Rep 2015:bcr2015210373, 2015
Egerman RS, Ramsey RD, Kao LW, et al: Hypertensive disease in pregnancies complicated by
systemic lupus erythematosus. Am J Obstet Gynecol 193:1676, 2005
Elliot B, Spence AR, Czuzoj-Shulman N, et al: Effect of Sjögren’s syndrome on maternal and neonatal
outcomes or pregnancy. J Perinat Med 47(6):637, 2019
Empson M, Lassere M, Craig J, et al: Prevention of recurrent miscarriage for women with
antiphospholipid antibody or lupus anticoagulant. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2:CD002859, 2005
Engel NM, Gramke HF, Peeters L, et al: Combined spinal-epidural anaesthesia for a woman with
Wegener’s granulomatosis with subglottic stenosis. Int J Obstet Anesth 20(1):94, 2011
Ernest JM, Marshburn PB, Kutteh WH: Obstetric antiphospholipid syndrome: an update on
pathophysiology and management. Semin Reprod Med 29:522, 2011

Esaka EJ, Golde SH, Stever MR, et al: A maternal and perinatal mortality in pregnancy complicated by
the kyphoscoliotic form of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. Obstet Gynecol 113(2):515, 2009
Eudy AM, McDaniel G, Clowse ME: Pregnancy in rheumatoid arthritis: a retrospective study. Clin
Rheumatol 37(3):789, 2018
Förger F, Villiger PM: Immunological adaptations in pregnancy that modulate rheumatoid arthritis
disease activity. Nat Rev Rheumatol 16(2):113, 2020
Gabbay-Benziv R, Zafrir-Danieli H, Blickstein D, et al: Antiphospholipid syndrome characteristics and
adverse pregnancy outcomes after 20 weeks of pregnancy. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 142(2):214, 2018
Garcia D, Erkan D: Diagnosis and management of the antiphospholipid syndrome. N Engl J Med
378(21):2010, 2018
Giannakopoulos B, Krilis SA: The pathogenesis of the antiphospholipid syndrome. N Engl J Med
368:1033, 2013
Greenberg SA, Amato AA: Inflammatory myopathies. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al
(eds): Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw Hill Education, 2018
Goodman R, Dellaripa PF, Miller AL, et al: An unusual case of abdominal pain. N Engl J Med 370:70,
2014
Gungor AN, Kalkan G, Oguz S, et al: Behçet disease and pregnancy. Clin Exp Obstet Gynecol
41(6):617, 2014
Guthrie KA, Dugowson CE, Voigt LF, et al: Does pregnancy provide vaccine-like protection against
rheumatoid arthritis? Arthritis Rheum 62(7):1842, 2010
Haddow JE, Rote NS, Dostal-Johnson D, et al: Lack of an association between late fetal death and
antiphospholipid antibody measurements in the 2nd trimester. Am J Obstet Gynecol 165:1308, 1991
Hahn BH: Systemic lupus erythematosus. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al (eds): Harrison’s
Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw Hill Education, 2018
Hamed HO, Ahmed SR, Alzolibani A, et al: Does cutaneous lupus erythematosus have more favorable
pregnancy outcomes than systemic disease? A two-center study. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand
92(8):934, 2013
Hamulyák EN, Scheres LJ, Marijnen MC, et al: Aspirin or heparin or both for improving pregnancy
outcomes in women with persistent antiphospholipid antibodies and recurrent pregnancy loss.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 5(5):CD012852, 2020
Hanly JG, Gladman DD, Rose TH, et al: Lupus pregnancy: a prospective study of placental changes.
Arthritis Rheum 31:358, 1988
Häupl T, Østensen M, Grützkau A, et al: Interaction between rheumatoid arthritis and pregnancy:
correlation of molecular data with clinical disease activity measures. Rheumatology (Oxford)
47(Suppl l):19, 2008a
Häupl T, Østensen M, Grützkau A, et al: Reactivation of rheumatoid arthritis after pregnancy: increased
phagocyte and recurring lymphocyte gene activity. Arthritis Rheum 58(10):2981, 2008b
He WR, Wei H: Maternal and fetal complications associated with systemic lupus erythematosus: an
updated meta-analysis of the most recent studies (2017–2019). Medicine (Baltimore) 99(16):e19797,
2020
Holers VM, Girardi G, Mo L, et al: Complement C3 activation is required for antiphospholipid antibodyinduced fetal loss. J Exp Med 195:211, 2002
Hot A, Perard L, Coppere B, et al: Marked improvement of Churg-Strauss vasculitis with intravenous
gamma globulins during pregnancy. Clin Rheumatol 26(12):2149, 2007
Hoxha A, Calligaro A, Di Poi E, et al: Pregnancy and foetal outcomes following anti-tumor-necrosis
factor alpha therapy: a prospective multicentre study. Joint Bone Spine 84(2):169, 2017

Hurst BS, Lange SS, Kullstam SM, et al: Obstetric and gynecologic challenges in women with EhlersDanlos syndrome. Obstet Gynecol 123(3):506, 2014
Ince-Askan H, Hazes JM, Dolhain RJ: Identifying clinical factors associated with low disease activity
and remission of rheumatoid arthritis during pregnancy. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken) 69(9):1297,
2017
Ivanchenko M, Thorlacius GE, Hedlund M, et al: Natural killer cells and type II interferon in Ro/SSA
and La/SSB autoantibody-exposed newborns at risk of congenital heart block. Ann Rheum Dis
80(2):194, 2021
Izmirly P, Kim M, Freidman DM, et al: Hydroxychloroquine to prevent recurrent congenital heart block
in fetuses of anti-SSA/Ro-positive mothers. J Am Coll Cardiol 76(3):292, 2020
Izmirly PM, Kim MY, Llanos C, et al: Evaluation of the risk of anti-SSA/Ro-SSB/La antibodyassociated cardiac manifestations of neonatal lupus in fetuses of mothers with systemic lupus
erythematosus exposed to hydroxychloroquine. Ann Rheum Dis 69(10):1827, 2010
Izmirly PM, Saxena AM, Kim MY, et al: Maternal and fetal factors associated with mortality and
morbidity in a multi–racial/ethnic registry of anti-SSA/Ro–associated cardiac neonatal lupus.
Circulation 124:1927, 2011
Izmirly PM, Wan I, Sahl S, et al: The incidence and prevalence of systemic lupus erythematosus in New
York County (Manhattan), New York: The Manhattan Lupus Surveillance Program. Arthritis
Rheumatol 69(10):2006, 2017
Jennette JC, Falk RJ, Bacon PA, et al: 2012 revised International Chapel Hill Consensus Conference
nomenclature of vasculitides. Arthritis Rheum 65(1):1, 2013
Jethwa H, Lam S, Smith C, et al: Dose rheumatoid arthritis really improve during pregnancy? A
systematic review and metaanalysis. J Rheumatol 46(3):245, 2019
Jimenez SA, Artlett CM: Microchimerism and systemic sclerosis. Curr Opin Rheumatol 17:86, 2005
Kalmantis K, Daskalakis G, Iavazzo C, et al: Henoch-Schonlein purpura in pregnancy. J Obstet Gynecol
28(4):403, 2008
Kirshenbaum M, Simchen MJ: Pregnancy outcome in patients with Takayasu’s arteritis: cohort study
and review of the literature. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 31(21):2877, 2018
Kishore S, Mittal V, Majithia V: Obstetric outcomes in women with rheumatoid arthritis: results from
nationwide inpatient sample database 2003–2011. Semin Arthritis Rheum 49(2):236, 2019
Kither H, Heazell A, Bruce IN, et al: Adverse pregnancy outcomes and subsequent development of
connective tissue disease in the UK: an epidemiological study. BJOG 127(8):941, 2020
Koukoura O, Mantas N, Linardakis H, et al: Successful term pregnancy in a patient with Wegener’s
granulomatosis: case report and literature review. Fertil Steril 89:457.e1, 2008
Kozora E, Arciniegas DB, Filley CM, et al: Cognitive and neurologic status in patients with systemic
lupus erythematosus without major neuropsychiatric syndromes. Arthritis Rheum 59:1639, 2008
Kuriya B, Hernández-Díaz S, Liu J, et al: Patterns of medication use during pregnancy in rheumatoid
arthritis. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken) 63(5):721, 2011
Kurkó J, Besenyei T, Laki J, et al: Genetics of rheumatoid arthritis—a comprehensive review. Clin Rev
Allergy Immunol 45(2):170, 2013
Kwak-Kim J, Agcaoili MSL, Aleta L, et al: Management of women with recurrent pregnancy losses
and antiphospholipid antibody syndrome. Am J Reprod Immunol 69(6):596, 2013
Lambe M, Bjornadal L, Neregard P, et al: Childbearing and the risk of scleroderma: a population-based
study in Sweden. Am J Epidemiol 159:162, 2004
Langford CA, Fauci AS: The vasculitis syndromes. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al (eds):
Harrison’s Principles of Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw

Hill Education, 2018
Lateef A, Petri M: Systemic lupus erythematosus and pregnancy. Rheum Dis Clin North Am 43(2):215,
2017
Latino JO, Udry S, Aranda F, et al: Risk factors for early severe preeclampsia in obstetric
antiphospholipid syndrome with conventional treatment. The impact of hydroxychloroquine. Lupus
29(13):1736, 2020
Laurinaviciene R, Sandholt LH, Bygum A: Drug-induced cutaneous lupus erythematosus: 88 new cases.
Eur J Dermatol 27(1):28, 2017
Lazzaroni MG, Dall’Ara F, Fredi M, et al: A comprehensive review of the clinical approach to
pregnancy and systemic lupus erythematosus. J Autoimmun 74:106, 2016
Lee ES, Bou-Gharios G, Seppanen E, et al: Fetal stem cell microchimerism: natural-born healers or
killers? Mol Hum Reprod 16(11):869, 2010
Lee S, Czuzoj-Shulman N, Abenhaim HA: Behçhet’s disease in pregnancy: obstetrical and neonatal
outcomes in a population-based cohort of 12 million births. J Perinat Med 47:381, 2019
Lefkou E, Mamopoulos A, Dagklis T, et al: Pravastatin improves pregnancy outcomes in obstetric
antiphospholipid syndrome refractory to antithrombotic therapy. J Clin Invest 126(8):2933, 2016
Linardaki G, Cherouvim E, Goni G, et al: Intravenous immunoglobulin treatment for pregnancyassociated dermatomyositis. Rheumatol Int 31(1):113, 2011
Liu XL, Xiao J, Zhu F: Anti-beta2 glycoprotein I antibodies and pregnancy outcome in antiphospholipid
syndrome. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 92(2):234, 2013
Lockshin MD, Druzin ML: Rheumatic disease. In Barron WM, Lindheimer JD (eds): Medical Disorders
During Pregnancy, 2nd ed. St. Louis, Mosby, 1995
Marder W: Update on pregnancy complications in systemic lupus erythematosus. Curr Opin Rheumatol
31(6):650, 2019
Maynard S, Guerrier G, Duffy M: Pregnancy in women with systemic lupus and lupus nephritis. Adv
Chronic Kidney Dis 26(5):330, 2019
McInnes IB, Schett G: The pathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis. N Engl J Med 365(23):2205, 2011
Mekinian A, Bourrienne MC, Carbillon L, et al: Non-conventional antiphospholipid antibodies in patients
with clinical obstetrical APS: prevalence and treatment efficacy in pregnancies. Semin Arthritis
Rheum 46(2):232, 2016
Mekinian A, Lazzaroni MG, Kuzenko A, et al: The efficacy of hydroxychloroquine for obstetrical
outcome in anti-phospholipid syndrome: data from a European multicenter retrospective study.
Autoimmun Rev 14(6):498, 2015
Merlino L, Del Prete F, Lobozzo B, et al: Behcet’s disease and pregnancy: a review of the literature.
Minerva Ginecol 72(5):332, 2020
Meroni PL, Borghi MO, Raschi E, et al: Pathogenesis of antiphospholipid syndrome: understanding the
antibodies. Nat Rev Rheumatol 7(6):330, 2011
Missumi LS, Souza FH, Andrade JQ, et al: Pregnancy outcomes in dermatomyositis and polymyositis
patients. Rev Bras Reumatol 55(2):95, 2015
Mohamed MA, Goldman C, El-Dib M, et al: Maternal juvenile rheumatoid arthritis may be associated
with preterm birth but not poor fetal growth. J Perinatol 36(4):268, 2016
Moroni G, Doria A, Giglio E, et al: Maternal outcome in pregnant women with lupus nephritis. A
prospective multicenter study. J Autoimmun 74:194, 2016
Moroni G, Ponticelli C: Pregnancy after lupus nephritis. Lupus 14:89, 2005
Motta M, Boffa MC, Tincani A, et al: Follow-up of babies born to mothers with antiphospholipid
syndrome: preliminary data from the European neonatal registry. Lupus 21(7):761, 2012

Moutsopoulos HM, Vlachoyiannopoulos PG: Antiphospholipid syndrome. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS,
Kasper DL, et al (eds): Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw Hill
Education, 2018
Munira S, Stine LC: Pregnancy in myositis and scleroderma. Best Pract Res Clin Obstet Gynaecol
64:59, 2020
Musiej-Nowakowska E, Ploski R: Pregnancy and early onset pauciarticular juvenile chronic arthritis.
Ann Rheum Dis 58:475, 1999
Nalli C, Iodice A, Andreoli L, et al: Long-term neurodevelopmental outcome of children born to
prospectively followed pregnancies of women with systemic lupus erythematosus and/or
antiphospholipid syndrome. Lupus 26:552, 2017
Nelson JL, Hughes KA, Smith AG, et al: Maternal–fetal disparity in HLA class II alloantigens and the
pregnancy-induced amelioration of rheumatoid arthritis. N Engl J Med 329:466, 1993
Nguyen V, Wuebbolt D, Pagnoux C, et al: Pregnancy outcomes in women with primary systemic
vasculitis: a retrospective study. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 34(17):2771, 2021
Østensen M: Pregnancy in patients with a history of juvenile rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Rheum
34:881, 1991
Owen J, Hauth JC: Polyarteritis nodosa in pregnancy: a case report and brief literature review. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 160:606, 1989
Pagnoux C: Updates in ANCA-associated vasculitis. Eur J Rheumatol 3(3):122, 2016
Pagnoux C, Le Guern V, Goffinet F, et al: Pregnancies in systemic necrotizing vasculitides: report on 12
women and their 20 pregnancies. Rheumatology (Oxford) 50(5):953, 2011
Parikh SV, Almaani S, Brodsky S, et al: Update on lupus nephritis: core curriculum 2020. Am J Kidney
Dis 76(2):265, 2020
Partlett R, Roussou E: The treatment of rheumatoid arthritis during pregnancy. Rheumatol Int 31(4):445,
2011
Peart E, Clowse ME: Systemic lupus erythematosus and pregnancy outcomes: an update and review of
the literature. Curr Opin Rheumatol 26(2):118, 2014
Pepin M, Schwarze U, Superti-Furga A, et al: Clinical and genetic features of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
type IV, the vascular type. N Engl J Med 342:673, 2000
Petri M: Pregnancy and systemic lupus erythematosus. Best Pract Res Clin Obstet Gynaecol 64:24,
2020a
Petri M: Systemic lupus erythematosus. Obstet Gynecol 136(1):226, 2020b
Petri M, Kallas R: Lupus in pregnancy. Contemporary OB/GYN 64(3):24, 2019
Petri M, Kim MY, Kalunian KC, et al: Combined oral contraceptives in women with systemic lupus
erythematosus. N Engl J Med 353:2550, 2005
Petri M, The Hopkins Lupus Pregnancy Center: Ten key issues in management. Rheum Dis Clin North
Am 33:227, 2007
Phansenee S, Sekararithi R, Jatavan P, et al: Pregnancy outcomes among women with systemic lupus
erythematosus: a retrospective cohort study from Thailand. Lupus 27(1):158, 2018
Pierro E, Cirino G, Bucci MR, et al: Antiphospholipid antibodies inhibit prostaglandin release by decidual
cells of early pregnancy: possible involvement of extracellular secretory phospholipase A2. Fertil
Steril 71:342, 1999
Pikwer M, Bergström U, Nilsson JA, et al: Breast feeding, but not use of oral contraceptives, is
associated with a reduced risk of rheumatoid arthritis. Ann Rheum Dis 68(4):526, 2009
Pinal-Fernandez I, Selva-O’Callaghan A, Fernandez-Codina A, et al: Pregnancy in adult-onset idiopathic
inflammatory myopathy: report from a cohort of myositis patients from a single center. Semin

Arthritis Rheum 44(2):234, 2014
Pons-Estel GJ, Alarcón GS, Scofield L, et al: Understanding the epidemiology and progression of
systemic lupus erythematosus. Semin Arthritis Rheum 39(4):257, 2010
Prockop DJ, Bateman JF: Heritable disorders of connective tissue. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper
DL, et al (eds): Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw Hill
Education, 2018
Putterman C, Wu A, Reiner-Benaim A, et al: SLE-key rule-out serologic test for excluding the diagnosis
of systemic lupus erythematosus: developing the ImmunArray iCHIP. J Immunol Methods 429:1,
2016
Radin M, Schreiber K, Cecchi I, et al: A multicentre study of 244 pregnancies in undifferentiated
connective tissue disease: maternal/fetal outcomes and disease evolution. Rheumatology (Oxford)
59(9):2412, 2020
Rahman A: Management of antiphospholipid syndrome. Clin Rheumatol 39(7):211, 2020
Raine C, Austin K, Giles I: Mechanisms determining the amelioration of rheumatoid arthritis in
pregnancy: a systematic review. Semin Arthritis Rheum 50(6):1357, 2020
Rak JM, Pagni PP, Tiev K, et al: Male microchimerism and HLA compatibility in French women with
scleroderma: a different profile in limited and diffuse subset. Rheumatology 48(4):363, 2009
Rand JH, Wu XX, Andree HA, et al: Antiphospholipid antibodies accelerate plasma coagulation by
inhibiting annexin-V binding to phospholipids: a “lupus procoagulant” phenomenon. Blood 92:1652,
1998
Rand JH, Wu XX, Andree HA, et al: Pregnancy loss in the antiphospholipid antibody syndrome—a
possible thrombogenic mechanism. N Engl J Med 337:154, 1997
Remaeus K, Johansson K, Askling J, et al: Juvenile onset arthritis and pregnancy outcome: a populationbased cohort study. Ann Rheum Dis 76:1809, 2017
Riancho-Zarrabeitia L, Martínez-Taboada V, Rúa-Figueroa I, et al: Antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) in
patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) implies a more severe disease with more damage
accrual and higher mortality. Lupus 29(12):1556, 2020
Ritchie J, Smyth A, Tower C, et al: Maternal deaths in women with lupus nephritis: a review of
published evidence. Lupus 21(5):534, 2012
Robertson B, Greaves M: Antiphospholipid syndrome: an evolving story. Blood Reviews 20:201, 2006
Robinson DP, Klein SL: Pregnancy and pregnancy-associated hormones alter immune responses and
disease pathogenesis. Horm Behav 62(3):263, 2012
Rodrigues BC, Lacerda MI, Ramires de Jesús GR, et al: The impact of different classes of lupus
nephritis on maternal and fetal outcomes: a cohort study of 147 pregnancies. Lupus 28(4):492, 2019
Rom AL, Wu CS, Olsen J, et al: Fetal growth and preterm birth in children exposed to maternal or
paternal rheumatoid arthritis. A nationwide cohort study. Arthritis Rheumatol 66:3265, 2014
Roman MJ, Pugh NL, Hendershot TP, et al: Aortic complications associated with pregnancy in Marfan
syndrome: the NHLBI National Registry of Genetically Triggered Thoracic Aortic Aneurysms and
Cardiovascular Conditions (GenTAC). J Am Heart Assoc 5(8), 2016
Roque H, Paidas M, Funai E, et al: Maternal thrombophilias are not associated with early pregnancy
loss. Thromb Haemost 91(2):290, 2004
Ross C, D’Souza R, Pagnoux C: Pregnancy outcomes in systemic vasculitides. Curr Rheumatol Rep
22(10):63, 2020
Rudd NL, Nimrod C, Holbrook KA, et al: Pregnancy complications in type IV Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.
Lancet 1(8314-5):50, 1983
Rudder M, Russo M, Ventetuolo CE: Breathing for two. N Engl J Med 384:61, 2021

Ruffatti A, Tonello M, Visentin MS, et al: Risk factors for pregnancy failure in patients with antiphospholipid syndrome treated with conventional therapies: a multicentre, case-control study.
Rheumatology 50(9):1684, 2011
Ruiter-Ligeti J, Czuzoj-Shulman N, Spence AR, et al: Pregnancy outcomes in women with osteogenesis
imperfecta: a retrospective cohort study. J Perinatol 36(10):828, 2016
Saccone G, Maruotti GM, Berghella V, et al: Obstetric outcomes in pregnant women with primary
antiphospholipid syndrome according to the antibody profile: the PREGNANTS study. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 216(5):525.e1, 2017
Sammaritano LR, Bermas BL, Chakravarty EE, et al: 2020 American College of Rheumatology
guidelines for the management of reproductive health in rheumatic and musculoskeletal diseases.
Arthritis Rheumatol 72(4):529, 2020
Sánchez-Guerrero J, Uribe AG, Jiménez-Santana L, et al: A trial of contraceptive methods in women
with systemic lupus erythematosus. N Engl J Med 353:2539, 2005
Schoenhoff F, Schmidli J, Czerny M, et al: Management of aortic aneurysms in patients with connective
tissue disease. J Cardiovasc Surg 54(1 suppl 1):125, 2013
Schreiber K, Hunt BJ: Pregnancy and antiphospholipid syndrome. Semin Thromb Hemost 42(7):780,
2016
Sciascia S, Hunt BJ, Talavera-Garcia E, et al: The impact of hydroxychloroquine treatment on
pregnancy outcome in women with antiphospholipid antibodies. Am J Obstet Gynecol 214(2):273.e1,
2016
Shah A, St. Clair EW: Rheumatoid arthritis. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al (eds):
Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw Hill Education, 2018
Sharma BK, Jain S, Vasishta K: Outcome of pregnancy in Takayasu arteritis. Int J Cardiol 75:S159,
2000
Shinohara K, Miyagawa S, Fujita T, et al: Neonatal lupus erythematosus: results of maternal
corticosteroid therapy. Obstet Gynecol 93:952, 1999
Silman A, Kay A, Brennan P: Timing of pregnancy in relation to the onset of rheumatoid arthritis.
Arthritis Rheum 35:152, 1992
Silver RM, Parker CB, Reddy UM, et al: Antiphospholipid antibodies in stillbirth. Obstet Gynecol
122(3):641, 2013
Silverman E, Jaeggi E: Non-cardiac manifestations of neonatal lupus erythematosus. Scand J Immunol
72:223, 2010
Simchen MJ, Goldstein G, Lubetsky A, et al: Factor V Leiden and antiphospholipid antibodies in either
mothers or infants increase the risk for perinatal arterial ischemic stroke. Stroke 40(1):65, 2009
Simpson JL: Cell-free fetal DNA and maternal serum analytes for monitoring embryonic and fetal
status. Fertil Steril 99(4):1124, 2013
Singh JA, Saag KG, Bridges SL Jr, et al: 2015 American College of Rheumatology Guideline for the
management of rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken) 68(1):1, 2016
Singh N, Tyagi S, Tripathi R, et al: Maternal and fetal outcomes in pregnant women with Takayasu
aortoarteritis: does optimally timed intervention in women with renal artery involvement improve
pregnancy outcome? Taiwan J Obstet Gynecol 54(5):597, 2015
Smok DA: Aortopathy in pregnancy. Semin Perinatol 38(5):295, 2014
Sneller MC: Wegener’s granulomatosis. JAMA 273:1288, 1995
Sobanski V, Launay D, Depret S, et al: Special considerations in pregnant systemic sclerosis patients.
Expert Rev Clin Immunol 12(11):1161, 2016

Solomons J, Coucke P, Symoens S, et al: Dermatosparaxis (Ehlers-Danlos type VIIC): prenatal
diagnosis following a previous pregnancy with unexpected skull fractures at delivery. Am J Med
Genet A 161(5):1122, 2013
Spiegel E, Nicholls-Dempsey L, Czuzoj-Shulman N, et al: Pregnancy outcomes in women with EhlersDanlos syndrome. J Matern Fetal neonatal Med July 13, 2020 [Epub ahead of print]
Spinillo A, Beneventi F, Locatelli E, et al: The impact of unrecognized autoimmune rheumatic diseases
on the incidence of preeclampsia and fetal growth restriction: a longitudinal cohort study. BMC
Pregnancy Childbirth 16(1):313, 2016
Srivatsa B, Srivatsa S, Johnson K, et al: Microchimerism of presumed fetal origin in thyroid specimens
from women: a case-control study. Lancet 358:2034, 2001
Steen VD: Pregnancy in women with systemic sclerosis. Obstet Gynecol 94:15, 1999
Stevens AM. Maternal microchimerism in health and disease. Best Pract Res Clin Obstet Gynecol
31:121, 2016
Stojan G, Baer AN: Flares of systemic lupus erythematosus during pregnancy and the puerperium:
prevention, diagnosis and management. Expert Rev Clin Immunol 8(5):439, 2012
Stojan G, Petri M: Epidemiology of systemic lupus erythematosus: an update. Curr Opin Rheumatol
30(2):144, 2018
Sykes B, Ogilvie D, Wordsworth P, et al: Consistent linkage of dominantly inherited osteogenesis
imperfecta to the type I collagen loci: COL1A1 and COL1A2. Am J Hum Genet 46(2):293, 1990
Taraborelli M, Ramoni V, Brucato A, et al: Brief report: successful pregnancies but a higher risk of
preterm births in patients with systemic sclerosis: an Italian multicenter study. Arthritis Rheum
64(6):1970, 2012
Tayabali S, Andersen K, Yoong W: Diagnosis and management of Henoch-Schönlein purpura in
pregnancy: a review of the literature. Arch Gynecol Obstet 286(4):825, 2012
Tenti S, Cheleschi S, Guidelli GM, et al: Intravenous immunoglobulins and antiphospholipid syndrome:
how, when and why? A review of the literature. Autoimmun Rev 15(3):226, 2016
Tincani A, Rebaioli CB, Andreoli L, et al: Neonatal effects of maternal antiphospholipid syndrome. Curr
Rheumatol Rep 11(1):70, 2009
Toglia MR, Weg JG: Venous thromboembolism during pregnancy. N Engl J Med 335:108, 1996
Tower C, Mathen S, Crocker I, et al: Regulatory T cells in systemic lupus erythematosus and
pregnancy. Am J Reprod Immunol 69(6):588, 2013
Tsokos GC: Systemic lupus erythematosus. N Engl J Med 365(22):2110, 2011
Unger A, Kay A, Griffin AJ, et al: Disease activity and pregnancy associated beta2-glycoprotein in
rheumatoid arthritis. BMJ 286:750, 1983
Van Dijk FS, Pals G, Van Rijn RR, et al: Classification of osteogenesis imperfecta revisited. Eur J Med
Genet 53(1):1, 2010
Varga J: Systemic sclerosis (scleroderma) and related disorders. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL,
et al (eds): Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw Hill Education,
2018
Wagner S, Craici I, Reed D, et al: Maternal and foetal outcomes in pregnant patients with active lupus
nephritis. Lupus 18(4)342, 2009
Waldorf KM, Nelson JL: Autoimmune disease during pregnancy and the microchimerism legacy of
pregnancy. Immunol Invest 37:631, 2008
Wallenius M, Salvesen KA, Daltveit AK, et al: Rheumatoid arthritis and outcomes in first and
subsequent births based on data from a national birth registry. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand
93(3):302, 2014

Wong LF, Porter TF, Scott JR: Immunotherapy for recurrent miscarriage. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
10:CD000112, 2014
Wu H, Birmingham DJ, Rovin B, et al: D-dimer level and the risk for thrombosis in systemic lupus
erythematosus. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 3:1628, 2008
Yang W, Tang H, Zhang Y, et al: Meta-analysis followed by replication identifies loci in or near
CDKN1B, TET3, CD80, DRAM1, and ARID5B as associated with systemic lupus erythematosus
in Asians. Am J Hum Genet 92(1):41, 2013
Ye Y, van Zyl B, Varsani H, et al: Maternal microchimerism in muscle biopsies from children with
juvenile dermatomyositis. Rheumatology (Oxford) 51(6):987, 2012
Zangari M, Lockwood CJ, Scher J, et al: Prothrombin activation fragment (F1.2) is increased in
pregnant patients with antiphospholipid antibodies. Thromb Res 85:177, 1997
Zhao C, Zhao J, Huang Y, et al: New-onset systemic lupus erythematosus during pregnancy. Clin
Rheumatol 32(6):815, 2013
Zucchi D, Tani C, Monacco F, et al: pregnancy and undifferentiated connective tissue disease: outcome
and risk of flare in 100 pregnancies. Rheumatology (Oxford) 59(6):1335, 2020
Zuppa AA, Riccardi R, Frezza A, et al: Neonatal lupus: follow-up in infants with anti SSA/Ro antibodies
and review of the literature. Autoimmun Rev 16:427, 2017

CHAPTER 63

Neurological Disorders

CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM IMAGING
HEADACHE
SEIZURE DISORDERS
CEREBROVASCULAR DISEASES
DEMYELINATING OR DEGENERATIVE DISEASES
NEUROPATHIES
SPINAL CORD INJURY
IDIOPATHIC INTRACRANIAL HYPERTENSION
MATERNAL VENTRICULAR SHUNTS
MATERNAL BRAIN DEATH
REFERENCES
Many neurological disorders precede pregnancy. Most affected women will
have successful perinatal outcomes, although some disorders carry specific
risks. Other women will have new-onset neurological symptoms during
pregnancy, and these must be distinguished from pregnancy complications.
Neurovascular disorders are an important cause of maternal mortality and
accounted for more than 7 percent of maternal deaths in the United States
from 2007 through 2016 (Petersen, 2019). Psychiatric disorders can manifest

with cognitive and neuromuscular abnormalities and should be considered in
the evaluation of neurological symptoms.

CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM IMAGING
Computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance (MR) imaging assist in
the diagnosis, classification, and management of many neurological
disorders. As discussed in Chapter 49, (p. 873), these can be used safely
during pregnancy (Chansakul, 2017; Lum, 2020). CT scanning is often used
when rapid diagnosis is necessary and is excellent for detecting recent
hemorrhage. That said, MR imaging is often preferred and is particularly
helpful to diagnose demyelinating diseases, arteriovenous malformations
(AVMs), congenital and developmental nervous system abnormalities,
posterior fossa lesions, and spinal cord diseases (Jamieson, 2020).
Whenever either modality is employed, a woman with advanced pregnancy
should be positioned in a lateral tilt with a wedge under one hip to prevent
hypotension and to diminish aortic pulsations, which may degrade the image.
Cerebral angiography with contrast injection, usually via the femoral
artery, is a valuable adjunct to the diagnosis and treatment of some
cerebrovascular diseases. Fluoroscopy delivers more radiation but can be
performed with abdominal shielding. Positron emission tomography (PET)
and functional MR imaging (fMRI) have not been evaluated in detail for use
in gravidas (van den Heuvel, 2016).

HEADACHE
In one national survey in the United States in 2012, 17 percent of persons
aged 18 to 44 years reported a severe headache or migraine within the past 3
months (Blackwell, 2014). Burch and coworkers (2015) reported that 24
percent of nonpregnant women in this age group were similarly affected. Of
pregnant women presenting with headache who received a neurological
consultation, two thirds were due to primary disorders. The diagnosis was
migraine in more than 90 percent. Of the other third due to secondary
conditions, more than half stemmed from hypertensive disorders (Robbins,
2015). In one recent observational study at University of Texas

Southwestern’s Clements University Hospital, 20 percent of emergency
department postpartum visits were for headache (Rodriguez, 2021).
The classification by the International Headache Society (2018) is shown
in Table 63-1. As discussed, in pregnant women, primary headaches are
more common than those derived from secondary causes (Sperling, 2015).
Migraine headaches are those most likely to be affected by the hormonal
changes of pregnancy (Pavlovic, 2017). The incidences of different
etiologies of severe headaches in pregnancy are shown in Figure 63-1
(Robbins, 2015).
TABLE 63-1. Headache Classification

FIGURE 63-1 Incidences of headache causes in 140 consecutive pregnant women for whom inhospital neurology consultation was requested.

■ Tension Headache
These are the most frequent cause of all headaches. They may be episodic or
chronic. Their characteristic muscle tightness and mild to moderate pain in
the back of the neck and head can persist for hours. Importantly, neurological
disturbances or nausea are typically absent, which distinguishes them from
migraines. The pain usually responds to rest, massage, local heat or ice,
nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), or mild tranquilizers.
Hospital admission is seldom necessary. For chronic headaches,
amitriptyline can be effective (Goadsby, 2018).

■ Migraine Headache
This is a periodic, sometimes incapacitating neurological disorder with
episodic attacks of severe headache and autonomic nervous system
dysfunction (Ashina, 2020; Charles, 2017). The International Headache

Society (2018) classifies three migraine types based on chronicity and on the
presence or absence of an aura.
1. Migraine without aura-formerly termed common migraine-is
characterized by a unilateral throbbing headache, nausea and vomiting, or
photophobia.
2. Migraine with aura-formerly termed classic migraine-has similar
symptoms preceded by premonitory neurological phenomena such as
visual scotoma or hallucinations. A third of patients have this type, which
sometimes can be averted if medication is taken at the first premonitory
sign.
3. Chronic migraine is defined by a migraine headache occurring at least 15
days each month for more than 3 months.
Migraine headaches may begin in childhood, peak in adolescence, and
tend to diminish in both frequency and severity with advancing years.
According to Ashina (2020), their annual prevalence is 15 percent in women
and 6 percent in men. Another 5 percent of women have probable migraine,
that is, they have all criteria but one.
These headaches are especially common in young women and have been
linked to hormone levels (Burch, 2020; Charles, 2017). Sensory sensitivity
with migraines is likely caused by monoaminergic sensory control systems in
the brainstem, hypothalamus, and cortex (Goadsby, 2018). The exact
pathophysiology is uncertain, but symptoms develop when neuronal
dysfunction leads to decreased cortical blood flow, activation of vascular
and meningeal nociceptors, and stimulation of trigeminal sensory neurons.
Importantly, migraines are not primarily a vascular disorder (Charles, 2017).
Migraine headaches—especially those with aura in young women—are
associated with increased risk for ischemic strokes (Tietjen, 2020). Other
associated conditions are asthma, anxiety and depression, and other pain
disorders.

Migraine in Pregnancy
Migraine headaches are frequently encountered during pregnancy. Most
migraineurs have improvement during pregnancy (Lucas, 2019). Still,
migraines—usually those with an aura—occasionally appear for the first
time during pregnancy. Pregnant women with preexisting migraine symptoms

may have other symptoms that suggest a more serious disorder, and new
neurological symptoms should prompt a complete evaluation (Charles,
2017).
Migraines during pregnancy are associated with increased rates of
preeclampsia, gestational hypertension, preterm birth, and other
cardiovascular morbidities that include ischemic stroke (Grossman, 2017;
Wabnitz, 2015). Bushnell and associates (2009) identified a migraine
incidence during pregnancy of 185 cases per 100,000 deliveries. Of
diagnoses associated in these gravid migraineurs, risks were significantly
higher for stroke, 16-fo1d; myocardial infarction, fivefold; and heart disease,
venous thromboembolism, and preeclampsia/gestational hypertension, each
twofold. In a systematic review of 14 studies, risks for preeclampsia and
low-birthweight neonates were significantly increased (Aukes, 2019).

Management
Several effective medications are shown in Table 63-2. Mild headaches
respond to oral therapy in 50 to 70 percent of cases. Initial therapy with
acetaminophen or an NSAID, along with an antiemetic, usually suffices for
many early headaches. For severe headaches, parenteral therapy is indicated
(Goadsby, 2018). Multitargeted drug therapy is necessary in most cases for
migraine relief (Gonzalez-Hernandez, 2014). Headaches are treated
aggressively with intravenous hydration, parenteral antiemetics, and triptans,
and opioids are reserved for the most recalcitrant headaches. Although a 2-g
infusion of magnesium sulfate has gained favor in the past few years, a
metaanalysis reported no benefits (Choi, 2014). Ergotamine derivatives are
potent vasoconstrictors and are avoided in pregnancy because of their
uterotonic effects (Briggs, 2022).
TABLE 63-2. Medications for Treatment of Acute Migraine in Pregnancy

Triptans are serotonin 5-HT1B/2D-receptor agonists that effectively
relieve headaches, nausea, and vomiting and greatly reduce analgesic needs.
Triptans can be given as an oral tablet, injection, rectal suppository, or
intranasal spray. They are best used in combination with NSAIDs (Goadsby,
2018). However, chronic NSAID use is avoided in pregnancy, especially
later pregnancy because of fetal ductus arteriosus constriction and fetal urine
production decline (Chap. 18, p. 151). The greatest triptan experience is with
sumatriptan (Imitrex), and although not studied extensively in pregnancy, it is
not a major teratogen (Saldanha, 2021; Spielmann, 2018). However, in one
study at 36 months of children exposed to triptans in pregnancy, Wood and
colleagues (2016) found neurodevelopment differences, including
emotionality and activity problems.

Some women will benefit from peripheral nerve blocks, and
Govindappagari and coworkers (2014) described their experiences with 13
pregnant women. For women with frequent migraine headaches, oral
prophylactic therapy is warranted. Amitriptyline (Elavil), 10 to 175 mg
daily; propranolol (Inderal), 40 to 120 mg daily; or metoprolol (Lopressor,
Toprol), 25 to 100 mg daily, are successful options (Contag, 2010; Lucas,
2009).
Calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) receptor antagonists to prevent
migraines have garnered enthusiasm. Several of these monoclonal antibodies
have been approved since 2018 for clinical use but not evaluated in
pregnancy (Ashina, 2020; Tepper, 2018). Similarly, in a Cochrane review,
botulinum toxin type A for chronic migraine may reduce migraine days per
month by 2 days compared with placebo (Herd, 2018).

■ Cluster Headache
This rare primary headache disorder is characterized by severe unilateral
lancinating pain radiating to the face and orbit, lasting 15 to 180 minutes, and
occurring with autonomic symptoms and agitation. Pregnancy does not affect
symptom severity. Affected women should avoid tobacco and alcohol. Acute
management includes 100-percent oxygen therapy and sumatriptan given as a
6-mg dose subcutaneously (Vander Pluym, 2016). If recurrent, prophylaxis
employs verapamil.

SEIZURE DISORDERS
After headaches, seizures are the next most prevalent neurological condition
encountered in pregnancy. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
reported that 3 million adults in 2015 had active epilepsy (Tian, 2018). Less
than half were seizure free in the past year. Importantly, epilepsy accounted
for 5 percent of maternal deaths in the United Kingdom from 2011 to 2013
(Knight, 2015).

■ Pathophysiology

A seizure is a transient combination of signs and symptoms stemming from
abnormal excessive or synchronous neuronal activity in the brain
(Lowenstein, 2018). Some identifiable causes of convulsive disorders in
young adults include head trauma, alcohol- and other drug-induced
withdrawals, cerebral infections, brain tumors, biochemical abnormalities,
and arteriovenous malformations. A search for these is prudent with a newonset seizure disorder in a pregnant woman. The diagnosis of idiopathic
epilepsy is one of exclusion.

■ Classification
Epilepsy encompasses different syndromes whose cardinal feature is a
predisposition to recurrent unprovoked seizures. The International League
Against Epilepsy recently updated the following definitions (Fisher, 2017).
Main categories describe seizure onset and include focal, generalized, and
unknown groups.
Focal seizure onset describes those that originate in one localized brain
area and affect correspondingly localized neurological function. They are
believed to result from trauma, abscess, tumor, or perinatal factors, although
a specific lesion is rarely demonstrated. Seizures may occur with either
intact or impaired awareness.
Focal seizures without dyscognitive features start in one region of the
body and progress toward other ipsilateral areas of the body and produce
tonic and then clonic movements. Seizures can affect sensory function or
produce autonomic dysfunction or psychological changes. Cognitive function
is not impaired, and recovery is rapid.
Focal seizures with dyscognitive features are often preceded by an aura
and followed by impaired awareness manifested by sudden behavioral arrest
or motionless stare. Involuntary movements such as picking motions or lip
smacking are common.
Generalized seizure onset describes those that involve both brain
hemispheres and may be preceded by an aura before an abrupt loss of
consciousness. They may be motor or nonmotor. There is a strong hereditary
component. In generalized tonic-clonic seizures, loss of consciousness is
followed by tonic contraction of the muscles and rigid posturing, and then by
clonic contractions of all extremities while the muscles gradually relax.
Return to consciousness is gradual, and the patient may remain confused and

disoriented for several hours. Absence seizures—also called petit mal
seizures—are a form of generalized epilepsy that involve a brief loss of
consciousness without muscle activity and are characterized by immediate
recovery of consciousness and orientation.
Unknown seizure onset describes seizures with an unwitnessed onset.
Thus, they remain unclassified as to focal or generalized onset until further
information allows categorization. However, these can be further subgrouped
as motor or nonmotor, or unclassified.

■ Preconceptional Counseling
Women with epilepsy ideally are counseled before pregnancy, and relevant
points are presented also in Chapter 9 (p. 166). Oral folic acid
supplementation with 0.4 mg per day is begun at least 1 month before
conception. The dose is increased to 4 mg when the woman taking
antiepileptic medication becomes pregnant. These medications are assessed
and adjusted with a goal of monotherapy using the least teratogenic
medication. If this is not feasible, attempts are made to reduce the number of
medications and to use the lowest effective dose (Stephen, 2019; Tomson,
2019b). Medication withdrawal should be considered if a woman is seizure
free for 2 years or more.

■ Pregnancy Complications
The major pregnancy-related risks to women with epilepsy are fetal
malformations and convulsions. Seizure control is a priority to avoid its
attendant morbidity and mortality. Early studies described worsening seizure
activity during pregnancy, however, this is less common now because of
more effective drugs (Pennell, 2020). Contemporary studies cite higher rates
of seizure activity in only 20 to 30 percent of gravidas (Tomson, 2019b).
Women who are seizure free for at least 9 months before conception will
likely remain so during pregnancy (Harden, 2009b).
Greater seizure frequency is often associated with subtherapeutic
anticonvulsant serum levels, a lower seizure threshold, or both. Numerous
pregnancy-associated alterations can result in subtherapeutic serum levels.
These include nausea and vomiting, slower gastrointestinal motility, antacid
use that diminishes drug absorption, pregnancy hypervolemia offset by

protein binding, induction of hepatic enzymes such as cytochrome oxidases,
placental enzymes that metabolize drugs, and increased glomerular filtration
that hastens drug clearance. Importantly, some women discontinue medication
because of teratogenicity concerns. Last, the seizure threshold can be affected
by pregnancy-related sleep deprivation and by hyperventilation and pain
during labor (Tomson, 2019b).
Status epilepticus is a medical emergency. It is more likely to occur in
women with refractory epilepsy (Kusznir Vitturi, 2019). In a randomized
trial of 384 nonpregnant patients with benzodiazepine-refractory status,
intravenous levetiracetam, fosphenytoin, or valproate yielded similar results
(Kapur, 2019). Only one half of patients in each cohort had cessation of
seizures and improved alertness by 60 minutes.
In addition to seizure-control challenges, women with epilepsy have a
small increased risk of pregnancy complications that include miscarriage,
hemorrhage, hypertensive disorders, placental abruption, preterm birth, fetalgrowth restriction, and cesarean delivery (Salman, 2018; Viale, 2015).
Importantly, MacDonald (2015) also reports a tenfold higher maternal death
rate, and, as mentioned earlier, epilepsy accounted for 5 percent of maternal
deaths in the United Kingdom. Postpartum depression rates also are
increased in epileptic women (Turner, 2009). Last, children of epileptic
mothers have a 10-percent risk of developing a seizure disorder.
With embryofetal malformations, it was difficult for years to separate the
influence of epilepsy from that of its therapy as the primary cause. Now,
untreated epilepsy is thought not to be associated with an elevated fetal
malformation rate (Tomson, 2019b). That said, the fetus of an epileptic
mother who takes certain anticonvulsant medications has an indisputably
greater risk for congenital malformations. Moreover, monotherapy is
associated with a lower rate of birth defects compared with multiagent
therapy. Adherence to these principles has resulted in declining malformation
rates from antiepileptic drugs (Tomson, 2019a).
Specific drugs, when given alone, raise the malformation rate (Chap. 8,
p. 150). Some are listed in Table 63-3. Phenytoin and phenobarbital increase
the major malformation rate two- to threefold above baseline (Perucca,
2005; Thomas, 2008). Valproate is a particularly potent teratogen, which has
a dose-dependent effect and raises the malformation risk four- to eightfold
(Klein, 2014; Tomson, 2019b). Valproate is also associated with lower
cognitive performance (Kasradze, 2017). In general, with polytherapy, the

risk rises with each drug added. A metaanalysis of 31 studies found
lamotrigine and levetiracetam to carry the lowest malformation risk (Weston,
2016).
TABLE 63-3. Teratogenic Effects of Common Anticonvulsant Medications

■ Management in Pregnancy
The American Academy of Neurology and the American Epilepsy Society
have guidelines regarding treatment in pregnancy (Harden, 2009a,b,c). The
major goal is seizure prevention. To accomplish this, treatment for nausea
and vomiting is provided, seizure-provoking stimuli are avoided, and
medication compliance is emphasized. The fewest necessary anticonvulsants
are given at the lowest dosage needed for seizure control. Although some
providers routinely monitor serum drug levels, these concentrations may be
unreliable because of altered protein binding. Free or unbound drug levels,
although perhaps more accurate, are not widely available. Importantly, no
evidence suggests that such monitoring improves seizure control (Adab,
2006). For these reasons, drug levels may be most informative if measured
following seizures or if noncompliance is suspected.
For women taking anticonvulsant drugs, a targeted sonographic
examination in midpregnancy is recommended to evaluate for anomalies.

Testing to assess fetal well-being is generally not indicated for women with
uncomplicated epilepsy.
For women desiring to breastfeed, data regarding the safety of the
various anticonvulsant medications are limited. However, no obvious
deleterious effects, such as long-term cognitive issues, have been reported
(Birnbaum, 2020; Briggs, 2022). Of birth control methods, combination oral
contraceptive (COC) pill failure rates are higher with some of the
anticonvulsant agents. For example, lamotrigine efficacy is substantially
lowered by COCs. Thus, other more reliable methods should be considered
(Chap. 38, p. 664).

CEREBROVASCULAR DISEASES
Abnormalities of the cerebrovascular circulation include both ischemic and
hemorrhagic strokes and anatomical anomalies, such as AVMs and
aneurysms. Cerebral ischemia is caused by reduction in blood flow that lasts
longer than several seconds. Early, neurological symptoms may manifest.
After a few minutes, however, infarction often follows. Hemorrhagic stroke
is caused by bleeding directly into or around the brain. It produces symptoms
by its mass effect, by blood’s toxic effects, or by elevated intracranial
pressure. Strokes in nonpregnant women are predominately ischemic. In
gravidas, roughly half are ischemic, and the other half are hemorrhagic
(Zofkie, 2018).
The obesity endemic in this country, along with a concomitant rise in
rates of heart disease, hypertension, and diabetes, has increased the
prevalence of strokes. Compared with men, women have a higher lifetime
risk of stroke and associated mortality rate (Martinez-Sånchez, 2011; Virani,
2021). Moreover, pregnancy raises the immediate and lifetime risk of both
ischemic stroke and hemorrhagic stroke (Jamieson, 2010; Jung, 2010).
With an incidence of 10 to 40 cases per 100,000 births, stroke is
relatively uncommon in gravidas. However, it contributes disparately to
maternal mortality rates (Leffert, 2016; Pacheco, 2019; Elgendy, 2021). The
incidence is rising as measured by pregnancy-related hospitalizations for
stroke (Callaghan, 2008; Kuklina, 2011). Most events are associated with
hypertensive disorders or heart disease. Of the pregnancy-related mortality
rate in the United States from 2007 to 2016, 7.2 percent was due to

cerebrovascular accidents, and 7.8 percent was associated with hypertension
(Petersen, 2019). Of maternal deaths after 42 days postpartum, 9.8 percent
were attributable to stroke (Creanga, 2017).

■ Risk Factors
Most strokes in pregnancy manifest either during labor and delivery or in the
puerperium. In a study of 2850 pregnancy-related strokes, approximately 10
percent developed antepartum, 40 percent intrapartum, and 50 percent
postpartum (James, 2005). Of 145 ischemic strokes, Leffert (2016) reported
a timing of 45 percent antepartum, 3 percent intrapartum, and 53 percent
postpartum.
Several risk factors both unrelated and related to pregnancy have been
recognized. Unrelated causes are age; migraines, hypertension, obesity, and
diabetes; cardiac disorders such as endocarditis, valvular prostheses, and
patent foramen ovale; and smoking. Stroke etiologies related to pregnancy
include hypertensive disorders, gestational diabetes, obstetrical hemorrhage,
and cesarean delivery. By far, the most common is pregnancy-associated
hypertensive disorders. A third of strokes are associated with gestational
hypertension, and hypertensive women compared with normotensive
counterparts have a three- to eightfold greater risk of stroke (Scott, 2012;
Wang, 2011). Stroke is the major cause of maternal mortality associated with
preeclampsia (Judy, 2019). Moreover, women with preeclampsia undergoing
general anesthesia may be at higher risk of stroke compared with those given
neuraxial anesthesia (Huang, 2010). Cesarean delivery raises the peripartum
stroke risk 1.5-fold compared with vaginal delivery (Lin, 2008). Sepsis from
any source increases the risk for postpartum stroke (Miller, 2019).
Pregnancy-induced effects on cerebrovascular hemodynamics include
enhanced autoregulation that maintains blood flow despite changes in
systemic blood pressure (van Teen, 2016). Although cerebral blood flow
decreases by 20 percent from midpregnancy until term, it increases
significantly with gestational hypertension (Zeeman, 2003, 2004b). Such
hyperperfusion at least intuitively would be dangerous for women with
certain vascular anomalies.

■ Ischemic Stroke

Acute occlusion or embolization of an intracranial blood vessel causes
cerebral ischemia, which may result in death of brain tissue (Fig. 63-2). The
more commonly associated etiologies of ischemic stroke are shown in Table
63-4. A transient ischemic attack (TIA) is caused by reversible ischemia,
and symptoms usually last less than 24 hours. Approximately 10 percent of
these patients have a stroke by 1 year (Amarenco, 2016).

FIGURE 63-2 Illustrations of a brain showing various types of strokes seen in pregnancy: (1)
subcortical infarction (preeclampsia), (2) hypertensive hemorrhage, (3) aneurysm, (4) embolism or
thrombosis in middle cerebral artery, (5) arteriovenous malformation, and (6) cortical vein thrombosis.

TABLE 63-4. Some Associated Disorders or Causes of Ischemic and
Hemorrhagic Strokes During Pregnancy or the Puerperium

Stroke usually incites sudden severe headache, hemiplegia, or other
neurological deficits. Seizures occasionally develop. Immediate assessment
and CT scanning is indicated (Pacheco, 2019). Further evaluation includes
echocardiography and additional cranial imaging with CT, MR imaging, or
angiography. Serum lipids are measured with the caveat that their values are
distorted by normal pregnancy (Appendix, p. 1231). Tests to detect
antiphospholipid antibodies, lupus anticoagulant, other thrombophilias, and,
if indicated, sickle-cell syndromes are performed (Buonanno, 2016). These
underlie up to a third of ischemic strokes in otherwise healthy young women.
With a thorough evaluation, most causes of embolism can be identified.
Some of these include cardiac-associated embolism, vasculitis, or
vasculopathy such as Moyamoya disease (Miyakoshi, 2009; Pacheco, 2019).
Outcomes of embolic strokes are reported to be favorable and similar to
those of nonpregnant women (Leffert, 2016). For some, thrombolysis for
ischemic stroke during pregnancy should be considered (Pacheco, 2019).
However, published experiences are sparse (Ryman, 2019). For some,
mechanical thrombectomy can be used.

Preeclampsia Syndrome
In reproductive-age women, a significant proportion of pregnancy-related
ischemic strokes are caused by gestational hypertension and preeclampsia
(Miller, 2020; Zofkie, 2018). As shown in Figure 63-2, areas of subcortical
edema and petechial hemorrhage may progress to cerebral infarction (Aukes,
2007, 2009; Zeeman, 2004a). Although these usually clinically manifest by
an eclamptic convulsion, a few women will suffer a symptomatic stroke from
a larger cortical infarction (Chap. 40, p. 700).
Other conditions with findings similar to preeclampsia are thrombotic
microangiopathies (Chap. 59, p. 1060) and the reversible cerebral
vasoconstriction syndrome (Chap. 40, p. 700). The latter, also termed
postpartum angiopathy, can cause extensive cerebral edema, necrosis and
widespread infarction, and areas of hemorrhage (Edlow, 2013; Miller,
2016).

Cerebral Embolism
These strokes usually involve the middle cerebral artery (see Fig. 63-2). The
diagnosis can be made with confidence only after thrombosis and
hemorrhage are excluded and is more certain if an embolic source is
identified. Hemorrhage may be more difficult to exclude because both
embolization and thrombosis can be followed by hemorrhagic infarction.
Paradoxical embolism is an uncommon cause, even considering that more
than a fourth of adults have a patent foramen ovale. Through the defect, rightsided venous thromboemboli are deported (Scott, 2012). Foraminal closure
may not improve outcomes in these patients, however, this procedure has
been performed during pregnancy (Dark, 2011). Assorted cardioembolic
causes of stroke include arrhythmias—especially atrial fibrillation, valvular
lesions, mitral valve prolapse, mural thrombus, infective endocarditis, and
peripartum cardiomyopathy.
Management of embolic stroke in pregnancy consists of supportive
measures and antiplatelet therapy. Thrombolytic therapy and anticoagulation
in pregnancy are controversial (Li, 2012).

Cerebral Artery Thrombosis
Most thrombotic strokes affect older individuals and are caused by
atherosclerosis, especially of the internal carotid artery. Many are preceded

by one or more TIAs. Thrombolytic therapy with a recombinant tissue
plasminogen activator (rtPA) is recommended. Alteplase is one of these. It is
given intravenously within the first 3-hour window if neurological deficits
are noted and if neuroimaging has excluded hemorrhage (Pacheco, 2019). A
principal risk is hemorrhagic transformation of an ischemic stroke. This
agent can be used in pregnancy, but published experiences of rtPA in this
group are few (Ryman, 2019).

Cerebral Venous Thrombosis
In one study in the United States, 6 percent of cerebral venous thromboses
were associated with pregnancy (Leavell, 2018). However, in more than 8
million deliveries from the Nationwide Inpatient Sample, cerebral venous
thrombosis caused only 2 percent of pregnancy-related strokes (James,
2005). Predisposing causes are numerous, and for gravidas, late pregnancy
and the puerperium are times of greatest risk (Silvis, 2019).
Thrombosis of the lateral or superior sagittal venous sinus usually occurs
in the puerperium and often in association with preeclampsia, sepsis, or
thrombophilia (see Fig. 63-2). It is more common in patients with inherited
thrombophilias or antiphospholipid antibodies. Headache is the most
frequent presenting symptom, neurological deficits are common, and up to a
third of women have seizures (Pacheco, 2019). Oh and colleagues (2020)
described a postpartum case in which cerebral vein thrombosis was
misdiagnosed as postdural puncture headache. The diagnosis is made using
MR venography.
Management includes anticonvulsants for seizures, and anticoagulation
with heparin (Pacheco, 2019; Smith, 2018). Antimicrobials are given for
septic thrombophlebitis, and fibrinolytic therapy is reserved for those women
failing systemic anticoagulation. The acute prognosis for venous thrombosis
in gravidas is better than in nonpregnant subjects, and mortality rates are <10
percent (McCau11ey, 2011).
In women with a prior cerebral venous thrombosis, one systematic
review found only one recurrence in 217 pregnancies and five noncerebral
venous thrombotic events in 186 pregnancies (Aguiar de Sousa, 2016). In a
study of 52 women on prophylactic anticoagulation with prior cerebral
venous thrombosis, recurrent thrombosis or bleeding did not develop.
However, 24 percent had late obstetrical complications (Martinelli, 2016).

Ischemic Stroke Recurrence
Women with prior ischemic stroke have a low risk for recurrence during a
subsequent pregnancy unless a specific, persistent cause is identified. During
a 5-year follow-up of 441 reproductive-aged women with prior ischemic
stroke or cerebral venous thrombosis, 13 had a recurrent ischemic stroke,
and only two were associated with pregnancy. The authors concluded that the
risk of stroke recurrence is low and a previous ischemic stroke is not a
contraindication to pregnancy (Lamy, 2000). In one study of nonpregnant
women, the ischemic stroke recurrence rate was similar between those with
and without antiphospholipid antibodies as long as the former received
warfarin or aspirin (Levine, 2004). The recurrence rate of reversible
cerebral vasoconstriction syndrome in a subsequent pregnancy was noted to
be 9 percent (Boitet, 2019).
Currently, no firm guidelines define prophylaxis in pregnant women with
a stroke history (Smith, 2018). The American Heart Association stresses the
importance of controlling risk factors such as hypertension and diabetes
(Furie, 2011). As discussed in Chapters 52 and 55, those with
antiphospholipid syndrome or certain cardiac conditions should be
considered for prophylactic anticoagulation. For most of these women, lowdose aspirin given throughout pregnancy seems reasonable.

■ Hemorrhagic Stroke
Intracerebral Hemorrhage
The symptoms of a hemorrhagic stroke are similar to those of an ischemic
stroke, and their differentiation is possible only with CT or MR imaging
(Hemphill, 2015; Smith, 2018). The two distinct categories of spontaneous
intracranial bleeding are subarachnoid hemorrhage and intracerebral
hemorrhage.
Intracerebral hemorrhage is bleeding into the brain parenchyma. It most
often stems from the spontaneous rupture of Charcot-Bouchard aneurysms of
small vessels damaged by chronic hypertension (see Fig. 63-2). Thus,
pregnancy-associated hemorrhagic strokes such as the one shown in Figure
63-3 are often associated with chronic hypertension and superimposed
preeclampsia (Cunningham, 2005; Martin, 2005). Because of its location,
this type of hemorrhage has much higher morbidity and mortality rates than

subarachnoid hemorrhage (Smith, 2018). Pressure-induced rupture causes
bleeding into the putamen, thalamus, adjacent white matter, pons, and
cerebellum. In the 28 women described by Martin and associates (2005),
half died and most survivors had permanent disabilities. This underscores
proper management of gestational hypertension, especially systolic
hypertension.

FIGURE 63-3 A noncontrast computed tomography axial head image demonstrates a large
intraparenchymal hemorrhage in this woman with preeclampsia.

Subarachnoid Hemorrhage
In a study of 639 cases of pregnancy-related subarachnoid hemorrhage from
the Nationwide Inpatient Sample, the incidence was 8.5 per 100,000
pregnancies (Limaye, 2019). A remarkably similar incidence was reported in
Japanese women (Yoshida, 2017). These bleeding events are more likely
caused by an underlying cerebrovascular malformation in an otherwise
normal patient (see Fig. 63-2). Ruptured saccular or “berry” aneurysms
cause 80 percent of all subarachnoid hemorrhages (Lawton, 2017). The
remaining cases stem from a ruptured AVM, coagulopathy, angiopathy,
venous thrombosis, infection, drug abuse, tumors, or trauma. The mortality

rate of subarachnoid hemorrhage during pregnancy is lower than that
reported for nonpregnant women—8 versus 17 percent (Limaye, 2019).
Intracranial Aneurysm. Approximately 1 to 2 percent of adults have this
lesion (Lawton, 2017). Only a small percentage rupture. The rate
approximates 0.1 percent for aneurysms <10 mm and 1 percent for those >10
mm (Smith, 2018). Most aneurysms identified during pregnancy arise from
the circle of Willis, and in 20 percent of cases, lesions are multiple.
Pregnancy does not raise the risk for aneurysmal rupture. However, because
of their high population prevalence, they are more likely to cause
subarachnoid bleeding than other etiologies (Hirsch, 2009; Tiel Groenestege,
2009). A systematic review of 44 women with 50 aneurysms in pregnancy
reported that 72 percent ruptured during pregnancy, and 78 percent of these
did so during the third trimester (Barbarite, 2016). This proclivity for rupture
late in pregnancy is reported by others (Yoshida, 2017).
The cardinal symptom of aneurysmal rupture leading to subarachnoid
hemorrhage is sudden severe headache that is accompanied by visual
changes, cranial nerve abnormalities, focal neurological deficits, and altered
consciousness. Signs of meningeal irritation, nausea and vomiting,
tachycardia, transient hypertension, low-grade fever, leukocytosis, and
proteinuria are typical. Prompt diagnosis and treatment may prevent
potentially lethal complications. The American Heart Association
recommends noncontrast cranial CT imaging as the first diagnostic test,
although MR imaging may be superior (Smith, 2018).
Treatment of subarachnoid hemorrhage includes bed rest, analgesia,
neurological monitoring, and strict blood pressure control. Repair of a
potentially accessible aneurysm during pregnancy weighs surgical risks
against the risk of recurrent hemorrhage. At least in nonpregnant patients, the
risk of subsequent bleeding with conservative treatment is 20 to 30 percent
for the first month and then 3 percent per year. The risk of rebleeding is
highest within the first 24 hours, and recurrent hemorrhage leads to death in
70 percent (Smith, 2018).
Early repair after the sentinel hemorrhage is accomplished by open
craniotomy or endovascular coil placement. In one systematic review of
management in pregnancy, coil embolization yielded lower complication
rates than aneurysmal clipping (Barbarite, 2016). For unruptured aneurysms,
surgical management resulted in a third fewer complications than no

treatment. For gravidas remote from term, repair without hypotensive
anesthesia seems optimal. For women near term, cesarean delivery followed
by aneurysm repair is a consideration. We have successfully done this in
several cases.
For aneurysms repaired before or during pregnancy, most allow vaginal
delivery if labor ensues remote from aneurysmal repair. Problems arise in
defining “remote,” and although some recommend 2 months, the time for
complete healing is unknown. For women who survive subarachnoid
hemorrhage, but in whom surgical repair is not done, we agree with
Cartlidge (2000) and recommend against bearing down and favor cesarean
delivery.
Arteriovenous Malformations. These are congenital focal abnormal
conglomerations of dilated arteries and veins with subarteriolar
disorganization (see Fig. 63-2). They lack capillaries and have resultant
arteriovenous shunting. Although unclear, the risk of bleeding during
pregnancy may rise with gestational age. When AVMs bleed, half do so into
the subarachnoid space, whereas half are intraparenchymal with
subarachnoid extension (Smith, 2018). Uncommon, they affect an estimated
0.01 percent of the general population. Of identified AVM cases in
pregnancy, 83 percent ruptured during pregnancy or postpartum, and more
than 80 percent of these ruptured in the second or third trimester. Hemorrhage
is associated with poor maternal outcome but does not appear to be more
likely during pregnancy. (Lu, 2016). Although correspondingly rare during
pregnancy, AVM bleeding accounted for 17 percent of hemorrhagic strokes in
one study (Yoshida, 2017). At Parkland Hospital in a 35-year period and
nearly 500,000 births, 62 women had a stroke, and five of these were due to
a bleeding AVM (Simolke, 1991; Zofkie, 2018).
Treatment of AVMs in nonpregnant patients is individualized. No
consensus guides whether all accessible lesions should be resected. Factors
include AVM symptoms; its anatomy and size; an associated aneurysm, which
is found in up to 60 percent of cases; and especially, prior AVM bleeding.
After hemorrhage, the risk of recurrent bleeding in unrepaired lesions is 6 to
20 percent within the first year, and 2 to 4 percent per year thereafter
(Friedlander, 2007; Smith, 2018). The mortality rate from a bleeding AVM is
10 to 20 percent. In pregnancy, the decision to operate is usually based on
neurosurgical considerations. Because of the high risk of recurrent

hemorrhage from an unresected or inoperable lesion, we favor cesarean
delivery.

DEMYELINATING OR DEGENERATIVE DISEASES
The demyelinating diseases are neurological disorders characterized by
immune-mediated focal or patchy destruction of myelin sheaths accompanied
by an inflammatory response. The degenerative diseases are multifactorial
and characterized by progressive neuronal death.

■ Multiple Sclerosis
This autoimmune demyelinating disease is second only to trauma as a cause
of neurological disability in middle adulthood. The demyelinating effects
stem predominantly from T cell–mediated autoimmune destruction of
oligodendrocytes that synthesize myelin. It has a familial occurrence with an
environmental trigger, it affects women twice as often as men, and it usually
begins in the 20s and 30s (Cree, 2018; Fang, 2020). In one study, 0.03
percent of California deliveries were complicated by multiple sclerosis
(MS) between 2001 and 2009 (Fong, 2018).
There are three clinical types of multiple sclerosis:
1. Relapsing MS (RMS) is the initial presentation in 90 percent of affected
individuals. With it, unpredictable recurrent episodes of focal or
multifocal neurological dysfunction usually are followed by full recovery.
Over time, however, relapses lead to persistent deficits.
2. Secondary progressive MS (SPMS) is relapsing disease that begins to
pursue a progressive downhill course after each relapse. All patients
likely develop this type eventually.
3. Primary progressive MS (PPMS) accounts for 10 percent of cases. With
it, disability gradually progresses from the time of initial diagnosis.
Classic findings of MS include sensory loss, visual symptoms from optic
neuritis, weakness, and paresthesias. Clinical diagnosis is aided by MR
imaging and cerebrospinal fluid analysis. In greater than 95 percent of cases,
MR imaging shows characteristic multifocal white-matter plaques that

represent discrete areas of demyelination (Fig. 63-4). Their appearance and
extent are less helpful for predicting treatment response.

FIGURE 63-4 Magnetic resonance cranial images from a woman with multiple sclerosis. A. T2weighted axial image shows bright signal abnormalities in white matter (arrows), typical for multiple
sclerosis. B. Sagittal T2-FLAIR image shows periventricular hyperintense lesions (Dawson fingers;
arrows) representative of demyelination in multiple sclerosis.

Formerly considered an MS variant, neuromyelitis optica spectrum
disorder (NMOSD) is viewed as a distinct autoimmune disease. Antibodies
target astrocytes and lead to autoimmune inflammation of the spinal cord and
optic nerve. Some evidence suggests that pregnancy worsens this disorder
(Mao-Draayer, 2020).

Multiple Sclerosis in Pregnancy
Women with MS experience fewer attacks during pregnancy, but with a
significantly greater relapse rate postpartum (Cree, 2018). This may be
related to higher pregnancy-induced numbers of T-helper lymphocytes and an
increased T2/Tl ratio. In a metaanalysis of women with more than 1200
pregnancies complicated by MS, their relapse rate was 0.4 per year before
pregnancy; 0.26 per year during pregnancy; and 0.7 per year after delivery
(Finkelsztejn, 2011). A systematic review reported similar findings (Bove,
2014). Factors associated with postpartum relapse include a high relapse
rate before pregnancy, relapses during pregnancy, and a high MS disability

score (Portaccio, 2014). Breastfeeding has no effect on postpartum relapses
(Hellwig, 2015; Portaccio, 2011).
With uncomplicated disease, pregnancy outcomes are usually not
adversely affected (Bove, 2014; Fong, 2018). Some women may fatigue
more easily, those with bladder dysfunction are predisposed to urinary
infection, and women with spinal lesions at or above T6 are at risk for
autonomic dysreflexia. In one study of 449 pregnancies in affected women,
the labor induction rate was higher, and second-stage labor was longer
(Dahl, 2006). The greater induction rate and elective operations contributed
to the overall higher cesarean delivery rate. In an analysis of 649 affected
women, the mean birthweight was lower, but the perinatal mortality rate was
similar to controls (Dahl, 2005). In a study of 3875 pregnancies in women
with MS, risks for infections and preterm delivery were increased
(MacDonald, 2019).

Management
Goals in pregnancy are to arrest acute or initial attacks, employ diseasemodifying agents, and provide symptomatic relief. Some treatments may
require modification during pregnancy. Acute or initial attacks are treated
with high-dose intravenous methylprednisolone—500 to 1000 mg daily for 3
to 5 days. This is followed by oral prednisone for 2 weeks. Plasma exchange
may help those with fulminant attacks resistant to corticosteroid therapy.
Symptomatic relief can be provided by analgesics. Carbamazepine,
phenytoin, or amitriptyline are suitable after the first trimester for neurogenic
pain; baclofen, for spasticity; α1-adrenergic blocking agents, for bladder neck
relaxation; and cholinergic and anticholinergic drugs, for bladder-contraction
stimulation or inhibition, respectively.
Several disease-modifying therapies are now available to treat relapsing
MS or for exacerbations. Examples include interferons, glatiramer,
fingolimod, dimethyl fumarate, natalizumab, and ocrelizumab (Cree, 2018;
Tintore, 2019). Data regarding their safety in pregnancy are limited (Briggs,
2022). In 246 women with MS, glatiramer was not teratogenic to their
offspring (Herbstritt, 2016). In a review of 92 pregnancies, first-trimester
natalizumab exposure was associated with an increased miscarriage risk
(Portaccio, 2018). Fetal exposure in 89 pregnancies to fingolimod was
associated with six fetal malformations and nine spontaneous losses.

Because of this and associated animal teratogenicity, its use in pregnancy is
not recommended. Due to its prolonged persistence, contraception is
recommended for 2 months after fingolimod cessation (Alroughani, 2016).
Last, prevention of relapses postpartum has been reported with intravenous
immunoglobulin (IVIG). A dose of 0.4 g/kg is given daily for 5 days during
weeks 1, 6, and 12 (Argyriou, 2008).

■ Myasthenia Gravis
This autoimmune-mediated neuromuscular disorder is more common in
women, and its incidence peaks in their 20s and 30s (Waters, 2019). The
etiology is unknown, but genetic factors likely play a role. Of affected
patients, 80 to 90 percent demonstrate antibodies to the acetylcholine
receptor (Lee, 2019). Those that are seronegative often have antibodies to
muscle-specific tyrosine kinase (MuSK), which regulates assembly of the
acetylcholine receptor subunits at the neuromuscular junction.
Cardinal features of myasthenia are weakness and easy fatigability of
facial, oropharyngeal, extraocular, and limb muscles. Deep-tendon reflexes
are preserved. Cranial muscles are involved early and disparately, and
diplopia and ptosis are common. Facial muscle weakness causes difficulty in
smiling, chewing, and speaking. In 85 percent of patients, the weakness
becomes generalized. Other autoimmune diseases may coexist, and
hypothyroidism should be excluded. The clinical course is marked by
exacerbations. These can be life threatening and include myasthenic crises,
which are characterized by severe muscle weakness, inability to swallow,
and respiratory muscle paralysis (Lee, 2019). Another is a cholinergic
crisis, which is caused by excessive cholinergic medication and leads to
nausea, vomiting, muscle weakness, abdominal pain, and diarrhea.

Management
Myasthenia gravis is manageable but not curable. The oral anticholinesterase
pyridostigmine (Mestinon) is first-line treatment. Thymectomy is
recommended but postponed until after pregnancy (Amato, 2018a; Wolfe,
2019). Anticholinesterase medications improve symptoms by impeding
acetylcholine degradation but seldom produce normal muscle function.
Ironically, overdose is manifest by the cholinergic crisis mentioned earlier
and may be difficult to differentiate from myasthenic symptoms. Most

gravidas refractory to anticholinesterase therapy respond to
immunosuppressive therapy with glucocorticoids, azathioprine, or
cyclosporine. When short-term, rapid improvement is needed—such as for a
surgical procedure or a myasthenic crisis—high-dose IVIG or plasma
exchange is usually effective (Amato, 2018a; Sanders, 2016).

Myasthenia Gravis and Pregnancy
The greatest period of risk is within the first year following diagnosis. Thus,
postponing pregnancy until improvement is sustained is reasonable.
Antepartum management of myasthenia gravis includes close observation,
liberal rest, and prompt treatment of infection (Waters, 2019). Women in
remission who become pregnant while taking corticosteroids or azathioprine
should continue these. Acute onset or exacerbation of myasthenia gravis
demands prompt hospitalization and supportive care. Plasmapheresis and
high-dose IVIG are options for emergencies (Waters, 2019). In refractory
cases, thymectomy has been successfully performed during pregnancy.
Although pregnancy does not appear to affect the overall course of
myasthenia gravis, fatigue common to most pregnancies may be exacerbated,
and the expanding uterus may compromise respiration. Maternal hypotension
or hypovolemia are ideally avoided because they can trigger crises. The
clinical course of myasthenia gravis during pregnancy is unpredictable, and
frequent hospitalizations are the norm. Up to a third of women have
worsening symptoms during pregnancy, and exacerbations develop equally in
all three trimesters (Djelmis, 2002; Podciechowski, 2005). In women with
stable disease, most will remain stable throughout pregnancy but likely
worsen in the first few months postpartum (Sanders, 2016).
Myasthenia gravis has no significant adverse effects on pregnancy
outcomes (Wen, 2009). Preeclampsia is a concern because magnesium
sulfate may precipitate a severe myasthenia crisis (Hamaoui, 2009; Heaney,
2010). Although phenytoin use also is problematic in this regard, its adverse
effects are less troublesome.
Because smooth muscle is unaffected, most women have normal labor.
Oxytocin is given for the usual indications, and cesarean delivery is reserved
for obstetrical indications. Narcotics may cause respiratory depression, and
close observation and respiratory support are essential during labor and
delivery. Curariform drugs are avoided. Examples include magnesium

sulfate, muscle relaxants used with general anesthesia, and aminoglycosides.
Neuraxial analgesia is accomplished with amide-type local agents. Regional
analgesia is preferred unless bulbar involvement or respiratory compromise
is significant (Almeida, 2010; Blichfeldt-Lauridsen, 2012). During secondstage labor, some women may have impaired voluntary expulsive efforts that
may warrant operative vaginal delivery.

Neonatal Effects
As discussed, 80 percent of mothers with myasthenia gravis have
immunoglobulin G (IgG) antibodies against the acetylcholine receptor. These
and anti-MuSK antibodies cross transplacentally, and the fetus can be
affected. Poor fetal swallowing may yield hydramnios (Heaney, 2010).
Similarly, 10 to 20 percent of neonates manifest myasthenia symptoms
(Jovandaric, 2016). Transient symptoms usually include a feeble cry, poor
suckling, and respiratory distress. Symptoms usually respond to
anticholinesterase agents and resolve within a few weeks as maternal IgG
antibodies clear.

NEUROPATHIES
Peripheral neuropathy is a general term for peripheral nerve(s) disorders, in
which one or more nerves are affected. Mononeuropathies are relatively
common in pregnancy and signify focal involvement of a single nerve trunk.
These imply local causation such as trauma, compression, or entrapment. For
example, traumatic pudendal, obturator, femoral, and common fibular
mononeuropathies can stem from childbirth (Chap. 36, p. 644).
Polyneuropathies can be axonal or demyelinating and can be acute, subacute,
or chronic (Amato, 2018b). These are often associated with systemic
diseases such as diabetes, with drug or environmental toxin exposure, or
with genetic disease. Late-stage syphilis is a rare cause (Ghanem, 2020).

■ Guillain–Barré Syndrome
In 75 percent of cases, this acute demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy has
clinical or serological evidence of an acute infection. Common associated
infections are Campylobacter jejuni, cytomegalovirus, Zika virus, and

Epstein-Barr virus; surgical procedures; and immunizations (Leonhard,
2019). Guillain–Barré syndrome is thought to be immune-mediated from
antibodies formed against nonself antigens. Demyelination causes sensory
and motor conduction blockade, and remyelination yields recovery in most
cases.
Clinical features include an areflexic, ascending paralysis, with or
without sensory disturbances. Autonomic dysfunction is common. The full
syndrome develops over 1 to 3 weeks. Some manifest as chronic
inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy, and our experiences indicate
that this may be relatively common in these young women.
Guillain-Barré syndrome is not more common in pregnancy, and its
clinical course mirrors that for nonpregnant individuals. After an insidious
onset, paresis and paralysis most often continue to ascend to cause
ventilatory weakness.
Management is supportive and incorporates venous thromboembolism
prophylaxis, pressure ulcer prevention, and enteral nutrition. In the
worsening phase, patients are hospitalized, and a fourth require ventilatory
assistance. IVIG or plasmapheresis are beneficial if begun within 1 to 2
weeks of motor symptoms, but neither decreases mortality rates (Leonhard,
2019). Up to 10 percent of patients deteriorate after initial improvement on
therapy, and re-treatment with 2 g/kg IVIG over 5 days is recommended.
Although most patients recover fully within several months to a year, the
mortality rate is 5 percent, mainly due to pulmonary complications and
arrhythmias (Pacheco, 2016).

■ Bell Palsy
This disfiguring palsy is usually a mononeuropathic acute facial paralysis
that is relatively common in reproductive-aged women (Fig. 63-5). It has a
female predominance, and rates in pregnancy may be increased (Beal, 2018;
Choi, 2020). The disease is characterized by facial nerve inflammation and
often is associated with reactivation of herpes simplex virus or herpes zoster
virus. Other causes are Lyme disease and borreliosis.

FIGURE 63-5 Bell facial nerve palsy developing on the day of cesarean delivery for dichorionic twins.
This woman was treated with prednisone and antiviral medication, and 3 weeks postpartum, the palsy
had almost resolved.

Bell palsy usually has an abrupt and painful onset with maximum
weakness by 48 hours. In some cases, hyperacusis and loss of taste
accompany paralysis (Beal, 2018). Management includes supportive care
with facial muscle massage and eye protection against corneal injury from
drying. Consensus supports that prednisone, 1 mg/kg given orally daily for 5
days, will improve outcomes and shorten the recovery period (Beal, 2018;
Madhok, 2016). It is controversial whether added valacyclovir or acyclovir
will hasten recovery (Beal, 2018; Gagyor, 2019).
It is unclear if pregnancy alters the prognosis for spontaneous facial palsy
recovery. In one study, compared with 90 percent of nonpregnant women and
men, only half of pregnant women recovered to a satisfactory level after 1
year (Gillman, 2002). In another report, pregnancy-associated Bell palsy had
worse long-term outcomes compared with those of nonpregnant cohort
(Phillips, 2017). Some prognostic markers for incomplete recovery are
bilateral palsy, recurrence in a subsequent pregnancy, greater percentage of
nerve function loss, and a faster rate of loss (Cohen, 2000; Gilden, 2004).

Other than a fivefold greater rate for gestational hypertension or
preeclampsia, women with Bell palsy do not have increased adverse
pregnancy outcomes rates (Katz, 2011).

■ Carpal Tunnel Syndrome
This syndrome results from compression of the median nerve and is the most
frequent mononeuropathy in pregnancy (Oliveira, 2019). Symptoms include
burning, numbness, or tingling along the inner half of one or both hands.
Others are wrist pain and numbness extending into the forearm and
sometimes into the shoulder. Symptoms are bilateral in 80 percent of
gravidas, and 10 percent have evidence for severe denervation. Differential
diagnosis includes cervical radiculopathy of C6–C7 and de Quervain
tendonitis. The latter is caused by swelling of the conjoined tendons and their
sheaths near the distal radius. Nerve conduction studies may help to clarify.
In pregnancy, the reported incidence of carpal tunnel syndrome is 7 to 43
percent and varies greatly because the range of symptoms is marked (Meems,
2015; Oliveira, 2019). Symptomatic treatment with a splint applied to a
slightly flexed wrist during sleep lightens pressure and usually provides
relief. Although symptoms typically are self-limited, occasionally surgical
decompression and corticosteroid injections are necessary (Keith, 2009; Shi,
2011). Symptoms may persist in more than half of patients at 1 year and in a
third at 3 years (Padua, 2010).
Meralgia paresthetica is another common pregnancy-induced
compression neuropathy (Gooding, 2020). Compression of the lateral
femoral cutaneous nerve creates pain, burning, and numbness on the outside
of the thigh. For treatment, the site at which the nerve crosses the crease in
the groin can be injected with corticosteroids. Oral gabapentin is another
treatment.

SPINAL CORD INJURY
According to the National Spinal Cord Injury Statistical Center (2021),
approximately 18,000 new spinal cord injuries are sustained each year. The
average age is 42 years, and males account for 80 percent of new cases.
Cord injury severity determines the short- and long-term prognosis and

pregnancy prognosis. For women, many have altered sexual function and
transient hypothalamic pituitary hypogonadism. Despite this, pregnancy is not
uncommon, and in a review of nearly 2000 women, 2 percent reported
pregnancy in the prior 12 months (Lezzoni, 2015).
Two serious and life-threatening events can complicate spinal cord
injuries. First, if the cord is transected above T10, the cough reflex is
impaired, respiratory function may be compromised, and pneumonitis from
covert aspiration can be serious. Pulmonary function tests are considered to
assess this risk, and some women may need ventilatory support in late
pregnancy or labor.
Second, women with lesions above T5–T6 are at risk for autonomic
dysreflexia. With this, stimuli from structures innervated below the level of
the spinal lesion lead to massive, disordered sympathetic stimulation. Abrupt
catecholamine release can prompt vasoconstriction with severe hypertension
and symptoms that include throbbing headaches, facial flushing, sweating,
bradycardia, tachycardia, arrhythmias, and respiratory distress. Dysreflexia
can be precipitated by various stimuli. These include distention or
manipulation of reproductive tract or lower urinary tract organs or bowel
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020; Krassioukov,
2009). In one report, 12 of 15 women at risk for autonomic dysreflexia
suffered at least one episode during pregnancy (Westgren, 1993).
Gravidas with spinal cord injury have an increased frequency of other
complications. In a review of 37 affected pregnant women, 30 percent had
pyelonephritis, 32 percent had lower urinary tract infections, and 9 percent
had pressure sores (Le Liepvre, 2017). Two women developed autonomic
dysreflexia, which caused cerebral hemorrhage in one. Urinary infections
may be related to altered vaginal microbiota (Pires, 2016). Bowel
dysfunction causes constipation in more than half, and anemia and pressurenecrosis skin lesions are common.
Vaginal delivery is generally successful (Robertson, 2020). Operative
vaginal delivery is frequently necessary. Because uterine contractions are not
affected by spinal cord lesions, labor is usually easy, comparatively
painless, and at times precipitous. If the lesion is below T12, uterine
contractions are felt normally. For lesions above T12, the risk of out-ofhospital delivery is substantial and can be minimized by teaching women to
palpate for uterine contractions. This is especially important because up to

20 percent of women deliver preterm (Westgren, 1993). Some recommend
tocodynamometry and weekly cervical examinations beginning at 28 to 30
weeks’ gestation. Another reasonable option that we frequently employ at
Parkland Hospital is elective hospitalization after 36 to 37 weeks. Spinal or
epidural analgesia extending to T10 prevents autonomic dysreflexia and
should be instituted at the start of labor (Kuczkowski, 2006). If severe
symptoms are identified before epidural placement, steps are taken to abolish
the provoking stimulus. A parenteral antihypertensive agent such as
hydralazine or labetalol is given.

IDIOPATHIC INTRACRANIAL HYPERTENSION
Also known as pseudotumor cerebri, this disorder is typified by increased
intracranial pressure without hydrocephalus. The cause is unknown, but it
may result from overproduction or underabsorption of cerebrospinal fluid
(CSF), or both. Symptoms include headache in at least 90 percent of cases,
visual disturbances such as loss of a visual field or central visual acuity in
70 percent, and commonly occurring papilledema that may be sightthreatening (Heaney, 2010; Kesler, 2013). Other complaints are stiff neck,
back pain, pulsatile tinnitus, and cranial nerve palsies (Dinkin, 2019).
The syndrome is often found in young women and is prevalent in those
who are obese, who recently gained weight, or both (Fraser, 2011). Along
with symptoms, other criteria for diagnosis include elevated intracranial
pressure >25 cm H2O, normal CSF composition, normal cranial CT or MR
imaging findings, papilledema, and no evidence for systemic disease. If
papilledema is not present, other criteria are required (Friedman, 2013).
Idiopathic intracranial hypertension is usually self-limited, but long-term
vision loss is common (Hatem, 2018). Visual defects can be prevented by
lowering the CSF pressure, and agents include acetazolamide to reduce fluid
production, furosemide, or topiramate.
Corticosteroids are now rarely used. Surgical intervention is
occasionally necessary and is accomplished by either lumboperitoneal
shunting of spinal fluid or optic nerve sheath fenestration. Another treatment
is stenting of dural venous sinus stenosis (Dinkin, 2019). It is controversial if
pregnancy is a risk factor for idiopathic intracranial hypertension. Certainly,
symptoms may first appear in pregnancy, and women previously diagnosed

may become symptomatic. Symptoms usually develop by midpregnancy, tend
to be self-limited, and usually resolve postpartum.
Pregnancy does not alter management. Some recommend serial visualfield testing to forestall permanent vision loss. In a report of 16 pregnant
women, visual-field loss developed in four, and it became permanent in one
(Huna-Baron, 2002). Visual-field loss is often coincident with the
development of papilledema, for which acetazolamide is given. Lee and
associates (2005) reported successful treatment of 12 pregnant women.
Although outmoded for treatment of nonpregnant individuals, repeated
lumbar punctures are generally successful in providing temporary relief
throughout pregnancy. In some pregnant women, surgical therapy becomes
necessary, including optic nerve sheath fenestration (Thambisetty, 2007).
Pregnancy complications are likely due to associated obesity and not to
intracranial hypertension. Rates of adverse maternal and perinatal outcomes
are not increased (Kesler, 2013). The route of delivery depends on
obstetrical indications, and conduction analgesia is safe (Aly, 2007;
Karmaniolou, 2011).

MATERNAL VENTRICULAR SHUNTS
Pregnancies in women with previously placed ventricular shunts for
obstructive hydrocephalus usually have satisfactory outcomes. Shunts may be
ventriculoperitoneal, ventriculoatrial, or ventriculopleural. Partial
obstruction of a shunt is common, especially late in pregnancy (Schiza,
2012). In one report of 17 such pregnancies, neurological complications
were reported in 13 (Wisoff, 1991). Findings included headaches in 60
percent, nausea and vomiting in 35 percent, lethargy in 30 percent, and ataxia
or gaze paresis, each in 20 percent. Most symptoms respond to conservative
management. However, if CT scanning during symptom evaluation discloses
acute hydrocephaly, the shunt is tapped or pumped several times daily. In
some cases, surgical revision is necessary and may be emergently indicated
(Murakami, 2010). Another shunting procedure is placement of an
endoscopic third ventriculostomy for hydrocephalus. With this, a small hole
is created in the floor of the third ventricle to allow CSF to flow directly into
lower cisterns. One report described successful results in five gravidas who
underwent endoscopic ventriculostomy (Riffaud, 2006).

Vaginal delivery is preferred in women with shunts, and unless there is a
meningomyelocele, conduction analgesia is permitted. Antimicrobial
prophylaxis is indicated if the peritoneal cavity is entered for cesarean
delivery or puerperal sterilization.

MATERNAL BRAIN DEATH
Brain death is rare in obstetrics, and only a few institutional brain-death
policies address pregnancy (Lewis, 2016). Life-support systems and
parenteral alimentation for up to 20 weeks while awaiting delivery have
been described (Hussein, 2006; Powner, 2003; Reinhold, 2019). Some
women were treated with aggressive tocolysis and antimicrobial therapy. In
one review of 17 women with persistent vegetative state who were given
various levels of support, five women died after delivery, and most of the
others remained in their vegetative state (Chiossi, 2006). The ethical,
financial, and legal implications, both civil and criminal, that arise from
providing or withdrawing such care are profound (Feldman, 2000). In some
women, perimortem cesarean delivery is performed.

REFERENCES
Adab N: Therapeutic monitoring of antiepileptic drugs during pregnancy and in the postpartum period: is
it useful? CNS Drugs 20:791, 2006
Aguiar de Sousa D, Canhao P, Ferro JM: Safety of pregnancy after cerebral venous thrombosis: a
systematic review. Stroke 47(3):713, 2016
Almeida C, Coutinho E, Moreira D, et al: Myasthenia gravis and pregnancy: anaesthetic management—
a series of cases. Eur J Anaesthesiol 27:985, 2010
Alroughani R, Altintas A, Al Jumah M, et al: Pregnancy and the use of disease-modifying therapies in
patients with multiple sclerosis: benefits versus risks. Mult Scler Int 2016: 1034912, 2016
Aly EE, Lawther BK: Anaesthetic management of uncontrolled idiopathic intracranial hypertension
during labour and delivery using an intrathecal catheter. Anaesthesia 62:178, 2007
Amarenco P, Lavallee PC, Labreuche J, et al: One-year risk of stroke after transient ischemic attack or
minor stroke. N Engl J Med 374(16):1533, 2016
Amato AA: Myasthenia gravis and other diseases of the neuromuscular junction. In Jameson JL, Fauci
AS, Kasper DL, et al (eds): Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York,
McGraw-Hill Education, 2018a, p 3232
Amato AA, Barohn RS: Peripheral neuropathy. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al (eds):
Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2018b, p
3204

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Obstetric management of patients with spinal
cord injuries. Committee Opinion No. 808, April 2020
Argyriou AA, Makris N: Multiple sclerosis and reproductive risks in women. Reprod Sci 15(8):755, 2008
Ashina M: Migraine. N Engl J Med 383(19):1866, 2020
Aukes AM, de Groot JC, Aarnoudse JG, et al: Brain lesions several years after eclampsia. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 200(5):504.e1, 2009
Aukes AM, Wessel I, Dubois AM, et al: Self-reported cognitive functioning in formerly eclamptic
women. Am J Obstet Gynecol 197:365.e1, 2007
Aukes AM, Yurtsever FN, Boutin A, et al: Associations between migraine and adverse pregnancy
outcomes: systematic review and meta-analysis. Obstet Gynecol Surv 74 (12):738, 2019
Barbarite E, Hussain S, Dellarole A, et al: The management of intracranial aneurysms during pregnancy:
a systematic review. Turk Neurosurg 26(4):465, 2016
Beal MF, Hauser SL: Trigeminal neuralgia, Bells palsy, and other cranial nerve disorders. In Jameson
JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al (eds): Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New
York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2018, p 3169
Birnbaum AK, Meador KJ, Karanam A, et al: Antiepileptic drug exposure in infants of breastfeeding
mothers with epilepsy. JAMA Neurol 77(4):441, 2020
Blackwell DL, Lucas JI, Clarke TC: Summary health statistics for U.S. adults: National Health
Interview Survey, 2012. Vital Health Stat (260):1, 2014
BlichfeIdt-Lauridsen L, Hansen BD: Anesthesia and myasthenia gravis. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand
56(1):17, 2012
Boitet R, de Gaalon S, Duflos C, et al: Long-term outcomes after reversible cerebral vasoconstriction
syndrome. Stroke 51(2):670, 2020
Bove R, Alwan S, Friedman JM, et al: Management of multiple sclerosis during pregnancy and the
reproductive years: a systematic review. Obstet Gynecol 124(6):1157, 2014
Briggs GG, Towers CV, Forinash CV: Drugs in Pregnancy and Lactation, 12th ed. Philadelphia, WoltersKluwer, 2022
Bromley RL, Weston J, Marson AG: Maternal use of antiepileptic agents during pregnancy and major
congenital malformations in children. JAMA 318(17):1700, 2017
Buonanno FS, Schmahmann JD, Romero JM, et al: Case 10–2016: a 22-year-old man with sickle cell
disease, headache, and difficulty speaking. N Engl J Med 374(13):1265, 2016
Burch R: Epidemiology and treatment of menstrual migraine and migraine during pregnancy and
lactation: a narrative review. Headache 60(1):200, 2020
Burch RC, Loder S, Loder E, et al: The prevalence and burden of migraine and severe headache in the
United States: updated statistics from government health surveillance studies. Headache 55(1):21,
2015
Bushnell CD, Jamison M, James AH: Migraines during pregnancy linked to stroke and vascular
diseases: US population based case-control study. BMJ 338:b664, 2009
Callaghan WM, MacKay AP, Berg CJ: Identification of severe maternal morbidity during delivery
hospitalizations, United States, 1991–2003. Am J Obstet Gynecol 199:133.e1, 2008
Cartlidge NE: Neurologic disorders. In Barron WM, Lindheimer MD (eds): Medical Disorders During
Pregnancy, 3rd ed. St. Louis, Mosby, 2000
Chansakul T, Young GS: Neuroimaging in pregnant women. Semin Neurol 37(6):712, 2017
Charles A: Migraine. N Engl J Med 377(6): 553, 2017
Chiossi G, Novic K, Celebrezze JU, et al: Successful neonatal outcome in 2 cases of maternal persistent
vegetative state treated in a labor and delivery suite. Am J Obstet Gynecol 195: 316, 2006

Choi H, Parman N: The use of intravenous magnesium sulphate for acute migraine: meta-analysis of
randomized controlled trials. Eur J Emerg Med 21:2, 2014
Choi HG, Hong SK, Park SK, et al: Pregnancy does not increase the risk of Bell’s Palsy: a national
cohort study. Otol Neurotol 41(1):e111, 2020
Christensen J, Pedersen L, Sun Y, et al: Association of prenatal exposure to valproate and other
antiepileptic drugs with risk for attend-deficit/hyperactivity disorder in offspring. JAMA Netw Open
2(1):e186606, 2019
Cohen Y, Lavie O, Granoxsky-Grisaru S, et al: Bell palsy complicating pregnancy: a review. Obstet
Gynecol Surv 55: 184, 2000
Contag SA, Bushnell C: Contemporary management of migraine disorders in pregnancy. Curr Opin
Obstet Gynecol 22:437, 2010
Creanga AA, Syverson C, Seed K, et al: Pregnancy-related mortality in the United States, 2011–2013.
Obstet Gynecol 130(2):366, 2017
Cree BA, Howser SL: Multiple sclerosis. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al (eds): Harrison’s
Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2018, p 3128
Cunningham FG: Severe preeclampsia and eclampsia: systolic hypertension is also important. Obstet
Gynecol 105:237, 2005
Dahl J, Myhr KM, Daltveit AK, et al: Planned vaginal births in women with multiple sclerosis: delivery
and birth outcome. Acta Neurol Scand Suppl 183:51, 2006
Dahl J, Myhr KM, Daltveit AK, et al: Pregnancy, delivery, and birth outcome in women with multiple
sclerosis. Neurology 65:1961, 2005
Dark L, Loiselle A, Hatton R, et al: Stroke during pregnancy: therapeutic options and role of
percutaneous device closure. Heart Lung Circ 20:538, 2011
Dinkin M, Oliveira C: Men are from Mars, idiopathic intracranial hypertension is from venous: the role
of venous sinus stenos is and stenting in idiopathic intracranial hypertension. Semin Neurol 39(6):
692, 2019
Djelmis J, Sostarko M, Mayer D, et al: Myasthenia gravis in pregnancy: report on 69 cases. Eur J
Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 104:21, 2002
Edlow JA, Caplan LR, O’Brien K, et al: Diagnosis of acute neurological emergencies in pregnant and
post-partum women. Lancet Neurol 12:175, 2013
Elgendy IY, Bukhari S, Barakat AF, et al: Maternal stroke: a call for action. Circulation 143(7):727, 2021
Fang X, Patel C, Gudesblatt M: Multiple sclerosis: clinical updates in women’s health care primary and
preventive care review. Obstet Gynecol 135(3):757, 2020
Feldman DM, Borgida AF, Rodis JF, et al: Irreversible maternal brain injury during pregnancy: a case
report and review of the literature. Obstet Gynecol Surv 55:708, 2000
Finkelsztejn A, Brooks JB, Paschoal FM Jr, et al: What can we really tell women with multiple sclerosis
regarding pregnancy? A systematic review and meta-analysis of the literature. BJOG 118:790, 2011
Fisher RS, Cross JH, French JA, et al: Operational classification of seizure types by the International
League against Epilepsy: position paper of the ILAE commission for classification and terminology.
Epilepsia 58(4): 522, 2017
Fong A, Chau CT, Quant C, et al: Multiple sclerosis in pregnancy: prevalence, sociodemographic
features and obstetrical outcomes. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 31(3):382, 2018
Food and Drug Administration: FDA drug safety communication: risk of oral clefts in children born to
mothers taking Topamax (topiramate), 2011. Available at:
http://www.fda.gov/drugs/drugsafety/ucm245085.htm. Accessed October 2, 2020

Fraser C, Plant GT: The syndrome of pseudotumor cerebri and idiopathic intracranial hypertension. Curr
Opin Neurol 24:12, 2011
Friedlander RM: Arteriovenous malformations of the brain. N Engl J Med 356(26):2704, 2007
Friedman DI, Lie GT, Digre KB: Revised diagnostic criteria for the pseudotumor cerebri syndrome in
adults and children. Neurology 81(13):1159, 2013
Furie KL, Kasner SE, Adams RJ, et al: Guidelines for the prevention of stroke in patients with stroke or
transient ischemic attack: a guideline for healthcare professionals from the American Heart
Association/American Stroke Association. Stroke 42:227, 2011
Gagyor I, Madhok VB, Daly F, et al: Antiviral treatment for Bell’s palsy (idiopathic facial paralysis).
Cochrane Database System Rev 9:CD001869, 2019
Ghanem KG, Ram S, Rice PA: The modern epidemic of syphilis. N Engl J Med 382(9):845, 2020
Gilden DH: Bell’s palsy. N Engl J Med 351:1323, 2004
Gillman GS, Schaitkin BM, May M, et al: Bell’s palsy in pregnancy: a study of recovery outcomes.
Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 126:26, 2002
Goadsby PJ: Migraine and other headache disorders. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al (eds):
Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. McGraw Hill Education, New York, 2018, p
3096
Gonzalez-Hernandez A, Condes-Lara M: The multi target drug approach in migraine treatment: the new
challenge to conquer. Headache 64:197, 2014
Gooding MS, Evangelista V, Pereira L: Carpal tunnel syndrome and meralgia paresthetica in pregnancy.
Obstet Gynecol Surv 75(2):121, 2020
Govindappagari S, Grossman T B, Ashlesha K, et al: Peripheral nerve blocks in the treatment of
migraine in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 124(6):1169, 2014
Grossman TB, Robbins MS, Govindappagari S, et al: Delivery outcomes of patients with acute migraine
in pregnancy: a retrospective study. Headache 57(4):605, 2017
Hamaoui A, Mercado R: Association of preeclampsia and myasthenia: a case report. J Reprod Med
54(9):587, 2009
Harden CL, Hopp J, Ting TY, et al: Practice parameter update: management issues for women with
epilepsy—focus on pregnancy (an evidence-based review): obstetrical complications and change in
seizure frequency. Neurology 73(2):126, 2009a
Harden CL, Meador KJ, Pennell PB, et al: Practice parameter update: management issues for women
with epilepsy-focus on pregnancy (an evidence-based review): teratogenesis and perinatal
outcomes. Neurology 73(2):133, 2009b
Harden CL, Pennell PB, Koppel BS, et al: Practice parameter update: management issues for women
with epilepsy-focus on pregnancy (an evidence-based review): vitamin K, folic acid, blood levels,
and breastfeeding. Neurology 73(2): 142, 2009c
Hatem CF, Yri HM, Sorensen AL, et al: Long-term visual outcome in a Danish population of patients
with idiopathic intracranial hypertension. Acta Ophthalmol 96(7):719, 2018
Heaney DC, Williams DJ, O’Brien PO: Neurology. In Powrie R, Greene M, Camann W (eds): de
Swiet’s Medical Disorders in Obstetric Practice, 5th ed. Wiley-Blackwell, Oxford, 2010
Hellwig K, Rockhoff M, Herbstritt S, et al: Exclusive breastfeeding and the effect on postpartum
multiple sclerosis relapses. JAMA Neurol 72(10):1132, 2015
Hemphill JC 3rd, Greenberg SM, Anderson CS, et al: Guidelines for the management of spontaneous
intracerebral hemorrhage: a guideline for healthcare professionals from the American Heart
Association/American Stroke Association. Stroke 46(7):2032, 2015

Herbstritt S, Langer-Gould A, Rockoff M, et al: Glatiramer acetate during early pregnancy: a
prospective cohort study. Mult Scler 22(6):810, 2016
Hirsch KG, Froehler MT, Huang J, et al: Occurrence of perimesencephalic subarachnoid hemorrhage
during pregnancy. Neurocrit Care 10(3):339, 2009
Huang CJ, Fan YC, Tsai PS: Differential impacts of modes of anaesthesia on the risk of stroke among
preeclamptic women who undergo caesarean delivery: a population-based study. Br J Anaesth
105(6):818, 2010
Huna-Baron R, Kupersmith MJ: Idiopathic intracranial hypertension in pregnancy. J Neurol 249(8):1078,
2002
Hussein I Y, Govenden V, Grant JM, et al: Prolongation of pregnancy in a woman who sustained brain
death at 26 weeks of gestation. BJOG 113:120, 2006
Iezzoni LI, Chen Y, McLain AB: Current pregnancy among women with spinal cord injury: findings
from the US national spinal cord injury database. Spinal Cord 53(11):821, 2015
International Headache Society: Headache classification committee of the International Headache
Society (IHS) the international classification of headache disorders, 3rd edition. Cephalgia 38(1):1,
2018
James AH, Bushnell CD, Jamison MG, et al: Incidence and risk factors for stroke in pregnancy and the
puerperium. Obstet Gynecol 106:509, 2005
Jamieson DG, McVige JW: Imaging of neurologic disorders in pregnancy. Neurol Clin 38(1):37, 2020
Jamieson DG, Skliut M: Stroke in women: what is different? Curr Atheroscler Rep 12:236, 2010
Jovandaric MZ, Despotovic DJ, Jesic MM, Neonatal outcome in pregnancies with auto-immune
myasthenia gravis. Fetal Pediatr Pathol 35(3):167, 2016
Judy AE, McCain CL, Lawton ES, et al: Systolic hypertension, preeclampsia-related mortality, and
stroke in California. Obstet Gynecol 133(6):1151, 2019
Jung SY, Bae HJ, Park BJ, et al: Parity and risk of hemorrhagic strokes. Neurology 74:1424, 2010
Kapur J, Elm J, Chamberlain JM, et al: Randomized trial of three anticonvulsant medications for status
epilepticus. N Engl J Med 381(22): 2103, 2019
Karmaniolou I, Petropoulos G, Theodoraki K: Management of idiopathic intracranial hypertension in
parturients: anesthetic considerations. Can J Anesth 58:650, 2011
Kasradze S, Gogatishvili N, Lomidze G, et al: Cognitive functions in children exposed to antiepileptic
drugs in uterostudy in Georgia. Epilepsy Behav 66:105, 2017
Katz A, Sergienko R, Dior U, et al: Bell’s palsy during pregnancy: is it associated with adverse perinatal
outcome? Laryngoscope 121:1395, 2011
Keith MW, Masear V, Amadio PC, et al: Treatment of carpal tunnel syndrome. J Am Acad Orthop Surg
17:397, 2009
Kesler A, Kupfermic M: Idiopathic intracranial hypertension and pregnancy. Clin Obstet Gynecol
56(2):389, 2013
Klein P, Mathews GC: Antiepileptic drugs and neurocognitive development. Neurology 82(3):194, 2014
Knight M, Tuffnell D, Kenyon S, et al (eds): Saving lives, improving mothers; care surveillance of
maternal deaths in the UK 2011–13 and lessons learned to inform maternity care from the UK and
Ireland Confidential Enquiries into Maternal Deaths and Morbidity 2009–13. Oxford, National
Perinatal Epidemiology Unit, 2015
Krassioukov A, Warburton DE, Teasel IR, et al: A systematic review of the management of autonomic
dysreflexia after spinal cord injury. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 90:682, 2009
Kuczkowski KM: Labor analgesia for the parturient with spinal cord injury: what does an obstetrician
need to know? Arch Gynecol Obstet 274:108, 2006

Kuklina EV, Tong X, Bansil P, et al: Trends in pregnancy hospitalizations that included a stroke in the
United States from 1994 to 2007. Stroke 42:2564, 2011
Kusznir Vitturi B, Barreto Cabral F, Mella Cukiert C: Outcomes of pregnant women with refractory
epilepsy. Seizure 69:251, 2019
Lamy C, Hamon JB, Coste J, et al: Ischemic stroke in young women. Neurology 55:269, 2000
Lawton MT, Vates GE: Subarachnoid hemorrhage. N Engl J Med 377(3):257, 2017
Leavell Y, Khalid M, Tuhrim S, et al: Baseline characteristics and readmissions after cerebral venous
sinus thrombosis in a nationally representative database. Cerebrovasc Dis 46 (5-6):249, 2018
Lee AG, Pless M, Falardeau J, et al: The use of acetazolamide in idiopathic intracranial hypertension
during pregnancy. Am J Ophthalmol 139:855, 2005
Lee I, Walker JB, Nozak K, et al: Weak and winded. N Engl J Med 381(1):76, 2019
Leffert LR, Clancy CR, Bateman BT, et al: Treatment patterns and short-term outcomes in ischemic
stroke in pregnancy or postpartum period. Am J Obstet Gynecol 214(6):723.e1, 2016
Le Liepvre H, Dinh A, Idiard-Chamois B, et al: Pregnancy in spinal cord-injured women, a cohort study
of 37 pregnancies in 25 women. Spinal Cord 55(2):167, 2017
Leonhard SE, Mandarakas MR, Gondim FA, et al: Diagnosis and management of Guillain-Barré
syndrome in ten steps. Nat Rev Neurol 15(11):671, 2019
Levine SR, Brey RL, Tilley BC, et al: Antiphospholipid antibodies and subsequent thrombo-occlusive
events in patients with ischemic stroke. JAMA 291:576, 2004
Lewis A, Varelas P, Greer D: Pregnancy and brain death: lack of guidance in U.S. hospital policies. Am
J Perinatol 33(14): 1382, 2016
Li Y, Margraf J, Kluck B, et al: Thrombolytic therapy for ischemic stroke secondary to paradoxical
embolism in pregnancy. Neurologist 18:44, 2012
Limaye K, Patel A, Dave M, et al: Secular increases in spontaneous subarachnoid hemorrhage during
pregnancy: a nationwide sample analysis. J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis 28 (4):1141, 2019
Lin SY, Hu CJ, Lin HC: Increased risk of stroke in patients who undergo cesarean section delivery: a
nationwide population-based study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 198:391.e1, 2008
Lowenstein DH: Seizures and epilepsy. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al (eds): Harrison’s
Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. McGraw Hill Education, New York, 2018, p 3050
Lu X, Liu P, Li Y: Pre-existing, incidental and hemorrhagic AVMs in pregnancy and postpartum:
gestational age, morbidity and mortality, management and risk to the fetus. Interv Neuroradiol
22(2):206, 2016
Lucas S: Medication use in the treatment of migraine during pregnancy and lactation. Curr Pain
Headache Rep 13:392, 2009
Lucas S: Migraine and other headache disorders: ACOG clinical updates in women’s health care
primary and preventive care review summary volume XVIII, number 4, Obstet Gynecol 134(1):211,
2019
Lum M, Tsiouris AJ: MRI safety considerations during pregnancy. Clin Imaging 62:69, 2020
MacDonald SC, Bateman BT, McElrath TF: Mortality and morbidity during delivery hospitalization
among pregnant women with epilepsy in the United States. JAMA Neurol 72(9):981, 2015
MacDonald SC, McElrath TF, Hernandez-Diaz S: Pregnancy outcomes in women with multiple
sclerosis. Am J Epidemiol 188(1):57, 2019
Madhok VB, Gagyor I, Daly F, et al: Corticosteroids for Bell’s palsy (idiopathic facial paralysis).
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 7:CD001942, 2016
Mao-Draayer Y, Thiel S, Mills EA, et al: Neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorders and pregnancy:
therapeutic considerations. Nat Rev Neurol 16(3):154, 2020

Martin JN Jr, Thigpen BD, Moore RC, et al: Stroke and severe preeclampsia and eclampsia: a paradigm
shift focusing on systolic blood pressure. Obstet Gynecol 105:246, 2005
Martinelli I, Passamonti SM, Maino A, et al: Pregnancy outcome after a first episode of cerebral vein
thrombosis. J Thromb Haemost 14(12):2386, 2016
Martinez-Sånchez P, Fuentes B, Fernåndez-Dominguez J, et al: Young women have poorer outcomes
than men after stroke. Cerebrovasc Dis 31:455, 2011
McCau11ey JA, Pates JA: Postpartum cerebral venous thrombosis. Obstet Gynecol 118:423, 2011
Meems M, Truijens S, Spek V, et al: Prevalence, course and determinants of carpal tunnel syndrome
symptoms during pregnancy: a prospective study. BJOG 122(8):1112, 2015
Miller EC, Gatollari HJ, Too G, et al: Risk of pregnancy associated stroke across age groups in New
York state. JAMA Neurol 73(12):1461, 2016
Miller EC, Leffert L: Stroke in pregnancy: a focused update. Anesth Analg 130(4):1085, 2020
Miller EC, Wen T, Elkind MSV, et al: Infection during delivery hospitalization and risk of readmission for
postpartum stroke. Stroke 50(10):2685, 2019
Miyakoshi K, Matsuoka M, Yasutomi D, et al: Moyamoya-disease-related ischemic stroke in the
postpartum period. J Obstet Gynaecol Res 35(5):974, 2009
Murakami M, Morine M, Iwasa T, et al: Management of maternal hydrocephalus requires replacement
of ventriculoperitoneal shunt with ventriculoatrial shunt: a case report. Arch Gynecol Obstet 282:339,
2010
National Spinal Cord Injury Statistical Center: Spinal cord injury: facts and figures at a glance. 2021.
Available at: https://www.nscisc.uab.edu/. Accessed October 15, 2021
Oh MK, Ryu JH, Jeon WJ, et al: Case report: postpartum cerebral venous thrombosis misdiagnosed as
postdural puncture headache. BMC Anesthesiol 20(1):80, 2020
Oliveira GA, Bernardes JM, Santos ES, et al: Carpal tunnel syndrome during the third trimester of
pregnancy: prevalence and risk factors. Arch Gynecol Obstet 300(3):623, 2019
Pacheco LD, Hankins GD, Saad AF, et al: Acute management of ischemic stroke during pregnancy.
Obstet Gynecol 113(5):933, 2019
Pacheco LD, Saad AF, Hankins GD, et al: Guillain-Barré syndrome in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol
128(5):1105, 2016
Padua L, Di Pasquale A, Pazzaglia C, et al: Systematic review of pregnancy-related carpal tunnel
syndrome. Muscle Nerve 42:697, 2010
Pavlovic JM, Akcali D, Bolay H, et al: Sex-related influences in migraine. J Neurosci Res 95(1-2):587,
2017
Pennell PB, French JA, May BC, et al: Changes in seizure frequency and antiepileptic therapy during
pregnancy. N Engl J Med 383(26):2547, 2020
Perucca E: Birth defects after prenatal exposure to antiepileptic drugs. Lancet Neurol 4:781, 2005
Petersen EE, Davis NL, Goodman D, et al: Racial/ethnic disparities in pregnancy-related deaths United
States, 2007–2016. MMWR 68(35):762, 2019
Phillips KM, Heiser A, Gaudin R, et al: Onset of Bell’s palsy in late pregnancy and early puerperium is
associated with worse long-term outcomes. Laryngoscope 127(12):2854, 2017
Pires CV, Linhares IM, Serzedello F, et al: Alterations in the genital microbiota in women with spinal
cord injury. Obstet Gynecol 127(2):273, 2016
Podciechowski L, Brocka-Nitecka U, Dabrowska K, et al: Pregnancy complicated by myasthenia
gravis-twelve years’ experience. Neuro Endocrinol Lett 26:603, 2005
Portaccio E, Annovazzi P, Ghezzi A, et al: Pregnancy decision making in women with multiple sclerosis
treated with natalizumab: I: fetal risks. Neurology 90(10):e823, 2018

Portaccio E, Ghezzi A, Hakiki B, et al: Breastfeeding is not related to postpartum relapses in multiple
sclerosis. Neurology 77:145, 2011
Powner DJ, Bernstein 1M: Extended somatic support in pregnant women after brain death. Crit Care
Med 31:1241, 2003
Reinhold AK, Kredel M, Markus CK, et al: Vaginal delivery in the 30+4 weeks of pregnancy and organ
donation after brain death in early pregnancy. BMJ Case Rep 12(9):e231601, 2019
Riffaud L, Ferre JC, Carsin-Nicol B, et al: Endoscopic third ventriculostomy for the treatment of
obstructive hydrocephalus during pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 108:801, 2006
Robbins MS, Farmakidis C, Dayal AK, et al: Acute headache diagnosis in pregnant women: a hospitalbased study. Neurology 85(12):1024, 2015
Robertson K, Dawood R, Ashworth F: Vaginal delivery is safely achieved in pregnancies complicated
by spinal cord injury: a retrospective 25-year observational study of pregnancy outcomes in a
national spinal injuries centre. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth 20(1):56, 2020
Rodriguez AN, Patel S, Macias D, et al: Timing of emergency postpartum hospital visits in the fourth
trimester. Am J Perinatol 38(4):319, 2021
Ryman KM, Pace WD, Smith S, et al: Alteplase therapy for acute ischemic stroke in pregnancy: two
case reports and a systematic review of the literature. Pharmacotherapy 39(7):767, 2019
Saiminen HJ, Leggett H, Boggild M: Glatiramer acetate exposure in pregnancy: preliminary safety and
birth outcomes. J Neurol 257(12):3, 2020
Saldanha IJ, Cao W, Bhuma MR,et al: Management of primary headaches during pregnancy,
postpartum, and breastfeeding: a systematic review. Headache 61(1):11, 2021
Salman L, Shmueli A, Ashwal E, et al: The impact of maternal epilepsy on perinatal outcome in
singleton gestations. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 31(24):3283, 2018
Sanders DB, Wolde GI, Benatar M, et al: International consensus guidance for management of
myasthenia gravis: executive summary. Neurology 87(4):419, 2016
Schiza S, Starnatakis E, Panagopoulou A, et al: Management of pregnancy and delivery of a patient with
malfunctioning ventriculoperitoneal shunt. J Obstet Gynaecol 32(1):6, 2012
Scott CA, Bewley S, Rudd A: Incidence, risk factors, management, and outcomes of stroke in
pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 120:318, 2012
Shi Q, MacDermid JC: Is surgical intervention more effective than non-surgical treatment for carpal
tunnel syndrome? A systemic review, J Orthop Surg 6:17, 2011
Silvis SM, Lindgren E, Hiltunen S, et al: Postpartum period is a risk factor for cerebral venous
thrombosis. Stroke 50(2): 501, 2019
Simolke GA, Cox SM, Cunningham FG: Cerebrovascular accident complicating pregnancy and the
puerperium. Obstet Gynecol 78:37, 1991
Smith WS, Johnston SC, Hemphill III JC: Cerebrovascular diseases. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper
DL, et al (eds): Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. McGraw-Hill Education, New
York, 2018, p 3068
Sperling JD, Dahlke JD, Huber WJ, et al: The role of headache in the classification and management of
hypertensive disorders in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 126(2):297, 2015
Spielmann K, Kayser A, Beck E, et al: Pregnancy outcome after anti-migraine triptan use: a prospective
observational cohort study. Cephalalgia 38(6):1081, 2018
Stephen LJ, Harden C, Tomson T, et al: Management of epilepsy in women. Lancet Neurol 18(5):481,
2019
Tepper SJ: Anti-calcitonin gene related peptide (CGRP) therapies: update on a previous review after the
American Headache Society 60th Scientific Meeting, San Francisco, June 2018. Headache 58(Suppl

3):276, 2018
Thambisetty M, Lavin PJ, Newman NJ, et al: Fulminant idiopathic intracranial hypertension. Neurology
68:229, 2007
Thomas SV, Ajaykumar B, Sindhu K, et al: Cardiac malformations are increased in infants of mothers
with epilepsy. Pediatr Cardiol 29:604, 2008
Tian N, Boring M, Kobau R, et al: Active epilepsy and seizure control in adults—United States, 2013
and 2015. MMWR 67(15):437, 2018
Tiel Groenestege AT, Rinkel CJ, van der Bom JG, et al: The risk of aneurysmal subarachnoid
hemorrhage during pregnancy, delivery, and the puerperium in the Utrecht population: casecrossover study and standardized incidence ratio estimation. Stroke 40(4):1148, 2009
Tietjen GE, Maly EF: Migraine and ischemic stroke in women: a narrative review. Headache 60(5):843,
2020
Tintore M, Vidal-Jordana A, Sastre-Garriga J, et al: Treatment of multiple sclerosis success from bench
to bedside. Nat Rev Neurol 15(1):53, 2019
Tomson T, Battino D, Bonizzoni E, et al: Comparative risk of major congenital malformations with eight
different antiepileptic drugs: a prospective cohort study of the EURAP registry. Lancet Neurol
17(6):530, 2018
Tomson T, Battino D, Bonizzoni E, et al: Declining malformation rates with changed antiepileptic drug
prescribing: an observational study. Neurology 93(9):e831, 2019a
Tomson T, Battino D, Bromley R, et al: Management of epilepsy in pregnancy: a report from the
International League against Epilepsy Task Force on women and pregnancy. Epileptic Disord
21(6):497, 2019b
Turner K, Piazzini A, Franza A, et al: Epilepsy and postpartum depression. Epilepsia 50(1):24, 2009
Van den Heuvel MI, Thomason ME: Functional connectivity of the human brain in utero. Trends Cogn
Sci 20(12):931, 2016
Van Teen TR, Panerai RB, Haeri S, et al: Changes in cerebral autoregulation in the second half of
pregnancy and compared to non-pregnant controls. Pregnancy Hypertens 6(4):380, 2016
VanderPluym J: Cluster headache: Special considerations for treatment of female patients of
reproductive age and pediatric patients. Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep 16(1):5, 2016
Viale L, Allotey J, Cheong-See F, et al: Epilepsy in pregnancy and reproductive outcomes: a systematic
review and metaanalysis. Lancet 386:1845, 2015
Virani SS, Alonso A, Aparicio HJ, et al: Heart disease and stroke statistics-2021 update: a report from
the American Heart Association 143(8):e254, 2021
Wabnitz A, Bushnell C: Migraine, cardiovascular disease, and stroke during pregnancy: systematic
review of the literature. Cephalalgia 35(2):132, 2015
Wang IK, Chang SN, Liao CC, et al: Hypertensive disorders in pregnancy and preterm delivery and
subsequent stroke in Asian women: a retrospective cohort study. Stroke 42:716, 2011
Waters J: Management of myasthenia gravis in pregnancy. Neurol Clin 37(1):113, 2019
Wen JC, Liu TC, Chen YH, et al: No increased risk of adverse pregnancy outcomes for women with
myasthenia gravis: a nationwide population-based study. Eur J Neurol 16:889, 2009
Westgren N, Hultling C, Levi R, et al: Pregnancy and delivery in women with a trauma spinal cord injury
in Sweden, 1980–1991. Obstet Gynecol 81:926, 1993
Weston J, Bromley R, Jackson CF, et al: Monotherapy treatment of epilepsy in pregnancy: congenital
malformation outcomes in the child. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 11:CD010224, 2016
Wisoff JH, Kratzert KJ, Handwerker SM, et al: Pregnancy in patients with cerebrospinal fluid shunts:
report of a series and review of the literature. Neurosurgery 29:827, 1991

Wolfe GI, Kaminski HJ, Aban IB, et al: Randomized trial of thymectomy in myasthenia gravis. N Engl J
Med 375(6):511, 2016
Wood ME, Frazier JA, Nordeng HM, et al: Longitudinal changes in neurodevelopmental outcomes
between 18 and 36 months in children with prenatal triptan exposure: findings from the Norwegian
Mother and Child Cohort Study. BMJ Open 6(9):e011971, 2016
Yager PH, Singhal AV, Nogueira RG: Case 31–2012: an 18-year old man with blurred vision, dysarthria,
and ataxia. N Engl J Med 367:1450, 2012
Yoshida K, Takahashi JC, Takenobu Y, et al: Strokes associated with pregnancy and puerperium. A
nationwide study by the Japan Stroke Society. Stroke 48:276, 2017
Zeeman GG, Fleckenstein JL, Twickler DM, et al: Cerebral infarction in eclampsia. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 190:714, 2004a
Zeeman GG, Hat ab M, Twickler DM: Increased cerebral blood flow in preeclampsia with magnetic
resonance imaging. Am J Obstet Gynecol 191:1425, 2004b
Zeeman GG, Hatab M, Twickler DM: Maternal cerebral blood flow changes in pregnancy. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 189:968, 2003
Zofkie A, Cunningham FG: A 33-year single-center experience with pregnancy-associated strokes.
Abstract No. 799, Am J Obstet Gynecol 218:S476, 2018

CHAPTER 64

Psychiatric Disorders

PSYCHOLOGICAL ADJUSTMENTS TO PREGNANCY
CLASSIFICATION OF PSYCHIATRIC DISORDERS
MAJOR DEPRESSION
BIPOLAR AND RELATED DISORDERS
ANXIETY DISORDERS
SCHIZOPHRENIA SPECTRUM DISORDERS
EATING DISORDERS
SUBSTANCE USE DISORDER
POSTTRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDERS
PERSONALITY DISORDERS
REFERENCES
Pregnancy and the puerperium are at times sufficiently stressful to provoke
mental illness. Such illness may represent recurrence or exacerbation of a
preexisting psychiatric disorder, or it may signal the onset of a new
condition. Especially prevalent in pregnancy and the puerperium are
depressive and anxiety disorders (Kendig, 2017). Many of these disorders
are associated with less prenatal care, substance use, preterm delivery, and
other poor obstetrical and neonatal outcomes. In affected gravidas, the

postpartum psychiatric illness rate also is higher (Baer, 2016). Last,
perinatal mood disorders can adversely hinder the mother-child relationship.
Despite these known risks, obstetrical providers often are reluctant to
confront or fail to identify mental health issues during pregnancy. Lyell and
colleagues (2012) found that the diagnosis of depression was not documented
in nearly half of the records of affected women.

PSYCHOLOGICAL ADJUSTMENTS TO PREGNANCY
Biochemical factors and life stressors can markedly influence mental health
and mental illness during the perinatal period (Meltzer-Brody, 2018b).
Intuitively, pregnancy exacerbates some coexisting psychological disorders.
Namely, a higher risk for mood disorders is linked with pregnancy-related
shifts in sex steroid and monoamine neurotransmitter levels, dysfunction of
the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis, thyroid dysfunction, and immune
response alterations (Yonkers, 2011). These changes, coupled with familial
clustering of depression cases, suggest that a subgroup of women may be at
greater risk for developing a unipolar major depressive disorder during
pregnancy.
Women respond variably to the stresses of pregnancy. Some express
persistent concerns regarding fetal health, child care, lifestyle changes, or
fear of childbirth pain. Anxiety, sleep disorders, and functional impairment
are common (Romero, 2014; Vythilingum, 2008). The level of perceived
stress is significantly higher for women whose fetus is at high risk for a
malformation, for those with preterm labor or delivery, and for those with
other medical complications (Alder, 2007; Ross, 2006). For example,
Hippman and associates (2009) screened for depression in 81 women who
had an increased risk for a fetus with aneuploidy. Half of these women had a
positive depression screening score, whereas only 2.4 percent of those with
a normal pregnancy did so.
Several steps can diminish psychological stress in the event of a poor
obstetrical outcome. For example, following a stillbirth, parental contact
with the newborn and provision of photographs and other infant memorabilia
is encouraged (Gold, 2007). Addressing associated sleep disorders also
seems reasonable (Juulia Paavonen, 2017).

■ The Puerperium
This is a particularly stressful time for women, and risks for mental illness
are increased. Up to 15 percent of women develop a nonpsychotic
postpartum depressive disorder within 6 months of delivery (Tam, 2007;
Yonkers, 2011). Depressive disorders are more likely in women with
obstetrical complications such as severe preeclampsia or fetal-growth
restriction, especially if associated with early delivery. Prior psychiatric
disorders or childhood trauma also raises the risk for postpartum depression
(Tebeka, 2021). Instead, some have a psychotic illness following delivery,
and half of these manifest as a bipolar disorder.
Importantly, stressors beyond those directly related to the pregnancy also
can raise perinatal depression rates. Tarney and colleagues (2015) identified
spouse military deployment as a factor for postpartum depression. But,
among women with a history of bipolar disorder, these elements play a lesser
role in the development of mania or depression (Yonkers, 2011).

Maternity Blues
Also called postpartum blues, this is a time-limited period of heightened
emotional reactivity experienced by half of women within the first week after
parturition. Prevalence estimates for the blues range from 26 to 84 percent
depending on diagnostic criteria (O’Hara, 2014). This emotional state
generally peaks on the fourth or fifth postpartum day and normalizes by day
10 (O’Keane, 2011).
The predominant mood during the puerperium is happiness, but affected
mothers are more emotionally labile. They also may have insomnia,
weepiness, depression, anxiety, poor concentration, and irritability. Mothers
may be transiently tearful for several hours and then recover completely, only
to be tearful again the next day. Supportive treatment is indicated, and
affected women are reassured that the dysphoria is transient and most likely
due to biochemical changes. They are monitored for development of
depression and other severe psychiatric disturbances.

■ Perinatal Evaluation and Screening
Both the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2018b) and
the United States Preventive Services Task Force now recommend screening

at least once during the perinatal period for depression and anxiety (Siu,
2016). Indeed, it has recently been recommended that all obstetrical care
providers complete a full assessment of mood and emotional well-being
during the comprehensive postpartum visit (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2018a). Identification of psychiatric
disorders in pregnancy can be challenging because changes in behavior and
mood are often attributed to pregnancy. To differentiate these, Yonkers and
associates (2011) recommend assessment of cognitive symptoms—for
example, loss of concentration. Excessive anxiety and insomnia—even
during periods of infant sleep—also can suggest postpartum depression.
Specific factors for depression are reviewed and include a prior personal or
family history of depression.
Universal screening programs for depression continue to evolve
(Venkatesh, 2016). One major step forward is state-level support for
screening. Beginning July 1, 2018, mothers who take newborns for Texas
Health Steps routine examination are able to receive testing and counseling
(Texas Health and Human Services, 2019). At Parkland Hospital, mental
illness screening is completed at the first prenatal visit using a brief riskbased query and again postpartum using a recognized screening tool for
postpartum depression. Questions search for psychiatric disorders, related
therapy, prior or current use of psychoactive medications, and current
symptoms. Women with a history of sexual, physical, or verbal abuse; illicit
substance use; and personality disorders are also at greater risk for
depression (Meltzer-Brody, 2014). Smoking and nicotine dependence and
obesity also raise rates of all mental disorders in pregnancy (Molyneaux,
2014). Last, because eating disorders may be exacerbated by pregnancy,
affected women are followed closely (p. 1149).
Several screening instruments shown in Table 64-1 are available and
have been validated for use during pregnancy and the puerperium (Bhat,
2017). Use of one of these is encouraged because symptom- or risk-based
screening alone may be insufficient. Cerimele and colleagues (2013) found
that obstetrician-gynecologists failed to identify 60 percent of depressed
women in clinical practice. In one study at Parkland Hospital, 17,000 women
were screened during their first postpartum visit using the Edinburgh
Postnatal Depression Scale (EPDS). Of these, 6 percent had scores that
indicated either minor or major depressive symptoms, and 12 women had
thoughts of self-harm (Nelson, 2013). In another study, Kim and coworkers

(2015) assessed suicidal ideation in more than 22,000 women screened using
the EPDS both during pregnancy and postpartum. They found rates of
depression as high as 3.4 percent during the puerperium. A small fraction of
those with thoughts of self-harm had a credible plan, intent, and means for
attempted suicide.
TABLE 64-1. Depression Screening Tools

Screening for perinatal depression alone was previously considered
insufficient, however, evidence now suggests that screening itself has clinical
benefit (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2018b). One
systematic review of six randomized trials that screened pregnant or
postpartum women found that follow-up of these women weeks to months
later demonstrated an absolute risk reduction in the depression rate by a
range of 2.1 to 9.1 percent (O’Connor, 2016). However, this review included
studies with and without treatment components compared with usual care.
Another limitation is that four of the six studies did not exclude women
previously known to be depressed. Findings from this analysis prompted an
interim update by the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
(2018b) to state that screening alone can have clinical benefit, although
treatment initiation or referral to a mental health care provider offers
maximum benefit.
Mechanisms to ensure adequate ensuing care can be problematic. Nelson
and associates (2013) found that more than three fourths of the 1106 women
with abnormally elevated EPDS scores did not keep their later appointment
for more formal psychiatric evaluation. Barriers include access to care,
personal perception of depression, and societal stigmata. Women referred to
a behavioral health provider located at the same site as their obstetrical care
are four times more likely to access treatment than those referred elsewhere

(Smith, 2009). To take advantage of this, at Parkland Hospital, mental health
counselors also practice at postpartum clinic sites.
Other promising interventions for puerperal depression include home
visits, telephone-based peer support, and interpersonal psychotherapy
(Dennis, 2013; Lavender, 2013; Yonemoto, 2017). A report from Kaiser
Permanente, which describes the benefits and hurdles of system-based
perinatal mental health care, provides a glimpse into the possible future of
universal perinatal screening and treatment (Avalos, 2016; Flanagan, 2016).

■ Treatment Considerations
Once a positive mental health screen result is identified, a stage-based
response protocol is triggered (Kendig, 2017). In brief, the initial response
focuses on maternal and infant safety, and if possible, onsite patient
assessment by either a mental health provider or mental health counselor.
Integrating on-site assessment and access to counselors quadruples later
attendance rates to mental health appointments (Byatt, 2015).
For women with suicidal or homicidal ideation, perinatal care providers
first determine a working diagnosis. Second, emergency psychiatric
consultation is sought and ambulance transport is implemented if needed.
Concurrently, perinatal care and psychiatric teams ideally communicate
closely. Last, the patient, her family, and clinical staff are emotionally
supported. Appreciation for this issue’s significance has grown with the
recent national emphasis on maternal mortality. For example, Palladino and
associates (2011) found that pregnancy-associated homicide and suicide
were significant contributors to maternal mortality in a multistate sample
from the National Violent Death Reporting system.
Many psychiatric disorders can be improved with counseling and
psychotherapy. In some instances, medications are needed. Shared decision
making is employed by patients and their health-care providers. In particular,
women taking psychotropic medication are informed of likely side effects.
Many of these drugs are discussed in Chapter 8, and some are discussed
subsequently.

■ Pregnancy Outcomes

As noted, maternal psychiatric illness can be linked to untoward outcomes
such as preterm birth, low birthweight, and perinatal mortality (Grigoriadis,
2013; Jarde, 2016; Steinberg, 2014). In a study of 16,334 deliveries, a
significant association between posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and
spontaneous preterm delivery was identified (Shaw, 2014). Domestic abuse
—another aforementioned risk factor for perinatal mood disorder—also is
linked with adverse perinatal outcomes (Yost, 2005).

CLASSIFICATION OF PSYCHIATRIC DISORDERS
The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition
(DSM-5) is the most recent version from the American Psychiatric
Association (2013). The manual assists in classifying mental disorders and
specifies criteria for each diagnosis. It is presumed that correct diagnosis
leads to specific treatment.

MOOD DISORDERS
Historically, depressive disorders include major depression—a unipolar
disorder—and manic-depression—a bipolar disorder with both manic and
depressive episodes. It also includes dysthymia, which is chronic, mild
depression.

■ Major Depression
This is the most common depressive disorder, and the 12-month prevalence
of major depressive episodes among adult women is 8.2 percent (Center for
Behavioral Health Statistics and Quality, 2015). From 2011 to 2014, 16
percent of women had used an antidepressant in the prior month (Pratt,
2017). The diagnosis is made by identifying symptoms listed in Table 64-2,
but very few patients manifest all of these.
TABLE 64-2. Symptoms of Depressive Illnessa

Major depression is multifactorial and prompted by genetic and
environmental factors. Families of affected individuals often also have
members suffering with alcohol abuse and anxiety disorders. Provocative
conditions leading to depression include substance abuse, certain
medications, other medical disorders, and life events that prompt grief
reactions. Although life events can trigger depression, genes influence the
response to these events and render the distinction between genetic and
environmental factors difficult.

Pregnancy and Depression
Pregnancy is a major life stressor that can precipitate or exacerbate
depressive tendencies. In addition, various pregnancy-induced effects are
implicated. Hormones certainly affect mood, as evidenced by premenstrual
syndrome and menopausal depression. Estrogen has been linked to enhanced
serotonin synthesis, decreased serotonin breakdown, and serotonin-receptor
modulation (Deecher, 2008). Concordantly, women who experience
postpartum depression often have higher predelivery serum estrogen and
progesterone levels and experience a greater decline postpartum (Ahokas,
1999).
The prevalence of antenatal depression averaged 11 percent in one
Cochrane Database review (Dennis, 2007). In more than 1800 women
enrolled for prenatal care at a single clinic, Melville and coworkers (2010)
found rates of nearly 10 percent. A higher rate has been seen in those after
antepartum complications (Toscano, 2021).

Postpartum Depression
Major or minor depression develops postpartum in 10 to 20 percent of
women (Mental Health America, 2019). Postpartum depressive symptoms
are associated with young maternal age, antenatal depression, unmarried
status, smoking, newborns requiring intensive care, and stressors during
pregnancy (Ko, 2017; Silverman, 2017). Specifically, physical or verbal
abuse is a potent risk for postpartum depression (McFarlane, 2014). Last,
serious adverse obstetrical events, especially those involving the neonate,
are strongly linked (Nelson, 2013, 2015).
Depression is frequently recurrent. Up to 70 percent of women with
previous postpartum depression have a subsequent episode. Women with
both prior puerperal depression and a current episode of “maternity blues”
carry an inordinately high risk for major depression. Indeed, 2 to 9 months
postpartum, assistance with postpartum depression was the fourth most
common challenge identified in women in the Pregnancy Risk Assessment
Monitoring System—PRAMS (Kanotra, 2007).
Postpartum depression is generally underrecognized and undertreated.
Major depression during pregnancy or after delivery can have devastating
consequences for affected women, their children, and families. One of the
most significant contributions to the mortality rate among new mothers is
suicide, which is most frequent among women with mental illness (Koren,
2012; Palladino, 2011). If left untreated, up to 25 percent of women with
postpartum depression will be depressed 1 year later. As the duration of
depression increases, so too does the number of sequelae and their severity.
Maternal depression during the first weeks and months after delivery can
lead to insecure attachment and later behavioral problems in the child
(Mezzacappa, 2017; Viktorin, 2017).

Depression Treatment
Therapy for mood disorders during pregnancy and postpartum has evolved.
Babbitt (2014) and Pozzi (2014) and their associates have reviewed
principles of perinatal care of women with major mental disorders. In
general, for mild and mild-moderate depression, psychological treatment
options, such as cognitive behavioral therapy, are considered first (Yonkers,
2011). Light- to moderate-intensity exercise may be beneficial (McCurdy,
2017).

Antidepressant medications together with some form of psychotherapy
are indicated for moderate to severe depression during pregnancy or the
puerperium (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2018b).
Shown in Figure 64-1 is one algorithm regarding mood disorder treatment.
Some of these medications are listed in Table 64-3. For women with severe
depression, a selective serotonin-reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) is selected
initially. If depressive symptoms improve during a 6-week trial, the
medication is continued for a minimum of 6 months to prevent relapse
(Wisner, 2002).

FIGURE 64-1 Treatment algorithm for pregnant women with mood disorders. Rx = prescription.

TABLE 64-3. Drugs Used for Treatment of Major Mood Disorders in
Pregnant Women

If the response is suboptimal or a relapse occurs, another SSRI is
substituted, or psychiatric referral is considered. At least 60 percent of
women taking antidepressant medication before pregnancy have symptoms
during pregnancy. In one study, approximately three fourths of women taking
antidepressants before pregnancy stopped taking them before or during early
pregnancy (Hayes, 2012). For those who discontinue treatment, almost 70
percent have a relapse compared with approximately 25 percent who
continue therapy.
In one metaanalysis, women using antidepressants during pregnancy had
higher rates of preterm birth and low-birthweight neonates (Huang, 2014).
Some of the included studies failed to control for the underlying depressive
illness (Susser, 2016). Nevertheless, in their review, Ray and Stowe (2014)
concluded that the relative reproductive safety data are reassuring and that
antidepressants remain a reasonable treatment option. Furthermore,
recurrence sometime after medication is discontinued develops in 50 to 85
percent of women with an initial postpartum depressive episode.
Surveillance includes monitoring for thoughts of suicide or infanticide,
emergence of psychosis, and response to therapy. For some women, the
course of illness is severe enough to warrant hospitalization.
Fetal and Neonatal Effects of Therapy. Some known and possible fetal and
neonatal effects of treatment are listed in Table 64-3. Some studies suggest

that SSRIs pose an elevated teratogenic risk for fetal cardiac defects, and
these have mainly focused on paroxetine (Paxil). Associations were most
consistent for ventricular septal defects. The estimated risk is no greater than
1 case in 200 exposed newborns (Koren, 2012). Nevertheless, the American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2018b) recommends that
paroxetine be avoided in women who are either pregnant or planning
pregnancy. In women exposed to paroxetine in the first trimester, fetal
echocardiography is considered. In one analysis of SSRIs, exposure to SSRIs
during pregnancy and perinatal mortality were not linked (Jimenez-Solem,
2013). Andersen and associates (2014) found that women discontinuing SSRI
treatment in early pregnancy had a small increased risk of miscarriage.
However, the risk was similar to that in women discontinuing SSRI treatment
months before pregnancy. These investigators concluded that treatment with
SSRIs during pregnancy should not be discontinued for fear of miscarriage.
Of other potential effects, the risk of persistent pulmonary hypertension of
the newborn is sixfold higher in neonates exposed to SSRIs after 20 weeks’
gestation (Chambers, 2006). This translates to an overall pulmonary
hypertension risk of less than 1 case in 100 exposed newborns (Koren,
2012). A population-based cohort study of 1.6 million pregnancies identified
a twofold greater rate in exposed neonates. This yields an estimated
attributable risk of 2 cases per 1000 births (Kieler, 2012). In a study of more
than 120,000 women prescribed antidepressants, an attributed risk of 1 case
per 1000 births was found (Huybrechts, 2015).
The maternal risk associated with discontinuing or tapering SSRI use
during pregnancy must be weighed against marginally elevated neonatal risks
(Ornoy, 2017). Women who abruptly discontinue either serotonin- or
norepinephrine-reuptake inhibitor therapy typically experience some form of
withdrawal.
Not surprisingly, up to 30 percent of exposed neonates also may exhibit
withdrawal symptoms. Symptoms are similar to opioid withdrawal but
typically are less severe. Neonatal SSRI withdrawal is usually self-limited,
and the newborn rarely remains in the nursery more than 5 days (Koren,
2009). Recent magnetic resonance imaging studies show brain volume
differences in SSRI-exposed fetuses compared with unexposed ones (LugoCandelas, 2018). Still, at this time, convincing evidence of long-term
neurobehavioral effects of fetal exposure to these medications is lacking
(Grzeskowiak, 2016; Man, 2017; Mezzacappa, 2017; Viktorin, 2017).

Some psychotropic medications pass into breast milk. In most cases,
however, levels are very low or undetectable. Effects may be transient
irritability, sleep disturbances, and colic.
Allopregnanolone. A recent Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved
therapeutic agent for treatment of postpartum depression is brexanolone,
which is an allopregnanolone analogue. Plasma allopregnanolone levels rise
in connection with progesterone throughout pregnancy, and after childbirth
these concentrations drop abruptly. Failure of gamma-aminobutyric acid type
A (GABA-A) receptors to adapt to these changes following delivery is a
suggested antecedent to postpartum depression. In small randomized trials,
intravenous infusions of brexanolone significantly reduced Hamilton Rating
Scale for Depression scores compared with placebo (Kanes, 2017; MeltzerBrody, 2018a). Treatment is prohibitively expensive, and further studies are
needed before its use is widely accepted.
Ketamine. This anesthetic drug is given intravenously for refractory
depression, but studies in pregnant or postpartum women are lacking.
Similarly, the recent FDA-approved esketamine nasal spray has not been
studied in these women.
Electroconvulsive Therapy. This form of depression treatment is
occasionally necessary during pregnancy for women with major mood
disorders unresponsive to pharmacotherapy. Women undergoing
electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) should be fasting for at least 6 hours. They
are given a rapid-acting antacid before the procedure, and their airway is
protected to decrease the likelihood of aspiration. After midpregnancy, a
wedge is placed under the right hip to prevent sudden maternal hypotension
from aortocaval compression. Other important preparatory steps include
assessment of the cervix, discontinuation of nonessential anticholinergic
medication, uterine and fetal heart rate monitoring, and intravenous
hydration. During the procedure, excessive hyperventilation is avoided. In
most cases, maternal and fetal heart rate and maternal blood pressure and
oxygen saturation remain normal throughout the procedure.
With proper preparation, the risks to both mother and fetus appear to be
reasonable (Ray-Griffith, 2016). Such therapy is relatively safe in the first
trimester (Calaway, 2016). That said, adverse maternal and perinatal

outcomes have followed ECT. Balki and associates (2006) reported a
pregnancy in which fetal brain damage likely was caused by sustained
maternal hypotension associated with treatment of status epilepticus
stimulated by ECT.
At least two extensive reviews have evaluated ECT outcomes in
pregnancy. In one, Miller (1994) found 300 cases and reported complications
in 10 percent. These included fetal arrhythmias, vaginal bleeding, abdominal
pain, and self-limited contractions. Women not adequately prepared had
higher risks for aspiration, aortocaval compression, and respiratory
alkalosis. In another review, Anderson and Reti (2009) described 339 cases,
undoubtedly with some homology with the earlier study. In most cases, ECT
therapy was done to treat depression, and it was 78-percent effective. They
reported a 5-percent maternal ECT-related complication rate. The associated
perinatal complication rate was 3 percent and included two fetal deaths.
In sum, we agree with Richards (2007) that ECT in pregnancy is not
“low risk” and that it should be reserved for women whose severe
depression is resistant to intensive pharmacotherapy.

Suicide
Self-harm is a primary cause of death among women during the perinatal
period, and major depression is among the strongest predictors (Melville,
2010). Between 2004 and 2012, self-harm, suicide, or drug overdose was
the leading cause of maternal death in Colorado (Metz, 2016). During a
similar time period in Ontario, perinatal suicide accounted for 5.3 percent of
all maternal deaths (Grigoriadis, 2017). Fetal loss is associated with a threeto fivefold greater risk for suicide (Weng, 2018). And, 54 percent of
pregnancy-associated suicides reportedly involved intimate-partner conflict
(Palladino, 2011).

■ Bipolar and Related Disorders
According to the National Institute of Mental Health (2017a), the lifetime
prevalence for manic-depression illness is 4.4 percent. The prevalence of
bipolar disorder does not vary between gravidas and nonpregnant
reproductive-aged women (Yonkers, 2011). It has a strong genetic component
and has been linked to possible mutations on chromosomes 16 and 8 (Jones,

2007). The risk that monozygotic twins are both affected is 40 to 70 percent,
and the risk for first-degree relatives is 5 to 10 percent (MullerOerlinghausen, 2002).
Periods of depression last at least 2 weeks. At other times, patients are
manic, in which mood is abnormally raised, expansive, or irritable. Potential
organic causes of mania include substance abuse, hyperthyroidism, and
central nervous system tumors. These are all excluded during an acute event.
Importantly, pregnancy frequently prompts medication discontinuation, which
poses a substantially increased risk for relapse. Approximately one third of
patients with manic-depression illness will attempt suicide during their
lifetime (Novick, 2010).

Bipolar Disorder in Pregnancy
This disorder has also been associated with adverse perinatal outcomes such
as preterm birth (Mei-Dan, 2015). Women who experience pregnancy
complications are more likely to exhibit periods of mania or depression (Di
Florio, 2013). Moreover, symptomatic women during pregnancy more likely
have postpartum relapses that can be severe (Taylor, 2018). Women who
tend to be manic present with exacerbations earlier in the postpartum period.
Typical therapy for bipolar disorder includes mood stabilizers such as
lithium, valproic acid, and carbamazepine and antipsychotic medications
(see Table 64-3). Treatment of bipolar disorder in pregnancy is complex and
is ideally managed concurrently with a psychiatrist. Decisions include risks
versus benefits of mood stabilizers, some of which are teratogenic (Clark,
2018). For example, lithium has been linked to Ebstein anomaly in exposed
fetuses. More recent data, however, suggest a lower risk of cardiac
malformations than previously indicated (Munk-Olsen, 2018; Patorno, 2017).
Nevertheless, many recommend fetal echocardiography for lithium-exposed
fetuses. Some limited evidence suggests that lithium in breast milk, when its
elimination is impaired as in dehydration or immaturity, can adversely affect
the infant (Davanzo, 2011). However, lithium use in mothers with a healthy,
term fetus is considered moderately safe. Children born to bipolar women do
not appear to suffer long-term adverse effects (Santucci, 2017). A more
detailed discussion of other mood stabilizers and antipsychotic medications
side effects is found in Chapter 8 (p. 153).

Postpartum Psychosis
This severe mental disorder is usually a bipolar disorder, but it may be due
to major depression (American Psychiatric Association, 2013). Its estimated
incidence is 1 case in every 1000 deliveries, and it is more common in
nulliparas, especially those with obstetrical complications (Bergink, 2016;
Tinkelman, 2017). In most cases, illness manifests within 2 weeks of
delivery and lasts 2 to 3 months. Because those with underlying psychiatric
disease have a 10- to 15-fold risk for recurrence postpartum, close
monitoring is recommended.
Women with a history of bipolar disease typically exhibit symptoms
within 1 to 2 days after delivery (Heron, 2007, 2008). Manic symptoms
include feeling excited or elated, being active or energetic, feeling “chatty,”
and suffering insomnia. Affected women may display confusion and
disorientation but may also have lucid episodes.
Postpartum psychosis has a 50-percent recurrence risk in the next
pregnancy. As a result, Bergink and associates (2016) recommend initiating
lithium therapy immediately after delivery in women with a history of
postpartum psychosis.
The clinical course of bipolar illness with postpartum psychosis is
comparable with that for nonpregnant women. Patients usually require
hospitalization, pharmacological treatment, and long-term psychiatric care.
Psychotic women may have delusions leading to thoughts of self-harm or
harm to their infants. Unlike women with nonpsychotic depression, these
women commit infanticide, albeit uncommonly (Kim, 2008). In most
instances, women with postpartum psychosis ultimately develop relapsing,
chronic, psychotic manic-depression.

■ Anxiety Disorders
The prevalence of anxiety disorder in the prior year among women in the
United States is 23 percent (National Institute of Mental Health, 2017b).
These relatively common disorders include panic attack, panic disorder,
social anxiety disorder, specific phobia, separation anxiety disorder, and
generalized anxiety disorder. All are characterized by irrational fear, tension,
and worry, which are accompanied by physiological changes such as
trembling, nausea, hot or cold flashes, dizziness, dyspnea, insomnia, and

frequent urination (Schneier, 2006). They are treated with psychotherapy and
medication, which may be an SSRI, tricyclic antidepressant, monoamine
oxide inhibitor, or other.

Anxiety Disorders in Pregnancy
Despite the relatively high prevalence in childbearing-aged women, data
regarding anxiety disorders in pregnancy are few. Most reports conclude that
rates between pregnant and nonpregnant women do not differ. One analysis of
268 gravidas with generalized anxiety disorder demonstrated that both
symptoms and anxiety severity decline across pregnancy (Buist, 2011).
From their review, Thorsness and colleagues (2018) concluded that some
of the anxiety disorders may have important maternal-fetal implications.
Some researchers, but not all, have linked these disorders to preterm birth,
fetal-growth restriction, and poor neurobehavioral development (Yonkers,
2017). Children with a history of in utero exposure to maternal anxiety are
felt to be at greater risk for various neuropsychiatric conditions such as
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD).

Anxiety Disorder Treatment
Anxiety disorders can be effectively treated during pregnancy with
psychotherapy, cognitive behavioral therapy, or medication (Williams,
2018). Mood and anxiety disorders coexist in more than half of women
identified with either diagnosis. Thus, antidepressants—specifically, SSRIs
—listed in Table 64-3 are often the first line of pharmacotherapy. As with
other medication exposures in pregnancy, choosing a single SSRI agent at the
lowest effective dose is preferred.
Benzodiazepines also are commonly used to treat anxiety or panic
disorders (Thorsness, 2018). Earlier case-control studies linked their use to
a possible increased risk for cleft lip and palate. A metaanalysis of more
than 1 million exposed pregnancies, however, did not identify a teratogenic
risk (Enato, 2011). Benzodiazepines, especially when taken during the third
trimester, can cause neonatal withdrawal syndrome, which persists for days
to weeks after delivery. Importantly, benzodiazepines should be avoided in
women with current or past history of substance misuse (Thorsness, 2018).

SCHIZOPHRENIA SPECTRUM DISORDERS

This major form of mental illness affects 1.1 percent of adults (National
Institute of Mental Health, 2016). Schizophrenia spectrum disorders are
defined by abnormalities in one or more of the following domains: delusions,
hallucinations, disorganized thinking, grossly disorganized or abnormal
motor behavior, and negative symptoms. Brain-scanning techniques such as
positron emission tomography (PET) and functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) show that schizophrenia is a degenerative brain disorder.
Subtle anatomical abnormalities are present early in life and worsen with
time.
Schizophrenia has a major genetic component, and concordance was 33
percent in monozygotic twins in large database (Hilker, 2018). If one parent
has schizophrenia, the risk to offspring is 5 to 10 percent (Rasic, 2014).
Some data, including a strong association between schizophrenia and the
velocardiofacial syndrome, suggest associated genes. Some cases are related
to chromosome 22q11, but sophisticated gene mapping studies clearly show
that schizophrenia is not related to a single gene or mutation (Kukshal, 2012).
Other putative risks for subsequent schizophrenia in an exposed fetus remain
unproven, for example, the association with maternal influenza A infection
(Chap. 67, p. 1187).
Signs of illness begin approximately at age 20 years, and work and
psychosocial functioning typically deteriorate over time. Women have a
slightly later onset than men. Thus, many investigators theorize that estrogen
is protective. With appropriate treatment, patients can experience a decline
or cessation of symptoms. Within 5 years from the first signs of illness, 60
percent have social recovery, 50 percent are employed, 30 percent are
mentally handicapped, and 10 percent require continued hospitalization
(American Psychiatric Association, 2013).

■ Schizophrenia in Pregnancy
Most studies have reported no adverse maternal outcomes, although some
earlier ones found higher rates of low birthweight, fetal-growth restriction,
and preterm delivery. In a study of more than 3000 pregnancies in
schizophrenic women, the rate of placental abruption was elevated threefold
and that of “fetal distress”—vaguely defined—was increased 1.4-fold
(Jablensky, 2005).

Because schizophrenia has a high recurrence rate if medications are
discontinued, continued therapy during pregnancy is advised. That said,
“typical” antipsychotic drugs listed in Table 64-3 are associated with
adverse fetal or maternal sequelae in some, but not all studies (Coughlin,
2015; Robinson, 2012). Because less is known about “atypical”
antipsychotics, the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
(2018c) recommends against their routine use in pregnant and breastfeeding
women. The FDA (2011) issued a safety communication concerning the
potential risk for abnormal muscle movements and withdrawal symptoms in
newborns of mothers treated with antipsychotic drugs during the third
trimester.

EATING DISORDERS
These include anorexia nervosa, in which the patient refuses to maintain
normal body weight, and bulimia nervosa, in which binge eating is usually
followed by purging or excessive fasting to maintain normal body weight
(American Psychiatric Association, 2013). Eating behavior disturbances
largely affect adolescent females and young adults. With anorexia and
bulimia, the lifetime prevalence for each is 2 to 3 percent (National Institute
of Mental Health, 2016a).
Bulik and coworkers (2009) studied pregnancy outcomes in almost
36,000 Norwegian women screened for eating disorders. Approximately 0.1
percent had anorexia nervosa, 0.85 percent had bulimia nervosa, and 5.1
percent reported a binge-eating disorder. This 6-percent pregnancy
prevalence is similar to the 6-month prevalence for nonpregnant individuals
(National Institute of Mental Health, 2016a). The last subtype had a higher
risk for large-for-gestational age neonates with a concomitantly increased
cesarean delivery rate. All eating disorders begin with the desire to be slim,
and women with chronic eating disorders may migrate between subtypes
(Andersen, 2009).

■ Eating Disorders in Pregnancy
Early pregnancy complication rates are increased with both eating disorders,
but especially in women with bulimia nervosa (Hoffman, 2011). Generally,
eating disorder symptoms improve during pregnancy, and remission rates

may reach 75 percent. In contrast, a typical case of hyperemesis gravidarum
may actually be a new or relapsing case of bulimia nervosa or of binge-purge
type anorexia nervosa. As perhaps expected, anorexia is associated with
low-birthweight, smaller head circumference, and small-for-gestational-age
newborns (Micali, 2016). Children born to these mothers are more likely to
have psychopathology at 7 years (Barona, 2016). Additional maternal risks
associated with eating disorders include poor wound healing and difficulties
with breastfeeding. At a minimum, closely monitoring gestational weight gain
in women with a suspected history of an eating disorder seems prudent.
Care for these women involves a multidisciplinary team that includes an
obstetrician, mental health provider, and either dietician or nutritionist.
Psychological treatment is the cornerstone for treatment in women with
eating disorders and frequently includes cognitive behavioral therapy.
Anorexia nervosa often responds to motivational interactions with meal
planning (Cardwell, 2013). After delivery, women with eating disorders are
more prone to postpartum depression. Women with bulimia are at particular
risk for disease rebound after delivery because of body image concerns.

SUBSTANCE USE DISORDERS
According to the American Psychiatric Association (2013), substancerelated disorders encompass 10 classes of drugs that include caffeine,
tobacco, cannabis, hallucinogens, opioids, anxiolytics, and stimulants. Their
essential feature is a cluster of cognitive, behavioral, and physiological
symptoms indicating that the individual continues to use the substance despite
significant related problems. Central to these disorders is an underlying
change in brain circuits that may persist beyond detoxification and
characterized by repeated relapses.
It is estimated that 10 percent of fetuses are exposed to one or more illicit
drugs. Agents may include heroin and other opiates, cocaine, amphetamines,
barbiturates, and marijuana (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2019). Well-documented sequelae include fetal-growth
restriction, low birthweight, and drug withdrawal soon after birth. Adverse
effects of marijuana are being delineated with expanding legalization. As
noted by Metz and Borgelt (2018), adverse perinatal outcomes associated
with marijuana use are especially seen with heavy use. Moreover, later
childhood neurobehavioral consequences may follow prenatal exposure.

Thus, women are currently advised to refrain from using marijuana during
pregnancy and lactation. Women who use such drugs frequently do not seek
prenatal care, which in itself is associated with risks for preterm and lowbirthweight newborns.

■ Opioid Use Disorder
These disorders have reached epidemic proportions in the United States. The
rates of maternal opioid-related diagnoses at delivery (0.8 percent) and of
neonatal abstinence syndrome (0.7 percent) in 2017 in the United States were
significantly higher than those in 2010 (Hirai, 2021). Because of this, the
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists and the American
Society of Addiction Medicine (2017) recommend universal screening by
questionnaire at the first prenatal visit. Urine drug testing to detect or confirm
substance use is performed only with patient consent and in compliance with
state laws.

Medication-Assisted Treatment
For women who abuse opioids, methadone maintenance can be initiated
within a registered treatment program to reduce opioid use complications
and narcotic withdrawal, to encourage prenatal care, and to avoid drug
culture risks (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2017).
Buprenorphine also may be offered and managed by physicians with specific
credentialing (Boyars, 2018; Jones, 2018). Available programs can be found
through the treatment locator of the Substance Abuse and Mental Health
Services Administration at www.samhsa.gov. Methadone dosages usually
are initiated at 10 to 30 mg daily and titrated as needed. Concomitant chronic
use of naloxone with buprenorphine is discouraged given risks of
precipitating neonatal withdrawal.

Medically Supervised Withdrawal
In some women, careful medication-assisted withdrawal may be an
appropriate option. This is controversial because of the relatively high
relapse rate, and it is discouraged by the American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists and the American Society of Addiction Medicine (2017).
From their review of more than 600 treated women, Boyars and Guille

(2018) caution against this approach but concluded that assisted withdrawal
is a reasonable approach. At Parkland Hospital, pregnant opioid users who
decline maintenance therapy are offered inpatient hospitalization for
controlled methadone taper. The goal is reduction of neonatal opioid
withdrawal syndrome rates (Dashe, 2002; Stewart, 2013). In 2017, 69
women who were enrolled in our opioid perinatal intervention program
delivered at Parkland Hospital. Of these women, 37 (54 percent) delivered
without use of opioids at delivery. Their neonates’ median length of stay was
4.5 days, which was significantly shorter than the 23.5 days required for
newborns whose mothers were using opioids at delivery.

Neonatal Opioid Withdrawal Syndrome
This is a drug withdrawal syndrome that most commonly follows maternal
opioid use. It is discussed in Chapter 33 (p. 605).

POSTTRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER
This is included in trauma– and stressor–related disorders (American
Psychiatric Association, 2013). The essential feature of PTSD is
development of characteristic symptoms following exposure to one or more
traumatic events. One example in obstetrics is PTSD following hyperemesis
gravidarum (Chap. 57, p. 1014). Symptoms may be anxiety or fear but can be
anhedonia, dysphoria, or dissociative behavior. According to Yonkers and
coworkers (2014), 8 percent of pregnant women have facets of this
syndrome. Psychotherapy is one first-line therapy (National Institute of
Mental Health, 2019). These women are also treated with benzodiazepines
or antidepressants. Those with concordant major depression are at high risk
for preterm birth.

PERSONALITY DISORDERS
These disorders are characterized by the chronic use of certain coping
mechanisms in an inappropriate, stereotyped, and maladaptive manner. They
are rigid and unyielding personality traits. The American Psychiatric
Association (2013) recognizes three clusters of personality disorders:

1. Paranoid, schizoid, and schizotypal personality disorders, which are
characterized by oddness or eccentricity.
2. Histrionic, narcissistic, antisocial, and borderline disorders, which are all
characterized by dramatic presentations along with self-centeredness and
erratic behavior.
3. Avoidant, dependent, compulsive, and passive-aggressive personalities,
which are characterized by underlying fear and anxiety.
In the United States, the prevalence of any personality disorder in the past
year approximates 9 percent (National Institute of Mental Health, 2017c).
Genetic and environmental factors are thought important in their genesis.
Psychotherapy is appropriate treatment, but most affected individuals do not
recognize their problem, and thus only 20 percent seek help. In an
observational study of 202 women with borderline personality disorder, De
Genna and associates (2012) noted that affected women become pregnant
during the most severe trajectory of their illness. They are at higher risk for
adolescent and unintended pregnancies. Notably, Conroy and coworkers
(2010) found that a mother’s ability to care for her newborn was impaired
only when a personality disorder was coupled with depression.

REFERENCES
Ahokas A, Kaukoranta J, Aito M: Effect of oestradiol on postpartum depression. Psychopharmacology
146:108, 1999
Alder J, Fink N, Bitzer J, et al: Depression and anxiety during pregnancy: a risk factor for obstetric, fetal
and neonatal outcome? A critical review of the literature. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 20:189,
2007
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Optimizing postpartum care. Committee Opinion
No. 736, May 2018a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Screening for perinatal depression. Committee
Opinion No. 757, November 2018b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Use of psychiatric medication during pregnancy
and lactation. Practice Bulletin No. 92, April 2008, Reaffirmed 2018c
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Alcohol abuse and other substance use disorders:
ethical issues in obstetric and gynecologic practice. Committee Opinion No. 633, June 2015,
Reaffirmed 2019
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, American Society of Addiction Medicine: Opioid
use and opioid use disorder in pregnancy. Committee Opinion No. 711, August 2017
American Psychiatric Association: Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th ed.
(DSM-V). Arlington, American Psychiatric Publishing, 2013

Anderson E, Reti I: ECT in pregnancy: a review of the literature from 1941 to 2007. Psychosom Med
71:235, 2009
Andersen JT, Andersen NL, Horwitz H, et al: Exposure to selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors in
early pregnancy and the risk of miscarriage. Obstet Gynecol 124(4):655, 2014
Avalos LA, Raine-Bennett T, Chen H, et al: Improved perinatal depression screening, treatment, and
outcomes with a universal obstetric program. Obstet Gynecol 127(5):917, 2016
Babbitt KE, Bailey KJ, Coverdale JH, et al: Professionally responsible intrapartum management of
patients with major mental disorders. Am J Obstet Gynecol 210:27, 2014
Baer RJ, Chambers CD, Bandoli G, et al: Risk of preterm birth by subtype among Medi-Cal participants
with mental illness. Am J Obstet Gynecol 215(4):519.e1, 2016
Balki M, Castro C, Ananthanarayan C: Status epilepticus after electroconvulsive therapy in a pregnant
patient. Int J Obstet Anest 15:325, 2006
Barona M, Nybo Andersen AM, Micali N: Childhood psychopathology in children of women with eating
disorders. Acta Psychiatr Scand 134(4):295, 2016
Bergink V, Rasgon N, Wisner KL: Postpartum psychosis: madness, mania, and melancholia in
motherhood. Am J Psychiatry 173(12):1179, 2016
Bhat A, Reed SD, Unützer J: The obstetrician-gynecologist’s role in detecting, preventing, and treating
depression. Obstet Gynecol 129(1):157, 2017
Boyars L, Guille C: Treatment of perinatal use disorder. Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am 45(3):511, 2018
Buist A, Gotman N, Yonkers KA: Generalized anxiety disorder: course and risk factors in pregnancy. J
Affective Dis 131(1–3):277, 2011
Bulik CM, Von Holle A, Siega-Riz AM, et al: Birth outcomes in women with eating disorders in the
Norwegian mother and child cohort (MoBa). Int J Eat Disord 42(1):9, 2009
Byatt N, Levin LL, Ziedonis D, et al: Enhancing participation in depression care in outpatient perinatal
care settings: a systematic review. Obstet Gynecol 126(5):1048, 2015
Calaway K, Coshal S, Jones K, et al: A systematic review of the safety of electroconvulsive therapy
use during the first trimester of pregnancy. J ECT 32(4):230, 2016
Cardwell MS: Eating disorder during pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol Surv 68(4):312, 2013
Center for Behavioral Health Statistics and Quality: Behavioral health trends in the United States:
results from the 2014 National Survey on Drug Use and Health. HHS Publication No. SMA 15–
4927, NSDUH Series H-50, 2015
Cerimele JM, Vanderlip ER, Croicu CA, et al: Presenting symptoms of women with depression in an
obstetrics and gynecology setting. Obstet Gynecol 122(2 Pt 1):313, 2013
Chambers CD, Hernandez-Diaz S, Van Martin LJ, et al: Selective serotonin-reuptake inhibitors and risk
of persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn. N Engl J Med 354(6):579, 2006
Clark CT, Wisner KL: Treatment of peripartum bipolar disorder. Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am
45(3):403, 2018
Conroy S, Marks MN, Schacht R, et al: The impact of maternal depression and personality disorder on
early infant care. Soc Psychiatry Epidemiol 45(3):285, 2010
Coughlin CG, Blackwell KA, Bartley C, et al: Obstetric and neonatal outcomes after antipsychotic
medication exposure in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 125(5):1224, 2015
Dashe JS, Sheffield JS, Olscher DA, et al: Relationship between maternal methadone dosage and
neonatal withdrawal. Obstet Gynecol 100(6):1244, 2002
Davanzo R, Copertino M, De Cunto A, et al: Antidepressant drugs and breastfeeding: a review of the
literature. Breastfeeding Med 6(2):89, 2011

Deecher D, Andree TH, Sloan D, et al: From menarche to menopause: exploring the underlying biology
of depression in women experiencing hormonal changes. Psychoneuroendocrinology 33:3, 2008
De Genna NM, Feske U, Larkby C, et al: Pregnancies, abortions, and births among women with and
without borderline personality disorder. Womens Health Issues 22(4):e371, 2012
Dennis CL, Dowswell T: Psychological interventions for preventing postpartum depression. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 2:CD001134, 2013
Dennis CL, Ross LE, Grigoriadis S: Psychosocial and psychological interventions for treating antenatal
depression. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 3:CD006309, 2007
Di Florio A, Forty L, Gordon-Smith K, et al: Perinatal episodes across the mood disorder spectrum.
JAMA Psychiatry 70(2):168, 2013
Enato E: The fetal safety of benzodiazepines: an updated meta-analysis. J Obstet Gynaecol Can
33(4):319, 2011
Flanagan T, Avalos LA: Perinatal obstetric office depression screening and treatment: implementation in
a health care system. Obstet Gynecol 127(5):911, 2016
Food and Drug Administration: Antipsychotic drug labels updated on use during pregnancy and risk of
abnormal muscle movements and withdrawal symptoms in newborns, 2017. Available at:
www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm243903.htm. Accessed October 10, 2019
Gold KJ, Dalton VK, Schwenk TL: Hospital care for parents after perinatal death. Obstet Gynecol
109:1156, 2007
Grigoriadis S, VonderPorten EH, Mamisashvili L, et al: The impact of maternal depression during
pregnancy on perinatal outcomes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Clin Psychiatry
74(4):e321, 2013
Grigoriadis S, Wilton AS, Kurdyak PA, et al: Perinatal suicide in Ontario, Canada: a 15-year populationbased study. CMAJ 189(34):E1085, 2017
Grzeskowiak LE, Morrison JL, Henriksen TB, et al: Prenatal antidepressant exposure and child
behavioural outcomes at 7 years of age: a study within the Danish National Birth Cohort. BJOG
123(12):1919, 2016
Hayes RM, Wu P, Shelton RC, et al: Maternal antidepressant use and adverse outcomes: a cohort study
of 228,876 pregnancies. Am J Obstet Gynecol 207:49.e1, 2012
Heron J, Blackmore ER, McGuinnes M, et al: No “latent period” in the onset of bipolar affective
puerperal psychosis. Arch Womens Ment Health 10:79, 2007
Heron J, McGuinness M, Blackmore ER, et al: Early postpartum symptoms in puerperal psychosis.
BJOG 115(3):348, 2008
Hilker R, Helenius D, Fagerlund B, et al: Heritability of schizophrenia and schizophrenia spectrum based
on the nationwide Danish Twin Register. Biol Psychiatry 83(6):492, 2018
Hippman C, Oberlander TG, Honer WG, et al: Depression during pregnancy: the potential impact of
increased risk for fetal aneuploidy on maternal mood. Clin Genet 75(1):30, 2009
Hirai AH, Ko JY, Owens PL, et al: Neonatal abstinence syndrome and maternal opioid-related
diagnoses in the US, 2010–2017. JAMA 325(2):146, 2021
Hoffman ER, Zerwas SC, Bulik CM: Reproductive issues in anorexia nervosa. Obstet Gynecol 6:403,
2011
Huang H, Coleman S, Bridge JA, et al: A meta-analysis of the relationship between antidepressant use
in pregnancy and the risk of preterm birth and low birth weight. Gen Hosp Psychiatry 36(1):13, 2014
Huybrechts KF, Bateman BT, Palmsten K, et al: Antidepressant use late in pregnancy and risk of
persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn. JAMA 313(21):2142, 2015

Jablensky AV, Morgan V, Zubrick SR, et al: Pregnancy, delivery, and neonatal complications in a
population cohort of women with schizophrenia and major affective disorders. Am J Psychiatry
162:79, 2005
Jarde A, Morais M, Kingston D, et al: Neonatal outcomes in women with untreated antenatal depression
compared with women without depression: a systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA
Psychiatry 73(8):826, 2016
Jimenez-Solem E, Andersen JT, Petersen M, et al: SSRI use during pregnancy and risk of stillbirth and
neonatal mortality. Am J Psychiatry 170(3):299, 2013
Jones CW, Terplan M: Pregnancy and naltrexone pharmacotherapy. Obstet Gynecol 132(4):923, 2018
Jones I, Hamshere M, Nangle JM, et al: Bipolar affective puerperal psychosis: genome-wide significant
evidence for linkage to chromosome 16. Am J Psychiatry 164:999, 2007
Juulia Paavonen E, Saarenpää-Heikkilä O, Pölkki P, et al: Maternal and paternal sleep during pregnancy
in the child-sleepbirth cohort. Sleep Med 29:47, 2017
Kanes S, Colguhoun H, Gundez-Bruce H, et al: Brexanolone (SAGE-547 injection) in post-partum
depression: a randomised controlled trial. Lancet 390(10093):480, 2017
Kanotra S, D’Angelo D, Phares TM, et al: Challenges faced by new mothers in the early postpartum
period: an analysis of comment data from the 2000 Pregnancy Risk Assessment Monitoring System
(PRAMS) Survey. Matern Child Health J 11(6):549, 2007
Kendig S, Keats JP, Hoffman MC, et al: Consensus bundle on maternal health: perinatal depression and
anxiety. Obstet Gynecol 129(3):422, 2017
Kieler H, Artama M, Engeland A, et al: Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors during pregnancy and
risk of persistent pulmonary hypertension in the newborn: population based cohort study from the
five Nordic countries. BMJ 344:d8012, 2012
Kim JH, Choi SS, Ha K: A closer look at depression in mothers who kill their children: is it unipolar or
bipolar depression? J Clin Psychiatry 69(10):1625, 2008
Kim JJ, La Porte LM, Saleh MP, et al: Suicide risk among perinatal women who report thoughts of selfharm on depression screens. Obstet Gynecol 125(4):885, 2015
Ko JY, Rockhill KM, Tong VT, et al: Trends in postpartum depressive symptoms—27 states, 2004, 2008,
and 2012. MMWR 66(6):153, 2017
Koren G, Finkelstein Y, Matsui D, et al: Diagnosis and management of poor neonatal adaptation
syndrome in newborns exposed in utero to selective serotonin/norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors. J
Obstet Gynaecol Can 31(4):348, 2009
Koren G, Nordeng H: Antidepressant use during pregnancy: the benefit-risk ratio. Am J Obstet Gynecol
207:157, 2012
Kukshal P, Thelma BK, Nimgaonkar VL, et al: Genetics of schizophrenia from a clinical perspective. Int
Rev Psychiatry 24(5):393, 2012
Lavender T, Richens Y, Milan SJ, et al: Telephone support for women during pregnancy and the first six
weeks postpartum. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 7:CD009338, 2013
Lugo-Candelas C, Cha J, Hong S, et al: Associations between brain structure and connectivity in infants
and exposure to selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors during pregnancy. JAMA Pediatr 172(6):525,
2018
Lyell DJ, Chambers AS, Steidtmann D, et al: Antenatal identification of major depressive disorder: a
cohort study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 207(6):506.e1, 2012
Maguire J, Mody I: GABA(A) plasticity during pregnancy: relevance to postpartum depression. Neuron
59(2):207, 2008

Man KKC, Chan EW, Ip P, et al: Prenatal antidepressant use and risk of attention-deficit/hyperactivity
disorder in offspring: population based cohort study. BMJ 357:j2350, 2017
McCurdy AP, Boulé NG, Sivak A, et al: Effects of exercise on mild-to-moderate depressive symptoms
in the postpartum period: a meta-analysis. Obstet Gynecol 129(6):1087, 2017
McFarlane J, Maddoux J, Cesario S, et al: Effect of abuse during pregnancy on maternal and child
safety and functioning for 24 months after delivery. Obstet Gynecol 123(4):839, 2014
Mei-Dan E, Ray JG, Vigod SN, et al: Perinatal outcomes among women with bipolar disorder: a
population-based cohort study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 212(3):367.e1, 2015
Meltzer-Brody S: Treating perinatal depression: risks and stigma. Obstet Gynecol 124(4):653, 2014
Meltzer-Brody S, Colguhoun H, Riesenberg R, et al: Brexanolone injection in post-partum depression:
two multicentre, double-blind, randomised, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trials. Lancet
392(10152):1058, 2018a
Meltzer-Brody S, Howard LM, Bergink V, et al: Postpartum psychiatric disorders. Nat Rev Dis Primers
4:18022, 2018b
Melville JL, Gavin A, Guo Y, et al: Depressive disorders during pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 116:1064,
2010
Mental Health America: Postpartum disorders. 2019. Available at:
www.mentalhealthamerica.net/conditions/postpartum-disorders. Accessed April 15, 2019
Metz TD, Borgett LM: Marijuana use in pregnancy and while breastfeeding. Obstet Gynecol
132(5):1198, 2018
Metz TD, Rovner P, Allshouse AA, et al: Maternal deaths from suicide and drug overdose in Colorado.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 214(1):S126, 2016
Mezzacappa A, Lasica PA, Giafagna F, et al: Risk for autism spectrum disorders according to period of
prenatal antidepressant exposure: a systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA Pediatr
171(6):555, 2017
Micali N, Stemann Larsen P, Strandberg-Larsen K, et al: Size at birth and preterm birth in women with
lifetime eating disorders: a prospective population-based study. BJOG 123(8):1301, 2016
Miller LJ: Use of electroconvulsive therapy during pregnancy. Hosp Community Psychiatry 45:444, 1994
Molyneaux E, Poston L, Ashurst-Williams S, et al: Obesity and mental disorders during pregnancy and
postpartum: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Obstet Gynecol 123(4):857, 2014
Muller-Oerlinghausen B, Berghofer A, Bauer M: Bipolar disorder. Lancet 359:241, 2002
Munk-Olsen T, Liu X, Viktorin A, et al: Maternal and infant outcomes associated with lithium use in
pregnancy: and international collaborative meta-analysis of six cohort studies. Lancet Psychiatry
5(8):644, 2018
National Institute of Mental Health: The numbers count: mental disorders in America. NIH Publication
No. 06–4584, 2016
National Institute of Mental Health: Bipolar disorder. 2017a. Available at:
www.nimh.nih.gov/health/statistics/bipolar-disorder.shtml. Accessed October 10, 2019
National Institute of Mental Health: Anxiety disorder. 2017b. Available at:
www.nimh.nih.gov/health/statistics/any-anxiety-disorder.shtml. Accessed October 10, 2019
National Institute of Mental Health: Personality disorders. 2017c. Available at:
www.nimh.nih.gov/health/statistics/personality-disorders.shtml. Accessed October 10, 2019
National Institute of Mental Health: Postpartum Depression. 2019. Available at:
www.nimh.nih.gov/health/publications/postpartum-depression-facts/postpartum-depressionbrochure_146657.pdf. Accessed October 10, 2019

National Institute of Mental Health: Post-traumatic stress disorder. 2019. Available at:
www.nimh.nih.gov/health/topics/post-traumatic-stress-disorder-ptsd/index.shtml. Accessed October
10, 2019
Nelson DB, Doty M, McIntire DD, et al: Rates and precipitating factors for postpartum depression
following screening in consecutive births. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 11:1, 2015
Nelson DB, Freeman MP, Johnson NL, et al: A prospective study of postpartum depression in 17648
parturients. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 26(12):1156, 2013
Novick DM, Swartz HA, Frank E: Suicide attempts in bipolar I and bipolar II disorder: a review and
meta-analysis of the evidence. Bipolar Disord 12(1):1, 2010
O’Connor E, Rossom RC, Henninger M, et al: Primary care screening for and treatment of depression
in pregnant and postpartum women: evidence report and systematic review for the US Prevention
Services Task Force. JAMA 315(4):388, 2016
O’Hara MW, Wisner KL: Perinatal mental illness: definition, description and aetiology. Best Pract Res
Clin Obstet Gynaecol 28(1):3, 2014
O’Keane V, Lightman S, Patrick K, et al: Changes in the maternal hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis
during the early puerperium may be related to the postpartum blues. J Neuroendocrinol 23(11):1149,
2011
Ornoy A, Koren G: Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors during pregnancy: do we have now more
definite answers related to prenatal exposure. Birth Defects Res 109(12):898, 2017
Palladino CL, Singh V, Campbell H, et al: Homicide and suicide during the perinatal period: findings from
the National Violent Death Reporting System. Obstet Gynecol 118(5):1056, 2011
Patorno E, Huybrechts KF, Bateman BT, et al: Lithium use in pregnancy and the risk of cardiac
malformations. N Engl J Med 376(23):2245, 2017
Pozzi RA, Yee LM, Brown K, et al: Pregnancy in the severely mentally ill patient as an opportunity for
global coordination of care. Am J Obstet Gynecol 210:32, 2014
Pratt LA, Brody DJ, Gu Q: Antidepressant use among persons aged 12 and over: United States, 2011–
2014. NCHS Data Brief 283:3, 2017
Ray S, Stowe ZN: The use of antidepressant medication in pregnancy. Best Pract Res Clin Obstet
Gynaecol 28(1):71, 2014
Ray-Griffith SL, Coker JL, Rabie N, et al: Pregnancy and electroconvulsive therapy: a multidisciplinary
approach. J ECT 32(2):104, 2016
Rasic D, Hajek T, Alda M, et al: Risk of mental illness in offspring of parents with schizophrenia, bipolar
disorder, and major depressive disorder: a meta-analysis of family high-risk studies. Schizophr Bull
40(1):28, 2014
Richards DS: Is electroconvulsive therapy in pregnancy safe? Obstet Gynecol 110:451, 2007
Robinson GE: Treatment of schizophrenia in pregnancy and postpartum. J Popul Ther Clin Pharmacol
19(3):e380, 2012
Romero R, Badr MS: A role for sleep disorders in pregnancy complications: challenges and
opportunities. Am J Obstet Gynecol 210:3, 2014
Ross LE, McLean LM: Anxiety disorders during pregnancy and the postpartum period: a systematic
review. J Clin Psychiatry 67:1285, 2006
Santucci AK, Singer LT, Wisniewski SR, et al: One-year developmental outcomes for infants of mothers
with bipolar disorder. J Clin Psychiatry 78(8):1083, 2017
Schneier FR: Clinical practice. Social anxiety disorder. N Engl J Med 355(10):1029, 2006
Shaw JG, Asch SM, Kimerling R, et al: Posttraumatic stress disorder and risk of spontaneous preterm
birth. Obstet Gynecol 124(6):1111, 2014

Silverman ME, Reichenberg A, Savitz DA, et al: The risk factors for postpartum depression: a
population-based study. Depress Anxiety 34(2):178, 2017
Siu AL, US Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF), Bibbins-Domingo K, et al: Screening for
depression in adults: US Preventive Services Task Force recommendation statement. JAMA
315(4):380, 2016
Smith MV, Howell H, Wang H, et al: Success of mental health referral among pregnant and postpartum
women with psychiatric distress. Gen Hosp Psychiatry 31(2):155, 2009
Steinberg JR, McCulloch CE, Adler NE: Abortion and mental health: findings from the National
Comorbidity Survey Replication. Obstet Gynecol 123:263, 2014
Stewart RD, Nelson DB, Adhikari EH, et al: The obstetrical and neonatal impact of maternal opioid
detoxification in pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 209(3):267.e1, 2013
Susser LC, Sansone SA, Hermann AD: Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor for depression in
pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 215(6):722, 2016
Tam WH, Chung T: Psychosomatic disorders in pregnancy. Curr Opin Obstet Gynecol 19:126, 2007
Tarney CM, Berry-Caban C, Jain RB, et al: Association of spouse deployment on pregnancy outcomes
in a U.S. military population. Obstet Gynecol 126(3):569, 2015
Taylor CL, Broadbent M, Khondoker M, et al: Predictors of severe relapse in pregnant women with
psychotic or bipolar disorders. J Psychiatr Res 104:100, 2018
Tebeka S, Le Strat Y, Mandelbrot L, et al: Early- and late-onset postpartum depression exhibit distinct
associated factors: the IGEDEPP prospective cohort study. BJOG 128(10):1683, 2021
Texas Health and Human Services: Texas Health Steps Medical Checkups. 2019. Available at:
www.txhealthsteps.com/texas-health-steps-medicaid-resource-center. Accessed October 8, 2019
Thorsness KR, Watson C, LaRusso EM: Perinatal anxiety: approach to diagnosis and management in
the obstetric setting. Am J Obstet Gynecol 219(4):326, 2018
Tinkelman A, Hill EA, Deligiannidis KM: Management of new onset psychosis in the postpartum period.
J Clin Psychiatry 78(9):1423, 2017
Toscano M, Royzer R, Castillo D, et al: Prevalence of depression or anxiety during antepartum
hospitalizations for obstetric complications: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Obstet Gynecol
137(5):881, 2021
Venkatesh KK, Kaimal A, Nadel H, et al: Implementation of universal screening for depression during
pregnancy: feasibility and impact on obstetric care. Am J Obstet Gynecol 215(4):517.e1, 2016
Viktorin A, Uher R, Kolevzon A, et al: Association of antidepressant medication use during pregnancy
with intellectual disability in offspring. JAMA Psychiatry 74(10):1031, 2017
Vythilingum B: Anxiety disorders in pregnancy. Curr Psychiatry Rep 10(4):331, 2008
Weng SC Chang JC, Yeh MK, et al: Do stillbirth, miscarriage, and termination of pregnancy increase
risks of attempted and completed suicide within a year? A population-based nested case-control
study. BJOG 125(8):983, 2018
Williams KE, Koleva H: Identification and treatment of peripartum anxiety disorders. Obstet Gynecol
Clin North Am 45(3):469, 2018
Wisner KL, Parry BL, Piontek CM: Postpartum depression. N Engl J Med 347:194, 2002
Yonemoto N, Dowswell T, Nagai S, et al: Schedules for home visits in early postpartum period.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 8:CD009326, 2017
Yonkers KA, Gilstad-Hayden K, Forray A, et al: Association of panic disorder, generalized anxiety
disorder, and benzodiazepine treatment during pregnancy with risk of adverse birth outcomes.
JAMA Psychiatry 174(11):1145, 2017

Yonkers KA, Smith MV, Forray A, et al: Pregnant women with posttraumatic stress disorder and risk of
preterm birth. JAMA Psychiatry 71(8):897, 2014
Yonkers KA, Vigod S, Ross LE: Diagnosis, pathophysiology, and management of mood disorders in
pregnant and postpartum women. Obstet Gynecol 117:961, 2011
Yost NP, Bloom SL, McIntire DD, et al: A prospective observational study of domestic violence during
pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 106(1):61, 2005

CHAPTER 65

Dermatological Disorders

PREGNANCY-SPECIFIC DERMATOSES
OTHER DERMATOLOGICAL CONDITIONS
DERMATOLOGICAL TREATMENT
REFERENCES

PREGNANCY-SPECIFIC DERMATOSES
Four dermatoses considered unique to pregnancy are pemphigoid gestationis
(PG), pruritic urticarial papules and plaques of pregnancy (PUPPP), atopic
eruption of pregnancy (AEP), and intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy.
Descriptions of these are given in Table 65-1. Their gross appearance can be
similar to each other or to other skin disorders, and pruritus is a common
feature. Of these four, adverse fetal outcomes are linked only with PG and
intrahepatic cholestasis. The latter is discussed in detail in Chapter 58 (p.
1032). It generally lacks primary skin lesions, but pruritus is usually
associated with abnormally elevated serum bile acid levels and mildly
increased hepatic transaminase levels.
TABLE 65-1. Pregnancy-specific Dermatoses

■ Pemphigoid Gestationis
In this rare autoimmune bullous disease, pruritic papules and urticarial
plaques initially form. Vesicles or bullae usually follow after 1 to 2 weeks.
Lesions frequently involve umbilicus and other skin surfaces but typically
spare mucous membranes, scalp, and face (Fig. 65-1).

FIGURE 65-1 Pemphigoid gestationis. A. Abdominal plaques classically involve the umbilicus. B.
Blistered lesions on the wrist and forearm. (Reproduced with permission from Dr. Kara Ehlers.)

Previously termed herpes gestationis, PG is not related to the
herpesvirus. Instead, maternal immunoglobulin G (IgG) antibodies target
collagen XVII found in the basement membrane of skin and amnionic
epithelium (Kelly, 1988; Sadik, 2016). Collagen XVII is also termed bullous
pemphigoid 180 (BP180). Autoantibody binding to BP180 activates
complement to promote eosinophil chemotaxis to the antigen-antibody
complexes. Eosinophilic degranulation damages the dermal–epidermal
junction and leads to blistering.

Pregnancy
In most cases, PG develops during a first pregnancy. Most subsequent
pregnancies also are affected, usually earlier and more severely (Tani,
2015). Additionally, other autoimmune diseases, especially Graves disease,
are frequent in affected women (Jenkins, 1999; Shornick, 1992).
PG usually begins during the second or third trimester, but postpartum
onset or exacerbation is common (Lawley, 1978). The disease course is often
marked by antepartum flares and remissions. In cases with early-onset and
blistering, PG can be associated with preterm birth, oligohydramnios, and
fetal-growth restriction (Al-Saif, 2016; Chi, 2009; Dabas, 2018). One theory
suggests mild placental insufficiency stems from IgG and complement
deposition along the amnionic basement membrane (Huilaja, 2013). Thus,
surveillance for and management of these complications in affected
pregnancies is reasonable.
In 5 to 10 percent of cases, IgG antibodies passively transfer from the
mother to cause similar skin lesions in the newborn (Erickson, 2002). These
eruptions in the neonate require only wound care and clear spontaneously
within a few weeks as the passively acquired IgG levels drop. After
delivery, maternal lesions resolve without scarring, and most women are
disease-free after 6 months (Jenkins, 1999). In some, however, resolution is
protracted. Disease may be exacerbated during menses or by oral
contraceptives (Fania, 2017; Semkova, 2009).

Diagnosis and Treatment
Before bullae form, these lesions may resemble PUPPP. Other diagnoses
include bullous pemphigoid, pustular psoriasis, erythema multiforme, linear
IgA bullous dermatosis, urticaria, dermatitis herpetiformis, allergic contact

dermatitis, and AEP (Lipozenčić, 2012). Potentially life-threatening druginduced blistering syndromes, such as Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic
epidermal necrolysis, also must be excluded (Stern, 2012).
Diagnostically, immunofluorescent staining of a skin punch biopsy
sample is the most accurate. With this, C3 complement and sometimes IgG
are seen deposited along the basement membrane between the epidermis and
the dermis (Katz, 1976; Tani, 2015). Circulating IgG antibodies against
BP180 also can be detected in maternal serum using enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) (Al Saif, 2017; Sitaru, 2004).
Pruritus with PG can be severe. Early in its course, topical high-potency
corticosteroids and oral antihistamines may be effective (p. 1158). For
refractory lesions, an oral corticosteroid is provided, and prednisone or
prednisolone is preferable. Either is inactivated by placental 11-βhydroxylase enzyme, which significantly lowers fetal exposure
(Benediktsson, 1997). Oral prednisone, 0.5 to 1 mg/kg daily and gradually
tapered to a maintenance dose, is one option. In rare intractable cases,
intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) therapy, cyclosporine, or plasmapheresis
has been used (Huilaja, 2015; Marker, 2011; Yang, 2018). Rituximab early in
pregnancy also is described, but its later use carries the risk of transient
newborn immunosuppression risks (Chakravarty, 2011; Tourte, 2017).

■ Pruritic Urticarial Papules and Plaques of Pregnancy
This common pregnancy-specific dermatosis is characterized by intensely
pruritic, 1- to 2-mm erythematous papules that coalesce to form urticarial
plaques. Also known as polymorphic eruption of pregnancy, PUPPP usually
appears late in pregnancy (Rudolph, 2005). Rarely, onset is postpartum
(Park, 2013). The rash affects the abdomen and proximal thighs in 97 percent
of women (Fig. 65-2). Lesions often initially form within striae but spare
periumbilical skin. The face, palms, and soles are rarely involved (High,
2005). It is more frequent in whites and nulliparas, those with multifetal
gestation, and those carrying a male fetus (Regnier, 2008). PUPPP seldom
recurs in subsequent pregnancies. Its cause is unknown, but an autoimmune
basis is not implicated (Ambros-Rudolph, 2011; Lawley, 1979).

FIGURE 65-2 Pruritic urticarial papules and plaques of pregnancy (PUPPP) shows small papules on
the buttock and proximal thigh and within abdominal striae.

PUPPP mimics several other skin eruptions. Some include contact
dermatitis, drug eruption, viral exanthem, insect bites, scabies infestation,
pityriasis rosea, and the other pregnancy-specific dermatoses (Brandão,
2017). Specifically, it may appear similar to early PG that has not yet
blistered. In unclear cases, skin biopsy and negative serum BP180 antibody
levels help to differentiate the two.
Pruritus will usually respond to treatment with oral antihistamines, skin
emollients, and topical corticosteroids (Lehrhoff, 2013). A few women will
need short-course systemic corticosteroids to relieve severe itching
(Scheinfeld, 2008).
PUPPP carries no adverse pregnancy effects. It usually resolves within
several days following delivery and does not scar. In 15 to 20 percent of
women, however, symptoms persist for 2 to 4 weeks postpartum (Vaughan
Jones, 1999).

■ Atopic Eruption of Pregnancy

This umbrella term encompasses three conditions previously considered
separately: eczema in pregnancy, prurigo of pregnancy, and pruritic
folliculitis of pregnancy (Ambros-Rudolph, 2006). Two thirds of women
with AEP have widespread eczematous changes, whereas the other third
have papular lesions (American Academy of Dermatology, 2019). Diagnosis
is greatly aided by a history of prior atopy and by rash characteristics. As a
group, these three pose no risk to the fetus (Roth, 2016).
Eczema in pregnancy appears as traditional eczema but with a pregnancy
onset. It is the most common pregnancy-specific dermatosis, and affected
skin shows dry, thickened, scaly, red patches involving extremity flexures,
nipples, neck, and face (Ambros-Rudolph, 2011). In contrast, prurigo of
pregnancy, also known as prurigo gestationis, is characterized by 5- to 10mm, itchy, erythematous papules or nodules commonly found on the extensor
surfaces and trunk. Last, pruritic folliculitis of pregnancy is rare and notable
for small, erythematous follicular papules and sterile pustules predominantly
on the trunk. Of AEP cases, 75 percent develop in the first or second
trimesters (Ambros-Rudolph, 2006). All lesions usually resolve with
delivery but may persist for up to 3 months postpartum. Recurrence with
subsequent pregnancies is variable but common.
Diagnosis is one of exclusion. Biopsy findings and serology results
specific for PG are negative (p. 1155). Serum bile acid levels help exclude
cholestasis of pregnancy. Many women with eczema of pregnancy have
elevated serum immunoglobulin E (IgE) levels (Ambros-Rudolph, 2006).
For all three AEP manifestations, skin lesions and pruritus are usually
controlled with chronic emollient use, as-needed oral antihistamines, and
low- or moderate-potency topical corticosteroid preparations (Roth, 2016).
With the latter, twice-daily application is continued for several weeks to
achieve improvement. For maintenance, moisturizer alone or once- or twiceweekly topical corticosteroid use is reasonable. For severe eczema, secondline agents include short-course ultrapotent topical corticosteroids. In some
cases, topical tacrolimus, narrow-band ultraviolet B therapy, an oral
corticosteroid, or cyclosporine is required (Eichenfield, 2014; Vestergaard,
2019).

OTHER DERMATOLOGICAL CONDITIONS

■ Acne Vulgaris
This is a common chronic dermatosis that may worsen, improve, or remain
stable during pregnancy. In symptomatic gravidas, either 2.5- to 5-percent
benzoyl peroxide or 15- to 20-percent azelaic acid is a suitable topical,
antiinflammatory, comedolytic agent (Chien, 2016). If needed, 5-percent
benzoyl peroxide can instead be coupled with either topical erythromycin or
clindamycin, and combined solutions are available. In these combinations,
benzoyl peroxide minimizes development of Propionibacterium acnes drug
resistance (Zaenglein, 2016). Topical retinoids include tretinoin and
adapalene. Large studies have not found higher rates of major birth defects
with their topical use (Jick, 1993; Shapiro, 1997). However, these are
probably best avoided during pregnancy, especially the first trimester
(Kaplan, 2015; Panchaud, 2012). The topical retinoid tazarotene is
contraindicated. For more severe cases, oral antibiotics that include
erythromycin, azithromycin, cephalexin, or amoxicillin may be coupled with
benzoyl peroxide. Systemic antibiotics are ideally delayed until the second
trimester, and therapy duration limited to 4 to 6 weeks (Chien, 2016).
Refractory cases often merit dermatological consultation. Also, for severe
cases, a short course of oral corticosteroid or intralesional injection is an
option. Of these, oral agents are delayed until after the first trimester due to
the small risk for facial clefts (Chap. 8, p. 153).

■ Psoriasis and Pustular Psoriasis of Pregnancy
Psoriasis is a common dermatosis with a variable course during pregnancy,
however, postpartum flares are common (Murase, 2005). The National
Psoriasis Foundation offers pregnancy guidelines (Bae, 2012). Emollients
alone are given initially, and low- or moderate-potency topical
corticosteroids can be added. In resistant cases, restrained use of highpotency or ultrapotent topical corticosteroids appears safe in the second and
third trimesters. Ultraviolet B phototherapy is a second-line option. Last,
cyclosporine, oral corticosteroids, or tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α)
antagonists that include adalimumab, etanercept, and infliximab are third-tier
agents for pregnancy. Overall, psoriasis itself does not pose a higher risk of
adverse pregnancy outcomes (Bobotsis, 2016). With severe disease, a small

increased risk of low birthweight, gestational diabetes, and preeclampsia
was found by some (Bröms, 2018; Yang, 2011).
Psoriasis is most commonly of the chronic plaque variety. In contrast,
with pustular psoriasis of pregnancy, severe systemic symptoms may
develop and can mimic sepsis. Formerly called impetigo herpetiformis, this
rare pustular form has an erythematous background and pruritic plaques
ringed by sterile pustules that enlarge, coalesce, and then crust (Fig. 65-3).
Plaques initially involve intertriginous areas but may spread to the torso,
extremities, and oral mucosa. Extensive lesions can lead to massive fluid
loss with hypovolemia, placental insufficiency, and fetal compromise and
may also become secondarily infected.

FIGURE 65-3 Generalized pustular psoriasis of pregnancy displays erythematous, sometimes pruritic
plaques ringed by sterile pustules that enlarge and then form a scaling crust. (Reproduced with
permission from Dr. Paul Slocum.)

Testing reveals leukocytosis, elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate,
hypocalcemia, and hypoalbuminemia (Umezawa, 2003). Blood cultures and
skin viral/bacterial cultures to exclude infection and a diagnostic skin biopsy
are obtained. Classically, the former are sterile, and the latter reveals
epidermal pustules of neutrophils.

First-line treatment is with oral prednisone (15–80 mg/d), cyclosporine
(2–3 mg/kg/d), infliximab (Remicade), topical corticosteroids, or topical
calcipotriene (Robinson, 2012; Trivedi, 2018). Selection of a systemic or
topical agent and its dose is directed by disease severity. As needed, fluid
resuscitation, electrolyte correction, and intravenous antibiotics for
secondary infections are adjuncts (Huang, 2011). Pustular psoriasis of
pregnancy typically resolves quickly postpartum, and thus early delivery can
be considered individually. Recurrences are reported in subsequent
pregnancies and with menses or oral contraceptive use (Roth, 2011).

■ Erythema Nodosum
This skin condition reflects subcutaneous fat inflammation and is associated
with many disorders, including pregnancy. Other triggers are infections,
sarcoidosis, drugs, Behçet syndrome, inflammatory bowel disease, or
malignancy (Mert, 2007; Papagrigoraki, 2010). Characteristically, tender,
red, warm, 1- to 6-cm nodules and plaques develop rapidly on extensor
surfaces. After a few days, lesions flatten, and color evolves like a bruise—
from dark red and purple to yellow green. Constitutional symptoms also may
be present. Initial evaluation and treatment focuses on the underlying
etiology. Symptoms spontaneously resolve in 1 to 6 weeks without scarring
but may leave residual hyperpigmentation (Acosta, 2013).

■ Pyogenic Granuloma
This lesion is frequently seen in pregnancy (Fig. 65-4) (Bett, 2019). Poorly
named, pyogenic granuloma is actually a lobular capillary hemangioma.
Pregnancy-associated elevations in angiogenic factors that include vascular
endothelial growth factor are implicated (Yuan, 2000, 2004). It commonly
forms on the gingiva, other oral/nasal surfaces, or hand in response to lowgrade local irritation or trauma (Cardoso 2013). Lesions grow quickly and
bleed with minimal provocation. Active bleeding can be controlled with
pressure and application of a silver nitrate stick or Monsel (ferric subsulfate)
paste. These growths often resolve within months postpartum and thus may
be observed antepartum. But, with a symptomatic antepartum growth, a
persistent postpartum lesion, or an unclear diagnosis, excision is preferred.
An option is scalpel excision plus suturing, electrosurgical curettage, laser

photocoagulation, or cryotherapy. Oral lesions are best referred to
specialists.

FIGURE 65-4 Pyogenic granuloma is characterized grossly by a lobulated red growth on a
pedunculated or sessile base. With minimal trauma, these vascular lesions bleed easily. (Reproduced
with permission from Dr. Sarah White.)

■ Miscellaneous Conditions
Hidradenitis suppurativa is a chronic inflammatory skin disease. Keratin
plugging of hair follicles and recurrent inflammation lead to painful nodules
and abscesses that rupture to create sinus tracts. Hurley stages I–III range
from transient, widely spaced inflammatory papules to diffuse involvement
with multiple deep sinus tracts between skin abscesses (Hurley, 1989). For
most, symptoms during pregnancy are unchanged or improved (Kromann,
2014; Vossen, 2017).
Treatment aims to decrease cutaneous inflammation and provide
antibacterial effects. For active stage I/II disease, 1-percent clindamycin is
topically applied twice daily for 12 weeks (Alikhan, 2019). As alternatives,
0.75-percent metronidazole or 2-percent erythromycin gel are suitable

(Perng, 2017). For stage II/III disease, a 300-mg clindamycin plus a 300-mg
rifampin dose orally twice daily for 10 weeks has evidence-based support
(Alikhan, 2019). Adalimumab (Humira) is an FDA-approved biological
agent that targets TNF-α and offers a second-line option for advanced-stage
disease in pregnancy (Jemec, 2019; Perng, 2017).
Neurofibromatosis lesions are typified by benign cutaneous
neurofibromas, café-au-lait spots, axillary and inguinal freckling, benign iris
nodules (Lisch nodules), and optic nerve gliomas. Neurofibromas may grow
in size and number during pregnancy (Cesaretti, 2013; Dugoff, 1996). With
neurofibromatosis type 1, higher rates of preeclampsia and preterm birth
complicate pregnancy (Leppävirta, 2017; Terry, 2013). With type 2, some
evidence suggests a risk for preeclampsia (Terry, 2015). Prenatal genetic
diagnosis is available for both types (Merker, 2015).
Rosacea fulminans, also known as pyoderma faciale, is rare and
typified by facial pustules and coalescing draining sinuses but without
comedones. Its marked presentation usually merits dermatological
consultation. Topical or oral antibiotics are primary treatment, and topical
corticosteroids may be added. Less often, short-course oral corticosteroids
or focal surgical drainage is a needed adjunct (Angileri, 2021; Fuentelsaz,
2011; Jarrett, 2010).
Other skin conditions discussed elsewhere in this book are hirsutism and
melanoma (Chap. 66, p. 1176), cutaneous lupus (Chap. 62, p. 1111),
hyperpigmentation (Chap. 4, p. 55), and skin lesions seen with infections
(Chaps. 67 and 68, p. 1182).

DERMATOLOGICAL TREATMENT
Local skin care, oral antihistamines, and topical corticosteroids are
commonly used for many dermatoses. Oral antihistamines are given for
pruritus. Suitable options include first-generation agents such as
diphenhydramine (Benadryl), 25 to 50 mg every 6 hours, or
chlorpheniramine (Chlor-Trimeton), 4 mg every 6 hours. Second-generation
agents—loratadine (Claritin) 10 mg daily or cetirizine (Zyrtec) 5 or 10 mg
daily—may produce less sedation and are also safe for pregnancy.
Numerous topical corticosteroid preparations are available, and in the
United States, these are categorized by potency (Table 65-2). For initial

treatment of dermatological disorders, low- or moderate-potency agents are
preferred. Low-potency agents include 1-percent hydrocortisone and 0.05percent desonide (DesOwen). Moderate-potency drugs are 0.1-percent
triamcinolone acetonide (Aristocort) and 0.1-percent mometasone furoate
(Elocon). High-potency medications include 0.05-percent betamethasone
dipropionate (Diprolene). Ultrapotent agents, such as 0.05-percent
clobetasol propionate (Temovate), are best reserved for refractory disorders
and used for only 2 to 4 weeks on small surface areas.
TABLE 65-2. Commonly Used Topical Corticosteroids in Pregnancy

Mild and moderate strengths are not associated with adverse pregnancy
outcomes, whereas high-potency and ultrapotent agents pose a small risk for
fetal-growth restriction with large cumulative doses (Chi, 2013, 2015). Even
then, this risk is less than that with oral corticosteroids. Importantly, with any
topical agent, factors that raise systemic absorption include a large surface
area treated, compromised epidermal barrier, occlusive dressing, prolonged
treatment duration, and coadministration of other topical agents that enhance
absorption.
For use in pregnancy and lactation, Murase (2014) and Butler (2014)
have compiled tables and evidence-based descriptions of most. Table 65-3
reflects more commonly encountered agents. Notable therapeutic agents to
avoid during pregnancy include methotrexate, psoralen plus ultraviolet A,
mycophenolate mofetil, podophyllin, and systemic retinoids. These
teratogens are discussed in Chapter 8. Bacterial infections are a potential
secondary complication of skin disorders and are treated promptly with oral
antimicrobial agents with gram-positive coverage.
TABLE 65-3. Some Dermatological Agents and Their Suitability for
Pregnancy

REFERENCES
Acosta KA, Haver MC, Kelly B: Etiology and therapeutic management of erythema nodosum during
pregnancy: an update. Am J Clin Dermatol 14(3):215, 2013
Al-Saif F, Elisa A, Al-Homidy A, et al: Retrospective analysis of pemphigoid gestationis in 32 Saudi
patients—clinicopathological features and a literature review. J Reprod Immunol 116:42, 2016
Al Saif F, Jouen F, Hebert V, et al: Sensitivity and specificity of BP180 NC16A enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay for the diagnosis of pemphigoid gestationis. J Am Acad Dermatol 76(3):560,
2017
Alikhan A, Sayed C, Alavi A, et al: North American clinical management guidelines for hidradenitis
suppurativa: a publication from the United States and Canadian Hidradenitis Suppurativa
Foundations: Part II: topical, intralesional, and systemic medical management. J Am Acad Dermatol
81(1):91, 2019
Ambros-Rudolph CM, Müllegger RR, Vaughan-Jones SA, et al: The specific dermatoses of pregnancy
revisited and reclassified: results of a retrospective two-center study on 505 pregnant patients. J Am
Acad Dermatol 54:395, 2006
Ambros-Rudolph CM: Dermatoses of pregnancy—clues to diagnosis, fetal risk and therapy. Ann
Dermatol 23(3):265, 2011
American Academy of Dermatology: Learning module: dermatoses in pregnancy. 2019. Available at:
https://www.aad.org/member/education/residents/bdc/pregnancy. Accessed November 19, 2019

Angileri L, Veraldi S, Barbareschi M: Rosacea fulminans: two case reports and review of the literature.
J Dermatolog Treat 32(1):110, 2021
Bae YS, Van Voorhees AS, Hsu S, et al: Review of treatment options for psoriasis in pregnant or
lactating women: from the Medical Board of the National Psoriasis Foundation. J Am Acad
Dermatol 67(3):459, 2012
Benediktsson R, Calder AA, Edwards CR, et al: Placental 11 beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase: a key
regulator of fetal glucocorticoid exposure. Clin Endocrinol 46(2):161, 1997
Bett JV, Batistella EÂ, Melo G, et al: Prevalence of oral mucosal disorders during pregnancy: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. J Oral Pathol Med 48(4):270, 2019
Bobotsis R, Gulliver WP, Monaghan K, et al: Psoriasis and adverse pregnancy outcomes: a systematic
review of observational studies. Br J Dermatol 175(3):464, 2016
Brandão P, Sousa-Faria B, Marinho C, et al: Polymorphic eruption of pregnancy: review of literature. J
Obstet Gynaecol 37(2):137, 2017
Briggs GG, Freeman RK, Towers CV, et al: Drugs in Pregnancy and Lactation, 11th ed. Philadelphia,
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2017
Bröms G, Haerskjold A, Granath F, et al: Effect of maternal psoriasis on pregnancy and birth outcomes:
a population-based cohort study from Denmark and Sweden. Acta Derm Venereol 98(8):728, 2018
Butler DC, Heller MM, Murase JE: Safety of dermatologic medications in pregnancy and lactation: part
II. lactation. J Am Acad Dermatol 70(3):417.e1, 2014
Cardoso JA, Spanemberg JC, Cherubini K, et al: Oral granuloma gravidarum: a retrospective study of
41 cases in Southern Brazil. J Appl Oral Sci 21(3):215, 2013
Cesaretti C, Melloni G, Quagliarini D: Neurofibromatosis type 1 and pregnancy: maternal complications
and attitudes about prenatal diagnosis. Am J Med Genet A 161A (2):386, 2013
Chakravarty EF, Murray ER, Kelman A, et al: Pregnancy outcomes after maternal exposure to
rituximab. Blood 117(5):1499, 2011
Chi CC, Wang SH, Charles-Holmes R, et al: Pemphigoid gestationis: early onset and blister formations
are associated with adverse pregnancy outcomes. Br J Dermatol 160(6):1222, 2009
Chi CC, Wang SH, Mayon-White R: Pregnancy outcomes after maternal exposure to topical
corticosteroids: a UK population-based cohort study. JAMA Dermatol 149(11):1274, 2013
Chi CC, Wang SH, Wojnarowska F, et al: Safety of topical corticosteroids in pregnancy. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 10:CD007346, 2015
Chien AL, Qi J, Rainer B, et al: Treatment of acne in pregnancy. J Am Board Fam Med 29(2):254, 2016
Dabas G, Afra TP, De D, et al: Anhydramnios in patients with pemphigoid gestationis. JAMA Dermatol
154(4):484, 2018
Dugoff L, Sujansky E: Neurofibromatosis type 1 and pregnancy. Am J Med Genet 66(1):7, 1996
Eichenfield LF, Tom WL, Berger TG, et al: Guidelines of care for the management of atopic dermatitis:
section 2. management and treatment of atopic dermatitis with topical therapies. J Am Acad
Dermatol 71(1):116, 2014
Erickson NI, Ellis RL: Neonatal rash due to herpes gestationis. N Engl J Med 347(9):660, 2002
Fania L, Guerriero C, Ricci F, et al: Herpes gestationis and oral contraceptive: case report and review of
the literature. Dermatol Ther 30(5):1, 2017
Fuentelsaz V, Ara M, Corredera C, et al: Rosacea fulminans in pregnancy: successful treatment with
azithromycin. Clin Exp Dermatol 36(6):674, 2011
High WA, Hoang MP, Miller MD: Pruritic urticarial papules and plaques of pregnancy with unusual and
extensive palmoplantar involvement. Obstet Gynecol 105:1261, 2005

Huang YH, Chen YP, Liang CC, et al: Impetigo herpetiformis with gestational hypertension: a case
report and literature review. Dermatology 222(3):221, 2011
Huilaja L, Mäkikallio K, Hannula-Jouppi K, et al: Cyclosporine treatment in severe gestational
pemphigoid. Acta Derm Venereol 95(5):593, 2015
Huilaja L, Mäkikallio K, Sormunen R, et al: Gestational pemphigoid: placental morphology and function.
Acta Derm Venereol 93(1):33, 2013
Hurley HJ: Axillary hyperhidrosis, apocrine bromhidrosis, hidradenitis suppurativa and familial benign
pemphigus: surgical approach. In Roenigk RK, Roenigk HH (eds): Dermatologic Surgery. New
York, Marcel Dekker, 1989, p 729
Jarrett R, Gonsalves R, Anstey AV: Differing obstetric outcomes of rosacea fulminans in pregnancy:
report of three cases with review of pathogenesis and management. Clin Exp Dermatol 35(8):888,
2010
Jemec GB, Okun MM, Forman SB, et al: Adalimumab medium-term dosing strategy in moderate-tosevere hidradenitis suppurativa: integrated results from the phase III randomized placebo-controlled
PIONEER trials. Br J Dermatol 181(5):967, 2019
Jenkins RE, Hern S, Black MM: Clinical features and management of 87 patients with pemphigoid
gestationis. Clin Exp Dermatol 24(4):255, 1999
Jick SS, Terris BZ, Jick H: First trimester topical tretinoin and congenital disorders. Lancet 341:1181,
1993
Kaplan YC, Ozsarfati J, Etwel F, et al: Pregnancy outcomes following first-trimester exposure to topical
retinoids: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Br J Dermatol 173(5):1132, 2015
Katz SI, Hertz KC, Yaoita H: Herpes gestationis. Immunopathology and characterization of the HG
factor. J Clin Invest 57(6):1434, 1976
Kelly SE, Bhogal BS, Wojnarowska F, et al: Expression of a pemphigoid gestationis-related antigen by
human placenta. Br J Dermatol 118:605, 1988
Kromann CB, Deckers IE, Esmann S, et al: Risk factors, clinical course and long-term prognosis in
hidradenitis suppurativa: a cross-sectional study. Br J Dermatol 171(4):819, 2014
Lawley TJ, Hertz KC, Wade TR, et al: Pruritic urticarial papules and plaques of pregnancy. JAMA
241(16):1696, 1979
Lawley TJ, Stingl G, Katz SI: Fetal and maternal risk factors in herpes gestationis. Arch Dermatol
114(4):552, 1978
Lehrhoff S, Pomeranz MK: Specific dermatoses of pregnancy and their treatment. Dermatol Ther
26(4):274, 2013
Leppävirta J, Kallionpää RA, Uusitalo E, et al: The pregnancy in neurofibromatosis 1: a retrospective
register-based total population study. Am J Med Genet A 173(10):2641, 2017
Lipozenčić J, Ljubojevic S, Bukvić-Mokos Z: Pemphigoid gestationis. Clin Dermatol 30(1):51, 2012
Marker M, Derfler K, Monshi B, et al: Successful immunoapheresis of bullous autoimmune diseases:
pemphigus vulgaris and pemphigoid gestationis. J Dtsch Dermatol Ges 9(1):27, 2011
Merker VL, Murphy TP, Hughes JB, et al: Outcomes of preimplantation genetic diagnosis in
neurofibromatosis type 1. Fertil Steril 103(3):761, 2015
Mert A, Kumbasar H, Ozaras R, et al: Erythema nodosum: an evaluation of 100 cases. Clin Exp
Rheumatol 25(4):563, 2007
Murase JE, Chan KK, Garite TJ, et al: Hormonal effect on psoriasis in pregnancy and postpartum. Arch
Dermatol 141(5):601, 2005
Murase JE, Heller MM, Butler DC: Safety of dermatologic medications in pregnancy and lactation: part
I. pregnancy. J Am Acad Dermatol 70(3):401.e1, 2014

Panchaud A, Csajka C, Merlob P, et al: Pregnancy outcome following exposure to topical retinoids: a
multicenter prospective study. J Clin Pharmacol 52(12):1844, 2012
Papagrigoraki A, Gisondi P, Rosina P, et al: Erythema nodosum: etiological factors and relapses in a
retrospective cohort study. Eur J Dermatol 20(6):773, 2010
Park SY, Kim JH, Lee WS: Pruritic urticarial papules and plaques of pregnancy with unique distribution
developing in postpartum period. Ann Dermatol 25(4):506, 2013
Park-Wyllie L, Mazzota P, Pastuszak A, et al: Birth defects after maternal exposure to corticosteroids:
prospective cohort study and meta-analysis of epidemiological studies. Teratology 62(6):385, 2000
Perng P, Zampella JG, Okoye GA: Management of hidradenitis suppurativa in pregnancy. J Am Acad
Dermatol 76(5):979, 2017
Rademaker M, Agnew K, Andrews M, et al: Psoriasis in those planning a family, pregnant or breastfeeding. The Australasian psoriasis collaboration. Australas J Dermatol 59(2):86, 2018
Regnier S, Fermand V, Levy P, et al: A case-control study of polymorphic eruption of pregnancy. J Am
Acad Dermatol 58 (1):63, 2008
Robinson A, Van Voorhees AS, Hsu S, et al: Treatment of pustular psoriasis: from the Medical Board of
the National Psoriasis Foundation. J Am Acad Dermatol 67(2):279, 2012
Roth MM: Pregnancy dermatoses: diagnosis, management, and controversies. Am J Clin Dermatol
12(1):25, 2011
Roth MM, Cristodor P, Kroumpouzos G: Prurigo, pruritic folliculitis, and atopic eruption of pregnancy:
facts and controversies. Clin Dermatol 34(3):392, 2016
Rudolph CM, Al-Fares S, Vaughan-Jones SA, et al: Polymorphic eruption of pregnancy: clinicopathology
and potential trigger factors in 181 patients. Br J Dermatol 154:54, 2005
Sadik CD, Lima AL, Zillikens D: Pemphigoid gestationis: toward a better understanding of the
etiopathogenesis. Clin Dermatol 34(3):378, 2016
Scheinfeld N: Pruritic urticarial papules and plaques of pregnancy wholly abated with one week twice
daily application of fluticasone propionate lotion: a case report and review of the literature. Dermatol
Online 14(11):4, 2008
Sekhon S, Jeon C, Nakamura M, et al: Review of the mechanism of action of coal tar in psoriasis. J
Dermatolog Treat 29(3):230, 2018
Semkova K, Black M: Pemphigoid gestationis: current insights into pathogenesis and treatment. Eur J
Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 145(2):138, 2009
Shapiro L, Pastuszak A, Curto G, et al: Safety of first-trimester exposure to topical tretinoin: prospective
cohort study. Lancet 350:1143, 1997
Shornick JK, Black MM: Fetal risks in herpes gestationis. J Am Acad Dermatol 26:63, 1992
Sitaru C, Powell J, Messer G, et al: Immunoblotting and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay for the
diagnosis of pemphigoid gestationis. Obstet Gynecol 103(4):757, 2004
Stern RS: Exanthematous drug eruptions. N Engl J Med 366:2492, 2012
Tani N, Kimura Y, Koga H, et al: Clinical and immunological profiles of 25 patients with pemphigoid
gestationis. Br J Dermatol 172(1):120, 2015
Terry AR, Barker FG 2nd, Leffert L, et al: Neurofibromatosis type 1 and pregnancy complications: a
population-based study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 209(1):46.e1, 2013
Terry AR, Merker VL, Barker FG 2nd, et al: Pregnancy complications in women with rare tumor
suppressor syndromes affecting central and peripheral nervous system. Am J Obstet Gynecol
213(1):108, 2015
Tourte M, Brunet-Possenti F, Mignot S, et al: Pemphigoid gestationis: a successful preventive treatment
by rituximab. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol 31(4):e206, 2017

Trivedi MK, Vaughn AR, Murase JE: Pustular psoriasis of pregnancy: current perspectives. Int J
Womens Health 10:109, 2018
Umezawa Y, Ozawa A, Kawasima T, et al: Therapeutic guidelines for the treatment of generalized
pustular psoriasis (GPP) based on a proposed classification of disease severity. Arch Dermatol Res
295(Suppl 1):S43, 2003
Vaughan Jones SA, Hern S, Nelson-Piercy C, et al: A prospective study of 200 women with dermatoses
of pregnancy correlating clinical findings with hormonal and immunopathological profiles. Br J
Dermatol 141:71, 1999
Vestergaard C, Wollenberg A, Barbarot S, et al: European task force on atopic dermatitis position paper:
treatment of parental atopic dermatitis during preconception, pregnancy and lactation period. J Eur
Acad Dermatol Venereol 33(9):1644, 2019
Vossen AR, Van Straalen KR, Prens EP, et al: Menses and pregnancy affect symptoms in hidradenitis
suppurativa: a cross-sectional study. J Am Acad Dermatol 76(1):155, 2017
Yang A, Uhlenhake E, Murrell DF: Pemphigoid gestationis and intravenous immunoglobulin therapy. Int
J Womens Dermatol 4(3):166, 2018
Yang YW, Chen CS, Chen YH, et al: Psoriasis and pregnancy outcomes: a nationwide population-based
study. J Am Acad Dermatol 64(1):71, 2011
Yuan K, Jin YT, Lin MT: The detection and comparison of angiogenesis-associated factors in pyogenic
granuloma by immunohistochemistry. J Periodontol 71(5):701, 2000
Yuan K, Lin MT: The roles of vascular endothelial growth factor and angiopoietin-2 in the regression of
pregnancy pyogenic granuloma. Oral Dis 10(3):179, 2004
Zaenglein AL, Pathy AL, Schlosser BJ, et al: Guidelines of care for the management of acne vulgaris. J
Am Acad Dermatol 74(5):945, 2016

CHAPTER 66

Neoplastic Disorders

CANCER THERAPY IN PREGNANCY
CERVIX
UTERUS
OVARY
BREAST CARCINOMA
BRCA1/2 MUTATIONS
THYROID CANCER
LYMPHOMAS
MALIGNANT MELANOMA
GASTROINTESTINAL TRACT CANCER
REFERENCES
Any of the many neoplasms that affect reproductive-aged women can
complicate pregnancy. Fortunately, most encountered neoplasms are benign,
and uterine leiomyomas and ovarian cysts are the most frequent. Despite this,
the incidence of malignancy approximates 1 case per 1000 to 2000
pregnancies (Korenaga, 2020; Ma, 2020). A third are diagnosed prenatally,
and the remainder within 12 months of delivery. The distribution of some of
these is shown in Figure 66-1 (de Haan, 2018). In another report from the

Cancer Research Network, breast malignancies made up 25 percent and
thyroid cancers, 20 percent. Melanoma and hematological and cervical
cancers each contributed approximately 10 percent (Cottreau, 2019).

FIGURE 66-1 Distribution of cancer in 1170 pregnant women form the International Network on
Cancer, Infertility, and Pregnancy (INCIP).

During pregnancy, cancer management poses unique problems related to
fetal concerns, and treatment is individualized. Considerations include the
type and stage of malignancy, the desire for pregnancy continuation, and
inherent risks associated with modifying or delaying cancer treatment. Last,
adverse pregnancy outcomes have been associated in general with gravidas
with cancer (Ma, 2020; Momen, 2018).

CANCER THERAPY IN PREGNANCY

■ Surgery
Operative procedures may be indicated to aid cancer diagnosis, staging, or
therapy. Fortunately, most surgeries that do not interfere with the
reproductive tract are well tolerated by both mother and fetus (Chap. 49, p.
867). Although many operations have classically been deferred until after 12
to 14 weeks’ gestation to minimize miscarriage risks, this probably is
unnecessary. We believe that surgery should be performed at any gestational
age if maternal well-being is imperiled.
Both pregnancy and malignancy are risk factors for venous
thromboembolism (VTE). From studies of women with cancer during
pregnancy, the risk of VTE is higher in pregnancy and in the postpartum
period than in gravidas without a malignancy (Bleu, 2016; Greiber, 2021).
Current guidelines lack specific recommendations for pregnant women
undergoing surgeries for cancer. Thus, depending on the complexity of the
planned procedure, it seems reasonable to consider prophylactic lowmolecular-weight heparin combined with elastic stockings and/or intermittent
pneumatic compression (Chap. 55, p. 989).

■ Diagnostic Imaging
Sonography is a preferred imaging tool during pregnancy. Even so, the
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019c) notes that
most diagnostic radiographic procedures deliver very low x-ray doses and
should not be delayed if they would directly affect therapy (Chap. 49, p.
872). Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging can safely be performed in any
trimester, but delay until after the first trimester may lower potential risks.
Gadolinium should not be used in the first trimester and should be used later
in pregnancy only when the benefits overwhelmingly outweigh risks
(American College of Radiology, 2021; Kanal, 2013). Computed tomography
(CT) is less often selected due to ionizing radiation, and procedure-related
doses are listed in Chapter 49 (p. 874). Thus, CT imaging is used in
pregnancy most often to evaluate acute concerns that include pulmonary
embolism, bowel or renal obstruction, and acute neurological events. To
enhance CT imaging, oral and intravenous contrasts may be added. These
lack known fetal harm, and postpartum breastfeeding need not be interrupted.
In pregnancy, some radioisotopes are relatively safe (Table 49-10, p. 876).

■ Radiation Therapy
Therapeutic radiation is used to treat cancers and delivers a higher radiation
dose than that with diagnostic imaging. Radiotherapy may significantly
expose the fetus depending on the dose, tumor location, field size, and
gestational age. Potential adverse effects include fetal malformation,
intellectual disability, growth restriction, sterility, and carcinogenesis (Brent,
1999; Stovall, 1995). In the 2 weeks following fertilization, exposure
typically leads to chromosomal damage and embryonic death. The next most
susceptible period is during organogenesis in weeks 2 through 8, and
exposure can create malformations. These might develop above a threshold
dose of 0.1 to 0.2 Gy. During weeks 8 through 25, the fetal central nervous
system is especially vulnerable. The threshold dose for intellectual disability
at 8 to 15 weeks’ gestation approximates 0.06 Gy, and at 16 to 25 weeks it is
about 0.25 Gy (Kal, 2005; Otake, 1996). After 25 weeks’ gestation,
susceptibility is less, although no gestational age is considered safe for
therapeutic radiation exposure. Thus, radiotherapy to the maternal abdomen
is contraindicated. With some head and neck cancers, however, radiotherapy
to supradiaphragmatic areas can be used relatively safely with abdominal
shielding of the fetus (Amant, 2015a).

■ Chemotherapy
Various antineoplastic drugs may be given as primary or adjunctive therapy.
Although chemotherapy often improves long-term maternal outcomes, many
are reluctant to employ it during pregnancy. Concerns for the fetus include
malformations, growth restriction, intellectual disability, and the risk of
future childhood malignancies. Risks depend primarily on fetal age at
exposure, and most agents are potentially detrimental in the first trimester
during organogenesis. Indeed, in one review, 14 percent of major
malformations were attributable to first-trimester exposure to cytotoxic drugs
(National Toxicology Program, 2013).
After the first trimester, most antineoplastic drugs are without immediate
obvious adverse fetal sequelae (Korenaga, 2020; Vercruysse, 2016).
Similarly, late mutagenic effects appear limited (Amant, 2015b; Cardonick,
2015). Although not always practicable, some recommend that chemotherapy
be withheld in the 3 weeks before expected delivery because neutropenia or

pancytopenia might cause undue risk for maternal infection or hemorrhage.
Another concern is that neonatal hepatic and renal clearance of chemotherapy
metabolites is limited (Ko, 2011). For these reasons, most cytotoxic
chemotherapy agents are contraindicated with breastfeeding (Pistilli, 2013).

■ Molecular Therapy
Biological agents designed to stimulate hemopoiesis are commonly used with
cancer treatments. Some of these include the granulocyte colony-stimulating
factors filgrastim (Neupogen) and pegfilgrastim (Neulasta). If required in
pregnancy, limited data support the safety of these agents (Boxer, 2015). Red
blood cells can be stimulated by erythropoietin alfa (Procrit), which from
case reports also appears safe in pregnancy (Sienas, 2013). However,
maternal hypertension is a known potential risk. Last, for chemotherapyinduced thrombocytopenia, romiplostim and eltrombopag are
thrombopoietin-receptor agonists that appear to be safe in pregnancy (Chua,
2020; Michel, 2020).

■ Targeted Therapy
The two main types of targeted therapy are monoclonal antibodies and smallmolecule inhibitors. Both block the actions of specific enzymes, proteins, or
other molecules involved in cancer cell growth (Tsao, 2019). Another is
nanotherapy using drugs incorporated into encapsulated nanoparticles
(Pereira, 2020). These drugs are designed to treat an ever-expanding list of
cancers, and some are described in later discussions of specific tumors.
Most of these compounds are labeled by the Food and Drug Administration
as class D, and data are limited regarding their pregnancy or breastfeeding
effects.
Many of these drugs target tyrosine kinase, an important enzyme that
regulates signaling pathways involved with cell division, differentiation, and
apoptosis. With first-trimester use, embryo toxicity or teratogenicity has been
attributed to these. Thus, use balances potential maternal benefit and
potential fetal risk (Lodish, 2013).
Of other agents, the monoclonal antibody trastuzumab (Herceptin)
inhibits the human epidermal growth factor receptor type 2 (HER2), which
some breast cancers express. Although not teratogenic, its use in the second

and third trimesters is associated with oligohydramnios, which appears to be
reversible upon stopping the drug (McCormick, 2018; Zagouri, 2013b).
Because of sparse available data, other HER2 inhibitors are best avoided in
pregnancy (Lambertini, 2015).

■ Fertility and Pregnancy after Cancer Therapy
Oncofertility is an emerging discipline to preserve fertility in young adults
diagnosed with cancer (Robson, 2020). Fertility may be diminished after
chemotherapy or radiotherapy. Counseling ideally takes place before cancer
treatment, and guidelines have been developed by the American Society for
Reproductive Medicine (ASRM) (2018) and other major groups (Oktay,
2018; van de Kooi, 2021). Prior to therapy, embryo or oocyte
cryopreservation is a recognized option. Ovarian tissue cryopreservation is
available in research settings (American Society for Reproductive Medicine,
2013a,b, 2014). In addition, many cancer survivors conceive by assisted
reproductive technologies (ART), which by itself has associated obstetrical
risks (Chap. 9, p. 169).
If pelvic radiation is planned, surgical transposition moves ovaries and
their intact primary blood supply out of the pelvis. The ovary is then fixed to
the lateral abdominal wall at a site 3 to 4 cm above the level of the
umbilicus. Metal clips are placed to help identify the ovary in future imaging
(Moawad, 2017). In one review, functional preservation was reported in 65
to 94 percent, depending on radiotherapy type (Gubbala, 2014).
In counseling cancer survivors, evidence suggests that exposure to most
radiotherapy or chemotherapy agents does not significantly raise the risk of
congenital anomalies or genetic disease in their offspring (Signorello, 2012;
Winther, 2012). In those treated as children, chemotherapy does not show a
consistent link to adverse obstetrical outcomes (Melin, 2015; Reulen, 2009).
Data are limited in those with cancer treated as an adult, and some studies
show slightly higher rates of preterm birth and cesarean delivery (Haggar,
2014; Stensheim, 2013).
Prior abdominopelvic radiation more convincingly affects neonatal
outcomes, including elevated rates of abortion, low birthweight, stillbirth,
and preterm birth (Signorello, 2006, 2010; Winther, 2008). Radiation may
reduce uterine volume, thin the endometrium, and impair uterine blood flow

(Critchley, 1992; van de Loo, 2019). Radiotherapy directed to the uterus and
given at a younger age shows greater effects (Teh, 2014).

■ Placental Metastases
Tumors infrequently metastasize to the placenta. The most common types are
malignant melanomas, leukemias, lymphomas, and breast cancer (Chap. 6, p.
112). Placentas from pregnancies in all women with cancer should be sent
for histological evaluation. Tumor cells are usually confined within the
intervillous spaces, and fetal metastases are rare (Al-Adnani, 2007;
Rubrecht, 2020).

REPRODUCTIVE TRACT NEOPLASMS
Benign neoplasms of the reproductive tract are common and include
leiomyomas, ovarian tumors, and endocervical polyps. Cancer in these
organs may also complicate pregnancy, and of these, cervical neoplasia
makes up most (de Haan, 2018).

■ Cervix
Endocervical Polyp
These are overgrowths of endocervical stroma covered by epithelium. They
typically appear as single, red, elongated fleshy masses of variable size that
extend outward from the endocervical canal. Usually benign, they can bleed
and can be a source of Pap test results reported as atypical glandular cells
of undetermined significance—AGUS. With removal and histological polyp
evaluation, dysplasia is diagnosed in up to 0.5 percent, and cancer is found
in approximately 0.1 percent (Park, 2020).
Few formal data guide management in pregnancy. Small asymptomatic
lesions may be left alone to slough during delivery or puerperal remodeling.
Removal and histological evaluation is reasonable if malignancy is
suspected or if bleeding is troublesome. For most, the polyp is grasped with
ring forceps and twisted repeatedly about its base to strangulate feeding
vessels. With repeated twisting, the base narrows and avulses. Monsel paste,
which is ferric subsulfate, can be applied with pressure to the stalk stub for

hemostasis. A thick-pedicle polyp may infrequently warrant surgical ligation
and excision.

Cervical Neoplasia
Pregnancy provides an opportune time to screen for cervical intraepithelial
neoplasia (CIN) and invasive cervical cancer. With Pap test screening,
pregnancy status should be noted on the requisition form as cytological
interpretation may be influenced by normal pregnancy-associated changes.
Presence of decidual cells and, less often, an Arias-Stella reaction are
examples. The latter gives an appearance of endocervical gland hyperplasia,
which can make differentiating this from truly atypical glandular cells
difficult.
Current screening guidelines apply to both nonpregnant women and
gravidas (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2021b; U.S.
Preventive Services Task Force, 2018). Recommendations for average-risk
women include: (1) no screening until age 21, (2) cytology alone every 3
years in those aged 21 to 29 years, and (3) in women aged ≥30 years, three
options are suitable. These are human papillomavirus (HPV) plus cytology,
termed co-testing, every 5 years; primary HPV testing every 5 years; or
cytology every 3 years.
Higher-risk women with altered immune systems include women with
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection, systemic lupus
erythematosus, organ transplant, or immunosuppressant medication use
(Perkins, 2020). Others include those with past CIN or prior early cervical
cancer or in utero diethylstilbestrol (DES) exposure. Affected women are
screened earlier and more often using current guidelines for HIV-affected
individuals (Panel on Opportunistic Infections in Adults and Adolescents
with HIV, 2020). Germane to gravidas aged ≤30 years, these guidelines
recommend Pap test screening at the time of initial HIV diagnosis and then
yearly. Once three consecutive Pap test findings are normal, screening may
be spaced to every 3 years. Co-testing is not recommended. For those aged
>30 years, similar Pap testing is applied. Co-testing is suitable for this
group, and if negative, the next test can repeated in 3 years.
Human Papillomavirus. This virus infects cervical epithelia. The infection
usually clears, but in some, the virus may promote benign, premalignant, or
cancerous neoplastic growth. The prevalence of HPV infection in pregnant

women approximates 15 percent (Hong, 2013; Liu, 2014). Of the many HPV
serotypes, several are associated with high-grade squamous intraepithelial
(HSIL) lesions and invasive cancer. Serotypes 16 and 18 are preeminent.
HPV testing targets only high-risk types associated with cervical neoplasia,
and identification of types 16 or 18 prompts colposcopic evaluation. There is
no indication for low-risk HPV testing.
Serotypes HPV 6 and 11 are linked with benign maternal genital warts.
Congenital HPV infection resulting from vertical transmission, which is
mother to fetus/newborn passage, beyond transient skin colonization is rare.
Still, conjunctival, laryngeal, vulvar, or perianal warts present at birth in the
neonate or that develop within 1 to 3 years of birth are most likely due to
perinatal exposure to these maternal HPV serotypes (Chap. 68, p. 1216).
Importantly, cesarean delivery does not lower the risk of neonatal laryngeal
papillomatosis.
The clear link between HPV infection and cervical neoplasia led to
development of approved vaccines that reduce cervical cancer risk (Lei,
2020). Only one vaccine is currently available in the United States. Gardasil
9 is a nonavalent HPV vaccine (9vHPV) against HPV types 6, 11, 16, 18, 31,
35, 45, 52, and 58. This vaccine is not administered during pregnancy and is
compatible with breastfeeding (Chap. 10, p. 189).
Abnormal Cytology and Histology. The incidence of abnormal cervical
cancer screening test results and their management is similar for gravidas and
nonpregnant women. Current 2019 management consensus guidelines from
the American Society of Colposcopy and Cervical Pathology focus on the
individual’s risk for CIN 3 or cervical cancer, rather than on specific
screening results (Perkins, 2020).
Management has become complex and derives from large database
analyses. Factors include the abnormal cytology and HPV results, age, and
previous screening results. As a result, algorithms now calculate the best
clinical approach to abnormal screening test results
(www.asccp.org/management-guidelines). In overview, certain cytological
abnormalities and HPV test results warrant colposcopy, and the main goal
during pregnancy is to exclude invasive cancer. Thus, lesions suspicious for
high-grade disease or cancer are biopsied. Endocervical sampling,
endometrial biopsy, and treatment of preinvasive lesions are unacceptable
during pregnancy.

Women with histologically confirmed CIN from biopsy during pregnancy
are allowed to deliver vaginally. Further evaluation is planned at least 4
weeks postpartum. Alternatively, for clinical findings with higher cancer
risk, repeat colposcopy and cytology/HPV testing are performed at intervals
no more frequently than 12 weeks. Biopsy is repeated only if a lesion
appears worse or invasive cancer is suspected (Perkins, 2020).
Postpartum reassessment may reveal lesions missed previously due to
either cervical changes of pregnancy or advancing lesion severity. Instead,
CIN regression is common during pregnancy or puerperium. In one study of
1079 pregnant women with cervical dysplasia in which biopsy correlated
with colposcopic findings, 61 percent of lesions reverted to normal
postpartum (Fader, 2010). In another study, lesions regressed postpartum in
70 percent of women with CIN 2 or 3. However, 7 percent of CIN 2 lesions
progressed to CIN 3, but no lesion advanced to invasive cancer (Yost, 1999).
In another study of 77 women with carcinoma in situ (CIS) diagnosed
antepartum, a third had postpartum regression of their lesion, two thirds had
persistent CIS, and only two women had microinvasive cancer on cone
biopsy after delivery (Ackermann, 2006).
Adenocarcinoma in situ (AIS) is managed in a manner similar to CIN 3
(Dunton, 2008). Thus, unless invasive cancer is identified, treatment of AIS
is not recommended until 6 weeks postpartum. Referral to a gynecologist
with advanced colposcopic skills is recommended (Perkins, 2020).
Cervical Conization. If invasive epithelial lesions are suspected, conization
is indicated and may be done with loop electrosurgical excisional procedure
(LEEP) or by cold-knife conization. However, the epithelium and underlying
stroma within the endocervical canal cannot be extensively excised without
the risk of membrane rupture. Logically, residual disease is common. Of 376
cone biopsies during pregnancy, residual neoplasia was later found in 43
percent of subsequent specimens (Hacker, 1982). In another series, nearly 10
percent of 180 pregnant women required transfusion after conization
(Averette, 1970). Thus, if possible, conization is avoided in pregnancy
because of its higher risks for abortion, membrane rupture, hemorrhage, and
preterm delivery.
Women with CIN treated before pregnancy may also encounter pregnancy
complications. First, distal cervical stenosis is uncommon but may follow
conization, LEEP, or laser surgery. Cervical stenosis almost always yields

during labor. A so-called conglutinated cervix may undergo almost complete
intrapartum effacement without dilation. Spontaneous dilation usually
promptly follows firm pressure with a fingertip, although instrumented
dilation or cruciate incisions may be required.
Second, preconceptional cold-knife conization is associated with
cervical insufficiency and preterm birth. However, the relationship between
preterm birth and LEEP continues to be debated (Castanon, 2012; Conner,
2014; Stout, 2015). The size of tissue excised seems to be directly related to
adverse outcomes (Weinmann, 2017).

Invasive Cervical Cancer
This cancer is found in approximately 1 in 1200 to 10,000 pregnancies
(Bigelow, 2017; McCormick, 2018). The diagnosis is confirmed with
biopsies taken during colposcopy, with conization, or from a grossly
abnormal lesion. Of the histological types, squamous cell carcinomas
account for 75 percent, whereas adenocarcinomas compose the remainder
(Schorge, 2017). Cancers may appear as exophytic or endophytic growth; as
a polyp, papillary tissue, or barrel-shaped cervix; or as focal ulceration or
necrosis. A watery, purulent, foul, or bloody discharge may be present. The
sensitivity of a single Pap test is poor. Thus, biopsy with Tischler forceps is
warranted for suspicious lesions. Abnormal tumor vessels may cause heavier
than expected biopsy-site bleeding, which is usually controlled by Monsel
paste and pressure.
Historically, cervical cancer was solely staged clinically. The current
staging system now incorporates radiological and surgical evaluation
(Bhatla, 2019). Lymph node metastasis is now also included in staging.
Allowable components of clinical staging are cold-knife conization, pelvic
examination under anesthesia, cystoscopy, intravenous pyelogram (or this
portion of MR imaging can be used), proctoscopy, and chest radiography.
Notably, physiological pregnancy changes may limit physical assessment of
cancer extent, which is more likely to be underestimated in gravidas.
Specifically, induration of the broad ligament base, which characterizes
tumor spread beyond the cervix, may be less prominent due to cervical,
paracervical, and parametrial pregnancy-induced softening. MR imaging can
be used without gadolinium contrast to ascertain involvement of the urinary
tract, parametrium, and lymph nodes (Beharee, 2019).

Management and Prognosis. Cervical cancer treatment in pregnant women is
individualized, and factors include the clinical stage, fetal age, and
individual desire to continue pregnancy. Stage IA1 is termed microinvasive
disease and describes lesions with deepest invasion <3 mm (Bhatla, 2019).
If diagnosed by cone biopsy, treatment follows guidelines similar to those for
intraepithelial disease. In general, continuation of pregnancy and vaginal
delivery are considered safe, and definitive therapy is reserved until 6 weeks
postpartum.
In contrast, cancer with greater invasion demands relatively prompt
therapy. During the first half of pregnancy, immediate treatment is advised by
most, but the decision whether to continue pregnancy is a factor. During the
latter half of pregnancy, the risk of early delivery versus delayed treatment
are weighed (McCormick, 2018). In two studies with a total of 40 women
past 20 weeks’ gestation with either stage I or stage IIA carcinoma, delayed
treatment was considered reasonable in women without bulky lesions
(Takushi, 2002; van Vliet, 1998). Another option is to complete staging using
laparoscopic lymphadenectomy and to delay treatment if metastases are
excluded (Alouini, 2008; Favero, 2010). In a metaanalysis, preoperative
neoadjuvant chemotherapy with platinum derivatives was found to be
promising for treatment in pregnancy (Zagouri, 2013a).
Although surgical therapy and radiation are equally effective, radical
hysterectomy plus pelvic lymphadenectomy is the preferred treatment for
invasive cervical cancer in most young women with stage I and early stage
IIA lesions. Disadvantageously, radiotherapy for cervical cancer destroys
ovarian and possibly sexual function and frequently causes intestinal and
urinary tract injury. In 49 women with pregnancy-associated stage IB cancer,
a 30-percent severe complication rate accompanied radiotherapy compared
with that of only 7 percent with radical surgery (Nisker, 1983). With surgery
before 20 weeks’ gestation, radical hysterectomy is usually performed with
the fetus in situ. In later pregnancy, however, hysterotomy and delivery is
often performed first (Fig. 66-2).

FIGURE 66-2 Radical hysterectomy specimen with invasive cervical squamous cell carcinoma. With
radical hysterectomy, the parametrium and 2 to 3 cm of vagina are excised to help achieve a tumor-free
resection. (Reproduced with permission from Dr. Debra L. Richardson.)

Although rarely selected during pregnancy, Ungár and colleagues (2006)
performed abdominal radical trachelectomy before 20 weeks’ gestation for
stage IB1 cancer in five pregnant women. One cases series describes four
women with stage IA1 adenocarcinoma at 16 to 23 weeks’ gestation treated
with laser conization, and all delivered at term (Yahata, 2008).
For more advanced-stage cancer, radiotherapy is given. External beam
radiation in early in pregnancy typically leads to spontaneous abortion. If
miscarriage does not ensue, curettage is performed. During the second
trimester, spontaneous abortion may not promptly occur and may necessitate
hysterotomy in up to a fourth of cases. This is selected because labor
induction or dilation and evacuation may pose serious hemorrhage risks from
the cancer.
Pregnancy does not negatively affect cervical cancer prognosis, and
survival outcomes are similar for pregnant and nonpregnant women (Amant,
2014; Mogos, 2013). For both of these groups, the overall 5-year survival

rate approximated 80 percent in a case-control study of 44 women with
pregnancy-associated cervical cancer (van der Vange, 1995).

Delivery
Adverse prognostic effects from vaginal delivery through a cancerous cervix
are unknown. For this reason, the mode of delivery is controversial,
especially for small, early-stage lesions. In some cases of bulky or friable
tumors, hemorrhage from the cancer may complicate vaginal delivery. Also,
recurrences in the episiotomy scar have been reported (Goldman, 2003).
Thus, most favor cesarean delivery.

Pregnancy after Radical Trachelectomy
Radical trachelectomy for stage IB1 and IB2 cervical cancer before
conception is one fertility-sparing option. During the typically vaginal
procedure, the cervix is amputated at the level of the internal os, and a
permanent-suture cerclage is placed around the isthmus to support future
pregnancies. The uterine isthmus is then reconstructed to the vagina.
Following this, women continue to menstruate, and conception can occur
naturally. Because of the permanent cerclage, a classical cesarean incision is
required for delivery. Evidence suggests that cervical length <13 mm at 20
weeks’ gestation is associated with preterm birth <34 weeks (Kasuga, 2017).
In a systematic review of 2566 women after radical trachelectomy for earlystage cancer, the 5-year overall maternal survival rate was 97 percent
(Smith, 2020). The pregnancy rate was 24 percent, and the live-birth rate
was 75 percent.

■ Uterus
Leiomyomas
Also known as myomas and somewhat erroneously called fibroids, uterine
leiomyomas are common benign smooth-muscle tumors. Their incidence
during pregnancy approximates 2 percent, but the cited range depends on the
frequency of routine sonography and population characteristics (Qidwai,
2006; Stout, 2010). In one study of 4271 women, the first-trimester myoma
prevalence was highest in black women—18 percent—and lowest in whites
—8 percent (Laughlin, 2009).

Leiomyomas vary in location and may develop as submucosal,
subserosal, or intramural growths. Less often, these develop in the cervix or
broad ligament. Rare parasitic types obtain their blood supply from adjacent
structures such as the omentum. In another rare manifestation—
leiomyomatosis peritonealis disseminata—numerous, small, benign
subperitoneal smooth-muscle tumors mimic carcinomatosis but often regress
after pregnancy.
In general, progesterone is considered the critical mitogen for uterine
leiomyoma growth. In turn, estrogen functions to upregulate and maintain
progesterone receptors (Ishikawa, 2010). In pregnancy, progesterone’s effect
on myoma growth is unpredictable, and tumor size may grow, regress, or
remain unchanged (Laughlin, 2009; Neiger, 2006).
Especially during pregnancy, these masses can be confused with other
pelvic masses, and sonographic imaging is indispensable (Fig. 66-3). Once
diagnosed, myomas do not require sonographic surveillance unless
associated complications are anticipated. With unclear sonographic findings,
MR imaging may be necessary and ideally performed after the first trimester.

FIGURE 66-3 Leiomyoma imaging. A. In this sagittal view from transvaginal sonography, a large
uterine leiomyoma (calipers) displays heterogeneous echoes and occupies the fundus. This mass lies
adjacent to an early first-trimester gestational sac (G) that shows a yolk sac. B. MR imaging at 16
weeks’ gestation shows a large leiomyoma (L) in the posterior uterine segment and cervix, which fills
the pelvis. Associated ureteral compression and hydronephrosis required placement of a percutaneous
nephrostomy tube. At term, planned cesarean delivery was done due to obstruction of the birth canal. B
= bladder; F = fetus; P = placenta.

Symptoms. Most leiomyomas are asymptomatic, but acute or chronic pain or
pressure may develop, especially with large masses (Doğan, 2016). For

chronic pain, nonnarcotic analgesic drugs usually suffice. More acutely, some
myomas can outgrow their blood supply and hemorrhagic infarction follows,
which is termed red or carneous degeneration. Clinically, acute focal
abdominal pain and tenderness are preeminent and often accompanied by
leukocytosis or low-grade fever. Thus, tumor degeneration may be difficult to
differentiate from other sources of acute abdominal pain. Sonography aids
diagnosis, but close observation is requisite because an infarcted myoma is
essentially a diagnosis of exclusion. Uncommonly, preterm labor is
stimulated by associated inflammation.
Symptoms from a degenerated myoma usually abate within a few days. In
severe cases, observation may be needed to exclude a septic cause. Although
surgery is rarely needed during pregnancy, myomectomy in highly selected
cases has yielded good outcomes. Of 23 reported cases, women were 14 to
20 weeks’ gestation, and in almost half, surgery was performed because of
pain (Celik, 2002; De Carolis, 2001). Except for one loss immediately
following surgery at 19 weeks, most underwent cesarean delivery at term.
Occasionally, a pedunculated subserosal myoma will undergo torsion with
subsequent painful necrosis. Laparoscopy or laparotomy can be used to
ligate the stalk and resect the necrotic tumor. That said, we believe that
surgery should be limited to tumors with a discrete pedicle that can be easily
clamped and ligated.
Pregnancy Complications. Myomas have been associated with several
complications that include preterm labor, placental abruption, fetal
malpresentation, obstructed labor, cesarean delivery, and postpartum
hemorrhage. In a review of pregnancy outcomes in 2065 women with
myomas compared with unaffected gravidas, placental abruption and breech
presentation were each increased fourfold; first-trimester bleeding and
dysfunctional labor, twofold; and cesarean delivery, sixfold (Coronado,
2000). In a report of 301 women with myomas, the preterm birth risk was
2.5-fold higher than in unaffected women (Girault, 2018). Another study
reported an eightfold increased second-trimester abortion risk in affected
women (Salvador, 2002).
Factors most important in determining morbidity in pregnancy are myoma
number, size, and location (Ciavattini, 2015; Jenabi, 2018; Lam, 2014). If the
placenta is adjacent to or implanted over a leiomyoma, the risks for abortion,
preterm labor, placental abruption, and postpartum hemorrhage are all

increased. Retroplacental myomas are also associated with fetal-growth
restriction (Knight, 2016). Myoma-related bleeding may stem from
miscarriage, preterm labor, placenta previa, and placental abruption. Rarely,
bleeding results from a submucous myoma that has prolapsed from the uterus
and into the cervix or vagina. In this case, although heavy or persistent
bleeding may require earlier intervention, the stalk, if accessible, can be
ligated vaginally near term to avoid avulsion during delivery.
Tumors in the cervix or lower uterine segment may obstruct labor (Fig.
66-4). Despite these complications, Qidwai and associates (2006) reported a
70-percent vaginal delivery rate even in women in whom myomas measured
≥10 cm. These data argue against empirical cesarean delivery, and we allow
a trial of labor unless myomas clearly obstruct the birth canal. If cesarean
delivery is indicated, uterine malrotation, which can be caused by a bulky
lateral myoma, should be excluded by palpation of the fundus prior to
hysterotomy (Chap. 3, p. 46). Myomas are generally left alone. Specifically,
because of enucleation-associated hemorrhage, myomectomy during cesarean
delivery is discouraged. Exceptions include recalcitrant intraoperative
bleeding or a myoma that prohibits hysterotomy closure. With cesarean
delivery in one study, mean hemoglobin levels dropped in those with
myomas, but the transfusion rate was not increased (Pergialiotis, 2017).
Importantly, cesarean hysterectomy may be technically difficult because of
lateral ureteral displacement by the masses.

FIGURE 66-4 Cesarean delivery performed because of a large leiomyoma in the lower uterine
segment. A classical vertical uterine incision, seen to the left of the myoma, was required for delivery of
the fetus.

Fortunately, myomas rarely become infected (Genta, 2001). When
infection develops, it usually is postpartum, especially if the tumor is located
immediately adjacent to the implantation site (Lin, 2002). They also may
become infected with an associated septic abortion or with myoma
perforation by a sound, dilator, or curette.
Fertility Considerations. Despite their relatively high prevalence in young
women, their negative effect on fertility is unclear. Moreover, evidence from
one systematic review was inconclusive to support myomectomy for
intramural or subserosal myomas to improve fertility (Metwally, 2020). As
an exception, the American Society for Reproductive Medicine (2017)
describes fair evidence for hysteroscopic myomectomy of submucous
myomas to improve clinical pregnancy rates. In a systematic review of nearly
1400 pregnancies, myomas were not associated with a higher miscarriage
rate (Sundermann, 2017).
Instead of an infertility indication, some women may elect myomectomy
to treat bleeding or pressure symptoms yet still desire fertility preservation.

Importantly, after myomectomy, the gravid uterus can rupture either before or
during labor (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2021a).
Management is individualized, and review of the prior operative report is
prudent. If resection resulted in a defect into or immediately adjacent to the
endometrial cavity, cesarean delivery is usually done before labor. Timing of
cesarean delivery is individualized, and the American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2021b) cites between 370/7 and 386/7
weeks’ gestation.
Uterine artery embolization of myomas is another option for women
seeking symptom relief yet desiring fertility preservation (Ludwig, 2020).
Women so treated have higher rates of miscarriage, cesarean delivery, and
postpartum hemorrhage. The Society of Interventional Radiology considers
myoma embolization relatively contraindicated in women who plan future
pregnancies (Dariushnia, 2014). Even so, myoma embolization does not harm
ovarian reserve (Shamy, 2020).

Endometrial Lesions
With endometriosis, studies have recently focused on a link with adverse
obstetrical outcomes (Stephansson, 2009; Zullo, 2017). However, data are
complicated by heterogeneity regarding disease stage and location, use of
ART, and analysis methodologies (Leone Roberti Maggiore, 2016). Despite
this, an association with placenta previa is the most consistent.
Occasionally, an endometrioma can develop after delivery from
endometrial tissue implanted within laparotomy or episiotomy scars.
Pfannenstiel incisions carry greater susceptibility than vertical ones (Ecker,
2014). These form a palpable mass and can cause cyclical localized pain.
Endometriomas within an ovary are discussed in the next section.
Adenomyosis is traditionally found in late reproductive life and beyond.
Its acquisition may be at least partially related to disruption of the
endometrial-myometrial border during sharp curettage for abortion (Curtis,
2002). In one systematic review, miscarriage, poor fetal growth,
preeclampsia, placenta previa, and preterm delivery were associated risks
(Nirgianakis, 2021).
Endometrial carcinoma is an estrogen-dependent neoplasia also usually
found in women aged >40 years and thus seen only rarely with pregnancy
(Korenaga, 2020). Of 27 cases that were identified during pregnancy or

within the first 4 months postpartum, most were found in first-trimester
curettage specimens (Hannuna, 2009). These are usually early-stage, welldifferentiated adenocarcinomas for which treatment consists primarily of
total abdominal hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy.
For nonpregnant women, surgical management of early endometrial
cancer is also the standard. However, to preserve fertility potential in a
well-counseled woman with early-stage, well-differentiated, endometrioid
endometrial cancer, treatment with oral or intrauterine progestin therapy can
be used to prompt tumor regression (Hamilton, 2021). Notably, live birth
rates are low, and a large percentage requires ART for conception (Harrison,
2019). Moreover, recurrences and deaths have been reported (Erkanli,
2010).

■ Ovary
Ovarian masses found during pregnancy are common. Incidences vary
depending on the frequency of prenatal sonography, the ovarian size
threshold, and study site designation as tertiary or primary care. Thus, the
incidence of ovarian masses not surprisingly ranges from 1 in 100 to 2000
pregnancies (Bacalbaşa, 2020; Korenaga, 2020). Of ovarian malignancies,
the incidence in the California Cancer Registry was 1 case in 19,000
pregnancies (Smith, 2003).
The most frequent types of ovarian masses are corpus luteum cysts,
endometriomas, benign cystadenomas, and mature cystic teratomas (dermoid
cysts). In one series of 53 endometriomas diagnosed in the first trimester, a
fourth each remained stable or increased in size, and a third shrank (Bailleux,
2017).
Mature cystic teratomas enlarge infrequently during pregnancy. Rarely, a
teratoma may express N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors within the
tumor’s neural-tissue component. Antibodies form against these receptors
within the tumor and then attack similar-looking receptors in the brain. In one
case, a pregnant woman developed encephalitis from these antibodies
(Mizutamari, 2016).
Because pregnant women are usually young, malignant tumors and those
of low malignant potential are proportionately uncommon. One study found
that 1 percent of 9375 ovarian masses were frankly malignant and that
another 1 percent were of low malignant potential (Leiserowitz, 2006). In

surgically excised masses, rates of malignancy are higher, vary from 4 to 13
percent, and probably reflect a greater preoperative concern for cancer
(Sherard, 2003).

Diagnosis
Most ovarian masses are asymptomatic. Some cause pressure or chronic
pain, and acute abdominal pain may be due to torsion, rupture, or
hemorrhage. Rarely, blood loss is sufficient to cause hypovolemia.
Ovarian masses are usually detected during routine prenatal sonography
or during imaging for other indications, including symptom evaluation. For
complicated anatomy, MR imaging can be used without contrast.
Cancer antigen 125 (CA125) is a tumor marker, and levels are frequently
elevated with ovarian malignancy. Importantly, in early pregnancy and early
puerperium, CA125 levels are normally elevated, possibly from the decidua.
From the second trimester until term, levels are not normally higher than
those in the nonpregnant woman (Appendix, p. 1229) (Korenaga, 2020;
Szecsi, 2014). With severe preeclampsia, however, concentrations are
abnormally elevated (Karaman, 2014). Other tumor markers that have been
used for diagnosis or posttreatment surveillance in pregnancy include human
chorionic gonadotropin (hCG), alpha-fetoprotein (AFP), inhibins A and B,
carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), and the multimarker OVA1 test (Liu,
2011).

Complications
Torsion and hemorrhage are significant complications of adnexal masses.
Torsion usually causes acute constant or episodic lower abdominal pain and
tenderness that is accompanied frequently by nausea and vomiting.
Transvaginal sonography (TVS) often aids diagnosis, and an adnexal mass is
typically comorbid. With color Doppler, absent flow strongly correlates with
torsion. However, minimal or early twisting may compromise only venous
flow, thus leaving the arterial supply intact. Other sonographic signs are
ovarian stromal edema; follicle displacement to the ovarian periphery; free
cul-de-sac fluid; the whirlpool sign, which displays twisted vessels of the
involved pedicle; and the follicular ring sign (Moro, 2020; Yatsenko, 2021).
This last sign is a 1- to 2-mm echogenic rim around antral follicles and may
reflect edema and engorged capillaries.

If torsion is suspected, laparoscopy or laparotomy is warranted. Contrary
to prior teaching, most now recommend untwisting to save the ovary (Fig.
66-5). Concerns for thrombus release and pulmonary embolism have been
allayed (McGovern, 1999). A grossly necrotic adnexum is removed. With a
salvageable ovary, within minutes of untwisting, congestion is relieved but
the blue-black color typically persists.

FIGURE 66-5 Ovarian torsion at term. The patient underwent cesarean delivery, and the left
uteroovarian pedicle was untwisted. (Reproduced with permission from Dr. C. Edward Wells.)

If the adnexum is deemed viable, there are options. First, an associated
neoplasm is resected. However, ovarian cystectomy in an edematous ovary
may be technically difficult, and adnexectomy may be necessary. Less often,
cystectomy may be delayed for low-risk lesions to allow easier enucleation
following edema resolution (Adeyemi-Fowode, 2019). Second,
oophoropexy, especially for a second case of torsion, can minimize
recurrence risk (Djavadian, 2004). Techniques described include shortening
of the uteroovarian ligament with a running stitch or fixing the uteroovarian
ligament to the posterior uterus, the lateral pelvic wall, or the round ligament
(Fuchs, 2010).

The most common cause of ovarian hemorrhage follows rupture of a
corpus luteum cyst. Symptoms mirror those of hemoperitoneum, and diffuse
lower abdominal pain is usual. TVS shows blood in the cul-de-sac and a
collapsed ovarian cyst remnant (Fig. 12-5, p. 224). If the diagnosis is certain
and symptoms abate, observation and surveillance is usually sufficient.
Concern for ongoing bleeding will typically prompt surgical evaluation. If
the corpus luteum is removed before 10 weeks’ gestation, progestational
support is recommended to maintain the pregnancy. Suitable regimens
include: (1) micronized progesterone (Prometrium), 200 or 300 mg orally
once daily; (2) 8-percent progesterone vaginal gel (Crinone), one
premeasured applicator vaginally daily, plus micronized progesterone, 100
or 200 mg orally once daily; or (3) intramuscular 17-hydroxyprogesterone
caproate, 150 mg. The first two regimens are given until 10 completed
weeks. For the last, if given between 8 and 10 weeks’ gestation, only one
injection is required immediately after surgery. If the corpus luteum is
excised between 6 and 8 weeks’ gestation, two additional doses should be
given 1 and 2 weeks after the first.

Asymptomatic Adnexal Mass During Pregnancy
Most of these are incidentally found, and decisions include necessity and
timing of resection. A cystic benign-appearing mass measuring <5 cm often
requires no additional antepartum surveillance. Early in pregnancy, this is
likely a corpus luteum cyst, which typically resolves by the early second
trimester. For cysts ≥10 cm, the risk of malignancy, torsion, or labor
obstruction is substantial, and surgical removal is reasonable.
Tumors between 5 and 10 cm are carefully evaluated by TVS coupled
with color Doppler and possibly MR imaging. Simple-appearing cysts can
be managed expectantly with sonographic surveillance (Fig. 66-6)
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2016; Schmeler,
2005). Resection is done if cysts grow, display malignant qualities, or
become symptomatic. Those with classic findings of endometrioma or mature
cystic teratoma may be resected postpartum or during cesarean delivery for
obstetrical indications.

FIGURE 66-6 Sonographic characteristics of common adnexal masses in pregnancy. A. A simple
hemorrhagic cyst with smooth walls and an internal reticular pattern is characteristic of a physiological
corpus luteum cyst. B. Homogeneous cystic mass with diffuse internal low-level echoes suggestive of
an endometrioma or hemorrhagic corpus luteum. C. Mature cystic teratoma (dermoid cyst) appears as
a complex adnexal cyst. On the right side, hyperechoic lines and dots represent hair in both longitudinal
and transverse planes. At the central superior aspect of this cyst, a mural nodule—the Rokitansky
protuberance—is seen. A fat (right side)-fluid (left side) level is another common finding with these
tumors.

On the other hand, if sonographic findings suggest cancer, prompt
resection is indicated (Caspi, 2000). Nodules, papillary excrescences, solid
components, or thick, vascular septa within the mass or ascites are
suggestive findings (Andreotti, 2020). In one review of 563 masses in
pregnancy, approximately half were simple, and the other half complex
(Webb, 2015). Among simple masses, 1 percent were malignant, and of
complex masses, 9 percent were cancerous.
Approximately 1 in 1000 pregnant women undergoes surgical exploration
for an adnexal mass (Boulay, 1998). In general, we plan resection at 14 to 20
weeks’ gestation because most masses that will regress will have done so by
this time. Laparoscopic removal is ideal (Chap. 49, p. 867) (Naqvi, 2015;
Sisodia, 2015). Importantly, the American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2016) recommends consultation with a gynecological
oncologist for elements implicating cancer that include a very elevated
CA125 level, a nodular or fixed pelvic mass, ascites, evidence of metastasis,
or ultrasound findings suggesting malignancy.

Pregnancy-Related Ovarian Tumors
One group of ovarian masses results directly from the stimulating effects of
various pregnancy hormones on ovarian stroma. These include pregnancy

luteoma, hyperreactio luteinalis, and ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome.
Pregnancy Luteoma. This is a rare, benign ovarian neoplasm that arises from
luteinized stromal cells and classically raises testosterone levels (Hakim,
2016; Irving, 2011). Up to 25 percent of affected women will be virilized,
and of these affected women, nearly half of their female fetuses will have
some degree of virilization. However, most mothers and their fetuses may be
unaffected because the placenta rapidly converts testosterone to estrogen
(Kaňová, 2011).
In typical cases, an adnexal mass along with maternal virilization will
prompt sonography and measurement of testosterone and CA125 levels.
Luteomas are variably sized, appear solid, may be multiple or bilateral, and
may be complex because of internal hemorrhage (Choi, 2000). Concerns for
malignancy may be further investigated with MR imaging (Kao, 2005;
Tannus, 2009).
Total testosterone levels are increased, but notably, levels in normal
pregnancy can be substantially elevated (Appendix, p. 1231). Differential
diagnoses include granulosa cell tumors, thecomas, Sertoli-Leydig cell
tumors, Leydig cell tumors, stromal hyperthecosis, and hyperreactio
luteinalis.
Generally, luteomas do not require surgical intervention unless torsion,
rupture, or hemorrhage complicate these (Masarie, 2010). Tumors
spontaneously regress during the first few months postpartum, and androgen
levels drop precipitously following delivery (Wang, 2005). Lactation may be
delayed a week by hyperandrogenemia (Dahl, 2008). Recurrence in
subsequent pregnancies is rare.
Hyperreactio Luteinalis. In this condition, one or both ovaries develop
multiple, large theca-lutein cysts, typically after the first trimester. Cysts are
caused by luteinization of the follicular theca interna layer, and most are
stimulated by exceptionally high hCG levels (Russell, 2009). Thus, they are
more common with gestational trophoblastic disease, twins, fetal hydrops,
and other conditions with increased placental mass (Nassr, 2018). Maternal
but not fetal virilization may develop (Malinowski, 2015). Serum
testosterone levels are not predictive of maternal virilization (Condic, 2021).
Sonographically, these ovarian tumors have a “spoke wheel” pattern
(Fig. 13-3, p. 238) (Baxi, 2014). If the diagnosis is confident, and unless

complicated by torsion or hemorrhage, surgical intervention is not required.
These masses resolve after delivery. Few data allow prediction of
recurrence in a subsequent pregnancy, but in one case report, a woman had
hyperreactio with three pregnancies (Bishop, 2016).
Ovarian Hyperstimulation Syndrome. This is typified by multiple ovarian
follicular cysts accompanied by increased capillary permeability. It most
often is a complication of ovulation-induction therapy for infertility, although
it rarely may develop in an otherwise normal pregnancy. Its etiopathogenesis
is thought to involve hCG stimulation of vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF) expression in granulosa-lutein cells (Soares, 2008). This causes
greater vascular permeability that can lead to ascites, pleural or pericardial
effusion, hypovolemia with acute kidney injury, and hypercoagulability.
Serious complications are renal dysfunction, adult respiratory distress
syndrome, ovarian rupture with hemorrhage, and VTE. Unlike hyperreactio
lutealis, virilization is absent (Suzuki, 2004).
Management is outlined by the American Society for Reproductive
Medicine (2016). Treatment is primarily supportive to maintain vascular
volume and prevent VTE. In severe cases, paracentesis can be helpful.

Ovarian Cancer
Malignancies of the ovary are the leading cause of death from genital-tract
cancers in all women (American Cancer Society, 2021). Still, the incidence
of ovarian malignancy only ranges from 1 case in 20,000 to 50,000 births
(Eibye, 2013; Smith, 2003). Of those found in pregnancy, 75 percent are
early-stage cancers that carry a 5-year survival rate between 70 and 90
percent (Brewer, 2011). The types of malignancy are also markedly different
in gravidas compared with those in older women. In pregnant women, these
are, in decreasing order of frequency, germ cell and sex cord-stromal tumors,
low-malignant-potential tumors, and epithelial cancers (Morice, 2012).
Pregnancy apparently does not alter the prognosis of most ovarian
malignancies. Management is similar to that for nonpregnant women, with the
usual proviso that it may be modified depending on gestational age. Thus, if
frozen-section histopathological analysis verifies malignancy, surgical
staging is done with careful inspection of all accessible peritoneal and
visceral surfaces (Bacalbaşa, 2020). Peritoneal washings are taken for
cytology, biopsies are obtained from the diaphragmatic surface and

peritoneum, omentectomy is completed, and pelvic and infrarenal paraaortic
lymph nodes are sampled, if accessible.
If disease is advanced, bilateral adnexectomy and omentectomy will
decrease most tumor burden. In early pregnancy, hysterectomy and aggressive
surgical debulking procedures may be elected. In other cases, minimal
debulking described in the previous paragraph is done, and the operation is
terminated. In some cases of aggressive or large-volume disease,
chemotherapy can be given during pregnancy while awaiting pulmonary
maturation. Monitoring maternal CA125 serum levels during chemotherapy is
not accurate in pregnancy (Morice, 2012).
Preventively, increasing parity is one known factor (Fortner, 2019;
Huang, 2020). A metaanalysis also found that prior miscarriage or abortion
lowered risk (Lee, 2021). Of modifiable factors, combination oral
contraceptives and breastfeeding lower ovarian cancer rates (Babic, 2020;
Havrilesky, 2013; Iversen, 2018). Discussed in Chapter 39 (p. 682), rates of
some ovarian cancers may decline following tubal interruption and perhaps
salpingectomy.

■ Adnexal Cysts
Paratubal and paraovarian cysts either are distended remnants of the
paramesonephric ducts or are mesothelial inclusion cysts. One autopsy series
in nonpregnant women cited an incidence of 5 percent (Dorum, 2005). The
most common paramesonephric cyst is the hydatid of Morgagni, which is
pedunculated and typically dangles from one of the fimbria. Although these
may undergo torsion, other complications are rare, and most are identified
during cesarean delivery or puerperal sterilization. In these instances, they
can simply be excised or drained by creating a large window in the cyst
wall. Neoplastic paraovarian cysts are rare, sonographically and
histologically resemble tumors of ovarian origin, and rarely are of borderline
potential or frankly malignant (Korbin, 1998).

■ Vulva and Vagina
Preinvasive disease in young women—vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia
(VIN) and vaginal intraepithelial neoplasia (VAIN)—are seen more often
than invasive disease and are commonly associated with HPV infection. As

with cervical neoplasia, these premalignant conditions are treated after
delivery.
Cancer of the vulva or vagina is generally a malignancy of older women,
and thus, these are rarely associated with pregnancy (Amant, 2019;
Korenaga, 2020). Even so, any suspicious lesion is biopsied. Most are
squamous cell cancers, and treatment is individualized according to the
clinical stage and depth of invasion. In a review of 23 cases, investigators
concluded that radical surgery for stage I disease was feasible during
pregnancy—including in the last trimester (Heller, 2000). It appears that
vaginal delivery is not contraindicated if vulvar and inguinal incisions are
well healed. In late pregnancy, resection and definitive therapy can often be
delayed due to these tumors’ typically slow progression (Anderson, 2001).
Other vulvar cancer types and vaginal malignancies are rare in pregnancy
and mainly the subjects of case reports (Korenaga, 2020; Matsuo, 2009).

BREAST CARCINOMA
Breast cancer incidence in women aged 25 to 40 years has been rising since
the 1930s (American Cancer Society, 2021; Lima, 2020). It has an overall
relatively high frequency in younger women and is the most frequent cancer
complicating pregnancy (see Fig. 66-1) (Alfasi, 2019; de Hann, 2018). From
the Nationwide Inpatient Sample, the incidence approximated 1 case in
15,000 births (Maor, 2017). Postponed childbearing was considered
partially responsible for the increase in pregnancy-associated breast cancer
in Sweden and Denmark (Andersson, 2015; Eibye, 2013). And, as more
women choose to delay childbearing, the frequency of associated breast
cancer is certain to rise. Genetic mutations underlie some breast cancer
cases, and these are discussed in that section (p. 1174).

■ Diagnosis
More than 90 percent of gravidas with breast cancer have a palpable mass,
and greater than 80 percent of cases are self-reported (Brewer, 2011). In
pregnancy, clinical assessment, diagnostic procedures, and treatment of
women with breast tumors are often slightly delayed (McCormick, 2018).
This is partially attributed to pregnancy-induced growth of breast tissue that
obscures masses.

Breast mass evaluation does not differ from that for nonpregnant women
(Loibl, 2015; McCormick, 2018). Thus, any suspicious breast mass should
be pursued to diagnosis. Pragmatically, a palpable discrete mass can be
biopsied or excised. To distinguish between a solid and cystic lesion,
sonography has high sensitivity and specificity (Navrozoglou, 2008).
Mammography is appropriate if indicated, and the fetal radiation risk is
negligible—0.04 mGy—with appropriate shielding (Krishna, 2013). But,
because breast tissue is denser in pregnancy, mammography has a falsenegative rate of 35 to 40 percent (Woo, 2003). If the decision to biopsy is
uncertain, MR imaging may be used.
To better classify imaging findings for breast masses, the American
College of Radiology (2013) developed the Breast Imaging-Reporting and
Data System—BI-RADS. Suitable for sonography, mammographic, and MR
imaging results, the intent is to communicate an individual woman’s risk of
developing breast cancer (Table 66-1).
TABLE 66-1. American College of Radiology: Breast Imaging Reporting
and Data Systems—BI-RADSa

Cystic breast lesions are simple, complicated, or complex. Simple cysts
do not require special management or monitoring, but they may be aspirated
if symptomatic. Complicated cysts show internal echoes during sonography,
and they sometimes are indistinguishable from solid masses. These are

typically aspirated, and if the sonographic abnormality does not resolve
completely, a core-needle biopsy is usually performed. Complex cysts have
septa or intracystic masses seen sonographically. Because some breast
cancer may form complex cysts, excision is usually recommended.
For solid breast masses, evaluation uses the triple test, that is, clinical
examination, imaging, and core needle biopsy. If all three suggest a benign
lesion or if all three suggest a breast cancer, the test is considered
concordant. A concordant benign triple test is ≥99-percent accurate, and
breast lumps in this category can be followed by clinical examination alone.
Most masses in pregnancy have these three reassuring features. In contrast, if
any of the three assessments suggests malignancy, the mass should be
excised.

■ Management
With breast cancer, a limited search of the most common metastatic sites is
completed. For most, this includes a chest radiograph, liver sonography, and
skeletal MR imaging (Becker, 2016; Krishna, 2013). MR imaging can also
evaluate the abdomen, pelvis, and brain.
Treatment of breast cancer includes an obstetrician, breast surgeon, and
medical oncologist. Initially, desires for pregnancy continuation are
addressed, and data indicate that pregnancy interruption does not influence
the course or prognosis of breast cancer (Cardonick, 2010). With pregnancy
continuation, treatment in general mirrors that for nonpregnant women.
Important caveats are that chemotherapy and surgery are postponed to the
second trimester, and adjuvant radiotherapy is withheld until after delivery
(Brewer, 2011). Delay should be avoided as the risk of metastases increases
with every few months by 5 to 10 percent (McCormick, 2018).
Surgical treatment may be definitive. In the absence of metastatic disease,
either a wide excision or a modified or total mastectomy—each with axillary
node staging—can be performed (Rosenkranz, 2006). Staging by sentinel
lymph node biopsy and lymphoscintigraphy with technetium-99m is safe.
Breast reconstruction, if desired, is typically delayed until after delivery
(Viswanathan, 2011). That said, one small series showed good results in 10
pregnant women who underwent immediate reconstruction after mastectomy
(Caragacianu, 2016).

Chemotherapy is usually given with both positive- and negative-node
breast cancers. In premenopausal women, survival rates with this approach
are improved, even if lymph nodes are cancer free. For node-positive
disease, multiagent chemotherapy is begun if delivery is not anticipated
within several weeks. Cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and cisplatin are
currently used (Euhus, 2016). If an anthracycline-based agent such as
doxorubicin is used, pretherapy maternal echocardiography is performed
because of associated cardiotoxicity (Brewer, 2011). Good maternal and
perinatal results have been reported (Freret, 2020; McCormick, 2018).
Immunotherapy for breast cancers is now commonplace. Trastuzumab
(Herceptin) is a monoclonal antibody to the HER2/neu receptor, which is
found in approximately a third of invasive breast cancers (Hudis, 2007). The
drug is not recommended in pregnancy. This is because HER2/neu is strongly
expressed in fetal renal epithelium, and trastuzumab has been linked with
miscarriage, fetal renal failure and related oligohydramnios, and preterm
birth (Amant, 2010; Azim, 2010).
The effects of pregnancy on the course of breast cancer and its prognosis
are complex. Breast cancer is more aggressive in younger women, but
whether it is more aggressive during pregnancy in these same women is
debatable (Azim, 2014). Clinically, most studies indicate little difference in
overall survival rates with pregnancy-associated breast cancer compared
with similarly aged and staged nonpregnant women (Beadle, 2009). Other
reports note worse overall survival rates with pregnancy-associated breast
cancer (Rodriguez, 2008). These investigators do conclude, however, that
later disease stages are more prevalent in pregnant women.
Because breast cancer is usually found at a more advanced stage in
pregnant women, the overall prognosis is diminished (Andersson, 2015). The
aggregate of studies published after 1990 indicate that up to 60 percent of
pregnant women have concomitant axillary node involvement at diagnosis.
And although, stage for stage, the 5-year survival rate is comparable in
pregnant and nonpregnant women, the more advanced stages that are typical
of pregnant women worsen their prognosis (Kuo, 2019; Zemlickis, 1992).

■ Pregnancy Following Breast Cancer
After breast cancer treatment, chemotherapy will render some women
infertile, but childbearing options were noted earlier (p. 1164). For those

who become pregnant, long-term maternal survival rates are not adversely
affected (Averette, 1999; Lambertini, 2019). One metaanalysis found that for
women with early breast cancer, pregnancy that occurs 10 months after
diagnosis may, in fact, confer a survival benefit (Valachis, 2010).
Breastfeeding does not adversely alter the course.
In women successfully treated for breast cancer, recurrence is a concern.
Because recurrences are more common soon after treatment, it seems
reasonable to delay conception for 2 to 3 years. Hormonal contraceptive
methods are contraindicated, and a copper-containing intrauterine device is
an excellent method for many. That said, women with breast cancer who
subsequently conceive do not appear to have diminished survival rates (Ives,
2006). Those who developed breast cancer within 10 years of delivery have
and increased risk for metastases (Goddard, 2019). Importantly, tamoxifen,
which may be used long-term following initial therapy, is a teratogen.
Discontinuation 2 months prior to conception is recommended (Zydus
Pharmaceuticals, 2020).

BRCA1/2 MUTATIONS
Hereditary breast and ovarian cancer (HBOC) syndrome yields a
susceptibility to either one or both of these two cancers in individuals with
recognized gene mutations (Table 66-2). BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations are
preeminent, but others are associated.
TABLE 66-2. Some Genes Associated with Hereditary Cancers

Preventively, cancer screening, chemoprevention, prophylactic surgery,
and preimplantation testing are options. First, ovarian cancer screening with
TVS or serum CA125 levels is not routinely recommended (Daly, 2021). For
breast cancer, surveillance in those aged 25 to 29 years is clinical breast
examination (CBE) performed by a provider once or twice yearly plus
annual breast MR imaging. For older individuals, yearly MR imaging and
mammography are alternated every 6 months.
For women with BRCA1 and BRCA2 gene mutation, combination oral
contraceptives (COC) are recognized chemoprevention for ovarian cancer
(Chen, 2019). COC effects on breast cancer risk are conflicting, and studies
show no risk or modest increased risk (Daly, 2021). For breast cancer
chemoprevention, tamoxifen can lower cancer risk in those with BRCA2
defects (King, 2001).
Prophylactic bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy (BSO) is recommended
after childbearing in those aged 35 to 40 years with BRCA1 defects and aged
40 to 45 years in those with BRCA2 mutations (Chen, 2019). BSO or
mastectomy also decreases breast cancer risk in these women (Kotsopoulos,
2016; Li, 2016; Rebbeck, 2009).
BRCA1/2 genes are transmitted in an autosomal dominant fashion. In
those planning pregnancy, affected women may elect preimplantation
genetic testing of blastocysts (Chen, 2019). However, with an established
pregnancy, prenatal testing poses ethical concerns regarding pregnancy
termination for a mutation that may not lead to cancer. Currently, testing for
conditions that do not accrue until adulthood are discouraged by the
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020a,b).
Regarding parity, protective benefits for breast cancer in women with
either BRCA defect show conflicting data (Kotsopoulos, 2018; Pan 2014;
Rieder, 2015; Toss, 2017). For ovarian cancer, parity lowers rates for
women with BRCA1 but not BRCA2 mutations (Kotsopoulos, 2015). Women
with either BRCA mutation who undergo induced abortion do not have an
elevated breast cancer risk (Friedman, 2006). Breastfeeding conveys a
protective effect against breast cancer in those with BRCA1 defects but not
BRCA2 mutations. It lowers ovarian cancer rates for those with either
mutation (Kotsopoulos, 2012; 2020).
Among those with either BRCA mutation, a breast cancer diagnosis
during pregnancy does not lower survival rates compared with similarly
affected but not pregnant women (Valentini, 2013). After breast cancer

treatment, women with either BRCA defect who pursue pregnancy do not
experience increase pregnancy complication rates. Moreover, disease-free or
overall survival rates are not worsened (Lambertini, 2020; Valentini, 2013).

THYROID CANCER
Palpable thyroid nodules are detected in 4 to 7 percent of the population, and
management is found in Chapter 61 (p. 1098). Approximately 10 percent are
malignant (Burman, 2015). In pregnancy, thyroid cancer incidence
approximates 10 cases per 100,000 births (Spiegel, 2019; Sullivan, 2019).
With this diagnosis, pregnancy termination is not necessary. Primary therapy
is partial or subtotal thyroidectomy ideally done during the second trimester.
Most lesions are well differentiated, and delayed treatment is acceptable
(Angell, 2019). For aggressive tumors, however, prompt surgical treatment is
recommended. Postoperatively, replacement thyroxine is given. A higher risk
for VTE is reported for these women (Spiegel, 2019).
In some thyroid cancer types, radioiodine is used for primary or
postoperative treatment. This is contraindicated in both pregnancy and
lactation for several reasons. First, iodine-131 transferred transplacentally is
avidly trapped by the fetal thyroid gland to cause hypothyroidism. Second,
during lactation, the breast also concentrates a substantial amount of iodide.
This may pose neonatal risk due to radioiodine-contaminated milk ingestion
and raise maternal cancer risk from significant breast irradiation. To limit
maternal exposure, a delay of 3 months between lactation and thyroid
ablation will more reliably ensure complete breast involution (Sisson, 2011).
In women with thyroid cancer who ultimately receive iodine-131 doses,
pregnancy should be avoided for 6 months to 1 year. This time ensures
thyroid function stability and permits confirmation of cancer remission
(Abalovich, 2007).

LYMPHOMAS
■ Hodgkin Disease
This lymphoma is probably B-cell derived and is cytologically distinguished
from other lymphomas by Reed–Sternberg cells. Of cancers in pregnancy,
lymphomas are common, and gestational rates are rising because of delayed

childbearing (see Fig. 66-1) (Horowitz, 2016). In one review from the
Nationwide Inpatient Sample, the incidence of Hodgkin lymphoma
approximates 1 case in 12,400 births (El-Messidi, 2015).
In more than 70 percent of these cases, lymph nodes painlessly enlarge at
sites above the diaphragm, that is, in the axillary, cervical, or submandibular
chains. Approximately one third of patients have fever, night sweats, malaise,
weight loss, or pruritus. Diagnosis is by histological examination of involved
nodes (McCormick, 2018).
The Lugano staging system is applied to Hodgkin and other lymphomas
(Table 66-3). For staging, pregnancy limits the use of some radiographic
studies, but at minimum, chest radiography, abdominal imaging with
sonography or MR imaging, and bone marrow biopsy are completed (Shah,
2020). MR imaging is excellent for evaluating thoracic and abdominal
paraaortic lymph nodes.
TABLE 66-3. Lugano Classification Staging System for Hodgkin and Other
Lymphomas

The current trend for nonpregnant individuals is to administer
chemotherapy for all stages of Hodgkin disease. In pregnancy, for early-stage
disease in the first trimester, options include pregnancy termination or
observation until after 12 weeks’ gestation and then multiagent chemotherapy
(Eyre, 2015; McCormick, 2018). For most advanced-stage disease after the
first trimester, cycles of doxorubicin, bleomycin, vinblastine, and
dacarbazine are given. In general, postponement of therapy until fetal
maturity is achieved seems justifiable only when the diagnosis is made late
in pregnancy.
Women with Hodgkin lymphoma have a higher incidence of VTE (ElMessidi, 2015; Horowitz, 2016). Also, in our experiences, the gravidas—

even after they are “cured”—are inordinately susceptible to infection and
sepsis. Active antineoplastic therapy only raises this vulnerability.
The overall prognosis with Hodgkin lymphoma is similar to that for
nonpregnant women, and 5-year survival rates exceed 90 percent (Maggen,
2019). Pregnancy does not adversely affect the cancer course of this
lymphoma, and pregnancy outcomes are not generally adversely affected. For
women with disease in remission, pregnancy does not stimulate relapse
(Weibull, 2016).

■ Non-Hodgkin Lymphomas
Although usually B-cell tumors, non-Hodgkin lymphomas can also be T-cell
or natural-killer-cell neoplasms. Their biology, classification, and treatment
are complex. They are associated with viral infections, and their incidence
has risen sharply at least partly because 5 to 10 percent of persons with HIV
infection develop lymphoma. Other associated viruses include Epstein-Barr
and hepatitis C viruses and human herpes virus 8. Some of these lymphomas
are aggressive, and survival rates vary with the type of cell line involved.
Non-Hodgkin lymphomas are infrequent during pregnancy (Pinnix, 2016).
They also are staged according to the Lugano system. If diagnosed in the first
trimester, pregnancy termination followed by multiagent chemotherapy is
recommended for all but indolent or very early disease. These less
aggressive forms may be observed in the first trimester, and then full
treatment given in the second. One regimen is rituximab plus the CHOP
combination of cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin (hydroxydaunorubicin),
vincristine [Oncovin], and prednisone. In a study of 80 pregnant women with
this regimen, the 3-year survival rate was 73 to 96 percent (Maggen, 2021).
Burkitt lymphoma is an aggressive B-cell tumor associated with EpsteinBarr virus infection. Prognosis is poor, and treatment is multiagent
chemotherapy. In an earlier review of 19 women whose pregnancies were
complicated by this lymphoma, 17 died within a year of diagnosis (Barnes,
1998).

■ Leukemias
These malignancies generally arise either from lymphoid tissues—
lymphoblastic or lymphocytic leukemias, or from bone marrow—myeloid

leukemias. They can be acute or chronic. Adult leukemias are more prevalent
after age 40 but still are among the most common malignancies of young
women (see Fig. 66-1). In two large registries, the incidence was 1 case in
40,000 to 50,000 births (Nolan, 2020; Smith, 2003). In a review of 72
pregnancies complicated by leukemia from 1975 until 1988, 44 had acute
myelogenous leukemia; 20 had acute lymphocytic leukemia; and eight had
one of the chronic leukemias (Caligiuri, 1989). Nolan and colleagues (2020)
cite similar proportions.
Acute leukemias almost always cause marked peripheral blood count
abnormalities, and often the white blood cell count is elevated with readily
recognizable circulating blast cells. The diagnosis is made from bone
marrow biopsy.
With current multiagent chemotherapy, remission during pregnancy is
common, and termination does not further improve the prognosis. In some
cases, pregnancy termination before viability may simplify management of an
acutely ill woman. Abortion is a consideration in early pregnancy to avoid
potential chemotherapy teratogens. One is all-trans-retinoic acid, also
known as tretinoin, which causes retinoic acid syndrome (Chap. 8, p. 154)
(Li, 2020; Santolaria, 2020). Tyrosine kinase inhibitors are another
teratogenic group (p. 1163) (Palani, 2015).
Other than these caveats, treatment of gravidas with leukemia is similar
to that for nonpregnant women. Acute myeloid leukemia is treated without
delay (Ali, 2015). After induction chemotherapy, postremission maintenance
therapy is mandatory to prevent a relapse, which is then usually treated with
stem-cell transplantation. If allogeneic stem-cell transplantation is indicated,
early delivery is considered. With some chronic leukemias, it may be
possible to delay therapy until after delivery (Fey, 2008). As with lymphoma,
infection and hemorrhage are significant complications that should be
anticipated in women with active disease.
Most descriptions of leukemia treatment in pregnancy are single cases or
small series (Routledge, 2018; Sanz, 2015). In one review of 58 cases, 75
percent were diagnosed after the first trimester (Reynoso, 1987). Half were
acute myelogenous leukemia, which had a remission rate of 75 percent with
chemotherapy. Only 40 percent of these pregnancies resulted in a live birth
(Caligiuri, 1989). In a more recent report of 92 pregnant women with acute
promyelocytic leukemia, 91 percent had a complete remission (Santolaria,
2020).

MALIGNANT MELANOMA
These most often originate from melanocytes in a preexisting nevus. Lesions
most often develop in fair-skinned whites and commonly in childbearingaged women. Pigmented lesions that change in contour or height or show
discoloration, bleeding, or ulceration should prompt biopsy (Richtig, 2017).
In some population studies, melanoma is the most frequent malignancy
complicating pregnancy (Andersson, 2015; Bannister-Tyrrell, 2015). The
reported incidence ranges from <1 to 3 cases per 1000 births (Cottreau,
2019; Eibye, 2013). Many are treated outpatient and thus not entered into
tumor registries.
Staging is clinical. Stage I is a melanoma with no palpable lymph nodes;
in stage II, lymph nodes are palpable; and in stage III, distant metastases are
identified. For patients with stage I, tumor thickness is the single most
important predictor of survival. The Clark classification includes five levels
of involvement by depth into the epidermis, dermis, and subcutaneous fat.
The Breslow scale measures tumor thickness and size, in addition to invasion
depth.
Primary surgical treatment for melanoma is determined by the stage and
includes wide local resection, sometimes with extensive regional lymph
node dissection. The American Academy of Dermatology recommends
sentinel lymph node mapping and biopsy using technetium-99m–sulfur
colloid, which has a calculated fetal dose of 0.014 mSv or 0.014 mGy
(Swetter, 2019). Routine regional node dissection reportedly improves
survival rates in nonpregnant patients with microscopic metastases. For
gravidas, an algorithm is proposed that begins with resection of the primary
tumor under local anesthesia but postpones sentinel lymph node biopsy until
postpartum (Broer, 2012). Although prophylactic chemotherapy or
immunotherapy is usually avoided during pregnancy, it may be given if
indicated by tumor stage and maternal prognosis. In most cases of distant
metastatic melanoma, treatment is at best palliative.
Stage-for-stage, survival is equivalent between pregnant and nonpregnant
women (Driscoll, 2016; Johansson, 2014). In two studies, half of pregnant
women presented with an advanced stage (de Haan, 2017; Sawyers, 2020).
Placentas are submitted for histological evaluation to exclude metastasis (p.
1164). Therapeutic abortion does not improve maternal survival rates.
Clinical stage is the strongest determinant of survival, and women with deep

cutaneous invasion or regional node involvement have the worst prognosis.
Approximately 60 percent of recurrences will manifest within 2 years, and
90 percent by 5 years. Thus, most recommend that pregnancy be avoided for
3 to 5 years after surgical resection. Interim contraception can include
combination oral contraceptives, as they do not appear to have adverse
cancer effects (Still, 2017).

GASTROINTESTINAL TRACT CANCER
Carcinomas of the colon and rectum are the third most frequent cancer in all
women in the United States (American Cancer Society, 2021). Their
incidence in pregnancy is rising because of delayed childbearing (Murphy,
2018). Even so, colorectal tumors are uncommon before age 40. An
approximate incidence of 1 case in 150,000 deliveries was derived from the
California Cancer Registry (Smith, 2003). In another report, however, the
incidence approximated 1 case in 13,000 pregnancies (Salani, 2014). Of
colorectal carcinomas in pregnant women, 80 percent arise from the rectum.
In one review, only 41 cases in pregnancy were colon cancers located above
the peritoneal reflection (Chan, 1999).
The most frequent symptoms are abdominal pain, distention, nausea,
constipation, and rectal bleeding. If symptoms of colon disease persist,
digital rectal examination, stool tests for occult blood, and colonoscopy are
done. Some gastrointestinal (GI) tract cancers are found because of
metastases to the ovary. These Krukenberg tumors are tumor-laden ovaries
from another, often GI, primary and carry a bleak prognosis (Kodama, 2016).
Colon cancer treatment in gravidas mirrors that for nonpregnant women.
Without evidence of metastatic disease, surgical resection is preferred, but
most pregnant women have advanced lesions (Al-Ibrahim, 2014). During the
first half of pregnancy, hysterectomy is not necessary to perform colon or
rectal resection, and thus, therapeutic abortion is not mandated. During later
pregnancy, therapy may be delayed until fetal maturation. However, bowel
hemorrhage, obstruction, or perforation may force surgical intervention.
Gastric and esophageal cancers are rare in pregnancy. Despite this,
persistent unexplained upper GI symptoms should be prompt upper
abdominal sonography and perhaps endoscopy.

REFERENCES
Abalovich M, Amino N, Barbour LA, et al: 2007 management of thyroid dysfunction during pregnancy
and postpartum: an Endocrine Society Clinical Practice Guideline. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 92:S1,
2007
Ackermann S, Gehrsitz C, Mehihorn G, et al: Management and course of histologically verified cervical
carcinoma in situ during pregnancy. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 85:1134, 2006
Adeyemi-Fowode O, Lin EG, Syed F, et al: Adnexal torsion in children and adolescents: a retrospective
review of 245 cases at a single institution. J Pediatr Adolesc Gynecol 32(1):64, 2019
Al-Adnani M, Kiho L, Scheimberg I: Maternal pancreatic carcinoma metastatic to the placenta: a case
report and literature review. Pediatr Dev Pathol 10:61, 2007
Al-Ibrahim A, Parrish J, Dunn E, et al: Pregnancy and maternal outcomes in women with prior or
current gastrointestinal malignancies. J Obstet Gynaecol Can 36(1):34, 2014
Alfasi A, Ben-Aharon I: Breast cancer during pregnancy-current paradigms, paths to explore. Cancers
(Basel) 11(11):1669, 2019
Ali S, Jones GL, Culligan DJ, et al: Guidelines for the diagnosis and management of acute myeloid
leukaemia in pregnancy. Br J Haematol 170(4):487, 2015
Alouini S, Rida K, Mathevet P: Cervical cancer complicating pregnancy: implications of laparoscopic
lymphadenectomy. Gynecol Oncol 108(3):472, 2008
Amant F, Berveiller P, Boere IA, et al: Gynecologic cancers in pregnancy: guidelines based on a third
international consensus meeting. Ann Oncol 30(10):1601, 2019
Amant F, Deckers S, Van Calsteren K, et al: Breast cancer in pregnancy: recommendations of an
international consensus meeting. Eur J Cancer 46(18):3158, 2010
Amant F, Han SN, Gziri MM, et al: Management of cancer in pregnancy. Best Pract Res Clin Obstet
Gynaecol 29(5):741, 2015a
Amant F, Uzan C, Han SN, et al: Matched cohort study on patients with cervical cancer diagnosed
during pregnancy. Ann Oncol 25(suppl 4):iv320, 2014
Amant F, Vandenbroucke T, Verheecke M, et al: Pediatric outcome after maternal cancer diagnosed
during pregnancy. N Engl J Med 373:1824, 2015b
American Cancer Society: ACS Journals: Cancer statistics. 2021. Available at:
www.cancer.org/research/cancer-facts-statistics/all-cancer-facts-figures/cancer-facts-figures2021.html. Accessed October 12, 2021
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Evaluation and management of adnexal masses.
Practice Bulletin No. 174, November 2016
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Guidelines for diagnostic imaging during
pregnancy and lactation. Committee Opinion No. 723, Reaffirmed 2019c
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Hereditary breast and ovarian cancer syndrome.
Practice Bulletin No. 182, September, 2017, Reaffirmed 2019d
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Carrier screening in the age of genomic
medicine. Committee Opinion No. 690, March 2017, Reaffirmed 2020a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Ethical issues in genetic testing. Committee
Opinion No. 410, June 2008, Reaffirmed 2020b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Management of symptomatic uterine
leiomyomas. Practice Bulletin No. May 2021a

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Medically indicated late-preterm and early-term
deliveries. Committee Opinion No. 831, June 2021b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Updated cervical cancer screening guidelines.
Practice Advisory April 2021c
American College of Radiology: ACR BI-RADS atlas: breast imaging reporting and data system, 5th
ed. Reston, ACR, 2013
American College of Radiology: ACR manual on contrast media. Reston, ACR, 2021
American Society for Reproductive Medicine: Fertility preservation and reproduction in patients facing
gonadotoxic therapies: an ethics committee opinion. Fertil Steril 110(3):380, 2018
American Society for Reproductive Medicine: Ovarian tissue cryopreservation: a committee opinion.
Fertil Steril 101(5):1237, 2014
American Society for Reproductive Medicine: Prevention and treatment of moderate and severe
ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome: a guideline. Fertil Steril 106(7):1634, 2016
American Society for Reproductive Medicine: Removal of myomas in asymptomatic patients to improve
fertility and/or reduce miscarriage rate: a guideline. Fertil Steril 108(3):416, 2017
American Society for Reproductive Medicine, Society for Assisted Reproductive Technology: Mature
oocyte cryopreservation: a guideline. Fertil Steril 99(1):37, 2013a
American Society for Reproductive Medicine, Society for Assisted Reproductive Technology:
Recommendations for gamete and embryo donation: a committee opinion. Fertil Steril 99(1):47,
2013b
Amin N, Chaabouni N, George A: Genetic testing for epithelial ovarian cancer. Best Pract Res Clin
Obstet Gynaecol 65:125, 2020
Anderson ML, Mari G, Schwartz PE: Gynecologic malignancies in pregnancy. In Barnea ER, Jauniaux
E, Schwartz PE (eds): Cancer and Pregnancy. London, Springer, 2001
Andersson TM, Johansson AL, Fredriksson I, et al: Cancer during pregnancy and the postpartum period:
a population-based study. Cancer 121(12):2072, 2015
Andreotti RF, Timmerman D, Strachowski LM, et al: O-RADS US risk stratification and management
system: a consensus guideline from the ACR ovarian-adnexal reporting and data system committee.
Radiology 294(1):168, 2020
Angell TE, Alexander EK: Thyroid nodules and thyroid cancer in the pregnant woman. Endocrinol
Metab Clin North Am 48(3):557, 2019
Averette HE, Mirhashemi R, Moffat FL: Pregnancy after breast carcinoma: the ultimate medical
challenge. Cancer 85:2301, 1999
Averette HE, Nasser N, Yankow SL, et al: Cervical conization in pregnancy: analysis of 180 operations.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 106:543, 1970
Azim HA Jr, Azim H, Peccatori FA: Treatment of cancer during pregnancy with monoclonal antibodies:
a real challenge. Expert Rev Clin Immunol 6(6):821, 2010
Azim HA Jr, Partridge AH: Biology of breast cancer in young women. Breast Cancer Res 16(4):427,
2014
Babic A, Sasamoto N, Rosner BA, et al: Association between breastfeeding and ovarian cancer risk.
JAMA Oncol 6(6):e200421, 2020
Bacalbaşa N, Bălescu I, Vîlcu M, et al: Cytoreductive surgery for advanced stage ovarian cancer in the
second trimester of pregnancy-a case report and literature review. Medicine (Baltimore)
99(29):e21127, 2020
Bailleux M, Bernard JP, Benachi A, et al: Ovarian endometriosis during pregnancy: a series of 53
endometriomas. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 209:100, 2017

Bannister-Tyrell M, Roberts CL, Hasovits C, et al: Incidence and outcomes of pregnancy-associated
melanoma in New South Wales 1994–2008. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol 55(2):116, 2015
Barnes MN, Barrett JC, Kimberlin DF, et al: Burkitt lymphoma in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 92:675,
1998
Baxi LV, Grossman LC, Abellar R: Hyperreactio luteinalis in pregnancy and hyperandrogenism: a case
report. J Reprod Med 59(9–10):509, 2014
Beadle BM, Woodward WA, Middleton LP, et al: The impact of pregnancy on breast cancer outcomes
in women < or = 35 years. Cancer 115(6):1174, 2009
Becker S: Breast cancer in pregnancy: a brief clinical review. Best Pract Res Clin Obstet Gynaecol
33:79, 2016
Beharee N, Shi Z, Wu D, et al: Diagnosis and treatment of cervical cancer in pregnant women. Cancer
Med 8(12):5425, 2019
Bhatla N, Berek JS, Cuello Fredes M, et al: Revised FIGO staging for carcinoma of the cervix uteri. Int
J Gynaecol Obstet 145(1):129, 2019
Bigelow CA, Horowitz NS, Goodman A, et al: Management and outcome of cervical cancer diagnosed
in pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 216(3):276.e1, 2017
Bishop LA, Patel S, Fries MH: A case of recurrent hyperreactio luteinalis in three spontaneous
pregnancies. J Clin Ultrasound 44(8):502, 2016
Bleau N, Patenaude V, Abenhaim HA: Risk of venous thromboembolic events in pregnant patients with
cancer. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 29(3):380, 2016
Boulay R, Podczaski E: Ovarian cancer complicating pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am
25:3856, 1998
Boxer LA, Bolyard AA, Kelley ML, et al: Use of granulocyte colony-stimulating factor during
pregnancy in women with chronic neutropenia. Obstet Gynecol 125(1):197, 2015
Brent RL: Utilization of developmental basic science principles in the evaluation of reproductive risks
from pre- and postconception environmental radiation exposures. Teratology 59:182, 1999
Brewer M, Kueck A, Runowicz CD: Chemotherapy in pregnancy. Clin Obstet Gynecol 54:602, 2011
Broer N, Buonocore S, Goldberg C: A proposal for the timing of management of patients with
melanoma presenting during pregnancy. J Surg Oncol 106(1):36, 2012
Burman KD, Wartofsky L: Thyroid nodules. N Engl J Med 373:2247, 2015
Caligiuri MA, Mayer RJ: Pregnancy and leukemia. Semin Oncol 16:388, 1989
Caragacianu DL, Mayer EL, Chun YS, et al: Immediate breast reconstruction following mastectomy in
pregnant women with breast cancer. J Surg Oncol 114(2):140, 2016
Cardonick E, Dougherty R, Grana G et al: Breast cancer during pregnancy: maternal and fetal
outcomes. Cancer 16:76, 2010
Cardonick EH, Gringlas MB, Hunter K, et al: Development of children born to mothers with cancer
during pregnancy comparing in utero chemotherapy-exposed children with nonexposed controls. Am
J Obstet Gynecol 212(5):658.e1, 2015
Caspi B, Levi R, Appelman Z, et al: Conservative management of ovarian cystic teratoma during
pregnancy and labor. Am J Obstet Gynecol 182:503, 2000
Castanon A, Brocklehurst P, Evans H, et al: Risk of preterm birth after treatment for cervical
intraepithelial neoplasia among women attending colposcopy in England: retrospective-prospective
cohort study. BMJ 345:e5174, 2012
Celik C, Acar A, Cicek N, et al: Can myomectomy be performed during pregnancy? Gynecol Obstet
Invest 53:79, 2002
Chan YM, Ngai SW, Lao TT: Colon cancer in pregnancy. A case report. J Reprod Med 44:733, 1999

Chen LM, Blank SV, Burton E, et al: Reproductive and hormonal considerations in women at increased
risk for hereditary gynecologic cancers: Society of Gynecologic Oncology and American Society for
Reproductive Medicine evidence-based review. Gynecol Oncol 155(3):508, 2019
Choi JR, Levine D, Finberg H: Luteoma of pregnancy: sonographic findings in two cases. J Ultrasound
Med 19(12):877, 2000
Chua SJ, Morton MR, Svigo J, et al: Use of romiplostim in pregnancy for refractory idiopathic
thrombocytopenia purpura: two case reports with maternal and fetal outcomes and literature review.
Obstet Med 13:45, 2020
Ciavattini A, Clemente N, Delli Carpini G, et al: Number and size of uterine fibroids and obstetric
outcomes. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 28(4):484, 2015
Condic M, Merz WM, Gembruch U, et al: Testosterone serum levels are not predictive of maternal
virilization in hyperreaction luteinalis. Arch Gynecol Obstet 303(1):129, 2021
Conner SN, Frey HA, Cahill AG, et al: Loop electrosurgical excision procedure and risk of preterm
birth. A systematic review and meta-analysis. Obstet Gynecol 123:752, 2014
Coronado GD, Marshall LM, Schwartz SM: Complications in pregnancy, labor, and delivery with uterine
leiomyomas: a population-based study. Obstet Gynecol 95:764, 2000
Cottreau CM, Dashevsky I, Andrade SE, et al: Pregnancy-associated cancer: a U.S. population-based
study. J Womens Health (Larchmt) 28(2):250, 2019
Critchley HO, Wallace WH, Shalet SM, et al: Abdominal irradiation in childhood: the potential for
pregnancy. BJOG 99(5):392, 1992
Curtis KM, Hillis SD, Marchbanks PA, et al: Disruption of the endometrial-myometrial border during
pregnancy as a risk factor for adenomyosis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 187(3):543, 2002
Dahl SK, Thomas MA, Williams DB, et al: Maternal virilization due to luteoma associated with delayed
lactation. Fertil Steril 90(5):2006.e17, 2008
Daly MB, Pal T, Berry MP, et al: Genetic/familial high-risk assessment: breast, ovarian, and pancreatic,
version 2.2021, NCCN clinical practice guidelines in oncology. J Natl Compr Canc Netw 19(1):77,
2021
Dariushnia SR, Nikolic B, Stokes LS, et al: Quality improvement guidelines for uterine artery
embolization for symptomatic leiomyomata. J Vasc Interv Radiol 25(11):1737, 2014
De Carolis S, Fatigante G, Ferrazzani S, et al: Uterine myomectomy in pregnant women. Fetal Diagn
Ther 16:116, 2001
de Haan J, Lok CA, de Groot CJ, et al: Melanoma during pregnancy: a report of 60 pregnancies
complicated by melanoma. Melanoma Res 27(3):218, 2017
de Haan J, Verheecke M, Van Calsteren K, et al: Oncological management and obstetrical and neonatal
outcomes for women diagnosed with cancer during pregnancy: a 20-year international cohort study
of 1170 patients. Lancet Oncol 19(3):337, 2018
Djavadian D, Braendle W, Jaenicke F: Laparoscopic oophoropexy for the treatment of recurrent torsion
of the adnexa in pregnancy: case report and review. Fertil Steril 82(4):933, 2004
Doğan S, Özyüncü Ö, Atak Z: Fibroids during pregnancy: effects on pregnancy and neonatal outcomes.
J Reprod Med 61(1–2):52, 2016
Dorum A, Blom GP, Ekerhovd E, et al: Prevalence and histologic diagnosis of adnexal cysts in
postmenopausal women: an autopsy study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 192(1):48, 2005
Driscoll MS, Martires K, Bieber AK, et al: Pregnancy and melanoma. J Am Acad Dermatol 75(4):669,
2016
Dunton CJ: Management of atypical glandular cells and adenocarcinoma in situ. Obstet Gynecol Clin
North Am 35(4):623, 2008

Easton DF, Pharoah PD, Antoniou AC, et al: Gene-panel sequencing and the prediction of breastcancer risk. N Engl J Med 372:2243, 2015
Ecker AM, Donnellan NM, Shepherd JP, et al: Abdominal wall endometriosis: 12 years of experience at
a large academic institution. Am J Obstet Gynecol 211(4):363.e1, 2014
Eibye S, Kjaer SK, Mellemkjaer L: Incidence of pregnancy-associated cancer in Denmark, 1977–2006.
Obstet Gynecol 122:608, 2013
El-Messidi A, Patenaude V, Hakeem G, et al: Incidence and outcomes of women with Hodgkin’s
lymphoma in pregnancy: a population-based study on 7.9 million births. J Perinat Med 43(6):683,
2015
Erkanli S, Ayhan A: Fertility-sparing therapy in young women with endometrial cancer: 2010 update. Int
J Gyn Cancer 20:1170, 2010
Euhus DM: Breast disease. In Hoffman BL, Schorge JO, Bradshaw KD, et al (eds): Williams
Gynecology, 3rd ed. New York, McGraw Hill Education, 2016
Eyre TA, Lau IJ, Mackillop L, et al: Management and controversies of classical Hodgkin lymphoma in
pregnancy. Br J Haematol 169(5):613, 2015
Fader AN, Alward EK, Niederhauser A, et al: Cervical dysplasia in pregnancy: a multi-institutional
evaluation. Am J Obstet Gynecol 203:113, 2010
Favero G, Chiantera V, Oleszczuk A, et al: Invasive cervical cancer during pregnancy: laparoscopic
nodal evaluation before oncologic treatment delay. Gynecol Oncol 118:123, 2010
Fey MF, Surbek D: Leukaemia and pregnancy. Recent Results Cancer Res 178:97, 2008
Fortner RT, Poole EM, Wentzensen NA, et al: Ovarian cancer risk factors by tumor aggressiveness: an
analysis from the Ovarian Cancer Cohort Consortium. Int J Cancer 145(1):58, 2019
Freret TS, Exman P, Mayer EL, et al: Birthweight and chemotherapy exposure in women diagnosed
with breast cancer during pregnancy. Am J Perinatol September 24, 2020 [Epub ahead of print]
Friedman E, Kotsopoulos J, Lubinski J, et al: Spontaneous and therapeutic abortions and the risk of
breast cancer among BRCA mutation carriers. Breast Cancer Res 8:R15, 2006
Fuchs N, Smorgick N, Tovbin Y, et al: Oophoropexy to prevent adnexal torsion: how, when, and for
whom? J Minim Invasive Gynecol 17(2):205, 2010
Genta PR, Dias ML, Janiszewski TA, et al: Streptococcus agalactiae endocarditis and giant
pyomyoma simulating ovarian cancer. South Med J 94:508, 2001
Girault A, Ray CL, Chapron C, et al: Leiomyomatous uterus and preterm birth: an exposed/unexposed
monocentric cohort study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 219(4):410.e1, 2018
Goldman NA, Goldberg GL: Late recurrence of squamous cell cervical cancer in an episiotomy site
after vaginal delivery. Obstet Gynecol 101:1127, 2003
Goddard ET, Bassale S, Schedin T, et al: Association between postpartum breast cancer diagnosis and
metastasis and the clinical features underlying risk. JAMA Netw Open 2(1):e186997, 2019
Greiber IK, Mikkelsen AP, Karlsen MA, et al: Cancer in pregnancy increases the risk of venous
thromboembolism: a nationwide cohort study BJOG 128(7):1151, 2021
Gubbala K, Laios A, Gallos I, et al: Outcomes of ovarian transposition in gynaecological cancers: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. J Ovarian Res 7:69, 2014
Hacker NF, Berek JS, Lagasse LD, et al: Carcinoma of the cervix associated with pregnancy. Obstet
Gynecol 59:735, 1982
Haggar FA, Pereira G, Preen D, et al: Adverse obstetric and perinatal outcomes following treatment of
adolescent and young adult cancer: a population based cohort study. PLoS One 9(12):e113292, 2014
Hakim C, Padmanabhan V, Vyas AK: Gestational hyperandrogenism in developmental programming.
Endocrinology 14:en20161801, 2016

Hamilton CA, Pothuri B, Arend RC, et al: Endometrial cancer: a society of gynecologic oncology
evidence-based review and recommendations, part II. Gynecol Oncol 160(3):827, 2021
Hannuna KY, Putignani L, Silvestri E, et al: Incidental endometrial adenocarcinoma in early pregnancy:
a case report and review of the literature. Int J Gynecol Cancer 19(9):1580, 2009
Harrison RF, He W, Fu S, et al: National patterns of care and fertility outcomes for reproductive-aged
women with endometrial cancer or atypical hyperplasia. Am J Obstet Gynecol 221(5):474.e1, 2019
Havrilesky LJ, Moorman PG, Lowery WJ, et al: Oral contraceptive pills as primary prevention for
ovarian cancer: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Obstet Gynecol 122(1):139, 2013
Heller DS, Cracchiolo B, Hameed M, et al: Pregnancy-associated invasive squamous cell carcinoma of
the vulva in a 28-year-old, HIV-negative woman: a case report. J Reprod Med 45:659, 2000
Hong Y, Li SQ, Hu YL, et al: Survey of human papillomavirus types and their vertical transmission in
pregnant women. BMC Infect Dis 13:109, 2013
Horowitz NA, Lavi N, Nadir Y, et al: Haematological malignancies in pregnancy: an overview with an
emphasis on thrombotic risks. Thromb Haemost 116(4):613, 2016
Huang T, Townsend MK, Wentzensen N, et al: Reproductive and hormonal factors and risk of ovarian
cancer by tumor dominance: results from the Ovarian Cancer Cohort Consortium (OC3). Cancer
Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 29(1):200, 2020
Hudis CA: Trastuzumab—mechanism of action and use in clinical practice. N Engl J Med 357:39, 2007
Irving JA, Clement PB: Nonneoplastic lesions of the ovary. In Kurman RJ, Ellenson LH, Ronnett BM
(eds): Blaustein’s Pathology of the Female Genital Tract, 6th ed. New York, Springer, 2011
Ishikawa H, Ishi K, Serna VA, et al: Progesterone is essential for maintenance and growth of uterine
leiomyomata. Endocrinology 151(6):2433, 2010
Iversen L, Fielding S, Lidegaard Ø, et al: Association between contemporary hormonal contraception
and ovarian cancer in women of reproductive age in Denmark: prospective, nationwide cohort study.
BMJ 362:k3609, 2018
Ives A, Saunders C, Bulsara M, et al: Pregnancy after breast cancer: population based study. BMJ
334(7586):194, 2006
Jenabi E, Khazaei S: The effect of uterine leiomyoma on the risk of malpresentation and cesarean: a
meta-analysis. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 31(1):87, 2018
Johansson AL, Andersson TM, Plym A, et al: Mortality in women with pregnancy-associated malignant
melanoma. J Am Acad Dermatol 71(6):1093, 2014
Kal HB, Struikmans H: Radiotherapy during pregnancy: fact and fiction. Lancet Oncol 6(5):328, 2005
Kanal E, Barkovich AJ, Bell C, et al: Expert panel on MR safety. ACR practice guideline for imaging
pregnant or potentially pregnant adolescents and women with ionizing radiation. J Magn Reson
Imaging 37:501, 2013
Kaňová N, Bičíková M: Hyperandrogenic states in pregnancy. Physiol Res 60(2):243, 2011
Kao HW, Wu CJ, Chung KT, et al: MR imaging of pregnancy luteoma: a case report and correlation
with the clinical features. Korean J Radiol 6(1):44, 2005
Karaman E, Karaman Y, Alkis I, et al: Maternal serum CA-125 level is elevated in severe
preeclampsia. Pregnancy Hypertens 4(1):29, 2014
Kasuga Y, Miyakoshi K, Nishio H, et al: Mid-trimester residual cervical length and the risk of preterm
birth in pregnancies after abdominal radical trachelectomy: a retrospective analysis. BJOG
124(11):1729, 2017
King MC, Wieand S, Hale K, et al: Tamoxifen and breast cancer incidence among women with inherited
mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2: National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project (NSABPP1) Breast Cancer Prevention Trial. JAMA 286:2251, 2001

Knight JC, Elliott JO, Amburgey OL: Effect of maternal retroplacental leiomyomas on fetal growth. J
Obstet Gynaecol Can 38(12):1100, 2016
Ko EM, Van Le L: Chemotherapy for gynecologic cancers occurring during pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol
Surv 66(5):291, 2011
Kodama M, Moeini A, Machida H, et al: Feto-maternal outcomes of pregnancy complicated by
Krukenberg tumor: a systematic review of literature. Arch Gynecol Obstet 294(3):589, 2016
Korbin CD, Brown DL, Welch WR: Paraovarian cystadenomas and cystadenofibromas: sonographic
characteristics in 14 cases. Radiology 208(2):459, 1998
Korenaga TR, Tewari KS: Gynecologic canter in pregnancy. Gynecol Oncol 157(3):799, 2020
Kotsopoulos J, Gronwald J, Lynch HT, et al: Age at first full-term birth and breast cancer risk in
BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers. Breast Cancer Res Treat 171(2):421, 2018
Kotsopoulos J, Gronwald J, McCuaig JM, et al: Breastfeeding and the risk of epithelial ovarian cancer
among women with a BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation. Gynecol Oncol 159(3):820, 2020
Kotsopoulos J, Huzarski T, Gronwald J, et al: Bilateral oophorectomy and breast cancer risk in BRCA1
and BRCA2 mutation carriers. J Natl Cancer Inst 109(1):djw177, 2016
Kotsopoulos J, Lubinski J, Gronwald J, et al: Factors influencing ovulation and the risk of ovarian cancer
in BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers. Int J Cancer 137(5):1136, 2015
Kotsopoulos J, Lubinski J, Salmena L, et al: Breastfeeding and the risk of breast cancer in BRCA1 and
BRCA2 mutation carriers. Breast Cancer Res 14(2):R42, 2012
Krishna I, Lindsay M: Breast cancer in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol Clin N Am 40:559, 2013
Kuo K, Caughey AB: Optimal timing of delivery for women with breast cancer, according to cancer
stage and hormone status: a decision-analytic model. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 32(3):419l, 2019
Lam SJ, Best S, Kumar S: The impact of fibroid characteristics on pregnancy outcome. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 211(4):395.e1, 2014
Lambertini M, Ameye L, Hamy AS, et al: Pregnancy after breast cancer in patients with germline
BRCA mutations. J Clin Oncol 38(26):3012, 2020
Lambertini M, Martel S, Campbell C, et al: Pregnancies during and after trastuzumab and/or lapatinib in
patients with human epidermal growth factor receptor 2–positive early breast cancer: analysis from
the NeoALTTO (BIG 1–06) and ALTTO (BIG 2–06) trials. Cancer 125(2):307, 2019
Lambertini M, Peccatori FA, Azim HA Jr: Targeted agents for cancer treatment during pregnancy.
Cancer Treat Rev 41(4):301, 2015
Laughlin SK, Baird DD, Savitz DA, et al: Prevalence of uterine leiomyomas in the first trimester of
pregnancy: an ultrasound-screening study. Obstet Gynecol 113(3):630, 2009
Lee AW, Rosenzweig S, Wiensch A; et al: Expanding our understanding of ovarian cancer risk: the role
of incomplete pregnancies. J Natl Cancer Inst 113(3):301, 2021
Lei J, Ploner A, Elfström KM, et al: HPV vaccination and the risk of invasive cervical cancer. N Engl J
Med 383(14):1340, 2020
Leiserowitz GS, Xing G, Cress R, et al: Adnexal masses in pregnancy: how often are they malignant?
Gynecol Oncol 101:315, 2006
Li X, You R, Wang X, et al: Effectiveness of prophylactic surgeries in BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation
carriers: a meta-analysis and systematic review. Clin Cancer Res 22(15):3971, 2016
Li YW, Xu YF, Hu W, et al: Acute myeloid leukemia during pregnancy: a single institutional experience
with 17 patients and literature review. Int J Hematol 112(4):487, 2020
Lima SM, Kehm RD, Swett K, et al: Trends in parity and breast cancer incidence in US women
younger than 40 years From 1935 to 2015. JAMA Netw Open 3(3):e200929, 2020

Lin YH, Hwang JL, Huang LW, et al: Pyomyoma after a cesarean section. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand
81:571, 2002
Liu J, Zanotti K: Management of the adnexal mass. Obstet Gynecol 117:1413, 2011
Liu P, Xu L, Sun Y, et al: The prevalence and risk of human papillomavirus infection in pregnant women.
Epidemiol Infect 142(8):1567, 2014
Lodish MB: Clinical review: kinase inhibitors: adverse effects related to the endocrine system. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab 98(4):1333, 2013
Loibl S, Schmidt A, Gentillini O, et al: Breast cancer diagnosed during pregnancy: adapting recent
advances in breast cancer care for pregnant patients. JAMA Oncol 1(8):1145, 2015
Ludwig PE, Huff TJ, Shanahan MM, et al: Pregnancy success and outcomes after uterine fibroid
embolization: updated review of published literature. Br J Radiol 93(1105):20190551, 2020
Ma KK, Monsell SE, Chandrasekaran S, et al: Cancer and pregnancy: national trends. Am J Perinatol
July 21, 2020 [Epub ahead of print]
Maggen C, Dierickx D, Lugtenburg P, et al: Obstetric and maternal outcomes in patients diagnosed with
Hodgkin lymphoma during pregnancy: a multicentre, retrospective, cohort study. Lancet Haematol
6(11):e551, 2019
Maggen C, Dierickx D, Cardonick E, et al: Maternal and neonatal outcomes in 80 patients diagnosed
with non-Hodgkin lymphoma during pregnancy: results from the International Network of Cancer,
Infertility, and Pregnancy. Br J Haematol 193(1):52, 2021
Maggiore U, Ferrero S, Mangili G, et al: A systematic review on endometriosis during pregnancy:
diagnosis, misdiagnosis, complications and outcomes. Hum Reprod Update 22(1):70, 2016
Malinowski AK, Sen J, Sermer M: Hyperreactio luteinalis: maternal and fetal effects. J Obstet
Gynaecol Can 37(8):715, 2015
Maor GS, Czuzoj-Shulman N, Spence AR, et al: Maternal and neonatal outcomes of pregnancy
associated breast cancer. Abstract No. 802, Am J Obstet Gynecol 216:S461, 2017
Masarie K, Katz V, Balderston K: Pregnancy luteomas: clinical presentations and management
strategies. Obstet Gynecol Surv 65(9):575, 2010
Matsuo K, Eno ML, Im DD, et al: Pregnancy and genital sarcoma: a systematic review of the literature.
Am J Perinatol 26(7):507, 2009
McCormick A, Peterson E: Cancer in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am 45(2):187, 2018
McGovern PG, Noah R, Koenigsberg R, et al: Adnexal torsion and pulmonary embolism: case report
and review of the literature. Obstet Gynecol Surv 54(9):601, 1999
Melin J, Heinävaara S, Malila N, et al: Adverse obstetric outcomes among early-onset cancer survivors
in Finland. Obstet Gynecol 126:803, 2015
Menon U, Karpinskyj C, Gentry-Maharaj A: Ovarian cancer prevention and screening. Obstet Gynecol
131(5):909, 2018
Metwally M, Raybould G, Cheong YC, et al: Surgical treatment of fibroids for subfertility. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 1:CD003857, 2020
Michel M, Ruggeri M, Gonzales-Lopez TJ, et al: Use of thrombopoietin receptor agonists for immune
thrombocytopenia in pregnancy: results from a multicenter study. Blood 136:3056, 2020
Mizutamari E, Matsuo Y, Namimoto T, et al: Successful outcome following detection and removal of a
very small ovarian teratoma associated with anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis during pregnancy.
Clin Case Rep 4(3):223, 2016
Moawad NS, Santamaria E, Rhoton-Vlasak A, et al: Laparoscopic ovarian transposition before pelvic
cancer treatment: ovarian function and fertility preservation. J Minim Invasive Gynecol 24(1):28,
2017

Mogos MF, Rahman S, Salihu HM, et al: Association between reproductive cancer and fetal outcomes:
a systematic review. Int J Gynecol Cancer 23(7):1171, 2013
Momen NC, Arendt LH, Ernst A, et al: Pregnancy-associated cancers and birth outcomes in children: a
Danish and Swedish population-based register study. BMJ Open 8(12):e022946, 2018
Morice P, Uzan C, Gouy S, et al: Gynaecological cancers in pregnancy. Lancet 379:558, 2012
Moro F, Bolomini G, Sibal M, et al: Imaging in gynecological disease (20): clinical and ultrasound
characteristics of adnexal torsion. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 56(6):934, 2020
Murphy JE, Shampain K, Riley LE, et al: Case 32–2018: a 36-year-old pregnant woman with newly
diagnosed adenocarcinoma. N Engl J Med 379(16):1562, 2018
Naqvi M, Kaimal A: Adnexal masses in pregnancy. Clin Obstet Gynecol 58(1):93, 2015
Nassr AA, Shamshiraz AA, Cortes MS, et al: Unusual course of hyperreaction luteinalis in twin
pregnancy complicated by twin-twin transfusion syndrome. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 52(5):677,
2018
National Toxicology Program: NTP monograph: developmental effects and pregnancy outcomes
associated with cancer chemotherapy use during pregnancy. NTP Monogr 2:1, 2013
Navrozoglou I, Vrekoussis T, Kontostolis E et al: Breast cancer during pregnancy: a mini-review. Eur J
Surg Oncol 34:837, 2008
Neiger R, Sonek JD, Croom CS, et al: Pregnancy-related changes in the size of uterine leiomyomas. J
Reprod Med 51:671, 2006
Nirgianakis K, Kalaitzopoulos DR, Schwartz AS, et al: Fertility, pregnancy and neonatal outcomes of
patients with adenomyosis: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Reprod Biomed Online
42(1):185, 2021
Nisker JA, Shubat M: Stage IB cervical carcinoma and pregnancy: report of 49 cases. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 145:203, 1983
Nolan S, Czuzoj-Shulman N, Abenhaim H: Obstetrical and newborn outcomes among women with
acute leukemias in pregnancy: a population-based study. J Matern Fetal Neonatal med 33(20):3514,
2020
Oktay K, Harvey BE, Partridge AH, et al: Fertility preservation in patients with cancer: ASCO clinical
practice guideline update. J Clin Oncol 36(19):1994, 2018
Otake M, Schull WJ, Lee S: Threshold for radiation-related severe mental retardation in prenatally
exposed A-bomb survivors: a re-analysis. Int J Radiat Biol 70:755–63, 1996
Palani R, Milojkovic D, Apperley JF: Managing pregnancy in chronic myeloid leukaemia. Ann Hematol
94 Suppl 2:S167, 2015
Pan H, He Z, Ling L, et al: Reproductive factors and breast cancer risk among BRCA1 or BRCA2
mutation carriers: results from ten studies. Cancer Epidemiol 38(1):1, 2014
Panel on Opportunistic Infections in Adults and Adolescents with HIV: Guidelines for the prevention
and treatment of opportunistic infections in adults and adolescents with HIV: recommendations from
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the National Institutes of Health, and the HIV
Medicine Association of the Infectious Diseases Society of America. 2020. Available at:
http://aidsinfo.nih.gov/contentfiles/lvguidelines/adult_oi.pdf. Accessed March 19, 2021
Park CK, Kim YW, Koh HH, et al: Clinicopathological characteristics of squamous cell carcinoma and
high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesions involving endocervical polyps. In Vivo 34(5):2613, 2020
Pereira KV, Giacomeli R, Gomes de Gomes M, et al: The challenge of using nanotherapy during
pregnancy: technological aspects and biomedical implications. Placenta 100:75, 2020
Pergialiotis V, Sinanidis I, Louloudis JE, et al: Perioperative complications of cesarean delivery
myomectomy: a meta-analysis. Obstet Gynecol 130(6):1295, 2017

Perkins RB, Guido RS, Castle PE, et al: 2019 ASCCP risk-based management consensus guidelines for
abnormal cervical cancer screening tests and cancer precursors. J Low Genit Tract Dis 24:102,
2020
Peters ML, Garber JE, Tung N: Managing hereditary breast cancer risk in women with and without
ovarian cancer. Gynecol Oncol 146(1):205, 2017
Pinnix CC, Osborne EM, Chihara D, et al: Maternal and fetal outcomes after therapy for Hodgkin or
non-Hodgkin lymphoma diagnosed during pregnancy. JAMA Oncol 2(8):1065, 2016
Pistilli B, Belletini G, Giovannetti E, et al: Chemotherapy, targeted agents, antiemetics and growthfactors in human milk: how should we counsel cancer patients about breastfeeding? Cancer Treat
Rev 39(3):207, 2013
Qidwai II, Caughey AB, Jacoby AF: Obstetric outcomes in women with sonographically identified
uterine leiomyomata. Obstet Gynecol 107:376, 2006
Rebbeck TR, Kauff ND, Domchek SM: Meta-analysis of risk reduction estimates associated with riskreducing salpingo-oophorectomy in BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation carriers. J Natl Cancer Inst
101(2):80, 2009
Reulen RC, Zeegers MP, Wallace WH, et al: Pregnancy outcomes among adult survivors of childhood
cancer in the British Childhood Cancer Survivor Study. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev
18(8):2239, 2009
Reynoso EE, Shepherd FA, Messner HA, et al: Acute leukemia during pregnancy: the Toronto
Leukemia Study Group experience with long-term follow-up of children exposed in utero to
chemotherapeutic agents. J Clin Oncol 5:1098, 1987
Richtig G, Byrom L, Kupsa R, et al: Pregnancy as driver for melanoma. Br J Dermatol 177(3):854, 2017
Rieder V, Salama M, Glöckner L, et al: Effect of lifestyle and reproductive factors on the onset of
breast cancer in female BRCA 1 and 2 mutation carriers. Mol Genet Genomic Med 4(2):172, 2015
Robson D, Phua C, Howard R, et al: Fertility preservation in oncology patients: a literature review
examining current fertility preservation techniques and access to oncofertility services in Australia.
Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol 60(1):18, 2020
Rodriguez AO, Chew H, Cress R, et al: Evidence of poorer survival in pregnancy-associated breast
cancer. Obstet Gynecol 112(1):71, 2008
Rosenkranz KM, Lucci A: Surgical treatment of pregnancy associated breast cancer. Breast Dis 23:87,
2006
Routledge DJ, Tower C, Davies E, et al: Successful management of acute myeloid leukaemia in a twin
pregnancy—a case report. Br J Haematol 180(4):605, 2018
Rubrecht AE, Seifert RP, Shenoy A: Maternal hematologic neoplasms during pregnancy: histologic
findings in the placenta. Placenta 104:195, 2020
Russell P, Robboy SJ: Ovarian cysts, tumor-like, iatrogenic and miscellaneous conditions. In Robboy SJ,
Mutter GL, Prat J, et al (eds): Robboy’s Pathology of the Female Reproductive Tract, 2nd ed.
London, Churchill Livingstone, 2009
Salani R, Billingsley CC, Crafton SM: Cancer and pregnancy: an overview for obstetricians and
gynecologists. Am J Obstet Gynecol 211(1):7, 2014
Salvador E, Bienstock J, Blakemore KJ, et al: Leiomyomata uteri, genetic amniocentesis, and the risk of
second-trimester spontaneous abortion. Am J Obstet Gynecol 186:913, 2002
Santolaria A, Perales A, Montesinos P, et al: Acute promyelocytic leukemia during pregnancy: a
systematic review of the literature. Cancers (Basel) 12(4):968, 2020
Sanz MA, Montesinos P, Casale MF, et al: Maternal and fetal outcomes in pregnant women with acute
promyelocytic leukemia. Ann Hematol 94(8):1357, 2015

Sawyers AE, Pavlick AC, Weber JS, et al: Management of melanoma during pregnancy: a case series
of 11 women treated at NYU Langone Health. Oncology 98(12):847, 2020
Schmeler KM, Mayo-Smith WW, Peipert JF, et al: Adnexal masses in pregnancy: surgery compared
with observation. Obstet Gynecol 105:1098, 2005
Schorge JO, Russo AL, Greene MF, et al: Case 21–2017. A 28-year-old pregnant woman with
endocervical carcinoma. N Engl J Med 377(2):174, 2017
Shah MR, Brandt JS, David KA, et al: Lymphoma occurring during pregnancy: current diagnostic and
therapeutic approaches. Curr Oncol Rep 22(11):113, 2020
Shamy TE, Amer SA, Mohamed AA, et al: The impact of uterine artery embolization on ovarian
reserve: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scan 99(1):16, 2020
Sherard GB III, Hodson CA, Williams HJ, et al: Adnexal masses and pregnancy: a 12-year experience.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 189:358, 2003
Sienas L, Wong T, Collins R, et al: Contemporary uses of erythropoietin in pregnancy: a literature
review. Obstet Gynecol Surv 68(8):594, 2013
Signorello LB, Cohen SS, Bosetti C, et al: Female survivors of childhood cancer: preterm birth and low
birth weight among their children. J Natl Cancer Inst 98:1453, 2006
Signorello LB, Mulvihill JJ, Green DM, et al: Congenital anomalies in the children of cancer survivors: a
report from the childhood cancer survivor study. J Clin Oncol 30(3):239, 2012
Signorello LB, Mulvihill JJ, Green DM, et al: Stillbirth and neonatal death in relation to radiation exposure
before conception: a retrospective cohort study. Lancet 376:624, 2010
Sisodia RM, Del Carmen MG, Boruta DM: Role of minimally invasive surgery in the management of
adnexal masses. Clin Obstet Gynecol 58(1):66, 2015
Sisson JC, Freitas J, McDougall IR, et al: Radiation safety in the treatment of patients with thyroid
diseases by radioiodine 131I: practice recommendations of the American Thyroid Association.
Thyroid 21(4):335, 2011
Smith ES, Moon AS, O’Hanlon R, et al: Radical trachelectomy for the treatment of early-stage cervical
cancer: a systematic review. Obstet Gynecol 136(3):533, 2020
Smith LH, Danielsen B, Allen ME, et al: Cancer associated with obstetric delivery: results of linkage
with the California cancer registry. Am J Obstet Gynecol 189:1128, 2003
Soares SR, Gómez R, Simón C, et al: Targeting the vascular endothelial growth factor system to prevent
ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome. Hum Reprod Update 14(4):321, 2008
Spiegel E, Spence AR, Czuzoj-Shulman N, et al: Pregnancy outcomes after thyroid cancer. J Perinat
Med 47(7):710, 2019
Stensheim H, Klungsøyr K, Skjaerven R, et al: Birth outcomes among offspring of adult cancer
survivors: a population-based study. Int J Cancer 133(11):2696, 2013
Stephansson O, Kieler H, Granath F, et al: Endometriosis, assisted reproduction technology, and risk of
adverse pregnancy outcome. Hum Reprod 24(9):2341, 2009
Still R, Brennecke S: Melanoma in pregnancy. Obstet Med 10(3):107, 2017
Stout MJ, Frey HA, Tuuli MG, et al: Loop electrosurgical excision procedure and risk of vaginal
infections during pregnancy: an observation study. BJOG 122(4):545, 2015
Stout MJ, Odibo AO, Graseck AS, et al: Leiomyomas at routine second-trimester ultrasound
examination and adverse obstetric outcomes. Obstet Gynecol 116(5):1056, 2010
Stovall M, Blackwell CR, Cundiff J, et al: Fetal does from radiotherapy with photon beams: report of
AAPM Radiation Therapy Committee Task Group No. 36. Med Phys 22(1):63, 1995
Sullivan SA: Thyroid nodules and thyroid cancer in pregnancy. Clin Obstet Gynecol 62(2):365, 2019

Sundermann AC, Velez Edwards DR, Bray MJ, et al: Leiomyomas in pregnancy and spontaneous
abortion: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Obstet Gynecol 130(5):1065, 2017
Suzuki S: Comparison between spontaneous ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome and hyperreactio
luteinalis. Arch Gynecol Obstet 269(3):227, 2004
Swetter SM, Tsao H, Bichakjian CK, et al: Guidelines of care of the management of primary cutaneous
melanoma. J Am Acad Dermatol 80(1):208, 2019
Szecsi PB, Anderson MR, Bjørngaard B, et al: Cancer antigen 125 after delivery in women with a
normal pregnancy: a prospective cohort study. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 93(12):1295, 2014
Takushi M, Moromizato H, Sakumoto K, et al: Management of invasive carcinoma of the uterine cervix
associated with pregnancy: outcome of intentional delay in treatment. Gynecol Oncol 87:185, 2002
Tamura K, Kaneda M, Futagawa M, et al: Genetic and genomic basis of the mismatch repair system
involved in Lynch syndrome. J Int J Clin Oncol 24(9):999, 2019
Tannus JF, Hertzberg BS, Haystead CM, et al: Unilateral luteoma of pregnancy mimicking a malignant
ovarian mass on magnetic resonance and ultrasound. J Magn Reson Imaging 29(3):713, 2009
Teh WT, Stern C, Chander S, et al: The impact of uterine radiation on subsequent fertility and pregnancy
outcomes. Biomed Res Int 2014:482968, 2014
Toss A, Grandi G, Cagnacci A, et al: The impact of reproductive life on breast cancer risk in women
with family history or BRCA mutation. Oncotarget 8(6):9144, 2017
Tsao NW, Lynd LD, Sayre EC, et al: Use of biologics during pregnancy and risk of serious infections in
the mother and baby: a Canadian population-based cohort study. BMJ Open 9(2):e023714, 2019
Ungár L, Smith JR, Pálfavli L, et al: Abdominal radical trachelectomy during pregnancy to preserve
pregnancy and fertility. Obstet Gynecol 108:811, 2006
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, Curry SJ, Krist AH, et al: Screening for cervical cancer: US
Preventive Services Task Force recommendation statement. JAMA 320(7):674, 2018
Valachis A, Tsali L, Pesce LL, et al: Safety of pregnancy after primary breast carcinoma in young
women: a meta-analysis to overcome bias of healthy mother effect studies. Obstet Gynecol Surv
65:786, 2010
Valentini A, Lubinski J, Byrski T, et al: The impact of pregnancy on breast cancer survival in women
who carry a BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation. Breast Cancer Res Treat 142(1):177, 2013
van de Loo LE, van den Berg MH, Overbeek A, et al: Uterine function, pregnancy complications, and
pregnancy outcomes among female childhood cancer survivors. Fertil Steril 111(2):372, 2019
van der Kooi AL, Mulder RL, Hudson MM, et al: Counseling and surveillance of obstetrical risks for
female childhood, adolescent, and young adult cancer survivors: recommendations from the
International Late Effects of Childhood Cancer Guideline Harmonization Group. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 224(1):3, 2021
van der Vange N, Weverling GJ, Ketting BW, et al: The prognosis of cervical cancer associated with
pregnancy: a matched cohort study. Obstet Gynecol 85:1022, 1995
van Vliet W, van Loon AJ, ten Hoor KA, et al: Cervical carcinoma during pregnancy: outcome of
planned delay in treatment. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 79:153, 1998
Vercruysse DC, Deprez S, Sunaert S, et al: Effects of prenatal exposure to cancer treatment on
neurocognitive development, a review. Neurotoxicology 54:11, 2016
Viswanathan S, Ramaswamy B: Pregnancy-associated breast cancer. Clin Obstet Gynecol 54(4):546,
2011
Wang YC, Su HY, Liu JY, et al: Maternal and female fetal virilization caused by pregnancy luteomas.
Fertil Steril 84:509.e15, 2005

Webb KE, Sakhel K, Chauhan SP, et al: Adnexal mass during pregnancy: a review. Am J Perinatol
32(11):1010, 2015
Weibull CE, Eloranta S, Smedby KE, et al: Pregnancy and the risk of relapse in patients diagnosed with
Hodgkin lymphoma. J Clin Oncol 34(4):337, 2016
Weinmann S, Naleway A, Swamy G, et al: Pregnancy outcomes after treatment for cervical cancer
precursor lesions: an observational study. PLoS One 12(1):e0165276, 2017
Winther JF, Boice JD Jr, Svendsen AL, et al: Spontaneous abortion in a Danish population-based cohort
of childhood cancer survivors. J Clin Oncol 26(26):4340, 2008
Winther JF, Olsen JH, Wu H, et al: Genetic disease in the children of Danish survivors of childhood and
adolescent cancer. J Clin Oncol 30(1):27, 2012
Woo JC, Yu T, Hurd TC: Breast cancer in pregnancy. Arch Surg 138:91, 2003
Yahata T, Numata M, Kashima K, et al: Conservative treatment of stage IA1 adenocarcinoma of the
cervix during pregnancy. Gynecol Oncol 109(1):49, 2008
Yatsenko O, Vlachou PA, Glanc P: Predictive value of single or combined ultrasound signs in the
diagnosis of ovarian torsion. Ultrasound Med 40(6):1163, 2021
Yost NP, Santoso JT, McIntire DD, et al: Postpartum regression rates of antepartum cervical
intraepithelial neoplasia II and III lesions. Obstet Gynecol 93:359, 1999
Zagouri F, Sergentanis TN, Chrysikos D, et al: Platinum derivatives during pregnancy in cervical cancer:
a systematic review and meta-analysis. Obstet Gynecol 121:337, 2013a
Zagouri F, Sergentanis TN, Chrysikos D, et al: Trastuzumab administration during pregnancy: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Breast Cancer Res Treat 137(2):349, 2013b
Zemlickis D, Lishner M, Degendorfer P, et al: Maternal and fetal outcome after breast cancer in
pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 166:781, 1992
Zullo F, Spagnolo E, Saccone G, et al: Endometriosis and obstetrics complications: a systematic review
and meta-analysis. Fertil Steril 108(4):667, 2017
Zydus Pharmaceuticals: Tamoxifen citrate. 2020. Available at:
https://medlibrary.org/lib/rx/meds/tamoxifen-citrate-11/page/2/#ID28. Accessed January 19, 2021

CHAPTER 67

Infectious Diseases

MATERNAL AND FETAL IMMUNOLOGY
VIRAL INFECTIONS
BACTERIAL INFECTIONS
PROTOZOAL INFECTIONS
BIOTERRORISM
REFERENCES
Infections remain a major cause of maternal and fetal morbidity and mortality
worldwide. The unique maternal–fetal vascular interface in some cases
serves to protect the fetus from infectious agents, but in other instances it
provides a conduit for transmission. Maternal serological status, acquisition
mode, gestational age at the time of infection, and immunological status of
mother and fetus all influence disease outcome.
The TORCH acronym reflects the infections toxoplasmosis, others,
rubella, and cytomegalovirus and herpesvirus infections. These can cross the
placenta to cause fetal infection and substantial neonatal sequelae. Of
members in the “others” category, parvovirus B19 infection is discussed
here. Herpesvirus and syphilis infections are described in Chapter 68.

MATERNAL AND FETAL IMMUNOLOGY

■ Maternal Immunological Changes
Despite significant advances, many of the maternal immunological
adaptations to pregnancy remain unclear. Successful pregnancy results from a
complex interplay between the innate and adaptive immune systems to
establish fetal tolerance (Chap. 5, p. 93) (Liu, 2017). Within the innate
system, decidual natural killer (dNK) cells interact with and aid invasion of
fetal extravillous trophoblasts via human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-G (Fig.
21-8, p. 404). Also, cytokines produced during viral infection activate dNK
cells to induce protective cytotoxicity (Tilburgs, 2015).
Within the adaptive immune system, a CD4+ subset of T helper cells
called regulatory T cells (Tregs) express forkhead box P3 (FOXP3). This is
an immune-suppressive transcription factor that plays a critical role in
inducing maternal immune tolerance to the fetus (Kahn, 2010). However, this
same mechanism compromises maternal defense against bacterial pathogens.
Noncoding microRNAs, whose roles are incompletely defined, regulate
activation and proliferation of both innate and adaptive immune cells
(Robertson, 2017).
In describing infections, horizontal transmission is the spread of an
infectious agent from one individual to another. Vertical transmission is
passage of an infectious agent from the mother to her fetus through the
placenta, during labor or delivery, or by breastfeeding. Thus, preterm rupture
of membranes or prolonged labor may enhance the risk of some neonatal
infections (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020b).
Table 67-1 shows specific infections by mode and acquisition timing. A final
term, the secondary attack rate, is the probability that infection develops in
a susceptible individual following known contact with an infectious person.
TABLE 67-1. Specific Causes of Some Fetal and Neonatal Infections

■ Fetal and Newborn Immunology
The active immunological capacity of the fetus and neonate is compromised
compared with that of older children and adults. That said, fetal innate and
adaptive immunity begin to develop by 9 to 15 weeks’ gestation (McGovern,
2017). The primary fetal response to infection is mediated by innate

immunity—macrophages and dendritic cells—and to a lesser extent, by
adaptive immunity—B and T cells (Chougnet, 2018). Passive immunity is
provided by maternal immunoglobulin G (IgG) transferred across the
placenta. By 16 weeks’ gestation, this transfer begins to rise rapidly, and by
26 weeks, fetal concentrations are equivalent to those of the mother.
Evidence suggests maternal vaccination also primes the fetal cell-mediated
immune response independent of passive immunity (Wilcox, 2018).
Neonatal infection, especially in its early stages, may be difficult to
diagnose because these newborns often fail to express classic clinical signs.
If the fetus was infected in utero, it may be depressed and acidotic at birth for
no apparent reason. The neonate may suck poorly, vomit, or show abdominal
distention. Respiratory insufficiency can develop, which may present
similarly to idiopathic respiratory distress syndrome. The neonate may be
lethargic or jittery. The response to sepsis may be hypothermia rather than
hyperthermia, and the total leukocyte and neutrophil counts can be depressed.

VIRAL INFECTIONS
■ Cytomegalovirus
The most common perinatal infection in the developed world is caused by
cytomegalovirus (CMV). It is a ubiquitous DNA herpesvirus that eventually
infects most humans, and some evidence of fetal infection is found in 0.2 to
2.2 percent of all neonates (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2020a). The virus is secreted into all body fluids, and
person-to-person contact with viral-laden saliva, semen, urine, blood, and
nasopharyngeal and cervical secretions can transmit infection. The fetus may
become infected by transplacental viremia, but amniocentesis does not result
in iatrogenic fetal transmission (Revello, 2008). The neonate is infected at
delivery or during breastfeeding and acquisition continues to accrue. Daycare centers, for example, are a frequent source.
Up to 85 percent of women from lower socioeconomic backgrounds are
seropositive by the time of pregnancy, whereas only half of women in higher
income groups have detectable IgG antibodies to CMV. Following primary
CMV infection, and behaving similarly to other herpesvirus infections, the
virus becomes latent but undergoes periodic reactivation characterized by
viral shedding. This occurs despite high serum levels of anti-CMV IgG

antibody. These antibodies do not prevent maternal recurrence, reactivation,
or reinfection, nor do they totally mitigate fetal or neonatal infection.

Maternal Infection
Pregnancy does not increase the risk or severity of maternal CMV infection.
Most primary infections are asymptomatic, but 10 to 15 percent of infected
adults have a mononucleosis-like syndrome characterized by fever,
pharyngitis, lymphadenopathy, and polyarthritis. Immunocompromised
women may develop myocarditis, pneumonitis, hepatitis, retinitis,
gastroenteritis, or meningoencephalitis. Most women with primary infection
have elevated serum aminotransferase levels or lymphocytosis. Reactivated
disease usually is asymptomatic, although viral shedding is common.
Because most primary maternal infections are clinically silent, they are
detected by IgG seroconversion. The rate of seroconversion during
pregnancy may reach 20 percent. Rates are higher in regions with greater
seroprevalence (Mussi-Pinhata, 2018). Women who are seronegative before
pregnancy and then acquire primary CMV infection during pregnancy are at
highest risk of having a congenitally infected fetus. Vertical transmission
rates for primary infection are 30 to 36 percent in the first trimester, 34 to 40
percent in the second, and 40 to 72 percent in the third (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020a; Picone, 2017). Approximately 23
percent of congenital CMV infections in the United States are from primary
maternal infection (Wang, 2011).
In contrast, recurrent or reactivated maternal infection infects the fetus in
only 0.15 to 2 percent of pregnancies. However, up to 90 percent of
congenitally infected neonates in high-prevalence areas are born to women
with recurrent infection (Mussi-Pinhata, 2018). The diagnosis of recurrent or
reactivated maternal CMV infection remains a challenge (Tanimura, 2017).

Congenital Infection
Newborns with apparent sequelae of intrauterine-acquired CMV infection
are described as having symptomatic CMV infection. Congenital CMV
infection is a syndrome that may include growth restriction, microcephaly,
intracranial calcifications, chorioretinitis, mental and motor delays,
sensorineural deficits, hepatosplenomegaly, jaundice, hemolytic anemia, and
thrombocytopenic purpura. An example of periventricular calcifications is

shown in Figure 67-1. Of the estimated 40,000 CMV-infected neonates born
each year, only 5 to 10 percent demonstrate this syndrome (Fowler, 1992).
Thus, most infected newborns are asymptomatic at birth, but some develop
late-onset sequelae. These may include hearing loss, neurological deficits,
chorioretinitis, psychomotor delay, and learning disabilities. Infections in
dichorionic twins most likely are nonconcordant (Egaña-Ugrinovic, 2016).

FIGURE 67-1 Congenital cytomegalovirus infection. A. Transverse view of the fetal head
demonstrates ventriculomegaly (LV) and periventricular calcifications. B. Transverse image of the fetal
abdomen with ascites (asterisk) and echogenic bowel.

Prenatal Diagnosis
Routine prenatal CMV serological screening is not recommended. Pregnant
women undergo serological testing for CMV if they present with a
mononucleosis-like illness or if congenital infection is suspected based on
abnormal sonographic findings (Fig. 67-2) (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020a; Society for Maternal-Fetal
Medicine, 2016). If either ultrasound or serological results indicate
infection, diagnostic amniocentesis is pursued.

FIGURE 67-2 Diagnostic algorithm for evaluation of cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection in pregnancy.
IgG = immunoglobulin G; IgM = immunoglobulin M; PCR = polymerase chain reaction.

Serum levels of CMV IgM alone do not accurately diagnose primary
infection because antibodies may persist for more than a year after infection
and may rise again following reactivation or reinfection. To help clarify a
primary infection from a past one, serological CMV-specific IgG avidity
assays measure the “avidity” or binding strength between IgG antibodies and
virus. Following primary infection, IgG antibodies have low avidity, which
during the next 2 to 4 months matures to high avidity. Low IgG avidity
indicates primary CMV infection within the preceding 3 to 4 months, and
high IgG avidity excludes primary infection within the previous 3 months.
Thus, primary infection during the first trimester may not be excluded if
maternal avidity testing is performed in the second or third trimesters
(Prince, 2014). In this case, diagnostic amniocentesis is still recommended if
ultrasound findings suggest congenital infection. In other cases, early primary
infection may be so recent that IgM is not yet detectable. If suspicion is high,
serological assays are repeated in 2 to 4 weeks.
More commonly, numerous sonographic fetal findings may prompt CMV
testing. Fetal abnormalities associated with CMV infection include

microcephaly, ventriculomegaly, and cerebral calcifications; ascites,
hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, and hyperechoic bowel; hydrops; early growth
restriction; and oligohydramnios. Findings will prompt maternal serological
CMV testing and diagnostic amniocentesis (see Fig. 67-2).
CMV polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing of amnionic fluid is
considered the gold standard for the diagnosis of fetal infection. Sensitivities
range from 70 to 99 percent and depend on amniocentesis timing. Sensitivity
is highest when amniocentesis is performed at least 6 weeks after maternal
infection and after 21 weeks’ gestation (Guerra, 2000). Abnormal
sonographic findings seen in combination with positive findings in amnionic
fluid samples are predictive of an approximate 75-percent risk of
symptomatic congenital infection (Leruez-Ville, 2016a). A negative result
from amnionic fluid PCR testing does not exclude fetal infection and may
need to be repeated if suspicion for fetal infection is high. Diagnostic viral
culture of amnionic fluid is also suitable although sensitivity is somewhat
lower. Isolation of virus from cell culture allows detection of actively
replicating virus, and rapid shell vial culture methods enable detection
within 24 hours (Saldan, 2017).

Management and Prevention
The management of the immunocompetent pregnant woman with primary,
reactivated, or recurrent CMV is limited to symptomatic treatment. If primary
CMV infection is diagnosed serologically or if fetal sonographic
abnormalities suggest congenital infection, amnionic fluid analysis should be
offered (see Fig. 67-2). Counseling regarding fetal outcome depends on the
gestational age during which primary infection is documented. Lipitz and
associates (2013) reported hearing loss or neurodevelopmental delay in 15
to 25 percent of infants following primary maternal infection in the first
trimester compared with 2 to 16 percent after second-trimester infection.
Despite the high infection rate with primary infection in the first half of
pregnancy, most fetuses develop normally. That said, pregnancy termination
may be an option for some.
Currently, no curative treatments are available for CMV infection. One
study group reported that treating pregnant women with high-dose oral
valacyclovir, 8 g daily, apparently mitigated adverse outcomes for 80 percent
of moderately asymptomatic fetuses compared with a historical cohort
(Leruez-Ville, 2016b). Kimberlin and colleagues (2015) previously showed

that oral valganciclovir administered for 6 weeks to neonates with
symptomatic central nervous system (CNS) disease prevented hearing
deterioration at 6 months and possibly later. In a recent randomized trial,
CMV-specific hyperimmune globulin given to pregnant women with primary
infection was ineffective in lowering perinatal CMV infection rates (Hughes,
2021).
For the CMV-affected fetus, a detailed anatomical sonographic
evaluation is performed. Referral to a maternal–fetal medicine specialist is
warranted, and serial sonography is indicated to identify poor growth,
oligohydramnios, or fetal hydrops, which confers a worse prognosis.
Antenatal surveillance is typically implemented after a shared discussion
about the goals of surveillance in a fetus with known congenital infection.
Delivery at term is the goal, although consultation with maternal–fetal
medicine and neonatology experts is warranted to determine whether earlier
delivery is indicated.
Prevention of congenital infection relies on avoiding maternal primary
infection, especially in early pregnancy. Basic hygiene measures such as
hand washing and not sharing food or utensils have been promoted,
particularly in women with toddlers in day care (Rawlinson, 2017). CMV
may be sexually transmitted among infected partners, but no data address the
efficacy of preventive strategies. Several clinical trials of a CMV vaccine
are underway (Gerna, 2019).

■ Varicella-Zoster Virus
Maternal Infection
Varicella-zoster virus (VZV) is a double-stranded DNA herpesvirus
acquired predominantly during childhood, and 90 percent of adults have
serological evidence of immunity. The incidence of varicella infection
declined by approximately 95 percent after the introduction of varicella
vaccination. Maternal and fetal varicella rates subsequently dropped (Baxter,
2014). In the United States between 2003 and 2010, the incidence of
maternal varicella among 7.7 million pregnancy admissions was 1.21 cases
in 10,000 (Zhang, 2015).
Primary infection—varicella or chickenpox—is transmitted by
respiratory droplets or through direct contact with an infected individual.

The incubation period is 10 to 21 days, and a nonimmune woman has a 70- to
90-percent risk of becoming infected after exposure (Whitley, 2018). Primary
varicella has a 1- to 2-day flu-like prodrome, which is followed by pruritic
vesicular lesions that crust after 3 to 7 days. Affected patients are contagious
from 1 day before the rash onset until all lesions become crusted.
In adults, mortality risk rises with age and is predominantly due to
secondary infection or VZV pneumonia (Leung, 2018). Risk factors for
severe pneumonitis include immunosuppression and early bacterial coinfection (Mirouse, 2017). Although the incidence was once thought to be
higher in gravidas, only 2.5 percent develops VZV pneumonia (Zhang, 2015).
Symptoms of VZV pneumonia usually appear 3 to 5 days into the illness
course. Fever, tachypnea, dry cough, dyspnea, and pleuritic pain are
characteristic. Nodular infiltrates are similar to other viral pneumonias.
Although resolution of pneumonitis parallels that of skin lesions, fever and
compromised pulmonary function may persist for weeks.
If primary varicella is reactivated years later, it causes herpes zoster or
shingles. The associated unilateral dermatomal vesicular eruption often
produces severe pain. Zoster does not appear to be more frequent or severe
in gravidas. Congenital varicella syndrome rarely develops in cases of
maternal herpes zoster (Ahn, 2016). Zoster is contagious if there is direct
contact with broken blisters.

Fetal and Neonatal Infection
In women with primary varicella during the first half of pregnancy, the fetus
may develop congenital varicella syndrome. Some features include
chorioretinitis, microphthalmia, cerebral cortical atrophy, growth restriction,
hydronephrosis, limb hypoplasia, and cicatricial skin lesions (Ahn, 2016;
Auriti, 2009). Among 1373 pregnant women with primary varicella infection
in one study, only 0.4 percent with a rash before 13 weeks’ gestation had
neonates with congenital varicella syndrome (Enders, 1994). The highest risk
period for vertical transmission was between 13 and 20 weeks, during which
2 percent of exposed fetuses had evidence of infection. After 20 weeks’
gestation, the researchers found no clinical evidence of congenital varicella.
Others described similar findings (Ahn, 2016). That said, fetuses that do
develop congenital varicella in the third trimester may have CNS
abnormalities and skin lesions (Koren, 2005).

If the fetus or neonate is exposed to active infection just before or during
delivery, and therefore before maternal antibody has formed, the newborn
faces a serious threat. Attack rates range from 25 to 50 percent, and mortality
rates approach 30 percent. In some instances, neonates develop disseminated
visceral and CNS disease, which is commonly fatal. For this reason,
varicella-zoster immune globulin (VariZIG) should be administered to
neonates born to mothers who have clinical evidence of varicella 5 days
before and up to 2 days after delivery (Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, 2013).

Diagnosis
Prior maternal varicella is usually confirmed clinically based on reported
history of prior illness or vaccination. Infection is confirmed by PCR-based
testing of vesicular fluid or of a crust that is lifted from the skin. Congenital
varicella may be diagnosed using PCR-based testing of amnionic fluid,
although a positive result does not correlate well with the development of
congenital infection (Mendelson, 2006). A detailed anatomical sonographic
evaluation performed at least 5 weeks after maternal infection may disclose
abnormalities, but the sensitivity is low (Mandelbrot, 2012).

Management and Prevention
Maternal Viral Exposure. Any patient diagnosed with primary varicella
infection or herpes zoster should be isolated from pregnant women.
Several aspects of maternal VZV exposure and infection in pregnancy affect
management. Exposed gravidas with a negative clinical history for prior
chickenpox or vaccination should undergo VZV serological testing. At least
70 percent of these women will be seropositive and thus immune.
Seronegative women should be given intramuscular VariZIG, 125 units per
10 kg body weight, up to a maximum dose of 625 units (5 vials). Although
best given within 96 hours of exposure, its use is approved for up to 10 days
to prevent or attenuate varicella infection (Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, 2013). This passive immunization appears to be highly effective
(Jespersen, 2016). In women with a reported history of chickenpox or
varicella vaccination, VariZIG is not indicated.
Maternal and Fetal Infection. For women with primary varicella, a chest
radiograph is recommended by many because VZV pneumonia often presents

with few symptoms. Most women require only supportive care, but those
who require intravenous fluids and especially those with pneumonia are
hospitalized. Acyclovir therapy is given to women requiring hospitalization
—10 to 15 mg/kg intravenously every 8 hours until afebrile. This is followed
by oral acyclovir, 800 mg five times daily to complete 7 days and until
lesions have crusted. For uncomplicated primary varicella without
hospitalization or for herpes zoster, treatment is oral acyclovir, 800 mg five
times daily for 7 days.
For the VZV-affected fetus, greater antenatal surveillance is typically
implemented. Serial sonography may help identify poor growth. Delivery at
term is the norm unless fetal findings prompt earlier timing.
Vaccination. An attenuated live-virus vaccine is recommended for
nonpregnant adolescents and adults with no history of varicella. Two doses
are needed and are separated by 4 to 8 weeks. The vaccine is not
recommended for gravidas or for those who may become pregnant within one
month following each vaccine dose. However, a registry of more than 1000
vaccine-exposed pregnancies reports no cases of congenital varicella
syndrome or other associated congenital malformations (Peppa, 2020). The
attenuated vaccine virus is not secreted in breast milk. Thus, postpartum
vaccination should not be delayed because of breastfeeding (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019e).

■ Influenza Virus
Influenza A and B belong to the Orthomyxoviridae family of RNA viruses,
and both cause epidemic human disease (Wright, 2018). Influenza A viruses
are subclassified further by hemagglutinin (H) and neuraminidase (N) surface
antigens. Influenza outbreaks occur annually, and severity is determined by
the number of outpatient visits, hospitalizations, and deaths (Xu, 2019).

Maternal Infection
Fever, dry cough, and systemic symptoms characterize this infection, which
usually is not life-threatening in otherwise healthy adults. However, pregnant
women in general are more susceptible to serious complications, particularly
pulmonary involvement (Mertz, 2017; Rasmussen, 2012). Severe infection

during the 2009 to 2010 pandemic had a maternal mortality rate of 1 percent
and caused 12 percent of pregnancy-related deaths (Callaghan, 2015).
No firm evidence links influenza A virus and congenital malformations.
Rather, the increased rates of neural-tube defects seen in neonates born to
women with influenza may be associated with hyperthermia. Viremia is
infrequent, and transplacental passage is rare (Rasmussen, 2012). Stillbirth,
preterm delivery, and first-trimester abortion have all been reported, but
these usually correlate with maternal infection severity (Fell, 2017; Meijer,
2015; Wang, 2021).
Influenza may be detected by nasopharyngeal swab of symptomatic
patients using rapid molecular or viral antigen detection assays known as
rapid influenza diagnostic tests (RIDTs). Recently, commercially available
multiplex molecular assays have allowed nucleic acid detection and
differentiation of both influenza and severe acute respiratory syndrome
(SARS)-CoV-2 respiratory viruses. Molecular tests are more sensitive and
specific than RIDTs, which have sensitivities of 50 to 70 percent. Decisions
to administer antiviral medications for influenza treatment or
chemoprophylaxis should be based on clinical symptoms and
epidemiological factors. Namely, the start of therapy should not be delayed
pending testing results.

Management
Of available agents, neuraminidase inhibitors are highly effective for the
treatment of early influenza A and B. These include oseltamivir (Tamiflu),
which is taken orally for treatment and for chemoprophylaxis; zanamivir
(Relenza), which is inhaled for treatment; and peramivir (Rapivab), which is
administered intravenously. A newer agent, baloxavir marboxil (Xofluza),
was approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration in 2018 for acute
uncomplicated influenza, although data in pregnancy are limited.
In pregnancy, experience is most robust with oseltamivir. The American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019a) and the Infectious
Diseases Society of America recommend oral oseltamivir—75 mg twice
daily for 5 days—for pregnant women with suspected or confirmed
influenza, ideally within 48 hours of symptom onset (Uyeki, 2019). Early
administration may reduce length of hospital stays (Oboho, 2016). For
prophylaxis following exposure to a contact with confirmed infection,

oseltamivir, 75 mg orally once daily for 7 days, is recommended.
Antibacterial medications are added when a secondary bacterial pneumonia
is suspected (Chap. 54, p. 962).

Vaccination
Effective vaccines against influenza are formulated annually and encouraged
for all women who will be pregnant during the influenza season, which
extends from October through March. Vaccination throughout the influenza
season, but optimally before the end of October, is recommended (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019c; Grohskopf, 2020). This
is especially important for those affected by chronic medical disorders such
as diabetes, heart disease, asthma, or human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
infection. Influenza vaccination was associated with a 40-percent reduction
in influenza-associated hospitalizations in pregnant women (Thompson,
2019).
Importantly, no evidence shows teratogenicity or developmental
problems in children exposed to maternal vaccination (Conlin, 2018;
Ludvigsson, 2016). Moreover, for mothers vaccinated during pregnancy, their
infants are protected from lower respiratory tract infections for the first 3
months of life (Nunes, 2017). All inactivated or recombinant influenza
vaccines may be used in gravidas (Grohskopf, 2020). However, a live
attenuated influenza virus vaccine available for intranasal use is not
recommended for pregnant women. Inactivated or recombinant influenza
vaccines may be administered concomitantly or sequentially with other
vaccines including COVID-19 and tetanus toxoid, reduced diphtheria toxoid,
and acellular pertussis (Tdap) vaccines.

■ Coronavirus
These single-stranded RNA viruses are named for the “crown” of surface
proteins covering the particles. Seven coronaviruses infect humans, four of
which cause upper respiratory disease characterized by rhinorrhea, sneezing,
and congestion (Cui, 2019). Three newer coronaviruses of zoonotic origin
have emerged in the past two decades and may cause serious lower
respiratory tract illness in humans. These are SARS-CoV, Middle East
respiratory syndrome (MERS-CoV), and the novel coronavirus of 2019
(SARS-CoV-2).

The first SARS-CoV emerged from China in 2003 and infected more than
8000 people. In a cohort of 12 pregnant women with confirmed infection, the
predominant symptoms were myalgia, chills, and cough (Wong, 2004). All
women had radiographic evidence of atypical pneumonia, 33 percent
required mechanical ventilation, and 80 percent of women diagnosed after 24
weeks’ gestation delivered preterm. Although no vertical transmission
occurred, the maternal fatality rate was 25 percent.
MERS-CoV emerged in the Middle East in 2012 and can cause
respiratory illness, acute kidney injury, and gastrointestinal illness (Hui,
2018). Although experience with MERS-CoV in pregnancy is limited, the
mortality rate in a small series was 40 percent (Assiri, 2016).

■ SARS-CoV-2
This virus causes the clinical illness known as coronavirus disease 2019
(COVID-19). The SARS-CoV-2 pandemic began in China in late 2019, and
by mid-2021 it had caused respiratory illness in more than 151 million
people and 3 million deaths globally (World Health Organization, 2021). The
mortality rate is between 1 and 2 percent in adults, and it increases sharply
with age (Verity, 2020). Compared with MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV, SARSCoV-2 is more infectious but less deadly. Variants with increased
transmissibility are emerging, and the Delta (B.1.617.2) variant has recently
predominated (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2020a).
Evidence suggests increased disease severity in gravidas who acquire this
variant (Adhikari, 2021).
SARS-CoV-2 is predominantly transmitted via respiratory droplets.
Asymptomatic or presymptomatic individuals account for 40 to 50 percent of
transmissions (He, 2020; Kimball, 2020). The immune response to natural
infection appears to require both humoral and cell-mediated immunity
(Hartley, 2020). Because of the potential for asymptomatic transmission,
interventions such as masking and social distancing are recommended
(Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2021b).

Maternal Infection
COVID-19 symptoms in gravidas do not differ from those in nonpregnant
individuals. An incubation period of approximately 5 to 14 days is followed

by fever, cough, and myalgia. Loss of smell (anosmia) and taste (ageusia) are
reported in more than half of patients (Patel, 2020). Diarrhea, nausea, and
vomiting are somewhat less common. Lower respiratory involvement
develops in some individuals approximately 8 days after symptom onset
(Huang, 2020). Signs of worsening of disease include dyspnea, tachypnea,
decreased oxygen saturation, and rarely, acute respiratory distress syndrome.
Imaging indicative of moderate to severe viral pneumonia reveals multifocal
opacities in a predominantly peripheral distribution and ground glass
opacities on computed tomography (Fig. 67-3). Pregnant women may be at
higher risk for intensive care unit admission, invasive ventilation, and death
(Zambrano, 2020). A study from Parkland Hospital demonstrated that 5
percent of infected gravidas developed severe or critical illness, and
diabetes may be a risk factor (Adhikari, 2020). Although COVID-19 was not
associated with adverse pregnancy outcomes, women with severe illness
experienced a higher rate of preterm birth. In a surveillance program of
COVID-19 in pregnant women, the rate of preterm birth was higher than the
general population—13 percent compared with 10 percent (Woodworth,
2020).

FIGURE 67-3 A. Chest radiograph of a critically ill pregnant woman at 26 weeks’ gestation
demonstrating diffuse bilateral pulmonary opacities with peripheral predominance. B. Axial image of the
chest from a computed tomographic scan demonstrates advanced COVID-19 disease with multiple
peripheral lobular consolidations and ground glass opacities.

Fetal Infection
Infection of the placenta by SARS-CoV-2 has been demonstrated, but
transmission to the fetus is rare (Schwartz, 2020). Microscopic examination

of the placenta may demonstrate inflammation and syncytiotrophoblast
necrosis (Fig. 67-4). Standardized criteria have been proposed for
determining definite, probable, or possible placental infection by SARSCoV-2 (Roberts, 2021). When vertical transmission does occur, infected
neonates may have asymptomatic, mild, or severe illness (Raschetti, 2020;
Sisman, 2020). Adhikari and associates (2020) demonstrated infection in 3
percent of neonates tested at 24 and 48 hours after birth. Mechanisms of
vertical transmission are poorly understood. No evidence suggests
transmission of SARS-CoV-2 through breastmilk (Centeno-Tablante, 2021).
Newborns with SARS-CoV-2 do not need to be separated from their mothers
but are isolated from the general newborn nursery population.

FIGURE 67-4 Placental SARS-CoV-2 infection. A. Histologic slide of a placenta with known maternal
SARS-CoV-2 infection. Large, discrete areas of the placenta showed increased perivillous fibrin (solid
arrow), focal trophoblast necrosis (open arrow), and marked histiocytic inflammation. B. Anti-SARSCoV-2 viral nucleocapsid antibody is positive in villous trophoblast (brown immunostaining), confirming
placental infection. (Reproduced with permission from Dr. Rebecca Collins.)

Diagnosis
Active maternal infection can be diagnosed from nasopharyngeal, nasal, or
saliva specimens. Reverse transcriptase–polymerase chain reaction (RTPCR) testing identifies viral RNA, whereas rapid antigen testing detects
viral antigen. Several commercial tests are available and listed on the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) (2021a) website. Rapid
antigen tests are inexpensive but less sensitive in asymptomatic individuals.
Thus, test result interpretation depends on pretest probability,
epidemiological risk factors, and intended use for diagnostic or screening

purposes in health-care or congregate settings. The latter include
dormitories, correctional facilities, nursing homes, and housing shelters
providing social services. Serological screening for IgG is used for
epidemiological and seroprevalence studies rather than diagnosis of acute
infection.

Management
For mild to moderate illness, supportive care is indicated and delivery is
reserved for obstetric indications. For those with mild illness at high risk for
clinical progression, anti-SARS-CoV-2 monoclonal antibodies may be
administered within 10 days of symptom onset and according to variant
predominance (National Institutes of Health, 2021). Pregnancy is considered
a high-risk criterion, and use of monoclonal antibodies can be considered in
consultation with specialists. Inpatient observation may be considered for
moderate illness, as up to 40 percent may worsen (Adhikari, 2020). For
pregnant women with severe to critical illness, inpatient management
includes supporting respiratory function, managing comorbid conditions, and,
when indicated, coordinating safe delivery with subspecialists (Society for
Maternal-Fetal Medicine, 2021). The goal of respiratory support is to
maintain oxygen saturation ≥95 percent and reduce dyspnea and tachypnea
(Pacheco, 2020). Prone positioning of gravidas to improve oxygenation in
severe cases of COVID-19 pneumonia has been described (Tolcher, 2020).
With severe infection, a dysregulated inflammatory response contributes
to lung injury and hypoxia. A United Kingdom trial found decreased mortality
rates at 28 days with intravenous or oral dexamethasone, 6 mg daily for up to
10 days in patients requiring supplemental oxygen or mechanical ventilation,
compared with usual care (RECOVERY Collaborative Group, 2021). In the
ACTT-1 trial, intravenous remdesivir, a broad-spectrum antiviral agent, was
associated with shortened time to recovery among patients requiring lowflow supplemental oxygen (Beigel, 2020). Remdesivir is approved by the
Food and Drug Administration for treatment of COVID-19 in hospitalized
adults. Data on efficacy and safety of antiviral and biological agents for
COVID-19 in pregnancy are limited. In a study of remdesivir in hospitalized
gravidas with COVID-19, no serious adverse events were reported, but
elevated serum aminotransaminase levels were common (Burwick, 2020).
Decisions to use currently available therapeutic agents under Emergency Use
Authorization are made in consultation with experts and should balance

potential benefits and theoretical risks (National Institutes of Health, 2021).
Antibiotics for respiratory illness are rarely necessary unless bacterial coinfection is suspected.

Prevention
Non-pharmaceutical interventions are mainstays for reducing the spread of
SARS-COV-2. These include universal masking, maintaining physical
distance of at least 6 feet, and hand hygiene. In healthcare settings, airborne
and contact isolation precautions are used, particularly when invasive
procedures are planned (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
2021c).
Currently available vaccines are highly protective against viral
transmission and clinical disease in nonpregnant adults (Baden, 2021;
Polack, 2020). In one study, the BNT162b2 mRNA vaccine was associated
with a reduction in COVID-19 diagnosed in pregnancy (Goldshtein, 2021).
The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists and the Society
for Maternal-Fetal Medicine (2021) recommend that pregnant and lactating
women receive the COVID-19 vaccine. Individuals who accept vaccination
are counseled to anticipate common reactions such as injection-site pain,
headache, fatigue, myalgia, and low-grade fever (Shimabukuro, 2021).
Recent evidence from national experts suggests no greater miscarriage rate in
gravidas receiving the vaccine (Zauche, 2021).

■ Mumps Virus
This is an RNA paramyxovirus that primarily infects the salivary glands but
also may involve the gonads, meninges, pancreas, and other organs. It is
transmitted by direct contact with respiratory secretions, saliva, or fomites.
Most transmission occurs before and within 5 days of parotitis onset, and
droplet isolation is recommended during this time (Kutty, 2010). Treatment is
symptomatic, and mumps during pregnancy is no more severe than in
nonpregnant adults.
An increased risk of spontaneous abortion has been observed in women
who acquire mumps in the first trimester. Infection is not associated with
congenital malformations, and fetal infection is rare (McLean, 2013).

Recent outbreaks in previously vaccinated young adults prompted the
recommendation of a third dose of measles-mumps-rubella (MMR) vaccine
for at-risk nonpregnant individuals during any outbreak (Marin, 2018). The
MMR vaccine is a live-virus vaccine. Thus, it is contraindicated in
pregnancy, although fetal risk from inadvertent administration is theoretical
(McLean, 2013). Pregnancy should be avoided for 30 days after vaccination.
The vaccine is encouraged for susceptible postpartum women, and
breastfeeding is not contraindicated.

■ Measles Virus (Rubeola)
This is a highly contagious RNA virus of the family Paramyxoviridae that
infects only humans. In endemic areas, annual outbreaks of measles occur in
late winter and early spring, with larger epidemic cycles every 2 to 5 years.
Although once declared eliminated in the United States, recent outbreaks
raise concerns regarding waning population immunity (Patel, 2019; Strebel,
2019). Transmission is by respiratory droplets, and the secondary attack rate
among susceptible contacts exceeds 90 percent (Rainwater-Lovett, 2018).
Typical symptoms include fever, coryza, conjunctivitis, and cough.
Koplik spots, small white lesions with surrounding erythema, appear on the
buccal mucosa. A characteristic erythematous maculopapular rash develops
on the face and neck and then spreads to the back, trunk, and extremities.
Diagnosis of acute infection is made by detection of measles-specific IgM
antibodies in serum. Additionally, measles RNA may be detected by RT-PCR
testing of a throat swab, nasopharyngeal swab, or urine specimen. Treatment
of measles is supportive, and evaluation for secondary infections may be
necessary.
For pregnant women without evidence of measles immunity,
postexposure prophylaxis is intravenous immune globulin (IVIG), and a 400mg/kg dose is ideally given within 6 days of exposure (Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention, 2020d). Human immune globulin (IG) is a blood
product used to provide antibodies for short-term prevention of infectious
diseases and is prepared from plasma pools derived from thousands of
donors.
Measles in pregnancy is associated with increased risk for pregnancy
loss, pneumonia, and death (Eberhart-Phillips, 1993; Ogbuanu, 2014). If a
woman develops measles shortly before delivery, risk of serious infection

developing in the neonate is considerable, and neonatal chemoprophylaxis is
warranted.
As a live-virus vaccine, MMR vaccine is not provided during pregnancy
as prevention. However, MMR vaccination is not an indication for pregnancy
termination. Susceptible women are vaccinated routinely postpartum, and
breastfeeding is not contraindicated.

■ Rubella Virus
Also called German measles, rubella is caused by an RNA togavirus and is
of minor importance in the absence of pregnancy. Transmission is via
nasopharyngeal secretions, and the transmission rate is 80 percent to
nonimmune individuals. The peak incidence is late winter and spring in
endemic areas (Lambert, 2015).
In 2018, more than 26,000 cases of rubella virus were reported
worldwide (Grant, 2019). In the United States, ongoing or sustained
transmission was eliminated in 2004, and large epidemics of rubella have
virtually disappeared here because of immunization. However, up to 10
percent of women are susceptible, and cases are also imported each year
from countries with incomplete vaccine coverage (Al Hammoud, 2018).
Maternal rubella is usually a mild febrile illness that follows an
incubation of 12 to 23 days. A generalized maculopapular rash begins on the
face and spreads to the trunk and extremities. Other symptoms may include
arthralgias or arthritis, head and neck lymphadenopathy, and conjunctivitis.
However, 25 to 50 percent of infections are asymptomatic. Viremia usually
precedes clinical signs by approximately a week, and adults are infectious
during viremia and through 7 days after the rash appears. Up to half of
maternal infections are subclinical despite viremia that may cause
spontaneous abortion or devastating fetal infection, described subsequently.

Diagnosis
Rubella virus may be isolated from the urine, blood, nasopharynx, and
cerebrospinal fluid for up to 2 weeks after rash onset. However, the
diagnosis is usually made with serological analysis. Specific IgM antibody
can be detected using enzyme-linked immunoassay for 4 to 5 days after onset
of clinical disease, but antibody can persist for up to 6 weeks after

appearance of the rash. Importantly, rubella virus reinfection can give rise to
transient low levels of IgM. With this, no adverse fetal effects have been
described. A false-positive IgM result is also possible in populations with
low prevalence of disease.
Serum IgG antibody titers peak 1 to 2 weeks after rash onset. These may
fail to distinguish between recent infection and preexisting immunity if the
specimen is obtained more than a week after symptoms. IgG avidity testing
aids differentiation, and high-avidity IgG antibodies indicate an infection at
least 2 months prior.

Fetal Effects
Rubella virus is one of the most complete teratogens, and its effects are
worst during organogenesis. Up to 90 percent of pregnant women with
rubella and a rash during the first 12 weeks of gestation have an affected
fetus (Miller, 1982). At 13 to 14 weeks’ gestation, this incidence is 50
percent, and by the end of the second trimester, it is 25 percent. Defects are
rare after 20 weeks’ gestation.
Features of congenital rubella syndrome are cardiac septal defects,
pulmonary stenosis, microcephaly, cataracts, microphthalmia, and
hepatosplenomegaly (Yazigi, 2017). Other abnormalities include
sensorineural deafness, intellectual disability, neonatal purpura, and
radiolucent bone disease. Neonates born with congenital rubella may shed
the virus for many months and thus be a threat to other infants and to
susceptible adults who contact them.

Management and Prevention
Rubella has no specific treatment. Droplet precautions for 7 days after the
onset of the rash are recommended. Postexposure passive immunization with
IVIG may be of benefit if given within 5 days of exposure (Young, 2015).
When rubella infection is diagnosed in the mother, targeted sonographic
examination is performed to evaluate for fetal structural anomalies described
in the last section. Referral to and counseling by a maternal–fetal medicine
specialist is warranted. If ultrasound findings suggest congenital infection or
growth delay, diagnostic amniocentesis is recommended to detect rubella
virus by PCR and to test for other congenital infections.

As prevention, MMR vaccine should be offered to nonpregnant women of
childbearing age who lack evidence of immunity. Vaccination of all
susceptible hospital personnel who might be exposed to patients with rubella
or who might have contact with pregnant women is important. Rubella
vaccination is avoided 1 month before or during pregnancy because the
vaccine contains attenuated live virus, although the fetal malformation risk is
theoretical. MMR vaccination is not an indication for pregnancy termination.
Prenatal serological screening for rubella is indicated for all pregnant
women. Women found to be nonimmune are offered the MMR vaccine
postpartum.

■ Parvovirus B19
This virus causes erythema infectiosum or fifth disease. It is a small, singlestranded DNA virus that replicates in rapidly proliferating cells such as
erythroblast precursors. This can lead to anemia, which is its primary fetal
effect. In individuals with increased red cell turnover, such as with sicklecell disease, parvovirus infection may cause an aplastic crisis.
The primary mode of parvovirus transmission is respiratory secretions,
although infection through blood transfusion or organ donation has been
reported. Most infections occur in late winter to early spring. The maternal
infection rate is highest in women with school-aged children and in day-care
workers. Viremia develops 4 to 14 days after exposure, and a rash follows
several days later. An otherwise immunocompetent individual is no longer
infectious at the onset of the rash. By adulthood, only 40 percent of women
are susceptible. The annual seroconversion rate is 1 to 2 percent, and the
secondary attack rate approaches 50 percent.

Maternal Infection
In 20 to 30 percent of adults, infection is asymptomatic. In others, fever,
headache, and flu-like symptoms may begin in the last few days of the
viremic phase. Several days later, a bright red rash with erythroderma affects
the face and gives a slapped-cheek appearance. The rash becomes lacelike
and spreads to the trunk and extremities. Adults often have milder rashes and
develop symmetrical polyarthralgia that may persist for several weeks. No
evidence suggests that parvovirus infection is altered by pregnancy. With
recovery, IgM antibody is generated 7 to 10 days postinfection, and

production persists for 3 to 4 months. Several days after IgM is produced,
IgG antibody is detectable and persists for life with natural immunity
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020a).

Fetal Infection
There is vertical transmission to the fetus in up to a third of maternal
parvovirus infections (de Jong, 2011; Lamont, 2011). Fetal infection is
associated with abortion, nonimmune hydrops, and stillbirth (Fig. 67-5). The
fetal loss rate with serologically proven parvovirus infection is 8 to 17
percent before 20 weeks’ gestation, and 2 to 6 percent after midpregnancy
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020a). Currently, no
data support screening asymptomatic mothers or evaluating stillborn fetuses
for parvovirus infection.

FIGURE 67-5 Stillborn, hydropic fetus and characteristically large placenta resulting from intrauterine
parvovirus B19 infection. (Reproduced with permission from Dr. April Bleich.)

Fetal hydrops develops in approximately 4 percent of gravidas infected
with parvovirus (Enders, 2004). Still, it is the most frequent infectious cause

of nonimmune hydrops in autopsied fetuses (Rogers, 1999). Hydrops usually
stems from infection in the first half of gestation. In one report, more than 80
percent of cases of fetal infection developed within 10 weeks of maternal
infection. The mean interval was 6 to 7 weeks (Yaegashi, 2000). The critical
period for maternal infection leading to fetal hydrops is estimated to be
between 13 and 16 weeks’ gestation, which coincides with the period in
which fetal hepatic hemopoiesis is greatest (Chap. 7, p. 128).

Diagnosis and Management
An algorithm for diagnosis of maternal parvoviral infection is illustrated in
Figure 67-6. Diagnosis is generally made by maternal serological testing for
specific IgG and IgM antibodies. Viral DNA may be detectable by PCR
testing in maternal serum during the prodrome and persist for months to years
after infection. Fetal infection is diagnosed by detection of B19 viral DNA in
amnionic fluid (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists,
2020a). Fetal and maternal viral loads do not predict fetal morbidity and
mortality (de Haan, 2007).

FIGURE 67-6 Algorithm for evaluation and management of human parvovirus B19 infection in
pregnancy. CBC = complete blood count; IgG = immunoglobulin G; IgM = immunoglobulin M; MCA =
middle cerebral artery; PCR = polymerase chain reaction; RNA = ribonucleic acid.

Most cases of parvovirus-associated hydrops develop in the first 10
weeks after infection. Thus, sonography should be performed every 2 weeks
in women with recent infection. As discussed in Chapter 14 (p. 262), middle
cerebral artery (MCA) Doppler interrogation is used to predict fetal anemia.
MCA Doppler findings that suggest anemia may warrant fetal blood sampling
followed by transfusion.
In hydropic fetuses without transfusion, mortality rates up to 30 percent
have been reported. With transfusion, 94 percent of hydrops cases resolve
within 6 to 12 weeks, and the overall mortality rate is <10 percent. Most
fetuses require only one transfusion because hemopoiesis resumes as
infection resolves.

Long-term Prognosis
Neurodevelopmental outcomes in fetuses transfused for B19 infectioninduced anemia have varied. In one review of 24 transfused hydropic fetuses,
abnormal neurodevelopment was noted in 5 of 16 survivors—32 percent—at
6 months to 8 years (Nagel, 2007). Outcomes were not related to severity of
fetal anemia or acidemia, and these investigators hypothesized that the
infection itself induced cerebral damage. In another study of 28 children
treated with intrauterine transfusion, 11 percent had neurodevelopmental
impairment during evaluation at a median age of 5 years (de Jong, 2012).
Conversely, Dembinski (2003) found no significant neurodevelopmental
delay despite severe fetal anemia.

Prevention
Currently, no parvovirus vaccine is available, and no antiviral agent is
recommended for prevention or treatment of maternal or fetal infection.
Decisions to avoid higher-risk work settings are complex and require
assessment of exposure risks. Pregnant women should be counseled that risks
for infection approximate 5 percent for casual, infrequent contact; 20 percent
for intense, prolonged work exposure such as for teachers; and 50 percent for
close, frequent interaction such as in the home. Workers at day-care centers

and schools need not avoid infected children because infectivity is greatest
before clinical illness. Last, infected children do not require isolation.

■ Other Respiratory Viruses
More than 200 antigenically distinct respiratory viruses cause the common
cold, pharyngitis, laryngitis, bronchitis, and pneumonia. The DNA-containing
adenovirus is more likely to produce cough and lower respiratory tract
involvement, including pneumonia. The RNA-containing rhinovirus,
respiratory enterovirus, and nonpandemic common coronavirus usually
produce a trivial illness characterized by rhinorrhea, sneezing, and
congestion. An enterovirus named EV-D68 caused large outbreaks of
respiratory illness in several countries and was linked to clusters of poliolike illness in children, known as acute flaccid myelitis (Sejvar, 2016).
The teratogenic risks of respiratory viruses are low. In one study,
amnionic fluid viral PCR testing was done on samples from 1191 women
undergoing amniocentesis for fetal karyotyping (Adams, 2012). Viral PCR
was positive in 6.5 percent, and adenovirus was the virus most frequently
identified. There was an association with fetal-growth restriction,
nonimmune hydrops, foot/hand abnormalities, and neural-tube defects.
Adenoviral infection is a known cause of childhood myocarditis and has
been reported in cases of fetal myocarditis and nonimmune hydrops (Towbin,
1994).

■ Other Enteroviruses
Characterized by a clinical phenotype distinct from that of respiratory
enteroviruses, these viruses are a major subgroup of RNA picornaviruses
that include nonrespiratory enterovirus species, coxsackievirus, poliovirus,
and echovirus. They are trophic for intestinal epithelium but can also cause
widespread maternal, fetal, and neonatal infections that may include the
CNS, skin, heart, and lungs. Most maternal infections are subclinical yet can
be fatal to the fetus-neonate (Tassin, 2014). Hepatitis A is an enterovirus
discussed in Chapter 58 (p. 1036).
Coxsackievirus infections with group A and B are usually asymptomatic.
Symptomatic infections—usually with group B—include aseptic meningitis;
polio-like illness; hand, foot, and mouth disease; rashes; respiratory disease;

pleuritis; pericarditis; and myocarditis. No treatment or vaccination is
available (Cohen, 2018). Coxsackievirus may be transmitted by maternal
secretions to the fetus at delivery in up to half of mothers who seroconverted
during pregnancy (Modlin, 1988). Transplacental passage also has been
reported, which may cause neonatal skin lesions, myocarditis, pneumonia, or
encephalitis (Ornoy, 2006). Some have reported higher rates of cardiac
anomalies and of low-birthweight, preterm, and growth-restricted newborns
(Chen, 2010).
Polioviruses are highly contagious and cause subclinical or mild
infections. The virus is trophic for the brain, and it can cause paralytic
poliomyelitis (Cohen, 2018). Siegel (1955) demonstrated that pregnant
women not only were more susceptible to polio but also had a higher death
rate. Perinatal transmission has been observed, especially when maternal
infection developed in the third trimester (Bates, 1955). Inactivated
subcutaneous polio vaccine is recommended for susceptible pregnant women
who must travel to endemic areas or are placed in other high-risk situations.
Live oral polio vaccine has been used for mass vaccination during pregnancy
without harmful fetal effects (Harjulehto, 1989).

■ Mosquito-borne Viruses
West Nile Virus
This mosquito-borne RNA flavivirus is a human neuropathogen. It is the most
common cause of arthropod-borne disease in the United States (McDonald,
2019). West Nile viral infection is typically acquired through mosquito bites
and is rarely transmitted through donated blood or organs. The incubation
period is 2 to 14 days, and most persons have mild or no symptoms. Less
than 1 percent of infected adults develop meningoencephalitis or acute
flaccid paralysis. With these, presenting symptoms may include fever, mental
status changes, muscle weakness, and coma (Stewart, 2013).
West Nile infection is diagnosed based on clinical symptoms and
detection of viral IgG and IgM in serum and IgM in cerebrospinal fluid
(Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2018). Management is
supportive, and no effective antiviral treatment is available. The primary
strategy for preventing exposure in pregnancy is use of insect repellant
containing N,N-diethyl-m-toluamide (DEET), which is considered safe

(Wylie, 2016). Avoiding outdoor activity and stagnant water and wearing
protective clothing also are recommended.
Adverse effects of West Nile viremia on pregnancy are unclear. Animal
data suggest that embryos are susceptible, and one case report of human fetal
infection at 27 weeks’ gestation described chorioretinitis and severe
cerebral leukomalacia (Alpert, 2003; Julander, 2006). However, data from
the West Nile Virus Pregnancy Registry show no increased risk for
miscarriage, preterm birth, or major malformations (O’Leary, 2006; Pridjian,
2016). No evidence suggests that maternal West Nile virus infection is
harmful to a breastfeeding infant.

Zika Virus
This RNA flavivirus is the first major mosquito-borne teratogen recognized
(Rasmussen, 2016). Zika virus is primarily transmitted by mosquito bite, but
sexual transmission is possible. The virus may be detected in body fluids for
months following acute infection (Joguet, 2017; Paz-Bailey, 2017). It was
first introduced to a nonimmune Brazilian population in 2014, but as of 2020,
no countries had reported active Zika transmission.
Maternal-Fetal Infection. Zika infection is asymptomatic in approximately 80
percent of adults. It may cause mild rash, fever, headache, arthralgia, and
conjunctivitis lasting a few days. The fetus can be severely infected whether
or not the mother is symptomatic. In one report of 134 women with positive
RT-PCR results, the fetal mortality rate was 7 percent (Brasil, 2016). Among
live births with first-trimester exposure, the rate of fetal birth defects ranges
from 5 to 15 percent (Reynolds, 2017). In the most severely affected fetuses,
a congenital Zika syndrome has been described that includes microcephaly,
lissencephaly, ventriculomegaly, intracranial calcifications, ocular
abnormalities, and congenital contractures (Honein, 2017).
Diagnosis and Management. Zika virus is typically detectable in blood
around the time of symptom onset and may persist days to months in pregnant
women (Meaney-Delman, 2016). Serum IgM antibodies typically become
detectable within the first 2 weeks and may persist for months. IgG
antibodies develop shortly after IgM ones and confer long-lived immunity
(Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2019).

Laboratory testing for Zika infection is recommended only in
symptomatic gravidas with residence in or recent travel to areas with active
dengue transmission and risk for Zika transmission (Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention, 2019). For a pregnant woman within 12 weeks of
symptom onset, PCR testing of serum and urine specimens for both dengue
and Zika virus RNA is recommended. For women with prenatal ultrasound
findings suggesting congenital Zika syndrome, Zika virus PCR and IgM are
initially performed on serum and urine. Amnionic fluid PCR may be
performed, although less is known about its diagnostic accuracy for
congenital infection.
Currently, no specific treatment or vaccine is available for Zika infection,
although several vaccines are in development (Shan, 2018). Prophylaxis
includes protective netting, insect spray to control the vector mosquito,
personal DEET spray use, and avoidance of sexual contact with partners
recently exposed.

■ Ebola Virus
A member of the RNA Filoviridae family, the Ebola virus is transmitted by
direct person-to-person contact (Kuhn, 2018). Infection produces a severe
hemorrhagic fever with pronounced immunosuppression and disseminated
intravascular coagulopathy. Treatment is supportive. Data are few concerning
Ebola viral infection in gravidas (Money, 2015; Oduyebo, 2015). Henwood
and associates (2017) described an approximate 50-percent risk of death
among pregnant and nonpregnant women with Ebola virus disease, and
universally poor fetal and neonatal outcomes. That said, no evidence
suggests that pregnant women are more susceptible to Ebola virus infection.
In survivors, persistent Ebola virus has been detected months after recovery
in “sanctuary sites” such as the eyes and gonads.
A live-attenuated Ebola virus vaccine, rVSV-ZEBOV, was approved in
2019 in the United States for individuals studying or treating Ebola virus.
Among 84 health-care workers who inadvertently received vaccination in
early pregnancy or who became pregnant soon after vaccination, pregnancy
loss or congenital anomalies were not associated with the vaccine (LegardyWilliams, 2020).

BACTERIAL INFECTIONS
■ Group A Streptococcus
Streptococcus pyogenes is the most frequent bacterial cause of acute
pharyngitis. In most cases, streptococcal pharyngitis, scarlet fever, and
erysipelas are not life threatening. Treatment, usually with penicillin, is
equivalent for pregnant and nonpregnant women. S pyogenes produces
numerous toxins and enzymes responsible for its local and systemic toxicity.
Pyrogenic exotoxin-producing strains are usually associated with severe
disease (Wessels, 2018). In the United States, S pyogenes infrequently causes
puerperal infection. Still, it remains the most common cause of severe
maternal postpartum infection and death worldwide, and their incidence is
rising (Hamilton, 2013; Wessels, 2018). Puerperal infections are discussed
in detail in Chapter 37 (p. 649).

■ Group B Streptococcus
Streptococcus agalactiae colonizes the gastrointestinal and genitourinary
tract in 10 to 25 percent of gravidas (Kwatra, 2016). Group B Streptococcus
(GBS) is isolated in a transient, intermittent, or chronic fashion during
pregnancy. Although the organism is more likely always present in these
same women, its isolation is not always consistent.

Maternal and Perinatal Infection
Maternal and fetal GBS effects range from asymptomatic colonization to
septicemia. S agalactiae can cause maternal bacteriuria, pyelonephritis,
osteomyelitis, postpartum mastitis, and puerperal infections. GBS may also
have the ability to overcome normally protective cervical mucus barriers
during pregnancy to cause ascending antenatal infection (Vornhagen, 2018).
As such, GBS has also been implicated in preterm labor, prelabor rupture of
membranes, chorioamnionitis, fetal infections, and stillbirth (Randis, 2014;
Seale, 2017).
Among newborns in the United States, GBS remains the leading
infectious cause of morbidity and mortality (Nanduri, 2019). Infection <7
days after birth is defined as early-onset disease, although many
investigators recognize a threshold of <72 hours of life as most compatible

with intrapartum acquisition of disease (Stoll, 2011). Tudela and associates
(2012) reported that newborns with early-onset GBS infection often had
clinical evidence of fetal infection during labor or at delivery.
In many neonates, septicemia involves signs of serious illness that
usually develop within 6 to 12 hours of birth. These include respiratory
distress, apnea, and hypotension. At the outset, therefore, neonatal infection
must be differentiated from respiratory distress syndrome caused by
insufficient surfactant production (Chap. 34, p. 615). The mortality rate with
early-onset disease has declined to approximately 4 percent, and preterm
newborns are disparately affected.
Late-onset disease caused by GBS is noted in 0.28 per 1000 live births
and usually manifests as meningitis 1 week to 3 months after birth (Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention, 2020a). The mortality rate, although
appreciable, is lower for late-onset meningitis than for early-onset sepsis.
Unfortunately, it is not uncommon for surviving infants of both early- and
late-onset disease to exhibit devastating neurological sequelae.

Prophylaxis for Perinatal Infections
Maternal intrapartum antibiotic administration is the main prevention of
early-onset GBS disease. In the United States, rates of early-onset neonatal
sepsis decreased from 3 cases per 1000 live births in the early 1990s to 0.25
cases in the years following widespread prophylaxis (Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention, 2020a). Both culture- and risk-based criteria to
identify candidates for intrapartum prophylaxis have been proposed and
debated (Table 67-2) (Braye, 2019; Hughes, 2017).
TABLE 67-2. Indications for Intrapartum Group B Streptococcal Infection
Prophylaxisa

Culture-based Prevention. The American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2020b) recommends universal vaginal-rectal culture
screening for GBS at 36 to 38 weeks’ gestation. This is followed by
intrapartum antibiotic prophylaxis for women identified to be carriers.
Selective enrichment of the vaginal-rectal culture to favor GBS growth and
then subculture improves detection. GBS isolates can also be tested for
inducible clindamycin resistance in women with reported penicillin allergy.
Updated guidance also recommends consideration of antenatal maternal
penicillin-allergy testing in GBS-colonized women at high risk for
anaphylaxis or IgE-mediated hypersensitivity (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020b). In a recent surveillance study of
neonates with early-onset sepsis, 53 percent of those diagnosed with GBS
disease were born to mothers with negative antenatal screening results (Stoll,
2020).
In women with heavy colonization, GBS may be specifically identified in
a routine prenatal urine culture obtained to exclude asymptomatic bacteriuria
(ASB). Cultures with ≥105 colony-forming units (cfu) should prompt
treatment of ASB to reduce the risk of acute pyelonephritis in pregnancy.
Values <105 do not require acute antepartum antibiotics for ASB. However,
women are given GBS prophylaxis in labor (see Table 67-2). As a surrogate,
we also consider a urine culture result that identifies gram-positive cocci,
without further speciation, to be a presumptive positive result for GBS.
Risk-based Prevention. This approach is recommended for women in labor
and whose GBS culture results are not known. It relies on risk factors

associated with intrapartum GBS transmission. Intrapartum
chemoprophylaxis is then given to candidates with criteria listed in Table
67-2.
At Parkland Hospital we use the risk-based approach for intrapartum
prophylaxis. Additionally, all term neonates who were not given intrapartum
prophylaxis are treated in the delivery room with aqueous penicillin G,
50,000 to 60,000 units intramuscularly. With this strategy, early-onset
neonatal sepsis rates in our predominantly minority population decreased to
levels similar to those reported by national surveillance data (Stafford, 2012;
Wendel, 2002).
Nucleic Acid–based Testing. Approximately 20 percent of laboratories now
offer PCR testing for maternal GBS screening (Fay, 2019). Additionally, a
rapid point-of-care PCR test has been evaluated for intrapartum
identification of maternal GBS (El Helali, 2019). One major limitation is
cost, which is currently several times greater than that of culture-based
techniques. A second is the inability to determine antibiotic sensitivities
using current PCR techniques.

GBS Vaccine
Serotype-specific capsular antibody concentrations clinically correlate with
reduced rates of GBS neonatal disease. However, vaccine development is
challenged by the diversity of GBS serotypes. Another hurdle is the
bacterium’s ability to undergo serotype switching by altering its capsular
polysaccharide (Dangor, 2016). No vaccines are clinically available at this
time.

Intrapartum Antimicrobial Prophylaxis
Penicillin remains the first-line agent for prophylaxis, and ampicillin is an
acceptable alternative (Table 67-3) (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2020b). Women with a penicillin allergy and at low risk for
anaphylaxis are given cefazolin (Briody, 2016). Those at high risk for
anaphylaxis or other life-threatening reaction, such as Stevens-Johnson
syndrome, should have antimicrobial susceptibility testing for erythromycin
and clindamycin performed on GBS isolates. Clindamycin-sensitive but
erythromycin-resistant isolates should undergo inducible clindamycin

resistance testing. If clindamycin resistance is confirmed, vancomycin should
be administered. Erythromycin is no longer used for penicillin-allergic
patients.
TABLE 67-3. Regimens for Intrapartum Antimicrobial Prophylaxis for
Perinatal GBS Disease

Management of spontaneous preterm labor, threatened preterm delivery,
or preterm prelabor rupture of membranes includes obtaining a GBS culture.
Intrapartum chemoprophylaxis is initiated until the culture results. Women
undergoing cesarean delivery before labor onset with intact membranes do
not need GBS chemoprophylaxis, regardless of colonization status or
gestational age.

■ Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus Aureus (MRSA)
Staphylococcus aureus is a pyogenic gram-positive organism and is
considered the most virulent staphylococcal species. It primarily colonizes
the nares, skin, genital tissues, and oropharynx. Although approximately 30
percent of adults carry S aureus, MRSA colonizes 2 percent of adults
(Gorwitz, 2008). MRSA colonization is considered the greatest risk factor
for subsequent infection (Marzec, 2016).
MRSA infection may be hospital- or community-acquired MRSA (CAMRSA). CA-MRSA is diagnosed in an outpatient setting or within 48 hours
of hospitalization in a person without health-care exposures in the past year.
Exposures include prior hospitalization, dialysis or surgery, or indwelling

catheters or devices (Dantes, 2013). In pregnant women, most cases are CAMRSA, which disproportionately affects persons in lower socioeconomical
strata (See, 2017).

MRSA and Pregnancy
Skin and soft tissue infections are the most common presentation of MRSA in
pregnant women. Mastitis and breast abscesses have been reported in up to a
fourth of MRSA cases in pregnancy (Laibl, 2005; Lee, 2010). Perineal or
episiotomy abscess, abdominal surgical site infection, and rare placental
abscess and chorioamnionitis have been associated with MRSA (Maeda,
2018; Pimentel, 2009). Last, osteomyelitis and spinal-epidural abscess have
been topics of case reports (Tanamai, 2016; Vakili, 2017).
Vertical transmission of MRSA is rare. Postnatal colonization and
infection in the newborn are associated with maternal and health-care worker
colonization or infection near the time of delivery (Jimenez-Truque, 2012;
Reich, 2016).

Management
Uncomplicated superficial infections are primarily managed by drainage and
local wound care. Although historically de-emphasized, evidence suggests
benefit from antibiotic therapy added to incision and drainage of smaller
abscesses (Daum, 2017; Forcade, 2012). Severe superficial infections,
especially those that fail to respond to local care or those in patients with
medical comorbidities, are treated with MRSA-appropriate antibiotics.
Purulent cellulitis should be treated empirically for MRSA until culture and
sensitivity results are available.
Most CA-MRSA strains are sensitive to trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
or clindamycin (Miller, 2015; Talan, 2016). Rifampin rapidly develops
resistance and should not be used as monotherapy. Linezolid, although
effective against MRSA, is expensive, and little information guides its use in
pregnancy. Although effective for MRSA infections, doxycycline,
minocycline, and other tetracyclines should not be used in pregnancy.
Vancomycin remains a first-line therapy for inpatient treatment of serious
MRSA infections.
The control and prevention of MRSA infection relies on appropriate
hand hygiene and prevention of skin-to-skin contact. Routine screening of

obstetrical patients for MRSA colonization is not recommended (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020c. That said, for women
with culture-proven MRSA colonization or infection, we add a single dose
of vancomycin to routine beta-lactam perioperative prophylaxis for cesarean
deliveries and deep perineal lacerations. Decolonization is not effective in
the general obstetrical population (Huang, 2019). Breastfeeding in women
colonized with MRSA is not prohibited, but optimal hygiene and attention to
minor skin breaks is encouraged.

■ Listeriosis
Listeria monocytogenes is a facultative intracellular gram-positive bacillus
that causes 100 to 200 infections requiring hospitalization each year in the
United States (Tack, 2020). Nearly all cases are thought to be foodborne.
Outbreaks have been caused by contaminated dairy products, fruits and
vegetables, and undercooked or processed meats and deli foods.
Invasive listerial infections are more common in pregnant women,
immunocompromised patients, and the very old or young. For unclear
reasons, infection during pregnancy is 10 to 20 times more common than in
the general population (Craig, 2019). Although pregnancy losses linked to
listeriosis are more likely to be reported, another hypothesis is that pregnant
women are more susceptible because of decreased cell-mediated immunity
(Baud, 2011).

Maternal and Fetal Infection
Infections with Listeria may result in noninvasive, febrile gastroenteritis,
sepsis, or CNS infection after a 2- to 4-week incubation. Listeriosis during
pregnancy may be asymptomatic or may cause a febrile illness that is
confused with influenza, pyelonephritis, or meningitis. The diagnosis usually
is not apparent until blood cultures are reported as positive. Occult or
clinical infection also may stimulate labor. Transplacental bacterial invasion
leads to fetal infection, which can result in stillbirth or clinical illness
similar to early-onset GBS sepsis. A classic description of overwhelming
fetal infection is that of disseminated microabscesses and granulomas known
as granulomatosis infantiseptica. Chorioamnionitis is common, and
placental macroabscesses may be seen. Late-onset neonatal infection can
also follow exposure at delivery. In a review of 222 cases, infection with

Listeria resulted in abortion or stillbirth in 20 percent, and neonatal sepsis
developed in 68 percent of surviving newborns (Mylonakis, 2002). In one
prospective cohort study, 24 percent of mothers experienced fetal loss, but
none after 29 weeks’ gestation (Charlier, 2017). However, a neonatal case
fatality rate of 21 percent has been reported (Sapuan, 2017).
Treatment with ampicillin plus gentamicin is usually recommended
because of its synergism against Listeria species (Rouse, 2016).
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole can be given to penicillin-allergic women.
Maternal treatment in most cases is also effective for fetal infection. No
vaccine is available. Prevention is by washing raw vegetables, cooking all
raw food, and avoiding the implicated foods listed previously (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019d).

■ Salmonellosis
Infections from Salmonella species continue to be a major cause of
foodborne illness. Six serotypes, including Salmonella subtypes
typhimurium and enteritidis, account for most cases in the United States.
Nontyphoid Salmonella gastroenteritis is contracted through contaminated
food. Symptoms that include nonbloody diarrhea, abdominal pain, fever,
chills, nausea, and vomiting begin 6 to 48 hours after exposure. Diagnosis is
made by stool studies (Chap. 57, p. 1018).
Treatment is with intravenous crystalloid solutions given for rehydration.
Antimicrobials are not given in uncomplicated infections because they do not
commonly shorten illness and may prolong the convalescent carrier state. If
gastroenteritis is complicated by high fever or bacteremia, antimicrobials are
given (Angelo, 2016). Rare case reports have linked Salmonella enteritidis
bacteremia with septic abortion (Delcourt, 2019).
Typhoid fever caused by Salmonella typhi remains a global health
problem. Infection is spread by oral ingestion of contaminated food, water,
or milk. Although uncommon in the United States, an outbreak in Central
America in 2017 involved almost 300 cases (Pan American Health
Organization, 2018). Severe complications among patients requiring
hospitalization include gastrointestinal bleeding—11 percent; intestinal
perforation—9 percent; encephalopathy—8 percent; renal failure—6
percent; and cardiovascular collapse—7 percent (Bano-Zaidi, 2018). In
pregnant women, the disease is more likely to be encountered during

epidemics and in those with recent travel (Engsbro, 2019). Septic abortion is
rare but reported (Jena, 2017).
Fluroquinolones and third-generation cephalosporins are the preferred
empirical treatment for enteric (typhoid) fever and invasive nontyphoidal
Salmonella infection (Shane, 2017). Antimicrobial susceptibility testing is
important to tailor the course of therapy, which typically lasts 1 to 2 weeks.
Two licensed vaccines for prevention of typhoid fever are available in the
United States (Milligan, 2018). From limited evidence, typhoid vaccine
administration to pregnant women before travel is not linked to adverse
outcomes.

■ Shigellosis
Transmitted via the fecal–oral route, shigellosis is a common cause of
diarrheal outbreaks in children attending day-care centers and in adults
following international travel. Bacillary dysentery caused by Shigella
species can range from mild diarrhea to severe dysentery with fever, bloody
stools, abdominal cramping, and tenesmus. In immunosuppressed
individuals, severe infection may lead to toxic megacolon, seizures or
meningitis, or hemolytic uremic syndrome (Kotloff, 2018).
Although mild infection is typically self-limited, treatment of dehydration
is essential. Antimotility drugs are avoided, and meticulous hygiene is
recommended to avoid transmission. Antimicrobial therapy during pregnancy
includes fluoroquinolones, ceftriaxone, or azithromycin. Resistance is
rapidly emerging, and antibiotic susceptibility testing can help guide
appropriate therapy (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2020e).
Shigellosis can stimulate uterine contractions and cause preterm birth
(Parisot, 2016).

■ Lyme Disease
Caused by the spirochete Borrelia burgdorferi, Lyme disease is the most
commonly reported vector-borne illness in the United States (Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention, 2021g). Lyme borreliosis results from tick
bites of the genus Ixodes. There are three stages (Steere, 2018). Early
infection—stage 1—causes a distinctive local skin lesion, erythema
migrans, which may be accompanied by a flu-like syndrome and regional

adenopathy. If untreated, early disseminated infection—stage 2—follows in
days to weeks. Multisystem involvement is frequent, but skin lesions,
neuropathies, myalgia, carditis, and meningitis predominate. If still untreated
after months, late or persistent infection—stage 3—manifests in perhaps half
of patients as a migratory arthritis. Native immunity is acquired, and the
disease enters a chronic phase in approximately 10 percent. Some patients
remain asymptomatic, but others in the chronic phase develop various skin,
joint, or neurological manifestations.
Clinical diagnosis is important because serological and PCR testing have
many pitfalls (Steere, 2016). IgM and IgG serological testing is
recommended in early infection and is followed by a second test—either a
second immunoassay or western blot—for confirmation (Mead, 2019).
Ideally, acute and convalescent serological evaluation is completed if
possible, however, rates of false-positive and -negative results are high.
Treatment is recommended by the Infectious Diseases Society of America
(Lantos, 2021). For erythema migrans, doxycycline for 10 days or
amoxicillin or cefuroxime axetil for 14 days is recommended. However,
doxycycline is usually avoided in pregnancy. Azithromycin for 7 days is a
second-line regimen. For other manifestations, a 14- to 28-day oral or
intravenous course of the same first-line drugs is recommended. No vaccine
is commercially available. Avoiding areas with endemic Lyme disease and
improving tick control in those areas is the most effective prevention. Selfexamination with removal of unengorged ticks within 36 hours of attachment
reduces infection risk. For tick bites recognized within 72 hours, a single
200-mg oral dose of doxycycline may reduce infection development (Lantos,
2021).
Several reports describe Lyme disease in pregnancy, although large
series are lacking. Transplacental transmission has been confirmed, but no
congenital effects of maternal borreliosis have been conclusively identified
(Shapiro, 2014). Prompt treatment of early maternal infection should prevent
most adverse pregnancy outcomes. In the northeast United States, between 2
and 40 percent of women with early Lyme disease may be co-infected with
Babesia microti, which is another parasite transmitted by same tick.
Babesiosis has been reported to cause congenital infection (Saetre, 2018).

■ Tuberculosis

Diagnosis and management of tuberculosis during pregnancy is discussed in
Chapter 54 (p. 965).

PROTOZOAL INFECTIONS
■ Toxoplasmosis
The obligate intracellular parasite Toxoplasma gondii has a life cycle with
two distinct stages (Kim, 2018). The feline stage takes place in cats—the
definitive host—and their prey. Unsporulated oocysts are excreted in feces.
In the nonfeline stage, tissue cysts containing bradyzoites or oocysts are
ingested by the intermediate host, including humans. Gastric acid digests the
cysts to release bradyzoites, which infect small-intestinal epithelium. Here,
they are transformed into rapidly dividing tachyzoites, which can infect all
cells within the host mammal. Humoral and cell-mediated immune defenses
eliminate most of these, but tissue cysts develop. Their lifelong persistence is
the chronic form of toxoplasmosis.
Human infection is acquired by eating raw or undercooked meat infected
with tissue cysts or by ingesting soil or water contaminated with oocysts
from cat feces. Prior infection is confirmed by serological testing, and its
prevalence depends on geographical locale and parasite genotype. The
incidence of congenital toxoplasmosis in the United States has declined and
now approximates 0.23 cases in 10,000 live births (Maldonado, 2017).

Maternal and Fetal Infection
Most acute maternal infections are subclinical and are detected only by
prenatal or newborn serological screening. In some cases, maternal
symptoms may include a flu-like illness with lymphadenopathy. In
immunocompetent adults, initial infection confers immunity, and
prepregnancy infection nearly eliminates any risk of vertical transmission.
Infection in immunocompromised women, however, may be severe, and
reactivation may cause encephalitis, chorioretinitis, or mass lesions.
Vertical transmission can cause fetal infection and then congenital
toxoplasmosis. The latter is a fetopathy characterized by ocular or
intracranial lesions and growth delay. Congenital toxoplasmosis is also
associated with an increased risk for preterm delivery (Freeman, 2005).

The estimated rate of vertical transmission rises with gestational age. In
one metaanalysis, the rate was 15 percent at 13 weeks, 44 percent at 26
weeks, and 71 percent at 36 weeks (SYROCOT Study Group, 2007).
Although transmission risk is lower in early pregnancy, sequelae of
congenital toxoplasmosis are more likely to be severe (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020a).
Notably, most infected fetuses are born without obvious toxoplasmosis
stigmata. Clinically affected neonates usually have generalized disease
expressed as low birthweight, hepatosplenomegaly, jaundice, and anemia.
Some primarily have neurological disease with intracranial calcifications,
hydrocephaly, or microcephaly (Dhombres, 2017). Many eventually develop
chorioretinitis and exhibit learning disabilities. This classic triad—
chorioretinitis, intracranial calcifications, and hydrocephalus—is often
accompanied by convulsions. Infected neonates with clinical signs are at risk
for long-term complications (Abdoli, 2014).

Screening and Diagnosis
With IgG antibody confirmed before pregnancy, there is no risk for fetal
infection in immunocompetent hosts. The American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists (2020a) does not recommend prenatal screening for
toxoplasmosis in low-prevalence areas, including the United States.
Screening IgG serology tests should be performed in immunocompromised
gravidas, including those with HIV infection.
Pregnant women with suspected toxoplasmosis also should be tested. The
parasite is rarely detected in tissue or body fluids. IgG antibodies against
Toxoplasma develop within 2 to 3 weeks after infection, peak at 1 to 2
months, and usually persist for life—sometimes in high titers. Although IgM
antibodies appear by 10 days after infection and usually become negative
within 3 to 4 months, they may remain detectable for years. Thus, IgM
antibodies are not used alone to diagnose acute toxoplasmosis. Best results
are obtained with the Toxoplasma Serologic Profile performed at the Dr.
Jack S. Remington Laboratory for Specialty Diagnostics
(www.sutterhealth.org). Toxoplasma IgG avidity increases with time. Thus,
if a high-avidity IgG result is found, infection in the preceding 3 to 5 months
is excluded. Multiple tests are available that allow high-avidity results to
confirm latent infection with a 100-percent positive predictive value
(Villard, 2013).

Congenital toxoplasmosis is suspected when sonography reveals findings
such as hydrocephaly, intracranial or hepatic calcifications, ascites, placental
thickening, hyperechoic bowel, and growth restriction. These are similar to
abnormalities that may be seen with congenital CMV. If these are found
incidentally, diagnostic amniocentesis with PCR testing for toxoplasma as
well as cytomegalovirus DNA is recommended, along with maternal
serologic testing for both infections. The sensitivity of PCR for detection of
toxoplasma DNA varies with gestational age and is lowest before 18 weeks’
gestation (Filisetti, 2015; Yamamoto, 2017).

Management
Prenatal treatment of acute maternal toxoplasmosis is based on two regimens.
Spiramycin may be given alone, or a pyrimethamine plus sulfonamide
combination is taken with folinic acid (American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists, 2020a). These two regimens have also been used
consecutively. Most experts will use spiramycin in women with acute
infection early in pregnancy to reduce the risk of vertical transmission.
Because it does not cross the placenta, spiramycin may not be used to treat
fetal infection. Pyrimethamine plus sulfadiazine with folinic acid is selected
for maternal infection after 18 weeks’ gestation or if fetal infection is
suspected. The SYROCOT study group (2007) reviewed data from 1438
treated pregnancies and found weak evidence for early treatment to reduce
congenital toxoplasmosis risks. Treatment has been associated with a
reduced rate of serious neurological sequelae and neonatal demise (CortinaBorja, 2010).

Prevention
No vaccine is available to prevent toxoplasmosis. Strategies to avoid
infection include: (1) cooking meat to safe temperatures; (2) peeling or
thoroughly washing fruits and vegetables; (3) cleaning all food preparation
surfaces and utensils that have contacted raw meat or unwashed fruits and
vegetables; (4) wearing gloves when changing cat litter or delegating this
duty; and (5) avoiding feeding cats raw or undercooked meat and keeping
cats indoors. Although these preventive steps are recommended, no robust
data support their effectiveness (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2020a; Di Mario, 2015).

■ Malaria
This protozoan infection remains a global health crisis. In 2018, it caused
260,000 deaths, and most occurred among children younger than 5 years
(World Health Organization, 2019). Sub-Saharan Africa and India carry the
largest burden of cases. Malaria had been effectively eradicated in Europe
and in most of North America, but some cases are imported in returning
military personnel or recent immigrants from endemic areas (Mace, 2017).
Transmitted by infected Anopheles mosquitoes, six species of Plasmodium
cause human disease.
Pregnant women have increased susceptibility (Kourtis, 2014). After
infection, antibodies to the parasite surface antigen VAR2CSA help mediate
placental accumulation of infected erythrocytes and lead to the harmful
effects of malaria (Mayor, 2015). Through this mechanism, some immunity
accrues with parity and is termed pregnancy-specific antimalarial
immunity. Ironically, malaria treatment dampens this immunity.

Maternal and Fetal Infection
Clinical manifestations are fever, chills, and flu-like symptoms, which may
occur episodically. Symptoms are less severe with recurrences. Malaria may
be associated with anemia and jaundice, and infections with Plasmodium
falciparum may cause kidney failure, coma, and death. That said, many
otherwise healthy but infected adults in endemic areas are asymptomatic
because of partial immunity. Pregnant women, although often asymptomatic,
are said to be more likely to develop traditional symptoms.
Malarial infections in pregnancy—either symptomatic or asymptomatic—
are associated with higher rates of perinatal morbidity and mortality
(Rogerson, 2018). Adverse outcomes include stillbirth, preterm birth, low
birthweight, and maternal anemia. These correlate with high levels of
placental parasitemia. The maternal anemia and low birthweight are
documented most frequently (Machado Filho, 2014; McClure, 2013).
Approximately 16 percent of low-birthweight neonates born to women in
Africa are attributable to maternal malaria infection (World Health
Organization, 2019). Effects stem from parasitized erythrocytes, monocytes,
and macrophages that accumulate in the vascular areas of the placenta (Fig.
67-7). Infections with P falciparum are the worst, and early infection raises
the risk for abortion. The incidence of malaria increases significantly in the

latter two trimesters and postpartum (Diagne, 2000). Despite this, congenital
malaria develops in <5 percent of neonates born to infected mothers.

FIGURE 67-7 Photomicrograph of placental malaria. Multiple infected erythrocytes are seen, and two
are identified (arrows). Cross section of nearby chorionic villus is shown (arrowhead).

Diagnosis and Management
Identification of parasites by microscopic evaluation of a blood smear
remains the diagnostic gold standard. In women with low parasite densities,
however, the sensitivity of microscopy is poor. Malaria-specific antigens are
now being used for rapid testing, which has become the diagnostic standard
(Cunningham, 2019).
For treatment, the most frequently used antimalarial drugs are not
contraindicated in pregnancy. The World Health Organization recommends
that all infected patients living in or traveling from endemic areas be treated
with an artemisinin-based regimen for uncomplicated falciparum malaria
(Tarning, 2016). The CDC (2020c) recommends that initial treatment be
determined by where the infection was acquired.
Pregnant women diagnosed with uncomplicated malaria caused by P
vivax, P malariae, P ovale, and chloroquine-sensitive P falciparum should

be treated with hydroxychloroquine or chloroquine (Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention, 2020c). For women infected with multidrug-resistant
P falciparum, the first-line agent for gravidas in the second and third
trimesters is a drug containing both artemether and lumefantrine. The
PREGACT Study Group (2016) compared four artemisinin-based drugs in
3428 pregnant women with falciparum malaria and reported no serious
maternal or perinatal adverse effects. Chloroquine-resistant P vivax should
be treated with mefloquine. Chloroquine-sensitive P vivax or P ovale should
be treated with chloroquine throughout pregnancy and then primaquine
postpartum. Resistance to all the antimalarial drugs has been reported,
including the recently added artemisinin-based compounds.
Treatment regimens for uncomplicated and severe malarial infections in
pregnancy are detailed at: www.cdc.gov/malaria/diagnosis_treatment. The
CDC also maintains a malaria hotline for treatment recommendations (855856-4713).

Prevention and Chemoprophylaxis
Malaria control and prevention relies on chemoprophylaxis when traveling
to or living in endemic areas. Vector control also is important. Insecticidetreated netting, pyrethroid insecticides, and DEET-based insect repellent
lower malarial rates in endemic areas. These are well tolerated in
pregnancy. If travel is necessary, chemoprophylaxis is recommended.
Chloroquine or hydroxychloroquine prophylaxis is safe and well
tolerated in pregnancy. One evaluation compared prophylaxis during
pregnancy with either sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine or dihydroartemisininpiperaquine and found the latter to be more effective in preventing placental
infection (Kakuru, 2016). Atovaquone/proguanil use is approved for
gravidas, however, primaquine and doxycycline are contraindicated (Briggs,
2022). The latest chemoprophylaxis regimens for pregnancy can be obtained
from the CDC Travelers’ Health website at:
www.cdc.gov/malaria/travelers/. The CDC also publishes Health
Information for International Travel (The Yellow Book) at:
www.cdc.gov/yellowbook. For women living in endemic areas, intermittent
preventive treatment with sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine is superior to
intermittent screening plus indicated treatment, although resistance is a
growing concern (Desai, 2018).

■ Amebiasis
Approximately 10 percent of the world population is infected with
Entamoeba histolytica, and most are asymptomatic (Andrade, 2018).
Amebic dysentery, however, may take a fulminant course during pregnancy.
Symptoms are fever, abdominal pain, and bloody stools. Prognosis is worse
if complicated by a hepatic abscess. Identifying E histolytica cysts or
trophozoites within a stool sample is diagnostic. Therapy is similar to that
for nonpregnant woman. For amebic colitis and invasive disease, tinidazole
may be preferred over metronidazole, (Gonzales, 2019).

MYCOTIC INFECTIONS
Disseminated fungal infection—usually pneumonitis—during pregnancy is
uncommon with coccidiomycosis, blastomycosis, cryptococcosis, or
histoplasmosis. Their identification and management are considered in
Chapter 54 (p. 965). Vulvovaginal candidiasis is described in Chapter 68 (p.
1218).

TRAVEL PRECAUTIONS DURING PREGNANCY
Pregnant travelers face general medical, obstetrical, and potentially
hazardous destination risks. Several sources provide travel information
(Freedman, 2016). The International Federation for Tropical Medicine has
comprehensive information available at www.iftm-hp.org, and the
International Society of Travel Medicine publishes information at
www.istm.org. Also, The Yellow Book from the CDC has extensive travel
information regarding pregnancy and breastfeeding.

BIOTERRORISM
The concept of bioterrorism involves the deliberate release of bacteria,
viruses, or other infectious agents to cause illness or death. These natural
agents are often altered to raise their infectivity or their resistance to medical
therapy. Health-care providers should be alert for significant increases in the
number of persons with febrile illnesses accompanied by respiratory

symptoms or with rashes not easily associated with common illnesses.
Clinicians are urged to contact their state health department or the CDC for
current information and recommendations. In their Committee Opinion, the
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019b) has addressed
disaster preparedness for obstetricians.

■ Smallpox
The variola virus causes smallpox and is considered a serious weapon. The
virus is highly transmissible and carries an overall 30-percent case fatality
rate. The last case of smallpox in the United States was reported in 1949, and
worldwide it was reported in Somalia in 1977. Nishiura (2006) has
reviewed the severe perinatal and maternal morbidity and mortality caused
by smallpox. The case fatality rate of smallpox is 61 percent if the pregnant
woman is unvaccinated. Rates of stillbirth, abortion, preterm delivery, and
neonatal demise rise significantly in pregnancies complicated by this
infection. The smallpox vaccine is made with live virus. Thus, pregnancy
should be delayed for 4 weeks after vaccination.

■ Anthrax
Bacillus anthracis is a gram-positive, spore-forming, aerobic bacterium. It
can cause three main types of clinical anthrax: inhalational, cutaneous, and
gastrointestinal (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2020b).
Anthrax meningitis may accompany any of the clinical anthrax forms and is
fatal in most cases. When inhaled, anthrax spores are deposited in the
alveoli. They are engulfed by macrophages and germinate in mediastinal
lymph nodes. The incubational period is usually less than 1 week but may be
as long as 2 months. Within 1 to 5 days of symptom onset, the second stage is
heralded by the abrupt onset of severe respiratory distress and high fevers.
Mediastinitis and hemorrhagic thoracic lymphadenitis are common. Chest
radiographs show a widened mediastinum. Case-fatality rates with
inhalational anthrax are high, even with aggressive antibiotic and supportive
therapy.

■ Other Bioterrorism Agents

Other category A bioterrorism agents include Francisella tularensis—
tularemia, Clostridium botulinum—botulism, Yersinia pestis—plague, and
Ebola, Marburg, Lassa, or Machupo viruses—hemorrhagic fever. The
guidelines for these biological agents are evolving and are detailed at the
CDC Bioterrorism website: emergency.cdc.gov/bioterrorism.

REFERENCES
Abdoli A, Dalimi A, Arbabi M, et al: Neuropsychiatric manifestations of latent toxoplasmosis on mothers
and their offspring. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 27(13):1368, 2014
Adams LL, Gungor S, Turan S, et al: When are amniotic fluid viral PCR studies indicated in prenatal
diagnosis? Prenat Diagn 32(1):88, 2012
Adhikari EH, Moreno W, Zofkie AC, et al: Pregnancy outcomes among women with and without severe
acute respiratory syndrome Coronavirus 2 infection. JAMA Netw Open 3(11):e2029256, 2020
Adhikari EH, SoRelle JA, McIntire DM, et al: Increasing severity of COVID-19 in pregnancy with
Delta (B.1.617.2) variant surge. Am J Obstet Gynecol In press
Ahn KH, Park YJ, Hong SC, et al: Congenital varicella syndrome: a systematic review. J Obstet
Gynaecol 36(5):563, 2016
Al Hammoud R, Murphy JR, Pérez N: Imported congenital rubella syndrome, United States 2017.
Emerg Infect Dis 24(4):800, 2018
Alpert SG, Fergerson J, Noël LP: Intrauterine West Nile virus: ocular and systemic findings. Am J
Ophthalmol 136(4):733, 2003
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Assessment and treatment of pregnant women
with suspected or confirmed influenza. Committee Opinion No. 753, September 2018, Reaffirmed
2019a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Hospital disaster preparedness for obstetricians
and facilities providing maternity care. Committee Opinion No. 726, December 2017, Reaffirmed
2019b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Influenza vaccination during pregnancy.
Committee Opinion No. 732, April 2018, Reaffirmed 2019c
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Management of pregnant women with
presumptive exposure to listeria monocytogenes. Committee Opinion No. 614, December 2014,
Reaffirmed 2019d
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Maternal immunization. Committee Opinion No.
741, June 2018, Reaffirmed 2019e
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Cytomegalovirus, parvovirus B9, varicella zoster,
and toxoplasmosis in pregnancy. Practice Bulletin No. 151, June 2015, Reaffirmed 2020a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Prevention of Group B streptococcal early-onset
disease in newborns. Committee Opinion No. 797, January 2020b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Use of prophylactic antibiotics in labor and
delivery. Practice Bulletin No. 199, August 2018, Reaffirmed 2020c
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Society for Maternal–Fetal Medicine: ACOG and
SMFM joint statement on WHO recommendations regarding COVID-19 vaccines and pregnant
individuals. 2021. Available at: https://www.acog.org/news/news-releases/2021/01/acog-and-smfm-

joint-statement-on-who-recommendations-regarding-covid-19-vaccines-and-pregnant-individuals.
Accessed May 11, 2021
Andrade RM, Reed SL: Amebiasis and infection with free-living amebae. In Jameson J, Fauci AS,
Kasper DL, et al (eds): Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGrawHill, 2018
Angelo KM, Reynolds J, Karp BE, et al: Antimicrobial resistance among nontyphoidal salmonella
isolated from blood in the United States, 2003–2013. J Infect Dis 214(10):1565, 2016
Assiri A, Abedi GR, Al Masri M, et al: Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus infection during
pregnancy: a report of 5 cases from Saudi Arabia. Clin Infect Dis 63(7):951, 2016
Auriti C, Piersigilli F, De Gasperis MR, et al: Congenital varicella syndrome: still a problem? Fetal Diagn
Ther 25(2):224, 2009
Baden LR, El Sahly HM, Essink B, et al: Efficacy and safety of the mRNA-1273 SARS-CoV-2
vaccine. N Engl J Med 384(5):403, 2021
Bano-Zaidi M, Aguayo-Romero M, Campos FD, et al: Typhoid fever outbreak with severe
complications in Yucatan, Mexico. Lancet Glob Health 6(10):e1062, 2018
Bates T: Poliomyelitis in pregnancy, fetus and newborn. Am J Dis Child 90: 189, 1955
Baud D, Greub G: Intracellular bacteria and adverse pregnancy outcomes. Clin Microbiol Infect
17:1312, 2011
Baxter R, Tran TN, Ray P, et al: Impact of vaccination on the epidemiology of varicella: 1995–2009.
Pediatrics 134(1):24, 2014
Beigel JH, Tomashek KM, Dodd LE, et al: Remdesivir for the treatment of Covid-19–final report. N
Engl J Med. 2020 Nov 5;383(19):1813, 2020
Bower WA, Schiffer J, Atmar RL, et al: Use of anthrax vaccine in the United States: recommendations
of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices, 2019. MMWR 68(4):1, 2019
Brasil P, Pereira JP, Moreira ME, et al: Zika virus infection in pregnant women in Rio de Janeiro. N Engl
J Med 375(24):2321, 2016
Braye K, Foureur M, de Waal K, et al: Group B streptococcal screening, intrapartum antibiotic
prophylaxis, and neonatal early-onset infection rates in an Australian local health district: 2006–2016.
PLoS ONE 14(4):e0214295, 2019
Briggs GG, Towers CV, Forinash CV: Drugs in Pregnancy and Lactation, 12th ed. Philadelphia, WoltersKluwer, 2022
Briody VA, Albright CM, Has P, et al: Use of cefazolin for group B streptococci prophylaxis in women
reporting a penicillin allergy without anaphylaxis. Obstet Gynecol 127(3):577, 2016
Burwick RM, Yawetz S, Stephenson KE, et al: Compassionate use of remdesivir in pregnant women
with severe Covid-19. Clin Infect Dis October 8, 2020 [Epub ahead of print]
Callaghan WM, Creanga AA, Jamieson DJ: Pregnancy related mortality resulting from influenza in the
United States during the 2009–2010 pandemic. Obstet Gynecol 126(3):486, 2015
Centeno-Tablante E, Medina-Rivera M, Finkelstein JL, et al: Transmission of SARS-CoV-2 through
breast milk and breastfeeding: a living systematic review. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1484(1):32, 2021
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Active bacterial core surveillance (ABCs) report emerging
infections program network group B Streptococcus, 2018. 2020a. Available at:
http://www.cdc.gov/abcs/reports-findings/survreports/gbs18.pdf. Accessed May 7, 2021
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Anthrax. 2020b. Available at:
https://www.cdc.gov/anthrax/index.html. Accessed May 7, 2021
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: COVID-19. COVID-19 testing overview. 2021a. Available
at: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/symptoms-testing/testing.html. Accessed May 7,

2021
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: COVID-19. Interim clinical guidance for management of
patients with confirmed Coronavirus disease (COVID-19). 2021b. Available at:
https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/hcp/clinical-guidance-management-patients.html.
Accessed May 7, 2021
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: COVID-19. Interim infection prevention and control
recommendations for healthcare personnel during the Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)
pandemic. 2021c. Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/hcp/infection-controlrecommendations.html. Accessed May 7, 2021
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: COVID-19. Science brief: emerging SARS-CoV-2
variants. 2021d. Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/more/science-andresearch/scientific-brief-emerging-variants.html. Accessed May 7, 2021
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. COVID-19 vaccine safety update. 2021e. Available at:
https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/acip/meetings/downloads/slides-2021-02/28-03-01/05-covidShimabukuro.pdf. Accessed May 7, 2021
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Ebola (Ebola virus disease). History of Ebola virus disease
(EVD) outbreaks. 2021f. Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/history/chronology.html.
Accessed May 7, 2021
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Lyme disease. Data and statistics. 2021g. Available at:
https://www.cdc.gov/lyme/stats/index.html. Accessed May 7, 2021
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Malaria. Malaria treatment (United States). 2020c.
Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/malaria/diagnosis_treatment/treatment.html. Accessed May 7,
2021
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Measles (rubeola). For healthcare professionals: clinical
features. 2020d. Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/measles/hcp/index.html. Accessed May 7, 2021
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Shigella–shigellosis. Questions and answers. 2020e.
Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/shigella/general-information.html. Accessed May 7, 2021
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Updated recommendations for use of VariZIG—United
States. MMWR 62(28):574, 2013
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: West Nile virus. Diagnostic testing: WNV antibody testing.
2018. Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/westnile/healthcareproviders/healthCareProvidersDiagnostic.html. Accessed May 7, 2021
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Zika virus. Testing guidance: new Zika and Dengue testing
guidance (updated November 2019). 2019. Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/zika/hcproviders/testing-guidance.html. Accessed May 7, 2021
Charlier C, Perrodeau E, Leclercq A, et al: Clinical features and prognostic factors of listeriosis: the
MONALISA national prospective cohort study. Lancet Infect Dis 17:510, 2017
Chen YH, Lin HC, Lin HC: Increased risk of adverse pregnancy outcomes among women affected by
herpangina. Am J Obstet Gynecol 203(1):49.e1, 2010
Chougnet CA: Human fetal immune cells fight back. Sci Transl Med 10(438):eaat3910, 2018
Cohen JI: Enterovirus, Parechovirus, and Reovirus Infections. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et
al (eds) Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2018
Conlin AM, Bukowinski AT, Levine JA, et al: A follow-up comparative safety analysis of pandemic
H1N1 vaccination during pregnancy and risk of infant birth defects among U.S. military mothers.
Vaccine 36(20):2855, 2018

Cortina-Borja M, Tan HK, Wallon M, et al: Prenatal treatment for serious neurological sequelae of
congenital toxoplasmosis: an observational prospective cohort study. PLoS Med 7(10):1, 2010
Craig AM, Dotters-Katz S, Kuller JA, et al: Listeriosis in pregnancy: a review. Obstet Gynecol Surv
74(6):362, 2019
Cui J, Li F, Zheng-Li S: Origin and evolution of pathogenic coronaviruses. Nat Rev Microbiol 17(3):181,
2019
Cunningham J, Jones S, Gatton ML, et al: A review of the WHO malaria rapid diagnostic test product
testing programme (2008-2018): performance, procurement and policy. Malar J 18(1):387, 2019
Dangor Z, Cutland CL, Izu A, et al: Temporal changes in invasive group B Streptococcus serotypes:
implications for vaccine development. PLoS One 11(12):e0169101, 2016
Dantes R, Mu Y, Belflower R, et al: National burden of invasive methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus
aureus infections, United States, 2011. JAMA Intern Med 173(21):1970, 2013
Daum RS, Miller LG, Immergluck L: A placebo-controlled trial of antibiotics for smaller skin abscesses.
N Engl J Med 376:2345, 2017
de Haan TR, Beersman MF, Oepkes D, et al: Parvovirus B19 infection in pregnancy: maternal and fetal
viral load measurements related to clinical parameters. Prenat Diagn 27:46, 2007
de Jong EP, Lindenburg IT, van Klink JM, et al: Intrauterine transfusion for parvovirus B19 infection:
long-term neurodevelopmental outcome. Am J Obstet Gynecol 206:204.e1, 2012
Delcourt C, Yombi JC, Vo B, et al: Salmonella enteritidis during pregnancy, a rare cause of septic
abortion: case report and review of the literature. J Obstet Gynaecol 39(4):554, 2019
Dembinski J, Eis-Hübinger AM, Maar J, et al: Long term follow up of serostatus after maternofetal
parvovirus B19 infection. Arch Dis Child 88:219, 2003
Desai M, Hill J, Fernandes S, et al: Prevention of malaria in pregnancy. Lancet Infect Dis 18(4):e119,
2018
Dhombres F, Friszer S, Maurice P, et al: Prognosis of fetal parenchymal cerebral lesions without
ventriculomegaly in congenital toxoplasmosis infection. Fetal Diagn Ther 41(1):8, 2017
Diagne N, Rogier C, Sokhna CS, et al: Increased susceptibility to malaria during the early postpartum
period. N Engl J Med 343:598, 2000
Di Mario S, Basevi V, Gagliotti C, et al: Prenatal education for congenital toxoplasmosis. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 10:CD006171, 2015
Eberhart-Phillips JE, Frederick PD, Baron RC, et al: Measles in pregnancy: a descriptive study of 58
cases. Obstet Gynecol 82(5):797, 1993
Egaña-Ugrinovic G, Goncé A, Garcia L, et al: Congenital cytomegalovirus infection among twin pairs. J
Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 29(21):3439, 2016
El Helali N, Habibi F, Azria E, et al: Point-of-care intrapartum group B Streptococcus molecular
screening: effectiveness and costs. Obstet Gynecol 133(2):276, 2019
Enders G, Miller E, Cradock-Watson J, et al: Consequences of varicella and herpes zoster in pregnancy:
prospective study of 1739 cases. Lancet 343:1548, 1994
Enders M, Weidner A, Zoellner I, et al: Fetal morbidity and mortality after acute human parvovirus B19
infection in pregnancy: prospective evaluation of 1018 cases. Prenat Diagn 24:513, 2004
Engsbro AL, Riis Jespersen HS, Goldschmidt MI, et al: Ceftriaxone-resistant Salmonella enterica
serotype Typhi in a pregnant traveller returning from Karachi, Pakistan to Denmark, 2019. Euro
Surveill 24(21):1900289, 2019
Fay K, Almendares O, Robinson-Dunn B, et al: Antenatal and intrapartum nucleic acid amplification test
use for group B Streptococcus screening—United States, 2016. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis
94(2):157, 2019

Fell DB, Savitz DA, Kramer MS, et al: Maternal influenza and birth outcomes: systematic review of
comparative studies. BJOG 124(1):48, 2017
Filisetti D, Year H, Villard O, et al: Contribution of neonatal amniotic fluid testing to diagnosis of
congenital toxoplasmosis. J Clin Microbiol 53(5):1719, 2015
Forcade NA, Wiederhold NP, Ryan L, et al: Antibacterials as adjuncts to incision and drainage for adults
with purulent methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) skin infections. Drugs 72:339,
2012
Fowler KB, Stagno S, Pass RF, et al: The outcome of congenital cytomegalovirus infection in relation to
maternal antibody status. N Engl J Med 326:663, 1992
Freedman DO, Chen LH, Kozarsky PE: Medical considerations before international travel. N Engl J
Med 375(3):247, 2016
Freeman K, Oakley L, Pollak A, et al: Association between congenital toxoplasmosis and preterm birth,
low birthweight and small for gestational age birth. BJOG 112:31, 2005
Gerna G, Lilleri D: Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) infection/reinfection: development of a protective
HCMV vaccine. New Microbiol 42(1):1, 2019
Goldshtein I, Nevo D, Steinberg DM, et al: Association between BNT162b2 vaccination and incidence
of SARS-CoV-2 infection in pregnant women. JAMA 326(8):728, 2021
Gonzales MLM, Dans LF, Sio-Aguilar J: Antiamoebic drugs for treating amoebic colitis. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 1(1):CD006085, 2019
Gorwitz RJ, Kruszon-Moran D, McAllister SK: Changes in the prevalence of nasal colonization with
Staphylococcus aureus in the United States, 2001–2004. J Infect Dis 197:1226, 2008
Grant GB, Desai S, Dumolard L, et al: Progress toward rubella and congenital rubella syndrome control
and elimination-worldwide, 2000–2018. MMWR 68(39):855, 2019
Grohskopf LA, Alyanak E, Broder KR, et al: Prevention and control of seasonal influenza with
vaccines: recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices—United States,
2020–2021 influenza season. MMWR 69(8):1, 2020
Guerra B, Lazzarotto T, Quarta S, et al: Prenatal diagnosis of symptomatic congenital cytomegalovirus
infection. Am J Obstet Gynecol 183:476, 2000
Hamilton SM, Stevens DL, Bryant AE: Pregnancy-related Group A streptococcal infections: temporal
relationship between bacterial acquisition, infection onset, clinical findings, and outcome. Clin Infect
Dis 57:870, 2013
Harjulehto T, Aro T, Hovi T, et al: Congenital malformations and oral poliovirus vaccination during
pregnancy. Lancet 1:771, 1989
Hartley GE, Edwards ES, Aui PM, et al: Rapid generation of durable B cell memory to SARS-CoV-2
spike and nucleocapsid proteins in COVID-19 and convalescence. Sci Immunol 5(54):eabf8891,
2020
He X, Lau EH, Wu P, et al: Temporal dynamics in viral shedding and transmissibility of COVID-19. Nat
Med 26(5):672, 2020
Henwood PC, Bebell LM, Roshania R, et al: Ebola virus disease and pregnancy: a retrospective cohort
study of patients managed at 5 Ebola treatment units in West Africa. Clin Infect Dis 65(2):292, 2017
Honein MA, Dawson AL, Petersen EE, et al: Birth defects among fetuses and infants of US women
with evidence of possible Zika virus infection during pregnancy. JAMA 317(1):59, 2017
Huang C, Wang Y, Li X, et al: Clinical features of patients infected with 2019 novel coronavirus in
Wuhan, China. Lancet 395(10223):497, 2020
Huang SS, Singh R, McKinnell JA, et al: Decolonization to reduce postdischarge infection risk among
MRSA carriers. N Engl J Med 380(7):638-50, 2019

Hughes BL, Clifton RG, Rouse DJ, et al: A trial of hyperimmune globulin to prevent congenital
cytomegalovirus infection. N Engl J Med 385(5):436, 2021
Hughes RG, Brocklehurst P, Steer PJ, et al: Prevention of early-onset neonatal group B streptococcal
disease: green-top guideline no. 36. BJOG 124(12):e280, 2017
Hui DS, Azhar EI, Kim YJ, et al: Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus: risk factors and
determinants of primary, household, and nosocomial transmission. Lancet Infect Dis 18(8):e217,
2018
Jena PP, Duggal SD, Kumar A, et al: Isolation of Salmonella typhi from high vaginal swab in a case of
septic abortion. Indian J Med Microbiol 35(2):311, 2017
Jespersen C, Helmuth IG, Krause TG: Varicella-zoster immunoglobulin treatment in pregnant women in
Denmark from 2005 to 2015: descriptive epidemiology and follow-up. Epidemiol Infect 144(16):3426,
2016
Jimenez-Truque N, Tedeschi S, Saye EJ, et al: Relationship between maternal and neonatal
Staphylococcus aureus colonization. Pediatrics 129:e1252, 2012
Joguet G, Mansuy JM, Matusali G, et al: Effect of acute Zika virus infection on sperm and virus
clearance in body fluids: a prospective observational study. Lancet Infect Disease 17(11):1200, 2017
Julander JG, Winger QA, Rickords LF, et al: West Nile virus infection of the placenta. Virology 347:175,
2006
Kahn DA, Baltimore D: Pregnancy induces a fetal antigen-specific maternal T regulator cell response
that contributes to tolerance. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 107(20):9299, 2010
Kakuru A, Jagannathan P, Muhindo MK, et al: Dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine for the prevention of
malaria in pregnancy. N Engl J Med 374(10):928, 2016
Kim K: Toxoplasma infections. In Jameson J, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al (eds): Harrison’s Principles of
Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2018
Kimball A, Hatfield KM, Arons M, et al: Asymptomatic and presymptomatic SARS-CoV-2 infections in
residents of a long-term care skilled nursing facility—King County, Washington, March 2020.
MMWR 69(13):377, 2020
Kimberlin DW, Sanchez PJ, Ahmed A, et al: Valganciclovir for symptomatic congenital cytomegalovirus
disease. N Engl J Med 372(10):933, 2015
Koren G: Congenital varicella syndrome in the third trimester. Lancet 366(9497):1591, 2005
Kotloff KL, Riddle MS, Platts-Mills JA, et al: Shigellosis. Lancet 391(10122):801, 2018
Kourtis AP, Read JS, Jamieson DJ: Pregnancy and infection. N Engl J Med 370(23):2211, 2014
Kuhn JH: Ebolavirus and Marburgvirus infections. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al (eds):
Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2018
Kutty PK, Kyaw MH, Dayan GH, et al: Guidance for isolation precautions for mumps in the US: a
review of the scientific basis for policy change. Clin Infect Disease 50(112):169, 2010
Kwatra G, Cunnington MC, Merrall E, et al: Prevalence of maternal colonization with group B
Streptococcus: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet Infect Dis 16(9):1076, 2016
Laibl VR, Sheffield JS, Roberts S, et al: Clinical presentation of community-acquired methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 106:461, 2005
Lambert N, Strebel P, Orenstein W: Rubella. Lancet 385:2297, 2015
Lamont RF, Sobel JD, Vaisbuch E, et al: Parvovirus B19 infection in human pregnancy. BJOG
118(2):175, 2011
Lantos PM, Rumbaugh J, Bockenstedt LK, et al: Clinical Practice Guidelines by the Infectious Diseases
Society of America (IDSA), American Academy of Neurology (AAN), and American College of

Rheumatology (ACR): 2020 Guidelines for the prevention, diagnosis and treatment of Lyme
Disease. Clin Infect Dis 72(1):e1, 2021
Lee IW, Kang L, Hsu HP, et al: Puerperal mastitis requiring hospitalization during a nine-year period.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 203:332.e1, 2010
Legardy-Williams JK, Carter RJ, Goldstein ST, et al: Pregnancy outcomes among women receiving
rVSV-ZEBOV-GP Ebola vaccine during the Sierra Leone trial to introduce a vaccine against Ebola.
Emerg Infect Dis 26(3):541, 2020
Leruez-Ville M, Stirnemann J, Yann S, et al: Feasibility of predicting the outcome of fetal infection with
cytomegalovirus at the time of prenatal diagnosis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 215(3):342.e1, 2016a
Leruez-Ville M, Ghout I, Bussières L, et al: In utero treatment of congenital cytomegalovirus infection
with valacyclovir in a multicenter, open-label, phase II study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 215(4):462.e1,
2016b
Leung J, Marin M: Update on trends in varicella mortality during the varicella vaccine era—United
States, 1990–2016. Hum Vaccin Immunother 14(10):2460, 2018
Lipitz S, Yinon Y, Malinger G, et al: Risk of cytomegalovirus-associated sequelae in relation to time of
infection and findings on prenatal imaging. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 41(5):508, 2013
Liu S, Diao L, Huang C, et al: The role of decidual immune cells on human pregnancy. J Reprod
Immunol 124:44, 2017
Ludvigsson JF, Ström P, Lundholm C, et al: Risk for congenital malformation with H1N1 influenza
vaccine: a cohort study with sibling analysis. Ann Intern Med 165(12):848, 2016
Mace KE, Arguin PM: Malaria surveillance—United States, 2014. MMWR 66(12):1, 2017
Machado Filho AC, da Costa EP, da Costa EP, et al: Effects of vivax malaria acquired before 20 weeks
of pregnancy on subsequent changes in fetal growth. Am J Trop Med Hyg 90(2):371, 2014
Maeda N, Hagiya H, Takiuchi T, et al: Persistent methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus bacteremia
owing to placental abscess. J Infect Chemother 24(12):975, 2018
Maldonado YA, Read JS, Committee on Infectious Diseases: Diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of
congenital toxoplasmosis in the United States. Pediatrics 139(2):e20163860, 2017
Mandelbrot L: Fetal varicella—diagnosis, management, and outcome. Prenat Diagn 32(6):511, 2012
Mandelbrot L, Kieffer F, Sitta R, et al: Prenatal therapy with pyrimethamine + sulfadiazine vs
spiramycin to reduce placental transmission of toxoplasmosis: a multicenter, randomized trial. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 219(4):386.e1, 2018
Marin M, Marlow M, Moore KL, et al: Recommendation of the Advisory Committee on Immunization
Practices for use of a third dose of mumps virus-containing vaccine in persons at increased risk for
mumps during an outbreak. MMWR 67(1):33-38, 2018
Marzec NS, Bessesen MT: Risk and outcomes of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA)
bacteremia among patients admitted with and without MRSA nares colonization. Am J Infection
Control 44:405, 2016
Mayor A, Bardajf A, Macete E, et al: Changing trends in P. falciparum burden, immunity, and disease
in pregnancy. N Engl J Med 373(17):1607, 2015
McClure EM, Goldenberg RL, Dent AE, et al: A systematic review of the impact of malaria prevention
in pregnancy on low birth weight and maternal anemia. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 121:103, 2013
McDonald E, Martin SW, Landry K, et al: West Nile virus and other domestic nationally notifiable
arboviral diseases—United States, 2018c. MMWR 68(31):673, 2019
McGovern N, Shin A, Low G, et al: Human fetal dendritic cells promote prenatal T-cell immune
suppression through arginase-2. Nature 546(7660):662, 2017

McLean HQ, Fiebelkorn AP, Temte JL, et al: Prevention of measles, rubella, congenital rubella
syndrome, and mumps, 2013: summary recommendations of the Advisory Committee on
Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR 62(4):1, 2013
Mead P, Petersen J, Hinckley A: Updated CDC recommendation for serologic diagnosis of Lyme
disease. MMWR 68(32):703, 2019
Meaney-Delman D, Oduyebo T, Polen KN, et al: Prolonged detection of Zika virus RNA in pregnant
women. Obstet Gynecol 128(4):724, 2016
Meijer WJ, van Noortwijk AG, Bruinse HW, et al: Influenza virus infection in pregnancy: a review. Acta
Obstet Gynecol Scand 94(8):797, 2015
Mendelson E, Aboundy Y, Smetana Z, et al: Laboratory assessment and diagnosis of congenital viral
infections: rubella, cytomegalovirus (CMV), varicella-zoster virus (VZV), herpes simplex virus
(HSV), parvovirus B19 and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). Reprod Toxicol 21:350, 2006
Mertz D, Geraci J, Winkup J, et al: Pregnancy as a risk factor for severe outcomes from influenza virus
infection: a systematic review and meta-analysis of observational studies. Vaccine 35(4):521, 2017
Miller E, Cradock-Watson JE, Pollock TM: Consequences of confirmed maternal rubella at successive
stages of pregnancy. Lancet 2:781, 1982
Miller LG, Daum RS, Creech CB, et al: Clindamycin versus trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole for
uncomplicated skin infections. N Engl J Med 372(12):1093, 2015
Milligan R, Paul M, Richardson M, et al: Vaccines for preventing typhoid fever. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev 5(5):CD001261, 2018
Mirouse A, Vignon P, Piron P, et al: Severe varicella-zoster virus pneumonia: a multicenter cohort study.
Crit Care 21(1):137, 2017
Modlin F: Perinatal echovirus and group B coxsackievirus infections. Clin Perinatol 15:233, 1988
Money D, Infectious Disease Committee Members, Yudin MH, et al: SOBC committee opinion on the
management of a pregnant woman exposed to or infected with Ebola virus disease in Canada. J
Obstet Gynaecol Can 37(2):182, 2015
Mussi-Pinhata MM, Yamamoto AY, Aragon DC, et al: Seroconversion of cytomegalovirus infection
during pregnancy and fetal infection in a highly seropositive population: “the BraCHS study.” J
Infect Dis 218(8):1200, 2018
Mylonakis E, Paliou M, Hohmann EL, et al: Listeriosis during pregnancy. Medicine 81:260, 2002
Nagel HT, de Haan TR, Vandenbussche FP, et al: Long-term outcome after fetal transfusion for
hydrops associated with parvovirus B19 infection. Obstet Gynecol 109(1):42, 2007
Nanduri SA, Petit S, Smelser C, et al: Epidemiology of invasive early-onset and late-onset group B
streptococcal disease in the United States, 2006 to 2015: multistate laboratory in population-based
surveillance. JAMA Pediatr 173(3):224, 2019
National Institutes of Health: Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) treatment guidelines. 2021.
Available at: https://www.covid19treatmentguidelines.nih.gov/. Accessed May 7, 2021
Nishiura H: Smallpox during pregnancy and maternal outcomes. Emerg Infect Dis 12:1119, 2006
Nunes MC, Cutland CL, Jones S, et al: Efficacy of maternal influenza vaccination against all-cause
lower respiratory tract infection hospitalizations in young infants: results from a randomized control
trial. Clin Infect Disease 65(7):1066, 2017
O’Leary DR, Kuhn S, Kniss KL, et al: Birth outcomes following West Nile virus infection of pregnant
women in the United States: 2003–2004. Pediatrics 117:e537, 2006
Oboho IK, Reed C, Gargiullo P, et al: Benefit of early initiation of influenza antiviral treatment to
pregnant women hospitalized with laboratory-confirmed influenza. J Infect Dis 214(4):507, 2016

Oduyebo T, Pineda D, Lamin M, et al: A pregnant patient with Ebola virus disease. Obstet Gynecol
126(6):1273, 2015
Ogbuanu IU, Zeko S, Chu SY, et al: Maternal, fetal, and neonatal outcomes associated with measles
during pregnancy: Namibia, 2009–2010. Clin Infect Dis 58(8):1086, 2014
Ornoy A, Tenenbaum A: Pregnancy outcome following infections by coxsackie, echo, measles, mumps,
hepatitis, polio and encephalitis viruses. Reprod Toxicol 21:446, 2006
Pacheco LD, Saad AF, Saade G: Early acute respiratory support for pregnant patients with coronavirus
disease 2019 (COVID-19) infection. Obstet Gynecol 136(1):42, 2020
Pan American Health Organization, World Health Organization: Salmonella serovar Typhi haplotype
H58–Epidemiological alert. Washington, D.C., 2018. Available at:
https://www3.paho.org/hq/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=14721:10-october2018-salmonella-enterica-serovar-typhi-epidemiological-alert&Itemid=42346&lang=en. Accessed
May 7, 2021
Parisot M, Jolivet A, Boukhari R, et al: Shigellosis and pregnancy in French Guiana: obstetric and
neonatal complications. Am J Trop Med Hyg 95(1):26, 2016
Patel A, Charani E, Ariyanayagam D, et al: New-onset anosmia and ageusia in adult patients diagnosed
with SARS-CoV-2 infection. Clin Microbiol Infect 26(9):1236, 2020
Patel M, Lee AD, Clemmons NS, et al: National update on measles cases and outbreaks—United
States, January 1–October 1, 2019. MMWR 68(40):893-896, 2019
Paz-Bailey G, Rosenberg ES, Doyle K, et al: Persistence of Zika virus in body fluids—preliminary
report. N Engl J Med 379(13):1234, 2017
Peppa M, Thomas SL, Minassian C, et al: Seasonal influenza vaccination during pregnancy and the risk
of major congenital malformations in live-born infants: a 2010–2016 historical cohort study. Clin
Infect Dis Jun 23:ciaa845, 2020
Picone O, Grangeot-Keros L, Senat M, et al: Cytomegalovirus non-primary infection during pregnancy.
Can serology help with diagnosis? J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 30(2):224, 2017
Pimentel JD, Meier FA, Samuel LP: Chorioamnionitis and neonatal sepsis from community-acquired
MRSA. Emerg Infect Dis 15:2069, 2009
Polack FP, Thomas SJ, Kitchin N, et al: Safety and efficacy of the BNT162b2 mRNA Covid-19
vaccine. N Engl J Med 383(27):2603, 2020
PREGACT Study Group, Pekyi D, Ampromfi AA, et al: Four artemisinin-based treatments in African
pregnant women with malaria. N Engl J Med 374(1):913, 2016
Pridjian G, Sirois PA, McRae S, et al: Prospective study of pregnancy and newborn outcomes in
mothers with West Nile illness during pregnancy. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol 106(8):716,
2016
Prince HE, Lapé-Nixon M: Role of cytomegalovirus (CMV) IgG avidity testing in diagnosing primary
CMV infection during pregnancy. Clin Vaccine Immunol 21(10):1377, 2014
Rainwater-Lovett K, Moss WJ: Measles (rubeola). In Kasper DL, Fauci AS, Hauser SL, et al (eds):
Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2018
Randis TM, Gleber SE, Hooven TA: Group B Streptococcus beta-hemolysin/cytolysin breaches
maternal-fetal barriers to cause preterm birth and IUFD in vivo. J Infect Dis 210:65, 2014
Raschetti R, Vivanti AJ, Vauloup-Fellous C, et al: Synthesis and systematic review of reported neonatal
SARS-CoV-2 infections. Nat Commun 11(1):5164, 2020
Rasmussen SA, Jamieson DJ, Honein MA, et al: Zika virus and birth defects—reviewing the evidence
for causality. N Engl J Med 374(20):1981, 2016

Rasmussen SA, Jamieson DJ, Uyeki TM: Effects of influenza on pregnant women and infants. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 207(3 Suppl):S3, 2012
Rawlinson WD, Boppana SB, Fowler KB, et al: Congenital cytomegalovirus infection in pregnancy and
the neonate: consensus recommendations for prevention, diagnosis, and therapy. Lancet Infect Dis
17(6):e177, 2017
RECOVERY Collaborative Group, Horby P, Lim WS, et al: Dexamethasone in hospitalized patients with
Covid-19. N Engl J Med 384(8):693, 2021
Reich PJ, Boyle MG, Hogan PG, et al: Emergence of community-associated methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus strains in the neonatal intensive care unit: an infection prevention and patient
safety challenge. Clin Microbiol Infect 22(7):645.e1, 2016
Revello MG, Furione M, Zavattoni M, et al: Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) DNAemia in the mother
at amniocentesis as a risk factor for iatrogenic HCMF infection of the fetus. J Infect Dis 197:593,
2008
Reynolds MR, Jones AM, Peterson EE, et al: Vital signs: update on Zika virus-associated birth defects
and evaluation of all U.S. infants with congenital Zika virus exposure—U.S. Zika pregnancy
registry, 2016. MMWR 66(13):366, 2017
Roberts DJ, Edlow AG, Romero RJ, et al: A standardized definition of placental infection by severe
acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), a consensus statement from the National
Institutes of Health/Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development (NIH/NICHD) SARS-CoV-2 placental infection workshop. Am J Obstet Gynecol
August 5, 2021 [Epub ahead of print]
Robertson SA, Zhang B, Chan H, et al: MicroRNA regulation of immune events at conception. Mol
Reprod Dev 84(9):914, 2017
Rogers BB: Parvovirus B19: twenty-five years in perspective. Pediatr Dev Pathol 2:296, 1999
Rogerson SJ, Desai M, Mayor A, et al: Burden, pathology, and costs of malaria in pregnancy: new
developments for an old problem. Lancet Infect Dis 18(4):e107, 2018
Rouse DJ, Keimig TW, Riley LE, et al: Case records of the Massachusetts General Hospital. Case 16–
2016. A 31-year-old pregnant woman with fever. N Engl J Med 374(21):2076, 2016
Saetre K, Godhwani N, Maria M, et al: Congenital babesiosis after maternal infection with Borrelia
burgdorferi and Babesia microti. J Pediatric Infect Dis Soc 7(1):e1, 2018
Saldan A, Forner G, Mengoli C, et al: Testing for cytomegalovirus in pregnancy. J Clin Microbiol
55(3):693, 2017
Sapuan S, Kortsalioudaki C, Anthony M, et al: Neonatal listeriosis in the UK 2004–2014. J Infect
74(3):236, 2017
Schwartz DA, Morotti D: Placental pathology of COVID-19 with and without fetal and neonatal
infection: trophoblast necrosis and chronic histiocytic intervillositis as risk factors for transplacental
transmission of SARS-CoV-2. Viruses 12(11):1308, 2020
Seale AC, Bianchi-Jassir F, Russell NJ, et al: Estimates of the burden of group B streptococcal disease
worldwide for pregnant women, stillbirths, and children. Clin Infect Dis 65(Suppl_2):S200, 2017
See I, Wesson P, Gualandi N, et al: Socioeconomic factors explain racial disparities in invasive
community-associated methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus disease rates. Clin Infect Dis
64(5):597, 2017
Sejvar JJ, Lopez AS, Cortese MM, et al: Acute flaccid myelitis in the United States, August–December
2014: results of nationwide surveillance. Clin Infect Dis 63(6):737, 2016
Shan C, Xie X, Shi PY: Zika virus vaccine: progress and challenges. Cell Host Microbe 24(1):12, 2018

Shane AL, Mody RK, Crump JA, et al: 2017 Infectious Diseases Society of American Clinical Practice
Guidelines for the diagnosis and management of infectious diarrhea. Clin Infect Dis 65(12):e45, 2017
Shapiro ED: Lyme disease. N Engl J Med 370(18):1724, 2014
Shimabukuro TT, Kim SY, Myers TR, et al: Preliminary findings of mRNA Covid-19 vaccine safety in
pregnant persons. N Engl J Med 384(24):2273, 2021
Siegel M, Goldberg M: Incidence of poliomyelitis in pregnancy. N Engl J Med 253:841, 1955
Sisman J, Jaleel MA, Moreno W, et al: Intrauterine transmission of SARS-COV-2 infection in a preterm
infant. Pediatr Infect Dis J 39(9):e265, 2020
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Hughes BL, Gyamfi-Bannerman C: Diagnosis and antenatal
management of congenital cytomegalovirus infection. Am J Obstet Gynecol 214(6):B5, 2016
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine: Publications & clinical guidance. 2021. Available at:
https://www.smfm.org/covidclinical. Accessed May 7, 2021
Stafford IA, Stewart RD, Sheffield JS, et al: Efficacy of maternal and neonatal chemoprophylaxis for
early-onset group B streptococcal disease. Obstet Gynecol 120(1):123, 2012
Steere AC, Strle F, Wormser GP, et al: Lyme borreliosis. Nat Rev Dis Primers 2:16090, 2016
Steere AC: Lyme borreliosis. Jameson J, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, (eds): Harrison’s Principles of Internal
Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2018
Stewart RD, Bryant SN, Sheffield JS: West Nile virus infection in pregnancy. Case report. Infect Dis
2013:351872, 2013
Stoll BJ, Hansen NI, Sanchez PJ, et al: The burden of group B streptococcal and E. coli disease
continues. Pediatrics 127(5):817, 2011
Stoll BJ, Puopolo KM, Hansen NI, et al: Early-onset neonatal sepsis 2015 to 2017, the rise of
Escherichia coli, and the need for novel prevention strategies. JAMA Pediatr Jul 1;174(7), 2020
Strebel PM, Orenstein WA: Measles. N Engl J Med 381(4):349, 2019
SYROCOT (Systematic Review on Congenital Toxoplasmosis) Study Group: Effectiveness of prenatal
treatment for congenital toxoplasmosis: a meta-analysis of individual patients’ data. Lancet 369:115,
2007
Tack DM, Ray L, Griffin PM, et al: Preliminary incidence and trends of infections with pathogens
transmitted commonly through food—Foodborne Diseases Active Surveillance Network, 10 U.S.
Sites, 2016–2019. MMWR 69(17):509, 2020
Talan DA, Mower WR, Krishnadasan A, et al: Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole versus placebo for
uncomplicated skin abscess. N Engl J Med 374(9):823, 2016
Tanamai VW, Seagle BL, Luo G: Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus intracranial epidural
abscess with osteomyelitis during pregnancy: a case report. J Reprod Med 61(5–6):295, 2016
Tanimura K, Tairaku S, Morioka I, et al: Universal screening with use of immunoglobulin G avidity for
congenital cytomegalovirus infection. Clin Infect Dis 65(10):1652, 2017
Tarning J: Treatment of malaria in pregnancy. N Engl J Med 374(1):981, 2016
Tassin M, Martinovic J, Mirand A, et al: A case of congenital echovirus 11 infection acquired early in
pregnancy. J Clin Virol 59:71, 2014
Thompson MG, Kwong JC, Regan AK, et al: Influenza vaccine effectiveness in preventing influenzaassociated hospitalizations during pregnancy: a multi-country retrospective test negative design study,
2010–2016. Clin Infect Dis 68(9):1444, 2019
Tilburgs T, Evans JH, Crespo ÂC, et al: The HLA-G cycle provides for both NK tolerance and
immunity at the maternal-fetal interface. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 112(43):13312, 2015
Tolcher MC, McKinney JR, Eppes CS, et al: Prone positioning for pregnant women with hypoxemia due
to coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). Obstet Gynecol 136(2):259, 2020

Towbin JA, Griffin LD, Martin AB, et al: Intrauterine adenoviral myocarditis presenting as nonimmune
hydrops fetalis: diagnosis by polymerase chain reaction. Pediatr Infect Dis J 13:144, 1994
Tudela CM, Stewart RD, Roberts SW, et al: Intrapartum evidence of early-onset group B
Streptococcus. Obstet Gynecol 119(3):626, 2012
Uyeki TM, Bernstein HH, Bradley JS, et al: Clinical practice guidelines by the Infectious Diseases
Society of America: 2018 update on diagnosis, treatment, chemoprophylaxis, and institutional
outbreak management of seasonal influenza. Clin Infect Dis. 68(6):e1, 2019
Vakili M, Crum-Cianflone NF: Spinal epidural abscess: a series of 101 cases. Am J Med 130(12):1458,
2017
Verity R, Okell LC, Dorigatti I, et al: Estimates of the severity of coronavirus disease 2019: a modelbased analysis. Lancet Infect Dis 20(6):669, 2020
Villard O, Breit L, Cimon B, et al: Comparison of four commercially available avidity tests for
Toxoplasma gondii-specific IgG antibodies. Clin Vaccine Immunol 20(2):197, 2013
Vornhagen J, Armistead B, Santana-Ufret V, et al: Group B streptococcus exploits vaginal epithelial
exfoliation for ascending infection. J Clin Invest 128(5):1985, 2018
Wang C, Zhang X, Bialek S, et al: Attribution of congenital cytomegalovirus infection to primary versus
non-primary maternal infection. Clin Infect Dis 52:e11, 2011
Wang R, Yan W, Du M, et al: The effect of influenza virus infection on pregnancy outcomes: a
systematic review and meta-analysis of cohort studies. Int J Infect Dis 105:567, 2021
Wendel GD Jr, Leveno KJ, Sánchez PJ, et al: Prevention of neonatal group B streptococcal disease: a
combined intrapartum and neonatal protocol. Am J Obstet Gynecol 186:618, 2002
Wessels MR: Streptococcal infections. In Kasper DL, Fauci AS, Hauser SL, et al (eds): Harrison’s
Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2018
Whitley RJ: Varicella-zoster virus infections. In Jameson J, Fausi AS, Kasper DL, et al (eds): Harrison’s
Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2018
Wilcox CR, Jones CE: Beyond passive immunity: is there priming of the fetal immune system following
vaccination of pregnancy and what are the potential clinical implications? Front Immunol 9:1548,
2018
Wong SF, Chow KM, Leung TN, et al: Pregnancy and perinatal outcomes of women with severe acute
respiratory syndrome. Am J Obstet Gynecol 191:292, 2004
Woodworth KR, Olsen EO, Neelam V, et al: Birth and infant outcomes following laboratory-confirmed
SARS-CoV-2 infection in pregnancy—SET-NET, 16 Jurisdictions, March 29-October 14, 2020.
MMWR 69(44):1635, 2020
World Health Organization: Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) weekly epidemiological update and
weekly operational update. 2021. Available at https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novelcoronavirus-2019/situation-reports. Accessed May 7, 2021.
World Health Organization: World Malaria Report 2019. 2019. Available at:
https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789241565721. Accessed May 7, 2021
Wright PF: Influenza. In Jameson J, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al (eds): Harrison’s Principles of Internal
Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2018
Wylie B, Hauptman M, Woolf AD: Insect repellants during pregnancy in the era of the Zika virus.
Obstet Gynecol 128(5):1111, 2016
Xu X, Blanton L, Elal AI, et al: Update: influenza activity in the United States during the 2018–19
season and composition of the 2019–20 influenza vaccine. MMWR 68(24):544, 2019
Yaegashi N: Pathogenesis of nonimmune hydrops fetalis caused by intrauterine B19 infection. Tohoku J
Exp Med 190:65, 2000

Yamamoto L, Targa LS, Sumita LM, et al: Association of parasite load levels in amniotic fluid with
clinical outcome in congenital toxoplasmosis. Obstet Gynecol 130(2):335, 2017
Yazigi A, De Pecoulas AE, Vauloup-Fellous C, et al: Fetal and neonatal abnormalities due to congenital
rubella syndrome: a review of literature. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 30(3):274, 2017
Young MK, Cripps AW, Nimmo GR, et al: Post-exposure passive immunization for preventing rubella
and congenital rubella syndrome. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 9:CD010586, 2015
Zambrano LD, Ellington S, Strid P, et al: Update: Characteristics of symptomatic women in reproductive
age with laboratory–confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection by pregnancy status—United States January
22-October 3, 2020. MMWR 69(44):1641, 2020
Zauche LH, Wallace B, Smoots AN, et al: Receipt of mRNA Covid-19 vaccines and risk of
spontaneous abortion. N Engl J Med September 8, 2021 [Epub ahead of print]
Zhang HJ, Patenaude V, Abenhaim HA: Maternal outcomes in pregnancies affected by varicella zoster
virus infections: population-based study on 7.7 million pregnancy admissions. J Obstet Gynaecol Res
41(1):62, 2015

CHAPTER 68

Sexually Transmitted Infections

SYPHILIS
GONORRHEA
CHLAMYDIAL INFECTION
HERPES SIMPLEX VIRUS
HUMAN PAPILLOMAVIRUS
VAGINITIS
HUMAN IMMUNODEFICIENCY VIRUS
REFERENCES
Sexually transmitted infections (STIs) include syphilis, gonorrhea,
chlamydial and trichomonal infections, and infections caused by human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV), herpes simplex virus (HSV), human
papillomavirus (HPV), and hepatitis B and C viruses. In describing their
pathogenesis, horizontal transmission is transfer to a contemporary. Instead,
vertical transmission refers to passage of an infectious agent from the
mother to her fetus through the placenta, during labor or delivery, or by
breastfeeding. Many STIs can harm the mother or fetus. Thus, these are
sought through both asymptomatic screening and symptomatic diagnostic
testing and then treated. For this, the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC) provides guidelines, which are described throughout this
chapter.

For STI screening and diagnosis, serological testing is recommended in
some cases and identifies antibodies formed by the patient against the
pathogen. In others, direct detection of an infectious agent by culture or by a
nucleic acid amplification test (NAAT) of body fluids or lesions is suitable.
NAATs include any molecular method used to detect the presence of DNA or
RNA of a pathogen. NAATs may be polymerase chain reaction (PCR) tests
(most common), transcription-mediated amplification (TMA) tests, or others.
NAATs may be qualitative (detecting presence or absence only) or
quantitative depending on the specific test. The terms NAAT and PCR may
be used interchangeably in some cases when appropriate.
If one STI is identified, patients are offered screening for all STIs,
because these infections are commonly comorbid. Treatment of most STIs is
associated with improved pregnancy outcome and prevention of perinatal
morbidity. Logically, education, screening, treatment, and prevention are
essential components of prenatal care.

SYPHILIS
This infection remains a major threat for both mother and fetus. Since 2001,
the combined rate of primary and secondary syphilis has risen almost yearly,
and among women in 2019, the rate was 4 cases per 100,000 persons
(Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2021b). For congenital
syphilis, the rate in 2019 was 48 cases per 100,000 live births. This is a
nearly 300 percent rise since 2015. Of risks, higher congenital syphilis rates
are linked to inadequate prenatal care, substance use during pregnancy,
African American race, and lack of screening and treatment (Smullin, 2021).
The CDC also includes sex work, multiple or new sexual partners,
incarceration, or homelessness (Workowski, 2021). Syphilis remains a
significant global health problem (Korenromp, 2019).

■ Pathogenesis
Syphilis is caused by the spirochetal bacterium Treponema pallidum. With
horizontal transmission, minute abrasions on the vaginal mucosa provide
entry, and cervical eversion, hyperemia, and friability raise this risk.
Spirochetes replicate and disseminate through lymphatic channels and then
hematogenously if untreated.

During vertical transmission, spirochetes readily cross the placenta. This
is the most common route, but neonatal infection may result from contact with
spirochetes from lesions at delivery or across the placental membranes. Fetal
infection develops in >50 percent of untreated early maternal syphilis cases
and in up to 10 percent of late latent disease (Fiumara, 1975; Hollier, 2001).

■ Clinical Manifestations
Maternal Syphilis and Definitions
This is staged according to clinical features and disease duration.
• Primary syphilis is diagnosed by its characteristic chancre, which
develops at the inoculation site. Typically, a solitary, painless lesion has a
raised, firm border and a red, smooth ulcerated base without significant pus
(Fig. 68-1). Nonsuppurative lymphadenopathy may develop. A chancre
usually resolves spontaneously in 2 to 8 weeks, even if untreated. Multiple
lesions, if found, are predominantly in women with HIV co-infection.

FIGURE 68-1 Primary syphilis. Chancres show a raised, firm border and smooth base and may be
singular or multiple, as seen here. Arrows point to two reciprocal or “kissing” lesions, which develop as

infection on one side spreads to the other when tissues are apposed. (Reproduced with permission from
Dr. Allison J. Tracy, MD.)

• Secondary syphilis stems from spirochete dissemination to multiple organ
systems. Manifestations develop 4 to 10 weeks after the chancre appears
and include dermatological abnormalities in up to 90 percent. A diffuse
macular rash, plantar and palmar circular lesions, patchy alopecia, and
mucous patches may be seen (Fig. 68-2). Condylomata lata are fleshcolored flat nodules found on the perineum and perianus. Mucosal lesions
teem with spirochetes and are highly infectious. Women may have
constitutional symptoms such as fever, headache, and myalgias. Hepatitis,
nephropathy, ocular changes, anterior uveitis, and periostitis are less
common findings. Manifestations of secondary syphilis resolve without
treatment after 1 to 6 months, despite incomplete clearance of organisms by
the immune system.

FIGURE 68-2 Secondary syphilis. A. Condyloma lata. (Reproduced with permission from Dr. Ralynn
Brann.) B. Target lesions on the palms. C. Diffuse maculopapular rash.

• With latent syphilis, clinical manifestations of primary or secondary
syphilis either have resolved or were never recognized, but infection
persists and is identified by serological testing. Early latent syphilis is
subclinical disease acquired within the preceding 12 months. Timing of
infection is determined by laboratory seroconversion results, clearly
described symptoms consistent with primary or secondary syphilis within
the prior 12 months, or exposure to a sexual partner in the previous 12
months with primary, secondary, or early latent syphilis. If the duration of
infection is either unclear or beyond 12 months, the term is latent syphilis,
unknown duration or late.

• Tertiary syphilis is a slowly progressive disease that affects any organ
system but is rarely seen in reproductive-aged women.
Early-stage syphilis includes primary, secondary, and early latent
syphilis. These are associated with high spirochete loads, and partner
transmission rates range from 30 to 60 percent (Garnett, 1997; Singh, 1999).
Late-stage syphilis includes latent syphilis, unknown duration or late and
tertiary syphilis. In these, transmission rates decline because of smaller
inoculum sizes.

■ Congenital Syphilis
Without screening and treatment, approximately 70 percent of infected
women will have an adverse pregnancy outcome (Hawkes, 2011). Maternal
infection can lead to congenital infection, preterm labor, low birthweight,
and fetal or neonatal death (Qin, 2014). Because of its immune incompetence
prior to midpregnancy, the fetus is less likely to manifest the immunological
inflammatory response characteristic of congenital infection before this time
(Silverstein, 1962). However, congenital infection is still presumed in all
cases, and thus treatment is imperative.
When vertical transmission occurs, severe congenital syphilis progresses
along a continuum. Hepatic abnormalities are followed by anemia,
thrombocytopenia, and then ascites and hydrops. Stillbirth remains a major
complication (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2021b). The
newborn may have jaundice with petechiae or purpuric skin lesions,
lymphadenopathy, rhinitis, pneumonia, myocarditis, nephrosis, or long-bone
involvement (Fig. 68-3).

FIGURE 68-3 Congenital syphilis. A. A desquamating skin rash known as pemphigus syphiliticus
may be seen. B. Neonatal lower-extremity long-bone radiographs show a “moth-eaten” appearance
(arrows). C. Enlarged hydropic placenta of a syphilis-infected pregnancy.

With syphilitic infection, the placenta becomes large and pale.
Microscopically, villi lose their characteristic arborization, and blood
vessels diminish or are obliterated as a result of endarteritis and stromal cell
proliferation. Sheffield and colleagues (2002c) described these villi in more
than 60 percent of placentas from women with untreated syphilis at delivery.
Examination of the umbilical cord may reveal necrotizing funisitis, and
spirochetes may be microscopically seen after immunohistochemical staining
(Adhikari, 2020).

■ Diagnosis
In their 2018 guidance, the United States Preventive Services Task Force
(USPSTF) recommends screening for syphilis in all pregnant women to
prevent congenital infection. Testing is performed at the first prenatal visit. In
populations with a high prevalence of syphilis or in persons with the risk
factors noted earlier, serological testing is repeated at 28 weeks’ gestation
and again at delivery (Workowski, 2021).
Treponema pallidum cannot be cultured from clinical specimens.
However, direct diagnosis of early-stage disease can be completed by darkfield microscopic examination, NAAT, or immunostaining of lesion exudate,
tissue, or body fluid. These methods are not widely available and are less
sensitive for blood specimens (Pillay, 2018). In practice, a diagnosis is made
with serological testing coupled with clinical findings.
Two types of serological tests are employed to diagnose and screen, and
sequential use of both reduces false-positive diagnoses. If the first is
positive, the second type is then performed. This combination identifies
infection but by itself does not determine disease stage. Instead, disease stage
is assigned based on initial serological titer levels, patient history of
potential exposures and prior treatment, and clinical-stage definitions,
described earlier.
Traditionally, the first type is nontreponemal testing, and either the
Venereal Disease Research Laboratory (VDRL) or the rapid plasma reagin
(RPR) is selected. Both tests measure patient immunoglobulin M and G (IgM
and IgG) antibodies formed against cardiolipin that is released from

damaged host cells and possibly also from treponemes. Notably, these same
antibodies can also be produced in response to other acute events that
include recent vaccination, febrile illness, and pregnancy itself. They can be
produced in response to chronic conditions such as intravenous (IV) drug
abuse, systemic lupus erythematosus, aging, leprosy, or cancer. As such,
these all serve as potential sources of false-positive results (Larsen, 1995).
Conversely, early infection may be characterized by very high levels of
antibody or antigen, which prevent immune complex formation and lead to
false-negative test results. This is the prozone effect. Alternatively,
seroconversion occurs at around the third week of infection but can take up to
6 weeks (Peeling, 2004). Thus, women with very early primary syphilis can
have initially false-negative serological test results.
With positive nontreponemal test results, findings are quantified and
expressed as titers. Because titers reflect disease activity, they rise during
early syphilis and often exceed levels of 1:32 in secondary syphilis. A
nontreponemal titer is usually measured on the day of treatment initiation.
Subsequent titer declines are considered relative to this day-of-treatment
titer.
The second type of serological test is used to confirm the presence of T
pallidum–specific antibodies. These tests include fluorescent treponemalantibody absorption tests (FTA-ABS), T pallidum passive particle
agglutination (TP-PA) tests, and various immunoassays (Association of
Public Health Laboratories, 2020). Of note, these treponemal-specific tests
generally remain positive throughout life, even after treatment. Antibodies
may be detected by treponemal assays up to a few weeks earlier than those
detected by nontreponemal tests (Levett, 2015).
Traditionally, nontreponemal tests are used first for screening, and results
are then confirmed by a treponemal-specific test. In a newer reverse
sequence strategy, screening begins first with a treponemal-specific test.
Each of the serological tests has limitations, including false-positive and negative results. Management of discordant finding with this latter sequence
is shown in Table 68-1. Notably, both approaches are suitable if a screening,
follow-up, and treatment program is in place.
TABLE 68-1. Interpretation of Serologic Tests Using Reverse Sequence
Syphilis Screening

In contrast to these laboratory tests, rapid “point-of-care” (POC) syphilis
screening of blood or serum samples is available. Most tests are treponemalspecific, and positive POC results can then be confirmed by laboratorybased tests. In hard-to-reach populations, immediate treatment of women
with positive POC results is associated with lower rates of stillbirth,
neonatal death, and congenital syphilis (Brandenburger, 2021). This practice,
however, risks overtreating previously cured women who still have residual
persistent treponemal antibodies. This limitation may be overcome by newer
POC dual tests, which simultaneously assess nontreponemal and treponemal
antibodies (Satyaputra, 2021).
Following maternal diagnosis, sonographic evaluation is performed for
fetuses >20 weeks’ gestation to search for signs of congenital syphilis. Rac
and associates (2014) noted that 31 percent of infected women diagnosed at
≥18 weeks’ gestation had fetuses with abnormal sonographic findings.
Hepatomegaly, placental thickening, hydramnios, ascites, hydrops fetalis, and
elevated middle cerebral artery Doppler velocimetry measurements suggest
fetal infection. Before 20 weeks, treatment is highly successful, and abnormal
sonographic findings are rare (Nathan, 1997).
With maternal infection and with a fetus of viable age that shows
sonographic findings, antepartum fetal heart rate (FHR) monitoring prior to
antibiotic treatment is recommended. If the FHR tracing is reassuring,
antibiotic therapy can proceed. In contrast, spontaneous late decelerations or

a nonreactive FHR tracing likely reflects an extremely ill fetus that may
poorly tolerate a Jarisch-Herxheimer reaction, described subsequently. In
this extreme case, consultation with a neonatologist regarding a plan of
delaying treatment, pursuing delivery, and then treating in the nursery is a
consideration (Wendel, 2002).
After antibiotic treatment, further sonographic surveillance or antenatal
testing of fetal well-being is determined in consultation with specialists.
Following adequate treatment, sonographic signs of congenital infection
resolve over weeks to months, and delivery is reserved for usual obstetrical
indications (Rac, 2014). In fetuses without initial signs of congenital
syphilis, subsequent sonographic evaluations are reserved for other fetal
indications.

■ Treatment
Syphilis therapy during pregnancy aims to eradicate maternal infection and to
prevent or treat congenital syphilis. Parenteral penicillin G benzathine
remains the preferred treatment for all stages of syphilis during pregnancy
(Table 68-2). A second dose of benzathine penicillin G may be given 1 week
after the initial dose in patients with early-stage syphilis or sonographic
signs of congenital infection. This aims to reduce the risk of fetal treatment
failure and is our current practice at Parkland Hospital. High maternal
serological titers, preterm delivery, and delivery shortly after antepartum
therapy are all risks for failure of maternal treatment to prevent neonatal
infection (Sheffield, 2002b). Women should abstain from sexual contact for 7
days, until all skin/mucous membrane lesions heal, and until sexual partners
are treated.
TABLE 68-2. Recommended Treatment for Pregnant Women with Syphilis

There are no proven alternatives to penicillin therapy during pregnancy.
Some data support a 1-g daily IV dose of ceftriaxone for 10 days (Cao, 2017;
Liang, 2016). Tetracyclines are effective but not recommended during
pregnancy, because of the risk for offspring teeth discoloration.
Following treatment of syphilis before 24 weeks’ gestation,
nontreponemal tests are repeated in either the third trimester or no sooner
than 8 weeks after treatment unless reinfection is suspected (Workowski,
2021). Following treatment after 24 weeks, nontreponemal titers may be
repeated in the third trimester in some cases and are repeated at delivery.
Adequate serological response to treatment is suggested by a fourfold
decline in nontreponemal titer and resolution of any clinical symptoms. A
fourfold decline in titer is more likely to occur following treatment of earlystage syphilis, which typically has high nontreponemal titers. Absence of a
fourfold decline does not itself determine treatment failure, particularly when
the initial nontreponemal titer is <1:8. Titers are best interpreted in
conjunction with clinical history and by those experienced with treatment of
syphilis in pregnancy. Because VDRL titers do not correspond directly to
RPR titers, consistent use of the same test for surveillance is recommended.
Some successfully treated patients may still exhibit persistently lowlevel positive titers, which are referred to as “serofast.” This state is more
likely in older individuals, those with lower initial nontreponemal antibody
titers, and those with later stages of syphilis (Seña, 2015).
In some instances, a woman may present without symptoms but describes
recent sexual contact with a person who has been diagnosed with syphilis.
She should be evaluated clinically and serologically. If their sexual contact
occurred within the preceding 90 days, the gravida is treated presumptively
for early syphilis, even if serological test results are negative. This accounts
for early infection but before seroconversion. If contact was more than 90
days ago, treatment is based on serological results.

Penicillin Reactions
Women with a history of penicillin allergy should have either an oral
stepwise penicillin-dose challenge or skin testing performed to confirm the
risk of IgE-mediated anaphylaxis. If confirmed, penicillin desensitization is
recommended and followed by benzathine penicillin G treatment (Table 683) (Wendel, 1985).

TABLE 68-3. Penicillin Allergy—Oral Desensitization Protocol for
Patients with a Positive Skin Test

Distinct from allergy, the Jarisch-Herxheimer reaction can develop
following penicillin treatment in most women with primary syphilis and
approximately half with secondary infection. Uterine contractions, mild
maternal temperature elevation, decreased fetal movement, and FHR

decelerations are findings. Treatment is supportive with antipyretics as
needed, hydration, and oxygen supplementation (Klein, 1990). In a study of
50 gravidas who received benzathine penicillin G for syphilis, the incidence
of Jarisch-Herxheimer reactions was 40 percent (Myles, 1998). Of the 31
women monitored electronically, 42 percent developed regular uterine
contractions, and 39 percent developed variable decelerations. All
contractions resolved within 24 hours. Thus, for fetuses of viable gestational
age, consideration is given to administering the first dose of antibiotic in
labor and delivery to permit continuous fetal monitoring for at least 24 hours
when the fetus has sonographic signs of syphilis (Adhikari, 2020; Wendel,
2002). With or without sonographic signs of fetal infection, patients are
counseled on symptoms of the Jarisch-Herxheimer reaction prior to syphilis
treatment and are encouraged to seek evaluation if they develop.

GONORRHEA
■ Infection Rates and Effects
Of reportable bacterial STIs, those caused by Neisseria gonorrhoeae are the
second most common. The incidence in women in the United States has
continued to rise since 2015, and the highest rates are in those aged 15 to 24
years (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2021b). Among women
giving birth in 2018, the rate was 310 cases per 100,000 live births
(Gregory, 2020). In most gravidas, infection is limited to the cervix, urethra,
and periurethral and greater vestibular (Bartholin) glands. Acute salpingitis
is rare in pregnancy. However, pregnant women account for a
disproportionate number of disseminated gonococcal infections (Bleich,
2012).
Gonococcal infection can have adverse effects in any trimester. In
affected women, associated rates of preterm delivery, preterm prelabor
ruptured membranes (PPROM), low birthweight, and perinatal mortality are
slightly higher than in those without infection (Vallely, 2021). Miscarriage
rates are not increased. However, untreated gonococcal cervicitis is
associated with septic abortion and with uterine infection after surgical
abortion (Burkman, 1976) (Chap. 11, p. 203).
Vertical transmission of gonorrhea mainly occurs through fetal contact
with cervical infection during birth. The predominant sequela is gonococcal

ophthalmia neonatorum, which can lead to corneal scarring, ocular
perforation, and blindness. Transmission rates are high and approximate 40
percent (Laga, 1986). Outlined in Chapter 32 (p. 593), ocular prophylaxis is
provided to all newborns (U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, 2019a).

■ Screening and Treatment
Pregnant women who live in high-prevalence areas or who are at risk for
gonorrhea should undergo first-trimester screening. Risk factors include age
≤25 years, prior or current STI, sex work, a new or nonmonogamous partner,
a partner with an STI, multiple sexual partners, and inconsistent condom use
if not monogamous (Workowski, 2021). Gonococcal infection is a marker for
concomitant chlamydial infection. Thus, if chlamydial testing is unavailable,
presumptive chlamydial therapy is given to women treated for gonorrhea.
Screening for gonorrhea in women is by culture or NAAT. NAATs have
replaced culture in most laboratories, and kits are available for specific
collection from the vagina, endocervix, or urine. Of these, vaginal or
cervical samples are preferred, as urine collection may detect up to 10
percent fewer infections (Papp, 2014). If used, the initial urine stream, not
midstream, is collected. In women with vaginal symptoms and who practice
anal intercourse, rectal screening can be considered. One study of
nonpregnant women at urban STI clinics found that approximately 20 percent
of rectal chlamydia and gonorrhea infections would be missed if only
cervical, vaginal, or urine samples were obtained (Llata, 2018). NAATs are
also suitable for diagnosis of rectal or pharyngeal disease (Food and Drug
Administration, 2019).
An ultrarapid NAAT for gonorrhea and chlamydia has been approved by
the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for point-of-care use. It performs
similarly to laboratory-based testing, and results are available in
approximately 30 minutes (Food and Drug Administration, 2021; Van Der
Pol, 2020). This test has not been rigorously studied in pregnant women but
may reduce barriers to prompt treatment in patients with limited access to
care.
Gonorrhea treatment continues to evolve due to the ability of N
gonorrhoeae to develop antimicrobial resistance (Table 68-4) (St Cyr,
2020). In gravidas, if chlamydia has not been excluded, a 1-g oral dose of

azithromycin is added. Patients abstain from intercourse for 7 days after they
and their sexual partner(s) have completed treatment.
TABLE 68-4. Treatment of Gonorrhea in Pregnancya,b

For those with pharyngeal infection, non-ceftriaxone-based regimens
have higher failure rates. Thus, those with contraindications to ceftriaxone
merit infectious disease specialist consultation. With pharyngeal infection, a
test-of-cure 1 to 2 weeks after treatment is recommend. This is unnecessary
after treatment of urogenital or rectal gonorrhea.
To exclude reinfection, repeat testing is recommended 3 months after
treatment of any gonorrhea infection. For any woman treated for gonorrhea in
the first trimester and for any uninfected woman who is at high risk for
gonococcal infection, testing is repeated in the third trimester (American
Academy of Pediatrics, 2017; Workowski, 2021).
Sexual contacts are treated. Expedited therapy, discussed with
chlamydial infection, is a less-desirable option due to the now-preferred
injectable regimen. If elected, a single, oral, 800-mg dose of cefixime is
provided. If chlamydia is not excluded, oral doxycycline, 100 mg twice daily
for 7 days, is added.

■ Disseminated Gonococcal Infections
Gonococcal bacteremia may cause disseminated infections that manifest as
petechial or pustular skin lesions, arthralgias, or septic arthritis.

Antimicrobial susceptibility testing is requested for isolates cultured from
infection sites. For treatment, ceftriaxone, 1 g IV or intramuscularly, is given
every 24 hours and continued for 24 to 48 hours after clinical improvement
(Workowski, 2021). An oral agent that is selected based on susceptibility
testing is then provided to complete 1 week of therapy. Prompt recognition
and antimicrobial treatment will usually yield favorable outcomes in
pregnancy (Bleich, 2012). Meningitis and endocarditis are rare in pregnancy,
but they may be fatal. For gonococcal endocarditis, ceftriaxone 1 to 2 g IV
every 12 hours should be continued for at least 4 weeks, and for meningitis,
10 to 14 days. In all these cases, a single, 1-g, oral dose of azithromycin is
provided to treat potential chlamydial co-infection (Workowski, 2021).

CHLAMYDIAL INFECTION
■ Infection Rates and Effects
Chlamydia trachomatis is an obligate intracellular bacterium that attaches to
columnar or transitional-cell epithelium to cause urogenital infection. It is the
most common reportable STI in the United States. The chlamydial infection
rate was 694 cases per 100,000 women in 2019, and the highest rate is in
those aged 15 to 24 years (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
2021b). Among women giving birth in 2018, the rate was 1844 cases per
100,000 live births (Gregory, 2020). Most infected pregnant women are
asymptomatic, but a third have urethral syndrome, urethritis, or greater
vestibular (Bartholin) gland infection (Peipert, 2003). Mucopurulent
cervicitis may result from chlamydial or gonococcal infection or both.
Uncommon manifestations during pregnancy are endometritis, salpingitis,
reactive arthritis, and Reiter syndrome.
The role of chlamydial infection in pregnancy complications remains
controversial. It is disputed whether untreated cervical infection raises rates
of preterm delivery, PPROM, low birthweight, or perinatal mortality
(Andrews, 2000; Reekie, 2018; Silva, 2011). Chlamydial infection is not
associated with a greater risk of chorioamnionitis or with peripartum pelvic
infection (Berman, 1987; Gibbs, 1987). However, delayed postpartum
uterine infection has been described by Hoyme and associates (1986). The
syndrome, which develops 2 to 3 weeks postpartum, is distinct from early

postpartum metritis. It is characterized by vaginal bleeding or discharge,
low-grade fever, and uterine tenderness.
Infection at delivery poses a higher risk to the newborn than to the
mother. Vertical transmission leads to infection in 8 to 44 percent of neonates
delivered vaginally from affected women (Rosenman, 2003). Of neonatal
infections, conjunctivitis is the most common (Chap. 32, p. 593). Perinatal
transmission to newborns can also cause pneumonia.

■ Screening and Treatment
Currently, the USPSTF and the American Academy of Pediatrics and
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2017) recommend
chlamydia screening for all women at the first prenatal visit (LeFevre, 2014).
The College further suggests testing in the third trimester for those treated in
the first trimester, all women aged ≤25 years, and those aged >25 years with
behavioral factors, which mirror those for gonorrhea. Dionne-Odom and
associates (2020) reported a reinfection rate of 10 percent in pregnant
women successfully treated before delivery.
Diagnosis is made predominantly by NAAT rather than culture. Of
samples for NAAT, vaginal or cervical samples are preferred, because urine
collection may detect up to 10 percent fewer infections (Papp, 2014;
Wiesenfeld, 2017). However, Roberts and associates (2011) evaluated
NAAT of urine specimens compared with cervical secretions in more than
2000 pregnant women and found them to be equivalent. As with gonorrhea,
the first portion of the urine stream is collected.
Currently recommended treatment regimens for chlamydial infections are
shown in Table 68-5. Azithromycin is first-line treatment in pregnancy. The
fluoroquinolones and doxycycline are usually avoided in pregnancy, and
erythromycin estolate is contraindicated because of drug-related
hepatotoxicity.
TABLE 68-5. Oral Treatment of Chlamydia trachomatis Infection in
Pregnancya

A test of cure is repeated 4 weeks after therapy completion in pregnancy.
Earlier NAAT may resample dead but treated organisms (Lazenby, 2017). A
positive result can reflect a reinfection, a false-positive case from dead
organisms, or treatment failure or noncompliance. Fortunately, drug
resistance is rare for C trachomatis (Deguchi, 2018). Our practice is to retreat women with positive test-of-cure results. Additionally, repeat screening
3 months after treatment is recommended to exclude reinfection (Workowski,
2021).

■ Expedited Partner Therapy
To prevent STI transmission, guidelines for expedited partner therapy (EPT)
have been created by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(2006a) and are endorsed by the American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2020a). With EPT, treatment is provided to persons who
were sexual contacts of the patient within the prior 60 days. Partner therapy
may be a prescription slip for the partner, direct medication administration to
the partner and patient simultaneously, or a medication packet delivered to
the partner(s) by the patient. Ideally, EPT does not replace traditional partner
referral to allow their medical assessment, counseling, and screening for
other STIs.
EPT is acceptable for treatment of sexual contacts with chlamydial
infection. Because of new guidelines that recommend injectable ceftriaxone
alone, EPT for gonorrhea is less desirable unless the partner(s) will be
unable or unwilling to seek treatment (Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, 2021a). Fewer data are available to assess this strategy for
trichomoniasis (Kissinger, 2006; Schwebke, 2010). EPT is not recommended
for syphilis.

EPT is legally permissible or potentially allowable in all states. Links to
specific state laws are found at: www.cdc.gov/std/ept/legal/default.htm.
Notably, the risk of litigation following an adverse outcome may be elevated
when a practice has uncertain legal status or is outside formally accepted
community practice standards (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
2006a) Medication-related adverse reactions among treated partners is rare
(Jamison, 2019).
The goal of EPT in pregnancy is to lower reinfection rates and adverse
maternal and neonatal effects. A recent study at Parkland Hospital showed
that EPT did not lower the chlamydia reinfection rate prior to delivery
(Zofkie, 2021). Partner compliance, cost, and education may be factors
(McCool-Myers, 2020; Slutsker, 2020).

HERPES SIMPLEX VIRUS
■ Adult Disease
Orogenital HSV infection manifests as shallow ulcers on affected mucosa.
Infection stems from either of two different HSV viruses that are
distinguished based on immunological differences. Yet, the two viruses have
significant DNA homology, and thus prior infection with one type attenuates a
primary infection with the other. Type 2 HSV is recovered almost
exclusively from the genital tract and is usually transmitted sexually. Type 1
is responsible for most nongenital infections and typically is acquired in
childhood. However, more than half of the new cases of genital herpes in
adolescents and young adults are now caused by HSV-1 infection (Bernstein,
2013). This rise in the prevalence of HSV-1 genital disease may stem from
an increase in rates of oral-genital sexual practices. Another explanation is
that HSV-1 acquisition has declined in childhood as a result of improved
living conditions and hygiene (Chemaitelly, 2019). Without prior exposure,
young people without HSV-1 antibodies are rendered susceptible to genital
acquisition of HSV-1 or -2.
Genital herpes simplex virus affects an estimated 19 million adolescents
and adults in the United States (Spicknall, 2021). In pregnant women, the
HSV-2 seroprevalence was 21 percent, and for HSV-1, it was 59 percent
from 2007 to 2014. However, from 1999 to 2014, pregnant women with
fewer sex partners were increasingly seronegative for both virus types

(Patton, 2018). Seronegative pregnant women have a 4 to 5 percent risk to
acquire either serotype during pregnancy (Brown, 1997; Kulhanjian, 1992).
For those who are already HSV-1 seropositive, acquisition risk for HSV-2
approximates 2 percent (Brown, 1997).
Once transmitted by contact, viruses replicate at the entry site. Following
mucocutaneous infection, the virus moves retrograde along sensory nerves. It
remains latent in cranial nerves or dorsal spinal ganglia, but recurrences are
common. HSV infections may be categorized into three groups.
First-episode primary infection describes the case in which HSV-1 or 2
is isolated from a lesion in the absence of HSV-1 or -2 serological
antibodies. The typical incubation period of 6 to 8 days may be followed by
a papular eruption with itching or tingling that then becomes painful and
vesicular. Multiple vulvar and perineal lesions may or may not coalesce but
then ulcerate (Fig. 68-4). Associated inguinal adenopathy can be severe.
Many women do not present with typical lesions, and abraded or knife-cut
lesions instead may be found. Cervical involvement is common, although it
may be unapparent clinically. Transient systemic influenza-like symptoms or
isolated high fevers with or without painful lesions are frequent and
attributed to viremia. Uncommonly, women require hospitalization for febrile
syndrome or for pain control of widespread ulceration. Hepatitis,
encephalitis, or pneumonia infrequently develop, and disseminated disease is
rare. After 2 to 4 weeks, all signs and symptoms of infection disappear. In
contrast to these classic symptoms, the percentage of asymptomatic primary
HSV-2 genital infections may reach 90 percent (Fanfair, 2013).

FIGURE 68-4 First-episode primary genital herpes simplex virus infection. As shown by the arrows,
lesions may be vesicular, may be crusted, or may be shallow ulcers.

First-episode nonprimary infection is diagnosed when one HSV type is
isolated from a lesion in a woman who has only antibodies to the other HSV
serotype. For example, prior childhood HSV-1 infection likely provides
cross-reacting antibodies to blunt the effects of new HSV-2 acquisition.
Compared with primary infection, nonprimary infections produce fewer
systemic manifestations or lesions, less pain, and briefer duration of lesions
and viral shedding.
Recurrent disease is characterized by isolation of HSV-1 or -2 from the
genital tract in women who carry antibodies to the same serotype. During the
latency period, in which viral particles reside in nerve ganglia, reactivation
is common and mediated through poorly understood stimuli. In general,
lesions are fewer in number, are less tender, and shed virus for a shorter
period than those of primary infection. Typically, they recur at the same sites.
Recurrences are most frequent in the first year after initial infection, and
rates slowly decline subsequently (Benedetti, 1999). Gravidas with a known
prior history of genital HSV often experience recurrences (Sheffield, 2006).

Asymptomatic viral shedding is defined by the absence of clinical
findings. Most infected women shed virus intermittently over time, and most
HSV transmission to a partner occurs during these periods of asymptomatic
viral shedding.

■ Vertical Transmission
HSV poses a higher risk to the newborn than to the mother. Thus, strategies
aim to curb rates of vertical transmission, which may occur by three routes:
(1) peripartum in 85 percent, (2) postnatal in 10 percent, or (3) intrauterine
in 5 percent (James, 2015). Evidence does not suggest an obvious link
between HSV infection and miscarriage (Zhou, 2015).
Peripartum transmission is by far the more frequent route of infection,
and the fetus is exposed to virus shed from the lower genital tract. HSV-1 or
-2 invades the uterus following membrane rupture or is transmitted by contact
at delivery. The newborn is mainly infected, but rare cases of maternal
endometritis have been described (Hollier, 1997; McGill, 2012). Of neonatal
manifestations, infection may localize to the skin, eye, or mouth—SEM
disease—in approximately 40 percent of cases. Instead, central nervous
system (CNS) disease with encephalitis is seen in 30 percent. Last,
disseminated disease that involves multiple major organs is found in 32
percent. Localized infection is usually associated with a good outcome.
Conversely, even with acyclovir treatment, disseminated infection has a
mortality rate of nearly 30 percent (Corey, 2009; Kimberlin, 2011). Of
disseminated or cerebral infection survivors, serious developmental and
CNS morbidity is seen in 20 to 50 percent.
In the United States, the neonatal infection rate ranges from 1 to 5 cases
in 10,000 births (Donda, 2019; Mahant, 2019). Most infected newborns are
born to mothers with no reported history of HSV infection (Gardella, 2010).
The risk of neonatal infection correlates with the presence of HSV in the
genital tract, HSV type, invasive obstetrical procedures, and stage of
maternal infection (Brown, 2005, 2007). Neonates born to women who
acquire genital HSV near the time of delivery have a 30- to 50-percent risk
of infection. This is attributed to higher viral loads and the lack of
transplacental protective antibodies (Brown, 1997, 2000). With recurrent
HSV, the neonatal infection rate is <1 percent (Pasternak, 2010; Prober,
1987).

Postpartum transmission is uncommon and passed to the newborn by
contact with an infected mother, family member, or health-care worker. The
clinical presentation mirrors that with peripartum transmission.
In-utero transmission of HSV-1 or HSV-2 is rare and is part of the
TORCH (toxoplasmosis, other, rubella, cytomegalovirus, herpes virus) group
of infections. Intrauterine HSV infection classically leads to disease
involving the skin (blisters, scarring), the CNS (hydranencephaly,
microcephaly, intracranial calcification), or the eyes (chorioretinitis,
microphthalmia). Bone and viscera can be involved (Marquez, 2011).
Congenital infection with HSV or another TORCH infection is considered in
a fetus with early or severe growth restriction, microcephaly, intracranial
anomalies or calcifications, or hepatomegaly. If sonographic findings are
identified, amniocentesis is recommended, and maternal HSV serological
testing is done. Analysis of amnionic fluid for HSV-1 and HSV-2 serotypes is
by NAAT (PCR) and culture (Curtin, 2013).

■ Diagnosis
The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020d) and
USPSTF (2016) recommend against routine serological HSV screening in
asymptomatic gravidas. However, for a woman with a reported history of
genital or oral lesions, a serological HSV diagnosis is sought. For women
with either suspicious ulcers or sonographic findings suggestive of
congenital infection, direct virological testing, described next, is performed
along with serological testing for HSV. Testing for syphilis and other STIs is
also considered for women with genital ulcers.
Direct virological tests, which are either PCR or culture, are performed
on a specimen from a mucocutaneous lesion or from amniocentesis. For
mucocutaneous lesions, PCR assays are more sensitive, the results generally
are available in 1 to 2 days, and specimen handling is easier. The sensitivity
of culture for detecting HSV is relatively low as vesicular lesions begin to
ulcerate and then crust. Also, results sometimes are not available for 7 to 14
days (Strick, 2006). Regardless of the test performed, HSV viral types
should be differentiated (LeGoff, 2014). Importantly, a negative culture or
PCR result does not exclude infection. In contrast, false-positive results are
rare. For amnionic fluid assessment, both culture and PCR are recommended
(Curtin, 2013).

Serological assays detect antibodies produced against the specific HSV
glycoproteins, G1 and G2. These proteins evoke type-specific antibody
responses to HSV-1 and HSV-2 infection, respectively, and they reliably
differentiate the two serotypes. Antibody detection confirms clinical
infection and may reflect a carrier state in an asymptomatic patient. IgG
antibodies develop 1 to 2 weeks after a primary infection and then persist.
Serological testing may be falsely negative in the case of early infection but
may also establish a nonprimary infection. For this reason, direct detection of
the virus in a lesion with concomitant type-specific serological testing is
helpful for clinical interpretation and counseling. Sensitivity and specificity
of glycoprotein-based IgG tests approach 90 to 100 percent (Wald, 2002).
IgM antibody detection is not a useful test, and antibodies may be detected
with recurrent episodes.

■ Management
In nonpregnant patients, antiviral therapy with acyclovir, valacyclovir, or
famciclovir is used to treat first-episode orogenital herpes. Oral or
parenteral preparations attenuate clinical infection and viral shedding
duration. Chronic suppressive therapy also is an option to limit recurrences
and to reduce heterosexual transmission (Corey, 2004).
In pregnant women, acyclovir and valacyclovir are safe (Briggs, 2022;
Stone, 2004). Data are limited regarding fetal effects with famciclovir.
For a primary outbreak during pregnancy, women may be given antiviral
therapy to attenuate and decrease the duration of symptoms and viral
shedding (Table 68-6). Women with HIV co-infection may require a longer
duration of treatment. Those with severe or disseminated HSV are given IV
acyclovir, 5 to 10 mg/kg every 8 hours for 2 to 7 days until clinically
improved. This is followed by oral antiviral drugs to complete at least 10
days of total therapy (Workowski, 2021). For intense discomfort, oral
analgesics and topical lidocaine ointment may provide some relief.
Comorbid urinary retention is rare but can be treated briefly with an
indwelling bladder catheter.
TABLE 68-6. Oral Antiviral Medications for Herpesvirus Infection in
Pregnancya

For recurrent HSV infections during pregnancy, antiviral treatment is
provided mainly for symptom relief (see Table 68-6). Although uncommon,
acyclovir resistance has been reported, predominantly in
immunocompromised patients (Piret, 2016).
Of precautions during pregnancy, amniocentesis, percutaneous cord
blood sampling, or transabdominal chorionic villus sampling may be
performed even with active genital lesions. Transcervical procedures may
best be delayed until lesions have resolved (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020d).

■ Peripartum Shedding Prophylaxis
To diminish vertical transmission risks, cesarean delivery is indicated for
women with active genital lesions or prodromal symptoms. Several studies
have shown that acyclovir or valacyclovir suppression initiated at 36 weeks’
gestation for gravidas with recurrences during pregnancy lowers the number
of HSV outbreaks at term. The goal is to decrease the need for cesarean
delivery (Hollier, 2008). This suppressive therapy will also decrease viral
shedding (Scott, 2002; Sheffield, 2006; Watts, 2003). One systematic review
evaluated acyclovir prophylaxis given from 36 weeks to delivery to women

with HSV recurrence during pregnancy. Sheffield and colleagues (2003)
found that suppressive therapy was associated with significantly lower rates
of clinical HSV recurrence, cesarean delivery for HSV recurrences, total
HSV detection, and asymptomatic shedding. Subsequent studies using
valacyclovir suppression showed similar results (Andrews, 2006; Sheffield,
2006). Because of these studies, the American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2020d) recommends viral suppressive therapy to begin at
≥36 weeks’ gestation for women with a clinical history of genital herpes.
Suppression continues until delivery. Notably, despite maternal antiviral
suppression, several cases of atypical neonatal herpes infection have been
reported (Pinninti, 2012).
On presentation for delivery, a woman with a history of HSV should be
questioned regarding current prodromal symptoms. A careful examination of
the vulva, vagina, and cervix is performed for all, and women without genital
lesions may proceed with labor and delivery. Usual obstetrical management,
including invasive fetal monitoring, is supported in the absence of active
lesions or prodromal symptoms (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2020d).
Suspicious lesions should be swabbed for culture or NAAT evaluation.
Cesarean delivery is indicated for women with suspicious genital lesions or
prodromal symptoms. Moreover, for women with a clinical recurrence at
delivery, there is no absolute duration of membrane rupture beyond which the
fetus would not benefit from cesarean delivery (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020e).
Cesarean delivery is not recommended for women with a history of HSV
infection but no active genital disease at the time of delivery. Moreover, an
active lesion in a nongenital area can be covered by an occlusive dressing,
and vaginal delivery is allowed.
With PPROM, no evidence suggests that external lesions cause ascending
fetal infection. However, antiviral treatment during expectant care is
recommended. Major and associates (2003) described expectant management
in 29 such women at gestational ages <31 weeks. No cases of neonatal HSV
developed, and the maximum infection risk was calculated to be 10 percent.
Women with active HSV lesions may breastfeed if the breast skin has no
lesions. Strict hand washing is essential. Valacyclovir and acyclovir may be
used for symptomatic maternal lesions during breastfeeding, as drug
concentrations in breast milk are low (Sheffield, 2002a).

HUMAN PAPILLOMAVIRUS
■ Maternal Infection and Prevention
This is a common STI, and numerous serotypes infect the lower genital tract.
In the United States from 2005 to 2006, the overall HPV prevalence was 40
percent in females aged 14 to 59 years (Liu, 2016). Prevalence is highest in
younger women, and some of this seroprevalence now reflects HPV
vaccination in this age group (Brouwer, 2015). Reproductive-aged women
often become infected within a few years of sexual activity onset, and most
infections are asymptomatic and transient. High-risk types are those with the
most oncogenic potential. Of these, HPV types 16 and 18 are often associated
with lower reproductive tract dysplasia (Chap. 66, p. 1165). Mucocutaneous
genital warts termed condyloma acuminata are usually caused by types 6
and 11.
The clear link between HPV infection and cervical neoplasia led to
development of vaccines that reduce cervical cancer risk (Lei, 2020).
Although three vaccines are licensed, only one vaccine is currently available
in the United States. Gardasil 9 is a nonavalent HPV vaccine against
serotypes 6, 11, 16, 18, 31, 35, 45, 52, and 58. This vaccine is not
recommended for gravidas. However, inadvertent exposures do occur, and
no adverse pregnancy outcomes are associated (Kharbanda, 2021; Moreira,
2016; Scheller, 2017). If a woman is found to be pregnant after starting the
vaccination series, remaining doses are delayed and given after delivery.
Women who are breastfeeding may be vaccinated. Gardasil is licensed for
females aged 9 to 45 years, and the target age is 11 to 12 years. It is
recommended for those aged 9 to 26 years. It is suitable for those aged 27 to
45 years, after shared decision-making regarding age-related benefits and
risks (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020b). The
three-dose series is given on a schedule of 0, 2, and 6 months for those aged
older than 15 (Table 10-7, p. 189). A two-dose regimen is used for younger
individuals.

■ Condyloma Acuminata Treatment
Genital warts frequently grow in number and size with pregnancy. They
commonly undergo apoptosis and resolution postpartum. Rarely, lesions may

fill the vagina or cover the perineum and make vaginal delivery or
episiotomy difficult. Genital wart eradication during pregnancy is usually
unnecessary unless they are symptomatic. Therapy is directed toward
debulking symptomatic warts yet minimizing treatment toxicity to the mother
and fetus.
Trichloroacetic or bichloracetic acid in an 80- to 90-percent solution
applied topically weekly is an effective regimen for external warts. Some
prefer cryotherapy, laser ablation, or surgical excision. Agents that have
limited safety data and thus are not recommended in pregnancy include
podophyllin resin, podofilox solution or gel, imiquimod cream, and
sinecatechins.

■ Neonatal Infection
Vertical transmission rates of HPV to the newborn are minimal. Juvenileonset recurrent respiratory papillomatosis (JoRRP) is a rare, benign
neoplasm of the larynx. It can cause hoarseness and respiratory distress in
children and is most often caused by HPV 6 or 11. Risks for infection are
maternal genital HPV infection and longer labors (Niyibizi, 2014). Although
many newborns are likely exposed to HPV, few develop JoRRP (Smith,
2004). The incidence in 2013 in the United States was 5 cases in 10,000
births, and dropping rates are attributed to HPV vaccination (Meites, 2021).
The benefit of cesarean delivery for prevention is unknown, and it is not
recommended to avert HPV transmission.

VAGINITIS
Pregnant women frequently develop increased vaginal discharge. This may
be a physiological discharge, described in Chapter 4 (p. 54), but should be
differentiated from symptomatic vaginitis, which is also common in
pregnancy. Fortunately, normal vaginal flora serve to prevent vaginitis. To
better understand this, normal vaginal microflora composition and function
are currently being studied in the Vaginal Human Microbiome Project
(Huang, 2014).

■ Bacterial Vaginosis

Diagnosis
Bacterial vaginosis (BV) is a maldistribution of normal vaginal flora. With
BV, numbers of lactobacilli are decreased, and anaerobic bacterial species
are overrepresented. These anaerobes include Gardnerella, Prevotella,
Mobiluncus, and Bacteroides species; Atopobium vaginae; and BVassociated bacteria, provisionally named BVAB1, BVAB2, and BVAB3.
These last three are relatively newly recognized bacteria (Fredricks, 2005).
Ribosomal RNA gene-sequencing techniques have identified composite
communities of vaginal flora, also called the vaginal microbiota. Five types
of these composite communities exist and are referred to as community state
types (CSTs). A woman can be categorized to one of these five CSTs based
on her vaginal microbiota composition (Ravel, 2011). Researchers have
begun to quantify the risk of BV associated with these CST groups.
Specifically, CSTs I, II, III, and V are rich in lactobacilli. CST IV is a
heterogeneous microbiota of strict anaerobes and is associated with BV.
CSTs vary racially, and CST IV is the most common in asymptomatic, healthy
black women (Fettweis, 2014). Pregnancy-related changes in vaginal
microbiota also are being defined and may hold keys to adverse BV-related
pregnancy outcomes, discussed subsequently (Romero, 2014).
Of childbearing-aged women in the United States, nearly 30 percent have
BV. In black women, the prevalence approximates 50 percent (Allsworth,
2007). Most women are asymptomatic. In those with symptoms, a foul, thin
vaginal discharge is a typical complaint. Associated risk factors are
douching, multiple partners, smoking, and altered host immunity (Desseauve,
2012; Koumans, 2007; Murphy, 2016).
For clinical diagnosis of BV, three of the four following Amsel criteria
are present: (1) vaginal pH >4.5; (2) a thin, milky, noninflammatory vaginal
discharge; (3) >20 percent clue cells seen microscopically; and (4) a fishy
odor after addition of 10-percent potassium hydroxide to a vaginal secretion
sample (Amsel, 1983). The last is described as a positive “whiff test” result.
Likewise, alkalinity of seminal fluid and blood are responsible for
complaints of foul odor after intercourse and with menses in affected women.
Initially, a vaginal fluid sample is mixed with saline on a glass slide for
microscopic evaluation, and this is often called a wet preparation or “wet
prep.” Clue cells are vaginal epithelial cells containing many attached
bacteria, which create a poorly defined stippled cellular border (Fig. 68-5).

Microscopically, leukocyte numbers are not increased. The higher vaginal
pH stems from the diminished acid production due to a diminished
lactobacilli population. Notably, Trichomonas vaginalis infection also is
associated with anaerobic overgrowth and elaborated amines. Thus, women
diagnosed with BV should have no microscopic evidence of trichomoniasis.

FIGURE 68-5 A. Bacterial vaginosis. Microscopy reveals several squamous cells heavily studded with
bacteria. Clue cells are covered to the extent that cell borders are blurred and nuclei are not visible
(arrows). B. Trichomonads (arrows).

The Nugent score, used primarily in research rather than clinical
practice, is a system employed for diagnosing BV (Nugent, 1991). During
microscopic examination of a gram-stained vaginal discharge smear, scores
are calculated by assessing bacteria staining and morphology.
NAATs to detect the bacterial types found in women with BV have
suitable accuracy and may be used for symptomatic women (Coleman, 2018).
However, these tests assess for bacteria that may also be part of normal flora
in asymptomatic women. Moreover, compared with traditional methods,
molecular tests have yet to show superior health outcomes but do add
substantial cost.

Treatment
Adverse pregnancy-related health outcomes associated with BV are preterm
birth, PPROM, and postpartum endometritis (Hillier, 1995; Watts, 1990). It
also increases susceptibility to STIs, including HIV (Atashili, 2008;
Brotman, 2010). For women at low risk for preterm birth, however, treatment
of BV does not reduce preterm birth rates (Brocklehurst, 2013; Carey, 2000).

The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2021) and
USPSTF (2020) do not recommend routine BV screening of asymptomatic
gravidas at low risk for preterm delivery. For women with prior preterm
birth, evidence of screening and treatment benefits are conflicting (Kahwati,
2020). At Parkland Hospital, we do not routinely screen for BV among
women with prior preterm birth.
Treatment is reserved for symptomatic women (Table 68-7). Agents not
listed are best avoided due to insufficient data regarding their use in
pregnancy (Workowski, 2021). It is still debated whether BV is a sexually
transmitted infection, and treatment of a male partner does not lower
recurrence rates (Amaya-Guio, 2016; Schwebke, 2021).
TABLE 68-7. Treatment of Bacterial Vaginosis in Pregnancya

■ Trichomoniasis
Diagnosis
Vaginitis caused by Trichomonas vaginalis is common, and its prevalence in
the United States approximates 2 percent in women (Patel, 2018). The
prevalence is higher in those older than 30 years compared with younger
women. Risks include black race, douching, and greater number of lifetime
sexual partners (Sutton, 2007). Among women, frequent sites of infection
include the urethra, endocervix, and vagina. Those with symptomatic
vaginitis often have a purulent discharge, pruritus, vulvovaginal erythema,
and colpitis macularis. The last is often termed a “strawberry cervix” and
displays a patchy, maculoerythematous ectocervix.

Trichomonads are flagellated, pear-shaped, motile organisms that are
somewhat larger than leukocytes. These parasites can readily be seen
microscopically moving briskly in wet preparation. Prompt inspection of
vaginal secretions is advantageous because trichomonads slow with cooling.
At times, T vaginalis may be found incidentally on a Pap test slide. Both of
these microscopic approaches have low diagnostic sensitivity that
approximates 60 percent (Krieger, 1988; Wiese, 2000). Pap tests can also
yield false-positive results. Thus, Pap test trichomonad findings warrant
confirmation with either a wet prep or NAAT.
Of other direct detection methods, culture is expensive, lengthy, and only
75 to 95 percent sensitive (Association of Public Health Laboratories, 2016;
Huppert, 2007). Laboratory NAAT-based evaluation of a vaginal,
endocervical, or urine sample is available, is completed in minutes to hours,
and offers superior sensitivity of 95 to 100 percent (Van Der Pol, 2016).
Although more costly than wet-preparation microscopy, a NAAT may be a
useful, second-line diagnostic test for microscopy-negative samples. An
optimal approach in pregnancy has not been established. Rapid POC testing
is also available but may sacrifice sensitivity for speed. The OSOM
Trichomonas Rapid Test provides results in 10 minutes, is suitable for office
use, and has sensitivities of 88 to 98 percent (Herbst de Cortina, 2016).

Treatment
Treatment is reserved for symptomatic women (Table 68-8). Previously, a
one-time, 2-g dose of oral metronidazole was used to eradicate T vaginalis.
In nonpregnant women, a large randomized trial compared this traditional
therapy against metronidazole, 500 mg orally twice daily for 7 days. The
longer course provided improved efficacy (Kissinger, 2018). New
guidelines from the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
(2020g) now recommend this change in nonpregnant women. The CDC
recognizes this regimen for pregnancy.
TABLE 68-8. Oral Treatment of Trichomoniasis in Pregnancya,b

Reinfection rates among women treated for trichomoniasis are high (Kim,
2020). Thus, retesting for T vaginalis is recommended for all sexually active
women within 3 months following initial therapy (Workowski, 2021). Some
authors recommend retesting 3 weeks after treatment in pregnancy (Lazenby,
2019).
Metronidazole is not teratogenic or fetotoxic, and it may be used in all
pregnancy stages (Briggs, 2022; Czeizel, 1998; Workowski, 2021). The
manufacturer recommends against its use during the first trimester (Pfizer,
2021). Fewer data are available for tinidazole, and thus metronidazole is
preferred. For allergic patients, metronidazole desensitization is effective
(Helms, 2008). With breastfeeding, the longer, lower-dose metronidazole
regimen is not associated with adverse infant outcomes (LactMed, 2021).
Perinatal transmission of trichomoniasis by direct contact in the birth
canal is rare but may lead to neonatal respiratory or genital infection (Bruins,
2013; Trintis, 2010). Some studies have linked trichomonal infection with
preterm birth (Van Gerwen, 2021). A few other studies implicate this
infection with PPROM and small-for-gestational age newborns (Silver,
2014). However, treatment in two randomized studies did not lower preterm
birth rates (Klebanoff, 2001; Stringer, 2010).
In sum, treating symptomatic women is reasonable. For most
asymptomatic women during pregnancy, screening is not done. However,
screening at the first prenatal visit and prompt treatment are encouraged for
gravidas with comorbid HIV infection. In this group, T vaginalis infection
may be a risk factor for vertical HIV transmission (Gumbo, 2010).

■ Candidiasis
Candida albicans or other candidal species can be identified by culture from
the vagina during pregnancy in approximately 20 percent of women. A link

between candidiasis and preterm birth is not robust (Cotch, 1998; Roberts,
2015). Thus, asymptomatic colonization requires no treatment. The organism,
however, can create a profuse, irritating discharge.
For symptoms, effective treatment is listed in Table 68-9. In pregnancy,
the CDC recommends 7-day regimens and suggests topical rather than oral
azoles (Workowski, 2021). In some women, infection is likely to recur and
require repeat treatment. In these cases, symptomatic infection usually
subsides after pregnancy (Sobel, 2007). Although not preferred treatment, a
single, 150-mg oral fluconazole dose is generally not considered teratogenic.
Data showing a small association with cardiac anomalies are conflicting, but
more recent evidence is reassuring (Mølgaard-Nielsen, 2013; Zhu, 2020). In
2019, the FDA noted that reviewed data do not provide conclusive evidence
for an increased miscarriage or stillbirth risk.
TABLE 68-9. Daily, Intravaginal Agents in 7-Day Regimens for
Vulvovaginal Candidiasis Treatment in Pregnancy

HUMAN IMMUNODEFICIENCY VIRUS
■ Pathogenesis

For human immunodeficiency viruses, which are HIV-1 and HIV-2, sexual
intercourse is the main mode of transmission. The virus can be passed by
blood, and infected mothers may infect their fetuses during labor and
delivery or by breast milk. The primary determinant of transmission is the
maternal plasma viral load.
For sexual transmission, the viral HIV envelope binds to mucosal
dendritic cells. These cells then present the viral particle to specific T
lymphocytes. These lymphocytes are defined phenotypically by their cluster
of differentiation 4 (CD4) glycoprotein surface antigens. The CD4 site
serves as a receptor for the virus. Once infected, CD4 T lymphocytes are
gradually depleted, which creates an immunodeficiency that is characterized
by low serum CD4 counts. In some infected with HIV, acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) reflects profound immunodeficiency
that gives rise to various opportunistic infections and neoplasms.
The incubation period from exposure to clinical disease averages 3 to 6
weeks. Acute HIV infection is similar to many other viral syndromes and
usually lasts less than 10 days. Common symptoms, if any, include fever,
fatigue, rash, headache, lymphadenopathy, pharyngitis, myalgias, nausea, and
diarrhea. After symptoms abate, the level of viremia usually declines to a set
point, and patients with the highest viral burden at this time progress more
rapidly to AIDS and death. According to the CDC, AIDS is defined by a
CD4 T-cell count <200 cells/μL, by CD4 T cells constituting <14 percent of
all lymphocytes, or by one of several AIDS-defining illnesses (Selik, 2014).
Route of infection, viral strain’s pathogenicity, initial viral inoculum, and the
host’s immunological status all affect progression.

■ Prenatal HIV Screening
In the United States, approximately 5000 women with HIV give birth
annually (Nesheim, 2018). However, the estimated number of perinatally
acquired HIV cases has dropped, and the rate was 0.9 per 100,000 live
births in 2018 (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2020a). The
decline predominantly stems from prenatal HIV testing and antiretroviral
therapy (ART) for the woman and then her neonate.
The CDC (2006b) and the American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2020f) recommend prenatal HIV screening using an opt-out
approach. With this, HIV testing is routinely included in antenatal testing, but

this testing may be declined. Women are given information regarding HIV but
are not required to sign a specific consent. This opt-out strategy has raised
HIV testing rates and is permitted in every United States jurisdiction (Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention, 2020b).
Repeat screening during the third trimester, preferably before 36 weeks’
gestation, is considered for all pregnant women. Retesting is recommended
in areas where HIV rates exceed 1 case per 1000 pregnant women screened
or for those with risk factors. These include incarceration, injection drug use,
prostitution, a suspected or known HIV-infected sexual partner, a new or
multiple sexual partners, or diagnosis of another STI (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020f).
The initial laboratory screening test for HIV is an antigen/antibody
combination immunoassay that detects antibodies against HIV-1 and HIV-2
and detects HIV-1 p24 antigen (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
2018a). No further testing is required for specimens that yield negative
results on the initial immunoassay unless a known recent exposure to HIV has
occurred. Antibody can be detected in most patients within 1 month of
infection, and thus a test for antibodies alone may not exclude early infection.
Instead, for acute primary HIV infection, identification of viral p24 core
antigen or viral RNA is necessary.
Specimens with a “reactive” (that is, a positive) antigen/antibody
combination immunoassay result should be tested with an antibody
immunoassay that differentiates HIV-1 antibodies from HIV-2 antibodies
(Fig. 68-6). The HIV-1/HIV-2 antibody differentiation immunoassay provides
results that are reported as positive or negative for HIV-1 antibodies, for
HIV-2 antibodies, or for HIV antibodies, undifferentiated. If these two serial
immunoassays (the initial screen and the differentiation assay) are
discordant, an HIV-1 NAAT—qualitative or quantitative HIV RNA test—is
performed (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2018a).

FIGURE 68-6 Algorithm for HIV testing. For specimens that are reactive on the initial
antigen/antibody combination immunoassay and nonreactive or indeterminate on the HIV-1/HIV-2
antibody differentiation immunoassay, a nucleic acid amplification test (NAAT) is performed. Following
a nonreactive HIV-1/HIV-2 antibody differentiation immunoassay, a positive HIV-1 NAAT indicates
laboratory evidence for acute HIV-1 infection. A positive HIV-1 NAAT result following indeterminate
HIV-1/HIV-2 antibody differentiation immunoassay indicates the presence of HIV-1 infection confirmed
by HIV-1 NAAT. A negative HIV-1 NAAT result following nonreactive or indeterminate HIV-1/HIV-2
antibody differentiation immunoassay indicates a false-positive result on the initial antigen/antibody
combination immunoassay. (Reproduced with permission from Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, 2018a.)

At delivery, women with undocumented HIV status should have a fourthgeneration HIV antigen/antibody combination screening test performed on a
blood sample. A negative screening test result does not need confirmation.
However, in cases of recent HIV exposure, consideration is given to
peripartum interventions to reduce perinatal transmission despite negative
HIV testing. Repeat interval testing is recommended to exclude very early
infection not identified with the initial screen. With a positive fourthgeneration HIV testing result, peripartum and neonatal interventions to reduce
perinatal transmission are initiated. These include intravenous zidovudine
infusion during labor and avoidance of breastfeeding, although breast milk

may be stored until confirmatory test results are available (Panel on
Treatment of Pregnant Women with HIV Infection and Prevention of Perinatal
Transmission, 2021). Interventions are continued until the results of an
antibody differentiation assay—and qualitative or quantitative RNA test if
indicated—is known. Interventions can be discontinued if confirmatory
testing is negative. To confirm a positive result from any initial HIV test, the
laboratory testing algorithm in Figure 68-6 is used and begins with the
antigen/antibody combination immunoassay.

■ Vertical Transmission
Viral burden and neonatal infection rates are directly related. In one cohort,
neonatal infection was 1 percent with <400 copies/mL, and it was 23 percent
when maternal viral RNA levels were >30,000 copies/mL (Cooper, 2002).
Among 2615 neonates born to mothers taking ART before conception and
during pregnancy, no cases of vertical transmission occurred when maternal
viral loads were <50 copies/mL at delivery (Mandelbrot, 2015).
Transmission of HIV infection, however, has been observed at all HIV RNA
levels, including those that were nondetectable by current assays.
Transplacental HIV transmission can occur early, and the virus has even been
identified in specimens from elective abortion (Lewis, 1990). Kourtis and
colleagues (2001) estimated that 20 percent of vertical transmission occurs
before 36 weeks’ gestation, 50 percent in the days before delivery, and 30
percent intrapartum. Transmission rates for breastfeeding may be as high as
30 to 40 percent and are associated with increasing HIV viral burden
(Kourtis, 2006, 2007; Slyker, 2012). In nonpregnant individuals, concomitant
STIs and horizontal HIV transmission are linked. Evidence also supports that
vertical transmission rates may be increased by comorbid STIs (Schulte,
2001; Watts, 2012).

■ Antepartum Care
Pregnant women with HIV infection need special attention and are seen in
consultation by physicians with special interest in this field. An additional
resource is the National Perinatal HIV Hotline (1–888–448–8765), which
provides free antepartum, intrapartum, or postpartum consultation to

providers. At Parkland Hospital, a pregnant woman with HIV infection is
initially assessed with the following:
• Standard prenatal laboratory surveys that include serum creatinine,
complete blood count, and bacteriuria screening
• Plasma HIV RNA quantification, which establishes the “viral load” value,
and antiretroviral resistance testing if the viral load is at least 500 to 1000
copies/mL
• CD4 T-cell count
• Screening for chlamydial infection, gonorrhea, syphilis, and trichomoniasis,
if not previously performed with new HIV diagnosis
• Serum hepatic aminotransferase levels
• HSV-1 and -2, cytomegalovirus, toxoplasmosis, and hepatitis B and C
serological screening
• Baseline chest radiograph
• Tuberculosis testing with purified protein derivative (PPD) skin testing or
with interferon-gamma release assay
• Evaluation of need for pneumococcal, hepatitis A, hepatitis B, Tdap,
COVID-19, and influenza vaccines
• Sonographic evaluation to establish gestational age.
During pregnancy, the risk of HIV transmission does not appear to be
increased with amniocentesis or other invasive diagnostic procedures in
women receiving effective ART that results in viral suppression (Floridia,
2017). For women not receiving ART, the risk rises approximately twofold
(Mandelbrot, 1996). If amniocentesis is performed, efforts are taken to avoid
passing through the placenta (Panel on Treatment of Pregnant Women with
HIV Infection and Prevention of Perinatal Transmission, 2021).

Antiretroviral Therapy
In overview, the ideal strategy to suppress viral load and minimize vertical
HIV transmission includes (1) preconceptional ART, (2) antepartum ART,
(3) intrapartum continuation of the antepartum oral ART regimen plus IV
zidovudine, and (4) newborn ART prophylaxis. ART is recommended for all
pregnant women with HIV infection, and it should be initiated as early in
pregnancy as possible. Treatment reduces the risk of perinatal transmission

regardless of CD4 T-cell count or HIV RNA level. Regimen adherence is
emphasized to help prevent viral drug resistance. Gravidas are treated with
at least three antiretroviral (ARV) agents.
The Panel on Treatment of Pregnant Women with HIV Infection and
Prevention of Perinatal Transmission (2021) has issued guidelines for four
different scenarios during pregnancy (Table 68-10). The following
paragraphs summarize these recommendations.
TABLE 68-10. Recommendations for HIV Antiviral Drug Use During
Pregnancy

First, women already taking ART at pregnancy onset are encouraged to
continue their regimen if viral suppression is adequate and if the ARV is safe

and tolerated. Didanosine, stavudine, and full-dose ritonavir, which differs
from ritonavir-boosted agents, are exceptions due to pregnancy toxicity but
not teratogenicity. The lopinavir/ritonavir combination is no longer
recommended based on risks for preterm and small-for-gestational-age
neonates.
Second, women who have never received antiretroviral therapy—
antiretroviral naïve—are given ART regardless of trimester. In general, the
starting regimen comprises two nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors
that are coupled into a single agent plus either a ritonavir-boosted protease
inhibitor or an integrase inhibitor.
Third, women who have previously received antiretroviral therapy but
are currently not taking medications should undergo HIV-resistance testing
because prior ART use raises the risk of drug resistance. However, ART is
initiated prior to receiving results of these drug-resistance tests. In this case,
initial ART selection should factor results of any prior resistance testing, if
available; prior ART regimen; and current ART pregnancy guidelines, that is,
those for ART-naïve women. Drug-resistance testing may then modify the
initial regimen.
For these three categories of women taking antepartum ART, therapy
surveillance is outlined in Table 68-10. Most patients with adequate viral
response have at least a 1-log viral load decline within 1 to 4 weeks after
starting therapy. Newer integrase inhibitors rapidly decrease viral loads and
are useful for women presenting late to prenatal care (Lockman, 2021). For
those who fail to achieve this degree of decline, regimen compliance is
assessed, resistance studies are reviewed, and ART modification is
considered.
During labor and delivery, an oral ART regimen is continued with sips of
water. Additionally, IV zidovudine is administered to women during labor
and before cesarean delivery. An exception to this addition is the patient who
is strictly adherent to her prescribed oral ART regimen and who has an HIV
RNA level that was previously documented to be <50 copies/mL at 34 to 36
weeks’ gestation or at 3 to 4 weeks before delivery. At Parkland Hospital,
we administer intrapartum IV zidovudine to all HIV-positive women,
regardless of viral load. A 2-mg/kg loading dose is infused over 1 hour and
is followed with zidovudine, 1 mg/kg/hr until delivery. Women with HIV
undergoing a scheduled cesarean delivery are given IV zidovudine as a

loading dose followed by 2 more hours of continuous maintenance therapy—
a total of 3 hours of infused zidovudine prior to surgery.
The fourth group includes women who present in labor and who are
taking no ART regimen. These women are given IV zidovudine intrapartum
as just described.

■ Delivery Planning
In some cases, cesarean delivery lowers HIV prenatal transmission rates
(International Perinatal HIV Group, 1999). The American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020c) suggests that scheduled cesarean
delivery be discussed and recommended for HIV-infected women with HIV-1
RNA load >1000 copies/mL. Scheduled delivery is recommended at 38
weeks’ gestation in these women to avoid spontaneous labor. Management of
women with either HIV-1 RNA load >1000 copies/mL or unknown viral load
who present in labor or with ruptured membranes is individualized. For
these women, IV zidovudine is recommended as previously described. In the
case of early labor, cesarean delivery is preferred to vaginal birth.
For women with HIV RNA load ≤1000 copies/mL, cesarean delivery to
reduce the risk of vertical HIV transmission is not recommended and is
unlikely to confer additional benefit to women already taking ART and
achieving viral suppression (Briand, 2013; Jamieson, 2007). Vaginal
delivery in this group is the goal, and awaiting spontaneous onset of labor is
suitable. Labor is not induced to prevent perinatal HIV transmission.
During labor, artificial membrane rupture, fetal scalp electrode
placement, episiotomy, and operative vaginal delivery are performed for
standard obstetrical indications but are avoided if possible in women with
detectable RNA viral load (Peters, 2016). Labor augmentation is used when
needed to shorten the interval to delivery to help further lower the
transmission risk. For the benefits described in Chapter 27 (p. 500), delayed
cord clamping in preterm neonates is acceptable and may be considered for
term newborns. Neuraxial analgesia is suitable. Postpartum hemorrhage is
best managed with oxytocin and prostaglandin analogues. Methylergonovine
(Methergine) and other ergot alkaloids adversely interact with reverse
transcriptase and protease inhibitors to cause severe vasoconstriction.

■ Postpartum Care
Vertical transmission rates rise with breastfeeding, and it generally is not
recommended for women with HIV infection in the United States, where
formula is readily available (Committee on Pediatric AIDS, 2013). In
nutritionally deprived countries, where infectious disease and malnutrition
are primary causes of infant death, the World Health Organization (2016)
recommends exclusive breastfeeding during the first 6 to 12 months.
The Panel on Treatment of Pregnant Women with HIV Infection and
Prevention of Perinatal Transmission (2021) strongly recommends that ART
regimens not be discontinued postpartum but continued lifelong for the
advantages of viral suppression. Ideally, all those planning pregnancy should
be receiving ART and have a viral load below detectable levels before
conception. As one benefit, interpregnancy viral load suppression is
associated with less vertical transmission in a subsequent pregnancy (French,
2014; Stewart, 2014). Reassuringly, for those seeking subsequent pregnancy,
when ART is available, repeated pregnancy in a healthy woman with HIV
has no significant effect on disease progression (Calvert, 2015). Transition
postpartum to general HIV care is critical to maintain viral suppression
(Swain, 2016).

■ Prevention
For adults without HIV infection but with risks for HIV acquisition, the
USPSTF (2019b) recommends offering preexposure prophylaxis (PrEP) to
decrease the risk of acquiring HIV. Risk factors for heterosexually active
women without HIV infection are a partner with HIV, syphilis or gonorrhea
within the past 6 months, and inconsistent condom use with a high-risk
partner. The last is a partner with injection drug use or with multiple other
sexual partners. Current guidance from the CDC (2018b) emphasizes the use
of ART to achieve viral suppression in the infected partner and barrier use as
primary methods of preventing horizontal transmission. However, PrEP for
the HIV-negative partner is considered, including during pregnancy to reduce
the risk of HIV acquisition and also vertical transmission. PrEP with
tenofovir disoproxil fumarate (TDF)/emtricitabine taken orally daily is
acceptable during pregnancy and is encouraged particularly if the HIV viral

load of the infected partner is unknown or unsuppressed. Barrier methods are
reinforced.
For conception in HIV-serodiscordant couples, assisted reproductive
technologies are available. In lower-resource settings, acceptable
approaches combine safer conception methods. These include combinations
of treatment to achieve viral suppression for the HIV-seropositive partner,
PrEP for the HIV-seronegative partner, STI screening and treatment, timed
condomless sex during peak fertility days, and self-insemination, (American
Society for Reproductive Medicine, 2021; Schwartz, 2019).
If pregnancy is undesired, contraception options are discussed (Chap. 38,
p. 664). Counseling also includes education for decreasing high-risk sexual
behaviors to prevent HIV transmission or acquisition and to decrease other
STI acquisition.

REFERENCES
Adhikari EH: Syphilis in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 135(5):1121, 2020
Allsworth JE, Peipert JF: Prevalence of bacterial vaginosis: 2001–2004 National Health and Nutrition
Examination Survey data. Obstet Gynecol 109(1):114, 2007
Amaya-Guio J, Viveros-Carreño DA, Sierra-Barrios EM, et al: Antibiotic treatment for the sexual
partners of women with bacterial vaginosis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 10:CD011701, 2016
American Academy of Pediatrics and American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Guidelines
for Perinatal Care, 8th ed. Washington, 2017
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Expedited partner therapy in the management of
gonorrhea and chlamydial infection. Committee Opinion No. 737, June 2020a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Human papillomavirus vaccination. Committee
Opinion No. 809, July 2020b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Labor and delivery management of women with
human immunodeficiency virus infection. Committee Opinion No. 751, August 2018, Reaffirmed
2020c
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Management of genital herpes in pregnancy.
Practice Bulletin No. 220, April 2020d
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Prelabor rupture of membranes. Practice Bulletin
No. 217, February 2020e
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Prenatal and perinatal human immunodeficiency
virus testing. Committee Opinion No. 752, August 2018, Reaffirmed 2020f
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Vaginitis in nonpregnant patients. Practice
Bulletin No. 215, January 2020g
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Prediction and prevention of spontaneous
preterm birth. Practice Bulletin No. 234, July 2021

American Society for Reproductive Medicine: Human immunodeficiency virus and infertility treatment:
an Ethics Committee opinion. Fertil Steril 115(4):860, 2021
Amsel R, Totten PA, Spiegel CA, et al: Nonspecific vaginitis. Diagnostic criteria and microbial and
epidemiologic associations. Am J Med 74(1):14, 1983
Andrews WW, Goldenberg RL, Mercer B, et al: The Preterm Prediction Study: association of secondtrimester genitourinary chlamydia infection with subsequent spontaneous preterm birth. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 183:662, 2000
Andrews WW, Kimberlin DF, Whitley R, et al: Valacyclovir therapy to reduce recurrent genital herpes
in pregnant women. Am J Obstet Gynecol 194(3):774, 2006
Association of Public Health Laboratories: Advances in laboratory detection of Trichomonas vaginalis
(Updated). Silver Spring, APHL, 2016
Association of Public Health Laboratories: Suggested Reporting Language for Syphilis Serological
Testing. Silver Spring, APHL, 2020
Atashili J, Poole C, Ndumbe PM, et al: Bacterial vaginosis and HIV acquisition: a meta-analysis of
published studies. AIDS 22(12):1493, 2008
Benedetti J, Zeh J, Corey L: Clinical reactivation of genital herpes simplex virus infection decreases in
frequency over time. Ann Intern Med 131: 14, 1999
Berman SM, Harrison HR, Boyce WT, et al: Low birth weight, prematurity, and postpartum
endometritis. Association with prenatal cervical Mycoplasma hominis and Chlamydia trachomatis
infections. JAMA 257(9):1189, 1987
Bernstein DI, Bellamy AR, Hook EW 3rd, et al: Epidemiology, clinical presentation, and antibody
response to primary infection with herpes simplex virus type 1 and type 2 in young women. Clin
Infect Dis 56(3):344, 2013
Bleich AT, Sheffield JS, Wendel GD, et al: Disseminated gonococcal infection in women. Obstet
Gynecol 119(3)597, 2012
Brandenburger D, Ambrosino E: The impact of antenatal syphilis point of care testing on pregnancy
outcomes: a systematic review. PLoS One 16(3):e0247649, 2021
Briand N, Jasseron C, Sibiude J, et al: Cesarean section for HIV-infected women in the combination
ART era, 2000–2010. Am J Obstet Gynecol 209(4):335.e1, 2013
Briggs GG, Towers CV, Forinash AB: Briggs Drugs in Pregnancy and Lactation: A Reference Guide to
Fetal and Neonatal Risk, 12th ed. Philadelphia, Wolters Kluwer, 2022
Brocklehurst P, Gordon A, Heatley E, et al: Antibiotics for treating bacterial vaginosis in pregnancy.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 1:CD000262, 2013
Brotman RM, Klebanoff MA, Nansel TR, et al: Bacterial vaginosis assessed by gram stain and
diminished colonization resistance to incident gonococcal, chlamydial, and trichomonal genital
infection. J Infect Dis 202:1907, 2010
Brouwer AF, Eisenberg MC, Carey TE, et al: Trends in HPV cervical and seroprevalence and
associations between oral and genital infection and serum antibodies in NHANES 2003–2012. BMC
Infect Dis 15:575, 2015
Brown EL, Gardella C, Malm G, et al: Effect of maternal herpes simplex virus (HSV) serostatus and
HSV type on risk of neonatal herpes. Acta Obstet Gynecol 86:523, 2007
Brown ZA: HSV-2 specific serology should be offered routinely to antenatal patients. Rev Med Virol
10(3):141, 2000
Brown ZA, Gardella C, Wald A, et al: Genital herpes complicating pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 106:845,
2005

Brown ZA, Selke SA, Zeh J, et al: Acquisition of herpes simplex virus during pregnancy. N Engl J Med
337:509, 1997
Bruins MJ, van Straaten IL, Ruijs GJ: Respiratory disease and Trichomonas vaginalis in premature
newborn twins. Pediatr Infect Dis J 32(9):1029, 2013
Burkman RT, Tonascia JA, Atienza MF, et al: Untreated endocervical gonorrhea and endometritis
following elective abortion. Am J Obstet Gynecol 126:648, 1976
Calvert C, Ronsmans C: Pregnancy and HIV disease progression: a systematic review and metaanalysis. Trop Med Int Health 20(2):122, 2015
Cao Y, Su X, Wang Q, et al: A multicenter study evaluating ceftriaxone and benzathine penicillin G as
treatment agents for early syphilis in Jiangsu, China. Clin Infect Dis 65(10):1683, 2017
Carey JC, Klebanoff MA, Hauth JC, et al: Metronidazole to prevent preterm delivery in pregnant
women with asymptomatic bacterial vaginosis. National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development Network of Maternal-Fetal Medicine Units. N Engl J Med 342:534, 2000
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Expedited partner therapy in the management of sexually
transmitted diseases. Atlanta, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2006a
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Revised recommendations for HIV testing of adults,
adolescents, and pregnant women in health-care settings. MMWR 55(14):1, 2006b
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Discordant results from reverse sequence syphilis
screening—five laboratories, United States, 2006–2010. MMWR 60(5):133, 2011
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: 2018 Quick reference guide: recommended laboratory
HIV testing algorithm for serum or plasma specimens. 2018a. Available at:
https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/50872. Accessed June 4, 2021
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: US Public Health Service: Preexposure prophylaxis for the
prevention of HIV infection in the United States—2017 Update: a clinical practice guideline. 2018b.
Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/hiv/pdf/risk/prep/cdc-hiv-prep-guidelines-2017.pdf. Accessed
June 5, 2021
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Monitoring selected national HIV prevention and care
objectives by using HIV surveillance data—United States and 6 dependent areas, 2018. HIV
Surveillance Supplemental Report, 2020a. Available at:
https://www.cdc.gov/hiv/pdf/library/reports/surveillance/cdc-hiv-surveillance-supplemental-reportvol-25-2.pdf. Accessed June 4, 2021
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: State laws that address high-impact HIV prevention
efforts. 2020b. Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/hiv/policies/law/states/. Accessed June 4, 2021
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Guidance on the use of expedited partner therapy in the
treatment of gonorrhea. 2021a. Available at: /www.cdc.gov/std/ept/gc-guidance.htm. Accessed
May 30, 2021
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Sexually Transmitted Disease Surveillance 2019. Atlanta,
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2021b
Chemaitelly H, Nagelkerke N, Omori R, et al: Characterizing herpes simplex virus type 1 and type 2
seroprevalence declines and epidemiological association in the United States. PLoS One
14(6):e0214151, 2019
Coleman JS, Gaydos CA: Molecular diagnosis of bacterial vaginosis: an update. J Clin Microbiol
56(9):e00342, 2018
Committee on Pediatric AIDS: Infant feeding and transmission of human immunodeficiency virus in the
United States. Pediatrics 131(2):391, 2013

Cooper ER, Charurat M, Mofenson L, et al: Combination antiretroviral strategies for the treatment of
pregnant HIV-1-infected women and prevention of perinatal HIV-1 transmission. J Acquir Immune
Defic Syndr 29:484, 2002
Corey L, Wald A: Maternal and neonatal herpes simplex virus infections. N Engl J Med 361(14):1376,
2009
Corey L, Wald A, Patel R, et al: Once-daily valacyclovir to reduce the risk of transmission of genital
herpes. N Engl J Med 350:11, 2004
Cotch MF, Hillier SL, Gibbs RS, et al: Epidemiology and outcomes associated with moderate to heavy
Candida colonization during pregnancy. The Vaginal Infections and Prematurity Study Group. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 178(2):374, 1998
Curtin WM, Menegus MA, Patru MM, et al: Midtrimester fetal herpes simplex-2 diagnosis by serology,
culture and quantitative polymerase chain reaction. Fetal Diagn Ther 33(2):133, 2013
Czeizel AE, Rockenbauer M: A population based case-control teratologic study of oral metronidazole
treatment during pregnancy. BJOG 105:322, 1998
Deguchi T, Hatazaki K, Ito S, et al: Macrolide and fluoroquinolone resistance is uncommon in clinical
strains of Chlamydia trachomatis. J Infect Chemother 24(8):610, 2018
Desseauve D, Chantrel J, Fruchart A, et al: Prevalence and risk factors of bacterial vaginosis during the
first trimester of pregnancy in a large French population-based study. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod
Biol 163(1):30, 2012
Dionne-Odom J, Subramaniam A, Aaron KJ, et al: High rates of persistent and recurrent chlamydia in
pregnant women after treatment with azithromycin. Am J Obstet Gynecol MFM 2(4):100216, 2020
Donda K, Sharma M, Amponsah JK, et al: Trends in the incidence, mortality, and cost of neonatal
herpes simplex virus hospitalizations in the United States from 2003 to 2014. J Perinatol 39(5):697,
2019
Drugs and Lactation Database (LactMed): Metronidazole. 2021. Available at:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK501315/#LM440.Drug_Levels_and_Effects. Accessed
July 24, 2021
Fanfair RN, Zaidi A, Taylor LD, et al: Trends in seroprevalence of herpes simplex virus type 2 among
non-Hispanic blacks and non-Hispanic whites aged 14 to 49 years—United States, 1988 to 2010.
Sex Transm Dis 40(11):860, 2013
Fettweis JM, Brooks JP, Serrano MG, et al: Differences in vaginal microbiome in African American
women versus women of European ancestry. Microbiology 160(Pt 10):2272, 2014
Fiumara NJ: Syphilis in newborn children. Clin Obstet Gynecol 18:183, 1975
Floridia M, Masuelli G, Meloni A, et al: Amniocentesis and chorionic villus sampling in HIV-infected
pregnant women: a multicentre case series. BJOG 124(8):1218, 2017
Food and Drug Administration: FDA allows for first point-of-care chlamydia and gonorrhea test to be
used in more near-patient care settings. 2021. Available at: https://www.fda.gov/news-events/pressannouncements/fda-allows-first-point-care-chlamydia-and-gonorrhea-test-be-used-more-nearpatient-care-settings. Accessed August 26, 2021
Food and Drug Administration: FDA clears first diagnostic tests for extragenital testing for chlamydia
and gonorrhea. 2019. Available at: www.fda.gov/news-events/press-announcements/fda-clearsfirst-diagnostic-tests-extragenital-testing-chlamydia-and-gonorrhea. Accessed May 28, 2021
Food and Drug Administration: FDA to review study examining use of oral fluconazole (Diflucan) in
pregnancy. 2019. Available at: https://www.fda.gov/drugs/drug-safety-and-availability/fda-drugsafety-communication-fda-review-study-examining-use-oral-fluconazole-diflucan-pregnancy.
Accessed June 4, 2021

Fredricks DN, Fiedler TL, Marrazzo JM: Molecular identification of bacteria associated with bacterial
vaginosis. N Engl J Med 353:1899, 2005
French CE, Thorne C, Tariq S, et al: Immunologic status and virologic outcomes in repeat pregnancies to
HIV-positive women not on antiretroviral therapy at conception: a case for lifelong antiretroviral
therapy? AIDS 28(9):1369, 2014
Gardella C, Huang ML, Wald A, et al: Rapid polymerase chain reaction assay to detect herpes simplex
virus in the genital tract of women in labor. Obstet Gynecol 115(6):1209, 2010
Garnett GP, Aral SO, Hoyle DV, et al: The natural history of syphilis. Implications for the transmission
dynamics and control of infection. Sex Transm Dis 24(4):185, 1997
Gibbs RS, Schachter J: Chlamydial serology in patients with intra-amniotic infection and controls. Sex
Transm Dis 14:213, 1987
Gregory EC, Ely DM: Trends and characteristics of sexually transmitted infections during pregnancy:
United States, 2016–2018. Natl Vital Stat Rep 69(3):1, 2020
Gumbo FZ, Duri K, Kandawasvika GQ, et al: Risk factors of HIV vertical transmission in a cohort of
women under a PMTCT program at three peri-urban clinics in a resource-poor setting. J Perinatol
30:717, 2010
Hawkes S, Matin N, Broutet N, et al: Effectiveness of interventions to improve screening for syphilis in
pregnancy: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet Infect Dis 11:684, 2011
Helms DJ, Mosure DJ, Secor WE, et al: Management of Trichomonas vaginalis in women with
suspected metronidazole hypersensitivity. Am J Obstet Gynecol 198(4):370.e1, 2008
Herbst de Cortina S, Bristow CC, et al: A systematic review of point of care testing for Chlamydia
trachomatis, Neisseria gonorrhoeae, and Trichomonas vaginalis. Infect Dis Obstet Gynecol
2016:4386127, 2016
Hillier SL, Nugent RP, Eschenbach DA, et al: Association between bacterial vaginosis and preterm
delivery of a low-birth-weight infant. The Vaginal Infections and Prematurity Study Group. N Engl J
Med 333:1737, 1995
Hollier LM, Harstad TW, Sanchez PJ, et al: Fetal syphilis: clinical and laboratory characteristics. Obstet
Gynecol 97:947, 2001
Hollier LM, Scott LL, Murphree SS, et al: Postpartum endometritis caused by herpes simplex virus.
Obstet Gynecol 89(5 Pt 2):836, 1997
Hollier LM, Wendel GD: Third-trimester antiviral prophylaxis for preventing maternal genital herpes
simplex virus (HSV) recurrences and neonatal infection. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 1:CD004946,
2008
Hoyme UB, Kiviat N, Eschenbach DA: The microbiology and treatment of late postpartum
endometritis. Obstet Gynecol 68:226, 1986
Huang B, Fettweis JM, Brooks JP, et al: The changing landscape of the vaginal microbiome. Clin Lab
Med 34(4):747, 2014
Huppert JS, Mortensen JE, Reed JL, et al: Rapid antigen testing compares favorably with transcriptionmediated amplification assay for the detection of Trichomonas vaginalis in young women. Clin
Infect Dis 45(2):194, 2007
International Perinatal HIV Group: The mode of delivery and the risk of vertical transmission of human
immunodeficiency virus type 1: a meta-analysis of 15 prospective cohort studies. N Engl J Med
340:977, 1999
James SH, Kimberlin DW: Neonatal herpes simplex virus infection: epidemiology and treatment. Clin
Perinatol 42(1):47, 2015

Jamison CD, Coleman JS, Mmeje O: Improving women’s health and combatting sexually transmitted
infections through expedited partner therapy. Obstet Gynecol 133(3):416, 2019
Jamison DJ, Read JS, Kourtis AP, et al: Cesarean delivery for HIV-infected women: recommendations
and controversies. Am J Obstet Gynecol 197: S96, 2007
Kahwati LC, Clark R, Berkman N, et al: Screening for bacterial vaginosis in pregnant adolescents and
women to prevent preterm delivery: updated evidence report and systematic review for the US
Preventive Services Task Force. JAMA 323(13):1293, 2020
Kharbanda EO, Vazquez-Benitez G, DeSilva MB, et al: Association of inadvertent 9-valent human
papillomavirus vaccine in pregnancy with spontaneous abortion and adverse birth outcomes. JAMA
Netw Open 4(4):e214340, 2021
Kim TG, Young MR, Goggins ER, et al: Trichomonas vaginalis in pregnancy: patterns and predictors
of testing, infection, and treatment. Obstet Gynecol 135(5):1136, 2020
Kimberlin DW, Whitley RJ, Wan W, et al: Oral acyclovir suppression and neurodevelopment after
neonatal herpes. N Engl J Med 365(14):1284, 2011
Kissinger P, Muzny CA, Mena LA, et al: Single-dose versus 7-day-dose metronidazole for the treatment
of trichomoniasis in women: an open-label, randomised controlled trial. Lancet Infect Dis 1251, 2018
Kissinger P, Schmidt N, Mohammed H, et al: Patient-delivered partner treatment for Trichomonas
vaginalis infection: a randomized controlled trial. Sex Transm Dis 33:445, 2006
Klebanoff MA, Carey JC, Hauth JC, et al: Failure of metronidazole to prevent preterm delivery among
pregnant women with asymptomatic Trichomonas vaginalis infection. N Engl J Med 345(7):487,
2001
Klein VR, Cox SM, Mitchell MD, et al: The Jarisch–Herxheimer reaction complicating syphilotherapy in
pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 75:375, 1990
Korenromp EL, Rowley J, Alonso M, et al: Global burden of maternal and congenital syphilis and
associated adverse birth outcomes—estimates for 2016 and progress since 2012. PLoS One
14(2):e0211720, 2019
Koumans EH, Sternberg M, Bruce C, et al: The prevalence of bacterial vaginosis in the United States,
2001–2004: associations with symptoms, sexual behaviors, and reproductive health. Sex Transm Dis
34:864, 2007
Kourtis AP, Bulterys M, Nesheim SR, et al: Understanding the timing of HIV transmission from mother
to infant. JAMA 285:709, 2001
Kourtis AP, Jamieson DJ, de Vincenzi I, et al: Prevention of human immunodeficiency virus-1
transmission to the infant through breastfeeding: new developments. Am J Obstet Gynecol 197:S113,
2007
Kourtis AP, Lee FK, Abrams EJ, et al: Mother-to-child transmission of HIV-1: timing and implications
for prevention. Lancet Infect Dis 6:726, 2006
Krieger JN, Tam MR, Stevens CE, et al: Diagnosis of trichomoniasis. Comparison of conventional wetmount examination with cytologic studies, cultures, and monoclonal antibody staining of direct
specimens. JAMA 259(8):1223, 1988
Kulhanjian JA, Soroush V, Au DS, et al: Identification of women at unsuspected risk of primary
infection with herpes simplex virus type 2 during pregnancy. N Engl J Med 326(14):916, 1992
Laga M, Plummer FA, Nzanze H, et al: Epidemiology of ophthalmia neonatorum in Kenya. Lancet
2(8516):1145, 1986
Larsen SA, Steiner BM, Rudolph AH: Laboratory diagnosis and interpretation of tests for syphilis. Clin
Microbiol Rev 8:1, 1995

Lazenby GB, Korte JE, Tillman S, et al: A recommendation for timing of repeat Chlamydia
trachomatis test following infection and treatment in pregnant and nonpregnant women. Int J STD
AIDS 28(9):902, 2017
Lazenby GB, Thompson L, Powell AM, et al: Unexpected high rates of persistent Trichomonas
vaginalis infection in a retrospective cohort of treated pregnant women. Sex Transm Dis 46(1):2,
2019
LeFevre ML, U.S. Preventive Services Task Force: Screening for Chlamydia and gonorrhea: U.S.
Preventive Services Task Force recommendation statement. Ann Intern Med 161(12):902, 2014
LeGoff J, Péré H, Bélec L: Diagnosis of genital herpes simplex virus infection in the clinical laboratory.
Virol J 11:83, 2014
Lei J, Ploner A, Elfström KM, et al: HPV vaccination and the risk of invasive cervical cancer. N Engl J
Med 383(14):1340, 2020
Levett PN, Fonseca K, Tsang RS, et al: Canadian Public Health Laboratory Network laboratory
guidelines for the use of serological tests (excluding point-of-care tests) for the diagnosis of syphilis
in Canada. Can J Infect Dis Med Microbiol 26 Suppl A:6A, 2015
Lewis SH, Reynolds-Kohler C, Fox HE, et al: HIV-1 in trophoblastic and villous Hofbauer cells, and
haematological precursors in eight-week fetuses. Lancet 335:565, 1990
Liang Z, Chen YP, Yang CS, et al: Meta-analysis of ceftriaxone compared with penicillin for the
treatment of syphilis. Int J Antimicrob Agents 47(1):6, 2016
Liu G, Markowitz LE, Hariri S, et al: Seroprevalence of 9 human papillomavirus types in the United
States, 2005–2006. J Infect Dis 213(2):191, 2016
Llata E, Braxton J, Asbel L, et al: Rectal Chlamydia trachomatis and Neisseria gonorrhoeae
infections among women reporting anal intercourse. Obstet Gynecol 132(3):692, 2018
Lockman S, Brummel SS, Ziemba L, et al: Efficacy and safety of dolutegravir with emtricitabine and
tenofovir alafenamide fumarate or tenofovir disoproxil fumarate, and efavirenz, emtricitabine, and
tenofovir disoproxil fumarate HIV antiretroviral therapy regimens started in pregnancy (IMPAACT
2010/VESTED): a multicentre, open-label, randomised, controlled, phase 3 trial. Lancet
397(10281):1276, 2021
Mahant S, Hall M, Schondelmeyer AC, et al: Neonatal herpes simplex virus infection among Medicaidenrolled children: 2009–2015. Pediatrics 143(4):e20183233, 2019
Major CA, Towers CV, Lewis DF, et al: Expectant management of preterm rupture of membranes
complicated by active recurrent genital herpes. Am J Obstet Gynecol 188:1551, 2003
Mandelbrot L, Mayaux MJ, Bongain A, et al: Obstetric factors and mother-to-child transmission of
human immunodeficiency virus type 1: the French perinatal cohorts. SEROGEST French Pediatric
HIV Infection Study Group. Am J Obstet Gynecol 175(3 Pt 1):661, 1996
Mandelbrot L, Tubiana R, Le Chenadec J, et al: No perinatal HIV-1 transmissions from women with
effective ART starting before conception. Clin Infect Dis 61(11):1715, 2015
Marquez L, Levy ML, Munoz FM, et al: A report of three cases and review of intrauterine herpes
simplex virus infection. Pediatr Infect Dis J 30(2):153, 2011
McCool-Myers M, Smith AD, Kottke MJ: Expert interviews on multilevel barriers in implementing
expedited partner therapy for chlamydia. J Public Health Manag Pract 26(6):585, 2020
McGill AL, Bavaro MF, You WB: Postpartum herpes simplex virus endometritis and disseminated
infection in both mother and neonate. Obstet Gynecol 120(2 Pt 2):471, 2012
Meites E, Stone L, Amiling R, et al: Significant declines in juvenile onset recurrent respiratory
papillomatosis following HPV Vaccine introduction in the United States. Clin Infect Dis 73(5):885,
2021

Mølgaard-Nielsen D, Svanström H, Melbye M, et al: Association between use of oral fluconazole during
pregnancy and risk of spontaneous abortion and stillbirth. JAMA 315(1):58, 2016
Moreira ED Jr, Block SL, Ferris D, et al: Safety profile of the 9-valent HPV vaccine: a combined
analysis of 7 phase III clinical trials. Pediatrics 138(2): pii:e20154387, 2016
Murphy K, Mitchell CM: The interplay of host immunity, environment and the risk of bacterial vaginosis
and associated reproductive health outcomes. J Infect Dis 214 Suppl 1:S29, 2016
Myles TD, Elam G, Park-Hwang E, et al: The Jarisch–Herxheimer reaction and fetal monitoring
changes in pregnant women treated for syphilis. Obstet Gynecol 92:859, 1998
Nathan L, Bohman VR, Sanchez PJ, et al: In utero infection with Treponema pallidum in early
pregnancy. Prenat Diagn 17:119, 1997
Nesheim SR, FitzHarris LF, Lampe MA, et al: Reconsidering the number of women with HIV infection
who give birth annually in the United States. Public Health Rep 133(6):637, 2018
Niyibizi J, Rodier C, Wassef M, et al: Risk factors for the development and severity of juvenile-onset
recurrent respiratory papillomatosis: a systematic review. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol 78(2):186,
2014
Nugent RP, Krohn MA, Hillier SL: Reliability of diagnosing bacterial vaginosis is improved by a
standardized method of Gram stain interpretation. J Clin Microbiol 29:297, 1991
Panel on Treatment of Pregnant Women with HIV Infection and Prevention of Perinatal Transmission:
Recommendations for use of antiretroviral drugs in pregnant women with HIV infection and
interventions to reduce perinatal HIV transmission in the United States. 2021. Available at:
https://clinicalinfo.hiv.gov/sites/default/files/guidelines/documents/Perinatal_GL.pdf. Accessed
August 30, 2021
Papp JR, Schachter J, Gaydos CA, et al: Recommendations for the laboratory-based detection of
Chlamydia trachomatis and Neisseria gonorrhoeae—2014. MMWR 63(0):1, 2014
Pasternak B, Hiviid A: Use of acyclovir, valacyclovir, and famciclovir in the first trimester of pregnancy
and the risk of birth defect. JAMA 304(8):859, 2010
Patel EU, Gaydos CA, Packman ZR, et al: Prevalence and correlates of Trichomonas vaginalis
infection among men and women in the United States. Clin Infect Dis 67(2):211, 2018
Patton ME, Bernstein K, Liu G, et al: Seroprevalence of herpes simplex virus types 1 and 2 among
pregnant women and sexually active, nonpregnant women in the United States. Clin Infect Dis
67(10):1535, 2018
Peeling RW, Ye H: Diagnostic tools for preventing and managing maternal and congenital syphilis: an
overview. Bull World Health Organ 82(6):439, 2004
Peipert JF: Clinical practice: genital chlamydial infections. N Engl J Med 18: 349, 2003
Peters H, Francis K, Harding K, et al: Operative vaginal delivery and invasive procedures in pregnancy
among women living with HIV. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 210:295, 2016
Pfizer: Flagyl (metronidazole tablets). 2021. Available at: labeling.pfizer.com/ShowLabeling.aspx?id =
570. Accessed June 2, 2021
Pillay A: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Syphilis Summit—diagnostics and laboratory
issues. Sex Transm Dis 45(9S Suppl 1):S13, 2018
Pinninti SG, Angara R, Feja KN, et al: Neonatal herpes disease following maternal antenatal antiviral
suppressive therapy: a multicenter case series. J Pediatr 161(1):134, 2012
Piret J, Boivin G: Antiviral resistance in herpes simplex virus and varicella-zoster virus infections:
diagnosis and management. Curr Opin Infect Dis 29(6):654, 2016
Prober CG, Sullender WM, Yasukawa LL, et al: Low risk of herpes simplex virus infections in neonates
exposed to the virus at the time of vaginal delivery to mothers with recurrent genital herpes simplex

virus infections. N Engl J Med 316:240, 1987
Qin J, Yang T, Xiao S, et al: Reported estimates of adverse pregnancy outcomes among women with
and without syphilis: a systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS One 9(7):e102203, 2014
Rac M, Bryant S, McIntire DD, et al: Progression of ultrasound findings of fetal syphilis following
maternal treatment. Am J Obstet Gynecol 210:S26, 2014
Ravel J, Gajer P, Abdo Z, et al: Vaginal microbiome of reproductive-age women. Proc Natl Acad Sci U
S A 108 (Suppl 1):4680, 2011
Reekie J, Roberts C, Preen D, et al: Chlamydia trachomatis and the risk of spontaneous preterm birth,
babies who are born small for gestational age, and stillbirth: a population-based cohort study. Lancet
Infect Dis 18(4):452, 2018
Roberts CL, Algert CS, Rickard KL, et al: Treatment of vaginal candidiasis for the prevention of
preterm birth: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Syst Rev 4:31, 2015
Roberts SW, Sheffield JS, McIntire DD, et al: Urine screening for Chlamydia trachomatis during
pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 117(4):883, 2011
Romero R, Hassan SS, Gajer P, et al: The composition and stability of the vaginal microbiota of normal
pregnant women is different from that of non-pregnant women. Microbiome 2(1):4, 2014
Rosenman MB, Mahon BE, Downs SM, et al: Oral erythromycin prophylaxis vs watchful waiting in
caring for newborns exposed to Chlamydia trachomatis. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 157(6):565,
2003
Satyaputra F, Hendry S, Braddick M, et al: The laboratory diagnosis of syphilis. J Clin Microbiol
59(10):e0010021, 2021
Scheller NM, Pasternak B, Mølgaard-Nielsen D, et al: Quadrivalent HPV vaccination and the risk of
adverse pregnancy outcomes. N Engl J Med 376(13):1223, 2017
Schulte JM, Burkham S, Hamaker D, et al: Syphilis among HIV-infected mothers and their infants in
Texas from 1988 to 1994. Sex Transm Dis 28: 316, 2001
Schwartz SR, Bassett J, Mutunga L, et al: HIV incidence, pregnancy, and implementation outcomes
from the Sakh’umndeni safer conception project in South Africa: a prospective cohort study. Lancet
HIV 6(7):e438, 2019
Schwebke JR, Desmond RA: A randomized controlled trial of partner notification methods for
prevention of trichomoniasis in women. Sex Transm Dis 37(6):392, 2010
Schwebke JR, Lensing SY, Lee J, et al: Treatment of male sexual partners of women with bacterial
vaginosis (BV): a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Clin Infect Dis 73(3):e672, 2021
Scott LL, Hollier LM, McIntire D, et al: Acyclovir suppression to prevent recurrent genital herpes at
delivery. Infect Dis Obstet Gynecol 10:71, 2002
Selik RM, Mokotoff ED, Branson B, et al: Revised surveillance case definition for HIV infection-United
States, 2014. MMWR 63(3):1, 2014
Seña AC, Zhang XH, Li T, et al: A systematic review of syphilis serological treatment outcomes in
HIV-infected and HIV-uninfected persons: rethinking the significance of serological nonresponsiveness and the serofast state after therapy. BMC Infect Dis 15:479, 2015
Sheffield JS, Fish DN, Hollier LM, et al: Acyclovir concentrations in human breast milk after
valacyclovir administration. Am J Obstet Gynecol 186:100, 2002a
Sheffield JS, Hill JB, Hollier LM, et al: Valacyclovir prophylaxis to prevent recurrent herpes at delivery:
a randomized clinical trial. Obstet Gynecol 108:141, 2006
Sheffield JS, Hollier LM, Hill JB, et al: Acyclovir prophylaxis to prevent herpes simplex virus recurrence
at delivery: a systematic review. Obstet Gynecol 102:1396, 2003

Sheffield JS, Sanchez PJ, Morris G, et al: Congenital syphilis after maternal treatment for syphilis during
pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 186:569, 2002b
Sheffield JS, Sanchez PJ, Wendel GD Jr, et al: Placental histopathology of congenital syphilis. Obstet
Gynecol 100:126, 2002c
Silva MJ, Florencio GL, Gabiatti JR, et al: Perinatal morbidity and mortality associated with chlamydial
infection: a meta-analysis study. Braz J Infect Dis 15(6):533, 2011
Silver BJ, Guy RJ, Kaldor JM, et al: Trichomonas vaginalis as a cause of perinatal morbidity: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Sex Transm Dis 41(6):369, 2014
Silverstein AM: Congenital syphilis and the timing of immunogenesis in the human fetus. Nature
194:196, 1962
Singh AE, Romanowski B: Syphilis: review with emphasis on clinical, epidemiologic, and some biologic
features. Clin Microbiol Rev 12(2):187, 1999
Slutsker JS, Tsang LB, Schillinger JA: Do prescriptions for expedited partner therapy for Chlamydia get
filled? Findings from a multi-jurisdictional evaluation, United States, 2017–2019. Sex Transm Dis
47(6):376, 2020
Slyker JA, Chung MH, Lehman DA, et al: Incidence and correlates of HIV-1 RNA detection in the
breast milk of women receiving HAART for the prevention of HIV-1 transmission. PLoS One
7(1):e29777, 2012
Smith EM, Ritchie JM, Yankowitz J, et al: Human papillomavirus prevalence and types in newborns and
parents. Sex Transm Dis 31:57, 2004
Smullin C, Wagman J, Mehta S, et al: A narrative review of the epidemiology of congenital syphilis in
the United States from 1980 to 2019. Sex Transm Dis 48(2):71, 2021
Sobel JD: Vulvovaginal candidosis. Lancet 369:1961, 2007
Spicknall IH, Flagg EW, Torrone EA: Estimates of the prevalence and incidence of genital herpes,
United States, 2018. Sex Transm Dis 48(4):260, 2021
St Cyr S, Barbee L, Workowski KA, et al: Update to CDC’s treatment guidelines for gonococcal
infection, 2020. MMWR 69(50):1911, 2020
Stewart R, Wells CE, Roberts S, et al: Benefit of inter-pregnancy HIV viral load suppression on
subsequent maternal and infant outcomes. Am J Obstet Gynecol 210:S14, 2014
Stone KM, Reiff-Eldridge R, White AD, et al: Pregnancy outcomes following systemic prenatal
acyclovir exposure: conclusions from the International Acyclovir Pregnancy Registry, 1984–1999.
Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol 70:201, 2004
Strick LB, Wald A: Diagnostics for herpes simplex virus: is PCR the new gold standard? Mol Diagn
Ther 10(1):17, 2006
Stringer E, Read JS, Hoffman I, et al: Treatment of trichomoniasis in pregnancy in sub-Saharan Africa
does not appear to be associated with low birth weight or preterm birth. S Afr Med J 100(1):58,
2010
Sutton M, Sternberg M, Koumans EH, et al: The prevalence of Trichomonas vaginalis infection among
reproductive-age women in the United States, 2001–2004. Clin Infect Dis 45(10):1319, 2007
Swain CA, Smith LC, Nash D, et al: Postpartum HIV care among women diagnosed during pregnancy.
Obstet Gynecol 128(1):44, 2016
Trintis J, Epie N, Boss R, et al: Neonatal Trichomonas vaginalis infection: a case report and review of
literature. Int J STD AIDS 21(8):606, 2010
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, Bibbins-Domingo K, Grossman DC, et al: Serologic screening for
genital herpes infection: US Preventive Services Task Force recommendation statement. JAMA
316(23):2525, 2016

U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, Curry SJ, Krist AH, et al: Ocular prophylaxis for gonococcal
ophthalmia neonatorum: US Preventive Services Task Force reaffirmation recommendation
statement. JAMA 321(4):394, 2019a
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, Curry SJ, Krist AH, et al: Screening for syphilis infection in
pregnant women: US Preventive Services Task Force reaffirmation recommendation statement.
JAMA 320(9):911, 2018
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, Owens DK, Davidson KW, et al: Preexposure prophylaxis for the
prevention of HIV infection: US Preventive Services Task Force recommendation statement.
JAMA 321(22):2203, 2019b
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, Owens DK, Davidson KW, et al: Screening for bacterial
vaginosis in pregnant persons to prevent preterm delivery: US Preventive Services Task Force
recommendation statement. JAMA 323(13):1286, 2020
Vallely LM, Egli-Gany D, Wand H, et al: Adverse pregnancy and neonatal outcomes associated with
Neisseria gonorrhoeae: systematic review and meta-analysis. Sex Transm Infect 97(2):104, 2021
Van Der Pol B: Clinical and laboratory testing for Trichomonas vaginalis infection. J Clin Microbiol
54(1):7, 2016
Van Der Pol B, Taylor SN, Mena L, et al: Evaluation of the performance of a point-of-care test for
chlamydia and gonorrhea. JAMA Netw Open 3(5):e204819, 2020
Van Gerwen OT, Craig-Kuhn MC, Jones AT, et al: Trichomoniasis and adverse birth outcomes: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. BJOG 128(12):1907
Wald A, Ashley-Morrow R: Serological testing for herpes simplex virus (HSV)-1 and HSV-2 infection.
Clin Infect Dis 35:S173, 2002
Watts D: Mother to child transmission of HIV—another complication of bacterial vaginosis? J Acquir
Immune Defic Syndr 60(3):221, 2012
Watts DH, Brown ZA, Money D, et al: A double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled trial of acyclovir
in late pregnancy for the reduction of herpes simplex virus shedding and cesarean delivery. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 188:836, 2003
Watts DH, Krohn MA, Hillier SL, et al: Bacterial vaginosis as a risk factor for postcesarean
endometritis. Obstet Gynecol 75:52, 1990
Wendel GD Jr, Sheffield JS, Hollier LM, et al: Treatment of syphilis in pregnancy and prevention of
congenital syphilis. Clin Infect Dis 35(Suppl 2): S200, 2002
Wendel GD Jr, Stark BJ, Jamison RB, et al: Penicillin allergy and desensitization in serious infections
during pregnancy. N Engl J Med 312:1229, 1985
World Health Organization, United Nations Children’s Fund: Guideline: updates on HIV and infant
feeding: the duration of breastfeeding, and support from health services to improve feeding practices
among mothers living with HIV. Geneva, WHO, 2016
Wiese W, Patel SR, Patel SC, et al: A meta-analysis of the Papanicolaou smear and wet mount for the
diagnosis of vaginal trichomoniasis. Am J Med 108(4):301, 2000
Wiesenfeld HC: Screening for Chlamydia trachomatis infections in women. N Engl J Med 376(8):765,
2017
Workowski KA, Bachmann LH, Chan PA, et al: Sexually transmitted diseases treatment guidelines,
2021. MMWR 70(4):1, 2021
World Health Organization, United Nations Children’s Fund: Guideline: updates on HIV and infant
feeding: the duration of breastfeeding, and support from health services to improve feeding practices
among mothers living with HIV. Geneva, WHO, 2016

Zhou Y, Bian G, Zhou Q, et al: Detection of cytomegalovirus, human parvovirus B19, and herpes
simplex virus-1/2 in women with first-trimester spontaneous abortions. J Med Virol 87(10):1749,
2015
Zhu Y, Bateman BT, Gray KJ, et al: Oral fluconazole use in the first trimester and risk of congenital
malformations: population based cohort study. BMJ 369:m1494, 2020
Zofkie AC, Fomina YY, Roberts SW, et al: Effectiveness of Chlamydia trachomatis expedited partner
therapy in pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 225(3):325.e1, 2021

APPENDIX

I. SERUM AND BLOOD CONSTITUENTS
II. MATERNAL ECHOCARDIOGRAPHIC MEASUREMENTS
III. SONOGRAPHIC MEASUREMENTS OF THE EMBRYO AND
FETUS
APPENDIX I. Serum and Blood Constituents

APPENDIX II. Maternal Echocardiographic Measurements

APPENDIX III. Sonographic Measurements of the Embryo and Fetus
TABLE III-1. Mean Gestational Sac Diameter and Crown-Rump Length
and Corresponding Menstrual Age

TABLE III-2. Fetal Weight Percentiles According to Gestational Age

TABLE III-3. Smoothed Birth Weight Percentiles for Twins with
Dichorionic Placentation

TABLE III-4. Smoothed Birth Weight Percentiles for Twins with
Monochorionic Placentation

TABLE III-5. Head Circumference Standard Deviations Below the Mean
(cm) According to Gestational Age

TABLE III-6. Fetal Thoracic Circumference Measurements (cm)
According to Gestational Age

TABLE III-7. Length of Fetal Long Bones (mm) According to Gestational
Age

TABLE III-8. Ocular Parameter Percentiles According to Gestational Age

TABLE III-9. Transverse Cerebellar Diameter Percentiles According to
Gestational Age

TABLE III-10. Reference Values for Umbilical Artery Doppler Indices

REFERENCES: APPENDIX I
1. Acromite MT, Mantzoros CS, Leach RE, et al: Androgens in preeclampsia. Am J Obstet Gynecol
180:60, 1999
2. Álvarez SI, Castañón SG, Ruata MLC, et al: Updating of normal levels of copper, zinc and selenium
in serum of pregnant women. J Trace Elem Med Biol 21(S1):49, 2007

3. Ardawi MSM, Nasrat HAN, BA’Aqueel HS: Calcium-regulating hormones and parathyroid
hormone-related peptide in normal human pregnancy and postpartum: a longitudinal study. Eur J
Endocrinol 137:402, 1997
4. Aslam N, Ong C, Woelfer B, et al: Serum CA 125 at 11–14 weeks of gestation in women with
morphologically normal ovaries. BJOG 107(5): 689, 2000
5. Aziz Karim S, Khurshid M, Rizvi JH, et al: Platelets and leucocyte counts in pregnancy. J Pak Med
Assoc 42:86, 1992
6. Bacq Y, Zarka O, Bréchot JF, et al: Liver function tests in normal pregnancy: a prospective study of
102 pregnant women and 102 matched controls. Hepatology 23:1030, 1996
7. Balloch AJ, Cauchi MN: Reference ranges for haematology parameters in pregnancy derived from
patient populations. Clin Lab Haematol 15:7, 1993
8. Beguin Y, Lipscei G, Thourmsin H, et al: Blunted erythropoietin production and decreased
erythropoiesis in early pregnancy. Blood 78(1):89, 1991
9. Belo L, Caslake M, Gaffney D, et al: Changes in LDL size and HDL concentration in normal and
preeclamptic pregnancies. Atherosclerosis 162:425, 2002
10. Belo L, Santos-Silva A, Rocha S, et al: Fluctuations in C-reactive protein concentration and
neutrophil activation during normal human pregnancy. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 123:46,
2005
11. Bianco I, Mastropietro F, D’Aseri C, et al: Serum levels of erythropoietin and soluble transferrin
receptor during pregnancy in non-β-thalassemic and β-thalassemic women. Haematologica 85:902,
2000
12. Borghi CB, Esposti DD, Immordino V, et al: Relationship of systemic hemodynamics, left ventricular
structure and function, and plasma natriuretic peptide concentrations during pregnancy complicated
by preeclampsia. Am J Obstet Gynecol 183:140, 2000
13. Braunwald E, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al (eds): Appendices. In Harrison’s Principles of Internal
Medicine, 15th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2001, p A-1
14. Burlingame J, Hyeong JA, Tang WHW: Changes in cardiovascular biomarkers throughout
pregnancy and the remote postpartum period. Am J Obstet Gynecol 208:S97, 2013
15. Carranza-Lira S, Hernández F, Sánchez M, et al: Prolactin secretion in molar and normal pregnancy.
Int J Gynaecol Obstet 60:137, 1998
16. Carter J: Serum bile acids in normal pregnancy. BJOG 98:540, 1991
17. Cerneca F, Ricci G, Simeone R, et al: Coagulation and fibrinolysis changes in normal pregnancy
increased levels of procoagulants and reduced levels of inhibitors during pregnancy induce a
hypercoagulable state, combined with a reactive fibrinolysis. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol
73:31, 1997
18. Choi JW, Pai SH: Tissue plasminogen activator levels change with plasma fibrinogen concentrations
during pregnancy. Ann Hematol 81:611, 2002
19. Davison JB, Vallotton MB, Lindheimer MD: Plasma osmolality and urinary concentration and
dilution during and after pregnancy: evidence that lateral recumbency inhibits maximal urinary
concentrating ability. BJOG 88:472, 1981
20. Desoye G, Schweditsch MO, Pfeiffer KP, et al: Correlation of hormones with lipid and lipoprotein
levels during normal pregnancy and postpartum. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 64:704, 1987
21. Dunlop W: Serial changes in renal haemodynamics during normal human pregnancy. BJOG 88:1,
1981
22. Dux S, Yaron A, Carmel A, et al: Renin, aldosterone, and serum-converting enzyme activity during
normal and hypertensive pregnancy. Gynecol Obstet Invest 17:252, 1984

23. Elsheikh A, Creatsas G, Mastorakos G, et al: The renin-aldosterone system during normal and
hypertensive pregnancy. Arch Gynecol Obstet 264:182, 2001
24. Ezimokhai M, Davison JM, Philips PR, et al: Non-postural serial changes in renal function during the
third trimester of normal human pregnancy. BJOG 88:465, 1981
25. Fadel HE, Northrop G, Misenhimer HR, et al: Acid-base determinations in amniotic fluid and blood
of normal late pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 53:99, 1979
26. Fauci AS, Kasper DL, Longo E, et al (eds): Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 17th ed.
New York, McGraw Hill, 2008
27. Faught W, Garner P, Jones G, et al: Changes in protein C and protein S levels in normal pregnancy.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 172:147, 1995
28. Francalanci I, Comeglio P, Liotta AA, et al: D-Dimer concentrations during normal pregnancy, as
measured by ELISA. Thromb Res 78:399, 1995
29. Hale SA, Sobel B, Benvenuto A, et al: Coagulation and fibrinolytic system protein profiles in women
with normal pregnancies and pregnancies complicated by hypertension. Pregnancy Hypertens
2(2):152, 2012
30. Handwerker SM, Altura BT, Altura BM: Serum ionized magnesium and other electrolytes in the
antenatal period of human pregnancy. J Am Coll Nutr 15:36, 1996
31. Haram K, Augensen K, Elsayed S: Serum protein pattern in normal pregnancy with special
reference to acute phase reactants. BJOG 90(2):139, 1983
32. Higby K, Suiter CR, Phelps JY, et al: Normal values of urinary albumin and total protein excretion
during pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 171:984, 1994
33. Hui C, Lili M, Libin C, et al: Changes in coagulation and hemodynamics during pregnancy: a
prospective longitudinal study of 58 cases. Arch Gynecol Obstet 285:1231, 2012
34. Hwang HS, Kwon JY, Kim MA, et al: Maternal serum highly sensitive C-reactive protein in normal
pregnancy and pre-eclampsia. Int J Gynecol Obstet 98:105, 2007
35. Hytten FE, Lind T: Diagnostic Indices in Pregnancy. Summit, CIBA-GEIGY Corporation, 1975
36. Ilhan N, Ilhan N, Simsek M: The changes of trace elements, malondialdehyde levels and superoxide
dismutase activities in pregnancy with or without preeclampsia. Clin Biochem 35:393, 2002
37. Jacobs IJ, Fay TN, Stabile I, et al: The distribution of CA 125 in the reproductive tract of pregnant
and non-pregnant women. BJOG 95(11):1190, 1988
38. Jimenez DM, Pocovi M, Ramon-Cajal J, et al: Longitudinal study of plasma lipids and lipoprotein
cholesterol in normal pregnancy and puerperium. Gynecol Obstet Invest 25:158, 1988
39. Jóźwik M, Jóźwik M, Pietrzycki, et al: Maternal and fetal blood ammonia concentrations in normal
term human pregnancies. Biol Neonate 87:38, 2005
40. Karsenti D, Bacq Y, Bréchot JF, et al: Serum amylase and lipase activities in normal pregnancy: a
prospective case-control study. Am J Gastroenterol 96:697, 2001
41. Kato T, Seki K, Matsui H, et al: Monomeric calcitonin in pregnant women and in cord blood. Obstet
Gynecol 92:241, 1998
42. Kim EH, Lim JH, Kim YH, et al: The relationship between aldosterone to renin ratio and RI value of
the uterine artery in the preeclamptic patient vs. normal pregnancy. Yonsei Med J 49(1):138, 2008
43. Kline JA, Williams GW, Hernandez-Nino J: D-Dimer concentrations in normal pregnancy: new
diagnostic thresholds are needed. Clin Chem 51:825, 2005
44. Koscica KL, Bebbington M, Bernstein PS: Are maternal serum troponin I levels affected by vaginal
or cesarean delivery? Am J Perinatol 21(1):31, 2004
45. Larrea F, Méndez I, Parra A: Serum pattern of different molecular forms of prolactin during normal
human pregnancy. Hum Reprod 8:1617, 1993

46. Larsson A, Palm M, Hansson L-O, et al: Reference values for clinical chemistry tests during normal
pregnancy. BJOG 115:874, 2008
47. Lattuada A, Rossi E, Calzarossa C, et al: Mild to moderate reduction of a von Willebrand factor
cleaving protease (ADAMTS-13) in pregnant women with HELLP microangiopathic syndrome.
Haematologica 88(9): 1029, 2003
48. Leek AE, Ruoss CF, Kitau MG, et al: Maternal plasma alphafetoprotein levels in the second half of
normal pregnancy: relationship to fetal weight, and maternal age and parity. BJOG 82:669, 1975
49. Lefkowitz JB, Clarke SH, Barbour LA: Comparison of protein S functional and antigenic assays in
normal pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 175:657, 1996
50. Leiserowitz GS, Evans AT, Samuels SJ, et al: Creatine kinase and its MB isoenzyme in the third
trimester and the peripartum period. J Reprod Med 37:910, 1992
51. Liu XH, Jiang YM, Shi H, et al: Prospective, sequential, longitudinal study of coagulation changes
during pregnancy in Chinese women. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 105(3):240, 2009
52. Lockitch G: Handbook of Diagnostic Biochemistry and Hematology in Normal Pregnancy. Boca
Raton, CRC Press, 1993
53. López-Quesada E, Vilaseca MA, Lailla JM: Plasma total homocysteine in uncomplicated pregnancy
and in preeclampsia. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 108:45, 2003
54. Louro MO, Cocho JA, Tutor JC: Assessment of copper status in pregnancy by means of
determining the specific oxidase activity of ceruloplasmin. Clin Chim Acta 312:123, 2001
55. Mannucci PM, Canciani MT, Forza I, et al: Changes in health and disease of the metalloprotease
that cleaves von Willebrand factor. Blood 98(9): 2730, 2001
56. Milman N, Bergholt T, Byg KE, et al: Reference intervals for haematological variables during
normal pregnancy and postpartum in 434 healthy Danish women. Eur J Haematol 79:39, 2007
57. Milman N, Byg KE, Hvas AM, et al: Erythrocyte folate, plasma folate and plasma homocysteine
during normal pregnancy and postpartum: a longitudinal study comprising 404 Danish women. Eur J
Haematol 76:200, 2006
58. Milman N, Graudal N, Nielsen OJ: Serum erythropoietin during normal pregnancy: relationship to
hemoglobin and iron status markers and impact of iron supplementation in a longitudinal, placebocontrolled study on 118 women. Int J Hematol 66:159, 1997
59. Mimouni F, Tsang RC, Hertzbert VS, et al: Parathyroid hormone and calcitriol changes in normal
and insulin-dependent diabetic pregnancies. Obstet Gynecol 74:49, 1989
60. Montelongo A, Lasunción MA, Pallardo LF, et al: Longitudinal study of plasma lipoproteins and
hormones during pregnancy in normal and diabetic women. Diabetes 41:1651, 1992
61. Moran P, Baylis PH, Lindheimer, et al: Glomerular ultrafiltration in normal and preeclamptic
pregnancy. J Am Soc Nephrol 14:648, 2003
62. Morse M: Establishing a normal range for D-dimer levels through pregnancy to aid in the diagnosis
of pulmonary embolism and deep vein thrombosis. J Thromb Haemost 2:1202, 2004
63. O’Leary P, Boyne P, Flett P, et al: Longitudinal assessment of changes in reproductive hormones
during normal pregnancy. Clin Chem 35(5):667, 1991
64. Özerol E, Özerol I, Gökdeniz R, et al: Effect of smoking on serum concentrations of total
homocysteine, folate, vitamin B12, and nitric oxide in pregnancy: a preliminary study. Fetal Diagn
Ther 19:145, 2004
65. Parente JV, Franco JG, Greene LJ, et al: Angiotensin-converting enzyme: serum levels during
normal pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 135:586, 1979
66. Piechota W, Staszewski A: Reference ranges of lipids and apolipoproteins in pregnancy. Eur J
Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 45:27, 1992

67. Pitkin RM, Gebhardt MP: Serum calcium concentrations in human pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol
127:775, 1977
68. Price A, Obel O, Cresswell J, et al: Comparison of thyroid function in pregnant and non-pregnant
Asian and western Caucasian women. Clin Chim Acta 208:91, 2001
69. Qvist I, Abdulla M, Jägerstad M, et al: Iron, zinc and folate status during pregnancy and two months
after delivery. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 65:15, 1986
70. Radder JK, Van Roosmalen J: HbA1c in healthy, pregnant women. Neth J Med 63:256, 2005
71. Reiter EO, Braunstein GD, Vargas A, et al: Changes in 25-hydroxyvitamin D and 24,25dihydroxyvitamin D during pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 135:227, 1979
72. Risberg A, Larsson A, Olsson K, et al: Relationship between urinary albumin and albumin/creatinine
ratio during normal pregnancy and preeclampsia. Scand J Clin Lab Invest 64:17, 2004
73. Romslo I, Haram K, Sagen N, et al: Iron requirement in normal pregnancy as assessed by serum
ferritin, serum transferrin saturation and erythrocyte protoporphyrin determinations. BJOG 90:101,
1983
74. Shakhmatova EI, Osipova NA, Natochin YV: Changes in osmolality and blood serum ion
concentrations in pregnancy. Hum Physiol 26:92, 2000
75. Sharma SC, Sabra A, Molloy A, et al: Comparison of blood levels of histamine and total ascorbic
acid in pre-eclampsia with normal pregnancy. Hum Nutr Clin Nutr 38C:3, 1984
76. Shivvers SA, Wians FH, Keffer JH, et al: Maternal cardiac troponin I levels during labor and
delivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 180:122, 1999
77. Singh HJ, Mohammad NH, Nila A: Serum calcium and parathormone during normal pregnancy in
Malay women. J Matern Fetal Med 8:95, 1999
78. Spiropoulos K, Prodromaki E, Tsapanos V: Effect of body position on PaO2 and PaCO2 during
pregnancy. Gynecol Obstet Invest 58:22, 2004
79. Spitzer M, Kaushal N, Benjamin F: Maternal CA-125 levels in pregnancy and the puerperium. J
Reprod Med 43(4):387, 1998
80. Strickland DM, Hauth JC, Widish J, et al: Amylase and isoamylase activities in serum of pregnant
women. Obstet Gynecol 63:389, 1984
81. Suri D, Moran J, Hibbard JU, et al: Assessment of adrenal reserve in pregnancy: defining the normal
response to the adrenocorticotropin stimulation test. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 91:3866, 2006
82. Van Buul EJA, Steegers EAP, Jongsma HW, et al: Haematological and biochemical profile of
uncomplicated pregnancy in nulliparous women: a longitudinal study. Neth J Med 46:73, 1995
83. van den Broek NR, Letsky EA: Pregnancy and the erythrocyte sedimentation rate. BJOG 108:1164,
2001
84. Walker MC, Smith GN, Perkins SL, et al: Changes in homocysteine levels during normal pregnancy.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 180:660, 1999
85. Wickström K, Edelstam G, Löwbeer CH, et al: Reference intervals for plasma levels of fibronectin,
von Willebrand factor, free protein S and antithrombin during third-trimester pregnancy. Scand J Clin
Lab Invest 64:31, 2004

REFERENCES: APPENDIX II
Savu O, Jurcuţ R, Giuşcă S, et al: Morphological and functional adaptation of the maternal heart during
pregnancy. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging 5:289, 2012

Vitarelli A, Capotosto L: Role of echocardiography in the assessment and management of adult
congenital heart disease in pregnancy. Int J Cardiovasc Imaging 27(6):843, 2011

REFERENCES: APPENDIX III
Ananth CV, Vintzileos, Shen-Schwarz S, et al: Standards of birth weight in twin gestations. Obstet
Gynecol 91:917, 1998
Daya S, Woods S, Ward S, et al: Early pregnancy assessment with transvaginal ultrasound scanning.
CMAJ 144(4):441, 1991
Chervenak FA, Jeanty P, Cantraine F, et al: The diagnosis of fetal microcephaly. Am J Obstet Gynecol
149(5):512, 1984
Chitkara J, Rosenberg J, Chervenak FA, et al: Prenatal sonographic assessment of the fetal thorax:
normal values. Am J Obstet Gynecol 156:1069, 1987
Chitty LS, Altman DG: Charts of fetal size: limb bones. BJOG 109(8):919, 2002
Hadlock FP, Harrist RB, Marinez-Poyer J: In utero analysis of fetal growth: a sonographic weight
standard. Radiology 181:129, 1991
Hadlock FP, Shah YP, Kanon DJ, et al: Fetal crown-rump length: reevaluation of relation to menstrual
age (5-18 weeks) with high-resolution real-time US. Radiology 182(2):501, 1992
Kofinas AD, Espeland MA, Penry M, et al: Uteroplacental Doppler flow velocimetry waveform indices
in normal pregnancy: a statistical exercise and the development of appropriate references values.
Am J Perinatol 9:94, 1992
Nyberg DA, Mack LA, Laing FC, et al: Distinguishing normal from abnormal gestational sac growth in
early pregnancy. J Ultrasound Med 6(1):23, 1987
Robinson HP, Fleming JE: A critical evaluation of sonar “crown-rump length” measurements. BJOG
82(9):702, 1975
Romero R, Pilu G, Jeanty P, et al: Prenatal diagnosis of congenital anomalies. Norwalk, Appleton &
Lange, 1988, p 83
Sherer DM, Sokolovski M, Dalloul M, et al: Nomograms of the axial fetal cerebellar hemisphere
circumference and area throughout gestation. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 29(1):32, 2007

INDEX
Note: Page references for figures are indicated by f, for tables by t.

3-vessel tracheal view (3VTV), fetal heart, 290f, 291
3-vessel view (3VV), fetal heart, 290f, 291
10-percent tumor, 1100
17-alpha-hydroxyprogesterone caproate (17-OHPC), 7, 795
for multifetal gestation, 854
20α-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (20α-HSD), 655
21-hydroxylase deficiency, 369
22q11.2 microdeletion syndrome, 315, 316t
39-week rule, 629
45,X (Turner syndrome), 36–37, 313–314
aneuploidy screening, 333
analyte-based, 337
cell-free DNA, 335, 335t
aortic size index, 37
cystic hygroma, 285, 286f
fetal anomalies, 339t
fetal-growth restriction, 829
isochromosomes, 317
miscarriage, 199
nonimmune hydrops, 362, 363
prevalence, 309, 309f
primary ovarian insufficiency, 36
46,XX disorders of sex development, 38–39
androgen excess, 38–39
gonadal dysgenesis, 38
ovarian development, abnormal, 38
ovotesticular, 38
testicular, 38
46,XY disorders of sex development, 37–38
androgen production/action, abnormal, 37–38
complete gonadal dysgenesis, 37
gonadal dysgenesis, 37
mixed gonadal dysgenesis, 37

partial gonadal dysgenesis, 37
testicular regression, 37
47,XXX, 37, 314
aneuploidy screening, 333
cell-free DNA, 335, 335t
prevalence, 309, 309f
47,XXY (Klinefelter syndrome), 37, 314
aneuploidy screening, 333
cell-free DNA, 335, 335t
47,XYY, 37
aneuploidy screening, 333
cell-free DNA, 335, 335t
prevalence, 309, 309f

A
Abdomen, fetal, 274, 274f
Abdomen, fetal anatomy, 295–301
bowel, 295
gallbladder and stomach, 295, 295f
gastrointestinal obstruction, 296
anal atresia, 296
duodenal atresia, 296, 296f
esophageal atresia, 296
jejunoileal atresia, 296, 296f
hepatosplenomegaly, 295
liver and spleen, 295, 295f
ventral wall, normal, 297, 297f
ventral wall defects, 297–298
body stalk anomaly, 297–298, 298f
gastroschisis, 297, 297f
omphalocele, 297, 297f
visible, 295
Abdomen, maternal
MRI, 267
pain, pregnancy sources, 221
Abdominal incisions, maternal
closure
secondary, 653–654, 653f
vacuum-assisted, 654, 654f, 655t
fascial dehiscence, 654, 655f
infections, puerperal, 653–654
prophylaxis, negative-pressure, 654, 655t
Abdominal pregnancy, 230–231
Abdominal wall, maternal

anterior anatomy
blood supply and lymphatics, 13–14, 13f
innervation, 13f, 14, 14f
ligaments, 13, 13f
muscles, 12, 13f
skin, subcutaneous layer, and fascia, 12, 13f
transversalis fascia and peritoneum, 12–13, 13f
puerperium, 638
skin, 55
Abnormally adherent placenta. See Placenta accreta spectrum (PAS)
Abnormal nonstress test, 387, 388–389, 388f
ABO compatibility, 354
ABO incompatibility, 354–355
maternal-fetal, 353
Abortion. See also specific types
anticoagulation and, 986
anti-D immunoglobulin, 203
complete, 201, 201f, 201t
definitions, 198, 208
elective, 208
euploid, 199
incomplete, 201
inevitable, previable fetus, 202–203
medication
first-trimester, 211–212, 212t
second-trimester, 213–214
missed, 201–202, 202t
rate, 208
ratio, 208
spontaneous. See Spontaneous abortion
therapeutic, 208
threatened, 200–201, 200f
immunoglobulin prophylaxis, 203
tubal, 221
voluntary, 208
Abortion, induced, 208–214
consequences, elective abortion, 214
definitions, 198, 208
first-trimester methods, 209–212
medical, 211–212, 212t
surgical, 209–211, 209f
legal influence, 208
postabortal conception, 214
provider availability, 208–209

second-trimester, hemorrhage, 776
second-trimester, methods, 213–214
dilation and evacuation, 213
fetal and placental evaluation, 214
medication abortion, 213–214
Abortion, septic, 203
intrauterine devices, 666
Abortus, defined, 3, 198, 785
Abrupt baseline spiking, 447f, 450
Abruptio placentae, 749
Abscess
from continuous lumbar epidural analgesia, 477
puerperal
adnexal, 656
breast, 660
ovarian, 656
psoas, 657
tuboovarian, IUDs, 666
Absence seizures, 1129
Absolute risk, 148
Acardiac twinning, 850, 850f
acephalus twin, 850
amorphous twin, 850, 850f
Acceleration phase, first stage of labor, 424, 424f
Accelerator influences, fetal heart rate, 449
Acetaminophen
hepatotoxicity, 1041
for migraine, 1128, 1128t
Acetylcholinesterase, amnionic fluid screening, 332–333
Achalasia, 1017
Achondroplasia, 302
Acid–base
equilibrium, maternal, 67
physiology, fetal, 591–592, 592f
study, hypoxic ischemic encephalopathy, 601
Acidemia, newborn
clinical significance, 592–593, 592t
metabolic, 591, 593
mixed respiratory–metabolic, 591
respiratory, 591, 593
Acitretin, teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 154
Acne vulgaris, 1156–1157
Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS), 1219. See also Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia, 965

Acquired thrombophilias, 979
antiphospholipid syndrome, 979
Acrania, 276, 277f
Acrocentric chromosomes, 315–316
Acromegaly, 1103–1104
Acromelia, 301
Actin–myosin interactions, parturition phase 1, 401, 402f
Actinomyces israelii, from IUDs, 666
Actinomycin D, for gestational trophoblastic neoplasia, 242
Activated protein C, 62
Active phase, first stage of labor, 424f, 425
Active-phase labor disorders, 434–437, 435t
arrest, 434, 435–436, 435f, 435t
Obstetric Care Consensus Committee, 436–437, 436f
protraction, 434–435, 435t, 436
Activin, placental, 96t, 98
Activity, fetal, determinants, 384
Acute chest syndrome, 1054
Acute coronary syndrome, maternal, 937–938
Acute fatty liver of pregnancy (AFLP), 1031t, 1033–1035
clinical findings and diagnosis, 1031t, 1033–1035, 1034t
etiopathogenesis, 1033
gross specimen, 1033, 1033f
HELLP syndrome, 1030–1031, 1031t
management, 1035
outcomes, maternal and perinatal, 1035
preeclampsia syndromes, 63
Swansea criteria, 1034–1035, 1034t
Acute flaccid myelitis, 1192
Acute kidney injury (AKI), 1005–1007, 1007f
placental abruption, 753–754
preeclampsia syndromes, 699
Acute leukemias, 14–15
Acute liver failure in pregnancy, 1030–1031, 1033f, 1034t
Acute lung injury, 884, 884t
Acute nephritic syndromes, 1001t, 1002
Acute poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis, 1002
Acute pulmonary edema, 883–884, 883t
cardiogenic hydrostatic, 883–884
diagnosis, 884
management, 884
severe preeclampsia and eclampsia, 724
noncardiogenic permeability, 883, 883t
Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), 884–887

clinical course, 885, 885f
definitions, 884
etiopathogenesis, 884–885, 884t
management, 883
mechanical ventilation, 885–887, 886f
conventional, 885
extracorporeal membrane oxygenation, 886
fetal oxygenation, 886, 886f
IV fluids, 886–887
mode, 885–886
noninvasive, 885
positive end-expiratory pressure, 886
pregnancy, 886
preterm newborn, 616
outcomes, long-term, 887
pyelonephritis, 997
Acute yellow atrophy, 1031t, 1033–1035. See also Acute fatty liver of pregnancy (AFLP)
Acyclovir, for herpes simplex virus, 1214–1215, 1215t
Adalimumab
for dermatological disorders, 1159, 1159t
for hidradenitis suppurativa, 1158
for inflammatory bowel disease, 1021–1022, 1021t
ADAMTS13, 1060
Adapalene
for dermatologic disorders, 1159, 1159t
teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 155
Adaptive immunity, fetal and newborn, 1182
Addison disease, 1102
maternal, on placental estrogen production, 103
Addisonian pernicious anemia, 1050
Adenomyosis, 1168–1169
Adenosine triphosphate (ATP)-binding cassette subfamily A member 3 (ABCA3) mutation, 600
Adenovirus, 1192
Adhesins, urinary tract infections, 995
Adhesions
hysterotomy, cesarean, 558
implantation, 86
Adiana Permanent Contraception system, 684
Adipocytokines, 58. See also specific types
Adipokines, 902
Adiponectin, 53, 58
Adipose tissue, pathophysiology, 902
Adnexal abscess, puerperal, 656
Adnexal cysts, 1171–1172

Adnexal mass, asymptomatic, 1170, 1170f
Adrenal cortical hypoplasia, fetal, 102
Adrenal crisis, fetal salt-wasting, 369
Adrenal gland–placental interactions, fetal, 102–103
Adrenal glands. See also specific glands and hormones
disorders, 1100–1103
adrenal insufficiency, 1102
aldosteronism, primary, 1103
Cushing syndrome, 1101–1102, 1102t
pheochromocytoma, 1100–1101, 1101f, 1101t
fetal, 134
fetal–placental interactions, 102–103
adrenal steroid precursor, fetal, 102
estriol synthesis, placental, 100f, 102
estrogen production, 102–103
maternal
aldosterone, 73–74
androgens, 74
cortisol, 73, 73f
deoxycorticosterone, 74
Adrenal insufficiency, 1102
Sheehan syndrome, 1104
Adrenalitis, autoimmune, 1102
Adrenal steroid precursor, fetal, 102
Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), 73, 73f
adrenal insufficiency, 1102
Cushing syndrome, 1101
fetal, 133
placental, 96t
Advanced maternal age (AMA), 333
aneuploidy risk, 333, 333f, 333t
autosomal trisomies, 310, 310f
placental abruption, 751
placenta previa risk, 756
preconceptual counseling, 169, 169f
trisomy 21 risk, 333, 333t
twinning, 839
Adynamic ileus, peritonitis, 656
Aftercoming head, partial breech extraction, 525–526, 525f–526f
Afterpains, 636
Age
gestational. See Gestational age
maternal, 169, 169f
advanced. See Advanced maternal age (AMA)

ovulation, 121, 121f
parental, assisted reproductive technologies, 169
paternal, 169
advanced, autosomal dominant inheritance, 319–320
disorders, 319
preconceptual counseling, 169
postconceptual, 121, 121f
Agenesis of corpus callosum, 278, 278f, 279f
Agnathia-otocephaly, 285, 286f
AIDS. See Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS); Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
Air bronchogram, 615, 616f
Air travel, prenatal, 188
Airway conductance, 67
Alagille syndrome, 316t
ALARA principle, 182, 247
Albumin, serum, 70
Albuterol, for asthma, 959–960, 959f, 960t
Alcock canal, 21
Alcohol
on fetal growth, 828
first-trimester spontaneous abortion, 200
Alcohol use/abuse
binge drinking, in fetal alcohol syndrome, 149–150
breastfeeding, 641
neonatal abstinence syndrome, 605
prenatal, 180
teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 146, 148–150, 149f, 149t
Aldosterone
maternal, 73–74
preeclampsia syndrome, 61
Aldosteronism, primary, 1103
Alkaline phosphatase, 70
Allelic heterogeneity, 319
All-fours maneuver, 503
Alliance for Innovation on Maternal Health (AIM), 6
Alloimmune thrombocytopenia, 1060
fetal, 359, 360t
Alloimmunization, red cell, 352–357. See also Red cell alloimmunization
Allopregnanolone, for major depression, 1147
all-trans-retinoic acid, 1176
Alobar holoprosencephaly, 279, 279f
Alpha1-adrenergic blockers, for multiple sclerosis, 1135
Alpha2-glycoprotein, pregnancy-associated, 1118

α/β-adrenergic blocker, for chronic hypertension, 949, 949t
17-Alpha-hydroxyprogesterone caproate (17-OHPC), 7
for multifetal gestation, 854
Alpha-methyldopa, hemolysis from, 1051
Alpha thalassemias, 1056–1057, 1057t
α0-thalassemia, nonimmune hydrops fetalis, 362
α-agonist, for chronic hypertension, 949, 949t
α-methyldopa, for chronic hypertension, severe, 950
Alteplase, for cerebral artery thrombosis, 1132
Amaurosis, preeclampsia syndromes, 65
Ambiguous genitalia, 35, 298, 299f
Ambrisentan, teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 153
Amebiasis, 1200
Amelia, 303
Amenorrhea, 176
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2
American Diabetes Association classification, 1069, 1070t
Amiloride, for aldosteronism, 1103
Amino acids, fetal nutrition, 136
Amitriptyline
for depression, 1145–1147, 1146t
for multiple sclerosis, 1135
Amlodipine, for hypertension, 951
chronic, 949, 949t
Amnestic response, 355
Amniocentesis, 344–346, 345f, 345t
for infection detection, preterm labor, 802
Amniochorion, abnormalities
amnionic band sequence, 110t, 113
amnionic sheet, 113
amnion nodosum, 113
chorioamnionitis, 113
limb-body wall complex, 113
Amnioinfusion
intrapartum, 600
for nonreassuring fetal status, 459, 459t
Amnion, 94–95
cell histogenesis, 94–95
epithelial cells, 94–95
mesenchymal cells, 95
cuboidal epithelium, 94, 94f
development, 88f, 94
layers, 94, 94f
metabolic functions, 95

prostaglandin synthesis, 399f, 400
structure and function, labor, 399, 399f
tensile strength, 95
Amnionic band sequence, 110t, 113, 276
Amnionic fluid. See also Hydramnios; Oligohydramnios; Polyhydramnios
acetylcholinesterase screening, 332–333
forebag, 411, 413, 413f
function, 255–256
imaging, 254–261. See also specific disorders
hydramnios, 257–260, 258f, 259t
oligohydramnios, 260–261, 261t
physiology, 254–257, 257t
semi-quantitative assessment (amniotic fluid index), 257, 258f
meconium in, 458
postterm pregnancy, 821
osmolality, 255–256, 256t
sterile intraamnionic inflammation, 789
Amnionic fluid embolism, 438, 743–745
diagnosis, 744–745, 745t
hemorrhage, obstetrical, 776
incidence and risk factors, 744
management, 745
outcomes, 745
pathophysiology, 743–744, 744f
Amnionic fluid index, postterm pregnancy, 818–819
Amnionic fluid volume
antepartum fetal assessment, 385
on activity at term, 384
biophysical profile, 389, 389t, 390f, 390t
biophysical profile, modified, 391
estimation, 391
heart rate decelerations, non stress testing, 389
paradoxical respiratory motion, 385
on fetal activity, 384
regulation, 255, 256t
Amnionicity, 839
Amnionic sheet, 113
Amnion nodosum, 113
Amnioreduction, 258
Amniotic fluid index, 257, 258f
Amniotomy
elective, 494, 494t
placental abruption, 755
Amoxicillin

for asymptomatic bacteriuria, 996, 996t
for Chlamydia trachomatis, 1212, 1212t
for dermatologic disorders, 1159, 1159t
Amphotericin B, for fungal pneumonia, 965
Ampicillin
for asymptomatic bacteriuria, 996, 996t
for pyelonephritis, 998
Ampicillin/sulbactam, for pneumonia, 963, 963t
Ampullary tubal pregnancy, 220, 220f
Amsel criteria, 1217
Anal atresia, fetal, 296
Anal canal, 20, 20f
Analgesia, 467–482. See also specific types
consultation, maternal factors, 468, 468t
labor, 468–470
multifetal gestation, 856
nerve blocks, 470–472
pain relief principles, 468
safety, 467
Analgesia, epidural, 473f, 475
combined spinal-epidural technique, 473f, 479
definition, 472
dural-puncture, 479
opioid, 479
for TOLAC/VBAC, 578
Analgesia, epidural, continuous lumbar, 473f, 475–479
complications, 473t, 475–477
abscesses, 477
back pain, 477
catheter tip shear, 477
CNS stimulation, 476
fever, 476–477
hematoma, 477
high spinal blockade, 475
hypotension, 476
ineffective analgesia, 475–476
contraindications, 475t, 478–479
anticoagulation, 478
preeclampsia-eclampsia, severe, 478–479
thrombocytopenia, 478
on labor, 477–478, 477t
cesarean delivery rates, 477–478, 478t
epidural placement timing, 478
fetal heart rate, 477

safety, 478
technique, 475, 476t
Analgesia, neuraxial, 472–480
combined spinal-epidural technique, 473f, 479
continuous lumbar epidural analgesia, 475–479
continuous spinal analgesia, during labor, 479
dural-puncture epidural, 479
epidural, 472, 473f, 475
epidural opioid analgesia, 479
epidural space anatomy, 472, 473f
local infiltration analgesia, 479–480, 480f
regional blocks, 472
spinal, 472
transversus abdominis plane block, 480
Analgesia, neuraxial, spinal (subarachnoid) block, 472–475
cesarean delivery, 472
complications, 473–474, 473t
arachnoiditis and meningitis, 474
bladder dysfunction, 474
convulsions, 474
high spinal blockade, 474
postdural puncture headache, 474
contraindications, 474–475, 475t
vaginal delivery, 472
Anal incontinence. See Incontinence, anal
Anal sphincter complex, 20–21
Anal triangle, 19–21
anal canal, 20, 20f
anal sphincter complex, 20–21
ischioanal fossae, 20f, 21, 21f
Analyte-based aneuploidy screening, 334, 336–339
benefits, 337
composite likelihood ratio, 336
first-trimester, 337–339
efficacy, 337–338
nuchal translucency, 337, 337f
second-trimester, 338–339
contingent sequential screening, 339
estriol, low maternal, 338–339
integrated screening, 339
MSAFP and neural-tube defects, 338, 338t
quadruple marker (quad), 338
sequential screening, 339
types, 336

ultrasound, 339–342
aneuploidy markers, 339–340, 339f, 339t
first-trimester markers, 340t, 341
second-trimester markers, 340f, 340t, 341–342, 341t. See also Ultrasound analyte-based
aneuploidy screening
Anatomy, fetal, 272–304. See also specific organs and systems
abdomen, 295–301. See also Abdomen, fetal
biometry, 272–274
abdominal circumference, 274, 274f
biparietal diameter, 272–274, 274f
crown-rump length, 272, 274f
femur length, 274, 274f
first trimester, 272
head circumference, 272–274
imaging, 272–273. See also Imaging, obstetrical
nomograms, 274
second and third trimesters, 272–273
brain and spine, 275–282
caudal regression sequence, 280, 281f
cerebellar hypoplasia, 276
corpus callosum, agenesis, 278, 278f, 279f
Dandy-Walker malformation, 279, 279f
hemivertebrae, 281–282, 282f
holoprosencephaly, 279, 279f
inferior vermian agenesis, 279
microcephaly, 280
neural-tube defects, 276–278, 277f
porencephaly, 280
sacrococcygeal teratoma, 280, 281f
schizencephaly, 280, 280f
sirenomelia, 280–281, 281f
sonographic evaluation
transcerebellar, 275–276, 275f
transthalamic, 275, 275f
transventricular, 275, 275f
spine regions, 276, 276f
ventriculomegaly, 278, 278f
detailed fetal
anatomic survey, 272, 273t
examination, 251–252, 251t
essential and minimal elements, 272, 273t
head, face, and neck, 282–286
agnathia-otocephaly, 285, 286f
brachycephaly, 283, 283f

craniofacial anatomy, normal, 282, 282f
cystic hygroma, 285–286, 286f
dolicocephaly, 283, 283f
epignathus, 285, 286f
facial clefts, 283–285, 285f
head imaging, nuchal cord, 282, 283f
micrognathia, 285, 285f
orbit and nose abnormalities, 283, 284f
heart, 288–295. See also Heart, fetal anatomy
kidneys and genitourinary tract, 298–301
MRI evaluation, 266
skeleton, 301–304
thorax, 286–288
abnormalities, 286–287
congenital cystic adenomatoid malformation, 287, 288f
congenital high airway obstruction sequence, 288, 289f
diaphragm, 286
diaphragmatic hernia, 287, 287f
normal, four-chamber view, 286, 287f
pulmonary hypoplasia, 286
pulmonary sequestration, 288, 289f
Anatomy, maternal, 12–29
abdominal wall, anterior, 12–14, 13f
blood supply and lymphatics, 13–14, 13f
innervation, 13f, 14, 14f
ligaments, 13, 13f
muscles, 12, 13f
skin, subcutaneous layer, and fascia, 12, 13f
transversalis fascia and peritoneum, 12–13, 13f
generative organs, internal, 22–27
blood supply, pelvic, 22f, 23–25, 24f
fallopian tubes, 22f, 26–27, 26f
innervation, pelvic, 25–26, 25f
lymphatics, pelvic, 25
ovaries, 22f, 26
uterus, 22–23, 22f
cervix, 22f, 23
endometrium, 22f, 23
ligaments, 22f, 23
myometrium, 23
perineum, 14–22, 15f
anal triangle, 19–21, 20f, 21f
pelvic diaphragm, 19, 19f
perineal body, 15f, 17, 17f

pudendal nerve, 21–22, 21f
urogenital triangle, 17–19, 18f
vagina and hymen, 16–17, 17f
vulva, 14–16, 15f, 16f
skeletal anatomy, pelvic, 27–29
bones and joints, 27–28, 27f
pelvic shapes, 28–29, 29f
planes and diameters, 28, 28f
midpelvis and pelvic outlet, 28, 28f
pelvic inlet, 27f, 28
urinary tract, lower, 27
bladder, 27
ureter, 22f, 27
Androgen(s). See also specific types
maternal, 74
production
46,XY disorders of sex development, 37–38
maternal tumors, on placental estrogen, 103
molar pregnancies, 237, 237f
Androgen-insensitivity syndrome, 38
Android pelvis, 28, 29f
Androstenedione, maternal, 74
Anembryonic gestation, 249
Anembryonic miscarriage, 199
Anemia(s), 1048–1053
acute blood loss, 1050
aplastic and hypoplastic, 1052–1053
bone marrow transplantation, 1053
pregnancy, 1052–1053
causes, 1048–1049, 1049t
of chronic disease, 1050
Cooley, 1057
definition and incidence, 1048, 1048t
fetal, 352–357
etiologies, 352
hemolytic disease of the fetus and newborn, 352
red cell alloimmunization, 352–357. See also Red cell alloimmunization
parvovirus B19, 352
treatment, fetal blood transfusions, 352, 356
fetal-growth restriction, 827
hematocrit values, pregnancy, 1048, 1048t
hemolytic, 1050–1052
autoimmune hemolysis, 1051
bacterial toxins, 1051

drug-induced hemolysis, 1051
erythrocyte enzyme deficiencies, 1052
inherited erythrocyte membrane defects, 1052
paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria, 1051
pregnancy-associated hemolysis, 1051
iron-deficiency, 1049–1050, 1049f
megaloblastic
folic acid deficiency, 1050
vitamin B12 deficiency, 1050
newborn, 605–606
on pregnancy outcomes, 1049
Anencephaly, 276
adrenal glands, 102
Anesthesia, general, for labor and delivery, 480–482
aspiration, 482
extubation, 481
fasting, 481–482
general principles, 467–468
induction, 481
inhalational anesthetics, 481
intubation, 480, 481
multifetal gestation, 856
obesity, risks, 908
obstetrical anesthesia services, 467–468
patient preparation, 480–481
personnel and equipment, 480
safety, 467, 467f
Anesthetic agents. See also specific types
on heart rate variability, fetal, 450
Anesthetic agents, for labor and delivery
inhalational, 481
nerve blocks, 470–472, 470t
cardiovascular toxicity, 471
CNS toxicity, 470–471
placement, test dosing, 470
Aneuploidy, 36, 237f, 252, 309. See also specific types
causes, 333
hydramnios, 258
nonimmune hydrops fetalis, 360, 362
nuchal translucency, 249–250
omphalocele, 296
risk, maternal age and, 333, 333f
umbilical artery abnormalities, 262
Aneuploidy screening, 327–328, 328f, 333–342

analyte-based, 334, 336–339. See also Analyte-based aneuploidy screening
cell-free DNA, 327–328, 328f, 328t, 334, 335–336, 336t
counseling, 334, 334t
false-negative rate, 334
false-positive rate, 335
PGT-A, 348
PGT-M, 348
PGT-SR, 348
positive predictive value, 335, 335t
test characteristics, 334–335
Aneurysm
Charcot-Bouchard, 1133
Circle of Willis, 937
intracranial, 1131f, 1133
berry, 1001
umbilical artery, 117
Angelman syndrome, 316t
imprinting, 322, 322t
Angiogenic/antiangiogenic factor imbalance, preeclampsia syndrome prediction, 703
Angiogenic factors, preeclampsia syndrome, 694–695, 694f
Angiographic embolization, for hemorrhage, 779–780
Angiography, maternal, 873, 873t
Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors
for chronic hypertension, 949
teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 150
Angiotensin II, 65
parturition phase 3, 413
preeclampsia syndrome, 61
Angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs)
for chronic hypertension, 949
teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 150
Angular pregnancy, 228–229
Anidulafungin, for candidiasis pneumonia, 965
Ankylosing spondylitis, 1109
Annovera, 673–674
Anomalies
May-Hegglin, 1059
renal, müllerian abnormalities with, 40, 40t
Anomalies, fetal. See also specific types
genitourinary, 31–47. See also Genitourinary anomalies, congenital
parturition delay, 408
ultrasonography, second- and third-trimester detection, 252
Anomalous fetuses, vaginal delivery, 505–506
Anorexia nervosa, 1149–1150

preconceptual counseling, 170
Anteflexion, uterine, 45
Antepartum care. See also specific topics
cardiovascular disorders, maternal, 920
Antepartum fetal assessment, 383–393. See also Assessment, antepartum fetal
Anterior asynclitism, 420, 422f
Anthrax, 1200
Anthropoid pelvis, 28, 29f
Antiangiogenic factors, preeclampsia syndrome, 694–695, 694f
Antiarrhythmics. See also specific types
fetal administration, 368
Anticardiolipin antibodies, 827–828, 1114
antiphospholipid syndrome, 1114
Anticipation, 321
Anticoagulation. See also specific types
continuous lumbar epidural analgesia and, 478
for pulmonary embolism, 982t, 988
for valve replacement before pregnancy, 922–923, 923t
recommendations, 923, 924f
Anticoagulation, for deep-vein thrombosis
abortion and, 986
complications, 985–986
heparin-induced osteoporosis, 986
heparin-induced thrombocytopenia, 985–986
delivery, 986
direct-acting oral anticoagulants, 985
labor and delivery, 985
low-molecular-weight heparin, 982t, 983–985, 983f
regimens, 982–983, 982t
unfractionated heparin, 983, 984t
warfarin compounds, 985
Anti-D alloimmunization
prevention, 356–357
serological weak D phenotypes, 357
Antidepressants. See also specific types
for major depression, 1145–1147, 1146t
for posttraumatic stress disorder, 1151
Anti-D immunoglobulin, 203, 356–357
in abortion, 203
for D-negative woman after delivery, 644
ectopic pregnancy, 221
after molar pregnancy termination, 239
Antidiuretic hormone, maternal, 71
Antiepileptics. See also specific types

preconceptual counseling, 166, 166t
teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 150
Antifungals. See also specific types
teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 150–151
Antigens
cancer antigen 125, 1169
Duffy group A, 354
erythrocyte, 352–353, 353t
erythrocyte D-antigen alloimmunization, 93
Kell, 354
leukocyte, human, 93, 692
minor, alloimmunization, 354
platelet, human, 359
Antihypertensives. See also specific types
for mild to moderate hypertension, 713, 714t
preeclampsia syndrome prevention, 704
Antiinflammatory agents. See also specific types
teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 151
Antileukotrienes, for asthma, 959
Antimüllerian hormone, 35
placental, 96t, 98
Antineoplastics, 1163. See also specific types
teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 152
Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA), 1119
Antinuclear antibodies (ANAs), systemic lupus erythematosus, 1110, 1110t
Antioxidants. See also specific types
for preeclampsia syndrome prevention, 704
for superimposed preeclampsia with chronic hypertension, prevention, 947
Antiphospholipid antibodies, 1114
pregnancy and, 1115
recurrent miscarriage, 204
testing, stillbirth evaluation, 627
Antiphospholipid antibody syndrome (APS), recurrent miscarriage, 204, 205t
Antiphospholipid syndrome, 979, 1114–1117
adverse pregnancy outcomes, 1115
antibodies against natural anticoagulants, 1114–1115, 1115t
anticardiolipin antibodies, 1114
β2-glycoprotein, 1114
fetal-growth restriction, 827–828
lupus anticoagulant, 1114
pathophysiology, 1114–1115
pregnancy and, 1115
thrombosis prevention, 1116
treatment

efficacy, 1116–1117, 1117t
pregnancy, 1116
Antipsychotics. See also specific types
teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 153
Antithrombin deficiency, 976
Antithrombotics. See also specific types
preeclampsia syndrome prevention, 704–705
Antithyroid antibodies, placental abruption risk, 753
Antivirals. See also specific types and indications
teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 151
Anti-β2 glycoprotein-I antibodies, fetal-growth restriction, 827–828
Antley-Bixler syndrome, 150
Anxiety disorders, 1148–1149
perinatal evaluation and screening, 1143
in pregnancy, 1148–1149
prevalence, 1148
treatment, 1146t, 1149
Aorta, maternal diseases of, 936–937
aortic coarctation, 937
aortic dissection, 936
Marfan syndrome, 936–937
Aortic coarctation, maternal, 937
Aortic compression, for hemorrhage, 780
Aortic dissection, maternal, 936
Aortic insufficiency, maternal, 925t, 927
Aortic size index (ASI), Turner syndrome, 37
Aortic stenosis, maternal, 925t, 926–927
Aortic valvuloplasty, fetal, 378
Apgar score, 590–591, 590t
cerebral palsy, 604, 604t
hypoxic ischemic encephalopathy, 601
Aplastic anemia, 1052–1053
bone marrow transplantation, 1053
pregnancy, 1052–1053
Apnea, newborn
primary, 587–588, 588f
resuscitation for, 587–588, 588f
secondary, 588, 588f
Apnea of prematurity, 617
Appendicitis, 1023–1025, 1024f
antimicrobial vs. surgical treatment, 1024
CT of, 1024
diagnosis, 1023–1024, 1024f
incidence, 1023

management, 1024
outcomes, pregnancy, 1025
Apposition, implantation, 86
Arachnoiditis, from spinal block, 474
Arcuate ligament of pubis, 27
Arcuate uterus (class VI), 41f, 44f, 45
Arhinia with proboscis, 283, 284f
Arias-Stella reaction, 53
Aripiprazole
for psychosis, 1145, 1146t
teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 153
Arms, partial breech extraction, 524, 524f, 525f
Aromatase deficiency, fetal-placental, 102
Arrest disorder (labor), 434, 435–436, 435f, 435t
Arrhythmias
fetal, 367–369, 368f
atrial flutter, 368, 368f
blocked atrial bigeminy, 367
bradyarrhythmias, 368–369
monitoring, 450–451
premature atrial contractions, 367–368
sinus tachycardia, 367
supraventricular tachycardia, 367–368, 368f
tachyarrhythmias, 367, 368, 368f
maternal, 935–936
bradyarrhythmias, 935
prolonged QT-interval, 936
supraventricular tachycardias, 935–936
ventricular tachycardias, 936
Arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia, maternal, 934, 936
Artemisia vulgaris, 529
Arterial switch operation, pregnancy after, 929
Arteries
inferior epigastric, 13, 13f
pudendal, 13, 13f, 15, 17, 18, 19, 21, 22
external, 13, 13f
superficial circumflex, 13, 13f
superficial epigastric, 13, 13f
Arteriovenous malformations, hemorrhagic stroke, 1131f, 1131t, 1133–1134
Arteriovenous oxygen, maternal, 67
Artery ligation, for hemorrhage, 779, 779f
Arthritis
psoriatic, 1109
rheumatoid, 1117–1118

syndromes, 1109
Asherman syndrome, recurrent miscarriage, 204, 211
Asherson syndrome, 1114
Ashkenazi Jewish recessive diseases, carrier screening, 343–344
Tay-Sachs disease, 343, 344
Asphyxia, Apgar score based definitions, 591
Asphyxia neonatorum, 601. See also Cerebral palsy
Aspiration
from anesthesia, labor and delivery, 482
meconium aspiration syndrome, 132, 600–601, 817
vacuum, 210, 210f, 211f
Aspirin
low-dose prophylaxis
for preeclampsia syndrome, 705
for superimposed preeclampsia with chronic hypertension, 947
teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 151
Assaults, pregnancy, 892–893
Assessment. See also specific types and indications
Assessment, antepartum fetal, 383–393
biophysical profile, 389–390
components and scores, 389, 389t, 390f
interpretation and management, 389–390, 389t
modified, 390–391
umbilical venous blood pH and, 390, 390t
breathing, 385–386
chest wall movement, paradoxical, 385, 385f
gasps/sighs, 385
irregular bursts, 385
time spent, percentage, 385, 386f
contraction stress test, uterine, 386, 386t
Doppler velocimetry, 391
blood flow velocity and applications, 391
ductus venosus, 391–392
middle cerebral artery, 392
umbilical artery, 391
uterine artery, 392
hypertension, chronic, 952
indications, 392, 392t
movements, 383–385
activity determinants, 384
behavioral states, 383–384, 384f
clinical application, 384–385
maternal perception, 384, 384f
nonstress test, 386–389

false-reactive tests, 389
fetal heart acceleration, 387, 387f
for fetal well-being, 386
heart rate decelerations, 389
interval between testing, 389
nonreactive (abnormal), 387, 388–389, 388f
reactive (normal), 387–388, 387f
normal, stillbirth rates, 392, 393t
testing summary, 392–393
timing, 392–393
Assessment, intrapartum fetal, 446–463. See also specific topics
electrocardiography, 456–457, 456f
electronic fetal monitoring, 446–454. See also Fetal monitoring, electronic
heart rate
nonreassuring, 457
reassuring, 457
nonreassuring status, 457–461, 460f. See also Nonreassuring fetal status
pulse oximetry, 456
scalp blood sampling, 455
scalp stimulation, 455–456
uterine activity surveillance, 461–463. See also under Uterine activity
vibroacoustic stimulation, 456
Assist-control ventilation, 885
Assisted reproductive technologies (ART)
ectopic pregnancy with, 221
maternal age, 169
multifetal pregnancy, 838, 839
ovarian pregnancy and, 231
placenta previa risk, 757
twinning, 838
monozygotic, 839, 840f
Asthma, 956–961
clinical course and severity, 957, 957f, 957t
clinical evaluation, 957t, 958–959
fetal effects, 958, 958t
management, acute
early treatment, 960–961, 961f
labor and delivery, 961
status asthmaticus and respiratory failure, 957f, 961
management, general
agents, 959, 959f, 960t
guidelines, 959
vitamin D, 959
pathophysiology, 956–957

pregnancy on, 957–958
pregnancy outcome, 958
Astute clinician model, 146
Asymptomatic bacteruria, 995, 996–997, 996t
Asynclitism, 420, 422f
anterior, 420, 422f
posterior, 420, 422f
Ataxic cerebral palsy, 602, 620
Atelectasis, puerperal, 650
Atherosclerotic disease, maternal, myocardial infarction, 938
Atherosis, 692
Atopic eruption of pregnancy, 1155t, 1156
Atopobium vaginae vaginosis, 1216
Atosiban, for tocolysis, preterm labor, 806
Atrial fibrillation, maternal, 936
Atrial flutter
fetal, 368, 368f
maternal, 936
Atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP)
heart failure, 884
maternal, 65
preeclampsia syndrome, 61
Atrial natriuretic peptide converting enzyme, 826
Atrial septal defect (ASD), maternal, 927–928
Atrial septoplasty, fetal, 378
Atrioventricular (AV) block, fetal, 368–369
Atrioventricular (AV) canal defect, fetal, 291–292, 291f
Atrioventricular (AV) septal defects
fetal, 291–292, 291f
maternal, congenital, 928
Attitude, fetal, 418, 418f
Attributable risk, 148
Atypical glandular cells of undetermined significance (AGUS), 1164
Augmentation, labor, 486–495. See also Labor, induction and augmentation
multifetal pregnancy, 857
Autism spectrum disorders, 605
Autocorrelation, 447
Autoimmune adrenalitis, 1102
Autoimmune hemolysis, 1051
Autoimmune hepatitis, 1031t, 1036t, 1039
Autoimmune mediators. See also specific types
serum and blood, 1231t
Autoimmune thyroid disease
autoimmune hepatitis, 1039

euthyroid, 1097
Autoimmunity. See also specific disorders and topics
thyroid disease and, 1090, 1090f
Autologous transfusion, for obstetrical hemorrhage, 774
Automobile
accidents, maternal, 892, 893f
travel, prenatal, 188
Autosomal dominant inheritance, 319–320, 319t
codominant genes, 319
expressivity, 319
paternal age, advanced, 319–320
penetrance, 319
Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD), 300–301
Autosomal monosomy, 199
Autosomal recessive inheritance, 319t, 320–321
inborn errors of metabolism, 320–321
consanguinity, 320–321
phenylketonuria, 320
Autosomal trisomies, 309–313. See also Trisomies, autosomal; specific types
AV canal defect, fetal, 291–292, 291f
A-wave, Doppler, 263, 264f
Axis pressure, fetal, 410
Azathioprine
for autoimmune hepatitis, 1039
for inflammatory bowel disease, 1021
Azelaic acid, for dermatologic disorders, 1159, 1159t
Azithromycin
for Chlamydia trachomatis, 637, 1211, 1212, 1212t
for dermatologic disorders, 1159, 1159t
for pneumonia, 963, 963t

B
Baby-Friendly Hospital Initiative, 640
Bacillus anthracis, 1200
Bacillus cereus diarrhea, acute, 1018, 1019t
Backache/back pain
continuous lumbar epidural analgesia, 477
pregnancy, 191–192
Back down, 419
Background retinopathy, 1074
Back up, 419
Baclofen, for multiple sclerosis, 1135
Bacterial infections, 1194–1197. See also specific types
genital tract, uterine infection from, 650

group A streptococcus, 1194
group B streptococcus, 1194–1195, 1194t, 1195t
listeriosis, 1196
Lyme disease, 1197
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus, 1196
salmonellosis, 1196–1197
shigellosis, 1197
tuberculosis. See Tuberculosis
Bacterial pneumonia, 962–963
diagnosis, 962, 962f
incidence and causes, 962
management, 962–963, 962t, 963t
pregnancy outcome, 963
prevention, 963
Bacterial toxins. See also specific types
hemolytic anemia, 1051
Bacterial vaginosis
diagnosis, 1216–1217, 1217f
preterm birth, 792
treatment, 1217, 1218t
Bacteriuria, pregestational diabetes, 1076
Bacteroides
sepsis, 887
uterine infections, 651
vaginosis, 1216
Bacteruria, asymptomatic, 995, 996–997, 996t
Bag-mask ventilation. See also Ventilation
newborn resuscitation, delivery room, 589, 589f
Bakri balloon tamponade, placenta previa, 759
Bakri postpartum balloon, 736, 737f
Balloon, Bakri postpartum, 736, 737f
Balloon tamponade
for esophageal varices, 1041
for placenta previa
Bakri, 759
Foley, 759
for uterine atony, 737, 737f
Baloxavir marboxil, for influenza, 1187
Banana sign, 277, 277f
Bandl ring, 409f, 410, 443
Barbiturates. See also specific types
on heart rate variability, fetal, 450
Bariatric surgery, on pregnancy
pregnancy after, 910–911

restrictive malabsorptive procedures, 910, 910t
restrictive procedures, 910, 910t
Barker hypothesis, 831–832
Barrier methods, contraception
cervical cap, 674–675
condom
female, 674, 675f
male, 674
diaphragm plus spermicide, 674
effectiveness, 665t
Bartholin glands, 14, 15–16, 15f, 18, 31
Basal plate, placenta, 107
Baseline spiking, abrupt, 447f, 450
Basement membrane, amnion, 94
Battledore placenta, 114, 253
Beading, cervical mucus, 53
Beat-to-beat variability, fetal, 446, 447f
Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome
imprinting, 322t
omphalocele, 296, 296f
Beclomethasone, for asthma, 959, 959f, 960t
Behavioral states, antepartum fetal, 383–384, 384f
Behçet disease, 1120
Bell palsy, 1136–1137, 1136f
Bendectin, 146
Benzathine penicillin G, for syphilis, 1209, 1210t
Benzodiazepines
for anxiety disorders, 1149
for neonatal abstinence syndrome, 605
for posttraumatic stress disorder, 1151
Benzoyl peroxide, for dermatologic disorders, 1159, 1159t
Berger disease, 1002
Bernard-Soulier syndrome, 1059
Berry aneurysm, intracranial, 1001
Beta blockers, for hypertension. See also specific types
chronic, 949, 949t
portal, 1041
pregnancy, 951
Betamethasone
for preterm labor management, intact membranes, 802–803
for respiratory distress syndrome prevention, preterm newborn, 617
Beta thalassemias, 1057–1058, 1058f
β2-glycoprotein, 1114
antiphospholipid syndrome, 1114

β-adrenergic bronchodilators, for cystic fibrosis, 969
β-adrenergic receptor agonists
for asthma, 959, 959f, 960, 960t
for tocolysis, preterm labor, 805
β-endorphin, fetal, 133
β-human chorionic gonadotropin (β-hCG), tubal pregnancy, 221, 222
β-lactam antimicrobial
allergy, 551
for cesarean delivery, prophylactic, 550
for uterine infections, 652, 652t
β-lactamase inhibitors, for uterine infections, 652, 652t
β-lactams, for pneumonia, 963, 963t
β-thalassemia major, 1057–1058
β-thalassemia minor, 1057–1058
Bexarotene, teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 154–155
Bicornuate uterus (class IV), 40t, 41f, 43–44, 44f
Bile acids, fetal effects, 1033
“Bili-lights,” 606
Bill axis traction device, 539
Bilobate placenta, 108
Binge drinking, in fetal alcohol syndrome, 149–150
Biologics. See also specific types
in pregnancy, 1163
for ulcerative colitis, 1021–1022, 1021t
Biophysical profile (BPP), 389–390
components and scores, 389, 389t, 390f
interpretation and management, 389–390, 389t
modified, 390–391
umbilical venous blood pH and, 390, 390t
Bioterrorism, 1200
Biparietal diameter, 272–274, 274f
Bipolar disorders, 1146t, 1148
Birth. See also specific topics
circulatory changes at, 128
definition, 3
periviable, 202
preterm, 783–807. See also Preterm birth
unplanned, 504
Birth canal injuries, 739–742
hematomas, puerperal, 740–742
diagnosis, 740–741, 741f
management, 741–742
risks, 740
types, 740, 741f

lacerations
cervical, 739–740, 740f
vulvovaginal, 739
Birth canal involution, 635
Birth defects. See also Teratogenic and fetotoxic agents; Teratology
etiology, 144, 145f
prevalence, 144
Birth rate
definition, 3
twin, 838
U.S., 3–4, 4t
Birthweight
definition, 3
distribution, 439–440, 439f
fatty acid metabolism and transfer on, 825
fetal death and, 2
fetal growth and, 824
large for gestational age, 832, 832t
macrosomia, 832–834
normal, 24f, 824, 824t
obesity on, 905, 905f
omega-3 intake on, 825
small for gestational age, 825–826, 825f
Barker hypothesis, 831–832
prevention, 832
Birthweight, low
extremely low, 3, 783
gonorrhea, 1211
low, 3, 783
multifetal gestation, 838f, 844, 844f
very low, 3, 783, 784t
Bisacromial diameter, 499
Bishop score, 488–489, 488t
Bladder
abnormalities, 39
exstrophy, 39
fetal
amnionic fluid, 298
bladder outlet obstruction, 301, 301f, 376–378
congenital abnormalities, 39
normal, 298, 298f
second trimester, 298
maternal, 27, 69–70
function, labor, 429

puerperium function, 643
spinal block on, 474
trauma, puerperium, 638
Bladder outlet obstruction, fetal, 301, 301f
Blastocyst, 86, 86f
development, 122
fertilization, 85, 86f
inner cell mass, 86, 86f, 122
trophectoderm, 86, 86f
trophoblasts, 86, 86f
Blastomere, 85, 86f
Blastomycosis, pneumonia, 965
Bleeding. See also Anemia(s); Hemorrhage
irregular, IUDs, 666
upper gastrointestinal, 1018
uterine, puerperium, 636–637
vaginal, early pregnancy, 200
vitamin K deficiency, newborn, 606
Blighted ovum, 199
Blindness, preeclampsia syndromes, 65
Blocked atrial bigeminy, 367
Blocks, nerve. See Nerve blocks; specific types
Blood and blood volume, puerperium, 638–639
hematological and coagulation changes, 638
postpartum diuresis, 638–639
pregnancy-induced hypervolemia, 638, 638f
Blood component products, for obstetrical hemorrhage, 771–772, 772t
Blood constituents, 1227t–1232t
autoimmune and inflammatory mediators, 1231t
blood gas, 1232t
cardiac, 1231t
chemical, 1229t
coagulation, 1228t
hematology, 1227t
lipids, 1231t
metabolic and endocrine tests, 1230t
renal function tests, 1232t
sex hormones, 1231t
vitamins and minerals, 1230t
Blood flow disruption
fetal, 111
subamnionic hematoma, 111
thrombotic vasculopathy, 110f, 111
villous vascular lesions, 111

maternal, 110–111
hematoma, 111
infarction, 111, 1131f
intervillous thrombus, 111
maternal floor infarction, 111
perivillous fibrin deposition, 110–111, 110f
subchorionic fibrin deposition, 110
Blood flow velocity, Doppler velocimetry, 391
Blood gases
serum and blood constituents, 1232t
umbilical cord blood studies
cerebral palsy, 604
newborn, 593
Blood group systems, types, 352
Blood loss, acute, anemia, 1050
Blood loss, obstetrical
calculation/estimation, 732–733, 732t
definition and incidence, 731–732, 732f
delivery, with severe preeclampsia and eclampsia, 725
estimated, appreciating, 734
qualitative, 732
quantitative, 732
Blood pressure, maternal, 64–65, 64f, 944. See also Hypertension
measurement, 688
multifetal gestation, 843
puerperium, 638, 638f
Blood replacement, for obstetrical hemorrhage, 771–774, 772t, 774
blood component products, 771–772, 772t
cryoprecipitate and fibrinogen concentrate, 772t, 773
dilutional coagulopathy, 772
fresh-frozen plasma, 772t, 773
platelets, 772–773, 772t
recombinant activated factor VII, 773
tranexamic acid, 773
type and screen vs. crossmatch, 771
viscoelastic assays, 774, 774f
whole blood and packed red blood cells, 772, 772t
Blood sampling, fetal, prenatal and preimplantation, 347–348, 347f
Blood supply
abdominal wall, anterior, 13–14, 13f
external pudendal arteries, 13, 13f
inferior epigastric artery, 13, 13f
superficial circumflex artery, 13, 13f
superficial epigastric artery, 13, 13f

pelvic, 22f, 23–25, 24f
internal iliac artery branches, 24–25, 24f
ovarian artery, 24, 24f
uterine artery, 24, 24f
veins, 24
Blood transfusion
fetal, 352, 356
intrauterine, 352
need, maternal, 733
for obstetrical hemorrhage
cell salvage and autologous transfusion, 774
massive transfusion protocols, 773–774, 774t
transfusion thresholds, 771
prophylactic RBCs, sickle-cell during pregnancy, 1054
Blood volume
fetal, 358
fetal-placental, 358
fetoplacental, 128
maternal, 59–60, 59f
multifetal gestation, 843
preeclampsia syndromes, 696, 696f
Bloody show, 53, 733–734
Bloom syndrome, carrier screening, 344
Blunt trauma, maternal, 892–893
B lymphocytes, breast milk, 640
Body mass index (BMI), 902, 903f
Body stalk, 87, 123, 123f
anomaly, 297–298, 298f
Boerhaave syndrome, hyperemesis gravidarum, 1014, 1014t
Bohr effect, 67
Bone(s)
embryo/fetal
density, skeletal dysplasias, 301–302
long bone length, by gestational age, 1239t
nasal, hypoplasia/sonographic absence, 283, 284f
nasal, second-trimester, 340t, 341
pelvic, 134
maternal
innominate, 27, 27f
pelvic, 27–28, 27f
Bone marrow transplantation, aplastic anemia, 1053
Bone morphogenic proteins, placental, 96t, 98
Borderline AFI, 259–260
Borrelia burgdorferi, 1197

Bosentan, teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 153
Botulism, 1200
Bowel. See also Small bowel and colon disorders
fetal, 295
echogenic, ultrasound, 340f, 340t, 341, 341t
maternal
injury, peripartum hysterectomy, 565
obstruction, pregnancy, 1022–1023
Brachial plexopathy, newborn, 609
Brachycephaly, 283, 283f
Bradyarrhythmia
definition, 367
fetal, 368–369, 450
monitoring, 368–369, 449, 450
paracervical block, 472
uterus rupture during labor, 579, 579f
maternal, 935
Brain, fetal
development, 124–125, 125f
injury, heart rate patterns, 460, 460f
Brain death, maternal, 898, 1138
cardiopulmonary resuscitation, 898
Brain natriuretic peptide (BNP)
heart failure, 884
maternal, 65
“Brain-sparing,” 263
Braunwald ventricular function graph, 63, 63f, 916
Braxton Hicks contractions, 52, 401
BRCA1/2 mutations, 1173–1174, 1174t
Breast, puerperal, 55, 640–641
abscess, 660
anatomy and secretory products, 639, 639f, 639t
breast engorgement, 642
engorgement, 642
puerperal fever, 649
infections, 659–660
abscess, 660
etiology, 660
management, 660
mastitis and suppurative mastitis, 659, 659f
Breast carcinoma, 1172–1173
diagnosis, 1172–1173, 1172t
management, 1173
pregnancy after, 1173

Breast examination, clinical, 13
Breastfeeding, puerperium, 639–642
breast anatomy and secretory products, 639, 639f, 639t
breast care, 640–641
contraindications, 641
drugs secreted in milk, 641–642
galactocele, 642
HIV-infected mothers, 641, 660
immunological consequences, 640
inverted nipples, 642
lactation, 640, 640t, 641t
endocrinology, 640
osteoporosis, 642, 1100
milk line, 642
polygalactia, 642
polymastia, 642
polythelia, 642
successful, ten steps to, 640, 641t
Breast Imaging-Reporting and Data System (BI-RADS), 11, 11t
Breast milk
composition, 639, 639t
immunological substances, 640
Breathing
air, newborn transition to, 586–587
capacity, maximum, 67
fetal, antepartum, 385–386
development, 131
gasps/sighs, 385
irregular bursts, 385
paradoxical chest wall movement, 385, 385f
percentage of time spent, 385, 386f
in utero, 586
Breech delivery, singleton, 518–529
classification, 518–519, 518f, 519f
complete breech, 518, 519f
frank breech, 518, 518f
stargazing fetus, 518–519
delivery route, 519–522
cesarean delivery, 519, 519t
complications, 521
imaging, 521–522
pelvimetry, 522
preterm breech fetus, 520–521
term breech fetus, 520

diagnosis
examination, 519
risk factors, 519
external cephalic version, 528–529
complications, 528
conduction analgesia, 529
indications, 528
moxibustion, 529
technique, 528–529, 529f
tocolysis, 529
labor and delivery, 522–528
labor induction/augmentation, 522–523
labor management, 522
partial breech extraction, 523–527, 523f–528f
aftercoming head, 525–526, 525f–526f
head entrapment, 527, 527f
nuchal arm, 524–525, 525f
spontaneous breech delivery, 523
total breech extraction
Frank breech, 527
incomplete or complete breech, 527–528, 527f
vaginal delivery methods, 523
Breech delivery, spontaneous vaginal, 523
Breech extraction
partial, 523–527, 523f–528f
aftercoming head, 525–526, 525f–526f
head entrapment, 527, 527f
nuchal arm, 524–525, 525f
total, Frank breech, 527
Breech presentation, 417–418, 519–522
cesarean delivery, 519, 519t
complications, 521
definition, 518
imaging, 521–522
pelvimetry, 522
preterm breech fetus, 520–521
preterm delivery, 520–521
term breech fetus, 520
term delivery, 520
twin, first, 857
Breslow scale, 1176
Breus moles, 111
Broad ligament, 22f
Bromocriptine, for prolactinomas, 1103

Bronchitis, acute, 961
Bronchogram, air, 615, 616f
Bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD), 616
Bronchopulmonary sequestration, 288, 289f
Brow presentation, 417, 418f, 441
BT-Cath, 736, 737f
Budd-Chiari syndrome, portal hypertension, 1040
Budesonide, for asthma, 959, 959f, 960t
Budesonide/formoterol, for asthma, 959, 959f, 960t
Bulbospongiosus muscle, 18, 18f, 19f
Bulimia nervosa, 1149–1150
preconceptual counseling, 170
Bundles of Probst, 278
Buprenorphine
on heart rate variability, fetal, 450
for neonatal abstinence syndrome, 605
for opioid use disorder, 1150
Bupropion, for depression, 1145–1147, 1146t
Burkitt lymphoma, 1175
Burn injury, 896–897, 896f
electrical and lightning injuries, 897, 897t
Butorphanol
on heart rate variability, fetal, 450
for labor and delivery, 469, 469t

C
Cabergoline, for prolactinomas, 1103
Caffeine
for apnea of prematurity, 617
first-trimester spontaneous abortion, 200
in pregnancy, 191
Calcification, placental, 111–112
Calcineurin inhibitors. See also specific types
for dermatologic disorders, 1159, 1159t
Calcipotriene
for dermatologic disorders, 1159, 1159t
for pustular psoriasis of pregnancy, 1157
Calcitonin, 1099
for hyperparathyroidism, 1100
maternal, 73
Calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) receptor antagonists. See also specific types
for migraine prevention, 1128
Calcitriol, for hypoparathyroidism, 1100
Calcium

calcitonin biosynthesis and secretion, 73
maternal, 59, 73
pregnancy nutrition, 184t, 185
transport, on fetal nutrition, 136
Calcium channel blockers
for hypertension
chronic, pregnancy, 949, 949t
mild to moderate, 713, 714t
pregnancy, 951
for tocolysis, preterm labor, 806
Calcium supplementation, for preeclampsia syndrome prevention, 1106
Calories, pregnancy nutrition, 184–185, 185f
Camper fascia, 12
Campylobacter, diarrhea, 1018, 1019t
Canavan disease, 343
Cancer antigen 125 (CA125), 1169
Cancer therapy, 1162–1164. See also specific types
chemotherapy, 1163
diagnostic imaging, 1163
fertility and pregnancy after, 1164
molecular therapy, 1163
placental metastases, 1164
radiation therapy, 1163
surgery, 1162–1163
targeted therapy, 1163–1164
Candidiasis (Candida), 1218–1219, 1219t
pneumonia, treatment, 965
spontaneous preterm labor, 790
Caniosyntosis, 283
Cannabinoid hyperemesis syndrome, 1014
Capsule, 511
Caput succedaneum, 423, 423f, 608, 608f
dystocia, 444
Carbamazepine
for bipolar disorder, 1146t, 1148
for multiple sclerosis, 1135
teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 150, 1130t
Carbapenems. See also specific types
for uterine infections, 652, 652t
Carbetocin
after cesarean delivery, 557
for third stage of labor, 507
Carbohydrate metabolism, maternal, 57, 57f
Carbon dioxide

placental transfer, 138
production, pregnancy, 956
Carbonic acid, fetal, 591
Carbon monoxide poisoning, 969–970
Carboprost tromethamine, for uterine atony, 736
Cardiac axis, fetal heart, 288, 289f
Cardiac catheterization, 918
Cardiac defects. See also specific types
DNA triplet repeat expansion, 324
Cardiac examination, fetal, 288–294
specialized, 291–294
cardiac rhabdomyoma, 294, 294f
coarctation of aorta, 292
double-outlet right ventricle, 293
D-transposition of great arteries, 293, 294f
Ebstein anomaly, 292, 293f
echocardiography, 252, 290f, 291
endocardial cushion defect, 291–292, 291f
hypoplastic left heart syndrome, 292, 292f
tetralogy of Fallot, 292–293, 293f
truncus arteriosus, 293–294, 294f
ventricular septal defect, 291, 291f
standard, 288–291, 289f–290f
four-chamber view, 290, 290f
normal, 286, 287f
left ventricular outflow tract view, 290–291, 290f
right ventricular outflow tract view, 290f, 291
three-vessel view, 290f, 291
Cardiac examination, maternal, 62–63, 63f
normal, 916, 917f
Cardiac function, preeclampsia syndromes, 695
Cardiac hemodynamics
preeclampsia and eclampsia, severe, invasive monitoring for, 724
preeclampsia syndromes, 695
pregnancy, 882–883, 883t
late, 64, 64t
Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging, 916
Cardiac natriuretic peptides, 65
Cardiac output, maternal
multifetal gestation, 843
pregnancy, 63–64, 916
puerperium, 638
Cardiac rhabdomyoma, 294, 294f
Cardiac surgery. See also under Cardiovascular disorders, maternal; Heart disease, maternal

during pregnancy, 923
Cardinal ligament, 23
Cardinal movements of labor, 420–424, 421f–422f
Cardiogenic hydrostatic edema, 883–884
Cardiomyopathy, fetal, pregestational diabetes, 1073
Cardiomyopathy, maternal, 932–934
arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia, 934
classification, 932
dilated cardiomyopathy, 932
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, 932
peripartum cardiomyopathy, 932–934, 933f
definition and development, 932–933, 933f
incidence and etiology, 933
management, 933
prognosis, 933–934
subsequent pregnancy, 934
restrictive cardiomyopathy, 934
septic, 888
Takotsubo cardiomyopathy, 934
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR), 897–898
brain death, maternal, 898, 1138
cesarean delivery, perimortem, 897–898
high-quality, 897, 897t
Cardiosplenic syndrome, 292
Cardiotocogram, terminal, 388–389
Cardiotocography, 446
Cardiovascular disorders, fetal, arrhythmias, 367–369, 368f
Cardiovascular disorders, maternal, 915–938
antepartum care, 920
aorta, diseases of, 936–937
aortic coarctation, 937
aortic dissection, 936
Marfan syndrome, 936–937
arrhythmias, 935–936
bradyarrhythmias, 935
prolonged QT-interval, 936
supraventricular tachycardias, 935–936
ventricular tachycardias, 936
cardiomyopathies, 932–934
arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia, 934
dilated cardiomyopathy, 932
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, 932
peripartum cardiomyopathy, 932–934, 933f
restrictive cardiomyopathy, 934

Takotsubo cardiomyopathy, 934
congenital heart disease, 927–930
atrial septal defects, 927–928
atrioventricular septal defects, 928
cyanotic heart disease, 920t, 928–929
Eisenmenger syndrome, 929–930, 929f
persistent (patent) ductus arteriosus, 928
pregnancy after surgical repair
single functional ventricle, 929
transposition of great vessels, 929
ventricular septal defects, 920t, 928
diagnosis, 916–918
clinical indicators, 916, 917t
diagnostic studies, 916–918, 917f
functional classification, 918, 919t
normal cardiac examination findings, 916, 917f
heart failure, 921–922
diagnosis, 921–922
management, 922
infective endocarditis, 934–935
diagnosis and management, 934
pregnancy, 934
prophylaxis, 934–935, 935t
types, 934
ischemic heart disease, 937–938
acute coronary syndrome, 937–938
pregnancy with prior ischemic heart disease, 938
labor and delivery, 920–921
analgesia and anesthesia, 920–921
intrapartum heart failure, 921
medications, common obstetrical, 938
physiology, pregnancy
cardiovascular, 915–916, 916t
ventricular function, 916
preconceptual counseling, 918–920
fetal heart lesions, risks, 918, 920t
risk factors, 918–920
prevalence, 915
puerperium, 921
pulmonary hypertension, 930–932
classification, clinical, 930, 931t
definition, 930
diagnosis and prognosis, 930
management, 931–932

pregnancy, 930–931, 931f
surgically corrected heart disease, 922–924
anticoagulation, recommendations, 923, 924f
anticoagulation, valve replacement before pregnancy, 922–923, 923t
cardiac surgery during pregnancy, 923
heart transplantation, pregnancy after, 923–924
valve replacement before pregnancy, 922–923
valvular heart disease, 924–927
aortic insufficiency, 925t, 927
aortic stenosis, 925t, 926–927
mitral insufficiency, 925t, 926
mitral stenosis, 924–926, 925t, 926f
mitral valve prolapse, 925t, 926
pulmonic stenosis, 925t, 927
Cardiovascular magnetic resonance imaging, 918
Cardiovascular physiology, 915–916, 916t
Cardiovascular system, fetal, 126–128
circulatory changes at birth, 128
fetal circulation, 126–128, 127f
fetoplacental blood volume, 128
Cardiovascular system, maternal, 62–65, 915–916, 916t
cardiac natriuretic peptides, 65
cardiac output, 63–64
circulation and blood pressure, 64–65, 64f
endothelin, 65
heart, 62–63, 63f
hemodynamic function, late pregnancy, 64, 64t
nitric oxide, 65
prostaglandins, 65
renin, angiotensin II, and plasma volume, 65
stroke volume, 62, 62f, 63f
ventricular function, 916
Carpal tunnel syndrome, 1137
maternal, misdiagnosed, 74
Carrier screening, genetic disorders, 342–344
Ashkenazi Jewish recessive diseases, 343–344
Tay-Sachs disease, 343, 344
cystic fibrosis, 342
ethnicity-based, 342
goal, 342
hemoglobinopathies
sickle, 343
thalassemias, 168, 343
spinal muscular atrophy, 343

timing, 342
Case-control studies, recall bias, 146
Caspase 3, 403
Caspofungin, for candidiasis pneumonia, 965
Catastrophic antiphospholipid antibody syndrome (CAPS), 1114
Catheter
intracardiac, percutaneous fetal, 378
intrauterine pressure, 461, 461f
peripherally inserted central, 1014
tip shear, from continuous lumbar epidural analgesia, 477
transcervical, 491–492, 491f
Caudal regression sequence, 280, 281f, 1071
CCAM-volume ratio (CVR), 370
CDE blood group incompatibility, 353–354, 354t
Cebocephaly, 283, 284f
Cefazolin
for cesarean delivery, prophylactic, 550
for pyelonephritis, 998
Cefixime, for Chlamydia trachomatis, 1211t
Cefotaxime, for pneumonia, 963, 963t
Ceftaroline, for pneumonia, 963, 963t
Ceftriaxone
for Chlamydia trachomatis, 1211, 1211t
for pneumonia, 963, 963t
for pyelonephritis, 998
Cell-free DNA (cfDNA)
genetics
prenatal, 7
tests, 327–328, 328f, 328t
placental, 137
preeclampsia syndromes, 1105
prediction, 703
prenatal screening, 183, 335–336
screening, 335–336
applications, 335
limitations, 335–336
low fetal fraction, 336
positive predictive value, 335
sensitivity and specificity, 335
types, 335
Cell salvage, for obstetrical hemorrhage, 774
Cellular adhesion molecules (CAMs), implantation, 86
Central nervous system
fetal development

brain, 124–125, 125f
spinal cord, 125
imaging, 1126
maternal, 74–75
eyes, 74–75
memory, 74
sleep, 75
MRI, obstetrical, 266, 266f, 267f
preeclampsia syndromes, 699–702
cerebral blood flow, 701
cerebral edema, 701–702
cerebrovascular pathophysiology, 700, 700f
neuroanatomical lesions, 700, 700f
neuroimaging studies, 701
neurological manifestations, 701
visual changes and blindness, 701, 702f
stimulation, from continuous lumbar epidural analgesia, 476
Central parenteral nutrition (CPN), 1013, 1013t
Cephalexin, for dermatologic disorders, 1159, 1159t
Cephalic–cephalic presentation, twin deliveries, 856
Cephalic index, 283
Cephalic–noncephalic presentation, twin deliveries, 856–857, 856f
Cephalic pole, 417
Cephalic presentation, 417, 418f
Cephalocele, 276, 277f
Cephalohematoma, perinatal, vacuum extraction, 535–536, 608, 608f
Cephalopelvic disproportion (CPD), 434
Cephalosporins
for asymptomatic bacteriuria, 996, 996t
for cesarean delivery, prophylactic, 550
for uterine infections, 652, 652t
Cerclage
elective, 206
emergency, 206
emergency/rescue, preterm labor, 804–805
McDonald, 206–207, 206f
Schirodkar, modified, 206–207, 207f
transabdominal, 207–208
vaginal, 206–207, 206f, 207f
Cerclage, cervical, 45
for multifetal gestation, 854
for multifetal gestation, prophylactic, 854
Cerebellum
diameter, transverse, by gestational age, 1241t

hemorrhage, newborn, 607t, 608, 618
hypoplasia, fetal, 276
Cerebral artery thrombosis, ischemic stroke, 1131f, 1132
Cerebral palsy, 601, 602–604, 620–621
Apgar scores, 604, 604t
causes, 601, 603
definition and types, 602
fetal heart rate monitoring, 604
incidence and epidemiological correlates, 602–604, 603f, 603t, 620
intellectual disability and seizure disorders, 605
intraventricular hemorrhage, 620
multifetal gestation, 845
neuroimaging studies, 604–605
nucleated red blood cells and lymphocytes, 604
perinatal infection/inflammation, 620–621, 621f
prevention/neuroprotection, 621
risk factors, parental, 603–604, 603t
risks, 620–621
types, 601, 602, 620
umbilical cord blood gas studies, 604
vascular anastomses, placental, 848
Cerebral venous thrombosis, ischemic stroke, 1132
Cerebroplacental ratio, 263
Cerebrovascular diseases, 1130–1134. See also specific types
hemorrhagic stroke, 1131f, 1131t, 1133–1134, 1133f
arteriovenous malformations, 1131f, 1133–1134
intracerebral, 1131f, 1133, 1133f
intracranial aneurysm, 1131f, 1133
neonatal, 607t, 608
subarachnoid, 1133–1134
incidence and types, 1130
ischemic stroke, 1131–1133, 1131f, 1131t
cerebral artery thrombosis, 1131f, 1132
cerebral embolism, 1132
cerebral venous thrombosis, 1132
preeclampsia syndrome, 1132
recurrence, 1132–1133
obesity and, 1130
risk factors, 1130–1131
Cerebrum
angiography, CNS, 1126
edema, preeclampsia syndromes, 65
embolism, ischemic stroke, 1132
hemorrhage, preeclampsia, 64, 64f

Certolizumab, for inflammatory bowel disease, 1021–1022, 1021t
Cervical cap, 674–675
Cervical dilators, hygroscopic, 492
Cervical (intraepithelial) neoplasia, 1164–1165
abnormal cytology and histology, 1165
cervical conization, 1165
human papillomavirus, 1165
screening guidelines, 1164
Cervical neoplasms, 1164–1167
cervical (intraepithelial) neoplasia, 1164–1165
abnormal cytology and histology, 1165
cervical conization, 1165
human papillomavirus, 1165
endocervical polyp, 1164
human papillomavirus, 1216
invasive cervical cancer, 1165–1167
delivery, 1166
management and prognosis, 1166, 1166f
pregnancy after radical trachelectomy, 1166–1167
prevalence, 1165–1166
Cervical os, 23
Cervical pessaries, for preterm labor, 804
Cervical pregnancy, 230, 230f
Cervical ripening
labor, 406–407
endocervical epithelia, 407
glycosaminoglycans, 406–407
induction, 407
inflammatory changes, 407
proteoglycans, 407
for TOLAC/VBAC, 578
preinduction, 486, 488–492
Bishop score, 488–489, 488t
cervical “favorability,” 488–489, 488t
mechanical techniques
hygroscopic cervical dilators, 492
transcervical catheter, 491–492, 491f
nitric oxide donors, 491
prostaglandin E1, 488t, 490–491, 490t
prostaglandin E2, 488t, 489–490, 489f
techniques overview, 488, 488t
Cervical softening, 405
Cervix, 17f, 22f, 23

abnormalities, müllerian, 41
annular/circular detachment, 740
conglutinated, 1165
conization, for cervical neoplasia, 1165
connective tissue, parturition phase 1, 405–406, 405f
dilation, 401f, 410f, 411, 411f
assessment, 427
curves, 436, 436f
dysfunction, spontaneous preterm labor, 789
effacement, 408, 410–411, 410f15f
assessment, 427
eversion, 53, 53f
imaging
cervical length, 254, 255f, 256f
funneling, 254, 256f
indications, 254, 256t
infections. See also specific types
in pregnancy, 181
insufficiency, second-trimester abortion, 205–206
labor assessment
dilation, 427
effacement, 427
fetal station, 427
position, 427
lacerations, 739–740, 740f
infection, 658
length, 254, 255f, 256f
placenta previa, 757
maternal, in pregnancy, 53, 53f
abnormalities, müllerian, 41
physiology and functions, labor, 399
softening, 405–406, 405f
stroma, 23
Cesarean delivery, 547–560
advantages, 548–549
analgesia
epidural, 477–478, 478t
spinal (subarachnoid) block, 472
for trauma, 896
breech, singleton, 519, 519t
definitions, 547–548
elective, for macrosomia, 833–834, 834t
for gestational diabetes mellitus, 1084
indications, 547, 548t

Laufe-Piper, 526, 526f
macrosomia, 834, 834t
multifetal gestation, 858
obesity, 908–909
surgical concerns, 909–910, 909f
patient preparation, 549–551
antibiotic prophylaxis, 550–551
delivery availability, 549
informed consent, 549
other preventions, 551
preoperative care, 550
surgical safety, 551
timing, 549–550
perimortem, 547
placenta accreta spectrum, 763–764, 764t
placental abruption, 754
placenta previa, 758–759
postmortem/perimortem, 547, 897–898
postoperative care
euvolemia evaluation, 565
hospital care, predischarge, 565–566
hospital discharge, 566
recovery suite, 565
pregestational diabetes, insulin management, 1078, 1078t
rate, elevated U.S., 547
risks, 548–549
maternal mortality and morbidity, 548
maternal request, 549
neonatal morbidity, 549
second stage, acute perinatal injury, 536
technique, 551–560
hysterotomy, 553–560. See also Hysterotomy, cesarean
laparotomy, 551–552
Maylard incision, 552
midline vertical incision, 552
Pfannenstiel incision, 551, 552
transverse incisions, 551, 552
thromboprophylaxis for, 989–990, 990t
Cesarean delivery, prior, 571–581
controversy, 100 years, 571–572, 572f, 572t
delivery route risks, 573–574
maternal, 573, 574t
perinatal, 574, 574t
factors, influencing, 572–573, 573t

labor and delivery considerations, 577–579
cervical ripening and labor stimulation, 578
epidural analgesia, 578
intrapartum care, 578
timing, 577, 577f
uterine scar exploration, 579
lexicon and acronyms, 571, 572t
multiple repeat, 580–581, 580f
placenta previa risk, 756–757
rates, total, primary, and low-risk, 571, 572f
trial of labor after cesarean, 577. See also Trial of labor after cesarean (TOLAC)
conservative approach, 580t, 581
recommendations, professional societies, 580t, 581
selection considerations, 574–577, 575t
uterine scar rupture, 579–580
diagnosis, 579, 579f
management, 579–580
vaginal birth after cesarean, 571–572, 572f, 581
Cesarean delivery on maternal request (CDMR), 549
Cesarean hysterectomy, 547
Cesarean scar pregnancy, 229–230, 253–254, 255f
diagnosis, 229, 229f
management, 229–230, 229f
placenta accreta spectrum and, 229, 759
Cetirizine, for pruritus, 1158
Charcot-Bouchard aneurysm, 722, 1133
Charcot triad, 1043
Chelation, for copper overload, 1040
Chemerin, 53
Chemoembolization, for interstitial pregnancy, 228
Chemotherapy. See also Antineoplastics; specific types
cancer, 1163
Chest compressions, newborn resuscitation, 590
Chest wall
maternal
compliance, 956
measurements, 65, 66f
movement, paradoxical, 385, 385f
Chiari III malformation, 276
Chickenpox, maternal, 1185
Childbearing, delayed. See also Advanced maternal age (AMA)
twinning, 839
Chlamydia trachomatis (chlamydia), 1212–1213
conjunctivitis, newborn prophylaxis, 593–594

expedited partner therapy, 1212–1213
infection rates and effects, 1212
intrauterine devices, 666
prophylaxis, 892t
screening and treatment, 1212, 1212t
surgical abortion, 209
testing, prenatal, 181
treatment, 637
urethritis, 997
uterine subinvolution, 637
Chloasma, 55
Chloroquine, for malaria prevention, 1199
Chlorpheniramine, for pruritus, 1158
Chlorpromazine
for hyperemesis gravidarum, 1015, 1015f, 1016t
for migraine, 1128, 1128t
teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 153
Chlorpromazine, for psychosis, 1145, 1146t
Cholangitis, ascending, 1043
Cholecystectomy, 1043, 1044
Cholecystitis, 1042, 1042f
in pregnancy, 1042, 1043
Cholelithiasis, 1042–1043, 1042f
Cholestasis, progressive familial intrahepatic, 1032
Cholesterol, fetal, 102
Cholinergic crisis, 1135
Chondrodysplasia punctuata, 339
Chorangiocarcinoma, 112
Chorangioma, 112, 112f
Chorangiosis, 111
focal, 111
Chorioadenoma destruens, 242
Chorioamnionitis, 113, 789
labor prolongation, 434
management, PPROM, 801
Chorioangioma, 112, 112f
Chorioangiomatosis, 111
Choriocarcinoma, gestational, 242
Chorion, 84, 85f, 87
development, 89, 89f
paracrine system, 89
structure and function, labor, 399
villus branching, 90, 91f
Chorion frondosum, 89, 346, 346f

Chorionic cavity, 84f, 85
Chorionicity, 839
Chorionic plate, 88
placenta, 107
Chorionic-type intermediate trophoblast, 242
Chorionic villus, 88–89, 88f
sampling, 346–347, 346f, 347f
Chorion laeve, 89
Christmas disease, 1062
Chromosomal abnormalities, 309–314. See also specific types
copy number variant, 309
karyotype, 309, 310t
nomenclature, standard, 309, 310t
number, 309–314
parental, recurrent pregnancy loss, 204
prevalence and types, 309, 309f, 332
structure, 309, 314–318
Chromosomal inversions, 317
paracentric, 317
pericentric, 317, 318f
Chromosomal microarray analysis (CMA)
clinical applications, 326–327
prenatal and preimplantation, 344
stillborn fetus, 627
Chromosomal number abnormalities, 309–314
autosomal trisomies, 309–313. See also Trisomy 13 (Patau syndrome); Trisomy 18 (Edwards
syndrome); Trisomy 21 (Down syndrome)
nondisjunction, 309
phenotypic severity, 310
prevalence, maternal age and, 310, 310f
monosomy, 313
polyploidy, 313
diandric triploidy, 313
digynic triploidy, 313
imprinting, 313
sex chromosome, 313–314. See also specific types
Chromosome
acrocentric, 315–316
structure, arms, 309
Chromosome abnormalities, number, 309–314
sex chromosome
45,X/46,XY, 37, 309f
46,XX/46,XY, 37
Chromosome abnormalities, structure, 314–318

deletions and duplications, 314–315, 315f
22q11.2 microdeletion syndrome, 315
microdeletions and microduplications, 315, 316t
inversions, 317
paracentric, 317
pericentric, 317, 318f
isochromosomes, 317
mosaicism, 318
ring chromosome, 317–318
translocations, 315–316
reciprocal, 315, 317f
robertsonian, 315–317, 317f
Chromosome microarray analysis (CMA), 7, 309, 310t
Chronic abruption–oligohydramnios sequence, 755
Chronic disease, anemia of, 1050
Chronic hypertensive diathesis, 946
Chronic kidney disease (CDK), 1003–1005
classification, 1003
pregnancy, 1003–1005
blood volume expansion, 1004, 1004f
chronic renal insufficiency, 1004–1005, 1005f
dialysis, 1005, 1006t
long-term effects, 1005
management, 1005
outcomes, 1004, 1005f, 1006t
renal disease with preserved function, 1004, 1004t
reproductive-aged women, 1003
Chronic renal insufficiency, 1004–1005, 1005f
Churg-Strauss vasculitis, 1120
Chylothorax
nonimmune hydrops fetalis, 362, 363
thoracic shunts for, 376, 376f
Ciclesonide, for asthma, 959, 959f, 960t
Cigarette smoking
placental abruption risk, 752
placenta previa risk, 756
prenatal, 179–180, 180t
spontaneous abortion, first-trimester, 200
teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 156–157
Cilastatin, for uterine infections, 652, 652t
Ciliopathy, polycystic kidney disease, 1001
Circle of Willis aneurysms, 937
Circulation
birth, changes at, 128

fetal, 126–128, 127f
maternal, 64–65, 64f
placenta, 91–93, 91f, 92f
fetal, 92
maternal, 92–93, 92f
Circumcision, male newborn, 595–596, 596f
Circumflex artery, superficial, 13, 13f
Circummarginate placenta, 109, 109f
Circumvallate placenta, 109, 109f, 110t
Cirrhosis, 1040
copper overload, 1039
crypotogenic, 1040
iron overload, 1039
Laënnec, 1040
postnecrotic, 1040
Citalopram, for depression, 1145–1147, 1146t
Clarithromycin, for pneumonia, 963, 963t
Clark classification, 1176
Clavicular fracture
anterior, deliberate, 503
newborn, 610
Cleft
facial, 283–285, 285f
lip/palate, 283–285, 285f
Cleidotomy, 504
Clem, See Cucurbita pepo
Clindamycin
for dermatologic disorders, 1159, 1159t
for hidradenitis suppurativa, 1158
for staphylococcal breast infections, 660
for trichomoniasis, 1218t
Clindamycin-gentamicin
for pelvic infections, after cesarean, 651, 652t
for uterine infections, 651, 652t
Clitoris, 15, 15f, 16f, 18, 18f, 19f
anomalies, 39
clitoromegaly, 39
Cloaca, 31, 32f
abnormalities, 377
exstrophy, 39
omphalocele, 296, 296f
Close calls, 6
Closing volume, 67
Clostridioides difficile diarrhea, 1018, 1019–1020, 1019f, 1019t

Clostridium
sepsis, 887
uterine infections, 651
Clostridium botulinum, 1200
Clostridium novyi, toxic shock syndrome, 659
Clostridium perfringens
hemolysis, 1051
sepsis, 888
toxic shock syndrome
puerperal, 659
septic abortion, 203
Clostridium sordellii
sepsis, 888
toxic shock syndrome
puerperal, 659
septic abortion, 203
Clotrimazole, for candidiasis, 1219t
Cloverleaf skull deformity, 302
Clozapine, for psychosis, 1145, 1146t
Clubfoot, 303, 303f, 610
Clubhand deformity, 304
Cluster headache, 1128
Coagulation
maternal, 61–62, 61t
preeclampsia syndromes, 696–697
puerperium, 638
serum and blood constituents, 1228t
Coagulation cascade inhibitors, 976, 977f
thrombophilias, 976, 977f
Coagulation defects, inherited, 1061–1063
factor VII deficiency, 1063
factor VIII inhibitors, 1062
factor IX inhibitors, 1062
factor X deficiency, 1063
factor XI deficiency, 1063
factor XII deficiency, 1063
factor XIII deficiency, 1063
fibrinogen abnormalities, 1063
hemophilias A and B, 1061–1062
von Willebrand disease, 1062–1063
Coagulation factors
fetal, 130
maternal, 61, 61t
Coagulopathy, obstetrical, 775–777

coagulation activation
normal, 775, 776f
pathological, 775–776
consumptive, placental abruption, 753
dilutional, 772
disseminated intravascular coagulation, 775
inciting conditions, 776
placenta previa, 757
pregnancy-induced changes, 775
Coal tar, for dermatologic disorders, 1159, 1159t
Coarctation of aorta, 292
Cocaine
abuse, placental abruption risk, 752
teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 157
Coccidioidomycosis, pneumonia, 965
Coccyx, 27
Codominant genes, 319
Cognition, puerperium, 643–644
Cognitive development, long-term, pregestational diabetes on, 1073
Coiling, umbilical cord, 113
Coitus
in pregnancy, 188
in puerperium, 645
COL1A1, 1121
Cold-agglutinin disease, 1051
Cold stress, newborn, 588
Colles fascia, 12, 18, 18f
Colloid oncotic pressure/wedge pressure gradient, 886–887
Colloid solutions, for obstetrical hemorrhage, 771
Colon disorders, 1018–1025. See also Small bowel and colon disorders
Colonic pseudoobstruction, 1023, 1023f
Colonoscopy, 1012–1013
Colorectal cancer, 1176
Colostomy, 1022
Colostrum, 55, 639
Colpocephaly, 278
Colporrhexis, 740
Combination hormonal contraceptives, 671–674
combination oral contraceptive pills, 671–672, 671t
drug efficacy, altered, 672
intravaginal rings, 673–674
mechanism of action, 671
metabolic changes, risks, and benefits, 672–673, 672t
transdermal patches, 674

Combination oral contraceptive pills, 671–672, 671t
Combined spinal-epidural (CSE) technique, 473f, 479
Community-acquired pneumonia (CAP), 961–962. See also Pneumonia
Compact layer, amnion, 94
Comparative genomic hybridization (CGH), 326
Complete abortion, 201, 201f, 201t
Complete androgen-insensitivity syndrome (CAIS), 38
Complete breech, 418, 518, 519f
total extraction, 527–528, 527f
Complete gonadal dysgenesis, 37
Complete hydatidiform mole, 235, 235t, 236–240
clinical findings, 237–238, 238f
diagnosis, 238–239, 238f
epidemiology and risk factors, 237
estrogen production, 102–103
features and histology, 236, 236f, 236t
management, 239–240, 240t
molar pregnancy termination, 239–240
postevacuation surveillance, 240
pathogenesis, 237, 237f
pathology, 239
in pregnancy, 235, 235t, 236–240
pregnancy after, 242–243
twin pregnancy, 237
Compound presentation, 443, 443f
Compression ultrasonography, 981
Compressor urethrae muscle, 19f
Computed tomography (CT)
central nervous system, 1126
gastrointestinal, 1013
maternal, 873–875, 874f, 874t
in pregnancy, risks, 1163
Conception
postabortal, 214
retained products, 636, 637f
Condom
female, 674, 675f
male, 674
Conduction analgesia, external cephalic version, 529
Conduction defects, fetal heart rate monitoring, 450
Condylomata acuminata, 1216
Condylomata lata, 1207, 1207f. See also Syphilis
Confined placental mosaicism, 318, 829
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH), 38–39

fetal, 299f, 369–370
fetal surgery for, open, 373
Congenital bilateral absence of the vas deferens (CBAVD), cystic fibrosis, 968
Congenital cystic adenamatoid malformation (CCAM), fetal therapy for
medical, 288f, 370, 373
surgical, 373
thoracic shunts, 288f, 376
Congenital cystic adenomatoid malformation (CCAM), 287, 288f
Congenital deformity, 610
Congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH), 286, 286f
fetoscopic surgery for, 375, 375f
lung-to-head ratio, 375
Congenital genitourinary anomalies, 31–47. See also Genitourinary anomalies, congenital
Congenital heart block, 368–369
Congenital heart disease, maternal, 927–930
atrial septal defects, 927–928
atrioventricular septal defects, 928
cyanotic heart disease, 920t, 928–929
Eisenmenger syndrome, 929–930, 929f
persistent (patent) ductus arteriosus, 928
pregnancy after surgical repair
single functional ventricle, 929
transposition of great vessels, 929
ventricular septal defects, 920t, 928
Congenital high airway obstruction sequence (CHAOS), 288, 289f
ex-utero intrapartum treatment for, 285f, 289f, 379
Congenital malformations. See also specific types
Chiari III, 276
congenital cystic adenomatoid, 287, 288f, 370, 373, 376
Dandy-Walker, 156, 279, 279f
from diabetes mellitus, 1071–1072, 1071f, 1071t
fetal-growth restriction, 828
heart, 288
multifetal gestation, 838, 844
pregestational diabetes, 1071–1072, 1071f, 1071t
pulmonary airway, 287
venolymphatic, 379, 379f
Congenital pulmonary airway malformation (CPAM), 287
Congenital varicella syndrome, 1186
Congenital Zika syndrome, 1193
Conglutinated cervix, 1165
Conjoined twins, 846, 847f
Conjugate
diagonal, 27f, 28, 438

obstetrical, 27f, 28, 438
true, 27f, 28
Conjunctivitis, chlamydial, newborn prophylaxis, 593–594. See also Chlamydia trachomatis
(chlamydia)
Connective tissue, cervical, 405–406, 405f
parturition phase 1, 405–406, 405f
Connective tissue disorders, 1109–1121
antiphospholipid syndrome, 1114–1117, 1115t, 1117t
hereditary
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, 1121
Marfan syndrome, 1121
osteogenesis imperfecta, 1121
immune-mediated, 1109–1110
inflammatory myopathies, 1120–1121
rheumatoid arthritis, 1117–1118
systemic lupus erythematosus, 1110–1114
systemic sclerosis/scleroderma, 1118–1119
vasculitis syndromes, 1119–1120
Connexin proteins, 403
Connexon, 403
Consanguinity, 320–321
Constitutionally small fetuses, 825
Consumptive coagulopathy, placental abruption, 753
Contiguous gene syndrome, 315
Contingent sequential screening, aneuploidy, 339
Continuous lumbar epidural analgesia, 475–479
complications, 473t, 475–477
abscesses, 477
back pain, 477
catheter tip shear, 477
CNS stimulation, 476
fever, 476–477
hematoma, 477
high spinal blockade, 475
hypotension, 476
ineffective analgesia, 475–476
contraindications, 475t, 478–479
anticoagulation, 478
preeclampsia-eclampsia, severe, 478–479
thrombocytopenia, 478
on labor, effect, 477–478, 477t
cesarean delivery rates, 477–478, 478t
epidural placement timing, 478
fetal heart rate, 477

safety, 478
technique, 475, 476t
Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP), 886
for respiratory distress syndrome, preterm newborn, 616
Continuous spinal analgesia, during labor, 479
Continuous-wave Doppler, 261
Contraception, 664–676
barrier methods
cervical cap, 674–675
condom
female, 674, 675f
male, 674
diaphragm plus spermicide, 674
effectiveness, 665t
classification, 664
contraceptives, 669–674. See also Contraceptives
combination hormonal, 671–674
progestin-only, 669–671
emergency, 676, 676t
contraceptives, 665t
copper-containing IUDs, 676
hormonal, 676, 676t
methods and brand names, 676, 676t
fertility awareness–based methods, 675
cycle-beads, 675
standard days method, 675
symptothermal method, 675
twoday method, 675
history, prenatal, 179
intrauterine devices, 664–668. See also Intrauterine devices (IUDs)
long-acting reversible, 664
pregnancies, unintended, 664
puerperium, 645
reversible methods, effectiveness, 664, 665t
side effects and risk, 664
spermicides, 675–676
contraceptive sponge, 675–676
effectiveness, 665t
vaginal contraceptive gel (Phexxi), 675
systemic lupus erythematosus, 1113–1114
United States Medical Eligibility Criteria, 664
Contraceptives, 669–674
combination hormonal, 671–674
combination oral contraceptive pills, 671–672, 671t

intravaginal rings, 673–674
mechanism of action, 671
method-specific effects
drug efficacy, altered, 672
metabolic changes, risks, and benefits, 672–673, 672t
transdermal patches, 674
effectiveness, 665t
progestin-only, 669–671
actions and side effects, 669
contraindications, 669
implants, 669–670, 670f
injectable, 670
pills, 670–671
Contraceptive sponge, 675–676
Contracted inlet, 438–439
Contracted midpelvis, 439
Contracted outlet, 439
Contraction-associated proteins (CAPS), 403
Contractions, uterine
Braxton Hicks, 52, 401
pressures, 494
terminology, 463
Contraction stress test (CST), 386, 386t
Contrast agents, radiographic, maternal exposure, 875
Convulsions, from spinal block, 474
Cooley anemia, 1057
Coombs test, indirect, 353
Copper-containing IUDs, emergency contraception, 676
Copper overload, hepatitis and cirrhosis from, 1039–1040
Copy number variant, 309
prevalence, 332
Cord. See Umbilical cord
Corin, 826
Cornual pregnancy, 43, 227
Coronary artery dissection, maternal, 938
Coronavirus, 1187. See also COVID-19
pneumonia, 964–965
Cor pulmonale, in cystic fibrosis, 968
Corpus callosum, agenesis of, 278, 278f, 279f
Corpus luteum, 82–83, 83f
Corrected transposition of the great vessels, 368
Corticosteroids. See also specific types
for asthma
inhaled, 959, 959f, 960t

systemic, 961
for dermatological disorders, 1158–1159, 1158t, 1159t
on fetal lung maturation, 131
on heart rate variability, fetal, 450
for HELLP syndrome, 716, 716f
immunosuppressants /fetotoxicity, 148, 153
for intraventricular hemorrhage prevention, preterm newborn, 619
for lung maturation, preeclampsia, 715–716
for multifetal gestation, antenatal, 854–855
outcomes, pregnancy, 1158, 1158t
for preterm labor, intact membranes, 600
agent selection, 802
late-preterm delivery, 802–803
recommendations and studies, 802
repeated courses, 803
rescue therapy, 803
for preterm prelabor, rupture of membranes, 801–802
for pustular psoriasis of pregnancy, 1157
for respiratory distress syndrome prevention, preterm newborn, 617
Corticotropin. See Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)
Corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH), 96t, 98, 99, 403, 404
parturition, phase 2, 407–408, 407f
Cortisol
lactation, 640
maternal, 73, 73f
Cosmeceuticals, teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 155
Counseling, preconceptual, 164–172
care efficacy, 164–165
counseling session, 165
definition, 164
fourth trimester counseling, 165
genetic diseases, 167–168
Eastern European Jewish descent individuals, 168, 183
family history and pedigree, 167–168, 167f
neural-tube defects, 168
phenylketonuria, 168
thalassemias, 168, 343
health indicators, 164, 164t
medical history, 165–167
diabetes mellitus, 165–166, 165f
epilepsy and antiepileptics, 166, 166t
immunizations, 166–167, 166t
parental age
assisted reproductive technologies, 169

maternal, 169, 169f
paternal, 169
reproductive history, 168
screening tests, 170, 171t–172t
social history
diet, 170
environmental exposures, 170
exercise, 170
intimate-partner violence, 170
LGBTQ individuals, 170
recreational drugs and smoking, 169–170
Couvelaire uterus, placental abruption, 753, 753f
COVID-19, 1187–1189, 1187f
newborn preventive care, 594–595
pandemic, 6
pneumonia, 964–965
preterm birth, 792
Coxsackievirus, 1192–1193
Cranial injuries, newborn
extracranial hemorrhage, 607t, 608–609, 608f
intracranial hemorrhage, 607–608, 607t
skull fractures, 609, 609f
C-reactive protein, 61
Creatine, serum, maternal, 68
CREST syndrome, 1119
Cretinism, endemic, 1097
Cricoid pressure, for intubation, labor and delivery, 481
Cri-du-chat syndrome, 315, 316t
Crisaborole, for dermatologic disorders, 1159, 1159t
Crista dividens, 127–128
Critical care and trauma, 881–898
acute pulmonary edema, 883–884, 883t
cardiogenic hydrostatic edema, 883–884
diagnosis, 884
management, 884
noncardiogenic permeability edema, 883, 883t
acute respiratory distress syndrome, 884–887
clinical course, 885, 885f
definitions, 884
etiopathogenesis, 884–885, 884t
management, 883
mechanical ventilation, 616, 885–887, 886f
outcomes, long-term, 887
cardiopulmonary resuscitation, 897–898

brain death, maternal, 898, 1138
cesarean delivery, perimortem, 897–898
high-quality, 897, 897t
critical care, 881–883
hemodynamic changes in pregnancy, 882–883, 883t
obstetrical, 881–882
organization, 881, 882t
severe maternal morbidity, 882
envenomation, 898
fetal injury and death, 893–894, 893f
trauma management, 895–896. See also under Injury and death, fetal
penetrating trauma, 894–895
placental injuries, 894, 894f, 895f
sepsis and septic shock, 887–891. See also Sepsis and septic shock
thermal injury, 896–897, 896f
electrical and lightning injuries, 897, 897t
trauma, 891–896
automobile accidents, 892, 893f
blunt, other, 892–893
intimate partner violence, 891–892
sexual assault and STD prophylaxis, 892, 892t
uterine rupture, 894
Critical titer, 353
Crohn disease, 1019f, 1020, 1020t
pregnancy and, 1021t, 1022
Cromones, for asthma, 959
Crowning, 499
Crown-rump length (CRL), 121–122, 248, 248f, 272, 274f
by gestational age, 1234t
Cryoprecipitate, for obstetrical hemorrhage, 772t, 773
Crypotogenic cirrhosis, 1040
Cryptococcosis, pneumonia, 965
Crystalloid solutions
for hemorrhage, obstetrical, 771
for preeclampsia and eclampsia, severe, 724
CT pulmonary angiography, 987–988, 988f
maternal, 874–875
Cuboidal epithelium, amnion, 94, 94f
Cul-de-sac, 16
Cucurbita pepo, See Clem
Cushing disease, 1101
hypertension, severe, 952–953
Cushing syndrome, 1101–1102, 1102t
Cyanotic heart disease, congenital maternal, 920t, 928–929

Cycle-beads, 675
Cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP), labor, 404
Cyclooxygenase 1 (COX-1), 400, 400f
Cyclooxygenase 2 (COX-2), 400, 400f
Cyclophosphamide, teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 152
Cyclosporine
for dermatologic disorders, 1159, 1159t
for inflammatory bowel disease, 1021
for pustular psoriasis of pregnancy, 1157
Cyllosoma, 297–298, 298f
Cyst
adnexal, 1171–1172
choroid plexus, trisomy 18, 341–342
Gartner duct, 33
Nabothian, 180
theca-lutein, 54
umbilical cord, 114
Cystic adenomatoid malformation, congenital, 287, 288f
Cystic fibrosis, 968–969, 969t
carrier screening, 342
jejunoileal atresia, 296, 296f
Cystic fibrosis conductance transmembrane regulator (CFTR) gene, 342
Cystic fibrosis transmembrane regulator (CFTR) gene, 319, 968
Cystic hygroma, 285–286, 286f
Cystitis, 995, 997
Cystoscopy, 995
Cystotomy, peripartum hysterectomy, 563–564, 564f
Cytogenetic analysis (karyotyping), 324–325
Cytokines. See also specific types
preeclampsia, 693
spontaneous preterm labor, 789–790
Cytokine storm, toxic shock syndrome toxin 1, 659
Cytomegalovirus (CMV), 1183–1185
breastfeeding, 641
congenital infection, 1183–1184, 1184f
diagnosis, prenatal, 1183–1184, 1183f
fetal-growth restriction, 828
management and prevention, 1184
maternal infection, 1183
Cytotoxic drugs, in breast milk, 641–642
Cytotrophoblasts, 86, 87f

D
D11, 357
D alloimmunization, 353–354, 354t
Dandy-Walker malformation, 279, 279f
from warfarin, 156
Data, evidence-based medicine, 2
D-dimer screening tests, 981–982
Death, fetal, 893–894, 893f. See also Injury and death, fetal
birthweight and, 2
causes, 3
definition, 624–625
epochs, 625, 625f
mortality epochs, 625, 625f
prolonged retention, obstetrical hemorrhage, 776
rate, 3, 3f
reporting requirements, 624
trial of labor after cesarean, 577
Death, infant, 3
measures, 4, 4f
Death, maternal
brain death, 898, 1138
causes, 4–5, 4f
direct, 3
fetomaternal hemorrhage, 896
hemorrhage, 731
indirect, 785
late, 3
pregestational diabetes, 1073
race/ethnicity on, 5, 5f
rates and trends, 3–5, 5f
Death, neonatal
early, 3
late, 3
Death, nonmaternal, 3
Death, pregnancy-associated, 3
Death, pregnancy-related
causes, 4, 4f
definition, 3
Deceleration phase, first stage of labor, 424, 424f
Decelerator influences, fetal heart rate, 449
Decidua, 84–85, 221–222
decidualization, 84

hemochorial placentation, 84
histology, 84–85, 85f
immune cells, 93
labor, 399, 404–405, 404f
prolactin, 85
regeneration, puerperium, 636
structure, 84, 84f
Decidua basalis, 84–85, 84f, 85f, 87f, 88, 89, 91f, 92f
Decidua capsularis, 84, 84f
Decidual cast, 222, 222f
complete abortion, 201, 201f
Decidualization, 84
Decidual natural killer cells, 89
Decidual reaction, 53
Decidua parietalis, 84, 84f
Decidua spongiosa, 412
Decidua vera, 84
Deep space, urogenital triangle, 18–19, 19f
urethra, 18–19, 19f
Deep-vein thrombosis, 980–986
anticoagulation
abortion and, 986
delivery and, 986
anticoagulation complications, 985–986
heparin-induced osteoporosis, 986
heparin-induced thrombocytopenia, 985–986
clinical presentation, 980
diagnosis, 980–982
algorithm, 981, 981f
compression ultrasonography, 981
D-dimer screening tests, 981–982
MRI, 981
management, 982–985
anticoagulation regimens, 982–983, 982t
direct-acting oral anticoagulants, 985
labor and delivery, 985
low-molecular-weight heparin, 982t, 983–985, 983f
unfractionated heparin, 983, 984t
warfarin compounds, 985
Defibulation (deinfibulation), for female genital mutilation, 505, 505f
Dehiscence
fascial, 654, 655f
uterine, 573
Dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA), placental production, 101, 101f

Dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (DHEA-S), placental production, 101, 101f
del, 309
Deletions, chromosome, 314–315, 315f
22q11.2 microdeletion syndrome, 315
microdeletions and microduplications, 315, 316t
Delivery. See also Cesarean delivery; Vaginal delivery; specific topics
anesthetic agents, 470–471, 470t
anticoagulation, 986
blood loss management, with severe preeclampsia and eclampsia, 725
head, vaginal delivery technique, 498–499, 499f
intentional, for preterm prelabor rupture of membranes, 800
placenta previa, 758–759
precipitous, 438
preeclampsia syndrome, <34 wk, 716–717, 717t
pregestational diabetes, 1078, 1078t
preterm
breech fetus, 520–521
gonorrhea, 1211
intact membranes, 806–807
posttraumatic stress disorder, 1144
pregestational diabetes, 1070–1071
route. See also specific types
hypertension, chronic, 952
multifetal gestation
breech first twin, 857
cephalic first twin, 856–857, 856f
shoulders, vaginal delivery technique, 499–500
timing
hypertension, chronic, 952
multifetal gestation, 855
Delta base, 591–593, 593f
Delta hepatitis, 1036t, 1038
Delta hypertension, 689
Delta sign, 842, 842f
Demise, fetal
multifetal gestation, 852–853, 852f
unexplained, pregestational diabetes, 1072
Demyelinating or degenerative disorders, 1134–1136
multiple sclerosis, 1134–1135, 1134f
in pregnancy, 1134–1135
myasthenia gravis, 1135–1136
neonatal effects, 1136
pregnancy and, 1135–1136
Dendritic cells, decidua, 93

Dental care, 188
Denys-Drash syndrome, 37
Deoxycorticosterone
maternal, 74
preeclampsia syndrome, 61
Depo-Provera, injectable, 670
Depo-subQ provera 104, 670
Depot medroxyprogesterone acetate (DMPA)
effectiveness, 665t
injectable, 670
medical eligibility criteria, 667t
progestin-only contraceptives, 669–670
Depression, major, 1144–1148
perinatal evaluation and screening, 1143–1144, 1143t
postpartum, 1143, 1145
pregnancy and, 1145
prevalence and factors, 1144
suicide, 1148
symptoms, 1145t
treatment, 1145–1148
algorithm, 1146f
allopregnanolone, 1147
drugs, 1145–1147, 1146t
electroconvulsive therapy, 1147–1148
fetal and neonatal effects, 1147
ketamine, 1147
Depression, postpartum
definition and incidence, 1143
outcomes, 1144
screening, 1143–1144, 1143t
treatment, 1144
Dermatologic disorders, 1154–1159
acne vulgaris, 1156–1157
erythema nodosum, 1157
hidradenitis suppurativa, 1158
neurofibromatosis lesions, 1158
pregnancy-specific dermatoses, 1154–1156, 1155t
atopic eruption of pregnancy, 1155t, 1156
pemphigoid gestationis, 1154–1156, 1155f, 1155t
pruritic urticarial papules and plaques of pregnancy, 1155t, 1156, 1156f
psoriasis, 1157
pustular psoriasis of pregnancy, 1157, 1157f
pyogenic granuloma, 1157–1158, 1157f
rosaceae fulminans, 1158

treatment, 1158–1159, 1158t
corticosteroids, 1158, 1158t
other agents, 1159, 1159t
Dermatomyositis, 1120–1121
Descent (fetal), 401f, 408, 420, 421f
second-stage disorders, 437
Desflurane, for labor and delivery, 481
Desipramine, for depression, 1145–1147, 1146t
Desmopressin, for diabetes insipidus, 1104
Desonide
for dermatological disorders, 1158, 1158t
outcomes, pregnancy, 1158, 1158t
Destruction-induced thyroiditis, 1098
Detailed fetal anatomy
examination, 251, 251t
survey, 272, 273t
Detection rate. See Sensitivity
Deterministic effects, maternal radiation, 871–872, 871t
Development
fetal, 124–135, 824. See also Fetal development and physiology
infant, multifetal gestation, 845
Dexamethasone
for congenital adrenal hyperplasia, maternal carriers, 369, 370
for dermatological disorders, 1158, 1158t
outcomes, pregnancy, 1158, 1158t
for preterm labor management, intact membranes, 802–803
D genotyping, fetal, 355
Diabetes insipidus, 1104
acute fatty liver of pregnancy, 1036
Diabetes mellitus, 1068–1085
macrosomia, 832–833
miscarriage, recurrent, 204, 205t
prevalence, 1068
types/classification
ADA, 1069, 1070t
etiologic (type 1/2), 1069, 1069t
maturity-onset diabetes of the young, 1069
pregnancy, 1068–1069
White/modified White, 1069, 1069t
Diabetes mellitus, gestational, 994–995, 1068, 1078–1085
cystic fibrosis, 969
definition, 1079
management, 1082–1084
benefits, 1082

diet, diabetic, 1082–1083
exercise, 1083
by functional class, 1082
glucose monitoring, 1083
insulin treatment, 1083
oral hypoglycemic agents, 1083–1084
maternal and fetal effects, 1081–1082
cesarean delivery, 1081
fetal macrosomia, 1081–1082
hypertension, 1081
hypoglycemia, neonatal, 1082
obesity, 905–906, 905f, 905t
obstetrical management, 1084
postpartum evaluation, 1084–1085, 1085t
prenatal care, subsequent visits, 183
prevalence, 1078
recurrent, 1085
screening and diagnosis, 1079–1081, 1079t, 1080
controversies, 1080, 1081f
justification for, 1080
recommendations, 1079–1080, 1079t
single-step approach, 1079, 1079t
threshold glucose values, 1079, 1079t, 1080, 1080t
two-step approach, 1080, 1080t
Diabetes mellitus, pregestational, 1068, 1069–1078
diagnosis, 1069–1070, 1070t
fetal effects, 1070–1073
cardiomyopathy, 1073
cognitive development, long-term, 1073
fetal demise, unexplained, 1072
growth, altered, 1072, 1072f
hydramnios, 1072
hyperbilirubinemia, 1073
hypocalcemia, 1073
hypoglycemia, 1073
inheritance, 1073
malformations, 1071–1072, 1071f, 1071t
neonatal, 1072–1073
polycythemia, 1073
preterm delivery, 1070–1071
respiratory distress syndrome, 1073
spontaneous abortion, 1070
fetal-growth restriction, 827
first-trimester care, 1076

harm in pregnancy, 1070, 1071t
infections, 1076
insulin treatment, 1076–1077, 1077t
glycemic control, maternal, 1076–1077, 1077t
hypoglycemia, 1077
monitoring, 1077, 1077t
maternal effects, 1073–1076
death, 1073
hypertension, 1073
ketoacidosis, 1075–1076, 1075t
nephropathy, 1074
neuropathy, 1075
preeclampsia, 1074, 1074f
respiratory, 1073
retinopathy, 1074–1075
preconception
care, 1076
counseling, 165–166, 165f
puerperium, 1078
second-trimester care, 1077–1078
third-trimester care and delivery, 1078
Diabetic gastropathy, 1075
Diabetic ketoacidosis, pregestational diabetes, 1075–1076, 1075t
fetal death, 1072
Diabetic nephropathy, 1074
Diabetic neuropathy, 1075
Diabetic retinopathy, 1074–1075
Diagnosis. See also specific disorders
cancer imaging, 1163
genetic tests, 324
prenatal, 332–348. See also Prenatal diagnosis
Diagnosis, pregnancy, 176–177
sonographic recognition, 177, 177f
symptoms and signs, 176
tests, 176–177, 176f
hCG, 176, 176f
home, 176–177
Diagonal conjugate, 27f, 28, 438
Dialysis, 1005, 1006t
Diamnionic twins, 839
Diamond-Blackfan anemia/syndrome, 1052, 1053
red cell alloimmunization, 352
Diandric triploidy, 199, 313
Diaphragm

fetal, 286
maternal, 65, 66f
pelvic, 19, 19f
Diaphragmatic hernia, 287, 287f, 1017
fetal, 287, 287f
Diaphragm plus spermicide, 674
Diarrhea, acute, 1018–1020, 1019t
Clostridioides difficile, 1019–1020, 1019f, 1019t
Diastasis recti, 55, 638
Diastolic notch, 262
Diathesis, chronic hypertensive, 946
Dichorionic twins, 839
Diclegis, for hyperemesis gravidarum, 1015, 1016t
Dicloxacillin, for staphylococcal breast infections, 660
Diet. See also specific topics
diabetic, for gestational diabetes mellitus, 1082–1083
first-trimester spontaneous abortion, 200
preconceptual counseling, 170
Dietary reference intakes, recommended allowances, 184, 184t
Diethylstilbestrol, müllerian abnormalities, 41f, 45
Didelphys virginiana, See Virgil
DiGeorge syndrome. See 22q11.2 microdeletion syndrome
Digestive enzymes, fetal, 132
Digestive system, fetal, 131–133
hydrochloric acid and digestive enzymes, 132
liver, 132
meconium, 132
pancreas, 132–133
stomach emptying, 132
swallowing, 131–132
Digital rotation, operative vaginal delivery, 539
Digoxin, fetal administration, 368
Digynic triploidy, 199, 313
Dihydrotachysterol, for hypoparathyroidism, 1100
Dihydrotestosterone, genitalia development, 33, 34f
1,25-Dihydroxyvitamin D, 1099
Dilapan-S, 209, 209f
Dilated cardiomyopathy, maternal, 932
Dilation, cervical, 401f, 410f, 411, 411f
assessment, 427
Dilational division, 424
Dilation and curettage (D & C), 210, 211f
Dilation and evacuation (D & E), 213
Dilutional coagulopathy, 772

Dimenhydrinate, for hyperemesis gravidarum, 1015
Dimethyl fumarate, for multiple sclerosis, 1135
Dinoprostone. See Prostaglandin E2
Dipalmitoyl phosphatidylcholine, 131
Diphenhydramine
for hyperemesis gravidarum, 1015
for pruritus, 1158
Direct electronic monitoring, fetal, 446–447, 446f, 447f
Direct maternal death, 3
Discharge, hospital
cesarean delivery, 566
newborn care, 596
puerperium, 645
Discordant growth, multifetal gestation, 851–852
diagnosis, 851
management, 852
pathogenesis, 851, 851f
selective fetal-growth restriction, 852
Disomy, uniparental, 322–323, 323f
Disorders, fetal. See Fetal disorders; specific types
Disorders of sex development (DSD), 35–39
46,XX, 36t, 38–39
androgen excess, 38–39
gonadal dysgenesis, 38
ovarian development, abnormal, 38
ovotesticular, 38
testicular, 38
46,XY, 36t, 37–38
androgen production or action, abnormal, 37–38
complete gonadal dysgenesis, 37
gonadal dysgenesis, 37
mixed gonadal dysgenesis, 37
partial gonadal dysgenesis, 37
testicular regression, 37
ambiguous genitalia, 35, 298, 299f
definitions, 35–36, 36t
dysgenetic testis, 35, 37
gender assignment, 39
germ cell cancer, 36
gonadal dysgenesis, 35
sex chromosome, 36–37. See also specific types
ovotesticular, 37
streak gonad, 35
Dispermic fertilization (dispermy), 237, 237f

Disproportion, fetopelvic, 438–443. See also Fetopelvic disproportion
Disseminated intravascular coagulation, 775
Diuresis, postpartum, 638–639
Diuretics, for hypertension. See also specific types and conditions
chronic, pregnancy, 949, 949t
severe, 723–724
Diverticulum, urethral, 1007, 1007f
Dizygotic twins, 839
DNA, cell-free
genetic tests, 327–328, 328f, 328t
placental, 137
prenatal screening, 183, 334, 335–336
DNA triplet repeat expansion, 321–322, 321t
fragile X syndrome, 321–322
imprinting, 322, 322t
multifactorial inheritance, 323–324, 323t
cardiac defects, 324
neural-tube defects, 324
threshold traits, 324, 324f
uniparental disomy, 322–323, 323f
D-negative, 353
with ectopic pregnancy, 221
Dolicocephaly, 283, 283f
Doppler imaging, obstetrical, 261–263
continuous-wave, 261
ductus arteriosus, 262
ductus venosus, 263, 264f
equation, 261, 261f
middle cerebral artery, 262–263, 263f
pulsed-wave, 261–262
umbilical artery, 262
uterine artery, 262
Doppler shift, 261
Doppler velocimetry, 391–392
blood flow velocity and applications, 391
middle cerebral artery, alloimmunized, 355–356, 356f
uterine, preeclampsia syndrome prediction, 703
uterine artery, preeclampsia syndromes, 1105
Double-bubble sign, 296, 296f
Double decidual sign, 177, 177f
Double-outlet right ventricle, 293
pregnancy after, 929
Down syndrome. See Trisomy 21 (Down syndrome)
Doxepin, for depression, 1145–1147, 1146t

Doxycycline
for Chlamydia trachomatis, uterine subinvolution, 637
teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 152
Doxylamine, for nausea of pregnancy, 186
Doxylamine + pyridoxine, for hyperemesis gravidarum, 1015, 1016t
D-positive, ABO-compatible newborn, 354
Drug-induced hemolysis, 1051
Drug-induced liver injury, 1030
Drugs. See Medications; specific types
Drugs, recreational, 180
breast milk, 641–642
preconceptual counseling, 169–170
Drugs of abuse
neonatal abstinence syndrome, 158–159, 605
teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 157–159
D sensitization, 354
D-transposition of great arteries, 293, 294f
Ductal-dependent lesions, fetal heart, 288
Ductus arteriosus, Doppler imaging, 262
Ductus venosus
Doppler imaging, obstetrical, 263, 264f
Doppler velocimetry, 391–392
Duffy group A antigens, 354
Dührssen incisions, 527, 527f
Duke-Li classification, 934
Duloxetine, for depression, 1145–1147, 1146t
Duncan mechanism, 412, 734
Duodenal atresia, fetal, 296, 296f
Duplicated renal collecting system, 299, 300f
Duplications, chromosome, microduplications, 315, 316t
Dural-puncture epidural analgesia, 479
Dysautonomia, familial, 343
Dysfibrinogenemia, 1063
Dysgenetic testis, 35, 37
Dyskinetic cerebral palsy, 602, 620
Dysmenorrhea, IUDs, 666
Dysostoses, 301
Dysplasias, skeletal, 301–302, 302f, 302t
Dystocia, 433–434, 433t
causes, 433, 433t
complications
caput succedaneum and molding, 444
fistula formulation, 443
maternal infection, 443

nerve injury, lower extremity, 444
postpartum hemorrhage, 443
uterine rupture, 443
uterine tears, 443
definition, 433
powers, passenger, and passage, 433

E
Eagle-Barrett syndrome, 377
Early goal-directed therapy (EGDT), sepsis and septic shock, 889, 890f
Early neonatal death, 3
Early pregnancy loss, 198
Early preterm birth, 783
Early term neonate, 785
Eastern European Jewish descent individuals, 168, 183
Eating disorders, 1149–1150
anorexia nervosa, 1149–1150
bulimia nervosa, 1149–1150
Ebola virus, 1193–1194
vaccine, 1194
Ebstein anomaly, 292, 293f
from lithium, maternal use, 153–154
maternal, 928–929
Echinocandins, for pneumocystis pneumonia, 965
Echocardiography, 918
fetal, 252, 290f, 291
maternal measurement, 1233t
transesophageal, pregnancy, 918
E-cigarettes, teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 157
Eclampsia
clinical findings, 717–719, 718f
development and risk, 717
ECMO, See extracorporeal membrane oxygenation
Ectocervix, 23
Ectopic pregnancy, 220–232
abdominal, 230–231
acute vs. chronic, 221
cervical, 230, 230f
cesarean scar, 229–230
diagnosis, 229, 229f
management, 229–230, 229f
clinical manifestations, 221–222
decidual cast, 222, 222f
D-negative women with, 221

heterotopic, 220, 231–232
incidence and prevalence, 220
interstitial, 227–229
diagnosis, 227–228, 228f
management, 228–229, 228f
intrauterine devices in, 665
ovarian, 231
pathogenesis and outcomes, 221
risks, 221
Ectopic pregnancy, management
expectant, 227
medical, 225–226
patient selection, 226
regimen options, 225, 225t
side effects, 226
surveillance, 225t, 226
medical vs. surgical, 227
surgical, 226–227
options, 226–227
persistent trophoblast, 227
Ectopic pregnancy, tubal, 220–227
ampullary, 220, 220f
classification, 220–221, 220f
diagnosis, 222–225
beta-human chorionic gonadotropin, 222
endometrial sampling, 224
laparoscopy, 225
progesterone, serum, 224
transvaginal sonography
adnexal findings, 223–224, 223f
endometrial findings, 222–223, 223f
hemoperitoneum, 224, 224f
pregnancy of unknown location, 177, 222
Eczema, 1156
Edema
cardiogenic hydrostatic, 883–884
noncardiogenic permeability, 883, 883t
severe, eclampsia, 718, 718f
triple, 364
Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale (EPDS), 1143–1144, 1143t
Edwards syndrome. See Trisomy 18 (Edwards syndrome)
Effacement, cervical, 408, 410–411, 410f15f
assessment, 427
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, 1121

Eisenmenger syndrome, 929–930, 929f
Elective abortion, 208
Elective labor, 487. See also Labor, induction and augmentation
Elective repeat cesarean delivery (ERCD), 573. See also Cesarean delivery, prior
Electrical injuries, maternal, 897, 897t
Electric vacuum aspiration, 210, 211f
Electrocardiography (ECG)
fetal, 456–457, 456f. See also Fetal monitoring, electronic
pregnancy, 916–919, 917f
Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), for major depression, 1147–1148
Electrolytes. See also specific types
metabolism, maternal, 58–59
preeclampsia syndromes, 697
Electronic fetal monitoring, 446–454. See also Fetal monitoring, electronic
Elliptocytosis, hereditary, red cell alloimmunization, 352
EMA-CO, for gestational trophoblastic neoplasia, 242
Embolectomy, for pulmonary embolism, 989
Embolism
cerebral, ischemic stroke, 1132
paradoxical, 928, 1132
Embryogenesis and fetal development, 121–138. See also Fetal development and physiology; specific
topics
embryonic, 122–124
early human, 122–123, 123f, 124f
embryonic period, 122–124, 122f–124f
teratology, 122–124, 122f–124f, 145
zygote and blastocyst development, 122
embryonic development, 122–124, 122f
energy and nutrition, 135–137
fetal development and physiology, 124–135
gestational age, 121–122, 121f
heavy metals, placental sequestration, 136–137
Naegele rule, 122, 178
placenta, 137–138
Embryonic loss, 199
Embryonic miscarriage, 199
Emergency contraception, 676, 676t
copper-containing IUDs, 676
effectiveness, 665t
hormonal, 676, 676t
methods and brand names, 676, 676t
Emergency Medical Treatment and Labor Act (EMTALA), 425–426
Emissary veins, 608
Employment, 187

Encephalocele, 276, 277f
Encephalomalacia, multicystic, placental vascular anastomoses, 848
Encephalopathy
bilirubin, acute newborn, 606
hypoxic ischemic, 601
prevention, 602
trial of labor after cesarean, 574
neonatal
criteria, 601–602, 602t
definition and types, 601
intellectual disability and seizure disorders, 605
neuroimaging studies, 604–605
prevention, 602
posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome, 64, 64f
Wernicke, hyperemesis gravidarum, 1014–1015, 1014t
Endemic cretinism, 1097
Endocardial cushion defect, 291–292, 291f, 368
Endocardial fibroelastosis, 292
Endocarditis
gonococcal, 1212
infective, maternal, 934–935, 935t
Libman-Sacks, 926
Endocervical canal, 23
Endocervical epithelia, cervical ripening, 407
Endocervical polyp, 1164
Endocrine cascades, parturition phase 2, 407–408, 407f
Endocrine disorders, 1089–1104. See also specific types
adrenal gland, 1100–1103
adrenal insufficiency, 1102
aldosteronism, primary, 1103
Cushing syndrome, 1101–1102, 1102t
pheochromocytoma, 1100–1101, 1101f, 1101t
parathyroid, 1099–1100
hyperparathyroidism, 1099–1100
hypoparathyroidism, 1100
pregnancy and lactation-associated osteoporosis, 642, 1100
pituitary, 1103–1104
acromegaly, 1103–1104
diabetes insipidus, 1104
lymphocytic hypophysitis, 1104
prolactinomas, 1103, 1103f
Sheehan syndrome, 1104
preeclampsia, 697
pregnancy and, 1089

thyroid, 1089–1099
autoimmunity and thyroid disease, 1090, 1090f
euthyroid autoimmune thyroid disease, 1097
fetal microchimerism, 1090
hyperthyroidism, 1090–1094
hypothyroidism, 1094–1097, 1095t
hypothyroidism, congenital, 1098
iodine deficiency, 1097–1098
nodular thyroid disease, 1098–1099
postpartum thyroiditis, 1098
thyroid physiology and pregnancy, 2f, 1089–1090
Endocrine gland development, fetal, 133–134
adrenals, 134
pituitary, 133
thyroid, 133–134
Endocrine system
fetal-placental unit, preeclampsia syndrome prediction, 703
lactation, 640
Endocrine system, maternal, 70–74
adrenal glands
aldosterone, 73–74
androgens, 74
cortisol, 73, 73f
deoxycorticosterone, 74
iodine status, 72–73
parathyroid glands, 73
pituitary gland, 70–71
thyroid function tests, 72, 72f
thyroid gland, 71–73
thyroid function, maternal and fetal, 71, 72f
thyroid hormones, 71–72
Endocrine tests, serum and blood, 1230t. See also specific types
Endoglin, soluble
multifetal gestation, 845
preeclampsia, 694, 694f
Endometrial carcinoma, 1169
Endometrial invasion, 89–90
Endometrial lesions, 1168–1169
Endometrioma, 1168
Endometriosis, 1168
Endometritis, postpartum, 650–653. See also Uterine infection, puerperal
bacterial vaginosis, 1217
Endometrium, 22f, 23
regeneration, puerperium, 636

Endomyometritis, postpartum, 650–653. See also Uterine infection, puerperal
Endoparametritis, postpartum, 650–653. See also Uterine infection, puerperal
Endosalpinx, 26–27, 54
Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP), 1012, 1043
biliary duct gallstones, 1044
gallstone pancreatitis, 1044
Endoscopy, gastrointestinal disorders, 1012–1013, 1013t
Endothelial cell activation, preeclampsia syndrome, 693
Endothelial dysfunction, oxidative stress and preeclampsia syndrome, 703
Endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS), uteroplacental blood flow, 52
Endothelin(s), 65, 413, 694
Endothelin 1 (ET-1)
parturition phase 3, 413
preeclampsia, 694
Endothelin-receptor antagonists, teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 153
Endotheliopathy, 693
Endotoxin-induced hemolysis, pyelonephritis, 997
Endovascular trophoblasts, 87, 87f
End-tidal carbon dioxide (ETCO2) monitor, newborn mask ventilation, 589
Energy and nutrition, fetal, 135–137
amino acids, 136
free fatty acids and triglycerides, 136
glucose and fetal growth, 135
heavy metals, placental sequestration, 136–137
ions and trace metals, 136
leptin, 135–136
proteins, 136
vitamins, 137
Energy and nutrition, maternal, energy demands, 55, 56t
Engagement, 420, 421f
Engorgement, breast, 642
Entamoeba histolytica, 1200
diarrhea, acute, 1018, 1019t
Enteral nutrition, 1013, 1013t
Enterobacter pyelonephritis, 997
Enterococcus
endocarditis, pregnancy, 934
uterine infections, 651
Enterovirus infection, 1192–1193
Envenomation, 898
Environmental exposures, preconceptual counseling, 170
Environmental toxins. See also specific types
first-trimester spontaneous abortion, 200
Eosinopenia, puerperium, 638

Eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis, 1120
Epidermal growth factor (EGF), breast milk, 639
Epidural analgesia, 473f, 475–479. See also Analgesia, epidural
Epidural blood patch, 472
Epidural space, anatomy, 472, 473f
Epigastric artery
inferior, 13, 13f
superficial, 13, 13f
Epignathus, 285, 286f
Epilepsy. See also Seizure disorders
preconceptual counseling, 166, 166t
Epinephrine, for acute asthma, 960
Epi-No intravaginal pump balloon, 499
Episiotomy
anterior, for female genitalia, 505
definition, 509
immediate postpartum care, 509–510, 510f
infections, 657–659, 658t
lateral, 510
mediolateral, 509–510, 510f
midline, 509–510, 510f
necrotizing fasciitis, 890
operative vaginal delivery, 535
repair, immediate postpartum, 510–513, 511f–512f
end-to-end technique, 511, 512f
overlapping technique, 511
Epispadias, 39
Epithelial cells, amnion, histogenesis, 94–95
Epithelioid trophoblastic tumor, 242
Eplerenone, for primary aldosteronism, 1103
Epochs, fetal period, 122f, 124–125, 125f
Epoöphoron, 32f, 33
Erb palsy, 609
Ergonovine
after cesarean delivery, 557
for hemorrhage prophylaxis, third stage of labor, 507
for uterine atony, 736
Ergot alkaloids. See also specific types
for uterine atony, 736
Ergotamine derivatives, 1128
Erythema, palmar, 55
Erythema infectiosum, 1191–1192, 1191f
Erythema migrans, 1197
Erythema nodosum, 1157

sarcoidosis, 967
Erythroblastosis fetalis, 352
on fetal estrogen production, 102
Erythrocyte D-antigen alloimmunization, 93
Erythrocytes
antigens
fetal hemolytic disease, 353, 353t
inheritance, 353
types, 352
enzyme deficiencies, hemolytic anemia, 1052
fetal, 128
membrane defects, inherited, 1052
Erythromycin
for dermatologic disorders, 1159, 1159t
for hidradenitis suppurativa, 1158
for staphylococcal breast infections, 660
Erythropoiesis, fetal, 128–129, 129f
Erythropoiesis-stimulating agents, for cerebral palsy, 621
Erythropoietin, fetal, 129
Escherichia coli
diarrhea, acute, 1018, 1019t
endocarditis, 934
pyelonephritis, 997
sepsis, 887
urinary tract infections, 995
uterine infections, 651
Esophagus
atresia, fetal, 296
cancers, 1176
varices, 1040–1041
Essential thrombocytosis, 1060
Essure Permanent Birth Control System, 684
Estimated date of confinement (EDC), 121
Estimated due date (EDD), 247–248
Estimated fetal weight (EFW), fetal-growth restriction, 825
Estimated gestational age, 248t, 815
Estriol
low maternal, aneuploidy screening, 338–339
placental synthesis, 100f, 102
Estrogen
lactation, 640
placental production, 101–102, 101f
fetal conditions, 102–103
maternal conditions, 103

pregnancy, 399
Estrogen receptor α, 399
Estrogen receptor β, 399–400
Etanercept, for dermatological disorders, 1159, 1159t
Ethambutol, for tuberculosis, multidrug-resistant, 967
Ethanol. See Alcohol
Ethnicity
carrier screening, 342
mortality rate, maternal, 5, 5f
twinning, 839
Euploid abortion, 199
Euthermia, newborn, 588
Euthyroid autoimmune thyroid disease, 1097
Evaluation, maternal, 866–877
clinical prenatal, 180–181
imaging. See also specific types
MRI, 875–877
in pregnancy, 877, 877t
radiography, 870–875
sonography, 875
medications, 866–867
physiology and laboratory values, 866
surgery
laparoscopic, 867–870, 868t
nonobstetrical, 867, 867t
Evaluation, newborn, 590–593
acid–base physiology, fetal, 591–592, 592f
acid–base studies, umbilical cord blood, 591
acidemia
clinical significance, 592–593, 592t
metabolic, 591, 593
mixed respiratory–metabolic, 591
respiratory, 591, 593
Apgar score, 590–591, 590t
cord blood gas determinations, recommendations, 593
Evans syndrome, 1051
Exencephaly, 276
Exercise
for gestational diabetes mellitus, 1083
preconceptual counseling, 170
preeclampsia syndrome prevention, 1105–1106
in pregnancy, 187, 187t
Exercise stress testing, 918
EXIT-to-ECMO, 379–380

EXIT-to-resection, 379
Exome, 308
Exons, 308
Exosomal microRNAs, 902
Expedited partner therapy (EPT), chlamydia, 1212–1213
Expiratory reserve volume, 65, 956
Expressivity, autosomal dominant inheritance, 319
Expulsion, 421f, 423
Expulsive force abnormalities, 434–437
labor disorders, 434–437
active-phase, 434–437
latent-phase prolongation, 434, 435t
second-stage descent, 437
pushing efforts, maternal, 437
uterine dysfunction
risk factors, 434
types, 434
Extension, 421f, 422–423
External anal sphincter (EAS), 19f, 20–21
repair, post-episiotomy, 510–513, 511f–512f
External cephalic version (ECV), 528–529
cesarean delivery avoidance, 45
complications, 528
conduction analgesia, 529
indications, 528
moxibustion, 529
technique, 528–529, 529f
tocolysis, 529
External electronic monitoring, fetal, 447
External genitalia score, 38
External oblique muscle, 12, 13f
External parasitic twins, 846
External pudendal arteries, 13, 13f
External rotation, 421f, 423
External urethral sphincter, 18–19, 19f
Extraamnionic saline infusion (EASI), 491, 491f
Extracellular fluid, preeclampsia, 61
Extrachorial placentation, 109, 109f, 110t
Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO)
for acute respiratory distress syndrome, 886
maternal, 922
for status asthmaticus, 961
Extracranial hemorrhage, newborn, 607t, 608–609, 608f
Extraembryonic coelom, 84, 87, 88f, 94, 95

Extravillous trophoblasts, 87, 87f
Extremely low birthweight, 3, 783
Extremely preterm birth, 783
Extremities, fetal
abnormalities, 301–304
clubfoot, 303, 303f
dysplasias, 301–302, 302f, 302t
limb-reduction defects, 303–304, 304f
polydactyly, 302–303, 303f
normal, 301, 302f
Extubation, for labor and delivery, 481
Ex-utero intrapartum treatment (EXIT), 378–380, 379f, 379t
for congenital high airway obstruction sequence, 285f, 289f, 379
for micrognathia, 285, 285f, 379
MRI, 267
for venolymphatic malformation, 379, 379f
Eyes
of Texas are upon you, See Williams Obstetrics
infection, newborn prophylaxis, 593–594
maternal, 74–75
parameters, by gestational age, 1240t

F
Face
clefts, 283–285, 285f
paralysis, newborn, 610, 610f
Face presentation, 417, 418f
etiology and diagnosis, 440, 440f
forceps delivery, 534f, 542
management, 440–441
mechanism of labor, 440, 441f
Facial nerve injury, newborn, 610, 610f
Factor V Leiden mutation, 978
Factor VII deficiency, 1063
Factor VIII inhibitor defects, inherited, 1062
Factor IX inhibitor defects, inherited, 1062
Factor X deficiency, 1063
Factor XI deficiency, 1063
Factor XII deficiency, 1063
Factor XIII
deficiency, 1063
fetal, 130
Failure to progress, 434
Fallopian tubes, 22f, 26–27, 26f

embryonic development, 31–33, 32f
endosalpinx, 26–27
mesosalpinx, 26
müllerian abnormalities, 45
myosalpinx, 26–27
in pregnancy, 54
Fallot tetralogy, maternal, 928
Falls, pregnancy, 892–893
False knots, 116
False labor, 52, 401
Famciclovir, for herpes simplex virus, 1214–1215
Familial dysautonomia, 343
Familial hyperinsulinism, carrier screening, 344
Familial porencephaly, 280
Family history, 167–168, 167f
Fanconi anemia, 1052
carrier screening, 344
red cell alloimmunization, 352
Fascia
anterior abdominal wall, 12, 13f
dehiscence, puerperal abdominal incision infections, 654, 655f
Fasting, for labor and delivery anesthesia, 481–482
FAST scan, fetal, for maternal trauma, 895, 895f
Fat
metabolism, maternal, 58, 58t
tissue pathophysiology, 902
Fatigue, 192
Fatty acids
cardioprotective, on preeclampsia risk, 1106
placental metabolism and transfer, 825
Feeding, newborn care, 595
Female genital mutilation, vaginal delivery, 504–505, 505t
Female phallic urethra, 39
FemCap, 674–675
Femoral artery, 13, 13f
Femoral fracture, newborn, 610
Femur length, fetal, 274, 274f
Fenestrated forceps blades, 537, 537f
Fentanyl, for labor and delivery, 469, 469t
Ferguson reflex, 409
Ferning, cervical mucus, 53
Fertility
after cancer therapy, 1164
inflammatory bowel disease, 1021

Fertility awareness–based methods (FABMs), 675
cycle-beads, 675
standard days method, 675
symptothermal method, 675
twoday method, 675
Fertility rate, 3
Fertilization, 85, 86f
blastocyst, 85, 86f
blastomeres, 85, 86f
dispermic, 237, 237f
morula, 85, 86f
zygote, 85, 86f
Fetal adrenal cortical hypoplasia, 102
Fetal adrenal gland–placental interactions, 102–103
Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorders (FASD), 149, 180
Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorders (FASD) Prevention Program, 179
Fetal alcohol syndrome, 149–150, 149f, 149t
Fetal assessment, antepartum, 383–393. See also Assessment, antepartum fetal
Fetal cell microchimerism, 1109–1110
Fetal demise
multifetal gestation, 852–853, 852f
unexplained, pregestational diabetes, 1072
Fetal development and physiology, 124–135
cardiovascular system, 126–128
circulatory changes at birth, 128
fetal circulation, 126–128, 127f
fetoplacental blood volume, 128
central nervous system
brain, 125–126, 126f
spinal cord, 125
digestive system, 131–133
hydrochloric acid and digestive enzymes, 132
liver, 132
meconium, 132
pancreas, 132–133
stomach emptying, 132
swallowing, 131–132
endocrine glands, 133–134
adrenals, 134
pituitary, 133
thyroid, 133–134
fetal period epochs, 122f, 124–125, 125f
hemopoiesis, 128–130, 128t, 129f
coagulation factors, 130

hemoglobin, 129–130, 129f
plasma proteins, 130
immunological system, 134–135
musculoskeletal system, 134
respiratory system
anatomical maturation, 130–131
breathing, 131
pulmonary surfactant, 130, 131, 408, 587
urinary system, 133
Fetal disorders, 352–364. See also specific types
anemia, 352–357
hemorrhage, fetomaternal, 357–359, 894, 896
hydrops fetalis, 360–364
thrombocytopenia
alloimmune, 359, 360t
immune, 359–360
Fetal-growth restriction (FGR), 825–832
Barker hypothesis, 831–832
constitutionally small fetuses, 825
definitions, 825–826, 825f
detection, 248t, 825, 826
sonographic assessment, 826
uterine fundal height, 826
early-onset growth restriction outcomes, 831
estimated fetal weight, 825
hypertension, chronic, 952
labetalol, 713
management, 829–831
Doppler velocimetry, 830, 830f
fetus remote from term, 831
fundamentals and algorithm, 829–830, 829f
intrapartum, 831
near-term fetus, 830–831
multifetal gestation, 828, 828f
outcomes, 831–832
pathophysiology, 826
postterm pregnancy, 818
preeclampsia syndromes, 702
prevention, 832
risk factors, 826–829, 827f
anemia, 827
antiphospholipid syndrome, 827–828
genetic abnormalities, 828–829
gestational weight gain and nutrition, 827

hypoxia, chronic, 827
infections, 828
malformations, congenital, 828
multifetal gestation, 828, 828f
placental, cord, and uterine abnormalities, 828
pregestational diabetes, 827
socioeconomic, 827
vascular and renal disease, 827
selective, 852
thrombophilias, 979
Fetal heart rate (FHR)
acceleration, nonstress test, 387, 387f
decelerations, nonstress test, 389
eclampsia, 718, 718f
neonatal encephalopathy, 602
Fetal heart rate (FHR), monitoring
accelerator influences, 449
analgesia on, 477
baseline heart activity, 449–451
arrhythmia, 450–451
baseline variability, 449–450, 450f
bradycardia, 449
rate, 449
sinusoidal heart rate, 448t, 450f, 451
tachycardia, 449
baseline variability, 446, 447f, 448t
absent, 449, 450f
decreased, 449–450
increased, 449
minimal, 449, 450f
beat-to-beat variability, 446, 447f
benefits, 460–461
bradyarrhythmias, 368–369, 450
cerebral palsy, intrapartum, 604
complications, 463
computerized interpretation, 454
conduction defects, 450
continuous lumbar epidural analgesia on, 477
deceleration, late, 386
decelerator influences, 449
electrocardiography, 456–457, 456f
electronic, 446–454
external (indirect), 447
internal (direct), 446–447, 446f, 447f

medications on, maternal, 450
nonreassuring fetal status, 457
heart rate patterns and brain injury, 460, 460f
three-tier fetal heart rate interpretation system, 457–458, 457t
patterns, 447–449, 448t
second-stage labor, 454, 455f
period rate changes, 451–454
accelerations, 448t, 451
deceleration
early, 448t, 451–452, 452f
late, 448t, 452, 452f
prolonged, 448t, 453–454, 454f
variable, 448t, 452–453, 452f, 453f, 454f
postterm pregnancy, 817, 818f
reassuring, 457
recommendations, current, 461, 461t
saltatory, 453, 454f
umbilical cord occlusion on, 453, 453f
uterus rupture during labor on, 579, 579f
Fetal hydantoin syndrome, 150
Fetal microchimerism, 1090
Fetal monitoring, electronic, 446–454. See also Fetal heart rate (FHR), monitoring
complications, 463
computerized interpretation, 454
intrapartum, 427
Fetal-neonatal alloimmune thrombocytopenia (FNAIT), 359, 360t
Fetal overgrowth, 832–834. See also Macrosomia
hyperglycemia, maternal, 824
lipid transfer, 825
Fetal-pelvic index, 440
Fetal period
epochs, 122f, 124–125, 125f
teratology, 145
Fetal-placental aromatase deficiency, 102
Fetal-placental sulfatase deficiency, 102
Fetal-placental unit endocrine function, preeclampsia syndrome prediction, 703
Fetal therapy, medical, 367–370. See also Medications; specific medications and disorders
arrhythmias, 367–369, 368f
congenital adrenal hyperplasia, 299f, 369–370
congenital cystic adenamatoid malformation, 288f, 370, 373
thyroid disease
hypothyroidism, 370
identification, 370
thyrotoxicosis, 370

Fetal therapy, surgical, 371–380
ex-utero intrapartum, 378–380, 379f, 379t
fetoscopic, 373–376
congenital diaphragmatic hernia and fetoscopic tracheal occlusion, 375, 375f
general principles, 373–374
lung-to-head ratio, 375
myelomeningocele repair, 375–376
twin-twin transfusion syndrome, 374–375, 375f
general principles, 371, 371t
indications, 371
in-utero, case selection, 371, 371t
open fetal, 371–373
benefits and risks, 371–372, 372t
myelomeningocele, 372–373, 373f
procedures, 371
sacrococcygeal teratoma, 373
thoracic masses, 373
percutaneous, 376–378
intracardiac catheter, 378
radiofrequency ablation, 378
thoracic shunts, 376, 376f
urinary shunts, 376–378, 377f, 377t
Fetogram, stillborn fetus, 626
Fetopelvic disproportion, 438–443
brow presentation, 417, 418f, 441
compound presentation, 443, 443f
face presentation
etiology and diagnosis, 440, 440f
management, 440–441
mechanism of labor, 440, 441f
pelvic capacity
contracted inlet, 438–439
contracted midpelvis, 439
contracted outlet, 439
pelvic fractures, 439
pregestational diabetes, 1072, 1072f
radiologic assessment, 439–440, 439f
transverse lie
etiology and diagnosis, 441–442, 442f
management, 442
mechanism of labor, 442
umbilical cord prolapse, 442–443
Fetoscopic surgery, 373–376
congenital diaphragmatic hernia and fetoscopic tracheal occlusion, 375, 375f

general principles, 373–374
lung-to-head ratio, 375
myelomeningocele repair, 375–376
twin-twin transfusion syndrome, 374–375, 375f
Fetoscopic tracheal occlusion (FETO), 375, 375f
Fetus compressus, 852
Fetus-in-fetu, 846
Fetus papyraceus, 852, 852f
Fever. See also specific disorders
from continuous lumbar epidural analgesia, 476–477
Fibrin deposition
perivillous, 110–111, 110f
subchorionic, 110
Fibrinogen
abnormalities, inherited, 1063
concentrate, for obstetrical hemorrhage, 773
fetal, 130
Fibrinolysis, maternal, 61–62, 61t
Fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 (FGFR2) gene, paternal age mutations, 319
Fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 (FGFR3)
chondrodysplasia, 301
paternal age effect, 320
phenotypic heterogeneity, 319
Fibroblast-like mesenchymal layer, amnion, 94
Fibroids, 1167
Fibronectins, preeclampsia syndromes, 1105
Fifth disease, 1191–1192, 1191f
Filgrastim, 1163
Filshie clips, for postpartum tubal sterilization, 681
Fingolimod, for multiple sclerosis, 1135
First stage of labor. See also Labor, normal
characteristics, 424–425, 424f
management, 427–429
First-trimester aneuploidy screening
analyte-based
efficacy, 337–338
nuchal translucency, 337, 337f
ultrasound, 340t, 341
Fish consumption, pregnancy nutrition, 188
Fistula
dystocia, 443
urinary tract, 1007
vesicocervical, 1007
vesicouterine, 1007

vesicovaginal, 1007
Flecainide, fetal administration, 368
Flexion, 420
Flexion point, vacuum extraction, 543, 543f
Floor infarction, maternal, 111
Fluconazole
for candidiasis, 1218
teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 150–151
Fluid alterations, preeclampsia syndromes, 697
Fluid therapy
for preeclampsia and eclampsia, severe
crystalloid solution, 724
invasive hemodynamic monitoring, 724
pulmonary edema, 724
resuscitation, for obstetrical hemorrhage, 771
Flunisolide, for asthma, 959, 959f, 960t
Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), 325, 325f
prenatal and preimplantation, 344
Fluoride, pregnancy nutrition, 186
Fluoroquinolones, for pneumonia, 963, 963t
Fluoroscopy. See also specific indications
central nervous system, 1126
maternal, 873, 873t
Fluoxetine, for depression, 1145–1147, 1146t
Fluphenazine, for psychosis, 1145, 1146t
Fluticasone, for asthma, 959, 959f, 960t
Fluticasone/salmeterol, for asthma, 959, 959f, 960t
Fluticasone/vilanterol, for asthma, 959, 959f, 960t
FMR1 gene, 322
Focal chorangiosis, 111
Focal nodular hyperplasia, 1041
Focal placenta accreta, 760
Focal seizures, 1128–1129
Foley balloon tamponade, placenta previa, 759
Folic acid, 164
deficiency, megaloblastic anemia, 1050
supplementation, fetal nutrition, 186
Folinic acid, 225. See also Leucovorin
Fontan repair, pregnancy after, 929
Food insecurity, fetal-growth restriction, 827
Footling breech, 418
Forced vital capacity, 67, 956
Forceps
blades, 537, 537f

design, 537, 537f
Kielland, 541–542, 541f
Luikart, 537f
Simpson, 537f
Forceps delivery, 537–542
Bill axis traction device, 539
blade application and delivery, 537–540, 538f–539f
face presentation, 534f, 542
forceps design, 537, 537f
manual rotation, 540, 540f
occiput transverse positions, 541–542, 541f
outlet, low, and midpelvic, 533, 534t
persistent occiput posterior positions, 540–541, 541f
Forebag, amnionic fluid, 411, 413, 413f
Forkhead box Pe (FOXP3), 1182
Founder effect, 342
Four-chamber view, fetal heart, 290, 290f
Fournier gangrene, 890
Fourth trimester, 7, 634–635, 635t. See also Postpartum; Puerperium
counseling, 165
Fractures, newborn, 610
Fragile X mental retardation 1 (FMR1) gene, 322
Fragile X syndrome, DNA triplet repeat expansion, 321–322
Fragile X tremor ataxia syndrome (FXTAS), 322
Francisella tularensis, 1200
Frank breech, 418, 518, 518f
total breech extraction, 527
Fraser syndrome, 37, 288, 289f
Fraternal twins, 839
Free fatty acids, fetal nutrition, 136
Free T3, 71–72, 72f
Free T4, 71–72, 72f
Fresh-frozen plasma, for obstetrical hemorrhage, 772t, 773
Full term neonate, 785
Fulminant hepatic necrosis, 1036
Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), CNS, 1126
Functional residual capacity (FRC), 65–66, 956
Fundal height, uterine, 182, 826
Fungal pneumonia, 965
Funic presentation, 116
Funis, 95
Funisitis, 113
Funneling, 254, 256f

Furcate insertion, umbilical cord, 115
Furosemide
for acute pulmonary edema, 884
for Cushing syndrome, 1100
for heart failure, 922
for hyperparathyroidism, 1100
for hypertension
chronic, postpartum, 953
chronic, pregnancy, 949
persistent severe postpartum, 725
maternal, on fetal urine formation, 133
Fused umbilical artery, shared lumen, 114

G
Gadolinium
chelates, maternal imaging, 876
toxicity, 1163
Galactocele, 642
Galeal aponeurosis, 608, 608f
Gallbladder
fetal, anatomy, 295, 295f
maternal, 70
Gallbladder disorders, 1042–1043
cholecystitis, 1042, 1042f
cholelithiasis, 1042–1043, 1042f
endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography, 1043, 1044
management, 1042–1043
during pregnancy, 1042
Gardnerella vaginalis
spontaneous preterm labor, 790
vaginosis, 1216
Gartner duct cysts, 33
Gas exchange, pulmonary, newborn transition to, 586–587
Gaskin maneuver, 503
Gasps, antepartum fetal, 385
Gastric cancers, 1176
Gastric emptying time, 70
Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), 1016–1017
Gastrointestinal disorders, maternal, 1012–1025. See also specific types
diagnostic techniques
endoscopy, 1012–1013, 1013t
laparoscopy, 1013
laparotomy, 1013
noninvasive imaging, 1013

nutritional support, 1013–1014, 1013t
small bowel and colon disorders, 1018–1025
appendicitis, 1023–1025, 1024f
colonic pseudoobstruction, 1023, 1023f
diarrhea, acute, 1018–1020, 1019t
Clostridioides difficile, 1019–1020, 1019f, 1019t
inflammatory bowel disease, 1020–1022, 1020t, 1021t
intestinal obstruction, 1022–1023
ostomy and pregnancy, 1022
upper gastrointestinal disorders, 1014–1018
Gastrointestinal obstruction, fetal, 296
anal atresia, 296
duodenal atresia, 296, 296f
esophageal atresia, 296
jejunoileal atresia, 296, 296f
Gastrointestinal tract, maternal, 70
gallbladder, 70
gastric emptying time, 70
hemorrhoids, 70
liver, 70
pyrosis, 70
Gastrointestinal tract cancer, 1176
Gastropathy, diabetic, 1075
Gastroschisis, 297, 297f
Gaucher disease, 1053
carrier screening, 344
red cell alloimmunization, 352
Gender. See also specific genders and topics
assignment, 39
embryonic development, 33–34, 34f
genetic, 34
gonadal, 34
phenotypic, 34–35, 35f, 35t
General anesthesia, 467–468, 467f, 480–482. See also Anesthesia, general
Generalized seizure, 1129
Generalized tonic-clonic seizures, 1129
GeneReviews database, 308
Genes. See also specific types and disorders
codominant, 319
Genetic disorders
carrier screening, 342–344
Ashkenazi Jewish recessive diseases, 343–344
Tay-Sachs disease, 343, 344
cystic fibrosis, 342

ethnicity-based, 342
goal, 342
hemoglobinopathies
sickle, 343
thalassemias, 168, 343
spinal muscular atrophy, 343
timing, 342
preconceptual counseling, 167–168
Eastern European Jewish descent individuals, 168, 183
family history and pedigree, 167–168, 167f
neural-tube defects, 168. See also Neural-tube defects (NTDs)
phenylketonuria, 168
thalassemias, 168, 343
Genetic gender, 34
Genetics, 308–328
abnormalities
chromosome, 309–314
chromosome structure, 309, 314–318
fetal-growth restriction, 828–829
genomics, 308–309
heterogeneity, 319
inheritance, modes, 318–324
prenatal, advances, 7
Genetic screening, prenatal care, 183
Genetics Home Reference, 309
Genetic Testing Registry (GTR), 308–309
Genetic tests, 324–328
chromosomal microarray analysis, 325–327, 326f
clinical applications, 326–327
cytogenetic analysis, 324–325
diagnosis, 324
fetal DNA, in maternal circulation, 327–328
cell-free DNA, 327–328, 328f, 328t
Rh D genotype evaluation, 328
fluorescence in situ hybridization, 325, 325f
preimplantation, 13, 348, 348f
screening, 324
whole exome sequencing, 327
whole genome sequencing, 327
Genitalia, fetal
ambiguous, 35, 298, 299f
embryonic development, 33–34, 34f
external, 298
normal, 298, 299f

Genital mutilation, female, vaginal delivery, 504–505, 505t
Genital ridge, 31, 32f
Genital tract
embryonic development, 31–33, 32f
infection, uterine infection from, 650
lacerations, lower, immediate postpartum, 508–509, 509f
Genitourinary anomalies, congenital, 31–47
bladder and perineal, 39–40
genitourinary tract, 31–34, 32f
müllerian, 40–45. See also müllerian abnormalities
sex development, 35–39, 36t
uterine flexion, 45–47, 46f
Genitourinary tract, embryonic development, 31–34
external genitalia, 33–34, 34f
genital tract, 31–33, 32f
gonads, 32f, 33
urinary system, 31, 32f
Genitourinary tract, fetal, 298–301. See also Bladder; Kidneys
bladder
amnionic fluid, 298
normal, 298, 298f
second trimester, 298
bladder outlet obstruction, 301, 301f
external genitalia, 298, 299f
kidneys
length, 298
multicystic dysplastic kidney, 300, 300f
normal, 298, 298f
polycystic kidney disease, 300–301, 301f
renal agenesis, 299–300, 300f
renal collecting system, duplicated, 299, 300f
renal pelvis dilatation, 298–299, 299f, 299t
ureteropelvic junction obstruction, 299
Genome
definition, 308
sequencing, 308
whole genome sequencing, 327
Genomic copy number variant, 315
Genomics, 308–309
Gentamicin
for Chlamydia trachomatis, 1211t
for pyelonephritis, 998
German measles, 1190–1191
Germ cell cancer, sex development disorders, 36

Gestational age, 121–122, 121f
assessment
imaging, 247–248, 248f, 248t
importance, 824
newborn, 595
obstetrical estimate, 783, 824, 824t
prenatal, 178–179, 181
crown-rump length, 121–122, 247–248, 248f, 248t
estimated due date, 247–248
last menstrual period, 783
suboptimally dated, 248
Gestational alloimmune liver disease, 1039
Gestational choriocarcinoma, 242
Gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM), 994–995, 1068, 1078–1085. See also Diabetes mellitus, gestational
Gestational hypertension, 689, 689t
obesity and, 905–906, 905f
Gestational sac
diameter, by gestational age, 1234t
transvaginal sonography, 177, 177f
Gestational thrombocytopenia, 1058–1059, 1058t
Gestational transient thyrotoxicosis, 1093
Gestational trophoblastic disease (GTD), 235–243. See also specific types
gestational trophoblastic neoplasia, 235, 235t, 240–243. See also Gestational trophoblastic neoplasia
(GTN)
hydatidiform mole, 235, 235t, 236–240
hyperthyroidism, 1093
molar, 235
nonmolar, 235
pregnancy, 242–243
trophoblast proliferation, 235
Gestational trophoblastic neoplasia (GTN), 235, 235t, 240–243
diagnosis, 241, 241f
on estrogen production, 102–103
histological classification
epithelioid trophoblastic tumor, 242
gestational choriocarcinoma, 242
invasion mole, 242
placental site trophoblastic tumor, 242
after molar pregnancy, 237, 239
pregnancy with, 242–243
staging and prognostic scoring, 241–242, 241t
treatment, 242
twinning, with coexisting normal fetus, 851
types, 235, 235t, 240–242

Ghrelin, 58
Giardia diarrhea, 1018, 1019t
Gigantomastia, 55
Gingivitis, preterm birth and, 792
Glands of Montgomery, 55
Glanzmann thrombasthenia, 1059
Glatiramer, for multiple sclerosis, 1135
Glomerular capillary endotheliosis, 61–62, 698f
Glomerular diseases, 1001–1003
acute nephritic syndromes, 1001t, 1002
classification, 1001
glomerulonephritis, 1001
syndromes, 1001–1002, 1001t
nephrotic syndromes, 1001t, 1002–1003, 1002t, 1003f
Glomerular endotheliosis, 61
preeclampsia syndromes, 697
Glomerular filtration rate (GFR), maternal, 8f, 68
Glomerular hyperfiltration, puerperium, 637
Glomerulonephritis, 1001
acute nephritic syndrome, 1002
syndromes, 1001–1002, 1001t
Glucocorticoids. See also Corticosteroids; specific types and indications
for bronchopulmonary dysplasia, 616
on estrogen production, placental, 103
for pneumocystis pneumonia, 965
for sarcoidosis, 967–968
teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 153
Glucose
on fetal growth, 135, 824
monitoring, for gestational diabetes mellitus, 1083
transport, fetal nutrition, 135
Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency
anemia, 1051, 1052
red cell alloimmunization, 352
Glucose kinase (GCK) mutation, 1070
Glucose transport proteins (GLUTs), fetal nutrition, 135
Glucosuria, maternal, 68
Glyburide, for gestational diabetes mellitus, 1083–1084
Glyceryl trinitrate, for cervical ripening, 491
Glycogen storage disease type I, carrier screening, 344
Glycophospholipids, 131
Glycosaminoglycans, cervical ripening, 406–407
Glycosuria, 994–995
GM2 gangliosides, Tay-Sachs disease, 344

GnRH, 96t, 98
Goiter, fetal, 370
Goitrous hypothyroidism, fetal, 1093
Goitrous thyrotoxicosis, fetal, 1092, 1092f, 1092t
Gomco clamp, 596, 596f
Gonadal dysgenesis, 35
46,XY, 37
Gonadal gender, 34–35, 35t
Gonadal mosaicism, 318
Gonadal ridge, 33
Gonads. See also specific topics
embryonic development, 32f, 33
Gonococcal ophthalmia neonatorum, 1211
Gonorrhea, 1211–1212
disseminated, 1212
infection rates and effects, 1211
newborn prophylaxis, 593
ophthalmia neonatorum, 1211
screening and treatment, 1211–1212
Goodpasture syndrome, acute nephritic syndrome, 1002
G protein–coupled receptors, myometrial, 403–404, 403f
Graded compression sonography, for appendicitis, 1024
Grandmother effect, 354
Granulomatosis infantiseptica, 1196
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis, 1120
Granulomatous mastitis, puerperal, 660
Graves disease
maternal, fetal thyrotoxicosis with, 370
thyroid-stimulating blocking antibodies, 1090
Gravida, 177
Group A streptococcus (GAS), 1194
sepsis, 887
toxic shock syndrome, septic abortion, 203
Group A β-hemolytic streptococcus
hemolysis from, 1051
sepsis, 887–888, 891f, 891t
uterine infections, 651
Group B streptococcus (GBS), 1194–1195, 1195t
endocarditis, pregnancy, 934
intrapartum prophylaxis, 1195, 1195t
maternal and perinatal infection, 1194
newborn, respiratory distress syndrome, 600
prenatal care, subsequent visits, 183
on preterm birth risk, 789

prophylaxis, for perinatal infections, 1194–1195, 1194t
culture-based, 1195
risk-based, 1194t, 1195
vaccine, 1195
Growth, fetal
diabetes mellitus on, pregestational, 1072, 1072f
glucose on, 135, 824
multifetal gestation, 851–852, 851f
normal, 823–825
birthweight, normal, 824, 824f, 824t
birthweight percentile, 824
phases, 823, 823f
physiology, 824–825
population reference, 824, 824f
variations, 824
overgrowth, 832–834. See also Macrosomia
hyperglycemia, maternal, 824
lipid transfer, 825
potential, 824
restriction. See Fetal-growth restriction (FGR)
substance abuse on, 828
Growth differentiation factors, placental, 96t, 98
Growth discordance, multifetal gestation, 851–852
diagnosis, 851
management, 852
pathogenesis, 851, 851f
selective fetal-growth restriction, 852
Growth disorders, fetal, 823, 825–835. See also Fetal-growth restriction (FGR)
macrosomia, 832–834. See also Macrosomia
Growth hormone (GH)
fetal, 133
maternal, 71
Growth hormone-releasing hormone (GHRH), 96t, 98, 99
Growth hormone variant (hGH-V), human, 96t, 99
Growth restriction, fetal. See Fetal-growth restriction (FGR)
Guillain-Barré syndrome, 1136
Gynecoid pelvis, 28–29, 29f

H
H1N1 influenza, 964
Hadegen, 145
Haemophilus influenzae, cystic fibrosis, 968
Hair, pregnancy changes, 55
Haloperidol

for psychosis, 1145, 1146t
teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 153
Hands-on method, vaginal delivery, 499
Hands-poised method, vaginal delivery, 499
Hart line, 15, 16
Hasson open entry technique, maternal laparoscopic surgery, 869, 870f
Haultain incision, 739
Head
aftercoming, partial breech extraction, 525–526, 525f–526f
circumference
fetal, 272–274
by gestational age, 1237t
delivery, vaginal, 498–499, 499f
technique, 498–499, 499f
entrapment
breech delivery, 527, 527f
partial breech extraction, 527, 527f
shape, fetal changes, 423–424, 423f
Head, face, and neck anatomy, fetal, 282–286
agnathia-otocephaly, 285, 286f
brachycephaly, 283, 283f
craniofacial, normal, 282, 282f
cystic hygroma, 285–286, 286f
dolicocephaly, 283, 283f
epignathus, 285, 286f
facial clefts, 283–285, 285f
head imaging, nuchal cord, 282, 283f
micrognathia, 285, 285f
orbit and nose abnormalities, 283, 284f
Headache, 1017, 1126–1128
classification, 1127, 1127t
cluster, 1128
incidence, by type, 1126–1127, 1127f
migraine, 1127–1128
with aura, 1127
chronic, 1127
management, 1128, 1128t
probable, 1127
without aura, 1127
postdural puncture, 474
preeclampsia, 65
tension, 1127
Health indicators, preconceptual counseling, 164, 164t
Health status, prenatal

alcohol, 180
cigarette smoking, 179–180, 180t
illicit drugs, 180
intimate-partner violence, 180
menstrual and contraceptive histories, 179
psychosocial screening, 179
Heart
examination. See Cardiac examination
maternal, 62–63, 63f
lesions, fetal risks, 918, 920t
plasticity, 63
Heart, fetal anatomy, 288–295
cardiac examination, specialized, 291–294
cardiac rhabdomyoma, 294, 294f
coarctation of aorta, 292
double-outlet right ventricle, 293
D-transposition of great arteries, 293, 294f
Ebstein anomaly, 292, 293f
echocardiography, 252, 290f, 291
endocardial cushion defect, 291–292, 291f
hypoplastic left heart syndrome, 292, 292f
tetralogy of Fallot, 292–293, 293f
truncus arteriosus, 293–294, 294f
ventricular septal defect, 291, 291f
cardiac examination, standard, 288–291, 289f–290f
four-chamber view, 290, 290f
left ventricular outflow tract view, 290–291, 290f
right ventricular outflow tract view, 290f, 291
superior and inferior vena cava views, 290f, 291
three-vessel view, 290f, 291
ductal-dependent lesions, 288
malformations, 288
M-mode imaging
definition and uses, 294
premature atrial contractions, 294–295, 295f
Heart block, congenital
fetus, 368–369
systemic lupus erythematosus, 1113
Heartburn, 70, 191, 1017
Heart disease, maternal. See also Cardiac examination, maternal
diagnosis, 916–918
clinical indicators, 916, 917t
diagnostic studies, 916–918, 917f
functional classification, 918, 919t

normal cardiac examination findings, 916, 917f
surgically corrected, 922–924
anticoagulation
recommendations, 923, 924f
valve replacement before pregnancy, 922–923, 923t
cardiac surgery during pregnancy, 923
heart transplantation, pregnancy after, 923–924
valve replacement before pregnancy, 922–923
Heart failure, maternal, 921–922
diagnosis, 921–922
intrapartum, 921
management, 922
thyrotoxic, pregnancy, 1092t, 1093
management, 1093, 1094f
Heart rate, fetal, electronic monitoring. See Fetal heart rate (FHR), monitoring
Heart repair, pregnancy after
single functional ventricle, 929
transposition of great vessels, 929
Heart sounds
fetal, 182
maternal, 63
Heart transplantation, pregnancy after, 923–924
Heart valve. See Valvular heart disease
Heavy metals. See also specific types
placental sequestration, 136–137
Helicobacter pylori, peptic ulcer disease, 1017–1018
HELLP syndrome, 951
acute fatty liver of pregnancy, 1030–1031, 1031t
hemorrhage, obstetrical, 776
hypertension, delta, 689
kidneys, 699
placental abruption risk, 752
vs. thrombotic microangiopathies, 1061, 1061t
Hematocrit, pregnancy values, 1048, 1048t
Hematological changes, maternal, 59–62
blood volume, 59–60, 59f
coagulation and fibrinolysis, 61–62, 61t
immunological functions, 60–61
inflammatory markers, 61
iron metabolism, 60, 60f
leukocytes and lymphocytes, 61
platelets, 62, 62f
preeclampsia syndromes
coagulation changes, 696–697

hemolysis, 696
thrombocytopenia, 696
regulatory proteins, 62
spleen, 62
Hematological disorders, maternal, 1048–1063. See also specific types
anemias, 1048–1053
hemoglobinopathies, 1053–1056
inherited coagulation defects, 1061–1063
platelet disorders, 1058–1060
polycythemias, 1053
thalassemia syndromes, 1056–1058
thrombophilias, 1063
thrombotic microangiopathies, 1060–1061
Hematological disorders, newborn, 605–607
anemia, 605–606
hemorrhagic disease, 606
hyperbilirubinemia, 606
polycythemia, 606
thrombocytopenia, 607
vitamin K deficiency bleeding, 606
Hematology. See also specific topics
puerperium, 638
serum and blood constituents, 1227t
Hematoma
cephalohematoma, vacuum extraction, 535–536
from continuous lumbar epidural analgesia, 477
cord, 116–117
maternal–placenta–fetal unit, 111
marginal, 111
massive subchorionic, 110t, 111
retroplacental, 111
subamnionic, 111
subchorial thrombus, 111
paravaginal, 740–741
puerperal, 740–742, 741f
diagnosis, 740–741, 741f
management, 741–742
risks, 740
types, 740, 741f
retroplacental, 749–750
supralevator, 740
vulvovaginal, 742
Hematuria
idiopathic, pregnancy, 995

maternal, 68
Hemivertebrae, 281–282, 282f
Hemochorial placentation, 84
Hemoconcentration
preeclampsia, 696, 696f
preeclampsia-eclampsia, 725
Hemodynamics, cardiac
preeclampsia and eclampsia, severe, invasive monitoring for, 724
preeclampsia syndromes, 695
pregnancy, 882–883, 883t
late, 64, 64t
Hemoglobin, fetal, 129–130, 129f
acute respiratory distress syndrome, 886
concentrations, 128, 128t
types, 129–130, 129f
Hemoglobin A, fetal, 130
Hemoglobin C, 1056
Hemoglobin C-β-thalassemia, 1056
Hemoglobin E, 1056
Hemoglobin F, 1057
fetal, 129–130, 129f
Hemoglobin H disease (β4), 1054
Hemoglobinopathies, 1053–1056
hemoglobin C and C-β-thalassemia, 1056
hemoglobin E, 1056
newborn, 1056
prenatal diagnosis, 1056
sickle-cell, 1053–1054
carrier screening, 343
pathophysiology, 1053–1054, 1053f
treatment, 1054
sickle-cell syndromes
complications, 1054–1055
fetal assessment, 1055
labor and delivery, 1055
morbidity and mortality, 1054, 1054t
prophylactic red cell transfusions, 1055
sickle-cell trait, 1055–1056
Hemolysis
microangiopathic, 60
preeclampsia syndromes, 696
Hemolysis, elevated liver enzyme levels, low platelet count syndrome. See HELLP syndrome
Hemolytic anemias, 1050–1052
autoimmune hemolysis, 1051

bacterial toxins, 1051
drug-induced hemolysis, 1051
erythrocyte enzyme deficiencies, 1052
inherited erythrocyte membrane defects, 1052
paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria, 1051
pregnancy-associated hemolysis, 1051
Hemolytic disease of the fetus and newborn, 352
on estrogen production, 102
Hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS), 1060
Hemoperitoneum, 224, 224f
Hemophilias A and B, 1061–1062
pregnancy and, 1062
Hemopoiesis, fetal, 128–130, 128t, 129f
coagulation factors, 130
hemoglobin, 129–130, 129f
plasma proteins, 130
Hemorrhage. See also Bleeding
Hemorrhage, fetomaternal, 357–359, 896
causes, 354t, 358
incidence and prevalence, 357–358, 358f
quantification, 358–359, 358f, 894, 896
quantification and Kleihauer-Betke staining, 358–359, 358f, 894, 896
Hemorrhage, newborn
caput succedaneum, 608, 608f
cephalohematoma, 608, 608f
epidural, 607t, 608
extracranial, 607t, 608–609, 608f
intracerebellar, 607t, 608, 618
intracerebral/neonatal hemorrhagic stroke, 607t, 608
intracranial, 607–608, 607t
intraventricular, 607t, 608, 618–620
subarachnoid, 607t, 608, 618
subdural, 607t, 608
subgaleal, 608–609, 608f
Hemorrhage, obstetrical
active labor (“blood show”), 53, 733–734
antepartum, 733–734
from cesarean delivery, 548
fetomaternal, 357–359, 894, 896
causes, 354t, 358
incidence and prevalence, 357–358, 358f
quantification and Kleihauer-Betke staining, 358–359, 358f, 894, 896
intracerebral, 1131f, 1133, 1133f
intracranial perinatal, vacuum extraction and forceps delivery, 536

maternal death from, 731
after midpregnancy, 734
postpartum, 733–734
late, 637, 637f
secondary, 637
subarachnoid, 1133–1134, 1147t
arteriovenous malformations, 1133–1134, 1147f
intracranial aneurysm, 1133, 1147f
Hemorrhage, obstetrical, management
of coagulopathies, 775–777
disseminated intravascular coagulation, 775
inciting conditions, 776
normal coagulation activation, 775, 776f
pathological coagulation activation, 775–776
pregnancy-induced coagulation changes, 775
diagnosis, 776–777, 777f
general, 777
of hemorrhage, 770–775
blood replacement, 771–774, 772t
fluid resuscitation, 771
hypovolemic shock, 770–771
transfusion complications, 774–775
surgical, 777–780
angiographic embolization, 779–780
aortic compression, 780
artery ligation, 779, 779f
overview and studies, 777–778
pelvic packing, 780
uterine compression sutures, 778–779, 778f
Hemorrhage, postpartum
blood transfusion after, 733
dystocia, 443
late, 637, 637f
secondary, 637
Hemorrhage causes, obstetrical, 731–745
amnionic fluid embolism, 743–745
diagnosis, 744–745, 745t
incidence and risk factors, 744
management, 745
outcomes, 745
pathophysiology, 743–744, 744f
antepartum, 733–734
birth canal injuries, 739–742. See also Birth canal injuries
blood loss

appreciating estimated, 734
assessment, 732–733, 732t
by delivery type, 731, 732f
definition and blood loss, 731
general considerations, 731–734
hemostasis mechanisms, normal, 731
incidence, 731–732
postpartum, 734
risk factors, 733, 733f, 733t
uterine atony, 734–737. See also Uterine atony
uterine inversion, 737–739
progressive degrees, 738, 738f
recognition and management, 738–739, 738f
risk factors, 737–738
surgical intervention, 738, 738f
uterine rupture
management and outcomes, 743, 744t
pathogenesis, 743, 743f
predisposing factors, 742–743, 742t
Hemorrhagic disease of the newborn, 606
Hemorrhagic fever, 1200
Hemorrhagic placental disorders, 749–765. See also specific types
placenta accreta spectrum, 229, 253, 254f, 580, 580f, 759–765
placental abruption, 446–447, 447f, 749–755, 947–948
placenta previa, 252–253, 253f, 755–759
Hemorrhagic stroke, 1131f, 1131t, 1133–1134
arteriovenous malformations, 1131f, 1133–1134
intracerebral, 1131f, 1133, 1133f
intracranial aneurysm, 1131f, 1133
neonatal, 607t, 608
subarachnoid, 1133–1134
Hemorrhoids, 20, 70
in pregnancy, 192
Hemostasis mechanisms, normal, 731
Henoch-Schönlein purpura, 1002, 1120
Heparin
osteoporosis from, 986
on preeclampsia risk, 1106
preeclampsia syndrome prevention, 703, 704
thrombocytopenia from, 985–986
Hepatic. See also Liver
Hepatic disorders, 1030–1042, 1031t
acetaminophen hepatotoxicity, 1041
acute fatty liver of pregnancy, 1031t, 1033–1035

acute liver failure in pregnancy, 1030–1031, 1033f, 1034t
cirrhosis, 1040
clinical findings, pregnancy, 1030, 1031t
copper overload, 1039–1040
cysts, polycystic kidney disease, 1001
esophageal varices, 1040–1041
focal nodular hyperplasia, 1041
HELLP syndrome, 1030, 1031t
hematoma, preeclampsia syndromes, 699, 699f
hepatitis. See also Hepatitis
autoimmune, 1031t, 1036t, 1039
viral, 1031t, 1035–1039, 1036t
hepatocellular adenoma, 1041–1042
hyperemesis gravidarum, 1030, 1031t
intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy, 1031t, 1032–1033
iron overload, 1039
laboratory testing, 1030
liver transplantation, 1042
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, 1031t, 1040
physiological changes, pregnancy-induced, 1030
portal hypertension, 1040–1041
Hepatic transplantation, 1042
Hepatitis
autoimmune, 1031t, 1036t, 1039
copper overload, 1039–1040
iron overload, 1039
viral, 1031t, 1035–1039
Hepatitis, viral, 1031t, 1035–1039
acute, 1035–1036
asymptomatic syndromes, 1035
chronic, 1036, 1036t
clinical presentation, 1035–1036
fulminant hepatic necrosis, 1036
symptomatic chronic active, 1036
vaccination, 1036
Hepatitis A, 1036, 1036t
vaccine, 1036
Hepatitis B, 1036–1038, 1036t, 1037f
breastfeeding, 641
prophylaxis, 892t
vaccine, 1037–1038
newborn, 594
Hepatitis C, 1036t, 1038–1039
breastfeeding, 641

intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy, 1032
vaccine, 1038
Hepatitis D, 1036t, 1038
Hepatitis E, 1036t, 1039
vaccine, 1039
Hepatocellular adenoma, 1041–1042
Hepatosplenomegaly, fetal, 295
Hepcidin, 60, 60f, 1049
HER2, trastuzumab on, 1164
Herbal medicine products, teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 157, 158t
Hereditary breast and ovarian cancer (HBOC) syndrome, 12
Hereditary hemochromatosis, 1039
Hereditary nonspherocytic anemia, 1052
Hereditary spherocytosis, 1052
Herlyn-Werner-Wunderlich syndrome, 43
Hernia
diaphragmatic, 287, 287f, 1017
congenital, 286, 286f
fetal, 287, 287f
hiatal, 1017
Herpes simplex virus (HSV), 1213–1216
adult disease, 1213–1214, 1213f
diagnosis, 1214
first-episode
nonprimary infection, 1213
primary infection, 1213, 1213f
management, 1214–1215, 1215t
prevalence, 1213
recurrent disease, 1214
vertical transmission, 1214
viral shedding
asymptomatic, 1214
peripartum prophylaxis, 1215–1216
Herpes zoster, 1186
Hesselbach triangle, 14
Heterogeneity, phenotype–genotype relationship, 319
Heteropaternity, 840
Heteroplasmy, 321
Heterotaxy, 292, 368
Heterotopic pregnancy, 220, 231–232
Heterozygosity, absence, 326
Hiatal hernia, 1017
Hidradenitis suppurativa, 1158
High airway obstruction sequence, congenital, 288, 289f

High-density lipoproteins (HDLs), 58
High-dependency care unit, obstetrical, 882
High spinal blockade
continuous lumbar epidural analgesia, 475
spinal block, 474
Hip dislocation, congenital, 610
Histoplasmosis pneumonia, 965
HIV, 1219–1223. See also Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS); Human immunodeficiency
virus (HIV)
HLA-B27, 1109
Hodgkin disease, 1174–1175, 1175t
Holoprosencephaly, 279, 279f, 283, 284f
Homans sign, 980
Home birth, vaginal delivery, 504
Homeobox (HOX), 126
Homoplasmy, 321
Horizontal transmission, 1182, 1183t
Hormones. See also specific types
preeclampsia syndromes, 697
Hormones, placental, 95–102, 96t
activin, 96t, 98
estrogen production, 101–102, 101f
human chorionic gonadotropin, 96–98, 96t
human placental lactogen, 96t, 98, 640
hypothalamic-like releasing hormones, 96t, 98–99
inhibin, 96t, 98
leptin, 99–100
neuropeptide Y, 96t, 100
parathyroid-releasing protein, 96t, 99
pituitary-like hormones, 96t, 99
progesterone production, 100–101, 100f
relaxin, 99
steroid production, 95, 96t
transforming growth factor beta superfamily, 100
Horner syndrome, 609
Hospital-acquired pneumonia, 961–962. See also Pneumonia
Hospital care, puerperium, 642–645
bladder function, 643
contraception, 645
general principles, 642–643
immunizations, 644
neuromuscular problems
musculoskeletal injuries, 644, 644f
obstetrical neuropathies, 644

pain, mood, and cognition, 643–644
perineal care, 643
Hospital discharge
cesarean delivery, 566
newborn care, 596
puerperium, 645
Hox, 31–33
Human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG)
hydatidiform mole, 238–239
placental, 96–98, 96t
biological functions, 97–98
biosynthesis, 96–97
fertility evaluation, uterine, 42
levels, abnormally high/low, 98
pregnancy tests, positive, 122–123
regulation, 97
serum and urine concentrations, 97, 97f
sexual differentiation, 35
pregnancy testing, 176, 176f
quiescent, 242
trophoblast, 235
Human Genome Project, 308
Human growth hormone variant (hGH-V), 96t, 99
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), 1219–1223. See also Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome
(AIDS)
antepartum care, 1220
antiretroviral therapy, 1220–1222, 1221t
breastfeeding, 641, 660
delivery planning, 1222
pathogenesis, 1219
postpartum care, 1222
prevention, 1222–1223
prophylaxis, 892t
screening, prenatal, 1219–1220, 1220f
testing, prenatal, 181
tuberculosis with, 967
vertical transmission, 1220
Human leukocyte antigen G (HLA G)., 692
Human leukocyte antigens (HLAs), 93
trophoblast, 93
Human papillomavirus (HPV), 1216
cervical neoplasia, 1216
cervical (intraepithelial) neoplasia, 1165
condylomata acuminata and treatment, 1216

maternal infection/prevention, 1216
neonatal infection, 1216
vaccines, 1216
Human placental lactogen (hPL), 96t, 98, 640
Human platelet antigen-1a (HPA-1a), 359
Humeral fracture, newborn, 610
Huntington procedure, 739
Hyaline membrane disease. See Respiratory distress syndrome (RDS)
Hyaluronan, 406–407
Hydantoin, teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 150
Hydatidiform mole, 235, 235t, 236–240
clinical findings, 237–238, 238f
complete, 235, 235t, 236–240
diagnosis, 238–239, 238f
epidemiology and risk factors, 237
features and histology, 236, 236f, 236t
management, 239–240, 240t
molar pregnancy termination, 239–240
postevacuation surveillance, 240
partial, 235, 235t
pathogenesis, 237, 237f
pathology, 239
pregnancy after, 242–243
twinning, with coexisting normal fetus, 851
twin pregnancy, 237
types, 235, 235t, 236
Hydralazine, for hypertension
chronic, 949, 949t
severe, 722–723, 723f, 723t, 952
severe chronic, 950
Hydramnios, 257–260, 258f, 259t
anomalies and mechanism, 258, 259t
hydrops fetalis, 257–258
idiopathic, 258–260
imaging and categorization, 257, 258f
management, 258–259
multifetal gestations, 258, 843
outcomes, 259–260
pregestational diabetes, 1072
prevalence and causes, 257–258, 259t
from swallowing inhibition, 132
Hydrochloric acid, fetal, 132
Hydrochlorothiazide, for chronic hypertension, 949, 949t
Hydrocortisone

for dermatological disorders, 1158, 1158t
outcomes, pregnancy, 1158, 1158t
Hydrometrocolpos, 40
Hydronephrosis, maternal, 69, 69f
Hydrops fetalis, 360–364
categories and etiologies, 360, 361t
diagnosis, 360, 362f
hydramnios, 257–258
immune hydrops, 360, 361t, 362f, 363f
mirror syndrome, 364
nonimmune hydrops, 360–364
diagnostic evaluation, 361t, 362–364, 363f
isolated effusion or edema, 363–364
pulmonary sequestration, 288
Hydroxychloroquine
for malaria prevention, 1199
for maternal autoimmune disease, fetal AV block prevention, 369
21-Hydroxylase deficiency, 369
20α-Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (20α-HSD), 655
Hygroscopic cervical dilators, 492
Hygroscopic dilators, 209, 209f
Hymen, 16
abnormalities, 39–40
Hymenal ring, 18, 18f, 33
Hyperaldosteronism, 1103
Hyperbaric oxygen, for carbon monoxide poisoning, 970
Hyperbilirubinemia
fetal, pregestational diabetes, 1073
neonatal, care, 595
newborn, 606
Hypercalcemia, hyperparathyroidism and, 1099
Hypercalcemic crisis, 1099–1100
Hypercoiled umbilical cord, 113
Hyperemesis gravidarum, 191, 1014–1016
cannabinoid hyperemesis syndrome, 1014
complications, 1014–1015, 1014t
definition, 1014
etiopathogenesis and factors, 1014
hepatic disorders, 1030, 1031t
hyperthyroidism, 1093
management, 1015–1016, 1015f, 1016t
pregestational diabetes, 1075
prevalence, 1014
thiamine deficiency and Wernicke encephalopathy, 1014–1015, 1014t

vitamin K deficiency, 1015
Hyperglycemia, maternal
familial, carrier screening, 344
fetal overgrowth, 824
macrosomia, 833
Hyperhomocysteinemia, 979
Hyperinsulinemia, fetal, from maternal hyperglycemia, 1072
Hyperlipidemia, maternal, 58
Hyperparathyroidism, 1099–1100
Hyperpigmentation, 55
Hyperreactio luteinalis, 54, 1171
Hypersplenism, maternal, 62
Hyperstimulation, uterine, 463
Hypertelorism, 283, 284f
Hypertension, 690. See also Preeclampsia (syndrome)
criteria, 691
definition, 945, 945t
gestational, 689, 689t
obesity and, 905–906, 905f
idiopathic intracranial, 1137–1138
multifetal gestation, 844–845
portal, 1040–1041
preeclampsia syndrome, 693
pregestational diabetes, 1073
pregnancy-associated, placental abruption risk, 752
pulmonary, 930–932. See also Pulmonary hypertension
“white coat,” 946
Hypertension, chronic, 945–953
adverse pregnancy effects, 946–948, 946t
maternal morbidity and mortality, 946–947
perinatal morbidity and mortality, 948, 948f
preeclampsia, superimposed, 946f, 947–948, 947f
chronic hypertensive diathesis, 946
classification, 950
definition and classification, 944, 945t
diagnosis, 944, 945t
diagnosis and evaluation, 945–946
lifestyle modifications for, 945, 945t
physiological effects, 946, 946f
placental abruption risk, 752
preconceptual counseling, 945, 945t
prevalence, reproductive age women, 944
risk factors, 946
treatment and benefits, nonpregnant, 945

Hypertension, chronic, management, 948–953
antihypertensive drugs, 948–949, 949t
adrenergic receptor blockers, 949, 949t
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, 949
angiotensin-receptor blockers, 949
calcium channel blockers, 949, 949t
diuretics, 949, 949t
vasodilators, 949, 949t
antihypertensive treatment, 950–951
mild or moderate hypertension, 950
recommendations, 951
severe chronic hypertension, 950, 950t
“tight control,” 950–951, 951t
delivery route choice, 952
delivery timing, 952
fetal assessment, 952
intrapartum considerations, 952
postpartum care, 952–953
preeclampsia
early-onset, expectant management, 952
superimposed, 951–952
prognosis, long-term, 953
Hypertension, severe. See also Eclampsia; Preeclampsia
etiology, 952–953
management, severe preeclampsia and eclampsia, 722–724
diuretics, 723–724
general principles and agents, 722
hydralazine, 722–723, 723f, 723t
labetalol, 723, 723t
nifedipine, 723, 723t
Hypertensive disorders, 688. See also Eclampsia; Preeclampsia
classification, 688
diagnosis, 688–689, 689f
delta hypertension, 689
empiric, 689
gestational hypertension, 689, 689t
hypertension, 690
preeclampsia superimposed on chronic hypertension, 690
preeclampsia syndrome, 689–690, 689t
severity, indicators, 689–690, 690t
Hyperthermia, maternal, from epidural analgesia, 476–477
Hyperthyroidism, 1090–1094, 1094f
congenital, 134
diagnosis, 1090–1091

fetal and neonatal effects, 1092–1093, 1092f, 1092t
fetal diagnosis, 1093
gestational trophoblastic disease, 1093
hyperemesis gravidarum, 1093
incidence, 1090, 1091t
management, 1093, 1094f
outcomes, pregnancy, 1092
pregnancy and, 1091
subclinical, 1093–1094
thyroid storm and thyrotoxic heart failure, 1092t, 1093
treatment, pregnancy, 1091–1092
Hypertonic uterine dysfunction, 434
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
fetal, pregestational diabetes, 1073
maternal, 932
Hyperuricemia, preeclampsia syndromes, 1105
Hypervolemia, maternal
multifetal gestation, 843
pregnancy-induced, 59–60, 59f, 638, 638f
Hypocalcemia, fetal, from pregestational diabetes, 1073
Hypochondroplasia, 302
Hypocoiled umbilical cord, 113
Hypofibrinogenemia, 772
Hypogastric nerves, 25, 25f
Hypoglycemia, pregestational diabetes
fetal, 1073
insulin treatment, 1077
Hypoparathyroidism, 1100
Hypophosphatasia, 302
Hypophysitis, lymphocytic, 1104
Hypopituitarism
lymphocytic hypophysitis, 1104
Sheehan syndrome, 1104
Hypoplastic anemia, 1052–1053
Hypoplastic left heart syndrome, 292, 292f
pregnancy after, 929
Hypoplastic left heart syndrome, fetal atrial septoplasty for, 378
Hypotelorism, 283, 284f
Hypotension
from continuous lumbar epidural analgesia, 476
supine hypotensive syndrome, 64
Hypothalamic-like releasing hormones, placental, 96t, 98–99
Hypothyroidism, 1094–1097
congenital, 134, 1098

fetal, 370
goitrous, 370, 1093
nongoitrous, 1093
fetal and neonatal effects, 1095
isolated maternal hypothyroxinemia, 1096–1097
miscarriage, recurrent, 204–205
outcomes, pregnancy, 1095, 1095t
overt (clinical), 1094
placental abruption risk, 753
severe, pregnancy, 1094
subclinical, 1094, 1095–1097
incidence and screening, 1095
on preeclampsia risk, 1106
pregnancy and, 1096, 1096t
from thyroiditis, 1098
treatment, 1094–1095, 1095t
Hypothyroxinemia, isolated maternal, 1096–1097
Hypotonic uterine dysfunction, 434
Hypovolemic shock, obstetrical, pathophysiology and management, 770–771
Hypoxia. See also specific disorders
fetal-growth restriction, 827
Hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF), 126
Hypoxic ischemic encephalopathy (HIE), 591, 601
causes, 601
criteria, 601–602, 602t
prevention, 602
trial of labor after cesarean, 574
Hyrtl anastomosis, 114
Hysterectomy
cesarean, 547
placenta accreta spectrum, 763–764, 764t
postpartum, 547
radical, 548
simple, 548
supracervical, 547–548, 563
Hysterectomy, peripartum, 547, 560–565
complications, 560
indications, 560
multifetal gestation, 838–839
technique, 560–563
general, 560–562, 561f–562f
salpingo-oophorectomy, 563
supracervical hysterectomy, 563
total hysterectomy, 562–563, 562f–563f

urinary tract or bowel injury
bowel injury, 565
cystotomy, 563–564, 564f
ureteral injury, 564–565
Hysterosalpingography, 42
Hysterostomy, open fetal surgery, 371
Hysterotomy, cesarean, 553–560
abdominal closure, 558
adhesions, 558
incision, classic cesarean, 559–560
indications, 559
uterine incision and repair, 559–560, 559f
incision, low transverse cesarean, 552f–553f, 553–558
delivery of fetus, 555–557, 555f–556f
delivery of placenta, 557, 557f
uterine incision, 553–555, 554f
uterine repair, 557–558, 558f
Joel-Cohen technique, 558–559
Misgav Ladach technique, 559
Hysterotomy, uterine infection after, 650

I
Ibuprofen
for migraine, 1128, 1128t
teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 151
Identical twins, 839
Idiopathic intracranial hypertension, 1137–1138
Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura, 1059
Ileostomy, 1022
Ileus, adynamic, in peritonitis, 656
Iliac artery ligation, 779, 779f
Iliohypogastric nerve, 13f, 14
Ilioinguinal nerves, 13f, 14
Ilium, 27, 28f
Illicit drug use, 180. See also Substance use disorders; specific drugs
Imaging, maternal. See also specific types and indications
magnetic resonance imaging, 875–877
during pregnancy, 877, 877t
radiography, 870–875
sonography, 875
Imaging, obstetrical, 246–268. See also specific types; specific types and indications
amnionic fluid, 254–261
breech delivery, singleton, 521–522
central nervous system, 1126

Doppler, 261–263, 261f–263f
gestational age assessment, 247–248, 248f, 248t
magnetic resonance imaging, 263–268
placenta and cervix, 252–254
cervical length, 254, 255f, 256f
cesarean scar pregnancy, 253–254, 255f
placenta accreta spectrum, 253, 254f
placenta previa and low-lying placenta, 252–253, 253f
technology and safety, 246–247
embryo and fetal safety, 247
operator safety, 247
ultrasound. See also Ultrasonography
first-trimester, 248–250, 249t, 250t
second- and third-trimester, 250–252, 250t, 251t
Imipamine, for depression, 1145–1147, 1146t
Imipenem, for uterine infections, 652, 652t
Imipenem/cilastatin, for uterine infections, 652, 652t
Immediate postpartum care, 507–513
1st hour after delivery, 507–508
episiotomy, 509–510, 510f
laceration and episiotomy repairs, 510–513, 511f–512f
lacerations
lower genital tract, 508–509, 509f
perineal, care, 513
skin-to-skin contact, 508
Immune hydrops, 360, 361t, 362f, 363f
Immune-mediated connective tissue diseases, 1109–1110
Immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome (IRIS), tuberculosis, in HIV-infected, 967
Immune thrombocytopenia, fetal, 359–360
Immune thrombocytopenic purpura, 1059–1060
alloimmune thrombocytopenia, 1060
classification, 1059, 1059t
fetal, 359–360
fetal and neonatal effects, 1059–1060
idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura, 1059
pregnancy and, 1059
Immunization. See also Vaccines; specific types
preconceptual counseling, 166–167, 166t
pregnancy, 188, 189t–190t
puerperium, 644
Immunoglobulin A
colostrum, 639
fetal, 134
maternal, 61

nephropathy, 1002
Immunoglobulin G
fetal, 134
maternal, 61
Immunoglobulin M, fetal, 134
Immunology. See also specific topics
fetal, 134–135, 1182–1183, 1183t
immunoglobulin A, 134
immunoglobulin G, 134
immunoglobulin M, 134
lymphocytes and monocytes, 134–135
functions. See also specific types
maternal, 60–61
maternal changes, 1182
newborn, 1182–1183, 1183t
breastfeeding, 640
Immunosuppressants. See also specific types
teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 148, 153
Impetigo herpetiformis, 1157, 1157f
Implanon, 669
Implantation
early trophoblast formation and, 85–89
blastocyst, 86, 86f
chorionic villi, 88–89, 88f
fertilization, 85–86, 86f
implantation, 86
invasion, early, 87–88, 88f
normal implantatoin, 691, 691f
trophoblast development, 86–87, 87f
placental development and, 82–103. See also specific topics
adrenal gland–placental interactions, fetal, 102–103
amnion, 94–95
decidua, 84–85, 84f, 85f
hormones, placental, 95–102, 96t
ovarian–endometrial cycle, 82–84, 83f
placenta and chorion, 89–93
umbilical cord, 95
Imprinting
Angelman syndrome, 322, 322t
Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome, 322t
DNA triplet repeat expansion, 322, 322t
maternal, 322
myoclonus-dystonic, 322t
paternal, 322

polyploidy, 313
Prader-Willi syndrome, 322, 322t
pseudohypoparathyroidism, 322t
Russell-Silver syndrome, 322t
Inborn errors of metabolism, 320–321
consanguinity, 320–321
phenylketonuria, 320
Incomplete abortion, 201
Incomplete breech, total extraction, 527–528, 527f
Incontinence
anal, after operative vaginal delivery, 535
urinary
after operative vaginal delivery, 535
stress, 54, 638
Incoordinate uterine dysfunction, 434
Indirect Coombs test, 353
Indirect electronic monitoring, fetal, 447
Indirect maternal death, 3
Indomethacin
teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 151
for tocolysis, preterm labor, 806
Induced abortion, 198, 208
Induced termination, 785
Induction, labor, 486–495. See also Labor, induction and augmentation
Inevitable abortion of previable fetus, 202–203
Infarction, maternal
floor, 111
placenta, 111
Infectious diseases, 1182–1200. See also specific types
bacterial, 1194–1197
group A streptococcus, 1194
group B streptococcus, 1194–1195, 1194t, 1195t
listeriosis, 1196
Lyme disease, 1197
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus, 1196
salmonellosis, 1196–1197
shigellosis, 1197
tuberculosis. See Tuberculosis
bioterrorism
anthrax, 1200
other agents, 1200
smallpox, 1200
immunology
fetal and newborn, 1182–1183, 1183t

maternal changes, 1182
maternal
dystocia, 443
operative vaginal delivery, 535
pregestational diabetes, 1076
spontaneous preterm labor, 789
cytokines, origin of, 789–790
inflammatory responses, 789
microbiota, 790
sterile intraamnionic inflammation, 789
urinary, puerperal fever, 649–650
mycotic, 1200
protozoal, 1197–1200
amebiasis, 1200
malaria, 1198–1200, 1199f
toxoplasmosis, 1197–1198
travel precautions, 1200
viral, 1183–1194
coronavirus, 1187
coxsackievirus, 1192–1193
cytomegalovirus, 1183–1185
influenza virus, 1186–1187
measles, 1189–1190
mosquito-borne
Ebola virus, 1193–1194
West Nile virus, 1193
Zika virus, 1193
mumps, 1189
parvovirus B19, 1191–1192
poliovirus, 1193
respiratory viruses, other, 1192
rubella, 1190–1191
SARS-CoV-2, 1187–1189, 1188f
varicella-zoster virus, 1185–1186
Infective endocarditis, maternal, 934–935
diagnosis and management, 934
pregnancy, 934
prophylaxis, 934–935, 935t
types, 934
Inferior epigastric artery, 13, 13f
Inferior hypogastric plexus, 25f, 26
Inferior strait, 28
Inferior vermian agenesis, 279
Infertility therapy. See Assisted reproductive technologies (ART)

Inflammation. See also specific disorders and types
cervical ripening, 407
immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome, 967
maternal markers, 61
mediators, serum and blood, 1231t
spontaneous preterm labor, 789
sterile intraamnionic, 789
Inflammatory bowel disease, 1020–1022
Crohn disease, 1019f, 1020, 1020t
fertility and, 1021
pregnancy and, 1021–1022, 1021t
ulcerative colitis, 1019f, 1020, 1020t
Inflammatory myopathies, 1120–1121
dermatomyositis, 1120–1121
polymyositis, 1120–1121
Infliximab
for dermatological disorders, 1159, 1159t
for inflammatory bowel disease, 1021–1022, 1021t
for pustular psoriasis of pregnancy, 1157
Influenza virus, 1186–1187
management, 1187
maternal infection, 1186–1187
pneumonia, 963–964
vaccination, 964, 1187
in pregnancy, 188, 189t
Infundibulopelvic ligament, 22f, 23
Inhalational anesthetics. See also specific types
for labor and delivery, 481
Inheritance. See also Genetics; specific traits and disorders
diabetes type 1, with pregestational diabetes, 1073
twinning, 839
Inheritance, modes, 318–324
autosomal dominant, 319–320, 319t
autosomal recessive, 319t, 320–321
DNA triplet repeat expansion, 321–322, 321t
fragile X syndrome, 321–322
imprinting, 322, 322t
multifactorial inheritance, 323–324, 323t
cardiac defects, 324
neural-tube defects, 324
threshold traits, 324, 324f
uniparental disomy, 322–323, 323f
mitochondrial, 321
phenotype–genotype relationship, 318–319

heterogeneity, 319
X-linked and Y-linked, 319t, 321
Inherited coagulation defects, 1061–1063. See also Coagulation defects, inherited
Inhibin, placental, 96t, 98
placental abruption risk, 752–753
Injuries, newborn, 607–610
congenital deformity, 610
cranial
extracranial hemorrhage, 607t, 608–609, 608f
intracranial hemorrhage, 607–608, 607t
skull fractures, 609, 609f
fractures, 610
incidence, 607
peripheral nerve
brachial plexopathy, 609
facial paralysis, 610, 610f
soft tissue injuries, 610
spinal cord, 609
Injury and death, fetal, 893–894, 893f
trauma management, 895–896
cesarean delivery, 896
electronic monitoring, 896
FAST scan, 895, 895f
fetomaternal hemorrhage, 896
Inlet, contracted, 438–439
Innate immunity, fetal and newborn, 1182
Inner cell mass, 122
blastocyst, 86, 86f
Innervation
abdominal wall, anterior, 13f, 14, 14f
iliohypogastric and ilioinguinal nerves, 13f, 14
generative organs, pelvic, 25–26, 25f
pelvis, 25–26, 25f
hypogastric nerves, 25, 25f
parasympathetic, 25f, 26
splanchnic nerves, 25f, 26
superior hypogastric plexus, 25, 25f
sympathetic, 25, 25f
Innominate bone, 27, 27f
Insertion, umbilical cord, 114–115, 115f
Battledore placenta, 114, 253
furcate, 115
vasa previa, 115–116, 116f, 253
velamentous, 115, 115f, 253

Inspiratory capacity, 66
Insulin
fetal, 132
lactation, 640
resistance
cytokines, 902
metabolic syndrome, 903–904, 903t, 905
treatment
gestational diabetes mellitus, 1083
pregestational diabetes, 1076–1077, 1077t
Insulin-like growth factor 1, macrosomia, 832–833
Integrated screening, aneuploidy, 339
Intellectual disability
cerebral palsy, 605
neonatal encephalopathy, 605
Intercostal nerves, 14, 14f
block, anesthetic, 480, 480f
Interdelivery interval, on trial of labor after cesarean, 576
Interferons. See also specific types
for multiple sclerosis, 1135
Interleukin-6, whey, 639
Intermediate care unit, obstetrical, 881, 882
Intermediate trophoblasts, 242
Intermittent mandatory ventilation, 885
Internal anal sphincter (IAS), 20–21, 20f
Internal electronic monitoring, fetal, 446–447, 446f, 447f
Internal iliac artery branches, 24–25, 24f
Internal oblique muscle, 12, 13f
Internal podalic version, 528
Internal rotation, 420–421, 422f
International System for Human Cytogenomic Nomenclature, 309, 310t
Interstitial line sign, 228
Interstitial pneumonitis, sarcoidosis, 967
Interstitial pregnancy, 227–229
diagnosis, 227–228, 228f
management, 228–229, 228f
Interstitial trophoblasts, 87, 87f
Interval sterilization, 681
Intervillous space, 88, 88f, 137
Intervillous thrombus, placenta, 111
Intestinal obstruction, 1022–1023
Intimate-partner violence, 891–892
preconceptual counseling, 170
pregnancy, 180

Intraamnionic infection and inflammation (triple I), 801
Intracardiac catheter, percutaneous, fetal, 378
Intracerebellar hemorrhage, newborn, 607t, 608, 618
Intracerebral hemorrhage, 1131f, 1133, 1133f
Intracranial aneurysm, 1131f, 1133
hemorrhagic stroke, 1131f, 1131t, 1133
Intracranial hemorrhage
newborn, 607–608, 607t
perinatal, vacuum extraction and forceps delivery, 536
preterm newborn, 618
Intradecidual sign, 177, 177f
Intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy (ICP), 1031t, 1032–1033
bile acids, fetal effects, 1033
clinical presentation, 1032
hepatitis C, chronic, 1032
management, 1032
outcomes, perinatal, 1032–1033
pathogenesis, 1032
Intramembranous flow, 256
Intrapartum
assessment, 446–463. See also Assessment, intrapartum; specific topics
care, for TOLAC/VBAC, 578
Intrauterine devices (IUDs), 664–668
chemically active, 664
contraceptive action, 665
copper-containing, as emergency contraception, 676
ectopic pregnancy and, 665
effectiveness, 665t
failure rates, 665t
insertion
eligibility and contraindications, 667, 667t
interval technique, 668
postpregnancy techniques, 668, 668f
timing, 667–668, 667t
method-specific adverse effects, 665–667
ectopic pregnancy, 665
infection, 666
lost device, 665–666
menstrual changes, 666
perforation, 666
pregnancy with, 665t, 666–667
ovarian pregnancy risk, 231
properties, 665, 665t
shape, 664–665

Intravaginal pump balloon, 499
Intravaginal rings, 673–674
Intravascular pulmonary angiography, 988
Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG)
maternal, alloimmunized pregnancy, 355
for measles, 1190
Intravenous pyelography, 995
Intraventricular hemorrhage
cerebral palsy, 620
newborn, 607t, 608
preterm, 618–620
Intrinsic factor, fetal, 132
Introns, 308
In-utero fetal surgery. See also specific types
case selection, 371, 371t
Invasion
early, implantation and trophoblast formation, 87–88, 88f
implantation, 86
Invasive mole, 235, 235t, 242
Inversions, chromosomal, 317
paracentric, 317
pericentric, 317, 318f
Inverted nipples, 642
In vitro fertilization (IVF)
gestational age, 121
multifetal pregnancy, 839
twinning, monozygotic, 839, 840f
Iodine
deficiency, 1097–1098
recurrent miscarriage, 204
maternal, 59
nutrition, prenatal, 184t, 185
status, 72–73
supplements, pregnancy, 1097–1098
transport, fetal nutrition, 136
Iodine-131, teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 156
Ionizing radiation, maternal, 870–871, 871t. See also Radiation
Ions (nutrition). See also specific types
fetal nutrition, 136
Ipratropium bromide, for asthma, 961
Iron, maternal

metabolism, 60, 60f
prenatal nutrition, 184t, 185
requirement, 59, 60, 60f
supplementation, 1049
Iron-deficiency anemia, 1049–1050, 1049f
Iron overload, hepatitis and cirrhosis, 1039
Ischemic heart disease, maternal, 937–938
acute coronary syndrome, 937–938
prior, pregnancy with, 938
Ischemic stroke, 1131–1133, 1131f, 1131t
cerebral artery thrombosis, 1131f, 1132
cerebral embolism, 1132
cerebral venous thrombosis, 1132
preeclampsia syndrome, 1132
recurrence, 1132–1133
Ischioanal fossae, 20f, 21, 21f
Ischiocavernous muscles, 8f, 19f
Ischiopubic ramus, 18, 18f, 19f
Ischiorectal fossae, 20f, 21, 21f
Ischium, 27, 28f
Isochromosomes, 317
Isodisomy, uniparental, 323
Isoetharine, for asthma, 960
Isolated maternal hypothyroxinemia, 1096–1097
Isomerism syndrome, 292
Isoniazid, for tuberculosis, 965
multidrug-resistant, 967
Isoproterenol, for asthma, 960
Isosorbide mononitrate, for cervical ripening, 491
Isotretinoin, teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 155
Isradipine, for hypertension, 713, 714t
Itraconazole, for fungal pneumonia, 965

J
Jadelle, 669
JAK2, 1053
Jarisch-Herxheimer reaction, 1210–1211
Jejunoileal atresia, fetal, 296, 296f
Jewish descent, Eastern European, 168, 183
Joel-Cohen technique, 558–559
Joints, pelvic, 27–28, 27f
Joubert syndrome, carrier screening, 344
Juvenile rheumatoid arthritis, 1118

K
Kallman syndrome, 316t, 339
Karyotype, chromosomal abnormalities, 7, 309, 310t
Karyotyping, 324–325
prenatal and preimplantation, 344
stillborn fetus, 627
Kell alloimmunization, 354, 355
Kell antigens, 354
Keratin plugging, for hidradenitis suppurativa, 1158
Kernicterus, 606
prevention, 130, 606
Ketamine, for major depression, 1147
Ketoacidosis, pregestational diabetes, 1075–1076, 1075t
fetal death, 1072
Ketoconazole
for Cushing syndrome, 1102
for fungal pneumonia, 965
Keyhole sign, 301, 301f, 377
Kidneys. See also Renal
Kidneys, fetal, 133, 298–301
duplicated renal collecting system, 299, 300f
length, 298
multicystic dysplastic kidney, 300, 300f
normal, 298, 298f
polycystic kidney disease, 300–301, 301f
ureteropelvic junction obstruction, 299
Kidneys, maternal, 67–68, 67t, 68f
injury, acute, 1005–1007, 1007f
preeclampsia (syndromes), 61
acute kidney injury, 699
anatomical changes, 697–698, 698f
glomerular endotheliosis, 697
proteinuria, 689t, 697
uric acid concentration, 697
transplantation, pregnancy after, 1000–1001
Kidney stones, 995, 998–1000
imaging, 995
pregnancy, 995, 999–1000, 999f
Kielland forceps, 541–542, 541f
kisspeptin, 817
Klebsiella pneumoniae pyelonephritis, 997
Klebsiella sepsis, 887
Kleeblattschädel, 302
Kleihauer-Betke (KB) staining, 894, 896

fetomaternal hemorrhage, 358–359, 358f, 894, 896
hydrops fetalis, 363
stillbirth evaluation, 627
Klinefelter syndrome, 37, 314, 333, 335, 335t
Klumpke palsy, 609
Knots, umbilical cord, 116
Koplik spots, 1190
Krukenberg spindles, 74
Krukenberg tumors, 1176

L
Labeling requirements, 147, 148t
Labetalol
growth-restricted neonates with, 713
for hypertension
chronic, pregnancy, 949, 949t
mild to moderate, 713, 714t
pregnancy, 951
severe, 723, 723t, 952
Labia majora, 14–15, 15f
Labia minora, 15, 15f
Labium minora, 19f
Labor. See also Labor and delivery
analgesia and sedation, 468–470
anesthetic agents, 470–471, 470t
definition, 398
false, 52, 401
labor, 788. See also Preterm birth
precipitous, 438
preterm birth, intact membranes, 806–807
spontaneous preterm
cervical dysfunction, 789
infection, 789–790
mechanisms, overview, 788, 788f
uterine overdistention, 788
stages, 400, 400f, 401f
third stage, 506–507
carbetocin, 507
ergonovine and methylergonovine, 507
management, 506–507
misoprostol, 507
oxytocin, high-dose, 507
placenta, 506–507, 506f, 508f
uterine atony, 734–735

TOLAC/VBAC, stimulation for, 578
Labor, abnormal, 433–444
cephalopelvic disproportion, 434
dystocia, 433–434, 433t
dystocia, complications
caput succedaneum and molding, 444
fistula formulation, 443
maternal infection, 443
nerve injury, lower extremity, 444
postpartum hemorrhage, 443
uterine rupture, 443
uterine tears, 443
expulsive force abnormalities, 434–437
labor disorders, 434–437
active-phase, 434–437
latent-phase prolongation, 434, 435t
second-stage descent, 437
pushing efforts, maternal, 437
uterine dysfunction
risk factors, 434
types, 434
failure to progress, 434
fetopelvic disproportion, 438–443. See also Fetopelvic disproportion
precipitous labor and delivery, 438
prematurely ruptured membranes, at term, 437–438
Labor, induction and augmentation, 486–495
augmentation, defined, 486
breech, singleton, 522–523
cervical ripening, 407
cervical ripening, preinduction, 488–492
Bishop score, 488–489, 488t
cervical “favorability,” 488–489, 488t
hygroscopic cervical dilators, 492
nitric oxide donors, 491
prostaglandin E1, 488t, 490–491, 490t
prostaglandin E2, 488t, 489–490, 489f
techniques overview, 488, 488t
transcervical catheter, 491–492, 491f
induction, 486–488
definition, 486
elective labor, 487
indications, 486
risks, 486–487, 487t

success, factors, 487–488
for macrosomia, 833, 834t
methods, 492–495
amniotomy, elective, 494, 494t
membrane stripping, 494–495, 819
oxytocin, 492–494, 493t
prostaglandin E1, 492
uterine contraction pressures, 494
multifetal gestation, 857
obesity, maternal, 905t, 908
postterm pregnancy, 819
pregestational diabetes, insulin management, 1078, 1078t
uterine atony from, 735
Labor, management, 425–430
Emergency Medical Treatment and Labor Act, 425–426
first-stage, 427–429
intrapartum fetal monitoring, 427
IV fluids, 428
maternal monitoring, 427–428
maternal position, 428
membrane rupture, 428–429
oral intake, 428
pain management, 428
urinary bladder function, 429
identification of labor, 426
initial evaluation, 426–428
cervical assessment, 427
laboratory studies, 427
ruptured membranes, 426–427
protocols, 430
second-stage, 429–430, 429f
Labor, normal, 417–430
duration, 425
fetal orientation, 417–420
attitude, 418, 418f
diagnosis, 419–420, 419f
lie, 417
position, 418–419, 418f
presentation, 417–418, 418f
first stage, 424–425, 424f
acceleration phase, 424, 424f
active phase, 424f, 425
deceleration phase, 424, 424f
latent phase, 424–425, 424f

latent phase, prolonged, 425
phase of maximum slope, 424, 424f
mechanisms, 420–424, 421f–422f
descent, 420, 421f
engagement, 420, 421f
expulsion, 421f, 423
extension, 421f, 422–423
external rotation, 421f, 423
fetal head shape changes, 423–424, 423f
flexion, 420
internal rotation, 420–421, 422f
occiput posterior position, 423
second stage, 425
Labor, physiology, 398–414
changes before, 398
maternal and fetal compartments, 398–399
placenta, 399, 399f
uterus and cervix, 398–399
parturition phases
1: uterine quiescence and cervical softening, 400–406
2: preparation for labor, 406–408
3: labor, 408–412
4: puerperium, 413–414
postaglandins, 400, 400f
preparations, 398
sex steroid hormone, 399–400
Labor and delivery
cardiovascular disease, maternal, 920–921
analgesia and anesthesia, 920–921
intrapartum heart failure, 921
cesarean delivery, prior, 577–579
cervical ripening and labor stimulation, 578
epidural analgesia, 578
intrapartum care, 578
timing, 577, 577f
uterine scar exploration, 579
multifetal gestation, 855–858
analgesia and anesthesia, 856
cesarean delivery, 858
delivery route, breech first twin, 857
delivery route, cephalic first twin, 856–857, 856f
delivery timing, 855
fetal presentation, 856
labor augmentation/induction, 857

preparations, 855–856
trial of labor after cesarean delivery, 858
triplet or higher order gestation, 858
vaginal delivery, 857–858
preterm birth, intact membranes, 802–807. See also under Preterm birth
Labor and delivery, analgesia. See also Analgesia
epidural, on outcome, 477, 477t
nitrous oxide, 469–470
parental agents
butorphanol, 469, 469t
fentanyl, 469, 469t
meperidine and promethazine, 468–469, 469t
morphine, 469t
remifentanil, 469, 469t
safety, 469
principles, 468
Labor and delivery, breech, singleton, 522–528
labor induction/augmentation, 522–523
labor management, 522
partial breech extraction, 523–527, 523f–528f
aftercoming head, 525–526, 525f–526f
head entrapment, 527, 527f
nuchal arm, 524–525, 525f
spontaneous breech delivery, 523
total breech extraction
Frank breech, 527
incomplete or complete breech, 527–528, 527f
vaginal delivery methods, 523
Laboratory tests. See also specific types
prenatal, 181
prenatal care, subsequent visits, 182–183
genetic screening, 183
gestational diabetes, 183
group B streptococcal infection, 183
neural-tube defects, 183. See also Neural-tube defects (NTDs)
subsequent visits, 182–183
Labor disorders, 434–437
active-phase, 434–437
arrest, 434, 435–436, 435f, 435t
Obstetric Care Consensus Committee, 436–437, 436f
protraction, 434–435, 435t, 436
latent-phase prolongation, 434, 435t
second-stage descent, 437
Lacerations, maternal

cervical, 739–740, 740f
infection from, 658
epigastric vessel, Maylard incision, 13–14, 13f
postpartum
late, 734
persistent, 734
vaginal delivery
genital tract, lower, 508–509, 509f
infection, 658
morbidity, maternal, 535
operative, 535
perineal, 513
repair, 510–513, 511f–512f
third- and fourth-degree, 508–509
vulvovaginal, 739
Lactate, fetal nutrition, 135
Lactation, puerperium, 639–642. See also Breastfeeding, puerperium
agalactia, 642
benefits, 640, 640t
breast
anatomy and secretory products, 639, 639f, 639t
care, 640–641
engorgement, 642
endocrinology, 640
osteoporosis, 642, 1100
Lactiferous ducts, 639, 639f
Lactobacillus acidophilus, 54
Lactobacillus crispatus, spontaneous preterm labor, 790
Lactogen, placental, 96t, 98, 640
Laënnec cirrhosis, 1040
Lambda sign, 842, 842f
Laminaria algae, 209, 209f
Laminaria japonica, 492
Lamotrigine, teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 1130t
Langer-Giedion syndrome, 316t
Langer lines, 12
Laparoscopic adjustable silicone gastric banding (LASGB, LAPBAND), 910, 910t
Laparoscopic surgery
for ectopic pregnancy, 226–227
maternal, 867–870, 868t
complications, 870
guidelines, 867, 868t
hemodynamic effects, 868, 869t
outcomes, 867–868, 868t

outcomes, perinatal, 868t, 870
technique, 868–870, 869f, 869t, 870f
Laparoscopy
ectopic pregnancy, 225
gastrointestinal, 1013
Laparotomy, gastrointestinal, 1013
Large for gestational age (LGA), 832, 832t
pregestational diabetes, 1072, 1072f
Laser photocoagulation, for twin-twin transfusion syndrome, 374, 374f
Last menstrual period (LMP) date, 121, 247
Late neonatal death, 3
Latent phase, labor
first stage, 424–425, 424f
prolonged, 425
prolongation, 434, 435t
Late preterm, 783
birth. See also Preterm birth
mortality and morbidity, newborn, 787, 787f, 788t
delivery, corticosteroid therapy, 802–803
Late term neonate, 785
Late term pregnancy, 815
Laufe-Piper cesarean delivery, 526, 526f
Laufe-Piper forceps, 526, 526f
L-corrected transposition of the great arteries, 293
Lead
screening, prenatal, 188
teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 153
Least pelvic dimensions, 28
Lecithins, 131
Leflunomide, teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 151
Left-atrial isomerism, 368
Left occiput anterior (LOA), 418–419, 418f, 419f, 420
Left occiput posterior (LOP), 418–419, 418f
Left ventricular assist devices, 922
Left ventricular outflow tract view, fetal heart, 290–291, 290f
Leg varicosities, 192
Leiomyomas, 1167–1168, 1167f, 1168f
on cesarean delivery technique, 559
on fertility, 1168
pregnancy complications, 1167–1168
uterine, recurrent miscarriage, 204
Leiomyomatosis peritonealis disseminata, 1167
Lemon sign, 277, 277f
Lenalidomide, teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 155

Leopold maneuvers, 419–420, 419f, 442, 442f, 519
Leptin, 53, 58
fetal, 135–136, 824
placental, 99–100
Letting down, 640
Leucine aminopeptidase, 70
Leucovorin. See also Folinic acid
for ectopic pregnancy, 225, 225t
Leukemia, 1175–1176
red cell alloimmunization, 352
Leukocyte alkaline phosphatase, 61
Leukocytes, maternal, 61
Leukocytosis, puerperium, 638
Levalbuterol, for asthma, 959, 959f, 960t
Levator ani muscles, 19, 19f, 21, 21f
Levetiracetam, teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 1130t
Levofloxacin, for pneumonia, 963, 963t
Levonorgestrel implants, 669
Levothyroxine
for hypothyroidism, fetal, 370
for thyrotoxicosis, fetal, 370
LGBTQ individuals, preconceptual counseling, 170
Libman-Sacks endocarditis, 926
Lie, fetal, 417
longitudinal, 417, 418f, 419f
transverse, 417, 418, 419, 420
on cesarean delivery technique, 559
etiology and diagnosis, 441–442, 442f
management, 442
mechanism of labor, 442
trial of labor after cesarean, 577
Ligaments, pelvic, 13
abdominal wall, anterior, 13, 13f
arcuate ligament of pubis, 27
broad, 22f, 23
cardinal, 23
infundibulopelvic, 22f, 23
round, 22f, 23
umbilical, 13, 13f
uteroovarian, 22, 22f, 26, 43
uterosacral, 22f, 23f
Lightening, labor, 406
Lightning injuries, maternal, 897, 897t
Limb-body-wall complex, 113, 297–298, 298f

Limb-reduction defects, 303–304, 304f
from amniocentesis, 346–347, 347f
Line alba, 55
Line nigra, 55
Lipids. See also specific types and disorders
serum and blood, 1231t
transfer, fetal overgrowth, 825
Lipokines, 902
Lipopolysaccharides
sepsis and septic shock, 887
spontaneous preterm labor, 789
Lipoproteins, 58
Liquid plasma, 773
Listeria monocytogenes, 1196
Listeriosis, 1196
Lithium
for bipolar disorder, 1146t, 1148
for postpartum psychosis, 1148
teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 153–154
Lithotripsy, 999
Live birth, defined, 3
Liver. See also Hepatic
fetal, 132, 295, 295f
herniation, 286
maternal, 70
preeclampsia syndromes
anatomical changes, 698–699, 698f
HELLP syndrome, 699
hepatic hematoma, 699, 699f
transaminitis, 698
transplantation, 1042
Lobar holoprosencephaly, 279
Local infiltration analgesia, 479–480, 480f
Lochia, 636
Lochia alba, 636
Lochia rubra, 636
Lochia serosa, 636
Locus heterogeneity, 319
Long-acting reversible contraception (LARC), 664
Long-acting β-agonists (LABA), for asthma, 959, 959f, 960t
Long bone length, by gestational age, 1239t
Longitudinal lie, 417, 418f, 419f
Longitudinal limb defect, 303
Long QT syndrome, maternal, 936

Loop of Henle, fetal, 133
Loops, umbilical cord, 116
Loraditine, for pruritus, 1158
Low back pain, 191
Low birthweight, 3, 783
extremely low, 3, 783
gonorrhea, 1211
multifetal gestation, 838f, 844, 844f
very low, 3, 783, 784t
multifetal gestation, 838, 838t
Low-density lipoproteins (LDLs), 58
Lower extremity nerve injury, dystocia, 444
Lower genital tract lacerations, immediate postpartum, 508–509, 509f
Lower urinary tract obstruction, fetal, urinary shunts for, 376–378
Low fetal fraction, cell-free DNA, 336
Low forceps delivery, 533, 534t
Low-glycemic-index diet, for gestational diabetes mellitus, 1083
Low-lying placenta
definition, 755
imaging, 253, 253f
placenta previa, 756
Low transverse cesarean incision, 552f–553f, 553–558
delivery of fetus, 555–557, 555f–556f
delivery of placenta, 557, 557f
uterine incision, 553–555, 554f
uterine repair, 557–558, 558f
Lugano staging system, 1175, 1175t
Luikart forceps, 537f, 538
Lumbar epidural analgesia, continuous, 475–479. See also Analgesia, continuous lumbar epidural
Lung. See also Pulmonary
capacity, total, 66
compliance, 67
transplantation, for cystic fibrosis, 969
volumes, 65–66, 66f
Lung surfactant, 130, 131, 587
fetal, 408
parturition phase 2, 408
for respiratory distress syndrome, preterm newborn, 617
Lung-to-head ratio, congenital diaphragmatic hernia, 375
Lupus anticoagulant, 1114
antiphospholipid syndrome, 1114
fetal-growth restriction, 827
placental abruption risk, 753
stillbirth evaluation, 627

Lupus dermatitis, 1113
Lupus nephritis, 1112
Lupus syndrome, neonatal, 1113
Luteinization, 82
Luteinizing hormone (LH), 403, 404
fetal, 133
Luteoma, 1171
Lying down adrenal sign, 298, 299f
Lyme disease, 1197
Lymphadenopathy, sarcoidosis, 967
Lymphangitis, with septic pelvic thrombophlebitis, 657
Lymphatics
abdominal wall, anterior, 13–14, 13f
pelvic, 25
Lymphocytes
fetal, 134–135
maternal, 61
Lymphocytic hypophysitis, 1104
Lymphomas, 1174–1175
Hodgkin disease, 1174–1175, 1175t
non-Hodgkin, 1175
Lymphopenia, puerperium, 638
Lyonization, 1052

M
Macitentan, teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 153
Mackenrodt ligament, 23
Macroadenomas, pituitary, 1103
Macrocystic CCAM lesions, 287, 288f
Macrolide antibiotics. See also specific types
for pneumonia, 963, 963t
Macrophages, decidua, 93
Macrosomia, 135, 832–834
definition, 832, 832t
detection, 832
management, 833–834
outcomes, 834, 834t
pathophysiology, 832–833
postterm pregnancy, 819
pregestational diabetes, 1072
risk factors, 833, 833t
Magnesium
calcitonin biosynthesis and secretion, 73
maternal, 59

nutrition, prenatal, 186
Magnesium sulfate
on heart rate variability, fetal, 450
for preeclampsia-eclampsia, 719–721, 720f
dosage schedule, 719–720, 719t, 720f
indications and administration, 719
other effects, 720–721
pharmacology and toxicology, 720
severe, 719–721, 719t, 720f
for preeclampsia-eclampsia, neuroprophylaxis
eclampsia, chronic hypertension, 952
seizure, 721–722, 721t, 722t
for preterm labor
intact membranes, neuroprotection, 786t, 803–804, 804t
tocolysis, 805–806
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), 875–877. See also specific indications
appendicitis, 1024, 1024f
cardiac, 916
cardiovascular, 918
central nervous system, 1126
contrast agents, 876
gastrointestinal, 1013
indications
fetal, 877, 877f
maternal, 876–877
pregnancy, 1163
safety, 875
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), obstetrical, 263–268
abdomen, 267
adjunct to fetal therapy, 267
central nervous system, 266, 266f, 267f
fetal anatomy, evaluation, 266
mechanisms, 263
placenta, 267–268, 268f
practice guidelines, 264, 265t
resolution, 263–264
safety, 264
short T1 inversion recovery, 266
technique, 264–266
thorax, 266–267, 266f
Major depression, 1144–1148
postpartum, 1143, 1145
pregnancy and, 1145
prevalence and factors, 1144

suicide, 1148
symptoms, 1145t
treatment, 1145–1148
algorithm, 1146f
allopregnanolone, 1147
drugs, 1145–1147, 1146t
electroconvulsive therapy, 1147–1148
fetal and neonatal effects, 1147
ketamine, 1147
Major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules, maternal, 61
Malaria, 1198–1200, 1199f
fetal-growth restriction, 828, 832
Malformations, congenital. See Congenital malformations; specific types
Malignant melanoma, 1176
Mallory-Weiss tears, 1014, 1014t
Management of Myelomeningocele Study (MOMS), 372, 372t, 373
Manual rotation, forceps delivery, 540, 540f
Manual vacuum aspiration, 210, 211f
Maple syrup urine disease, carrier screening, 344
Marfan syndrome, 1121
maternal, 936–937
Marginal hematoma, placenta, 111
Marginal previa, 755
Marijuana
breast milk, 641–642
teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 157
Mask of pregnancy, 55
Mask ventilation. See also Ventilation
newborn resuscitation, delivery room, 589, 589t
Massive perivillous fibrin deposition, 111
Massive subchorionic hematoma, 110t, 111
Mastitis, 642
Mastitis, puerperal, 659–660, 659f
etiology, 660
granulomatous, 660
management, 660
Maternal evaluation, 866–877
Maternal–fetal
interface, 86, 89, 91, 93
decidual immune cells, 93–94
trophoblast immunogenicity, 93
stress, preterm birth, 790–791
substance transfer, 137–138, 137t
surgery, 371–380. See also Fetal therapy, surgical

Maternal floor infarction, 111
Maternal monitoring, labor, 427–428
Maternal serum alpha-fetoprotein (MSAFP), 183, 276
analyte-based aneuploidy screening, 338
conditions associated with, 338, 338t
historical perspectives, 332–333
placental abruption risk, 752–753
placenta previa risk, 757
Maternal syndrome, preeclampsia, 691, 693–695, 694f
angiogenic and antiangiogenic factors, 694–695, 694f
endothelial cell activation, 693
pressor responses increased, 693–694
vasospasm and hypertension, 693
Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY), 1069. See also Diabetes mellitus
Mauriceau maneuver, 525, 525f
Maximum breathing capacity, 67
Mayer-Rokitansky-Küster-Hauster (MRKH) syndrome, 40
May-Hegglin anomaly, 1059
Maylard incision, epigastric vessel laceration, 13–14, 13f
McDonald cerclage, 206–207, 206f
vesicovaginal fistula after, 1007
McRoberts maneuver, 502, 502f
sacroiliac join mobility, 28
Measles (rubeola), 1189–1190
Measles-mumps-rubella (MMR) vaccine, 1189, 1190
postpartum, 188
in pregnancy, 167, 188, 189t
Mechanical index, 247
Mechanical ventilation. See Ventilation, mechanical
Mechanotransduction, 407
Meckel-Gruber syndrome, 276
polydactyly, 303
Meconium, 132
in amnionic fluid, 458
thick, postterm pregnancy, 821
Meconium aspiration syndrome, 132
newborn, 600–601
postterm pregnancy and oligohydramnios, 817
Meconium peritonitis, 296, 296f
nonimmune hydrops, 363
Median cleft face syndrome, 285
Medical history, preconceptual counseling, 165–167
diabetes mellitus, 165–166, 165f
epilepsy and antiepileptics, 166, 166t

immunizations, 166–167, 166t
Medically supervised withdrawal, for opioid use disorder, 1150
Medication abortion
first-trimester, 211–212, 212t
second-trimester, 213–214
Medication-assisted treatment, for opioid use disorder, 1150
Medication-assisted withdrawal, for opioid use disorder, 1150
Medications. See also specific medications
breastfeeding, secretion in milk, 641–642
common obstetrical, 938
maternal evaluation, 866–867
safety
exposure counseling, 147
labeling requirements, 147, 148t
risk information, presenting, 147–148
safety studies
case-control, 146
case reports and series, 146
cohort, 147
National Birth Defects Prevention Study, 146–147
pregnancy registries, 147
teratology counseling, 147–148
Megacystis-microcolon syndrome, 377
Megaloblastic anemia
folic acid deficiency, 1050
vitamin B12 deficiency, 1050
Melasma gravidarum, 55
Membrane potential regulation, parturition phase 1, 401–402
Membranes
delivery, 401f, 412, 412f
fetal, senescence, parturition phase 2, 408
Membranes, ruptured
labor
first stage, 428–429
initial evaluation, 426–427
premature, at term, 437–438
preterm prelabor rupture of membranes, 752, 798–802
Membrane stripping/sweeping, for labor induction, 494–495, 819
Memory, 74
Mendelian disorders, 318. See also specific types
Meningitis
gonococcal, 1212
from spinal block, 474
Meningocele, 277

Menstrual age, 121–122, 121f
Menstruation
after breastfeeding, 645
history, prenatal, 179
Mental retardation, 339
Meperidine
on heart rate variability, fetal, 450
for labor and delivery, 468–469, 469t
Meralgia paresthetica, 1137
6-Mercaptopurine, for inflammatory bowel disease, 1021
Mercury, teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 153
MERS-CoV, 1187
Mesenchymal cells
amnion, histogenesis, 95
dysplasia, placental, 109
Mesomelia, 301
Mesonephric duct, 31–33, 32f
Mesonephros, 31, 32f, 133
Metabolic acidemia, newborn, 591, 593
Metabolic changes, maternal, 55–59
adipocytokines, 58
carbohydrate metabolism, 57, 57f
electrolyte and mineral metabolism, 58–59
energy demands, 55, 56t
fat metabolism, 58, 58t
leptin, 58
protein metabolism, 57
water metabolism, 56–57, 56f
weight gain, normal, 56, 56t
Metabolic syndrome, 903–904, 903t, 946
gestational diabetes, 1084–1085
Metabolic tests, serum and blood, 1230t
Metals. See also specific types
heavy, placental sequestration, 136–137
trace, nutrition
fetal, 136
pregnancy, 186
prenatal, 186
Metanephros, 31, 32f
Metaproterenol, for asthma, 960
Metformin
for gestational diabetes mellitus, 1083–1084
on hypoxic inducible factor 1α, preeclampsia risk and, 1106
Methadone

maintenance, for opioid use disorder, 1150
for neonatal abstinence syndrome, 605
Methamphetamine, teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 157–158
Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), 1196
breast infections, 660
sepsis, 888
uterine infections, 651
Methimazole
embryopathy, 155–156
for hyperthyroidism, 1091
teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 155–156, 1091
Methotrexate
after abdominal pregnancy surgery, 231
for cervical pregnancy, 230
for cesarean scar pregnancy, 229
for ectopic pregnancy, 225–226, 225t, 227
for gestational trophoblastic neoplasia, 242
for interstitial pregnancy, 228
for persistent trophoblast, 227
teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 152
Methotrexate-aminopterin syndrome, 152
Methyldopa, for chronic hypertension, 949, 949t
Methylergonovine
after cesarean delivery, 557
for hemorrhage prophylaxis, third stage of labor, 507
for uterine atony, 736
Methylprednisolone
for asthma, 961
for multiple sclerosis, 1135
teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 153
Metoclopramide,
for hyperemesis gravidarum, 1015, 1015f, 1016t
for migraine, 1128, 1128t
Metoprolol, for chronic hypertension, 949, 949t
Metritis
with pelvic cellulitis, postpartum, 650–653. See also Uterine infection, puerperal
treatment, 653
Metronidazole
for hidradenitis suppurativa, 1158
for trichomoniasis, 1218, 1218t
for uterine infections, 652, 652t
Metyrapone, for Cushing syndrome, 1102
Micafungin, for candidiasis pneumonia, 965
Miconazole, for candidiasis, 1219t

Microadenomas, pituitary, 1103
Microangiopathic hemolysis, 60
Microbiota
spontaneous preterm labor, 790
vaginal, 1216
Microcephaly, 280
vascular anastomoses, placental, 848
Microchimerism, 93
fetal, 1090
fetal cell, 1109–1110
scleroderma, 1118
Microcystic CCAM lesions, 287, 288f
Microdeletions, 315, 316t
22q11.2 microdeletion syndrome, 315
prevalence, 332
Microduplications, 315, 316t
prevalence, 332
Micrognathia, 285, 285f
Micromelia, 301
Microphthalmmia, 283, 284f
Middle cerebral artery
Doppler imaging, 262–263, 263f
Doppler velocimetry, 392
alloimmunized pregnancy, 355–356, 356f
peak systolic velocity, 263, 263f, 392
Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS-CoV), 1187
Middle interhemispheric variant, holoprosencephaly, 279
Midpelvis, 28, 28f
contracted, 439
forceps delivery, 533, 534t
Mifepristone (RU-486), 406
for Cushing syndrome, 1102
on parturition, 399
Migraine headache, 1127–1128
with aura, 1127
chronic, 1127
in pregnancy, 1127–1128
management, 1128, 1128t
probable, 1127
without aura, 1127
Milk ejection, 640
Milk line, 642
Milk-to-plasma drug-concentration ratio, 641
Miller-Dieker syndrome, 316t

Mineralocorticoids. See also Corticosteroids
teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 153
Minerals. See also specific types
metabolism, maternal, 58–59
nutrition, prenatal, 184t, 185–186
serum and blood constituents, 1230t
Mini-pills, 670–671
Minor antigens, alloimmunization to, 354
Minute ventilation
pregnancy, 956
resting, 66
Mirror syndrome, 364, 373
Miscarriage, 198
anembryonic, 199
embryonic, 199
from gonorrhea, 1211
recurrent, 198, 203–205
anatomical factors, 204
chromosomal abnormalities, parental, 204
endocrine factors, 204–205
etiology, 204
immunological factors, 204, 205t
Misgav Ladach technique, 559
Misoprostol. See also Prostaglandin E1; Prostaglandin E2
after cesarean delivery, 557
for hemorrhage prophylaxis, third stage of labor, 507
for uterine atony, 736
Missed abortion, 201–202, 202t
Mithramycin, for hyperparathyroidism, 1100
Mitochondrial inheritance, 321
Mitral insufficiency, maternal, 925t, 926
Mitral stenosis, maternal, 924–926
cause and pathophysiology, 924–925, 925t
management, 925–926, 926f
pregnancy outcomes, 925
Mitral valve
prolapse, maternal, 925t, 926
replacement, before pregnancy, 922, 922t
Mixed cerebral palsy, 602, 620
Mixed gonadal dysgenesis, 37
Mixed respiratory–metabolic acidemia, newborn, 591
M (motion)-mode imaging
definition and uses, 294
premature atrial contractions, 294–295, 295f

MMPs, endometrial invasion, 90
Mobiluncus vaginosis, 1216
Moderate to late preterm birth, 783
Modified biophysical profile, 390–391
Mogen clamp, 596, 596f
Molar pregnancy, 235, 235t, 236–240, 236t. See also Hydatidiform mole
Molding (head), 423–424, 423f
dystocia, 444
Mole. See also Gestational trophoblastic disease (GTD)
hydatidiform, 235, 235t, 236–240, 851. See also Hydatidiform mole
complete, 235, 235t, 236–240. See also Complete hydatidiform mole
invasion, 242
Molecular therapy, cancer, 1163
Molecular weak D phenotypes, 357
Mometasone, for asthma, 959, 959f, 960t
Mometasone/formoterol, for asthma, 959, 959f, 960t
MOMMA Act, 7
MOMS trial, 372, 372t, 373
Monitoring, fetal electronic, 446–454. See also Fetal heart rate (FHR), monitoring
complications, 463
computerized interpretation, 454
intrapartum, 427
Monitoring, maternal, labor, 427–428
Monoamnionic twins, 845, 846f
Monochorionic twins, 839
vascular anastomoses and, 846–851, 847f
hydatidiform mole with coexisting normal fetus, 851
twin anemia–polycythemia sequence, 849–850
twin reversed-arterial-perfusion sequence, 850–851, 850f
twin-twin transfusion syndrome, 847–849, 847f–849f
vascular anastomoses, 846–847, 847f, 848f
Monoclonal antibodies, 1163. See also specific types and indications
Monocytes, fetal, 134–135
Monogenic disorders, 318. See also specific types
Mononeuropathies, 1136
Monosomy, 309, 313
autosomal, 199
Monozomy X (45,X), 199
Monozygotic twins, 839, 840f
vs. dizygotic, 839
Monro-Kellie hypothesis, 474
Mons pubis, 14, 15f
Montelukast, for asthma, 959
Montevideo units, 462, 494

calculation, 435–436, 435f
Montgomery, glands of, 55
Mood disorders, 1144–1149. See also specific disorders
anxiety, 1148–1149
bipolar, 1146t, 1148
major depression, 1144–1148
postpartum psychosis, 1148
puerperium, 643–644
Morbidity
maternal
cesarean delivery on, 548–549
severe, 5–6, 5t, 6f
vaginal delivery, operative, 535
neonatal
cesarean delivery, 549
pregestational diabetes, 1072–1073
obesity on
maternal, 905–906, 905f, 905t, 906f
offspring, long-term, 907
perinatal, 906–907
perinatal, after operative vaginal delivery, 535–537
Morbidly adherent placenta,. See Placenta accreta spectrum (PAS)
Morbid obesity, 902
Morphine
for labor and delivery, 469t
for neonatal abstinence syndrome, 605
Mortality
fetal
epochs, 625, 625f
from gonorrhea, 1211
newborn/infant
by gestational weeks, 784, 784t1
preterm birth, 784–787, 784t
Mortality, maternal
call to arms, 5t, 6–7
cesarean delivery, 548–549
hypertension, chronic, 946–947
perinatal
hypertension, chronic, 948, 948f
obesity, 906
placental abruption, 751, 751f
postterm pregnancy, 816, 816f, 816t
systemic lupus erythematosus, 1113
pneumonia, 962

preeclampsia syndrome, 688, 726, 726t
pulmonary embolism, 986
seizure, eclampsia, 718
sickle-cell syndromes, 1054, 1054t
TOLAC vs. ERCD, 574
Mortality rate
infant, 3
multifetal gestation, 838, 838t
maternal, 3, 4, 4f
multifetal gestation, 838, 838t
race/ethnicity, 5, 5f
neonatal, 3
perinatal, 3, 4, 4f
Mortality ratio, maternal, 3
pregnancy-related, 5, 5f
Morula, 85, 86f
Mosaicism, 318
confined placental, 318, 829
gonadal, 318
Mosquito-borne infections
Ebola virus, 1193–1194
West Nile virus, 1193
Zika virus, 1193
Movements, antepartum fetal, 383–385
activity determinants, 384
behavioral states, 383–384, 384f
clinical application, 384–385
maternal perception, 384, 384f
Moxa, 529
Moxibustion, external cephalic version, 529
Moxifloxacin, for pneumonia, 963, 963t
Moyamoya disease, 1132
MRKH syndrome, 40
Mucolipidosis type IV, carrier screening, 344
Mucopolysaccharidosis VII, red cell alloimmunization, 352
Mucus plug, 53
Mueller-Hillis maneuver, 440
Müllerian abnormalities, 40–45
cervical, 41
classification, 40, 40t, 41f
diethylstilbestrol, 41f, 45
fallopian tube, 45
müllerian agenesis, 40, 41f
principal deformities, 40, 40t

renal anomalies, comorbid, 40
uterine, 42–45
arcuate uterus, 41f, 44f, 45
bicornuate uterus, 40t, 41f, 43–44, 44f
cerclage treatment, 45
cesarean delivery, 45
discovery, 42
imaging, 42, 42f
septate uterus, 41f, 44–45, 44f
unicornuate uterus, 40t, 41f, 42–43
main horn, 43
rudimentary horn, 43
uterine didelphys, 41f, 43
vaginal, 40–41
Müllerian agenesis, 40, 41f
Müllerian duct, 31, 32f
Müllerian-inhibiting substance (MIS), 35
Multicystic dysplastic kidney (MCDK), 300, 300f
Multicystic encephalomalacia, placental vascular anastomoses, 848
Multidetector CT (MDCT), maternal, 873, 874t
Multidrug-resistant tuberculosis (MDR-TB), 967
Multifactorial inheritance, DNA triplet repeat expansion, 323–324, 323t
cardiac defects, 324
neural-tube defects, 324
threshold traits, 324, 324f
Multifetal gestation, 838–859
birth rate, twin, 838
diagnosis, 840–843
biochemical tests, 843
clinical evaluation, 840–841
MRI, 843
placental examination, 843, 843f
radiography, 843
sonography, 841–842, 848f, 848t, 849f
fetal complications, unique, 845–847
monoamnionic twins, 845, 846f
unique and aberrant twinning, 845–846
conjoined twins, 846, 847f
external parasitic twins, 846
fetus-in-fetu, 846
fetal demise, 852–853, 852f
fetal-growth restriction, 828, 828f
growth discordance, 851–852
diagnosis, 851

management, 852
pathogenesis, 851, 851f
selective fetal-growth restriction, 852
hydramnios, 258
hysterectomy, peripartum, 838–839
labor and delivery, 855–858
analgesia and anesthesia, 856
cesarean delivery, 858
delivery route, breech first twin, 857
delivery route, cephalic first twin, 856–857, 856f
delivery timing, 855
fetal presentation, 856
labor augmentation/induction, 857
preparations, 855–856
trial of labor after cesarean delivery, 577, 858
triplet or higher order gestation, 858
vaginal delivery, 857–858
mechanisms, 839–840
factors, 839–940
superfecundation, 840
superfetation, 840
twinning, dizygotic vs. monozygotic, 839
twinning, monozygotic, 839, 840f
monochorionic twins, 839
monochorionic twins, vascular anastomoses, 846–851, 847f
hydatidiform mole with coexisting normal fetus, 851
twin anemia–polycythemia sequence, 849–850
twin reversed-arterial-perfusion sequence, 850–851, 850f
twin-twin transfusion syndrome, 847–849, 847f–849f
vascular anastomoses, 846–847, 847f, 848f
mortality rate, infant/maternal, 838, 838t
physiologic adaptations, maternal, 843
placenta previa risk, 757
pregnancy complications, 841t, 843–845
congenital malformations, 838, 844
hypertension, 844–845
long-term infant development, 845
low birthweight, 838f, 844, 844f
spontaneous abortion, 843–844
vanishing fetus, 844
very-low-birthweight, 838, 838t
prenatal care, 853
preterm birth, 853–855
incidence, 853

prediction, 853–854
preterm prelabor membrane rupture, 855
prevention, 854
second twin, delayed delivery, 855
treatment, 854–855
T sign, 842, 842f
twin peak (lambda, delta) sign, 842, 842f
Multifetal pregnancy reduction (MPR), 858, 859
Multilobate placenta, 108
Multiparity, 177–178
macrosomia, 833
placenta previa risk, 756
Multiple endocrine neoplasia syndromes, pheochromocytoma, 1100
Multiple sclerosis, 1134–1135, 1134f
in pregnancy, 1134–1135
Mumps, 1189
Musculoskeletal system
abdominal wall muscles, anterior, 12, 13f
external oblique, 12, 13f
internal oblique, 12, 13f
pyramidalis, 12, 13f
rectus abdominis, 12, 13f
transversus abdominis, 12, 13f
fetal, 134
injuries. See also specific types
puerperium, 644, 644f
maternal, 74
Myasthenia gravis, 1135–1136
neonatal effects, 1136
Myasthenic crises, 1135
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, 965–967, 966t
Mycophenolate embryopathy, 153
Mycophenolate mofetil, teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 153
Mycophenolic acid, teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 153
Mycoplasma pneumoniae autoimmune hemolysis, 1051
Mycotic infections, 1200. See also specific types
Myelomeningocele, 277, 277f
fetal surgery for
fetoscopic, 375–376
open, 372–373, 373f
risks, 371–372, 372t
Myeloproliferative disorders. See also specific types
red cell alloimmunization, 352
Myocardial infarction, maternal, acute coronary syndrome, 937–938

Myocardial performance index, twin-twin transfusion syndrome, 849
Myocardial perfusion studies, 918
Myocardium, preeclampsia syndromes, 695. See also Preeclampsia (syndrome)
Myoclonus-dystonic, imprinting, 322t
MYOD, fetal, 134
Myofascitis, puerperal, 655
Myometrial gap junctions, parturition phase 1, 402–403
Myometrial relaxation and contraction, parturition phase 1, 401–404
actin–myosin interactions, 401, 402f
cyclic guanosine monophosphate, 404
G protein–coupled receptors, 403–404, 403f
membrane potential regulation, 401–402
myometrial gap junctions, 402–403
uterotonin degradation, accelerated, 404
Myometrium, 22, 23f
parturition phase 2, 406
prostaglandin synthesis, 400
Myopathies, inflammatory, 1120–1121
Myosalpinx, 26–27, 54
Myosin light-chain kinase (MLCK), 401, 402f
Myxomatous degeneration, 926

N
Nabothian cysts, 180
N-acetylcysteine (NAC), for acetaminophen overdose, 1041
Naegele rule, 122, 178
Naloxone, for narcotic reversal, labor and delivery, 469
Nanotherapy, cancer, 1163
Naproxen, for migraine, 1128, 1128t
Narcotics. See also specific types4
on heart rate variability, fetal, 450
Nasal bone hypoplasia/sonographic absence, 283, 284f
Natalizumab
for inflammatory bowel disease, 1021–1022, 1021t
for multiple sclerosis, 1135
National Birth Defects Prevention Study, 146–147
National Institutes of Health (NIH), 2
National Vital Statistics System, 2
Natural killer cells (NK), decidual, 89
Nausea of pregnancy, 191
doxylasmine for, 186
vitamin B6 for, 186
Near misses, 6

Necrotizing enterocolitis, preterm newborn, 617–618, 618f
Necrotizing fasciitis
episiotomy site, 890
pelvic, puerperal, 654–656
Needle-through-needle technique, 479
Nefazodone, for depression, 1145–1147, 1146t
Negative-pressure wound therapy (NPWT). See Vacuum-assisted closure (VAC)
Neisseria gonorrhoeae, 1211–1212, 1211t. See also Gonorrhea
endocarditis, 934
intrauterine devices, 666
prophylaxis, 892t
prophylaxis, newborn, 593
testing, prenatal, 181
Neonatal abstinence syndrome, 158–159, 605
Neonatal behavioral syndrome, 154
Neonatal death, 3. See also Death, fetal
Neonatal encephalopathy, 601–602, 602t
criteria, 601–602, 602t
definition and types, 601
intellectual disability and seizure disorders, 605
neuroimaging studies, 604–605
prevention, 602
Neonatal opioid withdrawal syndrome, 7, 1150
Neonate
cesarean delivery morbidity, 549
mortality rate, 3
postterm, 785
preterm, 785
term, 785
early, 785
full, 785
late, 785
Neoplastic disorders, 1162–1176. See also specific types
antineoplastics, teratogenicity/fetotoxicity
cyclophosphamide, 152
methotrexate, 152
tamoxifen, 152
trastuzumab, 152
BRCA1/2 mutations, 1173–1174
breast, 1172–1173
cancer therapy, 1162–1164. See also Cancer therapy
distribution, by type, 1162, 1162f
gastrointestinal tract, 1176

gestational trophoblastic neoplasia, 235, 235t, 240–243. See also Gestational trophoblastic neoplasia
(GTN)
hereditary, genes in, 1173, 1174t
incidence, 1162
leukemias, 1175–1176
lymphomas, 1174–1175
malignant melanoma, 1176
pheochromocytoma, 1100
reproductive tract, 1164–1172
thyroid, 1174
Nephrectomy, unilateral, pregnancy after, 995
Nephrogenic ridge, 31, 32f
Nephrolithiasis, 995, 998–1000
imaging, 995, 999f
lithotripsy, 999
pregnancy, 995, 999–1000, 999f
Nephropathy
diabetic, pregestational diabetes, 1074
IgA, 1002
reflux, 998
Nephrotic syndromes, 1001t, 1002–1003
causes, 1002, 1002t
outcomes, long-term, 1003
pregnancy, 1003, 1003f
Nerve blocks
for labor and delivery, 470–472. See also specific types
anesthetic agents, 470–471, 470t
cardiovascular toxicity, 471
CNS toxicity, 470–471
placement, test dosing, 470
paracervical, 472
pudendal, 471
peripheral, for migraine, 1128
spinal (subarachnoid), 472–475
transversus abdominis plane, 480
Nerve injury, lower extremity, dystocia, 444
Neural-tube defects (NTDs), 276–278, 277f
acrania, 276, 277f
amnionic-band sequence, 276
anencephaly, 276
banana sign, 277, 277f
cephalocele, 276, 277f
Chiari III malformation, 276
DNA triplet repeat expansion, 324

encephalocele, 276, 277f
exencephaly, 276
genetic diseases, preconceptual counseling, 168
incidence, 168
lemon sign, 277, 277f
maternal serum alpha-fetoprotein, 276
Meckel-Gruber syndrome, 276
meningocele, 277
MSAFP, 338, 338t
myelomeningocele, 277, 277f
preconceptual counseling, 168
prenatal care, subsequent visits, 183
spina bifida, 277, 277f
ultrasound screening, 333
ventriculomegaly, 277–278
Neuraminidase inhibitors, for influenza, 964, 1187
Neuraxial analgesia, 472–480. See also Analgesia, neuraxial
Neurofibromatosis
lesions, 1158
pheochromocytoma, 1100
Neurohypophysis, fetal, 133
Neurological disorders, 1126–1138. See also specific types
brain death, maternal, 898, 1138
central nervous system imaging, 1126
cerebrovascular diseases, 1130–1134. See also Cerebrovascular diseases
demyelinating or degenerative disorders, 1134–1136
multiple sclerosis, 1134–1135, 1134f
myasthenia gravis, 1135–1136
neonatal effects, 1136
pregnancy and, 1135–1136
headache, 1126–1128. See also Headache
idiopathic intracranial hypertension, 1137–1138
neuropathies, 1136–1137
Bell palsy, 1136–1137, 1136f
carpal tunnel syndrome, 1137
diabetic, maternal, pregestational diabetes, 1075
Guillain-Barré syndrome, 1136
meralgia paresthetica, 1137
seizure disorders, 1128–1130
spinal cord injury, 1137
ventricular shunts, maternal, 1138
Neuromuscular problems, puerperium
musculoskeletal injuries, 644, 644f
obstetrical neuropathies, 644

Neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder (NMOSD), 1134
Neuron(s)
migration, 126, 126f
proliferation, 126, 126f
Neuropathies, 1136–1137
Bell palsy, 1136–1137, 1136f
carpal tunnel syndrome, 1137
diabetic, maternal, pregestational diabetes, 1075
Guillain-Barré syndrome, 1136
meralgia paresthetica, 1137
obstetrical, 644
poly-, 1136
Neuropeptide Y, placental, 96t, 100
Neurophysin, 412
Neuroprophylaxis, seizure, severe preeclampsia and eclampsia, 721–722
effects, fetal and neonatal, 721–722
indications, 721
maternal safety and efficacy, 722, 722t
studies, 721, 721t
Newborn, 586–596. See also specific topics
air breathing, transition to, 586–587
preterm, 615–621, 785. See also Preterm newborn
preventive care, 593–594, 594t
COVID-19, 594–595
eye infection prophylaxis, 593–594
hepatitis B vaccine, 594
screening, 594, 594t
vitamin K, 594
risk factors and delivery care, 587
routine care, 595–596
circumcision, male, 595–596, 596f
feeding and weight loss, 595
gestational age estimation, 595
hyperbilirubinemia, neonatal, 595
rooming in and hospital discharge, 596
skin, 595
stools and urine, 595
umbilical cord, 595
transient tachypnea of, 587
Newborn, delivery room care, 587–590
immediate care, 587
resuscitation, 587–588, 588f
resuscitation protocol, 588–590, 588f
alternative airway, 589–590

bag-mask ventilation, 589, 589f
chest compressions, 590
initial assessment, 588–589, 588f
mask ventilation, 589, 589t
resuscitation discontinuation, 590
umbilical cord management, 587
Newborn, evaluation, 590–593. See also Evaluation, newborn
Newborn complications, term, 599–610. See also specific types
autism spectrum disorders, 605
cerebral palsy, 601, 602–604. See also Cerebral palsy
intellectual disability and seizure disorders, 605
neuroimaging studies, 604–605
encephalopathy, neonatal, 601–602, 602t
intellectual disability and seizure disorders, 605
neuroimaging studies, 604–605
hematological disorders, 605–607
anemia, 605–606
hemorrhagic disease of the newborn, 606
hyperbilirubinemia, 606
polycythemia, 606
thrombocytopenia, 607
vitamin K deficiency bleeding, 606
injuries, 607–610
brachial plexopathy, 609
congenital deformity, 610
cranial, 607–609
extracranial hemorrhage, 607t, 608–609, 608f
facial paralysis, 610, 610f
fractures, 610
incidence, 607
intracranial hemorrhage, 607–608, 607t
peripheral nerve, 609–610
skull fractures, 609, 609f
soft tissue injuries, 610
spinal cord, 609
neonatal abstinence syndrome, 605
respiratory distress, 599–601
meconium aspiration syndrome, 600–601
respiratory distress syndrome, 599, 600
transient tachypnea of the newborn, 599–600
Nexplanon, 669, 670f
Niche, 254, 255f
Nicotine teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 156–157
Niemann-Pick disease

carrier screening, 344
red cell alloimmunization, 352
Nifedipine
for hypertension, pregnancy, 951
chronic, 949, 949t
mild to moderate, 713, 714t
severe, 723, 723t, 952
for tocolysis, preterm labor, 806
Nipples
fissuring, 641
inverted, 642
lactation care, 640–641
stimulation, for uterine contractions, 386
Nitabuch layer, 85, 85f, 92f
Nitrazine, 426
Nitric oxide (NO), 65
for bronchopulmonary dysplasia prevention, 617
preeclampsia, 694
uteroplacental blood flow, 52
Nitric oxide (NO) donors
for cervical ripening, 491
for tocolysis, preterm labor, 806
Nitrofurantoin
for asymptomatic bacteriuria, 996, 996t
teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 151
Nitrous oxide, for labor and delivery, 469–470
NOAEL, 871
Nodular thyroid disease, 1098–1099
Nomenclature, chromosomal abnormalities, 309, 310t
Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD), 904, 1031t, 1040
Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH), 904, 1039
Noncardiogenic permeability edema, 883, 883t
Nondisjunction, 309
monosomy, 313
Nongoitrous hypothyroidism, fetal, 1093
Non-Hodgkin lymphomas, 1175
Nonimmune hydrops, 360–364
diagnostic evaluation, 361t, 362–364, 363f
isolated effusion or edema, 363–364
Nonimmune hydrops fetalis, parvovirus B19, 360, 362, 362f, 363
Noninvasive prenatal screening (NIPS), 327
Nonproliferative retinopathy, 1074
Nonreactive nonstress test, 387, 388–389, 388f
Nonreassuring fetal status, 457–461, 460f

diagnosis, 457–458, 457t
fetal distress, 457
heart rate patterns and brain injury, 460, 460f
management options
amnioinfusion, 459, 459t
resuscitative measures, 458–459, 459t
tocolysis, 459
meconium in amnionic fluid, 458
three-tier fetal heart rate interpretation system, 457–458, 457t
Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). See also specific types
for migraine, 1128, 1128t
for tension headache, 1127
teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 151
Nonstress test, 386–389
false-reactive tests, 389
fetal heart acceleration, 387, 387f
heart rate decelerations, 389
nonreactive (abnormal), 387, 388–389, 388f
reactive (normal), 387–388, 387f
testing intervals, 389
for well-being, fetal, 386
Nontreponemal testing, 1208
Noonan syndrome
cystic hygroma, 286, 286f
nonimmune hydrops, 362, 363
Normal nonstress test, 387–388, 387f
Norovirus diarrhea, acute, 1018, 1019t
Nortriptyline, for depression, 1145–1147, 1146t
Nose abnormalities, 283, 284f
Nuchal arm, partial breach extraction, 524–525, 525f
Nuchal cord, 116
imaging, fetal, 282, 283f
Nuchal translucency, 249–250, 250t
nuc ish, 309
Nuclear medicine studies, maternal, 875, 876t
Nugent score, 1217
Nulligravida, 177
Nullipara, 177
Nutrition
enteral, 1013, 1013t
fetal-growth restriction, 827
gastrointestinal disorders, 1013–1014, 1013t
in miscarriage, 200
parenteral, 1013–1014, 1013t

Nutrition, fetal, 135–137
amino acids, 136
free fatty acids and triglycerides, 136
glucose and fetal growth, 135
heavy metals, placental sequestration, 136–137
ions and trace metals, 136
leptin, 135–136
proteins, 136
vitamins, 137
Nutritional counseling, prenatal
calories, 184–185, 185f
dietary reference intakes, recommended allowances, 184, 184t
minerals, 184t, 185–186
pragmatic nutritional surveillance, 187
protein, 184t, 185
undernutrition, severe, 184
vitamins, 184t, 186–187
weight gain recommendations, 183–184, 183t
weight retention after pregnancy, 184, 184f
Nutritional surveillance, pragmatic prenatal, 187
NuvaRing, 673–674

O
Obesity, 902–911
cerebrovascular diseases, 1130
definitions, 902, 903f
macrosomia, 833
metabolic syndrome, 903–904, 903t
morbidity, 904, 904f
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, 904, 1031t, 1040
pathophysiology, adipose, 902
preconceptual counseling, 170
pregnancy, 904–907
morbidity
long-term offspring, 907
maternal, 905–906, 905f, 905t, 906f
perinatal, 906–907
mortality, perinatal, 906
prevalence, 904, 904f
prevalence, 902, 903f
treatment, 904
on trial of labor after cesarean, 577
Obesity management
antepartum

dietary intervention, 907
maternal weight gain, 907
prenatal care, 908
bariatric surgery
pregnancy after, 910–911
restrictive malabsorptive procedures, 910, 910t
restrictive procedures, 910, 910t
intrapartum, 908–910
anesthesia risks, 908
cesarean delivery, 908–909, 908f
cesarean delivery, surgical concerns, 909–910, 909f
labor induction, 905t, 908
Obstetrical anal sphincter injuries (OASIS), 499
repair
infectious morbidity after, 513
perineal breakdown rate after, 511
vaginal delivery
episiotomy, 510
with female genital mutilation, 505
lower genital tract lacerations, 508–509, 509f
persistent occiput posterior position, 500–501
prevention, 499
third- and fourth-degree lacerations, 508–509
vaginal delivery, operative, 535
training on rates of, 544
Obstetrical anesthesia services, 467–468
Obstetrical care measures, 4–6, 4f–6f, 5t. See also specific types
Obstetrical conjugate, 27f, 28, 438
Obstetrical critical care and trauma, 881–882
Obstetrical estimate, 824, 824t
Obstetrical imaging, 246–268. See also Imaging, obstetrical; specific types
Obstetrical neuropathies, 644
Obstructive renal failure, 1007, 1007f
Occiput posterior (OP) position, persistent, 423
forceps delivery, 540–541, 541f
vaginal delivery, 500–501
Occiput presentation, 417
Occiput transverse (OT) position
forceps delivery, 541–542, 541f
vaginal delivery, 500
Ocrelizumab, for multiple sclerosis, 1135
Octreotide, for acromegaly, 1104
Ocular parameters, by gestational age, 1240t
Ogilvie syndrome, 1023, 1023f

OHVIRA, 43
Olanzapine
for psychosis, 1145, 1146t
teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 153
Oligohydramnios, 257, 260
abdominal pregnancy, 231
borderline, 259–260
management, 260
outcomes, 260, 261t
postterm pregnancy, 817, 818–819, 818f
fetal distress and, 817, 818f
sequence, 610
Omega-3, maternal intake, on birthweight, 825
Omphalocele, 297, 297f
Onapristone, on parturition, 399
Oncofertility, 1164
Ondansetron
for hyperemesis gravidarum, 1015, 1016t
for migraine, 1128, 1128t
One-shot pyelography, 995, 998
Open surgery, fetal, 371–373
benefits and risks, 371–372, 372t
myelomeningocele, 372–373, 373f
procedures, 371
sacrococcygeal teratoma, 373
thoracic masses, 373
Operative vaginal delivery (OVD), 533–544, 1150. See also Vaginal delivery, operative
Opioids
abuse, pregnant women, 7
neonatal abstinence syndrome, 158–159, 605
epidural, 479
for migraine, 1128, 1128t
neonatal abstinence syndrome, 158–159
teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 158–159
withdrawal
medication-assisted, 1150
neonatal opioid withdrawal syndrome, 7, 1150
Opioid use disorder, 1150
Oral contraceptive pills, combination, 671–672, 671t
Oral corticosteroids, for asthma, 959, 959f
Oral hypoglycemic agents, for gestational diabetes mellitus, 1083–1084
Oral suctioning, newborn, 588
Orbit abnormalities, 283, 284f
Oromandibular limb hypogenesis, from amniocentesis, 346–347, 347f

Ortho Evra, 674
Orthopedic injuries, 893
Oseltamivir
for influenza, 964, 1187
for pneumonia, 963, 963t
Osteochondrodysplasias, 301
Osteoclasts, fetal, 134
Osteogenesis imperfecta, 301, 302, 303f, 1121
Osteoporosis
heparin-induced, 986
lactation-associated, 642, 1100
pregnancy-associated, 1100
Ostomy, 1022
Outlet, contracted, 439
Outlet forceps delivery, 533, 534t
Ovalocytosis, 1052
Ovarian abscess, puerperal, 656
Ovarian artery, 24, 24f
Ovarian development, abnormal, 38–39
Ovarian–endometrial cycle, 82–84, 83f
duration, 82, 83f
ovulation, 82–84
phases, 82–84, 83f
Ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome, 1171
Ovarian ligament, 22, 22f, 23, 26
Ovarian masses, 1169–1171
adnexal, asymptomatic, 1170, 1170f
complications, 1169–1170, 1169f
diagnosis, 1169
hyperreactio luteinalis, 1171
incidence and types, 1169
luteoma, pregnancy, 1171
ovarian cancer, 1171
ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome, 1171
pregnancy-related tumors, 1170–1171
Ovarian pregnancy, 231
Ovarian vein, septic thrombosis, 657, 658f
Ovaries, 22f, 26
in pregnancy, 53–54
relaxin, 54
theca-lutein cysts, 54
Overgrowth, fetal, 832–834. See also Macrosomia
Overlap syndrome, 1119
Overt diabetes mellitus, 1068. See also Diabetes mellitus

Overweight, 902
Ovotesticular
definition, 35
sex chromosome disorders, 37
structure and hormones, 35–36
Ovotestis, 35
Ovulation, 82–84, 83f
Ovulation age, 121, 121f
Ovum, blighted, 199
Oxcabazepine, teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 1130t
Oxidative stress, preeclampsia syndromes
markers, 1105
prediction, endothelial dysfunction, 703
Oxygen
maternal, arteriovenous, 67
newborn, saturation, 589, 589t
Oxygenation, fetal, acute respiratory distress syndrome
extracorporeal membrane, 886
mechanical ventilation, 886, 886f
Oxygen delivery
maternal, 67
placental transfer, 138
Oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve, 886, 886f
Oxytocin
biosynthesis, 412
after cesarean delivery, 557
for hemorrhage prophylaxis, third stage of labor, 507
for labor induction/augmentation, 492–494, 493t
dosage, maximal effective, 493
incremental dosing interval, 493
IV, 492–493
regimens, 493, 493t
risks vs. benefits, 578–579
in TOLAC, 487, 578
lactation, 640
maternal, 71
for myasthenia gravis, 1136
parturition phase 2, receptors, 406
parturition phase 3 (labor), 412–413
uterine atony, 735, 736
uterine contraction, challenge test, 385

P
Packed red blood cells, for obstetrical hemorrhage, 772, 772t

PAH gene, 320
Pain
puerperium, 643–644
relief. See Analgesia
Palmar erythema, 55
Palmer point, laparoscopic surgery, 869
Pancreas, fetal, 132–133
Pancreatic disorders, 1043–1044
cystic fibrosis, maternal, 968
pancreatic transplantation, 1044
pancreatitis, 1043–1044, 1043t
Pancreatic enzymes, fetal, 132–133
Pancreatitis, 1043–1044, 1043t
acute fatty liver of pregnancy, 1036
Paracentric inversion, 317
Paracervical block, for labor and delivery, 472
Parachute pack, for hemorrhage, 780
Paracrine system, 89
Paradoxical chest wall movement, 385, 385f
Paradoxical embolism, 928, 1132
Parallel shanks, forceps blades, 537, 537f
Paramesonephric duct, 31, 32f
Parametrial phlegmon, 656–657, 656f–657f
Parametrium, 23
Paraoöphoron, 32f, 33
Parasitic twins, external, 846
Parasympathetic nerves, pelvic, 25f, 26
Parathyroid disease, 1099–1100
hyperparathyroidism, 1099–1100
hypoparathyroidism, 1100
osteoporosis, lactation-associated, 642, 1100
Parathyroid glands, maternal, 73
Parathyroid hormone (PTH), 73, 1099
Parathyroid hormone–related protein (PTHrP), 96t, 99
fetal, 136
lactation, 640
Paraurethral glands, 14, 15–16, 15f, 19, 31
Parental age, preconceptual counseling. See also Advanced maternal age (AMA); Age
assisted reproductive technologies, 169
maternal, 169, 169f
paternal, 169
Parenteral nutrition, 1013–1014, 1013t
Parkland technique, tubal sterilization, 681–682, 683f
Paroxetine, for depression, 1145–1147, 1146t

Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria, hemolytic anemia, 1051
Paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia, maternal, 935
Partial breech extraction, 523–527, 523f–528f
aftercoming head, 525–526, 525f–526f
body, 523–524, 524f
head entrapment, 527, 527f
left leg, 523, 523f
nuchal arm, 524–525, 525f
shoulders and arms, 524, 524f, 525f
vaginal delivery, 523
Partial gonadal dysgenesis, 37
Partial hydatidiform mole, 235, 235t, 236–240, 236t. See also Hydatidiform mole
Partial pressure of carbon dioxide, 67
Partial thromboplastin time (PTT), obstetrical hemorrhage, 777
Partial weak D phenotypes, 357
Parturition
factors regulating, 401, 402f
overview, 400, 400f
Parturition phase 1: uterine quiescence and cervical softening, 400–406
cervical connective tissue, 405–406, 405f
cervical softening, 405
decidua, 404–405, 404f
myometrial relaxation and contraction, 401–404
actin–myosin interactions, 401, 402f
cyclic guanosine monophosphate, 404
G protein–coupled receptors, 403–404, 403f
membrane potential regulation, 401–402
myometrial gap junctions, 402–403
uterotonin degradation, accelerated, 404
overview, 400–401
Parturition phase 2: preparation for labor, 406–408
cervical ripening, 406–407
endocervical epithelia, 407
glycosaminoglycans, 406–407
induction, 407
inflammatory changes, 407
proteoglycans, 407
fetal contributions, 407–408
anomalies and delayed parturition, 408
endocrine cascades, 407–408, 407f
lung surfactant and platelet-activing factor, 408
membrane senescence, 408
uterine stretch, 407
myometrial changes, 406

oxytocin receptors, 406
progesterone withdrawal, 406, 795
Parturition phase 3: labor, 408–412
1st stage: clinical onset of labor, 401f, 409–411
ancillary forces, 410
cervical changes: effacement and dilation, 408, 410–411, 410f, 411f
uterine contractions, 409
uterine segments, distinct lower and upper, 409–410, 409f
uterine shape change, 410
2nd stage: fetal descent, 401f, 408
3rd stage: placenta and membranes delivery, 401f, 412, 412f
overview, 408–409
pelvic floor changes, 411
uteronins, phase 3 parturition, 412–413
Parturition phase 4: puerperium, 413–414
Parvovirus B19, 1191–1192
nonimmune hydrops fetalis, 360, 362, 362f, 363
red cell alloimmunization, 352
Passage, 433
Passenger, 433
Passive immunity, fetal and newborn, 1182–1183
Patau syndrome. See Trisomy 13 (Patau syndrome)
Patent ductus arteriosus, maternal, 928
Patent foramen ovale (PFO), maternal, 927–928
Paternal age. See also Age
advanced, autosomal dominant inheritance, 319–320
disorders, 319
preconceptual counseling, 169
Paternal imprinting, 322
Paternal semiallograft, 826
Peak expiratory flow
pregnancy, 956
rates, 67
Peak systolic velocity, middle cerebral artery, 263, 263f, 392
Pedigree, 167–168, 167f
Pegfilgrastim, 1163
Pegvisomant, for acromegaly, 1104
Pelvic floor
disorders
definition, 535
operative vaginal delivery, 535
labor changes, 411–412
Pelvic inflammatory disease (PID), from IUDs, 666
Pelvic organ prolapse (POP), 54–55

after operative vaginal delivery, 535
Pelvic organ prolapse quantification (POP-Q), 17, 54
Pelvic plexus, 25f, 26
Pelvimetry, breech delivery, 522
Pelvis
blood supply, 22f, 23–25, 24f
artery to round ligament, 23
internal iliac artery branches, 24–25, 24f
ovarian artery, 24, 24f
uterine artery, 24, 24f
veins, 24
Caldwell–Molloy classification, 28–29, 29f
capacity
contracted inlet, 438–439
contracted midpelvis, 439
contracted outlet, 439
pelvic fractures, 439
diaphragm, 19, 19f
division, 424
fractures, labor, 439
infections, puerperal, 649–659. See also specific types
abdominal incision infections, 653–654, 653f–655f, 655t
complications, 653
necrotizing fasciitis, 654–656
parametrial phlegmon, 656–657, 656f–657f
perineal infections, 657–659, 658t
peritonitis and adnexal abscesses, 656
puerperal fever, 649–650
septic pelvic thrombophlebitis, 657, 658f
toxic shock syndrome, 659
uterine infections, 650–653
complications, 653
microbiology, 650–651, 650t
pathogenesis, 651
predisposing factors, 650
prophylaxis, other, 653
prophylaxis, perioperative, 652–653, 652t
treatment, 651–652, 652t
inlet, 27f, 28
innervation, 25–26, 25f
hypogastric nerves, 25, 25f
inferior hypogastric plexus, 25f, 26
parasympathetic, 25f, 26
splanchnic nerves, 25f, 26

superior hypogastric plexus, 25, 25f
sympathetic, 25, 25f
measurements, average, 439
outlet, 28, 28f
packing, for hemorrhage, 780
radiation, on fertility and future pregnancy, 1164
reconstruction surgery, prior, on vaginal delivery, 505
shapes, 28–29, 29f
Pemphigoid gestationis, 1154–1156, 1155f, 1155t
Pemphigus syphiliticus, 1208f
Penetrance, autosomal dominant inheritance, 319
Penetrating trauma, maternal, 894–895
Penicillamine, for copper overload, 1040
Penicillin
allergy/reactions, 1210–1211
Jarisch-Herxheimer, 1210–1211
oral desensitization protocol, 1210, 1210t
extended-spectrum
for cesarean delivery, prophylactic, 550
for uterine infections, 651–652, 652t
Pentalogy of Cantrell, omphalocele, 296, 296f
Pepsinogen, fetal, 132
Peptic ulcer disease, 1017–1018
Peptococcus, uterine infections, 651
Peptostreptococcus, uterine infections, 651
Peramivir, for influenza, 964, 1187
Percreta, previous hysterotomies on, 580, 580f
Percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG), 1012
Percutaneous surgery, fetal, 376–378
intracardiac catheter, 378
radiofrequency ablation, 378
thoracic shunts, 376, 376f
urinary shunts, 376–378, 377f, 377t
Pericentric inversion, 317, 318f
Perinatal index, 816
Perinatal period
definition, 3
morbidity, after operative vaginal delivery, 535–537
mortality rate, 4, 4f
palliative care, 203, 787
Perineal body, 15f, 17, 17f
Perineal membrane, 18, 18f, 19f
Perineal nerve, 21f, 22
Perineum, 54–55

abnormalities, 39–40
clitoral, 39
cloacal exstrophy, 39
epispadias, 39
hymenal, 39–40
care, puerperium, 643
infections, puerperal, 657–659, 658t
laceration, immediate postpartum care, 513
Perineum, anatomy, 14–22, 15f
anal triangle, 19–21, 20f, 21f
anal canal, 20, 20f
anal sphincter complex, 20–21
ischioanal fossae, 20f, 21, 21f
hymen, 16
pelvic diaphragm, 19, 19f
perineal body, 15f, 17, 17f
pudendal nerve, 21–22, 21f
urogenital triangle, 17–19, 18f, 19t. See also Urogenital triangle
vagina, 16–17, 17f
vulva, 14–16, 15f, 16f
clitoris, 15, 15f, 16f
labia, 14–15, 15f
mons pubis, 14, 15f
vestibule, 15–16, 15f
Peripherally inserted central catheter (PICC), nutrition, 1014
Peripheral nerve blocks, for migraine, 1128
Peripheral nerve injuries, newborn
brachial plexopathy, 609
facial paralysis, 610, 610f
Peripheral parenteral nutrition (PPN), 1013
Peritoneum
abdominal wall, anterior, 12–13, 13f
puerperium, 638
Peritonitis
adynamic ileus, 656
meconium, 296, 296f
puerperal, 656
Periventricular leukomalacia, preterm newborn, 619, 620, 621f
Periviable birth, 202
Periviable fetuses, breech delivery, 521
Periviable period, 785
neonatal survival, 785, 785f, 786t
Perivillous fibrin deposition, 110–111, 110f
massive, 111

maternal floor infarction, 111
Permeability edema, 883, 883t
Pernicious anemia
Addisonian, 1050
of pregnancy, 1050
Pernicious placenta previa with accreta. See Placenta accreta spectrum (PAS)
Persistent ductus arteriosus, maternal, congenital, 928
Persistent müllerian duct syndrome (PMDS), 38
Persistent occiput posterior position, 423
forceps delivery, 540–541, 541f
vaginal delivery, 500–501
Persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn (PPHN), from SSRIs, 154
Persistent severe postpartum hypertension management, with severe preeclampsia and eclampsia
furosemide, 725
general principles, 725
reversible cerebral vasoconstriction syndrome, 725
thrombotic microangiopathy, 725
Persistent trophoblast, 227
Personality disorders, 1151
Pessaries, cervical
for multifetal gestation, 854
for preterm labor, 804
Petal presentation, 856
Pfannenstiel incision
Langer lines, 12
nerve severing, 14
PGT-A, 348
PGT-M, 348
PGT-SR, 348
Pharyngitis, Streptococcus pyogenes, 1194
Phase of maximum slope, first stage of labor, 424, 424f
Phencyclidine, teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 159
Phenobarbital
for neonatal abstinence syndrome, 605
teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 1129, 1130t
Phenothiazines, on fetal heart rate variability, 450
Phenotype–genotype relationship, 318–319
heterogeneity, 319
Phenotypic gender, 34–35, 35f, 35t
Phenotypic heterogeneity, 319
Phenotypic severity, 310
Phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) deficiency, 320
Phenylketonuria, preconceptual counseling, 168
Phenytoin

for multiple sclerosis, 1135
for seizure neuroprophylaxis, preeclampsia syndrome, 721–722, 722t
teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 150, 1129, 1130t
Pheochromocytoma, 1100–1101
diagnosis, 1101, 11013
hypertension, severe, 952–953
incidence and screening, 1100–1101
outcomes, pregnancy, 1101, 1101t
Phlebitis, septic pelvic, 657, 658f
Phlegmon, 656, 656f
parametrial, 656–657, 656f–657f
Phocomelia, 303
from thalidomide, 155
Phosphate, maternal, 59
Phosphatidylcholines, 131
Phosphatidylglycerol, 131
Phospholipase A2, preeclampsia, 58
Phospholipids, 1114
Phosphorus transport, fetal nutrition, 136
Physiology
fetal, 124–135. See also Fetal development and physiology
labor, 398–414. See also Labor, physiology
Physiology, maternal, 51–75. See also specific organs and systems
breasts, 55
cardiovascular system, 62–65, 915–916, 916t
central nervous system, 74–75
endocrine system, 70–74
gastrointestinal tract, 70
hematological changes, 59–62
metabolic changes, 55–59
multifetal gestation, 843
musculoskeletal system, 74
reproductive tract, 51–55
respiratory tract, 65–67
skin, 55
urinary system, 67–70
Pica, 170
in pregnancy, 191
PIG-A, 1051
Pimecrolimus, for dermatologic disorders, 1159, 1159t
Pinopodes, 83
Piper forceps, 526, 526f
Pituitary adenoma
acromegaly, 1103–1104

prolactinomas, 1103, 1103f
Pituitary disorders, 1103–1104. See also specific types
acromegaly, 1103–1104
diabetes insipidus, 1104
lymphocytic hypophysitis, 1104
prolactinomas, 1103, 1103f
Sheehan syndrome, 1104
placental abruption, 754
Pituitary failure. See Sheehan syndrome
Pituitary gland
fetal, 133
maternal, 70–71
Pituitary-like hormones, placental, 96t, 99
PKD1/2, 1001
Placenta, 89–93
anatomy, 91, 91f, 92f
“barrier,” breaks, 93
basal plate, 107
bilobate, 108
chorionic plate, 107
circulation, 91–93, 91f, 92f
fetal, 92
maternal, 92–93, 92f
delivery, 401f, 412, 412f, 506, 506f
dysfunction, postterm pregnancy, 817, 817f
embryofetal development, 137–138
intervillous space, 137
maternal–fetal substance transfer, 137–138, 137t
endometrial invasion, 89–90
growth and maturation, 88f, 90–91
imaging, 252–253, 253f
Battledore placenta, 114, 253
cesarean scar pregnancy, 253–254, 255f
MRI, 267–268, 268f
placenta accreta spectrum, 253, 254f
placenta previa and low-lying placenta, 252–253, 253f
labor physiology, 399, 399f
lacunae, 253
lesion identification, 107–108
low-lying, 755
metastases to, 1164
migration, 756
normal, 107–108
normally implanted, premature separation, 749. See also Placental abruption

removal, manual, 508f, 735–736
spiral artery invasion, 90
trophoblast invasion, regulators, 89–90
vaginal delivery, 506–507, 506f, 508f
visual inspection, 107
Placenta, abnormalities, 107–117
amniochorion
amnionic band sequence, 110t, 113
amnionic sheet, 113
amnion nodosum, 113
chorioamnionitis, 113
limb-body wall complex, 113
Battledore placenta, 114, 253
calcification, 111–112
circulatory disturbances, 109–111
blood flow disruption, fetal, 111
blood flow disruption, maternal, 110–111, 110f
classification, perfusion disorders, 109
lesions, 109
circummarginate placenta, 109, 109f
circumvallate placenta, 109, 109f, 110t
extrachorial placentation, 109, 109f, 110t
fetal-growth restriction, 828
injury, maternal, 894, 894f, 895f
mesenchymal dysplasia, 109
multilobate, 108
pathological examination, indications for, 107, 108t
placenta fenestrata, 108–109
placenta membanacea, 108
placentomegaly, 109
shape and size variants, 108–109, 108f
succentriate lobe, 108, 108f, 110t
tumors, 112–113
chorangioma, 112, 112f
metastatic, 112–113
umbilical cord, 113–117. See also Umbilical cord, abnormalities
Placenta accreta, 759–760, 760f
Placenta accreta index, 762
Placenta accreta spectrum (PAS), 7, 759–765
cesarean scar pregnancy, 229, 759
classification, 759–760, 760f, 761f
definition, 759
diagnosis, 761–762, 762f
etiopathogenesis, 759

focal placenta accreta, 760
hysterotomies on, previous, 580, 580f
imaging, 253, 254f
incidence and risk factors, 760–761, 761f
management, 762–764
cesarean delivery and hysterectomy, 763–764, 764t
conservative, 764
criteria and considerations, 762–763, 763t
delivery timing, 763
preoperative prophylactic catheterization, 763
outcomes, 764t, 765
placenta accreta, 759–760, 760f
placenta increta, 760, 760f
placenta percreta, 760, 760f
placenta previa with, 757
placenta removal, manual, 507, 508f
total placenta accreta, 760
Placenta adherens, manual placenta removal, 507, 508f
Placenta fenestrata, 108–109
Placenta increta, 760, 760f
hysterotomies on, previous, 580, 580f
Placental abruption, 749–755, 752t
diagnosis
acute kidney injury, 753–754
consumptive coagulopathy, 753
Couvelaire uterus, 753, 753f
pituitary failure, 754
signs and symptoms, 753
differential diagnosis, 754
etiopathogenesis, 749–751
chronic abruption, 750–751
depression, with dark adherent clot, 750, 750f
hemorrhage, early stages, 749–750
schematic, 750f
severity, defining, 750
traumatic abruption, 750
fetal heart rate monitoring, 446–447, 447f
frequency, 751, 751f
hemorrhage, obstetrical, 776
management
cesarean delivery, 754
expectant, 755
factors, 754
vaginal delivery, 754–755

morbidity and mortality, perinatal, 751, 751f
predisposing factors
cigarette smoking, 752
demographic, 751, 752t
pregnancy-associated hypertension and HELLP, 752
preterm prelabor ruptured membranes, 752
prior abruption, 752
serum markers, 752–753
preeclampsia, superimposed, 947–948
thrombophilias, 753, 979–980
Placental bed, 691, 691f
Placental disorders, hemorrhagic, 749–765. See also specific types
placenta accreta spectrum, 229, 253, 254f, 580, 580f, 759–765
placental abruption, 446–447, 447f, 749–755, 947–948
placenta previa, 252–253, 253f, 755–759
Placental–fetal adrenal endocrine cascade, 407–408, 407f
Placental growth factor (PlGF), 65
preeclampsia, 58, 695
soluble fms-like tyrosine kinase 1, preeclampsia evaluation, 711
Placental growth hormone, maternal, 71
Placental lactogen, 96t, 98, 640
Placental mesenchymal dysplasia, 109
Placental mosaicism, confined, 318
Placental perfusion, preeclampsia syndrome
prediction, 702–703
prevention, 703–704
Placental polypoid mass, 637, 637f
Placental site involution, puerperium, 636–637
hemorrhage, late, 637, 637f
subinvolution, 636–637, 637f
Placental site trophoblastic tumor, 242
Placental syndrome, preeclampsia syndromes, 691, 692–693, 692f
genetic factors, 693
immunological factors, 692–693
Placental tear (“fractures”), 894, 894f
Placenta membanacea, 108
Placenta percreta, 760, 760f
Placenta previa, 755–759
assisted reproductive technology, 757
cesarean delivery, prior, 756–757
cigarette smoking, 756
classification, 755–756, 755f, 756f
clinical features, 757
coagulopathy with, 757

definition, 755
delivery, 758–759
diagnosis, 757–758, 758f
imaging, 252–253, 253f
incidence, 756
management, 758
maternal age, 756
MSAFP, elevated, 757
multifetal gestation, 757
multiparity, 756
outcomes, 759
placenta accreta spectrum with, 757
placental migration, 756
Placentomegaly, 109
Plague, 1200
Planes and diameters, pelvic, 27f, 28, 28f
midpelvis and pelvic outlet, 28, 28f
pelvic inlet, 27f, 28
Plasma exchange, therapeutic, for intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy, 1032
Plasma proteins
fetal, 130
pregnancy-associated, placental abruption risk, 752–753
Plasma volume
expansion, for severe preeclampsia and eclampsia, 724
maternal, 65
Plasminogen activator inhibitor type 1, 979
Plasmodium, 1199
Plasmodium falciparum, 1199
Plasticity, ventricular remodeling, 63, 916
Platelet-activating factor (PAF)
fetal, 408
parturition phase 2, 408
Platelet disorders, 1058–1060. See also specific types
gestational thrombocytopenia, 1058–1059, 1058t
immune thrombocytopenic purpura, 1059–1060
alloimmune thrombocytopenia, 1060
classification, 1059, 1059t
fetal and neonatal effects, 1059–1060
idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura, 1059
pregnancy, 1059
inherited thrombocytopenia, 1059
preeclampsia syndromes, 1105
thrombocytopenia, 1058, 1058t
thrombocytosis, 1060

Platelets
fetal, 129, 129f
for hemorrhage, obstetrical, 772–773, 772t
maternal, 62, 62f
Platypelloid pelvis, 28, 29f
Pleural effusion, fetal, percutaneous thoracic shunt for, 376, 376f
Pneumatosis intestinalis, 617, 618f
Pneumococcal vaccines, 963
Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia, 965
Pneumocystis pneumonia, 965
Pneumonia, 961–965
bacterial, 962–963
diagnosis, 962, 962f
incidence and causes, 962
management, 962–963, 962t, 963t
outcomes, pregnancy, 963
prevention, 963
classification, 961
coronavirus (SARS, COVID-19), 964–965
fungal, 965
influenza, 963–964
mortality, 962
pathogens, 961–962
Pneumocystis, 965
prevalence, pregnancy, 962
varicella, 965
varicella-zoster virus, 1185–1186
Pneumonitis
disseminated fungal, 1200
interstitial, in sarcoidosis, 967
Podalic pole, 417
Poliovirus, 1193
Polyangiitis
eosinophilic granulomatosis with, 1120
granulomatosis with, 1120
Polyarteritis nodosa, 1119–1120
Polycystic kidney disease
fetal, 300–301, 301f
autosomal dominant, 300–301
renal agenesis, 299–300, 300f
pregnancy, 1001
Polycythemia, 1053
fetal, from pregestational diabetes, 1073
neonatal, 606

Polycythemia vera, 1053
Polydactyly, 302–303, 303f
trisomy 13, 303
Polygalactia, 642
Polyglandular autoimmune syndromes, 1102
Polyhydramnios, 257
Polyhydramnios–oligohydramnios syndrome, 848
Polymastia, 642
Polymorphic eruption of pregnancy, 1155t, 1156, 1156f
Polymyositis, 1120–1121
Polyneuropathies, 1136
“Poly-oil,” 848
Polyp
endocervical, 1164
uterine, recurrent miscarriage, 204
Polyploidy, 309, 313
diandric triploidy, 313
digynic triploidy, 313
imprinting, 313
Polypoid mass, placental, 637, 637f
Polythelia, 642
Pomalidomide, teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 155
Pomeroy technique, tubal sterilization, 681–682, 683f
Population reference, 824, 824f
Porencephaly, 280
vascular anastomoses, placental, 848
Portal hypertension, 1040–1041
thrombophilias, 1040
Portio supravaginalis, 17f, 22f, 23
Portio vaginalis, 23
Position, fetal, 418–419, 418f
occiput anterior, left, 418–419, 418f, 419f, 420
occiput posterior, 423
left, 418–419, 418f
normal labor, 423
occiput posterior, persistent
forceps delivery, 540–541, 541f
vaginal delivery, 500–501
occiput transverse
forceps delivery, 541–542, 541f
persistent, forceps delivery, 540–541, 541f
right, 418–419, 418f, 420
vaginal delivery, 500
Position, maternal, labor, 428

Positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP), acute respiratory distress syndrome, 886
Positron emission tomography (PET), central nervous system, 1126
Postconceptual age, 121, 121f
Postdural puncture headache, from spinal block, 474
Posterior asynclitism, 420, 422f
Posterior axilla sling traction, 503
Posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome, 64, 64f
Posterior urethral valves, 301, 301f
Postmature pregnancy, 815
Postmaturity syndrome, 816, 817f
Postmortem cesarean delivery, 547
Postnecrotic cirrhosis, 1040
Postpartum. See also Fourth trimester; Puerperium
Postpartum blues, 643–644, 1143
sleep, 75
Postpartum care, immediate, 507–513
1st hour after delivery, 507–508
episiotomy, 509–510, 510f
episiotomy repairs, 510–513, 511f–512f
laceration
lower genital tract, 508–509, 509f
perineal, 513
laceration repairs, 510–513, 511f–512f
skin-to-skin contact, 508
Postpartum depression, 1143, 1145. See also Depression, major
Postpartum diuresis, 638–639
Postpartum hemorrhage. See Hemorrhage, postpartum
Postpartum hysterectomy, 547
Postpartum psychosis, 1148
Postpartum thyroiditis, 1098
Postterm neonate, 785
Postterm pregnancy, 815–821
definition and terminology, 815
estimated gestational age, 815
incidence, 815–816
macrosomia, 819
management, antepartum, 819–820
induction factors, 819
induction vs. fetal testing, 819–820, 820t
management strategies, 820, 820f
management, intrapartum, 821
mortality and morbidity, perinatal, 816
oligohydramnios, 818–819
pathophysiology, 816–818

fetal distress and oligohydramnios, 817, 818f
fetal-growth restriction, 818
placental dysfunction, 817, 817f
postmaturity syndrome, 816, 817f
perinatal mortality and morbidity, 816f, 816t
Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), 1150–1151
spontaneous preterm delivery and, 1144
Potassium
maternal, 58–59
pregnancy nutrition, 186
Potter sequence, 299–300
Potter syndrome, 299–300
Pouch of Douglas, 16
Powers, 433
Prader score, 38, 369
Prader-Willi syndrome, 316t
imprinting, 322, 322t
Pragmatic nutritional surveillance, prenatal, 187
Prague maneuver, 526, 526f
Precipitous labor and delivery, 438
Preconceptual care efficacy, 164–165
Preconceptual counseling, 164–172, 918–920. See also Counseling, preconceptual
cardiovascular risk factors, 918–920
fetal heart lesions, risks, 918, 920t
hypertension, chronic, 945, 945t
Preconceptual health indicators, 164, 164t
Prednisolone, for asthma, acute, 961
Prednisone
for asthma, 961
for inflammatory bowel disease, 1021
for pustular psoriasis of pregnancy, 1157
for sarcoidosis, 968
teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 153
Preeclampsia (syndrome), 688–705
diagnosis, 689–690, 689t
etiopathogenesis, 691–695
etiology, 691–692
mechanisms, 691
phenotypic expression, 691
stage II – maternal syndrome, 691, 693–695, 694f
angiogenic and antiangiogenic factors, 694–695, 694f
endothelial cell activation, 693
pressor responses increased, 693–694
vasospasm and hypertension, 693

stage I – placental syndrome, 691, 692–693, 692f
genetic factors, 693
immunological factors, 692–693
two-stage theory, 691
hemodynamic changes and cardiac function, 695
hemorrhage, obstetrical, 776
hypertensive disorders, classification, 688
hypertensive disorders, diagnosis, 688–689, 689f
delta hypertension, 689
empiric, 689
gestational hypertension, 689, 689t
hypertension, 690
preeclampsia superimposed on chronic hypertension, 690
preeclampsia syndrome, 689–690, 689t
severity, indicators, 689–690, 690t
incidence and risk factors, 690–691, 691f, 691t
ischemic stroke, 1132
isoforms, 691
long-term consequences
cardiovascular mortality, 726, 726t
CNS sequelae, 726t, 727
renal sequelae, 726, 726t
mortality, 688
placental abruption risk, 752
prediction, 702–703
angiogenic/antiangiogenic factor imbalance, 703
cell-free DNA, 703
endothelial dysfunction and oxidative stress, 703
fetal-placental unit endocrine function, 703
multivariate screening algorithms, 703
other markers, 703
renal function tests, 703
uterine Doppler velocimetry, 703
vascular resistance testing and placental perfusion, 702–703
pregestational diabetes, 1074, 1074f
prevention, 703–705, 704t
antihypertensives, 704
antioxidants, 704
antithrombotics, 704–705
aspirin, low-dose, 705
bed rest, 1106
dietary and lifestyle modifications, 703–704, 1105
vascular resistance testing and placental perfusion, 703–704
superimposed, 946f

adverse pregnancy effects, 947–948, 947f
on hypertension, chronic, 690
management, 951–952
management, expectant, early-onset, 952
placental abruption, 947–948
prediction, 947
prevention, 947
risk, 947, 947f
thrombophilias, 980
Preeclampsia (syndrome), management, 711–727
antihypertensives, for mild to moderate hypertension, 713, 714t
delivery, considerations, 712
diagnosis, 711
evaluation, 711–712
expectant
delivery, indications for (<34 wks), 716–717, 717t
midtrimester preeclampsia, 715–716, 715t
corticosteroids, for HELLP syndrome amelioration, 716, 716f
corticosteroids, for lung maturation, 715–716
studies and maternal complications, 715, 715t
preterm severe eclampsia, 714–715, 715t
recommendations, 716–717, 716f, 717t
experimental therapies, 716–717, 716f, 717t
inpatient vs. outpatient care, 712–713, 713t
long-term consequences, 725–727, 726t
future pregnancies, 725–726, 726t
obesity, 714–715, 714f, 714t
Preeclampsia (syndrome), pathophysiology, 695–702
blood volume, 696, 696f
cardiovascular system
hemodynamic changes and cardiac function, 695
myocardial function, 695
ventricular function, 695–696, 695f
central nervous system, 699–702
cerebral blood flow, 701
cerebral edema, 701–702
cerebrovascular pathophysiology, 700, 700f
neuroanatomical lesions, 700, 700f
neuroimaging studies, 701
neurological manifestations, 701
visual changes and blindness, 701, 702f
endocrine and hormonal alterations, 697
fetal growth restriction, 702
fluid and electrolyte alterations, 697

hematological changes
coagulation, 696–697
hemolysis, 696
thrombocytopenia, 696
kidney
acute kidney injury, 698
anatomical changes, 697–698, 698f
glomerular endotheliosis, 697
proteinuria, 689t, 697
uric acid concentration, 697
liver
anatomical changes, 698–699, 698f
HELLP syndrome, 699
hepatic hematoma, 699, 699f
transaminitis, 698
uteroplacental perfusion, 702
Preeclampsia (syndrome), severe preeclampsia and eclampsia, 717–725
classification, 717, 884t
eclampsia
clinical findings, 717–719, 718f
development and risk, 717
management, 719–725
analgesia and anesthesia, 724
blood loss at delivery, 725
fluid therapy
crystalloid solution, 724
invasive hemodynamic monitoring, 724
pulmonary edema, 724
magnesium sulfate, 719–721, 719t, 720f. See also Magnesium sulfate
neuroprophylaxis, for seizure prevention, 721–722
effects, fetal and neonatal, 721–722
indications, 721
maternal safety and efficacy, 722, 722t
studies, 721, 721t
persistent severe postpartum hypertension
furosemide, 725
general principles, 725
reversible cerebral vasoconstriction syndrome, 725
thrombotic microangiopathy, 725
plasma volume expansion, 724
severe hypertension, 722–724
diuretics, 723–724
general principles and agents, 722
hydralazine, 722–723, 723f, 723t

labetalol, 723, 723t
nifedipine, 723, 723t
Preeclampsia-eclampsia
lupus vs., 1112
severe, continuous lumbar epidural analgesia and, 478–479
Preembryonic loss, 199
Preformed vitamin A, teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 155
Pregestational diabetes, 1068, 1069–1078. See also under Diabetes mellitus
cystic fibrosis, 968–969
Pregnancy. See also specific topics
diagnosis, 176–177, 176f
duration
normal, 178–179
terminology, 121–122, 121f
late term, 815
outcomes, U.S., 4, 4t
postmature, 815
postterm, 815–821
psychological adjustments, 1142–1144, 1143t
rates, U.S., 3–4, 4t
termination, induced, 785
unintended, 664
urinalysis, 994–995
Pregnancy-associated alpha2-glycoprotein., 1118
Pregnancy-associated death, 3
Pregnancy-associated hemolysis, 1051
Pregnancy-associated osteoporosis, 1100
Pregnancy-associated plasma protein, placental abruption risk, 752–753
Pregnancy Exposure Registries, 147
Pregnancy-induced hypervolemia, 59–60, 59f, 638, 638f
Pregnancy-induced hypoplastic anemia, 1052–1053
Pregnancy loss. See also Abortion
abortion, induced, 208–214. See also Abortion, induced
abortion, second-trimester, 205–208
cervical insufficiency, 205–206
etiology, 205, 205t
presurgical preparation, 206–208
complications, 208
transabdominal cerclage, 207–208
vaginal cerclage, 206–207, 206f, 207f
abortion, spontaneous. See Spontaneous abortion
biochemical, 199
early, 198
nomenclature, 198

recurrent, 198, 203–205
Pregnancy Mortality Surveillance System (PMSS), 4, 6
Pregnancy of unknown location (PUL), 177, 198, 222
Pregnancy-related death, 3–4, 4f
Pregnancy-related ovarian tumors, 1170–1171
Pregnancy-specific dermatoses
atopic eruption of pregnancy, 1155t, 1156
pemphigoid gestationis, 1154–1156, 1155f, 1155t
pruritic urticarial papules and plaques of pregnancy, 1155t, 1156, 1156f
Pregnancy tests, 176–177, 176f
hCG, 176, 176f
home, 176–177
Preimplantation genetic testing, 13, 168
Preimplantation period, teratology, 145
Premature atrial contractions, fetal, 367–368
M-mode imaging, 294–295, 295f
spiking, 446, 447f
Prematurely ruptured membranes, at term, 437–438
Prematurity, 783
Prenatal care, 175–192
common concerns, 187–192
automobile and air travel, 188
backache, 191–192
caffeine, 191
coitus, 188
cord blood banking, 192
dental care, 188
employment, 187
exercise, 187, 187t
headache, 191
hemorrhoids, 192
immunization, 188, 189t–190t
lead screening, 188
nausea and heartburn, 191
pica, 191
ptyalism, 191
seafood consumption, 188
sleep and fatigue, 192
varicosities, 192
initial evaluation, 177–181, 178t
cervical infections, 181
clinical evaluation, 180–181
gestational age assessment, 178–179, 181
laboratory tests, 181

pregnancy risk assessment, 181, 182t
prenatal record, 177–180. See also Prenatal record
multifetal gestation, 853
nutritional counseling, 183–187
calories, 184–185, 185f
dietary reference intakes, recommended allowances, 184, 184t
minerals, 184t, 185–186
pragmatic nutritional surveillance, 187
protein, 184t, 185
undernutrition, severe, 184
vitamins, 184t, 186–187
weight gain recommendations, 183–184, 183t
weight retention after pregnancy, 184, 184f
subsequent visits, 181–183
laboratory tests, 182–183
genetic screening, 183
gestational diabetes, 183
group B streptococcal infection, 183
neural-tube defects, 183. See also Neural-tube defects (NTDs)
surveillance, 181–182. See also Prenatal surveillance
U.S., 175
Prenatal diagnosis, 176–177, 177f, 332–348. See also specific topics
aneuploidy screening, 333–342
carrier screening, genetic disorders, 342–344
definition and goal, 332
historical perspective, 332–333, 333t
pregnancy tests, 176–177, 177f
prenatal and implantation tests, 344–348
amniocentesis, 344–346, 345f, 345t
chorionic villus sampling, 346–347, 346f, 347f
chromosomal microarray analysis, 344
fetal blood sampling, 347–348, 347f
fluorescence in situ hybridization, 344
genetic, preimplantation, 348, 348f
karyotyping, 344
sonographic recognition, 177
symptoms and signs, 176
Prenatal record, 177–180
components, 177, 178t
definitions, 177–178
duration, normal, 178–179
health status
alcohol, 180
cigarette smoking, 179–180, 180t

illicit drugs, 180
intimate-partner violence, 180
menstrual and contraceptive histories, 179
psychosocial screening, 179
trimesters, 209
Prenatal surveillance, 181–182
fetal heart sounds, 182
fundal height, 182
sonography, 182
Preproliferative retinopathy, 1074
Presentation, 417–418, 418f. See also specific types
multifetal gestation, 856
Presenting part, 417
Pressure-support ventilation, 885
Preterm birth, 783–807
causes, 787–791
bacterial vaginosis, 1217
direct, 787–788
maternal-fetal stress, 790–791
parturition pathway activation, 788
preterm labor, 788
preterm prelabor rupture of membranes, 790. See also Preterm prelabor rupture of membranes
(PPROM)
spontaneous preterm labor
cervical dysfunction, 789
infection, 789
infection, cytokines origin, 789–790
infection, inflammatory responses, 789
infection, microbiota, 790
mechanisms, overview, 788, 788f
uterine overdistention, 788
classification, 783
complications, 615–621, 615t. See also Preterm newborn
contributing factors, 791–792, 791t
birth defects, 791
genetic, 791–792
infection
antimicrobial prophylaxis, 792
bacterial vaginosis, 792
COVID-19, 792
interpregnancy interval, 792
lifestyle, 791
multifetal gestation, 791
periodontal disease, 792

pregnancy, 791
prior preterm birth, 791
threatened abortion, 791
definition, 783
diagnosis
ambulatory uterine monitoring, 793
biomarkers, 793
cervical change, 793
cervical length measurement, 793–794
fibronectin, fetal, 793
symptoms, 792–793
early, 783
euthermia, maintaining, 588
extremely, 783
labor management, intact membranes, 802–807
amniocentesis, for infection detection, 802
antimicrobial treatment, 804
bed rest, 804
cerclage, emergency/rescue, 804–805
cervical pessaries, 804
corticosteroid therapy
agent selection, 802
late-preterm delivery, 802–803
recommendations and studies, 802
repeated courses, 803
rescue therapy, 803
labor and delivery, 806–807
magnesium sulfate, for neuroprotection, 786t, 803–804, 804t
tocolysis
atosiban, 806
calcium-channel blockers, 806
magnesium sulfate, 805–806
nitric oxide donors, 806
prostaglandin inhibitors, 806
recommended agents, 805
β-adrenergic receptor agonists, 805
labor management, preterm prelabor rupture of membranes, 798–802
antimicrobial therapy, 801
chorioamnionitis, clinical, 801
corticosteroid therapy, 801–802
diagnosis, 798
expectant, 800–801
general scheme, 798, 799t
hospitalization, 799

intentional delivery, 800
natural history, 798, 799f
late, 783
moderate to late, 783
mortality and morbidity, newborn, 784–787, 784t
late-preterm birth, 787, 787f, 788t
rates, 784, 784t
short- and long-term morbidities, 784–785, 784t
threshold of viability
definition, 785
management, clinical, 785–787, 786f
periviable neonatal survival, 785, 785f, 786t
periviable period, 785
multifetal gestation, 853–855
incidence, 853
prediction, 853–854
preterm prelabor membrane rupture, 855
prevention, 854
risk, 838
second twin, delayed delivery, 855
treatment, 854–855
pregestational diabetes, 1070–1071
vs. prematurity, 783
prevention, 7, 794–798
aspirin, 798
cervical cerclage, 794–795, 794f
geography-based public health-care programs, 798, 798f
progesterone prophylaxis, with shortened cervix, 797, 797t
progestogen compounds, 795
progestogen compounds, prior preterm birth and, 795–797
FDA recommendations, 796–797, 796f
metabolism, 795–796
MFMU Network trial, 795
pricing concerns, 795
PROLONG trial, 796, 796t
progestogens summary, 797–798
rates, 615
rate trends, 783–784
very, 783

Preterm delivery
breech fetus, 520–521
gonorrhea, 1211
intact membranes, 806–807
posttraumatic stress disorder, 1144
pregestational diabetes, 1070–1071
Preterm newborn, 615–621, 785
brain disorders
intracranial hemorrhage, 618
intraventricular hemorrhage, 618–620
periventricular leukomalacia, 619, 620, 621f
sonography, 618
cerebral palsy, 601, 602–604, 620–621. See also Cerebral palsy
necrotizing enterocolitis, 617–618, 618f
prematurity complications, 615, 615t
respiratory distress syndrome, 615–617, 616f
retinopathy of prematurity, 618
Preterm prelabor rupture of membranes (PPROM), 790
bacterial vaginosis, 1217
gonorrhea, 1211
herpes simplex virus, 1216
inevitable abortion of previable fetus, 202–203
management, 798–802
antimicrobial therapy, 801
chorioamnionitis, clinical, 801
corticosteroid therapy, 801–802
diagnosis, 798
expectant management, 800–801
general scheme, 798, 799t
hospitalization, 799
intentional delivery, 800
natural history, 798, 799f
molecular changes, 790
multifetal gestation, 855
placental abruption risk, 752
at previable gestational age, 202–203
Prevotella vaginosis, 1216
Primary ovarian insufficiency, Turner syndrome, 36
Primary thrombocytosis, 1060
Primipara, 177
Primordian germ cell, 32f, 33
Prior cesarean delivery, 571–581. See also Cesarean delivery, prior
Proangiogenic placental growth factor, multifetal gestation, 845
Proatrial natriuretic peptide, preeclampsia, 61

Probable migraine, 1127
Probenecid, hemolysis from, 1051
Prochlorperazine
for hyperemesis gravidarum, 1015, 1015f, 1016t
for migraine, 1128, 1128t
Progesterone
deficiency, recurrent miscarriage, 205
lactation, 640
leiomyoma growth, 1167
for multifetal gestation
preterm, 854
vaginal micronized, 854
placental production, 100–101, 100f
pregnancy, 399
tubal pregnancy, 224
uterine quiescence, 655
withdrawal
labor, 399
parturition, 406, 795
Progestin-only contraceptives, 669–671
actions and side effects, 669
contraindications, 669
implants, 669–670, 670f
injectable, 670
pills, 670–671
Progestogen compounds, preterm birth prevention, 7, 795
prior preterm birth, 795–797
FDA recommendations, 796–797, 796f
metabolism, 795–796
MFMU Network trial, 795
pricing concerns, 795
PROLONG trial, 796, 796t
summary, 797–798
Progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis, 1032
Prolactin (PRL)
breast milk, 639
lactation, 640
maternal, 71
decidual, 85
Prolactin-inhibiting factor, lactation, 640
Prolactinomas, 1103, 1103f
Prolongation disorder (labor), 434, 435t
Prolonged pregnancy, 815–821. See also Postterm pregnancy
Prolonged QT-interval, maternal, 936

Promethazine
for hyperemesis gravidarum, 1015, 1015f, 1016t
for labor and delivery, 468–469
Pronephros, 133
Pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC), 99
Propranolol, for hypertension
chronic, 949, 949t
portal, 1041
Propylthiouracil (PTU)
adverse effects, pregnancy, 1091
for hyperthyroidism, 1091
Prostacyclin (PGI2), 65
preeclampsia, 693–694
Prostaglandin, 65
preeclampsia, 693–694
in TOLAC
for cervical ripening, 488t, 489–491, 489f, 490t, 578
for labor induction, 578
Prostaglandin E1
for cervical ripening, 488t, 490–491, 490t
in labor, 400
for labor induction/augmentation, 492
postterm pregnancy, 819
oral administration, 490–491
for uterine atony, 736
vaginal administration, 490
Prostaglandin E2, 403–404
administration, 490
for cervical ripening, 488t, 489–490, 489f
in labor, 400
for labor induction/augmentation, postterm pregnancy, 819
parturition phase 3, 413
side effects, 489–490
for uterine atony, 736
Prostaglandin F, for uterine atony, 736
Prostaglandin F2α, parturition phase 3, 413
Prostaglandin H synthase-1/2, 400, 400f
Prostaglandin inhibitors. See also specific types
for tocolysis, preterm labor, 806
Prostaglandins. See also specific types
amnionic, late pregnancy, 399, 399f
biosynthetic pathway, 400, 400f
parturition phase 3, 413, 413f

Protein, maternal pregnancy
excretion, 995
metabolism, 57
nutrition, 184t, 185
Protein (nutrition), fetal, 136
Protein C deficiency, 976–978
Protein S deficiency, 978
Proteinuria, 68, 69f
acute nephrotic syndromes, 1002
chronic kidney disease, 1003–1005
eclampsia, 718
glomerular disease, 1002
nephrotic syndromes, 1002
polycystic kidney disease, 1001
preeclampsia syndromes, 689t, 697, 1105
urinalysis, 995
Protein Z, 979
Proteoglycans, cervical ripening, 407
Proteus pyelonephritis, 997
Prothrombin G20210A mutation, 978–979
Prothrombin time (PT), obstetrical hemorrhage, 777
Protozoal infections, 1197–1200
amebiasis, 1200
malaria, 1198–1200, 1199f
toxoplasmosis, 1197–1198
Protraction disorder (labor), 434–435, 435t, 436
Provitamin A carotenoids, teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 155
Prune belly syndrome, 377
Prurigo gestationis, 1155t, 1156
Prurigo of pregnancy, 1155t, 1156
Pruritic folliculitis of pregnancy, 1155t, 1156
Pruritic urticarial papules and plaques of pregnancy (PUPP), 1155t, 1156, 1156f
Pseudofenestrated forceps blades, 537, 537f
Pseudogestational sac, 200, 223f
transvaginal sonography, 177, 222, 222f
Pseudohypoparathyroidism, imprinting, 322t
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, cystic fibrosis, 968
Pseudosinusoidal, 451
Pseudotumor cerebri, 1137–1138
Psoas abscess, puerperal, 657
Psoriasis, 1157
Psoriatic arthritis, 1109
Psychiatric disorders, 1142–1151. See also specific types
classification, 1144

eating, 1149–1150
in pregnancy, 1149–1150
evaluation and screening, perinatal, 1143–1144, 1143t
maternity blues, 1143
mood, 1144–1149
anxiety, 1148–1149
bipolar, 1146t, 1148
major depression, 1144–1148
postpartum psychosis, 1148
outcomes, pregnancy, 1144
personality, 1151
posttraumatic stress, 1150–1151
psychological adjustments, to pregnancy, 1142–1144, 1143t
puerperium, 1143
schizophrenia spectrum, 1149
stillbirth, stress, 1142
substance use, 1150
opioid use disorder, 1150
treatment, 1144
Psychiatric medications. See also specific types
teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 153
Psychosis
after eclampsia, 719
management, medical, 1145, 1146t, 1148
postpartum, 1148
Psychosocial screening, prenatal, 179
PTH-related protein (PTH-rP), 73, 1099
Ptyalism, 191
Pubis, 27, 28f
Pudendal artery, 13, 13f, 15, 17, 18, 19, 21, 22
Pudendal canal, 21
Pudendal nerve, 21–22, 21f
Pudendal nerve block, 21, 471
for labor and delivery, 472, 472f
Puerperal fever, 649–650
Puerperal hematomas, 740–742
diagnosis, 740–741, 741f
management, 741–742
risks, 740
types, 740, 741f
Puerperal infection, 649–660
breast infections, 659–660
abscess, 660
etiology, 660

management, 660
mastitis and suppurative mastitis, 659, 659f
definition, 649
pelvic infections, 649–659. See also under Pelvis
prophylaxis, perioperative for, 652–653, 652t
sepsis and septic shock, 890–891, 891f, 891t
susceptibility, 649
Puerperium, 413–414, 634–646. See also Fourth trimester; Postpartum; specific topics
blood and blood volume, 638–639
hematological and coagulation changes, 638
postpartum diuresis, 638–639
pregnancy-induced hypervolemia, 638, 638f
cardiovascular disease, maternal, 921
concerns, women’s, 634, 634t
contraception, 664
definition, 634
fourth trimester, 634–635, 635t
home care, 645–646
coitus, 645
follow-up, 645
hospital care, 642–645
bladder function, 643
contraception, 645
discharge, 645
general principles, 642–643
immunizations, 644
musculoskeletal injuries, 644, 644f
obstetrical neuropathies, 644
pain, mood, and cognition, 643–644
perineal care, 643
lactation and breastfeeding, 639–642
agalactia, 642
breast anatomy and secretory products, 639, 639f, 639t
breast care, 640–641
breast engorgement, 642
breastfeeding
contraindications, 641
drugs secreted in milk, 641–642
HIV-infected mothers, 641, 660
immunological consequences, 640
ten steps to successful, 640, 641t
galactocele, 642
inverted nipples, 642
lactation, 640, 640t, 641t

endocrinology, 640
osteoporosis, 642, 1100
milk line, 642
polygalactia, 642
polymastia, 642
polythelia, 642
mortality, maternal, 6–7
peritoneum and abdominal wall, 638
placental site involution, 636–637
hemorrhage, late postpartum, 637, 637f
subinvolution, 636–637, 637f
postpartum blues, 1143
psychiatric disorders, 1143
reproductive tract involution, 635–636, 635f
birth canal, 635
uterus, 635–636, 635f
stress, 1143
urinary tract, 637–638
Pulmonary. See also Lung
Pulmonary angiography
CT, 987–988, 988f
intravascular, 988
Pulmonary artery circulation, 987f
Pulmonary disorders, 956–970. See also specific types
asthma, 956–961
bronchitis, acute, 961
carbon monoxide poisoning, 969–970
cystic fibrosis, 968–969, 969t
pneumonia, 961–965
sarcoidosis, 967–968, 968t
tuberculosis, 965–967
Pulmonary edema, acute, 883–884, 883t
cardiogenic hydrostatic, 883–884
diagnosis, 884
management, 884
severe preeclampsia and eclampsia, 724
noncardiogenic permeability, 883, 883t
Pulmonary embolism, 986–989
clinical presentation, 986
diagnosis
approach, 987
CT-pulmonary angiography, 987–988, 988f
intravascular pulmonary angiography, 988
ventilation-perfusion scintigraphy lung scan, 988

management
anticoagulation, 982t, 988
embolectomy, 989
thrombolysis, 988–989
vena caval filters, 988
massive and submassive, 986–987, 987f
mortality, maternal, 986
pulmonary artery circulation, 987f
Pulmonary function. See also specific parameters
maternal, 65–67, 66f
Pulmonary gas exchange, newborn transition to, 586–587
Pulmonary hypertension, maternal, 930–932
classification, clinical, 930, 931t
definition, 930
diagnosis and prognosis, 930
management, 931–932
pregnancy, 930–931, 931f
Pulmonary hypoplasia, fetal anatomy, 286
Pulmonary sequestration, fetal, 288, 289f
percutaneous thoracic shunt for, 376, 376f
Pulmonary surfactant, 130, 131, 587
fetal, 408
parturition phase 2, 408
for respiratory distress syndrome, preterm newborn, 617
Pulmonary valvuloplasty, fetal, 378
Pulmonic stenosis, maternal, 925t, 927
Pulsed-wave Doppler, 261–262
Pulseless disease, 1120
Pulse oximetry, fetal, 456
Pulse rate, resting, 916
Purpura fulminans, 130, 776
Purtscher retinopathy, 65, 66f
Pushing, 410
efforts, maternal disorders, 437
Pustular psoriasis of pregnancy, 1157, 1157f
Pyelography, 995
Pyelonephritis, acute
pregestational diabetes, 1076
pregnancy, 995, 997–998, 998t
puerperal, 650
Pyoderma faciale, 1158
Pyogenic granuloma, 1157–1158, 1157f
Pyramidalis muscle, 12, 13f
Pyridostigmine, for myasthenia gravis, 1135

Pyropoikilocytosis, 1052
Pyrosis, 70, 1017
Pyruvate kinase deficiency, 1052
red cell alloimmunization, 352

Q
QT-interval prolongation, maternal, 936
Quadruple marker (quad), 338
Quetelet index, 902
Quetiapine, teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 153
Quiescence, uterine, 652–656
Quiescent hCG, 242
Quinacrine pellets, for sterilization, 685
Quinidine, hemolysis from, 1051

R
Race/ethnicity
mortality rate, maternal, 5, 5f
placental abruption, 751
twinning, 839
Radiation
definition, 870
dose, 870, 871t
maternal, 872, 872t
relative effective, 870, 871t
exposure, 870, 871t
Radiation, maternal
cancer therapy, 1163
diagnostic, 873–875, 873t, 874f, 874t
computed tomography, 873–875, 874f, 874t
contrast agents, radiographic, 875
fluoroscopy and angiography, 873, 873t
nuclear medicine studies, 875, 876t
radiographs, 873
fetal exposure, 871–872, 872t
ionizing, 870–871, 871t
pelvis, on fertility and future pregnancy, 1164
prior abdominopelvic, on neonatal outcomes, 1164
therapeutic, 873
Radical hysterectomy, 548
Radioactive isotypes, breast milk, 641–642
Radiography, maternal, 870–875
deterministic effects, 871–872, 871t

diagnostic radiation, 873–875, 873t, 874f, 874t
computed tomography, 873–875, 874f, 874t
contrast agents, radiographic, 875
fluoroscopy and angiography, 873, 873t
nuclear medicine studies, 875, 876t
radiographs, 873
dosimetry, x-ray, 872, 872t
heart, pregnancy, 918
ionizing radiation, 870–871, 871t
stochastic effects, 872
therapeutic radiation, 873
Radioiodine
teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 156
for thyroid cancer, on pregnancy, 1174
Radiopharmaceuticals, maternal, 875, 876t
Rapid influenza diagnostic tests (RIDTs), 1187
Rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis, 1002
Rapid plasma reagin (RPR) testing, 1208
RASopathies, nonimmune hydrops fetalis, 362
Rathke pouch, 133
Raynaud phenomenon, 1118–1119
Reactive nonstress test, 387–388, 387f
Reactive thrombocytosis, 1060
Recall bias, 146
Reciprocal translocations, 315, 317f
Recombinant activated factor VII, for obstetrical hemorrhage, 773
Recreational drugs. See also specific types
in breast milk, 641–642
preconceptual counseling, 169–170
in pregnancy, 180
Rectus abdominis muscle, 12, 13f
Recurrent pregnancy loss, 198, 203–205. See also Miscarriage, recurrent
Red blood cell
enzymopathies, red cell alloimmunization, 352
fetal, 128–129, 128t
transfusions, prophylactic, for sickle-cell, 1054
Red cell alloimmunization, 352–357
ABO blood group incompatibility, 354–355
alloimmunization
anti-D alloimmunization prevention, 356–357
Kell, 354, 355
to minor antigens, 354
blood groups systems and erythrocyte antigens, 352
causes, 352

CDE (Rh) blood group incompatibility, 353–354, 354t
critical titer, 353
grandmother effect, 354
hemolytic disease of the fetus and newborn, 352
management, pregnancy, 355–356
fetal blood transfusion, 352, 356
fetal risk assessment, 355
middle cerebral artery Doppler velocimetry, 355–356, 356f
outcomes, 356
parvovirus B19, 352
prevalence, 353
red cell antigens and fetal hemolytic disease, 353, 353t
screening, prenatal, 353
α0-thalassemia, 352
Reduction, selective, multifetal gestation, 858, 859
Reflux nephropathy, 998
Regional blocks, 472
Regulatory proteins. See also specific types
maternal, 62
Reiter disease, 1109
Relative effective dose, 870, 871t
Relaxin, 54, 99
Relaxin family peptide receptor 1 (RXFP1), 404
Remifentanil, for labor and delivery, 469, 469t
Remnants, umbilical cord, 114
Renal. See also Kidneys
Renal agenesis, 299–300, 300f
renal pelvis dilatation, 298–299, 299f, 299t
Renal and urinary tract disorders, 994–1007
acute kidney injury, 1005–1007, 1007f
chronic kidney disease, 1003–1005
classification, 1003
reproductive-aged women, 1003
chronic kidney disease, pregnancy, 1003–1005
blood volume expansion, 1004, 1004f
chronic renal insufficiency, 1004–1005, 1005f
dialysis, 1005, 1006t
long-term effects, 1005
management, 1005
outcomes, 1004, 1005f, 1006t
renal disease with preserved function, 1004, 1004t
glomerular diseases, 1001–1003
acute nephritic syndromes, 1001t, 1002
classification, 1001

glomerulonephritis, 1001
syndromes, 1001–1002, 1001t
nephrotic syndromes, 1001t, 1002–1003, 1002t, 1003f
lower urinary tract lesions, 1007
nephrolithiasis, 995, 998–1000, 999f
polycystic kidney disease, 1001
pregnancy
renal function assessment, 994–995
after renal transplantation, 1000–1001
urinary tract changes, 994–995
urinary tract infections, 995–998
bacteruria, asymptomatic, 995, 996–997, 996t
cystitis and urethritis, 995, 997
organisms and adhesins, 995
pyelonephritis, acute, 995, 997–998, 998t
reflux nephropathy, 998
risk factors, 995–996
Renal anomalies, müllerian abnormalities with, 40, 40t
Renal disorders. See also specific types
hypertrophy, 994
imaging, 995
incidence, 994
urinalysis, 994–995
Renal failure
acute kidney injury, 1005–1007, 1007f
obstructive, 1007, 1007f
Renal function
maternal, multifetal gestation, 843
tests. See also specific types
maternal, 68
preeclampsia syndrome prediction, 703
serum and blood constituents, 1232t
Renal insufficiency
chronic, pregnancy, 1004–1005, 1005f
fetal-growth restriction, 827
Renal pelvis dilatation, 298–299, 299f, 299t
Renal plasma flow, 68
Renal transplantation, pregnancy after, 1000–1001
Renal vascular resistance, fetal, 133
Renin, 65
preeclampsia syndrome, 61
Reproductive history, preconceptual counseling, 168
Reproductive tract, male, 685, 685f
Reproductive tract, maternal, 51–55

cervix, 53
fallopian tubes, 54
ovaries, 53–54
relaxin, 54
theca-lutein cysts, 54
uterus, 51–53
cervix, 53, 53f
contractility, 52
shape and position, 52
uteroplacental blood flow, 52
uteroplacental blood flow regulation, 52–53
vagina and perineum, 54–55
pelvic organ prolapse, 54–55
Reproductive tract involution, puerperium, 635–636, 635f
birth canal, 635
uterus, 635–636, 635f
Reproductive tract neoplasms, 1164–1172. See also specific types
adnexal cysts, 1171–1172
cervix, 1164–1167
ovary, 1169–1171
uterus, 1167–1169
vulva and vagina, 1172
Residual volume, 65, 956
Resistin, 53
Respiratory acidemia, newborn, 591, 593
Respiratory distress syndrome (RDS)
immature birth, 130
newborn, 599, 600
preterm birth, corticosteroids for, 802–803
preterm newborn, 615–617, 616f
clinical course, 616, 616f
etiopathogenesis, 615–616
prevention, 617
surfactant prophylaxis and rescue, 617
treatment, 616–617
Respiratory distress syndrome, fetal, pregestational diabetes, 1073
Respiratory failure, 957f, 961
Respiratory tract
fetal development
anatomical maturation, 130–131
breathing, 131
pulmonary surfactant, 130, 131, 408
maternal, 65–67
acid–base equilibrium, 67

diaphragm, 65, 66f
oxygen delivery, 67
pulmonary function, 65–67, 66f
subcostal angle and chest wall measurements, 65, 66f
Resting minute ventilation, 66
Restitution, 421f, 423
Restrictive cardiomyopathy, maternal, 934
Resuscitation, newborn
delivery room, 587–588, 588f
delivery room, protocol, 588–590, 588f
alternative airway, 589–590
bag-mask ventilation, 589, 589f
chest compressions, 590
initial assessment, 588–589, 588f
mask ventilation, 589, 589t
resuscitation discontinuation, 590
for nonreassuring fetal status, 458–459, 459t
Resuscitative endovascular balloon occlusion of the aorta (REBOA), 780
Retained products of conception, 636, 637f
Reticulocytes, fetal, 128
Retinal detachment, preeclampsia syndromes, 65
Retinoblastoma, 316t
Retinoic acid embryopathy, 154, 154f
Retinoic acid syndrome, 1176
Retinoids
for dermatologic disorders, 1159, 1159t
teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 154–155
Retinol, teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 155
Retinopathy
background (nonproliferative), 1074
maternal diabetic, pregestational diabetes, 1074–1075
preproliferative, 1074
Purtscher, 65, 66f
Retinopathy of prematurity, 618
RET proto-oncogene, 319
Retraction ring
complications, 443
pathological, 409f, 410
physiological, 409f, 410
Retroflexion, uterine, 46, 46f
Retrolental fibroplasia. See Retinopathy of prematurity
Retroplacental hematoma, 111, 749–750
Reversible cerebral vasoconstriction syndrome, persistent severe postpartum hypertension, 725
RF-seronegative spondyloarthropathies, 1109

Rh blood group incompatibility, 353–354, 354t
RHCE, 353
RHD, 353
Rh D genotyping, 327, 328, 328f, 357
Rheumatoid arthritis, 1117–1118
juvenile, 1118
Rheumatoid factor, 1109
Rhizomelia, 301, 302
Ribavirin, teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 152
Rib fracture, newborn, 610
Rifampin, 1032
hemolysis from, 1051
for tuberculosis, multidrug-resistant, 967
Rifamycin, for tuberculosis, 965
Right iliac artery ligation, 779, 779f
Right occiput transverse, 418–419, 418f, 420
Right ventricle
dysplasia, arrhythmogenic, maternal, 934
outflow tract view, fetal heart, 290f, 291
Ring chromosome, 317–318
Ring of fire, 224
Ripening, cervical, 406–407
endocervical epithelia, 407
glycosaminoglycans, 406–407
induction, 407
inflammatory changes, 407
proteoglycans, 407
Risk information, pregnancy medication exposure, 147–148
Risperidone
for psychosis, 1145, 1146t
teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 153
Ritgen maneuver, 499, 499f
Ritodrine, for tocolysis, preterm labor, 805
Robertsonian translocations, 315–317, 317f
Roberts syndrome, limb-reduction defects, 304
Robert uterus, 45
Roe v. Wade, 208
Rohr stria, 85
Rooming in, 596
Rosacea fulminans, 1158
Rosette test, 357
Rotation
external, 421f, 423
internal, 420–421, 422f

operative vaginal delivery, 533, 534t
Rotational thromboelastometry (ROTEM), for obstetrical hemorrhage, 774, 774f
Round ligament, 22f, 23
Roux-en-Y gastric bypass, 910, 910t
RU-486, 406
for Cushing syndrome, 1102
on parturition, 399
Rubella, 1190–1191
congenital rubella syndrome, 146
fetal-growth restriction, 828
Rubenstein-Taybi syndrome, 316t
Rubeola, 1189–1190
Rubin maneuver, 502, 503f
Rumack-Matthew nomogram, 1041
Rupture, ectopic pregnancy, 221
Ruptured membranes, labor. See also Preterm prelabor rupture of membranes (PPROM)
first stage, 428–429
initial evaluation, 426–427
premature, at term, 437–438
preterm prelabor rupture of membranes, 202–203, 790, 798–802. See also Preterm prelabor rupture
of membranes (PPROM)
Russell-Silver syndrome, imprinting, 322t

S
Sacculation, uterine, 46, 46f
Sacrococcygeal teratoma, 280, 281f
open surgery for, fetal, 373
Sacroiliac joint, 28
Sacrum, 27, 28f
Safety bundles, 6
Saline infusion sonography (SIS), 42
Salivation, profuse, 191
Salmonella diarrhea, acute, 1018, 1019t
Salmonella enteritidis, 1196–1197
Salmonella typhimurium, 1196–1197
Salmonellosis, 1196–1197
Salpingectomy
for ectopic pregnancy, 226–227
on interstitial pregnancy risk, 227
for sterilization, 681–683, 684f
Salpingitis, after tubal sterilization, 683
Salpingo-oophorectomy, peripartum hysterectomy, 563
Salpingostomy, for ectopic pregnancy, 226–227
Saltatory fetal heart rate, 453, 454f

Salt-restricted diet, for preeclampsia syndrome prevention, 1105
Salt-wasting adrenal crisis, 369
Sampson artery, 23, 24
Sarcoidosis, 967–968, 968t
SARS-CoV-2 (COVID-19), 1187–1189, 1187f, 1188f
diagnosis, 1189
fetal infection, 1188–1189, 1188f
management, 1189
maternal infection, 1188, 1188f
newborn preventive care, 594–595
pandemic, 6
pneumonia, 964–965
preterm birth, 792
prevention/vaccination, 1189
Scalp
blood sampling, fetal, 455
stimulation, fetal, 455–456
Scarpa fascia, 12, 18, 18f
Schirodkar cerclage, modified, 206–207, 207f
Schizencephaly, 280, 280f
Schizophrenia spectrum disorders, 1149
Schultze mechanism, 412, 734
Scleroderma, 1118–1119
Scleroderma renal crisis, 1119
Screening tests
genetic, 324
newborn, 594, 594t
preconceptual, 170, 171t–172t
Seafood consumption, pregnancy nutrition, 188
Seat-belt position, 892, 893f
Secondary attack rate, 1182
Secondary postpartum hemorrhage, 637
Secondary thrombocytosis, 1060
Second stage of labor
cesarean delivery, acute perinatal injury, 536
characteristics, 425
fetal heart rate monitoring, 454, 455f
management, 429–430, 429f
Second-trimester aneuploidy screening
analyte-based, 338–339
contingent sequential screening, 339
estriol, low maternal, 338–339
integrated screening, 339
MSAFP and neural-tube defects, 338, 338t

quadruple marker (quad), 338
sequential, 339
stepwise sequential screening, 339
ultrasound, 340f, 340t, 341–342, 341t. See also Ultrasound analyte-based aneuploidy screening
Segmentation-fusion defects, 281–282, 282f
Seizure disorders, 1128–1130
cerebral palsy, 605
classification, 1128–1129
eclampsia, 717–718, 718f
sudden death, 718
encephalopathy, neonatal, 605
management, 1129–1130, 1130t
neuroprophylaxis, severe preeclampsia and eclampsia, 721–722, 722t
pathophysiology, 1128
preconceptional counseling, 166, 166t, 1129
pregnancy complications, 1129
Selective fetal-growth restriction (sFGR), 852
Selective laser photocoagulation, for twin-twin transfusion syndrome, 374, 374f
Selective norepinephrine-reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs), teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 154
Selective reduction, multifetal gestation, 858, 859
Selective serotonin-reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs)
for anxiety disorders, 1146t, 1149
for depression, 1145, 1146t
fetal and neonatal effects, 1147
teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 154
Selective termination, multifetal gestation, 858, 859
Sellick maneuver, 481
SEM disease, 1214
Semilobar holoprosencephaly, 279
Sensescent-associated secretory phenotype (SASP), 408
Sensitivity
aneuploidy screening, 334
cell-free DNA, 335
Sentinel bleed, placenta previa, 757
Sentinel events, 602
Sepsis and septic shock, 887–891
clinical manifestations, 888–889, 888f, 888t
definition and terminology, 887
etiopathogenesis, 887–888, 887f
hemorrhage, obstetrical, 776
management, 889–891, 890f
adjunctive therapy, 891
puerperal infections, 890–891, 891f, 891t
surgical treatment, 889–891

phases, 889
spectrum, 887, 887f
Septate uterus (class IV), 41f, 44–45, 44f
Septic abortion, 203
intrauterine devices, 666
Septic cardiomyopathy, 888
Septicemia, obstetrical hemorrhage, 776
Septic pelvic thrombophlebitis, puerperal, 657, 658f
Sequential screening, aneuploidy, 339
Serological weak D phenotypes, 357
Serotonin, lactation, 640
Serous retinal detachment, preeclampsia syndromes, 65
Sertraline, for depression, 1145–1147, 1146t
Serum and blood constituents, 1227t–1232t
autoimmune and inflammatory mediators, 1231t
blood chemical, 1229t
blood gas, 1232t
cardiac, 1231t
coagulation, 1228t
hematology, 1227t
lipids, 1231t
metabolic and endocrine tests, 1230t
renal function tests, 1232t
sex hormones, 1231t
vitamins and minerals, 1230t
Severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) pneumonia, 964–965
Severe maternal morbidity (SMM), 5–6, 5t, 6f, 882
indicator, blood transfusion need, 733
Severe sepsis. See Sepsis and septic shock
Sevoflurane, for labor and delivery, 481
Sex chromosome. See also specific types
45,X (Turner syndrome), 313–314
47,XXX, 314
47,XXY (Klinefelter syndrome), 314
abnormalities, 313–314
aneuploidy, 36, 237f
imaging, obstetrical, 249–250, 252, 258, 262
aneuploidy screening, 333, 333f
analyte-based, 336–337
cell-free DNA, 335, 335t
ovotesticular disorders of sex development, 37
Sex chromosome disorders of sex development, 36–37
45,X, 36–37
47,XXX, 37

47,XYY, 37
aneuploidy, 36, 237f
obstetrical imaging, 249–250, 252, 258, 262
mixed gonadal dysgenesis, 37
ovotesticular, 37
Sex-determining region (SRY) gene, 34, 37
Sex development disorders, 35–39. See also Disorders of sex development (DSD)
Sex hormones. See also specific types
serum and blood, 1231t
steroid, in labor, 399–400
teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 155
Sexual assault, 892, 892t
Sexual differentiation, 34–35, 35t
müllerian-inhibiting substance, 35
sex-determining region (SRY) gene, 34
Sexually transmitted infections (STIs), 1206–1223. See also specific types
chlamydia, 1212–1213
gonorrhea, 593, 1211–1212
herpes simplex virus, 1213–1216
human immunodeficiency virus, 181, 641, 660, 892t, 967, 1219–1223
human papillomavirus, 1165, 1216
prophylaxis, after sexual assault, 892, 892t
screening and diagnosis, 1206
syphilis, 1206–1211
fetal-growth restriction, 828
testing, stillbirth evaluation, 627
transmission
horizontal, 1206
vertical, 1206
vaginitis, 1216–1219
bacterial vaginosis, 1216–1217, 1217f
candidiasis, 1218–1219, 1219t
trichomoniasis, 653, 892t, 1217–1218, 1218t
Shapes, pelvic, 28–29, 29f
Sharp dilation and curettage (D & C), 210, 211f
Sheehan syndrome, 640, 1104
on lactation, 640
placental abruption, 754
Shigellosis (Shigella), 1197
Shingles, 1186
Shock
hypovolemic obstetrical, 770–771
septic, 887–891. See also Sepsis and septic shock
Short-acting β-agonists (SABA), for asthma, 959, 959f, 960t

Short T1 inversion recovery MRI, 266
Shoulder delivery
partial breech extraction, 524, 524f, 525f
vaginal technique, 499–500
Shoulder dystocia, 423
gestational diabetes mellitus, labor induction prophylaxis, 1084
macrosomia, 834, 834t
pregestational diabetes, 1072
vacuum extraction and forceps delivery, 536
vaginal delivery, 501–504
all-fours maneuver, 503
anterior clavicle fracture, deliberate, 503
cleidotomy, 504
management, 502–504, 502f–503f
maternal and neonatal consequences, 501
McRoberts maneuver, 502, 502f
posterior axilla sling traction, 503
prediction and prevention, 501–502
Rubin maneuver, 502, 503f
shoulder delivery, posterior, 502, 503f
symphysiotomy, 503–504
Zavanelli maneuver, 504
Shoulder presentation, 426
Shprintzen syndrome. See 22q11.2 microdeletion syndrome
Shunts. See also specific types
ventricular, maternal, 1138
Sickle-cell crisis, 1054
Sickle-cell hemoglobinopathy, 1053–1054
carrier screening, 343
pathophysiology, 1053–1054, 1053f
treatment, 1054
Sickle-cell syndromes
complications, 1054–1055
fetal assessment, 1055
labor and delivery, 1055
morbidity and mortality, 1054, 1054t
prophylactic red cell transfusions, 1055
Sickle-cell trait, 1055–1056
Sickle hemoglobinopathy, carrier screening, 343
Sighs, antepartum fetal, 385
Simple hysterectomy, 548
Simpson forceps, 537f
Sinciput presentation, 417, 418f
Single functional ventricle, maternal, 929

Single intrauterine fetal demise (sIUFD), 852–853
Single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP), 308
Singleton breech delivery, 518–529
Single umbilical artery, 114
Single ventricle palliation, 292
Sino-implant III, 669
Sinovaginal bulbs, 32f, 33
Sinusoidal heart rate, fetal, 448t, 450f, 451
Sinus tachycardia, fetal, 368
Sirenomelia, 280–281, 281f
Size
fetal, trial of labor after cesarean, 577
maternal, twinning, 839–840
Sjögren syndrome, autoimmune hepatitis, 1039
Skeletal anatomy, pelvic, 27–29
bones and joints, 27–28, 27f
pelvic shapes, 28–29, 29f
planes and diameters, 28, 28f
midpelvis and pelvic outlet, 28, 28f
pelvic inlet, 27f, 28
Skeletal deformations, 301
Skeletal disruptions, 301
Skeleton, fetal, 301–304
clubfoot, 303, 303f
dysplasias, 301–302, 302f, 302t
examination, 301, 302t
limb-reduction defects, 303–304, 304f
polydactyly, 302–303, 303f
Skene glands, 15f, 16
Skin, maternal, 55
abdominal wall, 12, 13f, 55
hair changes, 55
hyperpigmentation, 55
vascular changes, 55
Skin, newborn care, 595
Skin-to-skin contact, immediate postpartum, 508
Skull
fetal, anatomy, 534, 534f
fractures, newborn, 609, 609f
Sleep, maternal, 75, 192
Sling traction, posterior axilla, 503
Sludge, gallbladder, 70
Small bowel and colon disorders, 1018–1025
appendicitis, 1023–1025, 1024f

antimicrobial vs. surgical treatment, 1024
diagnosis, 1023–1024, 1024f
incidence, 1023
management, 1024
outcomes, pregnancy, 1025
colonic pseudoobstruction, 1023, 1023f
diarrhea, acute, 1018–1020, 1019t
Clostridioides difficile, 1019–1020, 1019f, 1019t
inflammatory bowel disease, 1020–1022
Crohn disease, 1019f, 1020, 1020t
fertility and, 1021
pregnancy and, 1021–1022, 1021t
ulcerative colitis, 1019f, 1020, 1020t
intestinal obstruction, 1022–1023
ostomy and pregnancy, 1022
Small for gestational age (SGA), 825–826, 825f
Barker hypothesis, 831–832
prevention, 832
Small-molecule inhibitors, 1163–1164
Smallpox, 1200
Small vessel vasculitides, 1119
Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome, 338–339
Smith-Magenis syndrome, 316t
Smoking
on fetal growth, 828, 832
first-trimester spontaneous abortion, 200
placental abruption risk, 752
placenta previa risk, 756
preconceptual counseling, 169–170
prenatal record, 179–180, 180t
teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 156–157
Smoking cessation, on fetal-growth restriction, 832
Social history, preconceptual counseling
diet, 170
environmental exposures, 170
exercise, 170
intimate-partner violence, 170
LGBTQ individuals, 170
recreational drugs and smoking, 169–170
Socioeconomics, fetal-growth restriction, 827
Sodium
escape, 949
maternal, 58–59
Softening, cervical, 405–406, 405f

Soft tissue injuries, newborn, 610
Solomon technique, 374, 849
Soluble endoglin
multifetal gestation, 845
preeclampsia, 694, 694f, 695
Soluble fms-like tyrosine kinase 1 (sFLT-1), 52–53, 692, 694–695, 694f
multifetal gestation, 845
Somatostatin, 96t, 98
Sonography. See Ultrasonography
Sotalol, fetal administration, 368
Spastic diplegia, 602, 620
Spastic hemiplegia, 602, 620
Spastic quadriplegia, 602, 620
Specificity, aneuploidy screening, 334–335
Spermicides, 675–676
contraceptive sponge, 675–676
diaphragm plus, 674
effectiveness, 665t
vaginal contraceptive gel, 675
Spherocytosis, hereditary, red cell alloimmunization, 352
Sphincter urethrae, 19, 19f
Spina bifida, 277, 277f
Spinal analgesia, 472
Spinal (subarachnoid) block, 472–475
cesarean delivery, 472
complications, 473–474, 473t
arachnoiditis and meningitis, 474
bladder dysfunction, 474
convulsions, 474
high spinal blockade, 474
postdural puncture headache, 474
contraindications, 474–475, 475t
vaginal delivery, 472
Spinal cord
development, fetal, 126
injury, 1137
newborn, 609
Spinal-epidural technique, combined, 473f, 479
Spinal muscular atrophy, carrier screening, 343
Spiral arteries
invasion, 90
preeclampsia syndromes, 66
Spironolactone, for aldosteronism, 1103
Splanchnic nerves, 25f, 26

Spleen
fetal, 295, 295f
maternal, 62
Sponge, contraceptive, 675–676
Spontaneous abortion
clinical classification, 200–203
anti-D immunoglobulin, 203
complete abortion, 201, 201f, 201t
incomplete abortion, 201
inevitable abortion of previable fetus, 202–203
missed abortion, 201–202, 202t
septic abortion, 203
threatened abortion, 200–201, 200f
definition, 198
diagnosis guidelines, 202t
multifetal gestation, 843–844
pregestational diabetes, 1070
subcategories, 198
Spontaneous abortion, first-trimester, 198–203
diagnosis guidelines, 202t
fetal factors, 199
incidence, 199
maternal factors
behavioral, 200. See also Alcohol; Cigarette smoking; Smoking
environmental, 200. See also Teratogenic and fetotoxic agents
medical disorders, 199
nutrition, 200
surgical procedures, 199–200
miscarriage, recurrent, 198, 203–205
pathogenesis, 198–199
Spontaneous breech delivery, vaginal, 523
Spontaneous failure, ectopic pregnancy, 221
Spontaneous preterm labor, 788–790
Standard days method, 675
STAN system, 456–457
Staphylococcus
diarrhea, 1018, 1019t
endocarditis, 934
Staphylococcus aureus, 1196
breast infections, 660
cystic fibrosis, 968
endocarditis, 934
pyelonephritis, 997
sepsis, 888

toxic shock syndrome, puerperal, 659
Staphylococcus epidermidis endocarditis, 934
Stargazing fetus, 518–519
Statins, on preeclampsia risk, 1106
Station, 411
assessment, 427
operative vaginal delivery, 533, 534t
Status asthmaticus, 957f, 961
Status epilepticus, 1129
eclampsia, 718
Sterilization, 681–685
complications, long-term
contraceptive failure, 683–684
regrets, 684
salpingitis, 683
sexual interest/pleasure, 684
tubal sterilization reversal, 684
interval, 681
puerperal, 681
transcervical, 684–685
tubal
nonpuerperal, 681, 683
puerperal, 681–683, 682f–684f
vasectomy, 685, 685f
Steroids. See also specific types
placental production, 95, 96t
Steroid sulfatase deficiency, 316t, 339
Stillbirth, 624–625, 625f. See also Death, fetal
definitions, 3
distribution, by weeks gestation, 624, 624f
etiologies, 625, 625t
evaluation, stillborn fetus, 626–628, 627f
autopsy, 628
clinical, 626
laboratory, 626–628
hypertension, chronic, 952
macrosomia, 834, 834t
mortality epochs, 625, 625f
obesity and, 906
perinatal care, 628
prior (pregnancy after), 628–629, 628f, 629t
rates, changes, 629
reporting requirements, 624
risk factors, 625–626, 626t

stress, 1142
Stochastic effects, maternal radiography, 872
Stomach, fetal
anatomy, 295, 295f
emptying, 132
Stones, gallbladder, 70
Stools, newborn care, 595
Streak gonad, 35
Streptococcal toxic shock syndrome, puerperal, 659
Streptococcus
acute poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis, 1002
group A, 1194
group B, 1194–1195, 1194t, 1195t
uterine infections, 651
Streptococcus agalactiae, 1194
Streptococcus group B, pyelonephritis, 997
Streptococcus pneumoniae
endocarditis, 934
pneumonia, 962–963, 963t
Streptococcus pyogenes, 1194
toxic shock syndrome, septic abortion, 203
Stress
definition, 790
maternal-fetal, 790–791
puerperium, 1143
stillbirth, 1142
Stress dose, 1102
Stress urinary incontinence, 54, 638
Stretch marks, 55
Striae gravidarum, 55, 638
Striated urogenital sphincter complex, 19f
Strictures, umbilical cord, 116
Stroke
hemorrhagic, 1131f, 1131t, 1133–1134
arteriovenous malformations, 1131f, 1133–1134
intracerebral, 1131f, 1133, 1133f
intracranial aneurysm, 1131f, 1133
neonatal, 607t, 608
subarachnoid, 1133–1134
ischemic, 1131–1133, 1131f, 1131t
cerebral artery thrombosis, 1131f, 1132
cerebral embolism, 1132
cerebral venous thrombosis, 1132
preeclampsia syndrome, 1132

recurrence, 1132–1133
Stroke volume
maternal, 62, 62f, 63f
pregnancy, 916
ST segment-elevation MI (STEMI)., 938
Stuart-Prower factor deficiency, 1063
Stuck twin, 848
Subamnionic hematoma, 111
Subarachnoid hemorrhage, 1133–1134, 1147t
arteriovenous malformations, 1133–1134, 1147f
intracranial aneurysm, 1133, 1147f
newborn, 607t, 608, 618
Subchorial thrombus, 111
Subchorionic fibrin deposition, 110
Subchorionic hematoma
massive, 110t, 111
threatened miscarriage, 200, 200f
Subcostal angle, 65, 66f
Subcostal nerve, 14, 14f
Subcutaneous layer, anterior abdominal wall, 12, 13f
Subgaleal hemorrhage
newborn, 608–609, 608f
perinatal, vacuum extraction, 535–536
Subinvolution, placental site, 636–637, 637f
Suboptimally dated pregnancy, 248
Subsequent-pregnancy morbidity, operative vaginal delivery, 535
Subsequent visits
laboratory tests, 182–183
genetic screening, 183
gestational diabetes, 183
group B streptococcal infection, 183
neural-tube defects, 183. See also Neural-tube defects (NTDs)
surveillance, 181–182. See also Prenatal surveillance
Substance use disorders, 157–159, 1150. See also specific drugs
on fetal growth, 828
opioid use disorder, 1150
Succentriate lobes
placenta, 108, 108f, 110t
retention, 735
Succinylcholine, for intubation, labor and delivery, 481
Suicide, from major depression, 1148
Sulfasalazine, for inflammatory bowel disease, 1021
Sulfatase deficiency, fetal-placental, 102
Sulfonamides, teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 151–152

Sumatriptan
for cluster headache, 1128
for migraine, 1128, 1128t
Superfecundation, 840
Superfetation, 840
Superficial circumflex artery, 13, 13f
Superficial circumflex iliac artery, 13, 13f
Superficial epigastric artery, 13, 13f
Superficial external pudendal arteries, 13, 13f
Superficial space, urogenital triangle, 17–18, 18f
Superficial transverse perineal muscles, 17–18, 18f, 19f
Superficial venous thrombophlebitis, 986
Superimposed preeclampsia
adverse pregnancy effects, 947–948, 947f
management, 951–952
Superior hypogastric plexus, 25, 25f
Superior strait, 28
Supermorbid obesity, 902
Supine hypotensive syndrome, 64
Supracervical hysterectomy, 547–548, 563
Supralevator hematoma, 740
Suprapubic pressure, McRoberts maneuver, 502, 502f
Supraventricular arrhythmias, fetal, 450
Supraventricular tachycardia
ductus venosus Doppler velocimetry, 391–392
fetal, 192f, 295, 295f, 367–368
maternal, 935–936
Surfactant, pulmonary, 130, 131, 587
fetal, 408
parturition phase 2, 408
for respiratory distress syndrome, preterm newborn, 617
Surfactant protein A (SP-A), 408
Surfactant protein B mutation, 600
Surfactant protein C mutation, 600
Surgery, maternal. See also specific types
cancer, 1162–1163
cardiac, 923
laparoscopic, 867–870, 868t
nonobstetrical, 867, 867t
Surveillance, prenatal care, subsequent visits, 181–182
Survival motor neuron (SMN1) gene, 343
Suspensory ligament of the ovary, 23
Swallowing, fetal, 131–132
Swansea criteria, 1034–1035, 1034t

Swyer syndrome, 37
Sympathetic nerves, pelvic, 25, 25f
Symphysiotomy, shoulder dystocia, 503–504
Symptothermal method, 675
Synclitism, 420, 422f
Syncytin, 86
Syncytiotrophoblast, 86–87, 87f
necrosis, 110, 110f
Syndrome X, nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, 1040
Synechiae, uterine, recurrent miscarriage, 204
Syphilis, 1206–1211
clinical manifestations
condylomata lata, 1207, 1207f
early-stage, 1207
latent, 1207
late-stage, 1207
maternal, staging and definitions, 1207, 1207f
primary, 1207, 1207f
secondary, 1207, 1207f
tertiary, 1207
congenital, 1207–1208, 1208f
diagnosis, 1208–1209, 1209t
fetal-growth restriction, 828
pathogenesis, 1206–1207
testing, stillbirth evaluation, 627
treatment, 1209–1211, 1210t
Systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS). See Sepsis and septic shock
Systemic lupus erythematosus, 1110–1114
autoantibodies, 1110, 1110t
clinical manifestations and diagnosis, 1110–1111, 1111t
congenital heart block, 1113
contraception, 1113–1114
lupus nephritis, 1112
lupus vs. preeclampsia-eclampsia, 1112
management, 1112
miscarriage, recurrent, 204, 205t
mortality and morbidity, perinatal, 1113
neonatal lupus syndrome, 1113
pharmacological treatment, 1112–1113
pregnancy and, 1111–1112, 1111t
prognosis, long-term, 1113
Systemic right ventricle, 929
Systemic sclerosis, 1118–1119
Systemic vascular resistance, puerperium, 638

Systolic-diastolic (S/D) ratio, 261–262

T
T3, 71–72, 72f
T3-toxicosis, 1091
T4, 71–72, 72f
TACE questions, 169–170
Tachyarrhythmias
definition, 367
fetal, 367, 368, 368f
monitoring, 449
nonimmune hydrops fetalis, 362
Tachypnea, transient of newborn, 587
Tachysystole, 463
Tacrolimus
for dermatologic disorders, 1159, 1159t
for inflammatory bowel disease, 1021
Takayasu arteritis, 1120
Takotsubo cardiomyopathy, maternal, 934
Talipes equinovarus, 303, 303f, 610
Tamoxifen, teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 152
Targeted therapy, cancer, 1163–1164
Tay-Sachs disease, 343, 344
genetic screening, prenatal, 168, 183
Tazarotene, for dermatologic disorders, 1159, 1159t
T cells, maternal decidua, 93
Telogen effluvium, 55
10-percent tumor, 1100
Tensile strength, amnion, 95
Tension headache, 1127
Ten Steps to Successful Breastfeeding, 640, 641t
Teratogenic and fetotoxic agents, 144–159, 144t. See also specific types
absolute risk, 148
alcohol, 146, 148–150, 149f, 149t
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, 150
angiotensin receptor blockers, 150
antiepileptics, 150
antifungals, 150–151
antiinflammatory agents
leflunomide, 151
NSAIDs, 151
antimicrobials and antivirals
nitrofurantoin, 151

ribavirin, 152
sulfonamides, 151–152
tetracyclines, 152
antineoplastics
cyclophosphamide, 152
methotrexate, 152
tamoxifen, 152
trastuzumab, 152
attributable risk, 148
Bendectin, 146
definition, 144–145
drugs of abuse, 157–159
cocaine, 157
marijuana, 157
methamphetamine, 157–158
opioids, 158–159
phencyclidine, 159
polysubstance abuse, 157
prevalence, 157
toluene, 159
endothelin-receptor antagonists, 153
herbal medicine products, 157, 158t
immunosuppressants
corticosteroids, 148, 153
mycophenolate mofetil, 153
lead, 153
lenalidomide, 155
low-risk, 148
mercury, 153
pomalidomide, 155
psychiatric medications
antipsychotics, 153
lithium, 153–154
selective serotonin- and norepinephrine-reuptake inhibitors, 154
retinoids
acitretin, 154
bexarotene, 154–155
isotretinoin, 155
retinoic acid embryopathy, 154, 154f
topical, 155
vitamin A, 155
sex hormones, 155
teratogenicity criteria, determining, 145–146, 145t
thalidomide, 146, 155

thyroid medications
methimazole, 155–156
radioiodine, 156
tobacco, 156–157
warfarin, 156, 156f
Teratology, 144–147
birth defects
etiology, 144, 145f
prevalence, 144
definition and history, 144–145
embryonic period, 122–124, 122f–124f, 145
fetal period, 145
medication exposure, counseling, 147–148
preimplantation period, 145
studies
case-control, 146
case reports and series, 146
cohort, 147
National Birth Defects Prevention Study, 146–147
pregnancy registries, 147
teratogenicity, criteria, 145–146, 145t
Terbutaline
for asthma, 960
for maternal autoimmune disease, fetal AV block prevention, 369
for tocolysis, preterm labor, 805
Terconazole, for candidiasis, 1219t
Teriflunomide, teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 151
Terminal cardiotocogram, 388–389
Termination
induced, 785
selective, multifetal gestation, 858, 859
Term neonate/newborn, 785
complications, 599–610. See also Newborn complications, term
early term, 785
full term, 785
late, 785
postterm, 785
preterm, 785
Testicular regression, 37
Testis, dysgenetic, 35, 37
Testis-specific protein Y (TSPY), 36
Testosterone, maternal, 74
Tetanus-diphtheria-acellular pertussis (Tdap) vaccination, 188, 190t
Tetracyclines, teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 152

Tetralogy of Fallot, 292–293, 293f
Tetraphocomelia, 304
Tetraploidy, 313
Thalassemia (syndromes), 1056–1058
alpha, 1056–1057, 1057t
beta, 1057–1058, 1058f
carrier screening, 343
preconceptual counseling, 168
prenatal diagnosis, 1058
Thalassemia intermedia, 1057–1058
Thalidomide, teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 146, 155
Thanatophoric dysplasia, 302
Theca-lutein cysts, 54
Theophylline, for asthma, 959, 959f
Therapeutic abortion, 208
Therapeutic plasma exchange, for intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy, 1032
Thermal index, 247
Thermal injury, maternal, 896–897, 896f
electrical and lightning injuries, 897, 897t
Thiamine
deficiency, Wernicke encephalopathy and hyperemesis gravidarum, 1014–1015, 1014t
for hyperemesis gravidarum, 1015, 1015f
Thionamide, for hyperthyroidism, 1091
Thioxene, for psychosis, 1145, 1146t
Third stage of labor. See Labor, third stage
39-week rule, 629
Thorax
circumference, by gestational age, 1238t
masses, fetal open surgery for, 373
MRI, obstetrical, 266–267, 266f
shunts, fetal percutaneous, 376, 376f
Thorax, fetal anatomy, 286–288
abnormalities, 286–287
congenital cystic adenomatoid malformation, 287, 288f
congenital high airway obstruction sequence, 288, 289f
diaphragm, 286
diaphragmatic hernia, 287, 287f
normal, four-chamber view, 286, 287f
pulmonary hypoplasia, 286
pulmonary sequestration, 288, 289f
Threatened abortion, 200–201, 200f
immunoglobulin prophylaxis, 203
Three-tier fetal heart rate interpretation system, 457–458, 457t
Three-vessel tracheal view (3VTV), fetal heart, 290f, 291

Three-vessel view (3VV), fetal heart, 290f, 291
Threshold of viability
definition, 785
management, clinical, 785–787, 786f
periviable neonatal survival, 785, 785f, 786t
periviable period, 785
Threshold traits, DNA triplet repeat expansion, 324, 324f
Thrombin clot test, obstetrical hemorrhage, 777
Thrombocythemia, 1060
Thrombocytopenia, 1058, 1058t
fetal
alloimmune, 359, 360t
immune, 359–360
gestational, 1058–1059, 1058t
hypertension on, 689
inherited, 1059
maternal
continuous lumbar epidural analgesia and, 478
hemorrhage, obstetrical, 777
newborn, 607
preeclampsia syndromes, 696, 1105
Thrombocytosis, 1060
puerperium, 638
Thromboelastography
for obstetrical hemorrhage, 774, 774f, 777
for preeclampsia, 697
Thromboelastometry, obstetrical hemorrhage, 777
Thromboembolic disorders, 975–990. See also specific types
deep-vein thrombosis, 980–986
pathophysiology, 975
pulmonary embolism, 986–989
risk factors, 975–976, 976t
superficial venous thrombophlebitis, 986
thrombophilias, 976–980
thromboprophylaxis, 989–990, 990t
Thrombolysis, for pulmonary embolism, 988–989
Thrombophilias, 130, 976–980, 1063
acquired, 979
antiphospholipid syndrome, 979
coagulation cascade inhibitors, 976, 977f
definition, 976
inherited, 976–979
antithrombin deficiency, 976
factor V Leiden mutation, 978

hyperhomocysteinemia, 979
plasminogen activator inhibitor type 1, 979
protein C deficiency, 976–978
protein S deficiency, 978
protein Z, 979
prothrombin G20210A mutation, 978–979
maternal, 62
portal hypertension, 1040
pregnancy complications, 979–980
fetal-growth restriction, 979
outcomes, causal link, 979
placental abruption, 753, 979–980
preeclampsia, 980
screening, 980, 980t
venous thromboembolism and, 976, 977t
Thrombophlebitis
septic pelvic, puerperal, 657, 658f
superficial venous, 986
Thromboprophylaxis, 989–990, 990t
cesarean delivery, 989–990, 990t
venous, prior, 989
Thrombosis
cerebral artery, ischemic stroke, 1131f, 1132
cerebral vein, ischemic stroke, 1132
prevention, antiphospholipid antibody syndrome, 1116
septic, ovarian vein, 657, 658f
umbilical cord vessel, 117
Thrombotic microangiopathies, 1060–1061
etiopathogenesis, 1060
vs. HELLP syndrome, 1061, 1061t
for hypertension, persistent severe postpartum, 725
long-term prognosis, 1061
manifestations, 1060
pregnancy and, 1061
treatment, 1060–1061
Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura, 1060
Thrombotic vasculopathy, fetal, 110f, 111
Thromboxane A2, preeclampsia, 58
Thrombus
placenta, intervillous, 111
subchorial, maternal–placenta–fetal unit, 111
Thromobyctopenia-absent radius syndrome, 304
Thyroid ablation, radioactive iodine, 1092
Thyroid (thyroxine)-binding globulin (TBG)

fetal, 133–134
maternal, 71, 72f
Thyroid-blocking antibodies, 1090
Thyroid cancer, 1174
Thyroid disorders, fetal
hypothyroidism, 370
identification, 370
microchimerism, 1090
thyrotoxicosis, 370
Thyroid disorders, maternal, 1089–1099. See also specific types
autoimmunity and thyroid disease, 1090, 1090f
euthyroid autoimmune thyroid disease, 1097
hyperthyroidism, 1090–1094
hypothyroidism, 1094–1097, 1095t
congenital, 1098
subclinical, 1094, 1095–1097
incidence and screening, 1095
pregnancy and, 1096, 1096t
iodine deficiency, 1097–1098
nodular thyroid disease, 1098–1099
postpartum thyroiditis, 1098
thyroid physiology and pregnancy, 2f, 1089–1090
Thyroidectomy, subtotal, for hyperthyroidism, 1091
Thyroid function tests, maternal, 72, 72f
Thyroid gland
fetal, 133–134
function, maternal and fetal, 71, 72f
maternal, 71–73
physiology, pregnancy and, 2f, 1089–1090
Thyroid hormones
fetal, 134
maternal, 71–72
Thyroiditis
destruction-induced, 1098
hypothyroidism from, 1098
postpartum, 1098
Thyroid medications, teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 155–156
Thyroid peroxidase (TPO), 1090
autoantibodies to, euthyroid autoimmune thyroid disease, 1097
fetal, with maternal hypothyroidism, 1095
Thyroid peroxidase antibodies, 1090, 1090f
Thyroid-stimulating autoantibodies, 1090
Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH). See also Thyrotropin
fetal, 133

with maternal hypothyroidism, 1095
maternal, 71, 72f, 1089, 1090f
placental, 96t
Thyroid-stimulating immunoglobulins (TSIs), 1090
Thyroid storm
management, 1093, 1094f
pregnancy, 1092t, 1093
Thyroid transcription factor 1 gene mutation, 600
Thyrotoxic heart failure, 1092t, 1093
management, 1093, 1094f
Thyrotoxicosis, 1090–1094. See also Hyperthyroidism
fetal, 370, 1093
fetal and neonatal effects, 1092–1093, 1092f, 1092t
gestational transient, 1093
goitrous, fetal, 1092, 1092f, 1092t
twin pregnancy, 237
Thyrotropin
fetal, 133
maternal, 2f, 71, 1089
placental, 96t
Thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH), 96t, 98
pregnancy, 71, 1089, 1090f
Thyroxine (T4)
fetal, 133
pregnancy, 1089, 1090f, 1091
Tidal volume, 66, 956
Timed vital capacity, 67
Tissue plasminogen activator (rtPA)
for cerebral artery thrombosis, 1132
maternal, 61
Tissue refractoriness, 73
T lymphocytes, breast milk, 640
TNF-α inhibitors. See specific agents
Tobacco
on fetal growth, 828, 832
teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 156–157
Tocolysis
external cephalic version, 529
for multifetal gestation
prophylactic, 854
treatment, 854
for nonreassuring fetal status, 459
for preterm labor
atosiban, 806

calcium-channel blockers, 806
magnesium sulfate, 805–806
nitric oxide donors, 806
prostaglandin inhibitors, 806
recommended agents, 805
β-adrenergic receptor agonists, 805
Toll-like receptors (TLRs), spontaneous preterm labor, 789
Toluene, teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 159
Tonic-clonic seizure, 1129
Topical negative pressure (TNP). See Vacuum-assisted closure (VAC)
Topiramate, teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 1130t
TORCH infection, 1214
Torsades de pointes, 936
Torsion
adnexal cysts, 1171
ovarian, 1169–1170, 1169f, 1171
Torticollis, congenital, 610
Total breech extraction
Frank breech, 527
incomplete or complete breech, 527–528, 527f
vaginal delivery, 523
Total hysterectomy, peripartum, 562–563, 562f–563f
Total lung capacity, 66
Total placenta accreta, 760
Toxic shock syndrome (TSS)
puerperal, 659
septic abortion, 203
Toxic shock syndrome toxin 1 (TSST-1), puerperal, 659
Toxins. See also specific types
environmental, first-trimester spontaneous abortion, 200
Toxoplasma gondii, 1197–1198
fetal-growth restriction, 828
Toxoplasmosis, 1197–1198
Trace metals
fetal nutrition, 136
pregnancy nutrition, 186
Tracheal occlusion, fetoscopic, 375, 375f
Trachelectomy, pregnancy after, 1166–1167
Tracheoesophageal fistula, 296
Tranexamic acid (TXA)
after cesarean delivery, 557
for hemorrhage, obstetrical, 773
for uterine atony, 736
Transabdominal cerclage, 207–208

Transaminitis, preeclampsia syndromes, 698
Transcatheter aortic valve replacement, 927
Transcervical catheter, 491–492, 491f
Transcervical sterilization, 684–685
Transcobalamins, fetal nutrition, 186
Transcortin, 73
Transcutaneous flow, 256
Transdermal patches, contraceptive, hormonal, 674
Transesophageal echocardiography, 918
Transforming growth factor beta (TGF-β)
placental, 96t, 98
superfamily, placental hormones, 100
Transfusion, blood
fetal, 352, 356
intrauterine, 352
need, maternal, 733
for obstetrical hemorrhage
cell salvage and autologous transfusion, 774
massive transfusion protocols, 773–774, 774t
transfusion thresholds, 771
prophylactic RBCs, sickle-cell during pregnancy, 1054
Transfusion-associated circulatory overload, 774
Transfusion-related acute lung injury, 774
Transfusion thresholds, 771
Transient ischemic attack, 1131
Transient tachypnea of the newborn, 587, 599–600
trial of labor after cesarean, 574
vaginal birth after cesarean, 574
Transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic stent shunting, for esophageal varices, 1041
Translocations
chromosomal, 315–316
reciprocal, 315, 317f
robertsonian, 315–317, 317f
Transmembranous flow, 256
Transplantation
bone marrow, aplastic anemia, 1053
heart, pregnancy after, 923–924
liver, 1042
lung, for cystic fibrosis, 969
pancreatic, 1044
renal, pregnancy after, 1000–1001
Transposition of the great vessels
corrected, 368
pregnancy after, 929

Transvaginal sonography (TVS)
pseudogestational sac, 177, 222, 222f
tubal pregnancy
adnexal findings, 223–224, 223f
endometrial findings, 222–223, 223f
hemoperitoneum, 224, 224f
pregnancy of unknown location, 177, 222
Transversalis fascia, 12–13, 13f
Transverse arrest, 423
Transverse lie, 417, 418, 419, 420
on cesarean delivery technique, 559
etiology and diagnosis, 441–442, 442f
management, 442
mechanism of labor, 442
Transverse limb defect, 303, 304f
Transversus abdominis muscle, 12, 13f
Transversus abdominis plane, 14, 14f
block, 480
Trastuzumab, 1164
for breast cancer, 12
teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 152
Trauma, maternal, 891–896
automobile accidents, 892, 893f
bladder, puerperium, 638
blunt, 892–893
intimate partner violence, 891–892
penetrating, 894–895
sexual assault and STD prophylaxis, 892, 892t
Travel precautions, infectious diseases, 1200
Treponema pallidum, 1206–1207. See also Syphilis
diagnosis, 1208–1209, 1209t
Tretinoin, 1176
for dermatologic disorders, 1159, 1159t
teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 155
Trial of labor after cesarean (TOLAC), 45, 571–572, 572f. See also Cesarean delivery, prior
conservative approach, 580t, 581
failed, 573
multifetal gestation, 577, 858
rates, 571–572, 572f
recommendations, professional societies, 580t, 581
selection considerations, 574–577
cesarean delivery, prior, 577
fetal death, 577
fetal size and lie, 577

interdelivery interval, 576
multifetal gestation, 577
obesity, maternal, 577
uterine incision, prior, 575–576, 575f, 575t
uterine rupture, prior, 575t, 576
vaginal delivery, prior, 576
uterine extension/rupture risks, 555
uterine rupture and, 742
Trichomonas vaginalis (trichomoniasis), 1217–1218, 1218t
asymptomatic, postpartum infection rate, 653
diagnosis, 1217–1218
prophylaxis, 892t
treatment, 1218, 1218t
Tricyclic antidepressants, for major depression, 1145–1147, 1146t
Trientine, for copper overload, 1040
Triglycerides, fetal, 136
Triiodothyronine (T3), 71–72, 72f
fetal, 133
Trimesters. See also specific trimesters
prenatal record, 179
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
for asymptomatic bacteriuria, 996, 996t
for pneumocystis pneumonia, 965
for staphylococcal breast infections, 660
teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 151–152
Triple edema, 364
Triple test, 12
Triplets, 858. See also Multifetal pregnancy
birth rate, 838
Triploidy, 199, 309, 313. See also specific types
diandric, 199, 313
digynic, 199, 313
Triptans. See also specific types
for migraine, 1128, 1128t
Trisomies, autosomal, 309–313. See also specific types
nondisjunction, 309
phenotypic severity, 310
prevalence, maternal age and, 310, 310f
risk, maternal age and, 333, 333f
ultrasound markers, 340–341, 340f, 340t
Trisomy, 309
Trisomy 13 (Patau syndrome), 313, 313f
aneuploidy screening, 333
analyte-based, 337

cell-free DNA, 335, 335t
ultrasound, 341
fetal anomalies, 339t
fetal-growth restriction, 828
polydactyl, 303
prevalence, 309, 309f
robertsonian translocation, 316–317
Trisomy 16, first-trimester losses, 313
Trisomy 18 (Edwards syndrome), 312, 312f
aneuploidy screening, 333, 334t
analyte-based, 336–338
cell-free DNA, 335, 335t
ultrasound, choroid plexus cysts, 341–342
fetal anomalies, 339t
fetal-growth restriction, 828
prevalence, 309, 309f
Trisomy 21 (Down syndrome), 311–312, 311f
advanced maternal age in, 333, 333t
aneuploidy screening, 333
analyte-based, 336–339, 338t
cell-free DNA, 334, 335, 335t, 336t
cell-free DNA vs. first-trimester, 334
ultrasound, 340, 340f, 340t, 341t
on estrogen production, fetal, 102
fetal anomalies, 339t
fetal-growth restriction, 828–829
first-trimester losses, 313
maternal age and, 333, 333t
MSAFP screen, 333
nasal bone hypoplasia/sonographic absence, 283, 284f
prevalence, 309, 309f
Trisomy 22, first-trimester losses, 313
Trophectoderm, 86, 86f
Trophoblast, 86, 86f
chorionic-type intermediate, 242
development, 86–87, 87f
cytotrophoblasts, 86, 87f
endovascular trophoblasts, 87, 87f
extravillous trophoblasts, 87, 87f
interstitial trophoblasts, 87, 87f
syncytiotrophoblast, 86–87, 87f
villous trophoblasts, 87, 87f4
endovascular, 87f, 90
formation, early, 86–89

immunogenicity, 93
intermediate, 242
interstitial, 87f, 90
invasion, regulators, 87f, 89–90
lacunae, 88, 88f
persistent, 227
proliferation, 235. See also Gestational trophoblastic disease (GTD)
Trophoblast formation, early, 86–89
blastocyst, 86, 86f
inner cell mass, 86, 86f
trophectoderm, 86, 86f
trophoblasts, 86, 86f
chorionic villi, 88–89, 88f
fertilization, 85, 86f
blastocyst, 85, 86f
blastomeres, 85, 86f
morula, 85, 86f
zygote, 85, 86f
implantation, 86
invasion, early, 87–88, 88f
paracrine system, 86
trophoblast development, 86–87, 87f
cytotrophoblasts, 86, 87f
endovascular trophoblasts, 87, 87f
extravillous trophoblasts, 87, 87f
interstitial trophoblasts, 87, 87f
syncytiotrophoblast, 86–87, 87f
villous trophoblasts, 87, 87f4
Trophotropism, 756
True conjugate, 27f, 28
True knots, 116
Truncus arteriosus, 293–294, 294f
pregnancy after, 929
TSH-receptor antibodies (TRAb), fetal, 1092
T sign, 842, 842f
Tubal abortion, 221
Tubal pregnancy, 220–227
ampullary, 220, 220f
classification, 220–221, 220f
Tubal pregnancy, diagnosis, 222–225
beta-human chorionic gonadotropin, 222
endometrial sampling, 224
laparoscopy, 224
progesterone, serum, 224

transvaginal sonography
adnexal findings, 223–224, 223f
endometrial findings, 222–223, 223f
hemoperitoneum, 224, 224f
pregnancy of unknown location, 177, 222
Tubal sterilization
nonpuerperal, 681, 683
puerperal, 681–683, 682f–684f
reversal, 684
Tuberculosis, 965–967
clinical presentation, 965
congenital, 967
diagnosis, 966
fetal-growth restriction, 828
pregnancy and, 966, 966t
prevalence, 965
treatment
active, 967
latent, 966–967
neonatal, 967
Tuberous sclerosis, 294
Tuboovarian abscess, from IUDs, 666
Tularemia, 1200
Tumor necrosis factor α (TNF-α), 693
preeclampsia, 693
Tumors, placental
chorioangioma, 112, 112f
metastases, 1164
metastatic, 112–113
Turner syndrome. See 45,X (Turner syndrome)
Twin anemia–polycythemia sequence, 849–850
Twin peak sign, 842, 842f
Twin pregnancy/twinning. See also Multifetal pregnancy
acardiac, 850, 850f
birth rate, 838
diamnionic, 839
dichorionic, 839
dizygotic, 839
dizygotic vs. monozygotic, 839
fraternal, 839
hydatidiform mole, 237
identical, 839
monochorionic, 839
monochorionic, vascular anastomoses and, 846–851, 847f

hydatidiform mole with coexisting normal fetus, 851
twin anemia–polycythemia sequence, 849–850
twin reversed-arterial-perfusion sequence, 850–851, 850f
twin-twin transfusion syndrome, 847–849, 847f–849f
vascular anastomoses, 846–847, 847f, 848f
monozygotic, 839, 840f
mortality rate, infant/maternal, 838, 838t
preterm birth risk, 838
stuck twin, 848
unique and aberrant, 845–847
conjoined twins, 846, 847f
external parasitic twins, 846
fetus-in-fetu, 846
multifetal gestation, 845–846
Twin reversed arterial perfusion (TRAP) sequence, 850–851, 850f
radiofrequency ablation for, 378
Twin-twin transfusion syndrome (TTTS), 847–849, 847f–849f
diagnosis and prognosis, 848–849, 849f
fetal brain damage, 848
fetoscopic surgery for, 374–375, 375f
hydramnios, 258
monoamnionic twins, 845
nonimmune hydrops fetalis, 360
Twirla, 674
Twoday method, 675
Two-dimensional transvaginal sonography (2-D TVS), 42, 42f
Type 2 bias, 693
Tyrosine kinase, 1163

U
Ubiquitin protein ligase E3A, 322
Ulcerative colitis, 1019f, 1020, 1020t
pregnancy and, 1021–1022, 1021t
Ultrasonography
3-D and 4-D, 252
ALARA principle, 182, 247
compression, 981
first-trimester, 248–250, 249t
components, 248–249, 249t
detailed examination, 250
indications, 248–249, 249t
nuchal translucency, 249–250, 250t
mechanical index, 247
prenatal surveillance, 182

second- and third-trimester
components, 249t
detailed examinations, 251–252, 251t
fetal anomaly detection, 252
fetal echocardiography, 252
indications, 250, 250t
limited examination, 252
standard examinations, 250–251
thermal index, 247
Ultrasonography, embryo/fetus by gestational age, 1234t–1242t
cerebellar diameter, transverse, 1241t
gestational sac diameter and crown-rump length, 1234t
head circumference, 1237t
long bone length, 1239t
ocular parameters, 1240t
thoracic circumference, 1238t
umbilical artery Doppler indices, 1241t
weight percentiles, 1235t
twins with dichorionic placentation, 1236t
twins with monochorionic placentation, 1236t
Ultrasonography, maternal, 875, 1163
for appendicitis, 1024
kidneys, 995
for multifetal gestation, 841–842, 848f, 848t, 849f
prenatal surveillance, 182
transvaginal, pregnancy diagnosis, 177, 177f
Ultrasound analyte-based aneuploidy screening, 339–342
aneuploidy markers, 339–340, 339f, 339t
first-trimester markers, 340t, 341
second-trimester markers, 340f, 340t, 341–342, 341t
choroid plexus cysts, 341–342
echogenic fetal bowel, 340f, 340t, 341, 341t
echogenic intracardiac focus, 340f, 340t, 341, 341t
nasal bone, 340t, 341
nuchal skinfold, 340f, 340t, 341, 341t
sandal gap, 340f, 340t
short femur/humerus, 340t, 341, 341t
Ultrasound Doppler principle, 447
Ultraviolet B phototherapy, for inflammatory bowel disease, 1157
Umbilical artery
aneurysm, 117
Doppler imaging, 262
Doppler indices, by gestational age, 1241t
Doppler velocimetry, 391

fused, shared lumen, 114
single, 114
Umbilical coiling index (UCI), 113
Umbilical cord, 95
abnormalities, fetal-growth restriction, 828
blood acid–base studies, 591, 592–593, 592t
blood banking, prenatal, 192
blood gas studies
cerebral palsy, 604
newborn, 593
clamping
deferred, 587
on newborn air breathing, 587
vaginal delivery, 500
delivery room management, 587
entanglement, monoamnionic twins, 845, 846f
newborn care, 595
occlusion, on fetal heart rate, 453, 453f
prolapse, 442–443
from amniotomy, 494
venous blood pH, biophysical profile and, 390, 390t
Umbilical cord, abnormalities, 113–117
coiling, 113
hematomas, 116–117
insertion, 114–115, 115f
Battledore placenta, 114, 253
furcate, 115
vasa previa, 115–116, 116f, 253
velamentous, 115, 115f, 253
knots, strictures, and loops, 116
length, 113
remnants and cysts, 114
vascular
cord hematomas, 116–117
umbilical artery aneurysm, 117
umbilical cord vessel thromboses, 117
umbilical vein varix, 117
vessel number, 113–114, 114f
vessel thromboses, 117
Umbilical ligaments, 13, 13f
Umbilical vein
blood pH, biophysical profile and, 390, 390t
varix, 117
Umbrella pack, for hemorrhage, 780

Undernutrition, severe prenatal, 184
Undifferentiated connective tissue disease, 1119
Unicornuate uterus (class II), 40t, 41f, 42–43
main horn, 43
rudimentary horn, 43
Uniparental disomy, 322–323, 323f
Uniparental isodisomy, 323
United States Medical Eligibility Criteria (US-MEC), 664
Unknown seizure onset, 1129
Unplanned births, 504
Upper gastrointestinal bleeding, 1018
Upper gastrointestinal disorders, 1014–1018
achalasia, 1017
diaphragmatic hernia, 1017
gastroesophageal reflux disease, 1016–1017
hiatal hernia, 1017
hyperemesis gravidarum, 1014–1016, 1014t, 1015f
peptic ulcer disease, 1017–1018
upper gastrointestinal bleeding, 1018
Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy, 1012
Ureaplasma urealyticum
spontaneous preterm labor, 790
uterine infections, 651
Ureteral injury, peripartum hysterectomy, 564–565
Ureteric bud, 31, 32f
Ureteropelvic junction (UPJ) obstruction, 298, 299
Ureteroscopy, 995
Ureters, maternal, 22f, 27, 69, 69f
Urethra
anatomy, 18–19, 19f
atresia, fetal, 377
diverticulum, 1007, 1007f
stenosis, fetal, 377
Urethral valves
disorders, fetal, 377
posterior, 301, 301f
Urethritis, 997
Urethrovaginal sphincter muscle, 19f
Uric acid concentration, preeclampsia syndromes, 697
Urinalysis, maternal, 68–69, 68f, 994–995
urine protein, measuring, 68–69
Urinary incontinence. See Incontinence, urinary
Urinary shunts, percutaneous fetal, 376–378, 377f, 377t
Urinary system. See also specific organs and topics

embryonic development, 31, 32f
fetal, 133
Urinary system, maternal, 67–70
bladder, 69–70
kidney, 67–68, 67t, 68f
renal function tests, 68
ureters and hydronephrosis, 69, 69f
urinalysis, 68–69, 68f
urine protein, measuring, 68–69
Urinary tract, maternal
fistulas, 1007
lesions, lower
urethral diverticulum, 1007, 1007f
urinary tract fistulas, 1007
lower, 27
bladder, 27
ureter, 22f, 27
puerperium, 637–638
Urinary tract infections (UTIs), 995–998
bacteruria, asymptomatic, 995, 996–997, 996t
cystitis and urethritis, 995, 997
organisms and adhesins, 995
puerperal fever, 649–650
pyelonephritis, acute, 995, 997–998, 998t
reflux nephropathy, 998
risk factors, 995–996
Urine, fetal
first, 133
newborn care, 595
production, 260
Urine protein, measuring maternal, 68–69
Urogenital ridge, 31, 32f
Urogenital sinus, 31–33, 32f
Urogenital triangle, 17–19, 18f
deep space, 18–19, 19f
bulbospongiosus muscle, 19f
clitoris, 19f
compressor urethrae muscle, 19f
hymenal ring, 18f
ischiocavernous muscles, 19f
ischiopubis ramus, 19f
labium minus, 19f
levator ani muscles, 19f
perineal membrane, 19f

sphincter urethrae, 19, 19f
striated urogenital sphincter complex, 19f
superficial transverse perineal muscles, 17–18, 18f
urethra, 18–19, 19f
urethrovaginal sphincter muscle, 19f
superficial space, 17–18, 18f
Bartholin glands, 14, 15–16, 15f, 18, 31
bulbospongiosus muscle, 18, 18f
clitoris, 18, 18f
Colles fascia, 18, 18f
hymenal ring, 18, 18f, 33
ischiocavernous muscles, 18, 18f
ischiopubic ramus, 18, 18f
perineal membrane, 18, 18f
Scarpa fascia, 18, 18f
superficial transverse perineal muscles, 17–18, 18f
vestibular bulb, 18, 18f
Ursodeoxycholic acid, for intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy, 1032
Usher syndrome, carrier screening, 344
Ustekinumab, for inflammatory bowel disease, 1021–1022, 1021t
Uterine activity
normal, 463
surveillance, intrapartum, 461–463
electronic fetal monitoring, 463
external monitoring, 461–462
internal monitoring, 461, 461f
uterine activity patterns, 462–463, 462f
uterine contraction terminology, 463
tachysystole, 463
Uterine artery, 24, 24f
Doppler imaging, 262
Doppler velocimetry, 392
embolization
for cervical pregnancy, 230
for interstitial pregnancy, 228
ligation, for obstetrical hemorrhage, 779, 779f
Uterine atony, 734–737
evaluation and management, 735–737, 735f
balloon tamponade and surgical procedures, 737, 737f
bleeding unresponsive to uterotonic agents, 736–737, 737f
placenta removal, manual, 508f, 735–736
tranexamic acid, 736
uterotonic agents, 736
risk factors, 735

third-stage labor management, 734–735
Uterine compression, for hemorrhage
postpartum, bimanual, 736, 737f
sutures, 778–779, 778f
Uterine contractions. See Contractions, uterine
Uterine dehiscence, 573
Uterine didelphys (class III), 41f, 43
Uterine flexion, 45–47, 46f
anteflexion, 45
retroflexion, 46, 46f
sacculation, 46, 46f
uterine torsion, 46–47
Uterine incarceration, 46, 46f
Uterine incision
necrosis and separation, 657–658, 658f
prior, on TOLAC, 575–576, 575f, 575t
closure, 576
imaging prior incision, 576
number of prior cesarean incisions, 576
type, 575–576, 575f, 575t
Uterine infection, puerperal, 650–653
chlamydia, 1212
complications, 653
microbiology, 650–651, 650t
pathogenesis and clinical course, 651
predisposing factors, 650
prophylaxis
other, 653
perioperative, 652–653, 652t
treatment, 651–652, 652t
Uterine inversion, 737–739
progressive degrees, 738, 738f
recognition and management, 738–739, 738f
risk factors, 737–738
surgical intervention, 738, 738f
Uterine leiomyoma, recurrent miscarriage, 204
Uterine polyps, recurrent miscarriage, 204
Uterine quiescence, 652–656
Uterine rupture, 894
complete/incomplete, 573
dystocia, 443
management and outcomes, 743, 744t
pathogenesis, 743, 743f
predisposing factors, 742–743, 742t

primary/secondary, 742
trial of labor after cesarean, 742
prior, 575t, 576
risks, 555
Uterine scar
exploration, for VBAC, 579
rupture, prior cesarean delivery, 579–580
diagnosis, 579, 579f
management, 579–580
Uterine spiral arteries
invasion, 90
preeclampsia syndromes, 66
Uterine stretch, parturition phase 2, 407
Uterine synechiae, recurrent miscarriage, 204
Uterine tears, dystocia, 443
Uterine torsion, 46–47
Uterine veins, 24
Uteroovarian ligament, 22, 22f, 23, 26
Uteroplacental apoplexy, 753, 753f
Uteroplacental blood flow, 52
perfusion, preeclampsia syndromes, 702
regulation, 52–53
Uterosacral ligament, 22f, 23f
Uterotonic agents. See also specific types
for uterine atony, 736
bleeding unresponsive, 736–737, 737f
for uterine bleeding, puerperium, 636–637
Uterotonins
chorion, 399
parturition phase 3 (labor), 412–413, 413f
angiotensin II, 413
degradation, accelerated, 404
oxytocin, 412–413
prostaglandins, 413, 413f
Uterovaginal plexus, 25f, 472
Uterus, 22–23, 22f, 51–53
anomalies/abnormalities
congenital, recurrent miscarriage, 204
fetal-growth restriction, 828
anomalies/abnormalities, müllerian, 42–45
arcuate uterus, 41f, 44f, 45
bicornuate uterus, 40t, 41f, 43–44, 44f
cerclage treatment, 45
discovery, 42

imaging, 42, 42f
septate uterus, 41f, 44–45, 44f
unicornuate uterus, 40t, 41f, 42–43
main horn, 43
rudimentary horn, 43
uterine didelphys, 41f, 43
cervix, 22f, 23, 53, 53f
contractility, 52
contraction stress test, 386, 386t
embryonic development, 31–33, 32f
endometrium, 22f, 23
intraperitoneal organ distortion, 868–869, 869f
involutional, puerperium, 635–636, 635f
afterpains, 636
decidual and endometrial regeneration, 636
lochia, 636
sonographic findings, 635–636, 635f
labor
awakening/activation, 406
contractions, 409
physiology and functions, 398–399
segments and rings, 409–410, 409f
shape changes, 410
size decrease, third stage, 412, 412f
ligaments, 22f, 23
broad, 22f, 23
cardinal, 22f, 23
infundibulopelvic, 22f, 23
round, 22f, 23
uteroovarian, 22, 22f, 23, 26
uterosacral, 22f, 23
myometrium, 22f, 23
overdistention
spontaneous preterm labor, 788
uterine atony, 735
preeclampsia syndrome prediction, Doppler velocimetry, 703
shape and position, 52
uteroplacental blood flow, 52
preeclampsia, 702
regulation, 52–53
Uterus dysfunction
definition, 433
fundal height, 826
growth, multifetal gestation, 843

hypertonic (incoordinate), 434
hypotonic, 434
risk factors, 434
types, 434
Uterus neoplasms, 1167–1169
adenomyosis, 1168–1169
endometrial carcinoma, 1169
endometrial lesions, 1168–1169
endometriosis, 1168
leiomyomas, 1167–1168, 1167f, 1168f

V
Vaccines. See also Immunization; specific types
hepatitis, 1035
hepatitis A, 1036
hepatitis B, 1037–1038
newborn, 594
hepatitis C, 1038
hepatitis E, 1039
influenza, 964
pneumococcal, 963
preconceptual counseling, 166–167, 166t
pregnancy, 188, 189t–190t
puerperium, 644
recommendations, pregnancy and postpartum, 188, 189t–190t
Vacuum aspiration, 210, 210f, 211f
Vacuum-assisted closure (VAC), abdominal incision infections
prophylaxis, 654, 655t
puerperal, 654, 654f
Vacuum cups, 542–543, 542f, 542t
Vacuum extraction vaginal delivery, prerequisites, 533–534, 534t
Vacuum extractor, 542–543, 542f, 542t
Vacuum pressure conversions, 543, 543t
Vagina, 16–17, 17f, 54–55, 657, 658f
embryonic development, 31–33, 32f
maternal
abnormalities, 40–41
müllerian abnormalities, 40–41
pelvic organ prolapse, 54–55
Vaginal birth after cesarean (VBAC), 571–572, 572f. See also Cesarean delivery, prior
rates, 571–572, 572f
Vaginal bleeding, early pregnancy, 200
Vaginal cancer, 1172
Vaginal cerclage, 206–207, 206f, 207f

Vaginal contraceptive gel (Phexxi), 675
Vaginal delivery, 498–513
analgesia, spinal block, 472
anomalous fetuses, 505–506
breech delivery, singleton, 523
female genital mutilation, 504–505, 505t
home birth, 504
multifetal gestation, 857–858
pelvic reconstruction surgery, prior, 505
placental abruption, 754–755
postpartum care, immediate, 507–513
1st hour after delivery, 507–508
episiotomy, 509–510, 510f
episiotomy, repairs, 510–513, 511f–512f
lacerations, lower genital tract, 508–509, 509f
lacerations, perineal, care, 513
lacerations, repair, 510–513, 511f–512f
skin-to-skin contact, 508
prior, on trial of labor after cesarean, 576
Ritgen maneuver, 499, 499f
shoulder dystocia, 501–504. See also Shoulder dystocia, vaginal delivery
management, 502–504
maternal and neonatal consequences, 501
prediction and prevention, 501–502
technique, 498–501
cord clamping, 500
head delivery, 498–499, 499f
occiput transverse position, 500
persistent occiput posterior position, 500–501
preparation, 498
shoulders delivery, 499–500
third stage of labor, 506–507
carbetocin, 507
ergonovine and methylergonovine, 507
management, 506–507
misoprostol, 507
oxytocin, high-dose, 507
placenta delivery, 506, 506f
placenta removal, manual, 507, 508f
uterine atony, 734–735
water birth, 504
Vaginal delivery, operative, 533–544
classification and prerequisites, 533–534, 534f, 534t
outlet, low, and midpelvic, 533, 534t

station and rotation, 533, 534t
forceps delivery, 537–542
blade application, 537–540, 538f–539f
face presentation, 534f, 542
forceps design, 537, 537f
manual rotation, 540, 540f
occiput transverse positions, 541–542, 541f
persistent occiput posterior positions, 540–541, 541f
incidence and indications, 533
morbidity, maternal, 535
infection and subsequent-pregnancy morbidity, 535
lacerations, 535
pelvic floor disorders, 535
morbidity, perinatal, 535–537
acute injury, 535–536
acute injury, mechanisms, 536
long-term infant morbidity, 536
trial, 536–537
training, 544
vacuum-assisted delivery, 542–544
technique, 543–544, 543f, 543t
vacuum extractor design, 542–543, 542f, 542t
Vaginal flora, 1216
Vaginal intraepithelial neoplasia (VAIN), 11
Vaginal microbiota, 1216
Vaginal micronized progesterone, for multifetal gestation, 854
Vaginitis, 1216–1219
bacterial vaginosis, 792, 1216–1217, 1217f
candidiasis, 1218–1219, 1219t
trichomoniasis, 653, 892t, 1217–1218, 1218t
Valacyclovir, for herpes simplex virus, 1214–1215, 1215t
Valproate, teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 1129, 1130t
Valproic acid
for bipolar disorder, 1146t, 1148
teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 150
Valvular heart disease, maternal, 924–927
aortic insufficiency, 925t, 927
aortic stenosis, 925t, 926–927
heart valve replacement, before pregnancy, 922–923, 923t
mitral insufficiency, 925t, 926
mitral stenosis, 924–926, 925t, 926f
mitral valve prolapse, 925t, 926
polycystic kidney disease, lesions, 1001
pulmonic stenosis, 925t, 927

Valvuloplasty, fetal, 378
Vancomycin
for staphylococcal breast infections, 660
for uterine infections, 652, 652t
Vanishing fetus, 844
Vaping, teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 157
Varicella
maternal, 1185
pneumonia, 965
vaccination, pregnancy cautions, 167, 190t
Varicella-zoster immune globulin (VariZIG), 1186
Varicella-zoster virus (VZV), 1185–1186
diagnosis, 1186
fetal/neonatal infection, 1186
management and prevention, 1186
maternal infection, 1185–1186
vaccination, 1186
Varicosities, 192
Varix, umbilical vein, 117
Vasa previa, 115–116, 116f, 253
Vascular anastomoses, multifetal gestation, 846–847, 847f, 848f
twinning
hydatidiform mole with coexisting normal fetus, 851
twin anemia–polycythemia sequence, 849–850
twin reversed-arterial-perfusion sequence, 850–851, 850f
twin-twin transfusion syndrome, 847–849, 847f–849f
Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)
preeclampsia, 58, 58f, 694, 694f
retinopathy of prematurity, 618
Vascular lesions, fetal. See also specific types
villous, 111
Vascular resistance, maternal
multifetal gestation, 843
testing, preeclampsia syndrome
prediction, 702–703
prevention, 703–704
Vascular shunts, fetal, 586
Vascular spiders, 55
Vasculitis syndromes, 1119–1120
Behçet disease, 1120
eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis, 1120
granulomatosis with polyangiitis/Wegener granulomatosis, 1120
Henoch-Schönlein purpura, 1120
polyarteritis nodosa, 1119–1120

Takayasu arteritis, 1120
Vasectomy, 685, 685f
Vasodilators, for chronic hypertension, 949, 949t
Vasogenic edema, preeclampsia, 64
Vasoinhibin, 933
Vasopressin
deficiency, diabetes insipidus, 1104
preeclampsia, 61
Vasospasm, preeclampsia syndrome, 693
Vedolizumab, for inflammatory bowel disease, 1021–1022, 1021t
Vegetarian diet/vegetarians
preconceptual counseling, 170
zinc, 185–186
Vein of Galen aneurysm, 352f
Velamentous insertion, umbilical cord, 115, 115f, 253
Velocardiofacial syndrome, 316t
Velocimetry, Doppler, 391–392
Vena caval filters, for pulmonary embolism, 988
Venereal Disease Research Laboratory (VDRL) testing, 1208, 1210
Venlafaxine, for depression, 1145–1147, 1146t
Venous leg varicosities, 192
Venous thromboembolism
after cesarean delivery, 548, 550
Hodgkin lymphoma and, 14
paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria, 1051
pregnancy + malignancy on risk for, 1163
thrombophilias and, 976, 977t
Ventilation
maternal, 885–887
applications, 885
conventional, 885
noninvasive, 885
minute
pregnancy, 956
resting, 66
newborn resuscitation, delivery room
bag-mask, 589, 589f
mask, 589, 589t
Ventilation, mechanical
for acute respiratory distress syndrome, 616, 885–887, 886f
assist-control, 885
intermittent mandatory, 885
mode, 885–886
pressure-support, 885

for respiratory distress syndrome, preterm newborn, 616
Ventilation-perfusion scintigraphy lung scan, 988
Ventouse, 542–543, 542f, 542t
Ventral wall, fetal, normal, 297, 297f
Ventral wall defects, fetal, 297–298
body stalk anomaly, 297–298, 298f
gastroschisis, 297, 297f
omphalocele, 297, 297f
Ventricle, pregnancy remodeling, 63, 916
Ventricular function
maternal, 916
preeclampsia syndromes, 695–696, 695f
Ventricular septal defect (VSD)
fetal, 291, 291f
maternal, 920t, 928
Ventricular shunts, maternal, 1138
Ventricular tachycardia, maternal, 936
Ventriculo-arterial discordance, 293
Ventriculomegaly, 277–278, 278f
Verapamil, for chronic hypertension, 949, 949t
Vermian agenesis, inferior, 279
Version, 528
external cephalic, 528
internal podalic, 528
Vertex presentation, 417
Vertical transmission, 1182, 1183t
Very low birthweight, 3, 783, 784t
multifetal gestation, 838, 838t
Very-low-density lipoproteins (VLDLs), 58
Very preterm birth, 783
Vesicoamnionic shunts, fetal, 376–378, 377f
Vesicocentesis, fetal, 377
Vesicocervical fistula, 1007
Vesicoureteral reflux, 298
pregnancy, 994
Vesicouterine fistula, 1007
Vesicovaginal fistula, 1007
Vestibular bulb, 18, 18f
Vestibule, 15–16, 15f
Viability, threshold of
definition, 785
management, clinical, 785–787, 786f
periviable neonatal survival, 785, 785f, 786t
periviable period, 785

Vibroacoustic stimulation, 456
Video capsule endoscopy, 1012
Villous trophoblasts, 87, 87f
Villous vascular lesions, fetal, 111
Villus branching, 90, 91f
Viral infections, 1183–1194
coronavirus, 1187
COVID-19, 1187–1189, 1188f
coxsackievirus, 1192–1193
cytomegalovirus, 1183–1185
influenza virus, 1186–1187
measles, 1189–1190
mosquito-borne
Ebola virus, 1193–1194
West Nile virus, 1193
Zika virus, 1193
mumps, 1189
parvovirus B19, 1191–1192
poliovirus, 1193
respiratory viruses, other, 1192
rubella, 1190–1191
varicella-zoster virus, 1185–1186
Viscoelastic assays, for obstetrical hemorrhage, 774, 774f
Visfatin, 53, 58
Vital capacity, 67, 956
Vital statistics, 2–3
Vitamin(s). See also specific types
fetal nutrition, 137
pregnancy nutrition, 184t, 186–187
serum and blood constituents, 1230t
Vitamin A
for bronchopulmonary dysplasia prevention, 617
fetal nutrition, 186
teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 155
Vitamin B6
fetal nutrition, 186
for hyperemesis gravidarum, 1015
for nausea of pregnancy, 186
Vitamin B12
deficiency, megaloblastic anemia, 1050
fetal nutrition, 186
Vitamin C
fetal nutrition, 186

on preeclampsia risk, 1106
Vitamin D
for asthma, 959
fetal nutrition, 186–187
for hypoparathyroidism, 1100
on preeclampsia risk, 1106
Vitamin E, on preeclampsia risk, 1106
Vitamin K, newborn preventive care, 594
Vitamin K deficiency
bleeding, newborn, 606
hyperemesis gravidarum, 1015
Voluntary abortion, 208
von Gierke disease, carrier screening, 344
von Hippel-Lindau disease, pheochromocytoma, 1100
Von Willebrand disease, 1062–1063
Von Willebrand factor, 1062
Vulva
cancer, 1172
varicosities, 192
Vulva, anatomy, 14–16, 15f, 16f
Bartholin glands, 14, 15–16, 15f, 18, 31
clitoris, 15, 15f, 16f
labia, 14–15, 15f
mons pubis, 14, 15f
paraurethral glands, 14, 15–16, 15f, 19, 31
Skene glands, 15f, 16
vestibule, 15–16, 15f
Vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia, 11
Vulvovaginal hematoma, 742
Vulvovaginal lacerations, 739

W
Warfarin, teratogenicity/fetotoxicity, 156, 156f
Water birth, 504
Water metabolism, maternal, 56–57, 56f
Wedge pressure gradient, 886–887
Wegener granulomatosis, 1120
Weigert-Meyer rule, 298
Weight
categories and definitions, 902
gain, maternal
antepartum management, 907
dietary intervention, 907
gestational, fetal-growth restriction, 827

normal pregnancy, 56, 56t
recommendations, prenatal, 183–184, 183t
retention, after pregnancy, 184, 184f
loss, newborn, 595
percentiles, by gestational age, 1235t
twins with dichorionic placentation, 1236t
twins with monochorionic placentation, 1236t
Wernicke encephalopathy, hyperemesis gravidarum, 1014–1015, 1014t
West Nile virus, 1193
Whey, breast milk, 639
“White coat” hypertension, 946
White/modified White classification, diabetes, 1069, 1069t
Whole blood, for obstetrical hemorrhage, 772, 772t
Whole exome sequencing (WES), 7, 327
Whole genome sequencing (WGS), 327
Williams-Beuren syndrome, 316t
Wilson disease, 1039–1040
Window of implantation, 83
Withdrawal
opioid
medication-assisted, 1150
neonatal, 7, 1150
progesterone
labor, 399
parturition, 406, 795
Wolff-Chaikoff effect, 59
Wolffian duct, 31–33, 32f
Wolff-Parkinson-White (WPW) syndrome, maternal, 936
Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome, 316t
Wound incision infections
abdominal, puerperal, 653–654, 653f
prophylaxis, negative-pressure, 654, 655t

X
X-linked ichthyosis, 316t, 339
X-linked inheritance, 319t, 321
Xulane, 674

Y
Yersinia pestis, 1200
Y-linked inheritance, 321
Yolk sac, transvaginal sonography, 177, 177f

Z
Zafirlukast, for asthma, 959
Zanamivir, for influenza, 964, 1187
Zavanelli maneuver, 504, 527
Zika virus, 1193
microcephaly, 280
Zileuton, for asthma, 959
Zinc
for copper overload, 1040
pregnancy nutrition, 184t, 185–186
vegetarians, 185–186
Ziprasidone, for psychosis, 1145, 1146t
Zona basalis, decidua, 84–85, 85f
Zona compacta, decidua, 84
Zona functionalis, decidua, 84
Zona spongiosa
amnion, 94, 94f
decidua, 84
Zygosity, 839
Zygote, 85, 86f
development, 122

