CHAPTER 58

Hepatic, Biliary, and Pancreatic Disorders

HEPATIC DISORDERS
GALLBLADDER DISORDERS
PANCREATIC DISORDERS
REFERENCES
Disorders of the liver, gallbladder, and pancreas together constitute a
formidable list of complications that may arise in pregnancy. Some stem from
preexisting conditions, and some are unique to gestation. The relationships of
several of these with pregnancy can be intriguing and challenging.

HEPATIC DISORDERS
Liver diseases complicating pregnancy are placed into three general
categories. The first includes those specific to pregnancy and resolve either
spontaneously or following delivery. Hyperemesis gravidarum, intrahepatic
cholestasis, acute fatty liver, and HELLP syndrome—which is characterized
by hemolysis, elevated liver enzyme levels, and low platelet counts, are
examples. The second category involves acute hepatic disorders that are
coincidental to pregnancy, such as acute viral hepatitis. Last are chronic liver
diseases that predate pregnancy, such as chronic viral or autoimmune
hepatitis, cirrhosis, or esophageal varices.

Laboratory testing can aid differentiation of these disorders. Hepatic
dysfunction from hyperemesis gravidarum may manifest as mildly elevated
serum bilirubin and transaminase levels (Chap. 57, p. 1014). Others listed in
Table 58-1 can show more marked findings. One example, severe
preeclampsia syndrome, discussed in Chapter 40 (p. 689), can be further
complicated by the HELLP syndrome, which can rarely cause liver failure
(Casey, 2020).
TABLE 58-1. Clinical Findings with Liver Diseases in Pregnancy

Importantly, several normal pregnancy-induced physiological changes
induce appreciable liver-related clinical and laboratory manifestations
(Chap. 4, p. 70 and Appendix, p. 1229). Abnormalities such as increased
serum alkaline phosphatase levels, palmar erythema, and spider angiomas
are common during normal pregnancy. In addition, higher levels of estrogen,
progesterone, and other pregnancy hormones alter expression of the
cytochrome P450 system. For example, hepatic CYP1A2 expression

declines, but that of CYP2D6 and CYP3A4 rises. The latter pair possibly
affects metabolism of commonly used therapeutic agents in pregnancy
(Dallmann, 2018; Ornoy, 2019). Cytochrome enzymes are also expressed in
the placenta. The net effect is complex and likely influenced by gestational
age and organ of expression (Isoherranen, 2013). Despite these functional
changes, no major hepatic histological changes are induced by normal
pregnancy.

■ Acute Liver Failure in Pregnancy
Fortunately, liver failure is uncommon during pregnancy. Of the various
causes, drug-induced liver injury (DILI) is probably the most frequent nonpregnancy-related etiology (Hoofnagle, 2019). Acetaminophen toxicity is the
most prevalent cause in the United States (Lee, 2018). Other sources of liver
failure include acute fatty liver of pregnancy (AFLP), fulminant viral
hepatitis, environmental toxins, autoimmune hepatitis, shock liver, and
alternative medicines. In a highly selective study of 70 referred women with
a hepatic encephalopathy, half were caused by AFLP and half were
associated with HELLP syndrome (Casey, 2020).
The treatment of acute liver failure in pregnancy mirrors that for
nonpregnant individuals. Therapy targets the underlying etiology, and a team
of obstetricians, maternal-fetal medicine and critical care specialists,
hepatologists, and transplant surgeons is assembled. Laboratory studies
initially include serum levels of transaminases, bilirubin, amylase, lipase,
electrolytes, creatinine, albumin, fibrinogen, lactate, and total cholesterol;
complete blood count; and coagulation studies (Bacak, 2016). Etiologytargeted testing is described fully in later sections but broadly includes viral
and autoimmune serological assays and testing for acetaminophen, iron, and
copper toxicity. Computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance (MR)
imaging may be needed to investigate hepatic structure. For a pregnancyrelated etiology, delivery is undertaken. Because of comorbid coagulopathy,
vaginal delivery is preferable if it can be achieved expeditiously and fetal
condition allows. Hepatotoxic agents are avoided, coagulopathy is corrected,
and monitoring for cerebral edema and increased intracranial pressure is
necessary (Brown, 2018). Liver transplantation is problematic during
pregnancy, but delivery before transplantation is considered if necessary
(Bacak, 2016).

■ Intrahepatic Cholestasis of Pregnancy
Characterized by pruritus, jaundice, or both, this condition has been called
recurrent jaundice of pregnancy, cholestatic hepatosis, and icterus
gravidarum. Intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy (ICP) is more common in
multifetal pregnancy, and genetic influences are significant (Sticova, 2018).
Because of this, its incidence varies by population. In North America, the
overall incidence approximates 1 case in 500 to 1000 pregnancies, but its
rate nears 5.6 percent among pregnant Latina women in Los Angeles (Lee,
2006). Historically, indigenous women from Chile and Bolivia also have a
relatively high incidence of ICP. For unknown reasons, this incidence has
decreased since the 1970s and is now less than 2 percent (Reyes, 2016). In
Sweden, China, and Israel, the incidence varies from 0.25 to 1.5 percent
(Luo, 2015).

Pathogenesis
The cause of ICP is unclear, but changes in various sex steroid hormone
levels are implicated. In one study, women treated with vaginal progesterone
for preterm labor prophylaxis showed a fourfold increase in the ICP rate
(Zipori, 2020). Current research focuses on the numerous mutations in the
many genes that control hepatocellular transport systems. One example is
mutations of the ABCB4 gene, which encodes multidrug resistance protein 3
(MDR3) associated with progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis.
Another is error in the ABCB11 gene, which encodes a bile-salt export pump
(Reichert, 2018). Other potential gene products are the farnesoid X receptor
and transporting ATPase encoded by ATP8B1 (Abu-Hayyeh, 2016; Sticova,
2018). The latter predisposes to drug-induced cholestasis. In this regard, we
have encountered impressive cholestatic jaundice in gravidas taking
azathioprine following renal transplantation.
Following the inciting cause(s), bile acids are incompletely cleared and
accumulate in plasma. Hyperbilirubinemia results from retention of
conjugated pigment, but total plasma concentrations rarely exceed 4 to 5
mg/dL. Alkaline phosphatase levels are usually elevated even more than for
normal pregnancy. Serum transaminase levels are normal to moderately
elevated but seldom exceed 200 U/L (see Table 58-1). Liver biopsy shows
mild cholestasis with bile plugs in the hepatocytes and canaliculi of the
centrilobular regions. Inflammation or necrosis is absent. These changes

disappear after delivery but often recur in subsequent pregnancies or with
estrogen-containing contraceptives.

Clinical Presentation
Generalized pruritus that shows predilection for the palms and soles usually
develops in late pregnancy or occasionally earlier. Constitutional symptoms
are absent, and skin changes are limited to excoriations from scratching.
Serum transaminase and bile acid levels are measured in women with
suspected ICP. As a threshold for comparison, total serum bile acid levels
typically remain <10 μmol/L throughout normal pregnancy (Egan, 2012).
Elevated total serum bile acid or transaminase levels plus pruritus supports
an ICP diagnosis. Biochemical tests may be abnormal at presentation or may
follow initial pruritus after several weeks. Moreover, a rise in transaminase
levels may precede an increase in serum bile acid levels (Wood, 2018b).
Approximately 10 percent of women have concurrent jaundice.
With normal liver enzyme levels or with specific skin findings, pruritus
may instead reflect other dermatological disorders (Chap. 65, p. 1155).
Sonography may be warranted to exclude cholelithiasis and biliary
obstruction (p. 1042). Moreover, acute viral hepatitis is an unlikely
diagnosis because of the usually low serum transaminase levels seen with
ICP. Conversely, underlying chronic hepatitis C is associated with a
significantly greater risk of developing ICP, which may be as much as 20fold higher (Marschall, 2013).

Management
Pruritus may be troublesome and is thought to result from elevated serum bile
salt concentrations. Antihistamines and topical emollients usually provide
some relief. Cholestyramine is reported to be effective, but this compound
also lowers absorption of fat-soluble vitamins. This may lead to vitamin K
deficiency and fetal coagulopathy. Subsequent fetal intracranial hemorrhage
and stillbirth have been reported (Matos, 1997).
Currently, the most popular treatment is with ursodeoxycholic acid
(Actigall), which relieves pruritus and reduces serum levels of bile salts and
liver enzymes (Bacq, 2012; Parízek, 2016). It is available as 300-mg
capsules. Oral dosing is 10 to 15 mg/kg maternal body weight daily, which is
divided into two or three doses (Tran, 2016). In a large randomized trial, the

maternal “itch score” was not significantly lower with ursodeoxycholic acid
compared with placebo (Chappell, 2019). From our experiences at Parkland
Hospital, however, pruritus typically improves after 2 to 3 weeks of
ursodeoxycholic acid therapy (Yule, 2021). Such treatment has also been
reported to lower risks for stillbirth and fetal distress and is discussed
subsequently.
Other described treatments include therapeutic plasma exchange and
rifampin (Liu, 2018; Ovadia, 2018). A randomized trial comparing
ursodeoxycholic acid and rifampicin is underway (Australian New Zealand
Clinical Trials Registry, 2019).

Perinatal Outcomes
Early reports describe excessive adverse fetal outcomes in women with ICP.
However, data from the past two decades are ambiguous concerning
increased perinatal mortality rates and whether close fetal surveillance is
preventive. Sheiner and coworkers (2006) described no differences in
perinatal outcomes in 376 affected pregnancies compared with their overall
obstetrical population. However, rates of labor induction and cesarean
delivery in affected women were significantly higher. In a study of 5477
women with ICP from a database of 1.2 million births, neonates had a lower
5-minute Apgar score, but the stillbirth rate was not greater (Wikström
Shemer, 2013). The latter rate was thought to reflect a higher labor induction
rate, which at the time of the study was recommended to avoid stillbirth.
In some studies, complications developed more frequently in women
with higher total bile acid levels (Di Mascio, 2019; Herrera, 2018; Ovadia,
2019). These studies described stillbirths despite normal findings during
antenatal testing. One study of 693 Swedish women found a greater perinatal
mortality rate in women with bile acids levels >40 μmol/L (Glantz, 2004). In
others, an increased stillbirth risk was noted in women whose serum bile
acid levels were >100 μmol/L (Brouwers, 2015; Chappell, 2019, Kawakita,
2015). Chappell and associates (2019) also found that ursodeoxycholic acid
treatment did not lower perinatal death rates. The use of antenatal fetal
testing was not described. In a metaanalysis of 5557 women with ICP,
Ovadia and colleagues (2019) concluded that serum bile acid levels >100
μmol/L were associated with stillbirth.

Other adverse perinatal outcomes also have been described. Brouwers
and colleagues (2015) found higher rates of spontaneous preterm birth (19
percent) and meconium-stained amnionic fluid (48 percent), despite active
management leading to earlier delivery. Novel associations of ICP with
preeclampsia, gestational diabetes, and large for gestational age also are
reported (Wikström Shemer, 2013).
In summary, management is directed at early delivery to mitigate the
relatively uncommon incidence of fetal death. Treatment with
ursodeoxycholic acid does not always improve maternal symptoms or protect
against stillbirth. It is problematic that antenatal testing does not reliably
forecast impending fetal death. We do not routinely employ these for
uncomplicated ICP. The precise gestational age for labor induction is
uncertain, but many authors recommend 37 weeks’ gestation (Wood, 2018b).
At Parkland Hospital, we routinely induce labor at 38 weeks if symptoms
worsen or if serum bile acid levels exceed 40 μmol/L.

Fetal Effects of Bile Acids
As noted, evidence supports that maternal serum bile acid levels >100
μmol/L contribute to fetal death and meconium passage. Fetal death may be
related to the cardiotoxicity of bile acids, which causes cardiac dysfunction
and presumably cardiac arrest. In an ex-vivo preparation of cardiac
myocytes, cholic acid lowered beating rates in a dose-dependent fashion,
while elevating intracellular calcium concentration (Gao, 2014).
Prolongation of the fetal cardiac PR interval and successful reversal with
ursodeoxycholic acid has been described (Rodríguez, 2018; Strehlow,
2010). Last, Ozel and coworkers (2018) demonstrated impaired global
ventricular function in fetuses of pregnancies complicated by ICP.

■ Acute Fatty Liver of Pregnancy
The most frequent cause of acute liver failure during pregnancy is acute fatty
liver—also called acute fatty metamorphosis or acute yellow atrophy. It is
characterized by accumulation of microvesicular fat that literally “crowds
out” normal hepatocytic function (Fig. 58-1). Grossly, the liver is small, soft,
yellow, and greasy. In its worst form, the incidence approximates 1 case per
10,000 births (Nelson, 2013). AFLP recurring in subsequent pregnancy is
rare (Usta, 1994).

FIGURE 58-1 Acute fatty liver of pregnancy. Cross section of the liver from a woman who died as
the result of pulmonary aspiration and respiratory failure. The liver has a greasy yellow appearance.
Inset: Electron photomicrograph of a swollen hepatocyte containing numerous microvesicular fat
droplets (*). The nucleus (N) remains centered within the cell in contrast to the case with
macrovesicular fat deposition. (Reproduced with permission from Dr. Don Wheeler.)

Etiopathogenesis
Although the underlying cause remains unclear, many cases of AFLP are
associated with recessively inherited mitochondrial abnormalities of fatty
acid oxidation. Several mutations for the mitochondrial trifunctional protein
enzyme complex that catalyzes the last oxidative steps in the pathway are
implicated. The most common are the G1528C and E474Q missense
mutations of the gene on chromosome 2 that codes for long-chain-3hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase (LCHAD) (Liu, 2017a). Mutations for
medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (MCAD) and for carnitine
palmitoyltransferase 1 (CPT1) deficiency are others. These are similar to
mutations in children with Reye-like syndromes.
Sims and colleagues (1995) observed that some homozygous LCHADdeficient children with Reye-like syndromes had heterozygous mothers with
AFLP. This was also seen in women with a compound heterozygous fetus.
Although some conclude that only heterozygous LCHAD-deficient mothers
are at risk for ALFP when their fetus is homozygous, this is not always true

(Liu, 2017a). An association between fatty acid β-oxidation enzyme defects
and severe preeclampsia, especially in women with HELLP syndrome, is
also controversial (Chap. 40, p. 693). Most observations derive from
retrospective study of mothers with a child who later developed Reye-like
syndrome. One case-control study compared 50 mothers of children with a
fatty acid oxidation defect and 1250 mothers of matched control infants
(Browning, 2006). During their pregnancy, 12 percent of mothers with an
affected child developed HELLP syndrome and 4 percent developed AFLP.
Comparatively, only 0.9 percent of control women developed liver
problems. Despite these findings, the clinical, biochemical, and
histopathological findings are sufficiently disparate and support that severe
preeclampsia, with or without HELLP syndrome, and AFLP are distinct
syndromes (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2012;
Byrne, 2020).

Clinical Findings
AFLP almost always manifests in the last trimester and rarely midpregnancy
(Wong, 2020). From Parkland Hospital, Nelson and colleagues (2013)
described 51 women with AFLP at a mean gestational age of 37 weeks
(range 31.7 to 40.9 weeks). Approximately 41 percent were nulliparous and
20 percent were delivered at 34 weeks’ gestation or earlier. Women with a
multifetal gestation account for 20 percent of cases (Vigil-De Gracia, 2011).
AFLP has a broad spectrum of clinical features and severity, and
symptoms usually advance over several days. Persistent nausea and vomiting
are major complaints. Degrees of malaise, anorexia, epigastric pain, and
progressive jaundice vary. In almost all severe cases, acute liver injury
causes profound endothelial cell activation, capillary leakage, and
hemoconcentration; acute kidney injury; ascites; and sometimes pulmonary
permeability edema (Bernal, 2013). Half of affected women have
hypertension, proteinuria, and edema, alone or in combination. Notably, these
signs also suggest preeclampsia.
As shown in Tables 58-1 and 58-2, degrees of moderate to severe liver
dysfunction are manifest by hypofibrinogenemia, hypocholesterolemia, and
prolonged clotting times. Serum bilirubin levels usually are <10 mg/dL, and
serum transaminase levels are modestly elevated and usually <1000 U/L. An
AFLP diagnosis is arrived at by clinical and laboratory findings. Biopsy is
unnecessary. The Swansea criteria proposed by Ch’ng and associates (2002)

as a screening tool and predictor of severity shows suitable sensitivity
(Table 58-3) (Morton, 2018; Wang, 2017).
TABLE 58-2. Comparison of Clinical Findings at the Time of Admission in
67 Women with Acute Fatty Liver of Pregnancy and 67 with HELLP
Syndrome

TABLE 58-3. Swansea Criteria for AFLP Diagnosisa

Hemolysis can be severe and is thought to stem from effects of
hypocholesterolemia on erythrocyte membranes (Cunningham, 1985).
Laboratory evidence includes leukocytosis, nucleated red cells, mild to
moderate thrombocytopenia, and increased serum levels of lactic acid
dehydrogenase (LDH) or decreased haptoglobin levels. The peripheral
blood smear demonstrates echinocytosis. However, the hematocrit is often
high or within the normal range because of hemoconcentration. With severe
hemoconcentration, uteroplacental perfusion is reduced and this, along with
maternal acidosis, can cause fetal death. Likewise, maternal and fetal
acidemia are associated with a high incidence of fetal jeopardy and a
concordantly high cesarean delivery rate.
The degree of clotting dysfunction varies and can be potentially life
threatening, especially if cesarean delivery is undertaken. Coagulopathy is

caused by diminished hepatic procoagulant synthesis, although some
evidence supports increased consumption from disseminated intravascular
coagulopathy. As shown in Table 58-2, hypofibrinogenemia can be profound.
Of 51 women cared for at Parkland Hospital, almost one third had a plasma
fibrinogen level nadir below 100 mg/dL (Nelson, 2014). Elevated levels of
serum D-dimers or fibrin-split products also indicate an element of
consumptive coagulopathy (Lisman, 2017). Although usually modest,
occasionally thrombocytopenia is marked. Among the women from Parkland
Hospital, 20 percent had platelet counts <100,000/μL, and 10 percent had
platelet counts <50,000/μL (Byrne, 2020).
Because liver dysfunction and kidney injury are central to AFLP, Byrne
and colleagues (2020) have proposed the acronym FaCCT to differentiate
AFLP from HELLP syndrome using levels of commonly available laboratory
analytes: fibrinogen (<300 mg/dL) and cholesterol (<220 mg/dL), creatinine
(>0.9 mg/dL), and total bilirubin (>1 mg/dL). To emphasize, the clinical
features and sequelae of AFLP are attributed to liver dysfunction, whereas in
HELLP syndrome the procoagulant production and function of the liver
appears relatively preserved.
AFLP typically continues to worsen after diagnosis. Hypoglycemia is
common, and hepatic encephalopathy, severe coagulopathy, and some degree
of renal failure each develop in approximately half of women. Delivery
fortunately arrests liver function deterioration, but recovery may require
substantial supportive care.
Various liver imaging techniques can help confirm the diagnosis, but none
is particularly reliable (Liu, 2017a). In a prospective evaluation of the
Swansea criteria, only a quarter of women with AFLP had classic
sonographic findings that included maternal ascites or an echogenic hepatic
appearance (Knight, 2008). Although Châtel and coworkers (2016)
described greater liver fat detected by MR imaging, this has not been our
experience.
We have encountered several women with an underdeveloped form of
AFLP. Clinical involvement is relatively minor and laboratory aberrations—
usually only hemolysis and a decreased plasma fibrinogen level—herald the
syndrome. Thus, the spectrum of liver involvement can include unnoticed
milder cases, findings that are instead attributed to preeclampsia, or a severe
form displaying overt hepatic failure and associated encephalopathy.

Management
Intensive supportive measures and sound obstetrical care are essential.
Delivery of the fetus is necessary in the treatment of AFLP, and significant
procrastination increases maternal and fetal risks. We prefer a trial of labor
induction with close fetal surveillance. Although some recommend cesarean
delivery to hasten hepatic healing, this raises maternal bleeding complication
risks when coagulopathy is severe. Nonetheless, cesarean delivery is
common due to fetal intolerance of labor, and rates approach 90 percent. In
some cases, the fetus has already died when AFLP is diagnosed, and the
delivery route is less problematic. To correct coagulopathy, transfusions with
whole blood or packed red cells, along with fresh-frozen plasma,
cryoprecipitate, and platelets, are usually necessary for surgery or vaginal
laceration repair (Chap. 44, p. 772).
Hepatic function usually returns to normal within a week postpartum, but
in the interim, intensive medical support may be required. Two associated
conditions can be seen during this time. Perhaps a fourth of women have
evidence for transient diabetes insipidus. This presumably stems from
elevated vasopressinase concentrations caused by diminished hepatic
production of its inactivating enzyme. Second, acute pancreatitis develops
in approximately 20 percent.
With supportive care, recovery usually is complete. Maternal deaths are
caused by liver failure, sepsis, hemorrhage, aspiration, renal failure,
pancreatitis, and gastrointestinal bleeding. Two women died in the series
from Parkland Hospital. One had associated encephalopathy and aspirated
before intubation during transfer to our care. The other was a woman with
profound liver failure and nonresponsive hypotension (Nelson, 2013). Other
treatment measures have included plasma exchange and liver transplantation
(Ringers, 2016; Wu, 2018).

Maternal and Perinatal Outcomes
Maternal mortality rates with AFLP approached 75 percent in the past, but
the contemporaneous outlook is much better. From his review, Sibai (2007)
cites an average mortality rate of 7 percent. He also cited a 70-percent
preterm delivery rate and a 15-percent perinatal mortality rate, which in the
past was nearly 90 percent. During the past four decades at Parkland

Hospital, the maternal and perinatal mortality rates have been 4 percent and
12 percent, respectively (Byrne, 2020).

■ Viral Hepatitis
Most viral hepatitis syndromes are asymptomatic, and acute symptomatic
infections are becoming less common in the United States. There are at least
five distinct types of viruses causing hepatitis: A (HAV), B (HBV), D (HDV)
caused by the hepatitis B–associated delta agent, C (HCV), and E (HEV).
The clinical presentation of acute infection is similar in all, and although the
viruses themselves probably are not hepatotoxic, the immunological response
to them causes hepatocellular necrosis (Dienstag, 2018a,b). Several other
viral agents can infect the liver, and two examples are cytomegalovirus and
herpes simplex virus (Calix, 2020; McCormack, 2019).
Acute infections are most often subclinical and anicteric. When they are
clinically apparent, nausea and vomiting, headache, and malaise may precede
jaundice by 1 to 2 weeks. By the time jaundice develops, symptoms usually
are improving. Low-grade fever is more common with hepatitis A. Serum
transaminase levels vary, and their peaks do not correspond with disease
severity. Peak levels that range from 400 to 4000 U/L are usually reached by
the time jaundice develops (see Table 58-1). Serum bilirubin values
typically continue to rise, and peak at 5 to 20 mg/dL, despite falling serum
transaminase levels.
Severe features should prompt hospitalization. These include persistent
nausea and vomiting, prolonged prothrombin time, low serum albumin level,
hypoglycemia, high serum bilirubin level, or central nervous system
symptoms. In most cases, clinical and biochemical recovery is complete
within 1 to 2 months in all cases of hepatitis A, in most cases of hepatitis B,
but in only a small proportion of those caused by hepatitis C.
Patient’s feces, secretions, bedpans, and other articles in contact with the
intestinal tract should be handled with glove-protected hands. In hospitals,
extra precautions, such as double gloving during delivery and surgical
procedures, are recommended. Due to significant exposure of health-care
personnel to hepatitis B, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC) recommend active and passive vaccination, as described later (p.
1037) (Schillie, 2018). For hepatitis C, although direct antiviral regimens

have been developed, there is no vaccine. Guidelines instead recommend
postexposure serosurveillance only.
Acute hepatitis has a case-fatality rate of 0.1 percent. For those requiring
hospitalization, it may reach 1 percent. Most fatalities are due to fulminant
hepatic necrosis, which in later pregnancy may resemble AFLP. In these
cases, hepatic encephalopathy is the usual presentation, and the mortality rate
is 80 percent. Approximately half of patients with fulminant disease have
hepatitis B infection, and co-infection with the delta agent is common.
Chronic hepatitis is more prevalent than acute infection. The CDC (2019)
estimates that almost 3.5 million persons in the United States are living with
chronic viral hepatitis. Although most are asymptomatic, approximately 20
percent develop cirrhosis within 10 to 20 years (Dienstag, 2018a). When
present, symptoms are nonspecific and usually include fatigue. In some
patients, cirrhosis with liver failure or bleeding varices may be the initial
finding. Also, asymptomatic chronic viral hepatitis remains the leading cause
of liver cancer and the most frequent reason for liver transplantation.
Chronic viral hepatitis is usually diagnosed serologically (Table 58-4).
With persistently abnormal biochemical tests, liver biopsy usually discloses
active inflammation, continuing necrosis, and fibrosis that may lead to
cirrhosis. Chronic hepatitis is classified by cause; grade, defined by
histological activity; and stage, which is the degree of progression (Dienstag,
2018a).
TABLE 58-4. Laboratory Features of Chronic Hepatitis

Most young women with chronic viral hepatitis either are asymptomatic
or have only mild liver disease. For asymptomatic women, pregnancies are
usually uncomplicated. With symptomatic chronic active hepatitis, pregnancy
outcome depends primarily on disease severity, and especially on the
presence of portal hypertension (p. 1040). The few women whom we have
managed have done well, but their long-term prognosis is poor. Accordingly,
they should be counseled regarding possible liver transplantation as well as
contraceptive and sterilization options.

Hepatitis A
Vaccination has reduced the incidence of hepatitis A by 95 percent. In 2019,
the rate was 6 cases per 100,000 individuals in the United States (Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention, 2021). HAV is an RNA picornavirus and is
transmitted by the fecal–oral route and usually by contaminated food or water
ingestion. The incubation period approximates 4 weeks. Individuals shed
virus in their feces, and during the relatively brief period of viremia, their
blood also is infectious. Signs and symptoms are often nonspecific and
usually mild, although jaundice develops in most patients. Symptoms usually

last less than 2 months, but 10 to 15 percent of patients may remain
symptomatic or relapse for up to 6 months (Dienstag, 2018b). Early
serological testing identifies immunoglobulin M (IgM) anti-HAV antibody,
which may persist for several months. During convalescence, IgG antibody
predominates, and it provides subsequent immunity. Hepatitis A lacks a
chronic stage.
Vaccination during childhood with inactivated hepatitis viral vaccine is
more than 90-percent effective. The American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2018) and the Advisory Committee on Immunization
Practices recommends HAV vaccination for high-risk adults (Freedman,
2020). This includes pregnant women at risk (Nelson, 2020). Candidates are
persons with chronic liver disease, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
infection, homelessness, or illegal drug use. Those working in group
facilities with at-risk persons, conducting research with HAV, or traveling to
or adopting from endemic areas also are included. High-risk countries are
listed in the CDC (2020b) “Yellow Book”—Health Information for
International Travel.
For an unvaccinated gravida who is recently exposed by close personal
or sexual contact with a person with hepatitis A, passive immunization is
provided by a 0.1-mL/kg dose of immune globulin. Concurrently, the first
dose of the hepatitis A vaccine series is given in a separate arm (Nelson,
2020).
Pregnancy and Hepatitis A. Management of hepatitis A in pregnancy includes
a balanced diet and diminished physical activity. Women with mild illness
may be managed as outpatients. In developed countries, the effects of
hepatitis A on pregnancy outcomes are not dramatic (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2012, 2018). However, in resource-poor
countries, both perinatal and maternal mortality rates are substantively
higher. HAV is not teratogenic, and transmission to the fetus is negligible.
The risk of preterm birth may be higher, and neonatal cholestasis has been
reported (Urganci, 2003). Although HAV RNA has been isolated in breast
milk, no cases of neonatal hepatitis A have been reported secondary to
breastfeeding (Daudi, 2012).

Hepatitis B

This infection stems from a double-stranded DNA virus that is found
worldwide. HBV is endemic in Africa, Central and Southeast Asia, China,
Eastern Europe, the Middle East, and certain areas of South America. In all
these, infection prevalence reaches 5 to 20 percent. An estimated 1.6 million
people in the United States have chronic hepatitis B (Lim, 2020). HBV is
carcinogenic, and chronic infection is a known risk for hepatocellular
carcinoma. For others, cirrhosis can be a long-term sequela.
HBV is transmitted by exposure to blood or other body fluids from
infected individuals. In endemic countries, vertical transmission, that is from
mother to fetus or newborn, accounts for at least 35 to 50 percent of chronic
HBV infections. In low-prevalence countries such as the United States,
which has a prevalence below 2 percent, the more frequent transmission
mode is sexual contact or shared contaminated needles.
Acute hepatitis B develops after an incubation period that ranges from 40
to 150 days (Schillie, 2018). At least half of acute infections are
asymptomatic. Symptoms completely resolve within 3 to 4 months in most.
However, acute hepatitis B accounts for half of fulminant hepatitis cases.
Figure 58-2 details the sequence of the various HBV antigens and
antibodies in acute infection. The first serological marker is hepatitis B
surface antigen (HBsAg), which often precedes the rise in transaminase
levels. As HBsAg disappears, antibodies to the surface antigen develop
(anti-HBs), and this marks complete disease resolution. Hepatitis B core
antigen (HBcAg) is an intracellular antigen and not detectable in serum.
However, antibodies against this core antigen (anti-HBc) are detectable and
found within weeks of HBsAg appearance. The hepatitis B e antigen
(HBeAg) is present during times of high viral replication and often correlates
with detectable HBV DNA. After acute hepatitis, at least 90 percent of adults
recover completely, and the remainder are considered to have chronic
hepatitis B.

FIGURE 58-2 Sequence of various antigens and antibodies in acute hepatitis B. ALT = alanine
transaminase; anti-HBc = antibody to hepatitis B core antigen; anti-HBe = antibody to hepatitis B e
antigen; anti-HBs = antibody to hepatitis B surface antigen; HBeAg = hepatitis B e antigen; HBsAg =
hepatitis B surface antigen. (Redrawn from Dienstag JL: Acute viral hepatitis. In Jameson JL, Fauci
AS, Kasper DL, et al (eds): Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, NY:
McGraw Hill; 2018b, p 2347.)

Chronic HBV infection is often asymptomatic but may cause persistent
anorexia, weight loss, fatigue, and hepatosplenomegaly. Extrahepatic
manifestations include arthritis, generalized vasculitis, glomerulonephritis,
pericarditis, myocarditis, transverse myelitis, and peripheral neuropathy.
One risk factor for chronic disease is age at acquisition. Pertinent to the
obstetrician, this risk exceeds 90 percent in newborns. The risk is 50 percent
in young children and is less than 10 percent in immunocompetent adults
(Schillie, 2018). An immunocompromised state such as with HIV infection,
organ transplantation, or chemotherapy creates vulnerability.
Those with chronic HBV infection have serum test results that show
HBsAg persistence. These infected persons may be asymptomatic carriers or
may have chronic liver disease with or without cirrhosis or hepatocellular
cancer. The presence of HPV DNA in serum tests is a marker of HBV
replication. Those with high HBV replication, which is reflected in high

HBV DNA levels with or without HBeAg, have the greatest likelihood of
developing cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma.
Pregnancy and Hepatitis B. The US Preventive Services Task Force (2019)
recommends that all pregnant women be screened for HBV. This practice
identifies asymptomatic cases and later allows neonatal intervention. At the
first prenatal care visit, a serologic HBsAg level is obtained, and this is
repeated in high-risk women again at the time of delivery. All states require
cases of HBV infection to be reported, and 26 mandate that pregnant women
be screened (Culp, 2016). HBV infection does not cause excessive rates of
maternal morbidity or mortality (Stewart, 2013). In one regional study in the
United States, 14 percent of women with HBV infection had a worsening of
disease, sometimes termed a flare, either antepartum or in the 6 months
postpartum (Kushner, 2018). A review of data from the National Inpatient
Sample reported a modest rise in preterm birth rates in HBV-positive
mothers but no effect on fetal-growth restriction or preeclampsia rates
(Reddick, 2011). Others have shown similar results (Cui, 2017; Liu, 2017b).
Transplacental HBV infection is uncommon, and Towers and associates
(2001) reported that viral DNA is rarely found in amnionic fluid or cord
blood. The highest HBV DNA levels are found in women who transmitted
the virus to their fetuses (Dunkelberg, 2014; Society for Maternal-Fetal
Medicine, 2016).
To curb vertical transmission, newborns of seropositive mothers are
given hepatitis B immune globulin (HBIG) plus the first of a three-dose
hepatitis B recombinant vaccine series very soon after birth. In the absence
of HBV immunoprophylaxis, 10 to 20 percent of women positive for HBsAg
transmit viral infection to their infant. This rate rises to almost 90 percent if
the mother is HBsAg and HBeAg positive. Administration of
immunoprophylaxis and hepatitis B vaccine shortly after birth has lowered
transmission dramatically and prevented approximately 90 percent of
infections (Smith, 2012). But, women with high HBV viral loads—106 to 108
copies/mL—or those who are HBeAg positive still have at least a 10percent vertical transmission rate, regardless of immunoprophylaxis (Rogan,
2019; Yi, 2016). Hill and colleagues (2002) reported that the 2.4-percent
transmission rate was not increased with breastfeeding if neonatal
vaccination was completed. Although virus is present in breast milk, the
incidence of transmission is not diminished by formula feeding (Shi, 2011).

The American Academy of Pediatrics and the American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2018) do not consider maternal HBV
infection a contraindication to breastfeeding.
As a second transmission-prevention practice, the CDC and numerous
societies now recommend antiviral therapy to decrease viral levels in
gravidas whose viral load exceeds 106 to 108 copies/mL (Schillie, 2018).
Newer drugs include tenofovir, an adenosine nucleoside analogue, and
telbivudine, a thymidine analogue. Tenofovir is the first-line agent during
pregnancy, and no dose adjustments are necessary (Cressey, 2018). These
antiviral medications appear safe in pregnancy and are not associated with
greater rates of congenital malformations or adverse obstetrical outcomes
(Sylvester-Armstrong, 2019). Follow-up of children at age 6 to 7 years found
no related problems (Wen, 2020).
Regarding efficacy, one randomized trial in Thailand showed that
tenofovir compared with placebo beginning at 28 weeks’ gestation did not
reduce the low rate of vertical transmission if both active and passive
immunoprophylaxis were given at birth to the neonate (Jourdain, 2018). In
another similar randomized trial, vertical transmission rates were
significantly lowered (Pan, 2016).
For high-risk mothers who are seronegative, HBV vaccine can be given
during pregnancy. Candidates are persons with chronic liver disease,
diabetes, HIV or HCV infection, injection drug use, occupational exposure
risk, household contacts, or long-term travel to endemic areas. Those
requiring dialysis, living in a long-term-care or correctional facility, or
engaging in sex with multiple or HBV-infected partners also are included
(Schillie, 2018).
Vaccine efficacy is similar to that for nonpregnant adults, and overall
seroconversion rates approach 95 percent after three doses (Stewart, 2013).
The traditional vaccination schedule of 0, 1, and 6 months may be difficult to
complete during pregnancy, and compliance rates decline postpartum.
Sheffield and coworkers (2006) reported that an accelerated three-dose
regimen—given initially and at 1 and 4 months—resulted in seroconversion
rates of 56, 77, and 90 percent, respectively. This regimen was usually easily
completed during prenatal care.

Hepatitis D

Also called delta hepatitis, this is a defective RNA virus that is a hybrid
particle with an HBsAg coat and a delta core. The HDV must co-infect with
HBV either simultaneously or secondarily, and transmission is similar to
HBV.

Hepatitis C
This infection stems from a single-stranded RNA virus. Transmission is via
blood and other body fluids, although sexual transmission is inefficient. In the
United States, adult prevalence of HCV was reported to be 2 to 5 cases per
1000 births (Prasad, 2020; Rossi, 2020). Up to a third of anti-HCV positive
persons have no identifiable risk factors (Dienstag, 2018b).
Until recently, screening for HCV was encouraged only for high-risk
individuals. But in 2020, the CDC recommended HCV screening for all
adults at least once in a lifetime, and more regularly for those with risk
factors (Schillie 2020). These are injection drug use, hemodialysis, or
exposure to blood-contaminated items. The CDC also recommended prenatal
HCV screening for all women regardless of risk factors. The US Preventive
Services Task Force (2020) has published similar recommendations.
Chronic hepatitis C is diagnosed by identification of anti-HCV antibodies
detected with a serum immunoassay. Acute HCV infection is usually
asymptomatic or yields mild symptoms. Only 10 to 15 percent of patients
develop jaundice. The incubation period ranges from 15 to 160 days, with a
mean of 7 weeks. Transaminase levels are elevated episodically during the
acute infection. HCV RNA testing confirms clinical suspicion of active or
acute HCV infection. RNA levels may be found even before rises in
transaminase and anti-HCV levels. Anti-HCV antibody is not detected for an
average of 15 weeks and in some cases up to 1 year (Dienstag, 2018b).
Nearly 80 to 90 percent of patients with acute HCV will be chronically
infected. Although most remain asymptomatic, approximately 20 to 30
percent progress to cirrhosis within 20 to 30 years. Transaminase and HCV
RNA values fluctuate over time. Liver biopsy reveals chronic disease and
fibrosis in up to 50 percent, however, these findings are often mild. Overall,
the long-term prognosis for most patients is good.
Pregnancy and Hepatitis C. As expected, most pregnant women diagnosed
with HCV have chronic disease. Aggregate reports have chronicled modestly
greater fetal risks of low birthweight, neonatal intensive-care admission,

preterm delivery, and mechanical ventilation (Rossi, 2020; Society for
Maternal-Fetal Medicine, 2017). In some women, these adverse outcomes
may have been influenced by concurrent high-risk behaviors associated with
HCV infection.
The primary adverse perinatal outcome is vertical transmission of HCV
infection to the fetus-neonate. This is higher in mothers with viremia (Indolfi,
2014). Airoldi and Berghella (2006) cited a rate of 1 to 3 percent in HCVpositive, RNA-negative women compared with 4 to 6 percent in those who
were RNA-positive. In a report from Dublin, the vertical transmission rate in
545 women with HCV infection was 7 percent in RNA-positive women
compared with none in those who were RNA-negative (McMenamin, 2008).
Some have found an even higher risk when the mother is co-infected with
HIV (Snidjewind, 2015; Tovo, 2016). Approximately two thirds of prenatal
transmission cases occur peripartum. HCV genotype, invasive prenatal
procedures, breastfeeding, and delivery mode are not associated with
vertical transmission. That said, invasive procedures such as scalp-electrode
fetal heart rate monitoring are avoided. HCV infection is not a
contraindication to breastfeeding (Post, 2017).
No licensed vaccine is available for HCV prevention. In 2011, the first
direct-acting antiviral drugs against HCV became available. Since then,
second-generation prototypes with fewer adverse effects have been
developed and are given as combinations to nonpregnant individuals. They
are currently not recommended for use in pregnancy except in clinical trials
(Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, 2017). The combination of ledipasvir
plus sofosbuvir shows efficacy and reassuring safety data in early clinical
trials.

Hepatitis E
This infection stems from a water-borne RNA virus, which usually is
enterically transmitted by contaminated water supplies. Hepatitis E is found
worldwide, but the Centers for Disease Control (2020a) lists Mexico, Asia,
and Africa as endemic areas. In these regions, seroprevalence rates vary by
age and geography, but overall rates of 10 percent have been reported. In
Mexico, Durango State has the highest rate—37 percent (Fierro, 2016).
Hepatitis E is the most common cause of acute hepatitis worldwide but
rarely causes liver failure in the United States (Fontana, 2016). Epidemic

outbreaks in third-world countries result in substantial morbidity and
mortality rates. Pregnant women have a greater case-fatality rate than
nonpregnant individuals (Li, 2020). In a metaanalysis of nearly 4000 women
from Asia and Africa, maternal and fetal case-fatality rates were 21 and 34
percent, respectively (Jin, 2016a). Fulminant hepatitis, although rare, is more
common in gravidas and contributes to the increased mortality rates.
A recombinant HEV vaccine has been developed and licensed in China
(Zaman, 2020). It is >95 percent effective for 12 months after vaccination.
Long-term efficacy is 87 percent, and protective titers are maintained for up
to 4.5 years (Zhang, 2015). Preliminary data from inadvertently vaccinated
pregnant women show no adverse maternal or fetal events (Wu, 2012).

■ Autoimmune Hepatitis
This generally progressive chronic hepatitis is more common in women and
western countries. Autoimmune hepatitis frequently coexists with other types
of autoimmune disease, particularly autoimmune thyroid disease and Sjögren
syndrome. It is characterized by multiple autoimmune antibodies such as
antinuclear (ANA), anti-smooth muscle, and anti-liver, kidney microsome 1
(LKM1) antibodies (see Table 58-1). Rates of subsequent cirrhosis vary
worldwide. The less common type 2 autoimmune hepatitis has an even higher
prevalence in females and typically a more aggressive presentation. The
incidence peaks in childhood and adolescence.
Symptoms are typical of acute and chronic hepatitis, but a fourth of
patients may be asymptomatic. Treatment employs corticosteroids, alone or
combined with azathioprine (Dienstag, 2018a). Failure to respond to these
two agents is more frequent in those with type 2 disease. Nearly all women
with type 2 disease require long-term intensive therapy. In some patients with
progressive disease and cirrhosis, hepatocellular carcinoma develops.
In general, autoimmune hepatitis—especially when severe—increases
the risk of adverse pregnancy outcomes. Westbrook and coworkers (2012)
reported the outcomes of 81 pregnancies in 53 women. A third had a flare,
and these were more common in those not taking medication and those with
active disease in the year before conception. Women with cirrhosis had more
maternal and fetal complications. From a Swedish national database of 171
births, the frequencies of preterm birth, low birthweight, and diabetes were
elevated, but not those of preeclampsia or cesarean delivery (Stokkeland,

2016). Another study reported delivery before 38 weeks’ gestation in 25
percent of cases and development of a postpartum flare in a third
(Danielsson Borssén, 2016). However, adverse outcomes were not greater in
women with cirrhosis. Given the important role of procoagulant production,
surveillance of coagulation indices is advised to minimize obstetrical
hemorrhage complications. Also, the usual vaccines, along with
pneumococcal vaccine, should be given (Furer, 2020).

■ Iron and Copper Overload
Chronic hepatitis and cirrhosis can result from iron and copper overload.
Iron overload may stem from a primary cause, such as hereditary
hemochromatosis, or from secondary complications of erythrocyte disorders
(Chap. 56 p. 1052). Many gene mutations underlying hereditary
hemochromatosis involve hepcidin and result in dysregulated iron transport.
Some of these mutations are more common in certain populations from
northern Europe (Pietrangelo, 2016; Salgia, 2015). Cardiomyopathy,
diabetes, joint disease, and skin changes can coexist with liver disease.
Diagnosis is made by identifying an HFE gene mutation and elevated serum
ferritin and transferrin saturation levels. An abnormal HFE gene alone is not
diagnostic because the mutation has low penetrance. Pregnancy outcomes are
driven by the degree of liver dysfunction, although higher iron levels may
affect birthweight (Dorak, 2009).
A form of neonatal hemochromatosis that does not affect the mother is
now thought to be alloimmune and is called gestational alloimmune liver
disease (Anastasio, 2016; Ibrahim, 2020). With this, maternal autoantibodies
cross to the fetus and mediate dysfunction of iron homeostasis, although the
antigenic target of these alloantibodies remains unclear. It is associated with
significant neonatal morbidity and mortality and frequently recurs in
subsequent pregnancies. In these cases, antepartum treatment with
intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) may improve outcomes (Feldman, 2013;
Roumiantsev, 2015).
Wilson disease is caused by copper overload leading to chronic hepatitis
and cirrhosis. Autosomal recessive mutations of the ATP7B gene underlie
this disorder. This gene codes for the P-type ATPase involved in copper
transport to ceruloplasmin and bile (Bandman, 2015). This systemic
condition can also manifest with cardiomyopathy, renal disease,

neuropsychiatric symptoms, and certain endocrine abnormalities. Serum
ceruloplasmin, slit-lamp examination, and 24-hour urinary copper excretion
are used to identify this disease. A Kayser-Fleischer ring surrounding the iris
is highly specific, but a suspected diagnosis generally requires subsequent
genetic analysis confirmation.
With Wilson disease, infertility may be present, but pregnancy outcomes
among affected women are influenced by disease severity (Malik, 2013). In
one multicenter study of 282 pregnancies, the miscarriage rate was 26
percent, and 6 percent of the women had worsening liver disease
(Pfeiffenberger, 2018). Birth defects were not increased with chelation
treatment. Maternal and neonatal outcomes were good. The American
College of Gastroenterology states that few data guide which of the various
chelating agents is best (Tran, 2016). These include penicillamine, zinc, and
trientine, and any theoretical risks are outweighed by the risks of
discontinuing therapy. The latter include not only hepatic decompensation,
but also injury to the placenta and fetal liver. Accordingly, the American
College of Gastroenterology recommends that pregnant women should
continue their chelation therapy, although a dose reduction of 25 to 50
percent should be considered to promote wound healing in the event of a
surgical delivery.

■ Nonalcoholic Fatty Liver Disease
This is the most common chronic liver disease in the United States.
Unsurprisingly, because it is frequently comorbid with obesity, it is
demonstrable in 25 percent of American adults (Abdelmalek, 2018).
Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is a macrovesicular fatty liver
condition that resembles alcohol-induced liver injury but is seen without
ethanol abuse. Its most severe form—nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH)
—is an increasingly recognized condition that may occasionally progress to
hepatic cirrhosis. Currently, this is the third most common indication for liver
transplantation in the United States (Diehl, 2017).
Obesity, type 2 diabetes, and hyperlipidemia—syndrome X—frequently
coexist with NAFLD (Chap. 51, p. 904). The current hypothesis suggests that
these conditions may interact with other unknown etiological agents to cause
multiple insults that lead to hepatic injury (Buzzetti, 2016). In one study of
individuals with type 2 diabetes and normal liver enzyme levels, half had

NAFLD, and those with NAFLD showed greater insulin resistance (PortilloSanchex, 2015). In a study of obese adolescents undergoing bariatric surgery
and intraoperative core liver biopsy, more than a third had fatty liver without
hepatitis. An additional 20 percent had borderline or definite NASH
(Xanthakos, 2015).
Liver damage follows a progressive continuum from NAFLD to NASH
and then to hepatic fibrosis that may progress to cirrhosis (Goh, 2016). The
disease is usually asymptomatic, and it is a frequent explanation for elevated
serum transaminase levels found during routine screening. When other liver
disease is excluded, NAFLD is the cause of elevated asymptomatic
transaminase levels in up to 90 percent of cases. Currently, weight loss along
with control of diabetes and dyslipidemia is the only recommended
treatment.

Pregnancy
During the past decade, we have encountered an increasing number of obese
and diabetic gravidas with fatty liver infiltration. These women appear to
have no greater rates of adverse outcomes relative to liver involvement
compared with pregnant women of similar weight. However, some emerging
data indicate potential concerns. In one patient registry, risks of gestational
diabetes, preeclampsia, preterm birth, and low-birthweight newborns were
two- to threefold higher than in unaffected women (Hagström, 2016).
Yarrington and colleagues (2016) reported a high rate of gestational diabetes
among nonobese women who had elevated alanine transaminase levels in the
first trimester. Somewhat related, in another study, almost a fourth of women
with prior gestational diabetes had NAFLD (Foghsgaard, 2017). Last, some
evidence suggests that the fetus of an affected mother is at increased risk for
NAFLD in adulthood (Baker, 2018).

■ Cirrhosis
Irreversible chronic liver injury with extensive fibrosis and regenerative
nodules is the final common pathway for several disorders. Laënnec
cirrhosis from chronic alcohol exposure is the most frequent cause in the
general population. However, in young women, most cases are caused by
postnecrotic cirrhosis from chronic hepatitis B or C. As discussed, many
cases of cryptogenic cirrhosis are now known to be caused by NAFLD (Ge,

2016; Goh, 2016). Clinical manifestations of cirrhosis include jaundice,
edema, coagulopathy, and metabolic abnormalities. Of associated conditions,
portal hypertension can lead to gastroesophageal varices, and splenomegaly
may cause thrombocytopenia. Also, the incidence of venous
thromboembolism is increased. The prognosis is poor, and 75 percent have
progressive disease that leads to death in 1 to 5 years.
The incidence in pregnancy was reported to be 1 case in 3300 births
(Palatnik, 2017). Common complications include transient hepatic failure,
variceal hemorrhage, preterm delivery, fetal-growth restriction, spontaneous
bacterial peritonitis, and maternal death (Tan, 2008). Outcomes generally are
poor, especially if esophageal varices coexist. Another potentially fatal
cirrhosis complication arises from associated splenic artery aneurysms. Up
to 20 percent of aneurysm ruptures occur during pregnancy, and 70 percent of
these rupture in the third trimester (Tan, 2008). The 20-percent maternal
mortality rate is likely related to the emergent diagnosis of these aneurysms
(Ha, 2009).

■ Portal Hypertension and Esophageal Varices
In pregnant women, the causes of esophageal varices are equally divided
between cirrhosis and extrahepatic portal vein obstruction (Andrade, 2018).
Of the extrahepatic cases, some develop following portal vein thrombosis
associated with one of the thrombophilia syndromes (Chap. 55, p. 976).
Others follow thrombosis related to umbilical vein catheterization when the
woman was a neonate, especially if she was born preterm. Last, the rare
Budd-Chiari syndrome results from hepatic vein thrombosis that causes
extrahepatic portal hypertension. Of 16 pregnancies complicated by this
syndrome, one observational study reported favorable outcomes (Khan,
2017).
With either intrahepatic or extrahepatic resistance to flow, portal vein
pressure rises from its normal range of 5 to 10 mm Hg, and values may
exceed 30 mm Hg. Collateral circulation develops that carries portal blood
to the systemic circulation. Blood drains into the gastric, intercostal, and
other veins to reach the esophageal system, where varices develop. In rare
cases, abdominal wall varices develop (Wood, 2018a). Bleeding is usually
from varices near the gastroesophageal junction, and hemorrhage can be
severe. Bleeding during pregnancy from varices occurs in a third to half of

affected women and is the major cause of maternal mortality in this group
(Tan, 2008).
Maternal prognosis with esophageal varices largely depends on whether
these rupture. The mortality rate is 18 percent if varices are associated with
cirrhosis compared with 2 percent for varices without cirrhosis. Similarly,
perinatal mortality rates are high in women with varices and are worse if
cirrhosis caused the varices. Increased rates of neonatal demise, preterm
birth, low birthweight, preeclampsia, and postpartum hemorrhage have been
reported (Puljic, 2016).
Treatment is the same as for nonpregnant patients. Preventively, all
patients with cirrhosis, including pregnant women, should undergo
endoscopic screening for variceal dilation (Bacon, 2015). Beta-blocking
drugs such as propranolol are given to decrease portal pressure and bleeding
risk (Ge, 2016; Tran, 2016).
For acute bleeding and for prophylaxis, endoscopic band ligation is
preferred to sclerotherapy because it avoids any potential risk of injecting
sclerotherapeutic chemicals. Acute medical management for bleeding varices
verified endoscopically includes the intravenous vasoconstrictors octreotide
or somatostatin along with endoscopic banding. Vasopressin is less often
used. If endoscopy is not available, balloon tamponade using a triple-lumen
Sengstaken-Blakemore tube, which is placed into the esophagus and stomach
to compress bleeding varices, can be lifesaving. An interventional radiology
procedure—transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic stent shunting
(TIPSS)—also can control bleeding from gastric varices that is unresponsive
to other measures (Ge, 2016; Tan, 2008). We have had good outcomes with
this procedure done electively during pregnancy in women with prior
variceal hemorrhage (Chandramouli, 2020).

■ Acetaminophen Hepatotoxicity
As discussed earlier (p. 1030), acetaminophen is the most frequent cause of
acute liver failure in the United States (Lee, 2018). This commonly used
medication can be associated with hepatotoxicity at doses above 4 g/d, and
even less in certain populations (Clark, 2012). The drug is often used during
pregnancy, and overdose–either accidentally or by attempted suicide–may
lead to hepatocellular necrosis and acute liver failure (Taney, 2017).
Massive necrosis causes a cytokine storm and multiorgan dysfunction. Early

overdose symptoms are nausea, vomiting, diaphoresis, malaise, and pallor.
After a latent period of 24 to 48 hours, liver failure ensues, and it usually
begins to resolve in 5 days. In a prospective Danish study, only 35 percent of
patients who were treated for fulminant hepatic failure spontaneously
recovered before being listed for liver transplantation (Schmidt, 2007).
The antidote is N-acetylcysteine (NAC), which must be given promptly.
The drug is thought to raise glutathione levels, which aid metabolism of the
toxic metabolite, N-acetyl-p-benzoquinoneimine. The Rumack-Matthew
nomogram uses serum acetaminophen levels to predict subsequent plasma
hepatotoxic levels as a function of the time from acute ingestion (Rumack,
1975). The need for treatment is based on these projections, and online
nomograms and calculators are available. If the plasma level exceeds 150
μg/mL 4 hours after ingestion, treatment is given. When plasma
determinations are not available, empirical treatment is initiated if the
ingested amount is >7.5 g. An oral loading dose of 140 mg/kg is given
followed by 70 mg/kg every 4 hours for a total treatment duration of 72 hours
(Heard, 2008). Both the oral and an equally efficacious intravenous dosing
regimen have been reviewed by Hodgman and Garrard (2012). Although the
drug reaches therapeutic concentrations in the fetus, any protective effects of
NAC during acetaminophen overdose are unknown (Wiest, 2014).
After 14 weeks’ gestation, the fetus has some cytochrome P450 activity
necessary for metabolism of acetaminophen to the toxic metabolite. Riggs
and associates (1989) reported follow-up data from the Rocky Mountain
Poison and Drug Center in 60 women suffering overdose. The likelihood of
maternal and fetal survival was better if the antidote was given soon after
overdose. At least one 33-week fetus appears to have died as a direct result
of hepatotoxicity 2 days after maternal ingestion. In another case, Wang and
coworkers (1997) confirmed acetaminophen placental transfer and found
maternal and cord blood levels measuring 41 μg/mL. Both the mother and the
emergently delivered neonate died from hepatorenal failure.

■ Focal Nodular Hyperplasia
This benign lesion of the liver is characterized in most cases by a welldelineated accumulation of normal but disordered hepatocytes surrounding a
central stellate scar. These usually can be differentiated from hepatic
adenomas by MR and CT imaging. Except in rare situations of unremitting

pain, surgery is rarely indicated, and most women remain asymptomatic
during pregnancy. In one review of 20 cases, no woman had related
complications during pregnancy (Rifai, 2013). Three women showed 20percent tumor growth; in half, the tumor diminished in size; and the remaining
seven tumors were unchanged across pregnancy. In another surveillance of
44 lesions with MR imaging in 30 gravidas, tumor size was unchanged in 80
percent and decreased in most of the remainder (Ramírez-Fuentes, 2013).
Investigators concluded that size changes were unrelated to pregnancy,
combination oral contraceptive use, or menopause. This lesion is not a
contraindication to estrogen-containing contraceptives (Chap. 38, p. 673).

■ Hepatocellular Adenoma
This rare benign neoplasm develops most often in young women. Lesions are
more common in individuals taking combination oral contraceptives or other
steroid medications (Renzulli, 2019). Hepatic adenomas have a 5-percent
risk of malignant transformation and a significant risk of rupture-associated
hemorrhage, particularly in pregnancy. The rupture risk progresses with
lesion size, and surgery is generally recommended for tumors measuring >5
cm (Agrawal, 2015). Thus, differentiation from focal nodular hyperplasia is
important and can be achieved by MR or CT imaging.
Tran and associates (2016) recommend sonographic surveillance of
hepatic adenomas during pregnancy. In a study of 51 pregnancies in women
with an adenoma <5 cm, 25 percent of the lesions expanded approximately
14 mm (Gaspersz, 2020). In one review of 27 cases in pregnancy, 23 became
apparent in the third trimester and puerperium (Cobey, 2004). No bleeding
complications followed tumors measuring <6.5 cm. However, 60 percent
presented with tumor rupture that resulted in seven maternal deaths and six
fetal deaths. Of note, 13 of 27 women presented within 2 months postpartum,
and in half, hemorrhage heralded rupture. Bleeding adenomas can be
managed by angiographic embolization followed by resection (Tsilimigras,
2019).

■ Liver Transplantation
According to the Organ Procurement and Transplantation Network (2020)
more than 177,000 liver transplantations have been performed in the United

States. Analysis of the National Inpatient Sample database found 2 liver
transplantations per 100,000 deliveries (Ghazali, 2017). In most studies, the
80-percent live-birth rate compares favorably with that of the general
population. However, risks of preeclampsia, cesarean delivery, fetal-growth
restriction, and preterm birth are significantly elevated (Coscia, 2010;
Deshpande, 2012; Kanzaki, 2016). Although cesarean delivery is common,
vaginal delivery is not contraindicated (Madej, 2018). Mattila and
colleagues (2017) found that half of the women they cared for had maternal
complications, including acute graft rejection. Importantly, 4 percent of
mothers had died within a year after delivery, but this rate is comparable to
that in nonpregnant liver transplantation patients.

GALLBLADDER DISORDERS
■ Cholelithiasis and Cholecystitis
In the United States, 17 percent of women have gallstones. Most stones
contain cholesterol, and its oversecretion into bile is thought to be a major
factor in stone formation. The cumulative risk of all patients with gallstones
to become symptomatic is 20 percent (Lammert, 2016). For this reason,
prophylactic cholecystectomy is not warranted for asymptomatic stones.
Symptomatic cholelithiasis typically presents with right upper or
epigastric abdominal pain, bloating, belching, nausea, and fatty food
intolerance. Pain stems from gallbladder contraction, which forces a stone up
into the sac’s neck. With subsequent gallbladder relaxation, the stone falls
back to relieve the obstruction. Laboratory values are normal, and
leukocytosis or elevated liver and pancreatic enzymes should warn for acute
cholecystitis or pancreatitis. Standard care for symptomatic cholelithiasis is
laparoscopic cholecystectomy (Cafasso, 2014). Less often, oral
ursodeoxycholic acid therapy or extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy are
used, but experience with these during pregnancy is lacking.
Acute cholecystitis usually develops when a stone obstructs the cystic
duct, which connects the gallbladder to the common bile duct. Bacterial
infection plays a role in 50 to 85 percent of cases. In more than half of
patients with acute cholecystitis, a history of prior right upper quadrant pain
from biliary colic is elicited. With acute disease, pain is accompanied by
anorexia, nausea and vomiting, low-grade fever, and mild leukocytosis. As

shown in Figure 58-3, sonography will display stones, and both falsepositive and false-negative rates range from 2 to 4 percent (Greenberger,
2018). In acute cases, medical therapy consists of intravenous fluids,
antibiotics, analgesics, and in some instances, nasogastric suction. Surgical
therapy follows, and laparoscopic cholecystectomy is the preferred route for
most.

FIGURE 58-3 Sonogram shows multiple, hyperechoic gallstones collecting along the inferior wall of an
anechoic gallbladder.

■ Gallbladder Disease During Pregnancy
After the first trimester, the gallbladder fasting volume and the residual
volume after postprandial emptying are doubled. Incomplete emptying may
result in retention of cholesterol crystals, a prerequisite for cholesterol
gallstones. From studies, the combined incidence of biliary sludge and
gallstones is 5 to 8 percent (Ko, 2005, 2014).
Postpartum, sludge frequently regresses, and occasionally gallstones will
resorb. Still, gallbladder diseases are the most common cause of
nonobstetrical admissions in the first year following delivery (Lydon-

Rochelle, 2011). This is particularly true for women managed conservatively
during pregnancy. Jorge and coworkers (2015) reported that half of 53
women with symptomatic cholelithiasis in pregnancy underwent later
postpartum cholecystectomy. In 80 percent of these women, recurrent
symptoms had developed prior to surgery.

■ Medical versus Surgical Management
Symptomatic cholelithiasis is common in pregnancy. Othman and colleagues
(2012) showed that gravidas managed conservatively had greater pain, more
recurrent emergency department visits, more hospitalizations, and higher
cesarean delivery rate. Dhupar and associates (2010) reported more
complications with conservative management of gallbladder disease
compared with laparoscopic cholecystectomy in pregnancy. These included
multiple admissions, prolonged total parenteral nutrition (TPN), and
unplanned labor induction for worsening gallbladder symptoms. Therefore,
operative and endoscopic interventions are increasingly favored over
conservative measures.
Acute cholecystitis during pregnancy or the puerperium is also common.
Acute disease in pregnancy may be complicated by sepsis, pancreatitis,
venous thromboembolism, and bowel obstruction (El-Messidi, 2018).
Cholecystitis is initially managed similarly to that for nonpregnant women. In
the distant past, most favored medical therapy. However, the recurrence rate
during the same pregnancy is high, and 25 to 50 percent of women ultimately
require cholecystectomy for persistent symptoms (Dhupar, 2010). Moreover,
if cholecystitis recurs later in gestation, preterm labor is more likely and
cholecystectomy is technically more difficult.
Cholecystectomy can be performed safely in all trimesters (Kwon, 2018).
A metaanalysis found that cholecystectomy does not raise the risk of preterm
labor or of maternal or fetal mortality (Athwal, 2016). Of surgical routes,
laparoscopic cholecystectomy has evolved as the favored approach (Pearl,
2017; Shigemi, 2019). This is discussed further in Chapter 49 (p. 867).
Management at Parkland Hospital favors a surgical approach, especially if
biliary pancreatitis, as subsequently discussed, is comorbid (Juo, 2018).

■ Endoscopic Retrograde Cholangiopancreatography

Approximately 10 percent of patients with symptomatic stone disease have
common duct stones (Stinton, 2012). Symptomatic biliary duct gallstones
during pregnancy can be retrieved by endoscopic retrograde
cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) (Fogel, 2014; Greenberger, 2018). The
procedure is performed if common duct obstruction is suspected or proven.
ERCP can be modified in many cases so that radiation exposure from
fluoroscopy is avoided (Sethi, 2015). If standard fluoroscopy is used, a lead
apron shield is placed between the radiation source and the fetus.
In 68 ERCP procedures performed in pregnant women at Parkland
Hospital, all but two women had gallstones, and common duct stones were
identified in half of 65 women (Tang, 2009). Stones were successfully
removed in all but one woman. A biliary stent was placed in 22 percent of
cases and removed after delivery. Complications were minimal, but postERCP pancreatitis developed in 16 percent. Pregnancy outcomes were not
different from those in the general obstetrical population. As a less invasive
approach, MR cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) in pregnancy has been
reported (Oto, 2009).
Ascending cholangitis can complicate acute biliary obstruction. Nearly
70 percent of affected patients develop Charcot triad—jaundice, abdominal
pain, and fever. The diagnosis is aided by sonography, and treatment is
broad-spectrum antibiotics and biliary drainage by ERCP (Greenberger,
2018).

PANCREATIC DISORDERS
■ Pancreatitis
Acute pancreatic inflammation is triggered by factors that cause activation of
pancreatic trypsinogen followed by autodigestion. It is characterized by cellmembrane disruption and proteolysis, edema, hemorrhage, and necrosis
(Conwell, 2018). Up to 10 percent of patients develop necrotizing
pancreatitis, which carries a mortality risk of 15 percent. This rate rises if
infection develops (Cain, 2015).
The incidence of pancreatitis varies with the population studied. At
Parkland Hospital, with a predominant Mexican-American population, acute
pancreatitis complicated approximately 1 in 3300 pregnancies (Ramin,

1995). From other reviews, the incidence is 1 case in 3500 to 6000
pregnancies (Eddy, 2008; Hacker, 2015; Hernandez, 2007).
In nonpregnant patients, acute pancreatitis is almost equally associated
with gallstones and alcohol abuse. During pregnancy, however, cholelithiasis
is almost always the predisposing condition. Other causes are
hyperlipidemias, usually hypertriglyceridemia; hyperparathyroidism;
congenital ductal anomalies; recent ERCP; some drugs; and rarely
autoimmune pancreatitis (Conwell, 2018; Tang, 2018). Nonbiliary
pancreatitis occasionally develops postoperatively, or it is associated with
trauma, drugs, or some viral infections. Certain metabolic conditions,
including acute AFLP and familial hypertriglyceridemia, also predispose to
pancreatitis (Nelson, 2013). Cases of acute and chronic pancreatitis have
been linked to numerous mutations of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane
conductance regulator gene (Chang, 2015).

Diagnosis
Acute pancreatitis incites incapacitating epigastric pain, nausea and
vomiting, and abdominal distention. Patients are usually distressed and have
low-grade fever, tachycardia, hypotension, and abdominal tenderness. As
many as 10 percent have sepsis, which causes endothelial activation and can
lead to acute respiratory distress syndrome (Chap. 50, p. 887).
Serum lipase measurements are preferred for diagnosis, however,
amylase levels also can be used. In 173 pregnant women with pancreatitis,
the mean amylase value approximated 2000 IU/L, and the mean lipase value
approached 3000 IU/L (Table 58-5). Importantly, the degree of enzyme
elevation and disease severity do not reliably correlate. By 48 to 72 hours
amylase levels may return to normal despite other evidence for continuing
pancreatitis. Serum lipase activity typically remains increased with
continued inflammation. Leukocytosis is usually found, and 25 percent of
patients have hypocalcemia. Elevated serum bilirubin and aspartate
transaminase levels may signify concomitant gallstone disease.
TABLE 58-5. Laboratory Values in 173 Pregnant Women with Acute
Pancreatitis

Several prognostic scoring systems are used to classify pancreatitis
severity. However, the Ranson criteria and the Apache II scoring system may
be less relevant for pregnancy. In contrast, the Atlanta Classification
incorporates the degree of organ failure as a measure of severity and may be
more applicable in pregnancy (Cain, 2015; Conwell, 2018). With this last
tool, mild disease lacks organ failure or systemic complications. Moderately
severe disease shows organ failure lasting <48 h, with or without local or
systemic complications. Severe disease is defined by persistent single- or
multi-organ failure (Banks, 2013).

Management
Medical treatment mirrors that for nonpregnant patients. This includes
analgesics, intravenous hydration, and measures to decrease pancreatic
secretion by interdiction of oral intake. Nasogastric suction does not improve
outcomes of mild to moderate disease. In a series by Ramin and colleagues
(1995), all 43 affected pregnant women responded to conservative treatment
and were hospitalized for a mean of 8.5 days. If bacterial superinfection,
necrotizing pancreatitis, sepsis, or cholangitis is found, broad-spectrum
antimicrobials are administered. If common duct stones are found, ERCP is
indicated.
Enteral feeding may be helpful once pain improves and associated ileus
resolves. For women with more severe pancreatitis and prolonged disease
course, total enteral nutrition using nasojejunal feeding is superior to TPN
(Cain, 2015; Conwell, 2018). Cholecystectomy is considered after
inflammation subsides because women with gallstone pancreatitis carry a

greater risk of recurrent inflammation (Cain, 2015). Juo and coworkers
(2018) reported that a third of women with biliary pancreatitis not treated
with cholecystectomy were readmitted, and 30 percent of these had recurrent
pancreatitis. Of the initial group, those who instead did undergo
cholecystectomy had only a 5-percent readmission rate.

Pregnancy Outcomes
Increasing severity of pancreatitis is associated with adverse maternal and
fetal outcomes (Tang, 2018). In one review of 101 pancreatitis cases, Eddy
and coworkers (2008) found a 30-percent preterm delivery rate, and 11
percent were delivered before 35 weeks’ gestation. There were also 4
percent stillbirths. There were two pancreatitis-related maternal deaths.
Importantly, almost a third of women had recurrent pancreatitis during
pregnancy. In another study of 342 pregnancies complicated by pancreatitis,
preterm delivery and fetal mortality rates were comparable to the data from
Eddy (Hacker, 2015).

■ Pancreatic Transplantation
Few reports describe pregnancy following pancreas transplantation. Of 44
pregnancies in 73 women following pancreas-kidney transplantation,
outcomes are encouraging, and vaginal delivery has been described
(Mastrobattista, 2008). Although the incidence of hypertension,
preeclampsia, preterm delivery, and fetal-growth restriction are high, there
was only one perinatal death. Four rejection episodes developed during
pregnancy and were treated successfully. Pancreatic islet autotransplantation
and at least three subsequent successful pregnancies have been reported
(Jung, 2007).

REFERENCES
Abdelmalek MF, Diehl AM: Nonalcoholic fatty liver diseases and nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. In
Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al (eds): Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed.
New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2018, p 2401
Abu-Hayyeh S, Ovadia C, Lieu T, et al: Prognostic and mechanistic potential of progesterone sulfates in
intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy and pruritus gravidarum. Hepatology 63:1287, 2016
Agrawal S, Agarwal S, Arnason T, et al: Management of hepatocellular adenoma: recent advances. Clin
Gastroenterol Hepatol 13:1221, 2015

Airoldi J, Berghella V: Hepatitis C and pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol Surv 61(10):666, 2006
American Academy of Pediatrics and the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists:
Guidelines for Perinatal Care, 8th ed. Washington, DC, 2017
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Upper gastrointestinal tract, biliary, and
pancreatic disorders. Clinical Updates in Women’s Health Care, Vol. XI, No. 4, 2012
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Viral hepatitis in pregnancy. Practice Bulletin No.
86, October 2007, Reaffirmed 2018
Anastasio HB, Grundy M, Birsner ML, et al: Gestational alloimmune liver disease: a devastating
condition preventable with maternal intravenous immunoglobulin. Obstet Gynecol 128(5):1092, 2016
Andrade F, Shukla A, Bureau C, et al: Pregnancy in idiopathic non-cirrhotic portal hypertension: a
multicentric study on maternal and fetal management and outcome. J Hepatol 69(6):1242, 2018
Athwal R, Bhogal RH, Hodson J, et al: Surgery for gallstone disease during pregnancy does not
increase fetal or maternal mortality: a meta-analysis. Hepatobiliary Surg Nutr 5:53, 2016
Australian New Zealand Clinical Trials Registry. Trial of ursodeoxycholic acid versus rifampicin in
severe early onset intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy: the TURRIFIC study. 2019.
https://www.anzctr.org.au/Trial/Registration/TrialReview.aspx?id=374510. Accessed July 10, 2020
Bacak SJ, Thornburg LL: Liver failure in pregnancy. Crit Care Clin 32(1):61, 2016
Bacon BR: Cirrhosis and its complications. In Kasper DL, Fauci AS, Hauser SL, et al (eds): Harrison’s
Principles of Internal Medicine, 19th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2015
Bacq Y, Sentilhes L, Reyes HB, et al: Efficacy of ursodeoxycholic acid in treating intrahepatic
cholestasis of pregnancy: a meta-analysis. Gastroenterology 143(6):1492, 2012
Baker PR 2nd, Friedman JE: Mitochondrial role in the neonatal predisposition to developing nonalcoholic
fatty liver disease. J Clin Invest 128(9):3692, 2018
Bandman O, Weiss KH, Kaler SG: Wilson’s disease and other neurological copper disorders. Lancet
Neurol 14:103, 2015
Banks PA, Bollen TL, Dervenis C, et al: Classification of acute pancreatitis–2012: revision of the
Atlanta classification and definitions by international consensus. Gut 62(1):102, 2013
Bernal W, Wendon J: Acute liver failure. N Engl J Med 369(26):2525, 2013
Brouwers L, Koster MP, Page-Christiaens GC, et al: Intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy: maternal
and fetal outcomes associated with elevated bile acid levels. Am J Obstet Gynecol 212:100, 2015
Brown SA, Axenfeld E, Stonesifer EG, et al: Current and prospective therapies for acute liver failure.
Dis Mon 64(12):493, 2018
Browning MF, Levy HL, Wilkins-Haug LE, et al: Fetal fatty acid oxidation defects and maternal liver
disease in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 107:115, 2006
Buzzetti E, Pinzani M, Tsochatzis EA: The multiple-hit pathogenesis of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease
(NAFLD). Metabolism 65(8):1038, 2016
Byrne JJ, Seasely A, Nelson DB, et al: Comparing acute fatty liver of pregnancy from hemolysis,
elevated liver enzymes, and low platelets syndrome. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 19:1, 2020
Cafasso DE, Smith RR: Symptomatic cholelithiasis and functional disorders of the biliary tract. Surg Clin
North Am 94(2):233, 2014
Cain MA, Ellis J, Vengrove MA, et al: Gallstone and severe hypertriglyceride-induced pancreatitis in
pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol Surv 70:577, 2015
Calix RX, Loeliger KB, Burn MS, et al: Acute herpes simplex virus hepatitis in pregnancy. Obstet
Gynecol 135(2):396, 2020
Casey LC, Fontana RJ, Aday A, et al: Acute liver failure (ALF) in pregnancy: how much is pregnancyrelated? Hepatology 72:1366, 2020

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Hepatitis E FAQs for health professionals. 2020a.
Available at: http://www.cdc.gov/hepatitis/hev/hevfaq.htm. Accessed July 7, 2020
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Surveillance for viral hepatitis—United States, 2019. 2021.
Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/hepatitis/statistics/2017surveillance/. Accessed October 19, 2021
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Yellow book: table of contents. 2020b. Available at:
https://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/yellowbook/2020/table-of-contents. Accessed July 7, 2020
Chandramouli S, Lee WM, Lo J, et al: Prophylactic transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt
placement for cirrhosis management in pregnancy. Hepatology 71(5):1876, 2020
Chang MC, Jan IS, Liang PC, et al: Cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator gene variants
are associated with autoimmune pancreatitis and slow response to steroid treatment. J Cyst Fibros
14:661, 2015
Chappell LC, Bell JL, Smith A, et al: Ursodeoxycholic acid versus placebo in women with intrahepatic
cholestasis of pregnancy (PITCHES): a randomised controlled trial. Lancet 394(10201):849, 2019
Châtel P, Ronot M, Roux O, et al: Transient excess of liver fat detected by magnetic resonance imaging
in women with acute fatty liver of pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 214(1):127, 2016
Ch’ng CL, Morgan M, Hainsworth I, et al: Prospective study of liver dysfunction in pregnancy in
Southwest Wales. Gut 51(6):876, 2002
Clark R, Fisher JE, Sketris IS, et al: Population prevalence of high dose paracetamol in dispensed
paracetamol/opioid prescription combinations: an observational study. BMC Clin Pharmacol 12:11,
2012
Cobey FC, Salem RR: A review of liver masses in pregnancy and a proposed algorithm for their
diagnosis and management. Am J Surg 187(2):181, 2004
Conwell DL, Banks PA, Greenberger NJ: Acute and chronic pancreatitis. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS,
Kasper DL, et al (eds): Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGrawHill Education, 2018, p 2437
Coscia LA, Constantinescu S, Moritz MJ, et al: Report from the National Transplantation Pregnancy
Registry (NTPR): outcomes of pregnancy after transplantation. Clin Transpl 2010:65, 2010
Cressey TR, Harrison L, Achalapong J, et al: Tenofovir exposure during pregnancy and postpartum in
women receiving tenofovir disoproxil fumarate for the prevention of mother-to-child transmission of
hepatitis B virus. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 62(12):e01686, 2018
Cui AM, Shao JG, Li HB, et al: Association of chronic hepatitis B virus infection with preterm birth: our
experience and meta-analysis. J Perinat Med 45(8):933, 2017
Culp LA, Caucci L, Fenlon NE, et al: Assessment of state perinatal hepatitis B prevention laws. Am J
Prev Med 51(6):e179, 2016
Cunningham FG, Lowe TW, Guss S, et al: Erythrocyte morphology in women with severe preeclampsia
and eclampsia. Am J Obstet Gynecol 153:358, 1985
Dallmann A, Ince I, Coboeken K, et al: A physiologically base pharmacokinetic model for pregnant
women to predict the pharmacokinetics of drugs metabolized via several enzymatic pathways. Clin
Pharmacokinet 57(6):749, 2018
Daudi N, Shouval D, Stein-Zamir C, et al: Breastmilk hepatitis A virus DNA in nursing mothers with
acute hepatitis A virus infection. Breastfeed Med 7:313, 2012
Danielsson Borssén Å, Wallerstedt S, Nyhlin N, et al: Pregnancy and childbirth in women with
autoimmune hepatitis is safe, even in compensated cirrhosis. Scand J Gastroenterol 51:479, 2016
Deshpande NA, James NT, Kucirka LM, et al: Pregnancy outcomes of liver transplant recipients: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Liver Transpl 18(6):621, 2012

Dhupar R, Smaldone GM, Hamad GG: Is there a benefit to delaying cholecystectomy for symptomatic
gallbladder disease during pregnancy? Surg Endosc 24(1):108, 2010
Diehl AM, Day C: Cause, pathogenesis, and treatment of nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. N Engl J Med
377(21):2063, 2017
Dienstag JL: Chronic hepatitis. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al (eds): Harrison’s Principles
of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2018a, p 2375
Dienstag JL: Acute viral hepatitis. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al (eds): Harrison’s
Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2018b, p 2347
Di Mascio D, Quist-Nelson J, Riegel M, et al: Perinatal death by bile acid levels in intrahepatic
cholestasis of pregnancy: a systematic review. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 19:1, 2019
Dorak MT, Mackay RK, Relton CL, et al: Hereditary hemochromatosis gene (HFE) variants are
associated with birth weight and childhood leukemia risk. Pediatr Blood Cancer 53:1242, 2009
Dunkelberg JC, Berkley EM, Thiel KW, et al: Hepatitis B and C in pregnancy: a review and
recommendations for care. J Perinatol 34:882, 2014
Eddy JJ, Gideonsen MD, Song JY, et al: Pancreatitis in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 112:1075, 2008
Egan N, Bartels A, Khashan AS, et al: Reference standard for serum bile acids in pregnancy. BJOG
119:493, 2012
El-Messidi A, Alsarraj G, Czozuj-Shulman N, et al: Evaluation of management and surgical outcomes in
pregnancies complicated by acute cholecystitis. J Perinat Med 46(9):998, 2018
Fan L, Owusu-Edusei K Jr, Schillie SF, et al: Cost-effectiveness of active-passive prophylaxis and
antiviral prophylaxis during pregnancy to prevent perinatal hepatitis B virus infection. Hepatology
63:1471, 2016
Feldman AG, Whitington PF: Neonatal hemochromatosis. J Clin Exp Hepatology 3:313, 2013
Fierro NA, Realpe M, Meraz-Medina T, et al: Hepatitis E virus: an ancient hidden enemy in Latin
America. World J Gastroenterol 22:2271, 2016
Fogel EL, Sherman S: ERCP for gallstone pancreatitis. N Engl J Med 370:150, 2014
Foghsgaard S, Andreasen C, Vedtofte L, et al: Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease is prevalent in women
with prior gestational diabetes mellitus and independently associated with insulin resistance and waist
circumference. Diabetes Care 40(1):109, 2017
Fontana RJ, Engle RE, Scaglione S, et al: The role of hepatitis E virus infection in adult Americans with
acute liver failure. Hepatology 64(6):1870, 2016
Freedman MS, Hunter P, Ault K, et al: Advisory committee on immunization practices recommended
immunization schedule for adults aged 19 years or older—United States, 2020. MMWR 69(5):133,
2020
Furer V, Rondaan C, Heijstek MV, et al: 2019 update of EULAR recommendations for vaccination in
adult patients with autoimmune inflammatory rheumatic diseases. Ann Rheum Dis 79(1):39, 2020
Gao H, Chen LJ, Luo QQ, et al: Effect of cholic acid on fetal cardiac myocytes in intrahepatic
cholestasis of pregnancy. J Huazhong Univ Sci Technolog Med Sci 34:736, 2014
Gaspersz MP, Klompenhouwer AJ, Broker ME, et al: Growth of hepatocellular adenoma during
pregnancy: a prospective study. J Hepatol 72(1):119, 2020
Ge PS, Runyon BA: Treatment of patients with cirrhosis. N Engl J Med 375(8):767, 2016
Ghazali S, Czuzoj-Shulman N, Spence AR, et al: Pregnancy outcomes in liver transplant patients, a
population-based study. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 30(3):261, 2017
Glantz A, Marschall H, Mattsson L: Intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy: relationships between bile
acid levels and fetal complication rates. Hepatology 40:467, 2004
Goh GB, McCullough AJ: Natural history of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Dig Dis Sci 61:1226, 2016

Greenberger NJ, Paumgartner G: Disease of the gallbladder and bile ducts. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS,
Kasper DL, et al (eds): Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGrawHill Education, 2018, p 2422
Ha JF, Phillips M, Faulkner K: Splenic artery aneurysm rupture in pregnancy. Eur J Obstet Gynecol
Reprod Biol 146(2):133, 2009
Hacker FM, Whalen PS, Lee VR, et al: Maternal and fetal outcomes of pancreatitis in pregnancy. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 213:568, 2015
Hagström H, Höijer J, Ludvigsson JF, et al: Adverse outcomes of pregnancy in women with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Liver Int 36:268, 2016
Heard KJ: Acetylcysteine for acetaminophen poisoning. N Engl J Med 359(3):285, 2008
Hernandez A, Petrov MS, Brooks DC, et al: Acute pancreatitis and pregnancy: a 10-year single center
experience. J Gastrointest Surg 11:1623, 2007
Herrera CA, Manuck TA, Stoddard GJ, et al: Perinatal outcomes associated with intrahepatic
cholestasis of pregnancy. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 31(14):1913, 2018
Hill JB, Sheffield JS, Kim MJ, et al: Risk of hepatitis B transmission in breast-fed infants of chronic
hepatitis B carriers. Obstet Gynecol 99(6):1049, 2002
Hodgman MJ, Garrard AR: A review of acetaminophen poisoning. Crit Care Clin 28(4):499, 2012
Hoofnagle JH, Björnsson ES: Drug-induced liver injury—types and phenotypes. N Engl J med
381(3):264, 2019
Ibrahim SH, Jonas MM, Taylor SA, et al: Liver diseases in the perinatal period: interactions between
mother and infants. Hepatology 71(4):1474, 2020
Indolfi G, Azzari C, Resti M: Hepatitis: immunoregulation in pregnancy and perinatal transmission of
HCV. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol 11:6, 2014
Isoherranen N, Thummel KE: Drug metabolism and transport during pregnancy: how does drug
disposition change during pregnancy and what are the mechanisms that cause such changes? Drug
Metab Dispos 41(2):256, 2013
Jin H, Zhao Y, Zhang X, et al: Case-fatality risk of pregnant women with acute viral hepatitis type E: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Epidemiol Infect 144(10):2098, 2016
Jorge AM, Keswani RN, Veerappan A, et al: Non-operative management of symptomatic cholelithiasis
in pregnancy is associated with frequent hospitalizations. J Gastrointest Surg 19:598, 2015
Jourdain G, Ngo-Giang-Huong N, Harrison L, et al: Tenofovir versus placebo to prevent perinatal
transmission of hepatitis B. N Engl J Med 378(10):911, 2018
Jung HS, Choi SH, Noh JH, et al: Healthy twin birth after autologous islet transplantation in a
pancreatectomized patient due to a benign tumor. Transplant Proc 39(5):1723, 2007
Juo YY, Khrucharoen U, Sanaiha Y, et al: Cumulative financial burden of readmissions for biliary
pancreatitis in pregnant women. Obstet Gynecol 132(2):415, 2018
Kanzaki Y, Kondoh E, Kawasaki K, et al: Pregnancy outcomes in liver transplant recipients: a 15-year
single-center experience. J Obstet Gynaecol Res 42(11):1476, 2016
Kawakita T, Parikh LI, Ramsey PS, et al: Predictors of adverse neonatal outcomes in intrahepatic
cholestasis of pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 213:570, 2015
Khan F, Rowe I, Martin B, et al: Outcomes of pregnancy in patients with known Budd-Chiari syndrome.
World J Hepatol 9(21):945, 2017
Knight M, Nelson-Piercy C, Kurinczuk JJ, et al: A prospective national study of acute fatty liver of
pregnancy in the UK. Gut 57(7):951, 2008
Ko CW, Beresford SA, Schulte SJ, et al: Incidence, natural history, and risk factors for biliary sludge
and stones during pregnancy. Hepatology 41(2):359, 2005

Ko CW, Napolitano PG, Lee SP, et al: Physical activity, maternal metabolic measures, and the incidence
of gallbladder sludge or stones during pregnancy: a randomized trial. Am J Perinatol 31:39, 2014
Kwon H, Lee M, Park HS, et al: Laparoscopic management is feasible for nonobstetric surgical disease
in all trimesters of pregnancy. Surg Endosc 32(6):2643, 2018
Kushner T, Shaw PA, Kalra A, et al: Incidence, determinants and outcomes of pregnancy-associated
hepatitis B flares: a regional hospital-based cohort study. Liver Int 38(5):813, 2018
Lammert F, Gurusamy K, Ko CW, et al: Gallstones. Nat Rev Dis Primers 2:16024, 2016
Lee RH, Goodwin TM, Greenspoon J, et al: The prevalence of intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy in
a primarily Latina Los Angeles population. J Perinatol 26(9):527, 2006
Lee WM, Dienstag JL: Toxic and drug-induced hepatitis. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al
(eds): Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2018,
p 2366
Li M, Bu Q, Gong W, et al: Hepatitis E virus infection and its associated adverse feto-maternal
outcomes among pregnant women in Qinhuangdao, China. J Matern Neonatal Med 33(21):3647,
2020
Lim JK, Nguyen MH, Kim WR, et al: Prevalence of chronic hepatitis B virus infection in the United
States. Am J Gastroenterol 115(9):1429, 2020
Lisman T, Bernal W: Hemostatic issues in pregnancy-induced liver disease. Thromb Res 151 Suppl
1:S78, 2017
Liu J, Ghaziani TT, Wolf JL: Acute fatty liver disease of pregnancy: updates in pathogenesis, diagnosis,
and management. Am J Gastroenterol 112(6):838, 2017a
Liu J, Murray AM, Mankus EB, et al: Adjuvant use of rifampin for refractory intrahepatic cholestasis of
pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 132(3):678, 2018
Liu J, Zhang S, Liu M, et al: Maternal pre-pregnancy infection with hepatitis B virus and the risk of
preterm birth: a population-based cohort study. Lancet Glob Health 5(6):e624, 2017b
Luo XL, Zhang WY: Obstetrical disease spectrum in China: an epidemiological study of 111,767 cases in
2011. Chin Med J (Engl) 128:1137, 2015
Lydon-Rochelle M, Holt VL, Martin DP, et al: Association between method of delivery and maternal
rehospitalization. JAMA 283(18):2411, 2000
Madej A, Mazanowska N, Szpotańska-Sikorska M, et al: Delivery method in patients after liver or
kidney transplantation. Transplant Proc 50(7):2150, 2018
Malik A, Khawaja A, Sheikh L: Wilson’s disease in pregnancy: case series and review of literature.
BMC Res Notes 6:421, 2013
Marschall HU, Shemer EW, Ludvigsson JF, et al: Intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy and associated
hepatobiliary disease: a population-based cohort study. Hepatology 58(4):1385, 2013
Mastrobattista JM, Gomez-Lobo V: Pregnancy after solid organ transplantation. Obstet Gynecol
112:919, 2008
Matos A, Bernardes J, Ayres-de-Campos D, et al: Antepartum fetal cerebral hemorrhage not predicted
by current surveillance methods in cholestasis of pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 89:803, 1997
Mattila M, Kemppainen H, Isoniemi H, et al: Pregnancy outcomes after liver transplantation in Finland.
Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 96(9):1106, 2017
McCormack AL, Rabie N, Whittemore B, et al: HSV hepatitis in pregnancy: a review of the literature.
Obstet Gynecol Surv 74(2):93, 2019
McMenamin MB, Jackson AD, Lambert J, et al: Obstetric management of hepatitis C-positive mothers:
analysis of vertical transmission in 559 mother-infant pairs. Am J Obstet Gynecol 199:315.e1, 2008

Morton A, Laurie J: Physiological changes of pregnancy and the Swansea criteria in diagnosing acute
fatty liver of pregnancy. Obstet Med 11(3):126, 2018
Nelson DB, Byrne JJ, Cunningham FG: Acute fatty liver of pregnancy. Clin Obstet Gynecol 63(1):152,
2020
Nelson DB, Yost NP, Cunningham FG: Acute fatty liver of pregnancy: clinical outcomes and expected
durations of recovery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 209(5):456.e1, 2013
Nelson DB, Yost NP, Cunningham FG: Hemostatic dysfunction with acute fatty liver of pregnancy.
Obstet Gynecol 124:40, 2014
Nelson NP, Weng MK, Hofmeister MG, et al: Prevention of hepatitis A virus infection in the United
States: recommendations of the advisory committee on immunization practices. MMWR 69(5):1-38,
2020
Organ Procurement and Transplantation Network: National Data. Virginia, 2020. Available at:
https://optn.transplant.hrsa.gov/data/view-data-reports/national-data/. Accessed July 10, 2020
Ornoy A, Koren G. SSRIs and SNRIs (SRI) in pregnancy: effects on the course of pregnancy and the
offspring: how far are we from having all the answers? Int J Mol Sci 20(10):2370, 2019
Oto A, Ernst R, Ghulmiyyah L, et al: The role of MR cholangiopancreatography in the evaluation of
pregnant patients with acute pancreaticobiliary disease. Br J Radiol 82(976):279, 2009
Othman MO, Stone E, Hashimi M, et al: Conservative management of cholelithiasis and its
complications in pregnancy is associated with recurrent symptoms and more emergency department
visits. Gastrointest Endosc 76(3):564, 2012
Ovadia C, Lövgren-Sandblom A, Edwards LA, et al: Therapeutic plasma exchange as a novel treatment
for severe intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy: case series and mechanism of action. J Clin Apher
33(6):638, 2018
Ovadia C, Seed PT, Sklavounos A, et al: Association of adverse perinatal outcomes of intrahepatic
cholestasis of pregnancy with biochemical markers: results of aggregate and individual patient data
meta-analyses. Lancet 393(10174):899, 2019
Ozel A, Alici Davutoglu E, Eric Ozdemir M, et al: Assessment of fetal left ventricular modified
myocardial performance index and its prognostic significance for adverse perinatal outcome in
intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 12:1, 2018
Palatnik A, Rinella ME: Medical and obstetric complications among pregnant women with liver
cirrhosis. Obstet Gynecol 129(6):1118, 2017
Pan CQ, Duan Z, Dai E, et al: Tenofovir to prevent hepatitis B transmission in mothers with high viral
load. N Engl J Med 374:2324, 2016
Parízek A, Simják P, Cerný A, et al: Efficacy and safety of ursodeoxycholic acid in patients with
intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy. Ann Hepatol 15(5):757, 2016
Pearl JP, Price RR, Tonkin AE, et al: SAGES guidelines for the use of laparoscopy during pregnancy.
Surg Endosc 31(10):3767, 2017
Pfeiffenberger J, Beinhardt S, Gotthardt DN, et al: Pregnancy in Wilson’s disease: management and
outcome. Hepatology 67(4):1261, 2018
Pietrangelo A: Iron and the liver. Liver Int 36:116, 2016
Portillo-Sanchez P, Bril F, Maximos M, et al: High prevalence of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease in
patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus and normal plasma aminotransferase levels. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab 100(6):2231, 2015
Post JJ: Update on hepatitis C and implications for pregnancy. Obstet Med 10(4):157, 2017
Prasad M, Saade GR, Sandoval G, et al: Hepatitis C virus antibody screening in a cohort of pregnant
women: identifying seroprevalence and risk factors. Obstet Gynecol 135(4):778, 2020

Puljic A, Salati J, Doss A, et al: Outcomes of pregnancies complicated by liver cirrhosis, portal
hypertension, or esophageal varices. J Matern Fetal Med 29:506, 2016
Ramin KD, Ramin SM, Richey SD, et al: Acute pancreatitis in pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol
173:187, 1995
Ramírez-Fuentes C, Martí-Bonmatí L, Torregrosa A, et al: Variations in the size of focal nodular
hyperplasia on magnetic resonance imaging. Radiologia 55(6):499, 2013
Reddick KLB, Jhaveri R, Gandhi M, et al: Pregnancy outcomes associated with viral hepatitis. J Viral
Hepat 18(7):e394, 2011
Reichert MC, Lammert F: ABCB4 gene aberrations in human liver disease: an evolving spectrum.
Semin Liver Dis 38(4):299, 2018
Renzulli M, Clemente A, Tovoli F, et al: Hepatocellular adenoma: an unsolved diagnostic enigma. World
J Gastroenterol 25(20):2442, 2019
Reyes H: What have we learned about intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy? Hepatology 63:4, 2016
Rifai K, Mix H, Krusche S, et al: No evidence of substantial growth progression or complications of
large focal nodular hyperplasia during pregnancy. Scand J Gastroenterol 48(1):88, 2013
Riggs BS, Bronstein AC, Kulig K, et al: Acute acetaminophen overdose during pregnancy. Obstet
Gynecol 74:247, 1989
Ringers J, Bloemenkamp K, Francisco N, et al: Auxiliary or orthotopic liver transplantation for acute
fatty liver of pregnancy: case series and review of the literature. BJOG 123(8):1394, 2016
Rodríguez M, Sprohnle A, Muñoz J, et al: Treatment of intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy with
ursodeoxycholic acid associated with improvement of fetal first-degree atrioventricular block.
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 52(6):801, 2018
Rogan SC, Beigi RH: Treatment of viral infections in pregnancy. Clin Perinatol 46:235, 2019
Rossi RM, Wolfe C, Brokamp R, et al: Reported prevalence of maternal hepatitis C virus infection in the
United States. Obstet Gynecol 135(2):387, 2020
Roumiantsev S, Shah U, Westra SJ, et al: Case records of the Massachusetts general hospital. Case
20–2015. A newborn girl with hypotension coagulopathy, anemia, and hyperbilirubinemia. N Engl J
Med 372:2542, 2015
Rumack BH, Matthew H: Acetaminophen poisoning and toxicity. Pediatrics 55:871, 1975
Salgia RJ, Brown K: Diagnosis and management of hereditary hemochromatosis. Clin Liver Dis 19:187,
2015
Schillie S, Vellozzi C, Reingold A, et al: Prevention of hepatitis B virus infection in the United States:
recommendations of the advisory committee on immunization practices. MMWR 67(1):1, 2018
Schillie S, Wester C, Osborne M, et al: CDC recommendations for hepatitis C screening among adults—
United States, 2020. MMWR 69(2):1, 2020
Schmidt LE, Larsen FS: MELD score as a predictor of liver failure and death in patients with
acetaminophen-induced liver injury. Hepatology 45(3):789, 2007
Sethi S, Thosani N, Banerjee S: Radiation-free ERCP in pregnancy: a “sound” approach to leaving no
stone unturned. Dig Dis Sci 60:2604, 2015
Sheffield J, Roberts S, Laibl V, et al: The efficacy of an accelerated hepatitis B vaccination program
during pregnancy. Abstract No. 212. Am J Obstet Gynecol 195:S73, 2006
Sheiner E, Ohel I, Levy A, et al: Pregnancy outcome in women with pruritus gravidarum. J Reprod Med
51:394, 2006
Shi Z, Tang Y, Wang H, et al: Breastfeeding of newborns by mothers carrying hepatitis B virus: a metaanalysis and systematic review. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 165(9):837, 2011

Shigemi D, Aso S, Matsui H, et al: Safety of laparoscopic surgery for benign diseases during pregnancy:
a nationwide retrospective cohort study. J Minim Invasive Gynecol 26(3):501, 2019
Sibai BM: Imitators of severe preeclampsia. Obstet Gynecol 109:956, 2007
Sims HF, Brackett JC, Powell CK, et al: The molecular basis of pediatric long chain 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA
dehydrogenase deficiency associated with maternal acute fatty liver of pregnancy. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A 92:841, 1995
Smith EA, Jacques-Carroll L, Walker TY, et al: The national Perinatal Hepatitis B Prevention Program,
1994–2008. Pediatrics 129(4):609, 2012
Snidjewind IJ, Smit C, Schutten M, et al: Low mother-to-child-transmission rate of hepatitis C virus in
cART treated HIV-1 infected mothers. J Clin Virol 68:11, 2015
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine (SMFM), Dionne-Odom J, Tita AT, et al: Hepatitis B in pregnancy
screening, treatment, and prevention of vertical transmission. Consult Series No. 38. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 214:6, 2016
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine (SMFM), Hughes BL, Page CM, et al: Hepatitis C in pregnancy:
screening, treatment, and management. Am J Obstet Gynecol 217(5):B2, 2017
Stewart RD, Sheffield JS: Hepatitis B vaccination in pregnancy in the United States. Vaccines 1:167,
2013
Sticova E, Jirsa M, Pawlowska J: New insights in genetic cholestasis: from molecular mechanisms to
clinical implications. Can J Gastroenterol Hepatol 2018:2313675, 2018
Stinton LM, Shaffer EA: Epidemiology of gallbladder disease: cholelithiasis and cancer. Gut Liver 6:172,
2012
Stokkeland K, Ludvigsson JF, Hultcrantz R, et al: Increased risk of preterm birth in women with
autoimmune hepatitis—a nationwide cohort study. Liver Int 36:76, 2016
Strehlow SL, Pathak B, Goodwin TM, et al: The mechanical PR interval in fetuses of women with
intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 203:455.e1, 2010
Sylvester-Armstrong KR, Duff P: Evidence for use of tenofovir in pregnancy to prevent perinatal
transmission of hepatitis B infection. Clin Obstet Gynecol 62(4):835, 2019
Tan J, Surti B, Saab S: Pregnancy and cirrhosis. Liver Transpl 14(8):1081, 2008
Taney J, Anastasio H, Paternostro A, et al: Placental abruption with delayed fetal compromise in
maternal acetaminophen toxicity. Obstet Gynecol 130(1):159, 2017
Tang M, Xu JM, Song SS, et al: What may cause fetus loss from acute pancreatitis in pregnancy:
analysis of 54 cases. Medicine (Baltimore) 97(7):e9755, 2018
Tang S, Mayo MJ, Rodriguez-Frias E, et al: Safety and utility of ERCP during pregnancy. Gastrointest
Endosc 69:453, 2009
Tang SJ, Rodriguez-Frias E, Singh S, et al: Acute pancreatitis during pregnancy. Clin Gastroenterol
Hepatol 8(1):85, 2010
Tovo PA, Calitri C, Scolfaro C, et al: Vertically acquired hepatitis C virus infection: correlates of
transmission and disease progression. World J Gastroenterol 22:1382, 2016
Towers CV, Asrat T, Rumney P: The presence of hepatitis B surface antigen and deoxyribonucleic acid
in amniotic fluid and cord blood. Am J Obstet Gynecol 184:1514, 2001
Tran TT, Ahn J, Reau NS: ACG clinical guideline: Liver disease and pregnancy. Am J Gastroenterol
111:176, 2016
Tsilimigras DI, Rahnemai-Azar AA, Ntanasis-Stathopoulos I, et al: Current approaches in the
management of hepatic adenomas. J Gastrointest Surg 23(1):199, 2019
Turhan AN, Gönenç M, Kapan S, et al: Acute biliary pancreatitis related with pregnancy: a 5-year single
center experience. Ulus Travma Acil Cerrahi Derg 16(2):160, 2010

Urganci N, Arapoglu M, Akyildiz B, et al: Neonatal cholestasis resulting from vertical transmission of
hepatitis A infection. Pediatr Infect Dis J 22(4):381, 2003
US Preventive Services Task Force, Owens DK, Davidson KW, et al: Screening for hepatitis B virus
infection in pregnant women: US Preventive Services Task Force reaffirmation recommendation
statement. JAMA 322(4):349, 2019
US Preventive Services Task Force: Screening for hepatitis C virus infection in adolescents and adults:
US Preventive Services Task Force recommendation statement: JAMA 323:970, 2020
Usta IM, Barton JR, Amon EA, et al: Acute fatty liver of pregnancy: an experience in the diagnosis and
management of fourteen cases. Am J Obstet Gynecol 171:1342, 1994
Vigil-de Gracia P, Montufar-Rueda C: Acute fatty liver of pregnancy: diagnosis, treatment, and outcome
based on 35 consecutive cases. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 24(9):1143, 2011
Wang PH, Yang MJ, Lee WL, et al: Acetaminophen poisoning in late pregnancy. A case report. J
Reprod Med 42:367, 1997
Wang S, Li SL, Cao YX, et al: Noninvasive Swansea criteria are valuable alternatives for diagnosing
acute fatty liver of pregnancy in a Chinese population. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 30(24):2951,
2017
Wen WH, Chen HL, Ting-Fang Shih T, et al: Long-term growth and bone development in children of
HBV-infected mothers with and without fetal exposure to tenofovir disoproxil fumarate. J Hepatol
72(6):1082, 2020
Westbrook RH, Yeoman AD, Kriese S, et al: Outcomes of pregnancy in women with autoimmune
hepatitis. J Autoimmun 38(2–3):J239, 2012
Wiest DB, Chang E, Fanning D, et al: Antenatal pharmacokinetics and placental transfer of Nacetylcysteine in chorioamnionitis for fetal neuroprotection. J Pediatr 165:672, 2014
Wikström Shemer E, Marschall HU, Ludvigsson JF, et al: Intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy and
associated adverse pregnancy and fetal outcomes: a 12-year population-based cohort study. BJOG
120(6):717, 2013
Wong M, Hills F, Vogler K, et al: Acute fatty liver of pregnancy from 18 weeks gestation. Hepatology
71(6):2167, 2020
Wood AM, Grotegut CA, Ronald J, et al: Identification and management of abdominal wall varices in
pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 132(4):882, 2018a
Wood AM, Livingston EG, Hughes BL, et al: Intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy: a review of
diagnosis and management. Obstet Gynecol Surv 73(2):103, 2018b
Wu T, Zhu FC, Huang SJ, et al: Safety of the hepatitis E vaccine for pregnant women: a preliminary
analysis. Hepatology 55(6):2038, 2012
Wu Z, Huang P, Gong Y, et al: Treating acute fatty liver of pregnancy with artificial liver support
therapy: systematic review. Medicine (Baltimore) 97(38):e12473, 2018
Xanthakos SA, Jenkins TM, Kleiner DE, et al: Teen-LABS consortium. High prevalence of nonalcoholic
fatty liver disease in adolescents undergoing bariatric surgery. Gastroenterology 149:623, 2015
Yarrington CD, Cantonwine DE, Seely EW, et al: The association of alanine aminotransferase in early
pregnancy with gestational diabetes. Metab Syndr Relat Disord 14(5):254, 2016
Yi P, Chen R, Huang Y, et al: Management of mother-to-child transmission of hepatitis B virus:
propositions and challenges. J Clin Virol 77:32, 2016
Yule CS, Holcomb DS, Kraus AC, et al: Cholestasis: a prospective study of perinatal outcomes and time
to symptom improvement. Am J Perinatol 38(5):414, 2021
Zaman K, Dudman S, Stene-Johansen K, et al: HEV study protocol: design of a cluster-randomised,
blinded trial to assess the safety, immunogenicity and effectiveness of hepatitis E vaccine HEV 239

(Hecolin) in women of childbearing age in rural Bangladesh. BMJ Open 10(1):e033702, 2020
Zhang J, Zhang XF, Huang SJ, et al: Long-term efficacy of a hepatitis E vaccine. N Engl J Med
372:914, 2015
Zipori Y, Bachar G, Farago N, et al: Vaginal progesterone treatment for the prevention of preterm birth
and intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy: a case-control study. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol
253:117, 2020

