CHAPTER 68

Sexually Transmitted Infections

SYPHILIS
GONORRHEA
CHLAMYDIAL INFECTION
HERPES SIMPLEX VIRUS
HUMAN PAPILLOMAVIRUS
VAGINITIS
HUMAN IMMUNODEFICIENCY VIRUS
REFERENCES
Sexually transmitted infections (STIs) include syphilis, gonorrhea,
chlamydial and trichomonal infections, and infections caused by human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV), herpes simplex virus (HSV), human
papillomavirus (HPV), and hepatitis B and C viruses. In describing their
pathogenesis, horizontal transmission is transfer to a contemporary. Instead,
vertical transmission refers to passage of an infectious agent from the
mother to her fetus through the placenta, during labor or delivery, or by
breastfeeding. Many STIs can harm the mother or fetus. Thus, these are
sought through both asymptomatic screening and symptomatic diagnostic
testing and then treated. For this, the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC) provides guidelines, which are described throughout this
chapter.

For STI screening and diagnosis, serological testing is recommended in
some cases and identifies antibodies formed by the patient against the
pathogen. In others, direct detection of an infectious agent by culture or by a
nucleic acid amplification test (NAAT) of body fluids or lesions is suitable.
NAATs include any molecular method used to detect the presence of DNA or
RNA of a pathogen. NAATs may be polymerase chain reaction (PCR) tests
(most common), transcription-mediated amplification (TMA) tests, or others.
NAATs may be qualitative (detecting presence or absence only) or
quantitative depending on the specific test. The terms NAAT and PCR may
be used interchangeably in some cases when appropriate.
If one STI is identified, patients are offered screening for all STIs,
because these infections are commonly comorbid. Treatment of most STIs is
associated with improved pregnancy outcome and prevention of perinatal
morbidity. Logically, education, screening, treatment, and prevention are
essential components of prenatal care.

SYPHILIS
This infection remains a major threat for both mother and fetus. Since 2001,
the combined rate of primary and secondary syphilis has risen almost yearly,
and among women in 2019, the rate was 4 cases per 100,000 persons
(Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2021b). For congenital
syphilis, the rate in 2019 was 48 cases per 100,000 live births. This is a
nearly 300 percent rise since 2015. Of risks, higher congenital syphilis rates
are linked to inadequate prenatal care, substance use during pregnancy,
African American race, and lack of screening and treatment (Smullin, 2021).
The CDC also includes sex work, multiple or new sexual partners,
incarceration, or homelessness (Workowski, 2021). Syphilis remains a
significant global health problem (Korenromp, 2019).

■ Pathogenesis
Syphilis is caused by the spirochetal bacterium Treponema pallidum. With
horizontal transmission, minute abrasions on the vaginal mucosa provide
entry, and cervical eversion, hyperemia, and friability raise this risk.
Spirochetes replicate and disseminate through lymphatic channels and then
hematogenously if untreated.

During vertical transmission, spirochetes readily cross the placenta. This
is the most common route, but neonatal infection may result from contact with
spirochetes from lesions at delivery or across the placental membranes. Fetal
infection develops in >50 percent of untreated early maternal syphilis cases
and in up to 10 percent of late latent disease (Fiumara, 1975; Hollier, 2001).

■ Clinical Manifestations
Maternal Syphilis and Definitions
This is staged according to clinical features and disease duration.
• Primary syphilis is diagnosed by its characteristic chancre, which
develops at the inoculation site. Typically, a solitary, painless lesion has a
raised, firm border and a red, smooth ulcerated base without significant pus
(Fig. 68-1). Nonsuppurative lymphadenopathy may develop. A chancre
usually resolves spontaneously in 2 to 8 weeks, even if untreated. Multiple
lesions, if found, are predominantly in women with HIV co-infection.

FIGURE 68-1 Primary syphilis. Chancres show a raised, firm border and smooth base and may be
singular or multiple, as seen here. Arrows point to two reciprocal or “kissing” lesions, which develop as

infection on one side spreads to the other when tissues are apposed. (Reproduced with permission from
Dr. Allison J. Tracy, MD.)

• Secondary syphilis stems from spirochete dissemination to multiple organ
systems. Manifestations develop 4 to 10 weeks after the chancre appears
and include dermatological abnormalities in up to 90 percent. A diffuse
macular rash, plantar and palmar circular lesions, patchy alopecia, and
mucous patches may be seen (Fig. 68-2). Condylomata lata are fleshcolored flat nodules found on the perineum and perianus. Mucosal lesions
teem with spirochetes and are highly infectious. Women may have
constitutional symptoms such as fever, headache, and myalgias. Hepatitis,
nephropathy, ocular changes, anterior uveitis, and periostitis are less
common findings. Manifestations of secondary syphilis resolve without
treatment after 1 to 6 months, despite incomplete clearance of organisms by
the immune system.

FIGURE 68-2 Secondary syphilis. A. Condyloma lata. (Reproduced with permission from Dr. Ralynn
Brann.) B. Target lesions on the palms. C. Diffuse maculopapular rash.

• With latent syphilis, clinical manifestations of primary or secondary
syphilis either have resolved or were never recognized, but infection
persists and is identified by serological testing. Early latent syphilis is
subclinical disease acquired within the preceding 12 months. Timing of
infection is determined by laboratory seroconversion results, clearly
described symptoms consistent with primary or secondary syphilis within
the prior 12 months, or exposure to a sexual partner in the previous 12
months with primary, secondary, or early latent syphilis. If the duration of
infection is either unclear or beyond 12 months, the term is latent syphilis,
unknown duration or late.

• Tertiary syphilis is a slowly progressive disease that affects any organ
system but is rarely seen in reproductive-aged women.
Early-stage syphilis includes primary, secondary, and early latent
syphilis. These are associated with high spirochete loads, and partner
transmission rates range from 30 to 60 percent (Garnett, 1997; Singh, 1999).
Late-stage syphilis includes latent syphilis, unknown duration or late and
tertiary syphilis. In these, transmission rates decline because of smaller
inoculum sizes.

■ Congenital Syphilis
Without screening and treatment, approximately 70 percent of infected
women will have an adverse pregnancy outcome (Hawkes, 2011). Maternal
infection can lead to congenital infection, preterm labor, low birthweight,
and fetal or neonatal death (Qin, 2014). Because of its immune incompetence
prior to midpregnancy, the fetus is less likely to manifest the immunological
inflammatory response characteristic of congenital infection before this time
(Silverstein, 1962). However, congenital infection is still presumed in all
cases, and thus treatment is imperative.
When vertical transmission occurs, severe congenital syphilis progresses
along a continuum. Hepatic abnormalities are followed by anemia,
thrombocytopenia, and then ascites and hydrops. Stillbirth remains a major
complication (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2021b). The
newborn may have jaundice with petechiae or purpuric skin lesions,
lymphadenopathy, rhinitis, pneumonia, myocarditis, nephrosis, or long-bone
involvement (Fig. 68-3).

FIGURE 68-3 Congenital syphilis. A. A desquamating skin rash known as pemphigus syphiliticus
may be seen. B. Neonatal lower-extremity long-bone radiographs show a “moth-eaten” appearance
(arrows). C. Enlarged hydropic placenta of a syphilis-infected pregnancy.

With syphilitic infection, the placenta becomes large and pale.
Microscopically, villi lose their characteristic arborization, and blood
vessels diminish or are obliterated as a result of endarteritis and stromal cell
proliferation. Sheffield and colleagues (2002c) described these villi in more
than 60 percent of placentas from women with untreated syphilis at delivery.
Examination of the umbilical cord may reveal necrotizing funisitis, and
spirochetes may be microscopically seen after immunohistochemical staining
(Adhikari, 2020).

■ Diagnosis
In their 2018 guidance, the United States Preventive Services Task Force
(USPSTF) recommends screening for syphilis in all pregnant women to
prevent congenital infection. Testing is performed at the first prenatal visit. In
populations with a high prevalence of syphilis or in persons with the risk
factors noted earlier, serological testing is repeated at 28 weeks’ gestation
and again at delivery (Workowski, 2021).
Treponema pallidum cannot be cultured from clinical specimens.
However, direct diagnosis of early-stage disease can be completed by darkfield microscopic examination, NAAT, or immunostaining of lesion exudate,
tissue, or body fluid. These methods are not widely available and are less
sensitive for blood specimens (Pillay, 2018). In practice, a diagnosis is made
with serological testing coupled with clinical findings.
Two types of serological tests are employed to diagnose and screen, and
sequential use of both reduces false-positive diagnoses. If the first is
positive, the second type is then performed. This combination identifies
infection but by itself does not determine disease stage. Instead, disease stage
is assigned based on initial serological titer levels, patient history of
potential exposures and prior treatment, and clinical-stage definitions,
described earlier.
Traditionally, the first type is nontreponemal testing, and either the
Venereal Disease Research Laboratory (VDRL) or the rapid plasma reagin
(RPR) is selected. Both tests measure patient immunoglobulin M and G (IgM
and IgG) antibodies formed against cardiolipin that is released from

damaged host cells and possibly also from treponemes. Notably, these same
antibodies can also be produced in response to other acute events that
include recent vaccination, febrile illness, and pregnancy itself. They can be
produced in response to chronic conditions such as intravenous (IV) drug
abuse, systemic lupus erythematosus, aging, leprosy, or cancer. As such,
these all serve as potential sources of false-positive results (Larsen, 1995).
Conversely, early infection may be characterized by very high levels of
antibody or antigen, which prevent immune complex formation and lead to
false-negative test results. This is the prozone effect. Alternatively,
seroconversion occurs at around the third week of infection but can take up to
6 weeks (Peeling, 2004). Thus, women with very early primary syphilis can
have initially false-negative serological test results.
With positive nontreponemal test results, findings are quantified and
expressed as titers. Because titers reflect disease activity, they rise during
early syphilis and often exceed levels of 1:32 in secondary syphilis. A
nontreponemal titer is usually measured on the day of treatment initiation.
Subsequent titer declines are considered relative to this day-of-treatment
titer.
The second type of serological test is used to confirm the presence of T
pallidum–specific antibodies. These tests include fluorescent treponemalantibody absorption tests (FTA-ABS), T pallidum passive particle
agglutination (TP-PA) tests, and various immunoassays (Association of
Public Health Laboratories, 2020). Of note, these treponemal-specific tests
generally remain positive throughout life, even after treatment. Antibodies
may be detected by treponemal assays up to a few weeks earlier than those
detected by nontreponemal tests (Levett, 2015).
Traditionally, nontreponemal tests are used first for screening, and results
are then confirmed by a treponemal-specific test. In a newer reverse
sequence strategy, screening begins first with a treponemal-specific test.
Each of the serological tests has limitations, including false-positive and negative results. Management of discordant finding with this latter sequence
is shown in Table 68-1. Notably, both approaches are suitable if a screening,
follow-up, and treatment program is in place.
TABLE 68-1. Interpretation of Serologic Tests Using Reverse Sequence
Syphilis Screening

In contrast to these laboratory tests, rapid “point-of-care” (POC) syphilis
screening of blood or serum samples is available. Most tests are treponemalspecific, and positive POC results can then be confirmed by laboratorybased tests. In hard-to-reach populations, immediate treatment of women
with positive POC results is associated with lower rates of stillbirth,
neonatal death, and congenital syphilis (Brandenburger, 2021). This practice,
however, risks overtreating previously cured women who still have residual
persistent treponemal antibodies. This limitation may be overcome by newer
POC dual tests, which simultaneously assess nontreponemal and treponemal
antibodies (Satyaputra, 2021).
Following maternal diagnosis, sonographic evaluation is performed for
fetuses >20 weeks’ gestation to search for signs of congenital syphilis. Rac
and associates (2014) noted that 31 percent of infected women diagnosed at
≥18 weeks’ gestation had fetuses with abnormal sonographic findings.
Hepatomegaly, placental thickening, hydramnios, ascites, hydrops fetalis, and
elevated middle cerebral artery Doppler velocimetry measurements suggest
fetal infection. Before 20 weeks, treatment is highly successful, and abnormal
sonographic findings are rare (Nathan, 1997).
With maternal infection and with a fetus of viable age that shows
sonographic findings, antepartum fetal heart rate (FHR) monitoring prior to
antibiotic treatment is recommended. If the FHR tracing is reassuring,
antibiotic therapy can proceed. In contrast, spontaneous late decelerations or

a nonreactive FHR tracing likely reflects an extremely ill fetus that may
poorly tolerate a Jarisch-Herxheimer reaction, described subsequently. In
this extreme case, consultation with a neonatologist regarding a plan of
delaying treatment, pursuing delivery, and then treating in the nursery is a
consideration (Wendel, 2002).
After antibiotic treatment, further sonographic surveillance or antenatal
testing of fetal well-being is determined in consultation with specialists.
Following adequate treatment, sonographic signs of congenital infection
resolve over weeks to months, and delivery is reserved for usual obstetrical
indications (Rac, 2014). In fetuses without initial signs of congenital
syphilis, subsequent sonographic evaluations are reserved for other fetal
indications.

■ Treatment
Syphilis therapy during pregnancy aims to eradicate maternal infection and to
prevent or treat congenital syphilis. Parenteral penicillin G benzathine
remains the preferred treatment for all stages of syphilis during pregnancy
(Table 68-2). A second dose of benzathine penicillin G may be given 1 week
after the initial dose in patients with early-stage syphilis or sonographic
signs of congenital infection. This aims to reduce the risk of fetal treatment
failure and is our current practice at Parkland Hospital. High maternal
serological titers, preterm delivery, and delivery shortly after antepartum
therapy are all risks for failure of maternal treatment to prevent neonatal
infection (Sheffield, 2002b). Women should abstain from sexual contact for 7
days, until all skin/mucous membrane lesions heal, and until sexual partners
are treated.
TABLE 68-2. Recommended Treatment for Pregnant Women with Syphilis

There are no proven alternatives to penicillin therapy during pregnancy.
Some data support a 1-g daily IV dose of ceftriaxone for 10 days (Cao, 2017;
Liang, 2016). Tetracyclines are effective but not recommended during
pregnancy, because of the risk for offspring teeth discoloration.
Following treatment of syphilis before 24 weeks’ gestation,
nontreponemal tests are repeated in either the third trimester or no sooner
than 8 weeks after treatment unless reinfection is suspected (Workowski,
2021). Following treatment after 24 weeks, nontreponemal titers may be
repeated in the third trimester in some cases and are repeated at delivery.
Adequate serological response to treatment is suggested by a fourfold
decline in nontreponemal titer and resolution of any clinical symptoms. A
fourfold decline in titer is more likely to occur following treatment of earlystage syphilis, which typically has high nontreponemal titers. Absence of a
fourfold decline does not itself determine treatment failure, particularly when
the initial nontreponemal titer is <1:8. Titers are best interpreted in
conjunction with clinical history and by those experienced with treatment of
syphilis in pregnancy. Because VDRL titers do not correspond directly to
RPR titers, consistent use of the same test for surveillance is recommended.
Some successfully treated patients may still exhibit persistently lowlevel positive titers, which are referred to as “serofast.” This state is more
likely in older individuals, those with lower initial nontreponemal antibody
titers, and those with later stages of syphilis (Seña, 2015).
In some instances, a woman may present without symptoms but describes
recent sexual contact with a person who has been diagnosed with syphilis.
She should be evaluated clinically and serologically. If their sexual contact
occurred within the preceding 90 days, the gravida is treated presumptively
for early syphilis, even if serological test results are negative. This accounts
for early infection but before seroconversion. If contact was more than 90
days ago, treatment is based on serological results.

Penicillin Reactions
Women with a history of penicillin allergy should have either an oral
stepwise penicillin-dose challenge or skin testing performed to confirm the
risk of IgE-mediated anaphylaxis. If confirmed, penicillin desensitization is
recommended and followed by benzathine penicillin G treatment (Table 683) (Wendel, 1985).

TABLE 68-3. Penicillin Allergy—Oral Desensitization Protocol for
Patients with a Positive Skin Test

Distinct from allergy, the Jarisch-Herxheimer reaction can develop
following penicillin treatment in most women with primary syphilis and
approximately half with secondary infection. Uterine contractions, mild
maternal temperature elevation, decreased fetal movement, and FHR

decelerations are findings. Treatment is supportive with antipyretics as
needed, hydration, and oxygen supplementation (Klein, 1990). In a study of
50 gravidas who received benzathine penicillin G for syphilis, the incidence
of Jarisch-Herxheimer reactions was 40 percent (Myles, 1998). Of the 31
women monitored electronically, 42 percent developed regular uterine
contractions, and 39 percent developed variable decelerations. All
contractions resolved within 24 hours. Thus, for fetuses of viable gestational
age, consideration is given to administering the first dose of antibiotic in
labor and delivery to permit continuous fetal monitoring for at least 24 hours
when the fetus has sonographic signs of syphilis (Adhikari, 2020; Wendel,
2002). With or without sonographic signs of fetal infection, patients are
counseled on symptoms of the Jarisch-Herxheimer reaction prior to syphilis
treatment and are encouraged to seek evaluation if they develop.

GONORRHEA
■ Infection Rates and Effects
Of reportable bacterial STIs, those caused by Neisseria gonorrhoeae are the
second most common. The incidence in women in the United States has
continued to rise since 2015, and the highest rates are in those aged 15 to 24
years (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2021b). Among women
giving birth in 2018, the rate was 310 cases per 100,000 live births
(Gregory, 2020). In most gravidas, infection is limited to the cervix, urethra,
and periurethral and greater vestibular (Bartholin) glands. Acute salpingitis
is rare in pregnancy. However, pregnant women account for a
disproportionate number of disseminated gonococcal infections (Bleich,
2012).
Gonococcal infection can have adverse effects in any trimester. In
affected women, associated rates of preterm delivery, preterm prelabor
ruptured membranes (PPROM), low birthweight, and perinatal mortality are
slightly higher than in those without infection (Vallely, 2021). Miscarriage
rates are not increased. However, untreated gonococcal cervicitis is
associated with septic abortion and with uterine infection after surgical
abortion (Burkman, 1976) (Chap. 11, p. 203).
Vertical transmission of gonorrhea mainly occurs through fetal contact
with cervical infection during birth. The predominant sequela is gonococcal

ophthalmia neonatorum, which can lead to corneal scarring, ocular
perforation, and blindness. Transmission rates are high and approximate 40
percent (Laga, 1986). Outlined in Chapter 32 (p. 593), ocular prophylaxis is
provided to all newborns (U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, 2019a).

■ Screening and Treatment
Pregnant women who live in high-prevalence areas or who are at risk for
gonorrhea should undergo first-trimester screening. Risk factors include age
≤25 years, prior or current STI, sex work, a new or nonmonogamous partner,
a partner with an STI, multiple sexual partners, and inconsistent condom use
if not monogamous (Workowski, 2021). Gonococcal infection is a marker for
concomitant chlamydial infection. Thus, if chlamydial testing is unavailable,
presumptive chlamydial therapy is given to women treated for gonorrhea.
Screening for gonorrhea in women is by culture or NAAT. NAATs have
replaced culture in most laboratories, and kits are available for specific
collection from the vagina, endocervix, or urine. Of these, vaginal or
cervical samples are preferred, as urine collection may detect up to 10
percent fewer infections (Papp, 2014). If used, the initial urine stream, not
midstream, is collected. In women with vaginal symptoms and who practice
anal intercourse, rectal screening can be considered. One study of
nonpregnant women at urban STI clinics found that approximately 20 percent
of rectal chlamydia and gonorrhea infections would be missed if only
cervical, vaginal, or urine samples were obtained (Llata, 2018). NAATs are
also suitable for diagnosis of rectal or pharyngeal disease (Food and Drug
Administration, 2019).
An ultrarapid NAAT for gonorrhea and chlamydia has been approved by
the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for point-of-care use. It performs
similarly to laboratory-based testing, and results are available in
approximately 30 minutes (Food and Drug Administration, 2021; Van Der
Pol, 2020). This test has not been rigorously studied in pregnant women but
may reduce barriers to prompt treatment in patients with limited access to
care.
Gonorrhea treatment continues to evolve due to the ability of N
gonorrhoeae to develop antimicrobial resistance (Table 68-4) (St Cyr,
2020). In gravidas, if chlamydia has not been excluded, a 1-g oral dose of

azithromycin is added. Patients abstain from intercourse for 7 days after they
and their sexual partner(s) have completed treatment.
TABLE 68-4. Treatment of Gonorrhea in Pregnancya,b

For those with pharyngeal infection, non-ceftriaxone-based regimens
have higher failure rates. Thus, those with contraindications to ceftriaxone
merit infectious disease specialist consultation. With pharyngeal infection, a
test-of-cure 1 to 2 weeks after treatment is recommend. This is unnecessary
after treatment of urogenital or rectal gonorrhea.
To exclude reinfection, repeat testing is recommended 3 months after
treatment of any gonorrhea infection. For any woman treated for gonorrhea in
the first trimester and for any uninfected woman who is at high risk for
gonococcal infection, testing is repeated in the third trimester (American
Academy of Pediatrics, 2017; Workowski, 2021).
Sexual contacts are treated. Expedited therapy, discussed with
chlamydial infection, is a less-desirable option due to the now-preferred
injectable regimen. If elected, a single, oral, 800-mg dose of cefixime is
provided. If chlamydia is not excluded, oral doxycycline, 100 mg twice daily
for 7 days, is added.

■ Disseminated Gonococcal Infections
Gonococcal bacteremia may cause disseminated infections that manifest as
petechial or pustular skin lesions, arthralgias, or septic arthritis.

Antimicrobial susceptibility testing is requested for isolates cultured from
infection sites. For treatment, ceftriaxone, 1 g IV or intramuscularly, is given
every 24 hours and continued for 24 to 48 hours after clinical improvement
(Workowski, 2021). An oral agent that is selected based on susceptibility
testing is then provided to complete 1 week of therapy. Prompt recognition
and antimicrobial treatment will usually yield favorable outcomes in
pregnancy (Bleich, 2012). Meningitis and endocarditis are rare in pregnancy,
but they may be fatal. For gonococcal endocarditis, ceftriaxone 1 to 2 g IV
every 12 hours should be continued for at least 4 weeks, and for meningitis,
10 to 14 days. In all these cases, a single, 1-g, oral dose of azithromycin is
provided to treat potential chlamydial co-infection (Workowski, 2021).

CHLAMYDIAL INFECTION
■ Infection Rates and Effects
Chlamydia trachomatis is an obligate intracellular bacterium that attaches to
columnar or transitional-cell epithelium to cause urogenital infection. It is the
most common reportable STI in the United States. The chlamydial infection
rate was 694 cases per 100,000 women in 2019, and the highest rate is in
those aged 15 to 24 years (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
2021b). Among women giving birth in 2018, the rate was 1844 cases per
100,000 live births (Gregory, 2020). Most infected pregnant women are
asymptomatic, but a third have urethral syndrome, urethritis, or greater
vestibular (Bartholin) gland infection (Peipert, 2003). Mucopurulent
cervicitis may result from chlamydial or gonococcal infection or both.
Uncommon manifestations during pregnancy are endometritis, salpingitis,
reactive arthritis, and Reiter syndrome.
The role of chlamydial infection in pregnancy complications remains
controversial. It is disputed whether untreated cervical infection raises rates
of preterm delivery, PPROM, low birthweight, or perinatal mortality
(Andrews, 2000; Reekie, 2018; Silva, 2011). Chlamydial infection is not
associated with a greater risk of chorioamnionitis or with peripartum pelvic
infection (Berman, 1987; Gibbs, 1987). However, delayed postpartum
uterine infection has been described by Hoyme and associates (1986). The
syndrome, which develops 2 to 3 weeks postpartum, is distinct from early

postpartum metritis. It is characterized by vaginal bleeding or discharge,
low-grade fever, and uterine tenderness.
Infection at delivery poses a higher risk to the newborn than to the
mother. Vertical transmission leads to infection in 8 to 44 percent of neonates
delivered vaginally from affected women (Rosenman, 2003). Of neonatal
infections, conjunctivitis is the most common (Chap. 32, p. 593). Perinatal
transmission to newborns can also cause pneumonia.

■ Screening and Treatment
Currently, the USPSTF and the American Academy of Pediatrics and
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2017) recommend
chlamydia screening for all women at the first prenatal visit (LeFevre, 2014).
The College further suggests testing in the third trimester for those treated in
the first trimester, all women aged ≤25 years, and those aged >25 years with
behavioral factors, which mirror those for gonorrhea. Dionne-Odom and
associates (2020) reported a reinfection rate of 10 percent in pregnant
women successfully treated before delivery.
Diagnosis is made predominantly by NAAT rather than culture. Of
samples for NAAT, vaginal or cervical samples are preferred, because urine
collection may detect up to 10 percent fewer infections (Papp, 2014;
Wiesenfeld, 2017). However, Roberts and associates (2011) evaluated
NAAT of urine specimens compared with cervical secretions in more than
2000 pregnant women and found them to be equivalent. As with gonorrhea,
the first portion of the urine stream is collected.
Currently recommended treatment regimens for chlamydial infections are
shown in Table 68-5. Azithromycin is first-line treatment in pregnancy. The
fluoroquinolones and doxycycline are usually avoided in pregnancy, and
erythromycin estolate is contraindicated because of drug-related
hepatotoxicity.
TABLE 68-5. Oral Treatment of Chlamydia trachomatis Infection in
Pregnancya

A test of cure is repeated 4 weeks after therapy completion in pregnancy.
Earlier NAAT may resample dead but treated organisms (Lazenby, 2017). A
positive result can reflect a reinfection, a false-positive case from dead
organisms, or treatment failure or noncompliance. Fortunately, drug
resistance is rare for C trachomatis (Deguchi, 2018). Our practice is to retreat women with positive test-of-cure results. Additionally, repeat screening
3 months after treatment is recommended to exclude reinfection (Workowski,
2021).

■ Expedited Partner Therapy
To prevent STI transmission, guidelines for expedited partner therapy (EPT)
have been created by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(2006a) and are endorsed by the American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2020a). With EPT, treatment is provided to persons who
were sexual contacts of the patient within the prior 60 days. Partner therapy
may be a prescription slip for the partner, direct medication administration to
the partner and patient simultaneously, or a medication packet delivered to
the partner(s) by the patient. Ideally, EPT does not replace traditional partner
referral to allow their medical assessment, counseling, and screening for
other STIs.
EPT is acceptable for treatment of sexual contacts with chlamydial
infection. Because of new guidelines that recommend injectable ceftriaxone
alone, EPT for gonorrhea is less desirable unless the partner(s) will be
unable or unwilling to seek treatment (Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, 2021a). Fewer data are available to assess this strategy for
trichomoniasis (Kissinger, 2006; Schwebke, 2010). EPT is not recommended
for syphilis.

EPT is legally permissible or potentially allowable in all states. Links to
specific state laws are found at: www.cdc.gov/std/ept/legal/default.htm.
Notably, the risk of litigation following an adverse outcome may be elevated
when a practice has uncertain legal status or is outside formally accepted
community practice standards (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
2006a) Medication-related adverse reactions among treated partners is rare
(Jamison, 2019).
The goal of EPT in pregnancy is to lower reinfection rates and adverse
maternal and neonatal effects. A recent study at Parkland Hospital showed
that EPT did not lower the chlamydia reinfection rate prior to delivery
(Zofkie, 2021). Partner compliance, cost, and education may be factors
(McCool-Myers, 2020; Slutsker, 2020).

HERPES SIMPLEX VIRUS
■ Adult Disease
Orogenital HSV infection manifests as shallow ulcers on affected mucosa.
Infection stems from either of two different HSV viruses that are
distinguished based on immunological differences. Yet, the two viruses have
significant DNA homology, and thus prior infection with one type attenuates a
primary infection with the other. Type 2 HSV is recovered almost
exclusively from the genital tract and is usually transmitted sexually. Type 1
is responsible for most nongenital infections and typically is acquired in
childhood. However, more than half of the new cases of genital herpes in
adolescents and young adults are now caused by HSV-1 infection (Bernstein,
2013). This rise in the prevalence of HSV-1 genital disease may stem from
an increase in rates of oral-genital sexual practices. Another explanation is
that HSV-1 acquisition has declined in childhood as a result of improved
living conditions and hygiene (Chemaitelly, 2019). Without prior exposure,
young people without HSV-1 antibodies are rendered susceptible to genital
acquisition of HSV-1 or -2.
Genital herpes simplex virus affects an estimated 19 million adolescents
and adults in the United States (Spicknall, 2021). In pregnant women, the
HSV-2 seroprevalence was 21 percent, and for HSV-1, it was 59 percent
from 2007 to 2014. However, from 1999 to 2014, pregnant women with
fewer sex partners were increasingly seronegative for both virus types

(Patton, 2018). Seronegative pregnant women have a 4 to 5 percent risk to
acquire either serotype during pregnancy (Brown, 1997; Kulhanjian, 1992).
For those who are already HSV-1 seropositive, acquisition risk for HSV-2
approximates 2 percent (Brown, 1997).
Once transmitted by contact, viruses replicate at the entry site. Following
mucocutaneous infection, the virus moves retrograde along sensory nerves. It
remains latent in cranial nerves or dorsal spinal ganglia, but recurrences are
common. HSV infections may be categorized into three groups.
First-episode primary infection describes the case in which HSV-1 or 2
is isolated from a lesion in the absence of HSV-1 or -2 serological
antibodies. The typical incubation period of 6 to 8 days may be followed by
a papular eruption with itching or tingling that then becomes painful and
vesicular. Multiple vulvar and perineal lesions may or may not coalesce but
then ulcerate (Fig. 68-4). Associated inguinal adenopathy can be severe.
Many women do not present with typical lesions, and abraded or knife-cut
lesions instead may be found. Cervical involvement is common, although it
may be unapparent clinically. Transient systemic influenza-like symptoms or
isolated high fevers with or without painful lesions are frequent and
attributed to viremia. Uncommonly, women require hospitalization for febrile
syndrome or for pain control of widespread ulceration. Hepatitis,
encephalitis, or pneumonia infrequently develop, and disseminated disease is
rare. After 2 to 4 weeks, all signs and symptoms of infection disappear. In
contrast to these classic symptoms, the percentage of asymptomatic primary
HSV-2 genital infections may reach 90 percent (Fanfair, 2013).

FIGURE 68-4 First-episode primary genital herpes simplex virus infection. As shown by the arrows,
lesions may be vesicular, may be crusted, or may be shallow ulcers.

First-episode nonprimary infection is diagnosed when one HSV type is
isolated from a lesion in a woman who has only antibodies to the other HSV
serotype. For example, prior childhood HSV-1 infection likely provides
cross-reacting antibodies to blunt the effects of new HSV-2 acquisition.
Compared with primary infection, nonprimary infections produce fewer
systemic manifestations or lesions, less pain, and briefer duration of lesions
and viral shedding.
Recurrent disease is characterized by isolation of HSV-1 or -2 from the
genital tract in women who carry antibodies to the same serotype. During the
latency period, in which viral particles reside in nerve ganglia, reactivation
is common and mediated through poorly understood stimuli. In general,
lesions are fewer in number, are less tender, and shed virus for a shorter
period than those of primary infection. Typically, they recur at the same sites.
Recurrences are most frequent in the first year after initial infection, and
rates slowly decline subsequently (Benedetti, 1999). Gravidas with a known
prior history of genital HSV often experience recurrences (Sheffield, 2006).

Asymptomatic viral shedding is defined by the absence of clinical
findings. Most infected women shed virus intermittently over time, and most
HSV transmission to a partner occurs during these periods of asymptomatic
viral shedding.

■ Vertical Transmission
HSV poses a higher risk to the newborn than to the mother. Thus, strategies
aim to curb rates of vertical transmission, which may occur by three routes:
(1) peripartum in 85 percent, (2) postnatal in 10 percent, or (3) intrauterine
in 5 percent (James, 2015). Evidence does not suggest an obvious link
between HSV infection and miscarriage (Zhou, 2015).
Peripartum transmission is by far the more frequent route of infection,
and the fetus is exposed to virus shed from the lower genital tract. HSV-1 or
-2 invades the uterus following membrane rupture or is transmitted by contact
at delivery. The newborn is mainly infected, but rare cases of maternal
endometritis have been described (Hollier, 1997; McGill, 2012). Of neonatal
manifestations, infection may localize to the skin, eye, or mouth—SEM
disease—in approximately 40 percent of cases. Instead, central nervous
system (CNS) disease with encephalitis is seen in 30 percent. Last,
disseminated disease that involves multiple major organs is found in 32
percent. Localized infection is usually associated with a good outcome.
Conversely, even with acyclovir treatment, disseminated infection has a
mortality rate of nearly 30 percent (Corey, 2009; Kimberlin, 2011). Of
disseminated or cerebral infection survivors, serious developmental and
CNS morbidity is seen in 20 to 50 percent.
In the United States, the neonatal infection rate ranges from 1 to 5 cases
in 10,000 births (Donda, 2019; Mahant, 2019). Most infected newborns are
born to mothers with no reported history of HSV infection (Gardella, 2010).
The risk of neonatal infection correlates with the presence of HSV in the
genital tract, HSV type, invasive obstetrical procedures, and stage of
maternal infection (Brown, 2005, 2007). Neonates born to women who
acquire genital HSV near the time of delivery have a 30- to 50-percent risk
of infection. This is attributed to higher viral loads and the lack of
transplacental protective antibodies (Brown, 1997, 2000). With recurrent
HSV, the neonatal infection rate is <1 percent (Pasternak, 2010; Prober,
1987).

Postpartum transmission is uncommon and passed to the newborn by
contact with an infected mother, family member, or health-care worker. The
clinical presentation mirrors that with peripartum transmission.
In-utero transmission of HSV-1 or HSV-2 is rare and is part of the
TORCH (toxoplasmosis, other, rubella, cytomegalovirus, herpes virus) group
of infections. Intrauterine HSV infection classically leads to disease
involving the skin (blisters, scarring), the CNS (hydranencephaly,
microcephaly, intracranial calcification), or the eyes (chorioretinitis,
microphthalmia). Bone and viscera can be involved (Marquez, 2011).
Congenital infection with HSV or another TORCH infection is considered in
a fetus with early or severe growth restriction, microcephaly, intracranial
anomalies or calcifications, or hepatomegaly. If sonographic findings are
identified, amniocentesis is recommended, and maternal HSV serological
testing is done. Analysis of amnionic fluid for HSV-1 and HSV-2 serotypes is
by NAAT (PCR) and culture (Curtin, 2013).

■ Diagnosis
The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020d) and
USPSTF (2016) recommend against routine serological HSV screening in
asymptomatic gravidas. However, for a woman with a reported history of
genital or oral lesions, a serological HSV diagnosis is sought. For women
with either suspicious ulcers or sonographic findings suggestive of
congenital infection, direct virological testing, described next, is performed
along with serological testing for HSV. Testing for syphilis and other STIs is
also considered for women with genital ulcers.
Direct virological tests, which are either PCR or culture, are performed
on a specimen from a mucocutaneous lesion or from amniocentesis. For
mucocutaneous lesions, PCR assays are more sensitive, the results generally
are available in 1 to 2 days, and specimen handling is easier. The sensitivity
of culture for detecting HSV is relatively low as vesicular lesions begin to
ulcerate and then crust. Also, results sometimes are not available for 7 to 14
days (Strick, 2006). Regardless of the test performed, HSV viral types
should be differentiated (LeGoff, 2014). Importantly, a negative culture or
PCR result does not exclude infection. In contrast, false-positive results are
rare. For amnionic fluid assessment, both culture and PCR are recommended
(Curtin, 2013).

Serological assays detect antibodies produced against the specific HSV
glycoproteins, G1 and G2. These proteins evoke type-specific antibody
responses to HSV-1 and HSV-2 infection, respectively, and they reliably
differentiate the two serotypes. Antibody detection confirms clinical
infection and may reflect a carrier state in an asymptomatic patient. IgG
antibodies develop 1 to 2 weeks after a primary infection and then persist.
Serological testing may be falsely negative in the case of early infection but
may also establish a nonprimary infection. For this reason, direct detection of
the virus in a lesion with concomitant type-specific serological testing is
helpful for clinical interpretation and counseling. Sensitivity and specificity
of glycoprotein-based IgG tests approach 90 to 100 percent (Wald, 2002).
IgM antibody detection is not a useful test, and antibodies may be detected
with recurrent episodes.

■ Management
In nonpregnant patients, antiviral therapy with acyclovir, valacyclovir, or
famciclovir is used to treat first-episode orogenital herpes. Oral or
parenteral preparations attenuate clinical infection and viral shedding
duration. Chronic suppressive therapy also is an option to limit recurrences
and to reduce heterosexual transmission (Corey, 2004).
In pregnant women, acyclovir and valacyclovir are safe (Briggs, 2022;
Stone, 2004). Data are limited regarding fetal effects with famciclovir.
For a primary outbreak during pregnancy, women may be given antiviral
therapy to attenuate and decrease the duration of symptoms and viral
shedding (Table 68-6). Women with HIV co-infection may require a longer
duration of treatment. Those with severe or disseminated HSV are given IV
acyclovir, 5 to 10 mg/kg every 8 hours for 2 to 7 days until clinically
improved. This is followed by oral antiviral drugs to complete at least 10
days of total therapy (Workowski, 2021). For intense discomfort, oral
analgesics and topical lidocaine ointment may provide some relief.
Comorbid urinary retention is rare but can be treated briefly with an
indwelling bladder catheter.
TABLE 68-6. Oral Antiviral Medications for Herpesvirus Infection in
Pregnancya

For recurrent HSV infections during pregnancy, antiviral treatment is
provided mainly for symptom relief (see Table 68-6). Although uncommon,
acyclovir resistance has been reported, predominantly in
immunocompromised patients (Piret, 2016).
Of precautions during pregnancy, amniocentesis, percutaneous cord
blood sampling, or transabdominal chorionic villus sampling may be
performed even with active genital lesions. Transcervical procedures may
best be delayed until lesions have resolved (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020d).

■ Peripartum Shedding Prophylaxis
To diminish vertical transmission risks, cesarean delivery is indicated for
women with active genital lesions or prodromal symptoms. Several studies
have shown that acyclovir or valacyclovir suppression initiated at 36 weeks’
gestation for gravidas with recurrences during pregnancy lowers the number
of HSV outbreaks at term. The goal is to decrease the need for cesarean
delivery (Hollier, 2008). This suppressive therapy will also decrease viral
shedding (Scott, 2002; Sheffield, 2006; Watts, 2003). One systematic review
evaluated acyclovir prophylaxis given from 36 weeks to delivery to women

with HSV recurrence during pregnancy. Sheffield and colleagues (2003)
found that suppressive therapy was associated with significantly lower rates
of clinical HSV recurrence, cesarean delivery for HSV recurrences, total
HSV detection, and asymptomatic shedding. Subsequent studies using
valacyclovir suppression showed similar results (Andrews, 2006; Sheffield,
2006). Because of these studies, the American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2020d) recommends viral suppressive therapy to begin at
≥36 weeks’ gestation for women with a clinical history of genital herpes.
Suppression continues until delivery. Notably, despite maternal antiviral
suppression, several cases of atypical neonatal herpes infection have been
reported (Pinninti, 2012).
On presentation for delivery, a woman with a history of HSV should be
questioned regarding current prodromal symptoms. A careful examination of
the vulva, vagina, and cervix is performed for all, and women without genital
lesions may proceed with labor and delivery. Usual obstetrical management,
including invasive fetal monitoring, is supported in the absence of active
lesions or prodromal symptoms (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2020d).
Suspicious lesions should be swabbed for culture or NAAT evaluation.
Cesarean delivery is indicated for women with suspicious genital lesions or
prodromal symptoms. Moreover, for women with a clinical recurrence at
delivery, there is no absolute duration of membrane rupture beyond which the
fetus would not benefit from cesarean delivery (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020e).
Cesarean delivery is not recommended for women with a history of HSV
infection but no active genital disease at the time of delivery. Moreover, an
active lesion in a nongenital area can be covered by an occlusive dressing,
and vaginal delivery is allowed.
With PPROM, no evidence suggests that external lesions cause ascending
fetal infection. However, antiviral treatment during expectant care is
recommended. Major and associates (2003) described expectant management
in 29 such women at gestational ages <31 weeks. No cases of neonatal HSV
developed, and the maximum infection risk was calculated to be 10 percent.
Women with active HSV lesions may breastfeed if the breast skin has no
lesions. Strict hand washing is essential. Valacyclovir and acyclovir may be
used for symptomatic maternal lesions during breastfeeding, as drug
concentrations in breast milk are low (Sheffield, 2002a).

HUMAN PAPILLOMAVIRUS
■ Maternal Infection and Prevention
This is a common STI, and numerous serotypes infect the lower genital tract.
In the United States from 2005 to 2006, the overall HPV prevalence was 40
percent in females aged 14 to 59 years (Liu, 2016). Prevalence is highest in
younger women, and some of this seroprevalence now reflects HPV
vaccination in this age group (Brouwer, 2015). Reproductive-aged women
often become infected within a few years of sexual activity onset, and most
infections are asymptomatic and transient. High-risk types are those with the
most oncogenic potential. Of these, HPV types 16 and 18 are often associated
with lower reproductive tract dysplasia (Chap. 66, p. 1165). Mucocutaneous
genital warts termed condyloma acuminata are usually caused by types 6
and 11.
The clear link between HPV infection and cervical neoplasia led to
development of vaccines that reduce cervical cancer risk (Lei, 2020).
Although three vaccines are licensed, only one vaccine is currently available
in the United States. Gardasil 9 is a nonavalent HPV vaccine against
serotypes 6, 11, 16, 18, 31, 35, 45, 52, and 58. This vaccine is not
recommended for gravidas. However, inadvertent exposures do occur, and
no adverse pregnancy outcomes are associated (Kharbanda, 2021; Moreira,
2016; Scheller, 2017). If a woman is found to be pregnant after starting the
vaccination series, remaining doses are delayed and given after delivery.
Women who are breastfeeding may be vaccinated. Gardasil is licensed for
females aged 9 to 45 years, and the target age is 11 to 12 years. It is
recommended for those aged 9 to 26 years. It is suitable for those aged 27 to
45 years, after shared decision-making regarding age-related benefits and
risks (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020b). The
three-dose series is given on a schedule of 0, 2, and 6 months for those aged
older than 15 (Table 10-7, p. 189). A two-dose regimen is used for younger
individuals.

■ Condyloma Acuminata Treatment
Genital warts frequently grow in number and size with pregnancy. They
commonly undergo apoptosis and resolution postpartum. Rarely, lesions may

fill the vagina or cover the perineum and make vaginal delivery or
episiotomy difficult. Genital wart eradication during pregnancy is usually
unnecessary unless they are symptomatic. Therapy is directed toward
debulking symptomatic warts yet minimizing treatment toxicity to the mother
and fetus.
Trichloroacetic or bichloracetic acid in an 80- to 90-percent solution
applied topically weekly is an effective regimen for external warts. Some
prefer cryotherapy, laser ablation, or surgical excision. Agents that have
limited safety data and thus are not recommended in pregnancy include
podophyllin resin, podofilox solution or gel, imiquimod cream, and
sinecatechins.

■ Neonatal Infection
Vertical transmission rates of HPV to the newborn are minimal. Juvenileonset recurrent respiratory papillomatosis (JoRRP) is a rare, benign
neoplasm of the larynx. It can cause hoarseness and respiratory distress in
children and is most often caused by HPV 6 or 11. Risks for infection are
maternal genital HPV infection and longer labors (Niyibizi, 2014). Although
many newborns are likely exposed to HPV, few develop JoRRP (Smith,
2004). The incidence in 2013 in the United States was 5 cases in 10,000
births, and dropping rates are attributed to HPV vaccination (Meites, 2021).
The benefit of cesarean delivery for prevention is unknown, and it is not
recommended to avert HPV transmission.

VAGINITIS
Pregnant women frequently develop increased vaginal discharge. This may
be a physiological discharge, described in Chapter 4 (p. 54), but should be
differentiated from symptomatic vaginitis, which is also common in
pregnancy. Fortunately, normal vaginal flora serve to prevent vaginitis. To
better understand this, normal vaginal microflora composition and function
are currently being studied in the Vaginal Human Microbiome Project
(Huang, 2014).

■ Bacterial Vaginosis

Diagnosis
Bacterial vaginosis (BV) is a maldistribution of normal vaginal flora. With
BV, numbers of lactobacilli are decreased, and anaerobic bacterial species
are overrepresented. These anaerobes include Gardnerella, Prevotella,
Mobiluncus, and Bacteroides species; Atopobium vaginae; and BVassociated bacteria, provisionally named BVAB1, BVAB2, and BVAB3.
These last three are relatively newly recognized bacteria (Fredricks, 2005).
Ribosomal RNA gene-sequencing techniques have identified composite
communities of vaginal flora, also called the vaginal microbiota. Five types
of these composite communities exist and are referred to as community state
types (CSTs). A woman can be categorized to one of these five CSTs based
on her vaginal microbiota composition (Ravel, 2011). Researchers have
begun to quantify the risk of BV associated with these CST groups.
Specifically, CSTs I, II, III, and V are rich in lactobacilli. CST IV is a
heterogeneous microbiota of strict anaerobes and is associated with BV.
CSTs vary racially, and CST IV is the most common in asymptomatic, healthy
black women (Fettweis, 2014). Pregnancy-related changes in vaginal
microbiota also are being defined and may hold keys to adverse BV-related
pregnancy outcomes, discussed subsequently (Romero, 2014).
Of childbearing-aged women in the United States, nearly 30 percent have
BV. In black women, the prevalence approximates 50 percent (Allsworth,
2007). Most women are asymptomatic. In those with symptoms, a foul, thin
vaginal discharge is a typical complaint. Associated risk factors are
douching, multiple partners, smoking, and altered host immunity (Desseauve,
2012; Koumans, 2007; Murphy, 2016).
For clinical diagnosis of BV, three of the four following Amsel criteria
are present: (1) vaginal pH >4.5; (2) a thin, milky, noninflammatory vaginal
discharge; (3) >20 percent clue cells seen microscopically; and (4) a fishy
odor after addition of 10-percent potassium hydroxide to a vaginal secretion
sample (Amsel, 1983). The last is described as a positive “whiff test” result.
Likewise, alkalinity of seminal fluid and blood are responsible for
complaints of foul odor after intercourse and with menses in affected women.
Initially, a vaginal fluid sample is mixed with saline on a glass slide for
microscopic evaluation, and this is often called a wet preparation or “wet
prep.” Clue cells are vaginal epithelial cells containing many attached
bacteria, which create a poorly defined stippled cellular border (Fig. 68-5).

Microscopically, leukocyte numbers are not increased. The higher vaginal
pH stems from the diminished acid production due to a diminished
lactobacilli population. Notably, Trichomonas vaginalis infection also is
associated with anaerobic overgrowth and elaborated amines. Thus, women
diagnosed with BV should have no microscopic evidence of trichomoniasis.

FIGURE 68-5 A. Bacterial vaginosis. Microscopy reveals several squamous cells heavily studded with
bacteria. Clue cells are covered to the extent that cell borders are blurred and nuclei are not visible
(arrows). B. Trichomonads (arrows).

The Nugent score, used primarily in research rather than clinical
practice, is a system employed for diagnosing BV (Nugent, 1991). During
microscopic examination of a gram-stained vaginal discharge smear, scores
are calculated by assessing bacteria staining and morphology.
NAATs to detect the bacterial types found in women with BV have
suitable accuracy and may be used for symptomatic women (Coleman, 2018).
However, these tests assess for bacteria that may also be part of normal flora
in asymptomatic women. Moreover, compared with traditional methods,
molecular tests have yet to show superior health outcomes but do add
substantial cost.

Treatment
Adverse pregnancy-related health outcomes associated with BV are preterm
birth, PPROM, and postpartum endometritis (Hillier, 1995; Watts, 1990). It
also increases susceptibility to STIs, including HIV (Atashili, 2008;
Brotman, 2010). For women at low risk for preterm birth, however, treatment
of BV does not reduce preterm birth rates (Brocklehurst, 2013; Carey, 2000).

The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2021) and
USPSTF (2020) do not recommend routine BV screening of asymptomatic
gravidas at low risk for preterm delivery. For women with prior preterm
birth, evidence of screening and treatment benefits are conflicting (Kahwati,
2020). At Parkland Hospital, we do not routinely screen for BV among
women with prior preterm birth.
Treatment is reserved for symptomatic women (Table 68-7). Agents not
listed are best avoided due to insufficient data regarding their use in
pregnancy (Workowski, 2021). It is still debated whether BV is a sexually
transmitted infection, and treatment of a male partner does not lower
recurrence rates (Amaya-Guio, 2016; Schwebke, 2021).
TABLE 68-7. Treatment of Bacterial Vaginosis in Pregnancya

■ Trichomoniasis
Diagnosis
Vaginitis caused by Trichomonas vaginalis is common, and its prevalence in
the United States approximates 2 percent in women (Patel, 2018). The
prevalence is higher in those older than 30 years compared with younger
women. Risks include black race, douching, and greater number of lifetime
sexual partners (Sutton, 2007). Among women, frequent sites of infection
include the urethra, endocervix, and vagina. Those with symptomatic
vaginitis often have a purulent discharge, pruritus, vulvovaginal erythema,
and colpitis macularis. The last is often termed a “strawberry cervix” and
displays a patchy, maculoerythematous ectocervix.

Trichomonads are flagellated, pear-shaped, motile organisms that are
somewhat larger than leukocytes. These parasites can readily be seen
microscopically moving briskly in wet preparation. Prompt inspection of
vaginal secretions is advantageous because trichomonads slow with cooling.
At times, T vaginalis may be found incidentally on a Pap test slide. Both of
these microscopic approaches have low diagnostic sensitivity that
approximates 60 percent (Krieger, 1988; Wiese, 2000). Pap tests can also
yield false-positive results. Thus, Pap test trichomonad findings warrant
confirmation with either a wet prep or NAAT.
Of other direct detection methods, culture is expensive, lengthy, and only
75 to 95 percent sensitive (Association of Public Health Laboratories, 2016;
Huppert, 2007). Laboratory NAAT-based evaluation of a vaginal,
endocervical, or urine sample is available, is completed in minutes to hours,
and offers superior sensitivity of 95 to 100 percent (Van Der Pol, 2016).
Although more costly than wet-preparation microscopy, a NAAT may be a
useful, second-line diagnostic test for microscopy-negative samples. An
optimal approach in pregnancy has not been established. Rapid POC testing
is also available but may sacrifice sensitivity for speed. The OSOM
Trichomonas Rapid Test provides results in 10 minutes, is suitable for office
use, and has sensitivities of 88 to 98 percent (Herbst de Cortina, 2016).

Treatment
Treatment is reserved for symptomatic women (Table 68-8). Previously, a
one-time, 2-g dose of oral metronidazole was used to eradicate T vaginalis.
In nonpregnant women, a large randomized trial compared this traditional
therapy against metronidazole, 500 mg orally twice daily for 7 days. The
longer course provided improved efficacy (Kissinger, 2018). New
guidelines from the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
(2020g) now recommend this change in nonpregnant women. The CDC
recognizes this regimen for pregnancy.
TABLE 68-8. Oral Treatment of Trichomoniasis in Pregnancya,b

Reinfection rates among women treated for trichomoniasis are high (Kim,
2020). Thus, retesting for T vaginalis is recommended for all sexually active
women within 3 months following initial therapy (Workowski, 2021). Some
authors recommend retesting 3 weeks after treatment in pregnancy (Lazenby,
2019).
Metronidazole is not teratogenic or fetotoxic, and it may be used in all
pregnancy stages (Briggs, 2022; Czeizel, 1998; Workowski, 2021). The
manufacturer recommends against its use during the first trimester (Pfizer,
2021). Fewer data are available for tinidazole, and thus metronidazole is
preferred. For allergic patients, metronidazole desensitization is effective
(Helms, 2008). With breastfeeding, the longer, lower-dose metronidazole
regimen is not associated with adverse infant outcomes (LactMed, 2021).
Perinatal transmission of trichomoniasis by direct contact in the birth
canal is rare but may lead to neonatal respiratory or genital infection (Bruins,
2013; Trintis, 2010). Some studies have linked trichomonal infection with
preterm birth (Van Gerwen, 2021). A few other studies implicate this
infection with PPROM and small-for-gestational age newborns (Silver,
2014). However, treatment in two randomized studies did not lower preterm
birth rates (Klebanoff, 2001; Stringer, 2010).
In sum, treating symptomatic women is reasonable. For most
asymptomatic women during pregnancy, screening is not done. However,
screening at the first prenatal visit and prompt treatment are encouraged for
gravidas with comorbid HIV infection. In this group, T vaginalis infection
may be a risk factor for vertical HIV transmission (Gumbo, 2010).

■ Candidiasis
Candida albicans or other candidal species can be identified by culture from
the vagina during pregnancy in approximately 20 percent of women. A link

between candidiasis and preterm birth is not robust (Cotch, 1998; Roberts,
2015). Thus, asymptomatic colonization requires no treatment. The organism,
however, can create a profuse, irritating discharge.
For symptoms, effective treatment is listed in Table 68-9. In pregnancy,
the CDC recommends 7-day regimens and suggests topical rather than oral
azoles (Workowski, 2021). In some women, infection is likely to recur and
require repeat treatment. In these cases, symptomatic infection usually
subsides after pregnancy (Sobel, 2007). Although not preferred treatment, a
single, 150-mg oral fluconazole dose is generally not considered teratogenic.
Data showing a small association with cardiac anomalies are conflicting, but
more recent evidence is reassuring (Mølgaard-Nielsen, 2013; Zhu, 2020). In
2019, the FDA noted that reviewed data do not provide conclusive evidence
for an increased miscarriage or stillbirth risk.
TABLE 68-9. Daily, Intravaginal Agents in 7-Day Regimens for
Vulvovaginal Candidiasis Treatment in Pregnancy

HUMAN IMMUNODEFICIENCY VIRUS
■ Pathogenesis

For human immunodeficiency viruses, which are HIV-1 and HIV-2, sexual
intercourse is the main mode of transmission. The virus can be passed by
blood, and infected mothers may infect their fetuses during labor and
delivery or by breast milk. The primary determinant of transmission is the
maternal plasma viral load.
For sexual transmission, the viral HIV envelope binds to mucosal
dendritic cells. These cells then present the viral particle to specific T
lymphocytes. These lymphocytes are defined phenotypically by their cluster
of differentiation 4 (CD4) glycoprotein surface antigens. The CD4 site
serves as a receptor for the virus. Once infected, CD4 T lymphocytes are
gradually depleted, which creates an immunodeficiency that is characterized
by low serum CD4 counts. In some infected with HIV, acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) reflects profound immunodeficiency
that gives rise to various opportunistic infections and neoplasms.
The incubation period from exposure to clinical disease averages 3 to 6
weeks. Acute HIV infection is similar to many other viral syndromes and
usually lasts less than 10 days. Common symptoms, if any, include fever,
fatigue, rash, headache, lymphadenopathy, pharyngitis, myalgias, nausea, and
diarrhea. After symptoms abate, the level of viremia usually declines to a set
point, and patients with the highest viral burden at this time progress more
rapidly to AIDS and death. According to the CDC, AIDS is defined by a
CD4 T-cell count <200 cells/μL, by CD4 T cells constituting <14 percent of
all lymphocytes, or by one of several AIDS-defining illnesses (Selik, 2014).
Route of infection, viral strain’s pathogenicity, initial viral inoculum, and the
host’s immunological status all affect progression.

■ Prenatal HIV Screening
In the United States, approximately 5000 women with HIV give birth
annually (Nesheim, 2018). However, the estimated number of perinatally
acquired HIV cases has dropped, and the rate was 0.9 per 100,000 live
births in 2018 (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2020a). The
decline predominantly stems from prenatal HIV testing and antiretroviral
therapy (ART) for the woman and then her neonate.
The CDC (2006b) and the American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2020f) recommend prenatal HIV screening using an opt-out
approach. With this, HIV testing is routinely included in antenatal testing, but

this testing may be declined. Women are given information regarding HIV but
are not required to sign a specific consent. This opt-out strategy has raised
HIV testing rates and is permitted in every United States jurisdiction (Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention, 2020b).
Repeat screening during the third trimester, preferably before 36 weeks’
gestation, is considered for all pregnant women. Retesting is recommended
in areas where HIV rates exceed 1 case per 1000 pregnant women screened
or for those with risk factors. These include incarceration, injection drug use,
prostitution, a suspected or known HIV-infected sexual partner, a new or
multiple sexual partners, or diagnosis of another STI (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020f).
The initial laboratory screening test for HIV is an antigen/antibody
combination immunoassay that detects antibodies against HIV-1 and HIV-2
and detects HIV-1 p24 antigen (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
2018a). No further testing is required for specimens that yield negative
results on the initial immunoassay unless a known recent exposure to HIV has
occurred. Antibody can be detected in most patients within 1 month of
infection, and thus a test for antibodies alone may not exclude early infection.
Instead, for acute primary HIV infection, identification of viral p24 core
antigen or viral RNA is necessary.
Specimens with a “reactive” (that is, a positive) antigen/antibody
combination immunoassay result should be tested with an antibody
immunoassay that differentiates HIV-1 antibodies from HIV-2 antibodies
(Fig. 68-6). The HIV-1/HIV-2 antibody differentiation immunoassay provides
results that are reported as positive or negative for HIV-1 antibodies, for
HIV-2 antibodies, or for HIV antibodies, undifferentiated. If these two serial
immunoassays (the initial screen and the differentiation assay) are
discordant, an HIV-1 NAAT—qualitative or quantitative HIV RNA test—is
performed (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2018a).

FIGURE 68-6 Algorithm for HIV testing. For specimens that are reactive on the initial
antigen/antibody combination immunoassay and nonreactive or indeterminate on the HIV-1/HIV-2
antibody differentiation immunoassay, a nucleic acid amplification test (NAAT) is performed. Following
a nonreactive HIV-1/HIV-2 antibody differentiation immunoassay, a positive HIV-1 NAAT indicates
laboratory evidence for acute HIV-1 infection. A positive HIV-1 NAAT result following indeterminate
HIV-1/HIV-2 antibody differentiation immunoassay indicates the presence of HIV-1 infection confirmed
by HIV-1 NAAT. A negative HIV-1 NAAT result following nonreactive or indeterminate HIV-1/HIV-2
antibody differentiation immunoassay indicates a false-positive result on the initial antigen/antibody
combination immunoassay. (Reproduced with permission from Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, 2018a.)

At delivery, women with undocumented HIV status should have a fourthgeneration HIV antigen/antibody combination screening test performed on a
blood sample. A negative screening test result does not need confirmation.
However, in cases of recent HIV exposure, consideration is given to
peripartum interventions to reduce perinatal transmission despite negative
HIV testing. Repeat interval testing is recommended to exclude very early
infection not identified with the initial screen. With a positive fourthgeneration HIV testing result, peripartum and neonatal interventions to reduce
perinatal transmission are initiated. These include intravenous zidovudine
infusion during labor and avoidance of breastfeeding, although breast milk

may be stored until confirmatory test results are available (Panel on
Treatment of Pregnant Women with HIV Infection and Prevention of Perinatal
Transmission, 2021). Interventions are continued until the results of an
antibody differentiation assay—and qualitative or quantitative RNA test if
indicated—is known. Interventions can be discontinued if confirmatory
testing is negative. To confirm a positive result from any initial HIV test, the
laboratory testing algorithm in Figure 68-6 is used and begins with the
antigen/antibody combination immunoassay.

■ Vertical Transmission
Viral burden and neonatal infection rates are directly related. In one cohort,
neonatal infection was 1 percent with <400 copies/mL, and it was 23 percent
when maternal viral RNA levels were >30,000 copies/mL (Cooper, 2002).
Among 2615 neonates born to mothers taking ART before conception and
during pregnancy, no cases of vertical transmission occurred when maternal
viral loads were <50 copies/mL at delivery (Mandelbrot, 2015).
Transmission of HIV infection, however, has been observed at all HIV RNA
levels, including those that were nondetectable by current assays.
Transplacental HIV transmission can occur early, and the virus has even been
identified in specimens from elective abortion (Lewis, 1990). Kourtis and
colleagues (2001) estimated that 20 percent of vertical transmission occurs
before 36 weeks’ gestation, 50 percent in the days before delivery, and 30
percent intrapartum. Transmission rates for breastfeeding may be as high as
30 to 40 percent and are associated with increasing HIV viral burden
(Kourtis, 2006, 2007; Slyker, 2012). In nonpregnant individuals, concomitant
STIs and horizontal HIV transmission are linked. Evidence also supports that
vertical transmission rates may be increased by comorbid STIs (Schulte,
2001; Watts, 2012).

■ Antepartum Care
Pregnant women with HIV infection need special attention and are seen in
consultation by physicians with special interest in this field. An additional
resource is the National Perinatal HIV Hotline (1–888–448–8765), which
provides free antepartum, intrapartum, or postpartum consultation to

providers. At Parkland Hospital, a pregnant woman with HIV infection is
initially assessed with the following:
• Standard prenatal laboratory surveys that include serum creatinine,
complete blood count, and bacteriuria screening
• Plasma HIV RNA quantification, which establishes the “viral load” value,
and antiretroviral resistance testing if the viral load is at least 500 to 1000
copies/mL
• CD4 T-cell count
• Screening for chlamydial infection, gonorrhea, syphilis, and trichomoniasis,
if not previously performed with new HIV diagnosis
• Serum hepatic aminotransferase levels
• HSV-1 and -2, cytomegalovirus, toxoplasmosis, and hepatitis B and C
serological screening
• Baseline chest radiograph
• Tuberculosis testing with purified protein derivative (PPD) skin testing or
with interferon-gamma release assay
• Evaluation of need for pneumococcal, hepatitis A, hepatitis B, Tdap,
COVID-19, and influenza vaccines
• Sonographic evaluation to establish gestational age.
During pregnancy, the risk of HIV transmission does not appear to be
increased with amniocentesis or other invasive diagnostic procedures in
women receiving effective ART that results in viral suppression (Floridia,
2017). For women not receiving ART, the risk rises approximately twofold
(Mandelbrot, 1996). If amniocentesis is performed, efforts are taken to avoid
passing through the placenta (Panel on Treatment of Pregnant Women with
HIV Infection and Prevention of Perinatal Transmission, 2021).

Antiretroviral Therapy
In overview, the ideal strategy to suppress viral load and minimize vertical
HIV transmission includes (1) preconceptional ART, (2) antepartum ART,
(3) intrapartum continuation of the antepartum oral ART regimen plus IV
zidovudine, and (4) newborn ART prophylaxis. ART is recommended for all
pregnant women with HIV infection, and it should be initiated as early in
pregnancy as possible. Treatment reduces the risk of perinatal transmission

regardless of CD4 T-cell count or HIV RNA level. Regimen adherence is
emphasized to help prevent viral drug resistance. Gravidas are treated with
at least three antiretroviral (ARV) agents.
The Panel on Treatment of Pregnant Women with HIV Infection and
Prevention of Perinatal Transmission (2021) has issued guidelines for four
different scenarios during pregnancy (Table 68-10). The following
paragraphs summarize these recommendations.
TABLE 68-10. Recommendations for HIV Antiviral Drug Use During
Pregnancy

First, women already taking ART at pregnancy onset are encouraged to
continue their regimen if viral suppression is adequate and if the ARV is safe

and tolerated. Didanosine, stavudine, and full-dose ritonavir, which differs
from ritonavir-boosted agents, are exceptions due to pregnancy toxicity but
not teratogenicity. The lopinavir/ritonavir combination is no longer
recommended based on risks for preterm and small-for-gestational-age
neonates.
Second, women who have never received antiretroviral therapy—
antiretroviral naïve—are given ART regardless of trimester. In general, the
starting regimen comprises two nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors
that are coupled into a single agent plus either a ritonavir-boosted protease
inhibitor or an integrase inhibitor.
Third, women who have previously received antiretroviral therapy but
are currently not taking medications should undergo HIV-resistance testing
because prior ART use raises the risk of drug resistance. However, ART is
initiated prior to receiving results of these drug-resistance tests. In this case,
initial ART selection should factor results of any prior resistance testing, if
available; prior ART regimen; and current ART pregnancy guidelines, that is,
those for ART-naïve women. Drug-resistance testing may then modify the
initial regimen.
For these three categories of women taking antepartum ART, therapy
surveillance is outlined in Table 68-10. Most patients with adequate viral
response have at least a 1-log viral load decline within 1 to 4 weeks after
starting therapy. Newer integrase inhibitors rapidly decrease viral loads and
are useful for women presenting late to prenatal care (Lockman, 2021). For
those who fail to achieve this degree of decline, regimen compliance is
assessed, resistance studies are reviewed, and ART modification is
considered.
During labor and delivery, an oral ART regimen is continued with sips of
water. Additionally, IV zidovudine is administered to women during labor
and before cesarean delivery. An exception to this addition is the patient who
is strictly adherent to her prescribed oral ART regimen and who has an HIV
RNA level that was previously documented to be <50 copies/mL at 34 to 36
weeks’ gestation or at 3 to 4 weeks before delivery. At Parkland Hospital,
we administer intrapartum IV zidovudine to all HIV-positive women,
regardless of viral load. A 2-mg/kg loading dose is infused over 1 hour and
is followed with zidovudine, 1 mg/kg/hr until delivery. Women with HIV
undergoing a scheduled cesarean delivery are given IV zidovudine as a

loading dose followed by 2 more hours of continuous maintenance therapy—
a total of 3 hours of infused zidovudine prior to surgery.
The fourth group includes women who present in labor and who are
taking no ART regimen. These women are given IV zidovudine intrapartum
as just described.

■ Delivery Planning
In some cases, cesarean delivery lowers HIV prenatal transmission rates
(International Perinatal HIV Group, 1999). The American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020c) suggests that scheduled cesarean
delivery be discussed and recommended for HIV-infected women with HIV-1
RNA load >1000 copies/mL. Scheduled delivery is recommended at 38
weeks’ gestation in these women to avoid spontaneous labor. Management of
women with either HIV-1 RNA load >1000 copies/mL or unknown viral load
who present in labor or with ruptured membranes is individualized. For
these women, IV zidovudine is recommended as previously described. In the
case of early labor, cesarean delivery is preferred to vaginal birth.
For women with HIV RNA load ≤1000 copies/mL, cesarean delivery to
reduce the risk of vertical HIV transmission is not recommended and is
unlikely to confer additional benefit to women already taking ART and
achieving viral suppression (Briand, 2013; Jamieson, 2007). Vaginal
delivery in this group is the goal, and awaiting spontaneous onset of labor is
suitable. Labor is not induced to prevent perinatal HIV transmission.
During labor, artificial membrane rupture, fetal scalp electrode
placement, episiotomy, and operative vaginal delivery are performed for
standard obstetrical indications but are avoided if possible in women with
detectable RNA viral load (Peters, 2016). Labor augmentation is used when
needed to shorten the interval to delivery to help further lower the
transmission risk. For the benefits described in Chapter 27 (p. 500), delayed
cord clamping in preterm neonates is acceptable and may be considered for
term newborns. Neuraxial analgesia is suitable. Postpartum hemorrhage is
best managed with oxytocin and prostaglandin analogues. Methylergonovine
(Methergine) and other ergot alkaloids adversely interact with reverse
transcriptase and protease inhibitors to cause severe vasoconstriction.

■ Postpartum Care
Vertical transmission rates rise with breastfeeding, and it generally is not
recommended for women with HIV infection in the United States, where
formula is readily available (Committee on Pediatric AIDS, 2013). In
nutritionally deprived countries, where infectious disease and malnutrition
are primary causes of infant death, the World Health Organization (2016)
recommends exclusive breastfeeding during the first 6 to 12 months.
The Panel on Treatment of Pregnant Women with HIV Infection and
Prevention of Perinatal Transmission (2021) strongly recommends that ART
regimens not be discontinued postpartum but continued lifelong for the
advantages of viral suppression. Ideally, all those planning pregnancy should
be receiving ART and have a viral load below detectable levels before
conception. As one benefit, interpregnancy viral load suppression is
associated with less vertical transmission in a subsequent pregnancy (French,
2014; Stewart, 2014). Reassuringly, for those seeking subsequent pregnancy,
when ART is available, repeated pregnancy in a healthy woman with HIV
has no significant effect on disease progression (Calvert, 2015). Transition
postpartum to general HIV care is critical to maintain viral suppression
(Swain, 2016).

■ Prevention
For adults without HIV infection but with risks for HIV acquisition, the
USPSTF (2019b) recommends offering preexposure prophylaxis (PrEP) to
decrease the risk of acquiring HIV. Risk factors for heterosexually active
women without HIV infection are a partner with HIV, syphilis or gonorrhea
within the past 6 months, and inconsistent condom use with a high-risk
partner. The last is a partner with injection drug use or with multiple other
sexual partners. Current guidance from the CDC (2018b) emphasizes the use
of ART to achieve viral suppression in the infected partner and barrier use as
primary methods of preventing horizontal transmission. However, PrEP for
the HIV-negative partner is considered, including during pregnancy to reduce
the risk of HIV acquisition and also vertical transmission. PrEP with
tenofovir disoproxil fumarate (TDF)/emtricitabine taken orally daily is
acceptable during pregnancy and is encouraged particularly if the HIV viral

load of the infected partner is unknown or unsuppressed. Barrier methods are
reinforced.
For conception in HIV-serodiscordant couples, assisted reproductive
technologies are available. In lower-resource settings, acceptable
approaches combine safer conception methods. These include combinations
of treatment to achieve viral suppression for the HIV-seropositive partner,
PrEP for the HIV-seronegative partner, STI screening and treatment, timed
condomless sex during peak fertility days, and self-insemination, (American
Society for Reproductive Medicine, 2021; Schwartz, 2019).
If pregnancy is undesired, contraception options are discussed (Chap. 38,
p. 664). Counseling also includes education for decreasing high-risk sexual
behaviors to prevent HIV transmission or acquisition and to decrease other
STI acquisition.

REFERENCES
Adhikari EH: Syphilis in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 135(5):1121, 2020
Allsworth JE, Peipert JF: Prevalence of bacterial vaginosis: 2001–2004 National Health and Nutrition
Examination Survey data. Obstet Gynecol 109(1):114, 2007
Amaya-Guio J, Viveros-Carreño DA, Sierra-Barrios EM, et al: Antibiotic treatment for the sexual
partners of women with bacterial vaginosis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 10:CD011701, 2016
American Academy of Pediatrics and American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Guidelines
for Perinatal Care, 8th ed. Washington, 2017
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Expedited partner therapy in the management of
gonorrhea and chlamydial infection. Committee Opinion No. 737, June 2020a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Human papillomavirus vaccination. Committee
Opinion No. 809, July 2020b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Labor and delivery management of women with
human immunodeficiency virus infection. Committee Opinion No. 751, August 2018, Reaffirmed
2020c
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Management of genital herpes in pregnancy.
Practice Bulletin No. 220, April 2020d
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Prelabor rupture of membranes. Practice Bulletin
No. 217, February 2020e
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Prenatal and perinatal human immunodeficiency
virus testing. Committee Opinion No. 752, August 2018, Reaffirmed 2020f
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Vaginitis in nonpregnant patients. Practice
Bulletin No. 215, January 2020g
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Prediction and prevention of spontaneous
preterm birth. Practice Bulletin No. 234, July 2021

American Society for Reproductive Medicine: Human immunodeficiency virus and infertility treatment:
an Ethics Committee opinion. Fertil Steril 115(4):860, 2021
Amsel R, Totten PA, Spiegel CA, et al: Nonspecific vaginitis. Diagnostic criteria and microbial and
epidemiologic associations. Am J Med 74(1):14, 1983
Andrews WW, Goldenberg RL, Mercer B, et al: The Preterm Prediction Study: association of secondtrimester genitourinary chlamydia infection with subsequent spontaneous preterm birth. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 183:662, 2000
Andrews WW, Kimberlin DF, Whitley R, et al: Valacyclovir therapy to reduce recurrent genital herpes
in pregnant women. Am J Obstet Gynecol 194(3):774, 2006
Association of Public Health Laboratories: Advances in laboratory detection of Trichomonas vaginalis
(Updated). Silver Spring, APHL, 2016
Association of Public Health Laboratories: Suggested Reporting Language for Syphilis Serological
Testing. Silver Spring, APHL, 2020
Atashili J, Poole C, Ndumbe PM, et al: Bacterial vaginosis and HIV acquisition: a meta-analysis of
published studies. AIDS 22(12):1493, 2008
Benedetti J, Zeh J, Corey L: Clinical reactivation of genital herpes simplex virus infection decreases in
frequency over time. Ann Intern Med 131: 14, 1999
Berman SM, Harrison HR, Boyce WT, et al: Low birth weight, prematurity, and postpartum
endometritis. Association with prenatal cervical Mycoplasma hominis and Chlamydia trachomatis
infections. JAMA 257(9):1189, 1987
Bernstein DI, Bellamy AR, Hook EW 3rd, et al: Epidemiology, clinical presentation, and antibody
response to primary infection with herpes simplex virus type 1 and type 2 in young women. Clin
Infect Dis 56(3):344, 2013
Bleich AT, Sheffield JS, Wendel GD, et al: Disseminated gonococcal infection in women. Obstet
Gynecol 119(3)597, 2012
Brandenburger D, Ambrosino E: The impact of antenatal syphilis point of care testing on pregnancy
outcomes: a systematic review. PLoS One 16(3):e0247649, 2021
Briand N, Jasseron C, Sibiude J, et al: Cesarean section for HIV-infected women in the combination
ART era, 2000–2010. Am J Obstet Gynecol 209(4):335.e1, 2013
Briggs GG, Towers CV, Forinash AB: Briggs Drugs in Pregnancy and Lactation: A Reference Guide to
Fetal and Neonatal Risk, 12th ed. Philadelphia, Wolters Kluwer, 2022
Brocklehurst P, Gordon A, Heatley E, et al: Antibiotics for treating bacterial vaginosis in pregnancy.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 1:CD000262, 2013
Brotman RM, Klebanoff MA, Nansel TR, et al: Bacterial vaginosis assessed by gram stain and
diminished colonization resistance to incident gonococcal, chlamydial, and trichomonal genital
infection. J Infect Dis 202:1907, 2010
Brouwer AF, Eisenberg MC, Carey TE, et al: Trends in HPV cervical and seroprevalence and
associations between oral and genital infection and serum antibodies in NHANES 2003–2012. BMC
Infect Dis 15:575, 2015
Brown EL, Gardella C, Malm G, et al: Effect of maternal herpes simplex virus (HSV) serostatus and
HSV type on risk of neonatal herpes. Acta Obstet Gynecol 86:523, 2007
Brown ZA: HSV-2 specific serology should be offered routinely to antenatal patients. Rev Med Virol
10(3):141, 2000
Brown ZA, Gardella C, Wald A, et al: Genital herpes complicating pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 106:845,
2005

Brown ZA, Selke SA, Zeh J, et al: Acquisition of herpes simplex virus during pregnancy. N Engl J Med
337:509, 1997
Bruins MJ, van Straaten IL, Ruijs GJ: Respiratory disease and Trichomonas vaginalis in premature
newborn twins. Pediatr Infect Dis J 32(9):1029, 2013
Burkman RT, Tonascia JA, Atienza MF, et al: Untreated endocervical gonorrhea and endometritis
following elective abortion. Am J Obstet Gynecol 126:648, 1976
Calvert C, Ronsmans C: Pregnancy and HIV disease progression: a systematic review and metaanalysis. Trop Med Int Health 20(2):122, 2015
Cao Y, Su X, Wang Q, et al: A multicenter study evaluating ceftriaxone and benzathine penicillin G as
treatment agents for early syphilis in Jiangsu, China. Clin Infect Dis 65(10):1683, 2017
Carey JC, Klebanoff MA, Hauth JC, et al: Metronidazole to prevent preterm delivery in pregnant
women with asymptomatic bacterial vaginosis. National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development Network of Maternal-Fetal Medicine Units. N Engl J Med 342:534, 2000
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Expedited partner therapy in the management of sexually
transmitted diseases. Atlanta, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2006a
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Revised recommendations for HIV testing of adults,
adolescents, and pregnant women in health-care settings. MMWR 55(14):1, 2006b
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Discordant results from reverse sequence syphilis
screening—five laboratories, United States, 2006–2010. MMWR 60(5):133, 2011
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: 2018 Quick reference guide: recommended laboratory
HIV testing algorithm for serum or plasma specimens. 2018a. Available at:
https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/50872. Accessed June 4, 2021
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: US Public Health Service: Preexposure prophylaxis for the
prevention of HIV infection in the United States—2017 Update: a clinical practice guideline. 2018b.
Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/hiv/pdf/risk/prep/cdc-hiv-prep-guidelines-2017.pdf. Accessed
June 5, 2021
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Monitoring selected national HIV prevention and care
objectives by using HIV surveillance data—United States and 6 dependent areas, 2018. HIV
Surveillance Supplemental Report, 2020a. Available at:
https://www.cdc.gov/hiv/pdf/library/reports/surveillance/cdc-hiv-surveillance-supplemental-reportvol-25-2.pdf. Accessed June 4, 2021
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: State laws that address high-impact HIV prevention
efforts. 2020b. Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/hiv/policies/law/states/. Accessed June 4, 2021
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Guidance on the use of expedited partner therapy in the
treatment of gonorrhea. 2021a. Available at: /www.cdc.gov/std/ept/gc-guidance.htm. Accessed
May 30, 2021
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Sexually Transmitted Disease Surveillance 2019. Atlanta,
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2021b
Chemaitelly H, Nagelkerke N, Omori R, et al: Characterizing herpes simplex virus type 1 and type 2
seroprevalence declines and epidemiological association in the United States. PLoS One
14(6):e0214151, 2019
Coleman JS, Gaydos CA: Molecular diagnosis of bacterial vaginosis: an update. J Clin Microbiol
56(9):e00342, 2018
Committee on Pediatric AIDS: Infant feeding and transmission of human immunodeficiency virus in the
United States. Pediatrics 131(2):391, 2013

Cooper ER, Charurat M, Mofenson L, et al: Combination antiretroviral strategies for the treatment of
pregnant HIV-1-infected women and prevention of perinatal HIV-1 transmission. J Acquir Immune
Defic Syndr 29:484, 2002
Corey L, Wald A: Maternal and neonatal herpes simplex virus infections. N Engl J Med 361(14):1376,
2009
Corey L, Wald A, Patel R, et al: Once-daily valacyclovir to reduce the risk of transmission of genital
herpes. N Engl J Med 350:11, 2004
Cotch MF, Hillier SL, Gibbs RS, et al: Epidemiology and outcomes associated with moderate to heavy
Candida colonization during pregnancy. The Vaginal Infections and Prematurity Study Group. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 178(2):374, 1998
Curtin WM, Menegus MA, Patru MM, et al: Midtrimester fetal herpes simplex-2 diagnosis by serology,
culture and quantitative polymerase chain reaction. Fetal Diagn Ther 33(2):133, 2013
Czeizel AE, Rockenbauer M: A population based case-control teratologic study of oral metronidazole
treatment during pregnancy. BJOG 105:322, 1998
Deguchi T, Hatazaki K, Ito S, et al: Macrolide and fluoroquinolone resistance is uncommon in clinical
strains of Chlamydia trachomatis. J Infect Chemother 24(8):610, 2018
Desseauve D, Chantrel J, Fruchart A, et al: Prevalence and risk factors of bacterial vaginosis during the
first trimester of pregnancy in a large French population-based study. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod
Biol 163(1):30, 2012
Dionne-Odom J, Subramaniam A, Aaron KJ, et al: High rates of persistent and recurrent chlamydia in
pregnant women after treatment with azithromycin. Am J Obstet Gynecol MFM 2(4):100216, 2020
Donda K, Sharma M, Amponsah JK, et al: Trends in the incidence, mortality, and cost of neonatal
herpes simplex virus hospitalizations in the United States from 2003 to 2014. J Perinatol 39(5):697,
2019
Drugs and Lactation Database (LactMed): Metronidazole. 2021. Available at:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK501315/#LM440.Drug_Levels_and_Effects. Accessed
July 24, 2021
Fanfair RN, Zaidi A, Taylor LD, et al: Trends in seroprevalence of herpes simplex virus type 2 among
non-Hispanic blacks and non-Hispanic whites aged 14 to 49 years—United States, 1988 to 2010.
Sex Transm Dis 40(11):860, 2013
Fettweis JM, Brooks JP, Serrano MG, et al: Differences in vaginal microbiome in African American
women versus women of European ancestry. Microbiology 160(Pt 10):2272, 2014
Fiumara NJ: Syphilis in newborn children. Clin Obstet Gynecol 18:183, 1975
Floridia M, Masuelli G, Meloni A, et al: Amniocentesis and chorionic villus sampling in HIV-infected
pregnant women: a multicentre case series. BJOG 124(8):1218, 2017
Food and Drug Administration: FDA allows for first point-of-care chlamydia and gonorrhea test to be
used in more near-patient care settings. 2021. Available at: https://www.fda.gov/news-events/pressannouncements/fda-allows-first-point-care-chlamydia-and-gonorrhea-test-be-used-more-nearpatient-care-settings. Accessed August 26, 2021
Food and Drug Administration: FDA clears first diagnostic tests for extragenital testing for chlamydia
and gonorrhea. 2019. Available at: www.fda.gov/news-events/press-announcements/fda-clearsfirst-diagnostic-tests-extragenital-testing-chlamydia-and-gonorrhea. Accessed May 28, 2021
Food and Drug Administration: FDA to review study examining use of oral fluconazole (Diflucan) in
pregnancy. 2019. Available at: https://www.fda.gov/drugs/drug-safety-and-availability/fda-drugsafety-communication-fda-review-study-examining-use-oral-fluconazole-diflucan-pregnancy.
Accessed June 4, 2021

Fredricks DN, Fiedler TL, Marrazzo JM: Molecular identification of bacteria associated with bacterial
vaginosis. N Engl J Med 353:1899, 2005
French CE, Thorne C, Tariq S, et al: Immunologic status and virologic outcomes in repeat pregnancies to
HIV-positive women not on antiretroviral therapy at conception: a case for lifelong antiretroviral
therapy? AIDS 28(9):1369, 2014
Gardella C, Huang ML, Wald A, et al: Rapid polymerase chain reaction assay to detect herpes simplex
virus in the genital tract of women in labor. Obstet Gynecol 115(6):1209, 2010
Garnett GP, Aral SO, Hoyle DV, et al: The natural history of syphilis. Implications for the transmission
dynamics and control of infection. Sex Transm Dis 24(4):185, 1997
Gibbs RS, Schachter J: Chlamydial serology in patients with intra-amniotic infection and controls. Sex
Transm Dis 14:213, 1987
Gregory EC, Ely DM: Trends and characteristics of sexually transmitted infections during pregnancy:
United States, 2016–2018. Natl Vital Stat Rep 69(3):1, 2020
Gumbo FZ, Duri K, Kandawasvika GQ, et al: Risk factors of HIV vertical transmission in a cohort of
women under a PMTCT program at three peri-urban clinics in a resource-poor setting. J Perinatol
30:717, 2010
Hawkes S, Matin N, Broutet N, et al: Effectiveness of interventions to improve screening for syphilis in
pregnancy: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet Infect Dis 11:684, 2011
Helms DJ, Mosure DJ, Secor WE, et al: Management of Trichomonas vaginalis in women with
suspected metronidazole hypersensitivity. Am J Obstet Gynecol 198(4):370.e1, 2008
Herbst de Cortina S, Bristow CC, et al: A systematic review of point of care testing for Chlamydia
trachomatis, Neisseria gonorrhoeae, and Trichomonas vaginalis. Infect Dis Obstet Gynecol
2016:4386127, 2016
Hillier SL, Nugent RP, Eschenbach DA, et al: Association between bacterial vaginosis and preterm
delivery of a low-birth-weight infant. The Vaginal Infections and Prematurity Study Group. N Engl J
Med 333:1737, 1995
Hollier LM, Harstad TW, Sanchez PJ, et al: Fetal syphilis: clinical and laboratory characteristics. Obstet
Gynecol 97:947, 2001
Hollier LM, Scott LL, Murphree SS, et al: Postpartum endometritis caused by herpes simplex virus.
Obstet Gynecol 89(5 Pt 2):836, 1997
Hollier LM, Wendel GD: Third-trimester antiviral prophylaxis for preventing maternal genital herpes
simplex virus (HSV) recurrences and neonatal infection. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 1:CD004946,
2008
Hoyme UB, Kiviat N, Eschenbach DA: The microbiology and treatment of late postpartum
endometritis. Obstet Gynecol 68:226, 1986
Huang B, Fettweis JM, Brooks JP, et al: The changing landscape of the vaginal microbiome. Clin Lab
Med 34(4):747, 2014
Huppert JS, Mortensen JE, Reed JL, et al: Rapid antigen testing compares favorably with transcriptionmediated amplification assay for the detection of Trichomonas vaginalis in young women. Clin
Infect Dis 45(2):194, 2007
International Perinatal HIV Group: The mode of delivery and the risk of vertical transmission of human
immunodeficiency virus type 1: a meta-analysis of 15 prospective cohort studies. N Engl J Med
340:977, 1999
James SH, Kimberlin DW: Neonatal herpes simplex virus infection: epidemiology and treatment. Clin
Perinatol 42(1):47, 2015

Jamison CD, Coleman JS, Mmeje O: Improving women’s health and combatting sexually transmitted
infections through expedited partner therapy. Obstet Gynecol 133(3):416, 2019
Jamison DJ, Read JS, Kourtis AP, et al: Cesarean delivery for HIV-infected women: recommendations
and controversies. Am J Obstet Gynecol 197: S96, 2007
Kahwati LC, Clark R, Berkman N, et al: Screening for bacterial vaginosis in pregnant adolescents and
women to prevent preterm delivery: updated evidence report and systematic review for the US
Preventive Services Task Force. JAMA 323(13):1293, 2020
Kharbanda EO, Vazquez-Benitez G, DeSilva MB, et al: Association of inadvertent 9-valent human
papillomavirus vaccine in pregnancy with spontaneous abortion and adverse birth outcomes. JAMA
Netw Open 4(4):e214340, 2021
Kim TG, Young MR, Goggins ER, et al: Trichomonas vaginalis in pregnancy: patterns and predictors
of testing, infection, and treatment. Obstet Gynecol 135(5):1136, 2020
Kimberlin DW, Whitley RJ, Wan W, et al: Oral acyclovir suppression and neurodevelopment after
neonatal herpes. N Engl J Med 365(14):1284, 2011
Kissinger P, Muzny CA, Mena LA, et al: Single-dose versus 7-day-dose metronidazole for the treatment
of trichomoniasis in women: an open-label, randomised controlled trial. Lancet Infect Dis 1251, 2018
Kissinger P, Schmidt N, Mohammed H, et al: Patient-delivered partner treatment for Trichomonas
vaginalis infection: a randomized controlled trial. Sex Transm Dis 33:445, 2006
Klebanoff MA, Carey JC, Hauth JC, et al: Failure of metronidazole to prevent preterm delivery among
pregnant women with asymptomatic Trichomonas vaginalis infection. N Engl J Med 345(7):487,
2001
Klein VR, Cox SM, Mitchell MD, et al: The Jarisch–Herxheimer reaction complicating syphilotherapy in
pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 75:375, 1990
Korenromp EL, Rowley J, Alonso M, et al: Global burden of maternal and congenital syphilis and
associated adverse birth outcomes—estimates for 2016 and progress since 2012. PLoS One
14(2):e0211720, 2019
Koumans EH, Sternberg M, Bruce C, et al: The prevalence of bacterial vaginosis in the United States,
2001–2004: associations with symptoms, sexual behaviors, and reproductive health. Sex Transm Dis
34:864, 2007
Kourtis AP, Bulterys M, Nesheim SR, et al: Understanding the timing of HIV transmission from mother
to infant. JAMA 285:709, 2001
Kourtis AP, Jamieson DJ, de Vincenzi I, et al: Prevention of human immunodeficiency virus-1
transmission to the infant through breastfeeding: new developments. Am J Obstet Gynecol 197:S113,
2007
Kourtis AP, Lee FK, Abrams EJ, et al: Mother-to-child transmission of HIV-1: timing and implications
for prevention. Lancet Infect Dis 6:726, 2006
Krieger JN, Tam MR, Stevens CE, et al: Diagnosis of trichomoniasis. Comparison of conventional wetmount examination with cytologic studies, cultures, and monoclonal antibody staining of direct
specimens. JAMA 259(8):1223, 1988
Kulhanjian JA, Soroush V, Au DS, et al: Identification of women at unsuspected risk of primary
infection with herpes simplex virus type 2 during pregnancy. N Engl J Med 326(14):916, 1992
Laga M, Plummer FA, Nzanze H, et al: Epidemiology of ophthalmia neonatorum in Kenya. Lancet
2(8516):1145, 1986
Larsen SA, Steiner BM, Rudolph AH: Laboratory diagnosis and interpretation of tests for syphilis. Clin
Microbiol Rev 8:1, 1995

Lazenby GB, Korte JE, Tillman S, et al: A recommendation for timing of repeat Chlamydia
trachomatis test following infection and treatment in pregnant and nonpregnant women. Int J STD
AIDS 28(9):902, 2017
Lazenby GB, Thompson L, Powell AM, et al: Unexpected high rates of persistent Trichomonas
vaginalis infection in a retrospective cohort of treated pregnant women. Sex Transm Dis 46(1):2,
2019
LeFevre ML, U.S. Preventive Services Task Force: Screening for Chlamydia and gonorrhea: U.S.
Preventive Services Task Force recommendation statement. Ann Intern Med 161(12):902, 2014
LeGoff J, Péré H, Bélec L: Diagnosis of genital herpes simplex virus infection in the clinical laboratory.
Virol J 11:83, 2014
Lei J, Ploner A, Elfström KM, et al: HPV vaccination and the risk of invasive cervical cancer. N Engl J
Med 383(14):1340, 2020
Levett PN, Fonseca K, Tsang RS, et al: Canadian Public Health Laboratory Network laboratory
guidelines for the use of serological tests (excluding point-of-care tests) for the diagnosis of syphilis
in Canada. Can J Infect Dis Med Microbiol 26 Suppl A:6A, 2015
Lewis SH, Reynolds-Kohler C, Fox HE, et al: HIV-1 in trophoblastic and villous Hofbauer cells, and
haematological precursors in eight-week fetuses. Lancet 335:565, 1990
Liang Z, Chen YP, Yang CS, et al: Meta-analysis of ceftriaxone compared with penicillin for the
treatment of syphilis. Int J Antimicrob Agents 47(1):6, 2016
Liu G, Markowitz LE, Hariri S, et al: Seroprevalence of 9 human papillomavirus types in the United
States, 2005–2006. J Infect Dis 213(2):191, 2016
Llata E, Braxton J, Asbel L, et al: Rectal Chlamydia trachomatis and Neisseria gonorrhoeae
infections among women reporting anal intercourse. Obstet Gynecol 132(3):692, 2018
Lockman S, Brummel SS, Ziemba L, et al: Efficacy and safety of dolutegravir with emtricitabine and
tenofovir alafenamide fumarate or tenofovir disoproxil fumarate, and efavirenz, emtricitabine, and
tenofovir disoproxil fumarate HIV antiretroviral therapy regimens started in pregnancy (IMPAACT
2010/VESTED): a multicentre, open-label, randomised, controlled, phase 3 trial. Lancet
397(10281):1276, 2021
Mahant S, Hall M, Schondelmeyer AC, et al: Neonatal herpes simplex virus infection among Medicaidenrolled children: 2009–2015. Pediatrics 143(4):e20183233, 2019
Major CA, Towers CV, Lewis DF, et al: Expectant management of preterm rupture of membranes
complicated by active recurrent genital herpes. Am J Obstet Gynecol 188:1551, 2003
Mandelbrot L, Mayaux MJ, Bongain A, et al: Obstetric factors and mother-to-child transmission of
human immunodeficiency virus type 1: the French perinatal cohorts. SEROGEST French Pediatric
HIV Infection Study Group. Am J Obstet Gynecol 175(3 Pt 1):661, 1996
Mandelbrot L, Tubiana R, Le Chenadec J, et al: No perinatal HIV-1 transmissions from women with
effective ART starting before conception. Clin Infect Dis 61(11):1715, 2015
Marquez L, Levy ML, Munoz FM, et al: A report of three cases and review of intrauterine herpes
simplex virus infection. Pediatr Infect Dis J 30(2):153, 2011
McCool-Myers M, Smith AD, Kottke MJ: Expert interviews on multilevel barriers in implementing
expedited partner therapy for chlamydia. J Public Health Manag Pract 26(6):585, 2020
McGill AL, Bavaro MF, You WB: Postpartum herpes simplex virus endometritis and disseminated
infection in both mother and neonate. Obstet Gynecol 120(2 Pt 2):471, 2012
Meites E, Stone L, Amiling R, et al: Significant declines in juvenile onset recurrent respiratory
papillomatosis following HPV Vaccine introduction in the United States. Clin Infect Dis 73(5):885,
2021

Mølgaard-Nielsen D, Svanström H, Melbye M, et al: Association between use of oral fluconazole during
pregnancy and risk of spontaneous abortion and stillbirth. JAMA 315(1):58, 2016
Moreira ED Jr, Block SL, Ferris D, et al: Safety profile of the 9-valent HPV vaccine: a combined
analysis of 7 phase III clinical trials. Pediatrics 138(2): pii:e20154387, 2016
Murphy K, Mitchell CM: The interplay of host immunity, environment and the risk of bacterial vaginosis
and associated reproductive health outcomes. J Infect Dis 214 Suppl 1:S29, 2016
Myles TD, Elam G, Park-Hwang E, et al: The Jarisch–Herxheimer reaction and fetal monitoring
changes in pregnant women treated for syphilis. Obstet Gynecol 92:859, 1998
Nathan L, Bohman VR, Sanchez PJ, et al: In utero infection with Treponema pallidum in early
pregnancy. Prenat Diagn 17:119, 1997
Nesheim SR, FitzHarris LF, Lampe MA, et al: Reconsidering the number of women with HIV infection
who give birth annually in the United States. Public Health Rep 133(6):637, 2018
Niyibizi J, Rodier C, Wassef M, et al: Risk factors for the development and severity of juvenile-onset
recurrent respiratory papillomatosis: a systematic review. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol 78(2):186,
2014
Nugent RP, Krohn MA, Hillier SL: Reliability of diagnosing bacterial vaginosis is improved by a
standardized method of Gram stain interpretation. J Clin Microbiol 29:297, 1991
Panel on Treatment of Pregnant Women with HIV Infection and Prevention of Perinatal Transmission:
Recommendations for use of antiretroviral drugs in pregnant women with HIV infection and
interventions to reduce perinatal HIV transmission in the United States. 2021. Available at:
https://clinicalinfo.hiv.gov/sites/default/files/guidelines/documents/Perinatal_GL.pdf. Accessed
August 30, 2021
Papp JR, Schachter J, Gaydos CA, et al: Recommendations for the laboratory-based detection of
Chlamydia trachomatis and Neisseria gonorrhoeae—2014. MMWR 63(0):1, 2014
Pasternak B, Hiviid A: Use of acyclovir, valacyclovir, and famciclovir in the first trimester of pregnancy
and the risk of birth defect. JAMA 304(8):859, 2010
Patel EU, Gaydos CA, Packman ZR, et al: Prevalence and correlates of Trichomonas vaginalis
infection among men and women in the United States. Clin Infect Dis 67(2):211, 2018
Patton ME, Bernstein K, Liu G, et al: Seroprevalence of herpes simplex virus types 1 and 2 among
pregnant women and sexually active, nonpregnant women in the United States. Clin Infect Dis
67(10):1535, 2018
Peeling RW, Ye H: Diagnostic tools for preventing and managing maternal and congenital syphilis: an
overview. Bull World Health Organ 82(6):439, 2004
Peipert JF: Clinical practice: genital chlamydial infections. N Engl J Med 18: 349, 2003
Peters H, Francis K, Harding K, et al: Operative vaginal delivery and invasive procedures in pregnancy
among women living with HIV. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 210:295, 2016
Pfizer: Flagyl (metronidazole tablets). 2021. Available at: labeling.pfizer.com/ShowLabeling.aspx?id =
570. Accessed June 2, 2021
Pillay A: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Syphilis Summit—diagnostics and laboratory
issues. Sex Transm Dis 45(9S Suppl 1):S13, 2018
Pinninti SG, Angara R, Feja KN, et al: Neonatal herpes disease following maternal antenatal antiviral
suppressive therapy: a multicenter case series. J Pediatr 161(1):134, 2012
Piret J, Boivin G: Antiviral resistance in herpes simplex virus and varicella-zoster virus infections:
diagnosis and management. Curr Opin Infect Dis 29(6):654, 2016
Prober CG, Sullender WM, Yasukawa LL, et al: Low risk of herpes simplex virus infections in neonates
exposed to the virus at the time of vaginal delivery to mothers with recurrent genital herpes simplex

virus infections. N Engl J Med 316:240, 1987
Qin J, Yang T, Xiao S, et al: Reported estimates of adverse pregnancy outcomes among women with
and without syphilis: a systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS One 9(7):e102203, 2014
Rac M, Bryant S, McIntire DD, et al: Progression of ultrasound findings of fetal syphilis following
maternal treatment. Am J Obstet Gynecol 210:S26, 2014
Ravel J, Gajer P, Abdo Z, et al: Vaginal microbiome of reproductive-age women. Proc Natl Acad Sci U
S A 108 (Suppl 1):4680, 2011
Reekie J, Roberts C, Preen D, et al: Chlamydia trachomatis and the risk of spontaneous preterm birth,
babies who are born small for gestational age, and stillbirth: a population-based cohort study. Lancet
Infect Dis 18(4):452, 2018
Roberts CL, Algert CS, Rickard KL, et al: Treatment of vaginal candidiasis for the prevention of
preterm birth: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Syst Rev 4:31, 2015
Roberts SW, Sheffield JS, McIntire DD, et al: Urine screening for Chlamydia trachomatis during
pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 117(4):883, 2011
Romero R, Hassan SS, Gajer P, et al: The composition and stability of the vaginal microbiota of normal
pregnant women is different from that of non-pregnant women. Microbiome 2(1):4, 2014
Rosenman MB, Mahon BE, Downs SM, et al: Oral erythromycin prophylaxis vs watchful waiting in
caring for newborns exposed to Chlamydia trachomatis. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 157(6):565,
2003
Satyaputra F, Hendry S, Braddick M, et al: The laboratory diagnosis of syphilis. J Clin Microbiol
59(10):e0010021, 2021
Scheller NM, Pasternak B, Mølgaard-Nielsen D, et al: Quadrivalent HPV vaccination and the risk of
adverse pregnancy outcomes. N Engl J Med 376(13):1223, 2017
Schulte JM, Burkham S, Hamaker D, et al: Syphilis among HIV-infected mothers and their infants in
Texas from 1988 to 1994. Sex Transm Dis 28: 316, 2001
Schwartz SR, Bassett J, Mutunga L, et al: HIV incidence, pregnancy, and implementation outcomes
from the Sakh’umndeni safer conception project in South Africa: a prospective cohort study. Lancet
HIV 6(7):e438, 2019
Schwebke JR, Desmond RA: A randomized controlled trial of partner notification methods for
prevention of trichomoniasis in women. Sex Transm Dis 37(6):392, 2010
Schwebke JR, Lensing SY, Lee J, et al: Treatment of male sexual partners of women with bacterial
vaginosis (BV): a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Clin Infect Dis 73(3):e672, 2021
Scott LL, Hollier LM, McIntire D, et al: Acyclovir suppression to prevent recurrent genital herpes at
delivery. Infect Dis Obstet Gynecol 10:71, 2002
Selik RM, Mokotoff ED, Branson B, et al: Revised surveillance case definition for HIV infection-United
States, 2014. MMWR 63(3):1, 2014
Seña AC, Zhang XH, Li T, et al: A systematic review of syphilis serological treatment outcomes in
HIV-infected and HIV-uninfected persons: rethinking the significance of serological nonresponsiveness and the serofast state after therapy. BMC Infect Dis 15:479, 2015
Sheffield JS, Fish DN, Hollier LM, et al: Acyclovir concentrations in human breast milk after
valacyclovir administration. Am J Obstet Gynecol 186:100, 2002a
Sheffield JS, Hill JB, Hollier LM, et al: Valacyclovir prophylaxis to prevent recurrent herpes at delivery:
a randomized clinical trial. Obstet Gynecol 108:141, 2006
Sheffield JS, Hollier LM, Hill JB, et al: Acyclovir prophylaxis to prevent herpes simplex virus recurrence
at delivery: a systematic review. Obstet Gynecol 102:1396, 2003

Sheffield JS, Sanchez PJ, Morris G, et al: Congenital syphilis after maternal treatment for syphilis during
pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 186:569, 2002b
Sheffield JS, Sanchez PJ, Wendel GD Jr, et al: Placental histopathology of congenital syphilis. Obstet
Gynecol 100:126, 2002c
Silva MJ, Florencio GL, Gabiatti JR, et al: Perinatal morbidity and mortality associated with chlamydial
infection: a meta-analysis study. Braz J Infect Dis 15(6):533, 2011
Silver BJ, Guy RJ, Kaldor JM, et al: Trichomonas vaginalis as a cause of perinatal morbidity: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Sex Transm Dis 41(6):369, 2014
Silverstein AM: Congenital syphilis and the timing of immunogenesis in the human fetus. Nature
194:196, 1962
Singh AE, Romanowski B: Syphilis: review with emphasis on clinical, epidemiologic, and some biologic
features. Clin Microbiol Rev 12(2):187, 1999
Slutsker JS, Tsang LB, Schillinger JA: Do prescriptions for expedited partner therapy for Chlamydia get
filled? Findings from a multi-jurisdictional evaluation, United States, 2017–2019. Sex Transm Dis
47(6):376, 2020
Slyker JA, Chung MH, Lehman DA, et al: Incidence and correlates of HIV-1 RNA detection in the
breast milk of women receiving HAART for the prevention of HIV-1 transmission. PLoS One
7(1):e29777, 2012
Smith EM, Ritchie JM, Yankowitz J, et al: Human papillomavirus prevalence and types in newborns and
parents. Sex Transm Dis 31:57, 2004
Smullin C, Wagman J, Mehta S, et al: A narrative review of the epidemiology of congenital syphilis in
the United States from 1980 to 2019. Sex Transm Dis 48(2):71, 2021
Sobel JD: Vulvovaginal candidosis. Lancet 369:1961, 2007
Spicknall IH, Flagg EW, Torrone EA: Estimates of the prevalence and incidence of genital herpes,
United States, 2018. Sex Transm Dis 48(4):260, 2021
St Cyr S, Barbee L, Workowski KA, et al: Update to CDC’s treatment guidelines for gonococcal
infection, 2020. MMWR 69(50):1911, 2020
Stewart R, Wells CE, Roberts S, et al: Benefit of inter-pregnancy HIV viral load suppression on
subsequent maternal and infant outcomes. Am J Obstet Gynecol 210:S14, 2014
Stone KM, Reiff-Eldridge R, White AD, et al: Pregnancy outcomes following systemic prenatal
acyclovir exposure: conclusions from the International Acyclovir Pregnancy Registry, 1984–1999.
Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol 70:201, 2004
Strick LB, Wald A: Diagnostics for herpes simplex virus: is PCR the new gold standard? Mol Diagn
Ther 10(1):17, 2006
Stringer E, Read JS, Hoffman I, et al: Treatment of trichomoniasis in pregnancy in sub-Saharan Africa
does not appear to be associated with low birth weight or preterm birth. S Afr Med J 100(1):58,
2010
Sutton M, Sternberg M, Koumans EH, et al: The prevalence of Trichomonas vaginalis infection among
reproductive-age women in the United States, 2001–2004. Clin Infect Dis 45(10):1319, 2007
Swain CA, Smith LC, Nash D, et al: Postpartum HIV care among women diagnosed during pregnancy.
Obstet Gynecol 128(1):44, 2016
Trintis J, Epie N, Boss R, et al: Neonatal Trichomonas vaginalis infection: a case report and review of
literature. Int J STD AIDS 21(8):606, 2010
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, Bibbins-Domingo K, Grossman DC, et al: Serologic screening for
genital herpes infection: US Preventive Services Task Force recommendation statement. JAMA
316(23):2525, 2016

U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, Curry SJ, Krist AH, et al: Ocular prophylaxis for gonococcal
ophthalmia neonatorum: US Preventive Services Task Force reaffirmation recommendation
statement. JAMA 321(4):394, 2019a
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, Curry SJ, Krist AH, et al: Screening for syphilis infection in
pregnant women: US Preventive Services Task Force reaffirmation recommendation statement.
JAMA 320(9):911, 2018
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, Owens DK, Davidson KW, et al: Preexposure prophylaxis for the
prevention of HIV infection: US Preventive Services Task Force recommendation statement.
JAMA 321(22):2203, 2019b
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, Owens DK, Davidson KW, et al: Screening for bacterial
vaginosis in pregnant persons to prevent preterm delivery: US Preventive Services Task Force
recommendation statement. JAMA 323(13):1286, 2020
Vallely LM, Egli-Gany D, Wand H, et al: Adverse pregnancy and neonatal outcomes associated with
Neisseria gonorrhoeae: systematic review and meta-analysis. Sex Transm Infect 97(2):104, 2021
Van Der Pol B: Clinical and laboratory testing for Trichomonas vaginalis infection. J Clin Microbiol
54(1):7, 2016
Van Der Pol B, Taylor SN, Mena L, et al: Evaluation of the performance of a point-of-care test for
chlamydia and gonorrhea. JAMA Netw Open 3(5):e204819, 2020
Van Gerwen OT, Craig-Kuhn MC, Jones AT, et al: Trichomoniasis and adverse birth outcomes: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. BJOG 128(12):1907
Wald A, Ashley-Morrow R: Serological testing for herpes simplex virus (HSV)-1 and HSV-2 infection.
Clin Infect Dis 35:S173, 2002
Watts D: Mother to child transmission of HIV—another complication of bacterial vaginosis? J Acquir
Immune Defic Syndr 60(3):221, 2012
Watts DH, Brown ZA, Money D, et al: A double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled trial of acyclovir
in late pregnancy for the reduction of herpes simplex virus shedding and cesarean delivery. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 188:836, 2003
Watts DH, Krohn MA, Hillier SL, et al: Bacterial vaginosis as a risk factor for postcesarean
endometritis. Obstet Gynecol 75:52, 1990
Wendel GD Jr, Sheffield JS, Hollier LM, et al: Treatment of syphilis in pregnancy and prevention of
congenital syphilis. Clin Infect Dis 35(Suppl 2): S200, 2002
Wendel GD Jr, Stark BJ, Jamison RB, et al: Penicillin allergy and desensitization in serious infections
during pregnancy. N Engl J Med 312:1229, 1985
World Health Organization, United Nations Children’s Fund: Guideline: updates on HIV and infant
feeding: the duration of breastfeeding, and support from health services to improve feeding practices
among mothers living with HIV. Geneva, WHO, 2016
Wiese W, Patel SR, Patel SC, et al: A meta-analysis of the Papanicolaou smear and wet mount for the
diagnosis of vaginal trichomoniasis. Am J Med 108(4):301, 2000
Wiesenfeld HC: Screening for Chlamydia trachomatis infections in women. N Engl J Med 376(8):765,
2017
Workowski KA, Bachmann LH, Chan PA, et al: Sexually transmitted diseases treatment guidelines,
2021. MMWR 70(4):1, 2021
World Health Organization, United Nations Children’s Fund: Guideline: updates on HIV and infant
feeding: the duration of breastfeeding, and support from health services to improve feeding practices
among mothers living with HIV. Geneva, WHO, 2016

Zhou Y, Bian G, Zhou Q, et al: Detection of cytomegalovirus, human parvovirus B19, and herpes
simplex virus-1/2 in women with first-trimester spontaneous abortions. J Med Virol 87(10):1749,
2015
Zhu Y, Bateman BT, Gray KJ, et al: Oral fluconazole use in the first trimester and risk of congenital
malformations: population based cohort study. BMJ 369:m1494, 2020
Zofkie AC, Fomina YY, Roberts SW, et al: Effectiveness of Chlamydia trachomatis expedited partner
therapy in pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 225(3):325.e1, 2021

