CHAPTER 55

Thromboembolic Disorders

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
THROMBOPHILIAS
ANTIPHOSPHOLIPID SYNDROME
THROMBOPHILIA SCREENING
DEEP-VEIN THROMBOSIS
LABOR AND DELIVERY
SUPERFICIAL VENOUS THROMBOPHLEBITIS
PULMONARY EMBOLISM
THROMBOPROPHYLAXIS
REFERENCES
During the past century, the frequency of venous thromboembolism (VTE)
during the puerperium decreased remarkably as early ambulation became
routine practice. Despite this and other advances in prevention and treatment,
thromboembolism remains a leading cause of maternal morbidity and
mortality (Abe, 2019). Thrombotic pulmonary embolism accounted for
almost 10 percent of pregnancy-related deaths in the United States between
2011 and 2015 (Creanga, 2017; Petersen, 2019).
The absolute incidence of VTE during pregnancy is low—1 or 2 cases
per 1000 pregnancies. However, the risk is approximately five times higher

than that among women who are not pregnant (Greer, 2015). Approximately
equal numbers of cases are identified antepartum and in the puerperium. But
deep-vein thrombosis alone is more frequent antepartum, and pulmonary
embolism is more common postpartum. During the first 6 weeks of the
puerperium, the estimated incidence of a thromboembolic complication is 22
events per 100,000 deliveries. Although still elevated, the risk falls to
approximately 3 cases per 100,000 deliveries during the second 6-week
postpartum period (Kamei, 2014). As many as 2 percent of these women
have postthrombotic syndrome (Govindappagari, 2020).

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Rudolf Virchow (1856) postulated that stasis, local trauma to the vessel
wall, and hypercoagulability predisposed to venous thrombosis. During
pregnancy, the risk for each of these rises. Compression of the pelvic veins
and inferior vena cava by the enlarging uterus renders the lower extremity
venous system particularly vulnerable to stasis. Marik and Plante (2008) cite
a 50-percent reduction in venous flow velocity in the legs that lasts from the
early third trimester until 6 weeks postpartum. This stasis is the most
constant predisposing risk factor for venous thrombosis. Venous stasis,
delivery, preeclampsia, and sepsis contribute to endothelial cell injury. Last,
as listed in the Appendix (p. 1228), the synthesis of most clotting factors is
markedly enhanced during pregnancy and favors coagulation.
Risk factors for developing VTE during pregnancy are shown in Table
55-1. The most important of these is a personal history of thrombosis.
Specifically, 15 to 25 percent of all VTE cases during pregnancy are
recurrent events (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists,
2020b). Another important individual risk factor is a genetically determined
thrombophilia. An estimated 20 to 50 percent of women who develop a
venous thrombosis during pregnancy or postpartum have an identifiable
underlying procoagulant genetic disorder (American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists, 2020a).
TABLE 55-1. Some Risk Factors Associated with an Increased Risk for
VTE

Calculated risks for thromboembolism are approximately doubled in
women with multifetal gestation, anemia, hyperemesis, hemorrhage, cesarean
delivery, obesity, preeclampsia, and postpartum infection (Waldman, 2013).
Scheres and coworkers (2020) had similar observations for women with
preeclampsia. Risks were significantly higher among women who had a
stillbirth or who underwent peripartum hysterectomy. Last, as discussed in

Chapter 57 (p. 1021), inflammatory bowel disease increases the risk two- to
threefold (Kim, 2019).

THROMBOPHILIAS
Several important regulatory proteins act as inhibitors in the coagulation
cascade (Fig. 55-1). Normal values for many of these proteins during
pregnancy are found in the Appendix (p. 1228). Inherited or acquired
deficiencies of these inhibitory proteins are collectively referred to as
thrombophilias. These can lead to hypercoagulability and recurrent VTE
(Connors, 2017). Although these disorders are collectively present in
approximately 15 percent of white European populations, they are
responsible for approximately 50 percent of all thromboembolic events
during pregnancy (Pierangeli, 2011). Some aspects of the more common
inherited thrombophilias related to VTE are summarized in Table 55-2.

FIGURE 55-1 Inherited thrombophilias and their effect(s) on the coagulation cascade.

TABLE 55-2. Inherited Thrombophilias and Their Association with Venous
Thromboembolism (VTE) in Pregnancy

■ Inherited Thrombophilias
Patients with inherited thrombophilic disorders often have a family history of
thrombosis. These mutations are also found in up to half of all patients who
present with VTE before the age of 45 years, particularly in those whose
event occurred in the absence of well-recognized risk factors. Of greatest
significance is a family history of sudden death due to pulmonary embolism
or a history of multiple family members requiring long-term anticoagulation
therapy because of recurrent thrombosis (Connors, 2017).

Antithrombin Deficiency
Synthesized in the liver, antithrombin is one of the most important inhibitors
of thrombin and inactivates thrombin and factor Xa (Rhéaume, 2016).
Notably, the rate of antithrombin interaction with its target is accelerated
over 1000–fo1d by heparin. Antithrombin deficiency may result from
hundreds of different mutations that are almost always autosomal dominant.
Type I deficiency results from reduced synthesis of biologically normal
antithrombin, and type II deficiency is characterized by normal levels of
antithrombin with reduced functional activity.

Homozygous antithrombin deficiency is lethal. Heterozygous deficiency
affects approximately 1 in 2500 individuals. It is the most thrombogenic of
the heritable coagulopathies. The risk for thrombosis correlates with the
degree of deficiency. Antithrombin deficiency is associated with a 25- to 50fold higher relative risk of VTE in the general population and a sixfold
increased risk of thromboembolic complications during pregnancy (Ilonczai,
2015). As shown in Table 55-2, those affected have an inordinately high risk
of VTE during pregnancy.
Sabadell and associates (2010) studied the outcomes of 18 pregnancies
complicated by antithrombin deficiency. Twelve of these women were
treated with therapeutic doses of low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH).
Three of the untreated patients suffered a thromboembolic episode compared
with none in the treated group. Untreated women also had a 50-percent risk
of stillbirth and fetal-growth restriction. By comparison, none of the treated
women had a stillbirth, but a fourth developed fetal-growth restriction.
Abbattista and coworkers (2020) reported a 7-percent risk of VTE for
women treated with LMWH during pregnancy and a 12-percent risk for those
not treated. Similar results were reported by Ilonczai and colleagues (2015).
Last, Garcia-Botella and associates (2016) described a mesenteric vein
thrombosis in a pregnant woman with antithrombin deficiency.
Given such risk, affected women are managed during pregnancy with
anticoagulation regardless of whether they have had a prior thrombosis
(Abbattista, 2020; Bates, 2018). When anticoagulation is necessarily
withheld, such as during surgery or delivery, or if VTE develops in an
anticoagulated woman, treatment with recombinant human antithrombin may
be protective (Paidas, 2016).

Protein C Deficiency
When thrombin is bound to thrombomodulin on endothelial cells of small
vessels, its procoagulant activities are neutralized. This binding also
activates protein C, a natural anticoagulant. It, in the presence of protein S,
controls thrombin generation, in part, by inactivating factors Va and VIIIa
(see Fig. 55-1). Protein C activity increases modestly but significantly
throughout the first half of pregnancy, and some have speculated that this
augmentation may play a role in maintaining early pregnancy through both
anticoagulant and inflammatory regulatory pathways (Said, 2010).

More than 160 different autosomal dominant mutations for the protein C
gene have been described (Louis-Jacques, 2016). The prevalence of
heterozygous protein C deficiency is 2 to 3 per 1000, but many of these
individuals do not have a thrombosis history because the phenotypic
expression is highly variable. These prevalence estimates correspond with
functional activity threshold values of 50 to 60 percent, which are used by
most laboratories. As shown in Table 55-2, these are associated with a sixto twelvefold higher risk for VTE (Lockwood, 2012). The rare cases of
homozygous protein C deficiency may cause fatal neonatal purpura
fulminans. Last, sepsis can result in purpura fulminans in the adult with
heterozygous protein C deficiency (Bendapudi, 2021).

Protein S Deficiency
This circulating anticoagulant is activated by protein C, which enhances the
capacity of protein S to inactivate factors Va and VIIIa (see Fig. 55-1).
Protein S deficiency may be caused by more than 130 different mutations,
with an aggregate heterozygous prevalence of approximately 0.3 to 1.3 per
1000 individuals (Louis-Jacques, 2016). Protein S deficiency may be
measured by antigenically determined free, functional, and total S levels. All
three decline substantively during normal gestation (Appendix, p. 1228).
Thus, the diagnosis in pregnant women—as well as in those taking certain
oral contraceptives—is difficult. If screening during pregnancy is necessary,
threshold values for free protein S antigen levels in the second and third
trimesters have been identified at <30 percent and <24 percent, respectively.
The risk of VTE in pregnancy is increased severalfold (see Table 55-2).
Among those with a positive family history, the VTE risk in pregnancy is 6 to
7 percent (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020a).
Conard and coworkers (1990) described thrombosis in five of 29
pregnant women with protein S deficiency. They, as well as Burneo and
colleagues (2002), reported maternal cerebral vein thrombosis. Neonatal
homozygous protein S deficiency is usually associated with purpura
fulminans, the fatal clinical phenotype.

Factor V Leiden Mutation
This is the most prevalent of the known thrombophilia syndromes and is
characterized by resistance of plasma to the anticoagulant effects of activated

protein C. There are several mutations that create this resistance, but the most
common is the factor V Leiden mutation. This missense mutation results from
a substitution of glutamine for arginine at position 506 in the factor V
polypeptide. As a result of this mutation, activated factor V is neutralized
approximately tenfold more slowly by activated protein C (see Fig. 55-1).
This leads to enhanced thrombin generation.
Heterozygous inheritance of factor V Leiden is the most common
heritable thrombophilia. It is found in 3 to 15 percent of select European
populations, 1.2 percent of African Americans, and 2.2 of Hispanic
Americans, but is virtually absent in African blacks and Asians (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020a). Women who are
heterozygous for factor V Leiden account for approximately 40 percent of
VTE cases during pregnancy. However, the actual risk among pregnant
women who are heterozygous and who do not have a personal history or a
first-degree relative with a thrombotic episode before age 50 years is 5 to 12
events per 1000 births (see Table 55-2). In contrast, this risk is at least 10
percent among pregnant women with a personal or family history. Pregnant
women who are homozygous without a personal or family history have a 1to 4-percent risk for VTE, whereas those with such a history have an
approximately 17-percent risk (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2020a).
Diagnosis during pregnancy is performed by DNA analysis for the mutant
factor V gene. Bioassay is not used because of the normal resistance that
develops after early pregnancy from alterations in other coagulation protein
concentrations. Of note, activated protein C resistance can also be caused by
antiphospholipid syndrome, which is described on page 979 and also
detailed in Chapter 62 (p. 1114).
To assess the prognostic significance of maternal factor V Leiden
mutation during pregnancy, Kjellberg and associates (2010) compared the
outcomes of 491 carriers with those of 1055 controls. All three of the
thromboembolic events occurred among the carriers. But, preterm birth rates,
birthweights, or hypertensive complication rates did not differ between the
two groups. In a prospective observational study of almost 5000 women
conducted by the Maternal-Fetal Medicine Units Network, the heterozygous
mutant gene incidence was 2.7 percent (Dizon-Townson, 2005). Of three
pulmonary emboli and one deep-vein thrombosis cases—a rate of 0.8 per
1000 pregnancies—none was among these carriers. Moreover, in the

heterozygous women, the risks of preeclampsia, placental abruption, fetalgrowth restriction, or pregnancy loss were not elevated. The investigators
concluded that universal prenatal screening for the Leiden mutation and
prophylaxis for carriers without a prior VTE is not indicated.

Prothrombin G20210A Mutation
This missense mutation in the prothrombin gene leads to excessive
accumulation of prothrombin, which may be converted to thrombin.
Prothrombin levels are increased approximately 30 percent in heterozygotes
and 70 percent in homozygotes (MacCallum, 2014). As with factor V Leiden,
a personal or family history of VTE in a first-degree relative before age 50
years raises the risk of VTE during pregnancy (see Table 55-2). For a
heterozygous carrier with such a history, the risk exceeds 10 percent. Without
such a history, heterozygous carriers of the mutation have less than a 1percent risk of VTE during pregnancy (American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists, 2020a).
Silver and coworkers (2010) tested nearly 4200 women for the
prothrombin G20210A mutation. A total of 157—or 3.8 percent—of the
women carried the mutation, and only one of these was homozygous. Carriers
had similar rates of pregnancy loss, preeclampsia, fetal-growth restriction,
and placental abruption compared with noncarriers. Three thromboembolic
events occurred in women who tested negative for the mutation.
Homozygous patients, or those who are doubly heterozygous for a
G20210A mutation with a factor V Leiden mutation, have a greater
thromboembolism risk than heterozygous carriers (Connors, 2017). Others
have provided detailed information on pregnancy outcomes in women with
such rare compound thrombophilias (Carroll, 2018; Lim, 2016).

Hyperhomocysteinemia
The most common cause of elevated homocysteine is the C667T thermolabile
mutation of the 5, 10– methylene–tetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR)
enzyme. Inheritance is autosomal recessive. Elevated homocysteine levels
may also result from deficiency of one of several enzymes involved in
methionine metabolism and from correctible nutritional deficiencies of folic
acid, vitamin B6, or vitamin B12. During normal pregnancy, mean

homocysteine plasma concentrations decline and make a diagnosis difficult
(Lockwood, 2002).
A metaanalysis by den Heijer and associates (2005) reported an
association between MTHFR polymorphisms and a slightly greater risk for
thrombosis in international studies, but no such association was found in
North American studies (den Heijer, 2005). The authors speculated that folic
acid supplementation could explain the difference. Recall that folic acid
serves as a cofactor in the remethylation reaction of homocysteine to
methionine. Similarly, the American College of Chest Physicians posited that
the lack of an association with thromboembolism could reflect the
physiological reductions in homocysteine levels associated with pregnancy
as well as the effects of widespread prenatal folic acid supplementation
(Bates, 2012). The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
(2020a) has concluded that there is insufficient evidence to support
assessment of MTHFR polymorphisms or measurement of fasting
homocysteine levels in the evaluation for VTE.

Other Thrombophilia Mutations
Protein Z is a vitamin K–dependent protein that serves as a cofactor in factor
Xa inactivation. Studies have found that low protein Z levels are associated
with an elevated thromboembolism risk in nonpregnant patients and may be
implicated in the pathogenesis of poor pregnancy outcomes (Almawi, 2013).
Similarly, plasminogen activator inhibitor type 1 (PAI-I) is an important
regulator of fibrinolysis. Certain polymorphisms in the gene promoter have
been associated with slightly higher VTE risks. Although these
thrombophilias may exacerbate risk among patients when coinherited with
other thrombophilias, the American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2020a) has concluded that evidence to recommend screening
is insufficient.

■ Acquired Thrombophilias
Some examples of acquired hypercoagulable states include antiphospholipid
syndrome (APS), heparin-induced thrombocytopenia, and cancer.

Antiphospholipid Syndrome

This prothrombotic disorder can affect both the venous and arterial
circulations. The deeper veins of the lower limbs and the cerebral arterial
circulation are the most frequent sites of venous and arterial thrombosis,
respectively (Garcia, 2018; Konkle, 2018). Besides thrombosis, the other
major clinical manifestations of APS are adverse obstetrical outcomes
(Table 11-4, p. 205). Criteria for APS include (1) at least one otherwise
unexplained fetal death at or beyond 10 weeks; (2) at least one preterm birth
before 34 weeks’ gestation because of eclampsia, severe preeclampsia, or
placental insufficiency; or (3) at least three unexplained consecutive
spontaneous abortions before 10 weeks. The syndrome is discussed in detail
in Chapter 62 (p. 1114).
Testing for antiphospholipid antibodies should be performed in women
with an unexplained arterial or venous thromboembolism or a history of one
fetal loss or three or more recurrent embryonic or fetal losses (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020a). At this time, preterm
severe preeclampsia and early-onset placental insufficiency do not support
such testing. That said, there is evidence that antiphospholipid positivity
confers a worse prognosis for pregnancies complicated by HELLP syndrome
(Pécourt, 2021). These patients should be tested for the presence of three
factors: (1) lupus anticoagulant, (2) anticardiolipin immunoglobulin G and M
(IgG and IgM) antibodies, and (3) anti-β2 glycoprotein-I IgG and IgM
antibodies. If any of these laboratory test results are positive, a confirmatory
test is performed 12 weeks later (Connors, 2017).
Based on their study of 750 singleton pregnancies complicated by APS,
Saccone and colleagues (2017) found that anticardiolipin antibody is the
most common sole antiphospholipid antibody present. Women with APS have
a 5- to 12-percent risk of thrombosis during pregnancy or the puerperium.
Indeed, up to 25 percent of these thrombotic events occur during pregnancy
or in the puerperium.

■ Thrombophilias and Pregnancy Complications
Contrary to past teaching, no definite causal link between inherited
thrombophilias and adverse pregnancy outcomes exists (Ormesher, 2017).
The confusion was caused by a number of observational studies that were
later followed by large prospective cohort studies. Currently, the American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020a) does not recommend

inherited thrombophilia screening for women with a history of fetal loss or
adverse pregnancy outcomes such as fetal-growth restriction, placental
abruption, and preeclampsia.
There are no convincing data that link inherited thrombophilias and fetal
loss. It follows that there is no benefit to aspirin or heparin therapy as might
accrue for recurrent pregnancy loss due to antiphospholipid antibodies
(Chap. 62, p. 1116). Stillbirths also are not more common with heterozygous
mutations, but there is a weak association with homozygous factor V Leiden
mutation (Silver, 2016). Last, there is insufficient evidence to screen for
inherited thrombophilias in women with a fetal death (Arachchillage, 2019).
Fetal-growth restriction also is not more common with inherited
thrombophilias (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists,
2020a; Infante-Rivard, 2002). Likewise, there have been a number of
prospective cohort studies that showed no association of inherited
thrombophilias with placental abruption (Dizon-Townson, 2005; Silver,
2010). Conversely, Alfirevic and coworkers (2002) reported an association
with these and both heterozygosity and homozygosity for factor V Leiden
mutations as well as heterozygous prothrombin G20210A mutation.
Studies showing an association of inherited thrombophilias and
preeclampsia also are conflicting (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2020a). One large systematic review and metaanalysis of
nearly 22,000 women did not show an association between factor V Leiden
or prothrombin gene mutations with preeclampsia (Rodger, 2010). Similarly,
a more recent prospective study failed to show an association between
preeclampsia and 12 hereditary thrombophilias (Fernandez Arias, 2019).
Thus, because of uncertainties in the magnitude of risk and in the benefits
of prophylaxis given to prevent pregnancy complications in women with
heritable thrombophilias, it remains unproven that universal screening is
indicated (Louis-Jacques, 2016). In contrast, the association between APS
and adverse pregnancy outcomes—including fetal loss, recurrent pregnancy
loss, and preeclampsia—is much stronger (Liu, 2019).

■ Thrombophilia Screening
Given the relatively high incidence of thrombophilia in the population and
the low incidence of VTE, universal screening during pregnancy is not costeffective. Thus, a selective screening strategy is required. The American

College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020a) recommends that
thrombophilia screening be considered in the following clinical
circumstances: (1) a personal history of VTE with or without a recurrent risk
factor such as fractures, surgery, or prolonged immobilization; and (2) a firstdegree relative (parent or sibling) with a history of a high-risk inherited
thrombophilia. As discussed previously, testing for inherited thrombophilias
in women who have experienced recurrent fetal loss or adverse pregnancy
outcomes is not recommended.
Methods of screening for the more common inherited thrombophilias are
shown in Table 55-3. Whenever possible, laboratory testing is performed at
least 6 weeks after the thrombotic event, while the patient is not pregnant,
and when she is not receiving anticoagulation or hormonal therapy. Last,
screening for hyperhomocysteinemia is not recommended (American College
of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020a).
TABLE 55-3. How to Test for Thrombophilias

DEEP-VEIN THROMBOSIS
■ Clinical Presentation
During pregnancy, most venous thromboses are confined to the deep veins of
the lower extremity. Most of these are located in the iliofemoral and iliac
veins without involvement of the calf veins (Chan, 2010). In contrast, in the
general population, more than 80 percent of deep-vein thromboses involve
calf veins (Huisman, 2015). The vast majority are left sided (Blanco-Molina,

2007). Greer (2003) hypothesizes that this results from compression of the
left iliac vein by the right iliac and ovarian arteries, both of which cross the
vein only on the left side. Yet, as described in Chapter 56 (p. 994), the ureter
is compressed more on the right side.
Signs and symptoms vary depending on the degree of occlusion and the
intensity of the inflammatory response. Classically, thrombosis involving the
lower extremity is abrupt in onset, and there is pain and edema of the leg and
thigh. The thrombus typically involves much of the deep-venous system to the
iliofemoral region. Occasionally, reflex arterial spasm causes a pale, cool
extremity with diminished pulsations. Calf measurements may identify a
discordance in size. Alternatively, there may be appreciable clot, yet little
pain, heat, or swelling. Importantly, calf pain, either spontaneous or in
response to squeezing or to Achilles tendon stretching—Homans sign—may
be caused by a strained muscle or contusion. Importantly, 30 to 60 percent
of women with a confirmed lower-extremity acute deep-vein thrombosis
(DVT) have an asymptomatic pulmonary embolism (p. 986).

■ Diagnosis
Clinical diagnosis of DVT is difficult without testing and is confirmed in
only 10 percent of cases (Hull, 1990). Another challenge is that many of the
common diagnostic tests that have been investigated extensively in
nonpregnant patients have not been validated appropriately in pregnancy
(Huisman, 2015). Shown in Figure 55-2 is one diagnostic algorithm that can
be used for evaluation of pregnant women. With a few modifications, we
follow a similar evaluation at Parkland Hospital.

FIGURE 55-2 Algorithm to evalate suspected venous thromboembolism in pregnancy depending upon
number of YEARS criteria met. Evidence of DVT should prompt compression ultrasound. aThe three
YEARS criteria are clinical signs of DVT, hemoptysis, and PE as the most likely diagnosis. bThe
American Thoracic Society and Society of Thoracic Radiology recommend CXR; cThe American
Society of Hematology recommends pulmonary V/Q scanning. CT = computed tomography; CTA =
computed tomography angiography; CXR = chest x-ray; DVT = deep-vein thrombosis; MR = magnetic
resonance; PE = pulmonary embolism; V/Q scan = ventilation perfusion scan. (From Bates, 2018;
Guyatt, 2012; Leung, 2011; van der Hulle, 2019; van der Pol, 2019.)

Compression Ultrasonography
With suspected DVT, the initial diagnostic test recommended is compression
ultrasonography of the proximal leg veins (American College of

Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020b). The diagnosis is based on the
noncompressibility and typical echoarchitecture of a thrombosed vein. For
nonpregnant patients with suspected thrombosis, the safety of withholding
anticoagulation for 1 week has been established in the setting of a normal
compression ultrasound examination (Birdwell, 1998). Serial compression
examinations are then performed because isolated undetected calf
thromboses that ultimately extend into the proximal veins will do so within 1
to 2 weeks of presentation in approximately a fourth of patients. In pregnant
women, however, normal findings with ultrasonography do not always
exclude a pulmonary embolism. This is because the thrombosis may have
already embolized or because it arose from iliac or other deep-pelvic veins,
which are less accessible to ultrasound evaluation.
Two studies are helpful for evaluating whether serial examinations are
necessary for pregnant women suspected of having a DVT. Chan and
associates (2013) studied 221 pregnant and postpartum women presenting
with a suspected DVT. The 205 women with a negative initial study result
underwent serial testing, which was negative in all cases. Of these, one
woman had a pulmonary embolism 7 weeks later. Le Gal and colleagues
(2012) studied 210 pregnant and postpartum women with a suspected DVT.
Of these, 177 women without a DVT were not anticoagulated and did not
undergo serial testing. Two had an objectively confirmed thrombosis
diagnosed within 3 months. In sum, these data suggest that a negative single
complete compression ultrasonography study may safely exclude the
diagnosis of DVT in most pregnant women.

Magnetic Resonance Imaging
This imaging technique allows excellent delineation of anatomical detail
above the inguinal ligament. Thus, in many cases, magnetic resonance (MR)
imaging is immensely useful for diagnosis of iliofemoral and pelvic vein
thrombosis. The venous system can also be reconstructed using MR
venography (Chap. 49, p. 875). MR imaging is 100-percent sensitive and 90percent specific for detection of venographically proven DVT in nonpregnant
patients (Erdman, 1990). Importantly, almost half of those without DVT were
found to have nonthrombotic conditions that included cellulitis, myositis,
edema, hematomas, and superficial phlebitis.

D-dimer Screening Tests
These specific fibrin degradation products are generated when fibrinolysin
(plasminogen) degrades fibrin, as occurs in thromboembolism. Their
measurement is usually incorporated into diagnostic algorithms for VTE in
nonpregnant patients (Righini, 2018). This method was shown to be accurate
in the YEARS study (van der Hulle, 2017). Screening with the D-dimer test
in pregnancy, however, is problematic for several reasons. Depending on
assay sensitivity, D-dimer serum levels rise with gestational age along with
substantively elevated plasma fibrinogen concentrations (Appendix, p. 1228)
(Johnson, 2019). Levels are also affected by multifetal gestation and
cesarean delivery (Hu, 2020; Miyamoto, 2020). Last, D-dimer concentrations
can also be elevated in pregnancy complications such as placental abruption,
preeclampsia, and sepsis (Cunningham, 2015).
Three large prospective studies have evaluated D-dimer testing in
pregnant women to diagnose VTE. Righini and colleagues (2018) found that
D-dimer measurement, bilateral leg ultrasound, and computed tomographyangiogram safely ruled out VTE. Subsequently, van der Pol and coworkers
(2019) used a pregnancy-adapted YEARS algorithm to diagnose suspected
pulmonary embolism. The algorithm used D-dimer measurements and clinical
suspicion to confirm VTE. With none of the clinical criteria present, and with
the D-dimer level <1000 ng/mL, or with one or more clinical criteria present
and with the D-dimer level <500 ng/mL, pulmonary embolism was safely
excluded (see Fig. 55-2). Last, the DiPEP study showed that neither clinical
risk factors nor D-dimer levels were accurate in identifying pulmonary
embolism in pregnant women (Goodacre, 2019). They concluded that
pregnant women with suspected pulmonary embolism should all undergo
imaging studies.
The findings of the YEARS study and subsequent others will no doubt
guide care. However, currently the American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2020b) recommends against the use of D-dimer assays to
diagnose VTE in pregnant women. We agree, and in our view, these positive
results need to be duplicated before adaptation of their widespread use in
pregnant women. Still, a negative D-dimer assay should be reassuring, unless
VTE is the most likely diagnosis (Viau-Lapointe, 2020).

■ Management of Venous Thromboembolism

Optimal management of VTE during pregnancy has not undergone major
clinical study to provide evidence-based practices. There is, however,
consensus for treatment with anticoagulation and limited activity.
Thrombophilia testing does not change treatment (Connors, 2017).
Anticoagulation is initiated with either unfractionated heparin (UFH) or
LMWH (Table 55-4). Although either type is acceptable, most recommend
one of the LMWHs (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists,
2020b; Kearon, 2016). The American Society of Hematology recommends
preferential use of LMWH during pregnancy because of better
bioavailability, longer plasma half-life, more predictable dose response,
reduced risks of osteoporosis and thrombocytopenia, and less frequent
dosing (Bates, 2018).
TABLE 55-4. Anticoagulation Regimen Definitions

The duration of full anticoagulation varies, and no studies have defined
the optimal duration for pregnancy-related thromboembolism. In nonpregnant
patients, evidence supports a minimum treatment duration of 3 months
(Kearon, 2012). For pregnant patients, the American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020b) recommends therapeutic
anticoagulation for 3 to 6 months followed by intermediate or prophylactic
therapy for the duration of pregnancy and the postpartum period. If the
woman is not breastfeeding, direct acting oral agents can be considered (p.
985).
Recall that pulmonary embolism develops in as many as 60 percent of
patients with untreated venous thrombosis, and anticoagulation decreases this
risk to less than 5 percent. In nonpregnant patients, the mortality rate with a
pulmonary embolism approximates 1 percent (Douketis, 1998; Pollack,
2011).
With DVT, over several days, leg pain dissipates. After symptoms have
abated, graded ambulation is begun. Elastic stockings are fitted, and
anticoagulation is continued. Recovery to this stage usually takes 7 to 10
days. Graduated compression stockings can be continued for 2 years after the
diagnosis to reduce the incidence of postthrombotic syndrome (Brandjes,
1997). Symptoms include chronic leg paresthesias or pain, intractable
edema, skin changes, and leg ulcers. According to the American Society of
Hematology, catheter-directed thrombolytic therapy does not mitigate against
this complication (Bates, 2018).

Unfractionated Heparin
This agent should be considered for the initial treatment of thromboembolism
and in situations in which delivery, surgery, or thrombolysis may be
necessary (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020b).
UFH can be administered by one of two alternatives: (1) initial intravenous
therapy followed by adjusted-dose subcutaneous UFH given every 12 hours;
or (2) twice-daily, adjusted-dose subcutaneous UFH with doses adjusted to
prolong the activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) into the therapeutic
range 6 hours post injection (Table 55-5).
TABLE 55-5. Some Recommendations for Thromboprophylaxis During
Pregnancy

For intravenous therapy, several protocols are acceptable. In general, if
UFH is used, it is initiated with a bolus intravenous dose of 70 to 100 U/kg,
which is 5000 to 10,000 U. This is followed by continuous intravenous
infusions beginning at 1000 U/hr or 15 to 20 U/kg/hr. This infusion rate is
titrated to achieve an aPTT 1.5 to 2.5 times control values (Linnemann,
2016). Intravenous anticoagulation is maintained for about 5 to 7 days, after
which treatment is converted to subcutaneous heparin to maintain the aPTT to
at least 1.5 to 2.5 times control throughout the dosing interval. For women
with lupus anticoagulant, aPTT does not accurately assess heparin
anticoagulation, and thus anti–factor Xa levels are preferred.

Low-molecular-weight Heparin
This is a family of derivatives of unfractionated heparin, and their molecular
weights average 4000 to 5000 daltons compared with 12,000 to 16,000
daltons for conventional heparin. None of these heparins cross the placenta,
and all exert their anticoagulant activity by activating antithrombin. UFH has
equivalent activity against factor Xa and thrombin compared with LMWHs,
which have greater activity against factor Xa than against thrombin. They
also have a more predictable anticoagulant response and fewer bleeding
complications than UFH because of their better bioavailability, longer halflife, dose-independent clearance, and decreased interference with platelets
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020b; Bates, 2018).
Their longer half-life prohibits neuraxial analgesia in laboring women.
LMWH compounds are cleared by the kidneys and must be used cautiously
when there is renal dysfunction.
Several studies have shown that VTE is treated effectively with LMWH
(Quinlan, 2004; Tapson, 2008). Using serial venograms, Breddin and
associates (2001) observed that these compounds were more effective than
UFH in reducing thrombus size without increasing mortality rates or major
bleeding complications. Several different treatment regimens using LMWH
for treatment of acute VTE are listed in Table 55-4 (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020b).
Whether LMWH requires adjustments during the course of pregnancy is
controversial (Berresheim, 2014). The American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists (2020b) recommends monitoring with an anti-Xa level 4
hours after an injection with dose adjustment to maintain a therapeutic level.
Large studies using clinical end points that demonstrate an optimal

therapeutic range or show that dose adjustments increase therapy, safety, or
efficacy are lacking. Accordingly, the American Society of Hematology and
others have concluded that routine monitoring with anti-Xa levels is difficult
to justify (Bates, 2018; McDonnell, 2017).
In general, heparin pharmacokinetics includes more rapid clearance of
heparins as pregnancy progresses. The peaks of anti-Xa activity of
enoxaparin (Lovenox) across pregnancy are shown in Figure 55-3. Similarly,
tinzaparin (Innohep) with a dosage of 75 to 175 U/kg/d was necessary to
achieve peak anti–factor Xa levels of 0.1 to 1.0 U/mL (Smith, 2004). In
studies of dalteparin (Fragmin) pharmacokinetics, conventional starting
doses of dalteparin—100 U/kg every 12 hours—were likely insufficient to
maintain full anticoagulation in pregnant women (Barbour, 2004; Jacobsen,
2003). Thus, slightly higher doses than that shown in Table 55-4 may be
required.

FIGURE 55-3 Anti–factor Xa activity with repeated daily administration of 40 mg enoxaparin
subcutaneously in nonpregnant women and those from each trimester (Data from Lebaudy, 2008).

Any concerns regarding teratogenicity of enoxaparin have been obviated
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020b; Bates, 2021).
A comprehensive study of 1267 pregnant women treated with tinzaparin
found no cases of heparin-induced thrombocytopenia, maternal deaths, or
complications from regional analgesia (Nelson-Piercy, 2011). A total of 43
women (3.4 percent) required medical intervention for bleeding. Of 15
stillbirths, four were judged as possibly being related to tinzaparin use.
LMWHs have been judged to be safe during breastfeeding (Bates, 2018).

Labor and Delivery
Women receiving either therapeutic or prophylactic anticoagulation should
be converted from LMWH to the shorter-half-life UFH in the last month of
pregnancy or sooner if delivery appears imminent. The purpose of
conversion to UFH has less to do with any risk of maternal bleeding at the
time of delivery, but rather with neuraxial blockade complicated by an
epidural or spinal hematoma (Chap. 25, p. 478). The Society for Obstetric
Anesthesia and Perinatology recommends that UFH low-dose
thromboprophylaxis be withheld for 4 to 6 hours; UFH intermediate-dose
thromboprophylaxis for 12 hours; and UFH therapeutic dose for 24 hours
before neuraxial analgesia (Leffert, 2018). For LMWH, the Society
recommends to withhold low doses for 12 hours; intermediate doses 12 to 24
hours; and therapeutic doses 24 hours.
If a woman begins labor while taking UFH, clearance can be verified by
an aPTT. Reversal of heparin with protamine sulfate—1 mg per 100 units
heparin with a maximum dose of 50 mg—is rarely required and is not
indicated with a prophylactic dose of heparin. For women in whom
anticoagulation therapy has temporarily been discontinued, pneumatic
compression devices are recommended.

Warfarin Compounds
Vitamin K antagonists are generally contraindicated because they readily
cross the placenta and cause fetal death and malformations from
hemorrhages. This is discussed in detail in Chapter 8 (p. 156). Their sole
antepartum use is in women with a mechanical heart valve (Daughety, 2020).
These compounds do not accumulate in breast milk and are thus safe during
breastfeeding.

Postpartum venous thrombosis is usually treated with intravenous heparin
and oral warfarin initiated simultaneously. The initial dose of warfarin is 5
to 10 mg for the first 2 days. Subsequent doses are titrated to achieve an
international normalized ratio (INR) of 2 to 3. To avoid paradoxical
thrombosis and skin necrosis from the early antiprotein C effect of warfarin,
these women are maintained on therapeutic doses of UFH or LMWH for 5
days and until the INR is in a therapeutic range for 2 consecutive days
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020b).
Treatment in the puerperium may require larger doses of anticoagulant.
Brooks and colleagues (2002) compared anticoagulation in postpartum
women with that of age-matched nonpregnant controls. The former required a
significantly larger median total dose of warfarin—45 versus 24 mg—and a
longer time—7 versus 4 days—to achieve the target INR.

Direct-acting Oral Anticoagulants
Of these newer oral anticoagulants, dabigatran (Pradaxa) inhibits thrombin
and rivaroxaban (Xarelto) and apixaban (Eliquis) inhibit factor Xa. These
agents are becoming the drugs of choice for nonpregnant subjects with
thromboembolism (Kruger, 2019). Currently, very few reports address these
newer agents during pregnancy and breastfeeding, and thus the human
reproductive risks are essentially unknown (Lameijer, 2018; Rosenbloom,
2019). Despite this, the GARFIELD-VTE study reported that direct-acting
oral anticoagulant use in pregnant women was gaining favor (Jerjes-Sanchez,
2021). Dabigatran crosses the placenta, however, it is unknown whether any
of these agents are excreted in breast milk (Bapat, 2014). At this time,
because of the potential for infant harm, a decision should be made to either
avoid breastfeeding or use an alternative anticoagulant, such as warfarin, in
breastfeeding women (Bates, 2021; Kruger, 2019).

■ Complications of Anticoagulation
Three significant complications associated with anticoagulation are
hemorrhage, thrombocytopenia, and osteoporosis. The latter two are unique
to heparin, and their risk may be reduced with LMWHs. The most serious
complication is hemorrhage, which is more likely if there has been recent
surgery or lacerations. Troublesome bleeding is also more likely if the
heparin dosage is excessive. Unfortunately, management schemes using

laboratory testing to identify when a heparin dosage is sufficient to inhibit
further thrombosis, yet not cause serious hemorrhage, have been
discouraging.

Heparin-induced Thrombocytopenia
There are two types—the most common is a nonimmune, benign, reversible
thrombocytopenia that develops within the first few days of therapy and
resolves in approximately 5 days without therapy cessation. The second is
the severe form of heparin-induced thrombocytopenia, which results from an
immune reaction involving IgG antibodies directed against complexes of
platelet factor 4 and heparin. The diagnosis of heparin-induced
thrombocytopenia (HIT) is based on a drop in the platelet count of more than
50 percent or thrombosis beginning 5 to 10 days after the start of heparin in
association with the appearance of platelet-activating HIT antibodies. The
fall in platelet count in HIT occurs rapidly—over a period of 1 to 3 days—
and is assessed relative to the highest platelet count after the start of heparin.
The typical nadir is 40,000 to 80,000 platelets per microliter (Greinacher,
2015).
Although the incidence of HIT is approximately 3 to 5 percent in
nonpregnant individuals, it is <0.1 percent in obstetrical patients (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020b). Fausett and coworkers
(2001) reported no cases among 244 heparin-treated gravidas compared with
10 among 244 nonpregnant patients. Accordingly, the American College of
Chest Physicians recommends against platelet count monitoring when the risk
of HIT is considered to be <1 percent (Linkins, 2012). In others, they suggest
monitoring every 2 or 3 days from day 4 until 14.
Women with a presumptive diagnosis of HIT should have laboratory
testing for antiplatelet antibodies or by functional assays. However, these
tests often require several days to return results, so initial management
should be directed by clinical findings. Heparin therapy is stopped, and
alternative anticoagulation initiated. LMWH may not be entirely safe because
it has some cross reactivity with UFH. The American Society of Hematology
recommends use of fondaparinux (Arixtra), which is a pentasaccharide factor
Xa inhibitor (Bates, 2018). Successful use in pregnancy has been reported
(De Carolis, 2015; Elsaigh, 2015). Last, platelet transfusions are avoided
(Greinacher, 2015).

Heparin-induced Osteoporosis
Bone loss may develop with long-term heparin administration—usually 6
months or longer—and is more prevalent in cigarette smokers. UFH can
cause osteopenia, and this is less likely with LMWHs. Women treated with
any heparin should be encouraged to take an oral daily 1500-mg calcium
supplement (Cunningham, 2005; Lockwood, 2012).

■ Anticoagulation and Abortion
The treatment of DVT with heparin does not preclude pregnancy termination
by careful curettage. After the products are removed without trauma to the
reproductive tract, full-dose heparin can be restarted in several hours.

■ Anticoagulation and Delivery
The effects of heparin on blood loss at delivery depend on several variables:
(1) dose, route, and timing of administration; (2) number and depth of
incisions and lacerations; (3) intensity of postpartum myometrial
contractions; and (4) presence of other coagulation defects. Blood loss
should not be greatly increased with vaginal delivery if there are no
lacerations, and the uterus promptly contracts. Unfortunately, such ideal
circumstances do not always prevail. Thus, heparin therapy generally is
stopped during labor and delivery.
The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020b)
recommends restarting UFH or LMWH no sooner than 4 to 6 hours after
vaginal delivery or 6 to 12 hours after cesarean delivery. From their review,
Moriuchi and associates (2019) found that thromboprophylaxis started
within 24 hours after cesarean delivery was safe. At Parkland Hospital, we
wait at least 24 hours to restart therapeutic-dose heparin after cesarean
delivery or after vaginal delivery with significant lacerations.

SUPERFICIAL VENOUS THROMBOPHLEBITIS
Thrombosis limited strictly to the superficial veins of the saphenous system
is typically associated with varicosities or as a sequela of an indwelling
intravenous catheter. It is treated with analgesia, elastic support, heat, and

rest. Superficial vein thrombosis raises the risk of DVT four- to six-fold. In a
metaanalysis of nonpregnant patients with thrombophlebitis, 18 percent had a
concomitant DVT and 7 percent had a pulmonary embolism (Di Minno,
2016). Although controversial, the American Society of Hematology suggests
LMWH therapy (Bates, 2018).

PULMONARY EMBOLISM
Although it causes approximately 10 percent of maternal deaths, pulmonary
embolism is relatively uncommon during pregnancy and the puerperium.
According to Marik and Plante (2008), 70 percent of gravidas presenting
with a pulmonary embolism have associated clinical evidence of DVT. And
recall that between 30 and 60 percent of women with a DVT will have a
coexisting silent pulmonary embolism.

■ Clinical Presentation
In almost 2500 nonpregnant patients with a proven pulmonary embolism,
symptoms included dyspnea in 82 percent, chest pain in 49 percent, cough in
20 percent, syncope in 14 percent, and hemoptysis in 7 percent (Goldhaber,
1999). Other predominant clinical findings typically include tachypnea,
apprehension, and tachycardia. In some cases, an accentuated pulmonic
closure sound, rales, and/or friction rub is heard.
Right axis deviation and T-wave inversion in the anterior chest leads may
be evident on the electrocardiogram. In most cases, chest radiography results
are normal. In others, nonspecific findings may include atelectasis, an
infiltrate, cardiomegaly, or an effusion. Vascular markings in the lung region
supplied by the obstructed artery can be lost. Although most women are
hypoxemic, a normal arterial blood gas analysis does not exclude pulmonary
embolism. Approximately a third of young patients have PO2 values >80 mm
Hg. Thus, the alveolar- arterial oxygen tension difference is a more useful
indicator of disease. More than 86 percent of patients with acute pulmonary
embolism will have an alveolar-arterial difference >20 mm Hg (Lockwood,
2012). Even with massive pulmonary embolism, signs, symptoms, and
laboratory data to support the diagnosis may be deceptively nonspecific.

■ Massive and Submassive Pulmonary Embolism
Defined as embolism causing hemodynamic instability, these account for 5 to
10 percent of cases (Handal-Örefice, 2019). Acute mechanical obstruction of
the pulmonary vasculature causes increased vascular resistance and
pulmonary hypertension followed by acute right ventricular dilation. In
otherwise healthy patients, significant pulmonary hypertension does not
develop until 60 to 75 percent of the pulmonary vascular tree is occluded
(Guyton, 1954). Moreover, circulatory collapse requires 75- to 80-percent
obstruction. This is depicted in Figure 55-4 and emphasizes that most acutely
symptomatic emboli are large and likely a saddle embolism (Singhal, 1973).
These are suspected when the pulmonary artery pressure is substantively
increased as estimated by echocardiography.

FIGURE 55-4 Schematic of pulmonary arterial circulation. Note that the cross-sectional area of the
pulmonary trunk and the combined pulmonary arteries is 9 cm. A large saddle embolism could occlude
50 to 90 percent of the pulmonary tree, causing hemodynamic instability. As the arteries give off distal
branches, the total surface area rapidly increases, that is, 13 cm for the combined five lobar arteries, 36
cm for the combined 19 segmental arteries, and more than 800 cm for the total 65 subsegmental arterial
branches. Thus, hemodynamic instability is less likely with emboli past the lobar arteries.

Submassive embolism is diagnosed when there is evidence of right
ventricular dysfunction (Handal-Örefice, 2019). The mortality rate
approaches 25 percent, which compares with a 1-percent rate without such

dysfunction (Kinane, 2008). It is important in these cases to infuse
crystalloids carefully and to support blood pressure with vasopressors.
Aggressive intravenous fluid infusion has been associated with worsening
right-sided ventricular dysfunction (Konstantides, 2014). As discussed on
page 988, oxygen treatment, tracheal intubation, and mechanical ventilation
are completed preparatory to thrombolysis, filter placement, or
embolectomy.

■ Diagnosis
In most cases, recognition of a pulmonary embolism requires a high index of
suspicion that prompts objective evaluation. Exposure of the mother and fetus
to ionizing radiation is a concern when investigating a suspected pulmonary
embolism during pregnancy. However, this concern is largely overruled by
the hazards of missing a potentially fatal diagnosis. Moreover, erroneously
assigning a diagnosis of pulmonary embolism to a pregnant woman is also
fraught with problems. It unnecessarily exposes the mother and fetus to the
risks of anticoagulation treatment and will impact delivery plans, future
contraception, and thromboprophylaxis during subsequent pregnancies.
Therefore, investigations should aim for diagnostic certainty (Cohen, 2020).
Diagnosis of a pulmonary embolism follows the same algorithm as for
DVT shown in Figure 55-2. In addition to compression ultrasound of the
extremities, if a pulmonary embolism is suspected, chest x-ray and
electrocardiogram may be revealing. Echocardiography is useful to detect
other conditions that mimic pulmonary embolism—acute myocardial
infarction, pericardial tamponade, and aortic dissection. Further imaging
with computed tomography (CT) scanning, MR imaging, or ventilationperfusion lung scanning confirms the diagnosis (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020b). As discussed later (p. 988), the
American Society of Hematology recommends lung scanning as the first-line
diagnostic tool (Bates, 2018). At Parkland Hospital we preferentially use
CT-pulmonary angiography for suspected pulmonary embolism.

Computed Tomographic Pulmonary Angiography
Multidetector CT-pulmonary angiography (CTPA) is the most commonly
employed technique to diagnose pulmonary embolism in nonpregnant
patients. The technique is described further in Chapter 49 (p. 874), and an

imaging example is shown in Figure 55-5. The estimated fetal radiation
exposure averages 0.45 to 0.6 mGy. The estimated maternal breast dose is 10
to 70 mGy (Waksmonski, 2014).

FIGURE 55-5 Axial image of the chest from a four-channel multidetector spiral computed
tomographic scan performed after administration of intravenous contrast. There is enhancement of the
pulmonary artery with a large thrombus on the right (arrow) consistent with pulmonary embolism.
(Reproduced with permission from Dr. Michael Landay.)

CTPA has many advantages, but we find that the higher resolution allows
detection of previously inaccessible smaller distal emboli that have uncertain
clinical significance. Similar observations have been reported by others
(Anderson, 2007; Hall, 2009). Bourjeily and colleagues (2012) performed a
follow-up study of 318 pregnant women who had a negative CTPA
performed for a suspected pulmonary embolism. All were seen 3 months
following their initial presentation or at 6 weeks postpartum. None of these
women were subsequently diagnosed with a thromboembolism.

Ventilation-Perfusion Scintigraphy Lung Scan

This technique involves a small dose of radiotracer such as intravenously
administered technetium-99m macroaggregated albumin. There is negligible
fetal and maternal breast radiation exposure—0.1 to 0.4 mGy. The scan may
not provide a definite diagnosis because many other conditions can cause
perfusion defects. Examples are pneumonia or local bronchospasm. Chan and
coworkers (2002) found that a fourth of ventilation-perfusion scans in
pregnant women were nondiagnostic. In these instances, CTPA is preferred
(Tromeur, 2017).
To compare the performance of lung scintigraphy and CTPA, Revel and
associates (2011) evaluated 137 pregnant women with suspected pulmonary
embolism. The two modalities performed comparably and had no significant
differences between the proportions of positive, negative, or indeterminate
results. Specifically, the proportion of indeterminate results for both
approximated 20 percent, Similarly, one systematic review concluded that
both CTPA and lung scintigraphy seem appropriate for exclusion of
pulmonary embolism during pregnancy (van Mens, 2017).

Intravascular Pulmonary Angiography
This requires catheterization of the right side of the heart and is considered
the reference test for pulmonary embolism. With newer-generation
multidetector CT scanners, however, the role of invasive pulmonary
angiography has been questioned. This is especially true given the higher
radiation exposure for the fetus (Konstantinides, 2014). Other detractions are
that it can be time consuming, uncomfortable, and associated with dyeinduced allergy and renal failure. It is reserved for confirmation when less
invasive tests are equivocal.

■ Management
Immediate treatment for pulmonary embolism is full anticoagulation similar
to that for DVT as discussed on page 982 and shown in Table 55-4. There
are several complementary procedures that may be indicated.

Vena Caval Filters
The woman who has very recently suffered a pulmonary embolism and who
must undergo cesarean delivery presents a particularly serious problem.

Reversal of anticoagulation may be followed by another embolus, and
surgery while fully anticoagulated frequently results in life-threatening
hemorrhage or troublesome hematomas. In these cases, placement of a vena
caval filter should be considered before surgery (Marik, 2008). Moreover, in
the very infrequent circumstances in which heparin therapy fails to prevent
recurrent pulmonary embolism from the pelvis or legs or in which embolism
develops from these sites despite heparin treatment, a vena caval filter may
also be indicated. Such filters can also be used following massive emboli in
patients who are not candidates for thrombolysis.
The device is inserted through either the jugular or femoral vein and can
be inserted during labor (Jamjute, 2006). Routine filter placement has no
added advantage to heparin given alone (Decousus, 1998). Retrievable
filters may be used as short-term protection and then removed 1 to 2 weeks
later (Liu, 2012). From their systematic review, Harris and colleagues
(2016) found that complication rates in pregnant women with vena caval
filters are comparable to those in nonpregnant patients. In another series of
24 filters placed in obstetrical patients, 29 percent had complications
including removal failure (Rottenstreich, 2019).

Thrombolysis
Compared with heparin, thrombolytic agents provide more rapid lysis of
pulmonary clots and improvement of pulmonary hypertension in lifethreatening cases (Bates, 2021; Goldhaber, 2018). In one study of
nonpregnant patients receiving heparin for an acute submassive pulmonary
embolism, those receiving the recombinant tissue plasminogen activator
alteplase had a lower risk of death or treatment escalation (Konstantinides,
2002). One metaanalysis of trials involving nonpregnant patients reported
that the risk of recurrence or death was significantly lower in patients given
thrombolytic agents and heparin compared with those given heparin alone—
10 versus 17 percent (Agnelli, 2002). Importantly, however, there were five
—2 percent—fatal bleeding episodes in the thrombolysis group and none in
the heparin-only group.
There have been several case reports and reviews of thrombolysis in
pregnant women. Leonhardt and coworkers (2006) identified 28 reports of
tissue plasminogen activator use during pregnancy. Ten cases were for
thromboembolism. Complication rates were similar to those in nonpregnant
patients, and the authors concluded that such therapy should not be withheld

during pregnancy if indicated. Akazawa and Nishida (2017) reviewed 13
cases of systemic thrombolytic therapy administered during the first 48 hours
after delivery. Blood transfusion was required in five of the eight cesarean
deliveries, including three cases of hysterectomy and two cases of hematoma
drainage. Sousa-Gomes and associates (2019) reviewed outcomes in 141
pregnant women undergoing thrombolysis for VTE or stroke. Maternal death
complicated 3 percent of cases, and major bleeding occurred in 9 percent.

Embolectomy
Given the efficacy of thrombolysis and filters, surgical embolectomy is
uncommonly indicated. Published experience with emergency embolectomy
during pregnancy is limited to case reports (Colombier, 2015; Saeed, 2014).
From their review, Ahearn and colleagues (2002) found that although the
operative risk to the mother is reasonable, the stillbirth rate is 20 to 40
percent.

THROMBOPROPHYLAXIS
A Cochrane review of guidelines for thromboprophylaxis in pregnancy
concluded that there is a lack of overall agreement about which women
should be offered thromboprophylaxis (Middleton, 2021). The American
Society of Hematology summarized that evidence-based recommendations
rely largely on observational studies and on data extrapolated from
nonpregnant patients. In many cases, this led them to suggest—rather than
recommend—various schemes for thromboprophylaxis (Bates, 2018). In an
earlier study, Cleary-Goldman and coworkers (2007) surveyed 151 fellows
of the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists and reported
that intervention without a clear indication is common. Table 55-5 lists
several consensus recommendations for thromboprophylaxis. In some cases,
more than one option is listed, thus illustrating the confusion that currently
reigns. It is important to emphasize that the decision to treat with
anticoagulation in pregnancy is influenced by personal VTE history, family
history of VTE, severity of thrombophilias, and additional risk factors such
as obesity, cesarean delivery, or prolonged immobility (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020a).

■ Prior Venous Thromboembolism
In general, either antepartum surveillance or heparin prophylaxis is
recommended for women with prior VTE but without a recurrent risk factor.
Tengborn and associates (1989), however, suggested that such management
may not be effective. They reported outcomes in 87 pregnant Swedish
women who had prior thromboembolic disease and were not tested for
thrombophilias. Despite unfractionated heparin prophylaxis, which was
usually 5000 U twice daily, 15 percent developed antepartum VTE
recurrence. This compared with 12 percent not given heparin.
Brill-Edwards and colleagues (2000) prospectively studied 125 pregnant
women with a single prior VTE. Antepartum heparin was not given, but
anticoagulant therapy was given for 4 to 6 weeks postpartum. Six women had
a recurrent venous thrombosis, but there were no recurrences in women
without a known thrombophilia or whose prior thrombosis was associated
with a temporary risk factor. A study of 88 women without antiphospholipid
antibodies and who were not given antithrombotic prophylaxis reported a
subsequent pregnancy- or puerperium-related VTE in 22 percent (De
Stefano, 2006). Of 20 women whose original thrombosis was associated
with a transient risk factor—not including pregnancy or oral contraceptive
use—there were no recurrences during pregnancy, but two during the
puerperium. These findings imply that women with a prior thrombosis in
association with a thrombophilia or in the absence of a temporary risk factor
generally should be given both antepartum and postpartum prophylaxis
(Connors, 2017). These data also suggest that for women with a prior VTE,
antithrombotic prophylaxis during pregnancy could be tailored according to
the circumstances of the original event.
It is important to emphasize that VTE may recur despite antithrombotic
prophylaxis. A study of 270 women who had at least one previous VTE
found that 10 percent suffered a recurrent VTE (Galambosi, 2014). Twelve
of these recurrences occurred early in pregnancy before the initiation of
antithrombotic prophylaxis, and 16 occurred despite prophylactic use of
LMWH.
Our practice at Parkland Hospital for many years for women with a
history of prior VTE was to administer subcutaneous UFH, 5000 to 7500
units two to three times daily. More recently, we have used 40 mg of
enoxaparin given subcutaneously daily with transition to UFH near delivery.

With either regimen, the recurrence of documented DVT embolization has
been uncommon.

■ Cesarean Delivery
The risk for DVT and especially for fatal thromboembolism rises many fold
following cesarean delivery compared with that after vaginal delivery. When
considering that a third of women giving birth in the United States yearly
undergo cesarean delivery, pulmonary embolism is understandably a major
cause of maternal mortality (Creanga, 2017; Petersen, 2019). That said, the
lack of consensus described earlier by Middleton and coworkers (2021)
creates considerable variation in the current recommendations promulgated
by the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, the Royal
College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists, and the American College of
Chest Physicians (Palmerola, 2016).
Adherence to individual society guidelines following cesarean delivery
confers a greater risk in some instances. According to the Society for
Maternal-Fetal Medicine (2020), if American College guidelines were
followed, only 1 percent of these women would be candidates for
thromboprophylaxis. Almost 85 percent of the same cohort would be given
thromboprophylaxis following Royal College guidelines and about 35
percent if American College of Chest Physician guidelines were followed.
Some comparisons of these thromboprophylaxis guidelines are shown in
Table 55-6.
TABLE 55-6. Thromboprophylaxis Guidelines for Women Undergoing
Cesarean Delivery

Since 2011, the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
(2020b) recommends placement of pneumatic compression devices before
cesarean delivery for all women not already receiving thromboprophylaxis.
This recommendation was based primarily on consensus and expert opinion.
For patients undergoing cesarean delivery with additional risk factors for
thromboembolism, both pneumatic compression devices and UFH or LMWH
may be recommended. The College stipulated that cesarean delivery in an
emergency setting should not be delayed because of the time necessary to
begin thromboprophylaxis.
Implementation of this strategy by the Hospital Corporation of America,
the largest for-profit obstetrical health care delivery system in the United
States, was associated with a reduction in deaths from pulmonary embolism
from 7 of 458,097 cesarean births to 1 of 465,880 cesarean births (Clark,
2011, 2014).
In 2016, the National Partnership for Maternal Safety published several
consensus recommendations for the prevention of maternal VTE (D’Alton,
2016). These recommendations included expanded use of antenatal
thromboprophylaxis for women hospitalized 3 days or longer, expanded use

of prophylaxis during and after vaginal delivery, and expanded use of
pharmacological prophylaxis to most women after cesarean delivery. In
response, Sibai and Rouse (2016) expressed concern that these new
recommendations derive from sparse data of questionable applicability to
obstetrical patients. They called for better quality evidence to measure the
benefits, harms, and costs of increased pharmacological thromboprophylaxis.
As aptly expressed by Macones (2017), “an intervention, such as increased
postcesarean pharmacologic thromboprophylaxis, where there are legitimate
concerns about efficacy and safety, requires a much higher degree of
evidence before a national guideline is implemented.” We agree with these
sentiments.

REFERENCES
Abbattista M, Gianiello F, Novembrino C, et al: Risk of pregnancy-related venous thromboembolism and
obstetrical complications in women with inherited type I antithrombin deficiency: a retrospective,
single-centre, cohort study. Lancet Haematol 7(4):e320, 2020
Abe K, Kuklina EV, Hooper WC, et al: Venous thromboembolism as a cause of severe maternal
morbidity and mortality in the United States. Semin Perinatal 43(4):e320, 2019
Agnelli G, Becattini C, Kirschstein T: Thrombolysis vs heparin in the treatment of pulmonary embolism.
Arch Intern Med 162: 2537, 2002
Ahearn GS, Hadjiliadis D, Govert JA, et al: Massive pulmonary embolism during pregnancy successfully
treated with recombinant tissue plasminogen activator. Arch Intern Med 162:1221, 2002
Akazawa M, Nishida M: Thrombolysis with intravenous recombinant tissue plasminogen activator during
early postpartum period: a review of the literature. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 96(5):529, 2017
Alfirevic Z, Roberts D, Martlew V: How strong is the association between maternal thrombophilia and
adverse pregnancy outcome? A systematic review. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 101:6, 2002
Almawi WY, Al-Shaikh FS, Melemedjian OK, et al: Protein Z, an anticoagulant protein with expanding
role in reproductive biology. Reproduction 146(2):R73, 2013
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Inherited thrombophilias in pregnancy. Practice
Bulletin No. 197, June 2018. Reaffirmed 2020a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Thromboembolism in pregnancy. Practice
Bulletin No. 196, June 2018. Reaffirmed 2020b
Anderson DR, Kahn SR, Rodger MA, et al: Computed tomographic pulmonary angiography vs
ventilation-perfusion lung scanning in patients with suspected pulmonary embolism: a randomized
controlled trial. JAMA 298:2743, 2007
Arachchillage DR, Makris M: Inherited thrombophilia and pregnancy complications: should we test?
Semin Thromb Hemost 45(1):50, 2019
Bapat P, Kedar R, Lubetsky A, et al: Transfer of dabigatran and dabigatran etexilate mesylate across
the dually perfused human placenta. Obstet Gynecol 123(6):1256, 2014
Barbour LA, Oja JL, Schultz LK: A prospective trial that demonstrates that dalteparin requirements
increase in pregnancy to maintain therapeutic levels of anticoagulation. Am J Obstet Gynecol

191:1024, 2004
Bates SM: Pulmonary embolism in pregnancy. Semin Respir Crit Care Med 42(2):284, 2021
Bates SM, Greer IA, Middledorp S, et al: VTE, thrombophilia, antithrombotic therapy, and pregnancy.
Chest 141:e691S, 2012
Bates SM, Rajasekhar A, Middeldorp S, et al: American Society of Hematology 2018 guidelines for
management of venous thromboembolism: venous thromboembolism in the context of pregnancy.
Blood Adv 2(22):3317, 2018
Bendapudi PK, Whalen MJ, Lahoud-Rahme M, et al: Case 7–2021: a 19-year-old man with shock,
multiple organ failure, and rash. N Engl J Med 384(30):953, 2021
Berresheim M, Wilkie J, Nerenberg KA, et al: A case series of LMWH use in pregnancy: should trough
anti-Xa levels guide dosing? Thromb Res 134(6):1234, 2014
Birdwell BG, Raskob GE, Whitsett TL, et al: The clinical validity of normal compression ultrasonography
in outpatients suspected of having deep venous thrombosis. Ann Intern Med 128:1, 1998
Blanco-Molina A, Trujillo-Santos J, Criado J, et al: Venous thromboembolism during pregnancy or
postpartum: findings from the RIETE Registry. Thromb Haemost 97:186, 2007
Bourjeily G, Khalil H, Raker C, et al: Outcomes of negative multidetector computed tomography with
pulmonary angiography in pregnant women suspected of pulmonary embolism. Lung 190:105, 2012
Brandjes DP, Buller HR, Heijboer H, et al: Randomised trial of effect of compression stockings in
patients with symptomatic proximal-vein thrombosis. Lancet 349:759, 1997
Breddin HK, Hach-Wunderle V, Nakov R, et al: Effects of a low-molecular-weight heparin on thrombus
regression and recurrent thromboembolism in patients with DVT. N Engl J Med 344:626, 2001
Brill-Edwards P, Ginsberg JS, Gent M, et al: Safety of withholding heparin in pregnant women with a
history of venous thromboembolism. N Engl J Med 343:1439, 2000
Brooks C, Rutherford JM, Gould J, et al: Warfarin dosage in postpartum women: a case-control study.
Br J Obstet Gynaecol 109:187, 2002
Burneo JG, Elias SB, Barkley GL: Cerebral venous thrombosis due to protein S deficiency in pregnancy.
Lancet 359:892, 2002
Carroll R, Rebarber A, Booker W, et al: Double versus single thrombophilias during pregnancy. J
Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 31(19):2590, 2018
Chan WS, Ray JG, Murray S, et al: Suspected pulmonary embolism in pregnancy. Arch Intern Med
162:1170, 2002
Chan WS, Spencer FA, Ginsberg JS: Anatomic distribution of deep vein thrombosis in pregnancy.
CMAJ 182:657, 2010
Chan WS, Spencer FA, Lee AY, et al: Safety of withholding anticoagulation in pregnant women with
suspected deep vein thrombosis following negative serial compression ultrasound and iliac vein
imaging. CMAJ 185(4):E194, 2013
Clark SL, Christmas JT, Frye DR, et al: Maternal mortality in the United States: predictability and the
impact of protocols on fatal postcesarean pulmonary embolism and hypertension-related intracranial
hemorrhage. Am J Obstet Gynecol 211:32, 2014
Clark SL, Meyers JA, Frye DK, et al: Patient safety in obstetrics—the Hospital Corporation of America
experience. Am J Obstet Gynecol 204(4):283, 2011
Cleary-Goldman J, Bettes B, Robinson JN, et al: Thrombophilia and the obstetric patient. Obstet
Gynecol 110:669, 2007
Cohen SL, Feizullayeva C, McCandish JA, et al: Comparison of international societal guidelines for the
diagnosis of suspected pulmonary embolism during pregnancy. Lancet Haematol 7(3):e247, 2020

Colombier S, Niclauss L: Successful surgical pulmonary embolectomy for massive perinatal embolism
after emergency cesarean section. Ann Vasc Surg 29(7):1452.e1, 2015
Conard J, Horellou MH, Van Dreden P, et al: Thrombosis and pregnancy in congenital deficiencies in AT
III, protein C or protein S: study of 78 women. Thromb Haemost 63:319, 1990
Connors JM: Thrombophilia testing and venous thrombosis. N Engl J Med 377(12):1177, 2017
Creanga AA, Syverson C, Seed K, et al: Pregnancy-related mortality in the United States, 2011–2013.
Obstet Gynecol 130(2):366, 2017
Croles FN, Nasserinejad K, Duvekot JJ, et al: Pregnancy, thrombophilia, and the risk of a first venous
thrombosis: systematic review and Bayesian meta-analysis. BMJ 359:j4452, 2017
Cunningham FG: Screening for osteoporosis. N Engl J Med 353:1975, 2005
Cunningham FG, Nelson DB: Disseminated intravascular coagulation syndromes in obstetrics. Obstet
Gynecol 126(5):999, 2015
D’Alton ME, Friedman AM, Smiley RM, et al: National partnership for maternal safety: consensus
bundle on venous thromboembolism. Obstet Gynecol 128(4):688, 2016
Daughety MM, Zilberman-Rudenko J, Shatzel JJ, et al: Management of anticoagulation in pregnant
women with mechanical heart valves. Obstet Gynecol Surv 75(3):190, 2020
De Carolis S, di Pasquo E, Rossi E, et al: Fondaparinux in pregnancy: could it be a safe option? A
review of the literature. Thromb Res. 135(6):1039, 2015
De Stefano V, Martinelli I, Rossi E, et al: The risk of recurrent venous thromboembolism in pregnancy
and puerperium without antithrombotic prophylaxis. Br J Haematol 135:386, 2006
Decousus H, Leizorovicz A, Parent F, et al: A clinical trial of vena caval filters in the prevention of
pulmonary embolism in patients with proximal deep-vein thrombosis. N Engl J Med 338:409, 1998
Den Heijer M, Lewington S, Clarke R: Homocysteine, MTHRF and risk of venous thrombosis: a metaanalysis of published epidemiological studies. Thromb Haemost 3:292, 2005
Di Minno MN, Ambrosino P, Ambrosini F, et al: Prevalence of deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary
embolism in patients with superficial vein thrombosis: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J
Thromb Haemost 14(5):964, 2016
Dizon-Townson D, Miller C, Sibai B, et al: The relationship of the factor V Leiden mutation and
pregnancy outcomes for mother and fetus. Obstet Gynecol 106:517, 2005
Douketis JD, Kearon C, Bates S, et al: Risk of fatal pulmonary embolism in patients with treated venous
thromboembolism. JAMA 279:458, 1998
Elsaigh E, Thachil J, Nash MJ, et al: The use of fondaparinux in pregnancy. Br J Haematol 168(5):762,
2015
Erdman WA, Jayson HT, Redman HC, et al: Deep venous thrombosis of extremities: role of MR
imaging in the diagnosis. Radiology 174:425, 1990
Fausett MB, Vogtlander M, Lee RM, et al: Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia is rare in pregnancy. Am
J Obstet Gynecol 185:148, 2001
Fernandez Arias M, Mazarico E, Gonzalex A, et al: Genetic risk assessment of thrombophilia in patients
with adverse obstetric outcomes. PLoS One 14(2):e0211114, 2019
Galambosi PJ, Ulander VM, Kaaja RJ: The incidence and risk factors of recurrent venous
thromboembolism during pregnancy. Thromb Res 134(2):240, 2014
Garcia D, Erkan D: Diagnosis and management of the antiphospholipid syndrome. N Engl J Med
378(21):2010, 2018
García-Botella A, Asenjo S, De la Morena-Barrio ME, et al: First case with antithrombin deficiency,
mesenteric vein thrombosis and pregnancy: multidisciplinary diagnosis and successful management.
Thromb Res 144:72, 2016

Goldhaber SZ, Visani L, De Rosa M: Acute pulmonary embolism: Clinical outcomes in the International
Cooperative Pulmonary Embolism Registry (ICOPER). Lancet 353:1386, 1999
Goodacre S, Horspool K, Nelson-Piercy C, et al: The DiPEP study: an observational study of the
diagnostic accuracy of clinical assessment, D-dimer and chest x-ray for suspected pulmonary
embolism in pregnancy and postpartum. BJOG 126:383, 2019
Govindappagari S, O’Shaughnessy FO, Huang Y, et al: Obstetric thromboembolism and risk for postthrombotic syndrome in months and years after delivery. Abstract No. 112, Am J Obstet Gynecol
222:S89, 2020
Greer IA: Clinical practice. Pregnancy complicated by venous thrombosis. N Engl J Med 373(6):540,
2015
Greer IA: Prevention and management of venous thromboembolism in pregnancy. Clin Chest Med
24:123, 2003
Greinacher A: Heparin induced thrombocytopenia. N Engl J Med 373(3):252, 2015
Guyatt GH, Akl EA, Crowther M, et al: Executive summary: antithrombotic therapy and prevention of
thrombosis, 9th ed: American College of Chest Physicians evidence-based clinical practice
guidelines. Chest 141:7S, 2012
Guyton AC, Lindsey AW, Gilluly JJ: The limits of right ventricular compensation following acute
increase in pulmonary circulatory resistance. Circ Res 2:326, 1954
Hall WB, Truitt SG, Scheunemann LP, et al: The prevalence of clinically relevant incidental findings on
chest computed tomographic angiograms ordered to diagnose pulmonary embolism. Arch Intern
Med 169:1961, 2009
Handal-Orefice RC, Moroz LA: Pulmonary embolism management in the critical care setting. Semin
Perinatol 43(4):205, 2019
Harris SA, Velineni R, Davies AH: Inferior vena cava filters in pregnancy: a systematic review. J Vasc
Interv Radiol 27(3):354, 2016
Hu W, Wang Y, Li J, et al: The predictive value of d-Dimer test for venous thromboembolism during
puerperium: a prospective cohort study. Clin Appl Thromb Hemost 26:1076029620901786, 2020
Huisman MV, Klok FA: Current challenges in diagnostic imaging of venous thromboembolism.
Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program 2015:202, 2015
Hull RD, Raskob GF, Carter CJ: Serial IPG in pregnancy patients with clinically suspected DVT: clinical
validity of negative findings. Ann Intern Med 112:663, 1990
Ilonczai P, Oláh Z, Selmeczi A, et al: Management and outcomes of pregnancies in women with
antithrombin deficiency: a single-center experience and review of literature. Blood Coagul
Fibrinolysis 26(7):798, 2015
Infante-Rivard C, Rivard G, Yotov W, et al: Absence of association of thrombophilia polymorphisms
with intrauterine growth restriction. N Engl J Med 347(1):19, 2002
Jacobsen AF, Qvigstad E, Sandset PM: Low molecular weight heparin (dalteparin) for the treatment of
venous thromboembolism in pregnancy. BJOG 110:139, 2003
Jamjute P, Reed N, Hinwood D: Use of inferior vena cava filters in thromboembolic disease during
labor: case report with a literature review. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 19:741, 2006
Jerjes-Sánchez C, Rodriguez D, Farjat E, et al: Pregnancy-associated venous thromboembolism: insights
from GARFILED-VTE. TH Open 5(1):e24, 2021
Johnson ED, Schell JC, Rodgers GM: The D-dimer assay. Am J Hematol 94(7):833, 2019
Kamei H, Navi BB, Sriram N, et al: Risk of a thrombotic event after the 6-week postpartum period. N
Engl J Med 370(14):1307, 2014

Kearon C, Akl EA, Comerota AJ, et al: Antithrombotic therapy for VTE disease: antithrombotic therapy
and prevention of thrombosis, 9th ed: American College of Chest Physicians evidence-based clinical
practice guidelines. Chest 141:e419S, 2012
Kearon C, Akl EA, Ornelas J, et al: Antithrombotic therapy for VTE disease: CHEST guidelines and
expert panel report. Chest 149(2):315, 2016
Kim YH, Pfaller B, Marson A, et al: The risk of venous thromboembolism in women with inflammatory
bowel disease during pregnancy and the postpartum period: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Medicine (Baltimore) 98(38):e17309, 2019
Kinane TB, Grabowski EF, Sharma A, et al: Case 7–2008: a 17-year-old girl with chest pain and
hemoptysis. N Engl J Med 358:941, 2008
Kjellberg U, van Rooijen M, Bremme K, et al: Factor V Leiden mutation and pregnancy-related
complications. Am J Obstet Gynecol 203:469.e1, 2010
Konstantinides S, Geibel A, Heusel G, et al: Heparin plus alteplase compared with heparin alone in
patients with submassive pulmonary embolism. N Engl J Med 347:1143, 2002
Konstantinides SV, Torbicki A, Agnelli G, et al: 2014 ESC guidelines on the diagnosis and management
of acute pulmonary embolism. Eur Heart J 35(43):3033, 2014
Kruger PC, Eikelboom JW, Douketis JD, et al: Deep vein thrombosis: update on diagnosis and
management. Med J Aust 210(11):516, 2019
Lameijer H, Aalberts J, van Veldhuisen D, et al: Efficacy and safety of direct oral anticoagulants during
pregnancy; a systematic literature review. Thromb Res 169:123, 2018
Le Gal G, Kercret G, Yahmed KB, et al: Diagnostic value of single complete compression
ultrasonography in pregnant and postpartum women with suspected deep vein thrombosis:
prospective study. BMJ 344:e2635, 2012
Lebaudy C, Hulot J, Amoura Z, et al: Changes in enoxaparin pharmacokinetics during pregnancy and
implications for antithrombotic therapeutic strategy. Clin Pharmacol Ther 84(3):370, 2008
Leffert L, Butwick A, Carvalho B, et al: The Society for Obstetric Anesthesia and Perinatology
consensus statement on the anesthetic management of pregnancy and postpartum women receiving
thromboprophylaxis or higher dose anticoagulants. Anesth Analg 126(3):928, 2018
Leonhardt G, Gaul C, Nietsch HH, et al: Thrombolytic therapy in pregnancy. J Thromb Thrombolysis
21:271, 2006
Leung AN, Bull TM, Jaeschke R, et al: An official American Thoracic Society/Society of Thoracic
Radiology Clinical Practice Guideline: evaluation of suspected pulmonary embolism in pregnancy.
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 184:1200, 2011
Lim MY, Deal AM, Musty MD, et al: Thrombophilic risk of individuals with rare compound factor V
Leiden and prothrombin G20210A polymorphisms: an international case series of 100 individuals.
Eur J Haematol 97(4):353, 2016
Linkins L-A, Dans AL, Moores LK, et al: Treatment and prevention of heparin-induced
thrombocytopenia. Chest 141:e495S, 2012
Linnemann B, Scholz U, Rott H, et al: Treatment of pregnancy-associated venous thromboembolismposition paper from the Working Group in Women’s Health of the Society of Thrombosis and
Haemostasis (GTH). Vasa 45(2):103, 2016
Liu L, Sun D: Pregnancy outcomes in patients with primary antiphospholipid syndrome: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. Medicine (Baltimore) 98(20):e15733, 2019
Liu Y, Sun Y, Zhang S, et al: Placement of a retrievable inferior vena cava filter for deep venous
thrombosis in term pregnancy. J Vasc Surg 55:1042, 2012

Lockwood C: Thrombosis, thrombophilia, and thromboembolism: clinical updates in women’s health
care. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists Vol. VI, No. 4, October 2007,
Reaffirmed 2012
Lockwood CJ: Inherited thrombophilias in pregnant patients: detection and treatment paradigm. Obstet
Gynecol 99:333, 2002
Louis-Jacques AF, Maggio L, Romero ST: Prenatal screening for thrombophilias. Clin Lab Med
36(2):421, 2016
MacCallum P, Bowles L, Keeling D: Diagnosis and management of heritable thrombophilias. BMJ
349:g4387, 2014
Macones GA: Patient safety in obstetrics. More evidence, less emotion. Obstet Gynecol 103(2):257,
2017
Marik PE, Plante LA: Venous thromboembolic disease and pregnancy. N Engl J Med 359:2025, 2008
McDonnell BP, Glennon K, McTiernan A, et al: Adjustment of therapeutic LMWH to achieve specific
target anti-FXa activity does not affect outcomes in pregnant patients with venous
thromboembolism. J Thromb Thrombolysis 43(1):105, 2017
Middleton P, Shepherd E, Gomersall J: Venous thromboembolism prophylaxis for women at risk during
pregnancy and the early postnatal period. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 3:CD001689, 2021
Miyamoto K, Komatus H, Nagaya Y, et al: Changes in serum D-dimer level and effect of enoxaparin
sodium after a cesarean section: a retrospective study. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 11:1, 2020
Moriuchi K, Chigusa Y, Kondoh E, et al: Enoxaparin administration within 24 hours of caesarean
section: a 6-year single-centre experience and patient outcomes. J Obstet Gynecol 39(4):451, 2019
Nelson-Piercy C, Powrie R, Borg JY, et al: Tinzaparin use in pregnancy: an international, retrospective
study of the safety and efficacy profile. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 159:293, 2011
Ormesher L, Simcox LE, Tower C, et al: To test or not to test, the arguments for and against
thrombophilia testing in obstetrics. Obstet Med 10(2):61, 2017
Paidas MJ, Triche EW, James AH, et al: Recombinant human antithrombin in pregnant patients with
hereditary antithrombin deficiency: integrated analysis of clinical data. Am J Perinatol 33(4):343,
2016
Palmerola KL, D’Alton ME, Brock CO, et al: A comparison of recommendations for pharmacologic
thromboembolism prophylaxis after caesarean delivery from three major guidelines. BJOG 123:2157,
2016
Pécourt M, Yelnik C, Ghesquiere L, et al: Is the presence of antiphospholipid antibodies a poor
prognostic factor for patients with HELLP syndrome? Am J Obstet Gynecol April 1, 2021 [Epub
ahead of print]
Petersen EE, Davis NL, Goodman D, et al: Vital signs: pregnancy-related deaths, United States, 2011–
2015, and strategies for prevention, 13 states, 2013–2017. MMWR 68:423, 2019
Pierangeli SS, Leader B, Barilaro G, et al: Acquired and inherited thrombophilia disorders in pregnancy.
Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am 38:271, 2011
Pollack CV, Schreiber D, Goldhaber SZ, et al: Clinical characteristics, management, and outcomes of
patients diagnosed with acute pulmonary embolism in the emergency department. JACC 57:700,
2011
Quinlan DJ, McQuillan A, Eikelboom JW: Low-molecular-weight heparin compared with intravenous
unfractionated heparin for treatment of pulmonary embolism: a meta-analysis of randomized,
controlled trials. Ann Intern Med 140:143, 2004
Revel MP, Cohen S, Sanchez O, et al: Pulmonary embolism during pregnancy: diagnosis with lung
scintigraphy or CT angiography? Radiology 258:590, 2011

Rhéaume M, Weber F, Durand M, et al: Pregnancy-related venous thromboembolism risk in
asymptomatic women with antithrombin deficiency: a systematic review. Obstet Gynecol 127(4):649,
2016
Righini M, Robert-Ebadi H, Elias A, et al: Diagnosis of pulmonary embolism during pregnancy: a
multicenter prospective management outcome study. Ann Intern Med 169(11):766, 2018
Rodger M: Evidence base for the management of venous thromboembolism in pregnancy. Hematology
Am Soc Hematol Educ Program 2010:173, 2010
Rosenbloom JI, Macones GA: Future research directions for prevention and treatment of obstetric
venous thromboembolism. Semin Perinatol 43(4):213, 2019
Rottenstreich A, Kalish Y, Elchalal U, et al: Retrievable inferior vena cava filter utilization in obstetric
patients. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 32(18):3045, 2019
Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists: Reducing the risk of venous thromboembolism
during pregnancy and the puerperium (Green-top Guidelines no. 37a). April, 2015
Sabadell J, Casellas M, Alijotas-Reig J, et al: Inherited antithrombin deficiency and pregnancy: maternal
and fetal outcomes. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 149:47, 2010
Saccone G, Berghella V, Maruotti GM, et al: Antiphospholipid antibody profile based obstetric outcomes
of primary antiphospholipid syndrome: the PREGNANTS study. Am J Obstet Gynecol
216(5):525.e1, 2017
Saeed G, Möller M, Neuzner J, et al: Emergent surgical pulmonary embolectomy in a pregnant woman:
case report and literature review. Tex Heart Inst J 41(2):188, 2014
Said JM, Ignjatovic V, Monagle PT, et al: Altered reference ranges for protein C and protein S during
early pregnancy: implications for the diagnosis of protein C and protein S deficiency during
pregnancy. Thromb Haemost 103:984, 2010
Scheres LJJ, Lijfering WM, Groenwegan NF, et al: Hypertensive complications of pregnancy and risk of
venous thromboembolism. Hypertension 75(3):781, 2020
Sibai BM, Rouse DJ: Pharmacologic thromboprophylaxis in obstetrics: broader use demands better data.
Obstet Gynecol 128(4):681, 2016
Silver RM, Saade GR, Thorsten V, et al: Factor V Leiden, prothrombin G20210A, and methylene
tetrahydrofolate reductase mutations and stillbirth: the Stillbirth Collaborative Research Network.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 215(4):468.e1, 2016
Silver RM, Zhao Y, Spong CY, et al: Prothrombin gene G20210A mutation and obstetric complications.
Obstet Gynecol 115:14, 2010
Singhal S, Henderson R, Horsfield K, et al: Morphometry of the human pulmonary arterial tree. Circ
Res 33:190, 1973
Smith MP, Norris LA, Steer PJ, et al: Tinzaparin sodium for thrombosis treatment and prevention during
pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 190:495, 2004
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine (SMFM); Pacheco LD, Saade G, et al: Thromboembolism
prophylaxis for cesarean delivery. Consult Series #5. August, 2020
Sousa-Gomes M, Guimarães M, Montenegro N: Thrombolysis in pregnancy: a literature review. J
Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 32(14):2418, 2019
Tapson VF: Acute pulmonary embolism. N Engl J Med 358:1037, 2008
Tengborn L, Bergqvist D, Matzsch T, et al: Recurrent thromboembolism in pregnancy and puerperium: is
there a need for thromboprophylaxis? Am J Obstet Gynecol 160:90, 1989
Tromeur C, van der Pol LM, Klok FA, et al: Pitfalls in the diagnostic management of pulmonary
embolism in pregnancy. Thromb Res 151 Suppl 1:S86, 2017

Van der Hulle T, Cheung W, Kooij S, et al: Simplified diagnostic management of suspected pulmonary
embolism (the YEARS study): a prospective, multicentre, cohort study. Lancet 390(10091):289, 2017
Van der Pol LM, Tromeur C, Bistervels IM, et al: Pregnancy-adapted YEARS algorithm for diagnosis
of suspected pulmonary embolism. N Engl J Med 380(12):1139, 2019
van Mens TE, Scheres LJ, de Jong PG, et al: Imaging for the exclusion of pulmonary embolism in
pregnancy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 1:CD011053, 2017
Viau-Lapointe J, Pier-Arsenault M: New evidence in diagnosis of pulmonary embolism during
pregnancy. Obstet Med 13(3):120, 2020
Virchow R: Gesammelte Abhandlungen zur wissenschaftlichen Medizin. Frankfurt: Medinger Sohn &
Co., 1856, p 219
Waksmonski CA: Cardiac imaging and functional assessment I pregnancy. Semin Perinatol 38(5):240,
2014
Waldman M, Sheiner E, Vardi IS: Can we profile patients at risk for thrombo-embolic events after
delivery: a decade of follow up. Am J Obstet Gynecol 208:S234, 2013

