CHAPTER 47

Fetal-Growth Disorders

NORMAL FETAL GROWTH
FETAL-GROWTH RESTRICTION
DETECTION
RISK FACTORS
MANAGEMENT
FETAL MACROSOMIA
RISK FACTORS
MANAGEMENT
REFERENCES
Disorders of fetal growth occur at both ends of the spectrum, either fetalgrowth restriction or macrosomia. Each poses concern because of associated
morbidities and potential mortality. However, in both categories most of
these newborns are ultimately deemed normal and healthy but merely
constitutionally small or large. The clinical challenge thus lies in the
evaluation and management of suspected fetal-growth disorders.

NORMAL FETAL GROWTH

Fetal growth may be divided into three phases. The initial phase of
hyperplasia occurs in the first 16 weeks and is characterized by a rapid rise
in cell number. The second phase, which extends up to 32 weeks’ gestation,
includes both cellular hyperplasia and hypertrophy. After 32 weeks, fetal
mass accrues by cellular hypertrophy, and it is during this phase that most
fetal fat and glycogen accumulate. The corresponding fetal-growth rates
during these three phases approximate 5 g/d at 15 weeks’ gestation, 15 g/d at
24 weeks’, and 30 g/d at 34 weeks’ (Grantz, 2018; Williams, 1982).
In the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development Fetal
Growth Studies, serial sonographic evaluations were performed in 1733
nonobese, low-risk pregnancies at 12 sites across the United States (Grantz,
2018). As shown in Figure 47-1, growth velocity peaked at 35 weeks’
gestation (Grantz, 2018). The investigators demonstrated that fetal growth
varies considerably and that it is not highly correlated with fetal birthweight
percentile. Some fetuses with initial estimated weights below the 5th
percentile maintained their growth velocity and ultimately weighed more at
birth than other fetuses whose weight percentiles were initially higher but
whose growth was slower. Such findings support our understanding that large
and small fetal weight percentiles reflect constitutional size in some but
indicate disordered growth in others. They further highlight the importance of
serial sonography when abnormal growth is a concern.

FIGURE 47-1 Fetal weight gain in grams per day by race/ethnicity throughout gestation.

■ Normal Birthweight
Accurate gestational age assessment is critical for determining whether
birthweight is normal. Current normative data are based on birthweights from
pregnancies in which gestational age is established using an obstetrical
estimate that includes sonography and discussed in Chapter 14 (p. 248)
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019b). The
birthweight percentiles shown in Table 47-1 were derived using data from
more than 3 million liveborn singletons delivered across the United States in

2011 (Duryea, 2014). As shown in Figure 47-2, use of a birthweight
percentile curve in which gestational age is based on a last menstrual period
alone yields significantly larger weights for a given gestational age,
particularly in the preterm period. The accuracy of a birthweight reference
thus has potential to affect the prevalence of neonates diagnosed as small or
large for gestational age.
TABLE 47-1. 2011 Gestational Age Birthweight (g) Percentiles for
3,252,011 Singleton Live Births in the United States

FIGURE 47-2 Fetal-growth curves for births in the United States in 2011. Curves vary depending on
whether gestational age was calculated from the last menstrual period or from an improved obstetrical
estimate, derived in part using sonography. (Modified with permission from Duryea EL, Hawkins JS,
McIntire DD, et al: A revised birth weight reference for the United States. Obstet Gynecol. 2014
Jul;124(1):16–22.)

The curve by Duryea and associates (2014) is most accurately termed a
population reference, rather than a standard. A population reference
incorporates pregnancies of varying risks, along with the resulting outcomes,
both normal and abnormal. In contrast, a standard incorporates normal
pregnancies with normal outcomes. Because population references include
preterm births, which are more likely to be growth restricted, it has been
argued that the associated birthweight data overestimate impaired fetal
growth (Mayer, 2013; Zhang, 2010).

■ Physiology of Fetal Growth
Fetal development is believed to be determined by maternal provision of
substrate and its placental transfer, whereas fetal growth potential is
governed by the genome. The precise cellular and molecular mechanisms
leading to normal fetal growth are incompletely understood. Considerable
evidence supports the role of insulin and insulin-like growth factors in fetal
growth and weight gain regulation (Luo, 2012). These growth factors are
produced by virtually all organs and are potent stimulators of cell division

and differentiation. Other hormones implicated in fetal growth include leptin
and other adipokines, which are derived from adipose tissue. Fetal leptin
concentrations rise during gestation, and they correlate both with birthweight
and with neonatal fat mass (Briffa, 2015; Ökdemir, 2018; Simpson, 2017).
Both excessive and diminished maternal glucose availability also have
the potential to affect fetal growth (Chap. 7, p. 135). That said, growthrestricted neonates do not typically show pathologically low glucose
concentrations in cord blood (Pardi, 2006). Fetal-growth restriction in
response to glucose deprivation generally results only after long-term severe
maternal caloric deprivation (Lechtig, 1975). Conversely, hyperglycemia
more consistently results in excessive growth. The Hyperglycemia and
Adverse Pregnancy Outcomes (HAPO) Study Cooperative Research Group
(2008) found that elevated cord C-peptide levels, which reflect fetal
hyperinsulinemia, are associated with greater birthweight. This relationship
was noted even in women with maternal glucose levels below the threshold
for diabetes.
Excessive transfer of lipids has similarly been implicated in fetal
overgrowth (Delhaes, 2018). Free or nonesterified fatty acids in maternal
plasma may be transferred to the fetus via facilitated diffusion or after
liberation of fatty acids from triglycerides by trophoblastic lipases (GilSánchez, 2012). Independent of prepregnancy body mass index (BMI), higher
maternal free fatty acid levels during the latter half of pregnancy correlate
with birthweight (Crume, 2015). Greater intake of certain fatty acids,
particularly omega-3, is associated with greater birthweight (CalabuigNavarro, 2016).
Placental fatty acid metabolism and transfer may be dysregulated in fetalgrowth restriction and in maternal conditions associated with fetal
overgrowth. For example, levels of endothelial lipase are reduced with
deficient fetal growth, and this enzyme is overexpressed in placentas of
women with diabetes (Gauster, 2007, 2011). Others have reported that
diabetes and obesity are associated with altered placental lipid-transport
gene expression (Segura, 2017). Obesity is also linked with greater
expression of fatty acid binding/transport proteins within the trophoblast
(Myatt, 2016). These alterations lead to an abnormal accumulation of lipids
that can result in pathological placental inflammation and dysfunction
(Calabuig-Navarro, 2016; Myatt, 2016; Yang, 2016).

FETAL-GROWTH RESTRICTION
Fundamental to understanding fetal-growth restriction (FGR) is an
appreciation of the strengths and limitations of its defining criteria. A
diagnosis based on estimated fetal weight alone does not indicate disease
but rather a fetus that is in an at-risk category. Benefits of definitions such as
the one used by the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists are
ease of application and promotion of consistency across care settings.
However, if applied to an otherwise low-risk population, a 10th-percentile
threshold will label nearly 10 percent of fetuses as growth restricted,
although most are merely constitutionally small rather than compromised.
Moreover, a threshold will fail to identify at-risk fetuses with a weight above
that threshold but who have not reached their growth potential. Thus, the
definition is intended to strike a balance between false-positive and falsenegative diagnoses.

■ Definition
Various criteria and thresholds have been used to define FGR. These have
included estimated fetal weights (EFW) below the 3rd, 5th, or 10th
percentiles; similar abdominal circumference (AC) percentiles; a specified
decline in the EFW percentile or AC percentile over serial assessments; and
various abnormal Doppler findings (Lees, 2020). All definitions are based
solely on prenatal sonography and rely on accurate gestational age
assessment.
Currently, the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
(2021a) and the Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine (2020) recommend
defining FGR as either an EFW <10th percentile for gestational age or an AC
<10th percentile for gestational age. Use of the AC threshold may correctly
identify one additional small-for-gestational age (SGA) newborn for every
14 sonograms performed in the last month of pregnancy (Blue, 2018).
Importantly, management recommendations are further stratified based on
lower percentile thresholds and findings such as oligohydramnios or
abnormal umbilical artery Doppler velocimetry, as discussed subsequently
(p. 829).
To more precisely identify growth-restricted fetuses, investigators have
derived customized growth charts that incorporate variables such as maternal

height and weight, race or ethnicity, parity, and fetal sex. However,
customized growth curves do not improve outcomes and thus are not
recommended (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists,
2021a; Chiossi, 2017; Costantine, 2013; Grobman, 2013; Zhang, 2011).
FGR should be differentiated from SGA, which is a postnatal designation
based on birthweight percentile. When considering FGR detection,
investigators study the proportion of SGA neonates identified as FGR during
prenatal sonography. However, FGR often does not equate to SGA because
of the inherent error of sonographic measurement. One population-based
study of routine third-trimester sonography found that 50 percent of those
with suspected FGR had birthweights above the 10th percentile (Monier,
2015). Those with false-positive diagnoses of FGR were delivered 2 weeks
earlier in gestation, which raises concerns about potential iatrogenic
sequelae of routine screening.
Importantly, as many as 70 percent of SGA newborns are not
pathologically growth restricted. Indeed, such children have normal
outcomes and are thought to be appropriately grown when maternal ethnic
group, parity, weight, and height are considered (Unterscheider, 2015). In a
Swedish study of 130,000 term births, the maternal and paternal birthweights
were estimated to account for 6 and 3 percent of variance in birthweight,
respectively (Mattsson, 2013). Additionally, as shown in Figure 47-3, most
adverse outcomes occur in newborns smaller than the 3rd percentile
(Manning, 1995). In a review of more than 80,000 singleton term births from
Parkland Hospital, McIntire and colleagues (1999) found that neonatal
mortality and most neonatal morbidity rates rose only at birthweights at or
below the 3rd percentile.

FIGURE 47-3 Relationship between birthweight percentile and perinatal mortality and morbidity rates
in 1560 small-for-gestational-age fetuses. A progressive increase in both mortality and morbidity rates is
observed as birthweight percentile decreases.

Small-but-normal neonates do not show evidence of the postnatal
metabolic derangements commonly associated with deficient fetal growth.
Moreover, these intrinsically small newborns remain significantly smaller
during surveillance to 2 years compared with appropriate-for-gestational-age
sized neonates. However, they do not show differences in measures of
metabolic risk that included glucose and insulin levels (Milovanovic, 2012).
As discussed later, true SGA newborns carry short- and long-term metabolic
risks.

■ Detection

Identification of truly impaired fetal growth remains a challenge. Ideally, it
involves detecting fetuses who meet the aforementioned definition and also
discerning those at risk for compromise. There are three main tenets:
1. The diagnosis relies on accurate gestational age assessment, optimally
confirmed with sonography in the first or early second trimester (Table 141, p. 248). If gestational age is uncertain and the diagnosis is suspected,
serial sonography is considered.
2. In low-risk pregnancies, the diagnosis is suspected based on clinical
abdominal examination after 24 weeks’ gestation in which the fundal
height lags by ≥3 cm. Sonography is then performed.
3. If the pregnancy is at risk for FGR, based on factors reviewed in the next
section, sonography is considered to assist with detection. This is
performed at approximately 32 weeks’ gestation. Care is individualized,
and in some cases sonography may be needed every 4 weeks to assess
fetal growth. One example of the latter is twin gestations, because fundal
height cannot evaluate individual twin growth (Chap. 48, p. 851).

Uterine Fundal Height
At each prenatal visit after 20 weeks’ gestation, fundal height is assessed to
screen for fetal-growth impairment (Chap. 10, p. 182). The measurement in
centimeters approximates the gestational age in weeks. The uterine size-date
discrepancy may be unrelated to fetal size. However, if the measurement
differs by ≥3 cm in the absence of an obvious explanation, sonography is
generally performed.
Serial fundal height measurement is the only routine screening for FGR
that is endorsed by the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
and Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine (2021a). International consensus
also indicates that carefully performed serial fundal height measurements are
a simple, safe, inexpensive, and reasonably accurate method to screen for
FGR (McCowan, 2018).
Limitations of fundal height screening are well documented. The overall
sensitivity of fundal height to detect FGR ranges from 11 to 25 percent
(Goetzinger, 2012; Grantz, 2021; Roex, 2012; Sparks, 2011). Detection rates
are lower in obese women than in those with normal BMI (Goetzinger,
2012).

Sonographic Assessment
Studies of routine screening for FGR using third-trimester sonography have
yielded variable results, and detection of SGA neonates ranges from <20
percent to >60 percent (Hammad, 2016; Monier, 2015; Sovio, 2015;
Wanyonyi, 2021). One reason for poor detection is that sonography
performed at any point in gestation will fail to detect pregnancies in which
FGR develops later. Also, it will miss those needing delivery for FGR
before the sonographic examination was performed. Compounding this is that
EFW is an imperfect metric. Given that most SGA neonates are
constitutionally small, it is not unexpected that the recurrence risk for FGR
approximates 20 percent. Many of these cases are merely smaller mothers
having smaller healthy children in successive pregnancies.
Routine third-trimester sonography to assess fetal growth is not
recommended because it has not been demonstrated to improve outcomes
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2021a). Indeed, a
Cochrane database analysis of 13 trials with 34,980 women found that
routine late-pregnancy ultrasound for a low-risk or an unselected population
was not associated with maternal or fetal benefit (Bricker, 2015).

■ Pathophysiology
Fetal-growth restriction is one of the “major obstetrical syndromes”
associated with defects in early placentation (Brosens, 2015). Mechanisms
leading to abnormal trophoblastic invasion are likely multifactorial, and both
vascular and immunological etiologies have been proposed. For example,
atrial natriuretic peptide converting enzyme, also known as corin, plays a
critical role in trophoblastic invasion and remodeling of the uterine spiral
arteries (Cui, 2012). These processes are impaired in corin-deficient mice,
which also develop evidence of preeclampsia. Moreover, mutations in the
gene for corin are reported in women with preeclampsia (Chen, 2015).
Several immunological abnormalities are associated with FGR. This
raises the prospect of maternal rejection of the “paternal semiallograft.”
Rudzinski and colleagues (2013) studied C4d, a component of complement
that is associated with humoral rejection of transplanted tissues. They found
this to be highly associated with chronic villitis—88 percent of cases versus
only 5 percent of controls—and with reduced placental weight. In a study of

10,204 placentas, chronic villitis was associated with placental
hypoperfusion, fetal acidemia, and FGR and its sequelae (Greer, 2012). Kim
and coworkers (2015) extensively reviewed chronic inflammatory placental
lesions and their association with fetal-growth restriction, preeclampsia, and
preterm birth.

■ Risk Factors
Risk factors for impaired fetal growth may be divided into three overlapping
categories or “compartments”: those in the mother, the fetus, or the placenta.
Some of these are depicted in Figure 47-4. Many causes of FGR are
prospectively considered risk factors, because impaired fetal growth is not
consistent in all affected women.

FIGURE 47-4 Risk factors and causes of impaired fetal growth centering on the mother, fetus, and
placenta.

Gestational Weight Gain and Nutrition

Maternal weight gain during pregnancy is positively correlated with fetal
size (Hutcheon, 2019). Among women with gestational diabetes, gestational
weight gain is also associated with both neonatal birthweight and adiposity
(Blackwell, 2016). In contrast, a gestational weight gain during the second
and third trimesters that is less than that recommended by the Institute of
Medicine is associated with increased risk of an SGA neonate in women of
all weight categories except class II or III obesity (Durie, 2011) (Chap. 10,
p. 183). The best-documented effect of famine on fetal growth was in the
winter of 1944 in Holland. For 6 months, the German occupation army
restricted dietary intake to 500 kcal/d for civilians, including pregnant
women. As a result, the average birthweight declined by 250 g (Stein, 1975).
Undernourished women may benefit from micronutrient supplementation.
In one study, almost 32,000 Indonesian women were randomly assigned to
receive micronutrient supplementation or only iron and folate tablets (Prado,
2012). Offspring of those receiving the supplement had lower risks of early
infant mortality and low birthweight and had improved childhood motor and
cognitive abilities. A Cochrane review of 20 trials involving 141,849
women concluded that supplementation of micronutrients may lower the risk
of low birthweight (Keats, 2019). The importance of antenatal vitamins and
trace metals is discussed in Chapter 10 (p. 185).

Socioeconomic Factors
The effect of social deprivation on birthweight is interconnected with
lifestyle factors such as smoking, alcohol or other substance abuse, and poor
nutrition. With appropriate modifying interventions, women with
psychosocial factors were significantly less likely to deliver a lowbirthweight newborn and also had fewer preterm births and other pregnancy
complications (Coker, 2012).
Food insecurity, late entry into prenatal care, and limited access to
healthcare are all contributors to fetal-growth restriction (Bryant, 2010).
Hall (2020) found that in a military population with equal access to
healthcare, racial differences in late entry to prenatal care and FGR persist.
An Australian study showed that the proportion of pregnancies affected by
fetal-growth restriction increased as levels of social disadvantage rose
(Langridge, 2011).

Vascular and Renal Disease
Especially when complicated by superimposed preeclampsia, chronic
vascular disease commonly restricts fetal growth (Chap. 53, p. 948).
Maternal vascular disease as evidenced by abnormal uterine artery Doppler
velocimetry early in pregnancy is associated with higher rates of
preeclampsia, SGA neonates, and delivery before 34 weeks (He, 2020;
Poon, 2019). Using Washington state birth certificate data, Leary and
colleagues (2012) found that maternal ischemic heart disease was associated
with a 16-percent risk of having an SGA newborn.
Chronic renal insufficiency is frequently associated with underlying
hypertension and vascular disease. Nephropathies are commonly
accompanied by restricted fetal growth (Cunningham, 1990; Feng, 2015;
Saliem, 2016). These relationships are considered further in Chapter 56 (p.
1004).

Pregestational Diabetes
Fetal-growth restriction in newborns of women with diabetes may be related
to congenital malformations or may follow substrate deprivation from
advanced maternal vascular disease (Chap. 60, p. 1072). The likelihood of
restricted growth increases with worsening White classification, particularly
nephropathy (Klemetti, 2016). That said, the prevalence of serious vascular
disease associated with diabetes in pregnancy is low.

Chronic Hypoxia
Conditions associated with chronic hypoxia include asthma, maternal
cyanotic heart disease, other chronic pulmonary disease, cigarette smoking,
and living at high altitude. When exposed to a chronically hypoxic
environment, some fetuses have significantly reduced birthweight. Smoking
causes a dose-dependent reduction in fetal growth, resulting in an average
birthweight 200 g below that of newborns of nonsmokers (D’Souza, 1981).
For each 1000-meter rise in altitude, the birthweight declined 150 g in a
study of more than 1.8 million births in Austria (Waldhoer, 2015).

Anemia
In most cases, maternal anemia does not impair fetal growth. Exceptions
include sickle-cell disease and other inherited anemias (Desai, 2017; Thame,

2016). Importantly, curtailed maternal blood-volume expansion is linked to
FGR (de Haas, 2017; Stott, 2017). This is further discussed in Chapter 4 (p.
59).

Antiphospholipid Syndrome
Adverse obstetrical outcomes including fetal-growth restriction have been
associated with three types of antiphospholipid antibodies: anticardiolipin
antibodies, lupus anticoagulant, and anti-β2 glycoprotein-I antibodies.
Mechanistically, a “two-hit” hypothesis suggests that initial endothelial
damage is then followed by intervillous placental thrombosis. More
specifically, oxidative damage to certain membrane proteins is followed by
antiphospholipid antibody binding, which leads to immune-complex
formation and ultimately to thrombosis (Giannakopoulos, 2013). This
syndrome is considered in detail in Chapters 55 (p. 979) and 62 (p. 1115).
Women with more than one type of antiphospholipid antibody are at higher
risk for FGR compared with those with only one antibody (Saccone, 2017).
Also, anti-β2 glycoprotein-I antibodies may have a stronger association
with FGR, particularly early-onset disease.

Placental, Cord, and Uterine Abnormalities
Several placental abnormalities are associated with poor fetal growth, which
is presumed secondary to uteroplacental insufficiency. These are discussed
further throughout Chapter 6 and include chronic placental abruption,
extensive infarction, chorioangioma, velamentous cord insertion, and
umbilical artery thrombosis. Abnormal placental implantation leading to
endothelial dysfunction may also limit fetal growth (Brosens, 2015). This
pathology is implicated in pregnancies complicated by preeclampsia (Chap.
40, p. 694). Last, some uterine malformations are linked to impaired fetal
growth (Chap. 3, p. 43).

Multifetal Gestation
Pregnancy with two or more fetuses is more likely to be complicated by
diminished growth of one or more fetuses compared with that of singletons
(Fig. 47-5). Serial sonography is recommended for this reason. With the
understanding that normal twin growth may be less than that of singletons, we
use a chorionicity-specific twin nomogram to diagnose FGR at Parkland

Hospital. Discordance in estimated fetal weight also is considered when
evaluating twin growth (Chap. 48, p. 851).

FIGURE 47-5 Birthweight and gestational age relationships in multifetal gestations without
malformations delivered at Parkland Hospital.

Medications and Other Substances
Fortunately, most medications do not affect fetal growth. Selected
medications and other substances that have been associated with FGR due to
fetotoxicity are discussed in Chapter 8. Examples include cyclophosphamide
and other antineoplastic drugs, significant lead exposure, and drugs such as
cocaine and methamphetamine. Alcohol and tobacco each have potent effects
on fetal growth. FGR is included among the diagnostic criteria for fetal
alcohol syndrome, and cigarette smoking is associated with a two- to
threefold increased risk of FGR (Werler, 1997).

Maternal and Fetal Infections
Viral, bacterial, protozoan, and spirochetal infections have been implicated
in up to 5 percent of FGR cases and are discussed in Chapters 67 and 68.
The best known of these are rubella and cytomegalovirus infection. Both
promote calcifications in the fetus that are associated with cell death, and
infection earlier in pregnancy correlates with worse outcomes. Toda and
colleagues (2015) described a Vietnamese epidemic in which 39 percent of

292 term newborns with congenital rubella syndrome were low birthweight.
In one study of 238 primary cytomegalovirus infections, no severe cases
were observed when infection occurred after 14 weeks’ gestation (Picone,
2013). These investigators later identified sonographic findings in 30 of 69
cases of congenital infection, and growth restriction was noted in 30 percent
of these 30 cases (Picone, 2014).
Tuberculosis and syphilis also are associated with poor fetal growth.
Both extrapulmonary and pulmonary tuberculosis are linked with low
birthweight (Chap. 54, p. 965). Sobhy (2017) analyzed 13 studies that
included a total of 3384 women with active tuberculosis. The odds ratio was
1.7 for low birthweight. The etiology is uncertain, however, the adverse
effects on maternal health, compounded by effects of poor nutrition and
poverty, are important (Jana, 2012). Congenital syphilis is more common,
and paradoxically, the placenta is almost always larger and heavier than
normal due to edema and perivascular inflammation (Chap. 68, p. 1208).
Congenital syphilis is strongly linked with preterm birth and thus lowbirthweight newborns (Sheffield, 2002).
Congenital infection with toxoplasma gondii is associated with FGR.
Capobiango (2014) described 31 Brazilian pregnancies complicated by
congenital toxoplasmosis. Only 13 percent were treated antepartum for
toxoplasmosis, and low birthweight complicated nearly 40 percent of all the
pregnancies. Congenital malaria may similarly cause low birthweight and
poor fetal growth. Briand and colleagues (2016) emphasize the importance
of prophylaxis early in pregnancy for women at risk.

Congenital Malformations
In a classic review of more than 13,000 fetuses with major malformations
and chromosomal abnormalities, the rate of growth restriction was double
the population prevalence (Khoury, 1988). The birth defect most strongly
linked with FGR is gastroschisis. Nelson (2015) reviewed 111 fetuses with
gastroschisis and found that a third had birthweights <10th percentile.
Congenital cardiac abnormalities are also associated with a slight increase
in FGR risk. In a recent review of 1789 singleton neonates with isolated
congenital cardiac abnormalities, the prevalence of SGA was 13 percent,
which was 3 percent higher than the general-population risk (Ghanchi, 2021).
With few exceptions, the identification of growth restriction in the setting of a
structural malformation further increases the risk for an underlying genetic

syndrome. If not already performed, amniocentesis with chromosomal
microarray analysis should be offered.

Genetic Abnormalities
Many genetic syndromes are strongly linked with prenatal-growth
impairment or postnatal failure to thrive. Among liveborn neonates with
autosomal trisomies, trisomy 21 is associated with an SGA prevalence of 15
to 30 percent (Herrera, 2020; Khoury, 1988). With trisomies 13 and 18, the
risk of SGA is significantly greater, 50 percent and >80 percent, respectively
(Khoury, 1988). In trisomy 18, the combination of fetal abnormalities plus
FGR and hydramnios is particularly common. The crown-rump length in
fetuses with trisomy 18 and 13, unlike that with trisomy 21, is also typically
shorter than expected (Bahado-Singh, 1997; Schemmer, 1997). Poor fetal
growth similarly complicates Turner syndrome, and the severity correlates
with increasing haploinsufficiency of the short arm of the X chromosome
(Fiot, 2016). In contrast, poor growth is not characteristic of an increased
number of X chromosomes (Ottesen, 2010; Wigby, 2016). Discussed in
Chapter 16 (p. 318), confined placental mosaicism is a recognized cause of
FGR.

■ Management
If FGR is detected, efforts are made to assess the fetal condition and search
for possible causes. The risk for stillbirth is increased, and early-onset
growth restriction is especially problematic. General tenets of management
include serial evaluation of fetal growth every 3 weeks and at least weekly
evaluation of amnionic fluid and umbilical artery Doppler velocimetry. A
fetus with slow but progressing EFW is more reassuring than one that has
plateaued growth. This is supplemented with antepartum evaluation of fetal
well-being, which is usually nonstress testing or biophysical profile
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2021a) (Chap. 20, p.
387). Consideration is also given to performing a detailed fetal anatomic
survey and amniocentesis to assess for underlying genetic abnormalities or
infection—particularly with early-onset FGR. A management algorithm is
shown in Figure 47-6.

FIGURE 47-6 Algorithm for management of fetal-growth restriction. EFW = estimated fetal weight;
FLM = fetal lung maturity; NST = nonstress test; TORCH = toxoplasmosis, other, rubella,
cytomegalovirus, herpesvirus; UA = umbilical artery.

Delivery timing balances the risks of fetal death with the hazards of
preterm birth. Several multicenter studies address these problems, but
unfortunately, none has elucidated the optimal timing of delivery. For the
preterm fetus, the only randomized trial of delivery timing is the Growth
Restriction Intervention Trial (GRIT) (Thornton, 2004). This trial involved
548 women between 24 and 36 weeks’ gestation. Women were randomly
assigned to immediate delivery or to delayed delivery until the situation

worsened. The primary outcome was perinatal death or disability after
reaching age 2 years. Mortality rates did not differ through 2 years of age.
Moreover, children aged 6 to 13 years did not show clinically significant
differences between the two groups (Walker, 2011). The Disproportionate
Intrauterine Growth Intervention Trial at Term (DIGITAT) study examined the
delivery timing of growth-restricted fetuses who were 36 weeks’ gestation or
older. The 321 enrolled women were randomly assigned to labor induction
or to expectant management. Composite neonatal morbidity rates did not
differ, except that neonatal admissions were lower after 38 weeks’ gestation
in a secondary analysis (Boers, 2010, 2012). Secondary analyses of
DIGITAT did not identify a clear subgroup that benefited from labor
induction, and neurodevelopmental and behavioral outcomes at age 2 were
similar in both groups (Tajik, 2014; Van Wyk, 2012).

Doppler Velocimetry
Umbilical artery Doppler flow studies are central to the evaluation and
management of the fetus with growth restriction (Chap. 14, p. 262).
Abnormalities represent the negative progression from fetal adaptation to
failure. Specifically, initially increased impedance to flow in the umbilical
artery may progress to absent end-diastolic flow and then reversed enddiastolic flow (Fig. 47-7). This negative progression correlates with
hypoxia, acidosis, and fetal death. In one prospective series of 1116 fetuses
with EFW <10th percentile, only 1 percent of those with normal umbilical
artery Doppler studies had adverse outcomes compared with 12 percent of
fetuses with Doppler abnormalities (O’Dwyer, 2014). The stillbirth risk in
the setting of absent and reversed end-diastolic flow is 7 percent and 19
percent, respectively (Caradeux, 2018). Because of these findings, the
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2021a,b) and Society
for Maternal-Fetal Medicine (2020) recommend serial umbilical artery
Doppler studies in the management of FGR.

FIGURE 47-7 Doppler velocity waveforms. A. Normal waveform with normal S/D ratio. B.
Increased impedance to flow with abnormally elevated S/D ratio. C. Absent end-diastolic flow. D.
Reversed end-diastolic flow.

Doppler abnormalities in other vessels may convey information
regarding pathophysiology, but interrogation of these is not recommended for
routine management of the pregnancy complicated by FGR (American
college of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2021a; Society for MaternalFetal Medicine, 2020). Doppler abnormalities of the ductus venosus (Fig.
14-12, p. 264) reflect increased central venous pressure from decreased
cardiac compliance and higher right ventricular end-diastolic pressure.
Fetuses with abnormal ductus venosus Doppler flow have a 20-percent risk
for stillbirth, and this increases to 46 percent in cases with a reversed Awave (Caradeux, 2018). Second, pulsatile flow in the umbilical vein
waveform (Fig. 14-12) indicates cardiac dysfunction. Last, cerebral
vasodilation is the fetal adaptative response to hypoxemia in the setting of
growth restriction. The cerebroplacental ratio (CPR)—defined as middle
cerebral artery pulsatility index divided by umbilical artery pulsatility index
—is a measure of this adaptation and may be abnormal in severe cases of
FGR. An abnormal CPR <1 has been associated with greater risk for earlier
delivery, lower birthweight, cesarean delivery, neonatal intensive care unit
admission, and perinatal death (DeVore, 2015; Flood, 2014). However, a
metaanalysis of 18,731 fetuses found the CPR was not predictive of adverse
perinatal outcomes (Vollgraff, 2021).

Management of the Near-term Fetus
Delivery of a suspected growth-restricted fetus with normal umbilical artery
Doppler velocimetry, normal amnionic fluid volume, and reassuring fetal
testing can likely be deferred until 37 to 38 weeks’ gestation (see Fig. 47-6).
Expectant management can be guided using antepartum evaluation of fetal
well-being described in Chapter 20. If oligohydramnios is present, delivery
between 360/7 and 376/7 weeks’ gestation is recommended (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2021c; Society for MaternalFetal Medicine, 2020). With a normal fetal heart rate pattern, vaginal
delivery is planned. Notably, some of these fetuses do not tolerate labor.

Management of the Fetus Remote from Term

If growth restriction is identified in a fetus before 34 weeks, and amnionic
fluid volume and fetal surveillance findings are normal, observation is
recommended. As long as interval fetal growth and fetal surveillance test
results are normal, pregnancy is allowed to continue (see Fig. 47-6).
Reassessment of fetal growth is typically made no sooner than 3 weeks later.
Weekly outpatient assessment of umbilical artery Doppler velocimetry and
amnionic fluid volume is combined with fetal well-being testing. If umbilical
artery Doppler studies indicate absent or reversed end-diastolic flow,
inpatient surveillance is undertaken. During hospitalization, more frequent
sonographic evaluations and antenatal testing of fetal well-being and close
proximity to labor and delivery are advantages.
With growth restriction remote from term, no specific treatment
ameliorates the condition. Evidence does not support diminished activity or
bed rest to accelerate growth or improve outcomes. Nutrient
supplementation, attempts at plasma volume expansion, oxygen therapy,
antihypertensive drugs, heparin, and aspirin are all ineffective (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2021a).
Management decisions hinge on assessment of the relative risks of fetal
death during expectant management versus the risks from preterm delivery.
Reassuring results from fetal well-being tests may allow observation with
continued maturation. However, long-term neurological outcome, which
theoretically may suffer from additional weeks in an inhospitable intrauterine
environment, is a concern (Baschat, 2014; Lees, 2015; Thornton, 2004).
Baschat and associates (2009) showed that neurodevelopmental outcome at 2
years in growth-restricted fetuses was best predicted by birthweight and
gestational age. Doppler abnormalities are generally not associated with
poor childhood cognitive developmental scores among low-birthweight
fetuses delivered in the third trimester (Llurba, 2013). These findings
emphasize that adverse neurodevelopmental outcomes cannot always be
predicted.

■ Intrapartum Management
When lagging fetal growth is the result of placental insufficiency due to poor
maternal perfusion or reduction of functional placenta, the fetal condition
may be aggravated by labor. Equally important, oligohydramnios raises the

likelihood of cord compression during labor. For these and other reasons, the
frequency of cesarean delivery is increased.
The risk of neonatal hypoxia or meconium aspiration is also greater.
Thus, care for the newborn should be provided immediately by an attendant
who can skillfully clear the airway and ventilate a neonate as needed (Chap.
32, p. 586). The severely growth-restricted newborn is particularly
susceptible to hypothermia and may also develop other metabolic
derangements such as hypoglycemia, polycythemia, and hyperviscosity. Risk
is greatest at the lowest extremes of birthweight (Baschat, 2009, 2014;
Llurba, 2013).

■ Outcomes
Lessons learned from SGA neonates inform concerns about FGR. More than
50 years ago, Battaglia and Lubchenco (1967) classified SGA neonates as
those whose weights were below the 10th percentile for their gestational age.
The mortality rate of SGA neonates born at 38 weeks was 1 percent
compared with 0.2 percent in those with larger birthweights. More recent
data also indicate that the overall stillbirth rate among SGA neonates
approximates 1 percent, which is twice as high as the population prevalence
(Getahun, 2007).
The risk for abnormal neurological development also is greater in SGA
neonates. In an analysis of nearly 3000 newborns born before 27 weeks’
gestation, those weighing <10th percentile had a nearly fourfold higher risk
of neonatal death or neurodevelopmental impairment and a nearly threefold
greater risk of cerebral palsy compared with non-SGA neonates (De Jesus,
2013). In another analysis of more than 91,000 otherwise uncomplicated
pregnancies, newborns with birthweights <5th percentile had a higher risk of
low 5-minute Apgar score, respiratory distress, necrotizing enterocolitis, and
neonatal sepsis than appropriate-weight neonates. The risks of stillbirth and
neonatal death were sixfold and fourfold higher, respectively (MendezFigueroa, 2016).
Newborns at the lowest birthweight percentiles are at greatest risk for
adverse outcome. In one study of more than 44,561 neonates, only 14 percent
of those weighing <1st percentile at birth survived to discharge (Griffin,
2015). Poor motor, cognitive, language and attention, and behavioral

outcomes in growth-restricted newborns unfortunately persist into early
childhood and adolescence (Baschat, 2014; Levine, 2015; Rogne, 2015).

Early-onset Growth Restriction
Perinatal morbidities are further increased in the 30 percent of FGR
pregnancies diagnosed prior to 32 weeks’ gestation (Savchev, 2014). Thus,
this gestational age is used to demarcate early-onset from late-onset growth
restriction (Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, 2020). Early-onset FGR is
typically more severe and more commonly associated with placental
dysfunction and maternal hypertension than late-onset growth restriction
(Aviram, 2019; Dall’Asta, 2017). Pregnancies with early-onset FGR have
greater rates of umbilical artery Doppler abnormalities compared with those
with late onset. Similar to pregnancies complicated by preeclampsia,
increased maternal serum levels of antiangiogenic factors that include
soluble vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 1 (sVEGFR-1) and
soluble fms-like tyrosine kinase 1 (sFlt-1) are reported in pregnancies
complicated by early-onset growth restriction (Kingdom, 2018;
Korzeniewski, 2016) (Chap. 40, p. 694).

Barker Hypothesis
Thirty years ago, Barker (1992) hypothesized that adult mortality and
morbidity are related to fetal and infant health. This includes both under- and
overgrowth. In the context of FGR, numerous reports describe a relationship
between suboptimal fetal nutrition and a higher risk of subsequent adult
hypertension, atherosclerosis, type 2 diabetes, and metabolic derangement
(Colella, 2018; Jornayvaz, 2016). The degree to which low birthweight
mediates adult disease is controversial, as weight gain in early life also
appears important (Breij, 2014; Kerkhof, 2012; McCloskey, 2016).
Evidence suggests that FGR may affect organ development, particularly
that of the heart. Individuals with low birthweight demonstrate cardiac
structural changes and dysfunction that persist through childhood,
adolescence, and adulthood (Crispi, 2018). In one study, 80 infants who
were born SGA before 34 weeks’ gestation were compared at 6 months with
80 normally grown infants (Cruz-Lemini, 2016). The ventricle in SGA
infants was more globular, resulting in systolic and diastolic dysfunction. In
another study, echocardiography in 418 adolescents showed that low

birthweight was associated with a thicker left ventricular posterior wall
(Hietalampi, 2012). However, these findings have unclear long-term
significance (Cohen, 2016).
Growth restriction is also associated with postnatal structural and
functional renal changes. Luyckx and Brenner (2015) concluded that both low
and high birthweight, maternal obesity, and gestational diabetes adversely
affect in-utero development of the kidney and its health into adulthood.
However, other variables that include childhood nutrition, acute kidney
injury, excessive childhood weight gain, and obesity also worsen long-term
renal function.

■ Prevention
Ideally, prevention begins before conception. Maternal medical conditions
are treated, and medications are modified to help lower FGR risks. Smoking
cessation is critical. Other risk factors are tailored to the maternal condition,
such as antimalarial prophylaxis for women living in endemic areas and
correction of nutritional deficiencies. Treatment of mild to moderate
hypertension does not reduce the incidence of SGA newborns (Chap. 53, p.
950).
Currently, no pharmacologic therapies prevent growth restriction.
Considerable study of low-dose aspirin therapy has not demonstrated
consistent benefit in low-risk pregnancies. Daily aspirin therapy did not
reduce the risk for SGA neonates in a randomized trial of 1700 women
(Rolnik, 2017). Two large metaanalyses involving more than 20,000 women
did find that low-dose aspirin was associated with a significantly lower risk
of FGR, whether initiated prior to or after 16 weeks’ gestation (Meher, 2017;
Roberge, 2017). A Cochrane database analysis showed a small reduction in
the risk of SGA neonates with maternal aspirin therapy (Duley, 2019).
However, these studies included women at risk for preeclampsia, and the
modest decrease in the risk for growth restriction was a secondary finding.
Because evidence in women without risk factors for preeclampsia is lacking,
aspirin therapy for the prevention of FGR is not recommended (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020a, 2021a; Society for
Maternal-Fetal Medicine, 2020)

FETAL MACROSOMIA
■ Definition
The term macrosomia is used rather imprecisely to describe a fetus whose
estimated weight exceeds a threshold—typically 4000 g, 4500 g, or even
5000 g (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019a).
Although obstetricians generally agree that neonates weighing <4000 g are
not excessively large, a similar consensus has not been reached for the
definition of macrosomia.
Large for gestational age (LGA) denotes a fetus or newborn whose
weight exceeds the 90th percentile for gestational age. Similar to SGA, the
term LGA does not imply that growth is necessarily abnormal. Indeed, most
such neonates are simply constitutionally larger than their peers. The 90th
percentile for birthweight at 39 weeks’ gestation approximates 3900 g
(Duryea, 2014). Thus, most LGA neonates would not meet any of the
common definitions of macrosomia.
In the United States in 2019, 6.4 percent of all newborns weighed 4000
to 4499 g; 0.9 percent weighed 4500 to 4999 g; and 0.1 percent were born
weighing ≥5000 g (Martin, 2021). Similarly, during a 30-year period at
Parkland Hospital, during which more than 350,000 singletons were born,
only 1.4 percent of neonates weighed ≥4500 g (Table 47-2). We are of the
view that the upper limit of fetal growth, above which growth can be deemed
abnormal, is likely to be two standard deviations above the mean. This
represents perhaps 3 percent of births. At 40 weeks, such a threshold would
correspond to approximately 4500 g.
TABLE 47-2. Birthweight Distribution of 354,509 Liveborn Infants at
Parkland Hospital between 1988 and 2012

■ Detection
Because current methods fail to accurately estimate excessive fetal size,
macrosomia cannot be definitively diagnosed until delivery (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019a). Inaccuracy in estimates
of fetal weight, by either fundal height measurement or sonography, are often
attributable to maternal obesity. In one study of 502 patients with
sonographic estimated fetal weights >4000 g within 2 weeks of delivery, the
risk of birthweight overestimation was >50 percent (Zafman, 2020). Of those
who underwent cesarean delivery for suspected LGA, almost 30 percent
delivered a neonate weighing <4000 g.

■ Pathophysiology
Particularly in women with diabetes and elevated cord blood levels of
insulin-like growth factor 1, fetal macrosomia is associated with greater
neonatal fat mass and morphological heart changes. Pedersen (1954) first
proposed that hyperglycemia leads to fetal hyperinsulinemia and fetal
overgrowth. This has been extended to organ dysmorphia, for example,
increased interventricular septal thickness in neonates of mothers with
gestational diabetes (Aman, 2011; Garcia-Flores, 2011). The
cardiopulmonary vasculature also is adversely affected by diabetes in
pregnancy. In 3277 cases of persistent pulmonary hypertension of the

newborn, maternal obesity, diabetes, and both deficient and excessive fetal
growth were independent risk factors (Steurer, 2017). Long-term metabolic
consequences of fetal macrosomia in the setting of maternal obesity are
discussed in Chapter 51 (p. 907).

■ Risk Factors
Some factors associated with fetal macrosomia are listed in Table 47-3.
Many are interrelated. Advancing age usually correlates with multiparity and
risk for diabetes, and obesity is similarly associated with diabetes. In one
study, the birth prevalence of macrosomia exceeded 24 percent among obese
women in China, and macrosomia rates were approximately 2.5-fold higher
for prolonged pregnancy and gestational diabetes (Wang, 2017). As shown in
Table 47-2, maternal diabetes is strongly associated with neonates weighing
>4000 g. In a prospective study of 682 consecutive pregnancies complicated
by diabetes, women with type 1 diabetes were significantly more likely than
women with type 2 diabetes to have a neonate weighing above the 90th and
97.7th percentiles (Murphy, 2011). Higher third-trimester glucose
concentration correlates with fetal macrosomia, and hemoglobin A1c and
fasting glucose values are independent predictors of macrosomia risk
(Cyganek, 2017). Notably, maternal diabetes is associated with only a small
percentage of the total number of LGA newborns.
TABLE 47-3. Risk Factors for Fetal Macrosomia

■ Management

Several interventions have been proposed to interdict suspected or
“impending” fetal overgrowth. Exercise in pregnancy is beneficial to the
mother, does not increase the risk for growth impairment, and decreases
macrosomia risk. One metaanalysis of 28 studies involving 5322 women
concluded that exercise reduces the risk of an LGA newborn or birthweight
>4000 g without raising the risk of an SGA neonate or birthweight <2500 g
(Wiebe, 2015). Similarly, others have concluded that aerobic exercise
increases the likelihood of a normal weight neonate (Di Mascio, 2016;
Perales, 2016).
For women with diabetes, insulin therapy and glycemic control may
lower the prevalence of neonatal macrosomia but have not consistently
translated into reduced cesarean delivery rates. Fetal macrosomia,
irrespective of the diagnosis of diabetes mellitus, is strongly associated with
maternal obesity and excessive gestational weight gain (Durie, 2011; Durst,
2016; Harper, 2015). Currently recommended weight gains for pregnancy
according to maternal BMI are described in Chapter 10 (p. 183).

“Prophylactic” Labor Induction
Some clinicians have induced labor when fetal macrosomia was suspected in
nondiabetic women. The rationale for this approach was to obviate further
fetal growth and, in theory, reduce the risk of delivery complications or
cesarean delivery. In a systematic review of 11 studies of expectant
management compared with labor induction for suspected macrosomia, labor
induction significantly increased cesarean delivery rates without improving
perinatal outcomes (Sanchez-Ramos, 2002). In contrast, Magro-Malosso and
colleagues (2017) performed a metaanalysis of four randomized trials
involving 1190 women and concluded that labor induction at ≥38 weeks’
gestation for suspected macrosomia significantly reduces the frequency of
fetal overgrowth and fractures. In one of these studies, 822 women with
suspected LGA fetuses were randomly assigned either to early-term delivery
or to expectant management (Boulvain, 2015). There was a higher rate of
vaginal delivery that was marginally significant and a lower composite
measure of morbidity. The authors cautioned that any benefits should be
balanced with the risks of early-term labor induction and delivery. Namely, a
review of early-term births indicates that elective delivery before 39 weeks’
gestation does not improve maternal outcomes and is associated with worse
neonatal outcomes (Tita, 2016). We agree with the American College of

Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019a, 2020b) that current evidence does
not support a policy for early labor induction or delivery before 39 weeks’
gestation.

Elective Cesarean Delivery
With the delivery of macrosomic neonates, shoulder dystocia and its
attendant risks described in Chapter 27 (p. 501) are major concerns. That
said, 9 percent of these injuries still follow cesarean delivery (Johnson,
2020). Therefore, planned cesarean delivery on the basis of suspected
macrosomia to prevent brachial plexopathy is an unreasonable strategy in the
general population (Chauhan, 2005). Ecker and coworkers (1997) analyzed
80 cases of brachial plexus injury in 77,616 consecutive newborns at
Brigham and Women’s Hospital. They concluded that an excessive number of
otherwise unnecessary cesarean deliveries would be needed to prevent a
single brachial plexus injury in neonates born to women without diabetes.
Others echoed these sentiments in their analysis of nondiabetic mothers
(Rouse, 1996; Van der Looven, 2020).
Conversely, planned cesarean delivery may be a reasonable strategy for
diabetic women with an estimated fetal weight >4250 or >4500 g. Conway
and Langer (1998) described a protocol of routine cesarean delivery for
sonographic estimates of ≥4250 g in diabetic women. This management
significantly lowered the shoulder dystocia rate from 2.4 to 1.1 percent.
In summary, we agree with the American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists that elective delivery for the fetus that is suspected to be
overgrown is inadvisable, particularly before 39 weeks’ gestation. Last, we
also conclude that elective cesarean delivery is not indicated when estimated
fetal weight is <5000 g among women without diabetes and <4500 g among
women with diabetes (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists,
2019a, 2020b).

■ Outcomes
The adverse consequences of excessive fetal growth are considerable.
Neonates with a birthweight of at least 4000 g have cesarean delivery rates
exceeding 50 percent. This is particularly true with maternal obesity or
diabetes or with birthweights >5000 g (Cordero, 2015; Crosby, 2017; Hehir,

2015). Neonatal morbidity is higher in LGA neonates compared with those
with lower birthweights. Macrosomic newborns have higher rates of
shoulder dystocia, obstetrical brachial plexus injuries, and birth fractures
(Beta, 2019; Chauhan, 2017). Rates of shoulder dystocia vary greatly and can
reach nearly 30 percent for macrosomic neonates when maternal diabetes is
comorbid (Cordero, 2015). In general obstetrical populations that include
diabetic mothers, dystocia rates are at least 5 percent for neonates with
birthweights ≥5000 g (Crosby, 2017; Hehir, 2015). The risk for stillbirth is
greater with macrosomia, and this risk rises with increasing birth weight
(Salihu, 2020). Rates of postpartum hemorrhage, perineal laceration, and
maternal infection, which are related complications, also are higher in
mothers delivering overgrown newborns. Table 47-4 shows maternal and
neonatal outcomes by birthweight for neonates >4000 g delivered at Parkland
Hospital.
TABLE 47-4. Maternal and Fetal Outcomes for 208,090 Pregnancies
Delivered at Parkland Hospital from 1998 through 2012

REFERENCES
Aman J, Hansson U, Ostlund I, et al: Increased fat mass and cardiac septal hypertrophy in newborn
infants of mothers with well-controlled diabetes during pregnancy. Neonatology 100(2):147, 2011
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Macrosomia. Practice Bulletin No. 216,
December 2019a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Methods for estimating the due date. Committee
Opinion No. 700, May 2017, Reaffirmed 2019b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Low-dose aspirin use during pregnancy.
Committee Opinion No. 743, June 2018, Reaffirmed 2020a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Shoulder dystocia. Practice Bulletin No. 178,
May 2017, Reaffirmed 2020b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Fetal growth restriction. Practice Bulletin No.
227, January 2021a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Indications for outpatient antenatal fetal
surveillance. Committee Opinion No. 828, May 2021b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Medically indicated late-preterm and early-term
deliveries. Committee Opinion No. 831, January 2021c
Aviram A, Sherman C, Kingdom J, et al: Defining early vs late fetal growth restriction by placental
pathology. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 98(3):365, 2019
Bahado-Singh RO, Lynch L, Deren O, et al: First-trimester growth restriction and fetal aneuploidy: the
effect of type of aneuploidy and gestational age. Am J Obstet Gynecol 176(5):976, 1997
Barker DJ (ed): Fetal and Infant Origins of Adult Disease. London, BMJ Publishing, 1992
Baschat AA: Neurodevelopment after fetal growth restriction. Fetal Diagn Ther 36:136, 2014
Baschat AA, Viscardi RM, Hussey-Gardner B, et al: Infant neurodevelopment following fetal growth
restriction: relationship with antepartum surveillance parameters. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol
33(1):44, 2009
Battaglia FC, Lubchenco LO: A practical classification of newborn infants by weight and gestational
age. J Pediatr 71(2):159, 1967
Beta J, Khan N, Khalil A, et al: Maternal and neonatal complications of fetal macrosomia: systematic
review and meta-analysis. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 54(3):308-318, 2019
Blackwell SC, Landon MB, Mele L, et al: Relationship between excessive gestational weight gain and
neonatal adiposity in women with mild gestational diabetes mellitus. Obstet Gynecol 128:1325, 2016
Blue NR, Beddow ME, Savabi M, et al: A comparison of methods for the diagnosis of fetal growth
restriction between the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists and the American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Obstet Gynecol 131(5):835, 2018
Boers KE, van Wyk L, van der Post JA, et al: Neonatal morbidity after induction vs expectant
monitoring in intrauterine growth restriction at term: a subanalysis of the DIGITAT RCT. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 206:344.e1, 2012
Boers KE, Vijgen SM, Bijlenga D, et al: Induction versus expectant monitoring for intrauterine growth
restriction at term: randomised equivalence trial (DIGITAT). BMJ 341:c7087, 2010
Boulvain M, Senat MV, Perrotin F, et al: Induction of labour versus expectant management for largefor-date fetuses: a randomised controlled trial. Lancet 385:2600, 2015
Breij LM, Kerkhof GF, Hokken-Koelega AC: Accelerated infant weight gain and risk for nonalcoholic
fatty liver disease in early adulthood. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 99:1189, 2014

Briand V, Saal J, Ghafari C, et al: Fetal growth restriction is associated with malaria in pregnancy: a
prospective longitudinal study in Benin. J Infect Dis 214:417, 2016
Bricker L, Medley N, Pratt JJ: Routine ultrasound in late pregnancy (after 24 weeks’ gestation).
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 6:CD001451, 2015
Briffa JF, McAinch AJ, Romano T, et al: Leptin in pregnancy and development: a contributor to
adulthood disease? Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 308:E335, 2015
Brosens I, Benagiano G, Brosens JJ: The potential perinatal origin of placentation disorders in the young
primigravida. Am J Obstet Gynecol 212:580, 2015
Bryant AS, Worjoloh A, Caughey AB, et al: Racial/ethnic disparities in obstetric outcomes and care:
prevalence and determinants. Am J Obstet Gynecol 202(4):335, 2010
Calabuig-Navarro V, Puchowicz M, Glazebrook P, et al: Effect of ω-3 supplementation on placental lipid
metabolism in overweight and obese women. Am J Clin Nutr 103:1064, 2016
Capobiango JD, Breganó RM, Navarro IT, et al: Congenital toxoplasmosis in a reference center of
Paraná, Southern Brazil. Braz J Infect Dis 18:364, 2014
Caradeux J, Martinez-Portilla RJ, Basuki TR, et al: Risk of fetal death in growth-restricted fetuses with
umbilical and/or ductus venosus absent or reversed end-diastolic velocities before 34 weeks of
gestation: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 218(2S):S774, 2018
Chauhan SP, Grobman WA, Gherman RA, et al: Suspicion and treatment of the macrosomic fetus: a
review. Am J Obstet Gynecol 193(2):332, 2005
Chauhan SP, Rice MM, Grobman WA, et al: Neonatal morbidity of small- and large-for-gestational-age
neonates born at term in uncomplicated pregnancies. Obstet Gynecol 130(3):511, 2017
Chen S, Cao P, Dong N, et al: PCSK6-mediated corin activation is essential for normal blood pressure.
Nat Med 21:1048, 2015
Chiossi G, Pedroza C, Costantine MM, et al: Customized versus population-based growth charts to
identify neonates at risk of adverse outcomes: a systematic review and Bayesian meta-analysis of
observational studies. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 50(2):156, 2017
Cohen E, Wong FY, Horne RS, Yiallourou SR: Intrauterine growth restriction: impact on cardiovascular
development and function throughout infancy. Pediatr Res 79:821, 2016
Coker AL, Garcia LS, Williams CM, et al: Universal psychosocial screening and adverse pregnancy
outcomes in an academic obstetric clinic. Obstet Gynecol 119(6):1180, 2012
Colella M, Frérot A, Novais AR, et al: Neonatal and long-term consequences of fetal growth restriction.
Curr Pediatr Rev 14(4):212, 2018
Conway DL, Langer O: Elective delivery of infants with macrosomia in diabetic women: reduced
shoulder dystocia versus increased cesarean deliveries. Am J Obstet Gynecol 178(5):922, 1998
Cordero L, Paetow P, Landon MB, et al: Neonatal outcomes of macrosomic infants of diabetic and nondiabetic mothers. J Neonatal Perinatal Med 8:105, 2015
Costantine MM, Mele L, Landon MB, et al: Customized versus population approach for evaluation of
fetal overgrowth. Am J Perinatol 30:565, 2013
Crispi F, Miranda J, Gratacós E: Long-term cardiovascular consequences of fetal growth restriction:
biology, clinical implications, and opportunities for prevention of adult disease. Am J Obstet Gynecol
218(2S):S869, 2018
Crosby DA, Ahmed S, Razley A, et al: Obstetric and neonatal characteristics of pregnancy and delivery
for infant birthweight ≥5.0 kg. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 30(24):2961, 2017
Crume TL, Shapiro AL, Brinton JT, et al: Maternal fuels and metabolic measures during pregnancy and
neonatal body composition: the healthy start study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 100:1672, 2015

Cruz-Lemini M, Crispi F, Valenzuela-Alcaraz B, et al: Fetal cardiovascular remodeling persists at 6
months in infants with intrauterine growth restriction. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 48:349, 2016
Cui Y, Wang W, Dong N, et al: Role of corin in trophoblast invasion and uterine spiral artery remodelling
in pregnancy. Nature 484(7393):246, 2012
Cunningham FG, Cox SM, Harstad TW, et al: Chronic renal disease and pregnancy outcome. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 163(2):453, 1990
Cyganek K, Skupien J, Katra B, et al: Risk of macrosomia remains glucose-dependent in a cohort of
women with pregestational type 1 diabetes and good glycemic control. Endocrine 55(2):447, 2017
Dall’Asta A, Brunelli V, Prefumo F, et al: Early onset fetal growth restriction. Matern Health Neonatol
Perinatol 3:2, 2017
de Haas S, Ghossein-Doha C, van Kuijk SM, et al: Physiologic adaptation of maternal plasma volume
during pregnancy: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 49(2):177,
2017
De Jesus LC, Pappas A, Shankaran S, et al: Outcomes of small for gestational age infants born at <27
weeks’ gestation. J Pediatr 163:55.e1, 2013
Delhaes F, Giza SA, Koreman T, et al: Altered maternal and placental lipid metabolism and fetal fat
development in obesity: current knowledge and advances in non-invasive assessment. Placenta.
69:118, 2018
Desai G, Anand A, Shah P, et al: Sickle cell disease and pregnancy outcomes: a study of the
community-based hospital in a tribal block of Gujarat, India. J Health Popul Nutr 36:3, 2017
DeVore GR: The importance of the cerebroplacental ratio in the evaluation of fetal well-being in SGA
and AGA fetuses. Am J Obstet Gynecol 213(1):5, 2015
Di Mascio D, Magro-Malosso R, Saccone G, et al: Exercise during pregnancy in normal-weight women
and risk of preterm birth: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Am
J Obstet Gynecol 215(5):561, 2016
D’Souza SW, Black P, Richards B: Smoking in pregnancy: associations with skinfold thickness, maternal
weight gain, and fetal size at birth. Br Med J (Clin Res Ed) 282(6277):1661, 1981
Duley L, Meher S, Hunter KE, et al: Antiplatelet agents for preventing pre-eclampsia and its
complications. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2019(10):CD004659, 2019
Durie DE, Thornburg LL, Glantz JC: Effect of second-trimester and third-trimester rate of gestational
weight gain on maternal and neonatal outcomes. Obstet Gynecol 118(3):569, 2011
Durst JK, Sutton AL, Cliver SP, et al: Impact of gestational weight gain on perinatal outcomes in obese
women. Am J Perinatol 33:849, 2016
Duryea EL, Hawkins JS, McIntire DD, et al: A revised birth weight reference for the United States.
Obstet Gynecol 124:16, 2014
Ecker JL, Greenberg JA, Norwitz ER, et al: Birthweight as a predictor of brachial plexus injury. Obstet
Gynecol 89(5 pt 1):643, 1997
Feng Z, Minard C, Raghavan R: Pregnancy outcomes in advanced kidney disease. Clin Nephrol 83:272;
2015
Fiot E, Zenaty D, Boizeau P, et al: X-chromosome gene dosage as a determinant of impaired pre and
postnatal growth and adult height in Turner syndrome. Eur J Endocrinol 174:281, 2016
Flood K, Unterscheider J, Daly S, et al: The role of brain sparing in the prediction of adverse outcomes
in intrauterine growth restriction: results of the multicenter PORTO Study. Am J Obstet Gynecol
211(3):288, 2014
Garcia-Flores J, Jañez M, Gonzalez MC, et al: Fetal myocardial morphological and functional changes
associated with well-controlled gestational diabetes. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 154(1):24,

2011
Gauster M, Hiden U, Blaschitz A, et al: Dysregulation of placental endothelial lipase and lipoprotein
lipase in intrauterine growth-restricted pregnancies. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 92(6):2256, 2007
Gauster M, Hiden U, van Poppel M, et al: Dysregulation of placental endothelial lipase in obese women
with gestational diabetes mellitus. Diabetes 60(10):2457, 2011
Getahun D, Ananth CV, Kinzler WL: Risk factors for antepartum and intrapartum stillbirth: a populationbased study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 196(6):499, 2007
Ghanchi A, Rahshenas M, Bonnet D, et al: Prevalence of growth restriction at birth for newborns with
congenital heart defects: a population-based prospective cohort study EPICARD. Front Pediatr
9:676994, 2021
Giannakopoulos B, Krilis SA: The pathogenesis of the antiphospholipid syndrome. N Engl J Med
368(11):1033, 2013
Gil-Sánchez A, Koletzko B, Larqué E: Current understanding of placental fatty acid transport. Curr
Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care 15(3):265, 2012
Goetzinger KR, Tuuli MG, Odibo AO, et al: Screening for fetal growth disorders by clinical exam in the
era of obesity. J Perinatol 33(5):352, 2012
Grantz KL, Kim S, Grobman WA, et al: Fetal growth velocity: the NICHD fetal growth studies. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 219:285, 2018
Grantz KL, Ortega-Villa AM, Pugh SJ, et al: Combination of fundal height and ultrasound to predict
small for gestational age at birth. Am J Perinatol May 3, 2021 [Epub ahead of print]
Greer LG, Ziadie MS, Casey BM, et al: An immunologic basis for placental insufficiency in fetal growth
restriction. Am J Perinatol 29(7):533, 2012
Griffin IJ, Lee HC, Profit J, et al: The smallest of the small: short-term outcomes of profoundly growth
restricted and profoundly low birth weight preterm infants. J Perinatol 35:503, 2015
Grobman WA, Lai Y, Rouse DJ, et al: The association of cerebral palsy and death with small-forgestational-age birthweight in preterm neonates by individualized and population-based percentiles.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 209(4):340.e1, 2013
Hall C, Bukowinski AT, McGill AL, et al: Racial disparities in prenatal care utilization and infant small
for gestational age among active duty US military women. Matern Child Health J 24(7):885, 2020
Hammad IA, Chauhan CP, Mlynarczyk M, et al: Uncomplicated pregnancies and ultrasounds for fetal
growth restriction: a pilot randomized clinical trial. Am J Perinatol 6(1):e83, 2016
HAPO Study Cooperative Research Group: Hyperglycemia and adverse pregnancy outcomes. N Engl J
Med 358(19):1991, 2008
Harper LM, Tita A, Biggio JR: The Institute of Medicine guidelines for gestational weight gain after a
diagnosis of gestational diabetes and pregnancy outcomes. Am J Perinatol 32:239, 2015
He B, Hu C, Zhou Y: First-trimester screening for fetal growth restriction using Doppler color flow
analysis of the uterine artery and serum PAPP-A levels in unselected pregnancies. J Matern Fetal
Neonatal Med 12:1, 2020
Hehir MP, Mchugh AF, Maguire PJ, et al: Extreme macrosomia—obstetric outcomes and complications
in birthweights >5000 g. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol 55:42, 2015
Herrera CL, Hussamy DJ, McIntire DD, et al: Femur length parameters in fetuses with Down
syndrome. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 33(15):2516, 2020
Hietalampi H, Pahkala K, Jokinen E, et al: Left ventricular mass and geometry in adolescence: early
childhood determinants. Hypertension 60(5):1266, 2012
Hutcheon JA, Stephansson O, Cnattingius S, et al: Is the association between pregnancy weight gain
and fetal size casual?: a re-examination using a sibling comparison design. Epidemiology 30(2):234,

2019
Jana N, Barik S, Arora N, et al: Tuberculosis in pregnancy: the challenges for South Asian countries. J
Obstet Gynaecol Res 38(9):1125, 2012
Johnson GJ, Denning S, Clark SL, et al: Pathophysiologic origins of brachial plexus injury. Obstet
Gynecol 136(4):725, 2020
Jornayvaz FR, Vollenweider P, Bochud M, et al: Low birth weight leads to obesity, diabetes and
increased leptin levels in adults: the CoLaus study. Cardiovasc Diabetol 15:73, 2016
Keats EC, Haider BA, Tam E, et al: Multiple-micronutrient supplementation for women during
pregnancy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 3(3):CD004905, 2019
Kerkhof GF, Willemsen RH, Leunissen RW, et al: Health profile of young adults born preterm: negative
effects of rapid weight gain in early life. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 97(12):4498, 2012
Khoury MJ, Erickson JD, Cordero JF, et al: Congenital malformations and intrauterine growth
retardation: a population study. Pediatrics 82(1):83, 1988
Kim CJ, Romero R, Chaemsaithong P, et al: Chronic inflammation of the placenta: definition,
classification, pathogenesis, and clinical significance. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2213:S53, 2015
Kingdom JC, Audette MC, Hobson SR, et al: A placenta clinic approach to the diagnosis and
management of fetal growth restriction. Am J Obstet Gynecol 218(2S):S803, 2018
Klemetti MM, Laivuori H, Tikkanen M, et al: White’s classification and pregnancy outcome in women
with type 1 diabetes: a population-based cohort study. Diabetologia 59(1):92, 2016
Korzeniewski SJ, Romero R, Chaiworapongsa T, et al: Maternal plasma angiogenic index-1 (placental
growth factor/soluble vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-1) is a biomarker for the burden of
placental lesions consistent with uteroplacental underperfusion: a longitudinal case-cohort study. Am
J Obstet Gynecol 214(5):629, 2016
Langridge AT, Li J, Nassar N, et al: Community-level socioeconomic inequalities in infants with poor
fetal growth in Western Australia, 1984 to 2006. Ann Epidemiol 21(7):473-80, 2011
Leary PJ, Leary SE, Stout KK, et al: Maternal, perinatal, and post neonatal outcomes in women with
chronic heart disease in Washington State. Obstet Gynecol 120:1283, 2012
Lechtig A, Delgado H, Lasky RE, et al: Maternal nutrition and fetal growth in developing societies. Am
J Dis Child 129(5):434, 1975
Lees CC, Stampalija T, Baschat A, et al: ISUOG Practice Guildelines: diagnosis and management of
small-for-gestational-age fetus and fetal growth restriction. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 56(2):298,
2020
Lees CC, Marlow N, van Wassenaer-Leemhuis A, et al: 2 year neurodevelopmental and intermediate
perinatal outcomes in infants with very preterm fetal growth restriction (TRUFFLE): a randomised
trial. Lancet 385:2162, 2015
Levine TA, Grunau RE, McAuliffe FM, et al. Early childhood neurodevelopment after intrauterine
growth restriction: a systematic review. Pediatrics 135:126, 2015
Llurba E, Baschat AA, Turan OM, et al: Childhood cognitive development after fetal growth restriction.
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 41(4):383, 2013
Luo ZC, Nuyt AM, Delvin E, et al: Maternal and fetal IGF-I and IGF-II levels, fetal growth, and
gestational diabetes. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 97(5):1720, 2012
Luyckx VA, Brenner BM: Birth weight, malnutrition and kidney-associated outcomes-a global concern.
Nat Rev Nephrol 11:135, 2015
Magro-Malosso ER, Saccone G, Chen M, et al: Induction of labour for suspected macrosomia at term in
non-diabetic women: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. BJOG
124:414, 2017

Manning FA (ed): Intrauterine growth retardation. In Fetal Medicine Principles and Practice. Norwalk,
Appleton & Lange, 1995
Martin JA, Hamilton BE, Osterman MJ, et al: Births: final data for 2019. Natl Vital Stat Rep 70(2):1,
2021
Mattsson K, Rylander L: Influence of maternal and paternal birthweight on offspring birthweight—a
population-based intergenerational study. Paediatr Perinat Epidemiol 27(2):138, 2013
Mayer C, Joseph KS: Fetal growth: a review of terms, concepts and issues relevant to obstetrics.
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 41(2):136, 2013
McCloskey K, Burgner D, Carlin JB, et al: Infant adiposity at birth and early postnatal weight gain
predict increased aortic intima-media thickness at 6 weeks of age: a population-derived cohort study.
Clin Sci 130:443, 2016
McCowan LM, Figueras F, Anderson NH: Evidence-based national guidelines for the management of
suspected fetal growth restriction: comparison, consensus, and controversy. Am J Obstet Gynecol
218(2S):S855, 2018
McIntire DD, Bloom SL, Casey BM, et al: Birthweight in relation to morbidity and mortality among
newborn infants. N Engl J Med 340(16):1234, 1999
Meher S, Duley L, Hunter K, et al: Antiplatelet therapy before or after 16 weeks’ gestation for
preventing preeclampsia: an individual participant data meta-analysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol
216(2):121, 2017
Mendez-Figueroa H, Truong VT, Pedroza C, et al: Small-for-gestational-age infants among
uncomplicated pregnancies at term: a secondary analysis of 9 Maternal-Fetal Medicine Units
Network studies. Am J Obstet Gynecol 215:628.e1, 2016
Milovanovic I, Njuieyon F, Deghmoun S, et al: Innate small babies are metabolically healthy children. J
Clin Endocrinol Metab 97(12):4407, 2012
Monier I, Blondel B, Ego A, et al: Poor effectiveness of antenatal detection of fetal growth restriction
and consequences for obstetric management and neonatal outcomes: a French national study. BJOG
122(4):518, 2015
Murphy HR, Steel SA, Roland JM, et al: East Anglia Study Group for Improving Pregnancy Outcomes
in Women with Diabetes (EASIPOD). Obstetric and perinatal outcomes in pregnancies complicated
by Type 1 and Type 2 diabetes: influences of glycaemic control, obesity and social disadvantage.
Diabet Med 28(9):1060, 2011
Myatt L, Maloyan A: Obesity and placental function. Semin Reprod Med 34:42, 2016
Nelson DB, Martin R, Twickler DM, et al: Sonographic detection and clinical importance of growth
restriction in pregnancies with gastroschisis. J Ultrasound Med 34:2217, 2015
Ökdemir D, Hatipoğlu N, Kurtoğlu S, et al: The role of irisin, insulin and leptin in maternal and fetal
interaction. J Clin Res Pediatr Endocrinol 10(4):307, 2018
Ottesen AM, Aksglaede L, Garn I, et al: Increased number of sex chromosomes affects height in a
nonlinear fashion: a study of 305 patients with sex chromosome aneuploidy. Am J Med Genet A
152A:1206, 2010
Pardi G, Cetin I: Human fetal growth and organ development: 50 years of discoveries. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 194(4):1008, 2006
Pedersen J: Weight and length at birth of infants of diabetic mothers. Acta Endocrinol (Copenh) 16:330,
1954
Perales M, Santos-Lozano A, Ruiz JR, et al: Benefits of aerobic or resistance training during pregnancy
on maternal health and perinatal outcomes: a systematic review. Early Hum Dev 94:43, 2016

Picone O, Teissier N, Cordier AG, et al: Detailed in utero ultrasound description of 30 cases of
congenital cytomegalovirus infection. Prenat Diagn 34:518, 2014
Picone O, Vauloup-Fellous C, Cordier AG, et al: A series of 238 cytomegalovirus primary infections
during pregnancy: description and outcome. Prenat Diagn 2:1, 2013
Poon LC, Shennan A, Hyett JA, et al: The International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics
(FIGO) initiative on pre-eclampsia: a pragmatic guide for first-trimester screening and prevention.
Int J Gynaecol Obstet 145 Suppl 1(Suppl 1):1, 2019
Prado EL, Alcock KJ, Muadz H, et al: Maternal multiple micronutrient supplements and child cognition:
a randomized trial in Indonesia. Pediatrics 130(3):e536, 2012
Roberge S, Nicolaides K, Demers S, et al: The role of aspirin dose on the prevention of preeclampsia
and fetal growth restriction: systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 216(2):110,
2017
Roex A, Nikpoor P, van Eerd E, et al: Serial plotting on customized fundal height charts results in
doubling of the antenatal detection of small for gestational age fetuses in nulliparous women. Aust N
Z J Obstet Gynaecol 52(1):78, 2012
Rogne T, Engstrøm AA, Jacobsen GW, et al: Fetal growth, cognitive function, and brain volumes in
childhood and adolescence. Obstet Gynecol 125:673, 2015
Rolnik DL, Wright D, Poon LC, et al: Aspirin versus Placebo in Pregnancies at High Risk for Preterm
Preeclampsia. N Engl J Med 377(7):613, 2017
Rouse DJ, Owen J, Goldenberg RL, et al: The effectiveness and costs of elective cesarean delivery for
fetal macrosomia diagnosed by ultrasound. JAMA 276(2):1480, 1996
Rudzinski E, Gilroy M, Newbill C, et al: Positive C4d immunostaining of placental villous
syncytiotrophoblasts supports host-versus-graft rejection in villitis of unknown etiology. Pediatr Dev
Pathol 16(1):7, 2013
Saccone G, Berghella V, Maruotti GM, et al: Antiphospholipid antibody profile based obstetric outcomes
of primary antiphospholipid syndrome: the PREGNANTS study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 216(5):525,
2017
Saliem S, Patenaude V, Abenhaim HA: Pregnancy outcomes among renal transplant recipients and
patients with end-stage renal disease on dialysis. J Perinat Med 44:321, 2016
Salihu HM, Dongarwar D, King LM, et al: Phenotypes of fetal macrosomia and risk of stillbirth among
term deliveries over the previous four decades. Birth 47(2):202, 2020
Sanchez-Ramos L, Bernstein S, Kaunitz AM: Expectant management versus labor induction for
suspected fetal macrosomia: a systematic review. Obstet Gynecol 100(5 pt 1):997, 2002
Savchev S, Figueras F, Sanz-Cortes M, et al: Evaluation of an optimal gestational age cut-off for the
definition of early- and late-onset fetal growth restriction. Fetal Diagn Ther 36(2):9, 2014
Schemmer G, Wapner RJ, Johnson A, et al: First-trimester growth patterns of aneuploid fetuses. Prenat
Diagn 17(2):155, 1997
Segura MT, Demmelmair H, Krauss-Etschmann S, et al: Maternal BMI and gestational diabetes alter
placental lipid transporters and fatty acid composition. Placenta 57:144, 2017
Sheffield JS, Sánchez PJ, Morris G, et al: Congenital syphilis after maternal treatment for syphilis during
pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 186(3):569, 2002
Simpson J, Smith AD, Fraser A, et al: Programming of adiposity in childhood and adolescence:
associations with birth weight and cord blood adipokines. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 102(2):499, 2017
Sobhy S, Babiker Z, Zamora J, et al: Maternal and perinatal mortality and morbidity associated with
tuberculosis during pregnancy and the postpartum period: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
BJOG 124(5):727, 2017

Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Martins JG, Biggio JR, et al: Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine
consult series #52: diagnosis and management of fetal growth restriction. Am J Obstet Gynecol
223(4):B2, 2020
Sovio U, White IR, Dacey A, et al: Screening for fetal growth restriction with universal third trimester
ultrasonography in nulliparous women in the Pregnancy Outcome Prediction (POP) study: a
prospective cohort study. Lancet 386:2089, 2015
Sparks TN, Cheng YW, McLaughlin B, et al: Fundal height: a useful screening tool for fetal growth? J
Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 24(5):708, 2011
Stein Z, Susser M, Saenger G, et al: Famine and Human Development: The Dutch Hunger Winter of
1944–1945. New York, Oxford University Press, 1975
Steurer MA, Jelliffe-Pawlowski LL, Baer RJ, et al: Persistent Pulmonary Hypertension of the Newborn
in Late Preterm and Term Infants in California. Pediatrics 139(1):e20161165, 2017
Stott D, Papastefanou I, Paraschiv D, et al: Longitudinal maternal haemodynamics in fetal growth
restriction in pregnancies at high risk for placental insufficiency. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol
49(6):761, 2017
Tajik P, van Wyk L, Boers KE, et al: Which intrauterine growth restricted fetuses at term benefit from
early labour induction? A secondary analysis of the DIGITAT randomised trial. Eur J Obstet
Gynecol Reprod Biol 172:20, 2014
Thame MM, Singh-Minott I, Osmond C, et al: Pregnancy in sickle cell-haemoglobin C (SC) disease. A
retrospective study of birth size and maternal weight gain. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 203:16,
2016
Thornton JG, Hornbuckle J, Vail A, et al: Infant well-being at 2 years of age in the Growth Restriction
Intervention Trial (GRIT): multicenter randomized controlled trial. Lancet 364(9433):513, 2004
Tita AT: What we have learned about scheduling elective repeat cesarean delivery at term. Semin
Perinatol 40:287, 2016
Toda K, Reef S, Tsuruoka M, et al: Congenital rubella syndrome (CRS) in Vietnam 2011–2012–CRS
epidemic after rubella epidemic in 2010–2011. Vaccine 33:3673, 2015
Unterscheider J, O’Donoghue K, Malone FD: Guidelines of fetal growth restriction: a comparison of
recent national publications. Am J Perinatol 32:307, 2015
Van der Looven R, Le Roy L, Tanghe E, et al: Risk factors for neonatal brachial plexus palsy: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Dev Med Child Neurol 62(6):673, 2020
van Wyk L, Boers KE, van der Post JA, et al: Effects on (neuro)developmental and behavioral outcome
at 2 years of age of induced labor compared with expectant management in intrauterine growthrestricted infants: long-term outcomes of the DIGITAT trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol 206(5):406.e1,
2012
Vollgraff CA, van Osch IR, Heymans MW, et al: Cerebroplacental ratio in predicting adverse perinatal
outcome: a meta-analysis of individual participant data. 128(2):226, 2021
Waldhoer T, Klebermass-Schrehof K: The impact of altitude on birth weight depends on further motherand infant-related factors: a population-based study in an altitude range up to 1600 m in Austria
between 1984 and 2013. J Perinatol 35:689, 2015
Walker DM, Marlow N, Upstone L, et al: The Growth Restriction Intervention Trial: long-term
outcomes in a randomized trial of timing of delivery in fetal growth restriction. Am J Obstet Gynecol
204(1):34.e1, 2011
Wang D, Hong Y, Zhu L, et al: Risk factors and outcomes of macrosomia in China: a multicentric
survey based on birth data. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 30:623, 2017

Wanyyonyi SZ, Orwa J, Ozelle H, et al: Routine third-trimester ultrasound for the detection of small-forgestational age in low-risk pregnancies (ROTTUS study): randomized controlled trial. Ultrasound
Obstet Gynecol 57(6):910, 2021
Werler MM: Teratogen update: smoking and reproductive outcomes. Teratology 55(6):382, 1997
Wiebe HW, Boulé NG, Chari R, et al: The effect of supervised prenatal exercise on fetal growth: a
meta-analysis. Obstet Gynecol 125:1185, 2015
Wigby K, D’Epagnier C, Howell S, et al: Expanding the phenotype of Triple X syndrome: a comparison
of prenatal versus postnatal diagnosis. Am J Med Genet A 170:2870, 2016
Williams RL, Creasy RK, Cunningham GC, et al: Fetal growth and perinatal viability in California.
Obstet Gynecol 59:624, 1982
Yang X, Li M, Haghiac M, Catalano PM, et al: Causal relationship between obesity-related traits and
TLR4-driven responses at the maternal-fetal interface. Diabetologia 59:2459, 2016
Zafman KB, Bergh E, Fox NS: Accuracy of sonographic estimated fetal weight in suspected
macrosomia: the likelihood of overestimating and underestimating the true birthweight. J Matern
Fetal Neonatal Med 33(6):967, 2020
Zhang J, Merialdi M, Platt LD, et al: Defining normal and abnormal fetal growth: promises and
challenges. Am J Obstet Gynecol 202(6):522, 2010
Zhang J, Mikolajczyk R, Grewal J, et al: Prenatal application of the individualized fetal growth
reference. Am J Epidemiol 173(5):539, 2011

