CHAPTER 23

Abnormal Labor

DYSTOCIA
ABNORMALITIES OF THE EXPULSIVE FORCES
PREMATURELY RUPTURED MEMBRANES AT TERM
PRECIPITOUS LABOR AND DELIVERY
FETOPELVIC DISPROPORTION
FACE PRESENTATION
BROW PRESENTATION
TRANSVERSE LIE
COMPOUND PRESENTATION
COMPLICATIONS WITH DYSTOCIA
REFERENCES
Labor arrest, abnormal fetal presentation, or fetal jeopardy are indications
for a large percentage of primary cesarean deliveries in the United States
(Boyle, 2013). Lowering dystocia rates offers the potential to decrease rates
of this surgery and associated maternal morbidity.

DYSTOCIA

Dystocia literally means difficult labor and is characterized by abnormally
slow labor progress. Causes are grouped into three distinct categories.
Mechanistically, these simplify into abnormalities of the powers—poor
uterine contractility and maternal expulsive effort; of the passenger—the
fetus; and of the passage—the pelvis and lower reproductive tract.
These three groups act singly or in combination to produce dysfunctional
labor (Table 23-1). For the powers, uterine contractions may be
insufficiently strong or inappropriately coordinated to efface and dilate the
cervix. This is termed uterine dysfunction. Moreover, during second-stage
labor, voluntary maternal pushing may be inadequate. For the passenger, fetal
abnormalities of presentation, position, or anatomy may slow progress. Last,
for the passage, structural changes can contract the maternal bony pelvis. Or,
soft tissue abnormalities of the reproductive tract may block fetal descent.
TABLE 23-1. Some Causes of Dystocia in Term Vertex Singletons

To describe ineffective labors, two commonly used terms are
cephalopelvic disproportion (CPD) and failure to progress. CPD describes
obstructed labor resulting from disparity between the fetal head size and
maternal pelvis. The term CPD originated at a time when the main indication
for cesarean delivery was overt pelvic contracture from rickets (Olah,
1994). Such absolute disproportion is now rare, and most cases result from
malposition of the fetal head within the pelvis (asynclitism). True

disproportion is a tenuous diagnosis because 50 to 75 percent of women
undergoing cesarean delivery for this reason subsequently deliver even
larger newborns vaginally (Lewkowitz, 2015; Place, 2019).
A second phrase, failure to progress in either spontaneous or stimulated
labor, has become an increasingly popular description of ineffectual labor.
This term reflects lack of progressive cervical dilation or halted fetal
descent.

ABNORMALITIES OF THE EXPULSIVE FORCES
■ Types of Uterine Dysfunction
Uterine contractions are needed to dilate the cervix and to expel the fetus. A
contraction is initiated by spontaneous action potentials in the membrane of
smooth muscle cells. Unlike the heart, a single pacemaker or its site remain
unresolved (Young, 2018). Resulting uterine contractions in normal labor
show a rising and falling gradient of myometrial activity (Reynolds, 1951).
Normal spontaneous contractions can exert pressures approximating 60 mm
Hg (Hendricks, 1959). Even so, the lower limit of contraction pressure
required to dilate the cervix is 15 mm Hg (Caldeyro-Barcia, 1950).
In abnormal labor, two physiological types of uterine dysfunction may
develop. In the more common hypotonic uterine dysfunction, basal tone is
normal and uterine contractions have a normal gradient pattern
(synchronous). However, pressure during a contraction is insufficient to
dilate the cervix. In the second type, hypertonic uterine dysfunction or
incoordinate uterine dysfunction, either basal tone is elevated appreciably
or the pressure gradient is distorted.

■ Risk Factors for Uterine Dysfunction
Various factors are implicated in uterine dysfunction. First, neuraxial
analgesia can slow labor and has been associated with longer first and
second stages of labor (Sharma, 2004). With current anesthesia methods,
however, its effect on labor length is blunted (Anim-Somuah, 2018; Myers,
2020). Moreover, cesarean delivery rates are not higher, and supporting
studies are presented in Chapter 25 (p. 477).

Chorioamnionitis is associated with prolonged labor. Uterine infection
may directly contribute to uterine dysfunction or instead may simply be an
associated consequence of prolonged, dysfunctional labor (Mark, 2000;
Satin, 1992). Affected gravidas are monitored for labor progress, and
augmentation of protracted labor is prudent (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019a).
A higher station at the onset of labor is significantly linked with
subsequent dystocia (Friedman, 1965, 1976; Roshanfekr, 1999). Although a
risk factor, most nulliparas without fetal head engagement at diagnosis of
active labor still deliver vaginally. These observations apply especially for
parous women because the head typically descends later in labor.
Dystocia rate rises proportionally with maternal age even after adjusting
for maternal and fetal weight and parity (Timofeev, 2013; Waldenström,
2017). Maternal obesity lengthens the first stages of labor by 30 to 60
minutes in nulliparas, even after adjusting for associated diabetes, fetal
weight, and parity (Carlhäll, 2013; Kominiarek, 2011). Dystocia-associated
cesarean delivery rates are higher in this group (Fyfe, 2011; Kawakita,
2016). Growing evidence suggests a pathologic biological effect of obesity
on normal parturition (Azais, 2017; Carlson, 2015).

■ Labor Disorders
Latent-phase Prolongation
Uterine dysfunction can in turn lead to labor abnormalities (Table 23-2).
First, the latent phase may be prolonged, which is defined as >20 hours in the
nullipara and >14 hours in the multipara (Friedman, 1961, 1963b). In some,
uterine contractions cease, suggesting false labor. In the remainder, an
abnormally long latent phase persists and is often treated with amniotomy
and oxytocin stimulation (Friedman, 1963a). The diagnosis of uterine
dysfunction in the latent phase is difficult and commonly is made
retrospectively. Women who are not yet in active labor often are erroneously
treated for perceived uterine dysfunction.
TABLE 23-2. Abnormal Labor Patterns, Diagnostic Criteria, and Methods
of Treatment

Active-phase Disorders
In active labor, disorders are divided into those with slow progress—a
protraction disorder or those with halted progress—an arrest disorder.
Terms presented in Table 23-2 and their diagnostic criteria describe
abnormal labor. To be diagnosed with either of these, a woman must be in the
active phase of labor.
The criteria and management of abnormal labor have undergone
modification, and the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
and the Society for Maternal–Fetal Medicine (2019b) describe these in their
Obstetric Care Consensus titled Safe Prevention of the Primary Cesarean
Delivery. The Obstetric Care Consensus was a response to the rising
cesarean delivery rate because nearly one third of women who give birth
each year in the United States undergoes this surgery (Martin, 2019). New
recommendations stem from data of normal labor progress in a more
contemporary cohort. The World Health Organization (2018) has also
revised its recommendations on labor progress. These guidelines have
prompted controversy by their significant revision of the preexisting
understanding of abnormal labor.

Active-phase Protraction. Of active-phase disorders, protraction disorders
are less well described. Previously, protraction has been defined as <1
cm/hr cervical dilation for a minimum of 4 hours. These criteria were
adapted from those of Cohen and Friedman (1983) and shown in Table 23-2.
For this disorder, observation for further progress is appropriate treatment.
In monitoring active labor, if hypotonic contractions are strongly suspected,
internal monitors may be placed with amniotomy and again cervical change
and contraction pattern are reassessed. Deficient Montevideo units and poor
active labor progress typically prompts oxytocin augmentation. In accord
with the Consensus Committee (2019b), slow but progressive first-stage
labor should not be an indication for cesarean delivery.
Active-phase Arrest. Handa and Laros (1993) diagnosed active-phase arrest,
defined as no dilation for ≥2 hours, in 5 percent of term nulliparas. This
incidence has not changed since the 1950s (Friedman, 1978). Inadequate
uterine contractions, defined as <180 Montevideo units, calculated as shown
in Figure 23-1, were diagnosed in 80 percent of women with active-phase
arrest. Hauth and coworkers (1986, 1991) reported that when labor is
effectively induced or augmented with oxytocin, 90 percent of women
achieve 200 to 225 Montevideo units, and 40 percent achieve at least 300
Montevideo units. These results suggest that certain minimums of uterine
activity should be achieved before performing cesarean delivery for
dystocia. Oxytocin regimens suitable to augment labor mirror those to induce
labor. These regimens are outlined in detail in Chapter 26 (p. 493).

FIGURE 23-1 Montevideo units are calculated by subtracting the baseline uterine pressure from the
peak contraction pressure for each contraction in a 10-minute window and adding the pressures
generated by each contraction. In the example shown, there were five contractions producing pressure
changes of 52, 50, 47, 44, and 49 mm Hg, respectively. The sum of these five contractions is 242
Montevideo units.

Other criteria should also be met. First, the latent phase should be
completed, and the cervix is dilated ≥4 cm. Also, a uterine contraction
pattern of ≥200 Montevideo units in a 10-minute period has been present for
≥4 hours without cervical change (Rouse, 1999). The Consensus Committee
has extended this further, as described next.
Obstetric Care Consensus Committee. Four recommendations of the
Consensus Committee apply to management of first-stage labor. The first
admonishes against cesarean delivery in the latent phase. Specifically, a
prolonged latent phase should not be the sole indication for cesarean
delivery. This guideline is not new and is traceable to Friedman’s work.
The second directive, too, is conventional practice. It recommends
against cesarean delivery if labor is progressive but slow—a protraction
disorder. This instance is typically managed with observation, assessment of
uterine activity, and stimulation of contractions as needed.
A third instruction addresses the cervical dilation threshold that serves to
herald active labor. Namely, a cervical dilation of 6 cm—not 4 cm—is now
the recommended threshold. Moreover, before this threshold, standards for
active-phase progress should not be applied. Of note, the WHO (2018)

recognizes 5 cm as the active-labor threshold. Other large studies noted
labor acceleration after 5 cm (Ashwal, 2020; Oladapo, 2018).
A fourth stipulation notes that cesarean delivery for active-phase arrest is
best reserved for women with cervical dilation ≥6 cm and ruptured
membranes who fail to progress despite 4 hours of adequate uterine activity
or despite at least 6 hours of oxytocin administration but inadequate
contractions.
Of these, the change of thresholds from 4 to 6 cm has prompted the most
scrutiny. Described in Chapter 22 (p. 424), original labor curves have been
used since first proposed approximately 40 years ago by Friedman (1978).
Instead, Zhang and coworkers (2002) proposed a new labor curve derived
from a more contemporaneous cohort delivered between 1992 and 1996. The
Friedman labor curves reflected women in spontaneous labor with infrequent
use of neuraxial labor analgesia or oxytocin augmentation. In contrast, in the
later cohort, approximately 50 percent of women had neuraxial analgesia or
augmentation. In the later group, the rate of cervical change is slow between
4 and 6 cm but accelerates thereafter. This could reasonably be interpreted as
the active phase beginning at 6 cm. In comparing both labor curves, the
active phase curve in the Zhang cohort flattens beginning at 3 to 4 cm (Fig.
23-2). Namely, the 6-cm rule for active labor derives from a slowing of the
rate or flattening of the slope of cervical change in first-stage labor.

FIGURE 23-2 Cervical dilation curves from Friedman (1955) and Zhang (2002).

These findings by Zhang and coworkers (2002) are consistent with the
labor results obtained in the subsequent Safe Labor Consortium study (Zhang,
2010). However, this study derived its numbers from a retrospective
observational dataset built from abstracted labor and delivery information
from 19 hospitals across the United States. Various statistical methods and
heavy manipulations of these numbers were used (Cohen, 2015b). Moreover,
women were analyzed after excluding all women with cesarean deliveries or
asphyxiated newborns. The Consensus Committee (2019b) was explicit that
“the Consortium on Safe Labor data, rather than the standards proposed by
Friedman, should inform evidence-based labor management.”
Critics of the Consensus Committee recommendations note that the
Consortium on Safe Labor data were derived from clinical settings with a net
cesarean rate of 30 percent. Thus, adherence to the new recommendations
may fail to achieve desired cesarean rate reductions. Also, the study lacked a
focus on neonatal safety, given that all the asphyxiated neonates were
excluded. Supporters note that the study of prolonged first-stage labors by
Cheng and coworkers (2010) found higher rates of cesarean delivery and
chorioamnionitis but not higher rates of neonatal morbidity. However, Harper

and associates (2014) analyzed maternal and neonatal adverse outcomes
related to first-stage labor lengths. In 5030 women, first-stage labor
durations were divided into those <90th percentile or those ≥90th percentile,
with incremental increases thereafter. These authors and those of other large
studies similarly found maternal and neonatal composite morbidity scores
that were higher in cohorts after adoption of Consensus Committee guidelines
compared with groups prior to implementation (Blankenship, 2020;
Rosenbloom, 2017). This concern for adverse fetal and maternal effects
resulting from the new Consensus Committee guidelines was echoed by
Cohen and Friedman (2015a,b).
Another caveat notes that the efficacy of these recommendations to
achieve their primary goal is limited. One retrospective cohort study
compared 3200 women with uncomplicated term pregnancy undergoing
spontaneous or induced labor before guideline changes and 3000 similar
gravidas after these changes. The cesarean delivery rate for first-stage labor
arrest dropped from 1.8 to 0.9 percent in nulliparas during this time
(Thuillier, 2018). Percent changes were not significant in multiparas.
Adverse maternal and neonatal outcomes did not significantly differ between
epoch groups. In another evaluation of outcomes before and after guideline
implementation, cesarean delivery rates were unchanged (Rosenbloom,
2017).
The Consensus Committee suggests that cesarean deliveries for dystocia
are being done before 6 cm cervical dilation. However, evidence suggests
that all of the Committee’s first-stage recommendations are actually already
empirically in use but are concurrent with an overall cesarean delivery rate
>30 percent. For example, Nelson and associates (2020) analyzed data from
nearly 9000 women with primary cesarean deliveries for dystocia at 13
university hospitals between 1999 and 2000. Notably, the median cervical
dilation at the time of cesarean for dystocia was 6 cm. As another example,
primary cesarean delivery rates for dystocia at Parkland Hospital between
1988 and 2017 did not change significantly. Thus, Consensus Committee
guidelines may fail to prevent additional cesareans for dystocia. Logically,
further study is needed.

Second-stage Descent Disorders
As discussed in Chapter 22 (p. 425), fetal descent largely follows complete
dilation. Moreover, the second stage incorporates many of the cardinal

movements necessary for the fetus to negotiate the birth canal. Thus,
disproportion of the fetus and pelvis frequently becomes apparent during
second-stage labor.
Similar to first-stage labor, time boundaries have been supported to limit
second-stage duration to minimize adverse maternal and fetal outcomes. The
second stage in nulliparas has been limited to 2 hours and extended to 3
hours when regional analgesia is used. For multiparas, 1 hour has been the
limit, extended to 2 hours with regional analgesia. Several studies supported
this extension (Cohen, 1977; Menticoglou, 1995a,b; Saunders, 1992).
However, of maternal outcomes, higher rates of chorioamnionitis, anal
sphincter injury, operative vaginal birth, and postpartum hemorrhage accrue
as the second stage lengthens (Allen, 2009; Rouse, 2009).
Newer guidelines have been promoted by the Consensus Committee
(2019b) for second-stage labor. These recommend that a nullipara push for at
least 3 hours and a multipara push for at least 2 hours before second-stage
labor arrest is diagnosed. Importantly, one caveat is that maternal and fetal
status should be reassuring. These authors provide options to these times
before cesarean delivery is performed. Namely, longer durations may be
appropriate as long as progress is documented. Also, a specific maximal
length of time spent in second-stage labor beyond which all women should
undergo operative delivery has not been identified.
Intuitively, the goal to lower cesarean delivery rates is best balanced
with one to ensure neonatal safety. It is problematic that no robust data on
neonatal outcomes support the safety of allowing prolonged second-stage
labor. Data from many evaluations reveal that serious newborn consequences
attend second-stage labors longer than 3 hours (Bleich, 2012; Cahill, 2018;
Nelson, 2020; Rosenbloom, 2017). Other data, when adjusted for labor
variables, show no difference in adverse neonatal complications for these
longer second stages (Cheng, 2004; Le Ray, 2009; Rouse, 2009). Some
investigators have argued that the absolute number of such outcomes is small
and overall outcomes remain good (Grantz, 2018; Grobman, 2016; Laughon,
2014). That said, some of the adverse outcomes are severe. To fully
ascertain specific effect of these guidelines on morbidity rates, randomized
controlled trials are needed.
It is possible that prolonged first-stage labor presages that with the
second stage. Nelson and coworkers (2013) studied the relationships
between the lengths of the first and second stages of labor in 12,523

nulliparas at term delivered at Parkland Hospital. The second stage
significantly lengthened concomitantly with increasing first-stage duration.
The 95th percentile was 15.6 and 2.9 hours for the first and second stages,
respectively. Women with first stages lasting longer than 15.6 hours (>95th
percentile) had a 16-percent rate of second-stage labor lasting 3 hours (95th
percentile). This compared with a 4.5-percent rate of prolonged second
stages in women with first-stage labors lasting <95th percentile.

■ Maternal Pushing Efforts
With full cervical dilation, most women cannot resist the urge to push with
uterine contractions. The combined force created by contractions of the
uterus and abdominal musculature propels the fetus downward. However, at
times, force created by abdominal musculature is compromised sufficiently
to slow or even prevent spontaneous vaginal delivery. Heavy sedation or
regional analgesia may reduce the reflex urge to push and may impair the
ability to contract abdominal muscles sufficiently. Allowing time for these to
abate is reasonable. In other instances, the urge to push is overridden by the
intense pain created by bearing down. Depending on fetal station and
anticipated second stage, options include emotional support and
encouragement, parenteral analgesia, pudendal blockade, or neuraxial
analgesia.

PREMATURELY RUPTURED MEMBRANES AT TERM
Membrane rupture at term without spontaneous uterine contractions
complicates approximately 8 percent of pregnancies. In the past, labor
stimulation was initiated if contractions did not begin after 6 to 12 hours.
Practice-changing research included that of Hannah (1996) and Peleg (1999)
and their associates, who enrolled a total of 5042 pregnancies with ruptured
membranes in a randomized investigation. They measured the effects of
induction versus expectant management and also compared induction using
intravenous oxytocin with that using prostaglandin E2 gel. There were
approximately 1200 pregnancies in each of the four study arms. They
concluded that labor induction with intravenous oxytocin was preferred
management. This was based on significantly fewer intrapartum and

postpartum infections in women whose labor was induced. There were no
significant differences in cesarean delivery rates. Subsequent analysis by
Hannah and coworkers (2000) indicated higher rates of adverse outcomes
when expectant management at home was compared with in-hospital
observation. Mozurkewich and associates (2009) reported lower rates of
chorioamnionitis, metritis, and neonatal intensive care unit admissions for
women with term ruptured membranes whose labors were induced compared
with those managed expectantly. At Parkland Hospital, labor is induced soon
after admission when ruptured membranes are confirmed at term. In those
with hypotonic contractions or with advanced cervical dilation, oxytocin is
selected to lower potential hyperstimulation risk. In those with an
unfavorable cervix, no or few contraction, and no significant fetal heart rate
decelerations, prostaglandin E1 (misoprostol) is chosen to promote cervical
ripening and contractions. The benefit of prophylactic antibiotics in women
with ruptured membranes before labor at term is unclear (Passos, 2012).
However, in those with membranes ruptured longer than 18 hours, antibiotics
are instituted for group B streptococcal infection prophylaxis (Chap. 67, p.
1194).

PRECIPITOUS LABOR AND DELIVERY
Labor can be too slow, but it also can be abnormally rapid. Precipitous
labor and delivery is extremely rapid labor and delivery. It may result from
an abnormally low resistance of the soft parts of the birth canal, from
abnormally strong uterine and abdominal contractions, or rarely from a lack
of pain with contractions to cue advanced labor.
Precipitous labor terminates in expulsion of the fetus in <3 hours. Using
this definition, 25,260 live births—3 percent—were complicated by
precipitous labor in the United States in 2013 (Martin, 2015). Despite this
incidence, little information is published on maternal and perinatal outcomes.
For the mother, complications are few if the cervix is effaced
appreciably and compliant, if the vagina has been stretched previously, and if
the perineum is relaxed. Conversely, vigorous uterine contractions combined
with a long, firm cervix and a noncompliant birth canal may lead to uterine
rupture or extensive lacerations of the cervix, vagina, vulva, or perineum
(Sheiner, 2004). It is in these latter circumstances that amnionic-fluid

embolism most likely develops (Chap. 42, p. 743). Precipitous labor is
frequently followed by uterine atony. In one report of 99 term pregnancies,
short labors were more common in multiparas who typically had contractions
at intervals less than 2 minutes. Precipitous labors have been linked to
cocaine abuse and associated with placental abruption, meconium,
postpartum hemorrhage, and low Apgar scores (Mahon, 1994).
For the neonate, adverse perinatal outcomes from rapid labor may be
increased considerably for several reasons. The uterine contractions, often
with negligible intervals of relaxation, prevent appropriate uterine blood
flow and fetal oxygenation. Related to trauma, resistance of the birth canal
rarely may cause intracranial injury. In one review of 22 cases of Erb or
Duchenne palsy, precipitous second-stage labor was associated in a third of
the cases (Acker, 1988). During unattended birth, the newborn may fall to the
floor and be injured. Last, needed resuscitation may not be immediately
available due to delivery speed.
As treatment, analgesia is unlikely to modify these forceful contractions
significantly. The use of tocolytic agents such as magnesium sulfate or
terbutaline is unproven in these circumstances. A single, intramuscular 250ug terbutaline dose may be reasonable in an attempt to resolve a
nonreassuring fetal heart rate pattern. This is balanced against the risk of
associated uterine atony if delivery is imminent. Certainly, oxytocin
administration should be stopped.

FETOPELVIC DISPROPORTION
■ Pelvic Capacity
Fetopelvic disproportion arises from diminished pelvic capacity or from
abnormal fetal size, structure, presentation, or position. Commonly, both are
present. The pelvic inlet, midpelvis, or pelvic outlet may be contracted
solely or in combination. Any contraction of the pelvic diameters that
diminishes pelvic capacity can create dystocia. Normal pelvic anatomy is
also discussed in Chapter 2 (p. 28).

Contracted Inlet
Before labor, the fetal biparietal diameter averages from 9.5 to 9.8 cm. Thus,
it might prove difficult or even impossible for some fetuses to pass through a

pelvic inlet that has an anteroposterior diameter <10 cm. Mengert (1948) and
Kaltreider (1952), employing x-ray pelvimetry, demonstrated that the
incidence of difficult deliveries rises when either the anteroposterior
diameter of the inlet is <10 cm or the transverse diameter is <12 cm. Either
threshold can be used to consider a pelvis contracted. As expected, when
both diameters are shortened, dystocia rates are much greater than when only
one is diminished.
The anteroposterior diameter of the inlet is also called the obstetrical
conjugate. It is commonly approximated by manually measuring the diagonal
conjugate, which is approximately 1.5 cm greater. To measure the diagonal
conjugate, a hand with the palm oriented laterally extends its index finger to
the promontory. The distance from the fingertip to the point at which the
lowest margin of the symphysis strikes the same finger’s base is the diagonal
conjugate. Inlet contraction usually is defined as a diagonal conjugate <11.5
cm.
A diminutive woman is likely to have a small pelvis, but she is also
likely to have a small neonate. Thoms (1937) studied 362 nulliparas and
found that the mean birthweight of their offspring was significantly lower—
280 g—in women with a small pelvis than in those with a medium or large
pelvis.
Normally, cervical dilation is aided by hydrostatic action of the
unruptured membranes or by direct application of the presenting part against
the cervix after membrane rupture. In contracted pelves, however, because
the head is arrested in the pelvic inlet, the entire force exerted by
contractions acts directly on the portion of membranes that contact the
dilating cervix. Consequently, early spontaneous rupture of the membranes is
more likely.
After membrane rupture, absent pressure by the head against the cervix
and lower uterine segment predisposes to less effective contractions. Hence,
further dilation may proceed very slowly or not at all. Cibils and Hendricks
(1965) reported that the mechanical adaptation of the fetal passenger to the
bony passage plays an important part in determining the efficiency of
contractions. Better adaptation begets more efficient contractions.
A contracted inlet also plays an important part in the production of
abnormal presentations. In nulliparas with normal pelvic capacity, the
presenting part at term commonly descends into the pelvic cavity before
labor onset. If the inlet is contracted considerably or if asynclitism is

marked, descent usually does not take place until after labor onset, if at all.
Cephalic presentations still predominate, but the head floats over the pelvic
inlet or rests more laterally in one of the iliac fossae. Accordingly, very
slight influences may cause the fetus to assume other presentations. In women
with contracted pelves, face and shoulder presentations are encountered
more frequently, and the cord prolapses more often.

Contracted Midpelvis
This finding is more common than inlet contraction. It frequently causes
transverse arrest of the fetal head, which potentially can lead to a difficult
midforceps operation or to cesarean delivery.
The obstetrical plane of the midpelvis extends from the inferior margin of
the symphysis pubis through the ischial spines and touches the sacrum near
the junction of the fourth and fifth vertebrae. A transverse line theoretically
connecting the ischial spines divides the midpelvis into anterior and
posterior portions (Fig. 2-16, p. 29). The former is bounded anteriorly by the
lower border of the symphysis pubis and laterally by the ischiopubic rami.
The posterior portion is bounded dorsally by the sacrum and laterally by the
sacrospinous ligaments, forming the lower limits of the sacrosciatic notch.
Average midpelvis measurements are as follows: transverse, or
interischial spinous, 10.5 cm; anteroposterior, from the lower border of the
symphysis pubis to the junction of S4 and S5, 11.5 cm; and posterior sagittal,
from the midpoint of the interspinous line to the same point on the sacrum, 5
cm. The definition of midpelvic contractions has not been established with
the same precision possible for inlet contractions. Even so, the midpelvis is
likely contracted when the sum of the interspinous and posterior sagittal
diameters of the midpelvis—normally, 10.5 plus 5 cm, or 15.5 cm—falls to
13.5 cm or less. This concept was emphasized by Chen and Huang (1982) in
evaluating possible midpelvic contraction. Midpelvic contraction is
suspected whenever the interspinous diameter is <10 cm. When it measures
<8 cm, the midpelvis is contracted.
Although no precise manual method permits measure of midpelvic
dimensions, a suggestion of contraction sometimes can be inferred if the
spines are prominent, the pelvic sidewalls converge, or the sacrosciatic
notch is narrow. Moreover, Eller and Mengert (1947) noted that the
relationship between the intertuberous and interspinous diameters of the

ischium is sufficiently constant that narrowing of the interspinous diameter
can be anticipated when the intertuberous diameter is narrow. A normal
intertuberous diameter, however, does not always exclude a narrow
interspinous diameter.

Contracted Outlet
This finding usually is defined as an interischial tuberous diameter of 8 cm or
less. The pelvic outlet may be roughly likened to two triangles, with the
interischial tuberous diameter constituting the base of both. The sides of the
anterior triangle are the pubic rami, and its apex is the inferoposterior
surface of the symphysis pubis. The posterior triangle has no bony sides but
is limited at its apex by the tip of the last sacral vertebra—not the tip of the
coccyx. Diminution of the intertuberous diameter with consequent narrowing
of the anterior triangle must inevitably force the fetal head posteriorly.
Floberg and associates (1987) reported that outlet contractions were found in
almost 1 percent of more than 1400 unselected nulliparas with term
pregnancies. A contracted outlet may cause dystocia not so much by itself but
by an often-associated midpelvic contraction. Outlet contraction without
concomitant midplane contraction is rare.
Although the disproportion between the fetal head and the pelvic outlet is
not sufficiently great to give rise to severe dystocia, it may play an important
part in perineal tears. With increased narrowing of the pubic arch, the
occiput cannot emerge directly beneath the symphysis pubis but is forced
farther down upon the ischiopubic rami. The perineum, consequently,
becomes increasingly distended and thus exposed to risk of laceration.

Pelvic Fractures
Vallier (2012) and Riehl (2014) reviewed experiences with pelvic fractures
and pregnancy. Trauma from automobile collisions was the most common
cause. Moreover, they note that fracture pattern, minor malalignment, and
retained hardware are not absolute indications for cesarean delivery. In
determining vaginal delivery candidates, fracture healing requires 8 to 12
weeks and thus recent fracture merits cesarean delivery (Amorosa, 2013).
With a healed fracture, care includes review of pelvic radiographs and
possible pelvimetry later in pregnancy.

■ Radiologic Assessment
Current evaluation of pelvic capacity typically uses only digital interrogation
of the bony pelvis. Of radiological methods, x-ray pelvimetry with cephalic
presentations provides poor predictive value to diagnose CPD (Mengert,
1948; Pattinson, 2017). Similarly, magnetic resonance pelvimetry fails to
provide suitable accuracy in predicting cesarean delivery for dystocia
(Sporri, 2002; Zaretsky, 2005).
Fetal size alone is seldom the reason for failed labor. Indeed, most cases
of CPD arise in fetuses whose weight is well within the range of the general
obstetrical population. Figure 23-3 depicts Parkland Hospital data, in which
two thirds of neonates who required cesarean delivery after failed forceps
delivery weighed <3700 g. Thus, head malposition more likely obstructs
fetal passage through the birth canal. These include asynclitism, occiput
posterior position, and face, brow, or sinciput presentation.

FIGURE 23-3 Birthweight distribution of 362 newborns born by cesarean delivery after a failed
forceps attempt at Parkland Hospital from 1989–1999. Only 12 percent (n = 44) of the newborns
weighed >4000 g (dark bars).

For fetal head size estimation, clinical and radiographical methods to
predict CPD also have proved disappointing. First, Mueller (1885) and
Hillis (1930) described a clinical maneuver in which the fetal head is
grasped through the abdominal wall, and firm pressure is directed downward
along the axis of the inlet. If no disproportion exists, the head readily enters
the pelvis, and vaginal delivery can be predicted. However, a prospective
evaluation of this Mueller-Hillis maneuver found it poorly predicted
subsequent labor dystocia (Thorp, 1993).
Measurements of fetal head diameters using plain radiographical
techniques are hindered by parallax distortions. The biparietal diameter and
head circumference can be measured sonographically, and Thurnau and
colleagues (1991) used the fetal-pelvic index to identify labor
complications. However, the sensitivity of such measurements to predict
CPD is poor (Ferguson, 1998; Korhonen, 2015).

■ Face Presentation
Etiology and Diagnosis
With this presentation, the neck is hyperextended so that the occiput is in
contact with the fetal back, and the chin (mentum) is presenting (Fig. 23-4).
The rate is approximately 0.1 percent of births (Arsène, 2019; Gardberg,
2011).

FIGURE 23-4 Face presentation. The chin is directly posterior. Vaginal delivery is impossible unless
the chin rotates anteriorly.

Causes of face presentations are numerous and include conditions that
favor neck extension or prevent flexion. Preterm fetuses, with their smaller
head dimensions, can engage before conversion to occiput presentation, and
multifetal gestations carry increased risk (Arsène, 2019; Shaffer, 2006). High
parity is another predisposing factor (Fuchs, 1985). In these cases, a
pendulous maternal abdomen permits the fetal back to sag forward, which
promotes extension of the cervical spine. Fetal malformations and
hydramnios are other risk factors for face or brow presentations, and

anencephalic fetuses naturally present by the face (Bashiri, 2008). Last,
extended neck positions develop more frequently when the pelvis is
contracted or the fetus is very large. In a series of 141 face presentations
studied by Hellman and coworkers (1950), the incidence of inlet contraction
was 40 percent. This high incidence of pelvic contraction should be kept in
mind when considering management.
Face presentation is diagnosed by vaginal examination and palpation of
facial features. Notably, a breech may be mistaken for a face presentation.
With careful examination, however, the finger encounters muscular resistance
with the anus, whereas the bony, less-yielding jaws and palate are felt
through the mouth. The finger, upon removal from the anus, may be stained
with meconium. The mouth and malar eminences form a triangular shape,
whereas the ischial tuberosities and anus lie in a straight line. Sonography
can aid unclear cases (Bellussi, 2017). Used rarely, radiographs demonstrate
a hyperextended head with the facial bones at or below the pelvic inlet (Duff,
1981).

Mechanism of Labor
The fetal face may present with the chin (mentum) anteriorly, transversely, or
posteriorly, relative to the maternal symphysis pubis (Chap. 22, p. 418).
Although some mentum posterior presentations persist, most convert
spontaneously to an anterior position, even as late as second-stage labor
(Duff, 1981; Sharshiner, 2015).
With the chin anterior, internal rotation of the face brings the chin under
the symphysis pubis (Fig. 23-5). Only in this way can the neck traverse the
posterior surface of the symphysis pubis. After anterior rotation and descent,
the chin and mouth appear at the vulva, and the undersurface of the chin
presses against the symphysis. Once the chin clears the symphysis, the neck
can flex. The nose, eyes, brow, and occiput then appear in succession over
the anterior margin of the perineum. After birth of the head, the occiput sags
backward toward the anus. Next, the chin rotates externally to the side
toward which it was originally directed, and the shoulders are born as in
cephalic presentations. Fortunately temporary, edema and bruising can
significantly distort the face.

FIGURE 23-5 Face presentation. A. Mechanism of labor for right mentoanterior position. B. Swollen
eyes and lips are common and transient in newborns delivered with face presentation.

Instead, if the chin persists posteriorly, the relatively short neck cannot
span the anterior surface of the sacrum. Moreover, the fetal brow is pressed
against the maternal symphysis pubis. This position precludes the flexion
necessary to negotiate the birth canal. Hence, as noted earlier, vaginal birth
from a mentum posterior position is impossible unless the shoulders enter the
pelvis at the same time, an event that is impossible except for an extremely
small or macerated fetus.

Management
During labor, fetal heart rate monitoring is best done with external devices to
help avoid face or eye injury. Because face presentations among term-size
fetuses are more common with some degree of pelvic inlet contraction,
cesarean delivery rates are substantially higher than with occiput
presentation. If indicated, low or outlet forceps delivery of a mentum anterior
face presentation can be completed (Chap. 29, p. 542). Vacuum extraction
has been associated with eye trauma and is not recommended (De Bernardo,
2017).
As noted, rotation to a mentum anterior position may occur late in labor.
Conversion methods should not be pursued. Namely, attempts to convert a
face presentation manually to an occiput one, to rotate a posterior chin to a
mentum anterior position, or to complete internal podalic version and
extraction are dangerous and not recommended.

■ Brow Presentation
This uncommon presentation is diagnosed when that portion of the fetal head
between the orbital ridge and the anterior fontanel presents at the pelvic
inlet. As shown in Figure 23-6, the fetal head thus occupies a position
midway between full flexion (occiput) and full extension (face). Rates range
from 0.1 to 0.2 percent of births (Gardberg, 2011; Verspyck, 2012).

FIGURE 23-6 Brow posterior presentation.

Risks for persistent brow presentation mirror those for face presentation.
A brow presentation is commonly unstable and converts to a face or an
occiput presentation (Cruikshank, 1973). The presentation may be recognized
by abdominal palpation when both the occiput and chin can be palpated
easily, but vaginal examination is usually necessary. The frontal sutures,
large anterior fontanel, orbital ridges, eyes, and root of the nose are felt
during vaginal examination, but neither the mouth nor the chin is palpable.
Sonographic landmarks have been described (Bellussi, 2017).
Except when the fetal head is small or the pelvis is unusually large,
engagement of the fetal head and subsequent delivery cannot take place as
long as the brow presentation persists. Engagement is impossible until
marked molding shortens the occipitomental diameter or, more commonly,
until the neck either flexes to an occiput presentation or extends to a face
presentation. The considerable molding essential for vaginal delivery of a
persistent brow characteristically deforms the head. The caput succedaneum
is over the forehead, and it may be so extensive that identification of the
brow by palpation is impossible. In these instances, the forehead is
prominent and squared, and the occipitomental diameter is diminished.
Management principles mirror those for a face presentation.

■ Transverse Lie
Etiology and Diagnosis
With this, the fetus’ long axis lies approximately perpendicular to that of the
mother. In a transverse lie, the shoulder is usually positioned over the pelvic
inlet. The head occupies one iliac fossa, and the breech the other. This
creates a shoulder presentation in which the side of the mother on which the
acromion rests determines the designation of the position as right or left
acromial. In addition, the back may be directed anteriorly or posteriorly and
also superiorly or inferiorly. Thus, it is customary to further distinguish right
or left varieties as dorsoanterior and dorsoposterior (Fig. 23-7).

FIGURE 23-7 Transverse lie. Leopold maneuver of a fetus with right acromiodorsoanterior position.

Transverse lie complicates approximately 0.3 percent of births
(Cruikshank, 1973; Gemer, 1994). Some of the more common causes include
abdominal wall relaxation from high parity, preterm fetus, placenta previa,
abnormal uterine anatomy, hydramnios, and contracted maternal pelvis.
A transverse lie is usually recognized easily, often by inspection alone.
The abdomen is unusually wide, whereas the uterine fundus extends to only
slightly above the umbilicus. No fetal pole is detected in the fundus, and the
ballottable head is found on one side and the breech on the other. When the
back is anterior, a hard resistance plane extends across the front of the

abdomen. When it is posterior, irregular nodules that represent fetal small
parts are felt through the mother’s abdominal wall. During vaginal
examination, in the early stages of labor, if the side of the thorax can be
reached, the sequential parallel ribs are felt. With further dilation, the
scapula and the clavicle are distinguished on opposite sides of the thorax.
The position of the axilla indicates the side of the mother toward which the
shoulder is directed.

Mechanism of Labor
Spontaneous delivery of a fully developed newborn is impossible with a
persistent transverse lie. After rupture of the membranes, if labor continues,
the fetal shoulder is forced into the pelvis, and the corresponding arm
frequently prolapses. After some descent, the shoulder is arrested by the
margins of the pelvic inlet. As labor continues, the shoulder is impacted
firmly in the upper part of the pelvis. The uterus then contracts vigorously in
an unsuccessful attempt to overcome the obstacle. With time, a uterine
contraction ring rises increasingly higher and becomes more marked. An
extreme form is the Bandl ring, described in the complication section. With a
neglected transverse lie, the uterus will eventually rupture. Even without this
complication, maternal and fetal morbidity rates with transverse lie are
increased because of the frequent association with placenta previa, umbilical
cord prolapse, and fetal manipulations during cesarean delivery.
If the fetus is small—usually <800 g—and the pelvis is large,
spontaneous delivery is possible despite persistence of the abnormal lie. The
fetus is compressed with the head forced against its abdomen. A portion of
the thoracic wall below the shoulder thus becomes the most dependent part,
appearing at the vulva. The head and thorax then pass through the pelvic
cavity at the same time. The fetus, which is doubled upon itself in a position
sometimes referred to as conduplicato corpore, is expelled.

Management
Active labor in a woman with a transverse lie typically requires cesarean
delivery. With dorsoanterior or back down position, neither the fetal feet nor
head occupies the lower uterine segment. A low transverse uterine incision
may lead to difficult fetal extraction. Thus, a vertical hysterotomy incision is
typically indicated. With dorsoposterior or back up position, one or both feet

can be grasped through a low transverse incision and delivered by breech
extraction (Chap. 28, p. 527).
Before labor or early in labor, with the membranes intact, attempts at
external cephalic version (ECV) are worthwhile. Candidate selection and
ECV technique mirror those for the breech fetus and are described in Chapter
28 (p. 528). ECV success rates are high and exceed those for breech fetuses
(Correia Costa, 2020; Salzer, 2015).

■ Umbilical Cord Prolapse
Prolapse complicates 0.1 to 0.2 percent of births (Behbehani, 2016;
Gibbons, 2014). As noted earlier, umbilical cord prolapse may be more
common with pelvis contraction. Most risks stem from an unengaged
presenting part and include hydramnios, breech presentation, transverse lie,
premature or small fetus with weight <2500 g, preterm rupture of
membranes, and multifetal gestation (Hasegawa, 2016). Funic presentation is
one in which the umbilical cord is the presenting part. Although rare, it is a
potent risk factor for prolapse and merits cesarean delivery prior to labor. Of
maternal factors for cord prolapse, grand multiparity, a distorting leiomyoma,
or müllerian uterine anomaly are less common reasons (Pagan, 2020).
Umbilical cord prolapse is usually diagnosed clinically. The cord loop is
palpated in a position lower in the vaginal canal than the head or beside it.
For most cases, prompt manual elevation of the fetal head relieves cord
compression. Concurrently, expeditious transfer to an operating room and
preparations for cesarean delivery are completed. Rarely, vaginal or
operative vaginal birth is reasonable if it can be completed much more
rapidly than emergent cesarean birth (Royal College of Obstetricians and
Gynaecologists, 2017).

■ Compound Presentation
With this, an extremity prolapses alongside the presenting part, and both
present simultaneously in the pelvis (Fig. 23-8). Goplerud and Eastman
(1953) identified a hand or arm prolapsed alongside the head once in every
700 deliveries. Much less common was prolapse of one or both lower
extremities alongside a cephalic presentation or a hand alongside a breech.
At Parkland Hospital, compound presentations were identified in only 68 of

more than 70,000 singleton fetuses—an incidence of approximately 1 in
1000. Compound presentations form in cases that prevent or delay occlusion
of the pelvic inlet and mirror those for other malpresentations.

FIGURE 23-8 Compound presentation. A. The left hand is lying in front of the vertex. With further
labor, the hand and arm may retract from the birth canal, and the head may then descend normally. B.
Photograph of a small 34-week fetus with a compound presentation that delivered uneventfully with the
hand presenting first. Mild bruising resolved uneventfully. (Reproduced with permission from Dr.
Elizabeth Mosier.)

In most cases, the prolapsed part should be left alone. It typically does
not impede labor and often retracts out of the way with descent of the
presenting part. If it fails to retract and if it appears to prevent descent of the
head, the prolapsed part can be pushed gently upward and the head
simultaneously downward by fundal pressure. In cases with a co-presenting
hand, the fetus may reflexively retract the hand if pinched by the provider.
In general, rates of perinatal mortality and morbidity are increased, but
these mainly stem from effects of associated preterm birth, prolapsed
umbilical cord, and traumatic obstetrical procedures. Tebes and coworkers
(1999) described a rare case of pressure-induced forearm ischemia and later
surgical amputation.

COMPLICATIONS WITH DYSTOCIA
Dystocia, especially if labor is prolonged, is associated with a higher
incidence of several common obstetrical and neonatal complications. Noted
earlier, maternal infection, either intrapartum chorioamnionitis or
postpartum endomyometritis, is more common with desultory and prolonged
labors. Postpartum hemorrhage from atony is increased with prolonged and
augmented labors. Uterine tears at the time of second-stage cesarean
delivery also occur at greater incidence if the fetal head is impacted in the
pelvis.
Uterine rupture is another risk. Abnormal thinning of the lower uterine
segment creates a serious danger during prolonged labor (Delafield, 2018;

Ronel, 2012). As described in Chapter 21 (p. 410), the upper segment of the
uterus contracts, retracts, and expels the fetus. In response, the softened
lower uterine segment and cervix dilate and thereby form a greatly expanded,
thinned-out tube through which the fetus can pass. The boundary between
these segments is the physiological retraction ring. When disproportion is so
pronounced that fetal descent arrests, the lower uterine segment becomes
increasingly stretched, and the normal retraction ring is unusually marked.
Seldom encountered today, the pathological retraction ring of Bandl is
associated with exaggerated thinning of the lower uterine segment. The ring
may be seen clearly as a sharp uterine indentation and signifies impending
lower segment rupture.
Fistula formation may result from dystocia, in which the presenting part
is firmly wedged into the pelvis. Excessive pressure is exerted against
tissues lying between the leading part and the pelvic wall. Because of
impaired circulation, necrosis may result and become evident several days
after delivery as vesicovaginal, vesicocervical, or rectovaginal fistulas
(Letchworth, 2018). Most often, pressure necrosis follows a very prolonged
second stage. These are rare today except in undeveloped medical systems.
Lower-extremity nerve injury in the mother can follow prolonged
second-stage labor. These are discussed in Chapter 36 (p. 644). Fortunately,
deficits are mainly sensory, and most resolve within 6 months of delivery in
most women.
Similar to the mother, the incidence of peripartum fetal sepsis rises with
longer labors. Caput succedaneum and molding develop commonly and may
be impressive (Fig. 22-7, p. 423) (Buchmann, 2008). Mechanical trauma
such as nerve injury, fractures, and cephalohematoma also are more frequent
and are discussed further in Chapter 33 (p. 608).

REFERENCES
Acker DB, Gregory KD, Sachs BP, et al: Risk factors for Erb-Duchenne palsy. Obstet Gynecol 71:389,
1988
Allen VM, Baskett TF, O’Connell CM, et al: Maternal and perinatal outcomes with increasing duration
of the second stage of labor. Obstet Gynecol 113(6):1248, 2009
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Intrapartum management of intraamniotic
infection. Committee Opinion No. 712, August 2017, Reaffirmed 2019a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Society for Maternal–Fetal Medicine: Safe
prevention of the primary cesarean delivery. Obstetric Care Consensus No. 1, March 2014,

Reaffirmed 2019b
Amorosa LF, Amorosa JH, Wellman DS, et al: Management of pelvic injuries in pregnancy. Orthop Clin
North Am 44(3):301, 2013
Anim-Somuah M, Smyth RM, Cyna AM, et al: Epidural versus non-epidural or no analgesia for pain
management in labour. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 5:CD000331, 2018
Arsène E, Langlois C, Clouqueur E, et al: Prognosis for deliveries in face presentation: a case-control
study. Arch Gynecol Obstet 300(4):869, 2019
Ashwal E, Livne MY, Benichou JI, et al: Contemporary patterns of labor in nulliparous and multiparous
women. Am J Obstet Gynecol 222(3):267.e1, 2020
Azaïs H, Leroy A, Ghesquiere L, et al: Effects of adipokines and obesity on uterine contractility.
Cytokine Growth Factor Rev 34:59, 2017
Bashiri A, Burstein E, Bar-David J, et al: Face and brow presentation: independent risk factors. J
Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 21(6):357, 2008
Behbehani S, Patenaude V, Abenhaim HA: Maternal risk factors and outcomes of umbilical cord
prolapse: a population-based study. J Obstet Gynaecol Can 38(1):23, 2016
Bellussi F, Ghi T, Youssef A, et al: The use of intrapartum ultrasound to diagnose malpositions and
cephalic malpresentations. Am J Obstet Gynecol 217(6):633, 2017
Blankenship SA, Raghuraman N, Delhi A, et al: Association of abnormal first stage of labor duration
and maternal and neonatal morbidity. Am J Obstet Gynecol 223(3):445.e1, 2020
Bleich AT, Alexander JM, McIntire DD, et al: An analysis of second-stage labor beyond 3 hours in
nulliparous women. Am J Perinatol 29:717, 2012
Boyle A, Reddy UM, Landy HJ, et al: Primary cesarean delivery in the United States. Obstet Gynecol
122(1):33, 2013
Buchmann EJ, Libhaber E: Sagittal suture overlap in cephalopelvic disproportion: blinded and nonparticipant assessment. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 87(7):731, 2008
Cahill AG, Srinivas SK, Tita AT, et al: Effect of immediate vs delayed pushing on rates of spontaneous
vaginal delivery among nulliparous women receiving neuraxial analgesia: a randomized clinical trial.
JAMA 320(14):1444, 2018
Caldeyro-Barcia R, Alvarez H, Reynolds SR: A better understanding of uterine contractility through
simultaneous recording with an internal and a seven channel external method. Surg Obstet Gynecol
91:641, 1950
Carlhäll S, Källén K, Blomberg M: Maternal body mass index and duration of labor. Eur J Obstet
Gynecol Reprod Biol 171(1):49, 2013
Carlson NS, Hernandez TL, Hurt KJ: Parturition dysfunction in obesity: time to target the pathobiology.
Reprod Biol Endocrinol 13:135, 2015
Chen HY, Huang SC: Evaluation of midpelvic contraction. Int Surg 67:516, 1982
Cheng YW, Hopkins LM, Caughey AB: How long is too long: does a prolonged second stage of labor in
nulliparous women affect maternal and neonatal outcomes? Am J Obstet Gynecol 191(3):933, 2004
Cheng YW, Shaffer BL, Bryant AS, et al: Length of the first stage of labor and associated perinatal
outcomes in nulliparous women. Obstet Gynecol 116(5):1127, 2010
Cibils LA, Hendricks CH: Normal labor in vertex presentation. Am J Obstet Gynecol 91:385, 1965
Cohen W: Influence of the duration of second stage labor on perinatal outcome and puerperal morbidity.
Obstet Gynecol 49:266, 1977
Cohen W, Friedman EA: Management of Labor. Baltimore, University Park Press, 1983
Cohen WR, Friedman EA: Misguided guidelines for managing labor. Am J Obstet Gynecol
212(6):753.e1, 2015a

Cohen WR, Friedman EA: Perils of the new labor management guidelines. Am J Obstet Gynecol
212(4):420, 2015b
Correia Costa S, Raposo MI, Machado AP, et al: External cephalic version: predictors of success and
influence on caesarean rates. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 256:211, 2020
Cruikshank DP, White CA: Obstetric malpresentations: twenty years’ experience. Am J Obstet Gynecol
116:1097, 1973
De Bernardo G, Svelto M, Giordano M, et al: Face presentation in delivery room: what is strategy? BMJ
Case Rep 2017:bcr2016219114, 2017
Delafield R, Pirkle CM, Dumont A: Predictors of uterine rupture in a large sample of women in Senegal
and Mali: cross-sectional analysis of QUARITE trial data. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth 18(1):432,
2018
Duff P: Diagnosis and management of face presentation. Obstet Gynecol 57:105, 1981
Eller WC, Mengert WF: Recognition of mid-pelvic contraction. Am J Obstet Gynecol 53:252, 1947
Ferguson JE, Newberry YG, DeAngelis GA, et al: The fetal-pelvic index has minimal utility in predicting
fetal-pelvic disproportion. Am J Obstet Gynecol 179:1186, 1998
Floberg J, Belfrage P, Ohlsén H: Influence of pelvic outlet capacity on labor. A prospective pelvimetry
study of 1,429 unselected primiparas. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 66:121, 1987
Friedman EA: Labor: Clinical Evaluation and Management, 2nd ed. New York, Appleton-CenturyCrofts, 1978
Friedman EA, Sachtleben MR: Amniotomy and the course of labor. Obstet Gynecol 22:755, 1963a
Friedman EA, Sachtleben MR: Dysfunctional labor. I. Prolonged latent phase in the nullipara. Obstet
Gynecol 17:135, 1961
Friedman EA, Sachtleben MR: Dysfunctional labor. VI. Abnormal progress in the multipara. Obstet
Gynecol 22:478, 1963b
Friedman EA, Sachtleben MR: Station of the fetal presenting part II: Effect on the course of labor. Am
J Obstet Gynecol 93:530, 1965
Friedman EA, Sachtleben MR: Station of the fetal presenting part IV: Arrest of descent in nulliparas.
Obstet Gynecol 47:129, 1976
Fuchs K, Peretz BA, Marcovici R, et al: The grand multipara—is it a problem? Int J Gynaecol Obstet
73:321, 1985
Fyfe EM, Anderson NH, North RA, et al: Risk of first-stage and second-stage cesarean delivery by
maternal body mass index among nulliparous women in labor at term. Obstet Gynecol 117(6):1315,
2011
Gardberg M, Leonova Y, Laakkonen E: Malpresentations—impact on mode of delivery. Acta Obstet
Gynecol Scand 90(5):540, 2011
Gemer O, Segal S: Incidence and contribution of predisposing factors to transverse lie presentation. Int J
Gynaecol Obstet 44(3):219, 1994
Gibbons C, O’Herlihy C, Murphy JF: Umbilical cord prolapse—changing patterns and improved
outcomes: a retrospective cohort study. BJOG 121(13):1705, 2014
Goplerud J, Eastman NJ: Compound presentation: survey of 65 cases. Obstet Gynecol 1:59, 1953
Grantz KL, Sundaram R, Ma L, et al: Reassessing the duration of the second stage of labor in relation to
maternal and neonatal morbidity. Obstet Gynecol 131(2):345, 2018
Grobman WA, Bailit J, Lai Y, et al: Association of the duration of active pushing with obstetric
outcomes. Obstet Gynecol 127(4):667, 2016
Handa VL, Laros RK: Active-phase arrest in labor: predictors of cesarean delivery in a nulliparous
population. Obstet Gynecol 81:758, 1993

Hannah M, Ohlsson A, Farine D, et al: International Term PROM Trial: a RCT of induction of labor for
prelabor rupture of membranes at term. Am J Obstet Gynecol 174:303, 1996
Hannah ME, Hodnett ED, Willan A, et al: Prelabor rupture of the membranes at term: expectant
management at home or in hospital? Obstet Gynecol 96:533, 2000
Harper LM, Caughey AB, Roehl KA, et al: Defining an abnormal first stage of labor based on maternal
and neonatal outcomes. Am J Obstet Gynecol 210(6):536.e1, 2014
Hasegawa J, Ikeda T, Sekizawa A, et al: Obstetric risk factors for umbilical cord prolapse: a nationwide
population-based study in Japan. Arch Gynecol Obstet 294(3):467, 2016
Hauth JC, Hankins GD, Gilstrap LC III: Uterine contraction pressures achieved in parturients with
active phase arrest. Obstet Gynecol 78:344, 1991
Hauth JC, Hankins GD, Gilstrap LC III, et al: Uterine contraction pressures with oxytocin
induction/augmentation. Obstet Gynecol 68:305, 1986
Hellman LM, Epperson JW, Connally F: Face and brow presentation: the experience of the Johns
Hopkins Hospital, 1896 to 1948. Am J Obstet Gynecol 59:831, 1950
Hendricks CH, Quilligan EJ, Tyler AB, et al: Pressure relationships between intervillous space and
amniotic fluid in human term pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 77:1028, 1959
Hillis DS: Diagnosis of contracted pelvis by the impression method. Surg Gynecol Obstet 51:857, 1930
Kaltreider DF: Criteria of midplane contraction. Am J Obstet Gynecol 63:392, 1952
Kawakita T, Reddy UM, Landy HJ, et al: Indications for primary cesarean delivery relative to body
mass index. Am J Obstet Gynecol 215(4):515.e1, 2016
Kominiarek MA, Zhang J, VanVeldhuisen P, et al: Contemporary labor patterns: the impact of maternal
body mass index. Am J Obstet Gynecol 205:244.e1, 2011
Korhonen U, Taipale P, Heinonen S: Fetal pelvic index to predict cephalopelvic disproportion-a
retrospective clinical cohort study. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 94(6):615, 2015
Laughon SK, Berghella V, Reddy UM, et al: Neonatal and maternal outcomes with prolonged second
stage of labor. Obstet Gynecol 124(1):57, 2014
Le Ray C, Audibert F, Goffinet F, et al: When to stop pushing: effects of duration of second-stage
expulsion efforts on maternal and neonatal outcomes in nulliparous women with epidural analgesia.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 201(4):361.e1, 2009
Letchworth P, MacLaren E, Duffy S: Obstetric fistula: a paradigm shift is needed in research and
prevention. BJOG 125(8):925, 2018
Lewkowitz AK, Nakagawa S, Thiet MP, et al: Effect of stage of initial labor dystocia on vaginal birth
after cesarean success. Am J Obstet Gynecol 213(6):861.e1, 2015
Mahon TR, Chazotte C, Cohen WR: Short labor: characteristics and outcome. Obstet Gynecol 84:47,
1994
Mark SP, Croughan-Minihane MS, Kilpatrick SJ: Chorioamnionitis and uterine function. Obstet Gynecol
95(6 Pt 1):909, 2000
Martin JA, Hamilton BE, Osterman MJ, et al: Births: final data for 2013. Natl Vital Stat Rep 64(1):1,
2015
Martin JA, Hamilton BE, Osterman MJ: Births: final data for 2018. Natl Vital Stat Rep 68(13):1, 2019
Mengert WF: Estimation of pelvic capacity. JAMA 138:169, 1948
Menticoglou SM, Manning F, Harman C, et al: Perinatal outcomes in relation to second-stage duration.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 173:906, 1995a
Menticoglou SM, Perlman M, Manning FA: High cervical spinal cord injury in neonates delivered with
forceps: report of 15 cases. Obstet Gynecol 86:589, 1995b

Mozurkewich E, Chilimigras J, Koepke E, et al: Indications for induction of labour: a best-evidence
review. BJOG 116(5):626, 2009
Mueller P: About the prognosis for delivery with a narrow pelvis. Arch Gynaekol 27:311, 1885
Myers ER, Sanders GD, Coeytaux RR, et al: Labor dystocia. Comparative Effectiveness Review No.
226. AHRQ Publication No. 29-EHC007. Rockville, Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality,
2020
Nelson DB, McIntire DD, Leveno KJ: Relationship of the length of the first stage of labor to the length
of the second stage. Obstet Gynecol 122:27, 2013
Nelson DB, McIntire DD, Leveno KJ: Second-stage labor: consensus versus science. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 222(2):144, 2020
Oladapo OT, Diaz V, Bonet M, et al: Cervical dilatation patterns of ‘low-risk’ women with spontaneous
labour and normal perinatal outcomes: a systematic review. BJOG 125(8):944, 2018
Olah KS, Neilson J: Failure to progress in the management of labour. BJOG 101:1, 1994
Pagan M, Eads L, Sward L, et al: Umbilical cord prolapse: a review of the literature. Obstet Gynecol
Surv 75(8):510, 2020
Passos F, Cardose K, Coelho AM, et al: Antibiotic prophylaxis in premature rupture of membranes at
term. Obstet Gynecol 120:1045, 2012
Pattinson RC, Cuthbert A, Vannevel V: Pelvimetry for fetal cephalic presentations at or near term for
deciding on mode of delivery. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 3:CD000161, 2017
Peleg D, Hannah ME, Hodnett ED, et al: Predictors of cesarean delivery after prelabor rupture of
membranes at term. Obstet Gynecol 93:1031, 1999
Place K, Kruit H, Tekay A, et al: Success of trial of labor in women with a history of previous cesarean
section for failed labor induction or labor dystocia: a retrospective cohort study. BMC Pregnancy
Childbirth 19(1):176, 2019
Reynolds SR: Uterine contractility and cervical dilatation. Proc R Soc Med 44(8):695, 1951
Riehl JT: Caesarean section rates following pelvic fracture: a systematic review. Injury 45(10):1516,
2014
Ronel D, Wiznitzer A, Sergienko R, et al: Trends, risk factors and pregnancy outcome in women with
uterine rupture. Arch Gynecol Obstet 285(2):317, 2012
Rosenbloom JI, Stout MJ, Tuuli MG, et al: New labor management guidelines and changes in cesarean
delivery patterns. Am J Obstet Gynecol 217(6):689.e1, 2017
Roshanfekr D, Blakemore KJ, Lee J, et al: Station at onset of active labor in nulliparous patients and
risk of cesarean delivery. Obstet Gynecol 93:329, 1999
Rouse DJ, Owen J, Hauth JC: Active-phase labor arrest: oxytocin augmentation for at least 4 hours.
Obstet Gynecol 93:323, 1999
Rouse DJ, Weiner SJ, Bloom SL, et al: Second-stage labor duration in nulliparous women: relationship to
maternal and perinatal outcomes. Am J Obstet Gynecol 201(4):357.e1, 2009
Royal College of Obstetricians & Gynaecoloists: Umbilical cord prolapse. Green-top Guide No. 50, May
2014, Reaffirmed 2017
Salzer L, Nagar R, Melamed N, et al: Predictors of successful external cephalic version and assessment
of success for vaginal delivery. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 28(1):49, 2015
Satin AJ, Maberry MC, Leveno KJ, et al: Chorioamnionitis: a harbinger of dystocia. Obstet Gynecol
79:913, 1992
Saunders NS, Paterson CM, Wadsworth J: Neonatal and maternal morbidity in relation to the length of
the second stage of labour. BJOG 99(5):381, 1992

Shaffer BL, Cheng YW, Vargas JE, et al: Face presentation: predictors and delivery route. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 194(5):e10, 2006
Sharma SK, McIntire DD, Wiley J, et al: Labor analgesia and cesarean delivery: an individual patient
meta-analysis of nulliparous women. Anesthesiology 100(1):142, 2004
Sharshiner R, Silver RM: Management of fetal malpresentation. Clin Obstet Gynecol 58(2):246, 2015
Sheiner E, Levy A, Mazor M: Precipitate labor: higher rates of maternal complications. Eur J Obstet
Gynecol Reprod Biol 116(1):43, 2004
Spörri S, Thoeny HC, Raio Let al: MR imaging pelvimetry: a useful adjunct in the treatment of women
at risk for dystocia? AJR Am J Roentgenol 179(1):137, 2002
Tebes CC, Mehta P, Calhoun DA, et al: Congenital ischemic forearm necrosis associated with a
compound presentation. J Matern Fetal Med 8:281, 1999
Thom H: The obstetrical significance of pelvic variations: a study of 450 primiparous women. BMJ
2:210, 1937
Thorp JM Jr, Pahel-Short L, Bowes WA Jr: The Mueller-Hillis maneuver: can it be used to predict
dystocia? Obstet Gynecol 82:519, 1993
Thuillier C, Roy S, Peyronnet V, et al: Impact of recommended changes in labor management for
prevention of the primary cesarean delivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 218(3):341.e1, 2018
Thurnau GR, Scates DH, Morgan MA: The fetal-pelvic index: a method of identifying fetal-pelvic
disproportion in women attempting vaginal birth after previous cesarean delivery. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 165:353, 1991
Timofeev J, Reddy UM, Huang CC, et al: Obstetric complications, neonatal morbidity, and indications
for cesarean delivery by maternal age. Obstet Gynecol 122(6):1184, 2013
Vallier HA, Cureton BA, Schubeck D: Pregnancy outcomes after pelvic ring injury. J Orthop Trauma
26(5):302, 2012
Verspyck E, Bisson V, Gromez A, et al: Prophylactic attempt at manual rotation in brow presentation at
full dilatation. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand. 91(11):13, 2012
Waldenström U, Ekéus C: Risk of labor dystocia increases with maternal age irrespective of parity: a
population-based register study. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 96(9):1063, 2017
World Health Organization: WHO recommendations: intrapartum care for a positive childbirth
experience. Geneva, WHO; 2018
Young RC: The uterine pacemaker of labor. Best Pract Res Clin Obstet Gynaecol 52:68, 2018
Zaretsky MV, Alexander JM, McIntire DD, et al: Magnetic resonance imaging pelvimetry and the
prediction of labor dystocia. Obstet Gynecol 106:919, 2005
Zhang J, Landy HJ, Branch DW, et al: Contemporary patterns of spontaneous labor with normal
neonatal outcomes. Obstet Gynecol 116:1281, 2010
Zhang J, Troendle JF, Yancey MK: Reassessing the labor curve in nulliparous women. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 187(4):824, 2002

