CHAPTER 14

Obstetrical Imaging

TECHNOLOGY AND SAFETY
GESTATIONAL AGE ASSESSMENT
FIRST-TRIMESTER ULTRASOUND
SECOND- AND THIRD-TRIMESTER ULTRASOUND
PLACENTA AND CERVIX
HYDRAMNIOS
OLIGOHYDRAMNIOS
DOPPLER
MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING
REFERENCES
Obstetrical ultrasound is fundamental to prenatal care. It is used to confirm
gestational age and viability; to detect and characterize abnormalities of the
fetus, amnionic fluid, and placenta; and to assist with diagnostic and
therapeutic procedures.
Ultrasound practice continues to evolve. The number of components
included in the second-trimester standard and detailed fetal anatomical
surveys has expanded. With improved image resolution, fetal abnormalities
are increasingly identified in the late first trimester. This has prompted the
requirement for a limited anatomical survey during the standard first-

trimester examination and has led to the development of a new detailed firsttrimester examination. Detailed placental evaluation is a new specialized
examination to aid detection and characterization of placenta accreta
spectrum.
Across the United States, pregnant women receive ultrasound
examinations in various practice settings staffed by obstetrician–
gynecologists, maternal–fetal medicine specialists, and radiologists. Ideally,
examinations are performed by registered diagnostic medical sonographers
or physicians with certification in their area(s) of practice and in units
accredited by the American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine (AIUM) or
American College of Radiology. Components of accreditation include
evidence of physician training, sonographer credentialing, continuing
medical education, and protocols and procedures to ensure proper and safe
ultrasound practice. One important component is independent review of
submitted images.
To standardize ultrasound education for residents in obstetrics and
gynecology and fellows in maternal-fetal medicine, the American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, the Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine,
and the AIUM have developed consensus documents (Abuhamad, 2018;
Benacerraf, 2018). A focus of training—and of ultrasound practice—is
standardization of an ultrasound curriculum and provision of competency
assessment tools for image acquisition.

TECHNOLOGY AND SAFETY
The image on the ultrasound screen is produced by sound waves that are
reflected back from fluid and tissue interfaces of the fetus, amnionic fluid,
and placenta. Ultrasound transducers contain groups of piezoelectric crystals
that convert electrical energy into sound waves and convert returning sound
waves back into electrical energy. The sound waves are emitted in
synchronized pulses. As these pulses pass through tissue layers, dense tissue
such as bone produces high-velocity reflected waves. With routine grayscale imaging, which is also known as brightness-mode (B-mode), these
reflected waves are displayed as bright echoes on the screen. Conversely,
fluid generates few reflected waves and appears dark. Digital images
generated at 50 to more than 100 frames per second undergo postprocessing
that yields the appearance of real-time imaging.

Ultrasound refers to sound waves traveling at a frequency above 20,000
hertz (Hz [cycles per second]). Transducers use wide-bandwidth technology
to perform within a range of frequencies. Higher-frequency transducers yield
better image resolution, whereas lower frequencies penetrate tissue more
effectively. In early pregnancy, a 5- to 12-megahertz (MHz) transvaginal
transducer usually provides excellent resolution, because the early fetus lies
close to the transducer. In the first and second trimesters, a 4- to 6-MHz
transabdominal transducer is similarly sufficiently close to the fetus to yield
precise images. By the third trimester, however, a lower-frequency 2- to 5MHz transducer may be needed for tissue penetration—particularly in obese
patients—and this can lead to compromised image resolution.

■ Embryo and Fetal Safety
Sonography should be performed only for a valid medical indication and use
the lowest possible exposure setting to gain necessary information. This is
the ALARA principle—as low as reasonably achievable. Examinations are
performed only by those trained to recognize fetal abnormalities and artifacts
that may mimic pathology and with techniques to avoid ultrasound exposure
beyond what is considered safe for the fetus (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020; American Institute of Ultrasound in
Medicine, 2018a). No causal relationship has been demonstrated between
diagnostic ultrasound and any recognized adverse effect in human pregnancy.
The International Society of Ultrasound in Obstetrics and Gynecology (2016)
further concludes that there is no scientifically proven association between
ultrasound exposure in the first or second trimesters and autism spectrum
disorder or its severity.
All ultrasound machines are required to display two indices: the thermal
index and the mechanical index. The thermal index measures the relative
probability that the examination may raise the temperature enough to induce
injury. However, fetal damage resulting from commercially available
ultrasound equipment in routine practice is extremely unlikely. The potential
for temperature elevation is higher with longer examination time and is
greater near bone than in soft tissue. Theoretical risks are higher during
organogenesis than later in gestation. The thermal index for soft tissue, Tis,
should be used before 10 weeks’ gestation, and that for bone, Tib, at or
beyond 10 weeks (American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine, 2018a).

The thermal index is higher with pulsed Doppler applications than with
routine B-mode scanning. In the first trimester, if pulsed Doppler is clinically
indicated, the thermal index should be ≤0.7, and the exposure time should be
as brief as possible (American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine, 2020b).
This is an important consideration when pulsed Doppler is applied to assist
with identification or characterization of suspected abnormalities at 11 to 14
weeks’ gestation. To document the embryonic or fetal heart rate, motionmode (M-mode) scanning is used instead of pulsed Doppler imaging.
The mechanical index is a measure of the likelihood of adverse effects
related to rarefactional pressure, such as cavitation, which is relevant only in
tissues that contain air. Microbubble ultrasound contrast agents are not used
in pregnancy for this reason. In mammalian tissues that do not contain gas
bodies, no adverse effects have been reported over the range of
diagnostically relevant exposures. Fetuses cannot contain gas bodies and thus
are not considered at risk.
The use of ultrasound for any nonmedical purpose, such as “keepsake
fetal imaging,” is considered contrary to responsible medical practice and
is not condoned by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) (2019), the
American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine (2020b), or the American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020b). However, images or
video clips from medically indicated ultrasound examinations may be shared
with patients.

■ Operator Safety
The reported prevalence of work-related musculoskeletal discomfort or
injury among sonographers approximates 70 percent (Janga, 2012; Roll,
2012). The most common injuries are capsulitis and tendonitis of the
shoulder, epicondylitis of the elbow, carpal and cubital tunnel syndrome, and
neck or back strain (Murphey, 2018). The main risk factors for injury during
transabdominal ultrasound examinations are awkward posture, sustained
static forces, and various pinch grips used to maneuver the transducer
(Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2006). Excessive flexion,
extension, or abduction while scanning places stress on joints and muscles.
Task repetition without adequate recovery time may compound risks.
Maternal habitus can be contributory because more force is often needed
when imaging obese patients.

The following guidelines may help avert injury:
1. Position the patient close to you on the examination table. As a result, your
elbow is close to your body, shoulder abduction is <30 degrees, and your
thumb is facing up.
2. Adjust the table or chair height so that your forearm is parallel to the floor.
3. Use a chair with back support, if seated. Avoid leaning toward the patient
or monitor. Support your feet, and keep ankles in neutral position.
4. Face the monitor squarely and position it so that it is viewed at a neutral
angle from the horizon, such as 15 degrees downward.
5. Avoid reaching, bending, or twisting while scanning.
6. Take frequent breaks to help prevent muscle strain. Stretching and
strengthening exercises can be helpful.

GESTATIONAL AGE ASSESSMENT
Gestational age is based on two things: the certainty of the woman’s last
menstrual period (LMP) date and measurements of the embryo or fetus at the
initial ultrasound examination. Gestational sac measurement is not suitable
for gestational age assignment. If the LMP is certain, the estimated due date
(EDD) is based on LMP unless the date–measurement discrepancy exceeds
thresholds listed in Table 14-1 (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2019b,c). If the discrepancy exceeds these thresholds, or if
the LMP is uncertain or unknown, ultrasound measurements establish the
EDD.
TABLE 14-1. Assessment of Gestational Age

Ultrasound measurement of the crown-rump length (CRL) is the most
accurate method to establish or confirm gestational age (Appendix, p. 1234).
Transvaginal imaging yields higher resolution images. The CRL is measured
in the midsagittal plane with the embryo or fetus in a neutral, nonflexed
position. This allows its length to be measured in a straight line (Fig. 14-1).
The mean of three discrete measurements is used. Before 14 weeks’
gestation, the CRL is accurate to within 5 to 7 days (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019c).

FIGURE 14-1 A. The measured crown-rump length is approximately 7 mm in this 6-week embryo. B.
M-mode demonstrates embryonic cardiac activity and a heart rate of 124 beats per minute.

Starting at 140/7 weeks’ gestation, the biparietal diameter, head
circumference, abdominal circumference, and femur length should be
measured. Equipment software formulas calculate estimated gestational age
and fetal weight from these four biometric parameters. The accuracy of the
fetal weight estimate is assumed to be within 15 percent of the actual weight
(American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine, 2018a). Measurement criteria
are discussed in Chapter 15 (p. 272).
Before 22 weeks, gestational age assessment using these four biometric
parameters is accurate to within 7 to 10 days (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019c). Various nomograms are available
for other structural measurements, including the transverse cerebellar
diameter, orbital distances, thoracic circumference, and length of the ear,
kidney, long bones, and feet. These may be used to address specific questions
regarding organ system abnormalities or syndromes (Appendix, pp. 1238–
1241).
If the initial ultrasound examination is performed at or beyond 22 weeks’
gestation, the pregnancy is suboptimally dated (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019b). In such cases, subsequent
ultrasound evaluation in 3 to 4 weeks may be considered. This is especially
true if the ultrasound measurements are smaller than expected for gestational
age based on LMP and thus poor fetal growth is a possibility.
Fertilization is presumed to occur 2 weeks after a confident LMP.
Therefore, for pregnancies achieved with in vitro fertilization and fresh
transfer, 266 days are added to the egg-retrieval/fertilization date to calculate

the EDD. Similarly, if using a day-3 frozen embryo, adding 263 days
accounts for the days of embryo culture. For pregnancies conceived with
intrauterine insemination, LMP is used.

FIRST-TRIMESTER ULTRASOUND
The three types of first-trimester examinations include standard ultrasound;
nuchal translucency evaluation—between 11 and 14 weeks’ gestation; and
detailed first-trimester anatomy evaluation between 12 and 14 weeks’
gestation.
Indications for the standard first-trimester examination are listed in Table
14-2 (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020;
American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine, 2018a). Early pregnancy can
be evaluated with transabdominal or transvaginal sonography, or both. The
components listed in Table 14-3 should be assessed (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020; American Institute of Ultrasound in
Medicine, 2018a). The first trimester is the ideal time to evaluate the uterus,
adnexa, and cul-de-sac. Ultrasound interrogation at this time can reliably
diagnose anembryonic gestation, embryonic demise, ectopic pregnancy, and
gestational trophoblastic disease. In a multifetal gestation, determination of
chorionicity is most accurate in the first trimester (Chap. 48, p. 841).
Gestational sac implantation in a prior cesarean scar is increasingly detected
in the first trimester as well.
TABLE 14-2. Indications for First-Trimester Ultrasound Examination

TABLE 14-3. Components of Standard Ultrasound Examination by
Trimester

An intrauterine gestational sac may be consistently visualized with
transvaginal sonography by 5 weeks’ gestation, and an embryo with cardiac
activity by 6 weeks. The embryo should be visible transvaginally once the
mean sac diameter has reached 25 mm—otherwise the gestation is
anembryonic. Whenever an embryo or fetus is identified, it should be
measured, and cardiac motion should be documented with either video clip
or M-mode scanning (see Fig. 14-1B). Cardiac motion may be visible with
transvaginal imaging when the length of the embryo is 2 mm and should be
visible at 7 mm in a live embryo (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2020). If an embryo measures <7 mm and has no visible
cardiac activity, subsequent examination is recommended in 1 week
(American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine, 2018a). At Parkland
Hospital, first-trimester demise is diagnosed with transvaginal ultrasound if
the embryo has reached 10 mm and lacks cardiac motion, taking measurement
error into consideration. Criteria to diagnose first-trimester demise are found
in Table 11-2 (p. 202).
A recent addition to the standard first-trimester examination is an
assessment of selected anatomical components when fetal size permits.
These include the calvarium, umbilical cord insertion into the ventral wall,
and presence of extremities (American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine,
2018a).

■ Nuchal Translucency
This represents the maximum thickness of the subcutaneous translucent area
between the skin and soft tissue overlying the fetal spine at the back of the
neck. The nuchal translucency (NT) is measured in the sagittal plane between
11 and 14 weeks’ gestation using precise criteria (Table 14-4) (American
Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine, 2018a; International Society of
Ultrasound in Obstetrics and Gynecology, 2016). When the NT measurement
is increased, the risk for fetal aneuploidy and various structural anomalies—
in particular heart defects—is significantly elevated. It is a component of
first-trimester aneuploidy screening, which is discussed in Chapter 17 (p.
337). The aneuploidy risk calculation depends on the crown-rump length.
However, an NT measurement ≥3 mm is associated with increased risk for
fetal structural or genetic abnormalities and is an indication for a detailed
fetal anatomical survey.

TABLE 14-4. Guidelines for Nuchal Translucency (NT) Measurement

■ Detailed First-Trimester Ultrasound Examination
Assessment for fetal abnormalities in an at-risk pregnancy may include a
detailed survey of fetal anatomy at 12 to 14 weeks’ gestation. Such
examinations are a recent addition and limited to specialized centers with
advanced imaging skills, although use may be expected to expand. Despite
improvements in imaging technology, it is not realistic to expect that all
major abnormalities detectable in the second trimester may be visualized
in the first trimester. Abnormalities may change in appearance as the fetus
develops, and new findings may become evident. If an abnormality is
identified in the first trimester, detailed second-trimester sonography will be
important to further characterize the findings or identify associated
abnormalities. In an at-risk pregnancy, a normal first-trimester examination
does not obviate the recommendation for a detailed second-trimester fetal
anatomical survey.
In a systematic review of more than 118,000 pregnancies undergoing fetal
NT assessment, 46 percent of major abnormalities were detected in low-risk

or unselected pregnancies (Karim, 2017). In high-risk pregnancies, anomaly
detection exceeded 60 percent. Detection rates are high for fetal anencephaly,
alobar holoprosencephaly, and ventral wall defects. However, in one series
of 40,000 pregnancies with fetal anatomical evaluation at the time of NT
assessment, only a third of major cardiac anomalies were identified. No
cases of microcephaly, agenesis of the corpus callosum, cerebellar
abnormalities, congenital pulmonary airway malformations, or bowel
obstruction were detected (Syngelaki, 2011). Some of these abnormalities
had not yet developed by the end of the first trimester, and this is an
important caveat for counseling.

SECOND- AND THIRD-TRIMESTER ULTRASOUND
Ultrasound should be routinely offered to all pregnant women between 18
and 22 weeks’ gestation (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2020). Recognizing that the gestational age at which an
abnormality is identified may affect pregnancy management options,
providers often opt to perform the examination before 20 weeks. Indications
for second- and third-trimester sonograms are listed in Table 14-5
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020; American
Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine, 2018a). Based on data from large
insurance providers, pregnant women typically receive at least 4 to 5
sonograms per pregnancy (O’Keeffe, 2013). Examinations are classified as
standard, specialized, or limited. Specialized examination types include the
detailed fetal anatomy examination, detailed evaluation for placenta accreta
spectrum (p. 253), fetal echocardiography, Doppler velocimetry (p. 262),
and the biophysical profile (Chap. 20, p. 389).
TABLE 14-5. Indications for Standard Second- and Third-trimester
Ultrasound Examinations

■ Standard Second- and Third-Trimester Ultrasound
Examinations
The standard examination includes evaluation of fetal number and
presentation, cardiac activity, fetal biometry, amnionic fluid volume,
placental location, cervical length, and a survey of fetal anatomy (see Table
14-3). Anatomical components are listed in Table 15-1 (p. 273). With twins
or other multiples, documentation should also include the number of chorions
and amnions, comparison of fetal sizes, estimation of amnionic fluid volume
within each sac, and fetal phenotypic gender.

The American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine (2018a) revised its
prior 2013 standard ultrasound practice parameter to include the following
updates:
1. Components added to the standard fetal anatomical survey are presence of
the hands and feet, and when feasible, the three-vessel view and threevessel trachea views of the heart (Fig. 15-37, p. 290).
2. If the relationship between placenta and cervix cannot be assessed
transabdominally, transvaginal evaluation should be performed.
Transperineal evaluation remains an option but in our experience is rarely
used.
3. If the cervix appears abnormal or is not adequately visualized
transabdominally, transvaginal (or transperineal) examination is
recommended. If cervical length assessment is requested, measurement
should be based on a transvaginal image.
4. In the setting of velamentous cord insertion, color and pulsed Doppler
ultrasound should be used to evaluate for vasa previa (Figs. 6-6 and 6-7,
p. 115).

■ Detailed Second- and Third-Trimester Ultrasound
Examinations
The detailed fetal anatomy examination is also known as a targeted or
76811 examination. It is performed when the risk for a fetal structural or
genetic abnormality is elevated because of history, screening test result, or
abnormal finding during standard examination (Table 14-6) (American
Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine, 2019). The detailed ultrasound
examination is intended to be indication-driven and is not repeated without
an extenuating circumstance, such as a new risk factor (American Institute of
Ultrasound in Medicine, 2019). Physicians who perform or interpret these
ultrasound examinations should have gained expertise in fetal imaging
through both training and ongoing experience (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020).
TABLE 14-6. American Institute for Ultrasound in Medicine Indications for
Detailed Second- and Third-trimester Ultrasound Examinations

Components of the detailed examination are intended to be determined on
a case-by-case basis. Table 15-1 (p. 273) lists nearly 70 anatomical
components that may be included. When practices apply for adjunct
accreditation in performance of the detailed fetal anatomic survey, the
American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine specifies 50 components that
must be included when submitting normal cases for review. At Parkland
Hospital, we attempt to image these components in all detailed anatomic
surveys. When performing a given detailed examination, one challenge is
determining which components are needed for a given indication, as these
have not been codified. The most prevalent risk factors and thus indications
for detailed ultrasound examinations are maternal obesity and maternal age

≥35 years. In a systematic review of more than 16,000 pregnancies affected
by anomalies, obesity conferred modestly increased odds of a neural-tube
defect (1.9), ventriculomegaly (1.7), cardiovascular anomaly (1.3), cleft
lip/palate (1.2), anorectal atresia (1.5), and limb reduction defect (1.7)
(Stothard, 2009). Subsequently, Biggio and colleagues (2010) reported that
obesity was associated with a higher anomaly prevalence only in the setting
of diabetes. Maternal age ≥35 years is considered another indication for
detailed sonographic examination. However, the fetal anomaly risk may be
related to the associated increase in aneuploidy. Goetzinger and colleagues
(2017) found that the anomaly rate among euploid fetuses born to older
mothers was not increased.

■ Fetal Echocardiography
This specialized examination of fetal cardiac structure and function is
designed to identify and characterize abnormalities. Echocardiography
indications include suspected fetal cardiac structural or functional
abnormality; heart rate abnormality or arrhythmia; extracardiac anomaly or
hydrops; chromosomal abnormality; nuchal translucency ≥3.5 mm; in vitro
fertilization; monochorionic twin gestation; first-degree relative to the fetus
with a congenital cardiac defect; first- or second-degree relative to the fetus
with a Mendelian syndrome and childhood cardiac manifestation; prior fetus
with heart block in the setting of maternal anti-Ro or La antibodies; retinoid
exposure; and metabolic risk factor such as pregestational diabetes or
phenylketonuria (American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine, 2020a).
Selected cardiac anomalies are reviewed in Chap. 15 (p. 291).

■ Limited Ultrasound Examination
A limited second- or third-trimester examination is performed to address a
specific clinical question. Evaluation of fetal number, presentation, and
cardiac activity; amnionic fluid volume; and placental location with respect
to the internal os are common indications (American Institute of Ultrasound
in Medicine, 2018b). The examination may include fetal biometry but not a
complete anatomical survey. In the absence of an emergency, a limited
examination is performed only if a standard ultrasound survey has already

been completed. Otherwise, provided that the gestational age is at least 18
weeks, a standard ultrasound examination is recommended.

■ Fetal Anomaly Detection
With current advances in imaging technology, approximately 60 percent of
major fetal abnormalities may be detected during standard ultrasound
examinations (Byrne, 2020; Rydberg, 2017). For detailed ultrasound surveys
performed in pregnancies at increased risk for anomalies, detection rates
may exceed 90 percent (Dashe, 2009; Levi, 1998). The sensitivity of the
examination varies according to factors such as gestational age, maternal
habitus, fetal position, equipment features, examination type, operator skill,
and the specific abnormality. For example, maternal obesity lowers the
anomaly detection rate by 20 percent (Dashe, 2009).
Detection rates vary considerably according to the abnormality. In the
EUROCAT network of 28 population-based registries, 40 percent of major
fetal abnormalities are detected prenatally (EUROCAT, 2019). Detection
rates of selected abnormalities are as follows: anencephaly, 98 percent;
spina bifida, 89 percent; hydrocephaly, 82 percent; cleft lip/palate, 70
percent; hypoplastic left heart, 88 percent; transposition of the great vessels,
69 percent; diaphragmatic hernia, 73 percent; gastroschisis, 92 percent;
omphalocele, 90 percent; bilateral renal agenesis, 94 percent; posterior
urethral valves, 80 percent; limb reduction defects, 60 percent; and clubfoot,
60 percent. In contrast, anomalies with poor sonographic detection rates in
the second trimester include microcephaly, choanal atresia, cleft palate,
Hirschsprung disease, anal atresia, and congenital skin disorders. Although
clinicians tend to focus on abnormalities amenable to sonographic detection,
those that are undetectable can be no less devastating to families. Every
sonographic examination should include a frank discussion of examination
limitations.

■ Three-Dimensional Ultrasound Examination
Over the past three decades, three-dimensional (3-D) ultrasound has gone
from a novelty to a feature of all modern equipment. After a region of interest
is identified, a volume is acquired using a 3-D transducer. This volume can
be rendered to display axial, sagittal, coronal, or oblique images. Sequential

slices may be generated, similar to computed tomographic (CT) images.
Unlike two-dimensional (2-D) scanning, which appears to be happening in
real time on the screen, 3-D imaging is static and obtained by processing a
volume of stored images. With four-dimensional ultrasound, rapid
reconstruction of the rendered images conveys the impression that the
scanning is in real time.
For selected anomalies, such as those of the face and skeleton, for
tumors, and for some cases of neural-tube defects, 3-D sonography can add
useful information (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists,
2020; Goncalves, 2005). That said, comparisons of 3-D and conventional 2D sonography for the diagnosis of most congenital anomalies have not
demonstrated better overall detection rates (Goncalves, 2006; Reddy, 2008).
The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020b) has
concluded that proof of a clinical advantage of 3-D ultrasound for prenatal
diagnosis is generally lacking.

PLACENTA AND CERVIX
The standard examination includes evaluation of the anatomical relationship
between the placenta and the internal cervical os, the umbilical cord
insertion into the placenta, and cervical length assessment. (American
Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine, 2018a). Evaluation for placenta accreta
spectrum is a detailed examination type (see Table 14-6).

■ Placenta Previa and Low-lying Placenta
The location of the placenta with respect to the cervix may be accurately
assessed by approximately 16 weeks’ gestation. If transabdominal
visualization is limited, transvaginal ultrasound is recommended. Placenta
previa is diagnosed if the placenta overlies the internal cervical os to any
degree or reaches its margin (Fig. 14-2A). If the inferior placental edge is
within 2 cm of the internal os but does not reach the cervix, the diagnosis is
low-lying placenta (see Fig. 14-2B). Whenever placenta previa or low-lying
placenta are diagnosed, a follow-up ultrasound examination is recommended
at approximately 32 weeks’ gestation, with transvaginal evaluation if needed
to verify the relationship between the placenta and cervix. If findings persist,

a 36-week ultrasound examination also is recommended. Management of
these placenta types are discussed in Chapter 43 (p. 757).

FIGURE 14-2 A. Placenta previa. In this transvaginal image, the inferior edge (arrow) of the posterior
placenta (P) overlies the internal cervical os (arrowhead). H = head. B. Low-lying placenta. The
inferior placental edge (arrow) is within 2 cm of the internal cervical os (arrowhead) in this
transvaginal image. The bladder (B) is seen anterior to the cervix.

The umbilical cord insertion into the placenta should be interrogated.
Marginal cord insertion, also known as battledore placenta, is diagnosed if
the umbilical cord inserts into the edge of the placenta or within 2 cm of the
placental margin. If the umbilical cord does not insert into the placenta—but
rather into the membranes—the diagnosis is velamentous cord insertion
(Fig. 6-6, p. 115). With the latter, the umbilical arteries and vein traverse the
membranes along the uterine wall unprotected by Wharton jelly before
entering the placental margin. If umbilical vessels course within the portion
of membrane overlying the cervix or within 2 cm of the cervix, the diagnosis
is vasa previa (Fig. 6-7, p. 116). Vasa previa may also occur if there are two
or more placental lobes—as with a succenturiate lobe—and the
interconnecting vessels traverse the intervening membranes over or in
proximity to the internal cervical os. Transvaginal ultrasound with color
Doppler highlights the vessels, and pulsed-wave Doppler of the spanning
arterial vessel demonstrates a fetal heart rate, which confirms the diagnosis.
A subsequent detailed ultrasound examination is recommended at 32 weeks’
gestation (Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, 2015b). Chapter 6 (p. 114)
contains content on management of these entities.

■ Placenta Accreta Spectrum
Placenta accreta, increta, and percreta comprise the placenta accreta
spectrum (PAS). They are characterized by abnormal placental invasion onto,
into, or through the myometrium, respectively (Chap. 43, p. 759). Evaluation
includes transabdominal and transvaginal imaging, with and without color or
power Doppler and with the patient’s bladder partially filled. In one
metaanalysis that included more than 3200 pregnancies, the sensitivity of
ultrasound to identify placenta accreta, increta, and percreta was 91, 93, and
89 percent, respectively. Corresponding specificities were 97, 98, and 99
percent, respectively (Pagani, 2018). Five ultrasound criteria assist with
detection and characterization of PAS (Fig. 14-3):

FIGURE 14-3 These third-trimester sonograms demonstrate findings that characterize placenta
accreta spectrum. A. Transabdominal color mapping depicts bridging vessels between the bladder and
the uterine serosa (arrowheads) and shows large intraplacental lacunae (arrow). B. Transvaginal
transverse image showing a large bulge (suggesting placenta percreta) along the bladder-uterine serosal
interface (arrowheads) and multiple large, irregular lacunae (arrows). C. Disruption of the bladderserosal interface. The echogenic interface between bladder and serosa appears irregular (arrowheads).
The smallest myometrial thickness measures <1 mm, and bridging vessels are highlighted by color
Doppler. Large lacunae also are shown (arrows).

1. Placental lacunae, which are vascular spaces that may contain prominent
color Doppler flow

2. Attenuation or thinning of the retroplacental myometrium, such that the
smallest myometrial thickness measurement is <1 mm. This is also
referred to as loss of the retroplacental clear space
3. Disruption of the bladder-uterine serosal interface, which appears as an
irregular, echogenic boundary between the bladder and uterine serosa with
gray-scale imaging
4. Bridging vessels, which are demonstrated with color Doppler to course
from the placenta to the bladder-serosal interface
5. A placental “bulge” that pushes outward and distorts the contour of the
uterus or other organs. In some cases of placenta percreta, a focal
exophytic mass also is seen.
The accuracy of these criteria varies in published series and is affected
by the number and predictive value of given findings and by associated risk
factors such as placenta previa and number of prior cesarean deliveries
(Jauniaux, 2016; Rac, 2015). Serial evaluation may be helpful, particularly
in the third trimester. With concurrent placenta previa and history of cesarean
delivery, any of these ultrasound findings prompts a detailed ultrasound
evaluation. The role of magnetic resonance (MR) imaging as an adjunct in
pregnancies with suspected PAS is reviewed later (p. 268).

■ Cesarean Scar Pregnancy
Placental implantation within a prior hysterotomy scar—termed cesarean
scar pregnancy (CSP)—is often a precursor to second- or third-trimester
PAS (Happe, 2020; Rac, 2016; Timor-Trisch, 2014). Sonographically, the
gestational sac lies low and anteriorly in the uterus. CSPs may appear to rest
on the prior scar or may fill the niche, which is a myometrial pocket defect in
the thinned hysterotomy scar (Kaelin Agten, 2017). Placental sonolucencies,
a precursor to PAS lacunae, may be seen. The retroplacental myometrium
may be attenuated to a degree that the distance from the anterior trophoblastic
border to the uterine serosa measures <3 mm (D’Antonio, 2018; Moschos,
2014; Happe, 2020). Color Doppler may demonstrate prominent vascularity
in the region of the prior hysterotomy scar (Fig. 14-4). In some cases, the
gestational sac may bulge toward the bladder. CSP evaluation and
management are discussed in Chapter 12 (p. 229).

FIGURE 14-4 Cesarean scar pregnancy, transvaginal images. A. The trophoblast appears to fill the
scar “niche” (arrows). B. Outward bulging of the gestational sac toward the bladder (arrowheads). C.
Placental sonolucencies (arrows). D. Attenuation of the retroplacental myometrium. The distance from
the anterior trophoblastic border to the uterine serosa is <1 mm (arrows). Color Doppler demonstrates
vascularity in the region of the prior hysterotomy scar.

■ Cervical Length
Although the cervix may be imaged transabdominally (Fig. 14-5A),
visualization is often limited by maternal habitus, cervical position, or
shadowing by the fetal presenting part. In addition, the maternal bladder or
pressure from the transducer may artificially elongate the cervix’s
appearance. As a result, values from transabdominal or transvaginal
measurement of the cervix can differ significantly.

FIGURE 14-5 A. Transabdominal image of the cervix depicting the internal os and external os. B.
Transvaginal imaging provides a more accurate evaluation of the cervix and should be used for medical
decision-making. In this image, arrowheads mark the endocervical canal. (Reproduced with permission
from Dr. Emily Adhikari.)

If the cervix appears short or is inadequately visualized during
transabdominal evaluation, transvaginal assessment should be considered
(American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine, 2018a). Clinical decisionmaking should use only cervical length measurements obtained transvaginally
(Fig. 14-5B). Measurement should be performed at or beyond 16 weeks’
gestation. A short cervix is associated with an elevated risk for preterm
birth, particularly in those with prior preterm birth. Risk rises proportionally
with the degree of cervical shortening (Chap. 45, p. 793).
To measure the cervix transvaginally, the imaging criteria shown in Table
14-7 are followed. The endocervical canal should be visible in its entirety,
and images ideally are obtained over several minutes to capture dynamic
change. Funneling is a protrusion of amnionic membranes into a portion of
the endocervical canal that has dilated (Fig. 14-6). Funneling is not an
independent predictor of preterm birth but is associated with cervical
shortening. Transvaginal assessment is recommended if a funnel is suspected
transabdominally. The cervical length is measured distal to the funnel,
because the funnel’s base becomes the functional internal os. If the cervix is
dilated, as with cervical insufficiency, the membranes may prolapse through
the endocervical canal and into the vagina to produce an hourglass
appearance. Sludge represents an aggregate of particulate matter (debris)
within the amnionic sac and close to the internal os. In pregnancies at risk for
preterm birth, sludge further raises the risk.

TABLE 14-7. Criteria for Transvaginal Evaluation of the Cervix

FIGURE 14-6 Transvaginal image depicting a foreshortened cervix with funneling. Funneling is a
protrusion of amnionic membranes into a portion of the endocervical canal that has dilated. The distal
protruding edge of the funnel becomes the functional internal os (left arrow). Thus, the measured
cervical length, which lies between the arrows, should not include the funnel. (Reproduced with
permission from Dr. Emily Adhikari.)

AMNIONIC FLUID
■ Physiology
Amnionic fluid serves several roles. Fetal breathing is essential for normal
lung growth, and fetal swallowing permits gastrointestinal (GI) tract
development. The fluid also creates a physical space for fetal movement,
which is necessary for neuromusculoskeletal maturation. Amnionic fluid
further guards against umbilical cord compression and protects the fetus from
trauma. It also has bacteriostatic properties.
Early in pregnancy, amnionic fluid is similar in composition to
extracellular fluid. Amnionic fluid arises as a transudate of plasma either
from the fetus through its nonkeratinized skin or from the mother across the
uterine decidua and placenta surface (Beall, 2007). Specifically, early
transfer of water and other small molecules occurs via three mechanisms:
across the amnion—transmembranous flow; across fetal vessels on the
placental surface—intramembranous flow; and across fetal skin—
transcutaneous flow. Fetal urine production does not become a major
component of amnionic fluid until the second trimester, which explains why
fetuses with lethal renal abnormalities may not manifest severe amnionic
volume declines until after 18 weeks’ gestation. Water transport across the
fetal skin continues until keratinization occurs at 22 to 25 weeks. In the
second half of pregnancy, fetal urination is the primary source of amnionic
fluid. In late gestation, the fetal respiratory tract also produces approximately
350 mL of lung fluid per day. Fetal swallowing is the primary mechanism for
amnionic fluid resorption and averages 500 to 1000 mL per day (Mann,
1996). By term, the entire amnionic fluid volume is recirculated on a daily
basis (Table 14-8). However, impaired swallowing, secondary to either a
central nervous system (CNS) abnormality or GI tract obstruction, can result
in impressive amnionic fluid volume expansion.
TABLE 14-8. Amnionic Fluid Volume Regulation in Late Pregnancy

The osmolality of amnionic fluid is similar to that of fetal urine and
hypotonic to that of maternal and fetal plasma. Specifically, the osmolality of
maternal and fetal plasma approximates 280 mOsm/mL, whereas that of
amnionic fluid is about 260 mOsm/L. The hypotonicity of amnionic fluid
accounts for up to 400 mL per day of intramembranous fluid transfer across
and into fetal vessels on the placental surface (Mann, 1996). Maternal
dehydration can lead to higher maternal osmolality, which favors fluid
transfer from the fetus to mother and then from the amnionic fluid
compartment into the fetus (Moore, 2010).
Amnionic fluid volume expands from approximately 30 mL at 10 weeks’
gestation to 200 mL by 16 weeks and reaches 800 mL by the mid-third
trimester (Brace, 1989; Magann, 1997). Using dye dilution, Magann and
associates (1997) reported that the average amnionic fluid volume was
approximately 400 mL between 22 and 30 weeks’ gestation, then rose to 800
mL until 40 weeks, and subsequently declined by 8 percent per week. There
was a wide normal range, particularly in the third trimester. Abnormally
decreased fluid volume is termed oligohydramnios, whereas abnormally
increased fluid volume is termed hydramnios or polyhydramnios.

■ Semi-quantitative Assessment
Evaluation of amnionic fluid volume is a component of every second- or
third-trimester ultrasound examination. Volume is measured semiquantitatively using the single deepest pocket of fluid or the amnionic fluid
index (AFI). Both measurements are reproducible and, in the setting of a
fluid abnormality, can be followed serially over time to assess trends and aid

communication among providers. For this reason, subjective assessment
alone is not recommended.
The single deepest pocket of fluid is measured in a sagittal plane with the
ultrasound transducer held perpendicular to the floor and parallel to the long
axis of the woman. A pocket should be at least 1 cm wide to be considered
adequate, and the measurement should not include fetal parts or loops of
umbilical cord. Color Doppler is generally used to verify that umbilical cord
is not within the measurement. The measurement is considered normal if it is
>2 cm and <8 cm. Values below and above this range indicating
oligohydramnios and hydramnios, respectively. These thresholds correspond
to the 3rd and 97th percentiles (Chamberlain, 1984). When evaluating twins
and other multifetal gestations, a single deepest pocket is assessed in each
gestational sac, using the same normal range (Hernandez, 2012; Society for
Maternal-Fetal Medicine, 2013). The fetal biophysical profile similarly uses
a single deepest vertical pocket threshold of >2 cm to indicate normal
amnionic fluid volume (Chap. 20, p. 389).
To measure the AFI, the uterus is divided into four equal quadrants—the
right and left upper and lower quadrants, respectively. The AFI is the sum of
the single deepest pocket from each quadrant. In a study of 1400
measurements obtained from the INTERGROWTH-21st trial, the mean intraand interobserver variability of AFI measurements were each below 1 cm
(Sande, 2015). Two standard deviations from the mean, however, reached 5
and 7 cm, respectively. As useful rule of thumb, the AFI is generally three
times higher than the single deepest pocket of fluid.
The AFI is considered normal if >5 cm and <24 or 25 cm. Using an AFI
nomogram based on cross-sectional evaluation of nearly 800 uncomplicated
pregnancies, the mean AFI ranged between 12 and 15 cm from 16 weeks
until 40 weeks’ gestation (Moore, 1990). Other investigators have published
nomograms with similar mean values (Fig. 14-7) (Hinh, 2005; Machado,
2007).

FIGURE 14-7 Amnionic fluid index (AFI) according to gestational age–specific and threshold values.
The blue curves represent the 2.5th, 50th, and 97.5th AFI percentile values, based on the nomogram by
Moore (1990). Red and tan curves represent 50th percentile values for AFI from Machado (2007) and
from Hinh and Ladinsky (2005), respectively. The light blue and yellow shaded bars indicate threshold
values used to define hydramnios and oligohydramnios, respectively.

■ Hydramnios
Abnormally increased amnionic fluid volume complicates 1 to 2 percent of
singleton pregnancies (Dashe, 2002; Khan, 2017; Pri-Paz, 2012).
Hydramnios may be categorized as mild if the AFI is 25 to 29.9 cm;
moderate, if 30 to 34.9 cm; and severe, if ≥35 cm (Luo, 2017; Odibo, 2016).
Using a single deepest pocket of amnionic fluid, as is done in multifetal
gestations, mild hydramnios is defined as 8 to 9.9 cm, moderate as 10 to 11.9
cm, and severe hydramnios as ≥12 cm (Fig. 14-8). Mild hydramnios accounts
for approximately two thirds of cases and is frequently idiopathic and
benign. By comparison, severe hydramnios is far more likely to have an
underlying etiology and to have consequences for the pregnancy.

FIGURE 14-8 Severe hydramnios. This pocket of amnionic fluid measured >15 cm, and the amnionic
fluid index measured nearly 50 cm.

Underlying causes of hydramnios include fetal structural abnormalities or
genetic syndromes in approximately 15 percent and diabetes in 15 to 20
percent (Table 14-9). Selected anomalies and the likely mechanism by which
they cause hydramnios are shown in Table 14-10. Congenital infection, red
blood cell alloimmunization, and placental chorioangioma are less frequent
etiologies. Hydramnios may also complicate syphilis and cytomegalovirus,
toxoplasmosis, and parvovirus infections (Chaps. 67 and 68, pp. 1183 and
1206). Hydramnios is often seen with hydrops fetalis (Chap. 18, p. 360).
The underlying pathophysiology in such cases is frequently related to a highcardiac-output state, and severe fetal anemia a classic example. A detailed
ultrasound examination is indicated whenever hydramnios is identified. If a
fetal abnormality is identified at that time, the aneuploidy risk is significantly
elevated.
TABLE 14-9. Hydramnios: Prevalence and Associated Etiologies—Values
in Percent

TABLE 14-10. Selected Anomalies and Mechanism for Hydramnios

The degree of hydramnios positively correlates with the likelihood of an
anomalous fetus. At Parkland Hospital, the prevalence of an anomalous
neonate approximated 8 percent with mild hydramnios, 12 percent with
moderate hydramnios, and more than 30 percent with severe hydramnios
(Dashe, 2002). Even if no abnormality was detected during targeted

sonographic evaluation, the likelihood of a major anomaly identified at birth
was 1 to 2 percent if hydramnios was mild or moderate and 10 percent if
hydramnios was severe. The overall reported risk that an underlying anomaly
will be discovered after delivery ranges from 9 percent in the neonatal
period to 28 percent among infants followed to 1 year of age (Abele, 2012;
Dorleijn, 2009).
The amnionic fluid glucose concentration is higher in diabetic women
than in those without diabetes, and the AFI may correlate positively with the
amnionic fluid glucose concentration (Dashe, 2000; Spellacy, 1973; Weiss,
1985). Such findings support the hypothesis that maternal hyperglycemia
causes fetal hyperglycemia, which leads to fetal osmotic diuresis into the
amnionic fluid compartment. Repeat screening for gestational diabetes in
pregnancies with hydramnios does not appear to be beneficial if the secondtrimester glucose tolerance test result was normal (Frank Wolf, 2017).
Hydramnios is more frequently noted in multifetal gestations than in
singleton ones. In a review of nearly 2000 twin gestations, Hernandez and
coworkers (2012) identified hydramnios in 18 percent of both
monochorionic and dichorionic pregnancies. In monochorionic gestations,
hydramnios in one sac and oligohydramnios in the other are diagnostic
criteria for twin-twin transfusion syndrome (TTTS) (Chap. 48, p. 848).
Isolated hydramnios solely in one sac also may precede this syndrome’s
development (Chon, 2014). In the absence of a fetal abnormality or TTTS,
complication risks are not generally higher (Hernandez, 2012).
Idiopathic hydramnios is a diagnosis of exclusion. It accounts for up to
70 percent of all hydramnios cases, is mild in approximately 80 percent of
idiopathic cases, and subsequently resolves in more than one third (Odibo,
2016; Wiegand, 2016).

Management
Severe hydramnios occasionally results in early preterm labor or maternal
respiratory compromise. In such cases, large-volume amniocentesis—termed
amnioreduction—may be needed. The technique is similar to that for genetic
amniocentesis but is generally done with an 18- or 20-gauge needle. Fluid is
collected in either a vacuum container bottle or a larger syringe (Chap. 17, p.
344). Approximately 1000 to 2000 mL of fluid is slowly withdrawn over 20
to 30 minutes, depending on the severity of hydramnios and gestational age.

The goal is to restore amnionic fluid volume to the upper normal range.
Subsequent amnioreduction procedures may be required as often as weekly
or semiweekly.
In a review of 138 singleton pregnancies requiring amnioreduction for
hydramnios, a fetal GI malformation was identified in 20 percent, a
chromosomal abnormality or genetic condition in almost 30 percent, and a
neurological abnormality in 8 percent (Dickinson, 2014). In only 20 percent
of cases was the hydramnios idiopathic. The initial amnioreduction
procedure was performed at 31 weeks’ gestation, and the median gestational
age at delivery was 36 weeks.

Outcomes
Hydramnios can be associated with preterm birth, placental abruption,
uterine dysfunction during labor, and postpartum hemorrhage. When an
underlying cause is identified, the severity of hydramnios positively
correlates with risk for preterm delivery, small-for-gestational age newborn,
and perinatal mortality (Pri-Paz, 2012). However, idiopathic hydramnios is
generally not associated with preterm birth (Magann, 2010; Many, 1995;
Panting-Kemp, 1999). Placental abruption may result from rapid
decompression of an overdistended uterus following rupture of membranes
or therapeutic amnioreduction, occasionally days or weeks later. Uterine
dysfunction from overdistention may lead to postpartum atony and associated
postpartum hemorrhage.
With idiopathic hydramnios, birthweight exceeds 4000 g in nearly 25
percent of cases, and the likelihood is greater if the hydramnios is moderate
or severe (Luo, 2017; Odibo, 2016; Wiegand, 2016). A rationale for this
association is that larger fetuses have higher urine output, by virtue of their
increased volume of distribution, and fetal urine is the largest contributor to
amnionic fluid volume. Cesarean delivery rates are also higher in
pregnancies with idiopathic hydramnios, and reported rates range from 35 to
55 percent (Dorleijn, 2009; Khan, 2017; Odibo, 2016).
An unresolved question is whether hydramnios alone raises the risk for
perinatal mortality (Khan, 2017; Pilliod, 2015; Wiegand, 2016). Using birth
certificate data from California, Pilliod and colleagues (2015) reported that
at 37 weeks’ gestation, the stillbirth risk was sevenfold higher in pregnancies

with hydramnios. Risks appear to be compounded when fetal-growth
restriction is comorbid with hydramnios (Erez, 2005).

■ Oligohydramnios
Abnormally decreased amnionic fluid volume complicates 1 to 2 percent of
pregnancies (Casey, 2000; Petrozella, 2011). Oligohydramnios is diagnosed
if the AFI measures <5 cm or the single deepest pocket is <2 cm (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020). An AFI threshold of 5
cm is below the 2.5th percentile throughout the second and third trimesters
(see Fig. 14-7). Importantly, use of AFI rather than single deepest pocket will
identify more pregnancies as having oligohydramnios but without evidence of
improved pregnancy outcomes (Kehl, 2016; Nabhan, 2010). When evaluating
multifetal pregnancies for TTTS, a single deepest pocket <2 cm is used to
define oligohydramnios (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2021c). When no measurable pocket of amnionic fluid is
identified, the term anhydramnios is used.
By 18 weeks’ gestation, the fetal kidneys are the main contributor to
amnionic fluid volume. Selected renal abnormalities that lead to absent fetal
urine production include bilateral renal agenesis, bilateral multicystic
dysplastic kidney, unilateral renal agenesis with contralateral multicystic
dysplastic kidney, and the infantile form of autosomal recessive polycystic
kidney disease. Lower urinary abnormalities may also cause
oligohydramnios because of fetal bladder outlet obstruction (Figs. 15-58
through 15-61, p. 300). Complex fetal genitourinary abnormalities such as
persistent cloaca and sirenomelia similarly may result in a lack of amnionic
fluid. With oligohydramnios before the mid-second trimester, particularly
before 20 to 22 weeks, pulmonary hypoplasia is a significant concern. The
prognosis is extremely poor unless fetal therapy is an option (Chap. 19, p.
377).
Oligohydramnios is also associated with exposure to drugs that block the
renin-angiotensin system. These include angiotensin-converting enzyme
(ACE) inhibitors, angiotensin-receptor blockers, and nonsteroidal
antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). When taken in the second or third
trimester, ACE inhibitors and angiotensin-receptor blockers may result in
fetal hypotension, renal hypoperfusion, and renal ischemia, leading to
subsequent anuric renal failure (Bullo, 2012; Guron, 2000). Fetal skull bone

hypoplasia and limb contractures also have been described (Schaefer, 2003).
Additionally, NSAIDs can be associated with fetal ductus arteriosus
constriction and impaired fetal urine production (Chap. 8, p. 151).
Oligohydramnios in the late second trimester or in the third trimester is
often associated with uteroplacental insufficiency. A placental abnormality
or a maternal complication such as preeclampsia or vascular disease are
examples. Initially, ruptured membranes should be excluded. Then,
particularly in the second trimester, a detailed ultrasound examination should
be performed to search for fetal and placental abnormalities. If a placental
hematoma or chronic abruption is sufficiently severe to result in
oligohydramnios—the chronic abruption-oligohydramnios sequence (CAOS)
—then it commonly also causes growth restriction (Chap. 43, p. 750).

Management
Oligohydramnios detected before 36 weeks’ gestation in the presence of
normal fetal anatomy and growth is generally managed expectantly and
coupled with fetal surveillance (Chap. 20, p. 392). For late-preterm and
early-term pregnancies, risks of fetal compromise outweigh potential
complications of preterm delivery. The American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists (2021b) recommends delivery between 360/7 and 376/7
weeks. In a review of 16 trials of pregnancies with apparent isolated
oligohydramnios, oral or intravenous hydration was associated with a
significantly improved AFI. However, it was unclear whether this translated
into better pregnancy outcomes (Gizzo, 2015).

Outcomes
In a review of pregnancies with oligohydramnios at Parkland Hospital,
Petrozella and associates (2011) found that an AFI <5 cm identified between
24 and 34 weeks’ gestation was associated with increased risks for perinatal
morbidity and mortality (Table 14-11). Similarly, a metaanalysis comprising
more than 10,000 pregnancies found that oligohydramnios conferred a
twofold risk for cesarean delivery due to nonreassuring fetal status and a
fivefold risk for an Apgar score <7 at 5 minutes compared with pregnancies
with a normal AFI (Chauhan, 1999).

TABLE 14-11. Pregnancy Outcomes in Women Diagnosed with
Oligohydramnios between 24 and 34 Weeks’ Gestation at Parkland Hospital

As discussed, if oligohydramnios is defined as an AFI <5 cm rather than
a single deepest pocket <2 cm, more pregnancies will be classified as such.
Kehl and coworkers (2016) performed a prospective trial with more than
1000 term pregnancies in which women with an AFI <5 cm or a single
deepest pocket <2 cm were randomly assigned to labor induction or
expectant care. Significantly more pregnancies were diagnosed with
oligohydramnios using the AFI criterion—10 percent compared with just 2
percent—when single deepest pocket was used. This led to a higher rate of
labor induction in the AFI group but not to a difference in neonatal outcomes.

Borderline Oligohydramnios
This diagnosis is somewhat controversial. Also called borderline AFI. It
usually refers to an AFI between 5 and 8 cm (Magann, 2011; Petrozella,
2011). During the mid-third trimester, an AFI value of 8 cm is below the 5th
percentile on the Moore nomogram (see Fig. 14-7). Petrozella (2011) found
that pregnancies between 24 and 34 weeks’ gestation with an AFI between 5

and 8 cm were not more likely than those with an AFI >8 cm to have
maternal hypertensive complications or an increased risk for stillbirth and
neonatal death. Wood and colleagues (2014) reported a higher rate of fetalgrowth restriction in pregnancies with borderline AFI but not an increase in
rates of preterm delivery or need for neonatal intensive care. In a study of
late-preterm pregnancies that were otherwise uncomplicated, borderline AFI
conferred no increased risk for preterm delivery, nonreassuring fetal heart
rate tracing, low Apgar score, or neonatal respiratory compromise (Sahin,
2018). Evidence is insufficient to support fetal surveillance or delivery in
this setting (Magann, 2011).

DOPPLER
When sound waves strike a moving target, the frequency of the waves
reflected back is shifted in proportion to the velocity and direction of that
moving target—a phenomenon known as the Doppler shift. Because
magnitude and direction of the frequency shift depend on the motion of a
moving target, Doppler can help evaluate flow within blood vessels.
An important component of the Doppler equation is the angle of
insonation, abbreviated as theta (θ) (Fig. 14-9). This is the angle between the
sound waves from the transducer and flow within the vessel. Measurement
error becomes large when θ is not close to zero, in other words, when blood
flow is not coming directly toward or away from the transducer. For this
reason, ratios are often used to compare different waveform components and
allow cosine θ to cancel out of the equation. Figure 14-10 is a schematic of
the Doppler waveform and describes the three ratios commonly used. The
simplest is the systolic-diastolic ratio (S/D ratio), which compares the
maximal (or peak) systolic flow with end-diastolic flow to evaluate
downstream impedance to flow. Currently, two types of Doppler modalities
are available for clinical use.

FIGURE 14-9 Doppler equation. Ultrasound emanating from the transducer with initial frequency f o
strikes blood moving at velocity v. Reflected frequency f d is dependent on angle θ between beam of
sound and vessel.

FIGURE 14-10 Doppler systolic–diastolic waveform indices of blood flow velocity. S represents the
peak systolic flow or velocity, and D indicates the end-diastolic flow or velocity. The mean, which is the
time-average mean velocity, is calculated from computer-digitized waveforms.

Continuous-wave Doppler equipment contains two types of crystals, one
to transmit high-frequency sound waves and another to continuously capture
signals. In M-mode imaging, continuous-wave Doppler is used to evaluate
motion through time, however, it cannot image individual vessels.
Pulsed-wave Doppler uses only one crystal, which transmits the signal
and then waits until the returning signal is received before transmitting
another one. It allows precise visualization and color-flow mapping of the
vessel of interest. By convention, blood flowing toward the transducer is
displayed in red and that flowing away from the transducer appears in blue.

■ Umbilical Artery
The umbilical artery differs from other vessels in that it normally has
forward flow throughout the entire cardiac cycle. With advancing gestation,
the amount of flow during diastole increases because of decreasing placental
impedance. The S/D ratio approximates ≤4.0 after 20 weeks’ gestation, <3.0
after 30 weeks’, and close to 2.0 at term. More end-diastolic flow is
observed at the placental cord insertion than at the fetal ventral wall, a
reflection of downstream impedance to flow. Thus, abnormalities such as
absent or reversed end-diastolic flow will appear first at the cord insertion
site into the fetus. The International Society of Ultrasound in Obstetrics and
Gynecology recommends that umbilical artery Doppler measurements be
made in a free loop of cord (Bhide, 2013). However, assessment close to the
ventral wall insertion may optimize measurement reproducibility in cases in
which flow is diminished (Berkley, 2012).
The waveform is considered abnormal if the S/D ratio is >95th
percentile for gestational age. Threshold values are listed in the Appendix
(p. 1242). In extreme cases of growth restriction, end-diastolic flow can
become absent or even reversed (Fig. 47, p. 830). Such reversal of enddiastolic flow has been associated with greater than 70-percent obliteration
of the small muscular arteries in placental tertiary stem villi (Kingdom,
1997; Morrow, 1989).
Umbilical artery Doppler has been rigorously investigated to test of fetal
well-being. As described in Chapter 47 (p. 830), this tool aids management

of fetal-growth restriction and is associated with improved outcome in these
cases (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019a). It is
not recommended for other indications. Similarly, its use as a screening tool
for growth-restriction is not advised (Berkley, 2012). Abnormal umbilical
artery Doppler findings should prompt a detailed fetal evaluation, if not
already done, because abnormal measurements are often associated with
major fetal anomalies and aneuploidy (Wenstrom, 1991).

■ Ductus Arteriosus
Doppler evaluation of the ductus arteriosus is used primarily to monitor
fetuses exposed to indomethacin and other NSAIDs. Indomethacin may cause
ductal constriction or closure, particularly when used in the third trimester
(Huhta, 1987). The resulting increased pulmonary flow can cause reactive
hypertrophy of the pulmonary arterioles and eventual development of fetal
pulmonary hypertension. In a review of 12 randomized trials involving more
than 200 exposed pregnancies, Koren and coworkers (2006) reported that
NSAIDs raised the odds of ductal constriction 15-fold. The risk is typically
limited to drug use greater than 72 hours’ duration. Monitoring for ductal
constriction should be considered in such cases, so that the NSAID can be
discontinued if ductal constriction is identified. Fortunately, effects are often
reversible after NSAID discontinuation.

■ Uterine Artery
Uterine blood flow is estimated to rise from 50 mL/min early in gestation to
500 to 750 mL/min by term. The uterine artery Doppler waveform is
characterized by high diastolic flow velocities and turbulent flow. Greater
resistance to flow and development of a diastolic notch are associated with
later development of gestational hypertension, preeclampsia, and fetalgrowth restriction. Zeeman and associates (2003) also found that women
with chronic hypertension who had elevated uterine artery impedance at 16
to 20 weeks’ gestation were at greater risk to develop superimposed
preeclampsia. However, the technique, best testing interval, and defining
criteria for this indication have not been standardized. As the predictive
value of uterine artery Doppler testing is considered to be low, its use for
screening for hypertensive complications of pregnancy or for fetal-growth

restriction is not recommended in either high-risk or low-risk pregnancies
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019a, 2020b).

■ Middle Cerebral Artery
Doppler velocimetry of the middle cerebral artery (MCA) has become the
primary method of detecting fetal anemia and is central to surveillance of
alloimmunized pregnancies. Anatomically, the path of the MCA is such that
flow often approaches the transducer “head-on,” which allows accurate
determination of flow velocity (Fig. 14-11). The MCA is imaged in an axial
view of the head at the base of the skull and ideally within 2 mm of the
internal carotid artery origin. Velocity measurement is optimal when the
insonating angle θ is close to zero, and no more than 30 degrees of angle
correction should be used. In general, other fetal vessels are not suitable for
velocity assessment, because a larger insonating angle is needed and confers
significant measurement error.

FIGURE 14-11 Middle cerebral artery (MCA) Doppler. A. Color Doppler of the circle of Willis
demonstrates the correct location to sample the MCA. B. The waveform shows a peak systolic velocity
exceeding 70 cm/sec in a 32-week fetus with severe fetal anemia secondary to Rh alloimmunization.

With fetal anemia, the peak systolic velocity is enhanced due to greater
cardiac output and decreased blood viscosity (Segata, 2004). This permits
the reliable, noninvasive detection of fetal anemia in cases of blood-group
alloimmunization. Mari and colleagues (2000) demonstrated that an MCA
peak systolic velocity threshold of 1.50 multiple of the median (MoM) could
reliably identify fetuses with moderate or severe anemia. As discussed in

Chapter 18 (p. 355), MCA peak systolic velocity has replaced invasive
testing with amniocentesis as the preferred test for fetal anemia detection
(Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, 2015a).
MCA Doppler has also been studied as an adjunct in evaluation of fetalgrowth restriction (Chap. 47, p. 830). Fetal hypoxemia is associated with
increased blood flow to the brain, heart, and adrenal glands, which leads to
greater end-diastolic flow in the MCA. This phenomenon, called “brainsparing,” is actually a misnomer, as it does not protect the fetus but rather is
associated with perinatal morbidity and mortality (Bahado-Singh, 1999;
Cruz-Martinez, 2011). To evaluate redistribution of blood flow, investigators
have studied a ratio of the MCA pulsatility index (PI) to the umbilical artery
PI–termed the cerebroplacental ratio. Like the S/D ratio, the PI estimates
downstream impedance to flow (Fig. 14-10). In the PORTO (Prospective
Observational Trial to Optimize Paediatric Health in IUGR) study of
ultrasound-dated pregnancies with estimated fetal weights <10th percentile,
fetuses with a cerebroplacental PI ratio <1 had an 11-fold greater risk for
adverse perinatal outcomes (Flood, 2014). Such findings can further our
understanding of fetal pathophysiology. However, the utility of MCA
Doppler to aid the timing of delivery is uncertain, and it has not been adopted
as standard practice in the management of growth restriction (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2021a; Martins, 2020).

■ Ductus Venosus
The fetal ductus venosus shunts oxygenated blood from the intrahepatic
portion of the umbilical vein directly to the inferior vena cava, thus
bypassing the liver (Fig. 7-9, p. 127). The ductus venosus is imaged as it
branches from the umbilical vein at approximately the level of the
diaphragm. The waveform is biphasic and normally has forward flow
throughout the entire cardiac cycle (Fig. 14-12). The first peak reflects
ventricular systole, and the second is ventricular diastolic filling. These are
followed by a nadir during atrial contraction—termed the a-wave.

FIGURE 14-12 Venous Doppler abnormalities. A. Reversal of a-wave flow in the ductus venosus.
Arrows depict a-waves below the baseline. This finding may be identified with cardiac dysfunction in
the setting of severe fetal-growth restriction. B. Pulsatile flow in the umbilical vein. The undulating
umbilical venous waveform below the baseline indicates tricuspid regurgitation. Above the baseline is

the umbilical artery waveform, in which there is no visible end-diastolic flow. Because the venous
waveform is below the baseline in this image, it is not possible to determine whether the umbilical artery
end-diastolic flow is reversed.

It is believed that Doppler findings in preterm fetuses with growth
restriction show a progression in which umbilical artery Doppler
abnormalities are followed by ones in the MCA and then in the ductus
venosus. With severe fetal-growth restriction, cardiac dysfunction may lead
to flow in the a-wave that is decreased, absent, and eventually reversed and
to pulsatile flow in the umbilical vein (see Fig. 14-12). However, ductus
venosus Doppler assessment has not improved perinatal outcomes, and
neither the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2021a)
nor the Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine (Martins, 2020) recommend its
use in the routine management of fetal growth-restriction.

MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING
MR imaging is based on the excitation of hydrogen ions in the body by
pulsing radiofrequencies with high field-strength magnets (1.5 to 3 Tesla).
High-resolution fetal imaging is now possible, in part due to faster
acquisition times of less than one second per slice. The relaxing hydrogen
ions can be manipulated through various pulse sequences to produce different
representations on images. The classic example is simple fluid, such as
amnionic fluid or urine in the bladder, which appears bright on T2-weighted
and dark on T1-weighted image acquisitions.
Image resolution with MR is often superior to that with sonography
because MR is less hindered by bony interfaces, maternal obesity,
oligohydramnios, or an engaged fetal head. Thus, it can complement
sonography in evaluating suspected fetal abnormalities. Examples include
complex abnormalities of the fetal thorax and of the central nervous, GI,
genitourinary, and musculoskeletal systems. MR imaging is also used to
evaluate maternal pelvic masses and placental invasion. This modality,
however, is not portable, is time-consuming, and is generally limited to
referral centers with expertise in fetal imaging.
To guide clinical use, the American College of Radiology and Society for
Pediatric Radiology (2020b) have developed a practice guideline for fetal
MR imaging. This document acknowledges the primacy of sonography as the
preferred screening modality. Moreover, it recommends that fetal MR

imaging be used for problem solving to contribute to prenatal diagnosis,
counseling, treatment, and delivery planning. At Parkland Hospital, MR
imaging is performed in 15 percent of pregnancies with major fetal
abnormalities (Herrera, 2020). Specific indications are listed in Table 14-12
and are discussed subsequently (American College of Radiology, 2020b).
TABLE 14-12. Fetal Conditions for Which Magnetic Resonance Imaging
May Be Indicateda

■ Safety
MR imaging is not associated with known adverse fetal effects if performed
without administration of contrast media (Ray, 2016). It uses no ionizing
radiation, and human and tissue studies support its safety (Clements, 2000;
Reeves, 2010; Vadeyar, 2000; Wiskirchen, 1999). The strength of the
magnetic field is measured in tesla (T). Both 1.5T and 3T fetal MR imaging
can be done safely and successfully, assuming expertise of the imagers with
the physical principles of MR (Prayer, 2017). All clinical examinations must
adhere to the specific absorption rate, which is regulated by the FDA, and the
ALARA principle should be followed. Specifically, the amount of heat
generated in the MR is reflected in the specific absorption rate and must be
monitored.
The Society for Pediatric Radiology recommends 3T MR imaging
because of its improved signal-to-noise ratio, which results in better
resolution (Barth, 2017). We prefer 1.5T for diagnostic imaging given its
better field homogeneity. We reserve 3T for functional imaging, which
requires higher field strength.
Gadolinium-based MR contrast agents are gadolinium (Gd3+) chelates.
These contrast agents enter the fetal circulation and are excreted via fetal
urination into amnionic fluid. Here, they may remain for an indeterminate
period before being ingested and reabsorbed. The longer time the
gadolinium-chelate molecule remains in a protected space such as the
amnionic sac, the greater the potential for dissociation of the toxic Gd3+ ion.
In a population-based review from Ontario, children exposed to gadoliniumenhanced MR imaging in utero were at slightly increased risk for a broad set
of rheumatological, inflammatory, or infiltrative skin conditions (Ray, 2016).
In adults with renal disease, this contrast agent is associated with
development of nephrogenic systemic fibrosis, a potentially severe
complication. MR imaging with gadolinium is not recommended in
pregnancy without a life-threatening indication.

■ Technique
Before MR imaging, all women complete a written safety questionnaire that
includes information about metallic implants, pacemakers, or other metal- or
iron-containing devices. High-level magnetization may cause dangerous

movement in these devices, causing adjacent tissue damage and malfunction.
(American College of Radiology, 2020a). Iron supplementation may cause
image artifact in the colon but does not usually affect the resolution of fetal
images. In more than 4500 MR procedures performed at Parkland Hospital in
pregnancy during the past 18 years, <1 percent of our patients suffered
maternal anxiety secondary to claustrophobia. To reduce anxiety in this small
group, a single oral dose of diazepam, 5 to 10 mg, or lorazepam, 1 to 2 mg,
may be given.
To begin an MR examination, women are placed in a supine or left
lateral decubitus position. A torso coil is used in most circumstances to send
and receive the radiofrequency pulses, but a body coil can be used alone to
accommodate large maternal habitus. A series of three-plane localizers, or
scout views, are obtained relative to the maternal coronal, sagittal, and axial
planes. The gravid uterus is imaged in the maternal axial plane (7-mm slices,
0 gap) with a T2-weighted fast acquisition. Typically, these may be a singleshot fast spin echo sequence (SSFSE), half-Fourier acquisition single-shot
turbo spin echo (HASTE), or rapid acquisition with relaxation enhancement
(RARE), depending on the machine. Next, a fast T1-weighted acquisition
such as spoiled gradient echo (SPGR) is performed (7-mm thickness, 0 gap).
These large-field-of-view acquisitions through the maternal abdomen and
pelvis are particularly good for identifying fetal and maternal anatomy.
Orthogonal images of targeted fetal or maternal structures are then
obtained. In these cases, 3- to 5-mm slice thickness, 0 gap T2-weighted
acquisitions are performed in the coronal, sagittal, and axial planes.
Depending on the anatomy and underlying suspected abnormality, T1weighted images can be performed to evaluate for subacute hemorrhage, fat,
or location of normal structures that appear bright on these sequences, such
as liver and meconium in the colon (Brugger, 2006; Zaretsky, 2003b).
Short T1 inversion recovery (STIR) and frequency-selective fat-saturated
T2-weighted images may help differentiation in cases in which the water
content of the abnormality is similar to that of the normal structure. An
example is a thoracic mass compared with normal lung. Diffusion-weighted
imaging may be employed to evaluate for restricted diffusion, which can be
seen in ischemia, cellular tumors, or clotted blood (Brugger, 2006; Zaretsky,
2003b).

■ Fetal Anatomy Evaluation
A fetal anatomical survey is generally completed during the MR examination,
regardless of the fetal indication. Nearly 95 percent of anatomical
components recommended by the International Society of Ultrasound in
Obstetrics and Gynecology were visible at 30 weeks’ gestation (Millischer,
2013). The aorta and pulmonary artery were the most difficult to evaluate.
Zaretsky and coworkers (2003a) similarly found that with the exclusion of
cardiac structures, fetal anatomical evaluation was possible in 99 percent of
cases.

■ Central Nervous System
For intracranial anomalies, fast T2-weighted images produce excellent tissue
contrast. Cerebrospinal fluid–containing structures appear bright, which
allows exquisite detail of the posterior fossa, midline structures, and
cerebral cortex. T1-weighted images are used to identify hemorrhage. CNS
biometry obtained with MR imaging is comparable with that obtained using
sonography, and nomograms are available for the corpus callosum and
cerebellar vermis (Harreld, 2011; Katorza, 2016; Twickler, 2002; Xi, 2016).
MR imaging may provide valuable added information when cerebral
abnormalities are identified or suspected sonographically (Benacerraf, 2007;
Li, 2012). Additional information is more likely to be gained when the
examination is performed beyond 24 weeks’ gestation. In studies, MR
imaging has identified additional CNS findings or led to a changed diagnosis
in nearly 50 percent of cases and affected prognosis or management in 20
percent (Griffiths, 2017, Twickler, 2003).
MR imaging accurately portrays cerebral gyration and sulcation patterns
(Fig. 14-13) (Levine, 1999). It may assist with identifying agenesis or
dysgenesis of the corpus callosum and characterizing migrational
abnormalities (Benacerraf, 2007; Li, 2012; Twickler, 2003). In cases of
septo-optic dysplasia, MR imaging may confirm absence of the septum
pellucidum and display hypoplastic optic tracts (Fig. 14-14). When fetal
intracranial hemorrhage (ICH) is suspected, MR imaging can help to
characterize the extent of bleeding and to estimate when bleeding occurred.
Risk factors for fetal ICH include atypical-appearing ventriculomegaly,
concern for neonatal alloimmune thrombocytopenia, and severe TTTS or

demise of one monochorionic twin (Hu, 2006). With congenital fetal
infections, MR imaging can delineate the variable degrees of neural
parenchymal abnormality and subsequent maldevelopment (Soares de
Oliveira-Szejnfeld, 2016).

FIGURE 14-13 Axial images of the fetal brain demonstrate the normal gyration and sulcation
progression during fetal development. A. 23 weeks’ gestation. B. 33 weeks’ gestation. These images
were obtained using a Half Fourier Acquisition Single Shot Turbo Spin Echo (HASTE) sequence
because it is relatively motion insensitive.

FIGURE 14-14 Septo-optic dysplasia. A. Axial. B. Coronal. Images at 30 weeks’ gestation confirm
absence of the cavum septum pellucidum (arrowheads) in both. There is also associated mild

ventriculomegaly (arrow).

■ Thorax
MR imaging can delineate the location and size of space-occupying thoracic
lesions and quantify the volume of lung tissue. If needed, it can characterize
blood flow to a thoracic mass to differentiate cystic adenomatoid
malformation from pulmonary sequestration (Chap. 15, p. 287). With
congenital diaphragmatic hernia, MR imaging can help verify and quantify
the abdominal organs within the thorax (Debus, 2013; Lee, 2011; MehollinRay, 2012). This includes the volume of herniated liver and of compressed
lung tissue (Fig. 14-15). MR imaging can also measure lung volumes in
pregnancies with prolonged oligohydramnios secondary to renal
abnormalities or ruptured membranes (Messerschmidt, 2011; Zaretsky,
2005).

FIGURE 14-15 A. Coronal image of normal lungs on a balanced sequence at 29 weeks’ gestation.
The liver (L) and stomach (S) lie below the diaphragm. B. Left-sided congenital diaphragmatic hernia
(CDH) (dotted ellipse) seen on balanced sequence at 33 weeks. C. The T1-weighted sequence
confirms the subdiaphragmatic position of the liver and better delineates the small bowel (arrow) and
meconium-containing colon (arrowhead) that have herniated into the chest. D. Another image of a leftsided CDH at 22 weeks demonstrates no normal lung, the heart (H) displaced into the right chest, and
an elevated liver (dotted ellipse).

■ Abdomen

Meconium accumulation within the GI tract gives a predictable pattern and
has high signal intensity on T1-weighted sequences. Thus, MR imaging is a
complementary tool in diagnosing GI abnormalities and complex cloacal
malformations (Furey, 2016). With cystic abdominal abnormalities,
differences in signal characteristics may also help distinguish between
meconium in the fetal colon and urine in the bladder (Farhataziz, 2005).
Peritoneal calcifications related to meconium peritonitis are more readily
apparent sonographically, whereas pseudocysts and resultant abnormalities
of meconium migration are better delineated with MR imaging.

■ Adjunct to Fetal Therapy
Prior to fetal surgery, MR imaging is often used. In cases of
myelomeningocele, it precisely displays brain and spine anatomy. For
sacrococcygeal teratomas, if fetal surgery is considered, MR imaging may
identify tumor extension into the fetal pelvis (Avni, 2002; Neubert, 2004;
Perrone, 2018). When a fetal neck mass is identified with ultrasound, MR
imaging may help delineate a lesion’s extent and its mass effect on the oral
cavity and trachea. This can help identify cases that are at risk for adverse
outcome and that may benefit from an ex utero intrapartum treatment (EXIT)
procedure (Lazar, 2012; Ogamo, 2005; Ng, 2019). MR imaging can also
calculate a jaw index when an EXIT procedure may be needed for severe
micrognathia (Kooiman, 2018; Morris, 2009). At some centers, before laser
ablation of placental anastomoses for TTTS, MR imaging is performed to
identify fetal ICH or periventricular leukomalacia (Hu, 2006; Kline-Fath,
2007). Fetal therapy is discussed in Chapter 19 (p. 367).

■ Placenta
Despite improvements in ultrasound detection of PAS, particularly when the
placenta is anterior, characterization of the extent of invasion remains a
challenge. MR findings concerning for invasion are depicted in Figure 14-16.
They include dark intraplacental bands on T2-weighted images, a focal
bulge, placental heterogeneity, involvement of the bladder-uterine serosal
interface, and fibrin deposition (Clark, 2020; Leyendecker, 2012). When
used to complement ultrasound, MR imaging’s sensitivity to detect invasion
is high. Clark and associates (2020) reported that MR imaging findings

positively correlated with need for cesarean hysterectomy and with
histological and surgical impressions of invasion. Clinical risk factors and
ultrasound findings (p. 253) should be incorporated when interpreting MR
placental images (Chap. 43, p. 759).

FIGURE 14-16 A. Sagittal T2-weighted image of the placenta demonstrates placenta accreta
spectrum (PAS), in this case placenta percreta. There are intraplacental, dark, linear bands (arrows), a
large bulge along the bladder-serosal interface (arrowheads), and a central area of marked
inhomogeneity (asterisk). B. A coronal image from the same study demonstrates the bulge with right
lateral extension (arrowheads) and multiple, dark, linear bands (arrows). C. A sagittal, balanced,
steady state free precession (SSFE) image shows a bulge, retroplacental vessels, and irregularity of the
bladder-serosal interface (arrowheads). These contrast with the large maternal varices (arrows). F =
fetus.

Two emerging technologies also are being employed to investigate
placental insufficiency and PAS. Arterial spin labelling is a technique for
functional assessment of perfusion and excites maternal red blood cells to
serve as endogenous contrast agents (Zun, 2018). Second, radiomics textural
analysis characterizes placental morphology in vivo. MR textural features
may help select pregnancies requiring cesarean hysterectomy (Do, 2020).

REFERENCES

Abele H, Starz S, Hoopmann M, et al: Idiopathic polyhydramnios and postnatal abnormalities. Fetal
Diagn Ther 32(4):251, 2012
Abuhamad A, Minton KK, Benson CB, et al: Obstetric and gynecologic ultrasound curriculum and
competency assessment in residency training programs: consensus report. Am J Obstet Gynecol
218(1):29, 2018
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Management of suboptimally dated pregnancies.
Committee Opinion No. 688, March 2017, Reaffirmed 2019b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Methods for estimating the due date. Committee
Opinion No. 700, May 2017, Reaffirmed 2019c
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Ultrasound in pregnancy. Practice Bulletin No.
175, December 2016, Reaffirmed 2020
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Fetal growth restriction. Practice Bulletin No.
227, February 2021a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Society of Maternal–Fetal Medicine: Medically
indicated late-preterm and early-term deliveries. Committee Opinion No. 831, July 2021b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Multifetal gestations: twin, triplet, and higherorder multifetal pregnancies. Practice Bulletin No. 231, June 2021c
American College of Radiology: ACR manual on MR safety. 2020a. Available at:
https://www.acr.org/-/media/ACR/Files/Radiology-Safety/MR-Safety/Manual-on-MR-Safety.pdf.
Accessed September 15, 2021
American College of Radiology, Society for Pediatric Radiology: ACR-SPR practice parameter for the
safe and optimal performance of fetal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Resolution No. 45,
2020b. Available at: https://www.acr.org/-/media/ACR/Files/Practice-Parameters/mr-fetal.pdf.
Accessed September 15, 2021
American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine: AIUM-ACR-ACOG-SMFM-SRU practice parameter
for the performance of standard diagnostic obstetric ultrasound examinations. J Ultrasound Med
37(11):e13, 2018a
American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine: AIUM practice parameter for the performance of
detailed second- and third-trimester diagnostic obstetric ultrasound examinations. J Ultrasound Med
38(12):3093, 2019
American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine: AIUM practice parameter for the performance of fetal
echocardiography. J Ultrasound Med 39(1):E5, 2020a
American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine: AIUM practice parameter for the performance of limited
obstetric ultrasound examinations by advanced clinical providers. J Ultrasound Med 37:1587, 2018b
American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine: Prudent use and safety of diagnostic ultrasound in
pregnancy. 2020. Available at: https://www.aium.org/officialStatements/79. Accessed October 13,
2020b
Avni FE, Guibaus L, Robert Y, et al: MR imaging of fetal sacrococcygeal teratoma: diagnosis and
assessment. AJR Am J Roentgenol 178(1):179, 2002
Bahado-Singh RO, Kovanci E, Jeffres A, et al: The Doppler cerebroplacental ratio and perinatal
outcome in intrauterine growth restriction. Am J Obstet Gynecol 180(3):750, 1999
Barth R, Victoria T, Kline-Fath B, et al: ISUOG Guidelines for fetal MRI: a response to 3-T fetal
imaging and limited fetal exams. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 50(6):804, 2017
Beall MH, van den Wijngaard JP, van Gemert MJ, et al: Amniotic fluid water dynamics. Placenta 28(89):816, 2007

Benacerraf BR, Minton KK, Benson CB, et al: Proceedings: Beyond Ultrasound First Forum on
improving the quality of ultrasound imaging in obstetrics and gynecology. Am J Obstet Gynecol
218(1):19, 2018
Benacerraf BR, Shipp TD, Bromley B, et al: What does magnetic resonance imaging add to the prenatal
sonographic diagnosis of ventriculomegaly? J Ultrasound Med 26:1513, 2007
Bhide A, Acharya G, Bilardo CM, et al: ISUOG Practice Guidelines: use of Doppler ultrasonography in
obstetrics. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 41(2):233, 2013
Biggio JR, Chapman V, Neely C, et al: Fetal anomalies in obese women: the contribution of diabetes.
Obstet Gynecol 115 (201):290, 2010
Brace RA, Wolf EJ: Normal amniotic fluid volume changes throughout pregnancy. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 161(2):382, 1989
Brugger PC, Stuhr F, Lindner C, et al: Methods of fetal MR: beyond T2-weighted imaging. Euro J
Radiol 57(2):172, 2006
Bullo M, Tschumi S, Bucher BS: Pregnancy outcome following exposure to angiotensin-converting
enzyme inhibitors or angiotensin receptor antagonists: a systematic review. Hypertension 60:444,
2012
Byrne JJ, Morgan JL, Twickler DM, et al: Utility of follow-up standard sonography for fetal anomaly
detection. Am J Obstet Gynecol 222:615.e1, 2020
Casey BM, McIntire DD, Bloom SL, et al: Pregnancy outcomes after antepartum diagnosis of
oligohydramnios at or beyond 34 weeks’ gestation. Am J Obstet Gynecol 182:909, 2000
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Workplace solutions. Preventing work-related
musculoskeletal disorders in sonography. DHHS (NIOSH) Publication No. 2006–148, 2006
Chamberlain PF, Manning FA, Morrison I, et al: Ultrasound evaluation of amniotic fluid. The relationship
of marginal and decreased amniotic fluid volumes to perinatal outcome. Am J Obstet Gynecol
150:245, 1984
Chauhan SP, Sanderson M, Hendrix NW, et al: Perinatal outcome and amniotic fluid index in the
antepartum and intrapartum periods: a meta-analysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 181:1473, 1999
Chon AH, Korst LM, Llanes A, et al: Midtrimester isolated polyhydramnios in monochorionic diamniotic
multiple gestations. Am J Obstet Gynecol 211(3):303.e1, 2014
Clark HR, Ng Tw, Khan A, et al: Placenta accreta spectrum: correlation of MRI parameters with
pathologic and surgical outcomes in high-risk pregnancies. AJR Am J Roentgenol 214:1417, 2020
Clements H, Duncan KR, Fielding K, et al: Infants exposed to MRI in utero have a normal paediatric
assessment at 9 months of age. Br J Radiol 73(866):190, 2000
Cruz-Martinez R, Figueras F, Hernandez-Andrade E, et al: Fetal brain Doppler to predict cesarean
delivery for nonreassuring fetal status in term small-for-gestational-age fetuses. Obstet Gynecol
117:618, 2011
D’Antonio F, Timor-Tritsch IE, Palacios-Jaraquemada J, et al: First-trimester detection of abnormally
invasive placenta in high-risk women: systematic review and meta-analysis. Ultrasound Obstet
Gynecol 51(2):176, 2018
Dashe JS, McIntire DD, Ramus RM, et al: Hydramnios: anomaly prevalence and sonographic detection.
Obstet Gynecol 100(1):134, 2002
Dashe JS, McIntire DD, Twickler DM: Effect of maternal obesity on the ultrasound detection of
anomalous fetuses. Obstet Gynecol 113(5):1001, 2009
Dashe JS, Nathan L, McIntire DD, et al: Correlation between amniotic fluid glucose concentration and
amniotic fluid volume in pregnancy complicated by diabetes. Am J Obstet Gynecol 182(4):901, 2000

Debus A, Hagelstein C, Kilian A, et al: Fetal lung volume in congenital diaphragmatic hernia: association
of prenatal MR imaging findings with postnatal chronic lung disease. Radiology 266(3):887, 2013
Do QN, Lewis MA, Xi Y, et al: MRI of the placenta accreta spectrum (PAS) disorder: radiomics
analysis correlates with surgical and pathological outcome. J Magn Reson Imaging 51(3):936, 2020
Dorleijn DM, Cohen-Overbeek TE, Groenendaal F, et al: Idiopathic polyhydramnios and postnatal
findings. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 22(4):315, 2009
Einerson BD, Comstock J, Silver RM, et al: Placenta accreta spectrum disorder: uterine dehiscence, not
placental invasion. Obstet Gynecol 135(5):1104, 2020
Erez O, Shoham-Vardi I, Sheiner E, et al: Hydramnios and small for gestational age are independent risk
factors for neonatal mortality and maternal morbidity. Arch Gynecol Obstet 271(4):296, 2005
EUROCAT: Prenatal detection rates charts and tables. 2019. Available at: eu-rdplatform.jrc.ec.europa.eu/eurocat/eurocat-data/prenatal-screening-and-diagnosis_en. Accessed
September 15, 2021
Farhataziz N, Engels JE, Ramus RM, et al: Fetal MRI of urine and meconium by gestational age for the
diagnosis of genitourinary and gastrointestinal abnormalities. AJR Am J Roentgenol 184:1891, 2005
Flood K, Unterscheider J, Daly S, et al: The role of brain sparing in the prediction of adverse outcomes
in intrauterine growth restriction: results of the multicenter PORTO Study. Am J Obstet Gynecol
211:288.e1, 2014
Food and Drug Administration: Avoid fetal “keepsake” images, heartbeat monitors. 2014. Available at
https://www.fda.gov/consumers/consumer-updates/avoid-fetal-keepsake-images-heartbeat-monitors.
Accessed May 12, 2020
Frank Wolf M, Peleg D, Stahl-Rosenzweig T, et al: Isolated polyhydramnios in the third trimester: is a
gestational diabetes evaluation of value? Gynecol Endocrinol 33(11):849, 2017
Furey EA, Bailey AA, Twickler DM: Fetal MR imaging of gastrointestinal abnormalities. Radiographics
36(3):904, 2016
Gizzo S, Noventa M, Vitagliano A, et al: An update on maternal hydration strategies for amniotic fluid
improvement in isolated oligohydramnios and normohydramnios: evidence from a systematic review
of literature and meta-analysis. PLoS One 10(12):e0144334, 2015
Goetzinger KR, Shanks AL, Odibo AO, et al: Advanced maternal age and the risk of major congenital
anomalies. Am J Perinatol 34(3):217, 2017
Griffiths PD, Bradburn M, Campbell MJ, et al: Use of MRI in the diagnosis of fetal brain abnormalities
in utero (MERIDIAN): a multicenter, prospective cohort study. Lancet 389(10068):538, 2017
Guron G, Friberg P: An intact renin-angiotensin system is a prerequisite for normal renal development. J
Hypertens 18(2):123, 2000
Happe SK, Rac MW, Moschos E, et al: Prospective first trimester ultrasound of low implantation and
placenta accreta spectrum. J Ulrasound 39(10):1907, 2020
Harreld JH, Bhore R, Chason DP, et al: Corpus callosum length by gestational age as evaluated by fetal
MR imaging. Am J Neuroradiol 32(3):490, 2011
Hernandez JS, Twickler DM, McIntire DM, et al: Hydramnios in twin gestations. Obstet Gynecol
120(4):759, 2012
Herrera CL, Byrne JJ, Clark HR, et al: Utilization of fetal magnetic resonance imaging after
sonographic identification of major structural anomalies. J Ultrasound Med 39(10):2053, 2020
Hinh ND, Ladinsky JL: Amniotic fluid index measurements in normal pregnancy after 28 gestational
weeks. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 91:132, 2005
Hu LS, Caire J, Twickler DM: MR findings of complicated multifetal gestations. Obstet Gynecol 36(1):
76, 2006

Huhta JC, Moise KJ, Fisher DJ, et al: Detection and quantitation of construction of the fetal ductus
arteriosus by Doppler echocardiography. Circulation 75:406, 1987
Iams JD, Grobman WA, Lozitska A, et al: Adherence to criteria for transvaginal ultrasound imaging and
measurement of cervical length. Am J Obstet Gynecol 209(4):365, 2013
International Society of Ultrasound in Obstetrics and Gynecology: ISUOG statement on ultrasound
exposure in the first trimester and autism spectrum disorders. 2016. Available at:
https://www.isuog.org/resource/isuog-statement-on-ultrasound-exposure-in-the-first-trimester-andautism-spectrum-disorders-pdf.html. Accessed September 15, 2021
Janga D, Akinfenwa O: Work-related repetitive strain injuries amongst practitioners of obstetric and
gynecologic ultrasound worldwide. Arch Gynecol Obstet 286(2):353, 2012
Jauniaux E, Collins SL, Jurkovic D, et al: Accreta placentation: a systematic review of prenatal
ultrasound imaging and grading of villous invasiveness. Am J Obstet Gynecol 215(6):712, 2016
Kaelin Agten A, Cali G, Monteagudo A, et al: The clinical outcome of cesarean scar pregnancies
implanted “on the scar” versus “in the niche.” Am J Obstet Gynecol 216(5):510, 2017
Karim JN, Roberts NW, Salomon LJ, et al: Systematic review of first trimester ultrasound screening in
detecting fetal structural anomalies and factors affecting screening performance. Ultrasound Obstet
Gynecol 50(4):429, 2017
Katorza E, Bertucci E, Perlman S, et al: Development of the fetal vermis: new biometry reference data
and comparison of 3 diagnostic modalities-3D ultrasound, 2D ultrasound, and MR imaging. Am J
Neuroradiol 37(7):1359, 2016
Kehl S, Schelkle A, Thomas A, et al: Single deepest vertical pocket or amniotic fluid index as evaluation
test for predicting adverse pregnancy outcome (SAFE trial): a multicenter open-label, randomized
controlled trial. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 47:674, 2016
Khan S, Donnelly J: Outcome of pregnancy in women diagnosed with idiopathic polyhydramnios. Aust
N Z J Obstet Gynaecol 57(1):57, 2017
Kingdom JC, Burrell SJ, Kaufmann P: Pathology and clinical implications of abnormal umbilical artery
Doppler waveforms. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 9:271, 1997
Kline-Fath BM, Calvo-Garcia MA, O’Hara SM, et al: Twin-twin transfusion syndrome: cerebral
ischemia is not the only fetal MR imaging finding. Pediatr Radiol 37(1):47, 2007
Kooiman, Calabrese CE, Didier R, et al: Micrognathia and oropharyngeal space in patients with Robin
sequence: prenatal MRI measurements. J Oral Maxillofac Surg 76(2):408, 2018
Koren G, Florescu A, Costei AM, et al: Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs during third trimester and
the risk of premature closure of the ductus arteriosus: a meta-analysis. Ann Pharmacother
40(5):824, 2006
Lazar DA, Cassady CI, Olutoye OO, et al: Tracheoesophageal displacement index on predictors of
airway obstruction for fetuses with neck masses. J Pediatr Surg 47:46, 2012
Lee TC, Lim FY, Keswani SG, et al: Late gestation fetal magnetic resonance imaging-derived total lung
volume predicts postnatal survival and need for extracorporeal membrane oxygenation support in
isolated congenital diaphragmatic hernia. J Pediatr Surg 46(6):1165, 2011
Levi S: Routine ultrasound screening of congenital anomalies. An overview of the European experience.
Ann N Y Acad Sci 847:86, 1998
Levine D, Barnes PD: Cortical maturation in normal and abnormal fetuses as assessed with prenatal
MR imaging. Radiology 210:751, 1999
Leyendecker JR, DuBose M, Hosseinzadeh K, et al: MRI of pregnancy-related issues: abnormal
placentation. AJR Am J Roentgenol 198(2):311, 2012

Li Y, Estroff JA, Khwaja O, et al: Callosal dysgenesis in fetuses with ventriculomegaly: levels of
agreement between imaging modalities and postnatal outcome. Ultra Obstet Gynecol 40(5): 522,
2012
Luo QQ, Zou L, Gao H, et al: Idiopathic polyhydramnios at term and pregnancy outcomes: a multicenter
observational study. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 30(14):1755, 2017
Machado MR, Cecatti JG, Krupa F, et al: Curve of amniotic fluid index measurements in low risk
pregnancy. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 86:37, 2007
Magann EF, Bass JD, Chauhan SP, et al: Amniotic fluid volume in normal singleton pregnancies. Obstet
Gynecol 90(4):524, 1997
Magann EF, Chauhan CP, Hitt WC, et al: Borderline or marginal amniotic fluid index and peripartum
outcomes: a review of the literature. J Ultrasound Med 30(4):523, 2011
Magann EF, Doherty D, Lutegendorf MA, et al: Peripartum outcomes of high-risk pregnancies
complicated by oligo- and polyhydramnios: a prospective longitudinal study. J Obstet Gynaecol Res
36(2):268, 2010
Mann SE, Nijland MJ, Ross MG: Mathematic modeling of human amniotic fluid dynamics. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 175(4):937, 1996
Many A, Hill LM, Lazebnik N, et al: The association between polyhydramnios and preterm delivery.
Obstet Gynecol 86(3):389, 1995
Mari G, Deter RL, Carpenter RL, et al: Noninvasive diagnosis by Doppler ultrasonography of fetal
anemia due to maternal red-cell alloimmunization. Collaborative group for Doppler assessment of the
blood velocity in anemic fetuses. N Engl J Med 342:9, 2000
Martins JG, Biggio JR, Abuhamad A: Consult series #52: diagnosis and management of fetal growth
restriction. Am J Obstet Gynecol 223(4):B2, 2020
Mehollin-Ray AR, Cassady CI, Cass DL, et al: Fetal MR imaging of congenital diaphragmatic hernia.
Radiographics 32(4):1067, 2012
Messerschmidt A, Pataraia A, Helber H, et al: Fetal MRI for prediction of neonatal mortality following
preterm premature rupture of the fetal membranes. Pediatr Radiol 41:1416, 2011
Millischer AE, Sonigo P, Ville Y, et al: Standardized anatomical examination of the fetus at MRI. A
feasibility study. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 42(5):553, 2013
Modena AB, Fieni S: Amniotic fluid dynamics. Acta Bio Medica Ateneo Parmanese 75(Suppl 1):11,
2004
Moore TR: Amniotic fluid dynamics reflect fetal and maternal health and disease. Obstet Gynecol
116(3):759, 2010
Moore TR, Cayle JE: The amniotic fluid index in normal human pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol
162(5):1168, 1990
Morris LM, Lim FY, Elluru RG, et al: Severe micrognathia: indications for EXIT-to-Airway. Fetal Diagn
Ther 26(30):162, 2009
Morrow RJ, Abramson SL, Bull SB, et al: Effect of placental embolization of the umbilical artery
velocity waveform in fetal sheep. Am J Obstet Gynecol 151:1055, 1989
Moschos E, Wells CE, Twickler DM: Biometric sonographic findings of abnormally adherent
trophoblastic implantations on cesarean delivery scars. J Ultrasound Med 33:475, 2014
Murphey S, Society of Diagnostic Medical Sonography: White paper series: work related
musculoskeletal disorders in sonography. Society of Diagnostic Medical Sonography, Plano, Texas,
2018
Nabhan AF, Abdelmoula YA: Amniotic fluid index versus single deepest vertical pocket as a screening
test for preventing adverse pregnancy outcome. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 3:CD006953, 2008

Neubert S, Trautmann K, Tanner B, et al: Sonographic prognostic factors in prenatal diagnosis of SCT.
Fetal Diagn Ther 19(4): 319, 2004
Ng TW, Xi Y, Schindel D, et al: Fetal head and neck masses: MRI prediction of significant morbidity.
AJR Am J Roentgenol 212(1):215, 2019
Odibo IN, Newville TM, Ounpraseuth ST, et al: Idiopathic polyhydramnios: persistence across gestation
and impact on pregnancy outcomes. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 199:175, 2016
Ogamo M, Sugiyama T, Maeda T, et al: The ex utero intrapartum treatment (EXIT) procedure in giant
fetal neck masses. Fetal Diagn Ther 20(3):214, 2005
O’Keeffe DF, Abuhamad A: Obstetric ultrasound utilization in the United States: data from various
health plans. Semin Perinatol 37(5):29, 2013
Pagani G, Cali G, Acharya G, et al: Diagnostic accuracy of ultrasound in detecting the severity of
abnormally invasive placentation: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Acta Obstet Gynecol
Scand 97(1):25, 2018
Panting-Kemp A, Nguyen T, Chang E, et al: Idiopathic polyhydramnios and perinatal outcome. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 181(5):1079, 1999
Perrone EE, Jarboe MD, Maher CO, et al: Early delivery of sacrococcygeal teratoma with intraspinal
extension. Fetal Diagn Ther 43(1):72, 2018
Petrozella LN, Dashe JS, McIntire DD, et al: Clinical significance of borderline amniotic fluid index and
oligohydramnios in preterm pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 117(2 pt 1):338, 2011
Pilliod RA, Page JM, Burwick RM, et al: The risk of fetal death in nonanomalous pregnancies affected
by polyhydramnios. Am J Obstet Gynecol 213:410.e.1, 2015
Prayer D, Malinger G, Twickler D, et al: In reply: ISUOG Guidelines for fetal MRI: a response to 3-T
fetal imaging and limited fetal exams. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 50(6):805, 2017
Pri-Paz S, Khalek N, Fuchs KM, et al: Maximal amniotic fluid index as a prognostic factor in
pregnancies complicated by polyhydramnios. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 39(6):648, 2012
Rac MW, Dashe JS, Wells CE, et al: Ultrasound predictors of placental invasion: the Placenta Accreta
Index. Am J Obstet Gynecol 212(3):343, 2015
Rac MW, Moschos E, Wells CE, et al: Sonographic findings of morbidly adherent placenta in the first
trimester. J Ultrasound Med 35(2):263, 2016
Ray JG, Vermeulen MJ, Bharatha A, et al: Association between MRI exposure during pregnancy and
fetal and childhood outcomes. JAMA 316(9):952, 2016
Reeves MJ, Brandreth M, Whitby EH, et al: Neonatal cochlear function: measurement after exposure to
acoustic noise during in utero MR imaging. Radiology 257(3):802, 2010
Roll SC, Evans KD, Hutmire CD, et al: An analysis of occupational factors related to shoulder
discomfort in diagnostic medical sonographers and vascular technologists. Work 42(3):355, 2012
Rydberg C, Tunon K: Detection of fetal abnormalities by second-trimester ultrasound screening in a
non-selected population. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 96(2):176, 2017
Sahin E, Madendag Y, Tayyar AT, et al: Perinatal outcomes in uncomplicated late preterm pregnancies
with borderline oligohydramnios. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 31(23):3085, 2018
Sande JA, Ioannou C, Sarris I, et al: Reproducibility of measuring amniotic fluid index and single deepest
vertical pool throughout gestation. Prenat Diagn 35(5):434, 2015
Schaefer C: Angiotensin II-receptor-antagonists: further evidence of fetotoxicity but not teratogenicity.
Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol 67(8):591, 2003
Segata M, Mari G: Fetal anemia: new technologies. Curr Opin Obstet Gynecol 16:153, 2004
Soares de Oliveira-Szejnfeld P, Levine D, Melo AS, et al: Congenital brain abnormalities and Zika virus:
what the radiologist can expect to see prenatally and postnatally. Radiology 281:203, 2016

Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Mari G, Norton ME, et al: SMFM Clinical Guideline No. 8: The
fetus at risk for anemia—diagnosis and management. Am J Obstet Gynecol 212(6):697, 2015a
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Simpson LL: Twin-twin transfusion syndrome. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 208(1):3, 2013
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Sinkey RG, Odibo AO, et al: SMFM Clinical Consult Series No.
37: Diagnosis and management of vasa previa. Am J Obstet Gynecol 213(5):615, 2015b
Spellacy WN, Buhi WC, Bradley B, et al: Maternal, fetal, amniotic fluid levels of glucose, insulin, and
growth hormone. Obstet Gynecol 41:323, 1973
Stothard KJ, Tennant PW, Bell R, et al: Maternal overweight and obesity: A systematic review and
meta-analysis. JAMA 301(6):636, 2009
Syngelaki A, Chelemen T, Dagklis T, et al: Challenges in the diagnosis of fetal non-chromosomal
abnormalities at 11–13 weeks. Prenat Diagn 31:90, 2011
Timor-Tritsch IE, Monteagudo A, Cali G, et al: Cesarean scar pregnancy and early placenta accreta
share a common histology. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 43(4):383, 2014
Twickler DM, Magee KP, Caire J, et al: Second-opinion magnetic resonance imaging for suspected fetal
central nervous system abnormalities. Am J Obstet Gynecol 188:492, 2003
Twickler DM, Reichel T, McIntire DD, et al: Fetal central nervous system ventricle and cisterna magna
measurements by magnetic resonance imaging. Am J Obstet Gynecol 187:927, 2002
Vadeyar SH, Moore RJ, Strachan BK, et al: Effect of fetal magnetic resonance imaging on fetal heart
rate patterns. Am J Obstet Gynecol 182:666, 2000
Weiss PA, Hofmann H, Winter R, et al: Amniotic fluid glucose values in normal and abnormal
pregnancies. Obstet Gynecol 65:333, 1985
Wenstrom KD, Weiner CP, Williamson RA: Diverse maternal and fetal pathology associated with absent
diastolic flow in the umbilical artery of high-risk fetuses. Obstet Gynecol 77:374, 1991
Wiegand SL, Beamon CJ, Chescheir NC, et al: Idiopathic polyhydramnios: severity and perinatal
morbidity. Am J Perinatol 33(7):658, 2016
Wiskirchen J, Groenewaeller EF, Kehlbach R, et al: Long-term effects of repetitive exposure to a static
magnetic field 1.5 T on proliferation of human fetal lung fibroblasts. Magn Reson Med 41:464, 1999
Wood SL, Newton JM, Wang L, et al: Borderline amniotic fluid index and its relation to fetal intolerance
of labor: a 2-center retrospective cohort study. J Ultrasound Med 33(4):705, 2014
Xi Y, Brown E, Bailey A, et al: MR imaging of the fetal cerebellar vermis: Biometric predictors of
adverse neurologic outcome. J Magn Reson Imaging 44(5):1284, 2016
Zaretsky M, Ramus R, McIntire D, et al: MRI calculation of lung volumes to predict outcome in fetuses
with genitourinary abnormalities. AJR Am J Roentgenol 185:1328, 2005
Zaretsky MV, McIntire DD, Twickler DM: Feasibility of the fetal anatomic and maternal pelvic survey
by magnetic resonance imaging at term. Am J Obstet Gynecol 189:997, 2003a
Zaretsky MV, Twickler DM: Magnetic imaging in obstetrics. Clin Obstet Gynecol 46:868, 2003b
Zeeman GG, McIntire DD, Twickler DM: Maternal and fetal artery Doppler findings in women with
chronic hypertension who subsequently develop superimposed pre-eclampsia. J Matern Fetal
Neonatal Med 14:318, 2003
Zun Z, Limperopoulos C: Placental perfusion imaging using velocity-selective arterial spin labeling.
Magn Reson Med 80(3):1036, 2018

