CHAPTER 66

Neoplastic Disorders

CANCER THERAPY IN PREGNANCY
CERVIX
UTERUS
OVARY
BREAST CARCINOMA
BRCA1/2 MUTATIONS
THYROID CANCER
LYMPHOMAS
MALIGNANT MELANOMA
GASTROINTESTINAL TRACT CANCER
REFERENCES
Any of the many neoplasms that affect reproductive-aged women can
complicate pregnancy. Fortunately, most encountered neoplasms are benign,
and uterine leiomyomas and ovarian cysts are the most frequent. Despite this,
the incidence of malignancy approximates 1 case per 1000 to 2000
pregnancies (Korenaga, 2020; Ma, 2020). A third are diagnosed prenatally,
and the remainder within 12 months of delivery. The distribution of some of
these is shown in Figure 66-1 (de Haan, 2018). In another report from the

Cancer Research Network, breast malignancies made up 25 percent and
thyroid cancers, 20 percent. Melanoma and hematological and cervical
cancers each contributed approximately 10 percent (Cottreau, 2019).

FIGURE 66-1 Distribution of cancer in 1170 pregnant women form the International Network on
Cancer, Infertility, and Pregnancy (INCIP).

During pregnancy, cancer management poses unique problems related to
fetal concerns, and treatment is individualized. Considerations include the
type and stage of malignancy, the desire for pregnancy continuation, and
inherent risks associated with modifying or delaying cancer treatment. Last,
adverse pregnancy outcomes have been associated in general with gravidas
with cancer (Ma, 2020; Momen, 2018).

CANCER THERAPY IN PREGNANCY

■ Surgery
Operative procedures may be indicated to aid cancer diagnosis, staging, or
therapy. Fortunately, most surgeries that do not interfere with the
reproductive tract are well tolerated by both mother and fetus (Chap. 49, p.
867). Although many operations have classically been deferred until after 12
to 14 weeks’ gestation to minimize miscarriage risks, this probably is
unnecessary. We believe that surgery should be performed at any gestational
age if maternal well-being is imperiled.
Both pregnancy and malignancy are risk factors for venous
thromboembolism (VTE). From studies of women with cancer during
pregnancy, the risk of VTE is higher in pregnancy and in the postpartum
period than in gravidas without a malignancy (Bleu, 2016; Greiber, 2021).
Current guidelines lack specific recommendations for pregnant women
undergoing surgeries for cancer. Thus, depending on the complexity of the
planned procedure, it seems reasonable to consider prophylactic lowmolecular-weight heparin combined with elastic stockings and/or intermittent
pneumatic compression (Chap. 55, p. 989).

■ Diagnostic Imaging
Sonography is a preferred imaging tool during pregnancy. Even so, the
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019c) notes that
most diagnostic radiographic procedures deliver very low x-ray doses and
should not be delayed if they would directly affect therapy (Chap. 49, p.
872). Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging can safely be performed in any
trimester, but delay until after the first trimester may lower potential risks.
Gadolinium should not be used in the first trimester and should be used later
in pregnancy only when the benefits overwhelmingly outweigh risks
(American College of Radiology, 2021; Kanal, 2013). Computed tomography
(CT) is less often selected due to ionizing radiation, and procedure-related
doses are listed in Chapter 49 (p. 874). Thus, CT imaging is used in
pregnancy most often to evaluate acute concerns that include pulmonary
embolism, bowel or renal obstruction, and acute neurological events. To
enhance CT imaging, oral and intravenous contrasts may be added. These
lack known fetal harm, and postpartum breastfeeding need not be interrupted.
In pregnancy, some radioisotopes are relatively safe (Table 49-10, p. 876).

■ Radiation Therapy
Therapeutic radiation is used to treat cancers and delivers a higher radiation
dose than that with diagnostic imaging. Radiotherapy may significantly
expose the fetus depending on the dose, tumor location, field size, and
gestational age. Potential adverse effects include fetal malformation,
intellectual disability, growth restriction, sterility, and carcinogenesis (Brent,
1999; Stovall, 1995). In the 2 weeks following fertilization, exposure
typically leads to chromosomal damage and embryonic death. The next most
susceptible period is during organogenesis in weeks 2 through 8, and
exposure can create malformations. These might develop above a threshold
dose of 0.1 to 0.2 Gy. During weeks 8 through 25, the fetal central nervous
system is especially vulnerable. The threshold dose for intellectual disability
at 8 to 15 weeks’ gestation approximates 0.06 Gy, and at 16 to 25 weeks it is
about 0.25 Gy (Kal, 2005; Otake, 1996). After 25 weeks’ gestation,
susceptibility is less, although no gestational age is considered safe for
therapeutic radiation exposure. Thus, radiotherapy to the maternal abdomen
is contraindicated. With some head and neck cancers, however, radiotherapy
to supradiaphragmatic areas can be used relatively safely with abdominal
shielding of the fetus (Amant, 2015a).

■ Chemotherapy
Various antineoplastic drugs may be given as primary or adjunctive therapy.
Although chemotherapy often improves long-term maternal outcomes, many
are reluctant to employ it during pregnancy. Concerns for the fetus include
malformations, growth restriction, intellectual disability, and the risk of
future childhood malignancies. Risks depend primarily on fetal age at
exposure, and most agents are potentially detrimental in the first trimester
during organogenesis. Indeed, in one review, 14 percent of major
malformations were attributable to first-trimester exposure to cytotoxic drugs
(National Toxicology Program, 2013).
After the first trimester, most antineoplastic drugs are without immediate
obvious adverse fetal sequelae (Korenaga, 2020; Vercruysse, 2016).
Similarly, late mutagenic effects appear limited (Amant, 2015b; Cardonick,
2015). Although not always practicable, some recommend that chemotherapy
be withheld in the 3 weeks before expected delivery because neutropenia or

pancytopenia might cause undue risk for maternal infection or hemorrhage.
Another concern is that neonatal hepatic and renal clearance of chemotherapy
metabolites is limited (Ko, 2011). For these reasons, most cytotoxic
chemotherapy agents are contraindicated with breastfeeding (Pistilli, 2013).

■ Molecular Therapy
Biological agents designed to stimulate hemopoiesis are commonly used with
cancer treatments. Some of these include the granulocyte colony-stimulating
factors filgrastim (Neupogen) and pegfilgrastim (Neulasta). If required in
pregnancy, limited data support the safety of these agents (Boxer, 2015). Red
blood cells can be stimulated by erythropoietin alfa (Procrit), which from
case reports also appears safe in pregnancy (Sienas, 2013). However,
maternal hypertension is a known potential risk. Last, for chemotherapyinduced thrombocytopenia, romiplostim and eltrombopag are
thrombopoietin-receptor agonists that appear to be safe in pregnancy (Chua,
2020; Michel, 2020).

■ Targeted Therapy
The two main types of targeted therapy are monoclonal antibodies and smallmolecule inhibitors. Both block the actions of specific enzymes, proteins, or
other molecules involved in cancer cell growth (Tsao, 2019). Another is
nanotherapy using drugs incorporated into encapsulated nanoparticles
(Pereira, 2020). These drugs are designed to treat an ever-expanding list of
cancers, and some are described in later discussions of specific tumors.
Most of these compounds are labeled by the Food and Drug Administration
as class D, and data are limited regarding their pregnancy or breastfeeding
effects.
Many of these drugs target tyrosine kinase, an important enzyme that
regulates signaling pathways involved with cell division, differentiation, and
apoptosis. With first-trimester use, embryo toxicity or teratogenicity has been
attributed to these. Thus, use balances potential maternal benefit and
potential fetal risk (Lodish, 2013).
Of other agents, the monoclonal antibody trastuzumab (Herceptin)
inhibits the human epidermal growth factor receptor type 2 (HER2), which
some breast cancers express. Although not teratogenic, its use in the second

and third trimesters is associated with oligohydramnios, which appears to be
reversible upon stopping the drug (McCormick, 2018; Zagouri, 2013b).
Because of sparse available data, other HER2 inhibitors are best avoided in
pregnancy (Lambertini, 2015).

■ Fertility and Pregnancy after Cancer Therapy
Oncofertility is an emerging discipline to preserve fertility in young adults
diagnosed with cancer (Robson, 2020). Fertility may be diminished after
chemotherapy or radiotherapy. Counseling ideally takes place before cancer
treatment, and guidelines have been developed by the American Society for
Reproductive Medicine (ASRM) (2018) and other major groups (Oktay,
2018; van de Kooi, 2021). Prior to therapy, embryo or oocyte
cryopreservation is a recognized option. Ovarian tissue cryopreservation is
available in research settings (American Society for Reproductive Medicine,
2013a,b, 2014). In addition, many cancer survivors conceive by assisted
reproductive technologies (ART), which by itself has associated obstetrical
risks (Chap. 9, p. 169).
If pelvic radiation is planned, surgical transposition moves ovaries and
their intact primary blood supply out of the pelvis. The ovary is then fixed to
the lateral abdominal wall at a site 3 to 4 cm above the level of the
umbilicus. Metal clips are placed to help identify the ovary in future imaging
(Moawad, 2017). In one review, functional preservation was reported in 65
to 94 percent, depending on radiotherapy type (Gubbala, 2014).
In counseling cancer survivors, evidence suggests that exposure to most
radiotherapy or chemotherapy agents does not significantly raise the risk of
congenital anomalies or genetic disease in their offspring (Signorello, 2012;
Winther, 2012). In those treated as children, chemotherapy does not show a
consistent link to adverse obstetrical outcomes (Melin, 2015; Reulen, 2009).
Data are limited in those with cancer treated as an adult, and some studies
show slightly higher rates of preterm birth and cesarean delivery (Haggar,
2014; Stensheim, 2013).
Prior abdominopelvic radiation more convincingly affects neonatal
outcomes, including elevated rates of abortion, low birthweight, stillbirth,
and preterm birth (Signorello, 2006, 2010; Winther, 2008). Radiation may
reduce uterine volume, thin the endometrium, and impair uterine blood flow

(Critchley, 1992; van de Loo, 2019). Radiotherapy directed to the uterus and
given at a younger age shows greater effects (Teh, 2014).

■ Placental Metastases
Tumors infrequently metastasize to the placenta. The most common types are
malignant melanomas, leukemias, lymphomas, and breast cancer (Chap. 6, p.
112). Placentas from pregnancies in all women with cancer should be sent
for histological evaluation. Tumor cells are usually confined within the
intervillous spaces, and fetal metastases are rare (Al-Adnani, 2007;
Rubrecht, 2020).

REPRODUCTIVE TRACT NEOPLASMS
Benign neoplasms of the reproductive tract are common and include
leiomyomas, ovarian tumors, and endocervical polyps. Cancer in these
organs may also complicate pregnancy, and of these, cervical neoplasia
makes up most (de Haan, 2018).

■ Cervix
Endocervical Polyp
These are overgrowths of endocervical stroma covered by epithelium. They
typically appear as single, red, elongated fleshy masses of variable size that
extend outward from the endocervical canal. Usually benign, they can bleed
and can be a source of Pap test results reported as atypical glandular cells
of undetermined significance—AGUS. With removal and histological polyp
evaluation, dysplasia is diagnosed in up to 0.5 percent, and cancer is found
in approximately 0.1 percent (Park, 2020).
Few formal data guide management in pregnancy. Small asymptomatic
lesions may be left alone to slough during delivery or puerperal remodeling.
Removal and histological evaluation is reasonable if malignancy is
suspected or if bleeding is troublesome. For most, the polyp is grasped with
ring forceps and twisted repeatedly about its base to strangulate feeding
vessels. With repeated twisting, the base narrows and avulses. Monsel paste,
which is ferric subsulfate, can be applied with pressure to the stalk stub for

hemostasis. A thick-pedicle polyp may infrequently warrant surgical ligation
and excision.

Cervical Neoplasia
Pregnancy provides an opportune time to screen for cervical intraepithelial
neoplasia (CIN) and invasive cervical cancer. With Pap test screening,
pregnancy status should be noted on the requisition form as cytological
interpretation may be influenced by normal pregnancy-associated changes.
Presence of decidual cells and, less often, an Arias-Stella reaction are
examples. The latter gives an appearance of endocervical gland hyperplasia,
which can make differentiating this from truly atypical glandular cells
difficult.
Current screening guidelines apply to both nonpregnant women and
gravidas (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2021b; U.S.
Preventive Services Task Force, 2018). Recommendations for average-risk
women include: (1) no screening until age 21, (2) cytology alone every 3
years in those aged 21 to 29 years, and (3) in women aged ≥30 years, three
options are suitable. These are human papillomavirus (HPV) plus cytology,
termed co-testing, every 5 years; primary HPV testing every 5 years; or
cytology every 3 years.
Higher-risk women with altered immune systems include women with
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection, systemic lupus
erythematosus, organ transplant, or immunosuppressant medication use
(Perkins, 2020). Others include those with past CIN or prior early cervical
cancer or in utero diethylstilbestrol (DES) exposure. Affected women are
screened earlier and more often using current guidelines for HIV-affected
individuals (Panel on Opportunistic Infections in Adults and Adolescents
with HIV, 2020). Germane to gravidas aged ≤30 years, these guidelines
recommend Pap test screening at the time of initial HIV diagnosis and then
yearly. Once three consecutive Pap test findings are normal, screening may
be spaced to every 3 years. Co-testing is not recommended. For those aged
>30 years, similar Pap testing is applied. Co-testing is suitable for this
group, and if negative, the next test can repeated in 3 years.
Human Papillomavirus. This virus infects cervical epithelia. The infection
usually clears, but in some, the virus may promote benign, premalignant, or
cancerous neoplastic growth. The prevalence of HPV infection in pregnant

women approximates 15 percent (Hong, 2013; Liu, 2014). Of the many HPV
serotypes, several are associated with high-grade squamous intraepithelial
(HSIL) lesions and invasive cancer. Serotypes 16 and 18 are preeminent.
HPV testing targets only high-risk types associated with cervical neoplasia,
and identification of types 16 or 18 prompts colposcopic evaluation. There is
no indication for low-risk HPV testing.
Serotypes HPV 6 and 11 are linked with benign maternal genital warts.
Congenital HPV infection resulting from vertical transmission, which is
mother to fetus/newborn passage, beyond transient skin colonization is rare.
Still, conjunctival, laryngeal, vulvar, or perianal warts present at birth in the
neonate or that develop within 1 to 3 years of birth are most likely due to
perinatal exposure to these maternal HPV serotypes (Chap. 68, p. 1216).
Importantly, cesarean delivery does not lower the risk of neonatal laryngeal
papillomatosis.
The clear link between HPV infection and cervical neoplasia led to
development of approved vaccines that reduce cervical cancer risk (Lei,
2020). Only one vaccine is currently available in the United States. Gardasil
9 is a nonavalent HPV vaccine (9vHPV) against HPV types 6, 11, 16, 18, 31,
35, 45, 52, and 58. This vaccine is not administered during pregnancy and is
compatible with breastfeeding (Chap. 10, p. 189).
Abnormal Cytology and Histology. The incidence of abnormal cervical
cancer screening test results and their management is similar for gravidas and
nonpregnant women. Current 2019 management consensus guidelines from
the American Society of Colposcopy and Cervical Pathology focus on the
individual’s risk for CIN 3 or cervical cancer, rather than on specific
screening results (Perkins, 2020).
Management has become complex and derives from large database
analyses. Factors include the abnormal cytology and HPV results, age, and
previous screening results. As a result, algorithms now calculate the best
clinical approach to abnormal screening test results
(www.asccp.org/management-guidelines). In overview, certain cytological
abnormalities and HPV test results warrant colposcopy, and the main goal
during pregnancy is to exclude invasive cancer. Thus, lesions suspicious for
high-grade disease or cancer are biopsied. Endocervical sampling,
endometrial biopsy, and treatment of preinvasive lesions are unacceptable
during pregnancy.

Women with histologically confirmed CIN from biopsy during pregnancy
are allowed to deliver vaginally. Further evaluation is planned at least 4
weeks postpartum. Alternatively, for clinical findings with higher cancer
risk, repeat colposcopy and cytology/HPV testing are performed at intervals
no more frequently than 12 weeks. Biopsy is repeated only if a lesion
appears worse or invasive cancer is suspected (Perkins, 2020).
Postpartum reassessment may reveal lesions missed previously due to
either cervical changes of pregnancy or advancing lesion severity. Instead,
CIN regression is common during pregnancy or puerperium. In one study of
1079 pregnant women with cervical dysplasia in which biopsy correlated
with colposcopic findings, 61 percent of lesions reverted to normal
postpartum (Fader, 2010). In another study, lesions regressed postpartum in
70 percent of women with CIN 2 or 3. However, 7 percent of CIN 2 lesions
progressed to CIN 3, but no lesion advanced to invasive cancer (Yost, 1999).
In another study of 77 women with carcinoma in situ (CIS) diagnosed
antepartum, a third had postpartum regression of their lesion, two thirds had
persistent CIS, and only two women had microinvasive cancer on cone
biopsy after delivery (Ackermann, 2006).
Adenocarcinoma in situ (AIS) is managed in a manner similar to CIN 3
(Dunton, 2008). Thus, unless invasive cancer is identified, treatment of AIS
is not recommended until 6 weeks postpartum. Referral to a gynecologist
with advanced colposcopic skills is recommended (Perkins, 2020).
Cervical Conization. If invasive epithelial lesions are suspected, conization
is indicated and may be done with loop electrosurgical excisional procedure
(LEEP) or by cold-knife conization. However, the epithelium and underlying
stroma within the endocervical canal cannot be extensively excised without
the risk of membrane rupture. Logically, residual disease is common. Of 376
cone biopsies during pregnancy, residual neoplasia was later found in 43
percent of subsequent specimens (Hacker, 1982). In another series, nearly 10
percent of 180 pregnant women required transfusion after conization
(Averette, 1970). Thus, if possible, conization is avoided in pregnancy
because of its higher risks for abortion, membrane rupture, hemorrhage, and
preterm delivery.
Women with CIN treated before pregnancy may also encounter pregnancy
complications. First, distal cervical stenosis is uncommon but may follow
conization, LEEP, or laser surgery. Cervical stenosis almost always yields

during labor. A so-called conglutinated cervix may undergo almost complete
intrapartum effacement without dilation. Spontaneous dilation usually
promptly follows firm pressure with a fingertip, although instrumented
dilation or cruciate incisions may be required.
Second, preconceptional cold-knife conization is associated with
cervical insufficiency and preterm birth. However, the relationship between
preterm birth and LEEP continues to be debated (Castanon, 2012; Conner,
2014; Stout, 2015). The size of tissue excised seems to be directly related to
adverse outcomes (Weinmann, 2017).

Invasive Cervical Cancer
This cancer is found in approximately 1 in 1200 to 10,000 pregnancies
(Bigelow, 2017; McCormick, 2018). The diagnosis is confirmed with
biopsies taken during colposcopy, with conization, or from a grossly
abnormal lesion. Of the histological types, squamous cell carcinomas
account for 75 percent, whereas adenocarcinomas compose the remainder
(Schorge, 2017). Cancers may appear as exophytic or endophytic growth; as
a polyp, papillary tissue, or barrel-shaped cervix; or as focal ulceration or
necrosis. A watery, purulent, foul, or bloody discharge may be present. The
sensitivity of a single Pap test is poor. Thus, biopsy with Tischler forceps is
warranted for suspicious lesions. Abnormal tumor vessels may cause heavier
than expected biopsy-site bleeding, which is usually controlled by Monsel
paste and pressure.
Historically, cervical cancer was solely staged clinically. The current
staging system now incorporates radiological and surgical evaluation
(Bhatla, 2019). Lymph node metastasis is now also included in staging.
Allowable components of clinical staging are cold-knife conization, pelvic
examination under anesthesia, cystoscopy, intravenous pyelogram (or this
portion of MR imaging can be used), proctoscopy, and chest radiography.
Notably, physiological pregnancy changes may limit physical assessment of
cancer extent, which is more likely to be underestimated in gravidas.
Specifically, induration of the broad ligament base, which characterizes
tumor spread beyond the cervix, may be less prominent due to cervical,
paracervical, and parametrial pregnancy-induced softening. MR imaging can
be used without gadolinium contrast to ascertain involvement of the urinary
tract, parametrium, and lymph nodes (Beharee, 2019).

Management and Prognosis. Cervical cancer treatment in pregnant women is
individualized, and factors include the clinical stage, fetal age, and
individual desire to continue pregnancy. Stage IA1 is termed microinvasive
disease and describes lesions with deepest invasion <3 mm (Bhatla, 2019).
If diagnosed by cone biopsy, treatment follows guidelines similar to those for
intraepithelial disease. In general, continuation of pregnancy and vaginal
delivery are considered safe, and definitive therapy is reserved until 6 weeks
postpartum.
In contrast, cancer with greater invasion demands relatively prompt
therapy. During the first half of pregnancy, immediate treatment is advised by
most, but the decision whether to continue pregnancy is a factor. During the
latter half of pregnancy, the risk of early delivery versus delayed treatment
are weighed (McCormick, 2018). In two studies with a total of 40 women
past 20 weeks’ gestation with either stage I or stage IIA carcinoma, delayed
treatment was considered reasonable in women without bulky lesions
(Takushi, 2002; van Vliet, 1998). Another option is to complete staging using
laparoscopic lymphadenectomy and to delay treatment if metastases are
excluded (Alouini, 2008; Favero, 2010). In a metaanalysis, preoperative
neoadjuvant chemotherapy with platinum derivatives was found to be
promising for treatment in pregnancy (Zagouri, 2013a).
Although surgical therapy and radiation are equally effective, radical
hysterectomy plus pelvic lymphadenectomy is the preferred treatment for
invasive cervical cancer in most young women with stage I and early stage
IIA lesions. Disadvantageously, radiotherapy for cervical cancer destroys
ovarian and possibly sexual function and frequently causes intestinal and
urinary tract injury. In 49 women with pregnancy-associated stage IB cancer,
a 30-percent severe complication rate accompanied radiotherapy compared
with that of only 7 percent with radical surgery (Nisker, 1983). With surgery
before 20 weeks’ gestation, radical hysterectomy is usually performed with
the fetus in situ. In later pregnancy, however, hysterotomy and delivery is
often performed first (Fig. 66-2).

FIGURE 66-2 Radical hysterectomy specimen with invasive cervical squamous cell carcinoma. With
radical hysterectomy, the parametrium and 2 to 3 cm of vagina are excised to help achieve a tumor-free
resection. (Reproduced with permission from Dr. Debra L. Richardson.)

Although rarely selected during pregnancy, Ungár and colleagues (2006)
performed abdominal radical trachelectomy before 20 weeks’ gestation for
stage IB1 cancer in five pregnant women. One cases series describes four
women with stage IA1 adenocarcinoma at 16 to 23 weeks’ gestation treated
with laser conization, and all delivered at term (Yahata, 2008).
For more advanced-stage cancer, radiotherapy is given. External beam
radiation in early in pregnancy typically leads to spontaneous abortion. If
miscarriage does not ensue, curettage is performed. During the second
trimester, spontaneous abortion may not promptly occur and may necessitate
hysterotomy in up to a fourth of cases. This is selected because labor
induction or dilation and evacuation may pose serious hemorrhage risks from
the cancer.
Pregnancy does not negatively affect cervical cancer prognosis, and
survival outcomes are similar for pregnant and nonpregnant women (Amant,
2014; Mogos, 2013). For both of these groups, the overall 5-year survival

rate approximated 80 percent in a case-control study of 44 women with
pregnancy-associated cervical cancer (van der Vange, 1995).

Delivery
Adverse prognostic effects from vaginal delivery through a cancerous cervix
are unknown. For this reason, the mode of delivery is controversial,
especially for small, early-stage lesions. In some cases of bulky or friable
tumors, hemorrhage from the cancer may complicate vaginal delivery. Also,
recurrences in the episiotomy scar have been reported (Goldman, 2003).
Thus, most favor cesarean delivery.

Pregnancy after Radical Trachelectomy
Radical trachelectomy for stage IB1 and IB2 cervical cancer before
conception is one fertility-sparing option. During the typically vaginal
procedure, the cervix is amputated at the level of the internal os, and a
permanent-suture cerclage is placed around the isthmus to support future
pregnancies. The uterine isthmus is then reconstructed to the vagina.
Following this, women continue to menstruate, and conception can occur
naturally. Because of the permanent cerclage, a classical cesarean incision is
required for delivery. Evidence suggests that cervical length <13 mm at 20
weeks’ gestation is associated with preterm birth <34 weeks (Kasuga, 2017).
In a systematic review of 2566 women after radical trachelectomy for earlystage cancer, the 5-year overall maternal survival rate was 97 percent
(Smith, 2020). The pregnancy rate was 24 percent, and the live-birth rate
was 75 percent.

■ Uterus
Leiomyomas
Also known as myomas and somewhat erroneously called fibroids, uterine
leiomyomas are common benign smooth-muscle tumors. Their incidence
during pregnancy approximates 2 percent, but the cited range depends on the
frequency of routine sonography and population characteristics (Qidwai,
2006; Stout, 2010). In one study of 4271 women, the first-trimester myoma
prevalence was highest in black women—18 percent—and lowest in whites
—8 percent (Laughlin, 2009).

Leiomyomas vary in location and may develop as submucosal,
subserosal, or intramural growths. Less often, these develop in the cervix or
broad ligament. Rare parasitic types obtain their blood supply from adjacent
structures such as the omentum. In another rare manifestation—
leiomyomatosis peritonealis disseminata—numerous, small, benign
subperitoneal smooth-muscle tumors mimic carcinomatosis but often regress
after pregnancy.
In general, progesterone is considered the critical mitogen for uterine
leiomyoma growth. In turn, estrogen functions to upregulate and maintain
progesterone receptors (Ishikawa, 2010). In pregnancy, progesterone’s effect
on myoma growth is unpredictable, and tumor size may grow, regress, or
remain unchanged (Laughlin, 2009; Neiger, 2006).
Especially during pregnancy, these masses can be confused with other
pelvic masses, and sonographic imaging is indispensable (Fig. 66-3). Once
diagnosed, myomas do not require sonographic surveillance unless
associated complications are anticipated. With unclear sonographic findings,
MR imaging may be necessary and ideally performed after the first trimester.

FIGURE 66-3 Leiomyoma imaging. A. In this sagittal view from transvaginal sonography, a large
uterine leiomyoma (calipers) displays heterogeneous echoes and occupies the fundus. This mass lies
adjacent to an early first-trimester gestational sac (G) that shows a yolk sac. B. MR imaging at 16
weeks’ gestation shows a large leiomyoma (L) in the posterior uterine segment and cervix, which fills
the pelvis. Associated ureteral compression and hydronephrosis required placement of a percutaneous
nephrostomy tube. At term, planned cesarean delivery was done due to obstruction of the birth canal. B
= bladder; F = fetus; P = placenta.

Symptoms. Most leiomyomas are asymptomatic, but acute or chronic pain or
pressure may develop, especially with large masses (Doğan, 2016). For

chronic pain, nonnarcotic analgesic drugs usually suffice. More acutely, some
myomas can outgrow their blood supply and hemorrhagic infarction follows,
which is termed red or carneous degeneration. Clinically, acute focal
abdominal pain and tenderness are preeminent and often accompanied by
leukocytosis or low-grade fever. Thus, tumor degeneration may be difficult to
differentiate from other sources of acute abdominal pain. Sonography aids
diagnosis, but close observation is requisite because an infarcted myoma is
essentially a diagnosis of exclusion. Uncommonly, preterm labor is
stimulated by associated inflammation.
Symptoms from a degenerated myoma usually abate within a few days. In
severe cases, observation may be needed to exclude a septic cause. Although
surgery is rarely needed during pregnancy, myomectomy in highly selected
cases has yielded good outcomes. Of 23 reported cases, women were 14 to
20 weeks’ gestation, and in almost half, surgery was performed because of
pain (Celik, 2002; De Carolis, 2001). Except for one loss immediately
following surgery at 19 weeks, most underwent cesarean delivery at term.
Occasionally, a pedunculated subserosal myoma will undergo torsion with
subsequent painful necrosis. Laparoscopy or laparotomy can be used to
ligate the stalk and resect the necrotic tumor. That said, we believe that
surgery should be limited to tumors with a discrete pedicle that can be easily
clamped and ligated.
Pregnancy Complications. Myomas have been associated with several
complications that include preterm labor, placental abruption, fetal
malpresentation, obstructed labor, cesarean delivery, and postpartum
hemorrhage. In a review of pregnancy outcomes in 2065 women with
myomas compared with unaffected gravidas, placental abruption and breech
presentation were each increased fourfold; first-trimester bleeding and
dysfunctional labor, twofold; and cesarean delivery, sixfold (Coronado,
2000). In a report of 301 women with myomas, the preterm birth risk was
2.5-fold higher than in unaffected women (Girault, 2018). Another study
reported an eightfold increased second-trimester abortion risk in affected
women (Salvador, 2002).
Factors most important in determining morbidity in pregnancy are myoma
number, size, and location (Ciavattini, 2015; Jenabi, 2018; Lam, 2014). If the
placenta is adjacent to or implanted over a leiomyoma, the risks for abortion,
preterm labor, placental abruption, and postpartum hemorrhage are all

increased. Retroplacental myomas are also associated with fetal-growth
restriction (Knight, 2016). Myoma-related bleeding may stem from
miscarriage, preterm labor, placenta previa, and placental abruption. Rarely,
bleeding results from a submucous myoma that has prolapsed from the uterus
and into the cervix or vagina. In this case, although heavy or persistent
bleeding may require earlier intervention, the stalk, if accessible, can be
ligated vaginally near term to avoid avulsion during delivery.
Tumors in the cervix or lower uterine segment may obstruct labor (Fig.
66-4). Despite these complications, Qidwai and associates (2006) reported a
70-percent vaginal delivery rate even in women in whom myomas measured
≥10 cm. These data argue against empirical cesarean delivery, and we allow
a trial of labor unless myomas clearly obstruct the birth canal. If cesarean
delivery is indicated, uterine malrotation, which can be caused by a bulky
lateral myoma, should be excluded by palpation of the fundus prior to
hysterotomy (Chap. 3, p. 46). Myomas are generally left alone. Specifically,
because of enucleation-associated hemorrhage, myomectomy during cesarean
delivery is discouraged. Exceptions include recalcitrant intraoperative
bleeding or a myoma that prohibits hysterotomy closure. With cesarean
delivery in one study, mean hemoglobin levels dropped in those with
myomas, but the transfusion rate was not increased (Pergialiotis, 2017).
Importantly, cesarean hysterectomy may be technically difficult because of
lateral ureteral displacement by the masses.

FIGURE 66-4 Cesarean delivery performed because of a large leiomyoma in the lower uterine
segment. A classical vertical uterine incision, seen to the left of the myoma, was required for delivery of
the fetus.

Fortunately, myomas rarely become infected (Genta, 2001). When
infection develops, it usually is postpartum, especially if the tumor is located
immediately adjacent to the implantation site (Lin, 2002). They also may
become infected with an associated septic abortion or with myoma
perforation by a sound, dilator, or curette.
Fertility Considerations. Despite their relatively high prevalence in young
women, their negative effect on fertility is unclear. Moreover, evidence from
one systematic review was inconclusive to support myomectomy for
intramural or subserosal myomas to improve fertility (Metwally, 2020). As
an exception, the American Society for Reproductive Medicine (2017)
describes fair evidence for hysteroscopic myomectomy of submucous
myomas to improve clinical pregnancy rates. In a systematic review of nearly
1400 pregnancies, myomas were not associated with a higher miscarriage
rate (Sundermann, 2017).
Instead of an infertility indication, some women may elect myomectomy
to treat bleeding or pressure symptoms yet still desire fertility preservation.

Importantly, after myomectomy, the gravid uterus can rupture either before or
during labor (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2021a).
Management is individualized, and review of the prior operative report is
prudent. If resection resulted in a defect into or immediately adjacent to the
endometrial cavity, cesarean delivery is usually done before labor. Timing of
cesarean delivery is individualized, and the American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2021b) cites between 370/7 and 386/7
weeks’ gestation.
Uterine artery embolization of myomas is another option for women
seeking symptom relief yet desiring fertility preservation (Ludwig, 2020).
Women so treated have higher rates of miscarriage, cesarean delivery, and
postpartum hemorrhage. The Society of Interventional Radiology considers
myoma embolization relatively contraindicated in women who plan future
pregnancies (Dariushnia, 2014). Even so, myoma embolization does not harm
ovarian reserve (Shamy, 2020).

Endometrial Lesions
With endometriosis, studies have recently focused on a link with adverse
obstetrical outcomes (Stephansson, 2009; Zullo, 2017). However, data are
complicated by heterogeneity regarding disease stage and location, use of
ART, and analysis methodologies (Leone Roberti Maggiore, 2016). Despite
this, an association with placenta previa is the most consistent.
Occasionally, an endometrioma can develop after delivery from
endometrial tissue implanted within laparotomy or episiotomy scars.
Pfannenstiel incisions carry greater susceptibility than vertical ones (Ecker,
2014). These form a palpable mass and can cause cyclical localized pain.
Endometriomas within an ovary are discussed in the next section.
Adenomyosis is traditionally found in late reproductive life and beyond.
Its acquisition may be at least partially related to disruption of the
endometrial-myometrial border during sharp curettage for abortion (Curtis,
2002). In one systematic review, miscarriage, poor fetal growth,
preeclampsia, placenta previa, and preterm delivery were associated risks
(Nirgianakis, 2021).
Endometrial carcinoma is an estrogen-dependent neoplasia also usually
found in women aged >40 years and thus seen only rarely with pregnancy
(Korenaga, 2020). Of 27 cases that were identified during pregnancy or

within the first 4 months postpartum, most were found in first-trimester
curettage specimens (Hannuna, 2009). These are usually early-stage, welldifferentiated adenocarcinomas for which treatment consists primarily of
total abdominal hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy.
For nonpregnant women, surgical management of early endometrial
cancer is also the standard. However, to preserve fertility potential in a
well-counseled woman with early-stage, well-differentiated, endometrioid
endometrial cancer, treatment with oral or intrauterine progestin therapy can
be used to prompt tumor regression (Hamilton, 2021). Notably, live birth
rates are low, and a large percentage requires ART for conception (Harrison,
2019). Moreover, recurrences and deaths have been reported (Erkanli,
2010).

■ Ovary
Ovarian masses found during pregnancy are common. Incidences vary
depending on the frequency of prenatal sonography, the ovarian size
threshold, and study site designation as tertiary or primary care. Thus, the
incidence of ovarian masses not surprisingly ranges from 1 in 100 to 2000
pregnancies (Bacalbaşa, 2020; Korenaga, 2020). Of ovarian malignancies,
the incidence in the California Cancer Registry was 1 case in 19,000
pregnancies (Smith, 2003).
The most frequent types of ovarian masses are corpus luteum cysts,
endometriomas, benign cystadenomas, and mature cystic teratomas (dermoid
cysts). In one series of 53 endometriomas diagnosed in the first trimester, a
fourth each remained stable or increased in size, and a third shrank (Bailleux,
2017).
Mature cystic teratomas enlarge infrequently during pregnancy. Rarely, a
teratoma may express N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors within the
tumor’s neural-tissue component. Antibodies form against these receptors
within the tumor and then attack similar-looking receptors in the brain. In one
case, a pregnant woman developed encephalitis from these antibodies
(Mizutamari, 2016).
Because pregnant women are usually young, malignant tumors and those
of low malignant potential are proportionately uncommon. One study found
that 1 percent of 9375 ovarian masses were frankly malignant and that
another 1 percent were of low malignant potential (Leiserowitz, 2006). In

surgically excised masses, rates of malignancy are higher, vary from 4 to 13
percent, and probably reflect a greater preoperative concern for cancer
(Sherard, 2003).

Diagnosis
Most ovarian masses are asymptomatic. Some cause pressure or chronic
pain, and acute abdominal pain may be due to torsion, rupture, or
hemorrhage. Rarely, blood loss is sufficient to cause hypovolemia.
Ovarian masses are usually detected during routine prenatal sonography
or during imaging for other indications, including symptom evaluation. For
complicated anatomy, MR imaging can be used without contrast.
Cancer antigen 125 (CA125) is a tumor marker, and levels are frequently
elevated with ovarian malignancy. Importantly, in early pregnancy and early
puerperium, CA125 levels are normally elevated, possibly from the decidua.
From the second trimester until term, levels are not normally higher than
those in the nonpregnant woman (Appendix, p. 1229) (Korenaga, 2020;
Szecsi, 2014). With severe preeclampsia, however, concentrations are
abnormally elevated (Karaman, 2014). Other tumor markers that have been
used for diagnosis or posttreatment surveillance in pregnancy include human
chorionic gonadotropin (hCG), alpha-fetoprotein (AFP), inhibins A and B,
carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), and the multimarker OVA1 test (Liu,
2011).

Complications
Torsion and hemorrhage are significant complications of adnexal masses.
Torsion usually causes acute constant or episodic lower abdominal pain and
tenderness that is accompanied frequently by nausea and vomiting.
Transvaginal sonography (TVS) often aids diagnosis, and an adnexal mass is
typically comorbid. With color Doppler, absent flow strongly correlates with
torsion. However, minimal or early twisting may compromise only venous
flow, thus leaving the arterial supply intact. Other sonographic signs are
ovarian stromal edema; follicle displacement to the ovarian periphery; free
cul-de-sac fluid; the whirlpool sign, which displays twisted vessels of the
involved pedicle; and the follicular ring sign (Moro, 2020; Yatsenko, 2021).
This last sign is a 1- to 2-mm echogenic rim around antral follicles and may
reflect edema and engorged capillaries.

If torsion is suspected, laparoscopy or laparotomy is warranted. Contrary
to prior teaching, most now recommend untwisting to save the ovary (Fig.
66-5). Concerns for thrombus release and pulmonary embolism have been
allayed (McGovern, 1999). A grossly necrotic adnexum is removed. With a
salvageable ovary, within minutes of untwisting, congestion is relieved but
the blue-black color typically persists.

FIGURE 66-5 Ovarian torsion at term. The patient underwent cesarean delivery, and the left
uteroovarian pedicle was untwisted. (Reproduced with permission from Dr. C. Edward Wells.)

If the adnexum is deemed viable, there are options. First, an associated
neoplasm is resected. However, ovarian cystectomy in an edematous ovary
may be technically difficult, and adnexectomy may be necessary. Less often,
cystectomy may be delayed for low-risk lesions to allow easier enucleation
following edema resolution (Adeyemi-Fowode, 2019). Second,
oophoropexy, especially for a second case of torsion, can minimize
recurrence risk (Djavadian, 2004). Techniques described include shortening
of the uteroovarian ligament with a running stitch or fixing the uteroovarian
ligament to the posterior uterus, the lateral pelvic wall, or the round ligament
(Fuchs, 2010).

The most common cause of ovarian hemorrhage follows rupture of a
corpus luteum cyst. Symptoms mirror those of hemoperitoneum, and diffuse
lower abdominal pain is usual. TVS shows blood in the cul-de-sac and a
collapsed ovarian cyst remnant (Fig. 12-5, p. 224). If the diagnosis is certain
and symptoms abate, observation and surveillance is usually sufficient.
Concern for ongoing bleeding will typically prompt surgical evaluation. If
the corpus luteum is removed before 10 weeks’ gestation, progestational
support is recommended to maintain the pregnancy. Suitable regimens
include: (1) micronized progesterone (Prometrium), 200 or 300 mg orally
once daily; (2) 8-percent progesterone vaginal gel (Crinone), one
premeasured applicator vaginally daily, plus micronized progesterone, 100
or 200 mg orally once daily; or (3) intramuscular 17-hydroxyprogesterone
caproate, 150 mg. The first two regimens are given until 10 completed
weeks. For the last, if given between 8 and 10 weeks’ gestation, only one
injection is required immediately after surgery. If the corpus luteum is
excised between 6 and 8 weeks’ gestation, two additional doses should be
given 1 and 2 weeks after the first.

Asymptomatic Adnexal Mass During Pregnancy
Most of these are incidentally found, and decisions include necessity and
timing of resection. A cystic benign-appearing mass measuring <5 cm often
requires no additional antepartum surveillance. Early in pregnancy, this is
likely a corpus luteum cyst, which typically resolves by the early second
trimester. For cysts ≥10 cm, the risk of malignancy, torsion, or labor
obstruction is substantial, and surgical removal is reasonable.
Tumors between 5 and 10 cm are carefully evaluated by TVS coupled
with color Doppler and possibly MR imaging. Simple-appearing cysts can
be managed expectantly with sonographic surveillance (Fig. 66-6)
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2016; Schmeler,
2005). Resection is done if cysts grow, display malignant qualities, or
become symptomatic. Those with classic findings of endometrioma or mature
cystic teratoma may be resected postpartum or during cesarean delivery for
obstetrical indications.

FIGURE 66-6 Sonographic characteristics of common adnexal masses in pregnancy. A. A simple
hemorrhagic cyst with smooth walls and an internal reticular pattern is characteristic of a physiological
corpus luteum cyst. B. Homogeneous cystic mass with diffuse internal low-level echoes suggestive of
an endometrioma or hemorrhagic corpus luteum. C. Mature cystic teratoma (dermoid cyst) appears as
a complex adnexal cyst. On the right side, hyperechoic lines and dots represent hair in both longitudinal
and transverse planes. At the central superior aspect of this cyst, a mural nodule—the Rokitansky
protuberance—is seen. A fat (right side)-fluid (left side) level is another common finding with these
tumors.

On the other hand, if sonographic findings suggest cancer, prompt
resection is indicated (Caspi, 2000). Nodules, papillary excrescences, solid
components, or thick, vascular septa within the mass or ascites are
suggestive findings (Andreotti, 2020). In one review of 563 masses in
pregnancy, approximately half were simple, and the other half complex
(Webb, 2015). Among simple masses, 1 percent were malignant, and of
complex masses, 9 percent were cancerous.
Approximately 1 in 1000 pregnant women undergoes surgical exploration
for an adnexal mass (Boulay, 1998). In general, we plan resection at 14 to 20
weeks’ gestation because most masses that will regress will have done so by
this time. Laparoscopic removal is ideal (Chap. 49, p. 867) (Naqvi, 2015;
Sisodia, 2015). Importantly, the American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2016) recommends consultation with a gynecological
oncologist for elements implicating cancer that include a very elevated
CA125 level, a nodular or fixed pelvic mass, ascites, evidence of metastasis,
or ultrasound findings suggesting malignancy.

Pregnancy-Related Ovarian Tumors
One group of ovarian masses results directly from the stimulating effects of
various pregnancy hormones on ovarian stroma. These include pregnancy

luteoma, hyperreactio luteinalis, and ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome.
Pregnancy Luteoma. This is a rare, benign ovarian neoplasm that arises from
luteinized stromal cells and classically raises testosterone levels (Hakim,
2016; Irving, 2011). Up to 25 percent of affected women will be virilized,
and of these affected women, nearly half of their female fetuses will have
some degree of virilization. However, most mothers and their fetuses may be
unaffected because the placenta rapidly converts testosterone to estrogen
(Kaňová, 2011).
In typical cases, an adnexal mass along with maternal virilization will
prompt sonography and measurement of testosterone and CA125 levels.
Luteomas are variably sized, appear solid, may be multiple or bilateral, and
may be complex because of internal hemorrhage (Choi, 2000). Concerns for
malignancy may be further investigated with MR imaging (Kao, 2005;
Tannus, 2009).
Total testosterone levels are increased, but notably, levels in normal
pregnancy can be substantially elevated (Appendix, p. 1231). Differential
diagnoses include granulosa cell tumors, thecomas, Sertoli-Leydig cell
tumors, Leydig cell tumors, stromal hyperthecosis, and hyperreactio
luteinalis.
Generally, luteomas do not require surgical intervention unless torsion,
rupture, or hemorrhage complicate these (Masarie, 2010). Tumors
spontaneously regress during the first few months postpartum, and androgen
levels drop precipitously following delivery (Wang, 2005). Lactation may be
delayed a week by hyperandrogenemia (Dahl, 2008). Recurrence in
subsequent pregnancies is rare.
Hyperreactio Luteinalis. In this condition, one or both ovaries develop
multiple, large theca-lutein cysts, typically after the first trimester. Cysts are
caused by luteinization of the follicular theca interna layer, and most are
stimulated by exceptionally high hCG levels (Russell, 2009). Thus, they are
more common with gestational trophoblastic disease, twins, fetal hydrops,
and other conditions with increased placental mass (Nassr, 2018). Maternal
but not fetal virilization may develop (Malinowski, 2015). Serum
testosterone levels are not predictive of maternal virilization (Condic, 2021).
Sonographically, these ovarian tumors have a “spoke wheel” pattern
(Fig. 13-3, p. 238) (Baxi, 2014). If the diagnosis is confident, and unless

complicated by torsion or hemorrhage, surgical intervention is not required.
These masses resolve after delivery. Few data allow prediction of
recurrence in a subsequent pregnancy, but in one case report, a woman had
hyperreactio with three pregnancies (Bishop, 2016).
Ovarian Hyperstimulation Syndrome. This is typified by multiple ovarian
follicular cysts accompanied by increased capillary permeability. It most
often is a complication of ovulation-induction therapy for infertility, although
it rarely may develop in an otherwise normal pregnancy. Its etiopathogenesis
is thought to involve hCG stimulation of vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF) expression in granulosa-lutein cells (Soares, 2008). This causes
greater vascular permeability that can lead to ascites, pleural or pericardial
effusion, hypovolemia with acute kidney injury, and hypercoagulability.
Serious complications are renal dysfunction, adult respiratory distress
syndrome, ovarian rupture with hemorrhage, and VTE. Unlike hyperreactio
lutealis, virilization is absent (Suzuki, 2004).
Management is outlined by the American Society for Reproductive
Medicine (2016). Treatment is primarily supportive to maintain vascular
volume and prevent VTE. In severe cases, paracentesis can be helpful.

Ovarian Cancer
Malignancies of the ovary are the leading cause of death from genital-tract
cancers in all women (American Cancer Society, 2021). Still, the incidence
of ovarian malignancy only ranges from 1 case in 20,000 to 50,000 births
(Eibye, 2013; Smith, 2003). Of those found in pregnancy, 75 percent are
early-stage cancers that carry a 5-year survival rate between 70 and 90
percent (Brewer, 2011). The types of malignancy are also markedly different
in gravidas compared with those in older women. In pregnant women, these
are, in decreasing order of frequency, germ cell and sex cord-stromal tumors,
low-malignant-potential tumors, and epithelial cancers (Morice, 2012).
Pregnancy apparently does not alter the prognosis of most ovarian
malignancies. Management is similar to that for nonpregnant women, with the
usual proviso that it may be modified depending on gestational age. Thus, if
frozen-section histopathological analysis verifies malignancy, surgical
staging is done with careful inspection of all accessible peritoneal and
visceral surfaces (Bacalbaşa, 2020). Peritoneal washings are taken for
cytology, biopsies are obtained from the diaphragmatic surface and

peritoneum, omentectomy is completed, and pelvic and infrarenal paraaortic
lymph nodes are sampled, if accessible.
If disease is advanced, bilateral adnexectomy and omentectomy will
decrease most tumor burden. In early pregnancy, hysterectomy and aggressive
surgical debulking procedures may be elected. In other cases, minimal
debulking described in the previous paragraph is done, and the operation is
terminated. In some cases of aggressive or large-volume disease,
chemotherapy can be given during pregnancy while awaiting pulmonary
maturation. Monitoring maternal CA125 serum levels during chemotherapy is
not accurate in pregnancy (Morice, 2012).
Preventively, increasing parity is one known factor (Fortner, 2019;
Huang, 2020). A metaanalysis also found that prior miscarriage or abortion
lowered risk (Lee, 2021). Of modifiable factors, combination oral
contraceptives and breastfeeding lower ovarian cancer rates (Babic, 2020;
Havrilesky, 2013; Iversen, 2018). Discussed in Chapter 39 (p. 682), rates of
some ovarian cancers may decline following tubal interruption and perhaps
salpingectomy.

■ Adnexal Cysts
Paratubal and paraovarian cysts either are distended remnants of the
paramesonephric ducts or are mesothelial inclusion cysts. One autopsy series
in nonpregnant women cited an incidence of 5 percent (Dorum, 2005). The
most common paramesonephric cyst is the hydatid of Morgagni, which is
pedunculated and typically dangles from one of the fimbria. Although these
may undergo torsion, other complications are rare, and most are identified
during cesarean delivery or puerperal sterilization. In these instances, they
can simply be excised or drained by creating a large window in the cyst
wall. Neoplastic paraovarian cysts are rare, sonographically and
histologically resemble tumors of ovarian origin, and rarely are of borderline
potential or frankly malignant (Korbin, 1998).

■ Vulva and Vagina
Preinvasive disease in young women—vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia
(VIN) and vaginal intraepithelial neoplasia (VAIN)—are seen more often
than invasive disease and are commonly associated with HPV infection. As

with cervical neoplasia, these premalignant conditions are treated after
delivery.
Cancer of the vulva or vagina is generally a malignancy of older women,
and thus, these are rarely associated with pregnancy (Amant, 2019;
Korenaga, 2020). Even so, any suspicious lesion is biopsied. Most are
squamous cell cancers, and treatment is individualized according to the
clinical stage and depth of invasion. In a review of 23 cases, investigators
concluded that radical surgery for stage I disease was feasible during
pregnancy—including in the last trimester (Heller, 2000). It appears that
vaginal delivery is not contraindicated if vulvar and inguinal incisions are
well healed. In late pregnancy, resection and definitive therapy can often be
delayed due to these tumors’ typically slow progression (Anderson, 2001).
Other vulvar cancer types and vaginal malignancies are rare in pregnancy
and mainly the subjects of case reports (Korenaga, 2020; Matsuo, 2009).

BREAST CARCINOMA
Breast cancer incidence in women aged 25 to 40 years has been rising since
the 1930s (American Cancer Society, 2021; Lima, 2020). It has an overall
relatively high frequency in younger women and is the most frequent cancer
complicating pregnancy (see Fig. 66-1) (Alfasi, 2019; de Hann, 2018). From
the Nationwide Inpatient Sample, the incidence approximated 1 case in
15,000 births (Maor, 2017). Postponed childbearing was considered
partially responsible for the increase in pregnancy-associated breast cancer
in Sweden and Denmark (Andersson, 2015; Eibye, 2013). And, as more
women choose to delay childbearing, the frequency of associated breast
cancer is certain to rise. Genetic mutations underlie some breast cancer
cases, and these are discussed in that section (p. 1174).

■ Diagnosis
More than 90 percent of gravidas with breast cancer have a palpable mass,
and greater than 80 percent of cases are self-reported (Brewer, 2011). In
pregnancy, clinical assessment, diagnostic procedures, and treatment of
women with breast tumors are often slightly delayed (McCormick, 2018).
This is partially attributed to pregnancy-induced growth of breast tissue that
obscures masses.

Breast mass evaluation does not differ from that for nonpregnant women
(Loibl, 2015; McCormick, 2018). Thus, any suspicious breast mass should
be pursued to diagnosis. Pragmatically, a palpable discrete mass can be
biopsied or excised. To distinguish between a solid and cystic lesion,
sonography has high sensitivity and specificity (Navrozoglou, 2008).
Mammography is appropriate if indicated, and the fetal radiation risk is
negligible—0.04 mGy—with appropriate shielding (Krishna, 2013). But,
because breast tissue is denser in pregnancy, mammography has a falsenegative rate of 35 to 40 percent (Woo, 2003). If the decision to biopsy is
uncertain, MR imaging may be used.
To better classify imaging findings for breast masses, the American
College of Radiology (2013) developed the Breast Imaging-Reporting and
Data System—BI-RADS. Suitable for sonography, mammographic, and MR
imaging results, the intent is to communicate an individual woman’s risk of
developing breast cancer (Table 66-1).
TABLE 66-1. American College of Radiology: Breast Imaging Reporting
and Data Systems—BI-RADSa

Cystic breast lesions are simple, complicated, or complex. Simple cysts
do not require special management or monitoring, but they may be aspirated
if symptomatic. Complicated cysts show internal echoes during sonography,
and they sometimes are indistinguishable from solid masses. These are

typically aspirated, and if the sonographic abnormality does not resolve
completely, a core-needle biopsy is usually performed. Complex cysts have
septa or intracystic masses seen sonographically. Because some breast
cancer may form complex cysts, excision is usually recommended.
For solid breast masses, evaluation uses the triple test, that is, clinical
examination, imaging, and core needle biopsy. If all three suggest a benign
lesion or if all three suggest a breast cancer, the test is considered
concordant. A concordant benign triple test is ≥99-percent accurate, and
breast lumps in this category can be followed by clinical examination alone.
Most masses in pregnancy have these three reassuring features. In contrast, if
any of the three assessments suggests malignancy, the mass should be
excised.

■ Management
With breast cancer, a limited search of the most common metastatic sites is
completed. For most, this includes a chest radiograph, liver sonography, and
skeletal MR imaging (Becker, 2016; Krishna, 2013). MR imaging can also
evaluate the abdomen, pelvis, and brain.
Treatment of breast cancer includes an obstetrician, breast surgeon, and
medical oncologist. Initially, desires for pregnancy continuation are
addressed, and data indicate that pregnancy interruption does not influence
the course or prognosis of breast cancer (Cardonick, 2010). With pregnancy
continuation, treatment in general mirrors that for nonpregnant women.
Important caveats are that chemotherapy and surgery are postponed to the
second trimester, and adjuvant radiotherapy is withheld until after delivery
(Brewer, 2011). Delay should be avoided as the risk of metastases increases
with every few months by 5 to 10 percent (McCormick, 2018).
Surgical treatment may be definitive. In the absence of metastatic disease,
either a wide excision or a modified or total mastectomy—each with axillary
node staging—can be performed (Rosenkranz, 2006). Staging by sentinel
lymph node biopsy and lymphoscintigraphy with technetium-99m is safe.
Breast reconstruction, if desired, is typically delayed until after delivery
(Viswanathan, 2011). That said, one small series showed good results in 10
pregnant women who underwent immediate reconstruction after mastectomy
(Caragacianu, 2016).

Chemotherapy is usually given with both positive- and negative-node
breast cancers. In premenopausal women, survival rates with this approach
are improved, even if lymph nodes are cancer free. For node-positive
disease, multiagent chemotherapy is begun if delivery is not anticipated
within several weeks. Cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and cisplatin are
currently used (Euhus, 2016). If an anthracycline-based agent such as
doxorubicin is used, pretherapy maternal echocardiography is performed
because of associated cardiotoxicity (Brewer, 2011). Good maternal and
perinatal results have been reported (Freret, 2020; McCormick, 2018).
Immunotherapy for breast cancers is now commonplace. Trastuzumab
(Herceptin) is a monoclonal antibody to the HER2/neu receptor, which is
found in approximately a third of invasive breast cancers (Hudis, 2007). The
drug is not recommended in pregnancy. This is because HER2/neu is strongly
expressed in fetal renal epithelium, and trastuzumab has been linked with
miscarriage, fetal renal failure and related oligohydramnios, and preterm
birth (Amant, 2010; Azim, 2010).
The effects of pregnancy on the course of breast cancer and its prognosis
are complex. Breast cancer is more aggressive in younger women, but
whether it is more aggressive during pregnancy in these same women is
debatable (Azim, 2014). Clinically, most studies indicate little difference in
overall survival rates with pregnancy-associated breast cancer compared
with similarly aged and staged nonpregnant women (Beadle, 2009). Other
reports note worse overall survival rates with pregnancy-associated breast
cancer (Rodriguez, 2008). These investigators do conclude, however, that
later disease stages are more prevalent in pregnant women.
Because breast cancer is usually found at a more advanced stage in
pregnant women, the overall prognosis is diminished (Andersson, 2015). The
aggregate of studies published after 1990 indicate that up to 60 percent of
pregnant women have concomitant axillary node involvement at diagnosis.
And although, stage for stage, the 5-year survival rate is comparable in
pregnant and nonpregnant women, the more advanced stages that are typical
of pregnant women worsen their prognosis (Kuo, 2019; Zemlickis, 1992).

■ Pregnancy Following Breast Cancer
After breast cancer treatment, chemotherapy will render some women
infertile, but childbearing options were noted earlier (p. 1164). For those

who become pregnant, long-term maternal survival rates are not adversely
affected (Averette, 1999; Lambertini, 2019). One metaanalysis found that for
women with early breast cancer, pregnancy that occurs 10 months after
diagnosis may, in fact, confer a survival benefit (Valachis, 2010).
Breastfeeding does not adversely alter the course.
In women successfully treated for breast cancer, recurrence is a concern.
Because recurrences are more common soon after treatment, it seems
reasonable to delay conception for 2 to 3 years. Hormonal contraceptive
methods are contraindicated, and a copper-containing intrauterine device is
an excellent method for many. That said, women with breast cancer who
subsequently conceive do not appear to have diminished survival rates (Ives,
2006). Those who developed breast cancer within 10 years of delivery have
and increased risk for metastases (Goddard, 2019). Importantly, tamoxifen,
which may be used long-term following initial therapy, is a teratogen.
Discontinuation 2 months prior to conception is recommended (Zydus
Pharmaceuticals, 2020).

BRCA1/2 MUTATIONS
Hereditary breast and ovarian cancer (HBOC) syndrome yields a
susceptibility to either one or both of these two cancers in individuals with
recognized gene mutations (Table 66-2). BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations are
preeminent, but others are associated.
TABLE 66-2. Some Genes Associated with Hereditary Cancers

Preventively, cancer screening, chemoprevention, prophylactic surgery,
and preimplantation testing are options. First, ovarian cancer screening with
TVS or serum CA125 levels is not routinely recommended (Daly, 2021). For
breast cancer, surveillance in those aged 25 to 29 years is clinical breast
examination (CBE) performed by a provider once or twice yearly plus
annual breast MR imaging. For older individuals, yearly MR imaging and
mammography are alternated every 6 months.
For women with BRCA1 and BRCA2 gene mutation, combination oral
contraceptives (COC) are recognized chemoprevention for ovarian cancer
(Chen, 2019). COC effects on breast cancer risk are conflicting, and studies
show no risk or modest increased risk (Daly, 2021). For breast cancer
chemoprevention, tamoxifen can lower cancer risk in those with BRCA2
defects (King, 2001).
Prophylactic bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy (BSO) is recommended
after childbearing in those aged 35 to 40 years with BRCA1 defects and aged
40 to 45 years in those with BRCA2 mutations (Chen, 2019). BSO or
mastectomy also decreases breast cancer risk in these women (Kotsopoulos,
2016; Li, 2016; Rebbeck, 2009).
BRCA1/2 genes are transmitted in an autosomal dominant fashion. In
those planning pregnancy, affected women may elect preimplantation
genetic testing of blastocysts (Chen, 2019). However, with an established
pregnancy, prenatal testing poses ethical concerns regarding pregnancy
termination for a mutation that may not lead to cancer. Currently, testing for
conditions that do not accrue until adulthood are discouraged by the
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020a,b).
Regarding parity, protective benefits for breast cancer in women with
either BRCA defect show conflicting data (Kotsopoulos, 2018; Pan 2014;
Rieder, 2015; Toss, 2017). For ovarian cancer, parity lowers rates for
women with BRCA1 but not BRCA2 mutations (Kotsopoulos, 2015). Women
with either BRCA mutation who undergo induced abortion do not have an
elevated breast cancer risk (Friedman, 2006). Breastfeeding conveys a
protective effect against breast cancer in those with BRCA1 defects but not
BRCA2 mutations. It lowers ovarian cancer rates for those with either
mutation (Kotsopoulos, 2012; 2020).
Among those with either BRCA mutation, a breast cancer diagnosis
during pregnancy does not lower survival rates compared with similarly
affected but not pregnant women (Valentini, 2013). After breast cancer

treatment, women with either BRCA defect who pursue pregnancy do not
experience increase pregnancy complication rates. Moreover, disease-free or
overall survival rates are not worsened (Lambertini, 2020; Valentini, 2013).

THYROID CANCER
Palpable thyroid nodules are detected in 4 to 7 percent of the population, and
management is found in Chapter 61 (p. 1098). Approximately 10 percent are
malignant (Burman, 2015). In pregnancy, thyroid cancer incidence
approximates 10 cases per 100,000 births (Spiegel, 2019; Sullivan, 2019).
With this diagnosis, pregnancy termination is not necessary. Primary therapy
is partial or subtotal thyroidectomy ideally done during the second trimester.
Most lesions are well differentiated, and delayed treatment is acceptable
(Angell, 2019). For aggressive tumors, however, prompt surgical treatment is
recommended. Postoperatively, replacement thyroxine is given. A higher risk
for VTE is reported for these women (Spiegel, 2019).
In some thyroid cancer types, radioiodine is used for primary or
postoperative treatment. This is contraindicated in both pregnancy and
lactation for several reasons. First, iodine-131 transferred transplacentally is
avidly trapped by the fetal thyroid gland to cause hypothyroidism. Second,
during lactation, the breast also concentrates a substantial amount of iodide.
This may pose neonatal risk due to radioiodine-contaminated milk ingestion
and raise maternal cancer risk from significant breast irradiation. To limit
maternal exposure, a delay of 3 months between lactation and thyroid
ablation will more reliably ensure complete breast involution (Sisson, 2011).
In women with thyroid cancer who ultimately receive iodine-131 doses,
pregnancy should be avoided for 6 months to 1 year. This time ensures
thyroid function stability and permits confirmation of cancer remission
(Abalovich, 2007).

LYMPHOMAS
■ Hodgkin Disease
This lymphoma is probably B-cell derived and is cytologically distinguished
from other lymphomas by Reed–Sternberg cells. Of cancers in pregnancy,
lymphomas are common, and gestational rates are rising because of delayed

childbearing (see Fig. 66-1) (Horowitz, 2016). In one review from the
Nationwide Inpatient Sample, the incidence of Hodgkin lymphoma
approximates 1 case in 12,400 births (El-Messidi, 2015).
In more than 70 percent of these cases, lymph nodes painlessly enlarge at
sites above the diaphragm, that is, in the axillary, cervical, or submandibular
chains. Approximately one third of patients have fever, night sweats, malaise,
weight loss, or pruritus. Diagnosis is by histological examination of involved
nodes (McCormick, 2018).
The Lugano staging system is applied to Hodgkin and other lymphomas
(Table 66-3). For staging, pregnancy limits the use of some radiographic
studies, but at minimum, chest radiography, abdominal imaging with
sonography or MR imaging, and bone marrow biopsy are completed (Shah,
2020). MR imaging is excellent for evaluating thoracic and abdominal
paraaortic lymph nodes.
TABLE 66-3. Lugano Classification Staging System for Hodgkin and Other
Lymphomas

The current trend for nonpregnant individuals is to administer
chemotherapy for all stages of Hodgkin disease. In pregnancy, for early-stage
disease in the first trimester, options include pregnancy termination or
observation until after 12 weeks’ gestation and then multiagent chemotherapy
(Eyre, 2015; McCormick, 2018). For most advanced-stage disease after the
first trimester, cycles of doxorubicin, bleomycin, vinblastine, and
dacarbazine are given. In general, postponement of therapy until fetal
maturity is achieved seems justifiable only when the diagnosis is made late
in pregnancy.
Women with Hodgkin lymphoma have a higher incidence of VTE (ElMessidi, 2015; Horowitz, 2016). Also, in our experiences, the gravidas—

even after they are “cured”—are inordinately susceptible to infection and
sepsis. Active antineoplastic therapy only raises this vulnerability.
The overall prognosis with Hodgkin lymphoma is similar to that for
nonpregnant women, and 5-year survival rates exceed 90 percent (Maggen,
2019). Pregnancy does not adversely affect the cancer course of this
lymphoma, and pregnancy outcomes are not generally adversely affected. For
women with disease in remission, pregnancy does not stimulate relapse
(Weibull, 2016).

■ Non-Hodgkin Lymphomas
Although usually B-cell tumors, non-Hodgkin lymphomas can also be T-cell
or natural-killer-cell neoplasms. Their biology, classification, and treatment
are complex. They are associated with viral infections, and their incidence
has risen sharply at least partly because 5 to 10 percent of persons with HIV
infection develop lymphoma. Other associated viruses include Epstein-Barr
and hepatitis C viruses and human herpes virus 8. Some of these lymphomas
are aggressive, and survival rates vary with the type of cell line involved.
Non-Hodgkin lymphomas are infrequent during pregnancy (Pinnix, 2016).
They also are staged according to the Lugano system. If diagnosed in the first
trimester, pregnancy termination followed by multiagent chemotherapy is
recommended for all but indolent or very early disease. These less
aggressive forms may be observed in the first trimester, and then full
treatment given in the second. One regimen is rituximab plus the CHOP
combination of cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin (hydroxydaunorubicin),
vincristine [Oncovin], and prednisone. In a study of 80 pregnant women with
this regimen, the 3-year survival rate was 73 to 96 percent (Maggen, 2021).
Burkitt lymphoma is an aggressive B-cell tumor associated with EpsteinBarr virus infection. Prognosis is poor, and treatment is multiagent
chemotherapy. In an earlier review of 19 women whose pregnancies were
complicated by this lymphoma, 17 died within a year of diagnosis (Barnes,
1998).

■ Leukemias
These malignancies generally arise either from lymphoid tissues—
lymphoblastic or lymphocytic leukemias, or from bone marrow—myeloid

leukemias. They can be acute or chronic. Adult leukemias are more prevalent
after age 40 but still are among the most common malignancies of young
women (see Fig. 66-1). In two large registries, the incidence was 1 case in
40,000 to 50,000 births (Nolan, 2020; Smith, 2003). In a review of 72
pregnancies complicated by leukemia from 1975 until 1988, 44 had acute
myelogenous leukemia; 20 had acute lymphocytic leukemia; and eight had
one of the chronic leukemias (Caligiuri, 1989). Nolan and colleagues (2020)
cite similar proportions.
Acute leukemias almost always cause marked peripheral blood count
abnormalities, and often the white blood cell count is elevated with readily
recognizable circulating blast cells. The diagnosis is made from bone
marrow biopsy.
With current multiagent chemotherapy, remission during pregnancy is
common, and termination does not further improve the prognosis. In some
cases, pregnancy termination before viability may simplify management of an
acutely ill woman. Abortion is a consideration in early pregnancy to avoid
potential chemotherapy teratogens. One is all-trans-retinoic acid, also
known as tretinoin, which causes retinoic acid syndrome (Chap. 8, p. 154)
(Li, 2020; Santolaria, 2020). Tyrosine kinase inhibitors are another
teratogenic group (p. 1163) (Palani, 2015).
Other than these caveats, treatment of gravidas with leukemia is similar
to that for nonpregnant women. Acute myeloid leukemia is treated without
delay (Ali, 2015). After induction chemotherapy, postremission maintenance
therapy is mandatory to prevent a relapse, which is then usually treated with
stem-cell transplantation. If allogeneic stem-cell transplantation is indicated,
early delivery is considered. With some chronic leukemias, it may be
possible to delay therapy until after delivery (Fey, 2008). As with lymphoma,
infection and hemorrhage are significant complications that should be
anticipated in women with active disease.
Most descriptions of leukemia treatment in pregnancy are single cases or
small series (Routledge, 2018; Sanz, 2015). In one review of 58 cases, 75
percent were diagnosed after the first trimester (Reynoso, 1987). Half were
acute myelogenous leukemia, which had a remission rate of 75 percent with
chemotherapy. Only 40 percent of these pregnancies resulted in a live birth
(Caligiuri, 1989). In a more recent report of 92 pregnant women with acute
promyelocytic leukemia, 91 percent had a complete remission (Santolaria,
2020).

MALIGNANT MELANOMA
These most often originate from melanocytes in a preexisting nevus. Lesions
most often develop in fair-skinned whites and commonly in childbearingaged women. Pigmented lesions that change in contour or height or show
discoloration, bleeding, or ulceration should prompt biopsy (Richtig, 2017).
In some population studies, melanoma is the most frequent malignancy
complicating pregnancy (Andersson, 2015; Bannister-Tyrrell, 2015). The
reported incidence ranges from <1 to 3 cases per 1000 births (Cottreau,
2019; Eibye, 2013). Many are treated outpatient and thus not entered into
tumor registries.
Staging is clinical. Stage I is a melanoma with no palpable lymph nodes;
in stage II, lymph nodes are palpable; and in stage III, distant metastases are
identified. For patients with stage I, tumor thickness is the single most
important predictor of survival. The Clark classification includes five levels
of involvement by depth into the epidermis, dermis, and subcutaneous fat.
The Breslow scale measures tumor thickness and size, in addition to invasion
depth.
Primary surgical treatment for melanoma is determined by the stage and
includes wide local resection, sometimes with extensive regional lymph
node dissection. The American Academy of Dermatology recommends
sentinel lymph node mapping and biopsy using technetium-99m–sulfur
colloid, which has a calculated fetal dose of 0.014 mSv or 0.014 mGy
(Swetter, 2019). Routine regional node dissection reportedly improves
survival rates in nonpregnant patients with microscopic metastases. For
gravidas, an algorithm is proposed that begins with resection of the primary
tumor under local anesthesia but postpones sentinel lymph node biopsy until
postpartum (Broer, 2012). Although prophylactic chemotherapy or
immunotherapy is usually avoided during pregnancy, it may be given if
indicated by tumor stage and maternal prognosis. In most cases of distant
metastatic melanoma, treatment is at best palliative.
Stage-for-stage, survival is equivalent between pregnant and nonpregnant
women (Driscoll, 2016; Johansson, 2014). In two studies, half of pregnant
women presented with an advanced stage (de Haan, 2017; Sawyers, 2020).
Placentas are submitted for histological evaluation to exclude metastasis (p.
1164). Therapeutic abortion does not improve maternal survival rates.
Clinical stage is the strongest determinant of survival, and women with deep

cutaneous invasion or regional node involvement have the worst prognosis.
Approximately 60 percent of recurrences will manifest within 2 years, and
90 percent by 5 years. Thus, most recommend that pregnancy be avoided for
3 to 5 years after surgical resection. Interim contraception can include
combination oral contraceptives, as they do not appear to have adverse
cancer effects (Still, 2017).

GASTROINTESTINAL TRACT CANCER
Carcinomas of the colon and rectum are the third most frequent cancer in all
women in the United States (American Cancer Society, 2021). Their
incidence in pregnancy is rising because of delayed childbearing (Murphy,
2018). Even so, colorectal tumors are uncommon before age 40. An
approximate incidence of 1 case in 150,000 deliveries was derived from the
California Cancer Registry (Smith, 2003). In another report, however, the
incidence approximated 1 case in 13,000 pregnancies (Salani, 2014). Of
colorectal carcinomas in pregnant women, 80 percent arise from the rectum.
In one review, only 41 cases in pregnancy were colon cancers located above
the peritoneal reflection (Chan, 1999).
The most frequent symptoms are abdominal pain, distention, nausea,
constipation, and rectal bleeding. If symptoms of colon disease persist,
digital rectal examination, stool tests for occult blood, and colonoscopy are
done. Some gastrointestinal (GI) tract cancers are found because of
metastases to the ovary. These Krukenberg tumors are tumor-laden ovaries
from another, often GI, primary and carry a bleak prognosis (Kodama, 2016).
Colon cancer treatment in gravidas mirrors that for nonpregnant women.
Without evidence of metastatic disease, surgical resection is preferred, but
most pregnant women have advanced lesions (Al-Ibrahim, 2014). During the
first half of pregnancy, hysterectomy is not necessary to perform colon or
rectal resection, and thus, therapeutic abortion is not mandated. During later
pregnancy, therapy may be delayed until fetal maturation. However, bowel
hemorrhage, obstruction, or perforation may force surgical intervention.
Gastric and esophageal cancers are rare in pregnancy. Despite this,
persistent unexplained upper GI symptoms should be prompt upper
abdominal sonography and perhaps endoscopy.

REFERENCES
Abalovich M, Amino N, Barbour LA, et al: 2007 management of thyroid dysfunction during pregnancy
and postpartum: an Endocrine Society Clinical Practice Guideline. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 92:S1,
2007
Ackermann S, Gehrsitz C, Mehihorn G, et al: Management and course of histologically verified cervical
carcinoma in situ during pregnancy. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 85:1134, 2006
Adeyemi-Fowode O, Lin EG, Syed F, et al: Adnexal torsion in children and adolescents: a retrospective
review of 245 cases at a single institution. J Pediatr Adolesc Gynecol 32(1):64, 2019
Al-Adnani M, Kiho L, Scheimberg I: Maternal pancreatic carcinoma metastatic to the placenta: a case
report and literature review. Pediatr Dev Pathol 10:61, 2007
Al-Ibrahim A, Parrish J, Dunn E, et al: Pregnancy and maternal outcomes in women with prior or
current gastrointestinal malignancies. J Obstet Gynaecol Can 36(1):34, 2014
Alfasi A, Ben-Aharon I: Breast cancer during pregnancy-current paradigms, paths to explore. Cancers
(Basel) 11(11):1669, 2019
Ali S, Jones GL, Culligan DJ, et al: Guidelines for the diagnosis and management of acute myeloid
leukaemia in pregnancy. Br J Haematol 170(4):487, 2015
Alouini S, Rida K, Mathevet P: Cervical cancer complicating pregnancy: implications of laparoscopic
lymphadenectomy. Gynecol Oncol 108(3):472, 2008
Amant F, Berveiller P, Boere IA, et al: Gynecologic cancers in pregnancy: guidelines based on a third
international consensus meeting. Ann Oncol 30(10):1601, 2019
Amant F, Deckers S, Van Calsteren K, et al: Breast cancer in pregnancy: recommendations of an
international consensus meeting. Eur J Cancer 46(18):3158, 2010
Amant F, Han SN, Gziri MM, et al: Management of cancer in pregnancy. Best Pract Res Clin Obstet
Gynaecol 29(5):741, 2015a
Amant F, Uzan C, Han SN, et al: Matched cohort study on patients with cervical cancer diagnosed
during pregnancy. Ann Oncol 25(suppl 4):iv320, 2014
Amant F, Vandenbroucke T, Verheecke M, et al: Pediatric outcome after maternal cancer diagnosed
during pregnancy. N Engl J Med 373:1824, 2015b
American Cancer Society: ACS Journals: Cancer statistics. 2021. Available at:
www.cancer.org/research/cancer-facts-statistics/all-cancer-facts-figures/cancer-facts-figures2021.html. Accessed October 12, 2021
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Evaluation and management of adnexal masses.
Practice Bulletin No. 174, November 2016
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Guidelines for diagnostic imaging during
pregnancy and lactation. Committee Opinion No. 723, Reaffirmed 2019c
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Hereditary breast and ovarian cancer syndrome.
Practice Bulletin No. 182, September, 2017, Reaffirmed 2019d
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Carrier screening in the age of genomic
medicine. Committee Opinion No. 690, March 2017, Reaffirmed 2020a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Ethical issues in genetic testing. Committee
Opinion No. 410, June 2008, Reaffirmed 2020b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Management of symptomatic uterine
leiomyomas. Practice Bulletin No. May 2021a

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Medically indicated late-preterm and early-term
deliveries. Committee Opinion No. 831, June 2021b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Updated cervical cancer screening guidelines.
Practice Advisory April 2021c
American College of Radiology: ACR BI-RADS atlas: breast imaging reporting and data system, 5th
ed. Reston, ACR, 2013
American College of Radiology: ACR manual on contrast media. Reston, ACR, 2021
American Society for Reproductive Medicine: Fertility preservation and reproduction in patients facing
gonadotoxic therapies: an ethics committee opinion. Fertil Steril 110(3):380, 2018
American Society for Reproductive Medicine: Ovarian tissue cryopreservation: a committee opinion.
Fertil Steril 101(5):1237, 2014
American Society for Reproductive Medicine: Prevention and treatment of moderate and severe
ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome: a guideline. Fertil Steril 106(7):1634, 2016
American Society for Reproductive Medicine: Removal of myomas in asymptomatic patients to improve
fertility and/or reduce miscarriage rate: a guideline. Fertil Steril 108(3):416, 2017
American Society for Reproductive Medicine, Society for Assisted Reproductive Technology: Mature
oocyte cryopreservation: a guideline. Fertil Steril 99(1):37, 2013a
American Society for Reproductive Medicine, Society for Assisted Reproductive Technology:
Recommendations for gamete and embryo donation: a committee opinion. Fertil Steril 99(1):47,
2013b
Amin N, Chaabouni N, George A: Genetic testing for epithelial ovarian cancer. Best Pract Res Clin
Obstet Gynaecol 65:125, 2020
Anderson ML, Mari G, Schwartz PE: Gynecologic malignancies in pregnancy. In Barnea ER, Jauniaux
E, Schwartz PE (eds): Cancer and Pregnancy. London, Springer, 2001
Andersson TM, Johansson AL, Fredriksson I, et al: Cancer during pregnancy and the postpartum period:
a population-based study. Cancer 121(12):2072, 2015
Andreotti RF, Timmerman D, Strachowski LM, et al: O-RADS US risk stratification and management
system: a consensus guideline from the ACR ovarian-adnexal reporting and data system committee.
Radiology 294(1):168, 2020
Angell TE, Alexander EK: Thyroid nodules and thyroid cancer in the pregnant woman. Endocrinol
Metab Clin North Am 48(3):557, 2019
Averette HE, Mirhashemi R, Moffat FL: Pregnancy after breast carcinoma: the ultimate medical
challenge. Cancer 85:2301, 1999
Averette HE, Nasser N, Yankow SL, et al: Cervical conization in pregnancy: analysis of 180 operations.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 106:543, 1970
Azim HA Jr, Azim H, Peccatori FA: Treatment of cancer during pregnancy with monoclonal antibodies:
a real challenge. Expert Rev Clin Immunol 6(6):821, 2010
Azim HA Jr, Partridge AH: Biology of breast cancer in young women. Breast Cancer Res 16(4):427,
2014
Babic A, Sasamoto N, Rosner BA, et al: Association between breastfeeding and ovarian cancer risk.
JAMA Oncol 6(6):e200421, 2020
Bacalbaşa N, Bălescu I, Vîlcu M, et al: Cytoreductive surgery for advanced stage ovarian cancer in the
second trimester of pregnancy-a case report and literature review. Medicine (Baltimore)
99(29):e21127, 2020
Bailleux M, Bernard JP, Benachi A, et al: Ovarian endometriosis during pregnancy: a series of 53
endometriomas. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 209:100, 2017

Bannister-Tyrell M, Roberts CL, Hasovits C, et al: Incidence and outcomes of pregnancy-associated
melanoma in New South Wales 1994–2008. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol 55(2):116, 2015
Barnes MN, Barrett JC, Kimberlin DF, et al: Burkitt lymphoma in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 92:675,
1998
Baxi LV, Grossman LC, Abellar R: Hyperreactio luteinalis in pregnancy and hyperandrogenism: a case
report. J Reprod Med 59(9–10):509, 2014
Beadle BM, Woodward WA, Middleton LP, et al: The impact of pregnancy on breast cancer outcomes
in women < or = 35 years. Cancer 115(6):1174, 2009
Becker S: Breast cancer in pregnancy: a brief clinical review. Best Pract Res Clin Obstet Gynaecol
33:79, 2016
Beharee N, Shi Z, Wu D, et al: Diagnosis and treatment of cervical cancer in pregnant women. Cancer
Med 8(12):5425, 2019
Bhatla N, Berek JS, Cuello Fredes M, et al: Revised FIGO staging for carcinoma of the cervix uteri. Int
J Gynaecol Obstet 145(1):129, 2019
Bigelow CA, Horowitz NS, Goodman A, et al: Management and outcome of cervical cancer diagnosed
in pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 216(3):276.e1, 2017
Bishop LA, Patel S, Fries MH: A case of recurrent hyperreactio luteinalis in three spontaneous
pregnancies. J Clin Ultrasound 44(8):502, 2016
Bleau N, Patenaude V, Abenhaim HA: Risk of venous thromboembolic events in pregnant patients with
cancer. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 29(3):380, 2016
Boulay R, Podczaski E: Ovarian cancer complicating pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am
25:3856, 1998
Boxer LA, Bolyard AA, Kelley ML, et al: Use of granulocyte colony-stimulating factor during
pregnancy in women with chronic neutropenia. Obstet Gynecol 125(1):197, 2015
Brent RL: Utilization of developmental basic science principles in the evaluation of reproductive risks
from pre- and postconception environmental radiation exposures. Teratology 59:182, 1999
Brewer M, Kueck A, Runowicz CD: Chemotherapy in pregnancy. Clin Obstet Gynecol 54:602, 2011
Broer N, Buonocore S, Goldberg C: A proposal for the timing of management of patients with
melanoma presenting during pregnancy. J Surg Oncol 106(1):36, 2012
Burman KD, Wartofsky L: Thyroid nodules. N Engl J Med 373:2247, 2015
Caligiuri MA, Mayer RJ: Pregnancy and leukemia. Semin Oncol 16:388, 1989
Caragacianu DL, Mayer EL, Chun YS, et al: Immediate breast reconstruction following mastectomy in
pregnant women with breast cancer. J Surg Oncol 114(2):140, 2016
Cardonick E, Dougherty R, Grana G et al: Breast cancer during pregnancy: maternal and fetal
outcomes. Cancer 16:76, 2010
Cardonick EH, Gringlas MB, Hunter K, et al: Development of children born to mothers with cancer
during pregnancy comparing in utero chemotherapy-exposed children with nonexposed controls. Am
J Obstet Gynecol 212(5):658.e1, 2015
Caspi B, Levi R, Appelman Z, et al: Conservative management of ovarian cystic teratoma during
pregnancy and labor. Am J Obstet Gynecol 182:503, 2000
Castanon A, Brocklehurst P, Evans H, et al: Risk of preterm birth after treatment for cervical
intraepithelial neoplasia among women attending colposcopy in England: retrospective-prospective
cohort study. BMJ 345:e5174, 2012
Celik C, Acar A, Cicek N, et al: Can myomectomy be performed during pregnancy? Gynecol Obstet
Invest 53:79, 2002
Chan YM, Ngai SW, Lao TT: Colon cancer in pregnancy. A case report. J Reprod Med 44:733, 1999

Chen LM, Blank SV, Burton E, et al: Reproductive and hormonal considerations in women at increased
risk for hereditary gynecologic cancers: Society of Gynecologic Oncology and American Society for
Reproductive Medicine evidence-based review. Gynecol Oncol 155(3):508, 2019
Choi JR, Levine D, Finberg H: Luteoma of pregnancy: sonographic findings in two cases. J Ultrasound
Med 19(12):877, 2000
Chua SJ, Morton MR, Svigo J, et al: Use of romiplostim in pregnancy for refractory idiopathic
thrombocytopenia purpura: two case reports with maternal and fetal outcomes and literature review.
Obstet Med 13:45, 2020
Ciavattini A, Clemente N, Delli Carpini G, et al: Number and size of uterine fibroids and obstetric
outcomes. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 28(4):484, 2015
Condic M, Merz WM, Gembruch U, et al: Testosterone serum levels are not predictive of maternal
virilization in hyperreaction luteinalis. Arch Gynecol Obstet 303(1):129, 2021
Conner SN, Frey HA, Cahill AG, et al: Loop electrosurgical excision procedure and risk of preterm
birth. A systematic review and meta-analysis. Obstet Gynecol 123:752, 2014
Coronado GD, Marshall LM, Schwartz SM: Complications in pregnancy, labor, and delivery with uterine
leiomyomas: a population-based study. Obstet Gynecol 95:764, 2000
Cottreau CM, Dashevsky I, Andrade SE, et al: Pregnancy-associated cancer: a U.S. population-based
study. J Womens Health (Larchmt) 28(2):250, 2019
Critchley HO, Wallace WH, Shalet SM, et al: Abdominal irradiation in childhood: the potential for
pregnancy. BJOG 99(5):392, 1992
Curtis KM, Hillis SD, Marchbanks PA, et al: Disruption of the endometrial-myometrial border during
pregnancy as a risk factor for adenomyosis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 187(3):543, 2002
Dahl SK, Thomas MA, Williams DB, et al: Maternal virilization due to luteoma associated with delayed
lactation. Fertil Steril 90(5):2006.e17, 2008
Daly MB, Pal T, Berry MP, et al: Genetic/familial high-risk assessment: breast, ovarian, and pancreatic,
version 2.2021, NCCN clinical practice guidelines in oncology. J Natl Compr Canc Netw 19(1):77,
2021
Dariushnia SR, Nikolic B, Stokes LS, et al: Quality improvement guidelines for uterine artery
embolization for symptomatic leiomyomata. J Vasc Interv Radiol 25(11):1737, 2014
De Carolis S, Fatigante G, Ferrazzani S, et al: Uterine myomectomy in pregnant women. Fetal Diagn
Ther 16:116, 2001
de Haan J, Lok CA, de Groot CJ, et al: Melanoma during pregnancy: a report of 60 pregnancies
complicated by melanoma. Melanoma Res 27(3):218, 2017
de Haan J, Verheecke M, Van Calsteren K, et al: Oncological management and obstetrical and neonatal
outcomes for women diagnosed with cancer during pregnancy: a 20-year international cohort study
of 1170 patients. Lancet Oncol 19(3):337, 2018
Djavadian D, Braendle W, Jaenicke F: Laparoscopic oophoropexy for the treatment of recurrent torsion
of the adnexa in pregnancy: case report and review. Fertil Steril 82(4):933, 2004
Doğan S, Özyüncü Ö, Atak Z: Fibroids during pregnancy: effects on pregnancy and neonatal outcomes.
J Reprod Med 61(1–2):52, 2016
Dorum A, Blom GP, Ekerhovd E, et al: Prevalence and histologic diagnosis of adnexal cysts in
postmenopausal women: an autopsy study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 192(1):48, 2005
Driscoll MS, Martires K, Bieber AK, et al: Pregnancy and melanoma. J Am Acad Dermatol 75(4):669,
2016
Dunton CJ: Management of atypical glandular cells and adenocarcinoma in situ. Obstet Gynecol Clin
North Am 35(4):623, 2008

Easton DF, Pharoah PD, Antoniou AC, et al: Gene-panel sequencing and the prediction of breastcancer risk. N Engl J Med 372:2243, 2015
Ecker AM, Donnellan NM, Shepherd JP, et al: Abdominal wall endometriosis: 12 years of experience at
a large academic institution. Am J Obstet Gynecol 211(4):363.e1, 2014
Eibye S, Kjaer SK, Mellemkjaer L: Incidence of pregnancy-associated cancer in Denmark, 1977–2006.
Obstet Gynecol 122:608, 2013
El-Messidi A, Patenaude V, Hakeem G, et al: Incidence and outcomes of women with Hodgkin’s
lymphoma in pregnancy: a population-based study on 7.9 million births. J Perinat Med 43(6):683,
2015
Erkanli S, Ayhan A: Fertility-sparing therapy in young women with endometrial cancer: 2010 update. Int
J Gyn Cancer 20:1170, 2010
Euhus DM: Breast disease. In Hoffman BL, Schorge JO, Bradshaw KD, et al (eds): Williams
Gynecology, 3rd ed. New York, McGraw Hill Education, 2016
Eyre TA, Lau IJ, Mackillop L, et al: Management and controversies of classical Hodgkin lymphoma in
pregnancy. Br J Haematol 169(5):613, 2015
Fader AN, Alward EK, Niederhauser A, et al: Cervical dysplasia in pregnancy: a multi-institutional
evaluation. Am J Obstet Gynecol 203:113, 2010
Favero G, Chiantera V, Oleszczuk A, et al: Invasive cervical cancer during pregnancy: laparoscopic
nodal evaluation before oncologic treatment delay. Gynecol Oncol 118:123, 2010
Fey MF, Surbek D: Leukaemia and pregnancy. Recent Results Cancer Res 178:97, 2008
Fortner RT, Poole EM, Wentzensen NA, et al: Ovarian cancer risk factors by tumor aggressiveness: an
analysis from the Ovarian Cancer Cohort Consortium. Int J Cancer 145(1):58, 2019
Freret TS, Exman P, Mayer EL, et al: Birthweight and chemotherapy exposure in women diagnosed
with breast cancer during pregnancy. Am J Perinatol September 24, 2020 [Epub ahead of print]
Friedman E, Kotsopoulos J, Lubinski J, et al: Spontaneous and therapeutic abortions and the risk of
breast cancer among BRCA mutation carriers. Breast Cancer Res 8:R15, 2006
Fuchs N, Smorgick N, Tovbin Y, et al: Oophoropexy to prevent adnexal torsion: how, when, and for
whom? J Minim Invasive Gynecol 17(2):205, 2010
Genta PR, Dias ML, Janiszewski TA, et al: Streptococcus agalactiae endocarditis and giant
pyomyoma simulating ovarian cancer. South Med J 94:508, 2001
Girault A, Ray CL, Chapron C, et al: Leiomyomatous uterus and preterm birth: an exposed/unexposed
monocentric cohort study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 219(4):410.e1, 2018
Goldman NA, Goldberg GL: Late recurrence of squamous cell cervical cancer in an episiotomy site
after vaginal delivery. Obstet Gynecol 101:1127, 2003
Goddard ET, Bassale S, Schedin T, et al: Association between postpartum breast cancer diagnosis and
metastasis and the clinical features underlying risk. JAMA Netw Open 2(1):e186997, 2019
Greiber IK, Mikkelsen AP, Karlsen MA, et al: Cancer in pregnancy increases the risk of venous
thromboembolism: a nationwide cohort study BJOG 128(7):1151, 2021
Gubbala K, Laios A, Gallos I, et al: Outcomes of ovarian transposition in gynaecological cancers: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. J Ovarian Res 7:69, 2014
Hacker NF, Berek JS, Lagasse LD, et al: Carcinoma of the cervix associated with pregnancy. Obstet
Gynecol 59:735, 1982
Haggar FA, Pereira G, Preen D, et al: Adverse obstetric and perinatal outcomes following treatment of
adolescent and young adult cancer: a population based cohort study. PLoS One 9(12):e113292, 2014
Hakim C, Padmanabhan V, Vyas AK: Gestational hyperandrogenism in developmental programming.
Endocrinology 14:en20161801, 2016

Hamilton CA, Pothuri B, Arend RC, et al: Endometrial cancer: a society of gynecologic oncology
evidence-based review and recommendations, part II. Gynecol Oncol 160(3):827, 2021
Hannuna KY, Putignani L, Silvestri E, et al: Incidental endometrial adenocarcinoma in early pregnancy:
a case report and review of the literature. Int J Gynecol Cancer 19(9):1580, 2009
Harrison RF, He W, Fu S, et al: National patterns of care and fertility outcomes for reproductive-aged
women with endometrial cancer or atypical hyperplasia. Am J Obstet Gynecol 221(5):474.e1, 2019
Havrilesky LJ, Moorman PG, Lowery WJ, et al: Oral contraceptive pills as primary prevention for
ovarian cancer: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Obstet Gynecol 122(1):139, 2013
Heller DS, Cracchiolo B, Hameed M, et al: Pregnancy-associated invasive squamous cell carcinoma of
the vulva in a 28-year-old, HIV-negative woman: a case report. J Reprod Med 45:659, 2000
Hong Y, Li SQ, Hu YL, et al: Survey of human papillomavirus types and their vertical transmission in
pregnant women. BMC Infect Dis 13:109, 2013
Horowitz NA, Lavi N, Nadir Y, et al: Haematological malignancies in pregnancy: an overview with an
emphasis on thrombotic risks. Thromb Haemost 116(4):613, 2016
Huang T, Townsend MK, Wentzensen N, et al: Reproductive and hormonal factors and risk of ovarian
cancer by tumor dominance: results from the Ovarian Cancer Cohort Consortium (OC3). Cancer
Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 29(1):200, 2020
Hudis CA: Trastuzumab—mechanism of action and use in clinical practice. N Engl J Med 357:39, 2007
Irving JA, Clement PB: Nonneoplastic lesions of the ovary. In Kurman RJ, Ellenson LH, Ronnett BM
(eds): Blaustein’s Pathology of the Female Genital Tract, 6th ed. New York, Springer, 2011
Ishikawa H, Ishi K, Serna VA, et al: Progesterone is essential for maintenance and growth of uterine
leiomyomata. Endocrinology 151(6):2433, 2010
Iversen L, Fielding S, Lidegaard Ø, et al: Association between contemporary hormonal contraception
and ovarian cancer in women of reproductive age in Denmark: prospective, nationwide cohort study.
BMJ 362:k3609, 2018
Ives A, Saunders C, Bulsara M, et al: Pregnancy after breast cancer: population based study. BMJ
334(7586):194, 2006
Jenabi E, Khazaei S: The effect of uterine leiomyoma on the risk of malpresentation and cesarean: a
meta-analysis. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 31(1):87, 2018
Johansson AL, Andersson TM, Plym A, et al: Mortality in women with pregnancy-associated malignant
melanoma. J Am Acad Dermatol 71(6):1093, 2014
Kal HB, Struikmans H: Radiotherapy during pregnancy: fact and fiction. Lancet Oncol 6(5):328, 2005
Kanal E, Barkovich AJ, Bell C, et al: Expert panel on MR safety. ACR practice guideline for imaging
pregnant or potentially pregnant adolescents and women with ionizing radiation. J Magn Reson
Imaging 37:501, 2013
Kaňová N, Bičíková M: Hyperandrogenic states in pregnancy. Physiol Res 60(2):243, 2011
Kao HW, Wu CJ, Chung KT, et al: MR imaging of pregnancy luteoma: a case report and correlation
with the clinical features. Korean J Radiol 6(1):44, 2005
Karaman E, Karaman Y, Alkis I, et al: Maternal serum CA-125 level is elevated in severe
preeclampsia. Pregnancy Hypertens 4(1):29, 2014
Kasuga Y, Miyakoshi K, Nishio H, et al: Mid-trimester residual cervical length and the risk of preterm
birth in pregnancies after abdominal radical trachelectomy: a retrospective analysis. BJOG
124(11):1729, 2017
King MC, Wieand S, Hale K, et al: Tamoxifen and breast cancer incidence among women with inherited
mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2: National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project (NSABPP1) Breast Cancer Prevention Trial. JAMA 286:2251, 2001

Knight JC, Elliott JO, Amburgey OL: Effect of maternal retroplacental leiomyomas on fetal growth. J
Obstet Gynaecol Can 38(12):1100, 2016
Ko EM, Van Le L: Chemotherapy for gynecologic cancers occurring during pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol
Surv 66(5):291, 2011
Kodama M, Moeini A, Machida H, et al: Feto-maternal outcomes of pregnancy complicated by
Krukenberg tumor: a systematic review of literature. Arch Gynecol Obstet 294(3):589, 2016
Korbin CD, Brown DL, Welch WR: Paraovarian cystadenomas and cystadenofibromas: sonographic
characteristics in 14 cases. Radiology 208(2):459, 1998
Korenaga TR, Tewari KS: Gynecologic canter in pregnancy. Gynecol Oncol 157(3):799, 2020
Kotsopoulos J, Gronwald J, Lynch HT, et al: Age at first full-term birth and breast cancer risk in
BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers. Breast Cancer Res Treat 171(2):421, 2018
Kotsopoulos J, Gronwald J, McCuaig JM, et al: Breastfeeding and the risk of epithelial ovarian cancer
among women with a BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation. Gynecol Oncol 159(3):820, 2020
Kotsopoulos J, Huzarski T, Gronwald J, et al: Bilateral oophorectomy and breast cancer risk in BRCA1
and BRCA2 mutation carriers. J Natl Cancer Inst 109(1):djw177, 2016
Kotsopoulos J, Lubinski J, Gronwald J, et al: Factors influencing ovulation and the risk of ovarian cancer
in BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers. Int J Cancer 137(5):1136, 2015
Kotsopoulos J, Lubinski J, Salmena L, et al: Breastfeeding and the risk of breast cancer in BRCA1 and
BRCA2 mutation carriers. Breast Cancer Res 14(2):R42, 2012
Krishna I, Lindsay M: Breast cancer in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol Clin N Am 40:559, 2013
Kuo K, Caughey AB: Optimal timing of delivery for women with breast cancer, according to cancer
stage and hormone status: a decision-analytic model. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 32(3):419l, 2019
Lam SJ, Best S, Kumar S: The impact of fibroid characteristics on pregnancy outcome. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 211(4):395.e1, 2014
Lambertini M, Ameye L, Hamy AS, et al: Pregnancy after breast cancer in patients with germline
BRCA mutations. J Clin Oncol 38(26):3012, 2020
Lambertini M, Martel S, Campbell C, et al: Pregnancies during and after trastuzumab and/or lapatinib in
patients with human epidermal growth factor receptor 2–positive early breast cancer: analysis from
the NeoALTTO (BIG 1–06) and ALTTO (BIG 2–06) trials. Cancer 125(2):307, 2019
Lambertini M, Peccatori FA, Azim HA Jr: Targeted agents for cancer treatment during pregnancy.
Cancer Treat Rev 41(4):301, 2015
Laughlin SK, Baird DD, Savitz DA, et al: Prevalence of uterine leiomyomas in the first trimester of
pregnancy: an ultrasound-screening study. Obstet Gynecol 113(3):630, 2009
Lee AW, Rosenzweig S, Wiensch A; et al: Expanding our understanding of ovarian cancer risk: the role
of incomplete pregnancies. J Natl Cancer Inst 113(3):301, 2021
Lei J, Ploner A, Elfström KM, et al: HPV vaccination and the risk of invasive cervical cancer. N Engl J
Med 383(14):1340, 2020
Leiserowitz GS, Xing G, Cress R, et al: Adnexal masses in pregnancy: how often are they malignant?
Gynecol Oncol 101:315, 2006
Li X, You R, Wang X, et al: Effectiveness of prophylactic surgeries in BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation
carriers: a meta-analysis and systematic review. Clin Cancer Res 22(15):3971, 2016
Li YW, Xu YF, Hu W, et al: Acute myeloid leukemia during pregnancy: a single institutional experience
with 17 patients and literature review. Int J Hematol 112(4):487, 2020
Lima SM, Kehm RD, Swett K, et al: Trends in parity and breast cancer incidence in US women
younger than 40 years From 1935 to 2015. JAMA Netw Open 3(3):e200929, 2020

Lin YH, Hwang JL, Huang LW, et al: Pyomyoma after a cesarean section. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand
81:571, 2002
Liu J, Zanotti K: Management of the adnexal mass. Obstet Gynecol 117:1413, 2011
Liu P, Xu L, Sun Y, et al: The prevalence and risk of human papillomavirus infection in pregnant women.
Epidemiol Infect 142(8):1567, 2014
Lodish MB: Clinical review: kinase inhibitors: adverse effects related to the endocrine system. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab 98(4):1333, 2013
Loibl S, Schmidt A, Gentillini O, et al: Breast cancer diagnosed during pregnancy: adapting recent
advances in breast cancer care for pregnant patients. JAMA Oncol 1(8):1145, 2015
Ludwig PE, Huff TJ, Shanahan MM, et al: Pregnancy success and outcomes after uterine fibroid
embolization: updated review of published literature. Br J Radiol 93(1105):20190551, 2020
Ma KK, Monsell SE, Chandrasekaran S, et al: Cancer and pregnancy: national trends. Am J Perinatol
July 21, 2020 [Epub ahead of print]
Maggen C, Dierickx D, Lugtenburg P, et al: Obstetric and maternal outcomes in patients diagnosed with
Hodgkin lymphoma during pregnancy: a multicentre, retrospective, cohort study. Lancet Haematol
6(11):e551, 2019
Maggen C, Dierickx D, Cardonick E, et al: Maternal and neonatal outcomes in 80 patients diagnosed
with non-Hodgkin lymphoma during pregnancy: results from the International Network of Cancer,
Infertility, and Pregnancy. Br J Haematol 193(1):52, 2021
Maggiore U, Ferrero S, Mangili G, et al: A systematic review on endometriosis during pregnancy:
diagnosis, misdiagnosis, complications and outcomes. Hum Reprod Update 22(1):70, 2016
Malinowski AK, Sen J, Sermer M: Hyperreactio luteinalis: maternal and fetal effects. J Obstet
Gynaecol Can 37(8):715, 2015
Maor GS, Czuzoj-Shulman N, Spence AR, et al: Maternal and neonatal outcomes of pregnancy
associated breast cancer. Abstract No. 802, Am J Obstet Gynecol 216:S461, 2017
Masarie K, Katz V, Balderston K: Pregnancy luteomas: clinical presentations and management
strategies. Obstet Gynecol Surv 65(9):575, 2010
Matsuo K, Eno ML, Im DD, et al: Pregnancy and genital sarcoma: a systematic review of the literature.
Am J Perinatol 26(7):507, 2009
McCormick A, Peterson E: Cancer in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am 45(2):187, 2018
McGovern PG, Noah R, Koenigsberg R, et al: Adnexal torsion and pulmonary embolism: case report
and review of the literature. Obstet Gynecol Surv 54(9):601, 1999
Melin J, Heinävaara S, Malila N, et al: Adverse obstetric outcomes among early-onset cancer survivors
in Finland. Obstet Gynecol 126:803, 2015
Menon U, Karpinskyj C, Gentry-Maharaj A: Ovarian cancer prevention and screening. Obstet Gynecol
131(5):909, 2018
Metwally M, Raybould G, Cheong YC, et al: Surgical treatment of fibroids for subfertility. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 1:CD003857, 2020
Michel M, Ruggeri M, Gonzales-Lopez TJ, et al: Use of thrombopoietin receptor agonists for immune
thrombocytopenia in pregnancy: results from a multicenter study. Blood 136:3056, 2020
Mizutamari E, Matsuo Y, Namimoto T, et al: Successful outcome following detection and removal of a
very small ovarian teratoma associated with anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis during pregnancy.
Clin Case Rep 4(3):223, 2016
Moawad NS, Santamaria E, Rhoton-Vlasak A, et al: Laparoscopic ovarian transposition before pelvic
cancer treatment: ovarian function and fertility preservation. J Minim Invasive Gynecol 24(1):28,
2017

Mogos MF, Rahman S, Salihu HM, et al: Association between reproductive cancer and fetal outcomes:
a systematic review. Int J Gynecol Cancer 23(7):1171, 2013
Momen NC, Arendt LH, Ernst A, et al: Pregnancy-associated cancers and birth outcomes in children: a
Danish and Swedish population-based register study. BMJ Open 8(12):e022946, 2018
Morice P, Uzan C, Gouy S, et al: Gynaecological cancers in pregnancy. Lancet 379:558, 2012
Moro F, Bolomini G, Sibal M, et al: Imaging in gynecological disease (20): clinical and ultrasound
characteristics of adnexal torsion. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 56(6):934, 2020
Murphy JE, Shampain K, Riley LE, et al: Case 32–2018: a 36-year-old pregnant woman with newly
diagnosed adenocarcinoma. N Engl J Med 379(16):1562, 2018
Naqvi M, Kaimal A: Adnexal masses in pregnancy. Clin Obstet Gynecol 58(1):93, 2015
Nassr AA, Shamshiraz AA, Cortes MS, et al: Unusual course of hyperreaction luteinalis in twin
pregnancy complicated by twin-twin transfusion syndrome. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 52(5):677,
2018
National Toxicology Program: NTP monograph: developmental effects and pregnancy outcomes
associated with cancer chemotherapy use during pregnancy. NTP Monogr 2:1, 2013
Navrozoglou I, Vrekoussis T, Kontostolis E et al: Breast cancer during pregnancy: a mini-review. Eur J
Surg Oncol 34:837, 2008
Neiger R, Sonek JD, Croom CS, et al: Pregnancy-related changes in the size of uterine leiomyomas. J
Reprod Med 51:671, 2006
Nirgianakis K, Kalaitzopoulos DR, Schwartz AS, et al: Fertility, pregnancy and neonatal outcomes of
patients with adenomyosis: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Reprod Biomed Online
42(1):185, 2021
Nisker JA, Shubat M: Stage IB cervical carcinoma and pregnancy: report of 49 cases. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 145:203, 1983
Nolan S, Czuzoj-Shulman N, Abenhaim H: Obstetrical and newborn outcomes among women with
acute leukemias in pregnancy: a population-based study. J Matern Fetal Neonatal med 33(20):3514,
2020
Oktay K, Harvey BE, Partridge AH, et al: Fertility preservation in patients with cancer: ASCO clinical
practice guideline update. J Clin Oncol 36(19):1994, 2018
Otake M, Schull WJ, Lee S: Threshold for radiation-related severe mental retardation in prenatally
exposed A-bomb survivors: a re-analysis. Int J Radiat Biol 70:755–63, 1996
Palani R, Milojkovic D, Apperley JF: Managing pregnancy in chronic myeloid leukaemia. Ann Hematol
94 Suppl 2:S167, 2015
Pan H, He Z, Ling L, et al: Reproductive factors and breast cancer risk among BRCA1 or BRCA2
mutation carriers: results from ten studies. Cancer Epidemiol 38(1):1, 2014
Panel on Opportunistic Infections in Adults and Adolescents with HIV: Guidelines for the prevention
and treatment of opportunistic infections in adults and adolescents with HIV: recommendations from
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the National Institutes of Health, and the HIV
Medicine Association of the Infectious Diseases Society of America. 2020. Available at:
http://aidsinfo.nih.gov/contentfiles/lvguidelines/adult_oi.pdf. Accessed March 19, 2021
Park CK, Kim YW, Koh HH, et al: Clinicopathological characteristics of squamous cell carcinoma and
high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesions involving endocervical polyps. In Vivo 34(5):2613, 2020
Pereira KV, Giacomeli R, Gomes de Gomes M, et al: The challenge of using nanotherapy during
pregnancy: technological aspects and biomedical implications. Placenta 100:75, 2020
Pergialiotis V, Sinanidis I, Louloudis JE, et al: Perioperative complications of cesarean delivery
myomectomy: a meta-analysis. Obstet Gynecol 130(6):1295, 2017

Perkins RB, Guido RS, Castle PE, et al: 2019 ASCCP risk-based management consensus guidelines for
abnormal cervical cancer screening tests and cancer precursors. J Low Genit Tract Dis 24:102,
2020
Peters ML, Garber JE, Tung N: Managing hereditary breast cancer risk in women with and without
ovarian cancer. Gynecol Oncol 146(1):205, 2017
Pinnix CC, Osborne EM, Chihara D, et al: Maternal and fetal outcomes after therapy for Hodgkin or
non-Hodgkin lymphoma diagnosed during pregnancy. JAMA Oncol 2(8):1065, 2016
Pistilli B, Belletini G, Giovannetti E, et al: Chemotherapy, targeted agents, antiemetics and growthfactors in human milk: how should we counsel cancer patients about breastfeeding? Cancer Treat
Rev 39(3):207, 2013
Qidwai II, Caughey AB, Jacoby AF: Obstetric outcomes in women with sonographically identified
uterine leiomyomata. Obstet Gynecol 107:376, 2006
Rebbeck TR, Kauff ND, Domchek SM: Meta-analysis of risk reduction estimates associated with riskreducing salpingo-oophorectomy in BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation carriers. J Natl Cancer Inst
101(2):80, 2009
Reulen RC, Zeegers MP, Wallace WH, et al: Pregnancy outcomes among adult survivors of childhood
cancer in the British Childhood Cancer Survivor Study. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev
18(8):2239, 2009
Reynoso EE, Shepherd FA, Messner HA, et al: Acute leukemia during pregnancy: the Toronto
Leukemia Study Group experience with long-term follow-up of children exposed in utero to
chemotherapeutic agents. J Clin Oncol 5:1098, 1987
Richtig G, Byrom L, Kupsa R, et al: Pregnancy as driver for melanoma. Br J Dermatol 177(3):854, 2017
Rieder V, Salama M, Glöckner L, et al: Effect of lifestyle and reproductive factors on the onset of
breast cancer in female BRCA 1 and 2 mutation carriers. Mol Genet Genomic Med 4(2):172, 2015
Robson D, Phua C, Howard R, et al: Fertility preservation in oncology patients: a literature review
examining current fertility preservation techniques and access to oncofertility services in Australia.
Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol 60(1):18, 2020
Rodriguez AO, Chew H, Cress R, et al: Evidence of poorer survival in pregnancy-associated breast
cancer. Obstet Gynecol 112(1):71, 2008
Rosenkranz KM, Lucci A: Surgical treatment of pregnancy associated breast cancer. Breast Dis 23:87,
2006
Routledge DJ, Tower C, Davies E, et al: Successful management of acute myeloid leukaemia in a twin
pregnancy—a case report. Br J Haematol 180(4):605, 2018
Rubrecht AE, Seifert RP, Shenoy A: Maternal hematologic neoplasms during pregnancy: histologic
findings in the placenta. Placenta 104:195, 2020
Russell P, Robboy SJ: Ovarian cysts, tumor-like, iatrogenic and miscellaneous conditions. In Robboy SJ,
Mutter GL, Prat J, et al (eds): Robboy’s Pathology of the Female Reproductive Tract, 2nd ed.
London, Churchill Livingstone, 2009
Salani R, Billingsley CC, Crafton SM: Cancer and pregnancy: an overview for obstetricians and
gynecologists. Am J Obstet Gynecol 211(1):7, 2014
Salvador E, Bienstock J, Blakemore KJ, et al: Leiomyomata uteri, genetic amniocentesis, and the risk of
second-trimester spontaneous abortion. Am J Obstet Gynecol 186:913, 2002
Santolaria A, Perales A, Montesinos P, et al: Acute promyelocytic leukemia during pregnancy: a
systematic review of the literature. Cancers (Basel) 12(4):968, 2020
Sanz MA, Montesinos P, Casale MF, et al: Maternal and fetal outcomes in pregnant women with acute
promyelocytic leukemia. Ann Hematol 94(8):1357, 2015

Sawyers AE, Pavlick AC, Weber JS, et al: Management of melanoma during pregnancy: a case series
of 11 women treated at NYU Langone Health. Oncology 98(12):847, 2020
Schmeler KM, Mayo-Smith WW, Peipert JF, et al: Adnexal masses in pregnancy: surgery compared
with observation. Obstet Gynecol 105:1098, 2005
Schorge JO, Russo AL, Greene MF, et al: Case 21–2017. A 28-year-old pregnant woman with
endocervical carcinoma. N Engl J Med 377(2):174, 2017
Shah MR, Brandt JS, David KA, et al: Lymphoma occurring during pregnancy: current diagnostic and
therapeutic approaches. Curr Oncol Rep 22(11):113, 2020
Shamy TE, Amer SA, Mohamed AA, et al: The impact of uterine artery embolization on ovarian
reserve: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scan 99(1):16, 2020
Sherard GB III, Hodson CA, Williams HJ, et al: Adnexal masses and pregnancy: a 12-year experience.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 189:358, 2003
Sienas L, Wong T, Collins R, et al: Contemporary uses of erythropoietin in pregnancy: a literature
review. Obstet Gynecol Surv 68(8):594, 2013
Signorello LB, Cohen SS, Bosetti C, et al: Female survivors of childhood cancer: preterm birth and low
birth weight among their children. J Natl Cancer Inst 98:1453, 2006
Signorello LB, Mulvihill JJ, Green DM, et al: Congenital anomalies in the children of cancer survivors: a
report from the childhood cancer survivor study. J Clin Oncol 30(3):239, 2012
Signorello LB, Mulvihill JJ, Green DM, et al: Stillbirth and neonatal death in relation to radiation exposure
before conception: a retrospective cohort study. Lancet 376:624, 2010
Sisodia RM, Del Carmen MG, Boruta DM: Role of minimally invasive surgery in the management of
adnexal masses. Clin Obstet Gynecol 58(1):66, 2015
Sisson JC, Freitas J, McDougall IR, et al: Radiation safety in the treatment of patients with thyroid
diseases by radioiodine 131I: practice recommendations of the American Thyroid Association.
Thyroid 21(4):335, 2011
Smith ES, Moon AS, O’Hanlon R, et al: Radical trachelectomy for the treatment of early-stage cervical
cancer: a systematic review. Obstet Gynecol 136(3):533, 2020
Smith LH, Danielsen B, Allen ME, et al: Cancer associated with obstetric delivery: results of linkage
with the California cancer registry. Am J Obstet Gynecol 189:1128, 2003
Soares SR, Gómez R, Simón C, et al: Targeting the vascular endothelial growth factor system to prevent
ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome. Hum Reprod Update 14(4):321, 2008
Spiegel E, Spence AR, Czuzoj-Shulman N, et al: Pregnancy outcomes after thyroid cancer. J Perinat
Med 47(7):710, 2019
Stensheim H, Klungsøyr K, Skjaerven R, et al: Birth outcomes among offspring of adult cancer
survivors: a population-based study. Int J Cancer 133(11):2696, 2013
Stephansson O, Kieler H, Granath F, et al: Endometriosis, assisted reproduction technology, and risk of
adverse pregnancy outcome. Hum Reprod 24(9):2341, 2009
Still R, Brennecke S: Melanoma in pregnancy. Obstet Med 10(3):107, 2017
Stout MJ, Frey HA, Tuuli MG, et al: Loop electrosurgical excision procedure and risk of vaginal
infections during pregnancy: an observation study. BJOG 122(4):545, 2015
Stout MJ, Odibo AO, Graseck AS, et al: Leiomyomas at routine second-trimester ultrasound
examination and adverse obstetric outcomes. Obstet Gynecol 116(5):1056, 2010
Stovall M, Blackwell CR, Cundiff J, et al: Fetal does from radiotherapy with photon beams: report of
AAPM Radiation Therapy Committee Task Group No. 36. Med Phys 22(1):63, 1995
Sullivan SA: Thyroid nodules and thyroid cancer in pregnancy. Clin Obstet Gynecol 62(2):365, 2019

Sundermann AC, Velez Edwards DR, Bray MJ, et al: Leiomyomas in pregnancy and spontaneous
abortion: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Obstet Gynecol 130(5):1065, 2017
Suzuki S: Comparison between spontaneous ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome and hyperreactio
luteinalis. Arch Gynecol Obstet 269(3):227, 2004
Swetter SM, Tsao H, Bichakjian CK, et al: Guidelines of care of the management of primary cutaneous
melanoma. J Am Acad Dermatol 80(1):208, 2019
Szecsi PB, Anderson MR, Bjørngaard B, et al: Cancer antigen 125 after delivery in women with a
normal pregnancy: a prospective cohort study. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 93(12):1295, 2014
Takushi M, Moromizato H, Sakumoto K, et al: Management of invasive carcinoma of the uterine cervix
associated with pregnancy: outcome of intentional delay in treatment. Gynecol Oncol 87:185, 2002
Tamura K, Kaneda M, Futagawa M, et al: Genetic and genomic basis of the mismatch repair system
involved in Lynch syndrome. J Int J Clin Oncol 24(9):999, 2019
Tannus JF, Hertzberg BS, Haystead CM, et al: Unilateral luteoma of pregnancy mimicking a malignant
ovarian mass on magnetic resonance and ultrasound. J Magn Reson Imaging 29(3):713, 2009
Teh WT, Stern C, Chander S, et al: The impact of uterine radiation on subsequent fertility and pregnancy
outcomes. Biomed Res Int 2014:482968, 2014
Toss A, Grandi G, Cagnacci A, et al: The impact of reproductive life on breast cancer risk in women
with family history or BRCA mutation. Oncotarget 8(6):9144, 2017
Tsao NW, Lynd LD, Sayre EC, et al: Use of biologics during pregnancy and risk of serious infections in
the mother and baby: a Canadian population-based cohort study. BMJ Open 9(2):e023714, 2019
Ungár L, Smith JR, Pálfavli L, et al: Abdominal radical trachelectomy during pregnancy to preserve
pregnancy and fertility. Obstet Gynecol 108:811, 2006
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, Curry SJ, Krist AH, et al: Screening for cervical cancer: US
Preventive Services Task Force recommendation statement. JAMA 320(7):674, 2018
Valachis A, Tsali L, Pesce LL, et al: Safety of pregnancy after primary breast carcinoma in young
women: a meta-analysis to overcome bias of healthy mother effect studies. Obstet Gynecol Surv
65:786, 2010
Valentini A, Lubinski J, Byrski T, et al: The impact of pregnancy on breast cancer survival in women
who carry a BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation. Breast Cancer Res Treat 142(1):177, 2013
van de Loo LE, van den Berg MH, Overbeek A, et al: Uterine function, pregnancy complications, and
pregnancy outcomes among female childhood cancer survivors. Fertil Steril 111(2):372, 2019
van der Kooi AL, Mulder RL, Hudson MM, et al: Counseling and surveillance of obstetrical risks for
female childhood, adolescent, and young adult cancer survivors: recommendations from the
International Late Effects of Childhood Cancer Guideline Harmonization Group. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 224(1):3, 2021
van der Vange N, Weverling GJ, Ketting BW, et al: The prognosis of cervical cancer associated with
pregnancy: a matched cohort study. Obstet Gynecol 85:1022, 1995
van Vliet W, van Loon AJ, ten Hoor KA, et al: Cervical carcinoma during pregnancy: outcome of
planned delay in treatment. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 79:153, 1998
Vercruysse DC, Deprez S, Sunaert S, et al: Effects of prenatal exposure to cancer treatment on
neurocognitive development, a review. Neurotoxicology 54:11, 2016
Viswanathan S, Ramaswamy B: Pregnancy-associated breast cancer. Clin Obstet Gynecol 54(4):546,
2011
Wang YC, Su HY, Liu JY, et al: Maternal and female fetal virilization caused by pregnancy luteomas.
Fertil Steril 84:509.e15, 2005

Webb KE, Sakhel K, Chauhan SP, et al: Adnexal mass during pregnancy: a review. Am J Perinatol
32(11):1010, 2015
Weibull CE, Eloranta S, Smedby KE, et al: Pregnancy and the risk of relapse in patients diagnosed with
Hodgkin lymphoma. J Clin Oncol 34(4):337, 2016
Weinmann S, Naleway A, Swamy G, et al: Pregnancy outcomes after treatment for cervical cancer
precursor lesions: an observational study. PLoS One 12(1):e0165276, 2017
Winther JF, Boice JD Jr, Svendsen AL, et al: Spontaneous abortion in a Danish population-based cohort
of childhood cancer survivors. J Clin Oncol 26(26):4340, 2008
Winther JF, Olsen JH, Wu H, et al: Genetic disease in the children of Danish survivors of childhood and
adolescent cancer. J Clin Oncol 30(1):27, 2012
Woo JC, Yu T, Hurd TC: Breast cancer in pregnancy. Arch Surg 138:91, 2003
Yahata T, Numata M, Kashima K, et al: Conservative treatment of stage IA1 adenocarcinoma of the
cervix during pregnancy. Gynecol Oncol 109(1):49, 2008
Yatsenko O, Vlachou PA, Glanc P: Predictive value of single or combined ultrasound signs in the
diagnosis of ovarian torsion. Ultrasound Med 40(6):1163, 2021
Yost NP, Santoso JT, McIntire DD, et al: Postpartum regression rates of antepartum cervical
intraepithelial neoplasia II and III lesions. Obstet Gynecol 93:359, 1999
Zagouri F, Sergentanis TN, Chrysikos D, et al: Platinum derivatives during pregnancy in cervical cancer:
a systematic review and meta-analysis. Obstet Gynecol 121:337, 2013a
Zagouri F, Sergentanis TN, Chrysikos D, et al: Trastuzumab administration during pregnancy: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Breast Cancer Res Treat 137(2):349, 2013b
Zemlickis D, Lishner M, Degendorfer P, et al: Maternal and fetal outcome after breast cancer in
pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 166:781, 1992
Zullo F, Spagnolo E, Saccone G, et al: Endometriosis and obstetrics complications: a systematic review
and meta-analysis. Fertil Steril 108(4):667, 2017
Zydus Pharmaceuticals: Tamoxifen citrate. 2020. Available at:
https://medlibrary.org/lib/rx/meds/tamoxifen-citrate-11/page/2/#ID28. Accessed January 19, 2021

