CHAPTER 44

Management of Obstetrical Hemorrhage

MANAGEMENT OF HEMORRHAGE
BLOOD REPLACEMENT
OBSTETRICAL COAGULOPATHIES
SURGICAL MANAGEMENT OF HEMORRHAGE
REFERENCES
Recognition of obstetrical hemorrhage severity is crucial to its management.
However, visual estimates, especially when blood losses are excessive, are
notoriously inaccurate. In many cases, true volume losses are often two to
three times the clinical estimate. Moreover, in obstetrics, part and sometimes
even all of the lost blood may be concealed. Estimation is further
complicated in that peripartum hemorrhage also includes the pregnancyaugmented blood volume. After pregnancy hypervolemia is lost at delivery,
blood loss can be estimated by calculating 500 mL loss for each 3 volume
percent drop in hematocrit. Its nadir depends on the speed of resuscitation
with intravenous crystalloids and blood products. With ongoing blood loss,
the real-time hematocrit is at its maximum whenever measured in the
delivery, operating, or recovery room.
Prudently, if blood loss is considered more than average, the hematocrit
is determined, and plans are made for close observation for potential
physiological deterioration. Blood loss determination as recommended by
the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019b) is

discussed in detail in Chapter 42. Urine output measured hourly is one of the
most important “vital signs.” Unless diuretic agents are given—and these
are seldom indicated with active bleeding—accurately measured urine
flow reflects renal perfusion. This in turn reflects perfusion of other vital
organs. The volume of urine output should be ≥30 mL/hr and preferably ≥50
mL/hr.
Another important factor to consider with management of hemorrhage is
whether there are adequate procoagulants to achieve clot formation and
stability. Many cases of severe obstetrical hemorrhage are further
complicated by disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC), in which
blood has dysfunctional coagulation (p. 775).

MANAGEMENT OF HEMORRHAGE
■ Hypovolemic Shock
Shock from hemorrhage evolves through several stages (Cannon, 2018).
Early, the mean arterial pressure, stroke volume, cardiac output, central
venous pressure, and pulmonary capillary wedge pressure decline. Greater
differences in arteriovenous oxygen content values reflect enhanced tissue
oxygen extraction, although overall oxygen consumption falls.
Blood flow to capillary beds is controlled by arterioles, which are
resistance vessels and partially controlled by the central nervous system
(CNS). However, approximately 70 percent of total blood volume is
contained in venules, which are passive resistance vessels controlled by
humoral factors. Thus, the catecholamine release during hemorrhage prompts
greater venular tone, and this provides an autotransfusion from this
capacitance reservoir. This volume boost is accompanied by compensatory
rises in heart rate, systemic and pulmonary vascular resistance, and
myocardial contractility. At the same time, selective, CNS-mediated
arteriolar constriction or relaxation, termed autoregulation, preferentially
redistributes cardiac output and blood volume. Thus, more blood flow is
diverted to the heart, brain, and adrenal glands, whereas perfusion to the
kidneys, splanchnic beds, muscles, skin, and uterus is relatively diminished.
When the blood volume deficit exceeds approximately 25 percent,
compensatory mechanisms usually are inadequate to maintain cardiac output
and blood pressure. Importantly, additional small losses of blood will now

cause rapid clinical deterioration. Following an initial augmented total
oxygen extraction by maternal tissue, maldistribution of blood flow results in
local tissue hypoxia and metabolic acidosis. This creates a vicious cycle of
vasoconstriction, organ ischemia, and cellular death.
Hemorrhage also activates lymphocytes and monocytes, which in turn
prompts endothelial cell activation and platelet aggregation (Cannon, 2018).
This endotheliopathy promotes release of vasoactive mediators that occlude
small vessels and further impair microcirculatory perfusion. Comorbid
preeclampsia or sepsis also leads to loss of capillary endothelial integrity,
additional loss of intravascular volume into the extracellular space, and
platelet aggregation. These then can incite DIC.
The pathophysiological events just described create important but often
overlooked extracellular fluid and electrolyte shifts involved in both the
genesis and successful treatment of hypovolemic shock. These include
changes in the cellular transport of various ions such as sodium and water
into skeletal muscle as well as potassium loss. Replacement of extracellular
fluid and intravascular volume are both necessary. Patient survival rates are
enhanced in acute hemorrhagic shock if blood plus crystalloid solution are
given compared with blood transfusions alone.

■ Fluid Resuscitation
Whenever excessive blood loss is suspected, steps are simultaneously taken
to identify the bleeding source and to begin resuscitation. Refer to the
algorithm for hemorrhage management (Fig. 42-3, p. 735). If the woman is
undelivered, restoration of blood volume benefits both mother and fetus. It
also prepares for emergent delivery. If she is postpartum, immediately
identifying uterine atony, retained placental fragments, or genital tract
lacerations is essential. One or two large-bore intravenous infusion systems
are ideally established promptly, crystalloid solutions are rapidly infused,
and blood products are ordered. An operating room is readied, and a
surgical and anesthesia team are quickly assembled. Specific management of
hemorrhage is further dependent on its etiology. A neonatal resuscitation
team is included if imminent delivery is planned.
Serious hemorrhage demands prompt and adequate refilling of the
intravascular compartment with crystalloid solutions. These rapidly
equilibrate into the extravascular space, and only 20 percent of crystalloid

remains intravascular in critically ill patients after 1 hour (Zuckerbraun,
2010). Because of this, initial fluid is infused in a volume two to three
times the estimated blood loss.

Crystalloid Versus Colloid Solutions
Resuscitation of hypovolemic shock with colloid versus crystalloid solutions
has been debated. In a Cochrane review of resuscitation of nonpregnant
critically ill patients, Lewis and coworkers (2018) found selection of
colloids versus crystalloids probably makes little or no difference to
mortality rates. Similar results were found in the Saline versus Albumin
Fluid Evaluation (SAFE) randomized trial of almost 7000 nonpregnant
patients (Finfer, 2004). At Parkland Hospital, acute volume resuscitation is
preferably done with crystalloid solutions and blood.
Either a saline-based or a balanced crystalloid solution may be infused.
The latter includes Ringer lactate and Plasma-Lyte solutions, which have
electrolyte compositions similar to plasma. In some studies, but not in all,
balanced crystalloid solutions were found to be superior to saline-based
ones (Semler, 2018; Yule, 2020). Excessive saline-based crystalloid solution
can theoretically lead to hyperchloremic acidosis. In comparisons, the
difficulty lies in separating the effects of the underlying pathophysiology
driving the acidosis.

■ Blood Replacement
Type and Screen Versus Crossmatch
A blood type and antibody screen should be performed for any woman at
significant risk for hemorrhage. Because prediction of women at risk for
postpartum hemorrhage is poor, we perform type and screen in all women
upon admission to labor and delivery. Screening involves mixing maternal
serum with standard reagent red cells that carry antigens to which most of the
common clinically significant antibodies react. Instead, crossmatching
involves the use of actual donor erythrocytes rather than the standardized red
cells. This process is efficient, and only 0.03 to 0.07 percent of patients
identified as having no antibodies are subsequently found to them (Boral,
1979). Importantly, administration of screened blood rarely results in
adverse clinical sequelae.

Transfusion Thresholds
The hematocrit level or hemoglobin concentration threshold that mandates
blood transfusion is controversial (Bienstock, 2021). Cardiac output does not
substantively drop until the hemoglobin concentration falls to approximately
7 g/dL or when the hematocrit approximates 20 volume percent. Military
combat trauma units have used a target hematocrit of 21 volume percent, and
at this level, most experts recommend consideration of red cell transfusion
(Carson, 2017; Kogutt, 2019). In general, with ongoing obstetrical
hemorrhage, we recommend rapid blood infusion when the hematocrit is <25
volume percent. Other decision-modifying factors are whether the fetus is
undelivered; surgery is imminent or ongoing operative blood loss is
expected; or maternal hypoxia, vascular collapse, or other factors are
present.
Limited data address these issues. In a study from the Canadian Critical
Care Trials Group, nonpregnant patients were randomly assigned to
restrictive red cell transfusions to maintain hemoglobin concentration >7
g/dL or to liberal transfusions to maintain the hemoglobin level at 10 to 12
g/dL. The 30-day mortality rate was similar—19 versus 23 percent—in the
restrictive versus liberal groups, respectively (Hébert, 1999). Transfusion
therapy in nonpregnant patients with septic shock had similar mortality rates
when 7 g/dL was compared with 9 g/dL as targets for transfusions (Holst,
2014). The number of units transfused in a given woman to reach a target
hematocrit depends on her body mass and on the expectations of
additional blood loss.

Blood Component Products
The content and effects of transfusion of various blood components are
shown in Table 44-1. Because whole blood is rarely available, most women
with obstetrical hemorrhage and ongoing massive blood loss are given
packed red cells, crystalloid solutions, and blood components. As
subsequently discussed, many institutions use massive transfusion protocols
(MTPs) designed to anticipate all facets of massive obstetrical hemorrhage.
These protocols commonly contain plasma, cryoprecipitate, and platelets in
various ratios (Cunningham, 2015; Shields, 2011).

TABLE 44-1. Blood Products Commonly Transfused in Obstetrical
Hemorrhage

Several studies have assessed plasma:red cell ratios with MTPs used in
civilian trauma units and military combat hospitals (Hardin, 2014; Rahouma,
2018). Patients receiving a massive transfusion—defined as 10 or more units
of blood—had much higher survival rates as the ratio of plasma to red cell
units neared 1:1.4, that is, one unit of plasma given for each 1.4 units of
packed red cells. By way of contrast, the highest mortality group had a ratio
of 1:8.
From the foregoing, when red cell replacement exceeds five units or so,
evaluation of platelet count, clotting studies, and plasma fibrinogen
concentration is reasonable (Bienstock, 2021; Pacheco, 2019). In the woman
with obstetrical hemorrhage, the platelet count should be maintained
>50,000/µL by the infusion of platelet concentrates. A fibrinogen level <150
mg/dL or a sufficiently prolonged PT or PTT in a woman with surgical
bleeding is an indication for replacement. Fresh-frozen plasma is
administered in doses of 10 to 15 mL/kg, or alternatively, cryoprecipitate is
infused (see Table 44-1).
At Parkland Hospital, we use a standardized response to active
hemorrhage. If whole blood is not available, the following escalation of
blood products is applied: 2 units packed red blood cells, and if continued
bleeding, 2 units packed red blood cells and 2 units fresh-frozen plasma are
automatically ordered. Beyond this, MTP is initiated.

Whole Blood and Packed Red Blood Cells

Compatible whole blood is ideal for management of severe obstetrical
hemorrhage. It has a shelf life of 40 days, and 70 percent of the transfused
red cells function for at least 24 hours following transfusion. One unit raises
the hematocrit by 3 to 4 volume percent. Important for obstetrical
hemorrhage, whole blood replaces many coagulation factors needed in
obstetrics—especially fibrinogen—and its plasma treats hypovolemia. A
collateral derivative is that women with severe hemorrhage are resuscitated
with fewer blood donor exposures than with packed red cells and
components.
Experience at Parkland Hospital supports the preferable use of whole
blood for massive hemorrhage (Alexander, 2009; Hernandez, 2012). Of more
than 66,000 deliveries, women with obstetrical hemorrhage treated with
whole blood had significantly lower incidences of severe maternal morbidity
that included renal failure, acute respiratory distress syndrome, pulmonary
edema, hypofibrinogenemia, intensive care unit admissions, or maternal
death compared with those given packed red cells and component therapy.
One unit of packed erythrocytes is derived from one unit of whole blood to
have a hematocrit of 55 to 80 volume percent. One unit will increase the
hematocrit by 3 to 4 volume percent depending on the size of the woman.

Dilutional Coagulopathy
A major drawback of massive hemorrhage treatment with crystalloid
solutions and packed red blood cells is depletion of platelets and clotting
factors. Discussed later, this can lead to a dilutional coagulopathy that is
clinically indistinguishable from DIC (Cunningham, 2015; Hossain, 2013).
Thrombocytopenia is the most frequent coagulation defect found with blood
loss and multiple transfusions. In addition, packed red cells have only very
small amounts of soluble clotting factors, and stored whole blood is deficient
in platelets and in factors V, VIII, and XI. Thus, hypofibrinogenemia and
prolongation of the prothrombin (PT) and partial thromboplastin times (PTT)
are other sequelae. Because many causes of obstetrical hemorrhage also
cause DIC, the distinction between dilutional and consumptive coagulopathy
can be confusing. Fortunately, treatment for both is similar.

Platelets

Platelet transfusions are considered with ongoing obstetrical hemorrhage if
the platelet count falls below 50,000/µL (Kenny, 2015). In the nonsurgical
patient, bleeding is rarely encountered if the platelet count is 10,000/µL or
higher (Murphy, 2010). The preferable source of platelets is one “bag”
obtained by single-donor apheresis. This contains the equivalent of one unit
each from six individual donors. Depending on maternal size, each singledonor-apheresis, six-unit bag raises the platelet count by approximately
20,000/µL. If these bags are not available, then individual-donor platelet
units are used, and six to eight such units are generally transfused.
Importantly, the donor plasma in platelet units must be compatible with
recipient erythrocytes. Further, because some red blood cells are invariably
transfused along with the platelets, only units from D-negative donors should
be given to D-negative recipients.

Fresh-frozen Plasma
This component is prepared by separating plasma from whole blood and then
freezing it. Approximately 30 minutes are required for frozen plasma to thaw.
It is a source of all stable and labile clotting factors, including fibrinogen.
Thus, it is often used for treatment of women with consumptive or dilutional
coagulopathy. Plasma is not a suitable volume expander in the absence of
specific clotting factor deficiencies. It is considered in a bleeding woman
with a fibrinogen level <150 mg/dL or with an abnormal PT or PTT.
An alternative to frozen plasma is liquid plasma (LQP). This neverfrozen plasma is stored at 1 to 60 C for up to 40 days, and its use compares
favorably with fresh-frozen plasma (Backholder, 2017). Liquid plasma is not
universally available in many centers.

Cryoprecipitate and Fibrinogen Concentrate
Each unit of cryoprecipitate is prepared from one unit of fresh-frozen plasma.
Each 10- to 15-mL unit contains at least 200 mg of fibrinogen along with
factor VIII:C, factor VIII:von Willebrand factor, factor XIII, and fibronectin
(American Association of Blood Banks, 2017). It is usually given as a
“pool” or “bag” using an aliquot of fibrinogen concentrate taken from 8 to
120 donors. Cryoprecipitate is an ideal source of fibrinogen when levels are
dangerously low and surgical incisions show oozing. Because of transit time,
the return of cryoprecipitate to transfusion services is often not feasible and

is considered wastage if not deployed. Nearly 17 percent of ordered
cryoprecipitate has been reported to be wasted in labor and delivery units,
and this is the most commonly wasted product (Yee, 2019). Another
alternative is virus-inactivated fibrinogen concentrate (Ng, 2020). These
pooled fibrinogen products are marketed as RiaSTAP and Fibryna. Each
gram of concentrate raises the plasma fibrinogen level approximately 40
mg/dL. These concentrates are used to treat congenital hypofibrinogenemia
syndromes.

Recombinant Activated Factor VII
This synthetic vitamin K–dependent protein is available as NovoSeven.
Recombinant activated factor VII (rFVIIa) binds to exposed tissue factor at
the injury site to generate thrombin that activates platelets and the coagulation
cascade. Since its introduction, rFVIIa has been used to help control
hemorrhage from surgery, trauma, and obstetrical causes (Goodnough, 2016;
Murakami, 2015). Many Level I trauma centers include it in MTPs.
Importantly, rFVIIa will not be effective if the plasma fibrinogen level is <50
mg/dL or the platelet count is <30,000/µL.
One concern with rFVIIa is associated arterial—and to a lesser degree—
venous thrombosis. In a review of 35 randomized trials, arterial
thromboembolism developed in 55 percent (Levi, 2010). A second concern
is that it has been found to have only marginal efficacy (Pacheco, 2019).

Tranexamic Acid
Normally, plasminogen binds with tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) to form
plasmin. This binding degrades fibrin into fibrinogen–fibrin degradation
products and leads to clot lysis. Instead, tranexamic acid (TXA) reversibly
binds to plasminogen, and thereby blocks plasmin binding to fibrin. Fibrin
strands are not broken, and a clot persists to slow down bleeding.
Ahmadzia and coworkers (2021) recently reported the
pharmacodynamics of TXA at cesarean delivery using rotational
thromboelastometry. TXA inhibited tPA-induced clot lysis in a dosedependent manner. In the randomized WOMAN trial of gravidas with
hemorrhage following vaginal birth or during cesarean delivery, mortality
rates from obstetrical hemorrhage were 1.2 percent in those given a 1-g
intravenous TXA dose plus traditional care for bleeding. This rate was

statistically lower than the 1.7-percent death rate in women given traditional
care alone (WOMAN Trial Collaborators, 2017). The trial was carried out
in developing nations and because of the results, the drug is recommended by
the World Health Organization (2017). In a large randomized trial of
tranexamic acid given for prophylaxis, the drug did not decrease the rate of
postpartum hemorrhage following vaginal delivery (Sentilhes, 2018). In the
Tranexamic Acid for Preventing Postpartum Hemorrhage Following a
Cesarean Delivery—TRAAP2 trial—women undergoing cesarean delivery
who were given tranexamic acid prophylaxis had a lower incidence of redcell transfusions (Sentilhes, 2021).
Gayet-Ageron and coworkers (2018) conducted a metaanalysis with
more than 1000 patients with postpartum hemorrhage treated with TXA. They
also analyzed data from two randomized trials that included more than
40,000 women treated with TXA. They concluded that treatment must be
given soon after bleeding onset to reduce maternal mortality rates. Shakur
and colleagues (2018) performed a Cochrane database review and also
concluded that early TXA administration decreases maternal deaths.
Most of these studies were conducted in impoverished countries, and the
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019a) does not
recommend TXA for either prophylaxis or first-line treatment of obstetrical
hemorrhage. If used, administration within 3 hours of delivery is
recommended.

Massive Transfusion Protocols
As noted, these protocols are initiated once four to five units of packed red
cells have been given within 2 hours or so. These protocols speed blood
product delivery to provide early resuscitation and help avoid dilutional
coagulopathy. Once activated, packed red cells, plasma, platelets, and
fibrinogen are given set ratios (Table 44-2). Some protocols include rFVIIa,
TXA, or prothrombin complex concentrates (Jackson, 2018).
TABLE 44-2. Parkland Hospital Obstetrical Massive Transfusion Protocol

The data supporting the superiority of MTPs compared with traditional
component replacement to improve survival rates in obstetrical studies are
limited. Most reports describe nonpregnant trauma victims, but some
observational studies address obstetrical hemorrhage (Green, 2016;
Pacheco, 2016).

Viscoelastic Assays
Thromboelastography (TEG) and rotational thromboelastometry (ROTEM)
are point-of-care tests that assess coagulation in whole blood during massive
transfusions. These tests work by analyzing both clot formation and
breakdown in a whole blood sample from a given patient. Testing produces a
profile of coagulation dynamics, and displayed values indicate the speed and
quality of clot formation (Fig. 44-1). These assays provide information
regarding time to clot formation, clot strength, and fibrinolysis (Arnolds,
2020). Currently, they guide blood product replacement in trauma, liver
transplant, and cardiac surgery patients. Studies of TEG and ROTEM
techniques in pregnant women have confirmed the hypercoagulable state of
pregnancy and provide reference ranges for use in this population (Lee,
2021; McNamara, 2019; Pacheco, 2019).

FIGURE 44-1 Normal thromboelastograph (TEG). R (reaction time: start of test to clot forming. K
(clotting time): from start to 20 mm amplitude. Alpha (α) angle: speed of fibrin formation. A15, A20:
amplitude at 15 and 20 minutes. MCF: maximum clot firmness. LY30: amount of clot lysed at 30
minutes.

Although promising, they also have several limitations. For example, they
are less informative in a woman with torrential hemorrhage in whom clotting
function would need to be measured minute-by-minute. They cannot be used
to detect disorders of primary hemostasis (Solomon, 2012). A major
drawback is the risk of misinterpretation when tests are used by inadequately
trained personnel. Although use is gaining favor, we and others recommend
further study before these tests are widely applied for obstetrical hemorrhage
treatment (Amgalan, 2020). We have found this testing modality to be more
applicable after initial management of hemorrhage and with intensive care
recovery than during acute hemorrhage.

Cell Salvage and Autologous Transfusion
Preoperative patient phlebotomy and autologous blood storage for
transfusion in obstetrics has been disappointing. Exceptions are women with
a rare blood type or with unusual antibodies (Pacheco, 2013; Sullivan,
2019).
Intraoperative blood salvage with reinfusion is considered a safe
intervention in obstetrical patients. This practice may aid women declining

transfusion (Chap. 30, p. 549). Prior concern centered on amnionic fluid
contamination and embolism (Dhariwal, 2014; Goucher, 2015). To evaluate
benefits, one trial randomly assigned 3028 women at risk for hemorrhage and
undergoing cesarean delivery either to routine care or to cell salvage. The
rate of nonautologous donor blood transfusion was not significantly reduced
in the cell salvage group—2.5 versus 3.5 percent (Khan, 2017). In another
study, Sullivan and colleagues (2019) routinely set up most cesarean
deliveries for autologous transfusions and reported a lower rate of
nonautologous donor transfusion. Similar to prior reports, no cases of
amnionic fluid embolism were reported in these two studies.

■ Transfusion Complications
Of serious known risks, transfusion of an incompatible blood component
may result in acute hemolysis. If severe, this can cause DIC, acute kidney
injury, and death. Preventable errors responsible for most of these reactions
frequently include mislabeling of a specimen or incorrectly transfusing a
patient not slated for those products.
The rate of such errors in the United States is estimated to be 1 case in
14,000 units, but these events are likely underreported (Lerner, 2010). A
transfusion reaction is characterized by fever, hypotension, tachycardia,
dyspnea, chest or back pain, flushing, severe anxiety, and hemoglobinuria.
Immediate supportive measures include stopping the transfusion, treating
hypotension and hyperkalemia, provoking diuresis, and alkalinizing the urine.
Transfusion-related acute lung injury (TRALI) and transfusionassociated circulatory overload (TACO) are the most common causes of
transfusion-related mortality (Semple, 2019). Affected women
characteristically have severe dyspnea, hypoxia, and pulmonary edema that
develop within 6 hours of transfusion (Peters, 2015). Of the two, TACO is
more common, and its incidence nears 1 percent. TRALI is estimated to
complicate at least 1 in 12,000 transfusions (Carson, 2017). Although their
pathogenesis is incompletely understood, injury to the pulmonary capillaries
may arise from human leukocyte antigen (HLA) antibodies and human
neutrophil antibodies (HNA) in donor plasma (McCullough, 2016).
Management is supportive and may include mechanical ventilation (Chap.
50, p. 885).

Bacterial infection from transfusion of a contaminated blood component
is unusual because organism growth is discouraged by refrigeration. The
most often implicated contaminants of red cells include Yersinia,
Pseudomonas, Serratia, Acinetobacter, and Escherichia species. The more
important risk is from bacterial contamination of platelets, which are stored
at room temperature. Current estimates are that 1 in 1000 to 2000 platelet
units are contaminated. Death from transfusion-related sepsis is 1 case in
17,000 transfused single-donor platelets and 1 case in 61,000 transfused
apheresis-donor packs (Lerner, 2010).
Viral infection risks from transfusion have been curtailed. The estimated
risk of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) or of hepatitis C virus infection
in screened blood is 1 case in 1 to 2 million transfused units (Carson, 2017).
The estimated hepatitis B transmission rate is <1 case in 100,000 transfused
units (Jackson, 2003). Because of the high prevalence of the virus,
cytomegalovirus-infected leukocytes are often transfused.
Risks for transmitting West Nile virus, parvovirus B19, human Tlymphotropic virus type 1, and toxoplasmosis are slight (American
Association of Blood Banks, 2013; Foroutan-Rad, 2016). Although rare,
Zika virus has emerged as another relevant transfusion-transmitted infection
(Motta, 2016). Collection of all whole blood components now includes
testing for Zika virus (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2018). At
this time, transmission of SARS-CoV-2 virus from a COVID-positive donor
is hypothetical (Leblanc, 2020).

OBSTETRICAL COAGULOPATHIES
The terms consumptive coagulopathy, defibrination syndrome, and
disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) are often used
interchangeably, but distinctions are important. Actual consumption of
procoagulants within the intravascular tree results in a consumptive
coagulopathy. In contrast, massive loss of procoagulants from hemorrhage
results in a dilutional coagulopathy. Semantics aside, consumptive
coagulopathy culminates in a systemic intravascular activation that
completely disrupts natural hemostasis. As a result, an ineffective balance of
natural anticoagulant mechanisms leads to widespread fibrin deposition that
can cause multiorgan failure (Levi, 2016).

■ Pregnancy-induced Coagulation Changes
During normal pregnancy, the balance between coagulation and fibrinolysis
changes to create a procoagulant state. Changes that promote coagulation
include appreciable elevation in the plasma concentrations of factors I
(fibrinogen), VII, VII, IX, and X. A partial list of these normal values is
found in the Appendix (p. 1228). Concurrently, levels of plasminogen, which
lyses fibrin, rise considerably. However, plasminogen activator inhibitor 1
and 2 (PAI-1 and PAI-2) levels also increase. Thus, plasmin activity usually
declines until after delivery (Hale, 2012; Hui, 2012). As shown in Figure 47, (p. 62), mean platelet count drops by 10 percent during pregnancy, and
platelet activation is enhanced (Kenny, 2015; Reese, 2018).
The net results of these changes include greater levels of fibrinopeptide
A, β-thromboglobulin, platelet factor 4, and fibrinogen–fibrin degradation
products, which includes D-dimers. In addition to lower concentrations of the
anticoagulant protein S, pregnancy-related hypercoagulability, and decreased
fibrinolysis, there is augmented—yet compensated—intravascular
coagulation that may function to maintain the uteroplacental interface.

■ Disseminated Intravascular Coagulation
Because of the many definitions and variable severity, the incidence of
consumptive coagulopathy in gravidas varies and ranges from 0.03 to 0.35
percent (Erez, 2014; Rattray, 2012). For example, some degree of significant
coagulopathy is found in virtually all cases of placental abruption and
amnionic fluid embolism. Other instances in which frequently occurring but
less recognized degrees of coagulation activation can be found include
sepsis; thrombotic microangiopathies; acute kidney injury; acute fatty liver;
severe preeclampsia; and hemolysis, elevated liver enzyme levels, low
platelet count (HELLP) syndrome (Cunningham, 2015).
When consumptive coagulopathy is severe, the likelihood of maternal and
perinatal morbidity and mortality rises. In one study of 49 cases, antecedent
causes included those listed above, and 59 percent received blood
transfusions, 18 percent underwent hysterectomy, 6 percent required renal
dialysis, and three mothers died (Rattray, 2012). In this series, the perinatal
mortality rate was 30 percent. From 2010 to 2011, DIC was the second most
common severe maternal morbidity indicator (Creanga, 2014). DIC was

associated with nearly a fourth of maternal deaths during this study period.
Despite these statistics, consumptive coagulopathy as the sole cause of
maternal death is uncommon and accounts for only 0.2 percent of pregnancyrelated deaths in the United States (Creanga, 2015).

■ Activation of Normal Coagulation
Instead of the “waterfall” sequential activation of the clotting cascade, a
current theory proposes that tissue factor—an integral membrane
glycoprotein—serves as the principal initiator of coagulation (Levi, 2016).
Coagulation then moves forward but incorporates a feedback loop. To begin,
tissue factor forms complexes with factor VII/VIIa to activate factors IX and
X. Tissue factor is found in highly vascularized organs such as the brain,
lungs, and placenta; in amnionic fluid; and in certain other cells (Kuczyfiski,
2002; Østerud, 2006; Uszyfiski, 2001).
Tissue factor–factor VIIa complexes ultimately generate activated factor
X (Xa) to initiate clotting. Subsequently, the previously labeled “intrinsic”
pathway amplifies this process. Specifically, the initial thrombin produced
directly activates factor XI by providing a feedback amplification loop (Fig.
44-2). The end result of this amplified coagulation process is fibrin
formation. This is then counterbalanced by the fibrinolytic system, in which
plasminogen is activated. Even this process is tied initially to tissue factor.
The final product is fibrin degradation products, sometimes called fibrin
split products, which include D-dimers.

FIGURE 44-2 Coagulation pathway schematic. FSP = fibrin split products; PAI = plasminogen
activator inhibitor; TFPI = tissue factor pathway inhibitor.

■ Activation of Pathological Coagulation
With DIC, pathological entities prompt tissue factor release from
subendothelial tissue and stimulated monocytes, which in turn provoke
cytokine release from the endothelium. With generalized endothelial
activation, diffuse activation of coagulation follows. This pathological cycle
of coagulation and fibrinolysis becomes clinically important when
coagulation factors and platelets are sufficiently depleted to create
consumptive coagulopathy.

Purpura fulminans is a severe—often lethal—form of consumptive
coagulopathy. It is caused by microthrombi in small blood vessels leading to
skin necrosis and sometimes vasculitis. Debridement of large areas of skin
over the extremities and buttocks frequently requires treatment in a burn unit.
Rarely, four-extremity amputation is required (Bhatti, 2019). Purpura
fulminans usually complicates sepsis in women with heterozygous protein C
deficiencies and low protein C serum levels (Bhatti, 2019; Levi, 2016).
Importantly, homozygous protein C or S deficiency results in neonatal
purpura fulminans, which is fatal (Chap. 55, p. 976).

■ Inciting Conditions
Several obstetrical syndromes can trigger consumptive coagulopathy. Of
these, placental abruption is the most common cause of severe consumptive
coagulopathy in obstetrics and is discussed more fully in Chapter 43 (p.
749). With preeclampsia, eclampsia, and HELLP syndrome, endothelial
activation is a hallmark. Perhaps 10 percent of HELLP cases have some
disseminated coagulation (Haram, 2017). In general, the clinical severity of
preeclampsia is directly correlated with thrombocytopenia and fibrin
degradation products (Gedik 2017; Kenny, 2015). That said, intravascular
coagulation is seldom severe enough to be clinically worrisome (Pritchard,
1976). Acute fatty liver of pregnancy also causes intravascular coagulation in
addition to decreased procoagulant synthesis (Chap. 58, p. 1034).
Amnionic fluid embolism is usually caused by intravenous embolization
of meconium-laden amnionic fluid. It results in rapid cardiorespiratory
collapse and profound consumptive coagulopathy. The Society for MaternalFetal Medicine (2021) has developed a checklist for the initial management
of amnionic fluid embolism. It is discussed in Chapter 42 (p. 745).
Sepsis stemming from various infections can be accompanied by endo-or
exotoxin release. Although a feature of sepsis syndrome includes activation
of coagulation, seldom does sepsis alone cause massive procoagulant
consumption. Escherichia coli bacteremia is frequently seen with antepartum
pyelonephritis and puerperal infections, however, accompanying
consumptive coagulopathy is usually not severe. Some notable exceptions are
septicemia caused by exotoxins released from group A Streptococcus
pyogenes, Staphylococcus aureus, or Clostridium perfringens, C sordellii,
or C novyi (Herrera, 2016; Pritchard, 1971). Treatment of sepsis and septic

shock is discussed in Chapter 50 (p. 889). Septic abortion—especially
associated with these organisms—can incite coagulation and worsen
hemorrhage.
Second-trimester induced abortions can stimulate intravascular
coagulation even in the absence of sepsis. Ben-Ami and associates (2012)
described a 1.6-percent incidence in 1249 late-second-trimester pregnancies
terminated by dilation and evacuation. Two thirds were done for fetal
demise, which may have contributed to coagulopathy (Kerns, 2019). Another
source of intense coagulation is instillation of hypertonic solutions to effect
midtrimester abortions. These are not commonly used currently for pregnancy
terminations. The mechanism is thought to initiate coagulation by
thromboplastin release into maternal circulation from the placenta, fetus, and
decidua by the necrobiotic effect of hypertonic solutions.
Prolonged retention of a dead fetus is an unusual cause of consumptive
coagulopathy today. Namely, fetal death can be easily confirmed, and highly
effective methods for labor induction are available. Moreover, if the dead
fetus is undelivered, most women enter spontaneous labor within 2 weeks
and gross disruption of maternal coagulation rarely develops before 4 weeks
(Pritchard, 1959, 1973). After 1 month, however, almost a fourth will
develop consumptive coagulopathy.

■ Diagnosis
Bioassay is an excellent method to detect or suspect clinically significant
coagulopathy. Excessive bleeding at sites of modest trauma characterizes
defective hemostasis. Examples include persistent bleeding from
venipuncture sites, nicks from preoperative shaving, trauma from bladder
catheterization, and spontaneous bleeding from the gums, nose, or
gastrointestinal tract. Purpura or petechiae at pressure sites such as
sphygmomanometer cuffs or tourniquets suggest significant
thrombocytopenia. Any surgical procedure provides the ultimate bioassay
and elicits generalized oozing from abdominal wall layers, the
retroperitoneal space, the episiotomy, or incisions and dissections for
cesarean delivery or hysterectomy.
Of laboratory tests, fibrinogen and D-dimer levels can be informative. In
late pregnancy, plasma fibrinogen levels typically have risen to 300 to 600
mg/dL. Thus, even with severe consumptive coagulopathy, levels may

sometimes be sufficiently high to protect against clinically harmful
hypofibrinogenemia. For example, defibrination caused by a placental
abruption might lower an initial fibrinogen level of 600 mg/dL to 250 mg/dL.
Although this would indicate massive fibrinogen consumption, levels are still
adequate to promote clinical coagulation. The clinically impactful threshold
usually approximates 150 mg/dL. The effects of serious hypofibrinogenemia
—less than 50 mg/dL—can be illustrated with clinical thrombin clot test.
With low fibrinogen levels, the clot formed from whole blood in a glass
phlebotomy tube will initially be soft and cannot retract in volume. Instead,
during the next half hour, platelet-induced clot retraction ensues, and this
causes a tighter clot to form.
As depicted in Figure 44-2, fibrinolysis cleaves fibrin into various fibrin
degradation products, and one of the smaller ones is the D-dimer. Several
sensitive assays contain monoclonal antibodies specific for D-dimers
(Johnson, 2019). Assay values are almost always abnormally high with
clinically significant consumptive coagulopathy. At least in obstetrical
disorders, quantification does not correlate with outcomes. Examples of the
magnitude of fibrin split product elevations in various obstetrical
coagulopathies are shown in Figure 44-3.

FIGURE 44-3 Quantification of fibrin split products in various obstetrical syndromes that cause
disseminated intravascular coagulation. AFLP = acute fatty liver of pregnancy; HELLP = hemolysis,
elevated liver enzyme levels, low platelet count. (Reproduced with permission from Cunningham FG,
Nelson DB: Disseminated intravascular coagulation syndromes in obstetrics. Obstet Gynecol. 2015
Nov;126(5):999–1011)

Thrombocytopenia is likely if petechiae are abundant or if clotted blood
fails to retract within an hour or so. Confirmation is provided by a low
platelet count. If severe preeclampsia syndrome is comorbid, qualitative
platelet dysfunction may coexist (Chap. 40, p. 696).
Prothrombin time (PT) and partial thromboplastin time (PTT) are
standard coagulation tests. Prolongation may stem from very low fibrinogen
concentrations, from appreciably reduced levels of the procoagulants needed
to generate thrombin, or from large amounts of circulating fibrinogen–fibrin
degradation products.
Thromboelastometry and thromboelastography are point-of-care tests
used as adjuncts to conventional laboratory studies (McNamara, 2019;
Pacheco, 2019). Their current role may serve to guide blood product
replacements as discussed earlier (p. 774). Using many of these tests, several

organizations have attempted to establish a more uniform definition of DIC.
One is the International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis (ISTH)
scoring system. The score is used only after a condition known to cause
intravascular coagulation is identified and is calculated using a combination
of laboratory tests. Composite ISTH-DIC scores <5 suggest nonovert DIC,
whereas scores ≥5 are compatible with overt DIC. A scoring system for
nonovert DIC has been developed by Alhousseini and coworkers (2020).
These scoring systems have not been applied widely in obstetrics
(Hizkiyahu, 2019; Jonard, 2016; Nelson, 2014).

■ General Management
To halt ongoing defibrination, identifying and removing the inciting source is
a priority. With incisions or extensive lacerations accompanied by severe
hemorrhage, rapid replacement of procoagulants is usually indicated.
Vigorous restoration and maintenance of the circulation to treat hypovolemia
cannot be overemphasized. Adequate perfusion restores hepatic and
endothelial synthesis of procoagulants and permits prompt removal of
activated coagulation factors, fibrin, and fibrin degradation products by the
reticuloendothelial system.
Aside from these fundamental steps, few other agents have proved
soundly effective. Although its use is seemingly counterintuitive,
unfractionated heparin has now been abandoned. Other agents not
recommended for first-line use include tranexamic acid or epsilonaminocaproic acid, both antifibrinolytic agents (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019a; Pacheco, 2017). This is because the
fibrinolytic system is necessary for dissolution of widespread fibrin
thromboses caused by generalized intravascular coagulation (Levi, 2016).
Discussed earlier (p. 773), recombinant factor VIIa (rFVIIa) can be used to
help control severe obstetrical hemorrhage from other causes. However,
current clinical evidence is insufficient to make firm recommendations on its
administration for obstetrical coagulopathies.

SURGICAL MANAGEMENT OF HEMORRHAGE
Several invasive procedures can help to arrest severe postpartum
hemorrhage. A report from the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality

concluded that most studies addressing these methods are of poor quality
(Likis, 2015). In one study of 6660 women with postpartum hemorrhage, 4
percent underwent an invasive procedure, and 1 percent had a hysterectomy
(Kayem, 2016). The failure rate of conservative surgical and embolization
procedures was 15 percent.
Of specific methods, use of uterine balloon tamponade for treatment of
atony has doubled in the past decade (Merriam, 2020; Suarez, 2020). It is
described in Chapter 42 (p. 737).
For low-pressure bleeding, topical hemostatic agents can be used to
control persistent surgical oozing. These were reviewed by Stachowicz and
colleagues (2020). Other than for cesarean hysterectomy, these are seldom
used in obstetrical hemorrhage.

■ Uterine Compression Sutures
This surgical technique uses a no. 2 chromic suture to compress the anterior
and posterior uterine walls together (B-Lynch, 1997). Because they give the
appearance of suspenders, they are also called braces (Fig. 44-4). Several
modifications of the B-Lynch technique have been described (Gilmandyar,
2019; Matsubara, 2013; Nelson, 2007).

FIGURE 44-4 Uterine compression suture or “brace.” The B-Lynch suture technique is illustrated
from an anterior view of the uterus in Figures A, B, and D and a posterior view in Figure C. The
numbers denote the sequential path of the suture and are shown in more than one figure. Step 1.
Beginning below the incision, the needle pierces the lower uterine segment to enter the uterine cavity.
Step 2. The needle exits the cavity above the incision. The suture then loops up and around the fundus
to the posterior uterine surface. Step 3. The needle pierces the posterior uterine wall to reenter the

uterine cavity. The suture then traverses to the opposite side within the cavity. Step 4. The needle exits
the uterine cavity through the posterior uterine wall. From the back of the uterus, the suture loops up
and around the fundus to the front of the uterus. Step 5. The needle pierces the myometrium above the
incision to reenter the uterine cavity. Step 6. The needle exits below the incision, and the sutures at
points 1 and 6 are tied below the incision. The hysterotomy incision is then closed in the usual fashion.

B-Lynch sutures are mainly used to treat atony. These may help diminish
DIC-associated bleeding, while coagulation is corrected by transfusion.
Success rates vary by indication. For example, B-Lynch (2005) cited 948
cases with only 7 failures. Conversely, in other series, overall failure rates
were 20 to 25 percent (Kaya, 2016; Kayem, 2011).
Some unique complications can rarely follow compression sutures
(Matsubara, 2013). Most involve variations of uterine ischemic necrosis
with peritonitis (Gottlieb, 2008; Joshi, 2004; Treloar, 2006). In most cases,
subsequent pregnancies are uneventful if compression sutures are used (An,
2013). A few women with B-Lynch sutures, however, developed uterine wall
defects or uterine cavity synechiae (Akoury, 2008; Alouini, 2011; Ibrahim,
2013).

■ Artery Ligation
Ligation of arterial blood flow to the uterus can halt or diminish obstetrical
hemorrhage. Common indications include uterine hysterotomy incision
laceration, uterine atony, and abnormal placentation.
Uterine artery ligation may be unilateral or bilateral and is used mainly
for lacerations at the lateral part of a hysterotomy incision (Fig. 44-5). In our
experiences, this procedure is less helpful for other hemorrhage etiologies. In
rare cases with torrential hemorrhage from placenta accreta syndrome, a
tourniquet wrapped around the lower uterine segment may slow bleeding
sufficiently while resuscitation ensues and dissection for hysterectomy is
performed.

FIGURE 44-5 Uterine artery ligation. The suture goes through the lateral uterine wall anteriorly,
curves posteriorly, and then re-enters anteriorly. When tied, it encompasses the uterine artery.

Internal iliac artery ligation may also be unilateral or bilateral. For
years, ligation has been used to reduce pelvic hemorrhage. However, the
procedure may be technically difficult and is successful in only half of cases
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019a; Bienstock,
2021). Wei and colleagues (2019) reported it to be successful for improved
hemostasis with placenta previa. It is not particularly helpful for abating
hemorrhage with postpartum atony (Clark, 1985).
For internal iliac ligation, adequate exposure is obtained by opening the
peritoneum over the common iliac artery and dissecting down to the
bifurcation of the external and internal iliac arteries (Fig. 44-6). Branches
distal to the external iliac arteries are palpated to verify pulsations at or
below the inguinal area. Ligation of the internal iliac artery at a point 5 cm
distal to the common iliac bifurcation will usually avoid the internal iliac

artery’s posterior division branches (Bleich, 2007). The areolar sheath of the
artery is incised longitudinally, and a right-angle clamp is carefully passed
just beneath the artery from lateral to medial. Care must be taken not to
perforate contiguous large veins, especially the internal iliac vein. Suture—
usually nonabsorbable—is passed under the artery with a clamp, and the
vessel is then securely ligated.

FIGURE 44-6 Ligation of the right internal iliac artery. Unembalmed cadaveric dissection shows the
right-angle clamp passing underneath the anterior division of the internal iliac artery just distal to its
posterior division. (Reproduced with permission from Dr. Marlene Corton.)

The most important mechanism of action with internal iliac artery ligation
is an 85-percent reduction in pulse pressure in those arteries distal to the
ligation (Burchell, 1968). This converts an arterial pressure system into one

with pressures approaching those in the venous circulation. This creates
vessels more amenable to hemostasis via pressure and clot formation.
Even bilateral internal iliac artery ligation does not appear to interfere
with subsequent reproduction. Nizard and colleagues (2003) reported
subsequent pregnancy in 17 such women. From a total of 21 pregnancies, 13
were normal, 3 ended with miscarriage, 3 were terminated, and 2 were
ectopic.

■ Angiographic Embolization
This modality is now used for many causes of intractable hemorrhage when
surgical access is difficult. Its use has increased remarkably in the past
decade (Merriam, 2020). In more than 500 pregnancy-related cases,
embolization was effective in 90 percent (Grönvall, 2014; Lee, 2012;
Poujade, 2011; Zhang, 2015). After his review, Rouse (2013) concluded that
embolization can be used to arrest refractory postpartum hemorrhage. Other
reports have been less enthusiastic. Fertility is not impaired, and many
subsequent successful pregnancies have been reported (Fiori, 2009;
Kolomeyevskaya, 2009). An important caveat for these procedures is that
women with hemodynamic instability related to active bleeding should not
be removed from the operating room.
Complications are relatively uncommon but can be severe. Case reports
detail instances of iatrogenic iliac artery rupture, uterine ischemic necrosis,
and uterine infection (Grönvall, 2014; Katakam, 2009; Nakash, 2012). A rare
case of massive buttock necrosis and paraplegia followed bilateral internal
iliac artery embolization (Al-Thunyun, 2012). A myometrial defect in
subsequent pregnancy also has been reported (Choo, 2019).
In a few instances, massive blood loss and difficult surgical dissection is
anticipated. The use of balloon-tipped catheters preoperatively inserted into
the iliac or uterine arteries is described in management of placenta accreta
spectrum (Chap. 43, p. 759).

■ Aortic Compression
Prophylactic use of an aortic balloon occlusion device has been reported to
reduce blood loss and the need for hysterectomy (Chen, 2019). Also known
as resuscitative endovascular balloon occlusion of the aorta (REBOA),

such occlusion lowers the perfusion pressure distally, increases cardiac
afterload, and redistributes blood volume to the heart and brain (Cannon,
2018). Prolonged occlusion can result in lower limb ischemia requiring
amputation. Whittington and colleagues (2020) described its successful
prophylactic use in 11 women with placenta accreta spectrum disorders.
Instead, manual compression of the aorta above the sacral promontory
can be used in cases in which pelvic hemorrhage is torrential. If the abdomen
is closed, pressure placed above the umbilicus reduces blood pressure
distally (Barbieri, 2018).

■ Pelvic Packing
If hysterectomy fails to curtail hemorrhage, then pelvic packing with gauze
and termination of the operation may be considered (Pacheo, 2018; Touhami,
2018). Rolls of gauze are packed to provide constant local pressure. In some
cases, this may serve as a temporizing step prior to interventional
embolization. In other cases, packing alone may be left for 48 to 72 hours. If
the patient is stable and bleeding appears to have stopped, packing is
removed. In one review of 104 cases, the success rate was 79 percent.
Packing failed in 24 patients, and 13 of these women died, yielding an
overall mortality rate of 13 percent (Touhami, 2018).
The umbrella or parachute pack uses a similar concept (Logothetopulos,
1926). Although seldom used today, it can be lifesaving if all other measures
have failed, especially in low-resource areas (Dildy, 2006; Touhami, 2018).
The pack is constructed of a sturdy sterile plastic bag that is filled with gauze
rolls that are unwound and knotted together. Sufficient rolls are used to
provide adequate volume in the bag to fill the pelvis. The pack is introduced
transabdominally with the stalk exiting the vagina. Mild traction is applied
by tying the stalk to a 1-liter fluid bag, which is hung over the foot of the bed.
The umbrella pack is removed vaginally after 24 hours.

REFERENCES
Ahmadzia HK, Luban NL, Li S, et al: Optimal use of intravenous tranexamic acid for hemorrhage
prevention in pregnant women. Am J Obstet Gynecol 225(1):85.e1, 2021
Akoury H, Sherman C: Uterine wall partial thickness necrosis following combined B-Lynch and Cho
square sutures for the treatment of primary postpartum hemorrhage. J Obstet Gynaecol Can 30:421,

2008
Alexander JM, Sarode R, McIntire DD, et al: Use of whole blood in the management of hypovolemia
due to obstetric hemorrhage. Obstet Gynecol 113:1320, 2009
Alhousseini A, Romero R, Benshalom-Tirosh N, et al: Nonovert disseminated intravascular coagulation
(DIC) in pregnancy: a new scoring system for the identification of patients at risk for obstetrical
hemorrhage requiring blood product transfusion. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med February 3, 2020
[Epub ahead of print]
Alouini S, Coly S, Megier P, Lemaire B, et al: Multiple square sutures for postpartum hemorrhage:
results and hysteroscopic assessment. Am J Obstet Gynecol 205(4):335, 2011
Al-Thunyan A, Al-Meshal O, Al-Hussainan H, et al: Buttock necrosis and paraplegia after bilateral
internal iliac artery embolization for postpartum hemorrhage. Obstet Gynecol 120(2 Pt 2):468, 2012
American Association of Blood Banks: Circular of information for the use of human blood and blood
components. 2017. Available at: https://www.aabb.org/docs/default-source/default-documentlibrary/resources/circular-of-information-10-17.pdf. Accessed February 14, 2021
American Association of Blood Banks: Human parvovirus B19. 2013. Available at:
https://www.aabb.org/tm/eid/Documents/Human—Parvovirus—B19.pdf. Accessed February 14,
2021
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Postpartum hemorrhage. Practice Bulletin No.
183, October 2019a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Quantitative blood loss in obstetric hemorrhage.
Committee Opinion No. 794, December 2019b
Amgalan A, Allen T, Othman M, et al: Systematic review of viscoelastic testing (TEG/ROTEM) in
obstetrics and recommendations from the Women’s SSC of the ISTH. J Thromb Haemost
18(8):1813, 2020
An GH, Ryu HM, Kim My, et al: Outcomes of subsequent pregnancies after uterine compression
sutures for postpartum hemorrhage. Obstet Gynecol 122(3):565, 2013
Arnolds DE, Scavone BM: Thromboelastographic assessment of fibrinolytic activity in postpartum
hemorrhage: a retrospective single-center observational study. Anesth Analg 131(5):1373, 2020
Backholder L, Green L, Huish S, et al: A paired comparison of thawed and liquid plasma. Transfusion
57:881, 2017
Barbieri RL: Postpartum hemorrhage: aortic compression to reduce pelvic bleeding. OBG Management
30(10):10, 2018
Ben-Ami I, Fuchs N, Schneider D, et al: Coagulopathy associated with dilation and evacuation for
second-trimester abortion. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 91(1):10, 2012
Bhatti UF, Williams AM, Raghavendran K, et al: Four-extremity amputation following disseminated
intravascular coagulation and purpura fulminans. BMJ Case Rep 12(3):e228028, 2019
Bienstock JL, Ahizechukwu C, Eke C, et al: Postpartum hemorrhage. N Engl J Med 384:1635, 2021
Bleich AT, Rahn DD, Wieslander CK, et al: Posterior division of the internal iliac artery: anatomic
variations and clinical applications. Am J Obstet Gynecol 197:658.e1, 2007
B-Lynch C: Partial ischemic necrosis of the uterus following a uterine brace compression suture. BJOG
112:126, 2005
B-Lynch CB, Coker A, Laval AH, et al: The B-Lynch surgical technique for control of massive
postpartum hemorrhage: an alternative to hysterectomy? Five cases reported. BJOG 104:372, 1997
Boral LI, Hill SS, Apollon CJ, et al: The type and antibody screen, revisited. Am J Clin Pathol 71:578,
1979
Burchell RC: Physiology of internal iliac artery ligation. J Obstet Gynaecol Br Commonw 75:642, 1968

Cannon JW: Hemorrhagic shock. N Engl J Med 378(4):370, 2018
Carson JL, Triulzi DJ, Ness PM: Indications for and adverse effects of red-cell transfusion. N Engl J
Med 377:13, 2017
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Zika and blood transfusions. 2018. Available at:
https://www.cdc.gov/zika/transmission/blood-transfusion.html. Accessed February 14, 2021
Chen L, Wang X, Wang H, et al: Clinical evaluation of prophylactic abdominal aortic balloon occlusion in
patients with placenta accreta: a systematic review and meta-analysis. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth
19(1):30, 2019
Choo S, Wiseman D, MacMillan J, et al: Myometrial defect in a subsequent pregnancy after uterine
artery embolization for postpartum hemorrhage, in the absence of leiomyomas or previous uterine
surgery. J Obstet Gynaecol Can 42(2):173, 2019
Clark SL, Phelan JP, Yeh SY: Hypogastric artery ligation for obstetric hemorrhage. Obstet Gynecol
66:353, 1985
Creanga AA, Bateman BT, Kuklina EV, et al: Racial and ethnic disparities in severe maternal morbidity:
a multistate analysis, 2008–2010. Am J Obstet Gynecol 210(5):435.e1, 2014
Creanga AA, Berg CJ, Syverson C, et al: Pregnancy-related mortality in the United States, 2006–2010.
Obstet Gynecol 125(1):5, 2015
Cunningham FG, Nelson DB: Disseminated intravascular coagulation syndromes in obstetrics. Obstet
Gynecol 126(5):999, 2015
Dhariwal SK, Khan KS, Allard S, et al: Does current evidence support the use of intraoperative cell
salvage in reducing the need for blood transfusion in caesarean section? Curr Opin Obstet Gynecol
26(6):425, 2014
Dildy GA, Scott AR, Saffer CS: An effective pressure pack for severe pelvic hemorrhage. Obstet
Gynecol 108(5):1222, 2006
Erez O, Novack L, Beer—Weisel R, et al: DIC score in pregnant women—a population based
modification of the International Society on Thrombosis and Hemostasis score. PLoS One 9:e93240,
2014
Finfer S, Bellomo R, Boyce N, et al: A comparison of albumin and saline for fluid resuscitation in the
intensive care unit. N Engl J Med 350:2247, 2004
Fiori O, Deux JF, Kambale JC, et al: Impact of pelvic arterial embolization for intractable postpartum
hemorrhage on fertility. Am J Obstet Gynecol 200:384.e1, 2009
Foroutan-Rad M, Majidan H, Dalvand S, et al: Toxoplasmosis in blood donors: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. Transfus Med Rev 30(3):116, 2016
Gayet-Ageron A, Prieto—Merino D, Ker K, et al: Effect of treatment delay on the effectiveness and
safety of anti-fibrinolytics in acute severe haemorrhage: a meta-analysis of individual patient-level
data from 40 to 138 bleeding patients. Lancet 391(10116):125, 2018
Gedik E, Yücel N, Sahin T, et al: Hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, and low platelet syndrome:
outcomes for patients admitted to intensive care at a tertiary referral hospital. Hypertens Pregnancy
36(1):21, 2017
Gilmandyar D, Thornburg LL: Surgical management of postpartum hemorrhage. Semin Perinatol
43(1):27, 2019
Goodnough LT, Levy JH: The judicious use of recombinant factor VIIa. Semin Thromb Hemost
42(2):125, 2016
Gottlieb AG, Pandipati S, Davis KM, et al: Uterine necrosis. A complication of uterine compression
sutures. Obstet Gynecol 112:429, 2008
Goucher H, Wong CA, Patel SK, et al: Cell salvage in obstetrics. Anesth Analg 121(2):465, 2015

Green L, Knight M, Seeney FM, et al: The epidemiology and outcomes of women with postpartum
haemorrhage requiring massive transfusion with eight or more units of red cells: a national crosssectional study. BJOG 123(13):2164, 2016
Grönvall M, Tikkanen M, Metsätähti M, et al: Pelvic arterial embolization in severe obstetric
hemorrhage. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 93(7):716, 2014
Hale SA, Sobel B, Benvenuto A, et al: Coagulation and fibrinolytic system protein profiles in women
with normal pregnancies and pregnancies complicated by hypertension. Pregnancy Hypertens
2(2):152, 2012
Haram K, Mortensen JH, Mastrolia SA, et al: Disseminated intravascular coagulation in the HELLP
syndrome: how much do we-really know? J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 30(7):779, 2017
Hardin MO, Ritchie JD, Aden JK, et al: Plasma-to-red cell ratio and mechanism of injury in massively
transfused combat casualties. Mil Med 179(1):92, 2014
Hébert PC: Anemia and red cell transfusion in critical care. Transfusion Requirements in Critical Care
Investigators and the Canadian Critical Care Trials Group. Minerva Anestesiol 65(6):293, 1999
Hernandez JS, Alexander JM, Sarode R, et al: Calculated blood loss in severe obstetric hemorrhage and
its relation to body mass index. Am J Perinatol 29(7):557, 2012
Herrera C, Meehan R, Poddutori V, et al: Maternal deaths due to Clostridium novyi in an injection drug
user. Obstet Gynecol 128:876, 2016
Hizkiyahu R, Rabinovich A, Thachil J, et al: Modified ISTH pregnancy-specific DIC score in parturients
with liver rupture: population-based case series. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 32(15):2517, 2019
Holst LB, Haase N, Wetterslev J, et al: Lower versus higher hemoglobin threshold for transfusion in
septic shock. N Engl J Med 371(15):1381, 2014
Hossain N, Paidas MJ: Disseminated intravascular coagulation. Semin Perinatol 37(4):257, 2013
Hui C, Lili M, Libin C, et al: Changes in coagulation and hemodynamics during pregnancy: a prospective
longitudinal study of 58 cases. Arch Gynecol Obstet 285(5):1231, 2012
Ibrahim MI, Raafat TA, Ellaithy MI, et al: Risk of postpartum uterine synechiae following uterine
compression suturing during postpartum haemorrhage. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynecol 53(1):37, 2013
Jackson BR, Busch MP, Stramer SL, et al: The cost-effectiveness of NAT for HTV, HCV, and HBV in
whole-blood donations. Transfusion 43:721, 2003
Jackson D, DeLoughery TG: Postpartum hemorrhage: management of massive transfusion. Obstet
Gynecol Surv 73(7):418, 2018
Johnson ED, Schell JC, Rodgers GM: The D-dimer assay. Am J Hematol 94:833, 2019
Jonard M, Ducloy-Bouthors AS, Fourrier F: Comparison of two diagnostic scores of disseminated
intravascular coagulation in pregnant women admitted to the ICU. PLoS One 11(11):e016647, 2016
Joshi MM, Shrivastava M: Partial ischemic necrosis of the uterus following a uterine brace compression
suture. BJOG 111:279, 2004
Katakam N, Vitthala S, Sasson S, et al: Complications and failure of uterine artery embolization for
intractable postpartum haemorrhage. BJOG 116(6):863, 2009
Kaya B, Guralp O, Tuten A, et al: Which uterine sparing technique should be used for uterine atony
during cesarean section? The Bakri balloon or the B-Lynch suture? Arch Gynecol Obstet
294(3):511, 2016
Kayem G, Dupont C, Bouvier-Colle MH, et al: Invasive therapies for primary postpartum haemorrhage:
a population-based study in France. BJOG 123(4):598, 2016
Kayem G, Kurinczuk JJ, Alfirevic A, et al: Uterine compression sutures for the management of severe
postpartum hemorrhage. Obstet Gynecol 117(1):14, 2011

Kenny L, McCrae K, Cunningham FG: Platelets, coagulation, and the liver. In Taylor R, Roberts JM,
Cunningham FG (eds): Chesley’s Hypertension in Pregnancy, 4th ed. Amsterdam, Academic Press,
2015
Kerns JL, Ti A, Aksel S, et al: Disseminated intravascular coagulation and hemorrhage after dilation and
evacuation abortion for fetal death. Obstet Gynecol 134(4):708, 2019
Khan KS, Moore PAS, Wilson MJ, et al: Cell salvage and donor blood transfusion during cesarean
section: A pragmatic, multicentre randomised controlled trial (SALVO). PLoS Med
14(12):e1002471, 2017
Kogutt BK, Vaught AJ: Postpartum hemorrhage: blood product management and massive transfusion.
Semin Perinatol 43(1):44, 2019
Kolomeyevskaya NV, Tanyi JL, Coleman NM, et al: Balloon tamponade of hemorrhage after uterine
curettage for gestational trophoblastic disease. Obstet Gynecol 113:557, 2009
Kuczyfiski J, Uszyfiski W, Zekanowska E, et al: Tissue factor (TF) and tissue factor pathway inhibitor
(TFPI) in the placenta and myometrium. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 105:15, 2002
Leblanc JF, Germain M, Delage G, et al: Risk of transmission of severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2 by transfusion: a literature review. Transfusion 60(12):3046, 2020
Lee HJ, Kim M, Lim B, et al: Transcatheter arterial embolization in the management of postpartum
hemorrhage due to genital tract injury after vaginal delivery. J Vasc Interv Radiol 32(1):99, 2021
Lee HY, Shin JH, Kim J, et al: Primary postpartum hemorrhage: outcome of pelvic arterial embolization
in 251 patients at a single institution. Radiology 264(3):903, 2012
Lerner NB, Refaai MA, Blumberg N: Red cell transfusion. In Kaushansky K, Lichtman M, Beutler K,
et al (eds): Williams Hematology, 8th ed. New York, McGraw Hill, 2010, p 2287
Levi M, Levy JH, Andersen H F, et al: Safety of recombinant activated factor VI I in randomized
clinical trials. N Engl J Med 363(19):1791, 2010
Levi M, Seligsohn U: Disseminated intravascular coagulation. In Kaushansky K, Lichtman M, Prchal
JT, et al (eds): In Williams Hematology, 9th ed. New York, McGraw Hill Education, 2016, p 2199
Lewis SR, Pritchard MW, Evans DJ, et al: Colloids versus crystalloids for fluid resuscitation in critically
ill patients. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 8:CD000567, 2018
Likis FE, Sathe NA, Morgans AK, et al: Management of postpartum hemorrhage. Comparative
Effectiveness Reviews, No. 151, Rockville, Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, 2015
Logothetopulos K: Eine absolut sichere blutstillungsmethode bei vagina len und abdominal en
gynakologischen operationen. Zentralbl Gynakol 50:3202, 1926
Matsubara S, Yano H, Ohkuchi A, et al: Uterine compression suture for postpartum hemorrhage: an
overview. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 92(4):378, 2013
McCullough J, Refaai MA, Cohn CS: Blood procurement and red cell transfusion. In Kaushansky K,
Lichtman MA, Prchal JJ, et al (eds): Williams Hematology, 9th ed. McGraw Hill Education, 2016, p
2374
McNamara H, Kenyon C, Smith R, et al: Four years’ experience of a ROTEM® guided algorithm for
treatment of coagulopathy in obstetric haemorrhage. Anesthesia 74(8):984, 2019
Merriam AA, Huang Y, Wright JD, et al: Use of uterine tamponade and interventional radiology
procedures during delivery hospitalizations. Obstet Gynecol 135(3):674, 2020
Motta IJ, Spencer BR, Cordeiro da Silva SGI et al: Evidence for transmission of Zika virus by platelet
transfusion. N Engl J Med 375(11):1101, 2016
Murakami M, Kobayashi T, Kubo T, et al: Experience with recombinant activated factor VI I for severe
postpartum hemorrhage in Japan, investigated by Perinatology Committee, Japan Society of
Obstetrics and Gynecology. J Obstet Gynaecol Res 41(8):1161, 2015

Murphy M, Vassallo R: Preservation and clinical use of platelets. In Kaushansky K, Lichtman M,
Beutler K, et al (eds): Williams Hematology, 8th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2010
Nakash A, Tuck S, Davies N: Uterine sepsis with uterine artery embolization in the management of
obstetric bleeding. J Obstet Gynecol 32(1):26, 2012
Nelson DB, Lucke AM, McIntire DD, et al: Obstetric antecedents to body-cooling treatment of the
newborn infant. Am J Obstet Gynecol 211:155.el, 2014
Nelson WL, O’Brien JM: The uterine sandwich for persistent uterine atony: combining the B-Lynch
compression suture and an intrauterine Bakri balloon. Am J Obstet Gynecol 196(5):e9, 2007
Ng KT, Yap JL, Kwok PE: The effect of fibrinogen concentrate on postoperative blood loss: a
systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials. J Clin Anesth 63:109782, 2020
Nizard J, Barrinque L, Frydman R, et al: Fertility and pregnancy outcomes following hypogastric artery
ligation for severe postpartum haemorrhage. Hum Reprod 18:844, 2003
Østerud B, Bjorklid E: Sources of tissue factor. Semin Thromb Hemost 32(1):11, 2006
Pacheco LD, Hankins GV, Saad AF, et al: Tranexamic acid for the management of obstetric
hemorrhage. Obstet Gynecol 130:765, 2017
Pacheco LD, Lozada MJ, Saade GR, et al: Damage control surgery for obstetric hemorrhage. Obstet
Gynecol 132(2):423, 2018
Pacheco LD, Saade GR, Costantine MM, et al: An update on the use of massive transfusion protocols
in obstetrics. Am J Obstet Gynecol 214(3):340, 2016
Pacheco LD, Saade GR, Costantine MM, et al: The role of massive transfusion protocols in obstetrics.
Am J Perinatol 30(1):1, 2013
Pacheco LD, Saade GR, Hankins GD: Medical management of postpartum hemorrhage: an update.
Semin Perinatol 43(1):22, 2019
Peters Al, Van Stein D, Vlaar AP: Antibody-mediated transfusion-related acute lung injury: from
discovery to prevention. Br J Haematol 170(5):597, 2015
Poujade O, Grossetti A, Mougel L, et al: Risk of synechiae following uterine compression sutures in the
management of major postpartum haemorrhage. BJOG 118(4):433, 2011
Pritchard JA: Fetal death in utero. Obstet Gynecol 14:573, 1959
Pritchard JA: Haematological problems associated with delivery, placental abruption, retained dead
fetus, and amniotic fluid embolism. Clin Haematol 2:563, 1973
Pritchard JA, Cunningham FG, Mason RA: Coagulation changes in eclampsia: their frequency and
pathogenesis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 124:855, 1976
Pritchard JA, Whalley PJ: Abortion complicated by Clostridium perfringens infection. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 111:484, 1971
Rahouma M, Kamei M, Jodeh D, et al: Does a balanced transfusion ratio of plasma to packed red blood
cells improve outcomes in both trauma and surgical patients? A meta-analysis of randomized
controlled trails and observational studies. Am J Surg 216(2):342, 2018
Rattray DD, O’Connell CM, Baskett TF: Acute disseminated intravascular coagulation in obstetrics: a
tertiary centre population review (1980 to 2009). J Obstet Gynaecol Can 34(4):341, 2012
Reese JA, Peck JD, Deschamps DR, et al: Platelet counts during pregnancy. N Engl J Med 379(1):32,
2018
Rouse DJ: Epidemiological investigation of a temporal increase in atonic postpartum haemorrhage: a
population-based retrospective cohort study. Obstet Gynecol 122(3):693, 2013
Saraiya M, Green CA, Berg CJ, et al: Spontaneous abortion- related deaths among women in the United
States—1981–1991. Obstet Gynecol 94:172, 1999

Sathe NA, Likis FE, Young JL, et al: Procedures and uterine- sparing surgeries for managing
postpartum hemorrhage: a systematic review. Obstet Gynecol Surv 71(2):99, 2016
Semler MW, Self WH, Wanderer JP, et al: Balanced crystalloids versus saline in critically ill adults. N
Engl J Med 378(9):829, 2018
Semple JW, Rebetz J, Kapur R: Transfusion-associated circulatory overload and transfusion-related
acute lung injury. Blood 133(17):1840, 2019
Sentilhes L, Senat MV, Le Lous M, et al: Tranexamic acid for the prevention of blood loss after
cesarean delivery. N Engl J Med 384:1623, 2021
Sentilhes L, Winer N, Azria E, et al: Tranexamic acid for the prevention of blood loss after vaginal
delivery. N Engl J Med 379(8):731, 2018
Shakur H, Beaumont D, Pavord S, et al: Anti fibrinolytic drugs for treating primary postpartum
haemorrhage. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2:CD012964, 2018
Shields LE, Smalarz K, Reffigee L, et al: Comprehensive maternal hemorrhage protocols improve
patient safety and reduce utilization of blood products. Am J Obstet Gynecol 205:368.el, 2011
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine: Patient safety and quality committee, Combs CA, Montgomery
DM, et al: Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine special statement: checklist for initial management
of amniotic fluid embolism. Am J Obstet Gynecol 224(4):B29, 2021
Solomon C, Collis RE, Collins PW: Haemostatic monitoring during postpartum haemorrhage and
implications for management. Br J Anesth 109(6):851, 2012
Stachowicz AM, Whiteside JL: Topical hemostatic agents in gynecologic surgery for benign indications.
Obstet Gynecol 135(2):463, 2020
Suarez S, Conde-Agudelo A, Borovac-Pinheiro A, et al: Uterine balloon tamponade for the treatment of
postpartum hemorrhage: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol
222(4):293.e1, 2020
Sullivan IJ, Ralph CJ: Obstetric intra-operative cell salvage: a review of an established cell salvage
service with 1170 reinfused cases. Anaesthesia 74(8):976, 2019
Touhami O, Bouzid A, Ben Marzouk S, et al: Pelvic packing for intractable obstetric hemorrhage after
emergency peripartum hysterectomy: a review. Obstet Gynecol Surv 73(2):110, 2018
Treloar EJ, Anderson RS, Andrews HG, et al: Uterine necrosis following B-Lynch suture for primary
postpartum haemorrhage. BJOG 113:486, 2006
Uszyfiski M, Zekanowska E, Uszyfiski W, et al: Tissue factor (TF) and tissue factor pathway inhibitor
(TFPI) in amniotic fluid and blood plasma: implications for the mechanism of amniotic fluid
embolism. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 95:163, 2001
Wei Y, Luo J, Luo D: Comparison of efficacy between internal iliac artery and abdominal aorta balloon
occlusions in pernicious placenta previa patients with placenta accreta. Gynecol Obstet Invest
84(4):343, 2019
Whittington JR, Pagen ME, Nevil BD, et al: Risk of vascular complications in prophylactic compared to
emergent resuscitative endovascular balloon occlusion of the aorta (REBOA) in the management of
placenta accreta spectrum. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med August 11, 2020 [Epub ahead of print]
WOMAN Trial Collaborators Effect of early tranexamic acid administration on mortality, hysterectomy,
and other morbidities in women with post-partum haemorrhage (WOMAN): an international,
randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet 389(10084):2105, 2017
World Health Organization: WHO recommendation on tranexamic acid for the treatment of postpartum
haemorrhage. Geneva, WHO, 2017
Yee LM, McGee P, Bailit JL, et al: Daytime compared with nighttime differences in management and
outcomes of postpartum hemorrhage. Obstet Gynecol 133(1):155, 2019

Yule CS, Ambia A, Duryea E, et al: The effect of normal saline on renal function and electrolytes in
women with preeclampsia. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med November 18, 2020
Zhang E, Liu L, Owen R: Pelvic artery embolization in the management of obstetrical hemorrhage:
predictive factors for clinical outcomes. Cardiovasc Intervent Radiol 38(6):1477, 2015
Zuckerbraun BS, Peitzman AB, Billiar TR: Shock. In Brunicardi FC, Andersen DK, Billiar TR, et al
(eds): Schwartz’s Principles of Surgery, 9th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2010

