CHAPTER 27

Vaginal Delivery

DELIVERY TECHNIQUE
PERSISTENT OCCIPUT POSTERIOR POSITION
SHOULDER DYSTOCIA
SPECIAL POPULATIONS
THIRD STAGE OF LABOR
LOWER GENITAL TRACT LACERATIONS
LACERATION AND EPISIOTOMY REPAIRS
REFERENCES
The natural culmination of second-stage labor is controlled vaginal delivery
of a healthy neonate with minimal trauma to the mother. Although some
clinical settings favor cesarean delivery, for most fetuses, vaginal birth is
preferred. For the mother, spontaneous vaginal vertex delivery poses the
lowest risk of most maternal comorbidity, and comparisons with cesarean
delivery are found in Chapter 30 (p. 548). Delivery is usually spontaneous,
although some maternal or fetal complications may warrant operative vaginal
delivery, described in Chapter 29 (p. 533). Last, a malpresenting fetus or
multifetal gestation in many cases may be delivered vaginally but requires
special techniques. These are described in Chapters 28 and 48.

DELIVERY TECHNIQUE
■ Preparation
The end of second-stage labor is heralded as the perineum begins to bulge,
and the fetal scalp is seen through the separating labia. Perineal pressure
from the fetal head creates reflexive pushing efforts. At this time, additional
staff to attend the neonate and instruments are readied for delivery. Fetal
heart rate monitoring continues. As one example, a nuchal cord often tightens
with fetal descent and may lead to deepening variable decelerations. If the
bladder is distended, catheterization can provide added pelvic space.
During second-stage labor, pushing positions may vary. But for delivery,
the dorsal lithotomy position is most common and often the most satisfactory.
Leg holders or stirrups are often used to assist. With or without their use,
perineal laceration rates were equal in one randomized study of 214
parturients (Corton, 2012). With positioning, legs are not separated too
widely or placed one higher than the other. Legs are not strapped into the
stirrups. This permits quick flexion of the thighs backward onto the abdomen
should shoulder dystocia develop. Legs may cramp during second-stage
pushing, and cramping can be relieved by creating gentle muscle stretch, by
brief massage, or both.
Preparation for delivery includes vulvar and perineal cleansing. If
desired, sterile drapes are placed to cover the legs and abdomen and expose
only the perineum. Scrubbing, gowning, gloving, and donning protective
mask and eyewear protect both the gravida and accoucheur from infectious
agents.

■ Delivery of the Head
By the end of second-stage labor, the position of the occiput is usually
known. In some cases, however, molding and caput formation may have
precluded early accurate identification. At this time, careful assessment is
again performed as described in Chapter 22 (p. 429). In most cases, position
is occiput anterior (OA) or is rotated slightly oblique. But, in perhaps 5
percent, an occiput posterior (OP) position persists.
With each contraction, the vulvovaginal opening is dilated by the fetal
head to gradually form an ovoid and finally, an almost circular opening. This

encirclement of the largest head diameter by the vulvar ring is termed
crowning. The anus becomes greatly stretched, and the anterior wall of the
rectum is easily seen through it. The perineum thins and may spontaneously
lacerate. Third- and fourth- degree perineal lacerations, which by definition
involve the anal sphincter and perineal body, are collectively termed
obstetric anal sphincter injuries (OASIS). Because of their associated
morbidity (p. 508), one main goal during delivery is OASIS prevention.
To improve perineal elasticity and protect against laceration, some
perform daily antepartum perineal massage starting at 34 to 35 weeks’
gestation. With a lubricant, the woman or her partner inserts one or two
fingers 3 cm into the vagina and applies pressure, first downward for 2
minutes and then laterally to each side of the vaginal entrance for 2 minutes.
In one large randomized study, nulliparas benefited mainly by lower rates of
episiotomy and of first-degree laceration (Labreque, 1999). Third- and
fourth-degree laceration rates are not lowered (Beckmann, 2013). As another
tool, antepartum use of the Epi-No intravaginal pump balloon similarly aims
to stretch the perineum. However, in randomized trials, it did not prevent
episiotomy, perineal trauma, or levator injury (Brito, 2015; Kamisan Atan,
2016). Instead of antepartum use, perineal massage can be performed solely
intrapartum during second-stage labor. In a large randomized study, the rates
of episiotomy, OASIS, and intact perineum were similar to those in a
nonmassage group (Stamp, 2001). In subsequent systematic reviews, this
practice was noted to lower OASIS rates and raise rates of delivery over an
intact perineum (Aasheim, 2017; Aquino, 2020a).
When the head distends the vulva and perineum enough to open the
vaginal introitus to a diameter of 5 cm or more, slow delivery of the head
and control of accelerative forces may minimize lacerations (Laine, 2008).
One of two approaches may be instituted. With the hands-on method, the
thumb and remaining fingers form a V pressed against the perineum to bolster
it. The other hand maintains fetal neck flexion to deliver the smallest head
diameter through the introitus and provides gentle pressure against rapid
forward movement to avoid expulsive delivery. Instead, with the handspoised method, hands touch neither the head or perineum but are applied
only selectively to slow rapid head expulsion. In a large randomized trial
with more than 5000 gravidas, rates of intact perineum or OASIS did not
differ between groups. In the hands-poised cohort, episiotomy rates were
lower (McCandlish, 1998). Subsequent systematic reviews of randomized

trials similarly note lower episiotomy rates with a hands-poised approach.
However, among these analyses, intact perineum or OASIS rates were not
consistently benefitted by this method (Aasheim, 2017; Huang, 2020; PierceWilliams, 2019).
Alternatively, if expulsive efforts are inadequate or an expedited delivery
is needed, the Ritgen maneuver may be employed or an episiotomy cut. With
the maneuver, gloved fingers grasp the fetal chin just behind or in the anus
and exert upward pressure between contractions. As a counter, the other hand
presses against the occiput to control forces against the perineum (Fig. 27-1)
(Cunningham, 2008). Although expeditious, this maneuver does not alter
OASIS rates (Aquino, 2020b).

FIGURE 27-1 Modified Ritgen maneuver. Moderate upward pressure is applied to the fetal chin by the
posterior hand covered with a sterile towel, while the occiput is held against the symphysis.

■ Delivery of the Shoulders
Following delivery of the fetal head, a finger is passed across the fetal neck
to determine whether it is encircled by one or more umbilical cord loops.
The nuchal cord incidence increases with gestational age and is found in
nearly 25 percent of deliveries at term (Larson, 1997). If an umbilical cord
coil is felt, it is slipped over the head if loose enough. If applied too tightly,
the loop is cut between two clamps. Tight nuchal cords complicate
approximately 6 percent of all deliveries but are not associated with worse
neonatal outcomes than those without a cord loop (Henry, 2013).
Following its delivery, the fetal head falls posteriorly, bringing the face
almost into contact with the maternal anus. The occiput promptly turns
toward one of the maternal thighs, and the head assumes a transverse
position. This external rotation indicates that the bisacromial diameter,
which is the distance between the shoulders, has rotated into the
anteroposterior diameter of the pelvis.
Most often, the shoulders appear at the vulva just after external rotation
and are born spontaneously. If delayed, extraction aids controlled delivery.
The sides of the head and neck are grasped with two hands, and if needed,
gentle axial traction may be applied until the anterior shoulder appears under
the pubic arch. Axial traction is aligned with the fetal spine, and lateral
deviation of the neck does not exceed 25 to 45 degrees (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019c). Next, the posterior shoulder is
delivered. During delivery, abrupt or powerful lateral extension of the neck
is avoided to avert brachial plexus injury.
The rest of the body almost always follows the shoulders without
difficulty. With prolonged delay, however, its birth may be hastened by
moderate outward traction on the head and moderate pressure on the uterine
fundus. Hooking the fingers in the axillae is avoided. This can injure upper
extremity nerves and produce a transient or possibly permanent paralysis.
After the newborn, a gush of amnionic fluid that can be blood-tinged but not
grossly bloody usually follows.
Previously, immediate nasopharyngeal bulb suctioning of the newborn
was routine to remove secretions. However, suctioning of the nasopharynx
may lead to neonatal bradycardia (Gungor, 2006). American Heart
Association neonatal resuscitation recommendations eschew most suctioning
immediately following birth—even with meconium present (Chap. 32, p.

589). Moreover, with meconium-stained fluid, routine intubation for tracheal
suction is not recommended for vigorous or for nonvigorous neonates.
Suctioning is reserved for neonates who have obvious obstruction to
spontaneous breathing or who require positive-pressure ventilation
(Wyckoff, 2015). For suctioning, options are bulb syringe or suction catheter
aspiration and may include intubation and suctioning if the airway is
obstructed.

■ Cord Clamping
The umbilical cord is cut between two clamps placed 6 to 8 cm from the
fetal abdomen, and later an umbilical cord clamp is applied 2 to 3 cm from
its insertion into the fetal abdomen.
For vigorous term neonates, umbilical cord clamping is ideally delayed
30 to 60 seconds to transfer blood to the newborn. Resting the newborn
below the level of the uterus allows gravity to aid flow (Yao, 1974). As a
result, higher total body iron stores and lower anemia rates for the neonate
are sustained (Andersson, 2011; McDonald, 2013). This practice may be
particularly valuable in populations in which iron deficiency is prevalent
(World Health Organization, 2014). In general, delayed compared with early
umbilical cord clamping does not worsen Apgar scores or umbilical cord pH
values. For the mother, postpartum hemorrhage rates and puerperal
hemoglobin status do not differ between early and delayed clamping groups
(Andersson, 2013; Gomersall, 2021; Nudelman, 2020).
Of potential harms, a greater hemoglobin concentration raises risks for
hyperbilirubinemia (Chap. 33, p. 606). Data are conflicting but suggest that
neonatal phototherapy rates do not differ (Andersson, 2011; Chen, 2018;
McDonald, 2013). That said, the American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2020e) recommends that protocols should be in place that
identify neonatal jaundice. Other cautions are cases requiring expedited
maternal or fetal resuscitation. Others are those having abnormal placentation
or compromised placental function, such as with abruption or fetal-growth
restriction. Fewer data are available regarding cord “milking,” in which the
operator pushes blood through the cord toward the newborn. This maneuver
appears safe for term newborns and may be advantageous if rapid cord
clamping is clinically indicated (Panburana, 2020).

For the preterm neonate, delayed cord clamping for 30 seconds or longer
has several benefits. From systematic reviews on the topic, these include
decreased rates of blood transfusion and death before hospital discharge
(Fogarty, 2018; Rabe, 2019). However, one large randomized study did not
show an advantage for its primary outcome, which was a composite of death
plus major neonatal morbidity (Tarnow-Mordi, 2017). The American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020e) recommends delayed
cord clamping for vigorous term and preterm neonates not needing immediate
resuscitation at birth.
Cord milking in the preterm neonate may pose potential harm. Although
conflicting, some data suggest higher associated rates of severe
interventricular hemorrhage in those <32 weeks’ gestation (Katheria, 2019,
2020; Kumbhat, 2021). Because of rapid blood volume changes,
organizations currently recommend against the routine use of cord milking for
neonates born <29 weeks’ gestation (Seidler, 2021; Wyckoff, 2015).

■ Occiput Transverse Position
In some cases, pelvic shape leads to a persistent occiput transverse (OT)
position that is not easily overcome during second-stage pushing. A
platypelloid pelvis is flattened anteroposteriorly and an android pelvis is
heart shaped (Fig. 2-16, p. 29). With these, space may be inadequate for
occipital rotation to either an anterior or posterior position.
In the absence of a pelvic architectural abnormality or asynclitism, the
OT position is usually transitory. Thus, unless contractions are hypotonic, the
head usually rotates spontaneously to an OA position. If rotation ceases
because of poor expulsive forces, vaginal delivery can be aided. The easiest
is manual rotation of the occiput either anteriorly to an OA or, less
commonly, posteriorly to an OP position. Kielland forceps also can rotate the
occiput anteriorly. Both manual and forceps rotations are described in
Chapter 29 (p. 540).

■ Persistent Occiput Posterior Position
Approximately 2 to 10 percent of singleton, term, cephalic fetuses deliver in
an OP position (Cheng, 2010). Many fetuses delivering OP are OA in early
labor but malrotate during labor. Predisposing risks include epidural

analgesia, nulliparity, greater fetal weight, and prior delivery with OP
positioning (Cheng, 2006a; Gardberg, 2004; Lieberman, 2005). Of pelvic
shapes, an anthropoid pelvis and narrow subpubic angle can predispose
(Barth, 2015; Ghi, 2016).
Women with a persistent OP position have higher associated rates of
prolonged second-stage labor, cesarean delivery, and operative vaginal
delivery. For women who deliver vaginally, rates of blood loss and of
OASIS are increased (Senécal, 2005).
Newborns delivered from an OP position have higher complication rates
than those born positioned OA. In one study of neonatal outcomes in 2591
women undergoing delivery from a persistent OP position, rates of acidemic
umbilical cord gases, birth trauma, Apgar scores <7, and intensive care
nursery admission, among others, were higher compared with an OA position
(Cheng, 2006b). Others report similar findings (Fitzpatrick, 2001; Ponkey,
2003).
Fetal head position assessment is essential to management (Chap. 22, p.
429). However, digital examination for identification of fetal head position
can be inaccurate, and transabdominal sonography may increase accuracy
(Bellussi, 2017). The transducer is placed transversely just cephalad to the
maternal mons pubis. In the sonogram, fetal orbits and nasal bridge lie
ventrally, whereas the occiput apposes the lower sacrum. Such information
may explain prolonged second-stage labor and identify suitable candidates
for rotation. Of other interventions, varying maternal position either
antepartum or during labor does not appear to lower rates of persistent OP
position (Kariminia, 2004; Le Ray, 2016).
If the bony pelvic outlet is roomy and the perineum is somewhat relaxed
from prior deliveries, rapid spontaneous OP delivery can take place.
Conversely, if the perineum is resistant to stretch, second-stage labor may be
appreciably prolonged. During each maternal push, the head is driven against
the perineum to a greater degree than when the head position is OA. This
leads to greater rates of OASIS (Groutz, 2011). For these reasons, manual
rotation with spontaneous delivery from an OA position has advantages.
Lower rates of cesarean delivery, severe perineal laceration,
chorioamnionitis, and maternal blood loss follow rotation to OA position
(Shaffer, 2011). Alternatively, forceps rotation to an OA position may be
attempted for those with suitable skills. Last, forceps or vacuum device also

can be applied and delivery completed from an OP position. These operative
vaginal techniques are detailed in Chapter 29 (p. 540).
Infrequently, protrusion of fetal scalp through the introitus can be
erroneously encouraging. In these cases, findings reflect marked fetal head
elongation from molding plus substantive scalp edema and not fetal descent.
In some cases, the head may not even be engaged—that is, the biparietal
diameter may not have passed through the pelvic inlet. Labor is
characteristically long and descent of the head is slow. Careful palpation
above the symphysis may disclose the fetal head to be above the pelvic inlet.
Prompt cesarean delivery is appropriate.

SHOULDER DYSTOCIA
Following complete emergence of the fetal head during vaginal delivery, the
remainder of the body may not rapidly follow. The anterior fetal shoulder can
become wedged behind the symphysis pubis and fail to deliver with maternal
pushing and gentle axial traction by the provider. One indicator may be
retraction of the baby’s head against the mother’s perineum—the turtle sign.
Because the umbilical cord is compressed within the birth canal, shoulder
dystocia is an emergency. Several maneuvers may be performed to free the
shoulder. This requires a team approach, and effective communication and
leadership are critical.
Consensus regarding a specific definition of shoulder dystocia is lacking.
Some, including the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
(2019c), diagnose it if maneuvers are required to free the shoulder. Spong
and coworkers (1995) reported that the mean head-to-body delivery time in
normal births was 24 seconds compared with 79 seconds in those with
shoulder dystocia. These investigators proposed that a head-to-body delivery
time >60 seconds be used to define shoulder dystocia. Currently, however,
the diagnosis continues to rely on the clinical perception that the normal
traction needed for fetal shoulder delivery is ineffective.
Because of these differing definitions, the incidence of shoulder dystocia
varies. One review cites a clinically useful average of 1 percent of all
deliveries (Ouzounian, 2016). The incidence has risen in recent decades,
likely due to increasing fetal birthweight (Øverland, 2014). Greater

recognition and documentation also may boost reported incidences (Kim,
2016).

■ Maternal and Neonatal Consequences
In general, shoulder dystocia poses greater risk to the fetus than to the mother.
The main maternal risks are serious perineal tears and postpartum
hemorrhage, usually from uterine atony but also from lacerations (Hehir,
2020; Rahman, 2009). In contrast, significant neuromusculoskeletal injury
and asphyxia are neonatal concerns. These specific injuries are described
fully in Chapter 33 (p. 599). In one review of 1177 shoulder dystocia cases,
brachial plexus injury was diagnosed in 11 percent and clavicular or humeral
fracture in 2 percent (Chauhan, 2014). MacKenzie and associates (2007)
reviewed 514 cases. Of the neonates, 7 percent showed evidence of acidosis
at delivery, and 1.5 percent required cardiac resuscitation or developed
hypoxic ischemic encephalopathy (HIE). In another review of 200 cases,
rates of severe fetal acidosis and HIE were each 0.5 percent if delivery was
completed within 5 minutes. These rates rose to 6 and 24 percent,
respectively, with delivery delays ≥5 minutes (Leung, 2011).

■ Prediction and Prevention
Although several factors are clearly associated with this complication,
shoulder dystocia cannot be accurately predicted or prevented (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019c). Associated
characteristics include fetal macrosomia, maternal obesity, prolonged
second-stage labor, operative vaginal delivery, and a prior shoulder dystocia
(Mehta, 2004; Zhang, 2018).
Of these, increasing birthweight creates a corresponding rise in the
incidence of shoulder dystocia (Øverland, 2012). With fetal macrosomia,
commonly associated maternal characteristics are obesity, postterm
pregnancy, multiparity, and diabetes (Koyanagi, 2013). The combination of
fetal macrosomia and maternal diabetes mellitus escalates the frequency of
shoulder dystocia (Nesbitt, 1998). This predisposition may stem from
anthropomorphic differences between comparable-weight fetuses of
nondiabetic and diabetic mothers. The latter fetal group has larger shoulder
and extremity circumferences and greater shoulder-to-head and chest-to-head

size (Modanlou, 1982). However, translating these specific measurements
into stand-alone sonographic thresholds shows poor predictive sensitivity
(Burkhardt, 2014). Planned cesarean delivery should be considered for the
nondiabetic woman with a fetus whose estimated fetal weight is >5000 g or
for the diabetic woman whose fetus is estimated to weigh >4500 g
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019c).
As prevention, early labor induction has been evaluated. In one study,
approximately 800 women with suspected macrosomic fetuses were
randomly assigned to early induction between 37 and 39 weeks’ gestation or
to expectant care (Boulvain, 2015). Women with insulin-requiring diabetes
were excluded. Dystocia rates were lowered by two thirds in the induction
group, and neither group suffered brachial plexus injury. Other neonatal
outcomes were similar, except for a higher rate of hyperbilirubinemia and
phototherapy in the induction group. A systematic review of four randomized
trials again with the same compared groups showed no differences in rates of
cesarean delivery, shoulder dystocia, or operative vaginal delivery. Fetal
fracture rates were lower in the induction group (Magro-Malosso, 2017).
Notably, when assessing the benefits, the poor accuracy of antepartum fetal
weight prediction should be considered (Malin, 2016). Moreover, potential
benefits of early induction are balanced against potential harms from early
delivery. The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
(2019a,c) recommends against labor induction before 39 weeks for
suspected macrosomia alone.
Of other risks, recurrent shoulder dystocia ranges from 4 to 13 percent in
the three largest series (Al-Hawash, 2019). For many women with prior
shoulder dystocia, labor may still be a reasonable option. The American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019c) recommends that
estimated fetal weight, gestational age, maternal glucose intolerance, and
severity of prior neonatal injury be evaluated. Antepartum, risks and benefits
of cesarean delivery are discussed with any woman with a history of
shoulder dystocia. After discussion and risk assessment, either mode of
delivery is appropriate.

■ Management
Shoulder dystocia cannot be accurately predicted. Thus, the labor and
delivery team, which includes nurses, obstetrical providers, and anesthesia

staff, should be well versed in its management. An emergent call for
assistance should assemble these members.
Because of ongoing cord compression with this dystocia, one goal is to
reduce delivery time. This is balanced against the second goal, which is
avoiding fetal and maternal injury from aggressive manipulations. Adequate
analgesia assists maneuvers. Episiotomy may be needed to provide sufficient
room for essential manipulations but itself does not lower brachial plexus
injury rates (Gurewitsch, 2004; Paris, 2011).
Various techniques can be used to free the anterior shoulder from its
impacted position behind the symphysis pubis. The McRoberts maneuver is
often selected first. With it, legs are lifted from stirrups, hips are sharply
flexed up onto the abdomen, and knees remain flexed. Gherman and
colleagues (2000) analyzed the McRoberts maneuver using x-ray pelvimetry.
The procedure causes straightening of the sacrum relative to the lumbar
vertebrae, rotation of the symphysis pubis toward the maternal head, and a
decrease in the angle of pelvic inclination. This does not increase pelvic
dimensions, but pelvic rotation cephalad tends to free the impacted anterior
shoulder. Gonik and coworkers (1989) tested the McRoberts position
objectively with laboratory models and found that the maneuver reduced the
forces needed to free the fetal shoulder. During McRoberts maneuver, an
assistant can apply downward and laterally directed suprapubic pressure
(Fig. 27-2). This abducts the anterior shoulder to create a shorter
bisacromial diameter. It also rotates the shoulders into the oblique diameter,
which at the pelvic inlet is longer than the anteroposterior diameter. If
unsuccessful, most move next to the posterior shoulder or to rotation
maneuvers.

FIGURE 27-2 The McRoberts maneuver. The maneuver consists of removing the legs from the
stirrups and sharply flexing the thighs up onto the abdomen. Simultaneously, an assistant also provides
suprapubic pressure that is directed down and lateral.

With delivery of the posterior shoulder, the provider inserts a hand into
the posterior pelvis, carefully sweeps the posterior arm of the fetus forward
across its chest, and delivers the arm (Fig. 27-3). If possible, the operator’s
fingers are aligned parallel to the long axis of the fetal humerus to lower
fracture risks. With the arm now outside of the pelvis, the bisacromial
diameter is diminished. Next, the shoulder girdle is rotated into one of the
oblique diameters of the pelvic inlet. These steps resolve the disproportion
to free the anterior shoulder.

FIGURE 27-3 Delivery of the posterior shoulder for relief of shoulder dystocia. A. The operator’s
hand is introduced into the vagina along the fetal posterior humerus. B. The arm is splinted and swept
across the chest, keeping the arm flexed at the elbow. C. The fetal hand is grasped and the arm
extended along the side of the face. The posterior arm is delivered from the vagina.

Of the rotational maneuvers, the method recommended by Rubin (1964)
aims to shorten the bisacromial diameter (Fig. 27-4). A pelvic hand reaches
the most easily accessible fetal shoulder, often the posterior one, which is
then pushed toward the anterior surface of the chest. This maneuver abducts
the posterior shoulder and rotates both shoulders into one of the pelvic inlet’s
oblique diameters. Friction from the vagina also abducts the anterior
shoulder to some degree during this rotation. Again, resolution of the
disproportion can free the anterior shoulder.

FIGURE 27-4 Rubin maneuver. The bisacromial diameter is aligned vertically. The more easily
accessible fetal shoulder (the anterior is shown here) is pushed toward the anterior chest wall of the
fetus (arrow). Most often, this results in abduction of both shoulders, which reduces the bisacromial
diameter and frees the impacted anterior shoulder.

Instead, Woods (1943) reported that by rotating the posterior shoulder
progressively in a corkscrew fashion, the impacted anterior shoulder could
be released. For performance, one hand is pressed against the anterior
surface of the posterior shoulder, and pressure is directed toward the fetal
back. The posterior shoulder is then rotated 180 degrees, and in doing so, it
becomes the anterior-positioned limb. With rotation, this shoulder comes to
lie beneath, not behind, the symphysis and can be delivered.
In a review of these four methods, all had similar neonatal injury rates
(Spain, 2015). Importantly, delivery duration and the number of maneuvers
raises neonatal injury rates.
If the above are initially unsuccessful, they may be repeated, and other
methods may be elected. With an all-fours maneuver, also called the Gaskin
maneuver, the parturient rolls onto her hands and knees. Here, axial traction
against the head and neck attempts to free the posterior shoulder (Bruner,

1998). Challenges with this include immobility from regional analgesia and
time lost in patient repositioning.
In some cases, the posterior arm is inaccessible for delivery. Cluver and
Hofmeyr (2009) described posterior axilla sling traction to deliver the
posterior arm. With this, suction tubing or a stiff urinary catheter is threaded
under the fetal axilla, and both ends are brought together above the shoulder.
This forms a loop beneath the axilla. Catheter traction then sweeps upward
and outward to deliver the shoulder. Data continue to accrue. In a case series
of 119 cases in which this was the first maneuver, the success rate was 96
percent (Ansell, 2019).
For refractory cases despite the above efforts, deliberate fracture of the
anterior clavicle by using the thumb to press it toward and against the
maternal pubic ramus can be attempted to free the shoulder impaction. In
practice, however, deliberate fracture of a large neonate’s clavicle is
difficult. If successful, the fracture will heal rapidly and is usually trivial
compared with brachial nerve injury, asphyxia, or death.
Symphysiotomy involves cutting of the intervening symphyseal cartilage
and much of its ligamentous support to widen the symphysis pubis. In rare
cases, it has been used successfully for shoulder dystocia (Goodwin, 1997).
Using local analgesia, symphysiotomy surgically divides the intervening
symphyseal cartilage and much of its ligamentous support to widen the
symphysis pubis up to 2.5 cm (Basak, 2011). If feasible, a previously
inserted urinary catheter is displaced from the midline with the index finger
of the left hand, which is inside the vagina. Lack of provider training and
potentially serious maternal pelvic or urinary tract injury explain its rare use
in the United States.
The Zavanelli maneuver involves replacement of the fetal head into the
pelvis followed by cesarean delivery (Sandberg, 1985). Terbutaline, 0.25
mg, is given subcutaneously to produce uterine relaxation. The operator first
turns the head to an OA or OP position, flexes it, and slowly elevates it back
into the vagina. Cesarean delivery is then performed. Sandberg (1999)
reviewed 103 reported cases. It was successful in 91 percent of cephalic
cases and in all cases of breech head entrapments. Despite successful
replacement, fetal injuries were common but may have resulted from the
multiple manipulations used before the Zavanelli maneuver (Sandberg,
2007).

Cleidotomy consists of cutting the clavicle with scissors or other sharp
instruments. It is usually done for a dead fetus (Schramm, 1983).
In preparation for shoulder dystocia, clinical simulations aim to improve
performance, documentation, and retention of drill steps. Their use has
translated into improved neonatal outcome in some, but not all, investigations
(Crofts, 2016; Fransen, 2017; Gurewitsch Allen, 2017; Walsh, 2011). At our
institution, these drills involve resident, faculty, nursing, and anesthesia staff.

SPECIAL POPULATIONS
■ Home Birth
In 2017, 1.4 percent of deliveries in the United States were planned home
births. Unplanned home births constituted 0.2 percent (MacDorman, 2019).
Of unplanned home births in a 15-year epoch in Norway, 69 of 6027 or
1.1 percent resulted in fetal or neonatal death. This high rate was attributable
to infection, prematurity, and placental abruption (Gunnarsson, 2017).
Multiparity and distance from the hospital were ascribed risks (Gunnarsson,
2014). In the United States, youth, lack of prenatal care, minority race, and
lower educational attainment are risks (Declercq, 2010).
With planned home birth of a low-risk pregnancy, benefits include fewer
medical interventions that include labor augmentation, episiotomy, operative
vaginal delivery, and cesarean delivery (Bolten, 2016; Cheyney, 2014).
Regarding the safety of planned home birth, data from randomized trials are
lacking, and large observational studies derive from heterogeneous care
systems, whose results may not be generalizable. For example, several
developed countries deliver a large volume of carefully screened women at
home. Gravidas are attended by midwives with substantial training and in a
setting closely integrated with the local health-care system (Comeau, 2018;
de Jonge, 2015). The level of such coordination in the United States is less
uniform.
Overall, neonatal risks of home births in the United States are small but
greater than those of hospital delivery. Midwife-attended home births carry a
neonatal mortality risk of 1.3 per 1000 births. This is a nearly fourfold
greater rate compared with midwife-attended hospital births (Grünebaum,
2020). The most common underlying causes of death are those attributed to
labor and delivery events, to congenital anomalies, and to infection. Of

neonatal injuries, rates of neonatal seizure and serious neurological
dysfunction also are elevated in home-birth groups (Grünebaum, 2013, 2014,
2017; Snowden, 2015). Importantly, substantial risks attend home birth for
those with preeclampsia, with multifetal gestation, with prior cesarean
delivery, or with breech presentation (Caughey, 2019). The American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020b) specifically considers
the last three to be absolute contraindications. Further, the College considers
accredited hospitals and birthing centers to be the safest site for birth but
recognizes the autonomy of the well-counseled patient.

■ Water Birth
As one option for pain relief, some women choose to spend part of first-stage
labor in a large water tub. With this practice, one Cochrane review found
lower rates of regional analgesia use and no greater adverse neonatal or
maternal effects compared with traditional labor (Cluett, 2018).
For second-stage labor, water birth similarly aims to relieve pain, but it
can pose neonatal risks. The rate of cord avulsion during water birth
approximates 3 per 1000 births and stems primary from abruptly bringing the
newborn out of the water (Schafer, 2014). Fresh-water drowning and
pneumonia with sepsis are reported causes of neonatal death (Byard, 2010).
The latter emphasizes the need for rigorous sanitizing protocols. Systematic
reviews comment on the paucity of high-quality data but do not identify
overall greater neonatal or maternal harms or benefits from water birth in
low-risk, term, singleton gestations (Cluett, 2018; Taylor, 2016). Given the
lack of robust data and potential for serious complications, the American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2016) currently recommends
that “birth occur on land, not in water.”

■ Female Genital Mutilation
This practice refers to medically unnecessary vulvar and perineal surgical
modification. In the United States, it is a federal crime to perform
unnecessary genital surgery on a girl younger than 18 years and is condemned
by major health organizations that include the American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019b). Despite this, forms of female

genital mutilation are practiced in countries throughout Africa, the Middle
East, and Asia (UNICEF, 2020).
The World Health Organization (WHO) (2018a) classifies female genital
mutilation (FGM) into four types (Table 27-1). Some long-term risks include
propensity for urogenital infection, chronic vulvar pain, and dyspareunia
(Berg, 2014b). Thus, early in care, new gravidas are asked about these
problems or prior obstetrical complications. The psychiatric consequences
also can be profound, and referral for psychological assessment can be
offered (Low-Beer, 2018).
TABLE 27-1. World Health Organization Classification of Female Genital
Mutilation

With physical examination, a finger or cotton swab assesses elasticity
and caliber of the vaginal opening. Parturients with types I, II, and IV
typically require only routine obstetrical care. Those with type III FGM or
with extensive scarring have higher delivery risks. If an obstruction to
childbirth is recognized, the advantages of surgical release are ideally
discussed early antenatally. Division of midline scar tissue to reopen the
vulva is termed defibulation but also called deinfibulation or anterior
episiotomy (Kalis, 2012).
FGM is associated with some adverse maternal and neonatal
complications. Moreover, vaginal obstruction can delay diagnosis of other
pregnancy conditions. From a prospective study, the WHO (2006) estimated

that FGM raised perinatal morbidity rates by 1 to 2 percent. For mothers
with FGM, rates for prolonged labor, perineal lacerations and episiotomy,
and postpartum hemorrhage were higher than those without prior FGM (Berg,
2014a; Chibber, 2011). Evidence supports that gravidas with type III FGM
who undergo defibulation benefit from lower rates of cesarean delivery and
OASIS (Berg, 2018; Rodriguez, 2016). To prevent obstetrical complications,
the WHO (2016) recommends defibulation, which can be completed
antepartum or intrapartum (Fig. 27-5). In our and other’s experiences,
intrapartum defibulation allows successful vaginal delivery without major
complications (Rouzi, 2012).

FIGURE 27-5 Deinfibulation. Although not shown here, lidocaine is first infiltrated along the planned
incision if regional analgesia is not in place already. To protect underlying structures, two fingers or the
tips of a narrow clamp are insinuated behind the shelf created by fused labia but in front of the urethra

and crowning head. The shelf is then incised in the midline. After delivery, the raw edges are sutured
with rapidly absorbable material to secure hemostasis. (Reproduced with permission from Hawkins JS:
Lower genital tract procedures. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al (eds): Cunningham
and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2017.)

In discussing defibulation, cultural sensitivity is essential, and some
women may be offended by the suggestion that they have been assaulted or
mutilated (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2014).
Preoperative counseling ideally discusses expected anatomic and
physiologic changes. Partial defibulation uncovers the vagina and urethra,
and total defibulation extends the incision to reveal the clitoris, if present.
Women with infibulation often have a slow urine stream, and they perceive
menses and urine to originate from the same opening. Both will change after
scar incision. Affected women may be unfamiliar with normal vaginal
anatomy, which will be visible following surgery. One excellent review is
provided by Abdulcadir and associates (2018). Wound complications such
as hematoma, cellulitis, or incisional dehiscence are rare but are discussed
during counseling. Postoperative dyspareunia is uncommon, and in most
studies, female sexual functioning scores improve (Berg, 2018; Nour, 2006).

■ Prior Pelvic Reconstructive Surgery
These surgeries are performed with increasing frequency in reproductiveaged women, and thus pregnancy following them is not uncommon. Major
concerns are the degradation of repair by pregnancy and by vaginal birth.
After midurethral sling surgery and then a subsequent pregnancy,
continence is preserved for most. Multiple pregnancies, however, may raise
recurrence risk. Evidence does not favor a delivery route, and vaginal
delivery is suitable (Adams-Piper, 2016; Cavkaytar, 2014; Dyrkorn, 2020).
Sacral neuromodulation units are recommended to be turned off because
of unknown pregnancy effects from chronic electrical stimulation. From
small reviews, lowered device efficacy and displaced or broken device
leads can follow both vaginal and cesarean delivery (Mahran, 2017;
Roulette, 2018). Data do not proscribe vaginal birth.
Hysteropexy aims to correct prolapse of the vaginal apex yet preserve the
uterus. Available case series are few and small and do not allow estimates of
recurrence rate or delivery route recommendations (Wieslander, 2020). Most
undergo elective cesarean delivery.

■ Anomalous Fetuses
Rarely, delivery can be obstructed by extreme hydrocephaly, body stalk
anomaly, conjoined twins, or massive fetal abdominal enlargement from a
greatly distended bladder, ascites, or organomegaly. Specifically, with
milder forms of hydrocephaly, if the biparietal diameter is <10 cm or if the
head circumference is <36 cm, vaginal delivery may be permitted (Anteby,
2003).
In rare cases in which neonatal death has occurred or is certain due to
associated anomalies, vaginal delivery may be reasonable, but the head or
abdomen must be reduced in size for delivery. Removal of fluid by
cephalocentesis or paracentesis with sonographic guidance can be performed
intrapartum. As described earlier, cleidotomy can shorten the bisacromial
diameter. For hydrocephalic fetuses that are breech, cephalocentesis can be
accomplished suprapubically when the aftercoming head enters the pelvis.
Currently, these practices are more germane in developing countries.

THIRD STAGE OF LABOR
■ Delivery of the Placenta
Third-stage labor begins immediately after fetal birth and ends with placental
delivery. Goals include delivering an intact placenta and avoiding uterine
inversion or postpartum hemorrhage. The latter two, described in Chapter 42
(p. 731), are intrapartum emergencies.
Immediately after newborn birth, uterine fundal size and consistency are
examined. If the uterus remains firm and bleeding is minimal, watchful
waiting until the placenta separates is the usual practice. Neither massage nor
downward fundal pressure is employed, but the fundus is frequently palpated
to ensure that it does not become atonic and filled with blood from placental
separation. To prevent uterine inversion, umbilical cord traction must not
be used to pull the placenta from the uterus. Signs of separation include a
sudden gush of blood into the vagina, a globular and firmer fundus, outward
movement of the umbilical cord as the placenta descends into the vagina, and
elevation of the uterus into the abdomen. With the last, the placenta, having
separated, passes down into the vagina. Here, its bulk pushes the uterine
body upward.

These signs appear within minutes after newborn delivery, and the
median time ranges from 4 to 12 minutes (Frolova, 2016; Shinar, 2016b).
Once the placenta has detached from the uterine wall, the mother can bear
down, and intraabdominal pressure often expels the placenta into the vagina.
These efforts may fail or may not be possible because of analgesia. After
ensuring that the uterus is contracted firmly, the umbilical cord is kept
slightly taut but is not pulled. Pressure is exerted by a hand wrapped around
the fundus to propel the detached placenta into the vagina (Fig. 27-6).
Concurrently, the heel of the same hand exerts pressure between the
symphysis pubis and the uterine fundus and directs it toward the sacrum. This
aims to prevent inversion. Once the placenta passes through the introitus,
pressure on the uterus is relieved. The placenta is then gently lifted away.
Care is taken to prevent placental membranes from being torn off and left
behind. If the membranes begin to tear, they are grasped with a clamp and
removed by gentle teasing (Fig. 27-7).

FIGURE 27-6 Expression of the detached placenta. Note that the hand is not trying to push the fundus
through the birth canal! As the placenta leaves the uterus and enters the vagina, the uterus is pushed
cephalad by the heel of the hand on the abdomen while the cord is held in position. The mother can aid
in the delivery of the placenta by bearing down. As the placenta reaches the perineum, the cord is lifted,
which in turn lifts the placenta out of the vagina.

FIGURE 27-7 Membranes that were somewhat adhered to the uterine lining are separated by gentle
traction with ring forceps.

■ Management of the Third Stage
Practices within this stage of labor may be broadly considered as either
expectant or active. Expectant management involves waiting for placental
separation signs and allowing the placenta to deliver either spontaneously or
aided by nipple stimulation or gravity (World Health Organization, 2012).
In contrast, active management of third-stage labor includes earlier cord
clamping, controlled cord traction during placental delivery, and immediate
prophylactic administration of a uterotonic agent. The goal of this triad is to
limit postpartum hemorrhage. However, the value of this bundled approach is
questioned (Begley, 2019). For example and as noted previously (p. 500),
delayed cord clamping does not raise postpartum hemorrhage rates, and thus
early clamping is a less important component of this trio. Similarly, cord
traction fails to prevent hemorrhage. Traction does lower manual placenta

removal rates and shortens third-stage labor (Deneux-Tharaux, 2013;
Hofmeyr, 2015). Following placental delivery, we support uterine massage
to prompt uterine firming but recognize that evidence for its benefits to avoid
postpartum hemorrhage is not strong (Saccone, 2018).
Therefore, uterotonic drugs play an essential preemptive role to decrease
postpartum blood loss (Salati, 2019). A single agent is given either before or
after placental expulsion, and timing does not affect rates of postpartum
hemorrhage, placental retention, or third-stage labor length (Soltani, 2010).
Choices for hemorrhage prophylaxis include oxytocin (Pitocin), misoprostol
(Cytotec), and the ergots, namely ergonovine (Ergotrate) and
methylergonovine (Methergine). In addition, a combination agent of oxytocin
plus ergonovine (Syntometrine) is used outside the United States. Also in
other countries, carbetocin (Duratocin), a long-acting oxytocin analogue, is
available and effective for hemorrhage prevention (Kalafat, 2021).
Prescribing information for carbetocin cites its use for cesarean delivery, but
randomized trials reflect similar use for vaginal birth. Of agents, the WHO
(2018) recommends oxytocin for first-line use.

High-dose Oxytocin
Synthetic oxytocin is identical to that produced by the posterior pituitary. Its
action is noted at approximately 1 minute, and it has a mean half-life of 3 to 5
minutes. Recommended storage temperature is ≤25C°, which may pose
problems in some low-resource countries. When given as a bolus, oxytocin
can cause profound hypotension (Svanström, 2008). This hemodynamic
change may be dangerous to women with hemorrhage-related hypovolemia or
with certain cardiac conditions. Thus, oxytocin should be given as a dilute
solution by continuous intravenous infusion or as an intramuscular injection.
Despite the routine use of oxytocin, no standard prophylactic dose has
been established for its use following either vaginal or cesarean delivery.
Water intoxication can result from the antidiuretic action of high-dose
oxytocin if administered in a large volume of electrolyte-free dextrose
solution (Whalley, 1963). Our practice is to add 20 units (2 mL) of oxytocin
per liter of crystalloid solution. This is administered after delivery of the
placenta at a rate of 10 to 20 mL/min—200 to 400 mU/min—for a few
minutes until the uterus remains firmly contracted and bleeding is controlled.
The infusion rate then is reduced to 1 to 2 mL/min until the mother is ready
for transfer to the postpartum unit. The infusion is usually then discontinued.

For women without intravenous access, 10 units of intramuscular oxytocin
are injected.

Other Agents
Ergonovine and methylergonovine have similar activity in myometrium, but
only methylergonovine is currently manufactured in the United States. These
ergot alkaloid agents lower the rates of postpartum hemorrhage and the need
for additional uterotonic drugs. However, blood pressure elevation is a
concerning side effect (Liabsuetrakul, 2018). Methylergonovine is
contraindicated in hypertensive women. If selected, a 200-μg dose of
methylergonovine is given intramuscularly or is slowly injected
intravenously in a period not less than 60 seconds to avoid sudden
hypertension.
Misoprostol is a prostaglandin E1 analogue, which has proved inferior to
oxytocin for postpartum hemorrhage prevention (Tunçalp, 2012). However,
in resource-poor settings that lack oxytocin, misoprostol is suitable for
hemorrhage prophylaxis and is given orally as a single 400- or 600-μg dose
(World Health Organization, 2018c). Side effects include fever and diarrhea.
From systematic reviews, carbetocin and oxytocin show equivalent
efficacy for postpartum hemorrhage prevention after vaginal birth (van der
Nelson, 2021; Widmer, 2018). Carbetocin is more expensive. A heat-stable
form may have benefit in low-resource settings that may have inconsistent
temperatures during supply distribution (Malm, 2018).
Tranexamic acid (TXA) is an antifibrinolytic agent and has been
evaluated to prevent postpartum hemorrhage (Ahmadzia, 2018). In one
metaanalysis, a 1-g intravenous TXA dose following delivery in addition to
oxytocin was reported to lower the hemorrhage rate from 11.4 to 8.7 percent
(Saccone, 2020). In a randomized trial of 3891 women, however, TXA plus
oxytocin did not decrease the postpartum hemorrhage incidence compared
with oxytocin alone (Sentilhes, 2018). Currently, TXA use is not
recommended prophylactically (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2019c). To treat hemorrhage, TXA use is described in
Chapters 42 (p. 736) and 44 (p. 773).

■ Manual Removal of Placenta

In approximately 2 percent of singleton births, the placenta may not deliver
promptly (Cheung, 2011). This may represent: (1) placenta adherens, in
which uterine contractions are insufficient to detach the placenta; (2) lower
uterine segment constriction and a detached but trapped placenta; or (3)
placenta accreta spectrum. Consistent risks for retained placenta include
stillbirth, prior cesarean delivery, prior retention, and preterm delivery
(Belachew, 2014; Coviello, 2015; Endler, 2014). For the last, in one study
with nearly 46,000 deliveries, analysis predicted that 90 percent of placentas
would spontaneously deliver by 180 minutes for gestations at 20 weeks; 21
minutes at 30 weeks; and 14 minutes at 40 weeks (Dombrowski, 1995).
Postpartum hemorrhage can complicate a retained placenta, and bleeding
risk accrues with the length of third-stage labor. In the absence of bleeding,
evidence supports 15 to 20 minutes (Frolova, 2016; Shinar, 2016a; van Ast,
2019). The WHO (2012) cites a 60-minute threshold. Notably, if brisk
bleeding ensues and the placenta cannot be delivered by standard technique,
manual removal of the placenta is indicated (Fig. 27-8). When performed,
some administer a single dose of intravenous antibiotics, however, one
systematic review of observational studies found no benefits (Chibueze,
2015). The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020d)
concluded that data neither support nor refute this practice, but the WHO
(2012) recommends prophylaxis. At our institution, we administer a single
dose of cefazolin to women not already receiving antibiotics and not
penicillin allergic.

FIGURE 27-8 Manual removal of placenta. A. One hand grasps the fundus and the other hand is
inserted into the uterine cavity and the fingers are swept from side to side as they are advanced. B.
When the placenta detaches, it is grasped and removed.

IMMEDIATE POSTPARTUM CARE
The hour immediately following delivery of the placenta is critical. During
this time, lacerations are repaired. Although uterotonic agents are
administered, postpartum hemorrhage as the result of uterine atony is most
likely at this time. Hematomas may expand. Consequently, uterine tone and
the perineum are frequently evaluated. The mother’s blood pressure and
pulse are recorded immediately after delivery and every 15 minutes for the
first 2 hours. Her temperature is recorded every 4 hours during the first 8
hours and then every 8 hours thereafter. Vital signs may be obtained more
frequently in patients at higher risk of postpartum complications (American
Academy of Pediatrics, 2017). The placenta, membranes, and umbilical cord
are examined for completeness and anomalies, as described in Chapter 6 (p.
107).

■ Skin-to-skin Contact
This practice aims to connect the mother and newborn dyad early to promote
breastfeeding (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020a;
Moore, 2016; World Health Organization, 2018b). Ideally, the mother lies in
a semi-reclined position. After the newborn is dried to prevent cooling, its
chest is placed against the mother’s breast with access to her nipple. Its legs
are flexed, and the mother’s arm steadies its body. Covered with warm
blankets and often a cap, the neonate’s head is uncovered, turned to the side,
and placed in a sniffing position. Mouth and nares should remain
unobstructed (Widström, 2019). The dyad is continually monitored for
physiologic stability, somnolence, unobstructed breathing, and safe
positioning to avoid smothering or falls (Feldman-Winter, 2016).

■ Lower Genital Tract Lacerations
These lacerations may involve the cervix, vagina, or perineum. Those of the
cervix and vagina are described in Chapter 42 (p. 739). In general, those of

the perineum follow vaginal delivery, and most are first- and second-degree
lacerations. Lacerations are classified by depth and involved anatomy, and
complete definitions and visual examples are given in Figure 27-9. Of these,
third-degree lacerations involve the anal sphincter and are subcategorized
as:

FIGURE 27-9 1. First-degree perineal laceration: injury to only the vaginal epithelium or perineal skin.
2. Second-degree laceration: injury to perineum that spares the anal sphincter complex but involves the
perineal muscles, which are the bulbospongiosus and superficial transverse perineal muscles. 3a. Thirddegree laceration: <50 percent of the external anal sphincter (EAS) is torn. 3b. Third-degree laceration:
>50 percent of the EAS is torn, but the internal anal sphincter (IAS) remains intact. 3c. Third-degree
laceration: EAS and IAS are torn. 4. Fourth-degree laceration: the perineal body, entire anal sphincter
complex, and anorectal mucosa are lacerated. (Reproduced with permission from Kenton K, Mueller M:
Episiotomy and obstetric anal sphincter lacerations. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al
(eds): Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2017.)

(3a) <50 percent external anal sphincter (EAS) tear;

(3b) >50 percent EAS tear; and
(3c) EAS plus internal anal sphincter (IAS) tears.
Third- and fourth-degree perineal lacerations are considered obstetric
anal sphincter injuries (OASIS), and their combined incidence is 0.1 to 5
percent (Blondel, 2016; Friedman, 2015). Risk factors for these more
complex lacerations include nulliparity, midline episiotomy, persistent OP
position, Asian race, increasing fetal birthweight, and operative vaginal
delivery (Gurol-Urganci, 2013; Landy, 2011).
Morbidity rates rise as laceration severity increases. Compared with
simpler lacerations, OASIS are associated with greater blood loss and
puerperal pain. Wound disruption and infection rates are other risks
(Goldaber, 1993; Lewicky-Gaupp, 2015). Stock and coworkers (2013)
reported that approximately 7 percent of 909 OASIS had complications.
Long term, OASIS are linked with approximately doubled rates of anal
incontinence compared with vaginal delivery without OASIS (Evers, 2012;
Schei, 2019). Fourth-degree lacerations pose greater anal incontinence risk
than third-degree ones (Gommesen, 2020; Jangö, 2018). Evidence
implicating OASIS in subsequent long-term dyspareunia are conflicting
(Mous, 2008; O’Shea, 2018).
To ensure appropriate repair, identification and correct categorization is
essential. Intrapartum endoanal ultrasound has been used to unmask clinically
occult tears (Faltin, 2005). Few data currently support this imaging
intrapartum, and the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
(2020c) does not recommended it.
For women with a prior OASIS, questions may arise as to subsequent
pregnancy. In those without anal incontinence after OASIS repair, the rate of
developing this incontinence is not increased by a subsequent vaginal birth
(Jangö, 2016; Webb, 2017). Thus, a vaginal route is reasonable. However,
women with a prior OASIS do have a higher recurrence rate with a
subsequent delivery compared with multiparas without a prior OASIS
(Edozien, 2014; Elfaghi, 2004). The risk mirrors that of primiparas in the
general population and is low (Basham, 2013; Boggs, 2014). But, in those
who experience a recurrent OASIS, the risk of anal incontinence can be
substantial (Jangö, 2017). Fetal macrosomia and operative vaginal delivery
are factors for OASIS recurrence and can influence counseling in future
pregnancies. Specifically, patients may choose cesarean delivery to avoid

repeat OASIS. This consideration may be most pertinent for those with prior
postpartum anal incontinence, with OASIS complications that required a
second repair, or with psychological trauma (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020c). Planned cesarean delivery is
balanced against its associated operative risks (Chap. 30, p. 548).

■ Episiotomy
In contrast to spontaneous perineal tears, episiotomy is intended incision of
the perineum. Its goal is enlargement of vaginal opening for birth. Textbooks
and organizational guidelines often differ in their description. Kalis and
colleagues (2012) presents one classification, and we agree with the need for
terminology standardization.
Midline and mediolateral episiotomies are the two main types and vary
by the angle of perineal incision. Involved structures mirror those found with
second-degree laceration, and their repairs are analogous. The midline
episiotomy begins at the fourchette, incises the perineal body in the midline,
and ends well before the EAS is reached. The chosen incision length varies
from 2 to 3 cm depending on perineal length, degree of tissue thinning, and
outlet diameter needs for delivery. The mediolateral episiotomy begins at
the midline of the fourchette and is directed to the right or left at an angle 60
degrees off the midline (Fig. 27-10). This angle accounts for stretch
distortion of perineal anatomy during crowning. After delivery and distortion
resolution, it ultimately yields an incision 45-degrees from the midline for
suturing (Kalis, 2011). Used less often, the lateral episiotomy begins at point
1 to 2 cm lateral from the midline of the fourchette. It too is angled toward
either the right or the left ischial tuberosity.

FIGURE 27-10 A mediolateral episiotomy is cut as the baby’s head crowns. Fingers are insinuated
between the perineum and head. The incision begins in the midline and is directed toward the ipsilateral
ischial tuberosity at an angle 60 degrees off the midline. (Reproduced with permission from Kenton K,
Mueller M: Episiotomy and obstetric anal sphincter lacerations. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap
LC III, et al (eds): Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, NY: McGraw
Hill; 2017.)

The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020c)
recommends selective use of episiotomy rather than routine use. Evidence
shows lower rates of severe perineal trauma in women undergoing
spontaneous birth with a restrictive use of episiotomy (Dillon, 2019; Jiang,
2017). One potential indication is fetal jeopardy, and the quickly enlarged
vaginal opening can speed delivery. Others are shoulder dystocia, breech
delivery, fetal macrosomia, operative vaginal delivery, persistent OP
position, and other instances in which failure to perform an episiotomy will
result in significant perineal rupture. Surgical judgment and common sense
should guide selection.

As a result of selective use, episiotomy rates have dropped. Oliphant and
coworkers (2010) analyzed rates between 1979 and 2006 in the United
States and noted a 75-percent decline. In the United States in 2012,
episiotomy was performed in approximately 12 percent of vaginal births
(Friedman, 2015).
Before episiotomy, analgesia is provided by existing labor regional
analgesia, by bilateral pudendal nerve blockade, or by local infiltration of 1percent lidocaine. Some instead advocate 2.5-percent lidocaine-prilocaine
cream (EMLA cream). However, for efficacy, it requires application an hour
before expected delivery, which may be logistically difficult (Abbas, 2020).
If episiotomy is performed unnecessarily early, incisional bleeding may
be considerable before delivery. If it is performed too late, lacerations will
not be prevented. Typically, episiotomy is completed when the head is
visible during a contraction to a diameter of 4 to 5 cm.
Few data directly compare midline and mediolateral types. As noted,
midline episiotomy has a greater likelihood of associated OASIS (Coats,
1980; de Leeuw, 2001). Short-term rates of pain and dyspareunia are similar
or increased with mediolateral episiotomy (Fodstad, 2013, 2014; Sartore,
2004).
Even fewer studies compare lateral episiotomy to either mediolateral or
midline. One randomized trial compared lateral and mediolateral types in
nulliparas. Groups did not differ in pain scores, in sexual quality of life, or in
vaginal or perineal trauma, including OASIS (Karbanova, 2014a,b;
Necesalova, 2016). The authors also reported that mediolateral episiotomies
required less time and suture for the repair. Thus, among the three,
mediolateral episiotomy may be the preferred incision to reduce OASIS
rates.

■ Laceration and Episiotomy Repairs
Typically, perineal repairs are deferred until the placenta has been delivered.
This policy permits undivided attention to the signs of placental separation
and delivery. A further advantage is that repair is not interrupted or disrupted
by placenta delivery. This is especially true if manual placenta removal must
be performed. The major disadvantage is continuing blood loss until the
repair is completed. Direct pressure from an applied gauze sponge will help
to limit this volume.

For suitable repair, an understanding of perineal anatomy is necessary
(Chap. 2, p. 14). Adequate analgesia is imperative. Locally injected
lidocaine can be used solely or as a supplement to bilateral pudendal nerve
blockade. In those with epidural analgesia, additional doses can be given.
Following any repair, needle and sponge counts are reconciled and recorded
in the delivery note (Steelman, 2018).
First-degree lacerations do not always require repair, and sutures are
placed to control bleeding or restore anatomy. Here, few data guide suture
selection. A fine-gauge, absorbable suture such as chromic gut or a delayedabsorbable type such as polyglactin 910 (Vicryl) or poliglecaprone
(Monocryl) are suitable. If a site is hemostatic, skin glue is another option
(Feingenberg, 2014).
Second-degree laceration is shown in Figures 27-11. Midline and
mediolateral episiotomy repairs use similar steps. Namely, these close the
vaginal epithelium and reapproximate the bulbospongiosus and superficial
transverse perineal muscles during restoration of the perineal body.
Compared with placing interrupted sutures, a continuous suturing method
closes the defect faster, and has lower short-term pain scores, but wound
complications and long-term pain rates are comparable and low (Kettle,
2012; Kindberg, 2008; Valenzuela, 2009). Selected less often, blunt needles
are suitable and aim to decrease the incidence of needle-stick injuries
(Mornar, 2008). Commonly used suture materials are chromic catgut or 2–0
Vicryl. Compared with chromic catgut, Vicryl is associated with less shortterm discomfort, but long-term pain rates are comparable (Kettle, 2010).
However, traditional Vicryl occasionally requires removal of residual suture
from the repair site because of pain. This disadvantage may be reduced by
selecting a rapidly absorbed polyglactin 910 suture (Vicryl Rapide)
(Greenberg, 2004; Kettle, 2002). Other delayed absorbable options include
Monocryl or polydioxanone (PDS II). The perineal skin is closed by a
running subcuticular stitch with the same suture type used to close the
perineal defect.

FIGURE 27-11 Midline episiotomy repair. A. An anchor stitch is placed above the wound apex to
begin a running, locking closure with 2–0 suture to close the vaginal epithelium and deeper tissues and
reapproximate the hymeneal ring. B. A transition stitch redirects suturing from the vagina to the
perineum. C. The superficial transverse perineal and bulbospongiosus muscles are reapproximated using
a continuous, nonlocking technique with the same length of suture. This aids restoration of the perineal
body for long-term support. D. The continuous suture is then carried upward as a subcuticular stitch.
The final knot is tied proximal to the hymeneal ring. (Reproduced with permission from Kenton K,
Mueller M: Episiotomy and obstetric anal sphincter lacerations. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap
LC III, et al (eds): Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, NY: McGraw
Hill; 2017.)

For third-degree laceration repair, two methods are available to repair
the EAS. The first is an end-to-end technique, which we prefer, and is

shown in Figure 27-12. Initially, the torn ends of the EAS, which often
retract, are isolated. The EAS and its surrounding connective tissue are
brought to the midline. As a misnomer, this connective tissue is often called a
capsule (Maldonado, 2020). The strength of this closure is derived from the
connective tissue surrounding the sphincter and less so from the striated
muscle. Thus, serial interrupted sutures incorporate sphincter fibers and a
substantial portion of the perisphincter connective tissue to bring EAS ends
together. If the IAS is torn, a running, nonlocking closure is completed with
3-0 or 4-0 suture (see Fig. 27-13B). Few data guide suture selection for
sphincter repair, but delayed-absorbable material can provide sustained
tensile strength during healing (Williams, 2006). This theory is supported by
the study by Jallad and coworkers (2016), which showed a higher perineal
breakdown rate following OASIS repair with chromic catgut.

FIGURE 27-12 In overview, with end-to-end approximation of the external anal sphincter (EAS), a
suture is placed through the EAS muscle, and four to six simple interrupted 2–0 or 3–0 sutures of
polyglactin 910 are placed at the 3, 6, 9, and 12 o’clock positions through the perisphincter connective
tissue. To begin, disrupted ends of the striated EAS muscle and capsule are identified and grasped. The
first suture is placed posteriorly to maintain clear exposure. Another suture is then placed inferiorly at
the 6 o’clock position. The sphincter muscle fibers are next reapposed by a figure-of-eight stitch. Last,
the remainder of the fascia is closed with a stitch placed anterior to the sphincter cylinder and again
with one placed superior to it. (Reproduced with permission from Kenton K, Mueller M: Episiotomy and
obstetric anal sphincter lacerations. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al (eds):
Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2017.)

FIGURE 27-13 A. Suturing of the anorectal mucosa begins above the laceration apex using a
continuous, nonlocking method with fine-gauge absorbable suture such as 3–0 or 4–0 chromic gut or
polyglactin 910. Sutures are placed through the anorectal submucosa approximately 0.5 cm apart down
to the anal verge. B. A second reinforcing layer uses 3–0 delayed-absorbable suture in a continuous,
nonlocking fashion. This incorporates the torn ends of the internal anal sphincter (IAS), which can be
identified as the glistening white fibrous structure lying between the anal canal submucosa and the fibers
of the external anal sphincter. In many cases, the IAS retracts laterally and must be sought and
retrieved for repair. (Reproduced with permission from Kenton K, Mueller M: Episiotomy and obstetric
anal sphincter lacerations. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al (eds): Cunningham and
Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2017.)

With the overlapping technique, the ends of the EAS are brought to the
midline, lie atop one another, and are sutured in this position. This method is
suitable only for type 3c lacerations—those with complete EAS rupture. Two
rows of mattress sutures travel through both overlapping EAS ends to
recreate the anal ring. In comparing the two methods, neither yields superior
long-term anatomical or functional results (Farrell, 2012; Fernando, 2013;
Fitzpatrick, 2000). Also with type 3c lacerations, the IAS is repaired before
the EAS and is described next.

With fourth-degree laceration repairs, both torn edges of the rectal
mucosa are reapproximated first (see Fig. 27-13). Starting at a point 1 cm
proximal to the wound apex, sutures are placed approximately 0.5 cm apart
in the rectal muscularis and do not enter the anorectal lumen. Clinicians often
use 4–0 delayed-absorbable suture or chromic gut for this running suture line.
Some recommend a second reinforcing layer above this (Hale, 2007). The
next layer to cover the anorectal mucosa is formed by reapproximation of the
IAS.
For reduction of infectious morbidity associated with OASIS, a single
dose of antibiotic at the time of repair may be considered (Buppasiri, 2014;
Duggal, 2008; Lewicky-Gaupp, 2015; Stock, 2013). A single dose of a
second-generation cephalosporin is suitable, or clindamycin for penicillinallergic women. With OASIS, postoperatively, stool softeners are prescribed
for a week, and enemas and suppositories are avoided.

■ Perineal Laceration Care
Initially, locally applied ice packs help reduce swelling and allay discomfort
(de Souza Bosco Paiva, 2016). In subsequent days, warm sitz baths aid
comfort and hygiene. Additionally, a small squirt bottle of warm water can
cleanse the site after voiding or stooling. Analgesics containing codeine
provide considerable relief. For lesser degrees of discomfort, nonsteroidal
antiinflammatory drugs can be given.
Because pain may instead signal a large vulvar, paravaginal, or
ischiorectal fossa hematoma or perineal cellulitis, these sites should be
examined carefully if pain is severe or persistent. Management of these
complications is discussed in Chapters 37 and 42 (pp. 657 and 740). In
addition to pain, urinary retention may complicate episiotomy recovery, and
management is described in Chapter 36 (p. 643).
For those with second-degree lacerations or OASIS, intercourse is
usually proscribed until after the first puerperal visit. Compared with women
with intact perineum, those with perineal trauma show higher rates of
delayed intercourse at 3 and 6 months, but not at 1 year (McDonald, 2015;
Rådestad, 2008; Signorello, 2001).

REFERENCES

Aasheim V, Nilsen AB, Reinar L, et al: Perineal techniques during the second stage of labour for
reducing perineal trauma. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 6:CD006672, 2017
Abbas AM, Mohamed AA, Mattar OM, et al: Lidocaine-prilocaine cream versus local infiltration
anesthesia in pain relief during repair of perineal trauma after vaginal delivery: a systematic review
and meta-analysis. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 33(6):1064, 2020
Abdulcadir J, Marras S, Catania L, et al: Defibulation: a visual reference and learning tool. J Sex Med
15:601, 2018
Adams-Piper E, Buono K, Whitcomb E, et al: A large retrospective series of pregnancy and delivery
after midurethral sling for stress urinary incontinence. Female Pelvic Med Reconstr Surg 22(5):307,
2016
Al-Hawash S, Whitehead CL, Farine D: Risk of recurrent shoulder dystocia: are we any closer to
prediction? J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 32(17):2928, 2019
American Academy of Pediatrics, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Guidelines for
Perinatal Care, 8th ed. Elk Grove Village, AAP, 2017
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Guidelines for Women’s Health Care, 4th ed.
Washington, ACOG, 2014
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Immersion in water during labor and delivery.
Committee Opinion No. 679, November 2016
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Avoidance of nonmedically indicated early-term
deliveries and associated neonatal morbidities. Committee Opinion No. 765, January 2019a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Female genital mutilation. Statement of Policy,
2019b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Postpartum hemorrhage. Practice Bulletin No.
183, October 2017, Reaffirmed 2019c
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Shoulder dystocia. Practice Bulletin No. 178,
May 2017, Reaffirmed 2019d
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Optimizing support for breastfeeding as part of
obstetric practice. Committee Opinion No. 756, October 2018, Reaffirmed 2020a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Planned home birth. Committee Opinion No. 697,
April 2017, Reaffirmed 2020b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Prevention and management of obstetric
lacerations at vaginal delivery. Practice Bulletin No. 198, August 2018, Reaffirmed 2020c
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Use of prophylactic antibiotics in labor and
delivery. Practice Bulletin No. 199, August 2018, Reaffirmed 2020d
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Delayed umbilical cord clamping after birth.
Committee Opinion No. 814, November 2020e
Andersson O, Hellström-Westas L, Andersson D, et al: Effect of delayed versus early umbilical cord
clamping on neonatal outcomes and iron status at 4 months: a randomised controlled trial. BMJ
343:d7157, 2011
Andersson O, Hellström-Westas L, Andersson D, et al: Effects of delayed compared with early
umbilical cord clamping on maternal postpartum hemorrhage and cord blood gas sampling: a
randomized trial. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 92(5):567, 2013
Ansell L, Ansell DA, McAra-Couper J, et al: Axillary traction: an effective method of resolving shoulder
dystocia. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol 59(5):627, 2019
Anteby EY, Yagel S: Route of delivery of fetuses with structural anomalies. Eur J Obstet Gynecol
Reprod Biol 106(1):5, 2003

Aquino CI, Guida M, Saccone G, et al: Perineal massage during labor: a systematic review and metaanalysis of randomized controlled trials. Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 33(6):1051, 2020a
Aquino CI, Saccone G, Troisi J, et al: Is Ritgen’s maneuver associated with decreased perineal
lacerations and pain at delivery? J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 33(18):3185, 2020b
Barth WH Jr: Persistent occiput posterior. Obstet Gynecol 125(3):695, 2015
Basak S, Kanungo S, Majhi C: Symphysiotomy: is it obsolete? J Obstet Gynaecol Res 37(7):770, 2011
Basham E, Stock L, Lewicky-Gaupp C, et al: Subsequent pregnancy outcomes after obstetric anal
sphincter injuries (OASIS). Female Pelvic Med Reconstr Surg 19(6):328, 2013
Beckmann MM, Stock OM: Antenatal perineal massage for reducing perineal trauma. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 4:CD005123, 2013
Begley CM, Gyte GM, Devane D, et al: Active versus expectant management for women in the third
stage of labour. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2:CD007412, 2019
Belachew J, Cnattingius S, Mulic-Lutvica A, et al: Risk of retained placenta in women previously
delivered by caesarean section: a population-based cohort study. BJOG 121(2):224, 2014
Bellussi F, Ghi T, Youssef A, et al: The use of intrapartum ultrasound to diagnose malpositions and
cephalic malpresentations. Am J Obstet Gynecol 217(6):633, 2017
Berg RC, Odgaard-Jensen J, Fretheim A, et al: An updated systematic review and meta-analysis of the
obstetric consequences of female genital mutilation/cutting. Obstet Gynecol Int 2014:542859, 2014a
Berg RC, Taraldsen S, Said MA, et al: The effectiveness of surgical interventions for women with
FGM/C: a systematic review. BJOG 125(3):278, 2018
Berg RC, Underland V, Odgaard-Jensen J, et al: Effects of female genital cutting on physical health
outcomes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ Open 4(11):e006316, 2014b
Blondel B, Alexander S, Bjarnadóttir RI, et al: Variations in rates of severe perineal tears and
episiotomies in 20 European countries: a study based on routine national data in Euro-Peristat
Project. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 95(7):746, 2016
Boggs EW, Berger H, Urquia M, et al: Recurrence of obstetric third-degree and fourth-degree anal
sphincter injuries. Obstet Gynecol 124(6):1128, 2014
Bolten N, de Jonge A, Zwagerman E, et al: Effect of planned place of birth on obstetric interventions
and maternal outcomes among low-risk women: a cohort study in the Netherlands. BMC Pregnancy
Childbirth 16(1):329, 2016
Boulvain M, Senat MV, Perrotin F, et al: Induction of labour versus expectant management for largefor-date fetuses: a randomised controlled trial. Lancet 385(9987):2600, 2015
Brito LG, Ferreira CH, Duarte G, et al: Antepartum use of Epi-No birth trainer for preventing perineal
trauma: systematic review. Int Urogynecol J (10):1429, 2015
Bruner JP, Drummond SB, Meenan AL, et al: All-fours maneuver for reducing shoulder dystocia during
labor. J Reprod Med 43(5):439, 1998
Buppasiri P, Lumbiganon P, Thinkhamrop J, et al: Antibiotic prophylaxis for third- and fourth-degree
perineal tear during vaginal birth. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 10:CD005125, 2014
Burkhardt T, Schmidt M, Kurmanavicius J, et al: Evaluation of fetal anthropometric measures to predict
the risk for shoulder dystocia. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 43(1):77, 2014
Byard RW, Zuccollo JM. Forensic issues in cases of water birth fatalities. Am J Forensic Med Pathol
31(3):258, 2010
Caughey AB, Cheyney M: Home and birth center birth in the United States: time for greater
collaboration across models of care. Obstet Gynecol 133(5):1033, 2019
Cavkaytar S, Kokanali M, Ozer I, et al: Effect of pregnancy and delivery on urinary incontinence after
the midurethral sling procedure. Int Urogynecol J 26(5):693, 2014

Chauhan SP, Laye MR, Lutgendorf M, et al: A multicenter assessment of 1,177 cases of shoulder
dystocia: lessons learned. Am J Perinatol 31(5):401, 2014
Chen X, Li X, Chang Y, et al: Effect and safety of timing of cord clamping on neonatal hematocrit
values and clinical outcomes in term infants: a randomized controlled trial. J Perinatol 38(3):251,
2018
Cheng YW, Hubbard A, Caughey AB, et al: The association between persistent fetal occiput posterior
position and perinatal outcomes: an example of propensity score and covariate distance matching.
Am J Epidemiol 171(6):656, 2010
Cheng YW, Shaffer BL, Caughey AB: Associated factors and outcomes of persistent occiput posterior
position: a retrospective cohort study from 1976 to 2001. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 19(9):563,
2006a
Cheng YW, Shaffer BL, Caughey AB: The association between persistent occiput posterior position and
neonatal outcomes. Obstet Gynecol 107(4):837, 2006b
Cheung WM, Hawkes A, Ibish S: The retained placenta: historical and geographical rate variations. J
Obstet Gynaecol 31(1):37, 2011
Cheyney M, Bovbjerg M, Everson C, et al: Outcomes of care for 16,924 planned home births in the
United States: the Midwives Alliance of North America Statistics Project, 2004 to 2009. J
Midwifery Womens Health 59(1):17, 2014
Chibber R, El-Saleh E, El Harmi J: Female circumcision: obstetrical and psychological sequelae
continues unabated in the 21st century. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 24(6):833, 2011
Chibueze EC, Parsons AJ, Ota E, et al: Prophylactic antibiotics for manual removal of retained placenta
during vaginal birth: a systematic review of observational studies and meta-analysis. BMC
Pregnancy Childbirth 15:313, 2015
Cluett ER, Burns E, Cuthbert A: Immersion in water during labour and birth. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev 5:CD000111, 2018
Cluver CA, Hofmeyr GJ: Posterior axilla sling traction: a technique for intractable shoulder dystocia.
Obstet Gynecol 113(2 Pt 2):486, 2009
Coats PM, Chan KK, Wilkins M, et al: A comparison between midline and mediolateral episiotomies.
BJOG 87:408, 1980
Comeau A, Hutton EK, Simioni J, et al: Home birth integration into the health care systems of eleven
international jurisdictions. Birth 45(3):311, 2018
Corton MM, Lankford JC, Ames R, et al: A randomized trial of birthing with and without stirrups. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 207(2):133.e1, 2012
Coviello EM, Grantz KL, Huang CC, et al: Risk factors for retained placenta. Am J Obstet Gynecol
213(6):864.e1, 2015
Crofts JF, Lenguerrand E, Bentham GL, et al: Prevention of brachial plexus injury—12 years of
shoulder dystocia training: an interrupted time-series study. BJOG 123(1):111, 2016
Cunningham FG: The Ritgen maneuver: another sacred cow questioned. Obstet Gynecol 112:210, 2008
Declercq E, Macdorman MF, Menacker F, et al: Characteristics of planned and unplanned home births
in 19 states. Obstet Gynecol 116(1):93, 2010
de Jonge A, Geerts CC, van der Goes BY, et al: Perinatal mortality and morbidity up to 28 days after
birth among 743 070 low-risk planned home and hospital births: a cohort study based on three
merged national perinatal databases. BJOG 122(5):720, 2015
de Leeuw JW, Struijk PC, Vierhout ME, et al: Risk factors for third degree perineal ruptures during
delivery. BJOG 108(4):383, 2001

Deneux-Tharaux C, Sentilhes L, Maillard F, et al: Effect of routine controlled cord traction as part of the
active management of the third stage of labour on postpartum haemorrhage: multicentre randomised
controlled trial (TRACOR). BMJ 346:f1541, 2013
de Souza Bosco Paiva C, Junqueira Vasconcellos de Oliveira SM, Amorim Francisco A, et al: Length of
perineal pain relief after ice pack application: a quasi-experimental study. Women Birth 29(2):117,
2016
Dillon SJ, Nelson DB, Spong CY, et al: Episiotomy evolution of a common obstetric practice at a single
public hospital. Abstract No. 801, Am J Obstet Gynecol 220(1):S523, 2019
Dombrowski MP, Bottoms SF, Saleh AA, et al: Third stage of labor: analysis of duration and clinical
practice. Am J Obstet Gynecol 172:1279, 1995
Duggal N, Mercado C, Daniels K, et al: Antibiotic prophylaxis for prevention of postpartum perineal
wound complications: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol 111(6):1268, 2008
Dyrkorn OA, Staff AC, Kulseng-Hanssen S, et al: Childbirth after mid-urethral sling surgery: effects on
long-term success and complications. Int Urogynecol J 31(3):485, 2020
Edozien LC, Gurol-Urganci I, Cromwell DA, et al: Impact of third- and fourth-degree perineal tears at
first birth on subsequent pregnancy outcomes: a cohort study. BJOG 121(13):1695, 2014
Elfaghi I, Johansson-Ernste B, Rydhstroem H: Rupture of the sphincter ani: the recurrence rate in
second delivery. BJOG 111:1361, 2004
Endler M, Saltvedt S, Cnattingius S, et al: Retained placenta is associated with pre-eclampsia, stillbirth,
giving birth to a small-for-gestational-age infant, and spontaneous preterm birth: a national registerbased study. BJOG 121(12):1462, 2014
Evers EC, Blomquist JL, McDermott KC, et al: Obstetrical anal sphincter laceration and anal
incontinence 5–10 years after childbirth. Am J Obstet Gynecol 207(5):425.e1, 2012
Faltin DL, Boulvain M, Floris LA, et al: Diagnosis of anal sphincter tears to prevent fecal incontinence:
a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol 106:6, 2005
Farrell SA, Flowerdew G, Gilmour D, et al: Overlapping compared with end-to-end repair of complete
third-degree or fourth-degree obstetric tears: three-year follow-up of a randomized controlled trial.
Obstet Gynecol 120(4):803, 2012
Feigenberg T, Maor-Sagie E, Zivi E, et al: Using adhesive glue to repair first degree perineal tears: a
prospective randomized controlled trial. Biomed Res Int 2014:526590, 2014
Feldman-Winter L, Goldsmith JP, Committee on Fetus and Newborn, et al: Safe sleep and skin-to-skin
care in the neonatal period for healthy term newborns. Pediatrics 138(3):e20161889, 2016
Fernando RJ, Sultan AH, Kettle C, et al: Methods of repair for obstetric anal sphincter injury. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 12:CD002866, 2013
Fitzpatrick M, Behan M, O’Connell PR, et al: A randomized clinical trial comparing primary overlap
with approximation repair of third-degree obstetric tears. Am J Obstet Gynecol 183:1220, 2000
Fitzpatrick M, McQuillan K, O’Herlihy C: Influence of persistent occiput posterior position on delivery
outcome. Obstet Gynecol 98(6):1027, 2001
Fodstad K, Laine K, Staff AC: Different episiotomy techniques, postpartum perineal pain, and blood
loss: an observational study. Int Urogynecol J 24(5):865, 2013
Fodstad K, Staff AC, Laine K: Effect of different episiotomy techniques on perineal pain and sexual
activity 3 months after delivery. Int Urogynecol J 25:1629, 2014
Fogarty M, Osborn DA, Askie L, et al: Delayed vs early umbilical cord clamping for preterm infants: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 218(1):1, 2018
Fransen AF, van de Ven J, Schuit E, et al: Simulation-based team training for multi-professional obstetric
care teams to improve patient outcome: a multicentre, cluster randomised controlled trial. BJOG

124(4):641, 2017
Friedman AM, Ananth CV, Prendergast E, et al: Evaluation of third-degree and fourth-degree laceration
rates as quality indicators. Obstet Gynecol 125(4):927, 2015
Frolova AI, Stout MJ, Tuuli MG, et al: Duration of the third stage of labor and risk of postpartum
hemorrhage. Obstet Gynecol 127(5):951, 2016
Gardberg M, Stenwall O, Laakkonen E: Recurrent persistent occipito-posterior position in subsequent
deliveries. BJOG 111(2):170, 2004
Gherman RB, Tramont J, Muffley P, et al: Analysis of McRoberts’ maneuver by x-ray pelvimetry.
Obstet Gynecol 95:43, 2000
Ghi T, Youssef A, Martelli F, et al: Narrow subpubic arch angle is associated with higher risk of
persistent occiput posterior position at delivery. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 48(4):511, 2016
Goldaber KG, Wendel PJ, McIntire DD, et al: Postpartum perineal morbidity after fourth-degree
perineal repair. Am J Obstet Gynecol 168:489, 1993
Gomersall J, Berber S, Middleton P, et al: Umbilical cord management at term and late preterm birth: a
meta-analysis. Pediatrics 147(3):e2020015404, 2021
Gommesen D, Nohr EA, Qvist N, et al: Obstetric perineal ruptures-risk of anal incontinence among
primiparous women 12 months postpartum: a prospective cohort study. Am J Obstet Gynecol
222(2):165.e1, 2020
Gonik B, Allen R, Sorab J: Objective evaluation of the shoulder dystocia phenomenon: effect of
maternal pelvic orientation on force reduction. Obstet Gynecol 74:44, 1989
Goodwin TM, Banks E, Millar LK, et al: Catastrophic shoulder dystocia and emergency symphysiotomy.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 177:463, 1997
Greenberg JA, Lieberman E, Cohen AP, et al: Randomized comparison of chromic versus fastabsorbing polyglactin 910 for postpartum perineal repair. Obstet Gynecol 103(6):1308, 2004
Groutz A, Hasson J, Wengier A, et al: Third- and fourth-degree perineal tears: prevalence and risk
factors in the third millennium. Am J Obstet Gynecol 204(4):347.e1, 2011
Grünebaum A, McCullough LB, Arabin B, et al: Underlying causes of neonatal deaths in term singleton
pregnancies: home births versus hospital births in the United States. J Perinat Med 45(3):349, 2017
Grünebaum A, McCullough LB, Orosz B, et al: Neonatal mortality in the United States is related to
location of birth (hospital versus home) rather than the type of birth attendant. Am J Obstet Gynecol
223(2):254.e1, 2020
Grünebaum A, McCullough LB, Sapra KJ, et al: Apgar score of 0 at 5 minutes and neonatal seizures or
serious neurologic dysfunction in relation to birth setting. Am J Obstet Gynecol 209(4):323.e1, 2013
Grünebaum A, McCullough LB, Sapra KJ, et al: Early and total neonatal mortality in relation to birth
setting in the United States, 2006–2009. Am J Obstet Gynecol 211:390.e1, 2014
Gungor S, Kurt E, Teksoz E, et al: Oronasopharyngeal suction versus no suction in normal and term
infants delivered by elective cesarean section: a prospective randomized controlled trial. Gynecol
Obstet Invest 61(1):9, 2006
Gunnarsson B, Fasting S, Skogvoll E, et al: Why babies die in unplanned out-of-institution births: an
enquiry into perinatal deaths in Norway 1999–2013. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 96(3):326, 2017
Gunnarsson B, Smárason AK, Skogvoll E, et al: Characteristics and outcome of unplanned out-ofinstitution births in Norway from 1999 to 2013: a cross-sectional study. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand
93(10):1003, 2014
Gurewitsch Allen ED, Will SE, Allen RH, et al: Improving shoulder dystocia management and outcomes
with a targeted quality assurance program. Am J Perinatol 34(11):1088, 2017

Gurewitsch ED, Donithan M, Stallings SP, et al: Episiotomy versus fetal manipulation in managing
severe shoulder dystocia: a comparison of outcomes. Am J Obstet Gynecol 191(3):911, 2004
Gurol-Urganci I, Cromwell DA, Edozien LC, et al: Third- and fourth-degree perineal tears among
primiparous women in England between 2000 and 2012: time trends and risk factors. BJOG
120(12):1516, 2013
Hale RW, Ling FW: Episiotomy: procedure and repair techniques. Washington, American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2007
Hawkins JS: Lower genital tract procedures. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al (eds):
Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2017
Hehir MP, Rubeo Z, Flood K et al: Anal sphincter injury in vaginal deliveries complicated by shoulder
dystocia. Int Urogynecol J 29(3):377, 2018
Henry E, Andres RL, Christensen RD: Neonatal outcomes following a tight nuchal cord. J Perinatol
33(3):231, 2013
Hofmeyr GJ, Mshweshwe NT, Gülmezoglu AM: Controlled cord traction for the third stage of labour.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 1:CD008020, 2015
Huang J, Lu H, Zang Y, et al: The effects of hands on and hands off/poised techniques on maternal
outcomes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Midwifery 87:102712, 2020
Jallad K, Steele SE, Barber MD: Breakdown of perineal laceration repair after vaginal delivery: a casecontrol study. Female Pelvic Med Reconstr Surg 22(4):276, 2016
Jangö H, Langhoff-Roos J, Rosthøj S, et al: Long-term anal incontinence after obstetric anal sphincter
injury-does grade of tear matter? Am J Obstet Gynecol 218(2):232.e1, 2018
Jangö H, Langhoff-Roos J, Rosthøj S, et al: Mode of delivery after obstetric anal sphincter injury and
the risk of long-term anal incontinence. Am J Obstet Gynecol 214(6):733.e1, 2016
Jangö H, Langhoff-Roos J, Rosthøj S, et al: Recurrent obstetric anal sphincter injury and the risk of
long-term anal incontinence. Am J Obstet Gynecol 216(6):610.e1, 2017
Jiang H, Qian X, Carroli G, et al: Selective versus routine use of episiotomy for vaginal birth. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 2:CD000081, 2017
Kalafat E, Gokce A, O’Brien P, et al: Efficacy of carbetocin in the prevention of postpartum
hemorrhage: a systematic review and Bayesian meta-analysis of randomized trials. J Matern Fetal
Neonatal Med 34(14):2303, 2021
Kalis V, Laine K, de Leeuw JW, et al: Classification of episiotomy: towards a standardisation of
terminology. BJOG 119(5):522, 2012
Kalis V, Landsmanova J, Bednarova B, et al: Evaluation of the incision angle of mediolateral episiotomy
at 60 degrees. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 112:220, 2011
Kamisan Atan I, Shek KL, Langer S, et al: Does the Epi-No birth trainer prevent vaginal birth-related
pelvic floor trauma? A multicentre prospective randomized controlled trial. BJOG 123(6):995, 2016
Karbanova J, Rusavy Z, Betincova L, et al: Clinical evaluation of early postpartum pain and healing
outcomes after mediolateral versus lateral episiotomy. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 127(2):152, 2014a
Karbanova J, Rusavy Z, Betincova L, et al: Clinical evaluation of peripartum outcomes of mediolateral
versus lateral episiotomy. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 124(1):72, 2014b
Kariminia A, Chamberlain ME, Keogh J, et al: Randomised controlled trial of effect of hands and knees
posturing on incidence of occiput posterior position at birth. BMJ 328(7438):490, 2004
Katheria A, Reister F, Essers J, et al: Association of umbilical cord milking vs delayed umbilical cord
clamping with death or severe intraventricular hemorrhage among preterm infants. JAMA
322(19):1877, 2019

Katheria AC, Szychowski JM, Essers J, et al: Early cardiac and cerebral hemodynamics with umbilical
cord milking compared with delayed cord clamping in infants born preterm. J Pediatr 223:51, 2020
Kenton K, Mueller M: Episiotomy and obstetric anal sphincter lacerations. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman
BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al (eds): Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York,
McGraw-Hill Education, 2017
Kettle C, Dowswell T, Ismail KM: Absorbable suture materials for primary repair of episiotomy and
second degree tears. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 6:CD000006, 2010
Kettle C, Dowswell T, Ismail KM: Continuous and interrupted suturing techniques for repair of
episiotomy or second-degree tears. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 11:CD000947, 2012
Kettle C, Hills RK, Jones P, et al: Continuous versus interrupted perineal repair with standard or rapidly
absorbed sutures after spontaneous vaginal birth: a randomized controlled trial. Lancet 359:2217,
2002
Kim T, Vogel RI, Mackenthun SM, et al: Rigorous simulation training protocol does not improve
maternal and neonatal outcomes from shoulder dystocia. Obstet Gynecol 127 Suppl 1:3S, 2016
Kindberg S, Stehouwer M, Hvidman L, et al: Postpartum perineal repair performed by midwives: a
randomised trial comparing two suture techniques leaving the skin unsutured. BJOG 115(4):472,
2008
Koyanagi A, Zhang J, Dagvadorj A, et al: Macrosomia in 23 developing countries: an analysis of a
multicountry, facility-based, cross-sectional survey. Lancet 381(9865):476, 2013
Kumbhat N, Eggleston B, Davis AS, et al: Placental transfusion and short-term outcomes among
extremely preterm infants. Arch Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed 106(1):62, 2021
Labrecque M, Eason E, Marcoux S, et al: Randomized controlled trial of prevention of perineal trauma
by perineal massage during pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 180(3 Pt 1):593, 1999
Laine K, Pirhonen T, Rolland R, et al: Decreasing the incidence of anal sphincter tears during delivery.
Obstet Gynecol 111:1053, 2008
Landy HJ, Laughon SK, Bailit JL, et al: Characteristics associated with severe perineal and cervical
lacerations during vaginal delivery. Obstet Gynecol 117(3):627, 2011
Larson JD, Rayburn WF, Harlan VL: Nuchal cord entanglements and gestational age. Am J Perinatol
14(9):555, 1997
Le Ray C, Lepleux F, De La Calle A, et al: Lateral asymmetric decubitus position for the rotation of
occipito-posterior positions: multicenter randomized controlled trial EVADELA. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 215(4):511.e1, 2016
Leung TY, Stuart O, Sahota DS: Head-to-body delivery interval and risk of fetal acidosis and hypoxic
ischaemic encephalopathy in shoulder dystocia: a retrospective review. BJOG 118(4):474, 2011
Lewicky-Gaupp C, Leader-Cramer A, Johnson LL, et al: Wound complications after obstetric anal
sphincter injuries. Obstet Gynecol 125(5):1088, 2015
Liabsuetrakul T, Choobun T, Peeyananjarassri K, et al: Prophylactic use of ergot alkaloids in the third
stage of labour. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 6:CD005456, 2018
Lieberman E, Davidson K, Lee-Parritz A, et al: Changes in fetal position during labor and their
association with epidural analgesia. Obstet Gynecol 105(5 Pt 1):974, 2005
Low-Beer NM, Creighton SM, Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists: Female genital
mutilation and its management. Green-top Guideline No. 53, July 2015, Reaffirmed 2018
MacDorman MF, Declercq E: Trends and state variations in out-of-hospital births in the United States,
2004–2017. Birth 46(2):279, 2019
MacKenzie IZ, Shah M, Lean K, et al: Management of shoulder dystocia: trends in incidence and
maternal and neonatal morbidity. Obstet Gynecol 110:1059, 2007

Magro-Malosso ER, Saccone G, Chen M, et al: Induction of labour for suspected macrosomia at term in
non-diabetic women: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. BJOG
124(3):414, 2017
Mahran A, Soriano A, Safwat AS, et al: The effect of sacral neuromodulation on pregnancy: a
systematic review. Int Urogynecol J 28(9):1357, 2017
Maldonado PA, Carrick KS, Montoya TI, et al: Posterior vaginal compartment anatomy: implications for
surgical repair. Female Pelvic Med Reconstr Surg 26(12):751, 2020
Malin GL, Bugg GJ, Takwoingi Y, et al: Antenatal magnetic resonance imaging versus ultrasound for
predicting neonatal macrosomia: a systematic review and meta-analysis. BJOG 123(1):77, 2016
Malm M, Madsen I, Kjellström J: Development and stability of a heat-stable formulation of carbetocin
for the prevention of postpartum haemorrhage for use in low and middle-income countries. J Pept
Sci 24(6):e3082, 2018
McCandlish R, Bowler U, Van Asten H, et al: A randomised controlled trial of care of the perineum
during second stage of normal labour. BJOG 105(12):1262, 1998
McDonald EA, Gartland D, Small R, et al: Dyspareunia and childbirth: a prospective cohort study.
BJOG 122(5):672, 2015
McDonald SJ, Middleton P, Dowswell T, et al: Effect of timing of umbilical cord clamping of term
infants on maternal and neonatal outcomes. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 7:CD004074, 2013
Mehta SH, Bujold E, Blackwell SC, et al: Is abnormal labor associated with shoulder dystocia in
nulliparous women? Am J Obstet Gynecol 190(6):1604, 2004
Modanlou HD, Komatsu G, Dorchester W, et al: Large-for-gestational-age neonates: anthropometric
reasons for shoulder dystocia. Obstet Gynecol 60:417, 1982
Moore ER, Bergman N, Anderson GC, et al: Early skin-to-skin contact for mothers and their healthy
newborn infants. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 11:CD003519, 2016
Mornar SJ, Perlow JH: Blunt suture needle use in laceration and episiotomy repair at vaginal delivery.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 198:e14, 2008
Mous M, Muller SA, de Leeuw JW: Long-term effects of anal sphincter rupture during vaginal delivery:
faecal incontinence and sexual complaints. BJOG 115(2):234, 2008
Necesalova P, Karbanova J, Rusavy Z, et al: Mediolateral versus lateral episiotomy and their effect on
postpartum coital activity and dyspareunia rate 3 and 6 months postpartum. Sex Reprod Healthc
8:25, 2016
Nesbitt TS, Gilbert WM, Herrchen B: Shoulder dystocia and associated risk factors with macrosomic
infants born in California. Am J Obstet Gynecol 179:476, 1998
Nour NM, Michels KB, Bryant AE: Defibulation to treat female genital cutting: effect on symptoms and
sexual function. Obstet Gynecol 108(1):55, 2006
Nudelman MJR, Belogolovsky E, Jegatheesan P, et al: Effect of delayed cord clamping on umbilical
blood gas values in term newborns: a systematic review. Obstet Gynecol 135(3):576, 2020
Oliphant SS, Jones KA, Wang L, et al: Trends over time with commonly performed obstetric and
gynecologic inpatient procedures. Obstet Gynecol 116(4):926, 2010
O’Shea MS, Lewicky-Gaupp C, Gossett DR: Long-term sexual function after obstetric anal sphincter
injuries. Female Pelvic Med Reconstr Surg 24(2):82, 2018
Ouzounian JG: Shoulder dystocia: incidence and risk factors. Clin Obstet Gynecol 59(4):791, 2016
Øverland EA, Vatten LJ, Eskild A: Pregnancy week at delivery and the risk of shoulder dystocia: a
population study of 2,014,956 deliveries. BJOG 121(1):34, 2014
Øverland EA, Vatten LJ, Eskild A: Risk of shoulder dystocia: associations with parity and offspring
birthweight. A population study of 1,914,544 deliveries. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 91(4):483, 2012

Panburana P, Odthon T, Pongmee P, et al: The effect of umbilical cord milking compared with delayed
cord clamping in term neonates: a randomized controlled trial. Int J Womens Health 12:301, 2020
Paris AE, Greenberg JA, Ecker JL, et al: Is an episiotomy necessary with a shoulder dystocia? Am J
Obstet Gynecol 205(3):217.e1, 2011
Pierce-Williams RA, Saccone G, Berghella V: Hands-on versus hands-off techniques for the prevention
of perineal trauma during vaginal delivery: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized
controlled trials. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 3:1, 2019
Ponkey SE, Cohen AP, Heffner LJ, et al: Persistent fetal occiput posterior position: obstetric outcomes.
Obstet Gynecol 101(5 Pt 1):915, 2003
Rabe H, Gyte GM, Díaz-Rossello JL, et al: Effect of timing of umbilical cord clamping and other
strategies to influence placental transfusion at preterm birth on maternal and infant outcomes.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 9:CD003248, 2019
Rådestad I, Olsson A, Nissen E, et al: Tears in the vagina, perineum, sphincter ani, and rectum and first
sexual intercourse after childbirth: a nationwide follow-up. Birth 35:98, 2008
Rahman J, Bhattee G, Rahman MS: Shoulder dystocia in a 16-year experience in a teaching hospital. J
Reprod Med 54(6):378, 2009
Rodriguez MI, Seuc A, Say L, et al: Episiotomy and obstetric outcomes among women living with type 3
female genital mutilation: a secondary analysis. Reprod Health 13(1):131, 2016
Roulette P, Castel-Lacanal E, Sanson S, et al: Sacral neuromodulation and pregnancy: results of a
national survey carried out for the neuro-urology committee of the French Association of Urology
(AFU). Neurourol Urodyn 37(2):792, 2018
Rouzi AA, Al-Sibiani SA, Al-Mansouri NM, et al: Defibulation during vaginal delivery for women with
type III female genital mutilation. Obstet Gynecol 120(1):98, 2012
Rubin A: Management of shoulder dystocia. JAMA 189:835, 1964
Saccone G, Caissutti C, Ciardulli A, et al: Uterine massage as part of active management of the third
stage of labour for preventing postpartum haemorrhage during vaginal delivery: a systematic review
and meta-analysis of randomised trials. BJOG 125(7):778, 2018
Saccone G, Della Corte L, D’Alessandro P, et al: Prophylactic use of tranexamic acid after vaginal
delivery reduces the risk of primary postpartum hemorrhage. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med
33(19):3368, 2020
Salati JA, Leathersich SJ, Williams MJ, et al: Prophylactic oxytocin for the third stage of labour to
prevent postpartum haemorrhage. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 4:CD001808, 2019
Sandberg EC: Shoulder dystocia: associated with versus caused by the Zavanelli maneuver. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 197(1):115, 2007
Sandberg EC: The Zavanelli maneuver: 12 years of recorded experience. Obstet Gynecol 93:312, 1999
Sandberg EC: The Zavanelli maneuver: a potentially revolutionary method for the resolution of shoulder
dystocia. Am J Obstet Gynecol 152:479, 1985
Schafer R: Umbilical cord avulsion in waterbirth. J Midwifery Womens Health 59(1):91, 2014
Schei B, Johannessen HH, Rydning A, et al: Anal incontinence after vaginal delivery or cesarean
section. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 98(1):51, 2019
Schramm M: Impacted shoulders—a personal experience. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol 23:28, 1983
Seidler AL, Gyte GML, Rabe H, et al: Umbilical cord management for newborns <34 weeks’ gestation:
a meta-analysis. Pediatrics 147(3):e20200576, 2021
Senécal J, Xiong X, Fraser WD, et al: Effect of fetal position on second-stage duration and labor
outcome. Obstet Gynecol 105(4):763, 2005

Sentilhes L, Winer N, Azria E, et al: Tranexamic acid for the prevention of blood loss after vaginal
delivery. N Engl J Med 379(8):731, 2018
Shaffer BL, Cheng YW, Vargas JE, et al: Manual rotation to reduce caesarean delivery in persistent
occiput posterior or transverse position. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 24(1):65, 2011
Shinar S, Schwartz A, Maslovitz S, et al: How long is safe? Setting the cutoff for uncomplicated third
stage length: a retrospective case-control study. Birth 43(1):36, 2016a
Shinar S, Shenhav M, Maslovitz S, et al: Distribution of third-stage length and risk factors for its
prolongation. Am J Perinatol 33(10):1023, 2016b
Signorello LB, Harlow BL, Chekos AK, et al: Postpartum sexual functioning and its relationship to
perineal trauma: a retrospective cohort study of primiparous women. Am J Obstet Gynecol 184:881,
2001
Snowden JM, Tilden EL, Snyder J, et al: Planned out-of-hospital birth and birth outcomes. N Engl J Med
373(27):2642, 2015
Soltani H, Hutchon DR, Poulose TA: Timing of prophylactic uterotonics for the third stage of labour
after vaginal birth. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 8:CD006173, 2010
Spain JE, Frey HA, Tuuli MG, et al: Neonatal morbidity associated with shoulder dystocia maneuvers.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 212(3):353.e1, 2015
Spong CY, Beall M, Rodrigues D, et al: An objective definition of shoulder dystocia: prolonged head-tobody delivery intervals and/or the use of ancillary obstetric maneuvers. Obstet Gynecol 86:433, 1995
Stamp G, Kruzins G, Crowther C: Perineal massage in labour and prevention of perineal trauma:
randomised controlled trial. BMJ 322(7297):1277, 2001
Steelman VM, Shaw C, Shine L, et al: Retained surgical sponges: a descriptive study of 319
occurrences and contributing factors from 2012 to 2017. Patient Saf Surg 12:20, 2018
Stock L, Basham E, Gossett DR, et al: Factors associated with wound complications in women with
obstetric anal sphincter injuries (OASIS). Am J Obstet Gynecol 208(4):327.e1, 2013
Svanström MC, Biber B, Hanes M, et al: Signs of myocardial ischaemia after injection of oxytocin: a
randomized double-blind comparison of oxytocin and methylergometrine during caesarean section.
Br J Anaesth 100:683, 2008
Tarnow-Mordi W, Morris J, Kirby A, et al: Delayed versus immediate cord clamping in preterm infants.
N Engl J Med 377(25):2445, 2017
Taylor H, Kleine I, Bewley S, et al: Neonatal outcomes of waterbirth: a systematic review and metaanalysis. Arch Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed 101(4):F357, 2016
Tunçalp Ö, Hofmeyr GJ, Gülmezoglu AM: Prostaglandins for preventing postpartum haemorrhage.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 8:CD000494, 2012
UNICEF: Female genital mutilation country profiles. 2016. Available at
https://data.unicef.org/resources/fgm-country-profiles/. Accessed October 15, 2020
Valenzuela P, Saiz Puente MS, Valero JL, et al: Continuous versus interrupted sutures for repair of
episiotomy or second-degree perineal tears: a randomised controlled trial. BJOG 116(3):436, 2009
van Ast M, Goedhart MM, Luttmer R, et al: The duration of the third stage in relation to postpartum
hemorrhage. Birth 46(4):602, 2019
van der Nelson H, O’Brien S, Burnard S, et al: Intramuscular oxytocin versus Syntometrine versus
carbetocin for prevention of primary postpartum haemorrhage after vaginal birth: a randomised
double-blinded clinical trial of effectiveness, side effects and quality of life. BJOG 128(7):1236, 2021
Walsh JM, Kandamany N, Ni Shuibhne N, et al: Neonatal brachial plexus injury: comparison of
incidence and antecedents between 2 decades. Am J Obstet Gynecol 204(4):324.e1, 2011

Webb SS, Yates D, Manresa M, et al: Impact of subsequent birth and delivery mode for women with
previous OASIS: systematic review and meta-analysis. Int Urogynecol J 28(4):507, 2017
Whalley PJ, Pritchard JA: Oxytocin and water intoxication. JAMA 186:601, 1963
Widmer M, Piaggio G, Nguyen TM, et al: Heat-stable carbetocin versus oxytocin to prevent hemorrhage
after vaginal birth. N Engl J Med 379(8):743, 2018
Widström AM, Brimdyr K, Svensson K, et al: Skin-to-skin contact the first hour after birth, underlying
implications and clinical practice. Acta Paediatr 108(7):1192, 2019
Wieslander CK, Weinstein MM, Handa VL, et al: Pregnancy in women with prior treatments for pelvic
floor disorders. Female Pelvic Med Reconstr Surg 26(5):299, 2020
Williams A, Adams EJ, Tincello DG, et al: How to repair an anal sphincter injury after vaginal delivery:
results of a randomised controlled trial. BJOG 113(2):201, 2006
Woods CE: A principle of physics is applicable to shoulder delivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 45:796, 1943
World Health Organization: Care of Women and Girls Living with Female Genital Mutilation: a Clinical
Handbook. Geneva, WHO, 2018a
World Health Organization: Female genital mutilation and obstetric outcome: WHO collaborative
prospective study in six African countries. Lancet 367:1835, 2006
World Health Organization: Guideline: delayed umbilical cord clamping for improved maternal and infant
health and nutrition outcomes. Geneva, WHO, 2014
World Health Organization: Implementation guidance: protecting, promoting and supporting
breastfeeding in facilities providing maternity and newborn services—the revised Baby-friendly
Hospital Initiative. Geneva, WHO, 2018b
World Health Organization: WHO recommendations for the prevention and treatment of postpartum
haemorrhage. Geneva, WHO, 2012
World Health Organization: WHO recommendations: uterotonics for the prevention of postpartum
haemorrhage. Geneva, WHO, 2018c
Wyckoff MH, Aziz K, Escobedo MB, et al: Part 13: Neonatal resuscitation: 2015 American Heart
Association guidelines update for cardiopulmonary resuscitation and emergency cardiovascular care.
Circulation 132(18 Suppl 2):S543, 2015
Yao AC, Lind J: Placental transfusion. Am J Dis Child 127:128, 1974
Zhang C, Wu Y, Li S, et al: Maternal prepregnancy obesity and the risk of shoulder dystocia: a metaanalysis. BJOG 125(4):407, 2018

