# Chapter 6: Placental Abnormalities

- Normal Placenta
- Shape And Size Variants
- Extrachorial Placentation
- Circulatory Disturbances
- Placental Calcification
- Placental Tumors
- Amniochorion
- Umbilical Cord
- References

During pregnancy, the placenta provides the indispensable interface between mother and fetus (Chap. 5, p. 86). However, in part due to inaccessibility throughout gestation, the placenta’s anatomy, physiology, and molecular structure still remain some of the most understudied and intriguing topics in obstetrics. Furthermore, the parallels between placental formation and cancer afford opportunities to understand tumor biology and pathogenesis (Costanzo, 2018; Guttmacher, 2014). Visual placental inspection by the obstetrician is recommended, but routine pathological examination is not mandatory. Indeed, specific conditions that merit submission for detailed inspection are still debated. For

example, the College of American Pathologists recommends placental examination for an extensive list of indications, however many providers are not aware (Langston, 1997; Odibo, 2016). Moreover, data are insufficient to support all of these. At minimum, the placenta and cord should be inspected in the delivery room. The decision to request pathological examination should be based on clinical and placental findings (Table 6-1) (Redline, 2008; Roberts, 2008).

> **Table 6-1:** Some Indications for Placental Pathological Examinationa

## Normal Placenta

At term, the typical placenta weighs 470 g, is round to oval with a 22-cm diameter, and has a central thickness of 2.5 cm (Benirschke, 2012). It is composed of a placental disc, extraplacental membranes, and three-vessel umbilical cord. The disc surface that lies against the uterine wall is the basal plate, which is divided by clefts into portions—termed cotyledons. The fetal surface is the chorionic plate. Here, the umbilical cord inserts, typically in the center. Large fetal vessels that originate from the cord vessels then spread and branch across the chorionic plate before entering stem villi of the placenta parenchyma. In tracing these, fetal arteries almost invariably cross over veins. The chorionic plate and its vessels are covered by thin amnion, which can be easily peeled away from a postdelivery specimen. During prenatal sonographic examinations, multiple societies, including the American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine (2018), recommend identifying and recording placental location and its relationship to the internal cervical os. As seen sonographically, the normal placenta is homogenous and 2 to 4 cm thick, lies against the myometrium, and indents into the amnionic sac. The retroplacental space is a hypoechoic area that separates the myometrium from the basal plate and measures less than 1 to 2 cm. The umbilical cord is also imaged, its fetal and placental insertion sites examined, and its vessels counted.

Many placental lesions can be identified grossly or sonographically, but other abnormalities require histopathological examination for clarification. A detailed description of these is beyond the scope of this chapter, and interested readers are referred to textbooks by Benirschke (2012), Fox (2007), and Faye-Petersen (2006) and their colleagues. Moreover, the placenta accreta spectrum, placenta previa, and gestational trophoblastic disease are presented in detail in Chapters 41 and 20, respectively.

## Shape And Size Variants

Of variants, placentas may infrequently form as separate, nearly equally sized discs. This bilobate placenta may also be called bipartite placenta or placenta duplex. In these, the cord inserts between the two placental lobes— either into a connecting chorionic bridge or into intervening membranes. A placenta containing three or more equivalently sized lobes is rare and termed multilobate. Unlike this equal distribution, one or more disparately smaller accessory lobes—succenturiate lobes—may develop in the membranes at a distance from the main placenta (Fig. 6-1). These lobes have vessels that course through the membranes. Of clinical importance, if these vessels overlie the cervix to create a vasa previa, dangerous fetal hemorrhage can follow vessel laceration (p. 115). An accessory lobe can also be retained in the uterus after delivery to cause postpartum uterine atony and hemorrhage or later endometritis.

> **Figure 6-1:** Succenturiate lobe. A. Vessels extend from the main placental disc to supply the small round succenturiate lobe located to the left. (Reproduced with permission from Dr. Rachel Gardner.) B.

Sonographic imaging with color Doppler shows the main placental disc implanted posteriorly (asterisk). The succenturiate lobe is located on the anterior uterine wall across the amnionic cavity. Vessels are identified as the long red and blue crossing tubular structures that travel within the membranes to connect these two portions of placenta.

Rarely, the placental surface area varies from the norm. With placenta membranacea, villi cover all or nearly all the uterine cavity. This may occasionally give rise to serious hemorrhage because of associated placenta previa or accreta (Pereira, 2013). A ring-shaped placenta may be a variant of placenta membranacea. This placenta is annular, and a partial or complete ring of placental tissue is present. These abnormalities appear to be associated with a greater likelihood of antepartum and postpartum bleeding and fetal-growth restriction (Faye-Petersen, 2006; Steemers, 1995). With placenta fenestrata, the central portion of a placental disc is missing. In some cases, there is an actual hole in the placenta. More often, only villous tissue is missing, and the chorionic plate remains intact. During pregnancy, the normal placenta increases its thickness at a rate that approximates 1 mm per week. Although not measured as a component of routine sonographic evaluation, this thickness typically does not exceed 40 mm (Hoddick, 1985). Placentomegaly defines those thicker than 40 mm and commonly results from striking villous enlargement. Underlying maternal etiologies are diabetes mellitus or severe anemia, whereas fetal sources include hydrops, anemia, syphilis, toxoplasmosis, or infection caused by parvovirus or cytomegalovirus. In these conditions, the placenta is homogeneously thickened. In other cases placentas are thick but inhomogeneous. Partial mole is a classic example. The thickened placenta contains edematous villi, which appear as multiple, small, anechoic placental cysts (Chap. 13, p. 239). Cystic vesicles also are seen with placental mesenchymal dysplasia. In this rare condition, vesicles correspond to enlarged stem villi. However, unlike molar pregnancy, trophoblast proliferation is not excessive, and chromosomal complements are diploid (Woo, 2011). Rather than villous enlargement, inhomogeneous placentomegaly often may result from collections of blood or fibrin, which impart heterogeneity to the placenta. Examples of this are discussed later and include massive perivillous fibrin deposition, intervillous or subchorionic thromboses, and large retroplacental hematomas (p. 110).

## Extrachorial Placentation

The chorionic plate normally extends to the periphery of the placental disc and has a diameter similar to that of the basal plate. With extrachorial placentation, however, the chorionic plate fails to extend to this periphery and leads to a chorionic plate that is smaller than the basal plate (Fig. 6-2). Circummarginate and circumvallate placentas are the two types. In a circummarginate placenta, fibrin and old hemorrhage lie between the placental disc and the overlying sheer amniochorion. In contrast, with a circumvallate placenta, the chorionic plate periphery is a thickened, opaque, gray-white circular ridge composed of a double fold of chorion and amnion.

> **Figure 6-2:** A. In this illustration, circummarginate (left) and circumvallate (right) varieties of extrachorial placentation are shown. A circummarginate placenta is covered by a single layer of amniochorion. B. This transabdominal grayscale sonographic image shows a circumvallate placenta. The double fold of amnion and chorion creates a broad, opaque white ring and ridge on the fetal surface.

Sonographically, the circumvallate fold can be seen as a thick, linear band of echoes extending from one placental edge to the other. On cross section, however, it appears as two “shelves,” with each lying above an opposing placental margin (see Fig. 6-2). This anatomy can help differentiate this shelf from other bands (Table 6-2).

> **Table 6-2:** Sonographic Bands During Pregnancy

In small observational studies of circumvallate placenta diagnosed postpartum, it was associated with increased risk for antepartum bleeding, abruption, fetal demise, and preterm birth (Suzuki, 2008; Taniguchi, 2014). In a prospective sonographic investigation of 17 cases, however, Shen and associates (2007a) found most circumvallate placentas to be transient.

**Persistent cases were benign.** In general, most otherwise uncomplicated pregnancies with either type of extrachorial placentation have normal outcomes, and no increased surveillance is usually required.

## Circulatory Disturbances

Functionally, placental perfusion disorders can be grouped into: (1) those in which maternal blood flow to or within the intervillous space is disrupted, and (2) those with disturbed fetal blood flow through the villi. These lesions are frequently identified in the normal, mature placenta. Although they can limit maximal placental blood flow, functional reserve within the placental prevents harm in most cases. Indeed, some estimate that up to 30 percent of placental villi can be lost without untoward fetal effects (Fox, 2007). If extensive, however, these lesions can profoundly limit fetal growth. Lesions that disrupt perfusion are frequently seen grossly or sonographically, whereas smaller lesions are seen only histologically. With

sonography, many of these, such as subchorionic fibrin deposition, perivillous fibrin deposition, and intervillous thrombosis, appear as focal sonolucencies within the placenta. Greater magnetic resonance (MR) imaging use in pregnancy has permitted detection and further characterization of these lesions (Bockoven, 2020; Capuani, 2017). Importantly, in the absence of maternal or fetal complications, small isolated placental sonolucencies are considered incidental findings.

### Maternal Blood Flow Disruption

Subchorionic Fibrin Deposition These collections are caused by slowing of maternal blood flow within the intervillous space. In the upper portion of this space near the chorionic plate, blood stasis is prominent and leads to subsequent fibrin deposition. In viewing the placental fetal surface, subchorionic lesions are seen as white or yellow, firm, round, elevated plaques just beneath the chorionic plate.

Perivillous Fibrin Deposition Stasis of maternal blood flow around an individual villus also results in fibrin deposition and can lead to diminished villous oxygenation and necrosis of syncytiotrophoblast (Fig. 6-3). These small yellow-white placental nodules are grossly visible within the parenchyma of a sectioned placenta. Within limits, these reflect normal placental aging. Deposition that affects >25 percent of villi is associated with fetal-growth restriction and adverse neonatal outcomes (Devisme, 2017; Spinillo, 2019).

> **Figure 6-3:** Potential sites of maternally and fetally related placental circulatory disturbances.

**Maternal Floor Infarction.** This extreme variant of perivillous fibrin deposition is a dense fibrinoid layer within the placental basal plate and is erroneously termed an infarction. Maternal floor infarction has a thick, yellow or white, firm corrugated surface that impedes normal maternal blood flow into the intervillous space. In specific cases that extend up and beyond the basal plate to entrap villi and obliterate the intervillous space, the term massive perivillous fibrin deposition is used. The etiopathogenesis is unclear, but maternal auto- or alloimmunity appears contributory (FayePeterson, 2018; Romero, 2013). Antiphospholipid antibody syndrome and angiogenic factors involved with preeclampsia also have been implicated (Sebire, 2002; Whitten, 2013). These lesions are not reliably imaged with prenatal sonography, but they may create a thicker basal plate. Affected pregnancies are associated with miscarriage, fetal-growth restriction, preterm delivery, and stillbirth (Andres, 1990; Mandsager, 1994). Importantly, these adverse outcomes can recur in subsequent pregnancies.

Intervillous Thrombus This is a collection of coagulated maternal blood normally found in the intervillous space mixed with fetal blood from a break in a villus. Grossly, these round or oval collections vary in size up to several centimeters. They appear red if recent or white-yellow if older, and they develop at any

placental depth. Intervillous thrombi are common and typically not associated with adverse fetal sequelae. These reflect potential communication between maternal and fetal circulations, and thus large lesions are one cause of elevated maternal serum alpha-fetoprotein (MSAFP) levels (Table 17-5, p. 338). (Salafia, 1988).

Infarction Chorionic villi themselves receive oxygen solely from maternal circulation and specifically from blood supplied into the intervillous space. Any uteroplacental disease that diminishes or obstructs this supply can result in infarction of an individual villus. These are common lesions in mature placentas and are benign in limited numbers. If numerous, however, placental insufficiency can develop. When they are thick, centrally located, and randomly distributed, they may be associated with preeclampsia or lupus anticoagulant.

Hematoma The maternal–placental–fetal unit can develop several hematoma types. As depicted in Figure 6-3, these include: (1) retroplacental hematoma—formed between the placenta and its adjacent decidua; (2) marginal hematoma— formed between the chorion and decidua at the placental periphery—known clinically as subchorionic hemorrhage; (3) subamnionic hematoma— derived of fetal vessel origin and found beneath the amnion but above the chorionic plate, and (4) subchorial thrombus along the roof of the intervillous space and beneath the chorionic plate. With this last type, massive subchorionic hematomas are also known as Breus moles. Sonographically, hematomas evolve with time and appear hyperechoic to isoechoic in the first week after hemorrhage, hypoechoic at 1 to 2 weeks, and finally, anechoic after 2 weeks. Most subchorionic hematomas visible sonographically are fairly small and of no clinical consequence (Naert, 2019). However, extensive retroplacental, marginal, and subchorial collections are associated with higher rates of miscarriage, stillbirth, placental abruption, and preterm delivery (Tuuli, 2011). In essence, placental abruption is a large, clinically significant retroplacental hematoma.

### Fetal Blood Flow Disruption

Fetal Vascular Malperfusion Placental lesions that arise from fetal circulatory disturbances are also depicted in Figure 6-3. Normally, deoxygenated fetal blood flows from the two umbilical arteries into arteries within the chorionic plate. These surface arteries divide and send branches out across the placental surface. These eventually supply individual stem villi. Remember that fetal blood is oxygenated within each villus by passive diffusion of oxygen from maternal blood contained within the intervillous space. Thus, with fetal vessel thrombosis, portions of the villus distal to the obstruction become nonfunctional. Normally, thrombi in limited numbers are found in mature placentas. If many villi are affected, which can be seen with preeclampsia, the fetus may suffer growth restriction, stillbirth, or nonreassuring fetal heart rate patterns (Chisholm, 2015; Lepais, 2014; Saleemuddin, 2010).

Villous Vascular Lesions Villous capillaries show a spectrum of histological lesions. Chorangiosis describes an increased number of capillaries within terminal villi. Its definition requires ≥10 capillaries to be present in ≥10 villi in ≥10 fields viewed through a 10× lens (Altshuler, 1984). Clinically, long-standing hypoperfusion or hypoxia is thought to be causative (Stanek, 2016). Focal chorangiosis is increased capillary vascularity in a significant portion of the placenta but not diffusely. In one small study, lower Apgar scores and fetal vascular malperfusion were associated outcomes (Sung, 2019). Prenatal detection of chorangiosis has been reported (Inubashiri, 2017). Chorangiomatosis describes increased capillary number in stem villi, but terminal villi are spared. This finding has been linked with fetal-growth restriction and anomalies (Bagby, 2011). Despite these associations, the clinical significance of both vascular conditions remains unclear. Chorioangiomas are described subsequently.

Subamnionic Hematoma As noted earlier, these hematomas lie between the chorionic plate and amnion. They most often are acute iatrogenic events of no clinical consequence during third-stage labor when cord traction ruptures a vessel near the cord insertion.

Large, chronic antepartum lesions may cause fetomaternal hemorrhage or fetal-growth restriction (Deans, 1998). They also may be confused with other placental masses such as chorioangioma. In most cases, color Doppler interrogation will show absent internal blood flow within a hematoma and permit differentiation (Sepulveda, 2000).

## Placental Calcification

Calcium salts can be deposited throughout the placenta but are most common on the basal plate. Calcification accrues with advancing gestation, and greater degrees are associated with smoking and higher maternal serum calcium levels (Bedir Findik, 2015). These hyperechoic deposits can easily be seen sonographically, and a grading scale from 0 to 3 reflects increasing calcification with increasing numerical grade (Grannum, 1979). Following this scheme, a grade 0 placenta is homogeneous, lacks calcification, and displays a smooth, flat chorionic plate. A grade 1 placenta has scattered echogenicities and subtle chorionic plate undulations. Grade 2 shows echogenic stippling at the basal plate. Large, echogenic comma shapes originate from an indented chorionic plate, but their curve falls short of the basal plate. Last, a grade 3 placenta has echogenic indentations extending from the chorionic plate to the basal plate, which create discrete components that resemble cotyledons. Basal plate densities also increase. This grading scale poorly predicts neonatal outcome near term (McKenna, 2005; Mirza, 2018). However, data from two small studies link grade 3 placenta prior to 32 weeks with stillbirth and some other adverse pregnancy outcomes (Chen, 2011, 2015; Mirza, 2018).

## Placental Tumors

### Chorioangioma

These benign tumors have components similar to the blood vessels and stroma of the chorionic villus. Also called chorangiomas, these placental tumors have an incidence that approximates 1 percent (Guschmann, 2003). In some cases, fetal-to-maternal hemorrhage across tumor capillaries leads to elevated levels of MSAFP. This typically prompts sonographic evaluation to exclude a neural-tube defect, which also shows high MSAFP levels.

Sonographically, chorangiomas appear as a well-circumscribed, rounded, predominantly hypoechoic lesion lying near the chorionic plate and protruding into the amnionic cavity (Fig. 6-4). Documenting increased blood flow by color Doppler helps to distinguish these lesions from other placental masses such as hematoma, partial hydatidiform mole, teratoma, metastases, and leiomyoma (Prapas, 2000). Although rare, chorangiocarcinoma tumors mirror chorioangiomas clinically (Huang, 2015).

> **Figure 6-4:** Placental chorioangioma. A. Color Doppler imaging displays blood flow through a large chorioangioma with its border outlined by white arrows. B. Grossly, the chorioangioma is a round, wellcircumcised mass protruding from the fetal surface.

**Small chorioangiomas are usually asymptomatic.** Large tumors, typically those measuring >4 cm, can create significant arteriovenous shunting within the placenta to cause high-output heart failure, hydrops, and fetal death (Al Wattar, 2014). Compression or shearing of fetal erythrocytes within tumor vessels can lead to hemolysis and microangiopathic anemia (Bauer, 1978). Hydramnios, preterm delivery, and fetal-growth restriction are other sequelae (Dong, 2020). Large tumor size and fetal hydrops are the primary determinants and signal a potential adverse perinatal outcome (Buca, 2020). Grayscale and color Doppler interrogation of the placenta and amnionic fluid volume are used to identify these tumors. Diagnostic tools that can affirm associated fetomaternal hemorrhage include MSAFP level and Kleihauer-Betke stain (Chap. 18, p. 358). With fetal concern, echocardiography assesses cardiac function, whereas middle cerebral artery interrogation is used to identify fetal anemia. Several fetal therapies interfere with the vascular supply to the tumor and reverse fetal heart failure. At specialized perinatal centers, endoscopic laser ablation of feeder vessels to the tumor is most frequently used and is associated with favorable fetal outcomes (Hosseinzadeh, 2015). Discussed in Chapter 16, fetal transfusion can treat serious anemia, amnioreduction can temporize hydramnios, and digoxin therapy can assist fetal heart failure.

### Metastatic Tumors

Maternal malignant tumors rarely metastasize to the placenta. Of those that do, melanomas, leukemias and lymphomas, and breast cancer are the most common (Al-Adnani, 2007). Tumor cells usually are confined within the intervillous space. As a result, metastasis to the fetus is uncommon but is most often seen with melanoma (Alexander, 2003). Similarly, cases in which fetal malignancy metastasizes to the placenta are rare (Reif, 2014). These are predominantly fetal neuroectodermal tumors, and only one case in the literature describes transplantation of tumor to the maternal uterus (Nath, 1995).

## Amniochorion

### Chorioamnionitis

Normal genital-tract flora can colonize and infect the membranes, umbilical cord, and eventually the fetus. Bacteria most commonly ascend after prolonged membrane rupture and during labor to cause infection. Organisms initially infect the chorion and adjacent decidua in the area overlying the internal os. Subsequently, progression leads to full-thickness involvement of the membranes—chorioamnionitis. Organisms often then spread along the chorioamnionic surface to colonize and replicate in amnionic fluid. Inflammation of the chorionic plate and of the umbilical cord—funisitis— may follow (Kim, 2015; Redline, 2012). Most commonly, chorioamnionitis is microscopic or occult and caused by a wide variety of microorganisms. This is frequently cited as a possible explanation for many otherwise unexplained cases of ruptured membranes, preterm labor, or both (Chap. 45, p. 789). In some cases, gross infection is characterized by visible membrane clouding and is sometimes accompanied by a foul odor that depends on bacterial species.

### Other Membrane Abnormalities

Amnion nodosum is a condition characterized by numerous small, light-tan nodules affixed to the amnion that overlies the chorionic plate. These may be

scraped off the fetal surface and contain deposits of fetal squames and fibrin that reflect prolonged and severe oligohydramnios (Adeniran, 2007). Two notable bands can be formed by the fetal membranes. First, amnionic band sequence is an anatomical disruption sequence in which amnion bands tether, constrict, or amputate fetal parts. Bands may form spontaneously or follow fetal surgery procedures (see Table 6-2) (Lafitte, 2017). Amnionic bands commonly cause limb-reduction defects, facial clefts, or encephalocele (Barzilay, 2015; Guzmán-Huerta, 2013). Umbilical cord compromise is another sequela (Barros, 2014). Severe defects of the spine or ventral wall that accompany amnionic bands suggest a limb-body wall complex, described in Chapter 15 (p. 297). Sonography often first identifies the sequelae of this sequence rather than the bands themselves. As with any fetal anomaly, targeted sonography is indicated. Identification of a limb-reduction defect, an encephalocele in an atypical location, or an extremity with edema or positional deformity should prompt careful evaluation for amnionic bands. Management depends on the degree of anatomic deformity (Society of Maternal–Fetal Medicine, 2019). Fetoscopic laser interruption of the band may be suitable in highly selected antepartum cases (Gueneuc, 2019; Javadian, 2013). Second, an amnionic sheet in contrast is formed by normal amniochorion draped over a preexisting uterine synechia. Generally, these sheets pose little fetal risk, although slightly higher rates of preterm membrane rupture and placental abruption have been described (Nelson, 2010; Tuuli, 2012).

## Umbilical Cord

### Length

Most umbilical cords at delivery measure 40 to 70 cm long, and very few measure <30 cm or >100 cm. Cord length is influenced positively by both maternal parity and body mass index (Linde, 2018). In retrospective studies, short cords have been linked with congenital malformations and intrapartum distress (Krakowiak, 2004; Linde, 2018; Yamamoto, 2016). Excessively long cords are linked with cord entanglement or prolapse and with fetal anomalies (Olaya-C, 2015; Rayburn, 1981).

Because antenatal determination of cord length is technically limited, cord diameter has been evaluated as a predictive marker for fetal outcomes. Some have linked lean cords with poor fetal growth and large-diameter cords with macrosomia (Proctor, 2013). However, the clinical utility of this parameter is still unclear (Cromi, 2007; Raio, 2003).

### Coiling

Cord coiling characteristics are not currently part of standard sonographic evaluation. Usually the umbilical vessels spiral through the cord in a sinistral, that is, left-twisting direction (Fletcher, 1993; Lacro, 1987). The number of complete coils per centimeter of cord length is termed the umbilical coiling index—UCI (Strong, 1994). A normal, antepartum, sonographically derived UCI is 0.4, and this contrasts with a normal, postpartum, physically measured value of 0.2 (Sebire, 2007). UCIs <10th percentile are considered hypocoiled, and those >90th percentile are hypercoiled. Clinically, the significance of coiling extremes is controversial. Some studies evaluating large, unselected cohorts find no associations between UCI values and poor neonatal outcome (Jessop, 2014; Pathak, 2010). In others, extremes are linked with various adverse outcomes but most consistently with intrapartum fetal heart rate abnormalities, preterm labor, or fetal-growth restriction (Chitra, 2012; de Laat, 2006; Pergialiotis, 2019).

### Vessel Number

Counting cord vessel number is a standard component of anatomical evaluation during fetal sonographic examination and immediately after delivery (Fig. 6-5). Embryos initially have two umbilical veins. In the first trimester, the right vein typically atrophies to leave one large vein to accompany the two, thick-walled umbilical arteries. Four-vessel cords are rare and often associated with congenital anomalies (Puvabanditsin, 2011). If it is an isolated finding, however, prognosis can be good (Avnet, 2011).

> **Figure 6-5:** Two umbilical arteries are typically documented sonographically in the second trimester. They encircle the fetal bladder (asterisk) as extensions of the superior vesical arteries. A. In this color Doppler sonographic image, a single umbilical artery, shown in red, runs along the bladder wall before joining the umbilical vein (blue) in the cord. Remember with color Doppler that color signifies only blood flow direction relative to the transducer. B. A cross section of a floating cord segment shows the two vessels of the cord. The smaller circle is the single umbilical artery and the larger circle, the umbilical vein.

The most common aberration is that of a single umbilical artery (SUA). Its cited incidence is 0.63 percent in liveborn neonates, 1.92 percent in perinatal deaths, and 3 percent in twins (Heifetz, 1984). Fetuses with major malformations frequently have an SUA. Thus, its identification often prompts consideration for targeted sonography and possibly fetal echocardiography. The most frequent anomalies are cardiovascular and genitourinary (Hua, 2010; Murphy-Kaulbeck, 2010). In an anomalous fetus, an SUA greatly increases the aneuploidy risk, and amniocentesis is recommended for karyotype assessment (Dagklis, 2010). If targeted sonography finds otherwise normal anatomy, an isolated SUA in an otherwise low-risk pregnancy does not significantly raise the fetal aneuploidy risk. However, as an isolated finding, it has been associated with fetal-growth restriction and perinatal death in some but not all studies (Chetty-John, 2010; Ebbing, 2019; Voskamp, 2013). Thus, clinical monitoring of growth is reasonable, but the value of sonographic surveillance is unclear. In contrast, a fused umbilical artery with a shared lumen is rare. It arises from failure of the two arteries to split during embryological development. The common lumen may extend through the entire cord, but, if partial, it is typically found near the placental insertion site (Yamada, 2005). In one

report, these malformations were associated with a higher incidence of marginal or velamentous cord insertion but not of congenital fetal anomalies (Fujikura, 2003). Found in most placentas, the Hyrtl anastomosis is a connection between the two umbilical arteries, and it lies near the cord’s insertion into the placenta. This anastomosis acts physiologically to equalize pressures between the arteries (Gordon, 2007). The resulting redistribution of pressure gradients and blood flow improves placental perfusion, especially during uterine contractions or during compression of one umbilical artery. Fetuses with an SUA lack this safety valve (Raio, 1999, 2001).

### Remnants and Cysts

Several structures are housed in the umbilical cord during fetal development, and their remnants may be seen when the mature cord is inspected transversely. Indeed, in grossly sectioned cords, remnants of the allantoic duct, vitelline duct, and embryonic vessels are found in 25 to 50 percent (Grottling, 2019; Jauniaux, 1989). These are not associated with congenital malformations or perinatal complications. Cysts occasionally are found along the course of the cord. They are designated according to their origin. True cysts are epithelium-lined remnants of the allantoic or vitelline ducts and tend to be located closer to the fetal insertion site. In contrast, the more common pseudocysts form from local degeneration of Wharton jelly and occur anywhere along the cord. Both have a similar sonographic appearance. Single umbilical cord cysts identified in the first trimester tend to resolve completely, however, multiple cysts may portend miscarriage or aneuploidy (Ghezzi, 2003; Hannaford, 2013). Cysts persisting beyond this time are associated with a risk for structural defects and chromosomal anomalies (Bonilla, 2010; Zangen, 2010).

### Insertion

The cord normally inserts centrally into the placental disc, but eccentric, marginal, or velamentous insertions are variants. Of these, eccentric insertions in general pose no identifiable fetal risk. Marginal insertion is a common variant—sometimes referred to as a battledore placenta—in which

the cord anchors at the placental margin. In one population-based study, the rate was 6 percent in singleton gestations and 11 percent in twins (Ebbing, 2013). This common insertion variant rarely causes problems, but it and velamentous insertion occasionally result in the cord being pulled off during delivery of the placenta (Ebbing, 2015; Luo, 2013). In monochorionic twins, marginal insertion may be associated with weight discordance (Kent, 2011). With velamentous insertion, the umbilical vessels characteristically travel within the membranes before reaching the placental margin (Fig. 6-6). The incidence of velamentous insertion approximates 1 percent but is 6 percent with twins (Ebbing, 2013). It is more commonly seen with placenta previa (Papinniemi, 2007; Räisänen, 2012). Antenatal diagnosis is possible sonographically, and cord vessels are seen traveling along the uterine wall before entering the placental disc. Clinically, vessels are vulnerable to compression, which may lead to fetal hypoperfusion and acidemia. Higher associated rates of low Apgar scores, stillbirth, preterm delivery, and small for gestational age have been noted (de Los Reyes, 2018; Ebbing, 2017; Esakoff, 2015; Vahanian, 2015). Accordingly, monitoring of fetal growth is reasonable either clinically or sonographically (Vintzileos, 2015).

> **Figure 6-6:** Velamentous cord insertion. A. The umbilical cord inserts into the membranes (arrow). From here, the cord vessels branch and are supported only by membrane until they reach the placental disc. B. When viewed sonographically and using color Doppler, the cord vessels appear to lie against the myometrium as they travel to insert into the margin of the placental disc (P).

Last, with the rare furcate insertion, umbilical vessels lose their protective Wharton jelly shortly before they insert. As a result, they are covered only by an amnion sheath and prone to compression, twisting, and thrombosis.

Vasa Previa With this condition, vessels travel within the membranes and overlie the cervical os. There, they can be torn with cervical dilation or membrane rupture, and laceration can lead to rapid fetal exsanguination. Over the cervix, vessels can also be compressed by a presenting fetal part (Matsuzaki, 2019). Vasa previa may be more common than previously estimated, and rates are 1 case in 338 to 365 pregnancies (Hasegawa, 2012; Klahr, 2019). Vasa previa is classified as type 1, in which vessels are part of a velamentous cord insertion, and type 2, in which involved vessels span between portions of a bilobate or a succenturiate placenta (Catanzarite, 2001). Two other risks are conception with in vitro fertilization and secondtrimester placenta previa, with or without later migration (Baulies, 2007; Schachter, 2003). Compared with intrapartum diagnosis, antepartum diagnosis greatly improves the perinatal survival rate, which ranges from 97 to 100 percent (Oyelese, 2004; Swank, 2016; Zhang, 2021). Thus, vasa previa is ideally identified early, although this is not always possible. Effective screening for vasa previa begins during scheduled midtrimester sonographic examination. In suspicious cases, transvaginal sonography is added and shows cord vessels inserting into the membranes and vessels running above the cervical internal os (Fig. 6-7). Routine color Doppler interrogation of the placental cord insertion site, particularly in cases of placenta previa or low-lying placenta, may aid its detection. With this, the vessel waveform reflects the fetal heart rate. In one systematic review, the median prenatal detection rate was 93 percent (Ruiter, 2015).

> **Figure 6-7:** Vasa previa. A. Using color Doppler, an umbilical vessel (red linear structure) is seen overlying the internal os and cervical canal (arrows). At the bottom, the Doppler waveform seen with

this vasa previa has the typical appearance of an umbilical artery. B. The amniotomy site (held open by hemostat), which was created at the time of cesarean hysterotomy, illustrates how fetal vessels may be lacerated and why fetal delivery should be prompt (Reproduced with permission from Dr. Julie Lo.)

Once vasa previa is identified, subsequent imaging is reasonable because up to 39 percent of cases ultimately resolve (Erfani, 2019; Klahr, 2019). Bed rest apparently has no added advantage. Antenatal corticosteroids can be provided as indicated or given prophylactically at 28 to 32 weeks’ gestation to cover possible urgent preterm delivery. Antenatal hospitalization may be considered at 30 to 34 weeks to permit surveillance and expedited delivery for labor, bleeding, or rupture of membranes. Data supporting this are limited, and admission may best serve women with risk factors that portend early delivery (Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, 2015). A few cases of antepartum fetoscopic surgery with vessel laser ablation are described (Hosseinzadeh, 2015; Johnston, 2014). However, current practice is early scheduled cesarean delivery. The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2021) recommends cesarean delivery at 34 to 36 weeks’ gestation. At delivery, the fetus is expeditiously delivered after the hysterotomy incision in case a vessel is lacerated during uterine entry. Delayed cord clamping is not encouraged. In all pregnancies, otherwise unexplained vaginal bleeding either antepartum or intrapartum should prompt consideration of vasa previa and a lacerated fetal vessel. In many cases, bleeding is rapidly fatal, and neonatal salvage is not possible. With less hemorrhage, however, it may be possible to distinguish fetal versus maternal bleeding. Various tests can be used, and each relies on the increased resistance of fetal hemoglobin to denaturing by alkaline or acid reagents (Odunsi, 1996).

### Knots, Strictures, and Loops

Various mechanical abnormalities in the cord can impede blood flow and sometimes cause fetal harm. Of these, true knots are found in approximately 1 percent of births. These form from fetal movement, and associated risks include hydramnios and diabetes mellitus (Hershkovitz, 2001; Räisänen, 2013). Knots are especially common and dangerous in monoamnionic twins, which are discussed in Chapter 48 (p. 845). In singleton fetuses, the stillbirth

risk is increased four- to tenfold compared with those without knots (Airas, 2002; Sørnes, 2000). Knots can be found incidentally during antepartum sonography, and a “hanging noose” sign is suggestive (Ramon y Cajal, 2006). Threedimensional and color Doppler aid diagnostic accuracy (Hasbun, 2007). With these knots, optimal fetal surveillance is unclear but may include umbilical artery Doppler velocimetry, nonstress testing, or subjective fetal movement monitoring (Rodriguez, 2012). Allowing vaginal delivery is suitable, and intrapartum fetal heart rate tracings do not differ from unaffected pregnancies (Carter, 2018). In these cases, cesarean delivery rates are not increased and cord blood acid-base values are usually normal (Airas, 2002; Maher, 1996). In contrast, false knots form from focal redundancy and folding of an umbilical cord vessel rather than knotting. These lack clinical significance. A cord stricture is a focal narrowing of the diameter that usually develops near the fetal cord insertion site (Peng, 2006). Pathological features typically include absent Wharton jelly at the narrowed segment and obliteration of cord vessels (Sun, 1995). In most instances, the fetus is stillborn (French, 2005). Even less common is a cord stricture caused by an amnionic band. Cord loops are frequently encountered and are caused by coiling around various fetal parts during movement. A cord around the neck—a nuchal cord —is common, and vaginal delivery is suitable. One loop is reported in 20 to 34 percent of deliveries; two loops in 2.5 to 5 percent; and three loops in 0.2 to 0.5 percent (Kan, 1957; Sørnes, 1995; Spellacy, 1966). During labor, up to 20 percent of fetuses with a nuchal cord have moderate to severe variable heart rate decelerations, and these are associated with a lower umbilical artery pH (Hankins, 1987). Decelerations are not relieved by amnioinfusion (Spong, 1996). Cords wrapped around the body can have similar effects (Kobayashi, 2015). Despite their frequency, nuchal cords are not associated with greater rates of adverse perinatal outcome (Henry, 2013; Masad, 2019). Last, in a funic presentation, the umbilical cord is the presenting part. These are uncommon and most often are associated with fetal malpresentation (Kinugasa, 2007). A funic presentation in some cases is identified with placental sonography and color flow Doppler (Ezra, 2003). Overt or occult cord prolapse can complicate labor. Thus, once identified at term, cesarean delivery is typically recommended.

### Vascular

Cord hematomas are rare and generally follow rupture of an umbilical vessel, usually the vein, and hemorrhage into the Wharton jelly. Hematomas have been associated with abnormal cord length, umbilical vessel aneurysm, trauma, entanglement, umbilical vessel venipuncture, and funisitis (Gualandri, 2008). Most are identified postpartum, but hematomas are recognized sonographically as hypoechoic masses that lack blood flow (Chou, 2003). Sequelae include stillbirth or intrapartum abnormal fetal heart rate pattern (Abraham, 2015; Barbati, 2009; Sepulveda, 2005; Towers, 2009). However, case reports have described normal outcomes (SanchexCodez, 2018). Umbilical cord vessel thromboses are rare in utero events and seldom diagnosed antepartum. Approximately 70 percent are venous, 20 percent are venous and arterial, and 10 percent are arterial thromboses (Heifetz, 1988). These all have high associated rates of stillbirth, fetal-growth restriction, and intrapartum fetal distress (Minakami, 2001; Sato, 2006; Shilling, 2014). If these are identified antepartum as hypoechoic masses without blood flow, data from case reports support consideration of prompt delivery of viableaged fetuses (Kanenishi, 2013). An umbilical vein varix can complicate either the intraamnionic or fetal intraabdominal portion of the umbilical vein. Sonographically and complemented by color Doppler, rare intraamnionic varices show cystic dilation of the umbilical vein that is contiguous with a normal-caliber portion. Of complications, an intraamnionic varix may compress an adjacent umbilical artery or can rupture or thrombose. A systematic review of 250 cases found that approximately one fifth is associated with other anomalies. Isolated cases had reassuring outcomes but typically required antenatal surveillance (di Pasquo, 2018). The rare umbilical artery aneurysm is caused by congenital thinning of the vessel wall with diminished support from Wharton jelly. Indeed, most form at or near the cord’s placental insertion site, where this support is absent. These are associated with SUA, trisomy 18, amnionic fluid volume extremes, fetal-growth restriction, and stillbirth (Hill, 2010; Vyas, 2016). At least theoretically, these aneurysms could cause fetal compromise and death by compression of the umbilical vein. With aneurysms measuring >5 cm, the blood reservoir within the aneurysm may pose a risk for high-output heart

failure (Matsuki, 2017). These aneurysms may appear sonographically as a cyst with a hyperechoic rim. Within the aneurysm, color flow and spectral Doppler interrogation demonstrate either low-velocity or turbulent nonpulsatile flow (Olog, 2011; Shen, 2007b). Although not codified, management may include fetal karyotyping, antenatal fetal surveillance, and early delivery to prevent stillbirth (Doehrman, 2014). Some recommend delivery by cesarean to avoid aneurysm rupture.

## References

Abraham A, Rathore S, Gupta M, et al: Umbilical cord haematoma causing still birth—a case report. J Clin Diagn Res 9(12):QD01, 2015 Adeniran AJ, Stanek J: Amnion nodosum revisited: clinicopathologic and placental correlations. Arch Pathol Lab Med 131:1829, 2007 Airas U, Heinonen S: Clinical significance of true umbilical knots: a population-based analysis. Am J Perinatol 19:127, 2002 AIUM-ACR-ACOG-SMFM-SRU Practice parameter for the performance of standard diagnostic obstetric ultrasound examinations. J Ultrasound Med 37(11):e13, 2018 Al-Adnani M, Kiho L, Scheimberg I: Maternal pancreatic carcinoma metastatic to the placenta: a case report and literature review. Pediatr Dev Pathol 10:61, 2007 Alexander A, Samlowski WE, Grossman D, et al: Metastatic melanoma in pregnancy: risk of transplacental metastases in the infant. J Clin Oncol 21:2179, 2003 Altshuler G: Chorangiosis: an important placental sign of neonatal morbidity and mortality. Arch Pathol Lab Med 108(1):71, 1984 Al Wattar BH, Hillman SC, Marton T, et al: Placenta chorioangioma: a rare case and systematic review of literature. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 27(10):1055, 2014 American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Medically indicated late-preterm and early-term deliveries. Committee Opinion No. 831, June 2021 Andres RL, Kuyper W, Resnik R, et al: The association of maternal floor infarction of the placenta with adverse perinatal outcome. Am J Obstet Gynecol 163:935, 1990 Avnet H, Shen O, Mazaki E, et al: Four-vessel umbilical cord. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 38:604, 2011 Bagby C, Redline RW: Multifocal chorangiomatosis. Pediatr Dev Pathol 14(1):38, 2011 Barbati A, Cacace MG, Fratini D, et al: Umbilical cord haematoma with altered fetal heart rate. J Obstet Gynaecol 29(2):150, 2009 Barros M, Gorgal G, Machado AP, et al: Revisiting amniotic band sequence: a wide spectrum of manifestations. Fetal Diagn Ther 35(1):51, 2014 Barzilay E, Harel Y, Haas J, et al: Prenatal diagnosis of amniotic band syndrome—risk factors and ultrasonic signs. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 28(3):281, 2015 Bauer CR, Fojaco RM, Bancalari E, et al: Microangiopathic hemolytic anemia and thrombocytopenia in a neonate associated with a large placental chorioangioma. Pediatrics 62(4):574, 1978 Baulies S, Maiz N, Muñoz A, et al: Prenatal ultrasound diagnosis of vasa praevia and analysis of risk factors. Prenat Diagn 27:595, 2007

Bedir Findik R, Ersoy AO, Fidanci V, et al: Vitamin D deficiency and placental calcification in low-risk obstetric population: are they related? J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 29(19):3189, 2015 Benirschke K, Burton GJ, Baergen R: Pathology of the Human Placenta, 6th ed. New York, Springer, 2012, p 908 Bockoven C, Gastfield RD, Victor T, et al: Correlation of placental magnetic resonance imaging with histopathologic diagnosis: detection of aberrations in structure and water diffusivity. Pediatr Dev Pathol 23(4):260, 2020 Bonilla F Jr, Raga F, Villalaiz E, et al: Umbilical cord cysts: evaluation with different 3-dimensional sonographic modes. J Ultrasound Med 29(2):281, 2010 Buca D, Iacovlla C, Khlil A, et al: Perinatal outcome of pregnancies complicated by placental chorioangioma: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 55(4):441, 2020 Capuani S, Guerreri M, Antonelli A, et al: Diffusion and perfusion quantified by magnetic resonance imaging are markers of human placenta development in normal pregnancy. Placenta 58:33, 2017 Carter EB, Chu CS, Thompson Z, et al: True knot at the time of delivery: electronic fetal monitoring characteristics and neonatal outcomes. J Perinatol 38(12):1620, 2018 Catanzarite V, Maida C, Thomas W, et al: Prenatal sonographic diagnosis of vasa previa: ultrasound findings and obstetric outcome in ten cases. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 18:109, 2001 Chen KH, Chen LR, Lee YH: Exploring the relationship between preterm placental calcification and adverse maternal and fetal outcome. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 37(3):328, 2011 Chen KH, Seow KM, Chen LR: The role of preterm placental calcification on assessing risks of stillbirth. Placenta 36(9):1039, 2015 Chetty-John S, Zhang J, Chen Z, et al: Long-term physical and neurologic development in newborn infants with isolated single umbilical artery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 203(4):368.e1, 2010 Chisholm KM, Heerema-McKenney A: Fetal thrombotic vasculopathy: significance in live born children using proposed society for pediatric pathology diagnostic criteria. Am J Surg Pathol 39(2):274, 2015 Chitra T, Sushanth YS, Raghavan S: Umbilical coiling index as a marker of perinatal outcome: an analytical study. Obstet Gynecol Int 2012:213689, 2012 Chou SY, Chen YR, Wu CF, et al: Spontaneous umbilical cord hematoma diagnosed antenatally with ultrasonography. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 82(11):1056, 2003 Costanzo V, Bardelli A, Siena S, et al: Exploring the links between cancer and placenta development. Open Biol 8(6): 180081, 2018 Cromi A, Ghezzi F, Di Naro E, et al: Large cross-sectional area of the umbilical cord as a predictor of fetal macrosomia. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 30:804, 2007 Dagklis T, Defigueiredo D, Staboulidou I, et al: Isolated single umbilical artery and fetal karyotype. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 36(3):291, 2010 Dashe JS, Hoffman BL: Placental abnormalities. D’Alton (ed): Ultrasonography in Obstetrics and Gynecology, 6th ed. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2017 Deans A, Jauniaux E: Prenatal diagnosis and outcome of subamniotic hematomas. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 11:319, 1998 de Laat MW, Franx A, Bots ML, et al: Umbilical coiling index in normal and complicated pregnancies. Obstet Gynecol 107:1049, 2006 de Los Reyes S, Henderson J, Eke AC. A systematic review and meta-analysis of velamentous cord insertion among singleton pregnancies and the risk of preterm delivery. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 142(1):9, 2018

Devisme L, Chauvière C, Franquet-Ansart H, et al: Perinatal outcome of placental massive perivillous fibrin deposition: a case-control study. Prenat Diagn 37(4):323, 2017 di Pasquo E, Kuleva M, O’Gorman N, et al: Fetal intra-abdominal umbilical vein varix: retrospective cohort study and systematic review and meta-analysis. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 51(5):580, 2018 Doehrman P, Derksen BJ, Perlow JH, et al: Umbilical artery aneurysm: a case report, literature review, and management recommendations. Obstet Gynecol Surv 69(3):159, 2014 Dong T, Sher D, Luo Q: Pregnancy complications and adverse outcomes in placental chorioangioma: a retrospective cohort analysis. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 33(13):2269, 2020 Ebbing C, Johnsen SL, Albrechtsen S, et al: Velamentous or marginal cord insertion and the risk of spontaneous preterm birth, prelabor rupture of the membranes, and anomalous cord length, a population-based study. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 96(1):78, 2017 Ebbing C, Kiserud T, Johnsen SL, et al: Prevalence, risk factors and outcomes of velamentous and marginal cord insertions: a population-based study of 634,741 pregnancies. PLoS One 8(7):e70380,

## 2013

Ebbing C, Kessler J, Moster D, et al: Isolated single umbilical artery and the risk of adverse perinatal outcome and third stage of labor complications: a population-based study. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 99(3):374, 2020 Ebbing C, Kiserud T, Johnsen SL, et al: Third stage of labor risks in velamentous and marginal cord insertion: a population-based study. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 94(8):878, 2015 Erfani H, Haeri S, Shainker SA, et al: Vasa previa: a multicenter retrospective cohort study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 221(6):644.e1, 2019 Esakoff TF, Cheng YW, Snowden JM, et al: Velamentous cord insertion: is it associated with adverse perinatal outcomes? J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 28(4):409, 2015 Ezra Y, Strasberg SR, Farine D: Does cord presentation on ultrasound predict cord prolapse? Gynecol Obstet Invest 56:6, 2003 Faye-Petersen O, Sauder A, Estrella Y, et al: Dichorionic twins discordant for massive perivillous fibrinoid deposition: report of a case and review of the literature. Int J Surg Pathol 26(1):41, 2018 Faye-Petersen OM, Heller DS, Joshi VV: Handbook of Placental Pathology, 2nd ed. London, Taylor & Francis, 2006, pp 27, 83 Fletcher S: Chirality in the umbilical cord. BJOG 100(3):234, 1993 Fox H, Sebire NJ: Pathology of the Placenta, 3rd ed. Philadelphia, Saunders, 2007, pp 99, 133, 484 French AE, Gregg VH, Newberry Y, et al: Umbilical cord stricture: a cause of recurrent fetal death. Obstet Gynecol 105:1235, 2005 Fujikura T: Fused umbilical arteries near placental cord insertion. Am J Obstet Gynecol 188:765, 2003 Ghezzi F, Raio L, Di Naro E, et al: Single and multiple umbilical cord cysts in early gestation: two different entities. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 21:213, 2003 Gordon Z, Eytan O, Jaffa AJ, et al: Hemodynamic analysis of Hyrtl anastomosis in human placenta. Am J Physiol Regul Integra Comp Physiol 292:R977, 2007 Grannum PA, Berkowitz RL, Hobbins JC: The ultrasonic changes in the maturing placenta and their relation to fetal pulmonic maturity. Am J Obstet Gynecol 133:915, 1979 Grottling E, Gisselsson D: Changes in the prevalence of embryologic remnants in umbilical cord with gestational age. Pediatr Dev Pathol 22(4):288, 2019 Gualandri G, Rivasi F, Santunione AL, et al: Spontaneous umbilical cord hematoma: an unusual cause of fetal mortality: a report of 3 cases and review of the literature. Am J Forensic Med Pathol 29(2):185, 2008

Gueneuc A, Chalouhi GE, Borali D, et al: Fetoscopic release of amniotic bands causing limb constriction: case series and review of the literature. Fetal Diagn Ther 46(4):246, 2019 Guschmann M, Henrich W, Entezami M, et al: Chorioangioma—new insights into a well-known problem. I. Results of a clinical and morphological study of 136 cases. J Perinat Med 31:163, 2003 Guttmacher AE, Maddox YT, Spong CY: The Human Placenta Project: placental structure, development, and function in real time. Placenta 35(5):303, 2014 Guzmán-Huerta ME, Muro-Barragán SA, Acevedo-Gallegos S, et al: Amniotic band sequence: prenatal diagnosis, phenotype descriptions, and a proposal of a new classification based on morphologic findings. Rev Invest Clin 65(4):300, 2013 Hankins GD, Snyder RR, Hauth JC, et al: Nuchal cords and neonatal outcome. Obstet Gynecol 70:687,

## 1987

Hannaford K, Reeves S, Wegner E: Umbilical cord cysts in the first trimester: are they associated with pregnancy complications? J Ultrasound Med 32(5):801, 2013 Hasbun J, Alcalde JL, Sepulveda W: Three-dimensional power Doppler sonography in the prenatal diagnosis of a true knot of the umbilical cord: value and limitations. J Ultrasound Med 26(9):1215,

## 2007

Hasegawa J, Nakamura M, Ichizuka K, et al: Vasa previa is not infrequent. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 25(12):2795, 2012 Heifetz SA: Single umbilical artery: a statistical analysis of 237 autopsy cases and a review of the literature. Perspect Pediatr Pathol 8:345, 1984 Heifetz SA: Thrombosis of the umbilical cord: analysis of 52 cases and literature review. Pediatr Pathol 8:37, 1988 Henry E, Andres RL, Christensen RD: Neonatal outcomes following a tight nuchal cord. J Perinatol 33(3):231, 2013 Hershkovitz R, Silberstein T, Sheiner E, et al: Risk factors associated with true knots of the umbilical cord. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 98(1):36, 2001 Hill AJ, Strong TH Jr, Elliott JP, et al: Umbilical artery aneurysm. Obstet Gynecol 116(Suppl 2):559, 2010 Hoddick WK, Mahony BS, Callen PW, et al: Placental thickness. J Ultrasound Med 4(9):479, 1985 Hosseinzadeh P, Shamshirsaz AA, Cass DL, et al: Fetoscopic laser ablation of vasa previa for a fetus with a giant cervical lymphatic malformation. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 46(4):507, 2015 Hua M, Odibo AO, Macones GA, et al: Single umbilical artery and its associated findings. Obstet Gynecol 115(5):930, 2010 Huang B, Zhang YP, Yuan DF, et al: Chorangiocarcinoma: a case report and clinical review. Int J Clin Exp Med 8(9):16798, 2015 Inubashiri E, Watanabe Y, Akutagawa N, et al: Preliminary experience using three-dimensional HD liverendered images for antenatal diagnosis in placental chorangiosis. Taiwan J Obstet Gynecol 56(1):106, 2017 Jauniaux E, De Munter C, Vanesse M, et al: Embryonic remnants of the umbilical cord: morphologic and clinical aspects. Hum Pathol 20(5):458, 1989 Javadian P, Shamshirsaz AA, Haeri S, et al: Perinatal outcome after fetoscopic release of amniotic bands: a single-center experience and review of the literature. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 42(4):449,

## 2013

Jessop FA, Lees CC, Pathak S, et al: Umbilical cord coiling: clinical outcomes in an unselected population and systematic review. Virchows Arch 464(1):105, 2014 Johnston R, Shrivastava VK, Chmait RH: Term vaginal delivery following fetoscopic laser photocoagulation of type II vasa previa. Fetal Diagn Ther 35(1):62, 2014

Kan PS, Eastman NJ: Coiling of the umbilical cord around the foetal neck. BJOG 64:227, 1957 Kanenishi K, Nitta E, Mashima M, et al: HDlive imaging of intra-amniotic umbilical vein varix with thrombosis. Placenta 34(11):1110, 2013 Kent EM, Breathnach FM, Gillan JE, et al: Placental cord insertion and birthweight discordance in twin pregnancies: results of the national prospective ESPRiT Study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 205(4):376.e1,

## 2011

Kim CJ, Romero R, Chaemsaithong P, et al: Acute chorioamnionitis and funisitis: definition, pathologic features, and clinical significance. Am J Obstet Gynecol 213(4 Suppl):S29, 2015 Kinugasa M, Sato T, Tamura M, et al: Antepartum detection of cord presentation by transvaginal ultrasonography for term breech presentation: potential prediction and prevention of cord prolapse. J Obstet Gynaecol Res 33(5):612, 2007 Klahr R, Fox NS, Zafman K, et al: Frequency of spontaneous resolution of vasa previa with advancing gestational age. Am J Obstet Gynecol 221(6):646.e1, 2019 Kobayashi N, Aoki S, Oba MS, et al: Effect of umbilical cord entanglement and position on pregnancy outcomes. Obstet Gynecol Int 2015:342065, 2015 Krakowiak P, Smith EN, de Bruyn G, et al: Risk factors and outcomes associated with a short umbilical cord. Obstet Gynecol 103:119, 2004 Lacro RV, Jones KL, Benirschke K: The umbilical cord twist: origin, direction, and relevance. Am J Obstet Gynecol 157(4 Pt 1):833, 1987 Lafitte AS, Verspyck E, Jeanne Pasquier C, et al: Pseudoamniotic band syndrome after fetoscopic laser ablation of placental anastomoses for twin-twin transfusion syndrome: two case reports and systematic review. J Ultrasound Med 36(11):2373, 2017 Langston C, Kaplan C, Macpherson T, et al: Practice guideline for examination of the placenta. Arch Pathol Lab Med 121:449, 1997 Lepais L, Gaillot-Durand L, Boutitie F, et al: Fetal thrombotic vasculopathy is associated with thromboembolic events and adverse perinatal outcome but not with neurologic complications: a retrospective cohort study of 54 cases with a 3-year follow-up of children. Placenta 35(8):611, 2014 Linde LE, Rasmussen S, Kessler J, et al: Extreme umbilical cord lengths, cord knot and entanglement: risk factors and risk of adverse outcomes, a population-based study. PLoS One 13(3):e0194814,

## 2018

Luo G, Redline RW: Peripheral insertion of umbilical cord. Pediatr Dev Pathol 16(6):399, 2013 Maher JT, Conti JA: A comparison of umbilical cord blood gas values between newborns with and without true knots. Obstet Gynecol 88:863, 1996 Mandsager NT, Bendon R, Mostello D, et al: Maternal floor infarction of the placenta: prenatal diagnosis and clinical significance. Obstet Gynecol 83:750, 1994 Masad R, Gutvirtz G, Wainstock T, et al: The effect of nuchal cord on perinatal mortality and long-term offspring morbidity. J Perinatol 40(3):439, 2020 Matsuzaki S, Kimura T: Vasa previa. N Engl J Med 380(3):274, 2019 Minakami H, Akahori A, Sakurai S, et al: Umbilical vein thrombosis as a possible cause of perinatal morbidity or mortality: report of two cases. J Obstet Gynaecol Res 27(2):97, 2001 Mirza FG, Ghulmiyyah LM, Tamim H, et al: To ignore or not to ignore placental calcifications on prenatal ultrasound: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 31(6):797,

## 2018

Murphy-Kaulbeck L, Dodds L, Joseph KS, et al: Single umbilical artery risk factors and pregnancy outcomes. Obstet Gynecol 116(4):843, 2010

Nath ME, Kanbour A, Hu J, et al: Transplantation of congenital primitive neuroectodermal tumor of fetus to the uterus of mother: application of biotin-labeled chromosome-specific probes. Int J Gynecol Cancer 5(6):459, 1995 Naert MN, Muniz Rodriguez A, Khadraoui H, et al: Association between first-trimester subchorionic hematomas and adverse pregnancy outcomes after 20 weeks of gestation in singleton pregnancies. Obstet Gynecol 134(4):863, 2019 Nelson LD, Grobman WA: Obstetric morbidity associated with amniotic sheets. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 36(3):324, 2010 Odibo I, Gehlot A, Ounpraseuth ST, et al: Pathologic examination of the placenta and its clinical utility: a survey of obstetrics and gynecology providers. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 29(2):197, 2016 Odunsi K, Bullough CH, Henzel J, et al: Evaluation of chemical tests for fetal bleeding from vasa previa. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 55(3):207, 1996 Olaya-C M, Bernal JE: Clinical associations to abnormal umbilical cord length in Latin American newborns. J Neonatal Perinatal Med 8(3):251, 2015 Olog A, Thomas JT, Petersen S, et al: Large umbilical artery aneurysm with a live healthy baby delivered at 31 weeks. Fetal Diagn Ther 29(4):331, 2011 Oyelese Y, Catanzarite V, Prefumo F, et al: Vasa previa: the impact of prenatal diagnosis on outcomes. Obstet Gynecol 103:937, 2004 Papinniemi M, Keski-Nisula L, Heinonen S: Placental ratio and risk of velamentous umbilical cord insertion are increased in women with placenta previa. Am J Perinatol 24:353, 2007 Pathak S, Hook E, Hackett G, et al: Cord coiling, umbilical cord insertion and placental shape in an unselected cohort delivering at term: relationship with common obstetric outcomes. Placenta 31(11):963, 2010 Peng HQ, Levitin-Smith M, Rochelson B, et al: Umbilical cord stricture and over coiling are common causes of fetal demise. Pediatr Dev Pathol 9:14, 2006 Pereira N, Yao R, Guilfoil DS, et al: Placenta membranacea with placenta accreta: radiologic diagnosis and clinical implications. Prenat Diagn 33(13):1293, 2013 Pergialiotis V, Kotrogianni P, Koutaki D, et al: Umbilical cord coiling index for the prediction of adverse pregnancy outcomes: a meta-analysis and sequential analysis. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 27:1,

## 2019

Prapas N, Liang RI, Hunter D, et al: Color Doppler imaging of placental masses: differential diagnosis and fetal outcome. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 16:559, 2000 Proctor LK, Fitzgerald B, Whittle WL, et al: Umbilical cord diameter percentile curves and their correlation to birth weight and placental pathology. Placenta 34(1):62, 2013 Puvabanditsin S, Garrow E, Bhatt M, et al: Four-vessel umbilical cord associated with multiple congenital anomalies: a case report and literature review. Fetal Pediatr Pathol 30(2):98, 2011 Raio L, Ghezzi F, Di Naro E, et al: In-utero characterization of the blood flow in the Hyrtl anastomosis. Placenta 22:597, 2001 Raio L, Ghezzi F, Di Naro E, et al: Prenatal assessment of the Hyrtl anastomosis and evaluation of its function: case report. Hum Reprod 14:1890, 1999 Raio L, Ghezzi F, Di Naro E, et al: Umbilical cord morphologic characteristics and umbilical artery Doppler parameters in intrauterine growth-restricted fetuses. J Ultrasound Med 22:1341, 2003 Räisänen S, Georgiadis L, Harju M, et al: Risk factors and adverse pregnancy outcomes among births affected by velamentous umbilical cord insertion: a retrospective population-based register study. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 165(2):231, 2012

Räisänen S, Georgiadis L, Harju M, et al: True umbilical cord knot and obstetric outcome. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 122(1):18, 2013 Ramon y, Cajal CL, Martinez RO: Four-dimensional ultrasonography of a true knot of the umbilical cord. Am J Obstet Gynecol 195:896, 2006 Rayburn WF, Beynen A, Brinkman DL: Umbilical cord length and intrapartum complications. Obstet Gynecol 57(4):450, 1981 Rebarber A, Dolin C, Fox NS, et al: Natural history of vasa previa across gestation using a screening protocol. J Ultrasound Med 33(1):141, 2014 Redline RW: Inflammatory response in acute chorioamnionitis. Semin Fetal Neonatal Med 17(1):20,

## 2012

Redline RW: Placental pathology: a systematic approach with clinical correlations. Placenta 29(Suppl A):S86, 2008 Reif P, Hofer N, Kolovetsiou-Kreiner V, et al: Metastasis of an undifferentiated fetal soft tissue sarcoma to the maternal compartment of the placenta: maternal aspects, pathology findings and review of the literature on fetal malignancies with placenta metastases. Histopathology 65(6):933,

## 2014

Roberts DJ: Placental pathology, a survival guide. Arch Pathol Lab Med 132(4):641, 2008 Rodriguez N, Angarita AM, Casasbuenas A, et al: Three-dimensional high-definition flow imaging in prenatal diagnosis of a true umbilical cord knot. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 39(2):245, 2012 Romero R, Whitten A, Korzeniewski SJ, et al: Maternal floor infarction/massive perivillous fibrin deposition: a manifestation of maternal antifetal rejection? Am J Reprod Immunol 70(4):285, 2013 Ruiter L, Kok N, Limpens J, et al: Systematic review of accuracy of ultrasound in the diagnosis of vasa previa. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 45(5):516, 2015 Salafia CM, Silberman L, Herrera NE, et al: Placental pathology at term associated with elevated midtrimester maternal serum alpha-fetoprotein concentration. Am J Obstet Gynecol 158(5):1064,

## 1988

Saleemuddin A, Tantbirojn P, Sirois K, et al: Obstetric and perinatal complications in placentas with fetal thrombotic vasculopathy. Pediatr Dev Pathol 13(6):459, 2010 Sánchez-Códez MI, Lubián-Gutiérrez M, Méndez-Abad P: Umbilical cord hematoma. Fetal Pediatr Pathol 38(4):359, 2019 Sato Y, Benirschke K: Umbilical arterial thrombosis with vascular wall necrosis: clinicopathologic findings of 11 cases. Placenta 27:715, 2006 Schachter M, Tovbin Y, Arieli S, et al: In vitro fertilization is a risk factor for vasa previa. Fertil Steril 78(3):642, 2003 Sebire NJ: Pathophysiological significance of abnormal umbilical cord coiling index. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 30(6):804, 2007 Sebire NJ, Backos M, Goldin RD, et al: Placental massive perivillous fibrin deposition associated with antiphospholipid antibody syndrome. BJOG 109:570, 2002 Sepulveda W, Aviles G, Carstens E, et al: Prenatal diagnosis of solid placental masses: the value of color flow imaging. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 16:554, 2000 Sepulveda W, Wong AE, Gonzalez R, et al: Fetal death due to umbilical cord hematoma: a rare complication of umbilical cord cyst. J Matern-Fetal Neonatal Med 18(6):387, 2005 Shen O, Golomb E, Lavie O, et al: Placental shelf—a common, typically transient and benign finding on early second-trimester sonography. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 29:192, 2007a Shen O, Reinus C, Baranov A, et al: Prenatal diagnosis of umbilical artery aneurysm: a potentially lethal anomaly. J Ultrasound Med 26(2):251, 2007b

Shilling C, Walsh C, Downey P, et al: Umbilical artery thrombosis is a rare but clinically important finding: a series of 7 cases with clinical outcomes. Pediatr Dev Pathol 17(2):89, 2014 Society for Maternal-Fetal (SMFM) Publications Committee, Sinkey RG, Odibo AO, et al: Diagnosis and management of vasa previa. Am J Obstet Gynecol 213(5):615, 2015 Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Gandhi M, Rac MW, et al: Amniotic band sequence. Am J Obstet Gynecol 221(6):B5, 2019 Sørnes T: Umbilical cord encirclements and fetal growth restriction. Obstet Gynecol 86:725, 1995 Sørnes T: Umbilical cord knots. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 79:157, 2000 Spellacy WN, Gravem H, Fisch RO: The umbilical cord complications of true knots, nuchal coils and cords around the body. Report from the collaborative study of cerebral palsy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 94:1136, 1966 Spinillo A, Gardella B, Muscettola G, et al: The impact of placental massive perivillous fibrin deposition on neonatal outcome in pregnancies complicated by fetal growth restriction. Placenta 87:46, 2019 Spong CY, McKindsey F, Ross MG: Amniotic fluid index predicts the relief of variable decelerations after amnioinfusion bolus. Am J Obstet Gynecol 175(4 Pt 1):1066, 1996 Stanek J: Chorangiosis of chorionic villi: what does it really mean? Arch Pathol Lab Med 140(6):58,

## 2016

Steemers NY, De Rop C, Van Assche A: Zonary placenta. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 51(3):251, 1995 Strong TH Jr, Jarles DL, Vega JS, et al: The umbilical coiling index. Am J Obstet Gynecol 170(1 Pt 1):29, 1994 Sun Y, Arbuckle S, Hocking G, et al: Umbilical cord stricture and intrauterine fetal death. Pediatr Pathol Lab Med 15:723, 1995 Sung DK, Baergen RN: Focal chorangiosis: does it have clinical and pathologic significance? Pediatr Dev Pathol 22(5):406, 2019 Suzuki S: Clinical significance of pregnancies with circumvallate placenta. J Obstet Gynaecol Res 34(1):51, 2008 Swank ML, Garite TJ, Maurel K, et al: Vasa previa: diagnosis and management. Obstetrix Collaborative Research Network. Am J Obstet Gynecol 215(2):223.e1, 2016 Taniguchi H, Aoki S, Sakamaki K, et al: Circumvallate placenta: associated clinical manifestations and complications—a retrospective study. Obstet Gynecol Int 2014:986230, 2014 Towers CV, Juratsch CE, Garite TJ: The fetal heart monitor tracing in pregnancies complicated by a spontaneous umbilical cord haematoma. J Perinatol 29:517, 2009 Tuuli MG, Norman SM, Odibo AO, et al: Perinatal outcomes in women with subchorionic hematoma: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Obstet Gynecol 117(5):1205, 2011 Tuuli MG, Shanks A, Bernhard L, et al: Uterine synechiae and pregnancy complications. Obstet Gynecol 119(4):810, 2012 Vahanian SA, Lavery JA, Ananth CV, et al: Placental implantation abnormalities and risk of preterm delivery: a systematic review and metaanalysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 213(4 Suppl):S78, 2015 Vintzileos AM, Ananth CV, Smulian JC: Using ultrasound in the clinical management of placental implantation abnormalities. Am J Obstet Gynecol 213(4 Suppl):S70, 2015 Voskamp BJ, Fleurke-Rozema H, Oude-Rengerink K, et al: Relationship of isolated single umbilical artery to fetal growth, aneuploidy and perinatal mortality: systematic review and meta-analysis. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 42(6):622, 2013 Vyas NM, Manjeera L, Rai S, et al: Prenatal diagnosis of umbilical artery aneurysm with good fetal outcome and review of literature. J Clin Diagn Res 10(1):QD01, 2016

Whitten AE, Romero R, Korzeniewski SJ, et al: Evidence of an imbalance of angiogenic/antiangiogenic factors in massive perivillous fibrin deposition (maternal floor infarction): a placental lesion associated with recurrent miscarriage and fetal death. Am J Obstet Gynecol 208(4):310.e1, 2013 Woo GW, Rocha FG, Gaspar-Oishi M, et al: Placental mesenchymal dysplasia. Am J Obstet Gynecol 205(6):e3, 2011 Yamada S, Hamanishi J, Tanada S, et al: Embryogenesis of fused umbilical arteries in human embryos. Am J Obstet Gynecol 193:1709, 2005 Yamamoto Y, Aoki S, Oba MS, et al: Relationship between short umbilical cord length and adverse pregnancy outcomes. Fetal Pediatr Pathol 35(2):81, 2016 Zangen R, Boldes R, Yaffe H, et al: Umbilical cord cysts in the second and third trimesters: significance and prenatal approach. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 36(3):296, 2010 Zhang W, Geris S, Al-Emara N, et al: Perinatal outcome of pregnancies with prenatal diagnosis of vasa previa: systematic review and meta-analysis. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 57(5):710, 2021
