26 TH EDITION

Williams

OBSTETRICS

CUNNINGHAM
LEVENO
DASHE
HOFFMAN
SPONG

CASEY

Me
Graw
Hill

NOTICE
Medicine is an ever-changing science. As new research and clinical
experience broaden our knowledge, changes in treatment and drug therapy
are required. The authors and the publisher of this work have checked
with sources believed to be reliable in their efforts to provide information
that is complete and generally in accord with the standards accepted at the
time of publication. However, in view of the possibility of human error or
changes in medical sciences, neither the authors nor the publisher nor any
other party who has been involved in the preparation or publication of this
work warrants that the information contained herein is in every respect
accurate or complete, and they disclaim all responsibility for any errors
or omissions or for the results obtained from use of the information
contained in this work. Readers are encouraged to confirm the information
contained herein with other sources. For example and in particular,
readers are advised to check the product information sheet included in the
package of each drug they plan to administer to be certain that the
information contained in this work is accurate and that changes have not
been made in the recommended dose or in the contraindications for
administration. This recommendation is of particular importance in
connection with new or infrequently used drugs.

Williams

OBSTETRICS
26TH EDITION
F. Gary Cunningham
Kenneth J. Leveno
Jodi S. Dashe
Barbara L Hoffman
Catherine Y, Spong
Brian M. Casey

Grow
Hill
New York *C ! icng4> San Fran<iseo Lisbon London Madrid Mexico City
Milan New Ddhi San Juan Seoul Singapore Sydney Tbronro

^

Copyright © 2022 by McGraw Hill. All rights reserved. Except as permitted
under the United States Copyright Act of 1976, no part of this publication
may be reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, or stored in a
database or retrieval system, without the prior written permission of the
publisher.
ISBN: 978-1-26-046274-6
MHID:
1-26-046274-9
The material in this eBook also appears in the print version of this title:
ISBN: 978-1-26-046273-9, MHID: 1-26-046273-0.
eBook conversion by codeMantra
Version 1.0
All trademarks are trademarks of their respective owners. Rather than put a
trademark symbol after every occurrence of a trademarked name, we use
names in an editorial fashion only, and to the benefit of the trademark owner,
with no intention of infringement of the trademark. Where such designations
appear in this book, they have been printed with initial caps.
McGraw-Hill Education eBooks are available at special quantity discounts
to use as premiums and sales promotions or for use in corporate training
programs. To contact a representative, please visit the Contact Us page at
www.mhprofessional.com.
TERMS OF USE
This is a copyrighted work and McGraw-Hill Education and its licensors
reserve all rights in and to the work. Use of this work is subject to these
terms. Except as permitted under the Copyright Act of 1976 and the right to
store and retrieve one copy of the work, you may not decompile,
disassemble, reverse engineer, reproduce, modify, create derivative works
based upon, transmit, distribute, disseminate, sell, publish or sublicense the
work or any part of it without McGraw-Hill Education’s prior consent. You
may use the work for your own noncommercial and personal use; any other

use of the work is strictly prohibited. Your right to use the work may be
terminated if you fail to comply with these terms.
THE WORK IS PROVIDED “AS IS.” McGRAW-HILL EDUCATION AND
ITS LICENSORS MAKE NO GUARANTEES OR WARRANTIES AS TO
THE ACCURACY, ADEQUACY OR COMPLETENESS OF OR RESULTS
TO BE OBTAINED FROM USING THE WORK, INCLUDING ANY
INFORMATION THAT CAN BE ACCESSED THROUGH THE WORK
VIA HYPERLINK OR OTHERWISE, AND EXPRESSLY DISCLAIM ANY
WARRANTY, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED
TO IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS
FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. McGraw-Hill Education and its licensors
do not warrant or guarantee that the functions contained in the work will meet
your requirements or that its operation will be uninterrupted or error free.
Neither McGraw-Hill Education nor its licensors shall be liable to you or
anyone else for any inaccuracy, error or omission, regardless of cause, in the
work or for any damages resulting therefrom. McGraw-Hill Education has no
responsibility for the content of any information accessed through the work.
Under no circumstances shall McGraw-Hill Education and/or its licensors
be liable for any indirect, incidental, special, punitive, consequential or
similar damages that result from the use of or inability to use the work, even
if any of them has been advised of the possibility of such damages. This
limitation of liability shall apply to any claim or cause whatsoever whether
such claim or cause arises in contract, tort or otherwise.

EDITORS
F. Gary Cunningham, MD
Professor, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
Parkland Health and Hospital System
Dallas, Texas
Kenneth J. Leveno, MD
Professor, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
Parkland Health and Hospital System
Dallas, Texas
Jodi S. Dashe, MD
Professor, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
Medical Director of Prenatal Diagnosis
Parkland Health and Hospital System
Dallas, Texas
Barbara L. Hoffman, MD
Distinguished Professor in Obstetrics and Gynecology, in Honor of F. Gary
Cunningham, M.D.
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
Parkland Health and Hospital System
Dallas, Texas
Catherine Y. Spong, MD
Paul C. MacDonald Distinguished Chair in Obstetrics and Gynecology
Professor and Chair, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology

Chief, Division of Maternal-Fetal Medicine
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
Parkland Health and Hospital System
Dallas, Texas
Brian M. Casey, MD
Professor, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology
Vice Chair, Obstetrics
Director, Division of Maternal-Fetal Medicine
University of Alabama at Birmingham

DR. F. GARY CUNNINGHAM

Editor of Williams Obstetrics
18th through 26th Editions
In the early 1970s, as I was finishing my residency at Charity Hospital of
New Orleans, the 14th edition of Williams Obstetrics was published. The
residents in our program were totally enamored with the textbook because it
was a clinical manual derived from the editors’ personal experiences and
from contemporary, evidence-based literature.
During my last year, my chairman, Dr. Abe Mickal, invited me to attend a
national meeting where I first met four obstetricians who would have an
immeasurable impact on my life—Drs. Jack Pritchard, Paul MacDonald,
Norman Gant, and Peggy Whalley. Following that, I was invited to Dallas to
spend time at the University of Texas Southwestern and Parkland Hospital.
As I followed Dr. Pritchard through Labor & Delivery and his clinical
research laboratory, I became hooked on “Parkland Obstetrics” and later that
year began a fellowship that was the nascent subspecialty of Maternal–Fetal
Medicine. It also began a lifelong friendship with Jack Pritchard that I will
always treasure.
Beginning with the 15th edition of Williams Obstetrics, the authoreditors were Drs. Pritchard, MacDonald, and Gant. After publication of the
17th edition, these mentors asked me to assume the senior editor role. I was
immediately struck by the awesome responsibility of shepherding the book
that many people called “the bible of obstetrics.”

Over the years, and now as we publish this 26th edition, I reflect on the
evolution of obstetrics, and hence the complexity of sustaining a textbook
designed to cover the breadth of obstetrics. As essential fields such as
sonography, genetics, and fetal medicine were developed, we enlisted the
help of extremely talented leaders in their respective fields to ensure that the
book adequately presented these innovations. As for my role in this and other
editions, I can only promise the readers that the quality of the book has been
foremost in my mind and led me to spend literally tens of thousands of hours
to help prepare the past nine editions. To this end, the editors have always
strived to put the best product forward because of the tremendous
responsibility that we shoulder regarding the care of women and their unborn
children. The textbook has been one of the great passions in my life, and I
will miss the challenge.

DEDICATION

KENNETH LEVENO, MD
1941–2020
Dr. Kenneth Leveno was a vocal and stalwart defender of evidence-based
obstetrics. Sadly, he passed away in May 2020. Ken joined the Department
of Obstetrics & Gynecology at the University of Texas Southwestern after
completing a Maternal–Fetal Medicine fellowship in 1978. In 1984, he was
appointed Chief of Obstetrics at Parkland Memorial Hospital—a role in
which he served for the next 20 years. During that time and afterwards, he
worked tirelessly to achieve a level of excellence in obstetrical care for
indigent women of Dallas County. His inspiring leadership and innovations
raised the quality of care at the community obstetrics clinics, the high-risk
prenatal clinics at Parkland, and the inpatient units, which include the
Obstetrical Triage Unit, Labor & Delivery, postpartum wards, and the HighRisk Pregnancy Unit. Early on, he also designed a computerized database to
measure quality indicators and provide an underpinning for clinical research.
Indeed, his contributions to these programs were reverently referred to by us
as Parkland Obstetrics.
Ken Leveno’s leadership extended well beyond the hospital that he
loved. He was a leader in American obstetrics by his defining of clinical
research. Through his hundreds of peer-reviewed publications, his clinical

opinions, and his willingness to engage in national debates, he helped shape
obstetrical practices worldwide. In 1993, Ken began serving as an editor for
Williams Obstetrics—a task that he regarded as a privilege and a
responsibility. He co-authored the 19th through the current 26th editions. Last
and importantly, he mentored the careers of many Maternal–Fetal Medicine
fellows and young faculty who have gone on to achieve national reputations
in the care of women. Ken will be greatly missed.
The Editors

ASSOCIATE EDITORS
Mala S. Mahendroo, PhD
Professor, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology and Green Center for
Reproductive Biological Sciences
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
Dallas, Texas
David B. Nelson, MD
Dedman Family Scholar in Clinical Care
Associate Professor, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
Chief of Obstetrics
Parkland Health and Hospital System
Dallas, Texas
Shivani Patel, MD
Associate Professor, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
Assistant Quality Officer, Health Systems Affairs
Medical Director of Obstetrics, William P. Clements Jr. University Hospital
Parkland Health and Hospital System
Dallas, Texas
Diane M. Twickler, MD, FACR
Dr. Fred Bonte Professorship in Radiology
Professor, Department of Radiology and of Obstetrics and Gynecology
Vice Chairman at Large for Radiology
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
Medical Director of Obstetrics and Gynecology Ultrasonography
Parkland Health and Hospital System

Dallas, Texas

CONTRIBUTING AUTHORS
Emily H. Adhikari, MD
Assistant Professor, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
Medical Director of Perinatal Infectious Diseases
Parkland Hospital and Hospital System
Dallas, Texas
Donald D. McIntire, PhD
Biostatistician
Professor, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
Dallas, Texas
Wilmer Moreno, MD
Assistant Professor, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
Parkland Health and Hospital System
Dallas, Texas
David M. Owen, MD, PhD
Assistant Professor, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
Parkland Health and Hospital System
Dallas, Texas
Weike Tao, MD
Professor, Department of Anesthesiology and Pain Management
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
Parkland Health and Hospital System

Dallas, Texas
C. Edward Wells, MD
Professor, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
Parkland Health and Hospital System
Dallas, Texas
Myra H. Wyckoff, MD
Professor, Department of Pediatrics
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
Director, Newborn Resuscitation Services
Parkland Health and Hospital System
Dallas, Texas

CONTENTS
Preface
Acknowledgments

SECTION 1
OVERVIEW
1. Overview of Obstetrics

SECTION 2
MATERNAL ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
2. Maternal Anatomy
3. Congenital Genitourinary Abnormalities
4. Maternal Physiology

SECTION 3
PLACENTATION, EMBRYOGENESIS, AND FETAL
DEVELOPMENT
5. Implantation and Placental Development
6. Placental Abnormalities
7. Embryogenesis and Fetal Development

SECTION 4
PRECONCEPTIONAL AND PRENATAL CARE
8. Teratology, Teratogens, and Fetotoxic Agents
9. Preconceptional Counseling
10. Prenatal Care

SECTION 5
FIRST- AND SECOND-TRIMESTER PREGNANCY LOSS
11. First- and Second-Trimester Pregnancy Loss
12. Ectopic Pregnancy
13. Gestational Trophoblastic Disease

SECTION 6
THE FETAL PATIENT
14. Obstetrical Imaging
15. Normal and Abnormal Fetal Anatomy
16. Genetics
17. Prenatal Diagnosis
18. Fetal Disorders
19. Fetal Therapy
20. Antepartum Fetal Assessment

SECTION 7

LABOR
21. Physiology of Labor
22. Normal Labor
23. Abnormal Labor
24. Intrapartum Assessment
25. Obstetrical Analgesia and Anesthesia
26. Induction and Augmentation of Labor

SECTION 8
DELIVERY
27. Vaginal Delivery
28. Singleton Breech Delivery
29. Operative Vaginal Delivery
30. Cesarean Delivery and Peripartum Hysterectomy
31. Prior Cesarean Delivery

SECTION 9
THE NEWBORN
32. The Newborn
33. Complications of the Term Newborn
34. The Preterm Newborn
35. Stillbirth

SECTION 10

THE PUERPERIUM
36. The Puerperium
37. Puerperal Infection
38. Contraception
39. Sterilization

SECTION 11
OBSTETRICAL COMPLICATIONS
40. Preeclampsia Syndrome
41. Clinical Management of the Preeclampsia Syndrome
42. Causes of Obstetrical Hemorrhage
43. Hemorrhagic Placental Disorders
44. Management of Obstetrical Hemorrhage
45. Preterm Birth
46. Postterm Pregnancy
47. Fetal-Growth Disorders
48. Multifetal Pregnancy

SECTION 12
MEDICAL AND SURGICAL COMPLICATIONS
49. General Considerations and Maternal Evaluation
50. Critical Care and Trauma
51. Obesity
52. Cardiovascular Disorders

53. Chronic Hypertension
54. Pulmonary Disorders
55. Thromboembolic Disorders
56. Renal and Urinary Tract Disorders
57. Gastrointestinal Disorders
58. Hepatic, Biliary, and Pancreatic Disorders
59. Hematological Disorders
60. Diabetes Mellitus
61. Endocrine Disorders
62. Connective Tissue Disorders
63. Neurological Disorders
64. Psychiatric Disorders
65. Dermatological Disorders
66. Neoplastic Disorders
67. Infectious Diseases
68. Sexually Transmitted Infections

APPENDIX
Serum and Blood Constituents
Maternal Echocardiographic Measurements
Sonographic Measurements of the Embryo and Fetus
Index

PREFACE
Over its 26 editions, Williams Obstetrics has aimed to serve practicing
obstetricians and midwives in the bedside care of their patients. With its
detailed explanations of disease pathophysiology and treatment fundamentals,
it provides a bedrock text for residents who are training in Obstetrics or in
Family Medicine specialties. Fellows in Maternal–Fetal Medicine will
benefit from its additional discussions of complicated pathology and
management. Last, Williams Obstetrics can aid specialists who act as
consultants for gravidas with non-pregnancy-related disorders. Specifically,
each chapter in Section 12 focuses on a specific organ system, the normal
physiological changes and frequent disorders of that system in pregnancy, and
suitable treatment options.
For this 26th edition, we continue to present the detailed staples of basic
obstetrics such as maternal anatomy and physiology, preconceptional and
prenatal care, labor, delivery, and the puerperium. These accompany detailed
discussions of obstetrical complications exemplified by preterm labor,
hemorrhage, hypertension, and many more. To emphasize the “M” in
Maternal–Fetal Medicine, we continue to instruct on the many medical and
surgical disorders that can complicate pregnancy. And, our second patient—
the fetus—has accrued especial attention with an entire section devoted to
diagnosis and treatment of fetal disorders. For all of these, we once again
emphasize the science-based practice of clinical obstetrics. Expert clinical
pearls add depth to these discussions and are written for busy practitioners—
those “in the trenches.” To integrate all our content, the reader of one chapter
may be referred to a different chapter that contains complementary content.
This offers a more global understanding of a given topic.
To accomplish our teaching goals, the text has been updated with more
than 3000 new literature citations through 2021. Many of the nearly 900
figures are new, and these graphs, sonograms, magnetic resonance images,
photographs, photomicrographs, and data graphs are all in vivid color. Much
of the original artwork was rendered by our own medical illustrators.

As before, we continue to incorporate contemporaneous guidelines from
professional and academic organizations such as the American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, the Society for Maternal–Fetal Medicine,
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the National Institutes of
Health, and other authoritative sources. Many of these data are distilled into
nearly 100 tables, in which information has been arranged in an easy readand-use format. In addition, several diagnostic and management algorithms
are available to quickly guide practitioners. Although we strive to cite
numerous sources and provide multiple evidence-based options for such
management schemes, we also include our own clinical experiences drawn
from the large obstetrical service at Parkland Hospital. We are convinced
that these are disciplined examples of evidence-based obstetrics but quickly
acknowledge that they do not constitute the sole method of management.
F. Gary Cunningham
Kenneth J. Leveno
Jodi S. Dashe
Barbara L. Hoffman
Catherine Y. Spong
Brian M. Casey

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
In the creation and production of this textbook, we were fortunate to have the
assistance and support of countless talented professionals both within and
outside the Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology. To begin, we
acknowledge that an undertaking of this magnitude would not be possible
without the unwavering support provided by our recent Chairman Dr. Steven
Bloom and Vice-Chairman Dr. Barry Schwarz, whose financial and
academic endorsement has been essential. Dr. Bloom has served as an editor
for the 22nd through 25th editions but now has assumed the important role of
Associate Dean of Clinical Sciences at the University of Texas Southwestern
Medical Center.
In constructing such an expansive academic compilation, the expertise of
many colleagues was needed to add vital, evidence-based content. It was
indeed fortuitous for us to have access to a trove of collaborators from our
medical center. From our own Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Dr.
Shivani Patel was essential to the production of our book and is an
invaluable addition to our team. We benefitted from her obstetrical expertise,
writing talent, and ability to translate difficult concepts into teaching pearls.
Faculty with specific expertise included Dr. Claudia Werner, who lent
valuable insight into the management of cervical dysplasia. Our nationally
known pelvic anatomist, Dr. Marlene Corton, prepared graphic masterpieces
for the anatomy chapter with artist Lew Calver. We also are grateful to the
numerous faculty and residents who added seminal clinical photographs to
our text.
In addition to these contributors, we relied heavily on our colleagues in
the Division of Maternal–Fetal Medicine. These professionals, in addition to
providing expert consultation, graciously assisted us by covering clinical
duties when writing and editing were especially time consuming. These
include Drs. Scott Roberts, Oscar Andujo, Vanessa Rogers, Charles Brown,
Julie Lo, Robyn Horsager, Patricia Santiago-Muñoz, Mark Peters, Elaine
Duryea, Jamie Morgan, Morris Bryant, Shena Dillon, Anne Ambia, Robert

Martin, Robert Stewart, Stephan Shivvers, Ashley Zink, Sarah Happe, and
Christina Herrera.
We also emphasize that production of Williams Obstetrics would not be
feasible without the help of our Maternal–Fetal Medicine fellows and our
residents in Obstetrics and Gynecology. Their insatiable curiosity serves to
energize us to find new and effective ways to convey age-old truths, new
data, and cutting-edge concepts. Their logical and critical questions lead us
to weaknesses in the text, and thereby always help us to improve our work. In
addition, we sincerely thank them for their vigilance in capturing photographs
of spectacular examples of both obstetrical pathology and normal findings.
This edition is heavily populated with seminal examples of sonographic
findings. We are grateful for the efforts of Mary Gibbs, RDMS; Rafael Levy,
RDMS; Michael Davidson, RDMS; and the many talented sonographers at
Parkland Hospital.
Thanks to generous funding from the McGraw-Hill Companies, this 26th
edition now contains more than 200 color illustrations. Most of these were
crafted by several skilled medical illustrators who include Ms. Marie Sena,
Ms. Erin Frederickson, and Ms. SangEun Cha. All of these talented artists
trained here at UT Southwestern under the instruction of Mr. Lewis Calver.
Additional artistic support came from Mr. Joseph Varghese, Ms. Shreya
Tiwari, Dr. Sudhi Singh, and Mr. Manoj Kumar Choudhry. Their work at
Thomson Digital provided the full-color graphs and line art used to enhance
this edition. Their team tirelessly coordinated efforts between author and
artist and graciously accommodated our numerous changes and tweaks.
Production of the 5000-page manuscript would not have been possible
without a dedicated team. Once again, we are deeply indebted to Ms. Dawn
Wilson and Ms. Melinda Epstein for their untiring efforts with manuscript
production. Ms. Regina Williams also provided excellent, cheerful,
conscientious manuscript assistance. Mr. Charles Richards offered
knowledgeable and responsive information technology support. For these and
many more that go unnamed, we could not have done our job without their
expertise.
It again has been a privilege to work with the dedicated professionals
from McGraw-Hill Education. We have had the pleasure to work with
Executive Editor Mr. Jason Malley in production of our textbook and are
grateful for his support of Williams Obstetrics. Senior Project Development
Editor Ms. Christie Naglieri has again brought her considerable knowledge

to this edition of our book. Her dedication to creating the best textbook
supported our efforts, and we appreciate her productive, gracious style. We
thank Ms. Leah Carton, who provided professional, timely, and ever-sunny
aid. Mr. Richard Ruzycka served as production supervisor for this edition of
the textbook, and our book benefits from his years of experience.
Our text took its final shape under the watchful care of our compositors at
Aptara, Inc. We thank Ms. Indu Jawwad for her talents in graciously and
masterfully coordinating and overseeing composition. Her dedicated
attention to detail and organization were vital to completion of our project.
She has created many editions with us, and we consider her an essential team
member. At Aptara, Mr. Mahender Singh carried out the crucial task of
quality control. He also assisted, along with Mr. Rajesh Chander, Mr.
Kamlesh Bhatt, and Mr. Anil Varghese, in creating beautiful chapter layouts
to highlight our content aesthetically and informatively. This edition’s
chapters were also posted and available online for use prior to print
publication. We thank Mr. Braj Bhushan and Mr. Ashish Kumar Sharma for
preparing this content so brilliantly. Special thanks go to Mr. Greg Feldman.
As copyeditor, Greg added precision and clarity to our efforts. His
endurance and pleasant professionalism through many challenging chapters
has made our text better.
Last, we acknowledge our significant debt to the women who have
entrusted themselves and their unborn children to us for obstetrical care. The
clinical expertise and many images provided in this text would not have been
possible without their collaborative spirit to help us advance obstetrical
knowledge. We also offer enthusiastic and heartfelt appreciation to our
families and friends. Without their patience, generosity, love, and
encouragement, this task would have been impossible.
F. Gary Cunningham
Kenneth J. Leveno
Jodi S. Dashe
Barbara L. Hoffman
Catherine Y. Spong
Brian M. Casey

SECTION 1

OVERVIEW

