CHAPTER 43

Hemorrhagic Placental Disorders

PLACENTAL ABRUPTION
DIAGNOSIS
MANAGEMENT
PLACENTA PREVIA
DIAGNOSIS
MANAGEMENT
PLACENTA ACCRETA SPECTRUM
DIAGNOSIS
MANAGEMENT
REFERENCES
Hemorrhage following partial or complete separation of the placenta can be
torrential. Recall that the amount of blood flowing through the intervillous
space at term exceeds 600 mL/min (Pates, 2010). In the second half of
pregnancy, three placental disorders contribute substantially to maternal
mortality rates. These include placental abruption, placenta previa, and
placenta accreta spectrum.
The contributions of hemorrhagic placental disorders to maternal
mortality are discussed in Chapter 1 (p. 7) and Chapter 42 (p. 733). The
management and clinical experience with these disorders span more than a

generation. Placental abruption, for example, has been emphasized in this text
for more than 50 years beginning with the work of Dr. Jack Pritchard. Now
more common than years past, placenta accreta spectrum is another
substantial threat to maternal well-being.

PLACENTAL ABRUPTION
■ Etiopathogenesis
Separation of the placenta—either partially or totally—from its implantation
site before delivery is called placental abruption or abruptio placentae.
From Latin, the latter translates as “rending asunder of the placenta,” which
denotes a sudden accident, which is characteristic of most cases. In the
purest sense, the cumbersome—and thus seldom used—term premature
separation of the normally implanted placenta is most descriptive because
it excludes separation of a placenta previa.
Abruption likely begins with rupture of a decidual spiral artery and
hemorrhage into the decidual basalis. The subsequent expanding
retroplacental hematoma splits the decidua and leaves a thin layer adherent
to the myometrium. The decidual hematoma grows to lift away and compress
the adjacent placenta. In some cases that are associated with preeclampsia,
impaired trophoblastic invasion with subsequent atherosis is one underlying
predisposition (Brosens, 2011). Inflammation or infection also may be
contributory (Mhatre, 2016). However, histological findings cannot be used
to determine the timing of the abruption (Chen, 2017).
In the early stages of placental abruption, clinical symptoms may be
absent. Even with continued bleeding and placental separation, placental
abruption can still be either total or partial (Fig. 43-1). With either, bleeding
typically insinuates itself between the membranes and uterine wall,
ultimately escaping through the cervix to cause external hemorrhage. Less
often, the blood is retained, leading to concealed hemorrhage and delayed
diagnosis. The delay translates into greater maternal and fetal hazards. With
concealed hemorrhage, the likelihood of consumptive coagulopathy is also
increased. This is because increased pressure within the intervillous space,
caused by the expanding retroplacental clot, forces more placental
thromboplastin into the maternal circulation (Chap. 44, p. 775).

FIGURE 43-1 Schematic of placental abruption. Shown to the left is total placental abruption with
concealed hemorrhage. To the right is a partial abruption with blood and clots that dissect between
membranes and decidua to reach the internal cervical os and then the vagina.

Most blood in the retroplacental hematoma in a nontraumatic placental
abruption is maternal. This is because hemorrhage derives from separation
within the maternal decidua, and placental villi are usually initially intact. In
78 women at Parkland Hospital with a nontraumatic placental abruption,
fetal-to-maternal hemorrhage was documented in only 20 percent. All of
these had <10 mL fetal blood loss (Stettler, 1992). In another series of 68
women with a placental abruption, fetal cells were found in peripheral blood
in only 4 percent (Atkinson, 2015).
Placental abruption can create a visible circumscribed depression on the
maternal surface of a freshly delivered placenta. These depressions usually
measure a few centimeters in diameter and are covered by dark, clotted

blood. Because several minutes are required for these anatomical changes to
materialize, a very recently separated placenta may appear totally normal at
delivery. Our experiences are like those of Benirschke and associates (2012)
in that the “age” of the retroplacental clot cannot be determined exactly. In
the example shown in Figure 43-2, a large dark clot is well formed. It has
depressed the placental bulk and likely is at least several hours old.

FIGURE 43-2 Partial placental abruption with a dark adherent clot.

Defining placental abruption severity is problematic. We consider
placental abruption severe when the fetus dies. However, maternal and fetal
complications are frequently serious even with a liveborn fetus. Ananth and
coworkers (2016) have defined severe placental abruption as displaying one
or more of the following: (1) maternal sequelae that include disseminated
intravascular coagulation (DIC), shock, transfusion, hysterectomy, renal
failure, or death; (2) fetal complications such as nonreassuring fetal status,
growth restriction, or death; or (3) neonatal outcomes that include death,
preterm delivery, or growth restriction.

Traumatic Abruption

External trauma—usually from motor vehicle crashes or aggravated assault
—can cause placental separation. The frequency of abruption originating
from trauma varies. Importantly, abruption can stem from relatively minor
trauma (Huls, 2018). The clinical presentation and consequences of these
abruptions differ somewhat from spontaneous cases. For example, associated
fetomaternal hemorrhage, while seldom clinically significant with most
spontaneous abruptions, is more common with trauma because of
concomitant placental tears or “fractures” (Fig. 50-10, p. 895). In eight
women with traumatic placental abruption cared for at Parkland Hospital, we
found fetal-to-maternal hemorrhage of 80 to 100 mL in three (Stettler, 1992).
Importantly, in some cases of trauma, a nonreassuring fetal heart rate tracing
may not be accompanied by other evidence of placental separation. A
sinusoidal tracing is one example. Following blunt abdominal trauma, uterine
contractions are the single most important predictor of placental abruption
(Greco, 2019). Traumatic abruption is considered in more detail in Chapter
50 (p. 894).

Chronic Abruption
When placental separation is not followed by delivery, the placental
abruption is termed chronic. Some of these cases begin early in pregnancy.
Dugoff and coworkers (2004) observed an association between some
abnormally elevated maternal serum aneuploidy markers and subsequent
abruption. Others have correlated first- and second-trimester bleeding with
third-trimester placental abruption (Ananth, 2006; Weiss, 2004). In some
cases, chronic abruption and oligohydramnios develop and are called the
chronic abruption–oligohydramnios sequence (CAOS) (Elliott, 1998).
Even later in pregnancy, hemorrhage with retroplacental hematoma formation
is occasionally arrested completely without delivery. These women may
have abnormally elevated levels of maternal serum alpha-fetoprotein
(MSAFP) or placenta-specific RNAs as markers of the event (Miura, 2017;
Ngai, 2012).

■ Frequency
The reported incidence of placental abruption varies because of differing
criteria used for diagnosis. Its frequency averages 0.5 percent or 1 case in
200 deliveries. From one database of more than 125 million births from

1979 through 2010, the incidence of placental abruption was nearly 1 percent
(Hill, 2020). In more than 250,000 deliveries at Parkland Hospital from
2000 through 2015, the incidence of placental abruption averaged 1 case in
290 births (Fig. 43-3).

FIGURE 43-3 Frequency of placental abruption and placenta previa by maternal age at Parkland
Hospital from 2000 through 2015.

The frequency of placental abruption has risen in this country, and most
of this increase is in black women (Ananth, 2005, 2016). This disproportion
may be explained in part by the conservative management of early-onset
preeclampsia in some institutions (Chap. 41, p. 714). At Parkland Hospital,
however, the frequency of severe placental abruption has declined.
Specifically, with placental abruption so extensive as to kill the fetus, the
incidence was 0.24 percent or 1 case in 420 births from 1956 through 1967
(Pritchard, 1967). Through 2020, this same frequency dropped to 0.05
percent or 1 case in 2060 births. This likely reflects a concurrent decline in
the number of high-parity women giving birth and rise in the availability of
prenatal care and emergency transportation.

■ Perinatal Morbidity and Mortality
Overall, perinatal outcomes are influenced by gestational age, and the
frequency of placental abruption rises across the third trimester. As seen in
Figure 43-4, more than half of the placental abruptions at Parkland Hospital
developed at gestational ages ≥37 weeks’ gestation. Perinatal mortality and
morbidity, however, are more common with earlier abruptions and with
concomitant preeclampsia (Furukawa, 2015; Han, 2019). Of other related
factors, major fetal congenital anomalies have greater association with
placental abruption (Riihimäki, 2013).

FIGURE 43-4 Frequency of placental abruption by gestational age at Parkland Hospital.

Although the rates of fetal death have declined, the contribution of
abruption as a cause of stillbirth remains prominent because other causes
also have decreased. For example, since the early 1990s, 10 to 12 percent of
all third-trimester stillbirths at Parkland Hospital have been the consequence
of placental abruption. In a review of more than 15 million singleton births
between 1995 and 1998 in the United States, the perinatal mortality rate
associated with placental abruption was 119 death per 1000 births. This was
higher than the rate of 8 deaths per 1000 births in the general obstetrical
population (Salihu, 2005).

Neonatal deaths also are common following placental abruption. At
Parkland Hospital, 15 percent of liveborn neonates die. Perinatal morbidity
also is common in this group (Downes, 2017). Moreover, associated
childhood mortality mainly stems from birth-related asphyxia and prematurity
(Riihimäki, 2018). In one series, 20 percent of 43 liveborn neonates had
severe fetal acidemia following placental abruption, and 20 percent of
survivors developed cerebral palsy (Matsuda, 2013). In another study of 84
liveborns, 29 (35 percent) had an umbilical artery pH <7.00 (Onishi, 2019).
Ananth and coworkers (2017) attribute some of the adverse
neurodevelopmental outcomes to preterm delivery.

■ Predisposing Factors
Demographic Factors
Several predisposing factors raise the placental abruption risk (Table 43-1).
Advancing maternal age is one risk, although data regarding women of great
parity are conflicting (see Fig. 43-3) (Okby, 2017). Race or ethnicity also
appears important (Eubanks, 2021). In an earlier study, in almost 366,000
deliveries at Parkland Hospital, abruption severe enough to kill the fetus was
most common in black and white women—1 case in 200 births; less so in
Asian women—1 in 300; and least common in Latinas—1 in 350 (Pritchard,
1991). A familial association was found from one Norwegian populationbased registry (Rasmussen, 2009). In this study, if a woman had a severe
abruption, the risk for her sister was doubled. Candidate genes involved in
mitochondrial biogenesis and oxidative phosphorylation pathways, which
confer risk for placental abruption, have been described (Workalemahu,
2018).
TABLE 43-1. Risk Factors for Placental Abruption

Pregnancy-associated Hypertension
Some form of hypertension is the most frequent condition associated with
placental abruption. This includes gestational hypertension, preeclampsia,
chronic hypertension, or a combination. The hemolysis, elevated liver
enzyme levels, low platelet count (HELLP) syndrome carries an increased
risk for placental abruption. Moreover, expectant management of
preeclampsia in significantly preterm pregnancies was complicated by
placental abruption in 4 percent (Shoopala, 2019). In a report by Pritchard
and colleagues (1991) that described 408 women with placental abruption
and fetal demise, hypertension was apparent in half once hypovolemia was
corrected. Half of these latter women—a fourth of all 408—had chronic
hypertension. Examined another way, one Maternal-Fetal Medicine Units
(MFMU) Network study found that 1.5 percent of pregnant women with
chronic hypertension suffered placental abruption (Sibai, 1998). At Parkland
Hospital, the placental abruption frequency in women with treated chronic

hypertension and significant proteinuria was almost 1 percent. This incidence
compared with the 0.3-percent incidence in women with treated hypertension
without substantial proteinuria (Morgan, 2016).
Chronic hypertension with superimposed preeclampsia or with fetalgrowth restriction confers an even greater risk (Lueth, 2020). Even so, the
severity of hypertension does not necessarily correlate with abruption
incidence (Morgan, 2016; Zetterstrom, 2005). However, women with
preeclampsia that experience placental abruption have worse maternal, fetal,
and neonatal outcomes compared with women experiencing abruption alone
(Han, 2019). The long-term effects of these associations are apparent from
the significantly elevated cardiovascular mortality risk in women with prior
abruption, with or without chronic hypertension (DeRoo, 2016; Pariente,
2013). Observations from the Magpie Trial Collaborative Group suggest that
women with preeclampsia, with or without chronic hypertension, given
magnesium sulfate may have a reduced risk for abruption (Altman, 2002).
Last, Roberge and colleagues (2018), performed a metaanalysis and reported
that a 100-mg daily aspirin may decrease the incidence of placental
abruption.

Preterm Prelabor Ruptured Membranes
The placental abruption risk substantially rises when placental membranes
rupture before term. (Hackney, 2016). Of 756 women with ruptured
membranes between 20 and 36 weeks’ gestation, 5 percent developed an
abruption (Major, 1995). The frequency was 17 percent with previable
prelabor ruptured membranes (Kibel, 2016). The risk for abruption with
preterm membrane rupture is further elevated with comorbid infection
(Ananth, 2004). In one cohort study of pregnancies ≥34 weeks’ gestation, the
placental abruption rate was eightfold higher if hydramnios was comorbid
(Aviram, 2015). From a metaanalysis of 10 studies that included term and
preterm gestational ages, hydramnios was associated with a twofold greater
rate of placental abruption (Khazaei, 2019). Abrupt uterine decompression
during membrane rupture may be an inciting factor.

Prior Abruption
Many of the predisposing factors in women with a history of an abruption are
chronic conditions, and in these cases, placental abruption has a high

recurrence rate. Women with abruption and fetal death have a recurrence rate
of 12 percent, and half of these abruptions caused another fetal death
(Pritchard, 1970). Furuhashi and colleagues (2002) reported a 22-percent
recurrence rate, and half recurred at a gestational age 1 to 3 weeks earlier
than the first abruption. In one longitudinal Dutch study, Ruiter and
coworkers (2015) cited a recurrence risk of 5.8 percent. In a populationbased study of 767,000 pregnancies, the authors found a sevenfold higher
risk for recurrence of a “mild” abruption and twelvefold risk for a “severe”
abruption (Rasmussen, 2009). For women who had two severe abruptions,
the risk for a third was increased 50-fold.
Management of a pregnancy subsequent to an abruption is difficult
because another separation may suddenly occur, even remote from term. In
many of these recurrences, evaluation of fetal well-being is almost always
reassuring beforehand. Thus, antepartum fetal testing is usually not
predictive. Because term abruptions tend to be recurrent, Ruiter and
coworkers (2015) recommend labor induction at 37 weeks’ gestation. It
seems reasonable to induce labor at 38 completed weeks if other
complications do not develop beforehand.

Other Associations
Of these listed in Table 43-1, cigarette smoking is linked to an elevated risk
for placental abruption (Eubanks, 2021). One metaanalysis of 1.6 million
pregnancies in smokers found a twofold risk (Ananth, 1999). This risk was
five- to eightfold if smokers had chronic hypertension, severe preeclampsia,
or both. Similar findings are reported by others (Hogberg, 2007; Kaminsky,
2007). Cocaine abuse is linked, and in one series of 50 women who abused
cocaine during pregnancy, eight had a stillbirth caused by placental abruption
(Bingol, 1987).
Of potential serum markers, MSAFP, inhibin, and pregnancy-associated
plasma protein in abnormal levels carry increased risk (Ananth, 2017).
Indeed, preliminary data shows that MSAFP levels >280 µg/L in the third
trimester may be predictive (Ngai, 2012). Subclinical hypothyroidism or
high levels of antithyroid antibodies have been associated with a two- to
threefold higher risk for placental abruption (Abbassi-Ghanavati, 2010;
Maraka, 2016). Lupus anticoagulant is associated with maternal floor
infarction of the placenta but is less so with typical abruptions. Women
affected by some of the thrombophilias have higher associated rates of

thromboembolic events during pregnancy, however, no convincing evidence
supports a link between thrombophilias and placental abruption (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019; 2020).

■ Diagnosis
The signs and symptoms of placental abruption can vary considerably.
Classically, affected women have a sudden onset of abdominal pain, vaginal
bleeding, and uterine tenderness. In an earlier study, 78 percent had vaginal
bleeding, 66 percent had uterine tenderness or back pain, and 60 percent had
a nonreassuring fetal status (Hurd, 1983). Other findings included frequent
contractions and persistent hypertonus. However, in a fifth, preterm labor
was diagnosed, and placental abruption was not suspected until fetal distress
or death followed.
In some women, external bleeding can be profuse, yet placental
separation may not be so extensive as to compromise the fetus. In others,
external bleeding is absent, but the placenta is sufficiently sheared off to kill
the fetus—a concealed abruption. In either case, bleeding can be massive and
leads to hypovolemic shock. In an earlier report from Parkland Hospital,
Pritchard and Brekken (1967) described 141 women with abruption so
severe as to kill the fetus. Blood loss in these women often amounted to at
least half of their pregnant blood volume.

Consumptive Coagulopathy
With placental abruption, some degree of intravascular coagulation is almost
universal. Placental abruption is the most common cause of clinically
profound consumptive coagulopathy in obstetrics and probably in all
specialties (Cunningham, 2015). A primary consequence of intravascular
coagulation is the activation of plasminogen to plasmin, which then lyses
fibrin microemboli to maintain microcirculatory patency. With placental
abruption severe enough to kill the fetus, pathological levels of fibrinogen–
fibrin degradation products and D-dimers are almost always found in
maternal serum (Erez, 2015). Their quantification is not clinically useful.
In a third of women with an abruption severe enough to kill the fetus, the
plasma fibrinogen level will be <150 mg/dL. These levels are dependent on
the maternal preabruption fibrinogen level, and thus higher levels are

“protective” (Cunningham, 2015; Wang, 2016). Clinically significant low
levels may cause troublesome surgical bleeding, and measurement of levels
assists fibrinogen-replacement efforts. Levels of several other coagulation
factors also are variably decreased. These are not specifically measured in
DIC, but factors are replaced empirically with fresh frozen plasma as a part
of massive transfusion protocols (Chap. 44, p. 772). In addition,
thrombocytopenia, sometimes profound, may accompany severe
hypofibrinogenemia and can be common after repeated blood transfusions.
This “dilutional coagulopathy” is additive to DIC (Chap. 44, p. 772).
Consumptive coagulopathy is more likely with a concealed abruption
because intrauterine pressure is higher. This forces more thromboplastin into
the large veins draining the implantation site. With a partial abruption and a
live fetus, severe coagulation defects are less common. Our experience has
been that if serious coagulopathy develops, it is usually evident by the time
abruption symptoms appear. In one unusual case, a woman cared for at
Parkland Hospital presented with a nosebleed. She had no pain or vaginal
bleeding, but her fetus was dead. Her blood did not clot, and the plasma
fibrinogen level was 25 mg/dL. A total placental abruption was confirmed at
delivery.

Couvelaire Uterus
At the time of cesarean delivery, it is not uncommon to find widespread
extravasation of blood into the uterine musculature and beneath the serosa
(Fig. 43-5). This phenomenon is named after Couvelaire, who in the early
1900s termed it uteroplacental apoplexy. These myometrial hemorrhages
may incite uterine atony, but are not a sole indication for hysterectomy.
Effusions of blood may collect beneath the tubal serosa, between the leaves
of the broad ligaments, in the ovaries, or in the peritoneal cavity.

FIGURE 43-5 Couvelaire uterus from total placental abruption after cesarean delivery. Blood
markedly infiltrates the myometrium to reach the serosa. (Reproduced with permission from Dr. Steven
Blaine Holloway.)

End-organ Injury
Acute kidney injury (AKI) is a general term describing renal dysfunction
from many causes (Chap. 56, p. 1006). Delayed or incomplete treatment of
hypovolemia is one. However, even with placental abruption complicated by
severe DIC, prompt and vigorous treatment with blood and crystalloid
solutions usually prevents significant renal dysfunction. The risk for renal
injury with placental abruption rises when preeclampsia coexists
(Alexander, 2015; Drakeley, 2002). Most cases of AKI are reversible, do not
require dialysis, and generally have good long-term outcomes (Arazi, 2015).
However, irreversible acute cortical necrosis occasionally stems from
placental abruption (Gopalakrishnan, 2015).
Rarely, pituitary failure—Sheehan syndrome—follows severe
intrapartum or early postpartum hemorrhage. Described in Chapter 61 (p.
1104), the exact pathogenesis is not well understood, especially because
endocrine abnormalities are infrequent even in women who suffer
catastrophic hemorrhage (Matsuwaki, 2014).

Differential Diagnosis
Severe placental abruption usually is obvious. However, less severe forms
are not always recognized with certainty, and the diagnosis becomes one of
exclusion. Unfortunately, no laboratory tests or other diagnostic methods
accurately confirm lesser degrees of placental separation. Sonography has
limited use because the placenta and fresh clots may have similar imaging
characteristics. In a study of 149 women with a suspected placental
abruption, the sensitivity for sonography was only 24 percent (Glantz, 2002).
Thus, negative findings with sonographic examination do not exclude
placental abruption. Conversely, magnetic resonance (MR) imaging is highly
sensitive for placental abruption and should be considered if the diagnostic
information would change management (Masselli, 2011). Last, elevated
serum levels of D-dimers may be suggestive, but this has not been adequately
tested.
Thus, in the woman with vaginal bleeding and a live fetus, placenta
previa and other bleeding causes are sought with clinical and sonographic
evaluation. It has long been taught—perhaps with some justification—that
painful uterine bleeding signifies placental abruption, whereas painless
uterine bleeding indicates placenta previa. The differential diagnosis is
usually not this straightforward, and labor accompanying previa may cause
pain that suggests placental abruption. Conversely, pain from placental
abruption may mimic normal labor, or it may be painless, especially with a
posterior placenta. At times, the vaginal bleeding source remains obscure
even after delivery.

■ Management
Treatment varies depending on maternofetal clinical condition, gestational
age, and amount of associated hemorrhage. With a living viable-aged fetus
and with vaginal delivery not imminent, emergency cesarean delivery is
chosen by most. In some women, fetal compromise will be evident as shown
in Figure 43-6. When evaluating fetal status, sonographic confirmation of
fetal heart activity may be necessary because sometimes an electrode applied
directly to a dead fetus will provide misleading information by recording the
maternal heart rate (Chap. 24, p. 447).

FIGURE 43-6 Placental abruption with fetal compromise. Lower panel: Uterine hypertonus with a
baseline pressure of 20 to 25 mm Hg and frequent contractions peaking at approximately 75 mm Hg.
Upper panel: The fetal heart rate demonstrates baseline bradycardia with repetitive late decelerations.

If the fetus has died or if it is not considered sufficiently mature to live
outside the uterus, vaginal birth is preferable for the mother. In either case,
prompt and intensive resuscitation with blood products and crystalloids is
begun. These measures are lifesaving for the mother and hopefully for her
fetus. If the diagnosis of placental abruption is uncertain and the fetus is alive
and without evidence of compromise, close observation may be warranted
provided that immediate intervention is available. Colón and coworkers
(2016) performed a randomized trial and found no benefits to magnesium
sulfate tocolysis given to women with a preterm “nonsevere” abruption at 24
to 34 weeks’ gestation.

Cesarean Delivery
The compromised fetus is usually best served by cesarean delivery, and the
speed of response is an important factor in perinatal outcomes. In one study
of 33 singleton pregnancies with a clinically overt placental abruption and
fetal bradycardia, 15 of the 22 neurologically intact survivors were
delivered within a 20-minute decision-to-delivery interval (Kayani, 2003).
However, eight of 11 infants who died or developed cerebral palsy were
delivered after a 20-minute intervals. Onishi and colleagues (2019) also

found a significant negative correlation between these intervals and cord
arterial pH. At Parkland Hospital, placental abruption was one of the most
powerful antecedents to body-cooling treatment for neonatal encephalopathy
(Nelson, 2014).
A major hazard to cesarean delivery is imposed by clinically significant
consumptive coagulopathy. Preparations include two large-bore intravenous
catheters and plans for blood and component replacement. Measures of
hemoglobin, platelet, and fibrinogen levels as well as protime (PT) and
partial thromboplastin time (PTT) guide product replacement.

Vaginal Delivery
If the fetus has died, vaginal delivery is usually preferred. As reviewed
earlier, hemostasis at the placental implantation site depends primarily on
myometrial contraction and not blood coagulability. Thus, after vaginal
delivery, uterotonic agents and uterine massage are used to stimulate
myometrial contractions. Uterine muscle fibers compress placental site
vessels and prompt hemostasis even if coagulation is defective. In some
instances, vaginal delivery may not be preferable, even with a dead fetus.
One example is brisk hemorrhage that cannot be successfully managed by
vigorous blood replacement. Others are the myriad obstetrical complications
that prohibit vaginal delivery in general. In some women with extensive
placental abruption, labor tends to be rapid because the uterus is usually
persistently hypertonic (see Fig. 43-6). This can magnify fetal compromise.
In some cases, baseline intraamnionic pressures reach 50 mm Hg or higher,
and with contractions, pressures may attain levels exceeding 100 mm Hg.
Overall, however, first- and second-stage labor does not appear to be shorter
than usual (Downes, 2017).
Early amniotomy has long been championed in the management of
placental abruption. This ostensibly achieves better spiral artery
compression to diminish implantation site bleeding and reduce
thromboplastin infusion into the maternal vascular system. Although evidence
supporting this theory is lacking, membrane rupture may hasten delivery.
However, if the fetus is small, the intact sac may be more efficient in
promoting cervical dilation. If rhythmic uterine contractions are not
superimposed on baseline hypertonus, oxytocin is given in standard doses.
No data indicate that oxytocin augments thromboplastin escape into the
maternal circulation to worsen coagulopathy. In 1ight of hypertonus

associated with placental abruption, misoprostol may be a less favored
induction agent due to its association with uterine tachysystole.
In the past, some had set arbitrary time limits to permit vaginal delivery.
Instead, experiences illustrate that maternal outcome depends on the
diligence with which adequate fluid and blood replacement therapy are
pursued rather than on the interval to delivery. Observations from Parkland
Hospital described by Pritchard and Brekken (1967) are similar to those
from the University of Virginia reported by Brame and associates (1968).
Specifically, women with severe abruption who were transfused during 18
hours or more before delivery had similar outcomes to those in whom
delivery was accomplished sooner.

Expectant Management
If possible, delaying delivery may benefit an immature fetus. In one series,
43 women with placental abruption before 35 weeks’ gestation were
expectantly managed, and 31 of them were given tocolytic therapy (Bond,
1989). The mean interval until delivery for all 43 approximated 12 days.
Cesarean delivery was performed in 75 percent, and there were no
stillbirths. As discussed earlier, women with a very early abruption may
develop chronic abruption–oligohydramnios sequence. In one report, four
women with an abruption at a mean gestational age of 20 weeks subsequently
developed oligohydramnios and delivered at an average gestational age of
28 weeks (Elliott, 1998). In another description of 256 women with an
abruption at <28 weeks’ gestation, a mean of 1.6 weeks was gained
(Sabourin, 2012). Of the group, 65 percent were delivered before 29 weeks,
and half of all women underwent emergent cesarean delivery.
Unfortunately, even continuous fetal heart rate monitoring does not
guarantee universally good outcomes. A normal tracing may precede sudden
further separation with instant fetal compromise. In some of these, if the
separation is sufficient, the fetus will die before it can be delivered.
Tocolysis is advocated by some for suspected abruption if the fetus does not
display compromise. Some investigators have observed that tocolysis
improved outcomes in a highly selected cohort of women with preterm
pregnancies (Bond, 1989; Combs, 1992). In another study, Towers and
coworkers (1999) administered magnesium sulfate, terbutaline, or both to 95
of 131 women with abruption diagnosed before 36 weeks’ gestation. The
perinatal mortality rate was 5 percent in both groups with or without

tocolysis. Similar results were reported from a randomized trial (Colón,
2016). A clinical consideration to the use of tocolytic agents, such as
terbutaline, is that the drug-induced tachycardia may mask maternal
compromise. We are of the opinion that suspected placental abruption
contraindicates tocolytic agent use.

PLACENTA PREVIA
■ Classification
The Latin previa means going before, and in this sense, the placenta goes
before the fetus into the birth canal. Placenta previa describes a placenta that
is implanted somewhere in the lower uterine segment, either over or very
near the internal cervical os. Because these anatomical relationships cannot
always be precisely defined and because they frequently change across
pregnancy, terminology can sometimes be confusing.
Terminology for placenta previa has evolved, and the National Institutes
of Health (NIH)-sponsored Fetal Imaging Workshop (Reddy, 2014)
recommends the following classification:
• Placenta previa: the internal os is covered partially or completely by
placenta (Figs. 43-7 and 43-8). In the past, these were further classified as
either total or partial previa.

FIGURE 43-7 Placenta previa showing that copious hemorrhage could be anticipated with any cervical
dilation.

FIGURE 43-8 On speculum examination, placenta is visible protruding through the cervical os.
(Reproduced with permission from Dr. Maureen E. Flowers.)

• Low-lying placenta: implantation in the lower uterine segment is such that
the placental edge does not cover the internal os but lies within a 2-cm
wide perimeter around the os. A previously used term, marginal previa,
described a placenta that was at the edge of the internal os but did not
overlie it.
Clearly, the classification of some cases will depend on cervical dilation
at the time of assessment. For example, a low-lying placenta at 2-cm dilation
may become a partial placenta previa at 4-cm dilation because the cervix has
opened to expose the placental edge. Conversely, a placenta previa that
appears to be total before cervical dilation may become partial at 4-cm
dilation because the cervical opening now extends beyond the edge of the
placenta. Digital palpation in an attempt to ascertain these changing
relations between the placental edge and internal os as the cervix dilates
usually causes severe hemorrhage!
With any degree of placenta previa, a certain amount of spontaneous
placental separation is inevitable during lower uterine segment remodeling

and cervical dilation. Although this frequently causes bleeding and thus
technically constitutes a placental abruption, this term is usually not applied
in these instances.
Somewhat but not always related is vasa previa, in which fetal vessels
course through membranes and present at the cervical os. Vasa previa has
been reviewed by the Society for Maternal–Fetal Medicine (2015) and is
discussed in Chapter 6 (p. 115).

■ Placental Migration
Beginning with the use of sonography in obstetrics, the term placental
migration was coined to describe the apparent movement of the placenta
away from the internal os (King, 1973). Obviously, the placenta does not
actually move, and the mechanism of apparent movement is not completely
understood. To begin with, migration is clearly a misnomer, because
decidual invasion anchors chorionic villi.
Explanations of placental migration are likely additive. First, apparent
movement of the low-lying placenta relative to the internal os is related to
the imprecision of two-dimensional sonography. Second, as pregnancy
progresses, growth of the lower and upper uterine segments differs. With
greater blood flow in the upper uterus, placental growth toward this supply,
termed trophotropism, is thus more likely directed toward the fundus. Many
of those placentas that “migrate” most likely never were circumferentially
implanted with true villous invasion that reached the internal cervical os.
Importantly, a low-lying placenta or placenta previa is less likely to
“migrate” if there is a prior cesarean delivery scar.
The frequency of placental migration has been quantified. In one study of
4300 women at midpregnancy, 12 percent had a low-lying placenta
(Sanderson, 1991). Of placentas not covering the internal os, previa did not
persist, and none subsequently had placental hemorrhage. Conversely,
approximately 40 percent of placentas that covered the os at midpregnancy
continued to do so until delivery. Thus, placentas that lie close to but not
over the internal os until the early third trimester are unlikely to persist as a
previa by term (Heller, 2014; Parrott, 2015). The chance that placenta previa
persists increases with a hysterotomy scar (Kohari, 2012; Oyelese, 2006).

■ Incidence and Associated Factors
The incidence of placenta previa has risen during the past 30 years. Reported
incidences average about 0.4 percent or 1 case per 250 to 400 deliveries
(Hill, 2020). The frequency at Parkland Hospital from 1988 through 2003 for
nearly 250,000 births was 2.6 cases per 1000. For the 2004 to 2020 epoch, it
rose to 3.8 cases per 1000. Similar frequencies have been reported from
Austria, Finland, and Israel (Kollmann, 2016; Räisänen, 2014; Rosenberg,
2011).
Several demographic factors may contribute to this higher rate of
placenta previa. First, maternal age increases the frequency (Biro, 2012;
Roberts, 2012). In the First- and Second-Trimester Evaluation of Risk
(FASTER) trial, which included more than 36,000 women, the frequency of
previa was 0.5 percent for women <35 years compared with 1.1 percent in
those ≥35 years (Cleary–Goldman, 2005). At Parkland Hospital, the
incidence ranged from a rate of approximately 0.65 cases per 1000 births for
women ≤19 years to almost 10 cases per 1000 births for women older than
35.
Multiparity also elevates the rate of placenta previa (Räisänen, 2014).
Obviously, the effects of advancing maternal age and parity are confounding.
Still, Babinszki and colleagues (1999) reported that the 2.2-percent
incidence in women with parity of five or greater was significantly higher
than that of women with lower parity. The interpregnancy interval does not
affect this rate (Fox, 2015).
Cigarette smoking increases the relative risk of placenta previa at least
twofold (Usta, 2005). It has been postulated that carbon monoxide hypoxemia
causes compensatory placental hypertrophy and greater surface area.
Smoking may also be related to decidual vasculopathy.
Several clinical characteristics also raise placenta previa risks.
Foremost, women with one or more prior cesarean deliveries are at greater
risk for subsequent placental disorders that include placenta previa,
placental abruption, or placenta accreta spectrum (PAS) (Gibbins, 2018;
Klar, 2014). The cumulative risks for placenta previa that accrue with the
increasing number of cesarean deliveries are extraordinary. In one MFMU
Network study of 30,132 women undergoing cesarean delivery, the incidence
was 1.3 percent for those with only one prior cesarean delivery, but it was
3.4 percent if there were six or more prior cesareans (Silver, 2006). In a

retrospective cohort of nearly 400,000 women who were delivered of two
consecutive singletons, those with a cesarean delivery for the first pregnancy
had a 1.6-fold greater rate for previa in the second pregnancy (GurolUrganci, 2011). These same investigators reported a 1.5-fold higher rate
from six similar population-based studies. This risk is increased eightfold in
women with parity greater than four and who have more than four prior
cesarean deliveries (Gilliam, 2002).
Importantly, women with a prior uterine incision and placenta previa
have an increased likelihood that cesarean hysterectomy will be necessary
because of associated PAS (p. 761). In one study, 6 percent of women with a
primary cesarean delivery for placenta previa required a hysterectomy. This
rate was 25 percent for women with a placenta previa undergoing repeat
cesarean delivery (Frederiksen, 1999).
Multifetal gestation raises placenta previa risk (Ananth, 2003a; Luke,
2017a). Compared with monochorionic twins, dichorionic ones show higher
rates, which perhaps stems from having two implantation sites (Weis, 2012).
MSAFP levels, if abnormally elevated for otherwise unexplained reasons
during prenatal screening, raise the risk for placenta previa and a host of
other abnormalities. Moreover, women with a placenta previa and comorbid
MSAFP level >2.0 multiples of the median (MoM) at 16 weeks’ gestation
were at greater risk for late-pregnancy bleeding and preterm birth (Chap. 17,
p. 338).
Assisted reproductive technology (ART) used for conception elevates
placenta previa rates. Some of this association may derive from overlapping
effects. First, older women constitute a significant portion of patients electing
ART (Luke, 2017b). Second, even adjusting for multifetal gestation, ART is
still associated with higher previa rates (Karami, 2018). Last, in one
systematic review including nearly 256,000 births, uterine leiomyomas were
associated with higher placenta previa rates (Jenabi, 2019).

■ Clinical Features
Painless bleeding is the most characteristic event with placenta previa.
Bleeding usually does not develop until near the end of the second trimester
or later, but it can begin even before midpregnancy. Undoubtedly, some late
abortions are caused by an abnormally located placenta. Initial bleeding from
a previa usually begins without warning, and this sentinel bleed is rarely so

profuse as to prove fatal. Usually it ceases, only to recur. However, in
perhaps 10 percent of women, particularly those with a placenta implanted
near but not over the cervical os, bleeding is delayed until labor onset.
Bleeding at this time varies in degree, and it may mimic placental abruption.
In cases in which the placenta is located over the internal os, a specific
sequence of events leads to bleeding. First, the uterine body remodels to
form the lower uterine segment. With this, the internal os dilates, and some of
the implanted placenta inevitably separates. Bleeding that ensues is
augmented by the inherent inability of myometrial fibers in the lower uterine
segment to contract and thereby constrict torn vessels. Similarly, bleeding
from this lower-segment implantation site also frequently continues after
placental delivery. Last, lacerations in the friable cervix and lower segment
will bleed. These may be especially problematic following manual removal
of a somewhat adhered placenta.
Cervical length may alter the clinical course. Stafford (2010) but not
Trudell (2013), both with their associates, found that a placenta previa and a
third-trimester cervical length <30 mm increased the risks for hemorrhage,
uterine activity, and preterm birth. Similarly, Friszer (2013) but not Trudell
(2013), both with their coworkers, showed that women admitted for bleeding
had a greater chance of delivery in the subsequent 7 days when the cervical
length measured <25 mm sonographically.
Placenta accreta spectrum is a frequent and serious complication
associated with placenta previa. This abnormal placental attachment derives
in part from poorly developed decidua that lines the lower uterine segment.
Biswas and coworkers (1999) performed placental bed biopsies in 50
women with a placenta previa and in 50 control women. Infiltration of spiral
arterioles by trophoblastic giant cells, rather than by the expected
endovascular trophoblast cells, was found in half of specimens. In contrast,
only 20 percent of biopsies from normally implanted placentas had these
changes. In another study of 514 cases of placenta previa, abnormal placental
attachment was identified in 7 percent (Frederiksen, 1999). As discussed,
placenta previa overlying a prior cesarean incision conveys a particularly
high risk for PAS.
Coagulopathy rarely complicate placenta previa, even when
implantation site separation is extensive (Cunningham, 2015). Placental
thromboplastin, which incites the intravascular coagulation seen with
placental abruption, is presumed to readily escape through the cervical canal

rather than be forced into the maternal circulation. The paucity of large
myometrial veins in this area also may be protective.

■ Diagnosis
For uterine bleeding after midpregnancy, placenta previa and placental
abruption are always considered. In one Canadian study, placenta previa
accounted for 21 percent of women admitted from 22 to 28 weeks’ gestation
with vaginal bleeding (Sabourin, 2012). Previa should not be excluded until
sonographic evaluation has clearly proved its absence. If sonography is not
readily available, diagnosis by digital cervical examination is done in an
operating room and with preparations in place for operative delivery. We
call these preparations a double set-up technique. Even the gentlest
examination can cause torrential hemorrhage.
Using standard sonographic techniques, quick and accurate placental
localization can be accomplished (American Institute of Ultrasound in
Medicine, 2018). This is usually done with transabdominal sonography. If the
placenta clearly overlies the cervix or if it lies away from the lower uterine
segment, the examination has excellent sensitivity and negative predictive
value (Olive, 2006; Quant, 2014). Obese women may hinder clear viewing
of the lower uterine segment. A full bladder may artificially elongate the
cervix and compress the lower uterine segment to give the impression that the
placenta overlies the cervix.
If placental location remains unclear, transvaginal sonography is the most
accurate sonographic method and is safe even with vaginal bleeding (Fig.
43-9). In a comprehensive study, the internal os was visualized in all cases
with transvaginal sonography but in only 30 percent with transabdominal
sonography (Farine, 1988). As discussed, if the placental edge lies <2 cm
from the internal os, but not covering it, the placenta is considered low lying
(Reddy, 2014). In the absence of any other indication, sonography need not
be frequently repeated simply to document placental position. At Parkland
Hospital, women with placenta previa identified at 18 to 22 weeks’ gestation
and a prior cesarean delivery are reevaluated sonographically at 28 weeks
and again at 32 weeks if it persists. Those with a placenta previa but without
prior cesarean delivery undergo reimaging at 32 weeks. Restriction of
activity is not necessary unless a previa persists beyond 28 weeks’ gestation
or if clinical findings such as bleeding or contractions develop before this

time. At 32 weeks’ gestation, if the placental edge is still <2 cm from the os,
transvaginal sonography is repeated at 36 weeks’ gestation.

FIGURE 43-9 In this transvaginal image at 21 weeks’ gestation, the posterior placenta (P) completely
covers the internal cervical os (arrowhead). The dotted line represents the cervical canal.

Using MR imaging, several investigators report excellent visualization of
placental abnormalities. However, it is unlikely that this modality will
replace sonography for routine evaluation anytime soon given availability
and cost differences compared with sonography. However, MR imaging is
useful for evaluation of PAS (p. 761).

■ Management
Care with placenta previa is individualized, and three prominent factors
include fetal maturity, associated labor, and bleeding severity. In one study of
214 women with a placenta previa, 43 percent had an emergency delivery,
and half of these were preterm (Ruiter, 2015). Instead, if active bleeding
subsides and the fetus is immature, close observation in an obstetrical unit is
indicated. Data are sparse regarding tocolytic administration for uterine

contractions. Although robust randomized trials are lacking, Bose and
colleagues (2011) recommend that if tocolytics are given, they be limited to
48 hours of administration. As noted earlier, the physiological
cardiovascular responses to tocolytic agents that include hypotension and
tachycardia can mask maternal compromise. We categorically recommend
against their use in this setting.
After bleeding has ceased for approximately 2 days and the fetus is
judged to be healthy, a woman can usually be discharged home with
instructions for “pelvic rest.” The Society for Maternal–Fetal Medicine
(2018) does not recommend routine cervical length screening in these
women. Importantly, the woman and her family must appreciate the
possibility of recurrent bleeding and be prepared for immediate transport
back to the hospital. In other cases, prolonged hospitalization may be
necessary.
The frequency of emergency delivery in women with placenta previa
ranges from 25 to 40 percent (Erfani, 2019; Gibbons, 2018). In properly
selected patients, however, long-term inpatient care does not appear to add
benefits compared with outpatient management (Neilson, 2003). In one
randomized study of 53 women who had a bleeding previa at 24 to 36
weeks’ gestation, maternal or fetal morbidity rates did not differ between
management methods (Wing, 1996). Of all study women, 60 percent had
recurrent bleeding, and half eventually required expeditious cesarean
delivery.
For women who are near term and who are not bleeding, plans are made
for scheduled cesarean delivery. A planned delivery in a controlled setting is
optimal, and timing balances fetal immaturity against antepartum hemorrhage.
The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists and Society for
Maternal–Fetal Medicine (2021) recommend delivery for otherwise
uncomplicated placenta previa between 360/7 and 376/7 weeks. At Parkland
Hospital, we usually perform elective cesarean delivery at 380/7 weeks.
Recommendations for delivery of women with PAS are outlined in that
section.

■ Delivery

Practically all women with placenta previa undergo cesarean delivery. Some
recommend a vertical laparotomy incision to provide rapid entry if bleeding
is torrential or if generous operating space is required for hysterectomy. As
discussed, cesarean delivery is emergently performed in more than half
because of hemorrhage, for which about a fourth require blood transfusion
(Sabourin, 2012). Although a low transverse hysterotomy is usually possible,
this may cause fetal bleeding if the placenta is implanted anteriorly and the
placenta is incised. In such cases, fetal delivery should be expeditious
(Silver, 2015a). Thus, a vertical uterine incision may be preferable in some
instances. In either case, even when the incision extends through the placenta,
maternal or fetal outcomes are rarely compromised.
Following placental removal, the implantation site may bleed
uncontrollably due to poorly contracted smooth muscle, which is
characteristic of the lower uterine segment. If hemostasis at the placental
implantation site cannot be obtained by uterotonic agent administration and
pressure, it can be oversewn with no. 0 chromic sutures. Cho and associates
(1991) described placing interrupted sutures at 1-cm intervals to form a
circle around the bleeding portion of the lower segment to control
hemorrhage. Others have reported success with compression sutures that
traverse and compress the anterior and posterior uterine wall (Mohamed,
2019; Sallam, 2019).
Of other methods, Bakri or Foley balloon tamponade used alone or
coupled with compression sutures has been described (Albayrak, 2011;
Diemert, 2012). Other surgical options are bilateral uterine or internal iliac
artery ligation, illustrated in Chapter 44 (p. 779). Pelvic artery embolization
also has gained acceptance. Yu and colleagues (2020) performed a
randomized trial of perioperative prophylactic internal iliac artery balloon
occlusion during cesarean delivery for placenta previa and found that
deployment did not reduce postpartum hemorrhage or alter maternal or
neonatal morbidity.
If these more conservative methods fail and bleeding is brisk,
hysterectomy is necessary. Placenta previa—especially with PAS—currently
is a common indication for peripartum hysterectomy at Parkland Hospital and
other institutions (Jakobsson, 2015; Wong, 2011). In cases without PAS, the
reported incidence of hysterectomy with placenta previa is 2 percent
(Gibbins, 2018).

Thus, it is not possible to accurately estimate the effect on the
hysterectomy rate from placenta previa alone without considering the
associated PAS. Again, for women whose placenta previa is implanted
anteriorly at the site of a prior uterine incision, the likelihood of an
associated morbidly adherent placenta and need for hysterectomy is
increased. In a study of 318 peripartum hysterectomies performed in the
United Kingdom, 40 percent were done for abnormal placentation (Knight,
2007). At Parkland Hospital, 44 percent of cesarean hysterectomies were
done for bleeding placenta previa or for PAS (Wortman, 2015). The
technique for peripartum hysterectomy is described in Chapter 30 (p. 560).

■ Maternal and Perinatal Outcomes
Placenta previa and coexistent PAS both contribute substantively to maternal
morbidity and mortality rates. The maternal mortality ratio is increased
approximately threefold for women with a placenta previa (Gibbins, 2018).
In a report of 5367 maternal deaths in the United States from 2006 to 2013,
placenta previa alone accounted for nearly 3 percent of deaths from
hemorrhage (Creanga, 2014, 2017).
The report from the Consortium on Safe Labor emphasizes the ongoing
perinatal morbidity with placenta previa (Lai, 2012). In these cases, preterm
delivery continues to be a major cause of perinatal death (Balachandar,
2020; Nørgaard, 2012; Salihu, 2003). Ananth and colleagues (2003b)
reported a comparably elevated risk of neonatal death even for fetuses who
delivered at term. This is at least partially related to the fetal anomaly rate,
which is two- to threefold higher in pregnancies with placenta previa (Crane,
1999; Kancherla, 2015).
The association of fetal-growth restriction with placenta previa is likely
minimal after controlling for gestational age. In a population-based cohort of
more than 500,000 singleton births, most low-birthweight newborns
associated with placenta previa resulted from preterm birth (Ananth, 2001).
From their large metaanalysis, Balayla and coworkers (2019) found a
slightly increased frequency of fetal-growth restriction. At least two other
studies reported an elevated risk (Räisänen, 2014; Weiner, 2016).
Apparently, fetal growth effects are similar with placenta previa and PAS
(Jauniaux, 2019).

PLACENTA ACCRETA SPECTRUM
The term placenta accreta spectrum (PAS) describes aberrant placentation
characterized by abnormally implanted, invasive, or adhered placenta.
Derivation of accreta comes from the Latin ac- + crescere—to adhere or
become attached to (Benirschke, 2012). It is also referred to as the morbidly
adherent placenta, and in Europe it is referred to as a pernicious placenta
previa with accreta and abnormally adherent placenta.

■ Etiopathogenesis
The major clinical problem is placental failure to separate normally from the
myometrium after fetal delivery. This abnormal adherence stems in part from
partial or total absence of the decidua basalis and imperfect development of
the fibrinoid or Nitabuch layer, described in Chapter 5 (p. 85). If the
decidual spongy layer is lacking either partially or totally, the physiological
line of cleavage is absent, and some or all cotyledons are densely anchored.
Microscopically, placental villi attach to smooth muscle fibers rather than to
decidual cells. This decidual deficiency then prevents normal separation
after delivery. The surface area involved at the implantation site and the
depth of trophoblast ingrowth vary between women, but all affected
placentas can potentially cause significant hemorrhage.
Data now suggest that PAS is not solely caused by the decidua’s
anatomical deficiency. Indeed, the cytotrophoblasts may control decidual
invasion through factors such as angiogenesis (Duzyj, 2018; Goh, 2016).
Moreover, some tissue specimens show immunologically mediated
“hyperinvasiveness” (Harris, 2019). Some genes that code for remodeling
and for adherence may be highly expressed (Matsukawa, 2019; Shainker,
2020). Myometrial fibers attached to the basal plate in an antecedent
pregnancy are predictive markers for a subsequent PAS (Linn, 2015; Miller,
2016). This implies an antecedent “constitutional endometrial defect” in most
cases. The greater risk conveyed by previous surgical uterine trauma may be
partially explained by an enhanced vulnerability to trophoblast invasion
(Einerson, 2020; Jauniaux, 2018).
This association with prior trauma is reinforced by the close relationship
between cesarean scar pregnancy (CSP) and later development of PAS in
the same pregnancy. Indeed, accruing evidence suggests that CSP and PAS lie

on a spectrum and that CSP is a precursor (Happe, 2020; Timor-Tritsch,
2019). Described in Chapter 12 (p. 229), early rupture and hemorrhage with
CSP are not uncommon, and women often elect pregnancy-terminating
interventions to avoid these (Society for Maternal–Fetal Medicine, 2020;
Timor-Tritsch, 2019).

■ Classification
Variants of PAS are classified by the depth of trophoblastic growth (Figs. 4310 and 43-11). Placenta accreta indicates that villi are attached to the
myometrium. With placenta increta, villi actually invade the myometrium,
and placenta percreta defines villi that penetrate through the myometrium
and to or through the serosa (Silver, 2018). In clinical practice, these three
variants are encountered in an approximate ratio of 80:15:5, respectively
(Wong, 2008). At a referral center, however, the distribution was 22, 24, and
54 percent respectively (Birgani, 2020). In all three varieties, abnormal
adherence may involve all lobules—total placenta accreta. If all or part of a
single lobule is abnormally attached, it is described as focal placenta
accreta. Histological diagnosis cannot be made from the placenta alone, and
myometrial samples are necessary for confirmation (Jauniaux, 2021).
Terminology for consistent classification has been lacking because of varying
clinical criteria and lack of detailed pathological examinations. To alleviate
this, the International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics (FIGO) has
recently proposed a clinical classification system for PAS (Jauniaux, 2019).

FIGURE 43-10 Placenta accreta spectrum. A. Placenta accreta. B. Placenta increta. C. Placenta
percreta.

FIGURE 43-11 Varying degrees of myometrial invasion with placenta accreta spectrum disorders.
Incisions begin on the serosal surface and extend through to the placenta. A. In this case, the
myometrium (M) shows minimal invasion by the placenta (P). S = uterine serosa. B. A greater degree
of myometrial invasion is seen here. C. In this example, the placenta (brackets) extends to the serosal
edge, held by the surgeon’s hand. No myometrium remains at this site. (Reproduced with permission
from Dr. C. Edward Wells in Cunningham FG: Placenta previa and morbidly adherent placenta. In
Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al (eds): Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative
Obstetrics, 3rd edition. New York, McGraw Hill Education, 2017.)

■ Incidence and Risk Factors
Decades ago, the frequency of PAS was 1 in 20,000 births (McKeogh, 1951).
As late as 1971, Hellman and Pritchard in the 14th edition of Williams
Obstetrics described PAS as the subject of case reports. Since then, the
incidence has grown remarkably in direct relationship to the rising cesarean
delivery rate. For example, the incidence was 1 case in 2500 births in the
1980s, but it was 1 case per 731 births in a report from the MFMU Network
comprising 115,502 women (Bailit, 2015). From the Nationwide Inpatient
Sample, the PAS rate was an astounding 1 case in 270 births (Mogos, 2016).
This rising frequency has made PAS one of the most formidable problems
in obstetrics. Of 5367 pregnancy-related maternal deaths in the United States
from 2006 to 2013, 13 percent were due to hemorrhage caused by PAS
(Creanga, 2015, 2017). In addition, PAS is a leading cause of hemorrhage
and emergency peripartum hysterectomy (Awan, 2011; Eller, 2011; Rossi,
2010). The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists and the
Society for Maternal–Fetal Medicine (2018) have outlined optimal
management. The International Society for Abnormally Invasive Placenta
also has published guidelines (Collins, 2019).
In subsequent pregnancies following PAS, recurrence risks are high.
Women in whom hysterectomy is avoided have an estimated 20-percent
incidence of recurrence (Cunningham, 2016; Roeca, 2017). Some evidence
shows that these women also have greater risks for placenta previa, uterine
rupture, manual placental removal, preterm delivery, and hysterectomy
(Baldwin, 2020; Eshkoli, 2013).
PAS risk factors are similar to those for placenta previa (p. 756). Shown
in Figure 43-12, the two most important elements are an associated placenta

previa, a prior cesarean delivery, or more likely both (Klar, 2014; Silver,
2006). A classical hysterotomy incision has a higher risk for subsequent PAS
than a lower uterine segment one (Gyamfi-Bannerman, 2012). Of women
with a prior cesarean delivery, almost half had myometrial fibers seen
microscopically adhered to the placenta (Hardardottir, 1996; Miller, 2016).
Dysfunctional decidua may also follow other myometrial trauma such as
curettage or endometrial ablation (Baldwin, 2018; Gill, 2015). ART is an
independent risk factor for PAS (Salmanian, 2020).

FIGURE 43-12 Frequency of placenta accreta spectrum in women with one to four prior cesarean
deliveries (CDs) and now with a placenta previa.

Other risk markers are prenatal MSAFP and human chorionic
gonadotropin (hCG) used to screen for neural-tube defects and aneuploidies.
In one study of more than 9300 women screened at 14 to 22 weeks’ gestation,
the risk for PAS was eightfold higher with MSAFP levels >2.5 MoM, and it
was increased fourfold with maternal serum free β-hCG levels >2.5 MoM
(Hung, 1999).

■ Diagnosis
With first- and second-trimester PAS, hemorrhage usually stems from a
coexisting placenta previa. Such bleeding will typically prompt evaluation,
and ideally sonography is used (Chantraine, 2013; Jauniaux, 2018).
With lesser degrees of bleeding, first-trimester measurement of the
smallest myometrial thickness can help predict the later risk for peripartum
hysterectomy with PAS (Happe, 2020). In a screening study of more than
22,000 singleton pregnancies at 11 to 13 weeks’ gestation, 6 percent were at
high risk for PAS (Panaiotova, 2019). However imaging was less than
perfect to identify all of these placentas early. Subsequently, only 14 had a
suspected clinical diagnosis, and 13 of these were confirmed at delivery.
Five characteristic sonographic findings suggest PAS: (1) placental
lacunae; (2) thinning of the retroplacental myometrium; (3) disruption of the
bladder-uterine serosal interface; (4) bridging vessels from the placenta to
the bladder-serosal interface; and (5) placental bulge that pushes outward
and distorts the contour of the uterus (Fig. 43-13). In a metaanalysis, the
sensitivities of these criteria to identify placenta accreta, increta, and
percreta were 91, 93, and 89 percent, respectively. Corresponding
specificities were 97, 98, and 99 percent, respectively (Pagani, 2018).

FIGURE 43-13 Transabdominal sonogram of placental percreta shows multiple and massive placental
“lakes” or “lacunae” (L).

These figures may be overestimated because of clinical bias and
considerable interobserver variability (Silver, 2018). Some investigators
report fewer spectacular results with sonography (Jauniaux, 2016; Primo,
2014). Bowman and colleagues (2014) described the sensitivity of
sonography to be 54 percent; specificity, 88 percent; positive predictive
value, 82 percent; negative predictive value, 65 percent; and accuracy, 65
percent. Location affects sonographic accuracy. Posterior placental location
is associated with delayed diagnosis and increased surgical complications
(Morgan, 2019; Tinari, 2021). In one study, the detection rate was 90 percent
for anterior placenta accreta compared with 50 percent for posterior ones
(Pilloni, 2016). Nageotte (2014) concluded that identification of PAS with
sonography should be interpreted with clinical and operative findings.
Better results have been found by some using three-dimensional (3-D)
sonography and power Doppler (Collins, 2015). We too have found that the
addition of Doppler color flow mapping aids prediction of myometrial
invasion (Fig. 43-14). Invasion is suspected if the distance between the
uterine serosa–bladder wall interface and the retroplacental vessels

measures <1 mm and if large intraplacental lacunae are seen (Rac, 2015a;
Twickler, 2000). In another study, hypervascularity of the uterine serosa–
bladder wall interface had the highest positive and negative predictive
values for placenta percreta (Cali, 2013). Intracervical lakes also have been
reported with placenta percreta (di Pasquo, 2020).

FIGURE 43-14 Transvaginal sonogram of placental invasion with a placenta percreta. Retroplacental
vessels (color Doppler) invade the myometrium, and abnormal intraplacental venous lakes (L) are
commonly seen in this setting.

Yule and coworkers (2020) reported that the placenta accreta index was
useful for diagnosis. This index incorporates the number of prior cesarean
deliveries, placental location, lacunae, bridging vessels, and smallest
myometrial distance. These investigators are also exploring first-trimester
color mapping to develop a quantification algorithm (Yule 2021).
To further delineate anatomy, MR imaging can be added. We and others
use it to identify invasion of adjacent structures (Chalubinski, 2013; Reddy,
2014). Interobserver variability was reported to be excellent to diagnose
PAS and assess invasion depth. There was less agreement in assessing
topography of invasion (Finazzo, 2020). Using MR imaging, Mori and

colleagues (2020) described a high prevalence of pelvic parasitic arteries
with PAS. However, not all investigators have found MR imaging to be
beneficial (Einerson, 2018).
Although gadolinium is usually not added during pregnancy, this contrast
may enhance images (Millischer, 2017). Lax and coworkers (2007)
described three MR imaging findings that suggest PAS: uterine bulging, dark
intraplacental bands on T2-weighted imaging, and heterogeneous signal
intensity within the placenta indicative of lacunae. Some recommend MR
imaging if sonography results are inconclusive or there is a posterior previa
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2018; Silver, 2018).

■ Management
Preoperative assessment ideally begins once a possible PAS is recognized
antenatally. A major decision concerns the timing and the ideal facility for
delivery. Considerations include appropriate surgical, anesthesia, intensive
care, and blood banking capabilities. An obstetrical surgeon or
gynecological oncologist and surgical, urological, and interventional
radiological consultants should be available (Collins, 2019; Shamshirsaz,
2018). The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2018) and
the Society for Maternal–Fetal Medicine recommend planned delivery in a
tertiary-care facility. In some, specially designed teams have been assembled
and are on call (Shamshirsaz, 2018). A metaanalysis described the improved
maternal outcomes with such management (Bartels, 2018).
Silver and colleagues (2015b) have provided requisites for accreta
centers of excellence and their criteria to consider transfer to a higher levelof-care hospital (Table 43-2). If possible, delivery is best scheduled for
peak availability of all resources and team members. Even so, a third of
cases require unscheduled delivery, and contingency plans should be ready
(Pettit, 2019). Women who refuse blood or its derivatives pose especially
difficult management dilemmas (Barth, 2011).
TABLE 43-2. Criteria to Consider for Delivery of Placenta Accreta
Spectrum (PAS) in a Center of Excellence

Delivery Timing
In one study, 40 percent of women with PAS had bleeding mandating
unplanned delivery prior to 34 weeks’ gestation. Timing balances fetal
immaturity against adverse maternal consequences of hemorrhage and
emergency cesarean delivery (Perlman, 2017; Pettit, 2019). The American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2018; 2021) recommends
individualization and suggests delivery between 340/7 and 356/7 weeks’
gestation. They cite a decision-analysis study that justifies elective delivery
without fetal lung maturity testing after 34 completed weeks (Robinson,
2010). The Society for Maternal–Fetal Medicine (2018) recommends
delivery between 34 and 37 weeks. Two earlier surveys found that most
practitioners do not deliver these women until 36 weeks or later (Esakoff,
2012; Wright, 2013). At Parkland Hospital, we generally schedule these
procedures after 36 completed weeks but are prepared also to manage them
in nonelective situations (Rac, 2015b).
In some cases, PAS is not recognized until laparotomy. If resources are
inadequate to surgically manage the percreta and if the woman is stable and
not bleeding, the fetus is not delivered. The abdominal incision is closed,
and she is transferred to a tertiary-care facility.

Preoperative Prophylactic Catheterization
In cases that may involve the ureters, catheterization may aid their dissection
or identification. However, these catheters overall do not lower urinary tract
injury rates (Crocetto, 2021). Some, but not all, advocate preoperative
ureteral catheterization (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2018; Eller, 2011). The role of catheters for ureteral injury
repair is outlined in Chapter 30 (p. 564).

With arterial catheterization, balloon-tipped catheters aim to mitigate
blood loss and thereby enhance surgical visibility. Catheters are advanced
preoperatively into the internal iliac arteries and are inflated after fetal
delivery to occlude pelvic blood flow (Ballas, 2012; Desai, 2012; Zhou,
2021). Some prefer an infrarenal aortic balloon occlusion catheter (Mei,
2020). Alternatively, the catheters can be used to deliver occluding emboli to
bleeding arterial sites (Mei, 2018). Others have concluded that these
procedures offer borderline efficacy and have serious risks (Chen, 2020;
Makary, 2019; Mohr-Sasson, 2020). Rare complications have included
thrombosis of the common iliac artery (Bishop, 2011). At this time, the
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2018) concludes that
a firm recommendation cannot be made for or against intraarterial catheter
use. Similarly, there are no obvious benefits to prophylactic internal iliac
artery ligation in this setting (Po, 2012; Yu, 2020).

Cesarean Delivery and Hysterectomy
Before commencing with delivery, the risk of hysterectomy to prevent
exsanguination should be estimated. Some of these abnormal placentations,
especially if partial, may be amenable to placental delivery with hemostatic
suture placement. Confirmation of a percreta or increta almost always
mandates hysterectomy. Because the scope of invasion may not be apparent
before delivery of the fetus, some complete a number of dissection steps
early. This also minimizes blood loss during potentially tedious dissection
after hysterotomy and if the placenta bleeds. Thus, an attempt can be made to
create a wide bladder flap before making the hysterotomy incision
(Cunningham, 2017). The round ligaments are divided, and the lateral edges
of the peritoneal reflection are dissected downward. If possible, these
incisions are extended to encircle the entire placental implantation site that
visibly occupies the prevesical space and posterior bladder wall. Following
this, a classical hysterotomy, transverse fundal, or high posterior incision is
made to avoid the placenta (Kotsuji, 2013).
After fetal delivery, the extent of placental invasion is assessed without
attempts at manual placental removal. In a report from the United Kingdom,
attempts at partial or total placental removal prior to hysterectomy were
associated with twice as much blood loss (Fitzpatrick, 2014). Generally
speaking, with obvious percreta or increta, hysterectomy is usually the best
course, and the placenta is left in situ. With more extensive placental

ingrowth, bleeding may be minimal until manual placental removal is
attempted. Unless there is spontaneous separation with bleeding that
mandates emergency hysterectomy, the operation begins after full assessment
is made. Cesarean hysterectomy is carried out as described in Chapter 30
(p.560).
With heavy bleeding, successful treatment depends on immediate blood
replacement and other measures that can include uterine or internal iliac
artery ligation, balloon occlusion, or embolization. In some cases, the
operation is made easier by performance of a supracervical hysterectomy
(Levin, 2020). Kingdom and colleagues (2020) have described a modified
radical hysterectomy for PAS (Table 43-3). This technique is also detailed in
Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd edition (Cunningham,
2017). Because of a high risk for postoperative venous thromboembolism,
consideration is given for thromboprophylaxis (Silver, 2018).
TABLE 43-3. Steps in Cesarean Hysterectomy for Management of Placenta
Percreta

Conservative Management
Occasionally, it may be possible to trim the umbilical cord, repair the
hysterotomy incision, leave the placenta in situ, and not pursue hysterectomy
(Sentilhes, 2021). This option may be used for women in whom abnormal
placentation was not suspected before cesarean delivery and in whom uterine
closure stops bleeding. After this, she can be transferred to a higher level-ofcare facility for definitive management. Another consideration is the woman
with a strong desire for fertility and who has received extensive counseling.
Resection of the adherent placenta and underlying myometrium has been
advocated as a uterine-sparing technique (Palacios-Jaraquemada, 2020).
Conservative management was reviewed by Perez-Delboy (2014) and
Fox (2015) and their colleagues. In some of these cases, the placenta
spontaneously resorbed between 1 and 12 months with a mean of 6 months.

Numerous complications can occur and include sepsis, coagulopathy,
pulmonary embolism, and arteriovenous malformation (Fox, 2015; Judy,
2015; Roach, 2015). In other cases, sutures are placed through the outside
wall of the uterus overlying the placental bed. Shih and associates (2019)
described this using a Nausicaa procedure.
In some of these women, a subsequent hysterectomy—either planned or
prompted by bleeding or infection—is performed days to weeks postpartum
when blood loss might be less (Al-Khan, 2014; Sentilhes, 2009, 2021;
Zuckerwise, 2020). In some studies, 20 percent or fewer of women
ultimately required hysterectomy (Bretelle, 2007; Kutuk, 2018). In other
reports, however, up to 60 percent eventually required emergency
hysterectomy (Clausen, 2013; Pather, 2014). Evidence that treatment with
methotrexate aids resorption is lacking. Last, for women in whom the
placenta is left in situ, serial serum β-hCG measurements are not informative,
and serial sonographic or MR imaging is recommended (Timmermans, 2007;
Worley, 2008).
At this time, we agree with the American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2018) that leaving the placenta in situ should be considered
investigational. Exceptions permit transfer to a higher level of care.
Guidelines from the International Society for Abnormally Invasive Placenta
are more permissive (Collins, 2019).

■ Pregnancy Outcomes
In sum, PAS can have disastrous outcomes for both mother and fetus.
Although the depth of placental invasion does not correspond with perinatal
outcome, it is of paramount maternal significance. Table 43-4 displays
outcomes of women at tertiary-care hospitals and in whom the PAS diagnosis
was usually made preoperatively. Despite these advantages, complications
included hemorrhage, urinary tract injury, intensive care unit admission,
secondary surgical procedures, and maternal death. Some of these same
reports chronicle outcomes in a second cohort of women in whom care was
not given at a tertiary-care facility or in whom the diagnosis of percreta was
not made until delivery, or both. In these cohorts, morbidity and mortality
rates were higher (Erfani, 2019).

TABLE 43-4. Selected Maternal Outcomes in Women with Placenta
Accreta Spectrum Identified Prenatally and Delivered in Tertiary-Care
Units

REFERENCES
Abbassi-Ghanavati M, Casey BM, Spong CY, et al: Pregnancy outcomes in women with thyroid
peroxidase antibodies. Obstet Gynecol 116: 381, 2010
Albayrak M, Ozdemir I, Koc O, et al: Postpartum haemorrhage from the lower uterine segment
secondary to placenta previa/accreta: successful conservative management with Foley balloon
tamponade. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol 51(4):377, 2011
Alexander JM, Cunningham FG: Management. In Taylor RN, Roberts JM, Cunningham FG (eds):
Chesley’s Hypertensive Disorders in Pregnancy, 4th ed. Amsterdam, Academic Press, 2015
Al-Khan A, Gupta V, Illsley NP, et al: Maternal and fetal outcomes in placenta accreta after institution
of team-managed care. Reprod Sci 21(6):761, 2014
Altman D, Carroli G, Duley L, et al: Do women with preeclampsia, and their babies, benefit from
magnesium sulphate? The Magpie Trial: a randomised placebo-controlled trial. Lancet 359:1877,
2002
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Society for Maternal–Fetal Medicine: Placenta
accreta spectrum. Obstetric Care Consensus No. 7, November, 2018
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Antiphospholipid syndrome. Practice Bulletin No.
132, December 2012, Reaffirmed 2019

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Inherited thrombophilias in pregnancy. Practice
Bulletin No. 197, June 2018, Reaffirmed 2020
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Medically indicated late-preterm and early-term
deliveries. Committee Opinion No. 818, January 2021
American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine: AIUM-ACR-ACOG-SMFM-SRU practice parameter
for the performance of standard diagnostic obstetric ultrasound examinations. J Ultrasound Med
37(11):e13, 2018
Ananth CV, Demissie K, Smulian JC, et al: Placenta previa in singleton and twin births in the United
States, 1989 through 1998: a comparison of risk factor profiles and associated conditions. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 188(1):275, 2003a
Ananth CV, Demissie K, Smulian JC, et al: Relationship among placenta previa, fetal growth restriction,
and preterm delivery: a population-based study. Obstet Gynecol 98:299, 2001
Ananth CV, Friedman AM, Lavery JA, et al: Neurodevelopmental outcomes in children in relation to
placental abruption. BJOG 124(3):463, 2017
Ananth CV, Getahun D, Peltier MR et al: Placental abruption in term and preterm gestations. Obstet
Gynecol 107:785, 2006
Ananth CV, Lavery JA, Vintzileos AM, et al: Severe placental abruption: clinical definition and
associations with maternal complications. Am J Obstet Gynecol 214(2):272.e1, 2016
Ananth CV, Oyelese Y, Srinivas N, et al: Preterm premature rupture of membranes, intrauterine
infection, and oligohydramnios: risk factors for placental abruption. Obstet Gynecol 104:71, 2004
Ananth CV, Oyelese Y, Yeo L, et al: Placental abruption in the United States, 1979 through 2001:
temporal trends and potential determinants. Am J Obstet Gynecol 192(1):191, 2005
Ananth CV, Smulian JC, Vintzileos AM: Incidence of placental abruption in relation to cigarette smoking
and hypertensive disorders during pregnancy: a meta-analysis of observational studies. Obstet
Gynecol 93:622, 1999
Ananth CV, Smulian JC, Vintzileos AM: The effect of placenta previa on neonatal mortality: a
population-based study in the United States, 1989 through 1997. Am J Obstet Gynecol 188:1299,
2003b
Arazi ES, Kessous R, Shoham-Vardi I, et al: Is there an association between a history of placental
abruption and long-term maternal renal complications? J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 28(14):1641,
2015
Atkinson AL, Santolaya-Forgas J, Matta P, et al: The sensitivity of the Kleihauer-Betke test for
placental abruption. J Obstet Gynaecol 35(2):139, 2015
Aviram A, Salzer L, Hiersch L, et al: Association of isolated polyhydramnios at or beyond 34 weeks of
gestation and pregnancy outcome. Obstet Gynecol 125(4):825, 2015
Awan N, Bennett MJ, Walters WA: Emergency peripartum hysterectomy: a 10-year review at the
Royal Hospital for Women, Sydney. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol 51(3):210, 2011
Babinszki A, Kerenyi T, Torok O, et al: Perinatal outcome in grand and great-grand multi parity: effects
of parity on obstetric risk factors. Am J Obstet Gynecol 181: 669, 1999
Bailit JL, Grobman WA, Rice MM, et al: Morbidly adherent placenta treatments and outcomes. Obstet
Gynecol 125(3):683, 2015
Balachandar K, Melov SJ, Nayyar R: The risk of adverse maternal outcomes in cases of placenta
praevia in an Australian population between 2007 and 2017. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol 60(6):890,
2020
Balayla J, Desilets J, Shrem G: Placenta previa and the risk of intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR): a
systematic review and meta-analysis. J Perinat Med 47(6):577, 2019

Baldwin HJ, Nippita TA, Torvaldsen S, et al: Outcomes of subsequent births after placenta accreta
spectrum. Obstet Gynecol 136(4):745, 2020
Baldwin HJ, Patterson JA, Nippita TA, et al: Antecedents of abnormally invasive placenta in
primiparous women. Obstet Gynecol 131(2):227, 2018
Ballas J, Hull AD, Saenz, et al: Preoperative intravascular balloon catheters and surgical outcomes in
pregnancies complicated by placenta accreta: a management paradox. Am J Obstet Gynecol
207(3):216.e1, 2012
Bartels HC, Rogers AC, O’Brien D, et al: Association of implementing a multidisciplinary team
approach in the management of morbidly adherent placenta with maternal morbidity and mortality.
Obstet Gynecol 132(5):1167, 2018
Barth WH Jr, Kwolek CJ, Abrams JL, et al: Case records of the Massachusetts General Hospital. Case
23—2011. A 40-year-old pregnant woman with placenta accreta who declined blood products. N
Engl J Med 365(4):359, 2011
Benirschke K, Burton, Baergen RN: Pathology of the Human Placenta, 6th ed. New York, Springer,
2012, p 204
Bingol N, Fuchs M, Diaz V, et al: Teratogenicity of cocaine in humans. J Pediatr 110:93, 1987
Birgani S, Salmanian B, Shamshirsaz AA, et al: Placenta accreta spectrum FIGO clinical classification
in association with histopathological findings. Abstract No. 588, Am J Obstet Gynecol 222:S588,
2020
Biro MA, Davey MA, Caro Ian M, et al: Advanced maternal age and obstetric morbidity for women
giving birth in Victoria, Australia: a population-based study. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol 52(3):229,
2012
Bishop S, Butler K, Monaghan S, et al: Multiple complications following the use of prophylactic internal
iliac artery balloon catheterization in a patient with placenta percreta. Int J Obstet Anesth 20(1):70,
2011
Biswas R, Sawhney H, Dass R, et al: Histopathological study of placental bed biopsy in placenta previa.
Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 78:173, 1999
Bond AL, Edersheim TG, Curry L, et al: Expectant management of abruptio placentae before 35
weeks’ gestation. Am J Perinatol 6:121, 1989
Bose DA, Assel BG, Hill JB, et al: Maintenance tocolytics for preterm symptomatic placenta previa: a
review. Am J Perinatol 28(1):45, 2011
Bowman ZS, Eller AG, Kennedy AM, et al: Accuracy of ultrasound for the prediction of placenta
accreta. Am J Obstet Gynecol 211(2): 177.e1, 2014
Brame RG, Harbert GM Jr, McGaughey HS Jr, et al: Maternal risk in abruption. Obstet Gynecol 31:224,
1968
Bretelle F, Courbiére B, Mazouni C, et al: Management of placenta accreta: morbidity and outcome. Eur
J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 133(1):34, 2007
Brosens I, Pijnenborg R, Vercruysse L, et al: The “great obstetrical syndromes” are associated with
disorders of deep placentation. Am J Obstet Gynecol 204(3):193, 2011
Cali G, Biambanco L, Puccio G, et al: Morbidly adherent placenta: evaluation of ultrasound diagnostic
criteria and differentiation of placenta accreta from percreta. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 41(4):406,
2013
Chalubinski KM, Pils S, Klein K, et al: Prenatal sonography can predict the degree of placental invasion.
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 42(5):518, 2013
Chantraine F, Braun T, Gonser M, et al: Prenatal diagnosis of abnormally invasive placenta reduces
maternal peripartum hemorrhage and morbidity. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 92(4):439, 2013

Chen AL, Goldfarb IT, Scourtas AO, et al: The histologic evolution of revealed, acute abruptions. Hum
Pathol 67:187, 2017
Chen M, Liu X, You Y, et al: Internal iliac artery balloon occlusion for placenta previa and suspected
placenta accreta: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol 135(5):1112, 2020
Cho JY, Kim SJ, Cha KY, et al: Interrupted circular suture: bleeding control during cesarean delivery in
placenta previa accreta. Obstet Gynecol 78:876, 1991
Clausen C, Stensballe J, Albrechtsen CK, et al: Balloon occlusion of the internal iliac arteries in the
multidisciplinary management of placenta percreta. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 92(4):386, 2013
Cleary-Goldman J, Malone FD, Vidaver J, et al: Impact of maternal age on obstetric outcome. Obstet
Gynecol 105:983, 2005
Collins SL, Alemdar B, van Beekhuizen HJ, et al: Evidence-based guidelines for the management of
abnormally invasive placenta: recommendations from the International Society for Abnormally
Invasive Placenta. Am J Obstet Gynecol 220(6):511, 2019
Collins SL, Stevenson GN, Al-Khan A, et al: Three-dimensional power Doppler ultrasonography for
diagnosing abnormally invasive placenta and quantifying the risk. Obstet Gynecol 126(3):645, 2015
Colón I, Berletti M, Garabedian MJ, et al: Randomized, double-blinded trial of magnesium sulfate
tocolysis versus intravenous normal saline for preterm nonsevere placental abruption. Am J
Perinatol 33(7):696, 2016
Combs CA, Nyberg DA, Mack LA, et al: Expectant management after sonographic diagnosis of
placental abruption. Am J Perinatol 9:170, 1992
Crane JM, Van Den Hof MC, Dodds L, et al: Neonatal outcomes with placenta previa. Obstet Gynecol
93:541, 1999
Creanga AA, Bateman BT, Kuklina EV, et al: Racial and ethnic disparities in severe maternal morbidity:
a multistate analysis, 2008–2010. Am J Obstet Gynecol 210(5):435.e1, 2014
Creanga AA, Berg CJ, Syverson C, et al: Pregnancy-related mortality in the United States, 2006–2010.
Obstet Gynecol 125(1):5, 2015
Creanga AA, Berg CJ, Syverson C, et al: Pregnancy-related mortality in the United States, 2011–2013.
Obstet Gynecol 130:366, 2017
Crocetto F, Esposito R, Saccone G, et al: Use of routine ureteral stents in cesarean hysterectomy for
placenta accreta. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 34(3):386, 2021
Cunningham FG: Placenta previa and morbidly adherent placentae In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL,
Gilstrap LC III, et al (eds): Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York,
McGraw Hill Education, 2017
Cunningham FG, Nelson DB: Disseminated intravascular coagulation syndromes in obstetrics. Obstet
Gynecol 126(5):999, 2015
Cunningham KM, Anwar A, Lindow SW: The recurrence risk of placenta accreta following uterine
conserving management. J Neonatal Perinatal Med 8(4):293, 2016
DeRoo L, Skjaervan R, Wilcox A, et al: Placental abruption and long-term maternal cardiovascular
disease mortality: a population-based registry study in Norway and Sweden. Eur J Epidemiol
31(5):501, 2016
Desai N, Tam HT, Fleischer A: Prophylactic arterial catheterization may improve operative morbidity in
suspected placenta accreta and reduce the need for hysterectomy. Am J Obstet Gynecol
206(1):S44, 2012
Diemert A, Ortmeyer G, Hollwitz B, et al: The combination of intrauterine balloon tamponade and the
B-Lynch procedure for the treatment of severe postpartum hemorrhage. Am J Obstet Gynecol
206(1):65.e1, 2012

di Pasquo E, Ghi T, Cali G, et al: Intracervical lakes as sonographic marker of placenta accreta
spectrum disorder in patients with placenta previa or low-lying placenta. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol
55(4):460, 2020
Downes KL, Grantz KL, Shenassa ED: Maternal, labor, delivery, and perinatal outcomes associated
with placental abruption: a systematic review. Am J Perinatol 34:935, 2017
Drakeley AJ, Le Roux PA, Anthony J, et al: Acute renal failure complicating severe preeclampsia
requiring admission to an obstetric intensive care unit. Am J Obstet Gynecol 186:253, 2002
Dugoff L, Hobbins JC, Malone FD, et al: First trimester maternal serum PAPPA and free-beta subunit
human chorionic gonadotropin concentrations and nuchal translucency are associated with obstetric
complications: a population-based screening study (The FASTER Trial). Am J Obstet Gynecol
191:1446, 2004
Duzyj CM, Buhimschi IA, Laky CA, et al: Extravillous trophoblast invasion in placenta accreta is
associated with differential local expression of angiogenic and growth factors: a cross-sectional
study. BJOG 125(11):1441, 2018
Einerson BD, Comstock J, Silver RM, et al: Placenta accreta spectrum disorder: uterine dehiscence, not
placental invasion. Obstet Gynecol 135(5):1104, 2020
Einerson BD, Rodriguez CE, Kennedy AM, et al: Magnetic resonance imaging is often misleading when
used as an adjunct to ultrasound in the management of placenta accreta spectrum disorders. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 218(6):618.e1, 2018
Eller AG, Bennett MA, Sharshiner M, et al: Maternal morbidity in cases of placenta accreta managed
by a multidisciplinary care team compared with standard obstetric care. Obstet Gynecol 117 (2 Pt
1):331, 2011
Elliott JP, Gilpin B, Strong TH Jr, et al: Chronic abruption—oligohydramnios sequence. J Reprod Med
43:418, 1998
Erez O, Mastrolia SA, Thachil J: Disseminated intravascular coagulation in pregnancy: insights in
pathophysiology, diagnosis and management. Am J Obstet Gynecol 213(4):452, 2015
Erfani H, Kassir E, Fox KA, et al: Placenta previa without morbidly adherent placenta: comparison of
characteristics and outcomes between planned and emergent deliveries in a tertiary center. J Matern
Fetal Neonatal Med 32(6):906, 2019
Erfani H, Fox KA, Clark SL, et al: Maternal outcomes in unexpected placenta accreta spectrum
disorders: single-center experience with a multidisciplinary team. Am J Obstet Gynecol
221(4):337.e1, 2019
Esakoff TF, Handler SJ, Granados JM, et al: PAMUS: placenta accreta management across the United
States. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 25:761, 2012
Eshkoli T, Weintraub AY, Sergienko R, et al: Placenta accreta: risk factors, perinatal outcomes, and
consequences for subsequent births. Am J Obstet Gynecol 208(3):219.e1, 2013
Eubanks AA, Walz S, Thiel LM: Maternal risk factors and neonatal outcomes in placental abruption
among patients with equal access to health care. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 34(13):2101, 2021
Farine D, Fox HE, Jakobson S, et al: Vaginal ultrasound for diagnosis of placenta previa. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 159:566, 1988
Finazzo F, D’Antonio F, Masselli G, et al: Interobserver variability in MRI assessment of the severity of
placenta accreta spectrum disorders. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 55(4):467, 2020
Fitzpatrick K, Sellers S, Spark P, et al: The management and outcomes of placenta accreta, increta, and
percreta in the UK: a Population-based descriptive study. BJOG 121(1):62, 2014
Fox K, Shamshirsaz A, Salmanian B, et al: Is interpregnancy interval a predictor of severity of invasion
in morbidly adherent placenta? Abstract No. 821, Am J Obstet Gynecol 212(1):s395, 2015

Frederiksen MC, Glassenberg R, Stika CS: Placenta previa: a 22-year analysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol
180:1432, 1999
Friszer S, Le Ray C, Tort J, et al: Symptomatic placenta praevia: short cervix at admission is a predictive
factor for delivery within 7 days. Abstract No. 158, Am J Obstet Gynecol 208(1):S78, 2013
Furuhashi M, Kurauchi O, Suganuma N: Pregnancy following placental abruption. Arch Gynecol Obstet
267:11, 2002
Furukawa S, Doi K, Furuta K, et al: The effect of placental abruption on the outcome of extremely
premature infants. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 28(6):705, 2015
Gibbins KJ, Einerson BD, Varner MI, et al: Placenta previa and maternal hemorrhagic morbidity. J
Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 31(4):494, 2018
Gill LA, Baldwin E, Lessard-Anderson C, et al: Septic abortion with placenta accreta in pregnancy after
endometrial ablation. Obstet Gynecol 125(4):822, 2015
Gilliam M, Rosenberg D, Davis F: The likelihood of placenta previa with greater number of cesarean
deliveries and higher parity. Obstet Gynecol 99:976, 2002
Glantz C, Purnell L: Clinical utility of sonography in the diagnosis and treatment of placental abruption. J
Ultrasound Med 21:837, 2002
Goh WA, Zalud I: Placenta accreta: diagnosis, management and the molecular biology of the morbidly
adherent placenta. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 29(11):1795, 2016
Gopalakrishnan N, Dhanapriya J, Muthkumar P, et al: Acute kidney injury in pregnancy—a single center
experience. Ren Fail 37(9):1476, 2015
Greco PS, Day LJ, Pearlman MD: Guidance for evaluation and management of blunt abdominal trauma
in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 134(6):1343, 2019
Gurol-Urganci I, Cromwell DA, Edozien LC, et al: Risk of placenta previa in second birth after first
birth cesarean section. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth 11:95, 2011
Gutvirtz G, Walfisch A, Beharier O, et al: Isolated single umbilical artery is an independent risk factor
for perinatal mortality and adverse outcomes in term neonates. Arch Gynecol Obstet 294(5):931,
2016
Gyamfi-Bannerman C, Gilbert S, Landon MB, et al: Risk of uterine rupture and placenta accreta with
prior uterine surgery outside of the lower segment. Obstet Gynecol 120(6):1332, 2012
Hackney DN, Kuo K, Petersen RJ, et al: Determinants of the competing outcomes of intrauterine
infection, abruption, or spontaneous preterm birth after preterm premature rupture of membranes. J
Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 29(2):258, 2016
Han M, Lui D, Zeb S, et al: Are maternal and neonatal outcomes different in placental abruption
between women with and without preeclampsia? Placenta 85:69, 2019
Happe SK, Rac MW, Moschos E, et al: Prospective first-trimester ultrasound imaging of low
implantation and placenta accreta spectrum. J Ultrasound Med 39(10):1907, 2020
Hardardottir H, Borgida AE, Sanders MM, et al: Histologic myometrial fibers adherent to the placenta:
impact of method of placental removal. Am J Obstet Gynecol 174:358, 1996
Harris LK, Benagiano M, D’Elios MM, et al: Placental bed research: 2. Functional and immunological
investigations of the placental bed. Am J Obstet Gynecol 221(5):457, 2019
Heller HT, Mullen KM, Gordon RW, et al: Outcomes of pregnancies with a low-lying placenta
diagnosed on second-trimester sonography. J Ultrasound Med 33(4):691, 2014
Hill JM, Yadava S, Patrick HS, et al: Pregnancy complications among women diagnosed with placenta
previa and placental abruption. Abstract No. 446, Am J Obstet Gynecol 222:S92, 2020
Hogberg V, Rasmussen S, Irgens L: The effect of smoking and hypertensive disorders on abruptio
placentae in Norway 1999–2002. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 86:304, 2007

Huls CK, Detlefs C: Trauma in pregnancy. Semin Perinatol 42(1):13, 2018
Hung TH, Shau WY, Hsieh CC, et al: Risk factors for placenta accreta. Obstet Gynecol 93:545, 1999
Hurd WW, Miodovnik M, Hertzberg V, et al: Selective management of abruptio placentae: a prospective
study. Obstet Gynecol 61:467, 1983
Jakobsson M, Tapper AM, Colmorn LB, et al: Emergency peripartum hysterectomy: results from the
prospective Nordic Obstetric Surveillance Study (NOSS). Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 94(7):745,
2015
Jauniaux E, Collins S, Burton GJ: Placenta accreta spectrum: pathophysiology and evidence-based
anatomy for prenatal ultrasound imaging. Am J Obstet Gynecol 218(1):75, 2018
Jauniaux E, Collins SL, Jurkovic D, et al: Accreta placentation: a systematic review of prenatal
ultrasound imaging and grading of villous invasiveness. Am J Obstet Gynecol 215(6):712, 2016
Jauniaux E, Dimitrova I, Kenyon N, et al: Impact of placenta previa with placenta accreta spectrum
disorder on fetal growth. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 54(5):643, 2019
Jauniaux E, Hecht JL: Perinatal diagnosis of placenta accreta spectrum disorders in the twenty-first
century: visual inspection at birth is not enough. BJOG 128(2):328, 2021
Jenabi E, Fereidooni B: The uterine leiomyoma and placenta previa: a meta-analysis. J Matern Fetal
Neonatal Med 32(7):1200, 2019
Judy AE, Lyell DJ, Druzin ML, et al: Disseminated intravascular coagulation complicating the
conservative management of placenta percreta. Obstet Gynecol 126(5):1016, 2015
Kaminsky LM, Ananth CV, Prasad V, et al: The influence of maternal cigarette smoking on placental
pathology in pregnancies complicated by abruption. Am J Obstet Gynecol 197:275.e1, 2007
Kancherla V, Räisänen S, Gissler M, et al: Placenta previa and risk of major congenital malformations
among singleton births in Finland. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol 103(6):527, 2015
Karami M, Jenabi E, Fereidooni B: The association of placenta previa and assisted reproductive
techniques: a meta-analysis. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 31(14):1940, 2018
Kayani SI, Walkinshaw SA, Preston C: Pregnancy outcome in severe placental abruption. BJOG
110:679, 2003
Khazaei S, Jenabi E: The association between polyhydramnios and the risk of placenta abruption: a
meta-analysis. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med Jan 24:1, 2019
Kibel M, Asztalos E, Barrett J, et al: Outcomes of pregnancies complicated by preterm premature
rupture of membranes between 20 and 24 weeks of gestation. Obstet Gynecol 128:313, 2016
King DL: Placental migration demonstrated by ultrasonography. Radiology 109:167, 1973
Kingdom JC, Hobson SR, Murji A, et al: Minimizing surgical blood loss at cesarean hysterectomy for
placenta previa with evidence of placenta increta or placenta percreta: the state of play in 2020. Am
J Obstet Gynecol 223(3):322, 2020
Klar M, Michels KB: Cesarean section and placental disorders in subsequent pregnancies—a metaanalysis. J Perinat Med 42(5): 571, 2014
Knight M, UKOSS: Peripartum hysterectomy in the UK: management and outcomes of the associated
haemorrhage. BJOG 114:1380, 2007
Kohari KS, Roman AS, Fox NS, et al: Persistence of placenta previa in twin gestations based on
gestational age at sonographic detection. J Ultrasound Med 31(7):985, 2012
Kollmann M, Gaulhofer J, Lang U, et al: Placenta previa: incidence, risk factors and outcome. J Matern
Fetal Neonatal Med 29(9):1395, 2016
Kortekaas JC, Kazemier BM, Keulen JK, et al: Risk of adverse pregnancy outcomes of late- and
postterm pregnancies in advanced maternal age: a national cohort study. Acta Obstet Gynecol
Scand 99(8):1022, 2020

Kotsuji F, Nishihima K, Kurokawa T, et al: Transverse uterine fundal incision for placenta praevia with
accreta, involving the entire anterior uterine wall: a case series. BJOG 120(9):1144, 2013
Kutuk MS, Ak M, Ozgun MT: Leaving the placenta in situ versus conservative and radical surgery in
the treatment of placenta accreta spectrum disorders. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 140: 338, 2018
Lai J, Caughey AB, Qidwai GI, et al: Neonatal outcomes in women with sonographically identified
uterine leiomyomata. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 25(6):710, 2012
Lax A, Prince MR, Mennitt KW, et al: The value of specific MRI features in the evaluation of
suspected placental invasion. Magn Reson Imaging 25:87, 2007
Levin G, Rottenstreich A, Benshushan A, et al: The role of supracervical hysterectomy in reducing
blood products requirement in the management of placenta accreta: a case control study. J Matern
Fetal Neonatal Med 33(15):2522, 2020
Linn RL, Miller ES, Lim G, et al: Adherent basal plate myometrial fibers in the delivered placenta as a
risk factor for development of subsequent placenta accreta. Placenta 36(12):1419, 2015
Lueth A, Blue NR, Silver RM: Placental abruption in nulliparous women. Abstract No. 1186, Am J
Obstet Gynecol 222:S729, 2020
Luke B, Gopal D, Cabral H, et al: Adverse pregnancy, birth, and infant outcomes in twins: effects of
maternal fertility status and infant gender combinations; the Massachusetts Outcomes Study of
Assisted Reproductive Technology. Am J Obstet Gynecol 217(3):330.e1, 2017a
Luke B, Gopal D, Cabral H, et al: Pregnancy, birth, and infant outcomes by maternal fertility status: the
Massachusetts Outcomes Study of Assisted Reproductive Technology. Am J Obstet Gynecol
217(3):327.el, 2017b
Major CA, deVeciana M, Lewis DF, et al: Preterm premature rupture of membranes and abruptio
placentae: is there an association between these pregnancy complications? Am J Obstet Gynecol
172:672, 1995
Makary M, Chowdary P, Westgate JA: Vascular balloon occlusion and planned caesarean hysterectomy
for morbidly adherent placenta: a systematic review. J Obstet Gynaecol 59(5):608, 2019
Maraka S, Ospina NM, O’Keeffe DT, et al: Subclinical hypothyroidism in pregnancy: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. Thyroid 26(4):580, 2016
Masselli G, Brunelli R, Di Tola M, et al: MR imaging in the evaluation of placental abruption: correlation
with sonographic findings. Radiology 259(1):222, 2011
Matsuda Y, Ogawa M, Konno J, et al: Prediction of fetal academia in placental abruption. BMC
Pregnancy Childbirth 13:156, 2013
Matsukawa S, Sumigama S, Kotani T, et al: Possible association between cathepsin V and the
development of placenta accreta spectrum disorders. Gynecol Obstet Invest 84(4):396, 2019
Matsuwaki T, Khan KN, Inoue T, et al: Evaluation of obstetrical factors related to Sheehan syndrome. J
Obstet Gynaecol Res 40(1):46, 2014
McKeogh RP, D’Errico E: Placental accreta: clinical manifestations and conservative management. N
Engl J Med 245:159, 1951
Mei Y, Luo D, Lin Y: Clinical application of prophylactic internal iliac artery balloon occlusion combined
with uterine artery embolization in patients with abnormally invasive placenta. J Matern Fetal
Neonatal Med 31(24):3287, 2018
Mei Y, Luo D, Wei S, et al: Comparison of emergency cesarean hysterectomy with and without
prophylactic placement of intravascular balloon catheters in patients with placenta accreta spectrum.
J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med September 20, 2020 [Epub ahead of print]
Mhatre MV, Potter JA, Lockwood CJ, et al: Thrombin augments LPS-induced human endometrial
endothelial ell inflammation via PARK1 activation. Am J Reprod Immunol 76(1):29, 2016

Miller ES, Linn RL, Ernst LM: Does the presence of placental basal plate myometrial fibers in a prior
pregnancy improve prediction of placenta accreta? BJOG 123(13):2140, 2016
Millischer AE, Solomon LJ, Porcher R, et al: Magnetic resonance imaging for abnormally invasive
placenta: the added value of intravenous gadolinium injection. BJOG 124(1): 88, 2017
Mitric C, Desilets J, Baayla J, et al: Surgical management of the placenta accreta spectrum: an
institutional experience. Obstet Gynaecol Can 41(11):1551, 2019
Miura K, Higashijima A, Murakami Y, et al: Circulating levels of pregnancy-associated, placentaspecific microRNAs in pregnant women with placental abruption. Reprod Sci 24(1):148, 2017
Mogos MF, Salemi JL, Ashley M, et al: Recent trends in placenta accreta in the United States and its
impact on maternal-fetal morbidity and healthcare-associated costs, 1998–2011. Ultrasound Obstet
Gynecol 29(7):1077, 2016
Mohamed MA, Mohammed AH: Parallel vertical compression sutures to control bleeding in cases of
placenta previa and accreta. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 32(4):641, 2019
Mohr-Sasson A, Hochman R, Anteby M, et al: Cesarean delivery with and without uterine artery
embolization for the management of placenta accreta spectrum disorder—a comparative study.
Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 99(10):1374, 2020
Morgan EA, Sidebottom A, Vacquier M, et al: The effect of placental location in cases of placenta
accreta spectrum. Am J Obstet Gynecol 221(4):357, 2019
Morgan JL, Nelson DB, Roberts SW, et al: The impact of baseline proteinuria in pregnant women with
treated chronic hypertension. Obstet Gynecol 128:270, 2016
Mori K, Saida T, Hoshiai S, et al: High prevalence of intrapelvic parasitic arteries in patients with
placenta accreta spectrum: a case-control study using unenhanced magnetic resonance angiography.
Clin Imaging 65:50, 2020
Nageotte MP: Always be vigilant for placenta accreta. Am J Obstet Gynecol 211(2):87, 2014
Neilson JP: Interventions for suspected placenta praevia. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2:CD001998,
2003
Nelson DB, Lucke AM, McIntire DD, et al: Obstetric antecedents to body-cooling treatment of the
newborn infant. Am J Obstet Gynecol 211:155.el, 2014
Ngai I, Bernstein P, Chazotte C, et al: Maternal serum alpha fetoprotein (MSAFP) and placental
abruption. Abstract No. 122, Am J Obstet Gynecol 206(1):S66, 2012
Nørgaard LN, Pinborg A, Lidegaard Ø, et al: A Danish national cohort study on neonatal outcome in
singleton pregnancies with placenta previa. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 91(5):546, 2012
Okby R, Atawaz AA, Wainstock T, et al: Placental abruption in twin pregnancies, risk factors and
perinatal outcomes. Abstract No. 978, Am J Obstet Gynecol 216:S551, 2017
Olive EC, Roberts CL, Nassar N, et al: Test characteristics of placental location screening by
transabdominal ultrasound at 18–20 weeks. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 28(7):944, 2006
Onishi K, Tsuda H, Furna K, et al: The impact of the abruption severity and the onset-to-delivery time
on the maternal and neonatal outcomes of placental abruption. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med Mar
8:1, 2019
Oyelese Y, Smulian JC: Placenta previa, placenta accreta, and vasa previa. Obstet Gynecol 107:927,
2006
Pagani G, Cali G, Acharya G, et al: Diagnostic accuracy of ultrasound in detecting the severity of
abnormally invasive placentation: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Acta Obstet Gynecol
Scand 97(1):325, 2018
Palacios-Jaraquemada JM, Fiorillo A, Hamer J, et al: Placenta accreta spectrum: a hysterectomy can be
prevented in almost 80% of cases using a resective-reconstructive technique. J Matern Fetal

Neonatal Med January 26, 2020 [Epub ahead of print]
Panaiotova J, Tokunaka M, Krajewska K, et al: Screening for morbidly adherent placenta in early
pregnancy. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 53(1):101, 2019
Pariente G, Shoham-Vardi I, Kessous R, et al: Placental abruption as a marker for long term
cardiovascular mortality: a follow-up period of more than a decade. Am J Obstet Gynecol
208(1):S62, 2013
Parrott J, Holland M: Second-trimester marginal previa: is follow-up necessary? Abstract No. 653, Am
J Obstet Gynecol 212(1):S322, 2015
Pates JA, Hatab MR, McIntire DD, et al: Determining uterine blood flow in pregnancy with magnetic
resonance imaging. Magn Reson Imaging 28(4):507, 2010
Pather S, Strockyj S, Richards A, et al: Maternal outcome after conservative management of placenta
percreta at caesarean section: a report of three cases and a review of the literature. Aust N Z J
Obstet Gynaecol 54(1):84, 2014
Perez-Delboy A, Wright JD: Surgical management of placenta accreta: to leave or remove the
placenta? BJOG 121:163, 2014
Perlman NC, Little SE, Thomas A, et al: Patient selection for later delivery timing with suspected
previa-accreta. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 96(8):1021, 2017
Pettit KE, Stephenson ML, Truong YN, et al: Maternal and neonatal outcomes among scheduled versus
unscheduled deliveries in women with prenatally diagnosed, pathologically proven placenta accreta.
J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 32(6):927, 2019
Pilloni E, Alemanno MG, Gaglioti P, et al: Accuracy of ultrasound in antenatal diagnosis of placental
attachment disorders. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 47(3):302, 2016
Po LK, Simons ME, Levinsky ES: Concealed postpartum hemorrhage treated with transcatheter arterial
embolization. Obstet Gynecol 120(2 Pt 2):461, 2012
Primo LF, Arbogast K, Digiacomo T, et al: Placenta accreta: can we forecast its arrival? Obstet
Gynecol 123(Suppl 1):166, 2014
Pritchard JA, Brekken AL: Clinical and laboratory studies on severe abruptio placentae. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 97:681, 1967
Pritchard JA, Cunningham FG, Pritchard SA, et al: On reducing the frequency of severe abruptio
placentae. Am J Obstet Gynecol 165:1345, 1991
Pritchard JA, Mason R, Corley M, et al: Genesis of severe placental abruption. Am J Obstet Gynecol
108:22, 1970
Quant HS, Friedman AM, Wang E, et al: Transabdominal sonography as a screening test for secondtrimester placenta previa. Obstet Gynecol 13(3):628, 2014
Rac MW, Dashe JS, Wells CE, et al: Ultrasound predictors of placental invasion: the Placenta Accreta
Index. Am J Obstet Gynecol 212:343, 2015a
Rac MW, Wells CE, Twicker DM, et al: Placenta accreta and vaginal bleeding according to gestational
age at delivery. Obstet Gynecol 125(4):808, 2015b
Räisänen S, Kancherla V, Kramer MR, et al: Placenta previa and the risk of delivering a small-forgestational-age newborn. Obstet Gynecol 124(2 Pt 1):285, 2014
Rasmussen S, Irgens LM: Occurrence of placental abruption in relatives. BJOG 116:693, 2009
Reddy UM, Abuhamad AZ, Levine D, et al: Fetal imaging: executive summary of a joint Eunice
Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, Society for Maternal
—Fetal Medicine, American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine, American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists, American College of Radiology, Society for Pediatric Radiology, and Society of
Radiologists in Ultrasound Fetal Imaging Workshop. Obstet Gynecol 123(5):1070, 2014

Riihimäki O, Metsäranta M, Paavonen J, et al: Placental abruption and child mortality. Pediatrics
142(2):e20173915, 2018
Riihimäki O, Metsäranta M, Ritvanen A, et al: Increased prevalence of major congenital anomalies in
births with placental abruption. Obstet Gynecol 122(2 Pt 1):268, 2013
Roach MK, Thomassee MS: Acquired uterine arteriovenous malformation and retained placenta
increta. Obstet Gynecol 126(3):642, 2015
Roberge S, Bujold E, Nicolaides KH: Meta—analysis on the effect of aspirin use for prevention of
preeclampsia on placenta abruption and antepartum hemorrhage. Am J Obstet Gynecol 218(5):483,
2018
Roberts CL, Algert CS, Warrendorf J, et al: Trends and recurrence of placenta previa: a populationbased study. Aust NZJ Obstet Gynaecol 52(5):483, 2012
Robinson CJ, Villers MS, Johnson DD, et al: Timing of elective repeat cesarean delivery at term and
neonatal outcomes: a cost analysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 202(6):632, 2010
Roeca C, Little SE, Carusi D: Pathologically diagnosed accrete and hemorrhagic morbidity in a
subsequent pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 129(2):321, 2017
Rosenberg T, Pariente G, Sergienko R, et al: Critical analysis of risk factors and outcome of placenta
previa. Arch Gynecol Obstet 284(1):47, 2011
Rossi AC, Lee RH, Chmait RH: Emergency postpartum hysterectomy for uncontrolled postpartum
bleeding: a systematic review. Obstet Gynecol 115(3):637, 2010
Ruiter L, Ravelli AC, de Graaf IM, et al: Incidence and recurrence rate of placental abruption: a
longitudinal linked national cohort study in the Netherlands. Am J Obstet Gynecol 213(4): 573.el,
2015
Sabourin JN, Lee T, Magee LA, et al: Indications for timing of, and modes of delivery in a national
cohort of women admitted with antepartum hemorrhage at 22+0 to 28+6 weeks’ gestation. J Obstet
Gynaecol Can 34(11):1043, 2012
Salihu HM, Bekan B, Aliyu MH, et al: Perinatal mortality associated with abruptio placenta in singletons
and multiples. Am J Obstet Gynecol 193:198, 2005
Salihu HM, Li Q, Rouse DJ, et al: Placenta previa: neonatal death after live births in the United States.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 188:1305, 2003
Sallam HF, Shady NW: A sandwich technique (N & H variation technique) to reduce blood loss during
cesarean delivery for complete placenta previa: a randomized controlled trial. J Matern Fetal
Neonatal Med 32(19):3145, 2019
Salmanian B, Fox KA, Arian S, et al: In vitro fertilization as an independent risk factor for placenta
accreta spectrum. Am J Obstet Gynecol 223(4):568.e1, 2020
Sanderson DA, Milton PJ: The effectiveness of ultrasound screening at 18–20 weeks’ gestational age
for predication of placenta previa. J Obstet Gynaecol 11:320 1991
Sentilhes L, Gromez A, Clavier E, et al: Predictors of failed pelvic arterial embolization for severe
postpartum hemorrhage. Obstet Gynecol 113:992, 2009
Sentilhes L, Kayem G, Mattuizzi A: Conservative approach: intentional retention of the placenta. Best
Pract Res Clin Obstet Gynaecol 72:52, 2021
Shainker SA, Silver RM, Modest AM, et al: Placenta accreta spectrum: biomarker discovery using
plasma proteomics. Am J Obstet Gynecol 223(3):433.e1, 2020
Shamshirsaz AA, Fox KA, Erfani H, et al: Outcomes of planned compared with urgent deliveries using
a multidisciplinary team approach for morbidly adherent placenta. Obstet Gynecol 131(2):234, 2018
Shih JC, Liu KL, Kang J, et al: “Nausicaa” compression suture: a simple and effective alternative to
hysterectomy in placenta accreta spectrum and other causes of severe postpartum haemorrhage.

BJOG 126(3):412, 2019
Shoopala HM, Hall DR: Re-evaluation of abruptio placentae and other maternal complications during
expectant management of early onset preeclampsia. Pregnancy Hypertens 16:38, 2019
Sibai BM, Lindheimer M, Hauth J, et al: Risk factors for preeclampsia, abruptio placentae, and adverse
neonatal outcomes among women with chronic hypertension. N Engl J Med 339:667, 1998
Silver RM: Abnormal placentation: placenta previa, vasa previa, and placenta accreta. Obstet Gynecol
126(3):654, 2015a
Silver RM, Branch DW: Placenta accreta spectrum. N Engl J Med 378(16):152, 2018
Silver RM, Fox KA, Barton JR, et al: Center of excellence for placenta accreta. Am J Obstet Gynecol
212(5):561, 2015b
Silver RM, Landon MB, Rouse DJ, et al: Maternal morbidity associated with multiple repeat cesarean
deliveries. Obstet Gynecol 107:1226, 2006
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Gyamfi-Bannerman C: Management of bleeding in the late
preterm period. Consult Series No. 44, Am J Obstet Gynecol 218(1):B2, 2018
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Miller R, Timor-Tritsch IE, et al: Cesarean scar pregnancy.
Consult Series No. 49, Am J Obstet Gynecol 222(5):B2, 2020
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Sinkey RG, Odibo AO, et al: Diagnosis and management of vasa
previa. Am J Obstet Gynecol 213(5):615, 2015
Stafford IA, Dashe JS, Shivvers SA, et al: Ultrasonographic cervical length and risk of hemorrhage in
pregnancies with placenta previa. Obstet Gynecol 116(3):595, 2010
Stettler RW, Lutich A, Pritchard JA, et al: Traumatic placental abruption: a separation from traditional
thought. Presented at the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists Clinical Meeting,
April 27, 1992
Timmermans S, van Hof AC, Duvekot JJ: Conservative management of abnormally invasive
placentation. Obstet Gynecol Surv 62:529, 2007
Timor-Tritsch IE, Monteagudo A, Cali G, et al: Cesarean scar pregnancies: diagnosis and pathogenesis.
Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am 46(4):797, 2019
Tinari S, Buca D, Cali G, et al: Risk factors, histopathology and diagnostic accuracy in posterior placenta
accreta spectrum disorders: systematic review and meta-analysis. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol
57(6):903, 2021
Towers CV, Pircon RA, Heppard M: Is tocolysis safe in the management of third-trimester bleeding?
Am J Obstet Gynecol 180:1572, 1999
Trudell A, Stout M, Cahill A, et al: Second trimester cervical length and persistence of placental previa
in the third trimester. Abstract No. 91, Presented at the 33rd Annual Meeting of the Society for
Maternal-Fetal Medicine, February 11–16, 2013
Tuuli MG, Norman SM, Odibo AO, et al: Perinatal outcomes in women with subchorionic hematoma: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Obstet Gynecol 117(5):1205, 2011
Twickler DM, Lucas MJ, Balis AB, et al: Color flow mapping for myometrial invasion in women with a
prior cesarean delivery. J Matern Fetal Med 9:330, 2000
Usta IM, Hobeika EM, Abu Musa AA, et al: Placenta previa- accreta: risk factors and complications.
Am J Obstet Gynecol Rev 193:1045, 2005
Wang L, Matsunaga S, Mikami Y, et al: Pre-delivery fibrinogen predicts adverse maternal or neonatal
outcomes in patients with placental abruption. J Obstet Gynaecol Res 42(7):796, 2016
Warshak CR, Ramos GA, Eskander R, et al: Effect of predelivery diagnosis in 99 consecutive cases of
placenta accreta. Obstet Gynecol 115(1):65, 2010

Weiner E, Miremberg H, Grinstein E, et al: The effect of placenta previa on fetal growth and pregnancy
outcome in correlation with placental pathology. J Perinatol 36(12):1073, 2016
Weis MA, Harper LM, Roehl KA, et al: Natural history of placenta previa in twins. Obstet Gynecol
120(4):753, 2012
Weiss JL, Malone FD, Vidaver J, et al: Threatened abortion: a risk factor for poor pregnancy outcome, a
population-based screening study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 190:745, 2004
Wing DA, Paul RH, Millar LK: Management of the symptomatic placenta previa: a randomized,
controlled trial of inpatient versus outpatient expectant management. Am J Obstet Gynecol 174:305,
1996
Wong HS, Cheung YK, Zuccollo J, et al: Evaluation of sonographic diagnostic criteria for placenta
accreta. J Clin Ultrasound 36(9):551, 2008
Wong TY: Emergency peripartum hysterectomy: a 10-year review in a tertiary obstetric hospital. N Z
Med J 124(1345):34, 2011
Workalemahu T, Enquobahrie DA, Gelaye B, et al: Abruptio placentae risk and genetic variations in
mitochondrial biogenesis and oxidative phosphorylation: replication of a candidate gene association
study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 219:617.e1, 2018
Worley KC, Hnat MD, Cunningham FG: Advanced extrauterine pregnancy: diagnostic and therapeutic
challenges. Am J Obstet Gynecol 198:297.e1, 2008
Wortman A, Schaefer S, Wilson K, et al: Maternal morbidity associated with placenta previa with and
without placental invasion. Abstract No. 601, Am J Obstet Gynecol 212(1):S299, 2015
Wright JD, Silver RM, Bonanno C, et al: Practice patterns and knowledge of obstetricians and
gynecologists regarding placenta accreta. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 26(16):1602, 2013
Yasin N, Slade L, Atkinson E, et al: The multidisciplinary management of placenta accreta spectrum
(PAS) within single tertiary centre: a ten-year experience. Aust N Z Obstet Gynaecol 59(4):550,
2019
Yu SC, Cheng YK, Tse WT, et al: Perioperative prophylactic internal iliac artery balloon occlusion in the
prevention of postpartum hemorrhage in placenta previa: a randomized controlled trial. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 223(1):117.e1, 2020
Yule CS, Happe SK, Rac M, et al: Placenta accreta index predicts placenta accreta spectrum severe
enough to result in hysterectomy. Abstract No. 140, Am J Obstet Gynecol 222(1):S105, 2020
Yule CS, Lewis MA, Do QN, et al: Transvaginal color mapping ultrasound in the first trimester predicts
placenta accreta spectrum: a retrospective cohort study. J Ultrasound Med March 16, 2021 [Epub
ahead of print]
Zetterstrom K, Lindeberg SN, Haglund B, et al: Maternal complications in women with chronic
hypertension: a population-based cohort study. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 84:419, 2005
Zhou X, Sun X, Wang M, et al: The effectiveness of prophylactic internal iliac artery balloon occlusion in
the treatment of patients with pernicious placenta previa coexisting with placenta accreta. J Matern
Fetal Neonatal Med 34(1):93, 2021
Zuckerwise LC, Craig AM, Newton JM, et al: Outcomes following a clinical algorithm allowing for
delayed hysterectomy in the management of severe placenta accreta spectrum. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 222:179.e1, 2020

