CHAPTER 62

Connective Tissue Disorders

IMMUNE-MEDIATED CONNECTIVE TISSUE DISEASES
SYSTEMIC LUPUS ERYTHEMATOSUS
ANTIPHOSPHOLIPID SYNDROME
RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS
SYSTEMIC SCLEROSIS—SCLERODERMA
VASCULITIS SYNDROMES
INFLAMMATORY MYOPATHIES
HEREDITARY CONNECTIVE TISSUE DISORDERS
REFERENCES
Connective tissue disorders, also termed collagen vascular disorders, have
two basic underlying causes. First are the immune-complex diseases, in
which deposition of immune complexes causes connective tissue damage.
Because these manifest by sterile inflammation—predominantly of the skin,
joints, blood vessels, and kidneys—they are referred to as rheumatic
diseases. Many of these immune-complex diseases are more prevalent in
women, and systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and rheumatoid arthritis are
examples. Second are the inherited disorders that involve bone, skin,
cartilage, blood vessels, and basement membranes. These include Marfan
syndrome, osteogenesis imperfecta, and Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.

IMMUNE-MEDIATED CONNECTIVE TISSUE DISEASES
These disorders can be separated into those associated with and those
without autoantibody formation. The rheumatoid factor is an autoantibody
found in many autoimmune inflammatory conditions such as SLE, rheumatoid
arthritis, systemic sclerosis (scleroderma), mixed connective tissue disease,
dermatomyositis, polymyositis, and various vasculitis syndromes. Instead,
the RF-seronegative spondyloarthropathies are strongly associated with
expression of the antigen termed human leukocyte antigen B27 (HLA-B27).
These include ankylosing spondylitis, psoriatic arthritis, Reiter disease, and
other arthritis syndromes.
The normal immunosuppression of pregnancy that allows and is essential
for successful engraftment of fetal and placental tissues may mitigate activity
in some of these syndromes. First, estrogens upregulate and androgens
downregulate T-cell response, and progesterone is immunosuppressive
(Abdul Hussain, 2020; Robinson, 2012). Second, pregnancy induces a
predominance of T2 helper cells compared with cytokine-producing T1
helper cells (Petri, 2019). These changes are discussed in detail in Chapter 4
(p. 61).
However, active immune-mediated disease may contribute to obstetrical
complications (Kither, 2020). One longitudinal cohort study found that
unrecognized autoimmune systemic rheumatic disorders are associated with
significant risk for preeclampsia and fetal-growth restriction (Spinillo,
2016). In this study, the prevalence of unrecognized systemic rheumatic
diseases approximated 0.3 percent, and preeclampsia or fetal-growth
restriction complicated 25 percent of these pregnancies.
Last, some immune-mediated diseases may be either caused or activated
as a result of prior pregnancies. To explain, fetal cells and cell-free DNA are
detectable in maternal blood beginning early in pregnancy (Simpson, 2013;
Waldorf, 2008). Fetal cell microchimerism is the persistence of fetal cells in
the maternal circulation and in organs following pregnancy. These fetal cells
may become engrafted in maternal tissues and stimulate production of
autoantibodies. Evidence for this includes fetal stem cells engrafted in
tissues in women with autoimmune thyroiditis and systemic sclerosis
(Jimenez, 2005; Srivatsa, 2001). Such microchimerism has also been
described in women with SLE and those with rheumatoid arthritis–
associated HLA alleles (da Silva, 2016; Lee, 2010). Conversely, engrafted

maternal cells may provoke autoimmune conditions in a woman’s offspring
(Stevens, 2016; Ye, 2012).

SYSTEMIC LUPUS ERYTHEMATOSUS
This autoimmune disease has an intricate pathogenesis that results from
interactions between susceptibility genes and environmental factors (Hahn,
2018). Tissue-binding autoantibodies and immune complexes that are
directed at one or more nuclear components lead to cellular and organ
damage (Tsokos, 2011). In addition to this B-cell antibody production,
immunosuppression is impaired, including regulatory T-cell function (Tower,
2013). Some autoantibodies produced in patients with SLE are shown in
Table 62-1. Most patients have autoantibodies for many years before clinical
disease manifests.
TABLE 62-1. Some Autoantibodies Produced in Patients with Systemic
Lupus Erythematosus

Genetic influences are implicated, and the concordance is higher with
monozygotic compared with dizygotic twins—25 versus 2 percent,
respectively. Moreover, the frequency in patients with one affected family
member is 10 percent. The relative risk of disease rises if the “autoimmunity
gene” on chromosome 16 that predisposes to SLE, rheumatoid arthritis,
Crohn disease, and psoriasis is inherited. However, susceptibility genes such
as HLA-DR3, STAT4, APOL1, FCGR3A, and DNAse1 explain only a portion
of the genetic heritability (Hahn, 2018; Yang, 2013).

Interestingly, maternal exposure to fetal genes elevates susceptibility to
SLE development. A case-control study found that a child’s HLA-DRB1
genotype raises the risk of SLE in the mother (Cruz, 2016). In contrast,
neonatal lupus has been reported in an infant conceived via oocyte donor to a
mother with autoimmune disease with circulating anti-Ro and anti-La
antibodies (Chiou, 2016).

■ Clinical Manifestations and Diagnosis
Almost 90 percent of SLE cases develop in women, and it more commonly
affects African-American women compared with other populations (Izmirly,
2017; Stojan, 2018). Its prevalence in those of childbearing age
approximates 1 case in 500 (Pons-Estel, 2010). Accordingly, the disease is
encountered relatively frequently during pregnancy.
SLE notoriously varies in its presentation, course, and outcome (Table
62-2) (Hahn, 2018). Findings may be confined initially to one organ system,
and others become involved later. Instead, the disease may first be
multisystem. Frequent findings are malaise, fever, arthritis, rash,
pleuropericarditis, photosensitivity, anemia, and cognitive dysfunction. At
least half of patients have renal involvement. SLE is also associated with
declines in attention, memory, and reasoning (Hahn, 2018; Kozora, 2008).
TABLE 62-3. Clinical Criteria for Classification of Systemic Lupus
Erythematosus

Identification of antinuclear antibodies (ANA) is the best screening test,
however, a positive result is not specific for SLE. Low titers can be found in
normal individuals, other autoimmune diseases, acute viral infections, and
chronic inflammatory processes. Several drugs also can cause a positive
reaction. Antibodies to double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) and to Smith (Sm)
antigens are relatively specific for SLE, whereas other antibodies are not
(see Table 62-1). Although hundreds of autoantibodies have been described
in SLE, only a few have been shown to participate in tissue injury (Tsokos,

2011). Microarray profiles are being developed for more accurate diagnosis
(Putterman, 2016).
Chronic anemia develops frequently, and there may be leukopenia and
thrombocytopenia. Proteinuria and casts are found in the half of patients with
glomerular lesions. Lupus nephritis can also cause renal insufficiency, which
is more common if there are antiphospholipid antibodies (RianchoZarrabeitia, 2020). Other laboratory findings include false-positive syphilis
serology, prolonged partial thromboplastin time, and higher rheumatoid
factor levels. Increased serum D-dimer concentrations often follow a flare or
infection, but unexplained persistent elevations are associated with a high
risk for thrombosis (Wu, 2008).
The diagnostic criteria for SLE are listed in Table 62-3. If any four or
more of the 11 clinical criteria are present, serially or simultaneously, the
diagnosis is made. Importantly, numerous drugs can induce a lupus-like
syndrome. These include proton-pump inhibitors, thiazide diuretics,
antifungals, antihypertensives, chemotherapeutics, statins, and antiepileptics.
Drug-induced lupus is rarely associated with glomerulonephritis and usually
regresses when the medication is discontinued (Laurinaviciene, 2017).
TABLE 62-2. Some Clinical Manifestations of Systemic Lupus
Erythematosus

■ Lupus and Pregnancy

In a metaanalysis of nearly 9 million pregnancies, the incidence of lupus
approximated 1 case in 900 births (He, 2020). During pregnancy, lupus
improves in a third of women, remains unchanged in a third, and worsens in
the remaining third. Thus, in any pregnancy, the clinical condition can worsen
or flare without warning (Hahn, 2018).
In a cohort of 13,555 pregnant women with SLE, the maternal mortality
rate was 325 per 100,000 (Clowse, 2008). Maternal deaths invariably occur
in those with active disease (Ritchie, 2012). Women with SLE are at greater
risk for thrombotic complications, infection, postpartum hemorrhage, and
blood transfusion. He and Wei (2020) reported increased risks of adverse
pregnancy outcomes in women with SLE compared with unaffected women
(Table 62-4).
TABLE 62-4. Risk of Adverse Pregnancy Outcomes in Women with
Systemic Lupus Erythematosus

During the past several decades, pregnancy outcomes in women with
SLE have improved remarkably. For most women with inactive or
mild/moderate disease activity, pregnancy outcomes are relatively favorable
(Buyon, 2015). Women who have confined cutaneous lupus do not usually
have adverse outcomes (Hamed, 2013). However, newly diagnosed SLE
during pregnancy tends to be severe (Zhao, 2013). In general, pregnancy
outcome is best in women for whom: (1) lupus activity has been quiescent

for at least 6 months before conception; (2) lupus nephritis manifest by
proteinuria or renal dysfunction is absent; (3) neither antiphospholipid
syndrome nor lupus anticoagulant are detected; and (4) superimposed
preeclampsia does not develop (Peart, 2014; Petri, 2020a; Stojan, 2012).

■ Lupus Nephritis
Active nephritis is associated with adverse pregnancy outcomes, although
these have improved substantially and especially if disease remains in
remission (Stojan, 2012; Wagner, 2009). Of complications, women with
renal disease have a high incidence of gestational hypertension and
preeclampsia. Of 137 women with SLE reported by Rodrigues and
colleagues (2019), 27 percent of gravidas with preexisting renal disease
developed preeclampsia compared with only 16 percent of those without
underlying renal disease. In a review of 309 pregnancies complicated by
lupus nephritis, 30 percent suffered a flare, and 40 percent of these had
associated renal insufficiency (Moroni, 2005). The maternal mortality rate
was 1.3 percent. These findings were corroborated in a subsequent
prospective study (Moroni, 2016). In addition, a third of the 113 pregnancies
were delivered preterm. Compared with women without nephritis or with
inactive nephritis, those with active nephritis have a significantly increased
incidence of maternal and fetal complications (Rodrigues, 2019; Wagner,
2009). The higher the histological class, the greater the risk.
Most recommend continuation of immunosuppressive therapy for
nephritis during pregnancy. Hydroxychloroquine, cyclosporine, azathioprine,
and tacrolimus are permissible in pregnancy (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019b; Parikh, 2020). New-onset nephritis
or severe renal flare is treated aggressively with tacrolimus, and
consideration is given to adding intravenous corticosteroids,
immunosuppressive drugs, or intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) therapy
(Maynard, 2019; Parikh, 2020).

■ Lupus Versus Preeclampsia-Eclampsia
Chronic hypertension complicates up to 30 percent of pregnancies in women
with SLE (Egerman, 2005). Preeclampsia is common, and in those with
nephritis or antiphospholipid antibodies, superimposed preeclampsia is

encountered even more often and earlier (Bertsias, 2008; Dong, 2020).
Preeclampsia and SLE flares share features of hypertension, proteinuria,
edema, and renal function deterioration. However, the management is
distinct. Lupus nephritis is treated with immunosuppression, and severe
preeclampsia/eclampsia requires delivery. It may be difficult, if not
impossible, to discriminate a lupus flare with nephropathy from severe
preeclampsia if the kidney is the only involved organ (Petri, 2020b). Serum
uric acid and complement levels and dsDNA titers may aid in differentiating
the two. Last, central nervous system involvement with SLE may culminate in
convulsions similar to those of eclampsia.

■ Management During Pregnancy
Care consists primarily of monitoring maternal clinical and laboratory status
and fetal well-being. Establishment of baseline renal disease and
hematological values is important because pregnancy-induced laboratory
changes later in gestation can resemble SLE disease activity. A 24-hour urine
collection to assess proteinuria and serum creatinine level measurement
determine initial renal function. A complete blood count (CBC) identifies
preexisting anemia, leukopenia, and thrombocytopenia. Continued assessment
of renal function and hematological parameters is undertaken each trimester
unless symptoms develop. In this event, measures are monthly (Baer, 2011).
For monitoring of SLE activity, various laboratory techniques have been
recommended. As just discussed, establishing baseline values will assist
comparisons later in pregnancy. Serum complement levels (C3 and C4) and
dsDNA titers are drawn at the first prenatal care visit and when symptoms
develop. Serum complement levels are normally increased in pregnancy
(Appendix, p. 1231). Although falling or low C3 and C4 levels are more
likely to be associated with active disease, higher levels provide no
assurance against disease flare. If symptoms develop, the combination of
declining complement levels and rising dsDNA titers does indicate a lupus
flare (Baer, 2011). Women with SLE are also screened for antiphospholipid
antibodies at the beginning of pregnancy. Last, screening for anti-SS-A (antiRo) and anti-SS-B (anti-La) antibodies is recommended because of
associated fetal complications described later.

The combination of serial hematological, rheumatological, and renal
studies may detect changes in disease activity. SLE-associated hemolysis is
characterized by a positive Coombs test, anemia, reticulocytosis, and
unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia. Thrombocytopenia, leukopenia, or both
may develop. Chronic thrombocytopenia in early pregnancy may be due to
antiphospholipid antibodies (Lockshin, 1995). Later, thrombocytopenia may
indicate preeclampsia.
The fetus also is closely observed for adverse effects such as growth
restriction and oligohydramnios. Sonographic evaluations are performed
every 4 weeks beginning at 24 weeks’ gestation to assess for both.
Antepartum testing for fetal well-being is initiated in the third trimester and
described in Chapter 20 (p. 392) (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2021a,b). Unless evidence of maternal or fetal compromise
develops, pregnancy is allowed to progress to term.

■ Pharmacological Treatment
There is no cure for SLE, and complete remissions are rare. Approximately a
fourth of pregnant women have mild disease, which is not life threatening but
may be disabling because of pain and fatigue. Arthralgia and serositis can be
managed by nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). However,
during pregnancy, chronic or large intermittent dosing is avoided due to
related oligohydramnios or ductus arteriosus closure (Chap. 8, p. 151).
Antimalarials reduce dermatitis, arthritis, and fatigue (Hahn, 2018).
Although these agents cross the placenta, hydroxychloroquine (Plaquenil)
does not appear to cause congenital malformations (Briggs, 2022). Most
recommend continuation during pregnancy because therapy interruption can
precipitate a flare (Marder, 2019; Petri, 2019). For those not previously
using hydroxychloroquine, others favor initiation in the first trimester
because its use is associated with an 85-percent reduction in the risk of
having a small-for-gestational-age neonate (Parikh, 2020). Also, it lowers
the risk of fetal congenital heart block by 50 percent in women with anti-SSA antibodies. Low-dose aspirin can be used throughout gestation.
Severe disease is managed with corticosteroids such as prednisone, 1 to
2 mg/kg/d orally or methylprednisolone, 1000 mg given intravenously over
90 minutes daily for 3 days (Petri, 2007). After the disease is controlled, this
dose is tapered to a daily morning dose of 10 to 15 mg. Corticosteroid

therapy can lead to gestational diabetes. During labor, delivery, and
postpartum, corticosteroids in “stress doses” are given to women who take
these drugs chronically or who have done so recently. This augmented dose
reflects a normal adrenal response, and one option on admission for delivery
is hydrocortisone, 100 mg, given IV every 8 hours for 48 hours.
Tacrolimus, rituximab, and IVIG therapy also have been used to treat
lupus flares (Petri, 2019). These are usually reserved for lupus nephritis or
disease that is corticosteroid resistant. Azathioprine has a good safety record
during pregnancy (Hahn, 2018; Petri, 2019). Its recommended daily oral
dose is 2 mg/kg. Teratogenic medications to be avoided include
mycophenolate mofetil, methotrexate, and cyclophosphamide (Briggs, 2022;
Hahn, 2018). However, cyclophosphamide can be considered in the second
or third trimester for severe disease (Lazzaroni, 2016).
In nonpregnant subjects, antihypertensive therapy often includes an
angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor or an angiotensin-receptor
blocker. For pregnancy, these should be changed to safer fetal options such as
calcium-channel blockers, alpha methyldopa, or labetalol (Cabiddu, 2016).

■ Perinatal Mortality and Morbidity
Adverse perinatal outcome rates are significantly elevated in pregnancies
complicated by SLE. Among these are preterm delivery, fetal-growth
restriction, stillbirth, and neonatal lupus syndrome (see Table 62-4) (He,
2020; Phansenee, 2018). Perinatal outcome rates worsen in women with
active disease, significant proteinuria, or renal impairment and in those with
chronic hypertension, preeclampsia, or both (Lazzaroni, 2016). Adverse
outcomes are also more common in women with neuropsychiatric lupus (de
Jesus, 2017). Reasons at least partially responsible for adverse fetal
consequences include decidual vasculopathy with placental infarction and
decreased perfusion (Hanly, 1988).

■ Neonatal Lupus Syndrome
This is characterized by newborn skin lesions—lupus dermatitis; various
hematological and systemic derangements; and occasionally congenital heart
block (Hahn, 2018). Cutaneous manifestations can be present in 30 to 40
percent of infants and appear at 4 to 6 weeks of age (Silverman, 2010).

These are usually associated with anti-SS-A and SS-B antibodies, and up to
50 percent of women with SLE are positive for these (see Table 62-1).
Thrombocytopenia and hepatic involvement are seen in 5 to 10 percent of
affected infants.
In a review of outcomes in 128 infants born to women with lupus, 16
percent developed cutaneous lupus and 26 percent showed hematological
abnormalities and elevated transaminase levels (Cimaz, 2003). Cutaneous
lupus, thrombocytopenia, and autoimmune hemolysis are transient and clear
within a few months (Zuppa, 2017). In subsequent offspring, the recurrence
risk for neonatal lupus may approach 25 percent (Bramham, 2012). The only
maternal treatment that lowers the risk of neonatal lupus is
hydroxychloroquine (Izmirly, 2020; Petri, 2019).

■ Congenital Heart Block
Fetal and neonatal heart block results from diffuse myocarditis and fibrosis
in the region between the atrioventricular (AV) node and bundle of His.
Natural killer cells have been detected in fetal myocytes (Ivanchenko, 2021).
Congenital heart block develops almost exclusively in fetuses of women with
antibodies to the SS-A or SS-B antigens (Buyon, 1993). Even in the presence
of such antibodies, the incidence of fetal myocarditis is only 2 to 3 percent
(Bramham, 2012; Lateef, 2017). However, it rises to 20 percent with a prior
affected child. The cardiac lesion is permanent, and a pacemaker is generally
necessary. Long-term prognosis is poor. Of 325 infants with cardiac neonatal
lupus, nearly 20 percent died, and of these, a third were stillborn (Izmirly,
2011). Another autoimmune disease, Sjögren syndrome, also is associated
with fetal heart block (Brito-Zerón, 2020).
Maternal administration of corticosteroids, plasma exchange, or IVIG
therapy does not reduce the risk of congenital heart block. For women with
anti-SS-B and anti-SS-A antibodies, fetal cardiac monitoring is performed
between 18 and 26 weeks’ gestation. Maternal corticosteroid administration
for treatment of fetal congenital heart block is controversial and discussed
further in Chapter 19 (p. 369). This therapy to treat fetal heart block has not
been studied in randomized trials. However, some evidence derives from
fetuses exposed to their mother’s corticosteroid treatment for SLE and shows
that exposure may mitigate fetal myocarditis. Specifically, Shinohara and
coworkers (1999) reported no cases of heart block in 26 neonates whose

mothers received corticosteroids before 16 weeks’ gestation as part of SLE
maintenance therapy. By contrast, 15 of 61 neonates with heart block were
born to women in whom corticosteroid therapy was begun after 16 weeks for
an SLE exacerbation. Maternal hydroxychloroquine therapy is associated
with a lower incidence of fetal heart block, especially in those with a prior
affected child (Izmirly, 2010, 2020).

■ Long-term Prognosis and Contraception
The survival rate for women with SLE is 95 percent at 5 years, 90 percent at
10 years, and 78 percent at 20 years (Hahn, 2018). Infection, lupus flares,
end-organ failure, hypertension, stroke, and cardiovascular disease account
for most deaths. In general, women with SLE and chronic vascular or renal
disease may limit family size because of morbidity associated with the
disease and greater risks for adverse perinatal outcomes. For contraception,
combination oral contraceptives did not increase the incidence of lupus
flares in two large multicenter trials (Petri, 2005; Sánchez-Guerrero, 2005).
Notably, comorbid antiphospholipid antibodies are a contraindication to
estrogen-containing methods (Chap. 38, p. 672). Progestin-only implants and
injections provide effective contraception with no known effects on lupus
flare rates (Sammaritano, 2020). Data do not support the concern that
intrauterine device use and immunosuppressive therapy lead to higher
infection rates in these patients. Tubal sterilization may be advantageous and
is performed with greatest safety postpartum or whenever SLE is quiescent
(Chap. 39, p. 681).

ANTIPHOSPHOLIPID SYNDROME
This is an autoantibody-mediated acquired thrombophilia that predisposes to
recurrent thrombosis or pregnancy morbidity (Moutsopoulos, 2018).
Specifically, antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) is diagnosed in women with
persistently positive serum tests for antiphospholipid antibodies (APAs) plus
arterial and/or venous thromboses or obstetrical morbidity. APAs include
lupus anticoagulant, anticardiolipin antibody, and anti-β2 glycoprotein-I
antibody.
Phospholipids are the main lipid constituents of cell and organelle
membranes. Certain proteins in plasma associate noncovalently with these

phospholipids. APAs are directed against these phospholipids or these
phospholipid-binding proteins (Garcia, 2018; Giannakopoulos, 2013). This
antibody group may be of immunoglobulin G (IgG), IgM, and IgA classes,
alone or in combination. APAs are most common with SLE, other connective
tissue disorders, and APS. That said, a small proportion of normal women
and men have low levels of these antibodies.
The stimulus for autoantibody production is unclear, but it possibly is due
to a preceding infection or another event that causes endothelial disruption.
The resulting pathophysiology is mediated by one or more of the following:
(1) activation of various procoagulants, (2) inactivation of natural
anticoagulants, (3) complement activation, and (4) inhibition of
syncytiotrophoblast differentiation (Garcia, 2018). Clinically, these actions
lead to vascular thromboses or to pregnancy morbidity. Virtually every organ
system may be affected.
Central nervous system involvement is one of the most prominent clinical
manifestations. In addition to cerebrovascular arterial or venous thrombotic
events, psychiatric features and even multiple sclerosis can be present
(Binder, 2010). Renovascular involvement may lead to renal failure that can
be difficult to differentiate from lupus nephritis (D’Cruz, 2009). Peripheral
and visceral thromboses also are features. In one case, a puerpera developed
a mesenteric vessel infarction and subsequent spontaneous cecal perforation
(Ahmed, 2009). Obstetrical complications encompass recurrent pregnancy
loss and placental dysfunction reflected by fetal-growth restriction, stillbirth,
early-onset preeclampsia, and preterm birth. Treatment using aspirin,
heparin, and close monitoring has increased live-birth rates to more than 70
percent in these women (Hamulyák, 2020; Schreiber, 2016).
A small proportion of these patients develop the catastrophic
antiphospholipid antibody syndrome (CAPS) or Asherson syndrome. This is
defined as a rapidly progressive thromboembolic disorder simultaneously
affecting three or more organ systems or tissues (Garcia, 2018; Schreiber,
2016). It has a high mortality rate from activation of a cytokine storm. In half
of cases, a triggering event is identified.

■ Specific Antiphospholipid Antibodies
As mentioned, several antibodies in APS are directed against a specific
phospholipid or a phospholipid-binding protein:

1. β2 glycoprotein-I, also known as apolipoprotein H, is a phospholipidbinding plasma protein that inhibits prothrombinase activity within
platelets and prevents platelet aggregation (Giannakopoulos, 2013). Thus,
its normal action is to limit procoagulant binding and thereby prevent
coagulation cascade activation. Logically, antibodies directed against this
glycoprotein would reverse its anticoagulant activity and promote
thrombosis. This is important from an obstetrical viewpoint because β2
glycoprotein-I is expressed in high concentrations on the
syncytiotrophoblast surface. Complement activation may contribute to its
pathogenesis (Avalos, 2009; Tsokos, 2011). Teleologically, this seems
appropriate because the decidua intuitively should be a critical area to
prevent coagulation that might lead to intervillous space thrombosis.
2. Lupus anticoagulant (LAC) is a heterogeneous group of antibodies
directed against phospholipid-binding proteins. This antibody group
induces prolongation in vitro of the prothrombin, partial thromboplastin,
and Russell viper venom times. Thus, paradoxically, this so-called
anticoagulant is actually powerfully thrombotic in vivo. This is the only
APA that has been consistently associated with adverse pregnancy
outcomes (Petri, 2020a).
3. Anticardiolipin antibodies (ACAs) are directed against one of the many
phospholipid cardiolipins found in mitochondrial membranes and
platelets.

■ Antibodies Against Natural Anticoagulants
Some APAs are also directed against the natural anticoagulant proteins C and
S. Another is directed against the anticoagulant protein annexin V, which is
expressed in high concentrations by syncytiotrophoblast (Giannakopoulos,
2013). Testing for these other antibodies is not recommended (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019a). However, some studies
have evaluated these nonconventional antiphospholipid antibodies in women
who clinically meet APS criteria but do not have the classic antibody profile.
In one study, treatment of women who had these nonconventional antibodies
offered some benefits, such as a lower pregnancy loss rate (Mekinian, 2016).
Clinical features shown in Table 62-5 provide indications for testing. By
international consensus, APS is diagnosed based on laboratory and clinical
criteria (Table 11-4, p. 205). First, one of two clinical criteria—which are

vascular thrombosis or certain pregnancy morbidity—must be present. With
laboratory criteria, high IgG or IgM titers of ACA or anti-β2 glycoprotein-I
or LAC positivity should be confirmed on two occasions 12 weeks apart.
The diagnosis can be further stratified based on the number of these tests that
are positive.
TABLE 62-5. Some Clinical Features of Antiphospholipid Syndrome

Tests for LAC are nonspecific coagulation tests. The partial
thromboplastin time is generally prolonged because the anticoagulant
interferes with conversion of prothrombin to thrombin in vitro. The dilute
Russell viper venom test is considered more specific.
Branch and Khamashta (2003) recommend conservative interpretation of
results that are based on repeated tests from a reliable laboratory and that are
consistent with each clinical case. Only approximately 20 percent of patients
with APS have a positive LAC assay alone. Thus, ACA enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) testing also should be performed. Efforts have
been made to standardize ACA assays, however, these remain without
international standards (Garcia, 2018). For each APS test, interlaboratory
variation can be large, and agreement between commercial kits is poor.

■ Pregnancy and Antiphospholipid Antibodies
As many as 30 percent of patients with SLE have APAs. In women without
autoimmune diseases who have pregnancy complications, the prevalence of
positive results with APA testing is 7 percent (Garcia, 2018).
In women with elevated APA levels, and especially when LAC is
identified, risks for decidual vasculopathy, placental infarction, fetal-growth
restriction, early-onset preeclampsia, and recurrent fetal death are increased
(Saccone, 2017). Some of these women, like those with SLE, also have a

high incidence of venous and arterial thromboses, cerebral thrombosis,
hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia, and pulmonary hypertension (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019a; Clowse, 2008). In 191
LAC-negative women with APS, those with ACAs and β2-glycoprotein-I had
significantly greater miscarriage rates than if either one alone was positive
(Liu, 2013). Women with higher titers tend to have more adverse outcomes
(Alijotas-Reig, 2020; Gabbay-Benziv, 2018).

■ Pregnancy Pathophysiology
It is not precisely known how APAs cause damage, but it is likely that their
actions are multifactorial. Platelets may be damaged directly by APAs or
indirectly by binding β2-glycoprotein-I, which causes platelets to be
susceptible to aggregation (Giannakopoulos, 2013). One theory proposes that
phospholipid-containing endothelial cell or syncytiotrophoblast membranes
may be damaged directly by the APA or indirectly by antibody binding to
either β2 glycoprotein-I or annexin V (Rand, 1997, 1998). This prevents the
cell membranes from protecting the syncytiotrophoblast and endothelium.
This exposes the basement membrane, to which damaged platelets can adhere
and form a thrombus.
Pierro and colleagues (1999) reported that APAs decreased decidual
production of the vasodilating prostaglandin E2. Diminished protein C or S
activity and greater prothrombin activation also may be contributory
(Zangari, 1997). Evidence supports that thrombosis with APS stems from
activation of the tissue factor pathway (Amengual, 2003). Last, uncontrolled
placental complement activation by APAs is implicated in fetal loss and
growth restriction (Holers, 2002).
Complications in APS cannot be completely explained by thrombosis
alone. Animal models suggest that effects stem from inflammation rather than
thrombosis (Cohen, 2011). Some investigators hypothesize that APSassociated clotting is triggered as a “second hit” from innate inflammatory
immune responses. These investigators recommend treatment with
antiinflammatory agents (Meroni, 2011).

■ Adverse Pregnancy Outcomes

Overall, APAs are associated with higher rates of fetal wastage (Chap. 11, p.
204). In most early reports that describe these outcomes, however, women
were included because they had repeated adverse outcomes. Both antibody
prevalence and miscarriage are common—recall that the incidence of APAs
in the general obstetrical population is about 5 percent and early miscarriage
approximates 20 percent of call conceptions. Accordingly, current data are
too limited to conclude the exact risks for adverse effects of these antibodies
on pregnancy outcomes. Fetal deaths, however, are more characteristic with
APS than are first-trimester miscarriages (Garcia, 2018; Roque, 2004).
When otherwise unexplained fetal deaths are examined, the data are
mixed. One study measured ACA levels in 309 pregnancies with fetal death
and found no differences in their frequency compared with levels in 618
normal pregnancies (Haddow, 1991). In another study of women with
recurrent pregnancy loss, those with APAs had an increased rate of preterm
delivery (Clark, 2007). In a case-control study of 582 stillbirths and 1547
live births, a three- to fivefold higher risk for stillbirth was found in women
with elevated ACA and anti-β2 glycoprotein-I levels (Silver, 2013). In
women with APAs, adverse outcomes are more common in the presence of:
(1) all three classic APA types, (2) comorbid SLE or systemic autoimmune
diseases, and (3) prior thrombosis and pregnancy morbidity. Logistic
regression found the probability of pregnancy failure was 93 percent with
two or more APA types but was 63 percent for those with only one (Ruffatti,
2011).

■ Thrombosis Prevention in Pregnancy
Because of study heterogeneity, current treatment recommendations for
women with APAs can be confusing. Therapy is directed at thrombosis
prevention. As discussed, APAs are immunoglobulins that may be of G, M,
or A classes. Those directed against the phospholipids (PL) are termed GPL,
MPL, and APL, respectively. During testing, these are reported as
semiquantified phospholipid binding-unit levels and expressed as negative,
low-positive, medium-positive, or high-positive (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019a).
As discussed in Chapter 55 (p. 979), women with prior thromboembolic
events who have APAs are at risk for recurrence in subsequent pregnancies.
For these women, prophylactic anticoagulation with heparin throughout

pregnancy and for 6 weeks postpartum is recommended (American College
of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019a). For those without prior
thromboembolic events, recommendations for management vary and are
listed in Table 55-5 (p. 984). Some acceptable schemes include close
antepartum maternal observation with or without prophylactic or
intermediate-dose heparin, and then some form of postpartum anticoagulation
for 6 weeks. Sciascia and coworkers (2016) have presented preliminary
salutary results with hydroxychloroquine treatment. This currently is
considered investigational (Garcia, 2018; Latino, 2020).
Several researchers have questioned the need for heparin for women
with APAs but no history of thrombosis (Branch, 2010). Although this is less
clear, some recommend that women be treated if they have medium- or highpositive ACA titers or LAC activity and a prior second- or third-trimester
fetal death not attributable to other causes (Dizon-Townson, 1998; Lockshin,
1995). Others report that women with recurrent early pregnancy loss and
medium- or high-positive titers of antibodies may benefit from therapy
(Robertson, 2006).
Due to the risk of fetal-growth abnormalities and stillbirth, serial
sonographic assessment of fetal growth and antepartum testing in the third
trimester is recommended (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2019a, 2021a,b).

■ Specific Therapy in Pregnancy
Other agents are used to treat gravidas that have APS but no prior
thromboembolic event. Aspirin, in doses of 60 to 80 mg orally daily, blocks
conversion of arachidonic acid to thromboxane A2 while sparing
prostacyclin production. Thromboxane A2 usually causes platelet aggregation
and vasoconstriction, and prostacyclin has the opposite effect. The only
major side effect from low-dose aspirin is a slight risk of small-vessel
bleeding during surgical procedures. Low-dose aspirin does not reduce
adverse pregnancy outcomes in women who have APAs but who lack the
complete APS syndrome (Amengual, 2015). Thus, its use is recommended
for women with SLE or APS (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2020b; Rahman, 2020).

Unfractionated heparin is given subcutaneously in dosages of 5000 to
10,000 units every 12 hours. Some prefer low-molecular-weight heparin,
such as 40 mg enoxaparin (Lovenox) once daily (Kwak-Kim, 2013). With
therapeutic dosing, measurement of heparin levels may be useful because
clotting tests can be altered by LAC. The rationale for heparin therapy is to
prevent venous and arterial thrombotic episodes. Heparin therapy also
prevents thrombosis in the microcirculation, including the decidualtrophoblastic interface (Toglia, 1996). As discussed, heparin binds to β2glycoprotein-I, which coats the syncytiotrophoblast. This prevents binding of
ACAs and anti-β2 glycoprotein-I antibodies to their surfaces, which likely
prevents cellular damage (Tsokos, 2011). Heparin also binds to APAs in
vitro and likely in vivo.
Aspirin plus heparin therapy is the most effective regimen (de Jesus,
2014; Hamulyák, 2020). However, despite treatment, 30 percent of women
with APS do not achieve a successful outcome (Arslan, 2020). Heparin
therapy is associated with several complications that include bleeding,
thrombocytopenia, osteopenia, and osteoporosis. A description of various
heparins and their adverse effects is found in Chapter 55 (p. 983).
Corticosteroids generally should not be used with primary APS—that is,
without an associated connective tissue disorder. For women with SLE or
those being treated for APS who develop SLE, corticosteroid therapy is
indicated. In such cases of secondary APS seen with SLE, the dose of
prednisone should be maintained at the lowest effective level to prevent
flares.
IVIG therapy is controversial and has usually been reserved for women
with overt disease—including catastrophic antiphospholipid syndrome or
heparin-induced thrombocytopenia or both (Rahman, 2020). It is used when
other first-line therapies have failed, especially in the setting of
preeclampsia and fetal-growth restriction. IVIG is administered by some in
doses of 0.4 g/kg/d for 5 days—total dose of 2 g/kg. This is repeated
monthly, or it is given as a single dose of 1 g/kg each month. Treatment is
expensive, as one course costs more than $10,000. Tenti and colleagues
(2016) found no benefits from adding IVIG to low-dose aspirin and lowmolecular-weight heparin. One Cochrane review found no improvement in
the live-birth rate for IVIG therapy given to women with recurrent pregnancy
loss (Wong, 2014). Trials are needed before application of this expensive
and cumbersome therapy is recommended.

Immunosuppression with hydroxychloroquine is commonly used with
low-dose aspirin in the treatment of women with SLE. This regimen may be
beneficial by reducing the risk of thrombosis and improving pregnancy
outcomes in women who also have APS (Mekinian, 2015; Sciascia, 2016).
Statins have been examined due to their protective effects on
endothelium. In a small trial in 21 women with APS who developed fetalgrowth restriction or preeclampsia, the addition of pravastatin to low-dose
aspirin and low-molecular-weight heparin improved placental blood flow,
preeclampsia features, and pregnancy outcomes (Lefkou, 2016). Larger trials
are needed before this therapy is recommended.
Described earlier (p. 1114), catastrophic antiphospholipid syndrome is
treated aggressively with full anticoagulation, high-dose corticosteroids,
plasma exchange, and/or IVIG therapy (Garcia, 2018; Rahman, 2020).

■ Treatment Efficacy
Fetal loss is common in women with untreated APS, and especially in those
with LAC positivity. Even with treatment, recurrent fetal loss rates remain at
20 to 30 percent (Arslan, 2020; Empson, 2005; Ernest, 2011). Shown in
Table 62-6 are pregnancy outcomes from 750 treated women with primary
APS (Saccone, 2017). Participants were treated with low-dose aspirin and
prophylactic low-molecular-weight heparin starting in the first trimester.
Importantly, some women with SLE and APAs have normal pregnancy
outcomes without treatment. It is also emphasized that women with LAC and
prior poor pregnancy outcomes have had liveborn neonates without
treatment.
TABLE 62-6. Pregnancy Outcomes (%) in 750 Women Treated for
Antiphospholipid Syndrome—the PREGNANTS Study

In a manner similar to neonatal lupus syndrome (p. 1113), up to 30
percent of newborns demonstrate passively acquired APAs (Nalli, 2017).
One group found higher rates of learning disabilities in these children
(Tincani, 2009). Another reported a fourfold greater risk for perinatal strokes
(Simchen, 2009). Of 141 newborns followed in a European registry, the rate
of preterm birth was 16 percent; low birthweight occurred in 17 percent; and
later behavioral abnormalities developed in 4 percent of the children. There
were no cases of neonatal thrombosis (Motta, 2012). A 7-year study of 36
pregnancies in 26 women who had APS reported three cases of autism
spectrum disorder. All were associated with persistent neonatal anti-β2
glycoprotein-I IgG antibodies (Abisror, 2013).

RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS
This chronic inflammatory disease stems from immunological dysfunction,
and infiltrating T cells secrete cytokines to cause inflammation, polyarthritis,
and systemic symptoms. The cardinal feature is inflammatory synovitis that
usually involves the peripheral joints. The disease has a propensity for
cartilage destruction, bony erosions, and joint deformities. Pain, aggravated
by movement, is accompanied by swelling and tenderness. Extraarticular
manifestations include rheumatoid nodules, vasculitis, and pleuropulmonary
symptoms. Other complaints are fatigue, anorexia, and depression. The
American College of Rheumatology has published diagnostic criteria (Shah,
2018).
The worldwide prevalence of rheumatoid arthritis is 0.5 to 1 percent,
women are affected three times more often than men, and peak onset is from
25 to 55 years (Shah, 2018). There is a genetic predisposition, and

heritability is estimated at 15 to 30 percent (McInnes, 2011). Genome-wide
associated studies have identified more than 30 loci involved in rheumatoid
arthritis pathogenesis (Kurkó, 2013). Class II major histocompatibility
complex molecule HLA-DR4 and HLA-DRB1 alleles also show an
association (McInnes, 2011; Shah, 2018). Pregnancy provides a protection
against rheumatoid arthritis development, and this may be related to HLAdisparate fetal microchimerism (Förger, 2020; Guthrie, 2010).

■ Management
Treatment is directed at pain relief, inflammation reduction, protection of
articular structures, and preservation of function. Physical and occupational
therapy and self-care instructions are essential.
Aspirin and other NSAIDs nonspecifically inhibit both cyclooxygenase 1
(COX-1), which is an enzyme critical to normal platelet function, and COX2, which mediates inflammatory response mechanisms. However, in one
systematic review, a small increased rate of cardiac malformations was
found in newborns exposed to NSAIDs in the first trimester (Briggs, 2022).
In addition, NSAIDs are associated with early spontaneous abortions, ductus
arteriosus constriction, and neonatal pulmonary hypertension (Briggs, 2022).
Another potential side effect of chronic NSAID therapy is gastritis with acute
bleeding. Thus, risks versus benefits of these medications must be
considered. Glucocorticoid therapy in low to moderate doses is given to
achieve more rapid symptom control. Of these, prednisone, 7.5 mg orally
daily for the first 2 years of active disease, substantively reduces progressive
joint erosions (Shah, 2018).
Until recently, NSAIDs were the cornerstone of therapy, but they do not
retard disease progression. The American College of Rheumatology
recommends several disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs) that
may reduce or prevent joint damage (Singh, 2016). According to Shah and St.
Clair (2018), methotrexate has become the preferred DMARD outside of
pregnancy. NSAIDs thus are important in pregnancy because methotrexate
and leflunomide are contraindicated (Chap. 8, pp. 151–152). In one review
of drug exposure, a fourth of women with rheumatoid arthritis took a
DMARD within 6 months of conception (Kuriya, 2011). Of unplanned
exposures during pregnancy, 4 percent of 393 pregnant women were given a

category D or X medication—methotrexate was the most common at 2.9
percent.
Sulfasalazine and hydroxychloroquine are safe for use in pregnancy
(Briggs, 2022; Partlett, 2011). These, combined with relatively low-dose
prednisone—7.5 to 20 mg daily—usually successfully treat flares.
Biological DMARDs have revolutionized rheumatoid arthritis treatment.
These include the tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) inhibitors infliximab,
adalimumab, golimumab, certolizumab, and etanercept (Shah, 2018). Their
use in pregnancy is limited, but they appear to be safe for the fetus (Briggs,
2022). In one review, 13 percent of 393 pregnant women were given a
biological cytokine-inhibiting DMARD—primarily etanercept (Kuriya,
2011). In another review of 300 exposures, no fetal effects were noted
(Berthelot, 2009). A prospective study of 38 pregnant women found similar
results (Hoxha, 2017). In 74 women exposed to adalimumab during
pregnancy, no risks were identified (Burmester, 2017). Little is known
regarding the pregnancy effects of anakinra, an interleukin 1 receptor
antagonist, or of rituximab, an antagonist to the B-cell CD20 antigen. Other
biologics are abatacept, tocilizumab, and tofacitinib.

■ Pregnancy and Rheumatoid Arthritis
In up to 70 percent of women with rheumatoid arthritis, disease will improve
during pregnancy (Raine, 2020; Shah, 2018). Some studies suggest this may
be due to regulatory T-cell alterations (Förger, 2020). Even so, some women
develop disease during pregnancy, and others become worse. A downside to
this respite during pregnancy is that postpartum exacerbation occurs in 40 to
50 percent of women (Eudy, 2018; Jethwa, 2019). This may stem from
postpartum alterations in innate immunity (Häupl, 2008b).
Some studies report a protective effect of pregnancy against developing
new-onset rheumatoid arthritis. In a case-control study of 88 affected women,
pregnancy provided a degree of protection long term, but the likelihood of
new-onset rheumatoid arthritis was increased sixfold during the first 3
postpartum months (Silman, 1992). Pikwer and colleagues (2009) reported a
significant reduction in the risk of subsequent arthritis in women who
breastfed longer than 12 months.
These findings may reflect the interference of sex hormones with several
putative processes involved in arthritis pathogenesis, including

immunoregulation (Förger, 2020; Häupl, 2008a,b). First, Unger and
associates (1983) reported that amelioration of rheumatoid arthritis
correlated with serum levels of pregnancy-associated alpha2-glycoprotein.
This compound has immunosuppressive properties. Second, Nelson and
coworkers (1993) noted that disease improvement was associated with a
disparity in HLA class II antigens between mother and fetus. They suggested
that the maternal immune response to paternal HLA antigens may play a role
in pregnancy-induced remission of arthritis. In addition to monocyte
activations, there also may be T-lymphocyte activation (Förger, 2020).
Fertility is diminished in patients with rheumatoid arthritis, and adverse
pregnancy outcomes are increased. Kishore and colleagues (2019) reported
pregnancy outcomes from nearly 32,000 women with rheumatoid arthritis.
Compared with unaffected women, those with rheumatoid arthritis had
significantly greater rates of hypertensive diseases, preterm birth,
hemorrhage, and fetal-growth restriction.

■ Juvenile Rheumatoid Arthritis
This group of diseases is the most frequent cause of chronic arthritis in
children and persists into adulthood. In 76 pregnancies of 51 affected
Norwegian women, pregnancy had no effects on clinical presentation, but
disease activity usually became quiescent or remained so during pregnancy
(Østensen, 1991). Similar to rheumatoid arthritis, postpartum flares were
common. Joint deformities often developed in these women, and 15 of 20
cesarean deliveries were done for contracted pelves or joint prostheses.
Results from a summary of 39 Polish women with juvenile rheumatoid
arthritis were similar (Musiej-Nowakowska, 1999).
This arthritis portends few adverse pregnancy outcomes. The risk for
preterm birth is elevated, but fetal development is normal (Mohamed, 2016;
Rom, 2014; Wallenius, 2014). In a study of 1807 births, Remaeus and
associates (2017) reported increased incidences of preterm birth, fetalgrowth restriction, and preeclampsia. Disease severity in early pregnancy
was predictive of preterm delivery and fetal-growth restriction in one cohort
study (Bharti, 2015). And, patients with low disease activity scores in the
first trimester are likely to have low disease activity or remission in the third
trimester (Ince-Askan, 2017).

If the cervical spine is involved, particular attention is warranted during
pregnancy. Subluxation is common, and pregnancy, at least theoretically,
predisposes to this because of joint laxity. Importantly, there are anesthesia
concerns during endotracheal intubation.

SYSTEMIC SCLEROSIS—SCLERODERMA
This is a chronic multisystem connective tissue disorder of unknown
etiology. It is characterized by microvascular damage; inflammation from
immune system activation; and excessive deposition of collagen in the skin,
lungs, heart, gastrointestinal tract, and kidneys. It is uncommon, displays a 5to-1 female dominance, and typically affects those aged 30 to 50 years
(Clark, 2020; Varga, 2018).
This strong prevalence of scleroderma in women and its greater
incidence in the years following childbirth give credence to the hypothesis
that microchimerism is involved as discussed earlier (p. 1109) (Munira,
2020). Artlett and associates (1998) demonstrated Y-chromosomal DNA in
almost half of women with systemic sclerosis compared with only 4 percent
of controls. Rak and coworkers (2009) identified male microchimerism in
peripheral blood mononuclear cells more frequently in women with limited
versus diffuse scleroderma.

■ Clinical Course
The hallmark is overproduction of normal collagen. Limited cutaneous
systemic sclerosis is the more benign form and progresses slowly. With
diffuse cutaneous systemic sclerosis, skin fibrosis advances rapidly and is
followed by gastrointestinal tract fibrosis, especially the distal esophagus
(Varga, 2018). Pulmonary interstitial fibrosis along with vascular changes
may cause pulmonary hypertension, which develops in 15 percent of patients.
Antinuclear antibodies such as those listed in Table 62-1 are found in 95
percent of patients, and immunoincompetence often develops.
Raynaud phenomenon, which is typified by cold-induced, episodic,
rapidly reversible digital ischemia, is seen in 95 percent of patients. There
also may be swelling of the distal extremities and face. Symptoms from
esophageal involvement, especially fullness and epigastric burning pain,

occur in half of patients. Pulmonary involvement is frequent and causes
dyspnea. The 10-year cumulative survival rate is 70 percent in those with
pulmonary fibrosis, and pulmonary arterial hypertension is the main cause of
death (Clark, 2020; Varga, 2018). Women with limited cutaneous disease
such as the CREST syndrome—calcinosis, Raynaud phenomenon,
esophageal involvement, sclerodactyly, and telangiectasia—have milder
disease.
Overlap syndrome refers to systemic sclerosis with features of other
connective tissue disorders. Mixed connective tissue disease is a term used
for the syndrome involving features of SLE, systemic sclerosis, polymyositis,
rheumatoid arthritis, and high titers of anti-ribonucleoprotein (RNP)
antibodies (Rudder, 2021). The disorder is also termed undifferentiated
connective tissue disease (Radin, 2020; Zucchi, 2020).
Although systemic sclerosis is incurable, treatment directed at end-organ
involvement can sometimes relieve symptoms and improve function. Renal
involvement and hypertension are often comorbid. At times, ACE inhibitors
may be required for blood pressure control despite their known
teratogenicity. Obliterative vasculopathy of the renal cortical arteries
characterizes scleroderma renal crisis, which develops in up to a fourth of
these patients. This leads to renal failure and malignant hypertension.
Interstitial restrictive lung disease is common and frequently becomes life
threatening. Associated pulmonary hypertension is treated with bosentan or
sildenafil (Chap. 52, p. 931).

■ Pregnancy and Systemic Sclerosis
The prevalence of scleroderma in pregnancy approximates 1 case in 22,000
pregnancies (Chakravarty, 2008). If baseline function is good, these women
usually have stable disease during gestation. As perhaps expected, pregnancy
aggravates dysphagia and reflux esophagitis (Steen, 1999). Dysphagia results
from loss of esophageal motility due to neuromuscular dysfunction. A lower
amplitude or disappearance of peristaltic waves in the lower two thirds of
the esophagus is seen using manometry. Symptomatic treatment for reflux is
described in Chapter 57 (p. 1017).
Women with renal insufficiency and malignant hypertension have a higher
incidence of superimposed preeclampsia. With rapidly worsening renal or
cardiac disease, pregnancy termination should be considered. Renal crisis is

uncommon, but it is life threatening, and it does not improve with delivery
(Zucchi, 2020). Pulmonary hypertension usually contraindicates pregnancy
(Table 52-3, p. 919).
Vaginal delivery may be anticipated, unless the soft tissue thickening
wrought by scleroderma produces dystocia requiring cesarean delivery.
Tracheal intubation for general anesthesia has special concerns because of
limited ability of these women to open their mouths widely (Sobanski, 2016).
Because of esophageal dysfunction, aspiration is also more likely, and
neuraxial analgesia is preferable. Warming the delivery room and
intravenous fluids, extra blankets, and socks and gloves are considered to
improve impaired circulation from Raynaud phenomenon. If corticosteroids
were used frequently, stress doses of hydrocortisone, described earlier for
SLE (p. 1113), are recommended (Sobanski, 2016).
Maternal and fetal outcomes correlate with underlying disease severity.
In a review of 214 gravidas with systemic sclerosis, 45 percent had diffuse
disease (Steen, 1999). Major complications included renal crisis in three and
greater rates of preterm birth. A multicenter study of 109 pregnancies from
25 centers reported increased rates of preterm delivery, fetal-growth
restriction, and very-low-birthweight newborns (Taraborelli, 2012). In a
review of 307 affected pregnancies, risks for miscarriage, preterm births,
and gestational hypertension were increased (Blagojevic, 2020). These are
likely related to placental abnormalities that include decidual vasculopathy,
acute atherosis, and infarcts (Sobanski, 2016). Somewhat related, perinatal
outcomes are similar with undifferentiated connective tissue diseases (Radin,
2020; Zucchi, 2020).
Scleroderma may be associated with subfertility (Bernatsky, 2008;
Lambe, 2004). For women who do not choose pregnancy, several reversible
contraceptive methods are acceptable. However, hormonal agents, especially
combination oral contraceptives, probably should not be used, especially in
women with pulmonary, cardiac, or renal involvement. Due to the often
unrelenting progression of systemic sclerosis, permanent sterilization also is
considered.

VASCULITIS SYNDROMES

Inflammation and damage to blood vessels may be primary or caused by
another disease. Immune-complex deposition is presumed to underlie most
cases (Ross, 2020). Primary types are listed in Table 62-7 (Langford, 2018).
Small vessel vasculitides such as granulomatosis with polyangiitis and
eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis have antibodies directed
against proteins in the cytoplasmic granules of leukocytes—antineutrophil
cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA) (Pagnoux, 2016). In general, women with a
vasculitis syndrome have elevated rates of preterm birth and preeclampsia
(Nguyen, 2021).
TABLE 62-7. Primary Vasculitis Syndromes

■ Polyarteritis Nodosa
This necrotizing vasculitis of small and medium-sized arteries is
characterized clinically by myalgia, neuropathy, gastrointestinal disorders,
hypertension, and renal disease (Goodman, 2014). A third of cases are
associated with hepatitis B antigenemia (Langford, 2018). Symptoms are
nonspecific, and fever, weight loss, and malaise are present in more than half
of cases. Diagnosis is made by biopsy, and treatment is high-dose prednisone
plus cyclophosphamide. Vasculitis due to hepatitis B antigenemia responds to
antivirals, glucocorticosteroids, and plasma exchange (Chap. 58, p. 1037).
Only a few reports describe polyarteritis nodosa associated with
pregnancy. Of 12 affected gravidas, polyarteritis first manifested during
pregnancy in seven, and it was rapidly fatal by 6 weeks postpartum (Owen,
1989). The diagnosis was not made until autopsy in six of the seven women.
Four women continued pregnancy, which resulted in one stillborn and three
successful outcomes.

■ Granulomatosis with Polyangiitis—Wegener
Granulomatosis
This is a small-vessel necrotizing granulomatous vasculitis affecting the
upper and lower respiratory tract and kidney (Pagnoux, 2016). Disease
frequently includes sinusitis and nasal disease (90 percent); pulmonary
infiltrates, cavities, or nodules (85 percent); glomerulonephritis (75 percent);
and musculoskeletal lesions (65 percent) (Sneller, 1995). At least 90 percent
have polyangiitis (Langford, 2018). It is uncommon and usually encountered
after age 50. Koukoura and associates (2008) reviewed 36 cases in
association with pregnancy and found a higher preterm birth rate. In another
report, a second woman had disease-related pneumonitis, but pregnancy did
not appear to affect disease activity (Pagnoux, 2011). Because subglottic
stenosis is found in up to a fourth of patients, the anesthesiology service is
ideally consulted antepartum (Engel, 2011).
Therapeutic options are limited by teratogenicity and fetotoxicity (Daher,
2020). Corticosteroids are standard treatment, but azathioprine,
cyclosporine, and IVIG therapy may also be used. For severe disease in the
late second or third trimester, cyclophosphamide in combination with
prednisolone is highly effective. Rituximab is also approved for this disorder
and appears to be safe for the fetus (Briggs, 2022).

■ Takayasu Arteritis
Also called pulseless disease, this is a chronic inflammatory arteritis
affecting large vessels (Abisror, 2020). Unlike temporal arteritis, which
develops almost exclusively after age 55, the onset of Takayasu arteritis is
almost always before age 40. It is associated with abnormal angiography of
the upper aorta and its main branches and with upper extremity vascular
impairment. Death usually results from congestive heart failure or
cerebrovascular events. Computed tomography or magnetic resonance
angiography can detect this disorder before the development of severe
vascular compromise. Takayasu arteritis may respond symptomatically to
corticosteroid therapy, however, it is not curative. Surgical bypass or
angioplasty improves survival rates.
Comorbid severe renovascular hypertension, cardiac involvement, or
pulmonary hypertension worsen pregnancy prognosis (Comarmond, 2020;

Singh, 2015). Hypertension is relatively common and should be carefully
controlled. Blood pressure is most accurately measured in the lower
extremity. Overall, the prognosis for pregnancy is good (Kirshenbaum,
2018). A study of 43 pregnancies in 33 women with Takayasu arteritis
reported that half had complications (Abisror, 2020). Authors described an
increased risk of pregnancy-related hypertension and preeclampsia but
overall favorable maternal and fetal outcomes. A review from Comarmond
and colleagues (2020) cites a 5-percent life-threatening cardiovascular
complication rate. Involvement of the abdominal aorta portends worse
perinatal outcome (Sharma, 2000). Vaginal delivery is preferred, and
epidural analgesia has been advocated for labor and delivery.

■ Other Vasculitides
Behçet disease is rare, and its prevalence approximates 1 case per 100,000
births (Lee, 2019). In one series of 298 pregnancies in 94 affected women,
rates of miscarriage and smaller babies were higher than those in healthy
controls (Gungor, 2014). Although greater risks for preeclampsia, preterm
delivery, and venous thromboembolism are reported, pregnancy is not
contraindicated (Elliot, 2019; Merlino, 2020).
Formerly Churg-Strauss vasculitis, eosinophilic granulomatosis with
polyangiitis is rare in pregnancy (Jennette, 2013). One case report described
a pregnant woman who responded to IVIG therapy (Hot, 2007). Another
presented an affected 35-year-old woman at term whose necrotizing
vasculitis involved the heart, and she subsequently underwent cardiac
transplantation (Corradi, 2009). Edwards (2015) described one woman who
developed postpartum relapses of this vasculitis in each of two pregnancies.
Henoch-Schönlein purpura is uncommon after childhood. Characteristic
signs of the disorder include purpuric rash, arthralgia, abdominal pain, and
gastrointestinal bleeding. In one review of 20 pregnancies complicated by
this vasculitis, cutaneous lesions and arthralgias were present in three fourths
and in approximately one half, respectively (Tayabali, 2012). HenochSchönlein purpura responds well to corticosteroid therapy, and pregnancy
outcomes are generally good (Kalmantis, 2008).

INFLAMMATORY MYOPATHIES

These are acquired and potentially treatable causes of skeletal muscle
weakness with a prevalence of 14 to 32 cases in 100,000 persons
(Greenberg, 2018). Three major groups are polymyositis, dermatomyositis,
and inclusion-body myositis, which all present with progressive
asymmetrical muscle weakness. They have a variable association with
connective tissue diseases, malignancy, drugs, systemic autoimmune disease
such as Crohn disease, and viral, bacterial, and parasitic infections.
Polymyositis is a subacute inflammatory myopathy that is frequently
associated with one of the autoimmune connective tissue disorders
(Bitencourt, 2020; Munira, 2020). Dermatomyositis manifests as a
characteristic rash accompanying or preceding weakness. Laboratory
findings include elevated muscle enzyme levels in serum and an abnormal
electromyogram. Confirmation is by biopsy, which shows perivascular and
perimysial inflammatory infiltrates, vasculitis, and muscle fiber
degeneration. It usually develops alone but can overlap with systemic
sclerosis or mixed connective tissue disease.
Prevailing theories suggest that the syndromes are caused by viral
infections, autoimmune disorders, or both. Importantly, approximately 15
percent of adults who develop dermatomyositis have an associated
malignant tumor. The timing of myositis and tumor appearance may be
separated by several years. The most common sites of associated cancer are
breast, lung, stomach, and ovary. The disease usually responds to high-dose
corticosteroid therapy, immunosuppressive drugs such as azathioprine or
methotrexate, or IVIG (Dalakas, 2012; Linardaki, 2011).
Experiences in pregnancy are garnered mostly from case series and
reviews. One cohort of 17 gravidas with polymyositis/dermatomyositis had
higher rates of hypertension (23 percent), antepartum hemorrhage (11
percent), cesarean delivery (88 percent), and preterm birth (35 percent)
compared with unaffected pregnant women (Chen, 2015). In another series of
60 women with dermatomyositis and 38 with polymyositis, 80 percent had
no adverse effect on their disease. Similar results have been reported by
others (Missumi, 2015; Pinal-Fernandez, 2014). Pregnancy outcome is
related to dermatomyositis activity, and new-onset disease is particularly
aggressive (Munira, 2020).

HEREDITARY CONNECTIVE TISSUE DISORDERS

Numerous inherited mutations involve genes that encode for structural
proteins of bone, skin, cartilage, blood vessels, and basement membranes.
Although connective tissues contain many complex macromolecules such as
elastin and more than 30 proteoglycans, the most common constituents are
fibrillar collagen types I, II, and III. Various mutations, some recessively and
some dominantly inherited, result in clinical syndromes that include Marfan
and Ehlers-Danlos syndromes, osteogenesis imperfecta, chondrodysplasias,
and epidermolysis bulla. Of concern during pregnancy is the predilection for
these disorders to result in aortic aneurysms (Schoenhoff, 2013).

■ Marfan Syndrome
This is an autosomal dominant connective tissue disorder that has a
population prevalence of 1 case in 3000 to 5000 (Prockop, 2018). Marfan
syndrome affects both sexes equally. The syndrome is due to abnormal
fibrillin—a constituent of elastin—caused by any of several different
mutations in the FBN1 gene (Biggin, 2004). Located on chromosome 15q21,
the FBN1 gene has a high mutation rate. The lack of distinct genotypephenotype correlation and large clinical variability limits the ability to
predict disease severity in progeny. Currently, preimplantation genetic testing
and prenatal diagnosis are limited to the 80 percent of cases in which the
mutation in the FBN1 gene is known (Smok, 2014).
In severe disease, the elastic lamina in the media of the aorta shows
degeneration. This predisposes to aortic dilation or dissecting aneurysm,
which appears more commonly during pregnancy (Curry, 2014; Roman,
2016). Marfan syndrome was found to underlie 65 percent of cases of aortic
dissection in 27 pregnant women (Braverman, 2021). Marfan syndrome
complicating pregnancy is discussed in more detail in Chapter 52 (p. 936).

■ Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome
This disease is characterized by various connective tissue changes, including
skin hyperelasticity. Its prevalence is 7 cases per 100,000 births (Spiegel,
2020). Several disease types vary based on skin, joint, or other tissue
involvement. In the more severe types, rupture of any of several arteries can
cause either stroke or bleeding. Some types are autosomal dominant, some
recessive, and some X-linked (Solomons, 2013). Types I, II, and III are

autosomally dominant, and each accounts for approximately 30 percent of
cases. Type IV is uncommon but is known to predispose to preterm delivery,
great-vessel rupture, postpartum bleeding, and uterine rupture (Pepin, 2000).
In most, the underlying molecular defect affects collagen or procollagen.
In general, women with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome have a higher frequency
of preterm rupture of membranes, preterm delivery, antepartum and
postpartum hemorrhage, placenta previa, and cervical insufficiency (Hurst,
2014; Spiegel, 2020). Several cases of spontaneous uterine rupture have
been described (Rudd, 1983). Tissue fragility makes episiotomy repair and
cesarean delivery difficult. A maternal and fetal death from spontaneous
rupture of the right iliac artery has been reported (Esaka, 2009). In another
case, a newborn was found to have multiple congenital skull fractures and
intracranial hemorrhage caused by Ehlers-Danlos type VIIC (Bar-Yosef,
2008).

■ Osteogenesis Imperfecta
This disorder has a prevalence of 1 case in 20,000 births for type I and 1
case in 60,000 for type II (Prockop, 2018). It is characterized by brittle
bones, and affected patients often have blue sclerae, hearing loss, multiple
prior bone fractures, and dental abnormalities. There are up to 15 subtypes
based on the causative gene and clinical picture, which ranges from mild to
severe (Van Dijk, 2010). Genetic inheritance includes autosomal dominant,
autosomal recessive, and sporadic patterns. Type I is the mildest form, and
the typical mutation affects the COL1A1 gene (Sykes, 1990). Type II is
typically lethal in utero.
Women with osteogenesis imperfecta, most commonly type I, may have
successful pregnancies. However, risks include fractures, complications
related to scoliosis with restrictive lung disease, micrognathia, brittle teeth,
an unstable cervical spine, uterine rupture, and cephalopelvic disproportion.
A retrospective cohort of 295 women with osteogenesis imperfecta found
greater risks of antepartum hemorrhage, placental abruption, fetal-growth
restriction, congenital malformations, and preterm birth (Ruiter-Ligeti,
2016). It is not unusual for affected women to enter pregnancy with 20 to 30
prior fractures. Most require minimal treatment other than management of the
fractures and consideration of bisphosphonates to decrease bone loss.

Depending on the type of osteogenesis imperfecta, the fetus may be
affected and may also suffer fractures in utero or during delivery.
Preimplantation genetic testing and prenatal diagnosis is available in many
situations, if desired. In utero stem cell therapy is being evaluated (CouzinFrankel, 2016).

REFERENCES
Abdul Hussain G, Azizieh F, Makhseed M, et al: Effects of progesterone, dydrogesterone and estrogen
on the production of Th1/Th2/Th17 cytokines by lymphocytes from women with recurrent
spontaneous miscarriage. J Reprod Immunol 140:103132, 2020
Abisror N, Mekinian A, Hachulla E, et al: Analysis of risk factors for complications and adverse
obstetrical in women with Takayasu arteritis: a French retrospective study and literature review. Clin
Rheumatol 39(9):2707, 2020
Abisror N, Mekinian A, Lachassinne E, et al: Autism spectrum disorders in babies born to mothers with
antiphospholipid syndrome. Semin Arthritis Rheum 43(3):348, 2013
Ahmed K, Darakhshan A, Au E, et al: Postpartum spontaneous colonic perforation due to
antiphospholipid syndrome. World J Gastroenterol 15(4):502, 2009
Alijotas-Reig J, Esteve-Valverde E, Ferrer-Oliveras R, et al: Comparative study of obstetric
antiphospholipid syndrome (OAPS) and non-criteria obstetric APS (NC-OAPS): report of 1640
cases from the EUROAPS registry. Rheumatology (Oxford) 59(6):1306, 2020
Amengual O, Atsumi T, Khamashta MA: Tissue factor in antiphospholipid syndrome: shifting the focus
from coagulation to endothelium. Rheumatology 42:1029, 2003
Amengual O, Fujita D, Otta E, et al: Primary prophylaxis to prevent obstetric complications in
asymptomatic women with antiphospholipid antibodies: a systematic review. Lupus 24(11):1135, 2015
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Antiphospholipid syndrome. Practice Bulletin No.
132, December 2012, Reaffirmed 2019a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Immune modulating therapies in pregnancy and
lactation. Committee Opinion No. 776, March 2019b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Low-dose aspirin use during pregnancy.
Committee Opinion No. 743, June 2018, Reaffirmed 2020b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Antepartum fetal surveillance. Practice Bulletin
No. 229, May 2021a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Indications for outpatient antenatal fetal
surveillance. Committee Opinion No. 828, May 2021b
Arbuckle MF, McClain MT, Ruberstone MV, et al: Development of autoantibodies before the clinical
onset of systemic lupus erythematosus. N Engl J Med 349:1526, 2003
Arslan E, Branch DW: Antiphospholipid syndrome: diagnosis and management in the obstetric patient.
Best Pract Clin Obstet Gynaecol 64:31, 2020
Artlett CM, Smith B, Jimenez SA: Identification of fetal DNA and cells in skin lesions from women with
systemic sclerosis. N Engl J Med 338:1186, 1998
Avalos I, Tsokos GC: The role of complement in the antiphospholipid syndrome-associated pathology.
Clin Rev Allergy Immunol 34(2–3):141, 2009
Baer AN, Witter FR, Petri M: Lupus and pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol Surv 66(10):639, 2011

Bar-Yosef O, Polak-Charcon S, Hoffman C, et al: Multiple congenital skull fractures as a presentation
of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome type VIIC. Am J Med Genet A 146A:3054, 2008
Bernatsky S, Hudson M, Pope J, et al: Assessment of reproductive history in systemic sclerosis.
Arthritis Rheum 59:1661, 2008
Berthelot JM, De Bandt M, Goupille P, et al: Exposition to anti-TNF drugs during pregnancy: outcome of
15 cases and review of the literature. Joint Bone Spine 76(1):28, 2009
Bertsias G, Ionnidis JP, Boletis J, et al: EULAR recommendations for the management of systemic
lupus erythematosus (SLE). Ann Rheum Dis 67(2):195, 2008
Bharti B, Lindsay SP, Wingard DL, et al: Disease severity and pregnancy outcomes in women with
rheumatoid arthritis: results from the Organization of Teratology Information Specialists Autoimmune
Diseases in Pregnancy Project. J Rheumatol 42:1376, 2015
Biggin A, Holman K, Brett M, et al: Detection of thirty novel FBN1 mutations in patients with Marfan
syndrome or a related fibrillinopathy. Hum Mutat 23:99, 2004
Binder WD, Traum AZ, Makar RS, et al: Case 37–2010: a 16-year-old girl with confusion, anemia, and
thrombocytopenia. N Engl J Med 363(24):2352, 2010
Bitencourt N, Solow EB, Wright T, et al: Inflammatory myositis in systemic lupus erythematosus. Lupus
29(7):776, 2020
Blagojevic J, AlOdhaibi KA, Aly AM, et al: Pregnancy in systemic sclerosis: results of a systematic
review and metaanalysis. J Rheumatol 47(6):881, 2020
Bramham K, Soh MC, Nelson-Piercy C: Pregnancy and renal outcomes in lupus nephritis: an update
and guide to management. Lupus 21(12):1271, 2012
Branch DW, Gibson M, Silver RM: Recurrent miscarriage. N Engl J Med 363:18, 2010
Branch DW, Khamashta M: Antiphospholipid syndrome: obstetric diagnosis, management, and
controversies. Obstet Gynecol 101:1333, 2003
Braverman AC, Mitaue E, Harris KM, et al: Clinical features and outcomes of pregnancy-related acute
aortic dissection. JAMA Cardiol 6(1):58, 2021
Briggs GG, Towers CV, Forinash AB: Briggs Drugs in Pregnancy and Lactation: A Reference Guide to
Fetal and Neonatal Risk, 12th ed. Philadelphia, Wolters Kluwer, 2022
Brito-Zerón P, Pasoto SG, Robles-Marhuenda A, et al: Autoimmune congenital heart block and primary
Sjögren’s syndrome: characterization and outcomes of 49 cases. Clin Exp Rheumatol 38 Suppl
126(4):95, 2020
Burmester GR, Landewe R, Genovese MC, et al: Adalimumab long-term safety: infections, vaccination
response and pregnancy outcomes in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. Ann Rheum Dis 76(2):414,
2017
Buyon JP, Kim MY, Guerra MM, et al: Predictors of pregnancy outcomes in patients with lupus: a
cohort study. Ann Intern Med 163(3):153, 2015
Buyon JP, Winchester RJ, Slade SG, et al: Identification of mothers at risk for congenital heart block and
other neonatal lupus syndromes in their children. Comparison of enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay and immunoblot for measurement of anti SSA/Ro and anti SSB/La antibodies. Arthritis
Rheum 36:1263, 1993
Cabiddu G, Castellino S, Gernone G, et al: A best practice position statement on pregnancy in chronic
kidney disease: the Italian Study Group on Kidney and Pregnancy. J Nephrol 29(3):277, 2016
Chakravarty EF, Khanna D, Chung L: Pregnancy outcomes in systemic sclerosis, primary pulmonary
hypertension, and sickle cell disease. Obstet Gynecol 111(4):927, 2008
Chen JS, Roberts CL, Simpson JM, et al: Pregnancy outcomes in women with rare autoimmune
diseases. Arthritis Rheumatol 67(12):3314, 2015

Chiou AS, Sun G, Kim J, et al: Cutaneous neonatal lupus arising in an infant conceived from an oocyte
donation pregnancy. JAMA Dermatol 152(7):846, 2016
Cimaz R, Spence DL, Hornberger L, et al: Incidence and spectrum of neonatal lupus erythematosus: a
prospective study of infants born to mothers with anti-Ro autoantibodies. J Pediatr 142(6):678, 2003
Clark CA, Spitzer KA, Crowther MA, et al: Incidence of postpartum thrombosis and preterm delivery in
women with antiphospholipid antibodies and recurrent pregnancy loss. J Rheumatol 34:992, 2007
Clark KE, Etomi O, Ong VH: Systemic sclerosis in pregnancy. Obstet Med 13(3):105, 2020
Clowse ME, Jamison M, Myers E, et al: A national study of the complications of lupus in pregnancy.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 199:127.e1, 2008
Cohen D, Buurma A, Goemaere NN, et al: Classical complement activation as a footprint for murine
and human antiphospholipid antibody-induced fetal loss. J Pathol 225(4):502, 2011
Comarmond C, Saadoun D, Nizard J, et al: Pregnancy issues in Takayasu arteritis. Semin Arthritis
Rheum 50(5):911, 2020
Corradi D, Maestri R, Facchetti F: Postpartum Churg-Strauss syndrome with severe cardiac
involvement: description of a case and review of the literature. Clin Rheumatol 28(6):739, 2009
Couzin-Frankel J: The savior cells? Science 352(6283):284, 2016
Cruz GI, Shao X, Quach H, et al: A child’s HLA-DRBI genotype increases maternal risk of systemic
lupus erythematosus. J Autoimmun 74:201, 2016
Curry R, Gelson E, Swan L, et al: Marfan syndrome and pregnancy: maternal and neonatal outcomes.
BJOG 121(5):610, 2014
Daher A, Sauvetre G, Girszyn N, et al: Granulomatosis with polyangiitis and pregnancy: a case report
and review of the literature. Obstet Med 13(2):76, 2020
da Silva Florim GM, Caldas HC, Pavarino EC, et al: Variables associated to fetal microchimerism in
systemic lupus erythematosus patients. Clin Rheumatol 35(1):107, 2016
D’Cruz D: Renal manifestations of the antiphospholipid syndrome. Curr Rheumatol Rep 11(1):52, 2009
de Jesus GR, Rodrigues G, de Jesus NR, et al: Pregnancy morbidity in antiphospholipid syndrome: what
is the impact of treatment? Curr Rheumatol Rep 16:403, 2014
de Jesus GR, Rodrigues BC, Lacerda MI, et al: Gestational outcomes in patients with neuropsychiatric
systemic lupus erythematosus. Lupus 26:537, 2017
Dizon-Townson D, Branch DW: Anticoagulant treatment during pregnancy: an update. Semin Thromb
Hemost 24:55S, 1998
Dong Y, Yuan F, Dai Z, et al: Preeclampsia in systemic lupus erythematosus pregnancy: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. Clin Rheumatol 39(2):319, 2020
Edwards MH, Curtis EM, Ledingham JM: Postpartum onset and subsequent relapse of eosinophilic
granulomatosis with polyangiitis. BMJ Case Rep 2015:bcr2015210373, 2015
Egerman RS, Ramsey RD, Kao LW, et al: Hypertensive disease in pregnancies complicated by
systemic lupus erythematosus. Am J Obstet Gynecol 193:1676, 2005
Elliot B, Spence AR, Czuzoj-Shulman N, et al: Effect of Sjögren’s syndrome on maternal and neonatal
outcomes or pregnancy. J Perinat Med 47(6):637, 2019
Empson M, Lassere M, Craig J, et al: Prevention of recurrent miscarriage for women with
antiphospholipid antibody or lupus anticoagulant. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2:CD002859, 2005
Engel NM, Gramke HF, Peeters L, et al: Combined spinal-epidural anaesthesia for a woman with
Wegener’s granulomatosis with subglottic stenosis. Int J Obstet Anesth 20(1):94, 2011
Ernest JM, Marshburn PB, Kutteh WH: Obstetric antiphospholipid syndrome: an update on
pathophysiology and management. Semin Reprod Med 29:522, 2011

Esaka EJ, Golde SH, Stever MR, et al: A maternal and perinatal mortality in pregnancy complicated by
the kyphoscoliotic form of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. Obstet Gynecol 113(2):515, 2009
Eudy AM, McDaniel G, Clowse ME: Pregnancy in rheumatoid arthritis: a retrospective study. Clin
Rheumatol 37(3):789, 2018
Förger F, Villiger PM: Immunological adaptations in pregnancy that modulate rheumatoid arthritis
disease activity. Nat Rev Rheumatol 16(2):113, 2020
Gabbay-Benziv R, Zafrir-Danieli H, Blickstein D, et al: Antiphospholipid syndrome characteristics and
adverse pregnancy outcomes after 20 weeks of pregnancy. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 142(2):214, 2018
Garcia D, Erkan D: Diagnosis and management of the antiphospholipid syndrome. N Engl J Med
378(21):2010, 2018
Giannakopoulos B, Krilis SA: The pathogenesis of the antiphospholipid syndrome. N Engl J Med
368:1033, 2013
Greenberg SA, Amato AA: Inflammatory myopathies. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al
(eds): Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw Hill Education, 2018
Goodman R, Dellaripa PF, Miller AL, et al: An unusual case of abdominal pain. N Engl J Med 370:70,
2014
Gungor AN, Kalkan G, Oguz S, et al: Behçet disease and pregnancy. Clin Exp Obstet Gynecol
41(6):617, 2014
Guthrie KA, Dugowson CE, Voigt LF, et al: Does pregnancy provide vaccine-like protection against
rheumatoid arthritis? Arthritis Rheum 62(7):1842, 2010
Haddow JE, Rote NS, Dostal-Johnson D, et al: Lack of an association between late fetal death and
antiphospholipid antibody measurements in the 2nd trimester. Am J Obstet Gynecol 165:1308, 1991
Hahn BH: Systemic lupus erythematosus. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al (eds): Harrison’s
Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw Hill Education, 2018
Hamed HO, Ahmed SR, Alzolibani A, et al: Does cutaneous lupus erythematosus have more favorable
pregnancy outcomes than systemic disease? A two-center study. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand
92(8):934, 2013
Hamulyák EN, Scheres LJ, Marijnen MC, et al: Aspirin or heparin or both for improving pregnancy
outcomes in women with persistent antiphospholipid antibodies and recurrent pregnancy loss.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 5(5):CD012852, 2020
Hanly JG, Gladman DD, Rose TH, et al: Lupus pregnancy: a prospective study of placental changes.
Arthritis Rheum 31:358, 1988
Häupl T, Østensen M, Grützkau A, et al: Interaction between rheumatoid arthritis and pregnancy:
correlation of molecular data with clinical disease activity measures. Rheumatology (Oxford)
47(Suppl l):19, 2008a
Häupl T, Østensen M, Grützkau A, et al: Reactivation of rheumatoid arthritis after pregnancy: increased
phagocyte and recurring lymphocyte gene activity. Arthritis Rheum 58(10):2981, 2008b
He WR, Wei H: Maternal and fetal complications associated with systemic lupus erythematosus: an
updated meta-analysis of the most recent studies (2017–2019). Medicine (Baltimore) 99(16):e19797,
2020
Holers VM, Girardi G, Mo L, et al: Complement C3 activation is required for antiphospholipid antibodyinduced fetal loss. J Exp Med 195:211, 2002
Hot A, Perard L, Coppere B, et al: Marked improvement of Churg-Strauss vasculitis with intravenous
gamma globulins during pregnancy. Clin Rheumatol 26(12):2149, 2007
Hoxha A, Calligaro A, Di Poi E, et al: Pregnancy and foetal outcomes following anti-tumor-necrosis
factor alpha therapy: a prospective multicentre study. Joint Bone Spine 84(2):169, 2017

Hurst BS, Lange SS, Kullstam SM, et al: Obstetric and gynecologic challenges in women with EhlersDanlos syndrome. Obstet Gynecol 123(3):506, 2014
Ince-Askan H, Hazes JM, Dolhain RJ: Identifying clinical factors associated with low disease activity
and remission of rheumatoid arthritis during pregnancy. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken) 69(9):1297,
2017
Ivanchenko M, Thorlacius GE, Hedlund M, et al: Natural killer cells and type II interferon in Ro/SSA
and La/SSB autoantibody-exposed newborns at risk of congenital heart block. Ann Rheum Dis
80(2):194, 2021
Izmirly P, Kim M, Freidman DM, et al: Hydroxychloroquine to prevent recurrent congenital heart block
in fetuses of anti-SSA/Ro-positive mothers. J Am Coll Cardiol 76(3):292, 2020
Izmirly PM, Kim MY, Llanos C, et al: Evaluation of the risk of anti-SSA/Ro-SSB/La antibodyassociated cardiac manifestations of neonatal lupus in fetuses of mothers with systemic lupus
erythematosus exposed to hydroxychloroquine. Ann Rheum Dis 69(10):1827, 2010
Izmirly PM, Saxena AM, Kim MY, et al: Maternal and fetal factors associated with mortality and
morbidity in a multi–racial/ethnic registry of anti-SSA/Ro–associated cardiac neonatal lupus.
Circulation 124:1927, 2011
Izmirly PM, Wan I, Sahl S, et al: The incidence and prevalence of systemic lupus erythematosus in New
York County (Manhattan), New York: The Manhattan Lupus Surveillance Program. Arthritis
Rheumatol 69(10):2006, 2017
Jennette JC, Falk RJ, Bacon PA, et al: 2012 revised International Chapel Hill Consensus Conference
nomenclature of vasculitides. Arthritis Rheum 65(1):1, 2013
Jethwa H, Lam S, Smith C, et al: Dose rheumatoid arthritis really improve during pregnancy? A
systematic review and metaanalysis. J Rheumatol 46(3):245, 2019
Jimenez SA, Artlett CM: Microchimerism and systemic sclerosis. Curr Opin Rheumatol 17:86, 2005
Kalmantis K, Daskalakis G, Iavazzo C, et al: Henoch-Schonlein purpura in pregnancy. J Obstet Gynecol
28(4):403, 2008
Kirshenbaum M, Simchen MJ: Pregnancy outcome in patients with Takayasu’s arteritis: cohort study
and review of the literature. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 31(21):2877, 2018
Kishore S, Mittal V, Majithia V: Obstetric outcomes in women with rheumatoid arthritis: results from
nationwide inpatient sample database 2003–2011. Semin Arthritis Rheum 49(2):236, 2019
Kither H, Heazell A, Bruce IN, et al: Adverse pregnancy outcomes and subsequent development of
connective tissue disease in the UK: an epidemiological study. BJOG 127(8):941, 2020
Koukoura O, Mantas N, Linardakis H, et al: Successful term pregnancy in a patient with Wegener’s
granulomatosis: case report and literature review. Fertil Steril 89:457.e1, 2008
Kozora E, Arciniegas DB, Filley CM, et al: Cognitive and neurologic status in patients with systemic
lupus erythematosus without major neuropsychiatric syndromes. Arthritis Rheum 59:1639, 2008
Kuriya B, Hernández-Díaz S, Liu J, et al: Patterns of medication use during pregnancy in rheumatoid
arthritis. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken) 63(5):721, 2011
Kurkó J, Besenyei T, Laki J, et al: Genetics of rheumatoid arthritis—a comprehensive review. Clin Rev
Allergy Immunol 45(2):170, 2013
Kwak-Kim J, Agcaoili MSL, Aleta L, et al: Management of women with recurrent pregnancy losses
and antiphospholipid antibody syndrome. Am J Reprod Immunol 69(6):596, 2013
Lambe M, Bjornadal L, Neregard P, et al: Childbearing and the risk of scleroderma: a population-based
study in Sweden. Am J Epidemiol 159:162, 2004
Langford CA, Fauci AS: The vasculitis syndromes. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al (eds):
Harrison’s Principles of Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw

Hill Education, 2018
Lateef A, Petri M: Systemic lupus erythematosus and pregnancy. Rheum Dis Clin North Am 43(2):215,
2017
Latino JO, Udry S, Aranda F, et al: Risk factors for early severe preeclampsia in obstetric
antiphospholipid syndrome with conventional treatment. The impact of hydroxychloroquine. Lupus
29(13):1736, 2020
Laurinaviciene R, Sandholt LH, Bygum A: Drug-induced cutaneous lupus erythematosus: 88 new cases.
Eur J Dermatol 27(1):28, 2017
Lazzaroni MG, Dall’Ara F, Fredi M, et al: A comprehensive review of the clinical approach to
pregnancy and systemic lupus erythematosus. J Autoimmun 74:106, 2016
Lee ES, Bou-Gharios G, Seppanen E, et al: Fetal stem cell microchimerism: natural-born healers or
killers? Mol Hum Reprod 16(11):869, 2010
Lee S, Czuzoj-Shulman N, Abenhaim HA: Behçhet’s disease in pregnancy: obstetrical and neonatal
outcomes in a population-based cohort of 12 million births. J Perinat Med 47:381, 2019
Lefkou E, Mamopoulos A, Dagklis T, et al: Pravastatin improves pregnancy outcomes in obstetric
antiphospholipid syndrome refractory to antithrombotic therapy. J Clin Invest 126(8):2933, 2016
Linardaki G, Cherouvim E, Goni G, et al: Intravenous immunoglobulin treatment for pregnancyassociated dermatomyositis. Rheumatol Int 31(1):113, 2011
Liu XL, Xiao J, Zhu F: Anti-beta2 glycoprotein I antibodies and pregnancy outcome in antiphospholipid
syndrome. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 92(2):234, 2013
Lockshin MD, Druzin ML: Rheumatic disease. In Barron WM, Lindheimer JD (eds): Medical Disorders
During Pregnancy, 2nd ed. St. Louis, Mosby, 1995
Marder W: Update on pregnancy complications in systemic lupus erythematosus. Curr Opin Rheumatol
31(6):650, 2019
Maynard S, Guerrier G, Duffy M: Pregnancy in women with systemic lupus and lupus nephritis. Adv
Chronic Kidney Dis 26(5):330, 2019
McInnes IB, Schett G: The pathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis. N Engl J Med 365(23):2205, 2011
Mekinian A, Bourrienne MC, Carbillon L, et al: Non-conventional antiphospholipid antibodies in patients
with clinical obstetrical APS: prevalence and treatment efficacy in pregnancies. Semin Arthritis
Rheum 46(2):232, 2016
Mekinian A, Lazzaroni MG, Kuzenko A, et al: The efficacy of hydroxychloroquine for obstetrical
outcome in anti-phospholipid syndrome: data from a European multicenter retrospective study.
Autoimmun Rev 14(6):498, 2015
Merlino L, Del Prete F, Lobozzo B, et al: Behcet’s disease and pregnancy: a review of the literature.
Minerva Ginecol 72(5):332, 2020
Meroni PL, Borghi MO, Raschi E, et al: Pathogenesis of antiphospholipid syndrome: understanding the
antibodies. Nat Rev Rheumatol 7(6):330, 2011
Missumi LS, Souza FH, Andrade JQ, et al: Pregnancy outcomes in dermatomyositis and polymyositis
patients. Rev Bras Reumatol 55(2):95, 2015
Mohamed MA, Goldman C, El-Dib M, et al: Maternal juvenile rheumatoid arthritis may be associated
with preterm birth but not poor fetal growth. J Perinatol 36(4):268, 2016
Moroni G, Doria A, Giglio E, et al: Maternal outcome in pregnant women with lupus nephritis. A
prospective multicenter study. J Autoimmun 74:194, 2016
Moroni G, Ponticelli C: Pregnancy after lupus nephritis. Lupus 14:89, 2005
Motta M, Boffa MC, Tincani A, et al: Follow-up of babies born to mothers with antiphospholipid
syndrome: preliminary data from the European neonatal registry. Lupus 21(7):761, 2012

Moutsopoulos HM, Vlachoyiannopoulos PG: Antiphospholipid syndrome. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS,
Kasper DL, et al (eds): Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw Hill
Education, 2018
Munira S, Stine LC: Pregnancy in myositis and scleroderma. Best Pract Res Clin Obstet Gynaecol
64:59, 2020
Musiej-Nowakowska E, Ploski R: Pregnancy and early onset pauciarticular juvenile chronic arthritis.
Ann Rheum Dis 58:475, 1999
Nalli C, Iodice A, Andreoli L, et al: Long-term neurodevelopmental outcome of children born to
prospectively followed pregnancies of women with systemic lupus erythematosus and/or
antiphospholipid syndrome. Lupus 26:552, 2017
Nelson JL, Hughes KA, Smith AG, et al: Maternal–fetal disparity in HLA class II alloantigens and the
pregnancy-induced amelioration of rheumatoid arthritis. N Engl J Med 329:466, 1993
Nguyen V, Wuebbolt D, Pagnoux C, et al: Pregnancy outcomes in women with primary systemic
vasculitis: a retrospective study. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 34(17):2771, 2021
Østensen M: Pregnancy in patients with a history of juvenile rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Rheum
34:881, 1991
Owen J, Hauth JC: Polyarteritis nodosa in pregnancy: a case report and brief literature review. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 160:606, 1989
Pagnoux C: Updates in ANCA-associated vasculitis. Eur J Rheumatol 3(3):122, 2016
Pagnoux C, Le Guern V, Goffinet F, et al: Pregnancies in systemic necrotizing vasculitides: report on 12
women and their 20 pregnancies. Rheumatology (Oxford) 50(5):953, 2011
Parikh SV, Almaani S, Brodsky S, et al: Update on lupus nephritis: core curriculum 2020. Am J Kidney
Dis 76(2):265, 2020
Partlett R, Roussou E: The treatment of rheumatoid arthritis during pregnancy. Rheumatol Int 31(4):445,
2011
Peart E, Clowse ME: Systemic lupus erythematosus and pregnancy outcomes: an update and review of
the literature. Curr Opin Rheumatol 26(2):118, 2014
Pepin M, Schwarze U, Superti-Furga A, et al: Clinical and genetic features of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
type IV, the vascular type. N Engl J Med 342:673, 2000
Petri M: Pregnancy and systemic lupus erythematosus. Best Pract Res Clin Obstet Gynaecol 64:24,
2020a
Petri M: Systemic lupus erythematosus. Obstet Gynecol 136(1):226, 2020b
Petri M, Kallas R: Lupus in pregnancy. Contemporary OB/GYN 64(3):24, 2019
Petri M, Kim MY, Kalunian KC, et al: Combined oral contraceptives in women with systemic lupus
erythematosus. N Engl J Med 353:2550, 2005
Petri M, The Hopkins Lupus Pregnancy Center: Ten key issues in management. Rheum Dis Clin North
Am 33:227, 2007
Phansenee S, Sekararithi R, Jatavan P, et al: Pregnancy outcomes among women with systemic lupus
erythematosus: a retrospective cohort study from Thailand. Lupus 27(1):158, 2018
Pierro E, Cirino G, Bucci MR, et al: Antiphospholipid antibodies inhibit prostaglandin release by decidual
cells of early pregnancy: possible involvement of extracellular secretory phospholipase A2. Fertil
Steril 71:342, 1999
Pikwer M, Bergström U, Nilsson JA, et al: Breast feeding, but not use of oral contraceptives, is
associated with a reduced risk of rheumatoid arthritis. Ann Rheum Dis 68(4):526, 2009
Pinal-Fernandez I, Selva-O’Callaghan A, Fernandez-Codina A, et al: Pregnancy in adult-onset idiopathic
inflammatory myopathy: report from a cohort of myositis patients from a single center. Semin

Arthritis Rheum 44(2):234, 2014
Pons-Estel GJ, Alarcón GS, Scofield L, et al: Understanding the epidemiology and progression of
systemic lupus erythematosus. Semin Arthritis Rheum 39(4):257, 2010
Prockop DJ, Bateman JF: Heritable disorders of connective tissue. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper
DL, et al (eds): Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw Hill
Education, 2018
Putterman C, Wu A, Reiner-Benaim A, et al: SLE-key rule-out serologic test for excluding the diagnosis
of systemic lupus erythematosus: developing the ImmunArray iCHIP. J Immunol Methods 429:1,
2016
Radin M, Schreiber K, Cecchi I, et al: A multicentre study of 244 pregnancies in undifferentiated
connective tissue disease: maternal/fetal outcomes and disease evolution. Rheumatology (Oxford)
59(9):2412, 2020
Rahman A: Management of antiphospholipid syndrome. Clin Rheumatol 39(7):211, 2020
Raine C, Austin K, Giles I: Mechanisms determining the amelioration of rheumatoid arthritis in
pregnancy: a systematic review. Semin Arthritis Rheum 50(6):1357, 2020
Rak JM, Pagni PP, Tiev K, et al: Male microchimerism and HLA compatibility in French women with
scleroderma: a different profile in limited and diffuse subset. Rheumatology 48(4):363, 2009
Rand JH, Wu XX, Andree HA, et al: Antiphospholipid antibodies accelerate plasma coagulation by
inhibiting annexin-V binding to phospholipids: a “lupus procoagulant” phenomenon. Blood 92:1652,
1998
Rand JH, Wu XX, Andree HA, et al: Pregnancy loss in the antiphospholipid antibody syndrome—a
possible thrombogenic mechanism. N Engl J Med 337:154, 1997
Remaeus K, Johansson K, Askling J, et al: Juvenile onset arthritis and pregnancy outcome: a populationbased cohort study. Ann Rheum Dis 76:1809, 2017
Riancho-Zarrabeitia L, Martínez-Taboada V, Rúa-Figueroa I, et al: Antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) in
patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) implies a more severe disease with more damage
accrual and higher mortality. Lupus 29(12):1556, 2020
Ritchie J, Smyth A, Tower C, et al: Maternal deaths in women with lupus nephritis: a review of
published evidence. Lupus 21(5):534, 2012
Robertson B, Greaves M: Antiphospholipid syndrome: an evolving story. Blood Reviews 20:201, 2006
Robinson DP, Klein SL: Pregnancy and pregnancy-associated hormones alter immune responses and
disease pathogenesis. Horm Behav 62(3):263, 2012
Rodrigues BC, Lacerda MI, Ramires de Jesús GR, et al: The impact of different classes of lupus
nephritis on maternal and fetal outcomes: a cohort study of 147 pregnancies. Lupus 28(4):492, 2019
Rom AL, Wu CS, Olsen J, et al: Fetal growth and preterm birth in children exposed to maternal or
paternal rheumatoid arthritis. A nationwide cohort study. Arthritis Rheumatol 66:3265, 2014
Roman MJ, Pugh NL, Hendershot TP, et al: Aortic complications associated with pregnancy in Marfan
syndrome: the NHLBI National Registry of Genetically Triggered Thoracic Aortic Aneurysms and
Cardiovascular Conditions (GenTAC). J Am Heart Assoc 5(8), 2016
Roque H, Paidas M, Funai E, et al: Maternal thrombophilias are not associated with early pregnancy
loss. Thromb Haemost 91(2):290, 2004
Ross C, D’Souza R, Pagnoux C: Pregnancy outcomes in systemic vasculitides. Curr Rheumatol Rep
22(10):63, 2020
Rudd NL, Nimrod C, Holbrook KA, et al: Pregnancy complications in type IV Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.
Lancet 1(8314-5):50, 1983
Rudder M, Russo M, Ventetuolo CE: Breathing for two. N Engl J Med 384:61, 2021

Ruffatti A, Tonello M, Visentin MS, et al: Risk factors for pregnancy failure in patients with antiphospholipid syndrome treated with conventional therapies: a multicentre, case-control study.
Rheumatology 50(9):1684, 2011
Ruiter-Ligeti J, Czuzoj-Shulman N, Spence AR, et al: Pregnancy outcomes in women with osteogenesis
imperfecta: a retrospective cohort study. J Perinatol 36(10):828, 2016
Saccone G, Maruotti GM, Berghella V, et al: Obstetric outcomes in pregnant women with primary
antiphospholipid syndrome according to the antibody profile: the PREGNANTS study. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 216(5):525.e1, 2017
Sammaritano LR, Bermas BL, Chakravarty EE, et al: 2020 American College of Rheumatology
guidelines for the management of reproductive health in rheumatic and musculoskeletal diseases.
Arthritis Rheumatol 72(4):529, 2020
Sánchez-Guerrero J, Uribe AG, Jiménez-Santana L, et al: A trial of contraceptive methods in women
with systemic lupus erythematosus. N Engl J Med 353:2539, 2005
Schoenhoff F, Schmidli J, Czerny M, et al: Management of aortic aneurysms in patients with connective
tissue disease. J Cardiovasc Surg 54(1 suppl 1):125, 2013
Schreiber K, Hunt BJ: Pregnancy and antiphospholipid syndrome. Semin Thromb Hemost 42(7):780,
2016
Sciascia S, Hunt BJ, Talavera-Garcia E, et al: The impact of hydroxychloroquine treatment on
pregnancy outcome in women with antiphospholipid antibodies. Am J Obstet Gynecol 214(2):273.e1,
2016
Shah A, St. Clair EW: Rheumatoid arthritis. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al (eds):
Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw Hill Education, 2018
Sharma BK, Jain S, Vasishta K: Outcome of pregnancy in Takayasu arteritis. Int J Cardiol 75:S159,
2000
Shinohara K, Miyagawa S, Fujita T, et al: Neonatal lupus erythematosus: results of maternal
corticosteroid therapy. Obstet Gynecol 93:952, 1999
Silman A, Kay A, Brennan P: Timing of pregnancy in relation to the onset of rheumatoid arthritis.
Arthritis Rheum 35:152, 1992
Silver RM, Parker CB, Reddy UM, et al: Antiphospholipid antibodies in stillbirth. Obstet Gynecol
122(3):641, 2013
Silverman E, Jaeggi E: Non-cardiac manifestations of neonatal lupus erythematosus. Scand J Immunol
72:223, 2010
Simchen MJ, Goldstein G, Lubetsky A, et al: Factor V Leiden and antiphospholipid antibodies in either
mothers or infants increase the risk for perinatal arterial ischemic stroke. Stroke 40(1):65, 2009
Simpson JL: Cell-free fetal DNA and maternal serum analytes for monitoring embryonic and fetal
status. Fertil Steril 99(4):1124, 2013
Singh JA, Saag KG, Bridges SL Jr, et al: 2015 American College of Rheumatology Guideline for the
management of rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken) 68(1):1, 2016
Singh N, Tyagi S, Tripathi R, et al: Maternal and fetal outcomes in pregnant women with Takayasu
aortoarteritis: does optimally timed intervention in women with renal artery involvement improve
pregnancy outcome? Taiwan J Obstet Gynecol 54(5):597, 2015
Smok DA: Aortopathy in pregnancy. Semin Perinatol 38(5):295, 2014
Sneller MC: Wegener’s granulomatosis. JAMA 273:1288, 1995
Sobanski V, Launay D, Depret S, et al: Special considerations in pregnant systemic sclerosis patients.
Expert Rev Clin Immunol 12(11):1161, 2016

Solomons J, Coucke P, Symoens S, et al: Dermatosparaxis (Ehlers-Danlos type VIIC): prenatal
diagnosis following a previous pregnancy with unexpected skull fractures at delivery. Am J Med
Genet A 161(5):1122, 2013
Spiegel E, Nicholls-Dempsey L, Czuzoj-Shulman N, et al: Pregnancy outcomes in women with EhlersDanlos syndrome. J Matern Fetal neonatal Med July 13, 2020 [Epub ahead of print]
Spinillo A, Beneventi F, Locatelli E, et al: The impact of unrecognized autoimmune rheumatic diseases
on the incidence of preeclampsia and fetal growth restriction: a longitudinal cohort study. BMC
Pregnancy Childbirth 16(1):313, 2016
Srivatsa B, Srivatsa S, Johnson K, et al: Microchimerism of presumed fetal origin in thyroid specimens
from women: a case-control study. Lancet 358:2034, 2001
Steen VD: Pregnancy in women with systemic sclerosis. Obstet Gynecol 94:15, 1999
Stevens AM. Maternal microchimerism in health and disease. Best Pract Res Clin Obstet Gynecol
31:121, 2016
Stojan G, Baer AN: Flares of systemic lupus erythematosus during pregnancy and the puerperium:
prevention, diagnosis and management. Expert Rev Clin Immunol 8(5):439, 2012
Stojan G, Petri M: Epidemiology of systemic lupus erythematosus: an update. Curr Opin Rheumatol
30(2):144, 2018
Sykes B, Ogilvie D, Wordsworth P, et al: Consistent linkage of dominantly inherited osteogenesis
imperfecta to the type I collagen loci: COL1A1 and COL1A2. Am J Hum Genet 46(2):293, 1990
Taraborelli M, Ramoni V, Brucato A, et al: Brief report: successful pregnancies but a higher risk of
preterm births in patients with systemic sclerosis: an Italian multicenter study. Arthritis Rheum
64(6):1970, 2012
Tayabali S, Andersen K, Yoong W: Diagnosis and management of Henoch-Schönlein purpura in
pregnancy: a review of the literature. Arch Gynecol Obstet 286(4):825, 2012
Tenti S, Cheleschi S, Guidelli GM, et al: Intravenous immunoglobulins and antiphospholipid syndrome:
how, when and why? A review of the literature. Autoimmun Rev 15(3):226, 2016
Tincani A, Rebaioli CB, Andreoli L, et al: Neonatal effects of maternal antiphospholipid syndrome. Curr
Rheumatol Rep 11(1):70, 2009
Toglia MR, Weg JG: Venous thromboembolism during pregnancy. N Engl J Med 335:108, 1996
Tower C, Mathen S, Crocker I, et al: Regulatory T cells in systemic lupus erythematosus and
pregnancy. Am J Reprod Immunol 69(6):588, 2013
Tsokos GC: Systemic lupus erythematosus. N Engl J Med 365(22):2110, 2011
Unger A, Kay A, Griffin AJ, et al: Disease activity and pregnancy associated beta2-glycoprotein in
rheumatoid arthritis. BMJ 286:750, 1983
Van Dijk FS, Pals G, Van Rijn RR, et al: Classification of osteogenesis imperfecta revisited. Eur J Med
Genet 53(1):1, 2010
Varga J: Systemic sclerosis (scleroderma) and related disorders. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL,
et al (eds): Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw Hill Education,
2018
Wagner S, Craici I, Reed D, et al: Maternal and foetal outcomes in pregnant patients with active lupus
nephritis. Lupus 18(4)342, 2009
Waldorf KM, Nelson JL: Autoimmune disease during pregnancy and the microchimerism legacy of
pregnancy. Immunol Invest 37:631, 2008
Wallenius M, Salvesen KA, Daltveit AK, et al: Rheumatoid arthritis and outcomes in first and
subsequent births based on data from a national birth registry. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand
93(3):302, 2014

Wong LF, Porter TF, Scott JR: Immunotherapy for recurrent miscarriage. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
10:CD000112, 2014
Wu H, Birmingham DJ, Rovin B, et al: D-dimer level and the risk for thrombosis in systemic lupus
erythematosus. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 3:1628, 2008
Yang W, Tang H, Zhang Y, et al: Meta-analysis followed by replication identifies loci in or near
CDKN1B, TET3, CD80, DRAM1, and ARID5B as associated with systemic lupus erythematosus
in Asians. Am J Hum Genet 92(1):41, 2013
Ye Y, van Zyl B, Varsani H, et al: Maternal microchimerism in muscle biopsies from children with
juvenile dermatomyositis. Rheumatology (Oxford) 51(6):987, 2012
Zangari M, Lockwood CJ, Scher J, et al: Prothrombin activation fragment (F1.2) is increased in
pregnant patients with antiphospholipid antibodies. Thromb Res 85:177, 1997
Zhao C, Zhao J, Huang Y, et al: New-onset systemic lupus erythematosus during pregnancy. Clin
Rheumatol 32(6):815, 2013
Zucchi D, Tani C, Monacco F, et al: pregnancy and undifferentiated connective tissue disease: outcome
and risk of flare in 100 pregnancies. Rheumatology (Oxford) 59(6):1335, 2020
Zuppa AA, Riccardi R, Frezza A, et al: Neonatal lupus: follow-up in infants with anti SSA/Ro antibodies
and review of the literature. Autoimmun Rev 16:427, 2017

