CHAPTER 15

Normal and Abnormal Fetal Anatomy

BIOMETRY
BRAIN AND SPINE
HEAD, FACE, AND NECK
THORAX
HEART
GASTROINTESTINAL OBSTRUCTION
VENTRAL WALL DEFECTS
KIDNEYS AND GENITOURINARY TRACT
SKELETON
REFERENCES
The ability to detect and characterize abnormalities before birth is one of the
marvels of modern obstetrics. Sonography can image the fetus with
remarkable precision. Components of the standard anatomic survey are listed
in Table 15-1. These have been termed essential elements by the American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020) and minimal elements by
the American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine (2018). Ideally, residency
training in Obstetrics and Gynecology includes education in acquisition and
interpretation of these views. Resources provided by national societies assist
with this endeavor (Abuhamad, 2018).

TABLE 15-1. Components of Standard and Detailed Anatomic Surveys

A detailed fetal anatomic survey is a specialized examination that may
include more than 60 components, each determined on a case-by-case basis.
It is the primary method of evaluating at-risk pregnancies and characterizing

fetal abnormalities, thereby aiding consultation and delivery planning.
Indications are shown in Table 14-6 and discussed further in Chapter 14 (p.
251). At Parkland hospital, the detailed survey includes, at minimum, an
attempt to visualize all components required by the American Institute of
Ultrasound in Medicine for normal detailed case submission (see Table 151).
This chapter presents the standard and detailed anatomic surveys and
some of the many fetal abnormalities that may be detected when visualization
is optimal. When imaging or measuring any fetal structure, care should be
taken to place the focal zone at the appropriate level and to magnify the
image appropriately (Abuhamad, 2018). Whenever a fetal abnormality is
identified, a detailed anatomic survey is recommended. With rare exception,
amniocentesis with chromosomal microarray analysis also is offered. If a
cardiac abnormality is identified, fetal echocardiography is indicated.
Additional indications for these specialized examinations and for fetal
magnetic resonance (MR) imaging are reviewed in Chapter 14.

BIOMETRY
In the first trimester, crown-rump length (CRL) measurement is used to
establish or confirm gestational age (Appendix, p. 1234). The earlier that
sonography is performed, the more accurate this estimation. Gestational age
assessment is reviewed in Chapter 14 (p. 248). The fetus is imaged in the
midsagittal plane in a neutral, nonflexed position so that its length can be
measured in a straight line (Fig. 15-1). The average of three measurements is
used. First-trimester nuchal translucency measurement is reviewed in
Chapter 14 (p. 249).

FIGURE 15-1 The crown-rump length measures 61 mm in this 12-week, 4-day fetus.

In the second and third trimesters, the biparietal diameter, head
circumference, abdominal circumference, and femur length are measured to
confirm gestational age, if not already established in the first trimester, and to
estimate fetal weight. Ultrasound equipment and report packages calculate
these estimates using standardized nomograms (Hadlock, 1991). If an
abnormality involving one of the parameters is suspected, consideration is
given to excluding it from the gestational age calculation. Fetal weight
nomograms are available that do not include the head measurements or the
femur measurement (Hadlock, 1984; Shepard, 1982).
The biparietal diameter and head circumference are measured in the
transthalamic view. This is a transverse image that includes the midline falx
cerebri, cavum septum pellucidum, thalami, and insula (Fig. 15-2A). The
cerebral hemispheres should appear symmetric, and the cerebellum should
not be visible. The biparietal diameter is measured perpendicular to the falx
cerebri, from the outer edge of the skull in the near field to the inner edge of
the skull in the far field. The head circumference is measured by placing an
ellipse around the outer edge of the skull. The head circumference may also

be calculated by averaging the biparietal diameter and the occipito-frontal
diameter and multiplying by π.

FIGURE 15-2 Normal biometry. A. Transthalamic view depicts measurement of the biparietal
diameter (BPD) and head circumference (HC). Landmarks include the cavum septum pellucidum
(CSP), thalami (T), and insula (I). B. Abdominal circumference view (AC) shows measurement and
landmarks, which include the stomach (S) and the confluence of the umbilical vein (U) and the left
portal vein. C. Femur length measurement (FL).

The abdominal circumference is measured in a transverse image that
includes the stomach and the J-shaped confluence of the umbilical vein with
the portal sinus. An ellipse is placed just outside the fetal skin edge (Fig. 152B). The image should appear as round as possible and ideally contain no
more than 1 rib on either side. The spine should be visible in cross-section at
the 3 o’clock or 9 o’clock position, whereas the kidneys should not be
visible, as they are lower in the abdomen. Abdominal circumference is the
biometric parameter most affected by fetal growth. An abdominal
circumference below the 10th percentile may be used to diagnose fetalgrowth restriction (Chap. 47, p. 825).
The femur length is measured with the ultrasound beam perpendicular to
the long axis of the shaft. Calipers are placed at each end of the calcified

diaphysis (Fig. 15-2C). Throughout the second and third trimesters, the femur
length to abdominal circumference ratio is normally 20 to 24 percent. If this
ratio is below 18 percent, a skeletal dysplasia should be considered,
particularly if other long-bone measurements are lagging (p. 302). As
discussed in Chapter 17 (p. 340), a mildly foreshortened femur length
measurement is also a minor marker for Down syndrome (Herrera, 2020b).
Various nomograms exist for other fetal structures, including the
transverse cerebellar diameter, ocular distances, nasal bone, ear length, jaw
index, thoracic circumference, and lengths of the liver, kidneys, long bones,
and feet. They may be used to address specific questions regarding organ
system abnormalities, congenital infection, or genetic syndromes (Appendix,
pp. 1238–1241).

BRAIN AND SPINE
Standard sonographic evaluation of the fetal brain includes three transverse
(axial) views. As noted, the transthalamic view should contain the midline
falx cerebri, cavum septum pellucidum (CSP), thalami, and insula (see Fig.
15-2A). The CSP is the space between the two laminae that separate the
frontal horns of the lateral ventricles. It should be visible between
approximately 17 and 37 weeks’ gestation, but after this, fusion of the septi
pellucidi may obliterate the cavum. Inability to visualize a normal CSP may
indicate a midline brain abnormality (Fig. 15-3). For example, the frontal
horns are widely spaced apart in agenesis of the corpus callosum (ACC),
whereas in cases of septo-optic dysplasia (de Morsier syndrome) and lobar
holoprosencephaly, the frontal horns communicate. Discussed in Chapter 16
(p. 312), an abnormally wide CSP may also be found with trisomy 18.

FIGURE 15-3 Absence of the cavum septum pellucidum, with coronal (A) and transverse (B) images
showing communication between the frontal horns (FH) of the lateral ventricles. This may be isolated
but can occur in the setting of septo-optic dysplasia or lobar holoprosencephaly. C = choroid plexus; F =
falx cerebri.

The transventricular view lies superior to the transthalamic view and, as
the name implies, includes the lateral ventricles. The ventricles are measured
at their atrium, which is the confluence of the temporal and occipital horns
(Fig. 15-4). The measurement is normally 5 to 9 mm throughout the second
and third trimesters. Cerebrospinal fluid is produced within the ventricles by
the choroid plexus. Choroid plexus cysts are present in 0.5 to 2 percent of
uncomplicated pregnancies and approximately 30 to 50 percent of
pregnancies with trisomy 18 (Fig. 16-5, p. 312) (Reddy, 2014). A detailed
ultrasound examination is generally offered when found. In the absence of an
associated ultrasound abnormality, or unless an aneuploidy screening test
indicates increased risk for trisomy 18, a choroid plexus cyst is considered a
normal variant.

FIGURE 15-4 Transventricular view. A. Transverse image of the lateral ventricles, which contain the
choroid plexus (C). B. The ventricles are measured at the atria (A), the confluence of the temporal and
occipital horns. The measurement is normally 5–9 mm. Vp = lateral ventricle. (Reproduced with
permission from Rosa Robles, RDMS.)

For the transcerebellar view, the transducer is angled back through the
posterior fossa (Fig. 15-5). Structures visible in this image include the
midline falx cerebri, cavum septum pellucidum, thalami, cerebellum, and
cisterna magna. The cerebellum and cisterna magna are measured, and
between 15 and 20 weeks’ gestation, the nuchal skinfold thickness also is
measured. From 15 until 22 weeks, the cerebellar diameter in millimeters is
roughly equivalent to the gestational age in weeks (Chavez, 2003).
Cerebellar hypoplasia has been associated with various central nervous
system (CNS) and non-CNS abnormalities (Howley, 2018). The cisterna
magna should measure between 2 and 10 mm throughout the second trimester
and may reach 12 mm in the latter part of the third trimester. It becomes
effaced when the Chiari II malformation is present (p. 277). If the cisterna
magna is enlarged, the differential diagnosis includes absence of all or part
of the vermis (p. 279), a cyst such as an arachnoid cyst within the posterior
fossa, or mega-cisterna magna, which is a diagnosis of exclusion and has an
excellent prognosis. An increased nuchal skinfold measurement is associated
with increased risk for Down syndrome, other genetic syndromes, and
structural abnormalities (Chap. 17, p. 341).

FIGURE 15-5 Transcerebellar view. A. Transverse image of the posterior fossa showing
measurement of the cerebellum (Cereb), cisterna magna (CM), and nuchal skinfold thickness (NF). B.
Third-trimester image depicting the cerebellar hemispheres (CH) and cerebellar vermis (V). The fourth
ventricle (4) is anterior to the vermis. CSP = cavum septum pellucidum; I = insula; P = cerebral
peduncles.

Imaging of the spine includes evaluation of the cervical, thoracic, lumbar,
and sacral regions (Fig. 15-6). Representative images are often obtained in
the sagittal or coronal plane. However, imaging of each spinal segment in the
transverse plane is more sensitive for anomaly detection. Transverse images
demonstrate three ossification centers. The anterior ossification center is the
vertebral body, and the posterior paired ossification centers represent the
junction of vertebral laminae and pedicles. Ossification of the spine
proceeds in a cranial-caudal fashion. The ossification of the upper sacrum
(S1-S2) is not generally visible before 16 weeks’ gestation, and ossification
of the entire sacrum may not be visible until 21 weeks (De Biasio, 2003).
Thus, detection of some spinal abnormalities can be challenging in the early
second trimester.

FIGURE 15-6 Normal fetal spine. This sagittal image depicts the cervical (C), thoracic (T), lumbar (L),
and sacral spine (S). Arrows denote the parallel rows of paired posterior ossification centers, which
represent the junction of vertebral lamina and pedicles.

■ Neural-tube Defects
These defects include anencephaly, myelomeningocele (spina bifida),
cephalocele, and rare spinal dysraphisms. Normally, the neural tube closes
by the embryonic age of 26 to 28 days (Chap. 7, p. 124). The birth
prevalence of neural-tube defects approximates 0.9 in 1000 in the United
States and most of Europe and 1.3 in 1000 in the United Kingdom (Cragan,
2009; Dolk, 2010). Many neural-tube defects can be prevented with folic
acid supplementation. When isolated, neural-tube defect inheritance is
multifactorial, and the recurrence risk without periconceptional folic acid
supplementation is 3 to 5 percent (Chap. 16, p. 324).
Screening for neural-tube defects may be performed with either
ultrasound alone or ultrasound in addition to maternal serum alphafetoprotein (MSAFP) level measurement (American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists, 2019a). Between 15 and 20 weeks’ gestation, an upper
MSAFP threshold of 2.5 multiples of the median (MoM) is anticipated to

detect 95 percent with fetal anencephaly and 80 percent with
myelomeningocele. However, detection with standard sonography is at least
comparable to that with MSAFP (Dashe, 2006; Norem 2005). A detailed
ultrasound examination is the preferred diagnostic test and may identify other
abnormalities or conditions that also elevate MSAFP levels (Table 17-5, p.
338).
Anencephaly is an absence of the cranium and telencephalon above the
level of the skull base and orbits (Fig. 15-7). Acrania is absence of the
cranium with protrusion of disorganized brain tissue, and herniation of the
latter tissue is exencephaly. Importantly, brain tissue visible in the late first
trimester is often not seen when ultrasound is performed in the second or
third trimester. Thus, anencephaly is the final stage of exencephaly. It is often
diagnosed in the late first trimester, and with adequate visualization, virtually
all cases may be diagnosed in the second trimester.

FIGURE 15-7 Anencephaly/acrania. A. This transabdominal image at 11 weeks’ gestation depicts
relatively subtle absence of the cranium. B. A transvaginal image at 11 weeks demonstrates more
clearly the protrusion of a disorganized mass of brain tissue. C. By 14 weeks, this tissue resembles a
“shower cap.” CRL = crown–rump length.

Sonographically, the cranial contour may appear abnormal in the first
trimester and may resemble a “shower cap” in the late first or early second
trimester. The face often appears triangular, and sagittal images demonstrate
lack of an ossified cranium. Hydramnios from impaired fetal swallowing is
common in the third trimester. Anencephaly is uniformly lethal. If the
pregnancy is continued, perinatal palliative care consultation should be
considered (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019b).
Cephalocele is the herniation of meninges through a cranial defect,
typically located in the midline occipital region (Fig. 15-8). When brain
tissue herniates through the skull defect, the anomaly is termed an

encephalocele. Herniation of the cerebellum and other posterior fossa
structures constitutes a Chiari III malformation. Microcephaly is common
by the third trimester. Associated intracranial abnormalities are frequently
visible, and survivors have a high incidence of neurological deficits and
intellectual disability. Cephalocele is an important feature of the autosomal
recessive Meckel-Gruber syndrome, which includes cystic renal dysplasia
and polydactyly. A cephalocele not located in the occipital midline raises
suspicion for amnionic-band sequence (Chap. 6, p. 113).

FIGURE 15-8 Encephalocele. This transverse image depicts a large defect in the occipital region of
the cranium (arrows) through which meninges and brain tissue have herniated.

Spina bifida is characterized by defects in the vertebrae, typically the
dorsal arches, and subsequent exposure of the meninges and nerve roots. The
prevalence approximates 1 in 2000 births (Cragan, 2009; Dolk, 2010).
Herniation of a meningeal sac and neural elements is a myelomeningocele
(Fig. 15-9A). Less commonly, only an empty meningeal sac herniates, which
is a meningocele. Transverse images are helpful to demonstrate separation
or splaying of the lateral processes and characterize the level of the defect.
Most cases are open spina bifida, which means that the defect includes skin

and soft tissues. Closed defects are skin-covered and more challenging to
detect prenatally.

FIGURE 15-9 Myelomeningocele. A. Sagittal image of a lumbosacral myelomeningocele. Arrowheads
indicate nerve roots within the anechoic herniated sac. The overlying skin abruptly stops at the defect
(arrow). B. Transthalamic image demonstrating flattening of the frontal bones (arrows)—the lemon
sign. C. Transcerebellar image depicting the banana sign, an anterior curvature of the cerebellum
(arrows) and effacement of the cisterna magna.

Detection of spina bifida is aided by two characteristic cranial findings
(Nicolaides, 1986). Flatting or scalloping of the frontal bones is termed the
“lemon sign,” and anterior curvature of the cerebellum with effacement of
the cisterna magna is the “banana sign” (Fig. 15-9B,C). These findings are
manifestations of the Arnold-Chiari or Chiari II malformation. This develops
when downward displacement of the spinal cord pulls a portion of the
cerebellum through the foramen magnum and into the upper cervical canal.
The biparietal diameter measurement often lags behind the other biometric
parameters. Ventriculomegaly is common after mid-gestation, and 80 to 90
percent of infants with myelomeningocele require ventriculoperitoneal shunt
placement (Adzick 2011, Chao, 2010). Affected children require
multidisciplinary care to address problems related to the defect such as
deficits in swallowing, bladder and bowel function, and ambulation. Fetal
myelomeningocele surgery is discussed in Chapter 19 (p. 372).

■ Ventriculomegaly
Distention of the lateral ventricles is considered a nonspecific marker of
abnormal brain development (Pilu, 2018). Mild ventriculomegaly is
diagnosed when the atrial width measures 10 to 12 mm; moderate
ventriculomegaly, when the measurement is 13 to 15 mm; and severe

ventriculomegaly when >15 mm (Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine,
2018). Representative images are depicted in Figure 15-10. The choroid
plexus may appear dangling in severe cases.

FIGURE 15-10 Ventriculomegaly. A. Mild ventriculomegaly. The atria measured 11 mm. No
associated abnormality or underlying etiology was identified. B. Severe ventriculomegaly. In this fetus
with aqueductal stenosis, the atria measured 45 mm. Arrow denotes the dangling choroid plexus.

Ventriculomegaly may occur secondary to a variety of central nervous
system abnormalities and is associated with numerous genetic and infectious
etiologies. Initial evaluation includes a detailed examination of fetal
anatomy, amniocentesis for chromosomal microarray analysis, and testing for
congenital infections such as cytomegalovirus and toxoplasmosis (Chap. 16,
p. 326). Genetic syndromes resulting in ventriculomegaly include L1 Xlinked aqueductal stenosis, Joubert syndrome, Walker Warburg syndrome,
hydrolethalus syndrome, and lissencephaly syndromes (Kousi, 2016).
Ventriculomegaly does not typically result in significant skull enlargement.
Two exceptions—when macrocrania often occurs—are aqueductal stenosis
and the asymmetric ventriculomegaly interhemispheric cyst callosal
dysgenesis (AVID) syndrome (Oh, 2019). Fetal MR imaging should be
considered to assess for associated abnormalities that may not be detectable
sonographically (Herrera, 2020a; Katz, 2018) (Chap. 14, p. 263).
Prognosis is determined by etiology, severity, and progression. In a
systematic review of nearly 1500 mild to moderate cases, 1 to 2 percent
were associated with congenital infection; 5 percent, with aneuploidy; and

12 percent, with neurological abnormality (Devaseelan, 2010). With
chromosomal microarray analysis, genetic abnormalities may be identified in
10 to 15 percent (Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, 2018). The larger the
atria, the greater the likelihood of an underlying CNS abnormality and
subsequent abnormal outcome (Gaglioti, 2009; Joó, 2008). If
ventriculomegaly is isolated and remains mild, development is normal in at
least 90 percent, and if moderate, development is normal in at least 75
percent (Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, 2018). Progression
significantly raises the likelihood of abnormal neurological development.

■ Agenesis of the Corpus Callosum
The corpus callosum is a major fiber bundle that connects reciprocal regions
of the cerebral hemispheres. It is best viewed in the midsagittal plane, and
color Doppler may demonstrate the pericallosal artery (Fig. 15-11).
Agenesis of the corpus callosum has characteristic sonographic findings. The
frontal horns are widely separated, and the occipital horns are rounded—
which is called colpocephaly. Together these findings give the lateral
ventricles a teardrop shape (Fig. 15-12). A normal cavum septum pellucidum
is not visible because of frontal horn displacement. In the midline, bundles of
Probst represent fiber tracts that no longer cross in the midline.
Ventriculomegaly is not uncommon, and without the corpus callosum
bordering the third ventricle superiorly, the third ventricle may be elevated
and mildly enlarged.

FIGURE 15-11 Normal corpus callosum. A. Arrows point to the corpus callosum in this midsagittal
image. B. Power Doppler image of the pericallosal artery (arrowheads).

FIGURE 15-12 Agenesis of the corpus callosum. A. This transverse image demonstrates a teardropshaped ventricle. The frontal horns (F) are widely separated, no cavum septum pellucidum is visible, and
bundles of Probst (P) line the midline. B. There is mild ventriculomegaly, no cavum septum pellucidum is
visible (arrow), and the third ventricle (3V) is elevated and enlarged. A = atria.

In population-based series, agenesis of the corpus callosum occurs in 1
in 4000 to 5000 pregnancies (Ballardini, 2018; Stoll, 2019; Szabo, 2011). It
is associated with other anomalies, aneuploidy, and more than 200 genetic
syndromes. Thus, chromosomal microarray analysis should be offered, and
genetic counseling can be challenging. In a review of apparently isolated
cases, fetal MR imaging identified additional brain abnormalities in more
than 20 percent of cases (Sotiriadis, 2012). If MR imaging does not identify
associated abnormalities, normal developmental outcome in 67 to 75 percent
of cases and severe disability in about 10 percent has been reported (des
Portes, 2018; Sotiriadis, 2012).

■ Holoprosencephaly
During early normal brain development, the prosencephalon or forebrain
divides as it becomes the telencephalon and diencephalon. With
holoprosencephaly, the prosencephalon fails to divide completely into two
separate cerebral hemispheres and underlying paired diencephalic structures.
The most severe form, alobar holoprosencephaly, is characterized by a

single monoventricle that surrounds fused thalami (Fig. 15-13). In semilobar
holoprosencephaly, hemispheres partially separate. Lobar
holoprosencephaly refers to a variable degree of fusion of frontal structures
and is more challenging to detect with prenatal ultrasound. The lobar form is
among possible diagnoses when a normal cavum septum pellucidum cannot
be visualized. Last, the middle interhemispheric variant of
holoprosencephaly is characterized by communication between the
midportion of the bodies of the lateral ventricles with separation of the
frontal horns, such that the choroid plexus may prolapse from one lateral
ventricle into the other. Differentiation into two cerebral hemispheres is
induced by prechordal mesenchyme, which is also responsible for
differentiation of the midline face. Craniofacial anomalies associated with
holoprosencephaly are reviewed later (p. 283).

FIGURE 15-13 Alobar holoprosencephaly. The thalami (Th) are fused and encircled by a
monoventricle (V) with a covering mantle (M) of cortex. The midline falx is absent. (Reproduced with
permission from Rafael Levy, RDMS.)

The birth prevalence of holoprosencephaly is only 1 in 10,000. However,
the abnormality has been identified in nearly 1 in 250 early abortuses, which
attests to extremely high in-utero lethality (Orioli, 2010; Yamada, 2004). The

alobar form accounts for 40 to 75 percent of cases, and 30 to 40 percent have
a numerical chromosomal abnormality, particularly trisomy 13 (Orioli, 2010;
Solomon, 2010). Conversely, of trisomy 13 cases, two thirds are found to
have holoprosencephaly.

■ Dandy-Walker Malformation
This posterior fossa abnormality is characterized by agenesis of the
cerebellar vermis, posterior fossa enlargement, and elevation of the
tentorium cerebelli. The cerebellar hemispheres are visibly separated, and
fluid in the cisterna magna communicates with the fourth ventricle through the
cerebellar vermis defect (Fig. 15-14). The birth prevalence approximates 1
in 12,000 (Long, 2006). Associated anomalies and aneuploidy are common.
These include ventriculomegaly in 30 to 40 percent, other anomalies in
approximately 50 percent, and aneuploidy in 40 percent (Ecker, 2000; Long,
2006). Dandy-Walker malformation is also associated with numerous genetic
and sporadic syndromes, congenital viral infections, and teratogen exposure,
all of which greatly affect the prognosis. Thus, the initial evaluation mirrors
that for ventriculomegaly (p. 278).

FIGURE 15-14 Dandy-Walker malformation. A. The cerebellar hemispheres (CH) are widely
separated by a fluid collection that connects the 4th ventricle (4V) to the enlarged cisterna magna (CM).
B. Sagittal image depicts elevation of the tentorium (arrows).

Inferior vermian agenesis is a term used when only the inferior portion
of the vermis is absent. Even with partial and relatively subtle vermian

agenesis, the prevalence of associated anomalies and aneuploidy is still high,
and the prognosis is often poor (Ecker, 2000; Long, 2006).

■ Schizencephaly and Porencephaly
Schizencephaly is a rare brain abnormality characterized by clefts in one or
both cerebral hemispheres, typically involving the perisylvian fissure. The
cleft is lined by heterotopic gray matter and communicates with the ventricle,
extending through the cortex to the pial surface (Fig. 15-15). Schizencephaly
is believed to be an abnormality of neuronal migration, which explains its
typically delayed recognition until after midpregnancy (Howe, 2012). It is
associated with absence of the cavum septum pellucidum, resulting in frontal
horn communication. Ventriculomegaly is a common finding.

FIGURE 15-15 Schizencephaly. This transverse image shows a large cleft extending from the right
lateral ventricle through the cortex. Because the borders of the cleft are separate, the defect is termed
open-lipped. (Reproduced with permission from Michael Davidson, RDMS.)

In contrast, porencephaly is a cystic space within the brain that is lined
by white matter and may or may not communicate with the ventricular system.

It is generally considered to be a destructive lesion. Porencephaly may
develop following intracranial hemorrhage in the setting of neonatal
alloimmune thrombocytopenia or in an individual with a COL4A-1 mutation
—a genetic condition which causes familial porencephaly. In a
monochorionic twin gestation, acute hypotension following death of a cotwin also may create porencephaly. Fetal MR imaging should be considered
when either of these CNS anomalies is identified.

■ Microcephaly
This condition indicates that the size of the head is profoundly smaller than
expected. The Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine (2016) recommends that
fetal microcephaly be defined as a head circumference at least 3 standard
deviations (SD) below the mean for gestational age (Appendix, p. 1237).
However, many fetuses with measurements in this range have normal head
size at birth, and therefore the diagnosis of pathologic microcephaly is not
considered certain until the head circumference reaches 5 SD below the
mean (Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, 2016). The forehead is often
upsloping. Microcephaly is associated with a wide range of underlying
abnormalities, genetic syndromes, and congenital infections such as
toxoplasmosis, rubella, and cytomegalovirus, herpes, or Zika infection
(Chap. 67, p. 1183). Findings that suggest infection include parenchymal and
periventricular echogenic foci, ventriculomegaly, and cerebellar hypoplasia.
Amniocentesis should be offered, and fetal MR imaging should be
considered. The Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine (2016) recommends
performing a detailed ultrasound examination of the fetal brain if the head
circumference measures more than 2 SD below the mean. Another ultrasound
evaluation follows in 3 or 4 weeks, with the understanding that it may be
difficult to distinguish constitutionally small head size from pathologic
findings.

■ Sacrococcygeal Teratoma
This germ cell tumor is one of the most common tumors in neonates, with a
birth prevalence of approximately 1 in 28,000 (Derikx, 2006; Swamy, 2008).
It is thought to arise from the totipotent cells along the Hensen node, anterior
to the coccyx. Sacrococcygeal teratoma (SCT) classification includes four

types (Altman, 1974). Type 1 is predominantly external with a minimal
presacral component; type 2 is predominantly external but with a significant
intrapelvic component; type 3 is predominantly internal and has abdominal
extension; and type 4 is entirely internal with no external component. The
tumor histological type may be mature, immature, or malignant.
Sonographically, SCT is a solid and/or cystic mass that arises from the
anterior sacrum and usually extends inferiorly and externally as it grows
(Fig. 15-16). Solid components often vary in echogenicity, appear
disorganized, and may enlarge rapidly with advancing gestation. Fetal MR
imaging should be considered because internal pelvic components may be
challenging to visualize. Large, solid tumors frequently result in hydrops due
to high-output cardiac failure, either as a consequence of tumor vascularity or
secondary to bleeding within the tumor and resultant anemia. Hydramnios is
common. Fetuses with tumors >5 cm often require cesarean delivery, and
classical hysterotomy may be needed (Gucciardo, 2011). Fetal therapy for
SCT is discussed in Chapter 19 (p. 373).

FIGURE 15-16 Sacrococcygeal teratoma. This tumor enlarged from 3 cm in diameter at 19 weeks’
gestation (A) to 9 cm in diameter during a 5-week period (B). Arrows depict the external borders of the
mass.

■ Caudal Regression Sequence
This rare anomaly is characterized by absence of the sacral spine and often
portions of the lumbar spine. It is approximately 25 times more prevalent in
pregnancies complicated by diabetes (Garne, 2012). Caudal regression is
associated with genitourinary malformations and syndromes such as the

VACTERL association (vertebral defects, anal atresia, cardiac defects,
tracheo-esophageal fistula, renal anomalies, and limb abnormalities)
(Vilanova-Sanchez, 2018). Sonographic findings include a spine that appears
abnormally short, lacks normal lumbosacral curvature, and terminates
abruptly above the level of the iliac wings (Fig. 15-17). Because the sacrum
does not lie between the iliac wings, they are abnormally close together and
may appear shield-like. The lower extremities lack normal soft tissue
development and may be abnormally positioned.

FIGURE 15-17 Caudal regression sequence. A. The spine is markedly foreshortened. The arrow
shows where it terminates. B. The spine ends abruptly above the level of the iliac wings (I). C. Without
a vertebral body between the iliac wings (I), they assume a shield shape.

■ Sirenomelia
This rare anomaly may be confused with caudal regression sequence but is
quite different. Formerly termed mermaid syndrome, it is characterized by a
single lower extremity in the midline and bilateral renal agenesis. The
extremity may contain one or two sets of bones and feet (Fig. 15-18). The
bladder, anus, and genitalia are absent. What may appear to be a single
umbilical artery in these cases is instead a remnant of the vitelline artery.
After 18 weeks’ gestation, when the kidneys become the primary source of
amnionic fluid production, resultant anhydramnios may complicate the
diagnosis. Cases of surviving infants have a variant of sirenomelia in which
there is some functioning renal tissue and urinary output (Pinette, 2005).

FIGURE 15-18 Sirenomelia. A. This single lower extremity contained two femur bones (F), two lower
leg bones (LL), and a fused foot with toes pointing outward (*). B. Arrows show the soft tissue outline
of the lower extremity. Amnionic fluid is visible only because the gestational age is 17 weeks’ gestation.
By 18 weeks, absence of kidneys and bladder resulted in anhydramnios. (Reproduced with permission
from Melissa Salvie, RDMS.)

■ Hemivertebrae
These spinal segmentation-fusion defects are characterized by abnormal
development of half of the vertebral body. Affected vertebrae are triangular
and may be separate or fused to adjacent vertebral bodies. This leads to
abnormal curvature of the spine such as scoliosis (Fig. 15-19). Prenatally
diagnosed cases typically involve the thoraco–lumbar spine. Associated
abnormalities are common, particularly skeletal, renal, and cardiac defects
(Basude, 2015; Yulia, 2020). Hemivertebrae are also a component of several
syndromes, including the VACTERL association.

FIGURE 15-19 Hemivertebrae result in abnormal spinal curvature in these coronal images.
(Reproduced with permission from Rose Muli, RDMS.)

HEAD, FACE, AND NECK
Craniofacial anatomy on the detailed anatomic survey may include cranial
integrity and shape of the skull (Fig. 15-2A); images of the orbits, nose, and
lips; views of the maxilla, mandible, hard palate, and tongue; images of the
ears; and evaluation of the neck (Fig. 15-20). Of these structures, only the
upper lip is a component of the standard examination. At Parkland Hospital,
we include an image of the sagittal profile as part of our standard
examination to help detect micrognathia prenatally.

FIGURE 15-20 Normal craniofacial and neck anatomy. A. Transverse images of orbits (O) and nose
(N). The small circle within each orbit is the lens. The distance between the orbits roughly approximates
the width of each orbit. B. Sagittal view of the face, depicting the nasal bone (NB), lips (L), maxilla
(Max), and mandible (Man). C. Transverse image of the alveolar ridge. D. Coronal view of the nose,
upper lip, and lower lip. E. Sagittal image of the neck. F. Image of the ear. (Reproduced with permission
from Devi Nanandhan, RDMS.)

When imaging the neck, particularly in the third trimester, identifying a
nuchal cord is not uncommon (Fig. 15-21). This finding is not associated
with adverse outcome, and we do not alter fetal surveillance if a nuchal cord
is detected.

FIGURE 15-21 Nuchal cord incidentally noted with color Doppler in a transverse image of the fetal
neck at 34 weeks’ gestation.

■ Dolichocephaly and Brachycephaly
The cephalic index reflects the skull shape. It is measured by dividing the
biparietal diameter by the occipitofrontal diameter. The cephalic index is
normally 70 to 86 percent. It is smaller if the head shape is flattened—
dolichocephaly, and larger if the shape is rounded—brachycephaly. In such
cases, the head circumference measurement more reliably estimates
gestational age than does the biparietal diameter (Fig. 15-22). These head
shape variants may be normal or can be secondary to fetal position or
oligohydramnios. Dolichocephaly can occur with neural-tube defects, and
brachycephaly may be seen in fetuses with Down syndrome. A strawberryshaped skull describes a pattern of angulation typical of trisomy 18 (Fig. 165, p. 312). With any abnormal skull shape, craniosynostosis is a
consideration.

FIGURE 15-22 Transthalamic images demonstrating dolichocephaly (A) and brachycephaly (B). The
biparietal diameter (BPD) and head circumference (HC) are measured in each image.

■ Abnormalities of Orbits and Nose
Subjectively, the distance in between the orbits is similar to the diameter of
each orbit (see Fig. 15-20). The lens is often visible. Nomograms are
available for the ocular diameter and for the interorbital and binocular
distances (Appendix, p. 1240). Hypertelorism (Fig. 15-23) is a common
finding in trisomy 18. Hypotelorism, with or without microphthalmia, may be
found in the setting of holoprosencephaly. In its extreme form only a single
orbit is visible—cyclopia. Other comorbid anomalies with
holoprosencephaly include a single nostril—cebocephaly, or absence of the
entire nose (arhinia) with proboscis (Fig. 15-24).

FIGURE 15-23 Abnormalities of the orbits. A. Hypertelorism in a fetus with trisomy 18. B.
Hypotelorism in a fetus with trisomy 13 and alobar holoprosencephaly. C. Microphthalmia. This fetus

also had trisomy 13. Arrows point to the eyes.

FIGURE 15-24 Nasal abnormalities associated with holoprosencephaly. A. Sagittal profile depicting a
proboscis (arrow) protruding from the forehead. B. Coronal image demonstrating the proboscis along
with hypotelorism and absence of the nose. C. Coronal image demonstrating a single nostril
(cebocephaly). D. Photograph of a newborn with cebocephaly.

Nasal bone hypoplasia or sonographic absence is an aneuploidy marker
that confers increased risk for fetal Down syndrome (Fig. 15-25). It is not a
structural abnormality. Nasal bone measurement is part of the detailed
ultrasound examination and is measured only between 15 and 22 weeks’
gestation. The measurement is considered foreshortened if less than 2.5 mm
or if more than 2 SD below the mean for gestational age (Chap. 17, p. 341).

Hypoplasia of the nose is a different condition that can occur following
warfarin exposure (Fig. 8-4, p. 156).

FIGURE 15-25 Nasal bone (and its absence). A. Sagittal image of the profile showing measurement
of a normal nasal bone at 19 weeks. B. Fetus with trisomy 21, also at 19 weeks, with no visible nasal
bone. (Reproduced with permission from Jason McWhirt, RDMS.)

■ Facial Clefts
These are grouped into three main types. The first type, cleft lip and palate,
always involves the lip, may also involve the hard palate, can be unilateral
or bilateral, and has a birth prevalence that approximates 1 in 1000 (Cragan,
2009; Dolk, 2010). If isolated, the inheritance is multifactorial—with a
recurrence risk of 3 to 5 percent for one prior affected child. If a cleft is
visible in the upper lip, a transverse image at the level of the alveolar ridge
may demonstrate that the defect also involves the primary palate (Fig. 1526).

FIGURE 15-26 Cleft lip/palate. A. This fetus has a prominent unilateral (left-sided) cleft lip. B.
Transverse view of the palate in the same fetus demonstrates a defect in the alveolar ridge (arrow).
The tongue (T) is also visible.

In one review of low-risk pregnancies, cleft lip was identified
sonographically in only about half of cases (Maarse, 2010). Approximately
40 percent of those detected prenatally are associated with other anomalies
or syndromes, and aneuploidy is common (Maarse, 2011; Offerdal, 2008).
The rate of associated anomalies is highest for bilateral defects that involve
the palate. In the Utah Birth Defect Network, aneuploidy was identified in 1
percent with cleft lip alone, 5 percent with unilateral cleft lip and palate, and
13 percent with bilateral cleft lip and palate (Walker, 2001).
The second type of cleft is isolated cleft palate. It begins at the uvula,
may involve the soft palate, and occasionally involves the hard palate—but
does not involve the lip. The birth prevalence approximates 1 in 2000 (Dolk,
2010). Identification of an isolated cleft palate has been described using
detailed sonography, and particularly with three-dimensional imaging, but
detection is not feasible in all cases (Ramos, 2010; Wilhelm, 2010). Isolated
cleft palate is not expected to be visualized during a standard ultrasound
examination (Maarse, 2011; Offerdal, 2008).
A third type of cleft is median cleft lip, which may be found in fetuses
with holoprosencephaly, typically when hypotelorism is also present.
Additionally, a median cleft may be associated with hypertelorism and
frontonasal dysplasia, formerly called the median cleft face syndrome.

■ Micrognathia
The fetal profile can help identify cases of micrognathia—hypoplasia of the
mandible, and retrognathia, which is recession of the mandible in relation to
the maxilla (Fig. 15-27). To quantify micrognathia risk, a transverse image of
the mandible can be used to calculate the jaw index, which is the anteriorposterior diameter of the mandible expressed as a percentage of the
biparietal diameter (Paladini, 1999). Fetuses with micrognathia and
retrognathia frequently have a posterior cleft palate and glossoptosis
(recessed tongue)—a constellation of findings known as the Pierre Robin
sequence. Micrognathia is also a feature of Treacher Collins syndrome, oralfacial-digital syndromes, trisomies 18 and 13, triploidy, and the 22 q11.2
deletion. Micrognathia may result in hydramnios and can cause airway
obstruction at birth. Use of the ex-utero intrapartum treatment (EXIT)
procedure for severe micrognathia is discussed in Chapter 19 (p. 379).

FIGURE 15-27 Micrognathia. A. Sagittal image of a fetus with severe micrognathia. B. 3-dimensional
ultrasound rendering depicts the recessed chin and downslanting palpebral fissures. C. A transverse
image of the mandible was used to calculate a jaw index for this fetus.

Micrognathia should not be confused with agnathia–otocephaly, a rare
anomaly in which no mandible develops and the ears may fuse in the midline
(Fig. 15-28). The latter confers an extremely poor prognosis and has been
diagnosed as early as the late first trimester (Rodriguez, 2019).

FIGURE 15-28 Agnathia-otocephaly, ultrasound (A) and postdelivery (B) images. With this rare, lethal
anomaly the mandible fails to develop, and the ears are inferiorly displaced and may be fused in the
midline.

■ Epignathus
This rare teratoma arises from the oral cavity or pharynx. It may grow
outward or both outward and into the brain, the latter conferring an extremely
poor prognosis (Fig. 15-29). If brain involvement is absent, an EXIT
procedure, reviewed in Chapter 19 (p. 379), can help secure the airway at
delivery (Chung, 2012).

FIGURE 15-29 Epignathus, ultrasound (A) and postdelivery (B) images. This teratoma arises from the
oral cavity or pharynx and may grow outward from the mouth or both outward and into the brain, as in
this fetus (arrowhead). Arrows depict the external extent of the mass. (Reproduced with permission
from Halima Abdirahman, RDMS.)

■ Cystic Hygroma
This venolymphatic malformation is characterized by fluid-filled sacs that
extend from the posterior neck (Fig. 15-30). Cystic hygromas may be
diagnosed in the first trimester and vary widely in size. Impaired lymphatic
drainage from the head into the jugular vein leads to an accumulation of fluid
in jugular lymphatic sacs. The birth prevalence of cystic hygromas
approximates 1 in 5000. However, reflecting the high in-utero lethality of the
condition, the first-trimester incidence exceeds 1 in 300 (Malone, 2005).

FIGURE 15-30 Cystic hygromas. A. This 9-week fetus with a cystic hygroma (arrow) was later
found to have Noonan syndrome. B. Massive multiseptated hygromas (arrowheads) in the setting of
hydrops fetalis at 15 weeks’ gestation.

Up to 70 percent of cystic hygromas are associated with aneuploidy.
When cystic hygromas are diagnosed in the first trimester, trisomy 21 is the
most common aneuploidy, followed by 45,X and trisomy 18 (Kharrat, 2006;
Malone, 2005). First-trimester fetuses with cystic hygromas are five times
more likely to be aneuploid than fetuses with a thickened nuchal translucency.
When cystic hygromas are diagnosed in the second trimester, approximately
75 percent of aneuploid cases are 45,X—Turner syndrome (Johnson, 1993;
Shulman, 1992).
Even in the absence of aneuploidy, cystic hygromas confer a significantly
greater risk for other abnormalities, particularly flow-related cardiac
defects. These include hypoplastic left heart and coarctation of the aorta (p.
292). Cystic hygromas may also be part of a genetic syndrome such as
Noonan syndrome, an autosomal dominant disorder that shares several
features with 45,X. Noonan syndrome is characterized by short stature,
lymphedema, high-arched palate, and often pulmonary valve stenosis.
Large cystic hygromas are usually associated with hydrops fetalis, rarely
resolve, and carry a poor prognosis. Small hygromas may undergo
spontaneous resolution, and provided that fetal karyotype and
echocardiography results are normal, the prognosis may be good. The
likelihood of a nonanomalous liveborn neonate with normal karyotype
following identification of first-trimester hygroma approximates 1 in 6
(Kharrat, 2006; Malone, 2005).

THORAX
Thoracic anatomy imaged in the detailed anatomic survey may include the
lungs, ribs, and diaphragm. The lungs should appear homogeneous and
symmetric, each occupying approximately one third of the area in the fourchamber view of the heart (Fig. 15-31). The thoracic circumference is
measured at the skin line in a transverse plane at the level of the fourchamber view. If pulmonary hypoplasia is suspected secondary to a small
thorax, such as with a severe skeletal dysplasia, comparison with a reference
table may be helpful (Appendix, p. 1238). Representative images of the

diaphragm are usually obtained in the parasagittal or coronal plane. The
diaphragm appears as a hypoechoic line between the lungs and liver.
Thoracic abnormalities may appear sonographically as cystic or solid spaceoccupying lesions or as an effusion outlining the heart or lung(s). Fetal
therapy for thoracic abnormalities is discussed in Chapter 19 (p. 376).

FIGURE 15-31 Normal thoracic anatomy. A. The lungs each occupy one third of the area in the fourchamber view of the heart. B. The diaphragm (arrow) appears as a hypoechoic line in between the
lung and liver in this parasagittal view. LA = left atrium; LV = left ventricle; RA = right atrium; RV =
right ventricle.

■ Diaphragmatic Hernia
This is a defect in the diaphragm through which abdominal organs herniate
into the thorax. It is left-sided in approximately 75 percent of cases, rightsided in 20 percent, and bilateral in 5 percent (Gallot, 2007). The prevalence
of congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH) is 1 in 3000 to 5000 births
(Cragan, 2009; Dolk, 2010). Associated anomalies and aneuploidy are found
in 40 percent of cases (Gallot, 2007; Stege, 2003). In population-based
series, an associated abnormality reduces the overall survival rate of
neonates with CDH from approximately 50 percent to about 20 percent
(Colvin, 2005; Gallot, 2007). Without other abnormalities, the major causes
of neonatal mortality are pulmonary hypoplasia and pulmonary hypertension.
Left-sided CDH typically causes dextroposition of the heart to the right
side of the thorax, such that the cardiac axis points toward the midline (Fig.

15-32). Accompanying findings include the stomach bubble or bowel
peristalsis in the chest and a wedge-shaped mass—the liver—located
anteriorly in the left hemithorax. Liver herniation complicates at least 50
percent of cases and is associated with a 30-percent reduction in the survival
rate (Mullassery, 2010). With large lesions, impaired swallowing and
mediastinal shift may result in hydramnios and hydrops, respectively.

FIGURE 15-32 Congenital diaphragmatic hernia. In this transverse view of the thorax, the heart is
shifted to the right side of the chest by a left-sided diaphragmatic hernia containing stomach (S), liver
(L), and bowel (B).

An effort to reduce neonatal mortality rates and need for extracorporeal
membrane oxygenation (ECMO) has focused on prognostic indicators such as
the sonographic lung-to-head ratio, described in Chapter 19 (p. 375). MR
imaging parameters include measurements of lung volume and degree of liver
herniation (Dutemeyer, 2020; Oluyomi-Obi, 2017; Worley, 2009).

■ Congenital Cystic Adenomatoid Malformation
This abnormality represents a hamartomatous overgrowth of terminal
bronchioles that communicates with the tracheobronchial tree. It is also

called congenital pulmonary airway malformation (CPAM), based on an
understanding that not all histopathological types are cystic or adenomatoid
(Azizkhan, 2008; Stocker, 1977 2002). The estimated prevalence is 1 in
6000 to 8000 births, and this rate is rising because of improved sonographic
detection of milder cases (Burge, 2010; Duncombe, 2002; Lau, 2017).
With ultrasound, a congenital cystic adenomatoid malformation (CCAM)
is as a well-circumscribed mass that may appear solid and echogenic or may
have one or multiple variably sized cysts (Fig. 15-33). It usually involves
one lobe, receives its blood supply from the pulmonary artery, and has
pulmonary venous drainage. Lesions with cysts ≥5 mm are generally termed
macrocystic, and lesions that appear solid or have cysts <5 mm are
microcystic (Adzick, 1985).

FIGURE 15-33 Congenital cystic adenomatoid malformation (CCAM). A. This left-sided microcystic
CCAM is an echogenic mass that fills the left hemithorax and causes mediastinal shift, which displaces
the heart (arrows) to the right side of the chest. B. This left-sided macrocystic CCAM contains a cyst
as large as the heart and also displaces the heart to the right. C. This right-sided CCAM contains
multiple cysts of varying size (*) and displaces the heart farther to the left side of the chest (arrows).

In a review of 645 CCAM cases, the neonatal survival rate exceeded 95
percent, and 30 percent of cases demonstrated apparent prenatal resolution.
The other 5 percent of cases—typically very large lesions with associated
mediastinal shift—were complicated by hydrops and had poor prognosis
(Cavoretto, 2008). Microcystic CCAMs usually become less conspicuous
with advancing gestation, because in addition to occupying less of the thorax,
their echogenicity more closely resembles surrounding lung tissue. However,
a subset of CCAMs may demonstrate rapid growth between 18 and 26
weeks’ gestation. Corticosteroid therapy has been used for large microcystic
lesions to forestall growth and potentially ameliorate hydrops (Curran, 2010;
Peranteau, 2016). If a large dominant cyst is present, thoracoamnionic shunt

placement may lead to hydrops resolution. Fetal therapy for CCAM is
discussed in Chapter 19 (p. 370).

■ Pulmonary Sequestration
Also called a bronchopulmonary sequestration, this abnormality is an
accessory lung bud “sequestered” from the tracheobronchial tree. It is
nonfunctioning lung tissue. Most cases diagnosed prenatally are extralobar,
which means they are enveloped in their own pleura. Overall, however, most
sequestrations present in adulthood and are intralobar—within the pleura of
another lobe. Extralobar pulmonary sequestration is considered significantly
less common than CCAM, and no precise prevalence has been reported.
Lesions have a left-sided predominance and most often involve the left lower
lobe. Associated anomalies have been reported in approximately 10 percent
of cases (Yildirim, 2008).
Sonographically, pulmonary sequestration presents as a homogeneous,
echogenic thoracic mass (Fig. 15-34A). Thus, it may resemble a microcystic
CCAM. However, the blood supply is from the systemic circulation—from
the aorta—rather than the pulmonary artery (Fig. 15-34B). Approximately 10
to 20 percent are located below the diaphragm. A small percentage of fetuses
with pulmonary sequestration develop a large ipsilateral pleural effusion,
and without treatment, this may result in pulmonary hypoplasia or hydrops
(Fig. 15-34C). Treatment with thoracoamnionic shunting is discussed in
Chapter 19 (p. 376). Hydrops may also result from mediastinal shift or highoutput cardiac failure due to the left-to-right shunt imposed by the mass. In
the absence of a pleural effusion, the reported survival rate exceeds 95
percent, and 40 percent of cases demonstrate apparent prenatal resolution
(Cavoretto, 2008).

FIGURE 15-34 Pulmonary sequestration. A. Transverse image of the thorax depicts a left lower lobe
pulmonary sequestration (PS) in this 25-week fetus. B. Sagittal image showing that blood supply to the
mass is from a branch of the abdominal aorta, which confirms the diagnosis. C. Over the next 3 weeks,
a large ipsilateral pleural effusion develops (asterisk), resulting in mediastinal shift and dextroposition of
the heart to the far-right thorax. D. After placement of a double-pigtail shunt through the chest wall,
which drains the effusion into the amnionic fluid, the lung significantly reexpanded. Arrows point to coils
of the pigtail shunt. (Reproduced with permission from Dr. Elaine Duryea.)

■ Congenital High Airway Obstruction Sequence
This rare anomaly usually results from laryngeal or tracheal atresia. The
normal egress of lung fluid is obstructed, and the tracheobronchial tree and
lungs become massively distended. Sonographically, the lungs are brightly
echogenic, the bronchi are dilated, the diaphragm is flattened or everted, and
the heart is compressed (Fig. 15-35). Impaired venous return leads to
development of ascites, typically followed by hydrops. In one review of 118
cases, associated anomalies were identified in more than 50 percent

(Sanford, 2012). Congenital high airway obstruction sequence (CHAOS) is a
feature of the autosomal recessive Fraser syndrome and has been associated
with the 22q11.2 deletion syndrome. In some cases, the obstructed airway
spontaneously perforates, which potentially confers a better prognosis. The
EXIT procedure has significantly improved outcome in selected cases.

FIGURE 15-35 Congenital high airway obstruction sequence (CHAOS). The lungs (L) appear brightly
echogenic, and the bronchi (arrow) are dilated with fluid. Flattening and eversion of the diaphragm is
common, as is ascites (asterisks).

HEART
Cardiac malformations are the most common class of congenital anomalies.
Their overall prevalence is 8 cases in 1000 births (Cragan, 2009). Almost
90 percent of cardiac defects are multifactorial or polygenic in origin,
another 1 to 2 percent result from a single-gene disorder or gene-deletion
syndrome, and 1 to 2 percent may occur from exposure to a teratogen such as
maternal diabetes or isotretinoin. Based on data from population-based
registries, approximately 1 in 8 liveborn and stillborn neonates with a
congenital heart defect has a chromosomal abnormality (Dolk, 2010;

Hartman, 2011). Trisomy 21 accounts for most of these cases, followed by
trisomy 18, 22q11.2 deletion, trisomy 13, and monosomy X (Hartman, 2011).
Approximately 50 to 70 percent of aneuploid fetuses with cardiac anomalies
are also found to have noncardiac abnormalities.
Traditionally, congenital cardiac anomalies have been more challenging
to detect than anomalies of other organ systems. Recent series suggest that
standard ultrasound may identify 50 to 60 percent of those with major
cardiac anomalies before 22 weeks’ gestation (Byrne, 2020; Sun, 2018).
Prenatal detection may improve neonatal survival, particularly for ductaldependent lesions, that is, those requiring prostaglandin infusion after birth
to keep the ductus arteriosus open (Franklin, 2002; Mahle, 2001; Tworetzky,
2001).

■ Standard Cardiac Examination
Standard cardiac assessment includes a four-chamber view, evaluation of
rate and rhythm, evaluation of the left and right ventricular outflow tracts, and
when feasible, documentation of the 3-vessel view and 3-vessel trachea
view (Figs. 15-36 and 15-37). It is hoped that examination of the cardiac
outflow tracts and 3-vessel views will improve detection of outflow tract
abnormalities that may have a normal-appearing four-chamber view, such as
tetralogy of Fallot and transposition of the great arteries. Centers with
expertise have reported at least 90 percent detection of such anomalies with
incorporation of these views (Brandt, 2015; Palatnik, 2016).

FIGURE 15-36 Diagram showing measurement of cardiac axis from the four-chamber view. LA =
left atrium; LV = left ventricle; RA = right atrium; RV = right ventricle.

FIGURE 15-37 Standard and detailed examination cardiac views. A. Four-chamber view. B. Left
ventricular outflow tract view. Arrow depicts mitral valve becoming the posterior wall of the aorta. The
arrow with asterisk marks the interventricular septum becoming the anterior aortic wall. C. Right
ventricular outflow tract view. D. Three-vessel view. E. Three-vessel trachea view F. High short-axis
view (outflow tracts). G. Aortic arch view. H. Ductal arch view. I. Superior and inferior vena cavae
views. AA = aortic arch; Ao = aorta; DA = ductal arch; IVC = inferior vena cava; LA = left atrium;
LV = left ventricle; PA = pulmonary artery; RA = right atrium; RV = right ventricle; SVC = superior
vena cava; T = trachea.

The four-chamber view is a transverse image of the fetal thorax at a level
immediately above the diaphragm. It allows evaluation of cardiac size,
position in the thorax, cardiac axis, atria and ventricles, foramen ovale, atrial
septum primum, interventricular septum, and atrioventricular valves (Fig. 1537A). The left ventricle is apex-forming, and two pulmonary veins are often

visible entering the left atrium. The atria and ventricles should be similar in
size, and the apex of the heart should form a 45-degree angle with the left
anterior chest wall (see Fig. 15-36). Abnormalities of cardiac axis are
encountered in more than one third of fetuses with structural cardiac
anomalies (Shipp, 1995; Crane, 1997; Sinkovskaya, 2015).
The left ventricular outflow tract view demonstrates that the ascending
aorta arises entirely from the left ventricle. The interventricular septum is
shown to be in continuity with the anterior wall of the aorta, and the mitral
valve in continuity with the posterior wall of the aorta (Fig. 15-37B).
Ventricular septal defects and outflow tract abnormalities are often visible in
this view.
The right ventricular outflow tract view shows the right ventricle giving
rise to the main pulmonary artery, which subsequently branches into the right
and left pulmonary arteries. (Fig. 15-37C,F). Together, the left and right
outflow tract views demonstrate the normal perpendicular orientation of the
aorta and pulmonary artery and the comparable size of these great arteries.
The 3-vessel view (3VV) is a transverse image obtained just above the
base of the heart. The three vessels line up in a row: an oblique view of the
pulmonary artery, which should appear long and cylindrical; a crosssectional image of the ascending aorta; and a cross-sectional image of the
superior vena cava (SVC) (Fig. 15-37D). The pulmonary artery and aorta
should be similar in diameter. The 3-vessel trachea view (3VTV) also is a
transverse image but is obtained further cephalad. It includes the pulmonary
artery giving rise to the ductus arteriosus as it makes a V-shape with the
aortic arch, along with the SVC and the trachea (Fig. 15-37E). The 3VTV can
be helpful for identifying aortic arch abnormalities, particularly ductaldependent lesions.

■ Specialized Cardiac Examination
The detailed ultrasound examination includes the five cardiac components of
the standard examination plus the superior and inferior vena cavae and the
aortic and ductal arch views (Fig. 15-37G–I). The examination also involves
evaluation of the interventricular septum and cardiac situs, documentation of
which may be facilitated with video clips.
Fetal echocardiography is a more extensive examination of cardiac
structure and function designed to characterize abnormalities. In addition to

grayscale imaging views, echocardiography includes evaluation of cardiac
rate and rhythm, color Doppler ultrasound, pulsed-wave Doppler ultrasound,
cardiac biometry, and if clinically relevant, cardiac function assessment
(American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine, 2020b). These components
are beyond the scope of this text. Echocardiography indications are
discussed in Chapter 14 (p. 252). Selected cardiac anomalies are reviewed
next.

Ventricular Septal Defect
This is the most common congenital cardiac anomaly. It is found in
approximately 1 in 300 births (Bjornard, 2013; Cragan, 2009; Dolk, 2010).
A defect may be appreciated in the perimembranous or muscular portion of
the interventricular septum in the four-chamber view, and imaging of the left
ventricular outflow tract may show discontinuity of the interventricular
septum as it becomes the wall of the aorta (Fig. 15-38). Color Doppler may
demonstrate flow across the defect. Genetic abnormalities are diagnosed
with chromosomal microarray analysis in approximately 1 percent of
isolated cases but found in at least 15 percent if other structural
abnormalities also are present (Maya, 2020). More than a third of prenatally
diagnosed ventricular septal defects close in utero, and another third close in
the first year of life (Cho, 2017; Paladini, 2002; Svirsky, 2019).

FIGURE 15-39 Endocardial cushion defect. A. During ventricular systole, the lateral leaflets of the
mitral and tricuspid valves come together in the midline. But the atrioventricular valve plane is abnormal,
a common atrium (A) is observed, and there is a visible defect (arrow) in the interventricular septum. B.

During diastolic filling, opening of the atrioventricular valves more clearly demonstrates the absence of
their medial leaflets.

Endocardial Cushion Defect
This is also called an atrioventricular (AV) septal defect or AV canal
defect. It has a birth prevalence of approximately 1 in 2500 and is associated
with trisomy 21 in more than half of cases (Christensen, 2013; Cragan, 2009;
Dolk, 2010). The endocardial cushions are the crux of the heart, and defects
jointly involve the atrial septum primum, interventricular septum, and medial
leaflets of the mitral and tricuspid valves (Fig. 15-39). The majority of
defects are balanced–with ventricles comparable in size. Some are
unbalanced however, with one side of the heart significantly smaller than the
other. The endocardial cushion defect is considered partial if there is
absence of the atrial septum primum and a more subtle AV valve plane
abnormality, with no ventricular septal defect.

FIGURE 15-38 Ventricular septal defect. A. In this four-chamber view, a defect (arrow) is noted in
the perimembranous portion of the interventricular septum. B. The left ventricular outflow tract view
demonstrates a break in continuity (arrow) between the interventricular septum and the anterior wall of
the aorta.

Endocardial cushion defects are a common finding in heterotaxy, also
known as cardiosplenic or isomerism syndromes. Heterotaxy implies that

thoraco-abdominal organs normally on one side of the body are on an
incorrect side, on both sides, or absent, as in polysplenia or asplenia.
Complex cardiac abnormalities are a common feature, particularly
endocardial cushion defects. In a review of 632 pregnancies with fetal
heterotaxy, an endocardial cushion defect was present in 60 percent (Buca,
2018). These endocardial cushion defects are a particularly at-risk group
because of their association with third-degree heart block, which confers a
poor prognosis.

Hypoplastic Left Heart Syndrome
This anomaly is found in approximately 1 in 4000 births (Bjornard, 2013;
Cragan, 2009; Dolk, 2010;). During second-trimester ultrasound examination,
the left ventricle may be so small that a chamber is difficult to appreciate
(Fig. 15-40). Alternately, the left ventricle may be normal in size or dilated
but have severely decreased contractility and an echogenic inner wall due to
endocardial fibroelastosis. There may be no visible left ventricular inflow
or outflow, and reversal of flow may be documented in the aortic arch in the
3-vessel trachea view. As gestation advances, the left ventricle and aorta
become progressively smaller. Prenatal detection is nearly 90 percent in
population-based registries.

FIGURE 15-40 Hypoplastic left heart syndrome. A. In this four-chamber view, the left ventricle
appears “filled in” and echogenic, due to endocardial fibroelastosis. B. Color Doppler depicts only flow
from the right atrium into the right ventricle, and no left ventricular filling is visible. C. Color Doppler
shows reversal of flow in the aortic arch (arrow), which is perfused retrograde via the ductus
arteriosus. LA = left atrium; LV = left ventricle; RA = right atrium; RV = right ventricle.

Hypoplastic left heart syndrome is a ductal-dependent lesion for which
neonatal administration of prostaglandin therapy is essential. Postnatal
treatment consists of a three-staged palliative repair—single ventricle

palliation, or cardiac transplantation. Rates of survival to adulthood may
reach 70 percent (Feinstein, 2012). However, morbidity is high, and
developmental delays are common (Lloyd, 2017; Paladini, 2017; Wilson,
2018). Fetal therapy for this condition is discussed in Chapter 19 (p. 378).

Coarctation of the Aorta
Coarctation refers to narrowing of the aortic arch. The birth prevalence
approximates 1 in 2500 (Bjornard, 2013). Usually, the narrowing is focal
and found just distal to the origin of the left subclavian artery at the aortic
isthmus. Alternatively, a long segment of the aorta may be affected.
Coarctation may be isolated or associated with other cardiac anomalies, such
as hypoplastic left heart syndrome, unbalanced endocardial cushion defect,
or double-outlet right ventricle. The most common sonographic finding is
disproportion in ventricular size, with the left ventricle smaller than the right.
However, only one third with this finding have coarctation (Ghi, 2018; van
Nisselrooij, 2018). Other findings include narrowing of the aortic arch in the
3-vessel trachea view or narrowing of the isthmus in the aortic arch view–
which may be challenging to image. Coarctation is associated with Turner
syndrome (45,X), with the 22q11.2 deletion, and with autosomal trisomies.

Ebstein Anomaly
This rare anomaly is characterized by apical displacement of the tricuspid
valve, such that the septal and posterior valve leaflets of the tricuspid valve
attach closer to the cardiac apex (Fig. 15-41). The birth prevalence is
approximately 1 in 20,000 (Boyle, 2017). Fetuses with Ebstein anomaly
develop varying degrees of tricuspid regurgitation. In severe cases, right
atrium becomes markedly dilated, and the fetus may develop cardiomegaly
and hydrops. For many years, there was concern that lithium exposure
predisposed to Ebstein anomaly. However, as discussed in Chapter 8 (p.
154), the absolute attributable risk is likely well below 1 percent.

FIGURE 15-41 Ebstein anomaly. A. In this four-chamber view, the tricuspid valve’s septal leaflet
attaches closer to the cardiac apex (arrowhead) than the corresponding mitral valve leaflet (arrow). B.
The color Doppler blue jet reflects tricuspid regurgitation. LA = left atrium; LV = left ventricle; RA =
right atrium; RV = right ventricle.

Tetralogy of Fallot
This anomaly occurs in approximately 1 in 3000 births (Cragan, 2009; Dolk,
2010; Nelson, 2016). It includes a ventricular septal defect; an overriding
aorta; a pulmonary valve or pulmonary artery abnormality, and right
ventricular hypertrophy (Fig. 15-42). The last does not usually manifest
before birth. Due to the location of the ventricular septal defect, the fourchamber view may appear normal.

FIGURE 15-42 Tetralogy of Fallot. A. Left ventricular outflow tract view shows a ventricular septal
defect with an overriding aorta. The arrow points to the aortic valve. B. Right ventricular outflow tract
view demonstrating severe pulmonary artery stenosis. The arrow points to the pulmonary valve. C. In

this fetus with tetralogy of Fallot with absent pulmonary valve, the pulmonary artery shows marked
enlargement. Ao = aorta; LV = left ventricle; PA = pulmonary artery; RV = right ventricle.

The pulmonary artery abnormality is pulmonary stenosis in 60 percent of
cases, pulmonary atresia in slightly more than 25 percent, and absent
pulmonary valve in 10 to 15 percent (Zhao, 2016). Absence of the pulmonary
valve leads to marked enlargement of the pulmonary artery and poses a risk
for hydrops. The enlarged pulmonary artery can also compress the trachea
and cause tracheomalacia.
Chromosomal abnormalities are identified in approximately one third of
fetuses with tetralogy of Fallot. Of these, 22q11.2 deletions compose 15 to
20 percent, and autosomal trisomies constitute 10 percent (Zhao, 2016).

D-Transposition of the Great Arteries
This anomaly is characterized by outflow tracts that arise in parallel from the
ventricles. The right ventricle gives rise to the aorta, and the left ventricle to
the pulmonary artery (Fig. 15-43). Thus, there is ventriculo-arterial
discordance. The birth prevalence approximates 1 in 4000 (Bjornard, 2013).
The four-chamber view is often normal. Prenatal detection approximates 40
percent but is thought to improve with visualization of the outflow tracts
(Ravi, 2018). Additionally, the 3-vessel views may demonstrate only two
vessels, because the pulmonary artery is underneath the aorta.

FIGURE 15-43 D-transposition of the great arteries. A. Transverse image with color Doppler
depicting the outflow tracts arising in parallel. B. View of the left ventricle giving rise to the pulmonary
artery, which subsequently branches (arrows). C. Sagittal image of the aorta arising anteriorly from the
right ventricle and parallel to the pulmonary artery, which arises posteriorly. Ao = aorta; LV = left
ventricle; PA = pulmonary artery; RV = right ventricle.

D-transposition contrasts with L- or corrected transposition of the great
arteries, in which there is atrio-ventricular discordance in addition to
ventricular-arterial discordance. L-transposition is strongly associated with
other cardiac anomalies and is much less likely to be diagnosed prenatally as
an isolated finding.

Double-outlet Right Ventricle
With this anomaly, the majority of blood flow to both the pulmonary artery
and the aorta comes from the right ventricle. Double-outlet right ventricle
(DORV) is always associated with a ventricular septal defect. DORV has a
spectrum of presentation. It is categorized according to the location of the
ventricular septal defect and the relative proportion of blood flow from the
right ventricle to the outflow tracts. The outflow tracts are often malposed,
arising in parallel. The birth prevalence approximates 1 in 20,000 (Bjornard,
2013).

Truncus Arteriosus
This rare anomaly is characterized by a single, large outflow tract exiting the
heart—a common arterial trunk—rather than a separate aorta and pulmonary
artery. A prominent ventricular septal defect is usually identified, with an
enlarged overriding outflow tract that gives rise to pulmonary arteries as
well as head and neck vessels (Fig. 15-44). The differential diagnosis
includes tetralogy of Fallot with pulmonary atresia. The birth prevalence of
truncus arteriosus approximates 1 in 16,000 (Bjornard, 2013). In 1949,
Collett and Edwards categorized four types of truncus arteriosus according to
the origin of the pulmonary arteries. Characterization of anatomic variants
can often only be made postnatally.

FIGURE 15-44 Truncus arteriosus. Grayscale (A) and color Doppler (B) images depict a single, large
outflow tract. The common arterial trunk (CAT) overlies a ventricular septal defect (arrowhead) and
gives rise to the head and neck vessels and pulmonary arteries. LV = left ventricle; RV = right ventricle.
(Reproduced with permission from Paul Mallamaci, RDMS.)

Cardiac Rhabdomyoma
This is the most common cardiac tumor. Approximately 50 percent of cases
are associated with tuberous sclerosis, an autosomal dominant disease with
multiorgan system manifestations. Tuberous sclerosis is caused by mutations
in the hamartin (TSC1) and tuberin (TSC2) genes.
Sonographically, cardiac rhabdomyomas are well-circumscribed
echogenic masses, usually within the ventricles or outflow tracts (Fig. 1545). They may be single or multiple, may grow in size during gestation, and
may occasionally lead to inflow or outflow obstruction. In cases without
obstruction or large tumor size, the prognosis is relatively good from a
cardiac standpoint, because the tumors tend to regress after the neonatal
period. Because extracardiac findings of tuberous sclerosis may not be
apparent with prenatal sonography, MR imaging may be considered to
evaluate fetal CNS anatomy (p. 266).

FIGURE 15-45 Rhabdomyoma. In this four-chamber view of the heart, a large, echogenic, wellcircumscribed mass (R) fills the right ventricle and abuts the tricuspid valve (arrow). Despite its size,
the mass did not obstruct flow, and the neonate did well.

■ M-Mode
Motion-mode or M-mode imaging is a linear display of cardiac cycle events,
with time on the x-axis and motion on the y-axis. It is often used to measure
embryonic or fetal heart rate (Fig. 14-1, p. 248). If an abnormality of heart
rate or rhythm is identified, M-mode imaging permits separate evaluation of
atrial and ventricular waveforms. Thus, it is particularly useful for
characterizing arrhythmias and their response to treatment (Chap. 19, p. 367).
M-mode can also be used to assess ventricular function and atrial and
ventricular outputs.

Premature Atrial Contractions
Also called atrial extrasystoles, these are the most common fetal arrhythmia
and a frequent finding. They represent cardiac conduction system immaturity
and often resolve with advancing gestation or in the neonatal period.
Premature atrial contractions (PACs) may be conducted and thus sound like
extra beats. However, they are more commonly blocked, and with handheld
Doppler they sound like dropped beats. As shown in Figure 15-46, the

dropped beat may be demonstrated with M-mode evaluation as a
compensatory pause that follows the premature contraction.

FIGURE 15-46 M-mode. This image demonstrates normal concordance between atrial (A) and
ventricular (V) contractions. Movement of the tricuspid valve (T) is also shown. The blue arrow denotes
a premature atrial contraction followed by a compensatory pause.

PACs are not associated with major structural cardiac abnormalities.
Older case reports describe an association with maternal caffeine
consumption and with hydralazine (Lodeiro, 1989; Oei, 1989). In
approximately 2 percent of cases, affected fetuses are later identified to have
supraventricular tachycardia (SVT), which is an arrhythmia that requires
urgent treatment (Copel, 2000). Accordingly, pregnancies with fetal PACs
are often followed with fetal heart rate assessment as often as every 1 to 2
weeks until the ectopy resolves. Treatment of fetal SVT and other
arrhythmias is discussed in Chapter 19 (p. 368).

ABDOMEN
Abdominal anatomy visible in the second and third trimester includes the
stomach, liver, gallbladder, spleen, adrenal glands, kidneys, renal arteries,
small and large bowel, and ventral wall. The stomach is nearly always
identified after 14 weeks’ gestation. Nonvisualization of the stomach may be
secondary to impaired swallowing in the setting of oligohydramnios or to
underlying causes such as esophageal atresia, a craniofacial anomaly, or a
CNS or musculoskeletal abnormality. Fetuses with hydrops can also have
impaired swallowing.
Both the liver and spleen may be viewed in a transverse image obtained
at the level of the stomach and intrahepatic portion of the umbilical vein—the
plane at which the abdominal circumference is measured (see Fig. 15-2B).
Hepatosplenomegaly may occur with congenital infection or with hydrops.
By convention, the liver is measured in the sagittal or coronal plane, from the
top of the right hemidiaphragm to the inferior tip of the right lobe (Fig. 1547). The spleen is posterior to the stomach in the transverse plane. The
gallbladder may be imaged just inferior to the level at which the abdominal
circumference is measured. It lies to the right of the intrahepatic portion of
the umbilical vein and has a conical or teardrop shape (see Fig. 15-47B).

FIGURE 15-47 Abdominal organs. A. The liver is measured from the top of the right hemidiaphragm
to the inferior tip of the right lobe in this coronal image. B. Transverse image of the abdomen just
inferior to the level at which the abdominal circumference is measured, depicting the gallbladder (G),
stomach (S), spleen (Sp), liver (L), and right adrenal gland (A).

The appearance of fetal bowel changes with maturation. Increased bowel
echogenicity may indicate a small amount of swallowed intraamnionic blood,
especially if the maternal serum alpha-fetoprotein level is elevated. The
bowel appears as bright as bone in approximately 0.5 percent of secondtrimester fetuses. In such cases, the risk for fetal trisomy 21 is increased (Fig.
17-3, p. 340). Echogenic bowel is also associated with fetal
cytomegalovirus infection and with cystic fibrosis, in which echogenicity
represents inspissated meconium.

■ Gastrointestinal Obstruction
Bowel atresia is characterized by obstruction and proximal bowel dilation.
In general, the more proximal the obstruction, the more likely it is to lead to
hydramnios. The degree of hydramnios from proximal small-bowel
obstruction can be sufficiently severe to result in maternal respiratory
compromise or preterm labor and may necessitate amnioreduction (Chap. 14,
p. 258).

Esophageal Atresia
The birth prevalence of this anomaly approximates 1 in 4000 (Cragan, 2009;
Pedersen, 2012). It may be suspected when there is no visible stomach
bubble or when the stomach is contracted. However, because esophageal
atresia is associated with a tracheoesophageal fistula in up to 90 percent of
cases, fluid is often able to enter the stomach. More than 50 percent of those
with esophageal atresia have other abnormalities or underlying genetic
syndromes. Multiple malformations are present in 30 percent of cases, and
aneuploidy such as trisomy 18 or 21, in 10 percent. Approximately 10
percent of cases of esophageal atresia is found as part of the VACTERL
association (Pedersen, 2012).

Duodenal Atresia
This anomaly occurs in approximately 1 in 10,000 births (Best, 2012; Dolk,
2010). It is characterized by the sonographic double-bubble sign, which
develops from distention of the stomach and the first part of the duodenum
(Fig. 15-48). This finding may not be obvious before 24 weeks’ gestation.
Demonstrating continuity between the stomach and proximal duodenum

confirms that the second “bubble” is the proximal duodenum. Approximately
30 percent of affected fetuses have an associated chromosomal abnormality
or genetic syndrome, particularly trisomy 21. Of cases without a genetic
abnormality, a third have associated anomalies, most commonly cardiac
defects and other gastrointestinal abnormalities (Best, 2012).

FIGURE 15-48 Duodenal atresia. Transverse image of the double-bubble sign, which represents
distension of the stomach (S) and the first part of the duodenum (D). Continuity between these
structures confirms that the second cystic structure is the duodenum.

Jejunoileal Atresia
This condition may present with dilated small-bowel loops that fill the
abdomen or with meconium peritonitis from bowel perforation (Fig. 15-49).
Associated gastrointestinal abnormalities are identified postnatally in 25
percent of cases, with malrotation in 10 to 15 percent (Stollman, 2009).
Cystic fibrosis also is identified in approximately 10 percent.

FIGURE 15-49 Jejunoileal atresia with meconium peritonitis. A. Sagittal image of the fetal abdomen at
26 weeks’ gestation with severe ascites following bowel perforation. Arrows point to the bowel, which
is considerably more echogenic than the liver. B. Transverse image at 30 weeks demonstrates resolution
of ascites. The abdomen is now filled with dilated loops of small bowel. Focal bright echoes (arrows)
represent extraluminal meconium. A = ascites; L = liver.

In general, jejunal atresia is more strongly associated with bowel
dilation and hyperperistalsis, and ileal atresia, with perforation. Bowel
dilatation in jejunal atresia typically does not present until after 24 weeks’
gestation and may be accompanied by hydramnios. Perforation is frequently
associated with ascites, and bright echoes may be visible outside the bowel
lumen, outlining the peritoneal cavity. Over time, the ascites resolves, and the
extravasated meconium may form a pseudocyst. Fetal MR imaging can assist
with identifying the level of the defect (Chap. 14, p. 267).

Anal Atresia
Also known as imperforate anus, this condition is less readily diagnosed by
sonography. Hydramnios is not a typical feature, and the bowel may not be
significantly dilated. A transverse view through the pelvis may show an
enlarged rectum as an anechoic structure between the bladder and the
sacrum. Anal atresia is a feature of the VACTERL association.

■ Ventral Wall Defects

The integrity of the abdominal wall is assessed at the level of the cord
insertion during the standard examination (Fig. 15-50). Ventral wall defects
include gastroschisis, omphalocele, and body stalk anomaly.

FIGURE 15-50 Normal ventral wall. Transverse view of the abdomen demonstrating normal umbilical
cord insertion and integrity of the anterior abdominal wall.

Gastroschisis
This is a full-thickness abdominal wall defect located to the right of the
umbilical cord insertion. Bowel herniates through the defect into the
amnionic cavity. Gastroschisis may be diagnosed as early as the late first
trimester (Fig. 15-51). The prevalence is approximately 1 in 2000 births
(Jones, 2016; Nelson, 2015). Gastroschisis is the one major anomaly more
common in fetuses of younger mothers, and the average maternal age is 20
years (Santiago-Muñoz, 2007). Coexisting bowel abnormalities such as
jejunal atresia are found in approximately 15 percent of cases (Overcash,
2014). Gastroschisis is not associated with aneuploidy, and the survival rate
is 90 to 95 percent (Nelson, 2015; Raitio, 2020).

FIGURE 15-51 Gastroschisis. Transverse views of the lower abdomen at 13 weeks’ gestation (A) and
18 weeks (B) depict multiple small bowel loops (B) that have herniated into the amnionic cavity through
a defect to the right of the cord insertion (arrow).

Fetal-growth restriction complicates gastroschisis in 15 to 40 percent of
cases (Overcash, 2014; Santiago-Muñoz, 2007). Growth restriction does not
appear to confer increased mortality (Nelson, 2015; Overcash, 2014).
However, earlier gestational age at delivery does pose a risk for adverse
outcome, and planned delivery at 36 to 37 weeks’ gestation has not been
found to benefit the neonate (Al-Kaff, 2016; South, 2013).

Omphalocele
The birth prevalence of this anomaly approximates 1 in 3000 to 5000
(Canfield, 2006; Dolk, 2010). It develops when the lateral ectomesodermal
folds fail to meet in the midline. Abdominal organs herniate into the base of
the umbilical cord, covered only by a two-layered sac of amnion and
peritoneum (Fig. 15-52). More than half of cases are associated with other
major anomalies or aneuploidy. Aneuploidy is particularly common with
smaller defects (De Veciana, 1994). Omphalocele is also a component of
several syndromes, including Beckwith–Wiedemann, cloacal exstrophy, and
pentalogy of Cantrell. Neonatal survival approximates 90 percent for
isolated cases and 80 percent in those with other structural abnormalities
(Raitio, 2021; Springett, 2014). Isolated defects containing liver are
typically delivered via cesarean to decrease the risk for fetal trauma and
bleeding.

FIGURE 15-52 Omphalocele. Transverse view of the abdomen showing a large, round, membranecovered ventral wall defect containing exteriorized liver.

Body Stalk Anomaly
Also known as limb-body-wall complex or cyllosoma, this rare, lethal
anomaly is characterized by abnormal body wall formation. Typically, no
abdominal wall is visible, and the abdominal organs extrude into the
extraamnionic coelom (Fig. 15-53). The body and placenta are closely
approximated or fused, and the umbilical cord is extremely short. Acuteangle scoliosis is another feature, and amnionic bands are often identified.

FIGURE 15-53 Body-stalk anomaly. A. This 15-week fetus has no visible abdominal wall. The thorax
is disproportionately small compared with the head, and the small lower torso is deviated to the side.
Arrows point to the large mass of extruded abdominal organs. B. Acute-angle scoliosis. Arrows depict
the abnormal curvature of the spine. (Reproduced with permission from Deirdre Snelson, RDMS.)

■ Kidneys and Genitourinary Tract
The fetal kidneys are visible adjacent to the spine, frequently in the first
trimester and routinely by 18 weeks’ gestation (Fig. 15-54). The length of the
kidney approximates 20 mm at 20 weeks and grows about 1.1 mm each week
thereafter (Chitty, 2003).

FIGURE 15-54 Normal fetal kidneys and bladder. A. The kidneys are visible adjacent to the spine in
this 29-week fetus. A small amount of urine is often visible within the renal pelvis (arrow). B. Normal
fetal bladder, outlined by the two superior vesical arteries as they become the umbilical arteries.

The fetal bladder is also readily seen in the second trimester as a round,
anechoic structure in the anterior midline of the pelvis. With application of
Doppler, the bladder is outlined by the two superior vesical arteries as they
become the umbilical arteries of the umbilical cord (Chap. 6, p. 114). The
fetal ureters and urethra are not visible sonographically unless abnormally
dilated.
After 18 weeks’ gestation, the kidneys are the major source of amnionic
fluid (Chap. 14, p. 256). Normal amnionic fluid volume in the second half of
pregnancy suggests urinary tract patency and at least one functioning kidney.
External genitalia are a component of the detailed examination and are
part of the standard examination in multifetal gestations and when medically
indicated (American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine, 2019).
Identification may aid counseling in pregnancies at risk for an X-linked
genetic condition. Examples of normal and ambiguous genitalia are shown in
Figure 15-55. Disorders of sexual development are discussed in Chapter 3
(p. 35).

FIGURE 15-55 Normal and ambiguous genitalia. A. Female labia. B. Male penis and scrotum. C.
Ambiguous genitalia with a phallus and bifid scrotum. D. With this condition, color Doppler can assist
locating the urethral meatus, which is pinpointed here by the urine stream (blue).

Renal Pelvis Dilatation
Present in 1 to 5 percent of fetuses, this finding is also called urinary tract
dilatation or hydronephrosis. In 40 to 90 percent of cases, and particularly
when mild, renal pelvis dilatation is transient or physiological and does not
represent an underlying abnormality (Ismaili, 2003; Nguyen, 2010). In

approximately one third of cases, a urinary tract abnormality is confirmed in
the neonatal period. Of these, ureteropelvic junction (UPJ) obstruction and
vesicoureteral reflux (VUR) are the most frequent.
The fetal renal pelvis diameter is measured anterior-to-posterior in a
transverse plane. Calipers are placed on the inner border of the fluid
collection (Fig. 15-56). Although various thresholds have been defined, the
pelvis is typically considered dilated if it exceeds 4 mm in the second
trimester or 7 mm at approximately 32 weeks’ gestation (Nguyen, 2014;
Reddy, 2014). The second-trimester threshold is used to identify pregnancies
that warrant subsequent third-trimester evaluation.

FIGURE 15-56 Renal pelvis dilatation. A. The anterior-posterior diameter of the renal pelves
measured 7 mm in the transverse plane in this 34-week fetus. B. Sagittal image at 32 weeks depicts
renal pelvis dilatation with rounded calyces (arrow) in the setting of ureteropelvic junction obstruction.

The Society for Fetal Urology categorized renal pelvis dilatation based
on a metaanalysis of more than 100,000 screened pregnancies (Table 15-2)
(Lee, 2006; Nguyen, 2010). Provided that the finding is isolated, the degree
of dilation correlates with the likelihood of an underlying abnormality.
Associated calyceal dilation, cortical thinning, or dilation elsewhere along
the urinary tract confer increased risk (Nguyen, 2014). Mild pyelectasis in
the second trimester is a minor aneuploidy marker associated with a slightly
increased risk for trisomy 21, particularly when other findings or risk factors
are also present (Fig. 17-3, p. 340).

TABLE 15-2. Risk for Postnatal Urinary Abnormality According to Degree
of Renal Pelvis Dilation

Ureteropelvic Junction Obstruction. This condition is the most common
abnormality associated with renal pelvis dilatation. The birth prevalence is 1
in 1000 to 2000, and males are affected three times more often than females
(Williams, 2007; Woodward, 2002). Obstruction is generally functional
rather than anatomical, and it is bilateral in up to a fourth of cases. The
likelihood of UPJ obstruction ranges from 5 percent with mild renal pelvis
dilatation to more than 50 percent with severe dilatation (Lee, 2006).
Duplicated Renal Collecting System. In this anatomical anomaly, the upper
and lower poles of the kidney—called moieties—are each drained by a
separate ureter (Fig. 15-57). Duplication is found in approximately 1 in 4000
pregnancies, is more common in females, and is bilateral in 15 to 20 percent
of cases (James, 1998; Vergani, 1998; Whitten, 2001). Sonographically, an
intervening tissue band separates two distinct renal pelves. Hydronephrosis
or ureteral dilation may develop due to abnormal implantation of one or both
ureters within the bladder—a relationship that reflects the anatomical
Weigert-Meyer rule. The upper pole ureter tends to develop obstruction from
a ureterocele within the bladder, whereas the lower pole ureter has a
shortened intravesical segment that predisposes to VUR (see Fig. 15-57).
Thus, both moieties may become dilated from different etiologies, and both
are at risk for loss of function.

FIGURE 15-57 Duplicated renal collecting system. A. Renal pelvis dilatation is visible in both the
upper (U) and lower (L) pole moieties, which are separated by an intervening band of renal tissue
(arrowhead). B. A ureterocele (arrowhead) is visible within the bladder. Color Doppler depicts the
superior vesical arteries.

Renal Agenesis
The estimated prevalence of bilateral renal agenesis is 1 in 8000 births,
whereas that of unilateral renal agenesis is 1 in 1000 births (Cragan, 2009;
Dolk, 2010; Sheih, 1989; Wiesel, 2005). With an absent kidney, color
Doppler imaging of the descending aorta demonstrates absence of the
ipsilateral renal artery (Fig. 15-58). In addition, the ipsilateral adrenal gland
typically enlarges to fill the renal fossa, termed the lying down adrenal sign
(Hoffman, 1992).

FIGURE 15-58 Renal agenesis. A. Coronal image of a fetus with bilateral renal agenesis in which
color Doppler of the abdominal aorta is used to demonstrate absence of the renal arteries. B. In this
fetus with unilateral renal agenesis, arrowheads point to the adrenal gland (arrowheads) filling the renal
fossa, which is the “lying-down” adrenal sign.

If renal agenesis is bilateral, no urine is produced, and the resulting
anhydramnios leads to pulmonary hypoplasia, limb contractures, and
distinctive facies. When this combination results from renal agenesis, it is
called Potter syndrome, after Dr. Edith Potter, who described it in 1946.
When these abnormalities result from severely decreased amnionic fluid
volume from another etiology, such as bilateral multicystic dysplastic kidney
or autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease, it is called Potter
sequence. The prognosis for these abnormalities is extremely poor.

Multicystic Dysplastic Kidney
This severe form of renal dysplasia results in a nonfunctioning kidney. The
nephrons and collecting ducts form abnormally, such that primitive ducts are
surrounded by fibromuscular tissue, and the ureter is atretic (Hains, 2009).
Sonographically, the kidney contains numerous, variably sized, smoothwalled cysts that do not communicate with the renal pelvis and are
surrounded by echogenic cortex (Fig. 15-59).

FIGURE 15-59 Multicystic dysplastic kidneys. Coronal view of the fetal abdomen demonstrates
enlarged kidneys that are filled with cysts of varying size and contain no visible renal pelvis or normalappearing renal tissue.

Unilateral multicystic dysplastic kidney (MCDK) has a prevalence of 1
in 4000 births. Contralateral renal abnormalities are present in 30 to 40
percent—most frequently VUR or UPJ obstruction (Schreuder, 2009).
Nonrenal anomalies have been reported in 25 percent of cases. Cystic
dysplasia may occur as a component of many genetic syndromes (Lazebnik,
1999; Schreuder, 2009). If MCDK is isolated and unilateral, the prognosis is
generally good. Bilateral MCDK is found in approximately 1 in 12,000
births. It is associated with severely decreased amnionic fluid volume
starting early in gestation. This leads to Potter sequence and a poor
prognosis.

Polycystic Kidney Disease
Of the hereditary polycystic diseases, only the infantile form of autosomal
recessive polycystic kidney disease (ARPKD) may be reliably diagnosed
prenatally. ARPKD is a chronic, progressive disease of the kidneys and liver
that results in cystic dilation of the renal collecting ducts and in congenital

hepatic fibrosis (Turkbey, 2009). The carrier frequency of a disease-causing
mutation in the PKHD1 gene approximates 1 in 70, and the birth prevalence
is 1 in 20,000 (Zerres, 1998). The phenotypes of ARPKD range from lethal
pulmonary hypoplasia at birth to a presentation in late childhood or even
adulthood with predominantly hepatic manifestations. Sonographically,
ARPKD displays abnormally large kidneys that may fill or even distend the
fetal abdomen and have a solid, ground-glass texture (Fig. 15-60). Severe
oligohydramnios confers a poor prognosis.

FIGURE 15-60 Autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease (ARPKD). Transverse (A) and
coronal (B) images of a 29-week fetus with marked renal enlargement. The kidneys measure 7 cm in
length and have a ground-glass appearance. There is anhydramnios.

Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD), which is far
more common, usually does not manifest until adulthood (Chap. 56, p. 1001).
Even so, some fetuses with ADPKD have mild renal enlargement and
enhanced renal echogenicity in the setting of normal amnionic fluid volume.
The differential diagnosis for these findings includes several genetic
syndromes, aneuploidy, or normal variant.

Bladder Outlet Obstruction
Distal obstruction of the urinary tract is more frequent in male fetuses, and
the most common etiology is posterior urethral valves. It may be diagnosed
as early as the first trimester in some cases (Fig. 15-61). The bladder is
markedly dilated, with accompanying dilation of the proximal urethra, which

is termed the “keyhole” sign. Oligohydramnios, particularly before
midpregnancy, portends pulmonary hypoplasia and poor prognosis. The
kidneys may initially manifest severe hydroureteronephrosis but later
develop cystic renal dysplasia or become small and echogenic. Outcome may
be poor even with normal amnionic fluid volume. Associated anomalies
occur in 40 percent of cases, and aneuploidy has been reported in 5 to 8
percent (Hayden, 1988; Hobbins, 1984; Mann, 2010). Evaluation and
potential fetal therapy for bladder outlet obstruction is discussed in Chapter
19 (p. 376).

FIGURE 15-61 Bladder outlet obstruction. A. The bladder (B) is so large that it fills the abdomen in
this 13-week fetus. B. By 18 weeks, the kidneys (K) have become brightly echogenic. C. The bladder
is markedly dilated and thick-walled, with dilation of the proximal urethra, termed the “keyhole” sign
(arrow).

SKELETON
The standard examination includes demonstrating the presence of the arms,
legs, hands, and feet (American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine, 2018).
The detailed examination includes, in addition, the number and position of
the digits—fingers and toes (Fig. 15-62).

FIGURE 15-62 Normal extremities. A. Footprint with toes identified. B. Normal ankle position. C.
Hand with fingers identified. D. Normal hand and forearm position.

The Nosology and Classification of Genetic Skeletal Disorders includes
461 skeletal anomalies in 42 groups, characterized according to their
molecular phenotype, clinical features, or radiographic findings (Mortier,
2019). More than 90 percent of skeletal disorders now have a known genetic
basis, with pathogenic variants identified in more than 400 genes. The two
types of skeletal dysplasias are osteochondrodysplasias—the generalized
abnormal development of bone and/or cartilage, and dysostoses—which are
abnormalities of individual bones. In addition to these malformations,

skeletal abnormalities include deformations, as with some cases of clubfoot,
and disruptions such as limb-reduction defects.

■ Skeletal Dysplasias
The prevalence of skeletal dysplasias approximates 3 in 10,000 births. Two
groups account for more than half of all cases: the fibroblast growth factor 3
(FGFR3) chondrodysplasia group and the osteogenesis imperfecta and
decreased bone density group. Each occurs in 0.8 in 10,000 births
(Stevenson, 2012).
Evaluation of a pregnancy with suspected skeletal dysplasia includes a
survey of every long bone, as well as the hands and feet, skull size and
shape, clavicles, scapulae, thorax, and spine. Reference tables are used to
determine which long bones are affected and ascertain the degree of
shortening (Appendix, p. 1239). Involvement of all long bones is termed
micromelia, whereas predominant involvement of only the proximal,
intermediate, or distal long bone segments is termed rhizomelia, mesomelia,
and acromelia, respectively. The degree of ossification should be noted, as
should presence of bowing or fractures.
Although precise characterization may elude prenatal diagnosis, it is
frequently possible to determine whether a skeletal dysplasia is lethal. Lethal
dysplasias show profound long bone shortening, often with measurements far
below the 5th percentile, and display femur length-to-abdominal
circumference ratios <16 percent (Nelson, 2014; Rahemtullah, 1997; Ramus,
1998). Other sonographic abnormalities are generally evident. Pulmonary
hypoplasia is suggested by a thoracic circumference <80 percent of the
abdominal circumference value, a thoracic circumference <2.5th percentile,
and a cardiac circumference >50 percent of the thoracic circumference value
(Appendix, p. 1238). Affected pregnancies may also develop hydramnios
and/or hydrops.
The FGFR3 chondrodysplasias include achondroplasia,
hypochondroplasia, and thanatophoric dysplasia. Achondroplasia is the
most common nonlethal skeletal dysplasia. An impressive 98 percent of
cases are due to a specific point mutation in the FGFR3 gene. Inheritance is
autosomal dominant, and 80 percent of cases result from a new mutation.
Achondroplasia is characterized by long bone shortening that is
predominantly rhizomelic, an enlarged head with frontal bossing, depressed

nasal bridge, exaggerated lumbar lordosis, and a trident configuration of the
hands. Intelligence is usually normal. The femur and humerus measurements
may not fall below the 5th percentile until the early third trimester. In
homozygotes, who represent 25 percent of the offspring of heterozygous
parents, the condition is characterized by greater long bone shortening and is
lethal.
The other major class of FGFR3 dysplasias, thanatophoric dysplasia, is
the most common lethal skeletal disorder. It is characterized by severe
micromelia, and affected fetuses—particularly those with type II—may
develop a characteristic cloverleaf skull deformity (Kleeblattschädel) due to
craniosynostosis. Genetic testing is confirmatory.
Osteogenesis imperfecta represents a group of skeletal dysplasias
typified by hypomineralization. There are multiple types, and more than 90
percent of cases are characterized by a mutation in the COL1A1 or COL1A2
gene. Type II, also called the perinatal form, is lethal. The skull displays a
profound lack of ossification, and gentle pressure on the maternal abdomen
from the ultrasound transducer results in visible skull deformation (Fig. 1563). Other features include multiple in-utero fractures and ribs that appear
“beaded.” Inheritance is autosomal dominant, such that all cases result from
either new mutations or gonadal mosaicism. Another skeletal dysplasia that
creates severe hypomineralization is hypophosphatasia, which has an
autosomal recessive inheritance.

FIGURE 15-63 Post-axial polydactyly. A. In this image of the hand, the arrow points to a rudimentary
digit adjacent to the little finger. B. Foot with 6 toes in a fetus with trisomy 13. The arrow points to the
extra digit.

■ Polydactyly
The most common skeletal abnormality is polydactyly, which occurs in
approximately 1 in 1000 births. It is post-axial if on the side of the ulna or
fibula and pre-axial if on the side of the radius or tibia (Fig. 15-64). The
extra digit is often rudimentary, and in the absence of a bony component,
prenatal detection may be limited. Post-axial polydactyly is more common
and is frequently inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion. Polydactyly is
also a feature of syndromes such as Meckel-Gruber and trisomy 13.

FIGURE 15-64 Osteogenesis imperfecta, Type IIa. A. Due to lack of skull ossification, gentle
ultrasound transducer pressure on the maternal abdomen results in visible deformation (flattening) of the
skull in this 24-week fetus. B. When the transducer pressure is removed, the skull shape returns to
normal. C. In the four-chamber view of the heart, in-utero fractures lead to abrupt angulation of the ribs
(arrows). D. The thorax is markedly smaller than the abdomen in this sagittal image.

■ Clubfoot—Talipes Equinovarus
This disorder is notable for a deformed talus and shortened Achilles tendon.
The affected foot is abnormally fixed and positioned with equinus
(downward pointing), varus (inward rotation), and forefoot adduction. Most
cases are considered malformations, with a multifactorial genetic component.

However, an association with environmental factors and with early
amniocentesis suggests that deformation also plays a role (Tredwell, 2001).
Sonographically, the footprint is visible in the same plane as the tibia and
fibula (Fig. 15-65).

FIGURE 15-65 Talipes equinovarus or clubfoot. This condition is diagnosed by visualizing the
“footprint” in the same plane as the tibia and fibula.

The prevalence of clubfoot approximates 1 in 1000 births, and the
male:female ratio is 2:1 (Carey, 2003; Pavone, 2012). Clubfoot is bilateral
in approximately 50 percent of cases. At least 50 percent of affected
individuals have associated abnormalities, such as neural-tube defects,
arthrogryposis, and myotonic dystrophy and other genetic syndromes
(Mammen, 2004; Sharma, 2011). If there are other abnormalities, aneuploidy
is present in 30 percent. In contrast, the aneuploidy rate is <4 percent when
clubfoot appears isolated (Lauson, 2010; Sharma, 2011). Thus, a careful
search for associated abnormalities is warranted, and chromosomal
microarray analysis may be considered.

■ Limb-Reduction Defects

Documentation of the arms and legs is a component of the standard
examination. The absence or hypoplasia of all or part of one or more
extremities is a limb-reduction defect. The birth prevalence is 4 to 8 in
10,000 (Kucik, 2012; Stoll, 2010; Vasluian, 2013). Approximately half of
these are isolated defects, up to one third occur as part of a recognized
syndrome, and individuals in the remaining cases have other coexisting
anomalies (Stoll, 2010; Vasluian, 2013). Upper extremities are affected more
frequently than lower ones. A terminal transverse limb defect lacks part or
all of a distal limb to create a stump (Fig. 15-66). This is more common than
a longitudinal defect, which is complete or partial absence of the long
bone(s) on only one side of a given extremity.

FIGURE 15-66 Transverse limb-reduction defect. A. At 18 weeks’ gestation, only a rudimentary hand
was visible. B. By 24 weeks, the radius and ulna were normal in size and appearance, and small
rudimentary digits were evident.

Absence of an entire extremity is termed amelia. Phocomelia, associated
with thalidomide exposure, is an absence of one or more long bones with the
hands or feet attached to the trunk (Chap. 8, p. 155). Limb-reduction defects
are associated with numerous genetic syndromes, such as Roberts syndrome,
an autosomal recessive condition characterized by tetraphocomelia. A
clubhand deformity, usually from an absent radius, is a component of the
thrombocytopenia-absent radius syndrome and is also associated with
trisomy 18 (Fig. 16-5, p. 312). Limb-reduction defects may occur in the
setting of a disruption such as amnionic-band sequence (Chap. 6, p. 113).

They have also been associated with chorionic villus sampling when
performed before 10 weeks’ gestation (Fig. 17-5, p. 346).

REFERENCES
Abuhamad A, Minton KK, Benson CB, et al: Obstetric and gynecologic ultrasound curriculum and
competency assessment in residency training programs: consensus report. Am J Obstet Gynecol
218(1):29, 2018
Adzick NS, Harrison MR, Glick PL, et al: Fetal cystic adenomatoid malformation: prenatal diagnosis and
natural history. J Pediatr Surg 20:483, 1985
Adzick NS, Thom EA, Spong CY, et al: A randomized trial of prenatal versus postnatal repair of
myelomeningocele. N Engl J Med 364(11):993, 2011
Al-Kaff A, MacDonald SC, Kent N, et al: Delivery planning for pregnancies with gastroschisis: findings
from a prospective national registry. Am J Obstet Gynecol 213(4):557.e1, 2015
Altman RP, Randolph JG, Lilly JR: Sacrococcygeal teratoma: American Academy of Pediatrics Surgical
Section survey—1973. J Pediatr Surg 9:389, 1974
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Neural tube defects. Practice Bulletin No. 187,
December 2017, Reaffirmed 2019a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Perinatal palliative care. Committee Opinion No.
786, August 2019b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Ultrasound in pregnancy. Practice Bulletin No.
175, December 2016, Reaffirmed 2020
American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine: AIUM-ACR-ACOG-SMFM-SRU Practice parameter
for the performance of standard trimester diagnostic obstetric ultrasound examinations. J Ultrasound
Med 37(11):e13, 2018
American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine: AIUM Ultrasound Practice Accreditation. 2020a.
Available at: https://aium.org/accreditation/accreditation.aspx. Accessed August 17, 2020
American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine: Practice parameter for the performance of detailed
second- and third-trimester diagnostic obstetric ultrasound examinations. J Ultrasound Med
38(12):3093, 2019
American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine: Practice parameter for the performance of fetal
echocardiography. J Ultrasound Med 39(1):e5, 2020b
Azizkhan RG, Crombleholme TM: Congenital cystic lung disease: contemporary antenatal and postnatal
management. Pediatric Surg Int 24:643, 2008
Ballardini E, Marino P, Maietti E, et al: Prevalence and associated factors for agenesis of corpus
callosum in Emilia Romagna (1981–2015). Eur J Med Genet 61(9):524, 2018
Basude S, McDermott L, Newell S, et al: Fetal hemivertebra: associations and perinatal outcome.
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 45(4):434, 2015
Best KE, Tennant PWG, Addor M, et al: Epidemiology of small intestinal atresia in Europe: a registerbased study. Arch Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed 97(5):F353, 2012
Bjornard K, Riehle-Colarusso T, Gilboa SM, et al: Patterns in the prevalence of congenital heart defects,
metropolitan Atlanta, 1978 to 2005. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol 97(2):87, 2013
Boyle B, Garne E, Loane M, et al: The changing epidemiology of Ebstein’s anomaly and its relationship
with maternal mental health conditions: a European registry-based study. Cardio Young 27(4):677,

2017
Brandt JS, Wang E, Rychik J, et al: Utility of a single 3-vessel view in the evaluation of the ventricular
outflow tracts. J Ultrasound Med 34(8):1415, 2015
Buca DIP, Khalil A, Rizzo G, et al: Outcome of prenatally diagnosed fetal heterotaxy: systematic review
and meta-analysis. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 51:323, 2018
Burge D, Wheeler R: Increasing incidence of detection of congenital lung lesions. Pediatr Pulmonol
45(1):103, 2010
Byrne JJ, Morgan JL, Twickler DM, et al: Utility of follow-up standard sonography for fetal anomaly
detection. Am J Obstet Gynecol 222(6):615, 2020
Canfield MA, Honein MA, Yuskiv N, et al: National estimates and race/ethnic-specific variation of
selected birth defects in the United States, 1999–2001. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol
76(11):747, 2006
Carey M, Bower C, Mylvaganam A, et al: Talipes equinovarus in Western Australia. Paediatr Perinat
Epidemiol 17:187, 2003
Cavoretto P, Molina F, Poggi S, et al: Prenatal diagnosis and outcome of echogenic fetal lung lesions.
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 32:769, 2008
Chao TT, Dashe JS, Adams RC, et al: Central nervous system findings on fetal magnetic resonance
imaging and outcomes in children with spina bifida. Obstet Gynecol 116(2):323, 2010
Chavez MR, Ananth CV, Smulian JC, et al: Fetal transcerebellar diameter nomogram in singleton
gestations with special emphasis in the third trimester: a comparison with previously published
nomograms. Am J Obstet Gynecol 189(4):1021, 2003
Chitty LS, Altman DG: Charts of fetal size: kidney and renal pelvis measurements. Prenat Diagn 23:891,
2003
Cho YS, Park S E, Hong SK, et al: The natural history of fetal diagnosed isolated ventricular septal
defect. Prenat Diagn 37(9):889, 2017
Christensen N, Andersen H, Garne E, et al: Atrioventricular septal defects among infants in Europe: a
population-based study of prevalence, associated anomalies, and survival. Cardiol Young 23(4):560,
2013
Chung JH, Farinelli CK, Porto M, et al: Fetal epignathus: the case of an early EXIT (ex utero
intrapartum treatment). Obstet Gynecol 119(2):466, 2012
Collett RW, Edwards JE. Persistent truncus arteriosus; a classification according to anatomic types.
Surg Clin North Am 29(4):1245, 1949
Colvin J, Bower C, Dickinson JE, et al: Outcomes of congenital diaphragmatic hernia: a populationbased study in Western Australia. Pediatr 116:e356, 2005
Copel JA, Liang R, Demasio K, et al: The clinical significance of the irregular fetal heart rhythm. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 182:813, 2000
Cragan JD, Gilboa SM: Including prenatal diagnoses in birth defects monitoring: experience of the
Metropolitan Atlanta Congenital Defects Program. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol 85:20,
2009
Crane JM, Ash K, Fink N, et al: Abnormal fetal cardiac axis in the detection of intrathoracic anomalies
and congenital heart disease. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 10(2):90, 1997
Curran PF, Jelin EB, Rand L, et al: Prenatal steroids for microcystic congenital adenomatoid
malformations. J Pediatr Surg 45:145, 2010
Dashe JS, Twickler DM, Santos-Ramos R, et al: Alpha-fetoprotein detection of neural tube defects and
the impact of standard ultrasound. Am J Obstet Gynecol 195(6):1623, 2006

De Biasio P, Ginocchio G, Aicardi G, et al: Ossification timing of sacral vertebrae by ultrasound in the
mid-second trimester of pregnancy. Prenat Diagn 23:1056, 2003
De Veciana M, Major CA, Porto M: Prediction of an abnormal karyotype in fetuses with omphalocele.
Prenat Diagn 14:487, 1994
Derikx JP, De Backer A, Van De Schoot L, et al: Factors associated with recurrence and metastasis in
sacrococcygeal teratoma. Br J Surg 93:1543, 2006
des Portes V, Rolland A, Velazquez-Dominguez J, et al: Outcome of isolated agenesis of the corpus
callosum: a population-based prospective study. Eur J Paediatr Neurol 22(1):82, 2018
Devaseelan P, Cardwell C, Bell B, et al: Prognosis of isolated mild to moderate fetal cerebral
ventriculomegaly: a systematic review. J Perinat Med 38:401, 2010
Dolk H, Loane M, Garne E: The prevalence of congenital anomalies in Europe. Adv Exp Med Biol
686:349, 2010
Duncombe GJ, Dickinson JE, Kikiros CS: Prenatal diagnosis and management of congenital cystic
adenomatoid malformation of the lung. Am J Obstet Gynecol 187(4):950, 2002
Dutemeyer V, Cordier AG, Cannie MM, et al: Prenatal prediction of postnatal survival in fetuses with
congenital diaphragmatic hernia using MRI: lung volume measurement, signal intensity ratio, and
effect of experience. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med March 25, 2020 [Epub ahead of print]
Ecker JL, Shipp TD, Bromley B, et al: The sonographic diagnosis of Dandy-Walker and Dandy-Walker
variant: associated findings and outcomes. Prenat Diagn 20:328, 2000
Feinstein JA, Benson DW, Dubin AM, et al: Hypoplastic left heart syndrome: current considerations and
expectations. J Am Coll Cardiol 59(1 Suppl):S1, 2012
Franklin O, Burch M, Manning N, et al: Prenatal diagnosis of coarctation of the aorta improves survival
and reduces morbidity. Heart 87:67, 2002
Gaglioti P, Oberto M, Todros T: The significance of fetal ventriculomegaly: etiology, short-and long-term
outcomes. Prenat Diagn 29(4):381, 2009
Gallot D, Boda C, Ughetto S, et al: Prenatal detection and outcome of congenital diaphragmatic hernia: a
French registry-based study. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 29:276, 2007
Garne E, Loane M, Dolk H, et al: Spectrum of congenital anomalies in pregnancies with pregestational
diabetes. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol 94(3):134, 2012
Ghi T, Dall’Asta A, Cavalli C, et al: How often an isolated cardiac disproportion predicts a coarctation
of the aorta? Single center experience and systematic review of the literature. J Matern Fetal
Neonatal Med 31(10):1350, 2017
Gucciardo L, Uyttebroek A, de Wever I, et al: Prenatal assessment and management of sacrococcygeal
teratoma. Prenat Diagn 31:678, 2011
Hadlock FP, Harrist RB, Carpenter RJ, et al: Sonographic estimation of fetal weight. Radiology 150:535,
1984
Hadlock FP, Harrist RB, Martinez-Poyer J: In utero analysis of fetal growth: a sonographic weight
standard. Radiology 181(1):129, 1991
Hains DS, Bates CM, Ingraham S, et al: Management and etiology of the unilateral multicystic
dysplastic kidney: a review. Pediatr Nephrol 24:233, 2009
Hartman RJ, Rasmussen SJ, Botto LD, et al: The contribution of chromosomal abnormalities to
congenital heart defects: a population-based study. Pediatr Cardiol 32:1147, 2011
Hayden SA, Russ PD, Pretorius DH, et al: Posterior urethral obstruction. Prenatal sonographic findings
and clinical outcome in fourteen cases. J Ultrasound Med 7:371, 1988
Herrera CL, Byrne JJ, Clark HR, et al: Use of fetal magnetic resonance imaging after sonographic
identification of major structural anomalies. J Ultrasound Med 39(10):2053 2020a

Herrera CL, Hussamy DJ, McIntire DD, et al: Femur length parameters in fetuses with Down
syndrome. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 33(15):2516, 2020b
Hobbins JC, Robero R, Grannum P, et al: Antenatal diagnosis of renal anomalies with ultrasound: I.
Obstructive uropathy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 148:868, 1984
Hoffman CK, Filly RA, Callen PW: The “lying down” adrenal sign: a sonographic indicator of renal
agenesis or ectopia in fetuses and neonates. J Ultrasound Med 11:533, 1992
Howe DT, Rankin J, Draper ES: Schizencephaly prevalence, prenatal diagnosis and clues to etiology: a
register-based study. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 39(1):75, 2012
Howley MM, Keppler-Noreuil KM, Cunniff CM, et al: Descriptive epidemiology of cerebellar
hypoplasia in the National Birth Defects Prevention Study. Birth Defects Res 110(19):1419, 2018
Ismaili K, Hall M, Donner C, et al: Results of systematic screening for minor degrees of fetal renal
pelvis dilatation in an unselected population. Am J Obstet Gynecol 188:242, 2003
James CA, Watson AR, Twining P, et al: Antenatally detected urinary tract abnormalities: changing
incidence and management. Eur J Pediatr 157:508, 1998
Johnson MP, Johnson A, Holzgreve W, et al: First-trimester simple hygroma: cause and outcome. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 168:156, 1993
Jones AM, Isenburg J, Salemi JL, et al: Increasing prevalence of gastroschisis–14 states, 1995–2012.
MMWR 65(2):23, 2016
Joó JG, Tóth Z, Beke A, et al: Etiology, prenatal diagnoses and outcome of ventriculomegaly in 230
cases. Fetal Diagn Ther 24(3):254, 2008
Katz JA, Chock VY, Davis AS, et al: Utility of prenatal MRI in the evaluation and management of fetal
ventriculomegaly. J Perinatol 38(11):1444, 2018
Kharrat R, Yamamoto M, Roume J, et al: Karyotype and outcome of fetuses diagnosed with cystic
hygroma in the first trimester in relation to nuchal translucency thickness. Prenat Diagn 26:369, 2006
Kousi M, Katsanis N: The genetic basis of hydrocephalus. Ann Review Neurosci 39:409, 2016
Kucik JE, Alverson CJ, Gliboa SM, et al: Racial/ethnic variations in the prevalence of selected major
birth defects, Metropolitan Atlanta, 1994–2005. Public Health Reports 127(1):52, 2012
Lau CT, Kan A, Shek N et al: Is congenital pulmonary airway malformation really a rare disease?
Result of a prospective registry with universal antenatal screening program. Pediatr Surg Int
33(1):105, 2017
Lauson S, Alvarez C, Patel MS, et al: Outcome of prenatally diagnosed isolated clubfoot. Ultrasound
Obstet Gynecol 35:708, 2010
Lazebnik N, Many A: The severity of polyhydramnios, estimated fetal weight and preterm delivery are
independent risk factors for the presence of congenital anomalies. Gynecol Obstet Invest 48:28,
1999
Lee RS, Cendron M, Kinnamon DD, et al: Antenatal hydronephrosis as a predictor of postnatal
outcome: a meta-analysis. Pediatrics 118:586, 2006
Lloyd DF, Rutherford MA, Simpson JM, et al: The neurodevelopmental implications of hypoplastic left
heart syndrome in the fetus. Cardiol Young 27(2):217, 2017
Lodeiro JG, Feinstein SJ, Lodeiro SB: Fetal premature atrial contractions associated with hydralazine.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 160(1):105, 1989
Long A, Moran P, Robson S: Outcome of fetal cerebral posterior fossa anomalies. Prenat Diagn 26:707,
2006
Maarse W, Berge SJ, Pistorius L, et al: Diagnostic accuracy of transabdominal ultrasound in detecting
prenatal cleft lip and palate: a systematic review. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 35:495, 2010

Maarse W, Pistorius LR, Van Eeten WK, et al: Prenatal ultrasound screening for orofacial clefts.
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 38:434, 2011
Mahle WT, Clancy RR, McGaurn SP, et al: Impact of prenatal diagnosis on survival and early neurologic
morbidity in neonates with the hypoplastic left heart syndrome. Pediatrics 107:1277, 2001
Malone FD, Ball RH, Nyberg DA, et al: First-trimester septated cystic hygroma: prevalence, natural
history, and pediatric outcome. Obstet Gynecol 106:288, 2005
Mammen L, Benson CB: Outcome of fetuses with clubfeet diagnosed by prenatal sonography. J
Ultrasound Med 23:497, 2004
Mann S, Johnson MP, Wilson RD: Fetal thoracic and bladder shunts. Semin Fetal Neonatal Med 15:28,
2010
Maya I, Singer A, Yonath H, et al: What have we learned from 691 prenatal chromosomal microarrays
for ventricular septal defects? Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 99(6):757, 2020
Mortier GR, Cohn DH, Cormier-Daire V, et al: Nosology and classification of genetic skeletal disorders:
2019 revision. Am J Med Genet A 179(12):2393, 2019
Mullassery D, Ba’ath ME, Jesudason EC, et al: Value of liver herniation in prediction of outcome in fetal
congenital diaphragmatic hernia: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol
35:609, 2010
Nelson DB, Dashe JS, McIntire DD, et al: Fetal skeletal dysplasias: sonographic indices associated with
adverse outcomes. J Ultrasound Med 33(6):1085, 2014
Nelson DB, Martin R, Twickler DM, et al: Sonographic detection and clinical importance of growth
restriction in pregnancies with gastroschisis. J Ultrasound Med 34(12):2217, 2015
Nelson JS, Stebbins RC, Strassle PD, et al: Geographic distribution of live births with tetralogy of Fallot
in North Carolina 2003 to 2012. Birth Defect Res A Clin Mol Teratol 106(11):881, 2016
Nguyen HT, Benson CB, Bromley B, et al: Multidisciplinary consensus on the classification of prenatal
and postnatal urinary tract dilatation (UTD classification system). J Pediatric Urol 10:982, 2014
Nguyen HT, Herndon CDA, Cooper C, et al: The Society for Fetal Urology consensus statement on the
evaluation and management of antenatal hydronephrosis. J Pediatr Urol 6:212, 2010
Nicolaides KH, Campbell S, Gabbe SG: Ultrasound screening for spina bifida: cranial and cerebellar
signs. Lancet 2(8498):72, 1986
Norem CT, Schoen EJ, Walton DL, et al: Routine ultrasonography compared with maternal serum
alpha-fetoprotein for neural tube defect screening. Obstet Gynecol 106:747, 2005
Oei SG, Vosters RP, van der Hagen NL: Fetal arrhythmia caused by excessive intake of caffeine by
pregnant women. BMJ 298:568, 1989
Offerdal K, Jebens N, Swertsen T, et al: Prenatal ultrasound detection of facial cleft: a prospective
study of 49,314 deliveries in a non-selected population in Norway. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol
31:639, 2008
Oh KY, Gibson TH, Pinter JD, et al: Clinical outcomes following prenatal diagnosis of asymmetric
ventriculomegaly, interhemispheric cyst, and callosal dysgenesis (AVID). Prenat Diagn 39(1):26,
2019
Oluyomi-Obi T, Kuret V, Puligandla P, et al: Antenatal predictors of outcome in prenatally diagnosed
congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH). J Pediatr Surg 52(5):881, 2017
Orioli IM, Catilla EE: Epidemiology of holoprosencephaly: prevalence and risk factors. Am J Med Genet
Part C Semin Med Genet 154C:13, 2010
Overcash RT, DeUgarte DA, Stephenson ML, et al: Factors associated with gastroschisis outcomes.
Obstet Gynecol 124(3):551, 2014

Paladini D, Alfirevic Z, Carvalho JS, et al: ISUOG consensus statement on current understanding of the
association of neurodevelopmental delay and congenital heart disease: impact on prenatal
counseling. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 49(2):287, 2017
Paladini D, Morra T, Teodoro A, et al: Objective diagnosis of micrognathia in the fetus: the jaw index.
Obstet Gynecol 93(3):382, 1999
Paladini D, Russo M, Teodoro A, et al: Prenatal diagnosis of congenital heart disease in the Naples area
during the years 1994–1999—the experience of a joint fetal-pediatric cardiology unit. Prenatal Diagn
22(7):545, 2002
Palatnik A, Grobman WA, Cohen LS, et al: Role of the 3-vessel and trachea view in antenatal detection
of tetralogy of Fallot. J Ultrasound Med 35(8):1799, 2016
Pavone V, Bianca S, Grosso G, et al: Congenital talipes equinovarus: an epidemiological study in Sicily.
Acta Orthop 83(3):294, 2012
Pedersen RN, Calzolari E, Husby S, et al: Oesophageal atresia: prevalence, prenatal diagnosis and
associated anomalies in 23 European regions. Arch Dis Child 97:227, 2012
Peranteau WH, Boelig MM, Khalek N, et al: Effect of single and multiple courses of maternal
betamethasone on prenatal congenital lung lesion growth and fetal survival. J Pediatr Surg 51(1):28,
2016
Pilu G: Prenatal diagnosis of cerebrospinal anomalies. In Fleischer AC, Abramowicz JS, Goncalves LF,
et al (eds): Fleischer’s Sonography in Obstetrics and Gynecology: Textbook and Teaching Cases, 8th
ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2018
Pinette MG, Hand M, Hunt RC, et al: Surviving sirenomelia. J Ultrasound Med 24(11):1555, 2005
Rahemtullah A, McGillivray B, Wilson RD: Suspected skeletal dysplasias: femur length to abdominal
circumference ratio can be used in ultrasonographic prediction of fetal outcome. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 177:864, 1997
Raitio A, Lahtinen A, Syvanen J, et al: Gastroschisis in Finland 1993 to 2014-increasing prevalence, high
rates of abortion, and survival: a population-based study. Eur J Pediatr Surg 30(6):536, 2020
Raitio A, Tauriainen A, Syvanen J, et al: Omphalocele in Finland from 1993 to 2014: trends, prevalence,
mortality, and associated malformations-a population-based study. Eur J Pediatr Surg 31(2):172, 2021
Ramos GA, Romine LE, Gindes L, et al: Evaluation of the fetal secondary palate by 3-dimensional
sonography. J Ultrasound Med 29:357, 2010
Ramus RM, Martin LB, Twickler DM: Ultrasonographic prediction of fetal outcome in suspected
skeletal dysplasias with use of the femur length-to-abdominal circumference ratio. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 179(5):1348, 1998
Ravi P, Mills L, Fruitman D, et al: Population trends in prenatal detection of transposition of great
arteries: impact of obstetric screening ultrasound guidelines. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 51(5):659,
2018
Reddy UM, Abuhamad AZ, Levine D, et al: Fetal imaging: executive summary of a joint Eunice
Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, Society for MaternalFetal Medicine, American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine, American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists, American College of Radiology, Society for Pediatric Radiology, and Society of
Radiologists in Ultrasound Fetal Imaging Workshop. Obstet Gynecol 123(5):1070, 2014
Rodriguez N, Casasbuenas A, Andreeva E, et al. First-trimester diagnosis of agnathia-otocephaly
complex: a series of 4 cases and review of the literature. J Ultrasound Med 38(3):805, 2019
Sanford A, Saadai P, Lee H, et al: Congenital high airway obstruction sequence (CHAOS): a new case
and a review of phenotypic features. Am J Med Genet A 158A(12):3126, 2012

Santiago-Muñoz PC, McIntire DD, Barber RG, et al: Outcomes of pregnancies with fetal gastroschisis.
Obstet Gynecol 110:663, 2007
Schreuder MF, Westland R, van Wijk JA: Unilateral multicystic dysplastic kidney: a meta-analysis of
observational studies on the incidence, associated urinary tract malformations and the contralateral
kidney. Nephrol Dial Transplant 24:1810, 2009
Sharma R, Stone S, Alzouebi A, et al: Perinatal outcome of prenatally diagnosed congenital talipes
equinovarus. Prenat Diagn 31:142, 2011
Sheih CP, Liu MB, Hung CS, et al: Renal abnormalities in schoolchildren. Pediatrics 84:1086, 1989
Shepard MJ, Richards VA, Berkowitz RL, et al: An evaluation of two equations for predicting fetal
weight by ultrasound. Am J Obstet Gynecol 142:47, 1982
Shipp TD, Bromley B, Hornberger LK, et al: Levorotation of the fetal cardiac axis: a clue for the
presence of congenital heart disease. Obstet Gynecol 85:97, 1995
Shulman LP, Emerson DS, Felker RE, et al: High frequency of cytogenetic abnormalities in fetuses with
cystic hygroma diagnosed in the first trimester. Obstet Gynecol 80:80, 1992
Sinkovskaya ES, Chaoui R, Karl K, et al: Fetal cardiac axis and congenital heart defects in early
gestation. Obstet Gynecol 125(2)453, 2015
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine. Ultrasound screening for fetal microcephaly following Zika virus
exposure. Am J Obstet Gynecol 214(6):B2, 2016
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Fox NS, Monteagudo A, et al: Mild fetal ventriculomegaly:
diagnosis, evaluation, and management. Am J Obstet Gynecol 219(1):B2, 2018
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Simpson LL: Twin-twin transfusion syndrome. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 208(1):3, 2013
Solomon BD, Rosenbaum KN, Meck JM, et al: Holoprosencephaly due to numeric chromosome
abnormalities. Am J Med Genet Part C Semin Med Genet 154C:146, 2010
Sotiriadis A, Makrydimas G: Neurodevelopment after prenatal diagnosis of isolated agenesis of the
corpus callosum: an integrative review. Am J Obstet Gynecol 206(4):337.e1, 2012
South AP, Stutey KM, Meinzen-Derr J, et al: Metaanalysis of the prevalence of intrauterine fetal death
in gastroschisis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 209(2):114.e.1, 2013
Springett A, Draper ES, Rankin J, et al: Birth prevalence and survival of exomphalos in England and
Wales: 2005 to 2011. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol 100(9):721, 2014
Stege G, Fenton A, Jaffray B: Nihilism in the 1990s: the true mortality of congenital diaphragmatic
hernia. Pediatr 112:532, 2003
Stevenson DA, Carey JC, Byrne JL, et al: Analysis of skeletal dysplasias in the Utah population. Am J
Med Genet 158A:1046, 2012
Stocker JT: Congenital pulmonary airway malformation: a new name and expanded classification of
congenital cystic adenomatoid malformation of the lung. Histopathology 41(Suppl):424, 2002
Stocker JT, Madewell JE, Drake RM: Congenital cystic adenomatoid malformation of the lung:
classification and morphologic spectrum. Hum Pathol 8:155, 1977
Stoll C, Alembik Y, Dott B, et al: Associated malformations in patients with limb reduction deficiencies.
Eur J Med Genet 53(5):286, 2010
Stoll C, Dott B, Roth MP: Associated anomalies in cases with agenesis of the corpus callosum. Am J
Med Genet A 179(10):2101, 2019
Stollman TH, de Blaauw I, Wijnen MH, et al: Decreased mortality but increased morbidity in neonates
with jejunoileal atresia; a study of 114 cases over a 34-year period. J Pediatr Surg 44(1):217, 2009
Sun HY, Proudfoot JA, McCandless RT: Prenatal detection of critical cardiac outflow tract anomalies
remains suboptimal despite revised obstetrical imaging guidelines. Cong Heart Dis 13:748, 2018

Svirsky R, Brabbing-Goldstein D, Rozovkski U, et al: The genetic and clinical outcome of isolated fetal
muscular ventricular septal defect. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 32(17)2837, 2019
Swamy R, Embleton N, Hale J, et al: Sacrococcygeal teratoma over two decades: birth prevalence,
prenatal diagnosis and clinical outcomes. Prenat Diagn 28:1048, 2008
Szabo N, Gergev G, Kobor J, et al: Corpus callosum abnormalities: birth prevalence and clinical
spectrum in Hungary. Pediatr Neurol 44:420, 2011
Turkbey B, Ocak I, Daryanani K, et al: Autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease and congenital
hepatic fibrosis. Pediatr Radiol 39:100, 2009
Tworetzky W, McElhinney DB, Reddy VM, et al: Improved surgical outcome after fetal diagnosis of
hypoplastic left heart syndrome. Circulation 103:1269, 2001
Van Nisselrooij AE, Rozendaal L, Linskens IH, et al: Postnatal outcome of fetal isolated ventricular size
disproportion in the absence of aortic coarctation. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 52(5):593, 2018
Vasluian E, van der Sluis CK, van Essen AJ, et al: Birth prevalence for congenital limb defects in the
northern Netherlands: a 30-year population-based study. BMC Musculoskel Disord 14:323, 2013
Vergani P, Ceruti P, Locatelli A, et al: Accuracy of prenatal ultrasonographic diagnosis of duplex renal
system. J Ultrasound Med 18:463, 1998
Vilanova-Sanchez A, Reck CA, Sebastião YV et al: Can sacral development as a marker for caudal
regression help identify associated urologic anomalies in patients with anorectal malformation? J
Pediatr Surg 53(11)2178, 2018
Walker SJ, Ball RH, Babcook CJ, et al: Prevalence of aneuploidy and additional anatomic abnormalities
in fetuses and neonates with cleft lip with or without cleft palate. A population-based study in Utah.
J Ultrasound Med 20(11):1175, 2001
Whitten SM, Wilcox DT: Duplex systems. Prenat Diagn 21:952, 2001
Wiesel A, Queisser-Luft A, Clementi M, et al: Prenatal detection of congenital renal malformations by
fetal ultrasonographic examination: an analysis of 709,030 births in 12 European countries. Euro J
Med Genet 48:131, 2005
Wilhelm L, Borgers H: The “equals sign”: a novel marker in the diagnosis of fetal isolated soft palate.
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 36:439, 2010
Williams B, Tareen B, Resnick M: Pathophysiology and treatment of ureteropelvic junction obstruction.
Curr Urol Rep 8:111, 2007
Wilson WM, Valente AM, Hickey EJ, et al: Outcomes of patients with hypoplastic left heart syndrome
reaching adulthood after fontan palliation: multicenter study. Circulation. 137(9): 978, 2018
Woodward M, Frank D: Postnatal management of antenatal hydronephrosis. BJU Int 89:149, 2002
Worley KC, Dashe JS, Barber RG, et al: Fetal magnetic resonance imaging in isolated diaphragmatic
hernia: volume of herniated liver and neonatal outcome. Am J Obstet Gynecol 200(3):318.e1, 2009
Yamada S, Uwabe C, Fujii S, et al: Phenotypic variability in human embryonic holoprosencephaly in the
Kyoto collection. Birth Defects Res Part A Clin Mol Teratol 70:495, 2004
Yildirim G, Gungorduk K, Aslan H, et al: Prenatal diagnosis of extralobar pulmonary sequestration. Arch
Gynecol Obstet 278:181, 2008
Yulia A, Pawar S, Chelemen O, et al: Fetal hemivertebra at 11 to 14 weeks’ gestation. J Ultrasound
Med 39(9):1857, 2020
Zerres K, Mucher G, Becker J, et al: Prenatal diagnosis of autosomal recessive polycystic kidney
disease: molecular genetics, clinical experience, and fetal morphology. Am J Med Genet 6:137, 1998
Zhao Y, Abuhamad A, Fleenor J, et al. Prenatal and postnatal survival of fetal tetralogy of Fallot: a
meta-analysis of perinatal outcomes and associated genetic disorders. J Ultrasound Med 35(5):905,
2016

