CHAPTER 45

Preterm Birth

DEFINITION OF PRETERM BIRTH
PRETERM BIRTH RATE TRENDS
PRETERM NEWBORN MORBIDITY
CAUSES OF PRETERM BIRTH
CONTRIBUTING FACTORS
DIAGNOSIS
PRETERM BIRTH PREVENTION
MANAGEMENT OF PRETERM PRELABOR RUPTURE OF
MEMBRANES
MANAGEMENT OF PRETERM LABOR WITH INTACT
MEMBRANES
REFERENCES
Preterm birth is a substantial global health issue with significant
consequences to the newborn, family, and society. Preterm delivery affects
nearly 15 million births worldwide, is the leading cause of death in children
younger than 5 years, and remains a prominent issue in obstetrics
(Chawanpaiboon, 2019). Although the burden of preterm birth is clear,
defining the biology of human parturition and identifying strategies to reduce
preterm birth rates remain elusive.

DEFINITION OF PRETERM BIRTH
Preterm birth is delivery before 37 completed weeks, that is, before 366/7
weeks. Subdivisions vary among organizations. According to the American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2021b), births occurring
between 34 and 36 completed weeks are considered late preterm. The
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recognizes this late preterm
definition but also labels births before 336/7 weeks as early preterm (Martin,
2021). Instead, the World Health Organization (2018) defines births before
28 completed weeks as extremely preterm, those from 28 to 32 weeks as
very preterm, and from 32 to 37 weeks as moderate to late preterm.
These definitions lack a functional basis and should be distinguished
from the concept of prematurity, which represents incomplete development
of various organ systems at birth. For example, the lungs are particularly
affected and may be susceptible to the respiratory distress syndrome (Chap.
34, p. 615). Similarly, neonates born before term can be small or large for
gestational age but are still preterm by definition. Low birthweight refers to
neonates weighing 1500 to 2500 g; very low birthweight describes those
between 1000 and 1500 g; and extremely low birthweight refers to those
<1000 g (World Health Organization, 2019).

PRETERM BIRTH RATE TRENDS
In the United States, the preterm birth rate rose from 10.02 percent in 2018 to
10.23 percent for 2019. When interpreting these data, important factors and
trends merit discussion. First, during the past two decades, the percentage of
preterm neonates fell from 2007 to 2014 but has since risen (Martin, 2021).
Some argue that the rate drop reflected changes in obstetrical dating criteria
rather than true declines (Frey, 2016). Specifically, beginning in 2014, the
National Center for Health Statistics transitioned to a new standard for
estimating newborn gestational age for birth certificate completion (Martin,
2015). The new measure, which is the obstetrical estimate of gestational age
at delivery, replaced calculations based on the date of the last menstrual
period. These measures differ and do not provide equivalent absolute
numerical comparisons of preterm birth rates. Thus, current national data
are now not directly comparable to previously reported preterm birth
rates.

Although the percentage of neonates born early preterm rose slightly, the
rise in the overall preterm rate from 2018 to 2019 was due primarily to the
increase in late-preterm births. Rates of these preterm births have gradually
risen since 2013 (Martin, 2021). Notably, national data do not separate
spontaneous preterm births from those that may be prompted for medical
indication.
One disturbing aspect of preterm birth rate trends in the United States is
persistent disparities. Rates of preterm birth among black women are
markedly elevated above those for white and Hispanic women (Martin,
2021). Some investigators attribute this to differing socioeconomical
circumstances (Collins, 2007; Leveno, 2009). The rates of preterm birth in
the United States are also higher compared with those in other industrialized
countries (Ananth, 2009; Delnord, 2017). Internationally, preterm birth rates
also are rising (Chawanpaiboon, 2019).
Last, births in singleton pregnancies should be analyzed separately from
all births. Namely, multifetal gestations have a shorter average gestational
length and raise preterm birth rates (Martin, 2021).

PRETERM NEWBORN MORBIDITY AND MORTALITY
In 2018 in the United States, 21,498 infants died in their first year of life, and
66 percent of infant deaths were among those born preterm. Gestational age
at delivery and the risk of neonatal morbidity and mortality are inversely
related. Namely, neonates born in the early-preterm period make up the
smallest proportion of births, but these infants experience disproportionately
higher rates of prematurity-related complications, including death (Table 451) (Ely, 2020). For context, the infant mortality rate in those born at less than
28 weeks’ gestation was 186 times higher than in those born at 37 to 41
weeks in the United States in 2018.
TABLE 45-1. Infant Mortality Rates in the United States in 2018

The joint effect of gestational age and infant condition at birth also has
been examined. Data from the Swedish Medical Birth Register correlated
Apgar scores at 5 and 10 minutes in preterm neonates across gestational
ages. The relative risk of death consistently increased with decreased Apgar
scores (Cnattingius, 2020). Low Apgar scores in preterm newborns may
reflect biological immaturity rather than fetal depression. However, Apgar
scores and changes in the score between 5 and 10 minutes were associated
with neonatal mortality among preterm newborns.
Preterm neonates who survive are at risk for a range of short- and longterm morbidities, largely due to organ system immaturity (Table 45-2)
(Eichenwald, 2008). That said, remarkable strides have been made in
neonatal survival for those born preterm. In a study of more than 18,000
newborns weighing between 400 and 1500 g or aged between 22 and 32
weeks’ gestation, survival rates were analyzed as a function of both
birthweight and gestational age (Fanaroff, 2007). After achieving a
birthweight ≥1000 g, a gestational age ≥28 weeks for females, or age ≥30
weeks for males, survival rates reach 95 percent.
TABLE 45-2. Major Short- and Long-Term Problems in Very-LowBirthweight Infants

■ Threshold of Viability
Births once considered to be “abortuses” because the fetus weighed <500 g
are now classified as live births. In the United States in 2019, 5189 live
births weighed <500 g (Martin, 2021). Fortunately, perinatal and neonatal
care has advanced tremendously for these births. As a result, the threshold of
viability, which is the lower limit of fetal maturation compatible with
extrauterine survival, has been reassessed. Currently, the threshold of
viability lies between 200/7 and 256/7 weeks’ gestation. Neonates born in this
periviable period are vulnerable because of their immature organ systems.
Complications include brain injury and sepsis, both described in Chapter 34,
(p. 618). To guide obstetrical decision-making and care of these fetuses, a
national perinatal workshop convened in 2013 (Raju, 2014). The executive
summary statement from this meeting served as the foundation for an
Obstetric Care Consensus document (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2019d).

Periviable Neonatal Survival
Delivery before 23 weeks’ gestation often results in death, and survival rates
approximate 5 to 10 percent (Fig. 45-1). Among survivors, morbidity is
significant. Practices regarding active resuscitation vary between institutions
and may explain the differing perinatal outcomes among these. Neonatal

survival rates also vary among international comparisons, and rates at 24
weeks’ gestation range from 35 to 84 percent (Helenius, 2017).

FIGURE 45-1 Neonatal survival rates according to condition at birth and gestational age. Ishii (2013)
data curve reflects liveborn survival rates; Stoll (2010) curve reflects liveborn survival rates; Rysavy
(2015) curve reflects overall survival rates; Younge (2017) curve reflects survival and
neurodevelopmental outcomes.

A retrospective analysis of infants born at the University of Iowa from
2006 to 2015 at 22 to 25 weeks’ gestation underscores this issue (Watkins,
2020). After excluding anomalous fetuses, death in the delivery room, and
parental request for palliation, the neurodevelopmental outcomes were
analyzed for 169 of 214 survivors at 18 to 22 months. Active management
was defined as antenatal corticosteroids and resuscitation when desired by
the parents. The survival rate was lower in neonates born at 22 to 23 weeks’
than at 24 to 25 weeks’ gestation. However, mild or no neurodevelopmental
impairment was reported in 64 percent of the surviving 22- to 23-week
infants.
An important caveat when examining perinatal outcomes, however, is
ascertainment bias. For example, the mean survival rate is 45 percent if the
denominator is all live births compared with 72 percent if the denominator is
only newborns admitted to neonatal intensive care (Guillen, 2011). Another
source of bias is use of multicenter datasets with considerable differences in
obstetrical and early neonatal interventions (Stoll, 2010).
To evaluate contemporaneous outcomes of neonates born at 22 to 24
weeks, the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development
(NICHD) Neonatal Research Network reported both survival and

neurodevelopmental outcomes across consecutive birth-year epochs of 2000
to 2003, 2004 to 2007, and 2008 to 2011 in infants aged 18 to 22 months
(Younge, 2017). The percentage of infants who survived rose significantly
from 30 percent in 2000 to 2003 to 36 percent in 2008 to 2011. The
percentage of infants who survived without neurodevelopmental impairment
also significantly grew from 16 percent to 20 percent during the same time
period. Although rates of survival without neurodevelopmental impairment
increased over time for those born at 23 and 24 weeks, only 1 percent of
infants born at 22 weeks survived without neurodevelopmental impairment
(Younge, 2017).
Somewhat similar results were published from Sweden. This report
details a national population-based study of all neonates born at 22 to 26
weeks. Rates of survival to 1 year from 2004 to 2007 were compared with
rates from 2014 to 2016. Survival rates at 1 year among live-born neonates
at 22 to 26 weeks’ gestation significantly improved during the later period
(Table 45-3) (Norman, 2019).
TABLE 45-3. One-Year Survival Among Infants Delivered at 22–26
Weeks’ Gestational Age in Sweden

Clinical Management
The Periviable Birth Obstetric Care Consensus document also addresses
management options based on the clinical characteristics of a given
pregnancy. Nonmodifiable factors are fetal gender, weight, and plurality.
Potentially modifiable antepartum and intrapartum factors include the
location of delivery, intent to intervene by cesarean delivery, and
administration of antenatal corticosteroids (Table 45-4). Postnatal
management addresses the initiation or withdrawal of intensive care after
birth.
TABLE 45-4. General Guidance for Threatened Periviable Birth

Cesarean delivery at the threshold of viability is controversial. If the
fetus-neonate is perceived to be too immature for aggressive support,
cesarean delivery for common indications such as breech presentation or
nonreassuring fetal heart rate patterns might be preempted. Moreover,
observational studies have been inconsistent in demonstrating a benefit of
cesarean delivery for the sole indication of periviability. Moreover, cesarean
delivery may predispose the gravida to adverse intraoperative events and
morbidity (Bertholdt, 2018; Blanc, 2019).
In a study of 2906 singletons between 240/7 and 316/7 weeks eligible for
attempted vaginal birth, 84 percent of cephalic presenting fetuses were
delivered vaginally (Reddy, 2012). Neonatal mortality rates did not differ
compared with those associated with planned cesarean delivery. For breech
presentations, however, relative risk for mortality was threefold higher with
attempted vaginal delivery. In another study, Werner and colleagues (2013)
analyzed 20,231 newborns delivered at 24 to 34 weeks. Cesarean delivery
did not protect against poor outcomes such as neonatal death, intraventricular
hemorrhage, seizures, respiratory distress, and subdural hemorrhage.
From these findings, the Obstetric Care Consensus proposes that
cesarean delivery be considered for fetal indications at 230/7 to 246/7 weeks.
However, before 22 weeks, this route is reserved only for maternal
indications. As emphasized by the authors of the Iowa report cited earlier,
providing active management—such as antenatal corticosteroids—can be
uncoupled from the decision of cesarean in the periviable period (Watkins,
2020). That said, the frequency of cesarean in the 23rd week has increased in
the United States following publication of the perinatal workshop executive
summary in 2014 (Rossi, 2019).

It is difficult to summarize the current practices of obstetrical care in the
management of the periviable pregnancy given its continued rapid evolution.
Moreover, it appears that maternal and neonatal interventions are shifting
during the 22- to 23-week gestational age period. Data from the National
Center for Health Statistics show that rates of at least one maternal or
neonatal intervention were 38.9 percent and 78.3 percent for 22 and 23
weeks’ gestation, respectively (Hajdu, 2020).
In this uncertain environment, individualized, patient-centered care with
a multidisciplinary team remains essential. This is particularly relevant given
that nearly 20 percent of women may have serious morbidity with delivery
during the periviable period (Rossi, 2018).
For cases with threatened periviable delivery, neonatal and perinatal
consultation aids informed decision-making and helps form expectations for
the family. For fetuses with a life-limiting condition, such as extreme
prematurity, perinatal palliative care is a strategy that emphasizes comfort
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019c). Care team
members can include obstetric and neonatal professionals, chaplaincy, and
mental health specialists.

■ Late-preterm Birth
As discussed, neonates born between 34 and 36 weeks’ gestation account for
more than 70 percent of all preterm births (Fig. 45-2) (Martin, 2021). Most
of the increase in the total preterm birth rate for the United States 2018 to
2019 was among neonates born at 34 to 36 weeks. To estimate the risks
associated with late-preterm births, investigators analyzed neonatal mortality
and morbidity rates at 34, 35, and 36 weeks compared with those of births at
term at Parkland Hospital (McIntire, 2008). Approximately 3 percent of all
births during the study period were between 24 and 32 weeks, and 9 percent
were during the late-preterm period. Thus, and similar to the national rates,
late-preterm births accounted for three fourths of all preterm births.
Approximately 80 percent of these resulted from idiopathic spontaneous
preterm labor or prematurely ruptured membranes (Fig. 45-3). Other
obstetrical complications were implicated in the remaining 20 percent of
cases. Rates of morbidity and mortality were greater in these late-preterm
newborns compared with rates in term ones (Table 45-5) (McIntire, 2008).
Similarly, Tomashek (2007) reported higher neonatal mortality rates for late-

preterm newborns. Rates of adverse neurodevelopment outcomes also are
increased in these late-preterm infants (Petrini, 2009). Taken together, these
findings suggest that a health-care focus on prematurity should include these
late-preterm births.

FIGURE 45-2 Distribution of preterm births by gestational age in the United States in 2019.

FIGURE 45-3 Obstetrical complications associated with 21,771 late-preterm births at Parkland
Hospital.

TABLE 45-5. Neonatal Outcomes in Live Births Delivered Late Preterm
Compared with Referent Group at 39 Weeks

CAUSES OF PRETERM BIRTH

Four direct causes for preterm births in the United States include (1)
spontaneous unexplained preterm labor with intact membranes, (2) idiopathic
preterm prelabor rupture of membranes, (3) delivery for maternal or fetal
indications, and (4) twins and higher-order multifetal births. Of all preterm
births, 30 to 35 percent are indicated, 40 to 45 percent are due to
spontaneous preterm labor, and 30 to 35 percent follow preterm membrane
rupture (Goldenberg, 2008). More than 98 percent of triplets and 60 percent
of twins are born preterm (Martin, 2021).
At term, a common parturition pathway is activated physiologically and
leads to labor. For preterm labor, several disease processes are thought to
activate one or more of the components of this common pathway (Romero,
2014). Put another way, preterm labor is not simply labor that starts too soon.
This paradigm is supported by the rationale that causes of preterm birth have
multiple, often interacting, antecedents and contributing factors that lead to a
heterogenous syndrome (Deindl, 2020; Esplin, 2016). Analogous to other
complex disease processes, multiple coexistent genetic alterations, bacterial
and viral colonization, and diverse environmental factors may lead to
preterm birth (Bayar, 2020; Mekonnen, 2021; Volozonoka, 2020). These
multiple factors continue to pose challenges in identifying predictive
biomarkers in blood, urine, or cervicovaginal fluid, despite significant
technical advances in multiomic approaches (Ghaemi, 2021; Jehan, 2020;
Peterson, 2020; Parry, 2020).

■ Spontaneous Preterm Labor
Pregnancies with spontaneous preterm labor yet intact fetal membranes must
be distinguished from those complicated by ruptured membranes. Even so,
spontaneous preterm labor does not constitute a homogeneous group.
Evidence suggests it is a syndrome attributable to multiple pathological
processes (Romero, 2014). Among the more common associated findings are
multifetal pregnancy, intrauterine infection, bleeding, placental infarction,
premature cervical dilation, cervical insufficiency, hydramnios, uterine
fundal abnormalities, and fetal anomalies. Severe maternal illness from
infections, autoimmune diseases, and gestational hypertension also elevate
preterm labor risks.
These processes culminate in a common end point of premature cervical
dilation, effacement, and activation of uterine contractions. Importantly, the

actual process of preterm labor should be considered a final step stemming
from progressive or acute changes that could be initiated days or even weeks
before labor onset. Diverse pathways to instigate parturition exist and are
dependent on the etiology of preterm birth (Fig. 45-4) (Romero, 2014).
Major causes include uterine overdistention, premature cervical changes,
infection, and maternal–fetal stress. Genetic and environmental factors likely
contribute to each mechanism.

FIGURE 45-4 Proposed mechanisms of disease implicated in spontaneous preterm labor. Genetic and
environmental factors are likely contributors to each mechanism.

Uterine Overdistention
Multifetal pregnancy and hydramnios are well-recognized risks for preterm
birth. With these, uterine overdistention imparts greater stress on the
myometrium. In nonhuman primates, inflation of intraamnionic balloons can
stimulate uterine contractility, preterm labor, and an “inflammatory pulse.”
Similar inflammatory responses have been observed in the amnion of women
with polyhydramnios and twins (Adams Waldorf, 2015).
Early uterine overdistention likely acts to initiate expression of
contraction-associated proteins in the myometrium. These genes include
those coding for gap-junction proteins, oxytocin receptors, and prostaglandin
synthase (Korita, 2002; Lyall, 2002; Sooranna, 2004). Excessive uterine

distention also leads to early activation of the placental–fetal endocrine
cascade (Chap. 21, p. 407). Taken together, mechanical stress-induced
distension and activation of endocrine cascades both lead to premature
activation of inflammatory responses that result in uterine contractile
activation (Gomez-Lopez, 2014; Stephen, 2015). A possible compensatory
response to uterine distention is tissue remodeling and muscle growth
(Adams Waldorf, 2015).

Cervical Dysfunction
In most cases, premature cervical remodeling precedes labor onset. In some
instances, cervical dysfunction of the epithelia or its stromal extracellular
matrix is the underlying cause (Nallasamy, 2017). Importantly, an intact
cervical epithelial barrier is critical to prevent ascending infection. For
example, loss of hyaluronan in cervical epithelia or colonization of group B
streptococcus (GBS) enhances risk of preterm birth (Akgul, 2014; Coleman,
2021). GBS has the unique ability to synthesize the hyaluronan-degrading
enzyme hyaluronidase to aid bacterial ascension (Vornhagen, 2017). Second,
the mechanical competence of the cervix can be reduced. Genetic mutations
in components of collagen and elastic fibers or proteins required for their
assembly can be risk factors for cervical insufficiency and preterm birth
(Nallasamy, 2017; Volozonoka, 2020).

Infection
Of all the mechanisms listed in Figure 45-4, only intraamnionic infection has
been causally linked to spontaneous preterm delivery (Romero, 2014).
Bacteria can gain access to intrauterine tissues through (1) transplacental
transfer of maternal systemic infection, (2) flow of infection via the fallopian
tubes, or (3) ascending infection with bacteria from the vagina and cervix.
Because the lower pole of the fetal membrane–decidual junction is
contiguous with the cervical canal orifice, this anatomical arrangement
provides a passageway for microorganisms. Ascending infection is
considered to be the most common entry route where microorganisms
colonize the cervix, decidua, and possibly the membranes, and then may enter
the amnionic sac.
Colonization with an infectious agent has been detected in 25 to 40
percent of all preterm deliveries (Goldenberg, 2008). In some instances,

histological evidence of microbial inflammation is found in the fetal
membranes, decidua, or umbilical cord. Other cases are deemed sterile
intraamnionic inflammation. Despite the substantial association of infection
with preterm birth, the cellular and molecular mechanisms underlying
inflammation-driven preterm birth remain undefined (Cappelletti, 2020;
Purisch, 2017).
Current data suggest that microbial invasion of the reproductive tract is
sufficient to induce infection-mediated preterm birth. The level and kinetics
of inflammation can vary between a polymicrobial or single-microbe
exposure (Tong, 2021). Affected women are more likely to develop clinical
chorioamnionitis and rupture of membranes compared with women whose
cultures are sterile. Moreover, their neonates are also more likely to have
perinatal complications such as neonatal sepsis (Villamor-Martinez, 2020).
Although the clinical course is more severe when intraamnionic infection is
obvious, inflammation in the absence of detectable intraamnionic
microorganisms—termed sterile intraamnionic inflammation—is also a
risk factor for an inflammatory response (Motomura, 2021). In sum, the
earlier the onset of preterm labor, the greater the likelihood of underlying
infection (Goldenberg, 2000; Goncalves, 2002).
Paradoxically, the incidence of culture-positive amnionic fluid collected
by amniocentesis during spontaneous labor at term is similar to that with
preterm labor (Gomez, 1994; Romero, 1993). It has been suggested that at
term, amnionic fluid is infiltrated by bacteria as a consequence of labor,
whereas in preterm pregnancies, bacteria represent an inciting cause. Thus,
fetal infection, as defined by bacteria detected within amnionic fluid, has
differing etiologies and consequences.
With chorioamnionitis, microbes may invade only maternal tissue and not
amnionic fluid. Despite this, endotoxins can stimulate amnionic cells to
secrete cytokines that enter amnionic fluid. This scenario may serve to
explain the apparently contradictory observations concerning an association
between amnionic fluid cytokines and preterm labor in cases in which
microbes are not detected in the amnionic fluid.
Inflammatory Responses. These responses drive the pathogenesis of
infection-induced preterm labor. Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) or other toxins
elaborated by bacteria are recognized by receptors such as toll-like
receptors (TLRs) (Janssens, 2003). These receptors are present on

mononuclear phagocytes, decidual cells, cervical epithelia, and trophoblasts
(Gonzalez, 2007; Holmlund, 2002). The expression of TLRs on maternal
immune cells is necessary to recognize inflammatory stimuli in inflammationmediated preterm birth (Cappelletti, 2020). Activation of TLRs induces a
signaling cascade that activates production of chemokines such as interleukin
8 (IL-8) and cytokines such as IL-1β. Activation also recruits immune cells
into the reproductive tract. Cytokines are produced by immune cells and by
cells within the cervix, decidua, membranes, or fetus itself.
LPS-induced production of IL-1β in turn promotes a series of responses
that include (1) increased synthesis of others, that is, IL-6, IL-8, and tumor
necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α); (2) proliferation, activation, and migration of
leukocytes; (3) modifications in extracellular matrix proteins; and (4)
mitogenic and cytotoxic effects such as fever and acute-phase response (ElBastawissi, 2000). In many tissues, including myometrium, decidua, and
amnion, IL-1β also promotes prostaglandin formation that induces cervical
ripening and loss of myometrial quiescence (Challis, 2002; Keelan, 2003).
The importance of prostaglandins to infection-mediated preterm birth is
supported by the observation that prostaglandin inhibitors can reduce the rate
of LPS-induced preterm birth in both the mouse and nonhuman primate
(Gravett, 2007; Timmons, 2014). Inhibition of cyclooxygenase 2 prevents
inflammation-mediated preterm labor in the mouse. For these reasons,
clinical approaches described on page 806 are being explored.
Proteases such as matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) also are induced by
inflammatory cytokines and function to break down extracellular matrix
components such as collagen or elastic fibers. This disrupts the structural
integrity of fetal membranes or the cervix. Current evidence from animal and
human studies suggests that many aspects of infection-mediated preterm birth
differ from pathways that regulate term parturition (Hamilton, 2012;
Shynlova, 2013a,b; Willcockson, 2018).
Origin of Cytokines. Secretion of uterine cytokines is likely important for
preterm labor. Cytokines produced in maternal decidua and myometrium
have effects confined to that side, whereas cytokines produced in the
membranes or in cells within the amnionic fluid will not be transferred to
maternal tissues. In general, resident and invading leukocytes produce the
bulk of cytokines in cases of inflammation resulting from infection.

The presence of cytokines in amnionic fluid and their association with
preterm labor is well documented. But, their exact cellular origin—with or
without recoverable microorganisms—is not well defined. Amnionic fluid
cytokines are most likely secreted by mononuclear phagocytes or neutrophils
activated and recruited into the amnionic fluid (Tong, 2020). Thus, the
amount of amnionic fluid IL-1β would be determined by the number of
leukocytes recruited, their activational status, or the effect of amnionic fluid
constituents on their IL-1β secretion rate.
Microbiota. Mucosal immunity and barrier function of the cervicovaginal
epithelia, the vaginal microbiota composition, and their interplay among
differing populations are major research topics (Elovitz, 2019; Fettweis,
2019; Serrano, 2019). To explore these, advanced genomic analysis
techniques are used and show that the nonpregnant vagina hosts a complex
microbial community (Gajer, 2012; White, 2011). And, the vaginal
microbiome changes during normal pregnancy (Stout, 2017). Specifically, the
diversity of microbe populations are reduced during pregnancy and become
more stable.
Some but not all studies report an increased population of certain
microbes—for example, Gardnerella vaginalis and Ureaplasma
urealyticum—in women with preterm birth (Donders, 2009; Nelson, 2014).
In contrast, Schuster and coworkers (2020) reported that asymptomatic
vaginal Candida colonization was not associated with preterm birth.
Differences in populations studied, preterm birth definitions, and data
analysis complicate interpretation of these data. Currently, the strongest
evidence for the role of the microbiome in preterm birth relates to the vaginal
microbiota. The most consistent finding across almost all studies is the
benefit of a vaginal microbiota characterized by Lactobacillus crispatus
(Bayar, 2020).
Aagaard and colleagues (2014) suggested that the placenta contains a
microbiome akin to the oral microbiome. Subsequent studies, however, have
failed to confirm this (Lauder, 2016; Theis, 2019). Recently, de Goffau and
associates (2019) found no evidence of bacteria in most of 537 placental
samples from both complicated and uncomplicated pregnancies. Almost all
samples pointed to acquisition of bacteria during labor and delivery or to
contamination of laboratory reagents with the exception of Streptococcus

agalactiae. Thus, the human placenta does not appear to have a relevant
microbiome (Bayar, 2020).

■ Preterm Prelabor Rupture of Membranes
Previously referred to as preterm premature rupture of membranes, preterm
prelabor rupture of membranes (PPROM) defines spontaneous membrane
rupture before 37 completed weeks and before labor onset (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020g). Such rupture likely has
various causes, but intrauterine infection, oxidative stress–induced DNA
damage, and premature cellular senescence are major predisposing events
(Dutta, 2016; Mercer, 2003). Associated risk factors are similar to those at
term and include lower socioeconomical status, low body mass index,
nutritional deficiencies, and cigarette smoking. Women with PPROM carry
an enhanced risk for recurrence during a subsequent pregnancy (Bloom,
2001). Despite these known risk factors, none are identified in many cases.
Bacterial cultures of amnionic fluid support a role for infection in
PPROM. One review of 18 studies and almost 1500 women with PPROM
found that bacteria were isolated from amnionic fluid in a third of cases
(Goncalves, 2002). Microbiome-mediated preterm birth and PPROM are
current research areas (Bayar, 2020). One goal is to identify early risk
markers for PPROM.

Molecular Changes
In pregnancies with PPROM, the amnion exhibits a higher degree of cell
death and more apoptosis markers than in term amnion (ArechavaletaVelasco, 2002; Fortunato, 2003). In vitro studies indicate that apoptosis is
likely regulated by bacterial endotoxin, IL-1β, and TNF-α. In addition,
oxidative stress initiated by events other than infection can induce DNA
damage, premature senescence, and subsequent inflammation and proteolysis
that leads to PPROM (Menon, 2020).
With membrane rupture, thrombin activity rises, which activates MMPs
and prostaglandin synthesis. Studies by Mogami (2013) provide a mechanism
by which bacterial endotoxin or TNF-α elicits release of fetal fibronectin
(fFN) by amnion epithelial cells. The fFN then binds toll-like receptor 4 in
the amnion mesenchymal cells to activate signaling cascades. These result in

augmented prostaglandin E (PGE2) synthesis and elevated activity of MMPs.
Increasing prostaglandin levels promote cervical ripening and uterine
contractions. Greater MMP concentrations allow collagen breakdown in the
fetal membranes, resulting in premature rupture. Last, proteins involved in
collagen synthesis or promoting its tensile strength are altered in membranes
with premature rupture (Wang, 2006). Recently, Blois and associates (2020)
introduced the concept of galectins, a family of glycan-binding proteins.
They may serve as a mediator in fetal-maternal immune tolerance and work
to prevent microbial infections that lead to preterm birth.
Both preterm labor and PPROM arise from distinct pathophysiological
pathways but share inflammation as a common underlying mechanism.
Excellent reviews are presented by Menon (2020) and Diemert (2020) and
their coworkers.

■ Maternal-Fetal Stress
In this context, stress is defined as a condition that disturbs the normal
physiological or psychological functioning of an individual. Since the 1940s,
the association of maternal stress with birth outcomes has been explored.
Results vary partly because of methodological difference in measuring stress
(Hong, 2021). Quantitative measure is difficult, but considerable evidence
shows that psychosocial stress in the form of racial discrimination—
especially in black populations—results in poor health outcomes, including
preterm birth (Salow, 2018). Psychological duress can include childhood
stress, depression, or posttraumatic stress syndrome (Gillespie, 2017;
Goldstein, 2017; Venkatesh, 2016). In one review of more than 50 studies, a
significant link was found between low birthweight and preterm birth in
women impacted by intimate partner violence (Donovan, 2016).
One potential mechanism for stress-induced preterm birth is premature
activation of the placental–adrenal endocrine axis. Another mechanism by
which stress may translate to preterm birth is premature cellular senescence.
As part of normal physiology, aging of fetal and decidual cells precipitates
release of uterotonic signals for uterine activation at term. The interplay
between preterm birth and maternal stress was recently reviewed by Hong
and colleagues (2021).

CONTRIBUTING FACTORS
Several factors associated with preterm birth include pregnancy factors,
lifestyle and behaviors, genetic and demographic features, and aspects of
obstetrical history (Table 45-6). Disentangling association from causation
remains a dilemma.
TABLE 45-6. Factors That May Contribute to the Genesis of Preterm Labor

■ Prior Preterm Birth
The most important risk factor for preterm labor is a prior preterm birth.
Data from nearly 16,000 women delivered at Parkland Hospital are
instructive (Bloom, 2001). Namely, the recurrent preterm delivery risk for
women with a preterm first delivery was threefold greater than that of
women whose first neonate was born at term. More than a third of women
whose first two newborns were preterm subsequently delivered a third
preterm newborn. Most—70 percent—of the recurrent births occurred within
2 weeks of the gestational age of the prior preterm delivery. The causes of
prior preterm delivery also recurred. Although women with prior preterm
births are clearly at risk for recurrence, they represented only 10 percent of
the total preterm births. Expressed another way, 90 percent of the preterm
births at Parkland Hospital could not be predicted based on a history of
preterm birth. Others have confirmed the importance of prior spontaneous
preterm birth (Laughon, 2014). Moreover, prior indicated preterm birth was

strongly associated with subsequent spontaneous preterm birth. Variable
definitions of spontaneous and indicated may explain this association.
Ultimately, risk of recurrent preterm birth is influenced by three factors:
the frequency of prior preterm deliveries, severity as measured by
gestational age, and the order in which the prior preterm delivery occurred
(McManemy, 2007). That is, an individual woman’s risk for recurrent
preterm birth is influenced by her past number and sequence of preterm and
term births. For example, a risk of recurrent preterm birth for a gravida 3
para 2 woman with a prior preterm birth followed by a term birth is less than
that for a woman with a prior term birth followed by preterm birth. Thus, the
influence of reproductive history has a profound prognostic significance for
risk of recurrence. This may also influence the supposed benefit attributed to
interventions described later.

■ Pregnancy Factors
Of these, threatened abortion in early pregnancy is associated with higher
rates of later adverse outcomes. Weiss (2004) reported outcomes in nearly
14,000 women with vaginal bleeding at 6 to 13 weeks’ gestation. Both light
and heavy bleeding were associated with subsequent preterm labor, placental
abruption, and pregnancy loss before 24 weeks. Birth defects in the fetus
also may predispose to preterm birth. In a secondary analysis of data from
the First- and Second-Trimester Evaluation of Risk (FASTER) trial, birth
defects were associated with preterm birth and low-birthweight neonates
(Dolan, 2007). Multifetal gestation is another well-recognized associate.
Importantly, preterm delivery continues to be the major cause of the
excessive perinatal morbidity and mortality for these pregnancies.

■ Lifestyle Factors
Extremes of maternal weight—both underweight and obese mothers—have
an enhanced risk of preterm birth (Cnattingius, 2013; Girsen, 2016). Other
maternal factors implicated include young or advanced maternal age,
poverty, short stature, and vitamin C deficiency (Casanueva, 2005;
Goldenberg, 2008; Leveno, 2009). Cigarette smoking, inadequate maternal
weight gain, and illicit drug use affect the incidence and outcome of lowbirthweight neonates (Chap. 47, p. 825).

Studies of work and physical activity related to preterm birth have
yielded conflicting results (Goldenberg, 2008). Some evidence suggests that
working long hours, fixed night shifts, and hard physical labor are probably
linked to a higher risk of preterm birth (Cai, 2020). However, aerobic
exercise in normal-weight women with uncomplicated singleton pregnancies
appears to be safe and not associated with preterm birth (American College
of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020f; Di Mascio, 2016). One
metaanalysis of physical activity found that leisure-time physical activity
was associated with a reduced risk of preterm birth (Aune, 2017).
Because of the observational nature of many of the studies with the
potential for confounding, the American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2020b) has offered guidance for employment considerations
during pregnancy. It is emphasized that accommodations that allow a woman
to keep working are the most reliable way to guarantee pay, benefits, and job
protection.

■ Genetic Factors
Evidence for a genetic component to preterm birth is supported by familial
recurrent preterm births (Crider, 2005). Genome-wide studies have
identified genetic variants associated with gestational duration and preterm
birth (Zhang, 2017). Common variants in EBF1, EEFSEC, and AGTR2 genes
have an association with preterm birth. Data sets, however, included only
women with European ancestry, and thus future efforts will ideally include
other populations. Recent large-scale transcriptome studies have identified
additional loci associated with gestation length (Marinić, 2021; Sakabe,
2020).

■ Periodontal Disease
Gingivitis is a chronic anaerobic inflammation that affects as many as 50
percent of pregnant women in the United States (Goepfert, 2004). One
metaanalysis of 17 studies showed that periodontal disease was significantly
associated with preterm birth (Vergnes, 2007). To better study this
relationship, 813 pregnant women between 13 and 17 weeks’ gestation who
had periodontal disease were randomly assigned to treatment during
pregnancy or postpartum. Treatment during pregnancy improved periodontal

disease, however, it failed to significantly alter preterm birth rates
(Michalowicz, 2006). A workshop of the European Federation of
Periodontology and the American Academy of Periodontology reaffirmed
this position (Sanz, 2013).

■ Interpregnancy Interval
In one metaanalysis, intervals <18 months and >59 months were associated
with greater risks for both preterm birth and small-for-gestational-age
newborns (Conde-Agudelo, 2006). The causal effect of short interpregnancy
intervals, however, has been questioned (Ball, 2014). A recent cohort study
of more than three million births across four countries, including the United
States, found that associations between interpregnancy intervals and preterm
birth are modified by whether the previous pregnancy was preterm
(Marinovich, 2021).

■ Infection
Antimicrobial Prophylaxis
As discussed on page 789, a link between some cases of preterm birth and
infection seems irrefutable (Goldenberg, 2008). In several studies,
antimicrobial treatment has been given to prevent preterm labor that was
thought to stem from microbial invasion. Some of these strategies have
targeted Mycoplasma species.
First, Andrews and associates (2006) reported results of a randomized
trial in which they provided a course of azithromycin plus metronidazole
every 4 months to 241 nonpregnant women whose last pregnancy resulted in
spontaneous delivery before 34 weeks. Approximately 80 percent of the
women with subsequent pregnancies had received study drug within 6 months
of their subsequent conception. Such interconceptional antimicrobial
treatment did not reduce the rate of recurrent preterm birth. From a subgroup
analysis of this data, Tita and coworkers (2007) concluded that such use of
antimicrobials may be harmful.
In another randomized study, 2661 women were given placebo or
metronidazole plus erythromycin between 20 and 24 weeks’ gestation
followed by ampicillin plus metronidazole during labor (Goldenberg, 2006).

This antimicrobial regimen did not reduce the rate of preterm birth or
histological chorioamnionitis. As discussed later, antibiotic prophylaxis to
prevent preterm birth is not currently recommended in women with preterm
labor and intact membranes (Flenady, 2013).

Bacterial Vaginosis
In this condition, normal, hydrogen peroxide–producing, lactobacilluspredominant vaginal flora is replaced with anaerobes. For nearly 40 years,
bacterial vaginosis has been recognized to be associated with spontaneous
abortion, preterm labor, rupture of membranes, chorioamnionitis, and
amnionic fluid infection (Gravett, 1986; Hillier, 1995). Unfortunately,
screening and treatment have not prevented preterm birth (Haahr, 2016).
Moreover, microbial resistance or antimicrobial-induced change in the
vaginal flora results from regimens intended to eliminate bacterial vaginosis
(Beigi, 2004; Carey, 2005).

COVID-19
Early reports suggested an increase in rates of preterm birth in pregnant
women with COVID-19. However, population-level data show conflicting
results on the changes, if any, in preterm birth rates (Berghella, 2020;
Hedermann, 2021; Main, 2021). At Parkland Hospital, Adhikari and
colleagues (2020) did not identify higher rates of preterm birth in 252
women with COVID-19 compared with 3122 gravidas who tested negative.
However, women with severe infection are often delivered preterm for
maternal indications (Pierce-Williams, 2020).

DIAGNOSIS
■ Symptoms
Contractions, pelvic pressure, menstrual-like cramps, watery vaginal
discharge, and lower back pain are typical symptoms of preterm labor. These
can also be seen with normal pregnancy and may be minimized by patients
and providers. Early differentiation between true and false labor is difficult
—especially before demonstrable cervical effacement and dilation. Uterine
activity alone can be misleading because of Braxton Hicks contractions

(Chap. 4, p. 52). Accordingly, the American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2020e) defines preterm labor to be regular contractions
accompanied by a change in cervical dilation, effacement, or both or to be
regular contractions and cervical dilation of at least 2 cm at initial
presentation.
Chao (2011) prospectively studied 843 women with a singleton fetus
who presented to Parkland Hospital with preterm labor symptoms between
240/7 and 336/7 weeks, intact membranes, and cervical dilation <2 cm. Those
whose cervix remained <2 cm were sent home with a diagnosis of false
preterm labor. When analyzed against the general obstetrical population,
women sent home had a similar rate of birth before 34 weeks—2 versus 1
percent. However, these women did have significantly higher rates of birth
between 34 and 36 weeks—5 percent compared with 2 percent. Women with
cervical dilation of 1 cm at discharge were significantly more likely to
deliver before 34 weeks compared with women without cervical dilation—5
percent versus 1 percent. Almost 90 percent of the 1-cm group delivered
within 21 days of the initial presentation.

■ Cervical Change
Asymptomatic cervical dilation after midpregnancy is suspected to be a
preterm delivery risk factor. Multiparity alone is not sufficient to explain
cervical dilation discovered early in the third trimester. Cook (1996)
longitudinally evaluated cervical status with transvaginal sonography
between 18 and 30 weeks’ gestation in nulliparas and multiparas who all
subsequently gave birth at term. Cervical length and diameter were identical
in both groups throughout these critical weeks. In a study from Parkland
Hospital, routine digital cervical examinations were performed between 26
and 30 weeks in 185 asymptomatic women. Approximately 25 percent of
women whose cervix was dilated 2 or 3 cm delivered before 34 weeks
(Leveno, 1986a). Other investigators have verified cervical dilation as a
predictor of increased preterm delivery risk (Copper, 1995).
Although women with dilation and effacement in the third trimester are at
greater risk for preterm birth, detection does not necessarily improve
pregnancy outcome. In one randomized study, 2719 women undergoing
routine cervical examinations at each prenatal visit were compared with
2721 gravidas in whom serial examinations were not performed. Knowledge

of antenatal cervical dilation did not affect any pregnancy outcome related to
preterm birth or the frequency of interventions for preterm labor (Buekens,
1994). Thus, it seems that prenatal cervical examinations in asymptomatic
women are neither beneficial nor harmful. Numerous cervical imaging
technologies are under investigation for early, accurate prediction of cervical
changes associated with preterm birth (Pizzella, 2020).

■ Ambulatory Uterine Monitoring
An external tocodynamometer belted around the abdomen and connected to
an electronic waist recorder allows a woman to ambulate while uterine
activity is recorded. Results are transmitted via telephone daily. Women are
educated concerning signs and symptoms of preterm labor, and clinicians are
kept apprised of their progress. The 1985 approval of this monitor by the
U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) prompted its widespread clinical
use. Subsequently, it was proven that this expensive and time-consuming
system did not reduce preterm birth rates (Collaborative Home Uterine
Monitoring Study Group, 1995; Iams, 2002). Despite technology
improvements, use of such monitoring is discouraged (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2021c).

■ Biomarkers
Because clinical symptoms alone are not predictive of preterm birth,
surrogate biomarkers have been evaluated. These include fetal fibronectin
(fFN), phosphorylated insulin-like growth factor–binding protein 1
(phIGFBP-1), and placental alpha microglobulin 1 (PAMG-1). Their
performance varies between studies and is influenced by demographic and
other factors (Melchor, 2018).

Fetal Fibronectin
This glycoprotein is produced in 20 different molecular forms by various
cell types, including hepatocytes, fibroblasts, endothelial cells, and fetal
amnion cells. Present in high concentrations in maternal blood and amnionic
fluid, fFN is thought to function in intercellular adhesion during implantation
and in maintenance of placental adherence to uterine decidua (Leeson, 1996).

Detected in cervicovaginal secretions in women who have normal
pregnancies with intact membranes at term, fFN appears to reflect stromal
remodeling of the cervix before labor. Qualitative and quantitative fFN
levels are measured using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays, and values
exceeding 50 ng/mL are considered positive. Sample contamination by
amnionic fluid and maternal blood should be avoided. Interventional studies
based on fFN screening results in asymptomatic women have not
demonstrated improved perinatal outcomes (Andrews, 2003; Esplin, 2017).
The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2021c) does not
recommend screening with fFN tests. In one review of 16 trials involving
management based upon fFN results, the low quality of existing evidence and
need for cost-effectiveness analyses were noted (Berghella, 2019).

■ Cervical Length Measurement
Progressively shorter cervical canals assessed sonographically are
associated with increased rates of preterm birth (Iams, 1996). The
sonographic technique is described in Chapter 14 (p. 254). The Society for
Maternal-Fetal Medicine (2016b) has provided guidance for proper cervical
length measurement and recommends that sonographers and practitioners
obtain specific training through accreditation programs in the acquisition and
interpretation of cervical length images.
Transvaginal cervical sonography is not affected by maternal obesity,
cervix position, or shadowing from the fetal presenting part. Because of the
inability to easily distinguish the lower uterine segment from the cervix in
early gestation, transvaginal cervical length assessment is typically
performed after 16 weeks’ gestation. Such interrogation is currently limited
to singleton gestations and not recommended for multifetal gestations outside
of research trials (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists,
2021c).
Indications for cervical length measurement are controversial. For those
women with a history of prior spontaneous preterm birth, the Society for
Maternal-Fetal Medicine (2016b) recommends transvaginal cervical length
screening. And, the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
(2021c) now also recommends screening for this indication. In women with
singleton pregnancies but without a history of prior preterm birth, the Society

for Maternal-Fetal Medicine and the College view cervical length screening
as reasonable yet acknowledges that this remains an area of debate.
Biomarkers have been incorporated with hopes to improve screening
performance. Esplin and colleagues (2017) prospectively studied 9410
nulliparas with singleton pregnancies. Universal screening of
sonographically measured cervical length and quantitative measurement of
vaginal fFN levels were evaluated as predictors of women who would
spontaneously deliver before 37 weeks. These measures had poor predictive
performance as a screening test. Based on these findings, routine use of these
screening tests in a low-risk population is not recommended. Of other
markers, PAMG-1 has emerged as superior to predict potential preterm birth
compared with fFN, particularly among symptomatic women (Nikolova,
2018; Pirjani, 2019; Wing, 2017). Incorporating results of cervicovaginal
fluid proteomic markers and microRNAs obtained from peripheral blood
also has been assessed (Parry, 2020; Winger, 2020). Although evidence
seems promising, any firm recommendations should await larger clinical
trials (Jones, 2020). This is particularly important given the challenges with
accuracy and utility of screening, especially in low-risk women, who
represent most of the population with preterm birth.
A second concern with screening is the efficacy of interventions to
improve perinatal outcomes once cervical length screening, biomarkers, or
both have isolated at-risk women. Cervical cerclage or vaginal progesterone
have been evaluated, and their efficacy is described in the next section.
Bloom and Leveno (2017) subsequently critiqued the use of transvaginal
cervical length screening in low-risk women and the promulgation of
consensus guidelines. They highlighted the staggering costs encumbering the
healthcare system in the United States as a result of such strategies. Similar
concerns were raised by Kuusela and associates (2021) who evaluated
cervical length screening among 11,456 asymptomatic gravidas.

PRETERM BIRTH PREVENTION
Prevention of preterm birth remains an elusive goal. Yet, experts continue to
debate the optimal strategies to prevent or manage preterm birth (Medley,
2018). Dietary supplementations, for example, have not shown benefit
(Makrides, 2019; Palacios, 2019). Still, recent reports suggest that

prevention in selected populations may be achievable (Breslin, 2020;
Goodfellow, 2021).

■ Cervical Cerclage
Cerclage placement may be used to prevent preterm birth in at least three
circumstances. First, the procedure may benefit women who have a history of
recurrent second-trimester loss and who are diagnosed with cervical
insufficiency. A second instance is the woman identified during sonographic
examination to have a short cervix. The third indication is a “rescue”
cerclage, done emergently when cervical incompetence is recognized in
women with threatened preterm labor. Cerclage placement in twin
pregnancies for clinical indications is an evolving area (Li, 2019; Roman,
2020). In this chapter, however, cerclage placement will be in the context of
a singleton pregnancy.
An accurate history is critical for management decisions. For recurrent
abortion from cervical incompetence, historical clues are outlined in Chapter
11 (p. 205). For women with a short cervix incidentally detected by
sonography, the benefit of cerclage placement appears directly related to
whether the woman has a history of prior preterm birth. In those without a
prior preterm birth, cerclage for a sonographically detected short cervix
alone offers no advantage (Berghella, 2017). To and associates (2004)
screened 47,123 women and randomly assigned the 253 women with a
cervix measuring <15 mm, with or without a history of preterm birth, to
cerclage or no cerclage groups. The frequency of preterm delivery before 33
weeks did not differ significantly between the two cohorts.
In contrast, women with a sonographically diagnosed short cervix and a
history of preterm birth may benefit. Owen and colleagues (2009) randomly
assigned 302 women with prior preterm birth plus a short cervix—defined as
length <25 mm—to cerclage or no-procedure groups. The primary study
outcome was not supported by the intervention. However, women with a
cervical length <15 mm delivered before 35 weeks significantly less often
following cerclage compared with women with no cerclage—30 versus 65
percent. This study suggested that recurrent preterm birth could be prevented
in a subset of women with asymptomatic singleton gestations with both
previous preterm birth and short cervical length.

These findings prompted a reassessment by Berghella and coworkers
(2011), who performed a metaanalysis using individual patient data (Fig. 455). The primary outcomes from the included trials did not support cerclage
placement. However, these investigators concluded that cerclage
significantly prevented preterm birth and improved composite perinatal
mortality and morbidity outcomes in women with prior spontaneous preterm
birth, singleton gestation, and cervical length <25 mm.

FIGURE 45-5 Cerclage versus no cerclage for prevention of recurrent preterm birth in women with a
cervical length <25 mm. Forest plot analysis of composite perinatal mortality and morbidity. CI =
confidence interval; M-H = Mantel-Haenszel.

One caveat in the interpretation of this cerclage data is the influence of
obstetrical history. For example, all of the trials comprising the metaanalysis
included preterm birth as early as 16 to 17 weeks’ gestation. Defining these
early second-trimester losses as preterm births, rather than cervical
incompetence, is problematic. Thus, it is difficult to distinguish whether
these women were treated in the context of cervical incompetence or of
preterm labor at 16 weeks. Nonetheless, based on these findings, the
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2021c) concluded
that in women with a singleton pregnancy, prior spontaneous preterm birth,

cervical length <25 mm, and gestational age <24 weeks, cerclage placement
may be considered versus vaginal progesterone (p. 797).

Technique
The operative placement of cervical cerclage is shown in Chapter 11 (p.
206). Several emerging trends, however, merit comment. For example,
indication for cerclage placement may influence selection of suture material
(Battarbee, 2019). Tocolysis and antibiotics with cerclage placement is
another controversy (Eleje, 2020). In a retrospective report of 142 cases, 72
received perioperative prophylaxis, which consisted of perioperative
cefazolin and indomethacin, during physical examination–indicated cerclage
placement. This practice was associated with a significant prolongation in
gestational latency (Premkumar, 2020). At Parkland Hospital, we have not
adopted such practices. Last, for women with a history of a failed cerclage,
transabdominal cerclage appears to be superior to vaginal cerclage
(Shennan, 2020).

■ Prophylaxis with Progestogen Compounds
In most mammals, progesterone withdrawal is considered to be a
parturition-triggering event. During human parturition, however, maternal,
fetal, and amnionic fluid progesterone levels remain elevated. It has been
proposed that human parturition involves functional progesterone withdrawal
mediated by decreased activity of progesterone receptors (Chap. 21, p. 406).
It follows conceptually that progesterone administration may prevent preterm
labor. This hypothesis has stimulated several studies of both 17-alpha
hydroxyprogesterone caproate and vaginally administered progesterone in
women with varying risks for preterm birth.
At present, reported benefits of either progestogen therapy are largely
limited to women with singleton pregnancies. Progestogen prophylaxis
specifically in multifetal gestations has not lowered preterm birth rates
(Caritis, 2009; Dodd, 2019; Rehal, 2020; Rouse, 2007). Accordingly, both
the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2021c) and the
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine (2020b) support the use of progestogen
therapy for prevention of preterm birth in select women with singleton
pregnancies despite the challenges chronicled (Nelson, 2021). Either a

history of prior preterm birth or no prior preterm birth but a sonographically
identified short cervix is a criterion.

■ Prior Preterm Birth and Progestogen Compounds
The synthetic progestogen 17-alpha-hydroxyprogesterone caproate (17OHPC) is the focus of current controversy. It remains the first, and only, drug
approved by the FDA for prevention of recurrent preterm birth. This therapy
was originally approved in 2011 through an accelerated process for orphan
drugs and based on the findings of Maternal-Fetal Medicine Units (MFMU)
Network study, described next. However, this approval and justification for
continued use is now disputed (Chang, 2020; Food and Drug Administration,
2019, 2020; Greene, 2020; Nelson, 2021).

Maternal-Fetal Medicine Units Network Trial
In the MFMU Network trial, 463 women with a prior preterm birth were
randomly assigned to receive weekly intramuscular injections of inert oil
placebo or 17-OHPC from 16 through 36 weeks’ gestation (Meis, 2003).
Recurrence of preterm birth rates were 36 percent in women receiving 17OHPC and 55 percent in those given placebo. This study was challenged
because of the unexpectedly high preterm delivery rate in the placebo arm
(Romero, 2013). One explanation for this high rate was asymmetry in the
risks of recurrence. Indeed, 41 percent of the placebo group had ≥2 prior
preterm births compared with only 28 percent in the 17-OHPC group.
Another concern was that the injection dosage of 17-OHPC, which was 250
mg weekly, was empirically chosen (Caritis, 2012, 2014). Because of these
reported challenges, the FDA granted approval but called for a confirmatory
randomized clinical trial before final FDA approval (Food and Drug
Administration, 2019). The multicenter, international, randomized trial was
launched in 2009 but required 9 years to complete (Blackwell, 2020).

Pricing Concerns
Following the accelerated approval, drug-overpricing claims prompted
concern (Cohen, 2011; Romero, 2013). In 2011, the FDA gave temporary
approval to KV Pharmaceutical to market 17-OHPC under the brand name
Makena. Because regulations prohibited compounding, there was no

competitor for this relatively inexpensive drug, and Makena was priced at
$1500 per injection. This caused widespread concern because the
cumulative cost of Makena would be more than $30,000 per pregnancy.
Parkland Hospital, given these pricing concerns, contracted a local
compounding pharmacy to provide 250-mg, single-dose vials of 17-OHPC in
sesame oil at a cost of $25 per dose. Nelson and colleagues (2017) reported
their findings from this program in a prospective study of 430 women given
this compounded 17-OHPC. It was ineffective for prevention of recurrent
preterm birth at 35 weeks or less compared with a historical cohort from
Parkland Hospital. Moreover, 17-OHPC did not significantly reduce the
rates of recurrent preterm birth regardless of prior preterm birth number or
sequence. Moreover, plasma concentrations of 17-OHPC were not different
at 24 weeks or 32 weeks between women delivered at ≤35 weeks and those
delivered later.

Metabolism
Despite its widespread use, the mechanism of action for 17-OHPC remains
unknown. Sharma and associates (2008) reported that the metabolism of 17OHPC was predominantly mediated by the CYP3A enzymatic system. Thus,
other agents that induce or inhibit this system or hepatic impairment may alter
drug levels. They also showed that 17-OHPC is not converted after
administration to the progesterone metabolite 17α-hydroxyprogesterone. The
relative binding affinity of 17-OHPC to progesterone receptors approximates
only 30 percent of that by progesterone (Attardi, 2007).
Caritis and colleagues (2012) examined 61 women receiving 17-OHPC
therapy and found that the half-life was relatively long (median 16.2 days).
Pharmacokinetic parameters were affected by maternal body habitus and
varied widely between subjects. In addition, 17-OHPC crossed the placental
barrier and was detectible in cord plasma 44 days after the last maternal
injection (Caritis, 2012). Despite this, evidence to date suggests that 17OHPC is safe for the fetus (Food and Drug Administration, 2019). No
abnormalities, including abnormal genitalia, were found in a 48-month
follow-up study of infants exposed in the 2003 MFMU Network trial
(Northen, 2007). Simons and coworkers (2021) also reported no effect of
progestogens on child development in a systematic review comprising
numerous developmental measurements.

PROLONG Trial
The FDA-required confirmatory trial was the PROLONG trial and
completed in October 2018. A total of 1708 women were randomly assigned
in a 2:1 ratio to receive 17-OHPC or placebo. This trial had two primary
endpoints, which were birth <35 weeks’ gestation and a neonatal composite.
Data were analyzed for 1651 of the liveborn neonates (Table 45-7)
(Blackwell, 2020). Progesterone was not effective in preventing recurrent
preterm birth. In the analysis of various secondary outcomes, 17-OHPC
treatment also lacked efficacy.
TABLE 45-7. Perinatal Outcomes of PROLONG Trial

FDA Recommendations
In October 2019, the FDA convened an Advisory Committee meeting to
review 17-OHPC and the new data. Efficacy, side effects, and several
subgroup analyses were studied, and none supported 17-OHPC efficacy (Fig.
45-6). The FDA concluded that the PROLONG trial did not demonstrate a

treatment benefit of 17-OHPC in reducing the neonatal composite index or
the rate of spontaneous preterm birth prior to 35 weeks’ gestation. The
Advisory Committee recommended to withdraw approval. In November
2020, the Center for Drug Evaluation and Research proposed that Makena
(17-OHPC) be withdrawn from the market (Food and Drug Administration,
2020).

FIGURE 45-6 In analysis of co-primary endpoints for the PROLONG Trial, five of the included
defining risk factors were noted to be different from those in the Maternal-Fetal Medicine Units
Network trial (see text). These are black race, >1 prior spontaneous preterm birth, single or without a
partner, substance use during pregnancy, and ≤12 years of formal education. The three groups examined
in this post-hoc composite risk profile analysis were those with no risk factors, those with ≥1 risk factor,
and those with ≥2 risk factors. Makena is the brand name of 17-OHPC.

Response to the FDA position has been mixed. Both the American
College of Obstetricians (2019a, 2021a) and Society for Maternal-Fetal
Medicine (2020b) have issued statements endorsing continued use of 17OHPC for prevention of recurrent preterm birth in women with singleton
pregnancies. Endorsements by these organizations continue after publication
of a metaanalysis by the Evaluating Progestogens for Preventing Preterm
birth International Collaborative (EPPPIC) Group (2021). These
investigators summarized that vaginal progesterone and 17-OHPC both
reduced birth rates before 34 weeks’ gestation in high-risk singleton
pregnancies. Notably, the findings for 17-OHPC did not reach statistical
significance. Moreover, this metaanalysis grouped together trials of patients
with differing risk profiles. It combined women with and without a prior
preterm birth as well as women with and without a short cervix.

These positions have stimulated several dueling commentaries regarding
its use (Chang, 2020; Godlewski, 2020; Greene, 2020; Sibai, 2020). At this
time, the FDA has not withdrawn the accelerated approval. If formally
withdrawn, however, a consequence may be continued “off-label” use, with
the caveat that insurers may not provide payment coverage.

■ Progesterone Prophylaxis with Shortened Cervix
Three randomized trials are at the center of whether progestogen therapy
should be used in women without prior preterm births but who have a
shortened cervix (Table 45-8). In the first trial, 250 women with short
cervices measuring ≤15 mm identified during routine prenatal care were
nightly given 200-mg micronized progesterone vaginal capsules or placebo
from 24 to 34 weeks’ gestation (Fonseca, 2007). The rate of spontaneous
delivery <34 weeks was significantly reduced by progesterone therapy.
Importantly, this trial included nulliparas and also those with twins or prior
preterm birth.
TABLE 45-8. Randomized Trials of Progestogen Compounds Given
Prophylactically to Prevent Preterm Labor

In the second trial, 465 women with a short cervix—10 to 20 mm—were
given vaginal progesterone gel, 90 mg daily, or placebo (Hassan, 2011).
Those receiving progesterone had significantly lower rates of preterm birth
<33 weeks. This trial also included nulliparas and women with prior preterm
births. According to Likis and colleagues (2012), the heterogeneity of these
first two studies that included women with varied indications for

progestogen treatment, combined with the fact that outcomes were not
reported by risk factors such as nulliparity, made it impossible to interpret
the efficacy of progesterone for specific indications.
The third study randomly assigned administration of 17-OHPC
intramuscular injection or placebo between 16 and 223/7 weeks’ gestation to
nulliparas with a singleton gestation and a cervical length <30 mm detected
sonographically (Grobman, 2012). Treatment with 17-OHPC did not reduce
the frequency of preterm birth <37 weeks. Regardless of cervical length, 17OHPC was ineffective.
From these, vaginal progesterone, but not intramuscular 17-OHPC,
appears to benefit women with a sonographically measured short cervix.
Romero and Stanczyk (2013) provided a review to explain the conflicting
evidence and argued that naturally occurring progesterone, which is used in
the vaginal preparations, is not the same as synthetic 17-OHPC. Likewise,
Furcron and coworkers (2015) found that 17-OHPC did not have local
antiinflammatory effects at the maternal-fetal interface or cervix. Further, 17OHPC did not protect against endotoxin-induced preterm birth.
From all these studies, the American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2021c) concluded that universal cervical length screening in
women without a prior preterm birth is not mandatory. However, this
screening strategy could be considered in the context of treatment with
vaginal progesterone.
Because of the preliminary results suggesting success of vaginally
administered progesterone, the OPPTIMUM study was carried out—does
progesterone prophylaxis to prevent preterm labor improve outcome?
(Norman, 2016). High-risk women were defined as those with a prior
spontaneous birth ≤34 weeks or with a cervical length ≤25 mm or a positive
fFN test result combined with other clinical risk factors for preterm birth.
The primary outcomes of OPPTIMUM were unique in that both
immediate obstetrical and childhood outcomes were examined. These were
fetal death or birth <34 weeks; a composite of death, brain injury, or
bronchopulmonary dysplasia; and a standardized cognitive score at age 2
years. Contrary to earlier reports, vaginal progesterone was not associated
with a lower risk of preterm birth or composite neonatal adverse outcomes.
In children at 2 years, vaginal progesterone had no long-term benefit or harm.

■ Progestogens Summary
Thus, evidence remains conflicting as to the efficacy of progestogens across
various indications. Some have attempted to resolve these issues through
systematic review and metaanalysis (Conde-Agudelo, 2018; da Fonseca,
2020; Jarde, 2019; Prior, 2017; Romero, 2018). However, virtually all
evidence supporting progestogen use for a specific indication can be
challenged in some way. At this time, we agree with Norman and colleagues
(2016) that the results of recent studies should prompt a major review of
progesterone use for preterm birth prophylaxis, a search to identify specific
women who might benefit, and a redoubling of efforts to find alternative
strategies to prevent preterm birth in women at risk.

■ Geography-based Public Health-care Programs
A well-organized prenatal system can lower preterm birth rates in high-risk
indigent populations (Creasy, 1980). For example, in the Parkland Hospital
prenatal clinic system, a declining preterm birth rate between 1988 and 2006
coincided with a substantial rise in prenatal visit attendance (Fig. 45-7)
(Leveno, 2009). In the early 1990s, a concerted effort was made to improve
access by creating seamless care that began with antenatal enrollment and
extended through delivery and the puerperium. Prenatal clinics were placed
strategically throughout Dallas County to provide convenient access for
patients. Prenatal protocols are used by nurse practitioners at all clinic sites
to guarantee homogeneous care. Women with high-risk pregnancy
complications are referred to a hospital-based central clinic system. Here,
maternal-fetal medicine clinics operate each weekday and are staffed by
residents and midwives who are supervised by fellows and faculty.

FIGURE 45-7 Percentage of births before 37 weeks’ gestation at Parkland Hospital from 1988 to
2006 compared with that in the United States from 1996 to 2002. Analysis in both cohorts was limited to
singleton liveborn infants ≥500 g who received prenatal care. (Reproduced with permission from
Leveno KJ, McIntire DD, Bloom SL, et al: Decreased preterm births in an inner-city public hospital.
Obstet Gynecol. 2009 Mar;113(3):578–584.)

A similar obstetrical care system for indigent women at the University of
Alabama at Birmingham also has produced salutary results (Tita, 2011).
Given the recent emphasis on access to care, especially among underserved
minorities, these experiences remain relevant (United States Congress,
2019). Prenatal care is an important component of a comprehensive public
health-care system that at least partially affects the preterm birth rate.

■ Aspirin
Acetylsalicylic acid (ASA) is a cyclooxygenase inhibitor with
antiinflammatory and antiplatelet properties that has been used in pregnancy
most commonly to prevent or delay onset of preeclampsia (Chap. 41, p. 705).
Data now suggest that low-dose aspirin may also reduce spontaneous
preterm birth rates (Andrikopoulou, 2018). In one randomized study of
11,976 nulliparas in six low- and middle-income countries, women were
randomly assigned to receive low-dose aspirin (81 mg) or placebo initiated

between 60/7 and 136/7 weeks’ gestation (Hoffman, 2020). Low-dose aspirin
decreased the incidence of birth <37 weeks and reduced the perinatal
mortality rate. Although this trial did not differentiate spontaneous from
indicated preterm birth, it requires replication in high-resource settings. The
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020c) does not
recommend low-dose aspirin prophylaxis to prevent spontaneous preterm
birth in the absence of preeclampsia risk factors.

MANAGEMENT OF PRETERM PRELABOR RUPTURE
OF MEMBRANES
Methods used to diagnose ruptured membranes are detailed in Chapter 22 (p.
426). A history of vaginal leakage of fluid, either as a continuous stream or a
gush, should prompt a speculum examination to visualize gross vaginal
pooling of amnionic fluid, clear fluid from the cervical canal, or both.
Confirmation of rupture of membranes is usually accompanied by
sonographic examination to assess amnionic fluid volume, to identify the
presenting part, and if not previously determined, to estimate gestational age.
Once PPROM is identified, the general scheme shown in Table 45-9 can
guide management.
TABLE 45-9. Management of Prelabor Rupture of Membranes

■ Natural History
The time from PPROM to delivery is inversely related to the gestational age
at which rupture occurs. Very few days are gained if membranes rupture
during the third trimester compared with midpregnancy (Fig. 45-8) (Carroll,
1995).

FIGURE 45-8 Relationship of time between preterm membrane rupture and delivery in 172 singleton
pregnancies. (Reproduced with permission from Carroll SG, Blott M, Nicolaides KH: Preterm prelabor
amniorrhexis: Outcome of live births. Obstet Gynecol 1995 Jul;86(1):18–25.)

In an earlier study from Parkland Hospital, 298 consecutive women with
spontaneously ruptured membranes between 24 and 34 weeks’ gestation
were analyzed (Cox, 1988). PPROM constituted 1.7 percent of pregnancies
during the study period. At the time they presented, 76 percent of the women
were already in labor, and 5 percent were delivered for other complications.
Thus, only 19 percent initially were suitable for expectant management.
Ultimately, delivery was delayed 48 hours or more after membrane rupture in
only 7 percent of the total study cohort. None of the neonates in this group
died. This contrasted with a neonatal death rate of 8 percent in preterm
newborns delivered within 48 hours of membrane rupture. Others have
reported similar results (Nelson, 1994).

■ Hospitalization
Most clinicians hospitalize women with PPROM. Concerns regarding the
costs of lengthy hospitalizations are usually moot, because most women enter

labor within a week or less after membrane rupture. Carlan and coworkers
(1993) randomly assigned 67 women with PPROM at <37 weeks’ gestation
to home or hospital management. The mean gestational age was 31 weeks.
No benefits were found for hospitalization, and maternal hospital stays were
reduced by 50 percent in those sent home—14 versus 7 days. Importantly, the
investigators emphasized that this study was too small to conclude that home
management was safe in regard to umbilical cord prolapse.
If hospitalization is chosen, no consensus guides the optimal frequency of
inpatient assessment. The American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2020g) notes that an acceptable strategy would include
periodic sonograms for fetal growth, fetal heart rate monitoring, and clinical
surveillance for maternal infection—particularly fever. During the periviable
period and at gestation ages before interventions would be planned, a short
period of initial observation and consideration of outpatient monitoring in
select cases is reasonable. Hospitalization would then be practiced at the
time of viability.

■ Intentional Delivery
Before the mid-1970s, labor was usually induced in women with PPROM
because of sepsis fears. Maternal infection risk and fetal prematurity risk
vary according to the gestational age at membrane rupture, and management
decisions incorporate this data. With periviable pregnancy, Morales (1993b)
expectantly managed 94 singleton pregnancies with PPROM before 25
weeks. The average time gained was 11 days. Although 41 percent of infants
survived to age 1 year, only 27 percent of the original cohort were
neurologically normal. Similar results were reported by Farooqi (1998) and
Winn (2000) and their colleagues. Management of these early pregnancies is
discussed on page 785.
For PPROM in general, two randomized trials in the 1990s compared
labor induction with expectant management (Cox, 1995; Mercer, 1993). In
both of these studies, the balance of risk and benefit was difficult to
ascertain, as neither immediate delivery nor expectant management was
superior for neonatal outcomes. Lieman and associates (2005) found that
neonatal outcomes did not improve with expectant management beyond 33
weeks. McElrath and coworkers (2003) found that prolonged latency after
membrane rupture was not associated with a greater incidence of fetal

neurological damage. An important correlate is that infection—specifically
chorioamnionitis—is a recognized risk factor for neonatal neurological
injury (Gaudet, 2001; Wu, 2000).
Bond and colleagues (2017) compared planned early birth with expectant
management for women with PPROM before 37 weeks’ gestation. They
evaluated 12 randomized trials totaling 3617 women and 3628 newborns. No
clinically important differences in the incidence of neonatal sepsis between
women who immediately delivered and those managed expectantly were
identified. Although the incidence of chorioamnionitis was lower, neonates
of women randomized to early birth were more likely to be born at an earlier
gestational age and encountered attendant perinatal sequelae. The authors
concluded that in women with rupture of membranes before 37 weeks’
gestation without contraindications to continuing the pregnancy, a policy of
expectant management with careful monitoring was associated with better
outcomes for both the mother and newborn. A subsequent metaanalysis of
late-preterm prelabor rupture of membranes by Quist-Nelson and coworkers
(2018) noted that immediate delivery and expectant management resulted in
comparable rates of the composite of adverse neonatal outcomes.
Because of conflicting data and the controversies of immediate delivery
compared with expectant management, the American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020g) cannot make firm
recommendations. Clearly, gestational age is an important consideration. At
240/7 to 336/7 weeks, expectant management in the absence of nonreassuring
fetal status, clinical chorioamnionitis, or placental abruption is
recommended. At 340/7 to 366/7 weeks’ gestation, delivery was once
recommended, however, it is now considered reasonable to offer either
expectant management or immediate delivery following consideration of
risks and benefits, counseling, and shared decision-making. Expectant
management should not go beyond 370/7 weeks’ gestation. Based upon
limitations of access to care and resources, our current practices at Parkland
Hospital continue to favor immediate delivery after 34 weeks’ gestation.

■ Expectant Management
Several considerations arise during expectant management of PPROM
(Boettcher, 2020; Shaddeau, 2020). One is digital cervical examination.

Alexander and colleagues (2000) analyzed findings in women with
membrane rupture expectantly managed between 24 and 32 weeks’ gestation.
They compared those who had one or two digital cervical examinations with
women who were not examined. Those who were examined had a rupture-todelivery interval of 3 days compared with 5 days in those not examined. This
difference did not worsen maternal or neonatal outcomes. At Parkland
Hospital, digital cervical examination is used judiciously in PPROM cases.
Rupture of membranes following second-trimester amniocentesis is
uncommon (Chap. 17, p. 345). Compared with women with spontaneous
rupture during the second trimester, Borgida and associates (2000) found that
pregnancies complicated by PPROM after genetic amniocentesis resulted in
significantly better perinatal outcomes. The perinatal survival rate was 91
percent. After counseling, affected women are typically managed expectantly
as outpatients with serial surveillance of amnionic fluid volume and selfassessment of temperature (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2020g). In the series cited above, the mean time to
documentation of a normal amnionic fluid volume after amniocentesis
approximated 2 weeks.
Tocolysis given with PPROM has been reported in few studies. In
women with ruptured membranes and lack of labor, prophylactic tocolysis
does not improve neonatal outcomes but is associated with greater
chorioamnionitis rates (Mackeen, 2014). Similarly, therapeutic tocolysis—
for those with ruptured membranes and labor—has not provided significant
perinatal benefit (Garite, 1987).
Management of PPROM in the woman who has undergone cervical
cerclage is complex (American College of Obstetricians, 2020g). McElrath
and associates (2002) studied 114 women with a cerclage in place who later
had ruptured membranes before 34 weeks. They were compared with 288
controls. Pregnancy outcomes were equivalent in both groups. Cerclage
retention for more than 24 hours after PPROM may be associated with
pregnancy prolongation, however, intrauterine infection and its consequences
are risks (Giraldo-Isaza, 2011; Laskin, 2012). At Parkland Hospital,
cerclage retention in the absence of infection or labor is currently practiced
with close clinical surveillance in those with PPROM.
With PPROM in pregnancies before 26 weeks, the volume of amnionic
fluid remaining after rupture appears to have prognostic importance (Carroll,
1995; Hadi, 1994). Although varied by report, current rates of pulmonary

hypoplasia with PPROM before 24 weeks among surviving neonates can be
as high as 30 percent (Kiver, 2018). This suggests that 23 weeks reflects a
threshold for lung hypoplasia development (Chap. 7, p. 131). Further, when
contemplating early expectant management, oligohydramnios and resultant
limb compression deformities are influencing considerations.
For neonates born to women who have active herpetic lesions and who
are expectantly managed, the infectious morbidity risk appears to be
outweighed by risks associated with preterm birth (Chap. 68, p. 1216)
(Major, 2003). Lewis and associates (2007) found that expectant
management of women with PPROM and noncephalic presentation was
associated with a higher rate of umbilical cord prolapse, especially before
26 weeks.
Tissue sealants are often used to gain surgical hemostasis. Limited
reports describe their use for repair of fetal membranes (Chap. 11, p. 203).
Crowley and coworkers (2016) concluded that available data are currently
insufficient to assess the value of sealing procedures for PPROM. We do not
use these agents for this indication.

■ Clinical Chorioamnionitis
Infection is a major concern with membrane rupture. Although some cases
remain subclinical, if chorioamnionitis is diagnosed, prompt efforts to effect
delivery, preferably vaginally, are initiated. Because maternal leukocytosis
alone is not a consistent finding, fever is the only reliable indicator for the
diagnosis of chorioamnionitis. Institutional practices and protocols vary in
defining the temperature threshold. Traditionally, a temperature ≥38°C
(100.4°F) accompanying ruptured membranes has implied infection. At
Parkland Hospital, we still adhere to this criterion.
In 2015, a workshop sponsored by the NICHD was convened and
suggested renaming this condition intraamnionic infection and inflammation
—triple I (Higgins, 2016). The merits of this terminology have been
questioned (Barth, 2016). Nonetheless, the American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019b) revised both the definitions and
temperature thresholds for intraamnionic infection. Using these new
definitions, the diagnosis of suspected intraamnionic infection is made when
the maternal temperature is ≥39.0°C or when the maternal temperature is
38.0 to 38.9°C and one additional clinical risk factor is present. The latter

include low parity, multiple digital examinations, internal uterine and fetal
monitors, meconium-stained amnionic fluid, and the presence of certain
genital tract pathogens, such as group B streptococcus (GBS) and sexually
transmitted agents. Isolated maternal fever is defined as any maternal
temperature between 38.0°C and 38.9°C with no additional risk factors
present, and with or without persistent temperature elevation.
With chorioamnionitis, fetal and neonatal morbidity are substantively
increased. Alexander and colleagues (1998) studied 1367 very-lowbirthweight neonates delivered at Parkland Hospital. Approximately 7
percent were born to women with overt chorioamnionitis, and their outcomes
were compared with similar newborns without clinical infection. Those in
the infected group had higher incidences of sepsis, respiratory distress,
early-onset seizures, intraventricular hemorrhage, and periventricular
leukomalacia. Yoon and colleagues (2000) found that intraamnionic infection
in preterm neonates was associated with increased rates of cerebral palsy. In
one study of more than 11 million singleton live births in the United States
from 1995 to 1997, 1.6 percent of gravidas had fever during labor. This was
a strong predictor of infection-related death in both term and preterm
neonates (Petrova, 2001).

■ Antimicrobial Therapy
Various antimicrobials have been evaluated to forestall preterm delivery.
Mercer and associates (1995) reviewed 13 randomized trials that evaluated
antibiotics for PPROM before 35 weeks. Their metaanalysis indicated that
only three of 10 outcomes were possibly benefited: (1) fewer women
developed chorioamnionitis, (2) fewer newborns developed sepsis, and (3)
pregnancy was more often prolonged 7 days in women given antibiotics.
However, rates of other neonatal outcomes, including survival and
respiratory distress, were unaffected.
In an MFMU Network trial, women with membrane rupture between 24
and 32 weeks’ gestation were randomly assigned to expectant management
combined with placebo or to a 7-day antibiotic regimen. Treatment included
intravenous ampicillin plus erythromycin every 6 hours for 48 hours, which
was followed by oral amoxicillin plus erythromycin, every 8 hours for 5
days. Neither tocolytics nor corticosteroids were given. Antimicrobialtreated women had significantly fewer newborns with respiratory distress,

necrotizing enterocolitis, and composite adverse outcomes (Mercer, 1997).
The latency period was also significantly longer. Specifically, 50 percent of
women given an antimicrobial regimen remained undelivered after 7 days of
treatment compared with only 25 percent of those given placebo. Also, a
significantly greater number of treated pregnancies were undelivered at 14
and 21 days. Cervicovaginal GBS colonization did not alter these results.
Other studies have examined the efficacy of shorter treatment lengths and
different antimicrobial combinations. Three-day treatments compared with 7day regimens using either ampicillin or ampicillin-sulbactam appear equally
effective in regard to perinatal outcomes (Lewis, 2003; Segel, 2003).
Similarly, erythromycin compared with placebo offered a range of significant
neonatal benefits. The substitution of azithromycin for erythromycin does not
appear to impact maternal or neonatal outcomes, and the former has an
improved side-effect profile (Dotters-Katz, 2020). An amoxicillinclavulanate regimen is not recommended, however, because of its
association with an increased incidence of neonatal necrotizing enterocolitis
(Kenyon, 2004).
Some predicted that prolonged antimicrobial therapy in such pregnancies
might have unwanted consequences (Carroll, 1996; Mercer, 1999). Stoll and
associates (2002) studied 4337 neonates weighing from 400 to 1500 g and
born from 1998 to 2000. Their outcomes were compared with those of 7606
neonates of similar birthweight born from 1991 to 1993 and prior to the
practice of antibiotic prophylaxis. The overall rate of early-onset sepsis did
not change between these two epochs. But, the rate of GBS sepsis dropped
from 5.9 per 1000 births in the earlier group to 1.7 per 1000 births in the
later group. Comparing these same epochs, the rate of Escherichia coli
sepsis, however, rose from 3.2 to 6.8 per 1000 births. Almost 85 percent of
isolates from the more recent cohort were resistant to ampicillin. Neonates
with early-onset sepsis were more likely to die, especially if they were
infected with coliforms. Long term, Kenyon and coworkers (2008a) found
that antimicrobials given for women with PPROM had no effect on the health
of children at age 7 years.

■ Corticosteroid Therapy
A single course of corticosteroids is recommended for pregnant women with
PPROM between 240/7 and 340/7 weeks’ gestation (American College of

Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020g). A single course of corticosteroids
as early as 230/7 weeks in those at risk for preterm delivery within 7 days
may be considered. A similar controversy is found at the other end of the
gestational age spectrum, 340/7 to 366/7 weeks’ gestation and with rescue
therapy (p. 803). These issues were summarized by Battarbee (2020) in a
recent review.

MANAGEMENT OF PRETERM LABOR WITH INTACT
MEMBRANES
Women with signs and symptoms of preterm labor with intact membranes are
managed similarly to those with PPROM. If possible, delivery before 34
weeks’ gestation is delayed. Drugs used to abate or suppress preterm uterine
contractions are subsequently discussed.

■ Amniocentesis to Detect Infection
One of every 10 women with preterm labor and intact membranes will have
intraamnionic infection that is largely subclinical (Yoon, 2019). Because of
this, several tests have been used to diagnose intraamnionic infection
(Andrews, 1995; Romero, 1993; Yoon, 1996). Although such infection can
be identified with a positive test result, routine amniocentesis offers little
value.

■ Corticosteroid Therapy
Glucocorticosteroids were found to accelerate lung maturation in preterm
sheep fetuses, and Liggins and Howie (1972) evaluated them to treat women
with preterm labor. Corticosteroid therapy was effective in lowering the
incidence of respiratory distress syndrome (RDS) and neonatal mortality
rates if birth was delayed for at least 24 hours after initiation of
betamethasone. Infants exposed to corticosteroids in these early studies have
now been followed into adulthood with no ill effects detected.
In 1995, a National Institutes of Health (NIH) Consensus Development
Conference panel recommended corticosteroids for fetal lung maturation in
threatened preterm birth. A subsequent NIH Conference (2000) summarized

that data were insufficient to assess corticosteroid effectiveness in
pregnancies complicated by hypertension, diabetes, multifetal gestation,
fetal-growth restriction, or fetal hydrops. It was concluded, however, that
administering corticosteroids to these women is reasonable.
One metaanalysis of 30 studies totaling 7774 women and 8158 infants
quantified the benefit of a single course of corticosteroids (Roberts, 2017).
Treatment was associated with lower rates of perinatal death, neonatal death,
RDS, intraventricular hemorrhage, necrotizing enterocolitis, mechanical
ventilation, and systemic infection in the first 48 hours of life. No obvious
benefits were gained for chronic lung disease, death in childhood, or
neurodevelopmental delay in childhood. Therapy was not associated with
chorioamnionitis.
Parenthetically, corticosteroids given prophylactically to women at risk
of preterm birth in low- and middle-income countries actually increased
perinatal mortality rates (Althabe, 2015). Because of this unexpected finding,
a multicountry randomized trial comparing dexamethasone to placebo and
involving pregnant women between 260/7 and 336/7 weeks’ gestation was
recently completed (WHO ACTION Trials Collaborators, 2020). The trial
was stopped early due to benefits of dexamethasone, which resulted in a
significantly lower risk of stillbirth or neonatal death. The discrepancy
between the two reports was attributed to inaccuracies in gestational age
assessment (Rohwer, 2020).
A single course of corticosteroids is currently recommended for women
between 24 and 34 weeks’ gestation who are at risk for delivery within 7
days (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020a). This
recommendation for premature twins has been challenged (Viteri, 2016). For
pregnancies at 23 weeks and at risk of delivery within 7 days, a single
course of corticosteroids may be considered (p. 785). Administration of
corticosteroids during the periviable period is linked to parental decisions
regarding resuscitation and should be considered in that context (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019d).

Agent Selection
Betamethasone and dexamethasone are glucocorticoids that appear
equivalent in stimulating fetal lung maturation (Murphy, 2007). Reduced rates
of major preterm neonatal morbidities and increased rates of survival

without neurosensory disability at age 2 years do not differ between them
(Crowther, 2019; Elimian, 2007). A treatment course may be two 12-mg
doses of betamethasone, and each dose is given intramuscularly 24 hours
apart. With dexamethasone, 6-mg doses are given intramuscularly every 12
hours for four doses. Because treatment for less than 24 hours may be
beneficial and reduce neonatal morbidity and mortality rates, a first dose of
antenatal corticosteroids is administered regardless of the ability to complete
additional doses before delivery (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2020a).

Late-preterm Delivery
Antenatal betamethasone has been compared against placebo for neonates
that are likely to deliver in the late-preterm period (Gyamfi-Bannerman,
2016). Although only 60 percent of 2831 women received both injections,
the rate of respiratory complications measured as a composite outcome was
significantly lower with corticosteroid use compared with placebo—11.6
versus 14.4 percent. Because of these findings, consideration for
administration of a single course of betamethasone for women between 340/7
and 366/7 weeks is advocated by both the American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists (2020a) and the Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine
(2016a).
Adoption of this practice has not been universal because of both shortand long-term neonatal safety concerns (Crowther, 2016; Kamath-Rayne,
2016). Specifically, in the newborns receiving betamethasone, rates of
hypoglycemia were significantly greater (Gyamfi-Bannerman, 2016).
Neonatal hypoglycemia is particularly worrisome for possible adverse longterm consequences that include developmental delay (Kerstjens, 2012).
Another caveat is that the largest effects of betamethasone included a
reduction in transient tachypnea of the newborn (TTN), which is a selflimited condition with little clinical significance (Kamath-Rayne, 2016).
Specifically, the rates of TTN were 6.7 and 9.9 percent in those given
betamethasone and placebo, respectively. These rates are three- to fourfold
higher than those reported by the Consortium on Safe Labor (2010). The
latter was a retrospective, observational study from 19 hospitals across the
United States that included 233,844 deliveries. Because of these issues, we

do not provide corticosteroids beyond 34 weeks at Parkland Hospital at this
time.

Repeated Courses
A single dose of intramuscular corticosteroids has been compared with
repeated courses for lung maturation in two major randomized trials. Both
found that repeated courses reduced neonatal respiratory morbidity rates, but
the long-term consequences were much different. In one study, all women
were given a primary course of betamethasone. If the preterm delivery risk
persisted, they were assigned to serial weekly doses of betamethasone or
placebo. These investigators found no adverse effects in the infants followed
to age 2 years (Crowther, 2007).
In the second study, 495 women were randomly assigned to receive a
single corticosteroid course that contained two doses or assigned to repeated
courses that were given weekly (Wapner, 2007). In infants exposed to
repeated courses, a nonsignificant rise in the cerebral palsy rate was
identified. Still, exposure to the doubled betamethasone dose was worrisome
because some experimental evidence supports the view that adverse effects
are dose dependent (Bruschettini, 2006). We agree with Stiles (2007) who
summarized these two studies as “early gain, long-term questions.” At
Parkland Hospital, our practice is to follow the recommendations of the
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020a) for singlecourse therapy.

Rescue Therapy
This refers to administration of a second corticosteroid dose when delivery
becomes imminent and more than 7 days have elapsed since the initial dose.
In one randomized trial, 326 women received placebo or a single 12-mg
dose of betamethasone (Peltoniemi, 2007). Paradoxically, the rescue dose of
betamethasone increased the risk of RDS. In another randomized study of 437
women with gestations <33 weeks, Garite and associates (2009) reported
significantly lower rates of respiratory complications and neonatal
composite morbidity with rescue corticosteroids versus placebo. Rates of
perinatal mortality and other morbidities, however, did not differ. Another
study found that treated infants had improved respiratory compliance
(McEvoy, 2010). In a metaanalysis, Crowther and colleagues (2011)

concluded that a single rescue course of corticosteroids should be
considered in women whose prior course was administered at least 7 days
previously and who were <34 weeks’ gestation.
The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020a) notes
that a single rescue course of antenatal corticosteroids should be considered
in women with fetuses <34 weeks’ gestation whose prior course was
administered at least 7 days previously. Effects of rescue therapy beyond 34
weeks are unknown. At Parkland Hospital, we currently do not provide
additional courses of corticosteroids beyond the initial single-course therapy.

■ Magnesium Sulfate for Neuroprotection
Very-low-birthweight neonates whose mothers were treated with magnesium
sulfate for preterm labor or preeclampsia were found to have a reduced
incidence of cerebral palsy at 3 years (Grether, 2000; Nelson, 1995).
Because of this, randomized trials were designed to investigate this
hypothesis. In one trial, 1063 women at risk of delivery before 30 weeks’
gestation were given magnesium sulfate or placebo (Crowther, 2003).
Magnesium exposure improved some perinatal outcomes. Namely, rates of
both neonatal death and cerebral palsy were lower in the magnesium-treated
group. However, this study was not sufficiently powered. The multicenter
French trial reported by Marret and associates (2008) had similar problems.
More convincing evidence for magnesium neuroprotection came from the
randomized MFMU Network study—Beneficial Effects of Antenatal
Magnesium Sulfate—BEAM—study (Rouse, 2008). In the study, 2241
women at imminent risk for preterm birth between 24 and 31 weeks’
gestation were assigned to magnesium sulfate or placebo. Magnesium sulfate
was given as a 6-g bolus over 20 to 30 minutes and was followed with a
maintenance infusion of 2 g/hr. Magnesium sulfate was actually infusing at
the time of delivery in approximately half of the treated women. Infusion
continuation protocols vary by institution, including ours. In the BEAM study,
after 12 hours with no signs of imminent delivery, the infusion was stopped
and resumed if delivery again seemed imminent. If >6 hours had passed since
discontinuation, another loading dose was given.
A 2-year assessment was available for 96 percent of the children in the
BEAM trial (Table 45-10) (Rouse, 2008). The results can be interpreted
differently depending on statistical methodologies employed. Some interpret

these findings to mean that magnesium sulfate infusion prevents cerebral
palsy regardless of the gestational age at which therapy is given. Those with
a differing view conclude that this trial only supports use of magnesium
sulfate for prevention of cerebral palsy potentially before 28 weeks.
TABLE 45-10. Magnesium Sulfate for the Prevention of Cerebral Palsya

Subsequently, Doyle and associates (2009) reviewed five randomized
trials to assess neuroprotective effects. A total of 6145 infants were studied,
and these reviewers concluded that magnesium sulfate exposure compared
with no exposure significantly lowered risks for cerebral palsy. Rates of
other neonatal morbidities did not differ significantly. It was calculated that
treatment given to 63 women would prevent one case of cerebral palsy.
Controversy surrounding magnesium sulfate efficacy for neuroprotection
prompted a debate at the 2011 annual meeting of the Society for MaternalFetal Medicine. Rouse (2011) spoke for the benefits of magnesium sulfate,
whereas Sibai (2011) challenged that the reported benefits were falsely
positive due to random statistical error in the metaanalysis by Doyle (2009).
Another peculiarity is the apparent lack of dose-response for efficacy
(McPherson, 2014).
Because none of the individual studies found a benefit from magnesium
sulfate for fetal neuroprotection, the American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2020d,g) concluded that those electing prophylaxis should

develop specific guidelines, and this includes those with PPROM. In a recent
prospective observational study of infants born at 220/7 to 266/7 weeks’
gestation, exposure to both corticosteroids and magnesium sulfate was
associated with lower rates of neurodevelopmental impairment and death
compared with corticosteroids alone (Gentle, 2020). At Parkland Hospital,
for the periviable fetus, we individualize management as shown in Table 454.

■ Antimicrobial Treatment
Results have been disappointing in studies of antibiotics given to arrest
preterm labor. From one Cochrane metaanalysis, antimicrobial prophylaxis
given to women with intact membranes did not reduce preterm birth rates or
affect other clinically important short-term outcomes (Flenady, 2013).
However, rates of short- and longer-term harm were higher for children of
mothers exposed to antibiotics.
In the ORACLE Collaborative Group study of 6295 women with
spontaneous preterm labor, intact membranes, but without evidence of
infection, women were randomly assigned to receive antimicrobial or
placebo therapy (Kenyon, 2001). The primary outcomes of neonatal death,
chronic lung disease, and major cerebral abnormality were similar in both
groups. In a follow-up of the ORACLE II trial, fetal exposure to
antimicrobials in this setting was associated with an increased cerebral palsy
rate at age 7 years compared with that in children without fetal exposure
(Kenyon, 2008b). Moreover, although preterm birth is associated with
bacterial vaginosis, treatment with clindamycin in more recent randomized
trials has failed to lower preterm birth rates (Bellad, 2018; Subtil, 2018).
Importantly, antimicrobial use described here is distinct from that given for
GBS prophylaxis (Chap. 67, p. 1195).

■ Bed Rest
This has been one of the most often prescribed interventions, yet one of the
least supported by evidence (McCall, 2013). An earlier systematic review
concluded that evidence neither supported nor refuted bed rest for preterm
birth prevention (Sosa, 2004). Moreover, possible harms are
thromboembolic events, deconditioning, and bone loss (Kovacevich, 2000;

Promislow, 2004). Grobman and associates (2013) reported that women
with activity restriction were nearly 2.5 times more likely to have a preterm
birth before 34 weeks. This finding, however, may reflect ascertainment bias.
That is, women with restricted activity may have been assigned to bed rest
because they were viewed to have a greater risk for preterm delivery. The
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine (2020a) and the American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020f) recommend against activity
restriction to reduce preterm birth rates.

■ Cervical Pessaries
Silicone rings, such as the Arabin pessary, have been used to support the
cervix in women with a sonographically short cervix. In one study, 385
women with a cervical length ≤25 mm were provided a silicone pessary or
expectant management (Goya, 2012). Newborns spontaneously delivered
before 34 weeks’ gestation in 6 percent of women in the pessary group
compared with 27 percent in the expectant management group. In another
randomized trial, almost 100 women with a cervical length <25 mm at 20 to
24 weeks’ gestation received either pessaries or expectant management (Hui,
2013). The pessary did not lower the rate of delivery <34 weeks. Others
have reported similar findings (Nicolaides, 2016). Moreover, authors of a
recent systematic review totaling 4687 women and 7167 infants found that
current evidence does not support pessary use to prevent preterm birth or
improve perinatal outcomes in singleton or twin gestations with a short
cervix or in unselected twin gestations (Conde-Agudelo, 2020). The Society
for Maternal-Fetal Medicine (2017) currently recommends pessary
prophylaxis only within research protocols.

■ Emergency or Rescue Cerclage
Some evidence supports the concept that cervical incompetence and preterm
labor lie along a spectrum leading to preterm delivery. Consequently,
cerclage placement after preterm labor begins to manifest clinically has been
studied. Importantly, for women with labor and active cervical change,
cerclage is contraindicated.
In one study, 23 women with cervical incompetence before 27 weeks’
gestation were randomly assigned to bed rest, with or without an adjunctive

emergency McDonald cerclage (Althuisius, 2003). Delivery delay was
significantly greater in the cerclage group compared with those assigned to
bed rest alone—54 versus 24 days, respectively. Terkildsen and coworkers
(2003) studied 116 women who underwent second-trimester emergency
cerclage. Nulliparity, membranes extending beyond the external cervical os,
and cerclage before 22 weeks’ gestation were associated with a significantly
lower chance of significant pregnancy continuation. More recently, a
multicenter randomized trial assessed women with twin pregnancies and
asymptomatic cervical dilation of 1 to 5 cm between 160/7 and 236/7 weeks’
gestation (Roman, 2020). From a total of 30 enrolled women, 17 women
received physical examination-indicated cerclage, and 13 women received
no cerclage. Of note, all women who underwent cerclage received
indomethacin and antibiotics. In the cerclage group, the preterm birth rate
was significantly decreased at all evaluated gestational ages, and
specifically, cerclage lowered the birth rate for those <28 weeks by 50
percent. From these limited reports, for women facing a poor pregnancy
prognosis due to cervical dilation at midgestation, emergency or rescue
cerclage with appropriate counseling is reasonable. At this time, however, it
is unclear if such interventions truly confer a benefit or merely increase the
risk of membrane rupture and infection (Hawkins, 2017).

■ Tocolysis
Although several drugs have been used to prevent or inhibit preterm labor,
none is completely effective. The American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2020e) has concluded that tocolytic agents do not markedly
prolong gestation but may delay delivery in some women for up to 48 hours.
This may allow transport to an obstetrical center with higher-level neonatal
care and permit time for a course of corticosteroid therapy. Although
delivery may be delayed to administer corticosteroids, evidence does not
support that tocolytic therapy has any direct favorable effect on neonatal
outcomes or that any prolongation of pregnancy afforded by tocolytics alone
translates into statistically significant neonatal benefit.
Beta-adrenergic agonists, magnesium sulfate, calcium-channel blockers,
or indomethacin are the recommended tocolytic agents for short-term use.
The gestational age range for tocolytic use is debatable (Mendez-Figueroa,
2020). But, because the perinatal outcomes in preterm neonates are generally

good after 34 weeks’ gestation, most do not recommend use of tocolytics
after 33 weeks.
In many women, tocolytics stop contractions temporarily but rarely
prevent preterm birth. Moreover, the American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2020e) has concluded that maintenance therapy with
tocolytics is ineffective for preventing preterm birth. No trial has ever
convincingly shown reduced rates of any important adverse outcome by a
tocolytic drug compared with placebo (Walker, 2016).

β-Adrenergic Receptor Agonists
Several compounds stimulate β-adrenergic receptors to reduce intracellular
ionized calcium levels and prevent activation of myometrial contractile
proteins (Chap. 21, p. 403). Of β-mimetic drugs in the United States,
ritodrine and terbutaline have been used in obstetrics, but only ritodrine is
FDA-approved for preterm labor.
Ritodrine was voluntarily withdrawn from the United States market in
2003, but a discussion of ritodrine is included here to present issues with βmimetic drug use. In a randomized trial at Parkland Hospital, intravenous
ritodrine delayed delivery for 24 hours but without other benefits (Leveno,
1986b). Additional studies confirmed a delivery delay up to 48 hours
(Canadian Preterm Labor Investigators Group, 1992).
Importantly, β-agonist infusion resulted in serious and even fatal maternal
side effects. Pulmonary edema is a special concern, and its cause is
multifactorial. Risk factors include tocolytic therapy with β-agonist drugs,
multifetal gestation, concurrent corticosteroid therapy, tocolysis for more
than 24 hours, and intravenous infusion of large volumes of crystalloid. βAgonist agents cause retention of sodium and water, and with time—usually
24 to 48 hours—these can cause volume overload (Hankins, 1988). The
drugs have been implicated in increased capillary permeability, cardiac
rhythm disturbances, and myocardial ischemia. For example, in an earlier
study, tocolysis was the third most common cause of acute respiratory
distress and death in pregnant women during a 14-year period in Mississippi
(Perry, 1998).
Terbutaline is commonly used in the United States to forestall preterm
labor. Like ritodrine, it may cause pulmonary edema (Angel, 1988). Lowdose terbutaline can be administered long-term by subcutaneous pump, but

randomized trials fail to show benefit for such therapy (Guinn, 1998;
Wenstrom, 1997). Oral terbutaline also is ineffective (How, 1995; Parilla,
1993). In one trial, 203 women with arrested preterm labor at 24 to 34
weeks’ gestation were randomly assigned to receive 5-mg terbutaline tablets
or placebo every 4 hours (Lewis, 1996). Of outcomes, delivery rates at 1
week, median days of pregnancy extension, mean gestational age at delivery,
and incidence of preterm labor relapse were similar in both groups.
Because of serious maternal side effects, the FDA (2011) issued a
warning regarding terbutaline use for preterm labor. The American College
of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020e) recommends only short-term
inpatient use of terbutaline as a tocolytic or as acute therapy for uterine
tachysystole. Subcutaneous dosages of 0.25 mg are commonly used for the
latter indication.

Magnesium Sulfate
Ionic magnesium in a sufficiently high concentration can alter myometrial
contractility. It functions as a calcium antagonist, and when given in
pharmacological doses, it may inhibit labor. Magnesium sulfate treatment has
been associated with pulmonary edema (Samol, 2005). As discussed in
Chapter 41 (p. 720), this has not been our experience at Parkland Hospital
with treatment of tens of thousands of preeclamptic women with
intramuscular or intravenous magnesium sulfate.
In one randomized trial, 54 women with preterm labor received
magnesium sulfate, ritodrine, or placebo. Few differences in outcomes were
identified (Cotton, 1984). Cox and coworkers (1990) randomly assigned 156
women to receive magnesium sulfate or infusions of normal saline.
Magnesium sulfate–treated women and their neonates had identical outcomes
compared with those given placebo. Because of these findings, this method
of tocolysis was abandoned at Parkland Hospital. Similarly, Crowther and
associates (2014) concluded that magnesium sulfate to treat preterm labor
was ineffective and potentially harmful. Last, the FDA (2013) has warned
against prolonged use of magnesium sulfate given to arrest preterm labor
because of bone thinning and fractures in fetuses exposed for more than 5 to 7
days. This was attributed to low calcium levels in the fetus. Yule and
associates (2020) demonstrated the influence of magnesium sulfate on
maternal serum calcium levels.

Prostaglandin Inhibitors
These compounds are intimately involved in the contractions of normal labor
(Chap. 21, p. 413). Antagonists act by inhibiting prostaglandin synthesis or
by blocking their action on target organs.
Indomethacin, a nonselective cyclooxygenase inhibitor, was first used as
a tocolytic in one study of 50 women (Zuckerman, 1974). Studies that
followed reported the efficacy of indomethacin in halting contractions and
delaying preterm birth (Muench, 2003; Niebyl, 1980). Morales and
coworkers (1989, 1993a), however, compared indomethacin with either
ritodrine or magnesium sulfate and found no difference in their efficacy to
forestall preterm delivery. Berghella and associates (2006) reviewed four
trials of indomethacin given to women with a sonographically determined
short cervix and found such therapy to be ineffective to halt labor. But, as
discussed earlier, its use with cerclage is gaining favor.
Most studies have limited indomethacin use to 24 to 48 hours because of
concerns for oligohydramnios, which can develop with therapeutic doses. If
amnionic fluid is monitored, oligohydramnios can be detected early, and it is
reversible with drug discontinuation. There has also been considerable
debate on the association of necrotizing enterocolitis or early ductus
arteriosus closure and use of indomethacin (Doni, 2020; Hammers, 2015;
Muench, 2001). Two metaanalyses of the effects of antenatal indomethacin on
neonatal outcomes had conflicting findings (Amin, 2007; Loe, 2005). In one
review of 20 studies, cyclooxygenase inhibitors, including indomethacin,
provided no clear benefit compared with placebo or any other tocolytic agent
(Reinebrant, 2015).

Calcium-channel Blockers
Myometrial activity is directly related to cytoplasmic free calcium, and
reduced calcium concentrations inhibit contractions. Calcium-channel
blockers inhibit, by various mechanisms, calcium entry through cell
membrane channels.
From study results, calcium-channel blockers, especially nifedipine, are
safer and more effective tocolytic agents than β-agonist drugs (King, 2003;
Papatsonis, 1997). Comparing magnesium sulfate and nifedipine, one study
of 192 women at 24 to 33 weeks’ gestation found no substantial differences
in efficacy or adverse effects (Lyell, 2007). Comparing nifedipine and

atosiban in 145 women with preterm labor between 24 and 33 weeks,
another randomized study showed that neither agent was superior to delay
delivery. Neonatal morbidity rates were equivalent (Salim, 2012).
Flenady and coworkers (2014b) reviewed 38 trials of calcium-channel
blockers for preterm labor and concluded that these agents have benefits
compared with placebo. It is problematic, however, that this conclusion
stemmed from a trial with unclear risk of selection bias and a three-arm study
of 84 women that was not blinded (Ara, 2008; Zhang, 2002). More recently,
Hawkins and associates (2021) performed a randomized, placebo-controlled
trial of nifedipine for acute tocolysis of preterm labor at Parkland Hospital.
Acute tocolysis with nifedipine did not affect preterm birth rates. However,
the study results were obtained following an interim analysis demonstrating
futility for study continuation.
Importantly, the combination of nifedipine and magnesium sulfate for
tocolysis is potentially dangerous. Ben-Ami (1994) and Kurtzman (1993) and
their coworkers reported that nifedipine enhances the neuromuscular
blocking effects of magnesium, which can interfere with pulmonary and
cardiac function. In one small study of 54 women with preterm labor who
received either magnesium sulfate plus nifedipine or no tocolytic, neither
benefit nor harm was found (How, 2006).

Other Agents
Atosiban is a nonapeptide oxytocin analogue and an oxytocin-receptor
antagonist that is used in European countries to forestall labor. In randomized
trials, atosiban failed to improve relevant neonatal outcomes and was linked
with significant neonatal morbidity (Flenady, 2014a; Moutquin, 2000;
Romero, 2000). The FDA has denied approval of atosiban for use in the
United States because of these findings.
Nitric oxide donors are potent smooth-muscle relaxants that affect the
vasculature, gut, and uterus. In randomized clinical trials, nitroglycerin
administered orally, transdermally, or intravenously was ineffective or
showed no superiority compared with other tocolytics. In addition, maternal
hypotension is a common side effect (Bisits, 2004; Lees, 1999).

■ Labor and Delivery

Fetal heart rate and uterine contractions are monitored with preterm labor.
We prefer continuous electronic monitoring. Fetal tachycardia, especially
with ruptured membranes, suggests sepsis. Some evidence supports that
intrapartum acidemia may intensify some of the neonatal complications
usually attributed to preterm delivery. For example, Morgan and associates
(2017) found that metabolic acidemia significantly raised the risks related to
prematurity in neonates delivered <34 weeks’ gestation. Low and colleagues
(1995) observed that intrapartum acidosis—umbilical artery blood pH <7.0
—had an important role in neonatal complications. GBS infections are
common and dangerous in the preterm neonate, and antimicrobial prophylaxis
should be provided (Chap. 67, p. 1195).
For delivery, perinatal outcome data do not support routine episiotomy or
forceps delivery to protect the “fragile” preterm fetal head. Staff proficient in
resuscitative techniques commensurate with the gestational age and fully
oriented to any specific problems should be present at delivery. The
importance of specialized personnel and facilities for preterm newborn care
is underscored by the improved survival rates of these neonates when
delivered in tertiary-care centers. For community-based hospitals,
multidisciplinary team-based simulation for preterm delivery can improve
performance (Barbato, 2020).
Preterm newborns frequently have intracranial germinal matrix bleeding
that can extend to more serious intraventricular hemorrhage. It was
hypothesized that cesarean delivery to obviate trauma from labor and vaginal
delivery might prevent these complications. This has not been validated by
subsequent studies (Malloy, 1991). At Parkland Hospital, cesarean delivery
is reserved for usual obstetrical indications.

REFERENCES
Aagaard K, Ma J, Antony KM, et al: The placenta harbors a unique microbiome. Sci Transl Med
6(237):234ra65, 2014
Adams Waldorf KM, Singh N, Mohan AR, et al: Uterine overdistention induces preterm labor mediated
by inflammation: observations in pregnant women and nonhuman primates. Am J Obstet Gynecol
213(6):830.e1, 2015
Adhikari EH, Moreno W, Zofkie AC, et al: Pregnancy outcomes among women with and without severe
acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 infection. JAMA Netw Open 3(11):e2029256, 2020
Akgul Y, Word RA, Ensign LM, et al: Hyaluronan in cervical epithelia protects against infectionmediated preterm birth. J Clin Invest 124(12):5481, 2014

Alexander JM, Gilstrap LC, Cox SM, et al: Clinical chorioamnionitis and the prognosis for very low
birthweight infants. Obstet Gynecol 91:725, 1998
Alexander JM, Mercer BM, Miodovnik M, et al: The impact of digital cervical examination on
expectantly managed preterm ruptured membranes. Am J Obstet Gynecol 183:1003, 2000
Althabe F, Belizán JM, McClure EM, et al: A population-based, multifaceted strategy to implement
antenatal corticosteroid treatment versus standard care for the reduction of neonatal mortality due to
preterm birth in low-income and middle-income countries: the ACT cluster-randomised trial. Lancet
385(9968):629, 2015
Althuisius SM, Dekker G, Hummel P, et al: Cervical incompetence prevention randomized cerclage trial:
emergency cerclage with bed rest versus bed rest alone. Am J Obstet Gynecol 189:907, 2003
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Clinical guidance for integration of the findings of
the PROLONG study: progestin’s role in optimizing neonatal gestation. Practice advisory. 2019a.
Available at: http://www.acog.org/clinical/clinical-guidance/practiceadvisory/articles/2019/10/clinical-guidance-for-integration-of-the-findings-of-the-prolong-study.
Accessed March 13, 2021
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Intrapartum management of intraamniotic
infection. Committee Opinion No. 712, August 2017, Reaffirmed 2019b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Perinatal palliative care. Committee Opinion No.
786, August 2019c
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine: Periviable
birth. Obstetric Care Consensus No. 6, October 2017, Reaffirmed 2019d
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Antenatal corticosteroid therapy for fetal
maturation. Committee Opinion No. 713, August 2017, Reaffirmed 2020a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Employment considerations during pregnancy and
the postpartum period. Committee Opinion No. 733, April 2018, Reaffirmed 2020b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Low-dose aspirin use during pregnancy.
Committee Opinion No. 743, June 2018, Reaffirmed 2020c
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Magnesium sulfate before anticipated preterm
birth for neuroprotection. Committee Opinion No. 455, March 2010, Reaffirmed 2020d
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Management of preterm labor. Practice Bulletin
No. 171, October 2016, Reaffirmed 2020e
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Physical activity and exercise during pregnancy
and the postpartum period. Committee Opinion No. 804, April 2020f
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Prelabor rupture of membranes. Practice Bulletin
No. 217, February 2020g
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Prevention of group B streptococcal early-onset
disease in newborns. Committee Opinion No. 797, February 2020h
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Clinical guidance for the integration of the
findings of the EPPPIC meta-analysis: Evaluating Progestogens for Preventing Preterm Birth
International Collaborative. 2021a. Available at: www.acog.org/clinical/clinical-guidance/practiceadvisory/articles/2021/03/clinical-guidance-for-the-integration-of-the-findings-of-the-epppic-metaanalysis-evaluating-progestogens-for-preventing-preterm-birth-international-collaborative. Accessed
April 28, 2021
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Medically indicated late-preterm and early-term
deliveries. Committee Opinion No. 818, February 2021b

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Prediction and prevention of spontaneous
preterm birth. Practice Bulletin No. 234, August 2021c
Amin SB, Sinkin RA, Glantz C: Metaanalysis of the effect of antenatal indomethacin on neonatal
outcomes. Am J Obstet Gynecol 197:486, 2007
Ananth CV, Liu S, Joseph KS, et al: A comparison of foetal and infant mortality in the United States and
Canada. Int J Epidemiol 38(2):480, 2009
Andrews WW, Goldenberg RL, Hauth JC, et al: Interconceptional antibiotics to prevent spontaneous
preterm birth: a randomized clinical trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol 194:617, 2006
Andrews WW, Hauth JC, Goldenberg RL, et al: Amniotic fluid interleukin-6: correlation with upper
genital tract microbial colonization and gestational age in women delivered after spontaneous labor
versus indicated delivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 173:606, 1995
Andrews WW, Sibai BM, Thom EA, et al: Randomized clinical trial of metronidazole plus erythromycin
to prevent spontaneous preterm delivery in fetal fibronectin-positive women. Obstet Gynecol
101:847, 2003
Andrikopoulou M, Purisch SE, Handal-Orefice R, et al: Low-dose aspirin is associated with reduced
spontaneous preterm birth in nulliparous women. Am J Obstet Gynecol 219(4):399, e1, 2018
Angel JL, O’Brien WF, Knuppel RA, et al: Carbohydrate intolerance in patients receiving oral
tocolytics. Am J Obstet Gynecol 159:762, 1988
Ara I, Banu H: A prospective randomised trial of nifedipine versus placebo in preterm labour.
Bangladesh J Obstet Gynaecol 23(2):61, 2008
Arechavaleta-Velasco F, Mayon-Gonzalez J, Gonzalez-Jimenez M, et al: Association of type II apoptosis
and 92-kDa type IV collagenase expression in human amniochorion in prematurely ruptured
membranes with tumor necrosis factor receptor-1 expression. J Soc Gynecol Investig 9:60, 2002
Attardi BJ, Zeleznik A, Simhan H, et al: Comparison of progesterone and glucocorticoid receptor binding
and stimulation of gene expression by progesterone, 17-alpha hydroxyprogesterone caproate, and
related progestins. Am J Obstet Gynecol 197(6):599.e1, 2007
Aune D, Schlesinger S, Henriksen T, et al: Physical activity and the risk of preterm birth: a systematic
review and meta-analysis of epidemiological studies. BJOG 124(12):1816, 2017
Ball SJ, Pereira G, Jacoby P, et al: Re-evaluation of link between interpregnancy interval and adverse
birth outcomes: retrospective cohort study matching two intervals per mother. BMJ 349:g4333, 2014
Barbato AL, Wetzel EA, Li W, et al: Simulation education for preterm infant delivery room management
at community hospitals. Pediatrics 146(6):e20193688, 2020
Barth WH Jr: Lost in translation: the changing language of our specialty. Obstet Gynecol 127(3):423,
2016
Battarbee AN, Pfister A, Manuck TA: Suture thickness and transvaginal cervical cerclage outcomes.
Am J Obstet Gynecol MFM 1(4):100056, 2019
Battarbee AN: Use of antenatal corticosteroids in preterm prelabor rupture of membranes. Obstet
Gynecol Clin North Am 47(4):587, 2020
Bayar E, Bennett PR, Chan D, et al: The pregnancy microbiome and preterm birth. Semin
Immunopathol 42(4):487, 2020
Beigi RH, Austin MN, Meyn LA, et al: Antimicrobial resistance associated with the treatment of
bacterial vaginosis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 191:1124, 2004
Bellad MB, Hoffman MK, Mallapur AA, et al: Clindamycin to reduce preterm birth in a low resource
setting: a randomised placebo-controlled clinical trial. BJOG 125(12):1601, 2018
Ben-Ami M, Giladi Y, Shalev E: The combination of magnesium sulphate and nifedipine: a cause of
neuromuscular blockade. BJOG 101:262, 1994

Berghella V, Boelig R, Roman A, et al: Decreased incidence of preterm birth during coronavirus disease
2019 pandemic. Am J Obstet Gynecol MFM 2(4):100258, 2020
Berghella V, Ciardulli A, Rust OA, et al: Cerclage for sonographic short cervix in singleton gestations
without prior spontaneous preterm birth: systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized
controlled trials using individual patient-level data. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 50(5):569, 2017
Berghella V, Rafael TJ, Szychowski JM, et al: Cerclage for short cervix on ultrasonography in women
with singleton gestations and previous preterm birth: a meta-analysis. Obstet Gynecol 117(3):663,
2011
Berghella V, Rust OA, Althuisius SM: Short cervix on ultrasound: does indomethacin prevent preterm
birth? Am J Obstet Gynecol 195:809, 2006
Berghella V, Saccone G: Fetal fibronectin testing for reducing the risk of preterm birth. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 7:CD006843, 2019
Bertholdt C, Menard S, Delorme P, et al: Intraoperative adverse events associated with extremely
preterm cesarean deliveries. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 97(5):608, 2018
Bisits A, Madsen G, Knox M, et al: The randomized nitric oxide tocolysis trial (RNOTT) for the
treatment of preterm labor. Am J Obstet Gynecol 191:683, 2004
Blackwell SC, Gyamfi-Bannerman C, Biggio JR Jr, et al: 17-OHPC to prevent recurrent preterm birth in
singleton gestations (PROLONG study): a multicenter, international, randomized double-blind trial.
Am J Perinatol 37(2):127, 2020
Blanc J, Resseguier N, Goffinet F, et al: Association between gestational age and severe maternal
morbidity and mortality of preterm cesarean delivery: a population-based cohort study. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 220(4):399.e1, 2019
Blois SM, Velohren S, We G, et al: Role of galectin-glycan circuits in reproduction: from healthy
pregnant to preterm birth (PTB). Semin Immunopathol 42(4):469, 2020
Bloom SL, Leveno KJ: Unproven technologies in maternal-fetal medicine and the high cost of US health
care. JAMA 317(10):1025, 2017
Bloom SL, Yost NP, McIntire DD, et al: Recurrence of preterm birth in singleton and twin pregnancies.
Obstet Gynecol 98:379, 2001
Boettcher LB, Clark EA: Neonatal and childhood outcomes following preterm premature rupture of
membranes. Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am 47(4):671, 2020
Bond DM, Middleton P, Levett KM, et al: Planned early birth versus expectant management for women
with preterm prelabour rupture of membranes prior to 37 weeks’ gestation for improving pregnancy
outcome. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 3:CD004735, 2017
Borgida AF, Mills AA, Feldman DM, et al: Outcome of pregnancies complicated by ruptured
membranes after genetic amniocentesis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 183(4):937, 2000
Breslin N, Gyamfi-Bannerman C: Current preterm birth prevention strategies. Clin Perinatol 47(4):705,
2020
Bruschettini M, van den Hove DL, Gazzolo D, et al: Lowering the dose of antenatal steroids: the effects
of a single course of betamethasone on somatic growth and brain cell proliferation in the rat. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 194:1341, 2006
Buekens P, Alexander S, Boutsen M, et al: Randomised controlled trial of routine cervical examinations
in pregnancy. Lancet 344:841, 1994
Cai C, Vandermeer B, Khurana R, et al: The impact of occupational activities during pregnancy on
pregnancy outcomes: a systematic review and metaanalysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 222(3):224, 2020
Canadian Preterm Labor Investigators Group: Treatment of preterm labor with the beta-adrenergic
agonist ritodrine. N Engl J Med 327:308, 1992

Cappelletti M, Doll JR, Stankiewicz TE, et al: Maternal regulation of inflammatory cues is required for
induction of preterm birth. JCI Insight 5(22):e138812, 2020
Carey JC, Klebanoff MA: Is a change in the vaginal flora associated with an increased risk of preterm
birth? Am J Obstet Gynecol 192(4):1341, 2005
Caritis SN, Rouse DJ, Peaceman AM, et al: Prevention of preterm birth in triplets using 17alphahydroxyprogesterone caproate. Obstet Gynecol 113:285, 2009
Caritis SN, Sharma S, Venkataramanan R, et al: Pharmacology and placental transport of 17hydroxyprogesterone caproate in singleton gestation. Am J Obstet Gynecol 207(5):398.e1, 2012
Caritis SN, Venkataramanan R, Thom E, et al: Relationship between 17-alpha hydroxyprogesterone
caproate concentration and spontaneous preterm birth. Am J Obstet Gynecol 210(2):128.e1, 2014
Carlan SJ, O’Brien WF, Parsons MT, et al: Preterm premature rupture of membranes: a randomized
study of home versus hospital management. Obstet Gynecol 81:61, 1993
Carroll SG, Blott M, Nicolaides KH: Preterm prelabor amniorrhexis: outcome of live births. Obstet
Gynecol 86:18, 1995
Carroll SG, Papaionnou S, Ntumazah IL, et al: Lower genital tract swabs in the prediction of intrauterine
infection in preterm prelabour rupture of the membranes. BJOG 103:54, 1996
Casanueva E, Ripoll C, Meza-Camacho C, et al: Possible interplay between vitamin C deficiency and
prolactin in pregnant women with premature rupture of membranes: facts and hypothesis. Med
Hypotheses 64:241, 2005
Challis JR, Sloboda DM, Alfaidy N, et al: Prostaglandins and mechanisms of preterm birth.
Reproduction 124:1, 2002
Chang CY, Nguyen CP, Wesley B, et al: Withdrawing approval of Makena—a proposal from the FDA
Center for Drug Evaluation and Research. N Engl J Med 383(24):e131, 2020
Chao TT, Bloom SL, Mitchell JS, et al: The diagnosis and natural history of false preterm labor. Obstet
Gynecol 118(6):1301, 2011
Chawanpaiboon S, Vogel JP, Moller AB, et al: Global, regional, and national estimates of levels of
preterm birth in 2014: a systematic review and modelling analysis. Lancet Glob Health 7(1):e37,
2019
Cnattingius S, Johansson S, Razaz N: Apgar score and risk of neonatal death among preterm infants. N
Engl J Med 383(1):49, 2020
Cnattingius S, Villamor E, Johansson S, et al: Maternal obesity and risk of preterm delivery. JAMA
309(22):2362, 2013
Cohen AW, Copel JA, Macones GA, et al: Unjustified increase in cost of care resulting from U.S. Food
and Drug Administration approval of Makena (17α-hydroxyprogesterone caproate). Obstet Gynecol
117(6):1408, 2011
Coleman M, Armistead B, Orvis A, et al: Hyaluronidase impairs neutrophil function and promotes group
B Streptococcus invasion and preterm labor in nonhuman primates. mBio 12(1):e03115, 2021
Collaborative Home Uterine Monitoring Study Group: A multicenter randomized controlled trial of home
uterine monitoring: active versus sham device. Am J Obstet Gynecol 173:1170, 1995
Collins JW Jr, David RJ, Simon DM, et al: Preterm birth among African American and white women
with a lifelong residence in high-income Chicago neighborhoods: an exploratory study. Ethn Dis
17(1):113, 2007
Conde-Agudelo A, Romero R, Da Fonseca E, et al: Vaginal progesterone is as effective as cervical
cerclage to prevent preterm birth in women with a singleton gestation, previous spontaneous preterm
birth, and a short cervix: updated indirect comparison meta-analysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol
219(1):10, 2018

Conde-Agudelo A, Romero R, Nicolaides KH: Cervical pessary to prevent preterm birth in
asymptomatic high-risk women: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol
223(1):42, 2020
Conde-Agudelo A, Rosas-Bermúdez A, Kafury-Goeta AC: Birth spacing and risk of adverse perinatal
outcomes: a meta-analysis. JAMA 295:1809, 2006
Consortium on Safe Labor: Respiratory morbidity in late preterm births. JAMA 304(4):419, 2010
Cook CM, Ellwood DA: A longitudinal study of the cervix in pregnancy using transvaginal ultrasound.
BJOG 103:16, 1996
Copper RL, Goldenberg RL, Dubard MB, et al: Cervical examination and tocodynamometry at 28
weeks’ gestation: prediction of spontaneous preterm birth. Am J Obstet Gynecol 172:666, 1995
Cotton DB, Strassner HT, Hill LM, et al: Comparison between magnesium sulfate, terbutaline and a
placebo for inhibition of preterm labor: a randomized study. J Reprod Med 29:92, 1984
Cox SM, Leveno KJ: Intentional delivery versus expectant management with preterm ruptured
membranes at 30–34 weeks’ gestation. Obstet Gynecol 86:875, 1995
Cox SM, Sherman ML, Leveno KJ: Randomized investigation of magnesium sulfate for prevention of
preterm birth. Am J Obstet Gynecol 163:767, 1990
Cox SM, Williams ML, Leveno KJ: The natural history of preterm ruptured membranes: what to expect
of expectant management. Obstet Gynecol 71:558, 1988
Creasy RK, Gummer BA, Liggins GC: System for predicting spontaneous preterm birth. Obstet Gynecol
55(6):692, 1980
Crider KS, Whitehead N, Buus RM: Genetic variation associated with preterm birth: a HuGE review.
Genet Med 7(9):593, 2005
Crowley AE, Grivell RM, Dodd JM: Sealing procedures for preterm prelabour rupture of membranes.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 7:CD010218, 2016
Crowther CA, Ashwood P, Andersen CC, et al: Maternal intramuscular dexamethasone versus
betamethasone before preterm birth (ASTEROID): a multicentre, double-blind, randomised
controlled trial. Lancet Child Adolesc Health 3(11):769, 2019
Crowther CA, Brown J, McKinlay CJ, et al: Magnesium sulphate for preventing preterm birth in
threatened preterm labour. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 8:CD001060, 2014
Crowther CA, Doyle LW, Haslam RR, et al: Outcomes at 2 years of age after repeat doses of antenatal
corticosteroids. N Engl J Med 357:1179, 2007
Crowther CA, Harding JE: Antenatal glucocorticoids for late preterm birth. N Engl J Med 374(14):1376,
2016
Crowther CA, Hiller JE, Doyle LW, et al: Effect of magnesium sulfate given for neuroprotection before
preterm birth: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA 290:2669, 2003
Crowther CA, McKinlay CJ, Middleton P, et al: Repeat doses of prenatal corticosteroids for women at
risk for preterm birth for improving neonatal health outcomes. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
6:CD003935, 2011
da Fonseca EB, Damião R, Moreira DA: Preterm birth prevention. Best Pract Res Clin Obstet
Gynaecol 69:40, 2020
De Goffau MC, Lager S, Sovio U, et al: Human placenta has no microbiome but can contain potential
pathogens. Nature 572(7769):329, 2019
Deindl P, Diemert A: From structural modalities in perinatal medicine to the frequency of preterm birth.
Semin Immunopathol 42(4):377, 2020
Delnord M, Hindori-Mohangoo AD, Smith LK, et al: Variations in very preterm birth rates in 30 highincome countries: are valid international comparisons possible using routine data. BJOG 124(5):785,

2017
Di Mascio D, Magro-Malosso ER, Saccone G, et al: Exercise during pregnancy in normal-weight
women and risk of preterm birth: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled
trials. Am J Obstet Gynecol 215(5):561, 2016
Diemert A, Arck PC: Preterm birth: pathogenesis and clinical consequences revisited. Semin
Immunopathol 42(4):375, 2020
Dodd JM, Grivell RM, Obrien CM, et al: Prenatal administration of progestogens for preventing
spontaneous preterm birth in women with a multiple pregnancy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
11:CD012024, 2019
Dolan SM, Gross SJ, Merkatz IR, et al: The contribution of birth defects to preterm birth and low birth
weight. Obstet Gynecol 110:318, 2007
Donders GG, Van Calsteren K, Bellen G, et al: Predictive value for preterm birth of abnormal vaginal
flora, bacterial vaginosis and aerobic vaginitis during the first trimester of pregnancy. BJOG
116(10):1315, 2009
Doni D, Paterlini G, Locatelli A, et al: Effects of antenatal indomethacin on ductus arteriosus early
closure and on adverse outcomes in preterm neonates. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 33(4):645,
2020
Donovan BM, Spracklen CN, Schweizer ML, et al: Intimate partner violence during pregnancy and the
risk for adverse infant outcomes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. BJOG 123(8):1289, 2016
Dotters-Katz S: Antibiotics for prophylaxis in the setting of preterm prelabor rupture of membranes.
Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am 47(4):595, 2020
Doyle LW, Crowther CA, Middleton S, et al: Magnesium sulfate for women at risk of preterm birth for
neuroprotection of the fetus. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 1:CD004661, 2009
Dutta EH, Behnia F, Boldogh I, et al: Oxidative stress damage-associated molecular signaling pathways
differentiate spontaneous preterm birth and preterm premature rupture of the membranes. Mol Hum
Reprod 22(2):143, 2016
Eichenwald EC, Stark AR: Management and outcomes of very low birth weight. N Engl J Med
358(16):1700, 2008
El-Bastawissi AY, Williams MA, Riley DE, et al: Amniotic fluid interleukin-6 and preterm delivery: a
review. Obstet Gynecol 95:1056, 2000
Eleje GU, Eke AC, Ikechebelu JI, et al: Cervical stitch (cerclage) in combination with other treatments
for preventing spontaneous preterm birth in singleton pregnancies. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
9:CD012871, 2020
Elimian A, Garry D, Figueroa R, et al: Antenatal betamethasone compared with dexamethasone
(Betacode Trial): a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol 110:26, 2007
Elovitz MA, Gajer P, Riis V, et al: Cervicovaginal microbiota and local immune response modulate the
risk of spontaneous preterm delivery. Nat Commun 10(1):1305, 2019
Ely DM, Driscoll AK: Infant mortality in the United States, 2018: data from the period linked birth/infant
death file. Natl Vital Stat Rep 69(7):1, 2020
EPPPIC Group: Evaluating Progestogens for Preventing Preterm birth International Collaborative
(EPPPIC): meta-analysis of individual participant data from randomised controlled trials. Lancet
397(10280):1183, 2021
Esplin MS, Elovitz MA, Iams JD, et al: Predictive accuracy of serial transvaginal cervical lengths and
quantitative vaginal fetal fibronectin levels for spontaneous preterm birth among nulliparous women.
JAMA 317(10):1047, 2017

Esplin MS: The importance of clinical phenotype in understanding and preventing spontaneous preterm
birth. Am J Perinatol 33(3):236, 2016
Fanaroff AA, Stoll BJ, Wright LL, et al: Trends in neonatal morbidity and mortality for very low
birthweight infants. Am J Obstet Gynecol 196:e1.147, 2007
Farooqi A, Holmgren PA, Engberg S, et al: Survival and 2-year outcome with expectant management of
second trimester rupture of membranes. Obstet Gynecol 92:895, 1998
Fettweis JM, Serrano MG, Brooks JP, et al: The vaginal microbiome and preterm birth. Nat Med
25(6):1012, 2019
Flenady V, Hawley G, Stock OM, et al: Prophylactic antibiotics for inhibiting preterm labour with intact
membranes. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 12:CD000246, 2013
Flenady V, Reinebrant HE, Liley HG, et al: Oxytocin receptor antagonists for inhibiting preterm labour.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 6:CD004452, 2014a
Flenady V, Wojcieszek AM, Papatsonis DN, et al: Calcium channel blockers for inhibiting preterm
labour and birth. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 6:CD002255, 2014b
Fonseca EB, Celik E, Para M, et al: Progesterone and the risk of preterm birth among women with a
short cervix. N Engl J Med 357:462, 2007
Food and Drug Administration: CDER proposes withdrawal of approval for Makena. 2020. Available at:
www.fda.gov/drugs/drug-safety-and-availability/cder-proposes-withdrawal-approval-makena.
Accessed March 13, 2021
Food and Drug Administration: FDA drug safety communication: FDA recommends against prolonged
use of magnesium sulfate to stop pre-term labor due to bone changes in exposed babies. 2013.
Available at: www.fda.gov/drugs/drug-safety-and-availability/fda-drug-safety-communication-fdarecommends-against-prolonged-use-magnesium-sulfate-stop-pre-term. Accessed March 24, 2021
Food and Drug Administration: FDA drug safety communication: new warnings against use of
terbutaline to treat preterm labor. 2011. Available at:
www.fda.gov/drugs/drugsafety/ucm243539.htm. Accessed March 24, 2021
Food and Drug Administration: Makena (hydroxyprogesterone caproate injection). New Drug
Application 021945/Supplement 023. 2019. Available at: www.fda.gov/media/132431/download.
Accessed March 24, 2021
Fortunato SJ, Menon R: IL-1 beta is a better inducer of apoptosis in human fetal membranes than IL-6.
Placenta 24:922, 2003
Frey HA, Klebanoff MA: The epidemiology, etiology, and costs of preterm birth. Semin Fetal Neonatal
Med 21(2):68, 2016
Furcron AE, Romero R, Plazyo O, et al: Vaginal progesterone, but not 17α-hydroxyprogesterone
caproate, has antiinflammatory effects at the murine maternal-fetal interface. Am J Obstet Gynecol
213(6):846.e1, 2015
Gajer P, Brotman RM, Bai G, et al: Temporal dynamics of the human vaginal microbiota. Sci Transl Med
4(132):132ra52, 2012
Garite TJ, Keegan KA, Freeman RK, et al: A randomized trial of ritodrine tocolysis versus expectant
management in patients with premature rupture of membranes at 25 to 30 weeks of gestation. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 157:388, 1987
Garite TJ, Kurtzman J, Maurel K, et al: Impact of a “rescue course” of antenatal corticosteroids: a
multicenter randomized placebo-controlled trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol 200:248.e.1, 2009
Gaudet LM, Smith G: Cerebral palsy and chorioamnionitis: the inflammatory cytokine link. Obstet
Gynecol Surv 56(7):433, 2001

Gentle SJ, Carlo WA, Tan S, et al: Association of antenatal corticosteroids and magnesium sulfate
therapy with neurodevelopmental outcome in extremely preterm children. Obstet Gynecol
135(6):1377, 2020
Ghaemi MS, Tarca AL, Romero R, et al: Proteomic signatures predict preeclampsia in individual cohorts
but not across cohorts-implications for clinical biomarker studies. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med
March 2, 2021 [Epub ahead of print]
Gillespie SL, Christian LM, Alston AD, et al: Childhood stress and birth timing among African American
women: cortisol as biological mediator. Psychoneuroendocrinology 84:32, 2017
Giraldo-Isaza MA, Berghella V: Cervical cerclage and preterm PROM. Clin Obstet Gynecol 54(2):313,
2011
Girsen AI, Mayo JA, Carmichael SL, et al: Women’s prepregnancy underweight as a risk factor for
preterm birth: a retrospective study. BJOG 123(12):2001, 2016
Godlewski BJ, Sobolik LI, King VJ, et al: Accelerated approval of 17α-hydroxyprogesterone caproate: a
cautionary tale. Obstet Gynecol 135(5):1207, 2020
Goepfert AR, Jeffcoat MK, Andrews W, et al: Periodontal disease and upper genital tract inflammation
in early spontaneous preterm birth. Obstet Gynecol 104:777, 2004
Goldenberg RL, Culhane JF, Iams JD, et al: Preterm birth 1: epidemiology and causes of preterm birth.
Lancet 371:75, 2008
Goldenberg RL, Hauth JC, Andrews WW: Intrauterine infection and preterm delivery. N Engl J Med
342:1500, 2000
Goldenberg RL, Mwatha A, Read JS, et al: The HPTN 024 Study: the efficacy of antibiotics to prevent
chorioamnionitis and preterm birth. Am J Obstet Gynecol 194:650, 2006
Goldstein B, Bradley B, Ressler KJ, et al: Associations between posttraumatic stress disorder, emotion
dysregulation, and alcohol dependence symptoms among inner city females. J Clin Psychol
73(3):319, 2017
Gomez R, Romero R, Glasasso M, et al: The value of amniotic fluid interleukin-6, white blood cell count,
and gram stain in the diagnosis of microbial invasion of the amniotic cavity in patients at term. Am J
Reprod Immunol 32:200, 1994
Gomez-Lopez N, StLouis D, Lehr MA, et al: Immune cells in term and preterm labor. Cell Mol Immunol
11(6):571, 2014
Goncalves LF, Chaiworapongsa T, Romero R: Intrauterine infection and prematurity. Ment Retard Dev
Disabil Res Rev 8:3, 2002
Gonzalez JM, Xu H, Ofori E, et al: Toll-like receptors in the uterus, cervix, and placenta: is pregnancy an
immunosuppressed state? Am J Obstet Gynecol 197(3):296, 2007
Goodfellow L, Care A, Alfirevic Z: Controversies in the prevention of spontaneous preterm birth in
asymptomatic women: an evidence summary and expert opinion. BJOG 128(2):177, 2021
Goya M, Pratcorona L, Merced C, et al: Cervical pessary in pregnant women with a short cervix
(PECEP): an open-label randomised controlled trial. Lancet 379(9828):1790, 2012
Gravett MG, Adams KM, Sadowsky DW, et al: Immunomodulators plus antibiotics delay preterm
delivery after experimental intraamniotic infection in a nonhuman primate model. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 197(5):518.e1, 2007
Gravett MG, Nelson HP, DeRouen T, et al: Independent associations of bacterial vaginosis and
Chlamydia trachomatis infection with adverse pregnancy outcome. JAMA 256(14):1899, 1986
Greene MF, Klebankoff MA, Harrington D: Preterm birth and 17OHP-why the FDA should not
withdraw approval. N Engl J Med 383(24):e130, 2020

Grether JK, Hoogstrate J, Walsh-Greene E, et al: Magnesium sulfate for tocolysis and risk of spastic
cerebral palsy in premature children born to women without preeclampsia. Am J Obstet Gynecol
183:717, 2000
Grobman WA, Gilbert SA, Iams JD, et al: Activity restriction among women with a short cervix. Obstet
Gynecol 121:1181, 2013
Grobman WA, Thom EA, Spong CY, et al: 17alpha-Hydroxyprogesterone caproate to prevent
prematurity in nulliparas with cervical length less than 30 mm. Am J Obstet Gynecol 207(5):390e.1,
2012
Guillen Ú, DeMauro S, Ma L, et al: Survival rates in extremely low birthweight infants depend on the
denominator: avoiding potential for bias by specifying denominators. Am J Obstet Gynecol
205:328.e1, 2011
Guinn DA, Goepfert AR, Owen J, et al: Terbutaline pump maintenance therapy for prevention of
preterm delivery: a double-blind trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol 179:874, 1998
Gyamfi-Bannerman C, Thom EA, Blackwell SC, et al: Antenatal betamethasone for women at risk for
late preterm delivery. N Engl J Med 374(14):1311, 2016
Haahr T, Ersbøll AS, Karlsen MA, et al: Treatment of bacterial vaginosis in pregnancy in order to
reduce the risk of spontaneous preterm delivery – a clinical recommendation. Acta Obstet Gynecol
Scand 95(8):850, 2016
Hadi HA, Hodson CA, Strickland D: Premature rupture of the membranes between 20 and 25 weeks’
gestation: role of amniotic fluid volume in perinatal outcome. Am J Obstet Gynecol 170:1139, 1994
Hajdu SA, Rossi RM, DeFranco EA: factors associated with maternal and neonatal interventions at the
threshold of viability. Obstet Gynecol 135(6):1398, 2020
Hamilton S, Oomomian Y, Stephen G, et al: Macrophages infiltrate the human and rat decidua during
term and preterm labor: evidence that decidual inflammation precedes labor. Biol Reprod 86(2):39,
2012
Hammers AL, Sanchez-Ramos L, Kaunitz AM: Antenatal exposure to indomethacin increases the risk
of severe intraventricular hemorrhage, necrotizing enterocolitis, and periventricular leukomalacia: a
systematic review with metaanalysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 212:505.e1, 2015
Hankins GD, Hauth JC, Cissik JH, et al: Effects of ritodrine hydrochloride on arteriovenous blood gas
and shunt in healthy pregnant yellow baboons. Am J Obstet Gynecol 158:658, 1988
Hassan SS, Romero R, Vidyadhari D, et al: Vaginal progesterone reduces the rate of preterm birth in
women with sonographic short cervix: a multicenter, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled
trial. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 38:18, 2011
Hawkins JS, Wells CE, Casey BM, et al: Nifedipine for acute tocolysis of preterm labor: a placebocontrolled randomized trial. Obstet Gynecol 138(1):73, 2021
Hawkins JS: Lower genital tract procedures. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al (eds):
Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2017
Hedermann G, Hedley PL, Bækvad-Hansen M, et al: Danish premature birth rates during the COVID19 lockdown. Arc Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed 106(1):93, 2021
Helenius K, Sjörs G, Shah PS, et al: Survival in very preterm infants: an international comparison of 10
national neonatal networks. Pediatrics 140(6):e20171264, 2017
Higgins RD, Saade G, Polin RA, et al: Evaluation and management of women and newborns with a
maternal diagnosis of chorioamnionitis: summary of a workshop. Obstet Gynecol 127(3):426, 2016
Hillier SL, Nugent RP, Eschenbach DA, et al: Association between bacterial vaginosis and preterm
delivery of a low-birthweight infant. N Engl J Med 333:1737, 1995

Hoffman MK, Goudar SS, Kodkany BS, et al: Low-dose aspirin for the prevention of preterm delivery
in nulliparous women with a singleton pregnancy (ASPIRIN): a randomised, double-blind, placebocontrolled trial. Lancet 395(10220):285, 2020
Holmlund U, Cabers G, Dahlfors AR, et al: Expression and regulation of the pattern recognition
receptors Toll-like receptor-2 and Toll-like receptor-4 in the human placenta. Immunology 107:145,
2002
Hong X, Bartell TR, Wang X: Gaining a deeper understanding of social determinants of preterm birth by
integrating multi-omics data. Pediatr Res 89(2):336, 2021
How HY, Hughes SA, Vogel RL, et al: Oral terbutaline in the outpatient management of preterm labor.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 173:1518, 1995
How HY, Zafaranchi L, Stella CL, et al: Tocolysis in women with preterm labor between 320/7 and
346/7 weeks of gestation: a randomized controlled pilot study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 194:976, 2006
Hui SY, Chor CM, Lau TK, et al: Cerclage pessary for preventing preterm birth in women with a
singleton pregnancy and a short cervix at 20 to 24 weeks: a randomized controlled trial. Am J
Perinatol 30:283, 2013
Iams JD, Goldenberg RL, Meis PJ, et al: The length of the cervix and the risk of spontaneous premature
delivery. N Engl J Med 334:567, 1996
Iams JD, Newman RB, Thom EA, et al: Frequency of uterine contractions and the risk of spontaneous
preterm birth. N Engl J Med 346:250, 2002
Ishii N, Kono Y, Yonemoto N, et al: Outcomes of infants born at 22 and 23 weeks’ gestation. Pediatrics
132(1):62, 2013
Janssens S, Beyaert R: Role of Toll-like receptors in pathogen recognition. Clin Microbiol Rev 16:637,
2003
Jarde A, Lutsiv O, Beyene J, et al: Vaginal progesterone, oral progesterone, 17-OHPC, cerclage, and
pessary for preventing preterm birth in at-risk singleton pregnancies: an updated systematic review
and network meta-analysis. BJOG 126(5):556, 2019
Jehan F, Sazawal S, Baqui AH, et al: Multiomics characterization of preterm birth in low- and middleincome countries. JAMA Netw Open 3(12):e2029655, 2020
Jones EO, Liew ZQ, Rust OA: The short cervix: a critical analysis of diagnosis and treatment. Obstet
Gynecol Clin North Am 47(4):545, 2020
Kamath-Rayne BD, Rozance PJ, Goldenberg RL, et al: Antenatal corticosteroids beyond 34 weeks
gestation: what do we do now? Am J Obstet Gynecol 215(4):423, 2016
Keelan JA, Blumenstein M, Helliwell RJ, et al: Cytokines, prostaglandins and parturition—a review.
Placenta 24:S33, 2003
Kenyon S, Boulvain M, Neilson J: Antibiotics for preterm rupture of the membranes: a systematic
review. Obstet Gynecol 104:1051, 2004
Kenyon S, Pike K, Jones DR, et al: Childhood outcomes after prescription of antibiotics to pregnant
women with preterm rupture of the membranes: 7-year follow-up of the ORACLE I trial. Lancet
372:1310, 2008a
Kenyon S, Pike K, Jones DR, et al: Childhood outcomes after prescription of antibiotics to pregnant
women with spontaneous preterm labour: 7-year follow-up of the ORACLE II trial. Lancet
372:1319, 2008b
Kenyon SL, Taylor DJ, Tarnow-Mordi, et al: Broad-spectrum antibiotics for spontaneous preterm labour:
the ORACLE II randomized trial. Lancet 357:989, 2001

Kerstjens JM, Bocca-Tjeertes IF, de Winter AF, et al: Neonatal morbidities and developmental delay in
moderately preterm-born children. Pediatrics 130(2):e265, 2012
King JF, Flenady V, Papatsonis D, et al: Calcium channel blockers for inhibiting preterm labour: a
systematic review of the evidence and a protocol for administration of nifedipine. Aust N Z J Obstet
Gynaecol 43:192, 2003
Kiver V, Boos V, Thomas A, et al: Perinatal outcomes after previable preterm premature rupture of
membranes before 24 weeks gestation. J Perinat Med 46(5):555, 2018
Korita D, Sagawa N, Itoh H, et al: Cyclic mechanical stretch augments prostacyclin production in
cultured human uterine myometrial cells from pregnant women: possible involvement of upregulation of prostacyclin synthase expression. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 87:5209, 2002
Kovacevich GJ, Gaich SA, Lavin JP, et al: The prevalence of thromboembolic events among women
with extended bed rest prescribed as part of the treatment for premature labor or preterm premature
rupture of membranes. Am J Obstet Gynecol 182:1089, 2000
Kurtzman JL, Thorp JM Jr, Spielman FJ, et al: Do nifedipine and verapamil potentiate the cardiac
toxicity of magnesium sulfate? Am J Perinatol 10:450, 1993
Kuusela P, Jacobsson B, Hagberg H, et al: Second trimester transvaginal ultrasound measurement of
cervical length for prediction of preterm birth: a blinded prospective multicentre diagnostic accuracy
study. BJOG 128(2):195, 2021
Laskin MD, Yinon Y, Whittle WL: Preterm premature rupture of membranes in the presence of
cerclage: is the risk for intra-uterine infection and adverse neonatal outcome increased. J Matern
Fetal Neonatal Med 25(4):424, 2012
Lauder AP, Roche AM, Sherrill-Mix S, et al: Comparison of placenta samples with contamination
controls does not provide evidence for a distinct placenta microbiota. Microbiome 4(1):29, 2016
Laughon SK, Albert PS, Leishear K, et al: The NICHD Consecutive Pregnancies Study: recurrent
preterm delivery by subtype. Am J Obstet Gynecol 210(2):131.e1, 2014
Lees CC, Lojacono A, Thompson C, et al: Glyceryl trinitrate and ritodrine in tocolysis: an international
multicenter randomized study. Obstet Gynecol 94:403, 1999
Leeson SC, Maresh MJ, Martindale EA, et al: Detection of fetal fibronectin as a predictor of preterm
delivery in high risk symptomatic pregnancies. BJOG 103:48, 1996
Leveno KJ, Cox K, Roark ML: Cervical dilatation and prematurity revisited. Obstet Gynecol 68(3):434,
1986a
Leveno KJ, Klein VR, Guzick DS, et al: Single-centre randomised trial of ritodrine hydrochloride for
preterm labour. Lancet 1:1293, 1986b
Leveno KJ, McIntire DD, Bloom SL, et al: Decreased preterm births in an inner-city public hospital.
Obstet Gynecol 113(3):578, 2009
Lewis DF, Adair CD, Robichaux AG, et al: Antibiotic therapy in preterm premature rupture of
membranes: are seven days necessary? A preliminary, randomized clinical trial. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 188:1413, 2003
Lewis DF, Robichaux AG, Jaekle RK, et al: Expectant management of preterm premature rupture of
membranes and nonvertex presentation: what are the risks? Am J Obstet Gynecol 196:566, 2007
Lewis R, Mercer BM, Salama M, et al: Oral terbutaline after parenteral tocolysis: a randomized, doubleblind, placebo-controlled trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol 175:834, 1996
Li C, Shen J, Hua K: Cerclage for women with twin pregnancies: a systematic review and
metaanalysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 220(6):543, 2019
Lieman JM, Brumfield CG, Carlo W, et al: Preterm premature rupture of membranes: is there an
optimal gestational age for delivery? Obstet Gynecol 105:12, 2005

Liggins GC, Howie RN: A controlled trial of antepartum glucocorticoid treatment for prevention of the
respiratory distress syndrome in premature infants. Pediatrics 50:515, 1972
Likis FE, Velez Edwards DR, Andrews JC, et al: Progestogens for preterm birth prevention. Obstet
Gynecol 120:897, 2012
Loe SM, Sanchez-Ramos L, Kaunitz AM: Assessing the neonatal safety of indomethacin tocolysis: a
systematic review with meta-analysis. Obstet Gynecol 106:173, 2005
Low JA, Panagiotopoulos C, Derrick EJ: Newborn complication after intrapartum asphyxia with
metabolic acidosis in the preterm fetus. Am J Obstet Gynecol 172:805, 1995
Lyall F, Lye S, Teoh T, et al: Expression of Gsalpha, connexin-43, connexin-26, and EP1, 3, and 4
receptors in myometrium of prelabor singleton versus multiple gestations and the effects of
mechanical stretch and steroids on Gsalpha. J Soc Gynecol Investig 9:299, 2002
Lyell DJ, Pullen K, Campbell L, et al: Magnesium sulfate compared with nifedipine for acute tocolysis of
preterm labor: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol 1108:61, 2007
Mackeen AD, Seibel-Seamon J, Muhammad J, et al: Tocolytics for preterm premature rupture of
membranes. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2:CD007062, 2014
Main EK, Change SC, Carpenter AM, et al: Singleton preterm birth rates for racial and ethnic groups
during the coronavirus disease 2019 pandemic in California. Am J Obstet Gynecol 224(2): 239, 2021
Major CA, Towers CW, Lewis DF, et al: Expectant management of preterm premature rupture of
membranes complicated by active recurrent genital herpes. Am J Obstet Gynecol 188:1551, 2003
Makrides M, Best K, Yelland L, et al: A randomized trial of prenatal n-3 fatty acid supplementation and
preterm delivery. N Engl J Med 381(11):1035, 2019
Malloy MH, Onstad L, Wright E: The effect of cesarean delivery on birth outcome in very low birth
weight infants. Obstet Gynecol 77:498, 1991
Marinić M, Mika K, Chigurupati S, et al: Evolutionary transcriptomics implicates HAND2 in the origins
of implantation and regulation of gestation length. Elife 10:e61257, 2021
Marinovich ML, Regan AK, Gissler M, et al: Associations between interpregnancy interval and preterm
birth by previous preterm birth status in four high-income countries: a cohort study. BJOG
128(7):1134, 2021.
Marret S, Marpeau L, Bénichou J: Benefit of magnesium sulfate given before very preterm birth to
protect infant brain. Pediatrics 121(1):225, 2008
Martin JA, Hamilton BE, Osterman MJ, et al: Births: final data for 2019. Natl Vital Stat Rep 70(2):1,
2021
Martin JA, Osterman MJ, Kirmeyer SE, et al: Measuring gestational age in vital statistics data:
transitioning to the obstetric estimate. Natl Vital Stat Rep 64(5):1, 2015
McCall CA, Grimes DA, Drapkin Lyerly A: “Therapeutic” bed rest in pregnancy unethical and
unsupported by data. Obstet Gynecol 121:1305, 2013
McElrath TF, Allred E, Leviton A: Prolonged latency after preterm premature rupture of membranes: an
evaluation of histologic condition and intracranial ultrasonic abnormality in the neonate born at <28
weeks of gestation. Am J Obstet Gynecol 189:794, 2003
McElrath TF, Norwitz ER, Lieberman ES, et al: Perinatal outcome after preterm premature rupture of
membranes with in situ cervical cerclage. Am J Obstet Gynecol 187:1147, 2002
McEvoy C, Schilling D, Segel S, et al: Improved respiratory compliance in preterm infants after a single
rescue course of antenatal steroids: a randomized trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol 202(6):544.e1, 2010
McIntire DD, Leveno KJ: Neonatal mortality and morbidity rates in later preterm births compared with
births at term. Obstet Gynecol 111:35, 2008

McManemy J, Cooke E, Amon E, et al: Recurrence risk for preterm delivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol
196(6):576.e1, 2007
McPherson JA, Rouse DJ, Grobman WA, et al: Association of duration of neuroprotective magnesium
sulfate infusion with neonatal and maternal outcomes. Obstet Gynecol 124(4):749, 2014
Medley N, Poljak B, Mammarella S, et al: Clinical guidelines for prevention and management of preterm
birth: a systematic review. BJOG 125(1):1361, 2018
Meis PJ, Klebanoff M, Thom E, et al: Prevention of recurrent preterm delivery by 17alphahydroxyprogesterone caproate. N Engl J Med 348:2379, 2003
Mekonnen ZK, Oehlert JW, Eskenazi B, et al: The relationship between air pollutants and maternal
socioeconomic factors on preterm birth in California urban counties. J Expo Sci Environ Epidemiol
31:503, 2021.
Melchor JC, Khalil A, Wing D, et al: Prediction of preterm delivery in symptomatic women using
PAMG-1, fetal fibronectin and phIGFBP-1 tests: systematic review and meta-analysis. Ultrasound
Obstet Gynecol 52(4):442, 2018
Mendez-Figueroa H, Chauhan SP: Tocolytic therapy in preterm premature rupture of membranes.
Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am 47(4):569, 2020
Menon R, Behnia F, Polettini J, et al: Novel pathways of inflammation in human fetal membranes
associated with preterm birth and preterm pre-labor rupture of the membranes. Semin
Immunopathol 42(4):431, 2020
Mercer BM, Arheart KL: Antimicrobial therapy in expectant management of preterm premature
rupture of the membranes. Lancet 346:1271, 1995
Mercer BM, Carr TL, Beazley DD, et al: Antibiotic use in pregnancy and drug-resistant infant sepsis.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 181:816, 1999
Mercer BM, Crocker LG, Boe NM, et al: Induction versus expectant management in premature rupture
of the membranes with mature amniotic fluid at 32 to 36 weeks: a randomized trial. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 169:775, 1993
Mercer BM, Miodovnik M, Thurnau GR, et al: Antibiotic therapy for reduction of infant morbidity after
preterm premature rupture of the membranes. JAMA 278:989, 1997
Mercer BM: Preterm premature rupture of the membranes. Obstet Gynecol 101:178, 2003
Michalowicz BS, Hodges JS, DiAngelis AJ, et al: Treatment of periodontal disease and the risk of
preterm birth. N Engl J Med 355:1885, 2006
Mogami H, Kishore AH, Shi H, et al: Fetal fibronectin signaling induces matrix metalloproteases and
cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) in amnion cells and preterm birth in mice. J Biol Chem 288(3):1953,
2013
Morales WJ, Madhav H: Efficacy and safety of indomethacin compared with magnesium sulfate in the
management of preterm labor: a randomized study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 169:97, 1993a
Morales WJ, Smith SG, Angel JL, et al: Efficacy and safety of indomethacin versus ritodrine in the
management of preterm labor: a randomized study. Obstet Gynecol 74:567, 1989
Morales WJ, Talley T: Premature rupture of membranes at <25 weeks: a management dilemma. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 168:503, 1993b
Morgan JL, Nelson DB, Casey BM, et al: Impact of metabolic acidemia at birth on neonatal outcomes
in infants born before 34 weeks’ gestation. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 30(16):1902, 2017
Motomura K, Romero R, Galaz J, et al: RNA Sequencing reveals distinct immune responses in the
chorioamniotic membranes of women with preterm labor and microbial or sterile intra-amniotic
inflammation. Infect Immun 89(5):e00819, 2021

Moutquin JM, Sherman D, Cohen H, et al: Double-blind, randomized, controlled trial of atosiban and
ritodrine in the treatment of preterm labor: a multicenter effectiveness and safety study. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 183:1191, 2000
Muench MV, Baschat AA, Kopelman J, et al: Indomethacin therapy initiated before 24 weeks of
gestation for the prevention of preterm birth. Obstet Gynecol 101:65S, 2003
Muench MV, Harman CR, Baschat AA, et al: Early fetal exposure to long term indomethacin therapy to
prevent preterm delivery: neonatal outcome. Am J Obstet Gynecol 185:S149, 2001
Murphy KE: Betamethasone compared with dexamethasone for preterm birth: a call for trials. Obstet
Gynecol 110:7, 2007
Nallasamy S, Mahendroo M: Distinct roles of cervical epithelia and stroma in pregnancy and parturition.
Semin Reprod Med 35(2):190, 2017
National Institutes of Health: Antenatal corticosteroids revisited: repeat courses. NIH Consens
Statement 17(2):1, 2000
Nelson DB, Hanlon A, Nachamkin I, et al: Early pregnancy changes in bacterial vaginosis-associated
bacteria and preterm delivery. Paediatr Perinat Epidemiol 28(2):88, 2014
Nelson DB, McIntire DD, Leveno KJ: A chronicle of the 17OHP-C story to prevent recurrent preterm
birth. Am J Obstet Gynecol 224(2):175, 2021
Nelson DB, McIntire DD, McDonald J, et al: 17-alpha hydroxyprogesterone caproate did not reduce the
rate of recurrent preterm birth in a prospective cohort study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 216(6):600.e1,
2017
Nelson KB, Grether JK: Can magnesium sulfate reduce the risk of cerebral palsy in very-lowbirthweight infants? Pediatrics 95:263, 1995
Nelson LH, Anderson RL, O’Shea M, et al: Expectant management of preterm premature rupture of
the membranes. Am J Obstet Gynecol 171:350, 1994
Nicolaides KH, Syngelaki A, Poon LC, et al: A randomized trial of a cervical pessary to prevent
preterm singleton birth. N Engl J Med 374(11):1044, 2016
Niebyl JR, Blake DA, White RD, et al: The inhibition of premature labor with indomethacin. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 136:1014, 1980
Nikolova T, Uotila J, Nikolova N, et al: Prediction of spontaneous preterm delivery in women presenting
with premature labor: a comparison of placenta alpha microglobulin-1, phosphorylated insulin-like
growth factor binding protein-1, and cervical length. Am J Obstet Gynecol 219(6):610.e1, 2018
Norman JE, Marlow N, Messow CM, et al: Vaginal progesterone prophylaxis for preterm birth (the
OPPTIMUM study): a multicenter, randomized, double-blind trial. Lancet 387(10033):2106, 2016
Norman M, Hallberg B, Abrahamsson T, et al: Association between year of birth and 1-year survival
among extremely preterm infants in Sweden during 2004–2007 and 2014–2016. JAMA
321(12):1188, 2019
Northen AT, Norman GS, Anderson K, et al: Follow-up of children exposed in utero to 17 alphahydroxyprogesterone caproate compared with placebo. Obstet Gynecol 110(4):865, 2007
Owen J, Hankins G, Iams JD, et al: Multicenter randomized trial of cerclage for preterm birth
prevention in high-risk women with shortened mid-trimester cervical length. Am J Obstet Gynecol
201(4):375.e1, 2009
Palacios C, Kostiuk LK, Peña-Rosas JP: Vitamin D supplementation for women during pregnancy.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 7:CD008873, 2019
Papatsonis DN, Van Geijn HP, Ader HJ, et al: Nifedipine and ritodrine in the management of preterm
labor: a randomized multicenter trial. Obstet Gynecol 90:230, 1997

Parilla BV, Dooley SL, Minogue JP, et al: The efficacy of oral terbutaline after intravenous tocolysis.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 169:965, 1993
Parry S, Leite R, Esplin MS, et al: Cervicovaginal fluid proteomic analysis to identify potential
biomarkers for preterm birth. Am J Obstet Gynecol 222(5):493.e1, 2020
Peltoniemi OM, Kari MA, Tammela O, et al: Randomized trial of a single repeat dose of prenatal
betamethasone treatment in imminent preterm birth. Pediatrics, 119:290, 2007
Perry KG Jr, Martin RW, Blake PG, et al: Maternal mortality associated with adult respiratory distress
syndrome. South Med J 91(5):441, 1998
Peterson LS, Stelzer IA, Tsai AS, et al: Multiomic immune clockworks of pregnancy. Semin
Immunopathol 42(4):397, 2020
Petrini JR, Dias T, McCormick MC, et al: Increased risk of adverse neurological development for late
preterm infants. J Pediatr 154(2):169, 2009
Petrova A, Demissie K, Rhoads GG, et al: Association of maternal fever during labor with neonatal and
infant morbidity and mortality. Obstet Gynecol 98:20, 2001
Pierce-Williams RA, Burd J, Felder L, et al: Clinical course of severe and critical coronavirus disease
2019 in hospitalized pregnancies: a United States cohort study. Am J Obstet Gynecol MFM
2(3):100134, 2020
Pirjani R, Moini A, Almasi-Hashiani A, et al: Placenta alpha microglobulin-1 (PartoSure) test for the
prediction of preterm birth: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med
November 17, 2019 [Epub ahead of print]
Pizzella S, El Helou N, Chubiz J, et al: Evolving cervical imaging technologies to predict preterm birth.
Semin Immunopathol 42(4):385, 2020
Premkumar A, Sinha N, Miller ES, et al: Perioperative use of cefazolin and indomethacin for physical
examination-indicated cerclages to improve gestational latency. Obstet Gynecol 135(6):1409, 2020
Prior M, Hibberd R, Asemota N, et al: Inadvertent P-hacking among trials and systematic reviews of
the effect of progestogens in pregnancy? A systematic review and meta-analysis. BJOG
124(7):1008, 2017
Promislow JH, Hertz-Picciotto I, Schramm M, et al: Bed rest and other determinants of bone loss during
pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 191:1077, 2004
Purisch SE, Gyamfi-Bannerman C: Epidemiology of preterm birth. Semin Perinatol 41(7):387, 2017
Quist-Nelson J, de Ruigh AA, Seidler AL, et al: Immediate delivery compared with expectant
management in late preterm prelabor rupture of membranes: an individual participant data metaanalysis. Obstet Gynecol 131(2):269, 2018
Raju TN, Mercer BM, Burchfield DJ, et al: Periviable birth: executive summary of a joint workshop by
the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, Society for
Maternal-Fetal Medicine, American Academy of Pediatrics, and American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists. Obstet Gynecol 123(5):1083, 2014
Reddy UM, Zhang J, Sun L, et al: Neonatal mortality by attempted route of delivery in early preterm
birth. Am J Obstet Gynecol 207:117.e1, 2012
Rehal A, Benkó Z, De Paco Matallana C, et al: Early vaginal progesterone versus placebo in twin
pregnancies for the prevention of spontaneous preterm birth: a randomized, double-blind trial. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 224(1):86.e1, 2020
Reinebrant HE, Pileggi-Castro C, Romero CL, et al: Cyclo-oxygenase (COX) inhibitors for treating
preterm labour. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 6:CD001992, 2015
Roberts D, Brown J, Medley N, et al: Antenatal corticosteroids for accelerating fetal lung maturation for
women at risk of preterm birth. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 3:CD004454, 2017

Rohwer AC, Oladapo OT, Hofmeyr GJ: Strategies for optimizing antenatal corticosteroid administration
for women with anticipated preterm birth. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 5:CD013633, 2020
Roman A, Zork N, Haeri S, et al: Physical examination-indicated cerclage in twin pregnancy: a
randomized controlled trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol 223(6):902.e1, 2020
Romero R, Conde-Agudelo A, Da Fonseca E, et al: Vaginal progesterone for preventing preterm birth
and adverse perinatal outcomes in singleton gestations with a short cervix: a meta-analysis of
individual patient data. Am J Obstet Gynecol 218(2):161, 2018
Romero R, Dey SK, Fisher SJ: Preterm labor: one syndrome, many causes. 345(6198):760, 2014
Romero R, Nores J, Mazor M, et al: Microbial invasion of the amniotic cavity during term labor.
Prevalence and clinical significance. J Reprod Med 38:543, 1993
Romero R, Sibai BM, Sanchez-Ramos L, et al: An oxytocin receptor antagonist (atosiban) in the
treatment of preterm labor: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial with tocolytic rescue.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 182:1173, 2000
Romero R, Stanczyk FZ: Progesterone is not the same as 17α-hydroxyprogesterone caproate:
implications for obstetrical practice. Am J Obstet Gynecol 208(6):421, 2013
Rossi RM, DeFranco EA: Maternal complications associated with periviable birth. Obstet Gynecol
132(1):107, 2018
Rossi RM, Hall E, DeFranco EA: Contemporary trends in cesarean delivery utilization for live births
between 22 0/7 and 23 6/7 weeks of gestation. Obstet Gynecol 133(3):451, 2019
Rouse DJ, Caritis SN, Peaceman AM, et al: A trial of 17alpha-hydroxyprogesterone caproate to prevent
prematurity in twins. N Engl J Med 357:454, 2007
Rouse DJ, Hirtz DG, Thom E, et al: A randomized, controlled trial of magnesium sulfate for the
prevention of cerebral palsy. N Engl J Med 359:895, 2008
Rouse DJ: Magnesium sulfate for fetal neuroprotection. Am J Obstet Gynecol 205(4):296, 2011
Rysavy MA, Li L, Bell EF: Between-hospital variation in treatment and outcomes in extremely preterm
infants. N Engl J Med 372(19):1801, 2015
Sakabe NJ, Aneas I, Knoblauch N, et al: Transcriptome and regulatory maps of decidua-derived stromal
cells inform gene discovery in preterm birth. Sci Adv 6(49):eabc8696, 2020
Salim R, Garmi G, Zohar N, et al: Nifedipine compared with atosiban for treating preterm labor: a
randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol 120(6):1323, 2012
Salow AD, Pool LR, Grobman WA, et al: Associations of neighborhood-level racial residential
segregation with adverse pregnancy outcomes. Am J Obstet Gynecol 218(3):351.e1, 2018
Samol JM, Lambers DS: Magnesium sulfate tocolysis and pulmonary edema: the drug or the vehicle?
Am J Obstet Gynecol 192:1430, 2005
Sanz M, Kornman K, Working group 3 of the joint EFP/AAP workshop: Periodontitis and adverse
pregnancy outcomes: consensus report of the Joint EFP/AAP Workshop on Periodontitis and
Systemic Diseases. J Periodontol 84(4 Suppl):S164, 2013
Schuster HJ, de Jonghe BA, Limpens J, et al: Asymptomatic vaginal Candida colonization and adverse
pregnancy outcomes including preterm birth: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J Obstet
Gynecol MFM 2(3):100163, 2020
Segel SY, Miles AM, Clothier B, et al: Duration of antibiotic therapy after preterm premature rupture of
fetal membranes. Am J Obstet Gynecol 189:799, 2003
Serrano MG, Parikh HI, Brooks JP, et al: Racioethnic diversity in the dynamics of the vaginal
microbiome during pregnancy. Nat Med 25(6):1001, 2019
Shaddeau AK, Burd I: Antenatal monitoring after preterm rupture of membranes. Obstet Gynecol Clin
North Am 47(4):625, 2020

Sharma S, Ou J, Strom S, et al: Identification of enzymes involved in the metabolism of 17alphahydroxyprogesterone caproate: an effective agent for prevention of preterm birth. Drug Metab
Dispos 36(9):1896, 2008
Shennan A, Chandiramani M, Bennett P, et al: MAVRIC: a multicenter randomized controlled trial of
transabdominal vs transvaginal cervical cerclage. Am J Obstet Gynecol 222(3):261.e1, 2020
Shynlova O, Nedd-Roderique T, Li Y, et al: Infiltration of myeloid cells into decidua is a critical early
event in the labour cascade and post-partum uterine remodeling. J Cell Mol Med 17(2):311, 2013a
Shynlova O, Nedd-Roderique T, Li Y, et al: Myometrial immune cells contribute to term parturition,
preterm labour and post-partum involution in mice. J Cell Mol Med 17(1):90, 2013b
Sibai B, Saade GR, Das AF: Re-examining the Meis trials for evidence of false-positive results. Obstet
Gynecol 136(3):622, 2020
Sibai BM: Magnesium sulfate for neuroprotection in patients at risk for early preterm delivery: not yet.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 205(4):296, 2011
Simons NE, Leeuw M, Hooft JV, et al: The long-term effect of prenatal progesterone treatment on child
development, behavior and health: a systematic review. BJOG 128(6):964, 2021.
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, McIntosh J, Feltovich H, et al: The role of routine cervical length
screening in selected high- and low-risk women for preterm birth prevention. Am J Obstet Gynecol
215(3):B2, 2016b
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine: Implementation of the use of antenatal corticosteroids in the late
preterm birth period in women at risk for preterm delivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 215(2):B13, 2016a
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine: SMFM statement: use of 17-alpha hydroxyprogesterone caproate
for prevention of recurrent preterm birth. Am J Obstet Gynecol 223(1):B16, 2020b
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine: Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine Consult Series #50: the role
of activity restriction in obstetric management: (replaces consult number 33, August 2014). Am J
Obstet Gynecol 223(2):B2, 2020a
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine: The role of cervical pessary placement to prevent preterm birth in
clinical practice. Am J Obstet Gynecol 216(3):B8, 2017
Sooranna SR, Lee Y, Kim LU, et al: Mechanical stretch activates type 2 cyclooxygenase via activator
protein-1 transcription factor in human myometrial cells. Mol Hum Reprod 10:109, 2004
Sosa C, Althabe F, Belizan J, et al: Bed rest in singleton pregnancies for preventing preterm birth.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 1:CD003581, 2004
Stephen GL, Lui S, Hamilton SA, et al: Transcriptomic profiling of human choriodecidua during term
labor: inflammation as a key driver of labor. Am J Reprod Immunol 73(1):36, 2015
Stiles AD: Prenatal corticosteroids—early gain, long-term questions. N Engl J Med 357:1248, 2007
Stoll BJ, Hansen N, Fanaroff AA, et al: Changes in pathogens causing early-onset sepsis in very-lowbirth-weight infants. N Engl J Med 347:240, 2002
Stoll BJ, Hansen NI, Bell EF, et al: Neonatal outcomes of extremely preterm infants from the NICHD
Neonatal Research Network. Pediatrics 126:443, 2010
Stout MJ, Zhou Y, Wylie KM, et al: Early pregnancy vaginal microbiome trends and preterm birth. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 217(3):356.e1, 2017
Subtil D, Brabant G, Tilloy E, et al: Early clindamycin for bacterial vaginosis in pregnancy (PREMEVA):
a multicentre, double-blind, randomised controlled trial. Lancet 392(10160):2018
Terkildsen MF, Parilla BV, Kumar P, et al: Factors associated with success of emergent secondtrimester cerclage. Obstet Gynecol 101:565, 2003
Theis KR, Romero R, Winters AD, et al: Does the human placenta delivered at term have a microbiota?
Results of cultivation, quantitative real-time PCR, 16S rRNA gene sequencing, and metagenomics.

Am J Obstet Gynecol 220(3):267.e1, 2019
Timmons BC, Reese J, Socrate S, et al: Prostaglandins are essential for cervical ripening in LPSmediated preterm birth but not term or antiprogestin-driven preterm ripening. Endocrinology
155(1):287, 2014
Tita A, Owen J, Cliver S, et al: Decreasing temporal trends in adjusted preterm birth among women
receiving prenatal care at a university-based health system. Am J Obstet Gynecol 204:S183, 2011
Tita AT, Cliver SP, Goepfert AR, et al: Clinical trial of interconceptional antibiotics to prevent preterm
birth: subgroup analyses and possible adverse antibiotic-microbial interaction. Am J Obstet Gynecol
196:367, 2007
To MS, Alfirevic Z, Heath VC, et al: Cervical cerclage for prevention of preterm delivery in women
with short cervix: randomized controlled trial. Lancet 363(9424):1849, 2004
Tomashek KM, Shapiro-Mendoza CK, Davidoff MJ, et al: Differences in mortality between latepreterm and term singleton infants in the United States, 1995–2002. J Pediatr 151:450, 2007
Tong M, Abrahms VM: Neutrophils in preterm birth: friend or foe? Placenta 102:17, 2020
Tong M, Hanna SE, Abrahams VM: Polymicrobial stimulation of human fetal membranes induce
neutrophil activation and neutrophil extracellular trap release. J Reprod Immunol 145:103306, 2021
United States Congress: Hearing on improving maternal health: legislation to advance prevention efforts
and access to care. 2019. Available at https://energycommerce.house.gov/committee/activity/hearings/hearing-on-improving-maternal-health-legislation-to-advance-prevention. Accessed
March 13, 2021
Venkatesh KK, Riley L, Castro VM, et al: Association of antenatal depression symptoms and
antidepressant treatment with preterm birth. Obstet Gynecol 127(5):926, 2016
Vergnes JN, Sixou M: Preterm low birthweight and maternal periodontal status: a meta-analysis. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 196:135.e1, 2007
Villamor-Martinez E, Lubach GA, Rahim OM, et al: Association of histological and clinical
chorioamnionitis with neonatal sepsis among preterm infants: a systematic review, meta-analysis,
and meta-regression. Front Immunol 11:972, 2020
Viteri OA, Blackwell SC, Chauhan SP, et al: Antenatal corticosteroids for the prevention of respiratory
distress syndrome in premature twins. Obstet Gynecol 128(3):583, 2016
Volozonoka L, Rots D, Kempa I, et al: Genetic landscape of preterm birth due to cervical insufficiency:
comprehensive gene analysis and patient next-generation sequencing data interpretation. PLoS One
15(3):e0230771, 2020
Vornhagen J, Adams Waldorf KM, Rajagopal L: Perinatal group B streptococcal infections: virulence
factors, immunity, and prevention strategies. Trends Microbiol 25(11):919, 2017
Walker KF, Thornton JG: Tocolysis and preterm labour. Lancet 387(10033): 2068, 2016
Wang H, Parry S, Macones G, et al: A functional SNP in the promoter of the SERPINH1 gene
increases risk of preterm premature rupture of membranes in African Americans. PNAS 103:13463,
2006
Wapner RJ, Sorokin Y, Mele L, et al: Long-term outcomes after repeat doses of antenatal
corticosteroids. N Engl J Med 357:1190, 2007
Watkins PL, Dagle JM, Bell EF, et al: Outcomes at 18 to 22 months of corrected age for infants born at
22 to 25 weeks of gestation in a center practicing active management. J Pediatr 217:52, 2020
Weiss JL, Malone FD, Vidaver J, et al: Threatened abortion: a risk factor for poor pregnancy outcome, a
population-based screening study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 190:745, 2004
Wenstrom K, Weiner CP, Merrill D, et al: A placebo controlled randomized trial of the terbutaline pump
for prevention of preterm delivery. Am J Perinatol 14:87, 1997

Werner EF, Han CS, Savitz DA, et al: Health outcomes for vaginal compared with cesarean delivery of
appropriately grown preterm neonates. Obstet Gynecol 121:1195, 2013
White BA, Creedon DJ, Nelson KE, et al: The vaginal microbiome in health and disease. Trends
Endocrinol Metab 22(10):389, 2011
WHO ACTION Trials Collaborators, Oladapo OT, Vogel JP, et al: Antenatal dexamethasone for early
preterm birth in low-resource countries. N Engl J Med 383(26):2020
Willcockson AR, Nandu T, Liu CL, et al: Transcriptome signature identifies distinct cervical pathways
induced in lipopolysaccharide-mediated preterm birth. Biol Reprod 98(3):408, 2018
Wing DA, Haeri S, Silber AC, et al: Placental alpha microglobulin-1 compared with fetal fibronectin to
predict preterm delivery in symptomatic women. Obstet Gynecol 130(6):1183, 2017
Winger EE, Reed JL, Ji X, et al: MicroRNAs isolated from peripheral blood in the first trimester predict
spontaneous preterm birth. PLoS One 15(8):e0236805, 2020
Winn HN, Chen M, Amon E, et al: Neonatal pulmonary hypoplasia and perinatal mortality in patients
with mid-trimester rupture of amniotic membranes—a critical analysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol
182:1638, 2000
World Health Organization: International statistical classification of diseases and related health problems,
11th revision. 2019. Available at: www.who.int/classifications/classification-of-diseases. Accessed
April 27, 2021
World Health Organization: Preterm birth. 2018. Available at: www.who.int/news-room/factsheets/detail/preterm-birth. Accessed March 26, 2021
Wu YW, Colford JM Jr: Chorioamnionitis as a risk factor for cerebral palsy: a meta-analysis. JAMA
284(11):1417, 2000
Yoon BH, Romero R, Park JS, et al: Fetal exposure to an intra-amniotic inflammation and the
development of cerebral palsy at the age of three years. Am J Obstet Gynecol 182:675, 2000
Yoon BH, Romero R, Park JY, et al: Antibiotic administration can eradicate intra-amniotic infection or
intra-amniotic inflammation in a subset of patients with preterm labor and intact membranes. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 221(2):141.e1, 2019
Yoon BH, Yang SH, Jun JK, et al: Maternal blood C-reactive protein, white blood cell count, and
temperature in preterm labor: a comparison with amniotic fluid white blood cell count. Obstet
Gynecol 87:231, 1996
Younge N, Goldstein RF, Bann CM, et al: Survival and neurodevelopmental outcomes among periviable
infants. N Engl J Med 376(7):617, 2017
Yule CS, Ambia AM, Duryea EL, et al: The effect of normal saline on renal function and electrolytes in
women with preeclampsia. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med November 18, 2020 [Epub ahead of print]
Zhang G, Feenstra B, Bacelis J, et al: Genetic associations with gestational duration and spontaneous
preterm birth. N Engl J Med 377(12):1156, 2017
Zhang X, Liu M: Clinical observations on the prevention and treatment of premature labor with
nifedipine. [Chinese] Hua Xi Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao 33(2):288, 2002
Zuckerman H, Reiss U, Rubinstein I: Inhibition of human premature labor by indomethacin. Obstet
Gynecol 44:787, 1974

