CHAPTER 40

Preeclampsia Syndrome

TERMINOLOGY AND DIAGNOSIS
INCIDENCE AND RISK FACTORS
ETIOPATHOGENESIS
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
PREDICTION
PREVENTION
REFERENCES
Hypertensive disorders include preeclampsia, gestational hypertension, and
chronic hypertension and complicate up to 10 percent of pregnancies. As a
group, they are one member of the deadly triad—along with hemorrhage and
infection—that contributes greatly to maternal morbidity (Judy, 2019).
Preeclampsia, either alone or superimposed on chronic hypertension, is
the most dangerous. In the United States from 2011 to 2015, 7 percent of
pregnancy-related maternal deaths were caused by preeclampsia or
eclampsia (Petersen, 2019). Most hypertension-related deaths are deemed
preventable (Katsuragi, 2019). In response, Joint Commission (2019)
accredited hospitals are now required to track their recognition and timely
treatment of hypertension.
In 2018, a workshop to study preeclampsia was convened by the
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. This builds on the prior work of

the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists’ Task Force on
Hypertension in Pregnancy (2013). Its purpose was to review topics
regarding all aspects of preeclampsia and to recommend future research
areas. Many of these topics are discussed throughout this chapter and Chapter
41.

TERMINOLOGY AND DIAGNOSIS
To codify the classification of hypertensive disorders of pregnancy, the
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2013, 2020)
describes four types of hypertensive disease:
1. Preeclampsia and eclampsia syndrome
2. Chronic hypertension of any etiology
3. Preeclampsia superimposed on chronic hypertension
4. Gestational hypertension, in which definitive evidence for the
preeclampsia syndrome does not develop and hypertension resolves by 12
weeks postpartum.
This classification aims to differentiate preeclampsia syndrome, which is
potentially more ominous, from other hypertensive disorders.

■ Diagnosis of Hypertensive Disorders
Hypertension is diagnosed empirically when systolic and diastolic blood
pressures exceed 140 mm Hg and 90 mm Hg, respectively. Korotkoff phase
V is used to define diastolic pressure.
Previously for pregnant women, increases of 30 mm Hg systolic or 15
mm Hg diastolic above blood pressure values taken at midpregnancy had
also been used as diagnostic criteria, even when absolute values were
<140/90 mm Hg. These incremental changes are no longer used to define
hypertension. However, blood pressure surveillance in these gravidas is
reasonable because eclamptic seizures develop in some whose blood
pressures have stayed below 140/90 mm Hg (Alexander, 2006).
In other cases, mean arterial pressures that suddenly rise but that still lie
in normal range—“delta hypertension”—may signify preeclampsia

(Macdonald-Wallis, 2012; Zeeman, 2007). We use this term to describe a
relatively acute rise in blood pressure in individual patients, albeit some still
with pressures <140/90 mm Hg (Fig. 40-1). Some of these women will go on
to have obvious preeclampsia, and some even develop eclamptic seizures or
hemolysis, elevated liver enzyme levels, and low platelet count (HELLP)
syndrome.

FIGURE 40-1 Schematic of normal reference ranges for mean arterial blood pressure changes across
pregnancy. Patient A (blue) has mean blood pressures near the 20th percentile throughout pregnancy.
Patient B (red) has a similar pattern with mean pressures at the 25th percentile until approximately 36
weeks’ gestation, at which time her blood pressure begins to rise. By term, it is substantively higher and
in the 75th percentile, but she is still considered “normotensive.” This increase from the 25th to 75th
percentile can be termed “delta hypertension.”

Historically, systolic and diastolic blood pressure levels of 140/90 mm
Hg have been arbitrarily used since the 1950s to define “hypertension” in
nonpregnant individuals. However, these levels were selected by insurance
companies to characterize a population of middle-aged men. It seems more
realistic to define normal-range blood pressures for specific populations—
such as young, healthy, pregnant women (Lu, 2019; Reddy, 2020). To provide
such data, >1000 women were recently studied longitudinally through
pregnancy (Green, 2020). Data of this type may shape future thresholds.

■ Gestational Hypertension
Women with gestational hypertension have blood pressures that reach 140/90
mm Hg or greater for the first time after midpregnancy but lack proteinuria.
Almost half of affected women subsequently develop preeclampsia (Jim,
2017). Even so, when blood pressure rises appreciably, it is dangerous to
both mother and fetus to ignore this elevation only because proteinuria has
not yet developed (Fishel Bartal, 2020). As Chesley (1985) emphasized, 10
percent of eclamptic seizures develop before overt proteinuria can be
detected. Gestational hypertension is reclassified by some as transient
hypertension if preeclampsia does not develop and blood pressure returns to
normal by 12 weeks postpartum.

■ Preeclampsia Syndrome
Preeclampsia is best described as a pregnancy-specific syndrome that can
affect virtually every organ system. Although preeclampsia is more than
simply gestational hypertension with proteinuria, the appearance of protein
remains a primary diagnostic criterion. It is an objective marker and reflects
the system-wide endothelial leak that characterizes the preeclampsia
syndrome. Last, preeclampsia can be divided into early onset, <34 weeks;
late onset, ≥34 weeks; preterm onset, <37 weeks; and term onset, ≥37 weeks
(Burton, 2019; Poon, 2019).
In some women with preeclampsia, neither overt proteinuria nor fetalgrowth restriction are features (Sibai, 2009). Because of this, the Task Force
(2013) suggests other diagnostic criteria, some of which are shown in Table
40-1. Multiorgan involvement may be reflected by thrombocytopenia, renal
dysfunction, hepatocellular necrosis, central nervous system perturbations, or
pulmonary edema.
TABLE 40-1. Classification and Diagnosis of Pregnancy-Associated
Hypertension

The markers listed in Table 40-1 help also to classify preeclampsia
syndrome severity. Although many use a dichotomous “mild” and “severe”
classification, the Task Force (2013) discourages the use of “mild
preeclampsia.” It is problematic that there are criteria for the diagnosis of
“severe” preeclampsia, but the binary default classification is either implied
or specifically termed “mild,” “less severe,” or “nonsevere” (Alexander,
2003; Lindheimer, 2008). No consensus criteria define “moderate”
preeclampsia, which is an elusive third category. We use the criteria
recommended by the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
(2020), some of which are listed in Table 40-2 and categorize disease as
“severe” versus “nonsevere.”
TABLE 40-2. Indicators of Severity of Gestational Hypertensive
Disordersa

Some symptoms are considered ominous. Headaches or visual
disturbances can precede eclampsia, which is a convulsion in a woman with
preeclampsia that is not attributable to another cause. The seizures are
generalized and may appear before, during, or after labor. The proportion
that develops seizures later—after 48 hours postpartum—approximates 10
percent (Sibai, 2005; Zwart, 2008). Another symptom, epigastric or right
upper quadrant pain, frequently accompanies hepatocellular necrosis,
ischemia, and hepatic edema. Elevated serum hepatic transaminase levels
can be one marker. Last, thrombocytopenia also signifies worsening
preeclampsia. It represents platelet activation and aggregation and

microangiopathic hemolysis. Other factors indicative of severe preeclampsia
include renal or cardiac involvement. When these signs and symptoms are
profound, they likely cannot be temporized, and delivery will more likely be
required. Importantly, differentiating nonsevere and severe gestational
hypertension or preeclampsia can be misleading because what might be
apparently mild disease may progress rapidly to severe disease.

■ Preeclampsia Superimposed on Chronic Hypertension
Any chronic hypertensive disorder predisposes a woman to develop
superimposed preeclampsia syndrome. Chronic underlying hypertension is
diagnosed in women with documented blood pressures ≥140/90 mm Hg
before pregnancy or before 20 weeks’ gestation, or both. Thus, in women
who are not first seen until after midpregnancy, hypertensive disorders can
be difficult to classify. For example, a woman with previously undiagnosed
chronic vascular disease who is seen before 20 weeks frequently has blood
pressures within normal range. During the third trimester, however, as blood
pressures return to their originally hypertensive levels, it may be difficult to
determine whether hypertension is chronic or induced by pregnancy. Even a
careful search for evidence of preexisting end-organ damage may be futile,
as many of these women have mild disease and no evidence of ventricular
hypertrophy, retinal vascular changes, or renal involvement.
In 20 to 50 percent of women with chronic hypertension, blood pressure
rises to obviously abnormal levels, typically after 24 weeks’ gestation. If
new-onset or worsening baseline hypertension is accompanied by new-onset
proteinuria or other findings listed in Table 40-1, superimposed
preeclampsia is diagnosed (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2019a). Compared with “pure” preeclampsia, superimposed
preeclampsia commonly develops earlier in pregnancy. It tends to be more
severe and more often is accompanied by fetal-growth restriction. The same
criteria shown in Table 40-2 also further characterize the severity of
superimposed preeclampsia.

INCIDENCE AND RISK FACTORS
Preeclampsia is identified in 5 to 8 percent of all pregnancies (Jim, 2017;
Poon, 2019). Young and nulliparous women are particularly vulnerable,

whereas older women are at greater risk for chronic hypertension with
superimposed preeclampsia (Sheen, 2020). In one review of global studies,
the incidence of preeclampsia in nulliparas ranged from 3 to 10 percent
(Staff, 2015). In multiparas, the incidence ranges from 2 to 5 percent (Jim,
2017; Poon, 2019).
The incidence of preeclampsia is also influenced by race, ethnicity, and
genetic predisposition. In one study by the Maternal–Fetal Medicine Units
(MFMU) Network, the incidence of preeclampsia was 5 percent in white, 9
percent in Hispanic, and 11 percent in African American nulliparas (Myatt,
2012a,b). In addition, black women carry higher risk for associated severe
adverse outcomes (Gyamfi-Bannerman, 2020).
For several clinical factors, Bartsch and associates (2016) extracted data
from more than 25 million pregnancies and calculated relative risks (Table
40-3). Major risks include older age, nulliparity, obesity, diabetes, and
chronic hypertension. Another is preeclampsia and especially HELLP
syndrome in a prior pregnancy (Malström, 2020). Underlying metabolic
syndrome, hyperhomocysteinemia, or chronic kidney disease are others
(Masoudian, 2016; Wiles, 2020).
TABLE 40-3. Selected Clinical Risk Factors for Preeclampsia

Of lesser factors, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) seropositivity,
sleep-disordered breathing, and a male fetus pose a slightly higher risk
(Facco, 2017; Jaskolka, 2017; Sansone, 2016). Previously affected family
members are another, and maternal and fetal genetics are assuming greater
predictive importance (Burton, 2019; Gray, 2018; Phipps, 2019). Last,
preeclampsia frequently complicates the “mirror syndrome” (Chap. 18, p.
364) (Trad, 2021). Although smoking during pregnancy causes various
adverse pregnancy outcomes, ironically, it lowers the risk for hypertension
during pregnancy.
For eclampsia, seizure incidence has declined in areas where health care
is more readily available. In countries with adequate resources, the
incidence averages 1 case in 2000 to 3000 deliveries (Jaatinen, 2016;
O’Connor, 2013; Schaap, 2019). At Parkland Hospital, the incidence has

declined appreciably during the past decade and approximates 1 case in
2000 births (Fig. 40-2). This frequency may be related to improved access to
prenatal care and our active management approach (Chap. 41, p. 717).

FIGURE 40-2 Incidence of eclampsia per 10,000 deliveries at Parkland Hospital (p <0.05 for trend).

ETIOPATHOGENESIS
The mechanisms by which pregnancy incites or aggravates hypertension
remain unsolved. Any satisfactory theory concerning the origins of
preeclampsia must account for the observation that gestational hypertensive
disorders are more likely to develop in women with the following
characteristics:
• Exposure to chorionic villi for the first time
• Exposure to a superabundance of chorionic villi, as with twins or
hydatidiform mole

• Preexisting conditions associated with endothelial cell activation or
inflammation
• Genetic predisposition to hypertension developing during pregnancy.
A fetus is not a requisite for preeclampsia to develop. Although
chorionic villi are essential, they need not be intrauterine. For example,
preeclampsia can develop with an advanced abdominal pregnancy (Worley,
2008). Regardless of precipitating etiology, the cascade of promoting events
leads to systemic vascular endothelial damage, vasospasm, plasma
transudation, and ischemic and thrombotic sequelae.

■ Phenotypic Expression
This varies widely for preeclampsia, and phenotype is affected by the degree
of remodeling of uterine spiral arterioles by endovascular trophoblasts. This
process underlies the “two-stage disorder” theory of preeclampsia
pathogenesis. According to Redman and coworkers (2015), stage I—the
placental syndrome—is caused by faulty endovascular trophoblastic
remodeling that downstream causes stage II—the maternal syndrome.
Importantly, stage II can be modified by maternal conditions that also
manifest endothelial cell activation or inflammation. These include chronic
hypertension, renal disease, obesity, immunological or connective tissue
disorders, and diabetes.
Such staging is artificial, and preeclampsia syndrome presents a
spectrum of disease (Burton, 2019). Moreover, “isoforms” likely exist and
are discussed subsequently. Differences include maternal and fetal
characteristics, placental findings, genetic factors, and early- versus lateonset disease (Gray, 2018; Phipps, 2019; Poon, 2019).

■ Etiology
Of suggested mechanisms to explain the cause of preeclampsia, primary ones
include:
• Placental implantation with abnormal trophoblastic invasion of uterine
vessels
• Dysfunctional immunological tolerance between maternal, paternal
(placental), and fetal tissues

• Maternal maladaptation to cardiovascular or inflammatory changes of
normal pregnancy
• Genetic factors that include predisposing genes and epigenetic influences.

■ Stage I—Placental Syndrome
Normal placental implantation, as discussed in Chapter 5 (p. 90), is
characterized by extensive remodeling of the spiral arterioles within the
decidua basalis (Fig. 40-3). In this “placental bed,” endovascular
trophoblasts replace the vascular endothelial and muscular linings. This
advantageously enlarges arteriole diameter (Brosens, 2019). Veins are
invaded only superficially. In some preeclampsia cases, but not all,
trophoblastic invasion may be incomplete. With this, decidual vessels, but
not myometrial vessels, become lined with endovascular trophoblasts. The
deeper myometrial arterioles thus do not lose their endothelial lining and
musculoelastic tissue. As a result, their mean external diameter is only half
that of corresponding vessels in normal placentas (Fisher, 2015). This
mechanism is more prevalent in women with early-onset preeclampsia
(Khodzhaeva, 2016). Evidence suggests a critical role for soluble
antiangiogenic growth factors in this faulty endovascular remodeling
(McMahon, 2014).

FIGURE 40-3 Schematic representation of normal placental implantation shows proliferation of
extravillous trophoblasts from an anchoring villus. These trophoblasts invade the decidua and extend into
the walls of the spiral arteriole to replace the endothelium and muscular wall to create a dilated lowresistance vessel. With preeclampsia, there is defective implantation characterized by incomplete
invasion of the spiral arteriolar wall by extravillous trophoblasts. This results in a small-caliber vessel
with high resistance to flow.

From placental electron microscopy studies, early preeclamptic changes
include endothelial damage, insudation of plasma constituents into vessel
walls, myointimal cell proliferation, and medial necrosis (De Wolf, 1980).
Hertig (1945) referred to lipid accumulation in myointimal cells and
macrophages as atherosis. These findings are more common in placentas
from women diagnosed with preeclampsia before 34 weeks’ gestation
(Nelson, 2014). Acute placental vascular atherosis may also identify a group
of women at greater risk for atherosclerosis and cardiovascular disease later
in life (Staff, 2015) (Chap. 41, p. 726). In pregnancy, abnormally narrow
spiral arteriole lumens likely impair placental blood flow, reduce perfusion,
and create a hypoxic environment (Burton, 2019).
At this point, these changes incite a systemic inflammatory response,
which is stage II or the maternal syndrome. Defective placentation is posited
to further predispose affected women to gestational hypertension,
preeclampsia syndrome, preterm delivery, fetal growth-restriction, and
placental abruption (Brosens, 2019; Labarrere, 2017; Nelson, 2014).

Immunological Factors
Maternal immune tolerance to paternally derived placental and fetal antigens
is discussed in Chapter 5 (p. 85). Loss of this tolerance is another cited
theory for preeclampsia (Erlebacher, 2013). Certainly, histological changes
at the maternal–placental interface in those with preeclampsia suggest acute
graft rejection.
Tolerance dysregulation might also explain the elevated risk when the
paternal antigenic load is increased. One example is complete molar
pregnancies, which have diploid complement of chromosomes solely from
the father. Those with later-stage moles, have a high incidence of early-onset
preeclampsia.
Women with a trisomy 13 fetus also have a 30- to 40-percent incidence
of preeclampsia. The gene for one preeclampsia-linked factor, soluble fmslike tyrosine kinase 1, is on chromosome 13 (Bdolah, 2006). These women

have elevated serum levels of antiangiogenic factors, which can affect the
placenta (p. 694). Last, women previously exposed to paternal antigens, such
as a prior pregnancy with the same partner, may be “immunized” against
preeclampsia. Conversely, multiparas impregnated by a new partner have a
greater risk of preeclampsia (Mostello, 2002).
Burton and colleagues (2019) reviewed the possible role of immune
maladaptation in preeclampsia pathophysiology. In women destined to have
preeclampsia, extravillous trophoblasts early in pregnancy express reduced
amounts of immunosuppressive nonclassic human leukocyte antigen G (HLAG). Black women more commonly have the 1597∆C gene allele, which is
associated with incomplete HLA-G expression and may predispose to
preeclampsia (Loisel, 2013). This immune maladaptation may contribute to
the defective placental vascularization seen with preeclampsia.
As discussed in Chapter 4 (p. 61), T-helper (Th) lymphocytes during
normal pregnancy are produced so that type 2 activity is increased in relation
to type 1. This is the so-called type 2 bias (Phipps, 2019; Redman, 2015).
Th2 cells promote humoral immunity, whereas Th1 cells stimulate
inflammatory cytokine secretion (Ma, 2019). Beginning in the early second
trimester in women who develop preeclampsia, Th1 action is increased.

Genetic Factors
Preeclampsia appears to be a multifactorial, polygenic disorder. In one study
of almost 1.2 million Swedish births, a genetic association was found for
gestational hypertension and for preeclampsia (Nilsson, 2004). Ward and
Taylor (2015) cite an incident risk for preeclampsia of 20 to 40 percent for
daughters of preeclamptic mothers; 11 to 37 percent for sisters of
preeclamptic women; and 22 to 47 percent for twins. Ethnoracial factors are
important and evidenced by the high incidence of preeclampsia in African
American women. Latina women have a lower incidence because of
interactions of American Indian and white race genes (Shahabi, 2013).
The hereditary predisposition for preeclampsia likely stems from
interactions of literally hundreds of inherited genes—both maternal and
paternal—that control many enzymatic and metabolic functions throughout
every organ system (Burton, 2019; Triche, 2014). Plasma-derived factors
may induce some of these genes in preeclampsia (Leseva, 2020; Mackenzie,
2012). Thus, the clinical manifestation in any given woman with the

preeclampsia syndrome will reflect a spectrum. In this regard, phenotypic
expression will differ among similar genotypes depending on interactions
with environmental components (Yang, 2013).
Hundreds of genes have been studied for their possible association with
preeclampsia (Buurma, 2013; Sakowicz, 2016; Ward, 2015). However,
because of the complex phenotypic expression of preeclampsia, it is doubtful
that any one candidate gene will be found responsible. Last, a preeclampsia
predisposition has also been linked to genes of the fetus (Burton, 2019; Gray,
2018; Leseva, 2020).

■ Stage II—Maternal Syndrome
Endothelial Cell Activation
Inflammatory changes are believed to be a continuation of the placental
syndrome. In response to ischemia or other inciting causes, placental factors
are released and initiate a series of events (Burton, 2019; Davidge, 2015).
Thus, antiangiogenic and metabolic factors and other inflammatory leukocyte
mediators are thought to provoke the systemic endotheliopathy, which is
used synonymously here with endothelial cell activation or dysfunction.
Injury to systemic endothelial cells is seen as a centerpiece of preeclampsia
pathogenesis (Burton, 2019; Phipps, 2019).
Cellular dysfunction may result from an extreme activated state of
leukocytes in the maternal circulation (Gervasi, 2001). Briefly, cytokines
such as tumor necrosis factor α (TNF-α) and the interleukins may contribute
to the systemic oxidative stress associated with preeclampsia. This is
characterized by generation of highly toxic oxygen radicals. These injure
systemic vascular endothelial cells, lower nitric oxide production by these
cells, and interfere with prostaglandin balance. Other sequelae include
production of the lipid-laden macrophage foam cells seen in placental
atherosis; activation of systemic microvascular coagulation, which is
manifested by thrombocytopenia; and greater systemic capillary
permeability, which is reflected by edema and proteinuria.
Intact endothelium has anticoagulant properties. Also, systemic
endothelial cells, by releasing nitric oxide, blunt the response of vascular
smooth muscle to agonists. Injured or activated endothelial cells may
produce less nitric oxide and may secrete substances that promote

coagulation and vasopressor sensitivity. Further evidence of endothelial
activation includes changes in glomerular capillary endothelial morphology,
greater capillary permeability, and elevated blood concentrations of
substances associated with endothelial activations. Likely, multiple factors in
the plasma of preeclamptic women combine to exert these vasoactive effects
(Myers, 2007; Walsh, 2009).

Vasospasm and Hypertension
Vasospasm has long been associated with preeclampsia. Systemic
endothelial activation causes vasospasm, which elevates resistance to
produce hypertension. Concurrently, systemic endothelial cell injury
promotes interstitial leakage, and platelets and fibrinogen are deposited in
the subendothelial space. Endothelial junctional proteins are also disrupted,
and the subendothelial region of resistance arteries undergoes ultrastructural
change (Suzuki, 2003; Wang, 2002). The much larger venous circuit is
similarly involved.
With diminished blood flow because of maldistribution from vasospasm
and interstitial leakage, ischemia of the surrounding tissues can cause
necrosis, hemorrhage, and other end-organ disturbances. One important
clinical correlate to these changes is the markedly attenuated blood volume
seen in women with severe preeclampsia (Zeeman, 2009).

Increased Pressor Responses
As discussed in Chapter 4 (p. 53), pregnant women normally develop
refractoriness to infused vasopressors (Abdul-Karim, 1961). Women with
early preeclampsia, however, have enhanced vascular reactivity to infused
norepinephrine and angiotensin II (Raab, 1956; Talledo, 1968). Moreover,
increased sensitivity to angiotensin II clearly precedes the onset of
gestational hypertension (Gant, 1974). Paradoxically, women who develop
preterm preeclampsia have lower circulating levels of angiotensin II (Chase,
2017).
Numerous prostaglandins are thought to be central to preeclampsia
syndrome pathophysiology. Specifically, the blunted pressor response seen in
normal pregnancy is at least partially due to diminished vascular
responsiveness mediated by endothelial prostaglandin synthesis. For
example, compared with normal pregnancy, endothelial prostacyclin (PGI2)

production is lower in preeclampsia. This action appears to be mediated by
phospholipase A2 (Davidge, 2015). At the same time, thromboxane A2
secretion by platelets is increased, and the prostacyclin: thromboxane A2
ratio declines. The net result favors greater sensitivity to infused angiotensin
II and vasoconstriction (Spitz, 1988). These changes appear as early as 22
weeks in gravidas who later develop preeclampsia (Chavarria, 2003).
Nitric oxide is a potent vasodilator and is synthesized from 1-arginine by
endothelial cells. Inhibition of nitric oxide synthesis raises mean arterial
pressure, lowers heart rate, and reverses the pregnancy-induced
refractoriness to vasopressors. Nitric oxide likely is the compound that
maintains the normal low-pressure vasodilated state characteristic of normal
fetoplacental perfusion (Myatt, 1992). Nitric oxide mediates the effects of
placental growth factor (PlGF) and vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF) in vitro (Zhang, 2017). The effects of nitric oxide production in
preeclampsia are unclear. It appears that the syndrome is associated with
decreased endothelial nitric oxide synthase expression and thus lower nitric
oxide activity (Davidge, 2015).
Endothelins are 21-amino-acid peptides and potent vasoconstrictors.
Endothelin l (ET-1) is the primary isoform produced by human endothelium
(Karumanchi, 2016a). Plasma ET-1 levels are elevated in normotensive
pregnant women. Women with preeclampsia have even higher levels, and
these peptides may mediate renal injury (Phipps, 2019). Woman with
preeclampsia develop functional autoantibodies to the endothelin and
angiotensin II receptors (Buttrup, 2018). Interestingly, treatment of
preeclamptic women with magnesium sulfate lowers ET-1 concentrations
(Sagsoz, 2003). In animal studies, sildenafil reduces ET-1 concentrations
(Gillis, 2016).

Angiogenic and Antiangiogenic Factors
Placental vasculogenesis is evident by 21 days after conception. The list of
pro- and antiangiogenic substances involved in placental vascular
development is extensive, and the VEGF and angiopoietin families are the
most studied. Angiogenic imbalance describes excessive amounts of
antiangiogenic factors, which are thought to be stimulated by worsening
hypoxia at the uteroplacental interface. Trophoblast of women destined to

develop preeclampsia overproduce at least two antiangiogenic peptides that
enter the maternal circulation (Karumanchi, 2016b).
First, soluble fms-like tyrosine kinase 1 (sF1t-1) is a soluble variant of
the membrane-bound receptor for VEGF. As depicted in Figure 40-4,
elevated maternal sFlt-1 levels inactivate and reduce circulating PlGF and
VEGF concentrations, leading to endothelial dysfunction (Phipps, 2019). As
shown in data from Myatt and coworkers (2013), sFlt-1 levels begin to rise
in maternal serum months before preeclampsia is evident (Fig. 40-5). These
high levels in the second trimester are associated with a much higher risk for
preeclampsia development (Haggerty, 2012; March, 2015). This elevation
from normal levels appears even sooner with early-onset disease (Vatten,
2012). These factors are also operative in pregnancies complicated by fetalgrowth restriction (Herraiz, 2012).

FIGURE 40-4 Schematic of receptor blocking action of soluble fms-like tyrosine kinase 1 (sFlt-1) and
soluble endoglin (sENG).

FIGURE 40-5 Angiogenic and antiangiogenic factors in normotensive (NT) and preeclamptic (PE)
women across pregnancy. Both pairs of factors are significantly divergent by 23 to 26 weeks’ gestation.
sFlt-1 = soluble fms-like tyrosine kinase 1; PlGF = placental growth factor.

A second antiangiogenic peptide, soluble endoglin (sEng), inhibits
various transforming growth factor beta (TGF-β) isoforms from binding to

endothelial receptors (see Fig. 40-4). Endoglin is one of these receptors.
Decreased binding to endoglin diminishes endothelial nitric oxide-dependent
vasodilation. Serum levels of sEng also begin to rise months before clinical
preeclampsia develops (Haggerty, 2012).
Simultaneously elevated levels of sFlt-1 and sEng are associated with
more severe forms of preeclampsia (Phipps, 2019). In one systematic
review, third-trimester increases in sFlt-1 levels and lower PlGF
concentrations were found to correlate with preeclampsia development after
25 weeks’ gestation (Widmer, 2007). From another study, doubling of sFlt-1
and sEng expression increased the preeclampsia risk by 39 and 74 percent,
respectively (Haggerty, 2012). The cause of placental overproduction of
antiangiogenic proteins remains an enigma. Concentrations of the soluble
forms are not higher in fetal circulation or amnionic fluid of preeclamptic
women, and their levels in maternal blood dissipate after delivery (Staff,
2007).
Clinical use of antiangiogenic protein levels to predict and diagnosis
preeclampsia is being evaluated (p. 703). Moreover, one preliminary report
described therapeutic apheresis to reduce sFlt-1 levels (Thadhani, 2016).

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
■ Cardiovascular System
Disturbances in the cardiovascular system are common with preeclampsia
syndrome. These are related to: (1) greater cardiac afterload imposed by
hypertension; (2) cardiac preload, which is reduced by a pathologically
diminished volume expansion during pregnancy and which is increased by
administration of intravenous crystalloid or oncotic solutions; and (3)
endothelial activation leading to leakage of intravascular fluid into the
extracellular space.

Hemodynamic Changes and Cardiac Function
The cardiovascular aberrations of pregnancy-related hypertensive disorders
vary. Modifying factors include preeclampsia severity, degree of
hypertension, presence of underlying chronic disease, and the point in the
clinical spectrum in which these are studied. In some women, these
cardiovascular changes may precede hypertension (Easterling, 1990; Khalil,

2012; Melchiorre, 2013). Nevertheless, with the clinical onset of
preeclampsia, cardiac output declines, due at least in part to greater
peripheral resistance (Ferrazzi, 2018).

Myocardial Function
Serial echocardiographic studies document diastolic dysfunction in up to 45
percent of women with preeclampsia (Guirguis, 2015; Vaught, 2018). With
this dysfunction, ventricles do not properly relax and cannot fill
appropriately. In some affected women, functional differences persist up to 4
years after delivery (Evans, 2011; Orabona, 2017). Diastolic dysfunction
stems from ventricular remodeling, which is a maladaptive response to the
increased afterload of preeclampsia and aims to maintain normal
contractility. High levels of antiangiogenic proteins may be contributory
(Shahul, 2016). In otherwise healthy gravidas, these changes are usually
inconsequential. But in those with underlying ventricular dysfunction—for
example, concentric ventricular hypertrophy from chronic hypertension—
further diastolic dysfunction may cause cardiogenic pulmonary edema
(Wardhana, 2018). This is discussed further in Chapters 50 (p. 883) and 52
(p. 916).

Ventricular Function
Despite the relatively high frequency of diastolic dysfunction with
preeclampsia, clinical cardiac function in most affected women is
appropriate (Hibbard, 2015). In some preeclamptic women, high-sensitivity
cardiac troponin levels are slightly elevated (Morton, 2018). With severe
preeclampsia, amino-terminal pro–brain natriuretic peptide (NT–pro-BNP)
levels are increased (Zachary, 2017).
Women with preeclampsia syndrome usually have slightly hyperdynamic
ventricular function (Fig. 40-6). Both these and normotensive pregnant
women have a cardiac output that is appropriate for left-sided filling
pressures. This pressure can be altered by intravenous fluid volumes. Thus,
aggressive hydration results in overtly hyperdynamic ventricular function.
This is accompanied by elevated pulmonary capillary wedge pressures, and
pulmonary edema may develop despite normal ventricular function. This is
partly because of an alveolar endothelial-epithelial leak, and it is
compounded by decreased oncotic pressure from a low serum albumin

concentration. In sum, aggressive fluid administration to otherwise normal
women with severe preeclampsia substantially elevates normal left-sided
filling pressures and raises a physiologically normal cardiac output to
hyperdynamic levels.

FIGURE 40-6 Ventricular function in normally pregnant women (striped area) and in women with
eclampsia (boxed area) is plotted on a Braunwald ventricular function curve. Normal values are from
Clark, 1989, and those for eclampsia are from Hankins, 1984. PCWP = pulmonary capillary wedge
pressure; LVSWI = left ventricular stroke work index.

■ Blood Volume
In those with eclampsia, hemoconcentration is a hallmark feature (Pritchard,
1984). Data from Zeeman and associates (2009) show that normally expected
pregnancy blood volume expansion is severely curtailed (Fig. 40-7). Women
of average size have a nonpregnant blood volume of 3000 mL, and during the
last several weeks of a normal pregnancy, this averages 4500 mL (Chap. 4,

p. 59). With eclampsia, however, much or all of the anticipated 1500 mL
excess is lost. Such hemoconcentration results from generalized vasospasm
that follows endothelial activation and then from leakage of plasma into the
interstitial space. In women with preeclampsia—depending on its severity—
hemoconcentration is usually not as marked.

FIGURE 40-7 Total blood volumes in normotensive women compared with those with eclampsia. The
vertical extensions are one standard deviation from the mean. In the eclamptic women, note the
minimally increased blood volume compared with a subsequent normotensive pregnancy.

These changes have substantial clinical consequences. Women with
severe hemoconcentration are unduly sensitive to blood loss at delivery that
otherwise may be considered normal. Vasospasm and endothelial leakage of
plasma persist for a variable time after delivery as the endothelium is
restored to normal. As this takes place, vasoconstriction reverses, and as the
blood volume reexpands, the hematocrit usually falls from dilution.

Importantly, a substantive cause of this fall in hematocrit frequently is the
blood loss incurred at delivery.

■ Hematological Changes
Thrombocytopenia
The platelet count is routinely measured in women with any form of
gestational hypertension. The frequency and intensity of thrombocytopenia
vary and are dependent on the severity and duration of preeclampsia
(Hellmann, 2007; Hupuczi, 2007). Overt thrombocytopenia—defined by a
platelet count <100,000/µL—reflects severe disease (see Table 40-2). In
general, the lower the platelet count, the higher the likelihood of maternal and
fetal morbidity and mortality. In most cases, delivery is advisable because
thrombocytopenia usually worsens.
After delivery, the platelet count may continue to decline for the first day
or so. It then usually rises progressively to reach a normal level within 3 to 5
days. As discussed later, in some instances with HELLP syndrome, the
platelet count continues to fall after delivery. If this nadir is delayed until 48
to 72 hours, preeclampsia syndrome may be incorrectly attributed to one of
the thrombotic microangiopathies (Chap. 59, p. 1060).
Another platelet alteration is platelet activation and increased αdegranulation. This leads to release of β-thromboglobulin and factor 4 and to
enhanced platelet clearance (Kenny, 2015). Platelet volume concomitantly
increases as young platelets are released (Bellos, 2018). Paradoxically, in
most studies, in vitro platelet aggregation is reduced compared with the
normal increase that is characteristic of pregnancy. This likely is due to
platelet “exhaustion” following in-vivo activation. Although the cause is
unknown, immunological processes or simply platelet deposition at sites of
endothelial damage may be implicated. Levels of platelet-bound and
circulating platelet-bindable immunoglobulins are elevated, which suggests
platelet surface alterations. Abnormally low platelet levels do not develop in
the fetuses of women with preeclampsia despite severe maternal
thrombocytopenia (Kenny, 2015; Pritchard, 1987). Thus, thrombocytopenia
in a hypertensive woman is not a fetal indication for cesarean delivery.

Hemolysis

Severe preeclampsia is frequently accompanied by hemolysis, which
manifests as elevated serum lactate dehydrogenase levels and reduced
haptoglobin levels (Burwick, 2018). Other evidence comes from
schizocytosis, spherocytosis, and reticulocytosis in peripheral blood
(Cunningham, 1985; Pritchard, 1954, 1976). Red cell distribution width
(RDW) reflects variability in the size of circulating red blood cells, and
RDW is higher in preeclamptic women (Adam, 2019). These derangements
result in part from microangiopathic hemolysis caused by endothelial
disruption with platelet adherence and fibrin deposition. Cunningham and
coworkers (1995) postulated that erythrocyte morphological changes were
partially caused by serum lipid alterations. Related, substantively decreased
long-chain fatty acid content is found in erythrocytes of women with
preeclampsia (Mackay, 2012).
After early reports of hemolysis and thrombocytopenia with severe
preeclampsia, descriptions were added of abnormally elevated serum liver
transaminase levels that indicated hepatocellular necrosis (Chesley, 1978).
Weinstein (1982) referred to this combination of events as the HELLP
syndrome (p. 699).

Coagulation Changes
Subtle changes consistent with intravascular coagulation commonly are found
with preeclampsia and eclampsia (Cunningham, 2015; von Dadelszen, 2018).
Some include elevated factor VIII consumption, increased levels of
fibrinopeptides A and B and of D-dimers, and reduced concentrations of the
regulatory proteins—antithrombin III and proteins C and S. Coagulation
aberrations generally are mild and seldom clinically significant (Kenny,
2015; Pritchard, 1984). Unless placental abruption is comorbid, plasma
fibrinogen levels do not differ remarkably from levels found in normal
pregnancy (Cunningham, 2015). As preeclampsia worsens, so do abnormal
findings with thromboelastography, which is described in Chapter 44 (p.
774) (Pisani-Conway, 2013). Despite these changes, routine laboratory
assessments of coagulation, such as prothrombin time (PT), activated partial
thromboplastin time (aPTT), and plasma fibrinogen level, are not required in
the management of pregnancy-associated hypertensive disorders.

■ Endocrine and Hormonal Alterations

Plasma levels of renin, angiotensin II, aldosterone, deoxycorticosterone,
and atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) are substantively augmented during
normal pregnancy. ANP is released during atrial wall stretching from blood
volume expansion, and it responds to cardiac contractility (Chap. 4, p. 65).
Serum ANP levels rise in pregnancy, and its secretion is further enhanced in
preeclampsia (Gu, 2018). Levels of its precursor—proatrial natriuretic
peptide—also are elevated in preeclampsia. Vasopressin levels are similar
in nonpregnant, in normally pregnant, and in preeclamptic women, although
its metabolic clearance is elevated in the latter two (Dürr, 1999).

■ Fluid and Electrolyte Alterations
In women with severe preeclampsia, the volume of extracellular fluid,
which manifests as edema, is usually much greater than that in normal
pregnant women. The mechanism responsible for pathological fluid retention
is endothelial injury and subsequent extravasation of intravascular fluid.
Affected women also have reduced plasma oncotic pressure. This further
displaces intravascular fluid into the surrounding interstitium. In women with
preeclampsia, electrolyte concentrations do not differ appreciably from those
of normal pregnant women.
Following an eclamptic convulsion, the serum pH and bicarbonate
concentration are lowered due to lactic acidosis and compensatory
respiratory loss of carbon dioxide. The intensity of acidosis relates to the
amount of lactic acid produced— metabolic acidosis—and the rate at which
carbon dioxide is exhaled—respiratory acidosis.

■ Kidney
During normal pregnancy, renal blood flow and glomerular filtration rate
(GFR) rise appreciably (Chap. 4, p. 68). With preeclampsia, several
reversible physiological changes ensue. Of clinical importance, renal
perfusion and GFR are slightly reduced. Most of the decrement in GFR is
from increased renal afferent arteriolar resistance that may be elevated up to
fivefold (Conrad, 2015; Cornelis, 2011).
Morphological changes are characterized by glomerular endotheliosis,
which blocks filtration (Phipps, 2019). Diminished filtration causes serum

creatinine levels to rise to values seen in nonpregnant individuals, that is, 1
mg/mL, and sometimes higher. Acute kidney injury is discussed subsequently.
Plasma uric acid concentration is typically elevated in preeclampsia. The
elevation exceeds that attributable to the reduced GFR and likely is also due
to enhanced tubular reabsorption (Chesley, 1945). At the same time,
preeclampsia is associated with diminished urinary excretion of calcium,
perhaps because of greater tubular reabsorption (Taufield, 1987).

Proteinuria
Detection of proteinuria helps to establish the diagnosis of preeclampsia (see
Table 40-1). Abnormal protein excretion is empirically defined by 24-hour
urinary excretion exceeding 300 mg; a spot urine protein: creatinine ratio
≥0.3; or persistent protein values of 30 mg/dL (1+ dipstick) in random urine
samples. Although worsening or nephrotic-range proteinuria was in the past
considered by most to be a sign of severe disease, this does not appear to be
the case (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2013;
Bartal, 2020).
Problematically, the optimal method of establishing abnormal levels of
either urine protein or albumin remains to be defined. For a 24-hour
quantitative specimen, the consensus threshold value is ≥300 mg/24 h
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2013; Bartal, 2020).
Using a urinary protein excretion threshold of 165 mg in a 12-hour sample
shows equivalent efficacy (Stout, 2015).
Determination of urinary protein: creatinine ratio may supplant the
cumbersome 24-hour quantification (Morris, 2012). In one systematic
review, random urine protein:creatinine ratios <130 to 150 mg/g, that is, 0.13
to 0.15, indicate a low likelihood of proteinuria exceeding 300 mg/d
(Papanna, 2008). Ratios <0.08 or >1.19 have negative and positive
predictive values of 86 and 96 percent, respectively (Stout, 2013). However,
midrange ratios, for example, 300 mg/g or 0.3, have poor sensitivity and
specificity. Any midrange ratio should be repeated, and if persistent, a 24hour urine collection for measurement of protein excretion should be
considered.
With urine dipstick assessment, results depend on urine concentration and
are notorious for false-positive and -negative results. A concentrated urine

specimen may show a dipstick value of 1+ to 2+ in women who actually
excrete <300 mg/d.
Importantly, proteinuria may develop late, and some women may already
be delivered or have had an eclamptic convulsion before it appears. At
presentation, 10 to 15 percent of women with HELLP syndrome do not have
proteinuria (Sibai, 2004). In another report, 17 percent of women with
eclampsia did not have proteinuria by the time of seizures (Zwart, 2008).

Anatomical Changes
Sheehan and Lynch (1973) frequently found microscopic changes that were
identified at autopsy in the kidneys of eclamptic women. Glomeruli are
enlarged by approximately 20 percent, they are “bloodless,” and capillary
loops variably are dilated and contracted. Endothelial cells are swollen—
termed glomerular capillary endotheliosis (Spargo, 1959). Such swelling
may be severe enough to block or partially block the capillary lumens (Fig.
40-8). Last, homogeneous subendothelial deposits of proteins and fibrin-like
material are seen (Hecht, 2017).

FIGURE 40-8 Schematic showing glomerular capillary endotheliosis. The capillary of the normal
glomerulus shown on the left has wide endothelial fenestrations, and the pedicels emanating from the
podocytes are widely spaced (arrow). The illustration on the right is of a glomerulus with changes

induced by the preeclampsia syndrome. The endothelial cells are swollen and their fenestrae narrowed,
as are the pedicels that now abut each other.

Endothelial swelling may result from angiogenic protein “withdrawal.”
This is caused by the complexing of free angiogenic proteins with a
compatible circulating antiangiogenic protein receptor (see Fig. 40-4). The
angiogenic proteins are crucial for podocyte health, and their inactivation
leads to podocyte dysfunction and endothelial swelling (Conrad, 2015;
Phipps, 2019). Eclampsia is characterized by greater excretion of these
epithelial podocytes (White, 2014).

Acute Kidney Injury
In one study, preeclampsia syndrome caused acute kidney injury (AKI) in 5
percent of patients and in 14 percent of those with HELLP syndrome
(Novotny, 2020). With severe preeclampsia, Rodriguez and colleagues
(2021) reported AKI in 15 percent of women in a study from Parkland
Hospital. In most, AKI was stage 1. In another study of 72 women with
preeclampsia and renal failure, half had HELLP syndrome, and a third had
placental abruption (Drakeley, 2002). In a review of 183 women with
HELLP syndrome, 5 percent had AKI (Haddad, 2000). Of those with renal
injury, half had placental abruption, and most had postpartum hemorrhage.
Abnormal renal values usually begin to normalize 10 days or later after
delivery (Cornelis, 2011; Spaan, 2012). Although mild degrees of AKI are
encountered, clinically apparent acute tubular necrosis is almost invariably
induced by comorbid hemorrhage and subsequent hypovolemia and
hypotension (Chap. 43, p. 753).
To evaluate AKI etiology clinically, urine electrolytes may be obtained.
Results with preeclampsia reflect an intrarenal cause. In most with
preeclampsia, the urine sodium concentration is elevated. Instead, changes
that indicate a prerenal mechanism include increase urine osmolality,
elevated urine: plasma creatinine ratio, and low fractional excretion of
sodium.
In response to oliguria, sodium-containing crystalloid temporarily
improves urine output. However, rapid infusions may cause clinically
apparent pulmonary edema (p. 695). Intensive intravenous fluid therapy is
not indicated as “treatment” for women with preeclampsia and oliguria,
unless urine output is diminished from hemorrhage or fluid loss from

vomiting or fever. In nonpregnant individuals, intravenous saline infusions
have demonstrated a negative impact on renal function. However, at Parkland
Hospital, transition from Ringer lactate to normal saline did not significantly
impair renal function in women with preeclampsia (Yule, 2020).

■ Liver
Hepatic changes are common in women with severe preeclampsia syndrome.
Several gross and microscopic anatomical derangements lead to elevated
serum hepatic transaminase levels. This transaminitis indicates
hepatocellular injury and is a marker for severe preeclampsia. Values are
seldom more than 500 U/L, but levels exceeding 2000 U/L have been
reported (Chap. 58, p. 1031). In general, serum concentrations inversely
follow platelet levels, and they both usually return to normal levels within 3
days after delivery.

Anatomical Changes
Regions of periportal hemorrhage in the liver periphery typify the hepatic
lesions of eclampsia (Hecht, 2017; Sheehan, 1973). Extensive involvement
such as shown in Figure 40-9 is unusual. Sheehan and Lynch (1973)
described that some degree of hepatic infarction accompanied hemorrhage in
almost half of women who died with eclampsia. These findings
corresponded with reports during the 1960s that described elevated serum
hepatic transaminase levels. Pritchard and associates (1954) described
hemolysis and thrombocytopenia with eclampsia. This constellation of
hemolysis, hepatocellular necrosis, and thrombocytopenia was later termed
HELLP syndrome. Similarities with hepatic sinusoidal obstruction are
reviewed by von Salmuth and coworkers (2020).

FIGURE 40-9 Hepatic section from a woman with HELLP syndrome who died of aspiration
pneumonia. There are areas of ischemia and infarction, and histopathological examination showed
periportal hemorrhages.

Liver involvement with preeclampsia may clinically display several
manifestations. First, pain is considered a sign of severe disease. It typically
manifests as moderate to severe right upper quadrant or midepigastric pain
and tenderness. These women usually have elevated serum aspartate
transaminase (AST) or alanine transaminase (ALT) levels. In some cases,
however, the amount of hepatic tissue involved with infarction may be
surprisingly extensive yet still clinically insignificant. To study this, we
performed magnetic resonance (MR) imaging in 16 women with HELLP
syndrome (Nelson, 2018). All but two had evidence of acute liver injury, and
the volume of involvement correlated with serum AST levels. Frank
infarction is unusual, and in our experiences, it may be worsened or
precipitated by hypotension from obstetrical hemorrhage. It occasionally
causes hepatic failure—also called shock liver (Morgan, 2019; Yoshihara,
2016).

Hepatic Hematoma

In another presentation, periportal hemorrhage and infarction may extend to
develop a hepatic hematoma. This in turn can extend to form a subcapsular
hematoma that may rupture. Computed tomography (CT) scanning or MR
imaging greatly aids diagnosis (Fig. 40-10). Unruptured hematomas are
probably more common than clinically suspected and are more likely to be
found with HELLP syndrome (Nelson, 2018). Although once considered a
surgical condition, current management of a hepatic hematoma is usually
observation unless bleeding is ongoing. In some cases, however, prompt
surgical intervention or angiographic embolization may be lifesaving
(Chandrasekaran, 2020). In one review of 180 cases of hepatic hematoma or
rupture, 94 percent of affected gravidas had HELLP syndrome, and in 90
percent of the total, the capsule had ruptured (Vigil-De Gracia, 2012). The
maternal mortality rate was 22 percent, and the perinatal mortality rate was
31 percent. Another review of 73 cases found similar outcomes (Gupta,
2021). In rare cases, liver transplantation is necessary (Escobar Vidarte,
2019).

FIGURE 40-10 Abdominal CT imaging performed postpartum in a woman with severe HELLP
syndrome and right-upper quadrant pain. A large subcapsular hematoma (asterisk) is seen confluent
with intrahepatic infarction and hematoma (arrowhead). Numerous flame-shaped hemorrhages are
seen at the hematoma interface (arrows).

Acute fatty liver of pregnancy is sometimes confused with preeclampsia
(Byrne, 2020; Nelson, 2013). It too has an onset in late pregnancy, and often
hypertension, elevated serum transaminase and creatinine levels, and
thrombocytopenia are comorbid. In distinction, the hallmark of acute fatty
liver is marked liver dysfunction. Liver function overall is usually normal in
HELLP syndrome. Table 58-1 (p. 1031) highlights these clinical differences.
No convincing data link pancreatic involvement with preeclampsia
syndrome. In 407 women with severe preeclampsia, the incidence was 1
percent (Sang, 2019). That said, the occasional case of concurrent
hemorrhagic pancreatitis is likely unrelated (Lynch, 2015). In our
experiences from Parkland Hospital, lipase and amylase levels are seldom
elevated in women with preeclampsia (Nelson, 2018).

HELLP Syndrome
This acronym stands for hemolysis, elevated liver enzyme levels, and low
platelet count. No strict definition of the syndrome is universally accepted,
and thus its reported incidence varies.
In women with preeclampsia, those with HELLP syndrome typically have
worse outcomes than those without it (Martin, 2012, 2013). In the previously
noted study of 183 women with HELLP syndrome, 40 percent had adverse
outcomes, and two mothers died (Haddad, 2000). Complications included
eclampsia in 6 percent, placental abruption—10 percent, AKI—5 percent,
and pulmonary edema—10 percent. Stroke, hepatic hematoma, coagulopathy,
acute respiratory distress syndrome, and sepsis were other complications. In
one review of 693 women with HELLP syndrome, 10 percent had concurrent
eclampsia (Keiser, 2011). Obstetrical outcomes also may suffer. In one study
comparing women with HELLP against those with preeclampsia, rates of
eclampsia were greater with HELLP—15 versus 4 percent; preterm birth—
93 versus 78 percent; and perinatal mortality—9 versus 4 percent,
respectively (Sep, 2009). Because of these marked clinical differences, some
postulate that HELLP syndrome has a distinct pathogenesis (Reimer, 2013;
Vaught, 2016).

■ Central Nervous System

Headaches and visual symptoms are common with severe preeclampsia, and
associated convulsions define eclampsia. The earliest anatomical
descriptions of brain involvement came from autopsy specimens, but CT and
MR imaging and Doppler studies have added important insights.

Neuroanatomical Lesions
From early anatomical descriptions, brain pathology accounted for only
approximately a third of fatal cases, such as the one shown in Figure 40-11.
In fact, most deaths were from pulmonary edema, and brain lesions were
coincidental. Thus, although gross intracerebral hemorrhage was seen in up
to 60 percent of eclamptic women, it was fatal in only half of these
(Richards, 1988). With data from Sheehan and Lynch (1973) shown in Figure
40-12, cortical and subcortical petechial hemorrhages are other principal
lesions found at autopsy in women with eclampsia. The classic microscopic
vascular lesions consist of fibrinoid necrosis of the arterial wall and
perivascular microinfarcts and hemorrhages. Other lesions include
nonhemorrhagic areas of “softening” throughout the brain, hemorrhages in the
white matter, and subcortical edema (Hecht, 2017; Willard, 2018).
Hemorrhage in the basal ganglia or pons, often with rupture into the
ventricles, may develop.

FIGURE 40-11 This autopsy brain slice shows a fatal hypertensive hemorrhage in a primigravida with
eclampsia.

FIGURE 40-12 Composite illustration showing location of cerebral hemorrhages and petechiae in
women with eclampsia. Insert shows the level of the brain from which the main image was constructed.

Cerebrovascular Pathophysiology
Clinical, pathological, and neuroimaging findings have led to two general
theories to explain cerebral abnormalities with eclampsia. Endothelial cell
dysfunction likely plays a key role in both. The first theory suggests that in
response to acute and severe hypertension, cerebrovascular overregulation
leads to vasospasm and eventual tissue infarction (Trommer, 1988). Little
objective evidence supports this mechanism.
The second theory is that sudden elevations in systemic blood pressure
exceed the normal cerebrovascular autoregulatory capacity (Schwartz,
2000). Regions of forced vasodilation and vasoconstriction develop,
especially in arterial boundary zones. At the capillary level, disruption of
end-capillary pressure causes increased hydrostatic pressure,
hyperperfusion, and extravasation of plasma and red cells through
endothelial tight-junction openings. This leads to vasogenic edema.

Most likely, the true mechanism combines these two. Thus, a
preeclampsia-associated interendothelial cell leak develops at blood
pressure levels much lower than those that usually cause vasogenic edema,
and this is coupled with a loss of upper-limit autoregulation (Fugate, 2015;
Zeeman, 2009). As shown in Figure 40-13, these abnormalities manifest as
the posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome (PRES). Lesions
principally involve the occipital and parietal cortices, but other areas are
often involved, although less extensively (Edlow, 2013; Zeeman, 2004a).

FIGURE 40-13 Cranial magnetic resonance imaging in a nullipara with eclampsia. This T2-FLAIR
image shows an occipital lesion consistent with posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome (PRES).
FLAIR = fluid-attenuated inversion recovery.

Cerebral Blood Flow
Autoregulation is the mechanism by which cerebral blood flow remains
relatively constant despite alterations in cerebral perfusion pressure. In
nonpregnant individuals, this mechanism protects the brain from
hyperperfusion when mean arterial pressures increase up to 160 mm Hg.
These pressures are far greater than those seen in most women with
eclampsia. Thus, to explain eclamptic seizures, it was theorized that

autoregulation must be altered by pregnancy. Some investigators have shown
impaired autoregulation in women with preeclampsia (Bergman, 2021b;
Janzarik, 2014). When studied 2 to 3 years postpartum, women who had
preeclampsia had returned to normal autoregulation (Janzarik, 2018).
Zeeman and associates (2003) showed that cerebral blood flow during
the first two trimesters of normal pregnancy is similar to nonpregnant values.
But during the last trimester, flow significantly drops by 20 percent. They
found greater cerebral blood flow in this trimester in women with severe
preeclampsia compared with flow in normotensive pregnant women (Lee,
2019; Zeeman, 2004b). Taken together, these findings suggest that eclampsia
occurs when cerebral hyperperfusion forces capillary fluid interstitially
because of endothelial damage. This leak leads to perivascular edema. Some
data suggest that the blood-brain barrier is not impaired, but in-vitro studies
may indicate increased permeability (Bergman, 2021a; Burwick, 2018).

Neurological Manifestations
Several neurological manifestations typify the preeclampsia syndrome. Each
signifies severe involvement and requires immediate attention.
First, headache and scotomata are thought to arise from cerebrovascular
hyperperfusion that has a predilection for the occipital lobes. In women
preceding an eclamptic convulsion, up to 75 percent have headaches, and 20
to 30 percent have visual changes (Sibai, 2005; Zwart, 2008). The headaches
vary in severity and persistence. In our experiences, they are unique in that
they do not usually respond to traditional analgesia but frequently improve
after magnesium sulfate infusion.
Convulsions are diagnostic for eclampsia. These are caused by abnormal
excessive or synchronous neural activity in the brain. Evidence suggests that
extended seizures can cause significant brain injury and later brain
dysfunction.
Blindness and generalized cerebral edema are discussed in subsequent
sections. Last, women with eclampsia have been shown to have some
cognitive decline when studied 5 to 10 years following the involved
pregnancy (Bergman, 2021c). This is discussed further in Chapter 41 (p.
727).

Neuroimaging Studies

With CT imaging, localized hypodense lesions are frequently seen with
eclampsia at the gray- and white-matter junction and primarily in the
parietooccipital lobes. Frontal and inferior temporal lobes, the basal ganglia,
and thalamus are other sites (Brown, 1988). These hypodense areas
correspond to petechial hemorrhages and local edema. Edema of the
occipital lobes or diffuse cerebral edema may cause blindness, lethargy, and
confusion (Cunningham, 2000). Widespread edema can appear as marked
compression or even obliteration of the cerebral ventricles. Such women
may develop signs of impending life-threatening transtentorial herniation.
Several MR imaging acquisitions are used to study women with
eclampsia (Singh, 2021). Common findings are hyperintense T2 lesions in
the subcortical and cortical regions of the parietal and occipital lobes, which
reflect PRES (see Fig. 40-13). The basal ganglia, brainstem, and cerebellum
are other involved sites (Brewer, 2013; Zeeman, 2004a). PRES lesions are
almost universal in women with eclampsia, and their incidence in women
with severe preeclampsia approximates 20 percent (Hosapatna
Basavarajappa, 2020; Mayama, 2016). Although usually reversible, a fourth
of these hyperintense lesions with eclampsia have restricted diffusion that
signify cerebral infarctions. These have persistent MR imaging findings
(Loureiro, 2003; Zeeman, 2004a).

Visual Changes and Blindness
Retinal artery and venular calibers are decreased in women with
preeclampsia (Soma-Pillay, 2018). These changes, along with visual cortex
involvement, can cause scotomata, blurred vision, or diplopia, which is
common with severe preeclampsia and eclampsia. These symptoms usually
improve with magnesium sulfate therapy, or lowered blood pressure, or both.
Blindness is rare with preeclampsia alone, but it complicates up to 15
percent of women with eclampsia (Cunningham, 1995). It can develop a
week or more following delivery. Blindness is usually reversible and may
arise from three potential areas. These are the occipital lobe’s visual cortex,
the lateral geniculate nuclei, and the retina.
Occipital blindness is also called amaurosis. With MR imaging, affected
women usually have evidence of extensive occipital lobe vasogenic edema.
Of 15 women cared for at Parkland Hospital, occipital blindness lasted from
4 hours to 8 days, but it resolved completely in all cases (Cunningham,

1995). Rarely, extensive cerebral infarctions may result in total or partial
visual defects.
In the retina, ischemia, infarction, or serous detachment may occur
(Handor, 2014). Retinal infarction, termed Purtscher retinopathy, is rare
(Fig. 40-14). Serous retinal detachment is usually unilateral and seldom
causes total visual loss. Asymptomatic serous retinal detachment is relatively
common with preeclampsia (Gupta, 2019). In most cases of eclampsiaassociated blindness, visual acuity subsequently improves (Mandura, 2021).
If blindness is caused by retinal artery occlusion, vision may be permanently
impaired (Roos, 2012).

FIGURE 40-14 Purtscher retinopathy caused by choroidal ischemia and infarction in preeclampsia
syndrome. Ophthalmoscopy shows scattered yellowish, opaque lesions of the retina (arrows).
(Reproduced with permission from Lam, DS, Chan W: Images in clinical medicine. Choroidal ischemia
in preeclampsia. N Engl J Med 344(10):739, 2001).

Cerebral Edema
Manifestations that suggest widespread cerebral edema are worrisome.
During 13 years at Parkland Hospital, 10 of 175 women with eclampsia
were diagnosed with symptomatic cerebral edema (Cunningham, 2000).

Symptoms ranged from lethargy, confusion, and blurred vision to obtundation
and coma. In most cases, symptoms waxed and waned. Of these 10, three
became comatose and had imaging findings of transtentorial herniation. One
woman died.
Mental status changes generally correlated with the degree of
involvement seen with CT and MR imaging studies. These women are very
susceptible to sudden and severe blood pressure elevations, which can
acutely worsen the already widespread vasogenic edema. Thus, careful
blood pressure control is essential.

■ Uteroplacental Perfusion
Compromised uteroplacental perfusion is almost certainly a major
contributor to the increased perinatal morbidity and mortality rates
associated with preeclampsia syndrome (Harmon, 2015). Contributing
defects in endovascular trophoblastic invasion were discussed earlier (p.
692). Thus, measurement of uterine, intervillous, and placental blood flow
would likely be informative. Attempts to assess these in humans have been
hampered. Barriers include the placenta’s inaccessibility, the complexity of
its venous effluent, and the need for invasive techniques or radioisotopes.
As a surrogate, sonographic measurement of uterine artery blood flow
velocity can estimate resistance to uteroplacental blood flow. Vascular
resistance is estimated by comparing arterial systolic and diastolic velocity
waveforms (Chap. 14, p. 262). By the completion of placentation, impedance
to uterine artery blood flow is markedly decreased, but with abnormal
placentation, abnormally high resistance persists (Everett, 2012; Napolitano,
2012). In earlier studies, peak systolic:diastolic velocity ratios from uterine
and umbilical arteries in preeclamptic pregnancies were measured. In some
cases, but not all, resistance was higher (Ferrazzi, 2018; Trudinger, 1990).
Another Doppler waveform, termed uterine artery “notching,” has been
linked with increased risks for preeclampsia or fetal-growth restriction
(Groom, 2009). However, in one MFMU Network study, notching had a low
predictive value except for early-onset, severe disease (Myatt, 2012a).
Resistance in uterine spiral arteries also has been measured. In one
study, mean resistance values were greater in all women with preeclampsia
compared with those in normotensive controls (Matijevic, 1999). Another
study used MR imaging and other techniques to assess placental perfusion ex

vivo in the myometrial arteries removed from women with preeclampsia or
fetal-growth restriction (Ong, 2003). In both conditions, myometrial arteries
exhibited similar vascular responses.
Despite these findings, evidence for compromised uteroplacental
circulation is found in only a few women who later develop preeclampsia.
Indeed, when preeclampsia develops during the third trimester, only a third
of women with severe disease have abnormal uterine artery velocimetry (Li,
2005). In a study of 50 women with HELLP syndrome, only a third had
abnormal uterine artery waveforms (Bush, 2001). In general, the extent of
abnormal waveforms correlates with severity of fetal involvement (Ghidini,
2008; Groom, 2009).
These sonographic findings have value for prediction of fetal-growth
restriction but not preeclampsia (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2019b; Demers, 2019). Several other flow velocity
waveforms have been investigated for preeclampsia prediction. However,
none is suitable for clinical use (De Kat, 2019; Townsend, 2018).

Fetal-growth Restriction
Discussed in detail in Chapter 47, this potential consequence of
preeclampsia can serve as one severity indicator (see Table 40-2). Namely,
poor growth is usually confined to fetuses of women destined to develop
severe preeclampsia (Mateus, 2019). Perry and colleagues (2020) reported
that pregnancies complicated by fetal-growth restriction more likely had
maternal hemodynamic indices similar to preeclampsia. Measures showed
higher mean arterial pressure, greater systemic vascular resistance, lower
cardiac output, and elevated uterine artery pulsatility index. Fetuses born to
preeclamptic mothers have cardiac remodeling similar to growth-restricted
fetuses (Youseff, 2020).

PREDICTION
Some biological markers implicated in the genesis of the preeclampsia
syndrome have been measured to help predict its development. Although
most have been evaluated in the first half of pregnancy, some have been
tested as predictors of severity in the third trimester. Still others have been
used to forecast recurrent preeclampsia. Overall, these efforts have resulted

in testing strategies with poor sensitivity and poor positive predictive values
for preeclampsia (Conde-Agudelo, 2015; De Kat, 2019). Currently, no
screening tests for preeclampsia are predictably reliable, valid, and
economical.
Because combinations of tests and risk factors might be superior to single
predictors, some have developed multivariable screening algorithms (Boutin,
2021; Brunelli, 2020; Copel, 2020; Serra, 2020; Snell, 2020). One firsttrimester screening protocol using serum sFlt-1 levels has been proposed
(Pihl, 2020). Other examples are midpregnancy algorithms (Black, 2020;
Peguero, 2021; Stepan, 2020). None has been adequately verified sufficiently
for widespread clinical use (Capriglione, 2020).

■ Vascular Resistance Testing and Placental Perfusion
Most tests in this category are cumbersome, time consuming, and inaccurate.
To evaluate blood pressure changes, three tests assess the blood pressure
rise in response to a stimulus. In one, women at 28 to 32 weeks’ gestation
rest in the left lateral decubitus position and then roll to lie supine. With this
roll-over test, rising blood pressure in response to the maneuver signifies a
positive test. The isometric exercise test employs the same principle by
squeezing a handball. The angiotensin II infusion test provides
incrementally higher doses intravenously, and the hypertensive response is
quantified. Sensitivities of all three tests range from 55 to 70 percent, and
specificities approximated 85 percent (Conde-Agudelo, 2015).
Uterine artery Doppler velocimetry is posited to reflect faulty
trophoblastic invasion of the spiral arteries. The poor predictive value of
this for preeclampsia was described in the Uteroplacental Perfusion section
(p. 702).

■ Fetal-Placental Unit Endocrine Function
Several serum analytes have been proposed to help predict preeclampsia.
Newer ones are continually added. In general, none of these tests is clinically
beneficial for hypertension prediction.

■ Renal Function Tests

Hyperuricemia results from reduced uric acid clearance caused by
diminished glomerular filtration, increased tubular reabsorption, and
decreased secretion. In one study, the sensitivity of serum uric acid levels to
detect preeclampsia ranged from 0 to 55 percent, and specificity was 77 to
95 percent (Cnossen, 2006). These are seldom used to diagnose
preeclampsia (Chescheir, 2019).
Isolated gestational proteinuria is a risk factor for preeclampsia
(Jayaballa, 2015; Morgan, 2016). But, as a predictive test for preeclampsia,
microalbuminuria has sensitivities ranging from 7 to 90 percent and
specificities spanning 29 to 97 percent (Conde-Agudelo, 2015).

■ Endothelial Dysfunction and Oxidative Stress
Endothelial activation and inflammation are major participants in
preeclampsia pathophysiology. Levels of some implicated compounds are
elevated in the blood of affected women and have been assessed as
predictors.
Fibronectins are high-molecular-weight glycoproteins released from
endothelial cells and extracellular matrix following endothelial injury. In one
systematic review, however, neither cellular nor total fibronectin levels were
clinically useful to predict preeclampsia (Leeflang, 2007).
Thrombocytopenia and platelet dysfunction are integral features of
preeclampsia. Platelet activation causes their augmented destruction and
lower blood concentrations. Platelet volume is increased because of platelet
immaturity, and platelet volume has been described to be an early predictor
of preeclampsia (Bellos, 2019; Mayer-Pickel, 2021). Although markers of
coagulation activation described earlier (p. 696) are elevated, they
substantively overlap with levels in normotensive pregnant women (von
Dadelszen, 2018).
Of oxidative stress markers, higher levels of lipid peroxides coupled
with decreased antioxidant activity can be seen with preeclampsia. Other
markers are iron, transferrin, and ferritin; resistin; hyperhomocysteinemia;
blood lipids; and antioxidants such as ascorbic acid and vitamin E
(Christiansen, 2015; Conde-Agudelo, 2015; Mackay, 2012; Mignini, 2005).
However, none has sufficient predictive value.

■ Angiogenic and Antiangiogenic Factor Imbalance
An imbalance in angiogenic and antiangiogenic factors is convincingly linked
to preeclampsia pathogenesis (p. 694). Serum levels of VEGF and PlGF
begin to drop before clinical preeclampsia develops. At the same time,
levels of some antiangiogenic factors, such as sFlt-1 and sEng, begin to rise.
Factor levels and ratios differ significantly between women with
preeclampsia and those who are normotensive. These show especially good
predictive performance with early-onset preeclampsia (Burton, 2019;
Cerdeira, 2019; Phipps, 2019; Stepan, 2020).
These tests also can serve as diagnostic adjuncts (Duhig, 2019; Zeisler,
2016). First, they may aid differentiating between preeclampsia and mimics
that include chronic hypertension, chronic kidney disease, systemic lupus
erythematosus, and immunological thrombocytopenia. These tests can also
help differentiate mild and severe disease. These plus other multiple markers
will likely have a future role in first-trimester preeclampsia screening
(Sovio, 2019).

■ Other Markers
Cell-free DNA (cfDNA) of placental origin can be detected in maternal
plasma (Chap. 16, p. 327). It is hypothesized that cfDNA is released in
preeclampsia by accelerated apoptosis of cytotrophoblasts. However, one
MFMU Network study found no correlation between total cfDNA levels and
preeclampsia prediction (Silver, 2017).
Other investigated markers include glycosylated hemoglobin A1c, serum
cystatin-c, and first-trimester estimated placental volume (Bellos, 2019;
Cavero-Redondo, 2018; Kim, 2021). Proteomic, metabolomic, and
transcriptomic technologies can be employed to study serum and urinary
proteins and cellular metabolites. Preliminary studies indicate their potential
predictive value (Bahado-Singh, 2013; Ma, 2014).

PREVENTION
Various strategies used to prevent or modify preeclampsia severity have been
evaluated. Some are listed in Table 40-4. With the possible exception of
aspirin, none is convincingly and reproducibly effective.

TABLE 40-4. Some Methods to Prevent Preeclampsia That Have Been
Evaluated in Randomized Trials

■ Dietary and Lifestyle Modifications
A low-salt diet was one of the earliest researched preventions but is not
supported by data (De Snoo, 1937). Of studies, one randomized trial showed
that a sodium-restricted diet was ineffective in preventing preeclampsia
(Knuist, 1998).
Regular exercise during pregnancy is linked to a lower risk of
developing preeclampsia (Barakat, 2016; Morris, 2017). In one systematic
review, a similar trend toward risk reduction with exercise was noted
(Kasawara, 2012). Only a few studies have been randomized.
Somewhat related, one retrospective cohort study of 677 nonhypertensive
women were hospitalized for bed rest because of threatened preterm
delivery (Abenhaim, 2008). When outcomes of these women were compared
with those of the general obstetrical population, bed rest was associated with
a significantly reduced risk of developing preeclampsia (relative risk 0.27).
From two small randomized trials, prophylactic bed rest for 4 to 6 hours
daily at home was successful in significantly lowering the preeclampsia
incidence in women with normal blood pressures (Meher, 2006). Currently,
the Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine (2020) does not recommend
reduced activity for women with hypertensive disorders or for prevention of
preeclampsia.
Calcium supplementation has been studied, but in one trial of more than
4500 low-risk nulliparas, supplementation failed to decrease the risk for
preeclampsia or pregnancy-associated hypertension (Levine, 1997). Similar
findings were reported from another trial (Hofmeyer, 2019). In aggregate,
most trials show that unless women are calcium deficient, supplementation
offers no benefits (Palacios, 2019; Sanchez-Ramos, 2017).

Subclinical hypothyroidism is associated with increased preeclampsia
risk. This insufficiency has been postulated to stem from iodine deficiency,
but a recent metaanalysis found no association between iodine sufficiency
and preeclampsia (Businge, 2021). Folic acid was evaluated in a
randomized trial (Wen, 2018). Nearly 2500 high-risk women were given a 4mg folic acid dose daily or placebo. The incidence of preeclampsia in both
groups approximated 14 percent.
Cardioprotective fatty acids found in some fish likely prevent
inflammation-mediated atherogenesis. Thus, it was posited that they might
also prevent preeclampsia. However, randomized trials conducted thus far
show no such benefits from fish oil supplementation (Zhou, 2012). In one
longitudinal cohort study, a seafood diet, compared with a western one,
provided a protective effect against preeclampsia (Ikem, 2019).

■ Antihypertensive Drugs
Because of the prior purported benefits of sodium restriction for
preeclampsia prevention, diuretic therapy became popular with the advent of
chlorothiazide in 1957 (Flowers, 1962). In one metaanalysis of nine
randomized trials with more than 7000 pregnancies, women given diuretics
had a lower incidence of edema and hypertension but not of preeclampsia
(Churchill, 2007). Because women with chronic hypertension are at high risk
for preeclampsia, several randomized trials have evaluated various
antihypertensive drugs to reduce the incidence of superimposed
preeclampsia (Chap. 41, p. 713). A critical analysis of these trials by Staff
and coworkers (2015) failed to demonstrate benefits for this goal.

■ Antioxidants
Data imply that an imbalance between oxidant and antioxidant activity plays
a role in preeclampsia pathogenesis. Thus, naturally occurring antioxidants—
vitamins C, D, and E—might reduce such oxidation. Several randomized
studies have assessed antioxidant vitamin supplementation for women at high
risk for preeclampsia (Burton, 2019; Villar, 2009). The Combined
Antioxidant and Preeclampsia Prediction Studies (CAPPS) by the MFMU
Network included almost 10,000 low-risk nulliparas (Roberts, 2010). None

of these studies showed reduced preeclampsia rates in women supplemented
with vitamins C and E compared with those given placebo.
Statins were proposed to prevent preeclampsia because they stimulate
heme oxygenase-1 expression, which inhibits sF1t-1 release. Early animal
data suggest that statins may prevent hypertensive disorders of pregnancy
(Lewis, 2017). The MFMU Network plans a randomized trial to test
pravastatin for prevention, and a pilot study is completed (Costantine, 2016).
Metformin inhibits hypoxic inducible factor 1α by lowering
mitochondrial electron transport chain activity. It reduces sFlt-1 and sEng
activity and thus has potential to prevent preeclampsia (Brownfoot, 2016). In
a preliminary study, prediabetic women were given metformin or placebo
throughout pregnancy, and metformin-treated women had a lower incidence
of severe preeclampsia (Racine, 2021). However, other clinical studies are
lacking.

■ Antithrombotic Agents
Preeclampsia is characterized by vasospasm, endothelial cell dysfunction,
inflammation, and activation of platelets and the coagulation–hemostasis
system. Other sequelae include placental infarction and spiral artery
thrombosis (Nelson, 2014). Thus, antithrombotic agents have been evaluated
to prevent preeclampsia. Low-molecular-weight heparin has been studied in
randomized trials. In a subsequent metaanalysis using individual data from
963 women, the risk for recurrent preeclampsia, abruption, or fetal-growth
restriction was similar in women receiving heparin or placebo (Rodger,
2016).

Low-dose Aspirin
In low doses of 50 to 150 mg daily, aspirin effectively inhibits platelet
thromboxane A2 biosynthesis. It has minimal effects on vascular prostacyclin
production. Still, several clinical trials have shown limited benefits in
preeclampsia prevention. In a randomized trial from the MFMU Network,
risks for adverse outcomes were not significantly reduced with aspirin
therapy (Caritis, 1998). This study was followed by numerous similar
studies and metaanalyses.

In another randomized trial of more than 1600 women at high risk for
preterm preeclampsia, oral low-dose aspirin was given daily from 11 to 14
weeks’ gestation until 36 weeks to prevent recurrence (Rolnik, 2017). The
rate of preterm preeclampsia recurrence was 1.6 percent in the aspirin group
compared with 4.3 percent in the placebo arm. In a metaanalysis, Roberge
and colleagues (2017) found that aspirin prophylaxis initiated before 16
weeks’ gestation was associated with a significant risk reduction—
approximately 60 percent—of preeclampsia and fetal-growth restriction. At
the same time, however, Meher and associates (2017) performed an
individual participant data metaanalysis and reported a much lower—
approximately 10 percent—risk reduction. Effects were significant whether
therapy was initiated before or after 16 weeks’ gestation.
In a subsequent metaanalysis, Roberge and coworkers (2018) found that
aspirin prophylaxis given starting ≤16 weeks’ gestation reduced the risk of
preterm, but not term, preeclampsia. Turner and colleagues (2020) reported
that aspirin improved some perinatal outcomes independent of effects on
preeclampsia risk. But to the contrary, the review by Chaemsaithong and
coworkers (2020) found no benefits even when low-dose aspirin was given
before 11 weeks’ gestation.
Based on these data, the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (2021)
recommends low-dose aspirin prophylaxis for women at high risk for
preeclampsia. The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
(2018, 2020) now recommends low-dose aspirin be given between 12 and
28 weeks’ gestation to help prevent preeclampsia in high-risk women.
Candidates include those with ≥1 of the following: prior preeclampsia,
chronic hypertension, overt diabetes, renal disease, autoimmune disorders,
and multifetal gestation. Supplementation may be considered for those with
more than one of these qualities: nulliparous, aged older than 35 years,
obese, family history of preeclampsia, vulnerable sociodemographics, and
prior low-birthweight or growth-restricted neonate. These results have also
raised the question as to whether all pregnant women should be given aspirin
(Ayala, 2019).
Low-dose aspirin coupled with heparin mitigates thrombotic sequelae in
women with lupus anticoagulant (Chap. 62, p. 1116). Because of a similarly
high prevalence of placental thrombotic lesions found with severe
preeclampsia, trials have assessed the possible merits of such treatments for
women with prior preeclampsia. In two randomized trials, women with a

history of early-onset preeclampsia were given aspirin alone or a regimen of
enoxaparin plus aspirin (Groom, 2017; Haddad, 2016). Outcomes were
similar. Low-molecular-weight heparin, with or without aspirin, may
decrease the risk for preeclampsia in high-risk women (de Vries, 2012;
Wang, 2020).

REFERENCES
Abdul-Karim R, Assali NS: Pressor response to angiotonin in pregnant and nonpregnant women. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 82:246, 1961
Abenhaim HA, Bujold E, Benjamin A, et al: Evaluating the role of bedrest on the prevention of
hypertensive disease of pregnancy and growth restriction. Hypertens Pregnancy 27(2):197, 2008
Adam I, Mutabingwa TK, Malik EM: Red cell distribution width and preeclampsia: a systematic review
and meta-analysis. Clin Hypertens 25:15, 2019
Alexander JM, McIntire DD, Leveno KJ, et al: Magnesium sulfate for the prevention of eclampsia in
women with mild hypertension. Am J Obstet Gynecol 189:S89, 2003
Alexander JM, McIntire DD, Leveno KJ, et al: Selective magnesium sulfate prophylaxis for the
prevention of eclampsia in women with gestational hypertension. Obstet Gynecol 108: 826, 2006
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Hypertension in pregnancy. Report of the
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists’ Task Force on Hypertension in Pregnancy.
Obstet Gynecol 122:1122, 2013
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Low-dose aspirin use during pregnancy.
Committee Opinion No. 743, June, 2018
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Chronic hypertension in pregnancy. Practice
Bulletin No. 203, January 2019a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Obstetric analgesia and anesthesia. Practice
Bulletin No. 209, February 2019b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Gestational hypertension and preeclampsia.
Practice Bulletin No. 222, June 2020
Ayala NK, Rouse DJ: A nudge toward universal aspirin for preeclampsia prevention. Obstet Gynecol
133(4):725, 2019
Bahado-Singh RO, Akolekar R, Mandal R, et al: First-trimester metabolomic detection of late-onset
preeclampsia. Am J Obstet Gynecol 208(1):58e1, 2013
Baltajian K, Bajracharya S, Salahuddin S, et al: Sequential plasma angiogenic factors levels in women
with suspected preeclampsia. Am J Obstet Gynecol 215(1):89.e1, 2016
Barakat R, Pelaez M, Cordero Y, et al: Exercise during pregnancy protects against hypertension and
macrosomia: randomized clinical trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol 214:649.e1, 2016
Bartsch E, Medcalf KE, Park AL, et al: Clinical risk factors for preeclampsia determined in early
pregnancy: systematic review and meta-analysis of large cohort studies. BMJ 353:il753, 2016
Bdolah Y, Palomaki GE, Yaron Y, et al: Circulating angiogenic proteins in trisomy 13. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 194(1):239, 2006
Bellos I, Fitrou G, Daskalakis G, et al: Serum cystatin-c as predictive factor of preeclampsia: a
metaanalysis of 27 observational studies. Pregnancy Hypertens 16:97, 2019

Bergman L, Acurio J, Leon J, et al: Preeclampsia and increased permeability over the blood-brain
barrier: a role of vascular endothelial growth receptor 2. Am J Hypertens 34(1):73, 2021a
Bergman L, Cluver C, Carlberg N, et al: Cerebral perfusion pressure and autoregulation in eclampsia—
a case control study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 225(2):185.e1, 2021b
Bergman L, Thorgeirsdottir L, Elden H, et al: Cognitive impairment in preeclampsia complicated by
eclampsia and pulmonary edema after delivery. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 100(7):1280, 2021c
Black C, Rolnik DL, Al-Amin A, et al: Prediction of preterm preeclampsia at midpregnancy using a
multivariable screening algorithm. Aust N S J Obstet Gynaecol 60(5):675, 2020
Boutin A, Gasse C, Guerby P, et al: First-trimester preterm preeclampsia screening in nulliparous
women: the great obstetrical syndrome (GOS) study. J Obstet Gynaecol Can 43(1):43, 2021
Brewer J, Owens MY, Wallace K, et al: Posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome in 46 of 47
patients with eclampsia. Am J Obstet Gynecol 208(6):468e1, 2013
Brosens I, Puttemans P, Benagiano G: Placental bed research: 1. The placental bed. From spiral arteries
remodeling to the great obstetrical syndromes. Am J Obstet Gynecol 221(5):437, 2019
Brown CE, Purdy P, Cunningham FG: Head computed tomographic scans in women with eclampsia.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 159(4):915, 1988
Brownfoot FC, Hastie R, Hannan NJ, et al: Metformin as a prevention and treatment for preeclampsia:
effects on soluble fms-like tyrosine kinase 1 and soluble endoglin secretion and endothelial
dysfunction. Am J Obstet Gynecol 214(3):356.el, 2016
Brunelli E, Seidenari A, Germano C, et al: External validation of a simple risk score based on the
ASPRE trial algorithm for preterm preeclampsia considering maternal characteristics in nulliparous
pregnant women: a multicentric retrospective cohort study. BJOG 127(10):1210, 2020
Burton GJ, Redman CW, Roberts JM, et al: Preeclampsia: pathophysiology and clinical implications.
BMJ 366:12381, 2019
Burwick RM, Rincon M, Beeraka SS, et al: Evaluation of hemolysis as a severe feature of
preeclampsia. Hypertension 72(2):460, 2018
Bush KD, O’Brien JM, Barton JR: The utility of umbilical artery Doppler investigation in women with
HELLP (hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, and low platelet count) syndrome. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 184:1087, 2001
Businge C, Usenbo A, Longo-Mbenza B, et al: Insufficient iodine nutrition status and the risk of
preeclampsia: a systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ Open 11(2):e043505, 2021
Buttrup LS, Wallukat G, Schimke I, et al: Functional autoantibodies against endothelin-l receptor type A
and angiotensin II receptor type 1 in patients with preeclampsia. Pregnancy Hypertens Oct 14:189,
2018
Buurma AJ, Turner RJ, Driessen JH, et al: Genetic variants in preeclampsia: a meta-analysis. Hum
Reprod Update 19(3):289, 2013
Byrne JJ, Seasely A, Nelson DB, et al: Comparing acute fatty liver of pregnancy from hemolysis,
elevated liver enzymes, and low platelets syndrome. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 19:1, 2020
Capriglione S, Plotti F, Terranova C, et al: Preeclampsia and the challenge of early prediction: reality or
utopia? State of art and critical review of literature. J Matern Fetal Neonatal 33(4):677, 2020
Caritis S, Sibai B, Hauth J, et al: Low-dose aspirin to prevent preeclampsia in women at high risk.
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development Network of Maternal-Fetal Medicine
Units. N Engl J Med 338(11):70, 1998
Cavero-Redondo I, Martinez-Vizcaino V, Soriano-Cano A, et al: Glycated haemoglobin A1c as a
predictor of preeclampsia in type 1 diabetic pregnant women: a systematic review and metaanalysis.
Pregnancy Hypertens 14:49, 2018

Cerdeira AS, O’Sullivan J, Ohuma EO, et al: Randomized interventional study on prediction of
preeclampsia/eclampsia in women with suspected preeclampsia. Hypertension 74(4):983, 2019
Chaemsaithong P, Cuenca-Gomez D, Plana MN, et al: Does low-dose aspirin initiated before 11 weeks’
gestation reduce the rate of preeclampsia? Am J Obstet Gynecol 222(5):437, 2020
Chandrasekaran D, Simon R: Hepatic complications in preeclampsia. Clin Obstet Gynecol 63(1):165,
2020
Chase VL, McBride CA, Badger GJ, et al: Association of pre- pregnancy and longitudinal change in
angiotensin-II with preterm preeclampsia. Abstract No. 934, Am J Obstet Gynecol 216:S530, 2017
Chavarria ME, Lara-Gonzålez L, Gonzålez-Gleason A, et al: Prostacyclin/thromboxane early changes in
pregnancies that are complicated by preeclampsia. Am J Obstet Gynecol 188:986, 2003
Chescheir NC: Serum uric acid measurement in women with hypertensive disorders of pregnancy.
Obstet Gynecol 134(3): 636, 2019
Chesley LC: Diagnosis of preeclampsia. Obstet Gynecol 65:423, 1985
Chesley LC (ed): Hypertensive Disorders in Pregnancy. Appleton Century—Crofts, New York, 1978
Chesley LC, Williams LO: Renal glomerular and tubular function in relation to the hyperuricemia of
preeclampsia and eclampsia. Am J Obstet Gynecol 50:367, 1945
Christiansen M, Hedley PL, Placing S, et al: Maternal serum resistin is reduced in first trimester
preeclampsia pregnancies and is a marker of clinical severity. Hypertens Pregnancy 34(4):422, 2015
Churchill D, Beever GD, Meher S, et al: Diuretics for preventing preeclampsia. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev 1:CD004451, 2007
Cnossen JS, de Ruyter-Hanhijarvi H, van der Post JA, et al: Accuracy of serum uric acid determination
in predicting pre-eclampsia: a systematic review. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 85(5):519, 2006
Conde-Agudelo A, Romero R, Roberts JM: Tests to predict preeclampsia. In Taylor RN, Roberts JM,
Cunningham FG (eds): Chesley’s Hypertensive Disorders in Pregnancy, 4th ed. Amsterdam,
Academic Press, 2015
Conrad KP, Stillman I, Lindheimer MD: The kidney in normal pregnancy and preeclampsia. In Taylor
RN, Roberts JM, Cunningham FG (eds): Chesley’s Hypertensive Disorders in Pregnancy, 4th ed.
Amsterdam, Academic Press, 2015
Copel JA, Platt LD, Hobbins JC, et al: Gottesfe1d-Hohler memorial foundation risk assessment for early
onset preeclampsia in the United States. Obstet Gynecol 135(1):36, 2020
Cornelis T, Odutayo A, Keunen J, et al: The kidney in normal pregnancy and preeclampsia. Semin
Nephrol 31(1):4, 2011
Costantine MM, Cleary K, Hebert MF, et al: Safety and pharmacokinetics of pravastatin used for the
prevention of preeclampsia in high-risk pregnant women: a pilot randomized controlled trial Am J
Obstet Gynecol 214(6):720.e1, 2016
Cunningham FG, Fernandez CO, Hernandez C: Blindness associated with preeclampsia and eclampsia.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 172:1291, 1995
Cunningham FG, Lowe T, Guss S, et al: Erythrocyte morphology in women with severe preeclampsia
and eclampsia. Am J Obstet Gynecol 153:358, 1985
Cunningham FG, Nelson DB: Disseminated intravascular coagulation syndromes in obstetrics. Obstet
Gynecol 126(5):999, 2015
Cunningham FG, Twickler D: Cerebral edema complicating eclampsia. Am J Obstet Gynecol 182:94,
2000
Davidge S, de Groot C, Taylor RN: Endothelial cell dysfunction and oxidative stress. In Taylor RN,
Roberts JM, Cunningham FG (eds): Chesley’s Hypertensive Disorders in Pregnancy, 4th ed.
Amsterdam, Academic Press, 2015

De Kat AC, Hirst J, Woodward M, et al: Prediction models for preeclampsia: a systematic review.
Pregnancy Hypertens 16:48, 2019
Demers S, Boutin A, Gassee C, et al: First-trimester uterine artery Doppler for the prediction of
preeclampsia in nulliparous women: the great obstetrical syndrome study. Am J Perinatal 36(9):930,
2019
De Snoo K: The prevention of eclampsia. Am J Obstet Gynecol 34:911, 1937
de Vries JI, van Pampus MG, Hague WM: Low-molecular-weight heparin added to aspirin in the
prevention of recurrent early- onset pre-eclampsia in women with inheritable thrombophilia: the
FRUIT-RCT. J Thromb Haemost 10(1):64, 2012
De Wolf F, De Wolf-Peeters C, Brosens I, et al: The human placental bed: electron microscopic study
of trophoblastic invasion of spiral arteries. Am J Obstet Gynecol 137:58, 1980
Drakeley AJ, Le Roux PA, Anthony J, et al: Acute renal failure complicating severe preeclampsia
requiring admission to an obstetric intensive care unit. Am J Obstet Gynecol 186:253, 2002
Drassinower D, Friedman AM, Levin H, et al: Does magnesium exposure affect neonatal resuscitation?
Am J Obstet Gynecol 213:424.e1, 2015
Duckworth S, Griffin M, Seed PT, et al: Diagnostic biomarkers in women with suspected preeclampsia
in a prospective multicenter study. Obstet Gynecol 128(2):245, 2016
Duhig KE, Myers J, Seed PT, et al: Placental growth factor testing to assess women with suspected
preeclampsia: a multi centre, pragmatic, stepped-wedge cluster-randomised controlled trial. Lancet
393(10183):1807, 2019
Dürr JA, Lindheimer MD: Control of volume and body tonicity. In Lindheimer MD, Roberts JM,
Cunningham FG (eds): Chesley’s Hypertensive Disorders in Pregnancy, 2nd ed. Stamford, Appleton
& Lange, 1999
Easterling TR, Benedetti TJ, Schmucker BC, et al: Maternal hemodynamics in normal and preeclamptic
pregnancies: a longitudinal study. Obstet Gynecol 76:1061, 1990
Edlow JA, Caplan LR, O’Brien K, et al: Diagnosis of acute neurological emergencies in pregnant and
postpartum women. Lancet Neurol 12(2):175, 2013
Erlebacher A: Immunology of the maternal-fetal interface. Ann Rev Immunol 31:387, 2013
Escobar Vidarte MF, Montes D, Perez A, et al: Hepatic rupture associated with preeclampsia, report of
three cases and literature review. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 32(16):2767, 2019
Evans CS, Gooch L, Flotta D, et al: Cardiovascular system during the postpartum state in women with a
history of preeclampsia. Hypertension 58:57, 2011
Everett TR, Mahendru AA, McEniery CM, et al: Raised uterine artery impedance is associated with
increased maternal arterial stiffness in the late second trimester. Placenta 33(7):572, 2012
Facco FL, Parker CB, Reddy UM, et al: Association between sleep- disordered breathing and
hypertensive disorders of pregnancy and gestational diabetes mellitus. Obstet Gynecol 129(1):31,
2017
Ferrazzi E, Stampalija T, Monasta L, et al: Maternal hemodynamics: a method to classify hypertensive
disorders of pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 218(1):124.e1, 2018
Fishel Bartal M, Lindheimer MD, Sibai BM: Proteinuria during pregnancy: definition, pathophysiology,
methodology, and clinical significance. Am J Obstet Gynecol September 1, 2020 [Epub ahead of
print]
Fisher S, Roberts JM: The placenta in normal pregnancy and preeclampsia. In Taylor RN, Roberts JM,
Cunningham FG (eds): Chesley’s Hypertensive Disorders in Pregnancy, 4th ed. Amsterdam,
Academic Press, 2015

Flowers CE, Grizzle JE, Easterling WE, et al: Chlorothiazide as a prophylaxis against toxemia of
pregnancy. A double-blind study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 84:919, 1962
Fugate JE, Rabinstein AA: Posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome: clinical and radiological
manifestations, pathophysiology, and outstanding questions. Lancet Neurol 14(9):914, 2015
Gant NF, Chand S, Worley RJ, et al: A clinical test useful for predicting the development of acute
hypertension in pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 120:1, 1974
Gervasi MT, Chaiworapongsa T, Pacora P, et al: Phenotypic and metabolic characteristics of monocytes
and granulocytes in preeclampsia. Am J Obstet Gynecol 185:792, 2001
Ghidini A, Locatelli A: Monitoring of fetal well-being: role of uterine artery Doppler. Semin Perinatol
32:258, 2008
Gillis EE, Mooney JN, Garrett MR, et al: Sildenafil treatment ameliorates the maternal syndrome of
preeclampsia and rescues fetal growth in the Dahl salt-sensitive rat. Hypertension 67:647, 2016
Gray KJ, Saxena R, Karumanchi A: Genetic predisposition to preeclampsia is conferred by fetal DNA
variants near FLT1, a gene involved in the regulation of angiogenesis. Am J Obstet Gynecol
218(2):211, 2018
Green LJ, Mackillop LH, Salvi D, et al: Gestation-specific vital sign reference ranges in pregnancy.
Obstet Gynecol 135(3):653, 2020
Groom K, McCowan L, MacKay L, et al: Enoxaparin for the prevention of preeclampsia and
intrauterine growth restriction in women with a history: a randomized trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol
216(3):296.e1, 2017
Groom KM, North RA, Stone PR, et al: Patterns of change in uterine artery Doppler studies between
20 and 24 weeks of gestation and pregnancy outcomes. Obstet Gynecol 113(2):332, 2009
Gu Y, Thompson D, Xu J, et al: Aberrant proatrial natriuretic peptide/corin/natriuretic peptide receptor
signaling is present in maternal vascular endothelium in preeclampsia. Pregnancy Hypertens 11:1,
2018
Guirguis GF, Aziz MM, Boccia Liang C, et al: Is preeclampsia an independent predictor of diastolic
dysfunction: a retrospective cohort study. Pregnancy Hypertens 5(4):359, 2015
Gupta R, Sheidow T: Bilateral serous retinal detachment in association with preeclampsia. Can J
Ophthalmol 54(3):e98, 2019
Gyamfi-Bannerman C, Pandita A, Miller EC, et al: Preeclampsia outcomes at delivery and race. J
Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 33(21):3619, 2020
Haddad B, Barton JR, Livingston JC, et al: Risk factors for adverse maternal outcomes among women
with HELLP (hemolysis, e1evated liver enzymes, and low plate1et count) syndrome. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 183:444, 2000
Haddad B, Winer N, Chitrit Y, et al: Enoxaparin and aspirin compared with aspirin alone to prevent
placenta—mediated pregnancy complications. Obstet Gynecol 128(5):1053, 2016
Haggerty CL, Seifert ME, Tang G: Second trimester antiangiogenic proteins and preeclampsia.
Pregnancy Hypertens 2(2):158, 2012
Handor H, Daoudi R: Images in clinical medicine. Hypertensive retinopathy associated with
preeclampsia. N Engl J Med 370(8):752, 2014
Harmon QE, Huang L, Umbach DM, et al: Risk of fetal death with preeclampsia. Obstet Gynecol
125(3):628, 2015
Hecht JL, Ordi J, Carrilho C, et al: The pathology of eclampsia: an autopsy series. Hypertens Pregnancy
36:259, 2017
Heilmann L, Rath W, Pollow K: Hemostatic abnormalities in patients with severe preeclampsia. Clin
Appl Thromb Hemost 13: 285, 2007

Herraiz I, Escribano D, Gömez—Arriaga PI, et al: Predictive value of sequential mode1s of uterine
artery Doppler in pregnancies at high risk for pre—eclampsia. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 40(1):68,
2012
Hertig AT: Vascular pathology in the hypertensive albuminuric toxemias of pregnancy. Clinics 4:602,
1945
Hibbard JU, Shroff SG, Cunningham FG: Cardiovascular alterations in normal and preeclamptic
pregnancy. In Taylor RN, Roberts JM, Cunningham FG (eds): Chesley’s Hypertensive Disorders in
Pregnancy, 4th ed. Amsterdam, Academic Press, 2015
Hofmeyer GJ, Betran AP, Singata-Mad1ik M, et al: Prepregnancy and early pregnancy calcium
supplementation among women at high risk of preeclampsia: a multicentre, double-blind, randomised,
placebo-controlled trial. Lancet 393(10169):330, 2019
Hosapatna Basavarajappa D, Saha PK, Baga R, et al: Neuroradiological perspectives of severe
preeclampsia and eclampsia spectrum corre1ation from posterior reversible encephalopathy
syndrome. Pregnancy Hypertens 7(20):119, 2020
Hupuczi P, Nagy B, Sziller I, et al: Characteristic laboratory changes in pregnancies complicated by
HE1LP syndrome. Hypertens Pregnancy 26:389, 2007
Ikem E, Halldorsson TI, Birgisdöttir BE, et al: Dietary patterns and the risk of pregnancy-associated
hypertension in the Danish National Birth Cohort: a prospective longitudinal study. BJOG 126(5):663,
2019
Jaatinen N, Ekholm E: Eclampsia in Finland: 2006 to 2010. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 95(7):787, 2016
Janzarik WG, Ehlers E, Ehmann R, et al: Dynamic cerebral autoregulation in pregnancy and the risk of
preeclampsia. Hypertension 63:161, 2014
Janzarik WG, Gerber A, Markfeld-Erol F, et al: No long-term impairment of cerebral autoregulation
after preeclampsia. Pregnancy Hypertens 13:171, 2018
Jaskolka D, Retnakaran R, Zinman B, et al: Fetal sex and maternal risk of preeclampsia/eclampsia: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. BJOG 124(4):553, 2017
Jayaballa M, Sood S, Alahakoon I, et al: Microalbuminuria is a predictor of adverse pregnancy outcomes
including preeclampsia. Pregnancy Hypertens 5(4):303, 2015
Jim B, Karaumanchi SA: Preeclampsia: Pathogenesis, prevention, and long-term consequences. Semin
Nephrol 37(4):386, 2017
Joint Commission: R3 Report, Provision of care, treatment, and services standards for maternal safety.
August 21, 2019
Judy AE, McCain CL, Lawton ES, et al: Systolic hypertension, preeclampsia-re1ated mortality, and
stroke in California. Obstet Gynecol 133(6):1151, 2019
Karumanchi GA, Granger JP: Preeclampsia and pregnancy-re1ated hypertensive disorders.
Hypertension 67:238, 2016a
Karumanchi SA: Angiogenic factors in preeclampsia from diagnosis to therapy. Hypertension 67:1072,
2016b
Kasawara KT, do Nascimento SL, Costa ML, et al: Exercise and physical activity in the prevention of
preeclampsia: systematic review. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 91(10):1147, 2012
Katsuragi S, Tanaka H, Hasegawa J, et al: Analysis of preventability of hypertensive disorder in
pregnancy-re1ated maternal death using the nationwide registration system of maternal deaths in
Japan. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 32(20):3420, 2019
Keiser S, Owens M, Parrish M, et al: HELLP syndrome with and without eclampsia. Am J Perinatol
28(3):187, 2011

Kenny L, McCrae K, Cunningham FG: Plate1ets, coagulation, and the liver. In Taylor RN, Roberts JM,
Cunningham FG (eds): Chesley’s Hypertensive Disorders in Pregnancy, 4th ed. Amsterdam,
Academic Press, 2015
Khalil A, Akolekar R, Synge1aki A, et al: Maternal hemodynamics at 11–13 weeks’ gestation and risk
of pre-eclampsia. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 40(1):28, 2012
Khan KS, Wojdyla D, Say L, et al: WHO analysis of causes of maternal death: a systematic review.
Lancet 367:1066, 2006
Khodzhaeva ZS, Kogan YA, Shmakov RG, et al: Clinical and pathogenetic features of early- and lateonset preeclampsia. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 29(18):2980, 2016
Kim YR, Jung I, Park G, et al: First-trimester screening for early preeclampsia risk using maternal
characteristics and estimate placental volume. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 34(7):1155, 2021
Knuist M, Bonse1 GJ, Zondervan HA, et al: Low sodium diet and pregnancy-induced hypertension: a
multicentre randomized controlled trial. BJOG 105:430, 1998
Labarrere CA, DiCarlo HL, Bammerlin E, et al: Failure of physiologic transformation of spiral arteries,
endothe1ial and trophoblast ce1l activation, and acute atherosis in the basal plate of the placenta.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 216:287.e1, 2017
Lam DS, Chan W: Images in clinical medicine. Choroidal ischemia in preeclampsia. N Engl J Med
344(10):739, 2001
Lee YJ, Lee S, Jo HN, et al: Alterations in transcranial Doppler indices of pregnant women with
complicated preeclampsia. Pregnancy Hypertens January; 15:189, 2019
Leeflang MM, Cnossen JS, van der Post JA, et al: Accuracy of fibronectin tests for the prediction of
pre-eclampsia: a systematic review. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 133(1):12, 2007
Leseva MN, Binder AM, Ponsonby AL, et al: Differential gene expression and limited epigenetic
dysregulation at the maternofetal interface in preeclampsia. Hum Mol Genet 29(2):335, 2020
Levine RJ, Hauth JC, Curet LB, et al: Trial of calcium to prevent preeclampsia. N Engl J Med 337:69,
1997
Lewis AR, Afroze SH, Wesley KB, et al: Pravastatin protects cytotrophoblasts from a hyperglycemiainduced preeclampsia phenotype. Abstract No. 879, Am J Obstet Gynecol 216:S502, 2017
Li H, Gudnason H, Olofsson P, et al: Increased uterine artery vascular impedance is re1ated to adverse
outcome of pregnancy but is present in only one-third of late third-trimester preeclampsia women.
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 25:459, 2005
Lindheimer MD, Taler SJ, Cunningham FG: Hypertension in pregnancy [Invited Am Soc Hypertension
position paper]. J Amer Soc Hypertens 2:848, 2008
Loisel DA, Billstrand C, Murray K, et al: The maternal HLA-G 1597 DC null mutation is associated
with increased risk of preeclampsia and reduced HLA-G expression during pregnancy in AfricanAmerican women. Mol Hum Reprod 19(3):144, 2013
Loureiro R, Leite CC, Kahhale S, et al: Diffusion imaging may predict reversible brain lesions in
eclampsia and severe preeclampsia: initial experience. Am J Obstet Gynecol 189:1350, 2003
Lu Y, Lu C, Ji X, et al: Roles of microRNAs in preeclampsia. J Ce1l Physiol 234(2):1052, 2019
Lynch TA, Dexter SC: Alcoholic pancreatitis masquerading as preeclampsia. Obstet Gynecol
126(6):1276, 2015
Ma K, Jin H, Hu R, et al: A proteomic analysis of placental trophoblastic ce1ls in preeclampsia—
eclampsia. Ce1l Biochem Biophys 69(2):247, 2014
Ma Y, Ye Y, Zhang J, et al: Immune imbalance is associated with the deve1opment of preeclampsia.
Medicine (Baltimore) 98(14):e15080, 2019

Macdonald-Wallis C, Lawlor DA, Fraser A, et al: Blood pressure change in normotensive, gestational
hypertensive, preeclamptic, and essential hypertensive pregnancies. Hypertension 59(6):1241, 2012
Mackay VA, Huda SS, Stewart FM, et al: Preeclampsia is associated with compromised maternal
synthesis of long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids, leading to offspring deficiency. Hypertension
60(4):1078, 2012
Mackenzie RM, Sandrim VC, Carty DM, et al: Endothe1ial FOS expression and preeclampsia. BJOG
119(13):1564, 2012
Malmström, Håberg SE, Morken NH: Probability and outcomes of second pregnancy after HELLP
syndrome in the first: a population-based registry study. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 99(9):1206,
2020
Mandura RA: Bilateral serous retinal detachment and posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome
precipitated by eclamptic attack. Cureus 13(2):e13444, 2021
March MI, Geahchan C, Wenger J, Raghuraman N, et al: Circulating angiogenic factors and the risk of
adverse outcomes among Haitian women with preeclampsia. PLoS One 10(5):e0126815, 2015
Martin JN Jr, Brewer JM, Wallace K, et al: HELLP syndrome and composite major maternal morbidity:
importance of Mississippi classification System. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 26(12):1201, 2013
Martin JN Jr, Owens MY, Keiser SD, et al: Standardized Mississippi protocol treatment of 190 patients
with HELLP syndrome: slowing disease progression and preventing new major maternal morbidity.
Hypertens Pregnancy 31(1):79, 2012
Masoudian P, Nasr A, de Nanassy J: Oocyte donation pregnancies and the risk of preeclampsia or
gestation hypertension: a systematic review and metaanalysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 214(3):328,
2016
Mateus J, Newman RB, Zhang C, et al: Fetal growth patterns in pregnancy-associated hypertensive
disorders: NICHD fetal growth studies. Am J Obstet Gynecol 221(6):635.e1, 2019
Matijevic R, Johnston T: In vivo assessment of failed trophoblastic invasion of the spiral arteries in
preeclampsia. BJOG 106:78, 1999
Mayama M, Uno K, Tano S, et al: Incidence of posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome in
eclamptic and patients with preeclampsia with neurologic symptoms. Am J Obstet Gynecol
215(2):239e1, 2016
Mayer-Pickel K, Stern C, Eberhard K, et al: Comparison of mean platelet volume (MPV) and sFlt1/PlGF ratio as predictive markers for preeclampsia. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 34(9):1407, 2021
McMahon K, Karumanchi SA, Stillman IE, et al: Does soluble fms-like tyrosine kinase-1 regulate
placental invasion? Insight from the invasive placenta. Am J Obstet Gynecol 10:66e1, 2014
Meher S, Duley L: Rest during pregnancy for preventing preeclampsia and its complications in women
with normal blood pressure. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 19:CD005939, 2006
Meher S, Duley L, Hunter K, et al: Antiplatelet therapy before or after 16 weeks’ gestation for
preventing preeclampsia: an individual participant data meta-analysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol
216(2):121, 2017
Melchiorre K, Sutherland G, Sharma R, et al: Mid-gestational maternal cardiovascular profile in preterm
and term preeclampsia: a prospective study. BJOG 120(4):496, 2013
Mignini LE, Latthe PM, Villar J, et al: Mapping the theories of preeclampsia: the role of homocysteine.
Obstet Gynecol 105:411, 2005
Morgan JL, Nelson DB, Roberts SW, et al: Association of baseline proteinuria and adverse outcomes in
pregnant women with treated chronic hypertension. Obstet Gynecol 128(2):270, 2016
Morgan K, Della Torre M, Whelan AR, et al: A case of massive hepatic infarction in a patient with
HELLP syndrome. AJP Rep 9(1):e84, 2019

Morris E, McBride CA, Badger GJ, et al: Prepregnancy fitness and risk of hypertensive disorders of
pregnancy. Abstract No. 853, Am J Obstet Gynecol 216:S488, 2017
Morris RK, Riley RD, Doug M, et al: Diagnostic accuracy of spot urinary protein and albumin to
creatinine ratios for detection of significant proteinuria or adverse pregnancy outcome in patients
with suspected pre-eclampsia: a systematic review and metaanalysis. BMJ 345:e4342, 2012
Morton A, Morton A: High sensitivity cardiac troponin I levels in preeclampsia. Pregnancy Hypertens
13:79, 2018
Mostello D, Catlin TK, Roman L, et al: Preeclampsia in the parous woman: who is at risk? Am J Obstet
Gynecol 187:425, 2002
Myatt L, Brewer AS, Langdon G, et al: Attenuation of the vasoconstrictor effects of thromboxane and
endothelin by nitric oxide in the human fetal–placental circulation. Am J Obstet Gynecol 166:224,
1992
Myatt L, Clifton R, Roberts J, et al: Can changes in angiogenic biomarkers between the first and second
trimesters of pregnancy predict development of preeclampsia in a low-risk nulliparous patient
population? BJOG 120(10):1183, 2013
Myatt L, Clifton RG, Roberts JM, et al: First-trimester prediction of preeclampsia in nulliparous women
at low risk. Obstet Gynecol 119(6):2012a
Myatt L, Clifton RG, Roberts JM, et al: The utility of uterine artery Doppler velocimetry in prediction of
preeclampsia in a low-risk population. Obstet Gynecol 120(4):815, 2012b
Myers JE, Hart S, Armstrong S, et al: Evidence for multiple circulating factor in preeclampsia. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 196(3):266.e1, 2007
Napolitano R, Thilaganathan B: Mean, lowest, and highest pulsatility index of the uterine artery and
adverse pregnancy outcome in twin pregnancies. Am J Obstet Gynecol 206(6):e8, 2012
Nelson DB, Byrne JJ, Cunningham FG: Acute fatty liver of pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 137(3):535, 2021
Nelson DB, Kjan A, Bailey A, et al: Liver injury in hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, and low platelets
syndrome measured by diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance imaging. Am J Perinatol 35:741,
2018
Nelson DB, Yost NP, Cunningham FG: Acute fatty liver of pregnancy: clinical outcomes and expected
duration of recovery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 209(5):456e1, 2013
Nelson DB, Ziadie MS, McIntire DD, et al: Placental pathology suggesting that preeclampsia is more
than one disease. Am J Obstet Gynecol 210:66e1, 2014
Nilsson E, Ros HS, Cnattingius S, et al: The importance of genetic and environmental effects for pre—
eclampsia and gestational hypertension: a family study. BJOG 111:200, 2004
Novotny S, Lee-Plenty N, Wallace K, et al: Acute kidney injury associated with preeclampsia or
hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, and low platelets syndrome. Pregnancy Hypertens 19:94, 2020
O’Connor HD, Hehir MP, Kent EM, et al: Eclampsia: trends in incidence and outcomes over 30 years.
Am J Perinatol 30(8):661, 2013
Ong SS, Moore RJ, Warren AY, et al: Myometrial and placental artery reactivity alone cannot explain
reduced placental perfusion in preeclampsia and intrauterine growth restriction. BJOG 110(10):909,
2003
Orabona R, Vizzardi E, Sciatti E, et al: Insights into cardiac alterations after preeclampsia: an
echocardiographic study. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 49(1):124, 2017
Palacios C, Kostiuk LK, Pefia-Rosas J P: Vitamin D supplementation for women during pregnancy.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 7:CD008873, 2019
Palatnik A, Grobman WA, Miller ES: Is a history of preeclampsia associated with an increased risk of a
small for gestational age infant in a future pregnancy? Am J Obstet Gynecol 215(3):355e1, 2016

Papanna R, Mann LK, Kouides RW, et al: Protein/creatinine ratio in preeclampsia: a systematic review.
Obstet Gynecol 112: 135, 2008
Peguero A, Fernandez-Blanco L, Mazarico E, et al: Added prognostic value of longitudinal changes of
angiogenic factors in early-onset-severe preeclampsia: a prospective cohort study. BJOG
128(2):158, 2021
Perry H, Lehmann H, Mantovani E, et al: Are maternal hemodynamic indices markers of fetal growth
restriction in pregnancies with small-for-gestational-age fetus? Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol
55(2):210, 2020
Petersen EE, Davis NL, Goodman D, et al: Vital signs: pregnancy- related deaths, United States, 2011—
2015, and strategies for prevention, 13 states, 2013—2017. MMWR 68(18):423, 2019
Phipps EA, Thadhani R, Benzing T, et al: Preeclampsia: pathogenesis, novel diagnostics and therapies.
Nat Rev Nephrol 15(5):275, 2019
Pihl K, Sørensen S, Stener Jørgensen F: Prediction of preeclampsia in nulliparous women according to
first trimester maternal factors and serum markers. Fetal Diagn Ther 47(4):277, 2020
Pisani-Conway C, Simhan H: Does abnormal hemostasis as reflected by a thromboelastogram (TEC)
correlate with preeclampsia disease severity? Abstract No. 621, Am J Obstet Gynecol 208(1
suppl):S264, 2013
Poon LC, Shennan A, Hyett JA, et al: The International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics
(FIGO) initiative on preeclampsia: a pragmatic guide for first-trimester screening and prevention. Int
J Gynecol Obstet 145 (Suppl 1):1, 2019
Pritchard JA, Cunningham FG, Mason RA: Coagulation changes in eclampsia: their frequency and
pathogenesis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 124:855, 1976
Pritchard JA, Cunningham FG, Pritchard SA, et al: How often does maternal preeclampsia-eclampsia
incite thrombocytopenia in the fetus? Obstet Gynecol 69:292, 1987
Pritchard JA, Cunningham FG, Pritchard SA: The Parkland Memorial Hospital protocol for treatment of
eclampsia: evaluation of 245 cases. Am J Obstet Gynecol 148(7):951, 1984
Pritchard JA, Weisman R Jr, Ratnoff OD, et al: Intravascular hemolysis, thrombocytopenia and other
hematologic abnormalities associated with severe toxemia of pregnancy. N Engl J Med 250:87, 1954
Raab W, Schroeder G, Wagner R, et al: Vascular reactivity and electrolytes in normal and toxemic
pregnancy. J Clin Endocrinol 16:1196, 1956
Racine JL, Adams JH, Antony KM, et al: Metformin exposure and risk of hypertensive disorders of
pregnancy in patients with type 2 diabetes. Am J Perinatol May 3, 2021 [Epub ahead of print]
Ravichangran J, Woon SY, Quek YS, et al: High-sensitivity cardiac troponin I levels in normal and
hypertensive pregnancy. Am J Med 132(3):362, 2019
Reddy M, Rolnik DL, Harris K, et al: Challenging the definition of hypertension in pregnancy: Am J
Obstet Gynecol 222:606.e1, 2020
Redman CW, Sargent IL, Taylor RN: Immunology of abnormal pregnancy and preeclampsia. In Taylor
RN, Roberts JM, Cunningham FG (eds): Chesley’s Hypertensive Disorders in Pregnancy, 4th ed.
Amsterdam, Academic Press, 2015a
Reimer T, Rohrmann H, Stubert J, et al: Angiogenic factors and acute-phase proteins in serum samples
of preeclampsia and HELLP syndrome patients: a matched-pair analysis. J Matern Fetal Neonatal
Med 26(3):263, 2013
Richards A, Graham DI, Bullock MR: Clinicopathological study of neurological complications due to
hypertensive disorders of pregnancy. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 51:416, 1988
Roberge A, Nicolaides K, Demers S, et al: The role of aspirin dose on the prevention of preeclampsia
and fetal growth restriction: systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 216(2):110,

2017
Roberge S, Bujold E, Nicolaides KH: Aspirin for the prevention of preterm and term preeclampsia:
systematic review and metaanalysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 218(3):287, 2018
Roberts JM, Myatt L, Spong CY, et al: Vitamins C and E to prevent complications of pregnancyassociated hypertension. N Engl J Med 362(14):1282, 2010
Rodger MA, Gris JC, de Vries JI, et al: Low-molecular-weight- heparin and recurrent placentamediated pregnancy complications: a meta-analysis of individual patient data from randomised
controlled trials. Lancet 388(10060): 2629, 2016
Rodriguez AN, Nelson DB, Spong CY, et al: Acute kidney injury in pregnancies complicated by
preeclampsia with severe features. Abstract No. 1012. Am J Obstet Gynecol 220:S627, 2021
Rolnik DL, Wright D, Poon LC, et al: Aspirin versus placebo in pregnancies at high risk for preterm
preeclampsia. N Engl J Med 377:613, 2017
Roos NM, Wiegman MJ, Jansonius NM, et al: Visual disturbance in (pre)eclampsia. Obstet Gynecol
Surv 67(4):242, 2012
Sagsoz N, Kucukozkan T: The effect of treatment on endothelin-1 concentration and mean arterial
pressure in preeclampsia and eclampsia. Hypertens Pregnancy 22:185, 2003
Sakowicz A, Hejduk P, Pietrucha T, et al: Finding NEMO in preeclampsia. Am J Obstet Gynecol
214:538e1, 2017
Sanchez-Ramos L, Roeckner JT, Kaunitz AM: Which agent most effectively prevents preeclampsia? A
systematic review with multi-treatment comparison (network meta-analysis) of large multicenter
randomized controlled trials. Abstract No. 883, Am J Obstet Gynecol 216:S504, 2017
Sang C, Wang S, Zhang Z, et al: Characteristics and outcome of severe preeclampsia/eclampsia
concurrent with or complicated by acute pancreatitis: a report of five cases and literature review. J
Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 32(4):633, 2019
Sansone M, Sarno L, Saccone G, et al: Risk of preeclampsia in human immunodeficiency virus-infected
pregnant women. Obstet Gynecol 127(6):1027, 2016
Schaap TP, van den Akker T, Zwart JJ, et al: A national surveillance approach to monitor incidence of
eclampsia: the Netherlands Obstetric Surveillance System. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 98(3):342,
2019
Schwartz RB, Feske SK, Polak JF, et al: Preeclampsia-eclampsia: clinical and neuroradiographic
correlates and insights into the pathogenesis of hypertensive encephalopathy. Radiology 217:371,
2000
Sep S, Verbeek J, Spaanderman M, et al: Clinical differences between preeclampsia and the HELLP
syndrome suggest different pathogeneses. Reprod Sci 16:176A, 2009
Serra B, Mendoza M, Scazzocchio E, et al: A new model for screening for early-onset preeclampsia.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 222:608.e1, 2020
Shahabi A, Wilson ML, Lewinger JP, et al: Genetic admixture and risk of hypertensive disorders of
pregnancy among Latinas in Los Angeles County. Epidemiology 24(2):285, 2013
Shahul S, Medvedofsky D, Wenger JB, et al: Antiangiogenic factors and myocardial dysfunction.
Hypertension 67:1273, 2016
Sheehan HL, Lynch JB (eds): Cerebral lesions. In: Pathology of Toxaemia of Pregnancy. Baltimore,
Williams & Wilkins, 1973
Sheen JJ, Huang Y, Andrikopoulou M, et al: Maternal age and preeclampsia outcomes during delivery
hospitalizations. Am J Perinatol 37(1):44, 2020
Sibai BM: Diagnosis, controversies, and management of the syndrome of hemolysis, elevated liver
enzymes, and low platelet count. Obstet Gynecol 103:981, 2004

Sibai BM: Diagnosis, prevention, and management of eclampsia. Obstet Gynecol 105:402, 2005
Sibai BM, Stella CL: Diagnosis and management of atypical preeclampsia-eclampsia. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 200(5):481e.1, 2009
Silver RM, Myatt L, Hauth JC, et al: Cell-free total and fetal DNA in first trimester maternal serum and
subsequent development of preeclampsia. Am J Perinatol 34(2):191, 2017
Singh S, Mohakud S, Nail S, et al: Predictors of posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome in women
with hypertension in pregnancy: a prospective observational study. Pregnancy Hypertens 23:191,
2021
Snell KI, Allotey J, Smuk M, et al: External validation of prognostic models predicting preeclampsia:
individual participant data meta-analysis. BMC Med 18(1):302, 2020
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Lauder J, Sciscione A, et al: The role of activity restriction in
obstetric management. Consult Series #50, August 2020
Soma-Pillay P, Pillay R, Wong TT, et al: The effect of preeclampsia on retinal microvascular caliber at
delivery and postpartum. Obstetric Medicine 11(3):116, 2018
Sovio U, Smith G: Evaluation of a simple risk score to predict preterm preeclampsia using maternal
characteristics: a prospective cohort study. BJOG 126(8):963, 2019
Spaan JJ, Ekhart T, Spaanderman ME, et al: Renal function after preeclampsia: a longitudinal pilot study.
Nephron Clin Pract 120(3):c156, 2012
Spargo B, McCartney CP, Winemiller R: Glomerular capillary endotheliosis in toxemia of pregnancy.
Arch Pathol 68:593, 1959
Spitz B, Magness RR, Cox SM: Low-dose aspirin. I. Effect on angiotensin II pressor responses and
blood prostaglandin concentrations in pregnant women sensitive to angiotensin II. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 159(5):1035, 1988
Staff AC, Braekke K, Johnsen GM, et al: Circulating concentration of soluble endoglin (CD105) in fetal
and maternal serum and in amniotic fluid in preeclampsia. Am J Obstet Gynecol 197(2):176.e1, 2007
Staff AC, Sibai BM, Cunningham FG: Prevention of preeclampsia and eclampsia. In Taylor RN,
Roberts JM, Cunningham FG (eds): Chesley’s Hypertensive Disorders in Pregnancy, 4th ed.
Amsterdam, Academic Press, 2015
Stepan H, Hund M, Andraczek T: Combining biomarkers to predict pregnancy complications and
redefine preeclampsia: the angiogenic-placental syndrome. Hypertension 75(4):918, 2020
Stout MJ, Conner SN, Colditz GA, et al: The utility of 12-hour urine collection for the diagnosis of
preeclampsia. Obstet Gynecol 126(4):731, 2015
Stout MJ, Scifres CM, Stamilio DM: Diagnostic utility of urine protein-to-creatinine ratio for identifying
proteinuria in pregnancy. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 26(1):66, 2013
Suzuki Y, Yamamoto T, Mabuchi Y, et al: Ultrastructural changes in omental resistance artery in women
with preeclampsia. Am J Obstet Gynecol 189:216, 2003
Talledo OE, Chesley LC, Zuspan FP: Renin-angiotensin system in normal and toxemic pregnancies. III.
Differential sensitivity to angiotensin II and norepinephrine in toxemia of pregnancy. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 100:218, 1968
Taufield PA, Ales KL, Resnick LM, et al: Hypocalciuria in preeclampsia. N Engl J Med 316:715, 1987
Thadhani R, Hagmann H, Schaarschmidt W, et al: Removal of soluble fms-like tyrosine kinase-1 by
dextran sulfate apheresis in preeclampsia. J Am Soc Nephrol 27(3):903, 2016
Townsend R, Khalil A, Premakurnar Y, et al: Prediction of preeclampsia: review of reviews. Ultrasound
Obstet Gynecol 54(1):16, 2019
Trad A, Czeresnia R, Elrefaei A, et al: What do we know about the diagnosis and management of
mirror syndrome? J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med March 15, 2021 [Epub ahead of print]

Triche EW, Uzun A, DeWan AT, et al: Bioinformatic approach to the genetics of preeclampsia. Obstet
Gynecol 123(6):1155, 2014
Trommer BL, Homer D, Mikhael MA: Cerebral vasospasm and eclampsia. Stroke 19:326, 1988
Trudinger BJ, Cook CM: Doppler umbilical and uterine flow waveforms in severe pregnancy
hypertension. BJOG 97:142, 1990
Turner JM, Robertson NT, Hartel G, et al: Impact of low-dose aspirin on adverse perinatal outcome:
meta-analysis and meta-regression. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 55(2):157, 2020
U.S. Preventive Task Force: Aspirin use to prevent morbidity and mortality from preeclampsia:
preventive medication. Available at: www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/uspstf/draftrecommendation/aspirin-use-to-prevent-preeclampsia-and-related-morbidity-and-mortalitypreventive-medication1#fullrecommendationstart. Accessed May 25, 2021
Vatten LJ, Asvold BO, Eskild A: Angiogenic factors in maternal circulation and preeclampsia with or
without fetal growth restriction. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 91(12):1388, 2012
Vaught AJ, Gavriilaki E, Hueppchen N, et al: Direct evidence of complement activation in HELLP
syndrome: a link to atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome. Exp Hematol 44:390, 2016
Vaught AJ, Kovell LC, Szymanski LM, et al: Acute cardiac effects of severe preeclampsia. JACC
72(1):2, 2018
Vigil-De Gracia P, Ortega-Paz L: Preeclampsia/eclampsia and hepatic rupture. Int J Gynaecol Obstet
118(3):186, 2012
Villar J, Purwar M, Merialdi M, et al: World Health Organisation multicentre randomised trial of
supplementation with vitamins C and E among pregnant women at high risk for pre—eclampsia in
populations of low nutritional status from developing countries. BJOG 116(6):780, 2009
von Dadelszen P, Firoz T, Donnay F, et al: Preeclampsia in low and middle income countries—health
services lessons learned from the PRE-EMPT (PRE-eclampsia monitoring, prevention, and
treatment) Project. J Obstet Gynaecol Can 34(10):917, 2012
von Dadelszen P, Magee LA, Benton SJ, et al: Activated protein C as disease-modifying therapy in
antenatal preeclampsia: an open-label, single arm safety and efficacy trial. Pregnancy Hypertens
13:121, 2018
Von Salmuth V, van der Heiden Y, Bekkers I, et al: The role of hepatic sinusoidal obstruction in the
pathogenesis of the hepatic involvement in HELLP syndrome: exploring the literature. Pregnancy
Hypertens 19:37, 2020
Walsh SW: Plasma from preeclamptic women stimulates transendothelial migration of neutrophils.
Reprod Sci 16(3):320, 2009
Wang X, Gao H: Prevention of preeclampsia in high risk patients with low-molecular-weight heparin: a
metaanalysis. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 33(13):2202, 2020
Wang Y, Gu Y, Granger DN, et al: Endothelial junctional protein redistribution and increased monolayer
permeability in human umbilical vein endothelial cells isolated during preeclampsia. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 186:214, 2002
Ward K, Taylor RN: Genetic factors in the etiology of preeclampsia. In Taylor RN, Roberts JM,
Cunningham FG (eds): Chesley’s Hypertensive Disorders in Pregnancy, 4th ed. Amsterdam,
Academic Press, 2015
Wardhana MP, Dachlan EG, Dekker G: Pulmonary edema in preeclampsia: an Indonesian case-control
study. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 31(6):689, 2018
Weinstein L: Syndrome of hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes and low platelet count: a severe
consequence of hypertension in pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 142:159, 1982

Wen SW, White RR, Rybak N, et al: Effect of high dose folic acid supplementation in pregnancy on
preeclampsia (FACT): double blind, phase III, randomised controlled, international, multicentre trial.
BMJ 362:k3478, 2018
White WM, Garrett AT, Craici IM, et al: Persistent urinary podocyte loss following preeclampsia may
reflect subclinical renal injury. PLoS One 9(3):e92693, 2014
Widmer M, Villar J, Benigni A, et al: Mapping the theories of preeclampsia and the role of angiogenic
factors. Obstet Gynecol 109:169, 2007
Wiles K, Chappell LC, Lightstone L, et al: Updates in diagnosis and management of preeclampsia in
women with CKD. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 15(9):1371, 2020
Willard N, Honce J, Kleinschmidt-DeMasters B: PRES: review of histological features. J Neuropathol
Exp Neurol 77(2):100, 2018
Worley LC, Hnat MD, Cunningham FG: Advanced extrauterine pregnancy: diagnostic and therapeutic
challenges. Am J Obstet Gynecol 198(3):297e1, 2008
Yang J, Pearl M, DeLorenze GN, et al: Racial-ethnic differences in midtrimester maternal serum levels
of angiogenic and anti-angiogenic factors. Am J Obstet Gynecol 215:359e1, 2016
Yoshihara M, Mayama M, Ukai M, et al: Fulminant liver failure resulting from massive hepatic infarction
associated with hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, and low platelets syndrome. J Obstet Gynaecol
Res 42(10):1375, 2016
Youssef L, Miranda J, Paules C, et al: Fetal cardiac remodeling and dysfunction is associated with both
preeclampsia and fetal growth restriction. Am J Obstet Gynecol 222(1):79.e1, 2020
Yule CS, Ambia AM, Duryea EL, et al: The effect of normal saline on renal function and electrolytes in
women with preeclampsia. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med November 18, 2020 [Epub ahead of print]
Zachary S, Rubeo ZS, Jortani SA: The association of N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide with
severe preeclampsia, HELLP syndrome, and eclampsia Abstract No. 990, Am J Obstet Gynecol
216:S557, 2017
Zeeman G, Alexander JM, Vollaard E, et al: “Delta eclampsia”—a hypertensive encephalopathy of
pregnancy in “normotensive” women. Abstract No. 479, Am J Obstet Gynecol 197(6 Supp I): S140,
2007
Zeeman GG, Alexander JM, McIntire DD, et al: Homocysteine plasma concentration levels for the
prediction of preeclampsia in women with chronic hypertension. Am J Obstet Gynecol 189:574, 2003
Zeeman GG, Cunningham FG, Pritchard JA: The magnitude of hemoconcentration with eclampsia.
Hypertens Pregnancy 28(2):127, 2009
Zeeman GG, Fleckenstein JL, Twickler DM, et al: Cerebral infarction in eclampsia. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 190:714, 2004a
Zeeman GG, Hatab M, Twickler DM: Increased cerebral blood flow in preeclampsia with magnetic
resonance imaging. Am J Obstet Gynecol 191(4):1425, 2004b
Zeisler H, Llurba E, Chantraine F, et al: Predictive value of the sFlt-1: PlGF ration in women with
suspected preeclampsia. N Engl J Med 374:13, 2016
Zhang H, Chen J, Sheibani L, et al: Pregnancy augments VEGF-stimulated in vitro angiogenesis and
vasodilator (NO and H2S) production in human uterine artery endothelial cells. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab 102(7):2382, 2017
Zhou SJ, Yelland L, McPhee AJ, et al: Fish-oil supplementation in pregnancy does not reduce the risk of
gestational diabetes or preeclampsia. Am J Clin Nutr 95(6):1378, 2012
Zwart JJ, Richters A, Öry F, et al: Eclampsia in The Netherlands. Obstet Gynecol 112:820, 2008

