# Chapter 7: Embryogenesis and Fetal Development

- Gestational Age
- Embryonic Development
- Fetal Development And Physiology
- Energy And Nutrition
- Placental Role In Embryofetal Development
- References

Contemporary obstetrics incorporates physiology and pathophysiology of the fetus, and its development and environment. As a result, the fetus is considered a patient and is given the same meticulous care provided for the mother. Section 6 is dedicated to the fetal patient, however, virtually every aspect of obstetrics can affect the developing fetus.

## Gestational Age

Several terms define pregnancy duration and thus fetal age (Fig. 7-1). Gestational age or menstrual age is the time elapsed since the first day of the last menstrual period (LMP), a time that actually precedes conception. This starting time, which is usually approximately 2 weeks before ovulation and fertilization and nearly 3 weeks before blastocyst implantation, has traditionally been used. Embryologists describe embryofetal development in

ovulation age, or the time in days or weeks from ovulation. Another term is postconceptional age, which is nearly identical to ovulation age.

> **Figure 7-1:** Terminology used to describe pregnancy duration.

Until recently, clinicians customarily calculated menstrual age, and with this, term pregnancy averages 280 days or 40 weeks between the first day of the LMP and birth. This corresponds to 9 and 1/3 calendar months. However, menstrual cycle length variability among women renders many of these calculations inaccurate. This realization, combined with the frequent use of first-trimester sonography, has led to more accurate gestational age determination (Duryea, 2015). Much of this change stems from the accuracy of early sonographic measurement. As a result, the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, the American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine, and the Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine (2019) together recommend the following: 1. First-trimester sonography is the most accurate method to establish or reaffirm gestational age.

2. In conceptions achieved with in vitro fertilization (IVF), the embryo age and egg transfer date are used.

3. If available, the gestational ages calculated from the LMP and from firsttrimester sonography are compared, and the estimated date of confinement (EDC) is recorded and discussed with the patient.

4. The best obstetrical estimate of gestational age at delivery is recorded on the birth certificate.

The embryofetal crown-rump length in the first trimester is accurate ± 5 to 7 days. Thus, if sonographic gestational age differs by more than 5 days prior to 9 weeks’ gestation, or by more than 7 days later in the first trimester, the EDC is changed. These and discrepant values in the second and third trimester are discussed further in Chapter 14 (p. 248).

### Naegele Rule

An EDC based on the LMP can be quickly estimated as follows: add 7 days to the first day of the LMP and subtract 3 months. For example, if the first day of the LMP was October 5, the due date is 10–05 minus 3 (months) plus 7 (days) = 7–12, or July 12 of the following year. This calculation has been termed the Naegele rule. The period of gestation can also be divided into three units of approximately 14 weeks each. These three trimesters are important obstetrical milestones. In addition to estimating the EDC with either Naegele rule or “pregnancy wheels,” calculator tools in the electronic medical record and smartphone applications can provide a calculated EDC and gestational age. For example, the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020) has developed a calculator application that incorporates sonographic criteria and the LMP or embryo transfer date (Chap. 14, p. 248).

## Embryonic Development

The complexity of embryofetal development is immense. Figure 7-2 shows a developmental sequence of various organ systems. New information regarding organ development continues to accrue. For example, imaging techniques help to unravel the contributions of gene regulation and tissue interaction to eventual three-dimensional organ morphology (Anderson, 2016). Others have described the sequence of gene activation that underlies cardiac development (p. 126).

> **Figure 7-2:** Embryofetal development according to gestational age determined by the first day of the last menses. Times are approximate.

### Zygote and Blastocyst Development

During the first 2 weeks after ovulation and then fertilization, the zygote—or preembryo—progresses to the blastocyst stage. The blastocyst implants 6 or 7 days following fertilization. The 58-cell blastocyst differentiates into five cells—the inner cell mass, which develops into the embryo. The remaining 53 cells form placental trophoblast. Details of implantation and early development of the blastocyst and placenta are described in Chapter 5 (p. 86).

### Embryonic Period

The conceptus is termed an embryo at the beginning of the third week after ovulation and fertilization. Primitive chorionic villi form, and this coincides with the expected day of menses. The embryonic period, during which time organogenesis takes place, lasts 6 weeks. It begins the third week from the

LMP and continues through the eighth week. The embryonic disc is well defined, and most pregnancy tests that measure human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) become positive by this time. As shown in Figure 7-3, the body stalk is now differentiated. There are villous cores in which angioblastic chorionic mesoderm can be distinguished and a true intervillous space that contains maternal blood.

> **Figure 7-3:** Early human embryos. Ovulation ages: A. 19 days (presomite). B. 21 days (7 somites). C. 22 days (17 somites). (After drawings and models in the Carnegie Institute.)

During the third week, fetal blood vessels in the chorionic villi appear. In the fourth week, a cardiovascular system has formed (Fig. 7-4) (Moore, 2008). Thereby, a true circulation is established both within the embryo and between the embryo and the chorionic villi. Partitioning of the primitive heart begins. Also in the fourth week, the neural plate forms, and it subsequently folds to form the neural tube. By the end of the fifth menstrual week, the chorionic sac measures approximately 1 cm in diameter. The embryo is 3 mm long and can be measured sonographically. Arm and leg buds have developed, and the amnion is beginning to ensheathe the body stalk, which thereafter becomes the umbilical cord. At the end of the sixth week, the embryo is approximately 9 mm long, and the neural tube has closed (Fig. 7-5). Cardiac motion is almost always discernable sonographically (Fig. 7-6).

> **Figure 7-4:** Three- to four-week-old embryos. A, B. Dorsal views of embryos during 22 to 23 days of development showing 8 and 12 somites, respectively. C–E. Lateral views of embryos during 24 to 28 days, showing 16, 27, and 33 somites, respectively.

> **Figure 7-5:** Embryo photographs. A. Dorsal view of an embryo at 24 to 26 days and corresponding to Figure 7-4C. B. Lateral view of an embryo at 28 days and corresponding to Figure 7-4D. C. Lateral view of embryofetus at 56 days, which marks the end of the embryonic period and the beginning of the

fetal period. The liver is within the white, halo circle. (From Werth B, Tsiaras A: From Conception to Birth: A Life Unfolds. New York, Doubleday, 2002.)

> **Figure 7-6:** A. This image of an 8-week, 3-day embryo depicts measurement of the crown-rump length, which is 1.93 cm at this gestational age. B. Despite the early gestational age, M-mode imaging readily demonstrates embryonic cardiac activity. The heart rate in this image is 161 beats per minute.

The cranial end of the neural tube closes by 38 days from the LMP, and the caudal end closes by 40 days. Thus, the neural tube has closed by the end of the sixth week. And by the end of the eighth week, the crown-rump length approximates 22 mm. Fingers and toes are present, and the arms bend at the elbows. The upper lip is complete, and the external ears form definitive elevations on either side of the head. Three-dimensional images and videos of human embryos from the Multi-Dimensional Human Embryo project can be seen at: embryo.soad.umich.edu/.

## Fetal Development And Physiology

### Fetal Period Epochs

The transition from embryonic to fetal periods occurs at 7 weeks after fertilization, corresponding to 9 weeks after the LMP. At this time, the fetus approximates 24 mm in length, most organ systems have developed, and the fetus enters a period of growth and maturation. These phases are outlined in

> **Figure 7-2:** 

12 Gestational Weeks

The uterus usually is just palpable above the symphysis pubis. Fetal growth is rapid, and the fetal crown-rump length is 5 to 6 cm (Fig. 7-7). Centers of ossification have appeared in most fetal bones, and the fingers and toes have become differentiated. Skin and nails develop, and scattered rudiments of hair appear. The external genitalia are beginning to show definitive signs of male or female gender. The fetus begins to make spontaneous movements.

> **Figure 7-7:** This image of a 12-week, 2-day embryo depicts measurement of the crown-rump length. The fetal profile, cranium, and a hand and foot also are visible in this image.

16 Gestational Weeks Fetal growth slows at this time. The crown-rump length is 12 cm, and the fetal weight approximates 150 g. Clinically, the sonographic crown-rump length is not measured beyond 13 weeks, which corresponds to approximately 8.4 cm. Instead, biparietal diameter, head circumference, abdominal circumference, and femur length are measured. Fetal weight in the second and third trimesters is estimated from a combination of these measurements (Chap. 14, p. 248). Eye movements begin at 16 to 18 weeks, coinciding with midbrain maturation. By 18 weeks in the female fetus, the uterus is formed and vaginal

canalization begins. By 20 weeks in the male, testicles start to descend.

20 Gestational Weeks This is the midpoint of pregnancy as estimated from the LMP. The fetus now weighs somewhat more than 300 g, and weight increases substantially in a linear manner. From this point onward, the fetus moves approximately every minute and is active 10 to 30 percent of the day (DiPietro, 2005). Brown fat forms, and the fetal skin becomes less transparent. Downy lanugo covers its entire body, and some scalp hair can be seen. Cochlear function develops between 22 and 25 weeks, and this maturation continues for 6 months after delivery.

24 Gestational Weeks The fetus now weighs almost 700 g. The skin is characteristically wrinkled, and fat deposition begins. The head is still comparatively large, and eyebrows and eyelashes are usually recognizable. By 24 weeks, the secretory type II pneumocytes have initiated surfactant secretion (Chap. 32, p. 587). The canalicular period of lung development, during which the bronchi and bronchioles enlarge and alveolar ducts develop, is nearly completed. Despite this, a fetus born at this time will attempt to breathe, but many will die because the terminal sacs, required for gas exchange, have not yet formed. Although dependent on racial and ethnic factors, and as discussed in Chapter 45 (p. 785), the overall survival rate at 24 weeks barely exceeds 50 percent (Janevic, 2018). By 26 weeks, the eyes open. Nociceptors are present over all the body, and the neural pain system is developed (Kadic, 2012). The fetal liver and spleen are important early sites for hemopoiesis (Fanni, 2018).

28 Gestational Weeks The crown-rump length approximates 25 cm, and the fetus weighs about 1100 g. The thin skin is red and covered with vernix caseosa. The pupillary membrane has just disappeared from the eyes. Isolated eye blinking peaks at 28 weeks. The bone marrow now becomes the major site of hemopoiesis. The otherwise normal neonate born at this age has a 90-percent chance of survival without physical or neurological impairment.

32 and 36 Gestational Weeks At 32 weeks, the fetus has attained a crown-rump length approximating 28 cm and a weight of about 1800 g. The skin surface is still red and wrinkled. In contrast, by 36 weeks, the fetal crown-rump length averages about 32 cm, and the weight approximates 2800 g (Duryea, 2014). Because of subcutaneous fat deposition, the body is more rotund, and the previous wrinkled facies are now fuller. Normal fetuses have a nearly 100-percent survival rate.

40 Gestational Weeks This is considered term, and the fetus is fully developed. The average crown-rump length measures about 36 cm, and the average weight approximates 3500 g.

### Central Nervous System Development

Brain Development The cranial end of the neural tube closes by 38 days from the last menstrual period, and the caudal end closes by 40 days. Hence, folic acid supplementation to prevent neural-tube defects must be in place before this point to be efficacious (Chap. 9, p. 168). The walls of the neural tube form the brain and spinal cord. The lumen becomes the ventricular system of the brain and the central canal of the spinal cord. During the sixth week, the cranial end of the neural tube forms three primary vesicles. In the seventh week, five secondary vesicles develop: the telencephalon—future cerebral hemispheres; diencephalon—thalami; mesencephalon—midbrain; metencephalon—pons and cerebellum; and myelencephalon—medulla. This is, in part, controlled by Hox genes, and defects result in abnormal signaling that leads to neuropathic anomalies (Arendt, 2018). Meanwhile, flexures develop and fold the brain into its typical configuration. The end of the embryonic period signifies completion of primary and secondary neutralization. At 3 to 4 months’ gestation, neuronal proliferation peaks. As expected, disorders in this cerebral development phase profoundly worsen function (Ortega, 2017; Volpe, 2018). One example is Zika virus infection (Rothan, 2019). Neuronal migration occurs almost simultaneously and peaks at 3 to 5

months. This process is characterized by movement of millions of neuronal cells from their ventricular and subventricular zones to areas of the brain in which they reside for life (Fig. 7-8). Upregulation of gene expression for neuronal migration has been described (Di Donato, 2017). Noninvasive methods to study fetal neurodevelopment also have been reported (Goetzl, 2016; Wang, 2015).

> **Figure 7-8:** Neuronal proliferation and migration are complete at 20 to 24 weeks. During the second half of gestation, organizational events proceed with gyral formation and proliferation, differentiation, and migration of cellular elements. Approximate gestational ages are shown. A. 20 weeks. B. 35 weeks. C. 40 weeks.

As gestation progresses, the fetal brain appearance steadily changes. Thus, it is possible to identify fetal age from its external appearance (Volpe, 2018). Neuronal proliferation and migration proceed along with gyral growth and maturation (see Fig. 7-8). Sequential maturation studies using magnetic resonance (MR) imaging have characterized the developing fetal brain (Dubois, 2014; Meng, 2012; Wang, 2015).

Myelination of the ventral roots of the cerebrospinal nerves and brainstem begins at approximately 6 months, but most myelination progresses after birth. This lack of myelin and incomplete skull ossification permit fetal brain structure to be seen sonographically throughout gestation.

Spinal Cord Whereas the superior two thirds of the neural tube give rise to the brain, the inferior third forms the spinal cord. In the embryo, the spinal cord extends along the entire vertebral column length, but after that it lags behind vertebral growth. Ossification of the entire sacrum is visible sonographically by approximately 21 weeks (Chap. 15, p. 276). By 24 weeks, the spinal cord extends to S1, at birth to L3, and in the adult to L1. Spinal cord myelination begins at midgestation and continues through the first year of life. Synaptic function is sufficiently developed by the eighth week to demonstrate flexion of the neck and trunk. During the third trimester, integration of nervous and muscular function proceeds rapidly (Molina, 2017).

### Cardiovascular System

The embryology of the heart is highly complex. At its earliest stages of formation, the fetal heart undergoes molecular programming, and more than a hundred genes and molecular factors are integral to its morphogenesis (Kathiriya, 2015; Moore, 2020). These molecular factors include the hypoxia-inducible factor—HIF and homeobox (HOX)—family. To summarize its embryology, the straight cardiac tube is formed by the 23rd day during an intricate morphogenetic sequence, during which each segment arises at a unique time. Between 4 and 7 weeks the heart undergoes extensive growth and morphological modification, leading to the formation of a partially septated four-chambered heart with a set of primitive valves (Sylva, 2014). The valves develop, and the aortic arch forms by vasculogenesis. Chapter 8 of Hurst’s The Heart has a full description (Torres, 2017). Late in fetal life, coronary angiogenesis vascularizes the myocardium (Lu, 2021).

Fetal Circulation

This unique circulation is substantially different from that of the adult and functions until birth, when it changes dramatically. For example, fetal blood is oxygenated by the placenta and does not need to enter the pulmonary vasculature. Thus, most of the right ventricular output bypasses the lungs. In addition, the fetal heart chambers work in parallel, not in series. This effectively supplies the brain and heart, compared with the rest of the body, with more highly oxygenated blood from the dominant right ventricle. Oxygen and nutrient materials required for fetal growth and maturation are delivered from the placenta by the single umbilical vein (Fig. 7-9). The vein then divides into the ductus venosus and the portal sinus. The ductus venosus is the major branch of the umbilical vein and traverses the liver to enter the inferior vena cava directly. Because it does not supply oxygen to the intervening tissues, it carries well-oxygenated blood directly to the heart. In contrast, the portal sinus carries blood to the hepatic veins primarily on the left side of the liver, and oxygen is extracted. The relatively deoxygenated blood from the liver then flows back into the inferior vena cava, which also receives more deoxygenated blood returning from the lower body. Blood flowing to the fetal heart from the inferior vena cava, therefore, consists of an admixture of arterial-like blood that passes directly through the ductus venosus and less well-oxygenated blood that returns from most of the veins below the level of the diaphragm. The oxygen content of blood delivered to the heart from the inferior vena cava is thus lower than that leaving the placenta.

> **Figure 7-9:** The intricate nature of the fetal circulation is evident. The degree of blood oxygenation in various vessels differs appreciably from that in the postnatal state. aa = arteries; LA = left atrium; LV = left ventricle; RA = right atrium; RV = right ventricle; v = vein.

Because the ventricles of the fetal heart work in parallel, this allows the right ventricle to account for two thirds of the total cardiac output. Welloxygenated blood enters the left ventricle, which supplies the heart and brain, and less oxygenated blood enters the right ventricle, which supplies the rest of the body. Congenital cardiac defects may contribute to dysregulated brain development or placenta dysfunction (Fantasia, 2018; Lauridsen, 2017). These two separate circulations are maintained by right-atrium anatomy, which effectively directs entering blood to either the left atrium or the right

ventricle, depending on its oxygen content. This separation of blood according to its oxygen content is aided by the pattern of blood flow in the inferior vena cava. The well-oxygenated blood tends to course along the dorsomedial aspect of the inferior vena cava and the less oxygenated blood flows along the lateral vessel wall. This aids their shunting into opposite sides of the heart. Once this blood enters the right atrium, the configuration of the upper interatrial septum—the crista dividens—preferentially shunts the well-oxygenated blood from the medial side of the inferior vena cava through the foramen ovale into the left heart. Here, it is directed to the heart and brain (Dawes, 1962). After these tissues extract needed oxygen, the resulting less oxygenated blood returns to the right atrium through the superior vena cava. Blood flow velocity in the superior vena cava rises from 20 weeks until term (Stefopoulou, 2021). The less oxygenated blood coursing along the lateral wall of the inferior vena cava enters the right atrium and is deflected through the tricuspid valve to the right ventricle. The superior vena cava courses inferiorly and anteriorly as it enters the right atrium, ensuring that less well-oxygenated blood returning from the brain and upper body also will be shunted directly to the right ventricle. Similarly, the ostium of the coronary sinus lies just superior to the tricuspid valve so that less oxygenated blood from the heart also returns to the right ventricle. As a result of this blood flow pattern, blood in the right ventricle is 15 to 20 percent less saturated with oxygen than blood in the left ventricle. Almost 90 percent of blood exiting the right ventricle is shunted through the ductus arteriosus to the descending aorta. High pulmonary vascular resistance and comparatively lower resistance in the ductus arteriosus and the umbilical–placental vasculature ensure that only about 8 percent of right ventricular output goes to the lungs (Fineman, 2014). Thus, one third of the blood passing through the ductus arteriosus is delivered to the body. The remaining right ventricular output returns to the placenta through the two hypogastric arteries. These two arteries course from the level of the bladder along the abdominal wall to the umbilical ring and into the cord as the umbilical arteries. In the placenta, this blood picks up oxygen and other nutrients and is recirculated to the umbilical vein.

Circulatory Changes at Birth

After birth, the umbilical vessels, ductus arteriosus, foramen ovale, and ductus venosus normally constrict or collapse. With the functional closure of the ductus arteriosus and the expansion of the lungs, blood leaving the right ventricle preferentially enters the pulmonary vasculature to become oxygenated before it returns to the left heart (Hillman, 2012). Virtually instantaneously, the ventricles, which had worked in parallel in fetal life, now effectively work in series. The more distal portions of the hypogastric arteries undergo atrophy and obliteration within 3 to 4 days after birth. These become the umbilical ligaments, whereas the intraabdominal remnants of the umbilical vein form the ligamentum teres. The ductus venosus constricts by 10 to 96 hours after birth and is anatomically closed by 2 to 3 weeks. This ultimately forms the ligamentum venosum (Fineman, 2014).

Fetoplacental Blood Volume Although precise measurements of human fetoplacental blood volume are lacking, Usher and associates (1963) reported values in term normal newborns to average 78 mL/kg when immediate cord clamping was conducted. Gruenwald (1967) found that the fetal blood volume contained in the placenta after prompt cord clamping averaged 45 mL/kg of fetal weight. Thus, fetoplacental blood volume at term is approximately 125 mL/kg of fetal weight. This is important when assessing the magnitude of fetomaternal hemorrhage, which is discussed in Chapter 18 (p. 358).

### Hemopoiesis

Embryo hemopoiesis begins in the yolk sac and endothelium, followed by the liver, and then spleen and bone marrow (Canu, 2021). Transitions are intricate and involve several genes and protein complexes (Shao, 2018). Both myeloid and erythroid cells are continually produced by progenitors that derive from hemopoietic stem cells (Fanni, 2018; Heinig, 2015). The first erythrocytes released into the fetal circulation are nucleated and macrocytic. The mean cell volume is at least 180 fL in the embryo and decreases to 105 to 115 fL at term. Normal adult volume ranges from 80 to 95 fL. The erythrocytes of aneuploid fetuses generally do not undergo this maturation and maintain high mean cell volumes, which average 130 fL (Sipes, 1991). As fetal development progresses, more and more circulating erythrocytes are smaller and nonnucleated. With fetal growth, both the blood

volume in the common fetoplacental circulation and hemoglobin concentration increase. As shown in Table 7-1, fetal hemoglobin concentrations rise across pregnancy. For clinical purposes, the Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine (2015) recommends a cutoff fetal hematocrit value of 30 percent to define anemia.

> **Table 7-1:** Fetal Hemoglobin Concentrations Across Pregnancy

Because of their large size, fetal erythrocytes have a short life span, which progressively lengthens to approximately 90 days at term (Pearson, 1966). As a consequence, red blood cell concentrations rise. Reticulocytes are initially present at high levels but decrease to 4 to 5 percent of the total at term. Fetal erythrocytes differ structurally and metabolically from those in the adult (Baron, 2012). They are more deformable, which serves to offset their higher volume and viscosity. They also contain several enzymes with appreciably different activities.

Erythropoiesis is controlled primarily by fetal erythropoietin because maternal erythropoietin does not cross the placenta. Fetal hormone production is influenced by testosterone, estrogen, prostaglandins, thyroid hormone, lipoproteins, and importantly, by fetal hypoxia (Teramo, 2018). Serum erythropoietin levels rise with fetal maturity. The fetal liver is an important source until renal production begins near term. The erythropoietin concentration in amnionic fluid correlates closely with that in umbilical venous blood obtained by cordocentesis. After birth, erythropoietin normally may not be detectable for up to 3 months. In contrast, platelet production reaches stable levels by midpregnancy, although there is some variation across gestation (Fig. 7-10). The fetal and neonatal platelet count is subject to various agents, which are discussed in Chapter 18 (p. 359).

> **Figure 7-10:** Platelet counts by gestational age obtained the first day of life. Mean values and 5th and 95th percentiles are shown. (Data from Christensen RD, Henry E, Antonio DV: Thrombocytosis and thrombocytopenia in the NICU: incidence, mechanisms and treatments, J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 25 Suppl 4:15, 2012.)

Fetal Hemoglobin

This tetrameric protein is composed of two copies of two different peptide chains, which determine the type of hemoglobin produced (Fig. 7-11). Normal adult hemoglobin A1 is made of α and β chains. During embryonic and fetal life, various α and β chain precursors are produced. This results in the serial production of several different embryonic hemoglobins. At least 17 genetic loci potentially regulate erythropoiesis (Tumburu, 2017). Genes for β-type chains are on chromosome 11, and those for α-type chains on chromosome 16. Each of these genes is turned on and then off during fetal life, until α and β genes, which direct the production of adult hemoglobin A1, are permanently activated.

> **Figure 7-11:** Hemoglobin types transition throughout pregnancy. Alpha (α) and zeta (ζ) globin chains are interchangeable. The beta (β) globin chain can be replaced by epsilon (ε), gamma (γ), or delta ( δ) globin chains. In embryonic life (stage I), ζ and ε globin chain production is gradually replaced by α and γ globin chain production. Hemoglobin F is the main type in fetal life (stage II). After birth (stage III), HbA1 predominates.

The timing of production of each of these early hemoglobins corresponds to the site of hemoglobin production. Fetal blood is first produced in the yolk sac, where hemoglobins Gower 1, Gower 2, and Portland are made. Erythropoiesis then moves to the liver, where fetal hemoglobin F is

produced. When hemopoiesis finally moves to the bone marrow, adult-type hemoglobin A1 appears in fetal red blood cells and is present in progressively greater amounts as the fetus matures (Lessard, 2018). The final adult version of the α chain is produced exclusively by 6 weeks. After this, there are no functional alternative versions, and the gene for the zeta (ζ) globin chain is down-regulated. If the gene coding the α globin chain undergoes mutation, no alternate α-type chain can be substituted to form functional hemoglobin. In contrast, at least two versions of the β chain—δ and γ—remain in production throughout fetal life and beyond. With a mutation in the gene coding the β globin chain, these two other versions of the β chain often continue to be produced, resulting in either hemoglobin A2 (α2δ2) or hemoglobin F (α2γ2), which substitute for the abnormal or missing hemoglobin A1. Genes are turned off by methylation of their control region, which is discussed in Chapter 13 (p. 322). In some situations, methylation does not occur. For example, in newborns of diabetic women, hemoglobin F may persist due to hypomethylation of the γ gene (Perrine, 1988). With sickle-cell anemia, the γ gene remains unmethylated, and large quantities of fetal hemoglobin continue to be produced. As discussed in Chapter 59 (p. 1053), elevated hemoglobin F levels are associated with fewer sickle-cell disease symptoms, and pharmacological modification of these levels by hemoglobin F–inducing drugs is one treatment approach (Pasricha, 2018).

**Hemoglobins A and F function differently.** At any given oxygen tension and at identical pH, fetal erythrocytes that contain mostly hemoglobin F bind more oxygen than do those that contain nearly all hemoglobin A (Fig. 50-2, p. 886). This is because hemoglobin A binds 2,3-diphosphoglycerate (2,3DPG) more avidly than does hemoglobin F. Remember that 2,3-DPG is an intraerythrocyte phosphate, and hemoglobin has a reciprocal affinity for 2,3DPG and oxygen (Benesch, 1968). Thus, hemoglobin A’s greater 2,3-DPG binding lowers its oxygen affinity compared with hemoglobin F. Moreover, during pregnancy, maternal 2,3-DPG levels are greater, and because fetal erythrocytes have lower concentrations of 2,3-DPG, fetal cells have increased oxygen affinity. The amount of hemoglobin F in fetal erythrocytes begins to decrease in the last weeks of pregnancy. At term, approximately three fourths of total hemoglobin levels are hemoglobin F. During the first 6 to 12 months of life,

the hemoglobin F proportion continues to decline and eventually reaches the low levels found in adult erythrocytes (Pasricha, 2018).

Coagulation Factors With the exception of fibrinogen, other hemostatic proteins do not exist in embryonic forms. The fetus starts producing normal, adult-type procoagulant, fibrinolytic, and anticoagulant proteins by 12 weeks. Because they do not cross the placenta, their concentrations at birth are markedly below the levels that develop within a few weeks of life (Corrigan, 1992). In normal neonates, the levels of factors II, VII, IX, X, and XI, and of protein S, protein C, antithrombin, and plasminogen, all approximate 50 percent of adult levels. In contrast, levels of factors V, VIII, XIII, and fibrinogen are closer to adult values (Saracco, 2009). Maternal vitamin K deficiency has been associated with fetal cerebral hemorrhage (Goto, 2018). Without prophylactic treatment, the levels of vitamin K–dependent coagulation factors usually drop even further during the first few days after birth. This decline is amplified in breastfed infants and may lead to newborn hemorrhage (Chap. 33, p. 606). Schott (2018) and Konstantinidi (2019) and their colleagues have provided thromboelastographic parameters for both healthy and sick term newborns. Fetal fibrinogen, which appears as early as 5 weeks, has the same amino acid composition as adult fibrinogen but different properties (Klagsbrun, 1988). It forms a less compressible clot, and the fibrin monomer has a lower degree of aggregation (Heimark, 1988). Although plasma fibrinogen levels at birth are less than those in nonpregnant adults, the protein is functionally more active than adult fibrinogen (Ignjatovic, 2011). Neonates have higher cord plasma levels and fibronectin-fibrinogen complexes compared with maternal levels (Lis-Kuberka, 2018). Levels of functional fetal factor XIII (fibrin stabilizing factor) are significantly reduced compared with those in adults (Henriksson, 1974). Nielsen (1969) described low levels of plasminogen and elevated fibrinolytic activity in cord plasma compared with that of maternal plasma. Platelet counts in cord blood are in the normal range for nonpregnant adults. Despite this relative reduction in procoagulants, the fetus appears to be protected from hemorrhage, and fetal bleeding is rare. Even after invasive fetal procedures such as cordocentesis, excessive bleeding is uncommon. Ney and coworkers (1989) have shown that amnionic fluid thromboplastins

and a factor(s) in Wharton jelly combine to aid coagulation at the umbilical cord puncture site. Various thrombophilias may cause thromboses and pregnancy complications in adults (Chap. 55, p. 976). If the fetus inherits one of these mutations, thrombosis and infarction can develop in the placenta or fetal organs. This is usually seen with homozygous inheritance. One example is homozygous protein C mutation, which causes purpura fulminans.

Plasma Proteins Liver enzymes and other plasma proteins are produced by the fetus, and these levels do not correlate with maternal levels (Weiner, 1992). Concentrations of plasma proteins, which include albumin, lactic dehydrogenase, aspartate and alanine aminotransferases, and γ-glutamyl transpeptidase, all rise. Conversely, prealbumin levels decline with gestational age (Fryer, 1993). At birth, mean total plasma protein and albumin concentrations in fetal blood are similar to maternal levels. This is important because albumin binds unconjugated bilirubin to prevent kernicterus in the newborn (Chap. 33, p. 606).

### Respiratory System

Lung maturation and biochemical indices of functional fetal lung maturity are important predictors of early neonatal outcome. Morphological or functional immaturity at birth leads to the development of the respiratory distress syndrome (Chap. 34, p. 615). A sufficient amount of surface-active materials —collectively referred to as surfactant—in the amnionic fluid is evidence of fetal lung maturity (Warburton, 2017). As Liggins (1994) emphasized, however, the structural and morphological maturation of fetal lung also is extraordinarily important to proper lung function.

Anatomical Maturation Like the branching of a tree, lung development proceeds along an established timetable. As with other organ systems, gene activation and deactivation control these functions (Miller, 2019). The lung primordium is an outgrowth from foregut endoderm at approximately 20 days’ gestation. The lung bud arises at 25 days and within this framework, four essential lung development

stages are described by Moore (2020). First, the pseudoglandular stage entails growth of the intrasegmental bronchial tree between the 5th and 17th weeks. The microvasculature begins to develop, and the lung looks microscopically like a gland. Second, during the canalicular stage, from 16 to 25 weeks, the bronchial cartilage plates extend peripherally. Each terminal bronchiole gives rise to several respiratory bronchioles, and each of these in turn divides into multiple saccular ducts. Third, the terminal sac stage begins after 25 weeks. During this stage, primordial alveoli give rise to primitive pulmonary alveoli, that is, the terminal sacs. Simultaneously, an extracellular matrix develops from proximal to distal lung segments until term. The fourth alveolar stage begins during the late fetal period and continues well into childhood. An extensive capillary network is built, the lymphatic system forms, and type II pneumocytes begin to produce surfactant. At birth, only approximately 15 percent of the adult number of alveoli is present. Thus, the lung continues to grow and add more alveoli for up to 8 years. Various insults can upset this process, and their timing determines the sequelae. During the embryonic phase, abnormalities in lung development include esophageal and tracheal atresia, tracheoesophageal fistula, and pulmonary agenesis. Another example is fetal renal agenesis in which amnionic fluid is absent at the beginning of lung growth, and major defects occur in all four developmental stages. Similarly, the fetus with membrane rupture and subsequent oligohydramnios before 20 weeks usually exhibits nearly normal bronchial branching and cartilage development but has immature alveoli. In contrast, membrane rupture after 24 weeks may have minimal long-term effect on pulmonary structure. Last, vitamin D is thought to be important for several aspects of lung development (Hart, 2015; Ustun, 2020).

Pulmonary Surfactant After the first breath, the terminal sacs must remain expanded despite the pressure imparted by the tissue-to-air interface, and surfactant keeps them from collapsing. Surfactant is formed in type II pneumocytes that line the alveoli. These cells are characterized by multivesicular bodies that produce the lamellar bodies in which surfactant is assembled. During late fetal life, at a time when the alveolus is characterized by a water-to-tissue interface, the intact lamellar bodies are secreted from the lung and swept into the amnionic

fluid during respiratory-like movements that are termed fetal breathing. At birth, with the first breath, an air-to-tissue interface is established in the lung alveolus. Surfactant uncoils from the lamellar bodies and spreads to line the alveolus to prevent alveolar collapse during expiration. Thus, the fetal lungs’ capacity to produce surfactant establishes lung maturity.

**Surfactant Composition.** Gluck (1972) and Hallman (1976) and their coworkers approximated that 90 percent of surfactant dry weight is lipid, specifically glycerophospholipids. Proteins account for the other 10 percent. Nearly 80 percent of the glycerophospholipids are phosphatidylcholines (lecithins). The principal active component that constitutes half of surfactant is a specific lecithin, which is dipalmitoyl phosphatidylcholine (DPPC or PC). Phosphatidylglycerol (PG) accounts for another 8 to 15 percent. Its precise role is unclear because newborns without PG usually do well. The other major constituent is phosphatidylinositol (PI).

**Surfactant Synthesis.** Biosynthesis takes place in the type II pneumocytes. The apoproteins are produced in the endoplasmic reticulum, and the glycerophospholipids are synthesized by cooperative interactions of several cellular organelles. Phospholipid is the primary surface tension–lowering component of surfactant, whereas the apoproteins aid the forming and reforming of a surface film. The major apoprotein is surfactant A (SP-A), which is a glycoprotein with a molecular weight of 28,000 to 35,000 Da. It is synthesized in the type II cells, and its content in amnionic fluid increases with gestational age and fetal lung maturity. SP-A gene expression is demonstrable by 29 weeks (Mendelson, 2005). Specifically, SP-A1 and SP-A2 are two separate genes on chromosome 10, and their regulation is distinctive and different (McCormick, 1994).

**Corticosteroids and Fetal Lung Maturation.** Since Liggins (1969) observed accelerated lung maturation in lamb fetuses given glucocorticosteroid prior to preterm delivery, many suggested that fetal cortisol stimulates lung maturation and surfactant synthesis. It is unlikely, however, that corticosteroids are the only stimulus for augmented surfactant formation. But, when these are administered at certain critical times, they may improve preterm fetal lung maturation. Antenatal betamethasone and dexamethasone

for lung maturation and neonatal replacement surfactant therapy are discussed in Chapter 34 (p. 617).

Breathing Fetal respiratory muscles develop early, and chest wall movements are detected sonographically as early as 11 weeks (Koos, 2014). Breathing is essential for normal lung growth and development. From the beginning of the fourth month, the fetus engages in respiratory movement sufficiently intense to move amnionic fluid in and out of the respiratory tract. Some extrauterine events have effects on fetal breathing, for example, maternal exercise stimulates it (Sussman, 2016).

### Digestive System

After its embryogenic formation from the yolk sac as the primordial gut, the digestive system forms the intestines and various appendages. The foregut gives rise to the pharynx, lower respiratory system, esophagus, stomach, proximal duodenum, liver, pancreas, and biliary tree. The midgut gives rise to the distal duodenum, jejunum, ileum, cecum, appendix, and the right colon. The hindgut develops into the left colon, rectum, and the superior portion of the anal canal that empties into the cloaca (Kruepunga, 2018). Numerous malformations develop in these structures from improper rotation, fixation, and partitioning. A common example is one of the several types of intestinal atresias (Moore, 2020; Stoll, 2017). Swallowing begins at 10 to 12 weeks, coincident with the ability of the small intestine to undergo peristalsis and to actively transport glucose (Koldovsky, 1965). As a correlate, neonates born preterm may have swallowing difficulties because of immature gut motility (Singendonk, 2014). Much of the water in swallowed fluid is absorbed, and unabsorbed matter is propelled to the lower colon. Gitlin (1974) demonstrated that late in pregnancy, approximately 800 mg of soluble protein is ingested daily by the fetus. The stimulus for swallowing is unclear, but the fetal neural analogue of thirst, gastric emptying, and change in the amnionic fluid composition are potential factors (Boyle, 1992). The fetal taste buds may play a role because saccharin injected into amnionic fluid increases swallowing, whereas injection of a noxious chemical inhibits it (Liley, 1972).

Fetal swallowing appears to have little effect on amnionic fluid volume early in pregnancy because the volume swallowed is small compared with the total. However, term fetuses swallow between 200 and 760 mL per day —an amount comparable to that of the term neonate (Pritchard, 1966). Thus at term, amnionic fluid volume regulation can be substantially altered by fetal swallowing. For example, as discussed in Chapter 14 (p. 256), if swallowing is inhibited, hydramnios is common. Hydrochloric acid and some digestive enzymes are present in the stomach and small intestine in minimal amounts in the early fetus. Intrinsic factor is detectable by 11 weeks, and pepsinogen by 16 weeks. The preterm neonate, depending on its gestational age, may have transient deficiencies of these enzymes. The small intestinal histological appearance is normal (Meier, 2018). Stomach emptying appears to be stimulated primarily by volume. A dilated stomach suggests obstruction (McCormick, 2021). Movement of amnionic fluid through the gastrointestinal system may enhance growth and development of the alimentary canal. That said, other regulatory factors likely are involved. For example, anencephalic fetuses, in which swallowing is limited, often have normal amnionic fluid volume and normal-appearing gastrointestinal tract.

Meconium Fetal bowel contents consist of various products of secretion, such as glycerophospholipids from the lung, desquamated fetal cells, lanugo, scalp hair, and vernix. It also contains undigested debris from swallowed amnionic fluid. The dark greenish-black color forms from bile pigments, especially biliverdin. Meconium can pass from normal bowel peristalsis in the mature fetus or from vagal stimulation. It can also pass when hypoxia stimulates arginine vasopressin (AVP) release from the fetal pituitary gland. AVP stimulates colonic smooth muscle to contract, resulting in intraamnionic defecation (Rosenfeld, 1985). Meconium is toxic to the respiratory system, and its inhalation can result in meconium aspiration syndrome.

Liver The hepatic diverticulum is an outgrowth of the endodermal lining of the foregut. Epithelial liver cords and primordial cells differentiate into hepatic

parenchyma. By 9 weeks, the liver accounts for 10 percent of fetal weight (Moore, 2020). Serum liver enzyme levels increase with gestational age. As noted, in early gestation, fetal hepatic hemopoiesis is a key source of blood and immune cells (p. 125) (Popescu, 2019). The fetal liver has a gestational-age-related capacity to conjugate bilirubin, which forms from hemoglobin breakdown (Morioka, 2015). Because of hepatic immaturity, the preterm newborn is at particular risk for unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia (Chap. 33, p. 606). And because the life span of normal fetal macrocytic erythrocytes is shorter than that of the adult, relatively more unconjugated bilirubin is produced. Of this unconjugated form, only a small fraction is conjugated by the fetal liver, and this is excreted into the intestine and ultimately oxidized to biliverdin. Instead, most of the unconjugated bilirubin is excreted into the amnionic fluid after 12 weeks and transferred across the placenta (Bashore, 1969). Importantly, placental bilirubin transfer is bidirectional. Thus, a woman with severe hemolysis has excess unconjugated bilirubin that readily passes to the fetus and then into the amnionic fluid. Conversely, conjugated bilirubin is not exchanged to any significant degree between mother and fetus. Most fetal cholesterol derives from hepatic synthesis, which satisfies the large demand for low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol by the fetal adrenal glands. However, an estimated 20 to 50 percent of fetal cholesterol originates from the mother, is transferred through the placenta, and released to circulating fetal apolipoproteins (Baardman, 2012; Pecks, 2014). Fetuses with growth restriction have lower cholesterol levels due to diminished fetal synthesis rather than diminished maternal supply (Pecks, 2019). Hepatic glycogen is present in low concentration during the second trimester, but near term, levels rise rapidly and markedly to reach concentrations that are two- to threefold higher than those in the adult liver. After birth, glycogen content falls precipitously.

Pancreas This gland arises from dorsal and ventral pancreatic buds from the endoderm of the foregut (Moore, 2020). Gene regulation of its development has been reviewed (Jennings, 2015). Insulin-containing granules can be identified by 9 to 10 weeks, and insulin is detectable in fetal plasma at 12 weeks (Adam,

1969). Between 19 and 36 weeks, Kivilevitch and associates (2017) were able to visualize the pancreas sonographically in 60 percent of fetuses. The fetal pancreas responds to hyperglycemia by secreting insulin (Obenshain, 1970). Islets of Langerhans are enlarged in fetuses of mothers with metabolic abnormalities (Avagliano, 2019). These fetuses likely can be identified by sonographic pancreatic hyperechogenicity (Akkaya, 2018). Glucagon has been identified in the fetal pancreas at 8 weeks. Although hypoglycemia does not cause an increase in fetal glucagon levels, similar stimuli do so by 12 hours after birth (Chez, 1975). Most pancreatic enzymes are present by 16 weeks. Trypsin, chymotrypsin, phospholipase A, and lipase are found in the 14-week fetus, and their concentrations increase with gestational age (Werlin, 1992). Amylase has been identified in amnionic fluid at 14 weeks (Davis, 1986). The exocrine function of the fetal pancreas is limited. Physiologically important secretion occurs only after stimulation by a secretagogue such as acetylcholine, which is released locally after vagal stimulation (Werlin, 1992). Cholecystokinin normally is released only after protein ingestion and thus ordinarily is not found in the fetus.

### Urinary System

Renal development involves interaction between pluripotential stem cells, undifferentiated mesenchymal cells, and epithelial components (Fanos, 2015). Two primitive urinary systems—the pronephros and the mesonephros —precede development of the metanephros, which forms the final kidney. The pronephros involutes by 2 weeks, and the mesonephros produces urine at 5 weeks and degenerates by 11 to 12 weeks. Failure of these two structures either to form or to regress may result in anomalous urinary system development. Between 9 and 12 weeks, the ureteric bud and the nephrogenic blastema interact to produce the metanephros. Glomeruli develop and filtration begins by week 9 (Moore, 2020). The kidney and ureter develop from intermediate mesoderm. The bladder and urethra develop from the urogenital sinus. The bladder also develops in part from the allantois. Urogenital embryology is a focus of Chapter 3. By week 14, the loop of Henle is functional and reabsorption occurs (Smith, 1992). New nephrons continue to be formed until 36 weeks (Lindström, 2018). In preterm neonates, their formation continues after birth.

Although the fetal kidneys produce urine, their ability to concentrate and modify the pH is limited even in the mature fetus. Fetal urine is hypotonic with respect to fetal plasma and has low electrolyte concentrations. Renal vascular resistance is high, and the filtration fraction is low compared with adult values (Smith, 1992). Fetal renal blood flow and thus urine production are controlled or influenced by the renin-angiotensin system, the sympathetic nervous system, prostaglandins, kallikrein, and atrial natriuretic peptide. The glomerular filtration rate increases with gestational age from less than 0.1 mL/min at 12 weeks to 0.3 mL/min at 20 weeks. In later gestation, the rate remains constant when corrected for fetal weight (Smith, 1992). Hemorrhage or hypoxia generally decreases renal blood flow, glomerular filtration rate, and urine output. Urine usually is found in the bladder even in small fetuses. The fetal kidneys start producing urine at 12 weeks. By 18 weeks, they are producing 7 to 14 mL/d, and at term, this increases to 650 mL/d (Wladimiroff, 1974). Maternally administered furosemide augments fetal urine formation, whereas uteroplacental insufficiency, fetal-growth restriction, and other fetal disorders can lower it. Obstruction of the urethra, bladder, ureters, or renal pelves can damage renal parenchyma and distort fetal anatomy (Müller Brochut, 2014). Pathological correlates and prenatal therapy of urinary tract obstruction are discussed in Chapter 19 (p. 376). Kidneys are not essential for survival in utero but influence control of amnionic fluid composition and volume. Thus, abnormalities that cause chronic fetal anuria are usually accompanied by oligohydramnios and pulmonary hypoplasia (Cotton, 2017).

### Endocrine Gland Development

The fetal endocrine system is functional for some time before the central nervous system reaches maturity (Mulchahey, 1987).

Pituitary Gland The anterior pituitary gland develops from oral ectoderm—the Rathke pouch —whereas the posterior pituitary gland derives from neuroectoderm. Embryonic development involves a complex and highly spatiotemporally

regulated network of signaling molecules and transcription factors (Bancalari, 2012; Montenegro, 2019).

**Anterior and Intermediate Lobes.** The adenohypophysis, or anterior pituitary, differentiates into five cell types that secrete six protein hormones. Of these types, lactotropes produce prolactin (PRL), somatotropes produce growth hormone (GH), corticotropes produce adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), thyrotropes produce thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), and gonadotropes produce luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH). ACTH is first detected in the fetal pituitary gland at 7 weeks, and GH and LH have been identified by 13 weeks. By the end of the 17th week, the fetal pituitary gland synthesizes and stores all pituitary hormones. Moreover, the fetal pituitary is responsive to tropic hormones and is capable of secreting these early in gestation (Grumbach, 1974). The fetal pituitary secretes βendorphin, and cord blood levels of β-endorphin and β-lipotropin rise with fetal arterial partial pressure of carbon dioxide (Paco2) (Browning, 1983). The intermediate lobe in the fetal pituitary gland is well developed. The cells of this structure begin to disappear before term and are absent from the adult pituitary.

**Neurohypophysis.** The posterior pituitary gland or neurohypophysis is well developed by 10 to 12 weeks, and oxytocin and arginine vasopressin are demonstrable. Both hormones probably function in the fetus to conserve water by actions directed largely at the lung and placenta rather than kidney. Vasopressin levels in umbilical cord plasma are strikingly higher than maternal levels (Chard, 1971).

Thyroid Gland The thyroid primordium arises from the endoderm of the primordial pharynx (Moore, 2020). The thyroid migrates to its final position, and the obliterated thyroglossal duct connects to the foramen cecum of the tongue. The pituitary–thyroid system is functional by the end of the first trimester. By 10 to 12 weeks, the thyroid gland is able to synthesize hormones, and thyrotropin, thyroxine, and thyroid-binding globulin (TBG) have been detected in fetal serum as early as 11 weeks (Bernal, 2007). Thyroid follicles have formed and colloid is present. The placenta actively

concentrates iodine on the fetal side, and by 12 weeks and throughout pregnancy, the fetal thyroid concentrates iodine more avidly than does the maternal thyroid. Thus, maternal administration of either radioiodine or appreciable amounts of ordinary iodine is hazardous after this time (Chap. 66, p. 1174). Normal fetal levels of free thyroxine (T4), free triiodothyronine (T3), and TBG rise steadily throughout gestation (Ballabio, 1989). Compared with adult levels, by 36 weeks, fetal serum concentrations of TSH are higher, total and free T3 concentrations are lower, and T4 is similar. This suggests that the fetal pituitary may not become sensitive to feedback until late pregnancy. Fetal thyroid hormone plays a role in the normal development of virtually all fetal tissues, especially the brain (Andersen, 2018; Jansen, 2019). Congenital hypothyroidism is a heterogenous disorder for which several candidate genes have been identified (Moore, 2020). With hypothyroidism, it was previously believed that normal fetal growth and development provided evidence that T4 was not essential for fetal growth. It is now known, however, that growth proceeds normally because small quantities of maternal T4 prevent antenatal cretinism in fetuses with thyroid agenesis (Forhead, 2014; Vulsma, 1989). As discussed in Chapter 61 (p. 1098), the fetus with congenital hypothyroidism typically does not develop stigmata of cretinism until after birth (Abduljabbar, 2012). Because administration of thyroid hormone will prevent this, by state law, all newborns are tested for high serum levels of TSH (Chap. 32, p. 594). The placenta prevents substantial passage of maternal thyroid hormones to the fetus by rapidly deiodinating maternal T4 and T3 to form reverse T3, a relatively inactive thyroid hormone. Several antithyroid antibodies cross the placenta when present in high concentrations (Pelag, 2002). Those include the long-acting thyroid stimulators (LATS), LATS-protector (LATS-P), and thyroid-stimulating immunoglobulin (TSI). Congenital hyperthyroidism develops when maternal thyroid-stimulating antibody crosses the placenta to stimulate the fetal gland to secrete thyroxine (Donnelley, 2015). These fetuses develop large goiters as shown in Figure 61-3 (p. 1092). They also display tachycardia, hepatosplenomegaly, hematological abnormalities, craniosynostosis, and growth restriction. As children, they have perceptual motor difficulties, hyperactivity, and reduced growth (Johns, 2018).

Immediately after birth, thyroid function and metabolism undergo major change. Cooling to room temperature evokes a sudden and marked increase in TSH secretion. This in turn causes a progressive increase in serum T4 levels that are maximal 24 to 36 hours after birth. There are nearly simultaneous elevations of serum T3 levels.

Adrenal Glands These glands develop from two separate tissues. The medulla derives from neural crest ectoderm, whereas the fetal and adult cortex arise from intermediate mesoderm. The gland grows rapidly through cell proliferation and angiogenesis, cellular migration, hypertrophy, and apoptosis (Ishimoto, 2011). Expression of the Kiss1R gene, alone or in concert with corticotropinreleasing hormone, stimulates fetal adrenal growth (Katugampola, 2017). Fetal glands are enormous in relation to body size and are 10 to 20 times larger than adult glands (Karsli, 2019; Moore, 2020). The bulk is made up of the inner or fetal zone of the adrenal cortex and involutes rapidly after birth. This zone is scant to absent in rare instances in which the fetal pituitary gland is congenitally absent. The function of the fetal adrenal glands is discussed in Chapter 5 (p. 102).

### Immunological System

Infections in utero have provided an opportunity to examine mechanisms of the fetal immune response (Chap. 67, p. 1182). Evidence of immunological competence has been reported as early as 13 weeks (Stabile, 1988). In cord blood at or near term, the average level for most components approximates half that of the adult values. B cells differentiate from pluripotent hemopoietic stem cells that migrate to the liver (Berthault, 2017; Melchers, 2015). Despite this, in the absence of a direct antigenic stimulus such as infection, fetal plasma immunoglobulins consist almost totally of transferred maternal immunoglobulin G (IgG). Thus, antibodies in the newborn most often reflect maternal immunological experiences (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019). The interaction between maternal and fetal T cells is described in Chapter 5 (p. 93).

Immunoglobulin G Maternal IgG transport correlates with placental Fc receptor expression (Lozano, 2018). Fetal transport begins at approximately 16 weeks and increases thereafter. Because the bulk of IgG is acquired during the last 4 weeks, preterm neonates are poorly endowed with protective maternal antibodies. Newborns begin to slowly produce IgG, and adult values are not attained until age 3 years. In certain situations, the transfer of IgG antibodies from mother to fetus can be harmful rather than protective. The classic example is hemolytic disease of the fetus and newborn resulting from Rhantigen alloimmunization (Chap. 18, p. 353).

Immunoglobulins M and A In the adult, production of immunoglobulin M (IgM) in response to an antigenic stimulus is superseded in a week or so predominantly by IgG production. Similarly, very little IgM is produced by normal fetuses not exposed to infection, but with infection, the IgM response predominates and remains so for weeks to months in the newborn. And, because IgM is not transported from the mother, any IgM in the fetus or newborn is that which it produced. Thus, specific IgM levels in umbilical cord blood may be elevated in those with congenital infection. According to the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019), elevated IgM levels are usually found in newborns with congenital infection such as rubella, cytomegalovirus infection, or toxoplasmosis. In infants, adult levels of IgM are normally attained by age 9 months. Immunoglobulin A (IgA) ingested in colostrum provides mucosal protection against enteric infections. There is only a small amount of fetal secretory IgA found in amnionic fluid (Quan, 1999).

Lymphocytes and Monocytes The immune system develops early, and B lymphocytes are derived from primordial stem cells and appear in fetal liver by 9 weeks and in blood and spleen by 12 weeks (Moore, 2020). T lymphocytes begin to leave the thymus at approximately 14 weeks. Despite this, the newborn responds poorly to immunization, and especially poorly to bacterial capsular polysaccharides. This immature response may stem from a deficient response of newborn B cells to polyclonal activators or from a lack of T cells that proliferate in

response to specific stimuli (Hayward, 1983). In the newborn, monocytes are able to process and present antigen when tested with maternal antigenspecific T cells. DNA methylation patterns are developmentally regulated during monocyte-macrophage differentiation and contribute to the antiinflammatory phenotype in macrophages (Kim, 2012).

### Musculoskeletal System

The origin of most muscles and bones is mesodermal. MYOD is a member of the family of myogenic regulatory factors that activates transcription of muscle-specific genes (Moore, 2020). The limb buds appear by the fourth week. Most skeletal muscle derives from myogenic precursor cells in the somites. The skeleton arises from condensed mesenchyme—embryonic connective tissue—which eventually forms hyaline cartilage models of the bones. Osteoclasts arise from erythro-myeloid progenitors (Jacome-Galarza, 2019). By the end of the embryonic period, ossification centers have developed, and bones harden by endochondral ossification.

## Energy And Nutrition

Because of the small amount of yolk in the human ovum, growth of the embryofetus is dependent on maternal nutrients during the first 2 months. During the first few days after implantation, blastocyst nutrition comes from the interstitial fluid of the endometrium and the surrounding maternal tissue. Maternal adaptations to store and transfer nutrients to the fetus are discussed in Chapter 4 and summarized here. Three major maternal storage depots are the liver, muscle, and adipose tissue. These maternal depots and the storage hormone insulin are intimately involved in the metabolism of the nutrients absorbed from the gut. Maternal insulin secretion is sustained by increased serum levels of glucose and amino acids. The net effect is maternal storage of glucose as glycogen primarily in liver and muscle, retention of some amino acids as protein, and storage of the excess as fat (Abeysekera, 2016). Storage of maternal fat peaks in the second trimester and then declines as fetal energy demands rise in the third trimester (Pipe, 1979). Interestingly, the placenta appears to act as a nutrient sensor, altering transport based on the maternal supply and environmental stimuli (Jansson, 2006b, Wesolowski, 2017).

During times of fasting, glucose is released from glycogen, but maternal glycogen stores cannot provide an adequate amount of glucose to meet requirements for maternal energy and fetal growth. Augmentation is provided by cleavage of triacylglycerols, stored in adipose tissue, which results in free fatty acids and activation of lipolysis.

### Glucose and Fetal Growth

Although dependent on the mother for nutrition, the fetus also actively participates in providing its own nutrition. At midpregnancy, fetal serum glucose concentration is independent of maternal levels and may exceed them. Glucose is the major nutrient for fetal growth and energy. Logically, mechanisms exist to minimize maternal glucose use so that the limited maternal supply is available to the fetus. As one example, human placental lactogen (hPL) is a hormone normally abundant in the mother but not the fetus and has an insulin antagonist effect. It blocks the peripheral uptake and use of glucose, while instead promoting mobilization and use of free fatty acids by maternal tissues (Chap. 5, p. 98). This hormone is also diabetogenic as discussed in Chapter 60 (p. 1068). Last, intrinsic epigenetic changes play a role (Hansen, 2017). For example, nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is associated with fetal macrosomia (Lee, 2019).

Glucose Transport The transfer of D-glucose across cell membranes is accomplished by a carrier-mediated, stereospecific, nonconcentrating process of facilitated diffusion. There are 14 glucose transport proteins (GLUTs) encoded by the SLC2A gene family and characterized by tissue-specific distribution (Joshi, 2021). Several of these are expressed by trophoblast (Stanirowski, 2017). GLUT-1, GLUT-3, and GLUT-4 primarily aid glucose uptake by the placenta and are located in the plasma membrane of the syncytiotrophoblast microvilli (Acosta, 2015; James-Allan, 2019). DNA methylation regulates expression of placental GLUT genes, with epigenetic modification across gestation (Novakovic, 2013). Methylation increases as pregnancy advances and is induced by almost all growth factors. In addition to its transport role, the placenta uses glucose for its metabolic functions. Fetal and placental glucose consumption are inversely

related. Thus, placental glucose use is a key modulator of maternal-fetal transfer (Michelsen, 2019). Lactate is a product of glucose metabolism and transported across the placenta also by facilitated diffusion. By way of cotransport with hydrogen ions, lactate is probably transported as lactic acid.

Fetal Macrosomia The precise biomolecular events in the pathophysiology of fetal macrosomia are not defined. Nonetheless, fetal hyperinsulinemia is clearly one driving force (Luo, 2012). As discussed with fetal-growth disorders in Chapter 47 (p. 824), insulin-like growth factor and leptin and other adipokines are important regulators of placental development and function (Gao, 2012).

**Maternal obesity begets fetal macrosomia.** In addition, theories suggest that maternal obesity affects fetal cardiomyocyte growth that may result in fetal cardiomyopathy or even congenital heart disease (Roberts, 2015).

### Leptin

This polypeptide hormone was originally identified as a product of adipocytes and a regulator of energy homeostasis by curbing appetite. It also contributes to angiogenesis, hemopoiesis, osteogenesis, pulmonary maturation, and neuroendocrine, immune, and reproductive functions (Briffa, 2015). Leptin is produced by the mother, fetus, and placenta. It is expressed in syncytiotrophoblast and fetal vascular endothelial cells. Of placental production, 5 percent enters the fetal circulation, whereas 95 percent is transferred to the mother (Hauguel-de Mouzon, 2006). Leptin concentrations peak in amnionic fluid at midpregnancy (ScottFinley, 2015). Fetal serum leptin levels begin increasing at approximately 34 weeks and are correlated with fetal weight. This hormone is involved in the development and maturation of the heart, brain, kidneys, and pancreas, and its levels are decreased with fetal-growth restriction (Briffa, 2015; Yalinbas, 2019). Abnormal levels are associated with fetal-growth disorders, gestational diabetes, and preeclampsia, but not maternal obesity (Allbrand, 2018; Gurugubelli, 2018). Postpartum, leptin levels decline in both the newborn and mother. Perinatal leptin is associated with the development of metabolic syndromes later in life (Briffa, 2015).

### Free Fatty Acids and Triglycerides

The term newborn has a large proportion of fat, which averages 15 percent of body weight (Kimura, 1991). Thus, late in pregnancy, a substantial part of the substrate transferred to the human fetus is stored as fat. Although maternal obesity raises placental fatty acid uptake and fetal fat deposition, it does not appear to affect fetal organ growth (Dubé, 2012). Neutral fat in the form of triglycerides does not cross the placenta, but glycerol does. Despite this, evidence supports that abnormal maternal concentrations of triglycerides— both low and high levels—are associated with major congenital anomalies (Nederlof, 2015). There is preferential placental-fetal transfer of long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids (Fonseca, 2018). Lipoprotein lipase is present on the maternal but not on the fetal side of the placenta. This arrangement favors hydrolysis of triacylglycerols in the maternal intervillous space yet preserves these neutral lipids in fetal blood. Fatty acids transferred to the fetus can be converted to triglycerides in the fetal liver. The placental uptake and use of LDL is an alternative mechanism for fetal assimilation of essential fatty acids and amino acids (Chap. 5, p. 100). LDL binds to specific receptors in the coated-pit regions of the syncytiotrophoblast microvilli. The large LDL particle, measuring about 250,000 Da, is taken up by a process of receptor-mediated endocytosis. The apoprotein and cholesterol esters of LDL are hydrolyzed by lysosomal enzymes in the syncytium to yield: (1) cholesterol for progesterone synthesis; (2) free amino acids, including essential amino acids; and (3) essential fatty acids, primarily linoleic acid. Interestingly, maternal cholesterol is obligatory for steroid hormone synthesis, but increasing levels are associated with fetal aortic atherogenesis (de Nigris, 2018).

### Amino Acids

The placenta concentrates many amino acids in the syncytiotrophoblast, which are then transferred to the fetal side by diffusion. In cordocentesis blood samples, the amino acid concentration in umbilical cord plasma is greater than in maternal venous or arterial plasma. DNA methylation serves to regulate transporter gene expression (Simner, 2017). Transport system activity is influenced by gestational age and environmental factors. These

include heat stress, hypoxia, under- and overnutrition, and hormones such as glucocorticoids, growth hormone, and leptin (Briffa, 2015). Trophoblastic mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) regulates placental amino acid transporters and modulates transfer across the placenta (Jansson, 2012). In vivo studies suggest an upregulation of transport for certain amino acids and a greater delivery rate of these to the fetuses of women with gestational diabetes associated with fetal overgrowth (Jansson, 2006a).

### Proteins

Placental transfer of larger proteins is limited, but there are exceptions. As discussed, IgG crosses the placenta in large amounts via endocytosis and trophoblast Fc receptors. IgG transfer depends on maternal levels of total IgG, gestational age, placental integrity, IgG subclass, and antigenic potential (Palmeira, 2012). Conversely, the larger immunoglobulins—IgA and IgM— of maternal origin are effectively excluded from the fetus.

### Ions and Trace Metals

Calcium and phosphorus are actively transported from mother to fetus. Calcium is transferred for fetal skeletal mineralization (Olausson, 2012). A calcium-binding protein is produced in placenta. Parathyroid hormone– related protein (PTH-rP), as the name implies, acts as a surrogate PTH in many systems (Chap. 5, p. 99). PTH is not found in fetal plasma, but PTH-rP is present, suggesting that PTH-rP is the fetal parathormone (Martin, 2016). The expression of PTH-rP in cytotrophoblasts is modulated by the extracellular concentration of Ca2+ (Hellman, 1992). It seems possible that PTH-rP synthesized in decidua, placenta, and other fetal tissues is important in fetal Ca2+ transfer and homeostasis. Another example is the unidirectional transfer of iron. Typically, maternal plasma iron concentration is much lower than that in her fetus. Even with severe maternal iron-deficiency anemia, the fetal hemoglobin mass is normal. Iodine transport is clearly attributable to a carrier-mediated, energyrequiring active process. And, as discussed in Chapter 61 (p. 1097), the placenta concentrates iodine (Velasco, 2018). The concentrations of zinc in

the fetal plasma also are greater than those in maternal plasma. Conversely, copper levels in fetal plasma are less than those in maternal plasma. This fact is of particular interest because important copper-requiring enzymes are necessary for fetal development.

Placental Sequestration of Heavy Metals The heavy metal–binding protein metallothionein-1 is expressed in human syncytiotrophoblast. This protein binds and sequesters a host of heavy metals, including zinc, copper, lead, and cadmium. Despite this, fetal exposure is variable (Caserta, 2013). For example, lead enters the fetal environment at a level 90 percent of maternal concentrations. In contrast, placental transfer of cadmium is limited (Kopp, 2012). The most common source of environmental cadmium is cigarette smoke. Metallothionein also binds and sequesters copper in placental tissue. This accounts for the low copper levels in cord blood (Iyengar, 2001). It is possible that cadmium provokes metallothionein synthesis in the amnion. This may cause copper sequestration, a pseudocopper deficiency, and in turn, diminished amnion tensile strength.

### Vitamins

The concentration of vitamin A (retinol) is greater in fetal than in maternal plasma and is bound to retinol-binding protein and to prealbumin. Retinolbinding protein is transferred from the maternal compartment across the syncytiotrophoblast. The transport of vitamin C—ascorbic acid—from mother to fetus is accomplished by an energy-dependent, carrier-mediated process. As a result, the concentration of ascorbic acid is two to four times higher in fetal plasma than in maternal plasma (Morriss, 1994). Levels of principal vitamin D metabolites, including 1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol, are greater in maternal plasma than in fetal plasma. The 1β-hydroxylation of 25-hydroxyvitamin D3 is known to take place in placenta and in decidua.

## Placental Role In Embryofetal

## Development

The placenta is the organ of transfer between mother and fetus. Within this bidirectional maternal-fetal interface, maternal oxygen and nutrients transfer to the fetus, whereas CO2 and metabolic wastes are directed back to the mother. Fetal blood, which is contained in the fetal capillaries of the chorionic villi, has no direct contact with maternal blood, which remains in the intervillous space. Instead, bidirectional transfer depends on processes that allow or aid the transport through the syncytiotrophoblast that lines chorionic villi (Michelsen, 2017). With this system, breaks in the chorionic villi permit escape of fetal/placental cells and other blood-borne material into the maternal circulation. This leakage is the mechanism by which some D-negative women become sensitized by the erythrocytes of their D-positive fetus (Chap. 18, p. 353). The escape of fetal cells can also lead to fetal microchimerism from entrance of allogeneic fetal cells, including trophoblast, into maternal blood and other organs (Rijnink, 2015). Volumes are estimated to range from 1 to 6 cells/mL at midpregnancy. Some fetal cells become “immortal” in that they persist in the maternal circulation and organs following pregnancy. As discussed in Chapter 61 (p. 1109), the clinical corollary is that some maternal autoimmune diseases such as Hashimoto thyroiditis may be provoked by such microchimerism. Last, cell-free DNA (cfDNA) is released from syncytiotrophoblast during normal physiological cell turnover. After 10 weeks, 10 to 15 percent of all cfDNA in maternal plasma is trophoblastic DNA (Norton, 2015; Shaffer, 2018). This phenomenon underlies one maternal-serum screening method for fetal aneuploidy, which is discussed in Chapters 16 and 17 (pp. 327 and 335).

### The Intervillous Space

Maternal blood within the intervillous space is the primary source of maternal–fetal transfer. Blood from the maternal spiral arteries directly bathes the trophoblast layer that surrounds the villi. Substances transferred from mother to fetus first enter the intervillous space and are then transported to the syncytiotrophoblast. As such, the chorionic villi and intervillous space function together as the fetal lung, gastrointestinal tract, and kidney. Circulation within the intervillous space is described in Chapter 5 (p. 92). Intervillous and uteroplacental blood flow increases throughout

pregnancy, and at term, the residual volume of the intervillous space approximates 140 mL. Moreover, uteroplacental blood flow near term ranges from 700 to 900 mL/min, and most of this blood apparently goes to the intervillous space (Pates, 2010).

### Placental Transfer

In the terminal villi, substances that pass from maternal to fetal blood must first traverse the syncytiotrophoblast, the attenuated cytotrophoblast layer, the thinned villous stroma, and finally, the fetal capillary wall. Although this histological barrier separates maternal and fetal circulations, it is not a simple physical barrier. First, throughout pregnancy, syncytiotrophoblast actively or passively permits, facilitates, and adjusts the amount and rate of substance transfer to the fetus. As discussed in Chapter 5 (p. 92), the maternal-facing syncytiotrophoblast surface is characterized by a complex microvillus structure. The fetal-facing basal cell membrane is the site of transfer to the intravillous space. Finally, the villous capillaries are an additional site for transport from the intravillous space into fetal blood, or vice versa. In determining the effectiveness of the human placenta as an organ of transfer, several variables are important and shown in Table 7-2. Epigenetic placental changes brought about by methylation of genes engaged in nutrient transfer also play a role (Kerr, 2018).

> **Table 7-2:** Variables of Maternal-Fetal Substance Transfer

Mechanisms of Transfer Most substances with a molecular mass <500 Da pass readily through placental tissue by simple diffusion. These include oxygen, CO2, water, most electrolytes, and anesthetic gases (Carter, 2009). Some low-molecularweight compounds undergo transfer facilitated by syncytiotrophoblast. These are usually those that have low concentrations in maternal plasma but are essential for normal fetal development. Insulin, steroid hormones, and thyroid hormones cross the placenta, but very slowly. The hormones synthesized in situ in the syncytiotrophoblast enter both the maternal and fetal circulations, but not equally (Chap. 5, p. 86). Examples are hCG and hPL concentrations, which are much lower in fetal plasma than in maternal plasma. High-molecular-weight substances usually do not traverse the placenta, but there are important exceptions. As discussed, one is IgG—molecular weight 160,000 Da—which is transferred by way of a specific trophoblast receptor–mediated mechanism (Stach, 2014). Although simple diffusion is an important method of placental transfer, the trophoblast and chorionic villus unit demonstrate enormous selectivity in transfer. As discussed, important in this regard is DNA methylation of transporter genes (Kerr, 2018; Simner, 2017). The net results are different metabolite concentrations on the two sides of the villus.

Transfer of Oxygen and Carbon Dioxide Placental oxygen transfer is blood flow limited. Using estimated uteroplacental blood flow, Longo (1991) calculated oxygen delivery to be approximately 8 mL O2/min/kg of fetal weight. Because of the continuous passage of oxygen from maternal blood in the intervillous space to the fetus, its oxygen saturation resembles that in maternal capillaries. The average oxygen saturation of intervillous blood is estimated to be 65 to 75 percent, with a partial pressure (Pao2) of 30 to 35 mm Hg. The oxygen saturation of umbilical vein blood is similar but has a somewhat lower oxygen partial pressure (Ramsay, 1996). As noted earlier, fetal hemoglobin has a higher oxygen affinity than adult hemoglobin. The placenta is highly permeable to CO2, which traverses the chorionic villus by diffusion more rapidly than oxygen. Near term, the partial pressure of carbon dioxide (Paco2) in the umbilical arteries averages 50 mm Hg, which is approximately 5 mm Hg higher than in the maternal intervillous blood. Fetal blood has less affinity for CO2 than does maternal blood, thereby favoring CO2 transfer from fetus to mother. Also, mild maternal hyperventilation results in a fall in Paco2 levels, favoring a transfer of CO2 from the fetal compartment to maternal blood.

## References

Abduljabbar MS, Afifi AM: Congenital hypothyroidism. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab 25(102)13, 2012 Abeysekera MV, Morris JA, Davis GK, et al: Alterations in energy homeostasis to favour adipose tissue gain: a longitudinal study in healthy pregnant women. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol 56(1):42, 2016 Acosta O, Ramirez VI, Lager S, et al: Increased glucose and placental GLUT-1 in large infants of obese nondiabetic mothers. Am J Obstet Gynecol 212(2):227.e1, 2015 Adam PA, Teramo K, Raiha N, et al: Human fetal insulin metabolism early in gestation: response to acute elevation of the fetal glucose concentration and placental transfer of human insulin-I-131. Diabetes 18:409, 1969 Akkaya H, Büke B, Uysal G: Fetal pancreatic hyperechogenicity may be an early ultrasonographic sign of gestational diabetes mellitus. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 20:1, 2018 Allbrand M, Åman J, Lodefalk M: Placental ghrelin and leptin expression and cord blood ghrelin, adiponectin, leptin, and C-peptide levels in severe maternal obesity. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 31(21):2839, 2018 American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Cytomegalovirus, parvovirus B19, varicella zoster, and toxoplasmosis in pregnancy. Practice Bulletin No. 151, June 2015, Reaffirmed 2019

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: ACOG app. 2020. Available at: https://www.acog.org/membership/member-benefits/acog-app. Accessed April 5, 2020 American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine: Methods for estimating the due date. Committee Opinion No. 700, May 2017, Reaffirmed 2019 Andersen SL, Andersen S, Liew Z, et al: Maternal thyroid function in early pregnancy and neuropsychological performance of the child at 5 years of age. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 103(2):660,

## 2018

Anderson RH, Brown NA, Mohun TJ: Insights regarding the normal and abnormal formation of the atrial and ventricular septal structures. Clin Anat 29(3):290, 2016 Arendt D: Hox genes and body segmentation. Science 361(6409):1310, 2018 Avagliano L, Mascherpa M, Massa V, et al: Fetal pancreatic Langerhans islets size in pregnancies with metabolic disorders. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 32(21):3589, 2019 Baardman ME, Erwich JJ, Berger RM, et al: The origin of fetal sterols in second-trimester amniotic fluid: endogenous synthesis or maternal-fetal transport? Am J Obs Gynecol 207:202 e19, 2012 Ballabio M, Nicolini U, Jowett T, et al: Maturation of thyroid function in normal human foetuses. Clin Endocrinol 31:565, 1989 Bancalari RE, Gregory LC, McCabe MJ, et al: Pituitary gland development: an update. Endocr Dev 23:1, 2012 Baron MH, Isern J, Fraser ST: The embryonic origins of erythropoiesis in mammals. Blood 119(21):4828, 2012 Bashore RA, Smith F, Schenker S: Placental transfer and disposition of bilirubin in the pregnant monkey. Am J Obstet Gynecol 103:950, 1969 Benesch R, Benesch RE, Enoki Y: The interaction of hemoglobin and its subunits with 2,3diphosphoglycerate. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 61(3):1102, 1968 Bernal J: Thyroid hormone receptors in brain development and function. Nat Clin Pract Endocrinol Metab 3:249, 2007 Berthault C, Ramond C, Burlen-Defranoux O, et al: Asynchronous lineage priming determines commitment to T cell and B cell linages in fetal liver. Nat Immunol 18(10):1139, 2017 Boyle JT: Motility of the upper gastrointestinal tract in the fetus and neonate. In Polin RA, Fox WW (eds): Fetal and Neonatal Physiology. Philadelphia, Saunders, 1992, p 1028 Briffa JF, McAinch AG, Romano T, et al: Leptin in pregnancy and development: a contributor to adulthood disease? Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 308:E335, 2015 Browning AJF, Butt WR, Lynch SS, et al: Maternal plasma concentrations of β-lipotropin, β-endorphin and α:lipotropin throughout pregnancy. BJOG 90:1147, 1983 Canu G, Ruhrberg C: First blood: the endothelial origins of hematopoietic progenitors. Angiogenesis 24(2):199, 2021 Carter AM: Evolution of factors affecting placental oxygen transfer. Placenta 30(Suppl A):19, 2009 Caserta D, Graziano A, Lo Monte G, et al: Heavy metals and placental fetal-maternal barrier: a minireview on the major concerns. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci 17(16):198, 2013 Chard T, Hudson CN, Edwards CR, et al: Release of oxytocin and vasopressin by the human foetus during labour. Nature 234:352, 1971 Chez RA, Mintz DH, Reynolds WA, et al: Maternal-fetal plasma glucose relationships in late monkey pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 121:938, 1975 Christensen RD, Henry E, Antonio DV: Thrombocytosis and thrombocytopenia in the NICU: incidence, mechanisms and treatments. J Matern Fetal Neonat Med 25(54):15, 2012

Corrigan JJ Jr: Normal hemostasis in the fetus and newborn: Coagulation. In Polin RA, Fox WW (eds): Fetal and Neonatal Physiology. Philadelphia, Saunders, 1992, p 1368 Cotton CM: Pulmonary hypoplasia. Semin Fetal Neonatal Med 22(4):250, 2017 Davis MM, Hodes ME, Munsick RA, et al: Pancreatic amylase expression in human pancreatic development. Hybridoma 5:137, 1986 Dawes GS: The umbilical circulation. Am J Obstet Gynecol 84:1634, 1962 de Nigris F, Cacciator F, Mancini FP, et al: Epigenetic hallmarks of fetal early atherosclerotic lesions in humans. JAMA Cardiol 3(12):1184, 2018 Di Donato N, Chiari S, Mirzaa GM, et al: Lissencephaly: expanded imaging and clinical classification. Am J Med Genet A 173(6):1473, 2017 DiPietro JA: Neurobehavioral assessment before birth. MRDD Res Rev 11:4, 2005 Donnelley MA, Wood C, Casey B, et al: Early severe fetal Graves disease in a mother after thyroid ablation and thyroidectomy. Obstet Gynecol 125(5):1059, 2015 Dubé E, Gravel A, Martin C, et al: Modulation of fatty acid transport and metabolism by maternal obesity in the human full-term placenta. Biol Reprod 87(1):14, 2012 Dubois J, Dehaene-Lambertz G, Kulilova S, et al: The early development of brain white matter: a review of imaging studies in fetuses, newborns and infants. Neuroscience 12:276, 2014 Duryea EL, Hawkins JS, McIntire DD, et al: A revised birth weight reference for the United States. Obstet Gynecol 124(1):16, 2014 Duryea EL, McIntire DD, Leveno KJ: The rate of preterm birth in the United States is affected by the method of gestational age assignment. Am J Obstet Gynecol 213:331.e1, 2015 Fanni D, Angotzi F, Lai C, et al: Four stages of hepatic hematopoiesis in human embryos and fetuses. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 31(6):701, 2018 Fanos V, Loddo C, Puddu M, et al: From ureteric bud to the first glomeruli: genes, mediators, kidney alterations. Int Urol Nephrol 47(1):109, 2015 Fantasia I, Kasapoglu D, Kasapoglu T, et al: Fetal major cardiac defects and placental dysfunction at 11–13 weeks’ gestation. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 51(2):194, 2018 Fineman JR, Clyman R: Fetal cardiovascular physiology. In Resnik R, Creasy RK, Iams JD, et al (eds): Creasy and Resnik’s Maternal-Fetal Medicine: Principles and Practice, 7th ed. Philadelphia, Saunders, 2014, p 147 Fonseca FCPD, Mucci DB, Assumpcão RP, et al: Differential long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids status and placental transport in adolescent pregnancies. Nutrients 10(2):220, 2018 Forhead AJ, Fowden AL: Thyroid hormones in fetal growth and prepartum maturation. J Endocrinol 221(3):R87, 2014 Fryer AA, Jones P, Strange R, et al: Plasma protein levels in normal human fetuses: 13–41 weeks’ gestation. BJOG 100:850, 1993 Gao L, Lv C, Xu C, et al: Differential regulation of glucose transporters mediated by CRH receptor type 1 and type 2 in human placental trophoblasts. Endocrinology 153:1464, 2012 Gitlin D: Protein transport across the placenta and protein turnover between amnionic fluid, maternal and fetal circulation. In Moghissi KS, Hafez ESE (eds): The Placenta. Springfield, Thomas, 1974 Gluck L, Kulovich MV, Eidelman AI, et al: Biochemical development of surface activity in mammalian lung. 4. Pulmonary lecithin synthesis in the human fetus and newborn and etiology of the respiratory distress syndrome. Pediatr Res 6:81, 1972 Goetzl L, Darbinian N, Goetzl EJ: Novel window on early human neurodevelopment via fetal exosomes in maternal blood. Ann Clin Transl Neurol 3(5): 381, 2016

Goto T, Karita H, Takasu M, et al: A rare case of fetal extensive intracranial hemorrhage and wholecerebral hypoplasia due to latent maternal vitamin K deficiency. J Neonatal Perinatal Med 11(2):191,

## 2018

Gruenwald P: Growth of the human foetus. In McLaren A (ed): Advances in Reproductive Physiology. New York, Academic Press, 1967 Grumbach MM, Kaplan SL: Fetal pituitary hormones and the maturation of central nervous system regulation of anterior pituitary function. In Gluck L (ed): Modern Perinatal Medicine. Chicago, Year Book, 1974 Gurugubelli Krishna R, Vishnu Bhat B: Molecular mechanisms of intrauterine growth restriction. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 31(19):2634, 2018 Hallman M, Kulovich MV, Kirkpatrick E, et al: Phosphatidylinositol and phosphatidylglycerol in amniotic fluid: indices of lung maturity. Am J Obstet Gynecol 125:613, 1976 Hansen NS, Strasko KS, Hjort L, et al: Fetal Hyperglycemia changes human preadipocyte function in adult life. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 102(4):1141, 2017 Hart PH, Lucas RM, Walsh JP, et al: Vitamin D in fetal development: findings from a birth cohort study. Pediatrics 135(1):e167, 2015 Hauguel-de Mouzon S, Lepercq J, Catalano P: The known and unknown of leptin in pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 193(6):1537, 2006 Hayward AR: The human fetus and newborn: development of the immune response. Birth Defects Orig Artic Ser 19:289, 1983 Heimark R, Schwartz S: Cellular organization of blood vessels in development and disease. In Ryan U (ed): Endothelial Cells, Vol II. Boca Raton, CRC Press, 1988, p 103 Heinig K, Sage F, Robin C, et al: Development and trafficking function of haematopoietic stem cells and myeloid cells during fetal ontogeny. Cardiovasc Res 107(3):352, 2015 Hellman P, Ridefelt P, Juhlin C, et al: Parathyroid-like regulation of parathyroid hormone related protein release and cytoplasmic calcium in cytotrophoblast cells of human placenta. Arch Biochem Biophys 293:174, 1992 Henriksson P, Hedner V, Nilsson IM, et al: Fibrin-stabilization factor XIII in the fetus and the newborn infant. Pediatr Res 8:789, 1974 Hillman NH, Kallapur SG, Jobe AH: Physiology of transition from intrauterine to extrauterine life. Clin Perinatol 39(4):769, 2012 Ignjatovic V, Ilhan A, Monagle P: Evidence for age-related differences in human fibrinogen. Blood Coagul Fibrinolysis 22(2):110, 2011 Ishimoto H, Jaffe RB: Development and function of the human fetal adrenal cortex: a key component in the feto-placental unit. Endocr Rev 32(3):317, 2011 Iyengar GV, Rapp A: Human placenta as a “dual” biomarker for monitoring fetal and maternal environment with special reference to potentially toxic trace elements. Part 3: Toxic trace elements in placenta and placenta as a biomarker for these elements. Sci Total Environ 280:221, 2001 Jacome-Galarza CE, Percin GI, Muller JT, et al: Developmental origin, functional maintenance and genetic rescue of osteoclasts. Nature 568(7753):541, 2019 James-Allan LB, Arbet J, Teal SB, et al: Insulin stimulates GLUT4 trafficking to the syncytiotrophoblast basal plasma membrane in the human placenta. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 104(9):4225, 2019 Janevic T, Zeitlin J, Auger N, et al: Association of race/ethnicity with very preterm neonatal morbidities. JAMA Pediatr 172(11):1061, 2018 Jansen TA, Korevaar TI, Mulder TA, et al: Maternal thyroid function during pregnancy and child brain morphology: a time window-specific analysis of a prospective cohort. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol

7(8):629, 2019 Jansson T, Aye IL, Goberdhan DC: The emerging role of mTORC1 signaling in placental nutrientsensing. Placenta 33(Suppl 2):e23, 2012 Jansson T, Cetin I, Powell TL, et al: Placental transport and metabolism in fetal overgrowth—a workshop report. Placenta 27:109, 2006a Jansson T, Powell TL: Human placental transport in altered fetal growth: does the placenta function as a nutrient sensor? A review. Placenta 27:S91, 2006b Jennings RE, Berry AA, Strutt JP, et al: Human pancreas development 142(18):3126, 2015 Johns LE, Ferguson KK, Cantonwine DE, et al: Subclinical changes in maternal thyroid function parameters in pregnancy and fetal growth. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 103(4):1349, 2018 Joshi NP, Mane AR, Sahay AS, et al: Role of placental glucose transporters in determining fetal growth. Reprod Sci August 2, 2021 [Epub ahead of print] Kadic AS, Predojevic M: Fetal neurophysiology according to gestational age. Semin Fetal Neonatal Med 17(5):256, 2012 Karsli T, Strickland D, Livingston J, et al: Assessment of neonatal adrenal size using high resolution 2D ultrasound and its correlation with birth demographics and clinical outcomes. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 32(3):377, 2019 Kathiriya IS, Nora EP, Bruneau BG: Investigating the transcriptional control of cardiovascular development. Circ Res 116(4):700, 2015 Katugampola H, King PJ, Chatterjee S, et al: Kisspeptin is a novel regulator of human fetal adrenocortical development and function: a finding with important implications for the human fetoplacental unit. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 102(9):3349, 2017 Kerr B, Leiva A, Farías M, et al: Foetoplacental epigenetic changes associated with maternal metabolic dysfunction. Placenta 69:146, 2018 Kim ST, Romero R, Tarca AL: Methylome of fetal and maternal monocytes and macrophages at the feto-maternal interface. Am J Reprod Immunol 68(1):8, 2012 Kimura RE: Lipid metabolism in the fetal-placental unit. In Cowett RM (ed): Principles of PerinatalNeonatal Metabolism. New York, Springer, 1991, p 291 Kivilevitch Z, Achiron R, Perlman S, et al: The normal fetal pancreas. J Ultrasound Med 36(10):1997,

## 2017

Klagsbrun M: Angiogenesis factors. In Ryan U (ed): Endothelial Cells, Vol II. Boca Raton, CRC Press, 1988, p 37 Koldovsky O, Heringova A, Jirsova U, et al: Transport of glucose against a concentration gradient in everted sacs of jejunum and ileum of human fetuses. Gastroenterology 48:185, 1965 Konstantinidi A, Sokou R, Parastatidou S, et al: Clinical application of thromboelastography/thromboelastometry (TEG/TEM) in the neonatal population: a narrative review. Semin Thromb Hemost 45(5):449, 2019 Koos BJ, Rajaee A: Fetal breathing movements and changes at birth. Adv Exp Med Biol 814:89, 2014 Kopp RS, Kumbartski M, Harth V, et al: Partition of metals in the maternal/fetal unit and leadassociated decreases of fetal iron and manganese: an observational biomonitoring approach. Arch Toxicol 86(10):1571, 2012 Kruepunga N, Hikspoors JP, Mekonen HK, et al: The development of the cloaca in the human embryo. J Anat 233(6):724, 2018 Lauridsen MH, Uldbjerg N, Henriksen TB, et al: Cerebral oxygenation measurements by magnetic resonance imaging in fetuses with and without heart defects. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging 10(11):e006459, 2017

Lee SM, Kim BJ, Koo JN, et al: Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease is a risk factor for large-forgestational-age birthweight. PLoS One 14(8): e0221400, 2019 Lessard S, Beaudoin M, Orkin SH, et al: 14q32 and let-7 microRNAs regulate transcriptional networks in fetal and adult human erythroblasts. Hum Mol Genet 27(8):141, 2018 Liggins GC: Fetal lung maturation. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol 34:247, 1994 Liggins GC: Premature delivery of fetal lambs infused with glucocorticoids. J Endocrinol 45:515, 1969 Liley AW: Disorders of amniotic fluid. In Assali NS (ed): Pathophysiology of Gestation. New York, Academic Press, 1972 Lindström NO, McMahon JA, Guo J, et al: Conserved and divergent features of human and mouse kidney organogenesis. J Am Soc Nephrol 29(3):785, 2018 Lis-Kuberka J, Berghausen-Mazur M, Katnik-Prastowska I, et al: Delivery-associated presence of supramolecular fibronectin-fibrin complexes in puerperal and cord plasma. J Neonatal Perinatal Med 11(2):191, 2018 Longo LD: Respiration in the fetal-placental unit. In Cowett RM (ed): Principles of Perinatal-Neonatal Metabolism. New York, Springer, 1991, p 304 Lozano NA, Lozano A, Marini V, et al: Expression of FcRn receptor in placental tissue and its relationship with IgG levels in term and preterm newborns. Am J Reprod Immunol 80(3):e12972,

## 2018

Lu P, Wang Y, Liu Y, et al: Perinatal angiogenesis from preexisting coronary vessels via DLL4NOTCH1 signalling. Nat Cell Biol 23(9):967, 2021 Luo ZC, Nuyt AM, Delvin E, et al: Maternal and fetal IGF-I and IGF-II levels, fetal growth, and gestational diabetes. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 97(5):1720, 2012 Mari G, Deter RL, Carpenter RL, et al: Noninvasive diagnosis by Doppler ultrasonography of fetal anemia due to maternal red-cell alloimmunization. Collaborative Group for Doppler Assessment of the Blood Velocity in Anemic Fetuses (Level II-I). N Engl J Med 342:9, 2000 Martin TJ: Parathyroid hormone-related protein, its regulation of cartilage and bone development, and role in treating bone diseases. Physiol Rev 96(3):831, 2016 McCormick BM, Blakemore K, Johnson CT, et al: Outcomes of both complex and isolated cases of infants with large stomach on fetal ultrasound. Am J Obstet Gynecol MFM 3(1):100272, 2021 McCormick SM, Mendelson CR: Human SP-A1 and SP-A2 genes are differentially regulated during development and by cAMP and glucocorticoids. Am J Physiol 266:367, 1994 Meier CF, Camargo SM, Hunziker S, et al: Intestinal IMINO transporter SIT1 is not expressed in human newborns. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Physiol 315(5):G887, 2018 Melchers F: Checkpoints that control B cell development. J Clin Invest 125(6):2203, 2015 Mendelson CR, Condon JC: New insights into the molecular endocrinology of parturition. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol 93:113, 2005 Meng H, Zhang Z, Geng H, et al: Development of the subcortical brain structures in the second trimester: assessment with 7.0-T MRI. Neuroradiology 54(10):1153, 2012 Michelsen TM, Holme AM, Henriksen T: Transplacental nutrient transfer in the human in vivo determined by 4 vessel sampling. Placenta 59 Suppl 1: S26, 2017 Michelsen TM, Holme AM, Holm MB, et al: Uteroplacental glucose uptake and fetal glucose consumption: a quantitative study in human pregnancies. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 104(3):873, 2019 Miller AJ, Dye BR, Ferrer-Torres D, et al: Generation of lung organoids from human pluripotent stem cells in vitro. Nat Protoc 41(2):518, 2019 Molina A, Pituello F: Playing with the cell cycle to build the spinal cord. Dev Biol 432(1):14, 2017

Montenegro YH, de Queiroga Nascimento D, de Assis TO, et al: The epigenetics of the hypothalamicpituitary-adrenal axis in fetal development. Ann Hum Genet 83(4):195, 2019 Moore KL, Persaud TV: The Developing Human: Clinically Oriented Embryology, 8th ed. Elsevier, Philadelphia, 2008 Moore KL, Persaud TV, Torchia MG: The Developing Human: Clinically Oriented Embryology, 11th ed. Elsevier, Philadelphia, 2020 Morioka I, Iwatani S, Koda T, et al: Disorders of bilirubin binding to albumin and bilirubin-induced neurologic dysfunction. Semin Fetal Neonatal Med 20(1):31, 2015 Morriss FH Jr, Boyd RD, Manhendren D: Placental transport. In Knobil E, Neill J (eds): The Physiology of Reproduction, Vol II. New York, Raven, 1994, p 813 Mulchahey JJ, DiBlasio AM, Martin MC, et al: Hormone production and peptide regulation of the human fetal pituitary gland. Endocr Rev 8:406, 1987 Müller Brochut AC, Thomann D, Kluwe W, et al: Fetal megacystis: experience of a single tertiary center in Switzerland over 20 years. Fetal Diagn Ther 36(3):215, 2014 Nederlof M, de Walle HE, van Poppel MN, et al: Deviant early pregnancy maternal triglyceride levels and increased risk of congenital anomalies: a prospective community-based cohort study. BJOG 122:1176, 2015 Ney JA, Fee SC, Dooley SL, et al: Factors influencing hemostasis after umbilical vein puncture in vitro. Am J Obstet Gynecol 160:424, 1989 Nielsen NC: Coagulation and fibrinolysin in normal women immediately postpartum and in newborn infants. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 48:371, 1969 Norton ME, Jacobsson B, Swamy GK, et al: Cell-free DNA analysis for noninvasive examination of trisomy. N Engl J Med 372(17):1589, 2015 Novakovic B, Gordon L, Robinson WP, et al: Glucose as a fetal nutrient: dynamic regulation of several glucose transporter genes by DNA methylation in the human placenta across gestation. J Nutr Biochem 24(1):282, 2013 Obenshain SS, Adam PAJ, King KC, et al: Human fetal insulin response to sustained maternal hyperglycemia. N Engl J Med 283:566, 1970 Olausson H, Goldberg GR, Laskey A, et al: Calcium economy in human pregnancy and lactation. Nutr Res Rev 25(1):40, 2012 Ortega JA, Sirois CL, Memi F, et al: Oxygen levels regulate the development of human cortical radial glia cells. Cereb Cortex 27(7):3736, 2017 Palmeira P, Quinello C, Silveira-Lessa AL, et al: IgG placental transfer in health and pathological pregnancies. Clin Dev Immunol 2012:985646, 2012 Pasricha SR, Drakesmith H: Hemoglobinopathies in the fetal position. N Engl J Med 379(17):1675, 2018 Pates JA, Hatab MR, McIntire DD, et al: Determining uterine blood flow in pregnancy with magnetic resonance imaging. Magn Reson Imaging 28(4):507, 2010 Pearson HA: Recent advances in hematology. J Pediatr 69:466, 1966 Pecks U, Bornemann V, Klein A, et al: Estimating fetal cholesterol synthesis rates by cord blood analysis in intrauterine growth restriction and normally grown fetuses. Lipids Health Dis 18(1):185, 2019. Pecks U, Mohaupt MG, Hütten MC, et al: Cholesterol acceptor capacity is preserved by different mechanisms in preterm and term fetuses. Biochim Biophys Acta 1841:251, 2014 Pelag D, Cada S, Peleg A, et al: The relationship between maternal serum thyroid-stimulating immunoglobulin and fetal and neonatal thyrotoxicosis. Obstet Gynecol 99:1040, 2002

Perrine SP, Greene MF, Cohen RA, et al: A physiological delay in human fetal hemoglobin switching is associated with specific globin DNA hypomethylation. FEBS Lett 228:139, 1988 Pipe NGJ, Smith T, Halliday D, et al: Changes in fat, fat-free mass and body water in human normal pregnancy. BJOG 86:929, 1979 Popescu DM, Botting RA, Stephenson E, et al: Decoding human fetal liver haematopoiesis. Nature 574(7778):365, 2019 Pritchard JA: Fetal swallowing and amniotic fluid volume. Obstet Gynecol 28:606, 1966 Quan CP, Forestier F, Bouvet JP: Immunoglobulins of the human amniotic fluid. Am J Reprod Immunol 42:219, 1999 Ramsay MM, James DK, Steer PJ, et al (eds): Normal Values in Pregnancy. London, Elsevier, 1996, p 106 Reddy UM, Abuhamad AZ, Levine D, et al: Fetal imaging: executive summary of a joint Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, Society for MaternalFetal Medicine, American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, American College of Radiology, Society for Pediatric Radiology, and Society of Radiologists in Ultrasound Fetal Imaging workshop. Obstet Gynecol 123(5):1070, 2014 Rijnink EC, Penning ME, Wolterbeek R, et al: Tissue microchimerism is increased during pregnancy: a human autopsy study. Mol Hum Reprod 21(11):857, 2015 Roberts VH, Frias AE, Grove KL: Impact of maternal obesity on fetal programming of cardiovascular disease. Physiology 30:224, 2015 Rosenfeld CR, Porter JC: Arginine vasopressin in the developing fetus. In Albrecht ED, Pepe GJ (eds): Research in Perinatal Medicine, Vol 4. Perinatal Endocrinology. Ithaca, Perinatology Press, 1985, p 91 Rothan HA, Fang S, Mahesh M, et al: Zika virus and the metabolism of neuronal cells. Mol Neurobiol 56(4):2551, 2019 Saracco P, Parodi E, Fabris C, et al: Management and investigation of neonatal thromboembolic events: genetic and acquired risk factors. Thromb Res 123(6):805, 2009 Schott NJ, Emery SP, Garbee C, et al: Thromboelastograpohy in term neonates. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 31(19):2599, 2018 Scott-Finley M, Woo JG, Habli M, et al: Standardization of amniotic fluid leptin levels and utility in maternal overweight and fetal undergrowth. J Perinatol 35(8):547, 2015 Shaffer BL, Norton ME: Cell-free DNA screening for aneuploidy and microdeletion syndromes. Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am 45(1):13, 2018 Shao L, Chang J, Feng W, et al: The Wave2 scaffold Hem-1 is required for transition of fetal liver hematopoiesis to bone marrow. Nat Commun 9(1):2377, 2018 Simner C, Novakovic B, Killycrop KA, et al: DNA methylation of amino transporter genes in the human placenta. Placenta 60:64, 2017 Singendonk MM, Rommel N, Omari TI, et al: Upper gastrointestinal motility: prenatal development and problems in infancy. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol 11(9):545, 2014 Sipes SL, Weiner CP, Wenstrom KD, et al: The association between fetal karyotype and mean corpuscular volume. Am J Obstet Gynecol 165:1371, 1991 Smith FG, Nakamura KT, Segar JL, et al: In Polin RA, Fox WW (eds): Fetal and Neonatal Physiology, Vol 2, Chap 114. Philadelphia, Saunders, 1992, p 1187 Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Mari G, Norton ME, et al: Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine (SMFM) Clinical Guidelines #8: the fetus at risk for anemia—diagnosis and management. Am J Obstet Gynecol 212(6):697, 2015

Stabile I, Nicolaides KH, Bach A, et al: Complement factors in fetal and maternal blood and amniotic fluid during the second trimester of normal pregnancy. BJOG 95:281, 1988 Stach SC, Brizot Mde L, Liao AW, et al: Transplacental total IgG transfer in twin pregnancies. Am J Reprod Immunol 72(6):555, 2014 Stanirowski PJ, Szukiewicz D, Pyzlak M, et al: Impact of pre-gestational and gestational diabetes mellitus on the expression of glucose transporter GLIT-1, GLIT-4 and GLUT-9 in human term placenta. Endocrine 55(3):799, 2017 Stefopoulou M, Herling L, Johnson J, et al: Reference ranges of fetal superior vena cava blood flow velocities and pulsatility index in the second half of pregnancy: a longitudinal study. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth 21(1):158, 2021 Stoll C, Alembik Y, Dott B, et al: Associated anomalies in cases with esophageal atresia. Am J Med Genet A 173(8):2139, 2017 Sussman D, Lye SJ, Wells GD: Impact of maternal physical activity on fetal breathing and body movement—a review. Early Hum Dev 94:53, 2016 Sylva M, van den Hoff MJ, Moorman AF: Development of the human heart. Am J Med Genet A 164A(6):1347, 2014 Teramo KA, Klemetti MM, Widness JA: Robust increases in erythropoietin production by the hypoxic fetus is a response to protect the brain and other vital organs. Pediatr Res 84(6):807, 2018 Torres M, Martin-Puig S: Molecular and cellular development of the heart. Fuster V, Harrington RA, Narula J, et al (eds): Hurst’s The Heart, 14th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2017, p 161 Tumburu L, Thein SL: Genetic control of erythropoiesis. Curr Opin Hematol 24(3):173, 2017 Usher R, Shephard M, Lind J: The blood volume of the newborn infant and placental transfusion. Acta Paediatr 52:497, 1963 Ustun N, Eyerci N, Karadag N, et al: Association of vitamin D receptor gene Fokl and Taql polymorphisms and risk of RDS. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 33(21):3640, 2020 Velasco I, Bath SC, Rayman MP: Iodine as essential nutrient during the first 1000 days of life. Nutrients 10(3):290, 2018 Volpe JJ, Inder TE, Darras BT, et al (eds): Volpe’s Neurology of the Newborn, 6th ed. New York, Elsevier, 2018 Vulsma T, Gons MH, De Vijlder JJ: Maternal-fetal transfer of thyroxine in congenital hypothyroidism due to a total organification defect or thyroid agenesis. N Engl J Med 321:13, 1989 Wang R, Dai G, Takahashi E: High resolution MRI reveals detailed layer structures in early human fetal stages: in vitro study with histologic correlation. Front Neuroanat 9:150, 2015 Warburton D: Overview of lung development in the newborn human. Neonatology 111(4):398, 2017 Weiner CP, Sipes SL, Wenstrom K: The effect of fetal age upon normal fetal laboratory values and venous pressure. Obstet Gynecol 79:713, 1992 Werlin SL: Exocrine pancreas. In Polin RA, Fox WW (eds): Fetal and Neonatal Physiology. Philadelphia, Saunders, 1992, p 1047 Werth B, Tsiaras A: From Conception to Birth: A Life Unfolds. New York, Doubleday, 2002 Wesolowski SR, Kasmi KC, Jonscher KR, et al: Development origins of NAFLD: a womb with a clue. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol 14(2):81, 2017 Wladimiroff JW, Campbell S: Fetal urine-production rates in normal and complicated pregnancy. Lancet 1:151, 1974 Yalinbas EE, Binay C, Simsek E, et al: The role of umbilical cord blood concentration of IGF-I, IGR-II, leptin, adiponectin, ghrelin, resistin, and visfatin in fetal growth. Am J Perinatol 36(6):600, 2019

SECTION 4

## Preconceptional And

## Prenatal Care
