CHAPTER 36

The Puerperium

THE FOURTH TRIMESTER
REPRODUCTIVE TRACT INVOLUTION
PLACENTAL SITE INVOLUTION
URINARY TRACT
PERITONEUM AND ABDOMINAL WALL
BLOOD AND BLOOD VOLUME
LACTATION AND BREASTFEEDING
HOSPITAL CARE
HOME CARE
REFERENCES
The word puerperium is derived from Latin—puer, child + parus, bringing
forth. It defines the time following delivery during which pregnancy-induced
maternal anatomical and physiological changes return to the nonpregnant
state. Its duration is inexact but is considered to last between 4 and 6 weeks.
Although much less complex compared with pregnancy, the puerperium has
appreciable changes, and maternal morbidity is surprisingly common. For
example, in a survey of 1246 British mothers, 3 percent required hospital
readmission within 8 weeks (Thompson, 2002). Moreover, almost three
fourths of women continue to have health problems for up to 18 months

(Glazener, 1995). Of self-reported concerns, pain, breastfeeding, and
psychosocial topics are prominent. Table 36-1 lists data on these from the
Pregnancy Risk Assessment Surveillance System—PRAMS—of the Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).
TABLE 36-1. Concerns Raised by Women in the Puerperium

THE FOURTH TRIMESTER
Because the weeks following childbirth are a critical period for the woman
and her infant, the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
(2018a) promulgated the concept of a “fourth trimester.” This concept
reinforces the importance of the 12 weeks following birth, and components
of this model are outlined in Table 36-2. Thus, the comprehensive
postpartum visit includes a full assessment of physical, social, and
psychological well-being.
TABLE 36-2. Components of Postpartum Care for the Fourth Trimester

An initial visit is recommended at 3 weeks postdelivery and a final
summary visit at 12 weeks. Between this time, visits can be added as needed.
For example, women with chronic hypertension, overt diabetes,
cardiovascular disease, and depression may require additional
multidisciplinary care during this period. For all puerpera, a discussion of
positive lifestyle changes can be initiated. This time also affords the
opportunity to update immunizations (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2019). At the end of the 12-week fourth trimester, follow-up
then transitions into well-woman care, ongoing primary or specialty care,
and when necessary, preconceptional counseling (Chap. 9, p. 165).

REPRODUCTIVE TRACT INVOLUTION
■ Birth Canal
Return of the tissues in the birth canal to the nonpregnant state begins soon
after delivery. The vagina and its outlet gradually diminish in size but rarely
regain their nulliparous dimensions. Rugae begin to reappear by the third
week but are less prominent than before. The hymen is represented by
several small tags of tissue, which scar to form the myrtiform caruncles. The
vaginal epithelium reflects the hypoestrogenic state, and it does not begin to
proliferate until 4 to 6 weeks. This timing is usually coincidental with
resumed ovarian estrogen production. Lacerations or stretching of the

perineum during delivery can lead to vaginal outlet relaxation. Some damage
to the pelvic floor may be inevitable, and parturition predisposes to pelvic
organ prolapse (Chap. 30, p. 548).

■ Uterus
The massively augmented uterine blood flow necessary to maintain
pregnancy derives from significant hypertrophy and remodeling of pelvic
vessels. After delivery, their caliber gradually diminishes to approximately
that of the prepregnant state. Within the puerperal uterus, larger blood vessels
become obliterated by hyaline changes. They are gradually resorbed and
replaced by smaller ones. Minor vestiges of the larger vessels, however, may
persist for years.
During labor and vaginal delivery, the margin of the dilated cervix,
which corresponds to the external os, may be lacerated. The cervical opening
contracts slowly, and for a few days immediately after labor, it readily
admits two fingers. By the end of the first week, this opening narrows, the
cervix thickens, and the endocervical canal reforms. The external os does not
completely resume its pregravid appearance. It remains somewhat wider, and
typically, ectocervical depressions at the site of lacerations become
permanent. These changes are characteristic of a parous cervix (Fig. 36-1).
Cervical epithelium also undergoes considerable remodeling. This actually
may be salutary because almost half of women have regression of high-grade
dysplasia following delivery (Ahdoot, 1998; Kaneshiro, 2005).

FIGURE 36-1 Common appearance of nulliparous (A) and parous (B) cervices.

After delivery, the fundus of the contracted uterus lies slightly below the
umbilicus. It consists mostly of myometrium covered by serosa and internally
lined by decidua. The markedly attenuated lower uterine segment contracts
and retracts, but not as forcefully as the uterine corpus. During the next few
weeks, the lower segment is converted from a clearly distinct substructure
large enough to accommodate the fetal head to a barely discernible uterine
isthmus located between the corpus and internal cervical os. Immediately
postpartum, the anterior and posterior walls, which lie in close apposition,
are each 4 to 5 cm thick (Buhimschi, 2003). At this time, the uterus weighs
approximately 1000 g.
Myometrial involution is a truly remarkable feat of destruction or
deconstruction that begins as soon as 2 days after delivery (Williams, 1931).
The total number of myocytes does not decline appreciably—rather, their
size decreases markedly. Weights from removed uteri approximate 500 g by
1 week postpartum, 300 g by 2 weeks, and at 4 weeks, involution is complete
and the uterus weighs approximately 100 g (Williams, 1931). After each
successive delivery, the uterus is usually slightly larger than before the most
recent pregnancy.

Sonographic Findings
Uterine involution and declining uterine volume is best measured by
sonography (Fig. 36-2) (Wataganara, 2015). With this, estimates again show
uterine size declines of more than half, from 450 to 200 g, in the first 2
weeks. Sonographically, the uterus and endometrium return to the pregravid
size by 8 weeks postpartum. Complete involution in the multiparous uterus is
longer than for the nulliparous organ (Paliulyte, 2017). In the event of a
cesarean delivery, the residual myometrial thickness over the uterine incision
is thicker if a two-layer closure was used (Roberge, 2016).

FIGURE 36-2 Pattern of uterine involution through 7 weeks postpartum as estimated by sonography.

In a study of 42 normal puerperas, fluid in the endometrial cavity was
noted in 78 percent of women at 2 weeks, 52 percent at 3 weeks, 30 percent
at 4 weeks, and 10 percent at 5 weeks (Tekay, 1993). Belachew and
coworkers (2012) used three-dimensional sonography and visualized
intracavitary tissue matter in a third on day 1, 95 percent on day 7, 87 percent
on day 14, and 28 percent on day 28. By day 56, the small cavity was empty.
Doppler ultrasound of the uterine artery shows continuously increasing
vascular resistance throughout the first 7 weeks postpartum (Sohn, 1988;
Wataganara, 2015). Uterine artery flow impedance does not differ between
women undergoing vaginal versus cesarean delivery (Baron, 2016).

Decidual and Endometrial Regeneration
Because separation of the placenta and membranes involves the spongy layer,
the decidua basalis is not sloughed. The in situ decidua varies markedly in
thickness, it has an irregular jagged border, and it is infiltrated with blood,
especially at the placental site. Within 2 or 3 days after delivery, the
remaining decidua becomes differentiated into two layers. The superficial
layer becomes necrotic and is sloughed in the lochia. The basal layer
adjacent to the myometrium remains intact and is the source of new
endometrium. Decidual vessels are near normal by delivery and

endovascular trophoblasts are diminished. These vessels and the spiral
arteries also undergo involution (Zhang, 2018).
Endometrial regeneration is rapid, except at the placental site. Within a
week or so, the free surface becomes covered by epithelium. Sharman (1953)
identified a fully restored endometrium in all biopsy specimens obtained
from the 16th day onward. Histological endometritis is part of the normal
reparative process. Also, microscopic inflammatory changes characteristic
of noninfectious acute salpingitis are seen in almost half of women between 5
and 15 days (Andrews, 1951).

Clinical Aspects
Afterpains. Several clinical findings coincide with uterine involution. In
primiparas, the uterus tends to remain tonically contracted following
delivery. In multiparas, however, it often contracts vigorously at intervals
and gives rise to afterpains, which are similar to but milder than labor
contractions. These are more pronounced as parity increases and worsen
when the newborn suckles, likely because of oxytocin release (Holdcroft,
2003). Usually, afterpains decrease in intensity and become mild by the third
day. We have encountered unusually severe and persistent afterpains in
women with postpartum uterine infections (Chap. 37, p. 651).
Lochia. Early in the puerperium, sloughing of decidual tissue results in a
vaginal discharge of variable quantity. The discharge is termed lochia and
contains erythrocytes, shredded decidua, epithelial cells, and bacteria. For
the first few days after delivery, there is blood sufficient to color it red—
lochia rubra. After 3 or 4 days, lochia becomes progressively pale in color
—lochia serosa. After approximately the 10th day, because of an admixture
of leukocytes and reduced fluid content, lochia assumes a white or yellowwhite color—lochia alba. The average duration of lochial discharge ranges
from 24 to 36 days (Fletcher, 2012). Because of this expected leukocyte
component, saline preparations of lochia for microscopic evaluation in cases
of suspected puerperal metritis are typically uninformative.

PLACENTAL SITE INVOLUTION

Complete extrusion of the placental site takes up to 6 weeks (Williams,
1931). Immediately after delivery, the placental site is approximately palmsized. Within hours of delivery, it normally contains many thrombosed
vessels that ultimately undergo organization. By the end of the second week,
it measures 3 to 4 cm in diameter.
Placental site involution is an exfoliation process, which is prompted in
great part by undermining of the implantation site by new endometrial
proliferation (Williams, 1931). Thus, involution is not simply absorption in
situ. Exfoliation consists of both extension and “downgrowth” of
endometrium from the margins of the placental site, as well as “upward”
development of endometrial tissue from the glands and stroma left deep in the
decidua basalis after placental separation. Anderson and Davis (1968)
concluded that placental site exfoliation results from sloughing of infarcted
and necrotic superficial tissues followed by a remodeling process.

■ Subinvolution
In some cases, uterine involution is hindered because of incompletely
remodeled spiral arteries, retained placental fragments, or infection. Such
subinvolution is accompanied by varied intervals of prolonged lochia and by
irregular or excessive uterine bleeding. During bimanual examination, the
uterus is larger and softer than would be expected.
Inadequate conversion of spiral arteries into remodeled uteroplacental
arteries can cause subinvolution (Kavalar, 2012). These noninvoluted
vessels are filled with thromboses and lack an endothelial lining.
Perivascular trophoblasts are also identified in the vessel walls, which
suggests an aberrant interaction between uterine and trophoblast cells.
With bleeding, pelvic sonography may help differentiate subinvolution
from retained placenta. Characteristic findings of retained products include a
thickened endometrium or endometrial mass (Fig. 36-3). Vascularity within
this area increases the likelihood of retained products (Sellmyer, 2013).
Comparatively, subinvolution is characterized by an enlarged uterus with
tubular hypoechoic areas in the myometrium. These tubular structures reflect
neovascularization and dilated uterine vessels.

FIGURE 36-3 Sonographic appearance of puerperal uterine complications. A. Retained products of
conception. Tissue vascularity is highlighted here by color Doppler. B. Retained clot marked by calipers
shows mixed echogenicity in a woman with subinvolutional hemorrhage. Anechoic cystic areas within
the fundal myometrium reflect dilated vessels.

For treatment, uterotonics are recommended by many but their efficacy is
questionable (Hoyveda, 2001; American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2017d). At Parkland hospital, conservative management is
undertaken with methylergonovine (Methergine) 0.2 mg orally every 3 to 4
hours for 24 to 48 hours. For initially brisk bleeding, an intramuscular dose
of methylergonovine may be coupled with an infusion of synthetic oxytocin
(Pitocin) (20 units in 1 L crystalloid).
For cases with suspected comorbid infection, antimicrobial therapy
usually leads to a good response. Wager and associates (1980) reported that
a third of late cases of postpartum metritis are caused by Chlamydia
trachomatis. Empirical therapy with azithromycin or doxycycline usually
prompts resolution regardless of bacterial etiology. At our institution,
common oral options taken twice daily for 7 to 10 days include azithromycin,
500 mg; amoxicillin-clavulanate (Augmentin), 875 mg; or doxycycline, 100
mg.

■ Late Postpartum Hemorrhage
The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2017d) defines
secondary postpartum hemorrhage as bleeding 24 hours to 12 weeks after
delivery. Clinically worrisome uterine hemorrhage develops within 1 to 2
weeks in perhaps 1 percent of women. Such bleeding most often stems from
abnormal involution of the placental site. It occasionally is caused by

retention of a placental fragment or by a uterine artery pseudoaneurysm.
Rarely, retained products may undergo necrosis with fibrin deposition and
neovascularization, thus forming a placental polypoid mass. Severe
hemorrhage occurs in only 6 percent of these cases due to rupture of blood
vessels (Marques, 2011). Sonographically, a discrete hypervascular
endometrial mass that may extend into the myometrium is visualized (Fig. 364). As discussed in Chapter 59 (p. 1062), delayed postpartum hemorrhage
may also be caused by von Willebrand disease or other inherited
coagulopathies (Lipe, 2011).

FIGURE 36-4 Sonogram of a polypoid placental mass with color Doppler applied. The mass is
demarcated by the dashed white lines. Hypervascularity is seen extending from the mass into the
myometrium.

In our experiences, few women with delayed hemorrhage are found to
have retained placental fragments. Thus, we and others do not routinely
perform curettage (Lee, 1981). Another concern is that curettage may worsen
bleeding by avulsing part of the implantation site. Thus, in a stable patient, if
sonographic examination shows an empty cavity, then oxytocin,
methylergonovine, or a prostaglandin analogue is given. Suitable dosing is
found in Table 13-3 (p. 240). Antimicrobials are added if uterine infection is

suspected. If large clots are seen in the uterine cavity with sonography, then
gentle suction curettage is considered. Otherwise, curettage is carried out
only if appreciable bleeding persists or recurs after medical management.

URINARY TRACT
Normal pregnancy-induced glomerular hyperfiltration persists during the
puerperium but returns to prepregnancy baseline by 2 weeks (Hladunewich,
2004). Parturition induces a transient rise in excretion of glomerular
podocytes (Furuta, 2017). Dilated ureters and renal pelves return to their
prepregnant state by 2 to 8 weeks postpartum. Because of this dilated
collecting system, coupled with residual urine and bacteriuria in a
traumatized bladder, symptomatic urinary tract infection remains a concern in
the puerperium.
Funnell and colleagues (1954) used cystoscopy immediately postpartum
and described varying degrees of submucosal hemorrhage and edema.
Bladder trauma is associated most closely with labor length and thus to some
degree accompanies normal vaginal delivery. Postpartum, the bladder has a
greater capacity and a relative insensitivity to intravesical pressure.
Consequently, overdistention, incomplete emptying, and excessive residual
urine are frequent (Buchanan, 2014; Mulder, 2014). Acute urinary retention
is more common with epidural or narcotic analgesia (Kandadai, 2014). The
management of urinary retention is discussed later (p. 643).
Stress urinary incontinence during the puerperium may occur in 5 percent
of women (Wang, 2017). Much attention has been given to the potential for
subsequent development of urinary incontinence and other pelvic floor
disorders in the years following delivery (Colla, 2018). A more detailed
discussion is found in Chapter 30 (p. 548).

PERITONEUM AND ABDOMINAL WALL
The broad and round ligaments require considerable time to recover from
stretching and loosening during pregnancy. The abdominal wall remains soft
and flaccid as a result of ruptured elastic fibers in the skin and prolonged
distention by the gravid uterus. If the abdomen is unusually lax or pendulous,
an ordinary girdle is often satisfactory. An abdominal binder is another

temporary measure. Several weeks are required for these structures to return
to normal, and exercise aids recovery. These may be started anytime
following vaginal delivery. After cesarean delivery, a 6-week interval to
allow anterior abdominal wall fascia to heal and abdominal soreness to
diminish is reasonable. Silvery abdominal striae commonly develop as
striae gravidarum (Chap. 4, p. 55). Except for these, the abdominal wall
usually resumes its prepregnancy appearance. When muscles remain atonic,
however, the abdominal wall also remains lax.
Marked separation of the rectus abdominis muscles—diastasis recti—
may result. This separation develops from a gradual thinning and widening of
the linea alba and is coupled with a general laxity of the ventral abdominal
wall muscles. Importantly, musculofascial continuity and lack of a true hernia
sac differentiates this from a ventral hernia (Mommers, 2017).

BLOOD AND BLOOD VOLUME
■ Hematological and Coagulation Changes
Marked leukocytosis and thrombocytosis may occur during and after labor.
The white blood cell count seldom exceeds 25,000/μL, and the rise is
predominantly due to granulocytes (Arbib, 2016; Sanci, 2017). A relative
lymphopenia and an absolute eosinopenia is typical. Normally, during the
first few postpartum days, hemoglobin concentration and hematocrit decrease
moderately. If they fall much below prelabor levels, a considerable amount
of blood has been lost.
By the end of pregnancy, laboratory values that assess coagulation are
altered (Kenny, 2015). These changes are discussed in Chapter 4 (p. 61) and
listed in the Appendix (p. 1228). Many extend variably in the puerperium.
For example, a markedly higher plasma fibrinogen level is maintained at
least through the first week. This contributes to hypercoagulability (Chap. 55,
p. 975). As one result, the pregnancy-associated risks for deep-vein
thrombosis and pulmonary embolism persist in the 12 weeks following
childbirth (Kamel, 2014).

■ Pregnancy-Induced Hypervolemia

When the amount of blood attained by normal pregnancy hypervolemia is lost
as postpartum hemorrhage, the woman almost immediately regains her
nonpregnant blood volume (Chap. 42, p. 732). If less has been lost at
delivery, blood volume generally nearly returns to its nonpregnant level by 1
week after delivery. Cardiac output usually remains elevated for 24 to 48
hours postpartum and declines to nonpregnant values by 10 days (Robson,
1987). Heart rate changes follow this pattern, and blood pressure similarly
returns to nonpregnant values (Fig. 36-5). Correspondingly, systemic
vascular resistance remains in the lower range characteristic of pregnancy
for 2 days postpartum and then begins to steadily rise to normal nonpregnant
values (Hibbard, 2015). Despite this, Morris and coworkers (2015) found
that reduced arterial stiffness persists following pregnancy. They suggest a
significant favorable effect of pregnancy on maternal cardiovascular
remodeling. This may represent a mechanism by which preeclampsia risk is
reduced in subsequent pregnancies.

FIGURE 36-5 During the early puerperium, blood pressure normally rises toward nonpregnant values.
MAP = mean arterial pressure.

■ Postpartum Diuresis
Normal pregnancy is associated with appreciable extracellular sodium and
water retention, and postpartum diuresis is a physiological reversal of this

process. Chesley and associates (1959) demonstrated an approximate 2 liter
decline in sodium space during the first week postpartum. This corresponds
with loss of residual pregnancy hypervolemia. In preeclampsia, pathological
retention of fluid antepartum and then its normal diuresis postpartum may be
prodigious (Chap. 41, p. 724).
Postpartum diuresis results in a relatively rapid weight loss of 2 to 3 kg,
which is additive to the 5 to 6 kg incurred by delivery and normal blood loss.
Weight loss from pregnancy itself likely peaks by the end of the second week
postpartum. Any residual weight compared with prepregnancy values
probably represents fat stores that will persist.

LACTATION AND BREASTFEEDING
■ Breast Anatomy and Secretory Products
Each mature mammary gland or breast is composed of 15 to 25 lobes. They
are arranged radially and are separated from one another by varying amounts
of fat. Each lobe consists of several lobules, which in turn are composed of
numerous alveoli. Each alveolus is provided with a small duct that joins
others to form a single larger duct for each lobe (Fig. 36-6). These
lactiferous ducts open separately on the nipple, where they may be
distinguished as small but distinct orifices. The alveolar secretory epithelium
synthesizes the various milk constituents.

FIGURE 36-6 Schematic of the alveolar and ductal system during lactation. Note the myoepithelial
fibers (M) that surround the outside of the uppermost alveolus. The secretions from the glandular
elements are extruded into the lumen of the alveoli (A) and ejected by the myoepithelial cells into the
ductal system (D), which empties through the nipple. Arterial blood supply to the alveolus is identified by
the upper right arrow and venous drainage by the arrow beneath.

After delivery, the breasts begin to secrete colostrum, which is a deepyellow liquid. It usually can be expressed from the nipples by the second

postpartum day. Compared with mature milk, colostrum is rich in
immunological components and contains more minerals and amino acids (Y
de Vries, 2018). It also has more protein, much of which is globulin, but less
sugar and fat. Secretion persists for 5 to 14 days, with gradual conversion to
mature milk by 4 to 6 weeks. The colostrum content of immunoglobulin A
(IgA) offers the newborn protection against enteric pathogens. Other host
resistance factors found in colostrum and milk include complement,
macrophages, lymphocytes, lactoferrin, lactoperoxidase, and lysozymes.
A lactating mother produces upwards of 600 mL of milk daily, and
maternal gestational weight gain has little impact on its quantity or quality.
Mature milk is a complex and dynamic biological fluid that includes fat,
proteins, carbohydrates, bioactive factors, minerals, vitamins, hormones, and
many cellular products (Table 36-3). The contents and concentrations of
human milk change even during a single feed and are influenced by maternal
diet and by newborn age, health, and needs. Milk is isotonic with plasma,
and lactose accounts for half of the osmotic pressure. Essential amino acids
are derived from blood, and nonessential amino acids are derived in part
from blood or synthesized in the mammary gland. Most milk proteins are
unique and include alpha-lactalbumin, beta-lactoglobulin, and casein. Fatty
acids are synthesized in the alveoli from glucose and are secreted by an
apocrine-like process. Variable amounts of most vitamins are found in human
milk. Vitamin K is virtually absent, and thus, an intramuscular dose is given
to the newborn (Chap. 33, p. 606). Vitamin D content is low, and newborn
supplementation is recommended by the American Academy of Pediatrics
and the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2017).
TABLE 36-3. Average Composition of Human Breast Milk

Whey is milk serum and contains large amounts of interleukin-6 and other
chemokines (Polat, 2016). Human milk has a whey-to-casein ratio of 60:40,
which is considered ideal for absorption. Prolactin appears to be actively
secreted into breast milk. Epidermal growth factor has been identified, and
because it is not destroyed by gastric proteolytic enzymes, it may be
absorbed to promote growth and maturation of newborn intestinal mucosa.
Other critical components in human milk include melatonin and
oligosaccharides.

■ Lactation Endocrinology
The precise humoral and neural mechanisms involved in lactation are
complex. Progesterone, estrogen, and placental lactogen, as well as
prolactin, cortisol, and insulin, appear to act in concert to stimulate the
growth and development of the milk-secreting apparatus (Stuebe, 2014).
With delivery, the maternal serum levels of progesterone and estrogen
decline abruptly and profoundly. This drop removes the inhibitory influence
of progesterone on alpha-lactalbumin production and stimulates lactose

synthase to raise milk lactose levels. Progesterone withdrawal also allows
prolactin to act unopposed in its stimulation of alpha-lactalbumin production.
Activation of calcium-sensing receptors in mammary epithelial cells
downregulates parathyroid hormone–related protein (PTHrP) and increases
calcium transport into milk (Vanhouten, 2013). Serotonin also is produced in
mammary epithelial cells and has a role in maintaining milk production
(Collier, 2012).
The intensity and duration of subsequent lactation are controlled, in large
part, by the repetitive stimulus of suckling and emptying of milk from the
breast. Prolactin is essential for lactation, and women with extensive
pituitary necrosis—Sheehan syndrome—do not lactate (Chap. 61, p. 1104).
Although plasma prolactin levels fall after delivery to levels lower than
during pregnancy, each act of suckling triggers a rise in levels. Presumably a
stimulus from the breast curtails the release of dopamine—also known as
prolactin-inhibiting factor—from the hypothalamus. In turn, this transiently
induces increased prolactin secretion.
The posterior pituitary secretes oxytocin in pulsatile fashion. This
stimulates milk expression from a lactating breast by causing contraction of
myoepithelial cells in the alveoli and small milk ducts (see Fig. 36-6). Milk
ejection, or letting down, is a reflex initiated especially by suckling, which
stimulates the posterior pituitary to liberate oxytocin. The reflex may even be
provoked by an infant cry and can be inhibited by maternal fright or stress
(Stuebe, 2014).

■ Immunological Consequences of Breastfeeding
Human milk contains several protective immunological substances, including
secretory IgA and growth factors. The antibodies in human milk are
specifically directed against maternal environmental antigens such as
Escherichia coli (Macpherson, 2017). According to the CDC, breastfeeding
decreases the incidence of ear, respiratory, and gastrointestinal infections;
necrotizing enterocolitis; and sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS) (Perrine,
2015). Breastfeeding is especially important for immunity in preterm infants
(Lewis, 2017).
Much attention has been directed to the role of maternal breast milk
lymphocytes in neonatal immunological processes. Milk contains both T and
B lymphocytes, but the T lymphocytes appear to differ from those found in

blood. Specifically, milk T lymphocytes are almost exclusively composed of
cells that exhibit specific membrane antigens. These memory T cells appear
to be an avenue for the neonate to benefit from the maternal immunological
experience.

■ Lactation
The ideal time to begin breastfeeding is within an hour of birth. Human milk
is ideal food for newborns in that it provides age-specific nutrients,
immunological factors, and antibacterial substances. Milk also contains
factors that act as biological signals for promoting cellular growth and
differentiation. A list of the advantages of breastfeeding is shown in Table
36-4. Lactation has long-term benefits for both the mother and the infant. For
example, women who breastfeed have a lower risk of breast and
reproductive cancer. Children who were breastfed have higher adult
intelligence scores independent of a wide range of possible confounding
factors (Jong, 2012; Kramer, 2008). In the short term, lactation is associated
with less postpartum weight retention (Baker, 2008). In addition, rates of
SIDS are significantly lower among breast-fed infants. Bartek and colleagues
(2013) estimate that a 90-percent breastfeeding rate for 12 months would
save more than $3 billion annually in excess infant and maternal morbidity
costs. For all these reasons, the American Academy of Pediatrics and
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2017) support the
World Health Organization (2011) recommendations of exclusive
breastfeeding for up to 6 months.
TABLE 36-4. Advantages of Breastfeeding

Currently, 55 percent of women breastfeed at 6 months compared with a
Healthy People 2020 goal of 61 percent. (American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists 2018b). The Baby-Friendly Hospital Initiative is an
international program to raise rates of exclusive breastfeeding and to extend
its duration. It is based on the World Health Organization (2018) Ten Steps to
Successful Breastfeeding (Table 36-5). Worldwide, almost 20,000 hospitals
are deemed “baby-friendly,” however, only 15 to 20 percent of hospitals in
the United States are so designated (Baby-Friendly USA, 2018; Perrine,
2015). In a large population-based study done in the United States, fewer
than two thirds of term neonates were exclusively breastfed at the time of
discharge (McDonald, 2012). By 3 months, according to the CDC, less than
half of these infants are exclusively breastfed (Olaiya, 2016).
TABLE 36-5. Ten Steps to Successful Breastfeeding

Various individual resources are available online for lactating mothers
from the American Academy of Pediatrics (www.aap.org) and La Leche

League International (www.llli.org).

■ Breast Care
The nipples require little attention other than cleanliness and attention to skin
fissures. Fissured nipples render lactation painful, and they may have a
deleterious influence on milk production. These cracks also provide a portal
of entry for pyogenic bacteria. Because dried milk is likely to accumulate
and irritate the nipples, washing the areola with water and mild soap is
helpful before and after nursing. When the nipples are irritated or fissured,
some recommend topical lanolin and a nipple shield for 24 hours or longer
(Dennis, 2014). If fissuring is severe, the newborn should not be permitted to
nurse on the affected side. Instead, the breast is emptied regularly with a
pump until the lesions are healed.
Poor latching of the neonate to the breast can create such fissures. For
example, the newborn may take into its mouth only the nipple, which is then
is forced against the hard palate during suckling. Ideally, the nipple and
areola are both taken in to evenly distribute suckling forces. Moreover, the
force of the hard palate against the lactiferous sinuses aids their efficient
emptying, while the nipple is thereby positioned closer to the soft palate.

■ Breastfeeding Contraindications
Lactation is contraindicated in women who take street drugs or do not control
their alcohol use; have an infant with galactosemia; have human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection; have active, untreated tuberculosis;
take certain medications; or are undergoing breast cancer treatment
(American Academy of Pediatrics, 2017). Breastfeeding has been recognized
for some time as a mode of HIV transmission and is proscribed in developed
countries in which adequate nutrition is otherwise available (Chap. 68, p.
1222). Other viral infections do not contraindicate lactation. For example,
with maternal cytomegalovirus infection, both virus and antibodies are
present in breast milk. And, although hepatitis B virus is excreted in milk,
breastfeeding is not contraindicated if hepatitis B immune globulin is given
to the newborns of affected mothers. Maternal hepatitis C infection is not a
contraindication because breastfeeding has not been shown to transmit
infection. Women with active herpes simplex virus may suckle their infants if

there are no breast lesions and if particular care is directed to hand washing
before nursing. From the CDC (2021a), those with COVID-19 should wear a
mask and practice hand-hygiene.

■ Drugs Secreted in Milk
Most drugs given to the mother are secreted in breast milk, although the
amount ingested by the infant typically is small. Factors influencing drug
excretion include plasma concentration, degree of protein binding, plasma
and milk pH, degree of ionization, lipid solubility, and molecular weight
(Rowe, 2013). The ratio of drug concentration in breast milk to that in
maternal plasma is the milk-to-plasma drug-concentration ratio. Ideally, to
minimize infant exposure, medication selection favors drugs with a shorter
half-life, poorer oral absorption, and lower lipid solubility. If multiple daily
drug doses are required, each is taken by the mother after the closest feed.
Single daily-dosed drugs may be taken just before the longest infant sleep
interval—usually at bedtime.
Only a few drugs are absolutely contraindicated while breastfeeding
(American Academy of Pediatrics and American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists, 2017). Cytotoxic drugs may interfere with cellular
metabolism and potentially cause immune suppression or neutropenia, affect
growth, and at least theoretically, increase the childhood cancer risk.
Examples include cyclophosphamide, cyclosporine, doxorubicin,
methotrexate, and mycophenolate (Briggs, 2017). If a medication presents a
concern, its importance should be ascertained. A provider can also seek a
safer alternative or determine if neonatal exposure can be minimized if the
medication dose is taken immediately after each breastfeeding session. Last,
recreational drugs such as marijuana and alcohol should be avoided
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2017c; Metz, 2018).
Data on individual drugs are available through the National Institutes of
Health website, LactMed, which can be found at
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK501922/.
Radioactive isotopes of copper, gallium, indium, iodine, sodium, and
technetium rapidly appear in breast milk. Consultation with a nuclear
medicine specialist is recommended before performing a diagnostic study
with these isotopes (Chap. 49, p. 875). Ideally, a radionuclide with the
shortest excretion time in breast milk is selected. The mother should pump

her breasts before the study and store enough milk in a freezer to feed the
infant. After the study, she should pump her breasts to maintain milk
production but discard all milk produced during the time that radioactivity is
present. This ranges from 15 hours to 2 weeks, depending on the isotope
used. Importantly, radioactive iodine concentrates and persists in the thyroid.
Its special considerations are discussed in Chapter 66 (p. 1174). For
magnetic resonance (MR) imaging, breastfeeding should not be interrupted
after gadolinium administration (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2017a).

■ Breast Engorgement
This is common in women who do not breastfeed. It is typified by milk
leakage and breast pain, which peak 3 to 5 days after delivery. Up to half of
affected women require analgesia for breast pain relief, and as many as 10
percent report severe pain for up to 14 days.
Evidence is insufficient to firmly support any specific treatment
(Mangesi, 2016). That said, breasts can be supported with a well-fitting
brassiere, breast binder, or sports bra. Cool packs and oral analgesics for 12
to 24 hours aid discomfort. Pharmacological or hormonal agents in general
are not recommended to suppress lactation.
Fever caused by breast engorgement was common before the renaissance
of breastfeeding. In one study, 13 percent of puerperas with engorgement had
fever ranging from 37.8 to 39°C (Almeida, 1986). Fever seldom persists for
longer than 4 to 16 hours. The incidence and severity of engorgement and of
the fever associated with it are much lower if women breastfeed. Other
causes of fever, especially those due to infection, must be excluded. Mastitis
is infection of the mammary parenchyma and is relatively common in
lactating women (Chap. 37, p. 659).

■ Other Lactation Issues
With inverted nipples, lactiferous ducts open directly into a depression at the
center of the areola. With these depressed nipples, nursing is difficult. If the
depression is not deep, milk sometimes can be drawn out by a breast pump.
If instead the nipple is greatly inverted, daily attempts are made during the

last few months of pregnancy to draw or “tease” the nipple out with the
fingers.
Extra breasts—polymastia, or extra nipples—polythelia, may develop
along the former embryonic mammary ridge. Also termed the milk line, this
line extends from the axilla to the groin bilaterally. In some women, rests of
accessory breast tissue can be found in the mons pubis or vulva (Wagner,
2013). In the general population, the incidence of accessory breast tissue
ranges from 0.22 to 6 percent (Loukas, 2007). These breasts may be so small
as to be mistaken for pigmented moles, or if without a nipple, for
lymphadenopathy or lipoma. Polymastia has no obstetrical significance,
although occasionally enlargement of these accessory breasts during
pregnancy or engorgement postpartum may result in patient discomfort and
anxiety.
Galactocele is a milk duct that becomes obstructed by inspissated
secretions. The amount is ordinarily limited, but an excess may form a
fluctuant mass—a galactocele—that can cause pressure symptoms and have
the appearance of an abscess. It may resolve spontaneously or require
aspiration.
Among individuals, the volume of milk secreted varies markedly. This
depends not on general maternal health but on breast glandular development.
Rarely, there is complete lack of mammary secretion—agalactia.
Occasionally, mammary secretion is excessive—polygalactia.

Lactation-Associated Osteoporosis
This is a rare disorder of unknown etiology that may be associated with
severe back pain or vertebral fractures (Li, 2018; Zhang, 2017). Preliminary
studies indicate that bisphosphonates are effective in its management.
However, for almost all women, lactation is not associated with later-onset
osteoporosis (Crandall, 2017). Pregnancy-associated osteoporosis is
discussed in Chapter 61 (p. 1100).

HOSPITAL CARE
For 2 hours after delivery, blood pressure and pulse are taken every 15
minutes, at minimum. Temperature is assessed every 4 hours for the first 8
hours and then at least every 8 hours subsequently (American Academy of

Pediatrics and American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2017).
If regional analgesia or general anesthesia was used for labor or delivery, the
mother should be observed in an appropriately equipped and staffed
recovery area. Expected anesthesia recovery and complications are
described in Chapter 25 (p. 473).
Because the likelihood of significant hemorrhage is greatest immediately
postpartum, vaginal bleeding is closely monitored. The uterine fundus is
palpated to ensure that it is well contracted. If relaxation is detected, the
uterus should be massaged through the abdominal wall until it remains
contracted. Uterotonics also are sometimes required. Blood may accumulate
within the uterus without external bleeding. This may be detected early by
uterine enlargement during fundal palpation in the first postdelivery hours.
Postpartum hemorrhage is discussed in Chapter 41.
Early ambulation within a few hours after delivery is encouraged. An
attendant should be present for at least the first time, in case the woman
becomes syncopal. The many confirmed advantages of early ambulation
include fewer bladder complications, less frequent constipation, and reduced
rates of puerperal venous thromboembolism. As discussed, deep-vein
thrombosis and pulmonary embolism are common in the puerperium. In our
audits of puerperal women at Parkland Hospital, the frequency of venous
thromboembolism is extremely low. We attribute this to early ambulation.
Risk factors and other measures to diminish the frequency of
thromboembolism are discussed in Chapter 55 (p. 984).
Diets need not be restricted for women who give birth vaginally.
Generally, two hours after uncomplicated vaginal delivery, a woman is
allowed to eat. With lactation, the level of calories and protein consumed
during pregnancy is increased slightly as recommended by the Food and
Nutrition Board of the National Research Council (Chap. 10, p. 184). If the
mother does not breastfeed, dietary requirements are the same as for a
nonpregnant woman. We recommend oral iron supplementation for at least 3
months after delivery and hematocrit evaluation at the first postpartum visit.
As noted earlier, profound drops in estrogen levels follow removal of the
placenta. Reminiscent of the menopause, postpartum women may experience
hot flushes, especially at night. Importantly, the patient’s temperature is
assessed to differentiate these physiological vasomotor events from
infection.

In women with migraines, dramatic hypoestrogenism may trigger
headaches. Importantly, severe headaches should be differentiated from
postdural puncture headache or hypertensive complications. Care varies
depending on headache severity. Mild headaches may respond to analgesics
such as ibuprofen or acetaminophen. For more severe headaches, oral or
systemic narcotics can be used. Alternatively, a triptan, such as sumatriptan
(Imitrex), can relieve headaches by causing intracranial vasoconstriction,
and it is breastfeeding compatible.

■ Perineal Care
The woman is instructed to clean the vulva from anterior to posterior—the
vulva toward the anus. A cool pack applied to the perineum may help reduce
edema and discomfort during the first 24 hours if there is a perineal
laceration or an episiotomy. Most women also appear to obtain a measure of
relief from the periodic application of a local anesthetic spray. Severe
perineal, vaginal, or rectal pain always warrants careful inspection and
palpation. Severe discomfort usually indicates a problem, such as a
hematoma within the first day or so and infection after the third or fourth day
(Chap. 37, p. 657 and Chap. 42, p. 740). Beginning approximately 24 hours
after delivery, moist heat as provided by warm sitz baths can reduce local
discomfort. Tub bathing after uncomplicated delivery is allowed. The
episiotomy incision normally is firmly healed and nearly asymptomatic by
the third week.
Rarely, the cervix, and occasionally a portion of the uterine body, may
protrude from the vulva following delivery. This is accompanied by variable
degrees of anterior and posterior vaginal wall prolapse. Symptoms include a
palpable mass at or past the introitus, voiding difficulties, or pressure.
Puerperal procidentia typically improves with time as the weight of the
uterus lessens with involution. As a temporizing measure for pronounced
prolapse, the uterus can be replaced and held in position with a space-filling
pessary, such as a donut type.
Rectal veins are often congested at term. Thrombosis of these
hemorrhoids is common and may be promoted by second-stage pushing.
Treatment includes topically applied anesthetics, warm soaks, and stoolsoftening agents. Nonprescription topical preparations containing

corticosteroids, astringents, or phenylephrine are often used. However, no
randomized studies support their efficacy compared with symptomatic care.

■ Bladder Function
In most delivery units, intravenous fluids are infused during labor and for an
hour or so after vaginal delivery. Oxytocin, in doses that have an antidiuretic
effect, is typically infused postpartum, and rapid bladder filling is common.
Moreover, both bladder sensation and capability to empty spontaneously may
be diminished by components of the labor and delivery process. Thus,
urinary retention and bladder overdistention is common in the early
puerperium. The incidence in more than 5500 women studied with a bladder
scanner was 5 percent (Buchanan, 2014). It is much less clinically. Risk
factors that increased the likelihood of retention include primiparity, epidural
analgesia, cesarean delivery, perineal lacerations, operative vaginal
delivery, catheterization during labor, and prolonged second-stage labor
(Stephansson, 2016; Wang, 2017).
Prevention of bladder overdistention demands observation after delivery
to ensure that the bladder does not overfill and that it empties adequately
with each voiding. The enlarged bladder can be palpated suprapubically, or
it is evident abdominally indirectly as it elevates the fundus above the
umbilicus. Most currently use an automated sonography system to detect high
bladder volumes and thus postpartum urinary retention (Buchanan, 2014).
If a woman has not voided within 4 hours after delivery, it is likely that
she cannot. If she has trouble voiding initially, she also is likely to have
further trouble. First, an examination for perineal and genital-tract
hematomas is completed, as these may be contributory. With an
overdistended bladder, an indwelling catheter should be placed and left until
the factors causing retention have abated. Even without a demonstrable
cause, it usually is best to leave the catheter in place for at least 24 hours.
This prevents recurrence and allows recovery of normal bladder tone and
sensation.
When the catheter is removed, a voiding trial is completed to
demonstrate an ability to void appropriately. If a woman cannot void after 4
hours, urine volumes are measured sonographically. If more than 200 mL, the
bladder is not functioning appropriately, and the catheter is replaced and
remains for another 24 hours. Although rare, if retention persists after a

second voiding trial, an indwelling catheter and leg bag can be elected, and
the patient returns in 1 week for an outpatient voiding trial. In a study of 27
women with a protracted course, all resumed normal voiding by 3 weeks
postpartum (Mevorach Zussman, 2020).
During a voiding trial, if less than 200 mL of urine is obtained, the
catheter can be removed and the bladder subsequently monitored clinically
and sonographically as described earlier. Harris and coworkers (1977)
reported that 40 percent of such women develop bacteriuria, and thus a
single dose or short course of antimicrobial therapy against uropathogens is
reasonable after the catheter is removed.

■ Pain, Mood, and Cognition
Discomfort and its causes following cesarean delivery are considered in
Chapter 30 (p. 565). During the first few days after vaginal delivery, the
mother may be uncomfortable because of afterpains, episiotomy and
lacerations, breast engorgement, and at times, postdural puncture headache.
Mild analgesics containing codeine, ibuprofen, or acetaminophen, preferably
in combinations, are given as frequently as every 4 hours during the first few
days.
It is important to screen the postpartum woman for depression (Mangla,
2019). Commonly, mothers exhibit some degree of depressed mood a few
days after delivery. Termed postpartum blues, this likely is the consequence
of several factors. These include the emotional letdown that follows the
excitement and fears experienced during pregnancy and delivery, discomforts
of the early puerperium, fatigue from sleep deprivation, anxiety over the
ability to provide appropriate newborn care, and body image concerns. In
most women, effective treatment includes anticipation, recognition, and
reassurance. This disorder is usually mild and self-limited to 2 to 3 days,
although it sometimes lasts for up to 10 days. Should these moods persist or
worsen, an evaluation for symptoms of major depression is done (Chap. 64,
p. 1145).
Last, postpartum hormonal changes in some women may affect brain
function. Bannbers and colleagues (2013) observed a functional decline in
executive function in postpartum women.

■ Neuromusculoskeletal Problems
Obstetrical Neuropathies
Pressure on branches of the lumbosacral nerve plexus during labor may
manifest as complaints of intense neuralgia or cramplike pains extending
down one or both legs as soon as the head descends into the pelvis. If the
nerve is injured, pain may continue after delivery, and variable degrees of
sensory loss or muscle paralysis can result. In some cases, there is footdrop,
which can be secondary to injury at the level of the lumbosacral plexus,
sciatic nerve, or common fibular (peroneal) nerve (Bunch, 2014).
Components of the lumbosacral plexus cross the pelvic brim and can be
compressed by the fetal head or by forceps. The common fibular nerves may
be externally compressed when the legs are positioned in stirrups, especially
during prolonged second-stage labor.
Obstetrical neuropathy is relatively infrequent. Evaluation of more than
6000 puerperas found that approximately 1 percent had a confirmed nerve
injury (Wong, 2003). Lateral femoral cutaneous neuropathies were the most
common (24 percent), followed by femoral neuropathies (14 percent). A
motor deficit accompanied a third of injuries. Nulliparity, prolonged secondstage labor, and pushing for a long duration in the semi-Fowler position were
risk factors. The median duration of symptoms was 2 months, and the range
was 2 weeks to 18 months.
Injury of the iliohypogastric and ilioinguinal nerves may occur with
cesarean delivery (Rahn, 2010; Yazici Yilmaz, 2018). We have rarely
encountered lumbar arachnoiditis following epidural analgesia causing
severe bilateral neuropathic pain.

Musculoskeletal Injuries
Pain in the pelvic girdle, hips, or lower extremities may follow stretching or
tearing injuries sustained at normal or difficult delivery. MR imaging is often
informative when clinical examination is normal (Miller, 2015). Most
injuries resolve with antiinflammatory agents and physical therapy. Rarely,
there may be septic pyomyositis such as with iliopsoas muscle abscess
(Nelson, 2010; Young, 2010).
Separation of the symphysis pubis or one of the sacroiliac synchondroses
during labor leads to pain and marked interference with locomotion (Fig. 36-

7). Estimates of the frequency of this event vary widely from 1 in 600 to 1 in
30,000 deliveries (Reis, 1932; Taylor, 1986). In our experiences,
symptomatic separations are uncommon. Their onset of pain is often acute
during delivery, but symptoms may manifest either antepartum or up to 48
hours postpartum (Snow, 1997). Radiography is typically used for
evaluation. The normal distance of the symphyseal joint is 0.4 to 0.5 cm, and
symphyseal separation >1 cm is diagnostic for diastasis. Treatment is
generally conservative, with rest in a lateral decubitus position and an
appropriately fitted pelvic binder (Lasbleiz, 2017). Surgery is occasionally
necessary in some symphyseal separations >4 cm (Kharrazi, 1997). The
recurrence risk is high in subsequent pregnancies, and Culligan and
associates (2002) recommend consideration for cesarean delivery.

FIGURE 36-7 Pubic symphyseal separation found on the first postpartum day following vaginal
delivery of a 2840-g newborn. The patient had pain over the pubic bone and pain with ambulation. A
shuffling gait was noted, and she had difficulty with leg elevation when supine. The patient was treated
with physical therapy and analgesics. A pelvic binder was applied, and a rolling walker was provided.
She improved quickly and was discharged home on postpartum day 5.

In rare cases, fractures of the sacrum or pubic ramus are caused by even
uncomplicated deliveries (Alonso-Burgos, 2007; Speziali, 2015). Discussed

in Chapter 61 (p. 1100), the latter is more likely with osteoporosis
associated with heparin or corticosteroid therapy. In rare but serious cases,
bacterial osteomyelitis—osteitis pubis—can be devastating. Lawford and
coworkers (2010) reported such a case that caused massive vulvar edema.

■ Immunizations
The D-negative woman who is not isoimmunized and whose newborn is Dpositive is given 300 μg of anti-D immune globulin shortly after delivery
(Chap. 18, p. 357). Women who are not already immune to rubella or
varicella are excellent candidates for vaccination before discharge (Swamy,
2015). Those who have not received a tetanus/diphtheria (Tdap/Td) or
influenza vaccine should be given these (American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists, 2017e) (Table 10-7, p. 189). The CDC (2021b)
recommends the COVID-19 vaccine, and includes breastfeeding women.
Morgan and colleagues (2015) reported that implementation of a bestpractices alert in the electronic medical record was associated with a Tdap
immunization rate of 97 percent at Parkland Hospital. When permissible by
law, the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019)
recommends standing orders for indicated immunizations.

■ Contraception
During the hospital stay, a concerted effort is made to provide family
planning education. Various forms of contraception are discussed throughout
Chapter 38 and sterilization procedures in Chapter 39. The immediate
puerperium is an ideal time for consideration of long-acting reversible
contraception—LARC (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2017b).
Women not breastfeeding have return of menses usually within 6 to 8
weeks. At times, however, it is difficult clinically to assign a specific date to
the first menstrual period after delivery. A minority of women bleed small to
moderate amounts intermittently starting soon after delivery. Ovulation
occurs at a mean of 7 weeks but ranges from 5 to 11 weeks (Perez, 1972).
That said, ovulation before 28 days has been described (Hytten, 1995). Thus,
conception is possible during the early puerperium. Women who become
sexually active during the puerperium and who do not desire to conceive

should initiate contraception. Kelly and associates (2005) reported that by
the third month postpartum, 58 percent of adolescents had resumed sexual
intercourse, but only 80 percent of these were using contraception. Because
of this, many recommend LARC during the puerperium.
Women who breastfeed ovulate much less frequently compared with
those who do not, but variation is great. Timing of ovulation depends on
individual biological variation and the intensity of breastfeeding. Lactating
women may first menstruate as early as the second or as late as the 18th
month after delivery. Campbell and Gray (1993) analyzed daily urine
specimens in 92 lactating women. Breastfeeding in general delays
resumption of ovulation, although it does not invariably forestall it. Other
findings in their study included the following:
1. Resumption of ovulation was frequently marked by return of normal
menstrual bleeding.
2. Breastfeeding episodes lasting 15 minutes seven times daily delayed
ovulation resumption.
3. Ovulation can occur without bleeding.
4. Bleeding can be anovulatory.
5. The risk of pregnancy in breastfeeding women was approximately 4
percent per year.
For the breastfeeding woman, progestin-only contraceptives, such as
progestin pills, depot medroxyprogesterone, or progestin implants or IUDs,
do not affect the quality or quantity of milk. Not available in the United
States, success with the progesterone-releasing vaginal ring also has been
described (Carr, 2016). These may be initiated any time during the
puerperium. Estrogen-progestin contraceptives likely reduce the quantity of
breast milk, but under the proper circumstances, they too can be used by
lactating women. These hormonal methods are discussed in Chapter 38 (p.
671).

■ Hospital Discharge
Following uncomplicated vaginal delivery, hospitalization is seldom
warranted for more than 48 hours. Hospital stay length following labor and
delivery is now regulated by federal law (Chap. 32, p. 596). Currently, the

norms are hospital stays up to 48 hours following uncomplicated vaginal
delivery and up to 96 hours following uncomplicated cesarean delivery
(American Academy of Pediatrics and American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists, 2017; Blumenfield, 2015). Earlier hospital discharge is
acceptable for appropriately selected women if they desire it. A woman
should receive instructions concerning anticipated normal physiological
puerperal changes, including lochia patterns, weight loss from diuresis, and
milk let-down. She also should receive instructions concerning fever,
excessive vaginal bleeding, or leg pain, swelling, or tenderness. Persistent
headaches, shortness of breath, or chest pain warrant immediate concern.

HOME CARE
■ Coitus
No evidence-based data guide resumption of coitus after delivery, and
practices are individualized (Minig, 2009). After 2 weeks, coitus may be
resumed based on desire and comfort. Wallwiener and colleagues (2017)
reported that 60 percent of women resumed sexual activity by 1 week and 80
percent by 4 months. They also reported that a third of these women had
sexual dysfunction.
Intercourse too soon may be unpleasant, if not painful, and this may be
related to episiotomy incisions or perineal lacerations. In a study of women
without an episiotomy, only 0.4 percent of those with a first- or seconddegree tear had dyspareunia (Ventolini, 2014). Conversely, in primiparas
with an episiotomy, 67 percent had sexual dysfunction at 3 months, 31
percent at 6 months, and 15 percent at 12 months (Chayachinda, 2015). Only
40 percent of women with an anal sphincter injury had resumed intercourse
by 12 weeks (Leader-Cramer, 2016). Last, dyspareunia was also common
following cesarean delivery (McDonald, 2015).
Postpartum, the vulvovaginal epithelium is thin, and very little
lubrication follows sexual stimulation. This stems from the hypoestrogenic
state following delivery, which lasts until ovulation resumes. It may be
particularly problematic in breastfeeding women who are hypoestrogenic for
many months postpartum (Palmer, 2003). For treatment, small amounts of
topical estrogen cream can be applied daily for several weeks to vulvar
tissues. Additionally, vaginal lubricants may be used with coitus.

This same thinning of the vulvovaginal epithelium can lead to dysuria.
Topical estrogen can again be offered once cystitis is excluded.

■ Follow-Up Care
By discharge, women who had an uncomplicated vaginal delivery can
resume most activities, including bathing, driving, and household functions.
Despite this, Tulman and Fawcett (1988) reported that only half of mothers
regained their usual level of energy by 6 weeks. Women who delivered
vaginally were twice as likely to have normal energy levels at this time
compared with those with a cesarean delivery. Ideally, the care and nurturing
of the infant should be provided by the mother with ample help from the
father. Jimenez and Newton (1979) tabulated cross-cultural information on
202 societies from various international geographical regions. Following
childbirth, most societies did not restrict work activity, and approximately
half expected a return to full duties within 2 weeks. Wallace and coworkers
(2013) reported that 80 percent of women who worked during pregnancy
resume work by 1 year after delivery.
Discussed on page 634, during this fourth trimester, the American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2018a) recommends a
comprehensive visit within 12 weeks after delivery. This has proved quite
satisfactory to identify abnormalities beyond the immediate puerperium and
to initiate contraceptive practices.

REFERENCES
Ahdoot D, Van Nostrand KM, Nguyen NJ, et al: The effect of route of delivery on regression of
abnormal cervical cytologic findings in the postpartum period. Am J Obstet Gynecol 178:1116, 1998
Almeida OD Jr, Kitay DZ: Lactation suppression and puerperal fever. Am J Obstet Gynecol 154:940,
1986
Alonso-Burgos A, Royo P, Diaz L, et al: Labor-related sacral and pubic fractures. J Bone Joint Surg
89:396, 2007
American Academy of Pediatrics, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Guidelines for
Perinatal Care, 8th ed. Washington, 2017
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Guidelines for diagnostic imaging during
pregnancy and lactation. Committee Opinion No. 723, October 2017a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Long-acting reversible contraception: implants
and intrauterine devices. Practice Bulletin No. 186, November 2017b

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Marijuana use during pregnancy and lactation.
Committee Opinion No. 722, October 2017c
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Postpartum hemorrhage. Practice Bulletin No.
183, October 2017d
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Update on immunization and pregnancy: tetanus,
diphtheria, and pertussis vaccine. Committee Opinion No. 718, September 2017e
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Optimizing postpartum care. Committee Opinion
No. 736, May 2018a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Optimizing support for breastfeeding as part of
obstetric practice. Committee Opinion No. 756, October 2018b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologist: Immunization implementation strategies for
Obstetricians-Gynecologists. Committee Opinion No. 772, March 2019
Anderson WR, Davis J: Placental site involution. Am J Obstet Gynecol 102:23, 1968
Andrews MC: Epithelial changes in the puerperal fallopian tube. Am J Obstet Gynecol 62:28, 1951
Arbib N, Aviram A, Gabbay Ben-Ziv R, et al: The effect of labor and delivery on white blood cell count.
J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 29(18):2904, 2016
Baby-Friendly USA: Celebrating 500 baby-friendly designated facilities in the United States. 2018.
Available at: www.babyfriendlyusa.org/news/babyfriendly-usa-celebrates-major-milestone-of-500baby-friendly-designatedfacilities-in-the-united-states/. Accessed July 1, 2019
Baker JL, Gamborg M, Heitmann BL, et al: Breastfeeding reduces postpartum weight retention. Am J
Clin Nutr 88(6):1543, 2008
Bannbers E, Gingnell M, Engman J, et al: Prefrontal activity during response inhibition decreases over
time in the postpartum period. Behav Brain Res 241:132, 2013
Baron J, Hershkovitz R, Baumfeld Y, et al: Postpartum uterine artery blood flow impedance following
cesarean section or vaginal delivery. J Clin Ultrasound 44(5):278, 2016
Bartek MC, Stuebe AM, Schwarz EB, et al: Cost analysis of maternal disease associated with
suboptimal breastfeeding. Obstet Gynecol 122:111, 2013
Belachew J, Axelsson O, Mulic-Lutvica A, et al: Longitudinal study of the uterine body and cavity with
three-dimensional ultrasonography in the puerperium. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 91(10):1184, 2012
Blumenfield YJ, El-sayed YY, Lyell DJ, et al: Risk factors for prolonged postpartum length of stay
following cesarean delivery. Am J Perinatol 32:825, 2015
Briggs GG, Freeman RK, Towers CV, et al: Drugs in Pregnancy and Lactation, 11th ed. Philadelphia,
Wolters Kluwer, 2017
Buchanan J, Beckmann M: Postpartum voiding dysfunction: identifying the risk factors. Aust N Z J
Obstet Gynaecol 54(1):41, 2014
Buhimschi CS, Buhimschi IA, Malinow AM, et al: Myometrial thickness during human labor and
immediately postpartum. Am J Obstet Gynecol 188:553, 2003
Bunch K, Hope E: An uncommon case of bilateral peroneal nerve palsy following delivery: a case
report and review of the literature. Case Rep Obstet Gynecol 2014:746480, 2014
Campbell OM, Gray RH: Characteristics and determinants of postpartum ovarian function in women in
the United States. Am J Obstet Gynecol 169:55, 1993
Carr SL, Gaffield ME, Dragoman MV, et al: Safety of the progesterone-releasing vaginal ring (PVR)
among lactating women. Contraception 94(3):253, 2016
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Care for breastfeeding people. 2021a. Available at:
https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/hcp/care-for-breastfeeding-women.html. Accessed

October 11, 2021
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: COVID-19 vaccines while pregnant or breastfeeding.
2021b. Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019ncov/vaccines/recommendations/pregnancy.html. Accessed October 8, 2021
Chayachinda C, Titapant V, Ungkanungdecha A: Dyspareunia and sexual dysfunction after vaginal
delivery in Thai primiparous women with episiotomy. J Sex Med 12(5):1275, 2015
Chesley LC, Valenti C, Uichano L: Alterations in body fluid compartments and exchangeable sodium in
early puerperium. Am J Obstet Gynecol 77:1054, 1959
Childbirth Connection: Listening to mothers III: Pregnancy and birth. 2013a. Available at:
www.nationalpartnership.org/our-work/resources/health-care/maternity/listening-to-mothers-iiipregnancy-and-birth-2013.pdf. Accessed February 11, 2020
Childbirth Connection: Listening to mothers III: New mothers speak out. 2013b. Available at:
www.nationalpartnership.org/our-work/resources/health-care/maternity/listening-to-mothers-iii-newmothers-speak-out-major-findings-2013.pdf. Accessed February 11, 2020
Colla C, Paiva LL, Ferla L, et al: Pelvic floor dysfunction in the immediate puerperium, and 1 and 3
months after vaginal or cesarean delivery. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 143(1):94, 2018
Collier RJ, Hernandez LL, Horseman ND: Serotonin as a homeostatic regulator of lactation. Domest
Anim Endocrinol 43(2):161, 2012
Crandall CJ, Liu J, Cauley J, et al: Association of parity, breastfeeding, and fractures in the women’s
health observation study. Obstet Gynecol 130(1):171, 2017
Culligan P, Hill S, Heit M: Rupture of the symphysis pubis during vaginal delivery followed by two
subsequent uneventful pregnancies. Obstet Gynecol 100:1114, 2002
Dennis CL, Jackson K, Watson J: Interventions for treating painful nipples among breastfeeding women.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 12:CD007366, 2014
Fletcher S, Grotegut CA, James AH: Lochia patterns among normal women: a systematic review. J
Womens Health (Larchmt) 21(12):1290, 2012
Funnell JW, Klawans AH, Cottrell TL: The postpartum bladder. Am J Obstet Gynecol 67:1249, 1954
Furuta I, Zhai T, Umazume T, et al: Effects of childbirth on podocyturia in women with normotensive,
uncomplicated pregnancies. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol 312(6):F112, 2017
Glazener CM, Abdalla M, Stroud P, et al: Postnatal maternal morbidity: extent, causes, prevention and
treatment. BJOG 102:282, 1995
Harris RE, Thomas VL, Hui GW: Postpartum surveillance for urinary tract infection: patients at risk of
developing pyelonephritis after catheterization. South Med J 70:1273, 1977
Hibbard JU, Schroff SG, Cunningham FG: Cardiovascular alterations in normal and preeclamptic
pregnancy. In Taylor RN, Roberts JM, Cunningham FG (eds): Chesley’s Hypertensive Disorders in
Pregnancy, 4th ed. Amsterdam, Academic Press, 2015
Hladunewich MA, Lafayette RA, Derby GC, et al: The dynamics of glomerular filtration in the
puerperium. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol 286:F496, 2004
Holdcroft A, Snidvongs S, Cason A, et al: Pain and uterine contractions during breast feeding in the
immediate post-partum period increase with parity. Pain 104:589, 2003
Hoyveda F, MacKenzie IZ: Secondary postpartum hemorrhage: incidence, morbidity, and current
management. BJOG 108:927, 2001
Hytten F: The Clinical Physiology of the Puerperium. London, Farrand Press, 1995
Jimenez MH, Newton N: Activity and work during pregnancy and the postpartum period: a crosscultural study of 202 societies. Am J Obstet Gynecol 135:171, 1979

Jong DE, Kikkert HR, Fidler V, et al: Effects of long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acid supplementation
of infant formula on cognition and behavior at 9 years of age. Dev Med Child Neurol 54(12):1102,
2012
Kamel H, Navi B, Sriram N, et al: Risk of a thrombotic event after the 6-week postpartum period. N
Engl J Med 370:1307, 2014
Kandadai P, Kandadai V, Saini J, et al: Acute urinary retention after cesarean delivery: a case-control
study. Female Pelvic Med Reconstr Surg 20(5):276, 2014
Kaneshiro BE, Acoba JD, Holzman J, et al: Effect of delivery route on natural history of cervical
dysplasia. Am J Obstet Gynecol 192(5):1452, 2005
Kanotra S, D’Angelo D, Phares T, et al: Challenges faced by new mothers in the early postpartum
period: An analysis of comment data from the 2000 Pregnancy Risk Assessment Monitoring
Systems (PRAMS) survey. Matern Child Health J 11(6):549, 2007
Kavalar R, Arko D, Fokter Dovnik N, et al: Subinvolution of placental bed vessels: case report and
review of the literature. Wien Klin Wochenschr 124(19–20):725, 2012
Kelly LS, Sheeder J, Stevens-Simon C: Why lightning strikes twice: postpartum resumption of sexual
activity during adolescence. J Pediatr Adolesc Gynecol 18:327, 2005
Kenny LC, McCrae KR, Cunningham FG: Platelets, coagulation, and the liver. In Taylor RN, Roberts
JM, Cunningham FG (eds): Chesley’s Hypertensive Disorders in Pregnancy, 4th ed. Amsterdam,
Academic Press, 2015
Kharrazi FD, Rodgers WB, Kennedy JG, et al: Parturition-induced pelvic dislocation: a report of four
cases. J Orthop Trauma 11:277, 1997
Kramer MS, Aboud F, Mironova E, et al: Breastfeeding and child cognitive development: new evidence
from a large randomized trial. Arch Gen Psychiatry 65(5):578, 2008
Lasbleiz J, Sevestre FX, Moquet PY: Using an elastic band device after a severe obstetric pubic
symphyseal separation: clinical and imaging evaluation. Obstet Gynecol 130(3):625, 2017
Lawford AM, Scott K, Lust K: A case of massive vulvar oedema due to septic pubic symphysitis
complicating pregnancy. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol 50(6):576, 2010
Leader-Cramer A, Kentaon K, Davé B, et al: Factors associated with timing of return to intercourse
after obstetric anal sphincter injuries. J Sex Med 13(10):1523, 2016
Lee CY, Madrazo B, Drukker BH: Ultrasonic evaluation of the postpartum uterus in the management of
postpartum bleeding. Obstet Gynecol 58:227, 1981
Lewis ED, Richard C, Larsen BM, et al: The importance of human milk for immunity in preterm infants.
Clin Perinatol 44(1):23, 2017
Li LJ, Zhang J, Gao P, et al: Clinical characteristics and bisphosphonates treatment of rare pregnancyand lactation-associated osteoporosis. Clin Rheumatol 37(11):3141, 2018
Lipe BC, Dumas MA, Ornstein DL: Von Willebrand disease in pregnancy. Hematol Oncol Clin North
Am 25(2):335, 2011
Loukas M, Clarke P, Tubbs RS: Accessory breasts: a historical and current perspective. Am Surg
73(5):525, 2007
Macpherson AJ, de Agüero MG, Ganal-Vonarburg SC: How nutrition and the maternal microbiota
shape the neonatal immune system. Nat Rev Immunol 17(8):508, 2017
Mangesi L, Zakarija-Grkovic I: Treatment for breast engorgement during lactation. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev 6:CD006946, 2016
Mangla K, Hoffman MC, Trumpff C, et al: Maternal self-harm deaths: an unrecognized and preventable
outcome. Am J Obstet Gynecol 221(4):295, 2019

Marques K, Looney C, Hayslip C et al: Modern management of hypervascular placental polypoid mass
following spontaneous abortion: a case report and literature review. Am J Obstet Gynecol 205(2):e9,
2011
McDonald EA, Gartland D, Small R, et al: Dyspareunia and childbirth: a prospective cohort study.
BJOG 122:672, 2015
McDonald SD, Pullenayegum E, Chapman B, et al: Prevalence and predictors of exclusive
breastfeeding at hospital discharge. Obstet Gynecol 119(6):1171, 2012
Metz TD, Borgett LM: Marijuana use in pregnancy and while breastfeeding. Obstet Gynecol
132(5):1198, 2018
Mevorach Zussman N, Gonen N, Kovo M, et al: Protracted postpartum urinary retention—a long-term
problem or a transient condition? Int Urogynecol J 31(3):513, 2020
Miller JM, Low LK, Zielinski R, et al: Evaluating maternal recovery from labor and delivery: bone and
levator ani injuries. Am J Obstet Gynecol 213:188e1, 2015
Minig L, Trimble EL, Sarsotti C, et al: Building the evidence base for postoperative and postpartum
advice. Obstet Gynecol 114(4):892, 2009
Mommers EH, Ponten JE, Al Omar AK, et al: The general surgeon’s perspective of rectusdiastasis. A
systematic review of treatment options. Surg Endosc 31(12):4934, 2017
Morgan JL, Baggari SR, Chung W, et al: Association of a Best-Practice Alert and prenatal
administration with tetanus toxoid, reduced diphtheria toxoid, and acellular pertussis vaccination
rates. Obstet Gynecol 126(2):333, 2015
Morris EA, Hale SA, Badger GJ, et al: Pregnancy induces persistent changes in vascular compliance in
primiparous women. Am J Obstet Gynecol 212(5):633.e1, 2015
Mulder FE, Hakvoort RA, Schoffelmeer MA, et al: Postpartum urinary retention: a systematic review of
adverse effects and management. Int Urogynecol J 25(12):1605, 2014
Nelson DB, Manders DB, Shivvers SA: Primary iliopsoas abscess and pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol
116(2 Pt 2):479, 2010
Olaiya O, Dee DL, Sharma AJ, et al: Maternity care practices and breastfeeding among adolescent
mothers aged 12–19 years—United States, 2009–2011. MMWR 65(2):17, 2016
Paliulyte V, Drasutiene GS, Ramasauskaite D, et al: Physiological uterine involution in primiparous and
multiparous women: ultrasound study. Obstet Gynecol Int 2017:6739345, 2017
Palmer AR, Likis FE: Lactational atrophic vaginitis. J Midwifery Womens Health 48:282, 2003
Perez A, Vela P, Masnick GS, et al: First ovulation after childbirth: the effect of breastfeeding. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 114:1041, 1972
Perrine CG, Galuska DA, Dohack JL, et al: Vital signs: improvements in maternity care policies and
practices that support breastfeeding—United States, 2007–2013. MMWR 64:1112, 2015
Polat A, Tunc T, Erdem G, et al: Interleukin-8 and its receptors in human milk from mothers of full-term
and premature infants. Breastfeed Med 11:247, 2016
Rahn DD, Phelan JN, Roshanravan SM, et al: Anterior abdominal wall nerve and vessel anatomy:
clinical implications for gynecologic surgery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 202(3):234.e1, 2010
Reis RA, Baer JL, Arens RA, et al: Traumatic separation of the symphysis pubis during spontaneous
labor: with a clinical and x-ray study of the normal symphysis pubis during pregnancy and the
puerperium. Surg Gynecol Obstet 55:336, 1932
Roberge S, Demers S, Girard M, et al: Impact of uterine closure on residual myometrial thickness after
cesarean: a randomized controlled trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol 214(4):507.e1, 2016
Robson SC, Dunlop W, Hunter S: Haemodynamic changes during the early puerperium. BMJ (Clin Res
Ed) 294:1065, 1987

Rowe H, Baker T, Hale TW: Maternal medication, drug use and breastfeeding. Pediatr Clin North Am
6(1):275, 2013
Sanci M, Töz E, Ince O, et al: Reference values for maternal total and differential leukocyte counts in
different trimesters of pregnancy and the initial postpartum period in western Turkey. J Obstet
Gynecol 37(5):571, 2017
Sellmyer MA, Desser TS, Maturen KE, et al: Physiologic, histologic, and imaging features of retained
products of conception. Radiographics 33(3):781, 2013
Sharman A: Postpartum regeneration of the human endometrium. J Anat 87:1, 1953
Snow RE, Neubert AG: Peripartum pubic symphysis separation: a case series and review of the
literature. Obstet Gynecol Surv 52:438, 1997
Sohn C, Fendel H, Kesternich P: Involution-induced changes in arterial uterine blood flow [German]. Z
Geburtshilfe Perinatol 192:203, 1988
Speziali A, Tei MM, Placella G, et al: Postpartum sacral stress fracture. Case Rep Orthop 2015:704393,
2015
Stephansson O, Sandström A, Petersson G, et al: Prolonged second stage of labour, maternal infectious
disease, urinary retention and other complications in the early postpartum period. BJOG 123(4):608,
2016
Stuebe AM: Enabling women to achieve their breastfeeding goals. Obstet Gynecol 123:643, 2014
Swamy G, Heine RP: Vaccinations for pregnant women. Obstet Gynecol 125:212, 2015
Taylor RN, Sonson RD: Separation of the pubic symphysis. An underrecognized peripartum
complication. J Reprod Med 31:203, 1986
Tekay A, Jouppila P: A longitudinal Doppler ultrasonographic assessment of the alterations in peripheral
vascular resistance of uterine arteries and ultrasonographic findings of the involuting uterus during
the puerperium. Am J Obstet Gynecol 168(1 Pt 1):190, 1993
Thompson JF, Roberts CL, Currie M, et al: Prevalence and persistence of health problems after
childbirth: associations with parity and method of birth. Birth 29:83, 2002
Tulman L, Fawcett J: Return of functional ability after childbirth. Nurs Res 37:77, 1988
Vanhouten JN, Wysolmerski JJ: The calcium-sensing receptor in the breast. Best Prac Res Clin
Endocrinol Metab 27(3)403, 2013
Ventolini G, Yaklic JL, Galloway ML, et al: Obstetric vulvar lacerations and postpartum dyspareunia. J
Reprod Med 59(11-12):560, 2014
Wager GP, Martin DH, Koutsky L, et al: Puerperal infectious morbidity: relationship to route of delivery
and to antepartum Chlamydia trachomatis infection. Am J Obstet Gynecol 138:1028, 1980
Wagner IJ, Damitz LA, Carey E, et al: Bilateral accessory breast tissue of the vulva: a case report
introducing a novel labiaplasty technique. Ann Plast Surg 70(5):549, 2013
Wallace M, Saurel-Cubizolles MJ, EDEN mother–child cohort study group: Returning to work one year
after childbirth: data from the mother-child cohort EDEN. Matern Child Health J 17(8):1432, 2013
Wallwiener S, Müller M, Doster A, et al: Sexual activity and sexual dysfunction of women in the
perinatal period: a longitudinal study. Arch Gynecol Obstet 295(4):873, 2017
Wang H, Ghoniem G: Postpartum stress urinary incontinence, is it related to vaginal delivery? J Matern
Fetal Neonatal Med 30(13):1552, 2017
Wataganara T, Phithakwatchara N, Komoltri C, et al: Functional three-dimensional sonographic study of
the postpartum uterus. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 28(18):2221, 2015
Williams JW: Regeneration of the uterine mucosa after delivery with especial reference to the placental
site. Am J Obstet Gynecol 22:664, 1931

Wong CA, Scavone BM, Dugan S, et al: Incidence of postpartum lumbosacral spine and lower
extremity nerve injuries. Obstet Gynecol 101:279, 2003
World Health Organization: Exclusive breastfeeding for six months best for babies everywhere. 2011.
Available at: www.who.int/mediacentre/news/statements/2011/breastfeeding_20110115/en/.
Accessed July 1, 2019
World Health Organization: Protecting, promoting, and supporting breastfeeding in facilities providing
maternity and newborn services: the revised Baby-friendly Hospital Initiative 2018. Geneva, World
Health Organization, 2018
Yazici Yilmaz F, Aydogan Mathyk B, Yildiz S, et al: Postoperative pain and neuropathy after caesarean
operation featuring blunt or sharp opening of the fascia: a randomised, parallel group, double-blind
study. J Obstet Gynecol 38(7):933, 2018
Y de Vries J, Pundir S, Mckenzie E, et al: Maternal circulating vitamin status and colostrum vitamin
composition in healthy lactating women-a systematic approach. Nutrients 10(6):E687, 2018
Young OM, Werner E, Sfakianaki AK: Primary psoas muscle abscess after an uncomplicated
spontaneous vaginal delivery. Obstet Gynecol 116(2 Pt 2):477, 2010
Zhang M, Chen P, Li B, et al: Approach to the patient with pregnancy and lactation-associated
osteoporosis: a case report and a review of the literature. Medicine (Baltimore) 96(46):e8671, 2017
Zhang P: Decidual vasculopathy in preeclampsia and spiral artery remodeling revisited: shallow invasion
versus failure of involution. AJP Rep 8(4):e241, 2018

