CHAPTER 21

Physiology of Labor

MATERNAL AND FETAL COMPARTMENTS
SEX STEROID HORMONE ROLE
PROSTAGLANDINS ROLE
PHASE 1: UTERINE QUIESCENCE AND CERVICAL SOFTENING
PHASE 2: PREPARATION FOR LABOR
PHASE 3: LABOR
UTEROTONINS IN PARTURITION PHASE 3
PHASE 4: THE PUERPERIUM
REFERENCES
Labor is characterized by forceful and painful uterine contractions that effect
cervical dilation and cause the fetus to descend through the birth canal.
However, extensive preparations take place in both the uterus and cervix
long before this. During the first 36 to 38 weeks of normal gestation, the
myometrium is in a preparatory yet unresponsive state. Concurrently, the
cervix begins an early stage of remodeling yet maintains structural integrity.
Following uterine quiescence, a transitional phase begins during which
myometrial unresponsiveness is suspended and the cervix undergoes
ripening, effacement, and loss of structural cohesion.

The physiological processes that regulate parturition and the onset of
labor continue to be defined. Three theories describe labor initiation.
Viewed simplistically, the first is the functional loss of pregnancy
maintenance factors. The second focuses on synthesis of factors that
induce parturition. The third suggests that the mature fetus is the source of
the initial signal for parturition commencement. Research supports a model
that draws from all three themes. Thus, labor onset represents the culmination
of a series of biochemical changes in the uterus and cervix. These result from
endocrine and paracrine signals emanating from both mother and fetus. Their
relative contributions vary between species, and it is these differences that
complicate elucidation of the exact factors that regulate human parturition.
When parturition is abnormal, preterm labor, dystocia, or postterm pregnancy
may result.

MATERNAL AND FETAL COMPARTMENTS
■ Uterus and Cervix
The myometrial layer of the uterus is composed of bundles of smooth muscle
cells surrounded by connective tissue. In contrast to skeletal or cardiac
muscle, the smooth muscle cell is not terminally differentiated and therefore
is readily adaptable to environmental changes. Varied stimuli such as
mechanical stretch, inflammation, and endocrine and paracrine signals
modulate the transition of the smooth muscle cell into phenotypes that
provide cell growth, proliferation, secretion, and contractility.
Additionally, several smooth muscle qualities confer advantages for
uterine contraction efficiency and fetal delivery. First, the degree of smooth
muscle cell shortening with contractions may be one order of magnitude
greater than that attained in striated muscle cells. Second, forces can be
exerted in smooth muscle cells in multiple directions. This differs from the
contraction force generated by skeletal muscle, which is always aligned with
the axis of the muscle fibers. Third, the thick and thin filaments of smooth
muscle are found in long, random bundles throughout the cells. This
plexiform arrangement aids augmented shortening and force-generating
capacity. Last, greater multidirectional force generation in the uterine fundus
compared with that of the lower uterine segment helps optimize expulsive
force vectors.

Lining the thick muscular uterine walls, the endometrium is transformed
by pregnancy hormones and is then termed decidua. Composed of stromal
cells and maternal immune cells, the decidua serves to maintain the
pregnancy via unique immunoregulatory functions that suppress inflammatory
signals during gestation. However, at the end of pregnancy, the decidua
transitions to induce inflammatory signals and withdraw active
immunosuppression, contributing to parturition initiation.
During pregnancy, the cervix has multiple functions that include: (1)
maintaining the epithelial barrier to protect the reproductive tract from
infection, (2) sustaining cervical competence despite greater gravitational
forces as the fetus grows, and (3) orchestrating extracellular matrix (ECM)
changes that allow progressively greater tissue compliance.
In nonpregnant women, the cervix is closed and firm, and its consistency
is similar to nasal cartilage. By the end of pregnancy, the cervix is easily
distensible, and its consistency is similar to the lips of the oral cavity. The
cervix has a high ratio of fibroblasts to smooth muscle cells, and ECM
contributes significantly to overall tissue mass. Vink and colleagues (2016)
showed that the smooth muscle cells in the cervix have a spatial gradient.
Specifically, smooth muscle cells make up approximately 50 percent of
stromal cells at the internal os but only 10 percent at the external os. Also,
three-dimensional sonography and magnetic resonance imaging show
increases in the cross-sectional area of the cervical canal and changes in
ECM structure from early to late pregnancy (House, 2009; Lang, 2010;
Pizzella, 2020). Concurrent with expansion of the stroma, the cervical
epithelia proliferate and exert a pregnancy-specific immunoprotection.

■ Placenta
In addition to providing the exchange of nutrients and waste between mother
and fetus, the placenta is a key source of steroid hormones, growth factors,
and other mediators that maintain pregnancy and potentially aid the transition
to parturition. The fetal membranes—amnion and chorion—and adjacent
decidua serve as a physiologic, immunologic, and metabolic shield to protect
against untimely parturition initiation.
The amnion provides virtually all of the fetal membranes’ tensile strength
to resist membrane tearing and rupture (Chap. 5, p. 94). This avascular tissue
is highly resistant to penetration by leukocytes, microorganisms, and

neoplastic cells (Fig. 21-1). It also constitutes a selective filter to prevent
fetal particulate-bound lung and skin secretions from reaching the maternal
compartment. In this manner, maternal tissues are protected from amnionic
fluid constituents that could prematurely accelerate decidual or myometrial
activation or could promote adverse events such as amnionic fluid embolism.

FIGURE 21-1 The amnion synthesizes prostaglandins, and late in pregnancy, synthesis is augmented
by increased phospholipase A2 and prostaglandin H synthase, type 2 (PGHS-2) activity. The transport
of prostaglandins from the amnion to maternal tissues is limited by expression of the inactivating
enzyme, prostaglandin dehydrogenase (PGDH), in the chorion. During labor, PGDH levels decline, and
amnion-derived prostaglandins can influence membrane rupture and uterine contractility. The role of
decidual activation in parturition is unclear but may involve local progesterone metabolism and higher
prostaglandin receptor concentrations, thus enhancing uterine prostaglandin actions and cytokine
production. (Redrawn from Smith R: Parturition. N Engl J Med. 2007 Jan 18;356(3):271–283.)

The chorion is a primarily protective tissue layer and provides
immunological acceptance. It is also enriched with enzymes that inactivate
uterotonins, which are agents that stimulate contractions. Inactivating
enzymes include prostaglandin dehydrogenase, oxytocinase, and
enkephalinase (Cheung, 1990; Germain, 1994; Mizutani, 2011).

SEX STEROID HORMONE ROLE
In many species, the role of sex steroid hormones is clear— estrogen
promotes and progesterone inhibits the events leading to parturition. The
removal of progesterone, that is, progesterone withdrawal, directly precedes
progression of parturition. In addition, providing progesterone to some
species will delay parturition via a decline in myometrial activity and
continued cervical competency (Challis, 1994). In humans, however, both
estrogen and progesterone are components of a broader molecular system
that maintains uterine quiescence.

Plasma levels of estrogen and progesterone in normal pregnancy are
enormous and in great excess of the affinity constants for their receptors. For
this reason, it is difficult to comprehend how relatively subtle changes in the
ratio of their concentrations could modulate physiological processes during
pregnancy. The evidence, however, for an increased progesterone-toestrogen ratio in the maintenance of pregnancy and a decline in this ratio for
parturition is overwhelming. In all species studied, including humans,
administration of the progesterone-receptor antagonists mifepristone (RU486) or onapristone will promote some or all key features of parturition.
These include cervical ripening, greater cervical distensibility, and
augmented uterine sensitivity to uterotonins (Bygdeman, 1994; Chwalisz,
1994b; Wolf, 1993). The exact role of estrogen in regulation of human uterine
quiescence and cervical competency is less well understood. That said,
estrogen can advance progesterone responsiveness and, at the end of
pregnancy, aid in processes that mediate uterine activation and cervical
ripening.
Both progesterone and estrogen bind to nuclear receptors that regulate
gene transcription. Two nuclear receptors for estrogen are estrogen receptor
α (ERα) and estrogen receptor β (ERβ). Nuclear receptor isoforms of the
progesterone receptor (PR-A and PR-B) are encoded by differing transcripts
from a single gene (Patel, 2015).

PROSTAGLANDINS ROLE
Prostaglandins are lipid molecules with varied hormone-like actions. In
parturition, they play a prominent role in myometrial contractility, relaxation,
and inflammation. Prostaglandins interact with a family of eight different G
protein–coupled receptors (p. 403), several of which are expressed in the
myometrium and the cervix (Konopka, 2015; Myatt, 2004).
The major synthetic pathway involved in prostaglandin biosynthesis is
shown in Figure 21-2. Prostaglandins are produced using plasma membrane–
derived arachidonic acid, which usually is released by the action of
phospholipase A2 or C. The enzymes type 1 and 2 prostaglandin H synthase
(PGHS-1 and -2), also known as cyclooxygenase 1 and 2 (COX-1 and -2),
convert arachidonic acid to prostaglandin H2 (PGH2). These enzymes are the
target of many nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). The tocolytic

actions of specific COX inhibitors, as discussed in Chapter 45 (p. 806),
were considered promising until they were shown to have adverse fetal
effects (Loudon, 2003; Olson, 2007).

FIGURE 21-2 Overview of the prostaglandin biosynthetic pathway. PG = prostaglandin; PGDH =
prostaglandin dehydrogenase; PGE2 = prostaglandin E2; PGF2α = prostaglandin F2α; PGH2 =
prostaglandin H2; PGHS = prostaglandin H synthase; PGI2 = prostaglandin I2; PLA2 = phospholipase
A2; PLC = phospholipase C.

Through prostaglandin isomerases, PGH2 is converted to active
prostaglandins. These include prostaglandins E2 (PGE2), F2α (PGF2α), and I2
(PGI2). Isomerase expression is tissue-specific and thereby controls the
relative production of various prostaglandins. Another important control
point for prostaglandin activity is its metabolism, which most often is through
the action of 15-hydroxyprostaglandin dehydrogenase (PGDH). Expression
of this enzyme is upregulated during pregnancy in the uterus and cervix,
which provides the important ability to rapidly inactivate prostaglandins
(Giannoulias, 2002; Kishore, 2017). Thus, myometrial responses to
prostaglandins stem from a balance between prostaglandin synthesis versus
metabolism, from the relative expression of various prostaglandin receptors,
or from a switch in receptor-signaling pathways (Kandola, 2014; Lyall,
2002; Olson, 2007; Smith, 2001). It is possible that prostanoids contribute to
myometrial relaxation at one stage of pregnancy and to myometrial
contractions after parturition initiation (Myatt, 2004).

In addition to the myometrium, the amnion synthesizes several bioactive
peptides and prostaglandins that cause myometrial relaxation or contraction
(see Fig. 21-1). Late in pregnancy, amnionic prostaglandin biosynthesis of
PGE2 and PGF2α is increased, and phospholipase A2 and PGHS-2 show
greater activity (Peiris, 2020). The amnion is likely the major source for
amnionic fluid prostaglandins, and their role in the activation of cascades
that promote membrane rupture is clear. However, the influence of amnionderived prostaglandins on uterine quiescence and activation is less clear
because their access to maternal tissues is limited by expression of PGDH.

PHASE 1: UTERINE QUIESCENCE AND CERVICAL
SOFTENING
Parturition can be arbitrarily divided into four overlapping phases that
correspond to the major physiological transitions of the myometrium and
cervix during pregnancy (Fig. 21-3) (Casey, 1997; Shynlova, 2020; Vink,
2018). These include: (1) the prelude, (2) the preparation, (3) the process
itself, and (4) the recovery. Importantly, the phases of parturition should not
be confused with the clinical stages of labor. The first, second, and third
stages of labor make up phase 3 of parturition (Fig. 21-4).

FIGURE 21-3 The phases of parturition.

FIGURE 21-4 Labor course divided on the basis of expected evolution of the dilatation and descent
curves into three functional divisions. The preparatory division includes the latent and active phases. The
dilatational division is the phase of maximum slope of dilatation. The pelvic division encompasses both
the deceleration phase and the second stage, which is concurrent with the phase of maximum slope of
fetal descent. (Redrawn from Friedman EA: Labor: Clinical Evaluation and Management, 2nd ed. New
York, Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1978.)

Beginning even before implantation, a remarkably effective period of
myometrial quiescence is imposed. This phase 1 normally constitutes 95
percent of pregnancy and is characterized by uterine smooth muscle
tranquility with maintenance of cervical structural integrity (Fig. 21-5). All
manner of molecular systems—neural, endocrine, paracrine, and autocrine—

are likely called to implement and coordinate a state of relative uterine
unresponsiveness. Moreover, a complementary “fail-safe” system that
protects the uterus against agents that could perturb the tranquility of phase 1
also must be in place.

FIGURE 21-5 The key factors thought to regulate the phases of human parturition. CRH =
corticotropin-releasing hormone; hCG = human chorionic gonadotropin; PAF = platelet-activating factor;
PGDH = prostaglandin dehydrogenase; SPA = surfactant protein A.

During phase 1, the uterus must initiate extensive changes in its size and
vascularity to accommodate fetal growth. Concurrently, myometrial cells
undergo a phenotypic modification to a noncontractile state, and uterine
muscle is rendered unresponsive to natural stimuli. Although this
unresponsiveness continues until near the end of pregnancy, some lowintensity myometrial contractions are felt during the quiescent phase. These
contractions do not normally cause cervical dilation, and they are common
toward the end of pregnancy, especially in multiparas. They are referred to
as Braxton Hicks contractions or false labor (Chap. 4, p. 52).

The quiescence of phase 1 likely stems from: (1) actions of estrogen and
progesterone via intracellular receptors, (2) myometrial-cell plasma
membrane receptor–mediated increases in cyclic adenosine monophosphate
(cAMP), (3) generation of cyclic guanosine monophosphate, and (4) other
systems, including modification of myometrial-cell ion channels.

■ Myometrial Relaxation and Contraction
The balance between myometrial relaxation and contraction is controlled by
steroid- and peptide-hormone transcriptional regulation of key genes and
their protein products (Wray, 2019). Quiescence is achieved in part by: (1)
diminished intracellular crosstalk and reduced intracellular Ca2+ ([Ca2+]i)
levels, (2) ion-channel regulation of cell membrane potential, (3) activation
of the stress–unfolded protein response by the uterine endoplasmic reticulum,
and (4) uterotonin degradation. In contrast, contractility results from: (1)
enhanced interactions between the actin and myosin proteins, (2) heightened
excitability of individual myometrial cells, and (3) promotion of intracellular
crosstalk that allows synchronous contractions to develop.

Actin–Myosin Interactions
Actin and myosin proteins are essential to muscle contraction. For this, actin
must be converted from a globular to a filamentous form. Indeed, a potential
mechanism for maintenance of relaxation is the promotion of actin into a
globular form rather than into fibrils, which are required for contraction.
Moreover, actin must be attached to the cytoskeleton at focal points in the
cell membrane to allow tension to develop.
Actin must partner with myosin, which is composed of multiple light and
heavy chains (Fig. 21-6). This interaction is brought about by enzymatic
phosphorylation of the 20-kDa light chain of myosin (Stull, 1998). This is
catalyzed by the enzyme myosin light-chain kinase, which is activated by
calcium (Ca2+).

FIGURE 21-6 Uterine myocyte relaxation and contraction. A. Uterine relaxation is maintained by
factors that increase myocyte cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) levels. This activates protein
kinase A (PKA) to promote phosphodiesterase activity with dephosphorylation of myosin light-chain
kinase (MLCK). Other processes serve to maintain actin in a globular form and thus to prevent the fibril
formation necessary for contractions. B. Uterine contractions result from reversal of these sequences.
Actin now assumes a fibrillar form, and calcium enters the cell to combine with calmodulin to form
complexes. These complexes activate MLCK to bring about phosphorylation of the myosin light chains.
This generates ATPase activity to cause sliding of myosin over the actin fibrils, which is a uterine
contraction. AC = adenylyl cyclase; Ca2+ = calcium; DAG = diacylglycerol; Gs and Gα = G-receptor
proteins; IP 3 = inositol triphosphate; LC20 = light chain 20; PIP 3 = phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5–
triphosphate; PLC = phospholipase C; R-PKA = inactive protein kinase. (Redrawn from Smith R:
Parturition. N Engl J Med. 2007 Jan 18;356(3):271–283.)

Thus, logically, uterine relaxation ordinarily is promoted by conditions
that lower concentrations of (Ca2+)i. In contrast, agents that prompt
contraction act on myometrial cells to augment (Ca2+)i levels. Or, they allow
an influx of extracellular calcium through ligand- or voltage-regulated
calcium channels (see Fig. 21-6). For example, PGF2α and oxytocin bind
their respective receptors during labor to open ligand-activated calcium
channels. Activation of these receptors also releases calcium from the
sarcoplasmic reticulum. Additionally, greater localization of nonselective

cation channels on the cell membrane promotes Ca2+ entry (Ying, 2015). The
rise in (Ca2+)i levels is often transient. But, contractions can be prolonged by
inhibition of myosin phosphatase, an enzyme that dephosphorylates myosin
(Woodcock, 2004).

Regulation of Membrane Potentials
As just noted, myocyte excitability is regulated in part by changes in the
electrochemical potential gradient across the plasma membrane. Before
labor, myocytes maintain a relatively high interior electronegativity.
Maintenance of a hyperpolarized membrane potential attenuates smooth
muscle cell excitation and is regulated by ion channels.
Numerous ion channels control sodium (Na+) and calcium (Ca2+) influx
and potassium (K+) efflux to collectively regulate membrane potential.
Sodium leak channels (NALCN) are important to normal uterine function
(Reinl, 2018). Another key regulator is the large-conductance voltage- and
Ca2+-activated K+ channel (BKCa) (Pérez, 1993). The BKCa channel is
abundantly expressed in the myometrium and plays dual promoting and
opposing roles to maintain a balance between uterine quiescence and
contractility. Opening the BKCa channel allows potassium to leave the cell to
maintain interior electronegativity, thus preventing voltage-gated Ca2+ influx
and contraction. Inhibition of the BKCa channel augments myometrial
contractility. Regulation of uterine contractility from early to late gestation
may result from temporal changes in expression of the BKCa channel and/or
BKCa interacting partners (Wakle-Prabagaran, 2016).

Myometrial Gap Junctions
Cellular signals that control myometrial contraction and relaxation can be
effectively transferred between cells through intercellular junctional
channels. Communication is established between myocytes by gap junctions,
which aid the passage of electrical or ionic coupling currents as well as
metabolite coupling. The connexin family of proteins form cell-type specific
gap junctions (Solan, 2018). Connexin-43 is expressed in the myometrium,
and concentrations rise near labor onset. Six connexin subunits form a
connexon, and two adjacent connexons establish a conduit between

communicating cells. This permits exchange of small molecules that can be
nutrients, waste, metabolites, second messengers, or ions. Optimal numbers
and types of gap junctions are believed to be important for electrical
myometrial synchrony.
Progesterone promotes uterine quiescence in part by lowering expression
of contraction-associated proteins (CAPs) and maintaining expression of
anticontractile agents such as caspase 3 (Ingles, 2018; Kyathanahalli, 2015).
CAPs include the oxytocin receptor, prostaglandin F receptor, and connexin43. Also, at the end of pregnancy, increased stretch, metabolism of
progesterone by the enzyme 20α-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (20α-HSD),
loss of progesterone-mediated repression of CAP genes, and greater estrogen
dominance raise CAP levels. Integration of diverse regulatory pathways
culminates in released inhibition of connexin-43 and oxytocin receptor levels
to promote greater uterine contractility (Anamthathmakula, 2019; Mendelson,
2019; Peavey, 2021).

G Protein–Coupled Receptors
In addition to ion-channel linked receptors, G protein–coupled receptors
regulate myocyte contractility. These receptors together with appropriate
ligands may act with sex steroid hormones to maintain uterine quiescence
(Price, 2000; Sanborn, 1998). Examples are the luteinizing hormone (LH)
receptor and corticotropin-releasing hormone receptor 1 (CRHR1), both
described in this section (Fig. 21-7). Other G protein–coupled myometrial
receptors, instead, are associated with uterine contractility. G protein–
mediated activation of phospholipase C, which releases arachidonic acid, is
one example. Ligands for the G protein–coupled receptors include numerous
neuropeptides, hormones, and autacoids. Many of these are available to the
myometrium during pregnancy in high concentration via endocrine or
autocrine mechanisms.

FIGURE 21-7 G protein–coupled receptor signal transduction pathways. A. Receptors coupled to
heterotrimeric guanosine-triphosphate (GTP)-binding proteins (G proteins) are integral transmembrane
proteins that transduce extracellular signals to the cell interior. G protein–coupled receptors exhibit a
common structural motif consisting of seven membrane-spanning regions. B. Receptor occupation
promotes interaction between the receptor and the G protein on the interior surface of the membrane.
An exchange of guanosine diphosphate (GDP) for GTP on the G protein α subunit and dissociation of
the α subunit from the βγ heterodimer occurs. Depending on its isoform, the GTP-α subunit complex
mediates intracellular signaling either indirectly by acting on effector molecules such as adenylyl cyclase
(AC) or phospholipase C (PLC), or directly by regulating ion channel or kinase function. cAMP = cyclic
adenosine monophosphate; DAG = diacylglycerol; IP 3 = inositol triphosphate.

LH and human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) hormones share the same
LH-hCG receptor. This G protein–coupled receptor is found in myometrial
smooth muscle and blood vessels, and levels during pregnancy are greater
before labor (Ziecik, 1992). hCG acts to activate adenylyl cyclase by way of
a plasma membrane receptor Gαs-linked system. This lessens contraction
frequency and force and lowers the number of tissue-specific myometrial cell
gap junctions (Ambrus, 1994; Eta, 1994). Thus, high circulating levels of
hCG may be one mechanism of uterine quiescence. β-Adrenergic receptors
mediate Gαs-stimulated myometrial cell relaxation. Agents binding to these
receptors have been used for tocolysis of preterm labor and include ritodrine
and terbutaline (Chap. 45, p. 805). The rate-limiting factor is likely the
number of receptors expressed and the level of adenylyl cyclase expression.
Prostaglandin E2 mediates its diverse cellular effects through four G
protein–coupled receptors. Specifically, prostaglandin E receptors 1 through
4 (EP1-EP4) are expressed in the myometrium during pregnancy and with

labor onset (Astle, 2005; Leonhardt, 2003). EP2 and EP4 act through Gαs to
maintain myometrial cell quiescence but switch to a Gαq/11 calciumactivating pathway during labor (Kandola, 2014). EP1 and EP3 receptors act
through Gαq and Gαi to augment intracellular Ca2+ and contractility.
The peptide hormone relaxin binds to the G protein–coupled receptor
named relaxin family peptide receptor 1 (RXFP1). Binding activates
adenylyl cyclase, which in turn prevents increased intracellular Ca2+, and
thus promotes uterine quiescence (Downing, 1993; Meera, 1995). The H1
relaxin gene is primarily expressed in the decidua, trophoblast, and prostate,
whereas the H2 gene is primarily expressed in the corpus luteum. Relaxin
plasma levels peak at approximately 1 ng/mL between 8 and 12 weeks’
gestation. Thereafter, they decline until term.
Corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) is synthesized in the placenta
and hypothalamus. Discussed on page 408, CRH plasma levels rise
dramatically during the final 6 to 8 weeks of normal pregnancy and are
implicated in mechanisms that control the timing of human parturition (Smith,
2007; Wadhwa, 1998; Wang, 2019). CRH appears to promote myometrial
quiescence during most of pregnancy but then aids contractions with
parturition onset. Studies suggest that these opposing actions are achieved by
differential actions of CRH via its receptor CRHR1. In nonlaboring
myometrium at term, the interaction of CRH with CRHR1 activates the Gsadenylate cyclase-cAMP signaling pathway. This results in inhibition of
inositol triphosphate (IP3) and stabilization of (Ca2+)i levels (You, 2012).
However, in term laboring myometrium, (Ca2+)i concentrations are
augmented by CRH activation of G proteins Gq and Gi and prompts
stimulation of IP3 production and greater contractility.

Cyclic Guanosine Monophosphate
As noted, cAMP is an important mediator of myometrial relaxation.
However, activation of guanylyl cyclase raises intracellular cyclic guanosine
monophosphate (cGMP) levels. This also promotes smooth muscle
relaxation (Word, 1993). Intracellular cGMP levels are increased in the
pregnant myometrium and can be stimulated by atrial natriuretic peptide,
brain natriuretic peptide, and nitric oxide (Guerra, 2019; Telfer, 2001). All
of these factors and their receptors are expressed in the pregnant uterus.

Accelerated Uterotonin Degradation
The activity of enzymes that degrade or inactivate endogenously produced
uterotonins also is strikingly increased in phase 1. Pairs of some degrading
enzymes and their respective targets include PGDH and prostaglandins;
enkephalinase and endothelins; oxytocinase and oxytocin; diamine oxidase
and histamine; catechol O-methyltransferase and catecholamines;
angiotensinases and angiotensin II; and platelet-activating factor (PAF) and
PAF acetylhydrolase. Levels of several of these enzymes decline late in
gestation (Germain, 1994).

■ Decidua
To ensure uterine quiescence, the synthesis in the decidua of prostaglandins,
in particular PGF2α, is markedly suppressed. Suppression of prostaglandin
production here persists throughout most of pregnancy, and suppression
withdrawal is a prerequisite for parturition (Norwitz, 2015).
The mother and fetus come in direct contact at the decidua basalis and
decidua parietalis. At this interface, myeloid and lymphoid immune cells
such as natural killer cells, macrophages, dendritic cells, and T cells undergo
dynamic changes in number and phenotype to achieve a balanced
microenvironment (Ander, 2019; Solano, 2019; van der Zwan, 2020). This is
a critical site for immune tolerance in phase 1 and for decidual activation in
phase 2 of parturition (see Fig. 21-5). In phase 1 of parturition, these cells, in
collaboration with decidual cells, promote an environment of immune
tolerance to protect the fetus. Immune cells with innate and adaptive immune
responses support vascular and tissue remodeling, immune surveillance and
defense, and trophoblast invasion in phase 1 (Fig. 21-8).

FIGURE 21-8 Immune tolerance and activation at the maternal fetal interface. In the antepartum
period, dNK cells are abundant and their maturation is promoted by release of uterine IL-15. These cells
promote decidual remodeling, blastocyst implantation, and EVT invasion. The cytotoxicity of dNK cells
is regulated by the interaction of its KIR receptor with HLA-G on EVTs. Decidual macrophages—
primary antigen-presenting cells—produce the enzyme IDO, which limits T cell activation. Changes in
the intrapartum period are less understood, but the number of dNK cells decline and decidual
macrophages are activated to a proinflammatory phenotype. dNK = decidual natural killer; EVT =
extravillous trophoblasts; HLA = human leukocyte antigen; IL = interleukin; IDO = indoleamine 2,3dioxygenase; KIR = killer-cell immunoglobulin-like receptors.

During phase 2, decidual stromal cells and fetal membranes undergo an
aging process termed cellular senescence. Noninflammatory signals
precipitate senescence, which in turn leads to synthesis of proinflammatory
cytokines, augmented prostaglandin production, and increased protease
expression. These proteins and hormones break down fetal membranes.

■ Cervical Softening
The initial stage of cervical remodeling—termed softening—begins in phase
1 of parturition. It is characterized by greater tissue compliance, yet the
cervix remains firm and unyielding. Hegar (1895) first described palpable
softening of the lower uterine segment at 4 to 6 weeks’ gestation, and this

sign was once used to diagnose pregnancy. Clinically, the maintenance of
cervical anatomical and structural integrity is essential for pregnancy to
continue to term. Preterm cervical dilation, structural insufficiency, or both
may forecast delivery.

■ Cervical Connective Tissue
Cervical softening is an active molecular process that balances tissue
competence against slow, progressive compositional and structural changes
in the extracellular matrix (ECM) to increase compliance (Myers, 2015;
Nallasamy, 2017; Vink, 2018). Constituents of the ECM include type I and III
fibrillar collagens, matricellular proteins, glycosaminoglycans,
proteoglycans, and elastic fibers. Key to matrix changes, collagen, which is
the main structural protein in the cervix, undergoes conformational changes
that alter tissue stiffness and flexibility (Zhang, 2012). Specifically, collagen
processing and the number or type of stable covalent cross-links between
collagen’s triple helices are altered. Beginning in early pregnancy, mature
cross-links between newly synthesized collagen monomers are reduced due
to diminished expression and activity of the cross-link-forming enzymes
(Akins, 2011; Yoshida, 2014). These enzymes are lysyl hydroxylase and lysyl
oxidase. Gradual turnover of collagen during pregnancy replaces mature
cross-linked collagen fibrils with poorly linked fibrils. The result is a
collagen with reduced stiffness. The collagen-binding proteoglycans—
decorin and biglycan—ensure the new, poorly cross-linked collagen is
appropriately assembled and deposited in the ECM. Data from human and
mouse studies support the theory that a balance in the synthesis and
breakdown of collagen, rather than loss of collagen, achieves cervical
remodeling (Fig. 21-9) (Akins, 2011; Myers, 2008; Read, 2007; Yoshida,
2014).

FIGURE 21-9 Mouse studies identify molecular changes in collagen structure and function during
cervical remodeling. These changes are regulated by steroid hormones and result in a gradual loss of
tissue stiffness. During the softening phase, the decline in lysyl oxidase activity in conjunction with high
collagen turnover results in the replacement of strong cross-linked collagen fibers with weakly crosslinked collagen fibers. Second harmonic generation images in the mouse and human cervix show the
corresponding gradual decline in mechanical function of the cervix. (Compiled from Akins, 2010, 2011;
Ozasa, 1981; Read, 2007; Yoshida, 2014; Zhang, 2012.)

Clinical evidence for the importance of matrix changes to cervical
softening is supported by in vivo mechanical evaluation of the cervix (Badir,
2013; Parra-Saavedra, 2011). The prevalence of cervical insufficiency is
also higher in those with inherited defects in the synthesis or assembly of
collagen or elastic fibers (Anum, 2009; Hermanns-Le, 2005; Volozonoka,
2020). Examples are Ehlers-Danlos and Marfan syndromes, discussed in
Chapter 62 (p. 1121). Concurrent with matrix remodeling in the softening
period, genes involved in cervical dilation and parturition are actively
repressed (Kishore, 2012).

PHASE 2: PREPARATION FOR LABOR

To prepare for labor, the myometrial tranquility of phase 1 of parturition must
be suspended. This so-called uterine awakening or activation in phase 2 of
parturition is a progression of uterine changes during the last few weeks of
pregnancy. Importantly, shifting events associated with phase 2 can cause
either preterm or delayed labor.

■ Progesterone Withdrawal
Key factors in uterine activation are depicted in Figure 21-5. In species that
exhibit progesterone withdrawal, parturition progression to labor can be
blocked by administering progesterone to the mother. Whether progesterone
administration in the absence of classic progesterone withdrawal can delay
the timely onset of parturition or prevent preterm labor remains unclear. The
possibility that progesterone may prevent preterm labor has been studied, but
its use in preventing preterm birth continues to be debated (Chap. 45, p.
795).
Classic progesterone withdrawal from decreased secretion does not
occur in human parturition. However, a mechanism for progesterone
inactivation, whereby the myometrium and cervix become refractory to
progesterone’s inhibitory actions, is supported by studies using progesteronereceptor antagonists. Mifepristone is a classic steroid antagonist, acting at
the level of the progesterone receptor. Although less effective in inducing
abortion or labor later in pregnancy, mifepristone appears to have some
effect on cervical ripening and on increasing myometrial sensitivity to
uterotonins (Berkane, 2005; Chwalisz, 1994a).
The diverse mechanisms by which functional progesterone withdrawal or
antagonism is achieved is an active area of research. These include: (1)
changes in the relative expression of the nuclear progesterone-receptor (PR)
isoforms, (2) differential interaction of PR isoforms A and B with enhancers
and inhibitors of gene expression, (3) altered PR activity through changes in
the expression of coactivators or corepressors of receptor function, (4) local
progesterone inactivation by steroid-metabolizing enzymes or synthesis of a
natural antagonist, and (5) microRNA regulation of progesteronemetabolizing enzymes and transcription factors that modulate uterine
quiescence (Chen, 2017; Condon, 2003; Mahendroo, 1999; Mesiano, 2002;
Nadeem, 2016; Peavey, 2021; Renthal, 2010; Williams, 2012). Thus,
multiple pathways exist to create functional progesterone withdrawal.

■ Myometrial Changes
Phase 2 changes in the myometrium prepare it for labor contractions.
Changes result from a shift in the expression of proteins that control uterine
quiescence to an expression of CAPs, described earlier (p. 403)
(Mendelson, 2019; Renthal, 2015; Stanfield, 2019). These CAPs increase
uterine responsiveness to uterotonins.
Another critical change in phase 2 is formation of the lower uterine
segment from the isthmus. With this development, the fetal head often
descends to or even through the pelvic inlet—lightening. The abdomen
commonly undergoes a shape change, sometimes described by women as “the
baby dropped.” It is also likely that the lower segment myometrium is unique
from that in the upper uterine segment, and leads to distinct roles for each
near term and during labor. This is supported by human studies that
demonstrate differential expression of prostaglandin receptors and CAPs
within the upper- and lower-segment myometrial regions (Astle, 2005;
Blanks, 2003; Sparey, 1999). Near term, elevated expression of the HoxA13
gene in the lower myometrial segment compared with the upper segment also
induces CAP expression and regionalized contractility of the lower segment
(Li, 2016).

Oxytocin Receptors
Because of its long-standing application for labor induction, it seemed
logical that oxytocin must play a central role in spontaneous human labor.
Myometrial oxytocin receptor levels do rise during phase 2 of parturition,
and the level of oxytocin receptor mRNA in human myometrium at term is
greater than that found in preterm myometrium (Wathes, 1999). However, it is
unclear whether oxytocin plays a role in the early phases of uterine activation
or whether its sole function is in the expulsive phase of labor. Most studies
of regulation of myometrial oxytocin receptor synthesis have been performed
in rodents. Disruption of the oxytocin receptor gene in the mouse does not
affect parturition. This suggests that, at least in this species, multiple systems
likely ensure that parturition occurs.
Progesterone inhibits and estradiol induces oxytocin receptor expression.
Through interaction with PR-B, progesterone regulates numerous genes in the
oxytocin signaling pathway (Peavey, 2021). Progesterone may also act within
the myometrial cell to enhance oxytocin receptor degradation (Bogacki,

2002). These data indicate that one of the mechanisms whereby progesterone
maintains uterine quiescence is through inhibition of a myometrial oxytocin
signaling pathway.

■ Cervical Ripening
Before contractions begin, the cervix must shift from a state of competence to
one of compliance. This eventually leads to the cervix yielding and dilating
from forceful uterine contractions. Cervical modifications during phase 2
principally involve connective tissue changes—termed cervical ripening.
The transition from the softening to the ripening phase begins weeks or days
before labor. The understanding of this cervical matrix transformation
remains incomplete. However, it is clear that levels of glycosaminoglycans,
which are large linear polysaccharides, are uniquely increased in phase 2.

Glycosaminoglycans and Proteoglycans
Hyaluronan is a high-molecular-weight polysaccharide that functions alone,
but most other glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) complex with proteins to form
proteoglycans. Hyaluronan is a hydrophilic, space-filling molecule, and thus
greater hyaluronan production during cervical ripening is thought to increase
viscoelasticity, hydration, and matrix disorganization. Hyaluronan synthesis
is carried out by hyaluronan synthase isoenzymes, and expression of these
enzymes is elevated in the cervix during ripening (Akgul, 2012; Straach,
2005).

Inflammatory Changes
In phase 2, resident immune cells are localized to the cervical stroma,
although a functional role for them in this phase has not been demonstrated.
For example, studies of gene expression patterns at term both before and
after cervical ripening show little rise in proinflammatory gene expression.
However, once labor is underway, activation of neutrophils, proinflammatory
M1 macrophages, and tissue repair M2 macrophages in the cervix is
augmented. Moreover, proinflammatory and immunosuppressive gene
expression in the cervix increases markedly after delivery (Bollapragada,
2009; Hassan, 2006, 2009). This suggests a role for inflammatory cells in
postpartum cervical remodeling and repair (Mahendroo, 2012).

Induction of Cervical Ripening
No therapies prevent premature cervical ripening. In contrast, treatment to
promote cervical ripening for labor induction includes direct application of
PGE2 and PGF2α (Chap. 26, p. 489). Prostaglandins likely modify ECM
structure to aid ripening, although their role in the normal physiology of
cervical ripening remains unclear.
In some nonhuman species, events that allow cervical ripening are
induced by dropping serum progesterone concentrations. And in humans,
administration of progesterone antagonists causes cervical ripening.

Endocervical Epithelia
In addition to matrix changes during pregnancy, endocervical epithelial cells
proliferate such that endocervical glands account for a significant percentage
of cervical mass. The endocervical canal is lined with mucus-secreting
columnar and stratified squamous epithelia. These cells form both a mucosal
barrier and a tight junctional barrier that protect against microbial invasion
(Akgul, 2014; Blaskewicz, 2011; Timmons, 2007). The mucosal epithelium
recognizes and deters pathogen invasion via expression of toll-like receptors
that identify pathogens and via antimicrobial peptides and protease
inhibitors. These epithelia also express signals to underlying immune cells
when a pathogenic challenge exceeds their protective capacity (Wira, 2005).

■ Fetal Contributions to Parturition
It is intriguing to envision that the mature human fetus provides the signal to
initiate parturition, and evidence for fetal signaling is mounting (Mendelson,
2017). The fetus may give signals through blood-borne agents that act on the
placenta or through secretion into the amnionic fluid.

Uterine Stretch
Fetal growth is an important component of uterine activation in phase 2 of
parturition. With uterine activation, stretch is required for induction of
specific CAPs. Namely, stretch increases expression of connexin-43 and
oxytocin receptors. Levels of gastrin-releasing peptide, a stimulatory agonist
for smooth muscle, also are augmented by stretch in the myometrium
(Tattersall, 2012).

Clinical clues for a role of stretch come from the observation that
multifetal pregnancies carry a much greater risk for preterm labor than
singleton ones. Preterm labor is also more common in pregnancies
complicated by hydramnios. Although the mechanisms causing preterm birth
in these two are debated, a role for uterine stretch must be considered.
Cell signaling systems are influenced by stretch to regulate the
myometrial cell. This process—mechanotransduction—may include
activation of cell-surface receptors or ion channels, transmission of signals
through ECM, or release of autocrine molecules that act directly on
myometrium (Shynlova, 2007; Young, 2011).

Fetal Endocrine Cascades
The ability of the fetus to provide endocrine signals that initiate parturition
has been demonstrated in several species. However, evidence suggests that it
is not regulated in the same manner in humans. That said, the human fetal
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal-placental axis is considered a critical
component of normal parturition. Moreover, premature activation of this axis
is considered to prompt many cases of preterm labor (Challis, 2000, 2001).
Steroid products of the human fetal adrenal gland are believed to have effects
on the placenta and membranes that eventually transform the myometrium
from a quiescent to a contractile state.
A key component in the human may be the unique ability of the placenta
to produce large amounts of CRH that is identical to maternal and fetal
hypothalamic CRH (Grino, 1987; Saijonmaa, 1988) (Fig. 21-10). However,
unlike hypothalamic CRH, which is under glucocorticoid negative feedback,
cortisol instead stimulates placental CRH production. This ability makes it
possible to create a feed-forward endocrine cascade that does not end until
delivery.

FIGURE 21-10 The placental–fetal adrenal endocrine cascade. In late gestation, placental
corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) stimulates fetal adrenal production of dehydroepiandrosterone
sulfate (DHEA-S) and cortisol. The latter stimulates production of placental CRH, which leads to a
feed-forward cascade that enhances adrenal steroid hormone production. ACTH = adrenocorticotropic
hormone.

Maternal plasma CRH levels are low in the first trimester and rise from
midgestation to term. In the last 12 weeks, CRH plasma levels rise
exponentially, peak during labor, and then fall precipitously after delivery
(Frim, 1988; Sasaki, 1987). Amnionic fluid CRH concentrations similarly
increase in late gestation. CRH is the only trophic hormone-releasing factor
to have a specific serum binding protein. During most of pregnancy, CRHbinding protein (CRH-BP) binds most maternal circulating CRH, and this
inactivates it (Lowry, 1993). During later pregnancy, however, CRH-BP
levels in both maternal plasma and amnionic fluid decline, leading to
markedly greater levels of bioavailable CRH (Perkins, 1995; Petraglia,
1997).
In pregnancies in which the fetus can be considered “stressed” from
various complications, concentrations of CRH in fetal plasma, amnionic
fluid, and maternal plasma are greater than those seen in normal gestation
(Berkowitz, 1996; McGrath, 2002). The placenta is the likely source of this
elevated CRH concentration. For example, placental CRH content is fourfold
higher in placentas from women with preeclampsia than in those from normal
pregnancies (Perkins, 1995).

Placental CRH is thought to play several roles in parturition regulation. It
may enhance fetal cortisol production to provide positive feedback so that
the placenta produces more CRH. Late in pregnancy—phase 2 or 3 of
parturition—modification in the CRH receptor favors a switch from cAMP
formation instead to increased myometrial cell calcium levels via protein
kinase C activation (You, 2012). Oxytocin acts to attenuate CRH-stimulated
accumulation of cAMP in myometrial tissue. CRH acts to augment
myometrial contractile force in response to PGF2α (Benedetto, 1994). Last,
CRH stimulates fetal adrenal C19-steroid synthesis, thereby increasing
substrate for placental aromatization.
Some have proposed that the rising CRH level at the end of gestation
reflects a fetal-placental clock (McLean, 1995). CRH concentrations vary
greatly among women, and the rate of rise in maternal CRH levels is a more
accurate predictor of pregnancy outcome than is a single measurement
(Leung, 2001; McGrath, 2002). In this regard, the placenta and fetus, through
endocrinological events, influence parturition timing at the end of normal
gestation.

Fetal Lung Surfactant and Platelet-activating Factor
Surfactant protein A (SP-A) produced by the fetal lung is required for lung
maturation. SP-A is expressed by the human amnion and decidua, is present
in the amnionic fluid, and prompts signaling pathways in human myometrial
cells (Garcia-Verdugo, 2008; Lee, 2010; Snegovskikh, 2011). The exact
mechanisms by which SP-A activates myometrial contractility in women,
however, remain to be clarified. One mode may be its effects on
prostaglandins. Namely, SP-A selectively inhibits PGF2α in the term decidua,
but SP-A levels drop in the amnionic fluid at term (Chaiworapongsa, 2008).
The fetal lung also makes the uterotonic agent platelet-activating factor
(Frenkel, 1996; Toyoshima, 1995). This factor and SP-A play a role in fetal–
maternal signaling for parturition (Gao, 2015).

Fetal Membrane Senescence
Toward the end of pregnancy, fetal membranes undergo cellular senescence
(Menon, 2016). In human and animal fetal membranes, stretch and oxidative
stress induce senescent fetal membrane to manifest a form of sterile
inflammation termed senescent-associated secretory phenotype (SASP). This

in turn propagates inflammatory signals that further weaken the fetal
membrane and activate signals in the decidua and myometrium to initiate
parturition. Thus, as the functional necessity of fetal membranes declines at
term, they are able to promote signals that contribute to parturition initiation.

Fetal Anomalies and Delayed Parturition
Some evidence shows that pregnancies with markedly diminished estrogen
production may be associated with prolonged gestation. These include
women with inherited placental sulfatase deficiency and fetal anencephaly
with adrenal hypoplasia. The broad range of gestational length seen with
these disorders, however, calls into question the exact role of estrogen in
human parturition initiation.
Some brain anomalies of the fetal calf, fetal lamb, and sometimes the
human fetus delay the normal timing of parturition. In particular, the
association between fetal anencephaly and prolonged gestation is well
described (Rea, 1898; Malpas, 1933). Malpas concluded that the prolonged
gestation was attributable to anomalous fetal brain-pituitary-adrenal function.
Indeed, the adrenal glands of the anencephalic fetus are very small and, at
term, may be only 5 to 10 percent as large as those of a normal fetus. This is
caused by developmental failure of the fetal zone that normally accounts for
most of fetal adrenal mass and production of C19-steroid hormones (Chap. 5,
p. 101). Such pregnancies are associated with delayed labor and suggest that
the fetal adrenal glands are important for the timely onset of parturition.
Other fetal abnormalities that prevent or severely reduce the entry of fetal
urine or lung secretions into amnionic fluid do not prolong human pregnancy.
Examples are renal agenesis and pulmonary hypoplasia, respectively. Thus, a
fetal signal through the paracrine arm of the fetal–maternal communication
system does not appear to be mandated for parturition initiation.

PHASE 3: LABOR
This phase is synonymous with active labor, which is customarily divided
into three stages (see Figure 21-4). The first stage begins when spaced
uterine contractions of sufficient frequency, intensity, and duration are
attained to bring about cervical thinning, termed effacement. Several
uterotonins may be important to the success of this stage of active labor (see

Fig. 21-5). These have been shown to stimulate smooth muscle contraction
through G-protein coupling. This labor stage ends when the cervix is fully
dilated—about 10 cm—to allow passage of the term-sized fetus. The first
stage of labor, therefore, is the stage of cervical effacement and dilation.
The second stage begins when cervical dilation is complete and ends with
delivery. Thus, the second stage of labor is the stage of fetal expulsion. Last,
the third stage begins immediately after delivery of the fetus and ends with
the delivery of the placenta. This stage of labor is the stage of placental
separation and expulsion.

■ First Stage: Clinical Onset of Labor
Uterine Labor Contractions
In some women, forceful uterine contractions that effect delivery begin
suddenly. In others, labor initiation is heralded by spontaneous release of a
small amount of blood-tinged mucus from the vagina. This extrusion of the
mucus plug that had previously filled the cervical canal during pregnancy is
referred to as “bloody show.” Its passage indicates that labor is already in
progress or likely will ensue in hours to days.
Unique among physiological muscular contractions, those of uterine
smooth muscle during labor are painful. Suggested causes are: (1) hypoxia of
the contracted myometrium—such as that with angina pectoris; (2)
compression of nerve ganglia in the cervix and lower uterus by contracted
interlocking muscle bundles; (3) cervical stretching during dilation; and (4)
stretching of the peritoneum overlying the fundus.
Of these, compression of nerve ganglia in the cervix and lower uterine
segment by the contracting myometrium is an especially attractive hypothesis.
Paracervical infiltration with local anesthetic usually produces appreciable
pain relief with contractions (Chap. 25, p. 472). Uterine contractions are
involuntary and, for the most part, independent of extrauterine control. Neural
blockade from epidural analgesia does not diminish their frequency or
intensity. In other examples, myometrial contractions in paraplegic women
and in women after bilateral lumbar sympathectomy are normal but painless.
Mechanical stretching of the cervix enhances uterine activity in several
species, including humans. This phenomenon is the Ferguson reflex
(Ferguson, 1941). Its exact mechanism is unclear, and release of oxytocin has

been suggested but not proven. Manipulation of the cervix and “stripping” the
fetal membranes are associated with a rise in blood levels of prostaglandin
F2α metabolites.
The interval between contractions narrows gradually from approximately
10 minutes at the onset of first-stage labor to as little as 1 minute or less in
the second stage. Periods of relaxation between contractions, however, are
essential for fetal welfare. Unremitting contractions compromise
uteroplacental blood flow sufficiently to cause fetal hypoxemia. In activephase labor, the duration of each contraction ranges from 30 to 90 seconds
and averages 1 minute. Contraction intensity varies appreciably during
normal labor. Specifically, amnionic fluid pressures generated by
contractions during spontaneous labor average 40 mm Hg, but vary from 20
to 60 mm Hg (Chap. 24, p. 462).

Distinct Lower and Upper Uterine Segments
During active labor, the anatomical uterine divisions that were initiated in
phase 2 of parturition become increasingly evident (Figs. 21-11 and 21-12).
By abdominal palpation, even before membrane rupture, the two segments
can sometimes be differentiated. The upper segment is firm during
contractions, whereas the lower segment is softer, distended, and more
passive. This mechanism is imperative because if the entire myometrium,
including the lower uterine segment and cervix, were to contract
simultaneously and with equal intensity, the net expulsive force would
markedly decline. Thus, the upper segment contracts, retracts, and expels the
fetus. In response to these contractions, the softened lower uterine segment
and cervix dilate and thereby form a greatly expanded, thinned-out tube
through which the fetus can pass.

FIGURE 21-11 Sequence of development of the segments and rings in the uterus at term and in labor.
Note comparison between the nonpregnant uterus, the uterus at term, and the uterus during labor. The
passive lower uterine segment is derived from the isthmus, and the physiological retraction ring develops
at the junction of the upper and lower uterine segments. The pathological retraction ring develops from
the physiological ring. Anat. I.O. = anatomical internal os; E.O. = external os; Hist. I.O. = histological
internal os; Ph.R.R. = physiological retraction ring.

FIGURE 21-12 The uterus at the time of vaginal delivery. The active upper segment retracts around
the presenting part as the fetus descends through the birth canal. In the passive lower segment, there is
considerably less myometrial tone.

The myometrium of the upper segment does not relax to its original length
after contractions. Instead, it becomes relatively fixed at a shorter length. The
upper active uterine segment contracts down on its diminishing contents, but
myometrial tension remains constant. The net effect is to take up slack, thus
maintaining the advantage gained in expulsion of the fetus. Concurrently, the
uterine musculature is kept in firm contact with the uterine contents. As the
consequence of retraction, each successive contraction commences where its

predecessor left off. Thus, the upper part of the uterine cavity becomes
slightly smaller with each successive contraction. Because of the successive
shortening of the muscular fibers, the upper active segment becomes
progressively thickened throughout first- and second-stage labor (see Fig.
21-11). This process continues and results in a tremendously thickened upper
uterine segment immediately after delivery.
Clinically, it is important to understand that the phenomenon of upper
segment retraction is contingent on a decrease in the volume of its contents.
For this to happen, particularly early in labor when the entire uterus is
virtually a closed sac with only minimal cervical dilation, the musculature of
the lower segment must stretch. This permits a greater portion of the uterine
contents to occupy the lower segment. The upper segment retracts only to the
extent that the lower segment distends and the cervix dilates.
Relaxation of the lower uterine segment mirrors the same gradual
progression of retraction. In the lower segment, successive lengthening of the
fibers with labor is accompanied by thinning, normally to only a few
millimeters in the thinnest part. With lower segment thinning and concomitant
upper segment thickening, a boundary between the two is marked by a ridge
on the inner uterine surface—the physiological retraction ring. When the
thinning of the lower uterine segment is extreme, as in obstructed labor, the
ring is prominent and forms a pathological retraction ring. This abnormal
condition is also known as the Bandl ring, which is discussed further in
Chapter 23 (p. 442).

Changes in Uterine Shape
Each contraction gradually elongates the ovoid uterine shape an estimated 5
to 10 cm and thereby narrows the horizontal diameter. This fetal axis
pressure straightens the fetal vertebral column. It also presses the upper pole
of the fetus firmly against the fundus, whereas the lower pole is thrust farther
downward. With uterine lengthening, the longitudinal muscle fibers are
drawn taut. As a result, the lower segment and cervix are the only parts of the
uterus that are flexible, and these are pulled upward and around the lower
pole of the fetus.

Ancillary Forces

After the cervix is dilated fully, the most important force in fetal expulsion is
produced by maternal intraabdominal pressure. Contraction of the abdominal
muscles simultaneously with forced respiratory efforts with the glottis closed
is referred to as pushing. The force is similar to that with defecation, but the
intensity usually is much greater. The importance of intraabdominal pressure
is shown by the prolonged descent during labor in paraplegic women and in
those with a dense epidural block.

Cervical Changes
As the result of contraction forces, two fundamental changes—effacement
and dilation—occur in the ripened cervix. For an average-sized fetal head to
pass through the cervix, it must completely or fully dilate to a diameter of
approximately 10 cm. The fetus may not descend during cervical effacement.
However, as the cervix dilates, the presenting fetal part typically does
descend somewhat.
Cervical effacement is “obliteration” or “taking up” of the cervix. It is
manifest clinically by shortening of the cervical canal from a length of
approximately 3 cm to a mere circular orifice with almost paper-thin edges.
The muscular fibers at the level of the internal cervical os are pulled
upward, or “taken up,” into the lower uterine segment. The condition of the
external os remains temporarily unchanged (Fig. 21-13). Because of growing
myometrial activity during uterine preparedness for labor, appreciable
effacement of a softened cervix sometimes is accomplished before active
labor begins. Effacement causes expulsion of the mucous plug as the cervical
canal is shortened.

FIGURE 21-13 Schematic showing effacement and dilation. A. Before labor, the primigravid cervix is
long and undilated in contrast to that of the multipara, which has dilation of the internal and external os.
B. As effacement begins, the multiparous cervix shows more dilation and funneling of the internal os
compared with the primigravid cervix. C. As complete effacement is achieved in the primigravid cervix,
dilation is minimal. The reverse is true in the multipara.

Because the lower segment and cervix have less resistance during a
contraction, a centrifugal pull is exerted on the cervix and creates cervical
dilation (Fig. 21-14). As uterine contractions cause pressure on the
membranes, the hydrostatic action of the amnionic sac in turn dilates the
cervical canal like a wedge. The process of cervical effacement and dilation
causes formation of the forebag of amnionic fluid. This is the leading portion
of fluid and amnionic sac located in front of the presenting part. In the

absence of intact membranes, the pressure of the presenting fetal part against
the cervix and lower uterine segment is a similar wedge. Early rupture of the
membranes does not retard cervical dilation so long as the presenting fetal
part is positioned to exert pressure against the cervix and lower segment.

FIGURE 21-14 Hydrostatic action of membranes in effecting cervical effacement and dilation. With
labor progression, note the changing relations of the internal and external os in (A), (B), and (C).
Although not shown in this diagram, with membrane rupture, the presenting part, applied to the cervix
and the forming lower uterine segment, acts similarly.

Referring back to Figure 21-4, recall that cervical dilation is divided into
latent and active phases. The duration of the latent phase is more variable
and sensitive to extraneous factors. For example, sedation may prolong the
latent phase, and myometrial stimulation shortens it. The latent phase
duration has little bearing on the subsequent course of labor, whereas the
characteristics of the active phase are usually predictive of labor outcome.
Normal and abnormal labor curves are fully described in Chapters 22 and
23.

■ Second Stage: Fetal Descent
In many nulliparas, engagement of the head is accomplished before labor
begins. That said, the head may not descend further until late in labor. In the
descent pattern of normal labor, a typical hyperbolic curve is formed when
the station of the fetal head is plotted as a function of labor duration (see Fig.
21-4). Station describes descent of the fetal biparietal diameter in relation to
a line drawn between maternal ischial spines (Chap. 22, p. 427). Active
descent usually takes place after dilation has progressed for some time.
During second-stage labor, the speed of descent is maximal and is maintained
until the presenting part reaches the perineal floor (Friedman, 1978). In
nulliparas, the presenting part typically descends slowly and steadily. In
multiparas, however, descent may be rapid.

■ Pelvic Floor Changes
The birth canal is supported and functionally closed by the pelvic floor
(Chap. 2, p. 19). The most important component of the floor is the levator ani
muscle and the fibromuscular connective tissue that covers its upper and
lower surfaces. The biomechanical properties of these structures and of the
vaginal wall change markedly during parturition. These result from altered
ECM structure or composition (Alperin, 2015; Lowder, 2007; Rahn, 2008).
In the first stage of labor, the membranes, when intact, and the fetal
presenting part serve to dilate the upper vagina. The most marked change
consists of stretching levator ani muscle fibers. This is accompanied by
thinning of the central portion of the perineum, which becomes transformed
from a wedge-shaped, 5-cm-thick tissue mass to a thin, almost transparent
membranous structure less than 1 cm thick. When the perineum is distended
maximally, the anus becomes markedly dilated and presents an opening that
varies from 2 to 3 cm in diameter and through which the anterior wall of the
rectum bulges.

■ Third Stage: Delivery of Placenta and Membranes
This stage begins immediately after fetal delivery and involves separation
and expulsion of the placenta and membranes. Normally, by the time the
newborn is delivered, the uterine cavity is nearly obliterated and is an almost

solid mass of muscle, several centimeters thick, above the thinner lower
segment. The uterine fundus now lies just below the level of the umbilicus.
This sudden diminution in uterine size is inevitably accompanied by a
decrease in the area of the placental implantation site (Fig. 21-15). For the
placenta to accommodate itself to this reduced area, it thickens, but because
of limited placental elasticity, it buckles. The resulting tension pulls the
weakest layer—decidua spongiosa—from that site. Thus, placental
separation follows the disproportion created between the relatively
unchanged placental size and the reduced implantation site size.

FIGURE 21-15 Diminution in size of the placental site after birth of the newborn. A. Spatial relations
before birth. B. Placental spatial relations after birth.

Cleavage of the placenta is aided greatly by the loose structure of the
spongy decidua. As detachment proceeds, a hematoma forms between the
separating placenta and the adjacent decidua, which remains attached to the
myometrium. The hematoma is usually the result rather than the cause of the
separation, because in some cases bleeding is negligible.

The great decline in uterine cavity surface area simultaneously throws the
fetal membranes—the amniochorion and the parietal decidua—into
innumerable folds (Fig. 21-16). Membranes usually remain in situ until
placental separation is nearly completed. These are then peeled off the
uterine wall, partly by further contraction of the myometrium and partly by
traction that is exerted by the separated placenta as it descends during
expulsion.

FIGURE 21-16 Postpartum, membranes are thrown up into folds as the uterine cavity decreases in
size. (Reproduced with permission from Dr. Kelley S. Carrick.)

After the placenta has detached, it can be expelled by increased
abdominal pressure. Completion of the third stage is also accomplished by
alternately compressing and elevating the fundus, while exerting minimal
traction on the umbilical cord. The retroplacental hematoma either follows
the placenta or is found within the inverted sac formed by the membranes. In
this process, known as the Schultze mechanism of placental expulsion, blood
from the placental site pours into the membrane sac and does not escape
externally until after extrusion of the placenta. In the other form of placental
extrusion, known as the Duncan mechanism, the placenta separates first at

the periphery and blood collects between the membranes and the uterine wall
and escapes from the vagina. In this circumstance, the placenta descends
sideways, and its maternal surface appears first.

UTEROTONINS IN PARTURITION PHASE 3
■ Oxytocin
This nanopeptide is synthesized in the magnocellular neurons of the
supraoptic and paraventricular neurons. The prohormone is transported with
its carrier protein, neurophysin, along the axons to the neural lobe of the
posterior pituitary gland in membrane-bound vesicles for storage and later
release. The prohormone is converted enzymatically to oxytocin during
transport (Gainer, 1988; Leake, 1990).
Oxytocin—literally, quick birth—was the first uterotonin to be
implicated in parturition initiation. Support for this role includes: (1)
oxytocin receptor numbers strikingly rising in myometrial and decidual
tissues near the end of gestation; (2) oxytocin acting on decidual tissue to
promote prostaglandin release; and (3) oxytocin synthesis directly in
decidual and extraembryonic fetal tissues and in the placenta (Chibbar, 1993;
Zingg, 1995). Moreover, abundant data support oxytocin’s important role
during second-stage labor and in the puerperium, which is phase 4 of
parturition. Specifically, maternal serum oxytocin levels are elevated: (1)
during second-stage labor, which is the end of phase 3 of parturition; (2) in
the early puerperium; and (3) during breastfeeding (Nissen, 1995).
Immediately after delivery of the fetus and placenta, which completes
parturition phase 3, firm and persistent uterine contractions induced by
oxytocin are essential to prevent postpartum hemorrhage.

■ Prostaglandins
Prostaglandins play a critical role in phase 3 of parturition (MacDonald,
1993). First, levels of prostaglandins—or their metabolites—in amnionic
fluid, maternal plasma, and maternal urine are increased during labor.
Second, receptors for PGE2 and PGF2α are expressed in the uterus and
cervix. Thus, if these tissues are exposed to prostaglandins, they will
respond. Third, treatment of pregnant women with prostaglandins, by any of

several administration routes, causes abortion or labor at all gestational
ages. Moreover, administration of prostaglandin H synthase type 2 inhibitors
to pregnant women will delay spontaneous labor onset and sometimes arrest
preterm labor (Loudon, 2003).
During labor, prostaglandin production within the myometrium and
decidua is an efficient mechanism of activating contractions. For example,
prostaglandin synthesis is high and unchanging in the decidua during phase 2
and 3 of parturition. Moreover, the receptor level for PGF2α is augmented in
the decidua at term, and this increase most likely is the regulatory step in
prostaglandin action in the uterus.
The fetal membranes and placenta also produce prostaglandins. Primarily
PGE2, but also PGF2α, are detected in amnionic fluid at all gestational ages.
As the fetus grows, prostaglandin levels in the amnionic fluid rise gradually.
Their greatest elevation in concentration within amnionic fluid, however, is
demonstrable after labor begins. These higher levels likely result as the
cervix dilates and exposes decidual tissue (Fig. 21-17). These higher levels
in the forebag, compared with those in the upper compartment, are believed
to follow an inflammatory response that signals the events leading to active
labor. Together, the rise in cytokine and prostaglandin concentrations further
degrade the ECM, thus weakening fetal membranes.

FIGURE 21-17 Sagittal view of the exposed forebag and attached decidual fragments after cervical
dilation during labor. (Redrawn from MacDonald PC, Casey ML: Preterm birth. Sci Am 3:42, 1996.)

■ Endothelin 1
The endothelins are a family of 21-amino-acid peptides that powerfully
induce myometrial contraction (Word, 1990). The endothelin A receptor is
preferentially expressed in smooth muscle, and when activated, it effects a
rise in intracellular calcium. Endothelin 1 is produced in myometrium of term
gestations and is able to induce synthesis of other contractile factors such as
prostaglandins and inflammatory mediators (Momohara, 2004; Sutcliffe,
2009). The requirement of endothelin 1 in normal parturition physiology
remains to be established.

■ Angiotensin II
Modulation of uteroplacental blood flow is regulated by angiotensin II, a
potent vasoconstrictor. Although, in pregnancy, circulating levels of
angiotensin II are increased, vascular resistance is reduced and vasodilation
is enhanced. Two angiotensin II receptors are expressed in the uterus—AT1R
and AT2R. In nonpregnant women, the AT1R receptor predominates, but the
AT2R receptor is preferentially expressed in gravidas (Cox, 1993). During
normotensive pregnancy, AT2R-mediated effects on vascular smooth muscle
lead to vasodilation, which contributes to the pregnancy-associated rise in
uterine arterial blood flow. Decreased AT2R expression is associated with
preeclamptic pregnancies (Mishra, 2018; Rosenfeld, 2012) (Chap. 4, p. 65).

PHASE 4: THE PUERPERIUM
Immediately and for about an hour after delivery, the myometrium remains
persistently contracted. This directly compresses large uterine vessels and
allows thrombosis of their lumens to prevent hemorrhage. This is typically
augmented by endogenous and pharmacological uterotonic agents (Chap. 27,
p. 507).
Uterine involution and cervical repair are prompt remodeling processes
that restore these organs to the nonpregnant state. These protect the
reproductive tract from invasion by commensal microorganisms and restore
endometrial responsiveness to normal hormonal cyclicity.
During the early puerperium, lactogenesis and milk let-down begin in
mammary glands (Chap. 36, p. 639). Reinstitution of ovulation signals
preparation for the next pregnancy. Ovulation generally occurs within 4 to 6
weeks after birth. However, it is dependent on the duration of breastfeeding
and lactation-induced, prolactin-mediated anovulation and amenorrhea.

REFERENCES
Akgul Y, Holt R, Mummert M, et al: Dynamic changes in cervical glycosaminoglycan composition
during normal pregnancy and preterm birth. Endocrinology 153(7):3493, 2012
Akgul Y, Word RA, Ensign LM, et al: Hyaluronan in cervical epithelia protects against infectionmediated preterm birth. J Clin Invest 124(12):5481, 2014

Akins ML, Luby-Phelps K, Bank RA, et al: Cervical softening during pregnancy: regulated changes in
collagen cross-linking and composition of matricellular proteins in the mouse. Biol Reprod
84(5):1053, 2011
Akins ML, Luby-Phelps K, Mahendroo M: Second harmonic generation imaging as a potential tool for
staging pregnancy and predicting preterm birth. J Biomed Opt 15(2):026020, 2010
Alperin M, Lawley DM, Esparza MC, et al: Pregnancy-induced adaptations in the intrinsic structure of
rat pelvic floor muscles. Am J Obstet Gynecol 213(2):191 e191, 2015
Ambrus G, Rao CV: Novel regulation of pregnant human myometrial smooth muscle cell gap junctions
by human chorionic gonadotropin. Endocrinology 135(6):2772, 1994
Anamthathmakula P, Kyathanahalli C, Ingles J, et al: Estrogen receptor alpha isoform ERdelta7 in
myometrium modulates uterine quiescence during pregnancy. EBioMedicine 39:520, 2019
Ander S, Diamond MS, Coyne CB: Immune responses at the maternal-fetal interface. Sci Immunol
4(31):eaat6114, 2019
Anum EA, Hill LD, Pandya A, et al: Connective tissue and related disorders and preterm birth: clues to
genes contributing to prematurity. Placenta 30(3):207, 2009
Astle S, Thornton S, Slater DM: Identification and localization of prostaglandin E2 receptors in upper
and lower segment human myometrium during pregnancy. Mol Hum Reprod 11(4):279, 2005
Badir S, Bajka M, Mazza E: A novel procedure for the mechanical characterization of the uterine cervix
during pregnancy. J Mech Behav Biomed Mater 27:143, 2013
Benedetto C, Petraglia F, Marozio L, et al: Corticotropin-releasing hormone increases prostaglandin F2
alpha activity on human myometrium in vitro. Am J Obstet Gynecol 171(1):126, 1994
Berkane N, Verstraete L, Uzan S, et al: Use of mifepristone to ripen the cervix and induce labor in term
pregnancies. Am J Obstet Gynecol 192:114, 2005
Berkowitz GS, Lapinski RH, Lockwood CJ, et al: Corticotropin-releasing factor and its binding protein:
maternal serum levels in term and preterm deliveries. Am J Obstet Gynecol 174(5):1477, 1996
Blanks AM, Vatish M, Allen MJ, et al: Paracrine oxytocin and estradiol demonstrate a spatial increase
in human intrauterine tissues with labor. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 88(7):3392, 2003
Blaskewicz CD, Pudney J, Anderson DJ: Structure and function of intercellular junctions in human
cervical and vaginal mucosal epithelia. Biol Reprod 85(1):97, 2011
Bogacki M, Silvia WJ, Rekawiecki R, et al: Direct inhibitory effect of progesterone on oxytocin-induced
secretion of prostaglandin F(2alpha) from bovine endometrial tissue. Biol Reprod 67(1):184, 2002
Bollapragada S, Youssef R, Jordan F, et al: Term labor is associated with a core inflammatory response
in human fetal membranes, myometrium, and cervix. Am J Obstet Gynecol 200(1):104.e1, 2009
Bygdeman M, Swahn ML, Gemzell-Danielsson K, et al: The use of progesterone antagonists in
combination with prostaglandin for termination of pregnancy. Hum Reprod 9 Suppl 1:121, 1994
Casey ML, MacDonald PC: The endocrinology of human parturition. Ann N Y Acad Sci 828:273, 1997
Chaiworapongsa T, Hong JS, Hull WM, et al: The concentration of surfactant protein-A in amniotic fluid
decreases in spontaneous human parturition at term. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 21(9):652, 2008
Challis JR, Lye SJ: Parturition. In Knobil E, Neill JD (eds): The Physiology of Reproduction, 2nd ed. Vol
II. New York, Raven, 1994
Challis JR, Matthews SG, Gibb W, et al: Endocrine and paracrine regulation of birth at term and
preterm. Endocr Rev 21(5):514, 2000
Challis JR, Smith SK: Fetal endocrine signals and preterm labor. Biol Neonate 79(3–4):163, 2001
Chen CC, Montalbano AP, Hussain I, et al: The transcriptional repressor GATAD2B mediates
progesterone receptor suppression of myometrial contractile gene expression. J Biol Chem
292(30):12560, 2017

Cheung PY, Walton JC, Tai HH, et al: Immunocytochemical distribution and localization of 15hydroxyprostaglandin dehydrogenase in human fetal membranes, decidua, and placenta. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 163:1445, 1990
Chibbar R, Miller FD, Mitchell BF: Synthesis of oxytocin in amnion, chorion, and decidua may influence
the timing of human parturition. J Clin Invest 91(1):185, 1993
Chwalisz K: The use of progesterone antagonists for cervical ripening and as an adjunct to labour and
delivery. Hum Reprod 9 Suppl 1:131, 1994a
Chwalisz K, Garfield RE: Antiprogestins in the induction of labor. Ann N Y Acad Sci 734:387, 1994b
Condon JC, Jeyasuria P, Faust JM, et al: A decline in the levels of progesterone receptor coactivators in
the pregnant uterus at term may antagonize progesterone receptor function and contribute to the
initiation of parturition. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 100(16):9518, 2003
Cox BE, Ipson MA, Shaul PW, et al: Myometrial angiotensin II receptor subtypes change during ovine
pregnancy. J Clin Invest 92(5):2240, 1993
Dodd JM, Jones L, Flenady V, et al: Prenatal administration of progesterone for preventing preterm birth
in women considered to be at risk of preterm birth. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 7:CD004947, 2013
Downing SJ, Hollingsworth M: Action of relaxin on uterine contractions—a review. J Reprod Fertil
99(2):275, 1993
Eta E, Ambrus G, Rao CV: Direct regulation of human myometrial contractions by human chorionic
gonadotropin. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 79(6):1582, 1994
Ferguson JK: A study of the motility of the intact uterus at term. Surg Gynecol Obstet 73, 1941
Frenkel RA, Muguruma K, Johnston JM: The biochemical role of platelet-activating factor in
reproduction. Prog Lipid Res 35(2):155, 1996
Friedman EA: Labor: Clinical Evaluation and Management, 2nd ed. New York, Appleton-CenturyCrofts, 1978
Frim DM, Emanuel RL, Robinson BG, et al: Characterization and gestational regulation of corticotropinreleasing hormone messenger RNA in human placenta. J Clin Invest 82(1):287, 1988
Gainer H, Alstein M, Whitnall MH, et al: The biosynthesis and secretion of oxytocin and vasopressin. In
Knobil E, Neill J (eds): The Physiology of Reproduction, Vol II. New York, Raven, 1988
Garcia-Verdugo I, Tanfin Z, Dallot E, et al: Surfactant protein A signaling pathways in human uterine
smooth muscle cells. Biol Reprod 79(2):348, 2008
Gao L, Rabbitt EH, Condon JC, et al: Steroid receptor coactivators 1 and 2 mediate fetal-to-maternal
signaling that initiates parturition. J Clin Invest 125(7):2808, 2015
Germain AM, Smith J, Casey ML, et al: Human fetal membrane contribution to the prevention of
parturition: uterotonin degradation. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 78(2):463, 1994
Giannoulias D, Patel FA, Holloway AC, et al: Differential changes in 15-hydroxyprostaglandin
dehydrogenase and prostaglandin H synthase (types I and II) in human pregnant myometrium. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab 87(3):1345, 2002
Grino M, Chrousos GP, Margioris AN: The corticotropin releasing hormone gene is expressed in human
placenta. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 148(3):1208, 1987
Guerra DD, Hurt JK: Gasotransmitters in pregnancy: from conception to uterine involution. Biol Reprod
101(1):4, 2019
Hassan SS, Romero R, Haddad R, et al: The transcriptome of the uterine cervix before and after
spontaneous term parturition. Am J Obstet Gynecol 195(3):778, 2006
Hassan SS, Romero R, Tarca AL, et al: The transcriptome of cervical ripening in human pregnancy
before the onset of labor at term: identification of novel molecular functions involved in this process.
J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 33(12):1183, 2009

Hegar A: Diagnose der frühesten Schwangerschaftsperiode. Deutsche Medizinische Wochenschrift
21:565, 1895
Hermanns-Le T, Pierard G, Quatresooz P: Ehlers-Danlos-like dermal abnormalities in women with
recurrent preterm premature rupture of fetal membranes. Am J Dermatopathol 27(5):407, 2005
House M, Bhadelia RA, Myers K, et al: Magnetic resonance imaging of three-dimensional cervical
anatomy in the second and third trimester. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 144 Suppl 1:S65, 2009
Ingles J, Simpson A, Kyathanahalli C et al: Preconditioning the uterine unfolded protein response
maintains non-apoptotic caspase 3-dependent quiescence during pregnancy. Cell Death Dis
9(10):933, 2018
Kandola MK, Sykes L, Lee YS, et al: EP2 receptor activates dual G protein signaling pathways that
mediate contrasting proinflammatory and relaxatory responses in term pregnant human myometrium.
Endocrinology 155(2):605, 2014
Kishore AH, Li XH, Word RA: Hypoxia and PGE(2) regulate MiTF-CX during cervical ripening. Mol
Endocrinol 26(12):2031, 2012
Kishore AH, Liang H, Kanchwala M, et al: Prostaglandin dehydrogenase is a target for successful
induction of cervical ripening. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 114(31):E6427, 2017
Konopka CK, Glanzner WG, Rigo ML, et al: Responsivity to PGE2 labor induction involves concomitant
differential prostaglandin E receptor gene expression in cervix and myometrium. Genet Mol Res
14(3):10877, 2015
Kyathanahalli C, Organ K, Moreci RS, et al: Uterine endoplasmic reticulum stress-unfolded protein
response regulation of gestational length is caspase-3 and 7-dependent. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
112(45):14090, 2015
Lang CT, Iams JD, Tangchitnob E, et al: A method to visualize 3-dimensional anatomic changes in the
cervix during pregnancy: a preliminary observational study. J Ultrasound Med 29(2):255, 2010
Leake RD: Oxytocin in the initiation of labor. In Carsten ME, Miller JD (eds): Uterine Function.
Molecular and Cellular Aspects. New York, Plenum, 1990
Lee DC, Romero R, Kim CJ, et al: Surfactant protein-A as an anti-inflammatory component in the
amnion: implications for human pregnancy. J Immunol 184(11):6479, 2010
Leonhardt A, Glaser A, Wegmann M, et al: Expression of prostanoid receptors in human lower segment
pregnant myometrium. Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids 69(5):307, 2003
Leung TN, Chung TK, Madsen G, et al: Rate of rise in maternal plasma corticotrophin-releasing
hormone and its relation to gestational length. BJOG 108(5):527, 2001
Li H, Yu Y, Shi Y, et al: HoxA13 stimulates myometrial cells to secrete IL-1beta and enhance the
expression of contraction-associated proteins. Endocrinology 157(5):2129, 2016
Loudon JA, Groom KM, Bennett PR: Prostaglandin inhibitors in preterm labour. Best Pract Res Clin
Obstet Gynaecol 17(5):731, 2003
Lowder JL, Debes KM, Moon DK, et al: Biomechanical adaptations of the rat vagina and supportive
tissues in pregnancy to accommodate delivery. Obstet Gynecol 109(1):136, 2007
Lowry PJ: Corticotropin-releasing factor and its binding protein in human plasma. Ciba Found Symp
172:108, 1993
Lyall F, Lye S, Teoh T, et al: Expression of Gsalpha, connexin-43, connexin-26, and EP1, 3, and 4
receptors in myometrium of prelabor singleton versus multiple gestations and the effects of
mechanical stretch and steroids on Gsalpha. J Soc Gynecol Investig 9(5):299, 2002
MacDonald PC, Casey ML: Preterm birth. Sci Am 3:42, 1996
MacDonald PC, Casey ML: The accumulation of prostaglandins (PG) in amniotic fluid is an aftereffect
of labor and not indicative of a role for PGE2 or PGF2 alpha in the initiation of human parturition. J

Clin Endocrinol Metab 76(5):1332, 1993
Mahendroo M: Cervical remodeling in term and preterm birth: insights from an animal model.
Reproduction 143(4):429, 2012
Mahendroo MS, Porter A, Russell DW, et al: The parturition defect in steroid 5alpha-reductase type 1
knockout mice is due to impaired cervical ripening. Mol Endocrinol 13(6):981, 1999
Malpas P: Postmaturity and malformations of the foetus. BJOG 40(6):1046, 1933
McGrath S, McLean M, Smith D, et al: Maternal plasma corticotropin-releasing hormone trajectories
vary depending on the cause of preterm delivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 186(2):257, 2002
McLean M, Bisits A, Davies J, et al: A placental clock controlling the length of human pregnancy. Nat
Med 1(5): 460, 1995
Meera P, Anwer K, Monga M, et al: Relaxin stimulates myometrial calcium-activated potassium channel
activity via protein kinase A. Am J Physiol 269(2 Pt 1):C312, 1995
Mendelson CR, Montalbano AP, Gao L: Fetal-to-maternal signaling in the timing of birth. J Steroid
Biochem Mol Biol 170:19, 2017
Mendelson CR, Gao L, Montalbano AP: Multifactorial regulation of myometrial contractility during
pregnancy and parturition. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne) 10:714, 2019
Menon R, Bonney EA, Condon J, et al: Novel concepts on pregnancy clocks and alarms: redundancy
and synergy in human parturition. Hum Reprod Update 22(5):535, 2016
Mesiano S, Chan EC, Fitter JT, et al: Progesterone withdrawal and estrogen activation in human
parturition are coordinated by progesterone receptor A expression in the myometrium. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab 87(6):2924, 2002
Mishra JS, Gopalakrishnan K, Kumar S: Pregnancy upregulates angiotensin type 2 receptor expression
and increases blood flow in uterine arteries of rats. Biol Reprod 99(5):1091, 2018
Mizutani S, Wright JW, Kobayashi H: Placental leucine aminopeptidase- and aminopeptidase Adeficient mice offer insight concerning the mechanisms underlying preterm labor and preeclampsia.
J Biomed Biotechnol 2011:286947, 2011
Momohara Y, Sakamoto S, Obayashi S, et al: Roles of endogenous nitric oxide synthase inhibitors and
endothelin-1 for regulating myometrial contractions during gestation in the rat. Mol Hum Reprod
10(7):505, 2004
Myatt L, Lye SJ: Expression, localization and function of prostaglandin receptors in myometrium.
Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids 70(2):137, 2004
Myers KM, Feltovich H, Mazza E, et al: The mechanical role of the cervix in pregnancy. J Biomech
48(9):1511, 2015
Myers KM, Paskaleva AP, House M, et al: Mechanical and biochemical properties of human cervical
tissue. Acta Biomater 4(1):104, 2008
Nadeem L, Shynlova O, Matysiak-Zablocki E, et al: Molecular evidence of functional progesterone
withdrawal in human myometrium. Nat Commun 7:11565, 2016
Nallasamy S, Mahendroo M: Distinct roles of cervical epithelia and stroma in pregnancy and parturition.
Semin Reprod Med 35(2):190, 2017
Nissen E, Lilja G, Widstrom AM, et al: Elevation of oxytocin levels early post partum in women. Acta
Obstet Gynecol Scand 74(7):530, 1995
Norwitz ER, Bonney EA, Snegovskikh VV, et al: Molecular regulation of parturition: the role of the
decidual clock. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 5(11):1, 2015
Olson DM, Ammann C: Role of the prostaglandins in labour and prostaglandin receptor inhibitors in the
prevention of preterm labour. Front Biosci 12:1329, 2007

Ozasa H, Tominaga T, Nishimura T, et al: Lysyl oxidase activity in the mouse uterine cervix is
physiologically regulated by estrogen. Endocrinology 109(2):618, 1981
Parra-Saavedra M, Gomez L, Barrero A, et al: Prediction of preterm birth using the cervical
consistency index. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 38(1):44, 2011
Patel B, Elguero S, Thakore S, et al: Role of nuclear progesterone receptor isoforms in uterine
pathophysiology. Hum Reprod Update 21(2):155, 2015
Peavey MC, Wu SP, Li R, et al: Progesterone receptor isoform B regulates the Oxtr-Plcl2-Trpc3
pathway to suppress uterine contractility. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 118(11): e2011643118, 2021
Peiris HN, Romero R, Vaswani K, et al: Prostaglandin and prostamide concentrations in amniotic fluid
of women with spontaneous labor at term with and without clinical chorioamnionitis. Prostaglandins
Leukot Essent Fatty Acids 163:102195, 2020
Pérez GJ, Toro L, Erulkar SD, et al: Characterization of large-conductance, calcium-activated potassium
channels from human myometrium. Am J Obstet Gynecol 168(2):652, 1993
Perkins AV, Wolfe CD, Eben F, et al: Corticotrophin-releasing hormone-binding protein in human fetal
plasma. J Endocrinol 146(3):395, 1995
Petraglia F, Florio P, Simoncini T, et al: Cord plasma corticotropin-releasing factor-binding protein (CRFBP) in term and preterm labour. Placenta 18(2–3):115, 1997
Pizzella S, Helou NE, Chubiz J, et al: Evolving cervical imaging technologies to predict preterm birth.
Semin Immunopathol 42(4):385, 2020
Price SA, Pochun I, Phaneuf S, et al: Adenylyl cyclase isoforms in pregnant and non-pregnant human
myometrium. J Endocrinol 164(1):21, 2000
Rahn DD, Ruff MD, Brown SA, et al: Biomechanical properties of the vaginal wall: effect of
pregnancy, elastic fiber deficiency, and pelvic organ prolapse. Am J Obstet Gynecol 198(5):590
e591, 2008
Rea C: Prolonged gestation, acrania monstrosity and apparent placenta previa in one obstetrical case.
JAMA 30(20):1166, 1898
Read CP, Word RA, Ruscheinsky MA, et al: Cervical remodeling during pregnancy and parturition:
molecular characterization of the softening phase in mice. Reproduction 134(2):327, 2007
Reinl EL, Zhao P, Wu W, et al: Na+-leak channel, non-selective (NALCN) regulates myometrial
excitability and facilitates successful parturition. Cell Physiol Biochem 48(2):503, 2018
Renthal NE, Chen CC, Williams KC, et al: miR-200 family and targets, ZEB1 and ZEB2, modulate
uterine quiescence and contractility during pregnancy and labor. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
107(48):20828, 2010
Renthal NE, Williams KC, Montalbano AP, et al: Molecular regulation of parturition: a myometrial
perspective. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 5(11):1, 2015
Rosenfeld CR, DeSpain K, Word RA, et al: Differential sensitivity to angiotensin II and norepinephrine
in human uterine arteries. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 97(1):138, 2012
Saijonmaa O, Laatikainen T, Wahlstrom T: Corticotrophin-releasing factor in human placenta:
localization, concentration and release in vitro. Placenta 9(4):373, 1988
Sanborn BM, Yue C, Wang W, et al: G protein signalling pathways in myometrium: affecting the balance
between contraction and relaxation. Rev Reprod 3(3):196, 1998
Sasaki A, Shinkawa O, Margioris AN, et al: Immunoreactive corticotropin-releasing hormone in human
plasma during pregnancy, labor, and delivery. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 64(2):224, 1987
Shynlova O, Nadeem L, Zhang J, et al: Myometrial activation: novel concepts underlying labor. Placenta
92:28, 2020

Shynlova O, Williams SJ, Draper H, et al: Uterine stretch regulates temporal and spatial expression of
fibronectin protein and its alpha 5 integrin receptor in myometrium of unilaterally pregnant rats. Biol
Reprod 77(5):880, 2007
Smith GC, Wu WX, Nathanielsz PW: Effects of gestational age and labor on expression of prostanoid
receptor genes in baboon uterus. Biol Reprod 64(4):1131, 2001
Smith R: Parturition. N Engl J Med 356(3):271, 2007
Snegovskikh VV, Bhandari V, Wright JR, et al: Surfactant protein-A (SP-A) selectively inhibits
prostaglandin F2alpha (PGF2alpha) production in term decidua: implications for the onset of labor. J
Clin Endocrinol Metab 96(4):E624, 2011
Solan JL, Lampe PD: Spatio-temporal regulation of connexin43 phosphorylation and gap junction
dynamics. Biochem Biophys Acta Biomembr 1860(1):83, 2018
Solano ME: Decidual immune cells: guardians of human pregnancies. Best Pract Res Clin Obstet
Gynaecol 60:3, 2019
Sparey C, Robson SC, Bailey J, et al: The differential expression of myometrial connexin-43,
cyclooxygenase-1 and 2, and Gs alpha proteins in the upper and lower segments of the human
uterus during pregnancy and labor. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 84(5):1705, 1999
Stanfield Z, Amini P, Wang J, et al: Interplay of transcriptional signaling by progesterone, cyclic AMP,
and inflammation in myometrial cells: implications for the control of human parturition. Mol Hum
Reprod 25(7):408, 2019
Straach KJ, Shelton JM, Richardson JA, et al: Regulation of hyaluronan expression during cervical
ripening. Glycobiology 15(1):55, 2005
Stull JT, Lin PJ, Krueger JK, et al: Myosin light chain kinase: functional domains and structural motifs.
Acta Physiol Scand 164(4):471, 1998
Sutcliffe AM, Clarke DL, Bradbury DA, et al: Transcriptional regulation of monocyte chemotactic
protein-1 release by endothelin-1 in human airway smooth muscle cells involves NF-kappaB and
AP-1. Br J Pharmacol 157(3):436, 2009
Tattersall M, Cordeaux Y, Charnock-Jones DS, et al: Expression of gastrin-releasing peptide is
increased by prolonged stretch of human myometrium, and antagonists of its receptor inhibit
contractility. J Physiol 590(9):2081, 2012
Telfer JF, Itoh H, Thomson AJ, et al: Activity and expression of soluble and particulate guanylate
cyclases in myometrium from nonpregnant and pregnant women: down-regulation of soluble
guanylate cyclase at term. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 86(12):5934, 2001
Timmons BC, Mahendroo M: Processes regulating cervical ripening differ from cervical dilation and
postpartum repair: insights from gene expression studies. Reprod Sci 14(8 Suppl):53, 2007
Toyoshima K, Narahara H, Furukawa M, et al: Platelet-activating factor. Role in fetal lung development
and relationship to normal and premature labor. Clin Perinatol 22(2):263, 1995
van der Zwan A, van Unen V, Beyrend G, et al: Visualizing dynamic changes at the maternal-fetal
interface throughout human pregnancy by mass cytometry. Front Immunol 11:571300, 2020
Vink J, Myers K. Cervical alterations in pregnancy. Best Pract Res Clin Obstet Gynaecol 52:88, 2018
Vink JY, Qin S, Brock CO, et al: A new paradigm for the role of smooth muscle cells in the human
cervix. Am J Obstet Gynecol 215(4):478.e1, 2016
Volozonoka L, Rots D, Kempa I, et al: Genetic landscape of preterm birth due to cervical insufficiency:
comprehensive gene analysis and patient next-generation sequencing data interpretation. PLoS One
15(3):e0230771, 2020
Wadhwa PD, Porto M, Garite TJ, et al: Maternal corticotropin-releasing hormone levels in the early
third trimester predict length of gestation in human pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 179(4):1079,

1998
Wakle-Prabagaran M, Lorca RA, Ma X, et al: BKCa channel regulates calcium oscillations induced by
alpha-2-macroglobulin in human myometrial smooth muscle cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
113(16):E2335, 2016
Wang B, Wang P, Parobchak N, et al: Integrated RNA-seq and ChIP-seq analysis reveals a feedforward loop regulating H3K9ac and key labor drivers in human placenta. Placenta 76:40, 2019
Wathes DC, Borwick SC, Timmons PM, et al: Oxytocin receptor expression in human term and preterm
gestational tissues prior to and following the onset of labour. J Endocrinol 161(1):143, 1999
Williams KC, Renthal NE, Condon JC, et al: MicroRNA-200a serves a key role in the decline of
progesterone receptor function leading to term and preterm labor. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
109(19):7529, 2012
Wira CR, Grant-Tschudy KS, Crane-Godreau MA: Epithelial cells in the female reproductive tract: a
central role as sentinels of immune protection. Am J Reprod Immunol 53(2):65, 2005
Wolf JP, Simon J, Itskovitz J, et al: Progesterone antagonist RU 486 accommodates but does not induce
labour and delivery in primates. Hum Reprod 8:759, 1993
Woodcock NA, Taylor CW, Thornton S: Effect of an oxytocin receptor antagonist and rho kinase
inhibitor on the [Ca++]i sensitivity of human myometrium. Am J Obstet Gynecol 190:222, 2004
Word RA, Kamm KE, Stull JT, et al: Endothelin increases cytoplasmic calcium and myosin
phosphorylation in human myometrium. Am J Obstet Gynecol 162(4):1103, 1990
Word RA, Stull JT, Casey ML, et al: Contractile elements and myosin light chain phosphorylation in
myometrial tissue from nonpregnant and pregnant women. J Clin Invest 92(1):29, 1993
Wray S, Prendergast C: The myometrium: from excitation to contractions and labour. Adv Exp Med Biol
1124:233, 2019
Ying L, Becard M, Lyell D, et al: The transient receptor potential vanilloid 4 channel modulates uterine
tone during pregnancy. Sci Transl Med 7(319):319ra204, 2015
Yoshida K, Jiang H, Kim M, et al: Quantitative evaluation of collagen crosslinks and corresponding
tensile mechanical properties in mouse cervical tissue during normal pregnancy. PLoS One
9(11):e112391, 2014
You X, Gao L, Liu J, et al: CRH activation of different signaling pathways results in differential calcium
signaling in human pregnant myometrium before and during labor. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
97(10):E1851, 2012
Young RC, Goloman G: Mechanotransduction in rat myometrium: coordination of contractions of
electrically and chemically isolated tissues. Reprod Sci 18(1):64, 2011
Zhang Y, Akins ML, Murari K, et al: A compact fiber-optic SHG scanning endomicroscope and its
application to visualize cervical remodeling during pregnancy. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
109(32):12878, 2012
Ziecik AJ, Derecka-Reszka K, Rzucidlo SJ: Extragonadal gonadotropin receptors, their distribution and
function. J Physiol Pharmacol 43(4 Suppl 1):33, 1992
Zingg HH, Rozen F, Chu K, et al: Oxytocin and oxytocin receptor gene expression in the uterus. Recent
Prog Horm Res 50:255, 1995

