CHAPTER 28

Singleton Breech Delivery

CLASSIFICATION
DIAGNOSIS
DELIVERY ROUTE
LABOR AND DELIVERY
PARTIAL BREECH EXTRACTION
TOTAL BREECH EXTRACTION
EXTERNAL CEPHALIC VERSION
REFERENCES

CLASSIFICATION
Near term, the typical fetus spontaneously assumes a cephalic presentation.
However, if the fetal buttocks or legs enter the pelvis before the head, the
presentation is breech. At term, breech presentation persists in 2 to 5 percent
of singleton deliveries (Bin, 2016; Cammu, 2014; Toijonen, 2019). Breech
delivery of a second twin is discussed in Chapter 48 (p. 856).
The categories of frank, complete, and incomplete breech presentations
differ in their varying relations between the lower extremities and buttocks.
With a frank breech, lower extremities are flexed at the hips and extended at
the knees, and thus the feet lie close to the head (Fig. 28-1). With a complete
breech, both hips are flexed, and one or both knees are also flexed (Fig. 28-

2). With an incomplete breech, one or both hips are extended. As a result,
one or both feet or knees lie below the breech, and thus a foot or knee is
lowermost in the birth canal. A footling breech is an incomplete breech with
one or both feet below the breech.

FIGURE 28-1 Frank breech presentation.

FIGURE 28-2 Complete breech presentation.

Of singleton term breech fetuses, the neck may be extremely
hyperextended in perhaps 5 percent, and the term stargazing fetus is used
(Cimmino, 1975). With transverse lie and similar hyperextension of the fetal
neck, the term flying fetus is applied. With these, fetal or uterine anomalies
may be more prevalent and are sought if not previously identified (Phelan,
1983; Shipp, 2000). With hyperextension, vaginal delivery can injure the
cervical spinal cord. Thus, if identified at term, cesarean delivery is
indicated (Westgren, 1981). However, cases of spinal cord injury have been
reported following uneventful cesarean delivery of breech fetuses. Here, the
flexion itself may be implicated (Hernandez-Marti, 1984; Weinstein, 1983).

DIAGNOSIS
■ Risk Factors
Understanding the clinical settings that predispose to breech presentation can
aid early recognition. This fetal lie is more common remote from term, as
earlier in pregnancy each fetal pole has similar bulk (Toijonen, 2019).
Multifetal gestation is another (Chap. 48, p. 856). With singletons, other
factors include extremes of amnionic fluid volume, fetal anomalies, structural
uterine abnormalities, placenta previa, nulliparity, increased maternal age,
female fetal gender, prior breech delivery, and size that is small for
gestational age (Bin, 2016; Cammu, 2014; Noli, 2019; Roberts, 1999). One
study found that following one breech delivery, the recurrence rate for a
second breech presentation was 10 percent, and for a subsequent third breech
it was 28 percent (Ford, 2010).

■ Examination
Leopold maneuvers to ascertain fetal presentation are discussed in Chapter
22 (p. 419). With the first maneuver, the hard, round fetal head occupies the
fundus. The second maneuver identifies the hard, broad back to be on one
side of the abdomen and the knobby small parts on the other. With the third
maneuver, if not engaged, the softer breech is movable above the pelvic inlet.
After engagement, the fourth maneuver shows the breech to be beneath the
symphysis. The accuracy of this palpation varies (Lydon-Rochelle, 1993;
Nassar, 2006). Thus, with unclear presentation, sonographic examination is
indicated.
During cervical examination with a frank breech, no feet are appreciated,
but the fetal ischial tuberosities, sacrum, and anus are usually palpable. After
further fetal descent, the external genitalia also may be distinguished. When
labor is prolonged, the fetal buttocks may become markedly swollen,
rendering digital differentiation of a face and breech difficult. In some cases,
the anus may be mistaken for the mouth and the ischial tuberosities for the
malar eminences. With careful examination, however, the finger encounters
muscular resistance with the anus, whereas the bony, less yielding jaws and
palate are felt through the mouth. The finger, upon removal from the anus,
may be stained with meconium. The mouth and malar eminences form a

triangular shape, whereas the ischial tuberosities and anus lie in a straight
line. With a complete breech, the feet may be felt alongside the buttocks. In
footling presentations, one or both feet are inferior to the buttocks.
The fetal sacrum is palpated to establish position. As with cephalic
presentations, fetal position is designated to reflect the relations of the fetal
sacrum to the maternal pelvis. Thus, with left sacrum anterior (LSA), the
fetus’s back is up and its sacrum occupies the left upper (ventral) quadrant of
the mother’s pelvis. Other positions are right sacrum anterior (RSA), right or
left sacrum posterior (RSP or LSP), and right or left sacrum transverse (RST
or LST).

DELIVERY ROUTE
Multiple factors aid determination of the best delivery route. These include
maternal parity and pelvic dimensions; coexistent pregnancy complications;
provider experience; patient preference; hospital capabilities; and fetal size,
anatomy, and gestational age (Table 28-1).
TABLE 28-1. Factors Favoring Cesarean Delivery of the Breech Fetus

Compared with their term counterparts, preterm breech fetuses have
distinct complications related to their small size and immaturity.
Accordingly, a separate discussion of term and preterm breech fetuses is
presented.

■ Term Breech Fetus
Current obstetrical thinking regarding vaginal delivery of the term breech
fetus was tremendously influenced by results of the Term Breech Trial
(Hannah, 2000). This trial included 1041 women randomly assigned to
planned cesarean and 1042 to planned vaginal delivery. These comparator
groups reflect actual risks, and the planned vaginal delivery group included
those who required intrapartum cesarean delivery. In the planned vaginal
delivery group, 57 percent were actually delivered vaginally. Planned

cesarean delivery was associated with a lower risk of perinatal mortality
compared with planned vaginal delivery—3 per 1000 versus 13 per 1000.
Cesarean delivery was also associated with a lower risk of “serious”
neonatal morbidity—1.4 versus 3.8 percent. Short-term maternal morbidity
was similar between groups.
Critics of the Term Breech Trial emphasize that fewer than 10 percent of
candidates underwent radiological assessment of pelvic capacity. In
addition, most of the outcomes included in the “serious” neonatal morbidity
composite did not actually portend long-term infant disability (Whyte, 2004).
Since that trial, however, additional data favoring cesarean delivery has
come from the World Health Organization (Lumbiganon, 2010). In more than
100,000 deliveries from nine participating Asian countries, planned cesarean
delivery offered improved perinatal outcomes for the term breech fetus
compared with planned vaginal delivery. Other studies also have found
lowered neonatal morbidity and mortality rates with cesarean delivery
(Lyons, 2015; Rietberg, 2005; Vistad, 2015). From one metaanalysis, the
calculated absolute risk of perinatal mortality was 0.3 percent, and risk of
fetal birth trauma or neurological morbidity was 0.7 percent (Berhan, 2016).
In contrast, other studies support vaginal delivery as a suitable option at
term (Hofmeyr, 2015a). The Presentation et Mode d’Accouchement
(PREMODA) study—which translates as presentation and mode of delivery
—showed no differences in corrected neonatal mortality rates and neonatal
outcomes according to delivery mode (Goffinet, 2006). Severe acute
maternal morbidity scores were similar (Korb, 2019). This French
prospective observational study involved more than 8000 women with term
breech singletons. Strict criteria were used to select 2526 of these for
planned vaginal delivery, and 71 percent of that group were delivered
vaginally. Data from the Lille Breech Study Group in France also showed no
excessive morbidity in term breech singletons delivered vaginally provided
that strict fetal biometric and maternal pelvimetry parameters were applied
(Michel, 2011). Other smaller studies support these findings as long as
guidelines are part of the selection process (Alarab, 2004; Giuliani, 2002;
Toivonen, 2012).
Long-term evidence supporting vaginal breech delivery comes from Eide
and associates (2005). These investigators analyzed intelligence testing
scores of more than 8000 men delivered breech, and delivery route did not
affect later intellectual performance. Moreover, a 2-year follow-up from the

Term Breech trial showed similar risks for death and for
neurodevelopmental delay between delivery groups (Whyte, 2004). Other
studies support these findings (Bin, 2017; Macharey, 2018).
Despite evidence for this debate, at least in the United States, rates of
planned vaginal delivery attempts continue to decline (Grunebaum, 2016).
Thus, as predicted, the number of skilled providers able to safely select and
vaginally deliver breech fetuses steadily dwindles (Dotters-Katz, 2020).
Moreover, obvious medicolegal concerns make physician training in such
deliveries difficult. In response, some institutions have developed birth
simulators to improve resident competence in vaginal breech delivery
(Deering, 2006; Maslovitz, 2007).
In selecting suitable term breech vaginal delivery candidates, factors
outlined in Table 28-1 are weighed. Of these, various national organizations
recommend that the estimated term fetal weight lies between >2500 to 2800 g
and <3800 to 4000 g (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists,
2018b; Impey, 2017b; Kotaska, 2019). Fetal-growth restriction and
oligohydramnios are other contraindications, because of their inherent
association with poor neonatal outcome (Chaps. 14 and 47, pp. 260 and
831). Data support this concern for the term breech fetus (Hinnenberg, 2019;
Macharey, 2017a). Of uterine factors, prior hysterotomy carries an inherent
risk for rupture in labor. The PREMODA, Term Breech Trial, and other
studies allowed a trial of labor after cesarean for vaginal breech delivery,
but in each, these constituted a small percentage of participants. Other studies
have considered prior cesarean as a contraindication. Very limited data
suggest a possible link with adverse perinatal outcome (Azria, 2012;
Macharey, 2017a). Moreover, a prior cesarean delivery performed for
arrested labor may suggest a relatively contracted pelvis and a greater labor
risk. In contrast, parity and prior vaginal birth are positive factors and likely
reflect sufficient pelvic capacity. Last, those with spontaneous labor and
normal labor curves have higher successful vaginal birth rates.

■ Preterm Breech Fetus
In contrast to the term breech fetus, no randomized trials guide delivery
selection for the preterm breech fetus. Comparison of the available
observational studies is often hampered by their combining, splitting, or
overlapping of gestational age groups. Other study biases include differing

gestational age thresholds for planned neonatal resuscitation, assigning
mortality causation to delivery rather than immaturity, and tendency to favor
vaginal delivery for fetuses with a poor prognosis. In addition, the effects of
precipitous vaginal delivery and associated incomplete antenatal prophylaxis
with corticosteroids and antibiotics is difficult to evaluate.
Despite these limitations, for preterm breech fetuses as whole, data
support that planned cesarean delivery confers a survival advantage
compared with planned vaginal delivery. Reddy and associates (2012)
reported data from deliveries between 24 and 32 weeks’ gestation. For
breech fetuses within these gestational ages, attempting vaginal delivery
yielded a low success rate, and this group was associated with higher
neonatal mortality rates compared with planned cesarean delivery. From a
metaanalysis incorporating data from more than 3500 parturients, similar
mortality associations were reported (Bergenhenegouwen, 2014). In contrast,
in their smaller cohort with gestational ages of 26 to 34 weeks, Lorthe and
coworkers (2019) found similar rates of survival or of survival at discharge
without severe morbidity.
For less mature subgroups—23 to 28 weeks—the data are more
conflicting as to whether survival rates are improved with planned cesarean
delivery (Bergenhenegouwen, 2015; Grabovac, 2018; Kayem, 2015;
Thomas, 2016; Tucker Edmonds, 2015). In the balance, cesarean delivery is
proposed to avoid fetal injury from vaginal birth that may include anoxia,
trauma, and head entrapment. This is measured against maternal morbidity
from a classical uterine incision, which is often needed in this early preterm
group due to a poorly developed lower uterine segment. This incision
typically poses a risk of greater blood loss, higher infection rate, and
increased risk of uterine rupture in future pregnancies (Patterson, 2002;
Reddy, 2015; Sciscione, 2008). The high-level skills needed for safe vaginal
delivery of the very preterm fetus and the ultimate prognosis of the neonate
are other directing factors. For periviable fetuses, defined by them as 20 to
256/7 weeks, a consensus workshop of perinatal organizations concluded that
“available data do not consistently support routine cesarean delivery to
improve perinatal mortality or neurological outcomes for early preterm
infants” (Raju, 2014). A subsequent joint statement by the American College
of Obstetricians and Gynecologists and the Society for Maternal-Fetal
Medicine (2017) suggested consideration for cesarean delivery for

periviable fetuses beginning at 230/7 weeks, with a recommendation for
cesarean delivery at 250/7 weeks.
For more mature preterm breech fetuses, that is, between 32 and 37
weeks, again limited data guide delivery route selection. Bergenhenegouwen
and coworkers (2015) studied more than 6800 breech deliveries in a
subgroup between 32 and 37 weeks. With planned cesarean delivery or
planned vaginal birth, they found similar perinatal mortality and morbidity
rates.
All these findings shape practice. Thus, individualized decision-making
is needed for the preterm breech fetus for whom resuscitation is planned.
Provider skill, gestational age, parity, labor curve, and facility capability
weigh heavily in this process. For the fetus in which resuscitation is not
planned, vaginal delivery is likely preferable.

■ Delivery Complications
Compared with cephalic-presenting fetuses, higher rates of maternal and
perinatal morbidity can be anticipated with breech presentations. For the
mother, with either cesarean or vaginal delivery, genital tract laceration can
be problematic. With cesarean delivery, added stretching of the lower uterine
segment by forceps or by a poorly molded fetal head can extend hysterotomy
incisions. With vaginal delivery, especially with a thinned lower uterine
segment, delivery of the aftercoming head through an incompletely dilated
cervix or application of forceps may cause vaginal wall or cervical
lacerations, and even uterine rupture. Manipulations may also extend an
episiotomy, create deep perineal tears, require cervical incision, and raise
infection risks. If needed in select cases, inhalant anesthesia sufficient to
induce appreciable uterine relaxation during vaginal delivery may cause
uterine atony and postpartum hemorrhage. Maternal death is rare, but rates
appear higher in those with planned cesarean delivery for breech
presentation—a case-fatality rate of 0.47 maternal deaths per 1000 births
(Schutte, 2007). Other general short-term and long-term risks of cesarean
delivery are listed in Chapter 30 (p. 548).
For the fetus, prematurity and its complications are frequently comorbid
with breech presentation. Rates of congenital anomalies also are greater
(Mostello, 2014). Compared with cephalic presentation, umbilical cord

prolapse is more frequent with breech fetuses and with breech vaginal
delivery (Behbehani, 2016; Critchlow, 1994). Collea (1980) reported that
the incidence of prolapse approximated 0.5 percent with frank breech
presentation, 5 percent with complete breech, and up to 15 percent with
footling presentation.
Rare fetal morbidity includes humeral or clavicular fracture, brachial
plexus injury, and sternocleidomastoid muscle trauma (Chap. 33, p. 609.
These may occur with either route but more frequently complicate vaginal
birth. However, cesarean birth does not appear to afford greater protection
against femur or skull fractures (Ekéus, 2019; Goffinet, 2006; Hannah, 2000).
Rarely, traction may separate scapular, humeral, or femoral epiphyses
(Lamrani, 2011). The spinal cord may be injured or vertebrae fractured,
especially if great force is employed (Vialle, 2007). Last, genitals may be
injured with breech delivery (Saroha, 2015).
Some perinatal outcomes are inherent to the breech position rather than
delivery. For example, development of hip dysplasia is more common in
breech compared with cephalic presentation and is unaffected by delivery
mode (de Hundt, 2012; Hinderaker, 1994).

■ Imaging
As noted, limited sonographic evaluation near term is reasonable to confirm
presentation. Transabdominal sonography of the lower uterine segment in the
sagittal plane shows the presenting fetal part. Prior to this and as part of
prenatal care, sonographic fetal survey will have been performed in most
cases. If not, gross fetal abnormalities, such as hydrocephaly or anencephaly,
can be rapidly ascertained with sonography. This will identify many fetuses
not suitable for vaginal delivery. It will also help to ensure that a cesarean
delivery is not performed under emergency conditions for an anomalous fetus
with no chance of survival.
In many fetuses—especially those that are preterm or growth restricted—
the breech is smaller than the aftercoming head. Moreover, unlike cephalic
presentations, the head of a breech-presenting fetus does not undergo
appreciable molding during labor. Thus, if vaginal delivery is considered,
fetal size, breech type, and degree of neck flexion are evaluated (Fontenot,
1997; Rojansky, 1994). If needed, simple two-view radiography of the
maternal abdomen also can define fetal head inclination. Sonographic

identification of a nuchal arm or nuchal cord loops may warrant cesarean
delivery to avoid neonatal harm (Sherer, 1989).
The accuracy of fetal weight estimation by sonography is not altered by
breech presentation (McNamara, 2012). For planned vaginal delivery at
term, thresholds in Table 28-1 guide care. Moreover, a biparietal diameter
(BPD) >90 to 100 mm is often considered exclusionary for vaginal delivery
(Giuliani, 2002; Roman, 2008).

Pelvimetry
In addition to these requisite fetal parameters, some institutional protocols
recommend pelvimetry to assess the maternal bony pelvis prior to planned
vaginal term breech birth. Others, including our practice at Parkland
Hospital, instead monitor the steady progression of fetal descent and cervical
dilation to reflect adequate pelvic capacity.
For pelvimetry, one-view computed tomography (CT), magnetic
resonance (MR) imaging, or plain film radiography is suitable. Comparative
data among these modalities for pelvimetry are lacking, but CT is favored
due to its accuracy, low radiation dose, and widespread availability
(Thomas, 1998). Although variable, some suggest specific measurements to
permit a planned vaginal delivery: inlet anteroposterior diameter ≥10.5 cm;
inlet transverse diameter ≥12.0 cm; and midpelvic interspinous distance
≥10.0 cm (Azria, 2012; Vendittelli, 2006). Some have recommended
maternal-fetal biometry correlation. Appropriate values include: the sum of
the inlet obstetrical conjugate minus the fetal BPD is ≥15 mm; the inlet
transverse diameter minus the BPD is ≥25 mm; and the midpelvis
interspinous distance minus the BPD is ≥0 mm (Michel, 2011). From small
studies of MR imaging, vaginal delivery success rates approximating 75
percent were noted if the interspinous distance was >11 cm and true
obstetrical conjugate was >12 cm (Hoffmann, 2016; Klemt, 2019).

LABOR AND DELIVERY
■ Labor Management
On arrival to the labor unit, surveillance of fetal heart rate and uterine
contractions begins, and immediate recruitment of necessary staff includes:
(1) a provider skilled in the art of breech extraction, (2) an associate to

assist with the delivery, (3) anesthesia personnel who can ensure adequate
analgesia or anesthesia when needed, and (4) an individual trained in
newborn resuscitation. For the mother, intravenous access is obtained. This
allows, if required, emergency induction of anesthesia or maternal
resuscitation following hemorrhage from lacerations or from uterine atony.
Assessing cervical dilation, membranes status, and presenting part station
is essential for management. If labor is too far advanced, pelvimetry may be
unsafe if fetal expulsion in the radiology department is a possibility. This
alone, however, should not force the decision for cesarean delivery.
Commonly, stepwise labor progression itself is a good indicator of pelvic
adequacy (Biswas, 1993). Sonographic assessment, described earlier, is
completed. Ultimately, the choice of abdominal or vaginal delivery is guided
by factors listed in Table 28-1.
During labor, one-on-one nursing is ideal because of increased cord
prolapse risks, and physicians must be readily available for such
emergencies. Guidelines for monitoring the high-risk fetus are applied (Chap.
24, p. 461). For first-stage labor, most clinicians prefer continuous electronic
monitoring. At minimum, the fetal heart rate is recorded every 15 minutes. A
scalp electrode can be safely affixed to the buttock, but genitalia are avoided.
When membranes rupture, either spontaneously or artificially, the cord
prolapse risk rises appreciably. A small or preterm fetus or a non-frank
breech presentation raises this risk. Therefore, vaginal examination is
performed immediately following rupture, and special attention is directed to
the fetal heart rate for the first 5 to 10 minutes thereafter.
Continuous epidural analgesia is advocated by some. This may increase
the need for labor augmentation and prolong second-stage labor (Chadha,
1992; Confino, 1985). These potential disadvantages are weighed against the
advantages of better pain relief and increased pelvic relaxation should
extensive fetal manipulation be required. Analgesia must be sufficient for
episiotomy, for breech extraction, and for Piper forceps application. Nitrous
oxide plus oxygen inhalation provides further relief from pain. If general
anesthesia is required, it must be induced quickly.
Normal second-stage labor should show progressive fetal descent. An
initial passive second stage allows the breech to advance to the perineum
and is recommended. In the PREMODA study, this stage lasted <30 min for
60 percent of parturients and >60 min for only 20 percent (Goffinet, 2006).

For this passive phase, some recommend cesarean if the breech is not visible
after 1½ to 2 hours (Impey, 2017b; Kotaska, 2019).
Once the breech is visible, active pushing is encouraged. A hands-off
approach in which hands are poised merely to support delivering parts is
preferred to allow spontaneous delivery. In the PREMODA study, this active
phase was <30 min for 95 percent of those with successful vaginal births
(Goffinet, 2006). In their subanalysis of adverse neonatal outcome factors, an
active second stage >20 min increased the risk (Azria, 2012). In the Term
Breech Trial, the lowest risk for maternal and neonatal adverse outcomes
was seen in the group with active second stages lasting <30 min (Su, 2003,
2007). In one small observational study, fetal adverse risks rose if this phase
was >40 minutes (Macharey, 2017b). Canadian guidelines recommend
cesarean if completed or imminent delivery is not accomplished after 60 min
of pushing (Kotaska, 2019).

■ Labor Induction or Augmentation
Induction or augmentation of labor is controversial for term breech
pregnancies. Here again, data are limited and mostly retrospective. With
labor induction, Burgos and coworkers (2017) reported equivalent vaginal
delivery rates compared with spontaneous labor. With induction, however,
they reported higher rates of neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) admission.
But, Marzouk and associates (2011) found perinatal outcomes and cesarean
delivery rates not to differ. Last, others described greater cesarean delivery
rates with induction but similar neonatal outcomes (Macharey, 2016). In a
metaanalysis of studies, the NICU admission rate was 3 percent with labor
induction and was double that of those delivered from spontaneous labor.
The cesarean delivery rate with induction was higher and was 33 percent
(Sun, 2018).
Compared with cephalic presentations, breech labor in general proceeds
more slowly, but steady cervical progress is a positive indicator of adequate
pelvic capacity (Lennox, 1998). Thus, some protocols avoid augmentation
for the breech-presenting fetus, whereas others recommend it only for
hypotonic contractions (Alarab, 2004; Kotaska, 2019). In women with a
viable fetus, at Parkland Hospital, we use amniotomy to promote
contractions but prefer cesarean delivery instead of pharmacological labor
induction or augmentation.

■ Vaginal Delivery Methods
Vaginal breech delivery is accomplished by one of three methods. With
spontaneous breech delivery, the fetus is expelled entirely without any
traction or manipulation other than support of the newborn. With partial
breech extraction, the fetus is delivered spontaneously as far as the
umbilicus, but the remainder of the body is delivered by provider traction
and assisted maneuvers, with or without maternal expulsive efforts. With
total breech extraction, the entire fetal body is extracted by the provider.

■ Spontaneous Breech Delivery
Similar to vertex delivery, spontaneous expulsion of a breech fetus entails
sequential cardinal movements (Chap. 22, p. 421). First, engagement and
descent of the breech usually take place with the bitrochanteric diameter in
one of the oblique pelvic diameters. The anterior hip usually descends more
rapidly than the posterior hip, and when the resistance of the pelvic floor is
met, internal rotation of 45 degrees usually follows, bringing the anterior hip
toward the pubic arch and allowing the bitrochanteric diameter to occupy the
anteroposterior diameter of the pelvic outlet.
After rotation, descent continues until the perineum is distended by the
advancing breech, and the anterior hip appears at the vulva. By lateral
flexion of the fetal body, the posterior hip then is forced over the perineum,
which retracts over the fetal buttocks, thus allowing the fetus to straighten out
when the anterior hip is born. The legs and feet follow the breech and may be
born spontaneously or require aid.
After the birth of the breech, there is slight external rotation, with the
back turning anteriorly as the shoulders are brought into relation with one of
the oblique diameters of the pelvis. The shoulders then descend rapidly and
undergo internal rotation, with the bisacromial diameter occupying the
anteroposterior plane. Immediately following the shoulders, the head, which
is normally sharply flexed on the thorax, enters the pelvis in one of the
oblique diameters and then rotates to bring the posterior portion of the neck
under the symphysis pubis. The head is then born in flexion.
Infrequently, rotation renders the fetal back to lie posteriorly instead of
anteriorly. Such rotation is prevented if possible. Although the head can be
delivered by allowing the chin and face to pass beneath the symphysis, the

slightest traction on the body may cause extension of the head. With this, a
longer diameter of the head must pass through the pelvis.

■ Partial Breech Extraction
With breech delivery, successively larger and less compressible parts are
born. Thus, spontaneous expulsion is the exception, and vaginal delivery
typically requires skilled provider participation for the fetus to navigate the
birth canal. Noteworthy clinical pearls are provided by Yeomans (2017) in
Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd edition.
First, with all breech deliveries, unless the perineum is considerably lax,
an episiotomy is made and is an important adjunct to delivery. As discussed
in Chapter 27 (p. 510), mediolateral episiotomy may be preferred for its
lower associated risk of anal sphincter lacerations. Ideally, the breech is
allowed to deliver spontaneously to the umbilicus. Delivery of the breech
draws the umbilicus and attached cord into the pelvis. Therefore, once the
breech has passed beyond the vaginal introitus, the abdomen, thorax, arms,
and head must be delivered promptly either spontaneously or assisted.
The posterior hip will deliver, usually from the 6 o’clock position, and
often with sufficient pressure to evoke passage of thick meconium. The
anterior hip then delivers, followed by external rotation to a sacrum anterior
position. The mother is encouraged to continue to push as the fetus descends
until the legs are accessible. The legs are sequentially delivered by splinting
the femur with the operator’s fingers positioned parallel to the long axis of
the femur. This helps avoid femoral fracture. Pressure is exerted upward and
laterally to sweep each leg away from the midline (Fig. 28-3).

FIGURE 28-3 To deliver the left leg, two fingers of the provider’s left hand are placed beneath and
parallel to the femur. The thigh is then slightly abducted and pressure from the fingertips in the popliteal
fossa should induce knee flexion and bring the foot within reach. The foot is then grasped to gently
deliver the entire leg outside the vagina. A similar procedure is followed on the right. (Reproduced with
permission from Yeomans ER: Vaginal breech delivery. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III,
et al [eds]: Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill;
2017.)

Following delivery of the legs, the fetal bony pelvis is grasped with both
hands. The fingers should rest on the anterior superior iliac crests and the
thumbs on the sacrum. This minimizes the chance of fetal abdominal softtissue injury (Fig. 28-4). Maternal expulsive efforts are again used in
conjunction with downward traction to affect delivery.

FIGURE 28-4 To deliver the body, thumbs are placed over the sacrum, and each index finger wraps
over the top of the corresponding fetal iliac crest. Gentle downward traction is applied until the scapulas
are clearly visible. (Reproduced with permission from Yeomans ER: Vaginal breech delivery. In
Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al [eds]: Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative
Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2017.)

A cardinal rule in successful breech extraction is to employ steady,
gentle, downward traction until the lower halves of the scapulas are
delivered. Subsequent delivery of the shoulders and arms is not attempted
until one axilla becomes visible. It makes little difference which shoulder is
delivered first, and two methods are suitable for their delivery. In the first
method, with the scapulas visible, the trunk is rotated either clockwise or
counterclockwise to bring the anterior shoulder and arm into view (Fig. 285). During delivery of the arm, fingers and hand are aligned parallel to the
humerus and act as a splint. Perpendicular force risks humeral fracture. The
body of the fetus is then rotated 180 degrees in the reverse direction to bring
the other shoulder and arm into position for delivery.

FIGURE 28-5 A. After delivery of the first arm, 180-degree rotation of the fetal body brings the
sacrum to a right sacrum transverse (RST) position. B. Fingers of the provider’s hand extended over
the right shoulder and parallel to the humerus. These sweep the arm downward across the chest and
out. (Reproduced with permission from Yeomans ER: Vaginal breech delivery. In Yeomans ER,
Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al [eds]: Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New
York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2017.)

The second method is employed if trunk rotation is unsuccessful. With
this maneuver, the posterior shoulder is delivered first. For this, the feet are
grasped in one hand and drawn upward over the inner thigh of the mother
(Fig. 28-6). The operator’s hand enters over the fetal shoulder, fingers are
aligned parallel to the long axis of the fetal humerus, and the fetal arm is
swept upward. The posterior shoulder slides out over the perineal margin
and is usually followed by the arm and hand. Then, by depressing the body of
the fetus, the anterior shoulder emerges beneath the pubic arch, and the arm
and hand usually follow spontaneously. After both shoulders are delivered,
the back of the fetus tends to rotate spontaneously to the symphysis. Delivery
of the head may then be accomplished.

FIGURE 28-6 Infrequently, the posterior arm must be delivered first. For this, the lower half of the
fetal body is raised up and over the maternal groin. The provider’s fingers are inserted under the
posterior shoulder and aligned with the humerus. (Reproduced with permission from Yeomans ER:
Vaginal breech delivery. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al [eds]: Cunningham and
Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2017.)

Nuchal Arm
During delivery, one or both fetal arms occasionally may lie across the back
of the neck and become trapped at the pelvic inlet. With such a nuchal arm,
delivery is more difficult and can be aided by rotating the fetus through a half
circle in such a direction that the friction exerted by the birth canal will draw
the elbow toward the face (Fig. 28-7). With a right nuchal arm, the body
should be rotated counterclockwise, which rotates the fetal back toward the

maternal right. With a left nuchal arm, the rotation is clockwise, which
rotates the fetal back toward the maternal left. If rotation fails to free the
nuchal arm, it may be necessary to push the fetus upward to a roomier part of
the pelvis. If the rotation is still unsuccessful, still in this roomier part of the
pelvic, the nuchal arm can be extracted. For this, the operator’s hand enters
over the fetal shoulder, and fingers are aligned parallel to the long axis of the
fetal humerus. Downward pressure flexes the elbow, and the fetal arm is then
swept forward and down the ventral body surface for delivery. In this event,
fracture of the humerus or clavicle is common.

FIGURE 28-7 Reduction of a right nuchal arm is accomplished by rotating the fetal body 180 degrees
counterclockwise, which directs the fetal back to the maternal right. Friction exerted by the birth canal
will draw the elbow toward the face.

Delivery of the Aftercoming Head
The head of the fetus is normally extracted with one of the three maneuvers.
With any of these, hyperextension of the fetal neck is avoided.

First, with the Mauriceau maneuver, the index and middle finger of one
hand are applied over the maxilla, to flex the head, while the fetal body rests
on the palm of the same hand and forearm (Fig. 28-8). Fetal legs straddle the
forearm. Two fingers of the other hand hook over and grasp the shoulders.
Downward traction is concurrently applied until the suboccipital region
appears under the symphysis. Gentle suprapubic pressure simultaneously
applied by an assistant helps keep the head flexed. The body is slightly
elevated toward the maternal abdomen, and the mouth, nose, brow, and
eventually the occiput emerge successively over the perineum. With this
maneuver, the provider uses both hands simultaneously to exert continuous
downward gentle traction while balancing forces between the fetal neck and
maxilla to avoid neck hyperextension.

FIGURE 28-8 A. Delivery of the aftercoming head using the Mauriceau maneuver. Note that as the
fetal head is being delivered, flexion of the head is maintained by suprapubic pressure provided by an
assistant. B. Pressure on the maxilla is applied simultaneously by the operator as upward and outward
traction is exerted.

Second, specialized forceps can be used to deliver the aftercoming head.
Piper forceps, shown in Figure 28-9, or Laufe-Piper forceps may be applied

electively or when the Mauriceau maneuver cannot be accomplished easily.
The blades of the forceps are not applied to the aftercoming head until it has
been brought into the pelvis by gentle traction, combined with suprapubic
pressure, and is engaged. Suspension of the body of the fetus in a towel
effectively holds the fetus up and helps keep the arms and cord out of the way
as the forceps blades are applied.

FIGURE 28-9 Piper forceps for delivery of the aftercoming head.

Because the forceps blades are directed upward from the level of the
perineum, some choose to apply them from a one-knee kneeling position.
Piper forceps have a downward arch in the shank to accommodate the fetal
body and lack a pelvic curve. This shape permits direct application of the

cephalic curve of the blade along the length of the maternal vagina and fetal
parietal bone. The blade to be placed on the maternal left is held in the
provider’s left hand. The right hand slides between the fetal head and left
maternal vaginal sidewall to guide the blade inward and around the parietal
bone. The opposite blade mirrors this application.
Once in place, the blades are articulated, and the fetal body rests across
the shanks. The head is delivered by pulling gently outward and slightly
raising the handle simultaneously. This rolls the face over the perineum,
while the occiput remains beneath the symphysis until after the brow
delivers. Ideally, the head and body move in unison to minimize neck
extension.
Last, in some cases, the back of the fetus fails to rotate to the symphysis.
The fetus still may be delivered using the modified Prague maneuver. With
this, two fingers of one hand grasp the shoulders of the back-down fetus from
below while the other hand draws the feet up and over the maternal abdomen
(Fig. 28-10).

FIGURE 28-10 Delivery of the aftercoming head using the modified Prague maneuver necessitated by
failure of the fetal trunk to rotate anteriorly.

Head Entrapment
Either an incompletely dilated cervix or cephalopelvic disproportion can
entrap the head. At this point, a true emergency exists because significant
cord compression must be assumed.
First, an incompletely dilated cervix can constrict around the neck,
especially with a small preterm fetus. With gentle traction on the fetal body,
the cervix at times may be manually slipped over the occiput. If unsuccessful,
Dührssen incisions may be needed (Fig. 28-11). General anesthesia with

halogenated agents is another option to aid lower uterine segment relaxation.
As an extreme measure, replacement of the fetus higher into the vagina and
uterus, followed by cesarean delivery, can rescue an entrapped breech fetus.
This Zavanelli maneuver is classically performed to relieve intractable
shoulder dystocia (Sandberg, 1988). However, case reports have also
described its use for an entrapped aftercoming head (Sandberg, 1999; Steyn,
1994).

FIGURE 28-11 Dührssen incision being cut at 2 o’clock, which is followed by a second incision if
needed at 10 o’clock. Infrequently, an additional incision is required at 6 o’clock. The incisions are so
placed as to minimize bleeding from the laterally located cervical branches of the uterine artery. After
delivery, the incisions are repaired as described in Chapter 42 (p. 740).

Second, in cases with cephalopelvic disproportion and arrest of
aftercoming head, the Zavanelli maneuver or symphysiotomy are options

(Sunday-Adeoye, 2004; Wery, 2013). These are described in Chapter 27 (p.
504).

■ Total Breech Extraction
Frank Breech
During complete extraction of a frank breech, moderate traction is exerted by
a finger in each groin and aided by a generous episiotomy. Once the breech is
pulled through the introitus, the steps just described for partial breech
extraction are completed.
Rarely during vaginal delivery, a frank breech will require
decomposition inside the uterine cavity. Attributed to Pinard (1889), this
procedure converts a frank breech into a footling breech. It is accomplished
more readily if the membranes have ruptured only recently. It becomes
extremely difficult if amnionic fluid is scant and the uterus is tightly
contracted around the fetus. Pharmacological relaxation by general
anesthesia or intravenous magnesium sulfate, nitroglycerin, or a betamimetic
agent may be required. To begin, two fingers are carried up along one leg to
externally rotate the hip by pressing on the medial side of the thigh parallel to
the femur. Simultaneously, pressure in the popliteal fossa should prompt
spontaneous knee flexion which brings the corresponding foot into contact
with the back of the provider’s hand. The fetal foot then may be grasped and
brought down. Delivery is then accomplished as for incomplete breech,
described next.

Incomplete or Complete Breech
If rapid labor progress prohibits cesarean delivery, total extraction of an
incomplete or complete breech may be required. A hand is introduced
through the vagina, and both fetal feet are grasped. The ankles are held with
the middle finger lying between them. With gentle traction, the feet are
brought through the introitus (Fig. 28-12). As the legs begin to emerge
through the vulva, downward gentle traction is continued. As the legs
emerge, successively higher portions are grasped. When the breech appears
at the vaginal outlet, gentle traction is applied until the hips are delivered.
The thumbs are then placed over the sacrum and the fingers over the iliac

crests. Breech extraction is then completed, as described for partial breech
extraction.

FIGURE 28-12 Complete breech extraction begins with traction on the feet and ankles.

If only one foot can be grasped, it can be brought down into the vagina
and held with the appropriate hand, right hand for right foot and left hand for
left foot (Yeomans, 2017). With the first foot secure, the opposite hand is
introduced, passed upward along the leg, and guided to locate the other foot.
If the remaining hip is extended, the second foot is usually easily grasped and
brought down. If the hip is flexed and knee extended, a finger is hooked into
that groin, and traction will bring the lower half of the fetus down until the
leg can be reached.
For cesarean delivery, these same total breech extraction maneuvers can
be used. These steps can aid delivery of a frank, complete, or incomplete
breech through the hysterotomy incision.

EXTERNAL CEPHALIC VERSION
With version, fetal presentation is altered by physically substituting one pole
of a longitudinal presentation for the other, or converting an oblique or
transverse lie into a longitudinal presentation. Manipulations performed
through the abdominal wall that yield a cephalic presentation are termed
external cephalic version. Manipulations accomplished inside the uterine
cavity that yield a breech presentation are designated internal podalic
version. This latter procedure is reserved for delivery of a second twin and
described in Chapter 48 (p. 856).

■ Indications
External cephalic version (ECV) reduces the rate of noncephalic presentation
at birth, and its success rate is 50 to 60 percent (Hofmeyr, 2015b; Melo,
2019). For women with a transverse lie, the overall success rate is
significantly higher.
In general, ECV is attempted before labor in a woman who has reached
370/7 weeks’ gestation (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2020; Impey, 2017a). This threshold aims to balance risks of
fetal immaturity and the greater amnionic fluid volume seen in early-term
pregnancies, which aids turning. In support of this, one systematic review
found that ECV done before 370/7 weeks raised ECV success rates but did
not lower the ultimate cesarean delivery rate and increased the risk of latepreterm birth (Hutton, 2015). Before this time, breech presentation also still
has a high likelihood of correcting spontaneously. And, if ECV is performed
too early, time may allow a reversion back to breech (Bogner, 2012). Last, if
attempts at version cause a need for immediate delivery, complications of
iatrogenic early-term delivery generally are not severe.
Absolute contraindications to ECV are few. It is contraindicated if
vaginal delivery is not an option, such as with placenta previa. Relative
contraindications are early labor, oligohydramnios or ruptured membranes,
known nuchal cord, structural uterine abnormalities, fetal-growth restriction,
multifetal gestation, and prior abruption or its risk factors (Rosman, 2013).
Little data guide the decision for ECV for women with a prior cesarean
delivery. In one pooled series of small studies that contained more than 100

attempts, no uterine ruptures were reported (Impey, 2018). At Parkland
Hospital, we do not attempt ECV in these women.
Several factors can improve the chances of an ECV attempt. These are
multiparity, unengaged presenting part, nonanterior placenta, nonobese
patient, and abundant amnionic fluid (Lauterbach, 2021; Kok, 2008, 2009).
To augment the last parameter, neither a preprocedural 2-L intravenous fluid
bolus nor amnioinfusion raised ECV success rates (Burgos, 2014; Diguisto,
2018). Dedicated breech teams may increase these rates (Hickland, 2018;
Thissen, 2019).

■ Complications
Patient counseling includes a discussion regarding small but real risks for
placental abruption, preterm labor, and fetal compromise. Bradycardia is
common during or following ECV, but emergent cesarean rates are ≤0.5
percent. Uterine rupture, fetomaternal hemorrhage, alloimmunization,
amnionic fluid embolism, and maternal or fetal deaths are rare
(Grootscholten, 2008; Rodgers, 2017). Overall, compared with expectant
management, perinatal morbidity and mortality rates are not greater with
ECV (Krueger, 2018; Son, 2018).
Even after successful ECV, several reports suggest that the cesarean
delivery rate does not completely revert to the baseline for vertex
presentations. Specifically, dystocia, malpresentation, and nonreassuring
fetal heart patterns may be more common in these fetuses who have
undergone successful ECV (Chan, 2004; de Hundt, 2014; Vézina, 2004).

■ Technique
ECV should be carried out in an area that has ready access to a facility
equipped to perform emergency cesarean delivery. Because of the risk for
surgical intervention, intravenous access is obtained. Patients also abstain
from eating for 6 hours, but clear liquids can be consumed up to 2 hours
prior. Sonographic examination is performed to confirm nonvertex
presentation, document amnionic fluid volume adequacy, exclude obvious
fetal anomalies if not done previously, and identify placental location and
fetal spine orientation. Preprocedural external monitoring is performed to
document fetal heart rate reactivity. Anti-D immune globulin is given to Rh

D–negative women. Tocolysis and regional analgesia may be elected, and
rationale for these is provided in subsequent sections.
The woman is placed in left lateral tilt to aid uteroplacental perfusion,
and Trendelenburg positioning helps during elevation of the breech. During
the procedure, we prefer to monitor fetal heart motion sonographically. An
abundant abdominal coating of ultrasound gel permits this and also minimizes
painful skin friction (Vallikkannu, 2014).
A forward roll of the fetus usually is attempted first. One or two
providers may participate, and one hand grasps the head. The fetal buttocks
are then elevated from the maternal pelvis and displaced laterally (Fig. 2813). These are then gently guided toward the fundus, while the head is
simultaneously directed toward the pelvis. If the forward roll is
unsuccessful, a backward flip is attempted. ECV attempts are discontinued
for excessive discomfort, for persistently abnormal fetal heart rate, or after
multiple failed attempts. Failure is not always absolute. Ben-Meir and
colleagues (2007) reported a spontaneous version rate of 7 percent among
226 failed versions—2 percent among nulliparas and 13 percent among
multiparas.

FIGURE 28-13 External cephalic version. With an attempted forward roll, clockwise pressure is
exerted against the fetal poles.

If ECV is successful, a nonstress test is repeated until a normal test result
is obtained. A transient abnormal fetal heart rate tracing during or after ECV
complicates 6 to 9 percent of cases. This should prompt a traditional
resuscitative response with intravenous fluids, oxygen, and lateral tilt. Rates
of abnormal tracings prompting immediate cesarean delivery range from only
0.2 to 0.4 percent (Collaris, 2004; Grootscholten, 2008). Once resolved,
Kuppens and coworkers (2017) found that a transient abnormal tracing did
not predict later fetal distress in subsequent labor.

If ECV is completed before 39 weeks’ gestation, awaiting spontaneous
labor and fetal maturity is preferred. In some studies, immediate labor
induction is linked to higher cesarean delivery rates (Burgos, 2015; Kuppens,
2013).

Tocolysis
By relaxing the uterus prior to an ECV attempt, tocolysis raises success rates.
Most data support the use of the betamimetics terbutaline and ritodrine for
this (Cluver, 2015). In one such trial, Fernandez and coworkers (1996)
reported that the success rate with subcutaneous terbutaline—52 percent—
was significantly higher than without—27 percent. Our policy at Parkland
Hospital is to administer 250 μg of terbutaline subcutaneously to most
women before attempted ECV. When maternal tachycardia—a known side
effect of terbutaline—is noted, the attempt is begun. Terbutaline readily
crosses the placenta, and mild elevation of fetal heart rate baseline also is
possible (Ingemarsson, 1981; Roth, 1990). Data are limited and in some
cases are nonsupportive for other agents that include calcium-channel
blockers, such as nifedipine; nitric oxide donors, such as nitroglycerin; the
oxytocin-receptor antagonist atosiban; and another betamimetic salbutamol
(Burgos, 2010; Cluver, 2015; Hilton, 2009; Levin, 2019; Vani, 2009; Wilcox,
2011).

Conduction Analgesia
Epidural analgesia coupled with tocolysis has been reported to raise ECV
success rates compared with tocolysis alone (Goetzinger, 2011; MagroMalosso, 2016). Moreover, rates of complications that include fetal heart
rate aberrations, emergency cesarean delivery, or placental abruption are not
greater with regional analgesia. In trials, spinal and epidural have both
shown success and are reasonable options (Khaw, 2015; Weiniger, 2010).
Although uncommon, risks specific to regional analgesia, such as spinal
headache, are possible. Currently, the superior technique and best drugs to
administer are unclear. In contrast, from limited data, intravenous sedation or
nitrous oxide does not appear to improve ECV success (Burgos, 2016;
Dochez, 2019; Khaw, 2015; Straube, 2021).

■ Moxibustion

This is a traditional Chinese medicine technique that burns a cigarette-shaped
stick of ground Artemisia vulgaris—which is also known as mugwort or in
Japanese as moxa. At the BL 67 acupuncture point, the stick is directly
placed against the skin or indirectly heats an acupuncture needle at the site to
increase fetal movement and promote spontaneous breech version (Ewies,
2002). It is performed usually between 33 and 36 weeks’ gestation to permit
a trial of ECV if not successful. Results from randomized controlled studies
are conflicting (Bue, 2016; Coulon, 2014; Coyle, 2012; Sananes, 2016; Vas,
2013).

REFERENCES
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Mode of term singleton breech delivery.
Committee Opinion No. 745, July 2018b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine: Periviable
birth. Obstetric Care Consensus No. 6, October 2017
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: External cephalic version. Practice Bulletin No.
221, April 2020
Azria E, Le Meaux JP, Khoshnood B, et al: Factors associated with adverse perinatal outcomes for term
breech fetuses with planned vaginal delivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 207(4):285.e1, 2012
Behbehani S, Patenaude V, Abenhaim HA: Maternal risk factors and outcomes of umbilical cord
prolapse: a population-based study. J Obstet Gynaecol Can 38(1):23, 2016
Ben-Meir A, Elram T, Tsafrir A, et al: The incidence of spontaneous version after failed external
cephalic version. Am J Obstet Gynecol 196(2):157, 2007
Bergenhenegouwen L, Vlemmix F, Ensing S, et al: Preterm breech presentation: a comparison of
intended vaginal and intended cesarean delivery. Obstet Gynecol 126(6):1223, 2015
Bergenhenegouwen LA, Meertens LJ, Schaaf J, et al: Vaginal delivery versus caesarean section in
preterm breech delivery: a systematic review. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 172:1, 2014
Berhan Y, Haileamlak A: The risks of planned vaginal breech delivery versus planned caesarean section
for term breech birth: a meta-analysis including observational studies. BJOG 123(1):49, 2016
Bin YS, Ford JB, Nicholl MC, et al: Long-term childhood outcomes of breech presentation by intended
mode of delivery: a population record linkage study. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 96(3):342, 2017
Bin YS, Roberts CL, Nicholl MC, et al: Contribution of changing risk factors to the trend in breech
presentation at term. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol 56(6):564, 2016
Biswas A, Johnstone MJ: Term breech delivery: does x-ray pelvimetry help? Aust N Z J Obstet
Gynaecol 33:150, 1993
Bogner G, Xu F, Simbrunner C, et al: Single-institute experience, management, success rate, and
outcome after external cephalic version at term. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 116(2):134, 2012
Bue L, Lauszus FF: Moxibustion did not have an effect in a randomised clinical trial for version of
breech position. Dan Med J 63(2): A5199, 2016
Burgos J, Arana I, Garitano I, et al: Induction of labor in breech presentation at term: a retrospective
cohort study. J Perinat Med 45(3):299, 2017

Burgos J, Eguiguren N, Quintana E, et al: Atosiban vs. ritodrine as a tocolytic in external cephalic
version at term: a prospective cohort study. J Perinat Med 38(1):23, 2010
Burgos J, Iglesias M, Pijoan JI, et al: Probability of cesarean delivery after successful external cephalic
version. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 131(2):192, 2015
Burgos J, Pijoan JI, Osuna C, et al: Increased pain relief with remifentanil does not improve the success
rate of external cephalic version: a randomized controlled trial. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand
95(5):547, 2016
Burgos J, Quintana E, Cobos P, et al: Effect of maternal intravenous fluid therapy on external cephalic
version at term: a prospective cohort study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 211(6):665.e1, 2014
Cammu H, Dony N, Martens G, et al: Common determinants of breech presentation at birth in
singletons: a population-based study. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 177:106, 2014
Chadha YC, Mahmood TA, Dick MJ, et al: Breech delivery and epidural analgesia. BJOG 99:96, 1992
Chan LY, Tang JL, Tsoi KF, et al: Intrapartum cesarean delivery after successful external cephalic
version: a meta-analysis. Obstet Gynecol 104:155, 2004
Cimmino CV, Southworth LE: Persistent hyperextension of the neck in breech (“star-gazing fetus”) and
in transverse lie (“flying-fetus”): indication for cesarean section. Am J Roentgenol Radium Ther
Nucl Med 125(2):447, 1975
Cluver C, Gyte GM, Sinclair M, et al: Interventions for helping to turn term breech babies to head first
presentation when using external cephalic version. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2:CD000184, 2015
Collaris RJ, Oei SG.: External cephalic version: a safe procedure? A systematic review of versionrelated risks. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 83(6):511, 2004
Collea JV: Current management of breech presentation. Clin Obstet Gynecol 23(2):525, 1980
Confino E, Ismajovich B, Rudick V, et al: Extradural analgesia in the management of singleton breech
delivery. Br J Anaesth 57:892, 1985
Coulon C, Poleszczuk M, Paty-Montaigne MH, et al: Version of breech fetuses by moxibustion with
acupuncture: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol 124(1):32, 2014
Coyle ME, Smith CA, Peat B: Cephalic version by moxibustion for breech presentation. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 5:CD003928, 2012
Critchlow CW, Leet TL, Benedetti TJ, et al: Risk factors and infant outcomes associated with umbilical
cord prolapse: a population-based case-control study among births in Washington State. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 170(2):613, 1994
Deering S, Brown J, Hodor J, et al: Simulation training and resident performance of singleton vaginal
breech delivery. Obstet Gynecol 107(1):86, 2006
de Hundt M, Vlemmix F, Bais JM, et al: Risk factors for developmental dysplasia of the hip: a metaanalysis. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 165(1):8, 2012
Diguisto C, Winer N, Descriaud C, et al: Amnioinfusion for women with a singleton breech presentation
and a previous failed external cephalic version: a randomized controlled trial. J Matern Fetal
Neonatal Med 31(8):993, 2018
Dochez V, Esbelin J, Misbert E, et al: Effectiveness of nitrous oxide in external cephalic version on
success rate: a randomized controlled trial. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 99(3):391, 2020
Dotters-Katz SK, Gray B, Heine RP, et al: Resident education in complex obstetric procedures: are we
adequately preparing tomorrow’s obstetricians? Am J Perinatol 37(11):1155, 2020
Eide MG, Øyen N, Skjaerven R, et al: Breech delivery and intelligence: a population-based study of
8,738 breech infants. Obstet Gynecol 105(1):4, 2005
Ekéus C, Norman M, Åberg K, et al: Vaginal breech delivery at term and neonatal morbidity and
mortality—a population-based cohort study in Sweden. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med. 32(2):265,

2019
Ewies AA, Olah KS: The sharp end of medical practice: the use of acupuncture in obstetrics and
gynecology. BJOG 109(1):1, 2002
Fernandez CO, Bloom S, Wendel G: A prospective, randomized, blinded comparison of terbutaline
versus placebo for singleton, term external cephalic version. Am J Obstet Gynecol 174:326, 1996
Fontenot T, Campbell B, Mitchell-Tutt E, et al: Radiographic evaluation of breech presentation: is it
necessary? Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 10:338, 1997
Ford JB, Roberts CL, Nassar N, et al: Recurrence of breech presentation in consecutive pregnancies.
BJOG 117(7):830, 2010
Giuliani A, Scholl WMJ, Basver A, et al: Mode of delivery and outcome of 699 term singleton breech
deliveries at a single center. Am J Obstet Gynecol 187:1694, 2002
Goetzinger KR, Harper LM, Tuuli MG, et al: Effect of regional anesthesia on the success rate of
external cephalic version: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Obstet Gynecol 118(5):1137, 2011
Goffinet F, Carayol M, Foidart JM, et al: Is planned vaginal delivery for breech presentation at term still
an option? Results of an observational prospective survey in France and Belgium. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 194(4):1002, 2006
Grabovac M, Karim JN, Isayama T, et al: What is the safest mode of birth for extremely preterm
breech singleton infants who are actively resuscitated? A systematic review and meta-analyses.
BJOG 125(6):652, 2018
Grootscholten K, Kok M, Oei SG, et al: External cephalic version-related risks: a meta-analysis. Obstet
Gynecol 112(5):1143, 2008
Grunebaum A: Vaginal breech deliveries in the United States 1999–2013. Obstet Gynecol 127(5,
suppl):69S, 2016
Hannah ME, Hannah WJ, Hewson SA, et al: Planned caesarean section versus planned vaginal birth for
breech presentation at term: a randomised multicentre trial. Lancet 356:1375, 2000
Hernandez-Marti M, Dal Canto MC, Kidd JM: Evidence of spinal cord injury in an infant delivered by
cesarean section. A case report. Childs Brain 11(3):197, 1984
Hickland P, Gargan P, Simpson J, et al: A novel and dedicated multidisciplinary service to manage
breech presentation at term; 3 years of experience in a tertiary care maternity unit. J Matern Fetal
Neonatal Med 31(22):3002, 2018
Hilton J, Allan B, Swaby C, et al: Intravenous nitroglycerin for external cephalic version: a randomized
controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol 114(3):560, 2009
Hinderaker T, Daltveit AK, Irgens LM, et al: The impact of intra-uterine factors on neonatal hip
instability. An analysis of 1,059,479 children in Norway. Acta Orthop Scand 65(3):239, 1994
Hinnenberg P, Toijonen A, Gissler M, et al: Outcome of small for gestational age-fetuses in breech
presentation at term according to mode of delivery: a nationwide, population-based record linkage
study. Arch Gynecol Obstet 299(4):969, 2019
Hoffmann J, Thomassen K, Stumpp P, et al: New MRI criteria for successful vaginal breech delivery in
primiparae. PLoS One 11(8):e0161028, 2016
Hofmeyr GJ, Hannah M, Lawrie TA: Planned caesarean section for term breech delivery. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 7:CD000166, 2015a
Hofmeyr GJ, Kulier R, West HM: External cephalic version for breech presentation at term. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 4:CD000083, 2015b
Hutton EK, Hofmeyr GJ, Dowswell T: External cephalic version for breech presentation before term.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 7:CD000084, 2015

Impey LW, Murphy DJ, Griffiths M, et al: External cephalic version and reducing the incidence of term
breech presentation. BJOG 124: e178, 2017a
Impey LW, Murphy DJ, Griffiths M, et al: Management of breech presentation: green-top guideline No.
20b. BJOG 124(7):e151, 2017b
Impey OR, Greenwood CE, Impey LW: External cephalic version after previous cesarean section: a
cohort study of 100 consecutive attempts. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. 231:210, 2018
Ingemarsson I, Westgren M, Lindberg C, et al: Single injection of terbutaline in term labor: placental
transfer and effects on maternal and fetal carbohydrate metabolism. Am J Obstet Gynecol
139(6):697, 1981
Kayem G, Combaud V, Lorthe E, et al: Mortality and morbidity in early preterm breech singletons:
impact of a policy of planned vaginal delivery. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 192:61, 2015
Khaw KS, Lee SW, Ngan Kee WD, et al: Randomized trial of anaesthetic interventions in external
cephalic version for breech presentation. Br J Anaesth 114(6):944, 2015
Klemt AS, Schulze S, Brüggmann D, et al: MRI-based pelvimetric measurements as predictors for a
successful vaginal breech delivery in the Frankfurt Breech at term cohort (FRABAT). Eur J Obstet
Gynecol Reprod Biol 232:10, 2019
Kok M, Cnossen J, Gravendeel L, et al: Clinical factors to predict the outcome of external cephalic
version: a metaanalysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 199(6):630, 2008
Kok M, Cnossen J, Gravendeel L, et al: Ultrasound factors to predict the outcome of external cephalic
version: a meta-analysis. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 33(1):76, 2009
Korb D, Schmitz T, Alexander S, et al: Association between planned mode of delivery and severe
maternal morbidity in women with breech presentations: a secondary analysis of the PREMODA
prospective general population study. J Gynecol Obstet Hum Reprod 49(2):101662, 2020
Kotaska A, Menticoglou S: No. 384-management of breech presentation at term. J Obstet Gynaecol
Can 41(8):1193, 2019
Krueger S, Simioni J, Griffith LE, et al: Labour outcomes after successful external cephalic version
compared with spontaneous cephalic version. J Obstet Gynaecol Can 40(1):61, 2018
Kuppens SM, Hutton EK, Hasaart TH, et al: Mode of delivery following successful external cephalic
version: comparison with spontaneous cephalic presentations at delivery. J Obstet Gynaecol Can
35(10):883, 2013
Kuppens SM, Smailbegovic I, Houterman S, et al: Fetal heart rate abnormalities during and after
external cephalic version: which fetuses are at risk and how are they delivered? BMC Pregnancy
Childbirth 17(1):363, 2017
Lamrani YA, Maâroufi M, Kamaoui I, et al: Neonatal distal femoral epiphyseal dislocation: an ultrasound
diagnosis. J Med Ultrason 38(4):221, 2011
Lauterbach R, Bachar G, Ben-David C, et al: Association of persistent breech presentation with
external cephalic version success. Obstet Gynecol 137(2):258, 2021
Lennox CE, Kwast BE, Farley TM: Breech labor on the WHO partograph. Int J Gynaecol Obstet
62(2):117, 1998
Levin G, Ezra Y, Weill Y, et al: Nifedipine versus ritodrine during external cephalic version procedure: a
case control study. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 13:1, 2019
Lorthe E, Sentilhes L, Quere M, et al: Planned delivery route of preterm breech singletons, and neonatal
and 2-year outcomes: a population-based cohort study. BJOG 126(1):73, 2019
Lumbiganon P, Laopaiboon M, Gülmezoglu AM, et al: Method of delivery and pregnancy outcomes in
Asia: the WHO global survey on maternal and perinatal health 2007–08. Lancet 375(9713):490,
2010

Lydon-Rochelle M, Albers L, Gorwoda J, et al: Accuracy of Leopold maneuvers in screening for
malpresentation: a prospective study. Birth 20:132, 1993
Lyons J, Pressey T, Bartholomew S, et al: Delivery of breech presentation at term gestation in Canada,
2003–2011. Obstet Gynecol 125(5):1153, 2015
Macharey G, Gissler M, Rahkonen L, et al: Breech presentation at term and associated obstetric risks
factors-a nationwide population based cohort study. Arch Gynecol Obstet 295(4):833, 2017a
Macharey G, Ulander VM, Heinonen S, et al: Induction of labor in breech presentations at term: a
retrospective observational study. Arch Gynecol Obstet 293(3):549, 2016
Macharey G, Ulander VM, Heinonen S, et al: Risk factors and outcomes in “well-selected” vaginal
breech deliveries: a retrospective observational study. J Perinat Med 45(3):291, 2017b
Macharey G, Väisänen-Tommiska M, Gissler M, et al: Neurodevelopmental outcome at the age of 4
years according to the planned mode of delivery in term breech presentation: a nationwide,
population-based record linkage study. J Perinat Med 46(3):323, 2018
Magro-Malosso ER, Saccone G, Di Tommaso M, et al: Neuraxial analgesia to increase the success rate
of external cephalic version: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 215(3):276, 2016
Marzouk P, Arnaud E, Oury JF, et al: Induction of labour and breech presentation: experience of a
French maternity ward. [French]. J Gynecol Obstet Biol Reprod (Paris) 40(7):668, 2011
Maslovitz S, Barkai G, Lessing JB, et al: Recurrent obstetric management mistakes identified by
simulation. Obstet Gynecol 109(6):1295, 2007
McNamara JM, Odibo AO, Macones GA, et al: The effect of breech presentation on the accuracy of
estimated fetal weight. Am J Perinatol 29(5):353, 2012
Melo P, Georgiou EX, Hedditch A, et al: External cephalic version at term: a cohort study of 18 years’
experience. BJOG 126(4):493, 2019
Michel S, Drain A, Closset E, et al: Evaluation of a decision protocol for type of delivery of infants in
breech presentation at term. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 158(2):194, 2011
Mostello D, Chang JJ, Bai F, et al: Breech presentation at delivery: a marker for congenital anomaly? J
Perinatol 34(1):11, 2014
Nassar N, Roberts CL, Cameron CA, et al: Diagnostic accuracy of clinical examination for detection of
non-cephalic presentation in late pregnancy: cross sectional analytic study. BMJ 333:578, 2006
Noli SA, Baini I, Parazzini F, et al: Preterm birth, low gestational age, low birth weight, parity, and other
determinants of breech presentation: Results from a large retrospective population-based study.
Biomed Res Int 2019: 9581439, 2019
Patterson LS, O’Connell CM, Baskett TF: Maternal and perinatal morbidity associated with classic and
inverted T cesarean incisions. Obstet Gynecol 100(4):633, 2002
Phelan JP, Bethel M, DeVore G, et al: Use of ultrasonography in the breech presentation with
hyperextension of the fetal head. J Ultrasound Med 2(8):373, 1983
Pinard A: On version by external maneuvers. In traite du palper abdominal. Paris, Lauwereyns, 1889
Raju TN, Mercer BM, Burchfield DJ, et al: Periviable birth: executive summary of a joint workshop by
the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, Society for
Maternal-Fetal Medicine, American Academy of Pediatrics, and American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists. Obstet Gynecol 123(5):1083, 2014
Reddy UM, Rice MM, Grobman WA, et al: Serious maternal complications after early preterm delivery
(24-33 weeks’ gestation). Am J Obstet Gynecol 213(4):538, 2015
Reddy UM, Zhang J, Sun L, et al: Neonatal mortality by attempted route of delivery in early preterm
birth. Am J Obstet Gynecol 207(2):117.e1, 2012

Rietberg CC, Elferink-Stinkens PM, Visser GH: The effect of the Term Breech Trial on medical
intervention behaviour and neonatal outcome in The Netherlands: an analysis of 35,453 term breech
infants. BJOG 112(2):205, 2005
Roberts CL, Algert CS, Peat B, et al: Small fetal size: a risk factor for breech birth at term. Int J
Gynaecol Obstet 67(1):1, 1999
Rodgers R, Beik N, Nassar N, et al: Complications of external cephalic version: a retrospective analysis
of 1121 patients at a tertiary hospital in Sydney. BJOG 124(5):767, 2017
Rojansky N, Tanos V, Lewin A, et al: Sonographic evaluation of fetal head extension and maternal
pelvis in cases of breech presentation. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 73:607, 1994
Roman H, Carayol M, Watier L, et al: Planned vaginal delivery of fetuses in breech presentation at
term: prenatal determinants predictive of elevated risk of cesarean delivery during labor. Eur J
Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 138(1):14, 2008
Rosman AN, Guijt A, Vlemmix F, et al: Contraindications for external cephalic version in breech position
at term: a systematic review. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 92(2):137, 2013
Roth AC, Milsom I, Forssman L, et al: Effects of intravenous terbutaline on maternal circulation and
fetal heart activity. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 69(3):223, 1990
Sananes N, Roth GE, Aissi GA, et al: Acupuncture version of breech presentation: a randomized shamcontrolled single-blinded trial. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 204:24, 2016
Sandberg EC: The Zavanelli maneuver extended: progression of a revolutionary concept. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 158(6 Pt 1):1347, 1988
Sandberg EC: The Zavanelli maneuver: 12 years of recorded experience. Obstet Gynecol 93:312, 1999
Saroha M, Batra P, Dewan P, et al: Genital injuries in neonates following breech presentation. J
Neonatal Perinatal Med 8(4):421, 2015
Schutte JM, Steegers EA, Santema JG, et al: Maternal deaths after elective cesarean section for breech
presentation in the Netherlands. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 86(2):240, 2007
Sciscione AC, Landon MB, Leveno KJ, et al: Previous preterm cesarean delivery and risk of
subsequent uterine rupture. Obstet Gynecol 111(3):648, 2008
Sherer DM, Menashe M, Palti Z, et al: Radiologic evidence of a nuchal arm in the breech-presenting
fetus at the onset of labor: an indication for abdominal delivery. Am J Perinatol 6(3):353, 1989
Shipp TD, Bromley B, Benacerraf B: The prognostic significance of hyperextension of the fetal head
detected antenatally with ultrasound. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 15(5):391, 2000
Son M, Roy A, Grobman WA, et al: Association between attempted external cephalic version and
perinatal morbidity and mortality. Obstet Gynecol. 132(2):365, 2018
Steyn W, Pieper C: Favorable neonatal outcome after fetal entrapment and partially successful Zavanelli
maneuver in a case of breech presentation. Am J Perinatol 11:348, 1994
Straube LE, Fardelmann KL, Penwarden AA, et al: Nitrous oxide analgesia for external cephalic
version: A randomized controlled trial. J Clin Anesth 68:110073, 2021
Su M, McLeod L, Ross S, et al: Factors associated with adverse perinatal outcome in the term breech
trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol 189(3):740, 2003
Su M, McLeod L, Ross S, et al: Factors associated with maternal morbidity in the term breech trial. J
Obstet Gynaecol Can 29(4):324, 2007
Sun W, Liu F, Liu S, et al: Comparison of outcomes between induction of labor and spontaneous labor
for term breech—a systemic review and meta-analysis. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 222:155,
2018
Sunday-Adeoye IM, Okonta P, Twomey D: Symphysiotomy at the Mater Misericordiae Hospital Afikpo,
Ebonyi State of Nigeria (1982–1999): a review of 1013 cases. J Obstet Gynaecol 24(5):525, 2004

Thissen D, Swinkels P, Dullemond RC, et al: Introduction of a dedicated team increases the success
rate of external cephalic version: a prospective cohort study. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol
236:193, 2019
Thomas PE, Petersen SG, Gibbons K: The influence of mode of birth on neonatal survival and maternal
outcomes at extreme prematurity: a retrospective cohort study. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol
56(1):60, 2016
Thomas SM, Bees NR, Adam EJ: Trends in the use of pelvimetry techniques. Clin Radiol 53(4):293,
1998
Toijonen AE, Heinonen ST, Gissler MV, et al: A comparison of risk factors for breech presentation in
preterm and term labor: a nationwide, population-based case-control study. Arch Gynecol Obstet
301(2):393, 2020
Toivonen E, Palomäki O, Huhtala H, et al: Selective vaginal breech delivery at term—still an option.
Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 91(10):1177, 2012
Tucker Edmonds B, McKenzie F, Macheras M, et al: Morbidity and mortality associated with mode of
delivery for breech periviable deliveries. Am J Obstet Gynecol 213(1):70, 2015
Vallikkannu N, Nadzratulaiman WN, Omar SZ, et al: Talcum powder or aqueous gel to aid external
cephalic version: a randomised controlled trial. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth 14:49, 2014
Vani S, Lau SY, Lim BK, et al: Intravenous salbutamol for external cephalic version. Int J Gynecol
Obstet 104(1):28, 2009
Vas J, Aranda-Regules JM, Modesto M, et al: Using moxibustion in primary healthcare to correct nonvertex presentation: a multicentre randomised controlled trial. Acupunct Med 31(1):31, 2013
Vendittelli F, Pons JC, Lemery D, et al: The term breech presentation: neonatal results and obstetric
practices in France. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 125(2):176, 2006
Vézina Y, Bujold E, Varin J, et al: Cesarean delivery after successful external cephalic version of breech
presentation at term: a comparative study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 190:763, 2004
Vialle R, Piétin-Vialle C, Ilharreborde B, et al: Spinal cord injuries at birth: a multicenter review of nine
cases. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 20(6):435, 2007
Vistad I, Klungsøyr K, Albrechtsen S, et al: Neonatal outcome of singleton term breech deliveries in
Norway from 1991 to 2011. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 94(9):997, 2015
Weiniger CF, Ginosar Y, Elchalal U, et al: Randomized controlled trial of external cephalic version in
term multiparae with or without spinal analgesia. Br J Anaesth 104(5):613, 2010
Weinstein D, Margalioth EJ, Navot D, et al: Neonatal fetal death following cesarean section secondary
to hyperextended head in breech presentation. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 62(6):629, 1983
Wery E, Le Roch A, Subtil D: Zavanelli maneuver performed in a breech presentation. Int J Gynaecol
Obstet 120(2):193, 2013
Westgren M, Grundsell H, Ingemarsson I, et al: Hyperextension of the fetal head in breech presentation.
A study with long-term follow-up. BJOG 88(2):101, 1981
Whyte H, Hannah ME, Saigal S, et al: Outcomes of children at 2 years after planned cesarean birth
versus planned vaginal birth for breech presentation at term: the International Randomized Term
Breech Trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol 191(3):864, 2004
Wilcox CB, Nassar N, Roberts CL: Effectiveness of nifedipine tocolysis to facilitate external cephalic
version: a systematic review. BJOG 118(4):423, 2011
Yeomans ER: Vaginal breech delivery. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al (eds):
Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2017

