CHAPTER 41

Clinical Management of the Preeclampsia
Syndrome

DIAGNOSIS AND EVALUATION
CONSIDERATION FOR DELIVERY
SEVERE PREECLAMPSIA AND ECLAMPSIA
MAGNESIUM SULFATE
SEVERE HYPERTENSION TREATMENT
PERSISTENT SEVERE POSTPARTUM HYPERTENSION
LONG-TERM CONSEQUENCES
REFERENCES
Preeclampsia remains one of the leading causes of death and severe maternal
morbidity. This chapter discusses many clinical aspects of the preeclampsia
syndrome and its management after recognition. Also presented are the longterm consequences that may accrue in affected women. The pathophysiology
of preeclampsia was detailed in Chapter 40.

DIAGNOSIS AND EVALUATION
■ Diagnosis

In routine prenatal care, gravidas are seen more often during the third
trimester, and this aids early detection of preeclampsia. However, it cannot
always be diagnosed definitively. Increases in systolic and diastolic blood
pressure can be either normal physiological changes or signs of developing
pathology.
Women without overt hypertension, but in whom the early development
of preeclampsia is suspected, are seen more frequently. Heightened
surveillance permits recognition of ominous changes in blood pressure,
critical laboratory findings, and clinical signs and symptoms. Outpatient
surveillance continues unless overt hypertension, proteinuria, headache,
visual changes, or epigastric pain supervene. At Parkland Hospital, women
with new-onset overt hypertension—either diastolic pressures ≥90 mm Hg or
systolic pressures ≥140 mm Hg—are admitted to exclude preeclampsia or to
define its severity.

■ Evaluation
With hospitalization, a systematic evaluation begins:
• Detailed examination, which is coupled with daily scrutiny for headache,
visual changes, or epigastric pain
• Daily weight measurement to identify rapid weight gain
• Quantification of proteinuria or a urine protein: creatinine ratio
• Blood pressure readings with an appropriate-size cuff every 4 hours, unless
previously elevated, which would mandate more frequent readings
• Measurements of serum creatinine and hepatic transaminase levels and a
hemogram that includes a platelet count. The frequency of testing is
determined by hypertension severity. Although some recommend
assessment of serum uric acid and lactate dehydrogenase levels and
coagulation, their value has been questioned (Chescheir, 2019; CondeAgudelo, 2015)
• Evaluation of fetal size and well-being and amnionic fluid volume
• Reduced physical activity may have benefits, although evidence is not
robust.
Still investigational as a clinical tool, measurements of placental growth
factor (PlGF) and soluble fms-like tyrosine kinase 1 (sF1t-1) levels will

likely be available to help predict preeclampsia (Barton, 2020; Chappell,
2013; Zeisler, 2016). Chapter 40 (p. 694) describes their role in
preeclampsia genesis.
In sum, evaluation goals are early identification of preeclampsia and then
management until timely delivery. Complete abatement of all signs and
symptoms is uncommon until after delivery. If severe preeclampsia is
diagnosed using the criteria in Table 40-2 (p. 690), further management is
subsequently described.

■ Consideration for Delivery
With gestational hypertension, its morbidity and management vary depending
on hypertension severity, presence of preeclampsia, and gestational age of
the fetus. The basic management objectives for any pregnancy complicated
by preeclampsia are: (1) termination of pregnancy with the least possible
trauma to mother and fetus, (2) birth of a healthy newborn that subsequently
thrives, and (3) complete restoration of health to the mother. In many with
preeclampsia, especially those at or near term, all three objectives are
served equally well by induction of labor.
Termination of pregnancy is the only known cure for preeclampsia.
Headache, visual changes, or epigastric pain are indicative that convulsions
may be imminent, and oliguria is another ominous sign. Severe preeclampsia
almost always demands anticonvulsant and antihypertensive therapy,
followed by delivery. Treatment for eclampsia is identical. Prime objectives
are to forestall convulsions, control blood pressure to prevent intracranial
hemorrhage and serious damage to other organs, and deliver a healthy
newborn. This is true even when the cervix is unfavorable. Labor induction
is carried out, usually with preinduction cervical ripening (Chap. 26, p. 488).
Concerns stemming from an unfavorable cervix, a perceived sense of
urgency because of preeclampsia severity, and a need to coordinate neonatal
intensive care have led some to advocate for cesarean delivery. In an earlier
study from Parkland Hospital, Alexander and colleagues (1999) reviewed
278 singleton liveborn neonates weighing 750 to 1500 g delivered of women
with severe preeclampsia. In half of the women, labor was induced, and
induction was successful in accomplishing vaginal delivery in a third.
Similar data were reported from the Consortium on Safe Labor (Coviello,
2019). In this study, half of 914 women with severe preeclampsia underwent

induction, and half of these were delivered vaginally. Others have reported
similar observations (Alanis, 2008; Roland, 2017). For these reasons, we
attempt labor induction and reserve cesarean delivery for other obstetrical
indications.
With preeclampsia without severe features, optimal delivery timing has
not been widely studied. A randomized trial of 756 women with mild
preeclampsia supported delivery after 37 weeks’ gestation (Koopmans,
2009). This practice is also supported by the American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020a). At Parkland Hospital, we deliver
women with preeclampsia without severe features at 38 weeks’ gestation.
With a preterm fetus, the tendency is to delay delivery to help reduce the
risk of neonatal death or serious morbidity from prematurity. Such a policy
certainly is justified in milder cases. Assessments of fetal well-being and
placental function are performed, especially when the fetus is immature. To
assess these, most recommend frequent performance of nonstress testing or
biophysical profiles, which are described in Chapter 20 (p. 392). The
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2021a,b)
recommends consideration for antenatal surveillance twice weekly for those
with gestational hypertension and nonsevere features and daily testing for
those with severe features.
With late-preterm fetuses, that is, those between 34 and 36 weeks’
gestation, the decision to deliver is less clear (Barton, 2011; Langenveld,
2011). The Dutch HYPITAT-II study randomly assigned women with
nonsevere hypertension between 34 and 37 weeks to immediate delivery or
to expectant management (Broekhuijsen, 2015). Immediate delivery reduced
the risks for adverse maternal outcomes—1.1 versus 3.1 percent. However,
it increased the risk for neonatal respiratory distress syndrome— 5.7 versus
1.7 percent.
In a more recent study, 901 women at 34 to <37 weeks’ gestation with
nonsevere preeclampsia were randomly assigned to early delivery or
expectant management (Chappell, 2019). A third of each group self-stratified
into intervals of 34, 35, and 36 weeks’ gestation. For women in the
immediate delivery group, rates of the primary maternal outcomes, which
were features of severe preeclampsia, were significantly lower than in the
expectant group. Conversely, rates of adverse perinatal outcomes, which
were perinatal deaths or neonatal unit admission, were significantly greater
in the immediate delivery group. Similar findings were reported by other

(Bernardes, 2019; Chatzakis, 2021). Last, the PEACOCK study found that
angiogenic biomarkers did not help determine the need for delivery in latepreterm preeclampsia (Duhig, 2021). At Parkland Hospital, we favor an
active management approach given the maternal risks of expectant
management. However, if preeclampsia is nonsevere, we routinely induce
after 38 completed weeks.

■ Inpatient or Outpatient Care
For women with mild to moderate stable hypertension, whether or not
preeclampsia has been confirmed, monitoring is continued. During
surveillance, reduced physical activity throughout much of the day, at least
intuitively, seems reasonable. Complete bed rest was not recommended in
the prior consensus work of the American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists’ Task Force on Hypertension in Pregnancy (2013). Also, the
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine (2020b) suggests that activity
restriction not be prescribed for women with hypertensive disorders.
Complete bed rest is pragmatically unachievable because of the severe
restrictions it places on otherwise well women. It likely also predisposes to
thromboembolism (Knight, 2007; McCarty-Singleton, 2014).
To reduce activity, several studies have addressed the benefits of
inpatient care and outpatient management. The concept of prolonged
hospitalization for women with hypertension arose during the 1970s. At
Parkland Hospital, an inpatient antepartum unit was established in 1973 by
Dr. Peggy Whalley to provide care for such women. Initial results from this
unit were reported by Hauth (1976) and Gilstrap (1978) and their coworkers.
Most hospitalized women have a beneficial response characterized by
amelioration or improvement of hypertension. These women are not
“cured,” and nearly 90 percent have recurrent hypertension before or
during labor. By 2020, more than 10,000 nulliparas with mild to moderate,
early-onset hypertension during pregnancy had been managed successfully in
this unit. This relatively simple unit requires modest nursing care, no drugs
other than iron and folate supplements, and few essential laboratory tests.
Provider costs—not charges—for this care are minimal compared with the
cost of neonatal intensive care for a preterm neonate. Importantly,
thromboembolic disease has been rare in these women.

Many clinicians believe that further hospitalization is not warranted if
hypertension abates within a few days, and this has emboldened third-party
payers to deny inpatient reimbursement. Consequently, many women with
mild to moderate hypertension are managed at home. For women in
vulnerable sociodemographic home situations, this strategy may not be
feasible. In other groups, outpatient management may continue as long as
preeclampsia syndrome does not worsen and fetal jeopardy is not suspected.
Decreased activity is recommended, and women are encouraged to report
symptoms. Home blood pressure and urine protein monitoring or frequent
evaluations by a visiting nurse may be beneficial.
To assess this approach, 1182 nulliparas with mild gestational
hypertension—20 percent had proteinuria—were managed with home care
(Barton, 2002). Their mean gestational ages were 32 to 33 weeks at
enrollment and 36 to 37 weeks at delivery. Severe preeclampsia developed
in approximately 20 percent, two women had eclampsia, and 3 percent
developed hemolysis, elevated liver enzyme levels, and low platelet count
(HELLP) syndrome. Perinatal outcomes were generally good. In
approximately 20 percent, fetal growth was restricted, and the perinatal
mortality rate was 4.2 deaths in 1000 births.
Table 41-1 presents two studies that compare continued hospitalization
and outpatient care. In the first trial, after hospital evaluation, 218 women
with mild gestational nonproteinuric hypertension were randomly assigned to
continued hospitalization versus home care (Crowther, 1992). The mean
hospitalization duration was 22.2 days for women with inpatient management
compared with only 6.5 days in the home care group. Severe hypertension
and preterm delivery before 34 and before 37 weeks’ gestation were
significantly increased twofold in the outpatient group. Despite this, maternal
and newborn outcomes were otherwise similar.
TABLE 41-1. Randomized Clinical Trials Comparing Hospitalization
Versus Routine Care for Women with Mild Gestational Hypertension or
Preeclampsia

1
Another approach, popular in Europe, is day care. In the second trial
(Table 41-1), 374 women with gestational hypertension were randomized to
either day care or inpatient care (Turnbull, 2004). Almost 95 percent had
mild to moderate hypertension and 86 women had ≥1+ proteinuria. There
were no perinatal deaths, and none of the women developed eclampsia or
HELLP syndrome. Costs for either scheme were not significantly different,
and general satisfaction favored day care.
In sum, either inpatient or close outpatient management is appropriate for
a woman with mild de novo hypertension, including those with nonsevere
preeclampsia. Keys to success are close surveillance and patients with home
support and access to care.

■ Antihypertensive Therapy for Mild to Moderate
Hypertension
Antihypertensive drugs have been evaluated to prolong pregnancy or modify
perinatal outcomes in pregnancies complicated by various hypertensive
disorders. Treatment for women with chronic hypertension complicating
pregnancy is discussed in Chapter 53 (p. 949). Drug treatment for early mild
preeclampsia has been disappointing (Table 41-2). Sibai and associates
(1987a) reported that women given labetalol had significantly lower mean
blood pressures than those given a placebo. However, mean pregnancy
prolongation, gestational age at delivery, and birthweights did not differ
between groups. The cesarean delivery rate and the number of newborns
admitted to special-care nurseries also were similar. The frequency of

growth-restricted neonates was doubled in women given labetalol
compared with placebo—19 versus 9 percent.
TABLE 41-2. Randomized Placebo-Controlled Trials of Antihypertensive
Therapy for Early Mild Gestational Hypertension

The three other studies listed in Table 41-2 compare labetalol or a
calcium-channel blocker drugs against placebo. Except for fewer episodes of
severe hypertension, none of these studies showed any benefits from
antihypertensive treatment (Magee, 2015). One review of 49 randomized
trials of antihypertensive therapy for mild to moderate gestational
hypertension compared with either no treatment or placebo reached similar
conclusions (Abalos, 2014).

■ Expectant Management of Preterm Severe Preeclampsia
Up through the early 1990s, women with severe preeclampsia were usually
immediately delivered. Subsequently, however, another approach for women
with preterm severe preeclampsia was studied. The aim of “expectant”
management was to improve neonatal outcome without compromising
maternal safety. This approach always includes careful daily—and usually
more frequent—inpatient monitoring of the mother and her fetus.

Theoretically, antihypertensive therapy has potential application when
severe preeclampsia develops before intact neonatal survival is expected.
Such management has been controversial and is potentially dangerous
(Churchill, 2018). In one of the first studies, Sibai and the Memphis group
(1985) attempted to prolong pregnancy because of fetal immaturity in 60
women with severe preeclampsia between 18 and 27 weeks. The results
were disastrous. The perinatal mortality rate was 87 percent. Although no
mothers died, 13 suffered placental abruption, 10 had eclampsia, three
developed renal failure, two had hypertensive encephalopathy, one had an
intracerebral hemorrhage, and another had a ruptured hepatic hematoma.
Because of their early study, the Memphis group redefined criteria and
performed a randomized trial of aggressive versus expectant management for
95 women who had severe preeclampsia but with more advanced gestations
of 28 to 32 weeks (Sibai, 1994). Women with HELLP syndrome were
excluded from this trial. Aggressive management included glucocorticoid
administration for fetal lung maturation followed by delivery in 48 hours.
Expectantly managed women were observed at bed rest and given either
labetalol or nifedipine orally for severe hypertension. In this study,
pregnancy was prolonged for a mean of 15.4 days in the expectant
management group. An overall improvement in neonatal outcomes also was
reported.
In women expectantly managed at 23 to 34 weeks’ gestation, serious
complications have included placental abruption, HELLP syndrome,
pulmonary edema, renal failure, and eclampsia (Table 41-3). Moreover,
perinatal mortality rates averaged 90 per 1000 births. Fetal-growth
restriction was common, and in studies from The Netherlands, it was an
astounding 94 percent (Ganzevoort, 2005a,b). Perinatal mortality rates were
disproportionately high in these growth-restricted neonates (Haddad, 2007;
Shear, 2005).
TABLE 41-3. Maternal and Perinatal Outcomes with Expectant
Management of Severe Preeclampsia from 23 to 34 Weeks

Following these experiences, expectant management became more
commonly practiced, with the caveat that women with HELLP syndrome or
growth-restricted fetuses were usually excluded. More recently, a
prospective comparative study reported that expectant management of women
with “stable” HELLP syndrome at <34 weeks may benefit mother and fetus
(Cavaignac-Vitalis, 2019). The MEXPRE Latin Study was a multicenter trial
that randomly assigned 267 women with severe preeclampsia at 28 to 32
weeks’ gestation to prompt delivery or to expectant management (Vigil-De
Gracia, 2013). The perinatal mortality rate approximated 90 per 1000 in
each group, and the composite neonatal morbidity outcome was not improved
with expectant management. Conversely, fetal-growth restriction—22 versus
9 percent—and placental abruption—7.6 versus 1.5 percent—were
significantly higher in the group managed expectantly.
Churchill and colleagues (2018) performed a Cochrane Database review
of six randomized trials of interventionist versus expectant care for severe
preeclampsia between 24 and 34 weeks. Their review had findings similar
to those in Table 41-3 and suggested that expectant management was
beneficial to perinatal outcome. However, data were insufficient to establish
conclusions on maternal health.

■ Expectant Management of Midtrimester Preeclampsia

Several small studies have focused on expectant management of severe
preeclampsia syndrome before 28 weeks’ gestation. In one review of eight
such studies, maternal complications were common among nearly 200
women with severe preeclampsia with an onset <26 completed weeks
(Bombrys, 2009). Because no neonates survived when delivered before 23
weeks, most experts recommend pregnancy termination in these cases. For
women with slightly more advanced pregnancies, however, the decision is
less clear. For example, at 23 weeks’ gestation, the perinatal survival rate
was 18 percent, but long-term perinatal morbidity is yet unknown. For
women with pregnancies at 24 to 26 weeks, perinatal survival approaches 60
percent, and it averages almost 90 percent for those at 26 weeks.
As shown in Table 41-4, maternal complications—especially HELLP
syndrome—were commonplace and one mother died. Perinatal mortality
exceeded 50 percent. At this time, no comparative studies attest to perinatal
benefits of such expectant treatment versus early delivery in the face of
serious maternal complications, which approach rates of 50 percent.
TABLE 41-4. Pregnancy Outcomes with Expectant Management of Women
with Severe Midtrimester Preeclampsiaa

Corticosteroids for Lung Maturation
To enhance fetal lung maturation, glucocorticoids have been administered to
women with severe hypertension who are remote from term. Treatment does
not seem to worsen maternal hypertension, and a lower incidence of
respiratory distress and improved fetal survival rates have been cited. That
said, only one randomized trial has evaluated corticosteroids given to
hypertensive women for fetal lung maturation. This trial included 218 women
who had severe preeclampsia between 26 and 34 weeks’ gestation and who

were randomly assigned to betamethasone or placebo administration
(Amorim, 1999). Rates of neonatal complications that included respiratory
distress, intraventricular hemorrhage, and death were reduced significantly
when betamethasone was given compared with placebo. On the heavily
weighted negative side, there were two maternal deaths and 18 stillbirths.
We add these findings to buttress our unenthusiastic acceptance of attempts to
prolong gestation in many of these women (Alexander, 2015; Bloom, 2003).

Corticosteroids to Ameliorate HELLP Syndrome
Several observational studies have indicated that corticosteroid therapy
would ameliorate facets of the HELLP syndrome (Añez-Aguayo, 2018;
Martin, 2016). Subsequently, at least three randomized trials aimed to
evaluate the benefits of glucocorticoids given to improve the laboratory
abnormalities associated with HELLP syndrome. Fonseca and associates
(2005) randomly assigned 132 women with HELLP syndrome to either
dexamethasone or placebo administration. Outcomes assessed included
hospitalization length, recovery time of abnormal laboratory test results,
resolution of clinical parameters, and complications that included acute renal
failure, pulmonary edema, eclampsia, and death. None of these was
significantly different between the two groups. In another study, 105
postpartum women with HELLP syndrome were assigned to dexamethasone
or placebo treatment. Katz and colleagues (2008) found no advantage to
dexamethasone (Fig. 41-1). In the third study, preeclamptic women were
given either placebo or methylprednisolone if their platelet count was
between 50,000 and 150,000/μL (Pourrat, 2016). Again, no benefits were
gained from corticosteroid therapy. A Bolivian study did show benefits from
corticosteroid therapy, however, it was not randomized (Añez-Aguayo,
2018). Because of these findings, the 2013 Task Force does not recommend
corticosteroid treatment to improve thrombocytopenia with HELLP
syndrome.

FIGURE 41-2 Clinical management algorithm for severe preeclampsia at <34 weeks. HELLP =
hemolysis, elevated liver enzyme levels, low platelet count; L & D = labor and delivery; MgS04=
magnesium sulfate; UOP = urine output.

■ Expectant Management Recommendations
Taken in toto, these studies do not show overwhelming benefits of expectant
management of severe preeclampsia in women with gestations from 24 to 32
weeks compared with maternal risks. Despite these caveats, the Society for
Maternal-Fetal Medicine (2011) has determined that such management is a
reasonable alternative in selected women with severe preeclampsia before
34 weeks (Fig. 41-2). The Task Force (2013) supports this recommendation.
As shown in Table 41-5, such management calls for inpatient maternal and
fetal surveillance with delivery prompted by evidence for worsening severe
preeclampsia or maternal or fetal compromise. Although attempts are made
for vaginal delivery in most cases, the likelihood of cesarean delivery rises
with decreasing gestational age.

FIGURE 41-1 Recovery times for platelet counts and serum aspartate transaminase (AST) levels in
women with HELLP syndrome assigned to receive treatment with dexamethasone or placebo.

TABLE 41-5. Indications for Delivery in Women <34 Weeks’ Gestation
Managed Expectantly

Our view is more conservative. Undoubtedly, the overriding reason to
terminate pregnancies with severe preeclampsia is maternal safety. Indeed, it
seems obvious that a delay to prolong gestation in women with severe
preeclampsia may have serious maternal consequences. These observations
are even more pertinent when considered with the absence of convincing
evidence that perinatal outcomes are markedly improved by the average

prolongation of pregnancy by approximately 1 week. If undertaken, the
caveats that mandate delivery shown in Table 41-5 should be strictly heeded.

■ Experimental Therapies
In preliminary studies, therapies have been used to lower serum levels of
antiangiogenic factors in hopes to mitigate their adverse actions. Some of
these include therapeutic apheresis to lower sFlt-1 levels (Thadhani, 2016;
Winkler, 2018). Another novel therapy uses RNA molecules to silence
placental sFlt-1 (Turanov, 2018). The proton-pump inhibitor esomeprazole
was studied in women with early-onset preeclampsia (Cluver, 2018).
Sildenafil citrate, a phosphodiesterase inhibitor, has been provided to
promote vasodilation (Trapani, 2016; Vigil-De Gracia, 2016). Other studies
compared recombinant antithrombin infusion with placebo (Paidas, 2020).
In general, none of these therapies has shown promise.

SEVERE PREECLAMPSIA AND ECLAMPSIA
Classification of preeclampsia with severe features is summarized in Table
40-2 (p. 690). Briefly, features include systolic blood pressure ≥160 mm Hg
or diastolic pressure ≥110 mm Hg; liver derangement with transaminitis;
thrombocytopenia; renal insufficiency; pulmonary edema; new-onset
headache; or visual changes. Eclampsia is defined by new-onset tonicclonic, focal, or multifocal seizures in the absence of other causes.

■ Eclampsia
The development of eclampsia appreciably raises the risk to mother and fetus
(Fishel-Bartal, 2020). In an earlier report, Mattar and Sibai (2000)
described outcomes in 399 consecutive women with eclampsia from 1977
through 1998. Major maternal complications included placental abruption—
10 percent, neurological deficits—7 percent, aspiration pneumonia—7
percent, pulmonary edema—5 percent, cardiopulmonary arrest—4 percent,
and acute kidney injury (AKI)—4 percent. Moreover, 1 percent of these
women died. Several subsequent reports similarly described excessive
maternal morbidity and mortality rates with eclampsia that also included

HELLP syndrome, pulmonary embolism, and stroke (Andersgaard, 2006;
Knight, 2007).
Almost without exception—but at times unnoticed— preeclampsia
precedes convulsions. Eclampsia is most common in the last trimester and
becomes increasingly frequent as term approaches. Postpartum, the incidence
of eclampsia has declined during the past decade. Improved access to
prenatal care, earlier detection of antepartum preeclampsia, and prophylactic
use of magnesium sulfate are explanations (Chames, 2002). Other diagnoses
should be considered in women with convulsions more than 48 hours
postpartum or in women with focal neurological deficits, prolonged coma, or
atypical eclampsia.

■ Clinical Findings with Eclampsia
Eclamptic seizures may be violent, and the woman must be protected,
especially her airway. So forceful are the muscular movements that the
woman may throw herself out of her bed, and if not protected, her tongue is
bitten by the violent action of the jaws (Fig. 41-3). This phase, in which the
muscles alternately contract and relax, may last approximately a minute.

FIGURE 41-3 Hematoma of tongue from laceration during an eclamptic convulsion.
Thrombocytopenia may have contributed to the bleeding.

Gradually, the muscular movements become smaller and less frequent,
and finally the woman lies motionless.
After a seizure, the woman is postictal, but in some, a coma of variable
duration ensues. When the convulsions are infrequent, the woman usually
recovers some degree of consciousness after each attack. As the woman
arouses, a semiconscious combative state may ensue. In severe cases, coma
persists from one convulsion to another, and death may result.
Rarely, a single convulsion may be followed by coma from which the
woman may never emerge. As a rule, however, death does not occur until
after frequent convulsions. Last, and also rarely, convulsions continue
unabated—status epilepticus—and require deep sedation and even general
anesthesia to obviate anoxic encephalopathy.
The respiratory rate after an eclamptic convulsion usually rises and may
reach 50 or more per minute in response to hypercarbia, lactic acidemia, and
transient hypoxia. Cyanosis may be observed in severe cases. High fever is a
grave sign as it likely emanates from cerebrovascular hemorrhage.
Proteinuria is usually present, and a fourth of women with severe
preeclampsia have some degree of AKI (Rodriguez, 2021). Urine output may
be diminished appreciably, and occasionally anuria develops.
Hemoglobinuria may be seen, but hemoglobinemia is rare. Edema may be
pronounced (Fig. 41-4).

FIGURE 41-4 Severe edema in a young nullipara with antepartum preeclampsia. Fingerprint
indentations from clinical assessment can be seen on both shins. Rings at the ankles formed from elastic
sock bands. (Reproduced with permission from Dr. Nidhi Shah.)

With severe preeclampsia, urinary output rises after delivery and is
usually an early sign of improvement. With renal dysfunction, serum
creatinine levels are serially monitored. Proteinuria and edema ordinarily
disappear within a week postpartum. In most cases, blood pressure returns to
normal within a few days to 2 weeks after delivery (Berks, 2009). As
subsequently discussed, persisting and severe hypertension likely predicts
underlying chronic vascular disease.
In antepartum eclampsia, labor may begin spontaneously shortly after
convulsions ensue and may progress rapidly. If the seizures develop during
labor, contractions may increase in frequency and intensity, and the duration
of labor may be shortened. Because of maternal hypoxemia and lactic
acidemia caused by convulsions, fetal bradycardia often follows a seizure
(Fig. 41-5). In our experiences, the fetal heart rate usually recovers within 2
to 10 minutes. If it persists more than 10 minutes, another cause of
bradycardia, such as placental abruption, should be considered.

FIGURE 41-5 Fetal heart rate tracing shows fetal bradycardia following an intrapartum eclamptic
convulsion. Bradycardia resolved and beat—to—beat variability returned approximately 5 minutes
following the seizure.

Pulmonary edema may follow shortly after eclamptic convulsions or
several hours later. This complication is further explored on page 724.
Occasionally, sudden death occurs synchronously with an eclamptic
seizure, or it follows shortly thereafter. Most often in these cases, a massive
cerebral hemorrhage is the cause (Fig. 40-11, p. 700). Hemiplegia may result
from sublethal hemorrhage. Cerebral hemorrhages are more likely in older
women with underlying chronic hypertension. For women with a
neurological deficit after an eclamptic seizure, consideration is given for
emergent cranial computed tomography (CT) scanning. Up to 5 percent of
women with eclampsia have altered consciousness, including persistent
coma, following a seizure. This may be due to extensive cerebral edema, and
associated transtentorial herniation may cause death (Cunningham, 2000). In
approximately 10 percent of eclamptic women, some degree of blindness
follows a seizure. The causes of impaired vision which usually improves
postpartum, are discussed in Chapter 40 (p. 701).
Rarely, eclampsia is followed by psychosis, and the woman becomes
violent. This may last for several days to 2 weeks. The prognosis for return
to normal function is good, provided mental illness was not preexisting. It is
presumed to be similar to postpartum psychosis discussed in Chapter 64 (p.

1148). Antipsychotic medications have been effective in the few cases of
posteclampsia psychosis treated at Parkland Hospital.
Generally, eclampsia is more likely to be diagnosed too frequently rather
than overlooked. Epilepsy, encephalitis, meningitis, brain tumor,
neurocysticercosis, amnionic fluid embolism, postdural puncture cephalalgia,
and ruptured cerebral aneurysm during late pregnancy or in the puerperium
may simulate eclampsia. Until other such causes are excluded, however, all
pregnant women with convulsions should be considered to have eclampsia.
As a pragmatic rule, loading with magnesium sulfate should be considered
while alternate diagnoses are explored.

MANAGEMENT OF SEVERE PREECLAMPSIAECLAMPSIA
Most eclampsia regimens in the United States adhere to a similar philosophy:
• Control or prevent convulsions using an intravenous loading dose of
magnesium sulfate. This is followed by maintenance dosing, usually given
intravenously
• Provide intermittent antihypertensive medication to lower dangerously high
blood pressure
• Avoid diuretics unless pulmonary edema is obvious; limit intravenous fluid
administration unless fluid loss is excessive; and avoid hyperosmotic
agents
• Deliver the fetus to resolve preeclampsia.

■ Magnesium Sulfate
This parenterally administered agent is an effective anticonvulsant and
avoids producing central nervous system depression. It may be given
intravenously by continuous infusion or intramuscularly by intermittent
injection (Table 41-6). A third option is intermittent, intravenous, 2-g
injections (Easterling, 2018). Dosages for severe preeclampsia mirror those
for eclampsia. Because labor and delivery is a more likely time for seizures
to develop, women with severe preeclampsia or eclampsia usually are given
magnesium sulfate during labor and for 24 hours postpartum. In the United

States, magnesium sulfate is almost universally administered intravenously.
Of concern, magnesium sulfate solutions, although inexpensive to prepare,
are not readily available in all parts of the developing world. Even if
solutions are available, the technology to infuse them may not be. Thus, the
drug can be administered intramuscularly, and this is as effective as
intravenous infusion (Pritchard, 1955, 1975, 1984; Salinger, 2013).
TABLE 41-6. Magnesium Sulfate Dosage Schedule for Severe
Preeclampsia and Eclampsia

Magnesium sulfate is not given to treat hypertension. Magnesium ion most
likely exerts a specific anticonvulsant action on the cerebral cortex.
Typically, the mother stops convulsing after the initial 4-g loading dose. By
an hour or two, she regains consciousness sufficiently to be oriented to place
and time.
The magnesium sulfate dosage regimens presented in Table 41-6 usually
result in increased plasma magnesium levels. Data from Brookfield and
associates (2016) are illustrated in Figure 41-6. When magnesium sulfate is
given to arrest an eclamptic seizure, up to 15 percent of women will have a
subsequent convulsion. If so, an additional 2-g dose of magnesium sulfate in
a 20-percent solution is slowly administered intravenously. In a small
woman, this additional 2-g dose may be used once, but it can be given twice

if needed in a larger woman. In only 5 of 245 women with eclampsia at
Parkland Hospital was it necessary to use alternative supplementary
anticonvulsant medication to control seizures (Pritchard, 1984). For these, a
small dose of a short-acting benzodiazepine such as midazolam or lorazepam
is given intravenously. Their prolonged use is avoided because of an
associated higher mortality rate from aspiration pneumonia (Royal College
of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists, 2006).

FIGURE 41-6 Serum magnesium concentration in normotensive and preeclamptic women following a
4-g loading dose of magnesium sulfate and 2 g/h infusion.

Maintenance magnesium sulfate therapy has traditionally been continued
for 24 hours after delivery. For eclampsia that develops postpartum,
magnesium sulfate is administered for 24 hours after the onset of
convulsions. A few investigators have truncated this therapy duration to 12
hours and reported no seizures (Anjum, 2016; Ehrenberg, 2006; Kashanian,
2016). Outcomes have also been reported when magnesium sulfate therapy
was stopped after delivery (Ludmir, 2017; Vigil-De Gracia, 2018). These
studies are relatively small, and the abbreviated magnesium sulfate regimens
need further study before being routinely implemented.

Pharmacology and Toxicology

Parenterally administered magnesium is cleared almost totally by renal
excretion, and magnesium clearance rate is approximately a third of
glomerular filtration rate (GFR) determined by creatinine clearance.
Magnesium intoxication is unusual when the GFR is normal or only slightly
reduced. Adequate urine output usually correlates with preserved GFR. That
said, magnesium excretion is not urine flow dependent, and urinary volume
per unit time does not, per se, predict renal function. Thus, serum creatinine
levels must be measured to confirm a decreased GFR.
Eclamptic convulsions are almost always prevented or arrested by
plasma magnesium levels maintained at 4 to 7 mEq/L, 4.8 to 8.4 mg/dL, or
2.0 to 3.5 mmol/L. However, one review of magnesium pharmacokinetics
showed that most regimens result in much lower serum magnesium levels
(Okusanya, 2016). This was especially true if only 1 g/hr was infused (Yefet,
2017). Importantly, the obesity epidemic has affected these observations
(Cunningham, 2016). Tudela and colleagues (2013) described our results
from Parkland Hospital with magnesium administration to obese women.
More than 60 percent of women who had a body mass index (BMI) >30
kg/m2 and who were receiving a 2-g/hr dose had subtherapeutic levels at 4
hours. Thus, most obese women would require 3 g/hr to maintain effective
plasma levels. That said, most currently do not recommend routine
magnesium level measurements (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2020a; Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists,
2006).
Patellar reflexes disappear when the plasma magnesium level reaches 10
mEq/L—approximately 12 mg/dL—presumably because of a curariform
action. This sign serves to warn of impending magnesium toxicity. When
plasma levels rise above 10 mEq/L, breathing weakens. At 12 mEq/L or
higher levels, respiratory paralysis and respiratory arrest follow (Somjen,
1966). Treating with calcium gluconate or calcium chloride, 1 g
intravenously, coupled with magnesium sulfate discontinuation, usually
reverses mild to moderate respiratory depression. One of these agents
should be readily available whenever magnesium is being infused.
Unfortunately, the effects of intravenously administered calcium may be
short-lived if a steady-state toxic magnesium level has been reached. For
severe respiratory depression and arrest, prompt tracheal intubation and
mechanical ventilation are lifesaving. Direct toxic effects on the myocardium
from high levels of magnesium sulfate are uncommon (Morisaki, 2000).

Because magnesium is cleared almost exclusively by renal excretion,
our described dosages of magnesium sulfate will become excessive if the
GFR is substantially decreased. The initial 4- or 6-g loading dose of
magnesium sulfate can be safely administered regardless of renal function. It
is important to administer the standard loading dose and not to reduce it. A
loading dose achieves the desired therapeutic level, and the infusion
maintains the steady-state level. Thus, only the maintenance infusion rate
should be altered for those with a diminished GFR. Renal function is
estimated by measuring plasma creatinine. Whenever plasma creatinine
levels are >1.0 mg/mL, serial serum magnesium levels are determined to
guide the infusion rate (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2020a).
After a 4-g intravenous dose is administered during 15 minutes, mean
arterial pressure falls slightly and is accompanied by a 13-percent rise in
cardiac index (Cotton, 1986b). Thus, magnesium lowers systemic vascular
resistance and mean arterial pressure. At the same time, cardiac output is
increased. These findings are coincidental with transient nausea and flushing,
and the cardiovascular effects persist for only 15 minutes despite continued
magnesium infusion. Magnesium-induced vasodilation is weaker in placental
vessels because of diminished calcium-channel activity (Tang, 2018).
Thurnau and coworkers (1987) showed that magnesium therapy led to a
small but significant rise in the cerebrospinal fluid’s total magnesium
concentration. The magnitude was directly proportional to the corresponding
serum concentration.

Other Effects
Magnesium has anticonvulsant and neuroprotective effects in animal models.
Some proposed mechanisms of action include: (1) reduced presynaptic
release of the neurotransmitter glutamate, (2) blockade of glutamatergic Nmethyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors, (3) potentiation of adenosine action,
(4) improved calcium buffering by mitochondria, and (5) blockage of
calcium entry via voltage-gated channels (Arango, 2008; Wang, 2012).
In the uterus, relatively high serum magnesium concentrations depress
myometrial contractility. Inhibition of uterine contractility is magnesium dose
dependent, and serum levels of at least 8 to 10 mEq/L are needed to inhibit
uterine contractions (Watt-Morse, 1995). With the suggested magnesium

sulfate regimens for seizure prevention, prolonged myometrial depression
has not been observed. A transient decline in activity during and immediately
after the initial intravenous loading dose can be seen (Leveno, 1998; Witlin,
1997). Blood loss at delivery is not increased by standard magnesium sulfate
treatment (Graham, 2016).

■ Neuroprophylaxis—Prevention of Seizures
Several randomized trials have tested the efficacy of seizure prophylaxis for
women with gestational hypertension, with or without proteinuria. In all,
magnesium sulfate was superior to the comparator agent to prevent
eclampsia. Four of the larger studies are summarized in Table 41-7. In the
study from Parkland Hospital, magnesium sulfate therapy was superior to
phenytoin to prevent seizures in women with gestational hypertension or
preeclampsia (Lucas, 1995). In another study, magnesium sulfate and
nimodipine, which is a calcium-channel blocking drug with specific cerebral
vasodilator activity, were compared in 1650 women with severe
preeclampsia (Belfort, 2003). The rate of eclampsia was more than threefold
higher for women allocated to the nimodipine group—2.6 versus 0.8 percent.
TABLE 41-7. Randomized Comparative Trials of Prophylaxis with
Magnesium Sulfate and Placebo or Another Anticonvulsant in Women with
Gestational Hypertension

The largest comparative study was Magnesium Sulfate for Prevention of
Eclampsia reported by the Magpie Trial Collaboration Group (2002). More
than 10,000 women with severe preeclampsia from 33 countries were
randomly allocated to treatment with magnesium sulfate or placebo. Women
given magnesium had a 58-percent significantly lower risk of eclampsia than
those given placebo. Maternal mortality and placental abruption rates also
were decreased. Child behavior at 18 months did not differ between groups
(Smyth, 2009).

Who Should Be Given Magnesium Sulfate?
Magnesium will prevent proportionately more seizures in women with
correspondingly worse disease. However, severity is difficult to quantify,
and thus deciding which woman might benefit most from neuroprophylaxis is
sometimes difficult. The American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2020a) recommends that women with either eclampsia or
severe preeclampsia should be given magnesium sulfate prophylaxis. Again,
criteria that establish “severity” are not universal.
Thus, the conundrum is whether women with “nonsevere” gestational
hypertension or preeclampsia should receive magnesium neuroprophylaxis.
We found that approximately 1 woman in 100 who has nonsevere

preeclampsia but who is not given magnesium sulfate prophylaxis can be
expected to have a seizure. A fourth of these women likely will require
emergent cesarean delivery and be exposed to the attendant maternal and
perinatal morbidity from general anesthesia. From this, the major question
regarding management of nonsevere gestational hypertension remains
whether it is acceptable to avoid unnecessary treatment of 99 women to risk
eclampsia in one. The answer appears to be yes, as suggested by the
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020a). At Parkland
Hospital, our policy is to give magnesium neuroprophylaxis to women with
preeclampsia with severe features, and conservatively to those with
proteinuria hypertension (Table 40-1, p. 689).

Fetal and Neonatal Effects
Magnesium administered parenterally promptly crosses the placenta to
achieve equilibrium in fetal serum and less so in amnionic fluid (GortzakUzan, 2005; Narasimhulu, 2017). Magnesium sulfate has small but significant
effects on the fetal heart rate pattern and specifically on beat-to-beat
variability (Hallak, 1999). One study showed a lower baseline heart rate that
was within the normal range; decreased variability; and fewer prolonged
decelerations (Duffy, 2012).
Overall, maternal magnesium therapy appears safe for perinates
(Drassinower, 2015). One study of more than 1500 exposed preterm neonates
found no association between the need for neonatal resuscitation and cord
blood magnesium levels (Johnson, 2012). Still, a few neonatal adverse
events are associated with its use. In a Parkland Hospital study of 6654
mostly term, exposed newborns, 6 percent had hypotonia (AbbassiGhanavati, 2012). In addition, exposed neonates had lower 1- and 5-minute
Apgar scores, a higher intubation rate, and more admissions to the special
care nursery. Neonatal depression occurs only if hypermagnesemia at
delivery is severe.
Observational studies suggest a protective effect of magnesium against
the development of cerebral palsy in very-low- birthweight newborns
(Crowther, 2017). These beneficial effects may extend to growth-restricted
fetuses. Randomized trials have also assessed neuroprotective effects for
preterm neonates, and findings are discussed in Chapter 45 (p. 803). One
review expanded this possibility to include term newborns, but data were
insufficient to draw conclusions (Nguyen, 2013).

Maternal Safety and Efficacy
The multinational Eclampsia Trial Collaborative Group study (1995)
involved 1687 women with eclampsia randomly allocated to one of three
different anticonvulsant regimens: magnesium sulfate, diazepam, or phenytoin
(Table 41-8). In aggregate, magnesium sulfate therapy was associated with a
significantly lower incidence of recurrent seizures (9.7 percent) compared
with women given phenytoin (28 percent) or diazepam (17 percent).
Moreover, the aggregate maternal death rate of 3.2 percent with magnesium
sulfate was significantly lower than that of 5.2 percent for the other two
regimens.
TABLE 41-8. Randomized Comparative Trials of Magnesium Sulfate
versus Phenytoin and Diazepam to Prevent Recurrent Eclamptic
Convulsions

■ Severe Hypertension Treatment
Dangerous hypertension can cause cerebrovascular hemorrhage and
hypertensive encephalopathy, and it can trigger eclamptic convulsions. Other
complications are placental abruption and congestive heart failure induced
by elevated hypertensive afterload. Studies highlight the importance of
treating systolic hypertension when blood pressures are >160 mm Hg (Judy,
2019; Martin, 2005, 2016).
Because of these serious sequelae, the Working Group for the National
High Blood Pressure Education Program (2000) and the American College
of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020a) recommend treatment to lower

systolic pressures to a level ≤160 mm Hg and diastolic pressures to ≤110
mm Hg. Lower diastolic pressures can compromise placental perfusion.
From other observations, it seems likely that at least half of serious
hemorrhagic strokes associated with preeclampsia are in women with
chronic hypertension (Cunningham, 2005; Zofkie, 2018). Long-standing
hypertension results in development of Charcot–Bouchard aneurysms in the
deep penetrating arteries of the lenticulostriate branch of the middle cerebral
arteries. These vessels supply the basal ganglia, putamen, thalamus, adjacent
deep white matter, pons, and deep cerebellum. These unique aneurysmal
weakenings predispose these small arteries to rupture during sudden
hypertensive episodes.
Several drugs are available to rapidly lower dangerously elevated blood
pressure in women with pregnancy-associated hypertension. Hydralazine,
labetalol, and nifedipine are recommended as first-line agents by the
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020a). Evidence
supports their value to decrease stroke risk (Cleary, 2018).
All three agents have equivalent efficacy. Comparative studies of
hydralazine and labetalol show similar results (Mable, 1987; Umans, 2015).
Hydralazine causes significantly more maternal tachycardia and palpitations,
whereas labetalol more frequently leads to maternal hypotension and
bradycardia. Randomized trials that compared nifedipine with labetalol
found neither drug definitively superior, but nifedipine lowered blood
pressure more quickly (Gainder, 2019; Zulfeen, 2019). Both drugs are
associated with a reduced frequency of fetal heart rate accelerations (Cahill,
2013). Last, a study comparing nifedipine and hydralazine showed similar
efficacy (Sharma, 2017).
A few other generally available antihypertensive agents have been tested
in clinical trials but are not widely used (Umans, 2015). These include
verapamil, nitroglycerin, nitroprusside, ketanserin, nicardipine, and
nimodipine (Belfort, 2003; Cornette, 2016). Experimental antihypertensive
drugs may eventually be useful for preeclampsia treatment (Lam, 2013).

Hydralazine
This antihypertensive agent is administered intravenously or intramuscularly.
An initial 5- to 10-mg dose can act as rapidly as 10 minutes. If needed, this is
followed by 10-mg doses at 15- to 20-minute intervals until a satisfactory

response is achieved (Table 41-9). Although we will administer a third dose,
the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020a)
recommends labetalol therapy if severe hypertension persists after the
second dose. Another regimen continuously infuses hydralazine at a rate of
0.5 to 10 mg/hr.
TABLE 41-9. Antihypertensive Agents for Urgent Control of Severe
Hypertension

For higher blood pressures, the tendency to give a larger initial dose of
hydralazine should be avoided. The response to 5- to 10-mg doses cannot be
predicted by hypertension severity. Thus, our protocol is to always
administer 5 mg as the initial dose. An adverse response to exceeding this
initial dose is shown in Figure 41-7. This woman had chronic hypertension
complicated by severe superimposed preeclampsia, and hydralazine was
injected more frequently than recommended. Her blood pressure in less than
1 hour dropped from 270/150 mm Hg to 110/80 mm Hg. Fetal heart rate
decelerations characteristic of uteroplacental insufficiency became evident.
Decelerations persisted until her blood pressure was raised with rapid
crystalloid infusion. In some cases, this fetal response to diminished uterine
perfusion may be confused with placental abruption and may result in
unnecessary and potentially dangerous emergency cesarean delivery.

FIGURE 41-7 Hydralazine was given at 5-minute intervals instead of 15-minute intervals. The mean
arterial pressure dropped from 180 to 90 mm Hg within 1 hour and was associated with fetal
bradycardia. Rapid crystalloid infusion raised the mean pressure to 115 mm Hg, and the fetus
recovered.

Labetalol
This effective intravenous antihypertensive agent is an α- and nonselective βblocker. Some prefer its use to hydralazine because of fewer side effects.
Importantly, labetalol is usually not given to asthmatic women.
At Parkland Hospital, we give 10 mg intravenously initially. If blood
pressure has not declined to suitable levels in 10 minutes, 20 mg is given.
The next 10-minute incremental dose is 40 mg and is followed by another 40
mg if needed. If a salutary response is not achieved, an 80-mg dose is
provided (see Table 41-9). The American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2020a) recommends starting with a 10- to 20-mg intravenous
bolus. If not effective, this is followed by 20 to 80 mg every 10 to 30
minutes. If hypertension persists, hydralazine is then given.

Nifedipine
This calcium-channel blocking agent is given initially as a 10- to 20-mg oral
dose of immediate release medication. If necessary after 20 minutes, a 10- to
20-mg oral dose is repeated. With an unsatisfactory response, labetalol is
provided. Nifedipine given sublingually is no longer recommended. This
route is associated with dangerously rapid and extensive effects.

Diuretics
Potent loop diuretics can further compromise placental perfusion. Immediate
effects include redistribution of intravascular volume, which most often is
already reduced in severe preeclampsia (p. 724). Thus, before delivery,
diuretics are not used to lower blood pressure (Zeeman, 2009; Zondervan,
1988). Furosemide or similar drugs are used before delivery solely to treat
pulmonary edema. Discussed on page 725, they may have a role in treatment
of postpartum hypertension.

■ Fluid Therapy
Crystalloid solution is administered routinely at a rate between 60 and 125
mL per hour, unless fluid loss is unusual from vomiting, diarrhea,
diaphoresis, or excessive blood loss. Oliguria is common with severe
preeclampsia. Coupled with the knowledge that maternal blood volume is
likely constricted compared with that of normal pregnancy, it is tempting to
administer intravenous fluids more vigorously. However, controlled,
conservative fluid administration is preferred for the typical woman with
severe preeclampsia. These gravidas already have excessive extracellular
fluid that has inappropriately extravasated from the intravascular
compartment.
Infusion of large fluid volumes enhances the maldistribution and thereby
elevates the risk of pulmonary and cerebral edema (Sciscioner, 2003;
Zinaman, 1985). Thus, for preeclamptic women with anuria, small
incremental boluses can be given to maintain urine output above 30 mL/hr.
Diminished intravascular volume from hemorrhage or fluid loss from
vomiting or fever can similarly be replaced by gradual incremental boluses
of crystalloid. For labor analgesia with neuraxial analgesia, crystalloid
solutions are infused slowly in graded amounts (Chap. 25, p. 479).

Pulmonary Edema
Women with severe preeclampsia who develop pulmonary edema most often
do so postpartum (Cunningham, 1986, 2012). With pulmonary edema in the
eclamptic woman, aspiration of gastric contents, which may be the result of
convulsions, anesthesia, or oversedation, should be excluded. Otherwise, in
women with severe preeclampsia, three common causes of pulmonary edema

are pulmonary capillary permeability edema, cardiogenic edema, or their
combination.
First, in women with preeclampsia, both increased capillary
permeability and greater extravascular fluid oncotic pressure are found
(Brown, 1989; Øian, 1986). If intravenous fluid replacement is vigorous,
pulmonary congestion can follow.
Second, in some women, pulmonary edema may be caused by ventricular
failure from increased afterload that results from severe hypertension. Such
pulmonary edema from ventricular failure is more common in morbidly
obese women and in those with chronic hypertension.

Invasive Hemodynamic Monitoring
Knowledge concerning cardiovascular and hemodynamic pathophysiological
alterations associated with severe preeclampsia–eclampsia has accrued from
studies done using invasive monitoring and a pulmonary artery catheter (Fig.
40-5, p. 694). Two conditions frequently cited as indications are
preeclampsia associated with oliguria or with pulmonary edema (Clark,
2010). Somewhat ironically, it is usually vigorous treatment of the former
that results in most cases of the latter. The Task Force (2013) recommends
against routine invasive monitoring. This is best reserved for women with
severe preeclampsia and with accompanying cardiac disease, renal disease,
or both or with refractory hypertension, oliguria, and pulmonary edema.
Preliminary data from studies using a noninvasive cardiac monitoring
system need to be verified before widespread clinical application (Lavie,
2018).

■ Plasma Volume Expansion
Because the preeclampsia syndrome is associated with hemoconcentration,
some have infused various fluids, starch polymers, albumin concentrates, or
combinations to expand blood volume. Older studies describe serious
complications—especially pulmonary edema—with volume expansion
(Benedetti, 1985; Sibai, 1987b).
The Amsterdam randomized study reported by Ganzevoort and
coworkers (2005a,b) was a well-designed investigation done to evaluate
volume expansion. A total of 216 women with severe preeclampsia were

enrolled between 24 and 34 weeks’ gestation. The study included women
whose preeclampsia was complicated by HELLP syndrome, eclampsia,
pulmonary edema, or fetal-growth restriction. In the group randomly assigned
to volume expansion, each woman was given 250 mL of 6-percent
hydroxyethyl starch infused over 4 hours twice daily. Pregnancy outcomes
were compared with a control group, and none of these were significantly
different. Importantly, serious maternal morbidity and a substantive perinatal
mortality rate accompanied their expectant management.

■ Analgesia and Anesthesia
During the past 25 years, the use of neuraxial analgesia for women with
preeclampsia syndrome has proved ideal. Randomized studies attest to its
safety, and these trials are fully described in Chapter 25 (p. 478).
Initial problems with neuraxial analgesia included hypotension and
diminished uterine perfusion caused by sympathetic blockade in
preeclamptic women, who already have attenuated hypervolemia. However,
slow induction of epidural analgesia with dilute solutions of anesthetic
agents counter the need for rapid infusion of large volumes of crystalloid or
colloid to prevent maternal hypotension (Hogg, 1999; Wallace, 1995).
Importantly, epidural blockade avoids general anesthesia, in which the
stimulation of tracheal intubation may cause sudden severe hypertension.
Such blood pressure spikes can cause pulmonary edema, cerebral edema, or
intracranial hemorrhage. Last, tracheal intubation may be particularly
difficult and thus hazardous in women with airway edema due to
preeclampsia (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists,
2020b).
Judicious fluid administration is essential in women with severe
preeclampsia who receive regional analgesia. Vigorous crystalloid infusion
with epidural blockade in women with severe preeclampsia elevates
pulmonary capillary wedge pressures (Newsome, 1986). Aggressive volume
replacement in preeclamptic women raises their risk for pulmonary edema,
especially in the first 72 hours postpartum (Clark, 1985; Cotton, 1986a).
Last, most cases of pharyngolaryngeal edema are related to aggressive
volume therapy (Heller, 1983). In sum, general anesthesia, epidural
analgesia, or combined spinal-epidural analgesia are acceptable for women
severe preeclampsia if steps are taken to ensure a careful approach to the

selected method. At Parkland Hospital, a gentle bolus is given accompanying
epidural placement (Chap. 25, p. 479).

■ Blood Loss at Delivery
Hemoconcentration or lack of normal pregnancy-induced hypervolemia is an
almost predictable feature of severe preeclampsia–eclampsia (Fig. 40-7, p.
696) (Zeeman, 2009). These women, who consequently lack normal
pregnancy hypervolemia, may poorly tolerate even normal blood loss.
Thus, an appreciable fall in blood pressure soon after delivery most often
means excessive blood loss and not sudden resolution of vasospasm and
endothelial damage. When oliguria follows delivery, the hematocrit should
be evaluated frequently to help detect excessive blood loss. If identified,
hemorrhage should be treated appropriately by crystalloid and blood
transfusion.

■ Persistent Severe Postpartum Hypertension
Postpartum, 8 percent of women develop de novo hypertension (Goel, 2015).
At times, controlling severe hypertension may be difficult or intravenous
hydralazine or labetalol or oral immediate-release nifedipine are being used
repeatedly. In these cases, oral maintenance regimens can be given.
Examples include labetalol or another β-blocking agent; nifedipine extended
release; amlodipine; or another calcium-channel blocking agent (Sharma,
2017). Women so treated are less likely to require readmission (Stamilio,
2021; Wen, 2019). The Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine (2020a) has
developed a check list for postpartum care of women with hypertensive
disorders.
Persistent hypertension is likely aggravated by pathological interstitial
fluid that is now returning to the intravascular compartment, by underlying
chronic hypertension, or by both (Sibai, 2012; Tan, 2002). Nonsteroidal
antiinflammatory drugs do not aggravate postpartum hypertension (Anastasio,
2018; Penfield, 2019). In some women with chronic hypertension and leftventricular hypertrophy, severe postpartum hypertension can cause
pulmonary edema from cardiac failure (Cunningham, 1986, 2019; Sibai,
1987a).

Furosemide
Severe hypertension persists depending on the onset and length of
extracellular fluid mobilization and diuresis. Thus, it seems logical that
furosemide-augmented diuresis might serve to hasten blood pressure control
(Ascarelli, 2005). In one randomized trial of 384 women with hypertensive
disorders of pregnancy, a cohort that received furosemide postpartum had
significantly lower blood pressures at 7 days—6 versus 14 percent—
compared with women who received placebo (Lopes Perdigao, 2021). The
need for antihypertensive treatment to be given at discharge in the furosemide
group also was significantly reduced. In another randomized study, women
with severe postpartum preeclampsia received nifedipine plus furosemide or
nifedipine alone. The furosemide regimen significantly lowered the need for
additional antihypertensive agents—8 versus 26 percent, respectively
(Veena, 2017). Conversely, in one study, torsemide had no significant
benefits (Viteri, 2018).
We use a simple method to estimate excessive extracellular fluid. The
postpartum weight is compared with the most recent prenatal weight, either
from the last clinic visit or from admission for delivery. Typically, soon after
delivery, maternal weight should be reduced by at least 10 to 15 pounds
depending on newborn and placental weight, amnionic fluid volume, and
blood loss. Because of various interventions, especially intravenous
crystalloid infusions given with labor epidural analgesia or during operative
vaginal or cesarean delivery, women with severe preeclampsia often have an
immediate postpartum weight in excess of their last prenatal weight. If this
weight increase is associated with severe persistent postpartum
hypertension, diuresis with intravenous furosemide can be helpful in
controlling blood pressure.

Thrombotic Microangiopathy
Occasionally, women have an atypical syndrome in which severe
preeclampsia–eclampsia persists despite delivery. Martin and associates
(1995) described 18 such women whom they encountered during a 10-year
period. They advocate single or multiple plasma exchange for these women.
In some cases, 3 L of plasma was exchanged three times before a response
was forthcoming. This is a 36- to 45-donor-unit exposure for each patient.
Others have described plasma exchange performed in postpartum women

with HELLP syndrome (Förster, 2002; Obeidat, 2002). In all of these cases,
however, the distinction between HELLP syndrome and thrombotic
thrombocytopenic purpura or hemolytic uremic syndrome was not clear
(Tsai, 2016). In our experiences with more than 55,000 women with
gestational hypertension among nearly 500,000 pregnancies cared for at
Parkland Hospital through 2021, we have encountered very few women with
persistent postpartum hypertension, thrombocytopenia, and renal dysfunction
who were diagnosed as having a thrombotic microangiopathy (Dashe, 1998).

Reversible Cerebral Vasoconstriction Syndrome
This is another cause of persistent hypertension, “thunderclap” headaches,
seizures, and central nervous system findings. Reversible cerebral
vasoconstriction syndrome is characterized by diffuse segmental
constriction of cerebral arteries and may be associated with ischemic and
hemorrhagic strokes. This syndrome has several inciting causes that include
pregnancy and particularly preeclampsia (Ducros, 2012). It is more frequent
in women, and long-term sequelae are uncommon. However, in some cases,
vasoconstriction may be so severe as to cause cerebral ischemia and
infarction (Boitet, 2020). We have encountered only a few women with a
stroke cause by this arteriopathy (Zofkie, 2019). The most appropriate
management is unclear (Cho, 2019).

LONG-TERM CONSEQUENCES
■ Future Pregnancies
Women with preeclampsia during an index pregnancy are at risk for
hypertensive and other disorders in subsequent pregnancies and later in life
(Wang, 2021). In some, but not all women, the risk for hypertension is higher
in the first 6 months postpartum (Giorgione, 2021; Mulder, 2021). Even in
subsequent nonhypertensive pregnancies, women who had preterm
preeclampsia have a higher risk for preterm birth and growth-restricted
neonates (Connealy, 2014; Palatnik, 2016). Generally, the earlier
preeclampsia is diagnosed during the index pregnancy, the greater the
likelihood of recurrence. Women with preeclampsia near term had a
recurrence risk of 23 percent, but nulliparas diagnosed with preeclampsia

before 30 weeks had a recurrence risk as high as 40 percent (Bramham,
2011; Sibai 1986, 1991).
As perhaps expected, women with HELLP syndrome have a substantive
risk for recurrence in subsequent pregnancies. Even if HELLP syndrome
does not recur with subsequent pregnancies, again incidences of preterm
delivery, fetal-growth restriction, placental abruption, and cesarean delivery
are increased (Habli, 2009; Malmström, 2020).

■ Cardiovascular Morbidity
The preeclampsia syndrome is also a marker for subsequent long-term
cardiovascular morbidity (Table 41-10) (Hammad, 2020; Stuart, 2018;
Wang, 2021). Thus, women with hypertension identified during pregnancy
should be evaluated during the first several months postpartum.
TABLE 41-10. Some Long-Term Consequences in Women with
Preeclampsia Syndrome

The Working Group of the NHBPEP (2000) concluded that hypertension
attributable to pregnancy should resolve within 12 weeks of delivery, and
hypertension persisting beyond this time is considered chronic (Chap. 53, p.
944). The Magpie Trial Follow-Up Collaborative Group (2007) reported
that 20 percent of 3375 preeclamptic women seen at a median of 26 months
postpartum had hypertension. From one metanaalysis, a 28-percent incidence
of hypertension was found within 2 years of deliveries complicated by
preeclampsia (Giorgione, 2021). From a Danish registry and after a mean of
almost 15 years, the incidence of chronic hypertension was fivefold higher in
those who had gestational hypertension, fourfold greater after mild
preeclampsia, and sixfold higher after severe preeclampsia compared with
women without hypertension in pregnancy (Lykke, 2009).
Any hypertension during pregnancy is a risk marker for cardiovascular
morbidity in later life (Wang, 2021). As shown in data from Brouwers and
coworkers (2018), the risk is greater in women with recurrent preeclampsia
(Table 41-11). In a study from Iceland, the prevalence of ischemic heart
disease—24 versus 15 percent, and of stroke—9.5 versus 6.5 percent, were
increased in women who had gestational hypertension compared with
normotensive controls (Arnadottir, 2005). In a Swedish population study of
more than 400,000 women, those with recurrent preeclampsia had systolic
dysfunction and a greater incidence of ischemic heart disease (Valensise,
2016). Diastolic dysfunction also is more common (Bokslag, 2018).
Preeclampsia is also a risk for coronary artery calcification and idiopathic
cardiomyopathy (Gammill, 2018; White, 2016).
TABLE 41-11. Long-Term Cardiovascular Morbidities After Recurrent
Preeclampsia Compared with a Single Pregnancy with Preeclampsia and a
Subsequent Normal Pregnancy

Women who have preeclampsia and who develop chronic hypertension
later in life have an increased ventricular mass index before they become
hypertensive (Ghossein-Doha, 2013). Last, in at least some women with
prior preeclampsia, hypertensive cardiovascular pathologies appear to have
begun near the time of their own births. A similar phenomenon is associated
with preterm birth and with fetal-growth disorders.
Other cofactors or comorbidities are related to acquisition of these longterm adverse outcomes (Gastrich, 2012; Harskamp, 2007; Hermes, 2012;
Spaan, 2012). These include the metabolic syndrome, diabetes, obesity,
dyslipidemia, and atherosclerosis (Catzov, 2021; Cho, 2019; Kajantie,
2017). Women with pregnancy-associated hypertension are at increased risk
for type 2 diabetes (Stuart, 2018). Preeclampsia predisposes for later
diabetic retinopathy and retinal detachment (Auger, 2017; Beharier, 2016).

■ Renal Sequelae
Preeclampsia is a marker for subsequent renal disease. Almost 15 percent of
women with prior preeclampsia have renal dysfunction (Lopes van Balen,
2017). This may be related to AKI associated with preeclampsia (Novotny,
2020; Rodriquez, 2021). In a Danish study with more than a million women,
the chronic renal disease rate was sixfold greater in those who had
preeclampsia (Kristensen, 2019). These data need to be considered in light
of the findings that 15 to 20 percent of women with preeclampsia who

undergo renal biopsy have evidence of chronic renal disease (Chesley,
1978). In another long-term study, women with prior preeclampsia were
significantly more likely to be chronically hypertensive—55 versus 7 percent
—compared with control women. They also had higher peripheral vascular
and renovascular resistance and decreased renal blood flow. These data do
not permit conclusions as to cause versus effect (Spaan, 2009).

■ Central Nervous System Sequelae
Eclamptic seizures were once believed to have no significant long-term CNS
sequelae. However, this likely is not the case (Bergman, 2021c; Theilen,
2016). Recall that almost all eclamptic women have multifocal areas of
perivascular edema, and approximately a fourth also have areas of cerebral
infarction (Zeeman, 2004).
In several long-term studies in women with severe preeclampsia and
eclampsia, white-matter lesions in the brain that followed eclamptic
convulsions persist (Aukes, 2009, 2012). Specifically, with magnetic
resonance (MR) imaging, 40 percent of women with prior eclampsia had
more numerous and larger aggregate white-matter lesions compared with 17
percent of normotensive control women. These white-matter lesions were
also found in women with preeclampsia without convulsions (Aukes, 2012).
Others found temporal lobe white-matter changes and reduced cortical
volume in women with prior preeclampsia (Siepmann, 2017).
In some, but not all studies, women with prior eclampsia had
subjectively impaired cognitive functioning and increased risk for dementia
(Basit, 2018; Elharram, 2018). They also had a modest increase in the
frequency of seizure disorders (Nerenberg, 2017). In another study, women
with prior eclampsia had lower vision-related quality of life compared with
control women (Wiegman, 2012).

REFERENCES
Abalos E, Duley L, Steyn DW, et al: Antihypertensive drug therapy for mild to moderate hypertension
during pregnancy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2:CD002252, 2014
Abbassi-Ghanavati M, Alexander JM, McIntire DD: Neonatal effects of magnesium sulfate given to the
mother. Am J Perinatol 29(10):795, 2012
Abdel-Hady ES, Fawzy M, El-Negri M, et al: Is expectant management of early-onset severe
preeclampsia worthwhile in low-resource settings? Arch Gynecol Obstet 282(1):23, 2010

Alanis MC, Robinson CJ, Hulsey TC, et al: Early-onset severe preeclampsia: induction of labor vs
elective cesarean delivery and neonatal outcomes. Am J Obstet Gynecol 199:262e1, 2008
Alexander JM, Bloom SL, McIntire DD, et al: Severe preeclampsia and the very low-birthweight infant:
is induction of labor harmful? Obstet Gynecol 93:485, 1999
Alexander JM, Cunningham FG: Management. In: Taylor RN, Roberts JM, Cunningham FG (eds):
Chesley’s Hypertensive Disorders in Pregnancy, 4th ed. Amsterdam, Academic Press, 2015
Altman D, Carroli G, Duley L, et al: Do women with pre-eclampsia, and their babies, benefit from
magnesium sulphate? The Magpie Trial: a randomised placebo-controlled trial. Lancet
359(9321):1877, 2002
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Hypertension in pregnancy. Report of the
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists’ Task Force on Hypertension in Pregnancy.
Obstet Gynecol 122:1122, 2013
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Gestational hypertension and preeclampsia.
Practice Bulletin No. 222, June 2020a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Obstetric analgesia and anesthesia. Practice
Bulletin No. 209, February 2019, Reaffirmed 2020b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Antepartum fetal surveillance. Practice Bulletin
No. 145, June 2021a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Indications for outpatient antepartum fetal
surveillance. Practice Bulletin No. 145, June 2021b
Amorim MM, Santos LC, Faündes A: Corticosteroid therapy for prevention of respiratory distress
syndrome in severe preeclampsia. Am J Obstet Gynecol 180:1283, 1999
Anastasio HB, Campbell LE, Buermeyer A, et al: Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug administration and
postpartum blood pressure in women with hypertensive disorders of pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol
132(6):1471, 2018
Andersgaard AB, Herbst A, Johansen M, et al: Eclampsia in Scandinavia: incidence, substandard care,
and potentially preventable cases. Acta Obstet Gynecol 85:929, 2006
Anez-Aguayo M, Vigil-De Garcia: Dexamethasone in HELLP syndrome: experience in Bolivia. J
Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 33(1):1, 2018
Anjum S, Goel N, Shrama R, et al: Maternal outcomes after 12 hours and 24 hours of magnesium
sulfate therapy for eclampsia. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 132(1):68, 2016
Arango ME, Mejia-Mantilla JH: Magnesium for acute traumatic brain injury. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev 4:CD005400, 2008
Arnadottir GA, Geirsson RT, Arngrimsson R, et al: Cardiovascular death in women who had
hypertension in pregnancy: a case- control study. BJOG 112:286, 2005
Ascarelli MH, Johnson V, McCreary H, et al: Postpartum preeclampsia management with furosemide: a
randomized clinical trial. Obstet Gynecol 105:29, 2005
Auger N, Fraser WD, Paradis G, et al: Preeclampsia and long—term risk of maternal retinal disorders.
Obstet Gynecol 129(1):42, 2017
Aukes AM, de Groot JC, Aarnoudse JG, et al: Brain lesions several years after eclampsia. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 200(5):504.e1, 2009
Aukes AM, de Groot JC, Wiegman MJ, et al: Long-term cerebral imaging after preeclampsia. BJOG
119(9):1117, 2012
Barton JR, Woelkers DA, Newman RB, et al: Placental growth factor predicts time to delivery in
women with signs or symptoms of early preterm preeclampsia: a prospective multicenter study. Am
J Obstet Gynecol 229:259.e1, 2020

Barton CR, Barton JR, O’Brien JM, et al: Mild gestational hypertension: differences in ethnicity are
associated with altered outcomes in women who undergo outpatient treatment. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 186:896, 2002
Barton J, Barton L, Istwan N, et al: Elective delivery at 340/7 to 366/7 weeks’ gestation and its impact
on neonatal outcomes in women with stable mild gestational hypertension. Am J Obstet Gynecol
204(1):44e1, 2011
Basit S, Wohlfahrt J, Boyd HA: Preeclampsia and risk of dementia later in life: a nationwide cohort
study. BMJ 363:k4109, 2018
Beharier O, Davidson E, Sergienko R, et al: Preeclampsia and future risk for maternal ophthalmic
complications. Am J Perinatol 33(7):703, 2016
Belfort M, Anthony J, Saade G, et al: A comparison of magnesium sulfate and nimodipine for the
prevention of eclampsia. N Engl J Med 348:304, 2003
Belghiti J, Kayem G, Tsatsaris V, et al: Benefits and risks of expectant management of severe
preeclampsia at less than 26 weeks gestation: the impact of gestational age and severe fetal growth
restriction. Am J Obstet Gynecol 205(5):465.e1, 2011
Benedetti TJ, Kates R, Williams V: Hemodynamic observations in severe preeclampsia complicated by
pulmonary edema. Am J Obstet Gynecol 152:330, 1985
Berks D, Steegers EA, Molas M, et al: Resolution of hypertension and proteinuria after preeclampsia.
Obstet Gynecol 114(6):1307, 2009
Bernardes TP, Zwertbroek EF, Broekhuijsen K, et al: Delivery or expectant management for prevention
of adverse maternal and neonatal outcomes in hypertensive disorders of pregnancy: an individual
participant data meta-analysis. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 53(4):43, 2019
Bloom SL, Leveno KJ: Corticosteroid use in special circumstances: preterm ruptured membranes,
hypertension, fetal growth restriction, multiple fetuses. Clin Obstet Gynecol 46:150, 2003
Boitet R, de Gaalon S, Duflos C, et al: Long-term outcomes after reversible cerebral vasoconstriction
syndrome. Stroke 51(2):670, 2020
Bokslag A, Franssen C, Alma LJ, et al: Early-onset preeclampsia predisposes to preclinical diastolic left
ventricular dysfunction in the fifth decade of life: An observational study. PLoS One 13(6):e0198908,
2018
Bombrys AE, Barton JR, Habli M, Sibai BM: Expectant management of severe preeclampsia at 27(0/7)
to 33(6/7) weeks’ gestation: maternal and perinatal outcomes according to gestational age by weeks
at onset of expectant management. Am J Perinatol 26: 441, 2009
Bombrys AE, Barton JR, Nowacki EA, et al: Expectant management of severe preeclampsia at less
than 27 weeks’ gestation: maternal and perinatal outcomes according to gestational age by weeks at
onset of expectant management. Am J Obstet Gynecol 199:247.e1, 2008
Bramham K, Briley AL, Seed P, et al: Adverse maternal and perinatal outcomes in women with
previous preeclampsia: a prospective study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 204(6):512e1, 2011
Broekhuijsen K, van Baaren GJ, van Pampus MG, et al: Immediate delivery versus expectant
monitoring for hypertensive disorders of pregnancy between 34 and 37 weeks of gestation
(HYPITAT-II): an open—label, randomised controlled trial. Lancet 385(9986):2492, 2015
Brookfield KF, Su F, Elkomy MH, et al: Pharmacokinetics and placental transfer of magnesium sulfate
in pregnant women. Am J Obstet Gynecol 214:737e1, 2016
Brouwers L, van der Meiden-van Roest AJ, Savelkoul C, et al: Recurrence of preeclampsia and the risk
of future hypertension and cardiovascular disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis. BJOG
125(13):1642, 2018

Brown MA, Zammit VC, Lowe SA: Capillary permeability and extracellular fluid volumes in pregnancyinduced hypertension. Clin Sci 77:599, 1989
Budden A, Wilkinson L, Buksh MJ, et al: Pregnancy outcomes in women presenting with pre-eclampsia
at less than 25 weeks gestation. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol 46(5):407, 2006
Cahill A, Odibo A, Roehl K, et al: Impact of intrapartum antihypertensives on electronic fetal heart rate
(EFM) patterns in labor. Abstract No. 615, Am J Obstet Gynecol 208 (1 Suppl):S262, 2013
Catzov JM, McNeil RB, Marsh DJ, et al: Early pregnancy atherogenic profile in a first pregnancy and
hypertension risk 2 to 7 years after delivery. J Am Heart Assoc 10(5):e017216, 2021
Cavaignac-Vitalis M, Vidal F, Simon-Toulza C, et al: Conservative versus active management in HELLP
syndrome: results from a cohort study. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 32(11):1769, 2019
Chames MC, Livingston JC, Ivester TS, et al: Late postpartum eclampsia: a preventable disease? Am J
Obstet Gynecol 186: 1174, 2002
Chappell LC, Brocklehurst P, Green ME, et al: Planned early delivery or expectant management for late
preterm pre-eclampsia (PHOENIX): a randomised controlled trial. Lancet 394(10204):1181, 2019
Chappell LC, Brocklehurst P, Green ME, et al: Planned early delivery or expectant management for late
preterm pre-eclampsia (PHOENIX): a randomised controlled trial Lancet 394(10204):1181, 2019
Chappell LC, Duckworth S, Seed P T, et al: Diagnostic accuracy of placental growth factor in women
with suspected preeclampsia: a prospective multicenter study. Circulation 128 (19):2121, 2013
Chatzakis CV, Liberis A, Zavlanos A, et al: Early delivery or expectant management for later preterm
preeclampsia: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Act Obstet Gynecol Scand
100(8):1392, 2021
Chescheir NC: Serum uric acid measurement in women with hypertensive disorders of pregnancy.
Obstet Gynecol 134(3): 636, 2019
Chesley LC (ed): Hypertensive Disorders in Pregnancy. Appleton Century—Crofts, New York, 1978
Cho GJ, Jung US, Sim JY, et al: Is preeclampsia itself a risk factor for the development of metabolic
syndrome after delivery? Obstet Gynecol 62(4):233, 2019
Churchill D, Duley L, Thornton JG, et al: Interventionist versus expectant care for severe preeclampsia
between 24 and 34 weeks’ gestation. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 10: CD003106, 2018
Clark SL, Dildy GA III: Pulmonary artery catheterization. In: Belfort M, Saade GR, Foley MR, et al
(eds): Critical Care Obstetrics, 5th ed. West Sussex, Wiley-Blackwell, 2010
Clark SL, Divon MY, Phelan JP: Preeclampsia/eclampsia: hemodynamic and neurologic correlations.
Obstet Gynecol 66:337, 1985
Cleary KL, Siddiq Z, Ananth VC, et al: Use of antihypertensive medications during delivery
hospitalizations complicated by preeclampsia. Obstet Gynecol 131(3):441, 2018
Cluver CA, Hannan NJ, van Papendorp E, et al: Esomeprazole to treat women with preterm
preeclampsia: a randomized placebo controlled trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol 19(4):388, 2018
Coetzee EJ, Dommisse J, Anthony J: A randomised controlled trial of intravenous magnesium sulphate
versus placebo in the management of women with severe pre-eclampsia. BJOG 105(3):300, 1998
Conde-Agudelo A, Romero R, Roberts JM: Tests to predict preeclampsia. In: Taylor RN, Roberts JM,
Cunningham FG (eds): Chesley’s Hypertensive Disorders in Pregnancy, 4th ed. Amsterdam,
Academic Press, 2015
Connealy B, Carreno C, Kase B, et al: A history of prior preeclampsia as a risk factor for preterm birth.
Am J Perinatol 31(6):483, 2014
Cornette J, Buijs EA, Duvekot JJ, et al: Hemodynamic effects of intravenous nicardipine in severely
preeclamptic women with a hypertensive crisis. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 47(1):89, 2016

Cotton DB, Jones MM, Longmire S, et al: Role of intravenous nitroglycerine in the treatment of severe
pregnancy-induced hypertension complicated by pulmonary edema. Am J Obstet Gynecol 154:91,
1986a
Cotton DB, Longmire S, Jones MM, et al: Cardiovascular alterations in severe pregnancy-induced
hypertension: effects of intravenous nitroglycerin coupled with blood volume expansion. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 154:1053, 1986b
Coviello EM, Iqbal SN, Grantz KL, et al: Early preterm preeclampsia outcomes by intended mode of
delivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 220(1):100.e1, 2019
Crowther CA, Bouwmeester AM, Ashurst HM: Does admission to hospital for bed rest prevent disease
progression or improve fetal outcome in pregnancy complicated by non-proteinuric hypertension?
BJOG 99:13, 1992
Cunningham FG: Peripartum cardiomyopathy: we’ve come a long way, but…. Obstet Gynecol
120(5):992, 2012
Cunningham FG: Severe preeclampsia and eclampsia: systolic hypertension is also important. Obstet
Gynecol 105(2):237, 2005
Cunningham FG, Byrne JJ, Nelson DB: Peripartum cardiomyopathy. Obstet Gynecol 133(1):167, 2019
Cunningham FG, Nelson DB: Magnesium sulphate: too much of a good thing? BJOG 123:356, 2016
Cunningham FG, Pritchard JA, Hankins GD, et al: Peripartum heart failure: idiopathic cardiomyopathy
or compounding cardiovascular events? Obstet Gynecol 67:157, 1986
Cunningham FG, Twickler D: Cerebral edema complicating eclampsia. Am J Obstet Gynecol 182:94,
2000
Dashe JS, Ramin SM, Cunningham FG: The long-term consequences of thrombotic microangiopathy
(thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura and hemolytic uremic syndrome) in pregnancy. Obstet
Gynecol 91:662, 1998
Ducros A: Reversible cerebral vasoconstriction syndrome. Lancet Neurol 11(10):906, 2012
Duffy CR, Odibo AO, Roehl KA, et al: Effect of magnesium sulfate on fetal heart rate patterns in the
second stage of labor. Obstet Gynecol 119(6):1129, 2012
Duhig KE, Seed PT, Placzek A, et al: Prognostic indicators of severe disease in late preterm
preeclampsia to guide decision making on timing of delivery: the PEACOCK study. Pregnancy
Hypertens 24:90, 2021
Easterling TR, Benedetti TJ, Schmucker BC, et al: Maternal hemodynamics in normal and preeclamptic
pregnancies: a longitudinal study. Obstet Gynecol 76:1061, 1990
Ehrenberg HM, Mercer BM: Abbreviated postpartum magnesium sulphate therapy for women with mild
preeclampsia: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol 108(4):833, 2006
Elharram M, Dayan N, Kaur A, et al: Long-term cognitive impairment after preeclampsia: a systematic
review and metaanalysis. Obstet Gynecol 132(2):355, 2018
Eclampsia Trial Collaborative Group: Which anticonvulsant for women with eclampsia? Evidence from
the collaborative eclampsia trial. Lancet 345:1455, 1995
Fishel-Bartal M, Sibai BM: Eclampsia in the 21st century. Am J Obstet Gynecol 9378(20):31128, 2020
Fonseca JE, Méndez F, Cataho C, et al: Dexamethasone treatment does not improve the outcome of
women with HELLP syndrome: a double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomized clinical trial. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 193:1591, 2005
Förster JG, Peltonen S, Kaaja R, et al: Plasma exchange in severe postpartum HELLP syndrome. Acta
Anaesthesiol Scand 46:955, 2002

Gainder S, Thakur M, Saha SC, et al: To study the changes in fetal hemodynamics with intravenous
labetalol or nifedipine in acute severe hypertension. Pregnancy Hypertens 15:12, 2019
Gammill HS, Chettier R, Brewer A, et al: Cardiomyopathy and preeclampsia. Circulation 138(21):2359,
2018
Ganzevoort W, Rep A, Bonsel GJ, et al: A randomized trial of plasma volume expansion in hypertensive
disorders of pregnancy: influence on the pulsatile indices of the fetal umbilical artery and middle
cerebral artery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 192:233, 2005a
Ganzevoort W, Rep A, PERTA investigators, et al: A randomized controlled trial comparing two
temporizing management strategies, one with and one without plasma volume expansion, for severe
and early onset pre-eclampsia. BJOG 112:1337, 2005b
Gastrich MD, Gandhi SK, Pantazopoulos J, et al: Cardiovascular outcomes after preeclampsia or
eclampsia complicate myocardial infarction or stroke. Obstet Gynecol 120(4):823, 2012
Gaugler-Senden IP, Huijssoon AG, Visser W, et al: Maternal and perinatal outcome of preeclampsia
with an onset before 24 weeks’ gestation. Audit in a tertiary referral center. Eur J Obstet Gynecol
Reprod Biol 128:216, 2006
Ghossein-Doha C, Peeters L, van Jeijster S, et al: Hypertension after preeclampsia is preceded by
changes in cardiac structures and function. Hypertension 62(2):382, 2013
Gilstrap LC, Cunningham FG, Whalley PJ: Management of pregnancy-induced hypertension in the
nulliparous patient remote from term. Semin Perinatol 2:73, 1978
Giorgione V, Ridder A, Kalafat E, et al: Incidence of postpartum hypertension within 2 years of a
pregnancy complicated by preeclampsia: a systematic review and meta-analysis. BJOG 128(3):495,
2021
Goel A, Maski MR, Bajracharya S, et al: Epidemiology and mechanisms of de novo and persistent
hypertension in the postpartum period. Circulation 132(18):1726, 2015
Gortzak-Uzan L, Mezad D, Smolin A: Increasing amniotic fluid magnesium concentrations with stable
maternal serum levels. A prospective clinical trial. J Reprod Med 50:817, 2005
Graham NM, Gimovsky AC, Roman A, et al: Blood loss at cesarean delivery in women on magnesium
sulfate for preeclampsia. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 29(11):1817, 2016
Habli M, Eftekhari N, Wiebracht E, et al: Long-term maternal and subsequent pregnancy outcomes 5
years after hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, and low platelets (HELLP) syndrome. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 201(4):385.e1, 2009
Haddad B, Kayem G, Deis S, et al: Are perinatal and maternal outcomes different during expectant
management of severe preeclampsia in the presence of intrauterine growth restriction? Am J Obstet
Gynecol 196:237.e1, 2007
Hallak M, Martinez-Poyer J, Kruger ML, et al: The effect of magnesium sulfate on fetal heart rate
parameters: a randomized, placebo-controlled trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol 181:1122, 1999
Hammad IA, Meeks H, Fraser A, et al: Risks of cause-specific mortality in offspring of pregnancies
complicated by hypertensive disease of pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 222:75e.1, 2020
Harskamp RE, Zeeman GG: Preeclampsia: at risk for remote cardiovascular disease. Am J Med Sci
334(4):291, 2007
Hauth JC, Cunningham FG, Whalley PJ: Management of pregnancy- induced hypertension in the
nullipara. Obstet Gynecol 48: 253, 1976
Heller PJ, Scheider EP, Marx GF: Pharyngo-laryngeal edema as a presenting symptom in preeclampsia.
Obstet Gynecol 62:523, 1983
Hermes W, Ket JC, van Pampus MG, et al: Biochemical cardiovascular risk factors after hypertensive
pregnancy disorders: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Obstet Gynecol Surv 67(12):793, 2012

Hogg B, Hauth JC, Caritis SN, et al: Safety of labor epidural anesthesia for women with severe
hypertensive disease. Am J Obstet Gynecol 181:1096, 1999
Hoshino A, Obata S, Tochio A, et al: Efficacy of expectant management of severe preeclampsia and
preeclampsia superimposed on chronic hypertension before 34 weeks gestation. Pregnancy
Hypertens 15:177, 2019
Johnson LH, Mapp DC, Rouse DJ: Association of cord blood magnesium concentration and neonatal
resuscitation. J Pediatr 160(4):573, 2012
Judy AE, McCain CL, Lawton ES, et al: Systolic hypertension, preeclampsia-re1ated mortality, and
stroke in California. Obstet Gynecol 133(6):1151, 2019
Kajantie E, Osmond C, Eriksson JG: Gestational hypertension is associated with increased risk of type 2
diabetes in adult offspring: the He1sinki Birth Cohort Study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 216(3):281.e1,
2017
Kashanian M, Koohpayehzadeh J, Sheikhansari N, et al: A comparison between the two methods of
magnesium sulfate administration for duration of 12 versus 24 h after de1ivery in patients with
severe preeclampsia. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 29(14):2282, 2016
Katz L, de Amorim MM, Figueroa JN, et al: Postpartum dexamethasone for women with hemolysis,
e1evated liver enzymes, and low plate1ets (HE1LP) syndrome: a double-blind, placebo-controlled,
randomized clinical trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol 198:283.e1, 2008
Knight M, UK Obstetric Surveillance System (UKOSS): Eclampsia in the United Kingdom 2005. BJOG
114:1072, 2007
Koopmans CM, Bijlenga D, Groen H, et al: Induction of labour versus expectant monitoring for
gestational hypertension or mild pre-eclampsia after 36 weeks’ gestation (HYPITAT): a multicentre,
open-labe1 randomized controlled trial. Lancet 374(9694):979, 2009
Kristensen JH, Basit S, Wohlfahrt J, et al: Preeclampsia and risk of later kidney disease: nationwide
cohort study. BMJ 365:1516, 2019
Lam DS, Chan W: Images in clinical medicine. Choroidal ischemia in preeclampsia. N Engl J Med
344(10):739, 2001
Langenve1d J, Rave1li AC, van Kaam AH, et al: Neonatal outcome of pregnancies complicated by
hypertensive disorders between 34 and 37 weeks of gestation: a 7 year retrospective analysis of
national registry. Am J Obstet Gynecol 205(6):540.e1, 2011
Lavie A, Ram M, Lev S, et al: Maternal cardiovascular hemodynamics in normotensive versus
preeclamptic pregnancies: a prospective longitudinal study using a noninvasive cardiac system
(NICaSTM) BMC Pregnancy Childbirth 18(1):229, 2018
Leveno KJ, Alexander JM, McIntire DD, et al: Does magnesium sulfate given for prevention of
eclampsia affect the outcome of labor? Am J Obstet Gynecol 178:707, 1998
Lopes van Balen VA, Spaan JJ, Corne1is T, et al: Prevalence of chronic kidney disease after
preeclampsia. J Nephrol 30(3):403, 2017
Lopes Perdigao J, Lewey J, Hirshberg A, et al: Furosemide for acce1erated recovery of blood pressure
postpartum: a randomized placebo controlled trial. Hypertension 77(5):1517, 2021
Lucas MJ, Leveno KJ, Cunningham FG: A comparison of magnesium sulfate with phenytoin for the
prevention of eclampsia. N Engl J Med 333:201, 1995
Ludmir J, Vigil-De Gracia P, Mag-Pip (Magnesium postpartum in preeclampsia) study group: Is
magnesium sulfate use of benefit postpartum? A randomized controlled trial. Abstract No. 4, Am J
Obstet Gynecol 216:S3, 2017
Lykke JA, Langhoff-Roos J, Sibai BM, et al: Hypertensive pregnancy disorders and subsequent
cardiovascular morbidity and type 2 diabetes me1litus in the mother. Hypertension 53:944, 2009

Mable WC, Gonzalez AR, Sibai BM, et al: A comparative trial of labetalol and hydralazine in the acute
management of severe hypertension complicating pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 70:328, 1987
Magee LA, von Dade1szen P, Rey E, et al: Less-tight versus tight control of hypertension in pregnancy.
N Engl J Med 372(5):407, 2015
Magpie Trial Collaboration Group: Do women with preeclampsia, and their babies, benefit from
magnesium sulphate? The Magpie Trial: a randomised placebo-controlled trial. Lancet 359:1877,
2002
Magpie Trial Follow-Up Collaborative Group: The Magpie Trial: a randomized trial comparing
magnesium sulphate with placebo for preeclampsia. Outcome for women at 2 years. BJOG 114:300,
2007
Malmström, Håberg SE, Morken NH: Probability and outcomes of second pregnancy after HE1LP
syndrome in the first: a population-based registry study. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 99(9):1206,
2020
Martin JN Jr: Severe systolic hypertension and the search for safer motherhood. Semin Perinatol
40(2):119, 2016
Martin JN Jr, Files JC, Blake PG, et al: Postpartum plasma exchange for atypical preeclampsia–
eclampsia as HELLP (hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, and low platelets) syndrome. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 172:1107, 1995
Martin JN Jr, Thigpen BI, Moore RC, et al: Stroke and severe preeclampsia and eclampsia: a paradigm
shift focusing on systolic blood pressure. Obstet Gynecol 105(2):246, 2005
Mattar F, Sibai BM: Eclampsia. VIII. Risk factors for maternal morbidity. Am J Obstet Gynecol
182:307, 2000
McCarty-Singleton S, Sciscione AS: Maternal activity restriction in pregnancy and the prevention of
preterm birth: an evidence-based review. Clin Obstet Gynaecol 57:616, 2014
Mooney SS, Lee RM, Tong S, et al: Expectant management of severe preterm preeclampsia: a
comparison of maternal and fetal indications for delivery. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 29(23):3821,
2016
Morisaki H, Yamamoto S, Morita Y, et al: Hypermagnesemia-induced cardiopulmonary arrest before
induction of anesthesia for emergency cesarean section. J Clin Anesth 12(3):224, 2000
Mulder EG, Ghossein-Doha C, Crutsen J, et al: Effect of pregnancy prolongation in early-onsetpreeclampsia on postpartum maternal cardiovascular, renal and metabolic function in primiparous
women: an observational study. BJOG 128(1):121, 2021
Narasimhulu D, Brown A, Egbert NM, et al: Maternal magnesium therapy, neonatal serum magnesium
concentration and immediate neonatal outcomes. J Perinatol 37(12):1297, 2017
National High Blood Pressure Education Program: Working group report on high blood pressure in
pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 183:51, 2000
Nerenberg KA, Park AL, Vigod SN, et al: Long-term risk of a seizure disorder after eclampsia. Obstet
Gynecol 130(6):1327, 2017
Newsome LR, Bramwell RS, Curling PE: Severe preeclampsia: hemodynamic effects of lumbar
epidural anesthesia. Anesth Analg 65:31, 1986
Nguyen TM, Crowther CA, Wilkinson D, et al: Magnesium sulfate for women at term for
neuroprotection of the fetus. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2:CD009395, 2013
Novotny S, Lee-Plenty N, Wallace K, et al: Acute kidney injury associated with preeclampsia or
hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, and low platelets syndrome. Pregnancy Hypertens 19:94, 2020
Obeidat B, MacDougall J, Harding K: Plasma exchange in a woman with thrombotic thrombocytopenic
purpura or severe preeclampsia eclampsia. BJOG 109:961, 2002

Øian P, Maltau JM, Noddleland H, et al: Transcapillary fluid balance in preeclampsia. BJOG 93:235,
1986
Okusanya BO, Oladapo OT, Long O, et al: Clinical pharmacokinetic properties of magnesium sulphate
in women with preeclampsia and eclampsia. BJOG 123(3):356, 2016
Paidas MJ, Tita AT, Macones GA, et al: Prospective, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled
evaluation of the pharmacokinetics, safety and efficacy of recombinant antithrombin versus placebo
in preterm preeclampsia. Am J Obstet Gynecol 223(5):739.e1, 2020
Penfield CA, McNulty JA, Oakes MC, et al: Ibuprofen and postpartum blood pressure in women with
hypertensive disorders of pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 134(6):1219, 2019
Pickles CJ, Broughton Pipkin F, Symonds EM: A randomised placebo controlled trial of labetalol in the
treatment of mild to moderate pregnancy induced hypertension. BJOG 99(12):964, 1992
Pourrat O, Dorey M, Ragot S, et al: High-dose methylprednisolone to prevent platelet decline in
preeclampsia: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol 128:153, 2016
Pritchard JA: The use of magnesium ion in the management of eclamptogenic toxemias. Surg Gynecol
Obstet 100:131, 1955
Pritchard JA, Cunningham FG, Pritchard SA: The Parkland Memorial Hospital protocol for treatment of
eclampsia: evaluation of 245 cases. Am J Obstet Gynecol 148(7):951, 1984
Pritchard JA, Pritchard SA: Standardized treatment of 154 consecutive cases of eclampsia. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 123(5):543, 1975
Rodriguez AN, Nelson DB, Spong CY, et al: Acute kidney injury in pregnancies complicated by
preeclampsia with severe features. Abstract No. 1012. Am J Obstet Gynecol 220:S627, 2021
Roland C, Warshak CR, DeFranco EA: Success of labor induction for preeclampsia at preterm and
term gestational ages. J Perinatol 37(6):636, 2017
Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists: The management of severe pre-eclampsia. RCOG
Guideline 10A:1, 2006
Salinger DH, Mundie S, Regi A, et al: Magnesium sulphate for prevention of eclampsia: are
intramuscular and intravenous regimens equivalent? A population pharmacokinetic study. BJOG
120(7):894, 2013
Sciscione AC, Ivester T, Largoza M, et al: Acute pulmonary edema in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol
101:511, 2003
Sharma KJ, Greene N, Kilpatrick SJ: Oral labetalol compared to oral nifedipine for postpartum
hypertension: a randomized controlled trial. Hypertens Pregnancy 36(1):44, 2017
Shear RM, Rinfret D, Leduc L: Should we offer expectant management in cases of severe preterm
preeclampsia with fetal growth restriction? Am J Obstet Gynecol 192:1119, 2005
Sibai BM: Etiology and management of postpartum hypertension and preeclampsia. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 206(6):470, 2012
Sibai BM, Barton JR, Akl S, et al: A randomized prospective comparison of nifedipine and bed rest
versus bed rest alone in the management of pre-eclampsia remote from term. Am J Obstet Gynecol
167(1):879, 1992
Sibai BM, El-Nazer A, Gonzalez-Ruiz A: Severe preeclampsia- eclampsia in young primigravid women:
subsequent pregnancy outcome and remote prognosis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 155:011, 1986
Sibai BM, Gonzalez AR, Mable WC, et al: A comparison of labetalol plus hospitalization versus
hospitalization alone in the management of preeclampsia remote from term. Obstet Gynecol 70:323,
1987a
Sibai BM, Mable BC, Harvey CJ, et al: Pulmonary edema in severe preeclampsia-eclampsia: analysis of
thirty-seven consecutive cases. Am J Obstet Gynecol 156:1174, 1987b

Sibai BM, Mercer B, Sarinoglu C: Severe preeclampsia in the second trimester: recurrence risk and long
—term prognosis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 165:1408, 1991
Sibai BM, Mercer BM, Schiff E, et al: Aggressive versus expectant management of severe
preeclampsia at 28 to 32 weeks’ gestation: a randomized controlled trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol
171:818, 1994
Sibai BM, Spinnato JA, Watson DL, et al: Eclampsia. IV. Neurological findings and future outcome. Am
J Obstet Gynecol 15:184, 1985
Siepmann T, Boardman H, Bilderbeck A, et al: Long-term cerebral white and gray matter changes after
preeclampsia. Neurology 88(13):1256, 2017
Smyth RM, Spark P, Armstrong N, et al: Magpie Trial in the UK: methods and additional data for
women and children at 2 years following pregnancy complicated by preeclampsia. BMC Pregnancy
Childbirth 9:15, 2009
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Gibson KS, Hameed AB: Special statement: checklist for
postpartum discharge of women with hypertensive disorders. Am J Obstet Gynecol 223(4):B18,
2020a
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Lauder J, Sciscione A, et al: The role of activity restriction in
obstetric management. Consult Series No. 50, August 2020b
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Sibai BM: Evaluation and management of severe preeclampsia
before 34 weeks’ gestation. Am J Obstet Gynecol 205(3):191, 2011
Somjen G, Hilmy M, Stephen CR: Failure to anesthetize human subjects by intravenous administration of
magnesium sulfate. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 154(3):652, 1966
Spaan JJ, Ekhart T, Spaanderman ME, et al: Remote hemodynamics and renal function in formerly
preeclamptic women. Obstet Gynecol 113:853, 2009
Spaan JJ, Sep SJ, Lopes van Balen V, et al: Metabolic syndrome as a risk factor for hypertension after
preeclampsia. Obstet Gynecol 120(2 Pt 1):311, 2012
Stamilio DM, Beckham AJ, Boggess KA, et al: Risk factors for postpartum readmission for
preeclampsia or hypertension before delivery discharge among low-risk women: a case-control
study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 3(3):100317, 2021
Stuart JJ, Tanz LJ, Missmer SA, et al: Hypertensive disorders of pregnancy and maternal cardiovascular
disease risk factor development: an observational cohort study. Ann Intern Med 169(4):224, 2018
Tan LK, de Swiet M: The management of postpartum hypertension. BJOG 109(7):733, 2002
Tang J, He A, Li N, et al: Magnesium sulfate—mediated vascular relaxation and calcium channel
activity in placental vessels different from nonplacental vessels. J Am Heart Assoc 7(14):e009896,
2018
Thadhani R, Hagmann H, Schaarschmidt W, et al: Removal of soluble fms-like tyrosine kinase-l by
dextran sulfate apheresis in preeclampsia. J Am Soc Nephrol 27(3):903, 2016
Theilen LH, Fraser A, Hollingshaus MS, et al: All-cause and cause-specific mortality after hypertensive
disease of pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 128(2):238, 2016
Thurnau GR, Kemp DB, Jarvis A: Cerebrospinal fluid levels of magnesium in patients with preeclampsia
after treatment with intravenous magnesium sulfate: a preliminary report. Am J Obstet Gynecol
157:1435, 1987
Tsai HM, Kuo E: From gestational hypertension and preeclampsia to atypical hemolytic uremic
syndrome. Obstet Gynecol 127:907, 2016
Tudela CM, McIntire DD, Alexander JM: Effect of maternal body mass index on serum magnesium
levels given for seizure prophylaxis. Obstet Gynecol 121(2 Pt 1):314, 2013

Turanov M, Lo A, Hassier MR, et al: RNAi modulation of placental sFLT1 for the treatment of
preeclampsia. Nat Biotechnol November 19, 2018 [Epub ahead of print]
Turnbull DA, Wilkinson C, Gerard K, et al: Clinical, psychosocial, and economic effects of antenatal day
care for three medical complications of pregnancy: a randomized controlled trial of 395 women.
Lancet 363:1104, 2004
Umans JG, Abalos E: Cunningham FG: Antihypertensive treatment. In: Taylor RN, Roberts JM,
Cunningham FG (eds): Chesley’s Hypertensive Disorders in Pregnancy, 4th ed. Amsterdam,
Academic Press, 2015
Valensise H, Lo Presti D, Gagliardi G, et al. Persistent maternal cardiac dysfunction after preeclampsia
identifies patients at risk for recurrent preeclampsia. Hypertension 67(4):748, 2016
Veena P, Lakshimdeepthi P, Raghavan SS: Furosemide in postpartum management of severe
preeclampsia: a randomized controlled trial. Hypertens Preg 36:84, 2017
Vigil-De Gracia P, Ludmir J: Perinatal and hemodynamic evaluation of sildenafil citrate for preeclampsia
treatment: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol 128(5): 1181, 2016
Vigil-De Gracia P, Ludmir J, Ng J, et al: Is there benefit to continue magnesium sulphate postpartum in
women receiving magnesium sulphate before delivery? A randomised controlled study. BJOG
125(10):1304, 2018
Vigil-De Gracia P, Tejada OR, Minaca AC, et al: Expectant management of severe preeclampsia
remote from term: the MEXPRE Latin Study, a randomized multicenter clinical trial. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 209:425e1, 2013
Wallace DH, Leveno KJ, Cunningham FG, et al: Randomized comparison of general and regional
anesthesia for cesarean delivery in pregnancies complicated by severe preeclampsia. Obstet
Gynecol 86:193, 1995
Wang Y, Arvizu A, Rich-Edwards J, et al: Hypertensive disorders of pregnancy and subsequent risk of
premature mortality. J Am Coll Cardiol 77(10):1302, 2021
Wang LC, Huang C Y, Want HK, et al: Magnesium sulfate and nimesulide have synergistic effects on
rescuing brain damage after transient focal ischemia. J Neurotrauma 29(7):1518, 2012
Watt-Morse ML, Caritis SN, Kridgen PL: Magnesium sulfate is a poor inhibitor of oxytocin-induced
contractility in pregnant sheep. J Matern Fetal Med 4:139, 1995
Wen SW, White RR, Rybak N, et al: Effect of high dose folic acid supplementation in pregnancy on
preeclampsia (FACT): double blind, phase III, randomised controlled, international, multi centre trial.
BMJ 362:k3478, 2018
White WM, Mielke MM, Araoz PA, et al: A history of preeclampsia is associated with a risk for
coronary artery calcification 3 decades later. Am J Obstet Gynecol 214(4):519.e1, 2016
Wide-Swensson DH, Ingemarsson I, Lunell NO, et al: Calcium channel blockade (isradipine) in
treatment of hypertension in pregnancy: a randomized placebo-controlled study. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 173(1):872, 1995
Wiegman MJ, de Groot JC, Jansonius NM, et al: Long-term visual functioning after eclampsia. Obstet
Gynecol 119(5): 959, 2012
Winkler K, Contini C, Konig B, et al: Treatment of very preterm preeclampsia via heparin-mediated
extracorporeal LDL-precipitation (H.E.L.P.) apheresis: The Freiburg preeclampsia H.E.L.P.Apheresis study. Pregnancy Hypertens 12:136, 2018
Witlin AG, Friedman SA, Sibai BA: The effect of magnesium sulfate therapy on the duration of labor in
women with mild preeclampsia at term: a randomized, double-blind, placebo- controlled trial. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 176:623, 1997

Yefet E, Braester Y, Suleiman A, et al: The effect of magnesium sulfate at 1 gram versus 2 grams
maintenance doses on serum magnesium concentrations and adverse effects profile in women with
severe preeclampsia. Abstract No. 884, Am J Obstet Gynecol 216:S504, 2017
Zeeman GG, Cunningham FG, Pritchard JA: The magnitude of hemoconcentration with eclampsia.
Hypertens Pregnancy 28(2):127, 2009
Zeeman GG, Fleckenstein JL, Twickler DM, et al: Cerebral infarction in eclampsia. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 190:714, 2004
Zeisler H, Llurba E, Chantraine F, et al: Predictive value of the sFlt-1:PIGF ratio in women with
suspected preeclampsia. N Engl J Med 374:13, 2016
Zinaman M, Rubin J, Lindheimer MD: Serial plasma oncotic pressure levels and echoencephalography
during and after delivery in severe preeclampsia. Lancet 1:1245, 1985
Zofkie A, Cunningham FG: 33-year single center experience with pregnancy-associated strokes.
Abstract No. 799, Am J Obstet Gynecol 218:S476, 2018
Zondervan HA, Oosting J, Smorenberg-Schoorl ME, et al: Maternal whole blood viscosity in pregnancy
hypertension. Gynecol Obstet Invest 25:83, 1988
Zulfeen M, Tatapudi R, Sowjanya R: IV labetalol and oral nifedipine in acute control of severe
hypertension in pregnancy—a randomized controlled trial. Eur J Obstet Reprod Biol 236:46, 2019

