CHAPTER 50

Critical Care and Trauma

CRITICAL CARE
ACUTE PULMONARY EDEMA
ACUTE RESPIRATORY DISTRESS SYNDROME
SEPSIS AND SEPTIC SHOCK
TRAUMA
THERMAL INJURY
CARDIOPULMONARY RESUSCITATION
REFERENCES
Treatment of the critically ill pregnant woman has improved over the past
three decades with advances in intensive care capabilities. To achieve
optimal outcomes, severe medical, surgical, and obstetrical disorders
complicating pregnancy are frequently managed by a multidisciplinary team.
Importantly, obstetricians and these other health-care team members must
have a working knowledge of the unique considerations for pregnancy
(Padilla, 2021). Some discussed in Chapter 49 include pregnancy-induced
physiological changes, alterations in normal laboratory values, and
consideration for the second patient—the fetus. Because critically ill women
are usually young and healthy, their prognosis is generally good (Gaffney,
2014).

CRITICAL CARE
Despite noted gains, evidence suggests that severe morbidity rates are
increasing (Friedman, 2016). In the United States, 1 to 3 percent of pregnant
women require critical care services each year. The risk of death during such
admissions ranges from 2 to 11 percent (American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists, 2019a). Black women and Medicaid recipients are
disparately affected (Wen, 2020).
Those with pregnancy-associated complications—especially
hemorrhage, sepsis, and hypertension—have the greatest need for intensive
care (Chantry, 2015; Guntupalli, 2015a,b). That said, many antepartum
admissions are for nonobstetrical reasons, and these include diabetes,
pneumonia or asthma, heart disease, chronic hypertension, pyelonephritis,
and thyrotoxicosis (Guntupalli, 2015b; Zeeman, 2006). Cardiac disease is
the leading non-obstetrical indication for intensive care unit (ICU) admission
(Small, 2012). In instances of life-threatening hemorrhage, surgical
procedures may be necessary, and close proximity to an operating room is
paramount. For women who are undelivered, fetal well-being also is better
served by this close proximity, especially because many are delivered
preterm (Kilpatrick, 2016).

■ Organization of Critical Care
The concept and development of critical care for all aspects of medicine and
surgery began in the 1960s. As a part of this effort, the National Institutes of
Health held a Consensus Conference (1983) and the Society of Critical Care
Medicine (1988, 1999) established guidelines for ICUs. Especially pertinent
to obstetrics, these costly units prompted the evolution of a step-down
intermediate care unit. These latter units were designed for patients who did
not require intensive care but who needed a higher level of treatment than
that provided on a general ward. The American College of Critical Care
Medicine and the Society of Critical Care Medicine (1998) have published
guidelines for these units (Table 50-1).
TABLE 50-1. Guidelines for Conditions That Could Qualify for
Intermediate Care

■ Obstetrical Critical Care
Although critical care for obstetrical patients has generally evolved along the
path described in the last section, no detailed guidelines direct this care.
Most hospitals employ a blend of these concepts, and in general, units can be
divided into three types.
First, medical and surgical ICUs in most hospitals care for severely ill
obstetrical patients. These are staffed by specialists often certified in critical
care medicine. Admissions or transfers to these units are situation-specific
and based on the acuity of care needed and on the ability of the facility to
provide it. For example, pregnant women who require ventilatory support,
invasive monitoring, or pharmacological support of circulation are typically
transferred to an ICU (Chantry, 2015). In an earlier review of more than 25
tertiary-care referral institutions, approximately 0.5 percent of obstetrical
patients were transferred to these ICU types (Zeeman, 2006).
A second option is the obstetrical intermediate care unit. Sometimes
referred to as a high-dependency care unit, this type is found at Parkland
Hospital. Located within the labor and delivery unit, it has designated rooms
staffed by experienced personnel. This two-tiered system incorporates the
guidelines for intermediate and intensive care. Care is provided by maternalfetal medicine specialists, obstetricians, and nurses with experience in
critical care obstetrics. As needed, this team is expanded to include other
obstetricians and anesthesiologists, hospitalists, gynecological oncologists,
pulmonologists, cardiologists, surgeons, and other medical and surgical
subspecialists (Stevens, 2015). Many tertiary-care centers have developed
similar intermediate care units and use selected triage to ICUs.

Last, a few services have a full-care ICU as described first. However, it
is distinctly operated by obstetrical and anesthesia personnel near the labor
and delivery unit (Zeeman, 2003, 2006).
The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019a) has
summarized critical obstetrical care implementation depending on hospital
size and technical facilities. For intrahospital transfers, the federal
Emergency Medical Treatment and Labor Act (EMTALA) guidelines must be
followed. Moreover, according to the American Academy of Pediatrics and
the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2017), the
minimal monitoring required for a critically ill patient during transport
includes continuous pulse oximetry, electrocardiography, and regular
assessment of vital signs. Patients must have secure venous access, and those
who are mechanically ventilated must have endotracheal tube position
confirmed and secured. Left uterine displacement and supplemental oxygen is
applied routinely during transport of antepartum patients. Continuous fetal
heart rate or tocodynamic monitoring is individualized.

■ Severe Maternal Morbidity
Childbirth can result in significant morbidity for the pregnant woman. To
help address this, severe maternal morbidity (SMM) was developed as a
population-based monitoring standard for the most common of these
complications (Callaghan, 2012). An overall SMM rate is derived from 18
SMM indicators, which are abstracted from International Classification of
Diseases-10 (ICD-10) codes in administrative databases. SMM rates for an
individual indicator also may be informative. Some indicators are found in
Table 50-1, and the full list is available at
www.cdc.gov/reproductivehealth/maternalinfanthealth/smm/severemorbidity-ICD.htm. Several of these are included in this chapter, whereas
others are addressed in specific chapters on their topic.
The goal of SMM monitoring is to identify opportunities for intervention
and prevention. Despite its promise, limitations should be recognized. First,
the rate does not factor underlying patient comorbidities and obstetrical
risks. Thus, a tertiary-care center that serves as a referral center for women
with placenta accreta spectrum will understandably have higher blood
transfusion rates. Second, the ICD-10 indicators for existing SMM events are
not comprehensive. For example, only codes for total abdominal

hysterectomy are currently included in the SMM rate, whereas supracervical
hysterectomy is not. With these limitations in mind, caution should be
exercised when using SMM as a quality metric to compare hospitals
(Callaghan, 2012).

■ Hemodynamic Changes in Pregnancy
Data obtained during pregnancy with pulmonary artery catheterization (PAC)
have contributed immensely to the understanding of normal pregnancy
hemodynamics and pathophysiology of common obstetrical conditions. Clark
and coworkers (1989) used PAC to obtain cardiovascular measurements in
healthy pregnant women and again in these same women when nonpregnant
(Chap. 4, p. 64). Other evaluated conditions include preeclampsiaeclampsia, acute respiratory distress syndrome, and amnionic-fluid
embolism (Clark, 1997; Cunningham, 1987; Hankins, 1985). Because of
these studies, most have concluded that such monitoring is seldom necessary
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2013, 2019a, 2020;
Magder, 2015).
Formulas for deriving some hemodynamic parameters are shown in Table
50-2. These measurements can be indexed for body size by dividing by body
surface area. Normal values for nonpregnant adults are used, but with the
caveat that these may not necessarily reflect changes induced by the lowresistance uteroplacental circulation.
TABLE 50-2. Formulas for Deriving Various Cardiopulmonary Parameters

Cardiac complications are a common indication for ICU admission of
pregnant women (Guntupalli, 2015b). Evaluation of cardiac function is
frequently performed using echocardiography. This technology is
indispensable in interrogating cardiac anatomy and especially rightventricular function (Krishnan, 2015; Thiele, 2015). It is considered in more
detail in Chapter 52 (p. 918), and some normal values are listed in the
Appendix (p. 1233).
Given the association of cardiac dysfunction with maternal morbidity and
mortality, efforts have strived to expand cardiac monitoring by including
noninvasive cardiac output monitoring (NICOM). With this tool, a small
electrical current is applied to the chest, and voltage signals are captured by
four skin sensors arranged in a box on the chest. Compared with Doppler
echocardiography, NICOM significantly overestimates stroke volume and
cardiac output (McLaughlin, 2017). This modality has not yet been widely
adopted for use in the obstetrical population.

ACUTE PULMONARY EDEMA

The incidence of pulmonary edema complicating pregnancy averages 1 in
500 deliveries at tertiary referral centers. Of the two general etiologies,
cardiogenic, namely, hydrostatic edema is caused by high pulmonary
capillary hydraulic pressures. The other is noncardiogenic, that is,
permeability edema caused by capillary endothelial and alveolar epithelial
damage. In pregnancy, noncardiogenic pulmonary edema is more common.
More than half of pregnant women who develop pulmonary edema have some
degree of sepsis in conjunction with tocolysis, severe preeclampsia, or
obstetrical hemorrhage combined with vigorous fluid therapy (O’Dwyer,
2015; Pordeus, 2018).
In one study, the etiologies of pulmonary edema were hypertension,
cardiogenic, or both, and iatrogenic fluid overload (Pordeus, 2018). In
another study of 53 cases, 83 percent were caused by hypertensive disorders;
11 percent, cardiac events; and 6 percent, sepsis (O’Dwyer, 2015). Although
used less commonly today, tocolytic therapy with β-mimetic drugs was the
cause of up to 40 percent of pulmonary edema cases (Gandhi, 2014; Jenkins,
2003).

■ Noncardiogenic Permeability Edema
Endotheliopathy is the common denominator that is associated with
preeclampsia, sepsis, and acute hemorrhage—or frequently combinations
thereof—and they are the most common predisposing factors to pulmonary
edema (Table 50-3). These clinical scenarios are often associated with
corticosteroids given to induce fetal lung maturation along with vigorous
fluid replacement and tocolytic therapy (Thornton, 2011). Parenteral βagonists are indisputedly linked to pulmonary edema. Some studies have also
associated magnesium sulfate given for preeclampsia (Gandhi, 2014; Wilson,
2014; Xiao, 2014). Combined therapy is causative.
TABLE 50-3. Some Causes and Associated Factors for Pulmonary Edema
in Pregnancy

■ Cardiogenic Hydrostatic Edema
Ventricular failure causing pulmonary edema in pregnancy is usually
associated with some form of hypertension, hemorrhage and anemia, and
sepsis (Cunningham, 2019; Vaught, 2018). Although it can be due to
congenital or acquired anatomical defects, diastolic dysfunction is frequently
from chronic hypertension, obesity, or both (Jessup, 2003; Kenchaiah, 2002).
In these women, acute systolic hypertension exacerbates diastolic
dysfunction and causes pulmonary edema (Dennis, 2012; Vaught, 2018). In
two studies of pregnant women with preeclampsia and pulmonary edema,
half of them were undelivered (Gandhi, 2014; Pordeus, 2018).

■ Diagnosis
Clinical examination is confirmed by chest radiographs. Bedside lung
sonography may be helpful to detect fluid in the interstitial space and alveoli

(Pachtman, 2017). In many cases, when echocardiography is done later,
systolic function is normal as measured by ejection fraction.
In addition, ventricular myocytes and fibroblasts secrete brain
natriuretic peptide (BNP) and atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) with the
distention seen in heart failure. In nonpregnant patients, concentrations <100
pg/mL have an excellent negative predictive value, and levels >500 pg/mL
have an excellent positive predictive value. It is problematic that levels
frequently are 100 to 500 pg/mL and thus are nondiagnostic. Moreover,
concentrations of N-terminal BNP and ANP are both elevated with
preeclampsia (Szabo, 2014; Tihtonen, 2007). Normal values are discussed in
Chapter 4 (p. 65), and those for normal pregnancy are given in the Appendix
(p. 1231).

■ Management
Acute pulmonary edema requires emergency care. Oxygen therapy is initiated
and furosemide is given in periodic 20- to 40-mg intravenous doses as
needed. For oxygen delivery, nasal cannula, simple masks, and
nonrebreathing masks are first-line systems. Both nasal cannula and simple
mask allow mixing of supplemental oxygen with room air. Consequently,
oxygen administration is imprecise (Bateman, 1998). A nonrebreathing mask
has valves that limit the mixing of exhaled gas and room air with the oxygen
supply. Flow rates up to 10 to 15 L/min may be achieved, and oxygen
concentrations approach 95 percent (Boumphrey, 2003). As a treatment goal,
a pulse oximetry reading >92 percent reflects adequate oxygenation.
Further treatment depends on whether a woman is ante- or postpartum. A
live fetus prohibits the use of cardioactive drugs that might rapidly lower
peripheral resistance and in turn severely diminish uteroplacental
circulation. The cause of cardiogenic failure is determined by
echocardiography, which will help direct further therapy. Importantly, acute
pulmonary edema is not an indication for emergency cesarean delivery.

ACUTE RESPIRATORY DISTRESS SYNDROME
Acute lung injury that causes a form of severe permeability pulmonary edema
and respiratory failure is termed acute respiratory distress syndrome

(ARDS). This is a pathophysiological continuum from mild pulmonary
insufficiency to dependence on high inspired oxygen concentrations and
mechanical ventilation. Uniform criteria for its diagnosis are lacking, and
thus the incidence is variably reported for pregnancy. Rush and colleagues
(2017) queried the nationwide inpatient samples of more than 5.4 million
pregnancies and cited an incidence of 60 ventilated cases per 100,000 births.
They found an overall mortality rate of 9 percent. This rate is much higher if
caused or complicated by sepsis. Last, if ARDS develops antepartum, the
perinatal mortality rate is correspondingly high.

■ Definitions
Physiological criteria required for diagnosis of acute lung injury are study
dependent. In general, less precise terms are used for clinical care. Clinical
findings include dyspnea, tachypnea, and oxygen desaturation. Most
investigators define ARDS as radiographically documented pulmonary
infiltrates, a ratio of arterial oxygen tension to the fraction of inspired oxygen
(PaO2:FiO2) <200, and no evidence of heart failure (Baron, 2018). Revised
by international consensus, the Berlin Definition includes categories of mild,
moderate, and severe (Fan, 2018).

■ Etiopathogenesis
ARDS begins with an acute lung injury from various causes (Table 50-4).
More than half of pregnant women with ARDS have some combination of
sepsis, hemorrhage, shock, and fluid overload. Diffuse infectious pneumonia
and sepsis are two of the most frequent single-agent causes. Because it is
common, influenza pneumonitis often is a cause. Other etiologies such as
pneumococcal, metapneumovirus, and Legionnaire disease also are
encountered (Close, 2016; Fuchs, 2017). Of sepsis causes, pyelonephritis,
puerperal pelvic infection, and chorioamnionitis are the most frequent. The
contribution of transfusion-related acute lung injury (TRALI) is unclear
(Chap. 44, p. 774).
TABLE 50-4. Some Causes of Acute Lung Injury and Respiratory Failure

Endothelial injury in the lung capillaries releases cytokines that recruit
neutrophils to the inflammation site. Here, they elaborate more cytokines to
worsen tissue injury. Three stages describe ARDS development (Baron,
2018). First, the exudative phase follows widespread injury to the alveolar
epithelium and to the microvascular endothelium, including the pulmonary
vasculature. This endotheliopathy results in increased pulmonary capillary
permeability, surfactant loss or inactivation, diminished lung volume, and
vascular shunting that creates arterial hypoxemia. Next, the proliferative
phase usually begins approximately 7 days later and lasts up to 21 days.
Most patients recover during this phase. Last, the fibrotic phase results from
healing. Despite these insults, the long-term prognosis for pulmonary function
is surprisingly good (Baron, 2018; Herridge, 2003).

■ Clinical Course
With pulmonary injury, the clinical condition depends largely on the insult
magnitude, the ability to compensate for it, and the disease stage. At first,
physical examination findings are absent, except perhaps hyperventilation,
and arterial oxygenation usually is adequate. With worsening, clinical and
radiological evidence for pulmonary edema, decreased lung compliance, and
increased intrapulmonary blood shunting become apparent. Progressive
alveolar and interstitial edema develops, and inflammatory cells and
erythrocytes extravasate. Ideally, pulmonary injury is identified at this early
stage, and specific therapy is directed at the underlying insult.
Further progression to acute respiratory failure is characterized by
marked dyspnea, tachypnea, and hypoxemia. Additional functional lung
volume loss results in worsening of pulmonary compliance and greater
shunting. Diffuse abnormalities are heard by auscultation, and a chest
radiograph characteristically demonstrates bilateral lung involvement (Fig.
50-1). At this phase, the injury ordinarily would be lethal without ventilatory
support. When shunting exceeds 30 percent, severe refractory hypoxemia
develops. Comorbid metabolic and respiratory acidosis can result in
myocardial irritability, dysfunction, and cardiac arrest.

FIGURE 50-1 Anteroposterior chest radiograph of a second-trimester pregnant woman with marked
bilateral parenchymal and pleural opacification secondary to acute respiratory distress syndrome
(ARDS).

■ Management
ARDS mortality rates have declined because of advances in critical care
medicine (Baron, 2018; Fan, 2018). Management requires close attention to
recognizing and treating underlying medical and surgical disorders. In cases
of severe acute lung injury, providing adequate oxygenation of peripheral
tissues is balanced against ventilatory maneuvers that further aggravate lung
injury. At least intuitively, increasing oxygen delivery should produce a
corresponding rise in tissue uptake, but this is difficult to measure. Support
of systemic perfusion with intravenous crystalloid and blood is imperative.
Because sepsis is commonplace in lung injury, aggressive antimicrobial
therapy is given for infection, and any necrotic tissues are debrided. Oxygen
delivery can be greatly improved by correcting anemia. Specifically, each
gram of hemoglobin carries 1.25 mL of oxygen when 90-percent saturated.
By comparison, raising the arterial PaO2 from 100 to 200 mm Hg results in
the transport of only 0.1 mL of additional oxygen for each 100 mL of blood.

Reasonable goals in caring for the woman with severe lung injury are a
PaO2 of 60 mm Hg or 90-percent oxygen saturation using an inspired oxygen
content <50 percent and positive end-expiratory pressures <15 mm Hg. With
regard to the pregnancy, it remains controversial whether delivery of the
fetus improves maternal oxygenation (Mallampalli, 2010). In a study of 29
women undergoing mechanical ventilation, 10 were delivered while
intubated (Lapinsky, 2015). Respiratory function modestly improved in half,
but no factors were identified that predicted a better outcome.

■ Mechanical Ventilation
Noninvasive ventilation, that is, positive-pressure ventilation by face mask,
may be effective in some women in early stages of pulmonary insufficiency
(Duarte, 2014). Conventional ventilation is done with tracheal intubation.
Early intubation is preferred in the gravida if respiratory failure is more
likely than not and especially if it appears imminent. Because of the
physiological changes outlined in Chapter 4 (p. 67), PaCO2 is normally
reduced in a gravida relative to a nonpregnant woman. Thus, intubation
should be considered when PaCO2 levels reach 35 to 40 mm Hg.
Mechanical ventilation is used to assist or replace spontaneous
respiration (Celli, 2018). It improves oxygenation by its application of highoxygen-content gas and positive pressure. Many successful formulas for
mechanical ventilation are employed, and initially a tidal volume ≤6 mL/kg
is optimal (Fan, 2018; Schwaiberger, 2016). Adjustments are made to obtain
a PaO2 >60 mm Hg or a hemoglobin oxygen saturation ≥90 percent and to
reach a PaCO2 of 35 to 45 mm Hg. Lower PaO2 levels are avoided, because
placental perfusion may be impaired.
The mode is the manner in which ventilator breaths are triggered, cycled,
and limited. Three commonly used ventilation modes of include assistcontrol, intermittent mandatory, and pressure-support ventilation. Although
not a support mode, continuous positive airway pressure can be used in
patients with an intact ventilatory system who require little ventilatory
support.

Pregnancy

In a study of 51 women with ARDS, almost half had severe preeclampsia,
and most required intubation postpartum. Eleven were delivered while being
ventilated, and another six were discharged undelivered (Jenkins, 2003).
Two mothers died, and this included a woman who died as a complication of
tocolytic treatment. In a multicenter report, Lapinsky and associates (2015)
described 29 pregnant women undergoing mechanical ventilation for various
indications. Only a few had severe ARDS, and the mortality rate was 10
percent. Ten women delivered while being ventilated, but this had little
beneficial effect on their respiratory status.

Positive End-Expiratory Pressure
With severe lung injury and high intrapulmonary shunt fractions, it may not be
possible to provide adequate oxygenation with usual ventilatory pressures,
even with 100-percent oxygen. Positive end-expiratory pressure is usually
successful in decreasing the shunt by recruiting collapsed alveoli. At low
levels of 5 to 15 mm Hg, positive pressure can typically be used safely. At
higher levels, impaired right-sided venous return can result in decreased
cardiac output, lowered uteroplacental perfusion, alveolar overdistention,
falling compliance, and barotrauma (Celli, 2018; Schwaiberger, 2016).

Extracorporeal Membrane Oxygenation
As discussed in Chapter 33 (p. 600), extracorporeal membrane oxygenation
(ECMO) has been successfully used for neonatal meconium aspiration
syndrome. Some preliminary observations suggest that veno-venous ECMO
may be useful in adults with ARDS (Combes, 2018; Ende, 2016; Matthay,
2018). In one case series, 12 pregnant women with influenza-induced lung
failure were treated with ECMO, and of four maternal deaths, three were due
to anticoagulation-related hemorrhage (Nair, 2011). ECMO use also has been
reported for status asthmaticus (Clifford, 2018; Steinack, 2017). In multiple
reviews, ECMO was used mostly for ARDS, and the maternal and perinatal
mortality rate approximated 30 percent (Liu, 2018; Ramanathan, 2020; Saad,
2016). Maternal survival appears to be significantly lower compared with
nonpregnant women requiring ECMO (Webster, 2019).

Fetal Oxygenation

The propensity of the hemoglobin molecule to release oxygen is described by
the oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve (Fig. 50-2). For clinical purposes, the
curve can be divided into an upper oxygen association curve representing the
alveolar-capillary environment and a lower oxygen dissociation portion
representing the tissue-capillary environment. Shifts of the curve have their
greatest effect at the steep portion because they affect oxygen delivery. A
rightward shift is associated with decreased hemoglobin affinity for oxygen
and hence greater tissue-capillary oxygen interchange. Hypercapnia,
metabolic acidosis, fever, and increased 2,3-diphosphoglycerate levels
produce rightward shifts. During normal pregnancy, the erythrocyte
concentration of 2,3-diphosphoglycerate rises by approximately 30 percent,
which favors oxygen delivery.

FIGURE 50-2 Oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve. With higher oxygen tension (PaO2) in the pulmonary
alveoli, adult hemoglobin is maximally saturated compared with that at the lower oxygen tension in the
tissue capillaries. Note that at any given oxygen tension, fetal hemoglobin carries more oxygen than
adult hemoglobin, as indicated by percent saturation.

Fetal hemoglobin has a higher oxygen affinity than adult hemoglobin. As
seen in Figure 50-2, its oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve is positioned to
the left of the adult curve. To achieve 50-percent hemoglobin saturation in the
mother, the PaO2 must be 27 mm Hg compared with only 19 mm Hg in the
fetus. Under normal physiological conditions, the fetus is constantly on the
dissociation, or tissue, portion of the curve. Even with severe maternal lung
disease and very low PaO2 levels, oxygen displacement to fetal tissues is
favored. For example, in pregnant women who live at high altitudes, and
despite a maternal PaO2 of only 60 mm Hg, the fetal PaO2 is equivalent to that
seen at sea level (Subrevilla, 1971).

Intravenous Fluids
Although mortality rates are similar, conservative versus liberal fluid
management is associated with fewer days of mechanical ventilation
(Wiedemann, 2006). Some normal pregnancy-induced physiological changes
predispose to a greater risk of permeability edema from vigorous fluid
therapy. Serum albumin concentration determines colloid oncotic pressure
(COP), and 1 g/dL exerts approximately 6 mm Hg of pressure. As discussed
in Chapter 4 (p. 70), serum albumin concentrations normally drop in
pregnancy. This results in a decline in COP from 28 mm Hg in the
nonpregnant woman to 23 mm Hg at term and to 17 mm Hg in the puerperium
(Dennis, 2012). With preeclampsia, endotheliopathy causes extravascular
albumin loss and lowered serum albumin levels. These changes have a
significant clinical effect on the colloid oncotic pressure/wedge pressure
gradient. Normally, this gradient exceeds 8 mm Hg. However, when it is ≤4
mm Hg, the risk for pulmonary edema rises due to Starling forces. Finally, no
benefits are gained by albumin versus crystalloid infusions in these women
(Uhlig, 2014).

■ Long-Term Outcomes
Most patients with ARDS regain nearly normal lung function (Baron, 2018).
In nonpregnant subjects, however, risks for impaired global cognitive
function at 3 and 12 months are significant (Pandharipande, 2013).
Moreover, return to basic normal activity is delayed 1 to 2 years. In a 5-year
follow-up study, Herridge and coworkers (2011) reported normal lung

function but significant exercise limitation as well as physical and
psychological sequelae. Long-term follow-up studies of pregnant women
who recover from ARDS are lacking.

SEPSIS AND SEPTIC SHOCK
Sepsis is defined as infection with organ dysfunction, and septic shock
manifests with unresponsive hypotension (Cecconi, 2018). The Third
International Consensus Definition—“Sepsis-3”—denotes clinical criteria
for sepsis to include suspected infection and acute organ dysfunction
(Seymour, 2018). Use of the terms systemic inflammatory response
syndrome (SIRS) and severe sepsis are no longer recommended. The
syndrome is induced by a systemic inflammatory response to bacteria or
viruses or their by-products such as endotoxins or exotoxins. Its severity is a
continuum (Fig. 50-3). In an analysis of 55 million births, Kendle and
associates (2019) found an incidence of 2.4 cases per 10,000 deliveries. The
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine cites the incidence to be 4 to 10 cases
per 10,000 births. According to the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC), infection and sepsis caused 12 percent of pregnancyrelated deaths in the United States from 2013 to 2017 (Petersen, 2019).

FIGURE 50-3 Sepsis begins with a systemic inflammatory response to infection that may progress to
septic shock.

Infections that most commonly cause sepsis syndrome in obstetrics are
pyelonephritis (Chap. 56, p. 997), chorioamnionitis and puerperal sepsis
(Chap. 37, p. 651), pneumonia (Chap. 54, p. 962), septic abortion (Chap. 11,
p. 203), and necrotizing fasciitis (Chap. 37, p. 654). Septic shock is defined
by the need for vasopressor therapy despite fluid resuscitation. The mortality
rate for this in nonpregnant patients is 20 percent (Snyder, 2013). The
maternal mortality risk from sepsis is significantly underestimated (Bauer,
2015; Chebbo, 2016). However, most evidence indicates that case-fatality
rates are lower for pregnant women compared with age-matched nonpregnant
controls (Kidson, 2018).

■ Etiopathogenesis
Most information concerning sepsis pathogenesis derives from study of
lipopolysaccharide (LPS), which is the endotoxin portion of gram-negative
bacteria. The lipid A moiety is bound by mononuclear blood cells, becomes
internalized, and stimulates release of mediators and a series of complex
downstream perturbations. Clinical aspects of sepsis manifest when
cytokines that have endocrine, paracrine, and autocrine actions are released
(Seymour, 2018; Suffredini, 1989).
Although sepsis in obstetrics may be caused by several pathogens, most
cases stem from a small group. Sepsis and bacteremia complicating
pyelonephritis are commonly caused by Escherichia coli and Klebsiella
species (Cunningham, 1987; Snyder, 2013). Although pelvic infections are
usually polymicrobial, bacteria that cause severe sepsis are frequently
endotoxin-producing Enterobacteriaceae, and most commonly E coli
(Eschenbach, 2015). Other pelvic pathogens are aerobic and anaerobic
streptococci, Bacteroides species, and Clostridium species. Of these, group
A streptococcal infections are a significant source of infection (Leonard,
2019). Some strains of group A β-hemolytic streptococci and
Staphylococcus aureus—including community-acquired methicillin-resistant
S aureus strains (CA-MRSA)—produce a superantigen that activates T cells
to rapidly cause all features of sepsis. This manifests as toxic shock
syndrome, which is discussed further in Chapter 37 (p. 659) (Moellering,
2011; Soper, 2011).

Potent bacterial exotoxins also can cause severe sepsis syndrome.
Examples include exotoxins from Clostridium perfringens or sordellii, toxic
shock syndrome toxin 1 (TSST-1) from S aureus, and toxic shock–like
exotoxin from group A β-hemolytic streptococci (Herrera, 2016; Kaiser,
2018). These last exotoxins cause rapid and extensive tissue necrosis and
gangrene, especially of the postpartum uterus, and may cause profound
cardiovascular collapse and maternal death. In a review discussed
subsequently, the maternal mortality rate from these infections was 58
percent (Yamada, 2010).
Sepsis begins with an inflammatory response that is directed against
microbial endotoxins and exotoxins. CD4 T cells and leukocytes are
stimulated to produce proinflammatory compounds that include tumor
necrosis factor α (TNF-α), several interleukins, and other cytokines,
proteases, oxidants, and bradykinin that result in a “cytokine storm.” Many
other cellular reactions then follow and include stimulation of pro- and
antiinflammatory compounds, procoagulant activity, gene activation, receptor
regulation, and immune suppression (Seymour, 2018). It is also likely that
interleukin 6 (IL-6) mediates myocardial suppression (Pathan, 2004).
The pathophysiological response to this cascade is selective vasodilation
with maldistribution of blood flow. Leukocyte and platelet aggregation cause
capillary plugging. Worsening endotheliopathy causes profound permeability,
capillary leakage, and interstitial fluid accumulation. Depending on the
degree of endothelial injury and inflammatory response, a pathophysiological
and clinical continuum evolves as depicted in Figure 50-3. The clinical
syndrome begins with subtle signs of sepsis from infection and terminates
with septic shock. In its early stages, clinical shock results primarily from
lowered systemic vascular resistance that is not compensated fully by
increased cardiac output. Hypoperfusion worsens lactic acidosis, decreases
tissue oxygen extraction, and leads to end-organ dysfunction that includes
acute lung and kidney injury. Finally, septic cardiomyopathy with global
involvement is common with severe sepsis (Beesley, 2018; Martin, 2018).

■ Clinical Manifestations
Sepsis has myriad clinical manifestations that, at least in part, are dependent
on the specific invading microorganism and its particular endo- or exotoxins.
Some of the general effects of LPS are shown in Table 50-5.

TABLE 50-5. Clinical Manifestations of Sepsis

Thus, although capillary leakage initially causes hypovolemia, if
intravenous crystalloid is given at this point, sepsis hemodynamically can be
described as a high-cardiac-output, low-systemic-vascular-resistance
condition (Fig. 50-4). Concomitantly, pulmonary hypertension develops, and
despite the high cardiac output, severe sepsis also causes myocardial
depression (Seymour, 2018). This is often referred to as the warm phase of
septic shock. These findings are the most common cardiovascular
manifestations of early sepsis, but they can be accompanied by some of the
other clinical or laboratory aberrations listed in the prior section.

FIGURE 50-4 Hemodynamic effects of sepsis. Values for normal women at term are shown by dots.
With early sepsis, there is high cardiac output and low vascular resistance. With fluid resuscitation,
cardiac output increases even more, but so does capillary hydraulic pressure. With continued sepsis,
there may be myocardial depression to further increase capillary hydraulic pressure. Decreased plasma
oncotic pressure (serum albumin [g] × 6 mm Hg) contributes to interstitial lung fluid and endo/epithelial
leak causes alveolar flooding. IV = intravenous; LVSWI = left ventricular stroke work index; PCWP =
pulmonary capillary wedge pressure.

The response to initial intravenous hydration may be prognostic. Most
pregnant women who have early sepsis show a salutary response with
crystalloid and antimicrobial therapy, and if indicated, debridement of
infected tissue. Conversely, if following vigorous fluid infusion, septic shock
results, then the prognosis is more guarded. At this juncture, if β-adrenergic

inotropic agents fail to improve cardiovascular status, this indicates severe
and unresponsive extracellular fluid extravasation with vascular
insufficiency, overwhelming myocardial depression, or both. Oliguria and
continued peripheral vasoconstriction characterize a secondary, cold phase
of septic shock that is rarely survived. Another poor prognostic sign is
continued renal, pulmonary, and cerebral dysfunction once hypotension is
corrected (Chebbo, 2016; Seymour, 2018). The average risk of death rises by
15 to 20 percent with failure of each organ system.

■ Management
In 2004, an international consensus effort was launched as the Surviving
Sepsis Campaign (Dellinger, 2013). The cornerstone of management was
termed early goal-directed therapy (EGDT), which stressed prompt
recognition of serious bacterial infection and close monitoring of vital signs
and urine flow. After three multicenter trials did not show that this protocol
improved survival rates, this strategy is no longer recommended (PRISM
Investigators, 2017; Seymour, 2018).
Similar conclusions were reached with sets of early warning systems in
obstetrics (Edwards, 2015; Mhyre, 2014). Modified Early Warning Score
(MEWS) failed to predict sepsis in obstetrical populations with positive
predictive values as low as 1 to 2 percent (Lappen, 2010). Reasons for such
poor performance in pregnant women include physiological changes of vital
signs; relatively fewer comorbidities in a younger, healthier population; and
predominantly genitourinary infections. Thus, current efforts such as the
Sepsis in Obstetrics Score have been designed to identify women who
benefit from ICU admission early in their hospital course (Albright, 2017).
However, the validity of these findings beyond a single center and against
controls is yet unstudied.
Still, the major tenets of EGDT are employed for sepsis treatment.
Management of sepsis stresses prompt administration of broad-spectrum
antimicrobials, collection of specimens for culture, serum lactate level
measurement, an intravenous fluid bolus, and vasopressors as needed
(Seymour, 2018). An algorithm for management of sepsis is shown in Figure
50-5. The three basic steps are performed as simultaneously as possible and
include evaluation of the sepsis source and its sequelae, cardiopulmonary
function assessment, and immediate management. The most important step in

sepsis management is rapid infusion of 2 L and sometimes as many as 4 to 6
L of crystalloid fluids to restore renal perfusion in severely affected women
(Vincent, 2013). Simultaneously, appropriately chosen broad-spectrum
antimicrobials are begun, preferentially within 1 hour (Chen, 2019; Society
for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, 2019). Because hemoconcentration is caused
by the capillary leak, if anemia coexists, blood is given. Specific thresholds
for gravidas are lacking. In a group of nonpregnant individuals admitted to an
ICU, maintaining the hemoglobin concentration ≥9 g/dL did not have superior
outcomes compared with levels ≥7 g/dL (Holst, 2014). That said, fetal
oxygenation is improved by the higher concentration, as discussed earlier (p.
886).

FIGURE 50-5 Algorithm for evaluation and management of sepsis. Rapid and aggressive
implementation is paramount for success. The three steps—Evaluate, Assess, and Manage—are
carried out as simultaneously as possible.

The use of a colloid solution such as hetastarch is controversial
(Seymour, 2018). One Scandinavian randomized trial comparing
hydroxyethyl starch and Ringer acetate solutions reported a higher mortality
rate with the starch solution (Perner, 2012). Another study found equivalent
results with 6-percent hydroxyethyl starch compared with normal saline

(Myburgh, 2012). Additionally, albumin was not found to be superior to
crystalloids (Caironi, 2014).
Aggressive volume replacement ideally is promptly followed by urinary
output of at least 30 and preferably 50 mL/h, as well as other indicators of
improved perfusion. If not, vasoactive drug therapy is considered (Pacheco,
2014). As discussed, mortality rates are high when sepsis is further
complicated by respiratory or renal failure. With severe sepsis, damage to
pulmonary capillary endothelium and alveolar epithelium causes alveolar
flooding and pulmonary edema. This may occur even with low or normal
pulmonary capillary wedge pressures, as with the ARDS (p. 884). Therefore,
in some women, mechanical ventilation is indicated.
Broad-spectrum antimicrobials are chosen empirically based on the
probable source of infection. They are given promptly in maximal doses after
appropriate cultures are taken of blood, urine, or exudates not contaminated
by normal flora. In severe sepsis, appropriate and early empirical coverage
results in better survival rates (Seymour, 2017, 2018). Acute pyelonephritis
is usually caused by Enterobacteriaceae, as discussed in Chapter 56 (p. 997).
For pelvic infections, empirical selection of a regimen such as ampicillin,
gentamicin, plus clindamycin, which in sum covers aerobic and anaerobic
pathogens, generally suffices (Chap. 37, p. 651). Associated incisional and
other soft-tissue infections are increasingly likely to be caused by MRSA,
thus vancomycin may be added (Klevens, 2007). With septic abortion or
deep fascial infections, a Gram-stained smear may be helpful in identifying
Clostridium species or group A streptococcal organisms.

Surgical Treatment
Continuing sepsis may prove fatal, and debridement of necrotic tissue or
drainage of purulent material is crucial (Pacheco, 2014). Puerperal pelvic
infections include metritis and infections of perineal lacerations or of
hysterotomy or laparotomy incisions. If complicated by abscess, these may
require drainage. With a septic abortion, uterine contents must be removed
expeditiously by curettage as described in Chapter 11 (p. 203). Hysterectomy
is seldom indicated unless gangrene has resulted.
For women with pyelonephritis, continuing sepsis should prompt a
search for obstruction caused by calculi or by a perinephric or intrarenal
phlegmon or abscess. Renal sonography or “one-shot” pyelography can help

diagnose obstruction and calculi. With obstruction, ureteral catheterization,
percutaneous nephrostomy, or flank exploration may be lifesaving (Chap. 56,
p. 998). Computed tomography (CT) or magnetic-resonance imaging aids
identification of a renal phlegmon or abscess.
Puerperal Infections. Most cases of puerperal pelvic sepsis are clinically
manifested in the first several postpartum days, and intravenous
antimicrobial therapy without tissue debridement is generally curative. At
least four exceptions are notable.
First, massive uterine myonecrosis can be caused by group A βhemolytic streptococcal or clostridial infections (Kaiser, 2018; Soper, 2011).
Those with early-onset disease present with findings listed in Table 50-6.
The mortality rate in these women with gangrene, shown in Figure 50-6 is
high, and prompt hysterectomy may be lifesaving. Group A β-hemolytic
streptococci and clostridial colonization or infection also cause toxic-shock
syndrome without obvious gangrene (Mason, 2012). These are due to either
streptococcal toxic shock syndrome–like toxin or clostridial exotoxin that
evolved from S aureus (Chap. 37, p. 659). In many of these cases,
bacteremia and widespread tissue invasion develops, but uterine and
abdominal incisions are intact. If uterine necrosis can be excluded—usually
by CT scanning—then in our experiences, as well as in others, hysterectomy
may not be necessary (Soper, 2011). Still, these infections can be highly
lethal (Chen, 2019; Yamada, 2010).
TABLE 50-6. Clinical Findings in 126 Women with Group A β-Hemolytic
Streptococcal Infection

FIGURE 50-6 A fatal case of group A β-hemolytic Streptococcus pyogenes puerperal infection
following an uncomplicated vaginal delivery at term. The infection caused uterine gangrene and
overwhelming sepsis. Arrows point to overtly “ballooned-out” black gangrenous areas of the postpartum
uterus at the time of laparotomy for hysterectomy.

A second exception, necrotizing fasciitis of the episiotomy site or of the
abdominal surgical incision, is a surgical emergency. Described by Gallup
and coworkers (2002), these infections are aggressively managed as

discussed in Chapter 37 (p. 655). In one instance, Sinha and colleagues
(2015) described a woman with Fournier gangrene who required radical
debridement and colostomy.
Third, persistent or aggressive postpartum uterine infection with
necrosis, uterine incision dehiscence, and severe peritonitis may lead to
sepsis (Chap. 37, p. 651). In this regard, women following cesarean delivery
who are suspected of having peritonitis should be carefully evaluated for
uterine incisional necrosis or bowel perforation. These infections tend to be
less aggressive than necrotizing group A streptococcal infections and
develop later postpartum. CT imaging of the abdomen and pelvis can
frequently disclose these. If either is suspected, timely surgical exploration is
considered. With uterine incision necrosis, hysterectomy is usually necessary
(Fig. 37-5, p. 657). Last, peritonitis and sepsis much less commonly may
result from a ruptured parametrial, intraabdominal, or ovarian abscess
(Chap. 37, p. 656).

Adjunctive Therapy
A woman with severe sepsis is supported with continuing crystalloid
infusion, blood transfusions, and ventilation. In some cases, other measures
are needed. Vasoactive drugs are not given unless aggressive fluid treatment
fails to correct hypotension and perfusion abnormalities. First-line
vasopressors are norepinephrine and vasopressin (Seymour, 2018).
According to the Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine (2019),
norepinephrine has been studied most in pregnant women.
Glucocorticoid use in this setting remains controversial, and some but not
all studies show a favorable effect (Marik, 2018; Venkatesh, 2018). In a
recent study by Annane and colleagues (2018), hydrocortisone plus
fludrocortisone compared with placebo resulted in a significantly lower
mortality rate at 90 days. Thus, low-dose corticosteroid therapy can be
considered with septic shock (Suffredini, 2018).
Endotoxin stimulates endothelial cells to upregulate tissue factor and thus
procoagulant production (Cunningham, 2015). Consumptive coagulopathy
associated with sepsis is discussed in Chapter 44 (p. 776). At the same time,
endotoxin decreases the anticoagulant action of activated protein C. Several
agents developed to block coagulation, however, do not improve outcomes.

Last, induced hypothermia does not improve survival in patients with septic
shock and respiratory failure (Itenov, 2018).

TRAUMA
Depending on definitions used, 10 to 20 percent of gravidas suffer physical
trauma (Al-Thani, 2018; Mendez-Figueroa, 2017). Moreover, injury-related
deaths are the most commonly identified nonobstetrical cause of maternal
mortality (Huls, 2018; La Rosa, 2020). According to Deshpande and
coworkers (2017), pregnant victims of trauma are twice as likely to die
compared with nonpregnant affected women. In an audit from Parkland
Hospital, motor vehicle accidents and falls accounted for 85 percent of
injuries sustained by gravidas (Hawkins, 2007). From the National Violent
Death Reporting System, Palladino and colleagues (2011) found 2
pregnancy-associated suicides per 100,000 live births. The rate was 3 per
100,000 for pregnancy-associated homicides. Notably, intimate partner
violence may be linked to these suicides (Chisholm, 2017). Last, injury
prevention and education of high-risk patients may help decrease morbidity
rates (Globevnik, 2018).

■ Intimate Partner Violence
According to the CDC, intimate partner violence (IPV) describes physical,
sexual, or psychological harm by a current or former partner or spouse
(Breiding, 2015). Such violence affects 1 in 5 women in their lifetime
(Miller, 2019). One goal in violence prevention for Healthy People 2020 is
the reduction of physical abuse directed at women by male partners.
Even more appalling is that IPV continues during pregnancy (Hahn,
2018). Abuse is linked to poverty, poor education, and use of tobacco,
alcohol, and illicit drugs. Unfortunately, abused women tend to remain with
their abusers, and one major risk factor for intimate partner homicide is prior
IPV (Globevnik, 2018). Last, women seeking pregnancy termination have a
higher incidence of IPV (Bourassa, 2007).
In one study, pregnant women hospitalized in California as a result of
assault had significantly increased perinatal morbidity rates (El Kady, 2005).
Immediate sequelae were uterine rupture, preterm delivery, and maternal and

perinatal death. Subsequent outcomes included higher rates of placental
abruption, preterm and low-birthweight newborns, and other adverse
outcomes. Silverman and associates (2006) reported similar results from the
Pregnancy Risk Assessment Monitoring System. In a metaanalysis, women
suffering IPV had threefold increased risk for perinatal death (PastorMoreno, 2020).
The American Academy of Pediatrics and the American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2017) recommend universal screening for
IPV at the initial prenatal visit, during each trimester, and again at the
postpartum visit (Chap. 10, p. 180). A challenge in these recommendations is
that women who refuse to answer the screening question for IPV may be most
at risk (Yost, 2005). Moreover, the woman who is physically abused tends to
present late, if at all, for prenatal care.

■ Sexual Assault
The lifetime prevalence of sexual assault in the United States is 20 percent
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019c; Vrees, 2017).
Satin and associates (1992) reviewed more than 5700 female sexual assault
victims in Dallas County and reported that 2 percent were pregnant.
Associated physical trauma is common. From a forensic standpoint, the
evidence collection protocol is not altered (Linden, 2011).
In addition to attention to physical injuries, exposure to sexually
transmitted diseases must be considered. The CDC (2015, 2016)
recommends antimicrobial prophylaxis against gonorrhea, chlamydial
infection, and trichomoniasis (Table 50-7). At Parkland Hospital, we also
offer at-risk exposed assault victims HIV prophylaxis. If the woman is not
pregnant, another very important aspect is emergency contraception, as
recommended by the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
(2018a; 2019c) and discussed in Chapter 38 (p. 676).
TABLE 50-7. Guidelines for Prophylaxis Against Sexually Transmitted
Disease in Pregnant Victims of Sexual Assault

Last, the importance of psychological counseling for the rape victim and
her family cannot be overemphasized. As discussed in Chapter 64 (p. 1142),
a 30- to 35-percent lifetime risk each for posttraumatic stress disorder, major
depression, and suicide contemplation follows sexual assault (Linden, 2011).

■ Automobile Accidents
At least 3 percent of pregnant women are involved in motor vehicle
accidents each year in the United States. These crashes account for 90
percent of nonviolent blunt trauma in pregnancy (Sakamoto, 2019). Thus, they
are the most common causes of serious, life-threatening, or fatal blunt trauma
during pregnancy (Al-Thani, 2018; Greco, 2019; Petrone, 2017). Mattox and
Goetzl (2005) report these accidents to be the leading cause of traumatic
fetal deaths as well. This also was true from our experiences from Parkland
Hospital (Hawkins, 2007). As with all motor vehicle crashes, alcohol use is
often associated. Up to half of accidents occur without seat-belt use, and
many of these deaths would likely be preventable by the three-point restraints
shown in Figure 50-7 (Schuster, 2016). Seat belts prevent contact with the
steering wheel, and they reduce abdominal impact pressure.

FIGURE 50-7 Illustration showing correct use of three-point automobile restraint. The upper belt is
above the uterus, and the lower belt fits snugly across the upper thighs and well below the uterus.

Original concerns regarding injuries caused by airbag deployment have
been somewhat allayed. In a retrospective cohort study that included 2207

pregnant women in crashes with airbag deployment, perinatal outcomes were
not clinically different from 1141 controls without airbags (Schiff, 2010).
Importantly, 96 percent of both groups used seat belts. Logically, it appears
that injuries with airbag deployment are related to the severity of the crash
(Mendez-Figueroa, 2017).

■ Other Blunt Trauma
Some other common causes of blunt trauma are falls and aggravated assaults.
In the California review reported by El Kady and associates (2005),
approximately a third of pregnant women who were hospitalized for trauma
suffered intentionally inflicted injuries. Less common are blast or crush
injury.
With blunt trauma, intraabdominal injuries can be serious. Even so,
bowel injuries are less frequent because of the protective effect of a large
uterus. Still, diaphragmatic, splenic, liver, and kidney damage also may be
sustained. Particularly worrisome is the specter of amnionic-fluid embolism,
which has been reported with even mild trauma (Ellingsen, 2007;
Pluymakers, 2007). Retroperitoneal hemorrhage is likely more common than
in nonpregnant women (Takehana, 2011).
Orthopedic injuries also are encountered with some regularity (Desai,
2007). From the Parkland Hospital trauma unit, 6 percent of 1682 pregnant
women evaluated had orthopedic injuries. Additionally, this subset was at
increased risk for placental abruption, preterm delivery, and perinatal
mortality. In a review of 101 pelvic fractures during pregnancy, the maternal
mortality rate was 9 percent, and the fetal rate was 35 percent (Leggon,
2002). In another study of pelvic and acetabular fractures during 15
pregnancies, one maternal and four fetal deaths were reported (Almog,
2007). Last, head trauma and neurosurgical care raise unique issues (Qaiser,
2007).

■ Fetal Injury and Death
Perinatal death rates rise with the severity of maternal injuries. Fetal death is
more likely with direct fetoplacental injury, maternal shock, pelvic fracture,
maternal head injury, or hypoxia (Mendez-Figueroa, 2017; Pearlman, 2008).
In an earlier study, motor vehicle accidents caused 82 percent of fetal deaths

from trauma. Death resulted from placental injury in half and from uterine
rupture in 4 percent (Weiss, 2001).
Although uncommon, fetal skull and brain injuries are more likely if the
head is engaged and the maternal pelvis is fractured. Conversely, fetal head
injuries, presumably from a contrecoup effect, may be sustained in unengaged
vertex or nonvertex presentations. Fetal skull fractures are rare and best seen
using CT imaging (Sadro, 2012). One example is shown in Figure 50-8.
Intracranial hemorrhage may be another sequela (Gherman, 2014). Other
injuries have included fetal decapitation or incomplete midabdominal fetal
transection at midpregnancy (Rowe, 1996; Weir, 2008).

FIGURE 50-8 This woman in her third trimester was involved in a high-speed motor vehicle accident.
A. Maximum intensity projection acquired for maternal indications readily identifies fetal skull fractures

(arrows). B. Three-dimensional reformatted computed tomography (CT) image in a bone algorithm
demonstrates the fetal skeleton from data acquired during the maternal examination. Again, the arrow
marks one fracture site. (Photograph contributed by Dr. Travis Browning. Reproduced with permission
from Bailey AA, Twickler DM: Perioperative imaging. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III,
et al [eds]: Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill;
2017.)

■ Placental Injuries
Catastrophic events that potentially accompany blunt trauma include
placental abruption or placental tear or both. Placental abruption caused by
trauma is likely due to deformation of the elastic myometrium around the
relatively inelastic placenta (Crosby, 1968). This may result from a
deceleration injury as the forward-moving uterus meets the immovable
steering wheel or seat belt. Instead, placental injury may follow a contrecoup
injury, which is illustrated in Figure 50-9.

FIGURE 50-9 Mechanism of placental tear or “fracture” caused by a coup-contrecoup injury.
Although not shown here, forward momentum of the uterus at the time of initial impact propels it
forward. This is followed by a contrecoup, in which forces are directed backward. In this image, the
inelastic placenta fractures against the sacral promontory. During each phase, tremendous
intraabdominal pressure is generated that can lead to abruption, shown here as blood collecting in the
retroplacental space. Inset. Blood can be forced into placental bed venules and enter maternal
circulation. Such maternofetal hemorrhage may be identified with Kleihauer-Betke testing.

Some degree of abruption complicates 1 to 6 percent of minor injuries
and up to 50 percent of major ones (Schiff, 2002). Abruption is more likely if
vehicle speed exceeds 30 mph (Reis, 2000).

Clinical findings with traumatic abruption may be similar to those for
spontaneous placental abruption (Chap. 42, p. 753). Kettel and coworkers
(1988) emphasized that traumatic abruption may be occult and not
accompanied by uterine pain, tenderness, or bleeding. In our experiences
with 13 such women at Parkland Hospital, 11 had uterine tenderness, but
only five had vaginal bleeding. Because traumatic abruption is more likely to
be concealed and generate higher intrauterine pressures, associated
coagulopathy is more often seen than with atraumatic abruption (Cunningham,
2015). Partial separation also may generate uterine activity, which is
described more fully later (p. 896). Evidence of fetal compromise such as
fetal tachycardia, sinusoidal pattern, late decelerations, acidosis, and fetal
death are other worrisome features. CT imaging has been shown to be
accurate for diagnosis of traumatic abruption (Kopelman, 2013, 2016; Sadro,
2012). However, because routine placental evaluation by radiologists is not
common, these authors did not advocate for CT screening for abruption.
With a placental tear, life-threatening fetal hemorrhage may follow, and
blood enters either the amnionic sac or maternal circulation. As shown in
Figure 50-10, the tear is linear or stellate. Also shown is a Kleihauer-Betke
stain of maternal blood that is used to quantify fetomaternal hemorrhage. A
small amount of fetal-maternal bleeding has been described in up to a third of
trauma cases, and in 90 percent of these, the volume is <15 mL (Pearlman,
1990). Parenthetically, atraumatic placental abruption is much less often
associated with significant fetomaternal hemorrhage because only minimal
fetal blood enters into the intervillous space. With traumatic abruption,
however, massive fetomaternal hemorrhage may follow. In one study, the risk
of associated uterine contractions and preterm labor was 20-fold if there was
evidence for a fetomaternal bleed (Muench, 2004). With severe fetal
bleeding, long-term adverse neurological outcomes are frequent (Kadooka,
2014).

FIGURE 50-10 A. Partial placental abruption in which the adherent blood clot has been removed.
Note the laceration of the placenta (arrow), which caused fetal death from massive fetomaternal
hemorrhage. B. Kleihauer–Betke stain of a peripheral smear of maternal blood from the same woman.
The dark cells containing hemoglobin that constituted 4.5 percent of red blood cells are fetal in origin,
whereas the empty cells are maternal.

■ Uterine Rupture
Blunt trauma leads to uterine rupture in <1 percent of severe cases
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2017a; Greco,
2019). Rupture is more likely in a previously scarred uterus and is usually
associated with a direct impact of substantial force. Decelerative forces
following a 25-mph collision can generate up to 500 mm Hg of intrauterine
pressure in a properly restrained woman (Crosby, 1968). Clinical findings
may be identical to those for placental abruption with an intact uterus, and
maternal and fetal deterioration are inevitable. Weir and colleagues (2008)
described supracervical uterine avulsion and fetal transection at 22 weeks.

■ Penetrating Trauma
In a study of 321 pregnant women with abdominal trauma, Petrone (2011)
reported a 9-percent incidence of penetrating injuries. Of these, 77 percent
were gunshot wounds, and 23 percent were stab wounds. The incidence of
maternal visceral injury with penetrating trauma is only 15 to 40 percent
compared with 80 to 90 percent in nonpregnant individuals (Stone, 1999).

However, the large, intervening uterus is disproportionately involved
(Awwad, 1994). When the uterus sustains penetrating wounds, the fetus is
more likely than the mother to be seriously injured. The fetus sustains injury
in two thirds of cases, whereas maternal visceral damage is seen in only 20
percent. Still, their seriousness is underscored in that maternal-fetal mortality
rates are significantly higher than those seen with blunt abdominal injuries.
Specifically, maternal mortality rates were 7 versus 2 percent, and fetal
mortality rates were 73 versus 10 percent, respectively.

■ Management of Trauma
As discussed, maternal and fetal outcomes are directly related to injury
severity. That said, commonly used methods of severity scoring do not
account for the significant morbidity and mortality rates related to placental
abruption and thus to pregnancy outcomes. In a study of 582 pregnant women
hospitalized for injuries, the injury severity score did not accurately predict
adverse pregnancy outcomes (Schiff, 2005). Importantly, relatively minor
injuries were associated with preterm labor and placental abruption. In a
study of 317 women at ≥24 weeks’ gestation who had “minor trauma,” 14
percent had clinically significant uterine contractions requiring extended fetal
evaluation past 4 hours (Cahill, 2008).
With few exceptions, treatment priorities in injured pregnant women are
multidisciplinary (MacArthur, 2019; Mendez-Figueroa, 2017). Primary goals
are to evaluate and stabilize maternal injuries. Attention to fetal assessment
during the acute evaluation may divert attention from life-threatening
maternal injuries (American Academy of Pediatrics, 2017). Basic rules of
resuscitation include ventilation, arrest of hemorrhage, and treatment of
hypovolemia with crystalloid and blood products. After midpregnancy, the
large uterus is positioned off the great vessels to relieve vessel compression,
which decreases cardiac output (Nelson, 2015).
Following emergency resuscitation, fractures, internal injuries, bleeding
sites, and placental, uterine, and fetal trauma are sought (Greco, 2019;
MacArthur, 2019). Radiography is not proscribed, but special attention is
given each indication. Not surprisingly, one report observed that pregnant
trauma victims had less radiation exposure than nonpregnant controls
(Ylagan, 2008). Some advocate screening abdominal sonography followed
by CT scanning for positive sonographic findings (Saphier, 2014).

Procedures used include the FAST scan—focused assessment with
sonography for trauma. This is a 5-minute, four- to six-view imaging study
that evaluates perihepatic, perisplenic, pelvic, and pericardial views
(Mendez-Figueroa, 2017). In nonpregnant women, if fluid is seen in the
upper abdominal views, the hemoperitoneum volume is >500 mL (Fig. 5011) (Branney, 1995; Rodgerson, 2001). Importantly, this amount has not been
corroborated for pregnancy. In some cases, open peritoneal lavage may be
informative (Tsuei, 2006).

FIGURE 50-11 Fast scan. Upper quadrant scans show free fluid (blood) between the liver and kidney
(Morison pouch) and around the spleen. The patient had 2500 mL of blood in the peritoneal cavity.
(Reproduced with permission from Mendez-Figueroa H, Rouse DJ: Trauma in pregnancy. In Yeomans
ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al [eds]: Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed.
New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2017.)

Penetrating injuries in most cases must be evaluated using radiography.
Because clinical response to peritoneal irritation is blunted during
pregnancy, an aggressive approach to exploratory laparotomy is pursued.
Whereas exploration is mandatory for abdominal gunshot wounds, some
clinicians advocate close observation for selected stab wounds. Diagnostic
laparoscopy also has been used (Chap. 49, p. 868).

Cesarean Delivery
The necessity for cesarean delivery depends on several factors. Laparotomy
itself is not an indication for hysterotomy. Some considerations include
gestational age, fetal condition, extent of uterine injury, and whether the large
uterus hinders adequate management of other intraabdominal injuries (Tsuei,
2006).

Electronic Monitoring
Because fetal well-being may reflect the status of the mother, fetal monitoring
is another “vital sign” that helps evaluate the extent of maternal injuries.
Even if the mother is stable, electronic monitoring may suggest placental
abruption. In a study by Pearlman and coworkers (1990), no woman had an
abruption if uterine contractions were less often than every 10 minutes within
the 4 hours after trauma was sustained. Almost 20 percent of women who had
contractions more frequently than every 10 minutes in the first 4 hours had an
associated placental abruption. In these cases, abnormal tracings were
common and included fetal tachycardia and late decelerations. Conversely,
no adverse outcomes were reported in women who had normal monitor
tracings (Connolly, 1997). Importantly, if tocolytics are used for these
contractions, they may obfuscate findings, and we do not recommend them.
Because placental abruption usually develops early following trauma,
fetal monitoring is begun as soon as the mother is stable. The ideal duration
of posttrauma monitoring is not precisely known. From data just cited,
observation for 4 hours is reasonable if the fetal heart rate tracing is normal
and no other sentinel findings such as contractions, uterine tenderness, or
bleeding are noted. Certainly, monitoring should be continued as long as
there are uterine contractions, nonreassuring fetal heart patterns, vaginal
bleeding, uterine tenderness or irritability, serious maternal injury, or
ruptured membranes (Mendez-Figueroa, 2017). In rare cases, placental
abruption has developed days after trauma (Higgins, 1984).

■ Fetal-Maternal Hemorrhage
It is unclear whether routine use of the Kleihauer-Betke or an equivalent test
in pregnant trauma victims might modify adverse outcomes associated with
fetal anemia, cardiac arrhythmias, and death (Pak, 1998). In a retrospective

review of 125 pregnant women with blunt injuries, the Kleihauer-Betke test
was judged to be of little value during acute trauma management (Towery,
1993). Others have reached similar conclusions, although a positive test
result with fetal cells composing 0.1 percent predicted uterine contractions
or preterm labor (Muench, 2003, 2004).
For the woman who is D-negative, administration of anti-D
immunoglobulin should be considered (American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists, 2017b). This may be omitted if a test result for fetal
bleeding is negative. Even with anti-D immunoglobulin, alloimmunization
may still develop if the fetal-maternal hemorrhage exceeds 15 mL of fetal
cells. Immunoglobulin dose calculations are described in Chapter 18 (p.
357).
For the pregnant trauma patient, confirmation of current tetanus
immunization status is pertinent. When indicated, a dose of tetanus toxoid,
reduced diphtheria toxoid, and acellular pertussis (Tdap) vaccine is
preferred for its neonatal pertussis immunity benefits (Chap. 10, p. 188).

THERMAL INJURY
Treatment of the burned gravida is similar to that for nonpregnant individuals
(Correia-Sa, 2021). It is generally agreed that pregnancy does not alter
maternal outcome from thermal injury compared with that of nonpregnant
women of similar age. As perhaps expected, maternal and fetal survival
parallels the percentage of burned surface area. Karimi and colleagues
(2009) reported higher mortality rates for both with burns from suicide
attempts and inhalational injuries. The composite mortality rate for more than
200 women from six studies rose in a linear fashion as the percentage of
burned body surface area increased (Fig. 50-12). For 20-, 40-, and 60percent burns, the maternal mortality rates were approximately 4, 30, and 93
percent, respectively. The corresponding fetal mortality rates were 20, 48,
and 96 percent, respectively. With severe burns, the woman usually enters
labor spontaneously within a few days to a week and often delivers a
stillborn. Contributory factors are hypovolemia, pulmonary injury,
septicemia, and the burn-associated, intense catabolic state (Radosevich,
2013).

FIGURE 50-12 Maternal and fetal mortality rates by burn severity in 211 women. (Data from Akhtar,
1994; Amy, 1985; Mabrouk, 1977; Maghsoudi, 2006; Rayburn, 1984; Rode, 1990.)

Following serious abdominal burns, skin contractures that develop may
be painful during a subsequent pregnancy and may even require surgical
decompression and split-skin autografts (Mitsukawa, 2015; Radosevich,
2013). Loss or distortion of nipples may cause problems in breastfeeding.
Mitsukawa and associates (2015) reported that contracture release was
indicated with scars spanning >75 percent of the total abdominal area.
Alternatively, normal abdominal tissue expansion due to pregnancy appears
to be an excellent source for obtaining skin grafts postpartum to correct scar
deformities at other body sites (Del Frari, 2004).

■ Electrical and Lightning Injuries
Earlier case reports suggested a high fetal mortality rate with electric shock
(Fatovich, 1993). In a prospective cohort study, however, Einarson and
associates (1997) showed similar perinatal outcomes in 31 injured women
compared with those of noninjured controls. They concluded that traditional
110-volt North American electrical current likely is less dangerous than the
220-volt currents available in Europe. Thermal burns with electrocution may
be extensive, and a woman with brain death from cardiac arrest has been
described (Sparic, 2014).
The pathophysiological effects of lightning injuries can be devastating.
García Gutiérrez and colleagues (2005) reviewed 13 case reports of

lightning injuries during pregnancy and cited a 50-percent stillbirth rate.

CARDIOPULMONARY RESUSCITATION
Maternal cardiac arrest complicates from 1 in 12,000 to 36,000 delivery
admissions (Balki, 2017; Beckett, 2017; Zelop, 2018). The most common
causes are hemorrhage, anesthesia, heart failure, amnionic-fluid embolism,
and sepsis. Shown in Table 50-8 is the alphabetical A–H checklist of cardiac
arrest causes. General topics regarding planning and equipment have been
reviewed by the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
(2018b) and the Society for Obstetric Anesthesia and Perinatology (Lipman,
2014).
TABLE 50-8. Possible Etiologies for Cardiac Arrest During Pregnancy

Special considerations for cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR)
conducted in the second half of pregnancy are outlined in the American Heart
Association 2010 guidelines (Jeejeebhoy, 2015). The committee
acknowledges the following as standards: (1) relieve possible vena caval
compression by left lateral uterine displacement; (2) administer 100-percent
oxygen; (3) establish intravenous access above the diaphragm; (4) assess for
hypotension that warrants therapy, which is defined as systolic blood
pressure <100 mm Hg or <80 percent of baseline; and (5) review possible
causes of critical illness and treat these as early as possible.
The position of the heart for external compressions is not different from
that in nonpregnant women (Holmes, 2015). In nonpregnant women, external
chest compressions result in a cardiac output that is approximately 30
percent of normal. However, in late pregnancy, this may be less because of
uterine aortocaval compression (Nelson, 2015). Thus, uterine displacement
should accompany other resuscitative efforts. This can be accomplished by
tilting the operating table laterally, by placing a wedge under the right hip, or
by pushing the uterus to the left manually (Rose, 2015). Components of highquality cardiopulmonary resuscitation in pregnancy are shown in Table 50-9
(Society for Maternal–Fetal Medicine, 2018).
TABLE 50-9. High-Quality Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation in Pregnancy

■ Perimortem Cesarean Delivery

The maternal survival rate from cardiac arrest is 60 to 70 percent, and many
deaths are associated with out-of-hospital arrest (Beckett, 2017; He, 2021).
Because of pregnancy-induced hindrances on CPR efforts, emergent
perimortem cesarean delivery for improved maternal resuscitation and fetal
salvage is recommended by most. Specifically, the American Heart
Association and the Society for Obstetric Anesthesia and Perinatology
recommend operative delivery within 4 to 5 minutes of beginning CPR if the
fetus is viable and circulation is not restored (Zelop, 2018). In women
delivered by perimortem cesarean, neurologically intact neonatal survival
and the cardiac arrest-to-delivery interval are inversely related (Beckett,
2017; Katz, 2012). Specifically, of newborns delivered within 5 minutes of
arrest, 98 percent are neurologically intact; within 6 to 15 minutes, 83
percent are intact; within 16 to 25 minutes, 33 percent are intact; and within
26 to 35 minutes, only 25 percent are intact (Clark, 1997).
This serious and sometimes contentious issue is far from evidence based.
For example, the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
(2019a) recommends consideration for perimortem cesarean delivery
beginning at 4 minutes. Katz and associates (2005) reviewed 38 perimortem
cesarean deliveries with a “large selection bias.” They concluded that these
reports supported—but “fell far from proving”—that perimortem cesarean
delivery within 4 minutes of maternal cardiac arrest improves maternal and
fetal outcomes. Even so, as emphasized by Clark (1997) and Rose (2015)
and their coworkers, and in our experiences, these goals rarely can be met in
actual practice. For example, many cases of cardiac arrest occur in
uncontrolled circumstances, and thus, the time to CPR initiation alone would
consume the first 5 minutes. Thus “crash” cesarean delivery would supersede
resuscitative efforts, would possibly be done without appropriate anesthesia
or surgical equipment, and might lead to otherwise preventable maternal
death. Moreover, the distinction between a perimortem versus postmortem
cesarean operation is imperative (Katz, 2012; Rose, 2015). Last, in the
balance, any choice may favor survival of the mother over the fetus, or vice
versa, and thus there are immediate unresolvable ethical concerns. Katz
(2012) and Zelop and colleagues (2018) have provided scholarly reviews of
perimortem cesarean delivery.
Successful CPR can have morbid complications. Severe neurological
injury is the most feared (Romagano, 2017). Cox and coworkers (2018)

described liver lacerations in 3 of 7 survivors. Takotsubo cardiomyopathy
also has been reported (Kraft, 2017).

■ Maternal Brain Death
Occasionally, a pregnant woman with a supposedly healthy intact fetus will
be kept on somatic support to await fetal viability or maturity. This is
discussed in Chapter 63 (p. 1138).

ENVENOMATION
According to their review, Brown and coworkers (2013) reported that
clinically significant envenomations in pregnant women are from snakes,
spiders, scorpions, jellyfish, and hymenoptera. This last group includes bees,
wasps, hornets, and ants. Adverse outcomes are related to maternal effects.
Available evidence supports a venom-specific approach that incorporates
symptomatic care, antivenom administration when appropriate, anaphylaxis
treatment, and fetal assessment (Ghosh, 2018). One management scheme for
North American snakebites was provided by Lei and associates (2015).

REFERENCES
Akhtar MA, Mulawkar PM, Kulkarni HR: Burns in pregnancy: effect on maternal and fetal outcomes.
Burns 20:351, 1994
Albright CM, Has P, Rouse DJ, et al: Internal validation of the sepsis in obstetrics score to identify risk
of morbidity from sepsis in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 130(4):747, 2017
Almog G, Liebergall M, Tsafrir A, et al: Management of pelvic fractures during pregnancy. Am J
Orthop 36:E153, 2007
Al-Thani H, El-Menyar A, Sathian B, et al: Blunt traumatic injury during pregnancy: a descriptive
analysis from a level 1 trauma center. Eur J Trauma Emerg Surg 45(3):393, 2019
American Academy of Pediatrics, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Guidelines for
Perinatal Care, 8th ed. Washington, 2017
American College of Critical Care Medicine, Society of Critical Care Medicine: Guidelines on admission
and discharge for adult intermediate care units. Crit Care Med 26:607, 1998
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Hypertension in pregnancy: report of the
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists’ task force on hypertension in pregnancy.
Executive summary. Obstet Gynecol 122:1122, 2013
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Critical care in pregnancy. Practice Bulletin No.
170, October 2016, Reaffirmed 2017a

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Prevention of Rh D alloimmunization. Practice
Bulletin No. 181, August 2017b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Emergency contraception. Practice Bulletin No.
152, September 2015, Reaffirmed 2018a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Preparing for clinical emergencies in obstetrics
and gynecology. Committee Opinion No. 590, March 2014, Reaffirmed 2018b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Critical care in pregnancy. Practice Bulletin No.
211, April 2019a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Sexual assault. Committee Opinion No. 777,
April 2019c
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Gestational hypertension and preeclampsia.
Practice Bulletin No. 222, May 2020
Amy BW, McManus WF, Goodwin CW, et al: Thermal injury in the pregnant patient. Surg Gynecol
Obstet 161:209, 1985
Annane D, Renault A, Brun-Buisson C, et al: Hydrocortisone plus fludrocortisone for adults with septic
shock. N Engl J Med 378(9):809, 2018
Awwad JT, Azar GB, Seoud MA, et al: High-velocity penetrating wounds of the gravid uterus: Review
of 16 years of civil war. Obstet Gynecol 83(2):259, 1994
Bailey AA, Twickler DM: Perioperative imaging. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al
(eds): Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education,
2017
Balki M, Liu S, León JA, et al: Epidemiology of cardiac arrest during hospitalization for delivery in
Canada: a nationwide study. Anesth Analg 124(3):890, 2017
Baron RM, Levey BD: Acute respiratory distress syndrome: In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et
al (eds): Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education,
2018, p 2030
Bauer ME, Lorenz RP, Bauer ST, et al: Maternal deaths due to sepsis in the state of Michigan, 1999–
2006. Obstet Gynecol 126(4):747, 2015
Beckett VA, Knight M, Sharpe P: The CAPS Study: incidence, management and outcomes of cardiac
arrest in pregnancy in the UK: a prospective, descriptive study. BJOG 124(9):1374, 2017
Beesley SJ, Weber G, Sarge T, et al: Septic cardiomyopathy. Crit Care Med 46(4):625, 2018
Bourassa D, Bérubé J: The prevalence of intimate partner violence among women and teenagers
seeking abortion compared with those continuing pregnancy. J Obstet Gynaecol Can 29:415, 2007
Branney SW, Wolfe RE, Moore EE, et al: Quantitative sensitivity of ultrasound in detecting free
intraperitoneal fluid. J Trauma 40(6):1052, 1995
Breiding MJ, Basile KC, Smith SG, et al: Intimate partner violence surveillance: uniform definitions and
recommended data elements. Version 2.0, 2015. Available at:
www.cdc.gov/violenceprevention/pdf/intimatepartnerviolence.pdf. Accessed October 9, 2019
Brown SA, Seifert SA, Rayburn WF: Management of envenomations during pregnancy. Clin Toxicol
51:3, 2013
Cahill AG, Bastek JA, Stamilio DM, et al: Minor trauma in pregnancy—is the evaluation unwarranted?
Am J Obstet Gynecol 198:208.e1, 2008
Caironi P, Tognoni G, Masson S, et al: Albumin replacement in patients with severe sepsis or septic
shock. N Engl J Med 370(15):1412, 2014
Callaghan WM, Creanga AA, Kuklina EV: Severe maternal morbidity among delivery and postpartum
hospitalizations in the United States. Obstet Gynecol 120(5):1029, 2012

Cecconi M, Evans L, Levy M, et al: Sepsis and septic shock. Lancet 392(10141):75, 2018
Celli BR: Mechanical ventilatory support. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL (eds): Harrison’s
Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2018, p 2035
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Sexually transmitted diseases treatment guidelines, 2015.
MMWR 64(3):1, 2015
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Updated guidelines for antiretroviral postexposure
prophylaxis after sexual, injection drug use, or other nonoccupational exposure to HIV-United States,
2016. MMWR 65:458, 2016
Chantry AA, Deneux-Tharaux C, Bonnet MP, et al: Pregnancy-related ICU admissions in France:
trends in rate and severity, 2006–2009. Crit Care Med 43:78, 2015
Chebbo A, Tan S, Kassis C, et al: Maternal sepsis and septic shock. Crit Care Clin 32(1):119, 2016
Chen AX, Simpson SQ, Pallin DJ: Sepsis guidelines. N Engl J Med 380(14):1369, 2019
Chisholm CA, Bullock L, Ferguson JEJ II, et al: Intimate partner violence and pregnancy: epidemiology
and impact. Am J Obstet Gynecol 217(2):141, 2017
Clark SL, Cotton DB, Hankins GD, et al: Critical Care Obstetrics, 3rd ed. Boston, Blackwell Science,
1997
Clark SL, Cotton DB, Lee W, et al: Central hemodynamic assessment of normal term pregnancy. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 161:1439, 1989
Clifford C, Mhatre M, Craigo S: Successful use of extracorporeal membrane oxygenation for status
asthmaticus in a woman with a periviable pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 132(4):1007, 2018
Close A, Gimovsky A, Macri C: Adult respiratory distress disorders due to Legionnaires disease in
pregnancy: a case report. J Reprod Med 61(1–2):83, 2016
Combes A, Hajage D, Capellier G, et al: Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation for severe acute
respiratory distress syndrome. N Engl J Med 378(21):1965, 2018
Connolly AM, Katz VL, Bash KL, et al: Trauma and pregnancy. Am J Perinatol 14:331, 1997
Correia-Sa I, Marques M, Horta R, et al: Experience in management of burn injury during pregnancy in
a burn unit. J Burn Care Res 42:232, 2021
Cox TR, Crimmins SD, Shannon AM, et al: Liver lacerations as a complication of CPR during
pregnancy. Resuscitation 122:121, 2018
Crosby WM, Snyder RG, Snow CC, et al: Impact injuries in pregnancy, 1. Experimental studies. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 101:100, 1968
Cunningham FG, Byrne JJ, Nelson DB: Peripartum cardiomyopathy. Obstet Gynecol 133(1):167, 2019
Cunningham FG, Lucas MJ, Hankins GD: Pulmonary injury complicating antepartum pyelonephritis. Am
J Obstet Gynecol 156:797, 1987
Cunningham FG, Nelson DB: Disseminated intravascular coagulation syndromes in obstetrics. Obstet
Gynecol 126:999, 2015
Del Frari B, Pulzl P, Schoeller T, et al: Pregnancy as a tissue expander in the correction of a scar
deformity. Am J Obstet Gynecol 190:579, 2004
Dellinger RP, Levy MM, Rhodes A, et al: Surviving Sepsis Campaign: international guidelines for
management of severe sepsis and septic shock: 2012. Crit Care Med 41(580), 2013
Dennis AT, Solnordal CB: Acute pulmonary oedema in pregnant women. Anaesthesia 67(6):646, 2012
Desai P, Suk M: Orthopedic trauma in pregnancy. Am J Orthop 36:E160, 2007
Deshpande NA, Kucirka LM, Smith RN, et al: Pregnant trauma victims experience nearly 2-fold higher
mortality compared to their nonpregnant counterparts. Am J Obstet Gynecol 217(5):590.e1, 2017
Duarte AG: ARDS in pregnancy. Clin Obstet Gynecol 57(4):862, 2014

Edwards SE, Grobman WA, Lappen JR, et al: Modified obstetric early warning scoring systems
(MOEWS): validating the diagnostic performance for severe sepsis in women with chorioamnionitis.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 212(4):536.e1, 2015
Einarson A, Bailey B, Inocencion G, et al: Accidental electric shock in pregnancy: a prospective cohort
study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 176:678, 1997
El Kady D, Gilbert WM, Xing G, et al: Maternal and neonatal outcomes of assaults during pregnancy.
Obstet Gynecol 105:357, 2005
Ellingsen CL, Eggebo TM, Lexow K: Amniotic fluid embolism after blunt abdominal trauma.
Resuscitation 75(1):180, 2007
Ende H, Varelmann D: Respiratory considerations including airway and ventilation issues in critical care
obstetric patients. Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am 43(4):699, 2016
Eschenbach DA: Treating spontaneous and induced septic abortions. Obstet Gynecol 125(5):1042, 2015
Fan E, Brodie D, Slutsky AS: Acute respiratory distress syndrome: advances in diagnosis and treatment.
JAMA 319(7):698, 2018
Fatovich DM: Electric shock in pregnancy. J Emerg Med 11:175, 1993
Friedman AM, Ananth CV, Huang Y, et al: Hospital delivery volume, severe obstetrical morbidity, and
failure to rescue. Am J Obstet Gynecol 215(6):795.e1, 2016
Fuchs A, McLaren R Jr, Saunders P, et al: Human metapneumovirus infection and acute respiratory
distress syndrome during pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 130(3):630, 2017
Gaffney A: Critical care in pregnancy—is it different? Semin Perinatol 38(6):329, 2014
Gallup DG, Freedman MA, Meguiar RV, et al: Necrotizing fasciitis in gynecologic and obstetric patients:
a surgical emergency. Am J Obstet Gynecol 187:305, 2002
Gandhi S, Sun D, Park AL, et al: The Pulmonary Edema Preeclampsia Evaluation (PEPE) Study. J
Obstet Gynaecol 36(12):1065, 2014
García Gutiérrez JJ, Meléndez J, Torrero JV, et al: Lightning injuries in a pregnant woman: a case report
and review of the literature. Burns 31:1045, 2005
Gherman RB, Chauhan SP: Placental abruption and fetal intraventricular hemorrhage after airbag
deployment: a case report. J Reprod Med 59(9–10):501, 2014
Ghosh N, Henderson JA, Kim HG, et al: Rattlesnake envenomation in the third trimester of pregnancy.
Obstet Gynecol 132(3):682, 2018
Globevnik Vilikonja V, Lučovnik M, Premru Sršen T, et al: Violence before pregnancy and the risk of
violence during pregnancy. J Perinat Med 46(1):29, 2018
Greco PS, Day LJ, Pearlman MD: Guidance for evaluation and management of blunt abdominal trauma
in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 134:1343, 2019
Grobman WA, Bailit JL, Rice MM, et al: Can differences in obstetric outcomes be explained by
differences in the care provided? The MFMU Network APEX study. Am J Obstet Gynecol
21(2):147e.1, 2014
Guntupalli KK, Hall N, Karnard DR, et al: Critical illness in pregnancy: part I: an approach to a pregnant
patient in the ICU and common obstetric disorders. Chest 148(4):1093, 2015a
Guntupalli KK, Karnad DR, Bandi V, et al: Critical illness in pregnancy: part II: common medical
conditions complicating pregnancy and puerperium. Chest 148(5):1333, 2015b
Hahn CK, Gilmore AK, Aguayo RO, et al: Perinatal intimate partner violence. Obstet Gynecol Clin
North Am 45(3):535, 2018
Hankins GD, Wendel GD, Leveno KJ, et al: Myocardial infarction during pregnancy. A review. Obstet
Gynecol 65:139, 1985

Hawkins JS, Casey BM, Minei J, et al: Outcomes after trauma in pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol
197:S92, 2007
He F, Li RR, Liu PS, et al: Maternal cardiac arrest: a retrospective analysis. BJOG 128:1200, 2021
Herrera C, Meehan R, Podduturi V, et al: Maternal death due to Clostridium novyi in an injection drug
user. Obstet Gynecol 128(4):876, 2016
Herridge MS, Cheung AM, Tansey CM, et al: One-year outcomes in survivors of the acute respiratory
distress syndrome. N Engl J Med 348:683, 2003
Herridge MS, Tansey CM, Matté A, et al: Functional disability 5 years after acute respiratory distress
syndrome. N Engl J Med 364(14):1293, 2011
Higgins SD, Garite TJ: Late abruptio placentae in trauma patients: implications for monitoring. Obstet
Gynecol 63:10S, 1984
Holmes S, Kirkpatrick IDC, Zelop CM, et al: MRI evaluation of maternal cardiac displacement in
pregnancy: implications for cardiopulmonary resuscitation. Am J Obstet Gynecol 213:401.e1, 2015
Holst LB, Haase N, Wetterslev J, et al: Lower versus higher hemoglobin threshold for transfusion in
septic shock. N Engl J Med 371(15):1381, 2014
Huls CK, Detlefs C: Trauma in pregnancy. Semin Perinatol 42(1):13, 2018
Itenov TS, Johansen ME, Bestle M, et al: Induced hypothermia in patients with septic shock and
respiratory failure (CASS): a randomised, controlled, open-label trial. Lancet Respir Med 6(3):183,
2018
Jeejeebhoy FM, Zelop CM, Lipman S, et al: Cardiac arrest in pregnancy. Circulation 132(18):1747, 2015
Jenkins TM, Troiano NH, Graves CR, et al: Mechanical ventilation in an obstetric population:
characteristics and delivery rates. Am J Obstet Gynecol 188:439, 2003
Jessup M, Brozena S: Heart failure. N Engl J Med 348:2007, 2003
Kadooka M, Kato H, Kato A, et al: Effects of neonatal hemoglobin concentration on long-term outcome
of infants affected by fetomaternal hemorrhage. Early Hum Dev 90(9):431, 2014
Kaiser JE, Bakian AV, Silver RM, et al: Clinical variables associated with adverse maternal outcomes in
puerperal group A streptococci infection. Obstet Gynecol 132(1):179, 2018
Karimi H, Momeni M, Momeni M, et al: Burn injuries during pregnancy in Iran. Int J Gynaecol Obstet
104(2):132, 2009
Katz V, Balderston K, DeFreest M: Perimortem cesarean delivery: were our assumptions correct? Am
J Obstet Gynecol 192:1916, 2005
Katz VL: Perimortem cesarean delivery: its role in maternal mortality. Semin Perinatol 36(1):68, 2012
Kenchaiah S, Evans JC, Levy D, et al: Obesity and the risk of heart failure. N Engl J Med 347:305,
2002
Kendle AM, Salemi JL, Tanner JP, et al: Delivery-associated sepsis: trends in prevalence and mortality.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 220(4):391.e1, 2019
Kettel LM, Branch DW, Scott JR: Occult placental abruption after maternal trauma. Obstet Gynecol
71:449, 1988
Kidson KM, Henderson WR, Hutcheon JA: Case fatality and adverse outcomes are reduced in
pregnant women with severe sepsis or septic shock compared with age-matched comorbid-matched
nonpregnant women. Crit Care Med 46(11):1775, 2018
Kilpatrick SJ, Abreo A, Gould J, et al: Confirmed severe maternal morbidity is associated with high rate
of preterm. Am J Obstet Gynecol 215(2):233.e1, 2016
Klevens RM, Morrison MA, Nadle J, et al: Invasive methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
infections in the United States. JAMA 298 (15):1763, 2007

Kopelman TR, Bogert JN, Walters JW, et al: Computed tomographic imaging interpretation improves
fetal outcomes after maternal trauma. J Trauma Acute Care Surg 81(6):1131, 2016
Kopelman TR, Manriquez NE, Gridley M, et al: The ability of computed tomography to diagnose
placental abruption in the trauma patient. J Trauma Acute Care Surg 74(1):236, 2013
Kraft K, Graf M, Karch M, et al: Takotsubo syndrome after cardiopulmonary resuscitation during
emergency cesarean delivery. Obstet Gynecol 129(3):521, 2017
Krishnan S, Schmidt GA: Acute right ventricular dysfunction: real-time management with
echocardiography. Chest 147(3):835, 2015
La Rosa M, Loaiza S, Zambrano MA, et al: Trauma in pregnancy. Clin Obstet Gynecol 63(2):447, 2020
Lapinsky SE, Rojas-Suarez JA, Crozier TM, et al: Mechanical ventilation in critically-ill pregnant
women: a case series. Int J Obstet Anesth 24:323, 2015
Lappen JR, Keene M, Lore M, et al: Existing models fail to predict sepsis in an obstetric population with
intrauterine infection. Am J Obstet Gynecol 203(6):537.e1, 2010
Leggon RE, Wood GC, Indeck MC: Pelvic fractures in pregnancy: factors influencing maternal and fetal
outcomes. J Trauma 53:796, 2002
Lei C, Badowski NJ, Auerbach PS, et al: Disorders caused by venomous snakebites and marine animal
exposures. In Kasper DL, Fauci AS, Hauser SL, et al (eds): Harrison’s Principles of Internal
Medicine, 19th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2015, p 2736
Leonard A, Wright A, Saavedra-Campos M, et al: Sever group A streptococcal infections in mothers
and their newborns in London and the South East, 2010–2016: assessment of risk and audit of public
health management. BJOG 126(1):44, 2019
Linden JA: Care of the adult patient after sexual assault. N Engl J Med 365(9):834, 2011
Lipman S, Cohen S, Einav S, et al: The Society for Obstetric Anesthesia and Perinatology consensus
statement on the management of cardiac arrest in pregnancy. Anesth Analg 118(5):1003, 2014
Liu C, Sun W, Wang C, et al: Delivery during extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) support
of pregnant woman with severe respiratory distress syndrome caused by influenza: a case report
and review of the literature. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 32(15):2570, 2019
Mabrouk AR, el-Feky AE: Burns during pregnancy: a gloomy outcome. Burns 23:596, 1977
MacArthur B, Foley M, Gray K, et al: Trauma in pregnancy: a comprehensive approach to the mother
and fetus. Am J Obstet Gynecol 220(5):465, 2019
Magder S: Invasive hemodynamic monitoring. Crit Care Clin 31(1):67, 2015
Maghsoudi H, Samnia R, Garadaghi A, et al: Burns in pregnancy. Burns 32:246, 2006
Mallampalli A, Hanania A, Guntupalli KK: Acute lung injury and acute respiratory distress syndrome. In
Belfort MA, Saade GR, Foley MR, et al (eds): Critical Care Obstetrics, 5th ed. Hoboken, WileyBlackwell, 2010, p 338
Marik PE: The role of glucocorticoids as adjunctive treatment for sepsis in the modern era. Lancet
Respir Med 6(10):793, 2018
Martin L, Derwall M, Al Zoubi S, et al: The SEPTIC HEART current understanding of molecular
mechanisms and clinical implications. Chest 155(2):427, 2019
Mason KL, Aronoff DM: Postpartum group A Streptococcus sepsis and maternal immunology. Am J
Reprod Immunol 67(2):91, 2012
Matsushita H, Harada A, Sato T, et al: Fetal intracranial injuries following motor vehicle accidents with
airbag deployment. J Obstet Gynaecol Res 40(2):599, 2014
Matthay MA: Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation for severe acute respiratory distress syndrome. N
Engl J Med 379(9):884, 2018
Mattox KL, Goetzl L: Trauma in pregnancy. Crit Care Med 33:S385, 2005

Mendez-Figueroa H, Rouse DJ: Trauma in pregnancy. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et
al (eds): Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, McGraw-Hill
Education, 2017, p. 276
McLaughlin K, Wright SP, Kingdom JC, et al: Clinical validation of non-invasive cardiac output
monitoring in healthy pregnant women. J Obstet Gynaecol Can 39(11):1008, 2017
Mhyre JM, Tsen LC, Einav S, et al: Cardiac arrest during hospitalization for delivery in the United
States, 1998–2011. Anesthesiology 120(4):810, 2014
Miller E, McCaw B: Intimate partner violence. N Engl J Med 380(9):850, 2019
Mitsukawa N, Saiga A, Satoh K: Protocol of surgical indications for scar contracture release before
childbirth: women with severe abdominal scars after burn injuries. J Plast Surg Hand Surg 49(1):32,
2015
Moellering RC Jr, Abbott GF, Ferraro MJ: Case 2–2011: a 30-year-old woman with shock after
treatment for a furuncle. N Engl J Med 364(3):266, 2011
Muench M, Baschat A, Kush M, et al: Maternal fetal hemorrhage of greater than or equal to 0.1
percent predicts preterm labor in blunt maternal trauma. Am J Obstet Gynecol 189:S119, 2003
Muench MV, Baschat AA, Reddy UM, et al: Kleihauer-Betke testing is important in all cases of
maternal trauma. J Trauma 57:1094, 2004
Myburgh JA, Finfer S, Bellomo R, et al: Hydroxyethyl starch or saline for fluid resuscitation in intensive
care. N Engl J Med 367(20):1901, 2012
Nair P, Davies AR, Beca J, et al: Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation for severe ARDS in pregnant
and postpartum women during the 2009 H1N1 pandemic. Intensive Care Med 37(4):648, 2011
Nasraway SA, Cohen IL, Dennis RC, et al: Guidelines on admission and discharge for adult
intermediate care units. Crit Care Med 26(3):607, 1998
National Institutes of Health: Critical Care Medicine Consensus Conference. JAMA 250:798, 1983
Nelson DB, Stewart RD, Matulevicius SA, et al: The effects of maternal position and habitus on
maternal cardiovascular parameters as measured by cardiac magnetic resonance. Am J Perinatol
32:1318, 2015
O’Dwyer SL, Gupta M, Anthony J: Pulmonary edema in pregnancy and the puerperium: a cohort study
of 53 cases. J Perinat Med 43:675, 2015
Pacheco LD, Saade GR, Hankins GD: Severe sepsis during pregnancy. Clin Obstet Gynecol 57(4):827,
2014
Pachtman S, Koenig S, Meirowitz N: Detecting pulmonary edema in obstetric patients through point-ofcare lung ultrasonography. Obstet Gynecol 129(3):525, 2017
Padilla C, Markwei M, Easter SR, et al: Critical care in obstetrics: a strategy for addressing maternal
mortality. Am J Obstet Gynecol 224:567, 2021
Pak LL, Reece EA, Chan L: Is adverse pregnancy outcome predictable after blunt abdominal trauma?
Am J Obstet Gynecol 179:1140, 1998
Palladino CL, Singh V, Campbell J, et al: Homicide and suicide during the perinatal period. Obstet
Gynecol 118(5):1056, 2011
Pandharipande PP, Girad TD, Jackson A, et al: Long-term cognitive impairment after critical illness. N
Engl J Med 369:1306, 2013
Pastor-Moreno G, Ruiz-Perez I, Henares-Montiel J, et al: Intimate partner violence during pregnancy
and risk of fetal and neonatal death: a metaanalysis with socioeconomic context indicators. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 222(2):123, 2020
Pathan N, Hemingway CA, Alizadeh AA, et al: Role of interleukin 6 in myocardial dysfunction of
meningococcal septic shock. Lancet 363:203, 2004

Pearlman MD, Klinch KD, Flannagan CAC: Fetal outcome in motor-vehicle crashes: effects of crash
characteristics and maternal restraint. Am J Obstet Gynecol 198(4):450.e1, 2008
Pearlman MD, Tintinalli JE, Lorenz RP: A prospective controlled study of outcome after trauma during
pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 162:1502, 1990
Petersen EE, Davis NL, Goodman D, et al: Vital signs: pregnancy-related deaths, United States, 2011–
2015, and strategies for prevention, 13 states, 2013–2017. MMWR 68:423, 2019
Perner A, Naase N, Guttormsen, et al: Hydroxyethyl starch 130/0.4 versus Ringer’s acetate in severe
sepsis. N Engl J Med 367(2):124, 2012
Petrone P, Jiménez-Morillas P, Axelrad A, et al: Traumatic injuries to the pregnant patient: a critical
literature review. Eur J Trauma Surg 45(3):383, 2019
Petrone P, Talving P, Browder T, et al: Abdominal injuries in pregnancy: a 155-month study at two level
1 trauma centers. Injury 42(1):47, 2011
Pluymakers C, De Weerdt A, Jacquemyn Y, et al: Amniotic fluid embolism after surgical trauma: two
case reports and review of the literature. Resuscitation 72(2):324, 2007
Pordeus ACB, Katz L, Soares MC, et al: Acute pulmonary edema in a obstetric intensive care unit: a
case series study. Medicine (Baltimore) 97(28):e11508, 2018
PRISM Investigators, Rowan KM, Angus DC, et al: Early, goal-directed therapy for septic shock—a
patient-level meta-analysis. N Engl J Med 376(23):2223, 2017
Qaiser R, Black P: Neurosurgery in pregnancy. Semin Neurol 27:476, 2007
Radosevich MA, Finegold H, Goldfarb W, et al: Anesthetic management of the pregnant burn patient:
excision and grafting to emergency cesarean section. J Clin Anesth 25(7):582, 2013
Ramanathan K, Tan CS, Rycus P, et al: Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation in pregnancy: an analysis
of the extracorporeal life support organization registry. Crit Care Med 48(5):696, 2020
Rayburn W, Smith B, Feller I, et al: Major burns during pregnancy: effects on fetal well-being. Surg
Gynecol Obstet 63:392, 1984
Reis PM, Sander CM, Pearlman MD: Abruptio placentae after auto accidents. A case control study. J
Reprod Med 45:6, 2000
Rode H, Millar AJ, Cywes S, et al: Thermal injury in pregnancy—the neglected tragedy. S Afr Med J
77:346, 1990
Rodgerson JD, Heegaard WG, Plummer D, et al: Emergency department right upper quadrant
ultrasound is associated with a reduced time to diagnosis and treatment of ruptured ectopic
pregnancies. Acad Emerg Med 8(4):331, 2001
Romagano MP, Scorza WE, Lammers SE, et al: Treatment of a pregnant patient in a persistent
vegetative state. Obstet Gynecol 129(1):107, 2017
Rose CH, Faksh A, Traynor KD, et al: Challenging the 4- to 5-minute rule: from perimortem cesarean to
resuscitative hysterotomy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 213(5):653, 2015
Rowe TF, Lafayette S, Cox S: An unusual fetal complication of traumatic uterine rupture. J Emerg Med
14:173, 1996
Rush B, Martinka P, Kilb B, et al: Acute respiratory distress syndrome in pregnant women. Obstet
Gynecol 129(3):530, 2017
Saad AF, Rahman M, Maybauer DM, et al: Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation in pregnant and
postpartum women with H1N1-related acute respiratory distress syndrome: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. Obstet Gynecol 127(2):247, 2016
Sadro CT, Zins AM, Debiec K, et al: Case report: lethal fetal head injury and placental abruption in a
pregnant trauma patient. Emerg Radiol 19(2):175, 2012

Sakamoto J, Michels C, Eisfelder B, et al: Trauma in pregnancy. Emerg Med Clin North Am 37(2):317,
2019
Saphier NB, Kopelman TR: Traumatic Abruptio Placenta Scale (TAPS): a proposed grading system of
computed tomography evaluation of placental abruption in the trauma patient. Emerg Radiol
21(1):17, 2014
Satin AJ, Ramin JM, Paicurich J, et al: The prevalence of sexual assault: a survey of 2404 puerperal
women. Am J Obstet Gynecol 167:973, 1992
Schiff MA, Holt VL: Pregnancy outcomes following hospitalization for motor vehicle crashes in
Washington State from 1989 to 2001. Am J Epidemiol 161:503, 2005
Schiff MA, Holt VL, Daling JR: Maternal and infant outcomes after injury during pregnancy in
Washington state from 1989 to 1997. J Trauma 53:939, 2002
Schiff MA, Mack CD, Kaufman RP, et al: The effect of air bags on pregnancy outcomes in Washington
state: 2002–2005. Obstet Gynecol 115(1):85, 2010
Schuster M, Becker N, Mackeen AD: Blunt trauma in pregnancy. Abstract No. 363. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 214:S203, 2016
Schwaiberger D, Karcz M, Menk M, et al: Respiratory failure and mechanical ventilation in the
pregnant patient. Crit Care Clin 32(1):85, 2016
Seymour CW, Angus DC: Sepsis and septic shock. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al (eds):
Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2018, p
2044
Seymour CW, Gesten F, Prescott HC, et al: Time to treatment and mortality during mandated
emergency care for sepsis. N Engl J Med 376(23):2235, 2017
Sibai BM, Viteri OA: Diabetic ketoacidosis in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 123:167, 2014
Silverman JG, Decker MR, Reed E, et al: Intimate partner violence victimization prior to and during
pregnancy among women residing in 26 U.S. states: associations with maternal and neonatal death.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 195:140, 2006
Sinha R, Arachchi A, Lee P, et al: Fournier gangrene in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 125(6):1342, 2015
Small MJ, James AH, Kershaw T, et al: Near-miss maternal mortality: cardiac dysfunction as the
principal cause of obstetric intensive care unit admissions. Obstet Gynecol 119(2 Pt 1):250, 2012
Snyder CC, Barton JR, Habli M, et al: Severe sepsis and septic shock in pregnancy: indications for
delivery and maternal and perinatal outcomes. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 26(5):503, 2013
Soar J, Becker LB, Berg KM, et al: Cardiopulmonary resuscitation in special circumstances. Lancet
298:1257, 2021
Society of Critical Care Medicine: Guidelines for intensive care unit admission, discharge, and triage.
Crit Care Med 27(3):633, 1999
Society of Critical Care Medicine: Recommendations for intensive care unit admission and discharge
criteria. Crit Care Med 16(8):807, 1988
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine (SMFM), Pacheco LD, Saade G, et al: Amniotic fluid embolism:
diagnosis and management. Am J Obstet Gynecol 215(2):B16, 2016
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine (SMFM), Plante LA, Pacheco LD, et al: SMFM Consult Series
#47: sepsis during pregnancy and the puerperium. Am J Obstet Gynecol 220(4):B2, 2019
Soper DE, Lee SI, Kim JY, et al: Case 35–2011: a 33-year-old woman with postpartum leukocytosis and
gram-positive bacteremia. N Engl J Med 365(20):1916, 2011
Sparic R, Berisavac I, Kadija S, et al: Accidental electrocution in pregnancy. Int J Gynaecol Obstet
126(2):181, 2014

Steinack C, Lenherr R, Hendra H, et al: The use of life-saving extracorporeal membrane oxygenation
(ECMO) for pregnant woman with status asthmaticus. J Asthma 54(1):84, 2017
Stevens TA, Swaim LS, Clark SL: The role of obstetrics/gynecology hospitalists in reducing maternal
mortality. Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am 42(3):463, 2015
Stone IK: Trauma in the obstetric patient. Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am 26:459, 1999
Subrevilla LA, Cassinelli MT, Carcelen A, et al: Human fetal and maternal oxygen tension and acidbase status during delivery at high altitude. Am J Obstet Gynecol 111:1111, 1971
Suffredini AF: A role for hydrocortisone therapy in septic shock? N Engl J Med 378(9):860, 2018
Suffredini AF, Fromm RE, Parker MM, et al: The cardiovascular response of normal humans to the
administration of endotoxin. N Engl J Med 321(5):280, 1989
Szabo G, Molvarec A, Nagy B, et al: Increased B-type natriuretic peptide levels in early-onset versus
late-onset preeclampsia. Clin Chem Lab Med 52:281, 2014
Takehana CS, Kang YS: Acute traumatic gonadal vein rupture in a pregnant patient involved in a major
motor vehicle collision. Emerg Radiol 18(4):349, 2011
Thiele RH, Bartels K, Gan TJ: Cardiac output monitoring: a contemporary assessment and review. Crit
Care Med 43(1):177, 2015
Thornton CE, von Dadelszen P, Makris A, et al: Acute pulmonary oedema as a complication of
hypertension during pregnancy. Hypertens Pregnancy 30(2):169, 2011
Tihtonen KM, Kööbi T, Vuolteenaho O, et al: Natriuretic peptides and hemodynamics in preeclampsia.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 196:328, 2007
Towery R, English TP, Wisner D: Evaluation of pregnant women after blunt injury. J Trauma 35:731,
1993
Tsuei BJ: Assessment of the pregnant trauma patient. Injury Int J Care Injured 37:367, 2006
Uhlig C, Silva PL, Deckert S, et al: Albumin versus crystalloid solutions in patients with the acute
respiratory distress syndrome: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Crit Care 18(1):R10, 2014
Vaught AJ, Kovell LC, Szymanski LM, et al: Acute cardiac effects of severe pre-eclampsia. J Am Coll
Cardiol 72(1):1, 2018
Venkatesh B, Finfer S, Cohen J, et al: Adjunctive glucocorticoid therapy in patients with septic shock. N
Engl J Med 378(9):797, 2018
Vincent JL, De Backer D: Circulatory shock. N Engl J Med 369:1726, 2013
Vrees RA: Evaluation and management of female victims of sexual assault. Obstet Gynecol Surv
72(1):39, 2017
Webster CM, Manuck T: Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation in pregnant and postpartum women: a
ten-year cohort. Am J Obstet Gynecol 220(1):S545, 2019
Weir LF, Pierce BT, Vazquez JO: Complete fetal transection after a motor vehicle collision. Obstet
Gynecol 111(2):530, 2008
Weiss HB, Songer TJ, Fabio A: Fetal deaths related to maternal injury. JAMA 286:1863, 2001
Wen T, Syeda SK, Kern-Goldberger A, et al: Socioeconomic and racial disparities in intesive care level
utilization in a national sample. Abst. No. 686 Am J Obstet Gynecol 222:s434, 2020
Wiedemann HP, Wheeler AP, Bernard GR, et al: Comparison of two fluid-management strategies in
acute lung injury. N Engl J Med 354(24):2213, 2006
Wilson MS, Ingersoll M, Meschter E, et al: Evaluating the side effects of treatment for preterm labor in
a center that uses “high-dose” magnesium sulfate. Am J Perinatol 31(8):711, 2014
Xiao C, Gangal M, Abenhaim HA: Effect of magnesium sulfate and nifedipine on the risk of developing
pulmonary edema in preterm births. J Perinat Med 42(5):585, 2014

Yamada T, Yamada T, Yamamura MK, et al: Invasive group A streptococcal infection in pregnancy. J
Infect 60(6):417, 2010
Ylagan MV, Trivedi N, Basu T, et al: Radiation exposure in the pregnant trauma patient: implications for
fetal risk counseling. Abstract No. 320. Am J Obstet Gynecol 199(6):S100, 2008
Yost NP, Bloom SL, McIntire DD, et al: A prospective observational study of domestic violence during
pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 106(1):61, 2005
Zeeman GG: Obstetric critical care: a blueprint for improved outcomes. Crit Care Med 34:S208, 2006
Zeeman GG, Wendel GD Jr, Cunningham FG: A blueprint for obstetric critical care. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 188:532, 2003
Zelop CM, Einav S, Mhyre JM, et al: Cardiac arrest during pregnancy: ongoing clinical conundrum. Am
J Obstet Gynecol 219(1):52, 2018

