CHAPTER 19

Fetal Therapy

MEDICAL THERAPY
SURGICAL THERAPY
OPEN FETAL SURGERY
FETOSCOPIC SURGERY
PERCUTANEOUS PROCEDURES
EX-UTERO INTRAPARTUM TREATMENT
REFERENCES
Innovative treatments developed during the past three decades have
dramatically altered the course of selected fetal anomalies and conditions.
Over time, fetal interventions have become less invasive, and the number of
fetal centers has expanded. The North American Fetal Therapy Network now
includes 36 medical centers in the United States and Canada. Some of the
fetal abnormalities and conditions amenable to either medical or surgical
treatment are presented here. The management of fetal anemia and
thrombocytopenia is reviewed in Chapter 18, and treatment of some fetal
infections is discussed in Chapters 67 and 68.

MEDICAL THERAPY

Selected medications administered to the pregnant woman are transported
across the placenta in concentrations high enough to treat fetal conditions.
Pregnancy physiology affects drug concentration, and transfer depends on
maternal and placental metabolism (Chap. 8, p. 145).

■ Arrhythmias
Abnormal fetal cardiac rhythms are grouped into three categories:
tachyarrhythmias, heart rates >180 beats per minute (bpm);
bradyarrhythmias, heart rates <110 bpm; and ectopy, typically premature
atrial contractions. If a fetal arrhythmia is suspected, M-mode ultrasound,
described in Chapter 15 (p. 294), is used to measure the atrial and
ventricular rates and to clarify the relationship between atrial and ventricular
beats, thereby diagnosing the type of rhythm disturbance.

Premature Atrial Contractions
If the fetal heart rate is normal but the rhythm is irregular, the most common
etiology is premature atrial contractions (PACs). These atrial ectopic beats
are found in 1 to 2 percent of uncomplicated pregnancies (Hahurij, 2011;
Strasburger, 2010). PACs represent immaturity of the cardiac conduction
system. They typically resolve later in gestation or in the neonatal period.
PACs are usually an isolated finding but may be associated with redundancy
of the foramen ovale flap—formerly termed a foramen ovale aneurysm.
When a PAC is conducted, an extra beat is heard with handheld Doppler.
However, the premature contraction more commonly arrives at the
atrioventricular node during the refractory period. This results in a
compensatory pause, which sounds like a dropped beat. M-mode evaluation
confirms the diagnosis (Fig. 15-46, p. 295).
PACs may occur as frequently as every other beat, which means that the
auscultated fetal heart rate may be as low as 60 to 80 bpm. Known as
blocked atrial bigeminy, this condition is benign and does not require
treatment (Strasburger, 2010). However, monitoring the fetus in labor may be
challenging and necessitate cesarean delivery. M-mode ultrasound will
differentiate atrial bigeminy from other causes of bradycardia, such as thirddegree atrioventricular block.

Up to 2 percent of fetuses with PACs are later found to have
supraventricular tachycardia (Copel, 2000; Srinivasan, 2008). Given the
importance of prompt identification and treatment of supraventricular
tachyarrhythmias, pregnancies with PACs are often monitored with fetal heart
rate assessment every 1 to 2 weeks until the ectopy resolves. At Parkland
Hospital, we find that auscultation with handheld Doppler is sufficient for
surveillance.

Tachyarrhythmias
The two most common tachyarrhythmias are supraventricular tachycardia
(SVT) and atrial flutter. SVT is characterized by an abrupt increase in the
fetal heart rate to 180 to 300 bpm with 1:1 atrioventricular concordance (Fig.
19-1). The typical range is 200 to 240 bpm. SVT may develop secondary to
an ectopic focus or to an accessory atrioventricular pathway leading to a
reentrant tachycardia. Atrial flutter is characterized by a much higher atrial
rate, generally 300 to 500 bpm, with varying degrees of atrioventricular
block. As a result, the ventricular rate in a fetus with atrial flutter may range
from below normal to approximately 250 bpm (Fig. 19-2). In contrast, fetal
sinus tachycardia typically presents with a gradual heart rate rise to a rate
that is only slightly above normal. With this, readily discernible causes may
be maternal fever or hyperthyroidism, or rarely, fetal anemia or infection.

FIGURE 19-1 Supraventricular tachycardia (SVT). This M-mode image at 20 weeks’ gestation
demonstrates an initially normal fetal heartrate of 150 bpm. Midway through the image (arrow), the
fetal heart rate suddenly increases to 240 bpm. With SVT, there is one atrial beat (A) for each
ventricular beat (V).

FIGURE 19-2 Atrial flutter. In this M-mode image at 32 weeks’ gestation, calipers mark the
ventricular rate, which is approximately 220 bpm. There are two atrial beats (A) for each ventricular
beat (V), such that the atrial rate is approximately 440 bpm with 2:1 atrioventricular block.

If a fetal tachyarrhythmia is identified, it is important to determine
whether it is sustained—defined as present for at least 50 percent of the
time. It may be necessary to monitor the fetal heart rate for 12 to 24 hours
upon initial detection, and then periodically to reassess (Srinivasan, 2008).
Unsustained or intermittent tachyarrhythmias may become sustained over
time. Although intermittent tachyarrhythmias do not generally require
treatment, close fetal surveillance is warranted.
Sustained fetal tachyarrhythmias with ventricular rates exceeding 200
bpm impair ventricular filling to a degree that the risks for developing
cardiomyopathy and hydrops are significant. With atrial flutter, lack of
coordinated atrioventricular contractions may further compound this risk.
Maternal administration of antiarrhythmic agents that cross the placenta may
convert the rhythm to normal or may lower the baseline heart rate to forestall
heart failure. Therapy can require dosages at the upper end of the therapeutic
adult range. Therefore, a maternal electrocardiogram is obtained before and
during therapy. Monitoring of the maternal serum level may be necessary,

particularly if the dosage requires titration. If medical therapy is successful,
the medication is generally continued until delivery.
Antiarrhythmic medications most commonly used include digoxin,
flecainide, and sotalol. Their selection depends on the type of
tachyarrhythmia and provider experience with the drug. Traditionally,
digoxin was the initial preferred treatment, but its placental transfer may be
poor in the setting of hydrops. Many centers now use flecainide or sotalol as
first-line therapy (Ekiz, 2018; van der Heijden, 2013). A second agent is
needed in more than 50 percent of cases (Jaeggi, 2011; O’Leary, 2020; Shah,
2012). With treatment, conversion to a normal rhythm or reduction in heart
rate to a normal range occurs in 90 percent, including 80 percent of those
with hydrops (Miyoshi, 2019; Ueda, 2018). SVT is more likely than atrial
flutter to convert to a normal rhythm. The neonatal survival rate exceeds 90
percent (Ekman-Joelsson, 2015; Miyoshi, 2019; O’Leary, 2020; van der
Heijden, 2013).

Bradyarrhythmia
The most common etiology of fetal bradycardia is congenital heart block.
Approximately 50 percent of cases occur in the setting of a structural cardiac
abnormality involving the conduction system. These include heterotaxy, in
particular left-atrial isomerism; endocardial cushion defect; and less
commonly corrected transposition of the great vessels (Srinivasan, 2008).
The prognosis of heart block from a structural cardiac anomaly is extremely
poor, and fetal loss rates exceed 80 percent (Glatz, 2008; Strasburger, 2010).
In a structurally normal heart, 85 percent of atrioventricular block cases
are caused by transplacental passage of maternal anti-SSA/Ro or antiSSB/La antibodies (Buyon, 2009). Many of these women have, or
subsequently develop, systemic lupus erythematosus or other autoimmune
disease (Chap. 62, p. 1113). The risk of third-degree heart block with Ro
antibodies is small—only approximately 2 percent. However, the risk may
reach 20 percent if a prior infant has been affected. Immune-mediated
congenital heart block confers a mortality rate of nearly 20 percent, requires
permanent pacing in two thirds of surviving children, and also poses a risk
for cardiomyopathy (Brito-Zeron, 2015; Izmirly, 2011). If associated with
effusions, bradyarrhythmias, or endocardial fibroelastosis, neonatal status
may progressively worsen after birth.

Research has focused on maternal corticosteroid therapy to potentially
reverse fetal heart block or to forestall it. In the PR Interval and
Dexamethasone (PRIDE) study, a multicenter trial of pregnancies with antiSSA/Ro antibodies, Friedman and colleagues (2008, 2009) performed
weekly fetal echocardiography to assess for development of heart block.
Fetal heart block was treated with maternal oral dexamethasone, 4 mg daily.
Unfortunately, therapy did not prevent progression from second- to thirddegree block, and third-degree atrioventricular block was irreversible. In
rare cases, there was a potential benefit in reversing first-degree
atrioventricular block. However, first-degree block did not generally
progress even without treatment. Similarly, a subsequent review of
pregnancies with isolated second- or third-degree fetal heart block found that
dexamethasone therapy did not affect disease progression, need for
pacemaker in the neonatal period, or overall survival rates (Izmirly, 2016).
Despite considerable enthusiasm for corticosteroid treatment, a systematic
review of more than 700 pregnancies with treated fetal heart block
demonstrated no improvement in fetal or neonatal morbidity or mortality
rates (Michael, 2019). Thus, we do not recommend dexamethasone use for
this indication.
More recent efforts have turned to potential therapy with
hydroxychloroquine (Plaquenil), a mainstay of treatment for systemic lupus
erythematosus (Chap. 62, p. 1112). In a review of more than 250 women with
prior affected children, early treatment with hydroxychloroquine was
associated with a significant decrease in recurrence of congenital heart block
(Izmirly, 2012). A subsequent clinical trial found that treatment with
hydroxychloroquine was associated with a greater than 50-percent reduction
in the rate of fetal heart block (Izmirly, 2020). In each of these series, fewer
than 8 percent of children from pregnancies treated with hydroxychloroquine
experienced heart block. Research in this area is ongoing.
Maternal terbutaline has also been given in small cohorts with either
alloimmune- or heterotaxy-mediated fetal heart block in which the fetal heart
rate is persistently below 56 bpm. The terbutaline dosage is titrated to a
maternal heart rate of 95 to 115 bpm. Fetal heart rate increases of 5 to 10
bpm have been reported, but resolution of hydrops has not been consistently
demonstrated (Cuneo, 2007, 2010).

■ Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia
Several autosomal recessive enzyme deficiencies impair fetal synthesis of
cortisol from cholesterol by the adrenal cortex, leading to congenital adrenal
hyperplasia (CAH). CAH is the most common etiology of androgen excess in
those with 46,XX disorders of sex development (Chap. 3, p. 38). Lack of
cortisol stimulates adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH) secretion by the
anterior pituitary, overproduction of androstenedione and testosterone, and
subsequent virilization of female fetuses. Sequelae may include formation of
labioscrotal folds, persistence of a urogenital sinus, or even creation of a
penile urethra and scrotal sac (Fig. 15-55, p. 299).
More than 90 percent of CAH cases are caused by 21-hydroxylase
deficiency. There are two types: classic and nonclassic. The incidence of
classic CAH approximates 1 in 15,000 births worldwide but is higher in
selected populations. Among Yupik Eskimos, the reported incidence is 1 in
300 births (Nimkarn, 2016). Of those with classic CAH, 75 percent require
postnatal treatment with mineralocorticoids and glucocorticoids to prevent a
salt-wasting adrenal crisis, which is characterized by hyponatremia,
dehydration, hypotension, and even cardiovascular collapse. The remaining
25 percent with classic CAH have the simple virilizing type and also require
glucocorticoid supplementation. Nonclassic CAH may present with
precocious pubarche, hirsutism, or infertility. However, affected individuals
also may be asymptomatic. The prevalence of nonclassic CAH approximates
1 case per 200 Caucasians and Ashkenazi Jews in the United States (HannahShmouni, 2017). As discussed in Chapter 32 (p.594), all states mandate
newborn screening for CAH.
For more than three decades, dexamethasone has been administered to the
pregnant woman to suppress fetal androgen overproduction and either
obviate or ameliorate virilization of female fetuses (David, 1984; New,
2012). Prenatal corticosteroid therapy is successful in most cases if initiated
early and taken consistently. One metaanalysis found that dexamethasone
treatment was associated with reduced virilization. Specifically, the Prader
score, which grades genital masculinization on a scale 1 to 5, improved by
2.3 grades (Fernandez-Balselis, 2010). The alternative is consideration of
postnatal genitoplasty, which may include clitoroplasty, urogenital sinus
surgery, and additional vaginoplasty procedures. In a recent review, 18
percent of children treated with feminizing genitoplasty experienced

postoperative complications, and 12 percent required further surgery
(Baskin, 2020).
The typical preventive regimen is oral dexamethasone given to the
mother at a dosage of 20 μg/kg/d—up to 1.5 mg per day, divided in three
doses. The critical period for external genitalia development is 7 to 12
weeks’ gestation, and treatment to prevent virilization should be initiated by
9 weeks—before it is known whether the fetus is affected. Because this is
an autosomal recessive condition, affected females make up only 1 in 8 atrisk conceptions.
Carrier parents are typically identified after the birth of an affected child.
Molecular genetic testing is clinically available in such cases and initially
uses sequence analysis of the CYP21A2 gene, which encodes the 21hydroxylase enzyme (Nimkarn, 2016). If this is uninformative, gene-targeted
deletion/duplication analysis is performed, and additional testing such as
whole exome sequencing may be considered (Chap. 16, p. 327).
A goal of prenatal diagnosis is to limit dexamethasone exposure in males
and in unaffected females. If both parents are determined to be carriers,
prenatal molecular genetic testing may be performed on chorionic villi—at
10 to 12 weeks’ gestation—or on amniocytes after 15 weeks. Determination
of fetal gender using cell-free DNA (cfDNA) may aid in avoiding
dexamethasone treatment. CfDNA sensitivity to detect Y-chromosome
sequences is at least 95 percent when performed at or beyond 7 weeks
(Devaney, 2011; Hill, 2011). In the research setting, effective cfDNA testing
using hybridization probes flanking the CYP21A2 gene has been reported as
early as 56/7 weeks’ gestation (New, 2014).
Maternal treatment with dexamethasone has become controversial. The
Endocrine Society recommends that treatment be given only in the context of
research protocols (Speiser, 2018). It further recommends that such protocols
incorporate cfDNA screening for the Y-chromosome to avoid treatment of
male fetuses. Of note, if therapy is initiated shortly before 9 weeks’
gestation, the dose of dexamethasone used is not considered to have
significant teratogenic potential because organogenesis of major organs has
already taken place (McCullough, 2010). Ongoing concerns focus on the
potential effects of either excess endogenous androgens or excess exogenous
dexamethasone on the developing brain. Although maternal dexamethasone
has been used for many years to prevent virilization of female fetuses with
CAH, long-term safety data are relatively limited.

■ Congenital Cystic Adenomatoid Malformation
This well-circumscribed lung mass may appear solid and echogenic or may
have one or multiple variably sized cysts (Fig. 15-33, p. 288). Lesions with
one or more cysts ≥5 mm are termed macrocystic, whereas solid lesions and
those with smaller cysts are microcystic (Adzick, 1985). A small subset of
microcystic congenital cystic adenomatoid malformations (CCAMs) may
demonstrate rapid growth, generally between 18 and 26 weeks’ gestation.
The mass may become so large that it causes mediastinal shift, which may
compromise cardiac output and venous return, leading to hydrops (Cavoretto,
2008).
A CCAM-volume ratio (CVR) has been used to quantify size and risk for
hydrops in these severe cases (Crombleholme, 2002). This ratio is an
estimate of the CCAM volume using the formula for a prolate ellipse (length
× width × height × π/6) divided by the head circumference. In a series of 40
pregnancies with microcystic CCAM, the mean CVR was 0.5 at 20 weeks’
gestation, peaked at 1.0 by 26 weeks, and then declined sharply before
delivery (Macardle, 2016). With a CVR exceeding 1.6, the risk for hydrops
is as high as 60 percent. However, if the initial CVR is below 1.6, CCAM
growth resulting in hydrops develops in fewer than 2 percent of cases
(Ehrenberg-Buchner, 2013; Peranteau, 2016).
A CVR threshold of 1.0 also may assist counseling. In a series of 62
pregnancies with fetal lung masses, a maximal CVR >1.0 was associated
with a 75-percent likelihood that the neonate would be symptomatic
(Ehrenberg-Buchner, 2013). However, no fetus with a CVR ≤1.0
subsequently required surgery in the newborn period.
If the CVR exceeds 1.6 or if signs of hydrops develop, corticosteroid
treatment may be beneficial. Regimens include dexamethasone—6.25 mg
every 12 hours for four doses, or betamethasone—12.5 mg intramuscularly
every 24 hours for two doses. A single course of corticosteroids has been
associated with resolution of hydrops in approximately 80 percent of cases,
and 90 percent of treated fetuses survived (Loh, 2012; Peranteau, 2016).
Multiple courses of corticosteroids—generally two—have been advocated
for fetuses with large CCAM lesions and with persistent or worsening
hydrops or ascites despite a single course of medication (Derderian, 2015;
Peranteau, 2016). Therapy for macrocystic CCAM is discussed later.

■ Thyroid Disease
Identification of fetal thyroid disease is rare and is usually prompted by
sonographic detection of a fetal goiter. If a goiter is identified, determination
of fetal hyper- or hypothyroidism is essential, and thyroid hormone levels
should be measured in amnionic fluid or fetal blood. Traditionally, fetal
blood sampling was preferred to amniocentesis for guiding treatment, but
data are limited (Abuhamad, 1995; Ribault, 2009). Performance of these
procedures is discussed in Chapter 17 (p. 347). Goals of therapy are
correction of the physiological abnormality and diminished goiter size. The
goiter may compress the trachea and esophagus, leading to hydramnios from
impaired swallowing. Despite this, case reports attest to lack of airway
compromise and favorable outcomes (Blumenfeld, 2013; Machado, 2019).

Thyrotoxicosis
Maternal Graves disease may result in transplacental passage of
immunoglobulin G (IgG) thyroid-stimulating antibodies. Untreated fetal
thyrotoxicosis can present with goiter, tachycardia, growth restriction,
hydramnios, accelerated bone maturation, and even heart failure and hydrops
(Huel, 2009; Kiefer, 2017; Peleg, 2002; van Dijk, 2018). Fetal blood
sampling may be considered to confirm the diagnosis (Duncombe, 2001;
Srisupundit, 2008). Maternal administration of antithyroid medication may be
needed, even if the woman has had prior surgery or ablation and no longer
has hyperthyroidism. If the pregnant women develops hypothyroidism, she is
treated with supplemental levothyroxine (Hui, 2011).

Hypothyroidism
In a woman receiving medication for Graves disease, transplacental passage
of methimazole or propylthiouracil may cause fetal hypothyroidism (Bliddal,
2011). Other potential causes of fetal hypothyroidism resulting in goiter
include transplacental passage of thyroid peroxidase antibodies, fetal thyroid
dyshormonogenesis, and maternal consumption of iodine supplements
(Agrawal, 2002; Hardley, 2018; Overcash, 2016).
Goitrous hypothyroidism may lead to hydramnios, neck hyperextension,
and delayed bone maturation. Treatment with intraamnionic levothyroxine
should be considered. Optimal dosage and frequency have not been
established but have typically ranged from 150 to 500 μg every 1 to 4 weeks

(Machado, 2019; Nemescu, 2020; Ribault, 2009). If the pregnant woman is
receiving antithyroid medication, it is generally discontinued.

SURGICAL THERAPY
Fetal surgery, also called maternal-fetal surgery, is offered for selected
congenital abnormalities in which the likelihood of deterioration during
gestation is so great that delaying treatment until after delivery would risk
fetal death or substantially greater postnatal morbidity. Fetal surgical
procedures are highly specialized interventions performed at relatively few
centers to treat a small number of fetal conditions. They require extensive
preoperative counseling and multidisciplinary care. Principles for guiding
case selection are listed in Table 19-1. When considering fetal surgery, the
overriding concern is the safety of the mother and fetus. Accomplishing the
fetal goals of the procedure is secondary (Walsh, 2011).
TABLE 19-1. Guiding Principles for Fetal Surgical Procedures

Selected abnormalities amenable to fetal surgical treatment are shown in
Table 19-2. An overview of some of these procedures, their indications, and
complications is provided here to assist with initial patient evaluation and
counseling. Additional content is also found in Cunningham and Gilstrap’s
Operative Obstetrics, 3rd edition.
TABLE 19-2. Selected Fetal and Placental Abnormalities Amenable to InUtero Procedures

■ Open Fetal Surgery
Fetal procedures are considered open if they are accomplished though a
hysterotomy that is not performed for the purpose of delivery. Open
procedures are performed under general endotracheal anesthesia to suppress
uterine contractions and fetal responses. The hysterotomy is made with a
stapling device, and intraoperative ultrasound is used to avoid the placental
edge and to verify fetal position. The stapler seals the edges of the
myometrium and membranes to achieve hemostasis and avoid chorioamnion
separation. Warmed fluid is continuously infused into the uterus thorough a
rapid infusion device to limit cord compression. The fetus is gently
manipulated to facilitate exposure, to permit pulse oximetry monitoring, and
to establish venous access in case fluids or blood are emergently needed.
The surgical procedure is then performed, and the hysterotomy is closed.
Prophylactic antibiotics are generally administered for 24 hours. Tocolysis
typically includes intravenous magnesium sulfate for 24 hours and oral
indomethacin for 48 hours. Cesarean delivery is needed later in gestation and
for all future deliveries.

Risks
Open fetal surgery entails significant maternal and fetal risks. The most
recent data are from studies of fetal myelomeningocele repair, which is the
most commonly performed procedure. Morbidities identified in the
Management of Myelomeningocele Study (MOMS) are shown in Table 19-3
(Adzick, 2011). In a review of 26 open fetal myelomeningocele cases, 15
percent experienced preterm rupture of membranes, and the mean gestational
age at delivery was 35 weeks (Pruthi, 2021). Other potential risks include
maternal sepsis and fetal death during or following the procedure,
particularly if hydrops is present. Wilson and associates (2010) reviewed
subsequent pregnancy outcomes following open fetal surgery and reported
that 14 percent of women experienced uterine rupture and 14 percent had
uterine dehiscence.

TABLE 19-3. Benefits and Risks of Fetal Myelomeningocele Surgery
versus Postnatal Repair

Myelomeningocele Surgery
Fetal myelomeningocele is the first nonlethal birth defect for which in-utero
repair has been offered (Fig. 19-3). Following standard postnatal
myelomeningocele repair, affected children experience varying degrees of
paralysis, bladder and bowel dysfunction, developmental delays, and
brainstem dysfunction from the Arnold-Chiari II malformation (Chap. 15, p.
277). Damage is postulated to result from abnormal embryonic neurulation
followed by exposure of neural elements to amnionic fluid throughout
pregnancy (Adzick, 2010; Meuli, 1995, 1997).

FIGURE 19-3 Fetal myelomeningocele surgery. A. With the edges of both the laparotomy and
hysterotomy incisions retracted, the skin around the defect is incised. Subsequently, the neural placode is
sharply dissected from the arachnoid membrane. B. The dural membrane is reflected to the midline to
cover the neural placode and is reapproximated using suture. In some cases a patch is needed (not
shown). The fetal skin incision is subsequently sutured. Last, hysterotomy and laparotomy are then
closed. (Figures 19-3, 19-4, 19-6, and 19-8: Reproduced with permission from Shamshirsaz AA, Ramin,
SM, Belfort MA: Fetal therapy. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al: Cunningham and
Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, McGraw Hill Education, 2017.)

In the landmark MOMS trial, Adzick and colleagues (2011) randomized
183 pregnancies to prenatal or standard postnatal myelomeningocele repair
at three centers. Criteria for trial participation included: (1) a singleton fetus
at 19.0 to 25.9 weeks’ gestation; (2) an upper myelomeningocele boundary
between T1 and S1 confirmed by magnetic resonance imaging; (3) evidence
of hindbrain herniation; and (4) a normal karyotype and no evidence of a
fetal anomaly unrelated to the myelomeningocele. Women at risk for preterm
birth or placental abruption, those with a contraindication to fetal surgery,
and women with body mass index (BMI) >35 kg/m2 were excluded.
The MOMS trial demonstrated improved early childhood outcomes in the
prenatal surgery cohort (see Table 19-3). Children who had undergone fetal
surgery were twice as likely to walk independently by 30 months. They had
significantly less hindbrain herniation and were only half as likely to undergo
ventriculoperitoneal shunting by age 1 year. A primary outcome was a
composite score that was derived from the Bayley Mental Development
Index and from the difference between the functional and anatomical level of

the lesion at 30 months. This primary outcome was also significantly better in
the prenatal surgery group.
Despite these benefits, most children who received fetal surgery were
not able to ambulate independently, and nearly 30 percent were not able to
ambulate at all. Prenatal surgery did not confer improvements in fetal or
neonatal death rates or in the Bayley Mental Development Index score at age
30 months. Prenatal surgery was also associated with a small risk for
placental abruption and maternal pulmonary edema. Moreover, nearly half
were delivered before 34 weeks, which significantly increased the risk for
respiratory distress syndrome (Adzick, 2011).
It is the position of the American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2017) that nondirective counseling include the option of fetal
surgery for all pregnancies that meet MOMS trial criteria. Study of fetal
myelomeningocele repair in women with BMI up to 40 kg/m2 has
demonstrated outcomes similar to those in women of lower BMI (Hilton,
2019; Moldenhauer, 2020). Otherwise, MOMS trial criteria are strictly
followed. Outcomes of children aged 6 to 10 years who previously
participated in the MOMs trial are now available (Houtrow, 2020). Fetal
surgery conferred a sustained benefit in the likelihood of independent
ambulation. Nearly 30 percent of children were able to ambulate
independently, and approximately 50 percent required ventriculoperitoneal
shunt placement. Overall cognitive function was similar between cohorts
(Houtrow, 2020).

Thoracic Masses
Open fetal surgery is rarely performed for thoracic masses. Most are small,
and these have a good prognosis. Large CCAMs are often treated medically
with a course of corticosteroids (p. 370). A dominant cyst in a CCAM may
be amenable to drainage or shunt placement (p. 376). Similarly, an isolated
pleural effusion surrounding a pulmonary sequestration may be amenable to
drainage or shunt placement.
Fetal surgery is generally reserved for pregnancies prior to 32 weeks’
gestation in which there is a large, solid-appearing or microcystic mass and
hydrops is developing. In carefully selected cases, the survival rate
following open lobectomy approximates 60 percent (Vrecenak, 2013). Use of

the ex-utero intrapartum treatment procedure in the treatment of fetal lung
masses at delivery is discussed later.

Sacrococcygeal Teratoma
The perinatal mortality rate for cases of sacrococcygeal teratoma diagnosed
prenatally is 20 to 40 percent (Hedrick, 2004; Shue, 2013, Simonini, 2021).
Poor prognostic factors include a solid component constituting more than 50
percent of the tumor mass and a tumor volume-to-fetal weight ratio exceeding
12 percent prior to 24 weeks’ gestation (Akinkuotu, 2015). Hydramnios is
common, and hydrops may develop from high-output cardiac failure, either
as a consequence of tumor vascularity or secondary to bleeding within the
tumor and resulting anemia. Fetal loss rates approach 100 percent in such
cases. Mirror syndrome—maternal preeclampsia developing along with
fetal hydrops—may occur in this setting (Chap. 18, p. 364).
Open fetal surgery is considered only if the tumor is completely external
and high cardiac output with early hydrops has developed in the second
trimester (Vrecenak, 2013). However, given the poor prognosis, rapid
growth beyond 27 weeks often prompts early delivery and postnatal
resection rather than open fetal surgery (Baumgarten, 2019).

■ Fetoscopic Surgery
As with open fetal surgeries, these procedures are performed at highly
specialized centers. Fetoscopy is performed with fiberoptic endoscopes that
measure 1 to 2 mm in diameter. Instruments such as lasers fit through a 3- to
5-mm cannula that surrounds the endoscope. Not all fetoscopic procedures
involve placing the instruments through the maternal anterior abdominal wall.
In some cases, laparotomy facilitates optimal placement and maneuvering of
the instruments or positioning of the fetus. Examples of conditions treated by
fetoscopy are listed in Table 19-2.

Twin-Twin Transfusion Syndrome
As discussed in Chapter 48 (p. 849), fetoscopic laser ablation of placental
anastomoses is the preferred management for severe twin-twin transfusion
syndrome (TTTS). It is generally performed between 16 and 26 weeks’

gestation for monochorionic-diamnionic twin pregnancies with stage II to
stage IV TTTS (Quintero, 1999; Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, 2013).
A fetoscope inserted into the sac of the recipient twin is used to image
the vascular equator. The vascular equator separates the placental
cotyledons that supply each twin (Fig. 19-4). Selective laser
photocoagulation involves individually coagulating anastomoses that cross
between the twins (Ville, 1995). Arteriovenous anastomoses along the
placental surface of the equator are visualized with the fetoscope and then
photocoagulated using a 600-μm diameter diode laser or a 400-μm
neodymium:yttrium-aluminum-garnet (Nd:YAG) laser (Fig. 19-5). The
procedure is typically performed under epidural analgesia. At the end,
amnioreduction is performed to decrease the single deepest pocket of
amnionic fluid to below 5 cm, and antibiotics are injected into the amnionic
cavity.

FIGURE 19-4 Selective laser photocoagulation for twin-twin transfusion syndrome. The fetoscope is
inserted into the recipient-twin sac and positioned over the vascular equator, which lies in between the
two placental cord insertion sites. Arteriovenous anastomoses along the placental surface are
individually photocoagulated using the laser. (Reproduced with permission from Shamshirsaz AA,
Ramin, SM, Belfort MA: Fetal therapy. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al:
Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2017.)

FIGURE 19-5 Fetoscopic photograph of laser photocoagulation for twin-twin transfusion syndrome. A.
Vascular anastomoses (arrows) are shown before photocoagulation is performed. B. The ablation sites
appear as blanched yellow-white areas (arrows). (Reproduced with permission from Dr. Timothy M.
Crombleholme.)

Unfortunately, residual anastomoses remain in up to a third of cases and
may lead to TTTS recurrence or to the development of twin anemiapolycythemia sequence (TAPS). The latter is a feto-fetal transfusion
characterized by large differences in hemoglobin concentrations between a
pair of monochorionic twins. With the Solomon technique, immediately after
selective photocoagulation, the laser is used to coagulate the entire vascular
equator from one edge of the placenta to the other (Slaghekke, 2014a).
Placental dye-injection studies confirm a significant reduction in the number
of residual anastomoses following this procedure (Ruano, 2013; Slaghekke,
2014b).
Families should have reasonable expectations of procedural success and
potential complications. Without treatment, the perinatal mortality rate for
severe TTTS is 70 to 100 percent. Following laser therapy, the perinatal
mortality rate approximates 30 to 50 percent, and the risk for long-term
neurological handicap is 5 to 20 percent (Society for Maternal-Fetal
Medicine, 2013). One series reported a double-twin survival rate of nearly
70 percent and survival of at least one twin in more than 90 percent of cases
(Diehl, 2017). Ischemic fetal brain lesions have been identified in 2 percent
of those treated by laser and include cystic periventricular leukomalacia and
grade III or IV interventricular hemorrhage (Stirnemann, 2018). Cerebral
palsy has been reported in 5 percent of surviving children (Schou, 2019).

Procedure-related complications include preterm prelabor ruptured
membranes in up to 25 percent, placental abruption in 8 percent, vascular
laceration in 3 percent, and amnionic band syndrome resulting from laser
laceration of the membranes in 3 percent. Additionally, TAPS complicates 16
percent of pregnancies treated with selective laser photocoagulation and 3
percent treated with the Solomon technique (Habli, 2009; Robyr, 2006;
Slaghekke, 2014b). The majority of laser-treated TTTS pregnancies deliver
before 34 weeks’ gestation (Akkermans, 2015).

Congenital Diaphragmatic Hernia
Early attempts to treat congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH) used open
fetal surgery to reposition the liver into the abdomen. This unfortunately
kinked the umbilical vein and led to fetal demise (Harrison, 1993).
Knowledge that lungs normally produce fluid and that fetuses with upper
airway obstruction develop pulmonary hyperplasia formed the rationale for
tracheal occlusion. The idea was to “plug the lung until it grows” (Hedrick,
1994). Initial efforts focused on occluding the trachea with an external clip
(Harrison, 1993). Subsequently, a detachable silicone or latex balloon was
placed within the trachea endoscopically and inflated with normal saline
(Fig. 19-6). This procedure, fetoscopic tracheal occlusion (FETO), is
offered to selected pregnancies with isolated CDH in which the prognosis is
otherwise poor based on the degree of fetal liver herniation.

FIGURE 19-6 Fetoscopic tracheal occlusion (FETO). The endoscope enters the fetal oropharynx and
advances down the trachea. Inset: The balloon is inflated to occlude the trachea, and then the
endoscope is removed. (Reproduced with permission from Shamshirsaz AA, Ramin, SM, Belfort MA:
Fetal therapy. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al: Cunningham and Gilstrap’s
Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2017.)

FETO uses a 3-mm operating sheath and fetoscopes as small as 1 mm
(Van der Veeken, 2018). The procedure is generally performed between 26
and 30 weeks’ gestation. The balloon is removed after 6 weeks or at
approximately 34 weeks, either through a second fetoscopic procedure or by
ultrasound-guided puncture (Baschat, 2020). Fetal lamb research
demonstrated that without balloon removal, the number of type II
pneumocytes was markedly reduced, but that balloon removal normalized
type II pneumocyte density (Flageole, 1998). Because the procedure is
performed fetoscopically, vaginal delivery is not contraindicated.

In 2003, a randomized trial of the FETO procedure in pregnancies with
isolated CDH, liver herniation, and lung-to-head ratio <1.4 did not identify a
benefit from fetal therapy (Harrison, 2003). Survival rates 90 days after birth
were unexpectedly high—75 percent—in both groups. Therefore, the lung-tohead threshold was lowered and adjusted for gestational age in an effort to
improve prediction. In a metaanalysis of more than 200 pregnancies,
treatment with FETO was associated with a 13-fold improvement in survival
rates (Al-Maary, 2016). FETO has also been associated with improved
survival rates in right-sided CDH (Russo, 2021). Although study outcomes
are promising, this procedure is currently available in the United States only
through a research protocol.
Lung-to-Head Ratio. This imaging index was developed to improve
prediction of survival in fetuses with isolated left-sided CDH diagnosed
before 25 weeks’ gestation (Metkus, 1996). The lung-to-head ratio (LHR) is
a semi-quantitative estimate of the right lung area divided by the head
circumference. Investigators found that the neonatal survival rate was 100
percent if the LHR was >1.35 and that there were no survivors if the LHR
was <0.6 (Metkus, 1996). Nearly three fourths of pregnancies had values
between 0.6 and 1.35, and prediction was difficult in this group because the
overall survival rate approximated 60 percent.
Modifications to the LHR have been developed in an effort to improve
prediction. Jani and colleagues (2007) derived an observed-to-expected
(O/E) LHR nomogram to account for differential growth of the head and
torso across gestation. Lung area has been measured in 3 different ways: (1)
by tracing the lung circumference, (2) by multiplying the longest diameter of
the lung with its longest perpendicular diameter, and (3) by multiplying the
anterior-posterior diameter of the lung at the mid-clavicular line by the
perpendicular diameter at its midpoint (Jani, 2012). The North American
Fetal Therapy Network found that reproducibility of the O/E LHR was
highest when the lung circumference was traced, but that overall interrater
agreement was lower than anticipated (Abbasi, 2019).

Fetoscopic Myelomeningocele Repair
After publication of the MOMS trial findings, research efforts focused on
whether maternal morbidities associated with open fetal myelomeningocele
repair might be mitigated if the procedure were accomplished fetoscopically.

Araujo Junior and associates (2016) conducted a systematic review that
included 456 open cases and 84 fetoscopic surgeries. The endoscopic
procedures were generally performed by inserting instruments through the
maternal abdominal wall and then through the uterine wall, with partial
carbon dioxide insufflation of the uterus. The rate of maternal myometrial
dehiscence or attenuation was only 1 percent following endoscopy compared
with 26 percent following open procedures. However, fetoscopy was
associated with significantly higher rates of preterm delivery before 34
weeks—80 versus 45 percent, and of perinatal mortality—14 versus 5
percent.
More recently, investigators have performed fetoscopic
myelomeningocele repair but used laparotomy and exteriorization of the
uterus (Belfort 2017). The proportion of infants requiring
ventriculoperitoneal shunts before age 1 year—approximately 40 percent—
was similar to that with open fetal surgery in the MOMS trial (Adzick, 2011;
Belfort, 2017). In one series of 34 pregnancies treated with open fetoscopic
myelomeningocele repair, the median gestational age at delivery was 38
weeks, and 50 percent delivered vaginally (Kohn, 2018). Research is
ongoing in this area.

■ Percutaneous Procedures
These procedures are performed using a shunt, angioplasty catheter,
radiofrequency ablation needle, or bipolar cautery. Under ultrasound
guidance, instruments are inserted through the maternal abdominal wall,
uterine wall, and membranes to reach the amnionic cavity and fetus. Risks
may include preterm labor, preterm prelabor ruptured membranes, placental
abruption, maternal infection, and fetal injury or loss.

Thoracic Shunts
These shunts drain fetal pleural fluid into the amnionic cavity (Fig. 19-7). A
large effusion may result in pulmonary hypoplasia or may cause mediastinal
shift that is severe enough to result in hydrops. The most common etiology of
a primary effusion is chylothorax, which is caused by lymphatic obstruction.
Chylothorax is diagnosed if a cell count performed on the pleural fluid
demonstrates that more than 80 percent of the cells are lymphocytes, and
there is no evidence of infection. Pleural effusions may also form secondary

to congenital viral infection or aneuploidy, or they may be associated with a
malformation such as a pulmonary sequestration. Yinon and associates
(2010) reported aneuploidy in approximately 5 percent and associated
anomalies in 10 percent of cases.

FIGURE 19-7 Thoracoamnionic shunt placement. A. A large, right-sided fetal pleural effusion
(asterisks) and ascites were identified at 18 weeks’ gestation. The effusion was drained but rapidly
reaccumulated. The xanthochromic fluid contained 95-percent lymphocytes, consistent with chylothorax.
B. A double-pigtail shunt (arrow) was inserted under ultrasound guidance. Following shunt placement,
the effusion and ascites resolved.

Typically, the effusion is first drained using a 22-gauge needle. The fluid
may be sent for chromosomal microarray analysis, infection studies, and a
cell count. If the effusion recurs, a double-pigtail shunt is placed through the
fetal chest wall using a trocar and cannula. For a right-sided effusion, the
shunt is placed in the lower third of the chest to permit maximum expansion
of the lung. If left-sided, the shunt is placed along the upper axillary line to
allow the heart to return to normal position. The overall survival rate is 70
percent, and that for hydropic fetuses approximates 50 percent (Mann, 2010;
Yinon, 2010). We recommend weekly surveillance following shunt
placement because displacement into the amnionic cavity is common. At time
of delivery, the shunt must be clamped immediately to avoid neonatal
pneumothorax.
A shunt may also be used drain a dominant cyst in a fetus with
macrocystic CCAM (Fig. 15-33, p. 288). Only rarely are such cysts large

enough to confer risk for hydrops or pulmonary hypoplasia. Shunt placement
may improve the survival rate to 90 percent in those without hydrops and to
at least 75 percent if hydrops has developed (Litwinska, 2017).

Urinary Shunts
Vesicoamnionic shunts are offered in selected cases of fetal bladder-outlet
obstruction in which the amnionic fluid volume is severely diminished.
Lower urinary tract obstruction (LUTO) occurs more often in male fetuses. It
is most commonly caused by posterior urethral valves but may be due to
anterior urethral valves, urethral atresia or stenosis, or prune belly
syndrome, which is also called Eagle-Barrett syndrome. Cases in females
may be associated with complex cloacal abnormalities or the megacystismicrocolon syndrome. Ultrasound findings include dilation of the bladder
and proximal urethra, termed the “keyhole” sign, along with bladder wall
thickening (Fig. 15-61, p. 301). Associated oligohydramnios before
midpregnancy leads to pulmonary hypoplasia. Unfortunately, postnatal renal
function may be poor even when amnionic fluid volume is normal.
Evaluation includes a careful search for associated anomalies, which
may occur in 40 percent of cases, and for aneuploidy, which has been
reported in 5 to 8 percent (Hayden, 1988; Hobbins, 1984; Mann, 2010).
Potential candidates for therapy are fetuses without other severe anomalies
or genetic syndromes. Therapy is generally offered only if the fetus is male
because the underlying anomaly tends to be even more severe in females.
Serial bladder drainage—vesicocentesis—performed under ultrasound
guidance at approximately 48-hour intervals is used to evaluate fetal urine
electrolyte and protein content. Fetal urine is normally hypotonic due to
tubular resorption of sodium and chloride, whereas isotonic urine in the
setting of obstruction suggests renal tubular damage. Serial assessment has
been used to guide candidate selection for therapy (Table 19-4).
Chromosomal microarray analysis also may be performed on fetal urine.
TABLE 19-4. Fetal Urinary Analyte Values with Bladder Outlet
Obstruction

Vesicoamnionic shunt placement allows urine to drain from the bladder
into the amnionic cavity (Fig. 19-8). While this may prevent pulmonary
hypoplasia, it does not reliably preserve renal function, particularly if
cortical cysts are visible sonographically (Ruano, 2017). Warmed lactated
Ringer solution is first infused into the amniotic cavity. Amnioinfusion
improves ultrasound visualization, thereby facilitating evaluation of fetal
anatomy and shunt placement. A small trocar and cannula are then inserted
into the fetal bladder. A double-pigtail catheter is used, and the shunt is
placed as caudal as possible within the bladder to avoid dislodgement after
bladder decompression.

FIGURE 19-8 Vesicoamnionic shunt placement. A. After amnioinfusion is performed, a trocar is
inserted into the distended fetal bladder under sonographic guidance. The pigtail catheter is threaded into
the trocar. B. The double-pigtail shunt has been deployed down the trocar, and the trocar has been
removed. The distal end of the shunt is coiled within the fetal bladder, and the proximal end is draining
into the amnionic cavity. (Reproduced with permission from Shamshirsaz AA, Ramin, SM, Belfort MA:
Fetal therapy. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al: Cunningham and Gilstrap’s
Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2017.)

Complications include displacement of the shunt out of the fetal bladder
in up to 40 percent of cases, urinary ascites in approximately 20 percent, and
even development of bowel herniation through the abdominal wall defect—
gastroschisis—in up to 10 percent (Freedman, 2000; Mann, 2010). Preterm
delivery is common, and reported neonatal survival rates range from 50 to 90
percent (Biard, 2005; Walsh, 2011). A third of surviving children have
required dialysis or renal transplantation, and almost half have respiratory
problems (Biard, 2005). In a randomized trial comparing vesicoamnionic
shunt with conservative management in 31 cases, those receiving shunts had
higher survival rates. However, only two children had normal renal function
at age 2 years (Morris, 2013). Similarly, a metaanalysis of LUTO studies
performed between 1990 and 2015 found that vesicoamnionic shunt
conferred perinatal survival benefit but no improvement in renal function or
survival at age 2 years (Nassr, 2017).

Radiofrequency Ablation
With this procedure, high-frequency alternating current is used to coagulate
and desiccate tissue. Radiofrequency ablation (RFA) is the favored modality

for treatment of twin reversed arterial perfusion (TRAP) sequence, also
known as acardiac twin (Chap. 48, p. 850). Without treatment, the mortality
rate for the normal or pump twin in severe TRAP sequence exceeds 50
percent. The procedure is also used for selective termination with other
monochorionic twin complications.
Under ultrasound guidance, a 17- to 19-gauge RFA needle is directed
into the base of the umbilical cord within the abdomen of the acardiac twin,
and a 2-cm area of coagulation is achieved. Color Doppler is used to verify
absent flow into the acardius. The procedure is generally performed at 20
weeks’ gestation. The neonatal survival rate of the normal or pump twin
approximates 85 percent (Cabassa, 2013; Lee, 2013; Wagata, 2016). Risks
are higher for monoamnionic twin pregnancies, in whom the survival rate is
only 67 percent (Sugibayashi, 2016). The most common complications are
preterm prelabor ruptured membranes and preterm birth.
RFA has generally been offered for TRAP sequence when the volume of
the acardiac twin is large. In a series from the North American Fetal Therapy
Network, the median size of the acardius relative to the pump twin was 90
percent (Lee, 2013). Considering procedure-related risks, expectant
management with close fetal surveillance is often considered if the estimated
weight of the acardius is below 50 percent of the estimated weight of the
pump twin (Jelin, 2010).

Intracardiac Catheter Procedures
Selected fetal cardiac lesions may worsen during gestation, further
complicating and even limiting options for postnatal repair. Severe
narrowing of a cardiac outflow tract may result in progressive myocardial
damage in utero, and a goal of fetal intervention is to permit muscle growth
and preserve ventricular function. These innovative procedures include
aortic valvuloplasty for critical aortic stenosis; atrial septoplasty for
hypoplastic left heart syndrome with intact interatrial septum; and pulmonary
valvuloplasty for pulmonary atresia with intact interventricular septum.
Fetal aortic valvuloplasty is the most commonly performed cardiac
procedure, accounting for 75 percent of cases reported by the International
Fetal Cardiac Intervention Registry (Moon-Grady, 2015). It is offered for
selected cases of critical aortic stenosis in which the left ventricle is either
normal sized or dilated. The goal is to prevent progression to hypoplastic left

heart and to permit postnatal biventricular repair. Under sonographic
guidance, an 18-gauge cannula is inserted through uterus and fetal chest wall
and into the left ventricle. Although the procedure is ideally performed
percutaneously—through the maternal abdominal wall—laparotomy may be
needed if the fetal position is unfavorable. The cannula tip is positioned in
front of the stenotic aortic valve, and a 2.5- to 4.5-mm balloon catheter is
guided into the aortic annulus and then inflated. Fetal bradycardia requiring
treatment may complicate a third of cases, and hemopericardium requiring
drainage affects approximately 20 percent (Patel, 2020).
In a review of 108 fetuses treated with aortic valvuloplasty from 15
international centers, 75 percent survived until delivery, and biventricular
repair was achieved in 32 percent (Patel, 2020). Friedman and coworkers
(2018) from Boston Children’s Hospital have reported improved outcomes
with the procedure in recent years. Of 52 aortic valvuloplasty procedures
performed between 2009 and 2015, nearly 90 percent resulted in a live birth,
and more than 50 percent achieved biventricular repair. Guseh and
colleagues (2020) emphasize that most children with biventricular function
still require postnatal cardiac procedures. The risk for neurodevelopmental
impairment in childhood appears similar to cases treated with postnatal
repair (Laraja, 2017; Moon-Grady, 2015).
The subset of fetuses with hypoplastic left heart syndrome who also have
an intact or restrictive interatrial septum have postnatal mortality rates of
nearly 80 percent (Glantz, 2007; Jantzen, 2017). To help improve survival,
fetal atrial septoplasty using a percutaneous balloon catheter has been
offered. Atrial septal stent placement is often attempted at the time of
septoplasty to ensure patency. Of 47 such procedures reported by the
International Fetal Cardiac Intervention Registry, 35 percent of infants
survived to hospital discharge (Jantzen, 2017). However, the 1-year survival
rate was higher in those that had successful fetal cardiac intervention
compared with those that had not undergone intervention.
Fetal pulmonary valvuloplasty has been offered in cases of pulmonary
atresia with intact interventricular septum to prevent development of
hypoplastic right heart syndrome and subsequent single ventricle palliation.
The International Fetal Cardiac Intervention Registry reported that of 58
cases of attempted pulmonary valvuloplasty, the procedure was technically
successful in 70 percent (Hogan, 2020). Those with successful in-utero
procedures were twice as likely to achieve biventricular repair. However,

when procedure-related losses were considered, survival to hospital
discharge was similar to those who had not received fetal intervention,
approximating 75 percent. Long-term benefits of the procedure have yet to be
demonstrated.

■ Ex-Utero Intrapartum Treatment
This procedure allows the fetus to remain perfused by the placenta after
being partially delivered, so that lifesaving treatment can be performed
before completing the delivery. The technique was first developed to obtain
an airway with fetal tumors involving the oropharynx and neck and is still
used for this indication (Catalano, 1992; Kelly, 1990; Langer, 1992;
Shamshirsaz, 2021). An ex-utero intrapartum treatment (EXIT) procedure is
performed by a multidisciplinary team, which may include an obstetrician,
maternal-fetal medicine specialist, pediatric surgeon(s), pediatric
otolaryngologist, pediatric cardiologist, anesthesiologists for the mother and
fetus, neonatologists, and specially trained nursing personnel. Components of
the procedure are shown in Table 19-5 (Moldenhauer, 2013).
TABLE 19-5. Components of the Ex-Utero Intrapartum Treatment (EXIT)
Procedure

Selected indications are listed in Table 19-2. EXIT is the preferred
procedure for intrapartum management of large venolymphatic malformations
of the neck such as the one shown in Figure 19-9. Criteria for EXIT with a
cervical venolymphatic malformation include compression, deviation, or
obstruction of the airway by the mass, and also involvement of the floor of
the mouth (Laje, 2015). However, a review of 112 pregnancies with fetal

cervical venolymphatic malformations found that only about 10 percent met
these criteria. Other indications for EXIT include severe micrognathia and
congenital high airway obstruction sequence (CHAOS), which are
discussed in Chapter 15 (Figs. 15-27 and 15-35, p. 285). Criteria for an
EXIT procedure for micrognathia include a fetal jaw measurement below the
5th percentile along with indirect evidence of obstruction, such as
hydramnios, an absent stomach bubble, or glossoptosis (Morris, 2009b).
Case selection for EXIT procedures is generally based on fetal magnetic
resonance imaging findings.

FIGURE 19-9 Ex-utero intrapartum treatment (EXIT) procedure for a venolymphatic malformation.
A. Upon delivery of the head, placental circulation was maintained, and an airway was established over
the course of 20 minutes by a team of pediatric subspecialists that included a surgeon, anesthesiologist,
and otolaryngologist. B. Following a controlled intubation, the fetus was ready for delivery and transfer
to the neonatal intensive care unit team. (Reproduced with permission from Drs. Stacey Thomas and
Patricia Santiago-Muñoz.)

In some cases, an EXIT procedure has been used as a bridge to other
procedures. For example, resection of large thoracic masses may be
accomplished by fetal thoracotomy performed with intact placental
circulation. In a series of 16 fetuses with CCAM volume ratios >1.6 or
hydrops, all of whom had mediastinal compression, Cass and colleagues
(2013) reported that nine infants undergoing EXIT-to-resection survived. In
contrast, there were no survivors with urgent postnatal surgery alone.
Similarly, Moldenhauer (2013) reported that 20 of 22 newborns treated with
EXIT-to-resection for lung masses survived. The EXIT procedure has also
been used as a bridge to extracorporeal membrane oxygenation—EXIT-toECMO—in pregnancies with severe congenital diaphragmatic hernia.

However, it has not been found to clearly confer survival benefit in such
cases (Morris, 2009a; Shieh, 2017; Stoffan, 2012).
Counseling prior to an EXIT procedure includes procedure-related risks
such as hemorrhage from placental abruption or uterine atony, need for
cesarean delivery in future pregnancies, higher risk for subsequent uterine
rupture or dehiscence, possible need for hysterectomy, and fetal death or
permanent neonatal disability. Compared with cesarean delivery, the EXIT
procedure is associated with greater blood loss, a higher incidence of wound
complications, and a longer operating time (Noah, 2002; Shamshirsaz, 2019).

REFERENCES
Abbasi N, Ryan G, Johnson A, et al: Reproducibility of fetal lung-to-head ratio in left diaphragmatic
hernia across the North American Fetal Therapy Network (NAFTNet). Prenat Diagn 39(2):188,
2019
Abuhamad AZ, Fisher DA, Warsof SL, et al: Antenatal diagnosis and treatment of fetal goitrous
hypothyroidism: case report and review of the literature. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 6:368, 1995
Adzick NS: Fetal myelomeningocele: natural history, pathophysiology, and in utero intervention. Semin
Fetal Neonatal Med 15(1):9, 2010
Adzick NS, Harrison MR, Glick PL, et al: Fetal cystic adenomatoid malformation: prenatal diagnosis and
natural history. J Pediatr Surg 20:483, 1985
Adzick NS, Thom EA, Spong CY, et al: A randomized trial of prenatal versus postnatal repair of
myelomeningocele. N Engl J Med 364(11):993, 2011
Agrawal P, Ogilvy-Stuart A, Lees C: Intrauterine diagnosis and management of congenital goitrous
hypothyroidism. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 19:501, 2002
Akinkuotu AC, Coleman A, Shue E, et al: Predictors of poor prognosis in prenatally diagnosed
sacrococcygeal teratoma: a multiinstitutional review. J Pediatr Surg 50(5):771, 2015
Akkermans J, Peeters SH, Klumper FJ, et al: Twenty-five years of fetoscopic laser coagulation for
twin-twin transfusion syndrome: a systematic review. Fetal Diagn Ther 38(4):241, 2015.
Al-Maary J, Eastwood MP, Russo FM, et al: Fetal tracheal occlusion for severe pulmonary hypoplasia in
isolated congenital diaphragmatic hernia. A systematic review and meta-analysis of survival. Ann
Surg 264(6):929, 2016
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Neural tube defects. Practice Bulletin No. 187,
December 2017, Reaffirmed 2019
Araujo Junior EA, Eggink AJ, van den Dobbelsteen J, et al: Procedure-related complications of open vs
endoscopic fetal surgery for treatment of spina bifida in an era of intrauterine myelomeningocele
repair: systematic review and meta-analysis. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 48(2):151, 2016
Baschat AA, Rosner M, Millard SE, et al: Single-center outcome of fetoscopic tracheal balloon
occlusion for severe congenital diaphragmatic hernia. Obstet Gynecol 135(3):511, 2020
Baskin A, Wisniewski AB, Aston CE, et al: Post-operative complications following feminizing
genitoplasty in moderate to severe atypia: results from a multicenter, observational prospective
cohort study. J Pediatr Urol 16(5):568, 2020

Baumgarten HD, Gebb JS, Khalek N, et al: Preemptive delivery and immediate resection for fetuses
with high-risk sacrococcygeal teratomas. Fetal Diagn Ther 45(3):137, 2019
Belfort MA, Whitehead WE, Shamshirsaz AA, et al: Fetoscopic open neural tube defect repair.
Development and refinement of a two-port carbon dioxide insufflation technique. Obstet Gynecol
129(4):734, 2017
Biard JM, Johnson MP, Carr MC, et al: Long-term outcomes in children treated by prenatal
vesicoamniotic shunting for lower urinary tract obstruction. Obstet Gynecol 106(3):503, 2005
Bliddal S, Rasmussen AK, Sundberg K, et al: Antithyroid drug-induced fetal goitrous hypothyroidism.
Nat Rev Endocrinol 7:396, 2011
Blumenfeld YJ, Davis A, Milan K, et al: Conservatively managed fetal goiter: an alternative to in utero
therapy. Fetal Diagn Ther 34(3):184, 2013
Brito-Zeron P, Izmirly PM, Ramos-Casals M, et al: The clinical spectrum of autoimmune congenital
heart block. Nat Rev Rheumatol 11(5):301, 2015
Buyon JP, Clancy RM, Friedman DM: Autoimmune associated congenital heart block: integration of
clinical and research clues in the management of the maternal/fetal dyad at risk. J Intern Med
265(6):653, 2009
Cabassa P, Fichera A, Prefumo F, et al: The use of radiofrequency in the treatment of twin reversed
arterial perfusion sequence: a case series and review of the literature. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod
Biol 166(2):127, 2013
Cass DL, Olutoye OO, Cassady CI, et al: EXIT-to-resection for fetuses with large lung masses and
persistent mediastinal compression near birth. J Pediatr Surg 48(1):138, 2013
Catalano PJ, Urken ML, Alvarez M, et al: New approach to the management of airway obstruction in
“high risk” neonates. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 118:306, 1992
Cavoretto P, Molina F, Poggi S, et al: Prenatal diagnosis and outcome of echogenic fetal lung lesions.
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 32:769, 2008
Copel JA, Liang RI, Demasio K, et al: The clinical significance of the irregular fetal heart rhythm. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 182:813, 2000
Crombleholme TM, Coleman B, Hedrick H, et al: Cystic adenomatoid volume ratio predicts outcome in
prenatally diagnosed cystic adenomatoid malformation of the lung. J Pediatr Surg 37(3):331, 2002
Cuneo BF, Lee M, Roberson D, et al: A management strategy for fetal immune-mediated
atrioventricular block. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 23(12):1400, 2010
Cuneo BF, Zhao H, Strasburger JF, et al: Atrial and ventricular rate response and patterns of heart rate
acceleration during maternal-fetal terbutaline treatment of fetal complete heart block. Am J Cardiol
100(4):661, 2007
David M, Forest MG: Prenatal treatment of congenital adrenal hyperplasia resulting from 21hydroxylase deficiency. J Pediatr 105(5):799, 1984
Deprest JA, Flake AW, Gratacos E, et al: The making of fetal surgery. Prenat Diagn 30(7):653, 2010
Derderian SC, Coleman AM, Jeanty C, et al: Favorable outcomes in high-risk congenital pulmonary
airway malformations treated with multiple courses of maternal betamethasone. J Pediatr Surg
50(4):515, 2015
Devaney SA, Palomaki GE, Scott JA, et al: Noninvasive fetal sex determination using cell-free fetal
DNA: a systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA 306(6):627, 2011
Dhillon RK, Hillman SC, Pounds R, et al: Comparison of Solomon technique with selective laser ablation
for twin-twin transfusion syndrome: a systematic review. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 46(5):526,
2015

Diehl W, Diemert A, Grasso D, et al: Fetoscopic laser coagulation in 1020 pregnancies with twin-twin
transfusion syndrome demonstrates improvement in double-twin survival rate. Ultrasound Obstet
Gynecol 50():728, 2017
Duncombe GJ, Dickinson JE: Fetal thyrotoxicosis after maternal thyroidectomy. Aust N Z J Obstet
Gynaecol 41(2):224, 2001
Ehrenberg-Buchner S, Stapf AM, Berman DR, et al: Fetal lung lesions: can we start to breathe easier?
Am J Obstet Gynecol 208(2):151.e1, 2013
Ekiz A, Kaya B, Bornaun H, et al: Flecainide as first-line treatment for fetal supraventricular
tachycardia. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 31(4):407, 2018
Ekman-Joelsson BM, Mellander M, Lagnefeldt L, et al: Foetal tachyarrhythmia treatment remains
challenging even if the vast majority of cases have a favourable outcome. Acta Paediatr
104(11):1090, 2015
Fernandez-Balsells MM, Muthusamy K, Smushkin G, et al: Prenatal dexamethasone use for the
prevention of virilization in pregnancies at risk for classical congenital adrenal hyperplasia because
of 21-hydroxylase (CYP21A2) deficiency: a systematic review and meta-analyses. Clin Endocrinol
73(4):436, 2010
Flageole H, Evrard VA, Piedboeuf B, et al: The plug-unplug sequence: an important step to achieve type
II pneumocyte maturation in the fetal lamb model. J Pediatr Surg 33(2):299, 1998
Freedman AL, Johnson MP, Gonzalez R: Fetal therapy for obstructive uropathy: past, present… future?
Pediatr Nephrol 14:167, 2000
Friedman DM, Kim MY, Copel JA, et al: Prospective evaluation of fetuses with autoimmune associated
congenital heart block followed in the PR interval and dexamethasone evaluation (PRIDE) study.
Am J Cardiol 103(8):1102, 2009
Friedman DM, Kim MY, Copel JA: Utility of cardiac monitoring in fetuses at risk for congenital heart
block: the PR Interval and Dexamethasone (PRIDE) Prospective Study. Circulation 117:485, 2008
Friedman KG, Sleeper LA, Freud LR, et al: Improved technical success, postnatal outcome and refined
predictors of outcome for fetal aortic valvuloplasty. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 52(2):212, 2018
Glantz JA, Tabbutt S, Gaynor JW, et al: Hypoplastic left heart syndrome with atrial level restriction in
the era of prenatal diagnosis. Ann Thorac Surg 84:1633, 2007
Glatz AC, Gaynor JW, Rhodes LA, et al: Outcome of high-risk neonates with congenital complete heart
block paced in the first 24 hours after birth. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 136(3):767, 2008
Guseh SH, Friedman KG, Wilkins-Haug LE: Fetal cardiac intervention-perspectives from a single
center. Prenat Diagn 40(4):415, 2020
Habli M, Bombrys A, Lewis D, et al: Incidence of complications in twin-twin transfusion syndrome after
selective fetoscopic laser photocoagulation: a single-center experience. Am J Obstet Gynecol
201(4):417.e1, 2009
Hahurij ND, Blom NA, Lopriore E, et al: Perinatal management and long-term cardiac outcome in fetal
arrhythmia. Early Hum Dev 87:83, 2011
Hannah-Shmouni F, Morissette R, Sinaii N, et al: Revising the prevalence of nonclassic congenital
adrenal hyperplasia in US Ashkenazi Jews and Caucasians. Genet Med 19(11):1276, 2017
Hardley MT, Chon AH, Mestman J, et al: Iodine-induced fetal hypothyroidism: Diagnosis and treatment
with intra-amniotic levothyroxine. Horm Res Paediatr 90(6):419, 2018
Harrison MR, Filly RA, Golbus MS, et al: Fetal treatment. N Engl J Med 307:1651, 1982
Harrison MR, Keller RL, Hawgood SB, et al: A randomized trial of fetal endoscopic tracheal occlusion
for severe fetal congenital diaphragmatic hernia. N Engl J Med 349:1916, 2003

Harrison MR, Sydorak MR, Farrell JA, et al: Fetoscopic temporary tracheal occlusion for congenital
diaphragmatic hernia: prelude to a randomized controlled trial. J Pediatr Surg 38:1012, 1993
Hayden SA, Russ PD, Pretorius DH, et al: Posterior urethral obstruction. Prenatal sonographic findings
and clinical outcome in fourteen cases. J Ultrasound Med 7(7):371, 1988
Hedrick HL, Flake AW, Crombleholme TM, et al: Sacrococcygeal teratoma: prenatal assessment, fetal
intervention, and outcome. J Pediatr Surg 39(3):430, 2004
Hedrick MH, Estes JM, Sullivan KM, et al: Plug the lung until it grows (PLUG): a new method to treat
congenital diaphragmatic hernia in utero. J Pediatr Surg 29(5):612, 1994
Hill M, Finning K, Martin P, et al: Non-invasive prenatal determination of fetal sex: translating research
into clinical practice. Clin Genet 80(1):68, 2011
Hilton SA, Hodges MM, Dewberry LC, et al: MOMS plus: single institution review of outcomes for
extended BMI criteria for open fetal repair of myelomeningocele. Fetal Diagn Ther 46(6):411, 2019
Hobbins JC, Robero R, Grannum P, et al: Antenatal diagnosis of renal anomalies with ultrasound: I.
Obstructive uropathy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 148:868, 1984
Hogan WJ, Grinenco S, Armstrong A, et al: Fetal cardiac intervention for pulmonary atresia with intact
ventricular septum: International Fetal Cardiac Intervention Registry. Fetal Diagn Ther July 7, 2020
[Epub ahead of print]
Houtrow AJ, Thom EA, Fletcher JM, et al: Prenatal repair of myelomeningocele and school-age
functional outcomes. Pediatrics 145(2):e20191544, 2020
Huel C, Guibourdenche J, Vuillard E, et al: Use of ultrasound to distinguish between fetal
hyperthyroidism and hypothyroidism on discovery of a goiter. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 33:412,
2009
Hui L, Bianchi DW: Prenatal pharmacotherapy for fetal anomalies: a 2011 update. Prenat Diagn 31:735,
2011
Izmirly P, Kim M, Friedman DM, et al: Hydroxychloroquine to prevent recurrent congenital heart block
in fetuses of anti-SSA/Ro-positive mothers. J Amer Col Cardiol 76(3):292, 2020
Izmirly PM, Costedoat-Chalumeau N, Pisoni C, et al: Maternal use of hydroxychloroquine is associated
with a reduced risk of recurrent anti-SSA/Ro associated cardiac manifestations of neonatal lupus.
Circulation 126(1):76, 2012
Izmirly PM, Saxena A, Kim MY, et al: Maternal and fetal factors associated with mortality and
morbidity in a multi-racial/ethnic registry of anti-SSA/Ro-associated cardiac neonatal lupus.
Circulation 124(18):1927, 2011
Izmirly PM, Saxena A, Sahl SK, et al: Assessment of fluorinated steroids to avert progression and
mortality in anti-SSA/Ro-associated cardiac injury limited to the fetal conduction system. Ann
Rheum Dis 75(6):1161, 2016
Jaeggi E, Carvalho JS, de Groot E, et al: Comparison of transplacental treatment of fetal
supraventricular tachyarrhythmias with digoxin, flecainide, and sotalol. Results of a nonrandomized
multicenter study. Circulation 124(16):1747, 2011
Jani J, Nicolaides KH, Keller RL, et al: Observed to expected lung area to head circumference ratio in
the prediction of survival in fetuses with isolated diaphragmatic hernia. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol
30(1):67, 2007
Jani JC, Peralta CF, Nicolaides KH: Lung-to-head ratio: a need to unify the technique. Ultrasound
Obstet Gynecol 39(1):2, 2012
Jantzen DW, Moon-Grady AJ, Morris SA, et al: Hypoplastic left heart syndrome with intact or
restrictive atrial septum: a report from the International Fetal Cardiac Intervention Registry.
Circulation 136(14):1346, 2017

Jelin E, Hirose S, Rand L, et al: Perinatal outcome of conservative management versus fetal intervention
for twin reversed arterial perfusion sequence with a small acardiac twin. Fetal Diagn Ther 27:138,
2010
Kelly MF, Berenholz L, Rizzo KA, et al: Approach for oxygenation of the newborn with airway
obstruction due to a cervical mass. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 99(3 pt 1):179, 1990
Kiefer FL, Klebermass-Schrehf K, Steiner M, et al: Fetal/neonatal thyrotoxicosis in a newborn from a
hypothyroid woman with Hashimoto thyroiditis. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 102(1):6, 2017
Kohn JR, Rao V, Sellner AA, et al: Management of labor and delivery after fetoscopic repair of an open
neural tube defect. Obstet Gynecol 131(6):1062, 2018
Laje P, Peranteau WH, Hedrick HL, et al: Ex utero intrapartum treatment (EXIT) in the management of
cervical lymphatic teratoma. J Pediatr Surg 50(2):311, 2015
Langer JC, Tabb T, Thompson P, et al: Management of prenatally diagnosed tracheal obstruction: access
to the airway in utero prior to delivery. Fetal Diagn Ther 7(1):12, 1992
Laraja K, Sadhwani A, Tworetzky W, et al: Neurodevelopmental outcome in children after fetal cardiac
intervention for aortic stenosis with evolving hypoplastic left heart syndrome. J Pediatr 184:130, 2017
Lee H, Bebbington M, Crombleholme TM, et al: The North American Fetal Therapy Network Registry
data on outcomes of radiofrequency ablation for twin-reversed arterial perfusion sequence. Fetal
Diagn Ther 33(4):224, 2013
Litwinska M, Litwinska E, Janiak K, et al: Thoracoamniotic shunts in macrocystic lung lesions: case
series and review of the literature. Fetal Diagn Ther 41(3):179, 2017
Loh K, Jelin E, Hirose S, et al: Microcystic congenital pulmonary airway malformation with hydrops
fetalis: steroids vs open fetal resection. J Pediatr Surg 47(1):36, 2012
Macardle CA, Ehrenberg-Buchner S, Smith EA, et al: Surveillance of fetal lung lesions using the
congenital pulmonary airway malformation volume ratio: natural history and outcomes. Prenat Diagn
36(3):282, 2016
Machado CM, Castro JM, Campos RA, et al: Graves’ disease complicated by fetal goitrous
hypothyroidism treated with intra-amniotic administration of levothyroxine. BMJ Case Rep
12(8):e230457, 2019
Mann S, Johnson MP, Wilson RD: Fetal thoracic and bladder shunts. Semin Fetal Neonatal Med 15:28,
2010
McCullough LB, Chervenak FA, Brent RL, et al: A case study in unethical transgressive bioethics:
“Letter of Concern from Bioethicists” about the prenatal administration of dexamethasone. Am J
Bioeth 10(9):35, 2010
Metkus AP, Filly RA, Stringer MD, et al: Sonographic predictors of survival in fetal diaphragmatic
hernia. J Pediatr Surg 31(1):148, 1996
Meuli M, Meuli-Simmen C, Hutchins GM, et al: In utero surgery rescues neurological function at birth in
sheep with spina bifida. Nat Med 1(4):342, 1995
Meuli M, Meuli-Simmen C, Hutchins GM, et al: The spinal cord lesion in human fetuses with
myelomeningocele: implications for fetal surgery. J Pediatr Surg 32(3):448, 1997
Michael A, Radwan AA, Kamel Ali A, et al: Use of antenatal fluorinated corticosteroids in management
of congenital heart block: systematic review and meta-analysis. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol X
16(4):1000072, 2019
Miyoshi T, Maeno Y, Hamasaki T, et al: Antenatal therapy for fetal supraventricular tachyarrhythmias:
multicenter trial. J Am Coll Cardiol 74(7):874, 2019
Moldenhauer JS: Ex utero intrapartum therapy. Semin Pediatr Surg 22(1):44, 2013

Moldenhauer JS, Soni S, Jatres J, et al: Open fetal surgical outcomes for myelomeningocele closure
stratified by maternal body mass index in a large single-center cohort. Fetal Diagn Ther 47(12):889,
2020
Moon-Grady AJ, Morris SA, Belfort M, et al: International Fetal Cardiac Intervention Registry. A
worldwide collaborative description and preliminary outcomes. J Am Coll Cardiol 66(4):388, 2015
Morris LM, Lim FY, Crombleholme TM: Ex utero intrapartum treatment procedure: a peripartum
management strategy in particularly challenging cases. J Pediatr 154(1):126, 2009a
Morris LM, Lim FY, Elluru RG, et al: Severe micrognathia: indications for EXIT-to-airway. Fetal Diagn
Ther 26:162, 2009b
Morris RK, Malin GL, Quinlan-Jones E, et al: Percutaneous vesicoamniotic shunting versus
conservative management in fetal lower urinary tract obstruction (PLUTO): a randomized trial.
Lancet 382(9903):1496, 2013
Nassr AA, Shazly SA, Abdelmagied AM, et al: Effectiveness of vesicoamniotic shunt in fetuses with
congenital lower urinary tract obstruction: an updated systematic review and meta-analysis.
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 49(6):696, 2017
Nemescu D, Tanasa IA, Stoian DL, et al: Conservative in utero treatment of fetal dyshormonogenetic
goiter with levothyroxine, a systematic literature review. Exp Ther Med 20(3):2434, 2020
New MI, Abraham M, Yuen T, et al: An update on prenatal diagnosis and treatment of congenital
adrenal hyperplasia. Semin Reprod Med 30(5):396, 2012
New MI, Tong YK, Yuen T, et al: Noninvasive prenatal diagnosis of congenital adrenal hyperplasia
using cell-free DNA in maternal plasma. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 99(6):E1022, 2014
Nimkarn S, Gangishetti PK, Yau M, et al: 21-Hydroxylase deficient congenital adrenal hyperplasia. In
Pagon RA, Adam MP, Ardinger HH, et al (eds): GeneReviews. Seattle, University of Washington,
2016
Noah MM, Norton ME, Sandberg P, et al: Short-term maternal outcomes that are associated with the
EXIT procedure, as compared with cesarean delivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 186(4):773, 2002
O’Leary ET, Alexander ME, Bezzerides VJ, et al: Low mortality in fetal supraventricular tachycardia:
outcomes in a 30-year single-institution experience. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol 31(5):1105, 2020
Overcash RT, Marc-Aurele KL, Hull AD, et al: Maternal iodine exposure: a case of fetal goiter and
neonatal hearing loss. Pediatrics 137(4):e1, 2016
Patel ND, Nageotte S, Ing FF, et al: Procedural, pregnancy, and short-term outcomes after fetal aortic
valvuloplasty. Catheter Cardiovasc Inter 96(3):626, 2020
Peleg D, Cada S, Peleg A, et al: The relationship between maternal serum thyroid-stimulating
immunoglobulin and neonatal thyrotoxicosis. Obstet Gynecol 99(6):1040, 2002
Peranteau WH, Boelig MM, Khalek N, et al: Effect of single and multiple courses of maternal
betamethasone on prenatal congenital lung lesion growth and fetal survival. J Pediatr Surg 51(1):28,
2016
Pruthi V, Abbasi N, Ryan G, et al: Fetal surgery for open spina bifida in Canada: initial results. J Obstet
Gynecol Can 43(6):733, 2021
Quintero RA, Morales WJ, Allen MH, et al: Staging of twin-twin transfusion syndrome. J Perinatol
19:550, 1999
Ribault V, Castanet M, Bertrand AM, et al: Experience with intraamniotic thyroxine treatment in
nonimmune fetal goitrous hypothyroidism in 12 cases. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 94:3731, 2009
Robyr R, Lewi L, Salomon LJ, et al: Prevalence and management of late fetal complications following
successful selective laser coagulation of chorionic plate anastomoses in twin-to-twin transfusion
syndrome. Am J Obstet Gynecol 194(3):796, 2006

Ruano R, Dunn T, Braun MC, et al: Lower urinary tract obstruction: fetal intervention based on prenatal
staging. Pediatr Nephrol 32:(10):1871, 2017
Ruano R, Rodo C, Peiro JL, et al: Fetoscopic laser ablation of placental anastomoses in twin-twin
transfusion syndrome using “Solomon technique.” Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 42(4):434, 2013
Russo FM, Cordier AG, Basurto D, et al: Fetoscopic endoluminal tracheal occlusion reverses the natural
history of right-sided congenital diaphragmatic hernia: a European multicenter experience.
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 57(3):378, 2021
Schou KV, Lando AV, Ekelund CK, et al: Long-term neurodevelopmental outcome of monochorionic
twins after laser therapy or umbilical cord occlusion for twin-twin transfusion syndrome. Fetal Diagn
Ther 46(1):20, 2019
Shah A, Moon-Grady A, Bhogal N, et al: Effectiveness of sotalol as first-line therapy for fetal
supraventricular tachyarrhythmias. Am J Cardiol 190(11):1614, 2012
Shamshirsaz AA, Aalipour S, Erfani H, et al: Obstetrics outcomes of ex-utero intrapartum treatment
(EXIT). Prenat Diagn 39(8):643, 2019
Shamshirsaz AA, Aalipour S, Stewart KA, et al: Perinatal characteristics and early childhood follow up
after ex-utero intrapartum treatment for head and neck teratomas by prenatal diagnosis. Prenat
Diagn 41(4):497, 2021
Shamshirsaz AA, Ramin SM, Belfort MA: Fetal therapy. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III,
et al: Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education,
2017
Shieh HF, Wilson JM, Sheils CA, et al: Does the ex utero intrapartum treatment to extracorporeal
membrane oxygenation procedure change morbidity outcomes for high-risk congenital diaphragmatic
hernia survivors? J Pediatr Surg 52(1):22, 2017
Shue E, Bolouri M, Jelin EB, et al: Tumor metrics and morphology predict poor prognosis in prenatally
diagnosed sacrococcygeal teratoma: a 25-year experience at a single institution. J Pediatr Surg
48(6):1225, 2013
Simonini C, Strizek B, Berg C, et al: Fetal teratomas–a retrospective observational single-center study.
Prenat Diagn 41(3):301, 2021
Slaghekke F, Lewi L, Middeldorp JM, et al: Residual anastomoses in twin-twin transfusion syndrome
after laser: the Solomon randomized trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol 211(3):285.e1, 2014a
Slaghekke F, Lopriore E, Lewi L, et al: Fetoscopic laser coagulation of the vascular equator versus
selective coagulation for twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome: an open-label randomized controlled
trial. Lancet 383(9935):2144, 2014b
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Simpson LL: Twin-twin transfusion syndrome. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 208(1):3, 2013
Speiser PW, Arlt W, Auchus RJ, et al: Congenital adrenal hyperplasia due to steroid 21-hydroxylase
deficiency: an Endocrine Society clinical practice guideline. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 103(11):4043,
2018
Srinivasan S, Strasburger J: Overview of fetal arrhythmias. Curr Opin Pediatr 20:522, 2008
Srisupundit K, Sirichotiyakul S, Tongprasent F, et al: Fetal therapy in fetal thyrotoxicosis: a case report.
Fetal Diagn Ther 23(2):114, 2008
Stirnemann J, Chalouhi G, Essaoui M, et al: Fetal brain imaging following laser surgery in twin-to-twin
surgery. BJOG 125(9):1186, 2018
Stoffan AP, Wilson JM, Jennings RW, et al: Does the ex utero intrapartum treatment to extracorporeal
membrane oxygenation procedure change outcomes for high-risk patients with congenital
diaphragmatic hernia? J Pediatr Surg 47(6):1053, 2012

Strasburger JF, Wakai RT: Fetal cardiac arrhythmia detection and in utero therapy. Nat Rev Cardiol
7(5):277, 2010
Sugibayashi R, Ozawa K, Sumie M, et al: Forty cases of twin reversed arterial perfusion sequence
treated with radio frequency ablation using the multistep coagulation method: a single-center
experience. Prenat Diagn 36(5):437, 2016
Ueda K, Maeno Y, Miyoshi T, et al: The impact of intrauterine treatment on fetal tachycardia: a
nationwide survey in Japan. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 31(19):2605, 2018
van der Heijden LB, Oudijk MA, Manten GT, et al: Sotalol as first-line treatment for fetal tachycardia
and neonatal follow-up. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 42(3):285, 2013
Van der Veeken L, Russo FM, de Catte L, et al: Fetoscopic endoluminal tracheal occlusion and
reestablishment of fetal airways for congenital diaphragmatic hernia. Gynecol Surg 15(1):9, 2018
van Dijk, Smits IH, Fliers E, et al: Maternal thyrotropin receptor antibody concentration and the risk of
fetal and neonatal thyrotoxicosis: a systematic review. Thyroid 28(2):257, 2018
Ville Y, Hyett J, Hecher K, et al: Preliminary experience with endoscopic laser surgery for severe twintwin transfusion syndrome. N Engl J Med 332(4):224, 1995
Vrecenak JD, Flake AW: Fetal surgical intervention: progress and perspectives. Pediatr Surg Int
29(5):407, 2013
Wagata M, Muraskoshi T, Ishii K, et al: Radiofrequency ablation with an internally cooled electrode for
twin reversed arterial perfusion sequence. Fetal Diagn Ther 40(2):110, 2016
Walsh WF, Chescheir NC, Gillam-Krakauer M, et al: Maternal-fetal surgical procedures. Technical
Brief No. 5. AHRQ Publication No. 10(11)-EHC059-EF, Rockville, Agency for Healthcare
Research and Quality, 2011
Wilson RD, Lemerand K, Johnson MP, et al: Reproductive outcomes in subsequent pregnancies after a
pregnancy complicated by open maternal-fetal surgery (1996–2007). Am J Obstet Gynecol
203(3):209.e1, 2010
Yinon Y, Grisaru-Granovsky S, Chaddha V, et al: Perinatal outcome following fetal chest shunt insertion
for pleural effusion. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 36:58, 2010

