CHAPTER 54

Pulmonary Disorders

ASTHMA
ACUTE BRONCHITIS
PNEUMONIA
TUBERCULOSIS
SARCOIDOSIS
CYSTIC FIBROSIS
CARBON MONOXIDE POISONING
REFERENCES
During pregnancy, pulmonary disorders are frequently encountered. In one
study, asthma and community-acquired pneumonia accounted for almost 10
percent of nonobstetrical antepartum hospitalizations (Gazmararian, 2002).
Pregnant women, especially those in the last trimester, tolerate lung disease
poorly because of important pregnancy-induced changes in ventilatory
physiology (Han, 2018). Lung volumes and capacities are significantly
altered. In turn, these shift gas concentrations and acid-base values in blood.
These important and sometimes marked changes are reviewed in Chapter 4
(p. 66), and normal values for blood gas can be found in the Appendix (p.
1232). Some of these can be summarized as follows:

1. Vital capacity and inspiratory capacity increase by approximately 20
percent by late pregnancy.
2. Expiratory reserve volume declines from 1300 mL to approximately 1100
mL.
3. Progesterone-driven respiratory stimulation raises tidal volume
approximately 40 percent.
4. Minute ventilation increases 30 to 40 percent due to higher tidal volume.
As a result, arterial partial pressure of oxygen (PaO2) rises from 100 to
105 mm Hg.
5. Expanded metabolic demands cause a 30-percent increase in carbon
dioxide (CO2) production. But, because of its concomitantly greater
diffusion capacity and hyperventilation, the PaCO2 is reduced from 40 to 32
mm Hg.
6. Residual volume diminishes approximately 20 percent from 1500 mL to
1200 mL.
7. An expanding uterus and higher intraabdominal pressure lower chest wall
compliance by one third. This causes a 10- to 25-percent reduction in
functional residual capacity—the sum of expiratory reserve and residual
volumes.
Beginning at 14 to 16 weeks’ gestation forced vital capacity and peak
expiratory flow progressively increase (Grindheim, 2012). The result of
these pregnancy-induced changes is substantively greater ventilation due to
deeper but not more frequent breathing. This is thought to be stimulated by
basal oxygen consumption, which incrementally rises from 20 to 40 mL/min
in the second half of pregnancy.

ASTHMA
■ Pathophysiology
Asthma is a chronic inflammatory airway syndrome with a major hereditary
component. Polymorphism genes on chromosome 5q that include cytokine
gene clusters, β-adrenergic and glucocorticoid receptor genes, and the T-cell
antigen receptor gene are associated with greater airway responsiveness and
persistent subacute inflammation (Barnes, 2018). Racial differences are

seen, and morbidity rates are disproportionately higher in black compared
with white women (Kodadhala, 2018). Asthma is etiologically and clinically
heterogeneous, and an environmental allergic stimulant such as influenza or
cigarette smoke serves as a promoter for susceptible individuals.
The hallmarks of asthma are reversible airway obstruction from
bronchial smooth muscle contraction, vascular congestion, tenacious mucus,
and mucosal edema. Stimuli cause acute infiltration of eosinophils, mast
cells, and T lymphocytes. Inflammatory mediators produced by these and
other cells include histamine, leukotrienes, prostaglandins, cytokines,
immunoglobulin E (IgE), and many others. F-series prostaglandins and
ergonovine exacerbate asthma, and these commonly used uterotonics are
avoided if possible.

■ Clinical Course
Asthma manifestations range from mild wheezing to severe
bronchoconstriction, which obstructs airways and decreases airflow. This
lowers the forced expiratory volume in 1 second/forced vital capacity
(FEV1/FVC) ratio and the peak expiratory flow rate (PEFR). The work of
breathing progressively increases, and patients note chest tightness,
wheezing, or breathlessness. Subsequent worsening of oxygenation primarily
reflects ventilation–perfusion mismatching. This results from an uneven
distribution of airway narrowing.
Varied manifestations of asthma have led to a classification system that
considers severity, onset, and duration of symptoms (Table 54-1). With
persistent or worsening bronchial obstruction, clinical stages progress as
shown in Figure 54-1. Hypoxia initially is mitigated by hyperventilation,
which maintains the PaO2 within a normal range but lowers PaCO2, creating
respiratory alkalosis. As airway narrowing worsens, the degree of
ventilation–perfusion defects is accentuated, and arterial hypoxemia ensues.
With severe obstruction, fatigue causes early CO2 retention and impairs
ventilation. Because of hyperventilation, this may only be seen initially as the
PaCO2 returning to the normal range. With continuing obstruction, respiratory
failure follows.
TABLE 54-1. Classification of Asthma Severity

FIGURE 54-1 Clinical stages of asthma. FEV1 = forced expiratory volume in 1 second.

These changes are generally reversible and well tolerated by the healthy
nonpregnant individual. However, even early asthma stages may be
dangerous for the pregnant woman and her fetus. This is because diminished
functional residual capacity and greater pulmonary shunting render the
gravida more susceptible to hypoxia and hypoxemia.

Effects of Pregnancy on Asthma
Chronic asthma or an acute exacerbation affects up to 8 percent of gravidas
(Baghlaf, 2019; Flores, 2020; Mazurek, 2018). Pulmonary function changes
in pregnancy are more pronounced in asthmatics compared with healthy
women (Zairina, 2015). Despite this, pregnancy has an unpredictable effect
on underlying asthma. In a review of more than 2000 gravidas, approximately
a third each improved, remained unchanged, or clearly worsened (Gluck,
2006). Exacerbations are more common with severe disease (Ali, 2013). In a
study by Schatz and associates (2003), baseline severity correlated with
asthma morbidity during pregnancy. With mild disease, 13 percent of women
had an exacerbation and 2.3 percent required admission; with moderate
disease, these numbers were 26 and 7 percent; and for severe asthma, 52 and
27 percent. Others have reported similar findings (Charlton, 2013; Hendler,
2006).
Intrapartum exacerbation rates are controversial. In one study, 20 percent
of women with mild or moderate asthma had an intrapartum exacerbation
(Schatz, 2003). Mabie and coworkers (1992) reported an 18-fold greater
exacerbation risk following cesarean versus vaginal delivery. Conversely,
Wendel and colleagues (1996) reported exacerbations at the time of delivery
in only 1 percent of asthmatics.

Pregnancy Outcome
Asthma remains a potential risk factor for worse pregnancy outcomes despite
continued improvements in treatment. Data from two large studies are shown
in Table 54-2. The incidences of small-for-gestational-age neonates and
perinatal mortality also are significantly greater in women with asthma
(Kemppainen, 2018). However, these findings are not consistent among all
studies. A study of approximately 3000 pregnancies complicated by asthma
showed higher rates of maternal pneumonia and cesarean delivery but not of
perinatal mortality (Shaked, 2019). In a European report of 37,585

pregnancies of women with asthma, the risks for most obstetrical
complications were not increased (Tata, 2007). Blais and associates (2013)
noted that the incidence of spontaneous abortion may be slightly greater in
women with asthma.
TABLE 54-2. Maternal and Perinatal Outcomes in Women with Asthma

Some evidence suggests that severe disease, poor control, or both is
linked to higher morbidity rates. In a study by the Maternal-Fetal Medicine
Units (MFMU) Network, delivery before 37 weeks’ gestation was not more
frequent in pregnancies of women with asthma compared with controls
(Dombrowski, 2004). However, for women with severe asthma, the rate was

approximately twofold higher. The MFMU Network study suggests also a
direct relationship of baseline pregnancy FEV1 with birthweight and an
inverse relationship with rates of gestational hypertension and preterm
delivery (Schatz, 2006). Kemppainen and coworkers (2018) found that
women requiring treatment for asthma during pregnancy are at greater risk for
adverse perinatal outcomes.
Maternal morbidity rises markedly with status asthmaticus and includes
life-threatening complications such as muscle fatigue with respiratory arrest,
pneumothorax, pneumomediastinum, acute cor pulmonale, and cardiac
arrhythmias. Not surprisingly, maternal and perinatal mortality rates rise
substantively when mechanical ventilation is required.

Fetal Effects
Animal and human studies suggest that development of maternal respiratory
alkalosis leads to fetal hypoxemia well before the alkalosis compromises
maternal oxygenation (Rolston, 1974). Theories hypothesize that the fetus is
jeopardized by decreased uterine blood flow, reduced maternal venous
return, and an alkaline-induced leftward shift of the oxyhemoglobin
dissociation curve (Chap. 50, p. 886). The fetal response to maternal
hypoxemia is lower umbilical blood flow, higher systemic and pulmonary
vascular resistance, and decreased cardiac output. Several studies cited
above confirm that fetal-growth restriction rates rise with asthma severity.
Because the fetus may be seriously compromised, aggressive management is
necessary. Monitoring the fetal response is, in effect, an indicator of maternal
status. A return of moderate variability or accelerations in the fetal heart rate
is an indicator of improving maternal oxygen status.
Possible teratogenic or adverse fetal effects of drugs given to control
asthma are a concern. Several reports show a slightly greater risk for
abnormalities such as cleft lip and palate and autism spectrum disorders, but
further verification is necessary (Eltonsy, 2016; Gidaya, 2016; Murphy,
2013b; Wang, 2014). It is worrisome that up to half of women discontinue
essential treatment between 5- and 13-weeks’ gestation (Enriquez, 2006).

■ Clinical Evaluation

The subjective severity of asthma frequently does not correlate with
objective measures of airway function or ventilation. Clinical examination
also can be an inaccurate predictor, but useful signs include labored
breathing, tachycardia, pulsus paradoxus, prolonged expiration, and use of
accessory muscles. Signs of a potentially fatal exacerbation include central
cyanosis and altered consciousness.
Pulmonary function testing should be routine in the management of
asthma. Sequential measurement of the FEV1 or of the PEFR is the best
measure of severity (see Table 54-1). An FEV1 <1 L, or <20 percent of
predicted value, correlates with severe disease defined by hypoxia, poor
response to therapy, and a high relapse rate. The PEFR correlates well with
the FEV1, and it can be measured reliably with inexpensive portable meters.
It is advantageous for each woman to determine her own baseline when
asymptomatic to compare with values when symptomatic.

■ Management of Chronic Asthma
Asthma management by an experienced team produces better outcomes (Lim,
2014; Wendel, 1996). Management guidelines include:
1. Patient education about general asthma management and its effect on
pregnancy (Bonham, 2018; Robijn, 2019).
2. Avoidance or control of precipitating environmental factors. Viral
infections that include the common cold are frequent triggers (Ali, 2013;
Murphy, 2013a). Influenza and pneumococcal vaccination is encouraged.
3. Objective assessment of pulmonary function with PEFR or FEV1 and of
fetal status with serial growth ultrasound and antepartum testing if
indicated (Chap. 20, p. 392).
4. Pharmacological therapy with appropriate combinations and doses to
provide baseline control and treat exacerbations. Periodic medication
reviews are helpful to avoid noncompliance (Robijn, 2019).
5. Treatment of related disorders including smoking, depression, rhinitis, and
gastroesophageal reflux (Bonham, 2018).
In general, women with moderate to severe asthma ideally measure and
record either their FEV1 or PEFR twice daily. The FEV1 ideally is >80

percent of predicted. For PEFR, predicted values range from 380 to 550
L/min. Each woman has her own baseline value, and therapeutic adjustments
can be made using this (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2019). Another described method is a management algorithm
using fractional exhaled nitric oxide (FeNO) as a noninvasive marker of
airway inflammation (Powell, 2011). Asthma exacerbations were reduced by
50 percent with this approach (Clifton, 2019).

Agents for Chronic Treatment
Selection depends on disease severity. No therapeutic regimen for
management of asthma in pregnancy is universally accepted (Bain, 2014). βagonists help abate bronchospasm, and corticosteroids treat inflammation.
Stepwise regimens recommended for outpatient management are listed in
Figure 54-2.

FIGURE 54-2 Stepwise approach to asthma treatment. ICS = inhaled corticosteroids; LABA = longacting β-agonists; OCS = oral corticosteroids. (Barnes, 2018; National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute,
2007.)

For mild intermittent asthma, short-acting inhaled β-agonists as needed
are usually sufficient. Table 54-3 lists suitable agents.

TABLE 54-3. Chronic Asthma Treatment

For persistent asthma, most inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) are
administered twice daily. The goal is to reduce β-agonists use for
symptomatic relief. Initial low-dose ICS may be augmented to mediumranging dosing if the moderate or severe symptoms shown in Table 54-1
persist. A case-control study from Canada with a cohort of more than 15,600
nonpregnant women with asthma showed that ICS reduced hospitalizations
by 80 percent (Blais, 1998). At Parkland Hospital, Wendel and colleagues
(1996) achieved a 55-percent reduction in readmissions when severe
exacerbations were treated with ICS. In one study of nonpregnant subjects
with mild asthma, as-needed budesonide-formoterol, which is an aerosol ICS

and β-agonist combination, was superior to albuterol alone to prevent
exacerbations (Beasley, 2019). This is incorporated in new guidelines
(Cloutier, 2020).
Theophylline has been used less frequently since ICS became available.
Minimal benefit is gained with these compounds, and they have a high rate of
side effects. However, some theophylline derivatives are considered useful
for oral maintenance therapy if the initial response to ICS and β-agonists is
not optimal (Barnes, 2018).
Of other agents, antileukotrienes inhibit leukotriene synthesis and include
zileuton, zafirlukast, and montelukast. These drugs are given orally or by
inhalation for prevention, but they are ineffective for acute disease (Barnes,
2018). For maintenance, they are used in conjunction with ICS to allow
minimal corticosteroid dosing. Approximately half of individuals with
asthma will improve with these drugs. However, they are less effective than
ICS, and experience with their use in pregnancy is limited (Fanta, 2009).
Last, cromones, which are mast cell degranulation inhibitors, are ineffective
for acute asthma. They are used primarily to treat childhood asthma.

Vitamin D
Epidemiological data support an association between vitamin D
insufficiency and asthma severity. The proposed mechanism is modulation of
immunological pathways that diminish inflammatory responses (Pfeffer,
2018). Jensen and coworkers (2019) reported that pregnant women with
asthma have low vitamin D levels. One systematic review suggested that
increasing maternal vitamin D intake might prevent childhood asthma (Shi,
2021). Adams and colleagues (2021) reported an association between
decreased maternal vitamin D levels and childhood wheezing. However, a
randomized trial with antenatal vitamin D supplementation showed no
lowering of childhood asthma risks at 6 years of age (Brustad, 2019).

■ Management of Acute Asthma
Early Treatment
Treatment of acute asthma during pregnancy is similar to that for the
nonpregnant patient (Figure 54-3). Importantly, the threshold for
hospitalization is significantly lower. Intravenous (IV) hydration may help

clear pulmonary secretions, and supplemental oxygen is given by mask. The
therapeutic aim is to maintain the PaO2 >60 mm Hg, and preferably normal,
along with 90- to 95-percent oxygen saturation. Baseline pulmonary function
testing includes FEV1 or PEFR. Continuous pulse oximetry and electronic
fetal monitoring, depending on gestational age, may provide useful
information. Arterial blood gas analysis aides in assessing the severity of an
acute attack by providing objective assessment of maternal oxygenation,
ventilation, and acid-base status (see Fig. 54-1). However, Wendel and
associates (1996) found that routine arterial blood gas analysis did not help
to manage most pregnant women who required admission for asthma control.
If used, the results must be interpreted in relation to normal values for
pregnancy. For example, a PaCO2 >35 mm Hg with a pH <7.35 is consistent
with hyperventilation and CO2 retention in a pregnant woman. Antibiotics are
not given unless pneumonitis is comorbid (p. 962) (Terraneo, 2014).

FIGURE 54-3 Protocol for management of acute asthma at Parkland Hospital. aOf predicted value.
bLabor & delivery unit, recovery area, or intensive care unit. FEV = forced expiratory volume at 1
1
second; PEFR = peak expiratory flow rate (liters per minute).

First-line therapy for acute asthma includes a short-acting β-adrenergic
agonist, such as terbutaline, albuterol, isoetharine, epinephrine,
isoproterenol, or metaproterenol, which are given subcutaneously, taken

orally, or inhaled. In severely ill women, these drugs can be given
intravenously (Barnes, 2018).
Systemic corticosteroids are given early to all patients with severe acute
asthma. One regimen is oral prednisone or prednisolone or IV
methylprednisolone in a dose of 30 to 45 mg daily for 5 to 10 days without
tapering (Barnes, 2018). At Parkland Hospital, we use a higher daily IV dose
(see Figure 54-3). Because their onset of action is several hours,
corticosteroids are given initially along with β-agonists for severe acute
asthma. If the response is unsatisfactory, a nebulized anticholinergic drug
may be added. These drugs act to relax smooth muscle and diminish mucus.
By nebulizer, a 0.5-mg dose of ipratropium bromide is provided every 20
minutes as needed for three consecutive doses. Additional doses every 6 to 8
hours can be used (National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, 2007). Also,
for severe exacerbations, IV magnesium sulfate or theophylline may prove
efficacious.
Further management depends on the severity and response to therapy. If
initial therapy with a β-agonist is associated with FEV1 or PEFR
improvement to a level >70 percent of baseline, discharge can be
considered. For the woman with obvious respiratory distress or with an
FEV1 or PEFR <70 percent of predicted after three doses of a β-agonist,
admission is usually advisable (Lazarus, 2010). Intensive therapy is
continued with short-acting inhaled β-agonists, IV corticosteroids, inhaled
anticholinergics, and close observation for worsening respiratory distress or
fatigue in breathing (Racusin, 2013). The woman is cared for in the delivery
unit or an intermediate or intensive care unit (ICU) (Dombrowski, 2006;
Zeeman, 2003).

Status Asthmaticus and Respiratory Failure
Severe asthma of any type not responding after 30 to 60 minutes of intensive
therapy is termed status asthmaticus. Generally, management of nonpregnant
patients with status asthmaticus in an intensive care setting results in a good
outcome. In pregnant women, consideration should be given to early
intubation when maternal respiratory status worsens despite aggressive
treatment (see Fig. 54-1). Fatigue, CO2 retention, and hypoxemia are
indications for mechanical ventilation (Chan, 2015). In refractory cases,
venovenous extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) has been

successfully used for status asthmaticus during pregnancy (Clifford, 2018;
Steinack, 2017).

■ Labor and Delivery
For the laboring patient who has symptomatic asthma, the PEFR or FEV1 is
determined on admission, and serial measurements are taken. Maintenance
medications are continued through delivery, and stress-dose corticosteroids
are not necessary (Sylvester-Armstrong, 2020).
Oxytocin or prostaglandins E1 or E2 can be used for cervical ripening
and induction. A non-histamine-releasing narcotic such as fentanyl may be
preferable to meperidine for labor, and epidural analgesia is ideal. For
surgical delivery, conduction analgesia is preferred because tracheal
intubation can trigger severe bronchospasm. Postpartum hemorrhage is
treated with oxytocin or prostaglandin E1 (misoprostol) or E2 (dinoprostone
[Prostin]). Prostaglandin F2α (Hemabate) is contraindicated because it may
cause significant bronchospasm.

ACUTE BRONCHITIS
Large airway infection is manifest by cough without pneumonitis. It is
common in adults, especially in winter months. Infections are usually caused
by viruses, and of these, influenza A and B, parainfluenza, respiratory
syncytial, coronavirus, adenovirus, and rhinovirus are frequent isolates
(Irwin, 2018). Bacterial agents causing community-acquired pneumonia are
rarely implicated. The cough of acute bronchitis persists for 10 to 20 days
and occasionally lasts for a month or longer. Evidence supporting the
benefits of antimicrobial therapy is limited (Smith, 2017). As supportive
care, cough suppressants containing dextromethorphan and expectorants with
guaifenesin appear safe in pregnancy (Briggs, 2022).

PNEUMONIA
Infection of the lungs is a leading cause of death in the United States (Heron,
2017). Current classification includes community-acquired pneumonia
(CAP), which is typically encountered in healthy young women, including

gravidas. Patients in outpatient care facilities develop an infection that more
closely resembles hospital-acquired pneumonia (HAP) (Mandell, 2018).
In most cases of CAP, the offending pathogen is not identified. In a study
from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), pathogens were
identified in only 38 percent of nearly 2500 adults with pneumonia (Jain,
2015). These included viruses in 23 percent, bacteria in 11 percent, both in 3
percent, and fungi or protozoa in 1 percent. These percentages changed in
2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic (p. 964). Half of bacterial isolates
were Streptococcus pneumoniae.
Pneumonia in pregnant women is relatively common (Brito, 2011;
Sheffield, 2009). Gazmararian and coworkers (2002) reported that
pneumonia accounts for 4.2 percent of antepartum admissions for
nonobstetrical complications. Pneumonia is also a frequent indication for
postpartum readmission (Belfort, 2010). Admission rates for respiratory
illnesses during influenza season are higher than rates in the remaining
months.
Regardless of etiology, mortality from pneumonia is infrequent in young
women. However, during pregnancy, severe pneumonitis with appreciable
loss of ventilatory capacity is less well tolerated (Callaghan, 2015; Rogers,
2010). Hypoxemia and acidosis are also poorly accommodated by the fetus,
and they may stimulate preterm labor after midpregnancy. Because many
cases of pneumonia follow viral upper respiratory illnesses, worsening or
persistence of symptoms may represent developing pneumonia. Any gravida
suspected of having pneumonia should undergo chest radiography.

■ Bacterial Pneumonia
Many bacteria that cause CAP, such as S pneumoniae, are part of the normal
flora. Some factors that perturb the symbiotic relationship between
colonizing bacteria and mucosal phagocytic defenses include acquisition of a
virulent strain or bacterial infections following a viral infection. Cigarette
smoking and chronic bronchitis favor colonization with S pneumoniae,
Haemophilus influenzae, and Legionella species. Other risk factors include
asthma, binge drinking, and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection
(Mandell, 2018).

Incidence and Causes

Pregnancy itself does not appear to predispose to pneumonia. Jin and
associates (2003) reported the antepartum hospitalization rate for pneumonia
to be 1.5 per 1000 deliveries—almost identical to the rate of 1.47 per 1000
for nonpregnant women. Similarly, among 75,000 pregnancies at Parkland
Hospital, the incidence was 1.5 per 1000 (Yost, 2000). As discussed, at least
half are caused by viruses—influenza A and B, metapneumovirus,
adenovirus, and respiratory syncytial virus (Mandell, 2018). A fourth are
bacterial, and S pneumoniae causes half of these. Community-acquired
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (CA-MRSA) has emerged as a
common pathogen that may cause necrotizing pneumonia (Moran, 2013).
Occasionally, Legionnaires disease is encountered (Close, 2016).

Diagnosis
Typical symptoms of pneumonia include cough, dyspnea, sputum production,
and pleuritic chest pain. Mild upper respiratory symptoms and malaise
precede these symptoms, and mild leukocytosis is usually present. Chest
radiography is essential for diagnosis (Fig. 54-4). Radiographical findings
do not accurately predict the etiology, and as discussed, the responsible
pathogen is often not identified. Tests to identify a specific agent are optional
(Mandell, 2018). Sputum cultures, polymerase chain reaction (PCR) tests,
serological testing, cold agglutinin identification, and tests for bacterial
antigens are not routinely recommended. Exceptions are rapid PCR testing of
nasal swab samples for influenza A and B and for COVID-19. An assay to
screen for all three is available. Determination of serum procalcitonin levels
did not improve diagnostic efficacy (Huang, 2018).

FIGURE 54-4 Chest radiograph in a pregnant woman with right middle lobe and left upper lobe
pneumonia. Rounded right middle lobe and left apical infiltrates are consistent with the diagnosis.

Management
Many healthy young adults can be safely treated as outpatients, and the
pneumonia severity index (PSI) and the CURB-65 scoring system are guides
to admission (Mandell, 2018). Neither has been studied in pregnancy, and at
Parkland Hospital, we hospitalize all gravidas with radiographically proven
pneumonia. Outpatient therapy or 23-hour observation with optimal followup are reasonable options. Table 54-4 displays risk factors that should
prompt consideration for hospitalization (Mandel, 2018).
TABLE 54-4. Risk Factors for Early Deterioration in Community-Acquired
Pneumonia

With severe disease, admission to an ICU or intermediate care unit is
advisable. Approximately 20 percent of pregnant women with pneumonia
admitted to Parkland Hospital require this level of care (Zeeman, 2003).
Severe pneumonia is a relatively common cause of acute respiratory distress
syndrome (ARDS) during pregnancy, and mechanical ventilation may become
necessary (Chap. 50, p. 885). In a review of 51 gravidas who required
mechanical ventilation, 12 percent had pneumonia (Jenkins, 2003). Still,
their mortality rate is lower than that for other causes of ARDS (Rush, 2017).
Initial antimicrobial and antiviral treatment is empirical (Mandell, 2018).
In most otherwise healthy pregnant women, bacterial pneumonias are caused
by pneumococci, Mycoplasma, or Chlamydophila. Monotherapy initially is
with a macrolide (Table 54-5). Yost and colleagues (2000) reported that
erythromycin monotherapy, given intravenously and then orally, was effective
in all but one of 99 pregnant women with uncomplicated pneumonia. During
influenza season, we routinely administer oseltamivir (Tamiflu) along with
empirical therapy for bacterial pneumonia.
TABLE 54-5. Empirical Inpatient Antimicrobial Treatment for CommunityAcquired Pneumonia in Pregnancya

For women with more severe disease according to criteria in Table 54-4,
Mandell and Wunderink (2018) recommend: (1) a respiratory
fluoroquinolone or (2) a macrolide plus a preferred β-lactam (see Table 545). Resistance of pneumococcal isolates to macrolides will favor
fluoroquinolone regimens. The teratogenicity risk of fluoroquinolones is low,
and these should be given if indicated (Briggs, 2022). If MRSA is suspected,
IV vancomycin, 15 mg/kg every 12 hours, or linezolid, 600 mg every 12
hours, is added (Metlay, 2019).
Clinical improvement is usually evident in 48 to 72 hours with resolution
of fever in 2 to 4 days. With improvement, patients can be transitioned to oral
forms. Treatment of uncomplicated pneumonia is recommended for 5 to 7
days total (Musher, 2014). Patients should be afebrile for 48 to 72 hours and
demonstrate signs of clinical stability before therapy is discontinued.
Radiographic abnormalities may take up to 6 weeks to completely resolve
(Torres, 2008).
Worsening disease is a poor prognostic feature, and serial radiography is
recommended if fever persists. Even with improvement, however,
approximately 20 percent of women develop a pleural effusion. Treatment
failure may occur in up to 15 percent of cases, and a wider antimicrobial
regimen and more extensive diagnostic testing is warranted. For example, in
some cases, computed tomography of the chest may be necessary to identify
empyema that requires drainage.

Pregnancy Outcome
Maternal and perinatal morbidity and mortality rates from pneumonia remain
formidable. In five studies with a total of 632 women published after 1990,
almost 7 percent required intubation and mechanical ventilation, and the
maternal mortality rate was 0.8 percent.
In up to a third of cases of acute lung infection, prematurely ruptured
membranes and preterm delivery are frequent complications (Getahun, 2007;
Shariatzadeh, 2006). Likely related to these, older studies report a twofold
increase in rates of low-birthweight neonates (Sheffield, 2009). In one
population-based study from Taiwan of nearly 219,000 births, incidences of
preterm and growth-restricted newborns and of preeclampsia and cesarean
delivery were significantly higher (Chen, 2012).

Prevention
Two pneumococcal vaccines are available—a 23-serotype preparation
(PPSV23 [Pneumovax]) and a newer 13-serotype vaccine (PCV13 [Prevnar
13]). PPSV23 is 60- to 70-percent protective, and its use lowers emergence
of drug-resistant pneumococci. Neither vaccine is recommended for healthy
pregnant women. However, for gravidas with chronic diabetes mellitus or
with chronic heart, lung, or liver disease, one lifetime dose of PPSV23 is
suggested, if not previously provided. Moreover, for women with chronic
immunocompromise, generalized malignancy, chronic renal disease, cochlear
implant, or asplenia, such as with sickle-cell disease, one lifetime PCV13
dose is followed by one PPSV23 dose at least 8 weeks later and then again 5
years later if not provided previously (Freedman, 2021).

■ Influenza Pneumonia
Influenza A and B are RNA viruses that cause potentially epidemic
respiratory infection, including pneumonitis, in the winter months. The virus
is spread by aerosolized droplets and quickly infects ciliated columnar
epithelium, alveolar cells, mucus gland cells, and macrophages.

Clinical Presentation
Each year, 10 percent of pregnant women develop influenza (Cantu, 2013).
Disease onset follows 1 to 4 days after exposure, and common symptoms

include fever, cough, myalgia, and chills (Wright, 2018). In most healthy
adults, infection is self-limited. Pneumonia is the most frequent complication
and mimics bacterial pneumonia. According to the CDC, infected pregnant
women are more likely to be hospitalized and admitted to an ICU (Lindley,
2019). Others have corroborated these observations (Mertz, 2019; Prasad,
2019). At Parkland Hospital during the 2003–2004 influenza season,
pneumonia developed in 12 percent of pregnant women with influenza
(Rogers, 2010).
The 2009–2010 pandemic with the influenza (A/H1N1) pdm09 strain
was particularly severe (Rasmussen, 2014). In an MFMU Network study, 10
percent of pregnant or postpartum women admitted with H1N1 influenza
were cared for in an ICU, and 11 percent of these patients died (Varner,
2011). Risk factors included advanced pregnancy, smoking, and chronic
hypertension. Overall, influenza accounted for 12 percent of pregnancyrelated deaths during the 2009–2010 pandemic (Callaghan, 2015). During the
2013–2014 influenza season, a fourth of pregnant women admitted to
California ICUs died (Louie, 2015). ECMO may be lifesaving (Anselmi,
2015; Saad, 2016).
Rapid PCR testing of nasal swab samples for influenza A and B is
available. Primary influenza pneumonitis is characterized by sparse sputum
production and radiographic interstitial infiltrates (Wright, 2018). More
commonly, secondary or mixed pneumonia develop from bacterial
superinfection by streptococci or staphylococci after 2 to 3 days of initial
clinical improvement. The CDC (2007) reported several cases in which CAMRSA caused influenza-associated pneumonitis with a case-fatality rate of
25 percent.

Management
Supportive treatment is recommended for uncomplicated influenza, and early
antiviral therapy is effective (Oboho, 2016; Wright, 2018). The American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2018a) recommends treatment
of all pregnant women with suspected or proven influenza. This is regardless
of rapid influenza testing, which can have false-negative results (Datkhaeva,
2019). Hospitalization is considered for severely ill women and for those
with pneumonia. Influenza hospitalization rates for those with advanced
pregnancy are higher compared with nonpregnant women (Dodds, 2007;
Schanzer, 2007).

Treatment is with neuraminidase inhibitors, which interfere with release
of progeny virus from infected host cells and thus prevent infection of new
host cells. The preferred agent is oseltamivir (Tamiflu), which is given
orally, 75 mg twice daily. An alternative is zanamivir (Relenza), which is
given by inhalation, 10 mg twice daily. Recommended treatment duration
with either is 5 days. Last, peramivir (Rapivab) may be given as a 600-mg
IV dose over 15 to 30 minutes. All shorten the course of illness by 1 to 2
days, and they probably reduce the risk for pneumonitis (Belgi, 2014;
Muthuri, 2014). Few data guide use of these agents in pregnant women, but
the drugs are not teratogenic in animal studies and are considered low risk
(Briggs, 2022). Recently, the endonuclease inhibitor baloxavir marboxil
(Xofluza) was approved for use in nonpregnant individuals but is not
recommended for pregnant women.

Prevention
Vaccination against influenza A is recommended by the American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2018b) and the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention (2019a). During the 2018–2019 flu season, the CDC
reported that only half of pregnant women received the influenza vaccine
(Lindley, 2019). In a recent survey, however, O’Leary and colleagues (2019)
reported a 10-percent vaccine refusal rate in office practices.
Any inactivated influenza vaccines (IIV) or recombinant influenza
vaccine (RIV) may be used and is given once each flu season. Live
attenuated influenza vaccine (LAIV) should not be used in pregnancy
(Freedman, 2021). Prenatal vaccination affords some temporary protection
for infants (Madhi, 2014; Munoz, 2019; Tita, 2016). The vaccine has not
been linked with birth defects or adverse childhood health effects at 5 years
of age (Briggs, 2022; Conlin, 2018; Walsh, 2019). In one case-control study,
an association with vaccination and miscarriage was found (Donahue, 2017).
However, the observations were not definite and should not alter clinical
practice (Rasmussen, 2019; Sperling, 2018). Effects on pregnancy outcomes
are discussed in more detail in Chapter 67 (p. 1187).
A second coronavirus—Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERSCoV)—originated in Saudi Arabia in 2013. Fortunately, the epidemic was
contained and short lived.

■ Coronavirus
The first coronaviral infection in China in 2002 that caused severe acute
respiratory syndrome (SARS) was termed SARS-CoV. It caused atypical
pneumonitis with a case-fatality rate of approximately 10 percent (Dolin,
2012). SARS in pregnancy had a case-fatality rate of up to 40 percent
(Maxwell, 2017). Ng and associates (2006) reported that the placentas from
7 of 19 cases showed abnormal intervillous or subchorionic fibrin
deposition in three, and extensive fetal thrombotic vasculopathy in two.
In the winter of 2019–2020, a second worldwide outbreak of a
genetically similar virus originated in China. This was Coronavirus 2
(SARS-CoV2) known as COVID-19. Illness severity ranges from mild
common-cold symptoms to severe pneumonia or acute respiratory distress
syndrome (Rasmussen, 2020). From 18 affected pregnancies, the clinical
course of COVID-19 is similar to that seen in nonpregnant women. However,
preterm labor appears to be an associated risk (Chen, 2020; Zhu, 2020).
To minimize transmission of COVID-19, inpatient guidelines recommend
caring for an affected patient in a negative-pressure airborne infection
isolation room (AIIR) or transfer to an equipped facility. The potential for
vertical transmission (mother–to–newborn) transmission is currently unclear
Breslin, 2020). Neonates are suspected to have infection. Thus, isolation of
the newborn from other neonates is recommended. A newborn may room in
with its mother, who practices hand hygiene and wears a mask (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2021; Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention, 2020).

■ Varicella Pneumonia
Infection with varicella-zoster virus, the same agent responsible for
chickenpox, results in pneumonitis in 5 percent of gravidas (Harger, 2002).
Diagnosis and management are considered in Chapter 67 (p. 1186).

■ Pneumocystis Pneumonia
Fungal and yeast infections are usually of greatest consequence in
immunocompromised hosts, especially in women with acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). Of these, lung infection with

Pneumocystis jirovecii, formerly called Pneumocystis carinii, is a common
complication. The opportunistic yeast-like fungus causes interstitial
pneumonia characterized by dry cough, tachypnea, dyspnea, and diffuse
radiographic infiltrates. This organism is identified by polymerase chain
reaction testing of bronchoalveolar lavage secretions or, when necessary,
tissue staining of biopsy specimens (Morris, 2018). More common in HIVinfected persons, its incidence has risen in other immunocompromised
groups (Rego de Figueiredo, 2019).
In a report from the AIDS Clinical Trials Centers, pneumocystis
pneumonia was the most frequent HIV-related disorder in pregnant women
(Stratton, 1992). Ahmad and associates (2001) reviewed 22 cases during
pregnancy and cited a 50-percent mortality rate. Treatment is with
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole for 14 to 21 days. Alternative agents include
sulfadiazine plus pyrimethamine. Glucocorticoids also improve survival
rates. Echinocandins have been used successfully in nonpregnant patients
(Huang, 2019). Tracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation may be
required in some cases.
For prophylaxis, several international health agencies recommend one
double-strength trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole tablet orally daily for certain
groups of HIV-infected pregnant women. These include women with CD4+ Tlymphocyte counts <200/μL, those whose CD4+ T lymphocytes constitute
<14 percent, or if there is an AIDS-defining illness, particularly
oropharyngeal candidiasis (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
2021).

■ Fungal Pneumonia
Any of several fungi can cause pneumonia. In pregnancy, this is usually seen
in women with HIV infection or other sources of immunocompromise. In
uncompromised women, infection is usually mild and self-limited. It is
characterized initially by cough and fever, and dissemination is infrequent
(Mansour, 2015).
Histoplasmosis and blastomycosis do not appear to be more frequent or
more severe during pregnancy (Youssef, 2013). Data concerning
coccidioidomycosis are conflicting (Bercovitch, 2011; Patel, 2013). In a
case-control study from an endemic area, pregnancy was a significant risk

factor for disseminated disease (Rosenstein, 2001). In another study,
however, Caldwell and coworkers (2000) identified 32 serologically
confirmed cases during pregnancy and documented dissemination in only
three. Women with associated erythema nodosum have a better prognosis,
whereas mediastinal lymphadenopathy may more likely reflect disseminated
disease (Mayer, 2013). Last, Crum and Ballon-Landa (2006) reviewed 80
cases of antepartum coccidioidomycosis and found that almost all women
diagnosed in the third trimester had disseminated disease. Although the
overall maternal mortality rate was 40 percent, it was 20 percent for 29
cases reported since 1973. Spinello (2007) and Bercovitch (2011) with their
colleagues provide reviews of coccidioidomycosis in pregnancy.
Most cases of cryptococcosis reported during pregnancy manifest as
meningitis. Otherwise healthy pregnant women occasionally have
cryptococcal pneumonia (Asadi Gharabaghi, 2014). Diagnosis is difficult
because clinical presentation is similar to that of other community-acquired
pneumonias.
Itraconazole is the preferred therapy for most disseminated fungal
infections (Edwards, 2018). Pregnant women have also been given IV
amphotericin B or ketoconazole (Lewis, 2018; Paranyuk, 2006; Pilmis,
2015). Amphotericin B has been used extensively in pregnancy with no
embryofetal effects. Early in pregnancy, fluconazole and ketoconazole may
be embryotoxic in large doses. In the first trimester, these two and
itraconazole are ideally avoided if possible (Briggs, 2022).
Three echinocandin derivatives—caspofungin, micafungin, and
anidulafungin—are effective for invasive candidiasis (Edwards, 2018).
They are embryotoxic and teratogenic in laboratory animals and use in human
pregnancies has not been reported (Briggs, 2022).

TUBERCULOSIS
It is estimated that a third of the world population is infected with
Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Getahun, 2015). In the United States, it is
uncommon and is a disease of the elderly, the urban poor, minority groups,
and patients with HIV infection (Raviglione, 2018). According to the CDC
(2019b), the incidence of active tuberculosis in this country has plateaued
since 2000, and immigrants account for more than half of active cases.

Individuals born in the United States have newly acquired infection, whereas
foreign-born persons usually have reactivation of latent infection.
Infection begins with inhalation of mycobacteria, which incites a
granulomatous pulmonary reaction. In >90 percent of patients, infection is
contained and is dormant for long periods (Getahun, 2015). In those who are
immunocompromised, tuberculosis becomes reactivated to cause clinical
disease. Active disease manifests usually as cough with minimal sputum
production, low-grade fever, hemoptysis, and weight loss. Various
infiltrative patterns are seen on chest radiograph, and cavitation or
mediastinal lymphadenopathy may be associated. Stained smears of sputum
reveal acid-fast bacilli (AFB) in approximately two thirds of culturepositive individuals. Forms of extrapulmonary tuberculosis include
lymphadenitis, pleural, genitourinary, skeletal, meningeal, gastrointestinal,
and miliary or disseminated (Raviglione, 2018). Silent endometrial
tuberculosis can cause tubal infertility (Levison, 2010).

■ Tuberculosis and Pregnancy
The considerable influx of women into the United States from Asia, Africa,
Mexico, and Central America has been accompanied by an increased
frequency of tuberculosis in pregnancy. The prevalence of tuberculosis was
7.1 cases per 100,000 pregnancy-related hospitalizations (Dennis, 2018).
Sackoff and associates (2006) reported positive tuberculin test results in half
of 678 foreign-born women attending prenatal clinics in New York City. At
Jackson Memorial Hospital in Miami, 21 percent of 207 pregnant women
with HIV infection had a positive skin test result (Schulte, 2002).
One review of 3384 pregnant women showed that 72 percent of active
disease is pulmonary (Sobhy, 2017). It also confirmed earlier studies that
showed greater adverse maternal and perinatal outcomes (Table 54-6).
Others have found similar untoward effects (Dennis, 2018; El-Messidi,
2016). From her review, Efferen (2007) cited twofold greater rates of low
birthweight, preterm delivery, and preeclampsia. The perinatal mortality rate
was almost tenfold higher. Conversely, treated tuberculosis is usually
associated with good pregnancy outcomes (Moro, 2018; Taylor, 2013).
TABLE 54-6. Adverse Maternal and Perinatal Outcomes in 3384
Pregnancies Complicated by Active Tuberculosis

Extrapulmonary tuberculosis is less common, although its incidence
appears to be rising (El-Messidi, 2016). Llewelyn and colleagues (2000)
reported that 9 of 13 pregnant women with extrapulmonary disease had
delayed diagnoses. In the review cited above, 5.8 percent of women had
extrapulmonary infections, and they had worse outcomes (Sobhy, 2017). Jana
and coworkers (1999) described outcomes in 33 pregnant women with renal,
intestinal, and skeletal tuberculosis, and a third had low-birthweight
newborns. Prevost and Fung Kee Fung (1999) reviewed 56 cases of
tuberculous meningitis in which a third of mothers died. Spinal tuberculosis
may cause paraplegia, but vertebral fusion may prevent it from becoming
permanent (Badve, 2011). Psoas abscess develops in 5 percent of those with
spinal infections (Nigam, 2013). Other presentations include widespread
intraperitoneal tuberculosis simulating ovarian carcinomatosis or
degenerating leiomyoma, and hyperemesis gravidarum stemming from
tubercular meningitis (Kutlu, 2007; Moore, 2008; Sherer, 2005).

■ Diagnosis
For latent tuberculosis, two testing types are used. One is the time-honored
tuberculin skin test (TST), and the others are interferon-gamma release
assays (IGRAs), which are becoming preferred (Lewinsohn, 2017; Sosa,
2019). IGRAs are blood tests that measure interferon-gamma release in
response to antigens present in M tuberculosis but not in bacille CalmetteGuérin (BCG) vaccine.
The alternative is skin testing, for which the preferred antigen is purified
protein derivative (PPD) of intermediate strength of 5 tuberculin units. If the
intracutaneously applied test result is negative, no further evaluation is
needed. A positive skin test result measures ≥5 mm in diameter and requires
evaluation for active disease, including a chest radiograph. For active
infection, nucleic acid amplification testing and mycobacterial culture is
recommended (Raviglione, 2018).
Clinicians should promptly contact their state health department for cases
of suspected or confirmed active tuberculosis. Health departments can assist
in providing patient and public health management. This often includes
directly observed therapy (DOT) to ensure regimen compliance (Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention, 2013a). Each state’s control office can be
found at www.cdc.gov/tb/links/tboffices.htm.

■ Treatment
Latent Infection
In nonpregnant, tuberculin-positive patients younger than 35 years with no
evidence of active disease, treatment is given to substantially reduce the risk
that their latent infection will progress to active disease. The preferred
therapy is one of three rifamycin-based regimens with or without isoniazid
for 3 to 4 months duration (Sterling, 2020). Alternatively, isoniazid, 300 mg
orally daily, is given for 6 to 9 months. Isoniazid has been used for decades,
and it is considered safe in pregnancy (Briggs, 2022; Moro, 2018). However,
for gravidas with latent infection, most recommend that isoniazid therapy be
delayed until after delivery (Hill, 2019). Some even recommend withholding
treatment until 3 to 6 months after delivery because of a possibly increased
isoniazid-induced hepatitis risk in postpartum women. Serum levels of
hepatic transaminases should be monitored with isoniazid therapy.

Compliance is a major problem with postpartum therapy. Only 10 to 18
percent of postpartum patients complete treatment (Cruz, 2005; Sackoff,
2006). One obvious disconnect is that care for tuberculosis is given in health
systems apart from prenatal care (Zenner, 2012). In a decision model,
Boggess and colleagues (2000) reported fewer cases of tuberculosis if
treatment for a positive tuberculin skin test result occurred antepartum.
There are exceptions to delayed treatment for latent infection in
pregnancy. Recent skin test convertors are treated antepartum because the
incidence of active infection is 5 percent in the first year (Zumla, 2013).
Skin-test-positive women exposed to active infection are also treated
because the incidence of infection is 0.5 percent per year. Last, women with
HIV infection are treated because they have an approximate 10-percent
annual risk of active disease.

Active Infection
Regimens. Resistance to antituberculosis drugs has led to emergence of
multidrug-resistant tuberculosis (MDR-TB) strains. The World Health
Organization (2017) recommends isoniazid, rifampin, ethambutol, and
pyrazinamide together for 6 months for nonpregnant persons. These are used
until susceptibility studies are performed (Nahid, 2016). Pyridoxine is added
to help prevent isoniazid-associated neuropathy. A newer 4-month isoniazid,
rifapentine, moxifloxacin, and pyrazinamide regimen was not inferior to the
standard one (Dorman, 2021).
During pregnancy, in the first 2-month bactericidal phase, isoniazid,
rifampin, and ethambutol are given. This is followed by a 7-month
continuation phase with isoniazid and rifampin (Raviglione, 2018). A few
reports describe MDR-TB during pregnancy, and treatment options have
been reviewed (Esmail, 2018). Treatment should be undertaken in
consultation with infectious disease and the local health department.
Breastfeeding is not prohibited during antituberculous therapy. If neonatal
therapy is indicated, medication levels in breast milk are inadequate for this.
Treatment of active disease is of special concern in HIV-infected women
who are antiretroviral naïve. In these circumstances, beginning concomitant
therapy with antituberculosis and antiretroviral therapy can cause the
immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome (IRIS) with toxic drug
effects (Lai, 2016). That said, some studies support administration of

antiretroviral therapy 2 to 4 weeks after beginning antituberculosis therapy
(Blanc, 2011; Havlir, 2011). Also, rifampin or rifabutin may be
contraindicated if certain protease inhibitors or nonnucleoside reverse
transcriptase inhibitors are used. If there is resistance to rifabutin or
rifampin, then pyrazinamide therapy is given. Of the second-line regimens,
the aminoglycosides—streptomycin, kanamycin, amikacin, and capreomycin
—are ototoxic to the fetus and are contraindicated (Briggs, 2022).
Transmission Prevention. Inpatient airborne precautions should be initiated
for any patient with suspected active pulmonary tuberculosis or for patients
who remain infectious despite treatment. Precautions include rooming in a
negative-pressure room. Patients are encouraged to wear surgical masks
during interactions, and health-care workers should don personally fitted
N95 respirator masks. Patients undergoing treatment can be considered
noninfectious: (1) after 2 weeks of DOT treatment compliance, (2) after three
consecutive AFB-negative sputum smears, or (3) after clinical improvement
evidenced by absent fever and resolving cough (Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention, 2013b).

Neonatal Tuberculosis
Tuberculous bacillemia can infect the placenta, but the fetus infrequently
becomes infected. Congenital tuberculosis applies also to newborns who
are infected by aspiration of infected secretions at delivery. Each route
constitutes approximately half of the cases. Neonatal tuberculosis simulates
other congenital infections and manifests with hepatosplenomegaly,
respiratory distress, fever, and lymphadenopathy (Yeh, 2019).
Cantwell and colleagues (1994) reviewed 29 cases of congenital
tuberculosis. Only 12 of the mothers had active infection, and tuberculosis
was frequently demonstrated by postpartum endometrial biopsy. Adhikari
and associates (1997) described 11 South African postpartum women whose
endometrial biopsy was culture-positive. Six of their neonates had congenital
tuberculosis.
Neonatal infection is unlikely if the mother with active disease is treated
before delivery or if her sputum culture is negative. Most experts recommend
isolation of the susceptible newborn from the mother suspected of having
active disease. If the mother is infectious, 3 to 6 months of isoniazid
prophylaxis is given to the newborn. In an older study, the risk of disease in

the untreated infant born to a woman with active infection was 50 percent in
the first year (Jacobs, 1988).

SARCOIDOSIS
This is a chronic, multisystem inflammatory disease of unknown etiology
characterized by an accumulation of T-helper lymphocytes and phagocytes
within noncaseating granulomas (Baughman, 2018; Spagnolo, 2018).
Predisposition to the disease is genetically determined and characterized by
an exaggerated response of helper T lymphocytes to environmental triggers.
Pulmonary involvement is most common, followed by skin, eyes, lymph
nodes, and then all other organ systems. The prevalence of sarcoid in the
United States is 20 to 60 cases per 100,000, with equal sex distribution. It is
more than 10 times more common for blacks than for whites. Most patients
are between 20 and 40 years at disease presentation.
Pulmonary symptoms are dominant, and more than 90 percent of patients
have an abnormal chest radiograph at some point. Interstitial pneumonitis is
the hallmark of pulmonary involvement, and half of affected patients develop
permanent radiological changes. Lymphadenopathy, especially of the
mediastinum, is present in 75 to 90 percent of cases. A third each have
uveitis and skin involvement, the latter usually manifest as erythema
nodosum. In women, sarcoid causes approximately 10 percent of cases of
erythema nodosum (Mert, 2007). Importantly, any other organ system may be
involved. Confirmation of the diagnosis is with biopsy—preferably a lymph
node. However, because the lung may be the only obviously involved organ,
tissue acquisition is often difficult.
The overall prognosis for sarcoidosis is good, and it resolves without
treatment in 50 percent of patients. Still, quality of life is diminished, and in
20 percent chronic organ dysfunction, albeit mild and nonprogressive,
persists (Spagnolo, 2018). Approximately 5 percent die because of their
disease.
Glucocorticoids are the most widely used treatment for symptomatic
disease. Permanent organ derangement is seldom reversed by their use
(Spagnolo, 2018). Thus, the decision to treat is based on symptoms, physical
findings, chest radiograph, and pulmonary function tests. Unless respiratory
symptoms are prominent, therapy is usually withheld for a several-month

observation period. If inflammation does not subside, prednisone, 20 to 40
mg/d, is given daily and tapered to <10 mg by 6 months (Baughman, 2018).
For those with an inadequate response, immunosuppressive or cytotoxic
agents and cytokine modulators can be used.

■ Sarcoidosis and Pregnancy
Because it is uncommon and frequently benign, sarcoidosis is not often
diagnosed in pregnancy. In a study of the Nationwide Inpatient Sample, the
incidence was 9.6 cases per 100,000 births (Hadid, 2015). Meningitis, heart
failure, and neurosarcoidosis complicating pregnancy have been described
(Cardonick, 2000; Maisel, 1996; Wallmüller, 2012). Many small studies
report benign associations between sarcoidosis and pregnancy. However,
Table 54-7 displays the increased incidences of both maternal and fetal
adverse outcomes found in a Nationwide Inpatient Sample study of 678 cases
(Hadid, 2015). Risks for preeclampsia and preterm delivery were
approximately twofold greater. Risks for eclampsia, deep-vein thrombosis,
and pulmonary embolism were five- to sevenfold higher.
TABLE 54-7. Maternal and Perinatal Adverse Outcomes in 678 Women
with Sarcoidosis

Active sarcoidosis is treated using the same guidelines as for nongravid
women. Severe disease warrants serial pulmonary function determination.
Symptomatic uveitis, constitutional symptoms, and pulmonary symptoms are
treated with prednisone.

CYSTIC FIBROSIS
■ Pathophysiology
Cystic fibrosis is an autosomal recessive exocrinopathy and is one of the
most common fatal genetic disorders in Caucasians. Cystic fibrosis is caused
by one of more than 2000 mutations in a 230-kb gene on the long arm of
chromosome 7 (Sorscher, 2018). The normal peptide gene product functions
as a chloride channel and is termed the cystic fibrosis transmembrane
conductance regulator (CFTR). Mutations in the chloride channel alters
epithelial transport of electrolytes in CFTR-secretory cells. Affected sites
include the sinuses, lung, pancreas, liver, and reproductive tract.
Exocrine gland ductal obstruction develops from thick, viscid secretions.
In the lung, submucosal glandular ducts are affected. Eccrine sweat gland
abnormalities are the basis for the diagnostic sweat test, characterized by
elevated sodium, potassium, and chloride levels in sweat.
Lung involvement is commonplace and is usually the cause of death.
Bronchial gland hypertrophy with mucous plugging and small-airway
obstruction leads to subsequent infection that ultimately causes chronic
bronchitis and bronchiectasis. For complex and not completely explicable
reasons, chronic inflammation is caused by Pseudomonas aeruginosa, S
aureus, and H influenzae. Acute and chronic parenchymal inflammation
ultimately causes extensive fibrosis, and along with airway obstruction,
ventilation–perfusion mismatch develops. Pulmonary insufficiency is the end
result. Currently, the median predicted survival is 37 years, and nearly 80
percent of females with cystic fibrosis now survive to adulthood (Patel,
2015).
As discussed in Chapter 17 (p. 342), phenotypes vary widely, even
among homozygotes for the common Phe508del (∆F508) mutation. Disease
severity depends on which two alleles are inherited, and approximately 10
percent are disease-causing mutations (Sorscher, 2018). Homozygosity for
∆F508 is one of the most severe, and 90 percent of individuals with clinical
disease carry at least one F508 allele.

■ Preconceptional Counseling

Women with clinical cystic fibrosis are subfertile because of tenacious
cervical mucus. Traxler and colleagues (2019) recommend in-depth
preconceptional counseling regarding contraception. Males have
oligospermia or aspermia from associated congenital bilateral absence of
the vas deferens (CBAVD), and 98 percent are infertile (Ahmad, 2013).
Despite this, the North American Cystic Fibrosis Foundation estimated that 4
percent of affected women become pregnant every year (Edenborough,
1995). The endometrium and tubes express some CFTR but are functionally
normal, and the ovaries do not express the CFTR gene. Both intrauterine
insemination and in vitro fertilization can be successful for affected women.
Important factors are the long-term prognosis for the parent(s) and mutation
transmission to their offspring.

Screening
The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020)
recommends that carrier screening be offered to all women, affected by
cystic fibrosis or not, who are currently pregnant or considering conception
(Chap. 17, p. 342). The CDC also added cystic fibrosis to newborn
screening programs (Chap. 32, p. 594). The CFTR2 website
(www.cftr2.org) helps delineate which gene variants have a clear diseasecausing role and which are benign mutations.

■ Prenatal Care
Pregnancy outcome is inversely related to severity of lung dysfunction.
Advanced chronic lung disease, hypoxia, and frequent infections may prove
deleterious. At least in the past, cor pulmonale was common, but even that
does not preclude successful pregnancy (Cameron, 2005). In some women,
pancreatic dysfunction may cause malnutrition. Approximately 10 percent
have pregestational diabetes (Reynaud, 2017). Otherwise normal pregnancyinduced insulin resistance frequently results in gestational diabetes after
midpregnancy. In one study of 48 pregnancies, half had pancreatic
insufficiency, and a third required insulin (Thorpe-Beeston, 2013).
Cystic fibrosis is not affected by pregnancy. Early reports of a
deleterious effect on the course of cystic fibrosis were related to severe
disease (Olson, 1997). When matched with nonpregnant women by disease

severity, some reports indicate no deleterious effects on long-term survival
(Schechter, 2013).

■ Management
Prepregnancy counseling is imperative. Women who choose to become
pregnant require close surveillance for development of superimposed
infection, diabetes, and heart failure. Serial pulmonary function testing
assists management and estimates prognosis. If the FEV1 is at least 50
percent, women usually tolerate pregnancy well (Reynaud, 2020). Emphasis
is placed on postural drainage, bronchodilator therapy, and infection control.
β-Adrenergic bronchodilators help control airway constriction. Inhaled
recombinant human deoxyribonuclease I improves lung function by reducing
sputum viscosity (Sorscher, 2018). Inhaled 7-percent saline produces shortand long-term benefits. Nutritional status is assessed, and appropriate dietary
counseling given. Calcium and vitamin D are given for poor bone
mineralization. Pancreatic insufficiency requires replacement of oral
pancreatic enzymes. Promising new therapy to correct CFTR protein
dysfunction has been recently described. Using a combination of “CFTR
correctors” (tezacaftor–ivacaftor congeners), patients homozygous for the
Phe508del mutation significantly benefitted (Davies, 2018; Keating, 2018).
No reports of these drugs are available regarding pregnant women.
Infection is heralded by increasing cough and mucus production. Oral
semisynthetic penicillins or cephalosporins usually suffice to treat
staphylococcal infections. Pseudomonas infection is problematic, and
inhaled tobramycin and colistin have been used successfully to control this
organism. Serious pulmonary infections are treated with immediate
hospitalization and aggressive therapy. The threshold for hospitalization with
other complications is low. For labor and delivery, epidural analgesia is
recommended (Deighan, 2014).

■ Pregnancy Outcome
Earlier reports chronicled the poor maternal and perinatal outcomes in
affected women (Cohen, 1980; Kent, 1993). More recent reports describe
better outcomes, but there still are serious complications (Schlüter, 2019).

Disease severity is now quantified by pulmonary function studies, which are
the best predictor of pregnancy and long-term maternal outcome. One report
of 69 pregnancies found that if prepregnancy FEV1 was <60 percent of
predicted, the risk for preterm delivery, respiratory complications, and death
of the mother within a few years of childbirth was substantive (Edenborough,
2000). Others report similar findings (Fitzsimmons, 1996; Thorpe-Beeston,
2013).
Of 75 pregnancies from the French Cystic Fibrosis Registry, almost 20
percent of newborns were delivered preterm, and 30 percent had growth
restriction (Gillet, 2002). The one maternal death was due to Pseudomonas
sepsis in a woman whose prepregnancy FEV1 was 60 percent. Long-term,
however, 17 percent of women died, and four infants had confirmed cystic
fibrosis. Meconium peritonitis is found in 10 to 20 percent of affected fetuses
(Boczar, 2015; Terlizzi, 2016). In a more recent report from the French
registry, women with pregestational diabetes had outcomes similar to those
without diabetes (Reynaud, 2017).
Patel and associates (2015) queried the National Inpatient Sample
database and reported that the prevalence of cystic fibrosis in pregnancy had
a significant linear rise from 2000 to 2010. They analyzed 1119 affected
women and reported a litany of risks (Table 54-8). In contrast, perinatal
outcomes were surprisingly good.
TABLE 54-8. Odds Ratios for Maternal Complications in 1119 Pregnant
Women with Cystic Fibrosis Compared with Controls

■ Lung Transplantation
Cystic fibrosis is a common antecedent disease leading to lung
transplantation. Gyi and coworkers (2006) reviewed 10 pregnancies in
women following transplantation and reported nine liveborn neonates.
Maternal outcomes were less favorable. Of the three gravidas who
developed rejection during pregnancy, all had progressively declining
pulmonary function and died of chronic rejection by 38 months after delivery.
More recent international data show a median survival of 10.5 years in
patients living beyond the first year (Yusen, 2015).

CARBON MONOXIDE POISONING
Carbon monoxide is a ubiquitous gas, and most nonsmoking adults have a
carbon monoxyhemoglobin saturation of 1 to 3 percent. In cigarette smokers,
levels may be 5 to 15 percent, and polycythemia is comorbid. Carbon
monoxide is the most frequent cause of poisoning worldwide (Stoller, 2007).
Toxic levels are often encountered in inadequately ventilated areas warmed
by space heaters.
Carbon monoxide is particularly toxic because it is odorless and
tasteless and has a high affinity for hemoglobin binding. Thus, it displaces
oxygen and impedes its transfer with resultant hypoxia. Besides acute
sequelae including death and anoxic encephalopathy, cognitive defects
develop in as many as half of patients following loss of consciousness or in
those with carbon monoxide levels >25 percent (Weaver, 2002). Hypoxic
brain damage has a predilection for the cerebral cortex and white matter and
for the basal ganglia (Lo, 2007; Prockop, 2007). A Parkinson syndrome
sometimes follows after recovery.

■ Pregnancy and Carbon Monoxide Poisoning
Through several physiological alterations, the rate of endogenous carbon
monoxide production almost doubles in normal pregnancy (Longo, 1977).
Although the pregnant woman is not more susceptible to carbon monoxide
poisoning, the fetus does not tolerate excessive exposure (Friedman, 2015;
Nowadly, 2018). With chronic exposure, maternal symptoms usually appear
when the carboxyhemoglobin concentration is 5 to 20 percent. Symptoms

include headache, weakness, dizziness, physical and visual impairment,
palpitations, and nausea and vomiting. With acute exposure, concentrations of
30 to 50 percent produce symptoms of impending cardiovascular collapse.
Levels >50 percent may be fatal for the mother.
Because hemoglobin F has an even higher affinity for carbon monoxide,
fetal carboxyhemoglobin levels are 10 to 15 percent higher than those in the
mother. This may be due to facilitated diffusion (Longo, 1977). Importantly,
the half-life of carboxyhemoglobin is 2 hours in the mother but 7 hours in the
fetus. Carbon monoxide is bound so tightly to hemoglobin F, the fetus may be
hypoxic even before maternal carbon monoxide levels are appreciably
elevated. Several anomalies are associated with embryonic exposure, and
anoxic encephalopathy is the primary sequela of later fetal exposure (Alehan,
2007; Nowadly, 2018).

■ Treatment
For all victims, treatment of carbon monoxide poisoning is supportive along
with immediate administration of 100-percent inspired oxygen. Indications
for hyperbaric oxygen treatment in nonpregnant individuals are unclear (Kao,
2005). Weaver and associates (2002) reported that hyperbaric oxygen
treatment minimized the incidence of cognitive defects in adults at both 6
weeks and 1 year compared with normobaric oxygen. Hyperbaric oxygen is
generally recommended in pregnancy if carbon monoxide exposure has been
“significant” (Aubard, 2000; Ernst, 1998). The problem is how to define
significant exposure (Friedman, 2015). Although maternal carbon monoxide
levels are not accurately predictive of those in the fetus, some clinicians
recommend hyperbaric therapy if maternal levels exceed 15 to 20 percent.
Towers and Corcoran (2009) described affected fetuses to have an elevated
baseline heart rate, diminished variability, and absent accelerations and
decelerations with fetal monitoring. Treatment of the affected newborn with
hyperbaric oxygen also is controversial (Bar, 2007).
Elkharrat and coworkers (1991) described successful hyperbaric
treatments in 44 pregnant women. In another report, a woman’s abnormal
neurological and cardiopulmonary findings abated in a parallel fashion with
resolution of associated fetal heart rate variable decelerations (Silverman,
1997). Greingor and coworkers (2001) used 2.5-atm hyperbaric 100-percent
oxygen for 90 minutes in a 21-week-pregnant woman who was delivered of a

healthy neonate at term. The Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society
(2021) has a list of accredited facilities.

REFERENCES
Adams SN, Adjent MA, Gebretsadik T, et al: Prenatal vitamin D levels and child wheeze and asthma. J
Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 34(3):323, 2021
Adhikari M, Pillay T, Pillay DG: Tuberculosis in the newborn: an emerging disease. Pediatr Infect Dis J
16:1108, 1997
Ahmad A, Ahmed A, Patrizio P: Cystic fibrosis and fertility. Curr Opin Obstet Gynecol 25(3):167, 2013
Ahmad H, Mehta NJ, Manikal VM, et al: Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia in pregnancy. Chest 120:666,
2001
Alehan F, Erol I, Onay OS: Cerebral palsy due to nonlethal maternal carbon monoxide intoxication. Birth
Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol 79(8):614, 2007
Ali Z, Ulrik CS: Incidence and risk factors for exacerbations of asthma during pregnancy. J Asthma
Allergy 6:53, 2013
American Academy of Allergy Asthma & Immunology: Drug guide. 2020. Available at:
https://www.aaaai.org/Tools-for-the-Public/Drug-Guide. Accessed October 15, 2021
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Assessment and treatment of pregnant women
with suspected or confirmed influenza. Committee Opinion No. 753, October 2018a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Influenza vaccination during pregnancy.
Committee Opinion No. 732, April 2018b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Asthma in pregnancy. Practice Bulletin No. 90,
February 2008, Reaffirmed 2019
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Carrier screening for genetic conditions.
Committee Opinion No. 691, March 2017, Reaffirmed 2020
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Practice advisory: novel coronavirus 2019
(COVID-19). 2021. Available at: www.acog.org/Clinical-Guidance-and-Publications/PracticeAdvisories/Practice-Advisory-Novel-Coronavirus2019. Accessed October 15, 2021
Anselmi A, Ruggieri VG, Letheulle J, et al: Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation in pregnancy. J Card
Surg 30(10):781, 2015
Asadi Gharabaghi M, Allameh SF: Primary pulmonary cryptococcosis. BMJ Case Rep 2014:pii:
bcr2014203821, 2014
Aubard Y, Magne I: Carbon monoxide poisoning in pregnancy. BJOG 107:833, 2000
Badve SA, Ghate SD, Badve MS, et al: Tuberculosis of spine with neurological deficit in advanced
pregnancy: a report of three cases. Spine J 11(1):e9, 2011
Baghlaf H, Spence AR, Czuzoj-Shulman N, et al: Pregnancy outcomes among women with asthma. J
Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 32(8):1325, 2019
Bain E, Pierides KL, Clifton VL, et al: Interventions for managing asthma in pregnancy. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 10:CD010660, 2014
Bar R, Cohen M, Bentur Y, et al: Pre-labor exposure to carbon monoxide: should the neonate be treated
with hyperbaric oxygenation? Clin Toxicol 45(5):579, 2007
Barnes PJ: Asthma. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al: Harrison’s Principles of Internal
Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2018, p 1957

Baughman RP, Lower EE: Sarcoidosis. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al: Harrison’s
Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2018, p 2600
Beasley R, Holliday M, Reddel HK, et al: Controlled trial of Budesonide-Formoterol as needed for mild
asthma. N Engl J Med 380(21):2020, 2019
Belfort MA, Clark SL, Saade GR, et al: Hospital readmission after delivery: evidence for an increased
incidence of nonurogenital infection in the immediate postpartum period. Am J Obstet Gynecol
202:35.e1, 2010
Belgi RH, Venkataramanan R, Caritis SN, et al: Oseltamivir for influenza in pregnancy. Semin Perinatol
38(8):503, 2014
Bercovitch RS, Catanzaro A, Schwartz BS, et al: Coccidioidomycosis during pregnancy: a review and
recommendations for management. Clin Infect Dis 53(4):363, 2011
Blais L, Kettani FZ, Forget A: Relationship between maternal asthma, its severity and control and
abortion. Hum Reprod 28(4):908, 2013
Blais L, Suissa S, Boivin JF, et al: First treatment with inhaled corticosteroids and the prevention of
admissions to hospital for asthma. Thorax 53:1025, 1998
Blanc FX, Sok T, Laureillard D, et al: Earlier versus later start of antiretroviral therapy in HIV-infected
adults with tuberculosis. N Engl J Med 365(16):1471, 2011
Boczar M, Sawicka E, Zybert K: Meconium ileus in newborns with cystic fibrosis—results of treatment
in the group of patients operated on in the years 2000–2014. Dev Period Med 19(1):32, 2015
Boggess KA, Myers ER, Hamilton CD: Antepartum or postpartum isoniazid treatment of latent
tuberculosis infection. Obstet Gynecol 96:747, 2000
Bonham CA, Patterson KC, Strek ME: Asthma outcomes and management during pregnancy. Chest
153(2):515, 2018
Breslin N, Baptiste C, Gyamfi-Bannerman C, et al: COVID-19 infection among asymptomatic and
symptomatic pregnant women: Two weeks of confirmed presentations to an affiliated pair of New
York City hospitals. Am J Obstet Gynecol April 6. 2020
Briggs GG, Towers CV, Forinash CV: Drugs in Pregnancy and Lactation, 12th ed. Philadelphia, WoltersKluwer, 2022
Brito V, Niederman MS: Pneumonia complicating pregnancy. Clin Chest Med 32:121, 2011
Brustad N, Eliasen AU, Stokholm J, et al: High-dose vitamin D supplementation during pregnancy and
asthma in offspring at the age of 6 years. JAMA 321(10):1003, 2019
Caldwell JW, Asura EL, Kilgore WB, et al: Coccidioidomycosis in pregnancy during an epidemic in
California. Obstet Gynecol 95:236, 2000
Callaghan WM, Creanga AA, Jamieson DJ: Pregnancy-related mortality resulting from influenza in the
United States during the 2009–2010 pandemic. Obstet Gynecol 126:486, 2015
Cameron AJ, Skinner TA: Management of a parturient with respiratory failure secondary to cystic
fibrosis. Anaesthesia 60:77, 2005
Cantu J, Tita AT: Management of influenza in pregnancy. Am J Perinatol 30:99, 2013
Cantwell MF, Shehab ZM, Costello AM, et al: Congenital tuberculosis. N Engl J Med 330:1051, 1994
Cardonick EH, Naktin J, Berghella V: Neurosarcoidosis diagnosed during pregnancy by thoracoscopic
lymph node biopsy. J Reprod Med 45:585, 2000
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Severe methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
community-acquired pneumonia associated with influ-enza—Louisiana and Georgia—December
2006–January 2007. MMWR 56(14):325, 2007
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Treatment of tuberculosis disease. In Introduction to the
Core Curriculum on Tuberculosis: What the Clinician Should Know, 6th ed. 2013a

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Tuberculosis infection control. In Introduction to the Core
Curriculum on Tuberculosis: What the Clinician Should Know, 6th ed. 2013b
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Influenza (flu) vaccine and pregnancy. 2019a. Available at:
www.cdc.gov/vaccines/pregnancy/hcp-toolkit/flu-vaccine-pregnancy.html. Accessed October 16,
2021
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Tuberculosis (TB). 2019b. Available at:
www.cdc.gov/tb/statistics/surv/surv2018. Accessed October 16, 2021
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Evaluation and management considerations for neonates at
risk for COVID-19. 2020. Available at: www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/hcp/caring-fornewborns.html. Accessed October 15, 2021
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Guidelines for prevention and treatment of opportunistic
infections in adults and adolescents with HIV. 2021. Available at:
clinicalinfo.hiv.gov/sites/default/files/guidelines/documents/Adult_OI.pdf. Accessed October 15,
2021
Chan AL, Juarez MM, Gidwani N, et al: Management of critical asthma syndrome during pregnancy.
Clin Rev Allergy Immunol 45(1)45, 2015
Charlton RA, Hutchison A, Davis KJ, et al: Asthma management in pregnancy. PLoS One 8(4):e60247,
2013
Chen H, Guo J, Wang C, et al: Clinical characteristics and intrauterine vertical transmission potential of
COVID-19 infection in nine pregnant women: a retrospective review of medical records. Lancet
395(10226):809, 2020
Chen YH, Keller J, Wang IT, et al: Pneumonia and pregnancy outcomes: a nationwide population-base
study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 207:288.e1, 2012
Clifford C, Mhatre M, Craigo S: Successful use of extracorporeal membrane oxygenation for status
asthmaticus in a woman with a periviable pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 132(4):1007, 2018
Clifton VL: Managing asthma in pregnancy: effects on future child health. Lancet Respir Med 7(6):485,
2019
Close A, Gimovsky A, Macri C: Adult respiratory distress due to Legionnaires disease in pregnancy: a
case report. J Reprod Med 61(1–2):83, 2016
Cloutier MM, Baptist AP, Blake KV, et al: 2020 focused updates to the asthma management guidelines:
a report from the National Asthma Education and Prevention Program Coordinating Committee
Expert Panel Working Group. J Allergy Clin Immunol 146(6):1217, 2020
Cohen LF, di Sant Agnese PA, Friedlander J: Cystic fibrosis and pregnancy: a national survey. Lancet
2:842, 1980
Conlin AM, Bukowinski AT, Levine JA, et al: A follow-up comparative safety analysis of pandemic
H1N1 vaccination during pregnancy and risk of infant birth defects among U.S. military mothers.
Vaccine 36(20):2855, 2018
Crum NF, Ballon-Landa G: Coccidioidomycosis in pregnancy: case report and review of the literature.
Am J Med 119:993, 2006
Cruz CA, Caughey AB, Jasmer R: Postpartum follow-up of a positive purified protein derivative (PPD)
among an indigent population. Am J Obstet Gynecol 192:1455, 2005
Datkhaeva I, Has P, Fitzgerald K, et al: Outcomes of a negative rapid influenza diagnostic test in
pregnant women. Am J Perinatol 36(1):90, 2019
Davies JC, Moskowitz SM, Brown C, et al: VX-659-tezacaftor-ivacaftor in patients with cystic fibrosis
and one or two phe508del alleles. N Engl J Med 379(17):1599, 2018

Deighan M, Ash S, McMorrow R: Anaesthesia for parturients with severe cystic fibrosis: a case series.
Int J Obstet Anesth 23(1):75, 2014
Dennis EM, Hao Y, Tamambang M, et al: Tuberculosis during pregnancy in the United States:
racial/ethnic disparities in pregnancy complications and in-hospital death. PLoS One 13(3):e0194836,
2018
Dodds L, McNeil SA, Fell DB, et al: Impact of influenza exposure on rates of hospital admissions and
physician visits because of respiratory illness among pregnant women. CMAJ 17:463, 2007
Dolin R: Common viral respiratory infections. In Longo D, Fauci A, Kasper D, et al (eds): Harrison’s
Principles of Internal Medicine, 18th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2012, p 1485
Dombrowski MP: Asthma and pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 108:667, 2006
Dombrowski MP, Schatz M, Wise R, et al: Asthma during pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 103:5, 2004
Donahue JG, Kieke BA, King JP, et al: Association of spontaneous abortion with receipt of inactivated
influenza vaccine containing H1N1pdm09 in 2010–11 and 2011–12. Vaccine 35(40):5314, 2017
Dorman SE, Nahid P, Kurbatova EV, et al: Four-month rifapentine regimens with or without
moxifloxacin for tuberculosis. N Engl J Med 384(18):1705, 2021
Edenborough FP, Mackenzie WE, Stableforth DE: The outcome of 72 pregnancies in 55 women with
cystic fibrosis in the United Kingdom 1977–1996. BJOG 107:254, 2000
Edenborough FP, Stableforth DE, Webb AK, et al: The outcome of pregnancy in cystic fibrosis. Thorax
50:170, 1995
Edwards JE: Diagnosis and treatment of fungal infections. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al:
Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2018, p
1515
Efferen LS: Tuberculosis and pregnancy. Curr Opin Pulm Med 13:205, 2007
Elkharrat D, Raphael JC, Korach JM, et al: Acute carbon monoxide intoxication and hyperbaric oxygen
in pregnancy. Intensive Care Med 17:289, 1991
El-Messidi A, Czuzoj-Shulman N, Spence AR, et al: Medical and obstetric outcomes among pregnant
women with tuberculosis: a population-based study of 7.8 million births. Am J Obstet Gynecol
215(6):797.e1, 2016
Eltonsy S, Blais L: Asthma during pregnancy and congenital malformations: the challenging task of
separating the medication effect from asthma itself. J Allergy Clin Immunol 137(5):1623, 2016
Enriquez R, Pingsheng W, Griffin MR, et al: Cessation of asthma medication in early pregnancy. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 195:149, 2006
Ernst A, Zibrak JD: Carbon monoxide poisoning. N Engl J Med 339:1603, 1998
Esmail A, Sabur NF, Okpechi I, et al: Management of drug-resistant tuberculosis in special subpopulations including those with HIV co-infection, pregnancy, diabetes, organ-specific dysfunction,
and in the critically ill. J Thorac Dis 10(5):3102, 2018
Fanta CH: Asthma. N Engl J Med 360:1002, 2009
Finland M, Dublin TD: Pneumococcic pneumonias complicating pregnancy and the puerperium. JAMA
112:1027, 1939
Fitzsimmons SC, Fitzpatrick S, Thompson D, et al: A longitudinal study of the effects of pregnancy on
325 women with cystic fibrosis. Pediatr Pulmonol l13:99, 1996
Flores KF, Bandoli G, Chambers CD, et al: Asthma prevalence among women aged 18 to 44 in the
United States: national health and nutrition examination survey 2001–2016. J Asthma 57(7):693,
2020
Freedman MS, Ault K, Bernstein H: Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices recommended
immunization schedule for adults aged 19 years or older—United States, 2021. MMWR 70(6):193,

2021
Friedman P, Guo XM, Stiller RJ, et al: Carbon monoxide exposure during pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol
Surv 70(11):705, 2015
Gazmararian JA, Petersen R, Jamieson DJ, et al: Hospitalizations during pregnancy among managed
care enrollees. Obstet Gynecol 100:94, 2002
Getahun D, Ananth CV, Oyelese Y, et al: Acute and chronic respiratory diseases in pregnancy:
associations with spontaneous premature rupture of membranes. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med
20:669, 2007
Getahun H, Matteelli A, Chaisson R, et al: Latent Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection. N Engl J
Med 372:2127, 2015
Gidaya NB, Lee BK, Burstyn I, et al: In utero exposure to β-2-adrenergic receptor agonist drugs and
risk for autism spectrum disorders. Pediatrics 137(2):1, 2016
Gillet D, de Brackeleer M, Bellis G, et al: Cystic fibrosis and pregnancy. Report from French data
(1980–1999). BJOG 109:912, 2002
Gluck JC, Gluck PA: The effect of pregnancy on the course of asthma. Immunol Allergy Clin North Am
26:63, 2006
Greingor JL, Tosi JM, Ruhlmann S, et al: Acute carbon monoxide intoxication during pregnancy. One
case report and review of the literature. Emerg Med J 18:399, 2001
Grindheim G, Toska K, Estensen ME, et al: Changes in pulmonary function during pregnancy: a
longitudinal cohort study. BJOG 119:94, 2012
Gyi KM, Hodson ME, Yacoub MY: Pregnancy in cystic fibrosis lung transplant recipients: case series
and review. J Cyst Fibros 5(3):171, 2006
Hadid V, Patenaude V, Oddy L, et al: Sarcoidosis and pregnancy: obstetrical and neonatal outcomes in a
population-based cohort of 7 million births. J Perinat Med 43(2):201, 2015
Han Y, Lee JH, Chang JH, et al: Clinical features and outcomes in patients with pulmonary
complications during pregnancy and peripartum. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 33(7):1191, 2020
Harger JH, Ernest JM, Thurnau GR, et al: Risk factors and outcome of varicella-zoster virus pneumonia
in pregnant women. J Infect Dis 185:422, 2002
Havlir DV, Kendall MA, Ive P, et al: Timing of antiretroviral therapy for HIV-1 infection and
tuberculosis. N Engl J Med 365(16):1482, 2011
Hendler I, Schatz M, Momirova V, et al: Association of obesity with pulmonary and nonpulmonary
complications of pregnancy in asthmatic women. Obstet Gynecol 108(1):77, 2006
Heron M: Deaths: leading causes for 2015. Natl Vital Stat Rep 66(5):1, 2017
Hill WC, Paruolo JB, Giovino AC: Prophylaxis for tuberculosis in pregnant women. Clin Obstet Gynecol
62(4):846, 2019
Huang DT, Yealy DM, Filbin MR, et al: Procalcitonin-guided use of antibiotics for lower respiratory
tract infection. N Engl J Med 379(3):236, 2018
Huang YS, Liu CE, Lin SP, et al: Echinocandins as alternative treatment for HIV-infected patients with
Pneumocystis pneumonia. AIDS 33(8):1345, 2019
Irwin RS, French CL, Change AB, et al: Classification of cough as a symptom in adults and
management algorithms: CHEST guideline and expert panel report. Chest 153(1):196, 2018
Jacobs RF, Abernathy RS: Management of tuberculosis in pregnancy and the newborn. Clin Perinatol
15:305, 1988
Jain S, Self WH, Wunderink RG, et al: Community-acquired pneumonia requiring hospitalization among
U.S. adults. N Engl J Med 373:415, 2015

Jana N, Vasishta K, Saha SC, et al: Obstetrical outcomes among women with extrapulmonary
tuberculosis. N Engl J Med 341:645, 1999
Jenkins TM, Troiano NH, Grave CR, et al: Mechanical ventilation in an obstetric population:
characteristics and delivery rates. Am J Obstet Gynecol 188:549, 2003
Jensen ME, Murphy VE, Gibson PG, et al: Vitamin D status in pregnant women with asthma and its
association with adverse respiratory outcomes during infancy. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med
32(11):1820, 2019
Jin Y, Carriere KC, Marrie TJ, et al: The effects of community-acquired pneumonia during pregnancy
ending with a live birth. Am J Obstet Gynecol 188:800, 2003
Kao LW, Nañagas KA: Carbon monoxide poisoning. Med Clin North Am 89(6):1161, 2005
Keating D, Marigowda G, Burr L, et al: VX-445-tezacaftor-ivacaftor in patients with cystic fibrosis and
one or two Phe508del Alleles. N Engl J Med 379(17):1612, 2018
Kemppainen M, Lahesmaa-Korpinen AM, Kauppi P, et al: Maternal asthma is associated with
increased risk of perinatal mortality. PLoS One 13(5):e0197593, 2018
Kent NE, Farquharson DF: Cystic fibrosis in pregnancy. Can Med Assoc J 149:809, 1993
Kodadhala V, Obi J, Wessly P, et al: Asthma-related mortality in the United States, 1999 to 2015: A
multiple causes of death analysis. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 120(6):614, 2018
Kutlu T, Tugrul S, Aydin A, et al: Tuberculosis meningitis in pregnancy presenting as hyperemesis
gravidarum. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 20:357, 2007
Lai RP, Meintjes G, Wilkinson RJ: HIV-1 tuberculosis-associated immune reconstitution inflammatory
syndrome. Semin Immunopathol 38(2):185, 2016
Lazarus SC: Emergency treatment of asthma. N Engl J Med 363(8):755, 2010
Levison JH, Barbieri RL, Katx JT, et al: Hard to conceive. N Engl J Med 363(10):965, 2010
Lewinsohn DM, Leonard MK, LoBue PA, et al: Official American Thoracic Society/Infectious
Diseases Society of America/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention clinical practice
guidelines: diagnosis of tuberculosis in adults and children. Clin Infect Dis 65(2):111, 2017
Lewis PO, Khan I, Patel P: Successful stepdown treatment of pulmonary histoplasmosis with thriceweekly liposomal amphotericin B in a hospital-associated outpatient infusion centre: a case report. J
Clin Pharm Ther 43(2):269, 2018
Lim AS, Stewart K, Abramson MJ, et al: Multidisciplinary approach to management of maternal asthma
(MAMMA): a randomized controlled trial. Chest 145(5):1046, 2014
Lindley MD, Kahn KE, Bardenheier BH, et al: Burden and prevention of influenza and pertussis among
pregnant women and infants-United States. MMWR 68:885, 2019
Llewelyn M, Cropley I, Wilkinson RJ, et al: Tuberculosis diagnosed during pregnancy: a prospective
study from London. Thorax 55:129, 2000
Lo CP, Chen SY, Lee KW, et al: Brain injury after acute carbon monoxide poisoning: early and late
complications. AJR Am J Roentgenol 189(4):W205, 2007
Longo L: The biologic effects of carbon monoxide on the pregnant woman, fetus and newborn infant.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 129:69, 1977
Louie JK, Sailbay CJ, Kang M, et al: Pregnancy and severe influenza infection in the 2013–2014
influenza season. Obstet Gynecol 125(1):184, 2015
Mabie WC, Barton JR, Wasserstrum N, et al: Clinical observations on asthma in pregnancy. J Matern
Fetal Med 1:45, 1992
Madhi SA, Cutland CL, Kuwanda L, et al: Influenza vaccination of pregnant women and protection of
their infants. N Engl J Med 371(10):918, 2014

Maisel JA, Lynam T: Unexpected sudden death in a young pregnant woman: unusual presentation of
neurosarcoidosis. Ann Emerg Med 28:94, 1996
Mandell LA, Wunderink R: Pneumonia. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al: Harrison’s
Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2018, p 908
Mansour MK, Ackman JB, Branda JA, et al: Case 32–2015: a 57-year-old man with severe pneumonia
and hypoxemic respiratory failure. New Engl J Med 373:1554, 2015
Maxwell C, McGeer A, Tai KF, et al: No. 225-management guidelines for obstetric patients and
neonates born to mothers with suspected or probable severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS). J
Obstet Gynaecol Can 39(8):e130 2017
Mayer AP, Morris MF, Panse PM, et al: Does the presence of mediastinal adenopathy confer a risk for
disseminated infection in immunocompetent persons with pulmonary coccidioidomycosis? Mycoses
56(2):145, 2013
Mazurek JM, Syamlal G: Prevalence of asthma, asthma attacks, and emergency department visits for
asthma among working adults–national health interview survey, 2011–2016. MMWR 67(13):377,
2018
Mendola P, Laughon SK, Männistö TI, et al: Obstetric complications among US women with asthma.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 208(2):127.e1, 2013
Mendola P, Männistö TI, Leishear K, et al: Neonatal health of infants born to mothers with asthma. J
Allergy Clin Immunol 133(1):85, 2014
Mert A, Kumbasar H, Ozaras R, et al: Erythema nodosum: an evaluation of 100 cases. Clin Exp
Rheumatol 25:563, 2007
Mertz D, Lo CK, Lytvyn L, et al: Pregnancy as a risk factor for severe influenza infection: an individual
participant data meta-analysis. BMC Infect Dis 19(1):683, 2019
Metlay JP, Waterer GW, Long AC, et al: Diagnosis and treatment of adults with community-acquired
pneumonia. An official clinical practice guideline of the American Thoracic Society and Infectious
Diseases Society of America. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 200(7):e45, 2019
Moore AR, Rogers FM, Dietrick D, et al: Extrapulmonary tuberculosis in pregnancy masquerading as a
degenerating leiomyoma. Obstet Gynecol 111(2): 551, 2008
Moran GJ, Rothman RE, Volturo GA: Emergency management of community-acquired bacterial
pneumonia: what is new since the 2007 Infectious Diseases Society of America/American Thoracic
Society guidelines. Am J Obstet Gynecol 31:602, 2013
Moro RN, Scott NA, Vernon A, et al: Exposure to latent tuberculosis treatment during pregnancy. The
PREVENT TB and the iAdhere trials. Ann Am Thorac Soc 15(5):570, 2018
Morris A, Masur H: Pneumocystis infections. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al: Harrison’s
Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2018, p 1847
Munoz FM, Jamieson DJ: Maternal immunization. Obstet Gynecol 133(4):739, 2019
Murphy VE, Powell H, Wark PA: A prospective study of respiratory viral infection in pregnant women
with and without asthma. Chest 144(2):420, 2013a
Murphy VE, Wang G, Namazy JA, et al: The risk of congenital malformations, perinatal mortality and
neonatal hospitalization among pregnant women with asthma: a systematic review and metaanalysis. BJOG 120(7):812, 2013b
Musher DM, Thorner AR: Community-acquired pneumonia. N Engl J Med 371:1619, 2014
Muthuri SG, Venkatesan S, Myles PR, et al: Effectiveness of neuraminidase inhibitors in reducing
mortality in patients admitted to hospital with influenza A H1N1pdm09 virus infection: a metaanalysis of individual participant data. Lancet Respir Med 2:395, 2014

Nahid P, Dorman SE, Alipanah N, et al: Executive summary: Official American Thoracic
Society/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention/Infection Diseases Society of America clinical
practice guidelines: treatment of drug-susceptible tuberculosis. Clin Infect Dis 63(7):853, 2016
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute: Expert panel report 3: guidelines for the diagnosis and
management of asthma, 2007. Available at: www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health-topics/guidelines-fordiagnosis-management-of-asthma. Accessed January 10, 2020
Ng WF, Wong SF, Lam A, et al: The placentas of patients with severe acute respiratory syndrome: a
pathophysiological evaluation. Pathology 38:210, 2006
Nigam A, Prakash A, Pathak P, et al: Bilateral psoas abscess during pregnancy presenting as an acute
abdomen: atypical presentation. BMJ Case Rep 2013:pii:bcr2013200860, 2013
Nowadly C, Johnson-Arbor K, Boyle A: Severe unintentional first trimester carbon monoxide poisoning:
case report. Undersea Hyperb Med 45(4):453, 2018
Oboho IK, Reed C, Gargiullo P, et al: Benefit of early initiation of influenza antiviral treatment to
pregnant women hospitalized with laboratory-confirmed influenza. J Infect Dis 214(4):507, 2016
O’Leary ST, Riley LE, Lindley MC, et al: Obstetrician-Gynecologists’ strategies to address vaccine
refusal among pregnant women. Obstet Gynecol 133(1):40, 2019
Olson GL: Cystic fibrosis in pregnancy. Semin Perinatol 21:307, 1997
Paranyuk Y, Levine G, Figueroa R: Candida septicemia in a pregnant woman with hyperemesis
receiving parenteral nutrition. Obstet Gynecol 107:535, 2006
Patel EM, Swamy GK, Heine RP, et al: Medical and obstetric complications among pregnant women
with cystic fibrosis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 212:98.e1, 2015
Patel S, Lee RH: The case of the sinister spores: the patient was hospitalized for a menacing infection in
the second trimester of pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 208(5):417.e1, 2013
Pfeffer PE, Hawrylowicz CM: Vitamin D in asthma: mechanisms of action and considerations for
clinical trials. Chest 153(5):1229, 2018
Pilmis B, Jullien V, Sobel J, et al: Antifungal drugs during pregnancy: an updated review. J Antimicrob
Chemother 70(1):14, 2015
Powell H, Murphy VE, Taylor DR, et al: Management of asthma in pregnancy guided by measurement
of fraction of exhaled nitric oxide: a double-blind, randomised controlled trial. Lancet 378(9795):983,
2011
Prasad N, Huang QS, Wood T, et al: Influenza-associated outcomes among pregnant, postpartum, and
nonpregnant women of reproductive age. J Infect Dis 219(12):1893, 2019
Prevost MR, Fung Kee Fung KM: Tuberculous meningitis in pregnancy—implications for mother and
fetus: case report and literature review. J Matern Fetal Med 8:289, 1999
Prockop LD, Chichkova RI: Carbon monoxide intoxication: an updated review. J Neurol Sci 262(1–
2):122, 2007
Racusin DA, Fox KA, Ramin SM: Severe acute asthma. Semin Perinatol 37(4):234, 2013
Rasmussen SA, Jamieson DJ: 2009 H1N1 Influenza and pregnancy—5 years later. N Engl J Med
371:1373, 2014
Rasmussen SA, Jamieson DJ: Influenza and pregnancy: no time for complacency. Obstet Gynecol
133(1):23, 2019
Rasmussen SA, Smulian JC, Lednicky JA, et al: Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) and pregnancy:
what obstetricians need to know. Am J Obstet Gynecol 222(5):415, 2020
Raviglione MC: Tuberculosis. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al: Harrison’s Principles of
Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2018, p 1236

Rego de Figueiredo I, Vieira Alves R, Drummond Borges D, et al: Pneumocystosis pneumonia: a
comparison study between HIV and non-HIV immunocompromised patients. Pulmonology
25(5):271, 2019
Reynaud Q, Poupon-Bourdy S, Rabilloud M, et al: Pregnancy outcome in women with cystic fibrosisrelated diabetes. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 96(10):1223, 2017
Reynaud Q, Rousset Jablonski C, Poupon-Bourdy S, et al: Pregnancy outcome in women with cystic
fibrosis and poor pulmonary function. J Cyst Fibros 19(1):80, 2020
Robijn AL, Jensen ME, Gibson PG, et al: Trends in asthma self-management skills and inhaled
corticosteroid use during pregnancy and postpartum from 2004 to 2017. J Asthma 56(6):594, 2019
Rogers VL, Sheffield JS, Roberts SW, et al: Presentation of seasonal influenza A in pregnancy: 2003–
2004 influenza season. Obstet Gynecol 115(5):924, 2010
Rolston DH, Shnider SM, de Lorimer AA: Uterine blood flow and fetal acid–base changes after
bicarbonate administration to the pregnant ewe. Anesthesiology 40:348, 1974
Rosenstein NE, Emery KW, Werner SB, et al: Risk factors for severe pulmonary and disseminated
coccidioidomycosis: Kern County, California, 1995–1996. Clin Infect Dis 32:708, 2001
Rush B, Martinka P, Kilb B, et al: Acute respiratory distress syndrome in pregnant women. Obstet
Gynecol 129(3):530, 2017
Saad AF, Rahman M, Maybauer DM, et al: Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation in pregnant and
postpartum women with H1N1-related acute respiratory distress syndrome. Obstet Gynecol
127:241, 2016
Sackoff JE, Pfieffer MR, Driver CR, et al: Tuberculosis prevention for non-U.S.-born pregnant women.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 194:451, 2006
Schanzer DL, Langley JM, Tam TW: Influenza-attributed hospitalization rates among pregnant women
in Canada 1994–2000. J Obstet Gynaecol Can 29:622, 2007
Schatz M, Dombrowski MP, Wise R, et al: Asthma morbidity during pregnancy can be predicted by
severity classification. J Allergy Clin Immunol 112:283, 2003
Schatz M, Dombrowski MP, Wise R, et al: Spirometry is related to perinatal outcomes in pregnant
women with asthma. Am J Obstet Gynecol 194:120, 2006
Schechter MS, Quittner AL, Konstan MW, et al: Long-term effects of pregnancy and motherhood on
disease outcomes of women with cystic fibrosis. Ann Am Thorac Soc 10(3):213, 2013
Schlüter DK, Griffiths R, Adam A, et al: Impact of cystic fibrosis on birthweight: a population based
study of children in Denmark and Wales. Thorax 74(5):447, 2019
Schulte JM, Bryan P, Dodds S, et al: Tuberculosis skin testing among HIV-infected pregnant women in
Miami, 1995 to 1996. J Perinatol 22:159, 2002
Shaked E, Wainstock T, Sheiner E, et al: Maternal asthma: pregnancy course and outcome. J Matern
Fetal Neonatal Med 32(1):103, 2019
Shariatzadeh MR, Marrie TJ: Pneumonia during pregnancy. Am J Med 119:872, 2006
Sheffield JS, Cunningham FG: Management of community-acquired pneumonia in pregnancy. Obstet
Gynecol 114(4):915, 2009
Sherer DM, Osho JA, Zinn H, et al: Peripartum disseminated extrapulmonary tuberculosis simulating
ovarian carcinoma. Am J Perinatol 22:383, 2005
Shi D, Wang D, Meng Y, et al: Maternal vitamin D intake during pregnancy and risk of asthma and
wheeze in children: a systematic review and meta-analysis of observational studies. J Matern Fetal
Neonatal Med 34(4):653, 2021
Silverman RK, Montano J: Hyperbaric oxygen treatment during pregnancy in acute carbon monoxide
poisoning. A case report. J Reprod Med 42:309, 1997

Smith SM, Fahey T, Smucny J, et al: Antibiotics for acute bronchitis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
6:CD000245, 2017
Sobhy S, Babiker Z, Zamora J, et al: Maternal and perinatal mortality and morbidity associated with
tuberculosis during pregnancy and the postpartum period: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
BJOG 124(4):727, 2017
Sorscher EJ: Cystic fibrosis. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al: Harrison’s Principles of
Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2018, p 1986
Sosa LI, Njie GJ, Lobato MN, et al: Tuberculosis screening, testing, and treatment of U.S. health care
personnel: recommendations from the National Tuberculosis Controllers Association and CDC,
2019. MMWR 68(19):439, 2019
Spagnolo P, Rossi G, Trisolini R, et al: Pulmonary sarcoidosis. Lancet Respir Med 6(5):389, 2018
Sperling RS, Riley LE, Immunization and Emerging Infections Expert Work Group: influenza
vaccination, pregnancy safety, and risk of early pregnancy loss. Obstet Gynecol 131(5):799, 2018
Spinello IM, Johnson RH, Baqi S: Coccidioidomycosis and pregnancy: a review. Ann N Y Acad Sci
1111:358, 2007
Steinack C, Lenherr R, Hendra H, et al: The use of life-saving extracorporeal membrane oxygenation
(ECMO) for pregnant woman with status asthmaticus. J Asthma 54(1):84, 2017
Sterling TR, Njie G, Zenner D, et al: Guidelines for the treatment of latent tuberculosis infection:
recommendations from thhe National Tuberculosis Controllers Association and CDC, 2020. MMWR
69(1):1, 2020
Stoller KP: Hyperbaric oxygen and carbon monoxide poisoning: a critical review. Neurol Res 29(2):146,
2007
Stratton P, Mofenson LM, Willoughby AD: Human immunodeficiency virus infection in pregnant women
under care at AIDS Clinical Trials Centers in the United States. Obstet Gynecol 79:364, 1992
Sylvester-Armstrong KR, Duff P, Genç MR: Are peripartum stress-dose steroids necessary? Obstet
Gynecol 135(3):522, 2020
Tata LJ, Lewis SA, McKeever TM, et al: A comprehensive analysis of adverse obstetric and pediatric
complications in women with asthma. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 175:991, 2007
Taylor AW, Mosimaneotsile B, Mathebula U, et al: Pregnancy outcomes in HIV-infected women
receiving long-term isoniazid prophylaxis for tuberculosis and antiretroviral therapy. Infect Dis
Obstet Gynecol 2013:195637, 2013
Terlizzi V, Sciarrone A, Cook AC, et al: Extensive myocardial infarction in a fetus with cystic fibrosis
and meconium peritonitis. J Ultrasound Med 35(8):1826, 2016
Terraneo S, Polverino E, Cilloniz C, et al: Severity and outcomes of community acquired pneumonia in
asthmatic patients. Respir Med 108(11):1713, 2014
Therapeutic Research Center: inhaled corticosteroid dose comparison in asthma. 2017. Available at:
https://www.epocrates.com/sites/default/files/res/dacc/2017/InhaledCorticosteroidDoseComparePL1
704.pdf. Accessed February 24, 2020
Thorpe-Beeston JG, Madge S, Gyi K, et al: The outcome of pregnancies in women with cystic fibrosis
—single centre experience 1998–2011. BJOG 120(3):354, 2013
Tita AT, Andrews WW: Influenza vaccination and antiviral therapy in pregnant women. J Infect Dis
214(4):505, 2016
Torres A, Menéndez R: Hospital admission in community-acquired pneumonia. [Spanish]. Med Clin
(Barc) 131(6):216, 2008
Towers CV, Corcoran VA: Influence of carbon monoxide poisoning on the fetal heart monitor tracing: a
report of 3 cases. J Reprod Med 54(3):184, 2009

Traxler SA, Chavez V, Hadijiliadis D, et al: Fertility considerations and attitudes about family planning
among women with cystic fibrosis. Contraception 100(3):228, 2019
Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society: Chamber directory. 2021. Available at:
www.uhms.org/resources/chamber-directory.html. Accessed October 15, 2021
Varner MW, Rice MM, Anderson B, et al: Influenza-like illness in hospitalized pregnant and postpartum
women during the 2009–20120 H1N1 pandemic. Obstet Gynecol 118(3):593, 2011
Wallmüller C, Domanovits H, Mayr FB, et al: Cardiac arrest in a 35-year-old pregnant woman with
sarcoidosis. Resuscitation 83(6):e151, 2012
Walsh LK, Donelle J, Dodds L, et al: Health outcomes of young children born to mothers who received
2009 pandemic H1N1 influenza vaccination during pregnancy: retrospective cohort study. BMJ
366:l4151, 2019
Wang G, Murphy VE, Namazy J, et al: The risk of maternal and placental complications in pregnant
women with asthma: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med
27(9):934, 2014
Weaver LK, Hopkins RO, Chan KJ, et al: Hyperbaric oxygen for acute carbon monoxide poisoning. N
Engl J Med 347:1057, 2002
Wendel PJ, Ramin SM, Hamm CB, et al: Asthma treatment in pregnancy: a randomized controlled
study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 175:150, 1996
World Health Organization: Guidelines for treatment of drug-susceptible tuberculosis and patient care
(2017 update). 2017. Available at: https://www.who.int/tb/publications/2017/dstb_guidance_2017/en/.
Accessed February 17, 2020
Wright PF: Influenza. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al: Harrison’s Principles of Internal
Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2018, p 1382
Yeh JJ, Lin SC, Lin WC: Congenital tuberculosis in a neonate: a case report and literature review. Front
Pediatr 7:255, 2019
Yost NP, Bloom SL, Richey SD, et al: An appraisal of treatment guidelines for antepartum communityacquired pneumonia. Am J Obstet Gynecol 183: 131, 2000
Youssef D, Raval B, El-Abbassi A, et al: Pulmonary blastomycosis during pregnancy: case report and
review of the literature. Tenn Med 106(3):37, 2013
Yusen RD, Edwards LB, Kucheryavaya AY, et al: The registry of the International Society for Heart
and Lung Transplantation: thirty-second official adult lung and heart-lung transplantation report—
2015; focus theme: early graft failure. J Heart Lung Transplant 34(10):1264, 2015
Zairina E, Abramson MJ, McDonald CF, et al: A prospective cohort study of pulmonary function during
pregnancy in women with and without asthma. J Asthma 12:1, 2015
Zeeman GG, Wendel GD, Cunningham FG: A blueprint for obstetrical critical care. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 188:532, 2003
Zenner D, Kruijshaar ME, Andrews N, et al: Risk of tuberculosis in pregnancy: a national, primary carebased cohort and self-controlled case series study. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 185(7):779, 2012
Zhu H, Wang L, Fang C, et al: Clinical analysis of 10 neonates born to mothers with 2019-nCoV
pneumonia. Transl Pediatr 9(1):51, 2020
Zumla A, Raviglione M, Hafner R, et al: Tuberculosis. N Engl J Med 368:745, 2013

