CHAPTER 63

Neurological Disorders

CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM IMAGING
HEADACHE
SEIZURE DISORDERS
CEREBROVASCULAR DISEASES
DEMYELINATING OR DEGENERATIVE DISEASES
NEUROPATHIES
SPINAL CORD INJURY
IDIOPATHIC INTRACRANIAL HYPERTENSION
MATERNAL VENTRICULAR SHUNTS
MATERNAL BRAIN DEATH
REFERENCES
Many neurological disorders precede pregnancy. Most affected women will
have successful perinatal outcomes, although some disorders carry specific
risks. Other women will have new-onset neurological symptoms during
pregnancy, and these must be distinguished from pregnancy complications.
Neurovascular disorders are an important cause of maternal mortality and
accounted for more than 7 percent of maternal deaths in the United States
from 2007 through 2016 (Petersen, 2019). Psychiatric disorders can manifest

with cognitive and neuromuscular abnormalities and should be considered in
the evaluation of neurological symptoms.

CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM IMAGING
Computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance (MR) imaging assist in
the diagnosis, classification, and management of many neurological
disorders. As discussed in Chapter 49, (p. 873), these can be used safely
during pregnancy (Chansakul, 2017; Lum, 2020). CT scanning is often used
when rapid diagnosis is necessary and is excellent for detecting recent
hemorrhage. That said, MR imaging is often preferred and is particularly
helpful to diagnose demyelinating diseases, arteriovenous malformations
(AVMs), congenital and developmental nervous system abnormalities,
posterior fossa lesions, and spinal cord diseases (Jamieson, 2020).
Whenever either modality is employed, a woman with advanced pregnancy
should be positioned in a lateral tilt with a wedge under one hip to prevent
hypotension and to diminish aortic pulsations, which may degrade the image.
Cerebral angiography with contrast injection, usually via the femoral
artery, is a valuable adjunct to the diagnosis and treatment of some
cerebrovascular diseases. Fluoroscopy delivers more radiation but can be
performed with abdominal shielding. Positron emission tomography (PET)
and functional MR imaging (fMRI) have not been evaluated in detail for use
in gravidas (van den Heuvel, 2016).

HEADACHE
In one national survey in the United States in 2012, 17 percent of persons
aged 18 to 44 years reported a severe headache or migraine within the past 3
months (Blackwell, 2014). Burch and coworkers (2015) reported that 24
percent of nonpregnant women in this age group were similarly affected. Of
pregnant women presenting with headache who received a neurological
consultation, two thirds were due to primary disorders. The diagnosis was
migraine in more than 90 percent. Of the other third due to secondary
conditions, more than half stemmed from hypertensive disorders (Robbins,
2015). In one recent observational study at University of Texas

Southwestern’s Clements University Hospital, 20 percent of emergency
department postpartum visits were for headache (Rodriguez, 2021).
The classification by the International Headache Society (2018) is shown
in Table 63-1. As discussed, in pregnant women, primary headaches are
more common than those derived from secondary causes (Sperling, 2015).
Migraine headaches are those most likely to be affected by the hormonal
changes of pregnancy (Pavlovic, 2017). The incidences of different
etiologies of severe headaches in pregnancy are shown in Figure 63-1
(Robbins, 2015).
TABLE 63-1. Headache Classification

FIGURE 63-1 Incidences of headache causes in 140 consecutive pregnant women for whom inhospital neurology consultation was requested.

■ Tension Headache
These are the most frequent cause of all headaches. They may be episodic or
chronic. Their characteristic muscle tightness and mild to moderate pain in
the back of the neck and head can persist for hours. Importantly, neurological
disturbances or nausea are typically absent, which distinguishes them from
migraines. The pain usually responds to rest, massage, local heat or ice,
nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), or mild tranquilizers.
Hospital admission is seldom necessary. For chronic headaches,
amitriptyline can be effective (Goadsby, 2018).

■ Migraine Headache
This is a periodic, sometimes incapacitating neurological disorder with
episodic attacks of severe headache and autonomic nervous system
dysfunction (Ashina, 2020; Charles, 2017). The International Headache

Society (2018) classifies three migraine types based on chronicity and on the
presence or absence of an aura.
1. Migraine without aura-formerly termed common migraine-is
characterized by a unilateral throbbing headache, nausea and vomiting, or
photophobia.
2. Migraine with aura-formerly termed classic migraine-has similar
symptoms preceded by premonitory neurological phenomena such as
visual scotoma or hallucinations. A third of patients have this type, which
sometimes can be averted if medication is taken at the first premonitory
sign.
3. Chronic migraine is defined by a migraine headache occurring at least 15
days each month for more than 3 months.
Migraine headaches may begin in childhood, peak in adolescence, and
tend to diminish in both frequency and severity with advancing years.
According to Ashina (2020), their annual prevalence is 15 percent in women
and 6 percent in men. Another 5 percent of women have probable migraine,
that is, they have all criteria but one.
These headaches are especially common in young women and have been
linked to hormone levels (Burch, 2020; Charles, 2017). Sensory sensitivity
with migraines is likely caused by monoaminergic sensory control systems in
the brainstem, hypothalamus, and cortex (Goadsby, 2018). The exact
pathophysiology is uncertain, but symptoms develop when neuronal
dysfunction leads to decreased cortical blood flow, activation of vascular
and meningeal nociceptors, and stimulation of trigeminal sensory neurons.
Importantly, migraines are not primarily a vascular disorder (Charles, 2017).
Migraine headaches—especially those with aura in young women—are
associated with increased risk for ischemic strokes (Tietjen, 2020). Other
associated conditions are asthma, anxiety and depression, and other pain
disorders.

Migraine in Pregnancy
Migraine headaches are frequently encountered during pregnancy. Most
migraineurs have improvement during pregnancy (Lucas, 2019). Still,
migraines—usually those with an aura—occasionally appear for the first
time during pregnancy. Pregnant women with preexisting migraine symptoms

may have other symptoms that suggest a more serious disorder, and new
neurological symptoms should prompt a complete evaluation (Charles,
2017).
Migraines during pregnancy are associated with increased rates of
preeclampsia, gestational hypertension, preterm birth, and other
cardiovascular morbidities that include ischemic stroke (Grossman, 2017;
Wabnitz, 2015). Bushnell and associates (2009) identified a migraine
incidence during pregnancy of 185 cases per 100,000 deliveries. Of
diagnoses associated in these gravid migraineurs, risks were significantly
higher for stroke, 16-fo1d; myocardial infarction, fivefold; and heart disease,
venous thromboembolism, and preeclampsia/gestational hypertension, each
twofold. In a systematic review of 14 studies, risks for preeclampsia and
low-birthweight neonates were significantly increased (Aukes, 2019).

Management
Several effective medications are shown in Table 63-2. Mild headaches
respond to oral therapy in 50 to 70 percent of cases. Initial therapy with
acetaminophen or an NSAID, along with an antiemetic, usually suffices for
many early headaches. For severe headaches, parenteral therapy is indicated
(Goadsby, 2018). Multitargeted drug therapy is necessary in most cases for
migraine relief (Gonzalez-Hernandez, 2014). Headaches are treated
aggressively with intravenous hydration, parenteral antiemetics, and triptans,
and opioids are reserved for the most recalcitrant headaches. Although a 2-g
infusion of magnesium sulfate has gained favor in the past few years, a
metaanalysis reported no benefits (Choi, 2014). Ergotamine derivatives are
potent vasoconstrictors and are avoided in pregnancy because of their
uterotonic effects (Briggs, 2022).
TABLE 63-2. Medications for Treatment of Acute Migraine in Pregnancy

Triptans are serotonin 5-HT1B/2D-receptor agonists that effectively
relieve headaches, nausea, and vomiting and greatly reduce analgesic needs.
Triptans can be given as an oral tablet, injection, rectal suppository, or
intranasal spray. They are best used in combination with NSAIDs (Goadsby,
2018). However, chronic NSAID use is avoided in pregnancy, especially
later pregnancy because of fetal ductus arteriosus constriction and fetal urine
production decline (Chap. 18, p. 151). The greatest triptan experience is with
sumatriptan (Imitrex), and although not studied extensively in pregnancy, it is
not a major teratogen (Saldanha, 2021; Spielmann, 2018). However, in one
study at 36 months of children exposed to triptans in pregnancy, Wood and
colleagues (2016) found neurodevelopment differences, including
emotionality and activity problems.

Some women will benefit from peripheral nerve blocks, and
Govindappagari and coworkers (2014) described their experiences with 13
pregnant women. For women with frequent migraine headaches, oral
prophylactic therapy is warranted. Amitriptyline (Elavil), 10 to 175 mg
daily; propranolol (Inderal), 40 to 120 mg daily; or metoprolol (Lopressor,
Toprol), 25 to 100 mg daily, are successful options (Contag, 2010; Lucas,
2009).
Calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) receptor antagonists to prevent
migraines have garnered enthusiasm. Several of these monoclonal antibodies
have been approved since 2018 for clinical use but not evaluated in
pregnancy (Ashina, 2020; Tepper, 2018). Similarly, in a Cochrane review,
botulinum toxin type A for chronic migraine may reduce migraine days per
month by 2 days compared with placebo (Herd, 2018).

■ Cluster Headache
This rare primary headache disorder is characterized by severe unilateral
lancinating pain radiating to the face and orbit, lasting 15 to 180 minutes, and
occurring with autonomic symptoms and agitation. Pregnancy does not affect
symptom severity. Affected women should avoid tobacco and alcohol. Acute
management includes 100-percent oxygen therapy and sumatriptan given as a
6-mg dose subcutaneously (Vander Pluym, 2016). If recurrent, prophylaxis
employs verapamil.

SEIZURE DISORDERS
After headaches, seizures are the next most prevalent neurological condition
encountered in pregnancy. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
reported that 3 million adults in 2015 had active epilepsy (Tian, 2018). Less
than half were seizure free in the past year. Importantly, epilepsy accounted
for 5 percent of maternal deaths in the United Kingdom from 2011 to 2013
(Knight, 2015).

■ Pathophysiology

A seizure is a transient combination of signs and symptoms stemming from
abnormal excessive or synchronous neuronal activity in the brain
(Lowenstein, 2018). Some identifiable causes of convulsive disorders in
young adults include head trauma, alcohol- and other drug-induced
withdrawals, cerebral infections, brain tumors, biochemical abnormalities,
and arteriovenous malformations. A search for these is prudent with a newonset seizure disorder in a pregnant woman. The diagnosis of idiopathic
epilepsy is one of exclusion.

■ Classification
Epilepsy encompasses different syndromes whose cardinal feature is a
predisposition to recurrent unprovoked seizures. The International League
Against Epilepsy recently updated the following definitions (Fisher, 2017).
Main categories describe seizure onset and include focal, generalized, and
unknown groups.
Focal seizure onset describes those that originate in one localized brain
area and affect correspondingly localized neurological function. They are
believed to result from trauma, abscess, tumor, or perinatal factors, although
a specific lesion is rarely demonstrated. Seizures may occur with either
intact or impaired awareness.
Focal seizures without dyscognitive features start in one region of the
body and progress toward other ipsilateral areas of the body and produce
tonic and then clonic movements. Seizures can affect sensory function or
produce autonomic dysfunction or psychological changes. Cognitive function
is not impaired, and recovery is rapid.
Focal seizures with dyscognitive features are often preceded by an aura
and followed by impaired awareness manifested by sudden behavioral arrest
or motionless stare. Involuntary movements such as picking motions or lip
smacking are common.
Generalized seizure onset describes those that involve both brain
hemispheres and may be preceded by an aura before an abrupt loss of
consciousness. They may be motor or nonmotor. There is a strong hereditary
component. In generalized tonic-clonic seizures, loss of consciousness is
followed by tonic contraction of the muscles and rigid posturing, and then by
clonic contractions of all extremities while the muscles gradually relax.
Return to consciousness is gradual, and the patient may remain confused and

disoriented for several hours. Absence seizures—also called petit mal
seizures—are a form of generalized epilepsy that involve a brief loss of
consciousness without muscle activity and are characterized by immediate
recovery of consciousness and orientation.
Unknown seizure onset describes seizures with an unwitnessed onset.
Thus, they remain unclassified as to focal or generalized onset until further
information allows categorization. However, these can be further subgrouped
as motor or nonmotor, or unclassified.

■ Preconceptional Counseling
Women with epilepsy ideally are counseled before pregnancy, and relevant
points are presented also in Chapter 9 (p. 166). Oral folic acid
supplementation with 0.4 mg per day is begun at least 1 month before
conception. The dose is increased to 4 mg when the woman taking
antiepileptic medication becomes pregnant. These medications are assessed
and adjusted with a goal of monotherapy using the least teratogenic
medication. If this is not feasible, attempts are made to reduce the number of
medications and to use the lowest effective dose (Stephen, 2019; Tomson,
2019b). Medication withdrawal should be considered if a woman is seizure
free for 2 years or more.

■ Pregnancy Complications
The major pregnancy-related risks to women with epilepsy are fetal
malformations and convulsions. Seizure control is a priority to avoid its
attendant morbidity and mortality. Early studies described worsening seizure
activity during pregnancy, however, this is less common now because of
more effective drugs (Pennell, 2020). Contemporary studies cite higher rates
of seizure activity in only 20 to 30 percent of gravidas (Tomson, 2019b).
Women who are seizure free for at least 9 months before conception will
likely remain so during pregnancy (Harden, 2009b).
Greater seizure frequency is often associated with subtherapeutic
anticonvulsant serum levels, a lower seizure threshold, or both. Numerous
pregnancy-associated alterations can result in subtherapeutic serum levels.
These include nausea and vomiting, slower gastrointestinal motility, antacid
use that diminishes drug absorption, pregnancy hypervolemia offset by

protein binding, induction of hepatic enzymes such as cytochrome oxidases,
placental enzymes that metabolize drugs, and increased glomerular filtration
that hastens drug clearance. Importantly, some women discontinue medication
because of teratogenicity concerns. Last, the seizure threshold can be affected
by pregnancy-related sleep deprivation and by hyperventilation and pain
during labor (Tomson, 2019b).
Status epilepticus is a medical emergency. It is more likely to occur in
women with refractory epilepsy (Kusznir Vitturi, 2019). In a randomized
trial of 384 nonpregnant patients with benzodiazepine-refractory status,
intravenous levetiracetam, fosphenytoin, or valproate yielded similar results
(Kapur, 2019). Only one half of patients in each cohort had cessation of
seizures and improved alertness by 60 minutes.
In addition to seizure-control challenges, women with epilepsy have a
small increased risk of pregnancy complications that include miscarriage,
hemorrhage, hypertensive disorders, placental abruption, preterm birth, fetalgrowth restriction, and cesarean delivery (Salman, 2018; Viale, 2015).
Importantly, MacDonald (2015) also reports a tenfold higher maternal death
rate, and, as mentioned earlier, epilepsy accounted for 5 percent of maternal
deaths in the United Kingdom. Postpartum depression rates also are
increased in epileptic women (Turner, 2009). Last, children of epileptic
mothers have a 10-percent risk of developing a seizure disorder.
With embryofetal malformations, it was difficult for years to separate the
influence of epilepsy from that of its therapy as the primary cause. Now,
untreated epilepsy is thought not to be associated with an elevated fetal
malformation rate (Tomson, 2019b). That said, the fetus of an epileptic
mother who takes certain anticonvulsant medications has an indisputably
greater risk for congenital malformations. Moreover, monotherapy is
associated with a lower rate of birth defects compared with multiagent
therapy. Adherence to these principles has resulted in declining malformation
rates from antiepileptic drugs (Tomson, 2019a).
Specific drugs, when given alone, raise the malformation rate (Chap. 8,
p. 150). Some are listed in Table 63-3. Phenytoin and phenobarbital increase
the major malformation rate two- to threefold above baseline (Perucca,
2005; Thomas, 2008). Valproate is a particularly potent teratogen, which has
a dose-dependent effect and raises the malformation risk four- to eightfold
(Klein, 2014; Tomson, 2019b). Valproate is also associated with lower
cognitive performance (Kasradze, 2017). In general, with polytherapy, the

risk rises with each drug added. A metaanalysis of 31 studies found
lamotrigine and levetiracetam to carry the lowest malformation risk (Weston,
2016).
TABLE 63-3. Teratogenic Effects of Common Anticonvulsant Medications

■ Management in Pregnancy
The American Academy of Neurology and the American Epilepsy Society
have guidelines regarding treatment in pregnancy (Harden, 2009a,b,c). The
major goal is seizure prevention. To accomplish this, treatment for nausea
and vomiting is provided, seizure-provoking stimuli are avoided, and
medication compliance is emphasized. The fewest necessary anticonvulsants
are given at the lowest dosage needed for seizure control. Although some
providers routinely monitor serum drug levels, these concentrations may be
unreliable because of altered protein binding. Free or unbound drug levels,
although perhaps more accurate, are not widely available. Importantly, no
evidence suggests that such monitoring improves seizure control (Adab,
2006). For these reasons, drug levels may be most informative if measured
following seizures or if noncompliance is suspected.
For women taking anticonvulsant drugs, a targeted sonographic
examination in midpregnancy is recommended to evaluate for anomalies.

Testing to assess fetal well-being is generally not indicated for women with
uncomplicated epilepsy.
For women desiring to breastfeed, data regarding the safety of the
various anticonvulsant medications are limited. However, no obvious
deleterious effects, such as long-term cognitive issues, have been reported
(Birnbaum, 2020; Briggs, 2022). Of birth control methods, combination oral
contraceptive (COC) pill failure rates are higher with some of the
anticonvulsant agents. For example, lamotrigine efficacy is substantially
lowered by COCs. Thus, other more reliable methods should be considered
(Chap. 38, p. 664).

CEREBROVASCULAR DISEASES
Abnormalities of the cerebrovascular circulation include both ischemic and
hemorrhagic strokes and anatomical anomalies, such as AVMs and
aneurysms. Cerebral ischemia is caused by reduction in blood flow that lasts
longer than several seconds. Early, neurological symptoms may manifest.
After a few minutes, however, infarction often follows. Hemorrhagic stroke
is caused by bleeding directly into or around the brain. It produces symptoms
by its mass effect, by blood’s toxic effects, or by elevated intracranial
pressure. Strokes in nonpregnant women are predominately ischemic. In
gravidas, roughly half are ischemic, and the other half are hemorrhagic
(Zofkie, 2018).
The obesity endemic in this country, along with a concomitant rise in
rates of heart disease, hypertension, and diabetes, has increased the
prevalence of strokes. Compared with men, women have a higher lifetime
risk of stroke and associated mortality rate (Martinez-Sånchez, 2011; Virani,
2021). Moreover, pregnancy raises the immediate and lifetime risk of both
ischemic stroke and hemorrhagic stroke (Jamieson, 2010; Jung, 2010).
With an incidence of 10 to 40 cases per 100,000 births, stroke is
relatively uncommon in gravidas. However, it contributes disparately to
maternal mortality rates (Leffert, 2016; Pacheco, 2019; Elgendy, 2021). The
incidence is rising as measured by pregnancy-related hospitalizations for
stroke (Callaghan, 2008; Kuklina, 2011). Most events are associated with
hypertensive disorders or heart disease. Of the pregnancy-related mortality
rate in the United States from 2007 to 2016, 7.2 percent was due to

cerebrovascular accidents, and 7.8 percent was associated with hypertension
(Petersen, 2019). Of maternal deaths after 42 days postpartum, 9.8 percent
were attributable to stroke (Creanga, 2017).

■ Risk Factors
Most strokes in pregnancy manifest either during labor and delivery or in the
puerperium. In a study of 2850 pregnancy-related strokes, approximately 10
percent developed antepartum, 40 percent intrapartum, and 50 percent
postpartum (James, 2005). Of 145 ischemic strokes, Leffert (2016) reported
a timing of 45 percent antepartum, 3 percent intrapartum, and 53 percent
postpartum.
Several risk factors both unrelated and related to pregnancy have been
recognized. Unrelated causes are age; migraines, hypertension, obesity, and
diabetes; cardiac disorders such as endocarditis, valvular prostheses, and
patent foramen ovale; and smoking. Stroke etiologies related to pregnancy
include hypertensive disorders, gestational diabetes, obstetrical hemorrhage,
and cesarean delivery. By far, the most common is pregnancy-associated
hypertensive disorders. A third of strokes are associated with gestational
hypertension, and hypertensive women compared with normotensive
counterparts have a three- to eightfold greater risk of stroke (Scott, 2012;
Wang, 2011). Stroke is the major cause of maternal mortality associated with
preeclampsia (Judy, 2019). Moreover, women with preeclampsia undergoing
general anesthesia may be at higher risk of stroke compared with those given
neuraxial anesthesia (Huang, 2010). Cesarean delivery raises the peripartum
stroke risk 1.5-fold compared with vaginal delivery (Lin, 2008). Sepsis from
any source increases the risk for postpartum stroke (Miller, 2019).
Pregnancy-induced effects on cerebrovascular hemodynamics include
enhanced autoregulation that maintains blood flow despite changes in
systemic blood pressure (van Teen, 2016). Although cerebral blood flow
decreases by 20 percent from midpregnancy until term, it increases
significantly with gestational hypertension (Zeeman, 2003, 2004b). Such
hyperperfusion at least intuitively would be dangerous for women with
certain vascular anomalies.

■ Ischemic Stroke

Acute occlusion or embolization of an intracranial blood vessel causes
cerebral ischemia, which may result in death of brain tissue (Fig. 63-2). The
more commonly associated etiologies of ischemic stroke are shown in Table
63-4. A transient ischemic attack (TIA) is caused by reversible ischemia,
and symptoms usually last less than 24 hours. Approximately 10 percent of
these patients have a stroke by 1 year (Amarenco, 2016).

FIGURE 63-2 Illustrations of a brain showing various types of strokes seen in pregnancy: (1)
subcortical infarction (preeclampsia), (2) hypertensive hemorrhage, (3) aneurysm, (4) embolism or
thrombosis in middle cerebral artery, (5) arteriovenous malformation, and (6) cortical vein thrombosis.

TABLE 63-4. Some Associated Disorders or Causes of Ischemic and
Hemorrhagic Strokes During Pregnancy or the Puerperium

Stroke usually incites sudden severe headache, hemiplegia, or other
neurological deficits. Seizures occasionally develop. Immediate assessment
and CT scanning is indicated (Pacheco, 2019). Further evaluation includes
echocardiography and additional cranial imaging with CT, MR imaging, or
angiography. Serum lipids are measured with the caveat that their values are
distorted by normal pregnancy (Appendix, p. 1231). Tests to detect
antiphospholipid antibodies, lupus anticoagulant, other thrombophilias, and,
if indicated, sickle-cell syndromes are performed (Buonanno, 2016). These
underlie up to a third of ischemic strokes in otherwise healthy young women.
With a thorough evaluation, most causes of embolism can be identified.
Some of these include cardiac-associated embolism, vasculitis, or
vasculopathy such as Moyamoya disease (Miyakoshi, 2009; Pacheco, 2019).
Outcomes of embolic strokes are reported to be favorable and similar to
those of nonpregnant women (Leffert, 2016). For some, thrombolysis for
ischemic stroke during pregnancy should be considered (Pacheco, 2019).
However, published experiences are sparse (Ryman, 2019). For some,
mechanical thrombectomy can be used.

Preeclampsia Syndrome
In reproductive-age women, a significant proportion of pregnancy-related
ischemic strokes are caused by gestational hypertension and preeclampsia
(Miller, 2020; Zofkie, 2018). As shown in Figure 63-2, areas of subcortical
edema and petechial hemorrhage may progress to cerebral infarction (Aukes,
2007, 2009; Zeeman, 2004a). Although these usually clinically manifest by
an eclamptic convulsion, a few women will suffer a symptomatic stroke from
a larger cortical infarction (Chap. 40, p. 700).
Other conditions with findings similar to preeclampsia are thrombotic
microangiopathies (Chap. 59, p. 1060) and the reversible cerebral
vasoconstriction syndrome (Chap. 40, p. 700). The latter, also termed
postpartum angiopathy, can cause extensive cerebral edema, necrosis and
widespread infarction, and areas of hemorrhage (Edlow, 2013; Miller,
2016).

Cerebral Embolism
These strokes usually involve the middle cerebral artery (see Fig. 63-2). The
diagnosis can be made with confidence only after thrombosis and
hemorrhage are excluded and is more certain if an embolic source is
identified. Hemorrhage may be more difficult to exclude because both
embolization and thrombosis can be followed by hemorrhagic infarction.
Paradoxical embolism is an uncommon cause, even considering that more
than a fourth of adults have a patent foramen ovale. Through the defect, rightsided venous thromboemboli are deported (Scott, 2012). Foraminal closure
may not improve outcomes in these patients, however, this procedure has
been performed during pregnancy (Dark, 2011). Assorted cardioembolic
causes of stroke include arrhythmias—especially atrial fibrillation, valvular
lesions, mitral valve prolapse, mural thrombus, infective endocarditis, and
peripartum cardiomyopathy.
Management of embolic stroke in pregnancy consists of supportive
measures and antiplatelet therapy. Thrombolytic therapy and anticoagulation
in pregnancy are controversial (Li, 2012).

Cerebral Artery Thrombosis
Most thrombotic strokes affect older individuals and are caused by
atherosclerosis, especially of the internal carotid artery. Many are preceded

by one or more TIAs. Thrombolytic therapy with a recombinant tissue
plasminogen activator (rtPA) is recommended. Alteplase is one of these. It is
given intravenously within the first 3-hour window if neurological deficits
are noted and if neuroimaging has excluded hemorrhage (Pacheco, 2019). A
principal risk is hemorrhagic transformation of an ischemic stroke. This
agent can be used in pregnancy, but published experiences of rtPA in this
group are few (Ryman, 2019).

Cerebral Venous Thrombosis
In one study in the United States, 6 percent of cerebral venous thromboses
were associated with pregnancy (Leavell, 2018). However, in more than 8
million deliveries from the Nationwide Inpatient Sample, cerebral venous
thrombosis caused only 2 percent of pregnancy-related strokes (James,
2005). Predisposing causes are numerous, and for gravidas, late pregnancy
and the puerperium are times of greatest risk (Silvis, 2019).
Thrombosis of the lateral or superior sagittal venous sinus usually occurs
in the puerperium and often in association with preeclampsia, sepsis, or
thrombophilia (see Fig. 63-2). It is more common in patients with inherited
thrombophilias or antiphospholipid antibodies. Headache is the most
frequent presenting symptom, neurological deficits are common, and up to a
third of women have seizures (Pacheco, 2019). Oh and colleagues (2020)
described a postpartum case in which cerebral vein thrombosis was
misdiagnosed as postdural puncture headache. The diagnosis is made using
MR venography.
Management includes anticonvulsants for seizures, and anticoagulation
with heparin (Pacheco, 2019; Smith, 2018). Antimicrobials are given for
septic thrombophlebitis, and fibrinolytic therapy is reserved for those women
failing systemic anticoagulation. The acute prognosis for venous thrombosis
in gravidas is better than in nonpregnant subjects, and mortality rates are <10
percent (McCau11ey, 2011).
In women with a prior cerebral venous thrombosis, one systematic
review found only one recurrence in 217 pregnancies and five noncerebral
venous thrombotic events in 186 pregnancies (Aguiar de Sousa, 2016). In a
study of 52 women on prophylactic anticoagulation with prior cerebral
venous thrombosis, recurrent thrombosis or bleeding did not develop.
However, 24 percent had late obstetrical complications (Martinelli, 2016).

Ischemic Stroke Recurrence
Women with prior ischemic stroke have a low risk for recurrence during a
subsequent pregnancy unless a specific, persistent cause is identified. During
a 5-year follow-up of 441 reproductive-aged women with prior ischemic
stroke or cerebral venous thrombosis, 13 had a recurrent ischemic stroke,
and only two were associated with pregnancy. The authors concluded that the
risk of stroke recurrence is low and a previous ischemic stroke is not a
contraindication to pregnancy (Lamy, 2000). In one study of nonpregnant
women, the ischemic stroke recurrence rate was similar between those with
and without antiphospholipid antibodies as long as the former received
warfarin or aspirin (Levine, 2004). The recurrence rate of reversible
cerebral vasoconstriction syndrome in a subsequent pregnancy was noted to
be 9 percent (Boitet, 2019).
Currently, no firm guidelines define prophylaxis in pregnant women with
a stroke history (Smith, 2018). The American Heart Association stresses the
importance of controlling risk factors such as hypertension and diabetes
(Furie, 2011). As discussed in Chapters 52 and 55, those with
antiphospholipid syndrome or certain cardiac conditions should be
considered for prophylactic anticoagulation. For most of these women, lowdose aspirin given throughout pregnancy seems reasonable.

■ Hemorrhagic Stroke
Intracerebral Hemorrhage
The symptoms of a hemorrhagic stroke are similar to those of an ischemic
stroke, and their differentiation is possible only with CT or MR imaging
(Hemphill, 2015; Smith, 2018). The two distinct categories of spontaneous
intracranial bleeding are subarachnoid hemorrhage and intracerebral
hemorrhage.
Intracerebral hemorrhage is bleeding into the brain parenchyma. It most
often stems from the spontaneous rupture of Charcot-Bouchard aneurysms of
small vessels damaged by chronic hypertension (see Fig. 63-2). Thus,
pregnancy-associated hemorrhagic strokes such as the one shown in Figure
63-3 are often associated with chronic hypertension and superimposed
preeclampsia (Cunningham, 2005; Martin, 2005). Because of its location,
this type of hemorrhage has much higher morbidity and mortality rates than

subarachnoid hemorrhage (Smith, 2018). Pressure-induced rupture causes
bleeding into the putamen, thalamus, adjacent white matter, pons, and
cerebellum. In the 28 women described by Martin and associates (2005),
half died and most survivors had permanent disabilities. This underscores
proper management of gestational hypertension, especially systolic
hypertension.

FIGURE 63-3 A noncontrast computed tomography axial head image demonstrates a large
intraparenchymal hemorrhage in this woman with preeclampsia.

Subarachnoid Hemorrhage
In a study of 639 cases of pregnancy-related subarachnoid hemorrhage from
the Nationwide Inpatient Sample, the incidence was 8.5 per 100,000
pregnancies (Limaye, 2019). A remarkably similar incidence was reported in
Japanese women (Yoshida, 2017). These bleeding events are more likely
caused by an underlying cerebrovascular malformation in an otherwise
normal patient (see Fig. 63-2). Ruptured saccular or “berry” aneurysms
cause 80 percent of all subarachnoid hemorrhages (Lawton, 2017). The
remaining cases stem from a ruptured AVM, coagulopathy, angiopathy,
venous thrombosis, infection, drug abuse, tumors, or trauma. The mortality

rate of subarachnoid hemorrhage during pregnancy is lower than that
reported for nonpregnant women—8 versus 17 percent (Limaye, 2019).
Intracranial Aneurysm. Approximately 1 to 2 percent of adults have this
lesion (Lawton, 2017). Only a small percentage rupture. The rate
approximates 0.1 percent for aneurysms <10 mm and 1 percent for those >10
mm (Smith, 2018). Most aneurysms identified during pregnancy arise from
the circle of Willis, and in 20 percent of cases, lesions are multiple.
Pregnancy does not raise the risk for aneurysmal rupture. However, because
of their high population prevalence, they are more likely to cause
subarachnoid bleeding than other etiologies (Hirsch, 2009; Tiel Groenestege,
2009). A systematic review of 44 women with 50 aneurysms in pregnancy
reported that 72 percent ruptured during pregnancy, and 78 percent of these
did so during the third trimester (Barbarite, 2016). This proclivity for rupture
late in pregnancy is reported by others (Yoshida, 2017).
The cardinal symptom of aneurysmal rupture leading to subarachnoid
hemorrhage is sudden severe headache that is accompanied by visual
changes, cranial nerve abnormalities, focal neurological deficits, and altered
consciousness. Signs of meningeal irritation, nausea and vomiting,
tachycardia, transient hypertension, low-grade fever, leukocytosis, and
proteinuria are typical. Prompt diagnosis and treatment may prevent
potentially lethal complications. The American Heart Association
recommends noncontrast cranial CT imaging as the first diagnostic test,
although MR imaging may be superior (Smith, 2018).
Treatment of subarachnoid hemorrhage includes bed rest, analgesia,
neurological monitoring, and strict blood pressure control. Repair of a
potentially accessible aneurysm during pregnancy weighs surgical risks
against the risk of recurrent hemorrhage. At least in nonpregnant patients, the
risk of subsequent bleeding with conservative treatment is 20 to 30 percent
for the first month and then 3 percent per year. The risk of rebleeding is
highest within the first 24 hours, and recurrent hemorrhage leads to death in
70 percent (Smith, 2018).
Early repair after the sentinel hemorrhage is accomplished by open
craniotomy or endovascular coil placement. In one systematic review of
management in pregnancy, coil embolization yielded lower complication
rates than aneurysmal clipping (Barbarite, 2016). For unruptured aneurysms,
surgical management resulted in a third fewer complications than no

treatment. For gravidas remote from term, repair without hypotensive
anesthesia seems optimal. For women near term, cesarean delivery followed
by aneurysm repair is a consideration. We have successfully done this in
several cases.
For aneurysms repaired before or during pregnancy, most allow vaginal
delivery if labor ensues remote from aneurysmal repair. Problems arise in
defining “remote,” and although some recommend 2 months, the time for
complete healing is unknown. For women who survive subarachnoid
hemorrhage, but in whom surgical repair is not done, we agree with
Cartlidge (2000) and recommend against bearing down and favor cesarean
delivery.
Arteriovenous Malformations. These are congenital focal abnormal
conglomerations of dilated arteries and veins with subarteriolar
disorganization (see Fig. 63-2). They lack capillaries and have resultant
arteriovenous shunting. Although unclear, the risk of bleeding during
pregnancy may rise with gestational age. When AVMs bleed, half do so into
the subarachnoid space, whereas half are intraparenchymal with
subarachnoid extension (Smith, 2018). Uncommon, they affect an estimated
0.01 percent of the general population. Of identified AVM cases in
pregnancy, 83 percent ruptured during pregnancy or postpartum, and more
than 80 percent of these ruptured in the second or third trimester. Hemorrhage
is associated with poor maternal outcome but does not appear to be more
likely during pregnancy. (Lu, 2016). Although correspondingly rare during
pregnancy, AVM bleeding accounted for 17 percent of hemorrhagic strokes in
one study (Yoshida, 2017). At Parkland Hospital in a 35-year period and
nearly 500,000 births, 62 women had a stroke, and five of these were due to
a bleeding AVM (Simolke, 1991; Zofkie, 2018).
Treatment of AVMs in nonpregnant patients is individualized. No
consensus guides whether all accessible lesions should be resected. Factors
include AVM symptoms; its anatomy and size; an associated aneurysm, which
is found in up to 60 percent of cases; and especially, prior AVM bleeding.
After hemorrhage, the risk of recurrent bleeding in unrepaired lesions is 6 to
20 percent within the first year, and 2 to 4 percent per year thereafter
(Friedlander, 2007; Smith, 2018). The mortality rate from a bleeding AVM is
10 to 20 percent. In pregnancy, the decision to operate is usually based on
neurosurgical considerations. Because of the high risk of recurrent

hemorrhage from an unresected or inoperable lesion, we favor cesarean
delivery.

DEMYELINATING OR DEGENERATIVE DISEASES
The demyelinating diseases are neurological disorders characterized by
immune-mediated focal or patchy destruction of myelin sheaths accompanied
by an inflammatory response. The degenerative diseases are multifactorial
and characterized by progressive neuronal death.

■ Multiple Sclerosis
This autoimmune demyelinating disease is second only to trauma as a cause
of neurological disability in middle adulthood. The demyelinating effects
stem predominantly from T cell–mediated autoimmune destruction of
oligodendrocytes that synthesize myelin. It has a familial occurrence with an
environmental trigger, it affects women twice as often as men, and it usually
begins in the 20s and 30s (Cree, 2018; Fang, 2020). In one study, 0.03
percent of California deliveries were complicated by multiple sclerosis
(MS) between 2001 and 2009 (Fong, 2018).
There are three clinical types of multiple sclerosis:
1. Relapsing MS (RMS) is the initial presentation in 90 percent of affected
individuals. With it, unpredictable recurrent episodes of focal or
multifocal neurological dysfunction usually are followed by full recovery.
Over time, however, relapses lead to persistent deficits.
2. Secondary progressive MS (SPMS) is relapsing disease that begins to
pursue a progressive downhill course after each relapse. All patients
likely develop this type eventually.
3. Primary progressive MS (PPMS) accounts for 10 percent of cases. With
it, disability gradually progresses from the time of initial diagnosis.
Classic findings of MS include sensory loss, visual symptoms from optic
neuritis, weakness, and paresthesias. Clinical diagnosis is aided by MR
imaging and cerebrospinal fluid analysis. In greater than 95 percent of cases,
MR imaging shows characteristic multifocal white-matter plaques that

represent discrete areas of demyelination (Fig. 63-4). Their appearance and
extent are less helpful for predicting treatment response.

FIGURE 63-4 Magnetic resonance cranial images from a woman with multiple sclerosis. A. T2weighted axial image shows bright signal abnormalities in white matter (arrows), typical for multiple
sclerosis. B. Sagittal T2-FLAIR image shows periventricular hyperintense lesions (Dawson fingers;
arrows) representative of demyelination in multiple sclerosis.

Formerly considered an MS variant, neuromyelitis optica spectrum
disorder (NMOSD) is viewed as a distinct autoimmune disease. Antibodies
target astrocytes and lead to autoimmune inflammation of the spinal cord and
optic nerve. Some evidence suggests that pregnancy worsens this disorder
(Mao-Draayer, 2020).

Multiple Sclerosis in Pregnancy
Women with MS experience fewer attacks during pregnancy, but with a
significantly greater relapse rate postpartum (Cree, 2018). This may be
related to higher pregnancy-induced numbers of T-helper lymphocytes and an
increased T2/Tl ratio. In a metaanalysis of women with more than 1200
pregnancies complicated by MS, their relapse rate was 0.4 per year before
pregnancy; 0.26 per year during pregnancy; and 0.7 per year after delivery
(Finkelsztejn, 2011). A systematic review reported similar findings (Bove,
2014). Factors associated with postpartum relapse include a high relapse
rate before pregnancy, relapses during pregnancy, and a high MS disability

score (Portaccio, 2014). Breastfeeding has no effect on postpartum relapses
(Hellwig, 2015; Portaccio, 2011).
With uncomplicated disease, pregnancy outcomes are usually not
adversely affected (Bove, 2014; Fong, 2018). Some women may fatigue
more easily, those with bladder dysfunction are predisposed to urinary
infection, and women with spinal lesions at or above T6 are at risk for
autonomic dysreflexia. In one study of 449 pregnancies in affected women,
the labor induction rate was higher, and second-stage labor was longer
(Dahl, 2006). The greater induction rate and elective operations contributed
to the overall higher cesarean delivery rate. In an analysis of 649 affected
women, the mean birthweight was lower, but the perinatal mortality rate was
similar to controls (Dahl, 2005). In a study of 3875 pregnancies in women
with MS, risks for infections and preterm delivery were increased
(MacDonald, 2019).

Management
Goals in pregnancy are to arrest acute or initial attacks, employ diseasemodifying agents, and provide symptomatic relief. Some treatments may
require modification during pregnancy. Acute or initial attacks are treated
with high-dose intravenous methylprednisolone—500 to 1000 mg daily for 3
to 5 days. This is followed by oral prednisone for 2 weeks. Plasma exchange
may help those with fulminant attacks resistant to corticosteroid therapy.
Symptomatic relief can be provided by analgesics. Carbamazepine,
phenytoin, or amitriptyline are suitable after the first trimester for neurogenic
pain; baclofen, for spasticity; α1-adrenergic blocking agents, for bladder neck
relaxation; and cholinergic and anticholinergic drugs, for bladder-contraction
stimulation or inhibition, respectively.
Several disease-modifying therapies are now available to treat relapsing
MS or for exacerbations. Examples include interferons, glatiramer,
fingolimod, dimethyl fumarate, natalizumab, and ocrelizumab (Cree, 2018;
Tintore, 2019). Data regarding their safety in pregnancy are limited (Briggs,
2022). In 246 women with MS, glatiramer was not teratogenic to their
offspring (Herbstritt, 2016). In a review of 92 pregnancies, first-trimester
natalizumab exposure was associated with an increased miscarriage risk
(Portaccio, 2018). Fetal exposure in 89 pregnancies to fingolimod was
associated with six fetal malformations and nine spontaneous losses.

Because of this and associated animal teratogenicity, its use in pregnancy is
not recommended. Due to its prolonged persistence, contraception is
recommended for 2 months after fingolimod cessation (Alroughani, 2016).
Last, prevention of relapses postpartum has been reported with intravenous
immunoglobulin (IVIG). A dose of 0.4 g/kg is given daily for 5 days during
weeks 1, 6, and 12 (Argyriou, 2008).

■ Myasthenia Gravis
This autoimmune-mediated neuromuscular disorder is more common in
women, and its incidence peaks in their 20s and 30s (Waters, 2019). The
etiology is unknown, but genetic factors likely play a role. Of affected
patients, 80 to 90 percent demonstrate antibodies to the acetylcholine
receptor (Lee, 2019). Those that are seronegative often have antibodies to
muscle-specific tyrosine kinase (MuSK), which regulates assembly of the
acetylcholine receptor subunits at the neuromuscular junction.
Cardinal features of myasthenia are weakness and easy fatigability of
facial, oropharyngeal, extraocular, and limb muscles. Deep-tendon reflexes
are preserved. Cranial muscles are involved early and disparately, and
diplopia and ptosis are common. Facial muscle weakness causes difficulty in
smiling, chewing, and speaking. In 85 percent of patients, the weakness
becomes generalized. Other autoimmune diseases may coexist, and
hypothyroidism should be excluded. The clinical course is marked by
exacerbations. These can be life threatening and include myasthenic crises,
which are characterized by severe muscle weakness, inability to swallow,
and respiratory muscle paralysis (Lee, 2019). Another is a cholinergic
crisis, which is caused by excessive cholinergic medication and leads to
nausea, vomiting, muscle weakness, abdominal pain, and diarrhea.

Management
Myasthenia gravis is manageable but not curable. The oral anticholinesterase
pyridostigmine (Mestinon) is first-line treatment. Thymectomy is
recommended but postponed until after pregnancy (Amato, 2018a; Wolfe,
2019). Anticholinesterase medications improve symptoms by impeding
acetylcholine degradation but seldom produce normal muscle function.
Ironically, overdose is manifest by the cholinergic crisis mentioned earlier
and may be difficult to differentiate from myasthenic symptoms. Most

gravidas refractory to anticholinesterase therapy respond to
immunosuppressive therapy with glucocorticoids, azathioprine, or
cyclosporine. When short-term, rapid improvement is needed—such as for a
surgical procedure or a myasthenic crisis—high-dose IVIG or plasma
exchange is usually effective (Amato, 2018a; Sanders, 2016).

Myasthenia Gravis and Pregnancy
The greatest period of risk is within the first year following diagnosis. Thus,
postponing pregnancy until improvement is sustained is reasonable.
Antepartum management of myasthenia gravis includes close observation,
liberal rest, and prompt treatment of infection (Waters, 2019). Women in
remission who become pregnant while taking corticosteroids or azathioprine
should continue these. Acute onset or exacerbation of myasthenia gravis
demands prompt hospitalization and supportive care. Plasmapheresis and
high-dose IVIG are options for emergencies (Waters, 2019). In refractory
cases, thymectomy has been successfully performed during pregnancy.
Although pregnancy does not appear to affect the overall course of
myasthenia gravis, fatigue common to most pregnancies may be exacerbated,
and the expanding uterus may compromise respiration. Maternal hypotension
or hypovolemia are ideally avoided because they can trigger crises. The
clinical course of myasthenia gravis during pregnancy is unpredictable, and
frequent hospitalizations are the norm. Up to a third of women have
worsening symptoms during pregnancy, and exacerbations develop equally in
all three trimesters (Djelmis, 2002; Podciechowski, 2005). In women with
stable disease, most will remain stable throughout pregnancy but likely
worsen in the first few months postpartum (Sanders, 2016).
Myasthenia gravis has no significant adverse effects on pregnancy
outcomes (Wen, 2009). Preeclampsia is a concern because magnesium
sulfate may precipitate a severe myasthenia crisis (Hamaoui, 2009; Heaney,
2010). Although phenytoin use also is problematic in this regard, its adverse
effects are less troublesome.
Because smooth muscle is unaffected, most women have normal labor.
Oxytocin is given for the usual indications, and cesarean delivery is reserved
for obstetrical indications. Narcotics may cause respiratory depression, and
close observation and respiratory support are essential during labor and
delivery. Curariform drugs are avoided. Examples include magnesium

sulfate, muscle relaxants used with general anesthesia, and aminoglycosides.
Neuraxial analgesia is accomplished with amide-type local agents. Regional
analgesia is preferred unless bulbar involvement or respiratory compromise
is significant (Almeida, 2010; Blichfeldt-Lauridsen, 2012). During secondstage labor, some women may have impaired voluntary expulsive efforts that
may warrant operative vaginal delivery.

Neonatal Effects
As discussed, 80 percent of mothers with myasthenia gravis have
immunoglobulin G (IgG) antibodies against the acetylcholine receptor. These
and anti-MuSK antibodies cross transplacentally, and the fetus can be
affected. Poor fetal swallowing may yield hydramnios (Heaney, 2010).
Similarly, 10 to 20 percent of neonates manifest myasthenia symptoms
(Jovandaric, 2016). Transient symptoms usually include a feeble cry, poor
suckling, and respiratory distress. Symptoms usually respond to
anticholinesterase agents and resolve within a few weeks as maternal IgG
antibodies clear.

NEUROPATHIES
Peripheral neuropathy is a general term for peripheral nerve(s) disorders, in
which one or more nerves are affected. Mononeuropathies are relatively
common in pregnancy and signify focal involvement of a single nerve trunk.
These imply local causation such as trauma, compression, or entrapment. For
example, traumatic pudendal, obturator, femoral, and common fibular
mononeuropathies can stem from childbirth (Chap. 36, p. 644).
Polyneuropathies can be axonal or demyelinating and can be acute, subacute,
or chronic (Amato, 2018b). These are often associated with systemic
diseases such as diabetes, with drug or environmental toxin exposure, or
with genetic disease. Late-stage syphilis is a rare cause (Ghanem, 2020).

■ Guillain–Barré Syndrome
In 75 percent of cases, this acute demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy has
clinical or serological evidence of an acute infection. Common associated
infections are Campylobacter jejuni, cytomegalovirus, Zika virus, and

Epstein-Barr virus; surgical procedures; and immunizations (Leonhard,
2019). Guillain–Barré syndrome is thought to be immune-mediated from
antibodies formed against nonself antigens. Demyelination causes sensory
and motor conduction blockade, and remyelination yields recovery in most
cases.
Clinical features include an areflexic, ascending paralysis, with or
without sensory disturbances. Autonomic dysfunction is common. The full
syndrome develops over 1 to 3 weeks. Some manifest as chronic
inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy, and our experiences indicate
that this may be relatively common in these young women.
Guillain-Barré syndrome is not more common in pregnancy, and its
clinical course mirrors that for nonpregnant individuals. After an insidious
onset, paresis and paralysis most often continue to ascend to cause
ventilatory weakness.
Management is supportive and incorporates venous thromboembolism
prophylaxis, pressure ulcer prevention, and enteral nutrition. In the
worsening phase, patients are hospitalized, and a fourth require ventilatory
assistance. IVIG or plasmapheresis are beneficial if begun within 1 to 2
weeks of motor symptoms, but neither decreases mortality rates (Leonhard,
2019). Up to 10 percent of patients deteriorate after initial improvement on
therapy, and re-treatment with 2 g/kg IVIG over 5 days is recommended.
Although most patients recover fully within several months to a year, the
mortality rate is 5 percent, mainly due to pulmonary complications and
arrhythmias (Pacheco, 2016).

■ Bell Palsy
This disfiguring palsy is usually a mononeuropathic acute facial paralysis
that is relatively common in reproductive-aged women (Fig. 63-5). It has a
female predominance, and rates in pregnancy may be increased (Beal, 2018;
Choi, 2020). The disease is characterized by facial nerve inflammation and
often is associated with reactivation of herpes simplex virus or herpes zoster
virus. Other causes are Lyme disease and borreliosis.

FIGURE 63-5 Bell facial nerve palsy developing on the day of cesarean delivery for dichorionic twins.
This woman was treated with prednisone and antiviral medication, and 3 weeks postpartum, the palsy
had almost resolved.

Bell palsy usually has an abrupt and painful onset with maximum
weakness by 48 hours. In some cases, hyperacusis and loss of taste
accompany paralysis (Beal, 2018). Management includes supportive care
with facial muscle massage and eye protection against corneal injury from
drying. Consensus supports that prednisone, 1 mg/kg given orally daily for 5
days, will improve outcomes and shorten the recovery period (Beal, 2018;
Madhok, 2016). It is controversial whether added valacyclovir or acyclovir
will hasten recovery (Beal, 2018; Gagyor, 2019).
It is unclear if pregnancy alters the prognosis for spontaneous facial palsy
recovery. In one study, compared with 90 percent of nonpregnant women and
men, only half of pregnant women recovered to a satisfactory level after 1
year (Gillman, 2002). In another report, pregnancy-associated Bell palsy had
worse long-term outcomes compared with those of nonpregnant cohort
(Phillips, 2017). Some prognostic markers for incomplete recovery are
bilateral palsy, recurrence in a subsequent pregnancy, greater percentage of
nerve function loss, and a faster rate of loss (Cohen, 2000; Gilden, 2004).

Other than a fivefold greater rate for gestational hypertension or
preeclampsia, women with Bell palsy do not have increased adverse
pregnancy outcomes rates (Katz, 2011).

■ Carpal Tunnel Syndrome
This syndrome results from compression of the median nerve and is the most
frequent mononeuropathy in pregnancy (Oliveira, 2019). Symptoms include
burning, numbness, or tingling along the inner half of one or both hands.
Others are wrist pain and numbness extending into the forearm and
sometimes into the shoulder. Symptoms are bilateral in 80 percent of
gravidas, and 10 percent have evidence for severe denervation. Differential
diagnosis includes cervical radiculopathy of C6–C7 and de Quervain
tendonitis. The latter is caused by swelling of the conjoined tendons and their
sheaths near the distal radius. Nerve conduction studies may help to clarify.
In pregnancy, the reported incidence of carpal tunnel syndrome is 7 to 43
percent and varies greatly because the range of symptoms is marked (Meems,
2015; Oliveira, 2019). Symptomatic treatment with a splint applied to a
slightly flexed wrist during sleep lightens pressure and usually provides
relief. Although symptoms typically are self-limited, occasionally surgical
decompression and corticosteroid injections are necessary (Keith, 2009; Shi,
2011). Symptoms may persist in more than half of patients at 1 year and in a
third at 3 years (Padua, 2010).
Meralgia paresthetica is another common pregnancy-induced
compression neuropathy (Gooding, 2020). Compression of the lateral
femoral cutaneous nerve creates pain, burning, and numbness on the outside
of the thigh. For treatment, the site at which the nerve crosses the crease in
the groin can be injected with corticosteroids. Oral gabapentin is another
treatment.

SPINAL CORD INJURY
According to the National Spinal Cord Injury Statistical Center (2021),
approximately 18,000 new spinal cord injuries are sustained each year. The
average age is 42 years, and males account for 80 percent of new cases.
Cord injury severity determines the short- and long-term prognosis and

pregnancy prognosis. For women, many have altered sexual function and
transient hypothalamic pituitary hypogonadism. Despite this, pregnancy is not
uncommon, and in a review of nearly 2000 women, 2 percent reported
pregnancy in the prior 12 months (Lezzoni, 2015).
Two serious and life-threatening events can complicate spinal cord
injuries. First, if the cord is transected above T10, the cough reflex is
impaired, respiratory function may be compromised, and pneumonitis from
covert aspiration can be serious. Pulmonary function tests are considered to
assess this risk, and some women may need ventilatory support in late
pregnancy or labor.
Second, women with lesions above T5–T6 are at risk for autonomic
dysreflexia. With this, stimuli from structures innervated below the level of
the spinal lesion lead to massive, disordered sympathetic stimulation. Abrupt
catecholamine release can prompt vasoconstriction with severe hypertension
and symptoms that include throbbing headaches, facial flushing, sweating,
bradycardia, tachycardia, arrhythmias, and respiratory distress. Dysreflexia
can be precipitated by various stimuli. These include distention or
manipulation of reproductive tract or lower urinary tract organs or bowel
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020; Krassioukov,
2009). In one report, 12 of 15 women at risk for autonomic dysreflexia
suffered at least one episode during pregnancy (Westgren, 1993).
Gravidas with spinal cord injury have an increased frequency of other
complications. In a review of 37 affected pregnant women, 30 percent had
pyelonephritis, 32 percent had lower urinary tract infections, and 9 percent
had pressure sores (Le Liepvre, 2017). Two women developed autonomic
dysreflexia, which caused cerebral hemorrhage in one. Urinary infections
may be related to altered vaginal microbiota (Pires, 2016). Bowel
dysfunction causes constipation in more than half, and anemia and pressurenecrosis skin lesions are common.
Vaginal delivery is generally successful (Robertson, 2020). Operative
vaginal delivery is frequently necessary. Because uterine contractions are not
affected by spinal cord lesions, labor is usually easy, comparatively
painless, and at times precipitous. If the lesion is below T12, uterine
contractions are felt normally. For lesions above T12, the risk of out-ofhospital delivery is substantial and can be minimized by teaching women to
palpate for uterine contractions. This is especially important because up to

20 percent of women deliver preterm (Westgren, 1993). Some recommend
tocodynamometry and weekly cervical examinations beginning at 28 to 30
weeks’ gestation. Another reasonable option that we frequently employ at
Parkland Hospital is elective hospitalization after 36 to 37 weeks. Spinal or
epidural analgesia extending to T10 prevents autonomic dysreflexia and
should be instituted at the start of labor (Kuczkowski, 2006). If severe
symptoms are identified before epidural placement, steps are taken to abolish
the provoking stimulus. A parenteral antihypertensive agent such as
hydralazine or labetalol is given.

IDIOPATHIC INTRACRANIAL HYPERTENSION
Also known as pseudotumor cerebri, this disorder is typified by increased
intracranial pressure without hydrocephalus. The cause is unknown, but it
may result from overproduction or underabsorption of cerebrospinal fluid
(CSF), or both. Symptoms include headache in at least 90 percent of cases,
visual disturbances such as loss of a visual field or central visual acuity in
70 percent, and commonly occurring papilledema that may be sightthreatening (Heaney, 2010; Kesler, 2013). Other complaints are stiff neck,
back pain, pulsatile tinnitus, and cranial nerve palsies (Dinkin, 2019).
The syndrome is often found in young women and is prevalent in those
who are obese, who recently gained weight, or both (Fraser, 2011). Along
with symptoms, other criteria for diagnosis include elevated intracranial
pressure >25 cm H2O, normal CSF composition, normal cranial CT or MR
imaging findings, papilledema, and no evidence for systemic disease. If
papilledema is not present, other criteria are required (Friedman, 2013).
Idiopathic intracranial hypertension is usually self-limited, but long-term
vision loss is common (Hatem, 2018). Visual defects can be prevented by
lowering the CSF pressure, and agents include acetazolamide to reduce fluid
production, furosemide, or topiramate.
Corticosteroids are now rarely used. Surgical intervention is
occasionally necessary and is accomplished by either lumboperitoneal
shunting of spinal fluid or optic nerve sheath fenestration. Another treatment
is stenting of dural venous sinus stenosis (Dinkin, 2019). It is controversial if
pregnancy is a risk factor for idiopathic intracranial hypertension. Certainly,
symptoms may first appear in pregnancy, and women previously diagnosed

may become symptomatic. Symptoms usually develop by midpregnancy, tend
to be self-limited, and usually resolve postpartum.
Pregnancy does not alter management. Some recommend serial visualfield testing to forestall permanent vision loss. In a report of 16 pregnant
women, visual-field loss developed in four, and it became permanent in one
(Huna-Baron, 2002). Visual-field loss is often coincident with the
development of papilledema, for which acetazolamide is given. Lee and
associates (2005) reported successful treatment of 12 pregnant women.
Although outmoded for treatment of nonpregnant individuals, repeated
lumbar punctures are generally successful in providing temporary relief
throughout pregnancy. In some pregnant women, surgical therapy becomes
necessary, including optic nerve sheath fenestration (Thambisetty, 2007).
Pregnancy complications are likely due to associated obesity and not to
intracranial hypertension. Rates of adverse maternal and perinatal outcomes
are not increased (Kesler, 2013). The route of delivery depends on
obstetrical indications, and conduction analgesia is safe (Aly, 2007;
Karmaniolou, 2011).

MATERNAL VENTRICULAR SHUNTS
Pregnancies in women with previously placed ventricular shunts for
obstructive hydrocephalus usually have satisfactory outcomes. Shunts may be
ventriculoperitoneal, ventriculoatrial, or ventriculopleural. Partial
obstruction of a shunt is common, especially late in pregnancy (Schiza,
2012). In one report of 17 such pregnancies, neurological complications
were reported in 13 (Wisoff, 1991). Findings included headaches in 60
percent, nausea and vomiting in 35 percent, lethargy in 30 percent, and ataxia
or gaze paresis, each in 20 percent. Most symptoms respond to conservative
management. However, if CT scanning during symptom evaluation discloses
acute hydrocephaly, the shunt is tapped or pumped several times daily. In
some cases, surgical revision is necessary and may be emergently indicated
(Murakami, 2010). Another shunting procedure is placement of an
endoscopic third ventriculostomy for hydrocephalus. With this, a small hole
is created in the floor of the third ventricle to allow CSF to flow directly into
lower cisterns. One report described successful results in five gravidas who
underwent endoscopic ventriculostomy (Riffaud, 2006).

Vaginal delivery is preferred in women with shunts, and unless there is a
meningomyelocele, conduction analgesia is permitted. Antimicrobial
prophylaxis is indicated if the peritoneal cavity is entered for cesarean
delivery or puerperal sterilization.

MATERNAL BRAIN DEATH
Brain death is rare in obstetrics, and only a few institutional brain-death
policies address pregnancy (Lewis, 2016). Life-support systems and
parenteral alimentation for up to 20 weeks while awaiting delivery have
been described (Hussein, 2006; Powner, 2003; Reinhold, 2019). Some
women were treated with aggressive tocolysis and antimicrobial therapy. In
one review of 17 women with persistent vegetative state who were given
various levels of support, five women died after delivery, and most of the
others remained in their vegetative state (Chiossi, 2006). The ethical,
financial, and legal implications, both civil and criminal, that arise from
providing or withdrawing such care are profound (Feldman, 2000). In some
women, perimortem cesarean delivery is performed.

REFERENCES
Adab N: Therapeutic monitoring of antiepileptic drugs during pregnancy and in the postpartum period: is
it useful? CNS Drugs 20:791, 2006
Aguiar de Sousa D, Canhao P, Ferro JM: Safety of pregnancy after cerebral venous thrombosis: a
systematic review. Stroke 47(3):713, 2016
Almeida C, Coutinho E, Moreira D, et al: Myasthenia gravis and pregnancy: anaesthetic management—
a series of cases. Eur J Anaesthesiol 27:985, 2010
Alroughani R, Altintas A, Al Jumah M, et al: Pregnancy and the use of disease-modifying therapies in
patients with multiple sclerosis: benefits versus risks. Mult Scler Int 2016: 1034912, 2016
Aly EE, Lawther BK: Anaesthetic management of uncontrolled idiopathic intracranial hypertension
during labour and delivery using an intrathecal catheter. Anaesthesia 62:178, 2007
Amarenco P, Lavallee PC, Labreuche J, et al: One-year risk of stroke after transient ischemic attack or
minor stroke. N Engl J Med 374(16):1533, 2016
Amato AA: Myasthenia gravis and other diseases of the neuromuscular junction. In Jameson JL, Fauci
AS, Kasper DL, et al (eds): Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York,
McGraw-Hill Education, 2018a, p 3232
Amato AA, Barohn RS: Peripheral neuropathy. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al (eds):
Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2018b, p
3204

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Obstetric management of patients with spinal
cord injuries. Committee Opinion No. 808, April 2020
Argyriou AA, Makris N: Multiple sclerosis and reproductive risks in women. Reprod Sci 15(8):755, 2008
Ashina M: Migraine. N Engl J Med 383(19):1866, 2020
Aukes AM, de Groot JC, Aarnoudse JG, et al: Brain lesions several years after eclampsia. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 200(5):504.e1, 2009
Aukes AM, Wessel I, Dubois AM, et al: Self-reported cognitive functioning in formerly eclamptic
women. Am J Obstet Gynecol 197:365.e1, 2007
Aukes AM, Yurtsever FN, Boutin A, et al: Associations between migraine and adverse pregnancy
outcomes: systematic review and meta-analysis. Obstet Gynecol Surv 74 (12):738, 2019
Barbarite E, Hussain S, Dellarole A, et al: The management of intracranial aneurysms during pregnancy:
a systematic review. Turk Neurosurg 26(4):465, 2016
Beal MF, Hauser SL: Trigeminal neuralgia, Bells palsy, and other cranial nerve disorders. In Jameson
JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al (eds): Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New
York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2018, p 3169
Birnbaum AK, Meador KJ, Karanam A, et al: Antiepileptic drug exposure in infants of breastfeeding
mothers with epilepsy. JAMA Neurol 77(4):441, 2020
Blackwell DL, Lucas JI, Clarke TC: Summary health statistics for U.S. adults: National Health
Interview Survey, 2012. Vital Health Stat (260):1, 2014
BlichfeIdt-Lauridsen L, Hansen BD: Anesthesia and myasthenia gravis. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand
56(1):17, 2012
Boitet R, de Gaalon S, Duflos C, et al: Long-term outcomes after reversible cerebral vasoconstriction
syndrome. Stroke 51(2):670, 2020
Bove R, Alwan S, Friedman JM, et al: Management of multiple sclerosis during pregnancy and the
reproductive years: a systematic review. Obstet Gynecol 124(6):1157, 2014
Briggs GG, Towers CV, Forinash CV: Drugs in Pregnancy and Lactation, 12th ed. Philadelphia, WoltersKluwer, 2022
Bromley RL, Weston J, Marson AG: Maternal use of antiepileptic agents during pregnancy and major
congenital malformations in children. JAMA 318(17):1700, 2017
Buonanno FS, Schmahmann JD, Romero JM, et al: Case 10–2016: a 22-year-old man with sickle cell
disease, headache, and difficulty speaking. N Engl J Med 374(13):1265, 2016
Burch R: Epidemiology and treatment of menstrual migraine and migraine during pregnancy and
lactation: a narrative review. Headache 60(1):200, 2020
Burch RC, Loder S, Loder E, et al: The prevalence and burden of migraine and severe headache in the
United States: updated statistics from government health surveillance studies. Headache 55(1):21,
2015
Bushnell CD, Jamison M, James AH: Migraines during pregnancy linked to stroke and vascular
diseases: US population based case-control study. BMJ 338:b664, 2009
Callaghan WM, MacKay AP, Berg CJ: Identification of severe maternal morbidity during delivery
hospitalizations, United States, 1991–2003. Am J Obstet Gynecol 199:133.e1, 2008
Cartlidge NE: Neurologic disorders. In Barron WM, Lindheimer MD (eds): Medical Disorders During
Pregnancy, 3rd ed. St. Louis, Mosby, 2000
Chansakul T, Young GS: Neuroimaging in pregnant women. Semin Neurol 37(6):712, 2017
Charles A: Migraine. N Engl J Med 377(6): 553, 2017
Chiossi G, Novic K, Celebrezze JU, et al: Successful neonatal outcome in 2 cases of maternal persistent
vegetative state treated in a labor and delivery suite. Am J Obstet Gynecol 195: 316, 2006

Choi H, Parman N: The use of intravenous magnesium sulphate for acute migraine: meta-analysis of
randomized controlled trials. Eur J Emerg Med 21:2, 2014
Choi HG, Hong SK, Park SK, et al: Pregnancy does not increase the risk of Bell’s Palsy: a national
cohort study. Otol Neurotol 41(1):e111, 2020
Christensen J, Pedersen L, Sun Y, et al: Association of prenatal exposure to valproate and other
antiepileptic drugs with risk for attend-deficit/hyperactivity disorder in offspring. JAMA Netw Open
2(1):e186606, 2019
Cohen Y, Lavie O, Granoxsky-Grisaru S, et al: Bell palsy complicating pregnancy: a review. Obstet
Gynecol Surv 55: 184, 2000
Contag SA, Bushnell C: Contemporary management of migraine disorders in pregnancy. Curr Opin
Obstet Gynecol 22:437, 2010
Creanga AA, Syverson C, Seed K, et al: Pregnancy-related mortality in the United States, 2011–2013.
Obstet Gynecol 130(2):366, 2017
Cree BA, Howser SL: Multiple sclerosis. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al (eds): Harrison’s
Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2018, p 3128
Cunningham FG: Severe preeclampsia and eclampsia: systolic hypertension is also important. Obstet
Gynecol 105:237, 2005
Dahl J, Myhr KM, Daltveit AK, et al: Planned vaginal births in women with multiple sclerosis: delivery
and birth outcome. Acta Neurol Scand Suppl 183:51, 2006
Dahl J, Myhr KM, Daltveit AK, et al: Pregnancy, delivery, and birth outcome in women with multiple
sclerosis. Neurology 65:1961, 2005
Dark L, Loiselle A, Hatton R, et al: Stroke during pregnancy: therapeutic options and role of
percutaneous device closure. Heart Lung Circ 20:538, 2011
Dinkin M, Oliveira C: Men are from Mars, idiopathic intracranial hypertension is from venous: the role
of venous sinus stenos is and stenting in idiopathic intracranial hypertension. Semin Neurol 39(6):
692, 2019
Djelmis J, Sostarko M, Mayer D, et al: Myasthenia gravis in pregnancy: report on 69 cases. Eur J
Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 104:21, 2002
Edlow JA, Caplan LR, O’Brien K, et al: Diagnosis of acute neurological emergencies in pregnant and
post-partum women. Lancet Neurol 12:175, 2013
Elgendy IY, Bukhari S, Barakat AF, et al: Maternal stroke: a call for action. Circulation 143(7):727, 2021
Fang X, Patel C, Gudesblatt M: Multiple sclerosis: clinical updates in women’s health care primary and
preventive care review. Obstet Gynecol 135(3):757, 2020
Feldman DM, Borgida AF, Rodis JF, et al: Irreversible maternal brain injury during pregnancy: a case
report and review of the literature. Obstet Gynecol Surv 55:708, 2000
Finkelsztejn A, Brooks JB, Paschoal FM Jr, et al: What can we really tell women with multiple sclerosis
regarding pregnancy? A systematic review and meta-analysis of the literature. BJOG 118:790, 2011
Fisher RS, Cross JH, French JA, et al: Operational classification of seizure types by the International
League against Epilepsy: position paper of the ILAE commission for classification and terminology.
Epilepsia 58(4): 522, 2017
Fong A, Chau CT, Quant C, et al: Multiple sclerosis in pregnancy: prevalence, sociodemographic
features and obstetrical outcomes. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 31(3):382, 2018
Food and Drug Administration: FDA drug safety communication: risk of oral clefts in children born to
mothers taking Topamax (topiramate), 2011. Available at:
http://www.fda.gov/drugs/drugsafety/ucm245085.htm. Accessed October 2, 2020

Fraser C, Plant GT: The syndrome of pseudotumor cerebri and idiopathic intracranial hypertension. Curr
Opin Neurol 24:12, 2011
Friedlander RM: Arteriovenous malformations of the brain. N Engl J Med 356(26):2704, 2007
Friedman DI, Lie GT, Digre KB: Revised diagnostic criteria for the pseudotumor cerebri syndrome in
adults and children. Neurology 81(13):1159, 2013
Furie KL, Kasner SE, Adams RJ, et al: Guidelines for the prevention of stroke in patients with stroke or
transient ischemic attack: a guideline for healthcare professionals from the American Heart
Association/American Stroke Association. Stroke 42:227, 2011
Gagyor I, Madhok VB, Daly F, et al: Antiviral treatment for Bell’s palsy (idiopathic facial paralysis).
Cochrane Database System Rev 9:CD001869, 2019
Ghanem KG, Ram S, Rice PA: The modern epidemic of syphilis. N Engl J Med 382(9):845, 2020
Gilden DH: Bell’s palsy. N Engl J Med 351:1323, 2004
Gillman GS, Schaitkin BM, May M, et al: Bell’s palsy in pregnancy: a study of recovery outcomes.
Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 126:26, 2002
Goadsby PJ: Migraine and other headache disorders. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al (eds):
Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. McGraw Hill Education, New York, 2018, p
3096
Gonzalez-Hernandez A, Condes-Lara M: The multi target drug approach in migraine treatment: the new
challenge to conquer. Headache 64:197, 2014
Gooding MS, Evangelista V, Pereira L: Carpal tunnel syndrome and meralgia paresthetica in pregnancy.
Obstet Gynecol Surv 75(2):121, 2020
Govindappagari S, Grossman T B, Ashlesha K, et al: Peripheral nerve blocks in the treatment of
migraine in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 124(6):1169, 2014
Grossman TB, Robbins MS, Govindappagari S, et al: Delivery outcomes of patients with acute migraine
in pregnancy: a retrospective study. Headache 57(4):605, 2017
Hamaoui A, Mercado R: Association of preeclampsia and myasthenia: a case report. J Reprod Med
54(9):587, 2009
Harden CL, Hopp J, Ting TY, et al: Practice parameter update: management issues for women with
epilepsy—focus on pregnancy (an evidence-based review): obstetrical complications and change in
seizure frequency. Neurology 73(2):126, 2009a
Harden CL, Meador KJ, Pennell PB, et al: Practice parameter update: management issues for women
with epilepsy-focus on pregnancy (an evidence-based review): teratogenesis and perinatal
outcomes. Neurology 73(2):133, 2009b
Harden CL, Pennell PB, Koppel BS, et al: Practice parameter update: management issues for women
with epilepsy-focus on pregnancy (an evidence-based review): vitamin K, folic acid, blood levels,
and breastfeeding. Neurology 73(2): 142, 2009c
Hatem CF, Yri HM, Sorensen AL, et al: Long-term visual outcome in a Danish population of patients
with idiopathic intracranial hypertension. Acta Ophthalmol 96(7):719, 2018
Heaney DC, Williams DJ, O’Brien PO: Neurology. In Powrie R, Greene M, Camann W (eds): de
Swiet’s Medical Disorders in Obstetric Practice, 5th ed. Wiley-Blackwell, Oxford, 2010
Hellwig K, Rockhoff M, Herbstritt S, et al: Exclusive breastfeeding and the effect on postpartum
multiple sclerosis relapses. JAMA Neurol 72(10):1132, 2015
Hemphill JC 3rd, Greenberg SM, Anderson CS, et al: Guidelines for the management of spontaneous
intracerebral hemorrhage: a guideline for healthcare professionals from the American Heart
Association/American Stroke Association. Stroke 46(7):2032, 2015

Herbstritt S, Langer-Gould A, Rockoff M, et al: Glatiramer acetate during early pregnancy: a
prospective cohort study. Mult Scler 22(6):810, 2016
Hirsch KG, Froehler MT, Huang J, et al: Occurrence of perimesencephalic subarachnoid hemorrhage
during pregnancy. Neurocrit Care 10(3):339, 2009
Huang CJ, Fan YC, Tsai PS: Differential impacts of modes of anaesthesia on the risk of stroke among
preeclamptic women who undergo caesarean delivery: a population-based study. Br J Anaesth
105(6):818, 2010
Huna-Baron R, Kupersmith MJ: Idiopathic intracranial hypertension in pregnancy. J Neurol 249(8):1078,
2002
Hussein I Y, Govenden V, Grant JM, et al: Prolongation of pregnancy in a woman who sustained brain
death at 26 weeks of gestation. BJOG 113:120, 2006
Iezzoni LI, Chen Y, McLain AB: Current pregnancy among women with spinal cord injury: findings
from the US national spinal cord injury database. Spinal Cord 53(11):821, 2015
International Headache Society: Headache classification committee of the International Headache
Society (IHS) the international classification of headache disorders, 3rd edition. Cephalgia 38(1):1,
2018
James AH, Bushnell CD, Jamison MG, et al: Incidence and risk factors for stroke in pregnancy and the
puerperium. Obstet Gynecol 106:509, 2005
Jamieson DG, McVige JW: Imaging of neurologic disorders in pregnancy. Neurol Clin 38(1):37, 2020
Jamieson DG, Skliut M: Stroke in women: what is different? Curr Atheroscler Rep 12:236, 2010
Jovandaric MZ, Despotovic DJ, Jesic MM, Neonatal outcome in pregnancies with auto-immune
myasthenia gravis. Fetal Pediatr Pathol 35(3):167, 2016
Judy AE, McCain CL, Lawton ES, et al: Systolic hypertension, preeclampsia-related mortality, and
stroke in California. Obstet Gynecol 133(6):1151, 2019
Jung SY, Bae HJ, Park BJ, et al: Parity and risk of hemorrhagic strokes. Neurology 74:1424, 2010
Kapur J, Elm J, Chamberlain JM, et al: Randomized trial of three anticonvulsant medications for status
epilepticus. N Engl J Med 381(22): 2103, 2019
Karmaniolou I, Petropoulos G, Theodoraki K: Management of idiopathic intracranial hypertension in
parturients: anesthetic considerations. Can J Anesth 58:650, 2011
Kasradze S, Gogatishvili N, Lomidze G, et al: Cognitive functions in children exposed to antiepileptic
drugs in uterostudy in Georgia. Epilepsy Behav 66:105, 2017
Katz A, Sergienko R, Dior U, et al: Bell’s palsy during pregnancy: is it associated with adverse perinatal
outcome? Laryngoscope 121:1395, 2011
Keith MW, Masear V, Amadio PC, et al: Treatment of carpal tunnel syndrome. J Am Acad Orthop Surg
17:397, 2009
Kesler A, Kupfermic M: Idiopathic intracranial hypertension and pregnancy. Clin Obstet Gynecol
56(2):389, 2013
Klein P, Mathews GC: Antiepileptic drugs and neurocognitive development. Neurology 82(3):194, 2014
Knight M, Tuffnell D, Kenyon S, et al (eds): Saving lives, improving mothers; care surveillance of
maternal deaths in the UK 2011–13 and lessons learned to inform maternity care from the UK and
Ireland Confidential Enquiries into Maternal Deaths and Morbidity 2009–13. Oxford, National
Perinatal Epidemiology Unit, 2015
Krassioukov A, Warburton DE, Teasel IR, et al: A systematic review of the management of autonomic
dysreflexia after spinal cord injury. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 90:682, 2009
Kuczkowski KM: Labor analgesia for the parturient with spinal cord injury: what does an obstetrician
need to know? Arch Gynecol Obstet 274:108, 2006

Kuklina EV, Tong X, Bansil P, et al: Trends in pregnancy hospitalizations that included a stroke in the
United States from 1994 to 2007. Stroke 42:2564, 2011
Kusznir Vitturi B, Barreto Cabral F, Mella Cukiert C: Outcomes of pregnant women with refractory
epilepsy. Seizure 69:251, 2019
Lamy C, Hamon JB, Coste J, et al: Ischemic stroke in young women. Neurology 55:269, 2000
Lawton MT, Vates GE: Subarachnoid hemorrhage. N Engl J Med 377(3):257, 2017
Leavell Y, Khalid M, Tuhrim S, et al: Baseline characteristics and readmissions after cerebral venous
sinus thrombosis in a nationally representative database. Cerebrovasc Dis 46 (5-6):249, 2018
Lee AG, Pless M, Falardeau J, et al: The use of acetazolamide in idiopathic intracranial hypertension
during pregnancy. Am J Ophthalmol 139:855, 2005
Lee I, Walker JB, Nozak K, et al: Weak and winded. N Engl J Med 381(1):76, 2019
Leffert LR, Clancy CR, Bateman BT, et al: Treatment patterns and short-term outcomes in ischemic
stroke in pregnancy or postpartum period. Am J Obstet Gynecol 214(6):723.e1, 2016
Le Liepvre H, Dinh A, Idiard-Chamois B, et al: Pregnancy in spinal cord-injured women, a cohort study
of 37 pregnancies in 25 women. Spinal Cord 55(2):167, 2017
Leonhard SE, Mandarakas MR, Gondim FA, et al: Diagnosis and management of Guillain-Barré
syndrome in ten steps. Nat Rev Neurol 15(11):671, 2019
Levine SR, Brey RL, Tilley BC, et al: Antiphospholipid antibodies and subsequent thrombo-occlusive
events in patients with ischemic stroke. JAMA 291:576, 2004
Lewis A, Varelas P, Greer D: Pregnancy and brain death: lack of guidance in U.S. hospital policies. Am
J Perinatol 33(14): 1382, 2016
Li Y, Margraf J, Kluck B, et al: Thrombolytic therapy for ischemic stroke secondary to paradoxical
embolism in pregnancy. Neurologist 18:44, 2012
Limaye K, Patel A, Dave M, et al: Secular increases in spontaneous subarachnoid hemorrhage during
pregnancy: a nationwide sample analysis. J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis 28 (4):1141, 2019
Lin SY, Hu CJ, Lin HC: Increased risk of stroke in patients who undergo cesarean section delivery: a
nationwide population-based study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 198:391.e1, 2008
Lowenstein DH: Seizures and epilepsy. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al (eds): Harrison’s
Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. McGraw Hill Education, New York, 2018, p 3050
Lu X, Liu P, Li Y: Pre-existing, incidental and hemorrhagic AVMs in pregnancy and postpartum:
gestational age, morbidity and mortality, management and risk to the fetus. Interv Neuroradiol
22(2):206, 2016
Lucas S: Medication use in the treatment of migraine during pregnancy and lactation. Curr Pain
Headache Rep 13:392, 2009
Lucas S: Migraine and other headache disorders: ACOG clinical updates in women’s health care
primary and preventive care review summary volume XVIII, number 4, Obstet Gynecol 134(1):211,
2019
Lum M, Tsiouris AJ: MRI safety considerations during pregnancy. Clin Imaging 62:69, 2020
MacDonald SC, Bateman BT, McElrath TF: Mortality and morbidity during delivery hospitalization
among pregnant women with epilepsy in the United States. JAMA Neurol 72(9):981, 2015
MacDonald SC, McElrath TF, Hernandez-Diaz S: Pregnancy outcomes in women with multiple
sclerosis. Am J Epidemiol 188(1):57, 2019
Madhok VB, Gagyor I, Daly F, et al: Corticosteroids for Bell’s palsy (idiopathic facial paralysis).
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 7:CD001942, 2016
Mao-Draayer Y, Thiel S, Mills EA, et al: Neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorders and pregnancy:
therapeutic considerations. Nat Rev Neurol 16(3):154, 2020

Martin JN Jr, Thigpen BD, Moore RC, et al: Stroke and severe preeclampsia and eclampsia: a paradigm
shift focusing on systolic blood pressure. Obstet Gynecol 105:246, 2005
Martinelli I, Passamonti SM, Maino A, et al: Pregnancy outcome after a first episode of cerebral vein
thrombosis. J Thromb Haemost 14(12):2386, 2016
Martinez-Sånchez P, Fuentes B, Fernåndez-Dominguez J, et al: Young women have poorer outcomes
than men after stroke. Cerebrovasc Dis 31:455, 2011
McCau11ey JA, Pates JA: Postpartum cerebral venous thrombosis. Obstet Gynecol 118:423, 2011
Meems M, Truijens S, Spek V, et al: Prevalence, course and determinants of carpal tunnel syndrome
symptoms during pregnancy: a prospective study. BJOG 122(8):1112, 2015
Miller EC, Gatollari HJ, Too G, et al: Risk of pregnancy associated stroke across age groups in New
York state. JAMA Neurol 73(12):1461, 2016
Miller EC, Leffert L: Stroke in pregnancy: a focused update. Anesth Analg 130(4):1085, 2020
Miller EC, Wen T, Elkind MSV, et al: Infection during delivery hospitalization and risk of readmission for
postpartum stroke. Stroke 50(10):2685, 2019
Miyakoshi K, Matsuoka M, Yasutomi D, et al: Moyamoya-disease-related ischemic stroke in the
postpartum period. J Obstet Gynaecol Res 35(5):974, 2009
Murakami M, Morine M, Iwasa T, et al: Management of maternal hydrocephalus requires replacement
of ventriculoperitoneal shunt with ventriculoatrial shunt: a case report. Arch Gynecol Obstet 282:339,
2010
National Spinal Cord Injury Statistical Center: Spinal cord injury: facts and figures at a glance. 2021.
Available at: https://www.nscisc.uab.edu/. Accessed October 15, 2021
Oh MK, Ryu JH, Jeon WJ, et al: Case report: postpartum cerebral venous thrombosis misdiagnosed as
postdural puncture headache. BMC Anesthesiol 20(1):80, 2020
Oliveira GA, Bernardes JM, Santos ES, et al: Carpal tunnel syndrome during the third trimester of
pregnancy: prevalence and risk factors. Arch Gynecol Obstet 300(3):623, 2019
Pacheco LD, Hankins GD, Saad AF, et al: Acute management of ischemic stroke during pregnancy.
Obstet Gynecol 113(5):933, 2019
Pacheco LD, Saad AF, Hankins GD, et al: Guillain-Barré syndrome in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol
128(5):1105, 2016
Padua L, Di Pasquale A, Pazzaglia C, et al: Systematic review of pregnancy-related carpal tunnel
syndrome. Muscle Nerve 42:697, 2010
Pavlovic JM, Akcali D, Bolay H, et al: Sex-related influences in migraine. J Neurosci Res 95(1-2):587,
2017
Pennell PB, French JA, May BC, et al: Changes in seizure frequency and antiepileptic therapy during
pregnancy. N Engl J Med 383(26):2547, 2020
Perucca E: Birth defects after prenatal exposure to antiepileptic drugs. Lancet Neurol 4:781, 2005
Petersen EE, Davis NL, Goodman D, et al: Racial/ethnic disparities in pregnancy-related deaths United
States, 2007–2016. MMWR 68(35):762, 2019
Phillips KM, Heiser A, Gaudin R, et al: Onset of Bell’s palsy in late pregnancy and early puerperium is
associated with worse long-term outcomes. Laryngoscope 127(12):2854, 2017
Pires CV, Linhares IM, Serzedello F, et al: Alterations in the genital microbiota in women with spinal
cord injury. Obstet Gynecol 127(2):273, 2016
Podciechowski L, Brocka-Nitecka U, Dabrowska K, et al: Pregnancy complicated by myasthenia
gravis-twelve years’ experience. Neuro Endocrinol Lett 26:603, 2005
Portaccio E, Annovazzi P, Ghezzi A, et al: Pregnancy decision making in women with multiple sclerosis
treated with natalizumab: I: fetal risks. Neurology 90(10):e823, 2018

Portaccio E, Ghezzi A, Hakiki B, et al: Breastfeeding is not related to postpartum relapses in multiple
sclerosis. Neurology 77:145, 2011
Powner DJ, Bernstein 1M: Extended somatic support in pregnant women after brain death. Crit Care
Med 31:1241, 2003
Reinhold AK, Kredel M, Markus CK, et al: Vaginal delivery in the 30+4 weeks of pregnancy and organ
donation after brain death in early pregnancy. BMJ Case Rep 12(9):e231601, 2019
Riffaud L, Ferre JC, Carsin-Nicol B, et al: Endoscopic third ventriculostomy for the treatment of
obstructive hydrocephalus during pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 108:801, 2006
Robbins MS, Farmakidis C, Dayal AK, et al: Acute headache diagnosis in pregnant women: a hospitalbased study. Neurology 85(12):1024, 2015
Robertson K, Dawood R, Ashworth F: Vaginal delivery is safely achieved in pregnancies complicated
by spinal cord injury: a retrospective 25-year observational study of pregnancy outcomes in a
national spinal injuries centre. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth 20(1):56, 2020
Rodriguez AN, Patel S, Macias D, et al: Timing of emergency postpartum hospital visits in the fourth
trimester. Am J Perinatol 38(4):319, 2021
Ryman KM, Pace WD, Smith S, et al: Alteplase therapy for acute ischemic stroke in pregnancy: two
case reports and a systematic review of the literature. Pharmacotherapy 39(7):767, 2019
Saiminen HJ, Leggett H, Boggild M: Glatiramer acetate exposure in pregnancy: preliminary safety and
birth outcomes. J Neurol 257(12):3, 2020
Saldanha IJ, Cao W, Bhuma MR,et al: Management of primary headaches during pregnancy,
postpartum, and breastfeeding: a systematic review. Headache 61(1):11, 2021
Salman L, Shmueli A, Ashwal E, et al: The impact of maternal epilepsy on perinatal outcome in
singleton gestations. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 31(24):3283, 2018
Sanders DB, Wolde GI, Benatar M, et al: International consensus guidance for management of
myasthenia gravis: executive summary. Neurology 87(4):419, 2016
Schiza S, Starnatakis E, Panagopoulou A, et al: Management of pregnancy and delivery of a patient with
malfunctioning ventriculoperitoneal shunt. J Obstet Gynaecol 32(1):6, 2012
Scott CA, Bewley S, Rudd A: Incidence, risk factors, management, and outcomes of stroke in
pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 120:318, 2012
Shi Q, MacDermid JC: Is surgical intervention more effective than non-surgical treatment for carpal
tunnel syndrome? A systemic review, J Orthop Surg 6:17, 2011
Silvis SM, Lindgren E, Hiltunen S, et al: Postpartum period is a risk factor for cerebral venous
thrombosis. Stroke 50(2): 501, 2019
Simolke GA, Cox SM, Cunningham FG: Cerebrovascular accident complicating pregnancy and the
puerperium. Obstet Gynecol 78:37, 1991
Smith WS, Johnston SC, Hemphill III JC: Cerebrovascular diseases. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper
DL, et al (eds): Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. McGraw-Hill Education, New
York, 2018, p 3068
Sperling JD, Dahlke JD, Huber WJ, et al: The role of headache in the classification and management of
hypertensive disorders in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 126(2):297, 2015
Spielmann K, Kayser A, Beck E, et al: Pregnancy outcome after anti-migraine triptan use: a prospective
observational cohort study. Cephalalgia 38(6):1081, 2018
Stephen LJ, Harden C, Tomson T, et al: Management of epilepsy in women. Lancet Neurol 18(5):481,
2019
Tepper SJ: Anti-calcitonin gene related peptide (CGRP) therapies: update on a previous review after the
American Headache Society 60th Scientific Meeting, San Francisco, June 2018. Headache 58(Suppl

3):276, 2018
Thambisetty M, Lavin PJ, Newman NJ, et al: Fulminant idiopathic intracranial hypertension. Neurology
68:229, 2007
Thomas SV, Ajaykumar B, Sindhu K, et al: Cardiac malformations are increased in infants of mothers
with epilepsy. Pediatr Cardiol 29:604, 2008
Tian N, Boring M, Kobau R, et al: Active epilepsy and seizure control in adults—United States, 2013
and 2015. MMWR 67(15):437, 2018
Tiel Groenestege AT, Rinkel CJ, van der Bom JG, et al: The risk of aneurysmal subarachnoid
hemorrhage during pregnancy, delivery, and the puerperium in the Utrecht population: casecrossover study and standardized incidence ratio estimation. Stroke 40(4):1148, 2009
Tietjen GE, Maly EF: Migraine and ischemic stroke in women: a narrative review. Headache 60(5):843,
2020
Tintore M, Vidal-Jordana A, Sastre-Garriga J, et al: Treatment of multiple sclerosis success from bench
to bedside. Nat Rev Neurol 15(1):53, 2019
Tomson T, Battino D, Bonizzoni E, et al: Comparative risk of major congenital malformations with eight
different antiepileptic drugs: a prospective cohort study of the EURAP registry. Lancet Neurol
17(6):530, 2018
Tomson T, Battino D, Bonizzoni E, et al: Declining malformation rates with changed antiepileptic drug
prescribing: an observational study. Neurology 93(9):e831, 2019a
Tomson T, Battino D, Bromley R, et al: Management of epilepsy in pregnancy: a report from the
International League against Epilepsy Task Force on women and pregnancy. Epileptic Disord
21(6):497, 2019b
Turner K, Piazzini A, Franza A, et al: Epilepsy and postpartum depression. Epilepsia 50(1):24, 2009
Van den Heuvel MI, Thomason ME: Functional connectivity of the human brain in utero. Trends Cogn
Sci 20(12):931, 2016
Van Teen TR, Panerai RB, Haeri S, et al: Changes in cerebral autoregulation in the second half of
pregnancy and compared to non-pregnant controls. Pregnancy Hypertens 6(4):380, 2016
VanderPluym J: Cluster headache: Special considerations for treatment of female patients of
reproductive age and pediatric patients. Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep 16(1):5, 2016
Viale L, Allotey J, Cheong-See F, et al: Epilepsy in pregnancy and reproductive outcomes: a systematic
review and metaanalysis. Lancet 386:1845, 2015
Virani SS, Alonso A, Aparicio HJ, et al: Heart disease and stroke statistics-2021 update: a report from
the American Heart Association 143(8):e254, 2021
Wabnitz A, Bushnell C: Migraine, cardiovascular disease, and stroke during pregnancy: systematic
review of the literature. Cephalalgia 35(2):132, 2015
Wang IK, Chang SN, Liao CC, et al: Hypertensive disorders in pregnancy and preterm delivery and
subsequent stroke in Asian women: a retrospective cohort study. Stroke 42:716, 2011
Waters J: Management of myasthenia gravis in pregnancy. Neurol Clin 37(1):113, 2019
Wen JC, Liu TC, Chen YH, et al: No increased risk of adverse pregnancy outcomes for women with
myasthenia gravis: a nationwide population-based study. Eur J Neurol 16:889, 2009
Westgren N, Hultling C, Levi R, et al: Pregnancy and delivery in women with a trauma spinal cord injury
in Sweden, 1980–1991. Obstet Gynecol 81:926, 1993
Weston J, Bromley R, Jackson CF, et al: Monotherapy treatment of epilepsy in pregnancy: congenital
malformation outcomes in the child. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 11:CD010224, 2016
Wisoff JH, Kratzert KJ, Handwerker SM, et al: Pregnancy in patients with cerebrospinal fluid shunts:
report of a series and review of the literature. Neurosurgery 29:827, 1991

Wolfe GI, Kaminski HJ, Aban IB, et al: Randomized trial of thymectomy in myasthenia gravis. N Engl J
Med 375(6):511, 2016
Wood ME, Frazier JA, Nordeng HM, et al: Longitudinal changes in neurodevelopmental outcomes
between 18 and 36 months in children with prenatal triptan exposure: findings from the Norwegian
Mother and Child Cohort Study. BMJ Open 6(9):e011971, 2016
Yager PH, Singhal AV, Nogueira RG: Case 31–2012: an 18-year old man with blurred vision, dysarthria,
and ataxia. N Engl J Med 367:1450, 2012
Yoshida K, Takahashi JC, Takenobu Y, et al: Strokes associated with pregnancy and puerperium. A
nationwide study by the Japan Stroke Society. Stroke 48:276, 2017
Zeeman GG, Fleckenstein JL, Twickler DM, et al: Cerebral infarction in eclampsia. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 190:714, 2004a
Zeeman GG, Hat ab M, Twickler DM: Increased cerebral blood flow in preeclampsia with magnetic
resonance imaging. Am J Obstet Gynecol 191:1425, 2004b
Zeeman GG, Hatab M, Twickler DM: Maternal cerebral blood flow changes in pregnancy. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 189:968, 2003
Zofkie A, Cunningham FG: A 33-year single-center experience with pregnancy-associated strokes.
Abstract No. 799, Am J Obstet Gynecol 218:S476, 2018

