CHAPTER 32

The Newborn

TRANSITION TO AIR BREATHING
CARE IN THE DELIVERY ROOM
EVALUATION OF NEWBORN CONDITION
PREVENTIVE CARE
ROUTINE NEWBORN CARE
REFERENCES
In most instances at delivery, the newborn is healthy and vigorous, but at
times, special care may be needed. For this reason, the American Academy
of Pediatrics and the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
(2017a) recommend that every birth should be attended by at least one
qualified individual. This person should be skilled in the initial steps of
newborn care and positive-pressure ventilation, and their only responsibility
is management of the newborn. This usually is a pediatrician, nurse
practitioner, anesthesiologist, nurse anesthetist, or specially trained nurse.
However, in their absence, the responsibility for neonatal resuscitation falls
to the obstetrical attendant. Thus, obstetricians should be well versed in
measures for immediate care of the newborn.
The number and qualifications of personnel who attend the delivery will
vary depending on the anticipated risk, the number of babies, and the hospital
setting. A qualified team with full resuscitation skills should be present for
high-risk deliveries and immediately available for every resuscitation. This

team should not be on call at home or in a remote area of the hospital.
Moreover, team training through frequent simulation practice is
recommended for all who may be called to attend deliveries (Aziz, 2020).

TRANSITION TO AIR BREATHING
Immediately following birth, the newborn must promptly convert from
placental to pulmonary gas exchange. Pulmonary vascular resistance must
fall, pulmonary perfusion must rapidly rise, and unique fetal vascular shunts
must begin to close to separate the systemic and pulmonary circulations.
These shunts include the patent ductus arteriosus and patent foramen ovale,
described in Chapter 7 (p. 128). Lung aeration is not only critical for
pulmonary gas exchange. Specifically, recent studies suggest that it is
responsible for initiating cardiovascular changes at birth (Hooper, 2019).
In utero, the fetal lungs are filled with amnionic fluid, which must be
cleared quickly for air breathing. Various means contribute, and these
mechanisms may depend on gestational age and mode of delivery. First, in
term fetuses, a large release of fetal adrenaline late in labor stimulates
pulmonary epithelial cells to stop secreting and instead to start reabsorbing
lung liquid due to sodium-channel activation (te Pas, 2008). This mechanism
is likely a minor one, as blockade of the receptors for sodium-channel
activation reduces or delays but does not prevent liquid clearance from the
lungs at birth (Buchiboyina, 2017).
As a second method, mechanical forces aid lung fluid clearance. Early
reports described expulsion of lung liquid by compression of the fetal thorax
and abdomen as they passed through the birth canal (Karlberg, 1962;
Saunders, 1978). By this mechanism, up to a third of lung liquid is expelled
in a jet of fluid from the nose and mouth once the respiratory tract is exposed
to the lower outside pressure. However, it appears that uterine contractions
force a change in fetal posture, which compresses the thorax and raises
intrathoracic pressures. This expels lung liquid early in labor more so than
the “vaginal squeeze” theory (Hooper, 2019; te Pas, 2008; Vyas, 1981).
In a third mechanism, a significant amount of lung liquid is cleared after
birth (Hooper, 2019). In animal studies, most lung aeration occurs during
inspiration—within three to five breaths after birth (Hooper, 2007). The
transpulmonary pressure gradient during inspiration promotes movement of

fluid into the interstitial tissue. No liquid clears between breaths. From the
interstitium, fluid is gradually cleared, probably by the pulmonary circulation
and lymphatic vessels. It is possible for lung interstitial tissue pressure to
rise to a point that fluid can actually move back into the airspaces during
expiration unless positive end-expiratory pressure opposes liquid reentry
(Siew, 2009). This may contribute to development of transient tachypnea of
the newborn.
As fluid is replaced by air, compression of the pulmonary vasculature is
reduced considerably, and in turn, resistance to blood flow is lowered. With
the fall in pulmonary arterial blood pressure, the ductus arteriosus normally
closes.
High, negative intrathoracic pressures are required to permit the initial
entry of air into the fluid-filled alveoli. Normally, from the first breath after
birth, progressively more residual air accumulates in the lung. With each
successive breath, lower pulmonary opening pressure is required. In the
normal mature newborn, by approximately the fifth breath, pressure-volume
changes achieved with each respiration are very similar to those of the adult.
Thus, the breathing pattern shifts from shallow episodic inspirations
characteristic of the fetus to regular, deeper inhalations.
As a last mechanism, surfactant is synthesized by type II pneumocytes. It
lowers alveolar surface tension and helps maintain lung inflation by
preventing alveolar collapse. Insufficient surfactant, which is common in
preterm neonates, leads promptly to respiratory distress syndrome (Chap. 34,
p. 615).
In utero, umbilical venous return is the main source of preload for the left
ventricle. Namely, the fetal pulmonary blood flow is very low due to high
pulmonary vascular resistance and is unable to provide sufficient venous
return to maintain left ventricular output (Hooper, 2019).
Clamping the umbilical cord reduces preload for the left ventricle and
thus reduces cardiac output. Until the lungs aerate and pulmonary blood flow
increases, the reduced cardiac output will manifest as bradycardia. If cord
clamping is delayed until after the lungs have aerated, the transition is
smoother and cardiac output does not fall (Bhatt, 2013). This understanding
has led to interest in delayed (physiological) cord clamping, especially if it
can be done after successful inflation of the lung. Specialized resuscitation
trolleys have been developed to aid this practice, and several international
randomized trials are underway.

CARE IN THE DELIVERY ROOM
The International Liaison Committee on Resuscitation (ILCOR) updated its
scientific review for neonatal delivery room care and resuscitation (Wyckoff,
2020). This review is used by the American Academy of Pediatrics and the
American Heart Association to develop the neonatal resuscitation guidelines
for North America (Aziz, 2020).

■ Immediate Care
Before and during delivery, several determinants of neonatal well-being are
carefully considered. Risk factors can include: (1) poor maternal health
status; (2) prenatal complications, including any suspected fetal
malformations; (3) preterm gestational age; (4) labor complications; (5) long
duration of labor and ruptured membranes; (6) anesthesia that may affect
placental perfusion; (7) difficult delivery; and (8) various medications given
during labor and their dosages, administration routes, and timing.
When risk factors are present, neonatal resuscitation providers should be
present for the delivery. This team readies equipment, ensures that adequate
personnel are present, delegates roles and responsibilities, and considers
contingency plans to stabilize the newborn. In preparation, a neonatal
provider will ask the delivery provider regarding expected gestational age,
amnionic fluid color, additional maternal and fetal risk factors, and the
management plan for umbilical cord clamping (Weiner, 2021). Several
neonatal conditions are associated with a nonvigorous presentation. These
may include immaturity, hypoxemia or acidosis from any cause, sepsis,
recent drugs administered to the mother, meconium-stained amnionic fluid,
and central nervous system developmental abnormalities. Those related to
the respiratory tract are lung abnormalities, upper airway obstruction,
pneumothorax, and meconium aspiration.

■ Umbilical Cord Management
Obstetrical and pediatric care teams should ideally discuss plans regarding
umbilical cord management prior to delivery. Deferred cord clamping
provides transfusion of placental blood to the newborn. In term neonates,
delaying cord clamping by 30 to 60 seconds raises hemoglobin levels at birth

and improves iron stores during infancy. The only reported negative outcome
is hyperbilirubinemia and a higher subsequent rate of phototherapy
(Gomersall, 2021). In preterm neonates, deferred cord clamping may reduce
rates of blood transfusion, intraventricular hemorrhage, and necrotizing
enterocolitis and improves survival rates (Seidler, 2021).
Delayed cord clamping should be performed in preterm and term
newborns who do not require resuscitation at birth. There should be no delay
if a newborn requires resuscitation or if placental abruption, cord avulsion,
or bleeding placenta previa or vasa previa complicates delivery. Cord
milking is a reasonable alternative to immediate cord clamping for late
preterm and term newborns. It should be avoided in neonates <28 weeks’
gestation (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020a;
Gomersall, 2021; Seidler, 2021).

■ Newborn Resuscitation
Approximately 10 percent of newborns require some degree of active
resuscitation to stimulate breathing, and 1 percent need extensive care.
Perhaps not coincidentally, the neonatal death rate with home birth in the
United States is small but still fourfold greater than attended hospital births
(Grünebaum, 2020).
When deprived of adequate gas exchange, either before or after birth,
neonates demonstrate a well-defined sequence of events leading to apnea
(Fig. 32-1). With oxygen deprivation and carbon dioxide (CO2) elevation,
there is a transient period of rapid breathing, and if it persists, breathing
stops, which is termed primary apnea. This stage is accompanied by a fall in
heart rate and loss of neuromuscular tone. Simple stimulation will usually
reverse primary apnea. If oxygen deprivation and asphyxia persist, however,
the newborn will develop deep gasping respirations, followed by secondary
apnea. This latter stage is associated with a further decline in heart rate, fall
in blood pressure, and loss of neuromuscular tone. Neonates in secondary
apnea will not respond to stimulation and will not spontaneously resume
respiratory efforts. Unless ventilation is assisted, death follows.

FIGURE 32-1 Physiological changes associated with primary and secondary apnea in the newborn.
bpm = beats per minute; HR = heart rate; MAP = mean arterial pressure. (Reproduced with permission
from Kattwinkel J: Textbook of Neonatal Resuscitation, 6th ed. Elk Grove Village, American Academy
of Pediatrics and American Heart Association, 2010.)

Clinically, primary and secondary apneas are initially indistinguishable.
When a response to stimulation is not immediate, resuscitation with effective
ventilation of the apneic newborn must begin quickly. Effective positivepressure ventilation is the most critical intervention in neonatal resuscitation.

■ Resuscitation Protocol
Initial Assessment
Immediately after birth and usually during the delay for umbilical cord
clamping, newborn tone, respiratory effort, and heart rate are evaluated (Fig.
32-2). Most term neonates are vigorous by 10 to 30 seconds after birth
(Ersdal, 2012). For these, initial steps of warming the newborn can be done
on the mother’s chest or abdomen. Direct skin-to-skin contact with the mother
and drying and covering the newborn with a warm blanket will help maintain
euthermia (36.5 to 37.5°C). A vigorously crying newborn does not require
routine oral suctioning (Aziz 2020; Foster, 2017). Instead, bulb suctioning to
remove secretions is best reserved for those who cannot clear secretions on
their own due to apnea or copious secretions. Additional routine care steps

include drying, gentle stimulation by rubbing the newborn’s back, and
continued observation during the transition period.

FIGURE 32-2 Algorithm for resuscitation of the newborn based on the International Liaison
Committee on Resuscitation scientific review and recommended by the American Academy of
Pediatrics and American Heart Association (Aziz, 2020; Wyckoff, 2020). bpm = beats per minute;
CPAP = continuous positive airway pressure; ECG = electrocardiogram; ETT = endotracheal tube; HR
= heart rate; IV = intravenous; PPV = positive-pressure ventilation; SpO2 = peripheral oxygen
saturation; UVC = umbilical venous catheter.

If not vigorous or if preterm, the neonate is carried to a prewarmed
radiant warmer for initial newborn care steps. The initial wet birth blanket is
removed to allow newborn drying. Cold stress is associated with multiple
neonatal morbidities and mortality. Preterm infants are particularly
vulnerable, and special steps can help maintain euthermia. These are
providing a warm delivery room (>25°C), covering the neonatal head with
either a plastic or wool hat, applying polyethylene plastic “ponchos” or
wraps to slow evaporative heat losses, using chemically activated thermal
mattresses to reduce conductive heat loss, and administering warm,
humidified respiratory gases during respiratory stabilization (Aziz, 2020;
Wyckoff, 2020).
At the radiant warmer, newborns are positioned with mild neck extension
to maximally open the airway. If the newborn is apneic or has copious
secretions that obstruct the airway, then a bulb syringe or suction catheter can
help clear the mouth and the nose. Routine intubation and suctioning of
meconium-stained amnionic fluid is not recommended for the nonvigorous
newborn (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2021a;
Wyckoff, 2020). Intubation and suction are reserved for suspected airway

obstruction. Meconium-stained amnionic fluid is a significant risk factor for
the need for advanced resuscitation. In rare circumstances, the meconiumstained fluid can obstruct the newborn’s airway and necessitate intubation
and tracheal suctioning (Aziz, 2020; Wyckoff, 2020).
After completion of the initial stabilization steps, persisting apnea,
gasping respirations, or heart rate ≤100 beats per minute (bpm) should
prompt immediate administration of positive-pressure ventilation with room
air (Fig. 32-3). This should be started by 60 seconds of life, if not sooner,
once the initial steps are completed.

FIGURE 32-3 Correct use of bag-and-mask ventilation. The head should be in a sniffing position with
the tip of the nose pointing to the ceiling. The neck should not be hyperextended.

Mask Ventilation
Assisted ventilation by facemask at a rate of 40 to 60 breaths per minute is
recommended as an initial resuscitation step. Oxygen saturation is monitored
by pulse oximetry. Supplemental oxygen can be given in graduated, rising
percentages to maintain oxygen saturation values within a normal range.
Percentage goals rise progressively with accruing minutes of life (Table 321) (Weiner, 2021). Adequate ventilation is best indicated by an improved
heart rate. A colorimetric end-tidal carbon dioxide (ETCO2) monitor that

lies between the positive-pressure device and facemask serves as a helpful
adjunct to detect successful gas exchange during mask ventilation.
TABLE 32-1. Oxygen Saturation Goals per Minute of Life

If the heart rate remains ≤100 beats per minute after 5 to 10 positive
pressure breaths, and the attempted ventilation is inadequate, then further
corrective steps should begin. These can be remembered by the mnemonic
MR. SOPA (Table 32-2) (Weiner, 2021). The two most common problems
are mask leak due to an ineffective seal and malposition of the airway
(Schmölzer, 2019). Mask positioning should maintain an open mouth. This
provides a superior conduit for gas transfer than the narrow-caliber nares. If
the other corrective steps do not raise the heart rate, either intubation with an
endotracheal tube or placement of a supraglottic airway is required.
TABLE 32-2. Ventilation Corrective Steps (MR. SOPA)

Alternative Airway
If mask ventilation is ineffective or prolonged, an alternative airway is
placed. For tracheal intubation, a laryngoscope with a straight blade—size 0
for a preterm newborn and size 1 for a term neonate—is used. Gentle cricoid
pressure may be useful. An increasing heart rate and ETCO2 detection after
several breaths are the primary methods to confirm intubation of the trachea

and not the esophagus. One can also look for symmetrical chest wall motion;
auscultate for equal breath sounds, especially in the axillae; and auscultate
for the absence of breath sounds or gurgling over the stomach.
Once in place, the tube is used for tracheal suctioning only for a
suspected obstructed airway. Otherwise, an appropriate positive-pressure
device (self-inflating bag, flow-inflating bag, or T-piece resuscitator) is
attached to the endotracheal tube (Roehr, 2021). Ventilation breaths are
delivered at a rate of 40 to 60 per minute with a force adequate to stabilize
the heart rate. In term newborns, opening pressures of 30 to 40 cm H2O
typically will expand the alveoli without causing barotrauma. Once the lung
is inflated, less pressure is typically needed (20 to 25 cm H2O). For preterm
neonates, pressures of 20 to 25 cm H2O are typically used. Increases in heart
rate and peripheral oxygen saturation (SpO2) levels to acceptable ranges
reflect a positive response.

Chest Compressions
Most commonly, effective ventilation is all that is required to stabilize the
newborn in the delivery room. If the heart rate remains <60 bpm despite
ventilation corrective steps, including placement of an endotracheal tube,
chest compressions are initiated. Once the endotracheal tube is secured,
compressions are done from the head of the bed rather than the side so that
space is opened up for a provider to have umbilical venous access. When
compressions are initiated, the oxygen concentration is increased to 100
percent. With the two-thumb compression method, hands encircle the chest,
while the thumbs depress the sternum. Compressions are delivered on the
lower third of the sternum at a depth sufficient to generate a palpable pulse.
This is typically one third of the anterior-posterior diameter of the chest.
Compared with other techniques, this method offers less provider fatigue
over time, yields higher generated perfusion pressures, and lessens hand
malpositioning that could cause traumatic injury (Kapadia, 2012).
A 3:1 compressions-to-ventilation ratio is recommended, and 90
compressions and 30 breaths achieve approximately 120 events each minute.
Coordinated chest compressions and ventilations should continue until the
spontaneous heart rate is ≥60 bpm (Wyckoff, 2020).
If the heart rate remains ≤60 bpm after adequate ventilation and chest
compressions, intravenously administered epinephrine is indicated. The

recommended intravenous dose is 0.01 to 0.03 mg/kg. Epinephrine may be
given through the endotracheal tube if venous access has not been
established, but its action is less reliable (Isayama, 2020). If given through
the endotracheal tube, higher doses are employed—0.05 to 0.1 mg/kg.

Resuscitation Discontinuation
ILCOR concludes that it is reasonable to discontinue resuscitative efforts for
a neonate who remains without a heartbeat despite at least 20 minutes of
continuous and adequate resuscitative efforts (Wyckoff, 2020). Notably, the
decision to continue or discontinue resuscitative efforts must be
individualized. The time was recently lengthened due to reports of some
newborns enrolled in therapeutic hypothermia trials who had a 10-minute
Apgar score of 0 yet survived without disability. This suggests the need for
caution in limiting resuscitation to 10 minutes (Foglia, 2020).

EVALUATION OF NEWBORN CONDITION
■ Apgar Score
The scoring system described by Dr. Virginia Apgar in 1953 remains a useful
clinical tool to classify newborn health immediately after birth and to assess
the effectiveness of resuscitative measures (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2021b). During scoring, each of five easily
identifiable characteristics—heart rate, respiratory effort, muscle tone, reflex
irritability, and color—is assessed and assigned a value of 0, 1, or 2 (Table
32-3). In the currently recommended expanded form, concurrent resuscitation
interventions also are recorded over time. The total score, based on the sum
of the five components, is determined in all neonates at 1 and 5 minutes after
delivery. In those with a score <7, the score may be calculated at further 5minute intervals until a 20-minute Apgar score is assigned or resuscitation
efforts are halted (Weiner, 2021).
TABLE 32-3. 20-Minute Expanded Apgar Score

In an analysis of more than 150,000 newborns delivered at Parkland
Hospital, Casey and associates (2001b) assessed the significance of the 5minute score for predicting survival during the first 28 days of life. They
found that in term neonates, the risk of neonatal death was approximately 1 in
5000 for those with Apgar scores of 7 to 10. This risk compares with a
mortality rate of 25 percent for term newborns with 5-minute scores ≤3. Low
5-minute scores were comparably predictive of neonatal death in preterm
neonates. Similarly, an analysis of more than 113,000 preterm neonates
ranging from 22 to 36 weeks’ gestation found that Apgar scores at 5 and 10
minutes provided prognostic information for neonatal survival rates across
gestational-age strata (Cnattingius, 2020). Thus, the Apgar scoring system
remains relevant for the prediction of neonatal survival.
Apgar scores alone are not predictive of hypoxic ischemic
encephalopathy (HIE). However, in cohorts of babies diagnosed with HIE
based on umbilical cord blood pH and standardized neurologic
examinations, low 10-minute Apgar scores are significantly associated with
school-age outcomes (Natarajan, 2013).
Previously, many groups established erroneous definitions of asphyxia
based solely on low Apgar scores. These prompted the American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists and American Academy of Pediatrics
(2021b) to issue a series of joint opinions with important caveats regarding
Apgar score limitations. Certain elements of the Apgar score are partially
dependent on the physiological maturity of the newborn, and a healthy,
preterm neonate may receive a low score only because of immaturity. Other

influencing factors include fetal malformations, maternal medications, and
infection. Thus, it is inappropriate to use an Apgar score alone to diagnose
asphyxia. Moreover, the Apgar score alone cannot establish hypoxia as the
cause of cerebral palsy, as discussed in Chapter 33 (p. 604).

■ Umbilical Cord Blood Acid–Base Studies
Blood taken from umbilical vessels may be used for acid–base studies to
assess the metabolic status of the neonate. Blood collection is performed
following delivery by immediately isolating a 10- to 20-cm segment of cord
with two clamps placed near the neonate and another two clamps positioned
nearer the placenta. The cord is then cut between the two proximal clamps
and then the two distal clamps (Blickstein, 2007).
Arterial blood is drawn from the isolated cord segment into a 1- to 2-mL
commercially prepared plastic syringe containing lyophilized heparin or a
similar syringe that has been flushed with a heparin solution containing 1000
U/mL. Once sampling is completed, the needle is capped and the syringe
transported, on ice, to the laboratory. Although efforts should be made for
prompt transport, neither the pH nor partial pressure of CO2 (Pco2) values
change significantly in blood kept at room temperature for up to 60 minutes
(Lynn, 2007). Mathematical models have been developed that allow
reasonable prediction of birth acid–base status in properly collected cord
blood samples analyzed as late as 60 hours after delivery (Chauhan, 1994).
Notably, acid–base measurements can show significant variances between
different analyzing devices (Mokarami, 2012).

■ Fetal Acid–Base Physiology
The fetus produces both carbonic and organic acids. Carbonic acid (H2CO3)
forms from oxidative metabolism of CO2. The fetus usually rapidly clears
CO2 through the placental circulation. If CO2 clearance drops, carbonic acid
levels rise. This often follows impaired placental exchange. When H2CO3
accumulates in fetal blood and organic acids do not concurrently rise, the
result is respiratory acidemia.
In contrast, organic acids primarily include lactic and β-hydroxybutyric
acids. Levels of these increase with persistent placental exchange

impairment, and they result from anaerobic glycolysis. These organic acids
are cleared slowly from fetal blood. When they accumulate, without a
concurrent increase in H2CO3, the result is metabolic acidemia. With the
development of metabolic acidemia, bicarbonate (HCO3−) levels drop
because it is used to buffer the organic acid. A rise in H2CO3 concentrations
accompanied by greater organic acid levels, reflected by decreased HCO3−
levels, causes mixed respiratory-metabolic acidemia.
In the fetus, respiratory and metabolic acidemia and ultimately tissue
acidosis are most likely part of a progressively worsening continuum. This is
different from adult pathophysiology, in which distinct conditions result
either in respiratory acidosis—for example, pulmonary disease, or in
metabolic acidosis—for example, diabetes. In the fetus, the placenta serves
as both the lungs and, to a certain degree, the kidneys. One principal cause of
fetal acidemia is a drop in uteroplacental perfusion. This creates retention of
CO2, that is, respiratory acidemia, and if protracted and severe enough,
yields a mixed or metabolic acidemia.
Assuming that maternal pH and blood gases are normal, the actual pH of
fetal blood depends on the proportion of carbonic and organic acids and the
amount of bicarbonate, which is the major buffer in blood. This can best be
illustrated by the Henderson–Hasselbalch equation:

For clinical purposes, HCO3− represents the metabolic component and is
reported in mEq/L. The H2CO3 concentration reflects the respiratory
component and is reported as the Pco2 in mm Hg. Thus:

The result of this equation is a pH value. Because pH is a logarithmic
term, it does not give a linear measure of acid accumulation. For example, a
change in hydrogen ion concentration associated with a fall in pH from 7.0 to
6.9 is almost twice that which is associated with a fall in pH from 7.3 to 7.2.

For this reason, the change in base—termed delta base—offers a more linear
measure of the degree of accumulation of metabolic acid (Armstrong, 2007).
The delta base is a calculated number used as a measure of the change in
buffering capacity of bicarbonate (HCO3−). The formula for calculating the
base excess (BE) is as follows:

Shown in Figure 32-4 is a nomogram from which these can be calculated
if only two parameters are known. For example, the HCO3− concentration
declines with a metabolic acidemia as it is consumed to maintain a normal
pH. A base deficit develops when the HCO3− concentration drops below
normal levels, and a base excess occurs when HCO3− values are above
normal. Importantly, a mixed respiratory–metabolic acidemia with a large
base deficit and a low HCO3−, for example 12 mmol/L, is more often
associated with a depressed neonate than is a mixed acidemia with a minimal
base deficit and a more nearly normal HCO3− level.

FIGURE 32-4 Nomogram for determining the delta base. (Reproduced with permission from SiggaardAnderson O: Blood acid–base alignment nomogram. Scand J Clin Lab Invest. 1963;15:211–7.)

■ Clinical Significance of Acidemia
Fetal oxygenation and pH generally decline during the course of normal
labor. Normal umbilical cord blood pH and blood gas values at delivery in

term newborns are summarized in Table 32-4. Similar values have been
reported for preterm neonates (Ramin, 1989; Skiold, 2017). The lower limits
of normal pH in the newborn range from 7.05 to 7.16 for newborns 28 to 42
weeks’ gestation at birth, with some variation based on gestational age
(Skiold, 2017). Thus, these values should be considered to define neonatal
acidemia. Even so, most fetuses will tolerate intrapartum acidemia with a pH
as low as 7.00 without incurring neurological impairment (American College
of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2014; Lee, 2020). That said, in a study
of newborns with a pH <7.0 from Parkland Hospital, the incidences of
neonatal deaths—8 percent, intensive care admissions—39 percent,
intubations—14 percent, and seizures—13 percent, were notable (Goldaber,
1991). In a study of more than 51,000 term newborns, the incidence of
neonatal encephalopathy in those with a birth pH <7.0 was 3 percent (Yeh,
2012). Even those who had normal 5-minute Apgar scores but who had an
arterial cord pH values <7.0 experienced a higher risk of morbidity. This
included respiratory distress, neonatal intensive care unit admission, and
sepsis (Sabol, 2016). Faster acidemia resolution after birth is associated
with better outcome (Casey, 2001a).
TABLE 32-4. Umbilical Cord Blood pH and Blood Gas Values in Normal
Term Newborns

Respiratory Acidemia

Acute interruption in placental gas exchange is accompanied by subsequent
CO2 retention and respiratory acidemia. The most common antecedent factor
is transient umbilical cord compression. Generally, respiratory acidemia is
not harmful to the fetus (Low, 1994).
The degree to which pH is affected by Pco2—the respiratory component
of the acidosis—can be calculated. First, the upper normal neonatal Pco2
value of about 50 mm Hg is subtracted from the cord blood gas Pco2 value.
Each additional 10 mm Hg Pco2 increment will lower the pH by 0.08 units
(Eisenberg, 1987). Thus, in a mixed respiratory–metabolic acidemia, the
benign respiratory component can be calculated. As an example, acute cord
prolapse during labor prompts cesarean delivery of a neonate 20 minutes
later. The umbilical artery blood gas pH was 6.95 and the Pco2 was 90 mm
Hg. The degree to which the cord compression and subsequent impairment of
CO2 exchange affected the pH is calculated using the relationship given
earlier and shown below.

Thus, the pH before cord prolapse was approximately 7.27, well within
normal limits. Thus, the low pH resulted from respiratory acidosis.

Metabolic Acidemia
The fetus begins to develop metabolic acidemia when oxygen deprivation is
sufficiently long and severe to require anaerobic metabolism for cellular
energy needs. Low and associates (1997) defined fetal acidosis as a base
deficit ≥12 mmol/L, and severe fetal acidosis as a base deficit ≥16 mmol/L.
In the Parkland study of more than 150,000 newborns cited earlier, metabolic
acidemia was defined using umbilical cord blood gas thresholds that were
two standard deviations below the mean (Casey, 2001b). Thus, metabolic
acidemia was an umbilical artery blood pH <7.00 accompanied by a Pco2
≤76.3 mm Hg, with higher values indicating a respiratory component; HCO3−
concentration ≤17.7 mmol/L; and base deficit ≥10.3 mEq/L. From the
standpoint of possible neurological injury, the American College of

Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2014) defines metabolic acidosis as
umbilical arterial pH <7.0 and a base deficit ≥12 mmol/L.
Metabolic acidemia is associated with a high rate of multiorgan
dysfunction. In rare cases, such hypoxia-induced metabolic acidemia may be
so severe that it causes subsequent hypoxic ischemic encephalopathy (Chap.
33, p. 601). Severe metabolic acidosis is poorly predictive of subsequent
neurological impairment in the term neonate (Cahill, 2017). In fact, a fetus
without such acidemia cannot by definition have suffered recent hypoxicinduced injury. In preterm infants, newborn acid–base status is more closely
linked to intraventricular hemorrhage, periventricular leukomalacia, and
poorer long-term neurological outcomes (Baalbaki, 2021; Morgan, 2017).
Associations between metabolic acidemia, low Apgar scores, and
neonatal death have been described in term and preterm newborns (Morgan,
2015). Regarding term neonates, the risk of neonatal death was more than
3200-fold greater in term neonates with metabolic acidemia and 5-minute
scores ≤3 compared with those with a 5-minute Apgar score ≥7 (Casey,
2001b).

■ Recommendations for Cord Blood Gas Determinations
In some centers, cord gas analysis is performed in all neonates at birth
(Morgan, 2015; Sabol, 2016). Cost-effectiveness analysis for universal cord
blood gas measurement suggests benefit and potential cost savings (White,
2016). It seems reasonable to obtain cord blood gas determinations for
intrapartum cases of cesarean delivery for fetal compromise, abnormal fetal
heart rate tracing, fever, and low 5-minute Apgar score. Multifetal gestation
and severely growth-restricted fetuses are others.
Although umbilical cord acid–base blood determinations are poorly
predictive of either immediate or long-term adverse neurological outcome,
they provide the most objective evidence of the fetal metabolic status at
birth.

PREVENTIVE CARE
■ Eye Infection Prophylaxis

Ophthalmia neonatorum is mucopurulent conjunctivitis of newborns.
Gonococcal and chlamydial infections are among the most common causes
(American Academy of Pediatrics, 2021b).
Neisseria gonorrhoeae infection acquired at birth was a common cause
of childhood blindness in the past. Gonococcal prophylaxis is now
mandatory for all neonates in most states (American Academy of Pediatrics,
2017a). For prophylaxis soon after delivery, 0.5-percent erythromycin
ophthalmic ointment is recommended (U.S. Preventive Services Task Force,
2019).
For a neonate born to a mother with untreated gonorrhea, treatment of
presumptive neonatal gonococcal conjunctivitis is a single ceftriaxone dose,
25 to 50 mg/kg, intravenously or intramuscularly, not to exceed 125 mg
intramuscularly (American Academy of Pediatrics, 2021b). Before treatment,
neonatal testing for both gonococcal and chlamydia infections should be
obtained.
With chlamydial conjunctivitis, adequate neonatal prophylaxis is
challenging. Ideally, prenatal screening and treatment for Chlamydia
trachomatis obviates conjunctival infection (Hammerschlag, 2011) (Chap.
68, p. 1212). In neonates delivered vaginally of mothers with an active
chlamydial infection, 30 to 50 percent will develop conjunctivitis (Zikic,
2018). Prophylactic topical eye treatments do not reliably reduce the
incidence of chlamydial conjunctivitis.
Conjunctivitis in a newborn up to age 3 months should prompt
consideration for chlamydial infection (Moore, 2015). Treatment for neonatal
chlamydial conjunctivitis is oral erythromycin base or ethylsuccinate, 50
mg/kg/d given daily and divided into four doses for 14 days. Another is oral
azithromycin, 20 mg/kg given as a single daily dose for 3 days. A second
course may be required since the efficacy of erythromycin therapy
approximates only 80 percent. Posttreatment follow-up of these infants is
recommended (American Academy of Pediatrics, 2021b).

■ Hepatitis B Immunization
Routine immunization with thimerosal-free vaccine against hepatitis B within
the first 24 hours of life is standard practice for all medically stable
newborns with birthweights >2000 g (American Academy of Pediatrics,
2017b). If the mother is seropositive for hepatitis B surface antigen, the

neonate is also passively immunized with hepatitis B immune globulin. For
high-risk or even all seropositive women during pregnancy, some advocate
treatment with antiviral nucleoside or nucleotide analogues to minimize fetal
transmission (Dunkelberg, 2014) (Chap. 58, p. 1038).

■ Vitamin K
Supplemental vitamin K injection will prevent vitamin K deficiency bleeding
of the newborn (Chap. 33, p. 606). A single intramuscular dose of vitamin K,
0.5 to 1 mg, is given within 1 hour of birth (American Academy of
Pediatrics, 2017a).

■ COVID-19
The novel SARS-CoV-2 virus is very contagious, spreads person to person,
and can cause severe morbidity or mortality. Thus, birth attendants at the
delivery of a mother with COVID-19 should implement airborne and contact
isolation precautions to protect themselves during potentially aerosolizing
resuscitation procedures (Edelson, 2020).
National data suggest that approximately 2 percent of newborns of
women who test positive for SARS-CoV-2 near delivery have also tested
positive in the first 24 to 96 hours of life (American Academy of Pediatrics,
2021a). Newborn death directly attributable to perinatal infection with
SARS-CoV-2 is rare in the United States. However, evidence suggests that
symptomatic maternal infection at delivery is associated with increased risks
of preterm birth and perinatal morbidity (Chap. 67, p. 1188).
Infected mothers should wear a mask while holding their newborn. A
mother who is acutely ill with COVID-19 may be unable to care for her
neonate and may need temporary separation until she improves. Mothers who
are infected but who are not acutely ill can room-in with their well newborn
but should maintain a reasonable distance from their babies when possible.
Breastfeeding while wearing a mask and maintaining good hand hygiene is
suitable (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020b). The
newborn should be tested at least once for SARS-CoV-2 prior to discharge
(American Academy of Pediatrics, 2021a).

■ Newborn Screening
Mass-screening tests are available for 35 newborn conditions, and these are
recommended by the Advisory Committee on Heritable Disorders in
Newborns and Children (2018). Shown in Table 32-5, many are mandated by
various state laws. Most states require that all tests in the core panel be
performed. Supplemental conditions—secondary conditions—are listed on
the Advisory Committee’s website. Some states require some of these in
addition to their mandated core panel. Each practitioner should be familiar
with their individual state requirements, which are available at:
babysfirsttest.org/newborn-screening/states.
TABLE 32-5. Newborn Screening Core Panel

ROUTINE NEWBORN CARE
■ Gestational Age Estimation
Newborn gestational age can be estimated very soon after delivery. The
relationship between gestational age and birthweight can identify neonates at
risk for complications. For example, neonates who are either small or large
for gestational age are at greater risk for hypoglycemia and polycythemia,
and measurements of blood glucose and hematocrit are indicated.

■ Care of Skin and Umbilical Cord

All excess vernix, blood, and meconium is gently wiped off after delivery
while keeping the newborn warm. Any remaining vernix is readily absorbed
and disappears within 24 hours. The first bath is postponed until the
neonate’s temperature is stable.
Aseptic precautions are observed in the immediate care of the cord. The
American Academy of Pediatrics (2017a) has concluded that keeping the
cord dry is sufficient care. The umbilical cord begins to lose water from its
Wharton jelly shortly after birth. Within 24 hours, the cord stump loses its
characteristic bluish-white, moist appearance and soon becomes dry and
black. Within several days to weeks, the stump sloughs and leaves a small,
granulating wound, which after healing forms the umbilicus. Separation
usually takes place within the first 2 weeks. The umbilical cord dries more
quickly and separates more readily when exposed to air (López-Medina,
2020). Thus, a dressing is not recommended.
In resource-poor countries, local antimicrobial prophylaxis is reasonable
(Salam, 2014). The World Health Organization (2014) recommends
cleansing with chlorhexidine in situations in which hygienic conditions are
poor or infection rates are high.
Despite precautions, a serious umbilical infection—omphalitis—
sometimes develops. The most likely offending organisms are
Staphylococcus aureus, group A and B streptococcus, and gram-negative
rods such as Escherichia coli (Stewart, 2016). Typical signs of cellulitis and
stump discharge usually aid diagnosis. Mild erythema and some bleeding at
the stump site with cord detachment is common, but some cases present with
no outward signs.

■ Feeding and Weight Loss
Exclusive breastfeeding is preferred for the newborn’s first 6 months. In
2020, 84 percent of U.S. newborns were initially breastfed, 58 percent were
still nursing at 6 months, and 35 percent at 1 year (Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention, 2020). In many hospitals, breastfeeding begins in the
delivery room. Most term newborns thrive best when fed 8 to 12 times daily
for approximately 15 minutes each episode. Preterm or growth-restricted
newborns require feedings at shorter intervals. Breastfeeding is discussed
further in Chapter 36 (p. 639).

Because most neonates actually receive little nutriment for the first 3 or 4
days of life, they progressively lose weight until the flow of maternal milk is
established or other feeding is instituted. Preterm neonates lose relatively
more weight and regain their birthweight more slowly. Conversely, growthrestricted but otherwise healthy newborns regain their initial weight more
quickly than those born preterm. With proper nourishment, birthweight of
term newborns usually is regained by 10 days.

■ Stools and Urine
For the first 2 or 3 days after birth, the colon contains soft, brown-green
meconium. This consists of desquamated epithelial cells from the intestinal
tract, mucus, epidermal cells, and lanugo (fetal hair) that have been
swallowed along with amnionic fluid. The characteristic color results from
bile pigments. During fetal life and for a few hours after birth, the intestinal
contents are sterile, but bacteria quickly colonize the bowel contents.
Meconium stooling is seen in 90 percent of newborns within the first 24
hours and in most of the rest within 36 hours. Usually, newborns first void
shortly after birth but may not until the second day. Meconium and urine
passage indicates patency of the gastrointestinal and urinary tracts,
respectively. Failure of the newborn to stool or urinate after these times
suggests a congenital defect, such as Hirschsprung disease, imperforate anus,
or posterior urethral valve. After the third or fourth day, as a result of milk
ingestion, meconium is replaced by light-yellow, softer, homogeneous feces.

■ Neonatal Hyperbilirubinemia
Between the second and fifth day of life approximately one third of all
neonates develop physiological jaundice of the newborn. It has special
significance considering most hospitals have policies for early discharge.
Guidelines regarding standard phototherapy equipment and monitoring, as
well as treatment recommendations per gestational age, hour of life, and risk
factors are used (American Academy of Pediatrics, 2017a).
Hyperbilirubinemia is discussed further in Chapter 33 (p. 606).

■ Male Circumcision

Indications
Neonatal circumcision of male newborns has been a controversial topic in
the United States for at least 35 years. Even so, scientific evidence supports
several medical benefits that include prevention of phimosis, paraphimosis,
and balanoposthitis. Circumcision also lowers the incidence of penile cancer
and of cervical cancer among their sexual partners. The Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention (2011) estimates that the newborn male circumcision
rate has declined over the past decades in the United States, and rates vary
widely by region. From a national database, the overall circumcision rate
decreased from 57 percent in 2003 to 52 percent in 2016 (Jacobson, 2021).
The American Academy of Pediatrics Task Force on Circumcision
(2012) concluded that health benefits of newborn male circumcision
outweigh the risks. Specific benefits include prevention of urinary tract
infections, penile cancer, and transmission of some sexually transmitted
infections, including HIV (American Academy of Pediatrics, 2017a). Thus,
access to the procedure is justified for families who choose it. The Task
Force stopped short of recommending circumcision for all newborns.

Surgical Technique
Circumcision is performed only in a healthy neonate. Other contraindications
include any genital abnormalities such as hypospadias and a family history of
a bleeding disorder, unless excluded in the newborn.
The Task Force (2012) recommends procedural analgesia. Various pain
relief techniques include lidocaine-prilocaine topical cream, local analgesia
infiltration, dorsal penile nerve block, or ring block. The dorsal penile nerve
block or the ring block is superior to topical analgesia. The use of a pacifier
dipped in sucrose is a useful adjunct to these methods (Rossi 2021).
After appropriate penile cleansing, the ring block places a wheal of 1percent lidocaine at the base of the penis and then advances the needle in a
180-degree arc around the base of the penis. The needle is advanced first to
one side and then to the other to achieve a circumferential ring of analgesia.
The maximum dose of lidocaine is 1.0 mL. No vasoactive compounds such
as epinephrine should ever be added to a local analgesic agent for
circumcision.
The most commonly used instruments are shown in Figure 32-5 and are
Gomco and Mogen clamps and the Plastibell device. Compared with the

Gomco procedure, Kaufman and colleagues (2002) reported that the Mogen
technique required less time to perform and was associated with less
apparent discomfort for the newborn. Regardless of the method used, the goal
is to remove enough shaft skin and inner preputial epithelium so that the glans
is exposed sufficiently to prevent phimosis. Suitable technique ensures that:
(1) the amount of external skin to be removed must be accurately estimated,
(2) the preputial orifice must be dilated to visualize the glans and ensure that
it is normal, (3) the inner preputial epithelium must be freed from the glans
epithelium, and (4) the circumcision device must be left in place long enough
to produce hemostasis before excising the prepuce (Omole, 2020).

FIGURE 32-5 Three different tools used for circumcision. A. Mogen clamp. The arms of the clamp
open to a 3-mm maximum width. B. Gomco clamp, assembled. C. Plastibell device.

The risks for bleeding, infection, and hematoma formation are low.
Unusual complications include distal glans amputation, acquisition of HIV
infection or other sexually transmitted infection, meatal stenosis, penile
denudation, penile destruction with electrosurgical coagulation, subsequent
epidermal inclusion cyst and urethrocutaneous fistula, and ischemia
following the inappropriate use of lidocaine with epinephrine (El Bcheraoui,
2014; Pippi-Salle, 2013; Omole, 2020).

■ Rooming In and Hospital Discharge
Hospital rooming in places newborns in their mothers’ rooms instead of
central nurseries. This practice attempts to make all phases of childbearing
as natural as possible. It aims to foster early mother-child relationships and
establish effective breast feeding practices. By 24 hours, the mother is
generally fully ambulatory. Thereafter, she can usually provide routine care
for herself and her newborn.
Traditionally, the newborn is discharged with its mother, and in most
cases, maternal stay has determined that of the neonate. From 1970 to the
mid-1990s, average maternal postpartum length of stay declined steadily, and
many mothers were discharged before 48 hours. The World Health
Organization (2014) cites a minimal stay of only 24 hours. Although it is
clear that most newborns can be safely discharged within 48 hours, this is not
uniformly true. When Belgium recently reduced postpartum stays by 1 day,
rates of neonatal readmission for jaundice and dehydration increased
(Plusquin, 2020). Using Washington state data, Malkin and coworkers (2000)
found that the 28-day mortality rate was increased fourfold in newborns
discharged within 30 hours of birth, and the 1-year mortality rate grew
twofold. Safe discharge for late-preterm newborns has special concerns
(Whyte, 2012).
Because of the increased scrutiny regarding short hospital stays, federal
legislation—The Newborns’ and Mothers’ Health Protection Act of 1996—
was enacted to prohibit insurers from restricting hospital stays for mothers
and newborns to less than 2 days for vaginal delivery or 4 days for cesarean
delivery. In an analysis of more than 662,000 births in California, Datar and
Sood (2006) found that readmission rates declined by 9, 12, and 20 percent,
respectively, at 1, 2, and 3 years after the legislation was implemented.

REFERENCES
Advisory Committee on Heritable Disorders in Newborns and Children: Recommended uniform
screening panel. 2018. Available at: http://www.hrsa.gov/advisory-committees/heritabledisorders/rusp/index.html. Accessed June 16, 2021
American Academy of Pediatrics: FAQs: management of infants born to mothers with suspected or
confirmed COVID-19. 2021a. Available at https://services.aap.org/en/pages/2019-novelcoronavirus-covid-19-infections/clinical-guidance/faqs-management-of-infants-born-to-covid-19mothers/. Accessed June 16, 2021

American Academy of Pediatrics, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Care of the
newborn. In Guidelines for Perinatal Care, 8th ed. Elk Grove Village, AAP, 2017a
American Academy of Pediatrics, Committee on Infectious Diseases, Committee on Fetus and
Newborn: Elimination of perinatal hepatitis B: providing the first vaccine dose within 24 hours of
birth. Pediatrics 140(3):e20171870, 2017b
American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on Infectious Diseases: Red Book: Report of the
Committee on Infectious Diseases. Elk Grove Village, AAP, 2021b
American Academy of Pediatrics Task Force on Circumcision: Circumcision policy statement.
Pediatrics 130(3):585, 2012
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Executive summary: neonatal encephalopathy
and neurologic outcome, second edition. Report of the American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists’ Task Force on Neonatal Encephalopathy. Obstet Gynecol 123(4):896, 2014
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Delayed umbilical cord clamping after birth.
Committee Opinion No. 814, December 2020a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: General information regarding pregnant
individuals and COVID-19. 2020b. Available at: https://www.acog.org/clinical/clinicalguidance/practice-advisory/articles/2020/03/novel-coronavirus-2019. Accessed June 16, 2021
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Delivery of a newborn with meconium-stained
amniotic fluid. Committee Opinion No. 689, April 2017, Reaffirmed 2021a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, American Academy of Pediatrics: The Apgar
score. Committee Opinion No. 644, October 2015, Reaffirmed 2021b
Apgar V: A proposal for a new method of evaluation of the newborn infant. Curr Res Anesth Analg
32:260, 1953
Armstrong L, Stenson BJ: Use of umbilical cord blood gas analysis in the assessment of the newborn.
Arch Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed 92:430, 2007
Aziz K, Lee HC, Escobedo MB, et al: Part 5: Neonatal resuscitation: 2020 American Heart Association
guidelines for cardiopulmonary resuscitation and emergency cardiovascular care. Circulation
142:S524, 2020
Baalbaki SH, Wood SL, Tita AT, et al: Predicting long-term neurodevelopmental outcomes in very
preterm neonates by umbilical cord gas parameters. Am J Obstet Gynecol MFM 3(1):100248, 2021
Bhatt S, Alison BJ, Wallace EM, et al: Delaying cord clamping until ventilation onset improves
cardiovascular function at birth in preterm lambs. J Physiol 591(8):2113, 2013
Blickstein I, Green T: Umbilical cord blood gases. Clin Perinatol 34(3):451, 2007
Buchiboyina A, Jasani B, Deshmukh M, et al: Strategies for managing transient tachypnoea of the
newborn—a systematic review. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 30:1524, 2017
Cahill AG, Mathur AM, Smyser CD, et al: Neurologic injury in acidemic term infants. Am J Perinatol
34(7):668, 2017
Casey BM, Goldaber KG, McIntire DD, et al: Outcomes among term infants when two-hour postnatal
pH is compared with pH at delivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 184:447, 2001a
Casey BM, McIntire DD, Leveno KJ: The continuing value of the Apgar score for the assessment of
newborn infants. N Engl J Med 344:467, 2001b
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Breastfeeding report card: United States, 2020. Available
at: http://www.cdc.gov/breastfeeding/data/reportcard.htm. Accessed June 6, 2021
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Trends in in-hospital newborn male circumcision—United
States, 1999–2010. MMWR 60(34):1167, 2011

Chauhan SP, Cowan BD, Meydrech EF, et al: Determination of fetal acidemia at birth from a remote
umbilical arterial blood gas analysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 170:1705, 1994
Cnattingius S, Johansson S, Razaz N: Apgar score and risk of neonatal death among preterm infants. N
Engl J Med 383(1):49, 2020
Datar A, Sood N: Impact of postpartum hospital-stay legislation on newborn length of stay, readmission,
and mortality in California. Pediatrics 118:63, 2006
Dunkelberg JC, Berkley EM, Thiel KW, et al: Hepatitis B and C in pregnancy: a review and
recommendations for care. J Perinatol 34(12):882, 2014
Edelson DP, Sasson C, Chan PS, et al: Interim guidance for basic and advanced life support in adults,
children, and neonates with suspected or confirmed COVID-19. Circulation 141(25):e933, 2020
Eisenberg MS, Cummins RO, Ho MT: Code Blue: Cardiac Arrest and Resuscitation. Philadelphia,
Saunders, 1987
El Bcheraoui C, Zhang X, Cooper CS, et al: Rates of adverse events associated with male circumcision
in U.S. medical settings, 2001 to 2010. JAMA Pediatr 168(7):625, 2014
Ersdal HL, Mduma E, Svensen E, et al: Early initiation of basic resuscitation interventions including face
mask ventilation may reduce birth asphyxia related mortality in low-income countries: a prospective
descriptive observational study. Resuscitation 83(7):869, 2012
Foglia EE, Weiner G, de Almeida MF, et al: Duration of resuscitation at birth, mortality, and
neurodevelopment: a systematic review. Pediatrics 146(3:e20201449, 2020
Foster JP, Dawson JA, Davis PG et al: Routine oro/nasopharyngeal suction versus no suction at birth.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 4:CD010332, 2017
Goldaber KG, Gilstrap LC III, Leveno KJ, et al: Pathologic fetal acidemia. Obstet Gynecol 78:1103,
1991
Gomersall J, Berber S, Middleton P, et al: Umbilical cord management at term and late preterm birth: a
meta-analysis. Pediatrics 147(3):e2020015404, 2021
Grünebaum A, McCullough LB, Orosz B, et al: Neonatal mortality in the United States is related to
location of birth (hospital versus home) rather than the type of birth attendant. Am J Obstet Gynecol
223(2):254.e1, 2020
Hammerschlag MR: Chlamydial and gonococcal infections in infants and children. Clin Infect Dis
53(3):S99, 2011
Hooper SB, Kitchen MJ, Wallace MJ, et al: Imaging lung aeration and lung liquid clearance at birth.
FASEB J 21(12):3329, 2007
Hooper SB, Roberts C, Dekker J, et al: Issues in cardiopulmonary transition at birth. Semin Fetal
Neonatal Med 24:101033, 2019
Isayama T, Mildenhall L, Schmolzer GM, et al: The route, dose, and interval of epinephrine for neonatal
resuscitation: a systematic review. Pediatrics 146:(4):e20200586, 2020
Jacobson DL, Balmert LC, Holl JL, et al: Nationwide circumcision trends: 2003 to 2016. J Urol
205(1):257, 2021
Kapadia V, Wyckoff MH: Chest compressions for bradycardia or asystole in neonates. Clin Perinatol
39(4):833, 2012
Karlberg P, Adams FH, Geubelle F, et al: Alteration of the infant’s thorax during vaginal delivery. Acta
Obstet Gynecol Scand 41:223, 1962
Kattwinkel J: Textbook of Neonatal Resuscitation, 6th ed. Elk Grove Village, American Academy of
Pediatrics and American Heart Association, 2010
Kaufman GE, Cimo S, Miller LW, et al: An evaluation of the effects of sucrose on neonatal pain with 2
commonly used circumcision methods. Am J Obstet Gynecol 186:564, 2002

Kotaska K, Urinovska R, Klapkova E, et al: Re-evaluation of cord blood arterial and venous reference
ranges for pH, pO2, pCO2, according to spontaneous or cesarean delivery. J Clin Lab Anal
24(5):300, 2010
Lee JH, Jung J, Park H, et al: Umbilical cord arterial blood gas analysis in term singleton pregnancies: a
retrospective analysis over 11 years. Obstet Gynecol Sci 63(3):293, 2020
López-Medina MD, López-Araque AB, Linares-Abad M, et al: Umbilical cord separation time,
predictors and healing complications in newborns with dry care. PLoS One 15(1): e0227209, 2020
Low JA, Lindsay BG, Derrick EJ: Threshold of metabolic acidosis associated with newborn
complications. Am J Obstet Gynecol 177:1391, 1997
Low JA, Panagiotopoulos C, Derrick EJ: Newborn complications after intrapartum asphyxia with
metabolic acidosis in the term fetus. Am J Obstet Gynecol 170:1081, 1994
Lynn A, Beeby P: Cord and placenta arterial gas analysis: the accuracy of delayed sampling. Arch Dis
Child Fetal Neonatal Ed 92(4):F281, 2007
Malkin JD, Garber S, Broder MS, et al: Infant mortality and early postpartum discharge. Obstet Gynecol
96:183, 2000
Mokarami P, Wiberg N, Olofsson P: An overlooked aspect on metabolic acidosis at birth: blood gas
analyzers calculate base deficit differently. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 91(5):574, 2012
Moore DL, MacDonald NE, Canadian Paediatric Society Infectious Disease and Immunization
Committee: Preventing ophthalmia neonatorum. Paediatr Child Health 20(2):93, 2015
Morgan JL, Casey BM, Bloom SL, et al: Metabolic acidemia in live births at 35 weeks of gestation or
greater. Obstet Gynecol 126(2):279, 2015
Morgan JL, Nelson DB, Casey BM, et al: Impact of metabolic acidemia at birth on neonatal outcomes
in infants born before 34 weeks’ gestation. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 30(16):1902, 2017
Natarajan G, Shankaran S, Laptook AR, et al: Apgar scores at 10 min and outcomes at 6–7 years
following hypoxic-ischaemic encephalopathy. Arch Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed 98:F473, 2013
Omole F, Smith W, Carter-Wicker K: Newborn circumcision techniques. Am Fam Physician
101(11):680, 2020
Pippi-Salle JL, Jesus LE, Lorenzo AJ, et al: Glans amputation during routine neonatal circumcision:
mechanism of injury and strategy for prevention. J Pediatr Urol 9:763, 2013
Plusquin C, Uvin V, Drakopoulos P, et al: Reduction of hospital stay at maternity unit: an evaluation of
the impact on maternal and neonatal readmission. J Obstet Gynaecol 40(1):46, 2020.
Ramin SM, Gilstrap LC, Leveno KJ, et al: Umbilical artery acid–base status in the preterm infant.
Obstet Gynecol 74:256, 1989
Riley RJ, Jonson JW: Collecting and analyzing cord blood gases. Clin Obstet Gynecol 36:13, 1993
Roehr CC, Davis PG, Weiner GM, et al: T-piece resuscitator or self-inflating bag during neonatal
resuscitation: a scoping review. Pediatr Res 89:760, 2021
Rossi S, Buonocore G, Bellieni CV: Management of pain in newborn circumcision: a systematic review.
Eur J Pediatr 180(1):13, 2021
Sabol BA, Caughey AB: Acidemia in neonates with a 5-minute Apgar score of 7 or greater—what are
the outcomes? Am J Obstet Gynecol 215(4):486 e481, 2016
Salam RA, Mansoor T, Mallick D, et al: Essential childbirth and postnatal interventions for improved
maternal and neonatal health. Reprod Health 11 Suppl 1:S3, 2014
Saunders RA, Milner AD: Pulmonary pressure/volume relationships during the last phase of delivery
and the first postnatal breaths in human subjects. J Pediatr 93:667, 1978

Schmölzer GM, Morley CJ, Kamlin OC: Enhanced monitoring during neonatal resuscitation. Semin
Perinatol 43(8):151177, 2019
Seidler AL, Gyte GML, Rabe H, et al: Umbilical cord management for newborns <34 weeks’ gestation:
a meta-analysis. Pediatrics 147(3):e20200576, 2021
Siew ML, te Pas AB, Wallace MJ, et al: Positive end-expiratory pressure enhances development of a
functional residual capacity in preterm rabbits ventilated from birth. J Appl Physiol (1985)
106(5):1487, 2009
Siggaard-Anderson O: Blood acid–base alignment nomogram. Scand J Clin Lab Invest 15:211, 1963
Skiold B, Petersson G, Ahlberg M, et al: Population-based reference curve for umbilical cord arterial pH
in infants born at 28 to 42 weeks. J Perinatol 37:254, 2017
Stewart D, Benitz W, AAP Committee on Fetus and Newborn: Umbilical cord care in the newborn
infant. Pediatrics 138(3):e20162149, 2016
te Pas AB, Davis PG, Hooper SB, et al: From liquid to air: breathing after birth. J Pediatr 152(5):607,
2008
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, Curry SJ, Krist AH, et al: Ocular prophylaxis for gonococcal
ophthalmia neonatorum: U.S. Preventive Services Task Force reaffirmation recommendation
statement. JAMA 321(4):394, 2019
Watson MS, Mann MY, Lloyd-Puryear MA, et al: Newborn screening: towards a uniform screening
panel and system. Executive summary. Genet Med 8(Suppl 5):1S, 2006
Vyas H, Milner AD, Hopkins IE: Intrathoracic pressure and volume changes during the spontaneous
onset of respiration in babies born by cesarean section and by vaginal delivery. J Pediatr 99(5):787,
1981
Weiner GM, Zaichkin J: Textbook of Neonatal Resuscitation. 8th ed. Elk Grove Village, American
Academy of Pediatrics, 2021
White CR, Doherty DA, Cannon JW, et al: Cost effectiveness of universal umbilical cord blood gas and
lactate analysis in a tertiary level maternity unit. J Perinat Med 44(5):573, 2016
Whyte RK: Neonatal management and safe discharge of late and moderate preterm infants. Semin
Fetal Neonatal Med 17(3):153, 2012
World Health Organization: Postnatal care of the mother and newborn, 2013. Geneva, WHO, 2014
Wyckoff MH, Wyllie J, Aziz K, et al: Neonatal life support: 2020 International Consensus on
Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation and Emergency Cardiovascular Care Science with Treatment
Recommendations. Circulation 142:S185, 2020
Yeh P, Emary K, Impey L: The relationship between umbilical cord arterial pH and serious adverse
neonatal outcome: analysis of 51,519 consecutive validated samples. BJOG 119(7):824, 2012
Zikic A, Schünemann H, Wi T, et al: Treatment of neonatal chlamydial conjunctivitis: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. J Pediatric Infect Dis Soc 7(3):e107, 2018

