CHAPTER 37

Puerperal Infection

PUERPERAL PELVIC INFECTIONS
UTERINE INFECTION
ABDOMINAL INCISIONAL INFECTIONS
PERITONITIS AND ADNEXAL ABSCESSES
PARAMETRIAL PHLEGMON
SEPTIC PELVIC THROMBOPHLEBITIS
PERINEAL INFECTIONS
TOXIC SHOCK SYNDROME
BREAST INFECTIONS
BREAST ABSCESS
REFERENCES
Women are susceptible to several potentially serious complications during
the fourth trimester. Many of these conditions are encountered during
pregnancy, and others are unique to the puerperium. Historically, infection
was the most important source of postpartum maternal morbidity and
mortality, since emphasized by the studies of Semmelweis and Lister (Kadar,
2021). Puerperal infections include pelvic infections, mastitis, and breast
abscesses. Discussed in their respective chapters, cardiovascular disease
(Chap. 52, p. 915), venous thromboembolism (Chap. 55, p. 980), and

hemorrhage (Chap. 42, p. 731) currently are leading noninfectious puerperal
complications (Callaghan, 2012; Creanga, 2017). However, the incidence of
postpartum hospitalization due to sepsis is rising. Other puerperal issues and
their management are discussed in Chapter 36.

PUERPERAL PELVIC INFECTIONS
Traditionally, the term puerperal infection describes any bacterial infection
of the genital tract after delivery. Infection, preeclampsia, and obstetrical
hemorrhage formed the lethal triad of maternal death causes before and
during the 20th century. Fortunately, maternal mortality from puerperal
infection is uncommon because of effective antibiotics. Creanga and
associates (2017) reported results from the Pregnancy Mortality Surveillance
System, which contained 4693 pregnancy-related maternal deaths in the
United States from 2006 through 2010. Infection caused 13.6 percent of the
deaths and was the second leading etiology. In an analysis of the North
Carolina population, Berg and colleagues (2005) reported that 40 percent of
infection-related maternal deaths were preventable.

■ Puerperal Fever
Several infective and noninfective factors cause puerperal fever defined by
a temperature of 38.0°C (100.4°F) or higher. Using this conservative
definition, Filker and Monif (1979) reported that only approximately 20
percent of women febrile within the first 24 hours after vaginal delivery
were subsequently diagnosed with pelvic infection. This value was 70
percent in those undergoing cesarean delivery. Most persistent fevers after
childbirth are caused by genital tract infection. Of note, spiking fevers
≥39°C within the first 24 hours postpartum may be associated with virulent
pelvic infection caused by group A streptococcus (p. 651).
Other sources of puerperal fever include breast engorgement, urinary
infections, episiotomy and abdominal incisions, perineal lacerations, and
postcesarean respiratory complications. Approximately 15 percent of women
who do not breastfeed develop fever from breast engorgement. “Breast
fever” rarely exceeds 39°C in the first few postpartum days and usually lasts
<24 hours. The incidence of fever is lower in breastfeeding women (Chap.
36, p. 642). Postpartum urinary infections are uncommon because of the

normal diuresis. Acute pyelonephritis has a variable clinical picture. The
first sign of renal infection may be fever, followed later by costovertebral
angle tenderness, nausea, and vomiting. Atelectasis following general
anesthesia for cesarean delivery is caused by hypoventilation and is best
prevented by coughing and deep breathing on a fixed schedule following
surgery. Fever with atelectasis is due to infection triggered by proliferation
of normal flora distal to obstructing mucus plugs.

■ Uterine Infection
Postpartum uterine infection has been called endometritis, endomyometritis,
and endoparametritis. Following vaginal delivery, infection involves not
only the decidua but also the myometrium and parametrial tissues. Infection
after cesarean delivery is essentially a surgical site infection involving the
incised myometrium. In either case, we prefer the inclusive term metritis
with pelvic cellulitis.

Predisposing Factors
Route of delivery is the single most significant risk factor for the
development of uterine infection (Boggess, 2017; Moulton, 2018). In women
undergoing cesarean delivery, rehospitalization rates for wound
complications and metritis are higher than those with a vaginal birth
(Axelsson, 2018; Fein, 2019). In the French Confidential Enquiry on
Maternal Deaths, Deneux-Tharaux and coworkers (2006) cited a nearly 25fold greater infection-related mortality rate with cesarean delivery.
With vaginal delivery, women delivered at Parkland Hospital have a 1to 2-percent incidence of metritis. This rate rises to 5 to 6 percent in those
with ruptured membranes, prolonged labor, and multiple cervical
examinations. If intrapartum chorioamnionitis is present, the risk of persistent
uterine infection has exceeded 13 percent (DeNoble, 2019; Maberry, 1991).
These figures are similar to those reported by the Maternal Fetal Medicine
Units Network from a cohort of more than 115,000 women in whom the
overall pelvic infection rate approximated 5 percent (Grobman, 2015).
With operative vaginal delivery, women carry higher risks for metritis
and perineal infections than spontaneous birth (Mohamed-Ahmed, 2019).
Notably, these deliveries are often implemented in the context of prolonged

labor, which is a known metritis risk. One study of 3500 such women
showed that those receiving a single dose of prophylactic antibiotics had a
lower maternal infection rate (Knight, 2019). Infections include those of the
urinary tract, uterus, or perineal wound. Labor lengths were not presented,
but in approximately 50 percent of participants, “failure to progress” was the
operative vaginal delivery indication. Moreover, 10 percent of women had
rupture of membranes lengths between 24 and 48 hours. The contribution of
these, rather than the delivery mode, will require further investigation before
this prophylaxis is widely adopted solely for the indication of operative
vaginal delivery.
With cesarean delivery, hysterotomy is associated with significant
infectious morbidity. In the 1970s, pelvic infection complicated 50 percent of
cesarean deliveries at Parkland Hospital. Fortunately, antimicrobial
prophylaxis has done more to decrease the incidence and severity of
postcesarean infections than any other intervention in the past 30 years. Thus,
a single dose of perioperative antibiotics is recommended for all women
undergoing cesarean delivery (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2018b). Such practices lower the puerperal pelvic infection
risk by 65 to 75 percent (Smaill, 2014). β-lactam antimicrobials are superior
to other agents, and elements of this prophylaxis are outlined in Chapter 30
(p. 551) (Harris, 2019). Important risk factors for infection following surgery
include prolonged labor, membrane rupture, multiple cervical examinations,
and internal fetal monitoring.
Regardless of delivery route, pelvic infection generally is more frequent
in women of lower socioeconomic status (Maharaj, 2007). Except in extreme
cases usually not seen in developed countries, it is uncommon that anemia or
poor nutrition predispose to infection. Bacterial colonization of the lower
genital tract with certain microorganisms—for example, group B
streptococcus, Chlamydia trachomatis, Mycoplasma hominis, Ureaplasma
urealyticum, and Gardnerella vaginalis—has been associated with an
increased postpartum infection risk (Andrews, 1995; Jacobsson, 2002; Watts,
1990). Other factors associated with a greater risk include general
anesthesia, significant hysterotomy extension, young maternal age, nulliparity,
prolonged labor induction, chorioamnionitis, obesity, and meconium-stained
amnionic fluid (Acosta, 2012; Leth, 2011; Patel, 2019; Siriwachirachai,
2014).

Microbiology
Common Pathogens. Most pelvic infections are caused by bacteria
indigenous to the genital tract and listed in Table 37-1. Most of these
infections are polymicrobial, which enhances bacterial synergy. Other factors
that promote virulence are hematomas and devitalized tissue. Although the
cervix and vagina routinely harbor bacteria, the uterine cavity is usually
sterile before rupture of the amnionic sac. As the consequence of labor and
delivery and associated manipulations, anaerobic and aerobic bacteria
contaminate the amnionic fluid and uterus.
TABLE 37-1. Bacteria Commonly Responsible for Female Genital
Infections

Prior to the routine use of antimicrobial prophylaxis, Gilstrap and
Cunningham (1979) cultured amnionic fluid obtained at cesarean delivery
from women in labor with membranes ruptured more than 6 hours. All had
bacterial growth, and an average of 2.5 organisms was identified from each
specimen. Anaerobic and aerobic organisms were found in 63 percent,
anaerobes alone in 30 percent, and aerobes alone in only 7 percent.

Anaerobes included Peptostreptococcus and Peptococcus species in 45
percent, Bacteroides species in 9 percent, and Clostridium species in 3
percent. Clostridial species rarely cause puerperal infections, but infections
can be severe in those cases (Herrera, 2016). Aerobes included
Enterococcus in 14 percent, group B Streptococcus in 8 percent, and
Escherichia coli in 9 percent of isolates. Sherman and associates (1999)
later showed that bacterial isolates at cesarean delivery correlated with
those taken from women with metritis at 3 days postpartum. Group B
streptococci, E coli, and enterococci are some of the more common blood
culture isolates with metritis (Cape, 2013; O’Higgins, 2014). In the past 15
years, skin and soft-tissue infections due to methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) have become prevalent (Chap. 67, p. 1196).
However, MRSA is more commonly implicated in abdominal and perineal
incisional infections and less often in puerperal metritis (Anderson, 2007;
Patel, 2007).
Group A β-hemolytic streptococcal infections have a reported incidence
of 1 in 1220 births (Rottenstreich, 2019). During the past 25 years, group A
streptococcus has been reported to cause a toxic shock–like syndrome and
life-threatening infection (Donders, 2021; Gustafson, 2017; Shinar, 2016). In
reviews by Crum (2002) and Udagawa (1999), group A streptococcal
infections manifested before, during, or within 12 hours of delivery. Affected
women had a maternal mortality rate of almost 90 percent, and the fetal
mortality rate exceeded 50 percent.
The role of other organisms in the etiology of these infections is unclear.
Observations of Chaim and coworkers (2003) suggest that heavy cervical
colonization of U urealyticum may contribute to metritis development. To
counter this potential pathogen, azithromycin-based extended-spectrum
antibiotic prophylaxis reduces postoperative cesarean delivery infections
from 12 to 6 percent compared with β-lactam agents alone (Harper, 2017;
Tita, 2016). Chlamydial infections have been implicated in late-onset,
indolent metritis (Ismail, 1985). Last, Jacobsson and colleagues (2002)
reported a threefold higher risk of puerperal infection in a group of Swedish
women in whom bacterial vaginosis was identified in early pregnancy
(Chap. 68, p. 1216).
Bacterial Cultures. Routine genital tract cultures obtained before treatment
serve little clinical use and add significant costs. Women with a temperature

>102°F are more likely to have bacteremia (Easter, 2017). Even so, routine
blood cultures seldom modify care. In two studies done before perioperative
prophylaxis was used, blood cultures were positive in 13 percent of women
with postcesarean metritis at Parkland Hospital and in 24 percent of those at
Los Angeles County Hospital (Cunningham, 1978; DiZerega, 1979). In a later
Finnish study, bacteremia was identified in only 5 percent of women with
puerperal sepsis (Kankuri, 2003). Exceptions might be women with
exceedingly high temperature spikes that may signify virulent infection with
group A streptococci (Chap. 50, p. 890).

Pathogenesis and Clinical Course
Puerperal infection following vaginal delivery primarily involves the
placental implantation site, decidua and adjacent myometrium, or
cervicovaginal lacerations. The pathogenesis of uterine infection following
cesarean delivery is that of an infected surgical incision. Bacteria that
colonize the cervix and vagina gain access to the uterus during labor.
Postpartum, they invade devitalized uterine tissue. Parametrial cellulitis
follows with infection of the pelvic retroperitoneal fibroareolar connective
tissue. With early treatment, infection is contained within the parametrial and
paravaginal tissue, but it may extend deep into the pelvis.
Fever is the most important criterion for the diagnosis of postpartum
metritis. Intuitively, the degree of fever is believed proportional to the extent
of infection and sepsis. Temperatures usually are 38 to 39°C, and
temperatures >39°C suggest bacteremia or endotoxemia (Easter, 2017;
Suffredini, 1989). Women usually complain of abdominal pain, and
parametrial tenderness is elicited on abdominal and bimanual examination.
Leukocytosis may range from 15,000 to 30,000 cells/μL, but recall that
cesarean delivery itself raises the leukocyte count. Although an offensive
odor can develop, many women have foul-smelling lochia without evidence
for infection, and vice versa. Some other infections, notably those caused by
group A β-hemolytic streptococci, may be associated with scant, odorless
lochia (Anderson, 2014).

Treatment
If metritis develops following vaginal delivery, treatment with an oral or
intramuscular antimicrobial agent may be sufficient (Meaney-Delman, 2015).

For moderate to severe infections, however, intravenous therapy with a
broad-spectrum antibiotic regimen is indicated. Improvement occurs in 48 to
72 hours in nearly 90 percent of women treated with one of several regimens
discussed below. Persistent fever after this interval mandates a careful
search for causes of refractory pelvic infection. These include a parametrial
phlegmon—an area of intense cellulitis; an abdominal incisional or pelvic
abscess or infected hematoma; and septic pelvic thrombophlebitis. In our
experience, persistent fever is seldom due to antimicrobial-resistant bacteria
or due to drug side effects. The woman may be discharged home after she has
been afebrile for at least 24 hours, and further oral antimicrobial therapy is
not needed (Mackeen, 2015).
Choice of Antimicrobials. Therapy is empirical and initial treatment is
directed against the mixed flora shown in Table 37-1. For infections
following vaginal delivery, as many as 90 percent of women respond to
regimens such as ampicillin plus gentamicin. In contrast, anaerobic coverage
is included for infections following cesarean delivery (Table 37-2).
TABLE 37-2. Antimicrobial Regimens for Pelvic Infections Following
Cesarean Delivery

In 1979, DiZerega and coworkers compared the effectiveness of
clindamycin plus gentamicin with that of penicillin G plus gentamicin for
treatment of pelvic infections following cesarean delivery. Women given the
clindamycin-gentamicin regimen had a 95-percent response rate, and this
regimen is still considered by most to be the standard by which others are
measured (Mackeen, 2015). Despite this standard therapy, enterococcal
cultures may be persistently positive. The addition of ampicillin, either

initially or following no response after 48 to 72 hours, targets enterococci
(Brumfield, 2000).
Many authorities recommend periodical monitoring of serum gentamicin
levels. At Parkland Hospital, we do not routinely do so if a woman has
adequate renal function, which is evidenced by a normal serum creatinine
level. Once-daily dosing versus multiple dosing with gentamicin provides
adequate serum levels, and either method has similar cure rates (Livingston,
2003). In the event of diminished glomerular filtration, some recommend a
combination of clindamycin and a second-generation cephalosporin, because
of potential nephrotoxicity and ototoxicity with gentamicin. Instead, others
recommend a combination of clindamycin and aztreonam—the latter is a
monobactam compound with activity similar to the aminoglycosides.
The spectra of β-lactam antimicrobials include activity against many
anaerobic pathogens. Some examples include cephalosporins such as
cefoxitin, cefotetan, cefotaxime, and ceftriaxone. Extended-spectrum
penicillins are piperacillin, ticarcillin, and mezlocillin. β-lactam
antimicrobials are inherently safe and, except for allergic reactions, are free
of major toxicity. The β-lactamase inhibitors clavulanic acid, sulbactam,
and tazobactam have been combined with ampicillin, amoxicillin, ticarcillin,
and piperacillin to extend their spectra. Metronidazole has superior in vitro
activity against most anaerobes. This agent given with ampicillin and an
aminoglycoside provides coverage against most organisms encountered in
serious pelvic infections. It is also used second line to treat some cases of
Clostridioides difficile colitis.
Imipenem and similar antimicrobials are in the carbapenem family.
These offer broad-spectrum coverage against most organisms associated
with metritis. Imipenem coupled with cilastatin inhibits the antibiotic’s renal
metabolism. Because of imipenem’s higher cost, it is reasonable from both a
medical and an economic standpoint to reserve this drug for serious
nonobstetrical infections.
Vancomycin is a glycopeptide antimicrobial active against gram-positive
bacteria. It is used in lieu of β-lactam therapy for a patient with a type 1
allergic reaction and given for suspected infections due to S aureus and to
treat C difficile colitis (Chap. 57, p. 1019).

Perioperative Prophylaxis

The use of periprocedural techniques for infection prevention is common in
obstetrics (Table 37-3). Numerous studies show that prophylactic antibiotics
at the time of cesarean delivery reduce wound and postpartum pelvic
infection rates (Carter, 2017; Smaill, 2014). The observed benefit applies to
both elective and nonelective cesarean delivery. As noted from preliminary
data, antimicrobials may decrease pelvic infection rates after operative
vaginal delivery (p. 650). However, data are insufficient to suggest
prophylactic antimicrobials lower infection rates after spontaneous vaginal
delivery, repair of all episiotomies, or manual extraction of the placenta
(Bonet 2017a,b; Chongsomchai, 2014). The American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2018a) concluded that a single antibiotic
dose with third- and fourth-degree perineal laceration is reasonable and has
evidenced-based support.
TABLE 37-3. Various Prophylactic Methods for Decreasing Pelvic and
Wound Infection Rates Following Delivery

Single-dose prophylaxis with a 2-g dose of a first-generation
cephalosporin is ideal. This regimen has similar efficacy of broad-spectrum
agents or multiple-dose regimens (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2018b). For obese women, evidence supports a 3-g dose of
cefazolin to reach optimal tissue concentrations (Swank, 2015). Some
evidence supports addition of azithromycin to lower postcesarean uterine
infection rates (Markwei, 2021; Pierce, 2021; Tita, 2016). Women colonized
with MRSA are given vancomycin in addition to a cephalosporin (Chap. 67,
p. 1196). It is controversial whether the infection rate is reduced further if the
antimicrobial is given before the skin incision compared with after umbilical
cord clamping (Baaqeel, 2013; Macones, 2012; Sun, 2013; Ward, 2016). The
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2018b) has
concluded that the evidence favors predelivery administration.
Most women with a stated allergy to penicillin are not prone to
developing anaphylaxis. Without a history of anaphylaxis, most of these

women can safely be given a cephalosporin (Chap. 30, p. 551). If not, then
vancomycin is given along with clindamycin and gentamicin (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2018b).
Preoperative abdominal skin preparation decreases the risk for pelvic
and wound infections (Hadiati, 2018). Skin preparation with chlorhexidinealcohol is superior to iodine-alcohol for preventing surgical-site infections
(Tuuli, 2016). Additive beneficial effects may be gained by preoperative
vaginal cleansing with povidone-iodine rinse or application of
metronidazole gel (Caissutti, 2017; Felder, 2019; Haas, 2018).
Other Methods of Prophylaxis. Several studies have addressed the value of
prenatal cervicovaginal cultures. These are obtained in the hope of
identifying pathogens that might be eradicated to lower incidences of preterm
labor, chorioamnionitis, and puerperal infections. Unfortunately, treatment of
asymptomatic vaginal infections does not prevent these complications. For
asymptomatic bacterial vaginosis, Carey and associates (2000) reported no
beneficial effects for women treated. For asymptomatic Trichomonas
vaginalis infection, a similar postpartum infection rate was found in women
treated in the second trimester compared with placebo-treated women
(Klebanoff, 2001).
Technical maneuvers done to alter the postcesarean infection rate have
been studied (Chap. 30, p. 551). Allowing the placenta to separate
spontaneously and exteriorizing the uterus to close the hysterotomy may
reduce the infection risk (Jacobs-Jokhan, 2004; Lasley, 1997). However,
changing gloves after placental delivery, cleaning the intrauterine cavity, and
dilating the lower segment and cervix do not alter the infection rate
(Atkinson, 1996; Eke, 2019; Liabsuetrakul, 2018). No differences were
found in postoperative infection rates when single- and two-layer uterine
closures were compared (Hauth, 1992). Similarly, infection rates are not
affected by closure versus nonclosure of the peritoneum (Bamigboye, 2014;
Tulandi, 2003). Importantly, closure of subcutaneous tissue in obese women
does not lower the wound infection rate, but it does decrease the wound
separation incidence (Chelmow, 2004). Similarly, skin closure with staples
versus suture has a greater incidence of noninfectious skin separation
(Mackeen, 2012; Tuuli, 2011).

■ Complications of Uterine and Pelvic Infections
Metritis responds to antimicrobial treatment within 48 to 72 hours in more
than 90 percent of women. In some of the remainder, any of several
complications may arise. These include wound infection, complex pelvic
infection such as a phlegmon or an abscess, and septic pelvic
thrombophlebitis (Brown, 1999; Jaiyeoba, 2012). As with other aspects of
puerperal infections, the incidence and severity of these complications are
reduced by perioperative antimicrobial prophylaxis.

■ Abdominal Incisional Infections
Wound infection is a common cause of persistent fever in women treated for
metritis. Incisional infection risk factors include obesity, diabetes,
corticosteroid therapy, immunosuppression, anemia, hypertension, and
hematoma formation from inadequate hemostasis. If prophylactic
antimicrobials are given, the incidence of wound infection following
cesarean delivery ranges from 2 to 10 percent depending on risk factors
(Andrews, 2003; Chaim, 2000). From our experiences at Parkland Hospital,
the incidence is closer to 2 percent, but this risk rises with increasing body
mass (Hussamy, 2018).
Incisional abscesses that develop following cesarean delivery usually
cause persistent fever or fever that begins on approximately the fourth day.
The wound is erythematous and drains pus. Organisms that cause wound
infections are generally the same as those isolated from amnionic fluid at
cesarean delivery, however, hospital-acquired pathogens also may be
causative.
Treatment includes antimicrobials and surgical drainage and debridement
of devitalized tissue. This typically requires spinal analgesia or general
anesthesia. The fascia is carefully inspected to document integrity. Local
wound care thereafter is completed twice daily. Before each dressing
change, procedural analgesia is tailored to wound size and location, and
oral, intramuscular, or intravenous dosage routes are suitable. Topical
lidocaine also may be added. Necrotic tissue is removed, and the wound is
repacked with moist gauze. At 4 to 6 days, healthy granulation tissue is
typically present, and secondary en bloc closure of the open layers can
usually be accomplished (Wechter, 2005). As shown in Figure 37-1, a

polypropylene or nylon suture of appropriate gauge enters 2 to 3 cm from one
wound edge. It crosses the wound to incorporate the full wound thickness and
emerges 3 cm from the other wound edge. These are placed in series to close
the opening. In most cases, sutures may be removed on postprocedural day
10.

FIGURE 37-1 Secondary abdominal wound closure technique. (Reproduced with permission from
Worley KC: Postoperative complications. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al [eds]:
Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2017).

Vacuum-Assisted Wound Closure
This system promotes healing by applying negative pressure to the wound
(Fig. 37-2). The technique is variably referred to as vacuum-assisted
closure (VAC), topical negative pressure (TNP), and negative-pressure
wound therapy (NPWT). Negative-pressure systems are used for open
wounds after infection or for prophylaxis against wound disruption. Mouës

and colleagues (2011) confirmed that NPWT enhances blood flow to the
wound, promotes angiogenesis, induces cellular proliferation, and shrinks
wound size. Several systems are available and widely accepted, despite
meager formal evidence for clinical efficacy.

FIGURE 37-2 Theoretical effects of negative-pressure wound therapy include macro- and
microdeformation, removal of tissue fluid, and creation of a warm and moist environment. As shown in
the inset, tissue fluid is drawn out by suction tubing. It travels through the porous sponge dressing that
fills the wound and into an adjacent collection canister. As healing progresses, a layer of granulation
tissue (red) forms at the wound-sponge interface. (Reproduced with permission from Cunningham FG:
Surgical instruments. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al [eds]: Cunningham and
Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2017.)

Open abdominal wounds once infection has cleared or an “open surgical
abdomen” is a major indication for NPWT. Vacuum therapy is the most
efficient method of temporary abdominal closure for patients with open
abdominal wounds (Bruhin, 2014; Quyn, 2012). However, no trials have
compared vacuum-assisted wound closure with conventional wound care
after cesarean delivery. Also, these devices are used for closure of perineal

wounds resulting from infected episiotomies, hematomas, or abscesses
(Aviki, 2015). Very few randomized trials have compared vacuum-assisted
wound closure with conventional wound care (Kawakita, 2021; Yu, 2018).
Prophylaxis. Negative-pressure devices are also marketed to prevent wound
infections in incisions closed to heal by primary intention. Such prophylactic
use in 441 obese women undergoing cesarean delivery has been evaluated in
two large randomized trials. Hussamy and associates (2019) found in obese
women that the incidence of wound morbidity was similar in the standard
dressing group compared with the NPWT group (Table 37-4). The second
trial was a multicenter study from Denmark of 876 obese women (Hyldig,
2019). In the NPWT group, the surgical site infection rate was 4.6 percent
compared with 9.2 percent in the group of women treated with standard
dressing. Similarly, a systematic review found use of prophylactic NPWT
reduced wound complications (Yu, 2018). The cost effectiveness of these
systems is inconclusive in multiple studies (Echebiri, 2015; Lewis, 2014).
Smid and coworkers (2017) questioned the effectiveness of such therapy.
Because of these uncertainties, we agree with Tuuli (2019) that routine use of
prophylactic NPWT needs more evaluation before its widespread
acceptance.
TABLE 37-4. Randomized Trial of Prophylactic Incisional NegativePressure Wound Therapy (iNPWT) Versus Standard Surgical Dressing for
Morbidly Obese Women Undergoing Cesarean Delivery

Fascial Dehiscence
This separation of the fascial layer is a serious complication, and bowel
evisceration can be comorbid. Wound infection and obesity are prominent
risk factors (Poole, 1985; Subramaniam, 2014). For example, McNeeley and
associates (1998) reported a fascial dehiscence rate of approximately 1 per
300 operations in almost 9000 women undergoing cesarean delivery. Two
thirds of the 27 fascial dehiscences in this study were associated with
concurrent fascial infection and tissue necrosis.
Fascial dehiscence generally presents within the first 7 to 10
postoperative days. Superficial disruption of the subcutaneous layer and
extensive leakage of peritoneal fluid or purulent drainage are indicative. In
unclear cases, CT scanning may be elected preoperatively, if obtained
expeditiously.
Dehiscence is a surgical emergency. If abdominal contents have
eviscerated, sterile towels or gauze soaked in saline can be used early to

cover and gently replace bowel or omentum. Broad-spectrum antibiotics are
generally recommended to minimize ensuing peritonitis.
Given the high mortality risk associated with fascial dehiscence and
bowel evisceration, examination under anesthesia to estimate the extent of
separation is often warranted. Surgery aims to assess bowel health, debride
necrotic wound tissue, and close the fascia, if possible. For closure, an
interrupted mass closure using a no. 2 permanent suture is recommended
typically (Fig. 37-3). In cases with infection, the subcutaneous layers are left
to close secondarily. General surgery consultation is considered if bowel
ischemia or difficult fascial closure is anticipated.

FIGURE 37-3 Mass closure: each stitch is placed 1.5 to 2 cm from the wound edge (A) and
incorporates the peritoneum, rectus muscle, and rectus sheath (B). Stitches are spaced 1 cm apart along
the length of the incision. A.R.S. = anterior rectus sheath; P.R.S. = posterior rectus sheath; SubQ =
subcutaneous layer. (Reproduced with permission from Cundiff GW: Incisions and closures. In Yeomans
ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al [eds]: Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed.
New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2017.)

■ Necrotizing Fasciitis
This uncommon severe wound infection is associated with high mortality
rates. In obstetrics, necrotizing fasciitis may involve abdominal incisions, or
it may complicate episiotomy or other perineal lacerations. As the name
implies, tissue necrosis is significant. Of the risk factors for fasciitis
summarized by Owen and Andrews (1994), diabetes, obesity, and
hypertension are increasingly common in gravidas. Like pelvic infections,
this wound complication usually is polymicrobial and caused by organisms
that make up the normal vaginal flora. In some cases, however, infection is
caused by a single virulent bacterial species such as group A β-hemolytic
streptococcus (Anderson, 2014; Rimawi, 2012). Occasionally, rarely
encountered pathogens cause necrotizing infections (Chong, 2016; Swartz,
2004).
Goepfert and coworkers (1997) described nine cases of necrotizing
fasciitis in more than 5000 cesarean deliveries. The infection was fatal in
two women—one with metastatic breast cancer and the other with sepsis. In
another report, Schorge and colleagues (1998) described five women with
fasciitis following cesarean delivery. None of these women had predisposing
risk factors, and none died.
Infection may involve skin, superficial and deep subcutaneous tissues,
and any of the abdominopelvic fascial layers. In some cases, muscle also is
involved—myofasciitis. Most of these necrotizing infections do not cause
symptoms until 3 to 5 days after delivery. Some virulent infections develop
earlier. Clinical findings vary, and it is frequently difficult to differentiate
more innocuous superficial wound infections from a deep fascial one. If
myofasciitis progresses, the woman may become ill from septicemia. A high
index of suspicion, with surgical exploration if the diagnosis is uncertain,
may be lifesaving (Goh, 2014). We aggressively pursue early exploration
(Chap. 50, p. 890).
Successful treatment of necrotizing soft-tissue infections involves early
diagnosis, source control by surgical debridement, antimicrobials, and
intensive care (Gallup, 2002; Goh, 2014; Society for Maternal-Fetal
Medicine, 2019). Surgery includes thorough debridement of all infected
tissue, leaving wide margins of healthy bleeding tissue. This may include
extensive abdominal or vulvar debridement and excision of abdominal, thigh,
or buttock fascia. Death is virtually universal without surgical treatment, and

rates approach 50 percent even if exhaustive debridement is performed
(Johnson, 2020). With substantial resection, synthetic mesh may ultimately be
required later to close the fascial incision once infection is cleared (Gallup,
2002; McNeeley, 1998).

■ Peritonitis and Adnexal Abscesses
Following cesarean delivery, peritonitis is infrequent. It almost always is
preceded by metritis, especially cases with uterine incisional necrosis and
dehiscence. However, it may stem from a ruptured adnexal abscess or an
inadvertent intraoperative bowel injury. Perforative appendicitis also can
cause peritonitis (Chap. 57, p. 1024). In these cases, prompt surgical
treatment is usually indicated.
After vaginal delivery, peritonitis is rarely encountered, and many such
cases are due to virulent strains of group A β-hemolytic streptococci or
similar organisms. Importantly, abdominal rigidity may not be prominent with
puerperal peritonitis because of physiological abdominal wall laxity from
pregnancy. Pain may be severe, but frequently, the first symptoms of
peritonitis are those of adynamic ileus. Marked bowel distention may
develop, which is unusual after vaginal birth. Normally, if the infection
begins in an intact uterus and extends into the peritoneum, antimicrobial
treatment alone suffices.
An ovarian abscess rarely develops in the puerperium. These are
presumably caused by bacterial invasion through an opening in the ovarian
capsule (Wetchler, 1985). The abscess is usually unilateral, and women
typically present 1 to 2 weeks after delivery. Rupture is common, and
peritonitis may be severe.

■ Parametrial Phlegmon
For some women in whom metritis develops following cesarean delivery,
parametrial cellulitis is intense and forms an area of induration—a phlegmon
—within the leaves of the broad ligament (Fig. 37-4). These infections are
considered when fever persists longer than 72 hours despite intravenous
antimicrobial therapy (Brown, 1999; DePalma, 1982).

FIGURE 37-4 Left-sided parametrial phlegmon: cellulitis causes induration in the parametrium adjacent
to the hysterotomy incision. (Reproduced with permission from Worley KC: Postoperative
complications. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al [eds]: Cunningham and Gilstrap’s
Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2017).

Phlegmons are usually unilateral, and they frequently are limited to the
parametrium at the base of the broad ligament. If the inflammatory reaction is
more intense, cellulitis extends along natural lines of cleavage. The most
common form of extension is laterally along the broad ligament, with a
tendency to extend to the pelvic sidewall. Occasionally, posterior extension
may involve the rectovaginal septum, producing a firm mass posterior to the

cervix. In most women, clinical improvement follows continued treatment
with a broad-spectrum antimicrobial regimen. Typically, fever resolves in 5
to 7 days.
Severe cellulitis of the uterine incision may ultimately lead to necrosis
and separation (Treszezamsky, 2011). Extrusion of purulent material causes
intraabdominal abscess formation and peritonitis as described above.
Surgery is reserved for women in whom uterine incisional necrosis is
suspected. For most, hysterectomy and surgical debridement are needed.
These cases are difficult because the cervix and lower uterine segment are
involved with an intense inflammatory process that extends to the pelvic
sidewall. The adnexa are seldom involved, and one or both ovaries can
usually be conserved. Blood loss is often appreciable, and transfusion is
common.

Imaging Studies
Persistent puerperal infections can be evaluated using computed tomography
(CT) or magnetic resonance (MR) imaging (Wang, 2020). Brown and
associates (1991) used CT imaging in women in whom pelvic infection was
refractory to antimicrobial therapy given for 5 days. They found at least one
abnormal radiological finding in 75 percent of these women, and most were
nonsurgical lesions. Fishel Bartal and colleagues (2018) reported abnormal
CT findings in almost 60 percent of women with refractory fever persisting
>3 days. Pelvic fluid collections were seen in 22 percent, and surgical
intervention was prompted in 8 percent. Thus, imaging can be used to
dissuade surgical exploration in most cases.
Uterine incisional dehiscence such as shown in Figure 37-5 can
sometimes be confirmed based on CT images. These findings must be
interpreted within the clinical context because apparent uterine incisional
defects thought to represent edema can be seen even after uncomplicated
cesarean delivery. Shown in Figure 37-6 is a necrotic hysterotomy incision,
which had leaked into the peritoneal cavity.

FIGURE 37-5 Pelvic computed tomography scan showing necrosis of the uterine incision with gas in
the myometrium (arrows). A large abscess (a) fills the right parametrium.

FIGURE 37-6 Necrotic hysterotomy infection. Severe cellulitis of the uterine incision resulted in
dehiscence with subsequent leakage into the peritoneal cavity. Hysterectomy was required for sufficient
debridement of necrotic tissue. (Reproduced with permission from Dr. Denisse Holcomb.)

Occasionally, a parametrial phlegmon may suppurate, forming a fluctuant
broad ligament abscess that may point above the inguinal ligament. These
abscesses can dissect anteriorly and be amenable to CT-directed needle
drainage. A psoas abscess is rare, and despite antimicrobial therapy,
percutaneous drainage may be required to effectively treat it (Shahabi, 2002;
Swanson, 2008). If a phlegmon involving the rectovaginal septum suppurates,
surgical drainage is easily effected by colpotomy. Absorption of the
induration may require several days to weeks.

■ Septic Pelvic Thrombophlebitis
Suppurative thrombophlebitis was a frequent complication in the
preantibiotic era, and septic embolization was common. However, with the
advent of antimicrobial therapy, the mortality rate and need for surgical
therapy for these infections diminished. Septic phlebitis arises as an
extension along venous routes and may cause thrombosis. Lymphangitis often
coexists. The ovarian veins may then become involved because they drain the
upper uterus and therefore the placental implantation site. The experiences of
Witlin and Sibai (1995) and Brown and coworkers (1999) suggest that
puerperal septic thrombophlebitis is likely to involve one or both ovarian
venous plexuses. In a fourth of women, the clot extends into the inferior vena
cava and occasionally to the renal vein.
The incidence of septic phlebitis varies in several reports. In a 5-year
survey of 45,000 women who were delivered at Parkland Hospital, Brown
and workers (1999) found an incidence of 1 case per 9000 vaginal births and
1 per 800 cesarean deliveries. In a cohort of 16,650 women undergoing
primary cesarean delivery, Rouse and coworkers (2004) reported an
incidence of 1 case per 400 surgeries. Incidences approximated 1 per 175
cesarean deliveries if chorioamnionitis was antecedent, but only 1 per 500 if
there was no intrapartum infection.
Except for chills and occasional lower quadrant pain, women with septic
thrombophlebitis usually lack symptoms (Wouterlood, 2021). The diagnosis
can be confirmed by pelvic CT or MR imaging (Fig. 37-7). Using either,
Brown and coworkers (1999) found that 20 percent of 69 women with

persistent fever following >5 days of antimicrobial therapy for metritis had
septic pelvic thrombophlebitis. In a later study, Fischel Bartal and associates
(2018) reported that 6 percent of women with refractory fever ≥3 days had
septic phlebitis. These women normally have symptomatic improvement with
antimicrobial treatment, however, they continue to have fever.

FIGURE 37-7 Septic ovarian vein thrombosis—contrast-enhanced computed tomography scan: A.
Enlarged right ovarian vein filled with low-density thrombus (black arrow). Contrast is seen in ureter
(white arrow). R = lower pole, right kidney. B. Coronal image demonstrates enlarged right ovarian vein
filled with low-density thrombus (arrows). (B: Reproduced with permission from Dr. April Bailey in
Worley KC: Postoperative complications. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al [eds]:
Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2017.)

Treatment with heparin is controversial. In a randomized study of 14
women, the addition of heparin to antimicrobial therapy for septic pelvic
thrombophlebitis did not hasten recovery or improve outcome (Brown,
1999). We and others are of the opinion that heparin is unnecessary (Witlin,
1995). Others, however, continue to recommend anticoagulation (Klima,
2008; Lenz, 2017). Certainly, no evidence supports long-term anticoagulation
(Brown, 2018).

■ Perineal Infections
Episiotomy infections are uncommon, because the operation is now
performed less frequently (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2018a; Dillon, 2019). Reasons for this are discussed in
Chapter 27 (p. 510). In an older study, Owen and Hauth (1990) described
only 10 episiotomy infections in 20,000 women delivered vaginally. With
infection, however, dehiscence is a concern. Ramin and colleagues (1992)
reported an episiotomy dehiscence rate of 0.5 percent at Parkland Hospital,
and 80 percent of these were infected. Uygur and associates (2004) reported
a 1-percent dehiscence rate and attributed two thirds to infection.
When the anal sphincter is disrupted at delivery, the subsequent infection
rate is higher and is likely influenced by intrapartum antimicrobial treatment

(Buppasiri, 2014; Stock, 2013). Lewicky-Gaupp and colleagues (2015)
reported a 20-percent infection rate when the sphincter was torn. Goldaber
and coworkers (1993) described fourth-degree lacerations in 390
parturients, of whom 5.4 percent had morbidity. In these women, 2.8 percent
had infection and dehiscence, 1.8 percent had only dehiscence, and 0.8
percent only infection.

Pathogenesis and Clinical Course
As noted, perineal laceration infection may be complicated by dehiscence.
Other factors for separation include coagulation disorders, smoking, and
human papillomavirus infection (Ramin, 1994). No data suggest that
dehiscence is related to faulty repair.
With infection, local pain and dysuria, with or without urinary retention,
are frequent symptoms. Ramin and colleagues (1992) reported that the most
common findings were pain in 65 percent, purulent discharge in 65 percent,
and fever in 44 percent. In extreme cases, the entire vulva may become
edematous, ulcerated, and covered with exudate. Although life-threatening,
septic shock or necrotizing fasciitis is rare (p. 654).
Vaginal lacerations may also become infected directly or by extension
from the perineum. The epithelium becomes red and swollen and may then
become necrotic and slough. Parametrial extension can lead to lymphangitis.
Cervical lacerations are seldom noticeably infected, but instead may
manifest as metritis. Deep lacerations that extend directly into the base of the
broad ligament may become infected and cause lymphangitis, parametritis,
and bacteremia.

Treatment
Infected episiotomies are managed similar to other infected surgical wounds.
In women with obvious cellulitis but no purulence, close observation and
broad-spectrum antimicrobial therapy alone may be appropriate. With
purulence, drainage is established, and in most cases, sutures are removed
and the infected wound debrided. With dehiscence, local wound care is
coupled with intravenous antimicrobials. Hauth and associates (1986) were
the first to advocate for early episiotomy repair after infection subsided.
Hankins and colleagues (1990) described successful early repair in 94
percent of women, and the average duration from dehiscence to repair was 6

days. The two women with failures developed a pinpoint rectovaginal fistula
that was treated with a small rectal flap. Other studies have shown similar
high rates with early repair (Ramin, 1992; Uygur, 2004).
Before performing early repair, diligent preparation is essential (Table
37-5). The surgical wound must be properly cleaned and cleared of
infection. Once the surface of the wound is free of exudate and covered by
pink granulation tissue, secondary repair can be accomplished. The tissue
must be adequately mobilized, with special attention to identify and mobilize
the anal sphincter muscle. A tension-free suture line is essential to avoid
repeated dehiscence. Secondary closure of the wound is accomplished in
layers, as described for primary episiotomy closure (Chap. 27, p. 510).
Postoperative care includes local wound care, stool softeners, and nothing
per vagina or rectum until healed. Hard stools risk wound disruption, but
liquid stool can seep between sutures to reincite infection. Thus, soft formed
stools are the goal.
TABLE 37-5. Preoperative Protocol for Early Repair of Episiotomy
Dehiscence

■ Toxic Shock Syndrome

This acute febrile illness with severe multisystem derangement has a casefatality rate of 10 to 15 percent. Usual findings are fever, headache, mental
confusion, diffuse macular erythematous rash, nausea, vomiting, watery
diarrhea, and marked hemoconcentration. Renal failure followed by hepatic
failure, disseminated intravascular coagulation, and circulatory collapse may
progress in rapid sequence. During recovery, the rash-covered areas
desquamate. In early investigations of toxic shock syndrome (TSS),
Staphylococcus aureus was recovered from almost all afflicted persons.
Specifically, a staphylococcal exotoxin, termed toxic shock syndrome toxin
1 (TSST-1), was found to cause the clinical manifestations by provoking
profound endothelial injury. A very small amount of TSST-1 can activate T
cells to create a “cytokine storm” (Heying, 2007; Que, 2005). Toxic shock
syndrome has also been reported with MRSA (Deguchi, 2018).
Subsequent investigations have also implicated virulent group A βhemolytic streptococcal infection (Anderson, 2014; Rottenstreich, 2019;
Shinar, 2016). Heavy colonization or infection is complicated in some cases
by streptococcal toxic shock syndrome, which is produced when pyrogenic
exotoxin is elaborated. Serotypes M1 and M3 are particularly virulent
(Beres, 2004; Okumura, 2004). Last, almost identical findings of toxic shock
have been reported in pregnant women with Clostridium sordellii and novyi
colonization (Herrera, 2016; Robbie, 2000).
Thus, in some cases of toxic shock syndrome, infection is not apparent,
and colonization of a mucosal surface is the presumed source (Olp, 2020). At
least 10 to 20 percent of pregnant women have vaginal colonization with S
aureus. And Clostridium perfringens and sordellii are cultured from 3 to 10
percent of asymptomatic women (Chong, 2016). Thus, it is not surprising that
the disease develops in postpartum women when growth of vaginal bacteria
is abundant (Chen, 2006; Guerinot, 1982).
Delayed diagnosis and treatment are associated with maternal mortality
(Schummer, 2002). Crum and colleagues (2002) described a neonatal death
following antenatal toxic shock syndrome. Principal therapy is supportive,
while allowing reversal of capillary endothelial injury. Antimicrobial
therapy includes coverage against staphylococcal and streptococcal species.
With evidence of pelvic infection, antimicrobial therapy must also include
agents used for polymicrobial infections. Women with these infections may
require wound debridement and possibly hysterectomy. Because the toxin is
so potent, the mortality rate is correspondingly high (Hotchkiss, 2003).

BREAST INFECTIONS
Parenchymal infection of the mammary glands is a rare antepartum
complication, but the postpartum incidence of mastitis approximates 3
percent (Lee, 2010). No evidence supports use of prophylactic measures to
prevent breast infection (Crepinsek, 2012). Risk factors include nursing
difficulties, cracked nipples, and oral antibiotic therapy (Branch-Elliman,
2012; Mediano, 2014).
Symptoms of suppurative mastitis seldom appear before the end of the
first week postpartum and usually are not seen until the third or fourth week.
Infection almost invariably is unilateral, and marked engorgement usually
precedes inflammation. Symptoms include chills or actual rigors, which are
soon followed by fever and tachycardia. Pain is severe, and the breast(s)
becomes hard and red. Approximately 10 percent of women with mastitis
develop an abscess. Detection of fluctuation may be difficult, and sonography
is usually diagnostic (Fig. 37-8). Although rare, toxic shock syndrome from
mastitis caused by S aureus has been reported (Demey, 1989; Fujiwara,
2001).

FIGURE 37-8 Puerperal mastitis with breast abscess. A. Indurated, erythematous skin overlies the
area of right-sided breast infection. B. Sonographic picture of this 5-cm abscess.

■ Etiology
S aureus, especially MRSA, is the most commonly isolated organism in
breast infections. Matheson and coworkers (1988) found it in 40 percent of
women with mastitis. Other commonly isolated organisms are coagulasenegative staphylococci and viridans streptococci. The immediate source of
mastitis-causing organisms is almost always the newborn’s nose and throat.
Bacteria enter the breast through the nipple at fissures or small abrasions.
The infecting organism can usually be cultured from milk.
At times, suppurative mastitis reaches epidemic levels among nursing
mothers. Such outbreaks most often coincide with the appearance of a new
strain of antibiotic-resistant staphylococcus. A contemporaneous example is
MRSA, which has rapidly become the most commonly isolated
staphylococcal species in some areas (Berens, 2010; Klevens, 2007). At
Parkland Hospital from 2000 to 2004, Laibl and associates (2005) reported
that a fourth of community-acquired MRSA isolates were from pregnant or
postpartum women with mastitis. Hospital-acquired MRSA may cause
mastitis when the newborn becomes colonized after contact with nursery
personnel who are colonized (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
2006). Stafford and colleagues (2008) found a higher incidence of recurrent
abscess in those with MRSA-associated mastitis.

■ Management
Provided that appropriate therapy for mastitis is started before suppuration
begins, the infection usually resolves within 48 hours. Many recommend that
milk be expressed from the affected breast onto a swab and cultured before
beginning therapy. Bacterial identification and antimicrobial sensitivities can
provide information for a successful program of nosocomial infection
surveillance (Lee, 2010).
The most effective treatment has not been clarified (Jahanfar, 2013).
Thus, the initial antimicrobial choice is influenced by current experience
with staphylococcal infections at a given institution. Dicloxacillin, 500 mg
orally four times daily, may be started empirically. Erythromycin is given to
women who are penicillin sensitive. If the infection is caused by resistant,
penicillinase-producing staphylococcus species or if resistant organisms are
suspected while awaiting the culture results, then vancomycin, clindamycin,

or trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole is given (Sheffield, 2013). Although
clinical response may be prompt, treatment is recommended for 10 days.
Marshall and coworkers (1975) demonstrated the importance of
continued breastfeeding. They reported that of 65 women with mastitis, the
only three who developed abscesses were among the 15 women who quit
breastfeeding. Vigorous milk expression may be sufficient treatment alone
(Thomsen, 1984). Sometimes the infant will not nurse on the inflamed breast.
This probably is not related to any changes in the milk taste but is secondary
to engorgement and edema, which can make the areola harder to grip.
Pumping can alleviate this. When nursing bilaterally, it is best to begin
suckling on the uninvolved breast. This allows let-down to commence before
moving to the tender breast.
In resource-poor countries, breastfeeding in women infected with the
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) is not contraindicated. However, in the
setting of mastitis or breast abscess, it is recommended to stop feeding from
the infected breast. This is because HIV RNA levels rise in affected breast
milk. These levels return to baseline after symptoms resolve (Semrau, 2013).

■ Breast Abscess
In a population-based study of nearly 1.5 million Swedish women, the
incidence of breast abscess was 0.1 percent (Kvist, 2005). An abscess
should be suspected when defervescence does not follow within 48 to 72
hours of treatment or when a mass is palpable. Again, sonographic imaging is
valuable. Breast abscesses can be large, and in one case report, 2 L of pus
were released (Martic, 2012). Traditional therapy has been surgical
drainage, which usually requires general anesthesia. The incision ideally is
placed along Langer skin lines for a cosmetic result (Stehman, 1990). In
early cases, a single incision over the most dependent portion of fluctuation
is usually sufficient. Multiple abscesses require several incisions and
disruption of loculations. The resulting cavity is loosely packed with gauze,
which should be replaced at the end of 24 hours by a smaller pack.
More recently, sonographically guided needle aspiration using local
analgesia has become favored (Patani, 2018). This has an 80- to 90-percent
success rate (Geiss, 2014). In a randomized trial, Naeem and colleagues
(2012) compared surgical drainage with aspiration. At 8 weeks, they found
93 percent undergoing aspiration were healed compared with 77 percent

undergoing surgical drainage. Sonographic findings, initial choice of
antimicrobials, and infecting organism do not predict aspiration failure
(David, 2018).
Other etiologies should be considered in the setting of a nonhealing
abscess. Rarely, granulomatous mastitis presents as puerperal mastitis
(Ding, 2021 Freeman, 2017). Cancer or tuberculosis are other considerations
(Wu, 2020).

REFERENCES
Acosta CD, Bhattacharya S, Tuffnell D, et al: Maternal sepsis: a Scottish population-based case-control
study. BJOG 119(4):474, 2012
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Prevention and management of obstetrical
lacerations at vaginal birth. Practice Bulletin No. 198, June 2018a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Use of prophylactic antibiotics in labor and
delivery. Practice Bulletin No. 199, August 2018b
Anderson BL: Puerperal group A streptococcal infection: beyond Semmelweis. Obstet Gynecol
123(4):874, 2014
Anderson DJ, Sexton DJ, Kanafani ZA, et al: Severe surgical site infection in community hospitals:
epidemiology, key procedures, and the changing prevalence of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus
aureus. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 28 (9):1047, 2007
Andrews WW, Hauth JC, Cliver SP, et al: Randomized clinical trial of extended spectrum antibiotic
prophylaxis with coverage for Ureaplasma urealyticum to reduce post-cesarean delivery
endometritis. Obstet Gynecol 101:1183, 2003
Andrews WW, Shah SR, Goldenberg RL, et al: Association of post-cesarean delivery endometritis with
colonization of the chorioamnion by Ureaplasma urealyticum. Obstet Gynecol 85:509, 1995
Atkinson MW, Owen J, Wren A, et al: The effect of manual removal of the placenta on post-cesarean
endometritis. Obstet Gynecol 87:99, 1996
Aviki EM, Batalden RP, del Carmen MG, et al: Vacuum-assisted closure for episiotomy dehiscence.
Obstet Gynecol 126(3):530, 2015
Axelsson D, Brynhildsen J, Blomberg M: Postpartum infection in relation to maternal characteristics,
obstetric interventions, and complications. J Perinat Med 46(3):271, 2018
Baaqeel H, Baaqeel R: Timing of administration of prophylactic antibiotics for caesarean section: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. BJOG 120(6):661, 2013
Bamigboye AA, Hofmeyr GJ: Closure versus non-closure of the peritoneum at caesarean section.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 8:CD000163, 2014
Berens P, Swaim L, Peterson B: Incidence of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus in
postpartum breast abscesses. Breastfeed Med 5(3):113, 2010
Beres SB, Sylva GL, Sturdevant DE, et al: Genome-wide molecular dissection of serotype M3 group A
Streptococcus strains causing two epidemics of invasive infections. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
101:11833, 2004
Berg CJ, Harper MA, Atkinson SM, et al: Preventability of pregnancy-related deaths: results of a statewide review. Obstet Gynecol 106:1228, 2005

Boggess KA, Tita A, Jauk V, et al: Risk factors for postcesarean maternal infection in a trial of
extended-spectrum antibiotic prophylaxis. Obstet Gynecol 129(3):481, 2017
Bonet M, Ota E, Chibueze CE, et al: Antibiotic prophylaxis for episiotomy repair following vaginal birth.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 11:CD012136, 2017a
Bonet M, Ota E, Chibueze CE, et al: Routine antibiotic prophylaxis after normal vaginal birth for
reducing maternal infectious morbidity. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 11:CD012137, 2017b
Branch-Elliman W, Golen TH, Gold HS, et al: Risk factors for Staphylococcus aureus postpartum
breast abscess. Clin Infect Dis 54(1):71, 2012
Brown CE, Cunningham FG: Ovarian vein thrombosis: incidence of recurrent venous thromboembolism
and survival. Obstet Gynecol 131(4):740, 2018
Brown CE, Dunn DH, Harrell R, et al: Computed tomography for evaluation of puerperal infection. Surg
Gynecol Obstet 172:2, 1991
Brown CE, Stettler RW, Twickler D, et al: Puerperal septic pelvic thrombophlebitis: incidence and
response to heparin therapy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 181:143, 1999
Bruhin A, Ferreira F, Chariker M, et al: Systematic review and evidence based recommendations for the
use of negative pressure wound therapy in the open abdomen. Int J Surg 12(10)1105, 2014
Brumfield CG, Hauth JC, Andrews WW: Puerperal infection after cesarean delivery: evaluation of a
standardized protocol. Am J Obstet Gynecol 182:1147, 2000
Buppasiri P, Lumbiganon P, Thinkhamrop J, et al: Antibiotic prophylaxis for third- and fourth–degree
perineal tear during vaginal birth. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 10:CD005125, 2014
Caissutti C, Saccone G, Zullo F, et al: Vaginal cleansing before cesarean delivery: a systematic review
and meta-analysis. Obstet Gynecol 130(3):527, 2017
Callaghan WM, Creanga AA, Kuklina EV: Severe maternal morbidity among delivery and postpartum
hospitalizations in the United States. Obstet Gynecol 120:1029, 2012
Cape A, Tuomala RE, Taylor C, et al: Peripartum bacteremia in the era of group B streptococcus
prophylaxis. Obstet Gynecol 121(4):812, 2013
Carey JC, Klebanoff MA, Hauth JC, et al: Metronidazole to prevent preterm delivery in pregnant
women with asymptomatic bacterial vaginosis. N Engl J Med 342:534, 2000
Carter EB, Temming LA, Fowler S, et al: Evidence-based bundles and cesarean delivery surgical site
infections: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Obstet Gynecol 130(4):735, 2017
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Community-associated methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus infection among healthy newborns—Chicago and Los Angeles County,
2004. MMWR 55(12):329, 2006
Chaim W, Bashiri A, Bar-David J, et al: Prevalence and clinical significance of postpartum endometritis
and wound infection. Infect Dis Obstet Gynecol 8:77, 2000
Chaim W, Horowitz S, David JB, et al: Ureaplasma urealyticum in the development of postpartum
endometritis. Eur J Obstet Reprod Biol 15:145, 2003
Chelmow D, Rodriguez EJ, Sabatini MM: Suture closure of subcutaneous fat and wound disruption after
cesarean delivery: a meta-analysis. Obstet Gynecol 103:974, 2004
Chen KT, Huard RC, Della-Latta P, et al: Prevalence of methicillin-sensitive and methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus in pregnant women. Obstet Gynecol 108:482, 2006
Chong E, Winikoff B, Charles D, et al: Vaginal and rectal Clostridium sordellii and Clostridium
perfringens presence among women in the United States. Obstet Gynecol 127:360, 2016
Chongsomchai C, Lumbiganon P, Laopaiboon M: Prophylactic antibiotics for manual removal of retained
placenta in vaginal birth. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 10:CD004904, 2014

Creanga AA, Syverson C, Seed K, et al: Pregnancy-related mortality in the United States, 2011–2013.
Obstet Gynecol 130(2):366, 2017
Crepinsek MA, Crowe L, Michener K, et al: Interventions for preventing mastitis after childbirth.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 10:CD007239, 2012
Crum NF, Chun HM, Gaylord TG, et al: Group A streptococcal toxic shock syndrome developing in the
third trimester of pregnancy. Infect Dis Obstet Gynecol 10:209, 2002
Cunningham FG: Surgical instruments. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al (eds):
Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2017
Cunningham FG, Hauth JC, Strong JD, et al: Infectious morbidity following cesarean: comparison of two
treatment regimens. Obstet Gynecol 52:656, 1978
David M, Handa P, Castaldi M: Predictors of outcomes in managing breast abscesses—a large
retrospective single-center analysis. Breast J 24(5):755, 2018
Deguchi Y, Horiuchi Y, Shojima K, et al: Postpartum methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus toxic
shock syndrome caused by a perineal infection. Case Rep Obstet Gynecol 2018:2670179, 2018
Demey HE, Hautekeete MI, Buytaert P, et al: Mastitis and toxic shock syndrome. A case report. Acta
Obstet Gynecol Scand 68:87, 1989
Deneux-Tharaux C, Carmona E, Bouvier-Colle MH, et al: Postpartum maternal mortality and cesarean
delivery. Obstet Gynecol 108:541, 2006
DeNoble AE, Heine RP, Dotters-Katz SK: Chorioamnionitis and infectious complications after vaginal
delivery. Am J Perinatol 36(14):1437, 2019
DePalma RT, Cunningham FG, Leveno KJ, et al: Continuing investigation of women at high risk for
infection following cesarean delivery. Obstet Gynecol 60:53, 1982
Dillon SJ, Nelson DB, Spong CY, et al: Episiotomy: evolution of a common obstetric practice at a single
public hospital. Abstract No. 801, Am J Obstet Gynecol 220:S523, 2019
Ding ST, Gao YJ, Qin CX, et al: Granulomatous mastitis in multiparae during pregnancy and lactation:
observational study (STROBE compliant). Medicine (Baltimore) 100:e25912, 2021
DiZerega G, Yonekura L, Roy S, et al: A comparison of clindamycin-gentamicin and penicillin
gentamicin in the treatment of post–cesarean section endomyometritis. Am J Obstet Gynecol
134:238, 1979
Donders G, Greenhouse P, Donders F, et al: Genital tract GAS infection ISIDOG guidelines. J Clin Med
10:2043, 2021
Easter SR, Molina RL, Venkatesh KK, et al: Clinical risk factors associated with peripartum maternal
bacteremia. Obstet Gynecol 130(4):710, 2017
Echebiri NC, McDoom MM, Aalto MM, et al: Prophylactic use of negative pressure wound therapy
after cesarean delivery. Obstet Gynecol 125(2):299, 2015
Eke AC, Drnec S, Buras A, et al: Intrauterine cleaning after placental delivery at cesarean section: a
randomized controlled trial. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 32(2):236, 2019
Felder L, Paternostro A, Quist-Nelson J, et al: Implementation of vaginal cleansing prior to cesarean
delivery to decrease endometritis rates. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 32(12):1997, 2019
Fein AW, Wen T, D’Alton ME, et al: Risk factors and temporality for postpartum infection readmissions.
Abstract No. 618, Am J Obstet Gynecol 220:S409, 2019
Filker RS, Monif GR: Postpartum septicemia due to group G streptococci. Obstet Gynecol 53:28S, 1979
Fishel Bartal M, Sibai BM, Ben-Mayor Bashi T, et al: Abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan in
the evaluation of refractory puerperal fever: impact on management. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med
33(4):577, 2020

Freeman CM, Xia BT, Wilson GC, et al: Idiopathic granulomatous mastitis: a diagnostic and therapeutic
challenge. Am J Surg 214(4):701, 2017
Fujiwara Y, Endo S: A case of toxic shock syndrome secondary to mastitis caused by methicillinresistant Staphylococcus aureus. Kansenshogaku Zasshi 75:898, 2001
Gallup DG, Freedman MA, Meguiar RV, et al: Necrotizing fasciitis in gynecologic and obstetric patients:
a surgical emergency. Am J Obstet Gynecol 187(2)305, 2002
Geiss CS, Golshan M, Flaherty K, et al: Clinical experience with aspiration of breast abscesses based on
size and etiology at an academic medical center. J Clin Ultrasound 42(9):513, 2014
Gilstrap LC III, Cunningham FG: The bacterial pathogenesis of infection following cesarean section.
Obstet Gynecol 53:545, 1979
Goepfert AR, Guinn DA, Andrews WW, et al: Necrotizing fasciitis after cesarean section. Obstet
Gynecol 89:409, 1997
Goh T, Goh LG, Ang CH, et al: Early diagnosis of necrotizing fasciitis. Br J Surg 101(1):e119, 2014
Goldaber KG, Wendel PJ, McIntire DD, et al: Postpartum perineal morbidity after fourth degree
perineal repair. Am J Obstet Gynecol 168:489, 1993
Grobman WA, Bailit JL, Rice MM, et al: Racial and ethnic disparities in maternal morbidity and obstetric
care. Obstet Gynecol 125(6):1460, 2015
Guerinot GT, Gitomer SD, Sanko SR: Postpartum patient with toxic shock syndrome. Obstet Gynecol
59:43S, 1982
Gustafson LW, Blaakær Helming RB: Group A streptococci infection. A systematic clinical review
exemplified by cases from on obstetric department. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 215:33, 2017
Haas DM, Morgan S, Contreras K: Vaginal preparation with antiseptic solution before cesarean section
for preventing postoperative infections. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 1:CD007892, 2018
Hadiati DR, Hakimi M, Nurdiati DS, et al: Skin preparation for preventing infection following cesarean
section. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 10:CD007462, 2018
Hankins GD, Hauth JC, Gilstrap LC III, et al: Early repair of episiotomy dehiscence. Obstet Gynecol
75:48, 1990
Harper LM, Kilgore M, Szychowski JM, et al: Economic evaluation of adjunctive azithromycin
prophylaxis for cesarean delivery. Obstet Gynecol 130(2):328, 2017
Harris BS, Hopkins MK, Villers MS, et al: Efficacy of non-beta-lactam antibiotics for prevention of
cesarean delivery surgical site infections. AJP Rep 9(2):e167, 2019
Hauth JC, Gilstrap LC III, Ward SC, et al: Early repair of an external sphincter ani muscle and rectal
mucosal dehiscence. Obstet Gynecol 67:806, 1986
Hauth JC, Owen J, Davis RO: Transverse uterine incision closure: one versus two layers. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 167:1108, 1992
Herrera C, Meehan R, Podduturi V, et al: Maternal death due to Clostridium novyi in an injection drug
user. Obstet Gynecol 128(4):876, 2016
Heying R, van de Gevel J, Que YA, et al: Fibronectin-binding proteins and clumping factor A in
Staphylococcus aureus experimental endocarditis: FnBPA is sufficient to activate human
endothelial cells. Thromb Haemost 97:617, 2007
Hotchkiss RS, Karl IE: The pathophysiology and treatment of sepsis. N Engl J Med 348:2, 2003
Hussamy DJ, Wortman AC, McIntire DD, et al: A randomized trial of closed incision negative pressure
therapy in morbidly obese women undergoing cesarean delivery. [Abstract No. 45]. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 218:S35, 2018
Hussamy DJ, Wortman AC, McIntire DD, et al: Closed incision negative pressure therapy in morbidly
obese women undergoing cesarean delivery: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol 134:781,

2019
Hyldig N, Vinter CA, Kruse M, et al: Prophylactic incisional negative pressure wound therapy reduces
the risk of surgical site infection after caesarean section in obese women: a pragmatic randomised
clinical trial. BJOG 126(5):628, 2019
Ismail MA, Chandler AE, Beem ME: Chlamydial colonization of the cervix in pregnant adolescents. J
Reprod Med 30:549, 1985
Jacobs-Jokhan D, Hofmeyr G: Extra-abdominal versus intra-abdominal repair of the uterine incision at
caesarean section. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 4:CD000085, 2004
Jacobsson B, Pernevi P, Chidekel L, et al: Bacterial vaginosis in early pregnancy may predispose for
preterm birth and postpartum endometritis. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 81:1006, 2002
Jahanfar S, Ng CJ, Teng CL: Antibiotics for mastitis in breastfeeding women. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev 2:CD005458, 2013
Jaiyeoba O: Postoperative infections in obstetrics and gynecology. Clin Obstet Gynecol 55(4):904, 2012
Johnson O, Pouncey AL, Gardiner S, et al: A woman with spreading erythema after cesarean section.
BMJ 368:m445, 2020
Kadar N: Vindicating a traduced genius: Ignaz Philipp Semmelweis (1818–1865). Am J Obstet Gynecol
225:310, 2021
Kankuri E, Kurki T, Carlson P, et al: Incidence, treatment and outcome of peripartum sepsis. Acta
Obstet Gynecol Scand 82:730, 2003
Kawakita T, Iqbal SN, Overcash RT: Negative pressure wound therapy system in extremely obese
women after cesarean delivery compared with standard dressing. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med
34(4):634, 2021
Klebanoff MA, Carey JC, Hauth JC, et al: Failure of metronidazole to prevent preterm delivery among
pregnant women with asymptomatic Trichomonas vaginalis infection. N Engl J Med 345:487, 2001
Klevens RM, Morrison MA, Nadle J, et al: Invasive methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
infections in the United States. JAMA 298:1763, 2007
Klima DA, Snyder TE: Postpartum ovarian vein thrombosis. Obstet Gynecol 111:431, 2008
Knight M, Chiocchia V, Partlett C, et al: Prophylactic antibiotics in the prevention of infection after
operative vaginal delivery (ANODE): a multicentre randomised controlled trial. Lancet
393(10189):2395, 2019
Kvist LJ, Rydhstroem H: Factors related to breast abscess after delivery: a population-based study.
BJOG 112:1070, 2005
Laibl VR, Sheffield JS, Roberts S, et al: Clinical presentation of community-acquired methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 106:461, 2005
Lasley DS, Eblen A, Yancey MK, et al: The effect of placental removal method on the incidence of
postcesarean infections. Am J Obstet Gynecol 176(6):1250, 1997
Lee IW, Kang L, Hsu HP, et al: Puerperal mastitis requiring hospitalization during a nine-year period.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 203(4):332, 2010
Lenz CJ, Wysokinski WE, Henkin S, et al: Ovarian vein thrombosis: incidence of recurrent venous
thromboembolism and survival. Obstet Gynecol 130(5):1127, 2017
Leth RA, Uldbjerg N, Norgaard M, et al: Obesity, diabetes, and the risk of infections diagnosed in
hospital and post-discharge infections after cesarean section: a prospective cohort study. Acta
Obstet Gynecol Scand 90(5):501, 2011
Lewicky-Gaupp C, Leader-Cramer A, Johnson LL, et al: Wound complications after obstetric anal
sphincter injuries. Obstet Gynecol 125(5):1088, 2015

Lewis LS, Convery PA, Bolac CS, et al: Cost of care using prophylactic negative pressure wound
vacuum on closed laparotomy incisions. Gynecol Oncol 132(3):684, 2014
Liabsuetrakul T, Peeyananjarassri K: Mechanical dilatation of the cervix at non-labour caesarean
section for reducing postoperative morbidity. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 11:CD008019, 2018
Livingston JC, Llata E, Rinehart E, et al: Gentamicin and clindamycin therapy in postpartum
endometritis: the efficacy of daily dosing versus dosing every 8 hours. Am J Obstet Gynecol
188:149, 2003
Maberry MC, Gilstrap LC III, Bawdon RE, et al: Anaerobic coverage for intra-amnionic infection:
maternal and perinatal impact. Am J Perinatol 8:338, 1991
Mackeen AD, Berghella V, Larsen ML: Techniques and materials for skin closure in caesarean section.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 11:CD003577, 2012
Mackeen AD, Packard RE, Ota E, et al: Antibiotic regimens for postpartum endometritis. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 2:CD001067, 2015
Macones GA, Cleary KL, Parry S, et al: The timing of antibiotics at cesarean: a randomized controlled
trial. Am J Perinatol 29(4):273, 2012
Maharaj D: Puerperal pyrexia: a review. Part II: Obstet Gynecol Surv 62:400, 2007
Markwei MT, Babatunde I, Rathi N, et al: Preincision adjunctive prophylaxis for cesarean deliveries a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol May 5, 2021 [Epub ahead of print]
Marshall BR, Hepper JK, Zirbel CC: Sporadic puerperal mastitis—an infection that need not interrupt
lactation. JAMA 344:1377, 1975
Martic K, Vasilj O: Extremely large breast abscess in a breastfeeding mother. J Hum Lact 28(4):460,
2012
Matheson I, Aursnes I, Horgen M, et al: Bacteriological findings and clinical symptoms in relation to
clinical outcome in puerperal mastitis. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 67:723, 1988
McNeeley SG Jr, Hendrix SL, Bennett SM, et al: Synthetic graft placement in the treatment of fascial
dehiscence with necrosis and infection. Am J Obstet Gynecol 179:1430, 1998
Meaney-Delman D, Bartlett LA, Gravett MG, et al: Oral and intramuscular treatment options for early
postpartum endometritis in low-resource settings: a systematic review. Obstet Gynecol 125(4):789,
2015
Mediano P, Fernandez L, Rodriguez JM, et al: Case-control study of risk factors for infectious mastitis in
Spanish breastfeeding women. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth 14:195, 2014
Mohamed-Ahmed O, Hinshaw K, Knight M: Operative vaginal delivery and post-partum infection. Best
Pract Res Clin Obstet Gynaecol 56:93, 2019
Moulton LJ, Eric Jelovsek J, Lachiewicz M, et al: A model to predict risk of postpartum infection after
caesarean delivery. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 31(18):2409, 2018
Mouës CM, Heule F, Hovius SE: A review of topical negative pressure therapy in wound healing:
sufficient evidence? Am J Surg 201(4):544, 2011
Naeem M, Rahimnajjad MK, Rahimnajjad NA, et al: Comparison of incision and drainage against needle
aspiration for the treatment of breast abscess. Am Surg 78(11):1224, 2012
O’Higgins AC, Egan AF, Murphy OC, et al: A clinical review of maternal bacteremia. Int Gynaecol
Obstet 124(3):226, 2014
Okumura K, Schroff R, Campbell R, et al: Group A streptococcal puerperal sepsis with retroperitoneal
involvement developing in a late postpartum woman: case report. Am Surg 70:730, 2004
Olp RJ, Chamales IA, Schmiedecke SS: A case study of puerperal group A streptococcal infection
complicated by toxic shock syndrome. Am J Perinatol Rep 10:e1, 2020
Owen J, Andrews WW: Wound complications after cesarean section. Clin Obstet Gynecol 27:842, 1994

Owen J, Hauth JC: Episiotomy infection and dehiscence. In Gilstrap LC III, Faro S (eds): Infections in
Pregnancy. New York, Liss, 1990, p 61
Patani N, MacAskill F, Eshelby S, et al: Best-practice care pathway for improving management of
mastitis and breast abscess. Br J Surg 105(12):1615, 2018
Patel M, Kumar RA, Stamm AM, et al: USA300 genotype community-associated methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus as a cause of surgical site infection. J Clin Microbiol 45 (10):3431, 2007
Patel SS, Koelper NC, Srinivas SK, et al: Adverse maternal outcomes associated with uterine
extensions at the time of cesarean delivery. Am J Perinatol 36(8):785, 2019
Pierce SL, Bisson CM, Dubois ME, et al: Clinical effectiveness of adding azithromycin to antimicrobial
prophylaxis for cesarean delivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 225:335.e1, 2021
Poole GV Jr: Mechanical factors in abdominal wound closure: the prevention of fascial dehiscence.
Surgery 97(6):631, 1985
Que YA, Haefliger JA, Piroth L, et al: Fibrinogen and fibronectin binding cooperative for valve infection
and invasion in Staphylococcus aureus experimental endocarditis. J Exp Med 201:1627, 2005
Quyn AJ, Johnston C, Hall D, et al: The open abdomen and temporary abdominal closure systems—
historical evolution and systematic review. Colorectal Dis 14(8):e429, 2012
Ramin SM, Gilstrap LC III: Episiotomy and early repair of dehiscence. Clin Obstet Gynecol 37:816,
1994
Ramin SM, Ramus R, Little B, et al: Early repair of episiotomy dehiscence associated with infection.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 167:1104, 1992
Rimawi BH, Soper DE, Eschenbach DA: Group A streptococcal infections in obstetrics and
gynecology. Clin Obstet Gynecol 55(4):864, 2012
Robbie LA, Dummer S, Booth NA, et al: Plasminogen activator inhibitor 2 and urokinase-type
plasminogen activator in plasma and leucocytes in patients with severe sepsis. Br J Haematol
109:342, 2000
Rottenstreich A, Benenson S, Levin G, et al: Risk factors, clinical course and outcomes of pregnancyrelated group A streptococcal infections: retrospective 13-year cohort study. Clin Microbiol Infect
25(2):251.e1, 2019
Rouse DJ, Landon M, Leveno KJ, et al: The Maternal-Fetal Medicine Units cesarean registry:
chorioamnionitis at term and its duration—relationship to outcomes. Am J Obstet Gynecol 191:211,
2004
Schorge JO, Granter SR, Lerner LH, et al: Postpartum and vulvar necrotizing fasciitis: early clinical
diagnosis and histopathologic correlation. J Reprod Med 43:586, 1998
Schummer W, Schummer C: Two cases of delayed diagnosis of postpartal streptococcal toxic shock
syndrome. Infect Dis Obstet Gynecol 10:217, 2002
Semrau K, Kuhn L, Brooks DR, et al: Dynamics of breast milk HIV-1 RNA with unilateral mastitis or
abscess. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr 62(3):348, 2013
Shahabi S, Klein JP, Rinaudo PF: Primary psoas abscess complicating a normal vaginal delivery. Obstet
Gynecol 99:906, 2002
Sheffield JS: Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus in obstetrics. Am J Perinatol 30(2):125, 2013
Sherman D, Lurie S, Betzer M, et al: Uterine flora at cesarean and its relationship to postpartum
endometritis. Obstet Gynecol 94:787, 1999
Shinar S, Foulks Y, Amit S, et al: Clinical characteristics of and preventative strategies for peripartum
group A streptococcal infections. Obstet Gynecol 127(2):227, 2016
Siriwachirachai T, Sangkomkamhang US, Lumbiganon P, et al: Antibiotics for meconium-stained
amniotic fluid in labour for preventing maternal and neonatal infections. Cochrane Database Syst

Rev 12:CD007772, 2014
Smaill FM, Grivell RM: Antibiotic prophylaxis versus no prophylaxis for preventing infection after
cesarean section. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 10:CD007482, 2014
Smid MC, Dotters-Katz SK, Grace M, et al: Prophylactic negative pressure wound therapy for obese
women after cesarean delivery: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Obstet Gynecol 130(5):969,
2017
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine (SMFM), Plante LA, Pacheco LD, et al: SMFM Consult Series
#47: sepsis during pregnancy and the puerperium. Am J Obstet Gynecol 220(4):B2, 2019
Stafford I, Hernandez J, Laibl V, et al: Community-acquired methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus
aureus among patients with puerperal mastitis requiring hospitalization. Obstet Gynecol 112(3):533,
2008
Stehman FB: Infections and inflammations of the breast. In Hindle WH (ed): Breast Disease for
Gynecologists. Norwalk, Appleton & Lange, 1990, p 151
Stock L, Basham E, Gossett DR, et al: Factors associated with wound complications in women with
obstetric and sphincter injuries (OASIS). Am J Obstet Gynecol 208(4):327.e1, 2013
Subramaniam A, Jauk VC, Figueroa D, et al: Risk factors for wound disruption following cesarean
delivery. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 27(12):1237, 2014
Suffredini AF, Fromm RE, Parker MM, et al: The cardiovascular response of normal humans to the
administration of endotoxin. N Engl J Med 321(5):280, 1989
Sun J, Ding M, Liu J, et al: Prophylactic administration of cefazolin prior to skin incision versus
antibiotics at cord clamping in preventing postcesarean infectious morbidity: a systematic review and
meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Gynecol Obstet Invest 75(3):175, 2013
Swank ML, Wing DA, Nicolau DP, et al: Increased 3-gram cefazolin dosing for cesarean delivery
prophylaxis in obese women. Am J Obstet Gynecol 213(3):415.e1, 2015
Swanson A, Lau KK, Kornman T, et al: Primary psoas muscle abscess in pregnancy. Aust N Z J
Obstet Gynaecol 48(6):607, 2008
Swartz MN: Cellulitis. N Engl J Med 350:904, 2004
Tita A, Szychowski J, Boggess K, et al: Adjunctive azithromycin prophylaxis for cesarean delivery. N
Engl J Med 375(13):1231, 2016
Thomsen AC, Espersen T, Maigaard S: Course and treatment of milk stasis, noninfectious inflammation
of the breast, and infectious mastitis in nursing women. Am J Obstet Gynecol 149:492, 1984
Treszezamsky AD, Feldman D, Sarabanchong VO: Concurrent postpartum uterine and abdominal wall
dehiscence and Streptococcus anginosus infection. Obstet Gynecol 118(2):449, 2011
Tulandi T, Al-Jaroudi D: Nonclosure of peritoneum: a reappraisal. Am J Obstet Gynecol 189:609, 2003
Tuuli M: Prophylactic negative pressure wound therapy at caesarean: are we there yet? BJOG
126(5):635, 2019
Tuuli MG, Liu J, Stout MJ, et al: A randomized trial comparing skin antiseptic agents at cesarean
delivery. N Engl J Med 374(7):647, 2016
Tuuli MG, Rampersad RM, Carbone JF, et al: Staples compared with subcuticular suture for skin closure
after cesarean delivery: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Obstet Gynecol 117(3):682, 2011
Udagawa H, Oshio Y, Shimizu Y: Serious group A streptococcal infection around delivery. Obstet
Gynecol 94:153, 1999
Uygur D, Yesildaglar N, Kis S, et al: Early repair of episiotomy dehiscence. Aust N Z J Obstet
Gynaecol 44:244, 2004
Wang SS, Shum D, Kennedy A: Imaging of postpartum/peripartum complications. Radiol Clin North Am
58:431, 2020

Ward E, Duff P: A comparison of 3 antibiotic regimens for prevention of postcesarean endometritis: an
historical cohort study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 214(6):751.e1, 2016
Watts DH, Krohn MA, Hillier SL, et al: Bacterial vaginosis as a risk factor for post-cesarean
endometritis. Obstet Gynecol 75:52, 1990
Wechter ME, Pearlman MD, Hartmann KE: Reclosure of the disrupted laparotomy wound. A
systematic review. Obstet Gynecol 106:376, 2005
Wetchler SJ, Dunn LJ: Ovarian abscess. Report of a case and a review of the literature. Obstet
Gynecol Surv 40:476, 1985
Witlin AG, Sibai BM: Postpartum ovarian vein thrombosis after vaginal delivery: a report of 11 cases.
Obstet Gynecol 85:775, 1995
Worley KC: Postoperative complications. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al (eds):
Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2017
Wouterlood MA, Malhame I, Levesque, K, et al: Pregnancy-associated pelvic vein thrombosis: insights
from a multicenter case series. J Thromb Haemost 19:1926, 2021
Wu JM, Turashvili G: Cystic neutrophilic granulomatous mastitis: an update. J Clin Pathol 73(8):445,
2020
Yu L, Kronen RJ, Simon LE, et al: Prophylactic negative-pressure wound therapy after cesarean is
associated with reduced risk of surgical site infection: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 218(2):200.e1, 2018

