CHAPTER 67

Infectious Diseases

MATERNAL AND FETAL IMMUNOLOGY
VIRAL INFECTIONS
BACTERIAL INFECTIONS
PROTOZOAL INFECTIONS
BIOTERRORISM
REFERENCES
Infections remain a major cause of maternal and fetal morbidity and mortality
worldwide. The unique maternal–fetal vascular interface in some cases
serves to protect the fetus from infectious agents, but in other instances it
provides a conduit for transmission. Maternal serological status, acquisition
mode, gestational age at the time of infection, and immunological status of
mother and fetus all influence disease outcome.
The TORCH acronym reflects the infections toxoplasmosis, others,
rubella, and cytomegalovirus and herpesvirus infections. These can cross the
placenta to cause fetal infection and substantial neonatal sequelae. Of
members in the “others” category, parvovirus B19 infection is discussed
here. Herpesvirus and syphilis infections are described in Chapter 68.

MATERNAL AND FETAL IMMUNOLOGY

■ Maternal Immunological Changes
Despite significant advances, many of the maternal immunological
adaptations to pregnancy remain unclear. Successful pregnancy results from a
complex interplay between the innate and adaptive immune systems to
establish fetal tolerance (Chap. 5, p. 93) (Liu, 2017). Within the innate
system, decidual natural killer (dNK) cells interact with and aid invasion of
fetal extravillous trophoblasts via human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-G (Fig.
21-8, p. 404). Also, cytokines produced during viral infection activate dNK
cells to induce protective cytotoxicity (Tilburgs, 2015).
Within the adaptive immune system, a CD4+ subset of T helper cells
called regulatory T cells (Tregs) express forkhead box P3 (FOXP3). This is
an immune-suppressive transcription factor that plays a critical role in
inducing maternal immune tolerance to the fetus (Kahn, 2010). However, this
same mechanism compromises maternal defense against bacterial pathogens.
Noncoding microRNAs, whose roles are incompletely defined, regulate
activation and proliferation of both innate and adaptive immune cells
(Robertson, 2017).
In describing infections, horizontal transmission is the spread of an
infectious agent from one individual to another. Vertical transmission is
passage of an infectious agent from the mother to her fetus through the
placenta, during labor or delivery, or by breastfeeding. Thus, preterm rupture
of membranes or prolonged labor may enhance the risk of some neonatal
infections (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020b).
Table 67-1 shows specific infections by mode and acquisition timing. A final
term, the secondary attack rate, is the probability that infection develops in
a susceptible individual following known contact with an infectious person.
TABLE 67-1. Specific Causes of Some Fetal and Neonatal Infections

■ Fetal and Newborn Immunology
The active immunological capacity of the fetus and neonate is compromised
compared with that of older children and adults. That said, fetal innate and
adaptive immunity begin to develop by 9 to 15 weeks’ gestation (McGovern,
2017). The primary fetal response to infection is mediated by innate

immunity—macrophages and dendritic cells—and to a lesser extent, by
adaptive immunity—B and T cells (Chougnet, 2018). Passive immunity is
provided by maternal immunoglobulin G (IgG) transferred across the
placenta. By 16 weeks’ gestation, this transfer begins to rise rapidly, and by
26 weeks, fetal concentrations are equivalent to those of the mother.
Evidence suggests maternal vaccination also primes the fetal cell-mediated
immune response independent of passive immunity (Wilcox, 2018).
Neonatal infection, especially in its early stages, may be difficult to
diagnose because these newborns often fail to express classic clinical signs.
If the fetus was infected in utero, it may be depressed and acidotic at birth for
no apparent reason. The neonate may suck poorly, vomit, or show abdominal
distention. Respiratory insufficiency can develop, which may present
similarly to idiopathic respiratory distress syndrome. The neonate may be
lethargic or jittery. The response to sepsis may be hypothermia rather than
hyperthermia, and the total leukocyte and neutrophil counts can be depressed.

VIRAL INFECTIONS
■ Cytomegalovirus
The most common perinatal infection in the developed world is caused by
cytomegalovirus (CMV). It is a ubiquitous DNA herpesvirus that eventually
infects most humans, and some evidence of fetal infection is found in 0.2 to
2.2 percent of all neonates (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2020a). The virus is secreted into all body fluids, and
person-to-person contact with viral-laden saliva, semen, urine, blood, and
nasopharyngeal and cervical secretions can transmit infection. The fetus may
become infected by transplacental viremia, but amniocentesis does not result
in iatrogenic fetal transmission (Revello, 2008). The neonate is infected at
delivery or during breastfeeding and acquisition continues to accrue. Daycare centers, for example, are a frequent source.
Up to 85 percent of women from lower socioeconomic backgrounds are
seropositive by the time of pregnancy, whereas only half of women in higher
income groups have detectable IgG antibodies to CMV. Following primary
CMV infection, and behaving similarly to other herpesvirus infections, the
virus becomes latent but undergoes periodic reactivation characterized by
viral shedding. This occurs despite high serum levels of anti-CMV IgG

antibody. These antibodies do not prevent maternal recurrence, reactivation,
or reinfection, nor do they totally mitigate fetal or neonatal infection.

Maternal Infection
Pregnancy does not increase the risk or severity of maternal CMV infection.
Most primary infections are asymptomatic, but 10 to 15 percent of infected
adults have a mononucleosis-like syndrome characterized by fever,
pharyngitis, lymphadenopathy, and polyarthritis. Immunocompromised
women may develop myocarditis, pneumonitis, hepatitis, retinitis,
gastroenteritis, or meningoencephalitis. Most women with primary infection
have elevated serum aminotransferase levels or lymphocytosis. Reactivated
disease usually is asymptomatic, although viral shedding is common.
Because most primary maternal infections are clinically silent, they are
detected by IgG seroconversion. The rate of seroconversion during
pregnancy may reach 20 percent. Rates are higher in regions with greater
seroprevalence (Mussi-Pinhata, 2018). Women who are seronegative before
pregnancy and then acquire primary CMV infection during pregnancy are at
highest risk of having a congenitally infected fetus. Vertical transmission
rates for primary infection are 30 to 36 percent in the first trimester, 34 to 40
percent in the second, and 40 to 72 percent in the third (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020a; Picone, 2017). Approximately 23
percent of congenital CMV infections in the United States are from primary
maternal infection (Wang, 2011).
In contrast, recurrent or reactivated maternal infection infects the fetus in
only 0.15 to 2 percent of pregnancies. However, up to 90 percent of
congenitally infected neonates in high-prevalence areas are born to women
with recurrent infection (Mussi-Pinhata, 2018). The diagnosis of recurrent or
reactivated maternal CMV infection remains a challenge (Tanimura, 2017).

Congenital Infection
Newborns with apparent sequelae of intrauterine-acquired CMV infection
are described as having symptomatic CMV infection. Congenital CMV
infection is a syndrome that may include growth restriction, microcephaly,
intracranial calcifications, chorioretinitis, mental and motor delays,
sensorineural deficits, hepatosplenomegaly, jaundice, hemolytic anemia, and
thrombocytopenic purpura. An example of periventricular calcifications is

shown in Figure 67-1. Of the estimated 40,000 CMV-infected neonates born
each year, only 5 to 10 percent demonstrate this syndrome (Fowler, 1992).
Thus, most infected newborns are asymptomatic at birth, but some develop
late-onset sequelae. These may include hearing loss, neurological deficits,
chorioretinitis, psychomotor delay, and learning disabilities. Infections in
dichorionic twins most likely are nonconcordant (Egaña-Ugrinovic, 2016).

FIGURE 67-1 Congenital cytomegalovirus infection. A. Transverse view of the fetal head
demonstrates ventriculomegaly (LV) and periventricular calcifications. B. Transverse image of the fetal
abdomen with ascites (asterisk) and echogenic bowel.

Prenatal Diagnosis
Routine prenatal CMV serological screening is not recommended. Pregnant
women undergo serological testing for CMV if they present with a
mononucleosis-like illness or if congenital infection is suspected based on
abnormal sonographic findings (Fig. 67-2) (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020a; Society for Maternal-Fetal
Medicine, 2016). If either ultrasound or serological results indicate
infection, diagnostic amniocentesis is pursued.

FIGURE 67-2 Diagnostic algorithm for evaluation of cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection in pregnancy.
IgG = immunoglobulin G; IgM = immunoglobulin M; PCR = polymerase chain reaction.

Serum levels of CMV IgM alone do not accurately diagnose primary
infection because antibodies may persist for more than a year after infection
and may rise again following reactivation or reinfection. To help clarify a
primary infection from a past one, serological CMV-specific IgG avidity
assays measure the “avidity” or binding strength between IgG antibodies and
virus. Following primary infection, IgG antibodies have low avidity, which
during the next 2 to 4 months matures to high avidity. Low IgG avidity
indicates primary CMV infection within the preceding 3 to 4 months, and
high IgG avidity excludes primary infection within the previous 3 months.
Thus, primary infection during the first trimester may not be excluded if
maternal avidity testing is performed in the second or third trimesters
(Prince, 2014). In this case, diagnostic amniocentesis is still recommended if
ultrasound findings suggest congenital infection. In other cases, early primary
infection may be so recent that IgM is not yet detectable. If suspicion is high,
serological assays are repeated in 2 to 4 weeks.
More commonly, numerous sonographic fetal findings may prompt CMV
testing. Fetal abnormalities associated with CMV infection include

microcephaly, ventriculomegaly, and cerebral calcifications; ascites,
hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, and hyperechoic bowel; hydrops; early growth
restriction; and oligohydramnios. Findings will prompt maternal serological
CMV testing and diagnostic amniocentesis (see Fig. 67-2).
CMV polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing of amnionic fluid is
considered the gold standard for the diagnosis of fetal infection. Sensitivities
range from 70 to 99 percent and depend on amniocentesis timing. Sensitivity
is highest when amniocentesis is performed at least 6 weeks after maternal
infection and after 21 weeks’ gestation (Guerra, 2000). Abnormal
sonographic findings seen in combination with positive findings in amnionic
fluid samples are predictive of an approximate 75-percent risk of
symptomatic congenital infection (Leruez-Ville, 2016a). A negative result
from amnionic fluid PCR testing does not exclude fetal infection and may
need to be repeated if suspicion for fetal infection is high. Diagnostic viral
culture of amnionic fluid is also suitable although sensitivity is somewhat
lower. Isolation of virus from cell culture allows detection of actively
replicating virus, and rapid shell vial culture methods enable detection
within 24 hours (Saldan, 2017).

Management and Prevention
The management of the immunocompetent pregnant woman with primary,
reactivated, or recurrent CMV is limited to symptomatic treatment. If primary
CMV infection is diagnosed serologically or if fetal sonographic
abnormalities suggest congenital infection, amnionic fluid analysis should be
offered (see Fig. 67-2). Counseling regarding fetal outcome depends on the
gestational age during which primary infection is documented. Lipitz and
associates (2013) reported hearing loss or neurodevelopmental delay in 15
to 25 percent of infants following primary maternal infection in the first
trimester compared with 2 to 16 percent after second-trimester infection.
Despite the high infection rate with primary infection in the first half of
pregnancy, most fetuses develop normally. That said, pregnancy termination
may be an option for some.
Currently, no curative treatments are available for CMV infection. One
study group reported that treating pregnant women with high-dose oral
valacyclovir, 8 g daily, apparently mitigated adverse outcomes for 80 percent
of moderately asymptomatic fetuses compared with a historical cohort
(Leruez-Ville, 2016b). Kimberlin and colleagues (2015) previously showed

that oral valganciclovir administered for 6 weeks to neonates with
symptomatic central nervous system (CNS) disease prevented hearing
deterioration at 6 months and possibly later. In a recent randomized trial,
CMV-specific hyperimmune globulin given to pregnant women with primary
infection was ineffective in lowering perinatal CMV infection rates (Hughes,
2021).
For the CMV-affected fetus, a detailed anatomical sonographic
evaluation is performed. Referral to a maternal–fetal medicine specialist is
warranted, and serial sonography is indicated to identify poor growth,
oligohydramnios, or fetal hydrops, which confers a worse prognosis.
Antenatal surveillance is typically implemented after a shared discussion
about the goals of surveillance in a fetus with known congenital infection.
Delivery at term is the goal, although consultation with maternal–fetal
medicine and neonatology experts is warranted to determine whether earlier
delivery is indicated.
Prevention of congenital infection relies on avoiding maternal primary
infection, especially in early pregnancy. Basic hygiene measures such as
hand washing and not sharing food or utensils have been promoted,
particularly in women with toddlers in day care (Rawlinson, 2017). CMV
may be sexually transmitted among infected partners, but no data address the
efficacy of preventive strategies. Several clinical trials of a CMV vaccine
are underway (Gerna, 2019).

■ Varicella-Zoster Virus
Maternal Infection
Varicella-zoster virus (VZV) is a double-stranded DNA herpesvirus
acquired predominantly during childhood, and 90 percent of adults have
serological evidence of immunity. The incidence of varicella infection
declined by approximately 95 percent after the introduction of varicella
vaccination. Maternal and fetal varicella rates subsequently dropped (Baxter,
2014). In the United States between 2003 and 2010, the incidence of
maternal varicella among 7.7 million pregnancy admissions was 1.21 cases
in 10,000 (Zhang, 2015).
Primary infection—varicella or chickenpox—is transmitted by
respiratory droplets or through direct contact with an infected individual.

The incubation period is 10 to 21 days, and a nonimmune woman has a 70- to
90-percent risk of becoming infected after exposure (Whitley, 2018). Primary
varicella has a 1- to 2-day flu-like prodrome, which is followed by pruritic
vesicular lesions that crust after 3 to 7 days. Affected patients are contagious
from 1 day before the rash onset until all lesions become crusted.
In adults, mortality risk rises with age and is predominantly due to
secondary infection or VZV pneumonia (Leung, 2018). Risk factors for
severe pneumonitis include immunosuppression and early bacterial coinfection (Mirouse, 2017). Although the incidence was once thought to be
higher in gravidas, only 2.5 percent develops VZV pneumonia (Zhang, 2015).
Symptoms of VZV pneumonia usually appear 3 to 5 days into the illness
course. Fever, tachypnea, dry cough, dyspnea, and pleuritic pain are
characteristic. Nodular infiltrates are similar to other viral pneumonias.
Although resolution of pneumonitis parallels that of skin lesions, fever and
compromised pulmonary function may persist for weeks.
If primary varicella is reactivated years later, it causes herpes zoster or
shingles. The associated unilateral dermatomal vesicular eruption often
produces severe pain. Zoster does not appear to be more frequent or severe
in gravidas. Congenital varicella syndrome rarely develops in cases of
maternal herpes zoster (Ahn, 2016). Zoster is contagious if there is direct
contact with broken blisters.

Fetal and Neonatal Infection
In women with primary varicella during the first half of pregnancy, the fetus
may develop congenital varicella syndrome. Some features include
chorioretinitis, microphthalmia, cerebral cortical atrophy, growth restriction,
hydronephrosis, limb hypoplasia, and cicatricial skin lesions (Ahn, 2016;
Auriti, 2009). Among 1373 pregnant women with primary varicella infection
in one study, only 0.4 percent with a rash before 13 weeks’ gestation had
neonates with congenital varicella syndrome (Enders, 1994). The highest risk
period for vertical transmission was between 13 and 20 weeks, during which
2 percent of exposed fetuses had evidence of infection. After 20 weeks’
gestation, the researchers found no clinical evidence of congenital varicella.
Others described similar findings (Ahn, 2016). That said, fetuses that do
develop congenital varicella in the third trimester may have CNS
abnormalities and skin lesions (Koren, 2005).

If the fetus or neonate is exposed to active infection just before or during
delivery, and therefore before maternal antibody has formed, the newborn
faces a serious threat. Attack rates range from 25 to 50 percent, and mortality
rates approach 30 percent. In some instances, neonates develop disseminated
visceral and CNS disease, which is commonly fatal. For this reason,
varicella-zoster immune globulin (VariZIG) should be administered to
neonates born to mothers who have clinical evidence of varicella 5 days
before and up to 2 days after delivery (Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, 2013).

Diagnosis
Prior maternal varicella is usually confirmed clinically based on reported
history of prior illness or vaccination. Infection is confirmed by PCR-based
testing of vesicular fluid or of a crust that is lifted from the skin. Congenital
varicella may be diagnosed using PCR-based testing of amnionic fluid,
although a positive result does not correlate well with the development of
congenital infection (Mendelson, 2006). A detailed anatomical sonographic
evaluation performed at least 5 weeks after maternal infection may disclose
abnormalities, but the sensitivity is low (Mandelbrot, 2012).

Management and Prevention
Maternal Viral Exposure. Any patient diagnosed with primary varicella
infection or herpes zoster should be isolated from pregnant women.
Several aspects of maternal VZV exposure and infection in pregnancy affect
management. Exposed gravidas with a negative clinical history for prior
chickenpox or vaccination should undergo VZV serological testing. At least
70 percent of these women will be seropositive and thus immune.
Seronegative women should be given intramuscular VariZIG, 125 units per
10 kg body weight, up to a maximum dose of 625 units (5 vials). Although
best given within 96 hours of exposure, its use is approved for up to 10 days
to prevent or attenuate varicella infection (Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, 2013). This passive immunization appears to be highly effective
(Jespersen, 2016). In women with a reported history of chickenpox or
varicella vaccination, VariZIG is not indicated.
Maternal and Fetal Infection. For women with primary varicella, a chest
radiograph is recommended by many because VZV pneumonia often presents

with few symptoms. Most women require only supportive care, but those
who require intravenous fluids and especially those with pneumonia are
hospitalized. Acyclovir therapy is given to women requiring hospitalization
—10 to 15 mg/kg intravenously every 8 hours until afebrile. This is followed
by oral acyclovir, 800 mg five times daily to complete 7 days and until
lesions have crusted. For uncomplicated primary varicella without
hospitalization or for herpes zoster, treatment is oral acyclovir, 800 mg five
times daily for 7 days.
For the VZV-affected fetus, greater antenatal surveillance is typically
implemented. Serial sonography may help identify poor growth. Delivery at
term is the norm unless fetal findings prompt earlier timing.
Vaccination. An attenuated live-virus vaccine is recommended for
nonpregnant adolescents and adults with no history of varicella. Two doses
are needed and are separated by 4 to 8 weeks. The vaccine is not
recommended for gravidas or for those who may become pregnant within one
month following each vaccine dose. However, a registry of more than 1000
vaccine-exposed pregnancies reports no cases of congenital varicella
syndrome or other associated congenital malformations (Peppa, 2020). The
attenuated vaccine virus is not secreted in breast milk. Thus, postpartum
vaccination should not be delayed because of breastfeeding (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019e).

■ Influenza Virus
Influenza A and B belong to the Orthomyxoviridae family of RNA viruses,
and both cause epidemic human disease (Wright, 2018). Influenza A viruses
are subclassified further by hemagglutinin (H) and neuraminidase (N) surface
antigens. Influenza outbreaks occur annually, and severity is determined by
the number of outpatient visits, hospitalizations, and deaths (Xu, 2019).

Maternal Infection
Fever, dry cough, and systemic symptoms characterize this infection, which
usually is not life-threatening in otherwise healthy adults. However, pregnant
women in general are more susceptible to serious complications, particularly
pulmonary involvement (Mertz, 2017; Rasmussen, 2012). Severe infection

during the 2009 to 2010 pandemic had a maternal mortality rate of 1 percent
and caused 12 percent of pregnancy-related deaths (Callaghan, 2015).
No firm evidence links influenza A virus and congenital malformations.
Rather, the increased rates of neural-tube defects seen in neonates born to
women with influenza may be associated with hyperthermia. Viremia is
infrequent, and transplacental passage is rare (Rasmussen, 2012). Stillbirth,
preterm delivery, and first-trimester abortion have all been reported, but
these usually correlate with maternal infection severity (Fell, 2017; Meijer,
2015; Wang, 2021).
Influenza may be detected by nasopharyngeal swab of symptomatic
patients using rapid molecular or viral antigen detection assays known as
rapid influenza diagnostic tests (RIDTs). Recently, commercially available
multiplex molecular assays have allowed nucleic acid detection and
differentiation of both influenza and severe acute respiratory syndrome
(SARS)-CoV-2 respiratory viruses. Molecular tests are more sensitive and
specific than RIDTs, which have sensitivities of 50 to 70 percent. Decisions
to administer antiviral medications for influenza treatment or
chemoprophylaxis should be based on clinical symptoms and
epidemiological factors. Namely, the start of therapy should not be delayed
pending testing results.

Management
Of available agents, neuraminidase inhibitors are highly effective for the
treatment of early influenza A and B. These include oseltamivir (Tamiflu),
which is taken orally for treatment and for chemoprophylaxis; zanamivir
(Relenza), which is inhaled for treatment; and peramivir (Rapivab), which is
administered intravenously. A newer agent, baloxavir marboxil (Xofluza),
was approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration in 2018 for acute
uncomplicated influenza, although data in pregnancy are limited.
In pregnancy, experience is most robust with oseltamivir. The American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019a) and the Infectious
Diseases Society of America recommend oral oseltamivir—75 mg twice
daily for 5 days—for pregnant women with suspected or confirmed
influenza, ideally within 48 hours of symptom onset (Uyeki, 2019). Early
administration may reduce length of hospital stays (Oboho, 2016). For
prophylaxis following exposure to a contact with confirmed infection,

oseltamivir, 75 mg orally once daily for 7 days, is recommended.
Antibacterial medications are added when a secondary bacterial pneumonia
is suspected (Chap. 54, p. 962).

Vaccination
Effective vaccines against influenza are formulated annually and encouraged
for all women who will be pregnant during the influenza season, which
extends from October through March. Vaccination throughout the influenza
season, but optimally before the end of October, is recommended (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019c; Grohskopf, 2020). This
is especially important for those affected by chronic medical disorders such
as diabetes, heart disease, asthma, or human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
infection. Influenza vaccination was associated with a 40-percent reduction
in influenza-associated hospitalizations in pregnant women (Thompson,
2019).
Importantly, no evidence shows teratogenicity or developmental
problems in children exposed to maternal vaccination (Conlin, 2018;
Ludvigsson, 2016). Moreover, for mothers vaccinated during pregnancy, their
infants are protected from lower respiratory tract infections for the first 3
months of life (Nunes, 2017). All inactivated or recombinant influenza
vaccines may be used in gravidas (Grohskopf, 2020). However, a live
attenuated influenza virus vaccine available for intranasal use is not
recommended for pregnant women. Inactivated or recombinant influenza
vaccines may be administered concomitantly or sequentially with other
vaccines including COVID-19 and tetanus toxoid, reduced diphtheria toxoid,
and acellular pertussis (Tdap) vaccines.

■ Coronavirus
These single-stranded RNA viruses are named for the “crown” of surface
proteins covering the particles. Seven coronaviruses infect humans, four of
which cause upper respiratory disease characterized by rhinorrhea, sneezing,
and congestion (Cui, 2019). Three newer coronaviruses of zoonotic origin
have emerged in the past two decades and may cause serious lower
respiratory tract illness in humans. These are SARS-CoV, Middle East
respiratory syndrome (MERS-CoV), and the novel coronavirus of 2019
(SARS-CoV-2).

The first SARS-CoV emerged from China in 2003 and infected more than
8000 people. In a cohort of 12 pregnant women with confirmed infection, the
predominant symptoms were myalgia, chills, and cough (Wong, 2004). All
women had radiographic evidence of atypical pneumonia, 33 percent
required mechanical ventilation, and 80 percent of women diagnosed after 24
weeks’ gestation delivered preterm. Although no vertical transmission
occurred, the maternal fatality rate was 25 percent.
MERS-CoV emerged in the Middle East in 2012 and can cause
respiratory illness, acute kidney injury, and gastrointestinal illness (Hui,
2018). Although experience with MERS-CoV in pregnancy is limited, the
mortality rate in a small series was 40 percent (Assiri, 2016).

■ SARS-CoV-2
This virus causes the clinical illness known as coronavirus disease 2019
(COVID-19). The SARS-CoV-2 pandemic began in China in late 2019, and
by mid-2021 it had caused respiratory illness in more than 151 million
people and 3 million deaths globally (World Health Organization, 2021). The
mortality rate is between 1 and 2 percent in adults, and it increases sharply
with age (Verity, 2020). Compared with MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV, SARSCoV-2 is more infectious but less deadly. Variants with increased
transmissibility are emerging, and the Delta (B.1.617.2) variant has recently
predominated (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2020a).
Evidence suggests increased disease severity in gravidas who acquire this
variant (Adhikari, 2021).
SARS-CoV-2 is predominantly transmitted via respiratory droplets.
Asymptomatic or presymptomatic individuals account for 40 to 50 percent of
transmissions (He, 2020; Kimball, 2020). The immune response to natural
infection appears to require both humoral and cell-mediated immunity
(Hartley, 2020). Because of the potential for asymptomatic transmission,
interventions such as masking and social distancing are recommended
(Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2021b).

Maternal Infection
COVID-19 symptoms in gravidas do not differ from those in nonpregnant
individuals. An incubation period of approximately 5 to 14 days is followed

by fever, cough, and myalgia. Loss of smell (anosmia) and taste (ageusia) are
reported in more than half of patients (Patel, 2020). Diarrhea, nausea, and
vomiting are somewhat less common. Lower respiratory involvement
develops in some individuals approximately 8 days after symptom onset
(Huang, 2020). Signs of worsening of disease include dyspnea, tachypnea,
decreased oxygen saturation, and rarely, acute respiratory distress syndrome.
Imaging indicative of moderate to severe viral pneumonia reveals multifocal
opacities in a predominantly peripheral distribution and ground glass
opacities on computed tomography (Fig. 67-3). Pregnant women may be at
higher risk for intensive care unit admission, invasive ventilation, and death
(Zambrano, 2020). A study from Parkland Hospital demonstrated that 5
percent of infected gravidas developed severe or critical illness, and
diabetes may be a risk factor (Adhikari, 2020). Although COVID-19 was not
associated with adverse pregnancy outcomes, women with severe illness
experienced a higher rate of preterm birth. In a surveillance program of
COVID-19 in pregnant women, the rate of preterm birth was higher than the
general population—13 percent compared with 10 percent (Woodworth,
2020).

FIGURE 67-3 A. Chest radiograph of a critically ill pregnant woman at 26 weeks’ gestation
demonstrating diffuse bilateral pulmonary opacities with peripheral predominance. B. Axial image of the
chest from a computed tomographic scan demonstrates advanced COVID-19 disease with multiple
peripheral lobular consolidations and ground glass opacities.

Fetal Infection
Infection of the placenta by SARS-CoV-2 has been demonstrated, but
transmission to the fetus is rare (Schwartz, 2020). Microscopic examination

of the placenta may demonstrate inflammation and syncytiotrophoblast
necrosis (Fig. 67-4). Standardized criteria have been proposed for
determining definite, probable, or possible placental infection by SARSCoV-2 (Roberts, 2021). When vertical transmission does occur, infected
neonates may have asymptomatic, mild, or severe illness (Raschetti, 2020;
Sisman, 2020). Adhikari and associates (2020) demonstrated infection in 3
percent of neonates tested at 24 and 48 hours after birth. Mechanisms of
vertical transmission are poorly understood. No evidence suggests
transmission of SARS-CoV-2 through breastmilk (Centeno-Tablante, 2021).
Newborns with SARS-CoV-2 do not need to be separated from their mothers
but are isolated from the general newborn nursery population.

FIGURE 67-4 Placental SARS-CoV-2 infection. A. Histologic slide of a placenta with known maternal
SARS-CoV-2 infection. Large, discrete areas of the placenta showed increased perivillous fibrin (solid
arrow), focal trophoblast necrosis (open arrow), and marked histiocytic inflammation. B. Anti-SARSCoV-2 viral nucleocapsid antibody is positive in villous trophoblast (brown immunostaining), confirming
placental infection. (Reproduced with permission from Dr. Rebecca Collins.)

Diagnosis
Active maternal infection can be diagnosed from nasopharyngeal, nasal, or
saliva specimens. Reverse transcriptase–polymerase chain reaction (RTPCR) testing identifies viral RNA, whereas rapid antigen testing detects
viral antigen. Several commercial tests are available and listed on the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) (2021a) website. Rapid
antigen tests are inexpensive but less sensitive in asymptomatic individuals.
Thus, test result interpretation depends on pretest probability,
epidemiological risk factors, and intended use for diagnostic or screening

purposes in health-care or congregate settings. The latter include
dormitories, correctional facilities, nursing homes, and housing shelters
providing social services. Serological screening for IgG is used for
epidemiological and seroprevalence studies rather than diagnosis of acute
infection.

Management
For mild to moderate illness, supportive care is indicated and delivery is
reserved for obstetric indications. For those with mild illness at high risk for
clinical progression, anti-SARS-CoV-2 monoclonal antibodies may be
administered within 10 days of symptom onset and according to variant
predominance (National Institutes of Health, 2021). Pregnancy is considered
a high-risk criterion, and use of monoclonal antibodies can be considered in
consultation with specialists. Inpatient observation may be considered for
moderate illness, as up to 40 percent may worsen (Adhikari, 2020). For
pregnant women with severe to critical illness, inpatient management
includes supporting respiratory function, managing comorbid conditions, and,
when indicated, coordinating safe delivery with subspecialists (Society for
Maternal-Fetal Medicine, 2021). The goal of respiratory support is to
maintain oxygen saturation ≥95 percent and reduce dyspnea and tachypnea
(Pacheco, 2020). Prone positioning of gravidas to improve oxygenation in
severe cases of COVID-19 pneumonia has been described (Tolcher, 2020).
With severe infection, a dysregulated inflammatory response contributes
to lung injury and hypoxia. A United Kingdom trial found decreased mortality
rates at 28 days with intravenous or oral dexamethasone, 6 mg daily for up to
10 days in patients requiring supplemental oxygen or mechanical ventilation,
compared with usual care (RECOVERY Collaborative Group, 2021). In the
ACTT-1 trial, intravenous remdesivir, a broad-spectrum antiviral agent, was
associated with shortened time to recovery among patients requiring lowflow supplemental oxygen (Beigel, 2020). Remdesivir is approved by the
Food and Drug Administration for treatment of COVID-19 in hospitalized
adults. Data on efficacy and safety of antiviral and biological agents for
COVID-19 in pregnancy are limited. In a study of remdesivir in hospitalized
gravidas with COVID-19, no serious adverse events were reported, but
elevated serum aminotransaminase levels were common (Burwick, 2020).
Decisions to use currently available therapeutic agents under Emergency Use
Authorization are made in consultation with experts and should balance

potential benefits and theoretical risks (National Institutes of Health, 2021).
Antibiotics for respiratory illness are rarely necessary unless bacterial coinfection is suspected.

Prevention
Non-pharmaceutical interventions are mainstays for reducing the spread of
SARS-COV-2. These include universal masking, maintaining physical
distance of at least 6 feet, and hand hygiene. In healthcare settings, airborne
and contact isolation precautions are used, particularly when invasive
procedures are planned (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
2021c).
Currently available vaccines are highly protective against viral
transmission and clinical disease in nonpregnant adults (Baden, 2021;
Polack, 2020). In one study, the BNT162b2 mRNA vaccine was associated
with a reduction in COVID-19 diagnosed in pregnancy (Goldshtein, 2021).
The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists and the Society
for Maternal-Fetal Medicine (2021) recommend that pregnant and lactating
women receive the COVID-19 vaccine. Individuals who accept vaccination
are counseled to anticipate common reactions such as injection-site pain,
headache, fatigue, myalgia, and low-grade fever (Shimabukuro, 2021).
Recent evidence from national experts suggests no greater miscarriage rate in
gravidas receiving the vaccine (Zauche, 2021).

■ Mumps Virus
This is an RNA paramyxovirus that primarily infects the salivary glands but
also may involve the gonads, meninges, pancreas, and other organs. It is
transmitted by direct contact with respiratory secretions, saliva, or fomites.
Most transmission occurs before and within 5 days of parotitis onset, and
droplet isolation is recommended during this time (Kutty, 2010). Treatment is
symptomatic, and mumps during pregnancy is no more severe than in
nonpregnant adults.
An increased risk of spontaneous abortion has been observed in women
who acquire mumps in the first trimester. Infection is not associated with
congenital malformations, and fetal infection is rare (McLean, 2013).

Recent outbreaks in previously vaccinated young adults prompted the
recommendation of a third dose of measles-mumps-rubella (MMR) vaccine
for at-risk nonpregnant individuals during any outbreak (Marin, 2018). The
MMR vaccine is a live-virus vaccine. Thus, it is contraindicated in
pregnancy, although fetal risk from inadvertent administration is theoretical
(McLean, 2013). Pregnancy should be avoided for 30 days after vaccination.
The vaccine is encouraged for susceptible postpartum women, and
breastfeeding is not contraindicated.

■ Measles Virus (Rubeola)
This is a highly contagious RNA virus of the family Paramyxoviridae that
infects only humans. In endemic areas, annual outbreaks of measles occur in
late winter and early spring, with larger epidemic cycles every 2 to 5 years.
Although once declared eliminated in the United States, recent outbreaks
raise concerns regarding waning population immunity (Patel, 2019; Strebel,
2019). Transmission is by respiratory droplets, and the secondary attack rate
among susceptible contacts exceeds 90 percent (Rainwater-Lovett, 2018).
Typical symptoms include fever, coryza, conjunctivitis, and cough.
Koplik spots, small white lesions with surrounding erythema, appear on the
buccal mucosa. A characteristic erythematous maculopapular rash develops
on the face and neck and then spreads to the back, trunk, and extremities.
Diagnosis of acute infection is made by detection of measles-specific IgM
antibodies in serum. Additionally, measles RNA may be detected by RT-PCR
testing of a throat swab, nasopharyngeal swab, or urine specimen. Treatment
of measles is supportive, and evaluation for secondary infections may be
necessary.
For pregnant women without evidence of measles immunity,
postexposure prophylaxis is intravenous immune globulin (IVIG), and a 400mg/kg dose is ideally given within 6 days of exposure (Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention, 2020d). Human immune globulin (IG) is a blood
product used to provide antibodies for short-term prevention of infectious
diseases and is prepared from plasma pools derived from thousands of
donors.
Measles in pregnancy is associated with increased risk for pregnancy
loss, pneumonia, and death (Eberhart-Phillips, 1993; Ogbuanu, 2014). If a
woman develops measles shortly before delivery, risk of serious infection

developing in the neonate is considerable, and neonatal chemoprophylaxis is
warranted.
As a live-virus vaccine, MMR vaccine is not provided during pregnancy
as prevention. However, MMR vaccination is not an indication for pregnancy
termination. Susceptible women are vaccinated routinely postpartum, and
breastfeeding is not contraindicated.

■ Rubella Virus
Also called German measles, rubella is caused by an RNA togavirus and is
of minor importance in the absence of pregnancy. Transmission is via
nasopharyngeal secretions, and the transmission rate is 80 percent to
nonimmune individuals. The peak incidence is late winter and spring in
endemic areas (Lambert, 2015).
In 2018, more than 26,000 cases of rubella virus were reported
worldwide (Grant, 2019). In the United States, ongoing or sustained
transmission was eliminated in 2004, and large epidemics of rubella have
virtually disappeared here because of immunization. However, up to 10
percent of women are susceptible, and cases are also imported each year
from countries with incomplete vaccine coverage (Al Hammoud, 2018).
Maternal rubella is usually a mild febrile illness that follows an
incubation of 12 to 23 days. A generalized maculopapular rash begins on the
face and spreads to the trunk and extremities. Other symptoms may include
arthralgias or arthritis, head and neck lymphadenopathy, and conjunctivitis.
However, 25 to 50 percent of infections are asymptomatic. Viremia usually
precedes clinical signs by approximately a week, and adults are infectious
during viremia and through 7 days after the rash appears. Up to half of
maternal infections are subclinical despite viremia that may cause
spontaneous abortion or devastating fetal infection, described subsequently.

Diagnosis
Rubella virus may be isolated from the urine, blood, nasopharynx, and
cerebrospinal fluid for up to 2 weeks after rash onset. However, the
diagnosis is usually made with serological analysis. Specific IgM antibody
can be detected using enzyme-linked immunoassay for 4 to 5 days after onset
of clinical disease, but antibody can persist for up to 6 weeks after

appearance of the rash. Importantly, rubella virus reinfection can give rise to
transient low levels of IgM. With this, no adverse fetal effects have been
described. A false-positive IgM result is also possible in populations with
low prevalence of disease.
Serum IgG antibody titers peak 1 to 2 weeks after rash onset. These may
fail to distinguish between recent infection and preexisting immunity if the
specimen is obtained more than a week after symptoms. IgG avidity testing
aids differentiation, and high-avidity IgG antibodies indicate an infection at
least 2 months prior.

Fetal Effects
Rubella virus is one of the most complete teratogens, and its effects are
worst during organogenesis. Up to 90 percent of pregnant women with
rubella and a rash during the first 12 weeks of gestation have an affected
fetus (Miller, 1982). At 13 to 14 weeks’ gestation, this incidence is 50
percent, and by the end of the second trimester, it is 25 percent. Defects are
rare after 20 weeks’ gestation.
Features of congenital rubella syndrome are cardiac septal defects,
pulmonary stenosis, microcephaly, cataracts, microphthalmia, and
hepatosplenomegaly (Yazigi, 2017). Other abnormalities include
sensorineural deafness, intellectual disability, neonatal purpura, and
radiolucent bone disease. Neonates born with congenital rubella may shed
the virus for many months and thus be a threat to other infants and to
susceptible adults who contact them.

Management and Prevention
Rubella has no specific treatment. Droplet precautions for 7 days after the
onset of the rash are recommended. Postexposure passive immunization with
IVIG may be of benefit if given within 5 days of exposure (Young, 2015).
When rubella infection is diagnosed in the mother, targeted sonographic
examination is performed to evaluate for fetal structural anomalies described
in the last section. Referral to and counseling by a maternal–fetal medicine
specialist is warranted. If ultrasound findings suggest congenital infection or
growth delay, diagnostic amniocentesis is recommended to detect rubella
virus by PCR and to test for other congenital infections.

As prevention, MMR vaccine should be offered to nonpregnant women of
childbearing age who lack evidence of immunity. Vaccination of all
susceptible hospital personnel who might be exposed to patients with rubella
or who might have contact with pregnant women is important. Rubella
vaccination is avoided 1 month before or during pregnancy because the
vaccine contains attenuated live virus, although the fetal malformation risk is
theoretical. MMR vaccination is not an indication for pregnancy termination.
Prenatal serological screening for rubella is indicated for all pregnant
women. Women found to be nonimmune are offered the MMR vaccine
postpartum.

■ Parvovirus B19
This virus causes erythema infectiosum or fifth disease. It is a small, singlestranded DNA virus that replicates in rapidly proliferating cells such as
erythroblast precursors. This can lead to anemia, which is its primary fetal
effect. In individuals with increased red cell turnover, such as with sicklecell disease, parvovirus infection may cause an aplastic crisis.
The primary mode of parvovirus transmission is respiratory secretions,
although infection through blood transfusion or organ donation has been
reported. Most infections occur in late winter to early spring. The maternal
infection rate is highest in women with school-aged children and in day-care
workers. Viremia develops 4 to 14 days after exposure, and a rash follows
several days later. An otherwise immunocompetent individual is no longer
infectious at the onset of the rash. By adulthood, only 40 percent of women
are susceptible. The annual seroconversion rate is 1 to 2 percent, and the
secondary attack rate approaches 50 percent.

Maternal Infection
In 20 to 30 percent of adults, infection is asymptomatic. In others, fever,
headache, and flu-like symptoms may begin in the last few days of the
viremic phase. Several days later, a bright red rash with erythroderma affects
the face and gives a slapped-cheek appearance. The rash becomes lacelike
and spreads to the trunk and extremities. Adults often have milder rashes and
develop symmetrical polyarthralgia that may persist for several weeks. No
evidence suggests that parvovirus infection is altered by pregnancy. With
recovery, IgM antibody is generated 7 to 10 days postinfection, and

production persists for 3 to 4 months. Several days after IgM is produced,
IgG antibody is detectable and persists for life with natural immunity
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020a).

Fetal Infection
There is vertical transmission to the fetus in up to a third of maternal
parvovirus infections (de Jong, 2011; Lamont, 2011). Fetal infection is
associated with abortion, nonimmune hydrops, and stillbirth (Fig. 67-5). The
fetal loss rate with serologically proven parvovirus infection is 8 to 17
percent before 20 weeks’ gestation, and 2 to 6 percent after midpregnancy
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020a). Currently, no
data support screening asymptomatic mothers or evaluating stillborn fetuses
for parvovirus infection.

FIGURE 67-5 Stillborn, hydropic fetus and characteristically large placenta resulting from intrauterine
parvovirus B19 infection. (Reproduced with permission from Dr. April Bleich.)

Fetal hydrops develops in approximately 4 percent of gravidas infected
with parvovirus (Enders, 2004). Still, it is the most frequent infectious cause

of nonimmune hydrops in autopsied fetuses (Rogers, 1999). Hydrops usually
stems from infection in the first half of gestation. In one report, more than 80
percent of cases of fetal infection developed within 10 weeks of maternal
infection. The mean interval was 6 to 7 weeks (Yaegashi, 2000). The critical
period for maternal infection leading to fetal hydrops is estimated to be
between 13 and 16 weeks’ gestation, which coincides with the period in
which fetal hepatic hemopoiesis is greatest (Chap. 7, p. 128).

Diagnosis and Management
An algorithm for diagnosis of maternal parvoviral infection is illustrated in
Figure 67-6. Diagnosis is generally made by maternal serological testing for
specific IgG and IgM antibodies. Viral DNA may be detectable by PCR
testing in maternal serum during the prodrome and persist for months to years
after infection. Fetal infection is diagnosed by detection of B19 viral DNA in
amnionic fluid (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists,
2020a). Fetal and maternal viral loads do not predict fetal morbidity and
mortality (de Haan, 2007).

FIGURE 67-6 Algorithm for evaluation and management of human parvovirus B19 infection in
pregnancy. CBC = complete blood count; IgG = immunoglobulin G; IgM = immunoglobulin M; MCA =
middle cerebral artery; PCR = polymerase chain reaction; RNA = ribonucleic acid.

Most cases of parvovirus-associated hydrops develop in the first 10
weeks after infection. Thus, sonography should be performed every 2 weeks
in women with recent infection. As discussed in Chapter 14 (p. 262), middle
cerebral artery (MCA) Doppler interrogation is used to predict fetal anemia.
MCA Doppler findings that suggest anemia may warrant fetal blood sampling
followed by transfusion.
In hydropic fetuses without transfusion, mortality rates up to 30 percent
have been reported. With transfusion, 94 percent of hydrops cases resolve
within 6 to 12 weeks, and the overall mortality rate is <10 percent. Most
fetuses require only one transfusion because hemopoiesis resumes as
infection resolves.

Long-term Prognosis
Neurodevelopmental outcomes in fetuses transfused for B19 infectioninduced anemia have varied. In one review of 24 transfused hydropic fetuses,
abnormal neurodevelopment was noted in 5 of 16 survivors—32 percent—at
6 months to 8 years (Nagel, 2007). Outcomes were not related to severity of
fetal anemia or acidemia, and these investigators hypothesized that the
infection itself induced cerebral damage. In another study of 28 children
treated with intrauterine transfusion, 11 percent had neurodevelopmental
impairment during evaluation at a median age of 5 years (de Jong, 2012).
Conversely, Dembinski (2003) found no significant neurodevelopmental
delay despite severe fetal anemia.

Prevention
Currently, no parvovirus vaccine is available, and no antiviral agent is
recommended for prevention or treatment of maternal or fetal infection.
Decisions to avoid higher-risk work settings are complex and require
assessment of exposure risks. Pregnant women should be counseled that risks
for infection approximate 5 percent for casual, infrequent contact; 20 percent
for intense, prolonged work exposure such as for teachers; and 50 percent for
close, frequent interaction such as in the home. Workers at day-care centers

and schools need not avoid infected children because infectivity is greatest
before clinical illness. Last, infected children do not require isolation.

■ Other Respiratory Viruses
More than 200 antigenically distinct respiratory viruses cause the common
cold, pharyngitis, laryngitis, bronchitis, and pneumonia. The DNA-containing
adenovirus is more likely to produce cough and lower respiratory tract
involvement, including pneumonia. The RNA-containing rhinovirus,
respiratory enterovirus, and nonpandemic common coronavirus usually
produce a trivial illness characterized by rhinorrhea, sneezing, and
congestion. An enterovirus named EV-D68 caused large outbreaks of
respiratory illness in several countries and was linked to clusters of poliolike illness in children, known as acute flaccid myelitis (Sejvar, 2016).
The teratogenic risks of respiratory viruses are low. In one study,
amnionic fluid viral PCR testing was done on samples from 1191 women
undergoing amniocentesis for fetal karyotyping (Adams, 2012). Viral PCR
was positive in 6.5 percent, and adenovirus was the virus most frequently
identified. There was an association with fetal-growth restriction,
nonimmune hydrops, foot/hand abnormalities, and neural-tube defects.
Adenoviral infection is a known cause of childhood myocarditis and has
been reported in cases of fetal myocarditis and nonimmune hydrops (Towbin,
1994).

■ Other Enteroviruses
Characterized by a clinical phenotype distinct from that of respiratory
enteroviruses, these viruses are a major subgroup of RNA picornaviruses
that include nonrespiratory enterovirus species, coxsackievirus, poliovirus,
and echovirus. They are trophic for intestinal epithelium but can also cause
widespread maternal, fetal, and neonatal infections that may include the
CNS, skin, heart, and lungs. Most maternal infections are subclinical yet can
be fatal to the fetus-neonate (Tassin, 2014). Hepatitis A is an enterovirus
discussed in Chapter 58 (p. 1036).
Coxsackievirus infections with group A and B are usually asymptomatic.
Symptomatic infections—usually with group B—include aseptic meningitis;
polio-like illness; hand, foot, and mouth disease; rashes; respiratory disease;

pleuritis; pericarditis; and myocarditis. No treatment or vaccination is
available (Cohen, 2018). Coxsackievirus may be transmitted by maternal
secretions to the fetus at delivery in up to half of mothers who seroconverted
during pregnancy (Modlin, 1988). Transplacental passage also has been
reported, which may cause neonatal skin lesions, myocarditis, pneumonia, or
encephalitis (Ornoy, 2006). Some have reported higher rates of cardiac
anomalies and of low-birthweight, preterm, and growth-restricted newborns
(Chen, 2010).
Polioviruses are highly contagious and cause subclinical or mild
infections. The virus is trophic for the brain, and it can cause paralytic
poliomyelitis (Cohen, 2018). Siegel (1955) demonstrated that pregnant
women not only were more susceptible to polio but also had a higher death
rate. Perinatal transmission has been observed, especially when maternal
infection developed in the third trimester (Bates, 1955). Inactivated
subcutaneous polio vaccine is recommended for susceptible pregnant women
who must travel to endemic areas or are placed in other high-risk situations.
Live oral polio vaccine has been used for mass vaccination during pregnancy
without harmful fetal effects (Harjulehto, 1989).

■ Mosquito-borne Viruses
West Nile Virus
This mosquito-borne RNA flavivirus is a human neuropathogen. It is the most
common cause of arthropod-borne disease in the United States (McDonald,
2019). West Nile viral infection is typically acquired through mosquito bites
and is rarely transmitted through donated blood or organs. The incubation
period is 2 to 14 days, and most persons have mild or no symptoms. Less
than 1 percent of infected adults develop meningoencephalitis or acute
flaccid paralysis. With these, presenting symptoms may include fever, mental
status changes, muscle weakness, and coma (Stewart, 2013).
West Nile infection is diagnosed based on clinical symptoms and
detection of viral IgG and IgM in serum and IgM in cerebrospinal fluid
(Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2018). Management is
supportive, and no effective antiviral treatment is available. The primary
strategy for preventing exposure in pregnancy is use of insect repellant
containing N,N-diethyl-m-toluamide (DEET), which is considered safe

(Wylie, 2016). Avoiding outdoor activity and stagnant water and wearing
protective clothing also are recommended.
Adverse effects of West Nile viremia on pregnancy are unclear. Animal
data suggest that embryos are susceptible, and one case report of human fetal
infection at 27 weeks’ gestation described chorioretinitis and severe
cerebral leukomalacia (Alpert, 2003; Julander, 2006). However, data from
the West Nile Virus Pregnancy Registry show no increased risk for
miscarriage, preterm birth, or major malformations (O’Leary, 2006; Pridjian,
2016). No evidence suggests that maternal West Nile virus infection is
harmful to a breastfeeding infant.

Zika Virus
This RNA flavivirus is the first major mosquito-borne teratogen recognized
(Rasmussen, 2016). Zika virus is primarily transmitted by mosquito bite, but
sexual transmission is possible. The virus may be detected in body fluids for
months following acute infection (Joguet, 2017; Paz-Bailey, 2017). It was
first introduced to a nonimmune Brazilian population in 2014, but as of 2020,
no countries had reported active Zika transmission.
Maternal-Fetal Infection. Zika infection is asymptomatic in approximately 80
percent of adults. It may cause mild rash, fever, headache, arthralgia, and
conjunctivitis lasting a few days. The fetus can be severely infected whether
or not the mother is symptomatic. In one report of 134 women with positive
RT-PCR results, the fetal mortality rate was 7 percent (Brasil, 2016). Among
live births with first-trimester exposure, the rate of fetal birth defects ranges
from 5 to 15 percent (Reynolds, 2017). In the most severely affected fetuses,
a congenital Zika syndrome has been described that includes microcephaly,
lissencephaly, ventriculomegaly, intracranial calcifications, ocular
abnormalities, and congenital contractures (Honein, 2017).
Diagnosis and Management. Zika virus is typically detectable in blood
around the time of symptom onset and may persist days to months in pregnant
women (Meaney-Delman, 2016). Serum IgM antibodies typically become
detectable within the first 2 weeks and may persist for months. IgG
antibodies develop shortly after IgM ones and confer long-lived immunity
(Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2019).

Laboratory testing for Zika infection is recommended only in
symptomatic gravidas with residence in or recent travel to areas with active
dengue transmission and risk for Zika transmission (Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention, 2019). For a pregnant woman within 12 weeks of
symptom onset, PCR testing of serum and urine specimens for both dengue
and Zika virus RNA is recommended. For women with prenatal ultrasound
findings suggesting congenital Zika syndrome, Zika virus PCR and IgM are
initially performed on serum and urine. Amnionic fluid PCR may be
performed, although less is known about its diagnostic accuracy for
congenital infection.
Currently, no specific treatment or vaccine is available for Zika infection,
although several vaccines are in development (Shan, 2018). Prophylaxis
includes protective netting, insect spray to control the vector mosquito,
personal DEET spray use, and avoidance of sexual contact with partners
recently exposed.

■ Ebola Virus
A member of the RNA Filoviridae family, the Ebola virus is transmitted by
direct person-to-person contact (Kuhn, 2018). Infection produces a severe
hemorrhagic fever with pronounced immunosuppression and disseminated
intravascular coagulopathy. Treatment is supportive. Data are few concerning
Ebola viral infection in gravidas (Money, 2015; Oduyebo, 2015). Henwood
and associates (2017) described an approximate 50-percent risk of death
among pregnant and nonpregnant women with Ebola virus disease, and
universally poor fetal and neonatal outcomes. That said, no evidence
suggests that pregnant women are more susceptible to Ebola virus infection.
In survivors, persistent Ebola virus has been detected months after recovery
in “sanctuary sites” such as the eyes and gonads.
A live-attenuated Ebola virus vaccine, rVSV-ZEBOV, was approved in
2019 in the United States for individuals studying or treating Ebola virus.
Among 84 health-care workers who inadvertently received vaccination in
early pregnancy or who became pregnant soon after vaccination, pregnancy
loss or congenital anomalies were not associated with the vaccine (LegardyWilliams, 2020).

BACTERIAL INFECTIONS
■ Group A Streptococcus
Streptococcus pyogenes is the most frequent bacterial cause of acute
pharyngitis. In most cases, streptococcal pharyngitis, scarlet fever, and
erysipelas are not life threatening. Treatment, usually with penicillin, is
equivalent for pregnant and nonpregnant women. S pyogenes produces
numerous toxins and enzymes responsible for its local and systemic toxicity.
Pyrogenic exotoxin-producing strains are usually associated with severe
disease (Wessels, 2018). In the United States, S pyogenes infrequently causes
puerperal infection. Still, it remains the most common cause of severe
maternal postpartum infection and death worldwide, and their incidence is
rising (Hamilton, 2013; Wessels, 2018). Puerperal infections are discussed
in detail in Chapter 37 (p. 649).

■ Group B Streptococcus
Streptococcus agalactiae colonizes the gastrointestinal and genitourinary
tract in 10 to 25 percent of gravidas (Kwatra, 2016). Group B Streptococcus
(GBS) is isolated in a transient, intermittent, or chronic fashion during
pregnancy. Although the organism is more likely always present in these
same women, its isolation is not always consistent.

Maternal and Perinatal Infection
Maternal and fetal GBS effects range from asymptomatic colonization to
septicemia. S agalactiae can cause maternal bacteriuria, pyelonephritis,
osteomyelitis, postpartum mastitis, and puerperal infections. GBS may also
have the ability to overcome normally protective cervical mucus barriers
during pregnancy to cause ascending antenatal infection (Vornhagen, 2018).
As such, GBS has also been implicated in preterm labor, prelabor rupture of
membranes, chorioamnionitis, fetal infections, and stillbirth (Randis, 2014;
Seale, 2017).
Among newborns in the United States, GBS remains the leading
infectious cause of morbidity and mortality (Nanduri, 2019). Infection <7
days after birth is defined as early-onset disease, although many
investigators recognize a threshold of <72 hours of life as most compatible

with intrapartum acquisition of disease (Stoll, 2011). Tudela and associates
(2012) reported that newborns with early-onset GBS infection often had
clinical evidence of fetal infection during labor or at delivery.
In many neonates, septicemia involves signs of serious illness that
usually develop within 6 to 12 hours of birth. These include respiratory
distress, apnea, and hypotension. At the outset, therefore, neonatal infection
must be differentiated from respiratory distress syndrome caused by
insufficient surfactant production (Chap. 34, p. 615). The mortality rate with
early-onset disease has declined to approximately 4 percent, and preterm
newborns are disparately affected.
Late-onset disease caused by GBS is noted in 0.28 per 1000 live births
and usually manifests as meningitis 1 week to 3 months after birth (Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention, 2020a). The mortality rate, although
appreciable, is lower for late-onset meningitis than for early-onset sepsis.
Unfortunately, it is not uncommon for surviving infants of both early- and
late-onset disease to exhibit devastating neurological sequelae.

Prophylaxis for Perinatal Infections
Maternal intrapartum antibiotic administration is the main prevention of
early-onset GBS disease. In the United States, rates of early-onset neonatal
sepsis decreased from 3 cases per 1000 live births in the early 1990s to 0.25
cases in the years following widespread prophylaxis (Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention, 2020a). Both culture- and risk-based criteria to
identify candidates for intrapartum prophylaxis have been proposed and
debated (Table 67-2) (Braye, 2019; Hughes, 2017).
TABLE 67-2. Indications for Intrapartum Group B Streptococcal Infection
Prophylaxisa

Culture-based Prevention. The American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2020b) recommends universal vaginal-rectal culture
screening for GBS at 36 to 38 weeks’ gestation. This is followed by
intrapartum antibiotic prophylaxis for women identified to be carriers.
Selective enrichment of the vaginal-rectal culture to favor GBS growth and
then subculture improves detection. GBS isolates can also be tested for
inducible clindamycin resistance in women with reported penicillin allergy.
Updated guidance also recommends consideration of antenatal maternal
penicillin-allergy testing in GBS-colonized women at high risk for
anaphylaxis or IgE-mediated hypersensitivity (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020b). In a recent surveillance study of
neonates with early-onset sepsis, 53 percent of those diagnosed with GBS
disease were born to mothers with negative antenatal screening results (Stoll,
2020).
In women with heavy colonization, GBS may be specifically identified in
a routine prenatal urine culture obtained to exclude asymptomatic bacteriuria
(ASB). Cultures with ≥105 colony-forming units (cfu) should prompt
treatment of ASB to reduce the risk of acute pyelonephritis in pregnancy.
Values <105 do not require acute antepartum antibiotics for ASB. However,
women are given GBS prophylaxis in labor (see Table 67-2). As a surrogate,
we also consider a urine culture result that identifies gram-positive cocci,
without further speciation, to be a presumptive positive result for GBS.
Risk-based Prevention. This approach is recommended for women in labor
and whose GBS culture results are not known. It relies on risk factors

associated with intrapartum GBS transmission. Intrapartum
chemoprophylaxis is then given to candidates with criteria listed in Table
67-2.
At Parkland Hospital we use the risk-based approach for intrapartum
prophylaxis. Additionally, all term neonates who were not given intrapartum
prophylaxis are treated in the delivery room with aqueous penicillin G,
50,000 to 60,000 units intramuscularly. With this strategy, early-onset
neonatal sepsis rates in our predominantly minority population decreased to
levels similar to those reported by national surveillance data (Stafford, 2012;
Wendel, 2002).
Nucleic Acid–based Testing. Approximately 20 percent of laboratories now
offer PCR testing for maternal GBS screening (Fay, 2019). Additionally, a
rapid point-of-care PCR test has been evaluated for intrapartum
identification of maternal GBS (El Helali, 2019). One major limitation is
cost, which is currently several times greater than that of culture-based
techniques. A second is the inability to determine antibiotic sensitivities
using current PCR techniques.

GBS Vaccine
Serotype-specific capsular antibody concentrations clinically correlate with
reduced rates of GBS neonatal disease. However, vaccine development is
challenged by the diversity of GBS serotypes. Another hurdle is the
bacterium’s ability to undergo serotype switching by altering its capsular
polysaccharide (Dangor, 2016). No vaccines are clinically available at this
time.

Intrapartum Antimicrobial Prophylaxis
Penicillin remains the first-line agent for prophylaxis, and ampicillin is an
acceptable alternative (Table 67-3) (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2020b). Women with a penicillin allergy and at low risk for
anaphylaxis are given cefazolin (Briody, 2016). Those at high risk for
anaphylaxis or other life-threatening reaction, such as Stevens-Johnson
syndrome, should have antimicrobial susceptibility testing for erythromycin
and clindamycin performed on GBS isolates. Clindamycin-sensitive but
erythromycin-resistant isolates should undergo inducible clindamycin

resistance testing. If clindamycin resistance is confirmed, vancomycin should
be administered. Erythromycin is no longer used for penicillin-allergic
patients.
TABLE 67-3. Regimens for Intrapartum Antimicrobial Prophylaxis for
Perinatal GBS Disease

Management of spontaneous preterm labor, threatened preterm delivery,
or preterm prelabor rupture of membranes includes obtaining a GBS culture.
Intrapartum chemoprophylaxis is initiated until the culture results. Women
undergoing cesarean delivery before labor onset with intact membranes do
not need GBS chemoprophylaxis, regardless of colonization status or
gestational age.

■ Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus Aureus (MRSA)
Staphylococcus aureus is a pyogenic gram-positive organism and is
considered the most virulent staphylococcal species. It primarily colonizes
the nares, skin, genital tissues, and oropharynx. Although approximately 30
percent of adults carry S aureus, MRSA colonizes 2 percent of adults
(Gorwitz, 2008). MRSA colonization is considered the greatest risk factor
for subsequent infection (Marzec, 2016).
MRSA infection may be hospital- or community-acquired MRSA (CAMRSA). CA-MRSA is diagnosed in an outpatient setting or within 48 hours
of hospitalization in a person without health-care exposures in the past year.
Exposures include prior hospitalization, dialysis or surgery, or indwelling

catheters or devices (Dantes, 2013). In pregnant women, most cases are CAMRSA, which disproportionately affects persons in lower socioeconomical
strata (See, 2017).

MRSA and Pregnancy
Skin and soft tissue infections are the most common presentation of MRSA in
pregnant women. Mastitis and breast abscesses have been reported in up to a
fourth of MRSA cases in pregnancy (Laibl, 2005; Lee, 2010). Perineal or
episiotomy abscess, abdominal surgical site infection, and rare placental
abscess and chorioamnionitis have been associated with MRSA (Maeda,
2018; Pimentel, 2009). Last, osteomyelitis and spinal-epidural abscess have
been topics of case reports (Tanamai, 2016; Vakili, 2017).
Vertical transmission of MRSA is rare. Postnatal colonization and
infection in the newborn are associated with maternal and health-care worker
colonization or infection near the time of delivery (Jimenez-Truque, 2012;
Reich, 2016).

Management
Uncomplicated superficial infections are primarily managed by drainage and
local wound care. Although historically de-emphasized, evidence suggests
benefit from antibiotic therapy added to incision and drainage of smaller
abscesses (Daum, 2017; Forcade, 2012). Severe superficial infections,
especially those that fail to respond to local care or those in patients with
medical comorbidities, are treated with MRSA-appropriate antibiotics.
Purulent cellulitis should be treated empirically for MRSA until culture and
sensitivity results are available.
Most CA-MRSA strains are sensitive to trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
or clindamycin (Miller, 2015; Talan, 2016). Rifampin rapidly develops
resistance and should not be used as monotherapy. Linezolid, although
effective against MRSA, is expensive, and little information guides its use in
pregnancy. Although effective for MRSA infections, doxycycline,
minocycline, and other tetracyclines should not be used in pregnancy.
Vancomycin remains a first-line therapy for inpatient treatment of serious
MRSA infections.
The control and prevention of MRSA infection relies on appropriate
hand hygiene and prevention of skin-to-skin contact. Routine screening of

obstetrical patients for MRSA colonization is not recommended (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020c. That said, for women
with culture-proven MRSA colonization or infection, we add a single dose
of vancomycin to routine beta-lactam perioperative prophylaxis for cesarean
deliveries and deep perineal lacerations. Decolonization is not effective in
the general obstetrical population (Huang, 2019). Breastfeeding in women
colonized with MRSA is not prohibited, but optimal hygiene and attention to
minor skin breaks is encouraged.

■ Listeriosis
Listeria monocytogenes is a facultative intracellular gram-positive bacillus
that causes 100 to 200 infections requiring hospitalization each year in the
United States (Tack, 2020). Nearly all cases are thought to be foodborne.
Outbreaks have been caused by contaminated dairy products, fruits and
vegetables, and undercooked or processed meats and deli foods.
Invasive listerial infections are more common in pregnant women,
immunocompromised patients, and the very old or young. For unclear
reasons, infection during pregnancy is 10 to 20 times more common than in
the general population (Craig, 2019). Although pregnancy losses linked to
listeriosis are more likely to be reported, another hypothesis is that pregnant
women are more susceptible because of decreased cell-mediated immunity
(Baud, 2011).

Maternal and Fetal Infection
Infections with Listeria may result in noninvasive, febrile gastroenteritis,
sepsis, or CNS infection after a 2- to 4-week incubation. Listeriosis during
pregnancy may be asymptomatic or may cause a febrile illness that is
confused with influenza, pyelonephritis, or meningitis. The diagnosis usually
is not apparent until blood cultures are reported as positive. Occult or
clinical infection also may stimulate labor. Transplacental bacterial invasion
leads to fetal infection, which can result in stillbirth or clinical illness
similar to early-onset GBS sepsis. A classic description of overwhelming
fetal infection is that of disseminated microabscesses and granulomas known
as granulomatosis infantiseptica. Chorioamnionitis is common, and
placental macroabscesses may be seen. Late-onset neonatal infection can
also follow exposure at delivery. In a review of 222 cases, infection with

Listeria resulted in abortion or stillbirth in 20 percent, and neonatal sepsis
developed in 68 percent of surviving newborns (Mylonakis, 2002). In one
prospective cohort study, 24 percent of mothers experienced fetal loss, but
none after 29 weeks’ gestation (Charlier, 2017). However, a neonatal case
fatality rate of 21 percent has been reported (Sapuan, 2017).
Treatment with ampicillin plus gentamicin is usually recommended
because of its synergism against Listeria species (Rouse, 2016).
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole can be given to penicillin-allergic women.
Maternal treatment in most cases is also effective for fetal infection. No
vaccine is available. Prevention is by washing raw vegetables, cooking all
raw food, and avoiding the implicated foods listed previously (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019d).

■ Salmonellosis
Infections from Salmonella species continue to be a major cause of
foodborne illness. Six serotypes, including Salmonella subtypes
typhimurium and enteritidis, account for most cases in the United States.
Nontyphoid Salmonella gastroenteritis is contracted through contaminated
food. Symptoms that include nonbloody diarrhea, abdominal pain, fever,
chills, nausea, and vomiting begin 6 to 48 hours after exposure. Diagnosis is
made by stool studies (Chap. 57, p. 1018).
Treatment is with intravenous crystalloid solutions given for rehydration.
Antimicrobials are not given in uncomplicated infections because they do not
commonly shorten illness and may prolong the convalescent carrier state. If
gastroenteritis is complicated by high fever or bacteremia, antimicrobials are
given (Angelo, 2016). Rare case reports have linked Salmonella enteritidis
bacteremia with septic abortion (Delcourt, 2019).
Typhoid fever caused by Salmonella typhi remains a global health
problem. Infection is spread by oral ingestion of contaminated food, water,
or milk. Although uncommon in the United States, an outbreak in Central
America in 2017 involved almost 300 cases (Pan American Health
Organization, 2018). Severe complications among patients requiring
hospitalization include gastrointestinal bleeding—11 percent; intestinal
perforation—9 percent; encephalopathy—8 percent; renal failure—6
percent; and cardiovascular collapse—7 percent (Bano-Zaidi, 2018). In
pregnant women, the disease is more likely to be encountered during

epidemics and in those with recent travel (Engsbro, 2019). Septic abortion is
rare but reported (Jena, 2017).
Fluroquinolones and third-generation cephalosporins are the preferred
empirical treatment for enteric (typhoid) fever and invasive nontyphoidal
Salmonella infection (Shane, 2017). Antimicrobial susceptibility testing is
important to tailor the course of therapy, which typically lasts 1 to 2 weeks.
Two licensed vaccines for prevention of typhoid fever are available in the
United States (Milligan, 2018). From limited evidence, typhoid vaccine
administration to pregnant women before travel is not linked to adverse
outcomes.

■ Shigellosis
Transmitted via the fecal–oral route, shigellosis is a common cause of
diarrheal outbreaks in children attending day-care centers and in adults
following international travel. Bacillary dysentery caused by Shigella
species can range from mild diarrhea to severe dysentery with fever, bloody
stools, abdominal cramping, and tenesmus. In immunosuppressed
individuals, severe infection may lead to toxic megacolon, seizures or
meningitis, or hemolytic uremic syndrome (Kotloff, 2018).
Although mild infection is typically self-limited, treatment of dehydration
is essential. Antimotility drugs are avoided, and meticulous hygiene is
recommended to avoid transmission. Antimicrobial therapy during pregnancy
includes fluoroquinolones, ceftriaxone, or azithromycin. Resistance is
rapidly emerging, and antibiotic susceptibility testing can help guide
appropriate therapy (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2020e).
Shigellosis can stimulate uterine contractions and cause preterm birth
(Parisot, 2016).

■ Lyme Disease
Caused by the spirochete Borrelia burgdorferi, Lyme disease is the most
commonly reported vector-borne illness in the United States (Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention, 2021g). Lyme borreliosis results from tick
bites of the genus Ixodes. There are three stages (Steere, 2018). Early
infection—stage 1—causes a distinctive local skin lesion, erythema
migrans, which may be accompanied by a flu-like syndrome and regional

adenopathy. If untreated, early disseminated infection—stage 2—follows in
days to weeks. Multisystem involvement is frequent, but skin lesions,
neuropathies, myalgia, carditis, and meningitis predominate. If still untreated
after months, late or persistent infection—stage 3—manifests in perhaps half
of patients as a migratory arthritis. Native immunity is acquired, and the
disease enters a chronic phase in approximately 10 percent. Some patients
remain asymptomatic, but others in the chronic phase develop various skin,
joint, or neurological manifestations.
Clinical diagnosis is important because serological and PCR testing have
many pitfalls (Steere, 2016). IgM and IgG serological testing is
recommended in early infection and is followed by a second test—either a
second immunoassay or western blot—for confirmation (Mead, 2019).
Ideally, acute and convalescent serological evaluation is completed if
possible, however, rates of false-positive and -negative results are high.
Treatment is recommended by the Infectious Diseases Society of America
(Lantos, 2021). For erythema migrans, doxycycline for 10 days or
amoxicillin or cefuroxime axetil for 14 days is recommended. However,
doxycycline is usually avoided in pregnancy. Azithromycin for 7 days is a
second-line regimen. For other manifestations, a 14- to 28-day oral or
intravenous course of the same first-line drugs is recommended. No vaccine
is commercially available. Avoiding areas with endemic Lyme disease and
improving tick control in those areas is the most effective prevention. Selfexamination with removal of unengorged ticks within 36 hours of attachment
reduces infection risk. For tick bites recognized within 72 hours, a single
200-mg oral dose of doxycycline may reduce infection development (Lantos,
2021).
Several reports describe Lyme disease in pregnancy, although large
series are lacking. Transplacental transmission has been confirmed, but no
congenital effects of maternal borreliosis have been conclusively identified
(Shapiro, 2014). Prompt treatment of early maternal infection should prevent
most adverse pregnancy outcomes. In the northeast United States, between 2
and 40 percent of women with early Lyme disease may be co-infected with
Babesia microti, which is another parasite transmitted by same tick.
Babesiosis has been reported to cause congenital infection (Saetre, 2018).

■ Tuberculosis

Diagnosis and management of tuberculosis during pregnancy is discussed in
Chapter 54 (p. 965).

PROTOZOAL INFECTIONS
■ Toxoplasmosis
The obligate intracellular parasite Toxoplasma gondii has a life cycle with
two distinct stages (Kim, 2018). The feline stage takes place in cats—the
definitive host—and their prey. Unsporulated oocysts are excreted in feces.
In the nonfeline stage, tissue cysts containing bradyzoites or oocysts are
ingested by the intermediate host, including humans. Gastric acid digests the
cysts to release bradyzoites, which infect small-intestinal epithelium. Here,
they are transformed into rapidly dividing tachyzoites, which can infect all
cells within the host mammal. Humoral and cell-mediated immune defenses
eliminate most of these, but tissue cysts develop. Their lifelong persistence is
the chronic form of toxoplasmosis.
Human infection is acquired by eating raw or undercooked meat infected
with tissue cysts or by ingesting soil or water contaminated with oocysts
from cat feces. Prior infection is confirmed by serological testing, and its
prevalence depends on geographical locale and parasite genotype. The
incidence of congenital toxoplasmosis in the United States has declined and
now approximates 0.23 cases in 10,000 live births (Maldonado, 2017).

Maternal and Fetal Infection
Most acute maternal infections are subclinical and are detected only by
prenatal or newborn serological screening. In some cases, maternal
symptoms may include a flu-like illness with lymphadenopathy. In
immunocompetent adults, initial infection confers immunity, and
prepregnancy infection nearly eliminates any risk of vertical transmission.
Infection in immunocompromised women, however, may be severe, and
reactivation may cause encephalitis, chorioretinitis, or mass lesions.
Vertical transmission can cause fetal infection and then congenital
toxoplasmosis. The latter is a fetopathy characterized by ocular or
intracranial lesions and growth delay. Congenital toxoplasmosis is also
associated with an increased risk for preterm delivery (Freeman, 2005).

The estimated rate of vertical transmission rises with gestational age. In
one metaanalysis, the rate was 15 percent at 13 weeks, 44 percent at 26
weeks, and 71 percent at 36 weeks (SYROCOT Study Group, 2007).
Although transmission risk is lower in early pregnancy, sequelae of
congenital toxoplasmosis are more likely to be severe (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020a).
Notably, most infected fetuses are born without obvious toxoplasmosis
stigmata. Clinically affected neonates usually have generalized disease
expressed as low birthweight, hepatosplenomegaly, jaundice, and anemia.
Some primarily have neurological disease with intracranial calcifications,
hydrocephaly, or microcephaly (Dhombres, 2017). Many eventually develop
chorioretinitis and exhibit learning disabilities. This classic triad—
chorioretinitis, intracranial calcifications, and hydrocephalus—is often
accompanied by convulsions. Infected neonates with clinical signs are at risk
for long-term complications (Abdoli, 2014).

Screening and Diagnosis
With IgG antibody confirmed before pregnancy, there is no risk for fetal
infection in immunocompetent hosts. The American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists (2020a) does not recommend prenatal screening for
toxoplasmosis in low-prevalence areas, including the United States.
Screening IgG serology tests should be performed in immunocompromised
gravidas, including those with HIV infection.
Pregnant women with suspected toxoplasmosis also should be tested. The
parasite is rarely detected in tissue or body fluids. IgG antibodies against
Toxoplasma develop within 2 to 3 weeks after infection, peak at 1 to 2
months, and usually persist for life—sometimes in high titers. Although IgM
antibodies appear by 10 days after infection and usually become negative
within 3 to 4 months, they may remain detectable for years. Thus, IgM
antibodies are not used alone to diagnose acute toxoplasmosis. Best results
are obtained with the Toxoplasma Serologic Profile performed at the Dr.
Jack S. Remington Laboratory for Specialty Diagnostics
(www.sutterhealth.org). Toxoplasma IgG avidity increases with time. Thus,
if a high-avidity IgG result is found, infection in the preceding 3 to 5 months
is excluded. Multiple tests are available that allow high-avidity results to
confirm latent infection with a 100-percent positive predictive value
(Villard, 2013).

Congenital toxoplasmosis is suspected when sonography reveals findings
such as hydrocephaly, intracranial or hepatic calcifications, ascites, placental
thickening, hyperechoic bowel, and growth restriction. These are similar to
abnormalities that may be seen with congenital CMV. If these are found
incidentally, diagnostic amniocentesis with PCR testing for toxoplasma as
well as cytomegalovirus DNA is recommended, along with maternal
serologic testing for both infections. The sensitivity of PCR for detection of
toxoplasma DNA varies with gestational age and is lowest before 18 weeks’
gestation (Filisetti, 2015; Yamamoto, 2017).

Management
Prenatal treatment of acute maternal toxoplasmosis is based on two regimens.
Spiramycin may be given alone, or a pyrimethamine plus sulfonamide
combination is taken with folinic acid (American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists, 2020a). These two regimens have also been used
consecutively. Most experts will use spiramycin in women with acute
infection early in pregnancy to reduce the risk of vertical transmission.
Because it does not cross the placenta, spiramycin may not be used to treat
fetal infection. Pyrimethamine plus sulfadiazine with folinic acid is selected
for maternal infection after 18 weeks’ gestation or if fetal infection is
suspected. The SYROCOT study group (2007) reviewed data from 1438
treated pregnancies and found weak evidence for early treatment to reduce
congenital toxoplasmosis risks. Treatment has been associated with a
reduced rate of serious neurological sequelae and neonatal demise (CortinaBorja, 2010).

Prevention
No vaccine is available to prevent toxoplasmosis. Strategies to avoid
infection include: (1) cooking meat to safe temperatures; (2) peeling or
thoroughly washing fruits and vegetables; (3) cleaning all food preparation
surfaces and utensils that have contacted raw meat or unwashed fruits and
vegetables; (4) wearing gloves when changing cat litter or delegating this
duty; and (5) avoiding feeding cats raw or undercooked meat and keeping
cats indoors. Although these preventive steps are recommended, no robust
data support their effectiveness (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2020a; Di Mario, 2015).

■ Malaria
This protozoan infection remains a global health crisis. In 2018, it caused
260,000 deaths, and most occurred among children younger than 5 years
(World Health Organization, 2019). Sub-Saharan Africa and India carry the
largest burden of cases. Malaria had been effectively eradicated in Europe
and in most of North America, but some cases are imported in returning
military personnel or recent immigrants from endemic areas (Mace, 2017).
Transmitted by infected Anopheles mosquitoes, six species of Plasmodium
cause human disease.
Pregnant women have increased susceptibility (Kourtis, 2014). After
infection, antibodies to the parasite surface antigen VAR2CSA help mediate
placental accumulation of infected erythrocytes and lead to the harmful
effects of malaria (Mayor, 2015). Through this mechanism, some immunity
accrues with parity and is termed pregnancy-specific antimalarial
immunity. Ironically, malaria treatment dampens this immunity.

Maternal and Fetal Infection
Clinical manifestations are fever, chills, and flu-like symptoms, which may
occur episodically. Symptoms are less severe with recurrences. Malaria may
be associated with anemia and jaundice, and infections with Plasmodium
falciparum may cause kidney failure, coma, and death. That said, many
otherwise healthy but infected adults in endemic areas are asymptomatic
because of partial immunity. Pregnant women, although often asymptomatic,
are said to be more likely to develop traditional symptoms.
Malarial infections in pregnancy—either symptomatic or asymptomatic—
are associated with higher rates of perinatal morbidity and mortality
(Rogerson, 2018). Adverse outcomes include stillbirth, preterm birth, low
birthweight, and maternal anemia. These correlate with high levels of
placental parasitemia. The maternal anemia and low birthweight are
documented most frequently (Machado Filho, 2014; McClure, 2013).
Approximately 16 percent of low-birthweight neonates born to women in
Africa are attributable to maternal malaria infection (World Health
Organization, 2019). Effects stem from parasitized erythrocytes, monocytes,
and macrophages that accumulate in the vascular areas of the placenta (Fig.
67-7). Infections with P falciparum are the worst, and early infection raises
the risk for abortion. The incidence of malaria increases significantly in the

latter two trimesters and postpartum (Diagne, 2000). Despite this, congenital
malaria develops in <5 percent of neonates born to infected mothers.

FIGURE 67-7 Photomicrograph of placental malaria. Multiple infected erythrocytes are seen, and two
are identified (arrows). Cross section of nearby chorionic villus is shown (arrowhead).

Diagnosis and Management
Identification of parasites by microscopic evaluation of a blood smear
remains the diagnostic gold standard. In women with low parasite densities,
however, the sensitivity of microscopy is poor. Malaria-specific antigens are
now being used for rapid testing, which has become the diagnostic standard
(Cunningham, 2019).
For treatment, the most frequently used antimalarial drugs are not
contraindicated in pregnancy. The World Health Organization recommends
that all infected patients living in or traveling from endemic areas be treated
with an artemisinin-based regimen for uncomplicated falciparum malaria
(Tarning, 2016). The CDC (2020c) recommends that initial treatment be
determined by where the infection was acquired.
Pregnant women diagnosed with uncomplicated malaria caused by P
vivax, P malariae, P ovale, and chloroquine-sensitive P falciparum should

be treated with hydroxychloroquine or chloroquine (Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention, 2020c). For women infected with multidrug-resistant
P falciparum, the first-line agent for gravidas in the second and third
trimesters is a drug containing both artemether and lumefantrine. The
PREGACT Study Group (2016) compared four artemisinin-based drugs in
3428 pregnant women with falciparum malaria and reported no serious
maternal or perinatal adverse effects. Chloroquine-resistant P vivax should
be treated with mefloquine. Chloroquine-sensitive P vivax or P ovale should
be treated with chloroquine throughout pregnancy and then primaquine
postpartum. Resistance to all the antimalarial drugs has been reported,
including the recently added artemisinin-based compounds.
Treatment regimens for uncomplicated and severe malarial infections in
pregnancy are detailed at: www.cdc.gov/malaria/diagnosis_treatment. The
CDC also maintains a malaria hotline for treatment recommendations (855856-4713).

Prevention and Chemoprophylaxis
Malaria control and prevention relies on chemoprophylaxis when traveling
to or living in endemic areas. Vector control also is important. Insecticidetreated netting, pyrethroid insecticides, and DEET-based insect repellent
lower malarial rates in endemic areas. These are well tolerated in
pregnancy. If travel is necessary, chemoprophylaxis is recommended.
Chloroquine or hydroxychloroquine prophylaxis is safe and well
tolerated in pregnancy. One evaluation compared prophylaxis during
pregnancy with either sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine or dihydroartemisininpiperaquine and found the latter to be more effective in preventing placental
infection (Kakuru, 2016). Atovaquone/proguanil use is approved for
gravidas, however, primaquine and doxycycline are contraindicated (Briggs,
2022). The latest chemoprophylaxis regimens for pregnancy can be obtained
from the CDC Travelers’ Health website at:
www.cdc.gov/malaria/travelers/. The CDC also publishes Health
Information for International Travel (The Yellow Book) at:
www.cdc.gov/yellowbook. For women living in endemic areas, intermittent
preventive treatment with sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine is superior to
intermittent screening plus indicated treatment, although resistance is a
growing concern (Desai, 2018).

■ Amebiasis
Approximately 10 percent of the world population is infected with
Entamoeba histolytica, and most are asymptomatic (Andrade, 2018).
Amebic dysentery, however, may take a fulminant course during pregnancy.
Symptoms are fever, abdominal pain, and bloody stools. Prognosis is worse
if complicated by a hepatic abscess. Identifying E histolytica cysts or
trophozoites within a stool sample is diagnostic. Therapy is similar to that
for nonpregnant woman. For amebic colitis and invasive disease, tinidazole
may be preferred over metronidazole, (Gonzales, 2019).

MYCOTIC INFECTIONS
Disseminated fungal infection—usually pneumonitis—during pregnancy is
uncommon with coccidiomycosis, blastomycosis, cryptococcosis, or
histoplasmosis. Their identification and management are considered in
Chapter 54 (p. 965). Vulvovaginal candidiasis is described in Chapter 68 (p.
1218).

TRAVEL PRECAUTIONS DURING PREGNANCY
Pregnant travelers face general medical, obstetrical, and potentially
hazardous destination risks. Several sources provide travel information
(Freedman, 2016). The International Federation for Tropical Medicine has
comprehensive information available at www.iftm-hp.org, and the
International Society of Travel Medicine publishes information at
www.istm.org. Also, The Yellow Book from the CDC has extensive travel
information regarding pregnancy and breastfeeding.

BIOTERRORISM
The concept of bioterrorism involves the deliberate release of bacteria,
viruses, or other infectious agents to cause illness or death. These natural
agents are often altered to raise their infectivity or their resistance to medical
therapy. Health-care providers should be alert for significant increases in the
number of persons with febrile illnesses accompanied by respiratory

symptoms or with rashes not easily associated with common illnesses.
Clinicians are urged to contact their state health department or the CDC for
current information and recommendations. In their Committee Opinion, the
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019b) has addressed
disaster preparedness for obstetricians.

■ Smallpox
The variola virus causes smallpox and is considered a serious weapon. The
virus is highly transmissible and carries an overall 30-percent case fatality
rate. The last case of smallpox in the United States was reported in 1949, and
worldwide it was reported in Somalia in 1977. Nishiura (2006) has
reviewed the severe perinatal and maternal morbidity and mortality caused
by smallpox. The case fatality rate of smallpox is 61 percent if the pregnant
woman is unvaccinated. Rates of stillbirth, abortion, preterm delivery, and
neonatal demise rise significantly in pregnancies complicated by this
infection. The smallpox vaccine is made with live virus. Thus, pregnancy
should be delayed for 4 weeks after vaccination.

■ Anthrax
Bacillus anthracis is a gram-positive, spore-forming, aerobic bacterium. It
can cause three main types of clinical anthrax: inhalational, cutaneous, and
gastrointestinal (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2020b).
Anthrax meningitis may accompany any of the clinical anthrax forms and is
fatal in most cases. When inhaled, anthrax spores are deposited in the
alveoli. They are engulfed by macrophages and germinate in mediastinal
lymph nodes. The incubational period is usually less than 1 week but may be
as long as 2 months. Within 1 to 5 days of symptom onset, the second stage is
heralded by the abrupt onset of severe respiratory distress and high fevers.
Mediastinitis and hemorrhagic thoracic lymphadenitis are common. Chest
radiographs show a widened mediastinum. Case-fatality rates with
inhalational anthrax are high, even with aggressive antibiotic and supportive
therapy.

■ Other Bioterrorism Agents

Other category A bioterrorism agents include Francisella tularensis—
tularemia, Clostridium botulinum—botulism, Yersinia pestis—plague, and
Ebola, Marburg, Lassa, or Machupo viruses—hemorrhagic fever. The
guidelines for these biological agents are evolving and are detailed at the
CDC Bioterrorism website: emergency.cdc.gov/bioterrorism.

REFERENCES
Abdoli A, Dalimi A, Arbabi M, et al: Neuropsychiatric manifestations of latent toxoplasmosis on mothers
and their offspring. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 27(13):1368, 2014
Adams LL, Gungor S, Turan S, et al: When are amniotic fluid viral PCR studies indicated in prenatal
diagnosis? Prenat Diagn 32(1):88, 2012
Adhikari EH, Moreno W, Zofkie AC, et al: Pregnancy outcomes among women with and without severe
acute respiratory syndrome Coronavirus 2 infection. JAMA Netw Open 3(11):e2029256, 2020
Adhikari EH, SoRelle JA, McIntire DM, et al: Increasing severity of COVID-19 in pregnancy with
Delta (B.1.617.2) variant surge. Am J Obstet Gynecol In press
Ahn KH, Park YJ, Hong SC, et al: Congenital varicella syndrome: a systematic review. J Obstet
Gynaecol 36(5):563, 2016
Al Hammoud R, Murphy JR, Pérez N: Imported congenital rubella syndrome, United States 2017.
Emerg Infect Dis 24(4):800, 2018
Alpert SG, Fergerson J, Noël LP: Intrauterine West Nile virus: ocular and systemic findings. Am J
Ophthalmol 136(4):733, 2003
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Assessment and treatment of pregnant women
with suspected or confirmed influenza. Committee Opinion No. 753, September 2018, Reaffirmed
2019a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Hospital disaster preparedness for obstetricians
and facilities providing maternity care. Committee Opinion No. 726, December 2017, Reaffirmed
2019b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Influenza vaccination during pregnancy.
Committee Opinion No. 732, April 2018, Reaffirmed 2019c
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Management of pregnant women with
presumptive exposure to listeria monocytogenes. Committee Opinion No. 614, December 2014,
Reaffirmed 2019d
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Maternal immunization. Committee Opinion No.
741, June 2018, Reaffirmed 2019e
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Cytomegalovirus, parvovirus B9, varicella zoster,
and toxoplasmosis in pregnancy. Practice Bulletin No. 151, June 2015, Reaffirmed 2020a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Prevention of Group B streptococcal early-onset
disease in newborns. Committee Opinion No. 797, January 2020b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Use of prophylactic antibiotics in labor and
delivery. Practice Bulletin No. 199, August 2018, Reaffirmed 2020c
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Society for Maternal–Fetal Medicine: ACOG and
SMFM joint statement on WHO recommendations regarding COVID-19 vaccines and pregnant
individuals. 2021. Available at: https://www.acog.org/news/news-releases/2021/01/acog-and-smfm-

joint-statement-on-who-recommendations-regarding-covid-19-vaccines-and-pregnant-individuals.
Accessed May 11, 2021
Andrade RM, Reed SL: Amebiasis and infection with free-living amebae. In Jameson J, Fauci AS,
Kasper DL, et al (eds): Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGrawHill, 2018
Angelo KM, Reynolds J, Karp BE, et al: Antimicrobial resistance among nontyphoidal salmonella
isolated from blood in the United States, 2003–2013. J Infect Dis 214(10):1565, 2016
Assiri A, Abedi GR, Al Masri M, et al: Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus infection during
pregnancy: a report of 5 cases from Saudi Arabia. Clin Infect Dis 63(7):951, 2016
Auriti C, Piersigilli F, De Gasperis MR, et al: Congenital varicella syndrome: still a problem? Fetal Diagn
Ther 25(2):224, 2009
Baden LR, El Sahly HM, Essink B, et al: Efficacy and safety of the mRNA-1273 SARS-CoV-2
vaccine. N Engl J Med 384(5):403, 2021
Bano-Zaidi M, Aguayo-Romero M, Campos FD, et al: Typhoid fever outbreak with severe
complications in Yucatan, Mexico. Lancet Glob Health 6(10):e1062, 2018
Bates T: Poliomyelitis in pregnancy, fetus and newborn. Am J Dis Child 90: 189, 1955
Baud D, Greub G: Intracellular bacteria and adverse pregnancy outcomes. Clin Microbiol Infect
17:1312, 2011
Baxter R, Tran TN, Ray P, et al: Impact of vaccination on the epidemiology of varicella: 1995–2009.
Pediatrics 134(1):24, 2014
Beigel JH, Tomashek KM, Dodd LE, et al: Remdesivir for the treatment of Covid-19–final report. N
Engl J Med. 2020 Nov 5;383(19):1813, 2020
Bower WA, Schiffer J, Atmar RL, et al: Use of anthrax vaccine in the United States: recommendations
of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices, 2019. MMWR 68(4):1, 2019
Brasil P, Pereira JP, Moreira ME, et al: Zika virus infection in pregnant women in Rio de Janeiro. N Engl
J Med 375(24):2321, 2016
Braye K, Foureur M, de Waal K, et al: Group B streptococcal screening, intrapartum antibiotic
prophylaxis, and neonatal early-onset infection rates in an Australian local health district: 2006–2016.
PLoS ONE 14(4):e0214295, 2019
Briggs GG, Towers CV, Forinash CV: Drugs in Pregnancy and Lactation, 12th ed. Philadelphia, WoltersKluwer, 2022
Briody VA, Albright CM, Has P, et al: Use of cefazolin for group B streptococci prophylaxis in women
reporting a penicillin allergy without anaphylaxis. Obstet Gynecol 127(3):577, 2016
Burwick RM, Yawetz S, Stephenson KE, et al: Compassionate use of remdesivir in pregnant women
with severe Covid-19. Clin Infect Dis October 8, 2020 [Epub ahead of print]
Callaghan WM, Creanga AA, Jamieson DJ: Pregnancy related mortality resulting from influenza in the
United States during the 2009–2010 pandemic. Obstet Gynecol 126(3):486, 2015
Centeno-Tablante E, Medina-Rivera M, Finkelstein JL, et al: Transmission of SARS-CoV-2 through
breast milk and breastfeeding: a living systematic review. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1484(1):32, 2021
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Active bacterial core surveillance (ABCs) report emerging
infections program network group B Streptococcus, 2018. 2020a. Available at:
http://www.cdc.gov/abcs/reports-findings/survreports/gbs18.pdf. Accessed May 7, 2021
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Anthrax. 2020b. Available at:
https://www.cdc.gov/anthrax/index.html. Accessed May 7, 2021
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: COVID-19. COVID-19 testing overview. 2021a. Available
at: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/symptoms-testing/testing.html. Accessed May 7,

2021
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: COVID-19. Interim clinical guidance for management of
patients with confirmed Coronavirus disease (COVID-19). 2021b. Available at:
https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/hcp/clinical-guidance-management-patients.html.
Accessed May 7, 2021
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: COVID-19. Interim infection prevention and control
recommendations for healthcare personnel during the Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)
pandemic. 2021c. Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/hcp/infection-controlrecommendations.html. Accessed May 7, 2021
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: COVID-19. Science brief: emerging SARS-CoV-2
variants. 2021d. Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/more/science-andresearch/scientific-brief-emerging-variants.html. Accessed May 7, 2021
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. COVID-19 vaccine safety update. 2021e. Available at:
https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/acip/meetings/downloads/slides-2021-02/28-03-01/05-covidShimabukuro.pdf. Accessed May 7, 2021
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Ebola (Ebola virus disease). History of Ebola virus disease
(EVD) outbreaks. 2021f. Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/history/chronology.html.
Accessed May 7, 2021
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Lyme disease. Data and statistics. 2021g. Available at:
https://www.cdc.gov/lyme/stats/index.html. Accessed May 7, 2021
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Malaria. Malaria treatment (United States). 2020c.
Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/malaria/diagnosis_treatment/treatment.html. Accessed May 7,
2021
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Measles (rubeola). For healthcare professionals: clinical
features. 2020d. Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/measles/hcp/index.html. Accessed May 7, 2021
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Shigella–shigellosis. Questions and answers. 2020e.
Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/shigella/general-information.html. Accessed May 7, 2021
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Updated recommendations for use of VariZIG—United
States. MMWR 62(28):574, 2013
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: West Nile virus. Diagnostic testing: WNV antibody testing.
2018. Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/westnile/healthcareproviders/healthCareProvidersDiagnostic.html. Accessed May 7, 2021
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Zika virus. Testing guidance: new Zika and Dengue testing
guidance (updated November 2019). 2019. Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/zika/hcproviders/testing-guidance.html. Accessed May 7, 2021
Charlier C, Perrodeau E, Leclercq A, et al: Clinical features and prognostic factors of listeriosis: the
MONALISA national prospective cohort study. Lancet Infect Dis 17:510, 2017
Chen YH, Lin HC, Lin HC: Increased risk of adverse pregnancy outcomes among women affected by
herpangina. Am J Obstet Gynecol 203(1):49.e1, 2010
Chougnet CA: Human fetal immune cells fight back. Sci Transl Med 10(438):eaat3910, 2018
Cohen JI: Enterovirus, Parechovirus, and Reovirus Infections. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et
al (eds) Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2018
Conlin AM, Bukowinski AT, Levine JA, et al: A follow-up comparative safety analysis of pandemic
H1N1 vaccination during pregnancy and risk of infant birth defects among U.S. military mothers.
Vaccine 36(20):2855, 2018

Cortina-Borja M, Tan HK, Wallon M, et al: Prenatal treatment for serious neurological sequelae of
congenital toxoplasmosis: an observational prospective cohort study. PLoS Med 7(10):1, 2010
Craig AM, Dotters-Katz S, Kuller JA, et al: Listeriosis in pregnancy: a review. Obstet Gynecol Surv
74(6):362, 2019
Cui J, Li F, Zheng-Li S: Origin and evolution of pathogenic coronaviruses. Nat Rev Microbiol 17(3):181,
2019
Cunningham J, Jones S, Gatton ML, et al: A review of the WHO malaria rapid diagnostic test product
testing programme (2008-2018): performance, procurement and policy. Malar J 18(1):387, 2019
Dangor Z, Cutland CL, Izu A, et al: Temporal changes in invasive group B Streptococcus serotypes:
implications for vaccine development. PLoS One 11(12):e0169101, 2016
Dantes R, Mu Y, Belflower R, et al: National burden of invasive methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus
aureus infections, United States, 2011. JAMA Intern Med 173(21):1970, 2013
Daum RS, Miller LG, Immergluck L: A placebo-controlled trial of antibiotics for smaller skin abscesses.
N Engl J Med 376:2345, 2017
de Haan TR, Beersman MF, Oepkes D, et al: Parvovirus B19 infection in pregnancy: maternal and fetal
viral load measurements related to clinical parameters. Prenat Diagn 27:46, 2007
de Jong EP, Lindenburg IT, van Klink JM, et al: Intrauterine transfusion for parvovirus B19 infection:
long-term neurodevelopmental outcome. Am J Obstet Gynecol 206:204.e1, 2012
Delcourt C, Yombi JC, Vo B, et al: Salmonella enteritidis during pregnancy, a rare cause of septic
abortion: case report and review of the literature. J Obstet Gynaecol 39(4):554, 2019
Dembinski J, Eis-Hübinger AM, Maar J, et al: Long term follow up of serostatus after maternofetal
parvovirus B19 infection. Arch Dis Child 88:219, 2003
Desai M, Hill J, Fernandes S, et al: Prevention of malaria in pregnancy. Lancet Infect Dis 18(4):e119,
2018
Dhombres F, Friszer S, Maurice P, et al: Prognosis of fetal parenchymal cerebral lesions without
ventriculomegaly in congenital toxoplasmosis infection. Fetal Diagn Ther 41(1):8, 2017
Diagne N, Rogier C, Sokhna CS, et al: Increased susceptibility to malaria during the early postpartum
period. N Engl J Med 343:598, 2000
Di Mario S, Basevi V, Gagliotti C, et al: Prenatal education for congenital toxoplasmosis. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 10:CD006171, 2015
Eberhart-Phillips JE, Frederick PD, Baron RC, et al: Measles in pregnancy: a descriptive study of 58
cases. Obstet Gynecol 82(5):797, 1993
Egaña-Ugrinovic G, Goncé A, Garcia L, et al: Congenital cytomegalovirus infection among twin pairs. J
Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 29(21):3439, 2016
El Helali N, Habibi F, Azria E, et al: Point-of-care intrapartum group B Streptococcus molecular
screening: effectiveness and costs. Obstet Gynecol 133(2):276, 2019
Enders G, Miller E, Cradock-Watson J, et al: Consequences of varicella and herpes zoster in pregnancy:
prospective study of 1739 cases. Lancet 343:1548, 1994
Enders M, Weidner A, Zoellner I, et al: Fetal morbidity and mortality after acute human parvovirus B19
infection in pregnancy: prospective evaluation of 1018 cases. Prenat Diagn 24:513, 2004
Engsbro AL, Riis Jespersen HS, Goldschmidt MI, et al: Ceftriaxone-resistant Salmonella enterica
serotype Typhi in a pregnant traveller returning from Karachi, Pakistan to Denmark, 2019. Euro
Surveill 24(21):1900289, 2019
Fay K, Almendares O, Robinson-Dunn B, et al: Antenatal and intrapartum nucleic acid amplification test
use for group B Streptococcus screening—United States, 2016. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis
94(2):157, 2019

Fell DB, Savitz DA, Kramer MS, et al: Maternal influenza and birth outcomes: systematic review of
comparative studies. BJOG 124(1):48, 2017
Filisetti D, Year H, Villard O, et al: Contribution of neonatal amniotic fluid testing to diagnosis of
congenital toxoplasmosis. J Clin Microbiol 53(5):1719, 2015
Forcade NA, Wiederhold NP, Ryan L, et al: Antibacterials as adjuncts to incision and drainage for adults
with purulent methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) skin infections. Drugs 72:339,
2012
Fowler KB, Stagno S, Pass RF, et al: The outcome of congenital cytomegalovirus infection in relation to
maternal antibody status. N Engl J Med 326:663, 1992
Freedman DO, Chen LH, Kozarsky PE: Medical considerations before international travel. N Engl J
Med 375(3):247, 2016
Freeman K, Oakley L, Pollak A, et al: Association between congenital toxoplasmosis and preterm birth,
low birthweight and small for gestational age birth. BJOG 112:31, 2005
Gerna G, Lilleri D: Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) infection/reinfection: development of a protective
HCMV vaccine. New Microbiol 42(1):1, 2019
Goldshtein I, Nevo D, Steinberg DM, et al: Association between BNT162b2 vaccination and incidence
of SARS-CoV-2 infection in pregnant women. JAMA 326(8):728, 2021
Gonzales MLM, Dans LF, Sio-Aguilar J: Antiamoebic drugs for treating amoebic colitis. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 1(1):CD006085, 2019
Gorwitz RJ, Kruszon-Moran D, McAllister SK: Changes in the prevalence of nasal colonization with
Staphylococcus aureus in the United States, 2001–2004. J Infect Dis 197:1226, 2008
Grant GB, Desai S, Dumolard L, et al: Progress toward rubella and congenital rubella syndrome control
and elimination-worldwide, 2000–2018. MMWR 68(39):855, 2019
Grohskopf LA, Alyanak E, Broder KR, et al: Prevention and control of seasonal influenza with
vaccines: recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices—United States,
2020–2021 influenza season. MMWR 69(8):1, 2020
Guerra B, Lazzarotto T, Quarta S, et al: Prenatal diagnosis of symptomatic congenital cytomegalovirus
infection. Am J Obstet Gynecol 183:476, 2000
Hamilton SM, Stevens DL, Bryant AE: Pregnancy-related Group A streptococcal infections: temporal
relationship between bacterial acquisition, infection onset, clinical findings, and outcome. Clin Infect
Dis 57:870, 2013
Harjulehto T, Aro T, Hovi T, et al: Congenital malformations and oral poliovirus vaccination during
pregnancy. Lancet 1:771, 1989
Hartley GE, Edwards ES, Aui PM, et al: Rapid generation of durable B cell memory to SARS-CoV-2
spike and nucleocapsid proteins in COVID-19 and convalescence. Sci Immunol 5(54):eabf8891,
2020
He X, Lau EH, Wu P, et al: Temporal dynamics in viral shedding and transmissibility of COVID-19. Nat
Med 26(5):672, 2020
Henwood PC, Bebell LM, Roshania R, et al: Ebola virus disease and pregnancy: a retrospective cohort
study of patients managed at 5 Ebola treatment units in West Africa. Clin Infect Dis 65(2):292, 2017
Honein MA, Dawson AL, Petersen EE, et al: Birth defects among fetuses and infants of US women
with evidence of possible Zika virus infection during pregnancy. JAMA 317(1):59, 2017
Huang C, Wang Y, Li X, et al: Clinical features of patients infected with 2019 novel coronavirus in
Wuhan, China. Lancet 395(10223):497, 2020
Huang SS, Singh R, McKinnell JA, et al: Decolonization to reduce postdischarge infection risk among
MRSA carriers. N Engl J Med 380(7):638-50, 2019

Hughes BL, Clifton RG, Rouse DJ, et al: A trial of hyperimmune globulin to prevent congenital
cytomegalovirus infection. N Engl J Med 385(5):436, 2021
Hughes RG, Brocklehurst P, Steer PJ, et al: Prevention of early-onset neonatal group B streptococcal
disease: green-top guideline no. 36. BJOG 124(12):e280, 2017
Hui DS, Azhar EI, Kim YJ, et al: Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus: risk factors and
determinants of primary, household, and nosocomial transmission. Lancet Infect Dis 18(8):e217,
2018
Jena PP, Duggal SD, Kumar A, et al: Isolation of Salmonella typhi from high vaginal swab in a case of
septic abortion. Indian J Med Microbiol 35(2):311, 2017
Jespersen C, Helmuth IG, Krause TG: Varicella-zoster immunoglobulin treatment in pregnant women in
Denmark from 2005 to 2015: descriptive epidemiology and follow-up. Epidemiol Infect 144(16):3426,
2016
Jimenez-Truque N, Tedeschi S, Saye EJ, et al: Relationship between maternal and neonatal
Staphylococcus aureus colonization. Pediatrics 129:e1252, 2012
Joguet G, Mansuy JM, Matusali G, et al: Effect of acute Zika virus infection on sperm and virus
clearance in body fluids: a prospective observational study. Lancet Infect Disease 17(11):1200, 2017
Julander JG, Winger QA, Rickords LF, et al: West Nile virus infection of the placenta. Virology 347:175,
2006
Kahn DA, Baltimore D: Pregnancy induces a fetal antigen-specific maternal T regulator cell response
that contributes to tolerance. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 107(20):9299, 2010
Kakuru A, Jagannathan P, Muhindo MK, et al: Dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine for the prevention of
malaria in pregnancy. N Engl J Med 374(10):928, 2016
Kim K: Toxoplasma infections. In Jameson J, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al (eds): Harrison’s Principles of
Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2018
Kimball A, Hatfield KM, Arons M, et al: Asymptomatic and presymptomatic SARS-CoV-2 infections in
residents of a long-term care skilled nursing facility—King County, Washington, March 2020.
MMWR 69(13):377, 2020
Kimberlin DW, Sanchez PJ, Ahmed A, et al: Valganciclovir for symptomatic congenital cytomegalovirus
disease. N Engl J Med 372(10):933, 2015
Koren G: Congenital varicella syndrome in the third trimester. Lancet 366(9497):1591, 2005
Kotloff KL, Riddle MS, Platts-Mills JA, et al: Shigellosis. Lancet 391(10122):801, 2018
Kourtis AP, Read JS, Jamieson DJ: Pregnancy and infection. N Engl J Med 370(23):2211, 2014
Kuhn JH: Ebolavirus and Marburgvirus infections. In Jameson JL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al (eds):
Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2018
Kutty PK, Kyaw MH, Dayan GH, et al: Guidance for isolation precautions for mumps in the US: a
review of the scientific basis for policy change. Clin Infect Disease 50(112):169, 2010
Kwatra G, Cunnington MC, Merrall E, et al: Prevalence of maternal colonization with group B
Streptococcus: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet Infect Dis 16(9):1076, 2016
Laibl VR, Sheffield JS, Roberts S, et al: Clinical presentation of community-acquired methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 106:461, 2005
Lambert N, Strebel P, Orenstein W: Rubella. Lancet 385:2297, 2015
Lamont RF, Sobel JD, Vaisbuch E, et al: Parvovirus B19 infection in human pregnancy. BJOG
118(2):175, 2011
Lantos PM, Rumbaugh J, Bockenstedt LK, et al: Clinical Practice Guidelines by the Infectious Diseases
Society of America (IDSA), American Academy of Neurology (AAN), and American College of

Rheumatology (ACR): 2020 Guidelines for the prevention, diagnosis and treatment of Lyme
Disease. Clin Infect Dis 72(1):e1, 2021
Lee IW, Kang L, Hsu HP, et al: Puerperal mastitis requiring hospitalization during a nine-year period.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 203:332.e1, 2010
Legardy-Williams JK, Carter RJ, Goldstein ST, et al: Pregnancy outcomes among women receiving
rVSV-ZEBOV-GP Ebola vaccine during the Sierra Leone trial to introduce a vaccine against Ebola.
Emerg Infect Dis 26(3):541, 2020
Leruez-Ville M, Stirnemann J, Yann S, et al: Feasibility of predicting the outcome of fetal infection with
cytomegalovirus at the time of prenatal diagnosis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 215(3):342.e1, 2016a
Leruez-Ville M, Ghout I, Bussières L, et al: In utero treatment of congenital cytomegalovirus infection
with valacyclovir in a multicenter, open-label, phase II study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 215(4):462.e1,
2016b
Leung J, Marin M: Update on trends in varicella mortality during the varicella vaccine era—United
States, 1990–2016. Hum Vaccin Immunother 14(10):2460, 2018
Lipitz S, Yinon Y, Malinger G, et al: Risk of cytomegalovirus-associated sequelae in relation to time of
infection and findings on prenatal imaging. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 41(5):508, 2013
Liu S, Diao L, Huang C, et al: The role of decidual immune cells on human pregnancy. J Reprod
Immunol 124:44, 2017
Ludvigsson JF, Ström P, Lundholm C, et al: Risk for congenital malformation with H1N1 influenza
vaccine: a cohort study with sibling analysis. Ann Intern Med 165(12):848, 2016
Mace KE, Arguin PM: Malaria surveillance—United States, 2014. MMWR 66(12):1, 2017
Machado Filho AC, da Costa EP, da Costa EP, et al: Effects of vivax malaria acquired before 20 weeks
of pregnancy on subsequent changes in fetal growth. Am J Trop Med Hyg 90(2):371, 2014
Maeda N, Hagiya H, Takiuchi T, et al: Persistent methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus bacteremia
owing to placental abscess. J Infect Chemother 24(12):975, 2018
Maldonado YA, Read JS, Committee on Infectious Diseases: Diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of
congenital toxoplasmosis in the United States. Pediatrics 139(2):e20163860, 2017
Mandelbrot L: Fetal varicella—diagnosis, management, and outcome. Prenat Diagn 32(6):511, 2012
Mandelbrot L, Kieffer F, Sitta R, et al: Prenatal therapy with pyrimethamine + sulfadiazine vs
spiramycin to reduce placental transmission of toxoplasmosis: a multicenter, randomized trial. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 219(4):386.e1, 2018
Marin M, Marlow M, Moore KL, et al: Recommendation of the Advisory Committee on Immunization
Practices for use of a third dose of mumps virus-containing vaccine in persons at increased risk for
mumps during an outbreak. MMWR 67(1):33-38, 2018
Marzec NS, Bessesen MT: Risk and outcomes of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA)
bacteremia among patients admitted with and without MRSA nares colonization. Am J Infection
Control 44:405, 2016
Mayor A, Bardajf A, Macete E, et al: Changing trends in P. falciparum burden, immunity, and disease
in pregnancy. N Engl J Med 373(17):1607, 2015
McClure EM, Goldenberg RL, Dent AE, et al: A systematic review of the impact of malaria prevention
in pregnancy on low birth weight and maternal anemia. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 121:103, 2013
McDonald E, Martin SW, Landry K, et al: West Nile virus and other domestic nationally notifiable
arboviral diseases—United States, 2018c. MMWR 68(31):673, 2019
McGovern N, Shin A, Low G, et al: Human fetal dendritic cells promote prenatal T-cell immune
suppression through arginase-2. Nature 546(7660):662, 2017

McLean HQ, Fiebelkorn AP, Temte JL, et al: Prevention of measles, rubella, congenital rubella
syndrome, and mumps, 2013: summary recommendations of the Advisory Committee on
Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR 62(4):1, 2013
Mead P, Petersen J, Hinckley A: Updated CDC recommendation for serologic diagnosis of Lyme
disease. MMWR 68(32):703, 2019
Meaney-Delman D, Oduyebo T, Polen KN, et al: Prolonged detection of Zika virus RNA in pregnant
women. Obstet Gynecol 128(4):724, 2016
Meijer WJ, van Noortwijk AG, Bruinse HW, et al: Influenza virus infection in pregnancy: a review. Acta
Obstet Gynecol Scand 94(8):797, 2015
Mendelson E, Aboundy Y, Smetana Z, et al: Laboratory assessment and diagnosis of congenital viral
infections: rubella, cytomegalovirus (CMV), varicella-zoster virus (VZV), herpes simplex virus
(HSV), parvovirus B19 and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). Reprod Toxicol 21:350, 2006
Mertz D, Geraci J, Winkup J, et al: Pregnancy as a risk factor for severe outcomes from influenza virus
infection: a systematic review and meta-analysis of observational studies. Vaccine 35(4):521, 2017
Miller E, Cradock-Watson JE, Pollock TM: Consequences of confirmed maternal rubella at successive
stages of pregnancy. Lancet 2:781, 1982
Miller LG, Daum RS, Creech CB, et al: Clindamycin versus trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole for
uncomplicated skin infections. N Engl J Med 372(12):1093, 2015
Milligan R, Paul M, Richardson M, et al: Vaccines for preventing typhoid fever. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev 5(5):CD001261, 2018
Mirouse A, Vignon P, Piron P, et al: Severe varicella-zoster virus pneumonia: a multicenter cohort study.
Crit Care 21(1):137, 2017
Modlin F: Perinatal echovirus and group B coxsackievirus infections. Clin Perinatol 15:233, 1988
Money D, Infectious Disease Committee Members, Yudin MH, et al: SOBC committee opinion on the
management of a pregnant woman exposed to or infected with Ebola virus disease in Canada. J
Obstet Gynaecol Can 37(2):182, 2015
Mussi-Pinhata MM, Yamamoto AY, Aragon DC, et al: Seroconversion of cytomegalovirus infection
during pregnancy and fetal infection in a highly seropositive population: “the BraCHS study.” J
Infect Dis 218(8):1200, 2018
Mylonakis E, Paliou M, Hohmann EL, et al: Listeriosis during pregnancy. Medicine 81:260, 2002
Nagel HT, de Haan TR, Vandenbussche FP, et al: Long-term outcome after fetal transfusion for
hydrops associated with parvovirus B19 infection. Obstet Gynecol 109(1):42, 2007
Nanduri SA, Petit S, Smelser C, et al: Epidemiology of invasive early-onset and late-onset group B
streptococcal disease in the United States, 2006 to 2015: multistate laboratory in population-based
surveillance. JAMA Pediatr 173(3):224, 2019
National Institutes of Health: Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) treatment guidelines. 2021.
Available at: https://www.covid19treatmentguidelines.nih.gov/. Accessed May 7, 2021
Nishiura H: Smallpox during pregnancy and maternal outcomes. Emerg Infect Dis 12:1119, 2006
Nunes MC, Cutland CL, Jones S, et al: Efficacy of maternal influenza vaccination against all-cause
lower respiratory tract infection hospitalizations in young infants: results from a randomized control
trial. Clin Infect Disease 65(7):1066, 2017
O’Leary DR, Kuhn S, Kniss KL, et al: Birth outcomes following West Nile virus infection of pregnant
women in the United States: 2003–2004. Pediatrics 117:e537, 2006
Oboho IK, Reed C, Gargiullo P, et al: Benefit of early initiation of influenza antiviral treatment to
pregnant women hospitalized with laboratory-confirmed influenza. J Infect Dis 214(4):507, 2016

Oduyebo T, Pineda D, Lamin M, et al: A pregnant patient with Ebola virus disease. Obstet Gynecol
126(6):1273, 2015
Ogbuanu IU, Zeko S, Chu SY, et al: Maternal, fetal, and neonatal outcomes associated with measles
during pregnancy: Namibia, 2009–2010. Clin Infect Dis 58(8):1086, 2014
Ornoy A, Tenenbaum A: Pregnancy outcome following infections by coxsackie, echo, measles, mumps,
hepatitis, polio and encephalitis viruses. Reprod Toxicol 21:446, 2006
Pacheco LD, Saad AF, Saade G: Early acute respiratory support for pregnant patients with coronavirus
disease 2019 (COVID-19) infection. Obstet Gynecol 136(1):42, 2020
Pan American Health Organization, World Health Organization: Salmonella serovar Typhi haplotype
H58–Epidemiological alert. Washington, D.C., 2018. Available at:
https://www3.paho.org/hq/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=14721:10-october2018-salmonella-enterica-serovar-typhi-epidemiological-alert&Itemid=42346&lang=en. Accessed
May 7, 2021
Parisot M, Jolivet A, Boukhari R, et al: Shigellosis and pregnancy in French Guiana: obstetric and
neonatal complications. Am J Trop Med Hyg 95(1):26, 2016
Patel A, Charani E, Ariyanayagam D, et al: New-onset anosmia and ageusia in adult patients diagnosed
with SARS-CoV-2 infection. Clin Microbiol Infect 26(9):1236, 2020
Patel M, Lee AD, Clemmons NS, et al: National update on measles cases and outbreaks—United
States, January 1–October 1, 2019. MMWR 68(40):893-896, 2019
Paz-Bailey G, Rosenberg ES, Doyle K, et al: Persistence of Zika virus in body fluids—preliminary
report. N Engl J Med 379(13):1234, 2017
Peppa M, Thomas SL, Minassian C, et al: Seasonal influenza vaccination during pregnancy and the risk
of major congenital malformations in live-born infants: a 2010–2016 historical cohort study. Clin
Infect Dis Jun 23:ciaa845, 2020
Picone O, Grangeot-Keros L, Senat M, et al: Cytomegalovirus non-primary infection during pregnancy.
Can serology help with diagnosis? J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 30(2):224, 2017
Pimentel JD, Meier FA, Samuel LP: Chorioamnionitis and neonatal sepsis from community-acquired
MRSA. Emerg Infect Dis 15:2069, 2009
Polack FP, Thomas SJ, Kitchin N, et al: Safety and efficacy of the BNT162b2 mRNA Covid-19
vaccine. N Engl J Med 383(27):2603, 2020
PREGACT Study Group, Pekyi D, Ampromfi AA, et al: Four artemisinin-based treatments in African
pregnant women with malaria. N Engl J Med 374(1):913, 2016
Pridjian G, Sirois PA, McRae S, et al: Prospective study of pregnancy and newborn outcomes in
mothers with West Nile illness during pregnancy. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol 106(8):716,
2016
Prince HE, Lapé-Nixon M: Role of cytomegalovirus (CMV) IgG avidity testing in diagnosing primary
CMV infection during pregnancy. Clin Vaccine Immunol 21(10):1377, 2014
Rainwater-Lovett K, Moss WJ: Measles (rubeola). In Kasper DL, Fauci AS, Hauser SL, et al (eds):
Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2018
Randis TM, Gleber SE, Hooven TA: Group B Streptococcus beta-hemolysin/cytolysin breaches
maternal-fetal barriers to cause preterm birth and IUFD in vivo. J Infect Dis 210:65, 2014
Raschetti R, Vivanti AJ, Vauloup-Fellous C, et al: Synthesis and systematic review of reported neonatal
SARS-CoV-2 infections. Nat Commun 11(1):5164, 2020
Rasmussen SA, Jamieson DJ, Honein MA, et al: Zika virus and birth defects—reviewing the evidence
for causality. N Engl J Med 374(20):1981, 2016

Rasmussen SA, Jamieson DJ, Uyeki TM: Effects of influenza on pregnant women and infants. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 207(3 Suppl):S3, 2012
Rawlinson WD, Boppana SB, Fowler KB, et al: Congenital cytomegalovirus infection in pregnancy and
the neonate: consensus recommendations for prevention, diagnosis, and therapy. Lancet Infect Dis
17(6):e177, 2017
RECOVERY Collaborative Group, Horby P, Lim WS, et al: Dexamethasone in hospitalized patients with
Covid-19. N Engl J Med 384(8):693, 2021
Reich PJ, Boyle MG, Hogan PG, et al: Emergence of community-associated methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus strains in the neonatal intensive care unit: an infection prevention and patient
safety challenge. Clin Microbiol Infect 22(7):645.e1, 2016
Revello MG, Furione M, Zavattoni M, et al: Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) DNAemia in the mother
at amniocentesis as a risk factor for iatrogenic HCMF infection of the fetus. J Infect Dis 197:593,
2008
Reynolds MR, Jones AM, Peterson EE, et al: Vital signs: update on Zika virus-associated birth defects
and evaluation of all U.S. infants with congenital Zika virus exposure—U.S. Zika pregnancy
registry, 2016. MMWR 66(13):366, 2017
Roberts DJ, Edlow AG, Romero RJ, et al: A standardized definition of placental infection by severe
acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), a consensus statement from the National
Institutes of Health/Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development (NIH/NICHD) SARS-CoV-2 placental infection workshop. Am J Obstet Gynecol
August 5, 2021 [Epub ahead of print]
Robertson SA, Zhang B, Chan H, et al: MicroRNA regulation of immune events at conception. Mol
Reprod Dev 84(9):914, 2017
Rogers BB: Parvovirus B19: twenty-five years in perspective. Pediatr Dev Pathol 2:296, 1999
Rogerson SJ, Desai M, Mayor A, et al: Burden, pathology, and costs of malaria in pregnancy: new
developments for an old problem. Lancet Infect Dis 18(4):e107, 2018
Rouse DJ, Keimig TW, Riley LE, et al: Case records of the Massachusetts General Hospital. Case 16–
2016. A 31-year-old pregnant woman with fever. N Engl J Med 374(21):2076, 2016
Saetre K, Godhwani N, Maria M, et al: Congenital babesiosis after maternal infection with Borrelia
burgdorferi and Babesia microti. J Pediatric Infect Dis Soc 7(1):e1, 2018
Saldan A, Forner G, Mengoli C, et al: Testing for cytomegalovirus in pregnancy. J Clin Microbiol
55(3):693, 2017
Sapuan S, Kortsalioudaki C, Anthony M, et al: Neonatal listeriosis in the UK 2004–2014. J Infect
74(3):236, 2017
Schwartz DA, Morotti D: Placental pathology of COVID-19 with and without fetal and neonatal
infection: trophoblast necrosis and chronic histiocytic intervillositis as risk factors for transplacental
transmission of SARS-CoV-2. Viruses 12(11):1308, 2020
Seale AC, Bianchi-Jassir F, Russell NJ, et al: Estimates of the burden of group B streptococcal disease
worldwide for pregnant women, stillbirths, and children. Clin Infect Dis 65(Suppl_2):S200, 2017
See I, Wesson P, Gualandi N, et al: Socioeconomic factors explain racial disparities in invasive
community-associated methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus disease rates. Clin Infect Dis
64(5):597, 2017
Sejvar JJ, Lopez AS, Cortese MM, et al: Acute flaccid myelitis in the United States, August–December
2014: results of nationwide surveillance. Clin Infect Dis 63(6):737, 2016
Shan C, Xie X, Shi PY: Zika virus vaccine: progress and challenges. Cell Host Microbe 24(1):12, 2018

Shane AL, Mody RK, Crump JA, et al: 2017 Infectious Diseases Society of American Clinical Practice
Guidelines for the diagnosis and management of infectious diarrhea. Clin Infect Dis 65(12):e45, 2017
Shapiro ED: Lyme disease. N Engl J Med 370(18):1724, 2014
Shimabukuro TT, Kim SY, Myers TR, et al: Preliminary findings of mRNA Covid-19 vaccine safety in
pregnant persons. N Engl J Med 384(24):2273, 2021
Siegel M, Goldberg M: Incidence of poliomyelitis in pregnancy. N Engl J Med 253:841, 1955
Sisman J, Jaleel MA, Moreno W, et al: Intrauterine transmission of SARS-COV-2 infection in a preterm
infant. Pediatr Infect Dis J 39(9):e265, 2020
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Hughes BL, Gyamfi-Bannerman C: Diagnosis and antenatal
management of congenital cytomegalovirus infection. Am J Obstet Gynecol 214(6):B5, 2016
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine: Publications & clinical guidance. 2021. Available at:
https://www.smfm.org/covidclinical. Accessed May 7, 2021
Stafford IA, Stewart RD, Sheffield JS, et al: Efficacy of maternal and neonatal chemoprophylaxis for
early-onset group B streptococcal disease. Obstet Gynecol 120(1):123, 2012
Steere AC, Strle F, Wormser GP, et al: Lyme borreliosis. Nat Rev Dis Primers 2:16090, 2016
Steere AC: Lyme borreliosis. Jameson J, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, (eds): Harrison’s Principles of Internal
Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2018
Stewart RD, Bryant SN, Sheffield JS: West Nile virus infection in pregnancy. Case report. Infect Dis
2013:351872, 2013
Stoll BJ, Hansen NI, Sanchez PJ, et al: The burden of group B streptococcal and E. coli disease
continues. Pediatrics 127(5):817, 2011
Stoll BJ, Puopolo KM, Hansen NI, et al: Early-onset neonatal sepsis 2015 to 2017, the rise of
Escherichia coli, and the need for novel prevention strategies. JAMA Pediatr Jul 1;174(7), 2020
Strebel PM, Orenstein WA: Measles. N Engl J Med 381(4):349, 2019
SYROCOT (Systematic Review on Congenital Toxoplasmosis) Study Group: Effectiveness of prenatal
treatment for congenital toxoplasmosis: a meta-analysis of individual patients’ data. Lancet 369:115,
2007
Tack DM, Ray L, Griffin PM, et al: Preliminary incidence and trends of infections with pathogens
transmitted commonly through food—Foodborne Diseases Active Surveillance Network, 10 U.S.
Sites, 2016–2019. MMWR 69(17):509, 2020
Talan DA, Mower WR, Krishnadasan A, et al: Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole versus placebo for
uncomplicated skin abscess. N Engl J Med 374(9):823, 2016
Tanamai VW, Seagle BL, Luo G: Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus intracranial epidural
abscess with osteomyelitis during pregnancy: a case report. J Reprod Med 61(5–6):295, 2016
Tanimura K, Tairaku S, Morioka I, et al: Universal screening with use of immunoglobulin G avidity for
congenital cytomegalovirus infection. Clin Infect Dis 65(10):1652, 2017
Tarning J: Treatment of malaria in pregnancy. N Engl J Med 374(1):981, 2016
Tassin M, Martinovic J, Mirand A, et al: A case of congenital echovirus 11 infection acquired early in
pregnancy. J Clin Virol 59:71, 2014
Thompson MG, Kwong JC, Regan AK, et al: Influenza vaccine effectiveness in preventing influenzaassociated hospitalizations during pregnancy: a multi-country retrospective test negative design study,
2010–2016. Clin Infect Dis 68(9):1444, 2019
Tilburgs T, Evans JH, Crespo ÂC, et al: The HLA-G cycle provides for both NK tolerance and
immunity at the maternal-fetal interface. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 112(43):13312, 2015
Tolcher MC, McKinney JR, Eppes CS, et al: Prone positioning for pregnant women with hypoxemia due
to coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). Obstet Gynecol 136(2):259, 2020

Towbin JA, Griffin LD, Martin AB, et al: Intrauterine adenoviral myocarditis presenting as nonimmune
hydrops fetalis: diagnosis by polymerase chain reaction. Pediatr Infect Dis J 13:144, 1994
Tudela CM, Stewart RD, Roberts SW, et al: Intrapartum evidence of early-onset group B
Streptococcus. Obstet Gynecol 119(3):626, 2012
Uyeki TM, Bernstein HH, Bradley JS, et al: Clinical practice guidelines by the Infectious Diseases
Society of America: 2018 update on diagnosis, treatment, chemoprophylaxis, and institutional
outbreak management of seasonal influenza. Clin Infect Dis. 68(6):e1, 2019
Vakili M, Crum-Cianflone NF: Spinal epidural abscess: a series of 101 cases. Am J Med 130(12):1458,
2017
Verity R, Okell LC, Dorigatti I, et al: Estimates of the severity of coronavirus disease 2019: a modelbased analysis. Lancet Infect Dis 20(6):669, 2020
Villard O, Breit L, Cimon B, et al: Comparison of four commercially available avidity tests for
Toxoplasma gondii-specific IgG antibodies. Clin Vaccine Immunol 20(2):197, 2013
Vornhagen J, Armistead B, Santana-Ufret V, et al: Group B streptococcus exploits vaginal epithelial
exfoliation for ascending infection. J Clin Invest 128(5):1985, 2018
Wang C, Zhang X, Bialek S, et al: Attribution of congenital cytomegalovirus infection to primary versus
non-primary maternal infection. Clin Infect Dis 52:e11, 2011
Wang R, Yan W, Du M, et al: The effect of influenza virus infection on pregnancy outcomes: a
systematic review and meta-analysis of cohort studies. Int J Infect Dis 105:567, 2021
Wendel GD Jr, Leveno KJ, Sánchez PJ, et al: Prevention of neonatal group B streptococcal disease: a
combined intrapartum and neonatal protocol. Am J Obstet Gynecol 186:618, 2002
Wessels MR: Streptococcal infections. In Kasper DL, Fauci AS, Hauser SL, et al (eds): Harrison’s
Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2018
Whitley RJ: Varicella-zoster virus infections. In Jameson J, Fausi AS, Kasper DL, et al (eds): Harrison’s
Principles of Internal Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2018
Wilcox CR, Jones CE: Beyond passive immunity: is there priming of the fetal immune system following
vaccination of pregnancy and what are the potential clinical implications? Front Immunol 9:1548,
2018
Wong SF, Chow KM, Leung TN, et al: Pregnancy and perinatal outcomes of women with severe acute
respiratory syndrome. Am J Obstet Gynecol 191:292, 2004
Woodworth KR, Olsen EO, Neelam V, et al: Birth and infant outcomes following laboratory-confirmed
SARS-CoV-2 infection in pregnancy—SET-NET, 16 Jurisdictions, March 29-October 14, 2020.
MMWR 69(44):1635, 2020
World Health Organization: Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) weekly epidemiological update and
weekly operational update. 2021. Available at https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novelcoronavirus-2019/situation-reports. Accessed May 7, 2021.
World Health Organization: World Malaria Report 2019. 2019. Available at:
https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789241565721. Accessed May 7, 2021
Wright PF: Influenza. In Jameson J, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al (eds): Harrison’s Principles of Internal
Medicine, 20th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2018
Wylie B, Hauptman M, Woolf AD: Insect repellants during pregnancy in the era of the Zika virus.
Obstet Gynecol 128(5):1111, 2016
Xu X, Blanton L, Elal AI, et al: Update: influenza activity in the United States during the 2018–19
season and composition of the 2019–20 influenza vaccine. MMWR 68(24):544, 2019
Yaegashi N: Pathogenesis of nonimmune hydrops fetalis caused by intrauterine B19 infection. Tohoku J
Exp Med 190:65, 2000

Yamamoto L, Targa LS, Sumita LM, et al: Association of parasite load levels in amniotic fluid with
clinical outcome in congenital toxoplasmosis. Obstet Gynecol 130(2):335, 2017
Yazigi A, De Pecoulas AE, Vauloup-Fellous C, et al: Fetal and neonatal abnormalities due to congenital
rubella syndrome: a review of literature. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 30(3):274, 2017
Young MK, Cripps AW, Nimmo GR, et al: Post-exposure passive immunization for preventing rubella
and congenital rubella syndrome. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 9:CD010586, 2015
Zambrano LD, Ellington S, Strid P, et al: Update: Characteristics of symptomatic women in reproductive
age with laboratory–confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection by pregnancy status—United States January
22-October 3, 2020. MMWR 69(44):1641, 2020
Zauche LH, Wallace B, Smoots AN, et al: Receipt of mRNA Covid-19 vaccines and risk of
spontaneous abortion. N Engl J Med September 8, 2021 [Epub ahead of print]
Zhang HJ, Patenaude V, Abenhaim HA: Maternal outcomes in pregnancies affected by varicella zoster
virus infections: population-based study on 7.7 million pregnancy admissions. J Obstet Gynaecol Res
41(1):62, 2015

