CHAPTER 8

Teratology, Teratogens, and Fetotoxic
Agents

TERATOLOGY
CRITERIA FOR DETERMINING TERATOGENICITY
STUDIES IN PREGNANT WOMEN
COUNSELING FOR MEDICATION EXPOSURE
LABELING REQUIREMENTS
TERATOGENIC AND FETOTOXIC AGENTS
DRUGS OF ABUSE
REFERENCES
Birth defects are common. Of all newborns, 2 to 3 percent have a major
congenital abnormality detectable at birth (Cragan, 2009; Dolk, 2010). Some
medications undoubtedly pose significant risk to the developing embryo or
fetus (Table 8-1). However, 80 percent of birth defects do not have an
obvious etiology, and of those with an identified cause, nearly 95 percent of
cases have chromosomal or genetic origins (Feldkamp, 2017). The U.S.
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) (2018) estimates that <1 percent of all
birth defects are caused by medications (Fig. 8-1).
TABLE 8-1. Selected Teratogenic and Fetotoxic Agents

FIGURE 8-1 Etiology of birth defects. Known and unknown causes of 5504 birth defects from a
population-based review of 270,878 births.

That said, significant concern surrounds medication use in pregnancy.
This is because many pregnant women are prescribed medications and
because safety data are often lacking. Investigators from the National Birth
Defects Prevention Study found that women take an average of two to three
medications per pregnancy and that 70 percent use medication in the first
trimester (Mitchell, 2011). A population-based review from Canada found
that 65 percent of women fill ≥1 prescription during pregnancy (Leong,
2019). Between 2010 and 2019, the FDA approved 290 new drugs, and only
11 percent had human data related to pregnancy (Byrne, 2020).

TERATOLOGY
The study of birth defects and their etiology is termed teratology, derived
from the Greek teratos, meaning monster. A teratogen may be broadly
defined as any agent that acts during embryonic or fetal development to

produce a permanent alteration of form or function. Thus, a teratogen may be
a medication or other chemical substance, a physical or environmental factor
such as heat or radiation, a maternal metabolite as in diabetes or
phenylketonuria, or an infection such as cytomegalovirus.
Strictly defined, a teratogen causes structural abnormalities. A hadegen
—after the god Hades—is an agent that interferes with normal maturation and
function of an organ. A trophogen is an agent that alters growth. Substances
in the latter two groups typically affect development in the fetal period or
postnatally and are thus fetotoxins rather than teratogens.

■ Criteria for Determining Teratogenicity
The guidelines shown in Table 8-2 were proposed by Shepard (1994) as a
framework for discussion and have proved useful for nearly 30 years.
Although each individual criterion is not required to establish teratogenicity,
the following tenets should be considered (Shepard, 2002a):
TABLE 8-2. Criteria for Determining Teratogenicity

• The abnormality has been completely characterized. This is preferably
done by a geneticist or dysmorphologist because different genetic and
environmental factors may produce similar defects. It is easiest to prove
causation when a rare exposure produces a rare anomaly, when at least
three cases with the same exposure have been identified, and when the
defect is severe.
• The agent must cross the placenta. Although almost all drugs cross the
placenta, transport must be of sufficient quantity to directly influence
embryonic or fetal development or to alter maternal or placental
metabolism to exert an indirect effect. Placental transfer depends on

maternal metabolism; on specific characteristics of the drug, such as protein
binding and storage, molecular size, electrical charge, and lipid solubility;
and on placental metabolism, such as by the cytochrome P450 enzyme
system. In early pregnancy, the placenta also has a relatively thick
membrane that slows diffusion.
• Exposure must occur during a critical developmental period.
○ The preimplantation period is the 2 weeks between fertilization and
implantation and is known as the “all or none” period. As the zygote
undergoes cleavage, an insult damaging a large number of cells typically
causes embryonic death. However, if only a few cells are injured,
compensation may be possible and allow normal development.
○ The embryonic period extends from the second through the eighth week
postconception. It encompasses organogenesis and is thus the most
crucial period with regard to structural malformations. Critical
developmental periods for each organ system are illustrated in Figure 7-2
(p. 122).
○ The fetal period, which is beyond 8 weeks postconception, is
characterized by continued maturation and functional development.
During this time, certain organs remain vulnerable.
• A biologically plausible association is supportive. Because birth defects
and medication exposures are both common, they may be temporally but not
causally related.
• Epidemiological findings must be consistent. Because initial evaluation of
teratogen exposure is often retrospective, it may be hampered by recall
bias, inadequate reporting, and incomplete assessment of the exposed
population. Potential confounding factors include varying dosages,
concomitant drug therapy, and comorbid maternal disease(s). Familial and
environmental variables also can influence development of birth defects.
Thus, an important criterion for teratogenicity is that two or more highquality epidemiological studies report similar findings. Last, a relative risk
of 3.0 or greater is generally considered necessary to support the
hypothesis, whereas a lesser risk is interpreted with caution (Khoury,
1992).
• The suspected teratogen causes a defect in animal studies. This criterion is
not obligatory, and for litigation purposes, establishment of a causal

relationship between an exposure and an outcome in humans requires
human data (Teratology Society Public Affairs Committee, 2005).
Failure to employ these tenets and criteria has contributed to erroneous
conclusions regarding the safety of some widely used drugs. The poster child
for this is the medicolegal fiasco surrounding Bendectin. This antiemetic was
a combination of doxylamine and pyridoxine, with or without dicyclomine.
More than 30 million women used this drug worldwide, and it was safe and
effective for nausea and vomiting in early pregnancy. The 3-percent
congenital anomaly rate among exposed fetuses was not different from the
background rate (McKeigue, 1994). Despite considerable evidence that this
combination of an antihistamine and a B-vitamin is not teratogenic, Bendectin
was the target of numerous lawsuits, and the financial burden of defending
these forced its withdrawal from the marketplace in 1983. Consequently,
hospitalization rates for hyperemesis doubled (Koren, 1998). Ironically, the
combination of doxylamine and pyridoxine was subsequently remarketed
under the brand name Diclegis and was approved by the FDA in 2013.

■ Studies in Pregnant Women
The study of medication safety—or teratogenicity—in pregnant women is
fraught with complications. First, animal studies are necessary but
insufficient. For example, thalidomide was considered harmless in several
animal species but resulted in phocomelia in thousands of children born
across Europe in the late 1950s and early 1960s. Second, medications are
rarely approved by the FDA for a pregnancy-related indication. Despite the
Common Rule’s removal of pregnant women as a vulnerable population,
pregnant women are routinely excluded from research (Health and Human
Services, 2017; Spong, 2018). Last, drug concentration and thus embryo-fetal
exposure are affected by pregnancy physiology. This includes changes in
volume of distribution, cardiac output, gastrointestinal absorption, hepatic
metabolism, and renal clearance. In the absence of research trials, counseling
is based on case reports or series, case-control studies, cohort studies, and
pregnancy registry data.

Case Reports and Series

Many major teratogens were first described by clinicians who observed a
rare defect occurring after a rare exposure. This has been termed the “astute
clinician model” (Carey, 2009). Congenital rubella syndrome was identified
in this way by Gregg (1941), an Australian ophthalmologist whose
observations challenged the view that the uterine environment was
impervious to noxious agents. Other teratogens identified through case series
include thalidomide and alcohol (Jones, 1973; Lenz, 1962). Shepard (2002a)
recommended that establishment of teratogenicity in this way requires proven
exposure at a critical time in development and at least three such cases.
Unfortunately, teratogens are less likely to be identified if the exposure is
uncommon, if the defects are relatively nonspecific, or if abnormalities
develop in only a small proportion of exposed fetuses. A major limitation of
case series is their lack of a control group.

Case-control Studies
These studies begin with groups of affected infants (cases) and unaffected
controls and are structured to allow retrospective assessment of prenatal
exposure to particular substances. Case-control studies are an efficient way
to study rare outcomes (Alwan, 2015). These permit investigators to evaluate
associations and generate useful hypotheses. However, case-control studies
have inherent potential for recall bias. Namely, parents of an affected infant
are often more likely to recall exposure than those whose child is not ill.
Confounding by indication is another concern, that is, the indication for the
medication may be the cause of the birth defect. And importantly, birth defect
registries have statistical power to detect small differences that may not be
clinically meaningful. Grimes and Schulz (2012) have cautioned that unless
odds ratios in case-control studies are above three- to fourfold, the observed
associations may not be correct.
The National Birth Defects Prevention Study. Funded by Congress and
coordinated by the National Center on Birth Defects and Developmental
Disabilities, the National Birth Defects Prevention Study (NBDPS) took
place between 1997 and 2013 across ten states with active birth defects
surveillance programs. It is an excellent example of a population-based casecontrol study. The study involved approximately 32,000 cases and nearly
12,000 controls. Live births, stillbirths, and terminated pregnancies were
included. Clinical geneticists reviewed each potential case, and standardized

telephone interviews were conducted with women whose pregnancies were
affected or unaffected to obtain information regarding medication exposure
and risk factors (Mitchell, 2011; Reefhuis, 2015).
The NBDPS identified novel—although often small—associations
between individual birth defects and several classes of medications. These
include antibiotics, antidepressants, antiemetics, antihypertensives, asthma
medications, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), and opioids
(Ailes, 2016; Broussard, 2011; Fisher, 2018; Hernandez, 2012; Lin, 2012;
Munsie, 2011). Pregestational diabetes was significantly associated with 46
of 50 different abnormalities studied (Tinker, 2020). The NBDPS also found
associations between birth defects and exposures such as secondhand smoke,
pesticides, and nitrogen oxide, which is a marker of traffic-related air
pollution (Hoyt, 2016; Rocheleau, 2015; Stingone, 2017).
The NBDPS had several key limitations related to study design. First,
interviews were conducted 6 weeks to 2 years following delivery, which
raised the likelihood of recall bias. For example, 25 percent of women could
not remember which antibiotic they had taken (Ailes, 2016). Additionally,
only two thirds of women agreed to participate, and there were differences in
ethnicity and socioeconomic status between cases and controls. These factors
may have contributed to selection bias (Reefhuis, 2015). Further, medical
records were not reviewed to verify dosage, and this precluded assessment
of dose-response relationships. Last, a major limitation was that because the
NBDPS included only a small number of cases of each birth defect and
analyzed them for many different maternal exposures, it was not possible to
adjust for multiple comparisons. As a result, some of the observed
associations were likely due to chance (Alwan, 2015). As one example, the
study of antibiotics and birth defects included 43 comparisons and identified
four significant associations, but chance alone predicted that two
associations would be identified (Ailes, 2016).
Importantly, the NBDPS was able to identify statistically significant odds
ratios for which the absolute risk was quite low. Such findings have the
potential to complicate counseling and prenatal management. In many
instances, the risk identified by the NBDPS was as low as 1 case per 1000
exposed pregnancies.

Cohort Studies

These studies begin with cohorts of pregnant women who are exposed or
unexposed to a particular medication. The percentage of infants or children
affected with birth defects is examined in each cohort. Because individual
birth defects are rare, cohort studies require a very large sample size.
Medicaid datasets and private insurance claims databases are commonly
used for cohort studies of teratogenicity in the United States (Ehrenstein,
2010). Inability to adjust for confounding variables—such as the indication
for which the medication was needed—is an important limitation of this
study design.

Pregnancy Registries
Potentially harmful agents may be monitored by clinicians who prospectively
enroll exposed pregnancies in a registry. The FDA (2021) maintains an
active webpage of Pregnancy Exposure Registries. As of 2021, this included
registries for 115 individual medications and for medication groups used to
treat asthma, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, autoimmune diseases,
cancer, diabetes, epilepsy, hepatitis B and C, human immunodeficiency virus
infection, hypercholesterolemia, inborn errors of metabolism, inflammatory
bowel disease, multiple sclerosis, narcolepsy, psychiatric illness, and
transplant rejection. Similar to case series, exposure registries are hampered
by lack of a control group. The prevalence of an abnormality identified
through a registry requires knowledge of the baseline prevalence of that
anomaly in the population. Investigators typically use a birth defect registry
to assess population prevalence. One example is the Metropolitan Atlanta
Congenital Defects Program, which is an active surveillance program
established in 1967 for fetuses and infants with birth defects.

COUNSELING FOR MEDICATION EXPOSURE
Questions regarding medication and illicit drug use should be part of routine
preconceptional and prenatal care. Misinformation is common. Individuals
tend to underestimate the background risk for birth defects in the general
population and exaggerate potential risks associated with medication
exposure. In one population-based study of more than 270,000 births from
Utah that included 5500 fetuses and infants with major birth defects, only 4
cases were attributed to medication exposure (see Fig. 8-1) (Feldkamp,

2017). And yet, Koren and colleagues (1989) reported that a fourth of
women exposed to nonteratogenic drugs thought they had a 25-percent risk
for fetal anomalies. Misinformation may be amplified by inaccurate reports
in the lay press. Knowledgeable counseling may allay anxiety considerably
and may even avert pregnancy termination.
Several sources are available to assist providers with accurate and
updated risk information. With recent changes to the FDA labeling
requirements, discussed next, the manufacturer’s prescribing information has
become increasingly helpful. We recommend using this content for initial
counseling. Published research studies can be identified using PubMed, a
free database tool from the National Center for Biomedical Information.
Additionally, online databases such as Reprotox, TERIS, and Shepard’s
Online Catalog of Teratogenic Agents offer detailed reviews of medication
risks. Lactmed, a database from the National Library of Medicine,
specifically deals with medication use by breastfeeding women. Its entries
on specific medications describe levels in breast milk and potential effects
on the infant.
Ultimately, it is the responsibility of the clinician to interpret risk
information. Medication dosage and route, timing of exposure during
pregnancy, other medications used, and underlying medical condition(s) are
considered in this analysis. Last, the risk from lack of treatment also is
weighed.

■ Labeling Requirements
In 1979, the FDA developed a letter classification system (A, B, C, D, X) to
provide therapeutic guidance for prescribing medications in pregnancy.
These letter categories were intended to simplify risk-benefit data using
summary statements regarding available evidence from human or animal
studies of embryonic–fetal risk. Unfortunately, information regarding
medication risk was often incomplete and led to an overreliance on the
category definition.
To address these deficiencies, new FDA (2014, 2020b) labeling
requirements were created and went into effect in 2015. The label provides a
framework to aid prescribing decisions by more clearly communicating risks
and benefits. Information about each medication now incorporates a detailed
summary of risks, clinical considerations, and available data (Table 8-3).

Registry information is included when available. For each medication, a
lactation subsection is provided, and a section addressing potential risks in
females and males of reproductive potential is presented. In addition to risks
associated with specific medications, the label is required to include the
background risk of major birth defects and miscarriage in the general
population. Because of the level of detail in the new labels, the information
can be indispensable for counseling.
TABLE 8-3. Food and Drug Administration Pregnancy Labeling
Requirements

■ Presenting Risk Information
Counseling should cover not only the embryonic and fetal risks from drug
exposure, but also the risks and/or genetic implications of the condition for
which the drug is administered. Risks associated with not treating the
condition also are described. Even the manner in which information is
presented affects perception. For example, women given negative

information—such as a 2-percent chance of a malformed newborn—are more
likely to perceive an exaggerated risk than women given positive information
—such as a 98-percent chance of an unaffected infant (Jasper, 2001). Instead
of citing a higher odds ratio, it may be helpful to provide the absolute risk
for a particular defect or the attributable risk, which is the difference
between prevalence in exposed and unexposed individuals (Conover, 2011).
The association between oral corticosteroid medications and cleft lip sounds
far more concerning when presented as a tripling or 200-percent increase in
risk than when described as an increase from 1 to 3 cases per 1000 or as a
99.7-percent likelihood of no cleft development following exposure.
With a few notable exceptions, most commonly prescribed drugs and
medications can be used with relative safety during pregnancy. Many drugs
discussed in this chapter are low-risk teratogens, which are medications that
produce defects in fewer than 10 per 1000 maternal exposures (Shepard,
2002a). Because risks conferred by low-risk teratogens are so close to the
population background rate of fetal anomalies, they may not be a major factor
in deciding whether to discontinue treatment for an important condition
(Shepard, 2002b). All women have an approximate 3-percent chance of
having a fetus or newborn with a major anomaly. Although exposure to a
confirmed teratogen may elevate this risk, the magnitude of the increase is
usually only 1 or 2 percent or at most, doubled or tripled. The concept of risk
versus benefit is often central to counseling. Some untreated diseases pose a
more serious threat to both mother and fetus than medication exposure risks.

TERATOGENIC AND FETOTOXIC AGENTS
Considering the thousands of compounds available, relatively few
medications and other substances are considered to be major human
teratogens or to have significant fetotoxicity. The most common examples are
listed in Table 8-1. With few exceptions, in every clinical situation
potentially requiring therapy with a known teratogen, alternative drugs can be
given with relative safety. Realizing limitations in available evidence,
pregnant women should be advised to take any medication only when it is
clearly needed. Detailed sonography is generally indicated if the fetus has
been exposed to any major teratogen during the embryonic period.

■ Alcohol
Ethanol is a potent and prevalent teratogen. It is considered the leading cause
of preventable developmental disabilities worldwide (Hoyme, 2016). In the
United States, alcohol use is reported by 10 percent of pregnant women
(England, 2020). Nearly 10 percent of such women admit to binge drinking in
the first trimester, and 1 percent report binge drinking in the second and third
trimesters.
The fetal effects of alcohol abuse have been recognized since the 1800s.
Lemoine (1968) and Jones (1973) and their coworkers are credited with
describing the spectrum of alcohol-related fetal defects known as fetal
alcohol syndrome. Criteria are shown in Table 8-4 (Hoyme, 2016). For
every child with the syndrome, many more are born with neurobehavioral
deficits from alcohol exposure. Fetal alcohol spectrum disorder (FASD) is
an umbrella term that includes five conditions attributed to prenatal alcohol
damage: (1) fetal alcohol syndrome, (2) partial fetal alcohol syndrome, (3)
alcohol-related birth defects, (4) alcohol-related neurodevelopmental
disorder, and (5) neurobehavioral disorder associated with prenatal alcohol
exposure (Williams, 2015). The prevalence of FASD exceeds 1 percent in 76
countries, and 1 in 13 women who consume alcohol in pregnancy has a child
with FASD (Lange, 2017). The birth prevalence of fetal alcohol syndrome is
estimated to be as high as 1 percent in the United States (Centers for Disease
Control, 2015; Guerri, 2009). Further, studies of school-aged children have
identified FASD in 2 to 5 percent (May, 2009, 2014).
TABLE 8-4. Criteria for Prenatal Alcohol Exposure, Fetal Alcohol
Syndrome, and Alcohol-Related Birth Defects

Criteria

Fetal alcohol syndrome has specific criteria (see Table 8-4). These include
central nervous system (CNS) abnormalities, pre- or postnatal growth
impairment, and a characteristic pattern of minor facial abnormalities (Fig.
8-2). Similar criteria have been established for the other conditions that
make up FASD (Hoyme, 2016). Prenatal alcohol exposure criteria also are
available to assist with assessment.

FIGURE 8-2 Fetal alcohol syndrome. A. At 2½ years. B. At 12 years. Note persistence of short
palpebral fissures, epicanthal folds, flat midface, hypoplastic philtrum, and thin upper vermilion border.
(Reproduced with permission from Streissguth AP, Clarren, SK, Jones KL. Natural history of fetal
alcohol syndrome: a 10-year follow-up of eleven patients, Lancet. 1985 Jul 13;2(8446):85–91.)

Alcohol-related birth defects include cardiac and renal anomalies,
orthopedic problems, and abnormalities of the eyes and ears (see Table 8-4).
An association has further been reported between periconceptional alcohol
use and omphalocele and gastroschisis (Richardson, 2011). There are no
established sonographic criteria for prenatal diagnosis of fetal alcohol
syndrome. At Parkland Hospital, we reserve detailed sonography for
pregnancies that have met the exposure criteria listed in Table 8-4. Thirdtrimester assessment of fetal growth also should be considered.
Fetal vulnerability to alcohol is modified by genetic and environmental
factors, nutritional status, coexisting maternal disease, and maternal age

(Abel, 1995). Binge drinking, however, is believed to pose particularly high
risk for alcohol-related birth defects and has also been linked to a greater
risk for stillbirth (Centers for Disease Control, 2015; Strandberg-Larsen,
2008). The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), and the American Academy of
Pediatrics have stressed that no amount of alcohol can be considered safe in
pregnancy (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020a;
Williams, 2015).

■ Antiepileptic Medications
Traditionally, women with epilepsy requiring treatment with medication
were informed that their risk for fetal malformations was increased. More
recent data suggest that the risk may not be as great as once thought,
particularly for newer agents. The most frequently reported anomalies are
orofacial clefts, cardiac malformations, and neural-tube defects.
Of agents in current use, valproic acid confers the highest risk (Vajda,
2016). The North American Antiepileptic Drug (NAAED) Pregnancy
Registry reported that major malformations developed in 9 percent of fetuses
with first-trimester valproate exposure. This included a 4-percent risk for
neural-tube defects (Hernandez-Diaz, 2012). School-aged children with
prior in utero exposure to valproic acid have poorer cognitive development
—including significantly lower intelligence quotient (IQ) scores—than
children exposed to other antiepileptic drugs (Bromley, 2014; Meador,
2009).
Regarding other specific anticonvulsants, one metaanalysis identified
increased malformation rates among exposed children compared with rates
among children born to women with untreated epilepsy. Rates were twofold
higher among children exposed to carbamazepine or phenytoin, threefold
higher among those exposed to phenobarbital, and fourfold higher among
those exposed to topiramate as monotherapy (Weston, 2016). The risk for
fetal malformations is approximately doubled if multiple agents are required
(Vajda, 2016). Several older anticonvulsants may produce a constellation of
findings similar to the fetal hydantoin syndrome. The syndrome is
characterized by distinctive features such as hypertelorism, low nasal bridge,
and midface hypoplasia; hypoplasia of the distal phalanges and nails; growth
impairment; and intellectual disability.

Importantly, evidence to date suggests that these risks do not appear to
hold for the newer agents levetiracetam and lamotrigine (Mølgaard-Nielsen,
2011; Weston, 2016). A review of 208 pregnancies with first-trimester
lamotrigine exposure from the Israeli Teratology Information Service found
no increase in the rate of major malformations and no case of oral cleft
(Diav-Citrin, 2017). Similarly, the International Lamotrigine Pregnancy
Registry followed more than 1500 pregnancies with first trimester exposure
and observed no effect on the rate of major malformations (Cunnington,
2011). The Motherisk Program reviewed eight studies of levetiracetam and
concluded that monotherapy was associated with a 2-percent major
malformation rate, no different from that for the general population
(Chaudhry, 2014). More recently, a review of 465 pregnancies reported to
the Levetiracetam Pregnancy Registry found no evidence of teratogenicity
(Scheuerle, 2019).
Providers are encouraged to enroll pregnant women treated with
antiepileptic medication in the NAAED Pregnancy Registry. Management of
epilepsy in pregnancy is discussed in Chapter 63 (p. 1128).

■ Angiotensin-converting Enzyme Inhibitors and Receptor
Blocking Drugs
These medications may result in angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE)inhibitor fetopathy. Normal renal development depends on the fetal reninangiotensin system. ACE-inhibitor medication may cause fetal hypotension
and renal hypoperfusion, with subsequent ischemia and anuria (Guron, 2000;
Pryde, 1993). Reduced perfusion can result in fetal-growth restriction and
calvarium maldevelopment, and oligohydramnios may lead to pulmonary
hypoplasia and limb contractures (Barr, 1991). Because angiotensin-receptor
blockers have a similar mechanism of action, concerns regarding fetotoxicity
have been generalized to include this entire medication class. A recent
review of nearly 200 pregnancies from teratology information services found
a 30-percent fetopathy risk with angiotensin-receptor blockers compared
with a 3-percent risk with ACE-inhibitor exposure beyond 20 weeks’
gestation (Weber-Schoendorfer, 2020).
Concerns about ACE-inhibitor embryotoxicity have largely been
disproven. In 2006, a review of 29,000 infants from the Tennessee Medicaid
database identified a two- to threefold greater risk for neonatal cardiac and

CNS abnormalities among the 209 that had prenatal ACE-inhibitor exposure
(Cooper, 2006). Subsequent larger studies have not corroborated these
observations. In a retrospective cohort study of more than 460,000
pregnancies, risks for birth defects were not higher with ACE inhibitors than
with other antihypertensive medications (Li, 2011). Similarly, a review of
1.3 million pregnancies from the Medicaid Analytic eXtract found no
increased risk for any malformation with ACE-inhibitor exposure after
adjusting for confounding factors such as diabetes (Bateman, 2017). Thus,
women with inadvertent first-trimester exposure to these medications may be
reassured. Importantly, given the many therapeutic options for treating
hypertension during pregnancy, discussed in Chapter 53 (p. 949), ACE
inhibitors and angiotensin receptor-blocking drugs should be avoided in
pregnancy.

■ Antifungal Medications
From this class of drugs, fluconazole has been associated with a pattern of
congenital malformations resembling the autosomal recessive Antley-Bixler
syndrome. Abnormalities include oral clefts, abnormal facies, and cardiac,
skull, long-bone, and joint abnormalities. Such findings have been reported
only with chronic, first-trimester, high-dose treatment at doses of 400 to 800
mg daily.
Regarding low-dose treatment of vulvovaginal candidiasis, the Motherisk
Program conducted a systematic review of pregnancies with first-trimester
oral fluconazole exposure of 150 or 300 mg in total (Alsaad, 2015). The
overall risk for birth defects was not greater, although a small increase in
rates of cardiac malformations could not be excluded. A population-based
cohort study from Denmark identified a threefold greater risk for tetralogy of
Fallot following exposure to low-dose fluconazole (Mølgaard-Nielsen,
2013). The birth prevalence of tetralogy of Fallot rose from 3 to 10 cases per
10,000. Notably, investigators did not identify increased risks for 14 other
birth defects previously associated with exposure to high-dose azole
antifungal agents (Mølgaard-Nielsen, 2013). A subsequent review of more
than 37,000 pregnancies with first-trimester fluconazole exposure did not
identify an association with cardiac abnormalities (Zhu, 2020). Based on
reported risks, we do not perform detailed sonography or fetal
echocardiography following low-dose fluconazole exposure.

■ Antiinflammatory Agents
Nonsteroidal Antiinflammatory Drugs
This drug class includes both aspirin and traditional NSAIDs such as
ibuprofen and indomethacin. They exert their effects by inhibiting
prostaglandin synthesis. In a report from the NBDPS, at least 20 percent of
pregnant women recall first-trimester NSAID use, particularly ibuprofen and
aspirin, and such exposure is not a major risk factor for birth defects
(Hernandez, 2012).
When taken in late pregnancy, however, indomethacin may cause
constriction of the fetal ductus arteriosus and subsequent pulmonary
hypertension. Fetal ductal constriction is more likely with third trimester use
that exceeds 72 hours. The drug also may decrease fetal urine production and
amnionic fluid volume (Rasanen, 1995; van der Heijden, 1994; Walker,
1994). In one systematic review, indomethacin tocolysis was associated with
a 1.5-fold risk for bronchopulmonary dysplasia, intraventricular hemorrhage,
and necrotizing enterocolitis (Hammers, 2015a,b).
Based on a review of 35 cases of oligohydramnios or neonatal kidney
problems reported to the FDA Adverse Event Reporting System database,
the FDA recommends that pregnant women ≥20 weeks’ gestation avoid
NSAID use (Food and Drug Administration, 2020a). If NSAIDs are needed
for more than 48 hours, ultrasound evaluation of amnionic fluid should be
considered. Oligohydramnios usually resolves within 6 days of discontinuing
NSAIDs, but there are cases in which infants have died of renal failure.
With aspirin, a low dosage of 100 mg daily or less does not confer a
greater risk for constriction of the ductus arteriosus or for adverse infant
outcomes (Grab, 2000). As with other NSAIDs, however, high-dose aspirin
use should be avoided, particularly in the third trimester.

Leflunomide
This is a pyrimidine-synthesis inhibitor used to treat rheumatoid arthritis.
Leflunomide is considered contraindicated in pregnancy. In rats and rabbits,
leflunomide results in hydrocephalus, eye anomalies, skeletal anomalies, and
embryo death when given at or below human-equivalent doses (SanofiAventis, 2016). The active metabolite, teriflunomide, is detectable in plasma
for up to 2 years following discontinuation of the medication. Women who

become pregnant while taking leflunomide, and even those of childbearing
potential who have discontinued it, are recommended to undergo an
accelerated drug elimination procedure with either cholestyramine or
activated charcoal (Sanofi-Aventis, 2016).
Reassuringly, studies of exposed human pregnancies have not confirmed
these teratogenic effects (Berard, 2018; Chambers, 2010). In a cohort of 60
women with first-trimester leflunomide exposure who completed
cholestyramine washout, the rate of birth defects was not increased
(Chambers, 2010). A recent review of more than 500 exposed pregnancies
found that the rate of major birth defects was 3 percent, similar to the general
population (Henson, 2020). The rate of spontaneous abortion also was not
increased.

■ Antimicrobial and Antiviral Drugs
Medications used to treat infections are among those most frequently
administered during pregnancy. Over the years, experience has accrued
regarding their general safety. With few exceptions, commonly used
antimicrobial agents are without embryo-fetal safety concerns.

Nitrofurantoin
From NBDPS results, first-trimester nitrofurantoin exposure is linked to a
twofold risk for cleft lip (Ailes, 2016). Considering that the birth prevalence
of clefts approximates 1 case per 1000, the likelihood that a nitrofurantoinexposed fetus would not have a cleft would thus be 998 per 1000. For other
birth defects, initial associations with this antibiotic did not persist in the
final NBDPS cohort (Ailes, 2016).
In one systematic review of nitrofurantoin exposure in pregnancy, results
of cohort and case-control studies differed (Goldberg, 2015). Five cohort
studies included 9275 exposed pregnancies and nearly 1.5 million unexposed
pregnancies, and the review found no higher risk for any malformation.
However, among three case-control studies that had nearly 40,000 cases
matched with 130,000 controls, the rate of hypoplastic left heart syndrome
was threefold greater (Goldberg, 2015). For context, this increase in risk
would result in a birth prevalence of fewer than 1 case per 1000 exposed
infants. Nitrofurantoin is considered contraindicated in pregnant women with

known or suspected glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency
because of risk for hemolytic anemia and other hematologic abnormalities. In
the absence of G6PD deficiency, the There are no concerns with second- or
third-trimester nitrofurantoin use, and first-trimester use is appropriate if no
suitable alternatives are available.

Sulfonamides
These drugs are often combined with trimethoprim and used to treat
infections during pregnancy. One indication is treatment of methicillinresistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) infection. The NBDPS, which
included 107 pregnancies with periconceptional trimethoprimsulfamethoxazole exposure and birth defects, identified a fivefold greater
risk to have offspring with esophageal atresia or diaphragmatic hernia
(Ailes, 2016). Similar to findings with nitrofurantoin exposure, this degree of
increase would confer a risk of approximately 1 case per 1000 exposed
infants for these selected birth defects. However, these findings have not
been corroborated by other reports. One review from the Medication
Exposure in Pregnancy Risk Evaluation Program included more than 7500
infants with first-trimester exposure to trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
(Hansen, 2016). Compared with either unexposed infants or those exposed to
penicillins or cephalosporins, no higher risk for any congenital abnormality
was identified. Given this reassuring data, we consider sulfonamides
appropriate for first-trimester use if suitable alternatives are lacking.
Sulfonamides are considered contraindicated in pregnant women with
known or suspected G6PD deficiency because of risk for hemolytic anemia
and other hematologic abnormalities. Additionally, sulfonamides displace
bilirubin from protein-binding sites. Thus, if given near the time of preterm
delivery, these agents theoretically might worsen neonatal
hyperbilirubinemia. However, a population-based review of more than
800,000 births from Denmark found no association between exposure to
sulfamethoxazole in late pregnancy and neonatal jaundice (Klarskov, 2013).

Tetracyclines
These drugs are not commonly used in pregnant women. They have been
associated with yellowish-brown discoloration of the deciduous teeth when
used after 25 weeks’ gestation. The risk for subsequent dental caries is not

increased (Billings, 2004; Kutscher, 1966). Doxycycline has a reduced
ability to chelate calcium orthophosphate compared with other tetracyclines
and is preferred if needed. A systematic review of doxycycline-exposed
pregnancies identified no higher rates of either birth defects or staining of
deciduous teeth (Cross, 2016).

Ribavirin
This antiviral nucleoside analogue is a component of therapy for hepatitis C
infection, discussed in Chapter 58 (p. 1038). Ribavirin causes birth defects
in multiple animal species at doses significantly lower than those
recommended for human use. Reported malformations include skull, palate,
eye, skeleton, and gastrointestinal abnormalities. The drug has a half-life of
12 days and persists in extravascular compartments following therapy
discontinuation. Treated women must use two forms of contraception and
have monthly pregnancy tests while on therapy and for 6 months following
drug discontinuation (Merck, 2020). Ribavirin use is also contraindicated in
men whose partners are pregnant.

■ Antineoplastic Agents
Cancer management in pregnancy includes many chemotherapeutic agents
generally considered to be at least potentially toxic to the embryo, fetus, or
both. For the many novel polyclonal antibody therapies designated as
antineoplastics, there is little information concerning safety. The National
Toxicology Program (2013) conducted a review of 300 pregnancies with
first-trimester exposure and identified major malformations in 14 percent.
Treatment of cancer in pregnancy is discussed in Chapter 66 (p. 1163). Risks
associated with selected agents for which experience in pregnancy has
accrued are considered next.

Cyclophosphamide
This alkylating agent inflicts a chemical insult on developing fetal tissues and
leads to cell death and heritable DNA alterations in surviving cells.
Pregnancy loss rates are greater, and reported fetal abnormalities include
skeletal anomalies, limb defects, cleft palate, and eye abnormalities (Enns,
1999; Kirshon, 1988). The risk for a major abnormality is estimated to be 18

percent (National Toxicology Program, 2013). Surviving infants may have
growth abnormalities and developmental delays. Environmental exposure
among health-care workers is associated with a higher risk for spontaneous
abortion.

Methotrexate
This folic-acid antagonist is a potent teratogen. It is used for cancer
chemotherapy, immunosuppression of autoimmune diseases and psoriasis,
nonsurgical treatment of ectopic pregnancy, and medical abortion. It acts
similarly to aminopterin, which is no longer used clinically, and can cause
defects known collectively as the fetal methotrexate-aminopterin syndrome.
Associated craniofacial abnormalities include craniosynostosis with a
“clover-leaf” skull, wide nasal bridge, low-set ears, and micrognathia (Del
Campo, 1999). Exposure has also been linked to central nervous system
abnormalities, cardiac defects, and limb anomalies (Cumberland
Pharmaceuticals, 2020). Intellectual impairment has been described. The
embryo is thought to be most vulnerable at 8 to 10 weeks postconception and
at dosages of at least 10 mg/week. However, this is not universally accepted
(Feldkamp, 1993). Because of its distribution, methotrexate can remain in the
body for prolonged periods. Thus, preconceptional exposure is not without
risk.
The standard 50-mg/m2 dose given to treat ectopic pregnancy or to
induce abortion exceeds the 10-mg/week threshold dose. Reports describe
cardiac anomalies, particularly conotruncal defects, in intrauterine
pregnancies inadvertently treated with methotrexate for suspected ectopic
pregnancy (Dawson, 2014; Hyoun, 2012).

Tamoxifen
This nonsteroidal selective estrogen-receptor modulator (SERM) is used as
an adjuvant to treat breast cancer. In animal studies, tamoxifen has been
associated with malformations similar to those caused by diethylstilbestrol
(DES) exposure in rodents, including vaginal adenosis. One review of 167
pregnancies reported a fetal abnormality in 13 percent but emphasized that
evidence was limited (Schuurman, 2019). Abnormalities have included
ambiguous genitalia and craniofacial anomalies.

Trastuzumab
This is a recombinant monoclonal antibody directed to the human epidermal
growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) protein. Used to treat breast and gastric
cancers that express HER2 protein, this drug has not been associated with
fetal malformations. However, postmarketing surveillance identified cases of
oligohydramnios sequence resulting in pulmonary hypoplasia, renal failure,
skeletal abnormalities, and neonatal death (Genentech, 2020). Surveillance
for these complications is recommended for exposed pregnancies and for
those treated at any time in the 7 months prior to conception. A trastuzumab
pregnancy exposure registry and a pregnancy pharmacovigilance program
have been established to monitor pregnancy outcomes. These warnings also
apply to those treated with ado-trastuzumab emtansine.

■ Endothelin-receptor Antagonists
Bosentan, ambrisentan, and macitentan are three endothelin-receptor
antagonists used to treat pulmonary arterial hypertension (Chap. 52, p. 930).
The endothelin-receptor signaling pathway is important for neural-crest
development. Mice deficient in endothelin receptors develop neural-crest
cell defects that include craniofacial and cardiac outflow tract abnormalities
(de Raaf, 2015). Each of these three agents has been found to cause similar
birth defects in multiple animal species (Janssen, 2019a,b). No human data
are available. Endothelin-receptor antagonists may be obtained only through
restricted access programs, each of which has stringent requirements that
include contraception and monthly pregnancy testing (Gilead, 2019; Janssen,
2019a,b).

■ Immunosuppressant Medications
Selected autoimmune diseases and their treatment are reviewed in Chapter
62 (p. 1109).

Corticosteroids
Glucocorticoids and mineralocorticoids have antiinflammatory and
immunosuppressive actions. They are used to treat serious disorders such as
asthma and autoimmune disease. Corticosteroids have been associated with

orofacial clefts in animal studies, but the absolute risk is small. In a
metaanalysis of case-control studies by the Motherisk Program, systemic
corticosteroid exposure was associated with a threefold rate increase,
conferring an absolute risk of 3 clefts per 1000 exposed fetuses (ParkWyllie, 2000). A 10-year prospective cohort study by the same group,
however, did not identify an increased overall risk for major malformations.
Based on these findings, corticosteroids are not considered to represent a
major teratogenic risk.
Potential risks associated with prednisone or methylprednisolone are
considered to be lower than those with other corticosteroids. Prednisolone,
the active metabolite of prednisone, is itself metabolized and rendered
inactive by the placental enzyme 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase 2
(Murphy, 2007). Thus, it is thought to reach the fetus less effectively.

Mycophenolate Mofetil
This inosine monophosphate dehydrogenase inhibitor, and a related agent,
mycophenolic acid, are immunosuppressants. They are used to prevent
rejection in organ-transplant recipients and to treat autoimmune disease
(Chap. 62, p. 1112). Mycophenolate is a potent teratogen. From the National
Transplantation Pregnancy Registry, of pregnancies in which mycophenolate
was not discontinued until after the first trimester, birth defects complicated
30 percent, and another 30 percent spontaneously aborted (King, 2017). One
prospective review by the European Network of Teratology Information
Services similarly identified a spontaneous loss rate of nearly 30 percent in
exposed pregnancies. More than 20 percent of liveborn infants had major
anomalies (Hoeltzenbein, 2012).
Many affected infants have a pattern of defects termed mycophenolate
embryopathy. This includes microtia, auditory canal atresia, clefts,
coloboma and other eye anomalies, short fingers with hypoplastic nails, and
cardiac defects (Anderka, 2009; Merlob, 2009). A Risk Evaluation and
Mitigation Strategy (REMS) has been developed for mycophenolate
prescribers who treat women with reproductive potential. REMS are safety
strategies mandated by the FDA to help manage known risks associated with
a medicine yet still allow patients to have access to the benefits of a given
drug.

■ Lead
Lead crosses the placenta via passive diffusion. Prenatal lead exposure is
associated with fetal-growth impairment and with childhood
neurodevelopmental delays. According to the CDC (2010), no level of lead
exposure is considered safe in pregnancy. Although routine testing is not
recommended, risk factors should be assessed in all pregnancies (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019a). Care and testing for atrisk pregnancies is discussed in Chapter 10 (p. 188).

■ Mercury
The developing nervous system is particularly susceptible to mercury. In the
1950s and early 1960s, children born near Minamata Bay, Japan were found
to have congenital Minamata disease—severe neurological abnormalities
from methylmercury exposure in utero (Yorifuji, 2020). Prenatal exposure
causes disturbances in neuronal cell division and migration. This leads to a
range of defects from microcephaly to intellectual disability, choreo-athetoid
movement abnormalities, motor delays, and behavioral abnormalities
(Grandjean, 2011).
The principal concern for prenatal mercury exposure is the consumption
of certain species of large fish and seafood (Chap. 10, p. 188).
Methylmercury cannot be eliminated by cooking. It crosses the placenta and
can accumulate in the fetus. The FDA (2019) advises that pregnant women
and breastfeeding mothers avoid consumption of king mackerel, marlin,
orange roughy, shark, swordfish, tilefish, and bigeye tuna.

■ Psychiatric Medications
Treatment of psychiatric illness in pregnancy, including a discussion of the
risks and benefits of various psychiatric medications, is described in Chapter
64 (p. 1142).

Antipsychotic Medications
No antipsychotic medications are considered teratogenic. Exposed neonates
can manifest abnormal extrapyramidal muscle movements and withdrawal
symptoms that include agitation, abnormally enhanced or diminished muscle

tone, tremor, agitation, somnolence, respiratory abnormalities, and feeding
difficulty. Such findings are nonspecific and transient. An FDA (2017) alert
cited all medications in this class. Included are older medications like
haloperidol and chlorpromazine and newer medications such as aripiprazole,
olanzapine, quetiapine, and risperidone.

Lithium
This medication has been associated with Ebstein anomaly, a rare cardiac
abnormality that otherwise complicates only 1 per 20,000 births. Ebstein
anomaly is characterized by apical displacement of the tricuspid valve, often
resulting in severe tricuspid regurgitation and marked right atrial
enlargement. A report from the Lithium Baby Registry initially suggested that
the risk for Ebstein anomaly was as high as 3 percent. However, subsequent
series have identified an attributable risk for Ebstein anomaly and cooccurring right-sided cardiac anomalies of only 1 to 4 cases per 1000
exposed pregnancies (Patorno, 2017; Yacobi, 2008). The NBDPS found that
just 1 of 135 cases of Ebstein anomaly occurred in the setting of lithium
exposure (Downing, 2019).
Neonatal lithium toxicity stems from exposure near delivery. The
manufacturer recommends that if possible, the dosage should be decreased or
drug discontinued 2 to 3 days prior to delivery to reduce this risk (WestWard, 2020). Findings may persist for up to 2 weeks and may include
cardiac arrhythmias, hypoglycemia, nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, and a
“floppy infant syndrome” (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2019f). The latter may include hypotonia, respiratory distress
or apnea, bradycardia, cyanosis, and feeding difficulties (West-Ward, 2020).

Selective Serotonin- and Norepinephrine-reuptake Inhibitors
These medications have been studied more than almost any other, apart from
Bendectin (p. 146). As a class, they are not considered major teratogens
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019f). The one
exception is paroxetine, which has been associated with a slightly higher risk
for cardiac anomalies, particularly atrial and ventricular septal defects.
Metaanalyses have identified a pooled odds ratio of just 1.3 for paroxetine
and cardiac abnormalities (Berard, 2016; Wurst, 2010). However, a review
of nearly 1 million pregnancies from the nationwide Medicaid Analytic

eXtract identified no significant association between paroxetine use in the
first trimester and fetal cardiac abnormalities (Huybrechts, 2014). The
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019f) recommends
that women planning pregnancy avoid paroxetine. Fetal echocardiography
should be considered for those with first-trimester paroxetine exposure.
Neonatal effects have been associated with prenatal exposure to
selective serotonin-reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) and selective
norepinephrine-reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs). Approximately 25 percent of
neonates exposed to SSRIs in late pregnancy manifest one or more
nonspecific findings considered to represent poor neonatal adaptation
(Costei, 2002; Jordan, 2008). Collectively termed the neonatal behavioral
syndrome, findings can include jitteriness, irritability, hyper- or hypotonia,
feeding abnormalities, vomiting, hypoglycemia, thermoregulatory instability,
and respiratory abnormalities. Fortunately, these neonatal behaviors are
typically mild and self-limited and last approximately 2 days. Jordan and
coworkers (2008) reported that affected newborns were not more likely to
require a higher level of care, to experience respiratory abnormalities, or to
have prolonged hospitalization. Rarely, neonates exposed to SSRIs in late
pregnancy have demonstrated more severe adaptation abnormalities (Ornoy,
2017).
Another concern with late-pregnancy exposure is the possible association
of SSRI medications with persistent pulmonary hypertension of the
newborn (PPHN). The baseline incidence approximates 2 cases per 1000
term newborns. PPHN is characterized by elevated pulmonary vascular
resistance with right-to-left shunting and resultant hypoxemia. Two
population-based cohort studies—together involving more than 5 million
pregnancies—identified an attributable risk of only 1 to 2 cases per 1000
births (Huybrechts, 2015; Kieler, 2012). Moreover, cases of PPHN
associated with SSRI medication have not been severe (Ornoy, 2017).

■ Retinoids
Vitamin A derivatives are among the most potent human teratogens. By
inhibiting neural-crest cell migration during embryogenesis, they create a
pattern of cranial neural-crest defects—termed retinoic acid embryopathy—
that involve the CNS, face, heart, and thymus (Fig. 8-3). Specific anomalies
may include ventriculomegaly, maldevelopment of the facial bones or

cranium, microtia or anotia, micrognathia, cleft palate, conotruncal heart
defects, and thymic aplasia or hypoplasia.

FIGURE 8-3 Retinoic acid embryopathy. A. Bilateral microtia or anotia with stenosis of external ear
canal. B. Flat, depressed nasal bridge and ocular hypertelorism. (Reproduced with permission from
permission from Dr. Edward Lammer.)

Acitretin
This retinoid is used to treat severe psoriasis. It was introduced to replace
etretinate, a lipophilic retinoid with such a long half-life (120 days) that birth
defects resulted more than 2 years after therapy was discontinued. Although
acitretin has a short half-life, it is metabolized to etretinate, and thus remains
in the body for prolonged periods (Stiefel Laboratories, 2017). To obviate
exposure, the manufacturer of acitretin has developed a pregnancy risk
management program. Called “Do Your P.A.R.T”—pregnancy prevention
actively required during and after treatment, this program promotes a delay
of conception for at least 3 years following therapy discontinuation.

Bexarotene
This retinoid is used to treat refractory cutaneous T-cell lymphoma. When
given to rats in doses comparable to those for human therapy, fetuses
developed eye and ear abnormalities, cleft palate, and incomplete
ossification. For a woman to receive bexarotene, the manufacturer requires

two forms of contraception that are initiated 1 month before therapy and
continued for 1 month after it is discontinued. This is coupled with monthly
pregnancy testing during treatment (Bausch Health, 2020). Males who have
partners who could become pregnant are advised to use condoms during
sexual intercourse while taking bexarotene and for 1 month after
discontinuing therapy.

Isotretinoin
13-cis-Retinoic acid is a vitamin A isomer that stimulates epithelial cell
differentiation. It is primarily used to treat recalcitrant nodular acne. Firsttrimester exposure is associated with a high rate of pregnancy loss, and up to
a third of infants have malformations (Lammer, 1985). The iPLEDGE
program is an FDA-mandated REMS for isotretinoin and is found at
www.ipledgeprogram.com. This web-based, restricted-distribution program
requires participation for all patients, physicians, and pharmacies to help
eliminate embryo–fetal exposure. Other countries have instituted similar
programs, however, inadvertent exposure remains a global concern (AutretLeca, 2010; Crijns, 2011).

Topical Retinoids
These compounds, initially used to treat acne, have become so popular for
sun-damage treatment that they are called cosmeceuticals (Panchaud, 2012).
The most commonly used topical agents are tretinoin, isotretinoin, and
adapalene. Systemic absorption is low, and this argues against plausible
teratogenicity.
Isolated case reports have described malformations following topical
tretinoin, and it is unknown whether this is due to variability in absorption or
perhaps potential individual susceptibility (Kaplan, 2015). A prospective
study by the European Network of Teratology Information Services found no
higher rates of birth defects or spontaneous losses, and no case of retinoid
embryopathy (Panchaud, 2012). A systematic review of 635 pregnancies
exposed to topical retinoids identified no higher risk for congenital
malformations, spontaneous abortion, stillbirth, low birthweight, or preterm
delivery (Kaplan, 2015). Notably, the manufacturer of tazarotene cautions
that application over a sufficient body surface area could be comparable to

oral treatment. Accordingly, its use in pregnancy is not recommended
(Allergan, 2019).

Vitamin A
There are two natural forms of vitamin A. First, provitamin A carotenoids,
which include beta-carotene, alpha-carotene, and beta-cryptoxanthin, are
precursors found in fruits and vegetables. The body converts carotenoids into
vitamin A. They have never been shown to cause birth defects (Oakley,
1995).
Second, preformed vitamin A, also called retinol, has been associated
with cranial neural-crest defects when more than 10,000 IU per day is
consumed in the first trimester (Rothman, 1995). Preformed vitamin A is
present in liver, fish oils, milk, eggs, and in vitamin pills and dietary
supplements. It seems reasonable to avoid doses of preformed preparations
that exceed the recommended 3000 IU daily allowance (American Academy
of Pediatrics, 2017).

■ Sex Hormones
Selected functions and effects of male and female hormones on the
developing fetus are reviewed in Chapter 3 (p. 31). Androgen exposure may
cause varying degrees of virilization in female fetuses and may result in
ambiguous genitalia (Fig. 3-3, p. 34).

■ Thalidomide and Analogues
Possibly the most notorious human teratogen, thalidomide causes
malformations in 20 percent of fetuses exposed between 34 and 50 days
menstrual age. The characteristic malformation is phocomelia—an absence
or underdevelopment of one or more long bones. As a result, hands or feet
may attach to the trunk, occasionally by a small rudimentary bone. Cardiac
defects, gastrointestinal abnormalities, external ear and eye malformations,
and other limb-reduction defects also are common following thalidomide
exposure. The manufacturer reports that up to 40 percent of affected
newborns do not survive the neonatal period (Celgene, 2021).

Thalidomide was marketed outside the United States from 1956 to 1960,
before its teratogenicity was appreciated. The ensuing disaster, with
thousands of affected children, was instructive of several important
teratological principles. First, the placenta is not an effective barrier to the
transfer of toxic substances from mother to embryo (Dally, 1998). Second,
different species manifest considerable variability in their susceptibility to
drugs and chemicals. Namely, thalidomide produced no defects in multiple
rodent species and was assumed to be safe for humans. Last, timing of
exposure may be closely related to the type of defect (Vargesson, 2015). For
example, upper-limb amelia may develop with thalidomide exposure during
days 24 to 30 postconception, upper-limb phocomelia with exposure during
days 24 to 33, and lower-limb phocomelia with exposure during days 27 to
33.
Thalidomide was first approved in the United States in 1999 and
currently is used to treat erythema leprosum nodosum and multiple myeloma
(Celgene, 2021). The FDA has mandated a web-based, restricteddistribution program for thalidomide, called THALOMID REMS, which is
required before patients, physicians, and pharmacies can access the
medication.
Lenalidomide and pomalidomide are analogues of thalidomide. Both
cross the placenta in animal species. Lenalidomide is used to treat some
types of myelodysplastic syndrome and multiple myeloma. It has been found
to cause thalidomide-like limb abnormalities in monkeys (Celgene, 2019).
Pomalidomide is used to treat refractory multiple myeloma and acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS)-related Kaposi sarcoma. It is
teratogenic in rats and rabbits (Celgene, 2020). Restricted-distribution
programs similar to those used for thalidomide have been developed for
these analogues.

■ Thyroid Medications
Methimazole
This thionamide drug is used to treat hyperthyroidism. Methimazole has been
associated with a 2-fold increased risk for aplasia cutis congenita, as well as
choanal atresia and esophageal atresia (Yoshihara, 2012). This constellation
of findings has been termed methimazole embryopathy. Aplasia cutis is a

rare abnormality characterized by a full-thickness skin defect, usually the
scalp, occasionally with a defect of underlying bone. In a study of more than
1000 methimazole-treated pregnancies, Yoshihara and colleagues (2015)
identified the embryopathy in 1 to 2 percent. Treatment of hyperthyroidism in
pregnancy is reviewed in Chapter 61.

Radioiodine
Radioactive iodine-131 is used for treatment of thyroid cancer and
thyrotoxicosis and for diagnostic thyroid scanning. It is also a component of
iodine-131 tositumomab therapy, which is employed to treat a type of nonHodgkin lymphoma. Radioiodine is contraindicated during pregnancy
because it readily crosses the placenta and is concentrated in the fetal thyroid
gland by 12 weeks’ gestation. It may cause severe or irreversible fetal and
neonatal hypothyroidism, which can lead to decreased mental capacity and
delayed skeletal maturation. Pregnancy testing should be performed before
administration of radioiodine-131, and it is recommended that pregnancy be
avoided for 6 to 12 months following treatment (Haugen, 2016). A review of
more than 3000 pregnancies in which women delayed conception for at least
6 months after receiving radioactive iodine treatment identified no increase
in pregnancy losses or congenital malformations (Kim, 2020). Concerns for
the breastfeeding mother stem from breast exposure to the radioisotope.

■ Warfarin
This anticoagulant is a vitamin K antagonist with a long half-life. Because of
its low molecular weight, it readily crosses the placenta and may cause
embryotoxic and fetotoxic effects. It is considered contraindicated in
pregnancy with one important exception. As discussed in Chapter 52 (p.
922), warfarin is used to treat women with mechanical heart valves who are
at high risk for thromboembolism (Bristol-Myers Squibb, 2019).
Warfarin embryopathy is characterized by stippled epiphyses and nasal
hypoplasia (Fig. 8-4). In one review of 63 cases attributed to warfarin
exposure, 80 percent displayed characteristic findings, which include
depressed nasal bridge with nasal hypoplasia and choanal atresia, along with
stippled epiphyses of the femur, humerus, calcanei, and distal phalanges (Van
Driel, 2002). The embryopathy may result from exposure between 6 and 9
weeks’ gestation (Hall, 1980). Prevalence following exposure during this

critical period is estimated to be 6 percent. One metaanalysis of cases in
which the warfarin dosage was ≤5 mg/d identified embryopathy in 1 percent
of exposed fetuses. This suggests that risk may be dose dependent (Hassouna,
2014).

FIGURE 8-4 Warfarin embryopathy or fetal warfarin syndrome: nasal hypoplasia and depressed nasal
bridge seen in a fetal sonographic image (A) and in the same newborn (B).

If used beyond the first trimester, warfarin may lead to hemorrhage into
fetal structures, which can cause abnormal growth and deformation from
scarring (Warkany, 1976). Nearly 50 percent of reported embryopathy cases
also have CNS anomalies (van Driel, 2002). Abnormalities can include
agenesis of the corpus callosum; cerebellar vermian agenesis, which is the
Dandy-Walker malformation; microphthalmia; and optic atrophy. Affected
infants are also at risk for blindness, deafness, and developmental delays.

■ Tobacco
Cigarette smoking is the leading preventable cause of perinatal mortality. At
least 7 percent of women report smoking cigarettes during pregnancy (Drake,
2018). Cigarette smoke contains a complex mixture of nicotine, cotinine,
cyanide, thiocyanate, carbon monoxide, cadmium, lead, and various

hydrocarbons (Stillerman, 2008). In addition to being fetotoxic, many of
these substances have vasoactive effects or reduce oxygen levels.
Although tobacco is not considered a major human teratogen, selected
birth defects have been reported to occur with greater frequency following
exposure. Cigarette smoking and exposure to second-hand smoke have been
associated with up to a 1.5-fold risk for orofacial clefts (Kummet, 2016;
Sabbagh, 2015). This equates to an attributable risk of approximately 1 case
per 2000 births. It is plausible that the vasoactive properties of tobacco
smoke could produce congenital defects related to vascular disturbances. For
example, the prevalence of Poland sequence, which is caused by an
interruption in the vascular supply to one side of the fetal chest and
ipsilateral arm, has been reported to occur two times more commonly among
cigarette smokers (Martinez-Frias, 1999). The NBDPS similarly found an
association between active or passive cigarette smoking and limb reduction
defects, and an overall increase in risk of 25 percent (Caspers, 2013). A
small increased risk for fetal cardiac anomalies also has been reported and
may be dose related (Alverson, 2011; Malik, 2008; Sullivan, 2015).
The most prevalent obstetrical complication from smoking is a dosedependent reduction in fetal growth. Newborns of mothers who smoke weigh
on average 200 g less than newborns of nonsmokers (D’Souza, 1981).
Smoking doubles the risk of low birthweight and raises the risk of fetalgrowth restriction two- to threefold (Werler, 1997). As such, cigarette
smoking accounts for 15 percent of low-birthweight neonates (Dietz, 2010).
Even secondhand smoke increases the risk for low birthweight. Other
adverse pregnancy outcomes associated with cigarette smoking include
preterm birth, prelabor rupture of membranes, placenta previa, and placenta
abruption (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020b).
Approximately one third of cases of sudden infant death syndrome have been
attributed to cigarette smoking (Anderson, 2019; Dietz, 2010). Risks of
childhood asthma and obesity also are increased.
When inquiring about tobacco use, providers should include alternative
nicotine delivery products. All forms of nicotine cross the placenta. None is
considered safe in pregnancy. Vaping or e-cigarette products heat an “eliquid” containing nicotine—and often additional contaminants—along with
a flavoring agent. Nicotine is associated with adverse effects on fetal brain
and lung development (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2020b; Spindel, 2016). In adults, vaping has been linked to

serious lung injury known as EVALI—e-cigarette or vaping-associated lung
injury (Krishnasamy, 2020). Animal studies of hookah use, in which tobacco
smoke is filtered through a water bowl, demonstrate lower birthweight and
increased markers of cardiac stress (Khabour, 2016).
Smoking cessation should be strongly encouraged. Counseling includes
avoidance of secondhand smoke and all nicotine-replacement products, such
as patches, gum, and lozenges. A hotline is available from the Centers of
Disease Control and Prevention and can be accessed by calling 1-800-QUITNOW. The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force has recommended that
behavioral interventions be offered at the initial visit and continued
throughout pregnancy (Siu, 2015).

■ Herbal Medicinal Products
In large survey studies from North America and Europe, 30 to 60 percent of
women report using herbal remedies during pregnancy (Kennedy, 2016;
Pallivalapila, 2015). These products are not regulated by the FDA, and there
is a paucity of controlled studies assessing their safety and efficacy. The
identity, quantity, and purity of each ingredient are usually unknown. Authors
of a recent systematic review that included more than 1 million pregnancies
concluded that in the absence of more safety data, the use of herbal medicinal
products in pregnancy should be discouraged (Munoz Balbontin, 2019).
Selected herbal remedies and their reported adverse effects are shown in
Table 8-5.
TABLE 8-5. Pharmacological Actions and Adverse Effects of Some Herbal
Medicines

■ Drugs of Abuse
Substance abuse is not uncommon in pregnancy. Assessment of outcomes
attributable to illicit drug use is often confounded by factors such as poor
maternal health, malnutrition, and infectious disease. Polysubstance abuse
further complicates assessment of outcomes associated with any one drug.
Moreover, illegal substances may contain toxic contaminants such as lead,
cyanide, herbicides, and pesticides. Impurities added as diluents may
independently have serious adverse perinatal effects. As noted on page 149,
alcohol is a significant teratogen. Because it is legally obtained and
ubiquitous, its use confounds the study of illicit drug teratogenicity. Similarly,
tobacco use confounds the effect of drugs on fetal growth.

Cocaine
With this CNS stimulant, most adverse outcomes result from its
vasoconstrictive and hypertensive effects. Serious potential maternal
complications are cerebrovascular hemorrhage, myocardial damage, and
placental abruption. Studies of congenital abnormalities and cocaine
exposure have yielded conflicting results, but associations with cleft palate,
cardiovascular abnormalities, and urinary tract anomalies have been
reported (Chasnoff, 1988; Lipshultz, 1991; van Gelder, 2009). Cocaine use is
also associated with fetal-growth restriction and preterm delivery. Children
exposed as fetuses have risks for behavioral abnormalities and cognitive
impairments (Bada, 2011; Gouin, 2011).

Marijuana
This is the recreational drug most commonly used in pregnancy (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019b). Based on data from the
National Survey on Drug Use and Health, nearly 4 percent of pregnant
women reported using marijuana in 2014 (Brown, 2017). Among women
diagnosed with nausea and vomiting of pregnancy, the prevalence of
marijuana use increased from 7 to 11 percent from 2009 to 2016 (YoungWolff, 2019). Of concern is that the increase in prevalence is related to
perceived safety and efficacy. In a study of 400 cannabis dispensaries, nearly
70 percent advised a caller posing as a pregnant woman with nausea at 8
weeks’ gestation to use marijuana (Dickson, 2018). However, no data
support efficacy of marijuana for nausea and vomiting of pregnancy, and
there are indeed safety concerns (Metz, 2018).
Cannabinoids are not considered to be major teratogens, but they cross
the placenta, and endogenous cannabinoids play key roles in brain
development. In animals, cannabinoids are involved in neuronal
proliferation, migration, and differentiation (Campolongo, 2011). Adverse
developmental outcomes reported in exposed children include decreased
attention span and lower scores on tests of visual problem solving and
visual-motor coordination (Fried, 2003; Willford 2010).
Pregnancy outcome data are somewhat limited by the confounding risks
of concomitant tobacco use. In one metaanalysis of nearly 8000 exposed
pregnancies, only those with concomitant tobacco use had increased rates of
preterm birth and low-birthweight neonates (Conner, 2016). The American

College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019b) has stated that the
effects of marijuana may be as serious as those of cigarette smoking or
alcohol consumption. Because of neurodevelopmental concerns, women who
are pregnant or contemplating pregnancy should avoid marijuana use.

Methamphetamine
This sympathomimetic amine is derived from dextroamphetamine. It
enhances dopamine release and blocks its reuptake. Methamphetamine is
prescribed to treat attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and narcolepsy.
Abuse has been rising in the United States since the late 1980s (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019c). Methamphetamine is not
considered teratogenic. However, use in pregnancy is consistently associated
with small-for-gestational age newborns, and children are at risk for
developmental delays and behavioral abnormalities (Derauf, 2012; Eze,
2016; Gabrhelik, 2021; O’Connor, 2020). Behavioral abnormalities have
been described in both infants and school-aged children (Eze, 2016).
Hypertensive complications, placental abruption, preterm birth, and stillbirth
are other associated adverse outcomes (Gorman, 2014).

Opioids
The dramatic rise in narcotic use among nonpregnant and pregnant
individuals has been aptly termed an epidemic. Opioids are not major
teratogens. However, the NBDPS did identify a slightly greater risk for spina
bifida, gastroschisis, and cardiac abnormalities with periconceptional opioid
exposure (Broussard, 2011). The American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2019d) stresses that this potential, small increase in birth
defects with maintenance therapy should be weighed against the risks
associated with uncontrolled opioid abuse. Heroin addiction is associated
with adverse pregnancy outcomes from the effects of repeated narcotic
withdrawal on the fetus and placenta. These include preterm birth, placental
abruption, fetal-growth restriction, and fetal death.
Neonatal narcotic withdrawal, called the neonatal abstinence syndrome,
may manifest in 40 to 90 percent of exposed newborns (Blinick, 1973;
Creanga, 2012; Dashe, 2002; Zelson, 1973). As discussed in Chapter 33 (p.
605), CNS irritability may progress to seizures if untreated and may be
accompanied by tachypnea, apneic episodes, poor feeding, and failure to

thrive. At-risk neonates are closely monitored using a scoring system, and
those severely affected are treated with opioids (Finnegan, 1975). The
proportion of exposed newborns developing neonatal abstinence syndrome
has risen significantly in recent years (Creanga, 2012; Lind, 2015).
The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019d)
recommends that pregnant women with opioid-use disorder be maintained on
opioid-agonist therapy to reduce the risks associated with illicit opioid
abuse and associated behaviors. Treatment includes either buprenorphine,
which may be given in an office-based setting by a licensed buprenorphine
prescriber, or methadone, usually through a licensed outpatient opioid
treatment program. A multidisciplinary treatment program is recommended to
reduce the likelihood of additional opioid abuse while on maintenance
therapy. Withdrawal from methadone during pregnancy is discouraged
because of high relapse rates (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2019d). At Parkland Hospital, pregnant opioid users who
decline maintenance therapy are offered inpatient hospitalization for
controlled methadone taper. The goal is to reduce the likelihood of neonatal
abstinence syndrome (Dashe, 2002; Stewart, 2013).

Miscellaneous Drugs
Phencyclidine (PCP) or angel dust is not associated with congenital
anomalies. More than half of exposed newborns, however, experience
withdrawal symptoms characterized by tremors, jitteriness, and irritability.
Toluene is a common solvent used in paints and glue. Occupational exposure
is reported to have significant fetal risks (Wilkins-Haug, 1997). When
abused by women in early pregnancy, it is associated with toluene
embryopathy, which is phenotypically similar to fetal alcohol syndrome.
Abnormalities include pre- and postnatal growth deficiency, microcephaly,
midface hypoplasia, short palpebral fissures, and wide nasal bridge
(Pearson, 1994). Up to 40 percent of exposed children have developmental
delays (Arnold, 1994).

REFERENCES
Abel EL, Hannigan JH: Maternal risk factors in fetal alcohol syndrome: provocative and permissive
influences. Neurotoxicol Teratol 17(4):445, 1995

Ailes EC, Gilboa SM, Gill SK, et al: Association between antibiotic use among pregnant women and
urinary tract infections in the first trimester and birth defects, National Birth Defects Prevention
Study 1997 to 2011. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol 106(11):940, 2016
Allergan Pharmaceuticals: Avage (Tazarotene) prescribing information. 2019. Available at:
https://media.allergan.com/actavis/actavis/media/allergan-pdf-documents/productprescribing/AVAGE-Cream_pi.pdf. Accessed March 20, 2021
Alsaad AM, Kaplan YC, Koren G: Exposure to fluconazole and risk of congenital malformations in the
offspring: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Reprod Toxicol 52:78, 2015
Alverson CJ, Strickland MJ, Gilboa SM, et al: Maternal smoking and congenital heart defects in the
Baltimore-Washington Infant Study. Pediatrics 127(3):e647, 2011
Alwan S, Chambers CD: Findings from the National Birth Defects Prevention Study: interpretation and
translation for the clinician. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol 103(8):721, 2015
American Academy of Pediatrics, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Guidelines for
Perinatal Care, 8th ed. Elk Grove Village, AAP, 2017
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Lead screening during pregnancy and lactation.
Committee Opinion No. 533, August 2012, Reaffirmed 2019a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Marijuana use during pregnancy and lactation.
Committee Opinion No. 722, October 2017, Reaffirmed 2019b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Methamphetamine abuse in women of
reproductive age. Committee Opinion No. 479, March 2011, Reaffirmed 2019c
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Opioid use and opioid use disorder in pregnancy.
Committee Opinion No. 711, August 2017, Reaffirmed 2019d
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Use of psychiatric medications during pregnancy
and lactation. Practice Bulletin No. 92, April 2008, Reaffirmed 2019f
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Prepregnancy counseling. Committee Opinion
No. 762, December 2018, Reaffirmed 2020a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Tobacco and nicotine cessation during
pregnancy. Committee Opinion No. 807, April 2020b
Anderka MT, Lin AE, Abuelo DN, et al: Reviewing the evidence for mycophenolate mofetil as a new
teratogen: case report and review of the literature. Am J Med Genet A 149A(6):1241, 2009
Anderson TM, Lavista Ferres JM, Ren SY, et al: Maternal smoking before and during pregnancy and
the risk of sudden unexpected infant death. Pediatrics 143(4):e20183325, 2019
Ang-Lee MK, Moss J, Yuan CS: Herbal medicines and perioperative care. JAMA 286(2):208, 2001
Arnold GL, Kirby RS, Langendoerfer S, et al: Toluene embryopathy: clinical delineation and
developmental follow-up. Pediatrics 93(2):216, 1994
Autret-Leca E, Kreft-Jais C, Elefant E, et al: Isotretinoin exposure during pregnancy: assessment of
spontaneous reports in France. Drug Saf 33(8):659, 2010
Bada HS, Bann CM, Bauer CR, et al: Preadolescent behavior problems after prenatal cocaine
exposure: relationship between teacher and caretaker ratings (Maternal Lifestyle Study).
Neurotoxicol Teratol 33(1):78, 2011
Barr M, Cohen MM: ACE inhibitor fetopathy and hypocalvaria: the kidney-skull connection. Teratology
44(5):485, 1991
Bateman BT, Patorno E, Desai RJ, et al: Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors and the risk of
congenital malformations. Obstet Gynecol 129(1):174, 2017
Bausch Health: Bexarotene (Targretin) prescribing information. 2020. Available at:
https://bauschhealth.com/Portals/25/Pdf/PI/TargretinCapsules-PI.pdf. Accessed March 20, 2021

Berard A, Iessa N, Chaabane S, et al: The risk of major cardiac malformations associated with
paroxetine use during the first trimester of pregnancy: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Br J
Clin Pharmacol 81(4):589, 2016
Berard A, Zhao JP, Shui I, et al: Leflunomide use during pregnancy and the risk of adverse pregnancy
outcomes. Ann Rheum Dis 77(4):500, 2018
Billings RJ, Berkowitz RJ, Watson G: Teeth. Pediatrics 113(4Suppl):1120, 2004
Blinick G, Jerez E, Wallach RC: Methadone maintenance, pregnancy, and progeny. JAMA 225(5):477,
1973
Bristol-Myers Squibb Pharmaceuticals: Coumadin (Warfarin) prescribing information. 2019. Available
at: https://packageinserts.bms.com/pi/pi_coumadin.pdf. Accessed March 20, 2021
Bromley R, Weston J, Adab N, et al: Treatment for epilepsy in pregnancy: neurodevelopmental
outcomes in the child. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 10:CD010236, 2014
Broussard CS, Rasmussen SA, Reefhuis J, et al: Maternal treatment with opioid analgesics and risk for
birth defects. Am J Obstet Gynecol 204(4):314.e1, 2011
Brown QL, Sarvet AL, Shmulewitz D, et al: Trends in marijuana use among pregnant and nonpregnant
reproductive-aged women, 2002–2014. JAMA 317(2):207, 2017
Byrne JJ, Saucedo AM, Spong CY: Evaluation of drug labels following the 2015 Pregnancy and
Lactation Labeling Rule. JAMA Netw Open 3(8):e2015094, 2020
Campolongo P, Trezza V, Ratano P, et al: Developmental consequences of perinatal cannabis exposure:
behavioral and neuroendocrine effects in adult rodents. Psychopharmacology (Berl) 214(1):5, 2011
Carey JC, Martinez L, Balken E, et al: Determination of human teratogenicity by the astute clinician
method: review of illustrative agents and a proposal of guidelines. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol
Teratol 85(1):63, 2009
Caspers KM, Romitti RA, Lin S, et al: Maternal periconceptional exposure to cigarette smoking and
congenital limb deficiencies. Pediatr Perinat Epidemiol 27(6):509, 2013
Celgene Corporation: Pomalyst (pomalidomide) prescribing information. 2020. Available at:
https://packageinserts.bms.com/pi/pi_pomalyst.pdf. Accessed March 20, 2021
Celgene Corporation: Revlimid (lenalidomide) prescribing information. 2019. Available at:
https://packageinserts.bms.com/pi/pi_revlimid.pdf Accessed March 20, 2021
Celgene Corporation: Thalomid (thalidomide) prescribing information. 2021. Available at:
https://packageinserts.bms.com/pi/pi_thalomid.pdf Accessed March 20, 2021.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Alcohol use and binge drinking among women of
childbearing age—United States, 2011–2013. MMWR 64(37):1042, 2015
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Guidelines for the identification and management of lead
exposure in pregnant and lactating women. 2010. Available at:
https://www.cdc.gov/nceh/lead/publications/leadandpregnancy2010.pdf. Accessed March 20, 2021
Chambers CD, Johnson DL, Robinson LK, et al: Birth outcomes in women who have taken leflunomide
during pregnancy. Arthritis Rheum 62(5):1494, 2010
Chasnoff IJ, Chisum GM, Kaplan WE: Maternal cocaine use and genitourinary tract malformations.
Teratology 37(3):201, 1988
Chaudhry SA, Jong G, Koren G: The fetal safety of levetiracetam: a systematic review. Reprod Toxicol
46(1):40, 2014
Conner SN, Bedell V, Lipsey K, et al: Maternal marijuana use and adverse neonatal outcomes. Obstet
Gynecol 128(4):713, 2016
Conover EA, Polifka JE: The art and science of teratogen risk communication. Am J Med Genet C
Semin Med Genet 157(3):227, 2011

Cooper WO, Hernandez-Diaz S, Arbogast PG, et al: Major congenital malformation after first-trimester
exposure to ACE inhibitors. N Engl J Med 354(23):2443, 2006
Costei AM, Kozer E, Ho T, et al: Perinatal outcome following third trimester exposure to paroxetine.
Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 156(11):1129, 2002
Cragan JD, Giboa SM: Including prenatal diagnoses in birth defects monitoring: experience of the
Metropolitan Atlanta Congenital Birth Defects Program. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol
85(1)20, 2009
Creanga AA, Sabel JC, Ko JY, et al: Maternal drug use and its effect on neonates: a population-based
study in Washington state. Obstet Gynecol 119(5):924, 2012
Crijns HJ, Straus SM, Gispen-de Wied C, et al: Compliance with pregnancy prevention programmes of
isotretinoin in Europe: a systematic review. Br J Dermatol 164(2):238, 2011
Cross R, Ling C, Day NP, et al: Revisiting doxycycline in pregnancy and early childhood—time to
rebuild its reputation? Expert Opinion Drug Saf 15(3):367, 2016
Cumberland Pharmaceuticals: RediTrex (methotrexate) prescribing information. 2020. Available at:
https://reditrex.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/10/Reditrex-revised-PI_AUG2020-cleanJW.pdf.
Accessed March 20, 2021
Cunnington MC, Weil JG, Messenheimer JA, et al: Final results from 18 years of the International
Lamotrigine Pregnancy Registry. Neurology 76(21):1817, 2011
Dally A: Thalidomide: was the tragedy preventable? Lancet 351:1197, 1998
Dashe JS, Sheffield JS, Olscher DA, et al: Relationship between maternal methadone dosage and
neonatal withdrawal. Obstet Gynecol 100(6):1244, 2002
Dawson AL, Riehle-Colarusso T, Reefhuis J, et al: Maternal exposure to methotrexate and birth
defects: a population-based study. Am J Med Genet 164A(9):2212, 2014
Derauf C, LaGasse LL, Smith LM, et al: Prenatal methamphetamine exposure and inhibitory control
among young school-age children. J Pediatr 161:452, 2012
De Raaf MA, Beekhuijzen M, Guignabert C, et al: Endothelin-1 receptor antagonists in fetal
development and pulmonary arterial hypertension. Reprod Toxicol 56:45, 2015
Del Campo M, Kosaki K, Bennett FC, et al: Developmental delay in fetal aminopterin/methotrexate
syndrome. Teratology 60(1):10, 1999
Diav-Citrin O, Shechtman S, Zvi N, et al: Is it safe to use lamotrigine during pregnancy? A prospective
comparative observational study. Birth Defects Res 109(15):1196, 2017
Dickson B, Mansfield C, Guiahi M, et al: Recommendations from cannabis dispensaries about firsttrimester cannabis use. Obstet Gynecol 131(6):1031, 2018
Dietz PM, England LJ, Shapiro-Mendoza CK, et al: Infant morbidity and mortality attributable to
prenatal smoking in the U.S. Am J Prev Med 39(1):45, 2010
Dolk H, Loane M, Garne E: The prevalence of congenital anomalies in Europe. Adv Exp Med Biol
686:349, 2010
Downing KF, Riehle-Colarusso T, Gilboa SM, et al: Potential risk factors for Ebstein anomaly, National
Birth Defects Prevention Study, 1997–2011. Cardiol Young 29(6):819, 2019
Drake P, Driscoll AK, Mathews TJ: Cigarette smoking during pregnancy: United States, 2016. NCHS
Data Brief (305):1, 2018
D’Souza SW, Black P, Richards B: Smoking in pregnancy: associations with skinfold thickness, maternal
weight gain, and fetal size at birth. BMJ 282(6227):1661, 1981
Ehrenstein V, Sorensen HT, Bakketeig LS, et al: Medical databases in studies of drug teratogenicity:
methodological issues. Clin Epidemiol 2(1):37, 2010

England LJ, Bennett C, Denny CH, et al: Alcohol use and co-use of other substances among pregnant
females aged 12–44 years—United States, 2015–2018. MMWR 69(31):1009, 2020
Enns GM, Roeder E, Chan RT, et al: Apparent cyclophosphamide (Cytoxan) embryopathy: a distinct
phenotype? Am J Med Genet 86(3):237, 1999
Eze N, Smith LM, LaGasse LL, et al: School-aged outcomes following prenatal methamphetamine
exposure: 7.5-year follow-up from the infant development, environment, and lifestyle study. J Pediatr
170:34.e1, 2016
Facchinetti F, Pedrielli G, Benoni G, et al: Herbal supplements in pregnancy: unexpected results from a
multicentre study. Hum Reprod 27(11):3161, 2012
Feldkamp M, Carey JC: Clinical teratology counseling and consultation case report: low dose
methotrexate exposure in the early weeks of pregnancy. Teratology 47(6):533, 1993
Feldkamp ML, Carey JC, Byrne JL, et al: Etiology and clinical presentation of birth defects: population
based study. BMJ 357:j2249, 2017
Finnegan LP, Connaughton JF, Kron RE et al: Neonatal abstinence syndrome: assessment and
management. Addict Dis 2(1–2):141, 1975
Fisher SC, van Zutphen AR, Werler MM, et al: Maternal antihypertensive medication use and selected
birth defects in the National Birth Defects Prevention Study. Birth Defects Res 110(19):1433, 2018
Food and Drug Administration: Content and format of labeling for human prescription drug and
biological products; requirements for pregnancy and lactation labeling. Final rule. Fed Regist
79(233):72036, 2014
Food and Drug Administration: Evaluating the risks of drug exposure in human pregnancies. 2018.
Available at: https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fda-guidancedocuments/evaluating-risks-drug-exposure-human-pregnancies. Accessed March 20, 2021
Food and Drug Administration: FDA drug safety communication: antipsychotic drug labels updated on
use during pregnancy and risk of abnormal muscle movements and withdrawal symptoms in
newborns. 2017. Available at: https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm243903.htm. Accessed
March 20, 2021
Food and Drug Administration: FDA drug safety communication: FDA recommends avoiding use of
NSAIDs in pregnancy at 20 weeks or later because they can result in low amniotic fluid. 2020a.
Available at: www.fda.gov/drugs/drug-safety-and-availability/fda-recommends-avoiding-use-nsaidspregnancy-20-weeks-or-later-because-they-can-result-low-amniotic. Accessed March 20, 2021
Food and Drug Administration: List of pregnancy exposure registries. 2021. Available at:
https://www.fda.gov/science-research/womens-health-research/list-pregnancy-exposure-registries.
Accessed March 20, 2021
Food and Drug Administration: Pregnancy, lactation, and reproductive potential: labeling for human
prescription drug and biological products—content and format guidance for industry. Draft
Guidance, Revision 1. Rockville, Maryland, 2020b. Available at:
https://www.fda.gov/media/90160/download. Accessed March 20, 2021
Food and Drug Administration: Questions & answers from the FDA/EPA advice about eating fish for
women who are or might become pregnant, breastfeeding mothers, and young children. 2019.
Available at: https://www.fda.gov/food/consumers/questions-answers-fdaepa-advice-about-eatingfish-women-who-are-or-might-become-pregnant. Accessed March 20, 2021
Fried PA, Watkinson B, Gray R: Differential effects on cognitive functioning in 13- to 16-year-olds
prenatally exposed to cigarettes and marihuana. Neurotoxicol Teratol 25:427, 2003
Gabrhelik R, Skurtveit S, Nechanska B, et al: Prenatal methamphetamine exposure and adverse
neonatal outcomes: a nationwide cohort study. Eur Addict Res 27(2):97, 2021

Genentech: Herceptin (trastuzumab) prescribing information. 2020. Available at:
https://www.gene.com/download/pdf/herceptin_prescribing.pdf. Accessed March 20, 2021
Gilead Sciences: Letairis (ambrisentan) prescribing information. 2019. Available at:
https://www.gilead.com/∼/media/Files/pdfs/medicines/cardiovascular/letairis/letairis_pi.pdf.
Accessed March 20, 2021
Goldberg O, Moretti M, Levy A, et al: Exposure to nitrofurantoin during early pregnancy and congenital
malformations: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Obstet Gynaecol Can 37(2):150, 2015
Gorman MC, Orme KS, Nguyen NT, et al: Outcomes in pregnancies complicated by methamphetamine
use. Am J Obstet Gynecol 211(4):429.e1, 2014
Gouin K, Murphy K, Shah PS, et al: Effects of cocaine use during pregnancy on low birthweight and
preterm birth: systematic review and meta-analyses. Am J Obstet Gynecol 204(4):340.e1, 2011
Grab D, Paulus WE, Erdmann M, et al: Effects of low-dose aspirin on uterine and fetal blood flow
during pregnancy: results of a randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind trial. Ultrasound Obstet
Gynecol 15(1):19, 2000
Grandjean P, Herz KT: Methylmercury and brain development: imprecision and underestimation of
developmental neurotoxicity in humans. Mt Sinai J Med 78(1):107, 2011
Gregg NM: Congenital cataract following German measles in the mother. Trans Ophthalmol Soc 3:35,
1941
Grimes DA, Schulz KF: False alarms and pseudo-epidemics: the limitations of observational
epidemiology. Obstet Gynecol 120(4):920, 2012
Guerri C, Bazinet A, Riley EP: Foetal alcohol spectrum disorders and alterations in brain and behaviour.
Alcohol 44(2):108, 2009
Guron G, Friberg P: An intact renin-angiotensin system is a prerequisite for normal renal development. J
Hypertension 18(2):123, 2000
Hall HG, McKenna LG, Griffiths DL: Complementary and alternative medicine for induction of labor.
Women Birth 25(3):142, 2012
Hall JG, Pauli RM, Wilson K: Maternal and fetal sequelae of anticoagulation during pregnancy. Am J
Med 68(1):122, 1980
Hammers AL, Sanchez-Ramos L, Kaunitz AM: Antenatal exposure to indomethacin increases the risk
of severe intraventricular hemorrhage, necrotizing enterocolitis, and periventricular leukomalacia: a
systematic review with metaanalysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 212(4):505.e1, 2015a
Hammers AL, Sanchez-Ramos L, Kaunitz AM: Indomethacin as a tocolytic harmful to preterm infant.
Author reply. Am J Obstet Gynecol 213(6):879, 2015b
Hansen C, Andrade SE, Freiman H, et al: Trimethoprim-sulfonamide use during the first trimester of
pregnancy and the risk of congenital anomalies. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf 25(2):170, 2016
Hassouna A, Allam H: Limited dose warfarin throughout pregnancy in patients with mechanical heart
valve prosthesis: a meta-analysis. Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg 18(6):797, 2014
Haugen BR, Alexander EK, Bible KC, et al. 2015 American Thyroid Association management
guidelines for adult patients with thyroid nodules and differentiated thyroid cancer: the American
Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force on thyroid nodules and differentiated thyroid cancer.
Thyroid 26(1):1, 2016
Health and Human Services: Federal policy for the protection of human subjects. Fed Regist 82(2):7149,
2017
Henson LJ, Afsar S, Davenport L, et al: Pregnancy outcomes in patients treated with leflunomide, the
parent compound of the multiple sclerosis drug teriflunomide. Reprod Toxicol 95:45, 2020

Hernandez RK, Werler MM, Romitti P, et al: Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug use among women and
the risk of birth defects. Am J Obstet Gynecol 206(3):228.e1, 2012
Hernandez-Diaz S, Smith CR, Shen A, et al: Comparative safety of antiepileptic drugs during pregnancy.
Neurology 78(21):1692, 2012
Hoeltzenbein M, Elefant E, Vial T, et al: Teratogenicity of mycophenolate confirmed in a prospective
study of the European Network of Teratology Information Services. Am J Med Genet A
158A(3):588, 2012
Hoyme HE, Kalberg WO, Elliott AJ, et al: Updated clinical guidelines for diagnosing fetal alcohol
spectrum disorders. Pediatrics 138(2):e20154256, 2016
Hoyt AT, Canfield MA, Romitti PA, et al: Associations between maternal periconceptional exposure to
secondhand tobacco smoke and major birth defects. Am J Obstet Gynecol 215(5):613, 2016
Huybrechts KF, Bateman BT, Palmsten K, et al: Antidepressant use late in pregnancy and risk of
persistent pulmonary hypertension of the newborn. JAMA 313(21):2142, 2015
Huybrechts KF, Palmsten K, Avorn J, et al: Antidepressant use in pregnancy and the risk of cardiac
defects. N Engl J Med 360(25):2397, 2014
Hyoun SC, Obican SG, Scialli AR: Teratogen update: methotrexate. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol
Teratol 94(4):187, 2012
Janssen Pharmaceutica: Opsumit (macitentan) prescribing information. 2019a. Available at:
https://www.janssenlabels.com/package-insert/product-monograph/prescribinginformation/OPSUMIT-pi.pdf. Accessed March 20, 2021
Janssen Pharmaceutica: Tracleer (bosentan) prescribing information. 2019b. Available at:
https://www.tracleer.com/assets/PDFs/Tracleer_Full_Prescribing_Information.pdf. Accessed
March 20, 2021
Jasper JD, Goel R, Einarson A, et al: Effects of framing on teratogenic risk perception in pregnant
women. Lancet 358(9289):1237, 2001
Jones KL, Smith DW, Ulleland CN, et al: Pattern of malformation in offspring of chronic alcoholic
mothers. Lancet 1(7815):1267, 1973
Jordan AE, Jackson GL, Deardorff D, et al: Serotonin reuptake inhibitor use in pregnancy and the
neonatal behavioral syndrome. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 21(10):745, 2008
Kaplan YC, Ozsarfati J, Etwel F, et al: Pregnancy outcomes following first-trimester exposure to topical
retinoids: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Br J Dermatol 173(5):1117, 2015
Kennedy DA, Lupattelli A, Koren G, et al: Safety classification of herbal medicines used in pregnancy
in a multinational study. BMC Complement Altern Med 16(1):102, 2016
Khabour OF, Alzoubi KH, Al-Sheyab N, et al: Investigating the effects of exposure to waterpipe smoke
on pregnancy outcomes using an animal model. Nicotine Tob Res 18:585, 2016
Khoury MJ, James LM, Flanders WD, et al: Interpretation of recurring weak association obtained from
epidemiologic studies of suspected human teratogens. Teratology 46(1):69, 1992
Kieler H, Artama M, Engeland A, et al: Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors during pregnancy and
risk of persistent pulmonary hypertension in the newborn: population based cohort study from the
five Nordic countries. BMJ 344:d8012, 2012
Kim HO, Lee K, Lee SM, et al: Association between pregnancy outcomes and radioactive iodine
treatment after thyroidectomy among women with thyroid cancer. JAMA Intern Med 180(1):54,
2020
King RW, Baca MJ, Armenti VT, et al: Pregnancy outcomes related to mycophenolate exposure in
female kidney transplant recipients. Am J Transplant 17(1):151, 2017

Kirshon B, Wasserstrum N, Willis R, et al: Teratogenic effects of first trimester cyclophosphamide
therapy. Obstet Gynecol 72(3Pt2):462, 1988
Klarskov P, Andersen JT, Jimenez-Solem E, et al: Short-acting sulfonamides near term and neonatal
jaundice. Obstet Gynecol 122(1):105, 2013
Koren G, Bologa M, Long D, et al: Perception of teratogenic risk by pregnant women exposed to drugs
and chemicals during the first trimester. Am J Obstet Gynecol 160(5Pt1):1190, 1989
Koren G, Pastuszak A, Ito S: Drugs in pregnancy. N Engl J Med 338(16):1128, 1998
Krishnasamy VP, Hallowell BD, Ko JY, et al: Update: characteristics of a nationwide outbreak of ecigarette, or vaping, product use–associated lung injury—United States, August 2019–January 2020.
MMWR 69(3):90, 2020
Kummet CM, Moreno LM, Wilcox AJ, et al. Passive smoke exposure as a risk factor for oral clefts–a
large international population-based study. Am J Epidemiol 183(9):834, 2016
Kutscher AH, Zegarelli EV, Tovell HM, et al: Discoloration of deciduous teeth induced by administration
of tetracycline antepartum. Am J Obstet Gynecol 96(2):291, 1966
Lammer EJ, Chen DT, Hoar RM, et al: Retinoic acid embryopathy. N Engl J Med 313(14):837, 1985
Lange S, Probst C, Gmel G, et al: Global prevalence of fetal alcohol spectrum disorder among children
and youth: a systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA Pediatr 171(10):948, 2017
Lemoine P, Harouusseau H, Borteyru JP, et al: Les enfants de parents alcooliques: anomalies observées,
a propos de 127 cas. Ouest Med 21:476, 1968
Lenz W, Knapp K: Thalidomide embryopathy. Arch Environ Health 5:100, 1962
Leong C, Chateau D, Dahl M, et al: Prescription medication use during pregnancies that resulted in
births and abortions (2001-2013): a retrospective population-based study in a Canadian population.
PLoS One 14(3):e0211319, 2019
Li DK, Yang C, Andrade S, et al: Maternal exposure to angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors in the
first trimester and risk of malformations in offspring: a retrospective cohort study. BMJ 343:d5931,
2011
Lin S, Munsie JP, Herdt-Losavio ML, et al: Maternal asthma medication use and the risk of selected
birth defects. Pediatrics 129(2):317, 2012
Lind JN, Petersen EE, Lederer PA, et al: Infant and maternal characteristics in neonatal abstinence
syndrome—selected hospitals in Florida, 2010–2011. MMWR 64(8):213, 2015
Lipshultz SE, Frassica JJ, Orav EJ: Cardiovascular abnormalities in infants prenatally exposed to
cocaine. J Pediatr 118(1):44, 1991
Malik S, Cleves MA, Honein MA, et al: Maternal smoking and congenital heart defects. Pediatrics
121(4):e810, 2008
Martinez-Frias ML, Czeizel AE, Rodriguez-Pinilla E, et al: Smoking during pregnancy and Poland
sequence: results of a population-based registry and a case-control registry. Teratology 59(1):35,
1999
May PA, Baete A, Russo J, et al: Prevalence and characteristics of fetal alcohol spectrum disorders.
Pediatrics 134(5):855, 2014
May PA, Gossage JP, Kalberg WO, et al: Prevalence and epidemiologic characteristics of FASD from
various research methods with an emphasis on recent in-school studies. Dev Disabil Res Rev
15(3):176, 2009
McKeigue PM, Lamm SH, Linn S, et al: Bendectin and birth defects: I. A meta-analysis of the
epidemiologic studies. Teratology 50(1):27, 1994
Meador KJ, Baker GA, Browning N, et al: Cognitive function at 3 years of age after fetal exposure to
antiepileptic drugs. N Engl J Med 360(16):1597, 2009

Merck: Rebetol (ribavirin) prescribing information. 2020. Available at:
https://www.merck.com/product/usa/pi_circulars/r/rebetol/rebetol_pi.pdf. Accessed March 20, 2021
Merlob P, Stahl B, Klinger G: Tetrada of the possible mycophenolate mofetil embryopathy: a review.
Reprod Toxicol 28(1):105, 2009
Metz TD, Borgelt LM: Marijuana use in pregnancy and while breastfeeding. Obstet Gynecol
132(5):1198, 2018
Mitchell AA, Gilboa SM, Werler MM, et al: Medication use during pregnancy, with particular focus on
prescription drugs: 1976–2008. Am J Obstet Gynecol 205(1):51.e1, 2011
Mølgaard-Nielsen D, Hviid A: Newer-generation antiepileptic drugs and the risk of major birth defects.
JAMA 305(19):1996, 2011
Mølgaard-Nielsen D, Pasternak B, Hviid A: Use of oral fluconazole during pregnancy and the risk of
birth defects. N Engl J Med 369(9):830, 2013
Munoz Balbontin Y, Stewart D, Shetty A, et al: Herbal medicinal product use during pregnancy and the
postnatal period: a systematic review. Obstet Gynecol 133(5):920, 2019
Munsie JW, Lin S, Browne ML, et al: Maternal bronchodilator use and the risk of oral clefts. Hum
Reprod 26(11):3147, 2011
Murphy VE, Fittock RJ, Zarzycki PK, et al: Metabolism of synthetic steroids by the human placenta.
Placenta 28(1):39, 2007
National Toxicology Program: NTP monograph: developmental effects and pregnancy outcomes
associated with cancer chemotherapy use during pregnancy. NTP Monog 2:1, 2013
Nordeng H, Bayne K, Havnen GC, et al: Use of herbal drugs during pregnancy among 600 Norwegian
women in relation to concurrent use of conventional drugs and pregnancy outcome. Complement
Ther Clin Pract 17(3):147, 2011
Oakley GP, Erickson JD: Vitamin A and birth defects. N Engl J Med 333(21):1414, 1995
O’Connor A, Seeber C, Harris E, et al: Developmental outcomes following prenatal exposure to
methamphetamine: a western Australian perspective. J Paediatr Child Health 56(3):372, 2020
Ornoy A, Koren G: Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors during pregnancy: do we have now more
definite answers related to prenatal exposure? Birth Defects Res 109(12):898, 2017
Pallivalapila AR, Stewart D, Shetty A, et al: Use of complementary and alternative medicines during the
third trimester. Obstet Gynecol 125(1):204, 2015
Panchaud A, Csajka C, Merlob P, et al: Pregnancy outcome following exposure to topical retinoids: a
multicenter prospective study. J Clin Pharmacol 52(12):1844, 2012
Park-Wyllie L, Mazzota P, Pastuszak A, et al: Birth defects after maternal exposure to corticosteroids:
prospective cohort study and meta-analysis of epidemiological studies. Teratology 62(6):385, 2000
Patorno E, Huybrechts KF, Bateman BT, et al: Lithium use in pregnancy and the risk of cardiac
malformations. N Engl J Med 376(23):2245, 2017
Pearson MA, Hoyme HE, Seaver LH, et al: Toluene embryopathy: delineation of the phenotype and
comparison with fetal alcohol syndrome. Pediatrics 93(2):211, 1994
Pryde PG, Sedman AB, Nugent CE, et al: Angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor fetopathy. J Am Soc
Nephrol 3(9):1575, 1993
Rasanen J, Jouppila P: Fetal cardiac function and ductus arteriosus during indomethacin and sulindac
therapy for threatened preterm labor: a randomized study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 173(1):20, 1995
Reefhuis J, Gilboa SM, Anderka M, et al: The National Birth Defects Prevention Study: a review of the
methods. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol 103(8):656, 2015
Richardson S, Browne ML, Rasmussen SA, et al: Associations between periconceptional alcohol
consumption and craniosynostosis, omphalocele, and gastroschisis. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol

Teratol 91(7):623, 2011
Rocheleau CM, Bertke SJ, Lawson CC, et al: Maternal occupational pesticide exposure and risk of
congenital heart defects in the National Birth Defects Prevention Study. Birth Defects Res A Clin
Mol Teratol 103(10):823, 2015
Rothman KJ, Moore LL, Singer MR, et al: Teratogenicity of high vitamin A intake. N Engl J Med
333(21):1369, 1995
Sabbagh HJ, Hassan MH, Innes NP, et al: Passive smoking in the etiology of non-syndromic orofacial
clefts: a systematic review and meta-analysis. PLOS One 10(3):e0116963, 2015
Sadler TW (ed): Langman’s Medical Embryology, 6th ed. Baltimore, Williams & Wilkins, 1990, p 130
Sanofi-Aventis: Arava (leflunomide) prescribing information. 2016. Available at:
https://products.sanofi.us/arava/arava.html. Accessed March 20, 2021
Scheuerle AE, Holmes LB, Albano JD, et al: Levetiracetam Pregnancy Registry: final results and a
review of the impact of registry methodology and definitions on the prevalence of major congenital
malformations. Birth Defects Res 111(13):872, 2019
Schuurman TN, Witteveen PO, van der Wall E, et al: Tamoxifen and pregnancy: an absolute
contraindication? Breast Can 175(1):17, 2019
Shepard TH: Annual commentary on human teratogens. Teratology 66(6):275, 2002a
Shepard TH: Letters: “proof” of human teratogenicity. Teratology 50(2):97, 1994
Shepard TH, Brent RL, Friedman JM, et al: Update on new developments in the study of human
teratogens. Teratology 65(4):153, 2002b
Siu AL: Behavioral and pharmacotherapy interventions for tobacco smoking cessation in adults,
including pregnant women: U.S. Preventive Services Task Force Recommendation Statement. U.S.
Preventive Services Task Force. Ann Intern Med 163:622, 2015
Spindel ER, McEvoy CT: The role of nicotine in the effects of maternal smoking during pregnancy on
lung development and childhood respiratory disease. Implications for dangers of e-cigarettes. Am J
Respir Crit Care Med 193(5):486, 2016
Spong CY, Bianchi DW: Improving public health requires inclusion of underrepresented populations in
research. JAMA 319(4):337, 2018
Stewart RD, Nelson DB, Adhikari EH, et al: The obstetrical and neonatal impact of maternal opioid
detoxification in pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 209(3):267, 2013
Stiefel Laboratories: Soriatane (acitretin) prescribing information. 2017. Available at:
https://gskpro.com/content/dam/global/hcpportal/en_US/Prescribing_Information/Soriatane/pdf/SOR
IATANE-PI-MG.PDF. Accessed March 20, 2021
Stillerman KP, Mattison DR, Giudice LC, et al: Environmental exposures and adverse pregnancy
outcomes: a review of the science. Reprod Sci 15(7):631, 2008
Stingone JA, Luben TJ, Carmichael SL, et al: Maternal exposure to nitrogen dioxide, intake of methyl
nutrients and congenital heart defects in offspring. Am J Epidemiol 186(6):719, 2017
Strandberg TE, Andersson S, Jarvenpaa AL, et al: Preterm birth and licorice consumption during
pregnancy. Am J Epidemiol 156(9):803, 2002
Strandberg-Larsen K, Nielsen NR, Grønbaek M, et al: Binge drinking in pregnancy and risk of fetal
death. Obstet Gynecol 111(3):602, 2008
Streissguth AP, Clarren SK, Jones KL: Natural history of fetal alcohol syndrome: a 10-year follow-up of
eleven patients. Lancet 2:85, 1985
Sullivan PM, Dervan LA, Reiger S, et al: Risk of congenital heart defects in the offspring of smoking
mothers: a population-based study. J Pediatr 166(4):978, 2015

Teratology Society Public Affairs Committee: Causation in teratology-related litigation. Birth Def Res A
Clin Mol Teratol 73(6):421, 2005
Tinker SC, Gilboa SM, Moore CA, et al: Specific birth defects in pregnancies of women with diabetes:
National Birth Defects Prevention Study, 1997–2011. Am J Obstet Gynecol 222(2):176, 2020
Vajda FJ, O’Brien TJ, Lander CM, et al: Antiepileptic drug combinations not involving valproate and the
risk of fetal malformations. Epilepsia 57(7):1048, 2016
van der Heijden BJ, Carlus C, Narcy F, et al: Persistent anuria, neonatal death, and renal microcystic
lesions after prenatal exposure to indomethacin. Am J Obstet Gynecol 171(3):617, 1994
Van Driel D, Wesseling J, Sauer PJ, et al: Teratogen update: fetal effects after in utero exposure to
coumarins overview of cases, follow-up findings, and pathogenesis. Teratology 66(3):127, 2002
Van Gelder MM, Reefhuis J, Caton AR, et al: Maternal periconceptional illicit drug use and the risk of
congenital malformations. Epidemiology 20:60, 2009
Vargesson N: Thalidomide-induced teratogenesis: history and mechanisms. Birth Defects Res C
Embryo Today 105(2):140, 2015
Walker MP, Moore TR, Brace RA: Indomethacin and arginine vasopressin interaction in the fetal
kidney. A mechanism of oliguria. Am J Obstet Gynecol 171(5):1234, 1994
Warkany J: Warfarin embryopathy. Teratology 14(2):205, 1976
Weber-Schoendorfer C, Kayser A, Tissen-Diabate T, et al: Fetotoxic risk of AT1 blockers exceeds that
of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors: an observational study. J Hypertens 38(1):133, 2020
Werler MM: Teratogen update: smoking and reproductive outcomes. Teratology 55(6):382, 1997
Weston J, Bromley R, Jackson CF, et al: Monotherapy treatment of epilepsy in pregnancy: congenital
malformation outcomes in the child. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 11:CD010224, 2016
West-Ward Pharmaceuticals: Lithium prescribing information. 2020. Available at:
dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/drugInfo.cfm?setid=7dc9c6d2-6d9a-49e4-a8ab-437b0ed5f84e.
Accessed March 20, 2021
Wiesner J, Knoss W: Herbal medicinal products in pregnancy—which data are available? Reprod
Toxicol 72:142, 2017
Wilkins-Haug L: Teratogen update: toluene. Teratology 55(2):145, 1997
Willford JA, Chandler LS, Goldschmidt L, et al: Effects of prenatal tobacco, alcohol and marijuana
exposure on processing speed, visual-motor coordination, and inter-hemispheric transfer.
Neurotoxicol Teratol 32:580, 2010
Williams JF, Smith VC, American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on Substance Abuse: Fetal alcohol
spectrum disorders. Pediatrics 136(5):e1395, 2015
Wurst KE, Poole C, Ephross SA, et al: First trimester paroxetine use and the prevalence of congenital,
specifically cardiac defects: a meta-analysis of epidemiological studies. Birth Defect Res A Clin Mol
Teratol 88(3):159, 2010
Yacobi S, Ornoy A: Is lithium a real teratogen? What can we conclude from the prospective versus
retrospective studies? A review. Isr J Psychiatry Relat Sci 45(2):95, 2008
Yorifuji T: Lessons from an early-stage epidemiological study of Minimata disease. J Epidemiol 30(1):12,
2020
Yoshihara A, Noh JY, Watanabe N, et al: Substituting potassium iodide for methimazole as the treatment
for Graves’ disease during the first trimester may reduce the incidence of congenital anomalies: a
retrospective study at a single medical institution in Japan. Thyroid 25(10):1155, 2015
Yoshihara A, Noh J, Yamaguchi T, et al: Treatment of Graves’ disease with antithyroid drugs in the first
trimester of pregnancy and the prevalence of congenital malformation. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
97:2396, 2012

Young-Wolff KC, Sarovar V, Tucker LY et al: Trends in marijuana use among pregnant women with and
without nausea and vomiting in pregnancy, 2009–2016. Drug Alcohol Depend 196(1): 66, 2019
Zelson C, Lee SJ, Casalino M: Neonatal narcotic addiction: comparative effects of maternal intake of
heroin and methadone. N Engl J Med 289(23):1216, 1973
Zhu Y, Bateman BT, Gray KJ, et al: Oral fluconazole use in the first trimester and risk of congenital
malformations: population based cohort study. BMJ 369:m1494, 2020

