CHAPTER 18

Fetal Disorders

FETAL ANEMIA
RED CELL ALLOIMMUNIZATION
FETOMATERNAL HEMORRHAGE
FETAL THROMBOCYTOPENIA
HYDROPS FETALIS
MIRROR SYNDROME
REFERENCES
Fetal disorders may be acquired—such as alloimmunization; may be genetic
—congenital adrenal hyperplasia; or may be sporadic—like many structural
malformations. This chapter reviews fetal anemia and thrombocytopenia and
immune and nonimmune fetal hydrops. Hydrops is perhaps the quintessential
fetal disorder, as it can be a manifestation of severe illness from a wide
variety of etiologies. Fetal structural malformations are reviewed in Chapter
15, genetic abnormalities in Chapters 16 and 17, and conditions amenable to
medical or surgical fetal therapy in Chapter 19. Because congenital
infections arise as a result of maternal infection or colonization, they are
discussed in Chapters 67 and 68.

FETAL ANEMIA

Anemia may result from alloimmunization, infection, genetic disorders, or
fetomaternal hemorrhage. Red cell alloimmunization results from
transplacental passage of maternal antibodies that destroy fetal red cells.
Alloimmunization leads to overproduction of immature fetal and neonatal red
cells—erythroblastosis fetalis—a condition now referred to as hemolytic
disease of the fetus and newborn (HDFN). Congenital infections are also
associated with fetal anemia, particularly parvovirus B19, discussed in
Chapter 67 (p. 1191). In Southeast Asian populations, α0-thalassemia is a
common cause of severe anemia and nonimmune hydrops. Rare genetic
causes of anemia include red cell production disorders—such as DiamondBlackfan anemia and Fanconi anemia; red cell enzymopathies—glucose-6phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency and pyruvate kinase deficiency; red cell
structural abnormalities—hereditary spherocytosis and elliptocytosis;
lysosomal storage diseases—Gaucher disease, Niemann-Pick, and
mucopolysaccharidosis VII; and myeloproliferative disorders—leukemias.
Fetomaternal hemorrhage is discussed on page 357. Fetal anemia is typically
identified through Doppler evaluation of the fetal middle cerebral artery
(MCA) peak systolic velocity (p. 355).
Progressive fetal anemia from any cause leads to heart failure, hydrops
fetalis, and ultimately death. Treatment with intrauterine transfusions can be
lifesaving. Severely anemic fetuses transfused in utero have survival rates
exceeding 90 percent, and even in cases of hydrops fetalis, survival rates
approach 80 percent (Lindenberg, 2013; Mizuuchi, 2021; Zwiers, 2017).

■ Red Cell Alloimmunization
Currently, 36 different blood group systems and 360 erythrocyte antigens are
recognized by the International Society of Blood Transfusion (Storry, 2019).
Blood banks routinely screen for erythrocyte antigens. Some are
immunologically and genetically important, but many are rare and of little
clinical significance. An individual who lacks a specific erythrocyte antigen
may produce antibodies against it when exposed to that antigen. Such
antibodies can prove harmful if an individual receives an incompatible blood
transfusion. During pregnancy, these antibodies may cross the placenta and
lyse fetal red cells that contain the associated antigens, resulting in anemia.
The fetus typically inherits at least one erythrocyte antigen from the father
that is lacking in the mother. The pregnant woman may become sensitized if

enough fetal red cells reach her circulation to elicit an immune response.
Importantly, alloimmunization is uncommon for the following reasons: (1)
low prevalence of incompatible erythrocyte antigens; (2) insufficient
transplacental passage of fetal antigens and maternal antibodies; (3)
maternal-fetal ABO incompatibility, which leads to rapid clearance of fetal
erythrocytes before they elicit an immune response; (4) variable antigenicity;
and (5) variable maternal immune response to the antigen.
The prevalence of red cell alloimmunization in pregnancy approximates
1 percent (Bollason, 2017; Koelewijn, 2008). Most cases of severe fetal
anemia requiring antenatal transfusion are attributable to anti-D, anti-Kell,
anti-c, or anti-E alloimmunization (de Haas, 2015).
Maternal blood type and antibody screen are routinely assessed at the
first prenatal visit. Unbound antibodies in maternal serum are detected with
an indirect Coombs test (Chap. 10, p. 178). If the result is positive, the
specific antibodies are identified; their immunoglobulin subtype is
determined as either immunoglobulin G (IgG) or M (IgM); and the titer is
quantified. Only IgG antibodies are concerning, because IgM antibodies do
not cross the placenta. Selected antibodies and their potential to cause fetal
hemolytic anemia are listed in Table 18-1. The critical titer is the level at
which significant fetal anemia may develop. It may vary according to
antibody and laboratory but is usually between 1:8 and 1:32. If the
laboratory’s critical titer threshold for anti-D antibodies is 1:16, a titer
≥1:16 indicates the possibility of severe hemolytic disease. An important
exception is Kell sensitization, which is discussed on page 354.
TABLE 18-1. Selected Red Cell Antigens and Their Relationship to Fetal
Hemolytic Disease

CDE (Rh) Blood Group Incompatibility
The CDE system includes five erythrocyte antigens: C, c, D, E, and e. There
is no “d” antigen, and D-negativity is defined as the absence of the D antigen.
Although most people are D positive or negative, more than 200 D antigen
variants exist (Daniels, 2013). The CDE group was formerly termed Rh or
rhesus, due to a misconception that red cells from rhesus monkeys expressed
these human antigens. In transfusion medicine, “rhesus” is no longer used
(Sandler, 2017).
CDE antigens are clinically important. D-negative individuals may
become sensitized after a single exposure to as little as 0.1 mL of fetal

erythrocytes (Bowman, 1988). The two responsible genes—RHD and RHCE
—are located on the short arm of chromosome 1 and are inherited together,
independent of other blood group genes. Antigen positivity varies according
to race and ethnicity. Nearly 85 percent of non-Hispanic white Americans
are D-positive, as are approximately 90 percent of Native Americans, 93
percent of African Americans and Hispanic Americans, and 99 percent of
Asian Americans (Garratty, 2004).
The prevalence of D alloimmunization complicating pregnancy ranges
from 0.5 to 0.9 percent (Koelewijn, 2008; Martin, 2005). Without anti-D
immune globulin prophylaxis, a D-negative woman delivered of a Dpositive, ABO-compatible newborn has a 16-percent likelihood of
developing alloimmunization. Two percent will become sensitized by the
time of delivery, 7 percent by 6 months postpartum, and the remaining 7
percent will be “sensibilized”—producing detectable antibodies only in a
subsequent pregnancy (Bowman, 1985). If there is ABO incompatibility, the
D alloimmunization risk decreases to 2 percent because erythrocyte
destruction of incompatible cells limits sensitization (Bowman, 2006). D
sensitization may also occur following first-trimester pregnancy
complications, prenatal diagnostic procedures, and maternal trauma (Table
18-2).
TABLE 18-2. Causes of Fetomaternal Hemorrhage Associated with Red
Cell Antigen Alloimmunizationa

The C, c, E, and e antigens have lower immunogenicity than the D antigen
but can cause hemolytic disease. Sensitization to E, c, and C antigens
complicates approximately 0.3 percent of pregnancies in screening studies
and accounts for about 30 percent of red cell alloimmunization cases
(Howard, 1998; Koelewijn, 2008). Anti-E alloimmunization is the most
common, but the need for fetal or neonatal transfusions is greater with anti-c
alloimmunization than with anti-E or anti-C (de Haas, 2015; Hackney, 2004;
Koelewijn, 2008).
The Grandmother Effect. In virtually all pregnancies, small amounts of
maternal blood enter the fetal circulation. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
has identified maternal D-positive DNA in peripheral blood from preterm
and full-term D-negative newborns (Lazar, 2006). Thus, a D-negative female

fetus exposed to maternal D-positive red cells might develop sensitization,
and later might produce anti-D antibodies before or during pregnancy. This
mechanism is called the grandmother effect because the fetus in the current
pregnancy is jeopardized by maternal antibodies that were initially provoked
by his or her grandmother’s erythrocytes.

Alloimmunization to Minor Antigens
Because routine administration of anti-D immune globulin prevents anti-D
alloimmunization, proportionately more cases of hemolytic disease are
caused by red cell antigens other than D (American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists, 2019a; Koelewijn, 2008). These are also known as minor
antigens. Kell antigens are among the most frequent. Other antigens with
potential to cause severe alloimmunization include Duffy group A—Fya,
MNS, and Kidd—Jka (de Hass, 2015; Moise, 2008). In most cases,
sensitization to a minor antigen results from an incompatible blood
transfusion. However, if an IgG red cell antibody is detected and there is any
doubt as to its significance, the pregnancy should be evaluated for hemolytic
disease.
Only a few blood group antigens pose no fetal risk. Lewis antibodies—
Lea and Leb—are cold agglutinins, as are I antibodies. They are
predominantly IgM and are not expressed on fetal red cells (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019a). Another antibody that
does not cause fetal hemolysis is Duffy group B—Fyb.
Kell Alloimmunization. Approximately 90 percent of non-Hispanic white
Americans and up to 98 percent of African Americans are Kell antigen
negative. Kell type is not routinely determined. Transfusion history is
important, as nearly 90 percent of Kell sensitization cases result from
transfusion with Kell-positive blood.
Kell sensitization may develop more rapidly and may be more severe
than with sensitization to D and other blood group antigens. This is because
Kell antibodies attach to erythrocyte precursors in the fetal bone marrow and
thereby impair the normal hemopoietic response to anemia. With fewer
erythrocytes produced, there is less hemolysis, and thus severe anemia may
not be predicted by the maternal Kell antibody titer.

Slootweg and colleagues (2018) reviewed 93 pregnancies with Kell
alloimmunization in which the fetus was confirmed to be Kell-positive. They
found that a titer of 1:4 had 100 percent sensitivity, 27 percent specificity,
and 60 percent positive predictive value for transfusion requirement in the
fetal or neonatal period. More than 50 percent of Kell antigen–positive
fetuses ultimately needed transfusions. Given the potential for severe anemia,
the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019a) has
recommended that antibody titers not be used to monitor Kell-sensitized
pregnancies.

ABO Blood Group Incompatibility
Incompatibility for the major blood group antigens A and B is the most
common cause of hemolytic disease in newborns, but it does not cause
appreciable hemolysis in the fetus. This is because most anti-A and anti-B
antibodies are IgM types and do not cross the placenta. Also, fetal red cells
have fewer A and B antigenic sites than adult cells and are thus less
immunogenic. Approximately 20 percent of newborns have ABO blood
group incompatibility, although only 5 percent are affected clinically. In such
cases, the resulting anemia is typically mild.
The condition differs from CDE incompatibility in several respects.
First, ABO incompatibility is often seen in firstborn neonates, unlike
sensitization to other blood group antigens. This is because most group O
women have developed anti-A and anti-B isoagglutinins before pregnancy
from exposure to bacteria displaying similar antigens. Additionally, ABO
alloimmunization rarely becomes more severe in successive pregnancies.
Fetal surveillance and early delivery are not indicated in pregnancies with
prior ABO incompatibility. Postnatally however, neonates are evaluated for
hyperbilirubinemia, which may require treatment with phototherapy or
occasionally transfusion (Chap. 33, p. 606).

■ Management of the Alloimmunized Pregnancy
Of fetuses from D-alloimmunized pregnancies, 25 to 30 percent will have
mild to moderate hemolytic anemia, and up to 25 percent have anemia severe
enough to cause hydrops (Tannirandorn, 1990). If alloimmunization is
detected and the titer is below the critical value, the titer is generally
repeated every 4 weeks for the duration of the pregnancy (American College

of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019a). In any pregnancy in which the
antibody titer has reached a critical value, there is no benefit to repeating the
titer. The pregnancy is at risk even if the titer drops, and further evaluation is
required. Similarly, if a prior pregnancy was complicated by
alloimmunization, the pregnancy is considered at risk regardless of titer.

Fetal Risk Assessment
The presence of anti-D antibodies reflects maternal sensitization but does not
indicate whether the fetus is D-positive or D-negative. Up to 40 percent of
D-negative pregnant women carry a D-negative fetus. If a woman is
sensitized from a prior pregnancy, her antibody titer may rise during the
current pregnancy even if the current fetus is D-negative because of an
amnestic response. In a non-Hispanic white couple in which the woman is
D-negative, there is an 85-percent chance that the man is D-positive.
However, there is a 60-percent likelihood that he is heterozygous at the Dlocus, and only half of his children will be at risk for hemolytic disease.
Initial evaluation of alloimmunization begins with determining the
paternal erythrocyte antigen status. Provided that paternity is certain, if the
father is negative for the red cell antigen to which the mother is sensitized,
the pregnancy is not at risk. A prior blood transfusion may be the cause of
alloimmunization to a red cell antigen other than D. In a D-alloimmunized
pregnancy in which the father is D-positive, it is helpful to determine
paternal zygosity for the D antigen using DNA-based analysis. If the father is
heterozygous—or if paternity is not known—the woman should be offered
assessment of fetal genotype. Traditionally, this was done with amniocentesis
and PCR testing of uncultured amniocytes, which has a positive predictive
value of 100 percent and negative predictive value of approximately 97
percent (Van den Veyver, 1996). Fetal testing for other antigens—such as E/e,
C/c, Duffy, Kell, Kidd, and M/N—also is available with this method.
Chorionic villus sampling is not recommended because of greater risk for
fetomaternal hemorrhage and subsequent worsening of alloimmunization
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019a).
Noninvasive fetal D genotyping has been performed using cell-free DNA
(cfDNA) from maternal plasma (Chap. 17, p. 335). The reported sensitivity
exceeds 99 percent, the specificity exceeds 95 percent, and positive or
negative predictive values are similarly very high (Johnson, 2017; Moise,
2016; Pazourkova, 2021). Fetal D genotyping with cfDNA is routinely used

in parts of Europe but is not yet a widely used clinical tool in the United
States (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019a). Two
potential indications for cfDNA use in D-negative pregnant women are: (1)
in the setting of D alloimmunization, testing can identify fetuses who are also
D-negative and do not require anemia surveillance, and (2) in women
without D alloimmunization, anti-D immune globulin might be withheld if the
fetus is D negative. In the case of the latter, the American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019b) does not recommend routine
cfDNA screening in D-negative pregnancies until it has been demonstrated to
be cost-effective.
Management of the alloimmunized pregnancy typically consists of
maternal antibody titer surveillance followed by ultrasound monitoring of the
fetal MCA peak systolic velocity if a critical antibody titer is reached. As
noted earlier (p. 354), pregnancies with Kell alloimmunization often receive
ultrasound surveillance regardless of titer. Fetal blood sampling is generally
performed if the MCA peak systolic velocity exceeds the threshold for
severe anemia, with plan for concurrent intrauterine transfusion as needed.
Spectrophotometric analysis of amnionic fluid bilirubin, also known as the
ΔOD450 test, is no longer recommended (Society for Maternal-Fetal
Medicine, 2015a).
Recent efforts have focused on use of maternal intravenous
immunoglobulin (IVIG) therapy to postpone the initial intrauterine transfusion
to beyond 20 weeks in severely affected pregnancies (Maisonneuve, 2021).
Its mechanism of action is unclear, but IVIG therapy has been reported to
delay need for transfusion by an average of 3 weeks and to lower the risk for
hydrops (Zwiers, 2018).
Middle Cerebral Artery Doppler Velocimetry. Serial measurement of the
peak systolic velocity of the fetal MCA is the recommended test to detect
fetal anemia (Society for Maternal–Fetal Medicine, 2015a). The anemic fetus
shunts blood preferentially to the brain to maintain adequate oxygenation.
The velocity rises because of increased cardiac output and decreased blood
viscosity. Measurement technique is discussed in Chapter 14 (p. 262).
In a landmark study, Mari and coworkers (2000) measured the MCA
peak systolic velocity serially in 111 fetuses at risk for anemia and in 265
normal control fetuses. The threshold value of 1.5 multiples of the median
(MoM) for gestational age correctly identified all fetuses with moderate or

severe anemia. This provided a sensitivity of 100 percent, with a falsepositive rate of 12 percent.
MCA peak systolic velocity is followed serially, and values are plotted
on a curve like the one shown in Figure 18-1. If the velocity is between 1.0
and 1.5 MoM and the slope is rising—such that the value is approaching 1.5
MoM—MCA Doppler surveillance is generally performed at least weekly.
The false-positive rate of MCA peak systolic velocity increases significantly
beyond 34 weeks’ gestation and stems from the normal rise in cardiac output
that develops at this gestational age (Moise, 2008; Zimmerman, 2002). At
Parkland Hospital, MCA peak systolic velocity is not measured beyond 35
weeks, but ultrasound evaluation for hydrops is performed as needed.

FIGURE 18-1 Doppler measurements of the peak systolic velocity in the middle cerebral artery
(MCA) in 165 fetuses at risk for severe anemia. The blue line indicates the median peak systolic
velocity in normal pregnancies, and the red line shows 1.5 multiples of the median. (Reproduced with
permission from Oepkes D, Seaward PG, Vandenbussche et al: Doppler ultrasonography versus
amniocentesis to predict fetal anemia, N Engl J Med. 2006 Jul 13;355(2):156–164.)

Fetal Blood Transfusion
If the MCA peak systolic velocity exceeds 1.5 MoM or if hydrops develops
and anemia is the leading etiology, fetal blood sampling and intrauterine
transfusion should be considered. Fetal transfusion is typically performed
prior to 34 to 35 weeks’ gestation (Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine,
2015a). Later in gestation, the benefits of transfusion may be outweighed by

the risks of delaying delivery. Transfusion is most commonly intravascular.
However, the umbilical vein may be too narrow in the early second trimester
to readily permit needle entry, and severe hemolysis may necessitate
intraperitoneal fetal transfusion. In the setting of hydrops, peritoneal
absorption may be impaired, and some prefer to transfuse into both the fetal
peritoneal cavity and umbilical vein.
Transfusion is generally recommended only if the fetal hematocrit is <30
percent (Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, 2015a). If hydrops has
developed, the hematocrit is usually 15 percent or lower. The red cells
transfused are type O, D-negative, cytomegalovirus-negative, packed to a
hematocrit of approximately 80 percent to prevent volume overload,
irradiated to prevent fetal graft-versus-host reaction, and leukocyte-poor. The
fetal–placental volume allows rapid infusion of a relatively large quantity of
blood. Before transfusion, a paralytic agent such as vecuronium may be given
to the fetus to minimize movement. In a nonhydropic fetus, the target
hematocrit is 40 to 50 percent. The volume transfused may be estimated by
multiplying the estimated fetal weight in grams by 0.02 for each 10-percent
rise in hematocrit needed (Giannina, 1998). In the severely anemic fetus at
18 to 24 weeks’ gestation, a smaller volume is transfused initially, and
another transfusion may be planned for approximately 2 days later.
Subsequent transfusions take place every 2 to 4 weeks, depending on the
hematocrit.
The MCA peak systolic velocity threshold for severe anemia is higher
following an initial transfusion—1.70 MoM rather than 1.50 MoM (Society
for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, 2015a). It is hypothesized that the change in
threshold compensates for the contribution of donor cells in the initial
transfusion, because the donor cells are from adults and have a smaller mean
corpuscular volume. Following transfusion, the fetal hematocrit drops by
approximately 1 percent per day. The initial decline may be more rapid if
hydrops has developed.
Outcomes. The overall survival rate approximates 95 percent (Zwiers, 2017;
Mizuuchi, 2021). Complications include fetal death in 2 percent, need for
emergent cesarean delivery in 1 percent, and infection and preterm rupture of
membranes in 0.3 percent each, respectively. The stillbirth rate exceeds 15
percent if transfusion is required before 20 weeks (Lindenberg, 2013;
Zwiers, 2017). For hydropic fetuses, the neonatal survival rate is about 80

percent (Emiroglu, 2020; Van Kamp, 2001). In one series, 95 percent of
neonates survived if hydrops resolved following intrauterine transfusion
compared with fewer than 40 percent if hydrops persisted (Van Kamp,
2001).
Lindenberg (2012) reviewed long-term outcomes following intrauterine
transfusion in a cohort of more than 450 alloimmunized pregnancies.
Alloimmunization was secondary to anti-D in 80 percent, anti-Kell in 12
percent, and anti-c in 5 percent. Approximately a fourth of affected fetuses
had hydrops, and more than half also required exchange transfusion in the
neonatal period. Among nearly 300 children aged 2 to 17 years who
participated in neurodevelopmental testing, fewer than 5 percent had severe
impairments.

■ Prevention of Anti-D Alloimmunization
Anti-D immune globulin has been used for more than five decades to prevent
D alloimmunization. Unfortunately, 50 percent of women around the world
who would benefit from anti-D immune globulin do not receive it (Pegoraro,
2020). In countries without access, up to 10 percent of D-negative
pregnancies are complicated by hemolytic disease of the fetus and newborn
(Zipursky, 2015). With immunoprophylaxis, however, the alloimmunization
risk may be reduced to <0.2 percent. Despite long-standing and widespread
use, its mechanism of action is not completely understood.
Fetomaternal hemorrhage at delivery accounts for as many as 90 percent
of alloimmunization cases. Routine postpartum administration of anti-D
immune globulin to at-risk pregnancies within 72 hours of delivery lowers
the alloimmunization rate by 90 percent (Bowman, 1985). Additionally,
provision of anti-D immune globulin at 28 weeks’ gestation reduces the
third-trimester alloimmunization rate from approximately 2 percent to 0.1
percent (Bowman, 1988). Whenever there is doubt whether to give anti-D
immune globulin, it should be given. If not needed, it will not cause harm,
but failure to provide it when needed may have severe consequences.
Anti-D immune globulin is derived from human plasma donated by
individuals with high-titer anti-D immunoglobulin D antibodies.
Formulations prepared by cold ethanol fractionation and ultrafiltration must
be administered intramuscularly because they contain plasma proteins that
could result in anaphylaxis if given intravenously. Formulations prepared

using ion exchange chromatography may be administered either
intramuscularly or intravenously, which is relevant when treating significant
fetomaternal hemorrhage. Both preparation methods effectively remove viral
particles, including hepatitis and human immunodeficiency viruses.
Depending on the preparation, the half-life of anti-D immune globulin ranges
from 16 to 24 days, which is why it is given both in the third trimester and
following delivery. The standard intramuscular dose of anti-D immune
globulin—300 μg or 1500 IU—will protect the average-sized mother from a
fetal hemorrhage of up to 30 mL of fetal whole blood or 15 mL of fetal red
cells.
In the United States, anti-D immune globulin is given prophylactically to
all D-negative, unsensitized women at approximately 28 weeks’ gestation,
and a second dose is given after delivery if the newborn is D-positive
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019b). Before the
28-week dose of anti-D immune globulin, repeat antibody screening is
recommended to identify individuals who have become alloimmunized
(American Academy of Pediatrics, 2017). Following delivery, anti-D
immune globulin should be given within 72 hours. Recognizing that 40
percent of neonates born to D-negative women are also D negative,
administration of immune globulin is recommended only after the newborn is
confirmed to be D positive (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2019b). If immune globulin is inadvertently not administered
following delivery, it should be given as soon as the omission is recognized,
because there may be some protection up to 28 days postpartum (Bowman,
2006). Anti-D immune globulin is also administered after pregnancy-related
events that could result in sensitization (see Table 18-2). In the first trimester,
smaller doses of 50 or 120 µg may be suitable, as discussed in Chapters 11
and 12 (p. 203 and 221).
Anti-D immune globulin may produce a weakly positive—1:1 to 1:4—
indirect Coombs titer in the mother. This is harmless and should not be
confused with development of alloimmunization. Additionally, as the body
mass index increases above 27 to 40 kg/m2, serum antibody levels decrease
by 30 to 60 percent and may be less protective (MacKenzie, 2006; Woelfer,
2004). D-negative women who receive other types of blood products—
including platelet transfusions and plasmapheresis—also are at risk of
becoming sensitized, and this can be prevented with anti-D immune globulin.
Rarely, a small amount of antibody crosses the placenta and results in a

weakly positive direct Coombs test in cord and infant blood. Despite this,
passive immunization does not cause significant fetal or neonatal hemolysis.
In 2 to 3 per 1000 pregnancies, the volume of fetomaternal hemorrhage
may exceed 30 mL of whole blood (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2019b). A single dose of anti-D immune globulin would be
insufficient in such situations. If additional anti-D immune globulin is
considered only for women with risk factors such as those shown in Table
18-2, half of those who require additional immune globulin may be missed.
For this reason, all D-negative women should be screened at delivery,
typically with a rosette test, followed by quantitative testing if indicated
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019b).
The rosette test is a qualitative test that identifies whether fetal Dpositive cells are present in the circulation of a D-negative woman. A
sample of maternal blood is mixed with anti-D antibodies that coat any Dpositive fetal cells present in the sample. Indicator red cells bearing the Dantigen are then added, and rosettes form around the fetal cells as the
indicator cells attach to them by the antibodies. Thus, if rosettes are
visualized, there are fetal D-positive cells in that sample. In the setting of D
incompatibility, or any time a large fetomaternal hemorrhage is suspected—
regardless of antigen status, a Kleihauer-Betke test or flow cytometry test are
used. These are discussed on page 358.
The dosage of anti-D immune globulin is calculated from the estimated
volume of the fetal-to-maternal hemorrhage, as described on page 358. One
300-μg dose is given for each 15 mL of fetal red cells or 30 mL of fetal
whole blood to be neutralized. If using an intramuscular preparation of antiD immune globulin, no more than five doses may be given in a 24-hour
period. If using an intravenous preparation, two ampules—totaling 600 μg—
may be given every 8 hours. A positive indirect Coombs test or the presence
of circulating fetal cells on a rosette test demonstrate that the dose was
sufficient.

Serological Weak D Phenotypes
Formerly called Du, these are the most common antigenic D variants in the
United States and Europe (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2019a). Serological weak D phenotypes have been further
refined into two general categories using molecular analysis to complete

RHD genotyping. Molecular weak D phenotypes carry reduced numbers of
intact D antigens on the red cell surface. Partial D types have protein
deletions associated with abnormal D antigens that lack epitopes (Sandler,
2017).
Many individuals who test positive for weak D have weak D phenotypes
1, 2, or 3. These phenotypes may be managed as if D-positive. The
pregnancy is not considered at risk for alloimmunization, and thus anti-D
immune globulin is not needed (Sandler 2015, 2017). In contrast, individuals
with partial D antigens may be at risk for D-sensitization and do require
immune globulin. Molecular RHD genotyping has been suggested for
pregnant women with weak D phenotype, but cost-benefit analysis of this
strategy is presently lacking (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2019b). If molecular genetic testing has not been performed
in those with serologic weak D phenotype, D immunoprophylaxis should be
administered.

FETOMATERNAL HEMORRHAGE
A small amount of fetomaternal bleeding likely occurs in all pregnancies and
may be sufficient to provoke an antigen-antibody reaction in two thirds. As
shown in Figure 18-2, the incidence increases with advancing gestation and
with the volume of fetal blood in the maternal circulation (Choavaratana,
1997). The prevalence of fetomaternal bleeding of at least 30 mL is
estimated to be 3 events per 1000 pregnancies (Wylie, 2010). Fortunately,
frank hemorrhage is rare. In one series of more than 30,000 pregnancies,
fetomaternal hemorrhage ≥150 mL complicated 1 in 2800 births (de
Almeida, 1994).

FIGURE 18-2 Incidence of fetomaternal hemorrhage during pregnancy. The numbers at each data
point represent total volume of fetal blood estimated to have been transferred into the maternal
circulation.

Selected causes of fetomaternal hemorrhage are shown in Table 18-2.
With significant hemorrhage, the most common presenting complaint is
decreased fetal movement (Bellussi, 2017; Wylie, 2010). A sinusoidal fetal
heart rate pattern is infrequently seen but warrants immediate evaluation
(Chap. 24, p. 451). Sonography may demonstrate elevated MCA peak
systolic velocity, and indeed this is reported to be the most accurate
predictor (Bellusi, 2017; Wylie, 2010). Hydrops is an ominous finding. If the
MCA peak systolic velocity is elevated or hydrops is identified, urgent fetal
transfusion or delivery should be considered. In more than 80 percent of
cases, no etiology of the fetomaternal hemorrhage is identified.
One limitation of quantitative tests for fetal cells in the maternal
circulation is that they do not provide information regarding the timing or
chronicity of hemorrhage (Wylie, 2010). Anemia that develops gradually, as
with alloimmunization, is generally better tolerated by the fetus than acute
anemia. Chronic anemia may not produce fetal heart rate abnormalities until
the fetus is moribund. In contrast, significant acute hemorrhage may result in

profound fetal neurological impairment from cerebral hypoperfusion,
ischemia, and infarction. In some cases, fetomaternal hemorrhage is
identified during stillbirth evaluation (Chap. 35, p. 325).

■ Hemorrhage Quantification
Estimating the volume of fetomaternal hemorrhage is needed to calculate the
appropriate dose of anti-D immune globulin if the woman is D-negative, and
it may also influence obstetrical management. The most commonly used
quantitative test for fetal red cells in the maternal circulation is the acid
elution or Kleihauer-Betke (KB) test (Kleihauer, 1957). Fetal erythrocytes
contain hemoglobin F, which is more resistant to acid elution than
hemoglobin A. Following exposure to acid, only fetal hemoglobin remains.
Therefore, after staining, the fetal erythrocytes appear red and adult
erythrocytes appear as “ghosts” (Fig. 18-3). The fetal cells are then counted
and expressed as a percentage of adult cells. The fetal blood volume
involved in the fetomaternal hemorrhage may be calculated using the
following formula:

FIGURE 18-3 Kleihauer-Betke test demonstrating massive fetomaternal hemorrhage. After acidelution treatment, fetal red cells rich in hemoglobin F stain darkly, whereas maternal red cells with only
very small amounts of hemoglobin F stain lightly.

For a pregnant woman of normal size who is normotensive and has
reached full-term, the maternal blood volume (MBV) may be estimated as
5000 mL. Thus, in a woman with a hematocrit of 35 percent and whose fetus
has a hematocrit of 50 percent, the calculation for a KB test demonstrating
staining of 1.7 percent of sample cells is:

The fetal-placental blood volume at term approximates 125 mL/kg. For a
3000-g fetus, that would equate to 375 mL. Thus, this fetus lost
approximately 15 percent (60 ÷ 375 mL) of the fetal-placental volume.
Assuming the hematocrit is 50 percent in a term fetus, this 60 mL of whole
blood represents 30 mL of red cells lost into the maternal circulation. A loss
of this magnitude should be well tolerated hemodynamically but would
require two 300-μg doses of anti-D immune globulin to prevent
alloimmunization. A more precise method to estimate the maternal blood
volume includes a calculation based on the maternal height, weight, and
anticipated physiological maternal blood volume accrual (Table 42-1, p.
732).
The KB test is labor intensive. There are also two scenarios in which the
KB may be inaccurate: (1) maternal hemoglobinopathies in which the fetal
hemoglobin level is elevated, such as β-thalassemia, and (2) at or near term,
because the fetus may already be producing hemoglobin A.
Another method of quantifying fetomaternal hemorrhage is with flow
cytometry, which uses monoclonal antibodies to hemoglobin F or to the D
antigen and then measures the degree of fluorescence (Chambers, 2012;
Welsh, 2016). Flow cytometry is an automated test that can analyze a greater
number of cells than the KB test. It is also unaffected by maternal levels of
fetal hemoglobin and by fetal levels of hemoglobin A. Flow cytometry has
been reported to be more sensitive and accurate than the KB test, however, it
uses specialized technology not routinely available in many hospitals
(Chambers, 2012; Corcoran, 2014; Fernandes, 2007).

FETAL THROMBOCYTOPENIA
■ Alloimmune Thrombocytopenia
This is also referred to as fetal and neonatal alloimmune thrombocytopenia
(FNAIT). Alloimmune thrombocytopenia (AIT) is the most common cause of
severe thrombocytopenia among term newborns, with a frequency of 1 to 2
cases per 1000 births (Kamphuis, 2010; Pacheco, 2013; Risson, 2012).
FNAIT is caused by maternal alloimmunization to paternally inherited fetal
platelet antigens. Maternal antiplatelet antibodies cross the placenta in a
manner similar to red cell alloimmunization (p. 352). Unlike immune
thrombocytopenia, the maternal platelet count is normal with FNAIT. And,
unlike anti-D alloimmunization, severe sequelae may affect the initial at-risk
pregnancy.
Maternal platelet alloimmunization against human platelet antigen-1a
(HPA-1a) accounts for 80 to 90 percent of cases and is associated with the
greatest severity (Bussel, 1997; Knight, 2011; Tiller, 2013). This is followed
in order of frequency by alloimmunization against HPA-5b, HPA-1b, and
HPA-3a. Alloimmunization to other antigens accounts for only 1 percent of
reported cases.
Approximately 85 percent of non-Hispanic white individuals are HPA-1a
positive. Two percent are homozygous for HPA-1b and at risk for
alloimmunization. However, only 10 percent of these women produce
antiplatelet antibodies when carrying an HPA-1a fetus. Approximately a third
of affected fetuses or neonates will develop severe thrombocytopenia, and
10 to 20 percent with severe thrombocytopenia sustain an intracranial
hemorrhage (ICH) (Kamphuis, 2010). As a result, population-based
screening studies have identified one case of FNAIT-associated ICH per
25,000 to 60,000 pregnancies (Kamphuis, 2010; Knight, 2011).
FNAIT has a spectrum of presentation. Neonatal thrombocytopenia may
be an incidental finding, the newborn may manifest petechiae, or the fetus or
neonate may develop devastating ICH. Of 600 pregnancies with FNAIT
identified through a large international registry, fetal or neonatal ICH
complicated just 7 percent of cases (Tiller, 2013). Hemorrhage affected the
first-born child in 60 percent and occurred before 28 weeks’ gestation in
half. A third of affected children died soon after birth, and 50 percent of
survivors had severe neurological disabilities.

Bussel and coworkers (1997) evaluated fetal platelet counts before
therapy in 107 fetuses with FNAIT. Thrombocytopenia severity was
predicted by a prior sibling with perinatal ICH. Fifty percent had an initial
platelet count <20,000/μL. And, among those in whom the initial platelet
count was >80,000/μL, it dropped by at least 10,000/μL per week in the
absence of therapy.

Diagnosis and Management
AIT is typically diagnosed following delivery of a neonate with severe and
unexplained thrombocytopenia to a woman whose platelet count is normal.
Rarely, the diagnosis is ascertained after identifying fetal ICH. The condition
recurs in 70 to 90 percent of subsequent pregnancies, is often severe, and
usually develops earlier with each successive pregnancy. Traditionally, fetal
blood sampling was performed to detect fetal thrombocytopenia and to tailor
therapy. Platelets were transfused if the fetal platelet count was <50,000/μL.
The reported rate of procedure-related complications exceeds 10 percent
(Winkelhorst, 2017). For this reason, most favor empirical treatment with
IVIG instead (Berkowitz, 2006; Pacheco, 2011).
Therapy may be stratified according to whether a prior affected
pregnancy was complicated by perinatal ICH, and if so, at what gestational
age (Table 18-3) (Pacheco, 2011). Pioneering work by Bussel (1996) and
Berkowitz (2006) and their colleagues demonstrated the efficacy of such
treatment. In one series of 50 pregnancies with fetal thrombocytopenia
secondary to FNAIT, IVIG raised the platelet count by approximately
50,000/μL, and no fetus developed ICH (Bussel, 1996). Among pregnancies
at particularly high risk, which was based on a platelet count <20,000/μL or
a sibling with FNAIT-associated ICH, the addition of corticosteroids to IVIG
therapy was associated with a rise in platelet count in 80 percent of cases
(Berkowitz, 2006). However, a systematic review identified no consistent
benefit of corticosteroid treatment compared with IVIG therapy alone
(Winkelhorst, 2017). Thus, corticosteroid therapy is somewhat controversial.
Cesarean delivery is generally recommended at or near term.
TABLE 18-3. Fetal-Neonatal Alloimmune Thrombocytopenia (FNAIT)
Treatment Recommendations

■ Immune Thrombocytopenia
Also known as immune or idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP), this
autoimmune disorder is characterized by antiplatelet IgG antibodies that
attack platelet glycoproteins. The antibodies may cross the placenta and
cause fetal thrombocytopenia. Maternal ITP is discussed in Chapter 59 (p.
1059).
Fetal thrombocytopenia from maternal ITP is usually mild. However,
neonatal platelet levels may fall rapidly after birth and nadir at 48 to 72
hours of life. Neither the maternal platelet count, identification of antiplatelet
antibodies, nor treatment with corticosteroids effectively predicts fetal or
neonatal platelet counts (Hachisuga, 2014). Importantly, fetal platelet counts
are usually adequate to allow vaginal delivery without an increased risk of
ICH. In a review of more than 400 pregnancies with ITP, there was no case
of fetal or neonatal ICH and no infant with any central nervous system
abnormality (Wyszynski, 2016). Fetal blood sampling is not recommended
(Neunert, 2011). Mode of delivery is based on standard obstetrical
indications.

HYDROPS FETALIS
This phrase has its origins in Middle English, Latin, and Greek. The
condition was described by Ballantyne in 1892 as general dropsy, that is,

edema, of the fetus (Kaiser, 1971). Hydrops can be a manifestation of severe
illness from a wide variety of etiologies (Table 18-4) (Bellini, 2015).
TABLE 18-4. Categories and Etiologies of Nonimmune Hydrops Fetalis

Hydrops is diagnosed by identifying two or more fetal effusions—
pleural, pericardial, or ascites—or one effusion plus anasarca (Fig. 18-4).
Sonographically measured skin thickness of >5 mm constitutes edema or
anasarca. Placentomegaly is defined as placental thickness ≥4 cm in the
second trimester or ≥6 cm in the third trimester (Bellini, 2009; Society for
Maternal–Fetal Medicine, 2015b). As hydrops progresses in severity,
anasarca is an invariable feature and is usually accompanied by
placentomegaly and hydramnios.

FIGURE 18-4 Sonographic findings that define hydrops. A. This profile of a 23-week fetus with
nonimmune hydrops secondary to B19 parvovirus infection depicts scalp edema (arrowheads) and
ascites (*). B. This 34-week fetus had hydrops secondary to an arteriovenous malformation in the brain,
known as a vein of Galen aneurysm. In this coronal image, prominent pleural effusions (*) outline the
lungs (L). Fetal ascites is also present (arrows), as is anasarca. C. This axial (transverse) image depicts
a pericardial effusion (arrows) in a 23-week fetus with hydrops from B19 parvovirus infection. The
degree of cardiomegaly is impressive, and the ventricular hypertrophy raises concern for myocarditis,
which can accompany parvovirus infection. D. This axial (transverse) image depicts fetal ascites (*) in
a 15-week fetus with hydrops secondary to large cystic hygromas. Anasarca is also seen (bracket).

If found in association with red cell alloimmunization, hydrops is termed
immune, otherwise, it is nonimmune. Immune and nonimmune hydrops are
postulated to share several physiological abnormalities. The precise
pathogenesis remains unknown but is likely multifactorial. As shown in
Figure 18-5, these include decreased colloid oncotic pressure, increased
hydrostatic or central venous pressure, and enhanced vascular permeability.

FIGURE 18-5 Proposed pathogenesis of immune and nonimmune hydrops fetalis. (Data from Bellini,
2009; Lockwood, 2009.)

■ Immune Hydrops
This condition results from transplacental passage of maternal antibodies that
destroy fetal red cells. The resultant anemia stimulates marrow erythroid
hyperplasia and extramedullary hematopoiesis in the spleen and liver (see
Fig. 18-5). The latter likely causes portal hypertension and impaired hepatic
protein synthesis, which lowers plasma oncotic pressure (Nicolaides, 1985).
Fetal anemia may also raise central venous pressure (Weiner, 1989). Tissue
hypoxia from anemia may increase capillary permeability, such that fluid
collects in the fetal thorax, abdominal cavity, and/or subcutaneous tissue.
The incidence of immune hydrops has decreased dramatically with the
advent of anti-D immune globulin and with use of MCA Doppler to aid

anemia detection. Only severe anemia results in immune hydrops. Mari and
colleagues (2000) reviewed 70 pregnancies with fetal anemia from red cell
alloimmunization and found that all with immune hydrops had hemoglobin
values <5 g/dL. As discussed on page 356, immediate fetal blood transfusion
may be lifesaving.

■ Nonimmune Hydrops
At least 90 percent of cases of hydrops are nonimmune (Bellini, 2012). The
prevalence approximates 1 case per 1500 second-trimester pregnancies
(Heinonen, 2000). The number of specific disorders that can lead to
nonimmune hydrops is extensive. Etiologies and the proportion of births
within each hydrops category from a review of more than 6700 affected
pregnancies are summarized in Table 18-4 (Bellini, 2015).
A cause is identified in approximately 60 percent prenatally and in up to
80 percent postnatally (Bellini, 2009, 2015; Santo, 2011). Of prenatally
diagnosed cases, aneuploidy accounts for approximately 20 percent,
cardiovascular abnormalities for 15 percent, and infections for 14 percent—
the most common of which is parvovirus B19 (Santo, 2011; Sileo, 2020;
Sparks, 2019). In multifetal gestations, twin-twin transfusion syndrome is the
most frequent cause (Yeom, 2015). Fetal deaths and stillbirths are common
with nonimmune hydrops. Overall, only 40 percent of affected pregnancies
result in a liveborn neonate, and of these, the neonatal survival rate is just 50
percent (Nassr, 2018; Yeom, 2015).
Importantly, the etiology of nonimmune hydrops varies according to the
gestational age at diagnosis. In a review of 63 pregnancies undergoing
genetic testing for hydrops in the first trimester, aneuploidy was the cause in
70 percent (Sileo, 2020). Of cases diagnosed from 14 through 24 weeks,
aneuploidy and congenital infection each accounted for 20 percent. When
nonimmune hydrops presents before 24 weeks’ gestation, the most frequent
aneuploidy is 45,X—Turner syndrome, and in such cases, the survival rate is
<5 percent (Sohan, 2001).
Recent advances in genetic testing have improved the understanding of
hydrops cases that were previously considered idiopathic. In a review from
the University of California Fetal-Maternal Consortium, whole exome
sequencing was studied in 127 cases of unexplained nonimmune hydrops in
which traditional genetic testing was uninformative (Sparks, 2020). Nearly

30 percent had a pathogenic genetic variant. The most common etiology was
RASopathies, and many such cases resulted in Noonan syndrome. It is
anticipated that as experience with whole exome sequencing accrues, the
diagnostic yield will continue to increase.
Although the prognosis of nonimmune hydrops is guarded, it depends
heavily on etiology. In a large series from Thailand and Southern China, α0thalassemia is the main cause of nonimmune hydrops. It accounts for 30 to 50
percent of cases and confers an extremely poor prognosis (Liao, 2007;
Ratanasiri, 2009; Suwanrath-Kengpol, 2005). In contrast, treatable etiologies
such as parvovirus infection, chylothorax, and tachyarrhythmias, which each
constituting approximately 10 percent of cases, can result in survival in two
thirds of cases with fetal therapy (Sohan, 2001).

Diagnostic Evaluation
Hydrops is readily detected with prenatal sonography (see Fig. 18-5).
Imaging and laboratory evaluation may identify fetal structural abnormalities,
arrhythmias, anemia, aneuploidy, placental abnormalities, and complications
of monochorionic twinning. Depending on the circumstances, initial
evaluation includes the following:
1. Indirect Coombs test to identify alloimmunization
2. Detailed ultrasound examination of the fetus and placenta that includes:
• A detailed anatomical survey to assess for the structural abnormalities
listed in Table 18-4
• Fetal echocardiography to further evaluate cardiac structure and function
• MCA Doppler peak systolic velocity to assess for fetal anemia
3. Amniocentesis to obtain samples for chromosomal microarray analysis or
karyotyping and for parvovirus B19, cytomegalovirus, and toxoplasmosis
testing, as discussed in Chapter 67
4. Kleihauer-Betke test to detect fetomaternal hemorrhage if anemia is
suspected, depending on findings and test results
5. Consideration of testing for alpha-thalassemia and/or inborn errors of
metabolism.
Whole exome sequencing has significant potential to identify a genetic
etiology if the aforementioned evaluation is not informative (Sparks, 2020).
Counseling should include anticipated turnaround times, costs, and variants

of uncertain significance. It is not recommended for routine use (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020). In addition, because
sequencing is generally performed on the fetus and parents, a parent may be
identified or suspected to have an unrelated but medically actionable finding,
such as a cancer predisposition.
Isolated Effusion or Edema. The initial presentation of hydrops may be as a
single effusion or anasarca. Although neither is diagnostic of hydrops, the
above evaluation should be considered, and frequent surveillance may be
prudent. A pericardial effusion may precede development of hydrops in fetal
parvovirus B19 infection (Chap. 67, p. 1191). Similarly, isolated ascites may
be the initial finding in fetal parvovirus B19 infection or may result from a
gastrointestinal abnormality such as meconium peritonitis. An isolated
pleural effusion may represent a chylothorax, which is amenable to prenatal
diagnosis, and for which fetal therapy may be lifesaving if hydrops develops
(Chap. 19, p. 376). Last, isolated edema, particularly involving the upper
torso or the dorsum of the hands and feet, may be found in Turner or Noonan
syndrome or may represent congenital lymphedema syndrome (Chap. 16, p.
314).

■ Mirror Syndrome
The association between fetal hydrops and the development of maternal
edema, in which the mother mirrors the fetus, is attributed to Ballantyne. He
called the condition triple edema because the fetus, mother, and placenta all
became edematous. Mirror syndrome has been reported to complicate at
least 20 percent of hydrops cases (Chen, 2021). The etiology of the hydrops
is not related to development of mirror syndrome. It has been associated with
hydrops from D alloimmunization, twin-twin transfusion syndrome, placental
chorioangioma, fetal cystic hygroma, Ebstein anomaly, sacrococcygeal
teratoma, chylothorax, bladder outlet obstruction, supraventricular
tachycardia, vein of Galen aneurysm, and various congenital infections
(Braun, 2010).
In a review of more than 50 cases of mirror syndrome, Braun (2010)
found that approximately 90 percent of women had edema, 60 percent had
hypertension, 40 percent had proteinuria, 20 percent had liver enzyme
elevation, and nearly 15 percent had headache and visual disturbances.

Based on these findings, it is reasonable to consider mirror syndrome a form
of severe preeclampsia (Espinoza, 2006; Midgley, 2000). Others, however,
have suggested that it is a separate disease process with hemodilution rather
than hemoconcentration (Carbillon, 1997; Livingston, 2007).
Some reports describe the same imbalance of angiogenic and
antiangiogenic factors that is observed with preeclampsia, and this suggests a
common pathophysiology (Goa, 2013; Hobson, 2020; Llurba, 2012). These
findings, which include elevated concentrations of soluble fms-like tyrosine
kinase 1 (sFlt-1), decreased placental growth factor (PlGF) levels, and
elevation of soluble vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 1 (sVEGFR1) concentrations, are discussed further in Chapter 40 (p. 694).
In most cases with mirror syndrome, prompt delivery is indicated and
followed by resolution of maternal edema and other findings (Braun, 2010).
However, in isolated cases of fetal anemia, supraventricular tachycardia,
hydrothorax, or bladder outlet obstruction, successful fetal treatment has
resulted in resolution of both fetal hydrops and maternal mirror syndrome
(Goa, 2013; Livingston, 2007; Llurba, 2012; Midgley, 2000). Normalization
of the angiogenic imbalance has also been described following fetal
transfusion for parvovirus B19 infection. Fetal therapy for these conditions is
reviewed in Chapter 19. Given the parallels to severe preeclampsia,
delaying delivery to effect fetal therapy should be considered only with
caution. If the maternal condition deteriorates, delivery is recommended.

REFERENCES
American Academy of Pediatrics, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Guidelines for
Perinatal Care. 8th ed. Elk Grove Village, AAP, 2017
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Management of alloimmunization during
pregnancy. Practice Bulletin No. 192, March 2018, Reaffirmed 2019a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Prevention of Rh-D alloimmunization. Practice
Bulletin No. 181, August 2017, Reaffirmed 2019b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Microarrays and next-generation sequencing
technology: the use of advanced genetic diagnostic tools in obstetrics and gynecology. Committee
Opinion No. 682, December 2016, Reaffirmed 2020
Bellini C, Donarini G, Paladini D, et al: Etiology of non-immune hydrops fetalis: an update. Am J Med
Genet 167A:1082, 2015
Bellini C, Hennekam RC: Non-immune hydrops fetalis: a short review of etiology and pathophysiology.
Am J Med Genet 158A(3):597, 2012

Bellini C, Hennekam RC, Fulcheri E, et al: Etiology of nonimmune hydrops fetalis: a systematic review.
Am J Med Genet A 149A(5):844, 2009
Bellussi F, Perolo A, Ghi T, et al: Diagnosis of severe fetomaternal hemorrhage with fetal cerebral
Doppler: case series and systematic review. Fetal Diagn Ther 41(1):1, 2017
Berkowitz RL, Kolb EA, McFarland JG, et al: Parallel randomized trials of risk-based therapy for fetal
alloimmune thrombocytopenia. Obstet Gynecol 107(1):91, 2006
Bollason G, Hjartardottir H, Jonsson T, et al: Red blood cell alloimmunization in pregnancy during the
years 1996–2015 in Iceland: a nation-wide population study. Transfusion 57(11):2578, 2017
Bowman J: Rh-immunoglobulin: Rh prophylaxis. Best Pract Res Clin Haematol 19(1):27, 2006
Bowman JM: Controversies in Rh prophylaxis: who needs Rh immune globulin and when should it be
given? Am J Obstet Gynecol 151:289, 1985
Bowman JM: The prevention of Rh immunization. Transfus Med Rev 2:129, 1988
Braun T, Brauer M, Fuchs I, et al: Mirror syndrome: a systematic review of fetal associated conditions,
maternal presentation, and perinatal outcome. Fetal Diagn Ther 27(4):191, 2010
Bussel JB, Berkowitz RL, Lynch L, et al: Antenatal management of alloimmune thrombocytopenia with
intravenous gamma-globulin: a randomized trial of the addition of low-dose steroid to intravenous
gamma-globulin. Am J Obstet Gynecol 174(5):1414, 1996
Bussel JB, Zabusky MR, Berkowitz RL, et al: Fetal alloimmune thrombocytopenia. N Engl J Med
337:22, 1997
Carbillon L, Oury JF, Guerin JM, et al: Clinical biological features of Ballantyne syndrome and the role
of placental hydrops. Obstet Gynecol Surv 52(5):310, 1997
Chambers E, Davies L, Evans S, et al: Comparison of haemoglobin F detection by the acid elution test,
flow cytometry and high-performance liquid chromatography in maternal blood samples analysed for
fetomaternal haemorrhage. Transfus Med 22(3):199, 2012
Chen R, Liu M, Yan J, et al: Clinical characteristics of mirror syndrome: a retrospective study of 16
cases. J Obstet Gynaecol 41(1):73, 2021
Choavaratana R, Uer-Areewong S, Makanantakocol S: Fetomaternal transfusion in normal pregnancy
and during delivery. J Med Assoc Thai 80:96, 1997
Corcoran D, Murphy D, Donnelly J, et al: The prevalence of maternal F cells in a pregnant population
and potential overestimation of foeto-maternal haemorrhage as a consequence. Blood Transfus
12:570, 2014
Daniels G: Variants of RhD—current testing and clinical consequences. Br J Haematol 161(4):461, 2013
de Almeida V, Bowman JM: Massive fetomaternal hemorrhage: Manitoba experience. Obstet Gynecol
83:323, 1994
de Haas M, Thurik FF, Koelewijn JM et al: Haemolytic disease of the fetus and newborn. Vox Sang
109(2):99, 2015
Emiroğlu N, Yilmaz FH, Keçeci R, et al: Clinical characteristics and neonatal outcomes of liveborn
newborns with hydrops fetalis treated in a tertiary level neonatal intensive care unit. Birth Defects
Res 1:112(6):515, 2020
Fernandes BJ, von Dadelszen P, Fazal I, et al: Flow cytometric assessment of feto-maternal
hemorrhage; a comparison with Betke-Kleihauer. Prenat Diagn 27(7):641, 2007
Garratty G, Glynn SA, McEntire R, et al: ABO and Rh(D) phenotype frequencies of different
racial/ethnic groups in the United States. Transfusion 44(5):703, 2004
Giannina G, Moise KJ Jr, Dorman K: A simple method to estimate the volume for fetal intravascular
transfusion. Fetal Diagn Ther 13:94, 1998

Goa S, Mimura K, Kakigano A, et al: Normalisation of angiogenic imbalance after intra-uterine
transfusion for mirror syndrome caused by parvovirus B19. Fetal Diagn Ther 34(3):176, 2013
Hachisuga K, Hidaka N, Fujita Y, et al: Can we predict neonatal thrombocytopenia in offspring of
women with idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura? Blood 49(4):259, 2014
Hackney DN, Knudtson EJ, Rossi KQ, et al: Management of pregnancies complicated by anti-c
isoimmunization. Obstet Gynecol 103:24, 2004
Heinonen S, Ruynamen M, Kirkinen P: Etiology and outcome of second trimester nonimmunological
fetal hydrops. Scand J Obstet Gynecol 79:15, 2000
Hobson SR, Wallace EM, Chan YF, et al: Mirroring preeclampsia: the molecular basis of Ballantyne
syndrome. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 33(5):768, 2020
Howard H, Martlew V, McFadyen I, et al: Consequences for fetus and neonate of maternal red cell
allo-immunization. Arch Dis Child Fetal Neonat Ed 78:F62, 1998
Johnson JA, MacDonald K, Clarke G, et al: No. 343—Routine non-invasive prenatal prediction of fetal
RHD genotype in Canada: the time is here. J Obstet Gynaecol Can 39(5):366, 2017
Kaiser IH: Ballantyne and triple edema. Am J Obstet Gynecol 110(1):115, 1971
Kamphuis MM, Paridaans N, Porcelijn L, et al: Screening in pregnancy for fetal or neonatal alloimmune
thrombocytopenia: systematic review. BJOG 117(11):1335, 2010
Kleihauer B, Braun H, Betke K: Demonstration of fetal hemoglobin in erythrocytes of a blood smear.
Klin Wochenschr 35(12):637, 1957
Knight M, Pierce M, Allen D, et al: The incidence and outcomes of fetomaternal alloimmune
thrombocytopenia: a UK national study using three data sources. Br J Haematol 152(4):460, 2011
Koelewijn JM, Vrijkotte TG, van der Schoot CE, et al: Effect of screening for red cell antibodies, other
than anti-D, to detect hemolytic disease of the fetus and newborn: a population study in the
Netherlands. Transfusion 48:941, 2008
Lazar L, Harmath AG, Ban Z, et al: Detection of maternal deoxyribonucleic acid in peripheral blood of
premature and mature newborn infants. Prenat Diagn 26(2):168, 2006
Liao C, Wei J, Li Q, et al: Nonimmune hydrops fetalis diagnosed during the second half of pregnancy in
Southern China. Fetal Diagn Ther 22(4):302, 2007
Lindenburg I, van Kamp I, van Zwet E, et al: Increased perinatal loss after intrauterine transfusion for
alloimmune anaemia before 20 weeks of gestation. BJOG 120:847, 2013
Lindenburg IT, Smits-Wintjens VE, van Klink JM, et al: Long-term neurodevelopmental outcome after
intrauterine transfusion for hemolytic disease of the fetus/newborn: the LOTUS study. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 206:141.e1, 2012
Livingston JC, Malik KM, Crombleholme TM, et al: Mirror syndrome: a novel approach to therapy with
fetal peritoneal-amniotic shunt. Obstet Gynecol 110(2 Pt 2):540, 2007
Llurba E, Marsal G, Sanchez O, et al: Angiogenic and antiangiogenic factors before and after resolution
of maternal mirror syndrome. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 40(3):367, 2012
Lockwood CJ, Nadel AS, King ME, et al: A 32-year old pregnant woman with an abnormal fetal
ultrasound study. Case 16–2009. N Engl J Med 360(21):2225, 2009
MacKenzie IZ, Roseman F, Findlay J, et al: The kinetics of routine antenatal prophylactic intramuscular
injections of polyclonal anti-D immunoglobulin. BJOG 113:97, 2006
Maisonneuve E, Dugas A, Friszer S, et al: Effect of intravenous immunoglobulins to postpone the
gestational age of first intrauterine transfusion in very severe red blood cell alloimmunization: a casecontrol study. J Gynecol Obstet Hum Reprod 50(7):102119, 2021
Mari G, Deter RL, Carpenter RL, et al: Noninvasive diagnosis by Doppler ultrasonography of fetal
anemia due to maternal red-cell alloimmunization. N Engl J Med 342:9, 2000

Martin JA, Hamilton BE, Sutton PD, et al: Births: final data for 2003. Natl Vital Stat Rep 54(2):1, 2005
Midgley DY, Hardrug K: The mirror syndrome. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 8:201, 2000
Mizuuchi M, Murotsuki J, Ishii K, et al: Nationwide survey of intrauterine blood transfusion for fetal
anemia in Japan. J Obstet Gynaecol Res 47(6):2076, 2021
Moise KJ: Fetal anemia due to non-Rhesus-D red-cell alloimmunization. Semin Fetal Neonatal Med
13(4):207, 2008
Moise KJ, Gandhi M, Boring NH, et al: Circulating cell-free DNA to determine the fetal RHD status in
all three trimesters of pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 128(6):1340, 2016
Nassr AA, Ness A, Hosseinzadeh P, et al: Outcome and treatment of antenatally diagnosed nonimmune
hydrops fetalis. Fetal Diagn Ther 43(2):123, 2018
Neunert C, Lim W, Crowther M, et al: The American Society of Hematology 2011 evidence-based
practice guideline for immune thrombocytopenia. Blood 117(16):4190, 2011
Nicolaides KH, Warenski JC, Rodeck CH: The relationship of fetal plasma protein concentration and
hemoglobin level to the development of hydrops in rhesus isoimmunization. Am J Obstet Gynecol
152:341, 1985
Oepkes D, Seaward PG, Vandenbussche FP, et al: Doppler ultrasonography versus amniocentesis to
predict fetal anemia. N Engl J Med 355:156, 2006
Pacheco LD, Berkowitz RL, Moise KJ, et al: Fetal and neonatal alloimmune thrombocytopenia. A
management algorithm based on risk stratification. Obstet Gynecol 118(5):1157, 2011
Pazourkova E, Zednikova I, Korabecna M, et al: Optimization of diagnostic strategy for non-invasive
cell-free foetal RHD determination from maternal plasma. Vox Sang March 24, 2021 [Epub ahead
of print]
Pegoraro V, Urbinati D, Visser GHA, et al: Hemolytic disease of the fetus and newborn due to Rh(D)
incompatibility: a preventable disease that still produces significant morbidity and mortality in
children. PLoS One 15(7):e0235807, 2020
Ratanasiri T, Komwilaisak R, Sittivech A, et al: Incidence, causes, and pregnancy outcomes of hydrops
fetalis at Srinagarind Hospital, 1996–2005: a 10-year review. J Med Assoc Thai 92(5):594, 2009
Risson DC, Davies MW, Williams BA: Review of neonatal alloimmune thrombocytopenia. J Pediatr
Child Health 48(9):816, 2012
Sandler SG, Flegel WA, Westhoff CM, et al: It’s time to phase-in RHD genotyping for patients with a
serological weak D phenotype. Transfusion 55(3):680, 2015
Sandler SG, Queenan JT: A guide to terminology for Rh immunoprophylaxis. Obstet Gynecol 130(3):633,
2017
Santo S, Mansour S, Thilaganathan B, et al: Prenatal diagnosis of non-immune hydrops fetalis: what do
we tell the parents? Prenat Diagn 31:186, 2011
Sileo FG, Kulkarni A, Branescu I, et al: Non-immune fetal hydrops: etiology and outcome according to
gestational age at diagnosis. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 56(3):416, 2020
Slootweg YM, Lindenburg IT, Koelewijn JM, et al: Predicting anti-Kell-mediated hemolytic disease of
the fetus and newborn: diagnostic accuracy of laboratory management. Am J Obstet Gynecol
219(4):393.e1, 2018
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Mari G, Norton ME, et al: Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine
(SMFM) Clinical Guideline #8: The fetus at risk for anemia—diagnosis and management. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 212(6):697, 2015a
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Norton ME, Chauhan SP, et al: Society for Maternal-Fetal
Medicine (SMFM) Clinical Guideline #7: Nonimmune hydrops fetalis. Am J Obstet Gynecol
212(2):127, 2015b

Sohan K, Carroll SG, De La Fuente S, et al: Analysis of outcome in hydrops fetalis in relation to
gestational age at diagnosis, cause, and treatment. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 80(8):726, 2001
Sparks TN, Lianoglou BR, Adami RR, et al: Exome sequencing for prenatal diagnosis in nonimmune
hydrops fetalis. N Engl J Med 383(18):1746, 2020
Sparks TN, Thao K, Lianoglou BR, et al: Nonimmune hydrops fetalis: identifying the underlying genetic
etiology. Genet Med 21(6):1339, 2019
Storry JR, Clausen FB, Castilho L, et al: International Society of Blood Transfusion Working Party on
red cell immunogenics and blood group terminology: report of the Dubai, Copenhagen, and Toronto
meetings. Vox Sang 114(1):95, 2019
Suwanrath-Kengpol C, Kor-anantakul O, Suntharasaj T, et al: Etiology and outcome of non-immune
hydrops fetalis in southern Thailand. Gynecol Obstet Invest 59(3):134, 2005
Tannirandorn Y, Rodeck CH: New approaches in the treatment of haemolytic disease of the fetus.
Ballieres Clin Haematol 3(2):289, 1990
Tiller H, Kamphuis MM, Flodmark O, et al: Fetal intracranial hemorrhages caused by fetal and neonatal
alloimmune thrombocytopenia: an observational cohort study of 43 cases from an international
multicentre registry. BMJ 3:e002490, 2013
Van den Veyver IB, Moise KJ: Fetal RhD typing by polymerase chain reaction in pregnancies
complicated by rhesus alloimmunization. Obstet Gynecol 88:1061, 1996
Van Kamp IL, Klumper FJ, Bakkum RS, et al: The severity of immune fetal hydrops is predictive of
fetal outcome after intrauterine treatment. Am J Obstet Gynecol 185:668, 2001
Weiner CP, Pelzer GD, Heilskov J, et al: The effect of intravascular transfusion on umbilical venous
pressure in anemic fetuses with and without hydrops. Am J Obstet Gynecol 161:1498, 1989
Weinstein L: Irregular antibodies causing hemolytic disease of the newborn: a continuing problem. Clin
Obstet Gynecol 25(2):321, 1982
Welsh KJ, Bai Y, Education Committee of the Academy of Clinical Laboratory Physicians and
Scientists: pathology consultation on patients with a large Rh immune globulin dose requirement. Am
J Clin Pathol 145:744, 2016
Winkelhorst D, Murphy MF, Greinacher A, et al: Antenatal management in fetal and neonatal
alloimmune thrombocytopenia: a systematic review. Blood 129(11):1538, 2017
Woelfer B, Schuchter K, Janisiw M, et al: Postdelivery levels of anti-D IgG prophylaxis in mothers
depend on maternal body weight. Transfusion 44:512, 2004
Wylie BJ, D’Alton ME: Fetomaternal hemorrhage. Obstet Gynecol 115(5): 1039, 2010
Wyszynski DF, Carmen WJ, Cantor AB, et al: Pregnancy and birth outcomes among women with
idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura. J Pregnancy 2016:8297407, 2016
Yeom W, Paik ES, An JJ, et al: Clinical characteristics and perinatal outcome of fetal hydrops. Obstet
Gynecol Sci 58(2):90, 2015
Zimmerman R, Carpenter RJ Jr, Durig P, et al: Longitudinal measurement of peak systolic velocity in the
fetal middle cerebral artery for monitoring pregnancies complicated by red cell alloimmunization: a
prospective multicenter trial with intention-to-treat. BJOG 109(7):746, 2002
Zipursky A, Bhutani VK: Impact of Rhesus disease on the global problem of bilirubin-induced neurologic
dysfunction. Semin Fetal Neonatal Med 20(1):2, 2015
Zwiers C, Lindenburg IT, Klumper FJ, et al: Complications of intrauterine intravascular blood
transfusion: lessons learned after 1678 procedures. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 50(2):180, 2017
Zwiers C, van der Bom JG, van Kamp IL, et al: Postponing early intrauterine transfusion with
intravenous immunoglobulin treatment; the PETIT study on severe hemolytic disease of the fetus
and newborn. Am J Obstet Gynecol 219(3):291.e1, 2018

