CHAPTER 16

Genetics

GENOMICS IN OBSTETRICS
ABNORMALITIES OF CHROMOSOME NUMBER
ABNORMALITIES OF CHROMOSOME STRUCTURE
MOSAICISM
MODES OF INHERITANCE
CYTOGENETIC ANALYSIS
CHROMOSOMAL MICROARRAY ANALYSIS
WHOLE GENOME AND WHOLE EXOME SEQUENCING
FETAL DNA IN THE MATERNAL CIRCULATION
REFERENCES
Genetics is the study of genes, heredity, and the variation of inherited
characteristics. Medical genetics addresses the etiology and pathogenesis of
human diseases that are at least partially genetic in origin, as well as their
prediction and prevention. Whereas a gene is a specific sequence of
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) on a single chromosome that codes for a
particular protein, a genome is the entirety of all genes that make up an
organism. Genomics is the study of how genes function and interact with one
other. Chromosomal, mendelian, and nonmendelian genetic conditions are
reviewed in this chapter. Prenatal and preimplantation genetic testing and

newborn genetic screening are discussed in Chapters 17 and 32,
respectively.
Genetic disease is common. Two to 3 percent of newborns have a
recognized structural abnormality, another 3 percent are diagnosed with an
abnormality by age 5 years, and yet another 8 to 10 percent are found to have
a functional or developmental abnormality before reaching adulthood.

GENOMICS IN OBSTETRICS
The Human Genome Project was an international research program that
sequenced the 3 billion base pairs and more than 20,000 genes that make up
the human genome. It paved the way for research into gene organization and
function in an effort to understand the molecular basis of disease. More than
99 percent of our DNA is identical. The coding regions of DNA—exons—
constitute only 1.5 percent of the genome. An exome is the entirety of all the
exons that an organism contains. Introns are DNA sequences involved in
coding regulation and make up 24 percent of the genome. Intergenic DNA
composes the remainder.
Our genetic code varies once every 200 to 500 base pairs, usually as a
single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP). Thus, whole genome sequencing and
whole exome sequencing, described later (p. 327), hold tremendous potential
to further elucidate genetic variants in disease.
Toward this goal, genetic and genomic databases are maintained by the
National Center for Biotechnology Information (2021). These are freely
accessible and can be indispensable to providers who offer counseling and
testing for genetic conditions. The GeneReviews database has in-depth
clinical information for more than 800 genetic conditions, including
diagnostic criteria and management considerations. The Genetic Testing
Registry (GTR) database contains information for nearly 80,000 genetic tests
and instructions for specimen collection and transport to individual
laboratories throughout the world (National Center for Biotechnology
Information, 2021). The National Library of Medicine (2021) has also
established a genetic information database, the MedlinePlus Genetics, which
is intended for the lay population. It provides explanations of more than 1300
genetic conditions, a glossary of genetic concepts, and links to more
comprehensive medical resources.

CHROMOSOMAL ABNORMALITIES
Chromosomal abnormalities figure prominently in genetic disease. They
account for >50 percent of first-trimester miscarriages, approximately 20
percent of second-trimester losses, and 6 to 8 percent of stillbirths and earlychildhood deaths (Reddy, 2012; Stevenson, 2004; Wou, 2016). Based on data
from population-based registries, chromosomal abnormalities are identified
in 0.4 percent of recognized pregnancies (Wellesley, 2012). Most of these
are aneuploidies. Trisomy 21 accounts for >50 percent, trisomy 18 for nearly
15 percent, and trisomy 13 for 5 percent of cases (Fig. 16-1). If no
karyotypic abnormality is identified in a fetus with a structural anomaly,
additional testing with chromosomal microarray analysis is anticipated to
detect a chromosomal deletion or duplication—a copy number variant—in
approximately 6.5 percent of cases (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2020c).

FIGURE 16-1 Prevalence and relative proportion of selected chromosomal abnormalities from
EUROCAT (European Surveillance of Congenital Anomalies) population-based registries that included
>10,000 aneuploid live births, fetal deaths, and pregnancy terminations, 2000–2006.

■ Standard Nomenclature
Chromosomal abnormalities are described using the International System for
Human Cytogenomic Nomenclature (McGowan-Jordan, 2020).
Abnormalities fall into two broad categories: abnormal chromosome
number, such as trisomy, and abnormal chromosome structure, such as a
DNA segment deletion or duplication. Each chromosome has a short arm,
termed the “p” or petit arm, and a long arm, known as the “q” arm, selected
because it is the next letter in the alphabet. The two arms are separated by the
centromere.
When reporting a karyotype, the total number of chromosomes is listed
first, corresponding to the number of centromeres. This is followed by the
sex chromosomes, XX or XY, and then by a description of any structural
variation. Specific chromosomal abnormalities are indicated by standard
abbreviations, such as del (deletion), inv (inversion), and t (translocation).
The affected region or bands of the arms are then reported, so that the reader
will know the exact location. Examples are shown in Table 16-1.
TABLE 16-1. Examples of Karyotype Designations Using the 2020
International System for Human Cytogenomic Nomenclature

Nomenclature is similar for fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), a
technique used to rapidly identify a specific chromosome abnormality (p.
325). The abbreviation ish applies when in situ hybridization is performed
on metaphase cells and nuc ish when performed on interphase nuclei. If the
result is normal, ish is followed by the probe’s specific chromosomal region,
such as 22q11.2, and then the name of the probe and the number of signals
visualized—for example, HIRAx2. If a deletion is identified, del is included
before the chromosomal region, and the name of the probe is followed by a
minus sign (HIRA–), as shown in Table 16-1. The 22q11.2 deletion
syndrome is discussed later (p. 315).
For chromosomal microarray analysis (CMA), the designation begins
with the abbreviation arr (p. 348). This is followed by the version of the
genome build to which the nucleotide designations are aligned, such as
GRCh38 for Genome Reference Consortium human build 38. Next, the
number of the chromosome containing the abnormality is listed, followed by

the p or q arm, and then the specific bands in question. CMA reports also
include the affected base pair coordinates and thus convey the exact size and
location for every abnormality identified (see Table 16-1). The information
is reported in the same way whether the alteration is pathogenic or is of
uncertain clinical significance.

■ Abnormalities of Chromosome Number
The most easily recognized chromosomal abnormalities are numerical.
Aneuploidy is the inheritance of either an extra chromosome—resulting in
trisomy, or loss of a chromosome—monosomy. This differs from polyploidy,
which is an abnormal number of whole haploid chromosome sets. For
example, triploidy has 69 chromosomes. The estimated incidence of various
numerical chromosomal abnormalities is shown in Figure 16-1 (Wellesley,
2012).

Autosomal Trisomies
Trisomy usually results from nondisjunction, which is the failure of normal
chromosomal pairing and separation during meiosis. Nondisjunction may
occur if the chromosomes: (1) fail to pair up, (2) pair up properly but
separate prematurely, or (3) fail to separate. Although each chromosome pair
is equally likely to have a segregation error, trisomies other than 21, 18, or
13 rarely result in term pregnancies. Each of these autosomal trisomies has a
spectrum of phenotypic severity. Some fetuses come to attention earlier in a
pregnancy due to multiple major organ abnormalities or hydrops fetalis (p.
328). Others have more subtle findings or are detected only through prenatal
screening tests (Chap. 17, p. 337). Survival data are based on cases with
better prognosis, and this factors into counseling.
The likelihood that a pregnancy will be complicated by an autosomal
trisomy rises steeply with maternal age and particularly after age 35 (Fig.
16-2) (Mai, 2013). From birth until ovulation, oocytes are suspended in
midprophase of meiosis I. If nondisjunction occurs after completion of
meiosis, one gamete will have two copies of the affected chromosome,
which leads to trisomy if fertilized. The other gamete, receiving no copy of
the affected chromosome, is nullisomic and will be monosomic if fertilized.
It is estimated that 10 to 20 percent of oocytes are aneuploid secondary to
meiotic errors compared with 3 to 4 percent of sperm. After a pregnancy

with an autosomal trisomy, the risk for any autosomal trisomy in a future
pregnancy approximates 1 percent until the woman’s age-related risk exceeds
this. Screening and prenatal diagnosis of autosomal trisomies are discussed
in Chapter 17 (p. 333). Parental chromosomal studies are not indicated
unless the abnormality was caused by an unbalanced translocation or other
structural rearrangement (p. 315).

FIGURE 16-2 Prevalence of autosomal trisomies according to maternal age found in population-based
birth defect surveillance programs in the United States, 2006–2010.

Trisomy 21—Down Syndrome. In 1866, J. L. H. Down described a group of
intellectually disabled children with distinctive physical features. Nearly
100 years later, Lejeune (1959) demonstrated that Down syndrome stems
from an autosomal trisomy (Fig. 16-3). Trisomy 21 causes 95 percent of
Down syndrome cases. The nondisjunction event occurs during meiosis I in
approximately 75 percent of cases and in meiosis II in the remainder.
Because chromosome 21 is acrocentric, a robertsonian translocation (p. 315)
may occur, and this accounts for 3 to 4 percent of Down syndrome births. The
remaining 1 to 2 percent are caused by isochromosome 21 or mosaicism for
chromosome 21 (p. 317).

FIGURE 16-3 Male karyotype with trisomy 21 (47,XY,+21), consistent with Down syndrome.
(Reproduced with permission from Dr. Prasad Koduru.)

Down syndrome is the most common nonlethal trisomy. It is identified in
approximately 1 in 450 pregnancies (Loane, 2013). In the United States, fetal
losses and pregnancy terminations yield an estimated prevalence of 1 case
per 740 live births (Mai, 2013; Parker, 2010). The fetal death rate beyond 20
weeks’ gestation approximates 5 percent. Coinciding with the rise in overall
number of pregnancies in women aged 35 years and older, the proportion of
pregnancies with Down syndrome has increased approximately 33 percent
during the past four decades (Loane, 2013; Parker, 2010; Shin, 2009). Most
Down syndrome births at Parkland Hospital now occur in women in this age
group (Hussamy, 2019).
If major anomalies and minor aneuploidy markers are considered, 50 to
75 percent of pregnancies affected by Down syndrome are found to have a
sonographic abnormality (Chap. 17, p. 340) (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020d; Hussamy, 2019). A major structural
malformation is detected in the second trimester in approximately one third
of cases. The most prevalent anomalies in affected children are cardiac and
gastrointestinal. Cardiac abnormalities occur in approximately 50 percent,

particularly endocardial cushion defects and ventricular septal defects (Figs.
15-39A and 15-39B, p. 291) (Bergstrom, 2016; Freeman, 2008; Stoll, 2015).
Gastrointestinal abnormalities are identified in 6 to 12 percent and include
esophageal atresia, duodenal atresia, and Hirschsprung disease (Fig. 15-48,
p. 296) (Bull, 2011; Stoll, 2015).
Other health problems are also common with Down syndrome. These
include hearing loss in 75 percent, optical refractive errors in 50 percent,
cataracts in 15 percent, obstructive sleep apnea in 60 percent, thyroid
disease in 15 percent, transient myeloproliferative disorder in 10 percent of
newborns, early-onset Alzheimer’s disease in 70 percent of adults, and a
higher incidence of leukemia (Bull, 2011; Hartley, 2015). Women with Down
syndrome are fertile, and nearly one third of their offspring will have Down
syndrome. Males with Down syndrome have markedly reduced
spermatogenesis and are almost always sterile. The average intelligence
quotient (IQ) score is 35 to 70. Social skills in affected children are usually
higher than predicted by their IQ scores.
Characteristic features of Down syndrome are shown in Figure 16-4.
Typical findings include brachycephaly; epicanthal folds and up-slanting
palpebral fissures; Brushfield spots, which are whitish spots on the
periphery of the iris; a flat nasal bridge; and hypotonia. Infants often have
loose skin at the nape of the neck, a prominent space or “sandal-gap”
between the first and second toes, short fingers, a single palmar crease, and
clinodactyly of the fifth digit, in which hypoplasia of the middle phalanx
causes inward curvature. Discussed in Chapter 17, some of these findings are
seen during prenatal ultrasound examination.

FIGURE 16-4 Newborn with Down syndrome, karyotype 47,XX,+21 (trisomy 21). A. Characteristic
facial features include epicanthal folds and a flattened nasal bridge. B. The hand has a single palmar

crease (arrow) and hypoplasia of the middle phalanx of the fifth digit (arrowhead). C. The “sandal
gap” between the first and second toes is also known as hallux varus. (Reproduced with permission
from Dr. Aldeboran N. Rodriguez.)

Data suggest that approximately 95 percent of liveborn infants with
Down syndrome survive the first year. The 10-year survival rate is at least
90 percent overall and is 99 percent if major malformations are absent
(Rankin, 2012; Vendola, 2010). Average life expectancy is 55 to 60 years.
Several organizations offer education and support for prospective parents
faced with prenatal diagnosis of Down syndrome. These include the March
of Dimes, National Down Syndrome Congress (www.ndsccenter.org), and
National Down Syndrome Society (www.ndss.org).
Trisomy 18—Edwards Syndrome. The association between this constellation
of abnormalities and an autosomal trisomy was first described by Edwards
(1960). In population-based series of abortuses, stillbirths, and live births,
trisomy 18 approximates 1 per 2000 recognized pregnancies (Goel, 2019;
Loane, 2013; Parker, 2010). High in-utero lethality and termination of many
affected pregnancies explains a live birth prevalence of just 1 per 6600 to
10,000. Unlike Down syndrome and Patau syndrome, which may result from
a robertsonian translocation because they involve acrocentric chromosomes,
Edwards syndrome uncommonly stems from a chromosomal rearrangement.
Virtually every organ can be affected by trisomy 18. Common major
anomalies include heart defects in more than 90 percent, particularly
ventricular septal defects. Cerebellar vermian agenesis, myelomeningocele,
diaphragmatic hernia, omphalocele, imperforate anus, and renal anomalies
such as horseshoe kidney are others (Rosa, 2011; Springett, 2015; Watson,
2008). Sonographic images of these abnormalities are shown in Chapter 15.
Frequent cranial and extremity abnormalities in affected fetuses include a
“strawberry-shaped” cranium, abnormally wide cavum septum pellucidum,
choroid plexus cysts, micrognathia, clenched hands with overlapping digits,
radial aplasia with hyperflexed wrists, and rockerbottom or clubbed feet
(Fig. 16-5) (Abele, 2013). Importantly, choroid plexus cysts only raise the
risk for trisomy 18 in the setting of other risk factors, such as fetal structural
abnormalities or an abnormal aneuploidy screening test result (Reddy, 2014).

FIGURE 16-5 Trisomy 18—Edwards Syndrome. A. This transventricular sonographic view shows
fetal choroid plexus cysts and an angulated “strawberry-shaped” skull. B. Radial clubhand is manifested
as a single forearm bone (radius), with the hands in a fixed, hyperflexed position at right angles to the
forearms. C. This three-dimensional (3-D) sonographic image shows the characteristic hand position of
clenched fist with overlapping digits. D. 3-D sonographic image displays a rockerbottom foot (vertical
talus).

Pregnancies with trisomy 18 that reach the third trimester often develop
fetal-growth restriction, and the mean birthweight is <2500 g (Lin, 2006;
Rosa, 2011). When undiagnosed, trisomy 18 has resulted in emergency
cesarean for “fetal distress” in nearly 50 percent of cases (Schneider, 1981;
Houlihan, 2013). Mode of delivery and management of heart rate
abnormalities should be discussed in advance. Discussed in Chapter 35 (p.
628), perinatal palliative care consultation should be offered (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019).

In the National Birth Defects Prevention Study, median neonatal survival
with trisomy 18 was 8 days, and the 5-year survival rate was 12 percent
(Meyer, 2016). Not unexpectedly, major anomalies lower survival rates.
Data from the Society of Thoracic Surgeons indicate that infants with trisomy
18 who undergo cardiac surgery have mortality rates 3 to 5 times higher than
those without trisomy 18 (Cooper, 2019). Thus, among the minority with
trisomy 18 who survive until birth, the condition is severely life limiting.
Trisomy 13—Patau Syndrome. This constellation of fetal abnormalities and
their association with an autosomal trisomy was first described by Patau and
colleagues (1960). The incidence of trisomy 13 approximates 1 case in 5000
recognized pregnancies, which includes abortuses and stillbirths. Most
affected fetuses are lost or terminated. The live birth prevalence is 1 per
12,000 to 18,000 (Goel, 2019; Loane, 2013; Parker, 2010).
At least 80 percent of pregnancies with Patau syndrome result from
trisomy 13. With rare exception, the remainder are caused by a robertsonian
translocation involving chromosome 13. The most common translocation
involves chromosomes 13 and 14, der(13;14)(q10;q10), which is carried by
approximately 1 in 1300 phenotypically normal individuals. Among
translocation carriers, fewer than 2 percent give birth to a live infant with
Patau syndrome.
Trisomy 13 may be associated with abnormalities of any organ system.
Abnormalities of the brain, heart, kidneys, and extremities are the most
frequent. Holoprosencephaly, usually the alobar type, is present in two thirds
of cases and often is accompanied by severe facial abnormalities (Fig. 1513, p. 279). These may include hypotelorism or cyclopia, microphthalmia,
and nasal abnormalities that range from a single nostril to a proboscis.
Cardiac defects are found in up to 90 percent (Shipp, 2002). Other
abnormalities that suggest trisomy 13 include cephalocele, microcephaly,
omphalocele, cystic renal dysplasia, polydactyly, rockerbottom feet, aplasia
cutis, and cleft lip-palate, which may be median (Lin, 2007; Springett, 2015).
Sonographic images of several of these are shown in Chapter 15. Affected
fetuses often also have bilateral echogenic intracardiac foci. For the fetus or
newborn with a cephalocele, cystic kidneys, and polydactyly, the differential
diagnosis includes trisomy 13 and the autosomal-recessive Meckel–Gruber
syndrome.

Trisomy 13 is life limiting, even more so than trisomy 18 (Domingo,
2019). In the National Birth Defects Prevention Study, median survival of
neonates with trisomy 13 was 5 days, and the 5-year survival rate was below
10 percent (Meyer, 2016). Occasionally children with trisomy 13 have been
candidates for palliative surgical procedures. Most of these have a milder
phenotype that lacks brain, cardiac, gastrointestinal, or genitourinary
abnormalities (Nelson, 2016). Counseling regarding prenatal diagnosis and
management options is similar to that described for trisomy 18.
Unlike other aneuploidies, fetal trisomy 13 confers risk to the pregnant
woman. Continuing pregnancies have at least a 25-percent risk for
hypertensive complications (Dotters-Katz, 2018; Tuohy, 1992). The risk for
preeclampsia with severe features is increased more than tenfold and often
develops prior to 32 weeks’ gestation. Chromosome 13 contains the gene for
soluble fms-like tyrosine kinase-1 (sFlt-1), which is an antiangiogenic
protein associated with preeclampsia (Chap. 40, p. 694). Investigators have
documented overexpression of the sFlt-1 protein by trisomic 13 placentas
and in serum of women with preeclampsia (Bdolah, 2006; Silasi, 2011).
Other Trisomies. Live births are extremely rare with any other autosomal
trisomy. Trisomy 22 has been described in case reports and series (Heinrich,
2013; Kehinde, 2014). Affected fetuses have severe growth restriction,
microcephaly with an abnormal-shaped cranium, midface hypoplasia, and
cardiac and genitourinary abnormalities. Trisomy 16 is the most prevalent
trisomy among first-trimester losses, accounting for 16 percent. Trisomies 21
and 22 are also common among first trimester losses. Trisomy 1 has never
been reported.

Monosomy
Nondisjunction creates an equal number of nullisomic and disomic gametes.
As a rule, missing chromosomal material is more devastating than extra
chromosomal material, and almost all monosomic conceptuses are lost
before implantation. The one exception is monosomy for the X chromosome
(45,X), Turner syndrome, which is discussed subsequently. Unlike autosomal
trisomies, which increase in incidence with maternal age, monosomy and
maternal age lack an association.

Polyploidy

This is defined as more than two complete haploid chromosomal sets.
Polyploidy accounts for approximately 20 percent of spontaneous abortions
but is rarely found later in gestation.
Triploid pregnancies have three haploid sets, 69 chromosomes. If extra
set of chromosomes is paternal, the result is diandric triploidy, and if
maternal, digynic triploidy, relevant because the phenotype reflects the
parent of origin. This is an example of imprinting (p. 322). Diandric or type
I triploidy occurs after fertilization of one egg by two sperm or by one
abnormal diploid sperm. Diandric triploidy produces a partial molar
pregnancy, discussed in Chapter 13 (p. 237). With digynic or type II
triploidy, the extra chromosomal set is maternal, and the egg fails to undergo
the first or second meiotic division before fertilization. Digynic triploid
placentas do not develop molar changes. However, the fetus usually
develops asymmetrical growth restriction. Although diandric triploidy
accounts for the majority of triploid conceptions, the early loss rate is so high
that two thirds of triploid pregnancies identified beyond the first trimester
are digynic ( Jauniaux, 1999).
Triploidy is recognized in 1 per 5000 pregnancies (Zalel, 2016). It is
considered lethal, and fetuses with either the diandric or digynic form
typically have multiple structural anomalies. The brain, heart, kidneys, and
extremities are commonly affected (Massalska, 2017; Zalel, 2016).
Counseling, prenatal diagnosis, and delivery management are similar to those
for trisomies 18 and 13. The recurrence risk for a woman whose triploid
fetus survived past the first trimester is 1 to 1.5 percent, and thus prenatal
diagnosis is offered in future pregnancies.
Tetraploid pregnancies have four haploid sets of chromosomes, resulting
in either 92,XXXX or 92,XXYY. This suggests a postzygotic failure to
complete an early cleavage division. The conceptus invariably succumbs,
and the recurrence risk is minimal.

Sex Chromosome Abnormalities
45,X—Turner Syndrome. First described by Turner (1938), this syndrome
later was found to be caused by monosomy X (Ford, 1959). The birth
prevalence of Turner syndrome is approximately 1 in 2500 girls (Cragan,
2009; Dolk, 2010). The missing X chromosome is paternally derived in 80
percent of cases (Cockwell, 1991; Hassold, 1990).

Turner syndrome is the only monosomy compatible with life, but it is also
the most common aneuploidy in first-trimester losses, accounting for 20
percent. This is explained by its wide range in phenotype. Approximately 98
percent of affected conceptuses are so abnormal that they abort early in the
first trimester. Of the remainder, many manifest large, septated cystic
hygromas in the late first or early second trimester, often in the setting of
edema that progresses to hydrops fetalis. When cystic hygromas are
accompanied by hydrops, the prognosis is extremely poor (Chap. 15, p. 286).
Fewer than 1 percent of pregnancies with Turner syndrome result in a
liveborn neonate. Of these, only half are actually monosomy X—
approximately a fourth have mosaicism for monosomy X, such as
45,X/46,XX or 45,X/46,XY, and another 15 percent have isochromosome X.
It is thought that surviving individuals with 45,X may have had the benefit of
“rescue” by an additional cell line containing 46,XX during critical phases
of development that was subsequently lost (Hook, 2014).
Abnormalities associated with Turner syndrome include left-sided
cardiac defects—such as coarctation of the aorta, hypoplastic left heart
syndrome, or bicuspid aortic valve—in 30 to 50 percent; renal anomalies,
particularly horseshoe kidney; and hypothyroidism. Other features are short
stature, broad chest with widely spaced nipples, congenital lymphedema—
puffiness over the dorsum of hands and feet, and a “webbed” posterior neck
resulting from cystic hygromas. Intelligence scores are generally in the
normal range, but there may be impairments in visual-spatial organization,
nonverbal problem solving, and interpretation of social cues. A consensus
guideline is available that addresses screening and treatment for the range of
health problems affected individuals face (Graveholt, 2017). Growth
hormone is typically administered in childhood to ameliorate short stature.
More than 90 percent have ovarian dysgenesis and require estrogen repletion
at puberty. An exception is mosaicism involving the Y chromosome, as this
confers risk for germ cell neoplasm—regardless of whether the child is
phenotypically male or female. Accordingly, eventual prophylactic bilateral
gonadectomy is indicated (Cools, 2011; Schorge, 2020).
47,XXX. Approximately 1 in 1000 female newborns has an additional X
chromosome—47,XXX (Berglund, 2020). The extra X is maternally derived
in more than 90 percent of cases. The prevalence of 47,XXX is weakly
associated with maternal age, and cell-free DNA screening has resulted in

increased diagnoses. No specific pattern of malformations has been
described, but genitourinary problems and seizure disorders are more
common (Wigby, 2016). Affected infants do not have a characteristic
appearance. When children do come to attention, features may include tall
stature, hypertelorism, epicanthal folds, kyphoscoliosis, clinodactyly, and
hypotonia (Tartaglia, 2010; Wigby, 2016). More than one third are diagnosed
with a learning disability, half have attention deficit disorder, and overall
cognitive scores are in the low-average range. Pubertal development is
unaffected. Primary ovarian insufficiency has been reported. In the absence
of prenatal diagnosis, it is estimated that 47,XXX is ascertained in only 10
percent of affected children (Tartalgia, 2010).
Females with two or more extra X chromosomes—48,XXXX or
49,XXXXX—are likely to have physical abnormalities apparent at birth.
These abnormal X complements are associated with intellectual disability.
For both males and females, the IQ score is lower with each additional X
chromosome.
47,XXY—Klinefelter Syndrome. This is the most common sex chromosome
abnormality. It occurs in approximately 1 in 700 male infants (Radicioni,
2010). The additional X chromosome is maternally or paternally derived
with equal propensity (Jacobs, 1995; Lowe, 2001). There is a weak
association with advanced maternal and paternal age.
Like 47,XXX, newborns with 47,XXY usually appear phenotypically
normal and do not have a higher incidence of anomalies. As children, boys
are typically taller than average and have normal prepubertal development.
However, they have gonadal dysgenesis, do not undergo normal virilization,
and require testosterone supplementation. They may develop gynecomastia.
IQ scores usually lie in the average to low-average range, with increased
rates of delayed language development (Boada, 2009; Girardin, 2011).
Initiation of hormone replacement was previously recommended to begin in
adolescence. However, more recent research suggests that therapy earlier in
childhood results in improved working memory and executive functioning
and a decrease in anxiety disorders (Samango-Sprouse 2019; Tran, 2019).
47,XYY. This aneuploidy occurs in approximately 1 in 1000 male newborns
(Berglund, 2020). As with 47,XXX and XXY individuals, affected boys tend
to be tall. A third have macrocephaly, nearly two thirds demonstrate

hypotonia, and tremors are common (Bardsley, 2013). Rates of major
anomalies are not elevated, although hypertelorism and clinodactyly may be
identified in more than half. Pubertal development is normal, and fertility is
unimpaired. Affected individuals do have increased rates of oral and written
language impairments, attention deficit disorder, developmental delays, and
autism spectrum disorder (Bardsley, 2013; Joseph, 2018).
Males with more than two Y chromosomes—48,XYYY—or with both
additional X and Y chromosomes—48,XXYY or 49,XXXYY—are more
likely to have congenital abnormalities, medical problems, and intellectual
disability (Tartaglia, 2011).

■ Abnormalities of Chromosome Structure
Structural chromosomal abnormalities include deletions, duplications,
translocations, isochromosomes, inversions, ring chromosomes, and
mosaicism (see Table 16-1). Identification of a structural chromosomal
abnormality in offspring raises two primary questions. First, what phenotypic
or later developmental abnormalities are associated with the finding?
Second, is parental karyotype evaluation indicated? In other words, are the
parents at increased risk of carrying this abnormality, and if so, what is their
risk of having future affected offspring?

Deletions and Duplications
A chromosome with a deletion has a stretch of DNA that is missing, whereas
one with a duplication has a region that is included twice. Most deletions and
duplications occur during meiosis and result from malalignment or
mismatching during the pairing of homologous chromosomes. The misaligned
segment may then be deleted, or if the mismatch remains when the two
chromosomes recombine, it may result in a deletion in one chromosome and
duplication in the other (Fig. 16-6). When a deletion or duplication is
identified in a fetus or infant, parental karyotyping should be offered, because
if either parent carries a balanced translocation, the recurrence risk in
subsequent pregnancies is significantly increased. Deletions involving DNA
segments large enough to be seen with standard cytogenetic karyotyping are
identified in approximately 1 in 7000 births. Common deletions may be
referred to by eponyms—for example, del 5p is called cri du chat syndrome.

FIGURE 16-6 A mismatch during pairing of homologous chromosomes may lead to a deletion in one
chromosome and a duplication in the other. Del = deletion; Dupl = duplication.

Microdeletions and Microduplications. When a deletion or duplication is
smaller than 3 to 5 million base pairs, it is too small to be detected with a
standard karyotype analysis. CMA permits identification of these
microdeletions and microduplications (p. 325). When CMA is used, the
region of DNA that is missing or duplicated is termed a genomic copy
number variant. A microdeletion or duplication may involve a stretch of
DNA that contains multiple genes. This causes a contiguous gene syndrome,
which can encompass serious but unrelated phenotypic abnormalities
(Schmickel, 1986). In some cases, a microduplication may involve the exact
DNA region that causes a recognized microdeletion syndrome (Table 16-2).
When a specific microdeletion syndrome is suspected clinically, it is
confirmed using either CMA or FISH.
TABLE 16-2. Selected Microdeletion Syndromes

22q11.2 Microdeletion Syndrome. This syndrome is also known as
DiGeorge syndrome, Shprintzen syndrome, and velocardiofacial syndrome. It
is the most common microdeletion, with a prevalence of 1 case in 3000 to
6000 births. Inheritance is autosomal dominant—offspring of affected
individuals have a 50-percent chance of inheriting the syndrome. However,
more than 90 percent of cases arise from a de-novo mutation. The full
deletion contains 3 million base pairs, encompasses 40 genes, and includes
180 different features (Shprintzen, 2008). This is emblematic of a contiguous
gene syndrome and poses counseling challenges because features can vary
widely, even among family members. With prenatal diagnosis of an affected
fetus, genetic testing is offered to the pregnant patient and her partner.

Approximately 75 percent of affected individuals have an associated
conotruncal cardiac anomaly, such as tetralogy of Fallot, truncus arteriosus,
interrupted aortic arch, or ventricular septal defect (McDonald-McGinn,
2015). Immune deficiency, such as T-cell lymphopenia, also develops in 75
percent. More than 70 percent have velopharyngeal insufficiency or cleft
palate. Characteristic facial features include short palpebral fissures,
bulbous nasal tip, micrognathia, short philtrum, and small or posteriorly
rotated ears. Learning disabilities, autism spectrum disorder, and intellectual
disability also are common. Other manifestations include hypocalcemia,
renal anomalies, esophageal dysmotility, hearing loss, behavioral disorders,
and psychiatric illness, particularly schizophrenia.

Chromosomal Translocations
These are DNA rearrangements in which a DNA segment breaks away from
one chromosome and attaches to another. The rearranged chromosomes are
called derivative (der) chromosomes. The two types are reciprocal and
robertsonian translocations.
Reciprocal Translocations. A double-segment or reciprocal translocation
results when breaks occur in two different chromosomes and the broken
fragments are exchanged. Each affected chromosome receives a fragment of
the other. If no chromosomal material is gained or lost, the translocation is
considered balanced. The prevalence of reciprocal translocations
approximates 1 in 600 births.
The carrier of a balanced translocation will usually have a normal
phenotype. However, repositioning of specific genes within chromosomal
segments may cause major structural or developmental abnormalities in
approximately 6 percent of apparently balanced translocation carriers. Using
CMA technology, up to 20 percent of individuals who appear to have a
balanced translocation are found instead to have missing or redundant DNA
segments (Manning, 2010).
Balanced translocation carriers are at risk to produce unbalanced
gametes, resulting in abnormal offspring. As shown in Figure 16-7, if an
oocyte or sperm contains a translocated chromosome, fertilization results in
an unbalanced translocation—monosomy for part of one affected
chromosome and trisomy for part of the other. In general, translocation
carriers identified after the birth of an abnormal child have a 5- to 30-percent

risk of producing liveborn offspring with an unbalanced translocation.
Carriers identified for other reasons, for example, during an infertility
evaluation, have only a 5-percent risk. This risk is lower because gametes
are so abnormal that conceptions are nonviable.

FIGURE 16-7 A carrier of a balanced translocation may produce offspring who are also carriers of
the balanced rearrangement (B), offspring with unbalanced translocations (C, D), or offspring with
normal chromosomal complements (A).

Robertsonian Translocations. These involve only the acrocentric
chromosomes—13, 14, 15, 21, and 22. Acrocentric chromosomes have
extremely short p arms, and the p arms contain redundant copies of genes
coding for ribosomal RNA. In a robertsonian translocation, the q arms of two
acrocentric chromosomes fuse at one centromere to form a derivative
chromosome, and the other centromere and both p arms are lost. The lost
DNA is present in multiple copies on other acrocentric chromosomes, and
thus the translocation carrier is usually phenotypically normal. Because the
number of centromeres determines the chromosome count, a robertsonian
translocation carrier has only 45 chromosomes.

Balanced robertsonian carriers have reproductive difficulties. During
fertilization, if the derivative chromosome pairs with a normal haploid
chromosome, the resulting offspring will have trisomy. If the fused
chromosomes are homologous, that is, from the same chromosome pair, the
carrier can produce only unbalanced gametes. Each egg or sperm contains
either both copies of the translocated chromosome, which would result in
trisomy if fertilized, or no copy, which would result in monosomy. If the
fused chromosomes are nonhomologous, four of the six possible gametes
would be abnormal.
Robertsonian translocations are found in 1 in 1000 individuals. The risk
to have an abnormal offspring approximates 15 percent if a robertsonian
translocation is carried by the mother and 2 percent if carried by the father.
However, robertsonian translocations are not a major cause of miscarriage
and are identified in fewer than 5 percent of couples evaluated for recurrent
pregnancy loss. If a fetus or child is found to have a translocation trisomy,
both parents should be offered karyotype analysis. If neither parent is a
carrier, the recurrence risk is extremely low. The most common robertsonian
translocation is der(13;14)(q10;q10), which accounts for up to 20 percent of
cases of Patau syndrome (p. 313).

Isochromosomes
When either two p arms or two q arms from the same chromosome fuse
together, an isochromosome results. This may occur if the centromere breaks
transversely instead of longitudinally during meiosis II or mitosis.
Alternately, an isochromosome can result from a meiotic error in a
chromosome with a robertsonian translocation. If the isochromosome is
acrocentric, it is composed of two q arms and will behave like a homologous
robertsonian translocation. Such a carrier is phenotypically normal but can
produce only abnormal, unbalanced gametes. If the isochromosome is
nonacrocentric, it may be composed of either two p arms or two q arms.
Functionally this results in trisomy of the genes on the arms that are present
and monosomy of the genes on the arms that are lost. Thus, the carrier is
usually phenotypically abnormal and produces abnormal gametes. The most
common isochromosome involves the long arm of the X chromosome, i(Xq),
which is the etiology of 15 percent of cases of Turner syndrome.

Chromosomal Inversions
When the same chromosome breaks in two places, the intervening genetic
material may invert before the breaks are repaired. Although no genetic
material is lost or duplicated, an inversion may alter gene function. There are
two types—pericentric and paracentric inversions.
Pericentric Inversion. This results from breaks in both the p and q arms of a
chromosome, such that the inverted material spans the centromere (Fig. 168). A pericentric inversion causes problems in chromosomal alignment
during meiosis and confers significant risk for the carrier to produce
abnormal gametes and abnormal offspring. The observed risk of abnormal
offspring is 5 to 10 percent if ascertainment is made after the birth of an
abnormal child. The risk is only 1 to 3 percent if prompted by another
indication. An important exception is inv(9)(p11q12), a pericentric inversion
on chromosome 9 that is a normal variant and present in approximately 1
percent of the population.

FIGURE 16-8 Pericentric inversion involves the centromere, whereas paracentric inversion does not.
Individuals with pericentric inversions are at risk to have offspring with a duplication/deletion. Those
with paracentric inversions are at increased risk for early pregnancy loss.

Paracentric Inversion. If one arm of a chromosome suffers the two breaks, the
inverted material does not include the centromere, and the inversion is

paracentric (see Fig. 16-8). The carrier makes either normal balanced
gametes or gametes that are so abnormal as to preclude fertilization. Thus,
although infertility may be a problem, the risk of having an abnormal
offspring is extremely low.

Ring Chromosome
If a deletion occurs at each end of the same chromosome, the ends may come
together to form a ring chromosome. The telomere regions at the ends of each
chromosome contain redundant nucleoprotein complexes that stabilize the
chromosome. If only the telomeres are lost, all necessary genetic material is
retained, and the carrier is balanced. If a deletion extends more proximally
than the telomere, the carrier is likely to be phenotypically abnormal. An
example of this is the ring X chromosome, which may result in Turner
syndrome.

■ Mosaicism
A mosaic individual has two or more cytogenetically distinct cell lines that
are derived from a single zygote. Phenotypic expression of mosaicism
depends on several factors, including whether the cytogenetically abnormal
cells involve the fetus, part of the fetus, just the placenta, or some
combination. Mosaicism is found in approximately 0.3 percent of amnionic
fluid cultures (Carey, 2014). When abnormal cells are present in only a
single flask of amnionic fluid, the finding is likely pseudomosaicism, caused
by cell-culture artifact (Bui, 1984; Hsu, 1984). When abnormal cells involve
multiple cultures, however, true mosaicism is more likely. Further testing
verifies a second cell line in 60 to 70 percent of these fetuses (Hsu, 1984;
Worton, 1984).

Confined Placental Mosaicism
Mosaicism involving a gene abnormality is detected in 1 to 2 percent of
chorionic villus sampling specimens. Amniocentesis should be offered. In a
series of more than 1000 pregnancies with mosaicism at chorionic villus
sampling, subsequent amniocentesis identified true fetal mosaicism in 13
percent. Confined placental mosaicism accounted for 85 percent of cases,
and uniparental disomy, discussed later (p. 322), was found in 2 percent

(Malvestiti, 2015). If mosaicism is detected for a chromosome known to
contain imprinted genes—such as chromosomes 6, 7, 11, 14, or 15—testing
for uniparental disomy should be considered, as there may be fetal
consequences (Grati, 2014a).
Although outcomes with confined placental mosaicism are generally
good, risks of fetal-growth restriction and stillbirth are higher (Reddy, 2009).
Fetal-growth restriction may stem from impaired functioning of the aneuploid
placental cells (Baffero, 2012). In a recent series of 5500 pregnancies
undergoing chorionic villus sampling, the preterm birth rate in pregnancies
with confined placental mosaicism was 45 percent, and 50 percent of
affected newborns were small for gestational age (Toutain, 2018). Placental
mosaicism for trisomy 16 confers a particularly poor prognosis, with as few
as 1 in 3 pregnancies resulting in normal outcome (Grau Madsen, 2018).

Gonadal Mosaicism
Also called germline mosaicism, this refers to having one cell line in
gametes and another in somatic cells. A genetic abnormality that is confined
to gamete cells will affect all cells in the offspring. Thus, gonadal mosaicism
can account for apparently de-novo diseases in the offspring of normal
parents. Because spermatogonia and oogonia divide throughout fetal life, and
spermatogonia continue to divide throughout adulthood, a meiotic error can
occur in germ cells that were previously normal. New mutations identified in
an offspring whose father is older than 40 may arise through this mechanism,
as discussed later (p. 319) (Wilkie, 2017). Gonadal mosaicism also explains
the 6-percent recurrence risk after the birth of a child with a disease caused
by a “new” mutation.

MODES OF INHERITANCE
A monogenic or mendelian disorder is caused by a mutation or alteration in
a single locus or gene in one or both members of a gene pair. Types of
mendelian inheritance include autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive, Xlinked, and Y-linked (Table 16-3). Other monogenic inheritance patterns
include mitochondrial inheritance, uniparental disomy, imprinting, and
trinucleotide repeat expansion.

TABLE 16-3. Selected Monogenic (Mendelian) Disorders

■ Relationship between Phenotype and Genotype
When considering inheritance, it is the phenotype that is dominant or
recessive, not the genotype. If a disease is dominant, a normal gene directs
the production of normal protein, but the phenotype will be abnormal
because of protein produced by the abnormal gene. A heterozygous carrier of
a recessive disease may produce detectable levels of an abnormal gene
product but have no features of the condition, because the phenotype is
directed by the product of the normal co-gene. For example, erythrocytes
from carriers of sickle-cell anemia contain approximately 30 percent
hemoglobin S, but because the other 70 percent is hemoglobin A, these cells
do not usually sickle in vivo.

Heterogeneity
Genetic heterogeneity explains how different genetic mechanisms may result
in the same phenotype. Locus heterogeneity indicates that a specific disease
phenotype can be caused by mutations in different genetic loci. It also
explains why some diseases appear to follow more than one type of
inheritance. For example, retinitis pigmentosa may develop following
mutations in at least 35 different genes or loci and may result in autosomal
dominant, autosomal recessive, or X-linked forms. Allelic heterogeneity
describes how different mutations of the same gene may affect presentation of
a particular disease. For example, although only one gene has been
associated with cystic fibrosis—the cystic fibrosis conductance

transmembrane regulator gene—more than 2000 mutations in this gene have
been described and result in variable disease severity (Chaps. 17, p. 342 and
54, p. 968). Phenotypic heterogeneity explains how different disease states
can arise from different mutations in the same gene. As an example, mutations
in the fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 (FGFR3) gene may result in
several different skeletal disorders, including achondroplasia and
thanatophoric dysplasia, both of which are discussed in Chapter 15 (p. 302).

■ Autosomal Dominant Inheritance
If only one copy of a gene pair determines the phenotype, that gene is
considered to be dominant. Carriers have a 50-percent chance of passing on
the affected gene with each conception. A gene with a dominant mutation
generally specifies the phenotype in preference to the normal gene. That said,
not all individuals will necessarily manifest an autosomal dominant
condition the same way. Factors that affect the phenotype of an autosomal
dominant condition include penetrance, expressivity, and presence of
codominant genes.

Penetrance
This characteristic describes whether a dominant gene is expressed. A gene
with recognizable phenotypic expression in all individuals has complete
penetrance. Penetrance is incomplete if some carriers express the gene but
others do not. A gene that is expressed in 80 percent of individuals is 80percent penetrant. Incomplete penetrance explains why some autosomal
dominant diseases may appear to “skip” generations.

Expressivity
Individuals with the same autosomal dominant trait may manifest the
condition differently, even within the same family. Genes with variable
expressivity can produce disease manifestations that range from mild to
severe. Examples include neurofibromatosis, tuberous sclerosis, and adult
polycystic kidney disease.

Codominant Genes

If two different alleles in a gene pair are both expressed in the phenotype,
they are considered to be codominant. Blood type, for example, is
determined by expression of dominant A and B red-cell antigens that can be
expressed simultaneously. Another example of codominance is the group of
genes responsible for hemoglobin production. If one gene directs production
of hemoglobin S and the other directs production of hemoglobin C, that
individual will produce both S and C hemoglobin (Chap. 59, p. 1053).

Advanced Paternal Age
Paternal age older than 40 is associated with increased risk for spontaneous
genetic mutations. Spermatogonia undergo mitotic division every 16 days,
and the many replications raise the risk for single base-pair mutations. As a
result, offspring of older fathers are at risk for new autosomal dominant
disorders and X-linked carrier states. Several in particular have been termed
paternal age effect disorders (Goriely 2012). These include mutations in the
fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 (FGFR2) gene, which may cause
craniosynostosis syndromes such as Apert, Crouzon, and Pfeiffer syndromes;
mutations in the FGFR3 gene, which may result in achondroplasia and
thanatophoric dysplasia; and mutations in the RET proto-oncogene, which
may cause multiple endocrine neoplasia syndromes (Toriello, 2008).
Using whole genome sequencing to study SNPs among offspring of older
fathers, Kong and associates (2012) found an increase of approximately two
mutations for each year of paternal age past 40. The absolute risk for any
specific condition is low, because individual autosomal dominant disorders
are uncommon. Thus, no screening or testing is specifically recommended.

■ Autosomal Recessive Inheritance
Recessive diseases develop only when both gene copies are abnormal.
Unless carriers are screened for a specific disease, they usually are
recognized only after the birth of an affected child or the diagnosis of an
affected family member. If a couple has a child with an autosomal recessive
disease, the recurrence risk is 25 percent for each subsequent pregnancy.
Thus, 1/4 of offspring will be homozygous normal, 2/4 will be heterozygous
carriers, and 1/4 will be homozygous abnormal. In other words, three of four
children will be phenotypically normal, and 2/3 of phenotypically normal
siblings are actually carriers.

A heterozygous carrier of a recessive condition is only at risk to have
affected children if her or his partner is heterozygous or homozygous for the
disease. Genes for rare autosomal recessive conditions have low prevalence
in the general population. Thus, the likelihood that a partner will be a gene
carrier is small, unless there is consanguinity or the partner is a member of
an at-risk group. Carrier screening is discussed in Chapter 17 (p. 342).
Preimplantation genetic testing allows a blastocyst to be genetically
evaluated prior to intrauterine transfer during in vitro fertilization and is
described also in Chapter 17 (p. 348).

Inborn Errors of Metabolism
Most of these autosomal recessive diseases result from absence of a crucial
enzyme, leading to incomplete metabolism of proteins, lipids, or
carbohydrates. The metabolic intermediates that build up are toxic to various
tissues and may result in intellectual disability or other abnormalities.
Phenylketonuria. Also known as phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH)
deficiency, this autosomal recessive disease is caused by mutations in the
PAH gene. PAH metabolizes phenylalanine to tyrosine, and homozygotes have
diminished or absent enzyme activity. This leads to abnormally high levels of
phenylalanine, which results in progressive intellectual impairment, autism,
seizures, motor deficits, and neuropsychological abnormalities (Blau, 2010).
Because phenylalanine competitively inhibits tyrosine hydroxylase, which is
essential for melanin production, affected individuals also have hair, eye,
and skin hypopigmentation. More than 600 PAH gene mutations have been
characterized, and the carrier frequency varies by ethnicity. For those of
Northern European origin, carrier frequency is 1 in 50, such that the disease
affects up to 1 in 10,000 newborns (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2020b). Prompt diagnosis and restriction of dietary
phenylalanine beginning early in infancy are essential to prevent neurological
damage. All states mandate newborn screening for phenylketonuria (PKU).
Phenylalanine restriction alone would result in inadequate protein
consumption, and phenylalanine-free amino acid–based supplementation is
required. Maintenance of phenylalanine concentrations in the range of 2 to 6
mg/dL (120 to 360 μmol/L) is recommended from at least 3 months prior to
pregnancy and continuing throughout pregnancy (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020b).

Unfortunately, phenylalanine is actively transported to the fetus. Women
with PKU whose phenylalanine levels remain above the recommended range
during pregnancy are at risk to have otherwise normal (heterozygous)
offspring who sustain significant in utero damage as a result of being exposed
to toxic phenylalanine concentrations. Hyperphenylalaninemia raises the risk
for miscarriage and for PKU embryopathy, which is characterized by
intellectual disability, microcephaly, seizures, growth impairment, and
cardiac anomalies. Among women on unrestricted diets, the risk to have a
child with intellectual disability exceeds 90 percent, microcephaly develops
in more than 70 percent, and as many as 1 in 6 children have cardiac defects.
The Maternal Phenylketonuria Collaborative Study, which included 572
pregnancies followed more than 18 years, reported that maintenance of serum
phenylalanine levels in the recommended range significantly reduced the
fetal abnormality risk and resulted in normal childhood IQ scores (Koch,
2003; Platt, 2000).
Approximately 25 to 50 percent of individuals with PKU experience a
significant decline in phenylalanine levels when treated with the synthetic
PAH cofactor tetrahydrobiopterin (sapropterin) (Vockley, 2014). Based on
registry data, sapropterin is considered a treatment option for those in whom
phenylalanine levels remain elevated despite dietary therapy (Grange, 2014).
Preconceptional counseling and consultation with providers from
experienced PKU centers is recommended.

Consanguinity
In medical genetics, a union is consanguineous if between second cousins or
closer relatives. Although uncommon in Western countries, the global
estimate of consanguineous parentage approximates 10 percent of the
population (Oniya, 2019). More than 1 billion people are estimated to live in
countries in which 20 to 50 percent of marriages are consanguineous
(Romeo, 2014). First-degree relatives share half of their genes, seconddegree relatives share a fourth, and third-degree relatives—first cousins—
share one eighth. Because of the potential for shared deleterious genes,
consanguinity confers an increased risk to have offspring with otherwise rare
autosomal recessive diseases or multifactorial disorders. In populationbased series, first cousins have twice the risk for offspring with congenital
abnormalities (Sheridan, 2013; Stoltenberg, 1997). Consanguinity is also
associated with a greater rate of stillbirth (Kapurubandara, 2016). Because

CMA performed using a SNP platform may identify consanguinity, it is
important that preprocedural counseling include this possibility.
Incest is defined as a sexual relationship between first-degree relatives
such as parent-child or brother-sister and is universally illegal. Progeny of
such unions carry the highest risk of abnormal outcomes. Older studies
reported that up to 40 percent of offspring were abnormal as a result of
recessive and multifactorial disorders (Baird, 1982; Freire-Maia, 1984).

■ X-Linked and Y-Linked Inheritance
Most X-linked diseases are recessive. Common examples include color
blindness, hemophilia A and B, and Duchenne and Becker muscular
dystrophy. A male with an X-linked recessive gene is usually affected by the
disease it causes, because he lacks a second X chromosome to express the
normal dominant gene. However, a male with an X-linked disease cannot
have affected sons because they do not receive his X chromosome. When a
woman carries a gene causing an X-linked recessive condition, each son has
a 50-percent risk of being affected, and each daughter has a 50-percent
chance of being a carrier.
Women with an X-linked recessive gene are generally unaffected by the
disease it causes. In some cases, however, the random inactivation of one X
chromosome in each cell—termed lyonization—is skewed, and female
carriers may have features of the condition. For example, approximately 10
percent of female carriers of hemophilia A will have factor VIII levels less
than 30 percent of normal, and a similar proportion of female hemophilia B
carriers have factor IX levels less than 30 percent. Levels below these
thresholds confer a greater risk for abnormal bleeding when affected women
give birth (Plug, 2006). Indeed, even with higher levels, carriers are
reported to be at increased risk for bleeding complications (Olsson, 2014).
Female carriers of Duchenne or Becker muscular dystrophy carry an elevated
risk for cardiomyopathy, and periodic evaluation for cardiac dysfunction and
neuromuscular disorders is recommended (American Academy of Pediatrics,
2008).
X-linked dominant disorders mainly affect females, because they tend to
be lethal in males. Two examples are vitamin D–resistant rickets and
incontinentia pigmenti. An important exception is fragile X syndrome,
discussed subsequently.

The prevalence of Y-linked disorders is low. The Y-chromosome carries
genes important for sex determination and various cellular functions related
to spermatogenesis and bone development. Deletion of genes on the long arm
of Y results in severe spermatogenic defects, whereas genes at the tip of the
short arm are critical for chromosomal pairing during meiosis and for
fertility.

■ Mitochondrial Inheritance
Human cells contain hundreds of mitochondria, each with its own genome
and associated replication system. Oocytes have approximately 100,000
mitochondria. Sperm have only about 100, and the latter are destroyed after
fertilization. Each mitochondrion has multiple copies of a 16.5-kb circular
DNA molecule that contains 37 genes. Mitochondrial DNA encodes peptides
required for oxidative phosphorylation and encodes ribosomal and transfer
RNAs.
Mitochondria are inherited exclusively from the mother. Thus, although
males and females both can be affected by a mitochondrial disorder, a male
cannot transmit the condition to his offspring. When a cell replicates,
mitochondrial DNA sorts randomly into each of the resulting cells, a process
termed replicative segregation. As a consequence of replicative segregation,
any mitochondrial mutation will be propagated randomly into the newly
formed cells. Because each cell holds multiple copies of mitochondrial
DNA, the mitochondrion may contain only normal or only abnormal DNA,
termed homoplasmy. Alternatively, it may contain both normal and mutated
DNA, namely heteroplasmy. If a heteroplasmic oocyte is fertilized, the
relative proportion of mutated DNA may affect whether the individual
manifests a given mitochondrial disease. It is not possible to predict the
potential degree of heteroplasmy among offspring, and this poses challenges
for genetic counseling.
There are 33 mitochondrial diseases or conditions with known molecular
bases (Johns Hopkins University, 2020). Examples include myoclonic
epilepsy with ragged red fibers (MERRF), Leber optic atrophy, KearnsSayre syndrome, Leigh syndrome, and several forms of mitochondrial
myopathy and cardiomyopathy.

■ DNA Triplet Repeat Expansion
Mendel’s first law is that genes are passed unchanged from parent to
progeny, and barring new mutations, this is often true. Certain genes,
however, contain a region of DNA trinucleotide repeats that can expand
during parent-to-child transmission. The expansion can occur during male
meiosis, as in Huntington disease, or during female meiosis, as in fragile X
syndrome. Clinically, DNA triplet repeat expansion is manifested by
anticipation—a phenomenon in which a disease may manifest at an earlier
age or become more severe with each successive generation. Examples of
DNA triplet repeat diseases are shown in Table 16-4.
TABLE 16-4. Some Disorders Caused by DNA Triplet Repeat Expansion

Fragile X Syndrome
This is the most common inherited intellectual disability. Fragile X syndrome
affects approximately 1 in 3600 males and 1 in 4000 to 6000 females
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020a). It is caused
by expansion of a repeated trinucleotide DNA segment—cytosine-guanineguanine (CGG)—at chromosome Xq27.3. When the CGG repeat number
reaches a critical size—the full mutation—the fragile X mental retardation 1
(FMR1) gene becomes methylated and inactivated. Inactivation halts
expression of the FMR1 protein, which is abundant in nerve cells and
necessary for normal cognitive development.
Individuals with fragile X syndrome may have speech and language
problems, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, and autism or autistic-like
behaviors. Intellectual disability is generally more severe in males, in whom
average IQ scores are 35 to 45 (Nelson, 1995). The syndrome has

characteristic phenotypic features—a narrow face with large jaw, prominent
ears, connective tissue abnormalities, and macroorchidism in postpubertal
males.
Both the sex of the affected individual and the number of CGG repeats
determine the degree of clinical impairment. Clinically, four groups have
been described (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists,
2020a):
• Full mutation—more than 200 repeats
• Premutation—55 to 200 repeats
• Intermediate—45 to 54 repeats
• Unaffected—fewer than 45 repeats.
Full mutations are expressed in all males and many females. Males with
full mutations typically have significant cognitive and behavioral
abnormalities and phenotypic features. In females, random X chromosome
inactivation results in variable expression, and the disability may be much
less severe. With rare exception, the parent of origin of repeat expansion that
leads to a full mutation is female (Monaghan, 2013).
Counseling for a premutation is more complex. The woman with a fragile
X premutation may have offspring with the full mutation, and the risk ranges
from ≤5 percent with fewer than 70 CGG repeats to >95 percent with 100 to
200 CGG repeats (Nolin, 2003). Expansion is extremely unlikely in a male
premutation carrier, but all of his daughters will carry the premutation.
Among women with no risk factors, approximately 1 in 250 carries a fragile
X premutation, and in those with a family history of intellectual disability, the
risk approximates 1 in 90 (Cronister, 2008).
Fragile X premutation carriers may themselves experience significant
health consequences. Males with a premutation are at risk for the fragile X
tremor ataxia syndrome (FXTAS), which is characterized by memory loss,
executive function deficits, anxiety, and dementia (Monaghan, 2013).
Females are at decreased risk for FXTAS, but they have a 20-percent risk for
fragile X-associated primary ovarian insufficiency (POI).
Carrier screening is recommended for women with a family history of
fragile X syndrome, for those with unexplained intellectual disability,
developmental delay, or autism, and for women with POI (American College
of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020a). Prenatal diagnosis can be

accomplished by amniocentesis or chorionic villus sampling. Either type of
specimen can be used to evaluate the CGG repeat number, but chorionic
villus sampling may not accurately determine FMR1 gene methylation status.

■ Imprinting
Usually, one copy of each gene is inherited from each parent, and both copies
are expressed. Imprinting refers to the situation in which gene expression
varies according to the parent of origin. With maternal imprinting, a gene
inherited from the mother is transcriptionally silent and the gene inherited
from the father is active. Paternal imprinting is the opposite. This
phenomenon explains the phenotypic differences that occur in triploid
pregnancies according to whether the extra chromosomal set is maternal or
paternal (p. 313).
Imprinting affects gene expression by epigenetic control, that is, it
modifies the phenotype without altering the underlying genetic structure or
genotype. Importantly, the effect may be reversed in a subsequent generation,
because a female who inherits an imprinted gene from her father will pass it
in her oocytes with a maternal—rather than paternal—imprint, and vice
versa.
An example of imprinting can be found in two very different diseases
associated with the same region of DNA. Prader-Willi syndrome is
characterized by pronounced hyperphagia with obesity, along with short
stature, small hands and feet, and mild mental retardation. In more than 70
percent of cases, Prader-Willi is caused by microdeletion or disruption of a
DNA segment on the paternal chromosome 15, 15q11.2-q13. The remaining
cases are due to maternal uniparental disomy or due to maternal gene
imprinting with the paternal gene inactivated.
In contrast, individuals with Angelman syndrome have normal stature and
weight but severe intellectual disability, absent speech, seizures, ataxia,
jerky arm movements, and paroxysms of inappropriate laughter. In
approximately 70 percent of cases, Angelman syndrome is caused by
microdeletion for the 15q11.2-q13 DNA segment on the mother’s
chromosome 15. This segment contains a gene that codes for ubiquitin
protein ligase E3A, an important neural protein. Paternal gene imprinting
defects—with maternal genes inactivated—account for 2 to 3 percent, and 2

percent result from paternal uniparental disomy. Table 16-5 lists selected
diseases that can involve imprinting.
TABLE 16-5. Some Disorders That Can Involve Imprinting

■ Uniparental Disomy
This occurs when both members of a chromosome pair are inherited from the
same parent. Uniparental disomy usually has no clinical consequences,
because gene expression is not generally affected by the parent of origin and
because both copies of a chromosome pair are not usually identical.
However, if chromosomes 6, 7, 11, 14, or 15 are involved, offspring are at
increased risk for an abnormality because of parent-of-origin differences in
gene expression, that is, because of imprinting (Shaffer, 2001). Several
genetic mechanisms may cause uniparental disomy, the most common of
which is trisomic rescue, shown in Figure 16-9. After a nondisjunction event
produces a trisomic conceptus, one of the three homologues may be lost,
resulting in uniparental disomy for that chromosome in approximately one
third of cases.

FIGURE 16-9 Mechanism of uniparental disomy arising from trisomic “rescue.” A. In normal meiosis,
one member of each pair of homologous chromosomes is inherited from each parent. B. If
nondisjunction results in a trisomic conceptus, one homologue is sometimes lost. In a third of cases, loss
of one homologue leads to uniparental disomy.

Uniparental isodisomy occurs when an individual receives two identical
copies of one chromosome from the same parent. This mechanism has
explained cases of cystic fibrosis in which only one parent is a carrier but
the fetus inherits two copies of the same gene mutation (Spence, 1988;
Spotila, 1992).

■ Multifactorial Inheritance
Traits or diseases that are determined by the combination of multiple genes
and environmental factors are considered to have multifactorial inheritance
(Table 16-6). Polygenic traits are determined by the combined effects of
more than one gene. Many congenital and acquired conditions and common
traits display multifactorial inheritance. Examples include malformations
such as neural-tube defects, cardiac defects, and facial clefts; diseases such
as diabetes and atherosclerosis; and traits such as head size or height.
Multifactorial abnormalities tend to recur in families, but not according to a
mendelian pattern. If a couple has had 1 child with a multifactorial birth

defect, the risk that another child will be affected is empirically 3 to 5
percent. This risk declines exponentially with successively more distant
family relationships.
TABLE 16-6. Characteristics of Multifactorial Diseases

Multifactorial traits that have a normal distribution in the population are
termed continuously variable. A measurement that is more than two standard
deviations above or below the population mean may be considered
abnormal. Continuously variable traits tend to be less extreme in the
offspring of affected individuals, because of the statistical principle of
regression to the mean.

Threshold Traits
Some multifactorial traits do not appear until a threshold is exceeded.
Genetic and environmental factors that create propensity or liability for the

trait are themselves normally distributed, and only individuals at extremes of
the distribution exceed the threshold and exhibit the trait or defect. The
phenotypic abnormality is thus an all-or-none phenomenon.
Certain threshold traits have a clear male or female predominance. If an
individual of the less affected gender has the characteristic or defect, the risk
is greater in his or her offspring (Fig. 16-10). An example is pyloric stenosis,
which is approximately four times more common in males (Krogh, 2012). A
female with pyloric stenosis has likely inherited more predisposing genetic
factors than are necessary to produce the defect in a male, and the recurrence
risk for her children or siblings is thus higher than the expected 3 to 5
percent. Her brothers and sons would have the highest liability because they
not only will inherit more than the usual number of predisposing genes but
also are the more susceptible gender.

FIGURE 16-10 Schematic example of a threshold trait, such as pyloric stenosis, which has a
predilection for males. Each gender is normally distributed, but at the same threshold, more males than
females will develop the condition.

The recurrence risk for threshold traits is also greater if the defect is
severe. For example, the recurrence risk after the birth of a child with
bilateral cleft lip and palate approximates 8 percent, but it is only about 4
percent following a child with unilateral cleft lip alone.

Cardiac Defects

Structural cardiac anomalies are the most common birth defects, with a birth
prevalence of 8 cases per 1000. The risk of having a child with a cardiac
anomaly approximates 5 to 6 percent if the mother has the defect and 2 to 3
percent if the father is affected (Burn, 1998). Selected left-sided lesions,
including hypoplastic left heart syndrome, coarctation of the aorta, and
bicuspid aortic valve, may have recurrence risks four- to sixfold higher (Lin,
1988; Lupton, 2002; Nora, 1988). Observed recurrence risks for specific
cardiac malformations are listed in Table 52-4 (p. 920).

Neural-tube Defects
Risk for developing a neural-tube defect (NTD) is influenced by family
history, hyperthermia, hyperglycemia, teratogen exposure, obesity, ethnicity,
and fetal gender. More than 50 years ago, Hibbard and Smithells (1965)
postulated that abnormal folate metabolism was responsible for many NTDs.
However, most NTD cases do not occur in the setting of maternal folic acid
deficiency, and it has become clear that the gene-nutrient interactions
underlying folate-responsive NTDs are complex. For a woman with a prior
affected child, the 3- to 5-percent recurrence risk declines by at least 70
percent with 4 mg/d of periconceptional oral folic acid supplementation
(Grosse, 2007; MRC Vitamin Study Research Group, 1991).
Periconceptional folic acid supplementation also appears to ameliorate the
fetal NTD risk in women with pregestational diabetes and in those with
exposure to antiepileptic medications, fever during embryogenesis, and
obesity (Kerr, 2017; Petersen, 2019). Sonographic features of NTDs are
described in Chapter 15 (p. 276), their prevention with folic acid is
discussed in Chapter 9 (p. 168), and fetal therapy for myelomeningocele is
reviewed in Chapter 19 (p. 372).

GENETIC TESTS
All pregnant women should have the option of prenatal aneuploidy screening
and prenatal genetic diagnosis (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2018). Screening for fetal aneuploidy may be either serum
analyte-based or cell-free DNA-based. Prenatal genetic carrier screening
tests for cystic fibrosis and spinal muscular atrophy carrier status also are
routinely offered. Additional carrier screening tests are offered to at-risk

individuals. Expanded genetic carrier screening panels also are available.
The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists considers ethnicspecific, panethnic, and expanded carrier screening acceptable strategies
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020a). These
screening tests are discussed in Chapter 17 (p. 342).
For prenatal genetic diagnosis, the most commonly used tests are
chromosomal microarray analysis (CMA), cytogenetic analysis
(karyotyping), and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). Testing may be
performed on amnionic fluid or chorionic villi. In selected circumstances,
whole genome or whole exome sequencing may be considered, but these are
not recommended for routine use. To diagnose a specific disease whose
genetic basis is known, DNA-based tests are often employed, typically using
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for rapid amplification of DNA sequences.

■ Cytogenetic Analysis
Also known as karyotyping, cytogenetic analysis tests for numerical
chromosomal abnormalities—aneuploidy or polyploidy. It can also identify
balanced or unbalanced structural rearrangements of at least 5 to 10
megabases in size. Karyotyping has diagnostic accuracy exceeding 99
percent.
Any tissue containing dividing cells or cells that can be stimulated to
divide is suitable for cytogenetic analysis. The dividing cells are arrested in
metaphase, and their chromosomes are stained to reveal light and dark bands.
The most commonly used technique is Giemsa staining, which yields the Gbands shown in Figure 16-3. Each chromosome has a unique banding pattern
that permits its identification and detection of deleted, duplicated, or
rearranged segments. The accuracy of cytogenetic analysis rises with the
number of bands produced. Metaphase banding routinely yields 450 to 550
visible bands per haploid chromosome set, whereas prophase banding
generally yields 850 bands.
Only dividing cells can be evaluated, so the growth of cultured cells
affects the rapidity with which results are obtained. Amnionic fluid, which
contains amniocytes, epithelial cells, and gastrointestinal mucosal cells, will
usually yield results in 7 to 10 days (Chap. 17, p. 344). Fetal blood cells may
provide results in 36 to 48 hours but are rarely needed. If fetal skin
fibroblasts are evaluated postmortem, stimulation of cell growth can be more

difficult. Cytogenetic analysis may take 2 to 3 weeks in such cases and has
largely been replaced by CMA (Chap. 35, p. 627).

■ Fluorescence In Situ Hybridization
This technique is most commonly used for rapid identification of a specific
chromosomal abnormality, such as trisomy 21, 18, or 13. Because of its 1- to
2-day turnaround time, FISH is typically selected for cases in which findings
may alter pregnancy management. It may also be used to verify a suspected
deletion syndrome, such as the 22q11.2 microdeletion (p. 315), although
CMA is preferred. The American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2018) recommends that decision-making based on FISH
should incorporate clinical information consistent with the suspected
diagnosis. Supportive data may be an abnormal aneuploidy screening test
result, a sonographic finding, or a confirmatory diagnostic test such as
karyotyping or CMA.
To perform FISH, cells are fixed onto a glass slide, and fluorescentlabeled probes are hybridized to the fixed chromosomes (Fig. 16-11). Each
probe is a DNA sequence that is complementary to a chromosome region or
gene being investigated. If the DNA sequence is present, hybridization is
detected as a bright signal visible by microscopy. The number of signals
indicates the number of chromosomes or genes of that type in the cell. FISH
does not provide information on the entire chromosomal complement but
merely the chromosomal or gene region of interest. Figure 16-12 shows an
example of interphase FISH using α-satellite probes for chromosomes 18, X,
and Y to confirm trisomy 18.

FIGURE 16-11 Steps in fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH).

FIGURE 16-12 Interphase fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) using α-satellite probes for
chromosomes 18, X, and Y. In this case, the three light blue signals, two green signals, and absence of
red signals indicate that this is a female fetus with trisomy 18. (Reproduced with permission from Dr.
Frederick Elder.)

■ Chromosomal Microarray Analysis
This test is 100 times more sensitive than karyotyping and detects
microduplications and microdeletions as small as 50 to 100 kilobases.
Direct CMA, which is performed on uncultured cells, can yield results in 3
to 7 days. If cultured cells are required, results may take 10 to 14 days
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2018).
Microarrays use either a comparative genomic hybridization (CGH)
platform, a SNP platform, or a combination of the two. The CGH microarray
platform compares specimen DNA with a normal control sample. Shown in
Figure 16-13, the CGH chip contains reference DNA fragments of known
sequence—oligonucleotides. Fetal DNA from the amniocentesis or chorionic
villus sampling specimen is labeled with a fluorescent dye and then
hybridized to the DNA on the chip. Normal control DNA is labeled with a
different probe and also hybridized to the same chip. The intensity of the
fluorescent signals from the two samples is compared. With a SNP array, the
chip contains known DNA sequence variants, that is, single-nucleotide
polymorphisms. When fetal DNA is labeled and hybridized to the chip, the
fluorescent signal intensity indicates copy number variation.

FIGURE 16-13 Chromosomal microarray analysis. A. Actual microarray chip size. B. Each chip
contains thousands of cells (squares). C & D. Each cell contains thousands of identical oligonucleotides
on its surface and is unique in its nucleotide content. E. During genetic analysis, a mixture containing
tagged fetal DNA is presented to the chip. Complementary DNA sequences bind. F. If a laser is shined
on the chip, DNA sequences that have bound will glow thus identifying a matching sequence. (Modified
with permission from Doody KJ: Treatment of the infertile couple. In Hoffman BL, Schorge JO,
Schaffer JI, et al (eds): Williams Gynecology, 2nd ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2012.)

Both types of platforms detect aneuploidy, unbalanced translocations, and
microdeletions and microduplications. In addition, SNP arrays are able to
identify triploidy and can detect absence of heterozygosity. The latter can
occur with uniparental disomy, in which both copies of a chromosome are
inherited from one parent. Absence of heterozygosity may also occur with
consanguinity, and counseling prior to performance of an SNP array should
include this possibility (p. 321). Importantly, neither type of array platform
currently detects balanced chromosomal rearrangements. For this reason,
couples with recurrent pregnancy loss should be offered karyotyping as the
first-line test (Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, 2016).
In addition to identifying pathogenic copy number variants, CMA may
detect variants that are unable to be classified as benign or pathologic and

thus are considered to be of uncertain clinical significance. In recent series,
these variants of uncertain significance are identified in approximately 1
percent of prenatal specimens (Brady, 2014; Chong, 2019; Wang, 2018). Not
unexpectedly, variants of uncertain significance may be a source of distress
to families, even with comprehensive pretest counseling.

Clinical Applications
In pregnancies at increased risk for autosomal trisomy based on aneuploidy
screening results, karyotyping or FISH plus karyotyping should be offered,
and CMA should be made available (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2018). Clinicians are increasingly offering CMA in this
setting. If the karyotype is normal, CMA has identified clinically relevant
copy number variants in approximately 6.5 percent of pregnancies with fetal
abnormalities and in 1 to 2 percent of those without obvious fetal
abnormality (Callaway, 2013; Chong, 2019). The American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2018) and the Society for Maternal-Fetal
Medicine (2016) recommend CMA as the first-tier test when fetal structural
abnormalities are identified. If a particular anomaly that strongly suggests a
specific aneuploidy is identified, such as an endocardial cushion defect
(trisomy 21) or alobar holoprosencephaly (trisomy 13), then karyotyping or
FISH may be offered as the initial test. Genetic counseling should include
information regarding the benefits and limitations of both CMA and
karyotyping. Each should be made available to women who elect prenatal
diagnosis (Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, 2016). CMA may identify
instances of autosomal dominant genetic disorders that have not yet
manifested in an affected parent, and it may also identify instances of
nonpaternity.
For stillbirth evaluation, CMA is significantly more likely than standard
karyotyping to provide a genetic diagnosis, in part because it does not
require dividing cells. The Stillbirth Collaborative Research Network found
that when karyotyping was uninformative, approximately 6 percent of cases
had either aneuploidy or a pathogenic copy number variant identified with
CMA (Reddy, 2012). In a recent metaanalysis of more than 900 stillbirths
with normal karyotype, CMA identified pathogenic copy number variants in
6 percent with structural abnormalities and 3 percent with no abnormalities
evident (Martinez-Portilla, 2019). Overall, CMA yielded results 15 percent
more often than karyotyping alone.

■ Whole Genome and Whole Exome Sequencing
Most fetuses with structural abnormalities have a normal karyotype and a
normal CMA result. Whole genome sequencing (WGS) is a technique for
analyzing the entire genome. Whole exome sequencing (WES) analyzes only
the DNA coding regions, which account for approximately 1.5 percent of the
genome. These next-generation sequencing tools are increasingly used
postnatally to evaluate suspected genetic syndromes and intellectual
disability.
Several prospective, multicenter series have evaluated WES for
pregnancies in which fetuses have structural abnormalities, no karyotypic
evidence of aneuploidy, and normal CMA. WES identified genetic
abnormalities in approximately 10 percent of such cases (Lord, 2019;
Petrovski, 2019). Utility was higher in cases with cardiac, skeletal, or
multiorgan system anomalies.
Importantly, WGS and WES have significant limitations in their current
form. These include prohibitively long turnaround times, high costs, and
increased rates of false-positive and false-negative results and variants of
uncertain significance (American College of Medical Genetics, 2012; Atwal,
2014). In addition, because sequencing is generally performed on the fetus
and parents simultaneously, one parent may be identified or suspected to
have an unrelated but medically actionable finding, which further
complicates counseling (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2020c). As a result, the clinical utility of this promising
technology for prenatal cases is currently limited, and it is not recommended
for routine clinical use.

■ Fetal DNA in the Maternal Circulation
Fetal cells are present in maternal blood at a very low concentration, only 2
to 6 cells per milliliter (Bianchi, 2006). Intact fetal cells sometimes persist
in the maternal circulation for decades following delivery. Persistent fetal
cells may engraft in the mother, causing microchimerism (Chap. 62, p. 1109).
This has been implicated in maternal autoimmune diseases such as
scleroderma, systemic lupus erythematosus, and Hashimoto thyroiditis
(Kinder, 2017). From the standpoint of prenatal diagnosis, use of intact fetal
cells from maternal blood is limited by low cell concentration, cell

persistence into successive pregnancies, and difficulties in distinguishing
fetal and maternal cells. Cell-free DNA overcomes these limitations.

Cell-free DNA
Also known as cell-free fetal DNA or noninvasive prenatal screening
(NIPS), this screening test uses DNA fragments derived from maternal cells
and from apoptotic placental trophoblast cells. “Fetal” is thus a misnomer.
Cell-free DNA is reliably detected in maternal blood after 9 to 10 weeks’
gestation (Bianchi, 2018). The proportion of total cell-free DNA that is
placental is called the fetal fraction, and it accounts for approximately 10
percent of the total circulating cell-free DNA in maternal plasma. Unlike
intact fetal cells, cell-free DNA is cleared within minutes from maternal
blood.
Current clinical applications of cell-free DNA are aneuploidy screening
and Rh D genotyping (Fig. 16-14). Commercial laboratories have also
offered two other applications of cell-free DNA: (1) screening for selected
microdeletion and microduplication syndromes and (2) genome-wide
screening for deletions and duplications larger than 7 megabase pairs.
Currently, prospective data on these promising applications are limited, and
neither is recommended for routine screening (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020c).

FIGURE 16-14 Cell-free DNA screening. These DNA fragments are derived from apoptotic
trophoblast cells. Screening for autosomal trisomies and sex chromosomal aneuploidies may be
performed using whole-genome sequencing, chromosome-selective or -targeted sequencing, and
analysis of single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). Real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) also may be used to target specific regions or sequences, a technique used for Rh D genotyping.

Additional applications for cell-free DNA are on the horizon. In research
settings, numerous single-gene disorders have been detected and include
skeletal dysplasias, hemoglobinopathies, cystic fibrosis, congenital adrenal
hyperplasia, hemophilia, muscular dystrophy, myotonic dystrophy, and spinal
muscular atrophy (Camunas-Soler, 2018; Jenkins, 2018; Zhang, 2019).
Aneuploidy Screening. Several different assay platforms are used to screen
for fetal autosomal trisomies and sex chromosomal aneuploidies. These
include massively parallel sequencing, which is a WGS technique;
chromosome-selective or targeted sequencing; and analysis of SNPs
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2018, 2020c). By
simultaneously sequencing millions of chromosome-specific DNA fragments,
investigators can identify whether the proportion or ratio of fragments from
one chromosome is higher than expected. Thus, samples from women with a
Down syndrome fetus will have a larger proportion of DNA sequences from
chromosome 21.
The screening performance of cell-free DNA is excellent. In a
metaanalysis of 35 studies of largely high-risk pregnancies, the pooled
sensitivity to detect Down syndrome was 99.7 percent, and to identify
trisomies 18 and 13, 98 and 99 percent, respectively (Gil, 2017). For each,
the specificity was at least 99.9 percent, such that the cumulative falsepositive rate was below 1 percent. Aneuploidy screening reports commonly
include information about fetal sex, which may be clinically useful if the
fetus is at risk for an X-linked disorder or for congenital adrenal hyperplasia
(Chap. 17, p. 335). In a metaanalysis, the sensitivity of cell-free DNA testing
for fetal sex determination was reported to be 95 percent between 7 and 12
weeks’ gestation and 99 percent after 20 weeks (Devaney, 2011).
Causes of false-positive and false-negative screening results are listed in
Table 16-7. As with any other screening test, diagnostic confirmation should
be performed before irreversible medical intervention. Cell-free DNA
screens do not yield a result in 2 to 4 percent of cases. This may be due to
assay failure, high assay variance, or low fetal fraction (Norton, 2012;

Pergament, 2014; Quezada, 2015). Importantly, such pregnancies carry a
greater risk for fetal aneuploidy. In addition, results may not reflect the fetal
DNA complement but rather may indicate confined placental mosaicism,
early demise of an aneuploid co-twin, maternal mosaicism, or rarely, occult
maternal malignancy (Bianchi, 2015; Curnow, 2015; Grati, 2014b; Wang,
2014). Recommendations for counseling are discussed in Chapter 17 (p.
336).
TABLE 16-7. Selected Etiologies Creating Inaccurate Cell-free DNA
Results

Rh D Genotype Evaluation. Many fetuses of Rh D-negative women are also
Rh D-negative. In a predominantly white population, this prevalence
approaches 40 percent. Fetal Rh D genotype assessment from maternal blood
can eliminate administration of anti-D immune globulin in such cases,

thereby reducing costs and potential risk. When Rh D alloimmunization is
suspected, early identification of an Rh D-negative fetus might avoid
unnecessary middle cerebral artery Doppler assessment or amniocentesis.
Evaluation using cell-free DNA is done using real-time PCR to target several
exons of the RHD gene, typically exons 4, 5, 7, and 10.
Rh D-genotyping is performed routinely with cell-free DNA in Denmark,
Finland, and the Netherlands (Clausen, 2012; de Haas, 2016; Haimila,
2017). In population-based studies of more than 35,000 Rh D-negative
women screened at 24 to 27 weeks’ gestation, the false-negative rate—in
which Rh D-negative status was missed—was only 0.03 percent. The falsepositive rate—in which Rh immune globulin would be given unnecessarily—
was less than 1 percent (de Haas, 2016; Haimila, 2017). Similar results
were reported from the United Kingdom, although the false-negative rate was
higher in the first trimester. Investigators concluded that false-negative
screening results might increase the alloimmunization risk but by less than 1
case per million births (Chitty, 2014). Rh D alloimmunization is discussed in
Chapter 18 (p. 353).

REFERENCES
Abele H, Babiy-Pachomow O, Sonek J, et al: The cavum septum pellucidi in euploid and aneuploidy
fetuses. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 42(2):156, 2013
American Academy of Pediatrics: Clinical report: cardiovascular health supervision for individuals
affected by Duchenne or Becker muscular dystrophy. Pediatrics 116(6):1569, 2005, Reaffirmed
December 2008
American College of Medical Genetics (ACMG) Board of Directors: Points to consider in the clinical
application of genomic sequencing. Genet Med 14(8):759, 2012
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Prenatal diagnostic testing for genetic disorders.
Practice Bulletin No. 162, May 2016, Reaffirmed 2018
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Perinatal palliative care. Committee Opinion No.
786, August 2019
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Carrier screening for genetic conditions.
Committee Opinion No. 691, March 2017, Reaffirmed 2020a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Management of women with phenylalanine
hydroxylase deficiency (phenylketonuria). Committee Opinion No. 802, April 2020b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Microarrays and next-generation sequencing
technology: the use of advanced genetic diagnostic tools in obstetrics and gynecology. Committee
Opinion No. 682, December 2016, Reaffirmed 2020c
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Screening for fetal chromosomal abnormalities.
Practice Bulletin No. 226, October 2020d

Atwal PS, Brennan ML, Cox R, et al: Clinical whole-exome sequencing: are we there yet? Genet Med
16(9):717, 2014
Baffero GM, Somigliana E, Crovetto F, et al: Confined placental mosaicism at chorionic villus sampling:
risk factors and pregnancy outcome. Prenat Diagn 32(11):1102, 2012
Baird PA, McGillivray B: Children of incest. J Pediatr 101(5): 854, 1982
Bardsley MZ, Kowal K, Levy C, et al: 47,XYY syndrome: clinical phenotype and timing of
ascertainment. J Pediatr 163(4):1085, 2013
Bdolah Y, Palomaki GE, Yaron Y, et al: Circulating angiogenic proteins in trisomy 13. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 194(1):239, 2006
Berglund A, Stochholm K, Gravholt CH: The epidemiology of sex chromosome abnormalities. Am J
Med Genet C 184(2):202, 2020
Bergström S, Carr H, Petersson G, et al: Trends in congenital heart defects in infants with Down
syndrome. Pediatrics 138(1):e210160123, 2016
Bianchi DW, Chiu RW: Sequencing of circulating cell-free DNA during pregnancy. N Engl J Med
379(5):464, 2018
Bianchi DW, Chudova D, Sehnert AJ, et al: Noninvasive prenatal testing and incidental detection of
occult malignancies. JAMA 314(2):162, 2015
Bianchi DW, Hanson J: Sharpening the tools: a summary of a National Institutes of Health workshop on
new technologies for detection of fetal cells in maternal blood for early prenatal diagnosis. J Matern
Fetal Neonatal Med 19(4):199, 2006
Blau N, van Spronsen FJ, Levy HL: Phenylketonuria. Lancet 376(9750):1417, 2010
Boada R, Janusz J, Hutaff-Lee C, et al: The cognitive phenotype in Klinefelter syndrome: a review of
the literature including genetic and hormonal factors. Dev Disabil Res Rev 15(4):284, 2009
Brady PD, Delle Chiaie B, Christenhusz G, et al: A prospective study of the clinical utility of prenatal
chromosomal microarray analysis in fetuses with ultrasound abnormalities and an exploration of a
framework for reporting unclassified variants and risk factors. Genet Med 16(6):469, 2014
Bui TH, Iselius L, Lindsten J: European collaborative study on prenatal diagnosis: mosaicism,
pseudomosaicism and single abnormal cells in amniotic fluid cultures. Prenat Diagn 4(7):145, 1984
Bull MJ, American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on Genetics: Health supervision for children with
Down syndrome. Pediatrics 128(2):393, 2011
Burn J, Brennan P, Little J, et al: Recurrence risks in offspring of adults with major heart defects: results
from first cohort of British collaborative study. Lancet 351(9099):311, 1998
Callaway JL, Shaffer LG, Chitty LS, et al: The clinical utility of microarray technologies applied to
prenatal cytogenetics in the presence of a normal conventional karyotype: a review of the literature.
Prenat Diagn 33(12):1119, 2013
Canunas-Soler J, Lee H, Hudgins L, et al: Noninvasive prenatal diagnosis of single-gene disorders by
use of droplet digital PCR. Clin Chem 64(2):336, 2018
Carey L, Scott F, Murphy K, et al: Prenatal diagnosis of chromosomal mosaicism in over 1600 cases
using array comparative genomic hybridization as a first line test. Prenat Diagn 34(5):478, 2014
Chitty LS, Finning K, Wade A: Diagnostic accuracy of routine antenatal determination of fetal RHD
status across gestation: population based cohort study. BMJ 349:g5243, 2014
Chong HP, Hamilton S, Mone F, et al: Prenatal chromosomal microarray testing of fetuses with
ultrasound structural anomalies: a prospective cohort study of over 1000 cases. Prenat Diagn
39(12):1064, 2019
Clausen FB, Christiansen M, Steffensen R, et al: Report of the first nationally implemented clinical
routine screening for fetal RHD in D–pregnant women to ascertain the requirement for antenatal

RHD prophylaxis. Transfusion 52(4):752, 2012
Cockwell A, MacKenzie M, Youings S, et al: A cytogenetic and molecular study of a series of 45,X
fetuses and their parents. J Med Genet 28(3):151, 1991
Cools M, Pleskacova J, Stoop H, et al: Gonadal pathology and tumor risk in relation to clinical
characteristics in patients with 45,X/46,XY mosaicism. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 96(7):E1171, 2011
Cooper DS, Riggs KW, Zafar F, et al: Cardiac surgery in patients with trisomy 13 and 18: an analysis of
the Society of Thoracic Surgeons Congenital Heart Surgery Database. J Am Heart Assoc
8:e012349, 2019
Cragan JD, Gilboa SM: Including prenatal diagnoses in birth defects monitoring: experience of the
Metropolitan Atlanta Congenital Defects Program. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol 85(1):20,
2009
Cronister A, Teicher J, Rohlfs EM, et al: Prevalence and instability of fragile X alleles: implications for
offering fragile X premutation diagnosis. Obstet Gynecol 111(3):596, 2008
Curnow KJ, Wilkins-Haug L, Ryan A, et al: Detection of triploid, molar, and vanishing twin pregnancies
by single-nucleotide polymorphism-based noninvasive prenatal test. Am J Obstet Gynecol
212(1):79.e1, 2015
de Haas M, Thurik FF, van der Ploeg CP, et al: Sensitivity of fetal RHD screening for safe guidance of
targeted anti-D immunoglobulin prophylaxis: a prospective cohort study of a nationwide programme
in the Netherlands. BMJ 355:i5789, 2016
Devaney SA, Palomaki GE, Scott JA, et al: Noninvasive fetal sex determination using cell-free fetal
DNA: a systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA 306(6):627, 2011
Dolk H, Loane M, Garne E: The prevalence of congenital anomalies in Europe. Adv Exp Med Biol
686:349, 2010
Domingo L, Carey JC, Eckhauser A, et al: Mortality and resource use following cardiac interventions in
children with trisomy 13 and trisomy 18 and congenital heart disease. Pediatr Cardiol 40(2):349,
2019
Doody KJ: Treatment of the infertile couple. In Hoffman BL, Schorge JO, Halvorson LM, et al (eds):
Williams Gynecology, 4th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 2020
Dotters-Katz SK, Humphrey WM, Senz KL, et al: Trisomy 13 and the risk of gestational hypertensive
disorders: a population-based study. J Mat Fetal Neonatal Med 31(15):1951, 2018
Edwards JH, Harnden DG, Cameron AH, et al: A new trisomic syndrome. Lancet 1(7128):787, 1960
Ford CE, Jones KW, Polani PE, et al: A sex-chromosome anomaly in a case of gonadal dysgenesis
(Turner’s syndrome). Lancet 1(7075):711, 1959
Freeman SB, Bean LH, Allen EG, et al: Ethnicity, sex, and the incidence of congenital heart defects: a
report from the National Down Syndrome Project. Genet Med 10(3):173, 2008
Freire-Maia N: Effects of consanguineous marriages on morbidity and precocious mortality: genetic
counseling. Am J Med Genet 18(3):401, 1984
Gil MM, Accurti V, Santacruz B, et al: Analysis of cell-free DNA in maternal blood in screening for
aneuploidies: updated meta-analysis. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 50:302, 2017
Girardin CM, Vliet GV: Counselling of a couple faced with a prenatal diagnosis of Klinefelter syndrome.
Acta Pediatr 100(6):917, 2011
Goel N, Morris JK, Tucker D, et al: Trisomy 13 and 18-prevalence and mortality-a multi-registry
population based analysis. Am J Med Genet A 179(12):2382, 2019
Goriely A, Wilkie AO: Paternal age effect mutations and selfish spermatogonial selection: causes and
consequences for human diseases. Am J Hum Genet 90(2):175, 2012

Grange DK, Hillman RE, Burton BK, et al: Sapropterin dihydrochloride use in pregnant women with
phenylketonuria: an interim report of the PKU MOMS sub-registry. Mol Genet Metab 112(1):9, 2014
Grati FR: Chromosomal mosaicism in human feto-placental development: implications for prenatal
diagnosis. J Clin Med 3(3):809, 2014a
Grati FR, Malvestiti F, Ferreira JC, et al: Fetoplacental mosaicism: potential implications for falsepositive and false negative non-invasive prenatal screening results. Genet Med 16(8):620, 2014b
Grau Madsen S, Uldbjerg N, Sunde L, et al: Prognosis for pregnancies with trisomy 16 confined to the
placenta: a Danish cohort study. Prenat Diagn 38(13):1103, 2018
Grosse SD, Collins JS: Folic acid supplementation and neural tube defect recurrence prevention. Birth
Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol 79(11):737, 2007
Haimila KI, Sulin K, Kuosmanen M, et al: Targeted antenatal anti-D prophylaxis program for RhDnegative pregnant women–outcome of the first two years of a national program in Finland. Acta
Obstet Gynecol Scand 96(10):1228, 2017
Hartley D, Blumenthal T, Carrillo M, et al: Down syndrome and Alzheimer’s disease: common
pathways, common goals. Alzheimers Dement 11(6):700, 2015
Hassold T, Arnovitz K, Jacobs PA, et al: The parental origin of the missing or additional chromosome in
45,X and 47,XXX females. Birth Defects Orig Artic Ser 26(4):297, 1990
Heinrich T, Nanda I, Rehn M, et al: Live-born trisomy 22: patient report and review. Mol Syndromol
3(6):262, 2012
Hibbard ED, Smithells RW: Folic acid metabolism and human embryopathy. Lancet 1:1254, 1965
Hook EB, Warburton D: Turner syndrome revisited: review of new data supports the hypothesis that all
viable 45,X cases are cryptic mosaics with a rescue cell line, implying an origin by mitotic loss. Hum
Genet 133(4):417, 2014
Houlihan OA, O’Donoghue K: The natural history of pregnancies with a diagnosis of Trisomy 18 or
Trisomy 13; a retrospective case series. BMC Pregnancy and Childbirth 13:209, 2013.
Hussamy DJ, Herrera CL, Twickler DM, et al: Number of risk factors in Down syndrome pregnancies.
Am J Perinatol 36(1):79, 2019
Hsu LY, Perlis TE: United States survey on chromosome mosaicism and pseudomosaicism in prenatal
diagnosis. Prenat Diagn 4(7):97, 1984
Jacobs PA, Hassold TJ: The origin of numerical chromosomal abnormalities. Adv Genet 33:101, 1995
Jauniaux E: Partial moles: from postnatal to prenatal diagnosis. Placenta 20(5–6):379, 1999
Jenkins LA, Deans ZC, Lewis C, et al: Delivering an accredited non-invasive prenatal diagnosis service
for monogenic disorders and recommendations for best practice. Prenat Diagn 38(1):44, 2018
Johns Hopkins University: Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM). 2021. Available at:
http://omim.org/. Accessed October 4, 2021
Joseph L, Farmer C, Chlebowski C, et al: Characterization of autism spectrum disorder and
neurodevelopmental profiles in youth with XYY syndrome. J Neurodev Disord 10(1):30, 2018
Kapurubandara S, Melov S, Shalou E, et al: Consanguinity and associated perinatal outcomes, including
stillbirth. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynecol 56(6):599, 2016
Kehinde FI, Anderson CE, McGowan JE, et al: Co-occurrence of non-mosaic trisomy 22 and inherited
balanced t(4;6)(q33;q23.3) in a liveborn female: case report and review of the literature. Am J Med
Genet Part A 164(12):3187, 2014
Kerr SM, Parker SE, Mitchell AA, et al: Periconceptional maternal fever, folic acid intake, and the risk
for neural tube defects. Ann Epidemiol 27(12):777, 2017
Kinder JM, Stelzer IA, Arch PC, et al: Immunological implications of pregnancy-induced
microchimerism. Nat Rev Immunol 17(8)483, 2017

Koch R, Hanley W, Levy H, et al: The maternal phenylketonuria international study: 1984–2002.
Pediatrics 112(6 Pt 2):1523, 2003
Kong A, Frigge ML, Masson G, et al: Rate of de novo mutations, father’s age, and disease risk. Nature
488(7412):471, 2012
Krogh C, Gortz S, Wohlfahrt J, et al: Pre- and perinatal risk factors for pyloric stenosis and their
influence on the male predominance. Am J Epidemiol 176(1):24, 2012
Lejeune J, Turpin R, Gautier M: Chromosomic diagnosis of mongolism. Arch Fr Pediatr 16:962, 1959
Lin AE, Garver KL: Genetic counseling for congenital heart defects. J Pediatr 113(6):1105, 1988
Lin HY, Chen YJ, Hung HY, et al: Clinical characteristics and survival of trisomy 18 in a medical center
in Taipei, 1988–2004. Am J Med Genet 140(9):945, 2006
Lin HY, Lin SP, Chen YJ, et al: Clinical characteristics and survival of trisomy 13 in a medical center in
Taiwan, 1985–2004. Pediatr Int 49(3):380, 2007
Loane M, Morris JK, Addor M, et al: Twenty-year trends in the prevalence of Down syndrome and
other trisomies in Europe: impact of maternal age and prenatal screening. Eur J Hum Genet
21(1):27, 2013
Lord J, McMullan DJ, Eberhardt RY. Prenatal exome sequencing analysis in fetal structural anomalies
detected by ultrasonography (PAGE): a cohort study. Lancet 393(10173):747, 2019
Lowe X, Eskenazi B, Nelson DO, et al: Frequency of XY sperm increases with age in fathers of boys
with Klinefelter syndrome. Am J Hum Genet 69(5):1046, 2001
Lupton M, Oteng-Ntim E, Ayida G, et al: Cardiac disease in pregnancy. Curr Opin Obstet Gynecol
14(2):137, 2002
Mai CT, Kucik JE, Isenburg J, et al: Selected birth defects data from population-based birth defects
surveillance programs in the United States, 2006 to 2010: featuring trisomy conditions. Birth Defects
Res A Clin Mol Teratol 97(11):709, 2013
Malvestiti F, Agrati C, Grimi B, et al: Interpreting mosaicism in chorionic villi: results of a monocentric
series of 1001 mosaics in chorionic villi with follow-up amniocentesis. Prenat Diagn 35(11):1117,
2015
Manning M, Hudgins L: Professional Practice and Guidelines Committee: array-based technology and
recommendations for utilization in medical genetics practice for detection of chromosomal
abnormalities. Genet Med 12(11):742, 2010
Martinez-Portilla RJ, Pauta M, Hawkins-Villarreal A, et al: Added value of chromosomal microarray
analysis over conventional karyotyping in stillbirth work-up: systematic review and meta-analysis.
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 53(5):590, 2019
Massalska D, Bijok J, Ilnicka A, et al: Triploidy – variability of sonographic phenotypes. Prenat Diagn
37(8):774, 2017
McDonald-McGinn DM, Sullivan KE, Marino B, et al: 22q11.2 deletion syndrome. Nat Rev Dis Primers
1:15071, 2015
McGowan-Jordan J, Hastings RJ, Moore S (eds): ISCN 2020: An International System for Human
Cytogenomic Nomenclature. Basel, Karger, 2020
Meyer RE, Liu G, Gilboa SM, et al: Survival of children with trisomy 13 and trisomy 18: a multi-state
population-based study. Am J Med Genet Part A 170(4):825, 2016
Monaghan KG, Lyon E, Spector EB, et al: ACMG Standards and Guidelines for fragile X testing: a
revision to the disease-specific supplements to the Standards and Guidelines for Clinical Genetics
Laboratories of the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics. Genet Med 15(7):575,
2013

MRC Vitamin Study Research Group: Prevention of neural tube defects: results of the Medical
Research Council Vitamin Study. Lancet 338(8760):131, 1991
National Center for Biotechnology Information: GeneReviews. 2021. Available at:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1116/. Accessed October 4, 2021
National Center for Biotechnology Information: GTR: Genetic Testing Registry. 2021. Available at:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gtr/. Accessed October 4, 2021
National Library of Medicine: MedlinePlus Genetics. 2021. Available at:
https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/. Accessed October 4, 2021
Nelson DL: The fragile X syndromes. Semin Cell Biol 6(1):5, 1995
Nelson KE, Rosella LC, Mahant S, et al: Survival and surgical interventions for children with trisomy 13
and 18. JAMA 316(4):420, 2016
Nolin SL, Brown WT, Glickspan A, et al: Expansion of the fragile X CGG repeat in females with
premutation or intermediate alleles. Am J Hum Genet 72(2):454, 2003
Nora JJ, Nora AH: Updates on counseling the family with a first-degree relative with a congenital heart
defect. Am J Med Genet 29(1):137, 1988
Norton ME, Brar H, Weiss J, et al: Non-Invasive Chromosomal Evaluation (NICE) study: results of a
multicenter prospective cohort study for detection of fetal trisomy 21 and trisomy 18. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 207(2):137.e1, 2012
Nussbaum RL, McInnes RR, Willard HF (eds): Complex inheritance of common multifactorial traits. In
Thompson & Thompson Genetics in Medicine, 8th ed. Philadelphia, Saunders, 2016
Olsson A, Hellgren M, Berntorp E, et al: Clotting factor level is not a good predictor of bleeding in
carriers of haemophilia A and B. Blood Coagul Fibrinolysis 25(5):471, 2014
Oniya O, Neves K, Ahmed B, et al: A review of the reproductive consequences of consanguinity. Eur J
Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 232(1):87, 2019
Parker SE, Mai CT, Canfield MA, et al: Updated national birth prevalence estimates for selected birth
defects in the United States, 2004–2006. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol 88(12):1008, 2010
Patau K, Smith DW, Therman E, et al: Multiple congenital anomaly caused by an extra autosome.
Lancet 1(7128):790, 1960
Pergament E, Cuckle H, Zimmermann B, et al: Single-nucleotide polymorphism-based noninvasive
prenatal screening in a high-risk and low-risk cohort. Obstet Gynecol 124(2pt1):210, 2014
Petersen JM, Parker SE, Benedum CM, et al: Periconceptional folic acid and risk for neural tube
defects among higher risk pregnancies. Birth Defects Res 111(19):1501, 2019
Petrovski S, Aggarwal V, Giordano JL, et al. Whole-exome sequencing in the evaluation of fetal
structural anomalies: a prospective cohort study. Lancet 393(10173):758, 2019
Platt LD, Koch R, Hanley WB, et al: The international study of pregnancy outcome in women with
maternal phenylketonuria: report of a 12-year study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 182(2):326, 2000
Plug I, Mauser-Bunschoten EP, Brocker-Vriends AH, et al: Bleeding in carriers of hemophilia. Blood
108(1):52, 2006
Quezada MS, Gil MM, Francisco C, et al: Screening for trisomies 21, 18, and 13 by cell-free DNA
analysis of maternal blood at 10–11 weeks. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 45(1):36, 2015
Radicioni AF, Ferlin A, Balercia G, et al: Consensus statement on diagnosis and clinical management of
Klinefelter syndrome. J Endocrinol Invest 33(11):839, 2010
Rankin J, Tennant PWG, Bythell M, et al: Predictors of survival in children born with Down syndrome: a
registry-based study. Pediatrics 129(6):e1373, 2012

Reddy UM, Abuhamad AZ, Levine D, et al: Fetal Imaging. Executive summary of a joint Eunice
Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, Society for MaternalFetal Medicine, American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine, American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists, American College of Radiology, Society for Pediatric Radiology, and Society of
Radiologists in Ultrasound Fetal Imaging Workshop. Obstet Gynecol 123(5):1070, 2014
Reddy UM, Goldenberg R, Silver R, et al: Stillbirth classification—developing an international consensus
for research: executive summary of a National Institute of Child Health and Human Development
workshop. Obstet Gynecol 114(4):901, 2009
Reddy UM, Grier PP, Saade GR, et al: Karyotype versus microarray testing for genetic abnormalities
after stillbirth. N Engl J Med 367(23):2185, 2012
Romeo G, Bittles AH: Consanguinity in the contemporary world. Hum Hered 77(1):6, 2014
Rosa RF, Rosa RC, Lorenzen MB, et al: Trisomy 18: experience of a reference hospital from the south
of Brazil. Am J Med Genet A 155A(7):1529, 2011
Samango-Sprouse CA, Lasutschinkow P, Powell S, et al: The incidence of anxiety symptoms in boys
with 47,XXY (Klinefelter syndrome) and the possible impact of timing of diagnosis and hormonal
replacement therapy. Am J Med Genet Part A 179(3):423, 2019
Schmickel RD: Contiguous gene syndromes: a component of recognizable syndromes. J Pediatr
109(2):231, 1986
Schneider AS, Mennuti MT, Zackai EH: High cesarean section rate in trisomy 18 births: a potential
indication for late prenatal diagnosis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 140(4):367, 1981
Schorge JO: Ovarian germ cell and sex cord-stromal tumors. In Hoffman BL, Schorge JO, Halvorson
LM, et al (eds): Williams Gynecology, 4th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2020
Shaffer LG, Agan N, Goldberg JD, et al: American College of Medical Genetics Statement on
diagnostic testing for uniparental disomy. Genet Med 3(3):206, 2001
Sheridan E, Wright J, Small N, et al: Risk factors for congenital anomaly in a multiethnic birth cohort: an
analysis of the Born in Branford study. Lancet 382(9901):1350, 2013
Shin M, Besser LM, Kucik JE, et al: Prevalence of Down syndrome in children and adolescents in 10
regions of the United States. Pediatrics 124(6):1565, 2009
Shipp TD, Benacerraf BR: Second trimester ultrasound screening for chromosomal abnormalities.
Prenat Diagn 22(4):296, 2002
Shprintzen RJ: Velo-cardio-facial syndrome: 30 years of study. Dev Disabil Res Rev 14(1):3, 2008
Silasi M, Rana S, Powe C, et al: Placental expression of angiogenic factors in trisomy 13. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 204(6):546.e1, 2011
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine: The use of chromosomal microarray for prenatal diagnosis.
SMFM Consult Series No. 41. October 2016
Spence JE, Perciaccante RG, Greig FM, et al: Uniparental disomy as a mechanism for human genetic
disease. Am J Hum Genet 42(2):217, 1988
Spotila LD, Sereda L, Prockop DJ: Partial isodisomy for maternal chromosome 7 and short stature in an
individual with a mutation at the COLIA2 locus. Am J Hum Genet 51(6):1396, 1992
Springett A, Wellesley D, Greenlees R, et al: Congenital anomalies associated with trisomy 18 or trisomy
13: a registry-based study in 16 European countries, 2000–2011. Am J Med Genet A 167A(12):3062,
2015
Stevenson DA, Carey JC: Contribution of malformations and genetic disorders to mortality in a
children’s hospital. Am J Med Genet 126A(4):393, 2004
Stoll C, Dott B, Alembik Y, et al: Associated congenital anomalies among cases with Down syndrome.
Eur J Med Genet 58(12):674, 2015

Stoltenberg C, Magnus P, Lie RT, et al: Birth defects and parental consanguinity in Norway. Am J
Epidemiol 145(5):439, 1997
Tartaglia N, Ayari N, Howell S, et al: 48,XXYY, 48,XXXY, and 49,XXXXY syndromes: not just variants
of Klinefelter syndrome. Acta Paediatrica 100(6):851, 2011
Tartaglia NR, Howell S, Sutherland A, et al: A review of trisomy X (47,XXX). Orphanet J Rare Dis 5:8,
2010
Toriello HV, Meck JM, Professional Practice and Guidelines Committee: Statement on guidance for
genetic counseling in advanced paternal age. Genet Med 10(6):457, 2008
Toutain J, Goutte-Gattat D, Horovitz J, et al: Confined placental mosaicism revised: impact on pregnancy
characteristics and outcome. PLoS One 13(4):e0195905, 2018
Tran SL, Samango-Sprouse CA, Sadeghin T, et al: Hormonal replacement therapy and its potential
influence on working memory and competency/adaptive functioning in 47,XXY (Klinefelter
syndrome). Am J Med Genet Part A 179(12):2374, 2019
Tuohy JF, James DK: Pre-eclampsia and trisomy 13. BJOG 99(11):891, 1992
Turner HH: A syndrome of infantilism, congenital webbed neck and cubitus valgus. Endocrinol 23:566,
1938
Vendola C, Canfield M, Daiger SP, et al: Survival of Texas infants born with trisomies 21, 18, and 13.
Am J Med Genet A 152A(2):360, 2010
Vockley J, Andersson HC, Antshel KM, et al: ACMG Practice Guidelines: phenylalanine hydroxylase
deficiency: diagnosis and management guideline. Genet Med 16(2):188, 2014
Wang J, Chen L, Zhou C, et al. Prospective chromosome analysis of 3429 amniocentesis samples in
China using copy number variation sequencing. Am J Obstet Gynecol 219(3):287, 2018
Wang Y, Chen Y, Tian F, et al: Maternal mosaicism is a significant contributor to discordant sex
chromosomal aneuploidies associated with non-invasive prenatal testing. Clin Chem 60(1):251, 2014
Watson WJ, Miller RC, Wax JR, et al: Sonographic findings of trisomy 18 in the second trimester of
pregnancy. J Ultrasound Med 27(7):1033, 2008
Wellesley D, Dolk H, Boyd PA, et al: Rare chromosome abnormalities, prevalence, and prenatal
diagnosis rates from population-based congenital anomaly registers in Europe. Eur J Hum Genet
20(5):521, 2012
Wigby K, D’Epagnier C, Howell S, et al: Expanding the phenotype of triple X syndrome: a comparison
of prenatal versus postnatal diagnosis. Am J Med Genet Part A 170(11):2870, 2016
Wilkie AOM, Goriely A: Gonadal mosaicism and non-invasive prenatal diagnosis for reassurance in
sporadic paternal age effect (PAE) disorders. Prenat Diagn 23(9):946, 2017
Worton RG, Stern R: A Canadian collaborative study of mosaicism in amniotic fluid cell cultures. Prenat
Diagn 4(7):131, 1984
Wou K, Hyun Y, Chitayat D, et al: Analysis of tissue from products of conception and perinatal losses
using QF-PCR and microarray: a three-year retrospective study resulting in an efficient protocol.
Eur J Med Genet 59(8):417, 2016
Zalel Y, Shapiro I, Weissmann-Brenner A, et al: Prenatal sonographic features of triploidy at 12–16
weeks. Prenat Diagn 36(7)650, 2016
Zhang J, Li J, Saucier JB, et al. Non-invasive prenatal sequencing for multiple Mendelian monogenic
disorders using circulating cell-free DNA. Nat Med 2019;25(3):439

