CHAPTER 29

Operative Vaginal Delivery

INCIDENCE AND INDICATIONS
CLASSIFICATION AND PREREQUISITES
MORBIDITY
FORCEPS DELIVERY
VACUUM-ASSISTED DELIVERY
TRAINING
REFERENCES
Operative vaginal delivery (OVD) is birth accomplished with assistance
from forceps or a vacuum-cup device. Once these are applied to the fetal
head, outward traction generates forces that augment maternal pushing to
deliver the fetus.

INCIDENCE AND INDICATIONS
From national data, forceps or vacuum-assisted vaginal delivery aided 3.1
percent of births in the United States in 2015. This is a decline from 9
percent in 1990 (Martin, 2017). For these procedures, a vacuum is
disproportionately selected, and the vacuum-to-forceps delivery ratio
approximates 4:1 (Yeomans, 2010). Most of these procedures are successful
in effecting vaginal birth. From 2006 United States data, only 0.4 percent of

forceps trials and 0.8 percent of vacuum extraction attempts failed to result in
vaginal birth (Osterman, 2009). In the specific group of nulliparas with term
gestations, higher failure rates of 4.4 and 6.4 percent, respectively, were
found in a study of 25 academic hospitals (Bailit, 2016).
If technically safe, termination of second-stage labor by OVD is
considered for any condition that threatens the mother or fetus and that is
likely to be relieved by delivery. Of maternal indications, the most common
are maternal exhaustion and prolonged second-stage labor. However, a
specific, maximum second-stage length beyond which all women should be
considered for OVD has not been defined (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019). Other maternal reasons are
preexisting or intrapartum conditions that limit effective pushing or warrant
expedited delivery. Severe or acute pulmonary compromise, decompensation
from intrapartum infection, neurological disease, and serious cardiac
disorders are examples. Frequent fetal indications include nonreassuring
fetal heart rate and premature placental separation (Schuit, 2012).

CLASSIFICATION AND PREREQUISITES
Classification of OVD is summarized in Table 29-1. It emphasizes that
station and rotation are the two most important discriminators of risk for both
mother and neonate. Station is measured by the number of centimeters, either
above or below, an anatomical zero station, which is a line drawn between
the ischial spines. Stations range from –5 to 0 to +5. Procedures are
categorized as outlet, low, and midpelvic, and most are low or outlet
deliveries. High forceps, in which instruments are applied above 0 station,
have no place in current obstetrics.
TABLE 29-1. Operative Vaginal Delivery Prerequisites and Classification
According to Station and Rotationa

To aid patient selection, the Society for Maternal–Fetal Medicine (2020)
published a preprocedural checklist and documentation template. Once
station and rotation are determined, the prerequisites listed in Table 29-1 are
assessed. For vacuum extraction, fetuses ideally are not younger than 34
weeks’ gestation because of cranial hemorrhage vulnerability at earlier ages
(Åberg, 2014). Also prior to vacuum use, although infrequently used in the
United States, fetal scalp blood sampling should not have been recently
performed. Of requisites, ascertaining correct head position is essential, and
Figure 29-1 shows fetal skull anatomy. In unclear cases, sonography can help
identify fetal orbits and nasal bridge to aid orientation (Ghi, 2018).

FIGURE 29-1 Fetal head (A–B) at term showing fontanels, sutures, and various dimensions.

Regional analgesia is preferable for low or midpelvic procedures.
Pudendal blockade may prove adequate for outlet deliveries. As a causative
factor, newer epidural methods or placement during early labor do not raise
OVD rates (Anim-Somuahm, 2018; Liu, 2004).
The bladder is emptied to provide additional pelvic space and minimize
bladder trauma. Urinary retention and bladder dysfunction are frequent shortterm effects of OVD (Mulder, 2012; Pifarotti, 2014). Notably, episiotomy
and epidural analgesia, both common associates of OVD, also are risks for
urinary retention. Retention usually resolves after 24 to 48 hours of passive
catheter bladder drainage (Chap. 36, p. 643).

MORBIDITY
■ Maternal Morbidity
OVD carries increased risk of certain morbidities for both mother and fetus.
In general, a higher station and greater degrees of rotation raise procedure
difficulty and the chance of injury. Morbidity is most properly compared with
morbidity from cesarean delivery and not with that from spontaneous birth.
This is the most appropriate comparator because the alternative to indicated
OVD is cesarean delivery.

Lacerations
The very indications that prompt OVD are among those that also increase the
need for episiotomy and the likelihood of lacerations (de Leeuw, 2008). That
said, higher rates of third- and fourth-degree perineal lacerations, vaginal
wall lacerations, and less often cervical tears do complicate OVD compared
with spontaneous birth (Friedman, 2015; Gurol-Urganci, 2013; Landy, 2011).
These rates with OVD are also substantially higher than with cesarean
delivery. Third- and fourth-degree perineal lacerations are grouped as
obstetrical anal sphincter injuries (OASIS). In general, these tears more
frequently attend forceps delivery compared with vacuum extraction, and
especially if an episiotomy is midline (Kudish, 2006; O’Mahony, 2010).
With OVD, indicated episiotomy rather than routine use is
recommended. If required, a mediolateral episiotomy affords greater
protection against OASIS than midline incision (Gurol-Urganci, 2013; Jangö,
2014; van Bavel, 2018). But, short-term rates of pain and dyspareunia are
similar or increased with mediolateral episiotomy (Chap. 27, p. 510). As
another OASIS protection, early forceps disarticulation and removal can
avoid the full perineal distention created by the blades and crowning head.
Moreover, cessation of maternal pushing during disarticulation or as the head
begins to crown allows the clinician sole control of outward forces against
the perineum. Similarly, adding a dedicated assistant to bolster the perineum
can lower OASIS rates, and this is our practice (Wan, 2020). Last, OASIS
are more common with an occiput posterior (OP) position (Damron, 2004).
Thus, manual or forceps rotation to an occiput anterior (OA) position may
lower rates of lower reproductive tract injury (Bradley, 2013).

Infection and Subsequent-pregnancy Morbidity
As detailed in Chapter 30 (p. 548), cesarean delivery carries greater
maternal morbidity compared with spontaneous birth. For OVD, in one study
of more than 1 million births, cesarean delivery, but not OVD, was a risk for
peripartum hysterectomy (Spiliopoulos, 2011). Further, avoiding cesarean
delivery can minimize rates of subsequent pregnancy complications, such as
placenta previa, placenta accreta spectrum, uterine rupture, and adhesionrelated surgical organ injury.
In addition, postpartum wound or uterine infection is more frequent in
women following cesarean compared with OVD (Bailit, 2016; Halscott,

2015). Still, to address peripartum infection, investigators in the ANODE
trial randomly assigned nearly 3500 gravidas undergoing OVD to receive
either placebo or a single intravenous dose of amoxicillin plus clavulanic
acid (Knight, 2019). The puerperal infection rate was 11 percent after
antibiotic prophylaxis compared with 19 percent in those given placebo.
Notably, these infections often coincide with long labors and multiple
cervical examinations, both of which are common with women requiring
OVD. Thus, we believe that provision of antibiotics to those undergoing
OVD without other infection-related risks warrants further study. Indeed, the
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020a) notes that this
prophylaxis is reasonable but recommends against routine antibiotic
prophylaxis for all women undergoing OVD. However, the College (2020b)
does note that a single antibiotic dose with third- and fourth-degree perineal
laceration is reasonable. Several studies support this practice (Duggal, 2008;
Lewicky-Gaupp, 2015; Stock, 2013a).

Pelvic Floor Disorders
This term encompasses urinary incontinence, anal incontinence, and pelvic
organ prolapse (POP). OVD has been implicated as a possible risk for each.
Proposed mechanisms include structural compromise or pelvic floor
denervation secondary to forces exerted during delivery.
For urinary incontinence, parity and specifically vaginal delivery are risk
factors (Gyhagen, 2013; Rortveit, 2003). But, many studies do not support a
higher risk from OVD compared with the risk from vaginal birth alone
(Gartland, 2016; Leijonhufvud, 2011; MacArthur, 2016).
Evidence linking anal incontinence with OVD is conflicting. Some
studies show that OASIS, but not delivery mode, is the main etiological link
(Bols, 2010; Evers, 2012; Nygaard, 1997). In contrast, others directly
associate OVD with anal incontinence (Dolan, 2010; MacArthur, 2013). But,
these studies may not be incongruous—recall that OVD is associated with
increased rates of OASIS. Importantly, several studies and reviews have not
found cesarean delivery to be protective long term against anal incontinence
(Nelson, 2010).
Similarly for POP, evidence linking it to OVD is mixed (Gyhagen, 2013;
Volløyhaug, 2015). First, pelvic floor mechanisms leading to POP are
complex and incompletely defined (Gordon, 2019). Despite this, obstetrical

avulsion of the levator ani muscle from the pelvic sidewall has been
implicated, and OVD, especially forceps delivery, is one risk for this injury
(DeLancey, 2007; Dietz, 2008; Friedman, 2019). Again, the pelvic floor
injury rather OVD itself may be the causative agent, as those with OVD but
no avulsion did not suffer greater POP rates in one recent analysis (Handa,
2019).

■ Perinatal Morbidity
Acute Perinatal Injury
OVD carries higher risk for fetal injury than cesarean delivery or
spontaneous birth. Both OVD methods are implicated, and factors can
include delivery duration and the number of pulls or cup pop-offs (Åberg,
2019; Levin, 2019; Miller, 2020). Injuries are more frequent with vacuum
extraction, and injuries with this device include cephalohematoma, subgaleal
hemorrhage, retinal hemorrhage, neonatal jaundice secondary to these
hemorrhages, clavicular fracture, and scalp lacerations. Cephalohematoma
and subgaleal hemorrhage are both extracranial lesions illustrated in Figure
33-2 (p. 608). Shoulder dystocia has been linked to both methods (Dall’Asta,
2016). Forceps delivery has higher rates of facial nerve injury, brachial
plexus injury, depressed skull fracture, and corneal abrasion (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020a; Demissie, 2004; Dupuis,
2005). With intracranial hemorrhage, some studies have associated vacuum
extraction with higher rates, whereas others show similar rates with either
OVD method (Towner, 1999; Wen, 2001; Werner, 2011).
Compared with cesarean delivery, OVD carries higher risk of
extracranial hematomas, fractures, nerve injuries, retinal hemorrhage, and
head lacerations. However, rates of fetal acidemia or hypoxic
encephalopathy are not higher with OVD compared with second-stage
cesarean delivery (Bailit, 2016; Contag, 2010; Walsh, 2013). Intracranial
hemorrhage rates are similar among newborns delivered by vacuum
extraction, forceps, or cesarean delivery during labor (Towner, 1999). But,
intracranial hemorrhage rates are higher than among those delivered
spontaneously or by cesarean delivery before labor. These authors suggest
that the common risk factor for intracranial hemorrhage is abnormal labor.
Werner and associates (2011), in their evaluation of more than 150,000

singleton deliveries, reported that forceps delivery was associated with
fewer total neurological complications that included seizures,
intraventricular hemorrhage, and subdural hemorrhage compared with
vacuum-assisted birth or any cesarean delivery.
Compared with rotational OVD, second-stage cesarean delivery has
similar maternal and neonatal morbidity rates (Aiken, 2015; Bahl, 2013;
Stock, 2013b). For example, in their large series, Tempest and associates
(2013) found similar morbidity rates among malpositioned fetuses during
second-stage labor that underwent Kielland rotation, rotational vacuum
extraction, or emergency cesarean delivery.
Midforceps by definition are performed from a higher station. The bulk
of data are from older studies, and most show comparable neonatal
morbidity between low and midforceps procedures (Dierker, 1985; Gilstrap,
1984). In a recent report also comparing these two, Ducarme and coworkers
(2015) found comparable neonatal and maternal composite morbidity scores.
Comparing midpelvic OVD and second-stage cesarean delivery, most
studies support neonatal safety (Bashore, 1990; Cibils, 1990; HagadornFreathy, 1991). But, others have found increased rates of trauma and
umbilical cord blood acidemia with midforceps delivery (Robertson, 1990).
More recently, Muraca and associates (2018) compared midpelvic OVD
methods against second-stage cesarean delivery. For the indication of
dystocia, fetal and maternal morbidity composite scores were higher with
OVD. With distress as the indication, the neonatal morbidity score was
greater only with midpelvic vacuum-assisted OVD, whereas the maternal
morbidity score was higher only with midforceps. In another study
comparing both midpelvic OVD methods, maternal morbidity was greater
with forceps, and neonatal morbidity differed only in a higher
cephalohematoma rate with vacuum-assisted delivery (Baerthlein, 1986).

Mechanisms of Acute Injury
The types of fetal injury with OVD can usually be explained by the forces
exerted. In cases of cephalohematoma or subgaleal hemorrhage, suction and
perhaps rotation during vacuum extraction may lead to a primary vessel
shearing. Intracranial hemorrhage may result from skull fracture that lacerates
vessels or from vessel rupture alone due to exerted forces. With facial nerve
palsy, one of the forceps blades compresses the nerve against the facial

bones. To explain brachial plexus injury, Towner and Ciotti (2007) proposed
that as the fetal head descends down the birth canal, the shoulders may stay
above the pelvic inlet. Thus, similar to shoulder dystocia at the symphysis,
this “shoulder dystocia at the pelvic inlet” is overcome by traction forces but
with concomitant stretch on the brachial plexus.

Long-term Infant Morbidity
Evidence regarding long-term neurodevelopmental outcomes in children born
by OVD is reassuring (Seidman, 1991; Wesley, 1992). Moreover, no
association between forceps delivery and later epilepsy was found in a
cohort study of more than 21,000 births (Murphy, 2004). In their review,
O’Callaghan and colleagues (2011) reported no link between cerebral palsy
and OVD. Last, the incidence of neurodevelopmental morbidity was similar
in those undergoing successful forceps delivery, failed forceps with cesarean
delivery, or cesarean delivery without forceps in one study (Bahl, 2007).
Similarly, with midpelvic OVD, long-term neurodevelopment is not harmed
in most analyses (Dierker, 1986; Friedman, 1984; Nilsen, 1984; Wesley,
1993).

Trial of Operative Vaginal Delivery
If an attempt to perform OVD is expected to be difficult, it should be
considered a trial. Moving the woman to an operating room for this attempt,
which could be followed by immediate cesarean delivery if OVD fails, has
merit. If forceps cannot be satisfactorily applied, the procedure is stopped.
Either a trial of vacuum-assisted delivery or cesarean delivery is then
performed. With the former, if the fetus does not descend with traction, the
trial should be abandoned and cesarean delivery performed.
With such caveats, cesarean delivery after an OVD attempt was not
associated with adverse neonatal outcomes if the fetal heart rate was
concurrently reassuring (Alexander, 2009). A similar study evaluated 122
women who had a trial of midpelvic OVD in a setting with full preparations
for cesarean delivery (Lowe, 1987). Investigators found no significant
difference in immediate neonatal or maternal morbidity compared with that
of 42 women delivered for similar indications by cesarean but without such a
trial. Conversely, in 61 women who had “unexpected” vacuum or forceps

failure in which there was no prior preparation for immediate cesarean
delivery, neonatal morbidity was higher.
Some factors associated with OVD failure are persistent OP positions
and birthweight >4000 g (Ben-Haroush, 2007; Verhoeven, 2016). However,
Palatnik and coworkers (2016) found that risk factors poorly predicted
success. In general, to avert morbidity with failed OVD, the American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020a) cautions that these trials
should be attempted only if the clinical assessment suggests a successful
outcome. We also emphasize proper training.
Sequential instrumentation most often involves an attempt at vacuumassisted OVD followed by one with forceps. This sequence likely reflects
the overall higher completion rate with forceps. However, this practice
significantly raises fetal trauma risks (Dupuis, 2005; Gardella, 2001;
Murphy, 2011). The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
(2020a) recommends against the sequential use of instruments unless there is
a “compelling and justifiable reason.”

FORCEPS DELIVERY
■ Design
Forceps refers to the paired instrument, and each member of this pair is
called a branch. Branches are designated left or right according to the side of
the maternal pelvis to which they are applied (Fig. 29-2A). Each branch has
four components: blade, shank, lock, and handle (see Fig. 29-2B). Each
blade has a toe, a heel, and two curves. Of these, the outward cephalic curve
conforms to the round fetal head, whereas the upward pelvic curve
corresponds to the curve of the birth canal. Some blades are solid, meaning
smooth on both surfaces. Others have an opening within or a depression
along the blade surface and are termed fenestrated or pseudofenestrated,
respectively. A true window in the blade reduces the degree of head slippage
within the blades during forceps rotation. Disadvantageously, it can increase
blade thickness and friction against the vaginal wall. With
pseudofenestration, the forceps blade is smooth on the outer maternal side
but indented on the inner fetal surface. The goal is to reduce head slipping yet
improve the ease and safety of application and removal of forceps. In most
situations, however, despite these subtle differences, any are appropriate.

FIGURE 29-2 A. Simpson forceps have fenestrated blades, parallel shanks, and English lock. The
cephalic curve accommodates the fetal head. B. Luikart forceps have pseudofenestrated blades,
overlapping shanks, a sliding lock, and tongue-in-groove handles. The pelvic curve (black curve) is
marked in this example.

The blades are connected to shanks, which may be parallel or
overlapping. Parallel shanks limit compression of blades against the fetal
head and may be helpful with deliveries employing greater forces. These
shanks, however, add width against the introitus. In comparison, overlapping

shanks raise compression forces but distend the perineum less. This may
offer greatest advantage for outlet deliveries.
Locks are found on all forceps and help to connect the right and left
branches and stabilize the instrument. They can be located at the end of the
shank nearest to the handles (English lock), at the ends of the handles (pivot
lock), or along the shank (sliding lock). Although varied in design, handles,
when squeezed, raise compression forces against the fetal head. Thus, forces
to consider include traction and compression.

■ Blade Application and Delivery
Forceps blades grasp the head and are applied according to fetal head
position. If the head is in an OA position, two or more fingers of the right
hand are introduced inside the left posterior portion of the vulva and
advanced into the vagina beside the fetal head. The handle of the left branch
is grasped between the thumb and two fingers of the left hand (Fig. 29-3).
The blade tip is then gently introduced along the posterior left vaginal wall.
It is swept upward and inward between the fetal head and the palmar surface
of the fingers (Fig. 29-4). This blade can be held in position by an assistant.
For application of the right blade, two or more fingers of the left hand are
introduced into the right posterior portion of the vagina to serve as a guide
for the right blade. This blade is held in the right hand and introduced into the
vagina. With each blade, the thumb is positioned behind the heel, and most of
the insertion force comes from this thumb (Fig. 29-5). If the head is
positioned in a left OA (LOA) or right OA (ROA) position, then the lower of
the two blades is typically placed first.

FIGURE 29-3 For OA or LOA positions, the left handle of the forceps is held in the left hand. The
blade is introduced into the left side of the pelvis between the fetal head and the fingers of the
operator’s right hand.

FIGURE 29-4 Insertion arc of the blade. Importantly, the thumb of the right hand, not shown here,
guides the blade during placement.

FIGURE 29-5 In applying the second blade, insertional force is generated mainly by the thumb.
(Reproduced with permission from Yeomans ER: Operative vaginal delivery. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman
BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al (eds): Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York,
NY: McGraw Hill; 2017.)

The blades are constructed so that their cephalic curve is closely adapted
to the sides of the fetal head (Fig. 29-6). The fetal head is perfectly grasped
only when the long axis of the blades corresponds to the occipitomental
diameter (see Fig. 29-1). As a result, most of the blade lies over the lateral
face.

FIGURE 29-6 A. The forceps are symmetrically placed and articulated. B. The vertex is OA.
(Reproduced with permission from Yeomans ER: Operative vaginal delivery. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman
BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al (eds): Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York,
NY: McGraw Hill; 2017.)

Suboptimal blade placement can increase morbidity (Ramphul, 2015).
For OA positions, appropriately applied blades are equidistant from the
sagittal suture, and each blade is equidistant from its adjacent lambdoid
suture. In OP positions, blades are symmetrically placed relative to the
sagittal suture and to each coronal suture. After correct positioning, the
branches can be articulated. If branches do not articulate, the blade’s
relationships to the sutures are reassessed. Applied in this way, forceps
should not slip, and traction may be applied most advantageously. With most
forceps, if one blade is applied over the brow and the other over the occiput,

the instrument cannot be locked, or if locked, the blades will slip off when
traction is applied.
With both branches in place, slow articulation of the handles will also
typically correct mild asynclitism. For greater asynclitism, Luikart forceps
can be placed and once positioned, one handle will extend further than the
other along their long axis. Asynclitism is resolved by pulling and/or pushing
each respective branch within the sliding lock along the instrument’s long
axis until the finger guards align.
Once blades are placed satisfactorily, rotation to OA position is
performed before traction is applied (Fig. 29-7). Next, gentle, intermittent,
downward and outward traction is exerted concurrent with maternal efforts
until the perineum begins to bulge. For most stations, the initial direction of
traction is downward and brings the head beneath the symphysis.

FIGURE 29-7 If LOA, the vertex is rotated from this position to OA (arrow). (Reproduced with
permission from Yeomans ER: Operative vaginal delivery. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC
III, et al (eds): Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill;
2017.)

With head descent, the vector of forces changes continuously and are
gradually directed upward (Fig. 29-8). During the birth of the head,
mechanisms of spontaneous delivery should be simulated as closely as
possible. As a teaching tool for this, a Bill axis traction device can be
attached over the finger guards of most forceps. The instrument has an arrow
and indicator line. When the arrow points directly to the line, traction is
along the path of least resistance.

FIGURE 29-8 With low forceps, the direction of gentle traction for delivery of the head is indicated
(arrows). (Reproduced with permission from Yeomans ER: Operative vaginal delivery. In Yeomans ER,
Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al (eds): Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New
York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2017.)

It is impossible to ascertain the amount of force exerted by forceps for an
individual patient. Thus, traction is ideally intermittent and relieved between
contractions, as in spontaneous labor. Except when urgently indicated,
delivery should be sufficiently slow, deliberate, and gentle to prevent undue
head compression. It is preferable to apply traction only with each uterine
contraction. Maternal pushing will augment these efforts.
With traction, as the occiput distends the vulva, an episiotomy may be
performed if needed. The delivery may be completed in several ways. Some
clinicians keep the forceps in place to control the head. However, this blade
volume adds to vulvar distention and raises risks for laceration or
episiotomy. To prevent this, the forceps may be removed, and delivery is
then completed by maternal pushing (Fig. 29-9). Importantly, if blades are
disarticulated and removed too early, the head may recede and prolong
delivery. Pushing in some cases may be aided by the modified Ritgen

maneuver. We emphasize bolstering of the perineum to control outward
forces.

FIGURE 29-9 Branches are removed in the opposite order from that in which they were originally
placed. The fingers of the right hand, covered by a sterile towel, bolster the perineum. The thumb is
placed directly on the head to prevent sudden egress. (Reproduced with permission from Yeomans ER:
Operative vaginal delivery. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al (eds): Cunningham and
Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2017.)

■ Manual Rotation
In many cases, OT and OP head positions are often imperfectly flexed and
present a wider head diameter. This can slow fetal descent and lengthen
second-stage labor. By manually rotating the fetal occiput into the anterior
pelvis (OA positions), cephalopelvic proportions improve to help hasten
spontaneous birth. This is usually reserved for second-stage labor. Compared
with no attempt, manual rotation is associated with lower rates of cesarean
delivery, OVD, severe perineal laceration, and chorioamnionitis (Blanc,
2021; Shaffer, 2011). If OVD is still required, the new OA position lowers
rates of perineal trauma.
In the simplest cases, digital rotation can correct OT or OP positioning.
With head molding, the sutures override one another to create a bony ridge.
Two fingers hooked against this ridge and forces directed parallel to the
skull can rotate the occiput toward the anterior pelvis. This is done between
contractions, and advancements are then held in place during pushing.
Progressive degrees of rotation are attained with each attempt, and several
may be needed to ultimately rotate the occiput into the anterior pelvis.
Instead, with manual rotation, an open hand is inserted into the vagina.
For ROP position, the right palm cups the fetal head and straddles the sagittal
suture. The operator’s fingers wrap to one side of the fetal face, and the
thumb extends along the other side. Rotation is clockwise to bring the occiput
to an ROA position (Fig. 29-10). With LOP position, rotation is
counterclockwise with the left palm. Three actions are performed
simultaneously between contractions. The fetal head is flexed to provide a
smaller diameter for rotation and subsequent descent within the pelvis. Next,
slight destationing of the fetal head moves the head to a level in the maternal
pelvis with sufficient room to complete the rotation. Importantly, destationing
should not be confused with disengaging the fetal head, which is proscribed.
Third, we and others prefer also to place the other hand externally on the
corresponding side of the maternal abdomen to pull the back of the fetus up
and toward the midline in synchrony with internal head rotation. Barth
(2015) provides an excellent summary of this technique.

FIGURE 29-10 A. Manual rotation using the left hand, palm-up, to rotate from ROP. B. The head is
flexed and destationed during clockwise rotation to reach an OA position. (Reproduced with permission

from Yeomans ER: Operative vaginal delivery. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al
(eds): Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2017.)

Le Ray and associates (2007, 2013) reported a success rate >90 percent
with manual rotation. Complication were uncommon. In their report of 796
rotations, no cords prolapsed. Two women sustained cervical lacerations,
which required simple vaginal repair. Notably, this study allowed rotations
at advanced cervical dilation prior to second-stage labor, which may have
enhanced cervical injury risk. In 71 percent, fetal heart rate (FHR) was
normal during rotation, but severe FHR abnormalities were noted in 10
percent. However, the need for cesarean delivery after successful manual
rotation was not associated with FHR abnormalities. Failure to rotate the
head does not mandate cesarean delivery, and options are described next.

■ Persistent Occiput Posterior Positions
In cases with persistent OP positioning, the head may spontaneously deliver
OP, may be manually or instrumentally rotated to an OA position, or may be
delivered OP by forceps or vacuum (Bertholdt, 2019). In many cases, the
cause of a persistent OP position and of the difficulty in accomplishing
rotation is an anthropoid pelvis. This architecture opposes rotation and
predisposes to posterior delivery (Fig. 2-16, p. 29).
With forceps delivery from an OP position, downward and outward
traction is applied until the base of the nose passes under the symphysis (Fig.
29-11). The handles are then slowly elevated until the occiput gradually
emerges over the perineum’s fourchette. The forceps are directed downward
again, and the nose, mouth, and chin successively emerge from the vulva.

FIGURE 29-11 Outlet forceps delivery from an OP position. The head should be flexed after the
bregma passes under the symphysis.

OP delivery causes greater vulvar distention, and an episiotomy may be
needed. OP deliveries have a higher incidence of severe perineal lacerations
and of extensive episiotomy compared with OA positions (de Leeuw, 2008;
Pearl, 1993). Also, newborns undergoing OVD from OP positions have a
higher incidence of Erb and facial nerve palsies, 1 and 2 percent,
respectively, than those delivered from OA positions. As expected, rotations
to OA ultimately decrease perineal delivery trauma (Bradley, 2013).
For forceps rotations from an OP to OA position, Kielland forceps are
preferred because they have a less pronounced pelvic curve (Fig. 29-12).
Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd edition offers a more
detailed description and illustration of this Kielland forceps procedure
(Yeomans, 2017).

FIGURE 29-12 Kielland forceps. The characteristic features are minimal pelvic curvature (A), sliding
lock (B), and light weight.

■ Occiput Transverse Positions
With occiput transverse (OT) fetal head positions, rotation is required for
delivery. For this, the head may be manually or instrumentally rotated into an
OA position. Manual rotation was described earlier in that section (p. 540).
Forceps rotation by experienced operators can offer high success rates
with minimal maternal morbidity (Burke, 2012; Stock, 2013b). Either
standard forceps or specialized forceps, such as Kielland forceps, are used.
With the latter, each handle has a small knob, and branches are placed so that
this knob faces the occiput.
Kielland described two methods of applying the anterior blade. In this
example, placement with a left OT (LOT) position is described. With the
wandering method, the anterior blade is first introduced into the posterior
pelvis (Fig. 29-13). The blade is then arched around the face to an anterior
position. To permit this sweep of the blade, the handle is held close to the
left maternal buttock throughout the maneuver. The second blade is
introduced posteriorly, and the branches are locked.

FIGURE 29-13 A. Application of the right branch of the Kielland forceps to a head in LOT position.
The knob on this branch (colored blue) will ultimately face the occiput. B. The right branch is
wandered to its final position behind the symphysis. C. Insertion of the left branch of the Kielland
forceps directly posterior along the hollow of the sacrum. This branch is inserted to the maternal right of
the anterior branch to aid in engaging the sliding lock. (Reproduced with permission from Yeomans ER:
Operative vaginal delivery. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al (eds): Cunningham and
Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2017.)

After checking the application, the provider pulls the handles of the
Kielland forceps slightly to the patient’s right to flex the fetal head and create
a smaller diameter for rotation. The first and second fingers of the left hand
are placed over the finger guards with the palm against the handles. This
palm faces the maternal left. Concurrently, the first two fingers of the
operator’s right hand are placed against the anterior lambdoid suture. The
fetal head is then elevated and slightly destationed. For rotation in a
counterclockwise direction, the wrist of the left hand supinates, to direct this
palm upward. Simultaneously, two fingers of the right hand press against the
lambdoid suture ridge. This ensures that the fetal head turns with the blades
and does not slip. As a newer adjunct, abdominal sonography can follow and
document head rotation (Hinkson, 2021).
The second type of blade application introduces the anterior blade with
its cephalic curve directed upward to curve under the symphysis. After it has
been advanced far enough toward the upper vagina, it is turned on its long
axis through 180 degrees to adapt the cephalic curvature to the head. The
second blade is introduced posteriorly, and the branches are locked.
After rotation of the fetal occiput into the anterior pelvis, two acceptable
methods for delivery are available. In one, the operator applies traction on
the Kielland forceps using a bimanual grip described previously for
conventional forceps (p. 539). When the posterior fontanel has passed under
the subpubic arch, the handles can be elevated to the horizontal, but no
further. Raising the handles above the horizontal may cause vaginal sulcus

tears because of the reverse pelvic curve (Dennen, 1955). Alternatively, the
Kielland forceps can be removed after rotation and replaced with
conventional forceps. With this approach, moderate traction is first employed
to seat the head before switching instruments.

■ Face Presentations
With a mentum anterior face presentation, OVD is an option. The blades are
applied to the sides of the head along the occipitomental diameter, with the
pelvic curve directed toward the neck (see Fig. 29-1). Downward traction is
exerted until the chin appears under the symphysis. Then, by an upward
movement, the face is slowly extracted, with the nose, eyes, brow, and
occiput appearing in succession over the anterior margin of the perineum.
Forceps should not be applied to the mentum posterior presentation
because vaginal delivery is impossible except in very small fetuses.

VACUUM-ASSISTED DELIVERY
■ Vacuum Extractor Design
With vacuum-assisted OVD, suction is created within a cup placed on the
fetal scalp such that traction on the cup aids fetal birth. In the United States,
vacuum extractor is the preferred term, whereas in Europe it is commonly
called a ventouse (Fig. 29-14). Theoretical benefits of this tool compared
with forceps include simpler requirements for precise positioning on the fetal
head and avoidance of space-occupying blades within the vagina to help
mitigate maternal trauma.

FIGURE 29-14 Vacuum delivery systems. A. The Kiwi OmniCup contains a handheld vacuumgenerating pump, which is attached via flexible tubing to a rigid plastic mushroom cup. B. The Mityvac
Mystic II MitySoft Bell Cup has a soft bell cup attached by a semirigid shaft to a handheld pump.

Vacuum devices contain a cup, shaft, handle, and vacuum generator.
Vacuum cups are metal or plastic and differ in their shape, size, and
reusability. In the United States, plastic cups are generally preferred. Of
these, the soft cup is a pliable bell-shaped dome, whereas the rigid type has a
firm flattened mushroom-shaped cup and circular ridge around the cup rim
(Table 29-2). When compared, rigid mushroom cups generate significantly
more traction force (Hofmeyr, 1990; Muise, 1993). With OP positions or
with asynclitism, the flatter cup also permits improved placement at the
flexion point, which is typically less accessible with these head positions.
The trade-off is that the flatter cups have higher scalp laceration rates. Thus,
many manufacturers recommend soft bell cups for more straightforward OA
deliveries.
TABLE 29-2. Vacuum Cups for Operative Vaginal Delivery

Several investigators have compared outcomes with various rigid and
soft cups. Metal cups yield higher success rates but greater rates of scalp
injuries, including cephalohematomas (O’Mahony, 2010). In another study,
Kuit and colleagues (1993) found that the only advantage of the soft cups was

a lower incidence of scalp injury. In a review, Vacca (2002) concluded that
fewer scalp lacerations occurred with the soft cup, but that the rate of
cephalohematomas and subgaleal hemorrhage was similar between soft and
rigid cups. Importantly, high-pressure vacuum generates large amounts of
force regardless of the cup used (Duchon, 1998).
Aside from the cup, the shaft that connects the cup and handle may be
flexible or semiflexible. Tubing-like flexible shafts may be preferred for OP
positions or asynclitism to permit better seating of the cup. Last, the vacuum
generator may be handheld and actuated by the operator, or it may be held
and operated by an assistant.

■ Technique
An important step in vacuum-assisted OVD is proper cup placement over the
flexion point. This pivot point maximizes traction, minimizes cup
detachment, flexes the neck, and delivers the smallest head diameter through
the pelvic outlet. This improves success rates, lowers scalp injury rates, and
lessens perineal trauma because the smallest head diameter distends the
vulva (Baskett, 2008).
The flexion point is found along the sagittal suture, approximately 3 cm
from the posterior fontanel’s center and approximately 6 cm from the anterior
fontanel’s center. Because most cup diameters measure 5 to 6 cm, when
properly placed, the cup rim lies at the posterior fontanel’s border and 3 cm
from the anterior fontanel (Fig. 29-15). Placement of the cup more anteriorly
on the fetal cranium—near the anterior fontanel—is ideally avoided as it
leads to neck extension during traction unless the fetus is small. Such
placement delivers a wider head diameter through the vaginal opening. Last,
asymmetrical placement relative to the sagittal suture may worsen
asynclitism. Cup placement in OA positions is seldom difficult. In contrast, if
the indication for delivery is failure to descend caused by occipital
malposition, cup positioning can be difficult.

FIGURE 29-15 Drawing demonstrates correct cup placement at the flexion point. Along the sagittal
suture, this spot lies 3 cm from the posterior fontanel and 6 cm from the anterior fontanel.

During cup placement, maternal soft tissue entrapment predisposes the
mother to lacerations and virtually ensures cup dislodgement, colloquially
called a “pop off.” Thus, the entire cup circumference should be palpated
both before and after the vacuum has been created and again prior to traction
to exclude such entrapment. Gradual vacuum creation is advocated by some
and is generated by increasing the suction in increments of 0.2 kg/cm2 every
2 minutes until a total negative pressure of 0.8 kg/cm2 is reached (Table 293). That said, other studies have shown that negative pressure can be
increased to 0.8 kg/cm2 in <2 minutes without a significant difference in
efficacy or in maternal and fetal outcomes (Suwannachat, 2011, 2012).
TABLE 29-3. Vacuum Pressure Conversions

Once suction is created, the instrument handle is grasped, and traction is
initiated. Similar to forceps delivery, traction angles mirror that in Figure 298 and should be steady without jerking or rocking. The number of needed
pulls increases with higher station but typically ranges from one to four.
Efforts are intermittent, and each pull is coordinated with maternal pushing.
Manual torque to the cup is avoided as it can cause cup displacement or
cephalohematomas and, with metal cups, “cookie-cutter”–type scalp
lacerations. Thus, OA oblique positions are corrected not by rotation, but
solely by downward outward traction. Similarly, for OP positions, rotational
forces should not be applied. Instead, with correct flexion point placement
and line of traction, the head will usually rotate by itself (van den Akker,
2019).
During pulls, the operator should place the nondominant hand within the
vagina, with the thumb on the extractor cup and one or more fingers on the
fetal scalp. So positioned, descent of the presenting part can be judged and
the traction angle can be adjusted with head descent. In addition, the
relationship of the cup edge to the scalp can be assessed to help detect cup
separation.
Between contractions, some physicians will lower the suction levels to
decrease scalp injury rates, whereas others will maintain suction in cases
with a nonreassuring FHR to aid rapid delivery. No differences in maternal
or fetal outcome were noted if the vacuum level was decreased between
contractions or if an effort was made to prevent fetal loss of station (Bofill,
1997). Once the head is delivered, the vacuum pressure is relieved and the
cup removed.
Vacuum extraction should be considered a trial. Without early and clear
evidence of descent toward delivery, an alternative delivery approach should
be adopted. As a general guideline, progressive descent should accompany

each traction attempt. Neither data nor consensus are available regarding the
number of pulls required to effect delivery, the maximum number of cup popoffs that can be tolerated, or optimal total duration of the procedure. Some
manufacturers have recommendations regarding these (Clinical Innovations,
2018; CooperSurgical, 2018).
During a vacuum-assisted delivery trial, cup dislodgement due to
technical failure or less than optimal placement should not be equated with
dislodgement under ideal conditions of exact cup placement and optimal
vacuum maintenance. Technical failures may merit either additional attempts
at cup placement or, alternatively, a trial of forceps (Ezenagu, 1999;
Williams, 1991). The least desirable cases are those in which traction
without progress or multiple disengagements occur following correct cup
application and appropriate traction. As with forceps, clinicians should
embrace a willingness to abandon attempts at vacuum-assisted delivery if
satisfactory progress is not made (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2020a).

TRAINING
As the OVD rate has declined, so have opportunities for resident training
(Fitzwater, 2015; Kyser, 2014). In accredited programs, the median number
of these procedures completed by trainees has reached critically low levels,
and for recent graduates it approximated only 20 (Accreditation Council for
Graduate Medical Education, 2019; Dildy, 2016). For residents completing
training in 2021, the Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education
(2020) minimum requirement is 15 procedures.
To adapt, residency programs should have readily available skilled
operators to teach these procedures by simulation as well as through actual
cases (Spong, 2012). In one study, a 59-percent increase in forceps
deliveries over 2 years was related to a single experienced and proactive
instructor assigned to teach forceps to residents in labor and delivery (Solt,
2011).
In another, following implementation of a formal education program that
included a manikin and pelvic model simulation, rates of neonatal morbidity
and of severe maternal cervical, labial, and vaginal lacerations declined.
However, OASIS rates were unchanged (Cheong, 2004). Gossett and

associates (2016) found a 22-percent reduction in the OASIS rate following
an OVD simulation curriculum.

REFERENCES
Åberg K, Norman M, Ekéus C: Preterm birth by vacuum extraction and neonatal outcome: a populationbased cohort study. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth 14:42, 2014
Åberg K, Norman M, Pettersson K, et al: Protracted vacuum extraction and neonatal intracranial
hemorrhage among infants born at term: a nationwide case-control study. Acta Obstet Gynecol
Scand 98(4):523, 2019
Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education: Case log minimum numbers: obstetrics and
gynecology. 2020. Available at:
https://www.acgme.org/Portals/0/PFAssets/ProgramResources/220_Ob_Gyn_Minimum_Numbers_
Announcement.pdf?ver=2018-06-25-104354-993. Accessed July 23, 2020
Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education: Obstetrics and gynecology case logs. 2019.
Available at:
https://www.acgme.org/Portals/0/PDFs/220_National_Report_Program_Version_2018-2019.pdf.
Accessed July 23, 2020
Aiken AR, Aiken CE, Alberry MS, et al: Management of fetal malposition in the second stage of labor:
a propensity score analysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 212(3):355.e1, 2015
Alexander JM, Leveno KJ, Hauth JC, et al: Failed operative vaginal delivery. Obstet Gynecol
114(5):1017, 2009
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine: Safe
prevention of the primary cesarean delivery. Obstetric Care Consensus No. 1, March 2014,
Reaffirmed 2019
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Operative vaginal birth. Practice Bulletin No.
219, April 2020a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Prevention and management of obstetrical
lacerations at vaginal birth. Practice Bulletin No. 198, June 2018, Reaffirmed 2020b
Anim-Somuah M, Smyth RM, Cyna AM, et al: Epidural versus non-epidural or no analgesia for pain
management in labour Cochrane Database Syst Rev 5:CD000331, 2018
Baerthlein WC, Moodley S, Stinson SK: Comparison of maternal and neonatal morbidity in midforceps
delivery and midpelvis vacuum extraction. Obstet Gynecol 67(4):594, 1986
Bahl R, Patel RR, Swingler R, et al: Neurodevelopmental outcome at 5 years after operative delivery in
the second stage of labor: a cohort study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 197:147, 2007
Bahl R, Van de Venne M, Macleod M, et al: Maternal and neonatal morbidity in relation to the
instrument used for mid-cavity rotational operative vaginal delivery: a prospective cohort study.
BJOG 120(12):1526, 2013
Bailit JL, Grobman WA, Rice MM, et al: Evaluation of delivery options for second-stage events. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 214(5):638.e1, 2016
Barth WH Jr: Persistent occiput posterior. Obstet Gynecol 125(3):695, 2015
Bashore RA, Phillips WH Jr, Brinkman CR III: A comparison of the morbidity of midforceps and
cesarean delivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 162(6):1428, 1990

Baskett TF, Fanning CA, Young DC, et al: A prospective observational study of 1000 vacuum assisted
deliveries with the OmniCup device. J Obstet Gynaecol Can 30(7):573, 2008
Ben-Haroush A, Melamed N, Kaplan B, et al: Predictors of failed operative vaginal delivery: a singlecenter experience. Am J Obstet Gynecol 197:308.e1, 2007
Bertholdt C, Gauchotte E, Dap M, et al: Predictors of successful manual rotation for occiput posterior
positions. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 144(2):210, 2019
Blanc J, Castel P, Mauviel F, et al: Prophylactic manual rotation of occiput posterior and transverse
positions to decrease operative delivery: the PROPOP randomized clinical trial. Am J Obstet
Gynecol May 24, 2021 [Epub ahead of print]
Bofill JA, Rust OA, Schorr SJ, et al: A randomized trial of two vacuum extraction techniques. Obstet
Gynecol 89(5 Pt 1):758, 1997
Bols EM, Hendriks EJ, Berghmans BC, et al: A systematic review of etiological factors for postpartum
fecal incontinence. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 89(3):302, 2010
Bradley MS, Kaminski RJ, Streitman DC, et al: Effect of rotation on perineal lacerations in forcepsassisted vaginal deliveries. Obstet Gynecol 122(1):132, 2013
Broman SH, Nichols PL, Kennedy WA: Preschool IQ: prenatal and early developmental correlates.
Hillside, L. Erlbaum Associates, 1975
Burke N, Field K, Mujahid F, et al: Use and safety of Kielland’s forceps in current obstetric practice.
Obstet Gynecol 120(4):766, 2012
Cheong YC, Abdullahi H, Lashen H, et al: Can formal education and training improve the outcome of
instrumental delivery? Eur J Obstet Gynecol 113:139, 2004
Cibils LA, Ringler GE: Evaluation of midforceps delivery as an alternative. J Perinat Med 18(1):5, 1990
Clinical Innovations: Kiwi complete vacuum delivery system instructions for use. 2018. Available at:
clinicalinnovations.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/10/Kiwi-M_ME-IFU.pdf. Accessed August 13,
2020
Contag SA, Clifton RG, Bloom SL, et al: Neonatal outcomes and operative vaginal delivery versus
cesarean delivery. Am J Perinatol 27(6):493, 2010
Cooper Surgical: Mityvac vacuum-assisted delivery system. 2018. Available at:
www.coopersurgical.com/product-resources/5cf330cb-141e-4573-83caf67b4147ba4f_Mityvac_MitySoft_Bell_Cup_Instruction_for_Use.pdf. Accessed August 13, 2020
Dall’Asta A, Ghi T, Pedrazzi G, et al: Does vacuum delivery carry a higher risk of shoulder dystocia?
Review and meta-analysis of the literature. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 204:62, 2016
Damron DP, Capeless EL: Operative vaginal delivery: a comparison of forceps and vacuum for success
rate and risk of rectal sphincter injury. Am J Obstet Gynecol 191:907, 2004
de Leeuw JW, de Wit C, Kuijken JP, et al: Mediolateral episiotomy reduces the risk for anal sphincter
injury during operative vaginal delivery. BJOG 115:104, 2008
DeLancey JO, Morgan DM, Fenner DE, et al: Comparison of levator ani muscle defects and function in
women with and without pelvic organ prolapse. Obstet Gynecol 109:295, 2007
Demissie K, Rhoads GG, Smulian JC, et al: Operative vaginal delivery and neonatal and infant adverse
outcomes: population based retrospective analysis. BMJ 329(7456):24, 2004
Dennen EH: Forceps Delivery. Philadelphia, F.A. Davis Company, 1955
Dierker LJ, Rosen MG, Thompson K, et al: Midforceps deliveries: long-term outcome of infants. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 154:764, 1986
Dierker LJ, Rosen MG, Thompson K, et al: The midforceps: maternal and neonatal outcomes. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 152(2):176, 1985
Dietz HP, Simpson JM: Levator trauma is associated with pelvic organ prolapse. BJOG 115:979, 2008

Dildy GA, Belfort MA, Clark SL: Obstetric forceps: a species on the brink of extinction. Obstet Gynecol
128(3):436, 2016
Dolan LM, Hilton P: Obstetric risk factors and pelvic floor dysfunction 20 years after first delivery. Int
Urogynecol J Pelvic Floor Dysfunct 21:535, 2010
Ducarme G, Hamel JF, Bouet PE, et al: Maternal and neonatal morbidity after attempted operative
vaginal delivery according to fetal head station. Obstet Gynecol 126(3):521, 2015
Duchon MA, DeMund MA, Brown RH: Laboratory comparison of modern vacuum extractors. Obstet
Gynecol 72:155, 1998
Duggal N, Mercado C, Daniels K, et al: Antibiotic prophylaxis for prevention of postpartum perineal
wound complications: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol 111(6):1268, 2008
Dupuis O, Silveira R, Dupont C, et al: Comparison of “instrument-associated” and “spontaneous”
obstetric depressed skull fractures in a cohort of 68 neonates. Am J Obstet Gynecol 192(1):165,
2005
Evers EC, Blomquist JL, McDermott KC, et al: Obstetrical anal sphincter laceration and anal
incontinence 5–10 years after childbirth. Am J Obstet Gynecol 207(5):425.e1, 2012
Ezenagu LC, Kakaria R, Bofill JA: Sequential use of instruments at operative vaginal delivery: is it safe?
Am J Obstet Gynecol 180:1446, 1999
Fitzwater JL, Owen J, Ankumah NA, et al: Nulliparous women in the second stage of labor: changes in
delivery outcomes between two cohorts from 2000 and 2011. Obstet Gynecol 126(1):81, 2015
Friedman AM, Ananth CV, Prendergast E, et al: Evaluation of third-degree and fourth-degree laceration
rates as quality indicators. Obstet Gynecol 125(4):927, 2015
Friedman EA, Sachtleben-Murray MR, Dahrouge D, et al: Long-term effects of labor and delivery on
offspring: a matched-pair analysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 150:941, 1984
Friedman T, Eslick GD, Dietz HP: Delivery mode and the risk of levator muscle avulsion: a metaanalysis. Int Urogynecol J 30(6):901, 2019
Gardella C, Taylor M, Benedetti T, et al: The effect of sequential use of vacuum and forceps for
assisted vaginal delivery on neonatal and maternal outcomes. Am J Obstet Gynecol 185(4):896, 2001
Gartland D, MacArthur C, Woolhouse H, et al: Frequency, severity and risk factors for urinary and
faecal incontinence at 4 years postpartum: a prospective cohort. BJOG 123(7):1203, 2016
Ghi T, Eggebø T, Lees C, et al: ISUOG practice guidelines: intrapartum ultrasound. Ultrasound Obstet
Gynecol 52:128, 2018
Gilstrap LC 3rd, Hauth JC, Schiano S, et al: Neonatal acidosis and method of delivery. Obstet Gynecol
63(5):681, 1984
Gordon MT, DeLancey JO, Renfroe A, et al: Development of anatomically based customizable threedimensional finite-element model of pelvic floor support system: POP-SIM1.0. Interface Focus
9(4):20190022, 2019
Gossett DR, Gilchrist-Scott D, Wayne DB, et al: Simulation training for forceps-assisted vaginal delivery
and rates of maternal perineal trauma. Obstet Gynecol 128(3):429, 2016
Gurol-Urganci I, Cromwell DA, Edozien LC, et al: Third- and fourth-degree perineal tears among
primiparous women in England between 2000 and 2012: time trends and risk factors. BJOG
120(12):1516, 2013
Gyhagen M, Bullarbo M, Nielsen T, et al: The prevalence of urinary incontinence 20 years after
childbirth: a national cohort study in singleton primiparae after vaginal or caesarean delivery. BJOG
120:144, 2013
Hagadorn-Freathy AS, Yeomans ER, Hankins GD: Validation of the 1988 ACOG forceps classification
system. Obstet Gynecol 77:356, 1991

Halscott TL, Reddy UM, Landy HJ, et al: Maternal and neonatal outcomes by attempted mode of
operative delivery from a low station in the second stage of labor. Obstet Gynecol 126(6):1265, 2015
Handa VL, Blomquist JL, Roem J, et al: Pelvic floor disorders after obstetric avulsion of the levator ani
muscle. Female Pelvic Med Reconstr Surg 25(1):3, 2019
Hinkson L, Henrich W, Tutschek B: Intrapartum ultrasound during rotational forceps delivery: a novel
tool for safety, quality control and teaching. Am J Obstet Gynecol 224(1):93.e1, 2021
Hofmeyr GJ, Gobetz L, Sonnendecker EW, et al: New design rigid and soft vacuum extractor cups: a
preliminary comparison of traction forces. BJOG 97(8):681, 1990
Jangö H, Langhoff-Roos J, Rosthøj S, et al: Modifiable risk factors of obstetric anal sphincter injury in
primiparous women: a population-based cohort study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 210(1):59.e1, 2014
Knight M, Chiocchia V, Partlett C, et al: Prophylactic antibiotics in the prevention of infection after
operative vaginal delivery (ANODE): a multicentre randomised controlled trial. Lancet
393(10189):2395, 2019
Kudish B, Blackwell S, Mcneeley SG, et al: Operative vaginal delivery and midline episiotomy: a bad
combination for the perineum. Am J Obstet Gynecol 195(3):749, 2006
Kuit JA, Eppinga HG, Wallenburg HC, et al: A randomized comparison of vacuum extraction delivery
with a rigid and a pliable cup. Obstet Gynecol 82:280, 1993
Kyser KL, Lu X, Santillan D, et al: Forceps delivery volumes in teaching and nonteaching hospitals: are
volumes sufficient for physicians to acquire and maintain competence? Acad Med 89(1):71, 2014
Landy HJ, Laughon SK, Bailit JL, et al: Characteristics associated with severe perineal and cervical
lacerations during vaginal delivery. Obstet Gynecol 117(3):627, 2011
Le Ray C, Deneux-Tharaux C, Khireddine I, et al: Manual rotation to decrease operative delivery in
posterior or transverse positions. Obstet Gynecol 122(3):634, 2013
Le Ray C, Serres P, Schmitz T, et al: Manual rotation in occiput posterior or transverse positions. Obstet
Gynecol 110:873, 2007
Leijonhufvud A, Lundholm C, Cnattingius S, et al: Risks of stress urinary incontinence and pelvic organ
prolapse surgery in relation to mode of childbirth. Am J Obstet Gynecol 204(1):70.e1, 2011
Levin G, Elchalal U, Yagel S, et al: Risk factors associated with subgaleal hemorrhage in neonates
exposed to vacuum extraction. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 98(11):1464, 2019
Lewicky-Gaupp C, Leader-Cramer A, Johnson LL, et al: Wound complications after obstetric anal
sphincter injuries. Obstet Gynecol 125(5):1088, 2015
Liu EH, Sia AT: Rates of caesarean section and instrumental vaginal delivery in nulliparous women after
low concentration epidural infusions or opioid analgesia: systematic review. BMJ 328(7453):1410,
2004
Lowe B: Fear of failure: a place for the trial of instrumental delivery. BJOG 94:60, 1987
MacArthur C, Wilson D, Herbison P, et al: Faecal incontinence persisting after childbirth: a 12-year
longitudinal study. BJOG 120(2):169, 2013
MacArthur C, Wilson D, Herbison P, et al: Urinary incontinence persisting after childbirth: extent,
delivery history, and effects in a 12-year longitudinal cohort study. Prolong Study Group. BJOG
123(6):1022, 2016
Martin JA, Hamilton BE, Osterman MJ, et al: Births: final data for 2015. Natl Vital Stat Rep 66(1):1,
2017
Miller ES, Lai Y, Bailit J, et al: Duration of operative vaginal delivery and adverse obstetric outcomes.
Am J Perinatol 37(5):503, 2020
Muise KL, Duchon MA, Brown RH: The effect of artificial caput on performance of vacuum
extractors. Obstet Gynecol 81(2):170, 1993

Mulder F, Schoffelmeer M, Hakvoort R, et al: Risk factors for postpartum urinary retention: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. BJOG 119(12):1440, 2012
Muraca GM, Skoll A, Lisonkova S, et al: Perinatal and maternal morbidity and mortality among term
singletons following midcavity operative vaginal delivery versus caesarean delivery. BJOG
125(6):693, 2018
Murphy DJ, Libby G, Chien P, et al: Cohort study of forceps delivery and the risk of epilepsy in
adulthood. Am J Obstet Gynecol 191:392, 2004
Murphy DJ, Macleod M, Bahl R, et al: A cohort study of maternal and neonatal morbidity in relation to
use of sequential instruments at operative vaginal delivery. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol
156(1):41, 2011
Nelson RL, Furner SE, Westercamp M, et al: Cesarean delivery for the prevention of anal incontinence.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2:CD006756, 2010
Nilsen ST: Boys born by forceps and vacuum extraction examined at 18 years of age. Acta Obstet
Gynecol Scand 63:549, 1984
Nygaard IE, Rao SS, Dawson JD: Anal incontinence after anal sphincter disruption: a 30-year
retrospective cohort study. Obstet Gynecol 89:896, 1997
O’Callaghan ME, MacLennan AH, Gibson CS, et al: Epidemiologic associations with cerebral palsy.
Obstet Gynecol 118(3):576, 2011
O’Mahony F, Hofmeyr GJ, Menon V: Choice of instruments for assisted vaginal delivery. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 11:CD005455, 2010
Osterman MJ, Martin JA, Menacker F: Expanded health data from the new birth certificate, 2006. Natl
Vital Stat Rep 58(5):1, 2009
Palatnik A, Grobman WA, Hellendag MG, et al: Predictors of failed operative vaginal delivery in a
contemporary obstetric cohort. Obstet Gynecol 127(3):501, 2016
Pearl ML, Roberts JM, Laros RK, et al: Vaginal delivery from the persistent occiput posterior position:
influence on maternal and neonatal morbidity. J Reprod Med 38:955, 1993
Pifarotti P, Gargasole C, Folcini C, et al: Acute post-partum urinary retention: analysis of risk factors, a
case-control study. Arch Gynecol Obstet 289(6):1249, 2014
Ramphul M, Kennelly MM, Burke G, et al: Risk factors and morbidity associated with suboptimal
instrument placement at instrumental delivery: observational study nested within the Instrumental
Delivery & Ultrasound randomised controlled trial ISRCTN 72230496. BJOG 122(4):558, 2015
Robertson PA, Laros RK, Zhao RL: Neonatal and maternal outcome in low-pelvic and mid-pelvic
operative deliveries. Am J Obstet Gynecol 162:1436, 1990
Rortveit G, Daltveit AK, Hannestad YS, et al: Urinary incontinence after vaginal delivery or cesarean
section. N Engl J Med 348:9000, 2003
Schuit E, Kwee A, Westerhuis ME, et al: A clinical prediction model to assess the risk of operative
delivery. BJOG 119(8):915, 2012
Seidman DS, Laor A, Gale R, et al: Long-term effects of vacuum and forceps deliveries. Lancet
337:1583, 1991
Shaffer BL, Cheng YW, Vargas JE, et al: Manual rotation to reduce caesarean delivery in persistent
occiput posterior or transverse position. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 24(1):65, 2011
Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Staat B, Combs CA: SMFM special statement: operative vaginal
delivery: checklists for performance and documentation. Am J Obstet Gynecol 222(5):B15, 2020
Solt I, Jackson S, Moore T, et al: Teaching forceps: the impact of proactive faculty. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 204(5):448.e1, 2011

Spiliopoulos M, Kareti A, Jain NJ, et al: Risk of peripartum hysterectomy by mode of delivery and prior
obstetric history: data from a population-based study. Arch Gynecol Obstet 283(6):1261, 2011
Spong CY, Berghella V, Wenstrom KD, et al: Preventing the first cesarean delivery: summary of a Joint
Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, Society for
Maternal-Fetal Medicine, and American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists Workshop.
Obstet Gynecol 120(5):1181, 2012
Stock L, Basham E, Gossett DR, et al: Factors associated with wound complications in women with
obstetric anal sphincter injuries (OASIS). Am J Obstet Gynecol 208(4):327.e1, 2013a
Stock SJ, Josephs K, Farquharson S, et al: Maternal and neonatal outcomes of successful Kielland’s
rotational forceps delivery. Obstet Gynecol 121(5):1032, 2013b
Suwannachat B, Laopaiboon M, Tonmat S, et al: Rapid versus stepwise application of negative pressure
in vacuum extraction-assisted vaginal delivery: a multicentre randomised controlled non-inferiority
trial. BJOG 118(10):1247, 2011
Suwannachat B, Lumbiganon P, Laopaiboon M: Rapid versus stepwise negative pressure application for
vacuum extraction assisted vaginal delivery. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 8:CD006636, 2012
Tempest N, Hart A, Walkinshaw S, et al: A re-evaluation of the role of rotational forceps: retrospective
comparison of maternal and perinatal outcomes following different methods of birth for malposition
in the second stage of labor. BJOG 120(10):1277, 2013
Towner D, Castro MA, Eby-Wilkens E, et al: Effect of mode of delivery in nulliparous women on
neonatal intracranial injury. N Engl J Med 341:1709, 1999
Towner DR, Ciotti MC: Operative vaginal delivery: a cause of birth injury or is it? Clin Obstet Gynecol
50(3):563, 2007
Vacca A: Vacuum-assisted delivery. Best Pract Res Clin Obstet Gynaecol 16:17, 2002
van Bavel J, Hukkelhoven CW, de Vries C, et al: The effectiveness of mediolateral episiotomy in
preventing obstetric anal sphincter injuries during operative vaginal delivery: a ten-year analysis of a
national registry. Int Urogynecol J 29(3):407, 2018
van den Akker T: Vacuum extraction for non-rotational and rotational assisted vaginal birth. Best Pract
Res Clin Obstet Gynaecol 56:47, 2019
Verhoeven CJ, Nuij C, Janssen-Rolf CR, et al: Predictors for failure of vacuum-assisted vaginal
delivery: a case-control study. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 200:29, 2016
Volløyhaug I, Mørkved S, Salvesen Ø, et al: Forceps delivery is associated with increased risk of pelvic
organ prolapse and muscle trauma: a cross-sectional study 16–24 years after first delivery.
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 46(4):487, 2015
Walsh CA, Robson M, McAuliffe FM: Mode of delivery at term and adverse neonatal outcomes. Obstet
Gynecol 121(1):122, 2013
Wan L, Xia W, Zhang J: Effect of perineum protection cooperated by two operators in the forcepsassisted vaginal delivery: a case-control study. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 12:1, 2020
Wen SW, Liu S, Kramer MS, et al: Comparison of maternal and infant outcomes between vacuum
extraction and forceps deliveries. Am J Epidemiol 153(2):103, 2001
Werner EF, Janevic TM, Illuzzi J, et al: Mode of delivery in nulliparous women and neonatal intracranial
injury. Obstet Gynecol 118(6):1239, 2011
Wesley B, van den Berg B, Reece EA: The effect of operative vaginal delivery on cognitive
development. Am J Obstet Gynecol 166:288, 1992
Wesley BD, van den Berg BJ, Reece EA: The effect of forceps delivery on cognitive development. Am
J Obstet Gynecol 169(5):1091, 1993

Williams MC, Knuppel RA, O’Brien WF, et al: A randomized comparison of assisted vaginal delivery by
obstetric forceps and polyethylene vacuum cup. Obstet Gynecol 78:789, 1991
Yeomans ER: Operative vaginal delivery. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al (eds):
Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, McGraw-Hill Education, 2017
Yeomans ER: Operative vaginal delivery. Obstet Gynecol 115(3):645, 2010

