CHAPTER 30

Cesarean Delivery and Peripartum
Hysterectomy

DEFINITIONS
CESAREAN DELIVERY RISKS
PATIENT PREPARATION
CESAREAN DELIVERY TECHNIQUE
LAPAROTOMY
HYSTEROTOMY
PERIPARTUM HYSTERECTOMY
POSTOPERATIVE CARE
REFERENCES
In the United States, the cesarean delivery rate rose most dramatically from
4.5 percent in 1970 to 32.9 percent in 2009. The rate has since plateaued and
was 31.9 percent in 2018 (Martin, 2019). Some indications for performing
cesarean delivery are shown in Table 30-1. More than 85 percent of these
operations are performed for four reasons—prior cesarean delivery, labor
dystocia or arrest, fetal jeopardy, or abnormal fetal presentation. The latter
three compose the main indications for primary cesarean delivery (Barber,
2011; Boyle, 2013). Efforts to lower these rates are outlined in Safe

Prevention of the Primary Cesarean Delivery by the American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019b).
TABLE 30-1. Some Indications for Cesarean Delivery

Reasons for persistently elevated cesarean rates are not completely
understood, but some explanations include the following:
1. Women are having fewer children, thus, a greater percentage of births are
among nulliparas, who are at increased risk for cesarean delivery.
2. Average maternal age is rising, and older women, especially older
nulliparas, have a higher cesarean delivery risk.
3. Electronic fetal monitoring use is widespread and associated with a higher
cesarean delivery rate compared with intermittent fetal heart rate
auscultation.
4. Most breech fetuses are now delivered by cesarean.
5. The frequency of operative vaginal delivery has declined.
6. Obesity, which is a cesarean delivery risk, has reached epidemic
proportions.
7. Rates of cesarean delivery in women with preeclampsia have risen,
whereas labor induction rates for these patients have declined.
8. The vaginal birth after cesarean (VBAC) rate has decreased from a high of
28 percent in 1996 to 13.3 percent in 2018 (Martin, 2019).
9. Assisted reproductive technology is more widely used and is linked with
greater cesarean delivery rates (Luke, 2019).

DEFINITIONS
Cesarean delivery defines the birth of a fetus by laparotomy and then
hysterotomy. This definition is not applied to removal of the fetus from the
abdominal cavity in the case of uterine rupture or of abdominal pregnancy.
Rarely, hysterotomy is performed in a woman who has just died or in whom

death is expected soon—postmortem or perimortem cesarean delivery
(Chap. 50, p. 897).
In some cases, abdominal hysterectomy is indicated after delivery. When
performed at the time of cesarean delivery, the operation is cesarean
hysterectomy. If done shortly after vaginal delivery, it is postpartum
hysterectomy. Peripartum hysterectomy is a broader term that combines
these two. In most cases, total hysterectomy is performed and removes the
uterine body and cervix. Supracervical hysterectomy is selected less often
and removes only the uterine body. With either, adnexa are not usually
excised. In most instances, a simple hysterectomy, which is also a type I
hysterectomy, is performed. However, for women with invasive cervical
cancer, radical hysterectomy removes the uterus, parametrium, and proximal
vagina to achieve tumor excision with negative margins. For cases of
placenta percreta that extend toward the pelvic sidewall, similar radical
excision of the parametrium may be needed.

CESAREAN DELIVERY RISKS
To provide accurate informed consent, knowledge of maternal and neonatal
risks and benefits with surgery is essential. In broad terms, cesarean delivery
generally has higher maternal surgical risks for the current and subsequent
pregnancies compared with spontaneous vaginal birth. This is balanced
against lower rates of perineal injury and short-term pelvic floor disorders.
For the neonate, cesarean delivery generally offers lower rates of birth
trauma and stillbirth but greater rates of initial respiratory difficulties.

■ Maternal Mortality and Morbidity
For the mother, death attributable solely to cesarean delivery is rare in the
United States. A review of nearly 1.5 million pregnancies found maternal
mortality rates of 2.2 per 100,000 cesarean deliveries compared with 0.2 per
100,000 vaginal births (Clark, 2008). In a metaanalysis of 203 studies, Guise
and coworkers (2010) reported a maternal mortality rate of 13 per 100,000
with elective repeat cesarean compared with 4 per 100,000 with trial of
labor.

Some element of this risk may stem from the underlying indication for the
cesarean delivery. For example, long first-stage labor increases not only
cesarean risk but also rates of maternal fever and postpartum hemorrhage
(Blankenship, 2020). Additionally, in a study of more than 100,000
deliveries in China, where cesarean birth without a medical indication is
common, the maternal mortality rate was not higher in those with
nonindicated cesarean delivery than in women with spontaneous vaginal
birth (Hou, 2017).
Similar to mortality rates, the overall frequencies of some maternal
morbidities are increased with cesarean delivery. Villar and associates
(2007) reported that maternal morbidity rates were twofold higher with
cesarean delivery than with vaginal birth. Principal among these are
infection, hemorrhage, and venous thromboembolism (VTE). In addition,
anesthetic complications, which also rarely include death, have a greater
incidence with cesarean delivery compared with vaginal birth (Cheesman,
2009; Hawkins, 2011). Adjacent organs infrequently may be injured, which
is described in detail later (p. 563).
Women who undergo a cesarean delivery are much more likely to be
delivered by a repeat operation in subsequent pregnancies. For women
undergoing subsequent cesarean, the maternal risks just described are even
greater (Cahill, 2006; Marshall, 2011; Silver, 2006). Specifically outlined in
Chapter 31 (p. 580), abnormal placentation, wound and uterine infections,
adjacent organ injury, cesarean hysterectomy, and blood transfusion are
among the morbidity that accrues with multiple subsequent cesarean
operations.
As an advantage, cesarean delivery is associated with lower rates of
urinary incontinence and pelvic organ prolapse than is vaginal birth
(Gyhagen, 2013a,b; Handa, 2011). Rates of anal incontinence appear
uninfluenced by a vaginal or cesarean route (Blomquist, 2018; Nelson,
2019). In subgroup evaluation, operative vaginal delivery does carry an
overall greater anal incontinence risk, which likely stems from higher
sphincter injury rates with these procedures (Chap. 29, p. 535).
Pelvic floor advantages persist to some degree over time, but cesarean
delivery is not totally protective. Moreover, longitudinal studies suggest that
initial pelvic floor advantages gained from cesarean delivery are lost as
women age (Dolan, 2010; MacArthur, 2011, 2013). During their State-of-theScience Conference, the National Institutes of Health panel (2006)

summarized that stress urinary incontinence rates after elective cesarean
delivery are lower than those following vaginal delivery. However, the
duration of this protection is unclear, particularly in older and multiparous
populations. Defining women who would be at highest long-term risk for
pregnancy-related pelvic floor disorders might allow accurate delivery
counseling (Jelovsek, 2018).

■ Neonatal Morbidity
Cesarean delivery is associated with a lower rate of fetal trauma (Linder,
2013; Moczygemba, 2010). Alexander and colleagues (2006) found that fetal
injury complicated 1 percent of cesarean deliveries. Skin laceration was
most common, but others included cephalohematoma, clavicular fracture,
brachial plexopathy, skull fracture, and facial nerve palsy. Cesarean
deliveries following a failed operative vaginal delivery attempt had the
highest injury rate. The lowest rate—0.5 percent—occurred in the elective
cesarean delivery group. That said, Worley and associates (2009) found that
approximately a third of women who were delivered at Parkland Hospital
entered spontaneous labor at term, and 96 percent of these delivered
vaginally without adverse neonatal outcomes.

■ Cesarean Delivery on Maternal Request
Some women request elective cesarean delivery. Data regarding the true
incidence of cesarean delivery on maternal request (CDMR) are poor. An
older estimate in the United States was 5 percent (Declercq, 2005).
Reasons for the request include protection of pelvic floor support,
convenience, fear of childbirth, and reduced risk of fetal injury. One
retrospective study of more than 66,000 Chinese parturients compared
outcomes of those who elected planned vaginal birth or requested primary
cesarean delivery (Liu, 2015). Short-term serious maternal morbidity and
neonatal mortality rates were similar. For the newborns, rates of birth
trauma, infection, and hypoxic ischemic encephalopathy were low in both
groups but statistically lower with cesarean delivery. Respiratory distress
syndrome rates were greater in the CDMR cohort. A smaller study
comparing these two routes of delivery support these findings (Larsson,
2011).

The debate surrounding CDMR includes two medical points: the concept
of informed free choice by the woman, and the autonomy of the physician in
offering CDMR. To address this, the National Institutes of Health (2006)
held a State-of-the-Science Conference on Cesarean Delivery on Maternal
Request. Notably, most of the maternal and neonatal outcomes examined had
insufficient data to permit recommendations. Indeed, one of the main
conclusions of the conference was that more high-quality research is needed
to fully evaluate the issue. Guidelines from the American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020a) note that CDMR should not be
performed before 39 weeks’ gestation. It is ideally avoided in women
desiring several children because of the earlier-described morbidity from
accruing cesarean operations.

PATIENT PREPARATION
■ Delivery Availability
No nationally recognized standard of care currently dictates the acceptable
time interval to begin cesarean delivery. Previously, a 30-minute decision-toincision interval was recommended. However, Bloom and colleagues (2006)
evaluated nearly 3000 cesarean deliveries performed for emergency
indications. They reported that failure to achieve a cesarean delivery
decision-to-incision time <30 minutes was not associated with a negative
neonatal outcome. A subsequent systematic review echoed this finding
(Tolcher, 2014). Despite this, when faced with an acute, catastrophic
deterioration in fetal condition, cesarean delivery usually is indicated as
rapidly as possible, and thus purposeful delays are inappropriate. The
American Academy of Pediatrics and the American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists (2017) recommend that facilities giving obstetrical care
should have the ability to initiate cesarean delivery in a time frame that best
incorporates maternal and fetal risks and benefits.

■ Informed Consent
Informed consent is a process and not merely a medical document. The
consenting conversation should enhance a woman’s awareness of her
diagnosis and contain a discussion of medical and surgical care alternatives,

procedure goals and limitations, and operative risks. For women with a prior
cesarean delivery, the option of a trial of labor should be included for
suitable candidates. For those desiring permanent sterilization or intrauterine
device (IUD) insertion, consenting for these can be completed concurrently
(Chaps. 38 and 39, pp. 665 and 684).
An informed patient may decline a particular recommended intervention,
and a woman’s decision-making autonomy must be respected. In the medical
record, providers should document the reasons for refusal and should note
that the intervention’s value and the health consequences of not proceeding
with it have been explained.
For Jehovah’s Witnesses, informed consent discussions regarding blood
products ideally begin early in pregnancy. Acceptable blood products vary
widely among individual women, and a preoperative checklist of approved
products allows superior preparation (Hubbard, 2015). In general, red cells,
white cells, platelets, and plasma are considered primary blood components
and are declined. However, certain clotting factors or cell fractions may be
acceptable (Lawson, 2015). Before and after surgery, iron, folate, and, if
necessary, erythropoietin are accepted agents to help maximize hemoglobin
levels. Perioperatively, phlebotomy is limited, and pediatric collection tubes
are preferable. Intraoperative options include prompt treatment of atony to
limit blood loss and use of topical hemostatic agents, tranexamic acid, and
desmopressin to promote clot formation. Red blood cell salvage can provide
autologous donation. Normovolemic hemodilution and controlled
hypotensive or hypothermic anesthesia can limit red cell losses. To minimize
uncontrolled vessel bleeding, uterine artery embolization, occlusive vascular
balloons, and other options are described in Chapter 44 (p. 779) (Scharman,
2017).

■ Timing of Scheduled Cesarean Delivery
With elective delivery before 39 completed weeks, adverse neonatal
sequelae from neonatal immaturity are appreciable (Tita, 2009). To avoid
these, assurance of fetal maturity before scheduled elective surgery is
essential. Supporting criteria include corroborative ultrasound measurements
obtained prior to 20 weeks’ gestation, fetal heart tones heard for the past 30
weeks, and passage of 36 weeks since an initial positive pregnancy test
result (American Academy of Pediatrics, 2017).

■ Preoperative Care
Current perioperative care is guided by evidence-based enhanced recovery
after surgery (ERAS) recommendations. Among these, solid food intake is
stopped at least 6 hours before the procedure. Uncomplicated patients may
consume moderate amounts of clear liquids up to 2 hours before surgery
(American Society of Anesthesiologists, 2016). Bowel preparation is not
recommended (Wilson, 2018).
The woman scheduled for cesarean delivery typically is admitted the day
of surgery and evaluated by the obstetrical and anesthesia teams. Recently
performed hematocrit and indirect Coombs test are reviewed. If the latter is
positive, compatible blood availability must be ensured.
Regional analgesia is preferred for cesarean delivery. To minimize the
lung injury risk from rare aspiration, gastric acid is ideally buffered. An oral
antacid is consumed shortly before regional analgesia or induction of general
anesthesia. One example is Bicitra, 30 mL orally in a single dose. This can
be coupled with an intravenous (IV) dose of an H2-receptor antagonist,
which also raises gastric pH (Wilson, 2018).
Once the woman is supine, a wedge beneath the right hip and lower back
creates a left lateral tilt to aid venous return and avoid hypotension. Data are
insufficient to determine the value of fetal monitoring before scheduled
cesarean delivery in women without risk factors. Our practice is to obtain a
5-minute tracing prior to elective cases. At minimum, fetal heart sounds
should be documented in the operating room prior to surgery.
Of further preparations, hair removal at the surgical site does not lower
surgical site infection (SSI) rates (Kowalski, 2016). However, if hair is
obscuring, it is removed the day of surgery by clipping, which is associated
with fewer SSIs than shaving (Tanner, 2011). Chemical depilation the night
before surgery compared with clipping has similar SSI rates (Lefebvre,
2015). An electrosurgical grounding pad is placed near the surgical incision
and typically on the lateral thigh. At Parkland Hospital, we typically insert an
indwelling bladder catheter to collapse the bladder away from the
hysterotomy incision, to avert urinary retention secondary to regional
analgesia, and to allow accurate postoperative urine measurement. Small
studies show that catheterization may be withheld in hemodynamically stable
women. Catheter-related discomfort can be avoided, but urinary tract
infection rates are not lower (Abdel-Aleem, 2014).

The risk of VTE is increased with pregnancy. In the United States in
2014, women with cesarean delivery had a VTE rate of 8 per 10,000, which
almost doubled the rate for those with vaginal birth (Abe, 2019).
Accordingly, for all women not already receiving thromboprophylaxis, the
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2020c) recommends
initiation of pneumatic compression stockings before cesarean delivery.
These are usually discontinued once the woman ambulates. Consensus varies
among organizations, and the American College of Chest Physicians suggests
only early ambulation for women without risk factors who are undergoing
cesarean delivery (Bates, 2012). For women already receiving prophylaxis
or those with increased risk factors, they support escalation of prophylaxis.
Last, the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists (2015) is the
most conservative and suggest pharmacological prophylaxis for the largest
proportion of patients. These various methods and recommendations are
discussed in Chapter 55 (p. 989).
Some women scheduled for cesarean delivery have a comorbidity that
requires specific management in anticipation of surgery. Among others, these
include insulin-requiring diabetes, coagulopathy or thrombophilia, chronic
corticosteroid use, and significant reactive airway disease. Surgical
preparations are discussed in the respective chapters covering these topics.

■ Infection Prevention
Antibiotic Prophylaxis
Cesarean delivery is considered a clean contaminated case, and
postoperative febrile morbidity is common. Numerous trials show that a
single dose of an antibiotic given at the time of cesarean delivery
significantly decreases infectious morbidity (Smaill, 2014). Although more
obvious for women in active labor who then require cesarean delivery, this
practice also pertains to gravidas undergoing elective surgery. Depending on
drug allergies, most recommend a single IV dose of a β-lactam antibiotic—
either a cephalosporin or extended-spectrum penicillin. A 1-g dose of
cefazolin (Ancef) is an efficacious and cost-effective choice. Additional
doses are considered in cases with blood loss >1500 mL or with duration
longer than 3 hours. Recommendations for a 2- or 3-g cefazolin dose in
obese parturients are conflicting (Ahmadzia, 2015; Maggio, 2015; Swank,

2015; Young, 2015). The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
recommends a 2-g dose for weights ≥80 kg and 3 g for those ≥120 kg
(Berríos-Torres, 2017). The American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2020d) recognizes either dose as suitable for women ≥80 kg.
One pharmacokinetic analysis in obese women showed sufficient tissue
levels with a 2-g dose for cesarean deliveries lasting 1.5 hours. Authors
recommended consideration for redosing in obese women if surgeries were
longer (Grupper, 2017).
Evidence also supports extending the antibiotic spectrum (Markwei,
2021; Tita, 2008). One large randomized trial added azithromycin, 500 mg
IV, to standard prophylaxis prior to cesarean delivery for women in labor or
with ruptured membranes (Tita, 2016). Rates of SSIs and endometritis were
significantly lower in the extended-spectrum group compared with those in
the standard prophylaxis cohort.
In pregnant women with a history of infection with methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), a single, 15-mg/kg dose of vancomycin can
be added to the standard prophylaxis. Decolonization plays a limited role but
may be considered prior to a planned cesarean delivery in women with
known MRSA colonization (American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, 2020d).
Significant β-lactam allergy manifests as anaphylaxis, angioedema,
respiratory distress, or urticaria. This merits prophylaxis with a single, 900mg IV dose of clindamycin combined with a weight-based, 5-mg/kg dose of
an aminoglycoside as an alternative. The 900-mg clindamycin dose is also
used for obese patients. Some studies link higher SSI rates to regimens that
lack a β-lactam (Wilhelm, 2020). Antepartum penicillin-allergy evaluation
by a specialist may redefine the significance of the patient’s prior reaction.
Advantageously, this clarification may remove an allergy label and expanded
options (Wolfson, 2021).
Antibiotic administration before surgical incision lowers postoperative
infection rates without adverse neonatal effects compared with drug
administration after umbilical cord clamping (Mackeen, 2014b; Sullivan,
2007). Prophylaxis is ideally administered within the 60 minutes prior to the
start of planned cesarean delivery. For emergent delivery, antibiotics are
given as soon as feasible.
Preoperative preparation of the abdominal wall skin immediately prior to
surgery can help prevent SSIs. Chlorhexidine-alcohol or povidone-iodine

solutions are suitable, but data favor chlorhexidine (Hadiati, 2020; Tolcher,
2019). However, adding a wiping of the skin with chlorhexidine the night
before surgery was no better than placebo (Stone, 2020). Once abdominal
preparation is completed and dry, surgical drapes cover the patient. One type
has a cut-out window in the lower abdomen that is surrounded by an
adhesive border. Others are adhesive incisional drapes, in which the skin
and plastic drape must be incised together. The latter may slightly raise SSI
rates (Eckler, 2019; Hadiati, 2020).
Although not our practice, preoperative vaginal cleansing with a 1percent povidone-iodine scrub lowered endometritis and SSI rates in some
studies (Haas, 2020; Roeckner, 2019). With povidone allergy, 4-percent
chlorhexidine gluconate solution is an alternative. Last, some early evidence
may support extending oral antibiotic prophylaxis for 48 hours postcesarean
in obese women to lower SSIs (Valent, 2017).
Antibiotic prophylaxis against infective endocarditis is not recommended
for most cardiac conditions. Exceptions are women with repaired or
unrepaired cyanotic heart disease, prosthetic valves, or both. Prior infective
endocarditis or cardiac transplantation with resulting valve regurgitation are
others (American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2020d). Drug
infusion is 30 to 60 minutes prior to expected delivery (Table 52-9, p. 935).
Cesarean infection prophylaxis regimens also serve as appropriate
endocarditis coverage.

Other Preventions
Glycemic control in diabetics lowers wound infection rates and is
emphasized in Chapter 60 (p. 1068). Smoking is another modifiable risk
(Avila, 2012). Intraoperative normothermia lowers wound infection rates in
general surgery cases (Balki, 2020; Berríos-Torres, 2017). This tenet is
logically extrapolated to cesarean delivery (Caughey, 2018).
In children delivered by cesarean, some evidence shows higher asthma
and allergy rates (Kristensen, 2016). Gut microbiome differences between
vaginal and cesarean birth groups are a suggested cause (Shao, 2019). With
the hope to improve neonatal microbiota, swabbing the newborn mouth with
a gauze that was incubated in the maternal vagina 1 hour before surgery has
been described in preliminary studies. However, the American College of

Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2019c) does not encourage this practice
due to few data and the potential for transmission of harmful organisms.

■ Surgical Safety
The Joint Commission (2020) describes a protocol to prevent surgical
errors. For cesarean delivery, all relevant documents are verified
immediately before surgery, and a “time out” is completed. The “time out”
requires attention of the entire team to confirm that the patient, site, and
procedure are correct. Important discussions also include introduction of the
patient-care team members, verification of prophylactic antibiotics,
estimation of procedure length, and communication of anticipated
complications. Additionally, requests for special instrumentation should be
addressed preoperatively to prevent potential patient compromise and
intraoperative delays.
Surgical fires are a specific safety focus. As prevention, surgeons ideally
assess the fire risk at the procedure’s start, allow adequate drying of alcoholbased skin antiseptics, and keep ignition sources off the patient or drapes
when not in use (Food and Drug Administration, 2018; Wolf, 2013).
An instrument, sponge, and needle count before and after surgery is
essential. Moreover, active communication during surgery should clearly
convey items added to the operative field. At surgery completion, if counts
are not reconciled, portable radiographic imaging for retained objects is
done.

CESAREAN DELIVERY TECHNIQUE
■ Laparotomy
As with all surgery, a clear understanding of relevant anatomy is essential
(Chap. 2, p. 12). For entry into the abdomen, a suprapubic transverse
incision or a midline vertical one is chosen for cesarean delivery. Suitable
transverse incisions are Pfannenstiel or Maylard incisions, and the
Pfannenstiel type is selected most frequently.
Transverse incisions follow Langer lines of skin tension, and thus exert
less stress on the closed wound. Compared with vertical ones, Pfannenstiel
incisions offer superior cosmesis and lower incisional hernia rates. The

Pfannenstiel incision, however, is often discouraged for cases in which a
large operating space is essential or in which access to the upper abdomen
may be needed. With transverse incisions, because of the layers created
during incision of the internal and external oblique aponeuroses, purulent
fluid can collect between these. Therefore, some favor a midline vertical
incision for cases with high infection risks. Emergent entry is typically faster
with vertical incision during primary and repeat cesarean delivery (Wylie,
2010). Last, neurovascular structures, which include the ilioinguinal and
iliohypogastric nerves and superficial and inferior epigastric vessels, are
often encountered with transverse incisions. Logically, bleeding, wound
hematoma, and neurological disruption may more frequently complicate these
incisions compared with vertical ones. The best incision for the morbidly
obese parturient is unclear (Smid, 2016). Our preference for women with
morbid obesity is a periumbilical midline vertical incision (Chap. 51, p.
909).
The Maylard incision differs mainly from the Pfannenstiel in that the
rectus abdominis muscle bellies and their investing rectus sheath are
transected horizontally to widen the operating space. It is technically more
difficult due to required muscle cutting and ligation of the inferior epigastric
arteries, which lie laterally to these muscle bellies.
Once access is gained, metal handheld retractors provide exposure for
hysterotomy. One metaanalysis with nearly 1700 women showed no lowering
of postcesarean SSI rates with a disposable plastic barrier retractor (AlexisO) (Waring, 2018).

Transverse Incisions
With the Pfannenstiel incision, the skin and subcutaneous tissue are incised
using a low, transverse, slightly curvilinear incision. This is made at the
pubic hairline, which is typically 3 cm above the superior border of the
symphysis pubis. The incision is extended laterally to accommodate delivery
—12 to 15 cm is typical.
Sharp dissection is continued through the subcutaneous layer to the
fascia. The superficial epigastric vessels can usually be identified halfway
between the skin and fascia, several centimeters from the midline, and these
are coagulated.

The fascia is then incised sharply at the midline. The anterior abdominal
fascia is typically composed of two visible layers, the aponeurosis from the
external oblique muscle and a fused layer containing aponeuroses of the
internal oblique and transverse abdominis muscles. Ideally, the two layers
are individually incised during lateral extension of the fascial incision. The
inferior epigastric vessels usually lie outside the lateral border of the rectus
abdominis muscle and beneath the fused aponeuroses of the internal oblique
and transverse abdominis muscles. Thus, although infrequently required,
further lateral extension of the fascial incision may encounter these vessels.
In this case, vessels ideally are identified and coagulated or ligated to
prevent bleeding and vessel retraction.
Once the fascia is incised, the inferior fascial edge is grasped with
Kocher clamps and elevated by an assistant as the operator separates the
fascial sheath from the underlying rectus abdominis muscle either bluntly or
sharply until the superior border of the symphysis pubis is reached. Next, the
superior fascial edge is grasped and again, separation of fascia from the
rectus muscle is completed. Blood vessels coursing between the sheath and
muscles are clamped, cut, and ligated, or they are coagulated with an
electrosurgery blade. Meticulous hemostasis is imperative to lower rates of
incisional hematoma and infection. The fascial separation progresses
cephalad and laterally to create a semicircular area above the transverse
incision with a radius of approximately 8 cm. This will vary depending on
fetal size. The rectus abdominis and pyramidalis muscles are separated in the
midline to expose the transversalis fascia and peritoneum.
The transversalis fascia and preperitoneal fat are bluntly dissected away
to reach the underlying peritoneum. The peritoneum near the upper end of the
incision is opened carefully, either bluntly or by elevating it with two
hemostats placed approximately 2 cm apart. This upper site lowers
cystotomy risks. The tented fold of peritoneum between the clamps is
examined and palpated to ensure that omentum, bowel, or bladder is not
adjacent. The peritoneum is then incised. As the incision is extended
cephalad above the arcuate line, the transverse fibers of the posterior rectus
sheath are seen and are cut along with the peritoneum. The peritoneal
incision is then extended downward to just above the peritoneal reflection
over the bladder. Importantly, in women with prior intraabdominal surgery,
including cesarean delivery, omentum or bowel may be adhered to the

undersurface of the peritoneum. In women with obstructed labor, the bladder
may be pushed remarkably cephalad.

Midline Vertical Incision
This incision begins 2 to 3 cm above the superior margin of the symphysis. It
should be sufficiently long to allow fetal delivery, and 12 to 15 cm is typical.
Sharp or electrosurgical blade dissection through the subcutaneous layers
ultimately exposes the anterior rectus sheath. A small opening is made
sharply with scalpel in the upper half of the linea alba. Placement here helps
avoid potential cystotomy. Index and middle fingers are placed beneath the
fascia, and the fascial incision is extended first superiorly and then inferiorly
with scissors. Midline separation of the rectus muscles and pyramidalis
muscles and peritoneal entry are similar to those just described for the
Pfannenstiel incision.

■ Hysterotomy
Most often, the lower uterine segment is incised transversely as described by
Kerr in 1921. Occasionally, vertical incision confined solely to the lower
uterine segment may be elected (Krönig, 1912). In contrast, a classical
incision begins as a low vertical incision, which is then extended cephalad
into the active portion of the uterine corpus. Last, a fundal or even posterior
uterine incision may be selected for cases with placenta accreta syndrome.

Low Transverse Cesarean Incision
For most cesarean deliveries, this incision is preferred. Compared with a
classical incision, it repairs easily, causes less incision-site bleeding, and
promotes less bowel or omentum adherence to the myometrial incision.
Located in the inactive segment, it is also less likely to rupture during a
subsequent pregnancy.
Before hysterotomy, the surgeon palpates the fundus to identify degrees of
uterine rotation. The uterus may be rotated so that one round ligament is more
anterior and closer to the midline (Chap. 3, p. 46). In such cases, the uterus
can be manually reoriented and held to permit centering of the incision. This
avoids incision extension into and laceration of the adjacent uterine artery. A

moist sponge may be used to pack protruding bowel away from the operative
field.
The reflection of peritoneum at the upper margin of the bladder and
overlying the lower uterine segment is grasped in the midline with forceps
and incised transversely with scissors (Fig. 30-1). Following this initial
incision, scissors are inserted between peritoneum and lower-uterinesegment myometrium. Open scissors are pushed laterally from the midline on
each side. This transverse peritoneal incision extends almost the full length
of the lower uterine segment. As the lateral margin on each side is
approached, the scissors are directed slightly cephalad (Fig. 30-2). The
lower edge of peritoneum is elevated, and the bladder is gently separated
from the underlying lower uterine segment with blunt or sharp dissection
within this vesicouterine space (Fig. 30-3). This bladder flap creation
effectively moves the bladder away from the planned hysterotomy site. It also
helps prevent bladder laceration if an unintended inferior hysterotomy
extension occurs during fetal delivery. If dense adhesions complicate
vesicouterine space dissection, sharp dissection is preferred. If unclear, the
bladder and its upper border can be identified by distending or “back filling”
it with fluid instilled through a Foley catheter (Saaqib, 2020).

FIGURE 30-1 The loose peritoneum above the bladder reflection is grasped with forceps and incised
with Metzenbaum scissors.

FIGURE 30-2 This peritoneal edge is elevated and incised laterally.

FIGURE 30-3 Cross section shows blunt dissection of the bladder off the uterus to expose the lower
uterine segment.

In general, this caudad separation of bladder does not exceed 5 cm and
usually is less. However, in instances in which cesarean hysterectomy is
planned or anticipated, extended caudad bladder dissection is recommended
to aid total hysterectomy and decrease the risk of cystotomy.
Some surgeons do not create a bladder flap. The main advantage is a
shorter skin incision-to-delivery time. However, data supporting this practice
are currently limited (O’Neill, 2014; Tuuli, 2012).
Uterine Incision. The uterus is entered through the lower uterine segment.
Digital palpation to find the physiological border between firmer upper

segment myometrium and the more flexible lower segment can guide
placement. This is often at the level of the bladder flap incision.
For women with advanced or complete cervical dilation, the hysterotomy
is placed relatively higher. Failure to adjust increases the risk of lateral
extension of the incision into the uterine arteries. It may also lead to incision
of the cervix or vagina rather than the lower uterine segment. Such incisions
into the cervix distort postoperative cervical anatomy.
The uterus can be incised by various techniques. Each is initiated by
using a scalpel to transversely incise the exposed lower uterine segment for 1
to 2 cm in the midline (Fig. 30-4). Repetitive shallow strokes help avoid
fetal laceration. As the myometrium thins, a fingertip can then bluntly enter
the uterine cavity. Once the uterus is entered, the hysterotomy is lengthened
by simply spreading the incision, using lateral and slightly upward pressure
applied with each index finger (Fig. 30-5). Instead, some evidence supports
widening the lower-uterine-segment incision by pulling with fingers in a
cephalocaudad direction to help lower hysterotomy extension rates (Morales,
2019; Xodo, 2016).

FIGURE 30-4 The myometrium is incised with shallow strokes to avoid cutting the fetal head.

FIGURE 30-5 After entering the uterine cavity, the incision is extended laterally with fingers or with
bandage scissors (inset).

The goal is to create an incision sufficiently wide to deliver the
presenting fetal part yet avoid overextending the incision. Extensions usually
tear downward into the lower uterine segment or laterally into the uterine
vessels. Extensive inferior tears may include the cervix or vagina. Risk
factors for extensions include occiput posterior fetal head position, primary
cesarean delivery, and advanced first-stage or second-stage labor (de la
Torre, 2006; Karavani, 2020). Specific maneuvers to ameliorate this last
high-risk setting are discussed in the next section.
Alternatively, if the lower uterine segment is thick and unyielding, cutting
laterally and then slightly upward with bandage scissors will lengthen the
incision. Importantly, when scissors are used, the index and middle fingers of
the nondominant hand are insinuated beneath the myometrium and above fetal
parts to help avert fetal laceration. Comparing blunt and sharp expansion of

the initial uterine incision, blunt stretch is associated with fewer unintended
incision extensions, shorter operative time, and less blood loss. However,
the rates of infection and need for transfusion do not differ (Asıcıoğlu, 2014;
Saad, 2014).
During hysterotomy creation, if the placenta lies in the incision line, it
must be either detached or incised. Placental function is thereby
compromised, and thus delivery is expedited.
At times, a low transverse hysterotomy is selected but provides
inadequate room for delivery. In such instances, one corner of the
hysterotomy incision is extended cephalad into the contractile portion of the
myometrium—a J incision. If this is completed bilaterally, a U incision is
formed. Last, some prefer to extend in the midline—a T incision. As
expected, these have been linked with higher intraoperative blood loss
(Boyle, 1996; Patterson, 2002).
J-, U-, and T-incisions extend into the contractile portion, and a
subsequent trial of labor after cesarean (TOLAC) is more likely to be
complicated by uterine rupture. Similarly, from limited data, inferior
hysterotomy extensions also are associated with higher rupture rates, and in
our practice these preclude TOLAC (Goldfarb, 2011). The Royal College of
Obstetricians and Gynaecologists (2015) notes insufficient evidence to
support the general safety of TOLAC in women with a prior significant
uterine extension and cautions for decisions to be individualized. Last, a
prior classical incision, described later, or a fundal incision substantially
raises the rupture risk during subsequent TOLAC. Thus, following a primary
cesarean delivery complicated by these exceptional incision types, a
conversation disclosing these events and their significance should ensue with
the patient and are carefully described in the operative report.
Delivery of the Fetus. With a cephalic presentation, a hand is slipped into the
uterine cavity between the symphysis and fetal head. The head is elevated
gently with the fingers and palm through the incision. Once the head enters
the incision, delivery may be aided by modest fundal pressure (Fig. 30-6).

FIGURE 30-6 Delivery of the fetal head. (Figures 30-6 to 30-8: Reproduced with permission from
Johnson DD: Cesarean delivery. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al (eds): Cunningham
and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2017.)

After a long labor with cephalopelvic disproportion, the fetal head may
be tightly wedged in the birth canal. This situation raises the risk of
hysterotomy extension, of associated blood loss, and of fetal skull fracture.
First, a “push” method may be used. With this, upward pressure exerted by a
hand in the vagina by an assistant will help to dislodge the head and push it
cephalad. If this is anticipated, a patient in frog-leg position may allow
easier vaginal access.
Second, as an alternative, a “pull” method grasps the fetal legs and brings
them through the hysterotomy. The fetus is then delivered as one would
complete a breech extraction. Support for this latter approach comes from
small randomized trials and retrospective cohort studies (Berhan, 2014;
Jeve, 2016). The main advantage appears to be lower uterine extension rates.

Another pull method attempts to free the head by placing a palm on each
fetal shoulder and gently elevating them. Last, a least-common method uses a
“fetal pillow.” This is a distensible intravaginal balloon that is positioned
below the head and then inflated to elevate the fetal head. Evidence for its
superiority to the push method is limited and conflicting (Sacre, 2021; Seal,
2016).
Conversely, in women without labor, the fetal head may be unmolded and
lack a leading cephalic point. The round head may be difficult to lift through
the uterine incision in a relatively thick lower segment that is unattenuated by
labor. In such instances, either forceps or a vacuum device may be used to
deliver the fetal head. For this, the fetal head is manually grasped and turned
to an occiput transverse position. In this example, the head is left OT (LOT)
position. Two or more fingers of the right hand are introduced inside the
hysterotomy and behind the fetal head (Fig. 30-7). Fingers of the left hand
grasp the handle of the forceps. The blade’s toe is gently introduced between
the hand and fetal head. It is curved inward between the fetal head and the
palmar surface of the fingers. For the upper blade, two or more fingers of the
left hand are inserted into the right posterolateral aspect of the hysterotomy.
The forceps handle is grasped by the right hand. The blade toe is then gently
introduced along the posterior left lower uterine segment wall. It is curved
inward between the fetal face and the palmar surface of the fingers (Fig. 308A). The fingers of the left hand are moved beneath the lower edge of this
blade. Upward pressure against this edge will sweep or wander the blade
into position. As the blade reaches its final position, the shank and handle
come to rest in the midline, and the two handles are articulated (Fig. 30-8B).
Traction is up and out to guide the occiput through the hysterotomy.
Concurrent, gentle fundal pressure can be applied by an assistant.

FIGURE 30-7 To place the first forceps blade, the operator’s palm is slipped beneath the head. It is
guided along the palm to ultimately lie across the fetal malar and lower parietal bone as in vaginal
forceps application.

FIGURE 30-8 A. To apply the second blade, the operator’s hand is inserted into the posterolateral
aspect of the hysterotomy. The forceps blade is slipped inward across the palm. This hand then guides
the blade to overlie the upper malar and parietal bones. B. Once positioned, the handles are interlocked.
Slight upward and outward traction is used to lift the head through the incision.

After head delivery, a finger is passed across the fetal neck to determine
whether it is encircled by one or more umbilical cord loops. If present, these
are slipped over the head. The head is rotated to an occiput transverse
position, which aligns the fetal bisacromial diameter vertically. The sides of
the head are grasped with two hands, and gentle axial traction is applied until
the anterior shoulder enters the hysterotomy incision. Next, by upward axial
traction, the posterior shoulder is delivered. During delivery, abrupt or
powerful lateral force is avoided to avert brachial plexus injury. With steady
outward traction, the rest of the body then readily follows. Gentle fundal
pressure may aid this.
With some exceptions, current American Heart Association recommends
against routine neonatal suctioning immediately after birth, even with
meconium present (Wyckoff, 2015). A fuller discussion of this and delayed

umbilical cord clamping is found in Chapter 27 (p. 500). Specific to
cesarean delivery, delayed clamping does not lower maternal hemoglobin
levels on the first postoperative day (Jenusaitis, 2020; Purisch, 2019). After
the umbilical cord is clamped, the newborn is given to the team member who
will conduct care.
Comparing elective cesarean under neuraxial anesthesia and spontaneous
vaginal deliveries, studies show that the need for neonatal resuscitation is not
practically different between the two (Gordon, 2005). The American
Academy of Pediatrics and the American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2017) recommend that “a qualified person who is skilled in
neonatal resuscitation should be in the delivery room.” At Parkland Hospital,
pediatric nurse practitioners attend uncomplicated, scheduled cesarean
deliveries. Notably, as anticipated neonatal risks rise, so too should the
resuscitative skills of the attendants (Wyckoff, 2015).
To promote breastfeeding, the American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists (2020b) recommends skin-to-skin contact between newborn
and mother in the delivery room. Although most randomized trials focus on
vaginal birth, several small studies support such contact following cesarean
delivery, and this is our practice (Frederick, 2020; Moore, 2016).
Breastfeeding can be initiated the day of surgery.
Delivery of the Placenta. The uterine incision is observed for any vigorously
bleeding sites. These should be quickly clamped with Pennington or ring
forceps. Although some surgeons may prefer manual removal of the placenta,
spontaneous delivery prompted by some gentle steady cord traction may
reduce the risk of operative blood loss and infection (Anorlu, 2008; Baksu,
2005). Traction is coupled with fundal massage to hasten placental
separation and delivery (Fig. 30-9).

FIGURE 30-9 Placenta bulging through the uterine incision as the uterus contracts. A hand gently
massages the fundus to help aid spontaneous placental separation.

Immediately after delivery and quick gross inspection of the placenta for
missing portions, the uterine cavity is suctioned and wiped out with a gauze
sponge to remove avulsed membranes, vernix, and clots. In the past, doublegloved fingers or ring forceps placed through the hysterotomy incision were
used to dilate a closed cervix. This does not reduce infection or postpartum
hemorrhage rates and is not our practice (Kirscht, 2017; Liabsuetrakul,
2018).
To help prevent uterine atony after birth, an IV infusion containing two
ampules or 20 units of oxytocin per liter of crystalloid is infused at 10
mL/min. Some prefer higher infusion rates, however, nondilute boluses are
avoided because of associated hypotension (Roach, 2013). Once the uterus
contracts satisfactorily, the rate can be reduced. Although not available in the
United States, an alternative is carbetocin, which is a longer-acting oxytocin

derivative. It provides suitable, albeit more expensive, hemorrhage
prophylaxis (Kalafat, 2021). Other choices for hemorrhage prophylaxis
include misoprostol (Cytotec) and the ergots, namely methylergonovine
(Methergine) and ergonovine (Ergotrate). A combination agent of oxytocin
plus ergonovine (Syntometrine) is used outside the United States. Of agents,
the World Health Organization (2018) recommends oxytocin for first-line
use. Last, tranexamic acid (TXA) can be added to a standard oxytocin
infusion to help prevent blood loss. Despite early encouraging evidence,
methodology flaws have been cited (Franchini, 2018; Ker, 2016). With TXA
in one large trial, rates of estimated blood loss >1000 mL or red-cell
transfusion were lower than with placebo. But, TXA did not lower rates of
common blood loss–related secondary clinical outcomes (Sentilhes, 2021).
In contrast to prevention, treatment of atony is found in Chapter 42 (p. 734).
Uterine Repair. After placental delivery, the uterus is lifted through the
incision and onto the draped abdominal wall. We favor exteriorizing and
believe a relaxed, atonic uterus can be recognized quickly and massage
applied. Incision and bleeding points are more easily visualized and
repaired, especially if extensions were torn or the patient is obese. Adnexal
exposure is superior, and thus, tubal sterilization is easier. In contrast, some
clinicians prefer to close the hysterotomy with the uterus in situ. Comparing
these two approaches, the Coronis Collaborative Group (2013) trial
randomly assigned nearly 5000 parturients and found no differences in the
endometritis or transfusion rate. In one large metaanalysis, nausea and
vomiting and associated pain rates were comparable with either method
(Zaphiratos, 2015).
Before hysterotomy closure, IUD insertion, if planned, is completed
(Chap. 38, p. 668). Our practice is to perform a primary needle and sponge
count prior to uterine incision closure completion. For closure, one end of
the uterine incision is grasped to stabilize and maneuver the incision. The
uterine incision is then closed with one or two layers of continuous 0- or no.
1 absorbable suture (Fig. 30-10). Chromic catgut suture is used by many, but
some prefer synthetic delayed-absorbable polyglactin 910 (Vicryl). In
subsequent pregnancy, neither suture type is superior in mitigating against
greater rates of adverse pregnancy outcomes such as uterine incision rupture
(CORONIS Collaborative Group, 2016).

FIGURE 30-10 The cut edges of the uterine incision are approximated with a running, locking suture.

Single-layer closure is typically faster and is not associated with higher
rates of infection or transfusion (CAESAR Study Collaborative Group, 2010;
Dodd, 2014; Roberge, 2014). Moreover, most studies observed that the
number of layers does not significantly affect complication rates in the next
pregnancy (Chapman, 1997; CORONIS Collaborative Group, 2016;
Durnwald, 2003). One randomized trial with nearly 1600 parturients found a
slightly greater formation rate of cesarean scar niches at 3 months after
double-layer closure (Stegwee, 2021).
At Parkland Hospital, we use a one-layer uterine closure with chromic
catgut. The initial suture is placed just beyond one end of the uterine incision.

A continuous, locking suture line for hemostasis is performed, and each
suture penetrates the full myometrial thickness. The suture line then extends
to a point just beyond the incision’s opposite end. If bleeding sites or defects
persist after a single layer, more sutures are required. Another layer of
running suture or individually targeted figure-eight or mattress stitches are
options.
Although not our routine practice, the peritoneum in the anterior cul-desac can be approximated with a continuous 2-0 chromic catgut suture line.
Multiple randomized trials suggest that omission of this step causes no
postoperative complications (Grundsell, 1998; Irion, 1996; Nagele, 1996). If
tubal sterilization is planned, it is completed as described in Chapter 39 (p.
683).

Adhesions
Following cesarean delivery, adhesions commonly form within the
vesicouterine space or between the anterior abdominal wall and uterus. With
each successive pregnancy, the percentage of affected women and adhesion
severity rise (Morales, 2007; Tulandi, 2009). Adhesions can significantly
lengthen incision-to-delivery time and total operative time (Rossouw, 2013;
Sikirica, 2012). Rates of cystotomy and bowel injury also are raised because
of adhesive disease (Rahman, 2009; Silver, 2006).
Intuitively, scarring can be reduced by handling tissues delicately,
achieving hemostasis, and minimizing tissue ischemia, infection, and foreignbody reaction. Most recent data on short- and long-term outcomes show no
benefit to peritoneal closure (CAESAR Study Collaborative Group, 2010;
CORONIS Collaborative Group, 2013, 2016; Kapustian, 2012). Similarly,
most studies show no benefit from placement of an adhesion barrier at the
hysterotomy site (Edwards, 2014; Kiefer, 2016).

Abdominal Closure
Any laparotomy sponges are removed, and the paracolic gutters and cul-desac are gently suctioned of blood and amnionic fluid. Some surgeons irrigate
the gutters and cul-de-sac, especially in the presence of infection or
meconium. Routine irrigation in low-risk women, however, leads to greater
intraoperative nausea but not to lower postoperative infection rates (Eke,
2016; Viney, 2012).

Prior to abdominal closure, correct sponge and instrument counts are
verified. The rectus abdominis muscle bellies are allowed to fall into place.
The overlying rectus fascia is closed by a continuous, nonlocking technique
with a delayed-absorbable suture. In patients with a higher risk for infection,
monofilament suture may be preferable to braided material.
The subcutaneous tissue usually need not be closed if it is <2 cm thick.
With thicker layers, however, closure is recommended to minimize seroma
and hematoma formation, which can lead to wound infection, disruption, or
both (Bohman, 1992; Chelmow, 2004). Adding a subcutaneous drain does not
prevent significant wound complications (Hellums, 2007; Ramsey, 2005).
Skin is closed with a running subcuticular stitch of 4-0 delayedabsorbable suture, with adhesive glue, or with staples. In comparison, final
cosmetic results and infection rates appear similar, skin suturing takes longer,
but wound separation rates are higher with metal staples (Basha, 2010;
Figueroa, 2013; Mackeen, 2014a, 2015). Poliglecaprone 25 (Monocryl) or
polyglactin 910 (Vicryl) are both suitable (Tuuli, 2016). Outcomes with 2octyl cyanoacrylate adhesive (Dermabond) were equivalent to sutures for
Pfannenstiel incisions (Daykan, 2017; Siddiqui, 2013). A sterile thin
abdominal wound dressing is sufficient. In obese women, most evidence
favors against a negative-pressure wound vacuum atop the closed skin
incision compared with a standard wound dressing to lower wound infection
rates (Gillespie, 2021; Hussamy, 2019; Tuuli, 2020).

Joel-Cohen and Misgav Ladach Techniques
The Pfannenstiel-Kerr technique just described has been used for decades.
Others include the more recent Joel-Cohen and Misgav Ladach techniques
(Holmgren, 1999). These differ from traditional Pfannenstiel-Kerr entry
mainly by their initial incision placement and greater use of blunt dissection.
The Joel-Cohen technique creates a straight 10-cm transverse skin
incision 3 cm below the level of the anterior superior iliac spines (Olofsson,
2015). The subcutaneous tissue layer is opened sharply 2 to 3 cm in the
midline. This is carried down, without lateral extension, to the fascia. A
small transverse incision is made in the fascia, and curved Mayo scissors are
pushed laterally on each side and beneath intact subcutaneous fat to incise the
fascia. With this incision completed, an index finger from each hand is
inserted between the rectus abdominis muscle bellies and beneath the fascia.

One finger is moved cranially and the other caudally, in opposition, to
separate the bellies and further open the fascial incision. Then, a finger from
each hand hooks under each belly to stretch the muscles laterally. The
peritoneum is entered sharply, and this incision is sharply extended
cephalocaudad. Entry with the Misgav Ladach technique differs in that the
peritoneum is entered bluntly (Holmgren, 1999).
Modifications to the Joel-Cohen method abound. For emergency delivery,
we begin along a line somewhat lower on the abdomen and similar to that for
Pfannenstiel incision. For speed, we extend the initial fascial incision bluntly
by hooking index fingers in the fascial incision’s lateral corners and pulling
laterally (Hofmeyr, 2009; Oloffson, 2015). Index fingers insinuated between
the rectus bellies then move cephalocaudad in opposition to separate the
muscle bellies. Blunt index-finger dissection enters the peritoneum, and
again, cranial and caudad opposing stretch lengthens the peritoneal incision.
Last, all the layers of the abdominal wall are grasped together and pulled
laterally in opposition to further open the operating space.
These techniques have been associated with shorter operative times and
with lower rates of intraoperative blood loss and postoperative pain
(Mathai, 2013). They may, however, prove difficult for women with
preexisting anterior rectus fibrosis and peritoneal adhesions (Bolze, 2013).

Classical Cesarean Incision
Indications. This incision is usually avoided because it encompasses the
active upper uterine segment and thus is prone to rupture with subsequent
pregnancies. Some indications stem from difficulty in exposing or safely
entering the lower uterine segment. For example, a densely adhered bladder
from previous surgery is encountered; a leiomyoma occupies the lower
uterine segment; or the cervix is currently invaded by cancer. Women with
prior radical trachelectomy for cervix cancer are usually delivered by
classical incision. Massive maternal obesity can preclude safe access to the
lower uterine segment. A classical incision is also preferred for placenta
previa with anterior implantation, especially those complicated by placenta
accreta syndrome. In extreme cases of this, the typical classical hysterotomy
may be placed even higher in the uterine body or posteriorly to avoid the
placenta. Fetuses with cephalic presentation are then delivered in a manner
similar to total breech extraction.

In other instances, fetal indications dictate the need. Transverse lie of a
large fetus, especially if the membranes are ruptured and the shoulder is
impacted in the birth canal, usually requires a classical incision. Second,
with a fetus presenting as a back-down transverse lie, the back precludes
easy grasping of a leg through a transverse uterine incision for breech
delivery. Here, a classical incision provides superior room. Third, in
instances when the fetus is very small and breech, a classical incision may be
preferable (Osmundson, 2013). In such cases, the poorly developed lower
uterine segment provides inadequate space for the manipulations required for
breech delivery. Or, less commonly, the small fetal head may become
entrapped by a contracting uterine fundus following membrane rupture. With
multiple fetuses, a classical incision again may provide needed room for
extraction of fetuses that may be malpositioned or preterm (Osmundson,
2015). A large fetal malformation or conjoined twins may require the added
space afforded by a classical incision.
Uterine Incision and Repair. A vertical uterine incision is initiated with a
scalpel beginning as low as possible and preferably within the lower uterine
segment (Fig. 30-11). If adhesions, insufficient exposure, a tumor, or placenta
percreta preclude development of a bladder flap, then the incision is made
above the level of the bladder. Described earlier (p. 553), back filling the
bladder may aid this.

FIGURE 30-11 An initial small vertical hysterotomy incision is made in the lower uterine segment.
Fingers are insinuated between the myometrium and fetus to avoid fetal laceration. Scissors extend the
incision cephalad as needed for delivery. (Figures 30-11 and 30-12: Reproduced with permission from
Johnson DD: Cesarean delivery. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al (eds): Cunningham
and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2017.)

Once the uterus is entered with a scalpel, the incision is extended
cephalad with bandage scissors until it is long enough to permit fetal
delivery. With scissor use, the fetus can be better protected from laceration.
Fingers of the surgeon’s nondominant hand are insinuated between the
myometrium and fetus to prevent scissor cuts. As the incision is opened,
numerous large vessels that bleed profusely are commonly encountered
within the myometrium. The remainder of fetal and placental delivery
mirrors that with a low transverse hysterotomy.

For incision closure, one method employs a layer of 0- or no. 1 chromic
catgut with a running stitch to approximate the deeper length of the incision
(Fig. 30-12). The outer layer of myometrium is then closed along its length
with similar suture and with a running suture line. To achieve good
approximation and to prevent the suture from tearing through the myometrium,
it is helpful to have an assistant relieve tension by compressing the uterus on
each side of the wound toward the midline as each stitch is placed.

FIGURE 30-12 Classical incision closure. The deeper half (A) and superficial half (B) of the incision
are closed in a running fashion. The serosa is then closed (C).

PERIPARTUM HYSTERECTOMY
■ Indications
Hysterectomy is most commonly performed to arrest or prevent hemorrhage
from intractable uterine atony, surgical trauma/tears, or abnormal
placentation (Bateman, 2012; Kallianidis, 2020). It is more often completed
during or after cesarean delivery but may be needed following vaginal birth.
Among all deliveries, the peripartum hysterectomy rate in the United States
approximates 1 per 1000 births and has risen significantly during the past

few decades (Bateman, 2012; Govindappagari, 2016). During a 25-year
period, the rate of peripartum hysterectomy at Parkland Hospital was 1.7 per
1000 births (Hernandez, 2012). Most of this rise is attributed to the
increasing rates of cesarean delivery and its associated complications in
subsequent pregnancy (Flood, 2009; Orbach, 2011). Of hysterectomies,
approximately one half to two thirds are total, whereas the remaining cases
are supracervical (Rossi, 2010; Shellhaas, 2009).
Major complications of peripartum hysterectomy include greater blood
loss and risk of urinary tract damage. Blood loss is usually appreciable
because hysterectomy is being performed for hemorrhage that frequently is
torrential, and the procedure itself is associated with substantial bleeding.
Although many cases with hemorrhage cannot be anticipated, those with
abnormal implantation are often identified antepartum. Preparations for
placenta accreta syndrome are discussed in Chapter 43 (p. 763) and are
outlined by the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2018).
An important factor affecting the cesarean hysterectomy complication rate
is whether the operation is performed electively or emergently. With
anticipated or planned cesarean hysterectomy, rates of blood loss, blood
transfusion, and urinary tract complications are lower those with emergent
procedures (Briery, 2007; Glaze, 2008).

■ Hysterectomy Technique
Total or supracervical hysterectomy is performed using standard operative
techniques. Adequate exposure is essential, but initially, placement of a selfretaining retractor such as a Balfour is not necessary. Rather, satisfactory
exposure is obtained with cephalad traction on the uterus by an assistant,
along with handheld Richardson or Deaver retractors. The bladder flap is
deflected caudad to the level of the cervix if possible to permit total
hysterectomy. In cases in which cesarean hysterectomy is planned or strongly
suspected, extended bladder flap dissection is ideally completed before
initial hysterotomy. Later attempts at bladder dissection may be obscured by
bleeding, or excess blood may be lost during this dissection.
After cesarean delivery, the placenta is typically removed. In cases of
placenta accreta syndrome for which hysterectomy is already planned, the
placenta is usually left undisturbed in situ. If the hysterotomy incision is
bleeding appreciably, it can be quickly reapproximated with full-thickness

sutures, or Pennington or sponge forceps can be applied for hemostasis. If
bleeding is minimal, neither maneuver is necessary.
The round ligament is divided close to the uterus between clamps, and
each pedicle is ligated (Fig. 30-13). Either 0 or no. 1 suture can be used in
either chromic gut or delayed-absorbable material. Division of the round
provides access to the anterior leaf of the broad ligament, which is incised
downward to meet the former bladder flap incision. The posterior leaf of the
broad ligament adjacent to the uterus is bluntly or sharply perforated at a
point beneath the fallopian tube, uteroovarian ligament, and ovarian vessels
(Fig. 30-14). These structures together are then divided between sturdy
clamps placed close to the uterus (Fig. 30-15). The lateral pedicle is doubly
ligated. The medial clamp remains and is removed later with the entire
uterine specimen. The posterior leaf of the broad ligament is then incised
caudad toward the uterosacral ligaments (Fig. 30-16). The bladder and
attached peritoneal flap are further deflected and dissected as needed. If the
bladder flap is densely adhered, as it may be after previous hysterotomy
incisions, careful sharp dissection is employed (Fig. 30-17).

FIGURE 30-13 The round ligaments are clamped, ligated, and transected bilaterally. (Figures 30-13 to
30-21: Reproduced with permission from Cunningham FG, Gilstrap LC III: Peripartum hysterectomy. In
Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al (eds): Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative
Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2017.)

FIGURE 30-14 The posterior leaf of the broad ligament adjacent to the uterus is perforated just
beneath the fallopian tube, uteroovarian ligaments, and ovarian vessels.

FIGURE 30-15 The uteroovarian ligament and fallopian tube are clamped and cut. The lateral pedicle
is doubly ligated.

FIGURE 30-16 The posterior leaf of the broad ligament is divided inferiorly toward the uterosacral
ligament.

FIGURE 30-17 The bladder is dissected sharply from the lower uterine segment.

Special care is required from this point on to avoid injury to the ureters,
which pass beneath the uterine arteries. To help accomplish this, an assistant
places constant traction to pull the uterus in the direction away from the side
on which the uterine vessels are being ligated. The ascending uterine artery
and veins on either side are identified. These vessels are then clamped
adjacent to the uterus (Fig. 30-18). For security, some may prefer two lateral
clamps. The medial-most clamp helps prevent back bleeding from the uterus.
The uterine vessels are divided, and the lateral tissue pedicle is doubly
suture ligated. The medial clamp remains for later removal with the
specimen. After securing the uterine vessels on one side, the round ligament,
adnexal pedicle, and uterine vessels are then addressed on the contralateral
side.

FIGURE 30-18 The uterine vessels are clamped. Once divided, the lateral vascular pedicle is doubly
ligated to ensure hemostasis.

In cases with profuse hemorrhage, time and rapid hemostasis can be
gained by quickly clamping and dividing all of the just-described pedicles.
Once all are clamped, the surgical team can then return to ligate each pedicle
individually.

Total Hysterectomy
Even if total hysterectomy is planned, we find it technically easier in many
cases to finish the operation after amputating the uterine fundus and placing
Ochsner or Kocher clamps on the cervical stump for traction and hemostasis.
Self-retaining retractors also may be placed at this time. To remove the
cervix, the bladder is mobilized further if needed. This carries the ureters
caudad as the bladder is retracted beneath the symphysis. Bladder retraction

can also help prevent laceration or suturing of the bladder during cervical
excision and vaginal cuff closure.
The cardinal ligament, the uterosacral ligaments, and the many large
vessels within these ligaments are clamped systematically with sturdy
Heaney-type curved or straight clamps (Fig. 30-19). The clamps are placed
as close to the cervix as possible, taking care not to include excessive tissue
in each clamp. The tissue between the pair of clamps is incised, and the
lateral pedicle is suture ligated. These steps are repeated caudally and
bilaterally until the level of the lateral vaginal fornix is reached on each side.
In this way, the descending branches of the uterine vessels are clamped, cut,
and ligated as the cervix is separated from the cardinal ligaments.

FIGURE 30-19 The cardinal ligaments are clamped, incised, and ligated.

If the cervix is effaced and dilated considerably, its softness may obscure
palpable identification of the cervicovaginal junction. The junction location
can be ascertained either through the open hysterotomy incision or through a
vertical uterine incision made anteriorly in the midline at the level of the
ligated uterine vessels. A finger is directed inferiorly through the incision to
identify the free margin of the dilated, effaced cervix. The contaminated
glove is replaced. Another useful method to identify the cervical margins in
cases of planned hysterectomy is to transvaginally place four metal skin clips
or brightly colored sutures at 12, 3, 6, and 9 o’clock positions on the cervical
edges.
Immediately below the level of the cervix, a curved clamp is placed
across the lateral vaginal fornix on each side, and the vagina is incised above
the clamp (Fig. 30-20). The cervix is inspected to ensure that it has been
completely removed. A transfixing suture is used for vaginal cuff closure as
each clamp is removed. Interrupted stitches may be added to approximate the
middle portion of the cuff (Fig. 30-21). Each lateral vaginal fornix is secured
to the uterosacral ligaments to mitigate later vaginal prolapse. For cuff
closure, some surgeons instead prefer to close the vagina by apposing the
anterior and posterior vaginal walls with interrupted figure-eight sutures or
running suture line.

FIGURE 30-20 A curved clamp is placed across the lateral vaginal fornix below the level of the
cervix, and the tissue incised medially to the point of the clamp.

FIGURE 30-21 A transfixing stitch is placed on each side to close the lateral vaginal cuff. Interrupted
stitches (dotted lines) may be needed to close any midline gap.

All sites are examined carefully for bleeding. One technique is to
perform a systematic bilateral survey from the fallopian tube and ovarian
ligament pedicles to the vaginal vault and bladder flap. Bleeding sites are
ligated with care to avoid the ureters. The abdominal wall normally is closed
in layers, as previously described for cesarean delivery (p. 558).

Supracervical Hysterectomy
To perform a subtotal hysterectomy, the uterine body is amputated
immediately above the level of uterine artery ligation. The cervical stump
may be closed with a continuous or interrupted suture line of chromic catgut
or delayed-absorbable material. Subtotal hysterectomy is often all that is
necessary to stop hemorrhage. It may be preferred for women who would
benefit from a shorter surgery or for those with extensive adhesions that
threaten significant urinary tract injury.

Salpingo-oophorectomy
Because of the large adnexal vessels and their close proximity to the uterus,
it may be necessary to remove one or both adnexa to obtain hemostasis.
Briery and colleagues (2007) reported unilateral or bilateral oophorectomy

in a fourth of cases. Preoperative counseling for anticipated hysterectomy
should include this possibility.

■ Urinary Tract or Bowel Injury
These injuries are rare during cesarean delivery. The bladder laceration rate
approximates 2 injuries per 1000 cesarean deliveries, whereas that for
ureteral trauma nears 0.3 events per 1000 cases (Güngördük, 2010; Oliphant,
2014). Bowel is damaged in about 1 in 1000 cesarean deliveries (Silver,
2006).

Cystotomy
Bladder laceration most commonly occurs during blunt or sharp dissection in
the vesicouterine space to create the bladder flap, during peritoneal cavity
entry, and during hysterotomy (Phipps, 2005; Rahman, 2009). Risks are prior
cesarean delivery; comorbid adhesive disease; emergency cesarean delivery;
cesarean hysterectomy, especially cases with morbidly adherent placenta;
and surgery in second-stage labor compared with first-stage (Alexander,
2007; Salman, 2017; Silver, 2006).
Bladder injury is typically identified intraoperatively, and a clear-fluid
gush or the Foley bulb are indicators. In suspected cases, cystotomy can be
confirmed with retrograde instillation of fluid through a Foley catheter and
into the bladder. Dilute sterile infant formula is a common, available option.
Methylene blue–stained saline is another. Leakage of the indicator fluid aids
laceration identification and delineation of its borders. The dome is
lacerated most often, and trigone injuries make up the remainder (Phipps,
2005; Salman, 2017).
Prior to cystotomy repair, ureters are examined, and urine jets from each
orifice are sought. Inspection can be done directly through the cystotomy, if at
the dome. A separate diagnostic extraperitoneal cystotomy may be preferable
if the laceration nears the trigone. To aid viewing, urine jets can be colored
by IV dye, as described in the next section.
Once ureteral patency is confirmed, the bladder can be closed with a
two- or three-layer running closure using a 3-0 absorbable or delayedabsorbable suture (Fig. 30-22). The first layer inverts the mucosa into the
bladder. Subsequent layers reapproximate the bladder muscularis. After the

final layer, the bladder is filled with a marker fluid to demonstrate repair
integrity. Leaking defects are closed with interrupted reinforcing stitches.

FIGURE 30-22 Cystotomy repair. A. The primary layer inverts the bladder mucosa with running or
interrupted sutures of 3-0 delayed-absorbable or absorbable suture. B. Second and possibly a third layer
approximate the bladder muscularis to reinforce the incision closure. (Reproduced with permission from
Balgobin S: Urologic and gastrointestinal injuries. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al
(eds): Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, NY: McGraw Hill; 2017.)

Postoperative care requires continuous bladder drainage for 7 to 14 days
to permit healing and minimize the risk of fistula formation. Uropathogen
prophylaxis during this drainage is not required. Prior to catheter removal,

cystourethrography may not be needed for a simple, single laceration
measuring under 1 cm (Glaser, 2019).
Larger lacerations in or near the trigone require careful attention.
Specialists may be consulted, and in preparation, ureteral catheters,
described in the next section, can be assembled. Ureteral orifices are directly
inspected to document jets from both. If not seen, a ureteral catheter may be
passed through the cystotomy and into each orifice to confirm patency. Once
this is confirmed, repair should not disrupt the ureteral orifices, and stents
may remain to ensure their patency.
Unrecognized cystotomy can manifest postoperatively as hematuria,
oliguria, abdominal pain, ileus, ascites, peritonitis, fever, urinoma, or fistula.
For diagnosis, retrograde cystography or abdominal computed tomography
(CT) with cystography can be used (Tarney, 2013). Cystoscopy is also an
option but may require a procedural room. Once cystotomy is identified,
prompt repair is indicated (Balgobin, 2017).

Ureteral Injury
The ureter may be at risk during cesarean hysterectomy, especially those
complicated by placenta accreta syndrome. (Woldu, 2014). Although not our
practice, some advocate preoperative ureteral catheter placement to aid
intraoperative ureter identification (Eller, 2009; Matsubara, 2013).
Organization guidelines recommend individualization of this practice
depending on anticipated placenta accreta syndrome complexity (American
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2018; Collins, 2019). Further,
initial dorsal lithotomy positioning of the patient for these cases can permit
cystoscopy. Aside from hysterectomy, the ureter is also at risk during repair
of hysterotomy extensions into the broad ligament or vagina (Safrai, 2020).
If ureteral injury is suspected, IV dye is administered, and the pelvis is
directly inspected for extravasation. Of options, 50 mg of IV methylene blue
may be given over 5 minutes. However, methylene blue carries the potential
for inciting methemoglobinemia in patients with glucose-6-phosphate
dehydrogenase deficiency. Another option is 25 or 50 mg of IV 10-percent
sodium fluorescein, which stains bright yellow (Espaillat-Rijo, 2016;
Grimes, 2017).
Next, brisk dye-stained urine jets are sought from each orifice to exclude
ureteral kinking or ligation. Orifice viewing may be via cystoscopy, if

available; through a comorbid traumatic cystotomy; or through an intentional
diagnostic cystotomy. For the last, a midline extraperitoneal cystotomy in the
bladder dome gives excellent exposure. Sluggish or absent jets may reflect
patient hypovolemia, and ongoing volume resuscitation may yield expected
orifice jets. If not, consultation with a specialist is typically requested to
exclude ureteral injury.
While waiting, catheters and stents can be assembled. Semantically,
ureteral catheters are diagnostic tools, and typically are inserted and
removed in the same therapeutic intervention. Most stents are designed to
remain indwelling for prolonged ureteral drainage. Both types are hollow to
permit radiopaque medium injection and to allow urine egress through or
around them (Corton, 2020).
To exclude ureteral obstruction, a 4F to 6F open-ended or whistle-tip
catheter is threaded into one orifice. Once inserted, the catheter is advanced
to the level of suspected obstruction. If the tool threads easily up toward the
renal pelvis, obstruction is unlikely. In most, ureteral injury occurs at or
below the pelvic brim, and the distance from the ureteral orifice to the brim
approximates 13 cm (Jackson, 2019). Failure to easily advance the catheter
may indicate ureteral kinking, ligation, or crush injury. The appearance of the
catheter in the abdominal cavity indicates partial or complete transection
(Balgobin, 2017). Repair of ureteral injuries is dependent upon the type of
injury and location.
First, kinked or ligated ureters can be relieved by release of ensnaring
sutures. Crush injuries are inspected to ensure vital tissue. In these cases,
stents are left to avert ureteral stricture. Ureteral stents range from 4F to 7F.
Stents vary in length from 20 to 30 cm, and a 24-cm or 26-cm length is
appropriate for most adults. Double-pigtail or double-J stents describe their
tip shape, and the ends coil within the renal pelvis and bladder, respectively,
to prevent stent migration (Corton, 2020). A Foley catheter remains for 7 to
10 days, and the ureteral stents are removed via cystoscopy after 14 days.
Intravenous pyelography (IVP) is usually not necessary before removal of the
stent if it was placed as a precautionary measure after relatively minor injury
(Davis, 1999).
Crush injuries with devascularization, thermal injury, or transection
require more extensive repair. If a healthy-appearing ureter can be
reimplanted into the bladder without undue tension, then
ureteroneocystostomy is preferable. For more proximal injuries, a

ureteroureterostomy, a psoas hitch, or a Boari flap may be needed. An
explanation of these more extensive procedures is found in Cunningham and
Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd edition (Balgobin, 2017).
Unrecognized ureteral injury can mimic that of cystotomy with the
addition of possible costovertebral angle tenderness. CT urography is a
preferred initial diagnostic tool (Sharp, 2016). The duration of time from
injury to identification directs repair. Those identified early are often
suitable for immediate repair.

Bowel Injury
Serosal tears represent weak points in the small bowel. If obstruction
develops postoperatively, these weak spots may perforate, leading to
peritonitis. If serosal tears are few, they can be oversewn with either a fine
absorbable or nonabsorbable suture (Davis, 1999). More significant
lacerations are often repaired in consultation with a general surgeon or
gynecologic oncologist.

POSTOPERATIVE CARE
■ Euvolemia Evaluation
During and after cesarean delivery, requirements for IV fluids can vary
considerably. Current ERAS strategies aim for euvolemic replacement
(Caughey, 2018). Administered fluids consist of either lactated Ringer
solution or a similar crystalloid solution with 5-percent dextrose. Blood loss
with uncomplicated cesarean delivery approximates 1000 mL. The averagesized woman with a hematocrit of 30 percent or more and with a normally
expanded blood and extracellular fluid volume most often will tolerate blood
loss up to 2000 mL without difficulty. Unappreciated bleeding through the
vagina during the procedure, bleeding concealed in the uterus after its
closure, or both commonly lead to underestimation.
Blood loss averages 1500 mL with elective cesarean hysterectomy,
although this is variable (Pritchard, 1965). Most peripartum hysterectomies
are unscheduled, and blood loss in these cases is correspondingly greater.
Thus, in addition to close monitoring of vital signs and urine output, the
hematocrit should be determined intra- or postoperatively as indicated.

■ Recovery Suite
The amount of vaginal bleeding is closely monitored for at least an hour in
the immediate postoperative period. The uterine fundus is also identified
frequently by palpation to ensure that the uterus remains firmly contracted.
Criteria for transfer to the postpartum ward include minimal bleeding, stable
vital signs, and adequate urine output.

■ Hospital Care until Discharge
Analgesia, Vital Signs, Intravenous Fluids
Several schemes are suitable for postoperative pain control. First, adding
intrathecal opioid or epidural opioid such as morphine to neuraxial analgesia
can provide 12 to 24 hours of postoperative relief (American College of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019a; Caughey, 2018). Sedation and
respiratory depression rise with increasing intrathecal opioid doses.
Postoperative monitoring protocols reflect this and are outlined in Chapter
25 (p. 472) (Bauchat, 2019). Other potential side effects include pruritus,
nausea, or vomiting (Sultan, 2016). Despite these, long-acting neuraxial
analgesia is recommended instead of intermittent parental opioid dosing
(American Society of Anesthesiologists, 2016). For additional relief,
nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) can alternate with
acetaminophen (Ong, 2010). Breakthrough pain can be relieved by
oxycodone 2.5 to 5 mg every 4 hours (Bollag, 2021). Neonatal sedation is a
concern, and total oxycodone doses higher 30 mg/d are not recommended
(American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 2019a). Instead, for
severe breakthrough pain, intramuscular (IM) meperidine, 50 to 75 mg every
3 to 4 hours, or IM morphine, 10 to 15 mg every 3 to 4 hours, is an option.
For those without neuraxial anesthesia, a transversus abdominis place
(TAP) block can be considered (Fig. 2-2, p. 14). Patient-controlled analgesia
(PCA) also is reasonable. One PCA regimen uses IV morphine given as
needed as a 1-mg dose with a 6-minute lockout interval and maximum dose
of 30 mg in 4 hours. An additional 2-mg booster dose is permitted for a
maximum of two doses.
After transfer to her room, the woman is assessed at least hourly for 4
hours, and thereafter at intervals of 4 hours. Deep breathing and coughing are
encouraged to prevent atelectasis. Vital signs, uterine tone, urine output, and

vaginal and incisional bleeding are evaluated. The hematocrit is routinely
measured the morning after surgery. It is checked sooner if blood loss was
significant or if postoperative hypotension, tachycardia, oliguria, or other
evidence suggests hypovolemia. If the hematocrit is significantly lower than
the preoperative level, the measurement is repeated and a search for the
cause is instituted. Clinical and objective thresholds for transfusion are
described fully in Chapter 44 (p. 771). If ongoing blood loss is not expected,
iron therapy is preferred to transfusion.
Postpartum, the patient begins to mobilize and excrete her
physiologically expanded extravascular volume. Thus, maintenance IV fluid
proves adequate after surgery until consistent oral intake is reestablished. If
urine output falls below 30 mL/hr, however, a woman should be reevaluated
promptly. The cause of the oliguria may range from unrecognized blood loss
to an antidiuretic effect from infused oxytocin.
Women undergoing unscheduled cesarean delivery may have pathological
retention or constriction of the extracellular fluid compartment caused by
severe preeclampsia, sepsis syndrome, vomiting, prolonged labor without
adequate fluid intake, or increased blood loss. Women with these
complications are generally observed in the recovery room until improved.

Bladder and Bowel Function
A Foley catheter is often required to accurately assess urinary output. For
women not needing such monitoring, organizations differ in their
recommendations. The Society for Obstetric Anesthesia and Perinatology
suggests removal after 6 to 12 hours and cites the urinary retention risks
associated with long-acting neuraxial anesthesia (Bollag, 2021). The ERAS
Society recommends immediate postoperative removal (Macones, 2019).
The prevalence of urinary retention following cesarean delivery
approximates 5 percent (Chap. 36, p. 643). Failure to progress in labor and
postoperative narcotic analgesia are identified risks (Chai, 2008; Liang,
2007).
In uncomplicated cases, liquids or solid food may be offered within
hours of surgery and advanced as tolerated (Guo, 2015; Macones, 2019).
Some degree of adynamic ileus follows virtually every laparotomy but is
negligible after most cesarean deliveries. Postoperative ileus symptoms
include abdominal distention, colic, and an inability to pass flatus or stool.

With persistent nausea and vomiting or with prolonged bowel function delay,
radiological imaging may help exclude bowel obstruction. A plain
abdominal radiograph is a frequent first choice. However, in the general
population, this study is diagnostic in only 50 to 60 percent of small-bowel
obstruction (SBO) cases (Maglinte, 1997). Thus, a radiograph may best
serve as a triage tool in cases in which ileus is the suspected diagnosis.
Notably, an enlarged postpartum uterus can compress the rectosigmoid and
prevent it from filling with gas. Thus, findings suggesting a distal colonic
obstruction may confuse true cases of transient ileus (Kammen, 2000). CT
with IV and oral contrast provides greater accuracy for SBO diagnosis. Last,
although uncommon, an unrecognized bowel injury may underlie otherwise
unexplained fever and bowel dysfunction. Again, CT would be the more
diagnostic examination.
For treatment of ileus, IV fluids compensate for poor oral intake and
losses from emesis. Electrolyte imbalances are corrected to improve bowel
motility and avoid bowel edema. Nasogastric decompression is necessary
only with persistent vomiting or severe distention.
For prevention, surgical goals strive to minimize bowel manipulation,
avoid excess IV fluids or profound hypovolemia, and limit surgery length
(Bragg, 2015). After surgery, gum chewing enhances early bowel function
recovery (Ciardulli, 2018). Among studies, chewing was initiated
immediately or up to 12 hours later, lasted 15 to 60 minutes, and was
repeated in at least three sessions daily (Pereira Gomes Morais, 2016).

Ambulation and Wound Care
As discussed earlier, women undergoing cesarean delivery have an
increased VTE risk compared with those delivering vaginally (Chap. 55, p.
989). Early ambulation lowers this risk. Walking to the bathroom begins,
initially with assistance. Brief walks are encouraged. For women with
marked abdominal laxity, an abdominal binder can aid comfortable deep
coughing and ambulation. Evidence supporting routine application for all
parturients is limited and conflicting (Chankhunaphas, 2020; Gillier, 2016).
Although not evidence based, we remove the surgical dressing after 24
hours and inspect the incision daily. One small randomized trial showed no
wound healing effects if removed at 6 hours (Peleg, 2016). By the third
postpartum day, showering does not harm the incision. Prior to this, a plastic

covering can maintain dryness during showers. If used, staples are often
removed on the fourth postoperative day. In their place, tape strips can
remain for 1 week to reinforce skin edge integrity. If potential superficial
wound separation, without infection, is a concern, staples can remain for 7 to
10 days.

■ Hospital Discharge
For uncomplicated cesarean delivery, the average hospitalization length is 3
to 4 days (Buie, 2010). Data from studies suggest that earlier discharge is
feasible for properly selected women and newborns (Bayoumi, 2016; Tan,
2012). Protocols ideally include earlier reevaluation for neonatal jaundice.
However, discharge before 96 hours leads to a greater neonatal readmission
rate (Jones, 2020).
Activities during the first week are limited to self-care and newborn care
with assistance. Driving can be resumed when pain does not limit the ability
to brake quickly and when narcotic medications are not in use. In women
with cesarean delivery, intercourse was resumed in 44 percent by 6 weeks
postpartum, 81 percent by 3 months, and 97 percent at 1 year (McDonald,
2013). After the puerperium, the quality of sexual functioning does not differ
between those undergoing spontaneous vaginal birth or cesarean delivery
(Chang, 2015; Fehniger, 2013; Rogers, 2014). Return to work is variable.
Six weeks is commonly cited, although many women use the Family and
Medical Leave Act to allow up to 12 weeks for recovery and newborn
bonding.

REFERENCES
Abdel-Aleem H, Aboelnasr MF, Jayousi TM, et al: Indwelling bladder catheterisation as part of
intraoperative and postoperative care for caesarean section. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
4:CD010322, 2014
Abe K, Kuklina EV, Hooper WC, et al: Venous thromboembolism as a cause of severe maternal
morbidity and mortality in the United States. Semin Perinatol 43(4):200, 2019
Ahmadzia HK, Patel EM, Joshi D, et al: Obstetric surgical site infections: 2 grams compared with 3
grams of cefazolin in morbidly obese women. Obstet Gynecol 126(4):708, 2015
Alexander JM, Leveno KJ, Hauth J, et al: Fetal injury associated with cesarean delivery. Obstet
Gynecol 108(4):885, 2006
Alexander JM, Leveno KJ, Rouse DJ, et al: Comparison of maternal and infant outcomes from primary
cesarean delivery during the second compared with first stage of labor. Obstet Gynecol 109(4):917,

2007
American Academy of Pediatrics, American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Guidelines for
Perinatal Care, 8th ed. Elk Grove, American Academy of Pediatrics, 2017
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Placenta accreta spectrum. Obstetric Care
Consensus No. 7, 2018
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Obstetric analgesia and anesthesia. Practice
Bulletin No. 209, March 2019a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Safe prevention of the primary cesarean delivery.
Obstetric Care Consensus No. 1, March 2014, Reaffirmed 2019b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Vaginal seeding. Committee Opinion No. 725,
November 2017, Reaffirmed 2019c
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Cesarean delivery on maternal request.
Committee Opinion No. 761, December 2018, Reaffirmed 2020a
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Optimizing support for breastfeeding as part of
obstetric practice. Committee Opinion No. 756, September 2018, Reaffirmed 2020b
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Thromboembolism in pregnancy. Practice
Bulletin No. 196, June 2018, Reaffirmed 2020c
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: Use of prophylactic antibiotics in labor and
delivery. Practice Bulletin No. 199, August 2018, Reaffirmed 2020d
American Society of Anesthesiologists: Task Force on Obstetrical Anesthesia: practice guidelines for
obstetrical anesthesia. Anesthesiology 124:270, 2016
Anorlu RI, Maholwana B, Hofmeyr GJ: Methods of delivering the placenta at caesarean section.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 3:CD004737, 2008
Asıcıoğlu O, Güngördük K, Asıcıoğlu BB, et al: Unintended extension of the lower segment uterine
incision at cesarean delivery: a randomized comparison of sharp versus blunt techniques. Am J
Perinatol 31(10):837, 2014
Avila C, Bhangoo R, Figueroa R, et al: Association of smoking with wound complications after cesarean
delivery. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 25(8):1250, 2012
Baksu A, Kalan A, Ozkan A, et al: The effect of placental removal method and site of uterine repair on
postcesarean endometritis and operative blood loss. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 84(3):266, 2005
Balgobin S: Urologic and gastrointestinal injuries. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al
(eds): Cunningham and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, McGraw Hill Education,
2017
Balki I, Khan JS, Staibano P, et al: Effect of perioperative active body surface warming systems on
analgesic and clinical outcomes: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled
trials. Anesth Analg 131(5):1430, 2020
Barber EL, Lundsberg LS, Belanger K, et al: Indications contributing to the increasing cesarean delivery
rate. Obstet Gynecol 118(1):29, 2011
Basha SL, Rochon ML, Quiñones JN, et al: Randomized controlled trial of wound complication rates of
subcuticular suture vs staples for skin closure at cesarean delivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol
203(3):285.e1, 2010
Bateman BT, Mhyre JM, Callaghan WM, et al: Peripartum hysterectomy in the United States:
nationwide 14 year experience. Am J Obstet Gynecol 206(1):63.e1, 2012
Bates SM, Greer IA, Middeldorp S, et al: VTE, thrombophilia, antithrombotic therapy, and pregnancy:
Antithrombotic Therapy and Prevention of Thrombosis, 9th ed: American College of Chest
Physicians Evidence-Based Clinical Practice Guidelines. Chest 141(2 Suppl):e691S, 2012

Bauchat JR, Weiniger CF, Sultan P, et al: Society for Obstetric Anesthesia and Perinatology consensus
statement: monitoring recommendations for prevention and detection of respiratory depression
associated with administration of neuraxial morphine for cesarean delivery analgesia: Anesth Analg
129(2):458, 2019
Bayoumi YA, Bassiouny YA, Hassan AA, et al: Is there a difference in the maternal and neonatal
outcomes between patients discharged after 24 h versus 72 h following cesarean section? A
prospective randomized observational study on 2998 patients. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med
29(8):1339, 2016
Berhan Y, Berhan A: A meta-analysis of reverse breech extraction to deliver a deeply impacted head
during cesarean delivery. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 124(2):99, 2014
Berríos-Torres SI, Umscheid CA, Bratzler DW, et al: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
guideline for the prevention of surgical site infection, 2017. JAMA Surg 152(8):784, 2017
Blankenship SA, Raghuraman N, Delhi A, et al: Association of abnormal first stage of labor duration
and maternal and neonatal morbidity. Am J Obstet Gynecol 223(3):445.e1, 2020
Blomquist JL, Muñoz A, Carroll M: Association of delivery mode with pelvic floor disorders after
childbirth. JAMA 320(23):2438, 2018
Bloom SL, Leveno KJ, Spong CY, et al: Decision-to-incision times and maternal and fetal outcomes.
Obstet Gynecol 108(1):6, 2006
Bohman VR, Gilstrap L, Leveno K, et al: Subcutaneous tissue: to close or not to close at cesarean
section. Am J Obstet Gynecol 166:407, 1992
Bollag L, Lim G, Sultan P, et al: Society for Obstetric Anesthesia and Perinatology: consensus statement
and recommendations for enhanced recovery after cesarean. Anesth Analg 132(5):1362, 2021
Bolze PA, Massoud M, Gaucherand P, et al: What about the Misgav-Ladach surgical technique in
patients with previous cesarean sections? Am J Perinatol 30(3):197, 2013
Boyle A, Reddy UM, Landy HJ, et al: Primary cesarean delivery in the United States. Obstet Gynecol
122(1):33, 2013
Boyle JG, Gabbe SG: T and J vertical extensions in low transverse cesarean births. Obstet Gynecol
87(2):238, 1996
Bragg D, El-Sharkawy AM, Psaltis E, et al: Postoperative ileus: recent developments in pathophysiology
and management. Clin Nutr 34(3):367, 2015
Briery CM, Rose CH, Hudson WT, et al: Planned vs emergent cesarean hysterectomy. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 197(2):154.e1, 2007
Buie VC, Owings MF, DeFrances CJ, et al: National Hospital Discharge Survey: 2006 summary.
National Center for Health Statistics. Vital Health Stat 13(168):1, 2010
CAESAR Study Collaborative Group: Caesarean section surgical techniques: a randomised factorial trial
(CAESAR). BJOG 117(11):1366, 2010
Cahill AG, Stamilio DM, Odibo AO, et al: Is vaginal birth after cesarean (VBAC) or elective repeat
cesarean safer in women with a prior vaginal delivery? Am J Obstet Gynecol 195(4):1143, 2006
Caughey AB, Wood SL, Macones GA, et al: Guidelines for intraoperative care in cesarean delivery:
Enhanced Recovery after Surgery Society recommendations (Part 2). Am J Obstet Gynecol
219(6):533, 2018
Chai AH, Wong T, Mak HL, et al: Prevalence and associated risk factors of retention of urine after
caesarean section. Int Urogynecol J Pelvic Floor Dysfunct 194(4):537, 2008
Chang SR, Chen KH, Ho HN, et al: Depressive symptoms, pain, and sexual dysfunction over the first
year following vaginal or cesarean delivery: a prospective longitudinal study. Int J Nurs Stud
52(9):1433, 2015

Chankhunaphas W, Charoenkwan K.: Effect of elastic abdominal binder on pain and functional recovery
after caesarean delivery: a randomised controlled trial. J Obstet Gynaecol 40(4):473, 2020
Chapman SJ, Owen J, Hauth JC: One versus two-layer closure of a low transverse cesarean: the next
pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 89:16, 1997
Cheesman K, Brady JE, Flood P, et al: Epidemiology of anesthesia-related complications in labor and
delivery, New York State, 2002–2005. Anesth Analg 109:1174, 2009
Chelmow D, Rodriguez EJ, Sabatini MM: Suture closure of subcutaneous fat and wound disruption after
cesarean delivery: a meta-analysis. Obstet Gynecol 103:974, 2004
Ciardulli A, Saccone G, Di Mascio D, et al: Chewing gum improves postoperative recovery of
gastrointestinal function after cesarean delivery: a systematic review and meta-analysis of
randomized trials. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 31(14):1924, 2018
Clark SL, Belfort MA, Dildy GA, et al: Maternal death in the 21st century: causes, prevention, and
relationship to cesarean delivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 199(1):36.e1, 2008
Collins SL, Alemdar B, van Beekhuizen HJ, et al: Evidence-based guidelines for the management of
abnormally invasive placenta: recommendations from the International Society for Abnormally
Invasive Placenta. Am J Obstet Gynecol 220(6):511, 2019
CORONIS Collaborative Group, Abalos E, Addo V, et al: Caesarean section surgical techniques: 3 year
follow-up of the CORONIS fractional, factorial, unmasked, randomised controlled trial. Lancet
388(10039):62, 2016
CORONIS Collaborative Group, Abalos E, Addo V, et al: Caesarean section surgical techniques
(CORONIS): a fractional, factorial, unmasked, randomised controlled trial. Lancet 382(9888):234,
2013
Corton MM, Schaffer JI: Surgeries for pelvic floor disorders. In Hoffman BL, Schorge JO, Halvorson
LM, et al (eds): Williams Gynecology, 4th ed. New York, McGraw Hill Education, 2020
Davis JD: Management of injuries to the urinary and gastrointestinal tract during cesarean section.
Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am 26(3):469, 1999
Daykan Y, Sharon-Weiner M, Pasternak Y, et al: Skin closure at cesarean delivery, glue versus
subcuticular sutures: a randomized controlled trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol 216(4):406.e1, 2017
Declercq E, Menacker F, MacDorman M: Rise in “no indicated risk” primary caesareans in the United
States, 1991–2001: cross sectional analysis. BMJ 330(7482):71, 2005
de la Torre L, González-Quintero VH, Mayor-Lynn K, et al: Significance of accidental extensions in the
lower uterine segment during cesarean delivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 194(5):e4, 2006
Dodd JM, Anderson ER, Gates S, et al: Surgical techniques for uterine incision and uterine closure at
the time of caesarean section. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 7:CD004732, 2014
Dolan LM, Hilton P: Obstetric risk factors and pelvic floor dysfunction 20 years after first delivery. Int
Urogynecol J 21(5):535, 2010
Durnwald C, Mercer B: Uterine rupture, perioperative and perinatal morbidity after single-layer and
double-layer closure at cesarean delivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 189:925, 2003
Eckler R, Quist-Nelson J, Saccone G, et al: Adhesive incisional drapes during cesarean delivery for
preventing wound infection: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials.
Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol X 4:100090, 2019
Edwards RK, Ingersoll M, Gerkin RD, et al: Carboxymethylcellulose adhesion barrier placement at
primary cesarean delivery and outcomes at repeat cesarean delivery. Obstet Gynecol 123(5):923,
2014
Eke AC, Shukr GH, Chaalan TT, et al: Intra-abdominal saline irrigation at cesarean section: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 29(10):1588, 2016

Eller AG, Porter TF, Soisson P, et al: Optimal management strategies for placenta accreta. BJOG
116(5):648, 2009
Espaillat-Rijo L, Siff L, Alas AN, et al: Intraoperative cystoscopic evaluation of ureteral patency: a
randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol 128(6):1378, 2016
Fehniger JE, Brown JS, Creasman JM, et al: Childbirth and female sexual function later in life. Obstet
Gynecol 122(5):988, 2013
Figueroa D, Jauk VC, Szychowski JM, et al: Surgical staples compared with subcuticular suture for skin
closure after cesarean delivery: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol 121(1):33, 2013
Flood KM, Said S, Geary M, et al: Changing trends in peripartum hysterectomy over the last 4 decades.
Am J Obstet Gynecol 200(6):632.e1, 2009
Food and Drug Administration: Recommendations to reduce surgical fires and related patient injury:
FDA safety communication. 2018. Available at:
https://www.fda.gov/MedicalDevices/Safety/AlertsandNotices/ucm608637.htm. Accessed February
6, 2019
Franchini M, Mengoli C, Cruciani M, et al: Safety and efficacy of tranexamic acid for prevention of
obstetric haemorrhage: an updated systematic review and meta-analysis. Blood Transfus 16(4):329,
2018
Frederick A, Fry T, Clowtis L: Intraoperative mother and baby skin-to-skin contact during cesarean
birth: systematic review. MCN Am J Matern Child Nurs 45(5):296, 2020
Gillespie BM, Webster J, Ellwood D, et al: Closed incision negative pressure wound therapy versus
standard dressings in obese women undergoing caesarean section: multicentre parallel group
randomised controlled trial. BMJ 373:n893, 2021
Gillier CM, Sparks JR, Kriner R, et al: A randomized controlled trial of abdominal binders for the
management of postoperative pain and distress after cesarean delivery. Int J Gynaecol Obstet
133(2):188, 2016
Glaser LM, Milad MP: Bowel and bladder injury repair and follow-up after gynecologic surgery. Obstet
Gynecol 133(2):313, 2019
Glaze S, Ekwalanga P, Roberts G, et al: Peripartum hysterectomy: 1999 to 2006. Obstet Gynecol
111(3):732, 2008
Goldfarb I, Henry D, Dumont O, et al: Inadvertent hysterotomy extension at cesarean delivery and risk
of uterine rupture in the next pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 204(1, Suppl): S266, 2011
Gordon A, McKechnie EJ, Jeffery H: Pediatric presence at cesarean section: justified or not? Am J
Obstet Gynecol 193(3 pt 1):599, 2005
Govindappagari S, Wright JD, Ananth CV, et al: Risk of peripartum hysterectomy and center
hysterectomy and delivery volume. Obstet Gynecol 128(6):1215, 2016
Grimes CL, Patankar S, Ryntz T, et al: Evaluating ureteral patency in the post-indigo carmine era: a
randomized controlled trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol 217(5):601.e1, 2017
Grundsell HS, Rizk DE, Kumar RM: Randomized study of non-closure of peritoneum in lower segment
cesarean section. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 77:110, 1998
Grupper M, Kuti JL, Swank ML, et al: Population pharmacokinetics of cefazolin in serum and adipose
tissue from overweight and obese women undergoing cesarean delivery. J Clin Pharmacol 57(6):712,
2017
Guise JM, Denman MA, Emeis C, et al: Vaginal birth after cesarean: new insights on maternal and
neonatal outcomes. Obstet Gynecol 115(6):1267, 2010
Güngördük K, Asıcıoğlu O, Celikkol O, et al: Iatrogenic bladder injuries during caesarean delivery: a
case control study. J Obstet Gynaecol 30(7):667, 2010

Guo J, Long S, Li H, et al: Early versus delayed oral feeding for patients after cesarean. Int J Gynaecol
Obstet 128(2):100, 2015
Gyhagen M, Bullarbo M, Nielsen TF, et al: Prevalence and risk factors for pelvic organ prolapse 20
years after childbirth: a national cohort study in singleton primiparae after vaginal or caesarean
delivery. BJOG 120(2):152, 2013a
Gyhagen M, Bullarbo M, Nielsen TF, et al: The prevalence of urinary incontinence 20 years after
childbirth: a national cohort study in singleton primiparae after vaginal or caesarean delivery. BJOG
120(2):144, 2013b
Haas DM, Morgan S, Contreras K: Vaginal preparation with antiseptic solution before cesarean section
for preventing postoperative infections. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 4:CD007892, 2020
Hadiati DR, Hakimi M, Nurdiati DS, et al: Skin preparation for preventing infection following caesarean
section. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 6:CD007462, 2020
Handa VL, Blomquist JL, Knoepp LR, et al: Pelvic floor disorders 5–10 years after vaginal or cesarean
childbirth. Obstet Gynecol 118(4):777, 2011
Hawkins JL, Chang J, Palmer SK, et al: Anesthesia-related maternal mortality in the United States:
1979–2002. Obstet Gynecol 117(1):69, 2011
Hellums EK, Lin MG, Ramsey PS: Prophylactic subcutaneous drainage for prevention of wound
complications after cesarean delivery—a metaanalysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 197(3):229, 2007
Hernandez JS, Nuangchamnong N, Ziadie M, et al: Placental and uterine pathology in women
undergoing peripartum hysterectomy. Obstet Gynecol 119(6):1137, 2012
Hofmeyr JG, Novikova N, Mathai M, et al: Techniques for cesarean section. Am J Obstet Gynecol
201(5):431, 2009
Holmgren G, Sjöholm L, Stark M: The Misgav Ladach method for cesarean section: method description.
Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 78(7):615, 1999
Hou L, Hellerstein S, Vitonis A, et al: Cross sectional study of mode of delivery and maternal and
perinatal outcomes in mainland China. PLoS One 12(2):e0171779, 2017
Hubbard R, Waters JH, Yazer MH: Heterogeneity in blood product acceptance among antenatal
patients of the Jehovah’s Witness faith. Obstet Gynecol 126(5):974, 2015
Hussamy DJ, Wortman AC, McIntire DD, et al: Closed incision negative pressure therapy in morbidly
obese women undergoing cesarean delivery: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol
134(4):781, 2019
Irion O, Luzuy F, Beguin F: Nonclosure of the visceral and parietal peritoneum at caesarean section: a
randomised controlled trial. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 103:690, 1996
Jackson LA, Ramirez DM, Carrick KS, et al: Gross and histologic anatomy of the pelvic ureter: clinical
applications to pelvic surgery. Obstet Gynecol 133(5):896, 2019
Jelovsek JE, Chagin K, Gyhagen M, et al: Predicting risk of pelvic floor disorders 12 and 20 years after
delivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 218(2):222.e1, 2018
Jenusaitis L, Keplinger KB, Dean K, et al: Impact of a delayed cord clamping protocol on maternal and
neonatal outcomes in patients undergoing term cesarean section. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med
December 7, 2020 [Epub ahead of print]
Jeve YB, Navti OB, Konje JC: Comparison of techniques used to deliver a deeply impacted fetal head
at full dilation: a systematic review and meta-analysis. BJOG 123(3):337, 2016
Johnson DD: Cesarean delivery. In Yeomans ER, Hoffman BL, Gilstrap LC III, et al (eds): Cunningham
and Gilstrap’s Operative Obstetrics, 3rd ed. New York, McGraw Hill Education, 2017
Jones E, Taylor B, MacArthur C, et al: Early postnatal discharge for infants: a meta-analysis. Pediatrics
146(3):e20193365, 2020

Kalafat E, Gokce A, O’Brien P, et al: Efficacy of carbetocin in the prevention of postpartum
hemorrhage: a systematic review and Bayesian meta-analysis of randomized trials. J Matern Fetal
Neonatal Med 34(14):2303, 2021
Kallianidis AF, Maraschini A, Danis J, et al: Epidemiological analysis of peripartum hysterectomy across
nine European countries. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 99(10):1364, 2020
Kammen BF, Levine MS, Rubesin SE, et al: Adynamic ileus after caesarean section mimicking intestinal
obstruction: findings on abdominal radiographs. Br J Radiol 73(873):951, 2000
Kapustian V, Anteby EY, Gdalevich M, et al: Effect of closure versus nonclosure of peritoneum at
cesarean section on adhesions: a prospective randomized study. Am J Obstet Gynecol 206(1):56.e1,
2012
Karavani G, Chill HH, Reuveni-Salzman A: Risk factors for uterine incision extension during cesarean
delivery. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med June 24, 2020 [Epub ahead of print]
Ker K, Shakur H, Roberts I: Does tranexamic acid prevent postpartum haemorrhage? A systematic
review of randomised controlled trials. BJOG 123(11):1745, 2016
Kerr JM: The lower uterine segment incision in conservative caesarean section. J Obstet Gynaecol Br
Emp 28:475, 1921
Kiefer DG, Muscat JC, Santorelli J, et al: Effectiveness and short-term safety of modified sodium
hyaluronic acid-carboxymethylcellulose at cesarean delivery: a randomized trial. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 214(3):373.e1, 2016
Kirscht J, Weiss C, Nickol J, et al: Dilatation or no dilatation of the cervix during cesarean section
(Dondi Trial): a randomized controlled trial. Arch Gynecol Obstet 295(1):39, 2017
Kowalski TJ, Kothari SN, Mathiason MA, et al: Impact of hair removal on surgical site infection rates: a
prospective randomized noninferiority trial. J Am Coll Surg 223(5):704, 2016
Kristensen K, Henriksen L: Cesarean section and disease associated with immune function. J Allergy
Clin Immunol 137:587, 2016
Krönig B: Transperitonealer cervikaler Kaiserschnitt. In: Doderlein A, Krönig B (eds): Operative
Gynäkologie, 3rd ed. Leipzig, Thieme, 1912
Larsson C, Saltvedt S, Wiklund I, et al: Planned vaginal delivery versus planned caesarean section:
short-term medical outcome analyzed according to intended mode of delivery. J Obstet Gynaecol
Can 33(8):796, 2011
Lawson T, Ralph C: Perioperative Jehovah’s Witnesses: a review. Br J Anaesth 115(5):676, 2015
Lefebvre A, Saliou P, Lucet JC, et al: Preoperative hair removal and surgical site infections: network
meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. J Hosp Infect 91(2):100, 2015
Liabsuetrakul T, Peeyananjarassri K: Mechanical dilatation of the cervix during elective caeserean
section before the onset of labour for reducing postoperative morbidity. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev 8:CD008019, 2018
Liang CC, Chang SD, Chang YL, et al: Postpartum urinary retention after cesarean delivery. Int J
Gynaecol Obstet 99(3):229, 2007
Linder N, Linder I, Fridman E, et al: Birth trauma—risk factors and short-term neonatal outcome. J
Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 26(15):1491, 2013
Liu X, Landon MB, Cheng W, et al: Cesarean delivery on maternal request in China: what are the risks
and benefits? Am J Obstet Gynecol 212(6):817.e1, 2015
Luke B, Brown MB, Wantman E, et al: Risk of severe maternal morbidity by maternal fertility status: a
US study in 8 states. Am J Obstet Gynecol 220(2):195.e1, 2019
MacArthur C, Glazener C, Lancashire R, et al: Exclusive caesarean section delivery and subsequent
urinary and faecal incontinence: a 12-year longitudinal study. BJOG 118(8):1001, 2011

MacArthur C, Wilson D, Herbison P, et al: Faecal incontinence persisting after childbirth: a 12 year
longitudinal study. BJOG 120(2):169, 2013
Mackeen AD, Khalifeh A, Fleisher J, et al: Suture compared with staple skin closure after cesarean
delivery: a randomized controlled trial Obstet Gynecol 123(6):1169, 2014a
Mackeen AD, Packard RE, Ota E, et al: Timing of intravenous prophylactic antibiotics for preventing
postpartum infectious morbidity in women undergoing cesarean delivery. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev 12:CD009516, 2014b
Mackeen AD, Schuster M, Berghella V: Suture versus staples for skin closure after cesarean: a
metaanalysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 212(5):621.e1, 2015
Macones GA, Caughey AB, Wood SL, et al: Guidelines for postoperative care in cesarean delivery:
Enhanced Recovery after Surgery (ERAS) Society recommendations (part 3). Am J Obstet
Gynecol 221(3):247.e1, 2019
Maggio L, Nicolau DP, DaCosta M, et al: Cefazolin prophylaxis in obese women undergoing cesarean
delivery: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol 125(5):1205, 2015
Maglinte DD, Balthazar EJ, Kelvin FM, et al: The role of radiology in the diagnosis of small bowel
obstruction. AJR Am J Roentgenol 168(5):1171, 1997
Markwei MT, Babatunde I, Rathi N, et al: Preincision adjunctive prophylaxis for cesarean deliveries a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol May 5, 2021 [Epub ahead of print]
Marshall NE, Fu R, Guise JM: Impact of multiple cesarean deliveries on maternal morbidity: a
systematic review. Am J Obstet Gynecol 205(3):262.e1, 2011
Martin JA, Hamilton BE, Osterman MJ: Births: final data for 2018. Natl Vital Stat Rep 68(13):1, 2019
Mathai M, Hofmeyr GJ, Mathai NE: Abdominal surgical incisions for caesarean section. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 5:CD004453, 2013
Matsubara S, Kuwata T, Usui R, et al: Important surgical measures and techniques at cesarean
hysterectomy for placenta previa accreta. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 92(4):372, 2013
McDonald EA, Brown SJ: Does method of birth make a difference to when women resume sex after
childbirth? BJOG 120(7):823, 2013
Moczygemba CK, Paramsothy P, Meikle S, et al: Route of delivery and neonatal birth trauma. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 202(4):361.e1, 2010
Moore ER, Bergman N, Anderson GC, et al: Early skin-to-skin contact for mothers and their healthy
newborn infants. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 11:CD003519, 2016
Morales A, Reyes O, Cárdenas G: Type of blunt expansion of the low transverse uterine incision during
caesarean section and the risk of postoperative complications: a prospective randomized controlled
trial. J Obstet Gynaecol Can 41(3):306, 2019
Morales KJ, Gordon MC, Bates GW Jr: Postcesarean delivery adhesions associated with delayed
delivery of infant. Am J Obstet Gynecol 196(5):461.e1, 2007
Nagele F, Karas H, Spitzer D, et al: Closure or nonclosure of the visceral peritoneum at cesarean
delivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 174:1366, 1996
National Institutes of Health: State-of-the-Science Conference Statement on Cesarean Delivery on
Maternal Request. NIH Consens Sci Statements 23(1):1, 2006
Nelson RL, Go C, Darwish R, et al: Cesarean delivery to prevent anal incontinence: a systematic review
and meta-analysis. Tech Coloproctol 23(9):809, 2019
Oliphant SS, Bochenska K, Tolge ME, et al: Maternal lower urinary tract injury at the time of cesarean
delivery. Int Urogynecol J 25(12):1709, 2014
Olofsson P: Opening of the abdomen ad modum Joel Cohen, Joel-Cohen, Joel Joel-Cohen, or just
Cohen? Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 94(2):224, 2015

O’Neill HA, Egan G, Walsh CA, et al: Omission of the bladder flap at caesarean section reduces
delivery time without increased morbidity: a meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. Eur J
Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 174:20, 2014
Ong CK, Seymour RA, Lirk P, et al: Combining paracetamol (acetaminophen) with nonsteroidal
antiinflammatory drugs: a qualitative systematic review of analgesic efficacy for acute postoperative
pain. Anesth Analg 110:1170, 2010
Orbach A, Levy A, Wiznitzer A, et al: Peripartum cesarean hysterectomy: critical analysis of risk
factors and trends over the years. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 24(3):480, 2011
Osmundson SS, Garabedian MJ, Lyell DJ: Risk factors for classical hysterotomy by gestational age.
Obstet Gynecol 122:845, 2013
Osmundson SS, Garabedian MJ, Yeaton-Massey A, et al: Risk factors for classical hysterotomy in twin
pregnancies. Obstet Gynecol 125(3):643, 2015
Patterson LS, O’Connell CM, Baskett TF: Maternal and perinatal morbidity associated with classic and
inverted T cesarean incisions. Obstet Gynecol 100(4):633, 2002
Peleg D, Eberstark E, Warsof SL, et al: Early wound dressing removal after scheduled cesarean
delivery: a randomized controlled trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol 215(3):388.e1, 2016
Pereira Gomes Morais E, Riera R, Porfírio GJ, et al: Chewing gum for enhancing early recovery of
bowel function after caesarean section. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 10:CD011562, 2016
Phipps MG, Watabe B, Clemons JL, et al: Risk factors for bladder injury during cesarean delivery.
Obstet Gynecol 105(1):156, 2005
Pritchard JA: Changes in the blood volume during pregnancy and delivery. Anesthesiology 26:393, 1965
Purisch SE, Ananth CV, Arditi B, et al: Effect of delayed vs immediate umbilical cord clamping on
maternal blood loss in term cesarean delivery: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA 322(19):1869, 2019
Rahman MS, Gasem T, Al Suleiman SA, et al: Bladder injuries during cesarean section in a university
hospital: a 25-year review. Arch Gynecol Obstet 279(3):349, 2009
Ramsey PS, White AM, Guinn DA, et al: Subcutaneous tissue reapproximation, alone or in combination
with drain, in obese women undergoing cesarean delivery. Obstet Gynecol 105(5 Pt 1):967, 2005
Roach MK, Abramovici A, Tita AT: Dose and duration of oxytocin to prevent postpartum hemorrhage: a
review. Am J Perinatol 30(7):523, 2013
Roberge S, Demers S, Berghella V, et al: Impact of single- vs double-layer closure on adverse outcomes
and uterine scar defect: a systematic review and metaanalysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 211(5):453,
2014
Roeckner JT, Sanchez-Ramos L, Mitta M, et al: Povidone-iodine 1% is the most effective vaginal
antiseptic for preventing post-cesarean endometritis: a systematic review and network metaanalysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 221(3):261.e1, 2019
Rogers RG, Leeman LM, Borders N, et al: Contribution of the second stage of labour to pelvic floor
dysfunction: a prospective cohort comparison of nulliparous women. BJOG 121(9):1145, 2014
Rossi AC, Lee RH, Chmait RH: Emergency postpartum hysterectomy for uncontrolled postpartum
bleeding: a systematic review. Obstet Gynecol 115(3):637, 2010
Rossouw JN, Hall D, Harvey J: Time between skin incision and delivery during cesarean. Int J
Gynaecol Obstet 121(1):82, 2013
Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists: Birth after previous caesarean birth. Green-Top
Guideline No. 45, October 2015
Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists: Reducing the risk of venous thromboembolism
during pregnancy and the puerperium. Green-Top Guideline No. 37a, April 2015

Saad AF, Rahman M, Costantine MM, et al: Blunt versus sharp uterine incision expansion during low
transverse cesarean delivery: a metaanalysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 211(6):684.e1, 2014
Saaqib S, Iqbal A, Naheed M, et al: A randomized controlled trial of cystoinflation to prevent bladder
injury in the adhesive disease of multiple caesarean sections. Sci Rep 10(1):15297, 2020
Sacre H, Bird A, Clement-Jones M, et al: Effectiveness of the fetal pillow to prevent adverse maternal
and fetal outcomes at full dilatation cesarean section in routine practice. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand
100(5):949, 2021
Safrai M, Stern S, Gofrit ON, et al: Urinary tract injuries during cesarean delivery: long-term outcome
and management. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med October 4, 2020 [Epub ahead of print]
Salman L, Aharony S, Shmueli A, et al: Urinary bladder injury during cesarean delivery: maternal
outcome from a contemporary large case series. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 213:26, 2017
Scharman CD, Burger D, Shatzel JJ, et al: Treatment of individuals who cannot receive blood products
for religious or other reasons. Am J Hematol 92(12):1370, 2017
Seal SL, Dey A, Barman SC, et al: Randomized controlled trial of elevation of the fetal head with a fetal
pillow during cesarean delivery at full cervical dilatation. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 133(2):178, 2016
Sentilhes L, Sénat MV, Le Lous M, et al: Tranexamic acid for the prevention of blood loss after
cesarean delivery N Engl J Med 384(17):1623, 2021
Shao Y, Forster SC, Tsaliki E, et al: Stunted microbiota and opportunistic pathogen colonization in
caesarean-section birth. Nature 574(7776):117, 2019
Sharp HT, Adelman MR. Prevention, recognition, and management of urologic injuries during
gynecologic surgery. Obstet Gynecol 127(6):1085, 2016
Shellhaas CS, Gilbert S, Landon MB, et al: The frequency and complication rates of hysterectomy
accompanying cesarean delivery. Obstet Gynecol 114(2 Pt 1):224, 2009
Siddiqui DS, Lacuna EM, Chen HY, et al: Skin closure of Pfannenstiel incision with Dermabond, staples,
or suture during cesarean delivery: experience of a single attending. Am J Perinatol 30(3):219, 2013
Sikirica V, Broder MS, Chang E, et al: Clinical and economic impact of adhesiolysis during repeat
cesarean delivery. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 91(6):719, 2012
Silver RM, Landon MB, Rouse DJ, et al: Maternal morbidity associated with multiple repeat cesarean
deliveries. Obstet Gynecol 107:1226, 2006
Smaill FM, Grivell RM: Antibiotic prophylaxis versus no prophylaxis for preventing infection after
cesarean section. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 10:CD007482, 2014
Smid MC, Smiley SG, Schulkin J, et al: The problem of the pannus: physician preference survey and a
review of the literature on cesarean skin incision in morbidly obese women. Am J Perinatol
33(5):463, 2016
Stegwee SI, van der Voet LF, Ben AJ, et al: Effect of single- versus double-layer uterine closure during
caesarean section on postmenstrual spotting (2Close): multicentre, double-blind, randomised
controlled superiority trial. BJOG 128(5):866, 2021
Stone J, Bianco A, Monro J, et al: Study to reduce infection prior to elective cesarean deliveries
(STRIPES): a randomized clinical trial of chlorhexidine. Am J Obstet Gynecol 223(1):113.e1, 2020
Sullivan SA, Smith T, Chang E, et al: Administration of cefazolin prior to skin incision is superior to
cefazolin at cord clamping in preventing postcesarean infectious morbidity: a randomized controlled
trial. Am J Obstet Gynecol 196:455, 2007
Sultan P, Halpern SH, Pushpanathan E, et al: The effect of intrathecal morphine dose on outcomes after
elective cesarean delivery: a meta-analysis. Anesth Analg 123(1):154, 2016
Swank ML, Wing DA, Nicolau DP, et al: Increased 3-gram cefazolin dosing for cesarean delivery
prophylaxis in obese women. Am J Obstet Gynecol 213(3):415.e1, 2015

Tan PG, Norazilah MJ, Omar SZ: Hospital discharge on the first compared with the second day after a
planned cesarean delivery: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol 120(6):1273, 2012
Tanner J, Norrie P, Melen K: Preoperative hair removal to reduce surgical site infection. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 11:CD004122, 2011
Tarney CM: Bladder injury during cesarean delivery. Curr Womens Health Rev 9(2):70, 2013
The Joint Commission: The universal protocol. 2020. Available at:
https://www.jointcommission.org/standards/universal-protocol/. Accessed December 1, 2020
Tita AT, Hauth JC, Grimes A, et al: Decreasing incidence of postcesarean endometritis with extendedspectrum antibiotic prophylaxis. Obstet Gynecol 111(1):51, 2008
Tita AT, Landon MB, Spong CY, et al: Timing of elective repeat cesarean delivery at term and neonatal
outcomes. N Engl J Med 360(2):111, 2009
Tita AT, Szychowski JM, Boggess K, et al: Adjunctive azithromycin prophylaxis for cesarean delivery. N
Engl J Med 375(13):1231, 2016
Tolcher MC, Johnson RL, El-Nashar SA, et al: Decision-to-incision time and neonatal outcomes: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Obstet Gynecol 123(3):536, 2014
Tolcher MC, Whitham MD, El-Nashar SA, et al: Chlorhexidine-alcohol compared with povidone-iodine
preoperative skin antisepsis for cesarean delivery: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J
Perinatol 36(2):118, 2019
Tulandi T, Agdi M, Zarei A, Miner L, et al: Adhesion development and morbidity after repeat cesarean
delivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 201(1):56.e1, 2009
Tuuli MG, Liu J, Tita AT, et al: Effect of prophylactic negative pressure wound therapy vs standard
wound dressing on surgical-site infection in obese women after cesarean delivery: a randomized
clinical trial. JAMA 324(12):1180, 2020
Tuuli MG, Odibo AO, Fogertey P, et al: Utility of the bladder flap at cesarean delivery: a randomized
controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol 119(4):815, 2012
Tuuli MG, Stout MJ, Martin S, et al: Comparison of suture materials for subcuticular skin closure at
cesarean delivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 215(4):490.e1, 2016
Valent AM, DeArmond C, Houston JM, et al: Effect of post-cesarean delivery oral cephalexin and
metronidazole on surgical site infection among obese women: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA
318(11):1026, 2017
Villar J, Carroli G, Zavaleta N, et al: Maternal and neonatal individual risks and benefits associated with
caesarean delivery: multicentre prospective study. BJM 335:1025, 2007
Viney R, Isaacs C, Chelmow D: Intra-abdominal irrigation at cesarean delivery: a randomized controlled
trial. Obstet Gynecol 119(6):1106, 2012
Waring GJ, Shawer S, Hinshaw K: The use of O-ring retractors at caesarean section: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 228:209, 2018
Wilhelm NB, Bonsall TJ, Miller CL: The effect of beta-lactam allergy status on the rate of surgical site
infections: a retrospective cohort study. Ann Surg June 3, 2020 [Epub ahead of print]
Wilson RD, Caughey AB, Wood SL, et al: Guidelines for antenatal and preoperative care in cesarean
delivery: Enhanced Recovery after Surgery Society recommendations (Part 1). Am J Obstet
Gynecol 219(6):523.e1, 2018
Woldu SL, Ordonez MA, Devine PC, et al: Urologic considerations of placenta accreta: a contemporary
tertiary care institutional experience. Urol Int 93(1):74, 2014
Wolf O, Weissman O, Harats M, et al: Birth wind and fire: raising awareness to operating room fires
during delivery. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 26(13):1303, 2013

Wolfson AR, Mancini CM, Banerji A, et al: Penicillin allergy assessment in pregnancy: safety and
impact on antibiotic use. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract 9(3):1338, 2021
World Health Organization: WHO recommendations: uterotonics for the prevention of postpartum
haemorrhage. Geneva, WHO, 2018
Worley KC, McIntire DD, Leveno KJ: The prognosis for spontaneous labor in women with
uncomplicated term pregnancies: implications for cesarean delivery on maternal request. Obstet
Gynecol 113(4):812, 2009
Wyckoff MH, Aziz K, Escobedo MB, et al: Part 13: Neonatal resuscitation: 2015 American Heart
Association guidelines update for cardiopulmonary resuscitation and emergency cardiovascular care.
Circulation 132(18 Suppl 2):S543, 2015
Wylie BJ, Gilbert S, Landon MB, et al: Comparison of transverse and vertical skin incision for
emergency cesarean delivery. Obstet Gynecol 115(6):1134, 2010
Xodo S, Saccone G, Cromi A, et al: Cephalad-caudad versus transverse blunt expansion of the low
transverse uterine incision during cesarean delivery. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 202:75, 2016
Young OM, Shaik IH, Twedt R, et al: Pharmacokinetics of cefazolin prophylaxis in obese gravidae at
time of cesarean delivery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 213(4):541.e1, 2015
Zaphiratos V, George RB, Boyd JC, et al: Uterine exteriorization compared with in situ repair for
cesarean delivery: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Can J Anaesth 62(11):1209, 2015

